古文：陈本纪下高宗孝宣皇帝讳顼，字绍世，小字师利，始兴昭烈王第二子也。
现代文：陈高宗孝宣皇帝名叫陈顼，字叫绍世，小字叫师利，是始兴昭烈王的第二个儿子。
English: Emperor Chen Gaozong Xiaoxuan was named Chen Yu, his Chinese name was Shao Shih, and his Chinese name was Shili. He was the second son of King Shi Xingxiao.

古文：梁中大通二年七月辛酉生，有赤光满室。
现代文：梁朝的中大通二年七月辛酉日生，当时有红光满室。
English: In July of the second year of the Liang Dynasty, when Xin Xuan Nian was born, the room was filled with red light.

古文：少宽容，多智略。
现代文：少年的时候性格宽容，多智慧谋略。
English: When he was a young man, his personality was tolerant, and he had more wisdom and strategy.

古文：及长，美容仪，身长八尺三寸，垂手过膝，有勇力，善骑射。
现代文：长大以后，容貌俊美，身高八尺三寸，垂手过膝，勇猛有力，善于骑射。
English: When he grew up, he was handsome and handsome, eight feet three inches tall, hanging over his knees, brave and powerful, and good at riding and shooting.

古文：武帝平侯景，镇京口，梁元帝征武帝子侄入侍，武帝遣帝赴江陵。
现代文：武帝平定侯景，镇守京口，梁元帝征调武帝的子侄入朝服务，武帝派文帝前往江陵。
English: Emperor Wu subdued Houjing and garrisoned Jingkou, Emperor Liang Yuan conscripted Emperor Wu's nephew into the service of the North, and Emperor Wu sent Emperor Wen to Gangneung.

古文：累官爲中书侍郎。
现代文：逐步升迁为中书侍郎。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of Chusho-sajiro.

古文：时有军主李总与帝有旧，每同游处，帝尝夜被酒，张灯而寐，总适出，寻反，乃见帝是大龙，便惊走他室。
现代文：当时有一个军队主将李总和宣帝有旧交，常常一同游玩相处，文帝曾经有一次夜里喝醉了酒，点着灯睡着了，李总正好出去，过了一会回来，却见宣帝是一条大龙，于是十分惊恐地逃到其他房子里去了。
English: At that time, there was an army commander, Li Chong and Xuan Di, who had an old friendship and often played together. Once, Wen Di was drunk and fell asleep with a light on. Li Chong just went out and came back after a while. However, he saw that Xuan Di was a big dragon, so he fled to other houses in great fear.

古文：魏平江陵，迁于长安。
现代文：魏朝平灭了江陵，陈朝迁都到长安。
English: The Wei Dynasty destroyed Jiangling, and the Chen Dynasty moved the capital to Chang'an.

古文：帝貌若不慧，魏将杨忠门客张子煦见而奇之，曰： 此人虎头，当大贵也。 
现代文：文帝外貌好像不太聪慧，魏朝将领杨忠的门客张子煦见到后认为他十分奇特，说： 这人是个虎头，一定会成为大贵之人。 
English: Emperor Wen's appearance does not seem to be very intelligent. Zhang Zixuan, a protégé of the Wei Dynasty general Yang Zhonglu, thought he was very strange when he saw him, saying: This man is a tiger's head, he will surely become a great man.

古文：永定元年，遥袭封始兴郡王。
现代文：永定元年，在远方袭位受封为始兴郡王。
English: In the first year of Yongding, he was appointed as the king of Shixing County in a faraway place.

古文：文帝嗣位，改封安成王。
现代文：文帝继承王位，改封他为安成王。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne and changed his title to King Ancheng.

古文：天嘉三年，自周还，授侍中、中书监、中卫将军，置佐史。
现代文：天嘉三年，从周朝归来，被任命为侍中、中书监、中卫将军，安置了下属官吏佐史。
English: In the third year of Yutai, he returned to the south from Shimo, and was awarded the titles of Junior Chamberlain, Senior Clerk of the Privy Council, and General of the Middle Guard.

古文：历位司空、尚书令。
现代文：曾历任司空、尚书令。
English: He was successively appointed as Siku and Shang Shuling.

古文：废帝即位，拜司徒、录尚书、都督中外诸军事。
现代文：废帝即位后，被封为司徒、录尚书、都督中外诸军事。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended to the throne, he was appointed as a military officer, recorder, and governor of various provinces.

古文：光大二年正月，进位太傅，领司徒，加殊礼，剑履上殿。
现代文：光大二年正月，晋升职位为太傅，兼司徒，加封享受特殊礼遇，可以佩剑穿履朝见皇帝。
English: In the first month of the second year of Guangda University, he was promoted to the position of Taifu, concurrently Sifu, and enjoyed special courtesy, he could wear a sword to see the emperor.

古文：十一月甲寅，慈训太后黜废帝爲临海王，以帝入缵皇统。
现代文：十一月二十三日，慈训太后废黜废帝为临海王，让宣帝入宫继承皇帝世系。
English: On November 23rd, Empress Dowager Cixun dethroned the deposed emperor as the king of Linhai and allowed Emperor Xuan to enter the palace to succeed the imperial line.

古文：是月，齐武成帝殂。
现代文：本月，齐朝的武成帝去世。
English: This month, Emperor Wu Cheng of the Qi Dynasty passed away.

古文：太建元年春正月甲午，皇帝即位于太极前殿，大赦，改元。
现代文：太建元年春季的正月初四，宣帝在太极前殿即位，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Taijian, Emperor Xuan ascended the throne in the front hall of Taiji, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year.

古文：文武赐位一阶，孝悌力田及爲父后者，赐爵一级，鳏寡不能自存者，人赐谷五斛。
现代文：文武官员各赐官位一级，孝顺父兄、努力耕田以及做父亲较晚的，赐爵位一级，老而无妻、老而无夫不能自己生存的，每人赐谷五斛。
English: Civil and military officials were each given a first-class official rank, those who were filial to their fathers and brothers, worked hard to cultivate the land and were late fathers were given a first-class knighthood, and those who were old and had no wife or husband and could not survive on their own were each given a grain allowance of five yuan.

古文：复太皇太后尊号曰皇太后。
现代文：恢复太皇太后的尊号仍为皇太后。
English: The honorific title of the reinstated Grand Empress Dowager will still be Empress Dowager.

古文：立妃柳氏爲皇后，世子叔宝爲皇太子。
现代文：立皇妃柳氏为皇后，世子陈叔宝为皇太子。
English: Princess Yanagi was established as empress, and her heir, Chen Shubao, became crown prince.

古文：封皇子江州刺史康乐侯叔陵爲始兴王，奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：封皇子江州刺史康乐侯陈叔陵为始兴王，敬奉祭祀昭烈王。
English: Chen Shuling, the crown prince of Kangle County, Jiangsu Province, is known as King Shuxing, and is revered as the King of Martyrs.

古文：乙未，谒太庙。
现代文：初五，拜谒太庙。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, they all visit the Imperial Temple.

古文：丁酉，分命大使，观省四方风俗。
现代文：初七，分别任命大使观察了解四方风俗民情。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, ambassadors were appointed to observe and understand the customs and folk customs of the four directions.

古文：以尚书仆射沈钦爲左仆射，度支尚书王劢爲右仆射。
现代文：封尚书仆射沈钦为左仆射、度支尚书王劢为右仆射。
English: Fong Shangshu's servant Shen Qin was the left-hand servant, and Du Zhi Shangshu's servant Wang Xi was the right-hand servant.

古文：帝之在田，本有恢弘之度，及居尊位，实允天人之属。
现代文：十一日，在南郊祭祀天地。十二日，封皇子建安侯陈叔英为豫章王、丰城侯陈叔坚为长沙王。宣帝在未即帝位以前，本来具有非常宏大的气度，登基以后，确实担当起了上天和世人的托付。
English: On the 11th day, in the southern suburbs, sacrifices were made to heaven and earth. On the 12th day, the feudal prince Jianan Hou Chen Shuying became the king of Yuzhang, and the Fengcheng Hou Chen Shujian became the king of Changsha. Prior to his accession to the throne, Emperor Xuan originally had a very grand air, but after he ascended to the throne, he truly assumed the trust of heaven and the world.

古文：于时国步初弭，创痍未复，淮南之地，并入于齐。
现代文：当时国家刚刚消除祸乱，创伤尚未恢复，淮南地区都入了齐朝。
English: At that time, the country had just eliminated the scourge, the trauma had not yet recovered, and the Huainan region had entered the Qi Dynasty.

古文：帝志复旧境，意反侵地，强弱之形，理则县绝，犯斯不韪，适足爲禽。
现代文：宣帝立志恢复旧时的边界，并且决心反攻北侵齐地，当时的强弱对比，显然十分悬殊，犯了这样的错误，自然就容易被敌方战胜。
English: Emperor Xuan was determined to restore the old-time border, and was determined to counterattack the northern invasion of Qi. At that time, the contrast between the strong and the weak was obviously very great. If he made such a mistake, he would naturally be easily defeated by the enemy.

古文：及周兵灭齐，乘胜而举，略地还至江际，自此惧矣。
现代文：后来周兵灭了齐朝，乘胜发兵南下，侵占土地很快就到了长江沿岸，从此十分恐惧。
English: Later, Zhou's soldiers destroyed the Qi Dynasty, and took advantage of the victory to send troops to the south, and soon occupied the land along the Yangtze River. Since then, they have been very afraid.

古文：既而修饰都城，爲扞御之备，获铭云： 二百年后，当有痴人修破吾城者。 
现代文：随后就修整国都的城墙，作为防御的准备，由此获得的铭文中说： 二百年以后，应当会有痴人修整和破掉我的城池。 
English: He then repaired the walls of the capital as a preparation for defense, and the inscription thus obtained says: After two hundred years, there should be a fool to repair and break my castle.

古文：时莫测所从云。
现代文：据说当时的人们都不知道他将如何对付。
English: It is said that people at the time did not know what to make of him.

古文：后主讳叔宝，字元秀，小字黄奴，宣帝嫡长子也。
现代文：后主名叫叔宝，字元秀，小字黄奴，是宣帝的嫡长子。
English: His posthumous name was Shubao, with the characters 元秀 and 小字黄奴. He was the eldest legitimate son of Emperor Xuan.

古文：梁承圣二年十一月戊寅，生于江陵。
现代文：梁朝承圣二年十一月二十日，出生在江陵。
English: Liang Chaocheng was born in Gangneung on November 20, the second year of his reign.

古文：明年，魏平江陵，宣帝迁于长安，留后主于穰城。
现代文：第二年，魏朝平灭了江陵，宣帝迁都到长安，把后主留在穰城。
English: In the second year, the Wei Dynasty destroyed Jiangling, and Emperor Xuan moved the capital to Chang'an, leaving his heir in Lucheng.

古文：天嘉三年，归建邺，立爲安成王世子。
现代文：天嘉三年，回到建邺，立为安成王的世子。
English: In the third year of Tianjia, he returned to Jianye and became the heir of King Ancheng.

古文：光大二年，累迁侍中。
现代文：光大二年，逐步升迁为侍中。
English: In his second year of university, he was gradually promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：太建元年正月甲午，立爲皇太子。
现代文：太建元年正月初四，立为皇太子。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the first year of Tai Jian, he became crown prince.

古文：十四年正月甲寅，宣帝崩。
现代文：十四年正月初十，宣帝逝世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the 14th year, Emperor Xuan died.

古文：乙卯，始兴王叔陵构逆伏诛。
现代文：十一日，始兴王陈叔陵企图纂位，被杀死。
English: On the 11th day, King Chen Shuling of Shixing attempted to abdicate and was killed.

古文：丁巳，太子即皇帝位于太极前殿，大赦，在位文武及孝悌力田爲父后者，并赐爵一级，孤老鳏寡不能自存者，赐谷人五斛、帛二匹。
现代文：十三日，太子在太极前殿即皇帝位，实行大赦，在位的文武官员以及孝顺友爱、努力耕田、做父亲较晚的人，都赐给爵位一级，孤老鳏寡不能独立生活的，每人赐谷五斛、帛二疋。
English: On the 13th, the prince in the front hall of the Taiji, that is, the emperor's throne, carried out an amnesty. The reigning civil and military officials, as well as the filial piety and friendship, the efforts to cultivate the fields, and the late father, were all given a first-class knighthood. The lonely old people and the widows who could not live independently were each given a five-year allowance and a two-year allowance.

古文：癸亥，以侍中、丹阳尹、长沙王叔坚爲骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史。
现代文：十九日，以侍中、丹阳尹、长沙王陈叔坚为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史。
English: On the 19th, with the attendants, Danyang Yin and Changsha King Chen Shujian as cavalry generals, the Kaifu ceremony and the three divisions, and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：乙丑，尊皇后爲皇太后。
现代文：二十一日，尊皇后为皇太后。
English: On the twenty-first day, His Majesty the Empress became the Empress Dowager.

古文：丁卯，立皇弟叔重爲始兴王，奉昭烈王祀。
现代文：二十三日，立皇弟陈叔重为始兴王，祭祀昭烈王。
English: On the 23rd, the younger brother of the emperor, Chen Shujong, was established as the King of Shuxing and the King of Sholing.

古文：己巳，立妃沈氏爲皇后。
现代文：二十五日，立妃子沈氏为皇后。
English: On the 25th, Empress Dowager Shen became the Empress.

古文：辛未，立皇弟叔俨爲寻阳王，叔慎爲岳阳王，叔达爲义阳王，叔熊爲巴山王，叔虞爲武昌王。
现代文：二十七日，立皇弟陈叔俨为寻阳王，陈叔慎为岳阳王，陈叔达为义阳王，陈叔熊为巴山王，陈叔虞为武昌王。
English: On the 27th, the younger brothers of the founding emperors, Chen Shuxuan was the king of Xiangyang, Chen Shushan was the king of Yueyang, Chen Shuda was the king of Yiyang, Chen Shukong was the king of Bashan, and Chen Shugu was the king of Wuchang.

古文：甲戌，设无碍大会于太极前殿。
现代文：三十日，在太极前殿设立以布施为中心的佛家法会一一一无碍大会。
English: On the 30th, a Buddhist puja centered on giving alms was held in the front hall of the Taiji Temple.

古文：三月癸亥，诏内外衆官九品以上，各荐一人。
现代文：三月十九日，诏令朝内外众官员凡在九品以上的，各举荐一人。
English: On March 19th, the imperial edict ordered all officials inside and outside the country who were above the ninth grade to recommend one person each.

古文：又诏求忠谠，无所隐讳。
现代文：又下诏征求忠正言论，不要有什么隐瞒忌讳。
English: He also issued an edict to solicit loyal and upright speech, and not to have any hidden taboos.

古文：己巳，以新除翊左将军永阳王伯智爲尚书仆射。
现代文：十五日，以新任命的翊左将军永阳王陈伯智为尚书仆射。
English: On the fifteenth day, the newly appointed general Yongyang Wang Chen Bo Zhi was appointed as Shang Shufu.

古文：夏四月丙申，立皇子永康公胤爲皇太子，赐天下爲父后者爵一级，王公以下赉帛各有差。
现代文：夏季的四月二十三日，立皇子永康公陈胤为皇太子，赐天下做父亲较晚的人爵位一级，王公以下赏帛多少不等。
English: On the summer's 23rd day of April, Yongkang's son, Chen Yan, was appointed crown prince, and his late father was given a first-class knighthood, with awards ranging from the rank of grand duke downwards.

古文：庚子，诏： 镂金银薄、庶物化生、土木人、彩华之属，及布帛短狭轻疏者，并伤财废业，尤成蠹患。
现代文：二十七日，发出诏令说： 镂金银帘、婴儿蜡像、土木人、彩花之类，以及短窄轻稀的布帛，都是损伤财物毁坏生产的，尤其成为弊端。
English: On the 27th, a royal edict was issued, saying: Waxing gold and silver curtains, baby wax figures, civil engineers, flowers and the like, as well as short, narrow and light cloths, are all damage to property and destruction of production, and are especially a drawback.

古文：又僧尼道士，挟邪左道，不依经律，人间淫祀祅书诸珍怪事，详爲条制，并皆禁绝。 
现代文：又僧尼道士，搞歪门邪道，不依照经典律条，社会上的胡乱祭祀、妖邪书籍等奇怪现象，都要详细制定条例，一概加以禁绝。 
English: In addition, monks and nuns of Taoism, those who engage in crooked doors and evil ways, those who do not follow the classical rules, the random sacrifices in the society, the evil books and other strange phenomena should formulate detailed regulations to prohibit them altogether.

古文：秋七月辛未，大赦。
现代文：秋季的七月二十九日，实行大赦。
English: On the 29th of July in the autumn, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：是月，自建邺至荆州，江水色赤如血。
现代文：本月，从建邺到荆州，江水象血一样颜色赤红。
English: This month, from Jianye to Jingzhou, the river is as red as blood.

古文：八月癸未，天有声如风水相激。
现代文：八月十二日，天空中有声音好像是风和水互相激荡。
English: On August 12th, there was a sound in the sky that seemed to be wind and water stirring each other.

古文：乙酉夜，又如之。
现代文：十四日，再次发生。
English: On the 14th, it happened again.

古文：九月丙午，设无碍大会于太极前殿，舍身及乘舆御服，大赦。
现代文：九月初五，在太极前殿设无碍大会，舍身苦行，不用车子和御服。实行大赦。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, a no-obstacle assembly was held in the front hall of the Taiji Temple, and an amnesty was implemented.

古文：辛亥夜，天东北有声如虫飞，渐移西北。
现代文：初十夜，天空东北有像昆虫飞的声音，渐渐移向西北。
English: On the night of Xinhai, there was a sound in the northeastern sky like a bug flying, gradually moving to the northwest.

古文：丙寅，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王叔坚爲司空，征南将军、江州刺史豫章王叔英即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十五日，任命骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王陈叔坚为司空，征南将军、江州刺史豫章王陈叔英在本官号上加封开府仪同三司。
English: On the 25th, he appointed the General of the Cavalry, the Third Division of the Kaifu Rites and Traditions, the Yangzhou Provincial Historian Changsha Wang Chen Shujian as the Secretary of the Air Force, and the General of the Southern Expedition and the Jiangsu Provincial Historian Yuanzhang Wang Chen Shuying as the Third Division of the Kaifu Rites and Traditions.

古文：至德元年春正月壬寅，大赦，改元。
现代文：至德元年春季的正月初三，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the German year, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：以征南将军、江州刺史豫章王叔英爲中卫大将军；以司空、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王叔坚爲江州刺史；征东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史司马消难进号车骑将军。
现代文：任命征南将军、江州刺史豫章王陈叔英为中卫大将军；任命司空、骠骑将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史长沙王陈叔坚为江州刺史，征东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史司马消难晋升称号为车骑将军。
English: Appointed the General of the Southern Expedition, the General of the Yuzhang Expedition in Jiangzhou, Chen Shujing as the General of the Middle Guard; appointed the General of the Sky Expedition, the General of the Equestrian Expedition, the General of the Kaifu Expedition and the Third Division, the General of the Changsha Expedition in Yangzhou, Chen Shujian as the General of the Southern Expedition, the General of the Eastern Expedition, the General of the Equestrian Expedition and the Third Division, the General of the Eastern Expedition in Kaifu, the General of the Eastern Expedition and the Third Division, the General of the Eastern Expedition in Yangzhou, and the General of the Horse-Drawn

古文：癸卯，立皇子深爲始安王。
现代文：初五，立皇子陈琛为始安王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the prince Chen Xi was appointed the King of Xi'an.

古文：秋八月丁卯，以骠骑将军、开府仪同三司长沙王叔坚爲司空。
现代文：秋季的八月初一，任命骠骑将军、开府仪同三司长沙王陈叔坚为司空。
English: On the first day of August in autumn, he appointed the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the chief of the three departments of the king of Sha, Chen Shujian, as the secretary of the sky.

古文：九月丁巳，天东南有声如虫飞。
现代文：九月二十二日，天空的东南方有如同虫飞的声音。
English: In September, there was a sound like a bug flying in the southeastern sky.

古文：冬十一月丁酉，立皇弟叔平爲湘东王，叔敖爲临贺王，叔宣爲阳山王，叔穆爲西阳王，叔俭爲南安王，叔澄爲南郡王，叔兴爲沅陵王，叔韶爲岳山王，叔纯爲新兴王。
现代文：冬季的十一月初三，立皇弟陈叔平为湘东王，陈叔敖为临贺王，陈叔宣为阳山王，陈叔穆为西阳王，陈叔俭为安南王，陈叔澄为南郡王，陈叔兴为沅陵王，陈叔韶为岳山王，陈叔纯为新兴王。
English: On the third day of November in winter, the younger brother of the founding emperor, Chen Shuping, was the king of eastern Hunan, Chen Shuxuan was the king of Linhe, Chen Shuxuan was the king of Yangshan, Chen Shumu was the king of Xiyang, Chen Shujian was the king of Annan, Chen Shuzhen was the king of Nan County, Chen Shuxing was the king of Fuling, Chen Shuzhen was the king of Yue Mountain, and Chen Shujun was the emerging king.

古文：十二月丙辰，头和国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月二十三日，头和国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On December 23rd, the Emperor of Japan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：司空、长沙王叔坚有罪免。
现代文：司空、长沙王陈叔坚有罪而被免职。
English: Siku and Changsha King Chen Shujian were found guilty and removed from office.

古文：戊午夜，天开，自西北至东南，其内有青黄杂色，隆隆若雷声。
现代文：二十五日夜，天空裂开，自西北至东南，它的内部有青黄等各种颜色，隆隆地响，好像是雷声。
English: On the night of the 25th, the sky split open from the northwest to the southeast, and its interior had various colors such as blue and yellow, rumbling like thunder.

古文：二年春正月丁卯，分遣大使，巡省风俗。
现代文：二年春季的正月初四，分别派遣大使，巡察社会风俗。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the spring of the second year, ambassadors were sent to inspect social customs.

古文：癸巳，大赦。
现代文：三十日，实行大赦。
English: On the 30th, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：夏五月戊子，以吏部尚书江总爲尚书仆射。
现代文：夏季的五月二十七日，任命吏部尚书江总为尚书仆射。
English: On the 27th day of May in the summer, Shang Shujiang, the head of the personnel department, was appointed as Shang Shujiang.

古文：秋七月壬午，皇太子加元服，在位文武赐帛各有差。
现代文：秋季的七月二十二日，皇太子加冠冕，在位的文武官员赐帛数量不等。
English: On the 22nd of July in autumn, the crown prince was crowned, and the number of citations given by the reigning civil and military officials varied.

古文：孝悌力田爲父后者，赐爵一级；鳏寡癃老不能自存者，人谷五斛。
现代文：孝顺友爱、努力耕田和为父较晚的，赐爵位一级；鳏寡病老不能自己生活的，每人赠谷五斛。
English: Filial piety, brotherly love, hard work in the fields and late fatherhood are rewarded with a first-class knighthood; widows and widowers who are too ill to live on their own are each given five mu.

古文：冬十一月丙寅，大赦。
现代文：冬季的十一月初八，实行大赦。
English: On the eighth day of the eleventh month of winter, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：是月，盘盘、百济国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：本月，盘盘、百济国都派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: This month, both Pan Pan and Baekje sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月戊午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三年春季的正月初一，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the third year of spring.

古文：庚午，镇左将军长沙王叔坚即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：十三日，镇左将军长沙王陈叔坚依本官号加封开府仪同三司。
English: On the 13th, the town's left-wing general, Changsha Wang Chen Shujian, followed his official title and added the title of Kaifu Yi to the three divisions.

古文：三月辛酉，前丰州刺史章大宝举兵反。
现代文：三月初五，前丰州刺史章大宝起兵反叛。
English: On the 5th day of March, the former Toyosu stabbing history chapter big treasure started a rebellion.

古文：夏四月庚戌，丰州义军主陈景详斩大宝，传首建邺。
现代文：夏季的四月二十四日，丰州义军的军主陈景祥杀死章大宝，把人头传送到建邺。
English: On the 24th day of April in summer, Chen Jingxiang, the commander of the Toyosu rebel army, killed Zhang Dabao and sent his head to Jianye.

古文：冬十月己丑，丹丹国遣使朝贡。
现代文：冬季的十月初六，丹丹国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Dandan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十一月己未，诏修复仲尼庙。
现代文：十一月初七，诏令修复孔子庙。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, the Confucius Temple was restored by imperial decree.

古文：辛巳，幸长干寺，大赦。
现代文：二十九日，视察长干寺，实行大赦。
English: On the 29th, he inspected Chogan-ji Temple and implemented an amnesty.

古文：十二月癸卯，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十二月二十一日，高丽国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On December 21, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，梁明帝殂。
现代文：本年，梁明帝逝世。
English: This year, Emperor Liang Mingdi passed away.

古文：四年春正月甲寅，诏王公以下各荐所知，无隔舆皁。
现代文：四年春季的正月初三，诏令王公以下官员各自举荐所了解的贤人，不计较身份的低微。
English: On the third day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fourth year, officials below the prince were ordered to recommend the wise men they knew, regardless of their lower status.

古文：二月丙申，立皇弟叔谟爲巴东王，叔显爲临江王，叔坦爲新会王，叔隆爲新甯王。
现代文：二月十五日，立皇弟陈叔谟为巴东王，陈叔显为临江王，陈叔坦为新会王，陈叔隆为新宁王。
English: On February 15, Chen Shume, the younger brother of the founding emperor, became the king of Padang, Chen Shuxian became the king of Linjiang, Chen Shutan became the king of Xinhui, and Chen Shulong became the king of Xinning.

古文：夏五月丁巳，立皇子庄爲会稽王。
现代文：夏季的五月初七，立皇子陈庄为会稽王。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the summer, the prince Chen Zhuang was appointed as the king of the association.

古文：秋九月甲午，幸玄武湖，肄舻舰阅武。
现代文：秋季的九月十七日，驾临玄武湖，视察军舰检阅军队。
English: In the autumn, on September 17th, he arrived at Lake Xuanwu to inspect the warships and review the troops.

古文：丁未，百济国遣使朝贡。
现代文：三十日，百济国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 30th, Baekje sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月癸亥，以尚书仆射江总爲尚书令，吏部尚书谢侑爲尚书仆射。
现代文：冬季的十月十六日，任命尚书仆射江总为尚书令，吏部尚书谢亻由为尚书仆射。
English: On the 16th day of October in winter, he appointed Shang Shufu Sha Jiang Zong as Shang Shuling, and Shang Shuling Xie Rong Yu of the Personnel Department as Shang Shuling.

古文：十一月己卯，大赦。
现代文：十一月初三，实行大赦。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：祯明元年春正月戊寅，大赦，改元。
现代文：祯明元年春季的正月初三，实行大赦，改换年号。
English: On the third day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：乙未，地震。
现代文：二十日，发生地震。
English: In the morning, an earthquake occurred.

古文：秋九月庚寅，梁太傅安平王萧岩、荆州刺史萧瓛，遣其都官尚书沈君公诣荆州刺史陈慧纪请降。
现代文：秋季的九月十八日，梁朝的太傅安平王陈岩、荆州刺史萧王献，派遣他们的都官尚书沈君公到荆州刺史陈慧纪那里请求投降。
English: On the 18th day of the 9th month of the autumn, Liang Dynasty's Taifu Anping Wang Chen Yan and Jing Province's Zishi Xiao Wang Xian sent their capital official Shangshu Shen Juncong to Jing Province's Zishi Chen Huiji to request his surrender.

古文：辛卯，岩等帅其文武官男女济江。
现代文：十九日，萧岩等率领他们的文武官员和男女众人渡过长江。
English: On the 19th, Xiao Yan and others led their cultural and military officials and men and women across the Yangtze River.

古文：甲午，大赦。
现代文：二十二日，实行大赦。
English: On the 22nd, an amnesty was implemented.

古文：冬十一月丙子，以萧岩爲平东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史。
现代文：冬季的十一月初五，任命萧岩为平东将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November in winter, Xiao Yan was appointed as the General of Pingdong, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Dongyangzhou Zhishi.

古文：丁亥，以骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司豫章王叔英爲兼司徒。
现代文：十六日，任命骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司豫章王陈叔英为兼司徒。
English: On the 16th, he appointed the grand marshal of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the third secretary of the Henan Provincial Government, Wang Chen Shuying, as his assistant.

古文：十二月丙辰，以前镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史鄱阳王伯山爲镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十二月十六日，任命前镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司、东扬州刺史鄱阳王陈伯山为镇卫大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On December 16th, Chen Boshan, the former Zhenwei general, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, and the East Yangzhou chief priest of Shenyang, was appointed as Zhenwei general and Kaifu ceremony and three departments.

古文：二年春正月辛巳，立皇子恮爲东阳王，恬爲钱唐王。
现代文：二年春季的正月十一日，立皇子陈籉为东阳王，陈恬为钱塘王。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the spring of the second year, the prince Chen Xi was appointed King of Dongyang, and Chen Xi was appointed King of Qiantang.

古文：夏四月戊申，有群鼠无数，自蔡洲岸入石头，渡淮至于青塘两岸，数日自死，随流出江。
现代文：夏季的四月初十，有一大群老鼠无数只，从蔡州的江岸进入石头城，渡过淮河到达青塘两岸，不几天自己死去，随着长江流水漂出长江。
English: On the tenth day of April in the summer, a large group of countless mice entered Stone Town from the riverbank of Caizhou, crossed the Huaihe River to the two banks of Qingtang, died a few days later, and floated out of the Yangtze River with the flowing water.

古文：是月，郢州南浦水黑如墨。
现代文：本月，郢州的南浦水黑得像墨一样。
English: In August, the water in Nampo, Luzhou, was as black as ink.

古文：五月甲午，东冶铸铁，有物赤色，大如数升，自天坠鎔所，有声隆隆如雷，铁飞出墙外，烧人家。
现代文：五月二十六日，东冶铸造铁器，有一个赤色的东西，有几升大小，从天上落到了熔炉中，发出像雷一样的隆隆声，铁器又飞出墙外，烧了居民的宅院。
English: On May 26, a red object, several liters in size, fell from the sky onto the furnace of the Dongye Ironware Foundry, emitting a rumbling sound like thunder. The ironware flew out of the wall and burned the residents' houses.

古文：六月戊戌，扶南国遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月初一，扶南国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On the first day of June, Funan Province sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚子，废皇太子胤爲吴兴王，立扬州刺史始安王深爲皇太子。
现代文：初三，把皇太子陈胤废黜为吴兴王，立扬州刺史始安王陈琛为皇太子。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the crown prince Chen Yan was dethroned as Wu Xing Wang, and the Yangzhou Prince Shi An Wang Chen Yu was established as the crown prince.

古文：辛丑，以太子詹事袁宪爲尚书仆射。
现代文：初四，任命太子詹事袁宪为尚书仆射。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Yuan Xian as his assistant.

古文：丁巳，大风自西北激涛水入石头城，淮渚暴溢，漂没舟乘。
现代文：二初十，大风从西北激起浪涛，水进入石头城，淮河暴涨，淹没了舟船。
English: On the tenth day of the second lunar month, a strong wind from the northwest stirred up the waves, the water entered the Stone City, the Huai River surged, and the boat was submerged.

古文：冬十月己亥，立皇子藩爲吴王。
现代文：冬季十月初三，立皇子陈藩为吴王。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of winter, the prince of the Chen clan was crowned the king of Wu.

古文：己酉，幸莫府山，大校猎。
现代文：十三日，驾临莫府山，进行大型狩猎。
English: On the 13th, they arrived at Mt. Mofu for a large-scale hunt.

古文：十一月丁卯，诏克日于大政殿讯狱。
现代文：十一月初二，诏令限定日期在大政殿审理案件。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the Dahal decree set a limited date for the hearing of cases in the Grand Hall of State.

古文：丙子，立皇弟叔荣爲新昌王，叔匡爲太原王。
现代文：十一日，立皇弟陈叔荣为新昌王，陈叔匡为太原王。
English: On the 11th day, Chen Shurong, the younger brother of the founding emperor, became the king of Xinchang, and Chen Shuyuan became the king of Taiyuan.

古文：初隋文帝受周禅，甚敦邻好，宣帝尚不禁侵掠。
现代文：起初隋文帝受周朝的禅让，十分努力与邻邦修好，宣帝并不怎么防范侵掠。
English: At first, Emperor Sui and Emperor Wen yielded to the Zhou Dynasty and made great efforts to mend fences with neighboring countries. Emperor Xuan did not do much to prevent invasion and plunder.

古文：太建末，隋兵大举，闻宣帝崩，乃命班师，遣使赴吊，修敌国之礼，书称姓名顿首。而后主益骄，书末云： 想彼统内如宜，此宇宙清泰。 
现代文：太建末年，隋兵大举行动，听说宣帝去世，便命令回军，派遣使者前往吊祭，用平等国家的礼节，书信称姓名顿首，而后主越发骄傲，在书信的末尾说： 想来你们那里统驭内部如果适当，这宇宙就会清静太平。 
English: At the end of the Tai Jian period, the Sui soldiers made a big move. When they heard that Emperor Xuan had died, they ordered to return to the army, sent an envoy to the hanging ceremony, and with the etiquette of an equal country, the letter said the name suddenly, and the latter became more and more proud. At the end of the letter, he said: I want to come to you to control the inside, if appropriate, this universe will be quiet and peaceful.

古文：隋文帝不说，以示朝臣。
现代文：隋文帝很不高兴，把它拿给朝臣看。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was very unhappy and showed it to his courtiers.

古文：清河公杨素以爲主辱，再拜请罪，及襄邑公贺若弼并奋求致讨。
现代文：清河公杨素认为这是君主的耻辱，跪拜请罪，他和襄邑公贺若弼都奋力要求兴兵讨伐。
English: Yang Su, the lord of Qinghe, thought this was a disgrace to the monarch, and kneeled down to ask for forgiveness. He and the lord of Xiangyi, He Ruoqi, both tried their best to get the soldiers to fight.

古文：后副使袁彦聘隋，窃图隋文帝状以归，后主见之，大骇曰： 吾不欲见此人。 
现代文：后来副使袁彦到隋朝聘问，私下里把隋文帝的相貌画下来带回朝中，后主见了，大惊说： 我不愿意见到这个人。 
English: Later, the deputy envoy Yuan Yan went to the Sui Dynasty to ask questions. He secretly drew the face of the Sui Emperor and brought it back to the court. When the empress saw it, she was shocked and said, "I don't want to meet this person."

古文：每遣间谍，隋文帝皆给衣马，礼遣以归。
现代文：每次陈朝派遣间谍，隋文帝都送给衣服马匹，以礼相待，打发他们返回。
English: Every time the Chen Dynasty sent spies, the Sui Emperor gave them clothes and horses, treated them with courtesy, and sent them back.

古文：后主愈骄，不虞外难，荒于酒色，不恤政事，左右嬖佞珥貂者五十人，妇人美貌丽服巧态以从者千馀人。
现代文：后主更加骄傲了，不担心境外的患难，荒于酒色，不问政事，左右得到宠幸、带玉耳饰穿貂皮衣的小人有五十个，跟随身边的容貌美丽、衣服华艳、姿态巧媚的女子一千多人。
English: His successor was even more proud. He did not worry about the hardships outside the country. He was more interested in wine than politics. He did not care about politics. There were fifty little people around him who were favored, wearing mink coats with jade earrings. He was followed by more than a thousand women with beautiful looks, gorgeous clothes, and graceful posture.

古文：常使张贵妃、孔贵人等八人夹坐，江总、孔范等十人预宴，号曰 狎客 。
现代文：经常让张贵妃、孔贵人等八人夹坐在两边，江总、孔范等十人一起宴饮，号称 狎客 。
English: He often had eight people, including Zhang Guifei and Kong Guijin, sit on either side of him, and ten people, including Jiang Zong and Kong Fan, dine together. They were known as "guests."

古文：先令八妇人襞采笺，制五言诗，十客一时继和，迟则罚酒。
现代文：首先让八个妇人折叠彩纸，自己写一首五言诗，十个文人同时接续唱和，谁迟了就罚酒。
English: First of all, let eight women fold the colored paper and write a five-character poem by themselves. Ten literati will sing and chant at the same time. Whoever is late will be fined.

古文：君臣酣饮，从夕达旦，以此爲常。
现代文：君臣酣饮，从晚上直到早晨，以此作为常事。
English: It was customary for dignitaries and ministers to drink from evening until morning.

古文：而盛修宫室，无时休止。
现代文：他还大修宫室，无休无止。
English: He also overhauled the palace rooms, which he did incessantly.

古文：税江税市，征取百端。刑罚酷滥，牢狱常满。
现代文：在江面和市场上征税，名目百种，刑罚严酷繁多，牢狱经常塞满。
English: Taxes are levied on the surface of the river and in the market, there are hundreds of names, the punishments are harsh and varied, and the prisons are often full.

古文：覆舟山及蒋山柏林，冬月常多采醴，后主以爲甘露之瑞。
现代文：覆舟山和蒋山的柏树林，冬季常常有许多汁液泌出，后主认为是祥瑞的甘露。
English: The cypress forests that cover Zhoushan and Jiangshan often secrete a lot of sap in winter, which is considered to be the nectar of auspiciousness.

古文：前后灾异甚多。
现代文：在这前后灾害很多。
English: There were many disasters before and after this.

古文：有神自称老子，游于都下，与人对语而不见形，言吉凶多验，得酒辄釂之，经三四年乃去。
现代文：有个神人自称是老子，漫游京城，和人对面说话而不见身影，预言吉凶大多应验，得到酒就喝光，过了三四年才离去。
English: There is a godman who claims to be Laozi, roams the capital, speaks to people face to face without being seen, most of the prophecies of good and evil come true, gets drunk, and leaves after three or four years.

古文：船下有声云 明年乱 。
现代文：有一只船的下面有声音说 明年乱 。
English: There was a voice from under a ship saying that there would be a riot next year.

古文：视之，得婴儿长三尺而无头。
现代文：仔细一看，有一个婴儿，身长三尺而没有头。
English: On closer inspection, there was a baby, three feet long and headless.

古文：蒋山衆鸟鼓两翼以拊膺，曰 奈何帝！
现代文：蒋山的各种鸟扇动着两个翅膀来呼应，说 奈何帝！
English: All kinds of birds in Mount Jiang fan their two wings to echo, saying, "What a pity!

古文：奈何帝！ 
现代文：奈何帝 ！
English: What a pity!

古文：又建邺城无故自坏。
现代文：又建邺城无故自己损坏。
English: He also damaged the city of Jianye for no reason.

古文：青龙出建阳门，井涌雾，赤地生黑白毛，大风拔朱雀门，临平湖草旧塞，忽然自通。
现代文：有青龙飞出建阳门，井中涌出雾气，干旱而不生五谷的地上生出黑白毛，大风吹毁了朱雀门，临平湖中的草原来阻塞，忽然自己畅通。
English: A blue dragon flew out of the Jianyang Gate, mist gushed out of the well, black and white hair sprouted on the dry and barren ground, a strong wind blew down the Suzaku Gate, and the grass in the Linying Lake, which was originally blocked, suddenly flowed freely.

古文：后主又梦黄衣人围城，乃尽去绕城橘树。
现代文：后主又梦见有穿黄衣服的人围城，于是便全部除掉了环绕城市的橘树。
English: Later, the lord had another dream about people in yellow clothing besieging the city, so he removed all the orange trees surrounding the city.

古文：又见大蛇中分，首尾各走。
现代文：又看见一条大蛇从中间分开，头尾各自行走。
English: And I saw a great serpent divided in the midst, and go forth every one straight forward.

古文：夜中索饮，忽变爲血。
现代文：他在夜里要酒喝，忽然却变成了血。
English: He asked for wine in the night, and suddenly it turned into blood.

古文：有血沾阶至于坐床头而火起。
现代文：有血洒在台阶上，又弄到坐床的头上而起火。
English: Blood was spilled on the steps and on the headboard of the bed, which caught fire.

古文：有狐入其床下，捕之不见。
现代文：有狐狸钻入他的床下，去捉它却又看不见了。
English: A fox had crept under his bed and he went to catch it but couldn't see it.

古文：以爲祅，乃自卖于佛寺爲奴以禳之。
现代文：后主以为是反常的妖异，于是便自己卖身到佛寺中为奴来消灾。
English: The later owner thought it was an abnormal phenomenon, so he sold himself to a Buddhist temple as a slave to eliminate the disaster.

古文：于郭内大皇佛寺起七层塔，未毕，火从中起，飞至石头，烧死者甚衆。
现代文：他在外城内大皇佛寺建了一座七层塔，还没有建成，火从里面烧起来，飞到石头城，烧死的人很多。
English: In the outer city, he built a seven-storey pagoda for the Great Emperor's Buddhist Temple. It had not yet been completed, but a fire started inside and spread to Stone Town. Many people were burned to death.

古文：又采木湘州，拟造正寝，筏至牛渚矶，尽没水中，既而渔人见筏浮于海上。
现代文：又在湘州采伐木材，准备建造正寝，木筏行到牛渚矶，全部沉没在水中，不久一个渔夫看见木筏漂在海上。
English: In Xiangzhou, timber was harvested and prepared for construction. The rafts traveled to Niuhu Island, where they all sank in the water. A fisherman soon saw the rafts floating on the sea.

古文：起齐云观，国人歌曰： 齐云观，寇来无际畔。 
现代文：新盖起了一座齐云观，京城的人有歌谣说： 齐云观，寇来无际畔。 
English: A new Qiyun outlook has been built, and people in Beijing have a song saying: Qiyun outlook, Kolei boundless shore.

古文：始北齐末，诸省官人多称省主，未几而灭。
现代文：当初在北齐末年，各台省的长官多称为省主，不久就灭亡了。
English: At the end of the Northern Qi Dynasty, the governors of various provinces were mostly called provincial governors, but they soon died out.

古文：至是举朝亦有此称，识者以爲省主，主将见省之兆。
现代文：到现在整个朝廷也有这种说法，有识者认为省主，就是主将被省的征兆。
English: To this day, the entire imperial court shares this view. Those in the know believe that the arrival of the governor is a sign that the lord is about to be saved.

古文：隋文帝谓仆射高熲曰： 我爲百姓父母，岂可限一衣带水不拯之乎？ 
现代文：隋文帝对仆射高赹说： 我是百姓的父母，难道可以被一衣带水阻隔而不去拯救他们吗？ 
English: Emperor Sui Wen said to the servant Gao Ya: I am the parents of the people, can I be blocked by a coat of water and not save them?

古文：命大作战船。
现代文：就命令大造战船。
English: He ordered a large warship to be built.

古文：人请密之，隋文帝曰： 吾将显行天诛，何密之有！
现代文：有人请求保守秘密，隋文帝说： 我将要公开按照天意进行讨伐，有什么秘密要保？
English: Someone asked to keep it a secret, and Emperor Sui Wen said: I will openly carry out the crusade according to God's will, what secret should I keep?

古文：使投柿于江，若彼能改，吾又何求。 
现代文：让人把削下的木片投到江中，如果他们能改悔，我又有什么要求？ 
English: Let people throw the wood chips into the river, if they can repent, what do I require?

古文：及纳梁萧瓛、萧岩，隋文愈忿，以晋王广爲元帅，督八十总管致讨。
现代文：等到接受了萧王献、萧岩的投降，隋文帝越发愤怒，以晋王杨广为元帅，督统八十总管进行讨伐。
English: After he accepted the surrender of Xiao Wangchen and Xiao Yan, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty became more and more enraged and led a crusade with Yang Guang, the King of Jin, as the marshal and the eighty-year-old governor-general.

古文：乃送玺书，暴后主二十恶。
现代文：派人送去了盖有玉玺的信，揭露后主的二十条罪恶。
English: They sent a letter with a tambourine to expose the 20 sins of the deceased.

古文：又散写诏书，书三十万纸，遍喻江外。
现代文：又散发诏书，写成三十万张，遍撒江外，让人们都知道。
English: The imperial edict was also distributed, and 300,000 copies were written and scattered all over the river, so that people would know about it.

古文：诸军既下，江滨镇戍相继奏闻。
现代文：各路军队沿江而下，江边镇守的军将相继奏知朝廷。
English: Troops from all directions marched down the river, and the military commanders of the towns along the river successively reported to the imperial court.

古文：新除湘州刺史施文庆、中书舍人沈客卿掌机密，并抑而不言。
现代文：新任命的湘州刺史施文庆、中书舍人沈客卿掌管机密，都把情报扣下而不上报。
English: The newly-appointed Xiangzhou magistrate Shi Wenqing and the person in charge of Chinese books, Shen Keqing, both withheld the information and did not report it.

古文：初萧岩、萧瓛之至也，德教学士沈君道梦殿前长人，朱衣武冠，头出栏上，攘臂怒曰： 那忽受叛萧误人事。 
现代文：起初萧岩、萧王献前来，德教学士沈君道梦见殿前有个高个子的人，红衣服武士冠，头露出栏杆上面，捋起袖子愤怒地说： 怎么忽然被叛徒萧氏误了大事！ 
English: At first, Xiao Yan and Xiao Wang came forward to present, and the German scholar Shen Jundao dreamed that there was a tall man in front of the hall, red clothes and a samurai crown, his head exposed above the railing, and he rolled up his sleeves and said angrily: How did the traitor Mr. Xiao suddenly miss the big event!

古文：后主闻之，忌二萧，故远散其衆，以岩爲东扬州刺史，瓛爲吴州刺史。
现代文：后主听说后，很忌讳二萧，所以把他们的兵众远远地分散开，以萧岩为东扬州刺史，萧王献为吴州刺史。
English: After hearing this, the latter became very suspicious of the two Xiaos, so he dispersed their troops far away, with Xiao Yan as the history of East Yangzhou, and Xiao Wang as the history of Wuzhou.

古文：使领军任忠出守吴兴郡，以襟带二州。
现代文：让领军任忠出京任吴兴郡太守，以便像襟带一样环绕二州。
English: Let the leader of the army, Ren Zhong, leave Beijing to become the governor of Wuxing County, so that he can encircle the two states like a lapel.

古文：使南平王嶷镇江州，永嘉王彦镇南徐州。
现代文：派南平王陈嶷镇守江州，永嘉王陈彦镇守南徐州。
English: Nanping King Chen Yuzhen was sent to guard Jiangzhou, and Yongjia King Chen Yan was sent to guard South Xuzhou.

古文：寻召二王赴期明年元会，命缘江诸防船舰，悉从二王还都爲威势，以示梁人之来者，由是江中无一斗船。
现代文：不久又召二王赶回来准备明年元旦皇帝朝见群臣的元会，命令沿江的各防御舰船，全部跟随二王回到京城来造成威势，用以显示给前来的梁人看，因此江中已经没有一只战船。
English: Soon after, he called the two kings to hurry back to prepare for the next year's New Year's Day meeting of the emperor's court with his ministers, and ordered all the defensive ships along the river to follow the two kings back to the capital to create a prestige to show to the people of Liang, so there was no warship in the river.

古文：上流诸州兵，皆阻杨素军不得至。
现代文：上游各州的兵，都因为在阻止杨素的军队而不能到来。
English: The soldiers from the upstream states could not come because they were trying to stop Yang Su's army.

古文：都下甲士尚十余万人。
现代文：京城的带甲战士还有十余万人。
English: There are more than 100,000 armored soldiers in the capital.

古文：及闻隋军临江，后主曰： 王气在此，齐兵三度来，周兵再度至，无不摧没。
现代文：等到听说隋军到了江中，后主说： 王气在此，齐兵三度来犯，周兵两次到达，无不被摧毁。
English: When she heard that the Sui army had arrived in the middle of the river, she said, "The king's spirit is here. Qi soldiers have come three times, Zhou soldiers have arrived twice, and nothing will not be destroyed."

古文：虏今来者必自败。 
现代文：敌人现在来侵，必然自遭失败。 
English: If the enemy invades now, he is sure to fail.

古文：孔范亦言无渡江理。
现代文：孔范也说没有渡江的可能。
English: Kong Fan also said that there was no possibility of crossing the river.

古文：但奏伎纵酒，作诗不辍。
现代文：只是继续观看伎人奏乐和纵情饮酒，共同作诗不停。
English: They just continued to watch the geisha play music, drink alcohol, and write poetry together.

古文：三年春正月乙丑朔，朝会，大雾四塞，入人鼻皆辛酸。
现代文：祯明三年春季的正月初一，举行朝会，大雾弥漫四方，进入人的鼻孔都感到酸辣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial court meeting was held. The fog was thick in all directions, and people's nostrils felt hot and sour.

古文：后主昏睡，至晡时乃罢。
现代文：后主昏然睡去，到傍晚时候才醒。
English: Afterwards, the owner fell into a deep sleep and only woke up in the late afternoon.

古文：是日，隋将贺若弼自北道广陵济，韩擒趋横江济，分兵晨袭采石，取之。
现代文：这一天，隋将贺若弼从北面的广陵渡江，韩擒虎前往横江渡江，分兵于清晨袭击采石，将它攻占。
English: On this day, the Sui general He Ruoqi crossed the Yangtze River from Guangling in the north, and Han Xinghu went to the Yangtze River to cross the Yangtze River. The detachment attacked the quarry in the early morning and captured it.

古文：进拔姑孰，次于新林。
现代文：又进军占领姑熟，驻扎在新林。
English: They also marched into occupied Gukju and stationed in Xinlin.

古文：时弼攻下京口，缘江诸戍望风尽走，弼分兵断曲阿之冲而入。
现代文：当时贺若弼攻下京口，沿江各个据点的守军全都望风逃走，贺若弼分兵截断曲阿的要冲而攻入。
English: At that time, Herakozaki captured Kyoguchi, and the defenders of all the strongholds along the river fled, and Herakozaki's detachment cut off Qua's charge and invaded.

古文：丙寅，采石戍主徐子建至告变。
现代文：初二，采石的守军主将徐子建赶到，报告了情况的变化。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, the quarry's commander, Xu Zijian, arrived and reported the changes in the situation.

古文：戊辰，乃下诏曰： 犬羊陵纵，侵窃郊畿，蜂虿有毒，宜时扫定，朕当亲御六师，廓清八表，内外并可戒严。 
现代文：初四，下诏书说： 鬼子猖狂，已侵占近郊，蜂蝎有毒，应及时扫除，朕一定要亲自率领六军，肃清八方敌寇，京城内外全部可以戒严。 
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the next imperial edict said: "The devils are rampant and have occupied the suburbs. The wasps and scorpions are poisonous and should be swept away in time. I must personally lead the six armies to clear out the enemy invaders in all directions. All areas inside and outside the capital can be under martial law."

古文：于是以萧摩诃爲皇畿大都督，樊猛爲上流大都督，樊毅爲下流大都督，司马消难、施文庆并爲大监军，重立赏格，分兵镇守要害，僧尼道士尽皆执役。
现代文：于是任命萧摩诃为皇畿大都督，樊猛为上游大都督，樊毅为下游大都督，司马消难、施文庆都为大监军，重重地立下赏格，分兵镇守要害，僧尼道士全都参加服务。
English: As a result, Xiao Maqin was appointed as the grand governor of the Kinki region, Xuan Meng as the grand governor of the upstream, Zou Yi as the grand governor of the downstream, Sima Xidan and Shi Wenqing as the grand supervisors of the army, and the awards were established, the soldiers were divided to guard the key, and the monks and nuns all participated in the service.

古文：庚午，贺若弼攻陷南徐州。
现代文：初六，贺若弼攻陷南徐州。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, He Ruoqi conquered the southern Xuzhou.

古文：辛未，韩擒又陷南豫州。
现代文：初七，韩擒虎又攻陷了南豫州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Han Xuanhu once again invaded and occupied southern Yuzhou.

古文：隋军南北道并进。
现代文：隋军南北道并进。
English: The Sui army advanced along the north-south road.

古文：辛巳，贺若弼进军锺山，顿白土冈之东南，衆军败绩。
现代文：十七日，贺若弼进军钟山，驻扎在白土冈的东南面，众军溃败。
English: On the 17th, He Ruoqi marched into Zhongshan, stationed in the southeast of Baidu Hill, and his army was routed.

古文：弼乘胜进军宫城，烧北掖门。
现代文：贺若弼乘胜进军宫城，火烧北掖门。
English: Horakuni marched into Miyagi in triumph and set fire to Kitakata-mon Gate.

古文：是时，韩擒率衆自新林至石子冈，镇东大将军任忠出降擒，仍引擒经朱雀航趣宫城，自南掖门入。
现代文：这时候，韩擒虎率领军兵从新林到石子冈，镇东大将军任忠出城投降韩擒虎，又引导韩擒虎经过朱雀航奔向宫城，从南掖门进入。
English: At this time, Han Xunhu led the soldiers from Xinlin to Shizigaoka, and the town's general Ren Zhong went out of the city to surrender to Han Xunhu. He also led Han Xunhu to run to Miyagi through Suzakhahang and enter from the South Gate.

古文：城内文武百司皆遁出，唯尚书仆射袁宪、后合舍人夏侯公韵侍侧。
现代文：城内文武百官都逃出去了，只有尚书仆射袁宪、后阁舍人夏侯公韵在旁边侍候。
English: All the military and civilian officials in the city had fled, and only Shang Shufu (尚書僕) shot Yuan Xian and Xia Hou Gongyun (后閣舍人) were waiting nearby.

古文：宪劝端坐殿上，正色以待之。
现代文：袁宪劝他端坐在殿上，面色严肃地等待他们。
English: Yuan Xian advised him to sit in the hall and wait for them with a serious expression on his face.

古文：后主曰： 锋刃之下，未可及当，吾自有计。 
现代文：后主说： 刀剑砍下来，来不及抵挡，我自有办法。 
English: Afterward, the master said, "Since the sword has been cut down, there is no time to resist. I have my own way.

古文：乃逃于井。
现代文：便逃到了井里。
English: They fled to the well.

古文：二人苦谏不从，以身蔽井，后主与争久之方得入。
现代文：两人苦苦劝谏而不听从，就用身体把井挡住，后主与他们争了好久才得以进入。
English: The two of them tried hard to persuade him, but he did not listen, so they blocked the well with their bodies. The new owner fought with them for a long time before he was able to enter.

古文：沈后居处如常。
现代文：沈皇后的居住、举止和平时一样。
English: Empress Shen's residence and behavior are the same as usual.

古文：太子深年十五，闭合而坐，舍人孔伯鱼侍焉。
现代文：太子陈琛年龄十五岁，关上门坐在里边，舍人孔伯鱼在旁边侍候。
English: The fifteen-year-old prince Chen Xi closed the door and sat down inside, while his servant, Kong Bo Yu, waited nearby.

古文：戍士叩合而入，深安坐劳之曰： 戎旅在涂，不至劳也。 
现代文：军士敲门闯入，陈琛安然坐在那里慰劳他们说： 军旅长在路途中，没有能够前去慰劳。 
English: The sergeant knocked on the door and broke in. Chen Yao sat there calmly and comforted them. They said, "The brigade commander was on his way, so he couldn't go to comfort them."

古文：既而军人窥井而呼之，后主不应。
现代文：随后军人窥视井中而进行呼叫，后主不答应。
English: The soldier then peered into the well and called out, but the owner did not respond.

古文：欲下石，乃闻叫声。
现代文：后来要把石头投下去，才听到叫声。
English: Later, they were about to throw the stones down, when they heard shouting.

古文：以绳引之，惊其太重，及出，乃与张贵妃、孔贵人三人同乘而上。
现代文：他们用绳子往上拉他，很惊奇他体重过大，等到出来一看，原来是与张贵妃、孔贵人三个人一同乘着绳子上来。
English: They pulled him up with a rope, and were surprised to see that he was too heavy. When they came out, they saw that he had come up on the rope together with Zhang Guifei and Kong Guifen.

古文：隋文帝闻之大惊。
现代文：隋文帝听说后非常吃惊。
English: Emperor Sui was very surprised when he heard about it.

古文：开府鲍宏曰： 东井上于天文爲秦，今王都所在，投井其天意邪。 
现代文：开府鲍宏说： 东井在天文上的分野是秦地，现在是京城所在的地方，投井大概是天意吧！ 
English: Kaifu Baohong said, "Dongjing's astronomical field is Qin, and now it is the place where the capital city is located. It was probably God's will that the well was sunk!"

古文：先是江东谣多唱王献之桃叶辞，云： 桃叶复桃叶，度江不用烜，但度无所苦，我自接迎汝。 
现代文：先前江东民谣经常唱王献之的《桃叶辞》，说： 桃叶复桃叶，渡江不用楫，但渡无所苦，我自迎接汝。 
English: In the past, Jiangdong folk songs often sang the "Peach Leaf Speech" presented by Wang, saying: "Peach leaf plus peach leaf, cross the river without rafting, but there is no hardship in crossing, I will welcome you myself."

古文：及晋王广军于六合镇，其山名桃叶，果乘陈船而度。
现代文：等到晋王杨广驻军在六合镇，那座山叫做桃叶，果然是乘坐着陈朝的船渡江的。
English: When the Jin king Yang Guang stationed his troops in Liuhe Town, that mountain was called Taobao, and he did indeed cross the river on a boat from the Chen Dynasty.

古文：丙戌，晋王广入据台城，送后主于东宫。
现代文：二十二日，晋王杨广进入并占据台城，把后主送到了东宫。
English: On the 22nd, the Jin king Yang Guang entered and occupied Taicheng, and sent the empress dowager to the East Palace.

古文：三月己巳，后主与王公百司，同发自建邺，之长安。
现代文：三月初六，后主和王公百官，一同从建邺出发，前往长安。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the Empress Dowager and Wang Gong, accompanied by hundreds of officials, set out from Jianye and headed for Chang'an.

古文：隋文帝权分京城人宅以俟，内外修整，遣使迎劳之，陈人讴咏，忘其亡焉。
现代文：隋文帝临时分出京城居民的房舍来等候他们，内外修整，派遣使者迎接和慰劳他们，陈朝人讴歌咏叹，忘记了他们的亡国。
English: Emperor Sui Wen temporarily allocated the houses of the residents of Beijing to wait for them, repaired them inside and out, and sent emissaries to greet and comfort them. The Chen Dynasty people sang and lamented, forgetting their lost country.

古文：使还奏言： 自后主以下，大小在路，五百里累累不绝。 
现代文：使者回来上奏说： 从后主往下，大大小小走在路上，五百里绵绵不绝。 
English: When the messenger returned, he reported: "From the master's back to the master's back, walking on the road, large and small, the five hundred miles stretch endlessly.

古文：隋文帝嗟叹曰： 一至于此。 
现代文：隋文帝叹息说： 竟然到了这种地步。 
English: Sui Emperor Wen sighed and said, "It has come to this.

古文：及至京师，列陈之舆服器物于庭，引后主于前，及前后二太子、诸父诸弟衆子之爲王者，凡二十八人；司空司马消难、尚书令江总、仆射袁宪、骠骑萧摩诃、护军樊毅、中领军鲁广达、镇军将军任忠、吏部尚书姚察、侍中中书令蔡征、左卫将军樊猛，自尚书郎以上二百余人，文帝使纳言宣诏劳之。
现代文：等到了京城，把陈朝的车服器物摆放在庭院中，引导后主走到前面，还有前后两个太子、各个叔伯兄弟儿子当中做王的，共二十八人；司空司马消难、尚书令江总、仆射袁宪、骠骑萧摩诃、护军樊毅、中领军鲁广达、镇军将军任忠、吏部尚书姚察、侍中中书令蔡征、左卫将军樊猛，自尚书郎以上二百多人，文帝让纳言宣读诏书慰劳他们。
English: When they arrived at the capital, they placed the Chen Dynasty's car clothing and utensils in the courtyard and guided the heir to the throne to the front. There were also two princes in front and behind, and the king among the sons of various uncles and brothers, a total of 28 people; Sikyong Sima Qianhan, Shang Shuling Jiang Zong, Pupil Yuan Xian, Rider Xiao Miao, Guard Shen Yi, Central Leader Lu Guangda, Town Army General Ren Zhong, Staff Shang Shuling Yao Zha, Chamberlain Central Secretary Cai Zheng, and General Zuo Wei Qianmeng. Since Shang Shuling, there have been more than

古文：次使内史令宣诏让后主，后主伏地屏息不能对，乃见宥。
现代文：然后又让内史令宣读诏书指责后主，后主伏在地上屏住呼吸不能对答，才被宽免。
English: Then, the imperial edict was read out, and the emperor was reprimanded. The emperor lay on the ground holding his breath, unable to answer, before he was pardoned.

古文：隋文帝诏陈武、文、宣三帝陵，总给五户分守之。
现代文：隋文帝诏令陈朝的武、文、宣三个皇帝的陵墓，总共派给五户分别守护。
English: Sui Emperor Wen Zhao ordered the mausoleums of the three emperors Wu, Wen and Xuan of the Chen Dynasty to be guarded separately by five households.

古文：初，武帝始即位，其夜奉朝请史普直宿省，梦有人自天而下，导从数十，至太极殿前，北面执玉策金字曰： 陈氏五帝三十二年。 
现代文：起初，武帝刚即位，当天夜里奉朝请史普在殿中值勤，梦见有人从天上下来，引导和随从的人有几十个，到了太极殿前面，面向北方拿着玉册金字说： 陈氏五个皇帝共三十二年。 
English: At first, Emperor Wu had just ascended to the throne. That night, he had a dream that someone came down from the sky, leading and accompanying dozens of people. He came to the front of the Taiji Hall, facing north, holding a golden scroll and said: "The five emperors of the Chen dynasty have a total of thirty-two years.

古文：及后主在东宫时，有妇人突入，唱曰 毕国主 。
现代文：后来后主在东宫的时候，有个妇女突然进来，唱道： 毕国主。 
English: Later, when the empress dowager was in the East Palace, a woman suddenly came in and sang, "Bi Guoshu."

古文：有鸟一足，集其殿庭，以嘴画地成文，曰： 独足上高台，盛草变爲灰，欲知我家处，朱门当水开。 
现代文：有一群鸟都是一只脚，聚集在他的大殿庭院中，用嘴划地成为文字，说： 独足上高台，盛草变为灰，欲知我家处，朱门当水开。 
English: A flock of birds, all with one foot, gathered in the courtyard of his great hall, and with their beaks they wrote words, saying: "Walk alone on the high ground, the grass turns to ashes, if you want to know my home, the vermilion gate is open."

古文：解者以爲独足盖指后主独行无衆，盛草言荒秽，隋承火运，草得火而灰。及至京师，与其家属馆于都水台，所谓上高台当水也。
现代文：能解的人认为独足就是指后主独自行事没有群众，盛草是说荒芜，隋朝承的是火运，草得到火而变为灰，等到了京城，和他的家属在都水台建立馆舍，就是所谓上高台挡水了。
English: Those who can understand it think that "solitary" means that the empress dowager acted alone without the masses, "prosperous grass" means "deserted," and "Sui Dynasty" is inherited by fire, "grass gets fire and turns to ashes," and when he arrived in Beijing, he and his family built a pavilion at the Capital Water Tower, that is, the so-called Shanggaotai water barrier.

古文：其言皆验。
现代文：那些话都应验了。
English: Those words have come to pass.

古文：或言后主名叔宝，反语爲 少福 ，亦败亡之征云。
现代文：还有人说后主名叫叔宝，反语为 少福 ，也是败亡的征兆。
English: Others say that the queen's name is Shubao, an antonym for "less fortunate," which is also a sign of defeat.

古文：既见宥，隋文帝给赐甚厚，数得引见，班同三品。
现代文：后主被宽免以后，隋文帝赐给的东西十分丰厚，多次得到引见，等级和三品官相同。
English: Later, after the lord was pardoned, the Sui Emperor gave him something very rich, which was introduced many times, and the level was the same as that of the third grade official.

古文：每预宴，恐致伤心，爲不奏吴音。
现代文：常常参加宴会，恐怕会引起他的伤心，所以不奏吴地音乐。
English: He often attends banquets, which may cause him grief, so he doesn't play Wu music.

古文：后监守者奏言： 叔宝云， 既无秩位，每预朝集，愿得一官号 。 
现代文：后来监管者上奏道： 陈叔宝说： 现在没有官职级别，又常常参加朝廷的集会，所以希望得到一个官号。  
English: Later, the supervisor made a report: Chen Shubao said: Now there is no official rank, and I often attend meetings at the imperial court, so I hope to get an official title.

古文：隋文帝曰： 叔宝全无心肝。 
现代文：隋文帝说： 陈叔宝全无心肝。 
English: Sui Emperor Wen said: Chen Shubao is completely heartless.

古文：监者又言： 叔宝常耽醉，罕有醒时。 
现代文：监管者又说： 陈叔宝经常沉醉，很少有醒的时候。 
English: The supervisor also said: Chen Shubao is often drunk and rarely wakes up.

古文：隋文帝使节其酒，既而曰： 任其性；不尔，何以过日。 
现代文：隋文帝让人节制他的酒量，稍后又说： 随他的性子吧，不然，怎么过日子呢？ 
English: Emperor Sui Wen had him moderate his drinking, and later said, "Let him follow his inclination, otherwise, how will he live?"

古文：未几，帝又问监者叔宝所嗜。
现代文：不久，文帝又问监管者陈叔宝嗜好什么东西。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wen asked the supervisor what Chen Shubao's hobbies were.

古文：对曰： 嗜驴肉。 
现代文：回答说： 爱吃驴肉。 
English: He replied, "I like donkey meat."

古文：问饮酒多少？对曰： 与其子弟日饮一石。 
现代文：问他饮酒多少，回答说： 和他的子弟每天饮一石。 
English: Asked how much he drank, he replied: "A stone a day with his son."

古文：隋文帝大惊。
现代文：隋文帝大惊。
English: Emperor Sui Wen was shocked.

古文：及从东巡，登芒山，侍饮，赋诗曰： 日月光天德，山川壮帝居，太平无以报，愿上东封书。 
现代文：后来随从东巡，登芒山，陪同饮酒，并且赋诗说： 日月光天德，山川壮帝居，太平无以报，愿上东封书。 
English: Later, he followed the East Tour, climbed Mount Mangan, accompanied by drinking, and wrote a poem saying: The sun and the moon are bright and virtuous, mountains and rivers are strong and the emperor is at home, there is nothing to report, I would like to go to the East to seal the book.

古文：并表请封禅，隋文帝优诏谦让不许。
现代文：并且上表请求封禅，隋文帝宽厚地下诏谦让而不答应。
English: Moreover, the above table requested the sealing of Zen, but the Sui Emperor did not agree to the generous concession.

古文：后从至仁寿宫，常侍宴，及出，隋文帝目之曰： 此败岂不由酒；将作诗功夫，何如思安时事。
现代文：后来跟随到了仁寿宫，常常陪从宴会，等他出去，隋文帝看着他说： 这样的失败还不是因为酒么，用那些作诗的功夫，何如考虑安定天下大事！
English: Later, I followed him to the Renshou Palace and often accompanied him to banquets, waiting for him to go out. Emperor Sui looked at him and said, "This kind of failure is not because of wine. With all the effort of writing poetry, how can we consider the stability of the world?

古文：当贺若弼度京口，彼人密啓告急，叔宝爲饮酒，遂不省之。高熲至日，犹见啓在床下，未开封。
现代文：当贺若弼渡过京口的时候，那边的人秘密写信告急，陈叔宝为了饮酒，便没有看它，高赹到的时候，还看见信放在床下边，没有打开信封。
English: When He Ruojuan passed through Beijing, the people there secretly wrote a letter to express their urgency. Chen Shubao did not read it because he was drinking. When Gao Yao arrived, he also saw the letter under the bed and did not open the envelope.

古文：此亦是可笑，盖天亡也。
现代文：这也是可笑的，看来是天意要它灭亡的。
English: It is also ridiculous, it seems that it is the will of God to destroy it.

古文：昔苻氏所征得国，皆荣贵其主。
现代文：从前苻氏征伐取得各个国家，都是让它的国主荣华富贵。
English: In the past, the conquering and conquering of various countries by the Yi clan made its sovereigns rich and prosperous.

古文：苟欲求名，不知违天命，与之官，乃违天也。 
现代文：如果想要求名，就不知道违背天命，给他官做，就是违背天命的。 
English: If you want to ask for a name, you do not know that it is against the destiny of heaven to give him a post, it is against the destiny.

古文：隋文帝以陈氏子弟既多，恐京下爲过，皆分置诸州县，每岁赐以衣服以安全之。
现代文：隋文帝因为陈氏的子弟太多，恐怕京城难以安排，都分别给安置在各个州县，每年赐给衣服以安抚和保全他们。
English: Because there were too many children of the Chen clan, Emperor Sui Wen, fearing that it would be difficult to arrange the capital city, placed them in various states and counties separately, and gave them clothes every year to appease and protect them.

古文：后主以隋仁寿四年十一月壬子，终于洛阳，时年五十二。
现代文：后主于隋朝的仁寿四年十一月二十日，在洛阳去世，当时年龄五十二岁。
English: He died in Luoyang on November 20, the fourth year of the Sui Dynasty, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：赠大将军，封长城县公，諡曰炀。
现代文：追赠为大将军，封为长城县公，谥号叫作炀。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of general and given the title of county magistrate of the Great Wall. His posthumous name was Yu.

古文：葬河南洛阳之芒山。
现代文：葬在河南洛阳的芒山。
English: He was buried in Mangshan, Luoyang, Henan Province.

