古文：道者，神明之原也。
现代文：天地间各种奇妙的作用都本原于道。
English: All kinds of wondrous functions between heaven and earth originate from the Tao.

古文：神明者，处于度之内而见于度之外者也。
现代文：各种神妙的作用既存在于事物的适度之内又表现在事物的极限之中。
English: All kinds of miraculous effects both exist within the moderation of things and are manifested in the limits of things.

古文：处于度之内者，不言而信；见于度之外者，言而不可易也。
现代文：当事物处于稳定的适度之内时，不需要用言语去表述而万物自有定则；当事物运行到开始转化的极度时，无论怎样用语言去表述，道仍然在其中发挥着神妙的作用而不会改变。
English: When things are within a stable and appropriate range, there is no need to use words to express it, and everything has its own rules; when things run to the extreme of beginning to transform, no matter how to express it in words, the Tao still plays a miraculous role in it and will not change.

古文：处于度之内者，静而不可移也；见于度之外者，动而不可化也。静而不移，动而不化，故曰神。
现代文：事物处于适度之内时，它便保持相对静止状态而道的神妙作用也相应地不会发生变化；当事物处于适度之外时，它的性质便发生变动而道的神妙作用仍然并未改变而继续发挥作用。这种事物动、静有异而道的神妙作用不变的现象，就称为 神 。
English: When a thing is within its proper range, it remains in a relatively static state, and the miraculous effect of Tao does not change accordingly; when a thing is out of its proper range, its nature changes, but the miraculous effect of Tao remains unchanged and continues to play a role. This kind of unchanging phenomenon of the miraculous effect of motion, stillness and otherness of things is called God.

古文：神明者，见知之稽也。
现代文：道的这种神妙作用，便是人们的认识所要取法的楷式。
English: This miraculous effect of the Tao is the formula for people's understanding.

古文：有物始生，建于地而溢于天，莫见其形，大盈终天地之间而莫知其名。
现代文： 道 在刚刚产生的时候，它上超于天而下及于地，没有人知道它是什么样子它广大充满极尽于天地之间，而没有人知道它是怎样的称呼。
English: Tao When it was first created, it extended from the sky to the earth, and no one knew what it looked like. It was vast and filled with the utmost between heaven and earth, and no one knew what it was called.

古文：莫能见知，故有逆成；物乃下生，故有逆刑，祸及其身。
现代文：因为人们不能完全认识 道 ，所以违反常规的事情时有发生；不能认识 道 ，悖逆之事因之而起，刑罚的滥施也由此产生。
English: Because people cannot fully understand the Way, things that are out of the ordinary occur from time to time; because people cannot understand the Way, things that are rebellious occur, and the excessive use of punishment also occurs.

古文：养其所以死，伐其所以生。伐其本而离其亲，伐其与而败其根。
现代文：其结果自然是自取其祸。维护悖逆，损害顺正，离散亲族而破坏根本，攻伐盟友而毁其依托。
English: The result is, of course, self-inflicted. Defending the rebellious, harming the righteous, separating relatives and destroying the foundation, attacking allies and destroying their support.

古文：后必乱而卒于无名。
现代文：上述诸 逆 其结果必然是一切混乱而最终一事无成。
English: The inevitable result of all of the above is chaos and ultimately nothing gets done.

古文：如燔如倅，事之反也；如遥如骄，生之反也。凡物群财，超长非恒者，其死必应之。
现代文：事情一旦发展到满盈极盛就会走向反面一一毁败就会到来；人如过度骄横志满也会走向反面一一危殆马上临头；众物过分生长而超出准限一一离死灭就不远了。
English: Once things develop to fullness and prosperity, they will go the other way - destruction will come; if people are too arrogant and conceited, they will go the other way - danger is imminent; if things grow too much and exceed the limit - death is not far away.

古文：三者皆动于度之外，而欲成功者也，功必不成，祸必反自及也。
现代文：上述三事都是其自身的运动已经超出了正常的准度，如此而欲成其事功是绝对办不到的；非但如此，尚有祸患随之。
English: The above-mentioned three things are all beyond the normal accuracy of their own movement, and it is absolutely impossible to achieve their achievements in this way; on the other hand, there are still disasters.

古文：以刚为柔者活，以柔为刚者伐。
现代文：刚强有力却表现为虚弱无能可以生存，虚弱无能却显示为刚强有力必定败亡。
English: The strong and powerful are weak and powerless to survive, and the weak and powerless are strong and powerful to fail.

古文：重柔者吉，重刚者灭。
现代文：尊崇柔弱的会得吉而存，追求强刚的将得祸而亡。
English: Those who respect the weak will be blessed, while those who pursue the strong will be cursed.

古文：诺者言之符也，已者言之绝也。
现代文：诺，表示的是应允；已，表示的是拒绝。
English: To promise is to agree; to refuse is to refuse.

古文：已诺不信，则知大惑矣。
现代文：已经承诺了却失信，这即是认识的最大迷惑。
English: It has been promised but not trusted, which is the biggest confusion in cognition.

古文：已诺必信，则处于度之内也。
现代文：已经承诺了就必定守信，这就是所谓合于准度。
English: If you have made a promise, you must keep it. This is what is known as being punctual.

古文：天下有事，必审其名。
现代文：处理天下万事，首先要审查它们的名称。
English: In order to deal with all things in the world, we must first examine their names.

古文：名理者，循名究理之所之，是必为福，非必为灾。
现代文：名理的含义包括在行事上要因名知实，因实察理和在理论方法上把握其内在的实质这样的双重含义。
English: The meaning of the noun principle includes the double meaning of acting on the basis of knowledge and truth, investigating the principle of reality, and grasping its inherent essence through theoretical methods.

古文：是非有分，以法断之；虚静谨听，以法为符。
现代文：做到了这一点，便可以辨明是非，正确的可以给人带来福吉，错误的就可以带来灾害。
English: If you do this, you will be able to distinguish right from wrong, the right one can bring you luck, and the wrong one can bring disaster.

古文：审察名理终始，是谓究理。唯公无私，见知不惑，乃知奋起。
现代文：名理确定了是非的分际，然后用法度去裁决；观照事物时采取虚静审慎的态度，处理这些问题时再以法度为依据。在处理具体事物时，要把审察名理所得的结论贯穿于全过程，这就称之为 究理 。
English: The principle determines the boundary between right and wrong, and then uses the law to adjudicate; when observing things, it adopts a quiet and prudent attitude, and when dealing with these problems, it is based on the law. When dealing with specific things, the conclusion obtained by examining the principle should run through the entire process, which is called investigation.

古文：故执道者之观于天下也，见正道循理，能与曲直，能与终始。
现代文：只有依法办事而不偏执一己之私，方能认识天道而不迷惑，方能发奋自强。因此，掌握道的圣人在观照天下时，要体察天道遵循的事理，这样就能够正定事物之是非善恶、把握事物始末之理。
English: Only by acting in accordance with the law without being self-centered can one know the heavenly way without being confused, and be able to exert oneself. Therefore, when a sage who has mastered the way observes the world, he must observe the principles of the heavenly way. In this way, he can correctly determine whether things are good or evil, and grasp the reason for starting and ending things.

古文：故能循名究理。
现代文：做到这一点，同时也一定要 循名究理 。
English: In order to achieve this, we must also investigate the reasons behind the name.

古文：形名出声，声实调和。祸灾废立，如影之随形，如响之随声，如衡之不藏重与轻。
现代文：所有事物都有形名，而每一具体事物又都有它的具体名称，事物有具体名称与其具体事实相吻合，那么福祸兴衰的道理也就因此而可以把握了，这就与形移则影随、声动则响应、衡器确定则重轻即明的道理一样。
English: All things have physical names, and each specific thing has its specific name. If a thing has a specific name that matches its specific facts, then the reason for the rise and fall of fortune and misfortune can also be grasped. This is the same as the reason that shape shift is followed by shadow, sound movement is response, and weighing instrument is determined.

古文：故唯执道者能虚静公正，乃见正道，乃得名理之诚。
现代文：因此掌握道的圣人能够虚心静意地观照事物，能够依法公正地处理事物，因此能够认识自然人事的规律，并把握住名理的实质。
English: Therefore, sages who have mastered the Tao can contemplate things with a humble and quiet mind, can deal with things fairly according to the law, and therefore can understand the laws of nature and human affairs, and grasp the essence of philosophy.

古文：乱积于内而称失于外者伐，亡形成于内而举失于外者灭，逆则上溢而不知止者亡。
现代文：国内动荡不安却又在外交上举措失利，此是取败之道；国内已出现败亡的迹象却执迷不悟地对外兴兵，这是注定要灭亡的；违逆天道、骄横恣肆而怙恶不悛者，必自取灭亡。
English: Domestic turmoil and unrest, but failure in diplomatic measures, this is the way to defeat; signs of defeat have appeared in the country, but it is doomed to perish; those who violate the heavenly way, are arrogant and wanton, and hate evil, will perish themselves.

古文：国举袭虚，其事若不成，是谓得天；其若果成，身必无名。
现代文：举一国之兵而攻袭一弱小国家，如其事未遂，那算是上天的照顾，没有使其得到以强欺弱的恶名；然一旦得手，也绝无功名可言。
English: To raise the troops of one country and attack a weak and small country, if the attempt fails, it is a blessing from heaven that it did not get the bad reputation of being a bully; but if it succeeds, there is no merit to speak of.

古文：重逆以荒，守道是行，国危有殃。
现代文：大逆不道，外内迷乱，执此逆道，一意孤行，必定是国家危殆、自取祸殃。
English: It is dangerous and disastrous for a country to go against the trend, to be confused both at home and abroad, to stick to the wrong path, and to go it alone.

古文：两逆相攻，交相为殃，国皆危亡。
现代文：逆上加逆，酿成大患，国无大小，统统灭亡。
English: Upside down and upside down, brewing into a big trouble, the country has no size, all perish.

