古文：道宗四五年春正月壬申，如混同江。
现代文：大康五年春正月初二，皇上到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the fifth year of the Great Prosperity, the emperor went to the Mudongjiang River.

古文：癸酉，赐宰相耶律孝杰名仁杰。
现代文：初三，赐宰相耶律孝杰名为仁杰。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Prime Minister Yerutaka Ketsura was given the name Renjie.

古文：乙亥，如山榆淀。
现代文：初五，到山榆淀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I went to Yamazaki-Yodo.

古文：三月辛未，以宰相仁杰获头鹅，加侍中。
现代文：三月初二，因宰相耶律仁杰获取头鹅，加侍中。
English: On the second day of March, because of the Prime Minister, Yerut Renzhe, the first goose was obtained, and the attendants were added.

古文：壬辰，以北院枢密使魏王耶律乙辛知南院大王事，加于越，知北院枢密使事耶律霂为北院枢密使，北院枢密副使耶律特里底知北院枢密使事，左夷离毕耶律世迁同知北院枢密使事。
现代文：二十三日，以北院枢密使魏王耶律乙辛为知南院大王事，加于越，以知北院枢密使事耶律輄为北院枢密使，以北院枢密副使耶律特里底为知北院枢密使事，以左夷离毕耶律世迁为同知北院枢密使事。
English: On the 23rd, Yeludo Yixin, the privy councilor of the Northern Yuan, was appointed as the grand prince of the Southern Yuan, and Yue, the privy councilor of the Northern Yuan, was appointed as the privy councilor of the Northern Yuan, Yeludo Tridi, the deputy privy councilor of the Northern Yuan, was appointed as the privy councilor of the Northern Yuan, and Zuoying Biyeru was appointed as the privy councilor of the Northern Yuan.

古文：夏四月己未，如纳葛泺。
现代文：夏四月十一日，到纳葛泊。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, I went to Nagpur.

古文：五月丁亥，谒庆陵。
现代文：五月二十日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On May 20th, he paid homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：以契丹行宫都部署耶律燕哥为南府宰相，北面林牙耶律永宁为夷离毕，同知南院枢密使事萧挞不也及殿前副点检、驸马都尉萧酬斡并封兰陵郡王。
现代文：以契丹行宫都部署耶律燕哥为南府宰相，以北面林牙耶律永宁为夷离毕，封同知南院枢密使事萧挞不也及殿前副点检、驸马都尉萧酬斡同为兰陵郡王。
English: In the palace of Khitan, Ye Lu Yan Ge was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu; in the north, Lin Ya Ye Lu Yong Ning was appointed as the prime minister of Ili; in the south, Xiao Xun Bo, the envoy of the privy council, was appointed as the governor of Lanling; and in the front of the palace, the deputy inspector of points and the lieutenant of the imperial horse, Xiao Xiu, were appointed as the governor of Lanling.

古文：六月辛亥，阻卜来贡。
现代文：六月十四日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On June 14th, Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，以北府宰相、辽西郡王萧余里也为西北路招讨使。
现代文：二十日，以北府宰相、辽西郡王萧余里也为西北路招讨使。
English: On the 20th, Wang Xiaoyuri, the chancellor of Beifu and Liaoxi County, also invited envoys for the Northwest Road.

古文：己未，遣使隶囚。
现代文：二十二日，派使者察看犯人口供。
English: On the 22nd, an envoy was sent to inspect the prisoners.

古文：是月，放进士刘瓘等百一十三人。
现代文：同月，录进士刘馞等一百一十三人。
English: In the same month, there were 113 new recruits, including Liu Wei.

古文：秋七月己卯，猎夹山。
现代文：秋七月十三日，在夹山打猎。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, I went hunting in Jiashan.

古文：八月庚申，命有司撰《太宗神功碑》，立于南京。
现代文：八月二十五日，命令有司撰做《太宗神功碑》，立于南京。
English: On August 25th, he ordered Yushi to compile the "Tai Zong Sheng Monument" and set it up in Nanjing.

古文：九月己卯，诏诸路毋禁僧徒开坛。
现代文：九月十四日，诏令诸路不得禁止僧徒开坛集会。
English: On September 14th, the Emperor issued an edict that monks should not be prohibited from holding gatherings.

古文：壬午，禁扈从扰民。
现代文：十七日，禁止随从侵扰百姓。
English: On the 17th, it was forbidden for followers to harass the people.

古文：冬十月戊戌，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：冬十月初三，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the tenth month in winter, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己亥，驻跸独卢金。
现代文：初四，歇驾于独卢金。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he took a break in Lukin, Germany.

古文：壬子，诏惟皇子仍一字王，余并削降。
现代文：十七日，诏令只有皇子仍为一字王，其余一字王一律削降。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict decreed that only the prince would remain the one-character king, and all other one-character kings would be reduced.

古文：丁巳，振平州贫民。
现代文：二十二日，赈济平州贫民。
English: On the 22nd, he gave alms to the poor in Pingzhou.

古文：己未，以赵王杨绩为辽西郡王，魏王耶律乙辛降封混同郡王，吴王萧韩家奴兰陵郡王，致仕。
现代文：二十四日，以赵王杨绩为辽西郡王，魏王耶律乙辛降封为混同郡王，吴王萧韩家奴降封兰陵郡王，并辞官归田。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Wang Yang Rong was named the county king of Liaoxi, Wei King Yelu Yixin was demoted to the mixed county king, and Wu King Xiao Han Jiannu was demoted to the county king of Lanling, and resigned to return to the field.

古文：十一月丁丑，召沙门守道开坛于内殿。
现代文：十一月十三日，征召沙门守道到内殿开坛。
English: On November 13th, Shamen Shudo was summoned to the inner hall to open the altar.

古文：癸未，复南京流民差役三年，被火之家免租税一年。
现代文：十九日，免除南京流民差役三年，遭火灾之家免除租税一年。
English: On the 19th, the Nanjing refugees were exempted from forced labor for three years, and the fire victims' home was exempted from taxes for one year.

古文：十二月丙午，彗星犯尾。
现代文：十二月十二日，彗星犯尾宿。
English: On December 12th, the comet came to rest.

古文：乙卯，幸西京。
现代文：二十一日，临幸西京。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Linxing West Beijing comes to an end.

古文：戊午，行再生礼，赦杂犯死罪以下。
现代文：二十四日，举行再生礼，赦免杂罪犯人死罪以下之人。
English: On the 24th, a rebirth ceremony was held to pardon minor offenders and those with less than capital punishment.

古文：六年春正月癸酉，如鸳鸯泺。
现代文：六年春正月初九，皇上到鸳鸯泊。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the sixth year of spring, the emperor went to Oshidomari.

古文：辛卯，耶律乙辛出知兴中府事。
现代文：二十七日，出贬耶律乙辛为兴中府知府。
English: On the 27th, Yerut Yitsin was appointed governor of Xingzhongfu.

古文：三月庚寅，封皇孙延禧为梁王，忠顺军节度使耶律颇德南院大王，耶律仲禧南院枢密使，户部使陈毅参知政事。
现代文：三月二十七日，封皇孙耶律延禧为梁王，任命忠顺军节度使耶律颇德为南院大王，耶律仲禧为南院枢密使，户部使陈毅为参知政事。
English: On March 27th, the emperor's grandson, Yelu Yanxi, was named the King of Liang, and the commander of the Zhongshun Army was appointed to make Yelu Baode the Great King of the Southern Court, Yelu Zhongxi the Privy Councilor of the Southern Court, and Chen Yi the Councillor of the Household.

古文：夏四月乙卯，猎炭山。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，在炭山打猎。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of summer, I went hunting in the mountains of coal.

古文：五月壬申，免平州复业民租赋一年。
现代文：五月初十，免除平州恢复旧业的百姓租赋一年。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth month, the people of Pingzhou who resumed the old business were exempted from rent for one year.

古文：庚寅，以旱，祷雨，命左右以水相沃，俄而雨降。
现代文：二十八日，因天旱，祈祷降雨，命令左右以水相浇，不一会儿下了雨。
English: On the 28th, due to the drought, he prayed for rain, ordered water to be poured to the left and right, and soon it rained.

古文：六月戊戌，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：六月初七，歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, he stopped at Nagpur.

古文：戊申，以度支使王绩参知政事。
现代文：十七日，以度支使王绩为参知政事。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wang Qiming, a special envoy of the General Office of the Communist Party of China (CPC), was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：庚戌，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十九日，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 19th, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月戊辰，观市。
现代文：秋七月初七，察看市易。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th month of the July, inspect the market.

古文：癸未，为皇孙梁王延禧设旗鼓拽剌六人卫护之。
现代文：二十二日，为皇孙梁王耶律延禧设置旗鼓拽剌六人加以护卫。
English: On the 22nd, for the grandson of Emperor Liang, King Yerut Yanxi, six people set up a banner and drum to escort him.

古文：甲申，猎沙岭。
现代文：二十三日，在沙岭狩猎。
English: On the 23rd, they went hunting in the sand dunes.

古文：九月壬寅，祠木叶山。
现代文：闰九月十三日，祭祀木叶山。
English: On the 13th day of the 9th lunar month, the worship of Mujiyama ceased.

古文：己酉，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：二十日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 20th, he rested in Jinshidian.

古文：冬十月己未朔，省同知广德军节度使事，命奉先军节度使兼巡警乾、显二州。
现代文：冬十月初一，裁撤同知广德军节度使事一职，下令由奉先军节度使兼管乾、显二州之巡查警戒事务。
English: On the first day of October in winter, he abolished the post of the German military attaché to Tongzhi and Guangxi, and ordered that the former military attaché should also be in charge of the inspection and vigilance affairs of the two states.

古文：丁卯，耶律仁杰出为武定军节度使。
现代文：初九，出贬耶律仁杰为武定军节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 20th year of the 20th year of the 20th year of the 20

古文：庚午，参知政事刘诜致仕。
现代文：十二日，参知政事刘诜辞官。
English: On the 12th, Liu Xuan, the political advisor to the governor, resigned from his post.

古文：癸酉，以陈毅为汉人行宫都部署，王绩同知枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命陈毅为汉人行宫都部署，王绩为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, Chen Yi was appointed as the Han People's Palace Guard, and Wang Yi was appointed as the Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：辛巳，回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：二十三日，回鹘派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, the Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十一月己丑朔，日有食之。癸卯，召群臣议政。
现代文：十一月初一，日食。十五日，召集群臣商议政事。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of November. On the fifteenth day, a group of ministers were convened to discuss political affairs.

古文：十二月甲子，以耶律特里底为孟父敞稳。
现代文：十二月初六，任命耶律特里底为孟父敞稳。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, he appointed Jerutridis as Meng's father.

古文：乙丑，以萧挞不也为北府宰相，耶律世迁知北院枢密使事，耶律慎思同知北院枢密使事。
现代文：初七，任命萧挞不也为北府宰相，耶律世迁为知北院枢密使事，耶律慎思为同知北院枢密使事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Xiao Qianfu was also appointed as the prime minister of Beifu, Yelu Shiqian as the privy envoy of Chihokuin, and Yelu Shanxi as the privy envoy of Tongchihokuin.

古文：庚午，免西京流民租赋一年。
现代文：十二日，免除西京流民租赋一年。
English: On the 12th, it exempted the residents of the western capital from rent for one year.

古文：甲戌，减民赋。
现代文：十六日，减轻百姓赋税。
English: On the 16th, the people's taxes were reduced.

古文：丁亥，豫行正旦礼。
现代文：二十九日，先期举行正旦典礼。
English: On the 29th, the full moon ceremony was held ahead of schedule.

古文：戊子，如混同江。
现代文：三十日，到混同江。
English: On the 30th, we arrived at the Mudong River.

古文：七年春正月戊申，五国部长来贡。
现代文：七年春正月二十日，五国部首领前来进贡。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, the leaders of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，女直贡良马。
现代文：二十六日，女真贡献良马。
English: On the 26th, Nyoshin contributed a good horse.

古文：二月甲子，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：二月初七，皇上到鱼儿泊。
English: On the seventh day of the second month, the emperor went to stay with the fishes.

古文：夏五月壬子，驻跸岭西。
现代文：夏五月二十六日，歇驾于岭西。
English: On the 26th day of the 5th month of the summer, the train stopped at Lingxi.

古文：癸丑，有司奏永清、武清、固安三县蝗。
现代文：二十七日，有司奏告永清、武清、固安三县发生了蝗灾。
English: On the 27th, there was a report of locusts in Yongqing, Wuqing and Gu'an counties.

古文：甲寅，以萧挞不也兼殿前都点检，萧酬斡为汉人行宫都部署兼知枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，以萧挞不也兼任殿前都点检，任命萧酬斡为汉人行宫都部署兼知枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Rongfu was also appointed as the inspector of the front of the palace, and Xiao Rongyou was appointed as the inspector of the Han People's Palace and the Privy Council.

古文：六月甲子，诏月祭观德殿，岁寒食，诸帝在时生辰及忌日，诣景宗御容殿致奠。
现代文：六月初九，诏令每月以及每年的寒食节在观德殿举行祭祀活动，每逢各位先帝的生辰及忌日，则前往景宗御容殿进献祭品。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the lunar month, the monthly and annual cold food festival is held at the Kuangde Hall, and on the birthdays and deathdays of the past emperors, offerings are made at the Gyeongjonggung Palace.

古文：丙寅，阻卜余古赧来贡。
现代文：十一日，阻卜余古赧前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Dangpo Yu Guzhen came to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，以翰林学士王言敷参知政事，封北院宣徽使石笃漆水郡王。
现代文：十二日，以翰林学士王言敷为参知政事，封北院宣徽使石笃为漆水郡王。
English: On the 12th, Hanlin Scholar Wang Yanjiki was appointed as the governor of the county, and the Northern Court's proclamation made Shiduke the king of Lishui County.

古文：秋七月戊子，如秋山。
现代文：秋七月初三，到秋山。
English: Autumn On the third day of the seventh month, I went to Akiyama.

古文：丙申，谒庆陵。
现代文：十一日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 11th day, they paid their respects at the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：八月丁卯，射鹿赤山，加围场使涅葛为静江军节度使。
现代文：八月十三日，在赤山射鹿，升任围场使涅葛为静江军节度使。
English: On August 13th, he shot a deer in Akayama, and was promoted to the enclosure to make Nega the festival envoy of the Jingjiang Army.

古文：九月戊子，次怀州，命皇后谒怀陵。
现代文：九月初五，皇上驻于怀州，命皇后拜谒怀陵。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the emperor was stationed in Huairou and ordered the empress to visit Huairou Mausoleum.

古文：辛卯，次祖州，命皇后谒陵。
现代文：初八，驻于祖州，命皇后拜谒祖陵。
English: At the age of eight, he was stationed in Zuzhou and was ordered by the empress to pay homage to his ancestral tomb.

古文：乙巳，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：二十二日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 22nd, he stopped in Jinshidian.

古文：冬十月戊辰，以惕隐王九为南院大王，夷离毕奚抄只为彰国军节度使。
现代文：冬十月十五日，以惕隐王九为南院大王，以夷离毕奚抄只为彰国军节度使。
English: On the 15th day of October in winter, King Ingyu was appointed as the great king of the Southern Court, while King Bi抄 was only appointed as the envoy to celebrate the national army's festival.

古文：十一月乙酉，诏岁出官钱，振诸宫分及边戍贫户。
现代文：十一月初三，诏令每年动用官府钱币，赈济诸宫分以及边境戍所的贫困家庭。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Emperor issued an order to use government coins every year to give money to poor families in palaces and border posts.

古文：丁亥，幸驸马都尉萧酬斡第，方饮，宰相梁颖谏曰： 天子不可饮人臣家。 
现代文：初五，临幸驸马都尉萧酬斡府第，正当饮酒之时，宰相梁颖劝谏说： 天子不可在臣子家饮酒。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Lieutenant Xiao Rongrui, who was in charge of the imperial palace, was drinking alcohol when Prime Minister Liang Ying advised him: "A prince should not drink alcohol in a courtier's house."

古文：上即还宫。
现代文：皇上当即回宫。
English: The Emperor immediately returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：己亥，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十七日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 12th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，除绢帛尺度狭短之令。
现代文：二十九日，废除不得买卖使用尺寸狭小之绢帛的禁令。
English: On the 29th, the ban on the sale and use of small-sized brooms was abolished.

古文：十二月丁卯，武定军节度使耶律仁杰以罪削爵为民。
现代文：十二月十五日，武定军节度使耶律仁杰因为有罪被削爵为民。
English: On December 15th, the Wu Ding Jun Festival made Yelu Renjie be stripped of his title for being guilty.

古文：辛未，知兴中府事耶律乙辛以罪囚于来州。
现代文：十九日，兴中府知府耶律乙辛因为有罪被囚禁于来州。
English: On the 19th, Yelu Yixin, the governor of Xingzhong Prefecture, was imprisoned in Lishu because of his guilt.

古文：八年春正月甲申，如混同江。
现代文：八年春正月初二，皇上到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the eighth year of spring, the emperor went to the Mudong River.

古文：丁酉，铁骊、五国诸长各贡方物。
现代文：十五日，铁骊、五国等部首领分别贡献土产。
English: On the 15th, the leaders of the Ministry of Iron and Steel and the five countries respectively contributed to the production.

古文：二月戊午，如山榆淀。
现代文：二月初六，到山榆淀。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, I arrived in Yamagata-Yodo.

古文：辛酉，诏北、南院官，凡给驿者，必先奏闻。
现代文：初九，诏令北、南院官员，凡是要享受给予驿站车马者，必须先行奏闻。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, officials of the North and South Imperial Courts were ordered that anyone who wanted to enjoy the gift of a carriage and horses must first submit a report.

古文：贡新及奏狱讼，方许驰驿，余并禁之。
现代文：进贡新熟稻米以及奏报讼案，方才准予动用驿马，其余一概禁用。
English: Only in the case of paying a tribute of newly-matured rice and reporting a lawsuit is it permitted to use a mule, and all others are prohibited.

古文：己巳，夏国获宋将张天一，遣使来献。
现代文：十七日，夏国擒获宋将张天一，派使者前来进献。
English: On the 17th, Xia Guozhen received the Song general Zhang Tianyi and sent an envoy to present it.

古文：壬申，以耶律颇德为南府宰相兼知北院枢密使，燕哥为惕隐，萧挞不也兼知契丹行宫都部署事。
现代文：二十日，任命耶律颇德为南府宰相兼知北院枢密使，燕哥为惕隐，萧挞不也兼任知契丹行宫都部署事。
English: On the 20th, Ye Liupo De was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu and the privy envoy of Zhibei Academy, Yan Ge was appointed as the privy councilor of Zhibei Academy, and Xiao Qianfu was also appointed as the secretary of Zhibei Academy.

古文：三月庚戌，黄龙府女直部长术乃率部民内附，予官，赐印绶。
现代文：三月二十九日，黄龙府女真部首领术乃率领部民内附，授予官职，赐给印绶。
English: On March 29th, the head of the Huanglong Prefecture Women's Ministry of Truth led the Ministry of People's Internal Affiliation to award the official post and grant the seal.

古文：是月，诏行秬黍所定升斗。
现代文：同月，下诏颁行利用黑黍度量所制定的升和斗。
English: In the same month, the imperial edict issued by the emperor decreed that the imperial standard of height and weight would be determined using the measurement of the imperial standard of height and weight.

古文：夏四月壬戌，以耶律世迁为上京留守。
现代文：夏四月十一日，任命耶律世迁为上京留守。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, Yerutseyen was appointed to stay in Kyoto.

古文：六月辛亥朔，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：六月初一，歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: On the first day of June, he stopped in Nagpur.

古文：丙辰，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：初六，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，以耶律颇德为北院枢密使，耶律巢哥南府宰相，刘筠南院枢密使，萧挞不也兼知北院枢密使事，王绩汉人行宫都部署，萧酬斡国舅详稳。
现代文：初七，任命耶律颇德为北院枢密使，耶律巢哥为南府宰相，刘筠为南院枢密使，萧挞不也兼任知北院枢密使事，王绩为汉人行宫都部署，萧酬斡为国舅详稳。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Ye Ruipo De was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Court, Ye Ruizhe Brother was appointed as the prime minister of Nanfu, Liu Wei was appointed as the envoy of the Southern Court, Xiao Xunfu was also appointed as the envoy of the Northern Court, Wang Ji was appointed as the envoy of the Han Dynasty, and Xiao Zuoyu was appointed as the envoy of the Guozhuang Dynasty.

古文：乙丑，阻卜长来贡。
现代文：十五日，阻卜酋长前来进贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, the chief of Dzhab came to pay tribute.

古文：丙子，以耶律慎思知右夷离毕事。
现代文：二十六日，任命耶律慎思为知右夷离毕事。
English: On the 26th, Yerut Shensi was appointed as the leader of the Chiuyi.

古文：秋七月甲午，如秋山。
现代文：秋七月十五日，皇上到秋山。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Emperor went to Akiyama.

古文：南京霖雨，沙河溢永清、归义、新城、安次、武清、香河六县，伤稼。
现代文：南京大雨连绵，沙河水漫入永清、归义、新城、安次、武清、香河六县，伤害了庄稼。
English: In Nanjing, continuous heavy rain caused the water of the Sand River to flow into six counties including Yongqing, Guiyi, Xincheng, Anji, Wuqing and Xianghe, damaging crops.

古文：九月庚寅，谒庆陵。
现代文：九月十二日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On September 12th, he paid homage to the Qing Mausoleum.

古文：丁未，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：二十九日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 29th, he rested in Jinshidian.

古文：大风雪，牛马多死，赐扈从官以下衣马有差。
现代文：大风飞雪，牛马大多死去，赐给扈从官员以下衣服、马匹各有等差。
English: The wind blew snow, most of the cattle and horses died, and the clothes and horses given to officials and others were all unequal.

古文：冬十月乙卯，诏化哥傅导梁王延禧，加金吾卫大将军。
现代文：冬十月初八，诏令耶律化哥辅导梁王延禧，加号金吾卫大将军。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, the emperor ordered Ye Ruihua's brother to tutor Liang Wang Yanxi, and promoted him to the rank of general of King Wuwei.

古文：丙子，谒乾陵。
现代文：二十九日，拜谒乾陵。
English: On the 29th, the visit to the Qianling Mausoleum began.

古文：十一月壬午，以乙室大王萧何葛为南院宣徽使。权知奚六部大王事图赶为本部大王。
现代文：十一月初五，以乙室大王萧何葛为南院宣徽使，以权知奚六部大王事图赶为本部大王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Xiao Hege, the second-great king, was appointed as the herald of the Southern Court, and Guanzhixi, the sixth-great king, was appointed as the head of the headquarters.

古文：十二月癸丑，乌古敌烈统军使耶律马五为北院大王。
现代文：十二月初七，以乌古敌烈统军使耶律马六为北院大王。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the lunar month, the ancient enemy and the unified army made Yerushalayim the great king of the Northern Court.

古文：庚申，降皇后为惠妃，出居乾陵。
现代文：十四日，降皇后为惠妃，出居于乾陵。
English: On the 14th, the queen was demoted to Princess Hui, and she was born in Qianling.

古文：九年春正月辛巳，如春水。
现代文：九年春正月初五，皇上到春水。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, the emperor went to Chunshui.

古文：夏四月丙午朔，大雪，平地丈余，马死者十六七。
现代文：夏四月初一，大雪，平地堆起丈余，马匹死去十分之六、七。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, there was heavy snow and the ground was covered in snow. Six or seven out of ten horses died.

古文：五月，如黑岭。
现代文：五月，到黑岭。
English: In May, to Heiling.

古文：六月己未，驻跸散水原。
现代文：六月十五日，歇驾于散水原。
English: On the 15th of June, he stopped at the watering place.

古文：甲子，以耶律阿思为契丹行宫都部署，耶律慎思北院枢密副使。
现代文：二十日，任命耶律阿思为契丹行宫都部署，耶律慎思为北院枢密副使。
English: On the 20th, he appointed Yerut As for the deployment of the Khitan imperial entourage, and Yerut Shensi for the deputy envoy of the Northern Court.

古文：庚午，诏诸路检括脱户，罪至死者，原之。
现代文：二十六日，诏令诸路清查脱籍民户，获罪至死者，恕免其死罪。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict ordered all roads to be searched for people who had left the country, and they were found guilty and sentenced to death. However, they were spared the death penalty.

古文：闰月丁丑，以汉人行宫副部署可汗奴为南院大王。
现代文：闰六月初三，以汉人行宫副部署可汗奴为南院大王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 6th lunar month, Khan Nu was appointed as the king of the Southern Court with the Han people marching to the palace.

古文：戊寅，追谥庶人浚为昭怀太子。
现代文：初四，追谥庶人耶律浚为昭怀太子。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, he chased down a commoner, Ye Ruijun, and became Prince Zhao Huai.

古文：丁亥，阻卜来贡。
现代文：十三日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the thirteenth day, Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，以知兴中府事邢熙年为汉人行宫都部署，汉人行宫都部署王绩为南院枢密副使。
现代文：十五日，以兴中府知府邢熙年为汉人行宫都部署，以汉人行宫都部署王绩为南院枢密副使。
English: On the 15th, with Xingzhongfu as the prefectural capital, the Han people were deployed to the palace, and with the Han people being deployed to the palace, Wang Qi was appointed as the vice-secretary of the Southern Yuan.

古文：秋七月乙巳，猎马尾山。
现代文：秋七月初二，出猎于马尾山。
English: Autumn On the second day of the seventh month, I went hunting in Mawei Mountain.

古文：丁巳，谒庆陵。
现代文：十四日，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the 14th, they paid homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：癸亥，禁外官部内贷钱取息及使者馆于民家。
现代文：二十日，禁止京外官员在部内贷款给民户以获取利息以及使者就宿于百姓家中。
English: On the 20th, officials from Beijing and other cities were prohibited from making loans to private households within the ministry to obtain interest, as well as messengers staying in people's homes.

古文：八月，高丽王徽薨。
现代文：八月，高丽王徽逝世。
English: In August, King Hee of Goryeo passed away.

古文：九月癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：己酉，射熊于白石山，加围场使涅葛左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：初七，在白石山射熊，升任围场使涅葛为左金吾卫大将军。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he shot a bear in Shiroishi Mountain, and was promoted to the enclosure, making Nega the general of the Left Kingu Wei.

古文：己巳，以高丽王徽子三韩国公勋权知国事。
现代文：二十七日，以高丽王徽之子三韩国公王勋临时执掌高丽国政事。
English: On the 27th, the son of King Hee of Goryeo, the 3rd Korean Prince, temporarily took charge of the political affairs of Goryeo.

古文：辛未，五国部长来贡。
现代文：二十九日，五国部首领前来进贡。
English: On the 29th, the leaders of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：壬申，召北、南枢密院官议政事。
现代文：三十日，召集北、南枢密院官员商议政事。
English: On the 30th, officials of the North and South Privy Councils were convened to discuss political affairs.

古文：冬十月丁丑，谒观德殿。
现代文：冬十月初五，拜谒观德殿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, it is time to pay homage to the Goddess of Mercy.

古文：己卯，南院枢密使刘筠薨。
现代文：初七，南院枢密使刘筠逝世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, Liu Ye, passed away.

古文：壬辰，混同郡王耶律乙辛谋亡入宋，伏诛。
现代文：二十日，混同郡王耶律乙辛图谋逃奔宋国，被诛杀。
English: On the 20th, mixed up with the county king, Ye Luyi Xin, attempted to escape to Song, and was beaten to death.

古文：十一月丙午，进封梁王延禧为燕国王，大赦。以南院宣徽使萧何葛为南府宰相，三司使王经参知政事兼知枢密事。
现代文：十一月初五，进封梁王延禧为燕国王，大赦天下，以南院宣徽使萧何葛为南府宰相，以三司使王经为参知政事兼知枢密事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Liang Wang Yanxi was enthroned as the King of Yan, and the whole world was pardoned. Xiao Hege was made the prime minister of Nanfu by the proclamation of the emblem of the Southern Yuan, and Wang Jing was appointed as the councillor for political affairs and privy council affairs by the three commissioners.

古文：甲寅，诏僧善知雠校高丽所进佛经，颁行之。
现代文：十三日，诏令僧善知校雠高丽所进献的佛经，并颁行之。
English: On the 13th, the Buddhist sutra presented by the monk Zenzhixuan Gaoli was decreed and issued.

古文：己未，定诸令史、译史迁叙等级。
现代文：十八日，制定令史、译史等官职的升迁叙用等级。
English: On the 18th, the promotion and grading levels of official posts such as history of order and history of translation were established.

古文：十二月丁亥，以邢熙年知南院枢密使事。
现代文：十二月十七日，任命邢熙年为知南院枢密使事。
English: On December 17th, Gong Xi Rong was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：辛卯，以王言敷为汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：二十一日，任命王言敷为汉人行宫都部署。
English: On the 21st, Wang Yanji was appointed as the Han people's marching palace.

古文：高丽三韩国公王勋薨。
现代文：高丽三韩国公王勋逝世。
English: Goryeo's third Korean crown prince has died.

古文：是年，御前放进士李君裕等五十一人。
现代文：这一年，殿前录用进士李君裕等五十一人。
English: That year, fifty-one people, including the priest Li Junyu, were admitted to the imperial court.

古文：十年春正月辛丑朔，如春水。
现代文：十年春正月初一，到春水。
English: On the first day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring Festival, it will be spring water.

古文：丙午，复建南京奉福寺浮图。
现代文：初六，再次修建南京奉福寺佛塔。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the construction of the Nanjing Fengfu Temple pagoda began again.

古文：戊辰，如山榆淀。
现代文：二十八日，到山榆淀。
English: On the 28th, I arrived in Yamagata-Yodo.

古文：二月庚午朔，萌古国遣使来聘。
现代文：二月初一，萌古国派使者来访。
English: On the first day of February, Menggu sent an envoy to visit.

古文：三月戊申，远萌古国遣使来聘。
现代文：三月初九，远方萌古国派使者来访。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, an envoy from the distant Menggu country came to visit.

古文：丁巳，命知制诰王师儒、牌印郎君耶律固傅导燕国王延禧。
现代文：十八日，下令由知制诰王师儒、牌印郎君耶律固辅导燕国王耶律延禧。
English: On the 18th, it was decreed that King Ye Lu Yan Xie would be tutored by King Ye Lu Jiu, who was the teacher of King Ye Lu.

古文：夏四月丁丑，女直贡良马。
现代文：夏四月初八，女真贡献良马。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, Nyoshin contributed a good horse.

古文：五月壬戌，驻跸散水原。
现代文：五月二十四日，歇驾于散水原。
English: On the 24th of May, he stopped at the watering place.

古文：乙丑，阻卜来贡。
现代文：二十七日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：丙寅，降国舅详稳班位在敞稳之下。
现代文：二十八日，降国舅详稳位次居于敞稳之下。
English: On the 28th, the status of the downgraded uncle was second only to that of the open and stable.

古文：六月壬辰，禁毁铜钱为器。
现代文：六月二十四日，禁止销毁铜钱造作器物。
English: On June 24th, the destruction of copper money artifacts was prohibited.

古文：秋七月甲辰，如黑岭。
现代文：秋七月初七，到黑岭。
English: Autumn, the seventh day of the seventh month, to Heiling.

古文：九月癸亥，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：九月二十六日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On September 26th, he took a rest in Goseidian.

古文：冬十二月乙未，改庆州大安军曰兴平。
现代文：冬十二月三十日，改庆州大安军名曰兴平。
English: On the 30th day of December in winter, the name of the Da'an Army in Kaigeizhou was Xingping.

古文：是月，改明年为大安，赦杂犯死罪以下。
现代文：同月，改明年年号为大安，赦免判死罪以下的杂罪犯人。
English: In the same month, the name of the next year was changed to Da'an, and pardoned common criminals sentenced to death or less.

古文：大安元年春正月丁酉，如混同江。
现代文：大安元年春正月初二，到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Da'an, he went to the Mudongjiang River.

古文：癸卯，王绩知南院枢密使事，邢熙年为中京留守。
现代文：初八，任命王绩为知南院枢密使事，邢熙年为中京留守。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wang Pi was appointed as a privy envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty, and he stayed in Beijing for a year.

古文：戊申，以枢密直学士杜公谓参知政事。
现代文：十三日，以枢密直学士杜公谓为参知政事。
English: On the 13th, Du Gongsheng, a Privy Councilor, was appointed to participate in government affairs.

古文：庚戌，五国酋长来贡良马。
现代文：十五日，五国部酋长前来贡献良马。
English: On the 15th, the chiefs of the five provinces came to contribute good horses.

古文：二月辛未，如山榆淀。
现代文：二月初七，皇上到山渝淀。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month, the emperor went to Shanyu.

古文：夏四月乙酉，宋主顼殂，子煦嗣位，使来告哀。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，宋主赵顼崩殂，其子赵煦即位，派使者前来告哀。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the Song Emperor Zhao Bei died, and his son Zhao Bei ascended to the throne. He sent an envoy to pay his respects.

古文：辛卯，西幸。
现代文：二十八日，西幸。
English: On the 28th, Saiko was born.

古文：六月戊辰，驻跸拖古烈。
现代文：六月初六，歇驾于拖古烈。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month.

古文：壬申，以王绩为南府宰相，萧挞不也兼知南院枢密使事。
现代文：初十，任命王绩为南府宰相，萧挞不也兼任知南院枢密使事。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Wang Jie was appointed the prime minister of Nanfu, and Xiao Yifu also served as the privy envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：丁丑，遣使吊祭于宋。
现代文：十五日，派使者赴宋国吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 15th, an envoy was sent to Song to offer condolences.

古文：戊寅，宋遣王真、甄佑等馈其先帝遗物。
现代文：十六日，宋国派遣王真、甄佑等人前来馈赠其先帝遗物。
English: On the 16th, the Song Dynasty sent Wang Zhen, Zhen You and others to present the relics of the former emperor.

古文：秋七月乙巳，遣使贺宋主即位。
现代文：秋七月十四日，派使者祝贺宋主即位。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of autumn, an envoy was sent to congratulate Emperor Song on his accession to the throne.

古文：戊午，猎于赤山。
现代文：二十七日，出猎于赤山。
English: On the 27th, they went hunting in Akayama.

古文：八月丁卯，幸庆州。
现代文：八月初六，临幸庆州。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Linxiang Gyeongju.

古文：戊辰，谒庆陵。
现代文：初七，拜谒庆陵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, pay homage to the Yongqing Mausoleum.

古文：冬十月癸亥，驻跸好草淀。
现代文：冬十月初二，歇驾于好草淀。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, it rests in Hosoyodo.

古文：戊辰，夏国王李秉常遣使报其母梁氏哀。
现代文：初七，夏国王李秉常派使者前来为其母梁氏报哀。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the king of Xia, Li Bingzhang, sent an envoy to mourn for his mother, Liang.

古文：甲申，以萧挞不也为南院枢密使。
现代文：二十三日，任命萧挞不也为南院枢密使。
English: On the 23rd, Xiao Jifu was also appointed as a privy councilor of the Southern Yuan.

古文：十一月乙未，诏 比者外官因誉进秩，久而不调，民被其害。
现代文：十一月初五，下诏说： 近来，京外官因为安静守成增加俸禄，又长期不能外调，百姓遭受其害。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued: "Recently, Beijing's foreign affairs officials have increased their salaries because they have kept quiet and have not been able to be transferred abroad for a long time, and the people have suffered as a result.

古文：今后皆以资给迁转。 
现代文：今后一律根据资财供养的许可程度来对官吏进行提拔升级。 
English: In the future, all officials will be promoted and upgraded according to the degree of financial support.

古文：丁酉，以南女直详稳萧袍里为北府宰相。
现代文：初七，以南女真详稳萧袍里为北府宰相。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the southern woman, Zhengyo, is the prime minister of Beifu in a stable gown.

古文：辛亥，史臣进太祖以下七帝《实录》。
现代文：二十一日，史臣呈进太祖以下七帝《实录》。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shichen presented the "Real Record" of the seven emperors from the great-grandfather onwards.

古文：丙辰，遣使册三韩国公王勋弟运为高丽国王。
现代文：二十六日，派使者册立三韩国公王勋之弟王运为高丽国王。
English: On the 26th, an envoy was sent to crown Wang Yun, the younger brother of the three Korean princes, as King of Goryeo.

古文：己未，诏僧尼无故不得赴阙。
现代文：二十九日，诏令僧尼无故不得来入朝觐见。
English: On the 29th, the emperor ordered that monks and nuns were not allowed to enter the imperial court without a reason.

古文：十二月甲戌，宋遣蔡卞来谢吊祭。
现代文：十二月十四日，宋国派遣蔡卞前来感谢吊唁祭祀。
English: On December 14th, the Song Dynasty sent Cai Jun to thank for the condolence offering.

古文：二年春正月辛卯，如混同江。
现代文：二年春正月初二，皇上到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of spring, the emperor went to the Mudong River.

古文：己酉，五国诸部长来贡。
现代文：二十日，五国诸部酋长前来进贡。
English: On the 20th, the chieftains of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：癸丑，召权翰林学士赵孝严、知制诰王师儒等讲《五经》大义。
现代文：二十四日，召集权翰林学士赵孝严、知制诰王师儒等人讲解《五经》大义。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Xiaoyan, a scholar of Hanlin with the right to convene, and Zhixing Wang, a scholar of Confucianism, gave a lecture on the "Five Classics."

古文：二月癸酉，驻跸山榆淀。
现代文：二月十四日，歇驾于山榆淀。
English: On February 14th, it stopped in Shanshui County.

古文：是月，太白犯岁星。
现代文：同月，太白金星犯岁星。
English: In the same month, Taibai Venus became the New Year's star.

古文：三月乙酉，女直贡良马。
现代文：三月二十八日，女真贡献良马。
English: On March 28th, Nyoshin contributed a good horse.

古文：夏四月戊戌，北幸。
现代文：夏四月十一日，皇上北幸。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, Emperor Hokuchika passed away.

古文：癸丑，遣使加统军使萧讹都斡太子太保，裨将老古金吾卫大将军，萧雅哥静江军节度使，耶律燕奴右监门卫大将军，仍赐赉诸军士。
现代文：二十六日，派使者给统军使萧讹都斡加号为太子太保，裨将老古加号为金吾卫大将军，任命萧雅哥为静江军节度使，耶律燕奴为右监门卫大将军，又对众将士给以赏赐。
English: On the 26th, an envoy was sent to the United Army to appoint Xiao Yantu as the Crown Prince and Grand Pao, to appoint Lao Gu as the Grand General of the Jingjiang Army, to appoint Xiao Yagou as the Grand Envoy of the Jingjiang Army, and to appoint Yelu Yannu as the Grand General of the Right Guards, and to reward the soldiers.

古文：五月丁巳朔，以牧马蕃息多至百万，赏群牧官，以次进阶。
现代文：五月初一，因为放牧马群繁衍增殖达到百万匹，赏赐群牧官，依次晋升职位。
English: On the first day of May, because the grazing horse herd reached one million animals, the herdsmen were rewarded and promoted in turn.

古文：乙亥，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：十九日，歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: On the 19th, he stopped at Nagpur.

古文：戊寅，宰相梁颖出知兴中府事。
现代文：二十二日，出贬宰相梁颖为兴中府知府。
English: On the 22nd, the prime minister, Liang Ying, was appointed governor of Xingzhongfu.

古文：是月，放进士张毂等二十六人。
现代文：同月，录进士张毂等二十六人。
English: In the same month, 26 people, including Zhang Jun, were inducted.

古文：六月丁亥朔，以左夷离毕耶律坦为惕隐，知枢密院事耶律斡特剌兼知左夷离毕事。
现代文：六月初一，以左夷离毕耶律坦为惕隐，知枢密院事耶律斡特剌兼任知左夷离毕事。
English: On the first day of June, Zuo Yi left Bierutang as a precautionary measure, and the Privy Councillor of the Privy Council, Ye Lu, concurrently served as the Vice-Councillor of the Privy Council.

古文：丙申，阻卜来朝。
现代文：初十，阻卜前来朝见。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I came to see you in the morning.

古文：癸卯，遣使按诸路狱。
现代文：十七日，派使者审查诸路案件。
English: On the 17th, an envoy was sent to review Zhu Lu's case.

古文：甲辰，以同知南京留守事耶律那也知右夷离毕事。
现代文：十八日，以同知南京留守事耶律那也为知右夷离毕事。
English: On the 18th, Yerutna, who stayed in Nanjing with the same acquaintance, also left for Zhiyi.

古文：乙巳，阻卜酋长余古赧及爱的来朝，诏燕国王延禧相结为友。
现代文：十九日，阻卜酋长余古赧及爱的装来朝见，诏令燕国王延禧与二人相结为友。
English: On the 19th, Chief Yu Guzhen and Love came to see the emperor, and King Yan Yan was ordered to make friends with the two.

古文：戊申，以契丹行宫都部署耶律阿思兼知北院大王事。
现代文：二十一日，以契丹行宫都部署耶律阿思兼任知北院大王事。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, with Khitan's visit to the palace, Yelu Ath was deployed to serve as the Grand Prince of Chihokuin.

古文：壬子，高墩以下、县令、录事兄弟及子，悉许叙用。
现代文：二十五日，自高墩以下，县令、录事的兄弟及儿子，均准予选拔任用。
English: On the 25th, the brothers and sons of county magistrates, recorders, from Gaocheng and below, were all approved for selection and appointment.

古文：秋七月丁巳，惠妃母燕国夫人削古以厌魅梁王事觉，伏诛，子兰陵郡王萧酬斡除名，置边郡，仍隶兴圣宫。
现代文：秋七月初二，惠妃之母燕国夫人削古因为祈祷鬼神伤害梁王之事败露，被诛杀，其子兰陵郡王萧酬斡被除去名籍，安置于边郡，仍隶于兴圣宫。
English: On the second day of the second month of autumn, Lady Yan Guo, the mother of Hui Fei, was beaten to death for praying for ghosts and gods to harm King Liang, and her son, Lanling County King Xiao Rongyu, was removed from the family register and placed in Border County, still under the Xing Sheng Palace.

古文：戊午，猎沙岭。
现代文：初三，出猎于沙岭。
English: Junior 3, hunting in the sand dunes.

古文：甲子，赐兴圣、积庆二宫贫民钱。
现代文：初九，赐钱给兴圣、积庆二宫贫民。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, money was given to the poor in Xingsheng and Jieqing in the Second Palace.

古文：乙酉，出粟振辽州贫民。
现代文：三十日，发放粟米赈济辽州贫民。
English: On the 30th, corn was distributed to the poor in Liaozhou.

古文：八月戊子，以雪罢猎。
现代文：八月初三，因为下雪停止狩猎。
English: On the 3rd of August, hunting was suspended due to snow.

古文：九月庚午，还上京。
现代文：九月十五日，回上京。
English: On September 15, he returned to Tokyo.

古文：壬申，发粟振上京、中京贫民。
现代文：十七日，发放粟米赈济上京、中京贫民。
English: On the 17th, corn was distributed to the poor in Shangjing and Zhongjing.

古文：丙子，谒二仪、五鸾二殿。
现代文：二十一日，拜谒二仪、五鸾二殿。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the worship of the Two Rites and the Five Rites in the Second Hall began.

古文：己卯，出太祖、太宗所御铠仗示燕国王延禧，谕以创业征伐之难。
现代文：二十四日，取出太祖、太宗御用的铠仗给燕国王延禧观看，以创业征伐之艰难对他加以晓谕。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he took out the yakitori used by his great-great-grandfather and great-great-grandfather to show it to King Yan, and told him about the difficulties of starting a business.

古文：辛巳，召南府宰相议国政。
现代文：二十六日，召见南府宰相商议国政。
English: On the 26th, the prime minister of Nanfu was summoned to discuss national politics.

古文：冬十月乙酉朔，以枢密副使窦景庸知枢密院事。
现代文：冬十月初一，以枢密副使窦景庸为知枢密院事。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Dou Jingyong, the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：丙戌，五国部长来贡。
现代文：初二，五国部首领前来进贡。
English: On the second day of the first month, the leaders of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：丁亥，以夏国王李秉常薨，遣使诏其子乾顺知国事。
现代文：初三，因夏国王李秉常逝世，派使者诏令由其子李乾顺主持国事。
English: On the third day of the first month, due to the death of the king of Xia, Li Bingzhang, he sent an envoy to issue a decree that his son, Li Qianshun, should preside over state affairs.

古文：十一月甲戌，为燕国王延禧行再生礼，曲赦上京囚。
现代文：十一月二十日，为燕国王耶律延禧举行再生礼，特赦上京囚犯。
English: On November 20th, a rebirth ceremony was held for Yan King Yerut Yanxi, and prisoners who went to Beijing were pardoned.

古文：戊寅，高丽遣使谢封册。
现代文：二十四日，高丽国派使者感谢封册。
English: On the 24th, the Koryo Kingdom sent an envoy to thank the seal.

古文：癸未，出粟振乾、显、成、懿四州贫民。
现代文：二十九日，发放粟米赈济乾、显、成、懿四州贫民。
English: On the 29th, corn was distributed to the poor in the four prefectures of Qian, Xian, Cheng and Handan.

古文：十二月辛卯，以兰陵郡王萧挞不也为南院枢密使。
现代文：十二月初七，以兰陵郡王萧挞不也为南院枢密使。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, Wang Xiaohui of Lanling County also became the envoy of the Southern Yuan.

古文：己亥，夏国王李乾顺遣使上其父遗物。
现代文：十五日，夏国王李乾顺派使者奉上其父亲之遗物。
English: On the 15th, the king of Xia, Li Qianshun, sent an envoy to present the relics of his father.

