古文：邓禹字仲华，南阳新野人也。
现代文：邓禹字仲华，南阳郡新野县人。
English: Deng Yuza Zhonghua, a resident of Nanyang County, Nino County.

古文：年十三，能诵诗，受业长安。时光武亦游学京师，禹年虽幼，而见光武知非常人，遂相亲附。
现代文：十三岁时，就能朗诵诗篇，在长安从师学习，当时光武也游学京师，邓禹虽年幼，但见到光武后就知道他不是一位普通人，就与他亲近交往。
English: At the age of thirteen, he was able to recite poetry and studied under a teacher in Chang'an. At that time, Guangwu was also studying under a teacher in Beijing. Although Deng Yu was young, when he saw Guangwu, he knew that he was not an ordinary person and became close friends with him.

古文：数年归家。
现代文：数年后回家。
English: After a few years, he returned home.

古文：及汉兵起，更始立，豪杰多荐举禹，禹不肯从。
现代文：等到汉兵起，更始即位，豪杰们多荐举邓禹，邓禹不肯相从。
English: When the Han soldiers began to ascend to the throne, the heroes recommended Deng Yu, but Deng Yu refused to follow.

古文：及闻光武安集河北，即杖策北渡，追及于邺。
现代文：光武说： 即便这样，想干什么呢？ 邓禹说： 但愿明公威德加于四海，我得为明公效尺寸之力，垂功名于史册哩。 
English: Guangwu said, "Even so, what do you want to do?" Deng Yu said, "I hope that Ming Gong will spread to the four seas, and I will be honored in the annals of history for the power of Ming Gong effect and size."

古文：光武见之甚欢，谓曰： 我得专封拜，生远来，宁欲仕乎？ 禹曰： 不愿也。 光武曰： 即如是，何欲为？ 禹曰： 但愿明公威德加于四海，禹得效其尺寸，垂功名于竹帛耳。 光武笑，因留宿闲语。
现代文：光武大笑，就留他睡觉闲聊。
English: Guangwu laughed loudly, so they let him sleep and chatted.

古文：禹进说曰： 更始虽都关西，今山东未安，赤眉、青犊之属，动以万数，三辅假号，往往群聚。
现代文：邓禹进言说： 更始虽然定都关西，但现在山东没有安定，赤眉、青犊之流，劫辄以万数，三辅一带，往往群聚假借名号。
English: Deng Yu Jinyan said: Although Kansai was the capital at the beginning of the reformation, Shandong is not stable now. There are tens of thousands of Red Eyebrows and Green Eyed Peasants, and they often gather in groups under assumed names in the Sanfu area.

古文：更始既未有所挫，而不自听断，诸将皆庸人屈起，志在财币，争用威力，朝夕自快而已，非有忠良明智，深虑远图，欲尊主安民者也。
现代文：更始既没有挫败过他们，而他们也不听指挥裁决，各将领都是些庸人崛起，志在发财，争用威力，早晚图快乐罢了，并没有忠良明智，深谋远虑，真想尊重主上安抚百姓的。
English: They have not been defeated at the beginning, and they do not listen to the command and ruling. The generals are all rising mediocrities who aspire to make money, use power, and are happy sooner or later. They are not loyal, wise, foresighted, and really want to respect the Lord and appease the people.

古文：四方分崩离析，形势可见。
现代文：四方分崩离析，形势清楚可见。
English: The four parties are falling apart, and the situation is clearly visible.

古文：明公虽建藩辅之功，犹恐无所成立。
现代文：明公虽然建立了辅佐王室的功劳，恐怕也难成大业。
English: Although Emperor Ming established the merit of assisting the royal family, I am afraid it is difficult to become a great career.

古文：于今之计，莫如延揽英雄，务悦民心，立高祖之业，救万民之命。
现代文：为今之计，不如延揽四方英雄，务必取悦民心，建立高祖的伟业，拯救百姓万民的生命。
English: For now, it is better to recruit heroes from the four directions, make sure to please the people's hearts, establish the great cause of Gao Zu, and save the lives of the people.

古文：以公而虑天下，不足定也。 光武大悦，因令左右号禹曰邓将军。
现代文：以公的德才平定天下，是足可以平定的。 光武帝大悦，因此令左右的人称邓禹为邓将军。
English: The Emperor Guangwu was greatly pleased, so people around him called Deng Yu as General Deng.

古文：常宿止于中，与定计议。
现代文：让他住宿在帐中，共同商定策略计划。
English: Let him stay in the account and jointly agree on a strategic plan.

古文：及王郎起兵，光武自蓟至信都，使禹发奔命，得数千人，令自将之，别攻拔乐阳。从至广阿，光武舍城楼上，披舆地图，指示禹曰： 天下郡国如是，今始乃得其一。
现代文：等到王郎起兵，光武从蓟到信都，派邓禹征发各郡国的 快速部队 ，得数千人，令他亲自率领，另去攻拔乐阳县，又跟光武到广阿，光武住在城楼上，打开地图，指示邓禹说： 天下的郡国这样多，如今仅得了一个，你以前说以我的德才是足可以平定天下的，为什么呢？ 
English: When Wang Lang raised an army, Guangwu went from Shantou to Xindu, sent Deng Yu to recruit and dispatch the rapid troops of the counties and states, got thousands of people, let him personally lead, and went to attack Leyang County, and followed Guangwu to Guang'a. Guangwu lived on the upper floor of the city, opened the map, and instructed Deng Yu to say: There are so many counties and states in the world, and now only one has been obtained. You used to say that my virtue is the foot that can pacify the world. Why?

古文：子前言以吾虑天下不足定，何也？ 禹曰： 方今海内淆乱，人思明君，犹赤子之慕慈母。古之兴者，在德薄厚，不以大小。 光武悦。
现代文：邓禹说： 现在海内混乱，人们思念明君，就像婴儿思慕慈母一样。古代兴大业得天下的，在于德的厚薄，而不是土地的大小。 光武高兴。
English: Deng Yu said, "Nowadays, there is chaos at sea, and people miss Ming Jun, just like a baby misses his mother. In ancient times, it was the thickness of virtue, not the size of the land, that led to great achievements. Guangwu is happy.

古文：时任使诸将，多访于禹，禹每有所举者，皆当其才，光武以为知人。
现代文：当时任用将领，多访问于邓禹，邓禹所荐举的人才，都能才职相称，光武认为邓禹知人。
English: The generals appointed at that time mostly visited Deng Yu, and the talents recommended by Deng Yu were all commensurate with their positions. Guangwu considered Deng Yu to be an acquaintance.

古文：使别将骑，与盖延等击铜马于清阳。
现代文：派他另率骑兵，与盖延等击铜马于清阳。
English: He sent him to lead another cavalry and wait with Gai Yan to attack the bronze horse in Qingyang.

古文：延等先至，战不利，还保城，为贼所围。禹遂进与战，破之，生获其大将。
现代文：盖延等先到，战不利，退回保城，被贼所困，邓禹进兵与贼战，把贼兵打败，活捉了他们的大将。
English: Gai Yan and others arrived first, the battle was unfavorable, they returned to defend the city, trapped by the thieves, Deng Yu marched into the battle with the thieves, defeated the thieves, and captured their general alive.

古文：从光武追贼至蒲阳，连大克获，北州略定。
现代文：从光武追贼到蒲阳，连战连胜，北州大致平定。
English: From Guangwu Chasing Thieves to Puyang, continuous battles and victories, Beizhou has been roughly pacified.

古文：及赤眉西入关，更始使定国上公王匡、襄邑王成丹、抗威将军刘均及诸将，分据河东、弘农以拒之。
现代文：等到赤眉西入关，更始派定国上公王匡、襄邑王成丹、抗威将军刘均及诸将，分别据守河东、弘农郡以相抵抗。
English: After entering the western part of Akame, Ding Guo sent Shangguang Wang Kuang, Xiangyi Wang Chengdan, Liu Jun and other generals to defend Hedong and Hongnong counties respectively.

古文：赤眉众大集，王匡等莫能当。光武筹赤眉必破长安，欲乘并关中，而方自事山东，未知所寄，以禹沉深有大度，故授以西讨之略。
现代文：赤眉部众大集，王匡等抵挡不住，光武预计赤眉军必破长安，想乘隙吞并关中，而他自己刚好忙于山东，不知把西征的事寄托谁好，以邓禹深沉有大将风度，所以授以西讨的战略。
English: Guangwu expected that the Red Eyebrows Army would break through Chang'an and wanted to take advantage of the gap to annex Guanzhong, while he was busy in Shandong. He did not know who to entrust with the Western Expedition. Deng Yushenshen had the demeanor of a great general, so he was given the strategy of the Western Expedition.

古文：乃拜为前将军持节，中分麾下精兵二万人，遣西入关，令自选偏裨以下可与俱者。
现代文：就拜邓禹为前将军持节，平分麾下精兵二万人，派遣他西入关，令邓禹自己挑选将佐以下可跟他一起西征的人选。
English: On the occasion of the former general Bai Deng Yu's birthday, he divided the 20,000 elite soldiers under his command equally and sent them to the West, and ordered Deng Yu to choose the candidates who could go to the West with him from the rank of general.

古文：于是以韩歆为军师，李文、李春、程虑为祭酒，冯愔为积弩将军，樊崇为骁骑将军，宗歆为车骑将军，邓寻为建威将军，耿为赤眉将军，左于为军师将军，引而西。
现代文：于是以韩歆为军师、李文、李春、程虑为祭酒，冯忄音为积弩将军，樊崇为骁骑将军，宗歆为车骑将军，邓寻为建威将军，耿讠斤为赤眉将军，左于为军师将军，引军西去。
English: Therefore, Han Xuan was appointed as the military instructor, Li Wen, Li Chun and Cheng Xian as the sacrificial wine, Feng Yueyin as the general of Jiechuan, Yu Chong as the general of the cavalry, Zong Yu as the general of the cavalry, Deng Xuan as the general of Jian Wei, Geng Xujin as the general of the red eyebrows, and Zuo Yu as the general of the military instructor, and the army was led to the west.

古文：建武元年正月，禹自箕关将入河东，河东都尉守关不开，禹攻十日，破之，获辎重千余乘。
现代文：建武元年正月，邓禹自箕关将入河东郡，河东郡都尉守关不开，邓禹连攻十天，破关，缴获辎重一千多车。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Jianwu era, Deng Yu took the initiative to enter Hedong County. The captain of Hedong County could not keep the pass open. Deng Yu Lian attacked for ten days, broke through the pass, and seized more than a thousand vehicles.

古文：进围安邑，数月未能下。
现代文：进围安邑，几个月没能攻下。
English: After encircling Anyi, they were unable to capture Tome for several months.

古文：更始大将军樊参将数万人，度大阳欲攻禹，禹遣诸将逆击于解南，大破之，斩参首。
现代文：更始大将军樊参率领数万人，渡过大阳准备进攻邓禹，邓禹派遣诸将迎击于解县南面，大破樊参军，斩樊参首。
English: At the beginning of the war, the great general Shanshan, led by tens of thousands of people, crossed the Dayang River to prepare for the attack on Deng Yu. Deng Yu dispatched generals to meet the attack in the south of Xie County, broke Shanshan into the army, and beheaded Shanshan.

古文：于是王匡、成丹、刘均等合军十余万，复共击禹，禹军不利，樊崇战死。
现代文：于是王匡、成丹、刘均等合军十多万，再共同击邓禹，邓禹军不利，樊崇战死。
English: As a result, Wang Kuang, Cheng Dan, and Liu Bei gathered more than one hundred thousand troops, and then jointly attacked Deng Yu. Deng Yu's army was at a disadvantage, and Gong Chong died in the battle.

古文：会日幕，战罢，军师韩歆及诸将见兵势已摧，皆劝禹夜去，禹不听。
现代文：正好日暮，战事已罢，军师韩歆及诸将看到兵势已受到摧残，都劝邓禹乘夜离去，邓禹不听。
English: It was dusk, the battle was over, the military instructor Han Zheng and the generals saw that the army had been destroyed, and they all advised Deng Yu to leave at night, but Deng Yu did not listen.

古文：明日癸亥，匡等以六甲穷日不出，禹因得更理兵勒众。
现代文：第二天癸亥，王匡等认为，癸亥属于六甲凶日，整天没有出兵，邓禹因此得以停整兵器，重新调整部队。
English: On the next day, Zou Hai, Wang Kuang and others believed that Zou Hai belonged to the six counties and did not send troops all day, so Deng Yu was able to stop the weapons and re-adjust the troops.

古文：明旦，匡悉军出攻禹，禹令军中无得妄动；既至营下，因传发诸将鼓而并进，大破广。
现代文：第二天早晨，匡全军出攻邓禹，邓禹下令军中不得妄动；王匡军既到营下，邓禹传令诸将鼓噪并进，大破王匡军。
English: The next morning, the entire Kuang army attacked Deng Yu. Deng Yu ordered the army not to make any rash moves. Once Wang Kuang's army arrived at the camp, Deng Yu ordered the generals to march noisily together and defeated Wang Kuang's army.

古文：承制拜李文为河东太守，悉更置属县令长以镇抚之。
现代文：王匡等都弃军逃走，邓禹率轻骑急追，俘获刘均及河东太守杨宝、持节中郎将弭瞗，都杀了，收缴符节六个，印绶五百，兵器不可胜数，于是平定了河东郡。
English: Wang Kuang and others abandoned the army and fled, Deng Yu led a light cavalry in hot pursuit, captured Liu Jun and Yang Bao, the eunuch of Hedong, and Jijie Zhong Lang, and killed them all, collected six characters, five hundred stamps, and countless weapons, and then leveled Hedong County.

古文：是月，光武即位于鄗，使使者持节拜禹为大司徒。
现代文：当月，光武在高阝即位，派遣使者持节拜邓禹为大司徒。
English: In the same month, Guangwu ascended the throne in Gaozhou, and sent an envoy to hold a festival to worship Deng Yu as the great disciple.

古文：策曰： 制诏前将军禹：深执忠孝，与朕谋谟帷幄，决胜千里。
现代文：封官的命令说： 诏令前将军邓禹：深执忠孝，与我运筹帷幄之中，决胜千里之外。
English: The sealing order said: "Former General Deng Yu: I am deeply committed to loyalty and filial piety, and I am in the midst of planning, and the decisive victory is thousands of miles away.

古文：孔子曰： 自吾有回，门人日亲。
现代文：孔子说过： 自从我有了颜回，弟子们日益亲密。 
English: Confucius said, "Since I was born, my disciples have become more and more intimate."

古文：斩将破军，平定山西，功效尤著。
现代文：斩将破军，平定山西，功勋尤著。
English: He made outstanding contributions in defeating the enemy and stabilizing Shanxi Province.

古文：百姓不亲，五品不训，汝作司徒，敬敷五教，五教在宽。
现代文：如果百姓不亲，缺少五常的训导，你作为司徒，应对百姓施行五常的教化，五常的教化在于宽厚。
English: If the people are not familiar with and lack the five constant teachings, you, as a disciple, should carry out the five constant enlightenment of the people. The five constant enlightenment lies in generosity.

古文：今遣奉车都尉授印绶，封为酂侯，食邑万户。
现代文：今派遣奉车都尉授你印绶，封为赞阝侯，食邑万户。 
English: Now, we're sending Lieutenant Feng Che to give you the seal of approval, the seal of praise, and the food of all households.

古文：敬之哉！ 禹时年二十四。遂渡汾阴河，入夏阳。
现代文：邓禹这时只有二十四岁。于是邓禹渡过汾阴河，进入夏阳县。
English: At that time, Deng Yu was only 24 years old. Therefore, Deng Yu crossed the Suyin River and entered Xiayang County.

古文：更始中郎将左辅都尉公乘歙，引其众十万，与左冯翊兵共拒禹于衙，禹复破走之，而赤眉遂入长安。
现代文：更始中郎将左辅都尉公乘歙，带其部众十万，与左冯翊兵共同拒邓禹于衙县，邓禹再次将其攻破赶走，而赤眉军就进入长安。
English: At the beginning of the new year, the middle brother sent the left assistant captain Gong Rongqi, with 100,000 of his subordinates, together with the left Feng Rong soldiers, to resist Deng Yu in Handan County. Deng Yu once again defeated and drove him away, and the Red Eyed Army entered Chang'an.

古文：是时三辅连覆败，赤眉所过残贼，百姓不知所归。
现代文：这时三辅的军队接连覆败，赤眉军所过之处残暴掠夺，百姓不知所归。
English: At this time, the troops of Sanfu were defeated one after another, the Red Eyebrows brutally plundered everywhere they passed, and the people did not know where to return.

古文：闻禹乘胜独克而师行有纪，皆望风相携负以迎军，降者日以千数，众号百万。
现代文：听说邓禹每每乘胜独克而部队纪律严明，于是都望风携老扶幼迎接邓禹军队，归从的日以千数，人众号称百万。
English: They heard that Deng Yu was always victorious and his troops were well-disciplined, so they all looked forward to welcoming Deng Yu's troops with the old and the young. The number of days they followed him was in the thousands, and the number of people was said to be in the millions.

古文：禹所止辄停车住节，以劳来之，父老童稚，重发戴白，满其车下，莫不感悦，于是名震关西。
现代文：邓禹每到之处，常停车住节，慰劳问好，父老童稚，白发垂髻，挤满在他车下，莫不感激欢乐，于是邓禹名震关西。
English: Whenever Deng Yu went anywhere, he would often stop at festivals, greetings, fatherhood, white hair, crowded under his car, grateful joy, so Deng Yu's fame shook Kansai.

古文：帝嘉之，数赐书褒美。
现代文：帝赞扬他，几次写信赞美他。
English: The emperor praised him and wrote several letters praising him.

古文：诸将豪杰皆劝禹径攻长安。
现代文：诸将豪杰都劝邓禹直接攻长安。
English: All the great generals advised Deng Yu to directly attack Chang'an.

古文：禹曰： 不然。 今吾众虽多，能战者少，前无可仰之积，后无转馈之资。
现代文：邓禹说： 不然，现在我部众虽多，但能打仗的却少，前面没有可依赖的积蓄，后面也没有可供转运的资财。
English: Deng Yu said, "Otherwise, although there are many people in our group now, there are few who can fight. There are no savings to rely on in the front, and there are no assets to be transported in the back.

古文：赤眉新拔长安，财富充实，锋锐未可当也。
现代文：赤眉军刚刚攻取长安，财富充实，士气锐不可挡。
English: The Red Eyebrows had just captured Chang'an, their wealth was abundant, and their morale was unstoppable.

古文：夫盗贼群居，无终日之计，财谷虽多，变故万端，宁能坚守者也？
现代文：然而盗贼群居，无整天的打算，财谷虽多，变故万端，哪能坚守下去呢？
English: However, thieves live in groups, and there is no plan for the whole day. Although there are many financial valleys, there are all kinds of changes, how can you stick to it?

古文：上郡、北地、安定三郡，土广人稀，饶谷多畜，吾且休兵北道，就粮养士，以观其弊，乃可图也。 于是引军北至栒邑。
现代文：上郡、北地、安定三郡，地广人稀，谷米牲畜多，我们暂时整军北道，就粮养士，以观察赤眉军的弱点，才可以设法进攻他们哩！ 于是引军北至縌邑县。
English: Shang County, Beidai, and Anding three counties, the land is vast and sparsely populated, there is a lot of grain and livestock, we temporarily reorganize the army in the North Road, feed the soldiers, observe the weaknesses of the Red Eyebrows Army, and then we can try to attack them!

古文：禹所到，击破赤眉别将诸营保，郡邑皆开门归附。
现代文：邓禹所到之处，击破赤眉军别将诸营保，郡县都开门归附。
English: Wherever Deng Yu went, after defeating the Red Eyed Army, the commanders were sent to Yingbao, and the counties were opened to annexation.

古文：西河太守宗育遣子奉檄降，禹遣诣京师。
现代文：西河太守宗育遣儿子手奉邓禹晓谕各地的文书归降，邓禹派遣他到国都去。
English: Xihe Taishou Zong sent his son to obey Deng Yu's order to surrender everywhere, and Deng Yu sent him to the capital.

古文：帝以关中未定，而禹久不进兵，下敕曰： 司徒，尧也；亡贼，桀也。
现代文：帝以关中未定，而邓禹又久不进兵，就下达命令说： 司徒，是尧；亡贼，是桀。
English: Emperor Yiguan was undecided, and Deng Yu, who had not joined the army for a long time, issued an order saying: "Stu, it's you; the thief, it's you.

古文：长安吏人，遑遑无所依归。
现代文：长安的官吏民众，惶惶无所依归。
English: The officials and people of Chang'an have nowhere to turn.

古文：宜以时进讨，镇慰西京，系百姓之心。 禹犹执前意，乃分遣将军别攻上郡诸县，更征兵引谷，归至大要。
现代文：应掌握时机进讨，安定抚慰西京，以维系百姓的心。 邓禹还是坚持前面的意见，就分遣将军另行攻打上郡诸县，更征集兵力引进粮食，回到大要县。
English: It is necessary to seize the opportunity to advance the discussion, stabilize and soothe West Beijing, and maintain the hearts of the people. Deng Yu still adhered to the previous opinion, and dispatched generals to attack the counties and counties separately, and even recruited troops to import grain, and returned to Dayo County.

古文：遣冯愔、宗歆守栒邑。
现代文：派遣冯忄音、宗歆守縌邑。
English: Feng Yuyin was dispatched, and Zong Yu became the governor of Yuyi.

古文：二人争权相攻，愔遂杀歆，因反击禹，禹遣使以闻。
现代文：二人争权互相攻打，冯忄音杀了宗歆，并反击邓禹，邓禹派使者报告光武帝。
English: The two fought each other for power. Feng Yuyin killed Zonglu, and counterattacked Deng Yu. Deng Yu sent an envoy to report to Emperor Guangwu.

古文：帝问使人： 愔所亲爱为谁？ 对曰： 护军黄防。 帝度愔、防不能久和，势必相忤，因报禹曰： 缚冯愔者，必黄防也。 乃遣尚书宗广持节降之。
现代文：帝问使者： 忄音最亲爱的是谁？ 使者说： 是护军黄防。 帝猜度冯忄音和黄防不能久和，势必发生对抗。因此告诉邓禹说： 逮捕冯忄音的，必是黄防。 于是派遣尚书宗广拿着符节招降黄防。
English: The emperor asked the messenger, "Who is the dearest to Xuan Yin?" The messenger said, "It is the escort Huang Bei. The emperor guessed that Feng Xuan Yin and Huang Bei would not be able to make peace for a long time, and a confrontation was bound to occur. Therefore, he told Deng Yu, "The one who arrests Feng Xuan Yin must be Huang Bei." So he sent Shang Shuzongguang to recruit Huang Bei with a rune.

古文：后月余，防果执愔，将其众归罪。
现代文：后月余，黄防果然逮捕冯忄音，率领其部众归罪。
English: A month later, Huang Bao arrested Feng Yuyin and led his subordinates to bring him to justice.

古文：更始诸将王匡、胡殷等皆诣广降，与共东归。
现代文：更始诸将王匡、胡殷等都到宗广处投降，与宗广一起东归。
English: At the beginning of the war, generals Wang Kuang and Hu Yin surrendered to Zong Guang and returned to the East together with him.

古文：至安邑，道欲亡，广悉斩之。
现代文：到了安邑，王匡等想中途逃跑，宗广把他们都杀了。
English: When they arrived at Anyi, Wang Kuang and the others wanted to escape halfway, and Zong Guang killed them all.

古文：愔至洛阳，赦不诛。
现代文：冯忄音到洛阳，赦免不杀。
English: Feng Yuyin went to Luoyang and was pardoned but not killed.

古文：二年春，遣使者更封禹为梁侯，食四县。
现代文：建武二年春，遣使者改封邓禹为梁侯，食邑四县。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Jianwu era, the envoy changed his name to Deng Yu and became the Prince of Liang.

古文：时，赤眉西走扶风，禹乃南至长安，军昆明池，大飨士卒。
现代文：这时赤眉军西走扶风，邓禹才往南至长安，驻军昆明池，用酒食大宴士卒。
English: At this time, the Red Eyebrows Army went west to support the wind, and Deng Yucai went south to Chang'an, garrisoned Kunming Pond, and held a grand banquet with wine and food.

古文：率诸将斋戒，择吉日，修礼谒祠高庙，收十一帝神主，遣使奉诣洛阳，因循行园陵，为置吏士奉守焉。
现代文：率领诸将军沐浴更衣斋戒，选择吉日，演习礼仪祭祀高祖庙，收了十一帝的神主，派使者捧到洛阳，因而巡视园陵，特安置官吏士卒奉祀守陵。
English: He led the generals in bathing, changing clothes, fasting, choosing auspicious days, practicing etiquette and sacrificing to Gaozhu Temple, received the 11th emperor's god, sent an envoy to Luoyang, and thus inspected the mausoleum, and specially placed officials and officials to serve and guard the mausoleum.

古文：禹引兵与延岑战于蓝田，不克，复就谷云阳。
现代文：邓禹率兵与延岑战于蓝田，不胜，再就食云阳。
English: Deng Yu led his soldiers to fight against Yan Kui in Lantian, but was defeated, and then died.

古文：汉中王刘嘉诣禹降。
现代文：汉中王刘嘉到邓禹处投降。
English: Liu Jia, the king of the Han Dynasty, surrendered to Deng Yu.

古文：嘉相李宝倨慢无礼，禹斩之。
现代文：刘嘉相李宝傲慢无礼，邓禹把他杀了。
English: Liu Jiaxiang Li Bao was arrogant and rude, Deng Yu killed him.

古文：宝弟收宝部曲击禹，杀将军耿。
现代文：李宝的弟弟收集李宝部众击邓禹，杀了将军耿讠斤。
English: Li Bao's younger brother gathered Li Bao's troops to attack Deng Yu and killed General Geng Bingjin.

古文：无得复妄进兵。 禹惭于受任而功不遂，数以饥卒徼战，辄不利。
现代文：自从冯忄音反邓禹以后，邓禹的威望受到损害。这时赤眉军再次还入长安，邓禹与之战，败走，到了高陵，军士饥饿，都吃枣菜度日。
English: Deng Yu's prestige was damaged after Feng Xuanyin's anti-Deng Yu. At this time, the Red Eyed Army once again entered Chang'an, Deng Yu fought with it, lost, and went to Gaoling. The sergeant was hungry and ate dates to get through the day.

古文：三年春，与车骑将军邓弘击赤眉，遂为所败，众皆死散。
现代文：帝于是召邓禹回来，诏令说： 赤眉缺粮，自然会向东而来，我只要折断策马的杖去鞭打他就可把他打败。不是诸将值得忧虑的，不要再妄动进兵。 
English: The emperor then called Deng Yu back, and issued a decree: "Red-brow is short of grain, so he will naturally come to the east. I only need to break the horse's stick to whip him and he can be defeated. It is not the generals who are worth worrying about, so don't rush into the army.

古文：事在《冯异传》。
现代文：邓禹以受任而功不成为惭愧，几次驱饥饿之兵去征战，常不利。
English: Deng Yu was not ashamed of the achievement of being appointed, and several times drove hungry soldiers to go to war, often unfavorably.

古文：独与二十四骑还诣宜阳，谢上大司徒、梁侯印绶。
现代文：三年春，与车骑将军邓弘击赤眉，被赤眉打败，部众死的死散的散，独与二十四骑还归宜阳，归还大司徒、梁侯印绶以谢罪。
English: In the spring of the third year, with the chariot and cavalry general Deng Hong hit the red eyebrow, was defeated by the red eyebrow, the dead scattered, and only the twenty-four horsemen returned to Yiyang, returned to the Daishi, and Liang Hou Yinyan was punished with thanks.

古文：有诏归侯印绶。
现代文：诏命还侯印绶。
English: The imperial edict was returned to the prince.

古文：数月，拜右将军。
现代文：数月，拜右将军。
English: For several months, he paid homage to General Yu.

古文：延岑自败于东阳，遂与秦丰合。
现代文：延岑自败于东阳，就与秦丰合作。
English: After losing to Dongyang, Yancheng cooperated with Qin Feng.

古文：四年春，复寇顺阳间。
现代文：四年春，再侵犯顺阳一带。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, it invaded the Shunyang area again.

古文：遣禹护复汉将军邓晔、辅汉将军于匡，击破岑于邓；追至武当，复破之。
现代文：派邓禹保护复汉将军邓晔、辅汉将军于匡，击破延岑于邓；追到武当，再次破延岑。
English: He sent Deng Yu to protect the Fuxing Han general Deng Xuan and the Fu Han general Yu Kuang, and defeated Yan Xuan in Deng; he chased him to Wudang and defeated Yan Xuan again.

古文：岑奔汉中，余党悉降。
现代文：岑逃奔汉中，余党都投降了。
English: He fled to Hanzhong, and the rest of the party surrendered.

古文：十三年，天下平定，诸功臣皆增户邑，定封禹为高密侯，食高密、昌安、夷安、淳于四县。
现代文：建武十三年，天下平定，各功臣都增加了户邑，定封邓禹为高密侯，食高密、昌安、夷安、淳于四县的赋税。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, the country was pacified, and each meritorious subject increased the number of households. Deng Yu was assigned to Gaomi, and taxes were levied in Gaomi, Chang'an, Yi'an, and Jun'yu in four counties.

古文：帝以禹功高，封弟宽为明亲侯。
现代文：帝以邓禹功高，封邓禹弟邓宽为明亲侯。
English: The emperor regarded Deng Yu Gong Gao as a close relative, and named Deng Yu's younger brother Deng Guang as a close relative.

古文：其后左右将军官罢，以特进奉朝请。
现代文：后来左右将军的职衔撤销了，按特进朝见皇帝。
English: Later, the titles of the generals were revoked, and they were allowed to enter the court to see the emperor.

古文：禹内文明，笃行淳备，事母至孝。
现代文：邓禹内尚文明，行为忠厚淳朴而且周密，服事母亲非常孝顺。
English: Deng Yunei was civilized, his behavior was loyal, simple and thorough, and he served his mother very dutifully.

古文：天下既定，常欲远名势。
现代文：天下已经平定，常常想疏远名势。
English: The country has been pacified, and they often want to distance themselves from the status quo.

古文：有子十三人，各使守一艺。
现代文：有子女十三人，让他们各掌握一门技艺。
English: They have thirteen children, and each of them has mastered a craft.

古文：修整闺门，教养子孙，皆可以为后世法。
现代文：整饬家规，教养子孙，都可以成为后世的楷模。
English: Rectifying family rules and raising children and grandchildren can become a model for future generations.

古文：显宗即位，以禹先帝元功，拜为太傅，进见东向，甚见尊宠。
现代文：一切用度都取之于封地赋税，不修私产不谋私利。因此帝更加尊重他。
English: The emperor respected him all the more because all his expenses were taken from the taxation of the fief, and he did not cultivate private property or seek personal gain.

古文：居岁余，寝疾。
现代文：中元元年，再代理司徒职务。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he resumed his duties as acting chief priest.

古文：帝数自临问，以子男二人为郎。
现代文：从帝巡视山东，到泰山筑坛祭天。
English: From the emperor's inspection tour of Shandong to the building of the altar in Mount Tai.

古文：永平元年，年五十七薨，谥曰元侯。
现代文：显宗即位，因邓禹是先帝元勋，拜为太傅，朝见时令他东向站立尊如宾客，甚见尊宠。永平元年，邓禹年五十七岁逝世。谥曰元侯。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, Deng Yu was revered as the founder of the dynasty, and he was made to stand to the east as a guest. He was highly respected. He died in the first year of Yongping at the age of fifty-seven. He was known as the "Former Prince."

古文：帝分禹封为三国：长子震为高密侯，袭为昌安侯，珍为夷安侯。
现代文：帝分禹封为三国：长子震为高密侯，袭为昌安侯，珍为夷安侯。
English: The emperor divided Yufu into three provinces: the eldest son, Zhen, was Gaomi, Han was Chang'an, and Zhen was Yi'an.

古文：禹少子鸿，好筹策。
现代文：禹少子鸿，好筹策。
English: Yu Shaozihong, good planning.

古文：永平中，以为小侯。
现代文：永平中，以为小侯。
English: In Yongping Middle School, he thought he was a minor.

古文：引入与议边事，帝以为能，拜将兵长史，率五营士屯雁门。
现代文：引入与议边事，帝以为能，拜将兵长史，率五营士屯雁门。
English: Introducing and discussing side issues, the emperor thought it was possible, paid tribute to the commander, and led five battalions to Tunganmen.

古文：肃宗时，为度辽将军。
现代文：肃宗时，为度辽将军。
English: At the time of Emperor Suzong, he was General Du Liao.

古文：永元中，与大将军窦宪俱出击匈奴，有功，征行车骑将军。
现代文：永元中，与大将军窦宪俱出击匈奴，有功，征行车骑将军。
English: In the middle of the Yongyuan era, he went out with the great general Dou Xian to attack the Xiongnu, and was successful.

古文：出塞追畔胡逢侯，坐逗留，下狱死。
现代文：出塞追畔胡逢侯，坐逗留，下狱死。
English: Out of the prison, chase Hu Fenhou, sit and stay, go to prison and die.

古文：高密侯震卒，子乾嗣。
现代文：高密侯震卒，子乾嗣。
English: Gao Mihou's pupil, his son and heir.

古文：乾尚显宗女沁水公主。
现代文：乾尚显宗女沁水公主。
English: Princess Atsumi, the daughter of Emperor Inzai.

古文：永元十四年，阴皇后巫蛊事发，乾从兄奉以后舅被诛，乾从坐，国除。
现代文：永元十四年，阴皇后巫蛊事发，乾从兄奉以后舅被诛，乾从坐，国除。
English: In the 14th year of the Yongyuan era, there was an incident involving the Queen of Yin, Wushan. Qian was banished from his brother and uncle, and Qian was banished from the country.

古文：元兴元年，和帝复封乾本国，拜侍中。
现代文：元兴元年，和帝复封乾本国，拜侍中。
English: In the first year of the Genxing era, Emperor He restored the imperial seal to the country and made a visit to the palace.

古文：乾卒，子成嗣。
现代文：乾卒，子成嗣。
English: Kenzo's son, Shosei's heir.

古文：成卒，子褒嗣。
现代文：成卒，子褒嗣。
English: A graduate, a son, and an heir.

古文：褒尚安帝妹舞阴长公主，桓帝时为少府。
现代文：褒尚安帝妹舞阴长公主，桓帝时为少府。
English: He praised Emperor An's younger sister Princess Muyin, who was a shofu (junior prefect) at the time of Emperor Kan.

古文：褒卒，长子某嗣。
现代文：褒卒，长子某嗣。
English: The award winner is the eldest son, Sometsugu.

古文：少子昌袭母爵为舞阴侯，拜黄门侍郎。
现代文：少子昌袭母爵为舞阴侯，拜黄门侍郎。
English: His younger son Masa followed his mother's footsteps as a maiko, and became a waiter at the Yellow Gate.

古文：昌安侯袭嗣子藩，亦尚显宗女平皋长公主，和帝时为侍中。
现代文：昌安侯袭嗣子藩，亦尚显宗女平皋长公主，和帝时为侍中。
English: Prince Chang'an inherited the domain from his heir, and his granddaughter, Princess Pingyao, was also a lady-in-waiting when he became emperor.

古文：夷安侯珍子康，少有操行。
现代文：夷安侯珍子康，少有操行。
English: Yi'an Hou Zhen Zikang, a rare practitioner.

古文：兄良袭封，无后，永初六年，绍封康为夷安侯。
现代文：兄良袭封，无后，永初六年，绍封康为夷安侯。
English: Brother Liang attacked Feng, but there was no successor, Yongchu was only six years old, and Shao Feng Kang was the first of the Yi'an princes.

古文：时诸绍封者皆食故国半租，康以皇太后戚属，独三分食二，以侍祠侯为越骑校尉。
现代文：时诸绍封者皆食故国半租，康以皇太后戚属，独三分食二，以侍祠侯为越骑校尉。
English: At that time, all the people of Shaofeng were living in their home country with half-rent, and Kang was living with the relatives of the Empress Dowager, with only two-thirds rent, and with the attendants of the ancestral hall as the Viet cavalry captain.

古文：康以太后久临朝政，宗门盛满，数上书长乐宫谏争，宜崇公室，自损私权，言甚切至。
现代文：康以太后久临朝政，宗门盛满，数上书长乐宫谏争，宜崇公室，自损私权，言甚切至。
English: Long after Kang Yat-sen's accession to the throne, the dynasty was in full bloom, and it was said that it was proper to respect the court and not to infringe on private rights.

古文：太后不从。
现代文：太后不从。
English: The Empress Dowager did not comply.

古文：康心怀畏惧，永宁元年，遂谢病不朝。
现代文：康心怀畏惧，永宁元年，遂谢病不朝。
English: Kang's heart was filled with fear, and in the first year of Yongning, Xie fell ill.

古文：太后使内侍者问之。
现代文：太后使内侍者问之。
English: The Queen Mother made the chambermaid ask him.

古文：时宫人出入，多能有所毁誉，其中耆宿皆称中大人。
现代文：时宫人出入，多能有所毁誉，其中耆宿皆称中大人。
English: When people go in and out of the palace, most of them can have a bad reputation. Among them, those who stay in the palace are called middle-aged adults.

古文：所使者乃康家先婢，亦自通中大人。
现代文：所使者乃康家先婢，亦自通中大人。
English: The messenger is a former maid of the Kanko family, who is also an adult.

古文：康闻，诟之曰： 汝我家出，亦敢尔耶？ 婢怨恚，还说康诈疾而言不逊。
现代文：康闻，诟之曰： 汝我家出，亦敢尔耶？ 婢怨恚，还说康诈疾而言不逊。
English: Kangwen said, "You ran away from home, do you dare to run away again? You are so spiteful, and you say that it is no less than health fraud.

古文：太后大怒，遂免康官，遣归国，绝属籍。
现代文：太后大怒，遂免康官，遣归国，绝属籍。
English: The empress dowager was furious, so he was exempted from the Kangan and sent back to his country.

古文：及从兄骘诛，安帝征康为侍中。
现代文：及从兄骘诛，安帝征康为侍中。
English: And from his elder brother, Andi Seikang, he became a chamberlain.

古文：顺帝立，为太仆，有方正称，名重朝廷。
现代文：顺帝立，为太仆，有方正称，名重朝廷。
English: Shun Dili, as a servant of the emperor, was called Fang Zheng, and was held in high esteem by the imperial court.

古文：以病免，加位特进。
现代文：以病免，加位特进。
English: If you are ill, you will be exempted, but if you are fit, you will be admitted.

古文：阳嘉三年卒，谥曰义侯。
现代文：阳嘉三年卒，谥曰义侯。
English: Yangjia three-year-old, 曰義侯.

古文：论曰： 夫变通之世，君臣相择，斯最作事谋始之几也。
现代文：史官评论道：在变动的年代，君臣互相选择，这是作事最初谋划时的关键。
English: The historian commented: In an era of change, monarchs and ministers choose each other, which is the key to the initial planning of the work.

古文：邓公嬴粮徒步，触纷乱而赴光武，可谓识所从会矣。于是中分麾下之军，以临山西之隙，至使关河响动，怀赴如归。
现代文：邓公挑着粮食徒步奔走，在纷乱中独奔光武，可以说是知其所从明其所会的了，于是中分一半的军队，以击山西的空隙，至使河东关西震动，投奔到他麾下来的人如回到了家里一样。
English: Deng Gong ran on foot with grain, and in the turmoil he ran alone. It can be said that he knew what he was doing and knew what he would do. Therefore, he divided half of the army to attack the gap in Shanxi, so that the Kansai of Hedong was shaken, and the people who ran to him as if they had returned home.

古文：功虽不遂，而道亦弘矣！
现代文：功业虽没有完成，道义德行却得到了弘扬。
English: Although the work has not been completed, the moral virtue has been promoted.

古文：及其威损栒邑，兵散宜阳，褫龙章于终朝，就侯服以卒岁，荣悴交而下无二色，进退用而上无猜情，使君臣之美，后世莫窥其间，不亦君子之致为乎！
现代文：后来虽威损邑，兵散宜阳，上交了司徒的印绶，但仍以侯爵卒其岁月，光荣憔悴而在下始终无二色，封官进爵，失意回朝光武对他始终没有猜疑，使君臣之美，后世看不到一点瑕疵和隔阂，这难道不是仁人君子的最完美的作为吗？
English: Later, although he had lost his prestige, his army was scattered to the four winds, and he handed over the seal of St. Peter, he still lived his life as a marquis, and his glory remained undiminished. He was knighted, and when he returned to the court in despair, Guangwu never doubted him, so that the beauty of the prince and the courtier could not be seen by future generations. Isn't this the most perfect act of a benevolent gentleman?

古文：寇恂字子翼，上谷昌平人也，世为著姓。
现代文：寇恂字子翼，上谷郡昌平县人，世代都是显姓。
English: A native of Changping County, Shangtang County, he has been known by his family name for generations.

古文：恂初为郡功曹，太守耿况甚重之。
现代文：寇恂起初为郡功曹，太守耿况很器重他。
English: At first, he was a county meritorious person, and was highly regarded by the grand marshal Geng Zheng.

古文：王莽败，更始立。使使者徇郡国，曰 先降者复爵位 。
现代文：王莽失败，更始即位，派遣使者向各郡国宣示： 先归降的恢复爵位。 
English: After Wang Mang's defeat and enthronement, he sent an envoy to each county to announce: the first to return to the throne will be restored.

古文：恂从耿况迎使者于界上，况上印绶，使者纳之，一宿无还意。
现代文：寇恂跟从耿况在界上迎接使者，耿况呈上印绶，使者接受了，一夜也没有退还印绶的意思。
English: Kou Ye followed Geng Quan to greet the messenger in the world. Geng Quan presented the seal, the messenger accepted it, and did not intend to return the seal overnight.

古文：恂勒兵入见使者，就请之。
现代文：寇恂带着兵器入见使者，请退还印绶。
English: If you come to the envoy with weapons, please return the money.

古文：使者不与，曰： 天王使者，功曹欲胁之邪？ 恂曰： 非敢胁使君，窃伤计之不详也。
现代文：使者不肯给，说： 我是天王使者，功曹想胁迫我吗？ 寇恂说： 不是敢胁迫使君，我私下里是为使君计谋之不周而悲伤哩。
English: The messenger refused to give it, saying, "I am the messenger of the king of heaven. Does Gong Cao want to coerce me?" Guo Yao said, "I did not dare to coerce you. In private, I am saddened by the poor planning of Gong Cao."

古文：今天下初定，国信未宣，使君建节衔命，以临四方，郡国莫不延颈倾耳，望风归命。
现代文：现在天下初定，国家的信誉没有得到宣示，使君建符节衔使命，以临四方，郡国上下莫不伸着颈子倾着耳朵，望风归命。
English: Now that the fate of the world has been predetermined, and the credibility of the country has not been declared, it is the mission of the prince to build a symbol and title, to be present in all directions, and the county and the country must stretch their necks, lean their ears, and wait for the wind to return.

古文：今始至上谷而先堕大信，沮向化之心，生离畔之隙，将复何以号令它郡乎？
现代文：现在你初到上谷而毁了大信，沮丧了全郡归向顺化之心，产生了离心背叛的隙缝。你将怎样再号令其他的郡呢？
English: Now that you have arrived in Shanggu for the first time, destroyed Daxin, frustrated the county's return to the heart of Hue, and created a gap of centrifugal betrayal, how will you order other counties?

古文：且耿府君在上谷，久为使人所亲，今易之，得贤则造次未安，不紧则只更生乱。
现代文：而且耿府君在上谷，久为官吏人民所亲信，现在将他更易，如继任的是个贤者则耿介不安，如是不贤之人则只能更生离乱。
English: Moreover, Gengfukun in Shanggu, who has long been trusted by officials and the people, is now easier to replace. If the successor is a wise man, Geng Jie is uneasy, and if he is not a wise man, he can only live in confusion.

古文：为使君计，莫若复之以安百姓。 使者不应，恂左右以使者命召况。况至，恂进取印绶带况。
现代文：为使君计议，莫如复耿况太守之职以安百姓。 使者不答应，寇恂怒叱左右的人以使者命召耿况，耿况至，寇恂进取印绶给耿况。
English: In order to persuade the emperor, there was no better way than to restore Geng Zhou to the position of the supreme commander in order to keep the people safe. When the envoy did not agree, the people around Guo Zhou angrily scolded and summoned Geng Zhou with the envoy's order, until Guo Zhou took the seal and gave it to Geng Zhou.

古文：使者不得已，乃承制诏之，况受而归。
现代文：使者不得已，就秉承皇帝旨意恢复耿况职务。耿况受职而归。
English: As a last resort, the envoy upheld the emperor's will to restore Geng Jiao to his post. Geng Jiao accepted the post and returned.

古文：及王郎起，遣将徇上谷，急况发兵。
现代文：等到王郎起兵，派遣将领攻取上谷，急令耿况发兵。
English: When Wang Lang raised an army, he dispatched generals to attack Shanggu, and ordered Geng Cang to send troops.

古文：恂与门下掾闵业共说况曰： 邯郸拔起，难可信向。
现代文：寇恂与门下掾闵业共同对耿况说： 邯郸突然兴起，难于信赖归向。
English: Kou Ye and his disciple Gong Ye jointly said to Geng Zhou: "Gong Ye suddenly emerged, it is difficult to trust it.

古文：昔王莽时，所难独有刘伯升耳。
现代文：以前王莽时，只有刘伯升最难得。
English: Before Wang Mang, only Liu Boxing was the most rare.

古文：今闻大司马刘公，伯升母弟，尊贤下士，士多归之，可攀附也。 况曰： 邯郸方盛，力不能独拒，如何？ 恂对曰： 今上谷完实，控弦万骑，举大郡之资，可以详择去就。
现代文：现在听说大司马刘公，是刘伯升的同母弟，尊贤下士，士多归附于他，可以攀附。 耿况说： 邯郸现在很强盛，我们力不能独拒，怎么办？ 寇恂说： 现在上谷完整充实，有士卒万骑，具备大郡的条件，可以详细选择去就取舍。
English: Now I have heard that Major Ma Liu Gong is Liu Bo Sheng's younger brother by the same mother, honorable and virtuous corporal, and many soldiers have attached themselves to him and can be attached. Geng Fuxu said, "He is very strong now, we can't resist him, what should we do?" Kou Qi said, "Now Shanggu is complete and substantial, there are thousands of soldiers, with the conditions of a large county, you can choose to go and choose to leave.

古文：恂请东约渔阳，齐心合众，邯郸不足图也。 况然之，乃遣恂到渔阳，结谋彭宠。
现代文：我请求东约渔阳太守，齐心合众，邯郸不值得考虑。 耿况同意，就派寇恂到渔阳，结谋彭宠。
English: I asked the governor-general of Yuyang in the East to have a heart-to-heart meeting, but it was not worth considering. When Geng agreed, he sent Guo Wei to Yuyang to conspire against Peng Cai.

古文：恂还，至昌平，袭击邯郸使者，杀之，夺其军，遂与况子弇等俱南及光武于广阿。
现代文：寇恂回来，到昌平，袭击邯郸派来的使者，把他杀了，夺了他的军队，于是与耿况的儿子耿等都到南追及光武于广阿。
English: After returning to Changping, the Egret attacked the envoy sent by the Grasshopper, killed him, and captured his army. Therefore, he and Geng Zhen's son Geng and others went south to pursue the Egret and Guangwu in Guang'a.

古文：拜恂为偏将军，号承义侯，从破群贼。
现代文：光武拜寇恂为偏将军，号承义侯，跟从击破群贼。
English: Guangwu Baikang was a partial general, claiming to be a righteous man, and he followed the path of breaking the bandits.

古文：数与邓禹谋议，禹奇之，因奉牛、酒共交欢。
现代文：多次与邓禹谋议，邓禹奇其才，因而奉上牛酒与他共饮交欢。
English: He consulted with Deng Yu many times. Deng Yu was impressed by his talent, so he offered him cow wine to drink and have sex with him.

古文：光武南定河内，而更始大司马朱鲔等盛兵据洛阳，及并州未定，光武难其守，问于邓禹曰： 诸将谁可使守河内者？ 禹曰： 昔高祖任萧何于关中，无复四顾之忧，所以得专精山东，终成大业。
现代文：光武南定了河内，而更始大司马朱鲔等以大兵占据洛阳。又并州未得安定，光武对河内交谁把守颇感为难。问邓禹说： 诸将中有谁可使守河内的呢？ 邓禹说： 以前高祖任命萧何于关中，再也没有西顾之忧，所以得以专门精心策划山东，终成大业。
English: Guangwu Nan decided on Hanoi, and Ma Zhulun, the first general secretary, and others occupied Luoyang with soldiers. And when the state was not stable, Guangwu was quite puzzled about who would guard Hanoi. Deng Yu said: Who among the generals could guard Hanoi? Deng Yu said: Previously, Gao Zu appointed Xiao He in Guanzhong, and there was no longer any worry about the West, so he was able to carefully plan Shandong and finally achieve a great career.

古文：今河内带河为固，户口殷实，北通上党，南迫洛阳。
现代文：今河内傍临黄河，十分牢固，户口殷实，北面通上党，南面迫近洛阳。
English: Now, Hanoi is next to the Yellow River, it is very strong, the hukou is affluent, the north is connected to the party, and the south is close to Luoyang.

古文：寇恂文武备足，有牧人御众之才，非此子莫可使也。 乃拜恂河内太守，行大将军事。
现代文：寇恂文武备足，有治理百姓驾御众人的才能，非他不可使哩。 光武于是拜寇恂为河内太守，代理大将军事。
English: He had the talent to govern the people and lead the masses, and he had to use it. Therefore, Guangwu became the governor of Hanoi, acting as the military general.

古文：光武谓恂曰： 河内完富，吾将因是而起。
现代文：光武对寇恂说： 河内完好富裕，我将因此而兴起。
English: "Hanoi is well-preserved and rich, and I will rise because of this," said Guangwu to Kouyi.

古文：昔高祖留萧何镇关中，吾今委公以河内，坚守转运，给足军粮，率厉士马，防遏它兵，勿令北度而已。 光武于是复北征燕、代。
现代文：以前高祖留萧何镇守关中，我今把河内委托给你，坚守转运，给足军粮，率领鼓励士卒，防守遏制其他兵马，不让他们北渡就行了。 光武于是再北上征伐燕、代。
English: In the past, Gao Zu stayed in Xiao He Town to guard the pass, but now I entrust Hanoi to you, adhere to the transit, give enough army food, lead and encourage soldiers, defend and contain other soldiers and horses, and do not let them go to the north. Guangwu then went to the north to conquer Yan and Dai.

古文：恂移书属县，讲兵肄射，伐淇园之竹，为矢百余万，养马二千匹，收租四百万斛，转以给军。
现代文：寇恂移书各属县，论述军事练习骑射，砍伐淇园的竹子，制成箭矢百余万，养马二千匹，收租四百万斛，都转运到前线。
English: Colonels moved the book to each county, discussing military exercises such as riding and shooting, cutting down bamboo from the garden, making more than one million arrows, raising two thousand horses, and collecting four million yams in rent, all of which were transported to the front line.

古文：朱鲔闻光武北而河内孤，使讨难将军苏茂、副将贾彊将兵三万余人，度巩河攻温。
现代文：朱鲔听到光武北上而河内势孤，就使讨难将军苏茂、副将贾强率兵三万多人，渡过巩河向温进攻。
English: When Zhu Xi heard that Guangwu was moving north and Hanoi was isolated, he ordered the general of the army of resistance, Sumo, and the vice-general, Jia Qiang, to lead more than 30,000 soldiers across the Gonghe River to attack Wen.

古文：檄书至，恂即勒军驰出，并移告属县发兵，会于温下。
现代文：檄书到，寇恂即率军奔出，并转告各属县，发兵会师于温下。
English: When the imperial edict arrived, Kou Ye immediately led the army to rush out, and told each county that the troops would be sent to Wenxia.

古文：军吏皆谏曰： 今洛阳兵渡河，前后不绝，宜待众军毕集，乃可出也。 恂曰： 温，郡之藩蔽，失温则郡不可守。 遂驰赴之。
现代文：军吏们都劝谏说： 现在洛阳兵渡河，前后不绝，应等到各处兵马集齐后，才可以出击。 寇恂说： 温，是郡的藩篱屏蔽，如温失守，则郡就不可守住。 于是驰赴到温。
English: The military officials all advised him that Luoyang soldiers were crossing the river incessantly at the moment, and that he should wait until all the soldiers and horses were gathered together before he could attack.Kou Qi said, Wen is shielded by the county's fences, and if Wen is lost, then the county cannot be defended, so he rushed to Wen.

古文：旦日合战，而偏将军冯异遣救，及诸县兵适至，士马四集，幡旗蔽野。
现代文：天明时合战，而偏将军冯异派遣救兵以及各属县兵恰好都到了，兵马四集，幡旗蔽野。
English: The war broke out at dawn, and General Feng Yi sent rescuers as well as soldiers from each county, who all arrived at the same time. There were four sets of soldiers and horses, and the flag covered the field.

古文：恂乃令士卒乘城，鼓噪大呼，言曰： 刘公兵到！ 苏茂军闻之，阵动，恂因奔击，大破之，追至洛阳，遂斩贾彊。
现代文：寇恂于是命令士卒乘城击鼓呼叫，大呼： 刘公兵到！ 苏茂军听到，阵角松动，寇恂率军冲击，大破苏茂军，追到洛阳，斩了贾强。
English: The bandit then ordered his soldiers to beat drums in the city and shout, "Liu Gongbing has arrived!" The Su-Mao army heard this and the battle lines were loosened. The army led by the bandit broke through the Su-Mao army, chased it to Luoyang, and killed Jia Qiang.

古文：茂兵自投河死者数千，生获万余人。
现代文：苏茂兵士自己投黄河而死的达数千，活捉万余人。
English: Thousands of Sumo soldiers died when they threw themselves into the Yellow River, and more than 10,000 were captured alive.

古文：恂与冯异过河而还。
现代文：寇恂与冯异过黄河而回。
English: Kou Ye and Feng Ying cross the Yellow River and return.

古文：自是，洛阳震恐，城门昼闭。
现代文：自此洛阳震动恐惧，白天都紧闭城门。
English: Since then, fear has shaken Luoyang, and the city gates have been closed during the day.

古文：时，光武传闻朱鲔破河内，有顷，恂檄至，大喜曰： 吾知寇子翼可任也！ 诸将军贺，因上尊号，于是即位。
现代文：这时光武传闻朱鲔破了河内，没多久寇恂的檄书到了，光武大喜说： 我知道寇子翼是可以胜任的哩！ 诸将军庆贺，因而为光武呈上尊号，光武于是即帝位。
English: At this time, Zhu Di broke through Hanoi, and not long after, the imperial edict of Guo Di arrived. Guangwu was overjoyed and said, "I know that Guo Di is competent!" The generals celebrated, and thus presented Guangwu with the honorary title, and Guangwu became emperor.

古文：时，军食急乏，恂以辇车骊驾转输，前后不绝，尚书升斗以禀百官。
现代文：当时军粮急缺，寇恂以人力车马车转运军粮，前后不绝，尚书仅以升斗之粮以禀百官。
English: At that time, there was an acute shortage of military rations, and the robber barons used rickshaws and horse-drawn carriages to transport military rations continuously. Shangshu only used the grain from the lifting buckets to feed the hundreds of officials.

古文：帝数策书劳问，恂同门生茂陵董崇说恂曰： 上新即位，四方未定，而郡侯以此时据大郡，内得人心，外破苏茂，威震邻敌，功名发闻，此谗人侧目怨祸之时也。
现代文：光武帝几次以简策书牍慰劳寇恂，同门生茂陵人董崇对寇恂说： 皇上新即位，四方尚未平定，而君侯在这个时候占据着大郡，内得人心，外破苏茂，威震邻敌，功名显赫，这是奸谗之徒侧目窥视产生怨祸的时候哩！
English: Emperor Guangwu several times consoled Emperor Lao Koxuan with a brief strategy book, and his disciple, the Maolin man Dong Chong, said to Emperor Lao Koxuan: The emperor is newly enthroned, the four sides have not yet been pacified, and the prince at this time occupies a large county, wins the hearts of the people, breaks through Sumo, shakes the neighbors, and has a distinguished reputation. This is the time for the traitors to peep sideways and cause resentment!

古文：昔萧何守关中，悟鲍生之言而高祖悦。
现代文：以前萧何守关中，明悟采纳了鲍生的建议而高祖大喜。
English: In the past, when Xiao He was guarding the gate, Mingwu adopted Bao Sheng's suggestion and Gao Zu was overjoyed.

古文：今君所将，皆宗族昆弟也，无乃当以前人为镜戒。 恂然其言，称疾不视事。
现代文：现在你率领的，都是刘氏宗族昆弟，只怕是要以前人为鉴戒哩！ 寇恂以为然，假称有病不视事。
English: Those you are leading now are all members of the Liu clan, including Kun's younger brother, if only to serve as a warning to others! Kou Ye thought otherwise, pretending to be ill and ignoring the matter.

古文：帝将攻洛阳，先至河内，恂求从军。
现代文：帝将攻洛阳，先到河内，寇恂请求从军。
English: The emperor was going to attack Luoyang, and he went to Hanoi first, where he was asked to join the army.

古文：帝曰： 河内未可离也。 数固请，不听，乃遣兄子寇张、姊子谷崇将突骑，愿为军锋。
现代文：帝说： 河内不可离开你哩！ 几次坚决要求，帝不听，于是派遣兄的儿子寇张、姐姐的儿子谷崇率领突击队愿为军先锋。
English: The emperor said, "Hanoi must not leave you!" He made several resolute demands, but the emperor did not listen, so he sent his brother's son, Ko Chang, and his sister's son, Gu Chong, to lead the commando and to be the vanguard of the army.

古文：帝善之，皆以为偏将军。
现代文：帝称赞，都以为偏将军。
English: Everyone who praises the emperor thinks he is a great general.

古文：建武二年，恂坐系考上书者免。
现代文：建武二年，寇恂由于牵涉到考查上书的案子而被免职。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Kou Ye was removed from his post because he was involved in a case that was submitted for examination.

古文：是时，颍川人严终、赵敦聚众万余，与密人贾期连兵为寇。
现代文：这时颍川人严终、赵敦聚合部众万余人，与密人贾期连兵为盗寇。
English: At this time, Yan Zhen, Zhao Dun, and more than ten thousand people from the gathering department, and the secret agent Jia Zi Lianhe were robbers.

古文：恂免数月，复拜颍川太守，与破奸将军侯进俱击之。
现代文：寇恂免官数月，又被拜为颍川太守，与破奸将军侯进共同攻击。
English: A few months after he was relieved of his duties, he was once again worshipped as the governor of Beichuan and attacked together with the traitorous general Hou Jin.

古文：数月，斩期首，郡中悉平定。
现代文：数月，斩贾期首，颍川郡全部平定。
English: Within a few months, all of Hechuan County was pacified.

古文：封恂雍奴侯，邑万户。
现代文：封寇恂雍奴侯，食邑万户。
English: The siege of Yongnu, the food of thousands of households.

古文：执金吾贾复在汝南，部将杀人于颍川，恂捕得系狱。
现代文：执金吾贾复在汝南，他的部将在颍川杀了人，寇恂将他逮捕入狱。
English: The executioner, Kingu Jiafu, was in the south of the Ryukyus. His subordinate killed a man in the Li River, and the bandits arrested him and put him in prison.

古文：时尚草创，军营犯法，率多相容，恂乃戮之于市。
现代文：当时法制草创，军营犯了法，多半是宽恕容忍，而寇恂却将他斩首于市。
English: At that time, the legal system was still in its infancy, and if a military camp broke the law, it was mostly forgiven and tolerated, but if a thief was caught, he would be beheaded in the city.

古文：复以为耻，叹。
现代文：贾复以此为羞耻叹息。
English: Jia Fu sighed with shame.

古文：还过颍川，谓左右曰： 吾与寇恂并列将帅，而今为其所陷，大丈夫岂有怀侵怨而不决之者乎？
现代文：他回来路过颍川，对左右说： 我与寇恂并列将帅，现在被他所陷害，大丈夫岂有蒙受侵怨而不决斗的？
English: On his return, he passed by the Li River and said to those around him, "I was a general in the same rank as Kou Ye, and now I am being framed by him. Is it all right to bear grudges and not fight?

古文：今见恂，必手剑之！ 恂知其谋，不欲与相见。
现代文：今见寇恂，我必亲手杀了他！ 寇恂知道他的计谋，不想与他相见。
English: Now that I have seen Koro, I will kill him with my own hands! Koro knows his plot and does not want to meet him.

古文：谷崇曰： 崇，将也，得带剑侍侧。
现代文：谷崇说： 我是将军，可带剑在侧侍候，突然有变，可以抵挡得住。 
English: Gu Chong said: I am a general, I can wait with a sword at my side, if there is a sudden change, I can resist it.

古文：卒有变，足以相当。 恂曰： 不然。
现代文：寇恂说： 不然。
English: Kou Ye said: Otherwise.

古文：昔蔺相如不畏秦王而屈于廉颇者，为国也。
现代文：以前蔺相如不害怕秦王而屈让廉颇，是为了国家哩！
English: In the past, Emperor Xizang was not afraid of King Qin, but gave in to corruption for the sake of the country!

古文：区区之赵，尚有此义，吾安可以忘之乎？ 乃敕属县盛供具，储酒醪，执金吾军入界，一人皆兼二人之馔。
现代文：区区赵国，尚且有这种义举，我难道可以忘记吗？ 于是命令各属县大张供具，储足酒醪，执金吾军队入界，每人都可以得到两个人的酒食。
English: So I ordered each county to prepare a large amount of supplies, store enough wine barrels, and let our army enter the border. Each person can get two people's wine and food.

古文：恂乃出迎于道，称疾而还。
现代文：寇恂于是出迎于道，然后假称有病而回。
English: So he went out to meet Tao, and then returned, pretending to be ill.

古文：贾复勒兵欲追之，而使士皆醉，遂过去。
现代文：贾复想率兵追赶，而官吏兵卒们都喝醉了，于是过去。
English: Jia Fu thought of leading the soldiers to chase them, but the officers and soldiers were all drunk, so they passed by.

古文：恂遣谷崇以状闻，帝乃征恂。
现代文：寇恂派谷崇向帝说明情况，帝于是召见寇恂。
English: Koro sent Gu Chong to explain the situation to the emperor, who then summoned Koro.

古文：恂至引见，时复先在坐，欲起相避。
现代文：寇恂到洛阳被引见帝，当时贾复先在座，准备起身回避。
English: When Emperor Gaozong was introduced to Luoyang, Jia Fu was present and prepared to get up to avoid him.

古文：帝曰： 天下未定，两虎安得私斗？
现代文：帝说： 天下还没有平定，两虎怎能够私斗呢？
English: The emperor said: The world has not yet been pacified, how can two tigers fight each other?

古文：今日朕分之。 于是并坐极欢，遂共车同出，结友而去。
现代文：今天我为你们和解。 于是共坐在一起，极为欢快，就共乘车出城，结成好友而别。
English: Today I am reconciled to you, and so we sat together, very happy, and rode out of the city together, and parted as friends.

古文：恂归颍川。
现代文：寇恂回到颍川。
English: Kou Ye returned to the Lugu River.

古文：三年，遣使者即拜为汝南太守，又使骠骑将军杜茂将兵助恂讨盗贼。
现代文：建武三年，帝遣使者就拜寇恂为汝南太守，又使骠骑将军杜茂率兵助寇恂讨伐盗贼。
English: In the third year of the Jianwu era, the emperor sent an envoy to ask Qiao Wei to become the governor of Yunnan Province. He also asked the cavalry general Du Mao to lead the troops to help Qiao Wei fight against the thieves.

古文：盗贼清静，郡中无事。
现代文：盗贼被肃清，郡中安静无事。
English: The thieves have been eliminated and the county is quiet.

古文：恂素好学，乃修乡校，教生徒，聘能为《左氏春秋》者，亲受学焉。
现代文：寇恂向来好学，于是修建乡校，教学生徒弟，聘请能讲授《左氏春秋》的人，他自己也亲听老师讲学。
English: He was always eager to learn, so he built a village school, taught students to apprentices, and hired someone who could teach "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi," and he himself also listened to the teacher's lectures.

古文：七年，代朱浮为执金吾。
现代文：建武七年，代朱浮为执金吾。
English: In the seventh year of Jianwu, Zhu Fu was appointed as the successor of Kingu.

古文：明年，从车驾击隗嚣，而颍川盗贼群起，帝乃引军还，谓恂曰： 颍川迫近京师，当以时定。
现代文：第二年，跟随光武击隗嚣，而颍川盗贼群起，帝于是引军退还，对寇恂说： 颍川迫近京师，当早日平定。
English: In the second year, following Guangwu's attack on Gao, when the bandits in the Li River rose up en masse, the emperor withdrew his troops and said to Guo Wei: "The Li River is approaching the capital, so it should be pacified as soon as possible."

古文：惟念独卿能平之耳，从九卿复出，以忧国可也。 恂对曰： 颍川剽轻，闻陛下远逾阻险，有事陇、蜀，故狂狡乘间相诖误耳。
现代文：想起来只有你能平定群贼哩，从九卿的高位上复出，以忧虑国家着想好了。 寇恂回答说： 颍川剽悍轻捷，听说陛下远征险阻，去对付陇、蜀，所以狂悖狡猾之徒乘机作乱罢了。
English: Come to think of it, only you can subdue the band of thieves, rise again from the high position of the Nine Lords, and think of the country with concern.The thief replied, "I have heard that your majesty's expedition to deal with the dangers of the Yunnan and Sichuan Rivers is powerful and swift, so the cunning ruffians are just taking advantage of the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：如闻乘舆南向，贼必惶怖归死。
现代文：如果听说陛下南向，盗贼们必定惶惧归降。
English: If they hear that His Majesty is heading south, the thieves will surely panic and surrender.

古文：臣愿执锐前驱。 即日车驾南征，恂从至颍川，盗贼悉降，而竟不拜郡。
现代文：我愿率精锐以为前驱。 即日车驾南征，寇恂跟从到颍川，盗贼全部归降，而竟没有拜他为郡守。
English: I would like to lead the elite as the forerunner. On the same day, I drove south to march, and the robbers followed me to the Li River. The thieves all surrendered, but they did not worship him as the county governor.

古文：百姓遮道曰： 愿从陛下复借寇君一年。 乃留恂长社，镇抚使人，受纳余降。
现代文：百姓群集夹道而说道： 希望从陛下那儿再借寇君一年。 于是把寇恂留在长社，以镇抚官吏人民，接受其余的归降者。
English: Crowds of people gathered and said, "We hope to borrow Koujun from His Majesty for another year," so they left Koujun in Chosha to pacify the officials and people and accept the rest of the returnees.

古文：初，隗嚣将安定高峻，拥兵万人，据高平第一，帝使待诏马援招降峻，由是河西道开。
现代文：起初，隗嚣部将安定人高峻，拥兵万人，占据高平县第一城，帝派遣待诏马援去招降高峻，由此打开了河西通道。
English: At first, the Bullying Department occupied the first city of Gaoping County with Gao Jun, a stable person, and tens of thousands of soldiers, and the emperor sent a horse to recruit Gao Jun, thus opening the Hexi Channel.

古文：中郎将来歙承制拜峻通路将军，封关内侯，后属大司马吴汉，共围嚣于冀。
现代文：中郎将来歙承帝命拜高峻为通路将军，封关内侯，后来归属大司马吴汉，共围隗嚣于冀。
English: In the future, Zhonglang will succeed Gao Jun as the general of the road, and later belong to the grand secretary Ma Wuhan. They will encircle and encircle Ji Province.

古文：及汉军退，峻亡归故营，复助嚣拒陇阺。
现代文：等到汉军退，高峻逃回故营，再助隗嚣拒守陇阝氐。
English: When the Chinese army retreated, Gao Jun fled back to the former camp, and then refused to defend the castle.

古文：及嚣死，峻据高平，畏诛坚守。
现代文：隗嚣死后，高峻占据高平县，畏诛坚守。
English: After the death of Gong Ren, Gao Jun occupied Gaoping County, and Dui Yu held fast.

古文：建威大将军耿弇率太中大夫窦士、武威太守梁统等围之，一岁不拔。
现代文：建威大将军耿率太中大夫窦士、武威太守梁统等围高平，一年也未能攻下。
English: Geng, General Jianwei, Taizhong Doctor Dou Shi, Wuwei, Taishou Liang Tong, and others besieged Gaoping, but failed to capture it for a year.

古文：十年，帝入关，将自征之，恂时从驾，谏曰： 长安道里居中，应接近便，安定、陇西必怀震惧，此从容一处可以制四方也。
现代文：建武十年，帝入关，准备亲自征讨，寇恂当时跟从光武，劝谏说： 长安处在洛阳高平之间，应接方便，安定、陇西必定感到震动畏惧，这是安逸于一处可以制服四方哩。
English: In the tenth year of Jianwu's reign, when Emperor Jianwu entered the pass and prepared to personally collect taxes, Guo Yu, who was at that time a follower of Guangwu, advised him: "Chang'an is located between Luoyang and Gaoping. It is convenient to access, stable, and Shaanxi must feel tremors and fear. This is a comfortable place where you can subdue the four directions."

古文：今士马疲倦，方履险阻，非万乘之固，前年颍川，可为至戒。 帝不从。
现代文：现在兵马疲倦，刚刚从险阻中走出来，这不是陛下安国之良策，前年颍川发生的历史事件，可为至戒。 帝不听从。
English: Now the soldiers and horses are tired and have just come out of a dangerous situation. This is not a good strategy for the safety of His Majesty's country. The historical events that occurred the previous year in Shibukawa can be the supreme commandment. The emperor does not obey.

古文：进军及汧，峻犹不下，帝议遣使降之，乃谓恂曰： 卿前止吾此举，今为吾行也。
现代文：进军到了县，高峻还是攻不下，帝商议派遣使者去说服高峻投降，就对寇恂说： 你以前制止我这次行动，现在为我走一趟。
English: When the army marched into the county, Gao Jun still could not be attacked. The emperor discussed sending an envoy to persuade Gao Jun to surrender, and said to Kuo Wei: You stopped me from this action before, now go for me.

古文：若峻不即降，引耿弇等五营击之。 恂奉玺书至第一，峻遣军师皇甫文出谒，辞礼不屈。
现代文：如高峻不立即投降，我将率耿等五营发起攻击。 寇恂奉玺书来到第一城，高峻派遣军师皇甫文出来谒见，言词礼节都不屈从。
English: If Gao Jun did not surrender immediately, I would lead Geng and the other five battalions to launch an attack. 寇奉書 came to the first city, Gao Jun dispatched the military instructor Huang Fuwen to come out to meet, and did not yield to words and etiquette.

古文：恂怒，将诛文。
现代文：寇恂怒，准备杀皇甫文。
English: He was furious and prepared to kill Emperor Fuwen.

古文：诸将谏曰： 高峻精兵万人，率多强弩，西遮陇道，连年不下。
现代文：诸将劝谏说： 高峻精兵万人，有着许多强弩，遮住了西部的陇道，连年都没有攻下。
English: The generals advised him, saying, "You have tens of thousands of high-ranking and elite soldiers, and many strong fortresses. You have covered the western pass, and have not been able to capture the pass for years.

古文：今欲降之而反戮其使，无乃不可乎？ 恂不应，遂斩之。
现代文：现在要他投降而反杀其来使，只怕是不行吧？ 寇恂不答应，就杀了皇甫文。
English: Is it not enough to ask him to surrender and then kill him? If he did not agree, he killed the emperor.

古文：遣其副归告峻曰： 军师无礼，已戮之矣。
现代文：让其副使回去告诉高峻说： 军师无礼，已被杀了。
English: He told his deputy to go back and tell Gao Jun, "Your drill sergeant was rude and has been killed."

古文：欲降，急降；不欲，固守。 峻惶恐，即日开城门降。
现代文：要投降，请赶快；不想投降，就固守好了。 高峻惶恐，即日开城门投降。
English: If you want to surrender, please do it quickly; if you don't want to surrender, you'd better hold fast.

古文：诸将皆贺，因曰： 敢问杀其使而降其城，何也？ 恂曰： 皇甫文，峻之腹心，其所取计者也。
现代文：诸将都庆贺，因而说： 请问杀了他的来使而高峻以全城投降，这是什么原因？ 寇恂说： 皇甫文，是高峻的心腹，高峻的计谋都取之于他。
English: All the generals were celebrating, so they said, "What is the reason why Gao Jun killed his envoy and surrendered the whole city?" Kou Ye said, "Emperor Fuwen is Gao Jun's heart, and all of Gao Jun's stratagems come from him."

古文：今来，辞意不屈，必无降心。
现代文：现在他来了，言词不屈，必无归降之心。
English: Now he's here, his words are unyielding, and he has no intention of backing down.

古文：全之则文得其计，杀之则峻亡其胆，是以降耳。 诸将皆曰： 非所及也。 遂传峻还洛阳。
现代文：放他回去则高峻得了他的计谋，把他杀了则高峻吓破了胆，所以来投降了。 诸将都说： 我们没有想到哩。 于是逮捕高峻回到洛阳。
English: After letting him go, Gao Jun got his way, and after killing him, Gao Jun was so scared that he surrendered. The generals all said, "We didn't think of that," so they arrested Gao Jun and returned to Luoyang.

古文：恂经明行修，名重朝廷，所得秩奉，厚施朋友、故人及从吏士。
现代文：寇恂通晓经术修养德行，名望重于朝廷，所得的俸禄，都拿来厚施给朋友、故旧及跟从他的吏士。
English: He was well-versed in the classics and cultivated virtue. His reputation was more important than that of the imperial court, and he generously gave his salary to his friends, the elders, and the officials who followed him.

古文：常曰： 吾因士大夫以致此，其可独享之乎！ 时人归其长者，以为有宰相器。
现代文：常说： 我依靠士大夫的帮助才有今天，怎么能够独享富贵呢？ 当时的人把他视为长者，以为他有宰相的器才。
English: He often said, "I only got to where I am today thanks to the help of the scholar-officials, so how can I enjoy riches alone?" People at the time regarded him as an elder and thought he had the makings of a prime minister.

古文：十二年卒，谥曰威侯。
现代文：建武十二年去世，谥为威侯。
English: He died in the twelfth year of Jianwu, and became a powerful lord.

古文：子损嗣。
现代文：子寇损嗣位。
English: His son, Koga, lost his position as heir.

古文：恂同产弟及兄子、姊子以军功封列侯者凡八人，终其身，不传于后。
现代文：寇恂的同母弟及兄之子、姐之子以军功被封为列侯者共八人，都终身为侯但不传于后代。
English: There were a total of eight brothers and sisters of the same mother, and the sons and sons of their brothers and sisters, who were made vassals for their military achievements. They were vassals for life, but they were not passed down to future generations.

古文：初所与谋闵业者，恂数为帝言其忠，赐爵关内侯，官至辽西太守。
现代文：起初与寇恂一起谋事的闵业，寇恂多次向帝说明他的忠心，帝赐爵他为关内侯，官至辽西太守。
English: At first, he and Koro worked together to find a new career, and Koro repeatedly explained his loyalty to the emperor. The emperor gave him the title of Guan Nei Hou, and he became the governor of western Liao Province.

古文：十三年，复封损庶兄寿为洨侯。
现代文：建武十三年，再封寇损庶兄寿为氵交侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Jianwu era, he was re-imprisoned for sabotage, and his half-brother, Shou, became his courtier.

古文：后徙封损扶柳侯。
现代文：后来徙封寇损为挟柳侯。
English: Later, he was exiled and became a vassal lord.

古文：损卒，子釐嗣，徙封商乡侯。
现代文：寇损死后，子寇厘嗣位，徙封为商乡侯。
English: After the death of Koga, his son Kouri became the heir, and was given the title of merchant.

古文：釐卒，子袭嗣。
现代文：寇厘死后，子寇袭嗣位。
English: After Koli's death, his son Kolo succeeded to the throne.

古文：恂女孙为大将军邓骘夫人，由是寇氏得志于永初间。
现代文：寇恂的孙女儿是大将军邓骘的夫人，因此寇氏在安帝永初年间很得志。
English: Ko's granddaughter was the wife of General Deng Wei, so Ko was very successful in the early years of Andiyong.

古文：恂曾孙荣。
现代文：寇恂的曾孙寇荣。
English: He is the great-grandson of Kou Rong.

古文：论曰：传称 喜怒以类者鲜矣 。
现代文：史官评论道：《左传》上称 喜怒有节的很少，而喜怒无常的就多了 。
English: The historian commented: "Zo Zhuan" says that there are very few people who are moody, but there are many who are moody.

古文：夫喜而不比，怒而思难者，其惟君子乎！
现代文：喜而不朋比，见怒而想到别人的难处的，只有君子吧？
English: It is only a gentleman who thinks of the difficulties of others when he is angry, is it not?

古文：子曰： 伯夷、叔齐，不念旧恶，怨是用希。 于寇公而见之矣。
现代文：孔子说： 伯夷、叔齐不记念人家欺侮过他的旧事，所以人家也不积怨于他。 
English: Confucius said, "He does not remember the old days when people bullied him, so people do not hold grudges against him."

古文：荣少知名，桓帝时为侍中。
现代文：在寇公身上我们可以见到这种品德了。
English: We can see this quality in Kou Gong.

