古文：石崇每要客燕集，常令美人行酒。客饮酒不尽者，使黄门交斩美人。
现代文：石崇每次请客宴会，常常让美人劝酒；如果哪位客人不干杯，就叫家奴接连杀掉劝酒的美人。
English: Every time Shi Chong invited guests to a banquet, he often asked the beautiful woman to persuade them to drink. If any guest did not drink a toast, he would have his servants kill the beautiful woman successively.

古文：王丞相与大将军尝共诣崇。丞相素不能饮，辄自勉强，至于沉醉。
现代文：丞相王导和大将军王敦曾经一同到石崇家赴宴，王导一向不能喝酒，这时总是勉强自己喝，直到大醉。
English: The chancellor Wang Du and the general Wang Dun once went to a banquet at Shizong's house together. Wang Du had never been able to drink alcohol, but he always forced himself to drink until he was very drunk.

古文：每至大将军，固不饮，以观其变。
现代文：每当轮到王敦，他坚持不喝，来观察情况的变化。
English: Whenever it is Wang Dun's turn, he insists on not drinking to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：已斩三人，颜色如故，尚不肯饮。
现代文：石崇已经连续杀了三个美人，王敦神色不变，还是不肯喝酒。
English: Shi Chong has killed three beauties in a row. Wang Dun's expression remains unchanged, and he still refuses to drink.

古文：丞相让之，大将军曰： 自杀伊家人，何预卿事！ 
现代文：王导责备他，王敦说： 他自己杀他家里的人，干你什么事！ 
English: Wang Du rebuked him, Wang Dun said: "He killed his own family members, what are you doing!

古文：石崇厕，常有十余婢侍列，皆丽服藻饰。
现代文：石崇家的厕所里常常有十几个丫头排着队侍候，全都装束华贵、打扮艳丽。
English: There are often more than a dozen maids waiting in line in the toilets of the Isitong family, all dressed in luxurious and glamorous attire.

古文：置甲煎粉、沉香汁之属，无不毕备。又与新衣箸令出，客多羞不能如厕。
现代文：厕所中放着甲煎粉、沉香汁这类东西，十分齐备，又为客人准备了新衣服，让他们换上再出来。客人大多不好意思上厕所。
English: The toilets are well stocked with things like ginseng powder and agar jelly, and new clothes have been prepared for guests so that they can change and come out again. Most guests are embarrassed to go to the toilet.

古文：王大将军往，脱故衣，箸新衣，神色傲然。
现代文：大将军王敦进去，脱旧衣，换新衣，神色傲慢。
English: General Wang Dun went in, took off his old clothes and put on new ones, looking arrogant.

古文：群婢相谓曰： 此客必能作贼。 
现代文：婢女们互相说： 这位客人，一定能做叛贼啊。 
English: The maidservants said to one another, "This guest can surely be a traitor."

古文：武帝尝降王武子家，武子供馔，并用琉璃器。
现代文：晋武帝曾经到王武子家里去，武子设宴侍奉，用的器皿全是琉璃做的。
English: Emperor Jinwu once went to the home of Wang Muxi. Muxi served him at a banquet, and the utensils he used were all made of glazed ware.

古文：婢子百余人，皆绫罗裤，以手擎饮食。
现代文：婢女有一百多人，都穿着绫罗绸缎，用手托着食物。
English: There were more than a hundred maidservants, all dressed in scarlet and carrying food in their hands.

古文：烝豚肥美，异于常味。
现代文：其中有一道蒸小猪肉，味道鲜美，和一般的不一样。
English: Among them, there is a dish of steamed small pork, which is delicious and different from the average.

古文：帝怪而问之，答曰： 以人乳饮豚。 
现代文：武帝感到奇怪，问他怎么烹调的，王武子回答说： 是用人乳喂的小猪。 
English: Emperor Wu was puzzled and asked him how he cooked it. Wang Wuzi replied, "It's a piglet fed with human milk."

古文：帝甚不平，食未毕，便去。
现代文：武帝心中非常愤慨不满，饭还没吃完便走了。
English: Emperor Wu was very indignant and dissatisfied in his heart, and he left before finishing his meal.

古文：王、石所未知作。
现代文：这是连王恺、石崇也不懂得的作法。
English: This is a practice that even Wang Xi and Shitong do not understand.

古文：王君夫以糒澳釜，石季伦用蜡烛作炊。
现代文：王君夫用麦芽糖和饭来擦锅，石季伦用蜡烛当柴火做饭。
English: Wang Junfu used malt sugar and rice to clean the pot, and Shi Jilun used candles as firewood to cook.

古文：君夫作紫丝布步障碧绫裹四十里，石崇作锦步障五十里以敌之。
现代文：王恺用紫色丝织品做屏障，碧色绫罗衬里，长达四十里。石崇就用锦缎做了五十里长的屏障来与他抗衡。
English: Wang Yao made a barrier of purple silk fabric with a lining of turquoise brocade, which was forty miles long. Shi Chong used brocade to make a fifty-mile-long barrier to compete with him.

古文：石以椒为泥，王以赤石脂泥壁。
现代文：石崇用椒泥抹墙，王恺便用赤石脂泥来涂绘。
English: Ishitaka plastered the walls with chili paste, while Wang Yao painted them with red stone paste.

古文：石崇为客作豆粥，咄嗟便办。恒冬天得韭蓱虀。
现代文：石崇给客人做豆粥，很快就做好了；大冬天也总是有韭根、麦苗捣成的腌菜。
English: Shi Chong makes bean porridge for his guests, and it's ready in no time; in the dead of winter, there's always a stew made from ginger root and wheat seedlings.

古文：又牛形状气力不胜王恺牛，而与恺出游，极晚发，争入洛城，崇牛数十步后，迅若飞禽，恺牛绝走不能及。
现代文：另外，石崇家的牛外形、力气都比不过王恺家的牛，可是他和王恺出外游览，回来时，他很迟才坐牛车起程，两人争先进洛阳城，石崇的牛走了几十步后就快得象飞鸟一样，王恺的牛拼命跑也追不上。
English: In addition, the appearance and strength of Shizong's cattle are no better than those of Wang Qian's cattle, but he and Wang Qian went out for a tour. When he came back, he was very late to start the cattle car, and the two fought to get to Luoyang City. After walking dozens of steps, Shizong's cattle were as fast as flying birds, and Wang Qian's cattle could not catch up.

古文：每以此三事为搤腕。乃密货崇帐下都督及御车人，问所以。
现代文：王恺常常认为这三件事是最令人惋惜的，就暗中贿赂石崇府中卫队长和驭手，探问是什么原因。
English: Wang Yao often thought that these three things were the most regrettable, so he secretly bribed the captain of the central guard of Shizongfu and the driver to find out what the reason was.

古文：都督曰： 豆至难煮，唯豫作熟末，客至，作白粥以投之。
现代文：卫队长说： 豆子是最难煮烂的，只有事先煮熟做成豆未，客人到了，煮好白粥，然后把豆末加进去。
English: The captain of the guard said, "Beans are the most difficult to cook, and only if they are cooked in advance can they be made into bean paste. When the guests arrive, cook the porridge and then add the bean paste.

古文：韭蓱虀是捣韭根，杂以麦苗尔。 
现代文：韭蓱虀是把韭菜根捣碎，搀上麦苗罢了。 
English: It's just mashed leek root and sprinkled with barley.

古文：复问驭人牛所以驶。
现代文：又问驭手，牛为什么跑得飞快。
English: He also asked the driver why the cow was running so fast.

古文：驭人云： 牛本不迟，由将车人不及制之尔。
现代文：驭手说： 牛本来跑得不慢，由于驭手跟不上，反而控制着它罢了。
English: The charioteer said: The cow was not running slowly, but because the charioteer could not keep up, he was just controlling it.

古文：急时听偏辕，则驶矣。 
现代文：紧急时就任车侧过一边，那么牛就会跑得飞快了。 
English: In an emergency, if the car passes by on the other side, the cow will run very fast.

古文：恺悉从之，遂争长。
现代文：王恺全按他们所说的去做，终于争到了头名。
English: Wang Xuanquan did as they said, and finally won the first place.

古文：石崇后闻，皆杀告者。
现代文：石崇后来听说了，就把泄密的人都杀了。
English: When Shi Chong heard about it later, he killed everyone who had leaked the secret.

古文：王君夫有牛，名 八百里驳 ，常莹其蹄角。
现代文：王君夫有一头牛，名叫八百里驳，牛蹄、牛角经常磨得晶莹发亮。
English: Wang Junfu has a cow, named Eight Hundred Miles, whose hoofs and horns are often polished to a gleaming shine.

古文：王武子语君夫： 我射不如卿，今指赌卿牛，以千万对之。 
现代文：有一次，王武子对王君夫说： 我射箭的技术不如你，今天想指定你的牛做赌注，和你赌射箭，我押上一千万钱来顶你这头牛。 
English: Once, Wang Wuxi said to Wang Junfu, "My archery skill is not as good as yours. Today, I want to designate your ox as a bet, and bet on archery with you. I bet ten million dollars to win your ox."

古文：君夫既恃手快，且谓骏物无有杀理，便相然可。令武子先射。
现代文：王君夫既仗着自己射箭技术好，又认为这么好的牛没有可能杀掉，就答应了他，并且让王武子先射。
English: Wang Junfu not only relied on his good archery skills, but also believed that such a good cow could not be killed, so he agreed to him, and let Wang Wuxi shoot first.

古文：武子一起便破的，却据胡床，叱左右： 速探牛心来！ 
现代文：王武子一箭就射中，退下来坐在交椅上，吆喝随从赶快把牛心取来。
English: Wang Wuxi was hit by an arrow, retreated and sat on a chair, shouting to his attendants to quickly retrieve the bull's heart.

古文：须臾，炙至，一脔便去。
现代文：一会儿，烤牛心送来了，王武子吃了一小块就走了。
English: After a while, roast beef heart was delivered, Wang Wu Zi ate a small piece and left.

古文：王君夫尝责一人无服余衵，因直内箸曲合重闺里，不听人将出。
现代文：王君夫曾经处分一个人，不准他穿衣服，又径直把他关在深宫内院里，不让人带他出来。
English: Wang Junfu once punished a person by not allowing him to wear clothes, and then locked him up in the inner courtyard of the palace, not allowing anyone to take him out.

古文：遂饥经日，迷不知何处去。
现代文：这个人终于饿了好几天，弄得精神恍惚，不知该往哪里走。
English: Finally, the man had been hungry for several days, and he was in a daze, not knowing where to go.

古文：后因缘相为垂死，迺得出。
现代文：后来一个朋友帮助了他，都快死了，才得以出来。
English: Later, a friend helped him, both dying, to get out.

古文：石崇与王恺争豪，并穷绮丽，以饰舆服。
现代文：石崇和王恺两人互相攀比谁更阔绰，两人都用尽最鲜艳华丽的东西来装饰车马、服装。
English: Shi Chong and Wang Yao were both more extravagant than each other. Both of them used the brightest and most gorgeous things to decorate their cars, horses, and clothes.

古文：武帝，恺之甥也，每助恺。
现代文：晋武帝是王恺的外甥，常常资助王恺。
English: Emperor Jinwu was Wang Yao's nephew and often supported Wang Yao.

古文：尝以一珊瑚树，高二尺许赐恺。枝柯扶疏，世罕其比。
现代文：他曾经把一棵二尺来高的珊瑚树赏赐给王恺，这棵珊瑚树枝条繁茂，世上罕见。
English: He once presented Wang Yao with a two-foot-tall coral tree, which is rare in the world.

古文：恺以示崇。崇视讫，以铁如意击之，应手而碎。
现代文：王恺拿来给石崇看，石崇看后、拿铁如意敲它，随手就打碎了。
English: Wang Yao took it to show it to Shizong. After Shizong saw it, Lattice tapped it as he wished, and it broke with his hand.

古文：恺既惋惜，又以为疾己之宝，声色甚厉。
现代文：王恺既惋惜，又认为石崇是在妒忌自己的宝物，便声色俱厉起来。
English: Wang Yao not only felt sorry, but also thought that Shi Chong was jealous of his treasure, so he became very angry.

古文：崇曰： 不足恨，今还卿。 
现代文：石崇说： 这有什么好遗憾的，我现在就赔给你。 
English: Shi Chong said: What's so regrettable about this, I'll pay you now.

古文：乃命左右悉取珊瑚树，有三尺四尺，条干绝世，光彩溢目者六七枚，如恺许比甚众。
现代文：于是就叫手下的人把家里的珊瑚树全都拿出来，有三尺、四尺高的，树干、枝条举世无双而且光彩夺目的有六七棵，像王恺那样的就更多了。
English: So he asked his staff to take out all the coral trees in the house. They were three feet and four feet high, with a trunk and branches that were unique in the world and dazzling. There were sixty-seven of them, and there were many more like Wang Yao.

古文：恺惘然自失。
现代文：王恺看了之后，惘然若失。
English: After watching it, Wang Yao was stunned.

古文：王武子被责，移第北邙下。
现代文：王武子被处分，移居到北邙山下。
English: Wang Wu Zi was punished and moved to the foot of Beilun Mountain.

古文：于时人多地贵，济好马射，买地作埒，编钱币地竟埒。
现代文：当地人多、地价贵，王济喜欢骑马射箭，于是要买一块地，并用矮墙围起来。
English: There are many local people and the land is expensive. Wang Ji likes to ride horses and shoot arrows, so he wants to buy a piece of land and surround it with a low wall.

古文：时人号曰 金沟 。
现代文：这块地的价钱，是用绳子串着钱，围绕马场排一圈的。
English: The price of this piece of land is made by stringing money on a rope and lining it up in a circle around the horse farm.

古文：石崇每与王敦入学戏，见颜、原象而叹曰： 若与同升孔堂，去人何必有间！ 
现代文：当时的人把这里叫作 金沟 。石崇常常和王敦进学校游览，看见颜回、原宪的画像就叹息说： 如果我和他们一起登上孔子的厅堂做弟子，我和他们未必有什么差距呢！ 
English: People at that time called this place Jin Gou. Shi Chong often went on school tours with Wang Dun. When he saw the pictures of Yan Hui and the original Constitution, he sighed and said, "If I were to enter the hall of Confucius and become a disciple with them, there wouldn't necessarily be any difference between me and them!"

古文：王曰： 不知余人云何？子贡去卿差近。 
现代文：王敦说： 不知道孔门其徐弟子怎么样，我觉得你和子贡挺像的。 
English: Wang Dun said: I don't know about Confucius and his disciple Xu, but I think you and Zigong are quite similar.

古文：石正色云： 士当令身名俱泰，何至以瓮牖语人！ 
现代文：石崇神色严肃他说： 读书人应当使生活舒适，名位安稳，何至于用安贫乐道的话去劝诫人！ 
English: Looking serious, Shi Chong said: Readers should make their lives comfortable and their reputation stable. Why not use the words of poverty alleviation to exhort people?

古文：彭城王有快牛，至爱惜之。
现代文：彭城王有一头跑得很快的牛，他非常的爱惜这头牛。
English: King Pengcheng had a cow that could run very fast, and he was very fond of this cow.

古文：王太尉与射，赌得之。
现代文：太尉王衍和他赌射箭，把牛赢了。
English: Captain Wang Yan bet on archery with him and won the cow.

古文：彭城王曰： 君欲自乘则不论；若欲啖者，当以二十肥者代之。
现代文：彭城王说： 如果您想要用来驾车，我就不说什么了；如果想杀来吃，我就拿二十头牛来换取它。
English: Pengcheng Wang said: If you want to use it to drive a car, I will not say anything; if you want to kill and eat, I will take twenty cows in exchange for it.

古文：既不废啖，又存所爱。 
现代文：这既不妨碍您吃牛肉，又能保留住我的心爱之物。 
English: This does not prevent you from eating beef, but it preserves something dear to my heart.

古文：王遂杀啖。
现代文：可是王衍最终还是把那牛杀来吃了。
English: However, Wang Yan eventually ate the ox.

古文：王右军少时，在周侯末坐，割牛心啖之。
现代文：右军将军工羲之小时候，在武城侯周家作客，坐在末座上，吃饭时周先切牛心给他吃。
English: When the right-wing army general Gong Li was a child, he was a guest at the Wucheng marquis Zhou's house, sat on the last seat, and Zhou first cut the beef heart for him to eat.

古文：于此改观。
现代文：从此人们改变了对他的看法。
English: Since then, people have changed their minds about him.

