古文：孟子之平陆。谓其大夫曰： 子之持戟之士，一日而三失伍，则去之否乎？ 
现代文：孟子到了齐国的平陆县，对那里的地方官孔距心说： 如果你的守卫战士在一天内三次擅离职守，你会开除他们吗？ 
English: When Mencius arrived in Pinglu County, Qi Province, he said to the local official Kong Zhixin: "If your guards and soldiers go AWOL three times in one day, will you fire them?"

古文：曰： 不待三。 
现代文：长官说： 不必等三次才开除他。 
English: "You don't have to wait three times to fire him," the official said.

古文： 然则子之失伍也亦多矣。凶年饥岁，子之民，老羸转于沟壑，壮者散而之四方者，几千人矣。 
现代文：孟子说： 可是你失职的地方也很多，灾荒歉收的年份，你治下的百姓们，老弱病残的辗转于沟壑而死亡，年轻力壮的则散走四方，有好几千人啊。 
English: Mencius said, "But there are also many places where you have failed in your duty. In years of disaster and poor harvests, the people under your rule, the old, the weak, the sick and the dying, wandered into the ravines and died, while the young and the strong scattered in all directions. There are several thousand of them.

古文：曰： 此非距心之所得为也。 
现代文：长官说： 这不是我孔距心的能力能处理好的事情啊。 
English: "It's not something I'm equipped to handle," the chief said.

古文：曰： 今有受人之牛羊而为之牧之者，则必为之求牧与刍矣。求牧与刍而不得，则反诸其人乎？
现代文：孟子说： 现在假如有个人接受了替别人放牧牛羊的事，那一定要设法找到牧场和喂养牲畜的草料，要是找不到牧场和草料，那么是把牛羊还给主人呢？
English: Mencius said, "Nowadays, if a person accepts the job of herding cattle and sheep for someone else, he must try to find pasture and fodder for the livestock. If he cannot find pasture and fodder, should he return the cattle and sheep to the owner?

古文：抑亦立而视其死与？ 
现代文：还是站在一旁眼看着牛羊饿死呢？ 
English: Or stand by and watch the cows and sheep starve to death?

古文：曰： 此则距心之罪也。 
现代文：长官说： 这是我孔距心的罪过了。 
English: The officer said, "It's my fault for being absent-minded."

古文：他日，见于王曰： 王之为都者，臣知五人焉。知其罪者，惟孔距心。
现代文：过了些日子，孟子见到齐王，就对齐王说： 大王的地方长官，我结识了五个，其中能认识自己失职罪过的，只有孔距心一人。 
English: A few days later, Mencius saw King Qi and said to him, "Great King's magistrate, I have made the acquaintance of five, among whom only Kong Zhixin was able to recognize his crime of dereliction of duty.

古文：为王诵之。 
现代文：于是就为齐王讲述了经过。
English: He then described the process for Qi Wang.

古文：王曰： 此则寡人之罪也。 
现代文：齐王说： 这也是我的失职罪过啊。 
English: Qi Wang said, "This is also my crime of dereliction of duty."

