古文：真草书迹，微须留意。
现代文：对於真书、草书等书法技艺，是要稍加留意的。
English: A little attention should be paid to calligraphy techniques such as calligraphy and cursive.

古文：江南谚云： 尺牍书疏，千里面目也 承晋宋馀俗，相与事之，故无顿狼狈者。
现代文：江南俗谚说： 一尺书信，千里相见；一手好字，就是人的脸面。 现在的人继承了晋、宋以来的习俗，都在这书法上用功学习，所以没有在匆忙中弄得很狼狈的人。
English: A Jiangnan folk proverb says: "A foot of letter can be seen from a thousand miles away; a good handwriting is the face of a person." Nowadays, people have inherited the customs since the Jin and Song dynasties, and they are all studying hard on this calligraphy, so there is no one who is confused in a hurry.

古文：吾幼承门业，加性爱重，所见法书亦多，而玩习功夫颇至，遂不能佳者，良由无分故也。
现代文：我年幼的时候就继承了家门学业，加上本身也很爱好书法，所见到的书法字帖很多，而且在临帖摹写上也颇下功夫，但始终没有达到很高的造诣，可能是没有什么天分吧。
English: When I was young, I inherited my family's education. In addition, I am also very fond of calligraphy. I have seen a lot of calligraphy fonts, and I have also put a lot of effort into writing calligraphy, but I have never reached a high level of accomplishment. It may be that I have no talent.

古文：然而此艺不须过精。
现代文：然而这门技艺没必要学得太精深。
English: However, this skill does not need to be learned in great depth.

古文：夫巧者劳而智者忧，常为人所役使，更觉为累。
现代文：否则就要能者多劳，智者多忧，常被人家役使，更感到累赘。
English: Otherwise, those who are able to work will have to work harder, those who are wise will have to worry more, and those who are often made to do household chores will feel even more burdened.

古文：韦仲将遗戒，深有以也。
现代文：魏代书法家韦仲将给儿孙留下 不要学书法 的训诫，是很有道理的。
English: It makes sense that Wei Zhong, a calligrapher in the Wei Dynasty, would leave his children and grandchildren with the admonition not to learn calligraphy.

古文：王逸少风流才士，萧散名人，举世唯知其书，翻以能自蔽也。
现代文：王羲之是位风流才子，潇洒不羁的名人，所有的人都只知道他的书法，反而掩盖了他其他方面的才能。
English: Wang Xizhi is a talented and dashing celebrity. Everyone only knows his calligraphy, but it hides his other talents.

古文：萧子云每叹曰： 吾著《齐书》，勒成一典，文章弘义，自谓可观，唯以笔迹得名，亦异事也。 
现代文：萧子云常常感叹说： 我撰写了《齐书》刻印成一部典籍，书中的文章弘扬大义，我自以为很值得一看，最后却只因为抄写的笔记而得名，这可真是怪事。 
English: Xiao Ziyun often lamented: I wrote "Qi Shu" and engraved it into a classic book, the articles in the book promote the great cause, I thought it was worth a look, but in the end I only got the name because of the copied notes, which is really strange.

古文：王褒地胃清华，才学仇敏，后虽入关，亦被礼遇，犹以书工，崎岖碑碣之间，辛苦笔砚之役，尝悔恨曰： 假使吾不知书，可不至今日邪？ 
现代文：王褒出身贵族世家，才华横溢，文思敏捷，后来虽然到了北周，也依然得到礼遇。因为擅长书法，他常为人书写，困顿於碑碣之间，陷入了笔砚的辛苦劳役之中，他曾后悔说： 假如我不会书法，可能就不会像今天这般劳累了吧？ 
English: Wang Bo was born into an aristocratic family, talented and quick-witted. Later, although he came to Beizhou, he still received courtesy. Because he was good at calligraphy, he often wrote for people, stuck between the monuments, caught in the hard labor of the pen. He once regretted saying: If I didn't know calligraphy, I might not be as tired as I am today?

古文：以此观之，慎勿以书自命。
现代文：由此看来，千万不要以精通书法而自命不凡。
English: From this point of view, don't be pretentious about being proficient in calligraphy.

古文：虽然，廝猥之人，以能书拔擢者多矣。
现代文：话虽如此，地位低下的人，因写得一手好字而被提拔的事例也很多。
English: Having said that, there are also many examples of people with low status being promoted because of their good handwriting.

古文：故 道不同不相为谋 也。
现代文：所以说：道业不同的人，是不能互相谋划的。
English: Therefore, it is said that people with different religious vocations cannot plan for each other.

古文：梁氏秘阁散逸以来，吾见二王真草多矣，家中尝得十卷，方知陶隐居、阮交州、萧祭酒诸书，莫不得羲之之体，故是书之渊源。
现代文：梁武帝秘阁珍藏的图书、字画散佚以后，我见到了很多王羲之、王献之的真书、草书作品，家里也曾获得十卷。看了这些作品，才知道陶隐居、阮交州、萧祭酒等人的字，没有一个不是学王羲之的字体格局，可见王羲之的字应是书法的渊源。
English: After the books, calligraphy and paintings collected by Emperor Liangwu's secret cabinet were scattered, I saw many real books and cursive works of Wang Xizhi and Wang Xizhi, and my family also obtained ten volumes. After reading these works, I only knew the characters of Tao Yingguo, Ruan Jiaozhou, Xiao Zaiwu and others. None of them were not learning Wang Xizhi's font pattern. It can be seen that Wang Xizhi's characters should be the source of calligraphy.

古文：萧晚节所变，乃右军年少时法也。
现代文：萧祭酒晚年时的字有所变化，就是转向王羲之年轻时所写的隶书。
English: The characters in the late years of Xiao Shishu's life have changed, which is a turn to Wang Xizhi's youthful writings.

古文：晋宋以来，多能书者，故其时俗，递相染尚，所有部帙，楷正可观，不无俗字，非为大损。
现代文：两晋、刘宋以来，人们大多通晓书法，所以一时形成了风气。在人们中互相产生了影响，所有的书籍文献都抄写得非常漂亮。
English: Since the Jin Dynasty and the Song Dynasty, most people have been familiar with calligraphy, so it has formed a culture for a while. It has influenced each other among people, and all books and documents have been copied very beautifully.

古文：至梁天监之间，斯风未变。
现代文：即使难免出现个别俗体字，损害也不大。
English: Even if some vulgar characters inevitably appear, the damage is not great.

古文：大同之末，讹替滋生，萧子云改易字体，邵陵王颁行伪字，朝野翕然，以为楷式，画虎不成，多所伤败。
现代文：直到梁武帝天监年间，这种风气也没有改变，到了大同末年，错别字开始大量出现。萧子云改变字的形体，邵陵王常使用不规范的错别字；朝野上下都风起效仿，把它作为一种样板，结果画虎不成反类犬，造成很大的损害。
English: This culture did not change until the time of Emperor Liangwu's imprisonment in heaven. By the end of the Datong era, typos began to appear in large numbers. Xiao Ziyun changed the shape of the characters, and Shao Ling Wang often used irregular typos. People all over the country followed suit and used it as a model. As a result, the tiger did not become a dog, causing great damage.

古文：至为一字，唯见数点，或妄斟酌，逐便转移。
现代文：甚至有的字简化成只有几个点，有的将字体随意安排，任意改变偏旁的位置。
English: Some characters are even reduced to just a few dots, while others arrange the fonts at will, arbitrarily changing the position of the margins.

古文：尔后坟籍，略不可看。
现代文：自此以后的文献书籍几乎没法看。
English: Since then, it has been almost impossible to see the literature books.

古文：北朝丧乱之馀，书迹鄙陋，加以专辄造字，猥拙甚於江南，乃以 百  念 为 忧 ， 言  反 为 变 ， 不  用 为 罢 ， 追  来 为 归 ，  更  生 为 苏 ， 先  人 为 老 ，如此非一，遍满经传。
现代文：北朝经历了长期的兵荒马乱以后，书写字迹鄙陋不堪，加上擅自造字，字体比江南的还要粗俗笨拙。以致于把 百 、 念 两字组合替代 忧 字， 言 、 反 两字相组合替代 变 字， 不 、 用 两字组合替代 罢 字， 追 、 来 两字组合替代 归 字， 更 、 生 两字组合替代 苏 字， 先 、 入 两字组合替代 老 字。
English: After the Northern Dynasty experienced a long period of war and turmoil, the writing handwriting was despicable. In addition to the unauthorized creation of characters, the font was even more vulgar and clumsy than that of the south of the Yangtze River. So much so that the combination of one hundred and two characters was replaced by the word "worry," the combination of two words "speech" and "opposition" was replaced by the word "change," the combination of two words "no" was replaced by the word "stop," the combination of two words "pursue" and "come" was replaced by the word "return," the combination of two words "birth" was replaced by the

古文：唯有姚元标工於楷隶，留心小学，后生师之者众，泊于齐末，秘书缮写，贤於往日多矣。
现代文：像这样的情况不是个别的，而是在书中到处可见。只有姚元标擅长於楷书、隶书，专心研究文字训诂的学问，跟从他学习的门生很多。到了北齐末年，掌管典籍文献的官吏所抄写的字体，就比以前的时候强多了。
English: Such a situation is not isolated, but can be seen everywhere in the book. Only Yao Yuanbiao is good at block letters and cursive writing, concentrating on the study of the culture of writing, and there are many students who study with him. By the end of the Northern Qi Dynasty, the fonts copied by the officials in charge of classics and literature were much stronger than before.

古文：江南闾里间有《画书赋》，乃陶隐居弟子林道士所为。
现代文：江南民间流传有《画书赋》一书，是陶隐居的弟子杜道士撰写的。
English: There is a book called "Painting Book Fu" that has been passed down among the people of Jiangnan Province. It was written by Tao's reclusive disciple Du Daoshi.

古文：其人未甚识字，轻为轨则，托名贵师，世俗传信，后生颇为所误也。
现代文：这个人不怎么认识字，轻率地规定字体的法则，假托名师，世人以讹传讹且信以为真，误导了很多年轻学子。
English: This person didn't know much about the characters, and he misled many young students by carelessly prescribing the rules of the fonts, pretending to be a famous teacher, and the world believed him.

古文：画绘之工，亦为妙矣，自古名士，多或能之。
现代文：擅长绘画也是件好事，自古以来的名士大多数都擅长绘画。
English: It is also a good thing to be good at painting. Most famous people since ancient times are good at painting.

古文：吾家尝有梁元帝手画蝉雀白团扇及马图，亦难及也。
现代文：我家曾保存有梁元帝亲手画的蝉、雀白、团扇和马图，他的绘画水平也是旁人很难企及的。
English: My family once kept cicadas, sparrows, fans and horses painted by Emperor Liang Yuan himself. His level of painting is also difficult for others to match.

古文：武烈太子偏能写真，坐上宾客，随宜点染，即成数人，以问童孺，皆知姓名矣。
现代文：梁元帝的长子萧方擅长人物肖像，画在座的宾客，他只要用笔随意点染，就能画出几位逼真的人物形象。
English: Xiao Fang, the eldest son of Emperor Liang Yuan, is good at portraits. He can draw several lifelike figures of the guests present, as long as he dyes them with a pen.

古文：萧贲、刘孝先、刘灵，并文学已外，复佳此法。
现代文：拿了画像去问小孩，小孩都指出画中人物的姓名。还有萧贲、刘孝先、刘灵除了精通文章学术之外，也擅长绘画。
English: Taking the picture to ask the children, the children all pointed out the names of the characters in the picture. And Xiao Wei, Liu Xiaoxian, Liu Ling, in addition to being proficient in academic writing, are also good at painting.

古文：玩阅古今，特可宝爱。
现代文：赏玩古今名画，确实让人爱不释手。
English: Enjoying famous paintings from the past to the present is truly irresistible.

古文：若官未通显，每被公私使令，亦为猥役。
现代文：但如果擅长作画的人官位还未显贵，就会常被公家或私人使唤，作画也就成了一种下贱的差事。
English: However, if a person who is good at painting is not yet a prominent official, he or she will often be used by the public or private sector, and painting will become a lowly job.

古文：吴县顾士端出身湘东王国待郎，后为镇南府刑狱参军，有子曰庭，西朝中书舍人，父子并有琴、书之艺，尤妙丹青，常被元帝所使，每怀羞恨。
现代文：吴县顾士端身为湘东王国的侍即，后来任镇南府刑狱参军，他有个儿子名叫顾庭，是梁元帝的中书舍人，父子俩都通晓琴棋书画，常被梁元帝使唤，悔恨常常心生羞愧。
English: Gu Shidan of Wuxian County was a servant of the Kingdom of Eastern Hunan, and later served as a prison guard in Zhenanfu to join the army. He had a son named Gu Ting, who was Liang Yuan's Chinese calligrapher. Both father and son were familiar with Xiaoqin, calligraphy and painting, and were often used by Liang Yuan. They were often ashamed of their remorse.

古文：彭城刘岳，囊之子也，仕为骠骑府管记、平氏县令，才学快士，而画绝伦。后随武陵王入蜀，下牢之败，遂为陆护军画支江寺壁，与诸工巧杂处。
现代文：彭城有位刘岳，是刘橐的儿子，担任过骠骑府管记、平氏县令，富有才学，为人爽快，绘画技艺独一无二，后来跟随武陵王到蜀地，下牢关战败，就被陆护军弄到枝江的寺院里去画壁画，和那些工匠杂处一起。
English: There is a Liu Yue in Pengcheng. He is the son of Liu Zhe. He served as the governor of Zhengyi Prefecture and the governor of Ping County. He is rich in learning, cheerful, and has unique painting skills. Later, he followed the King of Wuling to Shudi. After he was imprisoned and defeated, he was forced by the army to paint murals in the temples of the Yangtze River, together with those craftsmen.

古文：向使三贤都不晓画，直运素业，岂见此耻乎？
现代文：如果这三位贤能的人当初都不会绘画，一直只致力於清高德雅的事业，怎么会受这样的耻辱呢？
English: If these three virtuous people did not know how to paint at the beginning, and had only been devoted to the cause of high moral and ethical standards, how could they have suffered such a disgrace?

古文：孤矢之利，以威天下，先王所以现德择贤，亦济身之急务也。
现代文：弓箭的锋利，可以威震天下，古代的帝王以射箭来考察人的德行，选择贤能。
English: The sharpness of the bow and arrow can make the world tremble. The ancient emperors used archery to examine people's virtues and choose virtue.

古文：江南谓世之常射，以为 兵射 ，冠冕儒生，多不习此。
现代文：同时也是保全性命的紧要事情。江南的人将世上常见的射箭，看成是武夫的射箭，所以儒雅的书生都不肯学习此道。
English: At the same time, it is also an urgent matter of preserving life. People in the south of the Yangtze River regard archery, which is common in the world, as a warrior's archery, so elegant students do not want to learn this way.

古文：别有 博射 ，弱弓长箭，施於准的，揖让升降，以行礼焉，防御寇难，了无所益，乱离之后，此术遂亡。
现代文：另外有一种比赛用的射箭，弓的力量很弱，箭身较长，设有箭靶，宾主相见，温文尔雅，作揖相让，举行射礼。这种射箭对于防御敌寇一点作用都没有。经过了战乱之后，这种 博射 就没人玩了。
English: In addition, there is a kind of competition archery, the strength of the bow is very weak, the arrow body is long, there is an arrow target, the guests meet each other, they are mild-mannered, make concessions, and hold a shooting ceremony. This kind of archery has no effect on the defense of the enemy. After the war, no one played this kind of shooting.

古文：河北文士，率晓 兵射 ，非直葛洪一箭，已解追兵，三九宴集，常縻荣赐。
现代文：北方的文人，大多数会 兵射 ，不只是葛洪能一箭可以追杀贼寇，三公九卿宴会时常常赐射箭的优胜者。
English: The literati in the north, most of them would practice archery, not only Ge Hong could chase and kill thieves and robbers with a single arrow, he was often the archery winner at the banquet of the three princes and nine nobles.

古文：虽然，要轻禽，截狡兽，不愿汝辈为之。
现代文：射箭技术的高低，关系到荣誉与赏赐。尽管这样，用射箭去猎获飞禽走兽这种事，我还是不愿意你们去做。
English: The level of archery skill is related to honor and reward. Despite this, I still don't want you to use archery to hunt birds and beasts.

古文：算术亦是六艺要事。自古儒士论天道。定律历者，智学通之。
现代文：算术也是六艺中重要的一个方面，自古以来的读书人谈论天文，推定历法，都要精通算术。
English: Arithmetic is also an important aspect of the six arts. Since ancient times, readers have talked about astronomy, estimated calendar, and must be proficient in arithmetic.

古文：然可以兼明，不可以专业。
现代文：然而，可以在学别的本领的同时学算术，不要专门去学习它。
English: However, you can learn arithmetic at the same time as other skills, don't study it exclusively.

古文：江南此学殊少，唯范阳祖恒精之，位至南康太守。河北多晚此术。
现代文：江南通晓算术的人很少，只有范附的祖恒精通它，他的官位是南康太守，北方人中多通晓算术。
English: There are very few people in the south of the Yangtze River who are proficient in arithmetic. Only Fan Zui's ancestor Hengru is proficient in it. His official rank is the governor of southern Kangtai Province. Most people in the north are proficient in arithmetic.

古文：医方之事，取妙极难，不劝汝曾以自命也。
现代文：医学方面，要达到高水准极为困难，我不鼓励你们以会看病自许。
English: In medicine, it is extremely difficult to achieve a high standard, and I do not encourage you to think that you can see a doctor.

古文：微解药性，小小和合，居家得以救急，亦为胜事，皇甫谧、殷仲堪则其人也。
现代文：稍微了解一些药性，略为懂得如何配药，居家过日子能够用来救急，也就可以了。皇甫谧、殷仲堪，就是这样的人。
English: It is enough to know a little about the properties of medicines, to know a little about how to dispense medicines, and to live at home so that they can be used for emergencies. Wang Fuxi and Yin Zhongkan are such people.

古文：《礼》曰： 君子无故不彻琴瑟。 
现代文：《礼记·乐记》说： 君子无故不撤去琴瑟。 
English: "Li Ji · Le Ji" said: A gentleman does not remove the harpsichord for no reason.

古文：古来名士，多所爱好。
现代文：自古以来的名士，大多爱好音乐。
English: Celebrities since ancient times, most of them love music.

古文：洎于梁初，衣冠子孙，不知琴者，号有所阙。大同以末，斯风顿尽。
现代文：到了梁朝初期，如果贵族子弟不懂弹琴鼓瑟，就被要认为有缺点，大同末年以来，这种风气已不存在。
English: In the early days of the Liang Dynasty, if a nobleman's son did not know how to play the piano or the drums, he was considered to have shortcomings. Since the end of the Datong Dynasty, this culture no longer exists.

古文：然而此乐音音雅致，有深味哉！
现代文：然而音乐和谐美妙，非常雅致，意味无穷！
English: However, the music has a wonderful harmony, is very elegant and full of meaning!

古文：今世曲解，虽变于古，犹足以畅神情也。
现代文：现在的琴曲歌词，虽然是从古代演变过来，还是足以使人听了神情舒畅。
English: The lyrics of today's koto music, although they have evolved from ancient times, are still enough to make people feel comfortable.

古文：唯不可令有称誉，见役勋贵，处之下坐，以取残杯冷炙之辱。
现代文：只是不要以擅长音乐闻名，那样就会被达官贵人所役使，身居下座为人演奏，以讨得残杯剩饭，备受屈辱。
English: Only don't be famous for being good at music, or you will be used by high-ranking dignitaries, and you will be humiliated by having to play for scraps.

古文：戴安道犹遭之，况尔曹乎！
现代文：戴安道尚且遭遇过这样的事，何况你们呢？ 
English: Diane's already been through this, how about you?

