古文：诸葛孔明千载人，其用兵行师，皆本于仁义节制，自三代以降，未之有也。
现代文：诸葛孔明是千载伟人，他用兵行军，指挥作战，都以仁义之道为本，这是自夏商周三代以来未曾有过的。
English: Zhuge Kongming is a great man for thousands of years. He marched with soldiers and commanded battles, all based on the path of benevolence and righteousness, which has not been seen since the third generation of Xia Shang.

古文：盖其操心制行，一出于诚，生于乱世，躬耕陇亩，使无徐庶之一言，玄德之三顾，则苟全性命，不求闻达必矣。
现代文：他的思虑行为，全都出于对刘玄德和恢复汉室事业的忠诚，他生在乱世，亲自耕田谋生，假如没有徐庶一句话的推荐，刘玄德三顾茅庐的热忱，那么他苟且保全性命，不求扬名显达就是一定的。
English: His thoughtful actions were all out of loyalty to Liu Xuande and the cause of restoring the Han dynasty. He was born in a chaotic world, and he cultivated the land to earn a living. If there was no recommendation from Xu Zhe, and if Liu Xuande did not have the enthusiasm to look into the matter, then he would have carefully preserved his life and would not have sought fame.

古文：其始见玄德，论曹操不可与争锋，孙氏可与为援而不可图，唯荆、益可以取，言如蓍龟，终身不易。
现代文：诸葛亮在隆中第一次会见刘玄德，纵论天下大势时，就提出不可和曹操较量高低，对孙权也只能互相支援，不可图谋，只有荆州、益州可以夺取。这些论断像占卜一样准确，终其一生的政治经历看，真是不容变更之论。
English: Zhuge Liang met Liu Xuande for the first time in Longzhong, and when discussing the general trend of the world, he proposed that it was impossible to compete with Cao Cao, and that Sun Quan could only support each other, not plot, and that only Jingzhou and Yizhou could be captured. These assertions were as accurate as divination, and judging from his lifelong political experience, they were really unchangeable.

古文：二十余年之间，君信之，士大夫仰之，夷夏服之，敌人畏之。
现代文：在他掌权的二十多年里，国君信任他，士大夫仰慕他，汉族和少数民族的百姓信服他，敌人畏惧他。
English: In the more than 20 years that he has been in power, the sovereign has trusted him, the scholars have admired him, the Han and ethnic minority people have believed in him, and the enemies have feared him.

古文：上有以取信于主，故玄德临终，至云： 嗣子不才，君可自取 ；后主虽庸懦无立，亦举国听之而不疑。
现代文：对上，他以忠诚取得君主的高度信任，所以玄德临死时对他说： 我的儿子没有才能，你可以自取为帝。 后主刘禅虽然平庸怯懦无所建树，也把整个国家交给他而毫无怀疑。
English: On the other hand, he gained the high trust of the monarch with his loyalty, so Xuan De said to him on his deathbed: My son has no talent, you can make yourself an emperor. Although his successor, Liu Zen, was mediocre and cowardly and did not build anything, he also handed over the entire country to him without any doubt.

古文：下有以见信于人，故废廖立而立垂泣，废李严而严致死。
现代文：对下，他的才德威望被部属信赖，所以长水校尉廖立和骠骑将军李严虽都被除名为民，但听到诸葛亮病逝的消息后，廖立恸哭落泪，李严病发死去。
English: On the other hand, his talent and prestige were trusted by his subordinates, so Changshui Lieutenant Colonel Liao Li and General Li Yan, the cavalry general, were both removed from the name of the people, but after hearing the news of Zhuge Liang's death, Liao Li Wei cried and shed tears, and Li Yan died of illness.

古文：后主左右奸辟侧佞，充塞于中，而无一人有心害疾者。
现代文：后主身边多奸佞之臣，却没有一个人有嫉恨暗害诸葛亮之心的。
English: There were many treacherous vassals of Zhuge Liang around the late lord, but none of them had the heart of jealousy to harm Zhuge Liang.

古文：魏尽据中州，乘操、丕积威之后，猛士如林，不敢西向发一矢以临蜀，而公六出征之，使魏畏蜀如虎。司马懿案行其营垒处所，叹为天下奇才。
现代文：当魏国完全占领中州之地以后，还挟有曹操、曹丕父子生前的积威，军中勇猛将士如林，却不敢发一兵一卒一箭到蜀国，而诸葛亮却率领大军六出岐山，讨伐魏国，致使魏国上下畏惧蜀国如同畏惧老虎，魏国将帅司马懿仔细考察诸葛亮的营垒后，叹服他是天下奇才。
English: When Wei completely occupied the land of Zhongzhou, Cao Cao, Cao Pi and their sons were still alive. The brave soldiers in the army were like a forest, but they did not dare to send one soldier, one man, one arrow to Shu. Zhuge Liang led a large army to fight Wei, causing Wei to fear Shu as if it were a tiger. After a careful examination of Zhuge Liang's camp, the Wei general Sima Yi was impressed that he was a genius.

古文：锺会伐蜀，使人至汉川祭其庙，禁军士不得近墓樵采，是岂智力策虑所能致哉？
现代文：敌将锤会征伐蜀国时，特地派人到汉川祭礼诸葛亮庙，并下令军士，禁止在诸葛亮墓附近砍柴，这难道是智力高超或谋略过人所能获得的吗？
English: When the enemy sent a hammer to conquer Shu, he specifically sent people to the Hanchuan Festival Zhuge Liang Temple and ordered the sergeants to prohibit the cutting of firewood near Zhuge Liang's tomb. Is this the result of superior intelligence or superior strategy?

古文：魏延每随公出，辄欲请兵万人，与公异道会于潼关，公制而不许，又欲请兵五千，循秦岭而东，直取长安，以为一举而咸阳以西可定。史臣谓公以为危计不用，是不然。
现代文：魏延每次随诸葛亮出兵伐魏，总请求拨给自己将士万人，他想仿照韩信故事，从暗道和诸葛亮在潼关会师，诸葛亮坚决制止，决不允许；魏延又想请求诸葛亮拨给他将士五千人，他要沿秦岭向东走，直取长安。他认为这一军事行动能使咸阳以西之地平定，史臣记载说，诸葛亮认为这是危险之计而不予采纳。
English: Every time Wei Yan followed Zhuge Liang to march to Wei, he always asked for 10,000 soldiers. He wanted to follow the Han Xin story and secretly meet Zhuge Liang at Shaoguan. Zhuge Liang resolutely stopped it and would never allow it. Wei Yan also wanted to ask Zhuge Liang to assign him 5,000 soldiers. He wanted to go east along Qinling and take Chang'an directly. He believed that this military action could pacify the land west of Xianyang. The historian recorded that Zhuge Liang considered this a dangerous plan and would not accept it.

古文：公真所谓义兵不用诈谋奇计，方以数十万之众，据正道而临有罪，建旗鸣鼓，直指魏都，固将飞书告之，择日合战，岂复翳行窃步，事一旦之谲以规咸阳哉！
现代文：其实不然，诸葛公真是人们所说的正义之师，不用阴谋诡计，他正要率领十万大军，占据要道去正面讨伐敌人。他竖起大旗，高鸣战鼓，直指魏国京都，本来要飞骑传书，通知敌方，择定日期交战，难道又能隐秘行动，暗中行事，以诡诈之计图谋咸阳吗？
English: In fact, it is not true. Zhuge Gong is really what people call a teacher of justice. He does not need to use intrigue and trickery. He is about to lead a hundred thousand-strong army and occupy the important road to fight the enemy head-on. He erected a large flag, high-pitched war drums, pointing directly at Wei's Kyoto. Originally, he was going to fly a courier, notify the enemy, and set a date for the battle. Can he act secretly, act secretly, and plot against Xianyang with deceitful schemes?

古文：司马懿年长于公四岁，懿存而公死，才五十四耳，天不祚汉，非人力也。 霸气西南歇，雄图历数屯。 
现代文：司马懿比诸葛亮年长四岁，司马懿活着，而诸葛亮不幸死去，享年才五十四岁，上天不保佑汉室，这不是人力所能挽回的。 霸气西南歇，雄图历数屯。 
English: Sima Yi is four years older than Zhuge Liang, Sima Yi is still alive, while Zhuge Liang unfortunately died at the age of fifty-four. Heaven does not bless the Han family, this is not something that can be saved by manpower. The domineering spirit of the south-west is over, and the male figure has passed through several towns.

古文：杜诗尽之矣。
现代文：杜甫诗已经全部说明白了。
English: Du Fu's poem has made everything clear.

