古文：《齐民要术》：种者，梨熟时，全埋之。
现代文：《齐民要术》：播种的方法，是在梨熟的时候，将整个的梨全部埋下去。
English: "Qimin Yaoshu": The method of sowing is to bury the whole pear when it is ripe.

古文：经年，至春地释，分栽之；多著熟粪及水。
现代文：经过一年，到春天地解冻时，进行分栽。多上熟粪，多浇水。
English: After a year, when the ground thaws in the spring, the plants are divided. More manure is applied and more water is poured.

古文：至冬叶落，附地刈杀之，以炭火烧头。
现代文：冬天树叶落后，将紧贴着地面割掉，用炭火将伤口烧焦。
English: In winter, when the leaves fall behind, they are cut off close to the ground, and the wounds are charred with charcoal.

古文：二年即结子。
现代文：两年以后，便可得梨。
English: After two years, you get pears.

古文：若稽生及种而不栽者，则著子迟。
现代文：若是橹生苗，和种过以后，不进行移栽的，都结子晚。
English: If the seedlings are twins, and if they are not transplanted after sowing, they will all bear late.

古文：每梨有十许子，惟二子生梨，余者生杜。
现代文：每一个梨，有十颗左右的种子，其中只有两粒种子生出来的是梨，其余的种子生出来的全是杜梨。
English: Each pear has about ten seeds, of which only two seeds produce pears, and the rest of the seeds produce all kinds of pears.

古文：插者，弥疾。
现代文：嫁接的梨树，结果实非常快速。
English: The result of grafting pear trees is actually very fast.

古文：插法，用棠、杜。
现代文：嫁接的方法，是用棠梨和杜梨。
English: The method of grafting is to use crabapple and jackfruit.

古文：棠，梨大而细理；杜次之；桑梨大恶。枣、石榴上插得者，为上梨；虽治十，收得一二也。
现代文：用棠梨树的，结的梨大，质理细；用杜梨树的，居第二位；用桑树的，梨的质量最坏；在枣树和石榴树上嫁接的，长出的是上等好梨；接十株，只能有一两株可以成活。
English: If you use the tanggu pear tree, the pear is large and has a fine texture; if you use the du pear tree, it ranks second; if you use the mulberry tree, the quality of the pear is the worst; if you graft it on the jujube tree and the pomegranate tree, it will grow into a first-class pear; if you connect ten trees, only one or two can survive.

古文：杜如臂已上，皆任插。
现代文：杜梨树长到臂膀以上粗细，皆可以嫁接。
English: Durian trees grow thicker than an arm and can be grafted.

古文：常先种杜，经年后插之。
现代文：应当先将杜梨移栽好，隔一年后再嫁接。
English: It should be transplanted first, and then grafted a year later.

古文：主客俱下亦得；然俱下者，杜死则不生也。
现代文：移植杜梨和嫁接工作，同时进行也可以，但杜梨死了，接穗亦不得生。
English: Transplanting and grafting can be carried out at the same time, but the jackdaw dies and the offspring cannot be born.

古文：杜树大者，插五枝，小者或三或二。
现代文：杜梨树大的，可嫁接五个接穗；树小的，或三个或两个皆可以。
English: In the case of a large tree, five scions can be grafted; in the case of a small tree, either three or two can be grafted.

古文：梨叶微动为上时，将欲开莩为下时。
现代文：梨树的叶芽开始萌动，为上等农时；芽的莩甲将要裂开，为下等农时。
English: The leaf bud of the pear tree begins to sprout, which is the upper agricultural time; the bud's carapace will crack, which is the lower agricultural time.

古文：先作麻纫女珍反。
现代文：预先要作好麻纫，女珍反。
English: In advance, you should do a good job of sewing.

古文：缠十许匝；以锯截杜，令去地五六寸。
现代文：缠扎十数圈，然后在离开地面五六寸高处，用锯将杜梨树锯断。
English: Then, at a height of five or six inches from the ground, the tree is cut down with a saw.

古文：不缠，恐插时皮披。
现代文：不缠扎，害怕嫁接时树皮会绽裂。
English: Do not tangle, afraid that the bark will crack during grafting.

古文：留杜高者，梨枝繁茂，遇大风则披。
现代文：杜梨砧留得高，梨树枝繁叶茂，遇到大风容易披裂。
English: The rhizome of the cucumber is left high, the branches of the pear tree are lush, and it is easy to split in a strong wind.

古文：其高留杜者，梨树早成，然宜作蒿簟盛杜，以土筑之令没。
现代文：留得高的，梨树可以早日长成，但应用蒿簟把杜梨砧围裹起来，然后壅土筑实把砧木埋没。
English: If left high, the pear tree can grow early, but it is necessary to wrap the rhododendron with straw, and then rake the soil to bury the beech.

古文：风时，以笼盛梨，免披耳。
现代文：吹风的时候并应用竹笼把梨罩起来，以免被风吹披裂。
English: When the wind blows, a bamboo cage is used to cover the pears to prevent them from being blown apart.

古文：斜攕所成反。竹为签，刺皮木之际，令深一寸许。
现代文：斜着把竹子削洒所成反作竹签，刺入韧皮和木质部中间，大约要一寸多深。
English: Make a bamboo stick by cutting the bamboo diagonally and inserting it into the middle of the phloem and the woody part. It should be about an inch or more deep.

古文：折取其美梨枝阳中者，阴中枝则实少。
现代文：在品种优良的好梨树上，折取向阳的枝条，阴面的枝条结果实少。
English: On a good pear tree with an excellent variety, the results of taking the branches that face the sun and the branches that face the shade are few.

古文：长五六寸，亦斜攕之，令过心；大小长短与签等。以刀微劁梨枝斜擞之际，剥去黑皮。
现代文：长约五六寸，同样的也要穿过条心，削成大小长短和竹签一样的斜面，同时用刀轻轻地将斜面背上的黑皮环剥掉。
English: About five or six inches long, the same should also pass through the strip, cut into the size and length of bamboo shoots and bamboo sticks, while gently peeling off the black leather ring on the back of the slope with a knife.

古文：勿令伤青皮，青皮伤，则死。
现代文：不要伤了绿色的韧皮，绿皮受了伤，嫁接便不会成功。
English: Don't hurt the green basting. If the green basting is injured, the graft will not succeed.

古文：拔去竹签，即插梨，令至藰处。木边向木，皮还近皮。
现代文：然后将竹签拔出，把梨的接穗插进去，插到环剥黑皮的地方为止；应使接穗的木质部对着砧木的木质部，接穗的韧皮部对着砧木的韧皮部。
English: Then pull out the bamboo stick and insert the scion of the pear into it until it reaches the place where the black skin is peeled off. The woody part of the scion should be placed against the woody part of the rootstock, and the phloem part of the scion against the phloem part of the rootstock.

古文：插讫，以绵莫幂同。
现代文：嫁接过后，用绵莫同羃字。
English: After grafting, use Mianmo Tongzhi.

古文：杜头，封熟泥于上，以土培覆，令梨枝仅得出头；以土壅四畔。当梨上沃水，水尽，以土覆之，勿令坚涸。
现代文：砧木顶部，用熟泥封涂严密，用土壅培覆盖；让梨枝稍微露出一点头，四周壅上土，对准梨枝上浇水，水耗尽以后，在上面盖上土，不要让土板结。
English: The top of the birch tree is tightly sealed with wet mud and covered with soil. Let the pear branch slightly expose its head, sprinkle the soil around it, pour water on the pear branch. After the water is exhausted, cover it with soil, and do not let the soil knot.

古文：百不失一。
现代文：依照上法，嫁接一百棵，也不会死一棵。
English: According to the law, if you graft a hundred trees, not a single one will die.

古文：梨枝甚脆；培土时宜慎之。勿使掌拨，掌拨则折。
现代文：梨的枝条很脆，覆土时务必小心，不要碰它；碰着，便会折断。
English: The branch of the pear is very brittle. When covering the soil, be careful not to touch it; if you do, it will break.

古文：其十字破杜者，十不收一。
现代文：如果采用把杜梨十字形劈开的办法，嫁接十棵，也难成活一棵。
English: If you use the method of splitting the crabapple cross-shaped, and graft ten trees, it is difficult to make a living one.

古文：所以然者，木裂皮开，虚燥故也。
现代文：这是因为木质部被劈裂，树皮被撕开，中间留有空隙，容易干枯的缘故。
English: This is because the woody part is split, the bark is torn, leaving a gap in the middle, and it is easy to dry out.

古文：梨既生，杜旁有叶出，辄去之。
现代文：梨既经嫁接成活，杜梨上如有叶子长出，应该随时去掉。
English: Since the pear has been grafted into life, if any leaves grow on the pear, they should be removed at any time.

古文：不去势分，梨长必迟。
现代文：如果不去掉，生长势必会分散，梨的接穗便会成长慢。
English: If it is not removed, the growth is bound to be dispersed, and the scion of the pear will grow slowly.

古文：凡插梨，园中者，用旁枝；庭前者，中心。
现代文：通常嫁接梨树，如果嫁接梨园中的树，便可选取侧枝；嫁接庭院中的树，便可用主中枝。
English: Pear trees are usually grafted. If the tree in the pear orchard is grafted, the side branches can be selected; if the tree in the courtyard is grafted, the main middle branch can be used.

古文：旁枝，树下易收；中心，上耸不妨。
现代文：采用旁枝，树形低下，便于采收；采用中心枝，树形高耸也不妨碍。
English: Using the side branches, the tree shape is low, which is convenient for harvesting; using the central branch, the tree shape is high, which is not a hindrance.

古文：用根蒂小枝，树形可憘，五年方结子。鸠脚老枝，三年即结子，而树丑。
现代文：用大树根部长出的小枝条，树形非常美观，但是结果实的时间，就要五年左右了；用鸠脚老枝，三年便可结果实，但树形却非常难看。
English: The small branches that grow from the roots of large trees have a very beautiful tree shape, but it takes about five years to produce fruit; with lame old branches, it takes three years to produce fruit, but the tree shape is very ugly.

古文：《吴氏本草》曰：金创，乳妇，不可食梨。
现代文：《吴氏本草》说： 受金属创伤的人，和哺乳婴儿的妇女，不可以食梨。
English: "Wu's Materia Medica" says: People who have suffered metal trauma, and women nursing babies, should not eat pears.

古文：梨多食则损人，非补益之物。
现代文：梨吃多了会损伤身体，并非补养的物品。
English: If you eat too many pears, you will damage your body. They are not a supplement.

古文：产妇蓐中，及疾病未愈，食梨多者，无不致病。
现代文：产妇临产前后，和患病未痊愈的人，梨吃多了，没有不生病的。
English: Around the time of giving birth, and for those who are still ill, there is no one who does not get sick if they eat too many pears.

古文：咳逆气上者，尤宜慎之。
现代文：有咳嗽、哮喘病的人，尤其应当注意少食梨。 
English: People with coughs or asthma should be especially careful not to eat too many pears.

古文：凡远道取梨枝者，下根即烧三四寸，亦可行数百里犹生。
现代文：凡是从远处取梨枝的，剪下以后，随即把下面的三四寸用火烧过，即便运往数百里以外的地方，仍然可以成活。
English: Anyone who takes a pear branch from a distance, after cutting it, immediately burns the bottom three or four inches with fire, even if it is transported to a place hundreds of miles away, can still survive.

古文：藏梨法：初霜后即收。
现代文：藏梨法：初次降过霜以后，便迅速收取。
English: Tibetan pear method: After the first frost, the cream is quickly collected.

古文：霜多则不得经夏也。
现代文：经霜的次数多了，就无法贮藏到夏天。
English: If the frosting is applied more often, it cannot be stored until summer.

古文：于屋下掘作深窨引坑，底无令润湿；收梨置中，不须覆盖，便得经夏。
现代文：在屋里挖掘一个极深的地窨子，坑底要干燥，把梨放进去，不用覆盖，便可以到夏天也不会腐坏。
English: Dig a very deep trench in the house, the bottom of the pit should be dry, put the pear in it, do not cover it, it can not rot in the summer.

古文：摘时必令好接，勿令损伤。
现代文：摘梨的时候一定要注意，不能有任何的损伤。
English: When picking pears, you must be careful not to cause any damage.

古文：凡醋梨，易水熟煮，则甜美而不损人也。
现代文：凡是带酸味的梨，多换几次水煮熟，便会变得甜美，对人也没有害处。
English: Any pear with a sour taste will become sweet if it is boiled in water several times. It is not harmful to humans.

