古文：○高宗七十二年春正月癸卯，罢枢密行府。庚申，孙近分司、漳州居住。
现代文：绍兴十二年春正月初九，废罢枢密行府。二十六日，孙近受到处罚，漳州居住。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the 12th year of Shaoxing's Spring, Sun Chian was punished and moved to Zhangzhou on the 26th.

古文：二月丁丑，加建国公瑗为检校少保，进封普安郡王。
现代文：二月十三日，建国公赵缓加衔为检校少保，进封普安郡王。
English: On February 13th, the founding father Zhao Yanzhong was promoted to the rank of junior guard of the inspection school, and became the king of Pu'an County.

古文：己卯，赐杨沂中名存中。
现代文：十五日，赐给杨沂中名为存中。
English: On the fifteenth day, the middle name of Yang Jie was given to the middle.

古文：丙戌，诏诸州修学宫。
现代文：二十二日，下诏各州修缮学宫。
English: On the 22nd, all prefectures ordered the renovation of the school palace.

古文：辛卯，蠲广南东、西路骆科残扰州县今年租。
现代文：二十七日，免除广南东、西路骆科破坏骚扰州县今年租税。
English: On the 27th, Luo Ke, East and West Road of Guangdong Province, was exempted from this year's tax.

古文：镇江、太平、池州、芜湖大火。
现代文：镇江、太平州、池州、芜湖发生大火灾。
English: Large fires occurred in Zhenjiang, Taiping, Chizhou and Wuhu.

古文：癸巳，金主许归梓宫及皇太后，遣何铸等还。
现代文：二十九日，金主答应归还徽宗梓宫和皇太后，派何铸等人回国。
English: On the 29th, the owner of the money promised to return Huizongzi Palace and the Empress Dowager, and sent He Ji and others back to China.

古文：三月丙申，临安府火。
现代文：三月初三，临安府发生火灾。
English: On the third day of March, a fire broke out in Lin'an.

古文：壬寅，命普安郡王出就第，朝朔望。
现代文：初九，命令普安郡王出宫居住，初一、十五朝见皇上。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, he ordered the king of Pu'an County to leave the palace and live in the palace, and visit the emperor on the first and fifteenth days of the first lunar month.

古文：辛亥，以士亻褭尝营护岳飞为朋比，责建州居住。
现代文：十八日，因赵士可曾经为岳飞辩护，贬建州居住。
English: On the 18th, because Zhao Shike had defended Yuefei, he was expelled from Jianzhou.

古文：丙辰，胡世将卒。
现代文：二十三日，胡世将逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Hu Shih will pass away.

古文：夏四月甲子朔，遣孟忠厚为迎护梓宫礼仪使，王次翁为奉迎两宫礼仪使。
现代文：夏四月初一，派孟忠厚担任迎护梓宫礼仪使，王次翁担任奉迎两宫礼仪使。
English: On the first day of April in summer, he sent Meng Zhonghou to serve as the ceremonial envoy to welcome the Zi Palace, and Wang Zi Weng to serve as the ceremonial envoy to welcome the two palaces.

古文：丁卯，皇太后偕梓宫发五国城，金遣完颜宗贤、刘祹护送梓宫，高居安护送皇太后。
现代文：初四，皇太后偕同徽宗梓宫从五国城出发，金国派完颜宗贤、刘神护送梓宫，高居安护送皇太后。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Empress Dowager Zhaotong Huizong and Empress Dowager Cixi set out from Wugu City. Empress Dowager Zhaotong Huizong sent Yan Zongxian and Liu Shen to escort Empress Dowager Cixi, while Gao Ju'an escorted Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：庚午，赐礼部进士陈诚之以下二百五十四人及第、出身。
现代文：初七，赐礼部进士陈诚之以下二百五十四人及第、出身。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the following 254 people and their birthplaces were given to Chen Cheng, a member of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：戊寅，封韦渊平乐郡王。
现代文：十五日，封韦渊为平乐郡王。
English: On the 15th, Wei Yuan was named the king of Pingle County.

古文：辛巳，皇后邢氏崩讣初至。
现代文：十八日，皇后邢氏逝世的消息传到朝廷。
English: On the 18th, news of the death of Empress Shun reached the Imperial Court.

古文：甲申，增修临安府学为太学。
现代文：二十一日，增修临安府学为太学。
English: On the 21st, Lin'an Prefectural School was upgraded to Taigaku.

古文：五月甲午，以郑刚中为川、陕宣抚副使。
现代文：五月初二，任命郑刚中为川、陕宣抚副使。
English: On the second day of May, Zheng Gangzhong was appointed deputy envoy of the Sichuan and Shaanxi Proclamation.

古文：乙未，遣沈昭远等贺金主生辰。
现代文：初三，派沈昭远等祝贺金主生辰。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Shen Zhaoyuan and others congratulated Jin on his birthday.

古文：置淮西、京西、陕西诸路榷场。
现代文：设置淮西、京西、陕西各路榷场。
English: Set up distribution centers in Huaxi, West Beijing, and Shaanxi.

古文：丙午，增筑慈宁殿。
现代文：十四日，增筑慈宁殿。
English: On the 14th, the addition of the Jining Hall was completed.

古文：停给度僧牒。
现代文：停止发放度僧碟。
English: Stop handing out CD's.

古文：乙卯，复试教官法。
现代文：二十三日，恢复试教官法。
English: On the 23rd, the law on probationary instructors was reinstated.

古文：六月甲子，命侍从、台谏、礼官杂议权奉欑宫。
现代文：六月初三，命令侍从、台谏、礼官一起讨论商议崇奉徽宗殡宫。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, he ordered the attendants, the eunuchs, and the etiquette officials to discuss and discuss the Chongfeng Huizong Funeral Palace.

古文：戌辰，以万俟禼为欑宫按行使。
现代文：初七，任命万侯为殡宫按行使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the appointment of Wanhou as a funeral home was exercised.

古文：辛未，责降王庶为向德军节度副使、道州安置。
现代文：初十，王庶贬降为向德军节度副使，道州安置。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Wang Shiao was demoted to the position of deputy envoy to the German army, and was resettled in Doushou.

古文：壬午，金国归孟庾、李正民。
现代文：二十一日，金国遣归孟庚、李正民。
English: On the 21st, Meng Geng and Li Zhengmin were sent back to China.

古文：甲申，以吴璘为检校少师、阶、成、岷、凤四州经略使。
现代文：二十三日，任命吴瞒为检校少师和阶、成、山民、凤四州经略使。
English: On the 23rd, Wu Zhen was appointed as the junior inspector of the school and the delegate of the four states of Qi, Cheng, Shanmin and Feng.

古文：秋七月壬辰朔，福州签判胡铨除名、新州编管。
现代文：秋七月初一，福州签判胡锉被除名，新州编管。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Fuzhou signed a judgment that Hu Wei was removed from the list, and Xinzhou was placed under control.

古文：丁酉，上皇后谥曰懿节，祔神主于别庙。
现代文：初六，敬献皇后溢号为爵节，在别庙附祭皇后神主。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the festival of honoring the empress was held, and the empress deity was enshrined in the temple.

古文：己亥，以何铸权参知政事。
现代文：初八，任命何铸代理参知政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, He Ji was appointed acting governor.

古文：己酉，始制常行仪仗及造玉辂。
现代文：十八日，开始制定常用仪仗和制造玉格。
English: On the 18th, they began to work out the commonly used ceremonial rings and manufacture jade plaques.

古文：乙卯，蠲广南、湖北沿边州军免行钱。
现代文：二十四日，免除广南、湖北沿边州军免行钱。
English: On the 24th, the troops of the border states along Guangnan and Hubei were exempted from payment.

古文：八月辛酉朔，兀使来求商州及和尚、方山二原。
现代文：八月初一，兀派使臣来要求割让商州及和尚原、方山原。
English: On the first day of August, the Xiongnu sent envoys to demand the cession of Shangzhou, as well as He Shangyuan and Fangshan Yuan.

古文：丙寅，何铸罢。
现代文：初六，何铸罢职。
English: Sixth year of junior high school, what a way to get fired.

古文：甲戌，以万俟禼参知政事，充金国报谢使。
现代文：十四日，任命万侯为参知政事，担任金国报谢使。
English: On the 14th, he appointed Wan Hou as a member of the Council of State, and served as the envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：壬午，皇太后至，入居慈宁宫。
现代文：二十二日，皇太后到朝廷，进居慈宁宫。
English: On the 22nd, the empress dowager arrived at the imperial court and moved into the Cining Palace.

古文：己丑，帝易缌服，奉迎徽宗及显肃、懿节二后梓宫至，奉安于龙德别宫。
现代文：二十九日，高宗换上丧服，奉迎徽宗及显肃、靓节二后梓宫到达，恭敬把它安置在龙德别宫。
English: On the 29th, Gao Zong changed into mourning clothes and arrived at Zi Gong after welcoming Huizong and Xian Su, the second day of the Spring Festival, and respectfully placed it in Longde Villa.

古文：是月，郑刚中分画陕西地界，割商、秦之半畀金国，存上津、丰阳、天水三县及陇西成纪余地，弃和尚、方山二原，以大散关为界。
现代文：这个月，郑刚中划定陕西地界，割让商、秦州的一半给金国，保留上津、丰阳、天水三县及陇西成纪余地，放弃和尚原、方山原，以大散关为界。
English: This month, Zheng Gangzhong delineated the territorial boundaries of Shaanxi, ceding Shang and half of Qinzhou to Jin, reserving Shangjin, Fengyang, Tianshui three counties and the western part of Shaanxi, abandoning Monzhuangyuan and Fangshanyuan, and taking the Great Sankuan as the boundary.

古文：九月乙未，以孟忠厚为枢密使，充欑宫总护使。
现代文：九月初六，任命孟忠厚为枢密使，担任殡宫总护使。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Meng Zhonghou was appointed as a privy envoy and served as the chief guardian of the Funeral Palace.

古文：壬寅，大赦。
现代文：十三日，大赦。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：乙巳，加秦桧太师，封魏国公。
现代文：十六日，秦桧加衔太师，封为魏国公。
English: On the 16th, Qin Hui was given the title of Grand Master, and was named the Prince of Wei.

古文：丙午，金使刘筈、完颜宗表等九人入见。
现代文：十七日，金国使臣刘蔼、完颜宗表等九人朝见高宗。
English: On the 17th, nine people, including Liu A, the envoy of Kim Guo, and Kangyan Zongbiao, went to see Gao Zong.

古文：戊申，以王次翁等充金国报谢使。
现代文：十九日，任命王次翁担任金国报谢使。
English: On the 19th, Wang Jiong was appointed as the ambassador of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：藏金国誓书于内侍省。
现代文：把金国誓书藏在内侍省。
English: He hid the Golden State Oath at the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：辛亥，加张中孚开府仪同三司，中彦靖海军节度使。
现代文：二十二日，张中孚加衔为开府仪同三司，张中彦为靖海军节度使。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Zhongfu was promoted to the third secretary of Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, and Zhang Zhongyan was promoted to the envoy of the Yasukuni Shrine.

古文：甲寅，杖杀伪福国长公主李善静。
现代文：二十五日，杖杀伪福国长公主李善静。
English: On the 25th, Li Zhenjing, the pseudo-Princess Li of the State of Fu, was killed with a cane.

古文：以金州郭浩为金、房、开、达四州经略安抚使。
现代文：任命金州知州郭浩为金、房、开、达四州经略安抚使。
English: Guo Hao of Jinzhou, Zhizhou was appointed as the economic and pacifying envoy of Jin, Fang, Kai and Dada four states.

古文：始遣杨愿使金贺正旦。
现代文：又开始派遣杨愿出使金国，祝贺正旦节。
English: Yang Jian also began to send envoys to the People's Republic of China to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：冬十月乙丑，始听中外用药。
现代文：冬十月初六，开始允许朝廷内外用乐。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the use of music inside and outside the imperial court was permitted.

古文：丙寅，权欑徽宗皇帝及显肃皇后于会稽永固陵，懿节皇后祔。
现代文：初七，徽宗皇帝和显肃皇后暂且葬在会稽永固陵，爵节皇后合葬。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Huizong and Empress Xiansu were temporarily buried in the Yonggu Mausoleum, and Empress Jiaojie was buried together.

古文：乙亥，以翰林学士程克俊签书枢密院事、权参知政事。
现代文：十六日，任命翰林学士程克俊为签书枢密院事、代理参知政事。
English: On the 16th, the Hanlin Scholar Cheng Kijun was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：丁丑，以皇太后回銮，推恩进封秦桧为秦、魏两国公，辞不拜。
现代文：十八日，因皇太后回到朝廷，推恩施惠，进封秦桧为秦、魏两国公，秦桧推辞不接受。
English: On the 18th, as the empress dowager returned to the imperial court, she extended her grace and favors, and Qin Hui was appointed as the prince of Qin and Wei. Qin Hui did not accept the resignation.

古文：庚辰，以何铸党援岳飞，不主和议，责授秘书少监、徽州居住。
现代文：二十一日，因何铸为救援岳飞说过话，不主张议和，贬降为秘书少监，徽州居住。
English: On the twenty-first day, he was demoted to the position of secretary and junior superintendent, and he lived in Huizhou.

古文：甲申，皇太后生辰，上寿于慈宁宫。
现代文：二十五日，皇太后生日，在慈宁宫祝寿。
English: On the 25th, the birthday of the Empress Dowager, she celebrated her birthday at the Jining Palace.

古文：丁亥，置福建路提举茶事司。
现代文：二十八日，设置福建路提举茶事司。
English: On the 28th, the Fujian Road Promotion Tea Affairs Division was set up.

古文：十一月癸巳，枢密使张俊罢，进封清河郡王。
现代文：十一月初五，枢密使张俊被罢，进封清河郡王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the envoy Zhang Jun was ousted and sent to Qinghe County.

古文：以左司郎中李椿年为两浙转运副使，专治经界。
现代文：任命左司郎李椿年为两浙转运副使，专门管理经界事务。
English: He appointed his left-hand man, Li Qin Rong, as the deputy envoy for transit of goods between the two Zhejiang provinces, specializing in the management of economic affairs.

古文：乙未，加杨存中少保。
现代文：初七，杨存中加衔少保。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, Yang Cunzhong was promoted to the junior high school.

古文：己亥，禁贬谪人私至行在。
现代文：十一日，禁止贬滴官吏私自到行在。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was forbidden for officials to come and go in private.

古文：庚子，作崇政、垂拱二殿。
现代文：十二日，修建崇政、垂拱二殿。
English: On the 12th, the construction of the two halls of the Su Zheng and the Hanging Arch.

古文：辛丑，刘光世薨。
现代文：十三日，刘光世逝世。
English: On the 13th, Liu Guangxi passed away.

古文：壬寅，曾祖姑秦、鲁国大长公主薨。
现代文：十四日，曾祖姑秦、鲁国大长公主逝世。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandmother Qin, the eldest princess of the State of Lu, passed away.

古文：丙午，尹焞卒。
现代文：十八日，尹笋享逝世。
English: On the 18th, Yin Xingxiang passed away.

古文：庚戌，孟忠厚罢。
现代文：二十二日，孟忠厚被罢。
English: On the 22nd, Meng Zhonghou was dismissed.

古文：左承事郎张戒坐党赵鼎、岳飞停官。
现代文：左承事郎张戒因替赵鼎、岳飞辩护被停官。
English: Zuo Zhengjiro Zhang Kai was suspended for defending Zhao Ding and Yue Fei.

古文：辛亥，遣张中孚、中彦还金国。
现代文：二十三日，派张中孚、中彦回到金国。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Zhongfu and Zhong Yan were sent back to Jin.

古文：十二月甲子，诏侍从、监察御史已上、监司、郡守各举所知宗室。
现代文：十二月初六，下诏侍从、监察御史以上官员、监司、郡守分别推举所知宗室子弟。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, officials above the rank of attendants, supervisors, supervisors, and county governors were elected separately.

古文：丙寅，幸秦、鲁国大长公主第临奠，又幸刘光世第临奠。
现代文：初八，到秦、鲁国大长公主家里祭奠吊丧，又到刘光世家里吊丧。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a memorial service was held at the home of the eldest princess of the Qin and Lu Dynasties, and a memorial service was held at the home of Liu Guangxi.

古文：庚午，命太学弟子员以三百人为额。
现代文：十二日，命令太学学生数额为三百人。
English: On the 12th, the order was issued to increase the number of students to 300.

古文：壬申，秦桧上《六曹寺监通用敕令格式》。
现代文：十四日，秦桧进呈六曹寺监通用救令格鸯。
English: On the 14th, Qin Yujin presented the general relief order to the supervisors of six monasteries.

古文：癸酉，以李显忠为保信军节度使、御前选锋军统制，王进为御前诸军都统制。
现代文：十五日，任命李显忠为保信军节度使、御前先锋军统制，王进为御前各军都统制。
English: On the 15th, Li Xianzhong was appointed as the commander of the Hoxin Army and the commander of the vanguard army, and Wang Jin was appointed as the commander of all the armies in front of the emperor.

古文：是岁，断大辟二十四人。
现代文：这年，二十四人被处以死刑。
English: Twenty-four people were sentenced to death that year.

古文：十三年春正月戊戌，加上徽宗谥曰体神合道骏烈逊功圣文仁德宪慈显孝皇帝。
现代文：绍兴十三年春正月初十，加上徽宗溢号为体神合道骏烈逊功圣文仁德宪慈显孝皇帝。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the spring of the 13th year of Shaoxing, with the addition of the Huizong exclamation mark, he became the emperor of the gods, the Taoism, the martyrs, the saints, the literati, the constitutionalists, the benevolent, and the virtuous.

古文：己亥，亲飨太庙，奉上册宝。
现代文：十一日，亲自到太庙合祭先祖，奉上册宝。
English: On the 11th day, he personally went to the Great Temple to hold a memorial service for his ancestors and presented the treasures.

古文：癸卯，增建国子监太学。
现代文：十五日，扩建国子监太学。
English: On the 15th, the expansion of Kuniko Juntai School began.

古文：乙巳，复兼试进士经义、试赋。
现代文：十七日，恢复兼试进士经义、诗赋。
English: On the seventeenth day, the reinstatement of part-time probationary students of classics and poetry.

古文：二月壬戌，初御前殿，特引四参官起居。
现代文：二月初四，到前殿，特地要四名参官跟随起居。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, he went to the front hall and specifically asked four councilors to follow him.

古文：甲子，制郊庙社稷祭器。
现代文：初六，制造郊庙社翟祭器。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, he began to make sacrificial vessels for a suburban temple.

古文：乙丑，更永固陵曰永祐。
现代文：初七，永固陵改称永陵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Yonggu Mausoleum was renamed Yongling Mausoleum.

古文：丙寅，封韩世忠咸安郡王。
现代文：初八，封韩世忠为咸安郡王。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Han Shizhong was crowned King of Xi'an County.

古文：乙亥，蠲雷、化等十州免行钱。
现代文：十七日，免除雷、化等十州免行钱。
English: On the 17th, ten prefectures such as Min, Hebei and Hebei were exempted from the tax.

古文：丙子，造金、象、革、木四辂。
现代文：十八日，制造金、象、革、木四格。
English: On the eighteenth day, four cases of gold, elephant, leather, and wood were made.

古文：庚辰，立太学及科举试法。
现代文：二十二日，确立太学及科举考试法。
English: On the 22nd, the Taixue and Keju Examination Law was established.

古文：辛巳，秘书少监秦熺修《建炎以来日历》成。
现代文：二十三日，秘书少监秦嬉修撰成健炎以来日厉。
English: On the 23rd, the secretary, Junior Supervisor Qin Qixiu, was drafted into Jianyan and has been working hard ever since.

古文：乙酉，建景灵宫，奉安累朝神御。
现代文：二十七日，修建景灵宫，把历朝神主迁庙到景灵宫。
English: On the 27th, the construction of Jingling Palace was completed, and the main temple of the deities of all dynasties was moved to Jingling Palace.

古文：三月己亥，造卤簿仪仗。
现代文：三月十二日，制造卤簿仪仗。
English: On the 12th of March, the production of the half-timbered book became a ceremonial act.

古文：乙巳，建社稷坛。
现代文：十八日，修建社翟坛。
English: On the 18th, the altar was built.

古文：丙午，筑圜丘。
现代文：十九日，筑建祭祀用的高台圆丘。
English: On the 19th, the construction of the high circular mound for the ritual ended.

古文：振淮南饥民。
现代文：贩济淮南饥民。
English: Vendors hand out food to the hungry in Huainan.

古文：仍禁遏籴。
现代文：依然禁止遏来。
English: The ban remains in place.

古文：夏四月癸亥，颁乡饮酒仪于郡国。
现代文：夏四月初六，向全国颁布乡饮酒仪。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, the township alcohol meter was promulgated to the whole country.

古文：甲戌，毁狱吏讯囚非法之具。
现代文：十七日，毁除狱吏讯审囚犯的非法刑具。
English: On the 17th, the illegal torture instruments used by prison officials to interrogate prisoners were destroyed.

古文：闰月己丑，立贵妃吴氏为皇后。
现代文：闰四月初二，立贵妃吴氏为皇后。
English: On the second day of the fourth lunar month, Guifei Wu was crowned empress.

古文：戊申，命史馆编《靖康建炎忠义录》。
现代文：二十一日，命令史馆编撰睛康建炎忠义录。
English: On the 21st, he ordered the history museum to compile a record of Kang Jianyuan's loyalty.

古文：庚戌，杨政入见，加检校少保，赐田五十顷。
现代文：二十三日，杨政朝见高宗，加衔检校少保，赐给五十顷田地。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Zemin met with Gao Zong, promoted him to the rank of school inspector, and gave him 50 hectares of farmland.

古文：壬子，蠲诸路无名月桩钱。
现代文：二十五日，免除各路无名月桩钱。
English: On the 25th, all roads will be exempted from the nameless monthly pile.

古文：乙卯，王次翁罢。
现代文：二十八日，王次翁被罢官。
English: On the 28th, Wang Jiong was dismissed.

古文：五月甲子，张九成坐党赵鼎，南安军居住。
现代文：五月初八，张九成因与赵鼎为同党，贬为南安军居住。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month, Zhang Jucheng was demoted to the Nan'an Army for being a member of the same party as Zhao Ding.

古文：壬申，置国子博士、正、录。
现代文：十六日，设置国子博士、正、录。
English: On the 16th, Dr. Kuniko was promoted to full professor.

古文：乙亥，命诸路置放生池。
现代文：十九日，命令各路设置放生池。
English: On the 19th, all roads were ordered to set up release ponds.

古文：丁丑，天申节，始上寿锡宴如故事。
现代文：二十一日，天申节，开始像原来的制度一样祝寿赐宴。
English: On the twenty-first day, Tenshin-sai, the celebration of birthdays and anniversaries began as in the old system.

古文：六月壬戌，禁三衙及诸军市易，月增将官供给钱有差。
现代文：六月壬戊日，禁止三衙和各军从事商业贸易，每月增加将官供给钱不等。
English: On the 3rd day of June, the Three Gorges Dam and the military were prohibited from engaging in commercial trade, and the supply of money to generals was increased every month.

古文：壬寅，程克俊罢，以万俟禼兼权签书枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，程克俊被罢职，任命万侯兼代理签书枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Cheng Kedong was dismissed from his post and appointed Wan Hou and Acting Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：戊申，诏诸路提刑岁举部内廉明平恕狱官。
现代文：二十三日，下诏各路提刑每年推举管辖区内廉洁公正的狱官。
English: On the 23rd, the following decreed that each province should annually nominate a clean and fair prison officer within its jurisdiction.

古文：庚戌，金遣洪皓、张邵、朱弁来归。
现代文：二十五日，金国派洪皓、张邵、朱弃回国。
English: On the 25th, Jin Guo sent Hong Qi, Zhang Shao and Zhu Xi to return to China.

古文：秋七月甲子，诏求遗书。
现代文：秋七月初九，下诏寻访搜罗遗亡书籍。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, the next imperial edict was issued to search for and collect lost books.

古文：罢捕贼补官格。
现代文：废罢捕贼补官格。
English: Abolish strikes to catch thieves and make up official ranks.

古文：丙寅，处州兵士杨兴等谋作乱，事觉伏诛。
现代文：十一日，处州兵士杨兴等策划叛乱，事情被发觉，被处以死刑。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the soldiers Yang Xing and others plotted a rebellion, the matter was discovered, and they were sentenced to death.

古文：戊辰，置诸州铜作务。
现代文：十三日，设置各州铜作务。
English: On the 13th, each state was set up for copper work.

古文：壬申，雨雹。
现代文：十七日，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the new year, hail fell.

古文：蠲浙西贫民逋负丁盐钱。
现代文：免除浙西贫民拖欠官府的丁盐钱。
English: The poor people in western Zhejiang will be exempted from the arrears of ding salt money owed to the government.

古文：八月丙戌，遣吏部侍郎江邈奉迎累朝神御于温州。
现代文：八月初二，派吏部侍郎江邀到温州奉迎历朝神主。
English: On the second day of the first month of August, he sent his servant, Lang Jiang, to Wenzhou to welcome the emperor.

古文：丁亥，命诸路有出身监司一员提举学事。
现代文：初三，命令各路有出身的监司一人提举学事。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the superintendent of each school was ordered to nominate a student.

古文：戊戌，洪皓至自金国，入见。
现代文：十四日，洪皓从金国回国，朝见高宗。
English: On the 14th, Hong Qi returned from Jin and met with Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：己亥，遣郑朴等使金贺正旦，王师心等贺金主生辰。
现代文：十五日，派郑朴等出使金国，祝贺正旦，王师心等人祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 15th, Zheng Pu and others sent envoys to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, Wang Shixin and others to congratulate Kim Guo's birthday.

古文：郑刚中献黄金万两。
现代文：郑刚中献一万两黄金。
English: Zheng Gang donated 10,000 taels of gold.

古文：辛丑，复昌化、万安、吉阳军。
现代文：十七日，恢复昌化、万安、吉阳军。
English: On the 17th, the troops of Changhua, Wan'an and Jiyang were restored.

古文：知阶州田晟将所部三千人赴行在。
现代文：阶州知州田晨率所部三千人到行在。
English: Chaozhou, Chizhou, Tiancheng, the headquarters of three thousand people came to the line.

古文：丁未，以晟主管侍卫马军司公事，其众隶焉。
现代文：二十三日，任命田晨主管侍卫马军司公事，他的部众仍隶属他。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Tian Chen to be in charge of the bodyguards, horses, and military affairs. His subordinates are still subordinate to him.

古文：己酉，加钱愐太尉。
现代文：二十五日，加给钱雨太尉衔。
English: On the 25th, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of Qianyu.

古文：庚戌，诏监司、守臣讲求恤民事宜。
现代文：二十六日，下诏监司、守臣讲求恤民事宜。
English: On the 26th day of the month, the overseer of the imperial edict and the courtier discussed the civil suit.

古文：九月丁巳，宗室子偁卒于秀州。
现代文：九月初四，宗室赵子翱在秀州逝世。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Zhao Zixuan passed away in Xiuzhou.

古文：甲子，洪皓出知饶州。
现代文：十一日，洪皓出任饶州知州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hong Hao took up the post of Raozhou Chizhou.

古文：戊辰，命诸路置敦宗院。
现代文：十五日，命令各路设置敦宗院。
English: On the fifteenth day, he ordered all roads to be set up with Dunsoin.

古文：己巳，诏淮东、京西监司岁终上州县所增户口，为守令殿最。
现代文：十六日，诏令淮东、京西监司每年年终上报州县所增长的户口数，作为考核守令政绩好坏的依据。
English: On the 16th, the Huaidong and West Beijing Supervision Departments were ordered to report the growth of the number of household accounts to the prefectural and county governments at the end of each year, as a basis for assessing the performance of the government.

古文：庚午，以兵部侍郎司马朴死节，赠兵部尚书，赐其家银绢。
现代文：十七日，因兵部侍郎司马朴为国捐躯，赠给兵部尚书职衔，赐给他家银绢。
English: On the seventeenth day, because the attendant of the military department, Sima Pu, sacrificed his life for the country, he gave the military department the title of Shangshu, and gave his family silver ingots.

古文：癸酉，诏诸州守、贰提举学事，县令、佐主管学事。
现代文：二十日，下诏各州正副长官提举学事，县令、佐主管学事。
English: On the 20th, the heads and deputy heads of each prefecture were asked to nominate academic affairs, and the county magistrates and sub-prefects were asked to nominate academic affairs.

古文：戊寅，蠲淮南逋欠坊场钱及上供帛。
现代文：二十五日，免除淮南拖欠的坊场钱和上供帛。
English: On the 25th, Huainan was exempted from the arrears of the market money and the up-front payment.

古文：冬十月己丑，秦桧上《监学敕令格式》。庚寅，制浑天仪。
现代文：冬十月初六，秦桧进呈监学救令格鸯。初七，制作浑天仪。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, Qin Yujin submitted the supervision and rescue order. On the 7th day of the first month, he made the Hun Tian instrument.

古文：乙未，奉安累朝帝后神御于景灵宫。
现代文：十二日，把历朝帝后神主恭敬安置在景灵宫。
English: On the twelfth day, the deity was respectfully placed in the Jingling Palace.

古文：十一月庚申，日南至，合祀天地于圜丘，太祖、太守并配，大赦。
现代文：十一月初八，冬至日，在圆丘合祭天地，以太祖、太宗配享，大赦全国。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, the winter solstice, at the round mound, the heavens and the earth will be joined in a festival.

古文：十二月癸未朔，日食，云阴不见。
现代文：十二月初一，日食，阴云密布看不见。
English: On the first day of December, the sun eclipsed, obscured by clouds.

古文：辛卯，毁私铸毛钱。
现代文：初九，毁掉私铸的劣质小钱。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, destroy the privately minted low-quality coins.

古文：癸巳，建秘书省。
现代文：十一日，修建秘书省。
English: On the 11th, the Ministry of Construction Secretary left.

古文：丁酉，增太学弟子员二百。
现代文：十五日，增加太学生员二百名。
English: On the 15th, the number of students was increased by two hundred.

古文：己亥，郭浩入见。
现代文：十七日，郭浩朝见高宗。
English: On the 17th, Guo Hao met with Gao Zong in the morning.

古文：丁未，命行在宗子入宫学。
现代文：二十五日，命令行在宗室子弟进人宫学。
English: On the 25th, he ordered his son to enter the Imperial Academy.

古文：己酉，金遣完颜晔等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣完颜哗等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Jong-un sent a delegation of senior officials to congratulate the upcoming Chinese New Year.

古文：是月，始颁来岁历于诸路监司、守臣。
现代文：这个月，开始向各路监司、守臣颁布来年历。
English: This month, the calendar for the coming year began to be promulgated to supervisors and retainers of all roads.

古文：是岁，关外初行营田。
现代文：这一年，关外开始实行营田。
English: In this year, yakitori began to be practiced outside of Kansai.

古文：十四年春正月丁巳，遣罗汝楫等报谢金国。
现代文：绍兴十四年春正月初五，派遣罗汝揖等人答谢金国。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the 14th year of Shaoxing Spring, Luo Ruxuan and others were sent to thank Jin Guo.

古文：甲子，临安府火。
现代文：十二日，临安府火灾。
English: On the 12th, a fire broke out in Lin'an.

古文：戊寅，命普安郡王为子侢解官持服。
现代文：二十六日，命令普安郡王为子翱解官守丧。
English: On the 26th, he ordered the King of Pu'an County to hold a memorial service for his son.

古文：二月丁亥，复置靖州新民学。
现代文：二月初六，重新设置靖州新民学。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, the new public school in Jingzhou was re-established.

古文：癸巳，蠲江、浙诸路逋欠钱帛。
现代文：十二日，免除江、浙各路拖欠官府的钱帛。
English: On the 12th, all roads in Jiangsu and Zhejiang were exempted from arrears of government money.

古文：戊戌，初命四川都转运司岁拨总制司钱百七十三万缗，市绢绵输于鄂州总领所。
现代文：十七日，初次下命四川都转运司每年拨总制司钱一百七十三万络，购买绸绢绵输纳鄂州总领所。
English: On the 17th, for the first time, the Sichuan Metropolitan Transportation Department was ordered to allocate a total of 1.73 million rupees annually to purchase silk and satin fabrics for the Nakhon Ratchasima Consulate General.

古文：丙午，罢万俟禼。
现代文：二十五日，罢除万侯。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, ten thousand vassals were dismissed.

古文：定宗学生额为百员。
现代文：确定宗学生员为一百名。
English: It was determined that the number of students would be one hundred.

古文：己酉，以资政殿学士楼炤签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十八日，任命资政殿学士楼招为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 28th, the Vice-President of the Privy Council and Acting Vice-President of the Privy Council was appointed.

古文：加郭浩检校少保。
现代文：加给郭浩检校少保职衔。
English: Give Guo Hao Jian the title of Junior Security Guard.

古文：三月乙卯，蠲江、浙、京、湖积欠上供钱米。
现代文：三月初四，免除江、浙、京、湖多年拖欠的上供钱米。
English: On the fourth day of the third month, the rice that has been in arrears for many years was exempted from Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Beijing and Hubei.

古文：丁卯，避金太祖嫌名，改岷州为西和州，川、陕宣抚司为四川宣抚司。
现代文：十六日，回避金太祖名讳，改崛州为西和州，川、陕宣抚司为四川宣抚司。
English: On the 16th, he evaded the name of King Taizu and changed Horizhou to Xihe, and the Sichuan and Shaanxi missions to Sichuan.

古文：己巳，幸太学。
现代文：十八日，到太学。
English: On the 18th, I went to Taigaku.

古文：蠲汀、漳、泉、建四州经贼残蹂民户赋役一年。
现代文：免除汀、漳、泉、建四州遭受盗贼残破践踏民户赋役一年。
English: Exempting Ting, Handan, Quan and Jian four prefectures from being trampled by thieves for one year.

古文：壬申，解潜坐党赵鼎，责授濠州团练副使、南安军安置。
现代文：二十一日，解潜因替赵鼎说话，贬降为壕州团练副使，南安军安置。
English: On the twenty-first day, because he spoke for Zhao Ding, he was demoted to the vice-envoy of Hezhou Reunification, and the Nan'an Army was resettled.

古文：己卯，诏举贤良。
现代文：二十八日，下诏征举贤良。
English: On the 28th, the next imperial edict was issued to recruit virtuous people.

古文：夏四月甲申，诏刑部及监司决绝滞讼。
现代文：夏四月初三，下诏刑部和监司处理积滞案件。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the Criminal Investigation Department and the Supervision Department will deal with the backlog of cases.

古文：丁亥，初禁野史。
现代文：初六，初次严禁野史。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, it is strictly forbidden to do field history for the first time.

古文：虔州民析其屋，朽柱中有文曰 天下太平年 。
现代文：虔州百姓拆房屋，朽柱中出现 天下太平年 的文字。
English: The people of Qianzhou were tearing down houses, and the words "The Year of the Great Peace" appeared in the rotting pillars.

古文：甲午，金人来求淮北人之在南者，诏原者听还。
现代文：十三日，金国派人来要求在淮南的淮北人回去，高宗下诏愿意回去者允许归还。
English: On the 13th, Jin Guo sent someone to ask the Huaibei people in Huainan to return, and Gao Zong issued an edict to allow those who wished to return to do so.

古文：遣马军司统领张守忠讨海贼朱明。
现代文：派马军司统领张守忠讨伐海贼朱明。
English: He sent Zhang Shouzhong, the commander of the Horse Division, to fight the pirate Zhu Ming.

古文：五月丙辰，诏阶、成、西和、凤四州募兵赴行在。
现代文：五月初六，下诏阶、成、西和、凤四州招募兵士前往行在。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the lunar calendar, soldiers from four prefectures, namely, Zhudao, Chengdu, Xihe and Feng, were recruited and sent to the front.

古文：甲子，楼炤罢。
现代文：十四日，楼招被罢。
English: On the 14th, the notice was removed.

古文：乙丑，以御史中丞李文会签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十五日，任命御史中承李文会为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：丙寅，婺州大水。
现代文：十六日，姿州发大水。
English: On the 16th, there was a big flood in Zizhou.

古文：己巳，金始遣乌延和等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金朝开始派乌延和等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, the Kim dynasty began to send Wu Yanhe and others to congratulate the Tianshin Festival.

古文：辛未，楚州盐城县海水清。
现代文：二十一日，楚州盐城县海水清亮。
English: On the 21st, the sea water in Yancheng County, Chuzhou, was clear.

古文：是月，严、信、衢、建四州水。
现代文：这个月，严、信、瞥、建四州发生水灾。
English: This month, floods occurred in four prefectures: Yan, Xin, Biao and Jian.

古文：六月甲申，蠲江、浙州县酒税、坊场、纲运、仓库积年逋负。
现代文：六月初四，免除江、浙州县酒税、坊场、纲运、仓库多年拖欠。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the liquor tax of Jiangsu and Zhejiang counties, and the liquor tax of workshops, warehouses and warehouses were exempted from years of arrears.

古文：孙近再夺三官，移南安军居住。
现代文：孙近再次被削夺三官，贬移南安军居住。
English: Once again, Sun Chian was stripped of his three posts and exiled to live with the Nan'an Army.

古文：丁亥，加高世则少保。
现代文：初七，加给高世则少保职衔。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, senior high school students are given the title of junior high school students.

古文：戊子，安南国入贡。
现代文：初八，安南国来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Annan Province came to pay tribute.

古文：癸巳，宣州泾县妖贼俞一作乱，守臣捕灭之。
现代文：十三日，宣州径县妖贼俞一叛乱，守臣捕获消灭了他。
English: On the thirteenth day, the Xuanzhou Jian County bandits staged a rebellion, and Shoucheng captured and eliminated him.

古文：乙未，振江、浙、福建被水之民。
现代文：十五日，贩济江、浙、福建遭水灾的民户。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, people from Jijiang, Zhejiang, and Fujian suffered from floods.

古文：丙申，内侍白鄂坐诽谤，及其客张伯麟俱黥配吉阳军。
现代文：十六日，内侍白鄂因诽谤罪，与他的门客张伯麟都被刺配吉阳军。
English: On the 16th, because of the crime of defamation, Bai E, the chambermaid, and his protégé, Zhang Bolin, were both stabbed to death by the Jiyang Army.

古文：特赠子偁太子少师，官给葬事。
现代文：特地赠给赵子翱太子少师职衔，官府出钱物为他安葬。
English: Zhao Zixuan was specially given the title of young teacher, and the government provided money for his burial.

古文：庚子，夺万俟禼三官、归州居住。
现代文：二十日，万侯被削夺三官，贬归州居住。
English: On the 20th, Wan Hou was stripped of his three official positions and was forced to live in the state.

古文：乙巳，置国子监小学。
现代文：二十五日，设置国子监小学。
English: On the 25th, the primary school of the State Children's Supervisor was established.

古文：秋七月戊午，金人杀王伦于河间府。
现代文：秋七月初九，金军在河间府杀王伦。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Chinese army killed Wang Lun in Hema Prefecture.

古文：丙寅，立明法科兼经法。
现代文：十七日，确立明法科兼经法。
English: On the 17th, it was established that both the Department of Law and the Department of Law were established.

古文：丙子，幸秘书省。
现代文：二十七日，高宗到秘书省。
English: On the 27th, Gao Zong went to the Ministry of Secretaries.

古文：八月癸未，抚州献瑞禾。
现代文：八月初四，抚州献纳嘉禾。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th lunar month, Fuzhou donated Jiahe.

古文：庚寅，以李椿年权户部侍郎，仍治经界。
现代文：十一日，任命李椿年代理户部侍郎，仍管理经界。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Qin was appointed as the steward of the household management department, and still managed the economic circle.

古文：乙未，遣林保使金贺正旦，宋之才贺金主生辰。
现代文：十六日，派遣林保出使金朝祝贺正旦，宋之才祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 16th, Lin Bao sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to congratulate Zhengdan, and Song Zhicai congratulated Kim on his birthday.

古文：九月辛酉，分利州为东、西路，以吴璘为利州西路安抚使，杨政利州东路安抚使。
现代文：九月十三日，利州划分为东、西路，任命吴瞒为利州西路安抚使，杨政为利州东路安抚使。
English: On September 13th, Lizhou was divided into East Road and West Road, and Wu Zhen was appointed as the West Road Pacification Commissioner of Lizhou, and Yang Zheng was appointed as the East Road Pacification Commissioner of Lizhou.

古文：甲子，命郡守终更入见，各举所部县令一人。
现代文：十六日，命令郡守任期满更换官职前到朝廷晋见皇上，分别推举所部县令一人。
English: On the 16th, he ordered the county governors to go to the imperial court to present themselves to the emperor before the expiration of their term of office.

古文：壬申，赵鼎移吉阳军安置。
现代文：二十四日，赵鼎贬移吉阳军安置。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Ding transferred the Jiyang Army and resettled them.

古文：癸酉，命临安府索蔡京子孙逮赴贬所，遇赦永不量移。
现代文：二十五日，命令临安府搜索蔡京的子孙，逮捕送往贬所，遇到赦免永远不酌情移近安置。
English: On the 25th, Lin'an Prefecture was ordered to search for Cai Jing's children and grandchildren, arrest them and send them to a detention center. If they were pardoned, they would never be allowed to move closer to resettlement.

古文：冬十月甲午，从右正言何若言，请戒内外师儒之官，黜伊川程氏之学。
现代文：冬十月十七日，采纳右正言何若的意见，请戒除朝廷内外师儒之官，罢默伊川程氏之学。
English: On the 17th day of the 10th month in winter, adopting the opinion of Ujishogen He Ryo, please banish the officials who taught Confucianism inside and outside the imperial court, and silence the learning of Ikawa Cho.

古文：乙未，加韦渊少师。
现代文：十八日，加给韦渊少师职衔。
English: On the 18th, Wei Yuan was given the title of junior teacher.

古文：己亥，以永、道、郴三州、桂阳监及茶陵县民多不举子，永蠲其身丁钱绢米麦。
现代文：二十二日，因为永、道、郴三州和桂阳监、茶陵县百姓大多数不养育子女，永远免除他们的身丁钱、绢、米、麦。
English: On the 22nd, because the majority of people in Yong, Dao, Handan, Guiyang, and Chaling counties do not raise children, they are forever exempted from paying money, money, rice, and wheat.

古文：十一月甲子，复内教，即禁中阅试三衙将士。
现代文：十一月十七日，恢复在皇城内训练士兵，同时在皇宫检阅考试三衙将士。
English: On November 17th, the training of soldiers in the imperial city resumed, and at the same time, the examination of three-star generals was reviewed in the imperial palace.

古文：癸酉，李光移琼州安置。
现代文：二十六日，李光移往琼州安置。
English: On the 26th, Li Guang moved to Qiongzhou for resettlement.

古文：乙亥，朱胜非薨。
现代文：二十八日，朱胜非逝世。
English: On the 28th, Zhu Shengfei passed away.

古文：十二月丁丑朔，潼川府路转运判官宋苍舒献嘉禾一茎九穗。
现代文：十二月初一，撞川府路转运判官宋苍舒献纳一茎九穗的嘉禾。
English: On the first day of December, Song Cangshu, the judge of Chuanshan Road Transportation, donated one stem of nine ears of Jiahe.

古文：己卯，命诸郡收养老疾贫乏之民，复置漏泽园，葬死而无归者。
现代文：初三，命令各郡收养老病贫穷百姓，重新设置漏泽园，埋葬死了没有人认领回家的尸体。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered all counties to collect old-age sick and poor people, re-establish the leaking garden, and bury the dead bodies that no one claimed to return home.

古文：丁酉，李文会罢，寻责筠州居住。
现代文：二十一日，李文会被罢，不久贬降箔州居住。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Wenkai was ousted, and soon after, he was demoted to live in Foozhou.

古文：庚子，以御史中丞杨愿签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十四日，任命御史中承杨愿为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the appointment of the history of the succession of Yang is willing to be the signatory of the Privy Council and the acting governor.

古文：癸卯，金遣孛散温等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金朝派遣李散温等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the Kim dynasty sent Li Sanwen and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是月，汀贼华齐寇漳州长泰县，安抚司遣兵捕之，为所败，将佐赵成等死之。
现代文：这个月，汀州贼华齐寇掠漳州长泰县，安抚司派兵捉拿他，被贼打败，将佐赵成等人战死。
English: This month, the thief Hua Qiqo of Tingzhou plundered the governor of Tai County, and the pacification department sent soldiers to capture him. He was defeated by the thief, and Zao Zhaocheng and others were killed in battle.

古文：是岁，四川宣抚司始取民户称提钱岁四十万缗，以备军费。
现代文：这一年，四川宣抚司开始征取民户称提钱每年四十万络，用来备做军费开支。
English: That year, the Sichuan Publicity Department began to collect 400,000 rupees per year from private households, which was used to prepare for military expenditure.

古文：十五年春正月丁未朔，御大庆殿，初行大朝会礼。
现代文：绍兴十五年春正月初一，到大庆殿，初次实行大朝会礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the 15th year of Shaoxing in the spring, he went to the Daqing Hall to perform the Grand Morning Ceremony for the first time.

古文：戊申，泸南安抚使冯楫献嘉禾。
现代文：初二，沪南安抚使冯揖贡献嘉禾。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, the pacification of Shanghai and South Korea made Feng Jun contribute to Jiahe.

古文：己未，分经义、诗赋为两科取士。
现代文：十三日，分经义、诗赋为两科取士。
English: On the 13th, the division of the sutras and poems into two subjects began.

古文：辛酉，初置籍田。
现代文：十五日，初次设置籍田。
English: On the fifteenth day, the first registration fields were set up.

古文：丁卯，减成都府路对籴米三之一、宣抚司激赏钱三十万缗。
现代文：二十一日，减除成都府路对来米三分之一和宣抚司激赏钱三十万络。
English: On the 21st, the Chengdu prefectural road was reduced by one-third and the reward money of the Publicity Department was 300,000 rupees.

古文：戊辰，命户部侍郎王鈇措置两浙经界。
现代文：二十二日，命令户部侍郎王铁处理两浙经界。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Wang Tie, the steward of the household, to deal with the two Zhejiang provinces.

古文：辛未，初命僧道纳免丁钱。
现代文：二十五日，初次命令僧道缴纳免丁钱。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the first order was given to the monks to pay free money.

古文：二月戊寅，增太学弟子员百人。
现代文：二月初二，增加太学弟子名额一百名。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the number of Taigaku disciples was increased by one hundred.

古文：乙未，诏州县科折之数，第三等户毋或均配。
现代文：十九日，下诏：州县科折赋税数额，第五等户不要平均分配。
English: On the 19th, the following edict: the amount of state and county tax rebates will be increased, and the fifth-class households should not be evenly distributed.

古文：己亥，封崇国公璩为恩平郡王，出就第。
现代文：二十三日，封崇国公赵朦为恩平郡王，搬出皇宫居住。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Miao, the Prince of Chong Guo, was named the King of Enping County and moved out of the palace to live.

古文：三月甲子，遣敷文阁待制周襟、马观国、史愿、诸将程师回、马钦、白常皆还金国。
现代文：三月十九日，遣送敷文阁待制周襟、马观国、史愿和将领程师回、马钦、白常都回金国。
English: On March 19th, Shikibunkaku sent Zhou Er, Ma Guo Guo, Shi Zheng, and the generals Cheng Shi Hui, Ma Qin, and Baizhang back to Jin.

古文：夏四月丙子朔，赐秦桧第一区。
现代文：夏四月初一，赐给秦桧住宅一幢。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, a new house was given to Qin Hui.

古文：戊寅，彗星出东方。
现代文：初三，彗星在东方出现。
English: On the third day of the first month, a comet appeared in the east.

古文：癸未，避殿减膳，命监司、郡守条上便民事宜，提刑巡行决狱。
现代文：初八，不上殿减少饮食，命令监司、郡守陈述便民事项，提刑巡视处理案件。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he did not go to the hall to reduce the diet, ordered the supervisor and the county governor to report the convenience of the people, and raised the punishment inspection to deal with the case.

古文：赐礼部进士刘章以下三百人及第、出身。
现代文：赐礼部进士刘章以下三百人及第、出身。
English: The 300 members of the Ceremonial Department, including Liu Zhang, are from the following provinces and regions.

古文：丁亥，以彗出，大赦。
现代文：十二日，因彗星出现举行大赦。
English: On the 12th, due to the appearance of the comet, an amnesty was held.

古文：癸巳，彗没。
现代文：十八日，彗星消失。
English: On the 18th, the comet disappeared.

古文：甲午，遣后军统制张渊讨捕福建盗贼。
现代文：十九日，派后军统制张渊讨伐捕捉福建盗贼。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Yuan, the commander-in-chief, sent his troops to fight and capture the Fujian thieves.

古文：庚子，罢四川都转运司。
现代文：二十五日，罢除四川都转运司。
English: On the 25th, the Sichuan Metropolitan Transportation Department was dismissed.

古文：五月丙辰，客星见。
现代文：五月十一日，客星出现。
English: On May 11, a guest star appeared.

古文：戊午，命贫民产子赐义仓米一斛。
现代文：十三日，命令贫民生了子女赐给一解义仓米。
English: On the thirteenth day, the poor were ordered to have children and give them a gift of rice.

古文：六月乙亥朔，日有食之。丁丑，幸秦桧第。
现代文：十九日，金国派遣完颜宗尹等人来祝贺天申节。六月初一，日食。初三，到秦桧家。
English: On the 19th, after sending Yan Zongyin and others to congratulate the Tenshin Festival, the first day of the first month of June, the solar eclipse, and the third day of the first month, they went to Qin Yu's house.

古文：乙酉，加桧妻妇子孙官封。
现代文：十一日，加给秦桧妻妇子孙官职和封爵。
English: On the 11th, Qin Yu's wife, children and grandchildren were given official positions and knighthoods.

古文：丁亥，客星没。
现代文：十三日，客星消失。
English: On the 13th, the guest star disappeared.

古文：秋七月戊申，复置利州铸钱监。
现代文：秋七月初四，重新设置利州铸钱监。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Lishu Mint Supervisor was re-established.

古文：戊午，命监司审查县令治状显著及老懦不职者，上其名以为黜陟。
现代文：十四日，命令监司审查考核县令治绩显著和老弱不称职的人，上报姓名作为升降的依据。
English: On the 14th, the Supervision Division was ordered to review and appraise the county's outstanding performance and incompetent people, and report their names as the basis for promotion and demotion.

古文：蠲庐、光二州上供钱米一年。
现代文：免除庐州、光州一年上供钱米。
English: Exempting Ganzhou and Gwangju from the annual supply of rice.

古文：丁卯，免汀、漳二州秋税及处州三县被水民家绢，鄂州旧额绢各一年。
现代文：二十三日，免除汀、漳二州秋税以及处州三县遭受水灾民户绸绢，鄂州旧额绢各一年。
English: On the 23rd, the autumn tax of Ting and Guizhou was exempted for one year, and the autumn tax of the three counties in Guizhou was exempted for one year, and the autumn tax of the three counties in Guizhou was exempted for one year.

古文：己巳，蠲四川转运司积贷常平钱十三万缗。
现代文：二十五日，免除四川转运司积贷常平钱十三万络。
English: On the 25th, the Sichuan Transportation Department was exempted from the loan of 130,000 rupees.

古文：八月申戌朔，禁收折帛合零钱，止输实数。
现代文：八月初一，禁止收取折帛合零就整钱，只缴纳应该输纳的实际数额。
English: On the first day of August, it is forbidden to collect the equivalent amount of money, and only pay the actual amount that should be paid.

古文：乙亥，蠲京西路请佃田租及州县场务税钱二年。
现代文：初二，免除京西路请佃田租及州县场务税钱二年。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the construction of the Beijing West Road will be exempted from farmland rent and state and county site management tax for two years.

古文：己亥，改诸路提举茶盐官为提举常平茶盐公事，川、广以宪臣兼领。
现代文：二十六日，各路提举茶盐官改为提举常平茶盐公事，川、广地区以宪臣兼管。
English: On the 26th, the nomination of tea and salt officials in each province was changed to the nomination of Changping tea and salt public affairs, and the Sichuan and Guangxi regions were concurrently managed by government officials.

古文：辛丑，复增太学弟子员二百。
现代文：二十八日，又增加太学弟子名额二百人。
English: On the 28th, the number of Taigaku disciples was increased by another 200 people.

古文：九月辛酉，遣钱周材使金贺正旦，严抑贺金主生辰。
现代文：九月十八日，派钱周材出使金国祝贺正旦，严抑祝贺金主生日。
English: On September 18th, Qian Zhou Zhai sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, and solemnly congratulated Kim Guo on his birthday.

古文：冬十月乙亥，帝书 一德格天之阁 赐秦桧，仍就第赐宴。
现代文：冬十月初三，高宗亲笔书写 一德格天之阁 赐给秦桧，并就第赐宴。
English: On the third day of the tenth month of winter, Gaozong personally wrote and gave the Dege Heavenly Pavilion to Qin Hui, and gave a banquet.

古文：丙子，杨愿罢。
现代文：初四，杨愿被罢。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Yang is willing to be expelled.

古文：癸未，以枢密都承旨李若谷签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十一日，任命枢密都承旨李若谷为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Ruogu, the Privy Councillor, was appointed as the Signatory Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor.

古文：武冈军徭人杨再兴降。
现代文：武冈军瑶人杨再兴投降。
English: Yang Zaixing, the leader of the Wugang Army, surrendered.

古文：庚寅，以翰林学士承旨秦熺为资政殿学士、提举万寿观兼侍读，恩数视执政。
现代文：十八日，任命翰林学士承旨秦嬉为资政殿学士、提举万寿观兼侍读，恩惠待遇如同执政。
English: On the 18th, Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Qin Rong was appointed as a Scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics, and he was also appointed as an attendant, and he was treated favorably as if he were in power.

古文：辛卯夜，雷。
现代文：十九日夜，打雷。
English: On the night of the 19th, there was thunder.

古文：癸巳，蠲安丰军上供钱米二年。
现代文：二十一日，免除安丰军二年的上供钱米。
English: On the 21st, the Anfeng Army was exempted from the two-year supply of rice.

古文：甲午，以汪勃言折彦质党赵鼎，郴州安置。
现代文：二十二日，因汪勃说折彦质与赵鼎是同党，遭到贬降，郴州安置。
English: On the 22nd, because Wang Bo said that Orihikosho and Zhao Ding were the same party, they were demoted and resettled in Zhangzhou.

古文：庚子，置四川宣抚司总领钱粮官。
现代文：二十八日，设置四川宣抚司总领钱粮官。
English: On the 28th, the chief cashier and food officer of the Sichuan Publicity and Relief Department was set up.

古文：辛丑，命秦熺班签书枢密之下。
现代文：二十九日，命令秦嬉的位次排在签书枢密院事之后。
English: On the 29th, he ordered Qin Qiao's rank to be next in line after the signing of the Privy Council.

古文：十一月甲辰，加钱忱少保，钱愐开府仪同三司。
现代文：十一月初三，加给钱忱少保职衔，钱圃为开府仪同三司。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Qian Zhen was given the title of Shao Bao, and Qian Po was promoted to the third division.

古文：丙辰，郭浩卒。
现代文：十五日，郭浩去世。
English: On the 15th, Guo Hao passed away.

古文：丙寅，全给秦桧岁赐公使钱万缗。
现代文：二十五日，供给秦桧岁赐公使钱一万络。
English: On the 25th, the amount of money offered to the Qin emperor was ten thousand rupees.

古文：闰月己卯，罢明法新科。
现代文：闰十一月初八，罢除明法新科。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month of the leap year, Mingfa New Science was abolished.

古文：十二月戊午，置江阴军市舶务。
现代文：十二月十八日，设置江阴军市舶务。
English: On December 18th, Jiangyin Military Shipbuilding Industry was established.

古文：甲子，命右司员外郎李朝正同措置经界。
现代文：二十四日，下令右司员外郎李朝正参与处理实行经界。
English: On the 24th, he ordered his right-hand man, his brother-in-law, Li Chaozheng, to participate in the implementation of the economic boundary.

古文：丁卯，金遣蒲察说等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣蒲察说等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim sent Putsa and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：十六年春正月戊子，增太学外舍生额至千人。
现代文：绍兴十六年春正月十八日，太学外舍生名额增加到一千人。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the 16th year of the Spring in Shaoxing, the number of foreign students at Taigaku increased to one thousand.

古文：癸丑，建秦桧家庙。三月庚午朔，建武学，置弟子员百人。
现代文：二十二日，高宗在东郊亲自祭祀农神，行籍田礼，拿着犁具推行九周，下诏告谕郡县劝农之意。二月初二，割让金州丰阳县、洋州乾县给金国。初三，毁除各路滥设的祠庙。
English: On the 22nd, Gaozong personally offered sacrifices to the farmer gods in the eastern suburbs, performed the registration and field rite, and carried out the nine weeks with the tools, and then issued an edict to the counties to persuade the farmers. On the second day of February, he ceded the Fengyang County and Yangzhou Qian County of Jinzhou to Jin Province. On the third day of the month, he destroyed the temples and shrines that were set up indiscriminately on various roads.

古文：辛卯，造秦桧家庙祭器。
现代文：三月初一，修建武学，弟子名额定为一百名。二十二日，制造秦桧家庙祭器。
English: On the first day of March, martial arts were established, and the number of disciples was set at one hundred. On the 22nd, the sacrificial vessels for the temple of the Qin Dynasty were made.

古文：乙未，增建太庙。
现代文：二十六日，护建太庙。
English: On the 26th, the construction of the Great Temple was completed.

古文：己亥，立淮东、江东、两浙、湖北州县岁较营田赏罚格。
现代文：三十日，确立淮东、江东、两浙、湖北州县，每年比较营田多少进行赏罚的标准和办法。
English: On the 30th, it established the standards and methods for rewarding and punishing Huadong, Jiangdong, two Zhejiang and Hubeizhou counties for the annual comparison of farmland.

古文：夏四月壬子，禁州县预借民税及和买钱。
现代文：夏四月十三日，禁止州县预借民税和和买钱。
English: On April 13 this summer, pre-borrowed tax money and money bought with pre-borrowed tax money from prefectures were prohibited.

古文：戊午，定选试武士弓马去留格。
现代文：十九日，确定挑选测试武士弓马去留的标准和办法。
English: On the 19th, the criteria and methods for selecting and testing samurai archers were determined.

古文：五月壬申，浚运河。
现代文：五月初四，疏浚运河。
English: On the fourth of May, the canal was dredged.

古文：命诸路漕臣兼提举学事。
现代文：命令各路槽臣兼提举学事。
English: He ordered all ministers to raise the issue of education.

古文：癸未，初作太庙祏室。
现代文：十五日，初次制作太庙藏神主的石匣。
English: On the 15th, for the first time, the stone box of the god of the temple was made.

古文：丙戌，作景钟。
现代文：十八日，制造景钟。
English: On the 18th, the bell was made.

古文：丁亥，金遣乌古论海等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派乌古论海等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Kim Guo sent Ugudonghai and others to congratulate the Tianshin Festival.

古文：六月，安南献驯象十。
现代文：六月，安南贡献十头驯象。
English: In June, Annan donated ten tamed elephants.

古文：秋七月壬申，以张浚上疏论时事，落节钺、连州居住。
现代文：秋七月初五，因张浚上疏议论时事，罢除节钱，连州居住。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of autumn, due to Zhang Jun's careless discussion of current affairs, he was expelled from the money-saving society and lived in Lianzhou.

古文：壬辰，立秘书省献书赏格。
现代文：二十五日，确立秘书省献纳书籍的奖赏标准和办法。
English: On the 25th, the reward standard and method for the donation of books by secretaries were established.

古文：丙申，复何铸为端明殿学士兼侍读。
现代文：二十九日，恢复何铸为端明殿学士兼侍读。
English: On the 29th, he was reinstated as a graduate and attendant of Duanming Palace.

古文：八月辛丑，筑高禖坛。
现代文：八月初四，修筑媒神坛。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, the construction of the media shrine began.

古文：壬子，遣边知白使金贺正旦，周执羔贺金主生辰。
现代文：十五日，派边知白出使金国祝贺正旦，周执羔祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 15th, Bianchi Bai sent an envoy to Jin Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, and Zhou Xilang congratulated Jin Guo on his birthday.

古文：九月甲戌，命何铸等为金国祈请使，请国族。
现代文：九月初七，命令何铸等人担任金国祈请使，迎请皇族。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, he ordered He Shou and others to serve as the envoys of the Golden National Prayer to welcome the royal family.

古文：甲午，赏统制张渊、韩京等讨捕福建、广东诸盗功，各进官有差。
现代文：二十七日，奖赏统制张渊、韩京等讨平捕获福建、广东各盗贼的功劳，分别升官不等。
English: On the 27th, the reward system Zhang Yuan, Han Jing, etc. were rewarded for their achievements in fighting and capturing the thieves in Fujian and Guangdong, and were promoted to different positions.

古文：冬十月戊戌，帝观新作礼器于射殿，撞景钟，奏新乐。
现代文：冬十月初二，高宗在射殿参观新制作的礼器，敲景钟，奏新乐。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, Gaozong visited the newly made ceremonial objects in the Hall of Fire, rang the bell, and played the new music.

古文：十一日丙子，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一月初十，在圆丘合祭天地，大赦全国。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of November, at the round mound festival, amnesty throughout the country.

古文：庚辰，罢州县新创税场。
现代文：十四日，废罢州县新创置的税场。
English: On the 14th, the newly created tax office in Bozhou County was abolished.

古文：癸未，复置御书院。
现代文：十七日，重新设置御书院。
English: On the 17th, Goshoin was re-established.

古文：己丑，加潘正夫少保。
现代文：二十三日，加给潘正夫少保职衔。
English: On the 23rd, Pan Zhengfu was given the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：十二月戊戌，彗见西南方，乙巳，灭。
现代文：十二月初三，彗星在西南方向出现。初十，彗星消失。
English: On the third day of the twelfth month, the comet appeared in the southwest direction. On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the comet disappeared.

古文：辛酉，金遣卢彦伦等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派卢彦伦等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, Kim sent Roh and others to congratulate the upcoming Spring Festival.

古文：十七年春正月己巳，命诸路收试中原流寓士人。
现代文：绍兴十七年春正月初五，命令各路收取中原流寓南方的士人参加科举考试。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the 17th year of the Spring, Shaoxing issued an order to all provinces to collect scholars of the Central Plains who lived in the south to participate in the imperial examinations.

古文：己卯，禁监司、郡守进羡余。
现代文：十五日，禁止监司、郡守进献多征收的赋税。
English: On the 15th, supervisors and county governors were prohibited from contributing more tax.

古文：辛卯，以举人多冒贯，命州县每三岁行乡饮酒礼以贡士。
现代文：二十七日，因举人有很多滥报籍贯，命州县每三年举行乡饮酒礼、招待贡士。
English: On the 27th, due to the fact that there were a lot of people who were born in the wrong place, Meizhou County held a township drinking ceremony every three years to invite tribute.

古文：壬辰，以李若谷参知政事，御史中丞何若签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，任命李若谷为参知政事，御史中承何若为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Li Ruogu was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and Gu Shi Zhongxiao was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：癸巳，进秦熺为资政殿大学士。
现代文：二十九日，秦嬉进升为资政殿大学士。
English: On the 29th, Qin Qixin was promoted to a scholar of the Academy of Capital and Political Affairs.

古文：二月乙巳，亲祠高禖。
现代文：二月十一日，亲自祭祀媒神。
English: On February 11th, he personally offered a sacrifice to the matchmaker.

古文：辛酉，李若谷罢。
现代文：二十七日，李若谷被罢。
English: On the 27th, Li Wakatani was ousted.

古文：三月乙亥，何若罢。
现代文：三月初二，何若被罢。
English: On the second day of the third month, he was arrested.

古文：己卯，以翰林学士段拂参知政事。
现代文：初六，任命翰林学士段拂为参知政事。
English: On the sixth day of the junior high school year, Hanlin Baccalaureate Dan Whisker was appointed to the post of councillor.

古文：乙酉，改封秦桧为益国公。
现代文：十二日，改封秦桧为益国公。
English: On the 12th, he was given the title of Qin Hui and became the ruler of Yixing.

古文：戊子，改命张俊为静江、宁武、靖海军节度使，韩世忠镇南、武安、宁国军节度使。
现代文：十五日，改命张俊为静江、宁武、靖海军节度使，韩世忠为镇南、武安、宁国军节度使。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Jun's name was changed to the naval festival envoy of Jingjiang, Ningwu, and Jing, and Han Shizhong's name was changed to the military festival envoy of Zhenan, Wu'an, and Ning.

古文：落李若谷资政殿学士、江州居住。
现代文：贬降李若谷为资政殿学士，江州居住。
English: Li Wakatani was demoted to the rank of scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics, and resided in Jiangzhou.

古文：夏四月丙申，蠲诸路免行钱三之一。
现代文：夏四月初三，免除各路三分之一的免行钱。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, one-third of the toll-free allowance for each route will be waived.

古文：己亥，以御史中丞汪勃签书枢密院事。
现代文：初六，任命御史中承汪勃为签书枢密院事。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Wang Bo was appointed as the Privy Councillor.

古文：己未，诏赵鼎遇赦永不检举。以前贬所潮州录事参军石恮待遇鼎厚，除名、浔州编管。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：赵鼎遇到赦免永不举用；因前贬到潮州的录事参军石 座待赵鼎非常好，被除名，得州编管。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Zhao Ding would never be promoted if he was pardoned; because he had previously been demoted to Chaozhou, the record of joining the army was very good for Zhao Ding. He was removed from the list and sent to Texas.

古文：五月甲子，诏举贤良。
现代文：五月初二，下诏荐举贤良。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, the following edict was issued recommending the promotion of virtuous people.

古文：乙丑，雨雹。
现代文：初三，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the new year, hail fell.

古文：乙巳，洪皓责濠州团练副使、英州安置。
现代文：初七，洪皓被贬降为壕州团练副使，英州安置。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Hong Hao was demoted to the position of deputy envoy of the Trench State Rehearsal, and was resettled in Yingzhou.

古文：辛巳，金遣完颜卞等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派完颜卞等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Jin Guo sent Gan Yan Xuan and others to congratulate the Tianshen Festival.

古文：六月乙卯，禁招安盗贼。
现代文：六月二十三日，禁止招安盗贼。
English: On June 23rd, it was forbidden to recruit security thieves.

古文：戊午，改命普安郡王瑗为常德军节度使，恩平郡王璩武康军节度使。
现代文：二十六日，改命普安郡王赵缓为常德军节度使，恩平郡王赵朦为武康军节度使。
English: On the 26th, the appointment of Wang Zhao Xuan of Pu'an County as the festival envoy of the Changde Army and that of Wang Zhao Mei of Enping County as the festival envoy of the Wukan Army were changed.

古文：秋七月庚辰，召郑刚中赴行在。
现代文：秋七月十九日，召郑刚中前往行在。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zheng Gang Middle School was summoned to the parade.

古文：辛巳，太白昼见。
现代文：二十日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 20th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：以徽猷阁待制、知成都府李璆权四川宣抚使。
现代文：任命徽酞阁待制、成都知府李矶代理四川宣抚使。
English: Appointed Huiyang Pavilion to be put on hold, and Chengdu Governor Li Jie as acting Sichuan envoy.

古文：癸未，命李璆同总领四川财赋符行中参酌减放四川重敛。
现代文：二十二日，命令李矶同总领四川财赋符行中一起参考旧制，酌情减免四川过重的赋税征收。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Li Ke, together with the head of the Sichuan Finance Bureau, to refer to the old system and reduce and exempt Sichuan's excessive tax collection as appropriate.

古文：戊子，以吴璘充御前诸军都统制兼知兴州。
现代文：二十七日，任命吴瞒担任御前各军都统制兼兴州知州。
English: On the 27th, Wu Zhen was appointed as the imperial commander-in-chief of all armies and the governor of Xingzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：八月庚子，罢建州创置卖盐坊。
现代文：八月初九，罢除福建创置的卖盐坊。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, the salt shop created and built in Fujian Province was abolished.

古文：癸卯，赵鼎薨于吉阳军。
现代文：十二日，赵鼎在吉阳军逝世。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Ding died in Jiyang Army.

古文：戊申，遣沈该使金贺正旦，詹大方贺金主生辰。
现代文：十七日，派沈该出使金国祝贺正旦，詹大方祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 17th, Shen Cai sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, and Zhan Dafang congratulated Kim Guo on his birthday.

古文：丁巳，以诸路羡余钱充月桩之数。
现代文：二十六日，把各路额外征取的税钱充做月桩钱。
English: On the 26th, the extra tax collected from each road was charged as a monthly fee.

古文：加邢孝扬太尉。
现代文：加给邢孝扬太尉衔。
English: He also promoted Gong Xiaoyang to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：九月己巳，减四川科率虚额钱岁二百八十五万缗。
现代文：九月初八，减除四川征取的虚额钱每年二百八十五万络。
English: At the beginning of September, the deduction of the bogus money collected in Sichuan amounted to 2.85 million rupees per year.

古文：癸酉，诏以四川宣抚司降赐库米一百万石，均减对籴。
现代文：十二日，下诏：以四少宣抚司降赐库米一百万石，均减对来。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: the four minor prefects were ordered to surrender and grant Kumi one million koku, all of which were reduced accordingly.

古文：乙亥，蠲江南东、西道诸州月桩钱。
现代文：十四日，免除江南东、西道各州月桩钱。
English: On the 14th, the monthly pile money of each prefecture in the southeast and west of the Yangtze River will be exempted.

古文：丙子，郑刚中罢。
现代文：十五日，郑刚中被罢。
English: On the 15th, Zheng Gang was dismissed.

古文：丙戌，减江、浙诸州折帛钱。
现代文：二十五日，减轻江、浙各州折帛钱。
English: On the 25th, the Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces will reduce their taxes.

古文：冬十月辛卯朔，日有食之。癸卯，建太一宫。
现代文：冬十月初一，日食。十三日，修建太一宫。
English: The first day of winter, the first day of October, a solar eclipse. On the 13th, the construction of Taichung Palace began.

古文：丁未，命太常岁以春秋二仲荐献欑宫，季秋遣御史按视。
现代文：十七日，命令太常寺每年春秋季的第二个月荐献殡宫，秋季的最后一个月派御史视察。
English: On the 17th, he ordered Taizhoji Temple to recommend a funeral hall to be built in the second month of spring and autumn every year, and to send an inspector to inspect it in the last month of autumn.

古文：己酉，进杨存中为少傅。
现代文：十九日，杨存中进升为少傅。
English: On the 19th, Yang Cunzhong was promoted to Shao Fu.

古文：己未，临安府甘露降。
现代文：二十九日，临安府降甘露。
English: On the 29th, Lin'an fell into chaos.

古文：十一月丙寅，秦桧上《重修免役敕令格式》。
现代文：十一月初六，秦桧呈上重修免役救令格鸯。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of November, Qin Hui submitted a petition for reinstatement, exemption from service and relief.

古文：丁卯，复赐进士闻喜宴。
现代文：初七，恢复赐进士闻喜宴。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the feast was resumed.

古文：十二月辛卯朔，禁诸州擅释放流配命官及事干边防切要之人。
现代文：十二月初一，严禁各州擅自释放流配本地的命官和事关边防要害的人。
English: On the first day of December, it is strictly forbidden for states to arbitrarily release local officials and people who are related to border defense.

古文：甲寅，郑刚中落职、桂阳监居住。
现代文：二十四日，郑刚中被贬降，桂阳监居住。
English: On the 24th, Zheng Gang was demoted and Gui Yang Jian took up residence.

古文：丙辰，金遣完颜宗藩等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十六日，金国派完颜宗藩等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 26th, Jin Guo sent Gan Yanzong and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：十八年春正月己巳，幸天竺寺，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：绍兴十八年春正月初十，高宗到天竺寺，于是到玉津园。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the 18th year of Shaoxing's Spring, Gaozong went to the Temple of Heaven, and then to the Jade Garden.

古文：二月乙未，段拂罢，寻落职、兴国军居住。
现代文：二月初六，段拂被罢，不久被贬降，兴国军居住。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：以汪勃兼权参知政事。
现代文：任命汪勃为代理参知政事。
English: Appointed Wang Bo as Acting Vice-Governor.

古文：辛亥，听赵鼎归葬。
现代文：二十二日，允许赵鼎归葬家乡。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Ding was allowed to be buried in his hometown.

古文：三月丁丑，命杨政、吴璘招关、陕流民补殿前军。
现代文：三月十九日，命令杨政、吴瞒招关、陕流民补充殿前军。
English: On March 19, he ordered Yang Zheng, Wu Zhe Zhaoguan, and the Shaanxi refugees to replenish the troops in front of the palace.

古文：戊寅，罢汀州诸县上供银，蠲茶铅本钱之半。
现代文：二十日，罢除汀州各县上供银，免除茶、铅本钱的一半。
English: On the 20th, the upper supply of silver from all counties in Tingzhou was cancelled, and half of the tea and lead capital was exempted.

古文：庚辰，幸新太一宫。
现代文：二十二日，到新修的太一宫。
English: On the 22nd, they went to the newly renovated Taichi-gu Shrine.

古文：壬午，以秦熺知枢密院事。
现代文：二十四日，任命秦嬉为知枢密院事。
English: On the 24th, Qin Qixi was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：乙酉，禁民私渡淮及招纳叛亡。
现代文：二十七日，严禁百姓私自渡越淮河及招纳叛降和逃跑的金国兵民。
English: On the 27th, it was strictly forbidden for the people to cross the Huaihe River without permission and to recruit soldiers and citizens of the People's Republic of China who had surrendered or fled.

古文：夏四月戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。
English: Summer The first day of April, a solar eclipse.

古文：庚子，秦熺乞避父子共政，以为观文殿学士、提举万寿观兼侍读、提举秘书省。
现代文：十三日，秦嬉请求回避父子共执朝政，任命为观文殿学士、提举万寿观、兼侍读、提举秘书省。
English: On the 13th, Qin Hui requested that both father and son should not be allowed to run the imperial government, and he was appointed as an academician of the Academy of Confucianism, promoted to the Ministry of Manchukuo, a part-time attendant, and promoted to the Ministry of Secretary.

古文：壬寅，命熺恩礼视宰臣班次，亚右仆射。
现代文：十五日，下令秦嬉的待遇与宰臣一样，仅次于右仆射。
English: On the 15th, he ordered that Qin Qiao's treatment be the same as that of the vice-minister, second only to that of the right-hand man.

古文：甲辰，赐礼部进士王佐以下三百三十人及第、出身。
现代文：十七日，赐礼部进士王佐等三百三十人及第出身。
English: On the 17th, he bestowed honorary titles on 330 members of the Ministry of Ceremonies, including Wang Zuo.

古文：丙辰，加士夽开府仪同三司。
现代文：二十九日，加给士套开府仪同三司的职衔。
English: On the 29th, the official title of the three departments was added.

古文：五月戊辰，加吴益太尉。
现代文：五月十一日，加给吴益太尉职衔。
English: On May 11, Wu Yi was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：乙亥，裁损奉使赏给。
现代文：十八日，裁减奉使的奖赏标准。
English: On the 18th, the reward standard for envoys was reduced.

古文：丙子，金遣萧秉温等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派萧秉温等来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Kim Guo sent Xiao Bingwen and others to congratulate Tianshin Festival.

古文：癸未，以李显忠私取故妻于金，降为平海军承宣使、台州居住。
现代文：二十六日，因李显忠私自到金国迎取原去世的妻子，被降为平海军承宣使，台州居住。
English: On the 26th, because Lee Hsien Chung went to the People's Republic of China to pick up his deceased wife, he was demoted to the position of the Vice-Admiral of the People's Liberation Army and resided in Taizhou.

古文：甲申，罢四川宣抚司，以李璆为四川安抚制置使。
现代文：二十七日，废罢四川宣抚司，任命李矶为四少安抚制置使。
English: On the 27th, the Sichuan Propaganda and Reassurance Department was abolished, and Li Ke was appointed as the fourth minor pacification system envoy.

古文：是月，徽州庆云见。
现代文：这个月，徽州出现五色云。
English: This month, five-colored clouds appeared in Huizhou.

古文：六月甲辰，筑九宫贵神坛于东郊。
现代文：六月十八日，在东郊修置九宫贵神坛。
English: On June 18th, the Jiugu Shrine was rebuilt in the eastern suburbs.

古文：戊申，士民曹溥等上尊号，不许。
现代文：二十二日，士民曹溥等进呈高宗尊号，没有得到采纳。
English: On the 22nd, Judge Cao Wei and others submitted the title of Gaozongxun, but it was not accepted.

古文：是月，遣太府丞宋仲堪诣江州置狱，鞫郑刚中欺隐官钱。
现代文：这个月，派太府寺承宋仲堪到江州，置狱审讯郑刚中欺盗隐瞒官钱。
English: This month, he sent Song Zhongkang, the successor of Taifu Temple, to Jiangzhou to interrogate Zheng Gangzhong in prison for stealing and concealing government money.

古文：福州候官县有竹实如米，饥民采食之。
现代文：福州侯官县有像米一样的竹实，饥民采集来吃。
English: Fuzhou Houguan County has bamboo shoots that look like rice, and hungry people collect them to eat.

古文：是夏，浙东西、淮南、江东旱。
现代文：这年夏季，浙东西、淮南、江东早灾。
English: In the summer of this year, the eastern and western parts of Zhejiang, Huainan and the eastern part of Jiangsu were hit by natural disasters.

古文：八月丙申，汪勃罢。
现代文：八月十一日，汪勃被罢。
English: On August 11, Wang Bo was arrested.

古文：丁酉，以工部尚书詹大方签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十二日，任命工部尚书詹大方为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 12th, Zhan Dafang of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce was appointed as the Signatory Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：禁州县士民饰词举留官吏。
现代文：严禁州县士民粉饰言词举留官吏。
English: It is strictly forbidden for state and county magistrates and people to whitewash words to retain officials.

古文：闰月庚申，免江、浙、湖南今岁和籴。
现代文：闰八月初五，免除江、浙、湖南今年和来。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th lunar month, Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Hunan will be exempted from this year's Lunar New Year holiday.

古文：甲子，命临安、平江二府、淮东西、湖北三总领所岁籴米百二十万石，以广储蓄。
现代文：初九，下命临安平江二府、淮东西、湖北三总领所，每年来米一百二十万石，用来增加储蓄。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he was ordered to visit the two prefectures of Pingjiang, Huaixi, and Hubei three general territorial offices in Lin'an Province. He came to the United States with 1.2 million koku of rice every year, which was used to increase savings.

古文：壬申，遣王墨卿使金贺正旦，陈诚之贺金主生辰。
现代文：十七日，派王墨卿出使金国祝贺正旦，陈诚之祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 17th, Wang Moqing sent an envoy to Jin Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, and Chen Chengzhi sent an envoy to congratulate Jin Guo on his birthday.

古文：甲申，辛道宗降官、房州羁管。
现代文：二十九日，辛道宗被降职，房州羁管。
English: On the 29th, Xin Daozong was demoted and taken into custody in Fangzhou.

古文：乙酉，禁奉使三节人出境博易。
现代文：三十日，严禁奉使三节人出境贸易。
English: On the 30th, it was strictly forbidden for people of the Three Divisions to engage in outbound trade.

古文：福建诸州贼平，以所创招奇兵为殿前司左翼军。
现代文：福建各州盗贼被平息，以所创招奇兵为殿前司左翼军。
English: The bandits in all the states of Fujian were subdued, and the left-wing army led by the former prefect of the palace was created.

古文：九月丙午，詹大方薨。
现代文：九月二十一日，詹大方逝世。
English: On September 21, Zhan Daifang passed away.

古文：冬十月丙辰，以御史中丞余尧弼签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：冬十月初二，任命御史中承余尧弼为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the second day of the second month of October in winter, he appointed Chungcheng Yuqi as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor.

古文：十一月乙酉朔，升感生帝为上祀。
现代文：十一月初一，升感生帝为上祀。
English: On the first day of November, Emperor Shokansho was enshrined.

古文：己亥，胡铨移吉阳军编管。
现代文：十五日，胡拴迁移到吉阳军编管。
English: On the 15th, Hu Yao was transferred to the Jiyang Military Command.

古文：壬寅，郑刚中责濠州团练副使、复州安置。
现代文：十八日，郑刚中被贬降为壕州团练副使，复州安置。
English: On the 18th, Zheng Gang was demoted to the vice-envoy of Hezhou Reunification and resettled in Fuzhou.

古文：戊申，禁四川买马官吏私市蛮马。
现代文：二十四日，严禁四川买马官吏私自购买蛮马。
English: On the 24th, it was strictly forbidden for officials in Sichuan to buy wild horses.

古文：辛亥，振绍兴府饥。
现代文：二十七日，贩济绍兴府饥民。
English: On the 27th, a vendor sells food to the hungry in Shaoxing.

古文：十二月乙卯朔，振明、越、秀、润、徽、婺、饶、信诸州流民。
现代文：十二月初一，贩济明、越、秀、润、徽、姿、饶、信各州流民。
English: On the first day of December, the traffickers were Jiming, Yue, Xiu, Run, Hui, Zi, Rao, and Xin, all of whom were refugees from various states.

古文：丙寅，借给被灾农民春耕费。
现代文：初二，借给遭受灾害农民春耕费用。
English: On the second day of the new year, the spring ploughing expenses will be lent to farmers who have suffered disasters.

古文：丁卯，命利路三都统措置营田，以其租充减免对籴之数。
现代文：初三，命令利州路三都统措置实行营田，用营田租税充作减免对来粮数。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he ordered the implementation of yakitori in the three cities of Lizhou Road, and used the yakitori tax to reduce and exempt the number of incoming grain.

古文：戊辰，蠲被灾下户积欠租税。
现代文：初四，免除遭受灾害下户拖欠租税。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, households that suffered from disasters were exempted from tax arrears.

古文：庚辰，金遣召守忠等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：十六日，金国派召守忠等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 16th, Kim Guo sent to summon Shou Zhong and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：十九年春正月甲申朔，以皇太后年七十，帝诣慈宁殿行庆寿礼。
现代文：绍兴十九年春正月初一，因皇太后七十岁，高宗到慈宁殿行庆寿礼。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 19th year of Shaoxing, because the empress dowager was 70 years old, Gao Zong went to Cining Hall to celebrate her birthday.

古文：甲午，罢国信所回易北货。
现代文：十一日，罢除国信所回易北货。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Guoxin's return to Beifang was cancelled.

古文：癸卯，幸天竺寺，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：二十日，高宗到天竺寺，于是到玉津园。
English: On the 20th, Gao Zong went to Tianzhu Temple, and then to the Jade Garden.

古文：牰瀼露螅麑睟毕从萌思拦砑霸旃贫荆菴刚弑＜淄蹔尪三月癸未朔，日有食之。甲辰，郑刚中移封州安置，子良嗣等亦除名编管。
现代文：二月二十四日，严禁湖北溪洞用人祭鬼及造虫毒，犯禁者保甲连同一起受到处罚。三月初一，日食。二十二日，郑刚中迁移封州安置，儿子郑良嗣等也被除名编管。
English: On February 24, it was strictly forbidden to use human sacrifices and insecticides in Hubei Xidong, and violators were punished together with Bao Jia. On the first day of March, the solar eclipse. On the 22nd, Zheng Gang Middle School was relocated to Fuzhou, and his son, Zheng Liangzi, was also removed from the editorial board.

古文：夏四月丁巳，立孳生牧马监赏罚格。
现代文：夏四月初六，确立孽生牧马监赏罚标准和办法。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the standards and methods for the supervision and punishment of herd horses born out of wedlock were established.

古文：丙寅，秘阁修撰张邵上秦桧在金国代徽宗与粘罕书稿，诏付史馆，以邵为徽猷阁待制。
现代文：十五日，秘阁修撰张邵进呈秦桧在金国代替徽宗写给粘罕的书稿，下诏交付史馆，任命张邵为徽酞阁待制。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Shao Jin, the author of the Secret Cabinet, presented the manuscript written by Qin Yu to Mu Han in Jin Province in place of Huizong, and delivered it to the History Museum, appointing Zhang Shao as the Huizong Cabinet.

古文：戊寅，湖、广、江西路、建康府并甘露降。
现代文：二十七日，湖广江西路、建康府都降甘露。
English: On the 27th, the west road of Huguangjiang and Jiankangfu were dripping with nectar.

古文：五月壬午朔，汀、漳、泉三州民田被贼蹂践，蠲其二税。
现代文：五月初一，汀、漳、泉三州民田被盗贼破坏，免其二税。
English: On the first day of May, Ting, Handan and Quanzhou were exempted from the second tax after their fields were destroyed by thieves.

古文：戊戌，赏平福建群盗功，以选锋军统制刘宝为武泰军承宣使，余将士迁秩有差。
现代文：十七日，奖赏平定福建盗贼功劳，任命选锋军统制刘宝为武泰军承宣使，其余将士升秩不等。
English: On the 17th, Liu Bao, who was awarded for his service in suppressing the Fujian bandits, was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army, and the rest of the generals were promoted.

古文：庚子，金遣唐括德温等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派唐括德温等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Jin Guo sent Tang Biao Dewen and others to congratulate Tianshin Festival.

古文：丁未，减连、英、循、惠、新、恩六州免行钱。
现代文：二十六日，减免连、英、循、惠、新、恩六州免行钱。
English: On the 26th, the six states of Lian, Ying, Su, Hui, Xin and En were exempted from the reduction and exemption.

古文：六月丁巳，茶陵县丞王庭珪作诗送胡铨，坐谤讪停官、辰州编管。
现代文：六月初七，茶陵县承王庭盖作诗送胡锉，因谤汕朝政被停官，辰州编管。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the lunar month, Chengwang Tingge of Chaling County wrote a poem to send to Hu Yao, was suspended for slandering the imperial government, and became the editor-in-chief of Chenzhou.

古文：戊午，秦桧上《吏部续降七司通用法》。
现代文：初八，秦桧进呈使部续降七司通用念。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Qin Yujin presented the general idea of reducing the number of envoys to seven.

古文：秋七月壬寅，颁诸农书于郡邑。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，向郡县颁发有关农书。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the relevant agricultural book was issued to counties.

古文：八月辛未，刺浙东诸州强盗当配者充沿海诸军。
现代文：八月二十二日，刺浙东各州强盗应当流放的补充沿海各军。
English: On August 22nd, the robbers of the eastern Zhejiang provinces should be exiled to supplement the coastal armies.

古文：九月戊申，命绘秦桧像，仍作赞赐之。
现代文：九月二十九日，下命绘画秦桧像，并且作赞赐给秦桧。
English: On September 29th, he was ordered to paint a portrait of Qin Hui, and praised Qin Hui.

古文：冬十月己未，湖南副总管辛永宗停官、肇庆府编管。
现代文：冬十月十一日，湖南副总管辛永宗停官，肇庆府编管。
English: In winter, on October 11, Xin Yongzong, deputy head of Hunan, was suspended, and Zhaoqing Prefecture was placed in charge.

古文：十一月壬辰，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一月十四日，在圆丘合祭天地，赦免全国。
English: On November 14th, at the Round Mound Festival, the whole country was pardoned.

古文：辛丑，李椿年以经界不均罢。
现代文：二十三日，因经界不均李椿年被罢。
English: On the 23rd, Li Chin Nian was ousted due to irregularities in the meridian.

古文：丁未，立州县垦田增亏赏罚格。
现代文：二十九日，确立州县垦田增减赏罚标准。
English: On the 29th, the reward and punishment standards for the increase and decrease of state and county rice fields were established.

古文：是月，命复蜡祭。
现代文：这个月，下命恢复蜡祭。
English: This month, the wax festival was ordered to resume.

古文：十二月丁巳，金岐王亮弑其主亶自立。
现代文：十二月初九，金岐王完颜亮杀金皇帝完颜自立。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month, the King of Jinqi died and the Emperor of Jin became independent.

古文：己未，诏无子女户、得解举人、太学生之独居者并免役。
现代文：十一日，下诏无子女户、得解举人、太学生之独居者都免役。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was announced that households without children, those who were exempted from enlistment, and students who lived alone would be exempted from military service.

古文：己巳，命四川制置司岁募扈卫三百人赴行在。
现代文：二十一日，命令四川制置司每年招募启从卫队三百人前往行在。
English: On the 21st, the Sichuan Construction Department was ordered to recruit 300 people from the Guard every year.

古文：丁丑，金遣完颜衮等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十九日，金国派完颜充等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 29th, Kim Guo sent Kang Yanchong and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：二十年春正月丁亥，秦桧入朝，殿前司军士施全道刺之，不中。
现代文：绍兴二十年春正月初九，秦桧上朝，殿前司军士施全在途中刺杀他，没有刺中。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16

古文：壬辰，磔全于市。
现代文：十四日，施全在闹市被碎尸万段。
English: On the 14th, Shi Quan was chopped up in the city.

古文：癸卯，趣诸路转运司及守臣毕经界事。
现代文：二十五日，催促各路转运司及守臣结束经界事项。
English: On the 25th, urged the departments of transit and transportation of all routes and Shoucheng to end the border issue.

古文：丙午，两浙转运副使曹泳言，李孟坚诵其父光所撰私史，语涉讥谤，诏送大理寺。
现代文：二十八日，两浙转运副使曹泳报告说，李孟坚背诵他的父亲李光撰写的私史，其中有些话有讥谤时政之嫌，下诏把李孟坚捕送到大理寺。
English: On the 28th, Cao Yong, deputy envoy of the Zhejiang-Shanghai Railway, reported that Li Mengjian recited a personal history written by his father Li Guang, some of which were suspected of ridiculing the current government, and ordered Li Mengjian to be arrested and sent to Dali Temple.

古文：二月戊申朔，立守贰、令尉营田增亏赏罚格。
现代文：二月初一，确立正副守臣、令尉营田增减赏罚标准。
English: On the first day of February, the reward and punishment standards for officials and subordinates were established.

古文：庚戌，禁民春月捕鸟兽。
现代文：初三，严禁百姓春季捕捉鸟兽。
English: On the third day of the New Year, it is strictly forbidden for people to catch birds and beasts in the spring.

古文：蠲静江府、昭州上供折布钱三之一。
现代文：免除静江府、昭州三分之一的上供折布钱。
English: One-third of the money donated by Shizuoka Prefecture and Shizuoka Prefecture will be exempted.

古文：壬子，罢经界所覆实官吏。
现代文：初五，废罢经界所检查核实的官吏。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, officials who have been inspected and verified by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall be abolished.

古文：庚申，免海外四州及泸、叙二州、长宁军经界。
现代文：十三日，罢废海外四州及沪、叙二州、长宁军经界。
English: On the 13th, the four overseas prefectures, Shanghai, Syria and Changning were abolished.

古文：三月庚辰，金遣完颜思恭等来报即位。
现代文：三月初三，金国派完颜思恭等来报告完颜亮即帝位。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Jin Guo sent Gan Siyong and others to report the completion of the imperial throne.

古文：癸未，以余尧弼参知政事，给事中巫伋签书枢密院事。
现代文：初六，任命余尧弼为参知政事，给事中巫吸为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Yu Yu was appointed to be a member of the Council of State, and Wusong was appointed to be a member of the Privy Council.

古文：丙戌，遣尧弼等贺金主即位。
现代文：初九，派余尧弼等祝贺金主即位。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he sent Yu Xi and others to congratulate the emperor on his enthronement.

古文：戊子，以秦熺为观文殿大学士、万寿观使。
现代文：十一日，任命秦嬉为观文殿大学士、万寿观使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Qin Qixi was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and Manchu Confucianism.

古文：丙申，李孟坚狱具。
现代文：十九日，李孟坚讥谤案审理完毕。
English: On the 19th, the Li Mengjian slander case was completed.

古文：诏李光遇赦永不检举，孟坚除名、峡州编管，胡寅、程瑀、潘良贵、张焘等八人缘坐，黜降有差。
现代文：下诏李光遇到赦免永不录用；李孟坚被除名，峡州编管；胡寅、程禹、潘良贵、张煮等八人因连坐受罪，贬降不等。
English: According to the following edict, Li Guang will never be hired if he is pardoned; Li Mengjian was removed from the list of cadres and appointed to the post of the governor of Xiaozhou; Hu Ying, Cheng Yu, Pan Liangui, Zhang Ni and other eight people were punished for consecutive sitting, and their demotion varied.

古文：戊戌，诏改正经界法之厉民者。
现代文：二十一日，下诏改正经界法对民不利的地方。
English: On the 21st, the following edict was issued to rectify the areas where the Military Demarcation Law was unfavorable to the people.

古文：庚子，以巫伋兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十三日，任命巫极兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Wuji as the acting governor.

古文：壬寅，胡寅责果州团练副使、新州安置。
现代文：二十五日，胡寅被贬降为果州团练副使，新州安置。
English: On the 25th, Hu Yin was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Cangzhou Rehearsal Team, and resettled in Xinzhou.

古文：夏四月壬子，以没入官田悉归常平司，禁募民佃种。
现代文：夏四月初六，把籍没来的官田全部划归常平司，严禁募民佃耕。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, all the government-owned fields that had not been registered were transferred to Changping, and it was strictly forbidden to recruit people to plow the fields.

古文：癸酉，置力田科，募江、渐、福建民耕两淮闲田。
现代文：二十七日，置力田科，招募江、浙、福建百姓耕种两淮闲荒田地。
English: On the 27th, the focus was on field science, and the people of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Fujian were recruited to cultivate two idle wasteland fields.

古文：是月，信州妖贼黄曾等作乱，陷贵溪县，江西兵马钤辖李横等讨平之。
现代文：这个月，信州妖贼黄曾等叛乱，攻陷贵溪县，江西兵马铃辖李横等讨伐平定。
English: This month, Huang Zeng and other rebels in Shinshu invaded and occupied Guixi County, and Li Heng, commander of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses in Jiangxi Province, fought and defeated them.

古文：五月庚辰，申禁诸军差承接文字使臣伺察朝政。
现代文：五月初五，再次严禁各军派出承接文字使臣侦察朝政。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, it was once again strictly forbidden for the armies to send envoys to undertake the reconnaissance of the imperial government.

古文：癸未，秦桧上《中兴圣统》。
现代文：初八，秦桧呈上《中兴圣纷。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Qin Hui presented "Zhongxing Shenglai."

古文：甲午，金就遣完颜思恭等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派遣完颜思恭等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Kim Guo sent Gan Siyong and others to congratulate the Tianshen Festival.

古文：六月癸亥，加秦熺少保。
现代文：六月十八日，加给秦嬉少保职衔。
English: On June 18, he was given the title of Qin Xishao Bao.

古文：诏大理寺鞫前太常主簿吴元美讥谤狱。
现代文：下诏大理寺审讯前太常主簿吴元美讥谤案件。
English: The following is the transcript of the trial of Wu Yuanmei before the Dali Temple.

古文：丙寅，禁民结集经社。
现代文：二十一日，严禁百姓结集经社。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was strictly forbidden for the people to gather.

古文：是月，建州民张大一作乱。
现代文：这个月，建州民张大一造反。
English: This month, the people of Jianzhou rebelled against Zhang.

古文：秋七月丙子，罢招刺禁军。
现代文：秋七月初二，废罢招刺禁军。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the strike against the imperial army was abolished.

古文：庚寅，罢泉、漳、汀三州经界。
现代文：十六日，罢除汀、漳、泉三州经界。
English: On the 16th, the borders of Ting, Handan and Quanzhou were abolished.

古文：八月申辰朔，量移张浚永州、孙近虔州、万俟禼沅州、李若谷饶州、李文会江州、段拂南康军，并居住。
现代文：八月初一，张浚移近安置永州居住，孙近虔州居住，万侯沉州居住，李若谷饶州居住，李文会江州居住，段拂南康军居住。
English: On the first day of August, Zhang Jianmiao was resettled in Yongzhou, Sun Jianyanzhou was resettled in Zengzhou, Wanhou was resettled in Shenzhou, Li Ruogu was resettled in Raozhou, Li Wenhui was resettled in Jiangzhou, and Duanfe Nankangjun was resettled in Duanfe.

古文：雷州守臣王Ｚ坐交通赵鼎、李光停官。
现代文：雷州守臣王因与赵鼎、李光交往被停官。
English: The governor of Leizhou, Wang Shouwen, was suspended from his post for associating with Zhao Ding and Li Guang.

古文：戊申，改建大理寺。
现代文：初五，改建大理寺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Dali Temple was rebuilt.

古文：辛酉，遣陈诚之使金贺正旦，王严贺金主生辰。
现代文：十八日，派陈诚之出使金国祝贺正旦，王乎祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 18th, Chen Chengzhe sent an envoy to Jin Guo to congratulate Zheng Dan, and Wang Hu congratulated Jin Guo on his birthday.

古文：九月甲申，以吴元美讥毁大臣，除名、容州编管。
现代文：九月十一日，吴元美因讥毁大臣，被除名，容州编管。
English: On September 11th, Wu Yuanmei was removed from his post for ridiculing the minister, and Yongzhou was put in charge of editing.

古文：丙申，侍御史曹筠以附下罔上罢。
现代文：二十三日，侍御史曹箔因附下欺上被罢。
English: On the 23rd, the chamberlain, Sio Haku, was ousted for deceiving the emperor.

古文：冬十月戊辰，右迪功郎安诚坐文字谤讪，送惠州编管。
现代文：冬十月二十六日，右迪功郎安诚因文字谤汕，送往惠州编管。
English: On the 26th day of winter in October, Ancheng, the right-hand man of Di Gonglang, was sent to Huizhou for defamation.

古文：秦桧有疾。
现代文：秦桧患病。
English: Qin Yu fell ill.

古文：庚午，命执政赴桧第议事。
现代文：二十八日，命令执政到秦桧家讨论政事。
English: On the 28th, the government was ordered to go to Qin Hui's house to discuss political affairs.

古文：十二月甲子，桧始朝，命肩舆入宫门，二孙扶掖升殿，不拜。
现代文：十二月二十二日，秦桧开始上朝，命令用轿子抬进宫门，他的两个孙子扶着他上殿，不朝拜皇帝。
English: On December 22, Qin Hui began to ascend to the throne, ordering that he be carried in a palanquin to the palace gate. His two grandsons supported him as he ascended to the palace, refusing to bow to the emperor.

古文：己巳，金遣萧颐等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派萧颐等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Guo sent Xiao Wei and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

古文：二十一年春正月癸未，以两淮民复业未久，宽其租税。
现代文：绍兴二十一年春正月十一日，因两淮百姓恢复农业生产不久，宽免其租赋。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of spring of the 21st year of Shaoxing, because the two Huai people resumed agricultural production soon, they were exempted from rent.

古文：庚子，蠲平江府折帛钱三年。
现代文：二十八日，免除平江府折帛钱三年。
English: On the 28th, Pingjiang Prefecture was exempted from the tax for three years.

古文：二月甲寅夜，雨雹。
现代文：二月十三日夜，降冰雹。
English: On the evening of February 13th, hail fell.

古文：乙卯，诏诸州置惠民局，官给医书。
现代文：十四日，下诏各州设立惠民局，官府供给医药书籍。
English: On the 14th, each state was ordered to set up a people's benefit bureau, and the government began to supply medical books.

古文：壬戌，遣巫伋等为金国祈请使，请归渊圣皇帝及皇族、增加帝号等事。
现代文：二十一日，派巫极等担任金国祈请使，请求金国归还钦宗皇帝及皇族、增加帝号等事项。
English: On the 21st, he sent Wuji and others to serve as envoys to pray for the return of Emperor Qinzong and the imperial family, and to request the return of the imperial title.

古文：癸亥，以余尧弼兼签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十二日，任命余尧弼兼签书枢密院事。
English: On the 22nd, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：三月丁丑，雨雹。
现代文：三月初六，降冰雹。
English: On the sixth day of the third month, hail fell.

古文：丁亥，蠲江、浙、荆湖等路中户以下积年逋负。
现代文：十六日，免除江、浙、荆湖等路中户以下多年拖欠的税赋。
English: On the 16th, the middle-income households and below in Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Jinghu were exempted from years of tax arrears.

古文：夏闰四月己卯，禁三衙掊克诸军。
现代文：夏闰四月初九，严禁三衙克扣各军。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, it is strictly forbidden to attack any army.

古文：丁亥，赐礼部进士赵逵以下四百四人及第、出身。
现代文：十七日，赐礼部进士赵连等四百零四人及第、出身。
English: On the 17th, 4004 people including Zhao Lian, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were given their first and second names.

古文：五月辛亥，罢利州路选刺义士。
现代文：五月十二日，罢废利州路选刺义士。
English: On May 12th, Li Zhou Road election supporters were dismissed.

古文：戊午，金遣刘长言等来贺天申节。
现代文：十九日，金国派刘长言等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On the 19th, Kim Guo sent Liu Changyan and others to congratulate Tianshin Festival.

古文：以吴璘、杨政、田师中并为太尉。
现代文：任命吴瞒、杨政、田师中都为太尉。
English: Wu Zhen, Yang Zheng and Tian Shizhong were all appointed to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：六月甲戌，括淮南佃田所隐顷亩，以理租税。
现代文：六月初五，清查淮南佃租田地中的隐匿田亩，让其按章缴纳租税。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month, the hidden mu of land in Huainan's rented fields was investigated, and the tax was paid in accordance with the regulations.

古文：辛巳，命岁给大理寺、三衙及州县钱，和药剂疗病囚。
现代文：十二日，下命每年拨给大理寺、三衙及州县钱，用于伴和药剂治疗患病的囚犯。
English: On the 12th, it was ordered that money be allocated annually to Dali Temple, Samcheok and counties for the treatment of sick prisoners.

古文：秋七月壬寅，以集英殿修撰、知衢州曹筠为四川安抚制置使。
现代文：秋七月初四，任命集英殿修撰、瞥州知州曹箔为四川安抚制置使。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Shuxin of the Shuei Dynasty and Caofei of the Gansu and Zhizhou Dynasties were appointed as envoys to pacify Sichuan.

古文：辛亥，罢柴米税。
现代文：十三日，罢除柴米税。
English: On the 13th, the tax on firewood and rice was abolished.

古文：癸亥，诏州县官尝被科率害民重罪者，不得任守令亲民官。
现代文：二十五日，下诏州县官曾经犯有科征害民重罪的，不得委任为守令一类的亲民官。
English: On the 25th, the following Zhaozhou county officials who have committed the felony of levying a fine and harming the people shall not be appointed as pro-people officials of the order-keeping type.

古文：八月辛未，秦桧上《重修诸路茶盐法》。
现代文：八月初四，秦桧进呈重修诸路茶盐含。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth lunar month, Qin Huijin was in the process of rebuilding all roads, including tea.

古文：壬申，韩世忠薨，诏进太师致仕。
现代文：初五，韩世忠逝世，下诏进升太师退休。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Han Shizhong passed away. He was promoted to Grand Master and retired.

古文：癸酉，追封通义郡王。
现代文：初六，追封通义郡王。
English: In the sixth year of his junior high school career, he became the crown prince of Tongyi County.

古文：禁郡守特断。
现代文：禁止郡守特断。
English: County governors are prohibited from making special decisions.

古文：乙亥，加岳阳军节度使士撙开府仪同三司，充万寿观使。
现代文：初八，加给岳阳军节度使赵士搏开府仪同三司职衔，担任万寿观使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the Yueyang Army Festival was added to make Zhao Shibo open the prefectural ceremony with three titles and serve as a Wan Shou Guan envoy.

古文：甲申，遣陈夔使金贺正旦，陈相贺金主生辰。
现代文：十七日，派陈夔出使金国祝贺正旦，陈相祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 17th, Chen Rong sent an envoy to Kim Guo to congratulate Zhengdan, and Chen Xiang congratulated Kim on his birthday.

古文：九月戊戌朔，籍寺观绝产以赡学。
现代文：九月初一，籍没寺观绝户田产用来供给学校开支。
English: On the first day of September, the income from the family farm was used to provide school expenses.

古文：乙巳，均科处州丁盐钱。
现代文：初八，平均征收处州丁盐钱。
English: In the first eight months of the year, the average collection of prefecture-level ding salt money was the highest.

古文：丁巳，增筑景灵宫。
现代文：二十日，扩建景灵宫。
English: On the 20th, the expansion of Jingling Palace began.

古文：是月，巫伋使还，所请皆不许。
现代文：这个月，巫吸出使金朝回国，所请事项都没有得到同意。
English: This month, Wuxu sent an envoy to the Kim dynasty to return to China, but none of the requests were approved.

古文：冬十月甲戌，幸张俊第。
现代文：冬十月初八，到张俊家。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, I went to Zhang Jun's home.

古文：壬午，进俊为太师，升从子子盖为安德军节度使。
现代文：十六日，进张俊太师衔，升他的从子张子盖为安德军节度使。
English: On the 16th, Zhang Juntai was promoted to the rank of division, and his son Zhang Ziguai was promoted to the Andorran army's festival envoy.

古文：甲申，夜有赤气。
现代文：十八日，夜晚出现红气。
English: On the 18th, red gas appeared in the evening.

古文：十一月庚戌，余尧弼罢。
现代文：十一月十四日，余尧弼被罢。
English: On November 14th, Yu Yao was dismissed.

古文：乙卯，命提举常平官修复陂湖。
现代文：十九日，命令提举常平官修复破湖。
English: On the 19th, an order was issued to promote a permanent civil servant to repair the broken lake.

古文：丁巳，进义副尉刘允中坐指斥谤讪弃市。
现代文：二十一日，进义副尉刘允中因指斥谤毁被斩杀在闹市。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Liu Yunzhong, a Jinyi lieutenant, was beheaded in a busy city because he was accused of slander.

古文：十二月壬申，雷。
现代文：十二月初六，打雷。
English: On the sixth day of the twelfth month, there was thunder.

古文：癸巳，金遣兀鲁定方等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派兀鲁定方等来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Jong-un sent the Yongle Party and others to congratulate the upcoming Chinese New Year.

古文：二十二年春正月丁未，加韦渊太保。
现代文：绍兴二十二年春正月十一日，加给韦渊太保职衔。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 22nd year of Shaoxing, Wei Yuan was given the title of Tai Bao.

古文：三月丁酉，以王庶二子之奇、之荀谤毁朝政，并除名，之奇梅州、之荀容州编管。
现代文：三月初二，因王庶的两个儿子王之奇、王之荀谤毁朝政，都被除名，王之奇梅州编管，王之荀容州编管。
English: On the second day of March, due to Wang Zhiqi and Wang Zihuang, two sons of Wang Zhiqi and Wang Zhihuang, undermining the imperial government, they were both expelled. Wang Zhiqi was appointed as the governor of Meizhou, and Wang Zhiying was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：甲辰，以直龙图阁叶三省、监都作院王远通书赵鼎、王庶，力诋和议，言涉谤讪，三省落职、筠州居住；远除名、高州编管。
现代文：初九，直龙图阁叶三省、监都作院王远与赵鼎、王庶有通信联系，力低议和，言语涉及谤汕，叶三省被贬降，箔州居住，王远被除名，高州编管。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Wang Yuan, the governor of the three provinces and the capital of Zhiliang, had a correspondence with Zhao Ding and Wang Shiao. The power was low and the words involved slander. The three provinces were degraded, Huzhou was lived in, Wang Yuan was removed from the name, and Gaozhou was made the governor.

古文：丁巳，遣司农丞钟世明诣福建路籍寺观绝产田宅入官，其后岁入钱三十四万缗。
现代文：二十二日，派司农承钟世明到福建路籍没寺观绝户财产田产归官府，其后每年收人三十四万络。
English: On the 22nd, he sent the chief farmer Zhong Shiming to Fujian, where he was registered as having no religious belief, his property and farmland were returned to the government, and thereafter his annual income was 340,000 rupees.

古文：夏四月丙子，巫伋罢。
现代文：夏四月十二日，巫极被罢。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wuji was banished.

古文：辛巳，以御史中丞章复签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十七日，任命御史中承章复为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he appointed Gishi Chuzhongzhangfu as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：五月癸丑，金遣田秀颖等来贺天申节。
现代文：五月十九日，金朝派田秀颖等人来祝贺天申节。
English: On May 19th, the Kim dynasty sent Tian Xiuying and others to congratulate the Tenshin Festival.

古文：是月，襄阳大水，容州野蚕成茧。
现代文：这个月，襄阳发大水，容州野蚕成茧。
English: This month, Yangyang had a big flood, and the Yongzhou wild silkworms grew into cocoons.

古文：秋七月甲午朔，加封程婴、公孙杵臼、韩厥为公，升中祀。
现代文：秋七月初一，加封程婴、公孙柞臼、韩厥为公，升为中祀。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Cheng Ying, Gong Sun Jiusu, and Han Jue were promoted to middle priests.

古文：丁巳，虔州军卒齐述杀殿前司统制吴进、江西同统领马晟，据州叛。
现代文：二十四日，虔州军卒齐述杀死殿前司统制吴进、江西同统领马晨，占据州城叛乱。
English: On the 24th, the soldiers of Qianzhou reported that they had killed Wu Jin, the former governor of the palace, and Ma Chen, the governor of Jiangxi Province, and occupied the city of Qianzhou.

古文：八月己卯，遣鄂州都统制田师中发兵同江西安抚使张澄、殿前司游奕军统制李耕讨述。
现代文：八月十七日，派鄂州都统制田师中出兵与江西安抚使张澄、殿前司游奕军统制李耕一起讨伐齐述。
English: On August 17th, he dispatched troops from the Ezhou Doto-Seiden Division to fight alongside the Jiangxi pacification envoy Zhang Cheng and the commander of the Yuyi Army, Li Gang.

古文：九月乙未，又遣左翼军统制陈敏相继讨之。
现代文：九月初四，又派左翼军统制陈敏接着讨伐齐述。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of September, Chen Min, the leader of the left-wing army, was sent to continue the crusade.

古文：癸丑，章复罢。
现代文：二十二日，章复被罢。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Fu was dismissed.

古文：冬十月甲戌，以御史中丞宋朴签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：冬十月十三日，任命御史中承宋朴为签书枢密院事兼代事参知政事。
English: On the 13th day of October in the winter, Song Pu, the middle son of Gu Shi, was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor and the Acting Councillor and the Councillor.

古文：就命李耕知虔州。
现代文：随即命令李耕为虔州知州。
English: He then ordered Li Gang to become the governor of Qianzhou.

古文：庚辰，以黄岩县令杨炜诽谤，除名、万安军编管；知台州萧振落职、池州居住。
现代文：十九日，黄岩县令杨炜因诽谤被除名，万安军编管，台州知州萧振降职，池州居住。
English: On the 19th, Yang Jie, the Huangyan County magistrate, was removed from his post for defamation, while Xiao Zhen, the commander of the Wan'an Army, was demoted from his post in Zhizhou, Taizhou, and resided in Chizhou.

古文：十一月戊申，合祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：十一月十八日，在圆丘合祭天地，赦免全国。
English: On November 18th, at the round mound festival, the whole country was pardoned.

古文：丁巳，立荐举受财刑名。
现代文：二十七日，制定荐举受财刑名。
English: On the 27th, the recommendation to impose a financial penalty was formulated.

古文：李耕入虔州，尽诛叛兵，虔州平。
现代文：李耕进人虔州，叛兵全部被诛杀，虔州平定。
English: Li Gang marched into Qianzhou. All the rebels were killed and Qianzhou was pacified.

古文：十二月辛酉朔，减夔州路及蒲江、淯井两监盐钱岁八万二千缗有奇。
现代文：十二月初一，减除夔州路及蒲江、清井两监每年盐钱八万二千多络。
English: On the first day of December, with the deduction of Luzhou Road and the two supervisors of Pujiang and Kiyoi, the annual salt money was more than 82,000 rupees.

古文：戊子，金遣张利用等来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十八日，金国派遣张利用等人来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 28th, China sent Zhang Rong and others to congratulate the next year's Spring Festival.

