古文：王睿，字洛诚，自云太原晋阳人也。
现代文：王睿字洛诚，自称是太原晋阳人。
English: Wang Rui, alias Luo Cheng, claimed to be from Taiyuan and Jinyang.

古文：六世祖横，张轨参军。
现代文：六世祖王横，是张轨的参军。
English: Zou Wangyong, the sixth generation, was the first to join the army.

古文：晋乱，子孙因居于武威姑臧。
现代文：晋代大乱时，子孙便居住在武威姑臧。
English: During the Great Turmoil of the Jin Dynasty, the descendants lived in Wuwei Gushan.

古文：父桥，字法生，解天文卜筮。
现代文：父亲王桥，字法生，懂得天文卜筮。
English: His father, Wang Qiao, was a student of calligraphy and knew astronomy.

古文：凉州平，入京。
现代文：凉州平定后，进入京城。
English: After the suppression of Liangzhou, it entered Beijing.

古文：家贫，以术自给，历位终于侍御中散。
现代文：家中贫穷，就依靠技艺供养，所经官职最后终止于侍御中散。
English: As his family was poor, he relied on his skills to support himself. His official duties finally ended when he was dismissed from the position of chamberlain.

古文：天安初，卒，赠平远将军、凉州刺史、显美侯，谥曰敬。
现代文：天安初年去世，追赠平远将军，凉州刺史，显菱侯，谥号为敬。
English: He died in the first year of Tian'an and was posthumously awarded the titles of Pingyuan General, Liangzhou Jishi, Xianling Hou, and his posthumous name was Yu Jing.

古文：俄为散骑常侍、侍令，领太史。承明元年，文明太后临朝，睿因缘见幸，超迁给事中。
现代文：王睿年轻时继承父亲职业，但姿容相貌高大漂亮。景穆在东宫时候，见到他很惊奇。兴安初年，提拔为太卜中散，不久升迁为太卜令，兼任太史。魏孝文帝承明元年，文明太后临朝称制，王睿有缘受宠，一跃而任给事中。
English: Wang Rui inherited his father's profession when he was young, but his appearance was tall and beautiful. When Jing Mu was in the East Palace, he was very surprised to see him. In the first year of Xing'an, he was promoted to the middle and lower echelons of the eunuchs, and soon he was promoted to the eunuchs, and also served as the eunuchs. In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowen's reign in the Ming Dynasty, the Empress Dowager of Civilization visited the imperial court to pay homage, and Wang Rui was favored by fate, and was immediately given the job.

古文：俄为散骑常侍、侍中、吏部尚书，赐爵太原公。
现代文：很快做了散骑常侍、侍中、吏部尚书，赐封爵位太原公。
English: He soon became a knight errant, a knight's footman, a chamberlain, and a secretary, and was given the title of Taiyuan Prince.

古文：于是内参机密，外豫政事，爱宠日隆，朝士慑惮焉。
现代文：于是对内参预机密要事，对外参加政府事务，宠爱恩遇日盛一日。
English: Therefore, it is important to prepare confidential matters for internal participation, participate in government affairs externally, and be favored day by day.

古文：太和二年，孝文及文明太后率百僚与诸方客临兽圈，有猛兽逸，登门阁道，几至御坐。
现代文：朝中官员都很害怕他。太和二年，孝文帝及文明太后率领百官与一些方士到野兽圈，有一猛兽逃出，跑上门阁道，差点到皇上坐处。
English: In 1902, Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Fuxing led hundreds of officials and some magicians to the beast's enclosure. A ferocious beast escaped and ran up Menge Road, almost reaching the emperor's seat.

古文：左右侍卫皆惊靡，睿独执戟御之，猛兽乃退。
现代文：皇上身边侍卫都惊倒在地，只有王睿手执戟抵挡猛兽，猛兽才退下。
English: The attendants and guards around the emperor were stunned and fell to the ground. Only Wang Rui held his hand to fend off the beast, and the beast retreated.

古文：故亲任转重。
现代文：所以对他更加亲近信任。
English: So I'm closer to him and trust him.

古文：三年春，诏睿与东阳王丕同入八议，永受复除。
现代文：太和三年春天，诏令王睿与东阳王丕同时享受减免刑罚的八种条件，永久性地免除徭役。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Taihe era, Wang Rui and Dongyang Wang Yao were ordered to enjoy the eight conditions of reduction and remission of punishment at the same time, and were permanently exempted from labor service.

古文：四年，迁尚书令，进爵中山王，加镇东大将军，置王官二十二人，中书侍郎郑羲为傅，郎中令以下，皆当时名士。
现代文：太和四年，调升为尚书令，提升封号为中山王。任镇东大将军，安置天子之官二十二人，中书侍郎郑义为傅，郎中令以下，都是当时的名士。
English: In the fourth year of Tahe, he was promoted to Shang Shuling, and his title was elevated to Zhongshan Wang. He was appointed as the general of the town of Dongda, and twenty-two officials of the heavenly son were installed. The servant of the middle secretary, Zheng Yi, was Fu, and his subordinates were all famous people at that time.

古文：又拜睿妻丁氏为妃。
现代文：又授王睿的妻子丁氏为妃。
English: He also made Wang Rui's wife, Ding Shi Lang, his wife.

古文：及沙门法秀谋逆事发，多所牵引。
现代文：僧徒法令谋秀的事情暴露后，牵连涉及到很多人。
English: A lot of people were implicated after the exposure of the scandal involving the monk's edict.

古文：睿曰： 与杀不辜，宁赦有罪，宜枭斩首恶，余从原赦，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：王睿说： 与其杀死无辜之人，宁可赦免有罪之人，应该将首犯斩头示众，其余一律赦免，不是很好吗？ 
English: Wang Rui said, "Instead of killing innocent people, it is better to pardon the guilty. The first offender should be beheaded and the rest should be pardoned. Isn't that good?"

古文：考文从之，得免者千余人。
现代文：孝文帝答应了，得以免罪的有一千多人。
English: Emperor Xiaowen agreed, and more than a thousand people were exonerated.

古文：睿出入帷幄，太后密赐珍玩缯彩，人莫能知。
现代文：王睿出入宫室，太后私下赐给他珍玩缯纟采，人们都不知道。
English: Wang Rui went in and out of the palace, and the empress dowager secretly gave him a precious jewel, but no one knew about it.

古文：率常以夜帷载阉官防致，前后钜万，不可胜数。
现代文：常在夜间用幕布围住阉官以防其到，前后数万，不可胜数。
English: Tens of thousands of eunuchs used to surround the eunuchs with a curtain at night to prevent their arrival.

古文：加以田园、奴婢、牛马杂畜，并尽良美。
现代文：又有田园、奴婢、牛马各类牲畜，都很精美。
English: There are also fields, slaves, cows, horses and all kinds of livestock, all of which are exquisite.

古文：大臣及左右因是以受赉赐，外示不私，所费又以万计。
现代文：大臣以及身边侍人也因此得到赏赐，对外表明不偏私，花费又能以万计算。
English: The minister and the attendants around him were also rewarded for this, showing to the outside world that they are not biased, and the cost can be calculated in tens of thousands.

古文：及疾病、孝文、太后每亲视疾，侍官省问，相望于道。
现代文：患病时，孝文帝、太后都亲自探问病情，侍官去探望的，相望于道。
English: When he was ill, both Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Xiaowen personally inquired about his condition. When the attendants went to visit him, they looked at each other in astonishment.

古文：及疾笃，上疏陈刑政之宜。
现代文：病情加重后，上疏陈说刑政之法。
English: After his condition worsened, Shang Soo told Chen about the criminal justice system.

古文：寻薨，孝文、文明太后亲临哀恸。
现代文：不久死去，孝文帝、文明太后亲去哀悼。
English: He died soon after, and Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Wencheng went to mourn.

古文：赐温明秘器，宕昌公王遇监护丧事。
现代文：赏赐温明秘器。宕昌公王遇监督照护丧事。
English: He was rewarded with a warm secret utensil. The death of Prince Gaochang was supervised and cared for.

古文：赠卫大将军、太宰、并州牧，谥曰宣王。
现代文：追赠大将军、太宰、并州牧，谥号宣王。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of general, grand vizier, and provincial governor, and was nicknamed King Xuanwang.

古文：内侍长董丑奴营坟墓。
现代文：内侍长董丑奴负责建造坟墓。
English: The chief chamberlain, Dong Hulun, is in charge of building the tomb.

古文：将葬于城东，孝文登城楼以望之。
现代文：准备在城东安葬时，孝文帝登上城楼遥望。
English: When preparing to be buried in the east of the city, Emperor Xiaowen went up to the castle tower for a distant look.

古文：京都文士为作哀诗及诔者百余人。
现代文：京都文人为他写哀悼诗与诔文的有一百多人。
English: More than a hundred Kyoto writers have written poems of condolence and eulogies for him.

古文：乃立睿祀于都南二十里大道右，起庙，以时祭荐，并立碑铭，置守祀五家。
现代文：于是在京城南二十里大路右边设置祭祀王睿的地方，建造庙宇，以便经常祭祀追荐，还树立碑铭，安置五家守护庙宇的人。
English: Therefore, a place to worship Wang Rui was set up on the right side of the Beijing South Twenty-Mile Road, a temple was built so that sacrifices could be recommended regularly, and a monument was erected to house the guardians of the five temples.

古文：又诏褒扬睿，图其捍猛兽状于诸殿，令高允为之赞。
现代文：又下诏书褒扬王睿，在各殿上绘出他抵御猛兽的图形，让高允为他写赞词。
English: He also issued an imperial edict praising Wang Rui, drawing a picture of him resisting a ferocious beast on each hall, and asked Gao Yun to write a eulogy for him.

古文：京邑士女，谄称睿美，造新声而弦歌之，名曰《中山王》。
现代文：京城中的仕女，无不奉承地称赞王睿的美貌，创作新曲而歌唱，名字叫《中山王》。
English: The ladies of the capital praised Wang Rui's beauty with flattery and created a new song called "The King of Zhongshan."

古文：诏班乐府，合乐奏之。
现代文：诏令发送音乐官署，配乐演奏。
English: The edict was sent to the Music Office, and the soundtrack was played.

古文：初，睿女妻李冲兄子蕤，次女以适赵国李恢子华。
现代文：当初，王睿的女儿嫁给李冲哥哥的儿子李蕤，二女儿又嫁给赵国李恢的儿子李华。
English: At first, Wang Rui's daughter married Li Chong's brother's son, Li Yao, and his second daughter married Zhao Guo's son, Li Hua.

古文：女之将行，先入宫中，其礼略如公主、王女之仪。
现代文：女儿出嫁时，先到宫中，礼节接近于公主、王侯的女儿的仪礼。
English: When a daughter marries, she goes to the palace first, and the etiquette is close to that of a princess, the daughter of a prince.

古文：太后亲御太华殿，寝其女于帐中，睿与张祐侍坐。
现代文：太后亲自看管太华殿，让他的女儿在帐中睡觉，王睿与张在旁侍坐。
English: The empress dowager personally looked after the Taihua Palace, letting his daughter sleep in the box, while Wang Rui and Zhang sat nearby.

古文：睿所亲及两李家丈夫、妇人列于东西廊。
现代文：王睿的亲朋以及两个李家的男人、妇女在东西廊中排列。
English: Wang Rui's relatives and friends, as well as the two men and women of the Li family, are lined up in the east and west galleries.

古文：及女子登车，太后送过中路。
现代文：等女儿登上车，太后又送过半路。
English: After waiting for her daughter to board the car, the empress dowager escorted her halfway across the road.

古文：时人窃谓天子、太后嫁女。
现代文：当时人私下称为天子、太后出嫁女儿。
English: At that time, people privately called him the son of heaven, and the empress dowager called him her daughter.

古文：睿之葬也，假亲姻义旧衰绖缟冠送丧者千余人，皆举声恸泣，以要荣利，时谓之义孝。
现代文：王睿下葬时，假称与他有姻亲、交情而披麻戴孝送葬的有一千多人，都大声恸哭，以邀荣取利，当时人称之为义孝。
English: When Wang Rui was buried, there were more than a thousand people who pretended to be relatives and friends of Wang Rui and attended his funeral in mourning, crying loudly and asking for honor and profit. At that time, they were called filial piety.

古文：睿既贵，乃言家本太原晋阳，遂移属焉。
现代文：王睿显贵后，便称家原在太原晋阳，于是转交归属给他。
English: After Wang Rui's rise to prominence, he claimed that Iehara was in Taiyuan and Jinyang, so it was transferred to him.

古文：故其兄弟封爵，多以并州郡县。
现代文：所以兄弟封爵时，大多是并州县郡。
English: So when brothers are knighted, it's usually in the same county.

古文：薨后，重赠睿父桥侍中、征西将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司、武威王，谥曰定。
现代文：死后，重新追赠王睿的父亲王桥为侍中、征西将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司、武威王，谥号定。
English: After his death, Wang Rui's father, Wang Qiao, was posthumously awarded the titles of Chamberlain, General of the Western Expedition, Doctor of the Western Light, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and King of Wuwei. His posthumous name was Ding.

古文：文成立，诛爱、周等，皆具五刑，夷三族。
现代文：追封王睿的母亲贾氏为妃，在坟墓左侧立碑。父子都埋在城东，相距一里多。
English: Wang Rui's mother, Jia, became the empress, and a monument was erected on the left side of the grave. Both father and son were buried in the east of the city, more than a mile apart.

古文：仇洛齐，中山人也，本姓侯氏。
现代文：迁都洛阳后，又改葬在太原晋阳故居。仇洛齐，中山人，本来姓侯氏。
English: After the capital was moved to Luoyang, he was reburied in the former residence of Taiyuan Jinyang. Qian Luoqi, a native of Zhongshan, was originally surnamed Hou.

古文：外祖父仇款，始出冯翊重泉，款仕石季龙末，徙鄴南枋头。
现代文：外祖父仇腪，最初来自冯翊重泉。仇矣欠仕于石季龙，末年，迁居邺城南边的枋头。
English: Qiu's grandfather, originally from Fengyuan Heavy Spring, was indebted to Shi Jilong and moved to Shantou, south of Shicheng, at the end of his life.

古文：仕慕容为乌丸护军、长水校尉。
现代文：仕于慕容日韦，任乌丸护军、长水校尉。
English: He served in Murong-Riwei, and was assigned to the protection force of Kumaru and the school captain of Changshui.

古文：生二子，长曰嵩，小曰腾。
现代文：生有两个儿子，长子叫仇嵩，幼子叫仇腾。
English: He had two sons, the eldest named Qiu Song and the youngest named Qiu Teng.

古文：嵩仕慕容垂，迁居中山，位殿中侍御史。
现代文：仇嵩侍奉幕容垂，迁居到中山，官职是殿中侍御史。
English: Kuchitake served the shogunate and moved to Nakayama. His official position was a palace attendant.

古文：嵩有二子，长曰广，小曰盆。
现代文：仇嵩有两个儿子，长子叫仇广，幼子叫仇盆。
English: Qiu Song has two sons. The eldest son is called Qiu Guang, and the younger son is called Qiu Bon.

古文：嵩妹子洛齐，生而非男，嵩养为子，因为仇姓。
现代文：仇嵩妹妹的儿子洛齐，生下来不像男孩，仇嵩收为养子，因此姓仇。
English: The son of Qiu Song's younger sister, Lozi, was not born as a boy, and Qiu Song adopted him as an adopted son, hence the surname Qiu.

古文：初，嵩长女有姿色，充冉闵妇。
现代文：当初，仇嵩的大女儿很有姿色，做冉闵的妇人。
English: At first, Quesong's eldest daughter was very pretty, and she was a beautiful woman.

古文：闵破，入慕容俊，又转赐卢豚，生子鲁元。
现代文：冉闵破败后，被慕容亻隽接纳，又转手赠给卢豚，生下儿子鲁元。
English: After the defeat of Ran Zheng, he was accepted by Murong Zheng, and then he was given to Lu Fu, and gave birth to his son Lu Yuan.

古文：鲁元有宠于太武，而知外祖嵩已死，唯有三舅，每言于帝。
现代文：鲁元得宠于太武，知道外祖父仇嵩已经死去，只有三个舅舅，经常在皇上面前说起。
English: Lu Yuan was favored by Taiwu. He knew that his maternal grandfather Qiu Song had died and there were only three uncles. He often spoke of this in front of the emperor.

古文：帝为访其舅。
现代文：皇帝替他寻访舅舅。
English: The emperor went to find his uncle for him.

古文：时东方罕有仕者，广、盆皆不乐入平城。
现代文：当时东方很少有出来做官的。仇广、仇盆都不乐意到平城。
English: At that time, very few Easterners came out to work as officials. Both Qiu Guang and Qiu Bin were not happy to come to Pingcheng.

古文：洛齐独请行曰： 我养子，兼人道不全，当为兄弟试祸福也。 
现代文：只有仇洛齐请求前往说： 我是养子，承担的人伦道德不完整，应当替兄弟尝试祸福。 
English: Only Qiao Luoqi asked to go, saying: I am an adopted son, the human ethics and morals I have undertaken are incomplete, and I should try the misfortune and fortune for my brother.

古文：乃乘驴赴京。
现代文：于是骑驴赴京。
English: So he rode a donkey to Beijing.

古文：鲁元候知将至，结从者百余骑，迎于桑乾河，见而下拜，从者亦同致敬。
现代文：鲁元得知他将要来到，聚合一百多名骑马的随从，迎接到桑河，见面后下拜，随从也一起致以敬礼。
English: Lu Yuan learned that he was coming, gathered more than a hundred horse-riding attendants, greeted the Mulberry River, bowed down after meeting, and the attendants also saluted together.

古文：入言于太武。
现代文：入宫告诉太武帝。
English: Tell that to Emperor Taibu when he enters the palace.

古文：太武问其才用所宜，鲁元曰： 臣舅不幸，生为阉人，唯合与陛下守宫闱耳。 
现代文：太武帝询问他的才能以安排适宜的职务。鲁元说 ：臣的舅父很不幸运，生下就是阉人，只适合于给陛下守卫宫闱。 
English: Emperor Taibu inquired about his talents in order to arrange a suitable position. Lu Yuan said: My uncle is very unlucky, he was born a eunuch, and is only suitable for guarding the palace for His Majesty.

古文：而不言其养子。
现代文：而不说他是养子。
English: Not to mention he's an adopted son.

古文：帝矜焉，引见叙用，赐爵文安子，稍迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：皇帝同情他，召引他相见录用。赐爵位文安子，不久调为给事黄门侍郎。
English: The emperor sympathized with him, summoned him to see him and hired him. He gave a peerage to Wen Anzi, and soon transferred him to the Yellow Gate Chamberlain.

古文：魏初，禁网疏阔，人户隐匿，漏脱者多。东州既平，绫罗户人乐葵，因是请采漏户，供为纶绵，自后逃户占为绫罗縠者非一。
现代文：魏朝初年，法令简略，人口隐瞒、遗漏的情况很多，东部各州平定之后，绫罗户人乐葵，由此请求收集遗漏户家，供给纶帛，此后逃户变成绸绫罗谷者不是一户二户。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, the decrees were simple, and there were many cases of concealment and omission of the population. After the eastern states were pacified, Luo households were happy, so they requested to collect the omitted households and supply straw. After that, the fugitive households became silk. Luo Valley is not one or two households.

古文：于是杂营户帅遍于天下，不属守宰，发赋轻易，人多私附，户口错乱，不可捡括。
现代文：于是经营户籍的长官充斥天下，不归属地方官吏，征收赋税很随便，人们大多私下依附，户口错乱，不能查考搜求。
English: As a result, the world is full of officials who manage household registration, who do not belong to local officials, tax collection is very casual, most people are privately dependent, household registration is disordered, and it is impossible to search and search.

古文：洛齐奏议罢之，一属郡县。
现代文：仇洛齐上奏主张禁止这种做法，都归属郡县。
English: Qian Luoqi advocated the prohibition of this practice, and it all belongs to the county.

古文：从征平凉，以功超迁散骑常侍。
现代文：跟随皇上征讨平凉，因功一跃而为散骑常侍。
English: He followed the emperor's campaign to pacify the country, and became a samurai horseman because of his outstanding performance.

古文：又加中书令，进爵零陵公，拜侍中、冀州刺史、内都大官。
现代文：又任中书令，提升封号为零陵公，授官侍中、冀州刺史、内都大官。
English: He was also appointed as a middle-ranking official, promoted to the title of Zilinggong, and awarded the titles of Jizhong, Jizhou, and Inner Capital.

古文：卒，谥曰康。
现代文：死后，谥号康。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Kang.

古文：抱嶷，字道德，安定石唐人也，居于直谷。
现代文：养子仇俨，荫袭爵位。抱嶷字道德，安定石唐人。居住在直谷。
English: The adopted son of a feudal lord, he inherited a peerage. He is a moral and stable Chinese. He lives in Naotani.

古文：自言其先姓巳，汉灵帝时，巳匡为安定太守。
现代文：自称先祖姓杞，汉灵帝时，杞匡做安定太守。
English: He claimed that his ancestor's family name was Zou, and when Han Ling was the emperor, Zou Kuang served as the Prince of Stability.

古文：董卓时，惧诛易氏，即家焉。无得而知也。
现代文：董卓大乱时，害怕被杀更改姓氏，就在那里安家，不得而知。
English: It is not known where Dong Zhuo, who feared being killed and changed his surname during the turmoil, made his home.

古文：幼时，陇东人张乾王反，家染其逆。及乾王败，父睹生逃免。
现代文：幼时，陇东人张乾王叛乱，他家人牵连在内，张乾王失败后，抱嶷的父亲抱睹生逃脱幸免。
English: When he was a child, Zhang Qianwang, a native of eastern Shandong Province, rebelled, and his family was implicated. After Zhang Qianwang's failure, his father, who was holding a crossbow, survived.

古文：嶷独与母没入内宫，受刑，遂为宦人。
现代文：抱嶷却与母亲沦落内宫，处以宫刑，于是成了宦官。
English: However, he and his mother were relegated to the inner palace and punished with the palace punishment, so he became a eunuch.

古文：小心慎密，累迁中常侍、中曹侍御尚书，赐爵安定公。
现代文：细心谨慎，接连升职为中常侍、中曹侍御尚书，赐封爵位安定公。
English: Careful and prudent, he was successively promoted to the posts of middle attendant and middle aide-de-camp, and was given a peerage as Prince Anzai.

古文：自总纳言，职当机近，诸所奏议，必致抗直。
现代文：亲自总管纳言，职居机要之位，所有奏章议折，处理时一定坦率耿直。
English: The general manager will personally give advice, the position of the position is important, all records will be discussed, and the handling will be frank and straightforward.

古文：孝文、文明太后嘉之，以为殿中侍御尚书。
现代文：孝文帝、文明太后赞许他，任命为殿中侍御尚书。
English: Emperor Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Bunmei praised him, and he was appointed as an attendant in the palace.

古文：太后既宠之，乃征其父睹生，拜太中大夫。
现代文：太后既然宠幸他，就征召他的父亲抱睹生，授官太中大夫。
English: Since the empress dowager favored him, she conscripted his father to work as a doctor.

古文：将还，见于皇信堂，孝文执手曰： 老人归途，几日可达？
现代文：准备回乡时，在皇信堂相见，孝文帝拉着他的手说： 老年人回乡，几天可以到达？
English: When they were preparing to return to their hometown, they met at the Emperor's Letter Hall, and Emperor Xiaowen took him by the hand and said, "Older people returning to their hometown, how many days can they arrive?

古文：好慎行路！ 
现代文：安稳谨慎地赶路！ 
English: Drive safely and carefully!

古文：其见幸如此。
现代文：他就是这样被宠幸。
English: That's how privileged he is.

古文：睹生卒，赠秦州刺史，谥曰靖。
现代文：抱睹生死去后，追赠秦州刺史，谥号靖。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Qinzhou Jishi" and the posthumous title of "Jingjing."

古文：赐黄金八十斤，缯彩及绢八百疋，以供丧用。
现代文：赏赐黄金八十斤，缯纟采及绢八百疋，以供丧事使用。
English: Awarded 80 catties of gold, 80 catties of rupees and 800 catties of rupees for use in the funeral.

古文：并别使劳尉。
现代文：另外派使臣尉问。
English: He also sent an envoy to inquire about it.

古文：加嶷大长秋卿。
现代文：抱嶷升任大长秋卿。
English: He was promoted to Dajang Qiuqing.

古文：嶷老疾，乞外禄，乃出为泾州刺史，特加右光禄大夫。
现代文：抱嶷年老多病，请求外官的俸禄，于是离京做了泾州刺史，特升迁为右光禄大夫。
English: When he was old and sick, he asked for the salary of a foreign minister, so he left Beijing to become the governor of Zhangzhou and was promoted to the post of doctor of the Uguanglu.

古文：将之州，孝文饯于西郊乐阳殿，以御白羽扇赐之。
现代文：将赴州所，孝文帝在西郊乐阳殿饯行，把御用白羽扇赏赐给他。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen was about to leave for the State Council, he visited Leyang Palace in the western suburbs and presented him with the Imperial White Feather Fan.

古文：十九年，以刺史从驾南征，以老旧，每见劳问，数道称嶷之正直。
现代文：太和十九年，以刺史身份随皇上南征，因是年老旧臣，常被劳慰探问。多次称赞抱嶷的正直。
English: In the 19th year of the Taisho era, he accompanied the Emperor on the Southern Expedition as a member of the Council of Elders, and because he was an old retainer, he was often questioned. He was praised for his honesty many times.

古文：命乘马出入行禁之间，与司徒冯诞同例。
现代文：诏命骑马出入宫中禁地，与司徒冯诞同等。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to ride a horse into and out of the palace's restricted area, which is the same as that of St. Feng Xing.

古文：太和末，又有秦松、白整，位并长秋卿。
现代文：军队回来，他也回州府。自认为是老辈官僚，处理政事多遵照以前法令，不能使用新定法规。
English: When the army comes back, he also returns to the state capital. He considers himself an elder bureaucrat, and deals with political affairs mostly in accordance with previous laws and regulations, and cannot use newly established laws and regulations.

古文：刘腾，字青龙，本平原城人也，徙属南兗州之谯郡。
现代文：侮辱傲视士族，不注重礼节应酬。生情残酷刻薄，即使是弟侄甥婿，一点也不接济。在州所去世。刘腾字青龙，本来是原城人，后来迁居到隶属南兖州的谯郡。
English: He insulted the proud scholars and did not pay attention to etiquette. He was born cruel and mean. Even his younger brother, nephew and son-in-law did not help him at all. He died in the prefecture. Liu Tengzhe Qinglong was originally from Chengdu, and later moved to Handan County, which is part of South Handan Province.

古文：幼时坐事受刑，补小黄门，转中黄门。
现代文：幼时因事定罪受刑，充当小黄门，调为中黄门。
English: At a young age, he was convicted and sentenced for an incident, served as a small yellow door, and was transferred to a medium yellow door.

古文：孝文之在县瓠，问其中事，腾具言幽后私隐，与陈留公主所告符协，由是进冗从仆射，仍中黄门。
现代文：孝文帝在县瓠时，询问宫中事情，刘腾详细说出幽后的私隐，与陈留公主所告诉的很吻合，由此升为冗从仆射，仍在中黄门。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen was at the county magistrate's office, he inquired about the affairs of the palace. Liu Teng detailed the private life of the empress dowager, which was very consistent with what Princess Chen Liu had told him. As a result, he was promoted to the position of a diligent subordinate and was still in the middle of the Yellow Gate.

古文：后与茹皓使徐、兗，采召人女。
现代文：后来和茹皓使徐、兖二州，选择召用民女。
English: Later, he and Zhu Xi sent Xu and Zou to the two prefectures, and chose to recruit a common woman.

古文：还，迁中给事。
现代文：回京后，升调中给事。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was promoted to middle management.

古文：灵太后临朝，以与于忠保护勋，除崇训太仆，加侍中，封长乐县公。
现代文：灵太后临朝执政，因他与于忠有守宫护驾的功劳，升任侍中，封为长乐县公。
English: Lingdai later ruled the imperial court, and because of his contribution to guarding the palace together with Yu Zhongyu, he was promoted to chamberlain and made the governor of Changle County.

古文：拜其妻魏氏为巨鹿郡君，每引入内，受赏赉亚于诸主外戚。
现代文：授予他妻子魏氏为钜鹿郡君，每次被召引入宫，得到的赏赐仅次于一些皇帝的外戚。
English: Awarded to his wife, the Wei clan, as the Elk County Jun, every time he was called into the palace, he received a reward second only to some of the emperor's relatives.

古文：所养二子，为郡守、尚书郎。
现代文：所收养的两个儿子，任郡守、尚书郎。
English: His two adopted sons, the county governor and Sho Shuro, grew up.

古文：腾曾疾笃，灵太后虑或不救，迁卫将军、仪同三司。
现代文：刘腾曾经病得很重，灵太后担心他或许不会有救，就升他为卫将军、仪同三司。
English: Liu Teng was once very ill, and the Dowager Empress was worried that he might not be able to be saved, so he was promoted to General of the Guards and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：后疾瘳。
现代文：后来病好了。
English: He later recovered.

古文：腾之拜命，孝明当为临轩，会日，大风寒甚，乃遣使持节授之。
现代文：刘腾授官时，孝明帝亲自走到长廊，碰巧那天大风刮得很冷，于是派使者持皇上符节给他授职。
English: When Liu Teng was appointed to the post, Emperor Xiaoming personally walked to the promenade. As it happened, the wind was blowing very cold that day, so he sent an envoy to confer the post on him.

古文：腾幼充宫役，手不解书，裁知署名而已，而奸谋有余，善射人意。
现代文：刘腾自幼充任宫役，手下翻书，仅知道签名而已。但是奸邪之计有余，善于猜度人意。
English: Liu Teng has been a palace servant since he was a child, and his subordinates have been turning over the books, and he only knows the signatures. However, he has more than enough evil plans, and he is good at guessing people's intentions.

古文：灵太后临朝，特蒙进宠，多所干托，内外碎密，栖栖不倦。洛北永桥、太上公、太上君及城东三寺，皆主修营。
现代文：灵太后临朝称制，极受恩宠，事务大多托付给他，宫室内外细小秘密，忙忙碌碌的不知疲倦，洛水北边的永桥、太上公、太上君以及城东三所寺庙，都是他主管修建的。
English: Lingdai Hou Lintong was highly favored, and most of the affairs were entrusted to him. He was in charge of the construction of the Yongqiao Bridge on the north side of Luoshui, the Grand Duke, the Grand Duchess, and the three temples in the east of the city.

古文：吏部尝望腾意，奏其弟为郡，带戍。
现代文：吏部曾经看出刘腾的意图，奏请封他弟弟为郡守，兼带守卫边疆。
English: The cadre department once saw Liu Teng's intention and requested that his brother be appointed as the county governor and guard the border.

古文：人资乖越，清河王怿抑而不奏。
现代文：与资质不相称，清河王元怿压住不上奏。
English: Not commensurate with his qualifications, Qinghe Wang Yuanqi was unable to play.

古文：腾以为恨，遂与领军元叉害怿，废灵太后于宣光殿。
现代文：刘腾怀恨在心。于是和领军元叉一起害死了元怿。在宣光殿废掉灵太后。
English: Liu Teng harbored hatred in his heart. Therefore, together with the leader of the army, Yuan Zha, he killed Yuan Shao. He deposed the Empress Dowager in the Xuan Guang Palace.

古文：宫门昼夜长闭，内外断绝。
现代文：宫门昼夜关闭，里外来往断绝。
English: The palace gate is closed day and night, and the inside and outside are cut off.

古文：腾自执管籥，明帝亦不得见，裁听传食而已。
现代文：刘腾自己拿着钥匙，明帝也不得见，只能听到送饭的话罢了。
English: Liu Teng himself held the key, and Ming Di was not allowed to see him. He could only hear the meal being delivered.

古文：太后服膳俱废，不免饥寒。
现代文：太后衣着膳食都不供应，难免又饥又寒。
English: The empress dowager was not provided with clothing or food, so she was inevitably hungry and cold.

古文：又使中常侍贾粲假言侍明帝书，密令防察。
现代文：刘腾又让中常侍贾粲假称服侍明帝写信，让自己在宫内访察。
English: Liu Teng also asked Jia Jia, the chief equerry, to write a letter pretending to serve Emperor Ming, and let him visit the palace.

古文：叉以腾为司空，表里擅权，共相树置。
现代文：元叉让刘腾做司空，里外专权，互相吹捧树立。
English: Yuan Fork allowed Liu Teng to be the secretary of the sky, the exclusive right at home and abroad, and the mutual praise.

古文：叉为外御，腾为内防，迭直禁闼，共裁刑赏。
现代文：元叉是外御，刘腾是内防，轮流在宫禁之中值班，一起决定赏罚。
English: Yuan Zha is the external governor, Liu Teng is the internal defense, take turns on duty during the palace ban, and decide on rewards and punishments together.

古文：腾遂与崔光同受诏，乘步挽出入殿门。
现代文：刘腾和崔光同时接受诏书，乘人拉车出入殿门。
English: Liu Teng and Cui Guang accepted the imperial edict at the same time and rode in a carriage to enter the palace gate.

古文：四年之中，生杀之威，决於叉、腾之手。
现代文：四年间，生杀大权，掌握在元叉、刘腾手中。
English: For four years, the power of life and death was in the hands of Yuan Xuan and Liu Teng.

古文：八坐九卿，旦造腾宅，参其颜色，然后方赴省府；亦有历日不能见者。
现代文：八座九卿等高级官员，早晨造访刘腾家宅，观看他的脸色，然后才去自己的官府，也有多天不能见到他的。
English: High-ranking officials such as the Eight Houses and Nine Lords visited Liu Teng's home in the morning to see his face, and then went to their own government offices. They could not see him for many days.

古文：公私属请，唯在财货，舟车之利，水陆无遗，山泽之饶，所在固护，剥削六镇，交通底市，岁入利息以巨万计。
现代文：公私请托，只取决于财货，舟车一旦有利，水陆运输一定一无所遗，山泽如果富饶，所在之地势必坚决防护，搜刮六镇，勾结黑市，每年所得利息可以用巨万计算。
English: Public and private trust, only depends on the goods. Once the boat trip is favorable, the land and water transportation must leave nothing to be desired. If Yamazawa is rich, the place where it is located is bound to be resolutely protected. Scraping six towns, colluding with the black market, the annual interest earned can be calculated in millions.

古文：又颇役嫔御，时有征求，妇女器物，公然受纳，逼夺邻居，广开室宇，天下咸苦之。
现代文：又好役使嫔妃侍奉自己。不时有征召，妇女与器物，公然占有，抢夺邻居，广开室宇，天下人都深受苦害。
English: From time to time there are conscription, women and utensils, open possession, robbery of neighbors, wide open rooms, and the whole world is suffering deeply.

古文：薨于位，中官为义息衰绖者四十余人。
现代文：死于位上，中等官职为他披麻行孝的有四十多人。
English: He died on the throne, and there are more than forty people who have served him as middle-ranking officials.

古文：腾之立宅也，奉车都尉周恃为之筮，不吉，深谏止之。
现代文：刘腾建宅院时，奉车都尉周恃为他卜筮，不吉利，尽力劝谏阻止他。
English: When Liu Teng was building his mansion, Feng Che's captain, Zhou Ye, tried his best to dissuade him.

古文：腾怒而不用。
现代文：刘腾大怒而不采纳。
English: Liu Teng was furious and refused to accept it.

古文：恃告人曰： 必困于三月、四月之交。 
现代文：周恃告诉他人说 ：一定会窘困在三、四月交会之时。 
English: Zhou Wei told others that he would definitely be in trouble at the time of the March-April meeting.

古文：至是果死。
现代文：到那时果然死去。
English: By then he was dead.

古文：事甫成，陈尸其下。
现代文：厅堂刚刚落成，尸体陈放下面。
English: The hall had just been completed, and the bodies were laid out below.

古文：追赠太尉、冀州刺史。
现代文：追赠太尉、冀州刺史。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain and awarded the Jizhou Medal of Honor.

古文：葬，阉官为义服，杖绖衰缟者以百数。朝贵皆从，轩盖填塞，相属郊野。
现代文：埋葬时，宦官为他穿义孝服，披麻穿白的有百人，朝中贵人都跟着，车盖堵塞，连接到郊野。
English: At the time of burial, the eunuch dressed him in filial piety, and there were a hundred people dressed in white, and the dignitaries of the dynasty followed, the car cover was blocked, and it was connected to the countryside.

古文：虽作 肱 字，世人皆称为 瑰 音。
现代文：魏朝初年以来，当权宦官死时的仪式都很盛大，但没有一个时候能够赶上刘腾。
English: Since the first year of the Wei Dynasty, the death ceremony of the eunuch in power has been grand, but it has never been able to catch up with Liu Teng.

古文：斯固亡秦者胡，盖县定于窈冥也。
现代文：灵太后重新执政，追回原封爵位，开掘坟墓，暴露尸骨，没收财产。
English: The spiritual empress regained power, recovered the original knighthood, excavated the grave, exposed the bones, and confiscated the property.

古文：韩凤，字长鸾，昌黎人也，父永兴，开府、青州刺史、高密郡公。
现代文：后来刘腾收养的一个儿子反叛入梁朝，灵太后大怒，把刘腾收养的其他人都移居到北方，不久派遣密使将他们追杀在汲郡。韩凤字长鸾，是昌黎人。父亲韩永兴，授任开府，青州刺史，封爵高密郡公。
English: Later, a son adopted by Liu Teng rebelled into the Liang Dynasty, and the Empress Dowager was furious. She moved everyone else adopted by Liu Teng to the north, and soon sent a secret envoy to hunt them down in Gumi County. Han Feng, also known as Nagase, was from Changli. His father, Han Yongxing, was given the post of Kaifu, the governor of Qingzhou, and the title of Duke of Gomi County.

古文：凤少聪察，有膂力，善骑射，稍迁乌贺真、大贤真正都督。
现代文：韩凤自幼聪明多智，体力强壮，擅长骑马射箭，后来升任为乌贺真、大贤真正都督。
English: Han Feng was clever and witty from a young age, physically strong, good at riding and archery, and later promoted to the governor of Wuhazhen.

古文：后主居东宫，年尚幼，武成简都督三十人，送令侍卫，凤在其数。
现代文：后主住在东宫，年纪还小，武成帝挑选都督三十人，送去侍卫后主，韩凤是其中之一。
English: The heir lived in the East Palace and was still young. Emperor Wu Cheng selected thirty governors and sent them to guard the heir. Han Feng was one of them.

古文：后主亲就众中牵凤手曰： 都督，看兒来。 
现代文：后主亲自在众人中拉着韩凤的手说 ：都督，看儿来。 
English: Afterward, the master himself took Han Feng's hand in the crowd and said, "Governor, come and see."

古文：因此被识，数唤共戏。
现代文：因此得到赏识，数次被后主唤去一同戏乐。
English: As a result, he was appreciated, and several times he was called by the Empress to perform with her.

古文：袭爵高密郡公，位开府仪同三司。
现代文：荫袭爵位高密郡公，位列开府仪同三司。
English: He inherited the title of Gaomi County magistrate, and was ranked as the highest-ranking official of the prefectural government.

古文：武平二年，和士开为厍狄伏连等矫害，敕咸阳王斛律明月、宜阳王赵彦深在凉风堂推问支党。
现代文：武平二年，和士开被厍伏连等矫诏杀害，皇帝下令让咸阳王斛律明月、宜阳王赵彦深在凉风堂审问同党。
English: In the second year of Wuping, when He Shikai was killed by Yao Fulian and others, the emperor ordered Xianyang King Yao Li Mingyue and Yiyang King Zhao Yanshen to interrogate the same party in Liangfeng Hall.

古文：其事秘密，皆令凤口传，然后宣诏敕号令文武。
现代文：这件事的内情，都让韩凤亲口传告，然后皇帝宣诏通告文武大臣。
English: Han Feng was allowed to tell the inside story of this matter in person, and then the emperor issued an edict notifying the minister of literature and armed forces.

古文：禁掖防守，悉以委之。
现代文：宫殿防卫，都交付给他。
English: The defence of the palace was entrusted to him.

古文：除侍中、领军，总知内省机密。
现代文：授予侍中、领军，总管内省机密。
English: Awarded to attendants, leaders, and the head of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：祖珽曾与凤于后主前论事，珽语凤云： 强弓长槊，容相推谢；军国谋算，何由得争？ 
现代文：祖王廷曾和韩凤在后主面前讨论事情，祖王廷对韩凤说 ：强弓长矛，容许互相推托；军国谋划，怎么能发生争执？ 
English: Ancestor Wangting and Han Feng had discussed the matter in front of the queen mother. Ancestor Wangting said to Han Feng: Strong bow and lance, allow mutual trust; military planning, how can there be a dispute?

古文：凤答云： 各出意见，岂在文武优劣！ 
现代文：韩凤回答说 ：各自发表意见，怎么有文武优劣的分别！ 
English: Han Feng replied, "Everyone expresses their own opinions, how can there be a distinction between the superior and inferior in literature and martial arts!"

古文：后主将诛斛律明月，凤固执不从。
现代文：后主将杀斛律明月，韩凤坚决不执行。
English: After that, the master will kill Zou Ruling Mingyue, and Han Feng will resolutely not carry it out.

古文：祖珽因有谗言，既诛明月，数日后主不兴语，后寻复旧。
现代文：祖王廷因在后主面前进有谗言，杀掉斛律明月后，有几天后主不和韩凤说话。后来才恢复旧日关系。
English: The ancestor Wang Ting did not speak to Han Feng for a few days after he killed Bao Lu Ming Yue because he had a bad word to say about him in front of his heir. It was only later that the old relationship was restored.

古文：仍封旧国昌黎郡王，又加特进。
现代文：仍旧封他故地昌黎郡王，另外又赐位特进。
English: He was still named the King of Changli County, his hometown, and was also given a special promotion.

古文：及祖珽除北徐州刺史，即令赴任。
现代文：祖王廷任北徐州刺史，皇上下令他立即上任。
English: Zuo Wangting served as the governor of North Xuzhou, and the emperor ordered him to take office immediately.

古文：既辞之后，迟留不行。
现代文：辞别皇上之后，祖王廷逗留京城不去赴任。
English: After bidding farewell to the emperor, Zuo Wangting stayed in Beijing and did not go to work.

古文：其省事徐孝远密告祖珽诛斛律明月后，矫称敕赐其珍宝财物，亦有不云敕而径回取者。
现代文：他的省事徐孝远告密祖王廷在杀死斛律明月后，矫诏称皇上赐给他珍宝财物，也有不说皇命而直接取回的。
English: His adviser, Xu Xiaoyuan, told the Emperor that after Wang Ting killed Bao Li Mingyue, he issued an edict saying that the Emperor had given him precious treasures and property, and some of them were directly retrieved without the Emperor's order.

古文：敕令领军将军侯吕芬追珽还，引入侍中省锁禁，其事首尾，并凤约敕责之。
现代文：皇上命令领军将军侯吕芬将祖王廷追回，引到侍中省关押，事情的前后，都是让韩凤约束斥责。
English: The emperor ordered the leading general, Hou Lüfen, to bring back Zu Wangting and take him into custody in Zhizhong Province. Han Feng was ordered to restrain and reprimand him both before and after the incident.

古文：进位领军大将军，余悉如故。
现代文：官职升为领军大将军，其他都和以往一样。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general leading the army, and everything else was the same as before.

古文：息宝行尚公主，在晋阳赐甲第一区。
现代文：儿子宝行娶公主为妻，在晋阳赏赐上等宅第。
English: His son Bao Xing married a princess and was rewarded with a first-class residence in Jinyang.

古文：其公主生男满月，驾幸凤宅，宴会尽日。
现代文：公主生男孩满月时，皇上驾临韩凤住宅，宴请宾客数天。
English: When the princess gave birth to a full-moon baby boy, the emperor drove to Han Feng's residence and entertained guests for several days.

古文：每旦早参，先被敕唤顾访，出后方引奏事官。
现代文：每天早参时，先被皇上召呼问事，出来后才召引奏事官。
English: Every morning when he went to the palace, he was first summoned by the emperor to ask questions, and only after he came out was he summoned to report to the officials.

古文：若不视事，内省急速者，皆附奏闻。
现代文：如果不处理政事，而内省急迫催促办理的，都由他顺便奏呈皇上。
English: If he does not deal with political affairs, but urgently urges them to be dealt with through introspection, he will incidentally report to the emperor.

古文：军国要密，无不经手。
现代文：国家与军中机密要闻，无不经过他的手。
English: State and military secrets passed through his hands.

古文：东西巡幸，及山水游戏射猎，独在御傍。
现代文：皇上东西游巡，以及游山玩水嬉戏射猎，只有他单独陪伴。
English: He was the only one to accompany the emperor on his tour of the East and West, as well as on his trips to the mountains to play in the water and go shooting.

古文：与高阿那肱、穆提婆共处衡轴，号曰三贵。
现代文：与高阿那肱、穆提婆共处中枢要职，号称三显贵。
English: Together with Gao Anaxun and Muti, they hold the central and important positions, and are known as the Three Notables.

古文：损国害政，日月滋甚。
现代文：损害国家，扰乱政治，日甚一日。
English: The damage to the country and the disruption of politics are increasing day by day.

古文：寿阳陷没，凤与穆提婆闻告败，握槊不辍曰： 他家物，从他去。 
现代文：寿阳陷落后，韩凤与穆提婆听说失败的消息，手握长槊不停地说： 他家的东西，任他去吧。 
English: After the fall of Shouyang, when Han Feng and Muti Ba heard the news of the defeat, they kept saying with long tongs in their hands: Let him go with his family's things.

古文：后帝使于黎阳临河筑城戍，曰： 急时且守此作龟兹国子。
现代文：后来皇上派他到黎阳，靠河修筑防护城，说： 危急时可守在这里做龟兹国子。
English: Later, the emperor sent him to Liyang to build a protective city by the river, saying, "In times of crisis, you can stay here and be a turtle son of the country."

古文：更可怜人生如寄，唯当行乐，何用愁为？ 
现代文：更可惜人生短促如蜉虫游寄于天地，只应该行乐，为什么要发愁呢？ 
English: It's even more unfortunate that life is short, like a tapeworm swimming in the sky. You should only have fun, why worry about it?

古文：君臣应和若此。
现代文：群臣也都这样应和。
English: The ministers also responded in the same way.

古文：凤恆带刀走马，未曾安行，瞋目张拳，有啖人之势。每咤曰： 恨不得剉汉狗饲马！ 
现代文：韩凤带刀驰马，不曾安稳行走，瞪眼挥拳，有吃人的样子，每次大声喝叱： 恨不能杀汉狗喂马！ 
English: Han Feng rides a horse with a knife, never walks steadily, glares and waves his fist, has the appearance of eating people, and every time he shouts: I can't wait to kill Han dogs and feed them to horses!

古文：又曰： 刀止可刈贼汉头，不可刈草。 
现代文：又说 ：刀只能用来砍汉贼头颅，不能除草。 
English: He also said: A knife can only be used to cut the heads of Han thieves, not to weed.

古文：其弟万岁，及其二子宝行、宝信，并开府仪同，万岁又拜侍中，亦处机要。
现代文：他的弟弟韩万岁，以及他的两个儿子宝行、宝信，都是开府仪同。韩万岁又官任侍中，也处在重要职位上。
English: His younger brother, Han Wan Rong, and his two sons, Bao Xing and Bao Xin, were all members of the Kaifu Rong. Han Wan Rong also served as an attendant and was also in an important position.

古文：宝信尚公主，驾复幸其宅，亲戚咸蒙官赏。
现代文：宝信娶公主，皇上又幸临他的家宅，亲戚都得到官家赏赐。
English: Baoxin married a princess, the emperor was fortunate enough to visit his home, and his relatives were rewarded by officials.

古文：凤母鲜于，段孝言之从母子姊也，为此偏相参附，奏遣监造晋阳宫。
现代文：韩凤的母亲鲜于，是段孝言姨母儿子的姐姐，因此不合理地攀比，上奏请求监造晋阳宫。
English: Han Feng's mother was a younger sister of Duan Xiaoyan's aunt's son, so she made an unreasonable request to supervise the construction of Jinyang Palace.

古文：陈德信驰驿检行，见孝言役官夫匠自营宅，即语云： 仆射为至尊起台殿未讫，何用先自营造？ 
现代文：陈德信乘马沿途察看，见段孝言役使官家工匠为自己建造宅第，就对他说 ：仆射为至尊建造台殿还没有完工，为何先为自己建起府第来？ 
English: Chen Dexin inspected along the way on horseback, and saw that Duan Xiaogenyu had ordered the government craftsmen to build a mansion for himself. He said to him: "The construction of the throne hall for the Supreme Leader has not yet been completed. Why did you build a mansion for yourself first?"

古文：凤及穆提婆亦遣孝言分工匠为己造宅。德信还，具奏闻。及幸晋阳，凤又以官马与他人乘骑，上因此发忿，与提婆并除名。
现代文：韩凤与穆提婆也让段孝言派工匠为自己建宅，陈德信回朝，详细陈奏皇上得知，等皇上临幸晋阳，韩凤又把官家马匹让给他人乘骑，皇上因此发怒，把韩凤和穆提婆一块除名。
English: Han Feng and Muti also let Duan Xiaoyan send craftsmen to build a house for themselves. Chen Deshun returned to the imperial court and told the emperor in detail that when the emperor came to Jinyang, Han Feng gave the official horses to others to ride. The emperor was angry and removed Han Feng and Muti together.

古文：亦不露其罪。仍毁其宅，公主离婚，复被遣尚鄴吏部门参。
现代文：也不公布他们的罪状，毁掉他的府宅，公主离婚，又被送往邺下交吏部参审。
English: He also did not publicize their charges, destroyed his mansion, divorced the princess, and sent her to the court officials' office to stand trial.

古文：及后主晋阳走还，被敕唤入内，寻诏复王爵及开府、领军大将军，常在左右。
现代文：后来后主从晋阳回京，韩凤被召入内宫，下诏恢复他的王爵与开府领军大将军，经常在皇上身边。
English: Later, after the lord returned to Beijing from Jinyang, Han Feng was summoned to the Inner Palace and ordered to restore his title of prince and the leading general of the Kaifu army. He was often at the emperor's side.

古文：仍从后主走度河，到青州，并为周军所获。
现代文：仍然跟随后主渡黄河，到青州，同被周朝军队俘获。
English: He still followed the master across the Yellow River to Qingzhou and was captured by the Zhou army.

古文：凤被宠要之中，尤嫉人士，朝夕宴私，唯相谮诉。
现代文：韩凤被宠幸，身居要职期间，特别嫉妒贤才士人，早晚饮宴，只是相互诽谤。
English: Han Feng was fortunate to be favored. During his time in high office, he was particularly jealous of people of merit. He held morning and evening banquets, but only slandered each other.

古文：崔季舒等冤酷，皆凤所为也，每一赐与，动至千万。
现代文：崔季舒等人的冤案，都是韩凤造成的。皇上每次赏赐他，动辄就是千万。
English: The wrongful cases of Cui Jishu and others were all caused by Han Feng. Every time the emperor rewarded him, it was tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：恩遇日甚，弥自骄恣，意色严厉，未尝与人相承接。
现代文：恩宠日甚一日，越发骄横恣肆，神色严厉，不曾和他人应酬过。
English: With each passing day, Grace became more and more arrogant and reckless. She had a stern look on her face and never socialized with others.

古文：朝士谘事，莫敢仰视，动致呵叱，辄詈云： 狗汉大不可耐！
现代文：朝廷官吏问事，不敢抬头看他，动不动就大声呵叱，大骂说： 狗汉人真不可忍受！
English: When the court officials asked questions, they dared not look up at him, but scolded and cursed him loudly at every turn, saying: "What an intolerable dog the Han Chinese are!

古文：唯须杀却！ 
现代文：只应该杀掉！ 
English: They should just kill it!

古文：若见武职，虽厮养末品，亦容下之。
现代文：如果碰上武士，即使身处社会末层，也容纳他们。
English: If you meet a samurai, even if you are at the bottom of society, accommodate them.

古文：仕隋，位终于陇州刺史。
现代文：在隋做官，官位最后达到陇州刺史。
English: He was an official in the Sui Dynasty, and his official rank finally reached the highest in the history of Zhangzhou.

