古文：二十一日平明起，天已大霁，以陆公书投莫。
现代文：二十一日黎明起床，天已大晴，把陆公的信投递给莫公。
English: On the twenty-first day, I got up at dawn, and it was already fine. I handed Lu Gong's letter to Mo Gong.

古文：莫在囤，不及往叩，以名柬去，余乃候饭于寓中。
现代文：莫公在囤子上，来不及去叩见，拿了名贴去，我就在离所中等待吃饭。
English: Mokong was on the raft, so he didn't have time to go and knock on the door, so he took the name tag and went. I was in the middle of leaving the house, waiting for dinner.

古文：既午，散步东街，渡塘堤，经州治前，而西循囤山北壁下行，共一里，入北山南向石洞。
现代文：中午后，在东街散步，走过塘中的堤坝，经过州治前，而后往西沿囤子所在的山北面的石壁下前行，共一里，进入北山向南的石洞。
English: After noon, take a walk on East Street, walk across the dam in the pond, pass through the prefecture, and then go west along the stone wall on the north side of the mountain where the raft is located, a total of one mile, and enter the stone cave on the north mountain to the south.

古文：又从洞前西北行半里，转而西南又半里，渡桥亭，入清水塘，返寓已下午。
现代文：又从洞前往西北行半里，转向西南又走半里，越过桥亭，步入清水塘，返回寓中已是下午。
English: I walked half a mile from the cave to the northwest, turned to the southwest and walked another half mile, crossed the bridge pavilion, walked into the clear water pond, and returned to the apartment in the afternoon.

古文：莫公馈米肉与酒，熟而酌之。
现代文：莫公馈赠了米肉与酒，煮熟后饮酒。
English: Mokong presented rice meat and wine, and drank alcohol after cooking.

古文：迨晚霁甚。
现代文：到晚上天气非常好。一 
English: By the evening, the weather was very good.

古文：二十二日五更颇寒，迨起而云气复翳。
现代文：二十二日五更时相当寒冷，等到起床后云气重又遮蔽了太阳。
English: It was quite cold at 5 a.m. on the 22nd. When I woke up, the clouds were heavy and covered the sun.

古文：站人言夫将至，可亟炊饭。
现代文：释站的人说脚夫将要到了，应赶快煮饭吃。
English: The person who released the station said that the porter was about to arrive, and that they should quickly cook and eat.

古文：既饭而夫仍不齐。
现代文：吃饭后脚夫仍来不齐。
English: After the meal, the porter still did not come.

古文：刘曰： 昨误以为银硃薄物，竟漫置之，不意其为宝物也传世的贵重物品，当即入言。
现代文：这之前，我没有什么东西作见面礼，拿了两枚水晶印章一并送进去馈赠，怎么一并收进去后，竟然没有回音。我再三索要回贴，众人都互相推楼，好像希望我走了就算了的样子。我不得已，前去叩拜一个姓刘的掌管案犊文书的人，对他讲了其中的缘故。
English: Before this, I didn't have anything to make a gift, I took two crystal seals and sent them in as a gift, but after receiving them together, there was no reply. I repeatedly asked for a return post, and everyone pushed each other, as if they wanted me to go away. I had no choice but to go and bow down to a man named Liu who was in charge of the documents, and told him why.

古文：但斯时未起，须缓一日程可耳。 余不得已，从之。
现代文：姓刘的说： 昨天误以为是银子朱砂一类微不足道的东西，居然漫不经心把它放到了一边，想不到这是传世的稀世之物，应该马上进去说明。
English: Liu said: "Yesterday, I mistakenly thought it was a silver cinnabar, a kind of insignificant thing, and actually carelessly put it aside. I couldn't imagine that it was a rare thing handed down from generation to generation. I should go in and explain it right away.

古文：昨诸人竟私置于外，故不得回柬，至是然后入白也。
现代文：但此时未起床，必须暂缓一天上路是可以的了。 我不得已，听从了他。
English: But at this time, I did not get up, so I had to postpone going on the road for a day.

古文：候至更余，刘犹在囤未归，乃闷闷卧。
现代文：等到一更多时，姓刘的仍在囤子上未归来，只好闷闷不乐地躺下。
English: After waiting for more than an hour, the man surnamed Liu still did not return from the raft, so he had to lie down sullenly.

古文：银锡二厂，在南丹州东南四十里，在金村西十五里，其南去那地州亦四十里。
现代文：银锡两种矿厂，在南丹州东南四十里，在金村西面十五里，它的南边距那地州也有四十里。
English: The two silver and tin mines are located 40 miles southeast of Nantan and 15 miles west of Jincun. Its southern edge is also 40 miles from Nantan.

古文：其地曰新州，属南丹；曰高峰，属河池州；曰中坑，属那地。
现代文：此地的矿厂有三处：一叫新州，属南丹州；一叫高峰，属河池州；一叫中坑，属那地州。
English: There are three mining plants here: one is called Xinzhou, which belongs to Nantan; one is called Gaofeng, which belongs to Hechi; and one is called Zhongkeng, which belongs to Nadi.

古文：皆产银、锡。
现代文：都出产银、锡。
English: They all produce silver and tin.

古文：三地相间仅一二里，皆客省客贾所集。
现代文：三个地方相隔仅一二里，都是外省的客商聚集之地。
English: The three places are only one or two miles apart, and are all places where merchants from other provinces gather.

古文：按《志》有高峰砦同 寨 ，即此高峰之厂，独属河池，而其地实错于南丹、那地之间，达州必由南丹境。
现代文：据志书，有处高峰碧，就是此地的高峰厂，唯独隶属于河池，但此地实际交错在南丹州、那地州之间，到达州里必得经由南丹州境内。
English: According to the book, there is a peak Biyu, which is the peak plant of this place, except that it belongs to Hechi, but this place is actually interlaced between Nantan and Nandi states, and it must pass through the territory of Nantan to reach the state.

古文：二十三日候夫不至，总站徐曰 以昨礼未酬，尚须待一日。 
现代文：推想是因为矿坑所在之地，所以把此地分为三部分。又有个灰罗厂，只产锡。有座孟英山，只产银。二十三日等脚夫不见来到，统管释站姓徐的人说： 因为昨天的礼没有答谢，还必须等一天。 
English: Supposedly, because of the location of the mine, this place was divided into three parts. There was also a smelting plant, which only produced tin. There was a Meng Ying Mountain, which only produced silver. On the 23rd, when the porter did not come, the person in charge of the release station, surnamed Xu, said: Because yesterday's gift was not thanked, we still have to wait one day.

古文：余求去不得，惟闷闷偃坐而已。
现代文：我要求离开不能实现，只有闷闷不乐地躺躺坐坐而已。
English: My request to leave could not be fulfilled, and I just lay there sullenly.

古文：至午后，始以两晶章还余，而损其一，余五色，则为诸人干没侵吞财物矣。是日午间雷雨，晚大霁。
现代文：到午后，才拿两枚水晶印章还给我，但损坏了其中的一枚，其余的五种东西，却被众人吞没了。这天午间下雷雨，晚上大晴。
English: In the afternoon, I took two crystal seals and returned them to me, but one of them was damaged, and the other five things were swallowed by the crowd. It was a thunderstorm in the afternoon and a fine evening.

古文：由银锡厂而南，两日程至涯洞，有大江自西而东，为那地、东兰二州界。其渡处名河水渡，实为刁江。
现代文：由银锡厂往南走，两天的路程到达涯洞，有大江自西流向东，是那地、东兰两州的分界，江上的渡口名叫河水渡，就是都泥江了。
English: Walking south from the Yin Tin Factory, it takes two days to reach Ya Dong. There is a big river flowing from west to east, which is the border between that place and Donglan. The ferry crossing on the river is called He Shui Du, which is the Mud River.

古文：其上流来自泗城界，其下流东历永顺土司北五里。即下石堰，为罗木渡者也。
现代文：它的上游来自于泅城州境内，它的下游向东流经永顺土司北面五里，立即流下石坝，成为罗木渡的江流了。
English: Its upstream comes from the territory of Lucheng Prefecture, and its downstream flows eastward through Yongshun five miles north of Tusi, immediately flowing down the stone dam and becoming the river of Luo Midu.

古文：南丹东八十余里抵大山岭，为河池州界；东南四十里过新州，为那地州界；西三日程约一百五十里抵巴鹅，北为平洲四寨界，西为泗城州界；西北二日程约一百里过六寨，为独山下司界；东北日半程约七十里抵东界，为荔波县界。
现代文：南丹州往东八十多里抵达大山岭，是河池州的州界；东南四十里过了新州，是那地州的州界；往西三夭的路程约一百五十里抵达巴鹅，北面是平洲四寨的边界，西边是洒城州的州界；往西北两天的路程约一百里过了六寨，是独山州下司的边界；向东北一天半的路程约七十里抵达东部边界，是荔波县的县界。
English: South Danzhou reached Dashanling more than eighty miles to the east, which is the state border of Hechi State; forty miles to the southeast passed Xinzhou, which is the state border of Nanji State; about one hundred and fifty miles to the west, which is the border of Pingzhou Sizhai in the north, and the state border of Surancheng State in the west; about one hundred miles to the northwest for two days, which is the border of Doushanzhou Shizi; and about one and a half miles to the northeast, which is the eastern border, which is the county border of Libo County.

古文：其等甚大，中国银不堪使也。
现代文：南丹州米肉各种东西的价钱都比其他地方高两倍。
English: The price of rice, meat and other goods in Nantan is twice as high as elsewhere.

古文：龙眼树至此无。德胜甚多。
现代文：唯有银价贱而且成色很低，此地的戮子非常大，使用中原的银子承受不了。
English: The only problem is that the price of silver is low and its fineness is low. The amount of silver in this area is very large, and the use of silver from the Central Plains is unbearable.

古文：二十四日晨起，阴云四合，是日为立夏。
现代文：到此地龙眼树没有了。二十四日早晨起床，阴云四面合拢，这天是立夏日。
English: On the morning of the 24th, I woke up to dark clouds closing in on all sides. It was the first day of summer.

古文：饭而待夫，久不至，上午止得四名，二名犹未至。
现代文：饭后等待派夫，很久不来，上午只得到四名，有两名还未来。
English: After dinner, we waited for the baker, but he didn't come for a long time. In the morning, we only got four bakers, and two of them didn't show up.

古文：余不能待，以二名担行李，以二名肩舆行。
现代文：我不能等下去，让两名挑行李，用两名扛轿子上路。
English: I couldn't wait any longer, let the two of them carry the luggage and go on the road with the two palanquins.

古文：出街北，直北行山坞间，一里半，大溪向东北去，路折而西北，逾土岭。
现代文：出到街北，一直往北行走在山坞间，一里半，大溪向东北流去，路折向西北，翻越土岭。
English: Go out to the north of the street, walk north all the way between the docks, a mile and a half, the creek flows to the northeast, the road turns to the northwest, and crosses the mound.

古文：二里半，逾岭西下，有水自东南来，北向而去，渡之南行，于是石峰复出，或回合，或逼仄，高树密枝，蒙翳深倩，时午日渐霁，如行绿幄中。
现代文：二里半，越过岭往西下走，有水流从东南流来，向北流去，渡水后往南行，在这里石峰重新出现，有的回绕拢来，有的紧逼侧立，高树密枝，蒙密荫蔽，幽深俏丽，此时中午太阳渐渐晴开，如同行走在绿色的筛慢之中。
English: Two and a half miles, crossing the ridge to the west, there is water flowing from the southeast to the north, after crossing the water to the south, where the stone peaks reappear, some around, some close to the side, tall trees, dense branches, covered with shade, deep and beautiful. At this time, the midday sun gradually clears, as if walking in a green sieve.

古文：已溯峡西入，惟闻水声潺潺，而翳密不辨其从出，想亦必东向之流，然石路甚大，不若州东皆从草莽中行也。
现代文：不久逆着山峡往西进去，只听见水声潺潺，但林木浓密遮挡着辨不出它从哪里流出去，推想也必定是向东的水流，然而石头路十分宽大，不像在州东都是从草莽中行走了。
English: Soon we entered the canyon to the west, and all we could hear was the sound of rushing water, but the thick trees obscured it, so we couldn't tell where it was coming from. We assumed it must be the eastward flow of water, but the stone path was very wide, unlike in the east of the state, where we had to walk through the grass.

古文：共三里，有石峰中立于两山峡间，高锐逾于众，而两旁夹壁反隘，益觉峥嵘。
现代文：共三里，有座石峰当中立在两面山峡之间，又高又尖超过群山，而两旁相夹的石壁反而狭小，益发觉得峥嵘。
English: A total of three miles, there is a stone peak standing in the middle between the two sides of the gorge, tall and sharp beyond the mountains, and the stone walls sandwiched between the two sides are narrow and increasingly feel cramped.

古文：由其南夹西透，又陟岭一里，西南逾脊，其南即深坑下坠，亦如岭北者之密翳沉碧也。
现代文：由它南边的夹谷穿过去，又登岭一里，向西南越过山脊，山脊南面就是下坠的深坑，也像岭北的山一样林木密蔽碧波沉浮了。
English: Passing through the valley on its south side, it climbs another mile up the ridge and crosses the ridge to the southwest. On the south side of the ridge is a deep pit, and like the mountain on the north side of the ridge, it is densely covered with trees.

古文：由岭上西循北峰，又逾脊西下，共里余，由两山夹中西出，曰夹山关今作关上。
现代文：由岭上往西沿北峰走，又越过山脊往西下行，共走一里多，由两山相夹的山谷中向西出来，叫夹山关。
English: From the ridge to the west along the north peak, and then over the ridge to the west down, a total of more than one mile, from the valley between the two mountains to the west, called the mountain pass.

古文：夹西即有数家倚北峰下，其后削崖如屏，前则新篁密箐，路从其下行。
现代文：西边就有数家人依傍在北峰下，它后面陡削的山崖如像屏风，前边是清新浓密的竹林，路从它下边走。
English: On the west side, there are several families leaning on the side of the north peak. Behind it, the steep cliff is like a screen. In front, there is a fresh dense bamboo forest. The road goes under it.

古文：忽北山之麓，石崖飞架，有小水自西来，漱石崖之脚，北入石洞中。
现代文：忽然北山的山麓，石崖飞架，有小溪从西边流来，冲刷着石崖的石脚，向北流入石洞中。
English: Suddenly, at the foot of the North Mountain, the stone cliff ledge, a stream came from the west, washed the stone foot of the stone cliff, and flowed north into the stone cave.

古文：洞门南向，在浮崖之东村后危崖之下，水自南捣入，当亦透北山而泄于南丹下流者也。
现代文：洞口向南，在浮空石崖东面村后的危崖之下，水从南面冲捣进洞，应当也是穿流过北山而后泄入南丹州下游的水流。
English: The mouth of the cave is to the south, under the cliff behind the village on the east side of the floating rock cliff. The water rushing into the cave from the south should also be the water flowing through the North Mountain and then leaking into the downstream of Nantan.

古文：由浮崖下溯细流西行，其内复回田一壑，南麓又有村数十家。
现代文：由浮空石崖下溯细小的溪流往西行，那里面又有田地回绕在满壑谷之中，南麓又有个数十家人的村庄。
English: From the floating rock cliff, a small stream is traced to the west, where there are fields around in the middle of the valley, and there is a village of dozens of families at the southern foot.

古文：又西三里，逾土山下，西北又一里，有水自西南土峡中来，东抵石崖下，转而北去，路亦渡水而北。
现代文：又向西三里，越过土山下走，向西北又是一里，有水流从西南的土山峡中流来，律东抵达石崖下，转向北流去，路也渡过水流往北走。
English: Another three miles to the west, go down over the hill, another mile to the northwest, there is water flowing from the southwest of the hill, and the east reaches the cliff and turns to the north, and the road also crosses the water to the north.

古文：二里，水由东北坞中去，由小岐西北升陟，冈阜高下，共四里，乃下岭。
现代文：二里，水由东北的山坞中流去，由岔开的小道向西北爬升，冈阜高低不一，共四里，这才下岭。
English: For two miles, the water flows from the middle of the mountain dock in the northeast, and climbs northwest from the path that has been opened. Gifu varies in height, a total of four miles, and this is the lower ridge.

古文：又西南转入山坞，为彝州村，日已下午矣。
现代文：又向西南转入山坞中，是夷州村，时光已到下午了。
English: It turned to the southwest and entered the dockyard, which is Yizhou village. It was already afternoon.

古文：炊而易骑，由坞中随细流东北行。
现代文：煮饭吃后换了坐骑，由坞中沿细流往东北行。
English: After cooking and eating, I changed my mount and rode from the dock along the stream to the northeast.

古文：一里，涉溪，又一里，逾坳乃转西北，细流在山峡中，亦西北转。
现代文：一里，涉过溪流，又走一里，越过山坳就转向西北，细流在山峡中，也向西北转。
English: One mile, wade through the stream, walk another mile, cross the mountains and turn to the northwest, the stream in the canyon, also turn to the northwest.

古文：已北渡一峡，复北上山，缘西山之半行，共二里，峰头石路甚崎嵚，其下峡中水亦自南而北，又有一东来小水凑合于其下而北去。
现代文：不久向北越过一个山峡，再往北上山，沿西山的半山腰行，共二里，峰头的石头路十分崎岖，山下峡中的水流也是自南往北流，又有一条从东面流来的小溪凑合到山下往北流去。
English: Soon I crossed a mountain gorge to the north, then went up the mountain to the north, and walked along the mid-mountain side of the West Mountain for a total of two miles. The stone road at the peak was very rugged. The water flow in the mountain gorge also flowed from south to north, and a small stream flowing from the east made up for it and flowed down the mountain to the north.

古文：又北行逾岭而下，则峡中汇水甚深，想即前水之转而西也。
现代文：又往北行越岭下走，就见峡中的积水非常深，猜想就是前边的水流转向西流了。
English: Walking further north across the ridge, I saw that the water in the gorge was very deep, and I guessed that the water flow in front of me had turned to the west.

古文：渡之，循涧北行，有堰截涧中，故其东水及马腹耳。
现代文：渡过积水，顺山涧往北行，有堤横堵在山涧中，所以堤东的水达到马肚子了。
English: After crossing the standing water, we went north along the ridge of the mountain. A dike was blocked in the ridge, so the water in the east of the dike reached the horse's stomach.

古文：共一里，又有小水自西土峡来，合而东去。
现代文：共走一里，又有小溪自西面的土山峡中流来，合流后往东流去。
English: A total of one mile away, there is also a small stream flowing from the middle of the earthen mountain gorge in the west, merging and flowing to the east.

古文：从其合处仍渡而北，则东来大路复至是会，乃循之西北上岭。
现代文：从水流会合处仍渡到溪北岸，就见东面来的大路又来到此地相会，于是沿大路向西北上岭。
English: After crossing from the confluence of the streams to the north bank of the creek, he saw that the main road coming from the east came to meet here, so he followed the main road to the northwest of Shangling.

古文：一里，逾土山隘，则北面石山屏立而东，路循南界土山西北行，两界之中复有田塍，东西开坞，有小水界其中，亦东向去。
现代文：一里，越过土山隘口，就见北面的石山屏风样矗立往东延去，路沿着南面一列土山往西北行。两列山之中又有田野，拓开成东西向的山坞，有小溪隔在其中，也是向东流去。
English: One mile beyond the earthen mountain pass, you can see the stone mountain screen in the north extending to the east. The road runs along a line of earthen mountains in the south to the northwest. There are fields in the middle of the two lines of mountains, opening up into a dock in the east-west direction, separated by a creek, which also flows to the east.

古文：又西二里余，坞南北山下俱有村，多瓦舍，曰栏路村今作拉大。
现代文：又向西走二里多，山坞南面北山下都有村庄，瓦房很多，叫栏路村。
English: Another two miles to the west, there are villages south of the dockyard and north of the mountain, and there are many tile houses. They are called Banlu Village.

古文：大路直西向山隙去，从岐北向渡溪，一里，逾北界石山北下，转西行半里，宿于蜡北村。
现代文：大路一直往西向着山间缺口走去，从岔路向北渡过溪流，一里，越过北面的石山向北下山，转向西行半里，住宿在蜡北村。
English: The main road went all the way west towards the gap between the mountains. From Kushiro, it went north across the stream for one mile, crossed the stone mountain to the north, went north down the mountain, turned west for half a mile, and stayed in Wax North Village.

古文：二十五日昧爽，由蜡北村稍西复北向入峡中，半里，逾小脊北下，半里，抵尖高峰下。
现代文：二十五日黎明，由蜡北村稍往西走重又向北走入山峡中，半里，越过小山脊往北下行，半里，抵达尖高峰下。
English: At dawn on the 25th, I walked from Wax North Village slightly westward and then northward into the canyon, half a mile, crossed the ridge to the north, half a mile, and arrived at the foot of the peak.

古文：其处另成一峒，有一二茅舍倚尖峰下。
现代文：此处另成一酮，有一二间茅屋靠在尖高峰下。
English: Here is a different scene, with one or two huts leaning against the peak.

古文：竟峒东北行二里，有村在西山之麓，曰肖村。
现代文：走完桐后往东北行二里，有村庄在西山的山麓，叫肖村。
English: After walking through Tong, two miles to the northeast, there is a village at the foot of the West Mountain, called Xiao Village.

古文：又北半里，有洞在西小山坑中，其门东南向，外层甚敞，中壁如屏，又辟内门甚深。
现代文：又向北走半里，有山洞在西面小山的坑谷中，洞口朝向东南，外面一层十分宽敞，中间的洞壁如像屏风，里面又辟有洞口非常深。
English: Another half-mile to the north, there is a cave in the valley of the western hill, the cave opening to the southeast, the outer layer is very spacious, the middle of the cave wall is like a screen, and there is a very deep cave opening inside.

古文：路由东山崖上行，隔坞对望之，藤萝罨覆挂，中有水自洞门潺潺出，前成涧南流西折去。
现代文：路由东面的山崖上走，隔着山坞与山洞对面相望，藤条覆挂，洞中有水从洞口潺潺流出，洞前形成山涧，向南流后折向西流去。
English: The path goes up the cliff to the east, across the dock from the opposite side of the cave, covered with rattan, with water flowing out of the mouth of the cave, forming a ridge in front of the cave, flowing south and then west.

古文：又东北半里，逾岭脊，颇峻。
现代文：又往东北行半里，越过岭脊，十分险峻。
English: Another half mile to the northeast, over the ridge, very steep.

古文：东西峰俱石崖，而此脊独土。
现代文：东西两面的山峰全是石崖，只有此处岭脊是土的。
English: The peaks on both the east and west sides are all rocky cliffs, only the ridge here is earthen.

古文：逾之东北下一里，又成一峒，曰街旁村。
现代文：越过岭脊向东北下走一里，又成一恫，叫街旁村。
English: Cross the ridge ridge and walk one mile to the northeast, and it will become a threat, called the village next to the street.

古文：送者欲换夫骑，而居人不承，强送者复前。
现代文：送行的人想要换夫换马，可居民不肯应差，强迫送行的人再往前走。
English: The send-off person wanted to change husbands and wives, but the residents did not want to go, forcing the send-off person to go further.

古文：于是西北登岭，岭上下多倚崖随壑之舍。
现代文：于是向西北登岭，岭上下之处有许多背靠山崖沿着壑谷的房屋。
English: As a result, I climbed the ridge to the northwest. There are many houses on the ridge and up and down that are backed by cliffs along the valley.

古文：一里，逾岭下而复上，又西北二里，复逾岭西转北向行，有村在东山之半，甚众。
现代文：一里，越过山岭下走后再上走，又往西北二里，再越到岭西转向北行，有个村庄在东山的半山腰，房屋非常多。
English: There is a village halfway up the Dongshan Mountain, with a large number of houses.

古文：循之北行二里，有尖山坚东峰之上，甚锐，下有瓦房，环篱回堵，颇不似诸村落。
现代文：沿着东山往北行二里，有座尖山竖立在东峰之上，非常尖锐，下边有瓦房，竹篱围墙环绕，不太像各地的村落。
English: Two miles north along the East Mountain, there is a sharp mountain standing on top of the East Peak, very sharp, with tile houses below, surrounded by a bamboo fence, not quite like villages around the country.

古文：其西界有山高耸，冠于诸峰，此始为南下多灵两江都泥、龙江。分界之脊，与所行东峰对夹成坞。
现代文：这里的西面有山高耸，胜过群峰，这才是向南下延到多灵山两江分界的山脊，与所走的东峰相对夹成山坞。
English: To the west of here, there are towering mountains, towering over the peaks. This is the ridge that stretches south to the border between the two rivers of Mount Dorling, sandwiched into a dock opposite the east peak.

古文：中开大壑，自南而北，即前栏路村西行大道，转而为此坞者也。
现代文：中间展开一个大壑谷，自南延向北，就是前边从栏路村往西走的大道，转而成为此处山坞了。
English: In the middle, a large valley spreads out, stretching from south to north, which is the main road from the village of Ranlu to the west, turning into a dock here.

古文：坞中土山之上，丛树蓊葱，居室鳞次。
现代文：坞中的土山之上，树丛郁郁葱葱，居民房屋鳞次栉比。
English: On top of the hill in the dockyard, the trees are lush, and the residents' houses are staggering.

古文：与此村东西相对者曰芒场，此大道所经者；余以站骑就村相换，故就此小道。
现代文：与此村东西相对的村庄叫芒场，这是大道经过的地方；我由于骚站的马匹要到村中去换，所以走上这条小道。
English: The village to the east and west of this village is called Mengchang, which is where the road passes; I took this path because I had to change horses in the village.

古文：然村夫沿门求代，彼皆不承，屡前屡止，强之不行。
现代文：然而乡村农夫挨门挨户去请求替换，那些人都不肯应差，屡次前走屡次停下来，强迫他们又不肯走。
English: However, when the village farmers went door-to-door to ask for replacements, those people did not want to go, repeatedly walking forward and repeatedly stopping, forcing them to refuse to go.

古文：方无可奈何，适有一少年悬剑插箭至，促其速行，则南丹莫君所遣令箭送余者，始得复前。
现代文：正在无可奈何之时，适好有一个少年悬挂宝剑插着弓箭来到，催促他们快走，原来是南丹州的莫君派遣持令箭来送我的人，这才开始再向前走。
English: Just when I was at my wit's end, a young boy arrived with a sword and a bow and arrow, urging them to hurry. It turned out to be Mo Jun from Nantan who had sent someone with a bow and arrow to see me off, and that's when I started to walk forward again.

古文：又北逾一岭，又北一里、饭于壁坳村。
现代文：又向北越过一座山岭，又向北一里，在壁坳村吃饭。
English: Another mile north, across a mountain range, and another mile north, to dine in the village of Kikyo.

古文：数家在东峰之半，前多踞石排列，置庐其间，实为选胜，而土人莫之知也。
现代文：数家人在东峰半山腰，村前排列着许多岩石，房屋建在其间，实在是首选的胜境，但当地人不知道它的优美之处。
English: Several families live in the middle of the East Peak, and there are many rocks lined up in front of the village. Houses are built in between them. It is really a preferred scenic spot, but the locals do not know its beauty.

古文：既饭，易骑至而无鞍，乃令二夫先以担行，站夫再往芒场觅鞍；久之仍不得，乃伐竹缚舆；舆成而候夫；又久之马至，已下午矣，乃西向行。
现代文：饭后，换的马匹到来但却没有马鞍，只好命令两个挑夫先挑担走，释站的脚夫再去芒场找马鞍；很久仍找不到，只得砍竹子捆成轿子；轿子做成又等候派夫；又是很久马才到，已是下午了，于是向西行。
English: After the meal, the changed horses arrived but without saddles, so they had to order the two porters to pick up the burden first, and the porter who released the station to go to the alder field to look for a saddle. They couldn't find it for a long time, so they had to cut bamboo and bundle it into a palanquin. Once the palanquin was made, they had to wait for the palanquin. The horses didn't arrive for a long time, it was already afternoon, so they headed west.

古文：先是，壁坳站夫言： 西北石山嵯峨，其下有村曰蛮王，此峰亦曰蛮峰。 
现代文：这之前，壁坳村释站的差夫说： 西北方石山巍峨，山下有个村庄叫蛮王村，此峰也叫做蛮王峰。 
English: Prior to this, the watchman at the Qibao village release station said: In the northwest, Shishan is towering, and there is a village called Barbarian King Village at the foot of the mountain. This peak is also called Barbarian King Peak.

古文：乃望之西行，越一土阜西下，共二里，有涧自南而北，逾涧又北上岭，逾土山二重，共一里，下至土峡中，有小水自北而南，溯之北上一里，直抵蛮王峰下。
现代文：于是望着它往西行；越过一座土阜往西下行，共走二里，有山涧自南往北流，越过山涧又向北上岭，越过两重土山，共一里，下到土山峡谷中，有小溪自北流向南，溯小溪往北上行一里，直抵蛮王峰下。
English: So he looked at it and went westward. He went westward over a clay pavement for a total of two miles. There was a mountain stream flowing from south to north. He crossed the mountain stream and went north to Shangling. He crossed two soil mountains for a total of one mile. He went down to the valley of the soil mountain. There was a stream flowing from north to south. He followed the stream northward for a mile and arrived at the foot of Banwang Peak.

古文：其屼嵲骈耸最，西南峰顶有石曲起，反躬北向，上复直竖如首，岂即所谓 蛮王 者耶？
现代文：它最为高峻突兀并列高耸，西南的峰顶有块岩石弯曲而起，反转身体朝向北方，上方又竖直如像头颅，莫非就是所谓的 蛮王 的地方了吗？
English: It is the most precipitous, jagged and towering. At the top of the southwest peak, there is a rock curving up, reversing its body to the north, and standing upright like a head above. Is it not the so-called Barbarian King's place?

古文：时顾仆押夫担在蛮王村，尚隔一夹，呼余直西从大道，彼亦从村押夫来。
现代文：此时顾仆押挑夫担子在蛮王村，还隔着一条峡谷，呼唤我一直向西从大道走，他也从村中押着挑夫来。
English: At this time, Gu's servant was holding the porter's burden in the village of Savage King, still across a canyon, calling me to keep walking west from the avenue, and he was also holding the porter from the village.

古文：半里，会于峰之西，乃转而循峰西夹北向行。
现代文：半里，与顾仆在山峰西面相会，于是转弯沿山峰西面的峡谷向北行。
English: Half a mile later, I met my guide on the west side of the mountain, so I turned around and headed north along the canyon on the west side of the mountain.

古文：其夹会水于中，北上半里，夹中犹土田，而水已北注，是为北来山脊，至蛮王而西渡南下，峙为芒场西最高之峰，以至多灵，为都泥、金城两江之界者也。
现代文：这个峡谷中有水流相会，往北上走半里，峡谷中仍有田地，但水流已往北流注，这是北面延伸来的山脊，到蛮王峰后向西延伸再往南下延，耸峙为芒场西面的最高峰，以下延到多灵山，成为都泥江、金城江两条江流的分界。
English: In this canyon, there is a confluence of water currents. Half a mile to the north, there are still fields in the canyon, but the water has flowed northward. This is the ridge that extends to the north, extends westward after the Mawang Peak, and extends southward. It stands as the highest peak on the west side of the Mangchang, and extends to the Doling Mountain below, becoming the boundary between the two rivers of the Douliu River and the Jincheng River.

古文：北随水行半里，其水西向去，路西北又半里，逾岭而下半里，西南山界扩然，北界石山之脊自西而东，有尖峰竖其上，环其西南为大壑，田陇高下，诸庐舍倚其东北尖峰下。
现代文：往北顺水流行半里，那水流向西流去，路向西北又走半里，越过岭后下半里，西南一列山十分广阔，北面一列石山的山脊自西延向东，有座尖峰竖立在山脊上，环绕在它的西南成为大壑谷，田亩高低错落，许多房屋依傍在它东北的尖峰下。
English: To the north, the water flows half a mile, the water flow to the west, the road to the northwest goes another half a mile, after crossing the ridge, the second half of the mile, the southwest mountain range is very broad, the northern mountain range extends from west to east, a peak stands on the ridge, and it is surrounded by a large valley in the southwest, the fields are staggered in height, and many houses are under the peak in the northeast.

古文：又里许，登其栏曰郊岗村今作者东，又名头水站，有水自东北脊间出，为都泥旁支之上流，此 头 名所由起也。
现代文：又走一里左右，登上村中的竹楼叫郊岚村，又叫头水站，有水流自东北的山脊间流出，是都泥江支流的上游，这是起名叫 头 的缘由了。
English: After walking for another mile or so, they climbed up to the bamboo tower in the village, which is called the Suburban Village, and also called the Head Water Station. There is water flowing out from the northeast ridge, which is the upstream of the tributary of the Dudu River. This is the reason for the name "head."

古文：村人以酒食献，餐之，易骑行。
现代文：村里人拿酒食来敬献，吃了酒饭，换了坐骑上路。
English: The villagers brought food and wine to make offerings, ate rice and wine, and changed their mounts to go on the road.

古文：西北一里半，有路逾北夹而去，乃导者由岐西出峰南。
现代文：向西北一里半，有路穿越北面的峡谷而去，于是向导由岔道向西出到峰南。
English: A mile and a half to the northwest, there is a path through the canyon to the north, so the guide goes west from the fork to the south of the peak.

古文：又半里，复易夫，始知其为小路就村也。
现代文：又走半里，再换脚夫，这才明白他们走小路是将就村子了。
English: After walking another half-mile and changing porters, it became clear that they were approaching a village by taking a back road.

古文：又西一里，雷雨大至，俄顷而过。
现代文：又往西一里，雷雨暴降，不一会就过去了。
English: Another mile to the west, a thunderstorm rolled in and soon passed.

古文：又西一里，登一堡，导者欲易骑，其人不从，只易夫而行。
现代文：又向西一里，登上一处土堡，向导想换马，那里的人不听从，只换了夫上路。
English: Another mile to the west, the guide wanted to change horses at an earthen fort, but the people there did not listen, they just changed husbands and went on their way.

古文：乃挟峰北转，越岭而下。
现代文：于是傍着山峰回北转，越过岭下走。
English: So I turned back to the north along the mountain peak and walked over the ridge.

古文：又西南坠，共二里，渡一涧，又西北行一里，始与东来大道合。
现代文：又向西南下坠，共二里，渡过一涧，又往西北行一里，这才与东面来的大道会合。
English: Then it plunged to the southwest for a total of two miles, crossed a ridge, and traveled one mile to the northwest before it met the highway coming from the east.

古文：复西北逾岭三里，望北山石脊嵯峨，诸庐舍倚其上，而尚隔一壑。
现代文：再西北越岭三里，望见北山石脊巍峨，许多房屋依傍在山上，但还隔着一个壑谷。
English: Three miles northwest of the ridge, you can see the towering stone ridge of the North Mountain. Many houses are on the mountain, but they are separated by a valley.

古文：又西，大道西去，由岐北转，从北山下东向行，一里，上抵飘渺村。
现代文：又向西，大道往西去，由岔道向北转，从北山下向东行，一里，上走到飘渺村。
English: And westward, the avenue went westward, turned northward from the turnpike, and went eastward from the foot of the North Mountain, one mile, and went up to the village of Aomei.

古文：其村倚山半，南向，东有尖峰高插岭头，西有危崖斜骞冈上。
现代文：此村靠在半山腰，面向南，东边有尖峰高插在岭头，西边有危崖斜举在冈上。
English: The village is located in the middle of the mountain, facing south. On the east, there are high peaks at the head of the ridge, and on the west, there are steep cliffs on the hill.

古文：村前平坠为壑，田陇盘错，自上望之，壑中诸陇皆四周环塍，高下旋叠，极似堆漆雕纹。
现代文：村前平缓地陷为壑谷，田亩盘绕错落，从上边望过去，壑谷中众多的田地四周都环绕着田埂，高下旋绕层层叠叠的，极似漆雕堆出来的纹路。
English: The front of the village is slowly sinking into a valley of rice paddies, where the rice paddies are coiled and staggered. Looking over from above, the numerous fields in the valley of rice paddies are surrounded by rice paddies, high and low, twisted and layered, very similar to the lines of lacquer carvings.

古文：盖自蛮王峰西渡脊而北，至此水皆西南入都泥，壑皆耕犁无隙，居人亦甚稠，所称巴坪哨，亦一方之沃壤也。
现代文：从蛮王峰西边越过山脊往北走，到此地水流都是往西南流入都泥江，壑谷中都耕犁得没有空隙，居民也非常稠密，是所称的巴坪哨，也是一片肥沃之地。
English: From the west side of the Mountain King Peak, go over the ridge to the north. The water flows to the southwest into the Mud River here. There is no gap in the valley, and the residents are very dense. It is the so-called Ba Ping sentry, and it is also a fertile land.

古文：是晚，雨后即霁甚。
现代文：这天晚上，雨后天气非常好。
English: On this night, after the rain, the weather was very good.

古文：二十六日晨起，饭而候骑，命夫先担行；待久之，乃得骑。
现代文：二十六日早晨起床，饭后等候坐骑，命令脚夫先挑担走；等了很久，才得到坐骑。
English: On the morning of the 26th, he got up, waited for the horse after dinner, ordered the porter to pick up the burden first, and waited for a long time before getting the horse.

古文：由西峰突崖下西向行，二里，逾岭西北下坞中。
现代文：由西峰突起的山崖下向西行，二里，越岭向西北下到坞中。
English: From the cliff protruding from the west peak to the west, two miles, across the ridge to the northwest to the dock.

古文：其坞东西开夹，中底甚平，东汇堰为塘，溯之西行，塘尽而成草洼。
现代文：这个山坞拓展成东西向的峡谷，坞中底部十分平坦，东边筑坝积为水塘，溯水塘往西行，水塘完后变成长满草的洼地。
English: This dock expands into an east-west canyon. The middle and bottom of the dock are very flat. The dammed area on the east is a pond. The backwater pond goes west. After the pond is finished, it becomes a grassy depression.

古文：共西半里，有墟场在路隅，曰巴平场。
现代文：共向西走半里，有个墟场在路旁，叫巴坪场。
English: A total of half a mile to the west, there is a market place on the side of the road, called Baping Square.

古文：其西有深夹自西北来，为此东西夹上流，场乃挟右而转者。
现代文：它西面有条深深的峡谷自西北延来，是这个东西向峡谷的上游，墟场是傍着右边转过去的地方。
English: To the west of it, there is a deep canyon stretching from the northwest. It is the upper reaches of this east-west canyon, and the market is the place where you turn around to the right.

古文：路度夹而西，复上岭，半里，逾脊西下，于是成南北夹。
现代文：路向西穿越峡谷，再上岭，半里，越过山脊往西下行，到这里成了南北向的峡谷。
English: The road went west through the canyon, then up the ridge, half a mile, over the ridge and down to the west, and here it became a north-south canyon.

古文：路转北行半里，夹仍东西转，路又西向半里，此夹中皆平底草蔓，似可为田。
现代文：路转向北行半里，峡谷仍转为东南向，路又向西走半里，此处峡谷中都是长满草丛的平坦谷底，似乎可以垦为田地。
English: The road turned half a mile to the north, the canyon still turned to the southeast, and the road went half a mile to the west. Here in the canyon are flat valley bottoms full of grass, it seems that they can be turned into fields.

古文：于是复西逾隘脊，其脊止高丈许，脊东即所行草壑，脊西则水溢成溪。
现代文：于是又向西越过隘口的山脊，这个山脊只有一丈多高，山脊东面就是所走过的长草的壑谷，山脊西面就有水溢出来形成溪流。
English: So he crossed the ridge of the pass to the west, this ridge is only as high as a crane, the east side of the ridge is the valley of the long grass that he walked through, and the west side of the ridge has water overflowing to form a stream.

古文：随溪西行半里，渡，从北山下行，过一坳，有三四家倚之。
现代文：沿溪流往西行半里，渡溪，从北山下行，走过一个山坳，有三四家人依傍着它。
English: Half a mile west along the stream, crossing the stream, descending from the North Mountain, walking through a ridge, with three or four families leaning against it.

古文：又西半里，大路直西去，以就村觅夫故，又南由岐涉溪逾南坳，共一里，得村于南坞中，曰潭琐。
现代文：又向西半里，大路一直向西去，因为就近到村中找脚夫的缘故，又向南由岔道涉过溪流越过南面的山坳，共一里，在南面山坞中找到一个村子，叫潭琐。
English: Another half-mile to the west, the highway continued westward, because it was close to the village to find the porter, and then to the south by the causeway, waded through the stream and crossed the southern mountains, a total of one mile, and found a village in the southern dock, called Tanzo.

古文：居村颇盛，山转中环，又成一峒。
现代文：村中居民十分多，山环绕着中间转过，又成了一蛔。
English: There are a lot of residents in the village, and the mountain has turned around the middle and become a ridge.

古文：又饭而候夫，久乃得之。
现代文：又吃了饭等候换夫，很久才得到。
English: She ate again and waited for a new husband, but it was a long time before she got one.

古文：下山半里，由西北峡出，即前西流之溪矣。由溪南西行半里，溪转而北，路亦随之。
现代文：下山半里，由西北的峡中出去，就是前边往西流的溪流了 由溪流南岸往西行半里，溪水转向北去，路也顺流走。
English: Half a mile down the mountain, out of the northwest gorge, is the westward-flowing stream ahead. Half a mile westward from the south bank of the stream, the stream turns to the north, and the road flows along.

古文：于是山开东西两界：东界山皆自东而西突，凡五六峰，西面皆平剖下坠，排列而北，若 五老 西向；西界山则土峰蜿蜒，与东界对列成峡，涧由其中北向去。
现代文：在这里山分开成东西两列：东面一列山都是自东往西突起，共有五六座山峰，西面都是平剖下坠，往北排列，好像五个老人面向西方；西面一列山则是蜿蜒的土峰，与东面一列山相对排列形成峡谷，山涧由其中向北流去。
English: Here, the mountains are separated into two columns, east and west: the east side of the mountain range protrudes from east to west, with a total of five or six peaks; the west side is flat and descends, and is aligned to the north, like five old men facing the west; the west side of the mountain range is a meandering earth peak, and is arranged opposite the east side of the mountain range to form a canyon, from which the hail flows to the north.

古文：从涧西循西山东麓北行半里，有小水东注于涧，渡之又北一里半，抵一岭，涧折而东去，路乃北逾岭。
现代文：从山涧西边沿西山的东麓往北行半里，有条小溪向东注入山涧，渡过小溪又向北走一里半，抵达一座山岭，山涧折向东流去，路于是向北越岭。
English: From the western edge of the mountains along the eastern foot of the West Mountain to the north for half a mile, there is a stream flowing east into the mountains, crossing the stream and going north for a mile and a half, reaching a ridge, the ridge turns to the east, and the road then goes north over the ridge.

古文：一里，则大路自东来合。
现代文：一里，就见大路从东面伸来。
English: After about a mile, the main road comes into view from the east.

古文：又东一里，有涧亦东注，渡之北，又一里，有水一泓，在路侧树根下石隙间，清冽殊异。
现代文：又向东一里，有条山涧也向东流注，渡到涧北，又走一里，有水一乱，在路旁树根下的石缝间，清澈甘冽特别奇异。
English: Another mile to the east, there is a mountain stream flowing to the east, passing to the north of Shandong, another mile to go, there is water chaos, between the stone cracks under the roots of the roadside trees, the clear sweet water is particularly strange.

古文：又北一里，又有水自西北峡中来，东出与石泓北流之水合，似透东北峡而去，路溯西北峡而入。
现代文：又向北一里，又有水流自西北的峡中流来，流出东边与石缝间清泉往北流的水合流，似乎是穿过东北的山峡流去，路溯西北的山峡进去。
English: Another mile to the north, there is water flowing from the middle of the gorge in the northwest, flowing out of the east and the north-flowing water of the clear spring between the stone cracks. It seems to flow through the mountain gorge in the northeast and enter the mountain gorge in the northwest.

古文：其峡湾环，北自东序六寨之一。南来，是名羊角冲，为此中伏莽之徒所公行无惮处。
现代文：这山峡山湾环绕，从北面的东序往南延来，这里名叫羊角冲，这是歹徒肆无忌惮公然横行之处。
English: This mountain gorge is surrounded by a mountain bay and extends from the eastern ridge in the north to the south. It is called Yangjiao Chong, and it is a place where gangsters run amok.

古文：舆夫指路侧偃草，为数日前杀人之区，过之恻然。
现代文：轿夫指出路旁倒伏的草丛，是数天前杀人的地方，走过这里心中恻然哀伤。
English: The driver pointed out that the bushes lying on the side of the road were the site of a murder a few days ago. As I walked past, my heart sank.

古文：入峡一里，东眺已逼东界突山下。
现代文：入峡走一里，往东眺望已逼近东面突立的山峰下。
English: One mile into the gorge, the view to the east is already approaching the peak of the mountain protruding to the east.

古文：又北则突山既尽，其坞大开。
现代文：又向北走就见突立的山峰完后，山坞十分开阔。
English: After walking north again, I saw the jutting mountain peaks, and the dock was very open.

古文：东望一峰尖迥而起，中空如合掌，悬架于众峰之间，空明下透，其上合处仅徒杠之凑，千尺白云，东映危峰腋间，正如吴门匹练，香炉瀑雪，不复辨其为山为云也。
现代文：望见东方一座山峰又尖又高地耸起，中间空着如合起来的手掌，悬架在群峰之间，下面透出空中的亮光，它上边合拢之处仅如独木桥一样凑拢，千尺白云，映衬在东边危峰山腰之间，正如苏州的白绢，庐山香炉峰雪花飞溅的瀑布，不再辨得清哪是山哪是云了。
English: Looking to the east, a mountain peak rises sharply and high, with an empty space in the middle like a clasped palm, suspended between the peaks. Below, the light of the sky shines through. The place where it closes at the top is only like a wooden bridge. A thousand feet of white cloud, silhouetted between the crest of the east peak and the mountainside, just like the Suzhou egret, the snow-splashed waterfall of Lushan incense peak. It is no longer clear which is the mountain and which is the cloud.

古文：自桂林来，所见穿山甚多，虽高下不一，内外交透，若此剜空环翠者，得未曾有。
现代文：自从桂林以来，见过的穿山很多，虽然高矮不一，内外相通，如此峰剑空翠色环绕的，未曾有过。
English: Since Guilin, I have seen a lot of mountain climbers. Although they are different in height, they are connected both inside and outside. I have never seen such peaks surrounded by the emerald sky.

古文：此地极粤西第一穷徼ｊｉｏ边界，亦得此第一奇胜，不负数日走磨牙吮血之区也。
现代文：此地是粤西极边界第一穷僻之地，也有此等第一奇绝的胜景，不辜负几天来奔走在这磨牙吮血之地了。
English: This place is the most remote place on the western border of Guangdong, and it also has the most amazing scenery. It's been a few days of running around in this place of grinding teeth and blood.

古文：又北一里，有村悬西峰石坡上，曰东序村，乃六寨极南之首村也。
现代文：又向北一里，有个村庄高悬在西峰的石坡上，叫东序村，是六寨极南边的头一个村子。
English: Another mile to the north, there is a village high on the stone slope of the west peak, called Dongxu village, which is the first village in the south of the Liuzhai pole.

古文：缚舆换夫。
现代文：捆轿子换夫。
English: Changing husbands with a bundle of palanquins.

古文：东北二里，复换夫。
现代文：往东北行二里，又换夫。
English: Two miles to the northeast, another change of husband.

古文：一里，有石峰中悬两峡间，前有数十家倚之，是为六寨哨。
现代文：向西北越过一道岭下走，共一里半，有个墟场叫六寨场。
English: Walking northwest over a ridge, a total of one and a half miles, there is a market called Liuzhai Market.

古文：所称 六寨 者，南自东序，北抵六寨哨，中有寨六。
现代文：转向北后往东又走半里，有溪水自东面流来，从独木桥上渡到溪北。一里，有座石峰高悬在两面山峡的中间，前边有数十家人背靠着它，这是六寨哨。
English: Turn to the north and then to the east and walk half a mile, there is a stream flowing from the east, crossing from the single-tree bridge to the north of the stream. One mile, there is a stone peak hanging high in the middle of the mountain gorge on both sides, with dozens of people leaning against it in front. This is the Six Villages Sentinel.

古文：缚舆换夫，从东峡北行一里，转而西入峡。
现代文：绑轿子换夫，从东面的峡中往北行一里，转向西走入山峡。
English: He tied his palanquin and changed his husband. He walked one mile north from the gorge in the east, turned west and walked into the gorge.

古文：其水东流，溯之入又一里余，大路直西逾隘，由岐西北就村半里，得浑村在北村下。
现代文：峡中的水往东流，逆流深入又是一里多，大路一直往西穿过隘口，由岔路就村子往西北半里，在北村下找到浑村。
English: The water in the gorge flows to the east, and the counter-current is more than a mile deep. The highway continues west through the pass, and from the fork in the road, the village is half a mile northwest, and Hun village is found under the north village.

古文：头目韦姓出帖呈览，以忠勇免差者。
现代文：姓韦的头目拿出贴子呈给我观看，是以忠勇免除差役的村子。
English: The leader, surnamed Wei, took out a postcard and showed it to me. It was the village that exempted Zhongyong from the police.

古文：余谕之送，其人出酒肉饷，以骑送余。
现代文：我告知他相送，此人拿出酒内来招待，派坐骑送我。
English: I told him to see me off, and he brought out the wine and invited me to ride with him.

古文：其地北有崇崖，有洞，门西南向，高悬崖上；南有绝壁，有洞，门东北向，深透壁间。
现代文：此地北面有高大的山崖，有山洞，洞口面向西南，高悬在山崖上；南面有绝壁，有山洞，洞口朝向东北，深透进石壁间。
English: In the north, there is a high cliff and a cave, with the mouth of the cave facing southwest and hanging high above the cliff; in the south, there is a cliff and a cave, with the mouth of the cave facing northeast and penetrating deep into the stone walls.

古文：从小路下西坡，交大路而南，二里，抵南洞之前。
现代文：从小路走下西面的山坡，与大路相交往南走，二里，抵达南面的山洞前边。
English: From the path, walk down the western slope of the mountain, meet the main road and walk south for two miles, arriving at the front of the cave in the south.

古文：循石壁西，又一里，转入南山峡中，东南入坞，有村曰银村。
现代文：沿着石壁向西走，又是一里，转入南面的山峡中，向东南走入山坞，有个村庄叫银村。
English: Walk west along the stone wall for another mile, turn into the mountain gorge to the south, and walk southeast into the dock. There is a village called Yincun.

古文：待夫久之，晚而缚舆，昏黑就道。
现代文：等换夫等了很久，天晚了才捆轿子，在昏黑中上路。
English: They waited for a long time before changing husbands. It was late in the day before they bundled up their palanquins and set out in the dark.

古文：西北循山出峡，转而西，共三里，宿于晚宛南村。
现代文：向西北沿着山走出峡谷，转向西，共走三里，住宿在晚宛南村。
English: Walk northwest along the mountain out of the canyon, turn to the west, walk a total of three miles, accommodation in the evening to Nancun.

古文：二十七日晨起，不及饭，村人舆就即行。
现代文：二十七日早晨起床，来不及吃饭，村里人就捆好轿子立即动身。
English: On the morning of the 27th, the villagers woke up and had no time to eat, so they bundled up their palanquins and set off immediately.

古文：循西山而北，石壑中渐有水东自浑村两麓来，流而成溪。
现代文：沿西山往北走，石山壑谷中渐渐有水从东面的浑村西麓流来，流成溪流。
English: Walking north along the West Mountain, water gradually flows from the western foothills of Hun Village in the east to form a stream.

古文：半里，渡溪北行，半里，有村在西山下，溪流环其前，村东向临之，为晚宛中村，其长又半里。
现代文：半里，渡过溪水往北行，半里，有村庄在西山下，溪流环绕在村前，村子向东临溪，是晚宛中村，村子长处又有半里。
English: Half a mile, across the stream to the north, half a mile, there is a village at the bottom of the mountain to the west, the stream surrounds the village, the village is east of the stream, it is the middle village in the evening, and the village is half a mile long.

古文：路隔溪，随之北又一里，渡桥而西，饭于晚宛北村。
现代文：路隔着溪流，顺溪流又往北一里，过桥后往西走，在晚宛北村吃饭。
English: After crossing the bridge and walking west, we had dinner in the evening in the village of Wanbei.

古文：换夫东渡桥，遂东北行一里半，逾东冈，有村在冈北悬阜上。
现代文：换夫后向东过桥，于是往东北行一里半，越过东面的山冈，有村庄在冈北高悬的土阜上。
English: After changing her husband, she crossed the bridge to the east, so she went one and a half miles to the northeast, over the mountains in the east, and there were villages on the high-hanging soil north of the mountains.

古文：又换夫，北下冈，渡一涧，复一里半，北上一冈，是为岜土音作 壁 歹村，乃丹州极北之寨也。
现代文：又换夫，向北下冈，渡过一条山涧，再走一里半，向北上登一座山冈，这是岂歹村，是南丹州极北边的寨子了。
English: He also changed his husband, went down the hill to the north, crossed a ridge, walked another mile and a half, and climbed a hill to the north. This is a village, a stockade in the far north of Nantan.

古文：六寨北至岜歹，西至巴鹅，昔皆泗城州所属之地，去泗城远，故后为丹州所占。
现代文：由此往西去两天的路程，叫罗猴，是泅城州的东北境，是都泥江上游流经的地方。
English: The two-day journey west from here, called Luo Monkey, is the northeast border of Lucheng Prefecture, the place where the upper reaches of the Dudong River flow.

古文：三年前上疏清界，当在其中。饭而换马，北下阜，过一涧，于是北上冈陇，渐逾坳而北，三上三下。
现代文：吃饭后换马，向北走下土阜，越过一条山涧，从此地起向北上登山冈土陇，慢慢越过山坳往北走，三次上走三次下山。
English: After dinner, change horses, walk north down the hill, cross a ridge, and from here walk north up the ridge, slowly walk north across the ridge, walk up and down the mountain three times.

古文：坞中俱荒芜，无复耕塍，其水皆西南流，故知东北即大山之脊矣。
现代文：山坞中全是一片荒芜的景象，不再有耕地，这里的水流全向西南流，因此知道东北就是大山的山脊了。
English: In the dockyard there is a barren landscape, there is no more arable land, and the water flows here in a southwesterly direction, so we know that the northeast is the ridge of the mountain.

古文：共五里，为山界，土人指以为与贵州下司分界处，此不特南丹北尽，实粤西西北尽处也。
现代文：共五里，是山界，当地人指认为是与贵州下司分界之处，此地不仅是南丹州到了北边的尽头，实际是粤西西北境的尽头了。
English: A total of five miles, it is the mountain border, the locals point out that it is the boundary with the lower division of Guizhou. This place is not only the end of the north of Nantan, but actually the end of the northwest border of Guangdong.

古文：逾脊北下，水犹西南流。
现代文：越过山脊向北下走，水流仍往西南流。
English: After crossing the ridge to the north, the water still flows to the southwest.

古文：又从岭北再升一土岭，共一里，北出石山之隘，是为艰坪岭。
现代文：又从岭北再爬升一座土岭，共一里，向北走出石山的隘口，这是艰坪岭。
English: From the north of the ridge, he climbed another ridge, a total of one mile, northward out of the stone mountain pass, this is the Herping Ridge.

古文：石骨棱削，对峙为门，是为南北二水分界。
现代文：岩石棱角分明似刀削一般，对峙成门，这里是南北两面水流的分界处。
English: The edges and corners of the rock are clearly delineated like a machined edge, facing each other like a door. This is the dividing point of the water flow on the north and south sides.

古文：北下一里，石路嶙峋，草木蒙密，马足跃石齿间，无可着蹄处，正伏莽者弄兵之窟，余得掉臂而过，亦幸矣哉！
现代文：向北下走一里，石子路面嶙峋，草木浓密，马足腾跃在牙齿状的石块间，没有可以落蹄之处、正是拦路抢劫的匪徒摆弄兵器的巢穴，我得以擦肩而过，也是幸运了呀！
English: Walking one mile to the north, the stone pavement is rutted, the vegetation is dense, the horse's feet prance between the tooth-like stones, there is no place to fall, it is the nest of highway robbers playing with weapons, I was able to pass by, and I was lucky!

古文：既下，西向行峡中，水似西流，而似无出处。
现代文：下山后，向西行走在峡谷中，水流似乎往西流，但似乎没有流出去的地方。
English: After descending the mountain, walking westward in the canyon, the water flow seems to flow westward, but there seems to be no place to flow out.

古文：一里，始复睹塍田。
现代文：一里，这才重新见到田地。
English: It took me a mile to see the fields again.

古文：又西半里，转而北，峡中塍乃大辟。
现代文：又向西半里，转向北，峡中的田野显得十分开阔。
English: Half a mile to the west, turning north, the fields in the gorge appear very open.

古文：又北一里，有村在西坞，曰由彝村，是为下司东南第一村，亦贵省东南第一村也。
现代文：又向北一里，有村庄在西面的山坞中，叫由夷村，这是下司东南境的第一个村子，也是贵州省东南境的第一村了。
English: Another mile to the north, there is a village in the western dock, called Yuyi Village. This is the first village in the southeast of the lower division, and also the first village in the southeast of Guizhou Province.

古文：南丹送骑及令箭竿头为铁制箭簇的传令旗牢子辞去。
现代文：南丹州送行的坐骑及持令箭的牢子告辞离开了。等派夫的时间非常长，担子先离开，天黑，马到了。
English: The rider of the Nantan State send-off and the jailer holding the arrows left. The waiting time was very long, the burden left first, it was dark, and the horse arrived.

古文：西北二里至山寨，又逾岭涉涧，越数村，夜行八里而抵下司，俱闭户莫启。
现代文：向西北二里走到山寨，又越岭涉涧地越过数村，夜幕中行走八里后抵达下司，都关着门不肯开。
English: Walked two miles northwest to the cottage, crossed the ridge and waded through several villages, walked eight miles in the night and arrived at the lower office, all closed the door and refused to open.

古文：久之，得一家启户人，卧地无草，遍觅之，得薪一束，不饭而卧。
现代文：很久，找到一家人开门进去，睡在地上没有草，遍处寻找，找到一束干柴，未吃饭便躺下了。
English: For a long time, I found a family who opened the door and went inside, slept on the ground without grass, searched everywhere, found a bunch of dry firewood, and lay down without eating.

