古文：成王既黜殷命，灭淮夷，还归在丰，作《周官》。
现代文：成王既黜殷命，灭淮夷，还归在丰，作《周官》。
English: Cheng Wang not only saved Yin's life, but also destroyed Huaiyi and returned to Feng to write "Zhou Guan."

古文：惟周王抚万邦，巡侯、甸，四征弗庭，绥厥兆民。
现代文：周成王安抚万国，巡视侯服、甸服等诸侯，四方征讨不来朝见的诸侯，以安定天下的老百姓。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang pacified all countries, inspected the princes such as Houfu and Tianfu, and solicited the princes who did not come to see the court from all directions, in order to stabilize the people of the world.

古文：六服群辟，罔不承德。
现代文：六服的诸侯，无人不奉承他的德教。
English: Of all the princes of the Rikufuku era, no one failed to flatter his moral teachings.

古文：归于宗周，董正治官。
现代文：成王回到王都丰邑，又督导整顿治事的官员。
English: Cheng Wang returned to Wangdu Fengyi, and also supervised the rectification of officials.

古文：王曰： 若昔大猷，制治于未乱，保邦于未危。 
现代文：成王说： 顺从往日的大法，要在未出现动乱的时候制定治理的办法，在未出现危机的时候安定国家。 
English: Cheng Wang said: Obey the Great Law of the past, and formulate a method of governance when there is no turmoil, and stabilize the country when there is no crisis.

古文：曰： 唐虞稽古，建官惟百。
现代文：成王说： 尧舜稽考古代制度，建立官职一百。
English: Cheng Wang said: "We will review the ancient system and establish one hundred official positions.

古文：内有百揆四岳，外有州、牧、侯伯。
现代文：内有百揆和四岳，外有州牧和侯伯。
English: There are Baekje and Shidake within, and Shumu and Houba outside.

古文：庶政惟和，万国咸宁。
现代文：各种政策适合，天下万国都安宁。
English: All kinds of policies are suitable, and all countries in the world are peaceful.

古文：夏商官倍，亦克用乂。
现代文：夏代和商代，官数增加一倍，也能用来治理。
English: In the Xia and Shang dynasties, the number of officials was doubled, which could also be used for governance.

古文：明王立政，不惟其官，惟其人。
现代文：明王设立官员，不考虑他的官员之多，而考虑要得到贤人。
English: Ming Wang set up officials, not considering the number of his officials, but considering to get wise men.

古文：今予小子，祗勤于德，夙夜不逮。
现代文：现在我恭敬勤奋施行德政，早起晚睡都有所不及。
English: Now I respectfully and diligently carry out the moral government, and I can get up early and go to bed late.

古文：仰惟前代时若，训迪厥官。
现代文：仰思顺从前代，建立我们的官制。
English: We should follow the previous generation and establish our official system.

古文：立太师、太傅、太保，兹惟三公。
现代文：设立太师、太傅、大保，这是三公。
English: The establishment of Taishi, Taifu, and Daibo, these are the Three Princes.

古文：论道经邦，燮理阴阳。
现代文：他们讲明治道，治理国家，调和阴阳。
English: They preach the Meiji way, govern the country, and harmonize yin and yang.

古文：官不必备，惟其人。
现代文：三公的官不必齐备，要考虑适当的人。
English: The three magistrates do not have to be complete, but the right person should be considered.

古文：少师、少傅、少保，曰三孤。
现代文：设立少师、少傅、少保，叫做三孤。
English: The establishment of a junior teacher, a junior foreman, and a junior security guard is called the Three Gorges.

古文：贰公弘化，寅亮天地，弼予一人。
现代文：他们协助三公弘扬教化，敬明天地的事，辅助我一人。
English: They help the Three Kings to promote enlightenment, respect tomorrow's affairs, and assist me.

古文：冢宰掌邦治，统百官，均四海。
现代文：冢宰主管国家的治理，统帅百官，调剂四海。
English: He is in charge of the governance of the country, the commander of a hundred officials, and the regulator of the four seas.

古文：司徒掌邦教，敷五典，扰兆民。
现代文：司徒主管国家的教育，传布五常的教训，使万民和顺。
English: Stowe was in charge of the nation's education, disseminating the teachings of the Five Classics to bring harmony to the people.

古文：宗伯掌邦礼，治神人，和上下。
现代文：宗伯主管国家的典礼，治理神和人的感通，调和上下尊卑的关系。
English: The patriarch presided over state ceremonies, governed the communication between God and man, and reconciled the relationship between the superior and the inferior.

古文：司马掌邦政，统六师，平邦国。
现代文：司马主管国家的军政，统率六师，平服邦国。
English: Sima was in charge of the country's military and political affairs, commanded six divisions, and served the state.

古文：司寇掌邦禁，诘奸慝，刑暴乱。
现代文：司寇主管国家的法禁，治理好恶的人，刑杀暴乱之徒。
English: The Scouts are in charge of enforcing the country's laws and prohibitions, governing the likes and dislikes of people, and punishing and killing rioters.

古文：司空掌邦土，居四民，时地利。
现代文：司空主管国家的土地，安置士农工商，依时发展地利。
English: S.K.K. is in charge of the country's land, resettling farmers, farmers and industrialists, and developing the country in accordance with the times.

古文：六卿分职，各率其属，以倡九牧，阜成兆民。
现代文：六卿分管职事，各自统率他的属官，以倡导九州之牧，大力安定兆民。
English: The six lords were in charge of duties, and each of them led his subordinate officers to advocate the shepherding of Kyushu and vigorously stabilize the one trillion people.

古文：六年，五服一朝。
现代文：六年，五服诸侯来朝见一次。
English: In the sixth year, the five feudal lords came to see the emperor once.

古文：又六年，王乃时巡，考制度于四岳。
现代文：又隔六年，王便依时巡视，到四岳校正制度。
English: Six years later, Wang went on a time-based inspection tour to Shiyue calibration system.

古文：诸侯各朝于方岳，大明黜陟。 
现代文：诸侯各在所属的方岳来朝见，王对诸侯普遍讲明升降赏罚。 成王说： 啊！
English: All the lords came to see the emperor at their respective Fangyue. The king told the lords in general about the rewards and punishments. Cheng Wang said: Ah!

古文：王曰： 呜呼！凡我有官君子，钦乃攸司，慎乃出令，令出惟行，弗惟反。
现代文：各级官长，要认真谨慎的对待你们的工作，慎重对待你们发布的命令。命令发出了就要进行，不要违抗。
English: Officials at all levels, be conscientious and prudent in your work and in the orders you issue. Once an order is issued, it must be carried out. Do not disobey it.

古文：以公灭私，民其允怀。
现代文：用公正消除私情，人民将会信任归服。
English: Use justice to eliminate personal feelings, and the people will trust and obey.

古文：学古入官。议事以制，政乃不迷。
现代文：先学古代治法再入仕途，议论政事依据法制，政事就不会错误。
English: First learn the ancient law and then re-enter the career path, discuss politics according to the legal system, and politics will not be wrong.

古文：其尔典常作之师，无以利口乱厥官。
现代文：你们要用周家常法作为法则，不要以巧言干扰你的官员。
English: You should use the Zhou Family Law as a rule, and do not interfere with your officials with clever words.

古文：蓄疑败谋，怠忽荒政，不学墙面，莅事惟烦。
现代文：蓄疑不决，必定败坏计谋，怠情忽略，必定废弃政事。不学习好象向墙站着，临事就会烦乱。
English: Suspicion and indecision are sure to ruin plans, laziness and neglect are sure to abandon politics. If you don't learn to stand like a man facing a wall, you'll get into trouble.

古文：戒尔卿士，功崇惟志，业广惟勤，惟克果断，乃罔后艰。
现代文：告诉你们各位卿士：功高由于有志，业大由于勤劳。能够果敢决断，就没有后来的艰难。
English: I would like to tell you gentlemen: Achievement is due to ambition, but industry is due to hard work. If you can make a decisive decision, there will be no future difficulties.

古文：位不期骄，禄不期侈。
现代文：居官不当骄傲，享禄不当奢侈，恭和俭是美德啊！
English: Being an official is an improper pride, enjoying a luxury is an improper luxury, and being respectful and frugal are virtues!

古文：恭俭惟德，无载尔伪。作德，心逸日休；作伪，心劳日拙。
现代文：不要行使诈伪，行德就心逸而日美，作伪就心劳而日拙。
English: Do not practice deception. To be virtuous is to be happy, to be deceptive is to be hard-working.

古文：居宠思危，罔不惟畏，弗畏入畏。
现代文：处于尊宠要想到危辱，无事不当敬畏，不知敬畏，就会进入可畏的境地。
English: If you are in the position of honor and favor, you should think of danger and humiliation, and fear nothing improperly. If you do not know how to fear, you will enter a terrible situation.

古文：推贤让能，庶官乃和，不和政庞。
现代文：推举贤明而让能者，众官就会和谐；众官不和，政事就复杂了。
English: If a wise and capable person is elected, the officials will be harmonious; if the officials are not harmonious, the government affairs will be complicated.

古文：举能其官，惟尔之能。称匪其人，惟尔不任。 
现代文：推举能者在其官位，是你们的贤能；所举不是那种人，是你们不能胜任。 成王说： 啊！
English: It is your wisdom that elects able men to their offices; it is not the kind of men that are elected, it is you who are not able.

古文：王曰： 呜呼！三事暨大无，敬尔有官，乱尔有政，以佑乃辟。永康兆民，万邦惟无斁。
现代文：任人、准夫、牧三位首长和大夫们：认真对待你们的官职，治理你们的政事，来辅助你们的君主，使广大百姓长远安宁；天下万国就不会厌弃我们了。 
English: The three chiefs and doctors, mandarins, magistrates, and pastors: Take your official duties seriously, govern your political affairs, assist your monarchs, and bring long-term peace to the broad masses of the people; the nations of the world will not abhor us.

