古文：二十有七年春，齐侯使庆封来聘。
现代文：二十七年春季，齐侯派遣庆封来鲁国聘问。
English: In the spring of the 27th year, Qihou sent Qingfeng to Lu Province to ask questions.

古文：夏，叔孙豹会晋赵武、楚屈建、蔡公孙归生、卫石恶、陈孔奂、郑良霄、许人、曹人于宋。
现代文：夏季，叔孙豹与晋国的赵武、楚国的屈建、蔡国的公孙归生、卫国的石恶、陈国的孔奂、郑国的良霄、许人、曹国人在宋国会见。
English: In the summer, the uncle and grandson of the leopard and Zhao Wu of Jin, Qu Jian of Chu, Gongsun Gensheng of Cai, Shi Xiang of Wei, Kong Wei of Chen, Liang Xiao, Xu Ren and Cao of Zheng met at the Song National Congress.

古文：卫杀其大夫甯喜。
现代文：卫国杀掉了自己的大夫甯喜。
English: He killed his own doctor, Shunxi.

古文：卫侯之弟鱄出奔晋。
现代文：卫侯的弟弟鱄逃到了晋国。
English: Wei Hou's younger brother Zou fled to Jin.

古文：秋七月辛巳，豹及诸侯之大夫盟于宋。
现代文：秋季七月辛巳日，鲁国大夫叔孙豹与各诸侯大夫在宋国结盟。
English: In the autumn, on the seventh day of the seventh month, the granduncle of the grandmaster of the State of Lu and the grandmasters of the various states formed an alliance in the State of Song.

古文：冬十有二月乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季十二月乙卯初一这天，发生了日食现象。
English: On the first day of winter in December, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：二十七年春，胥梁带使诸丧邑者具车徒以受地，必周。
现代文：二十七年春季，胥梁带让失去城邑的那些国家准备好车兵徒兵来接受土地，行动必须周密。
English: In the spring of the 27th year, Yan Liangbei asked the countries that had lost their cities to prepare car soldiers and foot soldiers to accept the land, and the action must be well-planned.

古文：使乌馀具车徒以受封，乌馀以其众出。使诸侯伪效乌馀之封者，而遂执之，尽获之。
现代文：让乌馀准备车兵来接受封地。乌馀带领他的一批人出来，胥梁带让诸侯假装把土地送给乌馀，因而乘乌馀不备而加以逮捕，全部俘虏了他们。
English: He asked Uyo to prepare chariots and soldiers to take over the fief. Uyo led a group of his men out and tricked the lords into pretending to give the land to Uyo, so they took advantage of Uyo's unpreparedness and arrested them, taking them all prisoner.

古文：皆取其邑而归诸侯，诸侯是以睦于晋。
现代文：把乌馀的城邑都夺了回来，还给诸侯，诸侯因此归向晋国。
English: The remaining cities and towns were recaptured and returned to the lords. The lords therefore returned to Jin.

古文：齐庆封来聘，其车美。
现代文：齐国的庆封来鲁国聘问，他的车子很漂亮。
English: Qingfeng from Qi Province came to Lu Province for an interview. His car was very beautiful.

古文：孟孙谓叔孙曰： 庆季之车，不亦美乎？ 
现代文：盂孙对叔孙说： 庆封的车子，不也很漂亮么！ 
English: The great-grandson said to his great-uncle: Qingfeng's car, isn't it beautiful!

古文：叔孙曰： 豹闻之： 服美不称，必以恶终。 
现代文：叔孙说： 豹听说： 衣饰和人不相称，必然得到恶果。 
English: Uncles and grandsons said: Leopards have heard: Clothing and people are not commensurate, and they will inevitably get bad results.

古文：美车何为？ 
现代文：漂亮的车子有什么用？ 
English: What's the use of a beautiful car?

古文：叔孙与庆封食，不敬。
现代文：叔孙设便宴招待庆封，庆封表现得不恭敬。
English: The uncle and grandson held a banquet to invite the Qingfeng, but the Qingfeng did not show respect.

古文：为赋《相鼠》，亦不知也。
现代文：叔孙为他赋《相鼠》这首诗，他也不明白其中的意思。
English: His great-uncle gave him the poem "Companion Rat," but he didn't understand the meaning.

古文：卫甯喜专，公患之。公孙免馀请杀之。
现代文：卫国的甯喜把持朝政，卫献公担心这件事，公孙免馀请求杀死甯喜。
English: Emperor Hezekiah was in charge of the imperial government, and Emperor Hezekiah was worried about this matter. Emperor Hezekiah's son-in-law requested Emperor Hezekiah to kill Emperor Hezekiah.

古文：公曰： 微甯子，不及此，吾与之言矣。
现代文：卫献公说： 如果没有甯子，我不能到这地步。我已经对他说过了 政由甯氏 。
English: "I wouldn't have made it this far if it hadn't been for Zizi," said Wei Xianguo. "I've already told him about Masayuki Tsukuda."

古文：事未可知，祇成恶名，止也。 
现代文：事情的结果不能知道，只是得到坏名声，不能做。 
English: You can't know the outcome of things, you just get a bad reputation and can't do it.

古文：对曰： 臣杀之，君勿与知。 
现代文：公孙免馀回答说： 下臣去杀他，君王不要参与计划就行了。 
English: Gongsun Mianyu replied, "Let the vassal kill him, and the prince should not take part in the plan."

古文：乃与公孙无地、公孙臣谋，使攻甯氏。弗克，皆死。
现代文：就和公孙无地、公孙臣商量，让他们攻打甯氏，没有攻下，公孙无地和公孙臣都因此战死了。
English: He discussed with Gongsun Mudi and Gongsun Zhen, and asked them to attack the Shun clan, but they failed to do so, and Gongsun Mudi and Gongsun Zhen both died in the battle.

古文：公曰： 臣也无罪，父子死余矣。 
现代文：卫献公说： 臣是没有罪的，父子二人都为我而死了！ 
English: Wei Xianguo said: "The minister is not guilty, both father and son have died for me!"

古文：夏，免馀复攻甯氏，杀甯喜及右宰穀，尸诸朝。
现代文：夏季，公孙免馀再次攻打甯氏，杀死了甯喜和右宰穀，陈尸在朝廷上。
English: In the summer, Gongsun Mianyu once again attacked the Zou clan, killed Zou Xi and Uzaigul, and his corpse was displayed at the imperial court.

古文：石恶将会宋之盟，受命而出。衣其尸，枕之股而哭之。欲敛以亡，惧不免，且曰： 受命矣。 
现代文：石恶将要参加宋国的结盟，接受了命令而出来，给尸首穿上衣服，头枕在尸体的大腿上而为他们号哭，想要入殓以后自己逃亡，又害怕不能免于祸难，姑且说： 接受使命了。 
English: Shi Zi was about to join the Song Dynasty alliance. He received the order and came out. He dressed the corpse, laid his head on the corpse's lap and cried for them. He wanted to escape after he was put in the coffin, but he was afraid that he would not be able to avoid the disaster. Let him say: I have accepted the mission.

古文：乃行。
现代文：于是就动身走了。
English: So they went on.

古文：子鲜曰： 逐我者出，纳我者死，赏罚无章，何以沮劝？
现代文：子鲜说： 驱逐我的逃亡了，接纳我的死去了，赏罚没有章程，如何禁止为恶和勉励为善？
English: Zixiang said, "The one who expelled me has fled, and the one who accepted my death has gone. There is no regulation for reward and punishment. How can I prohibit evil and encourage good?

古文：君失其信，而国无刑，不亦难乎！
现代文：国君失掉他的信用而国家没有正常的刑罚，不也很难了吗？
English: Isn't it also difficult for the sovereign to lose his trust and for the country not to have a normal punishment?

古文：且实使之。 
现代文：而且鱄实在是让甯喜这么做的。 
English: And I really let him do it.

古文：遂出奔晋。
现代文：子鲜说完这话就逃亡到晋国去。
English: After saying this, Zixiang fled to Jin Province.

古文：公使止之，不可。
现代文：卫献公让人阻止他，不行。
English: Wei Xian Gong let someone stop him, no can do.

古文：及河，又使止之。
现代文：子鲜到达黄河，卫献公又派人阻止他。
English: When Zixian reached the Yellow River, Wei Xiangong sent someone to stop him.

古文：止使者而盟于河。
现代文：他不让使者前进，而向黄河发誓。
English: He did not let the messenger go forward, but swore to the Yellow River.

古文：托于木门，不乡卫国而坐。
现代文：子鲜寄住在木门，坐着都不肯面对着卫国。
English: Zixian stayed in the wooden gate, and refused to face the defense of the country while sitting.

古文：木门大夫劝之仕。不可。曰： 仕而废其事，罪也。
现代文：木门大夫劝他做官，他不同意，说： 做官而废弃自己的职责，这是罪过；要尽自己的职责，这就宣扬了我逃亡的原因。
English: The doctor advised him to become an officer, but he did not agree, saying: "It is a sin to abandon one's duties to become an officer; I want to do my duty, which explains why I fled."

古文：将谁愬乎？
现代文：我将要向谁诉说呢？
English: Who am I going to tell?

古文：吾不可以立于人之朝矣。 
现代文：我不能够立在别人的朝廷上了。 
English: I can't stand in someone else's court.

古文：终身不仕。
现代文：一辈子也不出来做官。
English: Jun Yu-tao never held any official position.

古文：公丧之，如税服，终身。
现代文：卫献公为他服丧一直到死。
English: Wei Xian Gong mourned him until his death.

古文：公与免馀邑六十，辞曰： 唯卿备百邑，臣六十矣，下有上禄，乱也。
现代文：卫献公给公孙免馀六十个城邑，他辞谢说： 只有卿才具备一百个城邑，下臣已经有六十个邑了。下面的人而有了上面的人的禄位，这是祸乱。
English: When Wei offered to spare the remaining sixty townships for his grandson, he declined, saying, "Only my lord has a hundred townships, and my vassal already has sixty townships. It is a calamity for those below to have the position of those above.

古文：臣弗敢闻。
现代文：下臣不敢听到这种事。
English: A vassal would not dare to hear such a thing.

古文：且甯子唯多邑，故死。臣惧死之速及也。 
现代文：而且甯子就因为城邑多了，所以死了，下臣害怕死期快到。 
English: Moreover, because there were too many towns, the mule died, and the vassal was afraid that his time to die was approaching.

古文：公固与之，受其半。
现代文：卫献公一定要给他，他接受了一半。
English: He had to give him the tribute, and he accepted half.

古文：以为少师。
现代文：让他做了少师。
English: Let him become a junior teacher.

古文：公使为卿，辞曰： 大叔仪不贰，能赞大事。君其命之！ 
现代文：卫献公让他做卿，他辞谢说： 太叔仪没有二心，能够赞助大事，君王还是任命他吧。 
English: Wei Xian Gong asked him to be a lord, he declined and said: Uncle Yi has no second thoughts, he can sponsor major events, the king should still appoint him.

古文：乃使文子为卿。
现代文：于是就让太叔仪做了卿。
English: So he made his great-uncle a lord.

古文：宋向戌善于赵文子，又善于令尹子木，欲弭诸侯之兵以为名。
现代文：宋国的向戌和赵文子友好，又和令尹子木友好，想要停止诸侯之间的战争以取得名声。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Xiang Yao was friendly with Zhao Wenzi and Ling Yin Zi Mu, and wanted to stop the war between the princes to gain fame.

古文：如晋，告赵孟。
现代文：他去到晋国，告诉了赵文子。
English: He went to Jin Province and told Zhao Wenzi.

古文：赵孟谋于诸大夫。
现代文：赵文子和大夫们商量。
English: Zhao Wenzi consults with doctors.

古文：韩宣子曰： 兵，民之残也，财用之蠹，小国之大菑也。将或弭之，虽曰不可，必将许之。
现代文：韩宣子说： 战争，是残害百姓的祸事，是财货的蛀虫，是小国的大灾难，有人要消除它，虽然说办不到，一定要答应。
English: Han Xuan Zi said: War is a scourge that destroys the people, a pest of wealth and goods, and a great disaster for a small country. Someone wants to eliminate it, and although they say they can't, they must agree.

古文：弗许，楚将许之，以召诸侯，则我失为盟主矣。 
现代文：不答应，楚国将会答应，用来号召诸侯，那么我国就失去盟主的地位了。 
English: If he does not agree, the State of Chu will agree, and it will be used to call on the lords, and then our country will lose its status as the leader of the alliance.

古文：晋人许之。
现代文：晋国人答应了向戌。
English: The people of Jin agreed.

古文：如楚，楚亦许之。
现代文：向戌又去楚国，楚国也答应了。
English: Xiang Yu went to Chu again, and Chu agreed.

古文：如齐，齐人难之。
现代文：去到齐国，齐国人感到为难。
English: To go to Qi Province, the people of Qi Province feel embarrassed.

古文：陈文子曰： 晋、楚许之，我焉得已。
现代文：陈文子说： 晋国、楚国答应了，我们怎么能够不答应？
English: Chen Wenzi said: Jin and Chu promised, how can we refuse?

古文：且人曰 弭兵 ，而我弗许，则固携吾民矣！将焉用之？ 
现代文：而且别人说 消灭战争 ，而我们不答应，那么就使我们的百姓离心了，将要怎么使用他们？ 
English: And if others say, "Abolish war," and we do not agree, then we have alienated our people. How will we use them?

古文：齐人许之。
现代文：齐国人答应了。
English: The people of Qi agreed.

古文：告于秦，秦亦许之。
现代文：告诉秦国，秦国也答应了。
English: Tell Qin State, Qin State also agreed.

古文：皆告于小国，为会于宋。
现代文：这四个国家都通告小国，在宋国举行会见。
English: All four countries have notified small countries to hold meetings in Song.

古文：五月甲辰，晋赵武至于宋。
现代文：五月二十七日，晋国的赵文子到达宋国。
English: On May 27th, Zhao Wenzi from Jin arrived in Song.

古文：丙午，郑良霄至。
现代文：二十九日，郑国的良霄也来了。
English: On the 29th, Zheng's good fortune also came to an end.

古文：六月丁未朔，宋人享赵文子，叔向为介。
现代文：六月初一日，宋国人设享礼招待赵文子，叔向作为赵文子的副手。
English: On the first day of June, the people of Song set up an entertainment ceremony to invite Zhao Wenzi, and Uncle Xiang became Zhao Wenzi's deputy.

古文：司马置折俎，礼也。
现代文：司马把煮熟的牲畜切成碎块，放在盘子里，这是合于礼的。
English: Sima cut the cooked cattle into pieces and put them on a plate, which was proper.

古文：仲尼使举是礼也，以为多文辞。
现代文：以后孔子看到了这次礼仪的记载，认为文辞太多。
English: Later, Confucius saw the record of this etiquette and thought that there were too many words.

古文：戊申，叔孙豹、齐庆封、陈须无、卫石恶至。
现代文：初二日，叔孙豹、齐国的庆封、陈须无、卫国的石恶到达。
English: On the second day of the first month, the uncle and grandson of the leopard, the Qingfeng of Qi, the Chen Su, and the Shi Xiong of the defense of the country arrived.

古文：甲寅，晋荀盈从赵武至。
现代文：初八日，晋国的荀盈跟随赵文子之后到达。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Jin Province's Zou Ying arrived after Zhao Wenzi.

古文：丙辰，邾悼公至。
现代文：初十日，邾悼公到达。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Zou Yigong arrived.

古文：壬戌，楚公子黑肱先至，成言于晋。
现代文：十六日，楚国的公子黑肱先到达，和晋国商定了有关的条件。
English: On the 16th, the prince of Chu, Heihe, arrived first, and negotiated the relevant conditions with Jin.

古文：丁卯，宋向戌如陈，从子木成言于楚。
现代文：二十一日，宋国的向戌去到陈国，和子木商定有关楚国的条件。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xiang Yao of Song went to Chen and agreed with Ziki on the conditions of Chu.

古文：戊辰，滕成公至。
现代文：二十二日，滕成公到达。
English: On the 22nd, Teng Chenggong arrived.

古文：子木谓向戌： 请晋、楚之从，交相见也。 
现代文：子木告诉向戌，请求跟从晋国和楚国的国家互相见面。
English: Zigi told Xiang Yao to ask the countries from Jin and Chu to meet each other.

古文：庚午，向戌复于赵孟。
现代文：二十四日，向戌向赵文子复命。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Xiang Yu returned to Zhao Wenzi.

古文：赵孟曰： 晋、楚、齐、秦，匹也。晋之不能于齐，犹楚之不能于秦也。
现代文：赵文子说： 晋、楚、齐、秦四国地位对等，晋国不能指挥齐国，如同楚国不能指挥秦国一样。
English: Zhao Wenzi said: Jin, Chu, Qi and Qin are equal in status. Jin cannot command Qi, just as Chu cannot command Qin.

古文：楚君若能使秦君辱于敝邑，寡君敢不固请于齐。 
现代文：楚国国君如果能让秦国国君驾临敝邑，寡君岂敢不坚决向齐国国君请求？ 
English: If the king of Chu could allow the king of Qin to come to Lop County, would the king of Qi dare not to make a firm request to the king of Qi?

古文：壬申，左师复言于子木。子木使驲谒诸王。
现代文：二十六日，向戌向子木复命，子木派传车请示楚康王。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Xiang Xuan Zi Mu returned his life, and Zi Mu sent a car to ask King Chu Kang.

古文：王曰： 释齐、秦，他国请相见也。 
现代文：楚康王说： 放下齐国、秦国，请求和其他国家互相见面。 
English: King Chu Kang said, "Let go of Qi and Qin, and ask to meet with other countries."

古文：秋七月戊寅，左师至。
现代文：秋季，七月初二日，向戌到达。
English: In autumn, on the 2nd day of the 7th month, Xiang Zang arrived.

古文：是夜也，赵孟及子晳盟以齐言。
现代文：当夜，赵文子和公子黑肱统一了盟书的措辞。
English: That night, Zhao Wenzi and his son, Heihe Zang, unified the wording of the alliance.

古文：庚辰，子木至自陈。
现代文：初四日，子木从陈国到达。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Ziki arrived from Chen.

古文：陈孔奂、蔡公孙归生至。
现代文：陈国的孔奂、蔡国的公孙归生到达。
English: The great-grandsons of Confucius of Chen and Cai of Cai were born.

古文：曹、许之大夫皆至。
现代文：曹国和许国的大夫也都来到。
English: Doctors from Cao and Xu provinces also came.

古文：以藩为军，晋、楚各处其偏。
现代文：各国军队用篱笆做墙作为分界。晋国和楚国各自驻扎在两头。
English: The armies of each country used a fence to make a wall as a demarcation. Jin and Chu countries were stationed at both ends.

古文：伯夙谓赵孟曰： 楚氛甚恶，惧难。 
现代文：伯夙对赵文子说： 楚国的气氛很不好，恐怕会发生患难。 
English: Hobao said to Zhao Wenzi, "The atmosphere in the State of Chu is very bad. I'm afraid there will be trouble.

古文：赵孟曰： 吾左还入于宋，若我何？ 
现代文：赵文子说： 我们转折向左，进入宋国，能把我们怎么办？ 
English: Zhao Wenzi said: If we turn to the left and enter Song, what can we do?

古文：辛巳，将盟于宋西门之外，楚人衷甲。
现代文：初五日，各诸侯国代表准备在宋国西门外边结盟。楚国人在外衣里边穿上皮甲。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the representatives of the various states prepared to form an alliance outside the West Gate of Song. The people of Chu put on leather armor on the inside of their coats.

古文：伯州犁曰： 合诸侯之师，以为不信，无乃不可乎？夫诸侯望信于楚，是以来服。
现代文：伯州犁说： 会合诸侯的军队，而做别人不信任的事，恐怕不可以吧，诸侯盼望得到楚国的信任，因此前来顺服。
English: Bozhou Yao said, "I'm afraid it's not possible to meet the armies of the princes and do something that others don't trust. The princes hope to gain the trust of the state of Chu, so they come to obey."

古文：若不信，是弃其所以服诸侯也。 
现代文：如果不信任别人，这就是丢掉了所用来使诸侯顺服的东西了。 
English: If you don't trust others, you've lost something that was used to make princes obey.

古文：固请释甲。
现代文：他坚决请求脱去皮甲。
English: He insisted on taking off his leather jacket.

古文：子木曰： 晋、楚无信久矣，事利而已。
现代文：子木说： 晋国和楚国缺乏信用已经很久了，唯有去做对我有利的事就是了。
English: Ziki said: Jin and Chu have lacked trust for a long time. The only thing I can do is to do what is good for me.

古文：苟得志焉，焉用有信？ 
现代文：如果能如愿，哪里用得着有信用？ 
English: If you can get what you want, who needs credibility?

古文：大宰退，告人曰： 令尹将死矣，不及三年。
现代文：伯州犁退下去。对人说： 令尹将要死了，不会到三年。
English: He retreated to Bozhou and said to the people, "Ling Yin is about to die, it won't take three years.

古文：求逞志而弃信，志将逞乎？
现代文：但求满足意志而丢弃信用，意志会满足吗？
English: But to satisfy the will and discard trust, will the will be satisfied?

古文：志以发言，言以出信，信以立志，参以定之。
现代文：有意志就形成为语言，有语言就要有信用，有信用就加强意志。
English: With will comes language, with language comes trust, and with trust comes the strengthening of will.

古文：信亡，何以及三？ 
现代文：这三件事互相关联统一，然后才能确定。信用丢掉了，怎么能活到三年呢？ 
English: These three things are interrelated and unified before they can be determined. If you lose credibility, how can you live up to three years?

古文：赵孟患楚衷甲，以告叔向。
现代文：赵文子担心楚国人外衣里边穿皮甲，把这情形告诉了叔向。
English: Zhao Wenzi was worried that the people of Chu wore leather armor on the inside of their coats, and he told his uncle about this.

古文：叔向曰： 何害也。
现代文：叔向说： 有什么危害？
English: My uncle said, "What's the harm?

古文：匹夫一为不信，犹不可，单毙其死。
现代文：一个普通人一旦做出不守信用的事，尚且不可以，都不得好死。
English: Once an ordinary person does something that is not trustworthy, even if it is not allowed, he will die a painful death.

古文：若合诸侯之卿，以为不信，必不捷矣。
现代文：如果一个会合诸侯的卿做出不守信用的事情，就必然不能成功了。
English: If a lord of a gathering of lords does something that is not trustworthy, it is bound to fail.

古文：食言者不病，非子之患也。
现代文：说话不算数的人不能给人造成困难，这不是您的祸患。
English: It is not your misfortune that people who do not know how to speak can create difficulties for others.

古文：夫以信召人，而以僭济之，必莫之与也，安能害我？
现代文：用信用召集别人，而又利用了虚伪，必然没有人同意他，哪里能危害我们？
English: Using credibility to gather others, but using hypocrisy, no one will agree with him, where can it harm us?

古文：且吾因宋以守病，则夫能致死。
现代文：而且我们依靠着宋国来防守他们制造的困难，那就能人人舍命。
English: Moreover, if we rely on Song to defend against the difficulties they create, then everyone will give up their lives.

古文：与宋致死，虽倍楚可也。
现代文：和宋军一起誓死对抗，即使楚军增加一倍也是可以抵抗的，您有什么可害怕的呢？
English: And the Song Army vowed to fight to the death together. Even if the Chu Army doubles, it can be resisted. What do you have to fear?

古文：子何惧焉？又不及是。
现代文：但是事情又不至于到这一步。
English: But it didn't come to that.

古文：曰 弭兵 以召诸侯，而称兵以害我，吾庸多矣，非所患也。 
现代文：口称消除战争以召集诸侯，反而发动战争来危害我们，我们的用处就多了，不必担心。 
English: If, on the other hand, we should launch a war to endanger ourselves, our usefulness would increase, and there would be no need to worry.

古文：季武子使谓叔孙以公命，曰： 视邾、滕。 
现代文：季武子派人以鲁襄公的名义对叔孙豹说： 把我国比作和邾国、滕国小国一样。 
English: Jiwuxi sent a man in the name of Lu Xiang to his uncle and grandson, saying, "Compare our country to the small countries of Shao and Teng.

古文：既而齐人请邾，宋人请滕，皆不与盟。叔孙曰： 邾、滕，人之私也。我列国也，何故视之？
现代文：不久齐国人请求把邾国作为属国，宋国人请求把滕国作为属国，邾国、滕国都不参加结盟，叔孙说： 邾国、滕国，是别人的私属国；我们，是诸侯之国，为什么要看作和他们一样？
English: Soon after, the people of Qi asked for the state of Yao as a vassal state, and the people of Song asked for the state of Teng as a vassal state. Both Yao and Teng did not participate in the alliance. The uncle and grandson said: Yao and Teng are other people's private vassal states; we are a country of princes, why should we be considered the same as them?

古文：宋、卫，吾匹也。 
现代文：宋国、卫国，才是和我们对等的。 
English: The Song Dynasty and the Qing Dynasty are equal to us.

古文：乃盟。
现代文：于是就参加结盟。
English: So they joined the alliance.

古文：故不书其族，言违命也。
现代文：所以《春秋》不记载叔孙豹的族名，这是说他违背了鲁襄公命令的缘故。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" does not record the clan name of the uncle and grandson of the leopard, which is because he violated the order of Prince Lu Xiang.

古文：晋、楚争先。
现代文：晋国和楚国争执歃血盟誓的先后。
English: The dispute between Jin and Chu states resulted in blood oaths.

古文：晋人曰： 晋固为诸侯盟主，未有先晋者也。 
现代文：晋国人说： 晋国本来是诸侯的盟主，从来没有在晋国之前歃血的。 
English: The people of Jin said: Jin was originally the leader of the princes, and never shed blood before Jin.

古文：楚人曰： 子言晋、楚匹也，若晋常先，是楚弱也。
现代文：楚国人说： 您说晋国和楚国的地位相等，如果晋国总是在前面，这就是楚国比晋国弱。
English: The Chu people said: You said that the status of Jin and Chu is equal. If Jin is always ahead, it means that Chu is weaker than Jin.

古文：且晋、楚狎主诸侯之盟也久矣！
现代文：而且晋国和楚国交换着主持诸侯的结盟已经很久了。
English: Moreover, it has been a long time since Jin and Chu exchanged the alliance of presiding princes.

古文：岂专在晋？ 
现代文：难道专门由晋国主持？ 
English: Was it specially presided over by Jin?

古文：叔向谓赵孟曰： 诸侯归晋之德只，非归其尸盟也。
现代文：叔向对赵文子说： 诸侯归服晋国的德行，不是归服它主持结盟。
English: Uncle Xiang said to Zhao Wenzi: The virtue of the lords to submit to Jin is not to submit to it, but to preside over the alliance.

古文：子务德，无争先！
现代文：您致力于德行，不要去争执先后。
English: You are committed to virtue, do not go to dispute successively.

古文：且诸侯盟，小国固必有尸盟者。楚为晋细，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：而且诸侯结盟会，小国本来一定有主持结盟的事务，让楚国做小国盟主，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Moreover, in the alliance of lords, small countries must have presided over the affairs of the alliance. Is it not also possible for Chu to be the leader of the alliance of small countries?

古文：乃先楚人。
现代文：于是就让楚国先歃血。
English: As a result, Chu was allowed to draw blood first.

古文：书先晋，晋有信也。
现代文：《春秋》记载把晋国放在前面，这是由于晋国有信用。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records put Jin Guo in the front, which is due to the credit of Jin Guo.

古文：壬午，宋公兼享晋、楚之大夫，赵孟为客。子木与之言，弗能对。使叔向侍言焉，子木亦不能对也。
现代文：初六日，宋平公同时招待晋国和楚国的大夫，赵文子作为主宾坐首席，子木跟他说话，赵文子不能回答，让叔向在旁边帮着对答，子木也不能回答。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Song Ping Gong invited the doctors of Jin and Chu at the same time, and Zhao Wenzi was the chief guest. Ziki talked to him, but Zhao Wenzi could not answer, so Uncle Xiang helped him answer, and Ziki could not answer.

古文：乙酉，宋公及诸侯之大夫盟于蒙门之外。
现代文：初九日，宋平公和诸侯的大夫在蒙门外结盟。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Prince Song Ping and the princes' doctors formed an alliance outside the Mengmen Gate.

古文：子木问于赵孟曰： 范武子之德何如？ 
现代文：子木向赵文子询问说： 范武子的德行怎么样？ 
English: Zigi asked Zhao Wenzi: How is Fan Wuzi's virtue?

古文：对曰： 夫子之家事治，言于晋国无隐情。其祝史陈信于鬼神，无愧辞。 
现代文：赵文子回答说： 这个人的家事治理得井井有条，对晋国人来说没有可以隐瞒的情况，他的祝史向鬼神表示诚信没有言不由衷的话。 
English: Zhao Wenzi replied: This man's household management is well-organized, there is no situation that can be concealed from the people of Jin, and his congratulatory history expresses sincerity to ghosts and gods. There are no insincere words.

古文：子木归，以语王。
现代文：子木回去把话报告楚康王。
English: Zigi went back to report to King Chu Kang.

古文：王曰： 尚矣哉！
现代文：楚康王说： 高尚啊！
English: King Chu Kang said: How noble!

古文：能歆神人，宜其光辅五君以为盟主也。 
现代文：能够让神和人高兴，无怪乎他能辅佐五世国君作为盟主。 
English: Able to make both gods and people happy, it is no wonder that he can assist the fifth generation of the country's monarch as the leader.

古文：子木又语王曰： 宜晋之伯也！有叔向以佐其卿，楚无以当之，不可与争。 
现代文：子木又对楚康王说： 晋国称霸诸侯是合适的，有叔向来辅佐它的卿，楚国没有和他相当的人，不能和他相争。 
English: Ziki also said to King Chu Kang: It is appropriate for Jin to dominate the princes. An uncle has always assisted its lord. Chu has no one comparable to him and cannot compete with him.

古文：晋荀盈遂如楚涖盟。
现代文：于是晋国的荀盈就去到楚国参加结盟。
English: As a result, Shanying from Jin went to Chu to join the alliance.

古文：郑伯享赵孟于垂陇，子展、伯有、子西、子产、子大叔、二子石从。
现代文：郑简公在垂陇设享礼招待赵文子，子展、伯有、子西、子产、子太叔、两个子石跟从郑简公。
English: Zheng Jian Gong invited Zhao Wenzi to a banquet, and Zizhan, Bo You, Zixi, Zizang, Zitao, and two Zishi followed Zheng Jian Gong.

古文：赵孟曰： 七子从君，以宠武也。
现代文：赵文子说： 这七位跟从着君王，这是赐给武以光荣。
English: Zhao Wenzi said: These seven followed the king. This is the glory given to Wuyi.

古文：请皆赋以卒君贶，武亦以观七子之志。 
现代文：请求都赋诗以完成君王的恩赐，武也可以从这里看到这七位的志向。 
English: All requests were met with poetry to complete the king's gift, and Wu could also see the aspirations of these seven people from here.

古文：子展赋《草虫》，赵孟曰： 善哉！民之主也。
现代文：子展赋《草虫》这首诗。赵文子说： 好啊，这是百姓的主人！
English: Zhao Wenzi said: Good, this is the master of the people!

古文：抑武也不足以当之。 
现代文：但武是不足以承当的。 
English: But force is not enough.

古文：伯有赋《鹑之贲贲》，赵孟曰： 床笫之言不逾阈，况在野乎？
现代文：伯有赋《鹑之贲贲》这首诗。赵文子说： 床上的话不出门槛，何况在野外呢？
English: Zhao Wenzi said: Words on the bed do not cross the threshold, let alone in the open.

古文：非使人之所得闻也。 
现代文：这不是使人所应该听到的。 
English: That's not what people need to hear.

古文：子西赋《黍苗》之四章，赵孟曰： 寡君在，武何能焉！ 
现代文：子西赋《黍苗》的第四章。赵文子说： 有寡君在那里，武有什么能力呢？ 
English: In the fourth chapter of Zi Xi Fu's "Seedling," Zhao Wenzi said, "Where there are nobles, what is the power of martial arts?

古文：子产赋《隰桑》，赵孟曰： 武请受其卒章。 
现代文：子产赋《隰桑》这首诗。赵文子说： 武请求接受它的最后一章。 
English: Zhao Wenzi said: Wu requested to accept the last chapter of it.

古文：子大叔赋《野有蔓草》，赵孟曰： 吾子之惠也。 
现代文：子太叔赋《野有蔓草》这首诗。赵文子说： 这是大夫的恩惠。 
English: Zhao Wenzi said, "This is the doctor's favor.

古文：印段赋《蟋蟀》，赵孟曰： 善哉！
现代文：印段赋《蟋蟀》这首诗。
English: The poem "" is composed by Hintan Fu.

古文：保家之主也。
现代文：赵文子说： 好啊，这是保住家族的大夫！
English: Zhao Wenzi said, "Good, this is the doctor who can save the family!"

古文：吾有望矣。 
现代文：我有希望了。 
English: I have hope.

古文：公孙段赋《桑扈》，赵孟曰： 匪交匪敖，福将焉往？
现代文：公孙段赋《桑扈》这首诗。赵文子说：  不骄不傲 ，福禄还会跑到哪儿去？
English: Zhao Wenzi said: "If you are not proud, where will your fortune go?"

古文：若保是言也，欲辞福禄得乎？ 
现代文：如果保持这些话，即使想要辞掉福禄，能行吗？ 
English: If you keep these words, even if you want to quit Fukuro, can you do it?

古文：卒享。文子告叔向曰： 伯有将为戮矣！
现代文：享礼结束，赵文子告诉叔向说： 伯有将要被杀了！
English: At the end of the ceremony, Zhao Wenzi told his uncle: "Bo You is going to be killed!

古文：诗以言志，志诬其上，而公怨之，以为宾荣，其能久乎？
现代文：诗用来说明心意，心意在于诬蔑他的国君并且公开怨恨国君，又以此作为宾客的光荣，他能够长久吗？
English: Is it possible for him to go on for long, using poetry to express his intention, which is to slander his sovereign and openly hate him, and using this as a guest's honor?

古文：幸而后亡。 
现代文：即使侥幸，后来也一定逃亡。 
English: Even if it was a fluke, he was bound to escape later.

古文：叔向曰： 然。
现代文：叔向说： 对，他太骄奢。
English: Uncle Xiang said: Yes.

古文：已侈！所谓不及五稔者，夫子之谓矣。 文子曰： 其馀皆数世之主也。
现代文：所谓不到五年，说的就是这个人了。 赵文子说： 其余的人都是可以传下几世的大夫。
English: Zhao Wenzi said: "The rest of them are doctors who can be passed down for generations.

古文：子展其后亡者也，在上不忘降。
现代文：子展也许是最后灭亡的，因为处在上位而不忘记降抑自己。
English: The child exhibition may be the last to perish, because it is in the upper position and does not forget to lower itself.

古文：印氏其次也，乐而不荒。
现代文：印氏是最后第二家灭亡的，因为欢乐而有节制。
English: The Inn family was the second to last to perish, restrained by joy.

古文：乐以安民，不淫以使之，后亡，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：欢乐用来安定百姓。不要过分使用它们，灭亡在后，不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Joy is used to stabilize the people. Don't use them excessively, they will perish later. Isn't that okay?

古文：宋左师请赏，曰： 请免死之邑。 
现代文：宋国的左师请求赏赐，说： 下臣免于一死，请求赐给城邑。 
English: Song's Left Division asked for a reward, saying, "My vassal is spared from death, please give it to the city."

古文：公与之邑六十。
现代文：宋平公给他六十个城邑，他把文件交给子罕看。
English: Song Ping Gong gave him sixty cities and towns, and he handed the document to Zihang to read.

古文：以示子罕，子罕曰： 凡诸侯小国，晋、楚所以兵威之。畏而后上下慈和，慈和而后能安靖其国家，以事大国，所以存也。
现代文：子罕说： 凡是诸侯小国，晋国、楚国都用武力来威慑他们，使他们害怕然后就上下慈爱和睦，慈爱和睦然后能安定他们的国家，以事奉大国，这是所以生存的原因。
English: Zihan said: All small states, including the states of Jin and Chu, use force to intimidate them, make them afraid, and then love and make peace, love and make peace, and then stabilize their countries to serve the great powers. This is the reason for survival.

古文：无威则骄，骄则乱生，乱生必灭，所以亡也。
现代文：没有威慑就要骄傲，骄傲了祸乱就要发生，祸乱发生必然被灭亡，这就是所以灭亡的原因。
English: If there is no deterrent, there will be pride. If there is pride, there will be disaster. If there is disaster, there will be destruction. This is the reason for the destruction.

古文：天生五材，民并用之，废一不可，谁能去兵。
现代文：上天生长了金、木、水、火、土五种材料，百姓把它们样样使用上，缺一种都不可，谁能够废除武器？
English: Heaven has created five kinds of materials, gold, wood, water, fire and earth, and the common people use them all. They cannot do without any of them. Who can abolish weapons?

古文：兵之设久矣，所以威不轨而昭文德也。
现代文：武器的设置已经很久了，这是用来威慑不轨而宣扬文德的。
English: The weapon has been in place for a long time, and it is used to deter wrongdoing and promote morality.

古文：圣人以兴，乱人以废，废兴存亡昏明之术，皆兵之由也。而子求去之，不亦诬乎？
现代文：圣人由于武力而兴起，作乱的人由于武力而废弃。使兴起者废弃、灭亡者生存、明白者糊涂的策略，都是从武力来的，而您谋求去掉它，不也是欺骗吗？
English: The sage arises by force, the ruffian is overthrown by force; the stratagem of overthrowing the upriser, of keeping alive the dead, and of confusing the wise, all proceed from force, and is it not deception that you seek to abolish it?

古文：以诬道蔽诸侯，罪莫大焉。
现代文：以欺骗蒙蔽诸侯，没有比这再大的罪过了。
English: There is no greater sin than deceiving the princes.

古文：纵无大讨，而又求赏，无厌之甚也！ 
现代文：即使没有大的讨伐，反而又求取赏赐，这是不满足到了极点了。 
English: Even if there is no big crusade, but instead seek reward, this is not satisfied to the extreme.

古文：削而投之。左师辞邑。
现代文：因此，子罕就把封赏文件上的字削去并且扔了它。左师也就推辞了接受城邑。
English: Therefore, Zihan cut off the words on the award document and threw it away. Zuo Shi also refused to accept Chengwu.

古文：向氏欲攻司城，左师曰： 我将亡，夫子存我，德莫大焉，又可攻乎？ 
现代文：向氏想要攻打子罕，左师说： 我将要灭亡时，他老人家救了我，没有比这再大的恩德了。又可以攻打吗？ 
English: When Mr. Xiang wanted to attack Zihang, Zuo said, "When I was about to perish, he old man saved me. There is no greater blessing than this. Can we attack again?"

古文：君子曰：  彼己之子，邦之司直。 乐喜之谓乎？ 何以恤我，我其收之。 
现代文：君子说：  那位人物，是国家主持正义的人 ，这说的就是子罕吧！ 用什么赐给我，我将要接受它 ，这说的就是向戌吧？ 
English: The gentleman said: That person is the person who presides over justice in the country, which means Zihan! With what is given to me, I will accept it, which means Xiang Yao?

古文：向戌之谓乎？ 齐崔杼生成及彊而寡。娶东郭偃，生明。
现代文：齐国的崔杼生下成和强妻子就死了，又娶了东郭姜，生了明。
English: The wife of Qi's Cui Wei, who gave birth to Cheng Heqiang, died, and she married Dong Guo Jiang, who gave birth to Ming.

古文：东郭姜以孤入，曰棠無咎，与东郭偃相崔氏。
现代文：东郭姜带了前夫的儿子，名叫棠无咎，和东郭偃辅佐崔氏。
English: Dongguo Jiang brought her ex-husband's son, named Tang Muxin, and Dongguo Shifu Satsui.

古文：崔成有病而废之，而立明。
现代文：崔成有病被废，立了崔明做继承人。
English: Cui Chengyu was deposed due to illness, and Cui Ming was appointed as his successor.

古文：成请老于崔，崔子许之。偃与無咎弗予，曰： 崔，宗邑也，必在宗主。 
现代文：崔成请求在崔地退休，崔杼答应了，偃和无咎不给，说： 崔地，是宗庙所在的地方，一定要归于宗主。 
English: Cui Cheng asked to retire in Cui, Cui Yao agreed, saying: Cui, where the ancestral temple is located, must belong to the ancestral lord.

古文：成与彊怒，将杀之。
现代文：成和强生气，要杀死他们。
English: Cheng Heqiang got angry and wanted to kill them.

古文：告庆封曰： 夫子之身亦子所知也，唯無咎与偃是从，父兄莫得进矣。
现代文：告诉庆封说： 他老人家的为人，也是您所知道的，惟独听从无咎和偃的话，父老兄长都说不上话。
English: Tell Qingfeng: You also know that he is an old man, but he only listens to the words of no blame and blame. His father and brother are speechless.

古文：大恐害夫子，敢以告。 
现代文：很怕有害于他老人家，谨敢向您报告。 
English: I am afraid that it may be harmful to his old age, so I dare to report it to you.

古文：庆封曰： 子姑退，吾图之。 
现代文：庆封说： 您姑且退出去，我考虑一下。 
English: Qingfeng said: You may withdraw, I will think about it.

古文：告卢蒲嫳。
现代文：就告诉卢蒲嫳。
English: Just tell that to Lupu.

古文：卢蒲嫳曰： 彼，君之仇也。
现代文：卢蒲嫳说： 他，是国君的仇人。
English: Lupu said, "He is the enemy of the sovereign."

古文：天或者将弃彼矣。
现代文：上天或者将要抛弃他了。
English: Heaven may be about to abandon him.

古文：彼实家乱，子何病焉？
现代文：他家里确实出了乱子，您担的什么心？
English: His family did indeed get into a mess. What are you worried about?

古文：崔之薄，庆之厚也。 
现代文：崔家的削弱，就是庆家的加强。 
English: The weakening of the Cui family is the strengthening of the Qing family.

古文：他日又告。
现代文：过几天成和强又对庆封说这件事。
English: A few days later, Cheng and Qiang mentioned the matter to Qingfeng again.

古文：庆封曰： 苟利夫子，必去之！
现代文：庆封说： 如果有利于他老人家，一定要去掉他们。
English: Qingfeng said: If it is beneficial to his old people, they must be removed.

古文：难，吾助女。 
现代文：如有危难，我来帮助你们。 
English: If there's trouble, I'll come and help you.

古文：九月庚辰，崔成、崔彊杀东郭偃、棠無咎于崔氏之朝。
现代文：九月初五日，在崔氏的朝廷上，崔成、崔强把东郭偃和棠无咎杀了。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, at the court of the Cui clan, Cui Cheng and Cui Qiang killed Dong Guoqi and Tang Yu without any blame.

古文：崔子怒而出，其众皆逃，求人使驾，不得。
现代文：崔杼生气走了出来，他的手下人都逃了，找人套车，找不着。
English: Cui Gan walked out angrily, his men had all fled, and he couldn't find anyone to drive the cart.

古文：使圉人驾，寺人御而出。且曰： 崔氏有福，止余犹可。 
现代文：让养马的圉人套上车，寺人驾着车子出门，崔杼还说： 崔氏如果有福气，祸患仅仅停留在我身上还可以。 
English: The monk who kept the horse was put in the car, and the monk drove out of the house. Cui Yao also said, "If Cui is lucky, it's okay for the disaster to just stay on me.

古文：遂见庆封。
现代文：就进见庆封。
English: He went to Qingfeng.

古文：庆封曰： 崔、庆一也。
现代文：庆封说： 崔、庆是一家。
English: Qingfeng said, "Cui and Qing are family.

古文：是何敢然？
现代文：这些人怎么敢这样？
English: How dare these people do this?

古文：请为子讨之。 
现代文：请为您讨伐他们。 
English: Please fight them for you.

古文：使卢蒲嫳帅甲以攻崔氏。
现代文：让卢蒲嫳领着甲士以攻打崔氏。
English: Let Lo Po-tao lead his knights to attack the Choe clan.

古文：崔氏堞其宫而守之，弗克。
现代文：崔氏加筑宫墙据以防守，没有攻下。
English: The Cui clan built more palace walls to defend themselves, but they were not attacked.

古文：使国人助之，遂灭崔氏，杀成与彊，而尽俘其家。
现代文：发动国内的人们帮着攻打，就灭亡了崔氏，杀了成和强，夺取了他家里全部的人口和财货。
English: After mobilizing the people of the country to help in the attack, they destroyed the Cui clan, killed Cheng and Qiang, and seized all the people and goods of his family.

古文：其妻缢。
现代文：崔杼的妻子上吊死了。
English: Cui Wei's wife hanged herself.

古文：嫳复命于崔子，且御而归之。
现代文：卢蒲嫳向崔杼复命，并且为他驾车送他回家。
English: Lu Bupu relieved Cui Yao of his life and drove him home.

古文：至，则无归矣，乃缢。
现代文：崔杼到家，已经无家可归了，于是就上吊而死。
English: When Cui Wei got home, he was homeless, so he hanged himself.

古文：崔明夜辟诸大墓。
现代文：崔明在夜里躲在墓群里。
English: Cui Ming hid in the tombs at night.

古文：辛巳，崔明来奔，庆封当国。
现代文：初六日，崔明逃亡前来，庆封掌握了政权。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Cui Ming fled to Qingfeng and seized power.

古文：楚薳罢如晋涖盟，晋侯享之。
现代文：楚国的薳罢去到晋国参加盟会，晋平公设享礼招待他。
English: Zhai from Chu went to Jin to participate in the league, and Jin and Ping publicly invited him with great pomp.

古文：将出，赋《既醉》。
现代文：薳罢将要退出的时候，赋了《既醉》这首诗。
English: When he was about to quit, he wrote the poem "I'm Drunk Now."

古文：叔向曰： 薳氏之有后于楚国也，宜哉！
现代文：叔向说： 薳氏在楚国的后代将会长享禄位，应当啊！
English: Uncle Xiang said: The descendants of the Yi clan in Chu will enjoy a long-term position, it should be!

古文：承君命，不忘敏。
现代文：承受国君的命令，不忘记敏捷从事。
English: Take orders from the sovereign, and do not forget to act swiftly.

古文：子荡将知政矣。
现代文：子荡将要掌握政权了。
English: The son of a whore is about to take power.

古文：敏以事君，必能养民。政其焉往？ 
现代文：用敏捷来事奉国君，必然能保养百姓，政权还跑到哪儿去？ 
English: To serve the sovereign with agility will surely be able to maintain the people, where will the regime go?

古文：崔氏之乱，申鲜虞来奔，仆赁于野，以丧庄公。
现代文：崔氏那次叛乱，申鲜虞逃亡到鲁国来，在郊外雇用了仆人，为齐庄公服丧。
English: During the rebellion of the Cui clan, Shen Xiangu fled to Lu and hired servants in the suburbs to hold a public funeral for Qi Zhuang.

古文：冬，楚人召之，遂如楚为右尹。
现代文：冬季，楚国人召请申鲜虞，申鲜虞去到楚国，做了右尹。
English: In winter, the people of Chu invited Shen Xiangyu to perform. Shen Xiangyu went to Chu and performed the Right Yin.

古文：十一月乙亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一日，日食。
English: On the first day of November, a solar eclipse.

古文：辰在申，司历过也，再失闰矣。
现代文：当时斗柄指申，应该是九月，由于主管历法官员的过错，两次应该置闰月而没有置闰月。
English: At that time, the handle indicated that it should be September, but due to the fault of the competent calendar official, the leap month should be placed twice but the leap month was not placed.

