古文：韩稚幸灵赵逸梁四公
现代文：韩稚幸灵赵逸梁四公
English: Han Wook Yuk Ling, Zhao Yiliang the Fourth

古文：韩稚
现代文：韩稚
English: Han Waki

古文：汉惠帝时，天下太平，干戈偃息，远国殊乡，重译来贡。
现代文：汉惠帝在位时，战争平息，天下太平，远方的国家和偏僻的地域，纷纷前来朝贡。
English: When Emperor Han Hui was on the throne, the war subsided, the world was at peace, and distant countries and remote regions came to pay tribute.

古文：时有道士韩稚者，终之裔也，越海而来，云是东海神君之使，闻圣德洽于区宇，故悦服而来庭。
现代文：当时有个道士叫韩稚的，是终的后代，他越海而来，自称是东海神君的使者，听说汉皇帝的圣明德政遍施于环宇，所以心悦诚服而前来朝拜。
English: At that time, there was a Taoist monk named Han Zhi, who was the last descendant. He came across the sea, claiming to be the messenger of the East Sea God. He heard that the Holy Ming Dynasty of the Han Emperor was spreading throughout the world, so he was sincerely convinced and came to worship.

古文：时东极扶桑之外，有泥离国，亦来朝于汉。
现代文：同时，在东面很远处扶桑以外的地方。有个泥离国，亦派人来向汉帝朝拜。
English: Meanwhile, far away to the east, in a place other than Fusang, there was a muddy country that also sent people to worship the Han Emperor.

古文：其人长四尺，两角如蜼，牙出于唇，自腰已下有垂毛自蔽，居于深穴，其寿不可测也，帝云： 方士韩稚解绝国言，问人寿几何，经见几代之事。 
现代文：那人身长四尺，头上有两个角像蚕茧形状，长长的牙齿露在嘴唇外面，从腰部往下生着长长的毛遮蔽着，住在深洞里，没法推算他到底有多大岁数，惠帝说： 方士韩稚懂得远方国家的语言，问问这个人有多大岁数，经历过几代的事情。 
English: The man is four feet long, with two horns on his head shaped like cocoons, long teeth exposed on the outside of his lips, covered with long hair from the waist down, lives in a deep cave, and it is impossible to calculate how old he really is, Hui Di said: Fang Shi Han Zhi knows the language of a distant country, ask how old this person is, and has experienced several generations of things.

古文：答云： 五运相因，递生递死，如飞尘细雨，存殁不可论算。 
现代文：这个人答道： 五运相因，不断地生不断地死，就像飞尘细雨一样，活着多少代死了多少代是无法计算的。 
English: This person replied: Due to the five elements of luck, people are constantly born and constantly die, just like flying dust and drizzle. It is impossible to calculate how many generations have lived and how many generations have died.

古文：问女娲已前可问乎，对曰： 蛇身已上，八风均，四时序。
现代文：问他女娲以前的事知道与否，他说： 在蛇身人以前，八方的风就有规律地吹着，四个季节就有序地变化着。
English: When asked if his daughter knew anything about the past, he said, "Before the Serpent assumed human form, the wind blew regularly in all directions, and the four seasons changed in an orderly manner.

古文：不以威悦，搅乎精运。 
现代文：人们不分强弱，能够掌握万物运行的精要而生存着。 
English: People, no matter how strong or weak, can grasp the essence of the operation of all things and survive.

古文：又问燧人以前，答曰： 自钻火变腥以来，父老而慈，子寿而孝。
现代文：又问他燧人氏以前的事情，答道： 自从钻木取火改变腥膻以来，父辈年老而慈祥，子辈年壮而孝敬。
English: He also asked him about Mr. Hayato's past, and replied, "Ever since I started to drill wood and make fire to change the haze, my parents have been old and kind, and my children have been young and respectful.

古文：牺轩以往，屑屑焉以相诛灭，浮靡嚣薄，淫于礼，乱于乐，世欲浇伪，淳风坠矣。 
现代文：自从牺轩氏以后，就有各种原因频繁地互相杀伐，虚华不实，嚣闹浇薄，淫于礼仪，乱于音乐，世俗浇离虚伪，淳朴自然之风气丧失了。 
English: Since the death of Emperor Xuan, there have been various reasons for frequent mutual slaughter, the false and the true, the noisy and the thin, the lascivious in etiquette, the disorder in music, the secular and the hypocritical, and the simple and natural ethos has been lost.

古文：稚具以闻，帝曰： 悠哉杳昧，非通神达理者难可语乎斯道矣。 
现代文：韩稚把这个人说的话全部告诉了皇帝，皇帝说： 混沌蒙昧的年代实在长远呀，除非通神达理的人是很难跟他讲清这些道理的呀！ 
English: Han Zhi told the emperor everything the man had said. The emperor said, "The age of chaos and ignorance is really long. It would be difficult to explain these truths to him unless he was a man of reason."

古文：稚亦以斯而退，莫之所知。
现代文：韩稚也因此而告退，不知他到哪里去了。
English: Han Zhi also resigned because of this, and I don't know where he went.

古文：幸灵
现代文：幸灵
English: Fortunate soul

古文：晋幸灵者，豫章建昌人也，立性少言。
现代文：晋代有个叫幸灵的，是豫章建昌县人，生性寡言少语。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a man named Xingling. He was from Yuzhang, Jianchang County. He was a man of few words.

古文：与人群居，被人侵辱，而无愠色，邑里皆号为痴，父兄亦以为痴。
现代文：与大家在一起时，被别人侮辱了也不生气，同村人都称他傻子，父亲和哥哥也认为他痴呆。
English: When he is with everyone, he does not get angry when he is insulted by others. His fellow villagers call him a fool, and his father and brother also think he is demented.

古文：常使守稻，有牛食稻，灵见而不驱，待牛去，乃整理其残乱者。
现代文：家里人常常让他看守稻田，有牛吃稻子，他看见了也不驱赶，等牛走了之后，就去整理被践踏乱了的稻子。
English: His family often asked him to watch over the rice fields. When he saw cows eating rice, he would not chase them away. When the cows left, he would go and sort out the trampled rice.

古文：父见而怒之，灵曰： 夫万物生天地之间，各得其意，牛方食禾，奈何驱之？ 
现代文：父亲见了很生气，幸灵却说： 万物生长于天地之间，各得其意，牛刚才吃庄稼，凭什么去赶它？ 
English: The father was very angry when he saw it, but the happy spirit said: Everything grows between heaven and earth, each has its own meaning. The cow just ate the crops, why should we chase it?

古文：父愈怒曰： 即如汝言，复用理坏者何为？ 
现代文：父亲愤怒地说： 即使像你说的那样，还用去整理被踏坏的稻子干啥？ 
English: The father said angrily, "Even if it is as you say, what is the use of cleaning up the trampled rice?"

古文：灵曰： 此稻又得终其性矣。 
现代文：幸灵说： 这踏坏的稻子也应该终其性命呀，怎么能见它们受伤而不管呢？ 
English: Fortune said, "These trampled rice seeds should also have their lives ended. How can you see them injured and not care?"

古文：时顺阳樊长宾为建昌令，发百姓作官船，令人作楫一双。
现代文：当时，顺阳人樊长宾是建昌县令，他征发百姓制作官船，命令每人做一双船桨。
English: At that time, Shunyang people's chief guest was the Jianchang County magistrate, who solicited and dispatched the people to make the official ship and ordered each person to make a pair of oars.

古文：灵作讫而未输，俄而被人窃。
现代文：灵做完了后还没送交上去，很快就被人偷走了。
English: After the spirit was finished, it was not handed over, and it was soon stolen.

古文：窃者心痛欲死，灵曰： 尔无窃吾楫子乎？ 
现代文：偷的人心痛得要死，灵说： 你没偷我的桨吗？ 
English: The thief's heart ached to death, and the spirit said, "Didn't you steal my paddle?"

古文：窃者不应，须臾甚痛。灵曰： 尔不以情告我者死。 
现代文：偷的人没回答，顿时痛得更厉害了。灵说： 你不把实情告诉我，就会死的。 
English: The thief didn't answer, and the pain suddenly got worse. Ling said, "If you don't tell me the truth, you will die."

古文：窃者急，乃首应。
现代文：偷的人着急了，便点头承认。
English: The would-be thief nodded eagerly in acknowledgment.

古文：灵于是以水饮之，病乃愈。
现代文：灵于是拿水来给他喝，他的病便好了。
English: So the genie gave him a drink of water, and he felt better.

古文：船成，以数十人引一艘，不动。灵助之，船乃行。
现代文：船造成后，用十个人拉一艘，船不动；灵伸手相助，船这才往前走。
English: And when the ship was finished, it took ten men to haul it in one oar, and the ship did not move; but a spirit helped it, and it went on its way.

古文：从此人皆畏之，或称其神。
现代文：从此，别人都对他表示敬畏，有人称他是神仙。
English: Since then, others have been in awe of him, with some calling him a god.

古文：有龚仲儒女，病积年，气息才属，灵以水噀之，应时大愈。
现代文：龚仲儒的女儿病了多年了，奄奄一息；灵拿水来喷她，结果立时大愈。
English: Zou Zhongru's daughter had been ill for many years and was on her deathbed; the spirit used water to sprinkle her, and the result was an instant improvement.

古文：又吕猗母黄氏，痿庳一十余年，灵去黄氏数尺而坐，瞑目寂然，有顷，谓猗曰： 扶夫人起。 
现代文：吕猗的母亲黄氏，瘫痪了十多年了，灵在离黄氏几尺远处坐着，闭上两眼寂然无声，过了一会儿，对吕猗说： 把夫人扶起来。 
English: Lv Ying's mother, Ms. Huang, has been paralyzed for more than ten years. The spirit sat a few feet away from Ms. Huang, closed her eyes and was silent. After a while, she said to Lv Ying, "Pick up your wife."

古文：猗曰： 得疾累年，不可卒起。 
现代文：吕猗说： 得病多年了，不能马上起来。 
English: Lyu Hao said, "I have been ill for many years. I can't get up right away.

古文：灵曰： 试扶起。 
现代文：灵说： 试着扶起来看看。 
English: Ling said, "Try to lift it up and take a look."

古文：于是两人扶以立，又令去扶人，即能自行，乃留水一器而饮之。
现代文：于是两人扶她站起来了，灵又让扶她的人离开，于是便能自己走路，灵又给他们留下一杯水让病人喝。
English: So the two helped her to stand up, and the spirit let the people who were helping her go, so she could walk on her own. The spirit also left them a glass of water for the sick person to drink.

古文：高悝家内有鬼怪言语，器物自行，大以巫祝厌之，而不能绝。
现代文：高悝家里有鬼怪说话，屋里的器物自己走路，他用巫术大加镇压也不见效。
English: Ghosts speak in Gao Yao's home, objects in the house walk on their own, and his use of witchcraft to suppress them is ineffective.

古文：灵至门，见符甚多，曰： 以邪救邪，岂得已乎？ 
现代文：幸灵来到他门前看见有许多符，说： 以邪救邪，哪能根绝呢。 
English: When a fortunate soul came to his door, he saw many signs and said, "How can one eradicate evil with evil?

古文：并使焚之，其鬼怪遂绝。
现代文：叫他把符统统烧了，家里的鬼怪便绝迹了。
English: He told him to burn all the runes, and the ghosts in the house disappeared.

古文：从尔已后，百姓奔赴如云。灵救愈者，多不敢报谢。
现代文：从那以后，百姓们便如云涌一般跑到幸灵家里求他，经他救愈的人多数都不敢报答致谢。
English: Since then, people have been flocking to Shukun's home to ask for his help. Most of the people who have been cured by him are afraid to return the favor.

古文：立性至柔，见人即先拜，辄自称名。
现代文：幸灵生性特别柔顺和气，见到人就首先行礼，动辄自报姓名。
English: Lucky Ling has a particularly soft and gentle nature. When she sees people, she is the first to salute, and she often announces her name.

古文：凡草木之夭伤于山林者必起埋之，器物倾覆于途路者必举正之。
现代文：凡有草木夭损受伤于山林的，他见了一定扶起或掩埋好；凡有器物翻倒于路途上的他见了一定去扶正它们。
English: If he saw any shrubs or trees that were injured in the mountain forest, he would certainly pick them up or bury them well; if he saw any objects that had fallen over on the road, he would certainly go and pick them up.

古文：赵逸
现代文：赵逸
English: Zhao Yizhong

古文：后魏崇义里有杜子休宅，地形显敞，门临御路。
现代文：后魏时，崇义里有一座杜子休的宅院，地形显耀敞亮，门前面临官道。
English: In the late Wei Dynasty, there was a house of Du Zi Xiu in Chongyi, the terrain was bright and spacious, and the front door faced the official road.

古文：时有隐士赵逸者，云是晋武时人，晋朝旧事，多所记录。
现代文：当时有个叫赵逸的隐士，说是晋武帝时候的人，有关晋朝时代的旧事，他大部分都记得。
English: At that time, there was a hermit named Zhao Yat, who said that he was from the time of Emperor Jinwu, and he remembered most of the old things about the era of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：正光初，来至京师，见子休宅，叹息曰： 此是晋朝太康寺也。 
现代文：后魏正光初年他来到京都，看见杜子休的宅院后叹息道： 这是晋朝当年的太康寺呀！ 
English: When he came to Kyoto in the first year after Wei Zhengguang, he saw Du Zixu's house and sighed, "This is Taikang Temple in the Jin Dynasty!"

古文：时人未之信，问其由，答曰： 龙骧将军王浚平吴后，立此寺，本有三层浮图，用砖为之。 
现代文：当时人们都不相信，问他原因，答道： 当年龙骧将军王浚平定吴国后，建立了这座寺，本来有三层佛塔，用砖砌的。 
English: At the time, people didn't believe him. When asked why, he replied, "Back in the day, after the Long March general Wang Jun conquered Wu, he built this temple. Originally, it was a three-story pagoda made of bricks.

古文：指子休园曰： 此是故处。 
现代文：他指着子休的园子说： 这就是原来的地址。 
English: He pointed to Zi Xiu's garden and said, "This is the original address."

古文：子休掘而验之，果得砖数万，并有石铭云： 晋太康六年，岁次乙巳，九月甲戌朔，八日辛巳，仪同三司襄阳侯王浚敬造。 
现代文：子休掘土检验他说的话，果然挖得几万块砖，并有块石头上刻着铭文道： 晋太康六年，岁次乙巳，九月甲戌朔，八月辛巳，仪同三司襄阳侯王浚敬造。 
English: Zixu dug into the soil to check what he said, and indeed dug up tens of thousands of bricks, and there was an inscription on a stone: Jin Taikang was six years old, the year was Yixi, September was Jiaxing, August was Xinxi, and Yidong was built by the third prince of Xiangyang, Wang Jun.

古文：时园中果菜丰蔚，林木扶疏，乃服逸言，号为圣人。
现代文：当时园子里的果树和蔬菜长得丰茂旺盛，更有林木葱茏，人们便信服了赵逸的话，称他为圣人。
English: At that time, the fruit trees and vegetables in the garden were lush and vigorous, and the forest trees were greener. People were convinced by Zhao Yis words and called him a saint.

古文：子休遂拾宅为灵应寺，所得之砖，造三层浮图，好事者问晋朝京师何如今日，逸曰： 晋朝民少于今日，王侯帝宅与今日相似。 
现代文：杜子休也施舍出自己的宅院作为灵应寺，挖得的砖用来建造三层佛塔，好事的人问赵逸晋朝时的京都与现在对比到底怎么样，赵逸说 晋朝时居民比现在少，王侯们的宅第与现在相似。 
English: Du Zixiu also donated his house to serve as a Lingying Temple, and the bricks he dug up were used to build a three-story pagoda. When people asked Zhao Yizhong how Kyoto during the Jin Dynasty compared to now, Zhao Yizhong said that there were fewer residents during the Jin Dynasty than now, and the residences of the princes were similar to now.

古文：又云： 自永嘉以来，二百余年，建国称王者，十有六君，吾皆游其都鄙，目见其事。
现代文：又说： 自从永嘉年以来，二百余年间，建国称王者共有十六个君主，我都游历过京都的附近，亲眼看见其中的事情。
English: He also said, "Since Yongjia, for more than 200 years, there have been a total of 16 monarchs who founded the country and claimed to be the king. I have traveled around Kyoto and saw these things with my own eyes.

古文：国灭之后，观其史书，皆非实录，莫不推过于人，引善自向。
现代文：每个国家兴亡之后，看看他们的史书，都不是据实记录，没有人不是将过失推卸给别人，把好事引到自己身上。
English: After the rise and fall of each country, look at their history books, they are not reliable records, no one is not to shift the blame to others, to bring good things to themselves.

古文：符生虽好勇嗜酒，亦仁而不杀，观其治典，未为凶暴。
现代文：苻生虽然好勇嗜酒。但也懂得仁政而不轻易杀人，看着治理国家的政策法律，并不敢凶暴。
English: Although he was a daredevil and drunkard, he knew how to be benevolent and not to kill easily, and he did not dare to be violent when he looked at the policies and laws governing the country.

古文：及详其史，天下之恶皆归焉。
现代文：但在详细记载他的史书里天下所有的坏事都归在他身上。
English: But in the history books that detail him, all the bad things in the world are attributed to him.

古文：苻坚自是贤主，贼君取位，妄书生恶，凡诸史官，皆此类也。
现代文：苻坚自然是贤明的君主，但他窃取君位，随意杜撰，枉加恶名，所有史官都是这种类型。
English: Yan Jian is naturally a wise monarch, but he steals the throne, fabricates at will, and adds a bad name. All historians are of this type.

古文：人皆贵远贱近，以为信然。
现代文：人们都尊贵远的而贱视近的，以为史官的话都是真实的。
English: People respect those who are far away and despise those who are near, thinking that the words of historians are all true.

古文：当今之人，亦生愚死智，惑已甚矣。 
现代文：当今之人也是以为活着的就愚蠢，死了的才是聪明人，实在是被迷惑得太厉害了。 
English: People today also think that those who are alive are stupid, and those who are dead are smart. They are really too confused.

古文：问其故。逸曰： 生时中庸之人耳，及其死也，碑文墓志，莫不穷天地之大德，生民之能事。
现代文：有人问他为什么会是这样，赵逸说： 一个人活着的时候，尽管不过是中庸之辈而已，但在他死了以后，在他的碑文墓志里面，无不搜罗尽天地之间的大德和活着的人所能办到的好事。
English: When someone asked him why this was so, Zhao Yizhong said: When a person is alive, even if he is only a mediocre person, after his death, in his epitaph tombstone, there is nothing but to collect all the great virtues between heaven and earth and the good things that can be done by a living person.

古文：为君共尧舜连衡，为臣与伊尹等迹，牧民之官，浮虎慕其清尘，执法之吏，埋轮谢其梗直。
现代文：这个人是君主，则说他能与尧舜抗衡；这个人是大臣，就说他与伊尹有同等的政绩；凡是管理臣民的行政官员，就说他像浮虎一样令人慕其清尘；凡是执法的官员，就说他有埋轮大志令人称谢他的耿直。
English: If this person is a monarch, it means that he can compete with a baboon; if this person is a minister, it means that he has the same political achievements as Yi Yin; if this person is an administrative official who manages subjects, it means that he is like a floating tiger; if this person is a law enforcement official, it means that he has the ambition to bury the wheel, which is commendable.

古文：所谓生为盗跖，死为夷齐，妄言伤正，华词损实。 
现代文：所谓活着时是大贼盗跖，死后就夸称为圣贤伯夷叔齐所有这些，统统是运用虚妄之言中伤正气，借助华丽辞令损害事实。 
English: The so-called thieves and robbers when they were alive, and the boasting of being saints and sages after death, all of these are the use of false words to defame the righteous, and the use of flowery words to damage the facts.

古文：当时作文之士，惭逸此言，步兵校尉李登问曰： 太尉府前砖浮图，形制甚古，未知何年所造。 
现代文：当时舞文弄墨的文士，个个愧闻赵逸的这一番言论，有个武官步兵校尉李登问道： 太尉府前砖砌的佛塔，形式甚为古老，不知是何年建造的。 
English: At that time, the scribes who danced with ink were all ashamed to hear this remark from Zhao Yatong. A military attaché, infantry lieutenant Li Deng, asked: The brick pagoda in front of the captain's house is very old, I don't know how many years it was built.

古文：逸云： 晋义熙十二年，刘裕伐姚泓军人听作。 
现代文：赵逸说： 那是东晋义熙十二年时，刘裕讨伐姚泓的军人建造的。 
English: Zhao Yiyi said: It was built by the soldiers of Liu Yu who fought against Yao Xuan in the 12th year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：汝南王闻而异之，因问何所服饵以致延年。逸云： 吾不闲养生，自然长寿。
现代文：汝南王听了赵逸上面的话以后，非常惊异，便问他服用了什么长生不老药，才使他如此长寿。赵逸说： 我不懂得什么善生之道，而是自然长寿。
English: After listening to Zhao Yat's words above, King Runan was very surprised and asked him what kind of elixir he had taken to make him live so long. Zhao Yat said: I don't know what kind of way to live well, but natural longevity.

古文：郭璞常为吾筮云，寿年五百岁，今始余半。 
现代文：郭璞当年为我占卦说，我的寿长为五百年，现在开始还剩下一半。 
English: Guo Wei once said that my longevity was five hundred years, and now I still have half of it left.

古文：帝给步挽车一乘，游于市里，所经之处，多说旧迹，三年已后遁去，莫知所在。
现代文：皇帝给了他人力拉的车一辆，他周游市区，所到之处，大都能说出旧迹，三年之后，他隐遁而去，没人知道他在什么地方。
English: The emperor gave him a hand-pulled car, he traveled around the city, and wherever he went, he could mostly tell old stories. Three years later, he disappeared, and no one knew where he was.

古文：梁四公
现代文：梁四公
English: Liang Si Gong

古文：梁天监中，有罣闯颥杰、麸黅、仉肾四公谒武帝，帝见之甚悦，因命沈隐侯约作覆，将与百僚共射之。
现代文：南朝梁武帝天监年间，罣闯、颥杰、麸黅与仉肾等四公前来拜见武帝，武帝见了他们四人十分高兴，便命沈隐侯沈约作复，要与群臣共同射复。
English: During the Southern Dynasty, when Emperor Liangwu was in the Heaven's Prison, four princes, including Zi Zang, Zi Jie, Zi and Zi Ren, came to visit Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu was very happy to see the four of them, so he ordered Shen Yinghou and Shen Yao to retaliate, and they were to retaliate together with the vassals.

古文：时太史适获一鼠，约匣而缄之以献。
现代文：当时太史刚刚捉一只老鼠，沈约便将这只老鼠装在匣子里封好当作复呈给了武帝。
English: At that time, Taishi had just caught a mouse, and Shen Ye sealed the mouse in a box and presented it to Emperor Wu.

古文：帝筮之遇蹇之噬嗑。
现代文：武帝占卦占到了蹇之噬嗑。
English: Emperor Wu's prediction of the future has come to fruition.

古文：帝占成，群臣受命献卦者八人，有命待成俱出，帝占决，置诸青蒲，申命闯公揲蓍，对曰： 圣人布卦，其象吉矣，依象辩物，何取异之，请从帝命卦。 
现代文：武帝占成后，命令群臣中的八个人占，让他们占成后一块儿拿出来，武帝占定之后，将蓍草放在青蒲垫子上，又命闯公给他揲其余的蓍草，闯公说： 圣人设卦，卦象本身已经告诉了。要依照卦象辨别事物，但是如何选取蹇与噬嗑这两个不同的卦象呢？
English: Emperor Wu ordered eight of his courtiers to take up the scepter, and they took it out together. After taking up the scepter, Emperor Wu placed the reeds on a cushion and ordered Zeng Gong to give him the rest of the reeds. Zeng Gong said, "The sage has set up a riddle, and the riddle itself has told it. We must distinguish things according to the riddle, but how can we choose the two different riddles?

古文：时八月庚子日巳时，闯公奏请沈约举帝卦上一蓍以授臣，既撰占成，置于青蒲而退。
现代文：请允许我也随从皇上占卦。 这时正当八月庚子日巳时，闯公奏请武帝让沈约把武帝卦上的一支蓍草交给自己，占完之后，把蓍草放在青蒲垫子上就退回到原处。
English: At this time, just as the August Geng Zi Day was drawing to a close, Zeng Gongso asked Emperor Wu to let Shen Yao give him a sprig of rushes from Emperor Wu's bunch of rushes, and when he was finished, he put the rushes on a cushion and returned to his original place.

古文：读帝占曰： 先蹇后噬嗑是其时，内艮外坎是其象。
现代文：闯公看着武帝占的卦说： 先蹇后噬嗑这说的是时间，内艮外坎这说的是蹇卦的卦象。
English: Zeng Gong looked at Emperor Wu's Gua and said, "The first to speak, the last to speak, is time. The first to speak, the last to speak, is the elephant of Gua."

古文：坎为盗，其鼠也。
现代文：坎为盗，盗是老鼠。
English: A can is a thief, and a thief is a mouse.

古文：居蹇之时，动其见嗑，其拘系矣。
现代文：处在蹇的时间，动辄见嗑，鼠被拘囚了。
English: When I was in prison, I often saw rats. Rats were taken into custody.

古文：噬嗑六爻，四无咎，一利艰贞，非盗之事，上九荷校灭耳凶，是因盗获戾，必死鼠也。 
现代文：噬嗑六爻之中，有四爻的爻辞无咎；有一爻的爻辞占断为利艰贞，这五爻说的事都与盗没有关系；还有一爻就是上九，其爻辞是荷校灭耳，意思是戴上了很重枷锁，其占断是凶，这是因为盗窃而招致了刑罚，这老鼠一定是死的。 
English: Of the six, four were innocent; one was a thief, and the five had nothing to do with the theft; one was a rat, and the nine was a rat, and the rat was a rat, and the rat was a rat, and the rat was a rat, and the rat was a rat, and the rat was a rat, and the rat was a rat.

古文：群臣蹈舞呼万岁。帝自矜其中，颇有喜色。
现代文：群臣手舞足蹈高呼万岁，武帝也因自己射中了而洋洋得意，脸上显出得意的表情。
English: The courtiers clapped their hands and shouted, "Long live!," and Emperor Wu was also very pleased with himself for having hit the target, with a satisfied expression on his face.

古文：次读八臣占词，或辩于色，或推于气，或取于象，或演于爻，或依鸟兽龟龙，阴阳飞伏，其文虽玄远，然皆无中者。
现代文：接着又看那八位大臣的占辞，有的辨于颜色，有的推断于气，有的取于象，有的演于爻，有的依据于鸟兽龟龙之阴阳飞伏，他们的卦辞尽管文理玄妙幽远，然而都没有射中的。
English: Next, look at the divination words of the eight ministers. Some are distinguished by color, some are inferred by qi, some are taken from elephants, some are performed by dragonflies, and some are based on the yin and yang of birds, beasts, turtles and dragons. Their divination words, despite being far-fetched in terms of literature and science, have not hit the mark.

古文：末启闯公占曰： 时日王相，必生鼠矣。
现代文：最后看到闯公占的卦辞说： 这个时间是属王侯将相的时间，这是吉辰，这老鼠一定是活的。
English: At last, he saw the riddle saying: This time is the time of princes and generals, this is auspicious, this mouse must be alive.

古文：且阴阳晦而入文明，从静止而之震动，失其性必就擒矣。
现代文：但是阴阳晦而文明将入，从静止而到震动，老鼠因失其属性必然被捉住了。
English: But as the sun goes down and civilization comes into being, from stillness to vibration, the mouse is inevitably caught because it has lost its attributes.

古文：金盛之月，制之必金。
现代文：八月为金，是金盛的月份，要克它也必须是金。
English: August is gold, it is the month of gold, so it must be gold.

古文：子为鼠，辰与艮合体，坎为盗，又为隐伏，隐伏为盗，是必生鼠也。
现代文：子为鼠，时辰与艮卦正好合体，坎为盗，又为隐伏，隐伏也为盗，这老鼠肯定是活老鼠。
English: The son is a mouse, the hour coincides with the hour, the can is a thief, and the hiding place is also a thief, and the hiding place is also a thief. This mouse must be a live mouse.

古文：金数于四，其鼠必四。
现代文：金在五行之中位于第四，这老鼠必定四只。
English: Gold is the fourth element in the Five Elements, so there must be four mice.

古文：离为文明，南方之卦，日中则昃。况阴类乎。
现代文：离为文明，这是南方的卦，太阳到了中午之后就要偏西，何况老鼠是阴类呢。
English: This is a southern tale, and the sun will be westward after noon, not to mention that mice are female.

古文：晋之繇日，死如弃如，实其事也，日敛必死。 
现代文：晋卦的卦辞讲的就是日，晋为进，指的是日进，太阳进去之后，就是死了，没有了，其实说的就是这件事，太阳落下去老鼠必定就会死的。 
English: The words of the Jingu sutra are "日,晋为进," which means "sunset." After the sun goes in, it is dead and gone. In fact, this is what it says. When the sun goes down, the mouse will surely die.

古文：既见生鼠，百僚失色，而尤闯公曰： 占辞有四，今者唯一，何也？ 
现代文：文武百官听说是活老鼠后，大惊失色，于是责怪闯公道： 你占的卦辞说有四只老鼠，现在匣子里装的只有一只，这是怎么回事？ 
English: After hearing that it was a live mouse, the literary and military officials were shocked and disgraced, so they blamed the violation of justice: You said that there were four mice, but now there is only one mouse in the box. What's going on?

古文：公曰： 请剖之。 
现代文：闯公说： 请把这只老鼠剖开。 
English: He said, "Please cut open this mouse."

古文：帝性不好杀，自恨不中。
现代文：武帝禀性不好杀生，又遗憾自己没射对。
English: Emperor Wu is not good at killing, and he regrets that he did not shoot right.

古文：及至日昃，鼠且死矣，因令剖之，果妊三子。
现代文：到了太阳偏西时，那只老鼠眼看就要死了，这才令人将它剖开，果然发现大老鼠肚子里还怀着三只小老鼠。
English: When the sun was in the west, the mouse's eye looked like it was about to die, so they cut it open and found that the big mouse was still pregnant with three little mice.

古文：是日，帝移四公于五明殿西阁，示更亲近，其实囚之，唯朔望伏腊，得于义贤堂见诸学士。
现代文：这一天，武帝令四公搬到了五明殿西楼阁，表示与他们更为亲近，其实是将他们拘禁在这里了，只有每月的初一、十五以及伏腊等祭祀之日，他们才能到义贤堂与学生们见面。
English: On this day, Emperor Wu ordered the four princes to move to the west pavilion of the Wu Ming Palace, saying that they were closer to them. In fact, they were detained here. Only on the first day of the month, the fifteenth day of the month, and the day of the sacrifice, they could meet with the students in the Yixian Hall.

古文：然有军国疑议，莫不参预焉，大同中，盘盘国、丹丹国、扶昌国、高昌国遣使献方物，帝命有司设充庭法驾，雅乐九阕，百僚具朝服如元正之仪。
现代文：当然了，凡有关于军国大事的疑难问题进行议决时，他们也都参与。大同年间，盘盘国、丹丹国、扶昌国、高昌国派遣使者前来贡献地方特产，武帝令主管人员设置庭内法驾，排演雅乐九阙，文武百官都穿上服朝，就像正月祭典一样，上朝接待外宾。
English: Of course, they also participated whenever there were difficult issues concerning military affairs to be discussed. During the same year, the countries of Panpan, Dandan, Fuchang and Gaochang sent envoys to contribute local special products. Emperor Wu ordered the responsible personnel to set up a courtyard carriage and rehearse the Nine Treasures of the Court Music. All the civil and military officials put on the imperial robes, just like the New Year's Festival, and went to the imperial court to receive foreign guests.

古文：帝问四公： 异国来廷，爵命高下，欲以上公秩加之。 
现代文：武帝询问四公道： 异国的使臣前来朝拜，接待人员是讲究爵位高低的，我想以上公之爵位加给接待人员。 
English: Emperor Wu inquired of the four justices: Foreign envoys come to pay homage, the reception staff is particular about the rank of nobility, I would like to add the rank of nobility to the reception staff.

古文：黅公曰： 成王太平，周公辅政，越裳氏重译来贡，不闻爵命及之。
现代文：黅公说： 成王时代天下太平，周公辅佐朝政，越裳重译前来周朝献贡，没听说加给谁什么爵位。
English: Zeng Gong said: In the era of King Cheng, the world was at peace. Zhou Gong assisted the government of the Zhou Dynasty. More and more people came to pay tribute to the Zhou Dynasty. I did not hear who was given what title.

古文：春秋邾楚之君，爵不加子。
现代文：春秋时期的邾楚君，连子爵都没有加给。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, even the title of viscount was not given to Zou Chu.

古文：设使其君躬聘，依礼经，位止子男。
现代文：假若有人亲自接待外宾，依照《礼》的规定，爵位也只能是子或男。
English: If someone personally receives foreign guests, according to the provisions of the "Rite," the title of nobility can only be a son or a man.

古文：若加以上公，恐非稽古。 
现代文：如果加给上公爵位，恐怕不符合先例。 
English: If it were to be elevated to a dukedom, I'm afraid it would not be in keeping with precedent.

古文：帝固谓黅公更详定之。
现代文：武帝坚持让黅公重新考虑一下再作决定。
English: Emperor Wu insisted that Sun Gong reconsider before making a decision.

古文：俄属暴风如旋轮，曳帝裙带，帝又问其事，公曰： 明日亦未果，请他日议之。 
现代文：不一会儿刮起了旋风，旋风吹扯武帝的裙带，武帝又问这是怎么回事，黅公说： 明天也不能验证，请于他日议论。 
English: Not long after, a whirlwind blew up. The whirlwind ruffled Emperor Wu's crony's feathers. Emperor Wu asked what was going on, and Zeng Gong said, "You can't verify it tomorrow, please discuss it on another day."

古文：帝不怿，学士群诽之。
现代文：武帝不高兴，学士们也非难他。
English: Emperor Wu was not happy, and the scholars also rebuked him.

古文：向夕，帝女坠阁而死，礼竟不行。
现代文：到了晚上，武帝的女儿坠楼身亡，黅公在第二天也没去行吊丧之礼。
English: In the evening, Emperor Wu's daughter fell to her death, and Shao Gong did not go to the funeral the next day.

古文：后诘之，对曰： 旋风袭衣，爱子暴殒。更何疑焉。 
现代文：事后武帝追问他，他说： 旋风吹你的衣服，就证明你的爱女要暴亡，这还有什么疑问的呢？ 
English: Afterwards, Emperor Wu questioned him. He said, "If a whirlwind blows your clothes, it proves that your beloved daughter is about to die violently. Is there any doubt about this?"

古文：高昌国遣使贡盐二颗，颗如大斗，状白似玉。
现代文：高昌国派来的使臣贡献给朝廷两大粒咸盐，每粒都有斗一般大，形状洁白如玉。
English: The envoys sent by Gaochang contributed two large grains of salt to the imperial court. Each grain had a large bucket and was as white as a bead.

古文：干蒲桃、刺蜜、冻酒、白麦面。
现代文：还有干葡萄、刺蜜、冻酒、白麦面粉等。
English: There are also dried grapes, prickly honey, frozen wine, white wheat flour, etc.

古文：王公士庶皆不之识。
现代文：王公大臣与士庶百姓都不认识这些东西。
English: Wang Gongdian and the common people did not know these things.

古文：帝以其自万里绝域而来献，数年方达。
现代文：武帝认为使臣是从万里之外的远地方前来贡献这些东西的，经过许多年才到达这里。
English: Emperor Wu believed that the envoys had come from thousands of miles away to contribute these things, and it had taken many years to get here.

古文：文字言语，与梁国略同。
现代文：他们的文字和语言与梁国大致相同。
English: Their characters and language are roughly the same as Liang's.

古文：经三日，朝廷无祗对者，帝命杰公迓之。
现代文：过了三天，朝廷无人能够与他交谈，武帝便令杰公去接待他。
English: After three days, no one in the imperial court was able to talk to him, so Emperor Wu ordered Prince Jie to receive him.

古文：谓其使曰： 盐一颗是南烧羊山月望收之者，一是北烧羊山非月望收之者。
现代文：杰公对那位使者说： 这两颗咸盐其中一颗是在南烧羊山于某个月的十五日收取的，一颗是在北烧羊山于某个月十五日以外的日子收取的。
English: Jie Gong said to the messenger: One of the two salt pans was collected on the fifteenth day of a certain month in Nanbiao Yangshan, and the other was collected on a day other than the fifteenth day of a certain month in Beibiao Yangshan.

古文：蒲桃七是洿林，三是无半。
现代文：葡萄的十分之七产于頔林，十分之三出产于无半。
English: Seven-tenths of the grapes are produced in Yulin, and three-tenths are produced in Muxin.

古文：冻酒非八风谷所冻者，又以高宁酒和之。
现代文：冻酒不是八风谷冻制的，且又掺和进去一些高宁产的酒。
English: The frozen wine was not frozen in the Valley of the Eight Winds, and it was mixed with some wine produced in Kaohsiung.

古文：刺蜜是盐城所生，非南平城者。
现代文：刺蜜是盐城产的，不是南平城的产品。
English: Stinging honey is a product of Yancheng, not Nanping.

古文：白麦面是宕昌者，非昌垒真物。 
现代文：面粉是宕昌面粉，不是昌垒的真货。 
English: The flour is Tangchang flour, not Changye's genuine product.

古文：使者具陈实情，面为经年色败，至宕昌贸易填之。
现代文：使者把真实情况讲述了出来，他说面粉原是昌垒的真货，因为贮存五年变了质，所以到宕昌换了那里的面粉来充填。
English: The messenger explained the true situation. He said that the flour was originally from Changye, and because it had deteriorated after being stored for five years, it was replaced with flour from Tangchang.

古文：其年风灾，蒲桃刺蜜不熟，故驳杂。
现代文：那年闹风灾，葡萄与刺蜜成熟得不好，所以货色混杂。
English: That year was a disaster. Grapes and prickly honey did not ripen well, so the goods were mixed.

古文：盐及冻酒，奉王急命，故非时尔。
现代文：盐与冻酒，因为接到了国王的紧急命令，所以来不及弄到真货。
English: Salt and frozen wine, because of the king's urgent order, it was too late to get the real thing.

古文：因又向紫盐医珀，云自中路，遭北凉所夺，不敢言之。
现代文：杰公又问他怎么没有带来紫盐与药用琥珀，使者说在来的途中，被北凉人掠夺去了，没有敢告诉你们。
English: Jie Gong also asked him why he did not bring purple salt and medicinal amber. The messenger said that on the way, he was robbed by the Bei Liang people and did not dare to tell you.

古文：帝问杰公群物之异，对曰： 南烧羊山盐文理粗，北烧羊山盐文理密。
现代文：武帝询问这些东西有什么特异之处，杰公答道： 南烧羊山的盐粒文理粗，北烧羊山的盐文理细密。
English: Emperor Wu asked what was special about these things, and Jie Gong replied: The salt grains of Nanbiao Yangshan are coarse, while the salt grains of Beibiao Yangshan are fine.

古文：月望收之者，明彻如冰，以毡橐煮之可验。
现代文：十五日那天收的盐明彻如冰，用毡袋子加水一煮就可以检验出来。
English: The salt that was collected on the 15th day was as clear as ice, and could be tested by boiling it in a plastic bag with water.

古文：蒲桃洿林者皮薄味美，无半者皮厚味苦。
现代文：洿林的葡萄皮薄味美，无半产的葡萄皮厚味苦。
English: The grape skins of Yulin are thin and beautiful, and the grape skins of the semi-productive grapes are thick and bitter.

古文：酒是八风谷冻成者，终年不坏，今臭其气酸，洿林酒滑而色浅，故云然。
现代文：酒如果是八风谷冻制的，就会终年不变质；如今送来的这酒则已经变质，有一种酸味；洿林产的酒滑腻而颜色清浅。所以我才这么说。
English: If the wine is frozen in the Valley of the Eight Winds, it will not deteriorate throughout the year; the wine sent today has deteriorated and has a sour taste; the wine from Yulin is smooth and light in color. That's why I said so.

古文：南平城羊刺无叶，其蜜色明白而味甘，盐城羊刺叶大，其蜜色青而味薄。
现代文：南平城的羊刺树没有叶，结的刺蜜果颜色白净明亮而味道甘甜；盐城的羊刺树有大叶子，结的刺蜜果颜色发青而味道淡薄。
English: The sheep thorn trees in Nanping City have no leaves, and the prickly pear fruit is white and bright in color with a sweet taste; the sheep thorn trees in Yancheng City have large leaves, and the prickly pear fruit is bluish in color with a light taste.

古文：昌垒白麦面烹之将熟，洁白如新，今面如泥且烂。
现代文：昌垒产的白面粉蒸到快熟时，洁白新鲜；如今看到的白面粉蒸到快熟时，则像泥一样又粘又稀。
English: When the white flour produced in Changye is steamed until it is ripe, it is white and fresh; when the white flour we see today is steamed until it is ripe, it is sticky and thin like mud.

古文：由是知蜜麦之伪耳。
现代文：由此可以辨认刺蜜与面粉是假冒的。
English: From this it can be identified that the honey and flour are counterfeit.

古文：交河之间平碛中，掘深数尺，有末盐，如红如紫，色鲜味甘，食之止痛。
现代文：交河中间的沙滩里，往下挖几尺深，有粉末状的盐，颜色紫红，色彩鲜艳，味道甘美，吃了能够止痛。
English: In the sandy beach in the middle of the river, dig down a few feet deep, there is powdered salt, the color is purple-red, the color is bright, the taste is sweet, and it can relieve pain when eaten.

古文：更深一丈，下有瑿珀，黑逾纯漆，或大如车轮，末而服之，攻妇人小肠症瘕诸疾。
现代文：再往下挖到一丈深，就有药用琥珀，颜色比漆还黑，有的像车轮那样大，研成粉末服下去，能治妇人小肠瘀结等疾病。
English: Further down to a depth of one joule, there is medicinal amber, the color is darker than lacquer, some as large as a wheel, ground into a powder, which can treat women's small intestine knots and other diseases.

古文：彼国珍异，必当致贡，是以知之。
现代文：这是那个国家最珍奇的产物，是当然的贡品，因此知道他们肯定带了这两样东西。
English: It was the rarest product of that country, a tribute of course, so they knew they must have brought these two things.

古文：杰公尝与诸儒语及方域云： 东至扶桑，扶桑之蚕长七尺，围七寸，色如金，四时不死。
现代文：杰公曾经跟儒生们谈到周围四方的地理情况道： 东方到扶桑。扶桑的蚕有七八尺长，七寸粗，金黄色，一年四季不死。
English: Jie Gong once talked to Confucianism students about the geographical situation of the four sides around Fusang: East to Fusang. Fusang's silkworms are seven or eight feet long, seven inches thick, golden yellow, and immortal all year round.

古文：五月八日呕黄丝，布于条枝，而不为茧。
现代文：五月八日吐黄色丝，蚕丝分布在枝条上，而不结茧。
English: On May 8th, yellow silk was spit out. The silk was distributed on the branches, but did not scab over.

古文：脆如綖，烧扶桑木灰汁煮之，其丝坚韧，四丝为系，足胜一钧。
现代文：蚕丝像帽子上的装饰物那样脆弱，用扶桑木燃烧后的灰和在水里煮过后，蚕丝就变得坚韧了，用四根细丝辫成的细绳，足能提动一钧重的东西。
English: Silk is as fragile as the decoration on a hat, but after the ashes from the burning of Fusang wood and after boiling in water, the silk becomes tough. A string made of four filaments is enough to lift a heavy load.

古文：蚕卵大如燕雀卵，产于扶桑下。
现代文：蚕的卵像燕省卵那样大，产在扶桑树下面。
English: The eggs of the silkworm are as big as those of the swallow, and are laid under the Fusang tree.

古文：赍卵至句丽国，蚕变小，如中国蚕耳。
现代文：把这样的蚕卵带到句丽国去，生出的蚕就变小了，就像中国的蚕那么大。
English: If you take such silkworm eggs to Guli Province, the resulting silkworms will become smaller, just like the silkworms in China.

古文：其王宫内有水精城，可方一里，天未晓而明如昼，城忽不见，其月便蚀。
现代文：扶桑国的王宫里有座水晶城，方圆一里，天不亮水晶城就像白天一样明亮，如果水晶城偶尔不见了，就会出现月蚀。
English: There is a crystal city in the royal palace of Fusang, a mile in circumference, the sky is not bright, the crystal city is as bright as the daytime, if the crystal city occasionally disappears, there will be a lunar eclipse.

古文：西至西海，海中有岛，方二百里，岛上有大林，林皆宝树，中有万余家，其人皆巧，能造宝器，所谓拂林国也。
现代文：向西而至西海，海中有岛，方圆二百里，上面有大片的树林，树林里生长的全是宝贵的树木。岛上住着万余户人家，那里的人都很手巧，能够制造宝器，这就是所说的拂林国。
English: Westward to the West Sea, there is an island in the sea, with a circumference of two hundred miles. There is a large forest above it, and all the trees growing in the forest are precious trees. More than ten thousand households live on the island, and the people there are very handy and can make precious tools. This is the so-called forest country.

古文：岛西北有坑，盘坳深千余尺，以肉投之，鸟衔宝出，大者重五斤，彼云是色界天王之宝藏。
现代文：海岛的西北部有个大坑，大坑曲曲弯弯地有一千多尺深，扔下一块肉去，就有鸟衔着宝石飞出来，大的宝石有五斤重，那个地方的人说这是色界天王的宝藏。
English: There is a large pit in the northwest of the island. The large pit is more than a thousand feet deep. If you throw a piece of meat, a bird will fly out with a jewel. The large jewel weighs five pounds. People in that area say that this is the treasure of the king of the sex world.

古文：四海西北，无虑万里，有女国，以蛇为夫，男则为蛇，不噬人而穴处。
现代文：四海的西北方，大约一万里处，有个女儿国，女人把蛇当做丈夫，男人则是蛇，不咬人，住在洞穴里。
English: In the northwest of the four seas, about ten thousand miles away, there is a daughter country. The woman takes the snake as her husband, while the man is a snake, does not bite, and lives in a cave.

古文：女为臣妾官长，而居宫室。
现代文：女人在这个国家当官为臣，住在宫殿里。
English: In this country, women hold high office and live in palaces.

古文：俗无书契，而信呪诅，直者无他，曲者立死。
现代文：这里的习俗是没有文书契约，而是相信诅咒，坦率正直的人没有什么，不忠诚不公正的人立即就死。
English: The custom here is not to have a written contract, but to believe in curses, the frank and honest have nothing, and the disloyal and unjust die immediately.

古文：神道设教，人莫敢犯。
现代文：神道立下的教诲，谁也不敢违犯。
English: No one dares to violate the teachings of Shinto.

古文：南至火洲之南，炎昆山之上，其土人食蝑蟹髯蛇以辟热毒。
现代文：南方至火洲之南。在炎昆山上，当地人吃蝑蟹与髯蛇来预防热毒。
English: From the south to the south of Huashu. On the Yankun Mountain, the local people eat crabs and pythons to prevent heat poisoning.

古文：洲中有火木，其皮可以为布，炎丘有火鼠，其毛可以为褐，皆焚之不灼，污以火浣。
现代文：在火洲之中有火树，树皮可以做布，炎丘有火老鼠，鼠毛可以做衣服，这样的布与衣服都是用火烧不焦，玷污之后用火来洗涤。
English: In the middle of the cinder there are fire trees, the bark of which can be used to make cloth, the flame mounds have fire mice, and the mouse hair can be used to make clothes. Such cloth and clothes are not burned with fire, but are washed with fire after being stained.

古文：北至黑谷之北，有山极峻造天，四时冰雪，意烛龙所居。
现代文：北方至黑谷以北，那里的山特别高大，顶到了天，一年四季都是冰雪覆盖，意思是用冰雪的光亮来照亮龙居住的地方。
English: From the north to the north of Kurodani, the mountains there are particularly tall, reaching to the sky, and are covered with ice and snow all year round. It means to use the light of ice and snow to illuminate the place where the dragon lives.

古文：昼无日，北向更明。
现代文：白天没有太阳，北面更比南面更亮。
English: There is no sun during the day, and the north is brighter than the south.

古文：夜直上观北极。
现代文：夜间在正上方能看到北斗星。
English: At night, the Big Dipper can be seen directly above.

古文：西有酒泉，其水味如酒，饮之醉人。北有漆海，毛羽染之皆黑，西有乳海，其水白滑如乳。
现代文：西边有酒泉，泉水的味道像酒一样，喝了能使人醉；北边有漆海，毛发与羽毛在海水里染过后都成为黑色；西边有乳海，海水白色滑腻就像乳汁一样。
English: To the west there are wine springs, the water of which tastes like wine and intoxicates the drinker; to the north there is the lacquered sea, where hair and feathers turn black after being dyed in seawater; to the west there is the milky sea, the seawater is white and slippery like milk.

古文：三海间方七百里，水土肥沃，大鸭生骏马，大鸟生人，男死女活，鸟自衔其女，飞行哺之，衔不胜则负之，女能跬步，则为酋豪所养。
现代文：在这三个海之间方圆七百里的地方，水土肥沃，大鸭子生骏马，大鸟生人；鸟生的人男的都死女的能活，鸟衔着它生的女人在飞翔中喂养，衔不动了就用背驮着，女人能走路了，则被首领养育着。
English: In the seven-hundred-mile-square area between these three seas, the soil and water are fertile. Large ducks give birth to horses, and large birds give birth to people. Both men and women who give birth to birds die, but women who give birth to birds are able to live. The woman who holds the bird feeds it in flight and carries it on her back when it is no longer held, and when the woman is able to walk, she is raised by the chief.

古文：女皆殊丽，美而少寿，为人姬媵，未三十而死。
现代文：女人都是美女，相貌美丽而寿命短，给人作妻妾，不到三十岁就死了。
English: The women are all beauties, beautiful in appearance but short-lived, serving as wives and concubines, and dying before the age of thirty.

古文：有兔大如马，毛洁白，长尺余，有貂大如狼，毛纯黑，亦长尺余，服之御寒。 
现代文：有兔大如马，兔毛洁白，毛长一尺多，有貂大如狼，毛色纯黑，毛长也是一尺多长。
English: There are rabbits as big as horses, with white fur and more than a foot long, and jackals as big as wolves, with pure black fur and more than a foot long.

古文：朝廷闻其言，拊掌笑谑，以为诳妄，曰。
现代文：毛皮穿在身上能御寒。 
English: Wearing fur can protect you from the cold.

古文：邹衍九州、王嘉拾遗之谈耳。
现代文：满朝文武及在座的儒生听了他这番议论，都拍着巴掌直笑，以为他这是信口雌黄，说这纯属 邹衍九州与王嘉拾遗一类的谈论而已 。
English: Manchong Wenwu and all the Confucian scholars present laughed heartily when they heard him say this, thinking that he was just talking nonsense, and that this was just the kind of talk that Yuanyan Kyushu and Wang Jiaqi would engage in.

古文：司徒左长史王筠难之曰： 书传所载，女国之东，蚕崖之西，狗国之南，羌夷之别种，一女为君，无夫蛇之理，与公说不同，何也？ 
现代文：司徒左长史王筠提出质疑道： 在《汉书》与《左传》中记载着，女儿国的东面，蚕崖以西，狗国以南，有羌夷族的一个分支，那里由一个女人作君主，但没有把蛇作丈夫的道理，与您说的根本不同，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Shi Wangyao, the head of the Left Division of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court of

古文：公曰： 以今所知，女国有六，何者，北海之东，方夷之北，有女国，天女下降为其君，国中有男女，如他恒俗。
现代文：杰公说： 根据现在所知道的情况，女儿国有六个。
English: Jie Gong said: According to what we know now, there are six daughters in the country.

古文：西南夷板楯之西，有女国，其女悍而男恭，女为人君，以贵男为夫，置男为妾媵，多者百人，少者匹夫，昆明东南，绝徼之外，有女国，以猿为夫，生男类父，而入山谷，昼伏夜游，生女则巢居穴处。南海东南有女国，举国惟以鬼为夫，夫致饮食禽兽以养之。勃律山之西，有女国，方百里，山出石虺之水，女子浴之而有孕，其女举国无夫，并蛇六矣。
现代文：哪六个呢？北海东面与方夷北面有一个女儿国；天女下凡作她们的君主，国内有男有女，生活习俗与其他国家一样；西南少数民族聚居的板楯以西有个女儿国，那里的女人悍勇而男人恭顺，女人为国君，把尊贵的男人作为丈夫，宫中蓄养男人当做侍妾嫔妃，多的时候有上百人，少的时候只有自己匹配的丈夫；昆明之南的边境以外有个女儿国，女人以猿为丈夫，生下男孩像父亲，生下来之后就进入山谷；昼伏夜出，生下的女孩则住在草窝里和洞穴里；南海的东南面有个女儿国，整个国家的女人都以鬼为丈夫，丈夫捕到禽兽作饮食供养她们；勃律山的西面有个女儿国，方圆一百里，山里流出一条台虺河，女人在河水里洗浴之后就怀孕，全国的女人都没有丈夫；加上原先说的那个以蛇为丈夫的女儿国，总共是六个。
English: Which six? On the eastern side of the North Sea and on the northern side of the Fangyi River, there is a daughter country; the gods and goddesses who are their monarchs, there are men and women in the country, and the living customs are the same as in other countries; to the west of the southwest ethnic minority clustered in the plateau, there is a daughter country, where the women are brave and the men are obedient, the woman is the sovereign, the honorable man is the husband, and the men in the palace are raised as concubines and concubines, sometimes there are hundreds of people, sometimes only their matching husbands; outside the southern border of Kunming, there is a daughter

古文：昔狗国之南有女国，当汉章帝时，其国王死，妻代知国，近百年，时称女国，后子孙还为君。
现代文：从前狗国以南那个女儿国，在汉章帝时，国王死了，国王的妻子代替丈夫管理国家，历时近百年，当时称为女儿国，后来国王的子孙又重新做了君主。
English: Once upon a time, there was a daughter kingdom to the south of the former Dog Kingdom. During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng, the king died, and the king's wife replaced her husband to govern the country. This lasted for nearly a hundred years. At that time, it was called a daughter kingdom. Later, the king's children and grandchildren became monarchs again.

古文：若犬夫猿夫鬼夫水之国，博知者已知之矣，故略而不论。 
现代文：诸如以狗为丈夫、以猿为丈夫、以鬼为丈夫以及在河里洗澡怀孕的这几个女儿国，知识丰富的人都已经熟知，所以原先我便略而不论。 
English: Such things as a dog for a husband, a monkey for a husband, a ghost for a husband, and bathing in the river to become pregnant are familiar to those who are well-informed, so I initially ignored them.

古文：俄而扶桑国使使贡方物，有黄丝三百斤，即扶桑蚕所吐，扶桑灰汁所煮之丝也。
现代文：不久，扶桑国也紧接着派遣使臣来梁国贡献地方物产，有黄丝三百斤，就是扶桑蚕吐出来后又用扶桑木灰加水煮过的那种蚕丝。
English: Soon after, Fusang State also sent envoys to Liang State to contribute local products, including 300 kg of yellow silk, which is the silk spit out by Fusang silkworms and boiled with Fusang wood ash and water.

古文：帝有金炉，重五十斤，系六丝以悬炉，丝有余力。
现代文：武帝有一只金香炉，重五十斤，将六根蚕丝辫在一起用来挂这只香炉，丝的承受能力绰绰有余。
English: Emperor Wu had a golden incense burner that weighed fifty catties. Six strands of silk were strung together to hang the incense burner. The silk was more than strong enough to bear the weight.

古文：又贡观日玉，大如镜，方园尺余，明彻如琉璃，映日以观、见日中宫殿，皎然分明。
现代文：扶桑使臣还贡献了观日玉，玉大如化妆镜，方圆一尺多，明彻如琉璃，用它映着太阳观看，太阳里面的宫殿看得明白清楚。
English: The Fusang envoy also contributed a sundial. The sundial is as big as a make-up mirror, more than a foot in circumference, and as clear as glass. It is used to look at the sun, and the palace inside the sun can be seen clearly.

古文：帝令杰公与使者论其风俗土地物产，城邑山川，并访往昔存亡。
现代文：武帝令杰公与扶桑使臣谈论他们的风俗地理物产，以及城镇乡村山脉河流等情况，并且问及他们历史上的兴亡变迁过程。
English: Emperor Wu asked Prince Jie and the Fusang envoys to talk about their customs, geographical features, towns, villages, mountains and rivers, and asked them about the rise and fall of their history.

古文：又识使者祖父伯叔兄弟，使者流涕拜首，具言情实。
现代文：使者提到自己的祖父叔叔大爷与兄弟时，杰公与武帝都认识，使者便感动得流着眼泪叩头跪拜，一一介绍了本国的真实情况。
English: When the envoy mentioned his grandfather, uncle and brother, Jie Gong and Emperor Wu all knew each other, the envoy was moved to tears, bowed down and introduced the true situation of his country one by one.

古文：间岁，南海商人赍火浣布三端，帝以杂布积之。
现代文：隔了一年，南海的商人带来三端火洗布，武帝以为他是带的普通杂布来卖的。
English: A year later, a merchant from the South China Sea brought three ends of fire-washed cloth, and Emperor Wu thought he was bringing ordinary rags to sell.

古文：令杰公以他事召，至于市所，杰公遥识曰： 此火浣布也，二是缉木皮所作，一是续鼠毛所作。 
现代文：因为别的事情，武帝令杰公去召唤这位南海商人，杰公到了他经商的地方，远远地就认出来了，说： 这是火洗布，其中两端是用树皮织造的，一端是用鼠毛织造的。 
English: Because of other matters, Emperor Wu ordered Jie Gong to summon the South Sea merchant. When Jie Gong arrived at the place where he did business, he recognized it from a distance and said: This is a fire-washed cloth, of which two ends are woven from tree bark and one end is woven from mouse hair.

古文：以诘商人，具如杰公所说。
现代文：走到跟前向商人一打听，果然与杰公说的一样。
English: When I approached the merchant and asked him about it, he said the same thing as Jie Gonglu.

古文：因问木鼠之异，公曰： 木坚毛柔，是何别也。
现代文：于是问他树皮织的与鼠毛织的有什么不同，杰公说： 树皮织的质地坚硬，鼠毛织的质地柔软，这就是它们的区别。
English: So he asked him what was the difference between the bark weaving and the mouse hair weaving. Jie Gong said: The texture of the bark weaving is hard, and the texture of the mouse hair weaving is soft. This is the difference between them.

古文：以阳燧火山阴拓木爇之，木皮改常。 
现代文：如果用阳燧火山阴面的柘树一烧，树皮织的火洗布就会变形。 
English: If the eucalyptus tree on the shady side of the volcano is burned, the fire-washed cloth woven from the bark will be deformed.

古文：试之果验。
现代文：试验了一下，果然如他所说。
English: I tried it out and it does what it says on the tin.

古文：明年冬，扶南大舶从西天竺国来，卖碧玻黎镜，面广一尺五寸，重四十斤，内外皎洁，置五色物于其上，向明视之，不见其质。
现代文：第二年冬天，扶南国的一艘大船从西天竺国驶来，出售玻璃镜，镜面一尺五寸，重四十斤，正反两面都皎洁透亮，把五色物体放在镜子上面，天亮时一看，镜子上的东西就看不见了。
English: In the winter of the following year, a large ship from the southern kingdom of Funan sailed from the western kingdom of Yunnan to sell glass mirrors. The mirror was one foot five inches in length and weighed forty pounds. Both the front and back sides were clear and translucent. Five-colored objects were placed on the mirror. At dawn, the objects on the mirror were no longer visible.

古文：问其价，约钱百万贯文，帝令有司算之，倾府库偿之不足。
现代文：有人问这面镜子要多少价钱，那人说要一百万贯钱左右，武帝令有关人员核算了一下，府库里的所有钱都拿出来也不够这面镜子的价钱。
English: Someone asked how much the mirror would cost, and the man said that it would cost around one million rupees. Emperor Wu ordered the relevant personnel to do some calculations. All the money in the government treasury would not be enough to pay for the mirror.

古文：其商人言，此色界天王有福乐事，天澍大雨，众宝如山，纳之山藏，取之难得，以大兽肉投之藏中，肉烂粘宝，一鸟衔出，而即此宝焉，举国不识，无敢酬其价者。
现代文：那位商人说，这面镜子是色界天王做了功德方面的事，天降大雨。众宝如山，天王便收存起来放在山上的库府里面，别人很难拿出来，用大块的兽肉扔到库府之中，肉腐烂后沾住宝物，一只大鸟衔着飞了出来，衔出来的就是这面宝镜，举国上下都不认识这面宝镜，无人能够拿得出这个价钱的。
English: The merchant said, "This mirror is the result of the benevolence of the celestial king of the sexes. It rained heavily. The treasures are like mountains, and the heavenly king stored them in the treasure house on the mountain. It is difficult for others to take them out. Large pieces of animal meat were thrown into the treasure house. After the meat rotted, it stuck to the treasures. A big bird flew out with it, and what came out was this precious mirror. The whole country does not know this precious mirror, and no one can get this price.

古文：以示杰公，公曰： 上界之宝信矣。
现代文：把这面镜子拿给杰公看，杰公说： 这是天上的宝物，确实不假。
English: Take this mirror to Jie Gong and show it to him. Jie Gong said, "This is a heavenly treasure, it is indeed real."

古文：昔波罗尼斯国王有大福，得获二宝镜，镜光所照，大者三十里，小者十里。
现代文：从前波罗尼斯国王有大功德，能够得到两面宝镜，镜的亮光照到的距离，大镜是三十里，小镜是十里。
English: Once upon a time, King Polonius had the great merit of being able to obtain two precious mirrors. The distance illuminated by the light of the mirror is thirty miles for the large mirror and ten miles for the small mirror.

古文：至玄孙福尽，天火烧宫，大镜光明，能御灾火，不至焚爇。小镜光微，为火所害，虽光彩昧暗，尚能辟诸毒物。方园百步，盖此镜也。
现代文：到了他的玄孙功德尽了，天火焚烧了宫殿，大宝镜的光明能够抵御火灾，不至于被焚烧；小宝镜的光明微弱，被火烧了，虽然光彩黯淡了，仍能在方圆一百步之内，抵御毒物的侵害，那面小宝镜就是这面镜子。
English: When his great-great-grandson's merits were exhausted and the palace was burned by the fire of heaven, the light of the great mirror was able to resist the fire and was not burned; the light of the small mirror was weak and was burned by the fire, although the luster was dim, it was still able to resist the attack of poisons within a hundred paces, and that small mirror was this mirror.

古文：时王卖得金二千余斤，遂入商人之手，后王福薄，失其大宝，收夺此镜，却入王宫。
现代文：当时国王卖得金两千余斤，宝镜便到了商人手里，后来国王功德极少，大宝镜失去了、便把这面小宝镜收夺了回去，又藏在王宫里。
English: At that time, the king sold more than two thousand catties of gold, and the mirror ended up in the hands of a merchant. Later, when the king had very little merit and lost the large mirror, he took the small mirror back and hid it in the royal palace.

古文：此王十世孙失道，国人将谋害之，此镜又出，当是大臣所得，其应入于商贾。
现代文：这位国王的第十世孙子无道，国内众人要杀害他，这面宝镜又出了王宫，大概被大臣得到了，那就会进入商人的手里。
English: The tenth grandchild of the king has no way out, everyone in the country wants to kill him, and this mirror has left the royal palace, probably got by the minister, then it will go into the hands of the merchant.

古文：其价千金，倾竭府库不足也。 
现代文：它的价值是千两黄金，把全部府库的储存拿出来也不够。 
English: It's worth a thousand taels of gold, and it's not enough to take out all the treasury's reserves.

古文：因命杰公与之论镜，由是信伏。
现代文：武帝便命杰公与这位商人谈论这面镜子的出处、特点等，商人由此非常信服。
English: Emperor Wu then ordered Jie Gong to talk to the merchant about the origin and characteristics of the mirror, and the merchant was very convinced.

古文：更问此是瑞宝，王令货卖，即应大秦波罗奈国失罗国诸大国王大臣所取，汝辈胡客，何由得之，必是盗窃至此耳。
现代文：杰公又问商人： 此乃稀世国宝，国王如果同意出卖，就应该是大秦的波罗奈国失掉给的罗国的大国王与大臣所有，你乃一位别国的客人，怎么能够有这面宝镜呢？
English: Jie Gong also asked the merchant: This is a rare national treasure. If the king agrees to sell it, it should be owned by the great king and minister of Luo Province, which lost the Boronai Province of the Great Qin Dynasty to Luo Province. You are a guest from another country, how can you have this precious mirror?

古文：胡客逡巡未对，俄而其国遣使追访至梁，云其镜为盗所窃，果如其言。
现代文：一定是盗窃到这里来的吧。 这位商人半天也回答不上来，不久，那个国家便派人追查到梁国，说他们那面宝镜被盗窃走了，果然像杰公说的一样。
English: The merchant could not answer for a long time, and soon that country sent someone to investigate Liangguo, saying that their precious mirror had been stolen, just as Jie Gong said.

古文：后有魏使频至，亦言黑貂白兔鸭马女国，往往入京，梁朝卿士，始信杰公周游六合，出入百代，言不虚说，皆为美谈，故其多闻强识，博物辩惑。
现代文：后来有北魏的使者经常来到梁朝，也说到大如狼的黑貂、大如马的白兔、大鸭生骏马、大鸟生人的那个国家，常常有人来到京都，梁朝的公卿士人，开始相信杰公周游天地四方，出入于历朝百代，话不虚说，全是美谈。所以他能如此多闻强识，博物辨惑。
English: Later, emissaries from the Northern Wei Dynasty often came to the Liang Dynasty. They also talked about the country of the black stork as big as a wolf, the white rabbit as big as a horse, the duck as big as a horse, and the bird as big as a man. People often came to Kyoto. The court nobles of the Liang Dynasty began to believe that Jie Gong traveled around the world and the four directions, entering and exiting in hundreds of dynasties. The words were not false, they were all beautiful stories. That is why he could hear so much knowledge, and the museum was puzzled.

古文：虽仲尼之详大骨，子产之说台骀，亦不是过矣。
现代文：虽然孔仲尼能够评批骨，子产能够说骏马骑，也不能超过异人杰公。
English: Although Kong Zhongni can appraise the bone, the offspring can say that the horse is riding, and can not exceed the strange man.

古文：后魏天平之岁，当大同之际，彼此俗阜时康，贤才鼎盛。
现代文：东魏天平之年，正当梁朝大同年间，彼此双方民俗淳厚时世康平，贤能之才济济。
English: When the Eastern Wei Dynasty was at its most peaceful, just as the Liang Dynasty was at its most peaceful, the folk customs of both sides were at their best.

古文：其朝廷专对，称人物士流。
现代文：他们在朝廷上讨论时世，评说人物士流。
English: At court, they discussed the times and commented on the personalities.

古文：及应对礼宾，则肾公独预之为问答，皆得先鸣。
现代文：等到接待应对宾客时，则由肾公单独参与，在与宾客的交谈与应答中，每次都能得先声占上风。
English: When it was time to receive and respond to guests, Negi participated alone. In conversations and responses with guests, Negi always had the upper hand.

古文：所以出使外郊，宴会宾客，使彼落其术内，动挫词锋，机不虚发，举无遗策，肾公之力也。
现代文：让他出使外交，宴会宾客，能使对方落入自己的计谋之内，动即挫伤对方的词锋，战机绝不虚发，从无漏洞和失策，这些全赖肾公之力。
English: Let him send out diplomacy, banquet guests, can make the other side fall into his own stratagem, immediately frustrate the other side's words, warplanes will never be false, never have loopholes and missteps, these all rely on the power of the kidney.

古文：魏兴和二年，遣崔敏、阳休之来聘。
现代文：东魏兴和二年，派遣崔敏与阳休之前来访问梁朝。
English: In the second year of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Cui Min and Yang Hui were sent to visit the Liang Dynasty.

古文：敏字长谦，清河东武城人，博学赡文，当朝第一，与太原王延业齐名，加以天文律历医方药品卜筮。
现代文：崔敏字长谦，清河东武城人，学识渊博又极富文才，是当世第一，与太原著名学者王延业齐名，加以天文历算、医疗药物、占卜命卦等等学问，他样样精通。
English: Cui Minzhi Changqian, a native of Wucheng, east of the Qinghe River, was the most learned and literate person of his time. He was as famous as the famous scholar Wang Yanye of Taiyuan. He was also well versed in astronomy, medicine, fortune-telling, and so on.

古文：既至。帝选硕学沙门十人于御对百僚与之谈论，多屈于敏，帝赐敏书五百余卷，他物倍之。
现代文：梁武帝选拔了十名学识丰富的高僧跟文武百官一起，在朝廷上与崔敏谈论，多数都谈不过他，武帝赏赐崔敏五百多卷书，还有两倍于书的其他礼物。
English: Emperor Liangwu selected ten learned high-ranking monks along with hundreds of civil and military officials to discuss with Cui Min at the court, but most of them could not talk about him. Emperor Wu rewarded Cui Min with more than five hundred volumes of books and twice as many other gifts.

古文：四公进曰： 崔敏学问疏浅，不足上轸冲襟，命臣肾敌之，必死。 
现代文：四公对武帝进言道： 崔敏学识疏浅，不足够做上乘之人，命臣仉肾与他交战，他肯定被战死。 
English: The four princes said to Emperor Wu, "Cui Min is not well-educated, and he is not good enough to be a superior man. His vassal, Guo Jian, fought with him, and he must have been killed in battle.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：武帝听从了他们的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：初江东论学，有十二沙门论，以条疏徵核，有中观论，以乘寄萧然，言名理者。宗仰其术。北朝有如实论，质定宗礼，有回诤论，借机破义。
现代文：当年江东的论辩学问，有十二沙门论，以条理清晰逻辑严谨著称，有中观论，以长于表达寄托与描述著称，谈论名理者师法他们的论辩技巧；北朝则有如实论，长于质定宗礼，有回诤论，善长借机破义。
English: At that time, the Eastern Jiangsu's argumentation studies included the Twelve Samanas, which was famous for its clear logic and rigor, and the Middle View Theory, which was famous for being better than expression and description, and talked about the methods of famous reasoners and their argumentation skills; the Northern Dynasty had the Truthfulness Theory, which was better than the quality determination of religious rites, the Eclipses Theory, and the ability to take advantage of opportunities to break the meaning.

古文：敏总南北二业皆精，又桑门所专，唯在释氏。
现代文：崔敏总其南北两方的论辩之学，都能精通，又在沙门专门研究过佛教。
English: Cui Min has always been proficient in the study of arguments between the north and the south, and has studied Buddhism in Shamen.

古文：若儒之与道，蔽于未闻。
现代文：有的儒家学者对于道教道学往往缺乏了解。
English: Some Confucian scholars often lack understanding of Taoism.

古文：敏兼三教而擅之，颇有德色。
现代文：崔敏则同时对于儒、释、道三家都很擅长，颇有得意之色。
English: At the same time, Cui Min is very good at Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism, and is quite good at it.

古文：肾公尝于五天竺国以梵语精理问论中分别论、大无畏论、因明论。皆穷理尽妙。
现代文：肾公曾于五天竺国通过梵语精心研究过问论中的分别论、大无畏论、因明论，对这些学问都能透彻地理解其理论与奥妙。
English: In the Five Dynasties, through the study of Sanskrit, Neigong had carefully studied the theories of differentiation, fearlessness, and causality in the theory of questions, and he was able to thoroughly understand the theories and mysteries of these sciences.

古文：肾公貌寝形陋，而声气清畅。
现代文：肾公的形貌萎枯缩瘦，而说话的声音口气却清亮流畅。
English: Nephew's appearance is withered and thin, but the tone of his voice is clear and smooth.

古文：敏既频胜群僧，而乃傲形于物。
现代文：崔敏因为曾经屡次战胜各位高僧，于是恃才傲物。
English: Since Choe Min had repeatedly defeated high-ranking monks, he was proud of his accomplishment.

古文：其日，帝于诤居殿命肾公与敏谈论至苦，三光四气，五行十二支，十干八宿，风云气候，金丹玉液，药性针道，六性五蕴，阴阳历数，韫略机权，飞伏孤虚，鬼神情状，始自经史，终于老释，凡十余日。辩扬六艺百氏，与敏互为主客，立谈绝倒，观者莫不盈量忘归。
现代文：那天，武帝在净居殿为肾公与崔敏准备了论坛，两人理论得口干舌燥，十分疲劳。谈论范围极其广泛，三光四气、五行十二支、十干八宿、风云气候、金丹玉液、药性针道、六性五蕴、阴阳历算、韬略机权、飞伏孤虚、鬼神情状等各门各类无所不及，起自经史，终于老释，连续十余天，辩论阐扬六艺百家之学，肾公与崔敏互为主客，立论奇妙令人叹绝倾倒，旁观者无不自始至终听完他们的全部发言，常常忘记了回家。
English: On that day, Emperor Wu prepared a forum for Neigong and Cui Min at Cangjing Hall, and the two of them were very tired and dry-mouthed from theorizing. The discussion was extremely wide-ranging, covering the three lights and four airs, the five elements and twelve branches, the ten elements and eight mansions, the winds and clouds, the climate, the jade and gold, the medicinal acupuncture, the six sexes and five elements, the yin and yang calendar, the divination mechanism, the flying solitude, the state of ghosts and spirits, and so on. For more than ten days in a row, starting from the history of scripture and ending with the release of

古文：然敏词气既沮于頔。不自得，因而成病，舆疾北归，未达中路而卒。
现代文：然而崔敏的词气既已不及肾公，所以不能顺心自得因而酿成疾病，乘车急忙北归魏国，没有走到中途就死了。
English: However, since Cui Min's tone of voice was not as good as that of Neijiang, he could not follow his heart, which led to illness. He hurried north to Wei Province by car and died before reaching the halfway point.

