古文：圣宗四八年春正月辛巳，如台湖。庚寅，诏决滞狱。
现代文：统和八年春正月初四，至台湖。十三日，下诏审理积压案件。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the spring of the eighth year of unification, it came to Lake Tai. On the 13th, the backlog of cases began to be heard.

古文：庚子，如沈子泺。
现代文：二十三日，到沈子泊。
English: On the 23rd, we stayed at Shenzi.

古文：二月丁未朔，于阗、回鹘各遣使来贡。
现代文：二月初一，于阗、回鹘派使者来进贡。
English: On the first day of February, emissaries from Yunnan and Fujian were sent to pay tribute.

古文：壬申，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：二十六日，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月丁丑，李继迁遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初二，李继迁派使者进贡。
English: On the second day of March, Li Jiquan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚辰，太白、荧惑斗，凡十有五次。
现代文：初五，太白金星、火星相重合，一共十五次。
English: On the fifth day of the first lunar month, the phases of Venus and Mars overlap, a total of 15 times.

古文：乙酉，城杏埚，以宋俘实之。
现代文：初十，在杏埚筑城，让宋国俘虏居住。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Song prisoners were allowed to live in the city of Xingyao.

古文：辛丑，置宜州。
现代文：二十六日，设置宜州。
English: On the 26th, it was set up in Yizhou.

古文：夏四月丙午朔，严州刺史李寿英有惠政，民请留，从之。
现代文：夏四月初一，严州刺史李寿英由于素行仁政，任满后百姓请求他留下，得到皇上允许。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the people of Yanzhou asked Li Shouying to stay on after his term of office because of his benevolent politics, and he received the emperor's permission.

古文：庚戌，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：初五，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the 19th, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，以岁旱，诸部艰食，振之。
现代文：二十五日，因遭遇旱灾，诸部粮食缺乏，给予赈济。
English: On the 25th, due to the drought, there was a shortage of grain in various provinces, and relief was given.

古文：五月戊子，以宋降卒分隶诸军。
现代文：五月十四日，将宋国降卒分别隶属于诸军。
English: On May 14th, the subordinate officers of the Song Dynasty were assigned to different armies.

古文：庚寅，女直宰相阿海来贡，封顺化王。
现代文：十六日，女真宰相阿海前来进贡，被封为顺化王。
English: On the 16th, Nyanzhen Prime Minister Ahai came to pay tribute and was named King of Hue.

古文：丙申，清暑胡土白山。
现代文：二十二日，在胡土白山避暑。
English: On the 22nd, I spent the summer in Hutu Baishan.

古文：诏括民田。
现代文：下诏检括民田。
English: The following edict includes the inspection of private farms.

古文：六月丙午，以北面林牙磨鲁古为北院大王。
现代文：六月初三，任命北面林牙磨鲁古为北院大王。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, he appointed the north-facing Lin Ya Ma Luo Gu as the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：阿萨兰回鹘于越、达剌干各遣使来贡。
现代文：阿萨兰回鹘于越、达剌干分别派使者前来进贡。
English: Asalan returned the tribute to Vietnam, and Dajiangan sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，月掩天驷第一星。
现代文：十一日，月亮遮住了房宿第一星。
English: On the 11th day, the moon covered the first star.

古文：丙辰，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十三日，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the 13th, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：秋七月庚辰，改南京熊军为神军。
现代文：秋七月初七，改称南京熊军为神军。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the autumn, the Nanjing Bear Army was renamed the Divine Army.

古文：诏东京路诸宫分提辖司，分置定霸、保和、宣化三县，白川州置洪理，仪坤州置广义，辽西州置长庆，乾州置安德各一县。
现代文：诏令东京路诸宫分提辖司，分置定霸、保和、宣化三县，在白川州分置洪理县，仪坤州分置广义县，辽西州分置长庆县，乾州分置安德县。
English: The imperial edict divided the jurisdiction into three counties, namely, Dingba, Baohe and Xuanhua, in Shirakawa Prefecture, Hongli County, Guangyi County in Yikun Prefecture, Changqing County in Liaosih Prefecture, and Ande County in Qianzhou.

古文：省遂、妫、松、饶、宁、海、瑞、玉、铁里、奉德等十州，及玉田、辽丰、松山、弘远、怀清、云龙、平泽、平山等八县，以其民分隶他郡。
现代文：裁撤遂州、妫州、松州、饶州、宁州、海州、瑞州、玉州、铁里州、奉德州等十州和玉田、辽丰、松山、弘远、怀清、云龙、平泽、平山等八县，将其所辖民户分隶其他郡县。
English: Suizhou, Zhangzhou, Songzhou, Raozhou, Ningzhou, Haizhou, Ruizhou, Yuzhou, Telizhou, Bongdezhou and other ten prefectures and eight counties including Yutian, Liaofeng, Matsuyama, Hongyuan, Huaiqing, Yunlong, Pyeongtaek and Pingshan were abolished, and the households under their jurisdiction were divided into other counties.

古文：八月乙卯，以黑白羊祭天地。
现代文：八月十三日，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On August 13th, the heaven and earth were sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：九月乙亥，北女直四部请内附。
现代文：九月初三，北女真四部请求内附我国。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, the 4th Division of the North Women's Army requested to attach our country.

古文：壬辰，李继迁献宋俘。
现代文：二十日，李继迁献上宋国俘虏。
English: On the 20th, Li Jiji presented the remains of Song prisoners.

古文：冬十月丙午，以大败宋军，复遣使来告。
现代文：冬十月初四，李继迁因大败宋军，又派使者来奏告。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, because of the great defeat of the Song Army, Li Jiquan sent an envoy to report.

古文：己酉，阻卜等遣使来贡。
现代文：初七，阻卜等派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 7th day of the first month, they sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：是月，驻跸大王川。
现代文：同月，皇上歇驾于大王川。
English: In the same month, the Emperor died in the Great Wang River.

古文：十一月庚寅，以吐谷浑民饥，振之。
现代文：十一月十九日，因吐谷浑百姓闹饥荒，赈济之。
English: On the 19th of November, due to the famine in Tugu, the people of Tugu were forced to beg for food.

古文：丁酉，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：十二月癸卯，李继迁下宋麟、鄜等州，遣使来告。
现代文：十二月初二，李继迁攻下宋麟、等州，派使者前来奏报。
English: On the second day of December, Li Jiquan conquered Songlin and other prefectures, and sent an envoy to report the news.

古文：女直遣使来贡。
现代文：女真派使者进贡。
English: The Empress Zhenzhen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚戌，遣使封李继迁为夏国王。
现代文：初九，派使者封李继迁为夏国王。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he sent an envoy to crown Li Jiqian as the king of Xia.

古文：癸丑，回鹘来贡。
现代文：十二日，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 12th, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：是岁，放郑云从等二人及第。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取郑云从等二人及第。
English: This year, Zheng Yun, the second and the third, were admitted to the list.

古文：九年春正月甲戌，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：九年春正月初三，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the third day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, Nyoman sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙子，诏禁私度僧尼。
现代文：初五，下诏禁止私自剃度僧尼。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor issued an edict forbidding monks and nuns to shave themselves.

古文：庚辰，如台湖。
现代文：初九，至台湖。
English: Early September, to Lake Tai.

古文：乙酉，枢密使、监修国史室昉等进《实录》，赐物有差。
现代文：十四日，枢密使、监修国史室日方等献上所修《实录》，赐给他们财物若干。
English: On the 14th, the Japanese side presented the "Real Record" to the envoys and supervisors of the National History Office, and gave them some property.

古文：戊子，选宋降卒五百置为宣力军。
现代文：十七日，挑选五百名宋降兵组成宣力军。
English: On the 17th, 500 Song soldiers were selected to form the Xuanli Army.

古文：辛卯，诏免三京诸道租赋，仍罢括田。
现代文：二十七日，下诏免除三京诸道的赋税，并停止检括民田。
English: On the 27th, the emperor issued an edict exempting all roads in the three capitals from taxation, and stopped inspecting people's fields.

古文：二月丙午，夏国遣使告伐宋捷。
现代文：二月初五，夏国派使者奏告伐宋取得大捷。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Xia Guo sent an envoy to report that the Song Dynasty had won a great victory.

古文：丁未，以涿州刺史耶律王六为惕隐。
现代文：初六，任命涿州刺史耶律王六为惕隐。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：甲子，建威寇、振化、来远三城，屯戍卒。
现代文：二十三日，修建威寇、振化、来远三座城池，在此屯驻戍卒。
English: On the 23rd, the three cities of Weikou, Zhenhua and Laiyuan were built, and soldiers were stationed there.

古文：闰月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰二月初一，日食。
English: The first day of leap February, a solar eclipse.

古文：壬申，遣翰林承旨邢抱朴、三司使李嗣、给事中刘京、政事舍人张干、南京副留守吴浩分决诸道滞狱。
现代文：初二，派翰林承旨邢抱朴、三司使李嗣、给事中刘京、政事舍人张干、南京副留守吴浩分头审理诸道积压案件。
English: On the second day of the first semester, he sent Hanlin Chengzhi, Zou Baopu, Li Zhi, the third secretary, Liu Jing, the person in charge of the case, Zhang Gan, the person in charge of the political affairs, and Wu Hao, the deputy in charge of the case in Nanjing, to deal with the backlog of cases.

古文：三月庚子朔，振室韦、乌古诸部。
现代文：三月初一，赈济室韦、乌古诸部。
English: On the first day of March, Shwe, Ugu and other parts of the country will be affected.

古文：戊申，复遣库部员外郎马守琪、仓部员外郎祁正、虞部员外郎崔祐、蓟北县令崔简等分决诸道滞狱。
现代文：初九，再次派库部员外郎马守琪、仓部员外郎祁正、虞部员外郎崔佑、蓟北县令崔简等分头审理诸道积压案件。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, he once again sent warehouse department member Wai Lang Ma Shou Qi, warehouse department member Wai Lang Yu Zheng, yu department member Wai Lang Cui Yu, and Shihoku County magistrate Cui Jian to divide the backlog cases.

古文：甲子，幸南京。
现代文：二十五日，临幸南京。
English: On the 25th, I visited Nanjing.

古文：夏四月甲戌，回鹘来贡。
现代文：夏四月初五，回鹘前来进贡。
English: In the summer, on the fifth day of the fourth month, the Hui came to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，夏国王李继迁遣杜白来谢封册。
现代文：初六，夏国王李继迁派杜白前来感谢辽对他的册封。
English: On the sixth day of the first lunar month, the king of Xia, Li Jiqian, sent Du Bai to thank Liao for his investiture.

古文：丙戌，清暑炭山。
现代文：十七日，避暑于炭山。
English: On the 17th, they spent the summer in Su Shan.

古文：五月己未，以秦王韩匡嗣私城为全州。
现代文：五月二十一日，以秦王韩匡嗣私城为全州。
English: On May 21st, the private city of Qin King Han Kuangzhi was made the capital of the whole province.

古文：六月丁亥，突厥来贡。
现代文：六月二十日，突厥前来进贡。
English: On June 20, the Turks came to pay tribute.

古文：是月，南京霖雨伤稼。
现代文：同月，南京霖雨不断，庄稼受损。
English: In the same month, it rained incessantly in Nanjing, damaging crops.

古文：秋七月癸卯，通括户口。
现代文：秋七月初六，统一检括全国户口。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, the unified inspection of the national household registration will begin.

古文：乙巳，诏诸道举才行、察贪酷、抚高年、禁奢僣，有殁于王事者官其子孙。
现代文：初八，诏令诸道推荐有才德者，察举贪婪残酷的官吏，安抚年高德召力之人，禁止奢侈逾礼、不合法度的行为，授官给因征战而死者的子孙。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered all schools of thought to recommend people with talent and virtue, to investigate greedy and cruel officials, to appease people with high moral standards, to prohibit extravagant, immoral and illegal behavior, and to award positions to the children and grandchildren of those who died in the war.

古文：己未，夏国以复绥、银二州，遣使来告。
现代文：二十二日，夏国因收复绥、银二州，派使者前来奏告。
English: On the 22nd, Xia Guo sent an envoy to report on the recovery of Yunnan and Yinzhou.

古文：八月癸酉，铜州嘉禾生，东京甘露降。
现代文：八月初七，铜州生嘉禾，东京降甘霖。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th lunar month, it rained in Tokyo.

古文：戊寅，女直进唤鹿人。
现代文：十二日，女真进献驯鹿人。
English: On the twelfth day, Nyoshin presented the reindeer man.

古文：壬午，东京进三足乌。
现代文：十六日，东京进献三足乌。
English: On the 16th, Tokyo will present a three-legged owl.

古文：九月庚子，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：九月初四，鼻骨德前来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, they came to pay tribute.

古文：己酉，驻跸庙城。
现代文：十三日，出巡途中歇驾于庙城。
English: On the 13th, on his way out on patrol, he stopped at the temple town.

古文：南京地震。冬十月丁卯，阿萨兰回鹘来贡。
现代文：冬十月初二，阿萨兰回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 2nd day of the 10th month of winter, the Asalan Hui came to pay tribute.

古文：壬申，夏国王李继迁遣使来上宋所授敕命。
现代文：初七，夏国王李继迁派使者送上宋国授给他的敕令。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the king of Xia, Li Jijian, sent an envoy to deliver the imperial edict given to him by the Song Dynasty.

古文：丁丑，定难军节度使李继捧来附，授推忠效顺启圣定难功臣、开府仪同三司、检校太师兼侍中，封西平王。
现代文：十二日，定难军节度使李继捧前来降附，授予他为推忠效顺启圣定难功臣、开府仪同三司、检校太师兼侍中和西平王。
English: On the 12th, the Dingan Army Festival made Li Jitang come to annex, and awarded him as a loyal and obedient follower of the Holy Dingan, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, a proctor and a chamberlain, and the King of Xiping.

古文：十一月己亥，以青牛白马祭天地。
现代文：十一月初四，用青牛白马祭祀天地。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the heaven and earth are sacrificed with a young bull and a white horse.

古文：十二月，夏国王李继迁潜附于宋，遣招讨使韩德威持诏谕之。
现代文：十二月，夏国王李继迁暗中归附宋国，皇上派招讨使韩德威持诏前去晓以利害。
English: In December, the Xia king, Li Jiquan, secretly annexed the Song state, and the emperor sent a summons to Han Dewei to go to the front with the imperial edict.

古文：是岁，放进士石用中一人及第。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士石用中一人及等。
English: This year, there was one person from Shishi Junior High School who made it into the list and so on.

古文：十年春正月丁酉，禁丧葬礼杀马，及藏甲胄、金银、器玩。
现代文：十年春正月初二，禁止在丧葬仪式中杀戮马匹，不准陪葬甲胄、金银、器玩。
English: On the second day of the first month of the tenth year of spring, it was forbidden to kill horses during funeral ceremonies, and armor, gold and silver, and utensils were not allowed to accompany funerals.

古文：丙午，如台湖。
现代文：十一日，至台湖。
English: On the 11th day, we arrived at Lake Tai.

古文：二月乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：韩德威奏李继迁称故不出，至灵州俘掠以还。
现代文：韩德威奏称因李继迁托故不与他见面，故率军到灵州抢掠而回。
English: Handewei said that he did not meet with Li Jiqian because of his request, so he led the army to Lingzhou to loot and return.

古文：壬申，兀惹来贡。
现代文：初八，兀惹前来进贡。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15

古文：壬午，免云州租赋。
现代文：十八日，免除云州应交纳的租税。
English: On the 18th, the tax payable by Yunnan was exempted.

古文：庚寅，夏国以韩德威俘掠，遣使来奏，赐诏安慰。
现代文：二十六日，夏国王李继迁因韩德威在境内纵兵抢掠，派使者前来奏报，皇上赐诏安抚。
English: On the 26th day of the month, the king of Xia, Li Jijian, sent an envoy to report the plundering and pillaging in the territory due to Han Dewei, and the emperor issued an edict to appease him.

古文：辛卯，给复云州流民。
现代文：二十七日，免除云州流民的赋税徭役。
English: On the 27th, it exempted the Yunnan refugees from paying taxes.

古文：三月甲辰，铁骊来贡。
现代文：三月初十，铁骊前来进贡。
English: At the beginning of March, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：丙辰，如炭山。
现代文：二十二日，至炭山。
English: On the 22nd, we arrived at Su Mountain.

古文：夏四月乙丑，以台湖为望幸里。
现代文：夏四月初二，将台湖改称望幸里。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, the name of Lake Taihu was changed to Wangxingli.

古文：庚寅，命群臣较射。
现代文：二十七日，命令群臣比赛射箭技术。
English: On the 27th, he ordered his ministers to compete in archery.

古文：五月癸巳，朔州流民给复三年。
现代文：五月二十一日，免除朔州流民三年的赋税徭役。
English: On May 21, the Shuozhou exiles were exempted from three years of tax service.

古文：七月辛酉，铁骊来贡。
现代文：七月三十日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On July 30, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：八月癸亥，观稼，仍遣使分阅苗稼。
现代文：八月初二，察看庄稼。并派使者分头检查庄稼长势。
English: On the second day of August, the emperor inspected the crops and sent emissaries to check the growth of the crops.

古文：九月癸卯，幸五台山金河寺饭僧。
现代文：九月十三日，临幸五台山金河寺斋僧。
English: On September 13th, Rincheng Wutaishan Jinhe Temple lay monk.

古文：冬十月壬申，夏国王遣使来贡。
现代文：十月十二日，夏国王派使者来进贡。
English: On October 12, King Xia sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：戊寅，铁骊来贡。
现代文：十八日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 18th, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：十一月壬辰，回鹘来贡。
现代文：十一月初三，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：十二月庚辰，猎儒州东川。拜天。
现代文：十二月二十一日，在儒州东川狩猎，祭拜天地。
English: On December 21, he went hunting in Dongchuan, Confucius Province, and worshipped Heaven and Earth.

古文：是月，以东京留守萧恒德等伐高丽。
现代文：同月，派东京留守萧恒德等征伐高丽。
English: In the same month, he sent Xiao Hengde, who was stationed in Tokyo, to conquer Korea.

古文：十一年春正月壬寅，回鹘来贡。
现代文：十一年春正月十三日，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 11th year of the Spring, they came to Huizhou to pay tribute.

古文：丙午，出内帑钱赐南京统军司军。
现代文：十七日，将内府库钱财赐给南京统军司军。
English: On the 17th, he gave the money and property from the inner-prefectural treasury to the military of the Nanjing United Army.

古文：高丽王治遣朴良柔奉表请罪，诏取女直鸭渌江东数百里地赐之。
现代文：高丽王治派朴良柔上表请罪，皇上下诏赐给他女真鸭绿江以东的数百里土地。
English: King Goryeo sent Pak Ryong Ju to plead guilty, and the emperor gave him hundreds of miles of land east of the Yalu River.

古文：二月癸亥，霸州民妻王氏以妖惑众，伏诛。
现代文：二月初五，霸州百姓之妻王氏以妖术惑众，被诛杀。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Wang Shi, the wife of a citizen of Bazhou, was beaten to death for using magic to deceive the public.

古文：夏四月，幸炭山清暑。
现代文：夏四月，临幸炭山避暑。
English: Summer in April, summering in Linxing Coal Mountain.

古文：六月，大雨。
现代文：六月，大雨。
English: Heavy rain in June.

古文：秋七月己丑，桑乾、羊河溢居庸关西，害禾稼殆尽，奉圣、南京居民庐舍多垫溺者。
现代文：秋七月初三，桑干、羊河决口漫溢到居庸关以西，庄稼被淹损失殆尽，奉圣、南京二州居民房舍很多被水淹没。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the mouth of the Sanggan and Yanghe rivers overflowed to the west of Juyongguan. Crops were completely lost to flooding, and many houses of residents in Fengshan and Nanjing Erzhou were flooded.

古文：八月，如秋山。
现代文：八月，至秋山。
English: From August to autumn.

古文：冬十月甲申朔，驻跸蒲瑰坂。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于蒲瑰坂。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, it comes to rest on Puzuzaka.

古文：是岁，放进士王熙载等二人及第。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士王熙载等二人及第。
English: In this year, Wang Xizai, a new member of the list, came in second and third.

古文：十二年春正月癸丑朔，漷阴镇水，漂溺三十馀村，诏疏旧渠。
现代文：十二年春正月初一，氵郭阴镇水灾，淹没三十多个村庄。皇上下诏疏浚旧有渠道。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 12th year, the flood in the town of Gongguoyin flooded more than 30 villages. The emperor issued an edict to dredge the old channels.

古文：甲寅，以同政事门下平章事耶律硕老为惕隐。
现代文：初二，任命同政事门下平章事耶律硕老为惕隐。
English: On the second day of the freshman year, he appointed Ping Zhang, a member of the same political family, to be the head of the secret police.

古文：诏复行在五十里内租。
现代文：下诏蠲免京城方圆五十里内居民租税。
English: The following edict exempts residents within a 50-mile radius of Beijing from paying taxes.

古文：乙卯，幸延芳淀。
现代文：初三，临幸延芳淀。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Lin Xing Yan Fang Dian graduated.

古文：戊午，蠲宜州赋调。
现代文：初六，蠲免宜州赋税租调。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year,  was exempted from Yizhou tax and tariff adjustment.

古文：庚申，郎君耶律鼻舍等谋叛，伏诛。
现代文：初八，郎君耶律鼻舍等密谋叛乱，被诛杀。
English: Hatsuhachi, his brother-in-law Yerutsunasho and others plotted a rebellion and were killed.

古文：壬戌，以南院大王耶律景为上京留守，封漆水郡王。
现代文：初十，任命南院大王耶律景为上京留守，封为漆水郡王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the king of the Southern Court, Ye Lu Jing, was appointed to stay in Shangjing and was named the king of Urushi County.

古文：霸州民李在宥年百三十有三，赐束帛、锦袍、银带，月给羊酒，仍复其家。
现代文：霸州人李在宥时年一百三十三岁，皇上赐给他束带、锦袍、银带，每月赐给他羊酒，并免除全家的赋税徭役。
English: Li Zhaozhou was one hundred and thirty-three years old at the time of his death. The emperor gave him a sash, a gown and a silver belt, gave him sheep's wine every month, and exempted the whole family from paying taxes.

古文：二月甲申，免南京被水户租赋。
现代文：二月初二，免除南京遭水灾者租税。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the flood victims in Nanjing were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：己丑，高丽来贡。
现代文：初七，高丽前来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Goryeo came to pay tribute.

古文：甲午，免诸部岁输羊及关征。
现代文：十二日，免掉诸部每年应输纳的羊和关税之征。
English: On the 12th, the sheep and customs duties that should be paid annually by all ministries were exempted.

古文：庚子，回鹘来贡。
现代文：十八日，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 18th, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：三月丁巳，高丽遣使请所俘人畜，诏赎还。
现代文：三月初五，高丽派使者请求放回被俘虏的人员牲畜，皇上下诏让高丽赎回。
English: On the fifth day of March, Goryeo sent an envoy to request the return of the captured personnel and livestock, and the emperor issued an edict to let Goryeo be ransomed.

古文：戊午，幸南京。
现代文：初六，临幸南京。
English: 6th year of junior high school, Nanjing, China.

古文：丙寅，遣使抚谕高丽。
现代文：十四日，派使者安抚晓谕高丽。
English: On the 14th, an envoy was sent to pacify Korea.

古文：己巳，涿州木连理。
现代文：十七日，涿州发现连理树。
English: On the 17th, Lianlizhu was found in Zhangzhou.

古文：壬申，如长春宫观牡丹。
现代文：二十日，至长春宫观赏牡丹。
English: On the 20th, I went to Changchun Palace to see the peonies.

古文：是月，复置南京军都监。
现代文：同月，再次设置南京统军都监官职。
English: In the same month, the post of inspector of the Nanjing United Army was set up again.

古文：夏四月辛卯，幸南京。
现代文：夏四月初十，临幸南京。
English: On the tenth day of the fourth month of summer, Nanjing is at its best.

古文：壬辰，枢密直学士刘恕为南院枢密副使。
现代文：十一日，任命枢密直学士刘恕为南院枢密使。
English: On the 11th, Liu Shou, a Privy Councilor, was appointed as a Privy Councilor of the Southern Yuan.

古文：戊戌，以景宗石像成，幸延寿寺饭僧。
现代文：十七日，因景宗石像雕刻完工，临幸延寿寺斋僧。
English: On the 17th, the carving of the stone statue of the Yingjing sect was completed, and he became a monk at the Linxing Enju Temple.

古文：五月甲寅，诏北皮室军老不任事者免役。
现代文：五月初三，下诏免除北皮室军队里年老不能胜任差事者的徭役。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the following edict exempted Bei Lishu troops who were too old to serve as dispatchers.

古文：戊午，如炭山清暑。
现代文：初七，至炭山避暑。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, I went to Suanshan to take a summer vacation.

古文：庚辰，武定军节度使韩德冲秩满，其民请留，从之。
现代文：二十九日，武定军节度使韩德冲任期已满，治下百姓请求留下他，皇上同意了他们的请求。
English: On the 29th, the Wu Ding Jun Festival made Han Dezhong's term of office expired. The people under his reign asked him to stay, and the emperor agreed to their request.

古文：六月辛巳朔，诏州县长吏有才能无过者，减一资考任之。
现代文：六月初一，下诏对州县长吏有才能而无过失者，普降一级再考课任用之。
English: On the first day of June, the following edict was issued for the appointment of prefectural and county governors with talent and no fault, downgrading them to the next level.

古文：癸未，可汗州刺史贾俊进新历。
现代文：初三，可汗州刺史贾俊进献新历法。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Jia Jun, a student from Khanzhou, presented a new calendar.

古文：庚子，录囚。
现代文：二十日，查看犯人口供。
English: On the 20th, the inmate's confession was examined.

古文：甲辰，诏龙、凤两军老疾者代之。
现代文：二十四日，下诏募人代替龙、凤两军中老弱有病者。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued a decree to recruit people to replace the old, weak and sick in the two armies of the dragon and the phoenix.

古文：是月，太白、岁星相犯。
现代文：同月，太白、岁星二星光芒相触。
English: In the same month, two stars, Taibai and Jiuxing, collided with each other.

古文：秋七月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：甲寅，遣使视诸道禾稼。
现代文：初四，派使者到诸道查看庄稼。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, send emissaries to the provinces to inspect the crops.

古文：辛酉，南院枢密使室昉为中京留守，加尚父。
现代文：十一日，以南院枢密使室日方为中京留守，加封尚父。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Japanese side of the South Privy Council's Privy Council Office left for Chukyo, leaving Shangfu in charge.

古文：丙寅，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十六日，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 16th, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：戊辰，观获。
现代文：十八日，观看收割。
English: On the 18th, watch the harvest.

古文：庚午，诏契丹人犯十恶者依汉律。
现代文：二十日，诏令契丹人犯下十恶不赦之罪者依汉律进行处罚。
English: On the 20th, the emperor ordered the Khitan people to punish those who committed the ten unpardonable sins in accordance with Han law.

古文：己卯，以翰林承旨邢抱朴参知政事。
现代文：二十九日，任命翰林承旨邢抱朴为参知政事。
English: On the 29th, Hanlin Zhengzhi and Bao Baopu were appointed to be co-chairs of the government.

古文：八月庚辰朔，诏王太妃领西北路乌古等部兵及永兴宫分军，抚定西边；以萧挞凛督其军事。
现代文：八月初一，下诏让皇太妃统领西北路乌古等部军队和永兴宫分军，萧挞凛负责总督军中事务。
English: On the first day of August, the imperial edict was issued to let the Empress Dowager lead the troops of the Northwest Road, Wugu and other departments, and the Yongxing Palace detachment, and Xiao Yuling was responsible for the military affairs of the governor.

古文：乙酉，宋遣使求和，不许。
现代文：初六，宋派使者前来求和，皇上不同意。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Song sent an envoy to sue for peace, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：戊子，以国舅帐克萧徒骨为夷离毕。
现代文：初九，任命国舅帐克萧徒骨为夷离毕。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the uncle of the country, Zhe Ke Xiao Tu Jian, as the leader.

古文：乙未，下诏戒谕中外官吏。
现代文：十六日，下诏告戒训谕中外官吏。
English: On the 16th, he issued an edict warning and admonishing Chinese and foreign officials.

古文：丁酉，录囚，杂犯死罪以下释之。
现代文：十八日，查看犯人口供，犯死罪以下的人犯均得到赦免。
English: On the 18th, the confessions of the criminals were examined, and those who had committed crimes less than capital crimes were pardoned.

古文：九月壬子，室韦、党项、吐谷浑等来贡。
现代文：九月初三，室韦、党项、吐谷浑等前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, people from Muroto, Danzhao, and Tugu came to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，宋复遣使求和，不许。
现代文：十二日，宋再次派使者求和，皇上仍不准。
English: On the 12th, Song again sent an envoy to sue for peace, but the emperor still refused.

古文：壬戌，行拜奥礼。
现代文：十三日，举行拜奥礼。
English: On the 13th, the Olympic ceremony was held.

古文：癸酉，阻卜等来贡。
现代文：二十四日，阻卜等前来进贡。
English: On the 24th, tributes came from as far away as Sobo.

古文：冬十月乙酉，猎可汗州之西山。
现代文：冬十月初七，在可汗州的西山打猎。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, go deer hunting in the western mountains of Khan Prefecture.

古文：乙巳，诏定均税法。
现代文：二十七日，下诏制定均税法。
English: On the 27th, the Uniform Tax Law was promulgated.

古文：丁未，大理寺置少卿及正。
现代文：二十九日，在大理寺设置大理寺少卿和大理寺正的官职。
English: On the 29th, the official positions of Dalian Temple Shaoqing and Dalian Temple Zheng were established in Dalian Temple.

古文：十一月戊申朔，行再生礼。
现代文：十一月初一，举行再生礼。
English: On the first day of November, a rebirth ceremony was held.

古文：铁骊来贡。
现代文：铁骊前来进贡。
English: The shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：诏诸部所俘宋人有官吏儒生抱器能者，诸道军有勇健者，具以名闻。
现代文：下诏命令诸道献上所俘宋国官吏儒生中卓有才干者、军队中勇武有谋者的名单。
English: The imperial edict ordered all provinces to submit a list of the most talented Confucian scholars and military strategists among the Song officials they had captured.

古文：庚戌，诏郡邑贡明经、茂材异等。
现代文：初三，下诏州郡贡举通晓经术、才德优异超出一般的人。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the next Zhaozhou County Gongjue is a person who is well versed in the scriptures and has superior talent and virtue.

古文：甲寅，诏南京决滞狱。
现代文：初七，诏令南京审理积压案件。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Nanjing was ordered to review the backlog of cases.

古文：己未，官宋俘卫德升等六人。
现代文：十二日，授给被俘的宋人卫德升等六人官职。
English: On the 12th, Song Ren Wei De, who had been captured, was given a promotion and six other official positions.

古文：十二月戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：诏并奚王府奥理、堕隗、梅只三部为一，其二克各分为部，以足六部之数。
现代文：下诏将奚王府奥理、堕隗、梅只三部合为一部，其南北二克各分为部，以凑足六部的数目。
English: In the following edict, the three parts of the king's palace, Ori, Padang, and Meidang, were combined into one part, and the north and south were each divided into two parts, to make up the number of six parts.

古文：甲申，赐南京统军司贫户耕牛。
现代文：初七，赐给南京统军司所辖贫民耕牛。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, a cow was given to the poor people under the jurisdiction of the Nanjing United Military Department.

古文：戊子，高丽进妓乐，却之。
现代文：十一日，高丽进献乐妓舞妓，退还之。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the money was returned to her.

古文：庚寅，禁游食民。
现代文：十三日，禁止百姓游手好闲、不劳而获。
English: On the 13th, the people were forbidden to be idle and get something for nothing.

古文：癸巳，女直以宋人浮海赂本国及兀惹叛来告。
现代文：十六日，女真派人奏告宋人经海道到本国行贿和兀惹叛乱的消息。
English: On the 16th, Nyanzhen sent someone to report the news that the Song people had taken bribes and instigated rebellion in their own country via the sea route.

古文：丁未，幸南京。
现代文：十八日，临幸南京。
English: On the 18th, I went to Nanjing.

古文：是年，放进士吕德懋等二人及第。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士吕德懋等二人及第。
English: In the same year, Lu Decheng, a new member of the list, came in second and third.

古文：十三年春正月壬子，幸延芳淀。
现代文：十三年春正月初五，临幸延芳淀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the spring of the 13th year, Lin Xing extended to Fangyong.

古文：甲寅，置广灵县。
现代文：初七，设置广灵县。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Guangling County was established.

古文：丁巳，增泰州、遂城等县赋。
现代文：初十，增加泰州、遂城等县赋税。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the taxes of Taizhou, Suicheng and other counties will be increased.

古文：庚申，诏诸道劝农。
现代文：十三日，诏令诸道劝课农耕。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an edict to all provinces to encourage students to study agriculture.

古文：癸亥，长宁军节度使萧解里秩满，民请留，从之。
现代文：十六日，长宁军节度使萧解里任职期满，百姓请求让他留下，得到皇上允许。
English: On the 16th, the Changning Army Festival made Xiao Xieli's term of office expire, and the people asked him to stay, which was allowed by the emperor.

古文：庚午，如长春宫。
现代文：二十三日，至长春宫。
English: On the 23rd, to the Changchun Palace.

古文：三月丁丑朔，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：二月初一，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the first day of February, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲辰，高丽遣李周桢来贡。
现代文：二十八日，高丽派李周桢前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, Goryeo sent Li Zhouqi to pay tribute.

古文：三月癸丑，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：三月初七，夏国派使者进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：戊辰，武清县百馀人入宋境剽掠，命诛之，还其所获人畜财物。
现代文：二十二日，武清县有一百多人窜到宋国境内抢劫，皇上命令诛杀他们，并将其抢掠财物送还宋国。
English: On the 22nd, more than a hundred people from Wuqing County went to Song to rob, and the emperor ordered them to be killed and their looted property to be returned to Song.

古文：夏四月己卯，参知政事邢抱朴以母忧去官，起复。
现代文：夏四月初三，参知政事邢抱朴因丁服母忧离职，强行起复之。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the political advisor of the prefectural governor, Zou Bao, and the political advisor of the prefectural governor, Pak Ying Ding, resigned from their posts, and were forcibly reinstated.

古文：丙戌，诏诸道民户应历以来胁从为部曲者，仍籍州县。
现代文：初十，下诏命令应历年间以来被人胁迫而成为部曲的诸道民户，仍然到州县登记户籍。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the lower edict ordered all households that had been coerced by people over the years to register their household registration in their prefectures.

古文：甲午，如炭山清暑。
现代文：十八日，到炭山避暑。
English: On the 18th, I went to Suanshan Mountain for summer vacation.

古文：五月壬子，高丽进鹰。
现代文：五月初七，高丽进献鹰。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth lunar month, Goryeo presented an eagle.

古文：乙亥，北、南、乙室三府请括富民马以备军需，不许，给以官马。
现代文：三十日，北、南、乙室三府请求检括家道殷实民户的马匹以备军需，没有得到允许，配给三府官马。
English: On the 30th, the three prefectures of North, South, and B requested to inspect the horses of households to prepare for military supplies, but they were not allowed to distribute the official horses to the three prefectures.

古文：六月丙子朔，启圣军节度使刘继琛秩满，民请留，从之。
现代文：六月初一，启圣军节度使刘继琛任期已满，治下民户请求让他留下，皇上批准了他们的请求。
English: On the first day of June, the opening of the Sacred Army Festival made Liu Jisheng's term of office expired. The people under his rule asked him to stay, and the emperor approved their request.

古文：丁丑，诏减前岁括田租赋。
现代文：初二，下诏减免前年括出的田亩的租税。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the lower edict reduced and exempted the tax on farmland that was excluded the previous year.

古文：甲申，以宣徽使阿没里私城为丰州。
现代文：初九，以宣徽使阿没里私城为丰州。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the imperial seal was used to declare Anri's hometown to be Fuzhou.

古文：丙戌，诏许昌平、怀柔等县诸人请业荒地。
现代文：十一日，下诏准许昌平、怀柔等县民户将无主荒地作为产业。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the lower edict permitted households in Changping, Huairou and other counties to use ownerless wasteland as an industry.

古文：秋七月乙巳朔，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：秋七月初一，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁巳，兀惹乌昭度、渤海燕颇等侵铁骊，遣奚王和朔奴等讨之。
现代文：十三日，兀惹、乌昭度、渤海燕颇等侵略铁骊，皇上派奚王和朔奴等前往讨伐。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the invading hawks, including the dragon dragon, the black dragon, and the yellow dragon, were sent by the emperor to fight against the iron hawks, and the king of the dragon and the dragon knight were sent to fight.

古文：壬戌，诏蔚、朔等州龙卫、威胜军更戍。
现代文：十八日，诏令蔚、朔等州龙卫、威胜军换防。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Zhao ordered the Longwei and Wei Sheng armies of Wei, Shuo and other prefectures to change their defenses.

古文：八月丙子，夏国遣使进马。
现代文：八月初二，夏国派使者进献马匹。
English: On the second day of August, Xia Guo sent an envoy to present horses.

古文：壬辰，诏修山泽祠宇、先哲庙貌，以时祀之。
现代文：十八日，下诏修葺山林川泽之祠堂神庙、先哲庙宇及神像，按时祭祀。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued to repair the shrines and temples of the mountains, forests, rivers and lakes, as well as the temples of the sages and statues of the gods, and to hold the rituals on time.

古文：九月戊午，以南京太学生员浸多，特赐水硙庄一区。
现代文：九月十五日，因为南京太学生员日益增多，特地赐给太学水石岂庄一区。
English: On September 15th, due to the increasing number of students of Nanjing University of Technology, the first district of Shuishizhuang was specially awarded to the University of Technology.

古文：丁卯，奉安景宗及皇太后石像于延芳淀。
现代文：二十四日，将景宗和皇太后石像安放到延芳淀。
English: On the 24th, the stone statues of Emperor Jingzong and the Empress Dowager were placed in Yanfangyodo.

古文：冬十月乙亥，置义仓。
现代文：冬十月初二，设置义仓。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, a charity warehouse is set up.

古文：辛巳，回鹘来贡。
现代文：初八，回鹘派使者来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Hui sent an envoy to bring tribute.

古文：甲申，高丽遣李知白来贡。
现代文：十一日，高丽派李知白前来进贡。
English: On the 11th day, Goryeo sent Ri Chihai to pay tribute.

古文：戊子，兀惹归款，诏谕之。
现代文：十五日，兀惹归降，皇上下诏抚谕之。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he surrendered, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to this effect.

古文：庚子，鼻骨德来贡。
现代文：二十七日，鼻骨德前来朝贡。
English: On the 27th, he came to pay tribute.

古文：十一月乙巳，阿萨兰回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：十一月初三，阿萨兰回鹘派使者来进贡。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the Uighurs of Asalan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，遣使册王治为高丽国王。
现代文：十九日，派使者册封王治为高丽国国王。
English: On the 19th, an envoy was sent to proclaim Wangzhi as the King of Goryeo.

古文：戊辰，高丽遣童子十人来学本国语。
现代文：二十六日，高丽派童子十人前来学习本国语。
English: On the 26th, Goryeo sent ten boys to Korea to learn the Korean language.

古文：十二月己卯，铁骊遣使来贡鹰、马。
现代文：十二月初七，铁骊派使者前来进贡鹰、马。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, Tiexuan sent an envoy to bring tribute eagles and horses.

古文：辛巳，夏国以败宋人遣使来告。
现代文：初九，夏国因为打败宋人，派使者前来报告。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Xia Guo sent an emissary to report the defeat of the Song people.

古文：是年，放进士王用极等二人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士王用极等二人及第。
English: This year, Wang Yinggi and two others were admitted to the school and ranked second.

古文：十四年春正月己酉，渔于潞河。
现代文：十四年春正月初八，在潞河渔猎。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the 14th year of the Spring, I was fishing and hunting in the Minhe River.

古文：丁巳，蠲三京及诸州税赋。
现代文：十六日，蠲免三京和诸道的赋税。
English: On the 16th, taxes were exempted in the three capital cities and all provinces.

古文：丙寅，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：二十五日，夏国派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚午，以宣徽使阿没里家奴阎贵为丰州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，任命宣徽使阿没里家奴阎贵为丰州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Xuan Hui appointed Yan Gui, a descendant of the An'nli family, to write the history of Fuzhou.

古文：二月庚寅，回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：二月十九日，回鹘派使者前来进贡。
English: On February 19, the Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月壬寅，高丽王治表乞为婚，许以东京留守、驸马萧恒德女嫁之。
现代文：三月初二，高丽王治上表请求与辽联姻，皇上答应将东京留守、驸马萧恒德之女嫁给他。
English: On the second day of March, Goryeo's Wang Zhi made a formal request to marry Liao, and the emperor agreed to let him marry the daughter of his beloved horse, Xiao Hengde, who was away in Tokyo.

古文：庚戌，高丽复遣童子十人来学本国语。
现代文：初十，高丽再派童子十人前来学习本国语。
English: On the tenth day of the new year, Korea sent another ten boys to come and learn the local language.

古文：甲寅，韩德威奏讨党项捷。
现代文：十四日，韩德威奏报讨伐党项获得胜利。
English: On the 14th, Handweiss reported victory in the campaign against the Party.

古文：甲子，诏安集朔州流民。
现代文：二十四日，下诏安抚朔州流民。
English: On the 24th, he issued an edict to pacify the refugees in Shuozhou.

古文：夏四月甲戌，东边诸糺各置都监。
现代文：夏四月初四，在东边诸分别设置都监。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：庚寅，如炭山清暑。
现代文：二十日，至炭山避暑。
English: On the 20th, I went to Suanshan to escape the summer heat.

古文：己亥，凿大安山，取刘守光所藏钱。
现代文：二十九日，开凿大安山，取出刘守光所藏钱财。
English: On the 29th, the Da'an Mountain was excavated, and the money and property hidden by Liu Shuguang were retrieved.

古文：是月，奚王和朔奴、东京留守萧恒德等五人以讨兀惹不克，削官。
现代文：同月，奚王和朔奴、东京留守萧恒德等五人因讨伐兀惹没有取胜，被削夺官职。
English: In the same month, Shao Wang, Shuo Nu, and five others, including Xiao Hengde, who stayed in Tokyo, were stripped of their official posts because they did not win the battle.

古文：改诸部令稳为节度使。
现代文：改称诸部令稳为节度使。
English: Its name was changed from "Ministry of Order and Stability" to "Ministry of Discipline."

古文：五月癸卯，诏参知政事邢抱朴决南京滞狱。
现代文：五月初四，诏令参知政事邢抱朴审理南京积压案件。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, the Nanjing backlog of cases was ordered to be heard by the Vice-governor of the People's Republic of China, Zhou Baopu.

古文：庚戌，朔州威胜军一百七人叛入宋。
现代文：十一日，朔州威胜军一百零七人叛辽归宋。
English: On the 11th day, 107 members of the Shuozhou Weisheng Army defected to Liao and returned to Song.

古文：六月辛未，如炭山清暑。
现代文：六月初二，至炭山避暑。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, I went to Suanshan to escape the summer heat.

古文：铁骊来贡。
现代文：铁骊前来进贡。
English: The shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：乙酉，回鹘来贡。
现代文：十六日，回鹘前来进贡。
English: On the 16th, Hui Xuan came to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，高丽遣使来问起居。
现代文：二十日，高丽派使者来探问皇上起居饮食。
English: On the 20th, Goryeo sent an envoy to inquire about the emperor's daily life and diet.

古文：后至无时。
现代文：后来还不时派使者前来问起居。
English: Later, emissaries were sent from time to time to inquire about his whereabouts.

古文：秋七月戊午，回鹘等来贡。
现代文：秋七月二十日，回鹘等前来进贡。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Hui and others came to pay tribute.

古文：闰月丁丑，五院部进穴地所得金马。
现代文：闰七月初九，五院部进献掘地时得到的金马。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the leap year, the gold horse obtained when the 5th hospital went into the excavation site.

古文：冬十月丙辰，命刘遂教南京神武军士剑法，赐袍带锦币。
现代文：冬十月十九日，命令刘遂教习南京神武军士兵剑法，赐给他袍带锦帛等物。
English: In the winter of October 19th, he ordered Liu Sui to teach the soldiers of the Nanjing Shenwu Army swordsmanship, and gave him a robe, brocade and other things.

古文：戊午，乌昭度乞内附。
现代文：二十日，乌昭度请求内附。
English: On the 20th, a request for clarification was enclosed.

古文：十一月甲戌，诏诸军官毋非时畋猎妨农。
现代文：十一月初八，下诏命令诸军将领不要在规定时限之外打猎以免妨害农事。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, the general of the army was ordered not to hunt beyond the prescribed time limit so as not to interfere with farming.

古文：乙酉，奉安景宗及太后石像于乾州。
现代文：十九日，将景宗及太后石像安葬于乾州。
English: On the 19th, the stone statues of King Gyeongjong and the Empress Dowager were buried in Gyeongju.

古文：是月，回鹘阿萨兰遣使为子求婚，不许。
现代文：同月，回鹘阿萨兰派使者前来为儿子求婚，被拒绝。
English: In the same month, Uthman sent an emissary to his son to ask for his hand in marriage, but he was turned down.

古文：十二月甲寅，以南京道新定税法太重，减之。
现代文：十二月十八日，因南京道新制定的税法太重，下令予以减免。
English: On December 18, because the newly formulated tax law of Nanjing Province was too heavy, it was ordered to be reduced and exempted.

古文：甲子，挞凛诱叛酋阿鲁敦等六十人斩之，封兰陵郡王。
现代文：二十八日，萧挞凛诱杀叛乱酋长阿鲁敦等六十人，被封为兰陵郡王。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Yuling booby-trapped and killed sixty people, including the rebel chieftain Aroodun, and was named the king of Lanling County.

古文：幸南京。
现代文：皇上临幸南京。
English: Drive to Nanjing.

古文：是年，放进士张俭等三人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士张俭等三人及第。
English: In the same year, Zhang Jian and three other students were admitted to the school.

古文：十五年春正月庚午，幸延芳淀。
现代文：十五年春正月初五，临幸延芳淀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the fifteenth year of spring, Lin Xing extended to Fangyang.

古文：丙子，以河西党项叛，诏韩德威讨之。
现代文：十一日，河西党项叛乱，诏令韩德威前去讨伐。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Hexi Party revolted, and Han Dewei was ordered to go and fight.

古文：庚辰，诏诸道劝民种树。
现代文：十五日，诏令诸道劝导百姓种植树木。
English: On the 15th, the emperor issued an edict to persuade the people to plant trees.

古文：癸未，兀惹长武周来降。
现代文：十八日，兀惹首领武周前来降附。
English: On the 18th, Wu Zhou, the leader of Xiangjia, came to surrender.

古文：戊子，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：二十三日，女真派使者来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，诏南京决滞囚。
现代文：二十四日，下诏命令南京审理积压案件。
English: On the 24th, it ordered Nanjing to review the backlog of cases.

古文：乙未，免流民税。
现代文：三十日，免除流民赋税。
English: On the 30th, the tax exemption for the displaced people was lifted.

古文：二月丙申朔，如长春宫。
现代文：二月初一，至长春宫。
English: On the first day of February, to the Changchun Palace.

古文：戊戌，劝品部富民出钱以赡贫民。
现代文：初三，劝谕品部富民捐钱以赈济贫民。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the rich people in the goods department were advised to donate money to help the poor.

古文：庚子，徙梁门、遂城、泰州、北平民于内地。
现代文：初五，将梁门、遂城、泰州、北平民户迁徙到内地。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the residents of Liangmen, Suicheng, Taizhou and Beiping were relocated to the mainland.

古文：丙午，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：十一日，夏国派使者来进贡。
English: On the eleventh day, Xia Guo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，问安皇太后。
现代文：十九日，皇上向皇太后问安。
English: On the 19th, the Emperor sent his greetings to the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙辰，韩德威奏破党项捷。
现代文：二十一日，韩德威奏报讨伐党项取得胜利。
English: On the twenty-first day, Handweiss reported that the campaign against the Party had achieved victory.

古文：丁巳，诏品部旷地令民耕种。三月乙丑朔，党项来贡。
现代文：二十二日，下诏让百姓耕种品部荒地。三月初一，党项来朝贡。
English: On the 22nd, an edict was issued to let the people cultivate the wasteland of Shobo. On the first day of March, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：戊辰，募民耕滦州荒地，免其租赋十年。
现代文：初四，招募百姓耕种滦州荒地，免除十年的租税。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, people were recruited to cultivate wasteland in Ganzhou, and they were exempted from paying taxes for ten years.

古文：己巳，夏国破宋兵，遣使来告。
现代文：初五，夏国击败宋兵，派使者前来报告。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Xia defeated Song and sent an envoy to report.

古文：己卯，封夏国王李继迁为西平王。
现代文：十五日，册封夏国王李继迁为西平王。
English: On the 15th, Li Jizeng, the king of Xia, was proclaimed the king of Xiping.

古文：壬午，通括宫分人户，免南京逋税及义仓粟。
现代文：十八日，统一检括宫分人户，免除南京民户拖欠的赋税和义仓粟。
English: On the 18th, a unified inspection of households in the palace was carried out, exempting Nanjing households from tax arrears and donations.

古文：甲申，河西党项乞内附。
现代文：二十日，河西党项请求内附。
English: On the 20th, the request of the Hexi Party was enclosed.

古文：庚寅，兀惹乌昭度以地远，乞岁时免进鹰、马、貂皮，诏以生辰、正旦贡如旧，馀免。
现代文：二十六日，兀惹乌昭度因为与辽距离太远，请求免除每年向辽进贡麇、马和貂皮，皇上下诏允许他们除在皇帝生辰、正旦时要按旧例进贡外，其余的进贡一概免掉。
English: On the 26th, because the distance between Liao and Wu Zhaodu was too far, Wu Zhaodu requested to be exempted from the annual tribute of yakitori, horse and yakitori to Liao. The emperor issued an edict to allow them to pay tribute according to the old practice except for the emperor's birthday and the day of the month, and the rest of the tribute would be exempted.

古文：癸巳，宋主炅殂，子恒嗣位。
现代文：二十九日，宋主赵炅崩殂，其子赵恒继立。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the Song ruler Zhao Yingxuan and his son Zhao Hengjili died.

古文：甲午，皇太妃献西边捷。
现代文：三十日，皇太妃进献西边俘虏。
English: On the 30th, the Empress Dowager presented the western captives.

古文：夏四月乙未朔，罢奚五部岁贡摐。
现代文：夏四月初一，免除奚五部每年向辽进贡麇。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, five provinces were exempted from paying tribute to Liaoning Province.

古文：戊戌，录囚。
现代文：初四，查看犯人口供。
English: On the fourth day of the new school year, the prisoners' confessions were examined.

古文：壬寅，发义仓粟振南京诸县民。
现代文：初八，用义仓粟米赈济南京诸县居民。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, residents of various counties in Nanjing used the donated corn to feed themselves.

古文：丙午，广德军节度使韩德凝有善政，秩满，其民请留，从之。
现代文：十二日，广德军节度使韩德凝在位施行仁政，任期满后，其治下百姓请求让他留任，得到皇上允许。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the Guangde Army Festival made Han Deqing reign and implement benevolent government. After his term of office expired, the people under his reign requested that he remain in office and obtained the emperor's permission.

古文：己酉，幸南京。
现代文：十五日，临幸南京。
English: On the 15th, I went to Nanjing.

古文：丁巳，致奠于太宗皇帝庙。
现代文：二十三日，置祭品祭祀太宗皇帝庙。
English: On the 23rd, offerings were made to the temple of Emperor Taizong.

古文：己未，如炭山清暑。
现代文：二十五日，至炭山避暑。
English: On the 25th, I went to Suanshan to escape the summer heat.

古文：五月甲子朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：己巳，诏平州决滞狱。
现代文：初六，下诏令平州审理积压案件。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the lower court ordered Pingzhou to review the backlog of cases.

古文：是月，敌烈八部杀详稳以叛，萧挞凛追击，获部族之半。
现代文：同月，敌烈八部杀掉详稳叛乱，萧挞凛追击之，俘获其部众一半人口。
English: In the same month, the enemy Eight Divisions killed the Zhejing Rebellion, and Xiao Yulin pursued it and captured half of the population of his division.

古文：六月丙申，铁骊来贡。
现代文：六月初三，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, the spade came to pay tribute.

古文：壬子，夏国遣使来谢封册。
现代文：初九，夏国派使者前来感谢我国的册封。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Xia Guo sent an envoy to thank our country for the canonization.

古文：秋七月戊辰，党项来贡。
现代文：秋七月初六，党项前来进贡。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, the party came to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，禁吐谷浑别部鬻马于宋。
现代文：初九，禁止吐谷浑别部卖马匹给宋。
English: At the beginning of the 9th month, it was forbidden for the Tugu Hunbei Department to sell horses to Song.

古文：丙子，高丽遣韩彦敬奉币吊越国公主之丧。
现代文：十四日，高丽派韩彦敬带着钱币财物前来吊唁越国公主之死。
English: On the 14th, Koreans sent Han Yan Kei with money and property to mourn the death of the princess of Yue.

古文：辛卯，诏南京疾决狱讼。
现代文：二十九日，下诏令南京加速审理诉讼案件。
English: On the 29th, Nanjing was ordered to speed up the trial of litigation cases.

古文：八月丁酉，猎于平地松林，皇太后诫曰： 前圣有言：欲不可纵。
现代文：八月初五，在平地松林打猎，皇太后告诫皇上说 ：先圣曾说：人欲不可放纵。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth month, while hunting in the flat pine forest, the Empress Dowager admonished the Emperor, saying, "The Ancestor once said, 'Desire must not be indulged.'

古文：吾儿为天下主，驰骋田猎，万一有衔橛之变，适遣予忧。
现代文：我儿你作为天下之主，像这样沉溺于打猎出游，万一发生什么变故，可不是要让我替你担忧吗？
English: My son, you, as the lord of the world, indulge in hunting trips like this. In case something happens, don't you want me to worry about you?

古文：其深戒之！ 
现代文：希望你引以为戒！ 
English: I hope you will take this as a warning!

古文：九月丙寅，罢东边戍卒。
现代文：九月初四，撤除东边戍卒。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the guards on the east side were removed.

古文：庚午，幸饶州，致奠太祖庙。
现代文：初八，临幸饶州，献祭品祭祀太祖庙。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Linhong Raozhou, offerings were made to the Great Ancestor's Temple.

古文：戊子，萧挞凛奏讨阻卜捷。
现代文：二十六日，萧挞凛奏报讨伐阻卜取得胜利。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Xiao Yuling won the victory in the struggle against obstruction.

古文：冬十月壬辰朔，驻跸驼山，罢奚王诸部贡物。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于驼山。免除奚王诸部的进贡。
English: On the first day of October in winter, he rested on Camel Mountain. He was exempted from paying tribute from all parts of the kingdom.

古文：乙未，赐宿卫时服。
现代文：初四，赐给宿卫士兵应时服装。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the school year, the guards were given the appropriate clothing.

古文：丁酉，禁诸山寺毋滥度僧尼。
现代文：初六，禁止各个寺庙胡乱剃度僧尼。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, all temples are prohibited from arbitrarily shaving monks and nuns.

古文：戊戌，驰东京道鱼泺之禁。
现代文：初七，废除在东京道禁止在湖泊中捕鱼的禁令。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the ban on fishing in lakes in Tokyo-do will be lifted.

古文：戊申，以上京狱讼繁冗，诘其主者。
现代文：十七日，因为上京的诉讼案件繁多芜杂，下诏责问其主事者。
English: On the 17th, due to the large number and complexity of the litigation cases in Beijing, the person in charge was questioned.

古文：辛酉，录囚。
现代文：三十日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 30th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：十一月壬戌朔，录囚，丙戌，幸显州。
现代文：十一月初一，察看犯人口供。二十五日，临幸显州。
English: On the first day of November, the prisoners were inspected and interviewed. On the 25th, they were taken to Hsien Chau.

古文：戊子，谒显陵。
现代文：二十七日，拜谒显陵。
English: On the 27th, they paid their respects at the tomb of Pu Xian.

古文：庚寅，谒乾陵。
现代文：二十九日，拜谒乾陵。
English: On the 29th, the visit to the Qianling Mausoleum began.

古文：是月，高丽王治薨，侄诵遣王同颍来告。
现代文：同月，高丽王治崩殂，侄子王诵派王同颖前来奏告。
English: In the same month, Wang Zhi of Goryeo passed away, and his nephew Wang Xiepai and Wang Tongying came to report.

古文：十二月乙巳，钓鱼土河。
现代文：十二月十四日，在土河钓鱼。
English: December 14th, fishing in the Tu River.

古文：己酉，驻跸驼山。
现代文：十八日，歇驾于驼山。
English: On the 18th, he stopped at Camel Mountain.

古文：壬子，夏国遣使来贡。
现代文：二十一日，夏国派使者来进贡。
English: On the 21st, Xia Guo sent an envoy to bring tribute.

古文：甲寅，遣使祭高丽王治，诏其侄权知国事。
现代文：二十三日，派使者前去祭奠高丽王治，下诏让其侄子暂时处理国事。
English: On the 23rd, he sent an envoy to pay tribute to King Goryeo and issued an edict that his nephew should temporarily handle state affairs.

古文：丙辰，录囚。
现代文：二十五日，察看犯人口供。
English: On the 25th, the inspectors heard the prisoners' confessions.

古文：是年，放进士陈鼎等二人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录取进士陈鼎等二人及第。
English: This year, Chen Ding and two other students were admitted to the school.

