古文：党项，汉西羌别种，魏、晋后微甚。
现代文：党项，是汉时西羌的别种，魏晋以后甚微弱。
English: Dangxiang is a different species from the Han Dynasty's Xizang, and has been very weak since the Wei and Jin Dynasties.

古文：周灭宕昌、邓至，而党项始强。
现代文：北周灭宕昌、邓至以后，党项才开始强大。
English: It was only after the Northern Zhou Dynasty overthrew Tang Chang and Deng Zhi that the party began to grow strong.

古文：其地古析支也，东距松州，西叶护，南舂桑、迷桑等羌，北吐谷浑。
现代文：其地域即古析支，东临松州，西接叶护，南连舂桑、迷桑等羌，北至吐谷浑。
English: Its region is the ancient analysis branch, bordered by Songzhou in the east, Yegu in the west, Lianxiang and Muxiang in the south, and Tuyugun in the north.

古文：处山谷崎岖，大抵三千里。
现代文：处于崎岖山谷间，方圆约三千里。
English: It is located in a rugged valley, with a radius of about three thousand miles.

古文：以姓别为部，一姓又分为小部落，大者万骑，小数千，不能相统，故有细封氏、费听氏，往利氏、颇超氏、野辞氏、房当氏、米禽氏、拓拔氏、而拓拔最强。
现代文：以姓别为部落，一姓之中又分若干小部落，大的万把人，小的几千人，不能统一。有细封氏、费听氏、往利氏、颇超氏、野辞氏、房当氏、米禽氏、拓拔氏，其中拓拔氏最强。
English: Don't regard surnames as tribes. A single surname can be divided into several small tribes. A large tribe can have tens of thousands of people, while a small tribe can have a few thousand people. They cannot be unified. There are the Seifo clan, the Feiyu clan, the Hanli clan, the Po Chao clan, the Yoji clan, the Fudan clan, the Miji clan, and the Tuoba clan, of which the Tuoba clan is the strongest.

古文：土著，有栋宇，织犛尾、羊毛覆屋，岁一易。
现代文：依土地为生，住有房屋，编织牦尾、羊毛覆屋顶，每年一换。
English: They live off the land, live in houses, weave ponytails, and cover their roofs with wool, which they change every year.

古文：俗尚武，无法令、赋役。
现代文：民俗崇尚武功，没有法令和赋役，人寿很多超过百岁。
English: Folk customs advocate martial arts, there are no laws or enforcement, and many people live to be over 100 years old.

古文：人寿多过百岁，然好为盗，更相剽夺。
现代文：但好偷盗，相互劫掠。尤其看重复仇。
English: However, they are good at stealing and robbing each other. Especially look at the repeated revenge.

古文：尤重复雠，未得所欲者，蓬首垢颜，跣足草食，杀已乃复。
现代文：若未抓得想抓的人，就蓬头垢面，赤足素食，一定要杀了他才恢复常态。
English: If you don't catch the person you want to catch, you have to kill him before you can return to normal.

古文：男女衣裘褐，被氈。
现代文：男女都穿皮袄，披毡子。
English: Both men and women wear fur coats and ponchos.

古文：畜犛牛、马、驴、羊以食，不耕稼。
现代文：畜养牦牛、马、驴、羊等供食用，不种庄稼。
English: They raise yaks, horses, donkeys, sheep, etc. for food, but do not grow crops.

古文：地寒，五月草生，八月霜降。
现代文：气候寒冷，五月草才生，八月就降霜。
English: The climate is cold, with grass only growing in May and frost in August.

古文：无文字，候草木记岁。
现代文：没有文字，看草木的荣枯以记年。
English: There is no written language, and the year is recorded by watching the growth and withering of plants and trees.

古文：三年一相聚，杀牛羊祭天，取麦他国以酿酒。
现代文：三年人民大相聚一次，杀牛羊祭天，从别的国家取麦子酿酒。
English: Once every three years, the people gather in large numbers to slaughter cattle and sheep to sacrifice to the heavens, and to take wheat from other countries to make wine.

古文：妻其庶母、伯叔母、兄嫂、子弟妇，惟不娶同姓。
现代文：可以娶庶母、伯叔母、嫂及子弟妇为妻，只是不娶同姓人。
English: You can marry your stepmother, aunt, sister-in-law, and niece, but not someone with the same last name.

古文：老而死，子孙不哭；少死，则曰夭枉，乃悲。
现代文：人老而死，子孙不哭；如果年少而死，称为夭枉，为之痛哭。
English: When a man dies of old age, his children do not weep; if he dies young, they call it premature death and weep bitterly over it.

古文：贞观三年，南会州都督郑元镌谕，其酋细封步赖举部降。太宗玺诏慰抚，步赖因入朝，宴锡特异，以其地为轨州，即授刺史。
现代文：贞观三年，南会州都督郑元王寿派人招谕，酋长细封步赖率全部归附，太宗赐玺书慰抚，步赖因而入朝，宴赐特别丰厚，将其地列为轨州，任他为刺史。
English: In the third year of Zhenguan, Zheng Yuan Wang Shou, the governor of the Southern Huizhou, sent an invitation, and the chieftain Xiaofu Bu Lai was all attached. Emperor Taizong gave a letter of consolation, and Bu Lai thus entered the court. The banquet was particularly rich, and his land was listed as the track state, and he was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：步赖请率兵讨吐谷浑。
现代文：步赖请求率兵讨伐吐谷浑。
English: Bu Rai requested to lead an army to fight against Tu Guhun.

古文：其后诸酋长悉内属，以其地为崌、奉、严、远四州，即首领拜刺史。
现代文：后来众酋长都来归顺，将其地列为山居州、奉州、严州、远州，任其首领为各州刺史。
English: Later, all the chiefs came to submit, and their lands were classified as Shanju, Fengzhou, Yanzhou, and Yanzhou, and their leaders were appointed to write the history of each state.

古文：有拓拔赤辞者，初臣吐谷浑，慕容伏允待之厚，与结婚，诸羌已归，独不至。
现代文：有个叫拓拔赤辞的，起初臣附吐谷浑，吐谷浑首领慕容伏允对他很好，并结为亲家。及至各羌归附，赤辞独不来。
English: There was a man named Tuoba Chakji, who was at first a vassal of Tukuhun. The leader of Tukuhun, Murong Fuyun, was very kind to him, and he became a member of his family. When all the fiefs were annexed, Chakji did not come alone.

古文：李靖击吐谷浑，赤辞屯狼道峡抗王师。廓州刺史久且洛生欲谕降之，辞曰： 浑主以腹心待我，不知其佗，若速去，且污吾刀。 
现代文：李靖攻击吐谷浑，赤辞带兵屯扎狼道峡抵抗王师，廊州刺史久且洛生想劝他归降，赤辞辞谢 浑的君主待我如腹心，我不认识别人。你快走开，免得弄脏我的刀 。
English: Li Jing attacked Tugu Hun, Red Quip led his soldiers to camp in Wolf Road Gorge to resist Wang Shi, Longzhou had a long history and Luo Sheng wanted to persuade him to surrender, Red Quip thanked Hun's monarch for treating me like a confidant, I don't know anyone else. You should quickly leave, so as not to dirty my knife.

古文：洛生怒，引轻骑破之肃远山，斩首数百级，虏杂畜六千。
现代文：洛生怒，带领轻骑兵在肃远山将其打败，杀死几百人，俘获牲畜六千。
English: Luo became enraged and led the light cavalry to defeat them in the Suyuan Mountains, killing several hundred people and capturing six thousand livestock.

古文：帝因其胜又令约降，赤辞从子思头潜纳款，其下拓拔细豆亦降。
现代文：皇帝又命乘胜劝降。赤辞的侄子思头暗中送来降书，其下属拓拔细豆也降。
English: The emperor also ordered to use the victory to persuade the emperor to abdicate. Shidou, the nephew of the emperor, secretly sent a letter of abdication, and his subordinate Tuobao also abdicated.

古文：赤辞知宗族携沮，稍欲自归，岷州都督刘师立复诱之，即与思头俱内属。
现代文：赤辞知道宗族中已有二心，也渐生归附的想法。岷州都督刘师立再次劝降，赤辞乃与思头都归附。
English: He knew that there were two minds in the clan, and he gradually came around to the idea of affiliation. The governor of Zhangzhou, Liu Shili, once again persuaded him to surrender, and both he and Shidou did so.

古文：以其地为懿、嵯、麟、可三十二州，以松州为都督府，擢赤辞西戎州都督，赐氏李，贡职遂不绝。
现代文：列其地为懿州、嵯州、麟州、可州等三十二州，以松州为都督府，提拔赤辞为西州都督，赐姓李。以后入贡任职不绝。
English: Its territory was listed as the 32 prefectures of Ganzhou, Ganzhou, Linzhou, Kuzhou and other prefectures, with Songzhou as the prefectural capital, and Chakji was promoted as the prefect of Xizhou and given the surname Li. After that, he continued to serve as a tributary.

古文：于是自河首积石山而东，皆为中国地。
现代文：从此时开始，从黄河头积石山向东，都属中国的版图。
English: From this time onward, all the land eastward from the craggy mountains at the head of the Yellow River belonged to China.

古文：后吐蕃浸盛，拓拔畏逼，请内徙，始诏庆州置静边等州处之。
现代文：后来吐蕃日渐强盛，拓拔惧怕他们的进逼，要求内迁，诏令庆州设置静边等州安顿他们。
English: Later, Tubo became more and more powerful, and Tubo, fearing their advance, demanded that they move inland, and ordered Gyeongju to set up Jingbian and other prefectures to settle them.

古文：地乃入吐蕃，其处者皆为吐蕃役属，更号弭药。
现代文：拓拔的故地陷入吐蕃。当地的居民都成为吐蕃的隶属，改称他们为 弭药 。
English: The former place of Tuoba fell into Tubo. The local residents all became subordinate to Tubo, and they were renamed as Baojiro.

古文：又有黑党项者，居赤水西。
现代文：还有黑党项，位于赤水之西。
English: There is also the Black Party Section, located west of the Red Water.

古文：其长号敦善王，慕容伏允之走也依之。
现代文：其首领叫敦善王。当初慕容伏允逃避李靖，依附他同行。
English: Its leader was called Tun Son Wang. At the beginning, Murong Fuyun fled from Li Jing and accompanied him.

古文：及吐谷浑款附，敦善王亦纳贡。
现代文：及至吐谷浑归降，敦善王也来纳贡。
English: As far as Tukoku, they all surrendered, and King Dunsan also came to pay tribute.

古文：居雪山者曰破丑氏。
现代文：居于雪山的称为 破丑氏 。
English: Those who live in the snowy mountains are called the Ugly Goat Clan.

古文：又有白兰羌，吐蕃谓之丁零，左属党项，右与多弥接。
现代文：还有白兰羌，吐蕃称之为丁零。左连党项，右接多弥。
English: There is also a white lantern, which is called Ding Zi in Tibetan. On the left is the Party branch, and on the right is Tamiya.

古文：胜兵万人，勇战斗，善作兵，俗与党项同。武德六年，使者入朝。
现代文：有强兵万人，勇敢善战。习俗与党项同。武德六年，派使者入朝。
English: There are tens of thousands of strong soldiers, brave and good at war. Custom and party are the same. Six years of martial arts, sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：明年，以其地为维、恭二州。
现代文：第二年，列其地为维州、恭州。
English: In the second year, Victoria and Gyeongju were added to the list.

古文：贞观六年，与契苾数十万内属。
现代文：贞观六年，与契必艹几十万人同来归附。
English: Zhenguan for six years, and hundreds of thousands of people came to join him.

古文：永徽时，特浪生羌卜楼大首领冻就率众来属，以其地为剑州。
现代文：永徽时，特浪的生羌卜楼大首领冻就率众归附，列其地为剑州。
English: At the time of Yonghui, the great leader Jie Bo Lou, who was born in the special wave, led the people to attach, and listed his land as Jianzhou.

古文：龙朔后，白兰、舂桑及白狗羌为吐蕃所臣，籍其兵为前驱。
现代文：龙朔以后，白兰、舂桑及白狗羌被吐蕃所臣服，吐蕃在战争中用其兵为前驱。
English: After Longshuo, Bai Lan, Xinsang and Bai Xuchang were subjugated by Tubo, and Tubo used its soldiers as forerunners in the war.

古文：白狗与东会州接，胜兵才千人。
现代文：白狗与东会州相接，强兵才千人。
English: The White Dog is adjacent to the Eastern Heki Prefecture, and there are only a thousand strong soldiers.

古文：在西北者，天授中内附，户凡二十万，以其地为朝、吴、浮、归十州，散居灵、夏间。
现代文：居于西北的，天授年间归附，有二十万户，列其地为朝州、吴州、浮州、归州等十州，人民散居于灵州、夏州之间。
English: In the northwest, there were more than 200,000 households that were annexed during the Tianzhu era, including the ten prefectures of Chaozhou, Wuzhou, Fuzhou, and Guizhou, and the people were scattered between Lingshou and Xiazhou.

古文：至德末，为吐蕃所诱，使为乡导钞边。
现代文：至德末年，吐蕃诱骗为其向导侵犯边陲。
English: Toward the end of his life, he tricked and tricked his guide into trespassing on the border.

古文：俄悔悟，更来朝，愿助灵州饷輓。
现代文：不久悔悟，改过来朝，愿意帮助供给灵州的军饷。
English: He soon repented, changed his mind, and was willing to help supply Lingzhou with military rations.

古文：乾元间，中国数乱，因寇邠、宁二州，肃宗诏郭子仪都统朔方、邠宁、鄜坊节度事，以鄜州刺史杜冕、邠州刺史桑如圭分二队出讨。
现代文：乾元年间，中国多次变乱，乃趁乱侵犯、宁二州，肃宗诏令郭子仪都统朔方、宁、坊等州，节度军事，派州刺史杜冕、州刺史桑如王圭分两队出兵讨伐。
English: During the Qian and Yuan Dynasties, China experienced many upheavals. Instead of taking advantage of the turmoil to invade and subjugate the two states of Ning, Emperor Suizong issued an edict ordering Guo Ziyi to unify the states of Shuo, Fang, Ning, and Fang. He also issued a military edict ordering the states of Zhishi, Du Guan, and Zhishi, such as Wang Gui, to send two teams of soldiers to fight.

古文：子仪至，党项溃去。
现代文：郭子仪到，党项溃败。
English: Guo Ziyi arrived, and the party was routed.

古文：上元元年，在泾、陇部落十万众诣凤翔节度使崔光远降。
现代文：上元元年，在泾、陇的部落十万人到凤翔节度使崔光远处归降。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, a hundred thousand people from the tribes of Yao and Qian went to the Fengxiang Festival to make Cui Guang return from afar.

古文：二年，与浑、奴剌连和，寇宝鸡，杀吏民，掠财珍，焚大散关，入凤州，杀刺史萧忄曳，节度使李鼎追击走之。
现代文：上元二年，与浑、奴刺联和，侵犯宝鸡，杀吏民，掠财宝，焚大散关，进入凤州，杀刺史萧忄曳，节度使李鼎追击将他们赶走。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he made peace with the Huns and the slaves, invaded Baoji, killed officials and people, plundered treasures, set fire to large tracts of land, entered Fengzhou, killed Shi Xiaohui, and forced Li Ding to chase them away.

古文：明年，又攻梁州，刺史李勉走；进寇奉天，大掠华原、同官去。
现代文：第二年，又攻梁州，刺史李勉逃走；进而侵犯奉天，大肆掳掠华原、同官后去。
English: In the second year, he attacked Liangzhou again, stabbed Shi Li, and fled. He then invaded Fengtian, plundered Hua Yuan, and went after Tongguan.

古文：诏臧希让代勉为刺史，于是归顺、乾封、归义、顺化、和宁、和义、保善、宁定、罗云、朝凤凡十州部落诣希让献款，丐节印。
现代文：诏令臧希让代李勉为刺史，于是归顺、乾封、归义、顺化、和宁、和义、保善、宁定、罗云、朝凤共十州的部落均到臧希让处纳降书，乞讨节印，皇帝允许。
English: The imperial edict ordered the tribes in ten prefectures, including Suishun, Qianfeng, Guiyi, Hunhua, Tongning, HeNing, HeYi, BaoZhen, NingDing, Luoyang, and ChaFeng, to go to Anhui to submit their documents, beg for the imperial seal, and receive the emperor's permission.

古文：大酋郑廷、郝德入同州，刺史韦胜走，节度使周智光破之澄城。
现代文：仆固怀恩叛乱时，诱骗党项、浑、奴刺犯边，兵众数万，掠夺凤翔、銩稨，大酋郑廷、郝德攻入同州，刺史韦胜逃走。节度使周智光在澄城将他们打败。
English: When Gu Hui's vassals rebelled, they tricked tens of thousands of soldiers into defecting to the other side and plundered Fengxiang and Handan, while the great chieftains Zheng Ting and Handan invaded Tongzhou and stabbed Wei Sheng to escape. Zhou Zhiguang defeated them in Chengcheng.

古文：阅月，又入同州，焚官私室庐，壁马兰山。
现代文：过了一个月，再攻入同州，烧毁官府民宅，驻守马兰山。
English: A month later, they invaded Tongzhou again, burned down government and private houses, and garrisoned Malan Mountain.

古文：郭子仪遣兵袭之，退保三堡，子仪遣慕容休明谕降廷、德。
现代文：郭子仪派兵袭击，郑廷等人退而坚守三堡，郭子仪派慕容休明劝降郑廷、郝德。
English: Guo Ziyi sent troops to attack, Zheng Ting and others retreated and held on to the three fortresses. Guo Ziyi sent Murong Xuming to persuade Zheng Ting and Xing De to surrender.

古文：子仪以党项、吐谷浑部落散处盐、庆等州，其地与吐蕃滨近，易相胁，即表徙静边州都督、夏州、乐容等六府党项于银州之北、夏州之东、宁朔州吐谷浑住夏西，以离沮之。
现代文：郭子仪认为党项、吐谷浑的部落散处在盐州、庆州等地，与吐蕃临近，容易受吐蕃的胁迫，于是上书请将静边州都督、夏州、乐容等六府的党项迁到银州之北、夏州之东，宁朔州的吐谷浑住夏州西，使其分离阻隔。
English: Guo Ziyi believed that the tribes of Danzhao and Tugu Hun were scattered in Yanzhou, Gyeongju and other places, close to Tubo, and were easily coerced by Tubo. Therefore, he submitted a letter requesting that the Danzhao of six prefectures, including the governor of Jingbian, Cangzhou and Le Rong, be moved to the north of Yinzhou, the east of Cangzhou, and the Tugu Hun of Ningshuo to the west of Cangzhou, so that they could be separated.

古文：召静边州大首领左羽林大将军拓拔朝光等五刺史入朝，厚赐赍，使还绥其部。
现代文：召静边州大首领左羽林大将军拓拔朝光等五刺史入朝，赏赐丰厚，让他们回去安抚其部属。
English: General Zuo Yulin, the great leader of Jingbian Prefecture, was summoned to expel the five thorns of history, including Asamitsu, and reward them generously so that they could return to pacify their subordinates.

古文：先是，庆州有破丑氏族三、野利氏族五、把利氏族一，与吐蕃姻援，赞普悉王之，因是扰边凡十年。
现代文：起先，庆州有破丑氏族三部、野利氏族五部、把利氏族一部与吐蕃连姻互援，赞普全封他们为王，由此犯边达十年之久。
English: At first, Gyeongju had three Ugly clans, five Ugly clans, and one Ugly clan allied with Tubo for mutual support, and Zampu crowned them as kings, which lasted for ten years.

古文：子仪表工部尚书路嗣恭为朔方留后，将作少监梁进用为押党项部落使，置行庆州。
现代文：郭子仪上表请任工部尚书路嗣恭为朔方留后，将作少监梁进用为押党项部落使，设置行庆州。
English: After Guo Ziyi's last request for the appointment of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Industry, Shang Shullu and Zhi Gong to stay for the Shuo side, he will be used as a junior supervisor and a tribal envoy to support the party, and set up a line to Qingzhou.

古文：且言： 党项阴结吐蕃为变，可遣使者招慰，芟其反谋，因令进用为庆州刺史，严逻以绝吐蕃往来道。 
现代文：且说 ：党项暗中勾结吐蕃变乱，可派使者招抚，打消其谋反之心。就此令梁进用为庆州刺史，严密巡察，堵绝吐蕃往来的道路。 
English: He also said that the party was secretly colluding with the Tujia Rebellion, and that an envoy could be sent to appease them and dissuade them from plotting a rebellion. Therefore, Liang was assigned to investigate the history of Gyeongju, conduct strict inspections, and block the roads used by the Tujia Rebellion.

古文：代宗然之。
现代文：代宗认为有道理。
English: Daizong thinks it makes sense.

古文：又表置静边、芳池、相兴王州都督、长史，永平、旭定、清宁、宁保、忠顺、静塞、万吉等七州都督府。
现代文：郭子仪还上表请置静边、芳池、相兴三州都督、长史，永平、旭定、清宁、宁保、忠顺、静塞、万吉等七州都督府。
English: Guo Ziyi also asked the table to place Jingbian, Fangchi, Sangxing three state governors, Changshi, Yongping, Xuding, Qingning, Ningbo, Zhongshun, Jingce, Wanji and other seven state governors.

古文：于是破丑、野利、把利三部及思乐州刺史拓拔乞梅等皆入朝，宜定州刺史折磨布落、芳池州野利部并徙绥、延州。
现代文：于是破丑、野利、把利三部及思乐州刺史拓拔乞梅等皆入朝归附。宜定州刺史折磨布落、芳池州的野利部迁往绥州、延州。
English: As a result, the three parts of Haku, Yori, and Tori, as well as Sile Prefecture's Sashishi, Toubaku, Kaimei, and so on, were all annexed to the dynasty. The Sashishi of Iding Prefecture was destroyed, and the Yori Department of Houchi Prefecture was moved to Bozhou and Yanzhou.

古文：大历末，野利秃罗都与吐蕃叛，招馀族不应，子仪击之，斩秃罗都，而野利景庭、野利刚以其部数千人入附鸡子川。
现代文：大历末年，野利、秃罗都与吐蕃叛变，招余族均不应。郭子仪将其击破，斩杀秃罗都，而野利景庭、野利刚率领其部落几千人入附鸡子川。
English: At the end of the year of the great calendar, both Yoli and Zhao Luo rebelled against Tubo, and none of the Zhaoyu people should have done so. Guo Ziyi defeated and killed Zhao Luo, while Yoli Jingting and Yoli Gang led several thousand of their tribe into the annexed Chizi River.

古文：六州部落，曰：野利越诗、野利龙儿、野利厥律、儿黄、野海、野窣等；居庆州者号东山部，夏州者号平夏部。
现代文：六州部落，即野利越诗、野利龙儿、野利厥律、儿黄、野海、野穴卒等。居于庆州的称为东山部，居于夏州的称为平夏部。
English: There are six tribes in Gyeongju, namely, the Noryeetsu tribe, the Noryeongye tribe, the Noryeokyeol tribe, the Yeolyeol tribe, the Yeolyeol tribe, the Yeomyeol tribe, the Yeomyeol tribe, the Yeomyeol tribe, the Yeomyeol tribe, and the Yeomyeol tribe.

古文：永泰后稍徙石州，后为永安将阿史那思暕赋索无极，遂亡走河西。
现代文：永泰年后，渐渐迁往石州。后来被永安将阿思那思目柬无限止地勒索，于是逃奔河西。
English: After Yongtai, he gradually moved to Shizhou. Later, he was blackmailed endlessly by Yongan, and fled to Hexi.

古文：元和时复置宥州，护党项。
现代文：元和年间，再设置宥州以保护党项。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Yuzhou was set up again to protect the party.

古文：至大和中寝强，数寇掠。
现代文：至大和中渐渐强盛起来，又多次来骚扰掠夺。
English: The Supreme Court and the Central Court gradually became more powerful, and they harassed and plundered us many times.

古文：然器械钝苦，畏唐兵精，则以善马购铠，善羊贸弓矢。
现代文：不过他们的兵器很差，惧怕唐兵的精良器械，就用良马来购买铠甲，肥羊则换弓箭。
English: However, their weapons were poor, and they were afraid of the Tang soldiers' sophisticated equipment, so they used good horses to buy armor, and fat sheep to buy bows and arrows.

古文：鄜坊道军粮使李石表禁商人不得以旗帜、甲胄、五兵入部落，告者，举罪人财畀之。
现代文：坊道的军粮史李石上表要求禁止商人不得将旗帜、甲胄、各种兵器卖给各部落。如有来检举的，就把罪人的财产给他。
English: Li Shijiazhuang demanded that merchants be prohibited from selling flags, armor, and various weapons to various tribes. If anyone came to report, they would give him the criminal's property.

古文：至开成末，种落愈繁，富贾人赍缯宝鬻羊马，籓镇乘其利，强市之，或不得直，部人怨，相率为乱，至灵、盐道不通。
现代文：到开成末年，各部族种落越来越多，有钱的商人用绸缎珍宝来买他们的羊、马，藩镇乘机强买，甚至不给钱，部落中人生怨恨，相率作乱，以致灵州、盐州道路不通。
English: By the end of the Kaisei era, each tribe had more and more settlements. Wealthy merchants used silk and silk treasures to buy their sheep and horses. Towns and clans took advantage of the opportunity to force them to buy, and even refused to pay. People in the tribe resented each other and caused chaos, so that the roads in Lingzhou and Yanzhou were impassable.

古文：武宗以侍御史为使招定，分三印，以邠、宁、延属崔彦曾，盐、夏、长泽属李雩鄠，灵武、麟、胜属郑贺，皆绯衣银鱼，而功不克。
现代文：武宗派侍御史出使安抚，分三印统辖，在、宁、延等州的，由崔彦曾主管；在盐、夏、长泽等州的由李主管；在灵武、麟、胜等州的由郑贺主管。都赐绯衣银鱼以示郑重，但均无功。
English: The Wushu sect sent emissaries to pacify the situation, and divided it into three provinces. In the provinces of Ning and Yan, Cui Yan was in charge; in the provinces of Yan, Xia and Changze, Li was in charge; in the provinces of Lingwu, Lin and Sheng, Zheng He was in charge. They all gave him a silver fish to show their solemnity, but to no avail.

古文：宣宗大中四年，内掠邠、宁，诏凤翔李业、河东李拭合节度兵讨之，宰相白敏中为都统。
现代文：宣宗大中四年，党项内掠、宁。诏令凤翔的李业、河东的李拭会合节度兵讨伐，宰相白敏中为都统。
English: In the fourth year of Xuanzong University, the party's internal plunder and Ning came to the fore. Li Ye of Fengxiang and Li Wi of Hedong met to fight against the soldiers of the Qing Dynasty, and Prime Minister Bai Min was in favor of the unification of China.

古文：帝出近苑，或以竹一个植舍外，见才尺许，远且百步，帝属二矢曰： 党羌穷寇，仍岁暴吾鄙，今我约：射竹中则彼当自亡，不中，我且索天下兵翦之，终不以此贼遗子孙。 
现代文：皇帝出近苑，见有人在舍外植一丛竹，高只尺把，远约百步。皇帝拿了两支箭说： 党羌贼寇，每年都骚扰我边陲，现在我约誓：射竹中了，他们将自己灭亡；射不中，我就征调天下所有的兵剪灭他，决不让此贼留给子孙。 
English: The emperor came out of his garden and saw someone planting a clump of bamboo outside his house. It was only a few feet high and about a hundred paces away. The emperor took two arrows and said: "Party thugs and thieves have been harassing my countrymen every year. Now I swear: If they shoot the bamboo, they will destroy themselves; if they don't, I will conscript all the soldiers in the world to exterminate them. I will never allow this thief to be left to my descendants."

古文：左右注目，帝一发竹分，矢彻诸外，左右呼万岁。
现代文：左右均注目而视，皇帝一箭就把竹子射破了，一直穿过竹身。左右高呼万岁。
English: Both the right and the left looked at it attentively, and the emperor shot the bamboo with an arrow, and it went all the way through the bamboo. Long live the left and the right.

古文：不阅月，羌果破殄，馀种窜南山。
现代文：不到一个月，羌人果然被消灭，剩下的逃窜到南山。
English: Less than a month later, the Xiongnu were indeed wiped out, and the rest fled to Nanshan.

古文：始，天宝末，平夏部有战功，擢容州刺史、天柱军使。
现代文：当初，天宝末年，平夏部有战功，提拔为容州刺史、天柱军使。
English: At first, at the end of the Tenpo era, Ping Xia Bu was promoted to the rank of Yongzhou Jishi and Tianzhu Envoy for his military exploits.

古文：其裔孙拓拔思恭，咸通末窃据宥州，称刺史。
现代文：其孙子拓拔思恭咸通末年时窃据宥州，称为刺史。
English: At the end of his life, his grandson, Tuoba Sikyong Hantong, stole the state of Yuzhou, known as Sishi.

古文：黄巢入长安，与鄜州李孝昌坛而坎牲，誓讨贼，僖宗贤之，以为左武卫将军，权知夏绥银节度事。
现代文：黄巢入长安，拓拔思恭与州的李孝昌设坛歃血而盟，发誓共同讨贼。僖宗认为他贤能，任他为左武卫将军，暂管夏、绥、银等州的军事。
English: When Huang Chao entered Chang'an, Tuoba Sikyong and Li Xiaochang of Shizhou made a blood-stained alliance and swore to jointly hunt down thieves. Shizong thought he was so capable that he appointed him as General Zuowei, temporarily in charge of military affairs in Shizhou, Nanning, and Yin.

古文：次王桥，为巢所败，更与郑畋四节度盟，屯渭桥。
现代文：军驻王桥，被黄巢打败。又与郑畋等四节度盟誓，屯驻渭桥。
English: The army stationed at Wang Qiao was defeated by Huang Chao. He also swore an oath with Zheng Yi and other four generals to stay at Qiao Qiao.

古文：中和二年，诏为京城西面都统、检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：中和二年，诏任他为京城西面都统、检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year of middle school, he was appointed to the capital's west-facing metropolitan government, the school inspection office, and the school gate of the same middle school.

古文：俄进四面都统，权知京兆尹。
现代文：不久晋升为四面都统，暂任京兆尹。
English: He was soon promoted to Shifengdu Tong, and temporarily assumed the post of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：贼平，兼太子太傅，封夏国公，赐姓李。
现代文：贼乱平，兼任太子太傅，封爵夏国公，赐姓李。
English: Thief Ranping, concurrently serving as the Prince of the Daifu, knighted Xia Guoguo, given the surname Li.

古文：嗣襄王煴之乱，诏思恭讨贼，兵不出，卒。
现代文：后来嗣襄王誰作乱，诏令思恭讨贼。思恭兵未出，去世。
English: Later, the successor of King Xiang, who caused the disturbance, issued an edict ordering Sikyong to hunt down the thieves. Sikyong died before the soldiers came out.

古文：以弟思谏代为定难节度使，思孝为保大节度、鄜坊凡翟等州观察使，并检校司徒、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以他的弟弟思谏代任定难节度使，思孝为保大节度使，坊、丹、翟等州的观察使，并任检校司徒、同中书门下平章事。
English: He appointed his younger brother, Siyi, as the delegate to fix the difficult festival, and Siyiao as the delegate to ensure the great festival, as well as the observer of the provinces of Fang, Dan, and Handan, and served as the inspector of the school and the deputy secretary of the school.

古文：王行瑜反，以思孝为北面招讨使，思谏东北面招讨使。
现代文：王行瑜叛变，任思孝为北面招讨使、思谏为东北面招讨使。
English: Wang Xingyu rebelled, and appointed Sihiao as the north side recruiting officer, and Sihong as the northeast side recruiting officer.

古文：思孝亦因乱取鄜州，遂为节度使，累兼侍中。
现代文：思孝乘乱取州，即任节度使，累官兼侍中。
English: Si Xiao took part in the rebellion to take over the state, and was appointed as a delegate to the festival. He was also a regent and a chamberlain.

古文：以老荐弟思敬为保大军兵马留后，俄为节度使。
现代文：后因年老推荐弟思敬为保大军兵马留后，不久即任节度使。
English: Later, after recommending his younger brother Shigei to stay on as a soldier of the Grand Army of the Republic of Korea due to his old age, he was soon appointed as the Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：东女，亦曰苏伐剌挐瞿咀罗，羌别种也，西海亦有女自王，故称 东 别之。
现代文：东女，也称苏伐剌弩瞿咀罗，是羌族的别种。因西海也有女子自为王的，所以称 东 ，用以区分。
English: Dongmei, also known as the Suwa Diao Tsui Luo, is a different species of the Yao people. Because there are also women in the West Sea who consider themselves kings, they are called Dong to distinguish them.

古文：东与吐蕃、党项、茂州接，西属三波诃，北距于阗，东南属雅州罗女蛮、白狼夷。
现代文：其地东与吐蕃、党项、茂州相接，西连三波诃，北临于阗，东南靠雅州罗女蛮、白狼夷。
English: In the east, it is adjacent to Tubo, Danzhao, and Maozhou; in the west, it is adjacent to Sanbo, in the north to Yunnan, and in the southeast, it is adjacent to Yazhou, Luoyang, and Baiyong.

古文：东西行尽九日，南北行尽二十日。
现代文：东西的长度约为九日的行程，南北的长度则是二十天的行程。
English: The east-west length is about a nine-day trip, while the north-south length is a twenty-day trip.

古文：有八十城。
现代文：域内有八十个城。
English: There are eighty towns in the region.

古文：以女为君，居康延川，岩险四缭，有弱水南流，缝革为船。
现代文：以女子为君主，居于康延川，四周有险峻的山峦环绕，有河名弱水南流，用皮革缝船。
English: With a woman as its monarch, it lives on the Kangyan River, surrounded on all sides by steep mountains, has a river called the Weak Water South Stream, and uses leather to make boats.

古文：户四万，胜兵万人。
现代文：人口四万户，强兵一万人。
English: Population of forty thousand households, strong army of ten thousand.

古文：王号宾就，官曰高霸黎，犹言宰相也。
现代文：王称为 宾就 ，官称 高霸黎 ，就如汉人称宰相。
English: The king is called Bin Rong, the official title is Gao Ba Li, just as the Han people call the prime minister.

古文：官在外者，率男子为之。
现代文：王居外的官都由男子担任。
English: All posts outside the palace are held by men.

古文：凡号令，女官自内传，男官受而行。
现代文：凡有号令，由女官自内部传出，男官则受令而行。
English: Whenever there is an order, it is issued by the female officer from within, while the male officer is ordered to go.

古文：王侍女数百，五日一听政。
现代文：王有侍女几百人，五日听政一次。
English: The king had hundreds of maids of honour, and he had to listen to the government once every five days.

古文：王死，国人以金钱数万纳王族，求淑女二立之。
现代文：王死，国人给王族纳钱好几万，寻求二位淑女，长立为王，次为小王。
English: When the king died, the people of the country gave the royal family tens of thousands of money and sought two ladies. The eldest became king, followed by the younger king.

古文：次为小王，王死，因以为嗣，或姑死妇继，无篡夺。
现代文：王死，以小王为嗣。或是婆婆死媳妇继承，没有篡夺之事。
English: If the king dies, the younger king becomes the heir. Or if the mother-in-law dies and the daughter-in-law inherits, there is no usurpation.

古文：所居皆重屋，王九层，国人六层。
现代文：住所都是楼房。王所居的有九层，一般人住的为六层。
English: The residences are all buildings. Wang lives on the ninth floor, while the average person lives on the sixth floor.

古文：王服青毛绫裙，被青袍，袖委于地，冬羔裘，饰以文锦。
现代文：王穿青毛绫裙，披青袍，袖长拖地。冬天穿羔皮裘，用花锦装饰。
English: The king wears a blue-furred skirt, draped in a blue robe, with long sleeves trailing to the ground. In winter, he wears a lambskin coat, decorated with flower brocades.

古文：俗轻男子，女贵者咸有侍男，被发，以青涂面，惟务战与耕而已。
现代文：头发梳成小鬟髻，耳垂玉，脚穿革索。习俗轻视男子，高贵的女子都有侍男。他们披散头发，用青色涂脸。他们的工作就是作战及耕种。
English: Their hair is combed into small braids, their earlobes are beaded, and their feet are trimmed with leather. Custom despises men, and noble women have attendants. They wear their hair loose and paint their faces blue. Their work is warfare and farming.

古文：子从母姓。
现代文：孩子随母姓。
English: Children take their mother's surname.

古文：地寒宜麦，畜羊马，出黄金。
现代文：气候寒冷，宜种麦子，畜养羊、马，出产黄金。
English: The climate is cold, it is suitable to grow wheat, raise sheep and horses, and produce gold.

古文：风俗大抵与天竺同。
现代文：风俗一般与天竺相同。
English: The customs are generally the same as those in Tianmu.

古文：以十一月为正。
现代文：以十一月为岁始。
English: The year begins in November.

古文：巫者以十月诣山中，布糟麦，咒呼群鸟。俄有鸟来如鸡状，剖视之，有谷者岁丰，否即有灾，名曰鸟卜。
现代文：巫者十月到山里去，撒糟麦，祈祷并呼唤群鸟，不久就有像鸡一样的鸟来，捉住剖杀，肚里若有谷，预示年丰，否则有灾。此法称之为鸟卜。
English: In October, the sorcerer would go to the mountains to scatter the barley, pray and call the birds. Soon, a bird like a chicken would come to catch and kill the cuttlefish. If there is a trough in the stomach, it portends a good year, otherwise there will be a disaster. This method is called birding.

古文：居丧三年，不易服，不栉沐。
现代文：人死，居丧三年，不换衣服，不洗头洗澡。
English: If a person dies, they are buried for three years, without changing their clothes, washing their hair or taking a shower.

古文：贵人死，剥藏其皮，内骨甕中，糅金屑瘗之。
现代文：贵人死，剥下皮收藏起来，骨则放进坛子，掺金屑后埋葬。
English: When a noble died, the skin was peeled off and collected, while the bones were placed in a jar, mixed with gold dust and buried.

古文：王之葬，殉死至数十人。
现代文：王葬时，殉葬的多至几十人。
English: At the time of the king's burial, as many as dozens of people were buried.

古文：武德时，王汤滂氏始遣使入贡。高祖厚报，为突厥所掠不得通。
现代文：武德时，王汤滂氏才派使者入贡，高祖以厚礼回报，但被突厥抢走未能送到。
English: At the time of Wu De, the Wang Tanggu clan sent an envoy to pay tribute, Gao Zu returned the favor, but he was snatched away by the Turks and could not be delivered.

古文：贞观中，使复至，太宗玺制慰抚。
现代文：贞观年间，又派使者来，太宗赐玺书抚慰。
English: During the years of chengguan, he also sent an envoy, and the emperor gave him a letter of consolation.

古文：显庆初，遣使高霸黎文与王子三庐来朝，授右监门中郎将。
现代文：显庆初年，派使者高霸黎文与王子三卢来朝，委任为右监门中郎将。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xianqing's reign, Gaoba Liwen and Prince Sanlu were sent to the North as envoys, and he was appointed as the right supervisor of the gate.

古文：其王敛臂使大臣来请官号，武后册拜敛臂左玉钤卫员外将军，赐瑞锦服。
现代文：其王敛臂派大臣来请封官号，武后册拜敛臂为左玉钤卫员外将军，赐瑞锦服。
English: The king sent a minister to invite him to seal the official title, and the empress Dowager listed him as the left jade guardian general, and gave him the Ruijin uniform.

古文：天授、开元间，王及子再来朝，诏与宰相宴曲江，封王曳夫为归昌王、左金吾卫大将军。
现代文：天授、开元年间，王及其子两次来朝，诏令宰相与之宴于曲江，封王曳夫为归昌王、左金吾卫大将军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tenju and the first year of the 21st century, the king and his son came to the imperial court twice, and the emperor ordered the prime minister to have a banquet with them in Qujiang. The king's courtiers were King Guichang and General Zuo Guowei.

古文：后乃以男子为王。
现代文：后来以男子为王。
English: Later, men became king.

古文：贞元九年，其王汤立悉与白狗君及哥邻君董卧庭、逋租君邓吉知、南水君薛尚悉曩、弱水君董避和、悉董君汤息赞、清远君苏唐磨、咄霸君董藐蓬皆诣剑南韦皋求内附。
现代文：贞元九年，王汤立悉与白狗君以及哥邻君董卧庭、逋租君邓吉知、南水君薛尚悉曩、弱水君董避和、悉董君汤息赞、清远君苏唐磨、咄霸君董藐蓬都到剑南韦皋处请求归附。
English: In the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, Wang Tang Lixian and Baigu Jun, as well as his brother and neighbor Jun Dong Jiaotian, Zhaotian Jun Deng Jizhi, Nanshui Jun Xue Shang Xixian, Weakwater Jun Dong Yuhe, Zhi Dong Jun Tang Xizan, Qingyuan Jun Su Tangma, and Yiba Jun Dong Yibang, all went to Jianan Weiwu to request annexation.

古文：其种散居西山、弱水，虽自谓王，盖小小部落耳。
现代文：其种族散居西山、弱水，虽自称是王，实际是小小部落。
English: Their ethnicity is scattered in Xishan and Weakshui. Although they claim to be kings, they are actually a small tribe.

古文：自失河、陇，悉为吐蕃羁属，部数千户，辄置令，岁督丝絮。
现代文：自从河、陇失守，这些部落都被吐蕃控为属下。一部有几千户的，就设令官，每年要求上缴丝絮。
English: Since the loss of Hebei and Shandong, these tribes have all been controlled by Tuyun as subordinates. One of them, which has several thousand households, has set up a commanding officer to require the submission of filings every year.

古文：至是犹上天宝所赐诏书。
现代文：至此时呈上天宝时所赐诏书。
English: At this point, the imperial decree issued when the treasure was presented is complete.

古文：皋处其众于维、霸等州，赐牛、粮，治生业。
现代文：韦皋安置其人众在维、霸等州，赐给牛、粮，让他们发展生产。
English: Wei Xuan settled his people in Wei, Ba and other states, gave them cattle and grain, and let them develop production.

古文：立悉等入朝，差赐官禄。
现代文：立悉等入朝，均依等赐给官禄。
English: Upon entering the imperial court, they were all given official ranks according to rank.

古文：于是松州羌二万口相踵入附。
现代文：于是松州羌二万人亦随之归附。
English: As a result, 20,000 people from Songzhou were also annexed.

古文：立悉等官刺史，皆得世袭，然阴附吐蕃，故谓 两面羌 。
现代文：立悉等任刺史职，都能世袭。不过他们暗中仍依附吐蕃，所以称之为 两面羌 。
English: It is now known that the post of chief historian can be hereditary. However, they still secretly cling to the spittoon, so they call it the two-sided spittoon.

古文：高昌，直京师西四千里而赢，其横八百里，纵五百里，凡二十一城。
现代文：高昌，距京师西有四千多里。幅员横八百里，纵五百里，共有二十一城。
English: Gaochang is more than 4,000 miles west of Beijing, with a width of 800 miles and a length of 500 miles, and a total of 21 cities.

古文：王都交河城，汉车师前王廷也。
现代文：王都在交河城，是汉时车师前王廷。
English: The kings are all in Jiaohe City. It is the former royal court of the Han Dynasty.

古文：田地城，戊己校尉所治也。
现代文：田地城，是后汉戊己校尉的治地。
English: Tianchi City was ruled by Captain Wu Ji in the later Han Dynasty.

古文：胜兵万人。
现代文：有精兵万人。
English: There are tens of thousands of elite soldiers.

古文：土沃，麦、禾皆再熟。
现代文：土地肥沃，稻、麦都一年两熟。
English: The land is fertile, and rice and wheat ripen twice a year.

古文：有草名白叠，撷花可织为布。
现代文：有种草名叫白叠，取其花可织为布。
English: There is a kind of grass called white tuft, and its flowers can be used to weave cloth.

古文：俗辫髻垂后。
现代文：习俗编发为辫髻垂于脑后。
English: The custom is for the hair to hang down behind the head.

古文：其王曲伯雅，隋时尝妻以戚属宇文氏女，号华容公主。
现代文：其王叫麴伯雅，隋朝时曾娶国戚宇文氏之女华容公主为妻。
English: Its king is called Zibo Ya. During the Sui Dynasty, he married Princess Huarong, a daughter of the Uwen clan.

古文：武德初，伯雅死，子文泰立，遣使来告，高祖命使者临吊。
现代文：武德初年，伯雅死，子文泰继立，派使者来告丧，高祖命使者前往吊唁。
English: In the first year of Wude, Bo Ya died, and his son Wen Tai succeeded him. He sent an envoy to mourn, and Gao Zu's messenger went to offer condolences.

古文：弟崇裕有武艺，永徽中为右武卫翊府中郎将，封交河郡王，邑至三千户。
现代文：五年后，来献狗，高六寸、长一尺，能拖马衔烛，据说产于拂林艹。从此，中国有了拂林艹狗。
English: Five years later, a dog, six inches tall, one foot long, and able to pull a horse-drawn carriage, was presented. It was said to have been produced in Huilin. Since then, China has had Huilin hyenas.

古文：终镇军大将军，武后为举哀，襚以美锦，赙赐甚厚，封爵绝。
现代文：太宗即位，来献玄狐皮袄，皇帝赐其妻宇文氏花钿一架，宇文氏又贡玉盘。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, he came to present Emperor Xuanzang with a fox-hide scepter. The emperor gave his wife Uwen a scepter of flowers, and Uwen paid tribute with a jade plate.

古文：吐谷浑居甘松山之阳，洮水之西，南抵白兰，地数千里。
现代文：举凡西域各国有什么动静都报告朝廷。吐谷浑，位于甘松山之南，洮水之西，南面到白兰，地域达几千里。
English: All the countries in the western region reported to the imperial court on any developments.Tukugahun, located south of Mount Kanmatsu, west of Surabaya, and south of Phnom Penh, covers an area of several thousand miles.

古文：有城郭，不居也。随水草，帐室、肉粮。
现代文：有城郭，但不居住，而是逐水草搭帐篷而居，以肉食为主。
English: They have a castle, but they don't live there. Instead, they live from tent to tent, eating mostly meat.

古文：其官有长史、司马、将军、王、公、仆射、尚书、郎中，盖慕诸华为之。
现代文：官吏有长史、司马、将军、王、公、仆射、尚书、郎中，这都是仰慕中华而效法的。
English: Government officials have a long history, Sima, generals, kings, princes, courtiers, scholars, and courtiers, all of which are admired by the Chinese and imitated.

古文：俗识文字，其王椎髻黑冒，妻锦袍织裙，金花饰首。
现代文：民俗识文字，其王盘小髻蒙黑绸，其妻穿锦袍织裙，用金花做头饰。
English: He knows the words of folk customs. His wife wears a brocade kimono and a knitted skirt, and a headdress made of gold flowers.

古文：男子服长裙缯冒，或冠驩瀍。
现代文：男子穿长裙，头蒙绸帕，或戴幂。
English: Men wear long skirts, silk scarves over their heads, or turbans.

古文：妇人辫发萦后，缀珠贝。
现代文：妇人头发编成辫子绕在脑后，缀以珠贝。
English: The woman's hair is braided behind her head and decorated with pearls.

古文：婚礼，富家厚纳聘，贫者窃妻去。
现代文：婚礼，富家出很多聘礼，穷人家则偷了姑娘逃走。
English: At a wedding, the rich man pays a lot of dowry, while the poor man steals the girl and runs away.

古文：父死妻庶母，兄死妻嫂。
现代文：父亲若死了，就娶父亲的妾为妻；若哥哥死了，就娶嫂子为妻。
English: If his father dies, he shall marry his father's concubine; if his brother dies, he shall marry his sister-in-law.

古文：丧有服，葬已即除。
现代文：办丧事有分等级的丧服，死者落葬后就除服。
English: There are different grades of funeral attire for funerals, and the attire is removed after the deceased has been buried.

古文：民无常税，用不足，乃敛富室商人，足而止。
现代文：国内没有固定的税收。费用不够了，就向富有者及商人索取，够用即止。
English: There is no fixed tax in the country. If the fee is not enough, it will be collected from the rich and businessmen as soon as it is enough.

古文：凡杀人若盗马者死，它罪赎以物。
现代文：刑律凡杀人或盗马的都定死罪，其他犯法则可以缴纳物品赎罪。
English: According to the Criminal Law, anyone who commits homicide or steals a horse is sentenced to death. Other offenders can pay goods to atone for their crimes.

古文：地多寒，宜麦、菽、粟、芜菁，出小马、犛牛、铜、铁、丹砂。
现代文：气候寒冷，适宜种麦、豆、粟、蔓菁，出产小马、睺牛、铜、铁、丹砂。
English: The climate is cold, suitable for growing wheat, beans, millet, and cranberries, and producing colts, yaks, copper, iron, and silica sand.

古文：有青海者，周八九百里，中有山，须冰合，游牝马其上，明年生驹，号龙种。
现代文：境内有个青海，方圆八九百里，中间有座山，待到海水结冰，将母马放牧在这山上，第二年生驹，称为龙种。
English: There is a Qinghai in the territory, with a circumference of eight or nine hundred miles, and a mountain in the middle. Stay until the seawater freezes, graze the mare on this mountain, and the second-year foal is called the dragon breed.

古文：尝得波斯马，牧于海，生骢驹，日步千里，故世称 青海骢 。
现代文：曾得到波斯马，在青海放牧，生骢驹，能日行千里，所以称之为 青海骢 。
English: He once got a Persian horse, grazed in Qinghai, and had a donkey that could travel thousands of miles in a day, so he called it the Qinghai donkey.

古文：西北有流沙数百里，夏有热风，伤行人。
现代文：境西北有流沙几百里，夏天有热风，能灼伤行人。
English: There are hundreds of miles of quicksand in the northwest, and hot winds in the summer that can burn pedestrians.

古文：风将发，老驼引项鸣，埋鼻沙中，人候之，以氈蔽鼻口乃无恙。
现代文：风将起时，骆驼就引颈嘶鸣，将鼻子埋在沙里。人们以此为信号，用毡遮蔽口鼻就能无害。
English: When the wind is about to blow, the camel hisses and buries its nose in the sand. People use this as a signal to cover their nose and mouth with a beak.

古文：隋时，其王慕容伏允号步萨钵，尝寇边。炀帝遣铁勒败之，壁西平；复命观王雄破其众。
现代文：隋朝时，其王慕容伏允，称为步萨钵，曾侵扰我边陲，炀帝派铁勒将他打败，壁守西平；又命观王雄击破其他兵众。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, its king Murong Fuyun, known as Busacao, once invaded our borderlands. Emperor Bao sent Tiele to defeat him and defend Xiping; and ordered Wang Xiong to defeat other soldiers.

古文：伏允以数十骑入泥岭，亡去，仙头王率男女十余万降。
现代文：伏允带领几十人马入泥岭逃走。仙头王率领男女十多万人投降。
English: Fu Yun led dozens of men and horses into the muddy ridge and fled. Sento Wang led more than one hundred thousand men and women to surrender.

古文：置郡县镇戍，以长子顺为质，因王之，统馀众，俄追还。
现代文：乃设置郡县以镇守，扶立伏允当初作为质子入朝的长子顺为王，让他统领余众，但未至国又返。
English: Instead, counties and counties were set up with town guards, and Fuxiong's eldest son Shun, who had originally entered the court as a proton, was made king, allowing him to rule over the rest of the people, but he did not return to the country.

古文：伏允客党项，隋乱，因得复故地。
现代文：伏允客居党项。隋乱，伏允趁势收复故地。
English: The Sui Dynasty was in turmoil, and Fu Yun took advantage of the situation to recover his homeland.

古文：高祖受命，顺自江都还长安，于时李轨据凉州，帝乃约伏允和，令击轨自效，当护送顺。
现代文：高祖即王位，慕容顺自江都回到长安。当时，李轨据凉州。皇帝乃与慕容伏允约和，要他攻击李轨以报效，朝廷则护送慕容顺归国。
English: At that time, Li Le was based in Liangzhou. The emperor made an agreement with Murong Fu, asking him to attack Li Le to repay the favor, while the imperial court escorted Murong Shun back to the country.

古文：伏允喜，引兵与轨战库门，交绥止，即遣使请顺，帝遣之。
现代文：伏允很高兴，率兵与李轨在库门一战，后来两军皆退而停战。
English: Fu Yun was very happy. He led his troops into a battle with Li Rail at Kumen. Later, both armies withdrew and the war ended.

古文：顺至，号为大宁王。
现代文：伏允派使者请求送回慕容顺。皇帝乃送他归。顺回到国内，称为大宁王。
English: Fu Yun sent an envoy to request the return of Murong Shun. The emperor sent him back. Shun returned to the country and was known as King Dangning.

古文：太宗时，伏允遣使者入朝，未还，即寇鄯州。
现代文：太宗时，伏允派使者入朝，使者还未回时，即侵扰鄯州。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, Fu Yun sent an envoy to the North, and when the envoy had not yet returned, he invaded Bozhou.

古文：帝遣使者让，且召伏允；以疾为解，而为子求婚，验帝意。
现代文：皇帝派使者责备，同时召伏允入朝。伏允称病不入朝而为儿子求婚，用以窥测皇帝的心思。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to reprimand him, and at the same time summoned Fuyong to the court. Fuyong said that he was too ill to go to the court, but proposed marriage to his son in order to spy on the emperor's thoughts.

古文：帝召子亲迎，亦称疾。有诏止婚，遣中郎将康处真临谕。
现代文：皇帝召伏允子来朝亲迎，其子也说有病不能前来，于是诏令中止婚约，派中郎将康处真前去晓以祸福。
English: The emperor summoned Fuxun's son to come to meet the emperor, and his son also said that he was ill and could not come, so he issued a decree to terminate the marriage, and sent Zhong Lang to go to the front of the well-being department to learn about the misfortune and good fortune.

古文：又掠岷州，都督李道彦击走之，执名王二，斩级七百。
现代文：后来伏允又掠夺岷州，都督李道彦把他赶跑，俘名王二人，斩杀七百人。
English: Later, Fuxun also plundered Zhangzhou, and the governor Li Daohan chased him away, captured two famous kings, and slaughtered seven hundred people.

古文：连岁遣名王朝。
现代文：于是连年派名王入朝。
English: As a result, successive years sent eminent kings to the imperial court.

古文：俄寇凉州，鄯州刺史李玄运表吐谷浑牧马青海，轻兵掩之，可尽致。
现代文：后来，又侵略凉州，鄯州刺史李玄运上表说吐谷浑现正牧马青海，用轻兵掩袭，可全部抓获。
English: Later, they invaded Liangzhou again, and Li Xuanjun, the chief historian of Zhangzhou, wrote on a tablet that Tuyun was now the shepherd of Qinghai, and covered the attack with light soldiers, but all of them were captured.

古文：乃命左骁卫大将军段志玄、左骁卫将军梁洛仁率契苾、党项兵击之，未至三十里，志玄等不欲战，壁而留。
现代文：乃命左骁卫大将军段志玄、左骁卫将军梁洛仁率契必艹、党项兵去袭击。离青海还有三十里时，志玄等人不想打仗，就留下驻守。
English: He ordered General of the Left Division of the National Guard Duan Shih-hsuan and General of the Left Division of the National Guard Liang Luo-ren to attack with their troops. When they were still thirty miles away from Qinghai, Shih-hsuan and the others did not want to fight, so they stayed behind.

古文：虏知之，驱牧马走。
现代文：吐谷浑人发觉了，驱牧马离去。
English: When the people of Tugu found out, they drove the horses away.

古文：副将李君羡率精骑尾袭悬水上，得牛羊二万还。
现代文：副将李君羡率精骑在悬水袭击牧队的尾部，俘获牛羊两万后回。
English: Vice-commander Li Junen led the cavalry to attack the tail of the herdsmen in the suspended water, capturing 20,000 cattle and sheep.

古文：是时，伏允耄不能事，其相天柱王用事，拘天子行人鸿胪丞赵德楷。帝遣使晓敕，十返，无悛言。
现代文：这时，伏允已年老不能管事，其相天柱王当政，拘留了朝廷外交大臣鸿胪丞赵德楷，皇帝派使者前去宣谕敕书，往返十次，均无悔改的语言。
English: At this time, Fu Yun was too old to be in charge of affairs, and his cousin Tianzhu Wang took over the government, detained the Imperial Foreign Minister Hong Xuan Zhao Dekai, and the emperor sent an envoy to proclaim the imperial edict. They went back and forth ten times, and there was no language of repentance.

古文：贞观九年，诏李靖为西海道行军大总管，侯君集积石道，任城王道宗鄯善道，李道彦赤水道，李大亮且末道，高甑生盐泽道，并为行军总管，率突厥、契苾兵击之。
现代文：贞观九年，诏令李靖为西海道行军大总管，侯君集为积石道行军总管，任城王道宗为鄯善道行军总管，李道彦为赤水道行军总管，李大亮为且末道行军总管，高甑生为盐泽道行军总管率领突厥、契必艹兵去攻吐谷浑。
English: In the ninth year of Zhenguan, the emperor ordered Li Jing to be the general superintendent of the West Road March, Hou Junshi to be the general superintendent of the Jishi Road March, Ren Shingwang Daozong to be the general superintendent of the Hunan Road March, Li Daohan to be the general superintendent of the Equatorial Road March, Li Dayang to be the general superintendent of the Humen Road March, and Gao Xinsheng to be the general superintendent of the Yanze Road March to lead the Turkic and Qibya soldiers to attack Tugu.

古文：党项内属羌及洮州羌，皆杀刺史归伏允。
现代文：党项的内属羌及洮州羌都杀了刺史去依附伏允。
English: Both the internal subordinates of the party and the state killed the assassin to attach themselves to Fuyun.

古文：夏四月，道宗破伏允于库山，俘斩四百。
现代文：夏四月，道宗在库山打败了伏允的兵，杀及俘共四百人。
English: In the summer of April, Daozong defeated the soldiers of Fuyun in Ku Shan, killing and capturing a total of four hundred people.

古文：伏允谋入碛疲唐兵，烧野草，故靖马多饥。
现代文：伏允打算入大碛将唐兵拖垮，烧掉野草，所以李靖的马大多饥饿。
English: Fuxun planned to enter Daxuan to drag down the Tang soldiers and burn the weeds, so most of Li Jing's horses were starving.

古文：道宗曰： 柏海近河源，古未有至者。
现代文：道宗说 ：柏海临近黄河源头。从古没有人到过，伏允西去，不知他到了何处。
English: Daozong said, "Baihai is near the source of the Yellow River. No one has been there since ancient times. He went to the west, and I don't know where he went.

古文：伏允西走，未知其在，方马癯粮乏，难远入，不如按军鄯州，须马壮更图之。 君集曰： 不然。向者段志玄至鄯州，吐谷浑兵辄傅城，彼国方完，逆众用命也。
现代文：如今马瘦又缺粮，难以远入，不如按军鄯州，待马养壮了再做打算。 侯君集说： 不，以前段志玄到鄯州，吐谷浑兵就到了城下，那时他们国家正充实，民众肯为之出力。
English: Now the horses are thin and short of grain, and it is difficult to go far, so it is better to go to Bozhou according to the army, and wait for the horses to grow strong before making plans. Hou Junji said: No, before Duan Zhixuan went to Bozhou, the soldiers from Tuyun came to the city, at that time their country was full, and the people were willing to contribute to it.

古文：今虏大败，斥候无在，君臣相失，我乘其困，可以得志。
现代文：现在他们已大败，没有侦察兵，君臣不能相顾。我乘其困窘，可以得手。
English: Now they have been defeated, there are no scouts, and princes and ministers can't look out for each other. I can take advantage of their embarrassment and get the upper hand.

古文：柏海虽远，可鼓而至也。 
现代文：柏海虽远，激励士气也易到达。 
English: Although the sea is far away, it is easy to reach and inspire morale.

古文：靖曰： 善。 
现代文：李靖说 ：好。 
English: Li Jing said: Good.

古文：分二军：靖与大亮、薛万均以一军趣北，出其右；君集、道宗以一军趣南，出其左。
现代文：军分为二，李靖与大亮、薛万均带一军往北，袭击其右边；侯君集、道宗带一军往南，袭击其左边。
English: The army was divided into two. Li Jing, Dayang Liang and Xue Wanjun led an army to the north and attacked its right side; Hou Junji and Daozong led an army to the south and attacked its left side.

古文：靖将萨孤吴仁以轻骑战曼都山，斩名王，获五百级。
现代文：李靖的将领萨孤吴仁率轻骑与吐谷浑军战于曼都山，斩杀名王，俘获五百人。
English: Li Jing's general, Sako Wu Ren, led a light cavalry force against the army of Tuku Hun in the Battle of Mandu Mountain, killing the famous king and capturing five hundred people.

古文：诸将战牛心堆、赤水源，获虏将南昌王慕容孝俊，收杂畜数万。
现代文：其他各将战于牛心堆、赤水源，俘获其将南昌王慕容孝鯭，收缴各种牲畜好几万。
English: Others will fight in Niu Xin He, Cheshiyuan, and capture the king of Nanchang, Murong Xiaoyan, and seize tens of thousands of livestock.

古文：君集、道宗登汉哭山，战乌海，获名王梁屈葱。
现代文：君集、道宗登汉哭山，战乌海，俘获名王梁屈葱。
English: Kings Ji and Daozong ascended the Han's Weeping Mountain, fought against Wu Hai, and captured the famous king, Liang Quqing.

古文：靖破天柱部落于赤海，收杂畜二十万。
现代文：李靖在赤海击破天柱部落，收缴各种牲畜二十万。
English: Li Jing defeated the Tianzhu tribe in the Red Sea and confiscated 200,000 livestock of all kinds.

古文：大亮俘名王二十，杂畜五万，次且末之西。
现代文：李大亮俘获名王二十人，牲畜五万，驻扎且末之西。
English: Li Dayang captured twenty famous people and fifty thousand livestock, and stationed them in the west.

古文：伏允走图伦碛，将托于阗，万均督锐骑追亡数百里，又破之。
现代文：伏允逃至图伦碛，准备去于阗，薛万钧率精锐骑兵追奔几百里，又打败了他。
English: Fuxun fled to Tulunye and prepared to go to Yulunye. Xue Wanjun and his elite cavalry chased him for hundreds of miles and defeated him again.

古文：士乏水，刺马饮血。君集、道宗行空荒二千里，盛夏降霜，乏水草，士糜冰，马秣雪。
现代文：其时士兵缺水，刺马饮血解渴，君集、道宗行经无人空荒二千里，盛夏降霜，缺乏水草，士兵嚼冰，马喂雪。
English: At that time, the soldiers were short of water, the horses drank blood to quench their thirst, the monarchs and emperors traveled two thousand miles without anyone, the midsummer frost fell, there was a lack of aquatic plants, the soldiers chewed ice, and the horses fed snow.

古文：阅月，次星宿川，达柏海上，望积石山，览观河源。
现代文：一个月后，到了星宿川，终于到了柏海。北望积石山，观看黄河源头。
English: A month later, I arrived at the Hoshisukugawa River, and finally at the Kashiwa Sea. I looked north at the craggy mountains and watched the headwaters of the Yellow River.

古文：执失思力驰破虏车重。
现代文：执失思力驰兵击破吐谷浑的车队。
English: Out of their wits, the galloping soldiers defeated the convoy led by Tu Guhun.

古文：两军会于大非川、破逻真谷。
现代文：两军在大非川、破逻真谷相会。
English: The two armies met at the Dafu River and the Baloo Valley.

古文：顺之质隋，为金紫光禄大夫、伏允立其弟为太子。
现代文：当初慕容顺在隋为质子，任金紫光禄大夫，伏允立其弟为太子，顺归国后常郁郁不乐。
English: At first, Murong Shun was a proton in the Sui Dynasty, appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and Fu Yun appointed his brother as the prince. After Shun returned to China, he was often depressed and unhappy.

古文：顺归，常鞅鞅，自以失位，欲以功自结天子，乃斩天柱王，举国降。
现代文：自认为既已失去王位，想立功来结好天子，于是斩杀天柱王，举国归降。
English: He thought that he had already lost the throne and wanted to do his best to marry the son of heaven, so he killed the king of Tianzhu and the whole country surrendered.

古文：伏允惧，引千余骑遁碛中，众稍亡，从者才百骑，穷无聊，即自经死。
现代文：伏允害怕了，引一千多骑兵逃入大碛中，人渐渐走散，随从者最后只有百把人，窘迫无以解脱，乃自缢而死。
English: Fuxiong got scared and led more than a thousand cavalrymen to escape into the big raft. People gradually dispersed, and there were only a hundred followers at the end. There was no way out of the predicament, so he hanged himself and died.

古文：国人立顺为君，称臣内附，诏封四平郡王，号越胡吕乌甘豆可汗。
现代文：国人立顺为君，内附称臣。诏封为西平郡王，称蘾胡吕乌甘豆可汗。
English: He was enthroned as the king of Xiping County, and was also known as the Khan of Yinghulu and Wuzhu.

古文：帝恐未能定其国，遣李大亮率精兵镇援。
现代文：皇帝担心他不能抚定国家，派李大亮率精兵为他镇守援助。
English: The emperor was worried that he would not be able to pacify the country and sent Li Dayang and his elite soldiers to help him.

古文：顺久质华，国人不附，卒为下所杀，立其子燕王诺曷钵。
现代文：慕容顺长久质于中华，国人不服，终于被手下所杀，拥立其子燕王诺曷钵。
English: Murong Shun had long been a prominent figure in China, and the Chinese people were not satisfied. Finally, he was killed by his subordinates, and his son, Yan Wang Noruo, took his place.

古文：诺曷钵幼，大臣争权。
现代文：诺曷钵年幼，大臣争权。
English: Nobuko is young, and the ministers are fighting for power.

古文：帝诏侯君集就经纪之，始请颁历及子弟入侍。
现代文：皇帝诏令侯君集去协助治国，开始请颁历法并要求子弟入侍。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Hou Junji to assist in governing the country, began to ask for a calendar and asked his son to become an attendant.

古文：诏封诺曷钵河源郡王，号为地也拔勒豆可汗，遣淮阳郡王道明持节册命，赐鼓纛。
现代文：诏封诺曷钵为河源郡王，称乌地也拔勒豆可汗。派淮阳郡王道明持节去册封，赐给鼓纛。
English: The king of Heyuan County was given the title of King of Heyuan County, and the King of Wu County was given the title of King of Wu County. The king of Huaiyang County was given the title of King of Douming County and the title of King of Drum Tower.

古文：诺曷钵身入谢，遂请婚，献马牛羊万。
现代文：诺曷钵亲自入朝致谢，同时求婚，献马牛羊一万头。
English: Norodom personally went to the imperial court to express his thanks, and at the same time proposed marriage, offering 10,000 horses, cattle and sheep.

古文：比年入朝，乃以宗室女为弘化公主妻之，诏道明及右武卫将军慕容宝持节送公主。
现代文：第二年入朝，就将宗室女封作弘化公主与之婚配。诏令道明及右武卫将军慕容宝持符节护送公主。
English: In the second year of his accession to the imperial throne, he married the heiress of the Imperial House of Japan, Princess Konoha. He ordered Daoming and General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard Murong Bao to escort the princess on the day of the festival.

古文：其相宣王跋扈，谋作乱，欲袭公主，劫诺曷钵奔吐蕃。
现代文：吐谷浑的相宣王跋扈，阴谋作乱，想袭击公主，劫持诺曷钵奔吐蕃。
English: Tsuguhun's brother-in-law, Nobukatsu, plots to attack the princess and kidnap Nobukatsu.

古文：诺曷钵知之，引轻骑走鄯城，威信王以兵迎之。果毅都尉席君买率兵与威信王共讨，斩其兄弟三人，国大扰。
现代文：诺曷钵得报，带领轻骑去鄯城，威信王以兵迎击，果毅都尉席君买率兵与威信王共同攻击，斩其兄弟三人。国内骚乱。
English: Nogong received the report, led the light cavalry to Lucheng, Wixin Wang led the troops to meet the attack, and Guo Yi, captain Xi Junbei, led the troops to attack together with Wixin Wang, and beheaded his three brothers. Domestic unrest.

古文：帝又诏民部尚书唐俭、中书舍人马周持节抚慰。
现代文：皇帝又诏令民部尚书唐俭、中书舍人马周持节去抚慰。
English: The emperor also decreed that the Ministry of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People's Commissariat of the People'

古文：高宗立，以主故，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：高宗立，由于公主的缘故，任诺曷钵为驸马都尉。
English: Gao Zongli, for the sake of the princess, appointed Norio as the captain of the cavalry.

古文：又献名马，帝问马种性，使者曰： 国之最良者。 
现代文：诺曷钵又派人献名马。皇帝问马的种性，使者说： 是国内最好的。 
English: The emperor asked the horse's pedigree, and the messenger said, "It is the best in the country."

古文：帝曰： 良马人所爱。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：好马是人所爱的。 
English: The emperor said, "A good horse is a horse that people love."

古文：诏还其马。
现代文：诏令还给他马。
English: The imperial edict gave him back his horse.

古文：公主表请入朝，遣左骁卫将军鲜于匡济迎之。
现代文：公主上表请求入朝，派左骁卫将军鲜于匡济去迎接。
English: The princess made a request to enter the imperial court and sent General Zuo Jianwei to meet her in Kuangji.

古文：十一月，及诺曷钵至京师，帝又以宗室女金城县主妻其长子苏度摸末，拜左领军卫大将军。
现代文：十一月，公主和诺曷钵到达京师，皇帝又将宗室女金城县主嫁给其长子苏度模末，任他为左领军卫大将军。
English: In November, the princess and Nouwen arrived in Beijing. The emperor also married the heiress of Jincheng County to his eldest son, Sudo Momma, and appointed him as the left leader of the Army of Wei.

古文：久之，摸末死，主与次子右武卫大将军梁汉王闼卢摸末来请婚，帝以宗室女金明县主妻之。
现代文：后来，模末死，弘化公主与次子右武卫大将军梁汉王闼卢模末来求婚，皇帝将宗室女金明县主许配给他。
English: Later, after Maw Maw's death, Princess Hongwha and his second son, General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards Liang Hanwang and Lu Maw Maw came to propose marriage, and the emperor gave him his daughter-in-law, the ruler of Jinming County.

古文：既而与吐蕃相攻，上书相曲直，并来请师，天子两不许。
现代文：后来，吐谷浑与吐蕃相攻，都上书来指责对方，并来请求援兵。皇帝两方都不答应。
English: Later, when Tugu Hun and Tu Han attacked each other, they both wrote letters to blame the other side, and came to request reinforcements. The emperor did not agree to either side.

古文：吐谷浑大臣素和贵奔吐蕃，言其情，吐蕃出兵捣虚，破其众黄河上。
现代文：吐谷浑大臣素和贵投奔吐蕃，说了吐谷浑的情况。吐蕃出兵直攻其虚弱处，在黄河上大破其军。
English: The minister of Tugu Hun said the situation of Tugu Hun. Tugu Hun sent troops to directly attack its weak point and defeated its army on the Yellow River.

古文：诺曷钵不支，与公主引数千帐走凉州。
现代文：诺曷钵不敌，与公主带领几千帐避走凉州。
English: Nozaki was defeated, and he and the princess led several thousand people to escape from Liangzhou.

古文：帝遣左武卫大将军苏定方为安集大使，平两国怨。
现代文：皇帝派左武卫大将军苏定方为安集大使，调停两国的怨怒。
English: The emperor sent General Zuo Wei and General Su Dingfang as ambassadors to Anji to mediate the anger between the two countries.

古文：吐蕃遂有其地。
现代文：吐蕃于是占有其地。
English: As a result, Tu Bao took possession of the land.

古文：诺曷钵请内徙。
现代文：诺曷钵请求内迁。
English: Novo Nordisk requests to move in.

古文：乾封初，更封青海国王。
现代文：乾封初年，改封青海国王。
English: In the first year of the dry seal, he was renamed the King of Qinghai.

古文：帝欲徙其部于凉州之南山，群臣议不同，帝难之。
现代文：皇帝想把他们迁到凉州的南山，群臣意见不一。皇帝觉得难办。
English: The emperor wanted to move them to Nanshan in Liangzhou, but the ministers disagreed. The emperor found it difficult to do.

古文：咸亨元年，乃以右威卫大将军薛仁贵为逻娑道行军大总管，左卫员外大将军阿史那道真、左卫将军郭待封副之，总兵五万讨吐蕃，且纳诺曷钵于故廷。
现代文：咸亨元年，乃以右威卫大将军薛仁贵为逻娑道行军大总管，左卫员外大将军阿史那道真、左卫将军郭待封为行军副总管，统兵五万讨伐吐蕃，同时让诺曷钵居于故廷。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianheng, General Xue Rengui of the Right Division of the Wei Dynasty was appointed as the grand marshal of the march of the Liushan Road, General Ashina Daozhen of the Left Division of the Wei Dynasty and General Guo Jifeng of the Left Division of the Wei Dynasty were appointed as the deputy chief marshals of the march, and 50,000 soldiers were sent to fight against the Tibetans. At the same time, Emperor Nuo was allowed to live in the Imperial Palace.

古文：王师败于大非川，举吐谷浑地皆陷，诺曷钵与亲近数千帐才免。
现代文：王师在大非山败，吐谷浑的全部土地皆沦陷，诺曷钵与亲近的几千帐仅得免难。
English: Wang Shi was defeated in the mountains of Dafu, all the lands of Tuyugun fell, and only a few thousand accounts of Norodom and his relatives were spared.

古文：三年，乃徙浩亹水南。
现代文：咸亨三年，才将他们迁到浩水之南。
English: It took Hamhung three years to move them to the south of the vast water.

古文：诺曷钵以吐蕃盛，势不抗，而鄯州地狭，又徙灵州，帝为置安乐州，即拜刺史，欲其安且乐云。
现代文：诺曷钵因吐蕃强盛，自己不是他的对手，而鄯州又太窄小，又迁往灵州。皇帝为他设置安乐州，任他为刺史，希望他能又安定又快乐。
English: Because of the strength of Tubo, Norodom was not a match for him, and Bozhou was too small, so he moved to Lingzhou. The emperor set up Anlezhou for him and allowed him to be a historian, hoping that he would be stable and happy.

古文：诺曷钵死，子忠立。
现代文：诺曷钵死，其子忠继立。
English: Nozaki died and was succeeded by his son, Tadazane.

古文：忠死，子宣超立，圣历三年，拜左豹韬员外大将军，袭故可汗号，馀部诣凉、甘、肃、瓜、沙等州降。宰相张锡与右武卫大将军唐休璟议徙其人于秦、陇、丰、灵间，令不得畔去。
现代文：忠死，子宣超继立，圣历三年被任为左豹韬员外大将军，承袭原可汗称号。余部到凉州、甘州、肃州、瓜州、沙州等处归降，宰相张锡与右武卫大将军唐休瞡商议将他们迁往秦、陇、丰、灵等州之间，使他们不能背叛而去。
English: After the death of Zhong, his son, Xuan Chao, succeeded him, and in the third year of the lunar calendar, he was appointed as the general of the Left Leopard Corps, inheriting the original title of Khan. The rest returned to Liangzhou, Gansu, Suizhou, Guazhou, Shazhou and other places, and the prime minister, Zhang Xi, and the right guard general, Tang Xiuqi, discussed moving them to Qin, Kunlun, Feng, Ling and other states so that they could not betray them.

古文：凉州都督郭元振以为： 吐谷浑近秦、陇，则与监牧杂处；置丰、灵，又迩默啜；假在诸华，亦不遽移其性也。
现代文：凉州都督郭元振认为 ：吐谷浑靠近秦陇，则与监牧混处，如安置在丰、灵，又靠近默啜；即使处在华人中，也不能迅速改变其本性。
English: Guo Yuanzhen, the governor of Liangzhou, believes that: if the crane is close to the Qin Dynasty, it will be mixed with the overseer, if it is placed in Feng and Ling, it will be close to the silence; even if it is among the Chinese, it cannot quickly change its nature.

古文：前日王孝杰自河源军徙耽尔乙句贵置灵州，既其叛，乃入牧坊掠群马，瘢夷州县，是则迁中土无益之成验。
现代文：以前王孝杰自河源军将耽尔乙句贵迁置灵州。及至他反叛，就入牧坊掠夺群马，践踏州县。这就是把他们迁置中土没有好处的例证。
English: In the past, Wang Xiaojie from the Heyuan Army relocated Tang Er Yiguo to Lingzhou. When he rebelled, he went into the pasture to plunder the horses and trample the county. This is an example of the lack of benefit of relocating them to the Middle Earth.

古文：往素和贵叛去，于我无损，但失吐谷浑数十部，岂与句贵比邪？
现代文：往日素和贵背叛而去，于我无损，但失去吐谷浑几十部，岂能与句贵相比呢？
English: In the past, I did not lose anything by betraying Su and Gui, but losing dozens of Tu Guhun, can it be compared to Gui?

古文：今降虏非强服，皆突矢刃，弃吐蕃而来，宜当循其情，为之制也。
现代文：如今降我的虏人，不是因我兵力强大而臣服，都是冒矢刃弃吐蕃而来的，应该循其情而控制他们。
English: The Kushites who surrender to me now do not do so because I have a strong army, but because they have dared to abandon Tibet. They should be controlled according to their own circumstances.

古文：当甘、肃、瓜、沙降者，即其所置之。
现代文：在甘、肃、瓜、沙等州降的，就在那里安置，易于安心。
English: Those who are sent to Gansu, Suzhou, Guagua and Sha provinces will be resettled there, which is easy and safe.

古文：因所投而居，情易安，磔数州则势自分。顺其情，分其势，不扰于人，可谓善夺戎心者也。
现代文：分散在几个州，其势力也自然分散。顺其情，分其势，不惊扰人，可称作善于挫减争战之心的法子。
English: Dispersed in several states, its forces are naturally dispersed. Go with the flow, divide its momentum, do not alarm people, can be called a good way to defeat the spirit of war.

古文：岁遣镇遏使者与宣超兄弟抚护之，无令相侵夺，生业固矣。
现代文：每年派镇遏使者与宣超兄弟去抚慰他们，使他们不相互侵夺，其生活生产也就安定了。
English: Every year, the town sends emissaries and brothers to comfort them, so that they do not encroach on each other, and their life and production are stable.

古文：有如叛去，无损中国。 
现代文：即使有背叛而去的，也无损于中国。 
English: Even if there is a betrayal, it will not harm China.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：宣超死，子曦皓立。
现代文：后宣超死，子曦皓继立。
English: After the death of Xuan Zhao, his son, Xi Xi, succeeded him.

古文：曦皓死，子兆立。
现代文：曦皓死，子兆继立。
English: Xi Xi dies, Zi Zhao succeeds.

古文：吐蕃复取安乐州，而残部徙朔方、河东，语谬为 退浑 。
现代文：吐蕃又来攻取安乐州，吐谷浑残部迁往朔方、河东，语讹称他们为 退浑 。
English: Tubo invaded Anle Prefecture again, and the remnants of Tubo moved to Shuofang and Hedong, and they were called the "returned" Tubo.

古文：贞元十四年，以朔方节度副使、左金吾卫大将军慕容复为长乐都督、青海国王，袭可汗号。
现代文：贞元十四年，由朔方节度副使、左金吾卫大将军慕容复任长乐都督、青海国王，承袭可汗称号。
English: In the 14th year of the Zhengyuan era, Murong was reinstated as the governor of Changle and the king of Qinghai, inheriting the title of khan.

古文：复死，停袭。
现代文：慕容复死，封爵中止。
English: Murong Fu died and his knighthood was revoked.

古文：龟兹，一曰丘兹，一曰屈兹，东距京师七千里而赢，自焉耆西南步二百里，度小山，经大河二，又步七百里乃至。
现代文：吐谷浑自晋永嘉年间建国，至龙朔三年吐蕃吞取其地，共三百五十年。至此封爵也就断嗣了。龟兹，又称丘兹，也称屈兹，在京师之西七千多里。从焉耆向西南走二百里，翻过一座小山，又渡过两条大河，再行七百里才到。
English: It took a total of 350 years from the founding of the country in the Jin Yongjia period to the annexation of the land by Tu Wei in the third year of the Long Shuo period. At this time, the knighthood was also cut off. Kuez, also known as Chuz, also known as Quuz, is more than 7,000 miles west of Beijing. From Yancheng to the southwest, walk 200 miles, turn over a hill, and cross two large rivers, and then travel another 700 miles to arrive.

古文：横千里，纵六百里。
现代文：幅员东西一千里，南北六百里。
English: It covers an area of 1,000 miles from east to west and 600 miles from north to south.

古文：土宜麻、麦、粳稻、蒲陶，出黄金。
现代文：土壤适宜种麻、麦、粳稻、葡萄，出产黄金。
English: The soil is suitable for growing hemp, wheat, rice, and grapes, and produces gold.

古文：俗善歌乐，旁行书，贵浮图法。
现代文：人民善歌舞，有横写的文字，崇尚佛法。
English: The people are good at singing and dancing, have a horizontal written script, and advocate Buddhism.

古文：产子以木压首。
现代文：生了孩子用木压头。
English: She gave birth to a child with a wooden head.

古文：俗断发齐顶，惟君不翦发。
现代文：人民都剃发，只有君王不剪发。
English: The people all shave, only the king does not cut his hair.

古文：姓白氏。居伊逻庐城，北倚河羯田山，亦曰白山，常有火。
现代文：姓白，住在伊逻卢城，北靠阿羯田山，也叫白山，山上常有火。
English: Surnamed Bai, he lives in the city of Ilulu, north of Mount Abuta, also known as Mount Bai, where there are often fires.

古文：王以锦冒顶，锦袍、宝带。
现代文：王以锦盖头，穿锦袍，系宝带。
English: The king is crowned with a brocade cap, wears a brocade robe, and wears a treasure belt.

古文：岁朔，斗羊马橐它七日，观胜负以卜岁盈耗云。
现代文：每年初，斗羊、马、骆驼七天，观其胜负占卜年岁的丰歉。
English: At the beginning of each year, there are seven days of sheep, horse, and camel fighting, and people watch to see who wins and who loses.

古文：葱岭以东俗喜淫，龟兹、于阗置女肆，征其钱。
现代文：葱岭以东风俗喜淫，龟兹、于阗都开设女店肆，并征收其钱。
English: In the eastern region of Yiling, the custom is to masturbate. In Guizi and Yuzhou, women's stores are opened and their money is collected.

古文：高祖受禅，王苏伐勃駃遣使入朝。
现代文：高祖受禅即帝位，龟兹王苏伐勃马夫派使者入朝。
English: Gaozu's acceptance of Zen was tantamount to his accession to the imperial throne, and Emperor Suwaibomafu sent an envoy to the imperial court.

古文：会死，子苏伐叠立，号时健莫贺俟利发。
现代文：此时王死，其子苏伐叠继立，号称时健莫贺俟利发。
English: At this time, Wang died, and his son Su Vajia succeeded him, and was known as Shijian Mogao Lifa.

古文：贞观四年献马，太宗赐玺书，抚慰加等。
现代文：贞观四年入朝献马，太宗赐给玺书，抚慰有加。
English: Zhenguan entered the imperial court four years ago to offer a horse, and Emperor Taizong gave her a copy of the Book of Changes, which greatly comforted her.

古文：后臣西突厥。
现代文：后来龟兹臣服西突厥。
English: Later, the Khmer Rouge subjugated West Turkistan.

古文：郭孝恪伐焉耆，乃遣兵与焉耆影援，自是不朝贡。
现代文：郭孝恪伐焉耆，龟兹派兵援焉耆，从此时起不再朝贡。
English: Guo Xiao was defeated, and Guo Zi sent troops to aid Guo. From this time on, there would be no more tributes.

古文：苏伐叠死，弟诃黎布失毕立。
现代文：苏伐叠死，弟诃黎布失毕继立。
English: Su Vajia died, and his younger brother, Li Bu, succeeded him.

古文：二十一年，两遣使朝贡，然帝怒其佐焉耆叛，议讨之。
现代文：贞观二十一年，两次派使者来朝贡，但皇帝恨他帮助焉耆叛乱，商议要讨伐他。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan, he twice sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court, but the emperor hated him for helping the Yanqi rebellion and discussed how to fight him.

古文：是夜月食昴，诏曰： 月阴精，用刑兆也；星胡分，数且终。 
现代文：这天晚上，月食昴星，皇帝下诏说： 月是阴之精，是用刑之兆；昴星，是胡地的对应，气数将尽。 
English: On the evening of this day, when the lunar eclipse began, the emperor issued an edict saying: "The moon is the spirit of the shade, and is a sign of punishment; the moon is the corresponding star of the hut, and the number of qi will be exhausted.

古文：乃以阿史那社尔为昆丘道行军大总管，契苾何力副之，率安西都护郭孝恪、司农卿杨弘礼、左武卫将军李海岸等发铁勒十三部兵十万讨之。
现代文：于是任阿史那社尔为昆丘道行军大总管，契絆何力为副总管，率领安西都护郭孝恪、司农卿杨弘礼、左武卫将军李海岸等人征发铁勒十三部的兵十万人马前去讨伐。
English: As a result, Ashina Sal was appointed as the general manager of the march of Kunqiu Road, and Keikizai He Li was the deputy general manager. They led the Anxi Capital Guard Guo Xiaoqi, the Secretary of Agriculture Yang Hongli, the General of the Left Division of Wuwei Li Kaigan and others to recruit and dispatch 100,000 soldiers from the thirteen divisions of Tiele to go to the crusade.

古文：社尔分五军掠其北，执焉耆王阿那支。龟兹大恐，酋长皆弃城走。
现代文：阿史那社尔分五军攻打龟兹之北，擒获焉耆王阿那支，龟兹大惊，酋长们都弃城逃走。
English: Ashinasar divided into five armies to attack the north of Kuez and captured King Anan's army. Kuez was shocked, and the chieftains abandoned the city and fled.

古文：社尔次碛石，去王城三百里。
现代文：阿史那社尔到达碛石，距王城三百里。
English: Ashnashal arrived at Flint, three hundred miles from the royal city.

古文：先遣伊州刺史韩威以千骑居前，右骁卫将军曹继叔次之。
现代文：先派伊州刺史韩威带一千骑兵为前锋，右骁卫将军曹继叔随后。
English: He first sent the Izhou general Han Wei with a thousand cavalry as the vanguard, followed by the right guard general Cao Jizhong.

古文：至多褐，与王遇，其将羯猎颠兵五万合战。
现代文：到达多褐，与龟兹王相遇，其将羯猎颠带兵五万与王合力而战。
English: When he arrived at Dohuzi, he met the King of Kuez, who brought fifty thousand soldiers to join forces with the king.

古文：威伪北，王见威兵少，麾而进，威退与继叔合，还战，大破之，追奔八十里。
现代文：韩威假装败退，王见威兵少，挥兵追赶。韩威退而与曹继叔会合，回身再战，大破龟兹王，一直追赶了八十里。
English: Han Wei pretended to retreat, Wang saw that Wang Wei was short of soldiers and waved his soldiers to chase him. Han Wei retreated and met with Cao Jishun, turned back and fought again, defeated Cao Zi Wang, and chased him for eighty miles.

古文：王婴城，社尔将围之，王引突骑西走，城遂拔，孝恪居守。
现代文：王闭城自守，阿史那社尔准备围城，龟兹王率领突击骑兵西逃，城被攻破，郭孝恪居守。
English: Wang closed the city to defend himself, Ashina Sal prepared to besiege the city, Guizi Wang led the assault cavalry to flee west, the city was breached, and Guo Xiao stayed to defend.

古文：沙州刺史苏海政、行军长史薛万备以精骑穷蹑六百里。
现代文：沙州刺史苏海政、行军长史薛万备带精兵穷追六百里，龟兹王计穷，退保拨换城。
English: The marshal of Shazhou, Su Haizheng, and the commander of the march, Shi Xue Wanbei, led the elite soldiers in a six-hundred-mile chase. The king of tortoises was so poor that he had to bail out and change cities.

古文：王计穷，保拨换城，社尔围之。阅月，执王及羯猎颠。
现代文：阿史那社尔将兵围城。相持一个月，擒王及羯猎颠。
English: Ashnasal besieged the city. They held out for a month, and the king and the huntsman were victorious.

古文：其相那利夜逸，以西突厥并国人万馀来战，孝恪及子死之。
现代文：其相那利在夜色中逃走，带领了西突厥的人马合同国内的兵众共一万多人来战，郭孝恪及其子战死。
English: Guo Xianari fled in the night, leading more than ten thousand soldiers from West Turkistan to fight. Guo Xiaoju and his son were killed in the battle.

古文：王师扰，仓部郎中崔义起募兵战城中，继叔、威助击之，斩首三千级。
现代文：王师乱，仓部郎中崔义起募兵在城中与那利兵战，曹继叔、韩威配合攻击，斩杀三千人。
English: Wang Shiran, Cangbo's son-in-law, Cui Yi, raised an army to fight the Nali army in the city. Cao Jishu and Han Wei cooperated in the attack and killed 3,000 people.

古文：那利败，裒亡散复振，还袭王师，继叔乘之，斩八千级。
现代文：那利败，又收集散乱兵众卷土重来，曹继叔迎战，斩杀八千人。
English: After that defeat, he gathered the scattered soldiers and came back. Cao Jishun went to war and killed eight thousand people.

古文：那利走，或执以诣军。
现代文：那利逃走，后被人抓住送到军中来。
English: He ran away and was later caught and sent to the army.

古文：社尔凡破五大城，男女数万，遣使者谕降小城七百余，西域震惧，西突厥、安两国归军饷焉。社尔立王弟叶护王其国，勒石纪功。
现代文：阿史那社尔共攻破五大城，俘获男女好几万，派使者劝降的小城有七百多个。西域震惊，西突厥、安两国进献军饷，社尔扶立龟兹王的弟弟叶护为国王，并刻石纪功。
English: In total, Ashina-Sar breached five major cities, captured tens of thousands of men and women, and sent emissaries to persuade more than seven hundred small cities to surrender. The western region was shocked, the West Turkic and Andean countries advanced military banners, and Sar erected Ye Guo, the younger brother of the Turtle King, as king, and carved stone records.

古文：书闻，帝喜，见群臣从容曰： 夫乐有几，朕尝言之：土城竹马，童儿乐也；饬金翠罗纨，妇人乐也；贸迁有无，商贾乐也；高官厚秩，士大夫乐也；战无前敌，将帅乐也；四海宁一，帝王乐也。
现代文：报捷奏书上达，皇帝很高兴，朝见群臣时从容地说 ：乐，有几种几等，我曾经说过：筑土城、骑竹马，是儿童的乐趣；佩金银、穿绫罗，是妇人的乐趣；卖得利、屯及时，是商人的乐趣；做高官、享厚禄，是士大夫的乐趣；树军威、战无敌，是将帅的乐趣；四海宁、人民安，是帝王的乐趣。
English: The Emperor was very pleased when the report of the victory was delivered. When he saw the courtiers at the court, he calmly said, "There are several kinds of music. I once said: building a mud castle and riding a bamboo horse are children's pleasures; pawning gold and silver and wearing a sash are women's pleasures; selling at a profit and settling in a timely manner are merchant's pleasures; being a high-ranking official and enjoying a good income are the pleasures of a scholar and a scholar; building military prestige and being invincible in battle are the pleasures of a general; Shihaining and people's peace are the pleasures of an emperor

古文：朕今乐矣！ 
现代文：我现在十分快活。 
English: I'm very happy right now.

古文：遂遍觞之。
现代文：于是普遍斟酒。
English: As a result, there was a general pouring of wine.

古文：初，孝恪之击焉耆也，龟兹有浮屠善数，叹曰： 唐家终有西域，不数年吾国亦亡。 
现代文：当初，郭孝恪去讨伐焉耆，龟兹有个佛僧能知气数，曾叹息说： 唐家终究要统有西域，不过几年，我们国家也要亡了。 
English: At the beginning, Guo Xiaoqi went to fight against Yan Xuan, and there was a Buddhist monk who knew the number of qi, and once sighed and said: After all, the Tang family will have the western region, but in a few years, our country will also die.

古文：社尔执诃黎布失毕、那利、羯猎颠献太庙，帝受俘紫微殿。
现代文：阿史那社尔捉住龟兹王诃黎布失毕及那利、羯猎颠敬献太庙，皇帝在紫徽殿接受俘虏。
English: Ashnasahr captured the turtle king, Lib lost and Nali, hunted and sacrificed to the imperial temple, the emperor received captives in the Purple Hall.

古文：帝责谓，君臣皆顿首伏。
现代文：皇帝责备他们的罪过，龟兹君臣都匐伏谢罪。
English: The emperor reproached them for their sins, and all the princes and ministers prostrated themselves in thanksgiving.

古文：诏赦罪，改馆鸿胪寺，拜布失毕左武卫中朗将。
现代文：诏令赦罪，让他们改住在鸿胪寺，委任布失毕为左武卫中郎将。
English: He pardoned them by imperial edict, allowed them to live in Honjo-ji Temple, and appointed Bu Shubi as the middle captain of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards.

古文：始徙安西都护于其都，统于阗、碎叶、疏勒，号 四镇。 
现代文：将安西都护迁到原龟兹都城，统领于阗、碎叶、疏勒，号称 四镇 。
English: He moved the capital of Anxi Province to the capital city of Zizhi Province, and ruled the provinces of Yunnan, Shandong, and Shandong, known as the Four Towns.

古文：高宗复封诃黎布失毕为龟兹王，与那利、羯猎颠还国。
现代文：高宗又封诃黎布失毕为龟兹王，与那利、羯猎颠一同回国。
English: Gaozong also crowned Li Bu as the King of Kuez, and he returned to China together with Nali and Gonghu.

古文：那利烝其妻阿史那，王不能禁，左右请杀之，由是更猜忌。
现代文：后来龟兹王来朝时，那利与其妻阿史那有奸情，王制止不了。左右要求杀那利。由此，猜忌加深。
English: Later, when King Kamezi came to the imperial court, Nari had an affair with his wife, Ashina, and the king couldn't stop it. People on both sides demanded that Nari be killed. As a result, suspicion deepened.

古文：使者言状，帝并召至京师，囚那利，护遣王还。
现代文：使者来朝诉及情况，皇帝同时召两人到京师，囚禁了那利，派人护送龟兹王回国。
English: An envoy came to complain to the emperor about the situation, and the emperor summoned the two men to Beijing at the same time, imprisoned Nali, and sent someone to escort King Kamezi back to China.

古文：羯猎颠拒不内，遣使降贺鲁，王不敢进，悒悒死。
现代文：羯猎颠拒绝不让布失毕归，还派使者去突厥向贺鲁降服。布失毕不敢入国，抑郁而死。
English: Qianhuangbi refused to allow Bu Zuobi to return, and sent an envoy to Turkey to surrender to Horus. Bu Zuobi did not dare to enter the country, and died of depression.

古文：诏左屯卫大将军杨胄发兵禽羯猎颠，穷诛部党，以其地为龟兹都督府，更立子素稽为王，授右骁卫大将军，为都督。
现代文：诏令左屯卫大将军杨胄发兵擒拿羯猎颠，刨根诛杀其党羽，以其地列为龟兹都督府，扶立布失毕之子素稽为王，委任为右骁卫大将军，就任都督职。
English: The edict ordered the General of the Left Tunbei, Yang Xuan, to send soldiers to seize and hunt down and exterminate his followers, and his territory was listed as the capital, and his son, Su Qi, was appointed as the General of the Right Tunbei, and assumed the post of governor.

古文：是岁，徙安西都护府于其国，以故安西为西州都督府，即拜左骁卫大将军兼安西都护曲智湛为都督。
现代文：这一年，将安西都护府迁到龟兹国内，将原安西做西州都督府，即任左骁卫大将军兼安西都护麴智湛为都督。
English: In the same year, the Anxi Capital Protectorate was moved to Kuez Province, and the former Anxi Province was made the capital of Xizhou Province, with General Zuo Wei and Anxi Capital Protector Zhi Zhan as the governor.

古文：西域平。
现代文：西域从此平定。
English: The western region has since been pacified.

古文：帝遣使者分行诸国风俗物产，诏许敬宗与史官撰《西域图志》。
现代文：皇帝派使者分别到各国考察风俗、物产，诏令许敬宗与史官撰写《西域图志》。
English: The emperor sent emissaries to various countries to inspect customs and products, and ordered Xu Jingzong and historians to write "The History of the Western Regions."

古文：上元中，素稽献银颇罗、名马。
现代文：上元年间，素稽来献银颇罗及名马。
English: In the first year of the new year, Suqi came to donate silver and famous horses.

古文：天授三年，王延田跌来朝。
现代文：天授三年，龟兹王延田跌来朝。
English: Three years later, the King of Kamezi, Yan Tian, came to the imperial court.

古文：始，仪凤时，吐蕃攻焉耆以西，四镇皆没。
现代文：当初，仪凤年间，吐蕃攻打焉耆以西，四镇全部沦入敌手。
English: At first, during the Yi and Feng era, the four towns in the west of Yan'an were attacked by Tubo, and all of them fell into the enemy's hands.

古文：长寿元年，武威道总管王孝杰破吐蕃，复四镇地，置安西都护府于龟兹，以兵三万镇守。
现代文：长寿元年，武威道总管王孝杰击破吐蕃，恢复四镇的地，设置安西都护府于龟兹，派兵三万镇守。
English: In the first year of Longevity, Wang Xiaojie, the general manager of Wuwei Road, defeated the Tuyun, restored the land of the four towns, set up the Anxi Capital Protection Office in Gezi, and sent 30,000 soldiers to guard the town.

古文：于是沙碛荒绝，民供赀粮苦甚，议者请弃之，武后不听。
现代文：当时沙碛荒芜，人民供给军需不堪负担，朝中议臣建议放弃，武后不听。
English: At that time, the sand dunes were barren, and the people's supply of military supplies was unbearable. The councilors in the court suggested giving up, but Empress Wu did not listen.

古文：都护以政勣称华狄者，田扬名、郭元振、张孝嵩、杜暹云。
现代文：安西都护以政绩受到华人、西域人称颂的有田扬名、郭元振、张孝嵩、杜暹等人。
English: Anxi tutelage was praised by Chinese and Westerners for its political achievements, and Arita became famous, followed by Guo Yuanzhen, Zhang Xiaosong, Du Siam and others.

古文：开元七年，王白莫苾死，子多币立，改名孝节。
现代文：开元七年，龟兹王白莫絆死，子多币继立，改名孝节。
English: In the seventh year of the founding of the Republic of China, Guizi Wang Baimo tripped and died, and his son Duo Jian succeeded him, and changed his name to Xiao Jie.

古文：十八年，遣弟孝义来朝。
现代文：开元十八年，派弟弟孝义来朝。
English: In the 18th year of the first century, he sent his younger brother, Takayoshi, to the imperial court.

古文：自龟兹赢六百里，窬小沙碛，有跋禄迦，小国也，一曰亟墨，即汉姑墨国，横六百里，纵三百里。风俗文字与龟兹同，言语少异。
现代文：贞观四年，文泰来朝，皇帝礼赐甚厚。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, Wen Tai came to the DPRK, and the emperor gave him a very generous gift.

古文：出细氈褐。西三百里度石碛至凌山，葱岭北原也，水东流，春夏山谷积雪。西北五百里至素叶水城，比国商胡杂居。
现代文：宇文氏请求能入宗籍，诏赐李氏，改封为常乐公主。后来，文泰与西突厥交往，凡西域去朝贡的都要借道其国，均遭堵劫。
English: The Uwen clan requested to be naturalized as a member of the imperial family, and the imperial edict was issued to the Li clan, changing her title to Princess Changle. Later, Wentei interacted with the West Turks, and anyone who went to pay tribute in the West had to go through their country, and they were all robbed.

古文：素叶以西数十城，皆立君长，役頟属突厥。
现代文：伊吾曾臣服西突厥，此时归附朝廷。文泰与突厥叶护共同攻击伊吾。
English: Igu had once been subject to the West Turks, but this time it was annexed to the imperial court. Wen Tai and the Turk Ye Gu jointly attacked Igu.

古文：自素叶水城至羯霜那国，衣氈褐皮氎，以缯缭。素叶城西四百里至千泉，地赢二百里，南雪山，三垂平陆，多泉池，因名之，突厥可汗岁避暑其中。
现代文：皇帝下诏，谴责文泰反复无常，召其大臣冠军阿史那矩商议事情，文泰不派，另派长史麴雍来谢罪。当初，隋大业末年，中国人很多投奔突厥。
English: The emperor issued an edict, condemning Wen Tai's capriciousness, and summoned his champion minister, Ashina Momot, to discuss the matter. Wen Tai did not send a delegation, but instead sent the head of the Sui Dynasty, Shiyong, to apologize. At the beginning, at the end of the Sui Dynasty, many Chinese went to Turkey.

古文：群鹿饰铃鹌，可狎也。
现代文：至颉利兵败，有些人逃入高昌。
English: Some fled to Gaochang after the defeat at Haili.

古文：西赢百里至呾逻私城，亦比国商胡杂居。
现代文：皇帝诏令护送他们归国，文泰隐匿不送，又与西突厥乙毗设击破焉耆三城，掳掠其人民，焉耆王向朝廷控诉。
English: The emperor issued an imperial decree to escort them back to the country, but they were hidden by the Western Turks, who set out to destroy the three cities of Yan'an and plunder its people. The king of Yan'an complained to the imperial court.

古文：有小城，三百，本华人，为突厥所掠，群保此，尚华语。
现代文：皇帝派虞部郎中李道裕来问罪，文泰又派使者谢罪。皇帝对使者责备说 ：你们的主子几年都不来朝贡，全无藩臣之礼。
English: The emperor sent Li Daoyu, a retainer of Yu Bu, to ask about the crime, and Wen Tai also sent an envoy to apologize. The emperor scolded the envoy, saying, "Your master has not come to pay tribute for several years, and there is no courtesy from the vassals."

古文：西南赢二百里至白水城，原隰膏腴。
现代文：国内又擅自设置官吏，模仿我朝百官。今年岁首，万国君长均来朝，而你们的主子不来。
English: At the beginning of this year, all the kings of the world came to the DPRK, but your master did not come.

古文：南五十里有笯赤建国，广千里，地沃宜稼，多蒲陶。
现代文：日前我派人前往，文泰竟然说： 鹰在天上飞，野鸡在蒿草中窜，猫在堂前游玩，老鼠安处于洞穴，各得其所，岂不快哉！ 
English: A few days ago, I sent someone to visit, and Wen Tai even said: The eagle flies in the sky, the pheasant grazes in the reeds, the cat plays in front of the hall, the mouse is in the cave, each has its place, isn't it unpleasant!

古文：又二百里即石国。
现代文：西域使者入贡，你们主子都扣留不让通行。
English: Envoys from the West paid tribute, but your masters detained them and did not allow them to pass.

古文：疏勒，一曰佉沙，环五千里，距京师九千里而赢。
现代文：又对薛延陀说： 既然当了可汗，就与唐天子相等，为什么要拜谒唐的使者？ 
English: He also said to Xue Yantuo: Since you have become a khan, you are equal to Tang Tianzi, why should you worship the messenger of Tang?

古文：多沙碛，少壤土。
现代文：明年，我将发兵讨伐你国。
English: Next year, I will invade your country.

古文：俗尚诡诈，生子亦夹头取褊，其人文身碧瞳。
现代文：回去告诉你们主子好好思量。 那时，薛延陀可汗请求当向导，民部尚书唐俭到延陀加固约定。皇帝又下玺书给文泰，晓以祸福，促使他入朝。
English: Go back and tell your masters to think about it carefully. At that time, Xue Yandakhan requested to be a guide, and the Ministry of People's Affairs sent a letter to Tang Jian to Yandakhan to strengthen the agreement. The emperor also sent a letter to Wen Tai, urging him to enter the imperial court.

古文：王姓裴氏，自号 阿摩支 ，居迦师城，突厥以女妻之。胜兵二千人。
现代文：文泰声称有病不来。皇帝任侯君集为交河道大总管，左屯卫大将军薛万均、萨孤吴仁为副总管，任契必艹何力为葱山道副大总管，任武卫将军牛进达为行军总管，率领突厥、契必艹几万骑兵前去讨伐。
English: Wen Tai claimed that he was ill and would not come. Emperor Ren Hou Junji was the general manager of the cross-river road, Zuotunwei generals Xue Wanjun and Sakuo Wu Ren were the deputy general managers, Ren Qibing He Li was the deputy general manager of the mountain road, and Ren Wuwei general Niu Jinda was the general manager of the march, leading tens of thousands of Turkish and Qibing cavalry to fight.

古文：俗祠祅神。贞观九年，遣使者献名马，又四年，与硃俱波、甘棠贡方物。
现代文：群臣劝谏远行万里，难以取胜，况且地处边陲荒域，即使攻击得手，也不能长期守护。皇帝不听，文泰对左右说： 以前我入朝时，看见秦、陇之北，城邑萧条，已不再是隋朝时光景。
English: The emperors did not listen, and Wen Tai said to the right and left: "When I entered the imperial court, I used to see the cities of Qin and the northern part of Handan in a state of depression, but this is no longer the Sui Dynasty.

古文：太宗谓房玄龄等曰： 曩之一天下，克胜四夷，惟秦皇、汉武耳。
现代文：如今来讨伐我，如果兵多，则粮饷运输不及；若兵力在三万以下，我有能力钳制。王师渡过砂碛，必然疲惫，而我以逸待劳，可以坐收胜利。 贞观十四年，文泰听说王师已到碛口，又惊骇惶恐，不知该怎么办。
English: If more soldiers come to fight against me now, the transportation of grain and rice will not be enough; if the number of soldiers is less than thirty thousand, I will be able to control it. Wang Shi has crossed the sand dunes, he must be tired, and I can win by waiting for labor. In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Wen Tai heard that Wang Shi had arrived at the mouth of the river, and he was shocked and frightened, and did not know what to do.

古文：朕提三尺剑定四海，远夷率服，不减二君者。
现代文：发病而死，子智盛继立。侯君集进攻田地城，契必艹何力率前军猛战，这天晚上星陨落城中，第二天攻克其城，俘虏七千多人。
English: He died of the disease, and his son Zhisheng succeeded him. Hou Junzhu attacked Tianchi City, and Qibing He led the front army in a fierce battle. On this night, the star fell in the city, and the next day, the city was conquered, and more than seven thousand people were captured.

古文：然彼末路不自保，公等宜相辅弼，毋进谀言，置朕于危亡也。 
现代文：中郎将辛獠儿率精锐骑兵夜逼其都，智盛送信给君集： 得罪天子的，是我先王。他罪孽深重，受谴责良深。
English: The middle vassal forced Xin Ye'er and his elite cavalry into the capital at night, and Zhimeng sent a message to Junshi: "It was my forefather who sinned against the Son of Heaven. He was deeply guilty and deeply condemned.

古文：仪凤时，吐蕃破其国。
现代文：现已震惊身亡。智盛我即位不久，望公能赦我。 
English: Now he has died of shock. Tomomori I ascended the throne not long ago, I hope the public can forgive me.

古文：开元十六年，始遣大理正乔梦松摄鸿胪少卿，册其君安定为疏勒王。天宝十二载，首领裴国良来朝，授折冲都尉，赐紫袍、金鱼。
现代文：君集说： 如真能悔过，那就自缚后来军门。 
English: Kim Ji-sik said, "If I can truly repent, then I will bind myself to the military."

古文：硃俱波亦名硃俱槃，汉子合国也。
现代文：智盛不作答。王师进军，填平护城河，开来冲车，将石块如密雨般掷入城中，城中大惊。
English: Zhisheng did not answer. Wang Shi marched in, filled the moat, drove the car, threw the stones into the city like a heavy rain, and the city was shocked.

古文：并有西夜、蒲犁、依耐、得若四种地，直于阗西千里，葱岭北三百里，西距喝盘陀，北九百里属疏勒，南三千里女国也。胜兵二千人。尚浮屠法，文字同婆罗门。甘棠，在海南，昆仑人也。
现代文：智盛令大将麴士义守城，自己则与绾曹麴德俊来王师军门，请求能臣事天子。
English: Tomomori ordered the commander of the Imperial Guard to defend the city, while he and the commander of the Imperial Guard, Cao Cao, came to the gate of Wang Shih's army and begged to be allowed to serve the emperor.

古文：喝盘陀，或曰汉陀，曰渴馆檀，亦谓渴罗陀，由疏勒西南入剑末谷、不忍领六百里，其国也。
现代文：君集晓谕智盛投降。智盛的答辞并不卑屈，薛万均勃然而怒说： 先把城攻下，不懂事的小儿，跟他有什么可说的。 乃指挥部队进军，智盛惊惧流汗，伏地说 ：听凭侯公发落。 于是投降。
English: The king's council ordered Zhimeng to surrender. Zhimeng's answer was not humble, but Xue Wanjun got angry and said: "First, take the city, you stupid child, what can I say to him? But when the commanding troops marched in, Zhimeng was so scared that he was sweating profusely. He said, "I will submit to the lord of the manor." So he surrendered.

古文：距瓜州四千五百里，直硃俱波西，南距悬度山，北抵疏勒，西护密，西北判汗国也。
现代文：君集分兵平定各处，共三州、五县、二十二城，人民八千户，共三万人，马四千匹。当初，高昌国内有童谣说： 高昌兵，如霜雪；唐家兵，如日月。日月照霜雪，即刻自消灭。 
English: At the beginning, there was a children's rhyme in Gaochang that said: Gaochang soldiers are like frost and snow; Tang soldiers are like the sun and moon. If the sun and moon shine on the frost and snow, they will immediately self-destruct.

古文：治葱岭中，都城负徙多河。
现代文：文泰曾追查童谣的来源，未能查到。
English: Wentai once traced the source of the nursery rhyme, but was unable to find the author.

古文：胜兵千人。其王本疏勒人，世相承为之。
现代文：捷报传到京师，天子大悦，宴请群臣，论功行赏，赦免高昌部属，分其地列为州县，称为西昌州。
English: The news of the victory spread to Beijing, and the emperor was overjoyed. He held a banquet for the courtiers, commended their meritorious deeds, and pardoned Gaochang's subordinates. His territory was divided into prefectures and counties, and was called Xichang Prefecture.

古文：西南即头痛山也。
现代文：特进魏征进谏： 陛下即位，高昌最先来朝谒。
English: Wei, Zheng, and Qian: His Majesty ascended to the throne, and Gaochang was the first to come to the imperial court.

古文：葱岭俗号极嶷山，环其国。
现代文：不久因为他们掠夺了胡商，阻止了贡献，所以遭到陛下的谴责。文泰死，罪过也就中止了。
English: Soon, because they plundered Hu merchants and prevented contributions, they were condemned by His Majesty. When Wen Tai died, the crime was suspended.

古文：人劲悍，貌、言如于阗。
现代文：如能安抚其人民，扶立其子嗣。这样 讨伐有罪，抚慰人民 ，是 道 的表现。
English: If he can pacify his people and support his children, then it is a manifestation of the Way to fight evil and comfort the people.

古文：其法，杀人剽劫者死，馀得赎。赋必输服饰，王坐人床。
现代文：一次有个卖好书的，其母看看箱子里的钱，叹道： 为什么爱这物件，不叫我儿子出人头地？ 
English: Once upon a time, there was a man who sold good books. His mother looked at the money in the box and sighed: Why love this object and not let my son get ahead?

古文：后魏太延中，始通中国。
现代文：把所有的钱拿出来换了书。
English: I took all the money out and changed the books.

古文：贞观九年，遣使者来朝。
现代文：昭曾任司膳卿，能写一手好文章。
English: Zhao was once the Secretary of the Ministry of Cuisine, and he can write a good article.

古文：开元中破平其国，置葱岭守捉，安西极边戍也。
现代文：弟弟崇裕有武艺，永徽年间任右武卫翊府中郎将，封爵交河郡王，封邑达三千户。死时为镇军大将军，武后为他举哀，赠死者美锦袍，奠仪甚厚，封爵则中止了。
English: His younger brother, Chong Yu, was skilled in martial arts. During the Yonghui era, he served as the vice-commander of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and was given the title of King of Jiahe County, with a fief of 3,000 households. At the time of his death, he was the general of the town army. The empress dowager held a memorial service for him, presented the deceased with a beautiful brocade robe, and held a grand ceremonial, but the knighthood was cancelled.

古文：于阗，或曰瞿萨旦那，亦曰涣那，曰屈丹，北狄曰于遁，诸胡曰豁旦。
现代文：于阗，或称为瞿萨旦那，也叫涣那、屈丹，北狄人称之为于遁，胡人称之为豁旦。
English: Yu, or known as sa旦那, is also called 那, Qu Dan. The people of Beidi call it Yu, and the people of Hu call it 開旦.

古文：距京师九千七百里，瓜州赢四千里，并有汉戎庐、杆弥、渠勒、皮山五国故地。
现代文：距京师有九千七百里，距瓜州四千多里，据有汉代的戎卢、杆弥、渠勒、皮山等五国的旧地。
English: It is 9,700 miles away from Beijing and more than 4,000 miles away from Guazhou. According to the Han Dynasty, there were five ancient places in China, including Ronglu, Jiaoyi, Qianle and Pishan.

古文：其居曰西山城，胜兵四千人。有玉河，国人夜视月光盛处必得美玉。
现代文：王所居称西山城，有强兵四千人，有河名玉河，国人夜里看月光最亮的地方定能找到美玉。
English: Wang Soju is known as Xishan City. It has a strong army of four thousand soldiers and a river called the Jade River. The local people can find beautiful jade in the place where the moonlight is the brightest at night.

古文：王居绘室。
现代文：王住的房子绘有彩图。
English: The house where Wang lives is painted with colorful pictures.

古文：俗机巧，言迂大，喜事祅神、浮屠法，然貌恭谨，相见皆跪。
现代文：民俗善机巧，说起话来转弯抹角。
English: Folklore is very clever, and when it speaks, it twists and turns.

古文：以木为笔，玉为印，凡得问遗书，戴于首乃发之。
现代文：供奉袄神，崇尚佛法。其人看来严谨有礼，人们相见都行跪礼。用木做笔，刻玉为印章。凡得到朝廷送去的抚慰、赏赐的诏书等，一定先供戴在头上，然后再打开看。
English: They offer sacrifices to the gods and worship Buddha's teachings. They appear to be strict and courteous, and people kneel when they see each other. They use wood to make pens, and carved jade for seals. Any consolation or reward sent by the imperial court, such as an imperial edict, must first be offered and worn on the head, and then opened.

古文：自汉武帝以来，中国诏书符节，其王传以相授。
现代文：自汉武帝以来，中国送去的诏书、符节等，其王视作国宝代代相传。
English: Since Emperor Hanwu, the imperial edicts, runes, etc. sent by China have been passed down from generation to generation as national treasures.

古文：人喜歌舞，工纺勣。
现代文：人民喜欢歌舞，善于纺织。
English: The people like to sing and dance and are good at weaving.

古文：西有沙碛，鼠大如蝟，色类金，出入群鼠为从。
现代文：国西有沙碛，其中鼠大如刺猬，毛色如金。人出入沙碛，常有群鼠跟随。
English: In the western part of the country, there are sandpipers, in which mice are as big as hedgehogs and their fur is as golden. When people go in and out of sandpipers, they are often followed by groups of mice.

古文：初无桑蚕，丐邻国，不肯出，其王即求婚，许之。将迎，乃告曰： 国无帛，可持蚕自为衣。 
现代文：起初国内没有蚕桑，向邻国乞讨，邻国不肯给。其王来朝求婚，皇帝同意，将要迎娶时才报请说 ：国内没有绸子，可以带蚕来自己织衣。 
English: At first, there were no silkworms in the country, so they begged from the neighboring countries, but the neighboring countries refused to give them silk. Their king came to the imperial court to propose marriage, and the emperor agreed. When they were about to get married, they reported, "Please say: There is no silk in the country, you can bring silkworms to weave your own clothes."

古文：女闻，置蚕帽絮中，关守不敢验，自是始有蚕。
现代文：公主听说后，将蚕种藏在帽絮中，关守不敢查验公主，从此，于阗才开始有蚕。
English: After the princess heard about it, she hid the silkworm seeds in her hat lint, and the guards did not dare to examine the princess. From then on, there were only silkworms in Yunnan.

古文：女刻石约无杀蚕，蛾飞尽得治茧。
现代文：公主刻石约定不得杀蚕，要待蛾飞尽才可以抽丝。
English: The princess carved a stone stipulating that no silkworms were to be killed, and that no silk was to be drawn until the moths had flown away.

古文：王姓尉迟氏，名屋密，本臣突厥，贞观六年，遣使者入献。后三年，遣子入侍。
现代文：于阗王姓尉迟，名屋密，本来臣服于突厥。贞观六年，派使者入朝贡献，三年后，派儿子入朝侍卫。
English: Yu Shao Wang's family name was Fuzi, and he was well-known and well-connected, and he was originally a subject of the Turks. Zhenguan spent six years sending emissaries to the court to make contributions, and three years later, he sent his son to serve as an attendant to the court.

古文：阿史那社尔之平龟兹也，其王伏阇信大惧，使子献橐它三百。
现代文：阿史那社尔平定龟兹时，于阗王伏信十分恐惧，派儿子来献骆驼三百头。
English: When Ashina-shal was subduing the Khazars, King Fushin of Khotan was so afraid that he sent his son to offer three hundred camels.

古文：长史薛万备谓社尔曰： 公破龟兹，西域皆震恐，愿假轻骑羁于阗王献京师。 
现代文：长史薛万备对阿史那社尔说： 您击破了龟兹，整个西域都震惊恐惧，希望您能借给我轻骑兵，我去把于阗王捉来献给京师。 
English: The head of Shi, Xue Wanbei, said to Ashina Sha'er: You have broken the tortoise, the entire western region is shocked and frightened, I hope you can lend me light cavalry, I will catch Yu Xuan Wang and present him to the Beijing Division.

古文：社尔许之。
现代文：社尔同意。
English: Searle agreed.

古文：至于阗，陈唐威灵，劝入见天子，伏阇信乃随使者来。
现代文：薛万备到了于阗，向王陈述唐的威势及神助，劝王入朝拜谒天子。伏信就跟随使者来。
English: When Xue Wanbei arrived in Yunnan, he told the king of Tang's might and divine help, and persuaded the king to enter the court to worship the Son of Heaven. Fuxin followed the messenger.

古文：会高宗立，授右卫大将军，子叶护玷为右骁卫将军，赐袍带，布帛六千段，第一区，留数月遣之，请以子弟宿卫。
现代文：正逢高宗即位，授官右卫大将军，授官给他的儿子叶护玷为右骁卫将军，赐给锦袍玉带及布帛六千段、住宅一区。留王住了几个月后送他回国，伏信要求让其子弟留下宿卫。
English: At the time of Emperor Gaozong's accession to the throne, he was appointed to the post of Right Guard General, and his son Ye Youcun was appointed to the post of Right Guard General. He was given a brocade gown, a jade belt and six thousand pieces of cloth, as well as a residential area. After several months, Emperor Ruiwang sent him back to China, but Fuxin demanded that his son remain as a bodyguard.

古文：上元初，身率子弟酋领七十人来朝。
现代文：上元初年，伏信亲自带领子弟及首领等七十人来朝。
English: In the first year of Shangyuan, Fuxin personally led 70 people, including his sons and chiefs, to the DPRK.

古文：击吐蕃有功，帝以其地为毘沙都督府，析十州，授伏阇雄都督。
现代文：助攻吐蕃有功，皇帝将其国土列为毗沙都督府，分为十个州，委任伏雄为都督。
English: In recognition of his assistance to Tubo, the emperor listed his territory as the Visha Prefecture, divided it into ten prefectures, and appointed Fuxiong as the prefect.

古文：死，武后立其子璥。
现代文：伏雄死后，武后扶立其子伏王敬为王。
English: After the death of King Fuxiong, Empress Wu raised her son King Fuxiong to the throne.

古文：开元时献马、驼、豽。
现代文：开元年间来朝献马、驼、豸内。
English: In the first year of the new year, he came to offer horses, camels and donkeys to the emperor.

古文：璥死，复立尉迟伏师战为王。
现代文：伏王敬死，再立尉迟家族的尉迟伏师战为王。
English: Fu Wang Qian died, and then the Fu family's Fu Shi Fushi became king.

古文：死，伏阇达嗣，并册其妻执失为妃。
现代文：尉迟伏师战死，伏达继立，册封其妻执失氏为王妃。
English: After his subordinate died in the battle, Woda succeeded him and made his wife, Jiu Qiu, the empress.

古文：死，尉迟圭嗣，妻马为妃。
现代文：伏达死，尉迟王圭继立，妻马氏为王妃。
English: After Voda's death, the late King Kei succeeded to the throne, and his wife Ma became the empress.

古文：圭死，子胜立。
现代文：尉迟王圭死，子尉迟胜立。
English: The second-in-command, Wang Gui, died, and the second-in-command, Chi Shengli, took over.

古文：至德初，以兵赴难，因请留宿卫。
现代文：至德初年，派兵赴国难。事后要求留在京师宿卫。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, it was difficult to send troops to the country. After the fact, he asked to stay in Kyoto as an innkeeper.

古文：乾元三年，以其弟左监门卫率叶护曜为大仆员外卿、同四镇节度副使，权知本国事。
现代文：乾元三年，皇帝委任其弟左监门卫率叶护尉迟曜为大仆员外卿、同四镇节度副使，代理本国政事。
English: In the third year of Qianyuan, the emperor appointed his younger brother, the left supervisor of the gatekeeper, and Lieutenant Ye Shiyou, as the great servant of the foreign secretary and the deputy envoy of the Four Towns Festival, acting on behalf of the national politics.

古文：胜自有传。于阗东三百里有建德力河，七百里有精绝国；河之东有汗弥，居达德力城，亦曰拘弥城，即宁弥故城。
现代文：于阗东三百里有条建德力河，七百里处有个精绝国；河之东有汗弥国，王居在达德力城，也叫拘弥城，就是宁弥的故城。
English: Three hundred kilometers east of Shandong, there is the Jian Delighe River, and seven hundred kilometers away, there is the Jing Zi Guo; east of the river, there is the Khan Mi Guo, and the king's residence is in Dadeli City, also called Zhen Mi City, which is the old city of Ning Mi.

古文：皆小国也。
现代文：都是些小国。
English: They are all small countries.

古文：初，德宗即位，遣内给事硃如玉之安西，求玉于于阗，得圭一，珂佩五，枕一，带胯三百，簪四十，奁三十，钏十，杵三，瑟瑟百斤，并它宝等。
现代文：当初，德宗即位时，曾派内给事朱如玉到安西，向于阗求玉，得到一个圭、五个珂佩及一个玉枕，此外还有带胯三百、玉簪四十、奁三十、钏十、玉杵三、瑟瑟一百斤以及其他珍宝。
English: At first, when Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, he sent Zhu Rurong to Anxi to solicit jade from Yu Yu, and obtained a gui, five kopecks and a jade pillow, in addition to bringing 300 jin of jade, 40 jin of jade, 30 jin of jade, 10 jin of jade, 3 jin of jade, 100 jin of silk and other precious treasures.

古文：及还，诈言假道回纥为所夺。
现代文：朱如玉回国，假称借道回纥时被回纥抢去。
English: When Zhu Rudao returned to China, he was robbed by a ruffian while pretending to take a back road.

古文：久之事泄，得所市，流死恩州。
现代文：后来，事情败露，将卖掉的也都收回，朱如玉则流放到恩州，后死于该地。
English: Later, when the affair was revealed, the items that had been sold were also recovered, and Zhu Ruyu was exiled to Enzhou, where he later died.

古文：天竺国，汉身毒国也，或曰摩伽陀，曰婆罗门。
现代文：天竺国，就是汉朝时的身毒国，也叫摩伽陀，或叫婆罗门。
English: Amitabha's country, that is, the poisoned country of the Han Dynasty, is also called Mogadha, or Brahman.

古文：去京师九千六百里，都护治所二千八百里。居葱岭南，幅圆三万里，分东、西、南、北、中五天竺，皆城邑数百。
现代文：距京师九千六百里，距都护所在地二千八百里，位于葱岭之南，幅员三万里，分东、西、南、北、中五天竺，每个天竺都有几百个城市。
English: It is 9,600 miles away from Beijing, 2,800 miles away from the location of the capital, and is located in the south of Qiuling, with an area of 30,000 miles. It is divided into east, west, south, north and middle five days, and each day has hundreds of cities.

古文：南天竺濒海，出师子、豹、犭军、橐它、犀、象、火齐、琅墯、石蜜、黑盐。
现代文：南天竺濒海，出产狮子、豹、犭军、骆驼、犀、象、火齐、琅、石蜜、黑盐等。
English: Nantianyu on the coast, producing lions, leopards, boars, camels, rhinoceroses, elephants, fireflies, dragonflies, nectar, black salt and so on.

古文：北天竺距雪山，圜抱如璧，南有谷，通为国门。
现代文：北天竺靠近雪山，四面都是山环抱，如同一个璧，南面有谷，成为与外界相通的国门。
English: North Tianyao is close to the snow-capped mountains. It is surrounded by mountains on all sides, like a gem, and has a valley on the south, making it a gateway to the outside world.

古文：东天竺际海，与扶南、林邑接。
现代文：东天竺临海，与扶南、林邑接壤。
English: Dongtianye borders the sea, and shares a border with Funan and Linyi.

古文：西天竺与罽宾、波斯接。
现代文：西天竺与宾、波斯连接。
English: West Tianyu is connected to Bin and Persia.

古文：中天竺在四天竺之会，都城曰茶镈和罗城，滨迦毘黎河。
现代文：中天竺在四天竺之中心，都城叫茶和罗城，濒临迦毗黎河。
English: The middle heaven is in the center of the four heavens, and the capital city is called Cha and Luo, on the edge of the Kavili River.

古文：有别城数百，皆置长；别国数十，置王。
现代文：四周有城几百个，都设置长官，有附属国几十个，都设王。
English: All around there are hundreds of cities, each with its own governor, and dozens of dependent countries, each with its own king.

古文：曰舍卫；曰迦没路，开户皆东向；曰迦尸，或曰波罗奈，亦曰波罗那斯。
现代文：较大的国有舍卫；有迦没路，他们住房的门都朝东开；有迦尸，或叫波罗奈，也叫波罗那斯。
English: The larger kingdoms have their guardians; there are the Kauravas, whose houses all have their doors facing east; and the Kauravas, or Boronai, also called Boronas.

古文：其畜有稍割牛，黑色，角细，长四尺许，十日一割，不然困且死。
现代文：牲畜有稍割牛，黑毛，细角，有四尺多长，十天要割一次，否则将被困死。
English: Cattle have slightly trimmed horns, black hair, fine horns, more than four feet long, and must be trimmed once every ten days, otherwise they will be trapped to death.

古文：人饮其血，或曰寿五百岁，牛寿如之。
现代文：据说人喝其血能活五百岁，牛也能活五百岁。
English: It is said that people who drink its blood can live for five hundred years, and cows can live for five hundred years.

古文：中天竺王姓乞利咥氏，亦曰刹利，世有其国，不篡杀。
现代文：中天竺王姓乞利，也叫刹利，世代均为中天竺王，没有发生过篡杀之事。
English: Zhongtianqian Wang surnamed Qili, also known as Xeli, generations are Zhongtianqian Wang, there has been no tampering with the murder.

古文：土溽热，稻岁四熟。禾之长者没橐它。
现代文：气候湿热，稻谷一年四熟，禾杆长的可淹没骆驼。
English: The climate is hot and humid, the rice is ripe four times a year, and the length of the straw can drown a camel.

古文：以贝齿为货。
现代文：用贝齿作为货币。
English: Using shell teeth as currency.

古文：有金刚、旃檀、郁金，与大秦、扶南、交趾相贸易。
现代文：出产金刚、旃檀、郁金，与大秦、扶南、交趾等国相互贸易。
English: It produces vajra, sandalwood and tulips, and trades with Daqin, Funan, Kota and other countries.

古文：人富乐，无簿籍，耕王地者乃输税。以舐足摩踵为致礼。
现代文：人民富裕安乐，不设簿籍，耕种君王土地的要纳税，以舔脚、摩脚跟为最尊敬的礼节。
English: The people are rich and happy, there are no books, and those who cultivate the land of kings must pay taxes. Licking feet and rubbing heels are the most respected etiquette.

古文：家有奇乐倡伎。
现代文：每家都有乐器及演唱者。
English: Each family has its own musical instruments and singers.

古文：王大臣皆服锦罽，为螺髻于顶，馀发翦使卷。
现代文：君王及大臣们都穿锦，头顶上盘一个螺髻，其余的头发剪短并使之卷曲。
English: Monarchs and ministers wore brocade, a braid on top of the head, and the rest of the hair was cut short and curled.

古文：男子穿耳垂当，或悬金，耳缓者为上类；徒跣，衣重白。
现代文：男子耳朵穿孔挂玉或挂金，让金玉的重量拉耳下垂，耳垂大的为最美；赤足，衣服崇尚白色。
English: Men's ears are pierced with hanging beads or gold, so that the weight of the gold beads pulls the ears down, the ear lobe is the most beautiful; barefoot, clothes are white.

古文：妇人项节金、银、珠缨络，死者燔骸取灰，建窣堵，或委野中及河，饵鸟兽鱼鳖，无丧纪。
现代文：妇女颈上佩金、银项链，或戴珍珠璎珞。人死，火化后取骨灰，建塔收藏；或者将尸体放在野外或河里，去喂鸟兽鱼鳖，没有丧悼的文字。
English: Women wear gold and silver necklaces around their necks, or wear pearl necklaces. When a person dies, the ashes are taken after cremation to build a tower for collection; or the corpse is placed in the wild or in a river to feed birds, animals and fish. There is no mourning text.

古文：谋反者幽杀之；小罪赎钱；不孝者断手足，劓耳鼻，徙于边。
现代文：若有人谋图造反，幽禁至死；犯小罪可用钱赎；不孝父母者，砍断手足，割掉耳朵鼻子，流放边界。
English: If anyone tries to rebel, he will be imprisoned until death; if he commits a minor crime, he can be redeemed with money; if he is unfilial to his parents, he will have his hands and feet cut off, his ears and nose cut off, and he will be exiled to the border.

古文：有文字，善步历，学《悉昙章》，妄曰梵天法。
现代文：国家有文字，长于天文历算，学习《悉昙章》，称此为梵天法。
English: The country has a written language, excels in the astronomical calendar, and studies the Sutra of Avalokiteshvara, which is called the Law of Brahma.

古文：书贝多叶以记事。
现代文：在贝多树叶上书写以记事。
English: Write on a bedouin leaf to keep a record.

古文：尚浮图法，不杀生饮酒，国中处处指曰佛故迹也。
现代文：崇尚佛法，不杀生、不饮酒，国中许多地方都可指出佛的故迹。
English: They advocate Buddhism, do not kill animals, and do not drink alcohol. Many places in the country can point to the Buddha's legacy.

古文：信盟誓，传禁咒，能致龙起云雨。
现代文：相信盟誓，传诵禁咒语，能招龙来兴云雨。
English: They believe that swearing and reciting forbidden spells can attract dragons to bring prosperity.

古文：隋炀帝时，遣裴矩通西域诸国，独天竺、拂菻不至为恨。
现代文：隋炀帝时，曾派裴矩通西域各国，惟独没到天竺和拂林艹，引以为憾。
English: When the Sui Dynasty ruled China, they sent Pei Jitsu to the countries in the western region, but unfortunately, he did not go to Tianyao and Huilin.

古文：武德中，国大乱，王尸罗逸多勒兵战无前，象不弛鞍，士不释甲，因讨四天竺，皆北面臣之。
现代文：唐武德年间，天竺国中大乱，王尸罗逸多率兵作战，所向无敌，其时象不解鞍，人不卸甲，征讨四天竺，使他们都对中天竺北面称臣。
English: During the Tang and Wude Dynasties, there was a great turmoil in the Middle Kingdom of Heaven and Earth. Wang Zhi Luo Yi led many soldiers to fight, and they were invincible. At that time, they did not unsaddle their saddles, they did not unload their armor, and they fought for the Four Heavenly Armies, so that they were all subject to the Middle Kingdom of Heaven and Earth.

古文：会唐浮屠玄奘至其国，尸罗逸多召见曰： 而国有圣人出，作《秦王破阵乐》，试为我言其为人。 
现代文：恰逢唐僧人玄奘到他们国家，尸罗逸多召见玄奘说 ：听说你们国家出了个圣人，曾作《秦王破阵乐》，请对我说说这个人的情况。 
English: When the Tang monk Xuanzang came to their country, Zhi Luo Yiduo summoned Xuanzang and said, "I have heard that there is a saint in your country who once composed the "Song of the Broken Qin Dynasty." Please tell me about this person."

古文：玄奘粗言太宗神武，平祸乱，四夷宾服状。
现代文：玄奘大致谈了太宗的神武，如何平定祸乱，如何使四夷臣服。
English: Xuanzang spoke in general about the divine power of Emperor Taizong, how to quell the calamity, and how to make the four barbarians submit.

古文：王喜，曰： 我当东面朝之。 
现代文：天竺王很高兴，说： 我一定要东向朝见你国圣人。 
English: King Amaterasu was very pleased and said, "I must go to the East to see the saint of your country."

古文：贞观十五年，自称摩伽陀王，遣使者上书。
现代文：贞观十五年，派使者随玄奘东来上表，表文上自称摩伽陀王。皇帝即命云骑尉梁怀持节前往抚慰。
English: In the 15th year of Zhenguan, he sent an envoy to accompany Xuanzang Dong to the table, on the table text he called himself the King of Mogadishu. The emperor immediately ordered the cloud cavalry officer Liang Huai Jie to go to comfort.

古文：帝命云骑尉梁怀璥持节尉抚，尸罗逸多惊问国人： 自古亦有摩诃震旦使者至吾国乎？ 皆曰： 无有。 
现代文：尸罗逸多惊喜地问国人： 自古以来，曾有摩诃震旦派人到我们国家来的事吗？ 国人们都说： 从没有过。 
English: Surprised, Zhi Luo Yiduo asked the Chinese people: Since ancient times, has there ever been a case of a person being sent to our country by the Great Dragon Emperor? The Chinese people all said: Never.

古文：戎言中国为摩诃震旦。
现代文：用他们的语言，称中国即为摩诃震旦。
English: In their language, China is referred to as "Ma震旦."

古文：乃出迎，膜拜受诏书，戴之顶，复遣使者随入朝。
现代文：于是出郊恭迎唐使者，顶礼膜拜后接受诏书，顶在头上。以后又派使者随唐使入朝。
English: As a result, they welcomed the Tang emissaries from the countryside, bowed down and accepted the imperial edict, and placed it on their heads. Later, they sent emissaries to accompany the Tang envoys to the imperial court.

古文：诏卫尉丞李义表报之，大臣郊迎，倾都邑纵观，道上焚香，尸罗逸多率群臣东面受诏书，复献火珠、郁金、菩提树。
现代文：诏令卫尉丞李义表前去答礼。天竺国大臣出来郊迎，全城人都出来观看，焚香夹道。尸罗逸多率群臣面朝东接受诏书，又奉献火珠、郁金、菩提树等。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Lieutenant Commander Li Yihou to go to answer the salute. The Minister of the State of Tianzhu came out to the suburbs to welcome, and the whole city came out to watch and burn incense. Zhao Luo Yidu mostly led a group of courtiers to face east to accept the imperial edict, and also offered fire beads, tulips, Bodhi trees, etc.

古文：二十二年，遣右卫率府长史王玄策使其国，以蒋师仁为副；未至，尸罗逸多死，国人乱，其臣那伏帝阿罗那顺自立，发兵拒玄策。
现代文：贞观二十二年，皇帝派右卫率府长史王玄策出使天竺，以蒋师仁为副手。他们还未到达，尸罗逸多死，国内骚乱，其臣那伏帝阿罗那顺自立为王，发兵拒绝王玄策。
English: In the 22nd year of Zhenguan, the emperor sent the right guard led by the governor Shi Wangxuan to send the envoy Tianyao, with Jiang Shiren as his deputy. Before they arrived, Luo Yidu died, there were domestic riots, and his vassal Navodia Arona Shun became king, and sent troops to reject Wangxuan's plan.

古文：时从骑才数十，战不胜，皆没，遂剽诸国贡物。
现代文：那时玄策的随从只有几十人，战不胜，全部战死，其他各国贡献的物品也都被抢。
English: At that time, there were only a few dozen of his followers. They were unable to win the war, and all of them died in battle. The items contributed by other countries were also robbed.

古文：玄策挺身奔吐蕃西鄙，檄召邻国兵。
现代文：王玄策等脱身逃奔到吐蕃西郊，传檄文召募邻国兵。
English: Wang Xuan Zhe and others escaped and fled to the western suburbs of Tubo, and Chuanzhongwen called for the recruitment of soldiers from neighboring countries.

古文：吐蕃以兵千人来，泥婆罗以七千骑来，玄策部分进战茶镈和罗城，三日破之，斩首三千级，溺水死万人。
现代文：吐蕃发兵千人，泥娑罗发来七千人马。王玄策与薛师仁各率兵进击茶和罗城，连战三日，大破天竺兵，杀死三千人，落水溺死的有万人。
English: One thousand soldiers were sent from Tubo, and seven thousand horses were sent from Mudan Luo. Wang Xuan Zhao and Xue Shiren each led an army to attack the city of Cha and Luo, and fought for three days in a row. They broke through the sky, killed three thousand soldiers, and drowned ten thousand people.

古文：阿罗那顺委国走，合散兵复阵，师仁禽之，俘斩千计。
现代文：阿罗那顺弃国而逃，集合散兵再来交战，薛师仁将他擒获，杀死及俘获的以千计。
English: Arona abandoned the country and fled, gathering scattered soldiers to fight again. Xue Shiren captured him, killing and capturing thousands.

古文：馀众奉王妻息阻乾陀卫江，师仁击之，大溃，获其妃、王子，虏男女万二千人，杂畜三万，降城邑五百八十所。
现代文：剩下的人护卫着王的妻儿在乾陀卫江阻击，师仁猛攻，大胜，俘获王妃、王子，还有男女一万二千人，各种牲畜三万头。五百八十所城邑全都降伏。
English: The rest of the people escorted the king's wives and children to block the Qiantaowei River, and the teachers and scholars stormed and won a great victory, capturing the princess and prince, as well as 12,000 men and women, and 30,000 livestock of all kinds. All 580 cities and towns surrendered.

古文：东天竺王尸鸠摩送牛马三万馈军，及弓、刀、宝缨络。迦没路国献异物，并上地图，请老子象。
现代文：东天竺王尸鸠摩送来三万牛马犒军，还有弓、刀、宝璎珞等，迦没路国献异物，并献上地图，还要求赐给老子的像。
English: The East Heavenly King's corpse, Ganma, sent an army of thirty thousand oxen, horses, and donkeys, as well as bows, swords, treasures, and so on. The land of Ganilou offered foreign objects, presented a map, and also asked for a statue to be given to Lao Zi.

古文：玄策执阿罗那顺献阙下。
现代文：王玄策将阿罗那顺献于阙下。
English: Wang Xuanzhe presented Arona Shun to the emperor.

古文：有司告宗庙，帝曰： 夫人耳目玩声色，口鼻耽臭味，此败德之原也。
现代文：有司祭告宗庙。皇帝说： 人的耳目享娱声色，口鼻爱好美味，这是品德败坏的根源。
English: A priest reported to the ancestral temple. The emperor said, "People's ears and eyes enjoy entertaining sounds, and their mouths and noses love delicious food. This is the root of the corruption of moral character."

古文：婆罗门不劫吾使者，宁至俘虏邪？ 
现代文：婆罗门如果不抢劫我的使者，何至于做俘虏呢？ 
English: If a brahmin does not rob my messenger, what is the use of being a captive?

古文：擢玄策朝散大夫。
现代文：提升王玄策为朝散大夫。
English: Wang Xuanshe was promoted to the post of doctor of morning sickness.

古文：得方士那逻迩娑婆寐，自言寿二百岁，有不死术，帝改馆使治丹，命兵部尚书崔敦礼护视。
现代文：有个方士那逻迩娑婆寐，自称已有二百岁了，有不死之术。皇帝为之造馆所，供他炼丹，命兵部尚书崔敦礼护视。
English: There was a sorcerer who claimed to be two hundred years old and had the power of immortality. The emperor built a museum for him, provided him with alchemy, and ordered the military to protect him.

古文：使者驰天下，采怪药异石，又使者走婆罗门诸国。
现代文：派使者满天下采购奇药异石，又派人到婆罗门各国寻觅。
English: He sent emissaries all over the world to procure exotic stones, and sent people to Brahman countries to search for them.

古文：所谓畔茶法水者，出石臼中，有石象人守之，水有七种色，或热或冷，能销草木金铁，人手入辄烂，以橐它髑髅转注瓠中。
现代文：有所谓畔茶法水，出石臼中，有石像石人守护。水有七种颜色，时热时冷，能融化草木金铁，人手入水就烂。要用骆驼髑髅才能舀起灌入瓠中。
English: There is the so-called "Han tea method water," in the stone mill, there is a stone statue of a stone guardian. The water has seven colors, it is hot and cold, it can melt grass and metal, and it will rot if you put your hand in the water. You have to use a camel to pick it up and pour it into the urn.

古文：有树名咀赖罗，叶如梨，生穷山崖腹，前有巨虺守穴，不可到，欲取叶者，以方镞矢射枝则落，为群鸟衔去，则又射，乃得之。
现代文：还有一种树，名叫咀赖罗，叶子像梨，生在穷山崖壁上，树前有大蛇守护的洞，无法到达。想取叶的人，要用方头箭射断树枝，树枝落下，被群鸟衔去，再将鸟射杀才能取到。
English: There is another kind of tree, called Tsui Lai Lo, with leaves like pears, which grows on the cliffs of poor mountains. There is a snake-guarded hole in front of the tree, which cannot be reached. If you want to take the leaves, you have to shoot the branches with a square-headed arrow. The branches fall and are chased away by the birds. Then you have to shoot the birds to get them.

古文：其诡谲类如此。
现代文：收购的奇巧怪物都是这样一类的东西。
English: All of the acquired Kikko monsters are of this type.

古文：后术不验，有诏听还，不能去，死长安。
现代文：后来，方士的方术不灵验，皇帝诏令让他回去，未能离开，死于长安。
English: Later, the sorcerer's sorcery did not work, and the emperor ordered him to go back. Unable to leave, he died in Chang'an.

古文：高宗时，庐伽逸多者，东天竺乌茶人，亦以术进，拜怀化大将军。
现代文：高宗时，有个叫卢伽逸多的，是东天竺乌茶人，也以方术进献，任他为怀化大将军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong, there was a man named Lu Jia Yiduo, who was a tea master of the Eastern Heaven Dynasty, and he was also gifted with the skill of the square. He was appointed as the general of Huaihua.

古文：乾封三年，五天竺皆来朝。
现代文：乾封三年，五天竺都来朝贡。
English: After three years of dry sealing, the imperial tribute came in five days.

古文：开元时，中天竺遣使者三至；南天竺一，献五色能言鸟，乞师讨大食、吐蕃，丐名其军。
现代文：开元时，中天竺三次派使者来，南天竺来人一次，献五色会说话的鸟，求兵讨伐大食、吐蕃，还请求为其军队赐名。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, the Middle Heavenly Palace sent envoys three times, and the Southern Heavenly Palace sent envoys once, offering five-colored talking birds, soliciting soldiers to fight against the Taekwondo and the Spitting Dragonfly, and also requesting that their army be given a name.

古文：玄宗诏赐怀德军。
现代文：玄宗诏赐为怀德军。
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued an imperial edict to protect the German army.

古文：总章三年，遣使者来朝。
现代文：使者说 ：蕃夷都以得赐锦袍玉带为荣。 
English: The emissary said: "All the Qiang people are proud of having been given the brocade robe and the jade belt.

古文：天宝初，王尸罗迷迦再遣使献大珠、钿金、宝璎、象齿、白氎。波斯，居达遏水西，距京师万五千里而赢。东与吐火罗、康接，北邻突厥可萨部，西南皆濒海，西北赢四千里，拂菻也。
现代文：皇帝就赐给锦袍、金革带、鱼袋及武官所用佩刀、砺石等七事。北天竺曾来朝一次。波斯，位于达遏水之西，距京师有一万五千多里，东与吐火罗及康国接壤，北与突厥可萨部比邻，西南都濒海，往西北去四千多里就是拂林艹。
English: The emperor gave him a brocade robe, a gold leather belt, a fish bag, a saber used by the military attaché, and a flint stone, among other seven items. The North Celestial Dragon once came to the DPRK. Persia is located in the west of the Yellow Sea, more than fifteen thousand miles away from Beijing, bordering with Tuhuaro and Kangguo in the east, adjacent to the Turkic Khazars in the north, bordering the sea in the southwest, and more than four thousand miles to the northwest is the Whirling Dragon.

古文：人数十万，其先波斯匿王，大月氏别裔，王因以姓，又为国号。
现代文：人民有几十万。其祖先波斯匿王，是大月氏的别支，王就以此为姓，也以之为国号。
English: The people number several hundred thousand, and their ancestor, King Pausanias, was from another branch of the Otsuki clan. The king took this as his family name, as well as his country name.

古文：治二城，有大城十馀。
现代文：王都有两个，还有大城十几个。
English: There are two kings and more than a dozen great cities.

古文：俗尊右下左，祠天地日月水火。
现代文：习俗右为尊、左为卑，祭祠天地日月水火之神。
English: According to custom, the right side is revered, the left is inferior, and the deities of heaven, earth, sun, moon, water, and fire are worshipped at shrines.

古文：祠夕，以麝揉苏，泽耏颜鼻耳。
现代文：祭祠之日，用麝香揉和苏，涂在脸面、鼻、耳及胡须上。
English: On the day of the shrine, rub the horseradish with musk and apply it to the face, nose, ears and beard.

古文：西域诸胡受其法，以祠祅。拜必交股。
现代文：西域各国都学习他们的办法而祭祠神灵，礼拜时定要两腿交叉。
English: All Western countries have learned from their methods to worship the deities in shrines, and they always cross their legs during worship.

古文：俗徒跣，丈夫祝发，衣不剖襟，青白为巾帔，缘以锦。
现代文：民俗赤脚，男子剪发，衣服不剖衣襟，套青白色的巾帔，边上用锦缎装饰。
English: Folk barefoot, men's haircut, clothes without a collar, set of blue and white scarves, decorated with brocade on the edge.

古文：妇辫发著后。
现代文：妇女编辫子垂在脑后。
English: Women with braids hanging down the back of their heads.

古文：战乘象，一象士百人，负则尽杀。
现代文：作战时乘象，一头象随战士一百人，如果战败，就全部杀掉。
English: Elephants are used in battle. One elephant is accompanied by a hundred soldiers. If they are defeated, they are all killed.

古文：断罪不为文书，决于廷。
现代文：审判罪行不写文书，就当庭决断。
English: If a crime is to be tried without a written document, it shall be decided in court.

古文：叛者铁灼其舌，疮白为直，黑为曲。
现代文：反叛者用烙铁烧灼舌头，如果疮口是白色的则为有理；如果疮口是黑色的，则为无理。
English: A rebel burns his tongue with a hot iron. If the sore is white, it is justified; if the sore is black, it is unjustified.

古文：刑有髡、钳、刖、劓，小罪耏，或系木于颈，以时月而置。
现代文：刑罚有剃光头、用铁箍住颈子、断脚、割鼻等，小罪则剃须、或者系木箍在颈上，到一定的时候解掉。
English: Punishments include having one's head shaved, having one's neck chained with an iron hook, having one's foot broken, having one's nose cut, etc. Minor offenses include having one's head shaved, or having a wooden stake tied around one's neck, which is removed at a certain time.

古文：劫盗囚终老，偷者输银钱。
现代文：抢劫偷盗则终身囚禁，小偷则罚款。
English: Robbery and theft are punishable by life imprisonment, while thieves are fined.

古文：凡死，弃于山，服阅月除。
现代文：人死了，弃尸山上，居丧一个月就结束。
English: When a person dies and is abandoned on a mountain, the mourning period ends after a month.

古文：气常歊热，地夷漫，知耕种畜牧。
现代文：当地气候炎热，土地宽平，人民懂得耕种畜牧。
English: The local climate is hot, the land is wide and flat, and the people know how to farm and raise livestock.

古文：有鹫鸟，能啖羊。
现代文：有一种鹫鸟，能吃羊。
English: There is an ostrich that can eat sheep.

古文：多善犬、娄、大驴。产珊瑚，高不三尺。
现代文：有很多良种狗，还有马娄、大驴，出产珊瑚，高不到三尺。
English: There are many well-bred dogs, as well as foals and large donkeys, which produce coral and are less than three feet tall.

古文：隋末，西突厥叶护可汗讨残其国，杀王库萨和，其子施利立，叶护使部帅监统。
现代文：隋末，西突厥叶护可汗击破其国，杀了王库萨和，其子施利继立，叶护派部帅监统其国。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, the West Turk Yegor Khan defeated his country, killed King Kusa and his son Shili Jiritsu, and Yegor sent a military commander to rule his country.

古文：施利死，遂不肯臣。立库萨和女为王，突厥又杀之。
现代文：施利死后，不肯再臣服西突厥，立库萨和之女为王，突厥又把王杀了。
English: After Shiri's death, he refused to submit to the Western Turks any longer, and the daughter of Kusa Sawa was made king. The Turks then killed the king.

古文：施利之子单羯方奔拂菻，国人迎立之，是为伊怛支。
现代文：施利的儿子单羯方逃奔拂林艹，国人迎他回来，立为王，就是伊怛支。
English: Shili's son, Shan Yifang, fled to the forest, but the local people welcomed him back and made him king, that is, the Ili branch.

古文：死，兄子伊嗣俟立。
现代文：单羯方死后，哥哥的儿子伊嗣俟继立。
English: After the death of Shan Yifang, his brother's son, Ishi Yifang, succeeded him.

古文：贞观十二年，遣使者没似半朝贡。
现代文：贞观十二年，派使者没似半来朝贡献，献活褥蛇。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, he sent an envoy to contribute to the North, and offered live pythons.

古文：又献活褥蛇，状类鼠，色正青，长九寸，能捕穴鼠。
现代文：这种蛇样子像老鼠，黑色，身长九寸，能入洞捕鼠。
English: This snake looks like a mouse, black, nine inches long, and can burrow into holes to catch mice.

古文：伊嗣俟不君，为大酋所逐，奔吐火罗，半道，大食击杀之。子卑路斯入吐火罗以免。
现代文：伊嗣俟不像个君王，被大酋长驱逐，逃奔吐火罗，半路上被大食兵杀害，其子卑路斯逃入吐火罗，免遭杀害。
English: Isildur was not like a king. He was banished by the great chieftain and fled to Tuharo. Halfway there, he was killed by the cannibals. His son Belus fled to Tuharo to avoid being killed.

古文：遣使者告难，高宗以远不可师，谢遣。会大食解而去，吐火罗以兵纳之。
现代文：派使者入朝告急求援，高宗认为太远，大队人马无法前往，于是向使者道歉辞谢，正好大食的兵解围而去，吐火罗派兵送其归国。
English: Gaozong thought that it was too far for a large group of soldiers to travel, so he apologized to the envoy and thanked him. The soldiers, who had eaten a lot of food, went to relieve the siege, and Tu Huaro sent soldiers to escort them back to the country.

古文：龙朔初，又诉为大食所侵，是时天子方遣使者到西域分置州县，以疾陵城为波斯都督府，即拜卑路斯为都督。
现代文：龙朔初年，卑路斯又来投诉被大食侵扰。这时，天子正派使者到西域分置州县。于是列疾陵城为波斯都督府，就委任卑路斯为都督。
English: In the first year of the Long Shuo, Belus came again to complain of being harassed by big food. At this time, the Son of Heaven was sending an envoy to the western region to set up prefectures. Therefore, he designated Shiling City as the Persian capital, and appointed Belus as the governor.

古文：俄为大食所灭。
现代文：不久，被大食所灭。
English: Before long, it was wiped out by the great eclipse.

古文：虽不能国，咸亨中犹入朝，授右武卫将军，死。
现代文：卑路斯虽没有了自己的国家，咸亨年间还亲自入朝，任他为右武卫将军，死于此任。
English: Although Pelusus did not have his own country, he personally entered the imperial court during the reign of Hamken, and was appointed as the right guard general. He died in this position.

古文：始，其子泥涅师为质，调露元年，诏裴行俭将兵护还，将复王其国。
现代文：当初，卑路斯的儿子泥涅师在朝为人质。调露元年，诏令裴行俭带兵护送他回国，准备让他仍当波斯国王。
English: At first, Pelusus's son, Merneaster, was held hostage in the imperial court. In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, the emperor ordered Baekhyun to escort him back to the country with an army, in preparation for him to remain the king of Persia.

古文：以道远，至安西碎叶，行俭还。泥涅师因客吐火罗二十年，部落益离散。
现代文：由于道路遥远，裴行俭将他送到安西碎叶就回朝了，泥涅师因而在吐火罗客居二十年，部落越发离散。
English: Due to the distance of the road, Pei Xingjian sent him to Anxi to chop leaves and then returned to the imperial court. As a result, Muneishi lived as a guest in Tuhuaro for 20 years, and the tribe became more and more scattered.

古文：景龙初，复来朝，授左威卫将军。
现代文：景龙初年，再次来朝，委任他为左威卫将军。
English: In the first year of Jinglong, he came to the DPRK again and appointed him as General Zuo Weiwei.

古文：病死，西部独存。
现代文：后来病死。波斯西部尚保持独立。
English: He later died of illness, but western Persia remained independent.

古文：开元、天宝间，遣使者十辈献码床、火毛绣舞筵。
现代文：开元、天宝年间，派使者十多人来献玛瑙床、火毛绣舞筵。
English: During the years of Kaigen and Tenpo, more than ten emissaries were sent to offer onyx beds and fire-embroidered dancing gongs.

古文：乾元初，从大食袭广州，焚仓库庐舍，浮海走。
现代文：乾元初年，跟从大食袭击广州，焚毁仓库庐舍，泛海逃走。
English: In the first year of Qianyuan, the followers of the Great Food attacked Guangzhou, burned down warehouses and houses, and fled across the sea.

古文：大历时复来献。
现代文：大历时又来朝贡献。
English: It took a long time for me to come back and make a contribution.

古文：又有陀拔斯单者，或曰陀拔萨惮。
现代文：还有陀拔斯单，或称为陀拔萨惮。
English: There is also Thubasthan, or Thubasasashru.

古文：其国三面阻山，北濒小海。
现代文：其国三面都是山，北临小海。
English: The country is surrounded by mountains on three sides, with a small sea to the north.

古文：居婆里城，世为波斯东大将。
现代文：王居于娑里城，世代都是波斯东大将。
English: The king lived in the city of Bali, and generations of emperors were Persian generals.

古文：波斯灭，不肯臣大食。
现代文：波斯被灭，陀拔斯单不肯臣服大食。
English: Persia was annihilated, and Tubas refused to submit to gluttony.

古文：不耻烝报，于夷狄最甚，号曰 寻 。
现代文：天宝五年，王忽鲁汗派使者入朝，受封为归信王。
English: In the 5th year of the Heavenly Treasure, King Hulukhan sent an envoy to the imperial court and was crowned as the convert king.

古文：其君臣七日一休，不出纳交易，饮以穷夜。
现代文：八年后派儿子自会罗入朝，受任为右武卫员外中郎将，赐给紫袍、金鱼，留在朝中宿卫，后来被黑衣大食所灭。
English: Eight years later, he sent his son, Luo, to join the imperial court. Luo was appointed to the position of the right guard, and was given a purple robe and a goldfish. Luo remained in the imperial court as a night watchman, but was later killed by the black-clad glutton.

古文：大食，本波斯地。男子鼻高，黑而髯。
现代文：大食，原本是波斯的地域，男子高鼻子、黑而多须。
English: Large food, originally from the Persian region, men with high noses, black and bearded.

古文：女子白皙，出辄鄣面。
现代文：女子皮肤白嫩，出外则要遮面。
English: A woman's skin is white and tender, and she should cover her face when going out.

古文：日五拜天神。
现代文：每日要拜天神五次。
English: Tenjin must be worshipped five times a day.

古文：银带，佩银刀，不饮酒举乐。
现代文：腰系银带，佩银刀。不饮酒娱乐。
English: He wears a silver belt around his waist and carries a silver knife. He does not drink alcohol.

古文：有礼堂容数百人，率七日，王高坐为下说曰： 死敌者生天上，杀敌受福。 
现代文：有个礼堂可容纳几百人，每七天一次，王坐在高台上对属下说： 为杀敌战死的人将在天上再生，杀敌者将得福。 
English: There is an auditorium that can accommodate several hundred people. Once every seven days, the king sits on a high platform and says to his subordinates: "Those who die in battle for the sake of killing the enemy will be reborn in heaven, and those who kill the enemy will be blessed."

古文：故俗勇于斗。
现代文：所以民俗勇于战斗。
English: That's why folk customs are brave in battle.

古文：土饶砾不可耕，猎而食肉。刻石蜜为庐如舆状，岁献贵人。
现代文：土地多沙石，不堪耕种，以打猎食肉为生，将石蜜刻成车子状态的房子，每年用来献给贵人。
English: The land is sandy and rocky, making it difficult to cultivate. They hunt carnivorous animals for a living, and carve stone honey into a house in the shape of a car, which is dedicated to a noble every year.

古文：蒲陶大者如鸡卵。有千里马，传为龙种。
现代文：所产葡萄大的有如鸡蛋，还产千里马，传为龙种。
English: The grapes produced are as big as eggs, and also produce centipedes, which are said to be dragon seeds.

古文：隋大业中，有波斯国人牧于俱纷摩地那山，有兽言曰： 山西三穴，有利兵，黑石而白文，得之者王。 
现代文：隋朝大业年间，有波斯国人在俱纷摩地那山放牧，有个兽开口说话： 山之西有三个山洞，里面有兵器，还有刻着白字的黑石头。
English: During the Sui Dynasty and the reign of King Dayan, a group of Persians were grazing on Mount Madinah. An animal spoke: "In the west of the mountain, there are three caves with weapons and black stones engraved with white characters.

古文：走视，如言。
现代文：波斯国人去讨伐，都大败而回。
English: The Persians went out to fight and came back defeated.

古文：石文言当反，乃诡众裒亡命于恒曷水，劫商旅，保西鄙自王，移黑石宝之。国人往讨之，皆大败还，于是遂强。
现代文：于是逐渐强大起来。
English: As a result, it gradually became stronger.

古文：灭波斯，破拂菻，始有粟麦仓庾。
现代文：后来灭波斯、破拂林艹，才有了粟麦及仓庾。
English: Later, the Persians were exterminated and the forests were cleared, and only then did corn and millet appear.

古文：南侵婆罗门，并诸国，胜兵至四十万。
现代文：又南侵婆罗门，合并一些小国，精兵增至四十万。
English: He also invaded the south of Brahman, merged some small countries, and increased the number of elite soldiers to 400,000.

古文：康、石皆往臣之。
现代文：康、石等小国都臣服于他。
English: Small states such as Kang and Shih were subjugated to him.

古文：其地广万里，东距突骑施。西南属海。
现代文：此刻其地域有万里之广，东接突骑施，西南濒海。
English: At the moment, its territory is thousands of miles wide, with Shixi in the east and the coastal areas in the southwest.

古文：海中有拨拔力种，无所附属。
现代文：海中有拨拔力种族，无所附属。
English: In the sea, there is a race of pluckers, who have no allegiance.

古文：不生五谷，食肉，刺牛血和乳饮之。
现代文：不生五谷，食肉，刺牛血调和奶后做饮料。
English: They do not grow cereals, they eat meat, and they make a drink after mixing ox blood with milk.

古文：俗无衣服，以羊皮自蔽。
现代文：民间没有衣服，用羊皮遮体。
English: The people have no clothes and cover themselves with sheepskins.

古文：妇人明皙而丽。
现代文：妇女白皙漂亮，国内多产象牙及阿末香。
English: The women are fair-haired and beautiful, and the country is rich in ivory and ambergris.

古文：多象牙及阿末香，波斯贾人欲往市，必数千人纳氎镵血誓，乃交易。
现代文：波斯商人想去贸易，一定要几千人缴纳叠毛、歃血盟誓，这才能交易。
English: If a Persian merchant wanted to trade, he would have to pay several thousand people to swear an oath of stacked wool and blood.

古文：兵多牙角，而有弓、矢、铠、槊，士至二十万，数为大食所破略。
现代文：武器多用牙、角，有弓、矢、铠、矛肖，士兵有二十万，多次遭到大食的侵略。
English: The weapons were mostly tusks and horns, with bows, arrows, crossbows and spears. There were 200,000 soldiers, and they were repeatedly invaded by large predators.

古文：永徽二年，大食王豃密莫末始遣使者朝贡，自言王大食氏，有国三十四年，传二世。
现代文：永徽二年，大食王谷敢密莫木腻才派使者来朝贡，自称为大食氏之王，已建国三十四年了，传了两代人。
English: In the second year of Yonghui, the king of the Daishoku clan sent an envoy to pay tribute. He called himself the king of the Daishoku clan. It has been 34 years since the founding of the country, and it has been passed down for two generations.

古文：开元初，复遣使献马、钿带，谒见不拜，有司将劾之。中书令张说谓殊俗慕义，不可置于罪。
现代文：开元初年，又派使者来献马、钿带，谒见皇帝时不跪拜，有司准备判他不敬罪，中书令张说说远方异域之人慕义而来，不可判为有罪。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, he also sent an envoy to offer a horse and a sash. When he met the emperor, he did not kneel down. A judge was preparing to convict him of disrespect. The imperial edict ordered Zhang to say that people from distant foreign lands came to seek righteousness and could not be found guilty.

古文：玄宗赦之。
现代文：玄宗也宽赦了他。
English: Xuanzong also pardoned him.

古文：使者又来，辞曰： 国人止拜天，见王无拜也。 
现代文：后来使者又来，辞谢说： 我国人只拜天，见王不拜。 
English: Later, the emissary came again and said, "Our people only worship God, they do not worship the king."

古文：有司切责，乃拜。
现代文：有司严肃地批评他，这才依汉法而跪拜。
English: Yuji seriously criticized him, which made him kneel down in accordance with Chinese law.

古文：十四年，遣使苏黎满献方物，拜果毅，赐绯袍、带。
现代文：开元十四年，派使者苏黎满来献物产，委任他为果毅，赐给绯袍及玉带。
English: In the 14th year of the first century, he sent an emissary to Zurich to donate goods, appointed him as a guarantor, and gave him a robe and a jade belt.

古文：或曰大食族中有孤列种，世酋长，号白衣大食。种有二姓，一曰盆尼末换，二曰奚深。
现代文：据说大食族中有孤列这一支族，世代有酋长，称为白衣大食，其中有二姓，一姓盆尼末换，一姓奚深。
English: It is said that among the large food-eating tribes, there is the Solitary Column tribe, which has had chiefs for generations, known as the White-Clothed Large Food-Eaters. Among them, there are two surnames, one of which is the surname of Bonni Matsuo, and the other is the surname of Shenshen.

古文：有摩诃末者，勇而智，众立为王。
现代文：以前有个叫摩诃末的人，勇猛有智，众人拥戴他为王。
English: Once upon a time, there was a brave and wise man named Mawame, who was worshipped as a king.

古文：辟地三千里，克夏腊城。
现代文：辟地三千里，攻克夏腊城。
English: Travel three thousand miles and conquer Shara Castle.

古文：传十四世，至末换，杀兄伊疾自王，下怨其忍。
现代文：传了十四代，到末换，杀了哥哥伊疾自立为王，手下人恨他残酷。
English: It was passed down for fourteen generations, and at the end of it, he killed his brother Yizhi and became king himself. His subordinates hated him cruelly.

古文：有呼罗珊木鹿人并波悉林将讨之，徇众曰： 助我者，皆黑衣。 
现代文：有个呼罗栅木鹿人叫并波悉林的，准备讨伐末换。他到各地向众人宣传，且说： 帮助我干大事的人，都穿黑衣。 
English: There was a Kura-zagi Deer Man who was preparing for a final battle, and he went to all parts of the country to spread the word to the people, saying, "People who help me do great things all wear black."

古文：俄而众数万，即杀末换，求奚深种孙阿蒲罗拔为王，更号黑衣大食。
现代文：不久聚众几万，杀了末换，寻找奚深种族的孙子阿蒲罗拔，拥立他为王，改称黑衣大食。
English: They soon gathered tens of thousands of people, killed the last convert, searched for the grandson of the deep race, Aburoba, made him king, and changed their name to the Black-Clothed Tycoons.

古文：蒲罗死，弟阿蒲恭拂立。
现代文：蒲罗死，弟弟阿蒲恭拂立。
English: Bulo died, and his younger brother, Apu-kyong, was born.

古文：至德初，遣使者朝贡。
现代文：至德初年，派使者来朝贡。
English: In the first year of the Tokugawa Shogunate, he sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：代宗取其兵平两京。
现代文：代宗用他们的兵平定两京之乱。
English: Daizong used their soldiers to quell the rebellion in the two capitals.

古文：阿蒲恭拂死，子迷地立。
现代文：阿蒲恭拂死，其子迷地继立。
English: Apu-kyong dies, and his son reluctantly takes over.

古文：死，弟诃论立。
现代文：迷地死，其子牟栖继立。牟栖死，其弟诃论继立。
English: When Muxi died, his son Muxu succeeded to the throne. When Muxu died, his younger brother Yan Rong succeeded to the throne.

古文：贞元时，与吐蕃相攻，吐蕃岁西师，故鲜盗边。
现代文：贞元时，与吐蕃相攻。吐蕃每年要西向抵抗大食，所以很少侵扰我边域。
English: At the time of Zhenyuan, it was attacked by spadefoot. Spadefoot has to move westward every year to resist large predators, so it rarely invades my border area.

古文：十四年，遣使者含嵯、乌鸡、沙北三人朝，皆拜中郎将，赉遣之。
现代文：贞元十四年，派使者含嵯、乌鸡、沙北三人来朝，都受任为中郎将，厚赐后送回国。
English: In the 14th year of the Zhengyuan era, he sent three envoys, Han Zheng, Wu Ji, and Shabei, to the DPRK. All of them were appointed as middle lords and sent back to the country after being generously rewarded.

古文：传言其国西南二千里山谷间，有木生花如人首，与语辄笑，则落。
现代文：传说其国西南二千里山谷间有一种树，开花像人头，对它说话就会笑，然后就落了。
English: Legend has it that there is a tree in a valley two thousand miles southwest of his country that blossoms like a human head. If you talk to it, it will laugh and then fall down.

古文：东有末禄，小国也。
现代文：大食东有个末禄小国。
English: In the east, there is a small country called Muroku.

古文：治城郭，多木姓，以五月为岁首，以画缸相献。
现代文：有城郭，人民姓木的多。以五月为一年之首，以彩画缸相赠为礼。
English: There is a castle, and the people have many surnames. The first day of the year is in May, and people give each other painted jars as a gift.

古文：有寻支瓜，大者十人食乃尽。蔬有颗葱、葛蓝、军达、茇薤。
现代文：有种寻支瓜，大的要十来个人才吃得完，蔬菜产颗葱、葛蓝、军达、茇薤。
English: There is a kind of gourd, and it takes more than ten people to finish eating the big one. Vegetables produce green onions, kudzu, arrowroot and lettuce.

古文：大食之西有苫者，亦自国。北距突厥可萨部，地数千里。
现代文：大食之西有苫，也自成一国，北接突厥可萨部，幅员几千里。
English: To the west of Taekwondo, there is Korea, which is also a country in its own right. To the north, there is the Turkic-Khazar part, which is several thousand miles wide.

古文：有五节度，胜兵万人。
现代文：有五节度，强兵一万人。
English: There are five sections, each with ten thousand strong soldiers.

古文：土多禾。有大川，东流入亚俱罗。
现代文：土多产禾稻，有条大河，东流入亚俱罗。
English: The land produces a lot of rice, and there is a large river that flows east into Aguro.

古文：商贾往来相望云。
现代文：商人常相往来。
English: Businessmen often come and go.

古文：自大食西十五日行，得都盘，西距罗利支十五日行；南即大食，二十五日行；北勃达，一月行。
现代文：自大食西行十五天，可到都盘，西边距罗利支有十五天的路程；南靠近大食，有二十五天的路程；北是勃达，要走一个月。
English: It takes 15 days to travel west from Taekwondo to Toepan, and 15 days to travel west from Raleigh; 25 days to travel south from Taekwondo; and one month to travel north from Buda.

古文：勃达之东距大食二月行；西抵岐兰二十日行；南都盘，北大食，皆一月行。
现代文：勃达之东距大食有两个月的路程；往西到岐兰，要行二十日；南是都盘，北是大食，都要走一个月。
English: To the east of Buda, it is a two-month journey from the great eclipse; to the west to Qilan, it takes twenty days; to the south is the capital, and to the north is the great eclipse, it takes one month.

古文：岐兰之东南二十日行，得阿没，或曰阿昧；东南距陀拔斯十五日行；南沙兰，一月行；北距海二日行。
现代文：从岐兰往东南走二十天，到达阿没，或称阿昧；东南行十五日，可到陀拔斯；南行一个月，可到沙兰；北行两天就到海。
English: From Qilan, it takes 20 days to travel southeast to reach An, or Ama; 15 days to travel southeast to reach Tubas; one month to travel south to reach Saran; and two days to travel north to reach the sea.

古文：居你诃温多城，宜马羊，俗柔宽，故大食常游牧于此。
现代文：君主居于你诃温多城，多畜马、羊，人民温柔宽厚。所以大食常到此游牧。
English: The monarch lives in your warm city, there are many animals, horses and sheep, and the people are gentle and generous. Therefore, the nomads often come here to eat.

古文：沙兰东距罗利支，北恒满，皆二十日行；西即大食，二十五日行。
现代文：沙兰东是罗利支，北是怛满，都是二十天的行程；西是大食，有二十五天的行程。
English: The east of Saran is Raleigh Branch, the north is Boman, both are twenty-day trips; the west is Dafu, with a twenty-five-day trip.

古文：罗利支东距都盘，北陀拔斯，皆十五日行；西沙兰，二十日行；南大食，二十五日行。
现代文：罗利支东是都盘，北是陀拔斯，都是十五天的行程；西面是沙兰，要走二十天；南面是大食，要走二十五天。
English: To the east of Raleigh is Tudpan, to the north is Tubas, both are fifteen-day trips; to the west is Saran, it takes twenty days to go; to the south is Dafu, it takes twenty-five days to go.

古文：怛满，或曰怛没，东陀拔斯，南大食，皆一月行；北岐兰，二十日行；西即大食，一月行。居乌浒河北平川中。
现代文：怛满，或称怛没，东到陀拔斯，南到大食，都要走一个月；北到岐兰，走二十天；西也是大食，要走一个月，君主居于乌浒河北平川中。
English: It takes one month to travel from the east to Tubas and from the south to Taekwondo; twenty days to travel from the north to Qilan; and one month to travel from the west to Taekwondo. The monarch lives in the middle of the Ping River, north of the Wuyi River.

古文：兽多师子。
现代文：野兽多狮子。
English: Most of the beasts are lions.

古文：西北与史接，以铁关为限。
现代文：西北与史国接壤，以铁关为界限。
English: In the northwest, it shares a border with Shikoku, with Tetsugen as the boundary.

古文：天宝六载，都盘等六国皆遣使者入朝，乃封都盘王谋思健摩诃延曰顺化王，勃达王摩俱涩斯曰守义王，阿没王俱那胡设曰恭信王，沙兰王卑路斯威曰顺礼王，罗利支王伊思俱习曰义宁王，怛满王谢没曰奉顺王。
现代文：天宝六年，都盘等六国都派使者入朝，于是封都盘王谋思健摩诃延为顺化王，封勃达王摩俱涩斯为守义王，封阿没王俱那胡设为恭信王，封沙兰王卑路斯威为顺礼王，封罗利支王伊思俱习为义宁王，封怛满王谢没为奉顺王。
English: In the sixth year of the Tenpo era, the emissaries of six countries, including Du Pan, were sent to the imperial court. As a result, Du Pan was crowned as the king of Hue, Bu Da was crowned as the king of Shouyi, Amang was crowned as the king of Gongxin, Saran was crowned as the king of Shunli, Roerich was crowned as the king of Yining, and Shuman was crowned as the king of Bongshun.

古文：赞曰：西方之戎，古未尝通中国，至汉始载乌孙诸国。
现代文：评论：西戎，古代未曾与中国相通。至汉朝才记载有乌孙等国。
English: Comment: Xi Rong, in ancient times, had no communication with China, and it was not until the Han Dynasty that countries such as Wusun were recorded.

古文：后以名字见者浸多。
现代文：后来，见到的名字渐渐多起来。
English: Later, the number of names I saw gradually increased.

古文：唐兴，以次脩贡，盖百馀，皆冒万里而至，亦已勤矣！
现代文：唐兴，他们来修好入贡，共有一百多国，都是万里迢迢而来，可说是专诚了！
English: Tang Xing, they came to repair the tribute, a total of more than a hundred countries, all came from far and wide, can be said to be dedicated!

古文：然中国有报赠、册吊、程粮、传驿之费，东至高丽，南至真腊，西至波斯、吐蕃、坚昆，北至突厥、契丹、靺鞨，谓之 八蕃 ，其外谓之 绝域 ，视地远近而给费。
现代文：然而中国也有馈赠回报、册封吊唁、输粮传驿等费用。东到高丽，南到真腊，西到波斯、吐蕃、坚昆，北到突厥、契丹？称之为 八番 ，再往外，就称为 绝域 了。根据地域的远近而给予费用。
English: However, China also has gift returns, registered condolences, grain transports, and other expenses. East to Korea, south to China, west to Persia, Tuva, Jiankun, north to Turkey and Khitan? Call it the eighth, and further out, it is called the "territory." Expenses are paid according to the proximity of the region.

古文：开元盛时，税西域商胡以供四镇，出北道者纳赋轮台。
现代文：开元盛时，抽取西域胡商的税收以供四镇之用，出北道的向轮台纳赋，地大则赋费加倍。
English: At the time of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, the tax revenue of the Western Hu merchants was extracted for the use of the four towns, the revenue from the Northern Road to the round table was the highest, and the land grant was doubled.

古文：地广则费倍，此盛王之鉴也。
现代文：这是圣明皇帝的明智之举。
English: This was a wise move by Emperor Shengming.

