古文：六年春，葬许僖公。
现代文：流年春季，安葬许僖公。
English: In the spring of the previous year, Xu Yigong was buried.

古文：夏，季孙行父如陈。
现代文：夏季，季文子到陈国聘问。
English: In the summer, Ji Wenzi went to Chen Guo for an interview.

古文：秋，季孙行父如晋。
现代文：秋季，季文子到晋国。
English: In the autumn, Ji Fumiko went to Jin Province.

古文：八月乙亥，晋侯驩卒。
现代文：八月乙亥，晋侯驩去世。
English: In August of the Year of the Boar, Jin Houyi passed away.

古文：冬十月，公子遂如晋，葬晋襄公。
现代文：冬季十月，公子遂到晋国，安葬晋襄公。
English: In the winter of October, the prince finally came to Jin Province to bury Jin Xiang.

古文：晋杀其大夫阳处父。
现代文：晋国将自己的大夫处父杀死。
English: Jin killed his own doctor father-in-law.

古文：晋狐射姑出奔狄。
现代文：晋国的狐射姑逃到狄国。
English: The fox-shooting aunt of Jin fled to Di.

古文：闰月，不告月，犹朝于庙。
现代文：闰月不举行告朔的仪式，仍然在宗庙祭祀。
English: The ceremony of announcing the new year does not take place during the leap month, and sacrifices are still held at the ancestral temple.

古文：六年春，晋蒐于夷，舍二军。
现代文：六年春季，晋国在夷地检阅军队，撤去两个军。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Jin reviewed the army in Yidi and withdrew two armies.

古文：使狐射姑将中军，赵盾佐之。
现代文：让狐姑射率领中军，赵盾辅助他。
English: Let Xugu Xie lead the Chinese army, and Zhao Dun support him.

古文：阳处父至自温，改蒐于董，易中军。
现代文：阳处父从温地来，改在董地检阅军队，调换了中军主将。
English: Yang Duifu came from Warmi and inspected the army in Dongdi instead, and changed the commander of the Chinese army.

古文：阳子，成季之属也，故党于赵氏，且谓赵盾能，曰： 使能，国之利也。 
现代文：阳子，原是成季的下属，所以偏向赵氏，而且认为赵盾富有才能，说： 任用能干的人，这是国家的利益。 
English: Yang Zi, who used to be a subordinate of Cheng Qi, was partial to the Zhao clan, and believed that Zhao Dun was rich in talent, saying: "Appointing capable people is in the interest of the country.

古文：是以上之。
现代文：所以使赵盾居于上位。
English: Therefore, Zhao Dunju was promoted to a higher position.

古文：宣子于是乎始为国政，制事典，正法罪，辟狱刑，董逋逃，由质要，治旧洿，本秩礼，续常职，出滞淹。
现代文：赵宣子从这时开始掌握国家的政权，制定章程，修订法令，清理诉讼，督察逃亡，使用契约，清除政治上的污垢，恢复被破坏的次序，重建已经废弃的官职，提拔被压抑的贤能。
English: From then on, Zhao Xuanzi began to take control of the country's political power, formulate regulations, amend laws and regulations, clean up lawsuits, inspectors fled, use contracts, remove political dirt, restore the destroyed order, rebuild abandoned official positions, and promote suppressed talents.

古文：既成，以授大傅阳子与大师贾佗，使行诸晋国，以为常法。
现代文：政令法规完成以后，交给太傅阳子和太师贾佗，使之在晋国推行，作为经常的法则。
English: After the completion of the decrees and regulations, it was handed over to the Grand Duke Yang Zi and the Grand Master Jia Zi, so that it could be implemented in Jin as a permanent rule.

古文：臧文仲以陈、卫之睦也，欲求好于陈。
现代文：臧文仲由于陈、卫两国和睦，想要讨好陈国。
English: Because of the rapprochement between Chen and Wei, Gong Wenzhong wanted to please Chen Guo.

古文：夏，季文子聘于陈，且娶焉。
现代文：夏季，季文子到陈国聘问，同时娶了家室。
English: In the summer, Ji Wen Zi went to Chen Guo to ask for advice, and married his wife at the same time.

古文：秦伯任好卒。以子车氏之三子奄息、仲行、鍼虎为殉，皆秦之良也。
现代文：秦穆公任好死了，用子车氏的三个儿子奄息、仲行、鍼虎殉葬，这三个人都是秦国的杰出人物。
English: Qin Mu Gongren died a good death, and the three sons of Mr. Yozi Che passed away, Zhong Xing, and Acupuncture Tiger died and were buried. These three people are outstanding figures in Qin.

古文：国人哀之，为之赋《黄鸟》。
现代文：国都的人哀悼他们，为他们赋了《黄鸟》这首诗。
English: The people of the capital mourned them and gave them the poem "Yellow Bird."

古文：君子曰： 秦穆之不为盟主也，宜哉。
现代文：君子说： 秦穆公没有当上盟主，活该！
English: The gentleman said: Qin Mu Gong did not become the leader, he deserved it!

古文：死而弃民。
现代文：死了以后还抛弃百姓。
English: He abandoned his people even after his death.

古文：先王违世，犹诒之法，而况夺之善人乎！
现代文：以前的国君离世，还留下了法度，而何况夺百姓的好人呢？
English: When the previous sovereign passed away, he left behind laws and regulations, but what about the good people who robbed the people?

古文：《诗》曰： 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁。 
现代文：《诗》说： 贤人的死亡，国家就困乏损伤。 
English: "Poetry" said: The death of a wise man, the country is exhausted and damaged.

古文：无善人之谓。
现代文：这就是说没有好人。
English: That means there are no good guys.

古文：若之何夺之？
现代文：为什么还去夺走好人呢？
English: Why take away a good man?

古文：古之王者知命之不长，是以并建圣哲，树之风声，分之采物，著之话言，为之律度，陈之艺极，引之表仪，予之法制，告之训典，教之防利，委之常秩，道之以礼，则使无失其土宜，众隶赖之而后即命。
现代文：古代身居王位的人知道寿命不能长久，因此就普遍选出贤能，给他们树立风气教化，分给他们旗帜服装，把对他们有益的话记录在典册上，为他们制订法度，对他们公布准则，设立表率来引导他们，给予规章让他们使用，告诉他们先王遗留下来的训导，教育他们防止谋求私利，委任他们一定的职务，开导他们使之合于礼仪，让他们不要违背了因地制宜，让大家都信赖他们，然后到死为止。
English: The ancient kings knew that they would not live long, so they chose the wise, educated them, gave them banners and robes, recorded what was good for them, made laws for them, published rules for them, set up examples to guide them, gave them rules to use, told them the teachings left by the previous king, educated them to prevent them from seeking personal gain, appointed them to certain positions, enlightened them to make them conform to etiquette, so that they would not violate local customs, let everyone trust them, and then until death.

古文：圣王同之。
现代文：这样的做法，圣人和先王都是相同的。
English: In this way, the sage and the king are the same.

古文：今纵无法以遗后嗣，而又收其良以死，难以在上矣。 
现代文：现在即使没有法则留给后代，反而将杰出人物作为殉葬，这就难于处在上面了。 
English: Now, even if there is no law left for future generations, it is difficult to be at the top, instead of burying outstanding figures as martyrs.

古文：君子是以知秦之不复东征也。
现代文：君子因此而知道秦国再也无法向东征伐了。
English: As a result, the nobles knew that Qin could no longer march eastward.

古文：秋，季文子将聘于晋，使求遭丧之礼以行。
现代文：秋季，季文子准备到晋国聘问，让人代他请求如果遭到丧事以后应得的礼仪然后才动身。
English: In the autumn, Ji Wenzi was preparing to go to Jin Province for an interview. He asked someone to ask for the etiquette he should have if he were to suffer a funeral before he left.

古文：其人曰： 将焉用之？ 
现代文：随行的人说： 准备了做什么用？ 
English: The people who accompanied him said: What is it for?

古文：文子曰： 备豫不虞，古之善教也。
现代文：文子说： 预备好意外的事，这是古代的好教训。
English: Fumiko said, "Prepare for the unexpected. This is a good lesson from ancient times.

古文：求而无之，实难。
现代文：临时去请求而没有得到，这会遇到困难。
English: If you ask for something and don't get it, it's going to be difficult.

古文：过求何害。 
现代文：所得虽然一时用不着，有什么害处？ 
English: What's the harm if you don't need the income for a while?

古文：八月乙亥，晋襄公卒。
现代文：八月十四日，晋襄公死了。
English: On August 14th, Prince Jinxiang passed away.

古文：灵公少，晋人以难故，欲立长君。
现代文：晋灵公年幼，晋国人由于发生祸难的缘故，要立年长的国君。
English: Jin Ling Gong was young, and the people of Jin wanted to establish an older sovereign due to the calamity that occurred.

古文：赵孟曰： 立公子雍。
现代文：赵孟说： 立公子雍为君。
English: Zhao Meng said, "Establish Yong as your prince.

古文：好善而长，先君爱之，且近于秦。
现代文：他乐于行善而且年长，先君宠爱他，而且为秦国所亲近。
English: He likes to do good deeds and is old. The former emperor loved him and he was close to the Qin State.

古文：秦旧好也。
现代文：秦国，是老朋友了。
English: Qin is an old friend.

古文：置善则固，事长则顺，立爱则孝，结旧则安。
现代文：能安排好人就巩固，立年长的人就名正言顺，立先君所爱就合于孝道，结交老朋友就安定。
English: If you can arrange good people, you will consolidate; if you can appoint older people, you will be consistent; if you can appoint your loved ones, you will be consistent with filial piety; if you can make old friends, you will be stable.

古文：为难故，故欲立长君，有此四德者，难必抒矣。 
现代文：因为祸难的缘故，所以要立年长的国君。有了这四项德行的人，祸难就必定可以缓和了。 
English: Because of the calamity, it is necessary to establish an elderly sovereign. With these four virtues, the calamity can certainly be alleviated.

古文：贾季曰： 不如立公子乐。
现代文：贾季说： 不如立公子乐。
English: Jia Ji said, "It's better to become a prince."

古文：辰嬴嬖于二君，立其子，民必安之。 
现代文：辰嬴受到两位国君的宠爱，立她的儿子，百姓必然安定。 
English: Tatsuko was favored by two sovereigns and raised her son, so the people must be at ease.

古文：赵孟曰： 辰嬴贱，班在九人，其子何震之有？
现代文：赵孟说： 辰嬴低贱，位次第九，她的儿子有什么威严呢？
English: Zhao Meng said, "Chen Yao is lowly, ranked ninth, what is the dignity of her son?

古文：且为二嬖，淫也。
现代文：而且为两位国君所宠幸，这是淫荡。
English: And to be favored by two sovereigns, it's obscene.

古文：为先君子，不能求大而出在小国，辟也。
现代文：作为先君的儿子，不能求得大国而出居小国，这是鄙陋。
English: As the son of a former emperor, it is shameful not to be able to move to a small country from a big country.

古文：母淫子辟，无威。陈小而远，无援。将何安焉？
现代文：母亲淫荡，儿子鄙陋，就没有威严；陈国小而且远，有事不能救援，怎么能安定呢？
English: The mother is lascivious, the son is despicable, there is no dignity; Chen Guo is small and far away, there is no rescue, how can it be stable?

古文：杜祁以君故，让偪姞而上之，以狄故，让季隗而己次之，故班在四。
现代文：杜祁由于国君的缘故，让位给偪姞而使她在上；由于狄人的缘故，让位给季隗而自己居她之下，所以位次第四。
English: Cuckoo, for the sake of the sovereign, yielded her place to the rooster, so that she was on top; for the sake of the deacon, she yielded her place to the gooseberry, and she was below her, so she was fourth.

古文：先君是以爱其子而仕诸秦，为亚卿焉。
现代文：先君因此喜欢她的儿子，让他在秦国做官，做到亚卿。
English: Therefore, the Ancestor liked her son, and let him work as an official in Qin, and become the second highest official.

古文：秦大而近，足以为援，母义子爱，足以威民，立之不亦可乎？ 
现代文：秦国大而且近，有事足以救援；母亲具有道义，儿子受到喜欢，足以威临百姓。立公子雍，不也可以吗？ 
English: Qin Guoda is big and close, there is enough to rescue; the mother is moral, the son is liked, enough to threaten the people. Is it not possible to establish a prince?

古文：使先蔑、士会如秦，逆公子雍。
现代文：派先蔑、士会到秦国迎接公子雍。
English: He sent an advance party of samurai to Qin to welcome Prince Yong.

古文：贾季亦使召公子乐于陈。
现代文：贾季也派人到陈国召回公子乐。
English: Jia Ji also sent someone to Chen Guo to call back the nobles.

古文：赵孟使杀诸郫。
现代文：赵孟派人在郫地杀了公子乐。
English: Zhao Meng sent someone to kill Gongzile in Shunde.

古文：贾季怨阳子之易其班也，而知其无援于晋也。
现代文：贾季怨恨阳子改变他的地位，又知道他在晋国没有人援助。
English: Jia Ji resented Yang Zi for changing his status and knew that he had no one to help him in Jin.

古文：九月，贾季使续鞫居杀阳处父。
现代文：九月，贾季派续鞠居杀死阳处父。
English: In September, Jia Ji sent Jiu Ju to kill Yang's stepfather.

古文：书曰： 晋杀其大夫。 侵官也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 晋杀其大夫 ，这是由于阳处父侵夺了官职的缘故。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Jin killed his doctor, which was due to the fact that Yang's stepfather had usurped his official position.

古文：冬十月，襄仲如晋，葬襄公。
现代文：冬季十月，襄仲到晋国参加晋襄公的葬礼。
English: In the winter of October, Xiang Zhong went to Jin Province to attend the funeral of Jin Xiang Gong.

古文：十一月丙寅，晋杀续简伯。
现代文：十一月某一天，晋国杀了续简伯。
English: On a certain day in November, Jin killed Zhai Jianbo.

古文：贾季奔狄。
现代文：贾季逃亡到狄。
English: Jia Ji fled to Di.

古文：宣子使臾骈送其帑。
现代文：宣子派臾骈把他的妻子儿女送到他那里去。
English: He sent his wife and children to him.

古文：夷之蒐，贾季戮臾骈，臾骈之人欲尽杀贾氏以报焉。
现代文：在夷地阅兵的时侯，贾季曾经侮辱过臾骈。臾骈手下的人因此要杀尽贾氏来图报复。
English: At the time of the military parade in Yidi, Jia Ji had insulted Yao. Therefore, Yao's subordinates wanted to kill all of Jia's followers in order to take revenge.

古文：臾骈曰： 不可。
现代文：臾骈说： 不行。
English: Zou said, "That's not possible.

古文：吾闻前志有之曰： 敌惠敌怨，不在后嗣 ，忠之道也。
现代文：我听说《前志》上有这样的话： 有惠于人或有怨于人，和他的后代无关，这合于忠诚之道。 
English: I have heard that there is a saying in "The Ancients": Whether it is beneficial to a person or detrimental to a person has nothing to do with his descendants. This is in line with the way of loyalty.

古文：夫子礼于贾季，我以其宠报私怨，无乃不可乎。
现代文：他老人家对贾季表示礼貌，我因为受到他的宠信而报复自己的私怨，恐怕不可以吧！
English: His old man was polite to Jia Ji. I'm afraid I can't take revenge for being favored by him.

古文：介人之宠，非勇也。
现代文：因为别人的宠信而去报复，这不是勇敢。
English: It is not brave to take revenge for someone else's favour.

古文：损怨益仇，非知也。
现代文：消减怨气而增加仇恨，这不是明智。
English: It is not wise to reduce bitterness and increase hatred.

古文：以私害公，非忠也。
现代文：以私害公，这不是忠诚。
English: It's not loyalty if you do it under false pretenses.

古文：释此三者，何以事夫子？ 
现代文：舍弃了这三条，用什么去事奉他老人家？ 
English: Having abandoned these three precepts, with what will he serve his old man?

古文：尽具其帑，与其器用财贿，亲帅扞之，送致诸竟。
现代文：所以就把贾季的妻儿以及他们的器用财货准备齐全，亲自领头保卫，把他们送到边境上。
English: Therefore, he prepared Jaji's wife and children, as well as their equipment and goods, and personally led the defense and sent them to the border.

古文：闰月不告朔，非礼也。
现代文：闰月不举行告朔的仪式，这是不合于礼仪的。
English: It is not proper etiquette not to hold a ceremony to announce the new year when there is a leap month.

古文：闰以正时，时以作事，事以厚生，生民之道，于是乎在矣。
现代文：闰用来补正四时，根据四时来安排农事，农事合于时令可以使百姓富裕，养活百姓的方法就在于此了。
English: Leap is used to make up for the four o'clock, according to the four o'clock to arrange agricultural affairs, agricultural affairs in accordance with the season can make the people rich, the way to feed the people lies in this.

古文：不告闰朔，弃时政也，何以为民？
现代文：不举行闰月告朔仪式，这是放弃了施政的时令，怎么能治理百姓？
English: How can you govern the people if you do not hold the ceremony to announce the arrival of the new year at the time of the leap month?

