古文：初三日，简通 检 ，检查顾仆所促拓工《水月洞碑》，始见陆碑尾张上每行失拓二字，乃同静闻亲携此尾往令重拓。
现代文：初三日清点顾仆催促拓工拓来的《水月洞碑》，这才见陆务观碑文末尾一张上每行漏拓了两个字，于是同静闻亲自带着这末尾一张前去叫他重拓。
English: On the first three days of the Qing Dynasty, Gu's servant urged the excavator to excavate the "Suiyue Cave Monument." It was only then that he saw that two words were missing from each line at the end of the inscription of the view of the land, so Tong Jingwen personally took the last one to ask him to re-excavate.

古文：二里，出南门，一里，抵拓工家，坐候其饭。
现代文：二里，出了南门，一里，来到拓工家，坐下等他吃饭。
English: Two miles, out of the south gate, one mile, came to the pioneer's house, sat down and waited for him to eat.

古文：上午乃同往水月，手指笔画之。
现代文：上午才一同前往水月洞，用手给他指出笔划。
English: In the morning, they went to Shuiyue Cave together to show him the strokes by hand.

古文：余与静闻乃少憩山南三教庵，录张鸣凤羽王父所撰方、范二公《漓山祠记》。
现代文：我与静闻就到山南的三教庵稍作休息，抄录张鸣凤羽王的父亲撰写的方、范二公的《漓山祠记》。
English: Jinghan and I went to Sanjiao Temple in Shannan to take a short break and transcribe Fang Fan Ergong's "History of Lushan Ancestral Temple," which was written by Zhang Ming, the father of Feng Yu Wang.

古文：遂二里，南过雉山岩，再登青萝阁，别郑、杨诸君。
现代文：于是走了二里路，往南过锥山岩，再次登上青萝阁，辞别郑、杨诸君。
English: So he walked the two-mile path, southward over the rock of Jie Mountain, and again ascended the Qingluo Pavilion to bid farewell to Zheng and Yang Zhujun.

古文：欲仍过水月观所拓，而酷暑酿雨，雷声殷殷。
现代文：打算仍然前去水月洞察看拓碑的情况，可酷暑酝雨，雷声隆隆。
English: I still intend to go to the water and moon to see the situation of the monument, but the heat is hot, the rain is brewing, and the thunder is rumbling.

古文：静闻谓拓工必返午餐，不若趋其家便，遂西一里，至拓工家，则工犹未返也。
现代文：静闻认为拓工必定回家去吃午饭了，不如赶到他家去方便，便向西一里，来到拓工家，拓工却还未回家。
English: Jing Wen thought that the prospector must have gone home for lunch, so she hurried to his home for convenience, then went one mile west to the prospector's home, but the prospector had not yet returned home.

古文：《百粤风土记》司道谢肇浙辑。
现代文：于是往北一里，进了南门，在面馆中吃了午餐，已是下午了。
English: So I went one mile north, entered the south gate, and had lunch at a noodle restaurant. It was already afternoon.

古文：诸书，强静闻往市焉。还由靖藩正门而南，甫抵寓而雨至。
现代文：雨势将至，我听郑子英说过，十字街东口的书铺中，有《桂故》、《桂胜》及《西事饵》、诸书，强逼静闻前往购书。返回时由靖江王城正门往南走，刚到寓所雨就来了。
English: The rain is coming. I heard Zheng Ziying say that in the bookstores at the east exit of the cross street, there are "Gui Po," "Gui Sheng" and "Xi Shizhen" and other books, forcing me to go to buy books. When I returned, I walked south from the main gate of the Jingjiang Royal City, and as soon as I arrived at the apartment, the rain came.

古文：初四日，令顾仆再往拓工家索碑。
现代文：初四日命令顾仆再去拓工家索取碑帖。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Gu ordered his servant to go to the excavator's house again to request the inscription.

古文：及至，则所拓者止务观前书碑三张，而此尾独无，不特前番所拓者不补，而此番所拓并失之，其人可笑如此。
现代文：到返来时，就见所拓的碑帖只有陆务观所写碑文的前面三张，而这末尾一张唯独没有，不仅前次所拓的不补，而且此次所拓的也一并把它漏掉了，这个人可笑如此。
English: When he returned, he saw that only the first three tablets of the inscription written by Lu Muxun had been excavated, while the last one was missing. Not only had the previous excavation not been completed, but the current excavation had also omitted it altogether. This man was ridiculous.

古文：再令静闻往，曰： 当须之明日。 
现代文：再次叫静闻前往。拓工说： 等明天才行。 
English: He told Jingwen to go there again. The excavator said, "We can wait until tomorrow."

古文：是日，余换钱市点，为起程计。
现代文：这一夭，我换钱买了点心，为上路做准备。
English: This morning, I exchanged money and bought snacks to prepare for the trip.

古文：初五日，晨餐后即携具出南门，冀得所补碑，即往隐山探六洞之深奥处。
现代文：初五日早餐后立即带上工具出了南门，希望得到所补的碑帖后，马上前往隐山去探察六个洞的深奥之处。
English: After breakfast on the fifth day of the first month, they immediately took their tools and went out of the south gate. After hoping to get the inscribed tablet, they immediately went to Hidden Mountain to explore the depths of the six caves.

古文：及至，而碑犹未拓也。
现代文：及到时，碑却仍旧未拓。
English: When the time came, the monument had still not been excavated.

古文：订余： 今日必往，毋烦亲待。 
现代文：与我讲定： 今天一定去，不必麻烦亲自等待了。 
English: Make an appointment with me: I'll definitely go today, you don't have to wait in person.

古文：时欲觅清秀岩，出城即渡濠护城河坝而趋西。
现代文：我于是仍然进了南门，一直往北走过全城，从华景山的左侧出了西清门。
English: So I still entered the South Gate, walked all the way north across the city, and left the West Qingmen from the left side of Huajing Mountain.

古文：濠中荷叶田田，花红白交映，香风艳质，遥带于青峰粉堞间，甚胜也。
现代文：城门在城的西北隅，再往北就是北城门，西面的山与它相连。城外削崖的半中腰，有个洞向西，非常深远。此时读了《清秀岩记》，打算去找清秀岩，出城后马上越过护城河的堤坝往西赶去。
English: The city gate is in the northwest corner of the city, and the north gate is further north, and the mountain to the west is connected to it. Halfway up the cliff outside the city, there is a hole to the west, very far away. At this time, I read "Clear Show Rock" and planned to find Clear Show Rock. After leaving the city, I immediately crossed the dam of the moat to the west.

古文：有二岐，一乃循山北西行，一南从山南入峡。
现代文：有两条岔道，一条是沿着山的北麓往西行，一条往南从山的南麓进入峡谷。
English: There are two access roads, one along the northern foot of the mountain to the west, one to the south from the southern foot of the mountain into the canyon.

古文：其循北麓者，即北门西来之大道。
现代文：那沿着北麓走的，就是从北门往西来的大道。
English: The one along the northern foot is the main road from the north gate to the west.

古文：更有石峰突峙其北，片片若削，而下开大洞，西南向焉。与城崖西向之洞一高一下，俱崡岈诱人欲往，但知非清秀，姑取道岐南峡中。
现代文：另外有座石峰突起耸峙在它的北面，一片片好像刀削般，而下面张开一个大洞，朝向西南，与城墙所在山崖上向西的洞一高一低，全都十分深邃诱人想要前去，但心知不是清秀岩，姑且取道岔向南面的峡中去。
English: In addition, there is a stone peak protruding to the north of it. It looks like a knife cutting, and a large hole opens below, facing southwest, with the cave on the cliff where the city wall is located to the west, one high and one low. They are all very deep and tempting to go, but they know that it is not a beautiful rock. Let's take the path and go to the gorge to the south.

古文：西行一里，则峡北峡南，其山俱中断若辟门，南北向，其门径路遂四交焉。
现代文：往西行一里，就见峡北峡南，那山都从中断开好似开启的门洞，呈南北向，这门洞中的小径与大路四面相交。
English: One mile to the west, you can see the gorge north of the gorge south, the mountains are from the break open like an open door hole, north-south, the path in this door hole and the road on all sides intersect.

古文：径之西北，有洞南向。
现代文：小径的西北方，有个洞向南。
English: Northwest of the trail, there's a cave off to the south.

古文：急觅道而登，其洞北入，愈入愈深，无他旁窦，而夹高底平，湾环以进，幽莫能测。
现代文：急忙找路往上登，此洞向北通进去，越进越深，没有其他旁洞，可夹壁高耸底部平坦，弯弯绕绕地进去，幽深不能探测。
English: Rushing to find a way to climb up, this hole leads to the north, getting deeper and deeper, there are no other side holes, but the walls are high and the bottom is flat, the bends go around the ground, and the depth cannot be detected.

古文：仍出洞，候行者问之，曰： 此黑洞也。 
现代文：仍然出洞来，等候过路的人问他，说： 这是黑洞。 
English: Still coming out of the hole, a passerby asked him, saying: "It's a black hole."

古文：问： 清秀何在？ 
现代文：问道： 清秀岩在哪里？ 
English: Question: Where is Qingxiu Rock?

古文：曰： 不知。 
现代文：答： 不知道。 
English: A: I don't know.

古文：问： 旁近尚有洞几何？ 
现代文：问： 近旁还有几个洞？ 
English: Q: How many holes are there nearby?

古文：曰： 正西有山屏立峡中者，其下洞名牛角。
现代文：答： 正西有座山似屏风矗立在峡中的，它下边的洞名叫牛角洞。
English: A: Just to the west, there is a mountain like a screen standing in the gorge. The cave below it is called the Cow Horn Cave.

古文：西南出峡为隐山，其洞名老君。
现代文：向西南出了峡是隐山，那里的洞名叫老君洞。
English: To the southwest of the gorge is Hidden Mountain, where the cave is called Laojun Cave.

古文：由北出峡，有塘曰清，东界山岩曰横洞，西南濒塘，洞名下庄。
现代文：由北面出峡，有个水塘叫清塘，东面分界之山的岩洞叫横洞，西南方濒临塘水的洞名叫下庄岩。
English: From the north out of the gorge, there is a pond called Qingtang, the rock cave on the east side of the mountain of the demarcation is called the horizontal cave, and the cave on the southwestern edge of the pond is called the lower Zhuang rock.

古文：近洞惟此，无所谓清秀者。 
现代文：附近的洞只有这些，没有所谓的清秀岩这地方。 
English: These are the only caves nearby, there is no so-called Qingxiu Rock here.

古文：余得清塘之名，知清秀在此，遂北转从大道出峡门。
现代文：我听到清塘的名字，心知清秀岩在此地，于是转向北从大道走出峡口。
English: I heard the name of Qingtang and knew that Qingxiuyan was here, so I turned north from the avenue and walked out of the gorge.

古文：其峡门东西崖俱有小洞，无径路可登。
现代文：这个峡口东西两面山崖上都有小洞，无直接到的路可登。
English: There are small holes in the cliff on both sides of the gorge, and there is no direct access.

古文：北出临塘，则潴水一泓，浸山西北麓大道。
现代文：向北出去面临水塘，就见积水一片，浸泡到山西北麓的大道上。
English: If you go north and face the reservoir, you will see a sheet of stagnant water, soaking into the main road at the northwest foot of the mountain.

古文：余循大道而西，沿清塘而绕其右，疑清秀在其上，急遵之。
现代文：我顺着大道往西走，沿着清塘绕到它的右岸，怀疑清秀岩就在那上边，急忙顺着它走。
English: I walked west along the avenue, skirted the Qingtang to its right bank, suspected that the Qingxiu Rock was up there, and hurriedly walked along it.

古文：其路南嵌崖端，北俯渊碧。
现代文：这路向南镶嵌在山崖顶端，朝北俯视着渊深的碧波。
English: This road is embedded in the top of the cliff to the south, and overlooks the deep blue waves to the north.

古文：既而一岐南上，余以为必清秀无疑。
现代文：随即一条岔道往南上延伸，我以为必定是通到清秀岩无疑了。
English: A causeway then extended southwards, which I assumed would lead to Qingshuiyan without a doubt.

古文：攀跻渐高，其磴忽没，仰望山坳并无悬窍，知非岩洞所在。
现代文：渐渐攀登到高处，那石瞪突然隐没了，仰望山坳上并无高悬的洞穴，知道不是岩洞所在之处。
English: As I gradually climbed higher, the rock face suddenly disappeared. I looked up and saw that there was no high-hanging cave on the ridge, so I knew it wasn't a cave.

古文：乃下，随路出塘之西，其南山回坞转，别成一壑，而洞门杳然无可觅也。
现代文：于是下山，顺路出到水塘的西南，它南边山回坞转，另外形成一个壑谷，可洞口无影无踪不能找到。
English: So I went down the mountain, went along the road to the southwest of the reservoir, turned back to the dock on the south side of the mountain, and formed another valley, but I couldn't find the mouth of the cave without a trace.

古文：其地去黑洞已一里矣。
现代文：此地距黑洞已有一里路了。
English: This is a mile away from the black hole.

古文：于是仍从崖端东返，复由峡门南下，竟不得登岩之径。
现代文：于是仍从山崖顶端往东返回来，再由峡口南下，始终找不到登岩洞的小径。
English: As a result, I still returned from the top of the cliff to the east, and then went south from the mouth of the gorge, but I still couldn't find the path to the cave.

古文：再过黑洞前，乃西趋屏立峡中山。
现代文：再次经过黑洞前，就向西赶到似屏风矗立在峡中的山去。
English: Before passing the black hole again, we drove west to a mountain that stood in the gorge like a screen.

古文：一里，抵屏之东北，即有洞斜骞，门东北向，其内南下，渐入渐暗，盖与黑洞虽南北异向，高下异位，而湾环而入，无异轨焉。
现代文：一里，抵达屏风山的东北面，立即有个洞斜斜地高张着，洞口朝向东北，洞内往南下倾，渐渐进去渐渐暗下来，大体上与黑洞虽然一南一北方向不同，高低位置相异，可弯弯绕绕地进去，没有不同之处。
English: One mile, arrived at the northeast side of the Pingfeng Mountain, immediately there was a hole obliquely stretched high, the mouth of the hole facing the northeast, the inside of the hole leaning southward, gradually entering and gradually darkening, generally different from the black hole, although the south-north direction is different, the height and position are different, can bend around and enter, there is no difference.

古文：出洞，绕屏北而西，闻伐木声丁丁，知有樵不远，四望之，即在屏崖之半。
现代文：出洞后，绕过屏风山北麓往西走，听到有丁丁冬冬的伐木声，知道有樵夫在不远处，四处望去，樵夫就在屏风样山崖的半中腰。
English: After getting out of the cave, I walked around the northern foot of the Pingfeng Mountain to the west, heard the sound of logging in the winter, and knew that there was a woodcutter not far away. Looking around, the woodcutter was halfway up the Pingfeng-like cliff.

古文：问此洞名，亦云： 牛角。 
现代文：询问此洞的名字，也是说： 牛角洞。 
English: If you ask for the name of this cave, you will also be told: "Cow Horn Cave."

古文：问： 清秀何在？ 
现代文：问道： 清秀岩在哪里？ 
English: Question: Where is Qingxiu Rock?

古文：其人谬指曰： 随屏南东转，出南峡乃是。 
现代文：那人错指路说： 顺着屏风山向南往东转，出了南边的峡谷就是。 
English: The man pointed the wrong way and said, "Go south and east along Byobu Mountain, and you will come to the canyon on the south side."

古文：余初闻之喜，绕西麓转南麓，则其屏南崖峭削，色俱赭黄，下有洼潴水，从山麓石崖出。
现代文：我起初听到这话很高兴，绕过西麓转到南麓，就见那屏风山南面的山崖陡峭峻削，石色全是赫黄色，下方有洼地积水，水从山麓的石崖上流出来。
English: At first, I was very happy to hear this. I went around the west foot to the south foot, and saw the steep cliff on the south side of the mountain. The stone color was all yellow, and there was a depression below. Water flowed out of the stone cliff at the foot of the mountain.

古文：崖不甚高，而中若崆峒，盖即牛角南通之穴，至此则坠成水洼也。
现代文：石崖不怎么高，可里边好像有空洞，大概就是牛角洞通到南边的洞穴，到这里便下陷成积水的洼地了。
English: The cliff isn't very high, but there seems to be a hollow in the middle, probably a cave that leads from the Cattle Horn Cave to the cave on the south side, where it sinks into a water-logged depression.

古文：又东一里，抵南峡门，入北来大道。
现代文：又往东行一里，到达南面的峡口，走上北来的大道。
English: Another mile to the east, reach the mouth of the gorge to the south, and take the main road to the north.

古文：复遇一人，询之，其人曰： 此南去即老君洞，不闻所谓清秀。
现代文：又遇见一个人，向他间路，那人说： 此地往南去就是老君洞，没听说过所谓的清秀岩。
English: He also met a man who said, "Going south from here is Laojun Cave. I've never heard of the so-called Qingxiu Rock."

古文：惟北峡有清塘，其上有洞，南与黑洞通。
现代文：唯在北面的峡谷中有个清塘，它上方有个洞，南边与黑洞相通。
English: However, there is a clear pond in the canyon to the north, with a hole above it, which connects to the black hole to the south.

古文：此是君来道。 
现代文：此外没有别的洞。这是先生来的路。 
English: There is no other cave. This is the way the master came.

古文：余始悟屏端所指，乃误认隐山，而清秀所托，必不离北峡。
现代文：我这才醒悟过来，屏风山顶端指路的人，把这里误认为是隐山，而清秀岩所在之处，必定不会离开北面的峡谷。
English: It was only then that I came to realize that the guide at the top of the Byobu Mountain mistook this place for a hidden mountain, and the place where the Qingxiu Rock is located will certainly not leave the canyon to the north.

古文：时已当午，遂不暇北转，而罔南炊隐山。
现代文：此时已当正午，来不及转到北边去，只好惘然若失地往南到隐山煮饭吃。
English: At this time, it was already noon, and there was no time to turn to the north, so I had to head south to Hidden Mountain to cook and eat.

古文：又一里，则隐山在望矣。
现代文：又走一里，就见隐山在望了。
English: After walking another mile, I saw Hidden Mountain in the distance.

古文：仰见路西径道交加，多西北登崖者，因令顾仆先往朝阳，就庵而炊，余呼静闻遵径西北入。
现代文：抬头见路西边小径大道交织在一起，有很多是往西北上登山崖的路，因而叫顾仆先一步前往朝阳洞，到庵中去煮饭，我招呼静闻顺着小路向西北入山。
English: Looking up, I saw that the paths and boulevards on the west side of the road were intertwined, and there were many paths to climb the cliff to the northwest. Therefore, I asked Gu to go to Chaoyang Cave first and cook rice in the hermitage. I invited Jingwen to follow the path to the northwest and enter the mountain.

古文：已而登崖蹑峤，丛石云軿í通 屏 ，透架石而入，上书 灵咸感应 四大字，知为神宇。
现代文：继而登上山崖踏上山尖，成丛的岩石云层样屏蔽着，穿过架空的岩石进去，上方写着 灵咸感应 四个大字，知道是神庙。
English: Then I climbed up the cliff and stepped onto the mountaintop, shielded by clumps of rock clouds, and entered through the overhead rock. Above it was written, "Ling Xian Xuan Zhen," four large characters, and I knew it was a temple.

古文：入其洞，则隙裂成龛，香烟纸雾，氤氲其间，而中无神像，外竖竿标旗，而不辨其为何洞何神也。
现代文：走入这个洞，只见缝隙裂成石完，香烟纸雾，弥漫缭绕于洞中，可洞中无神像，外边竖着竿子，竿顶挂着旗子，辨不清这是什么洞什么神。
English: Stepping into this hole, I saw a crevice split into a rock, cigarette paper fog, pervading the hole, but there was no god in the hole, there was a pole outside and a flag on top of the pole, I couldn't tell what kind of hole or god it was.

古文：下山，而好食犬，时有犬骨满洞中。
现代文：下山来，见有拿着鸡、酒前来的人，询问他们，知道这是都篆岩。
English: When I came down from the mountain, I saw some people coming with chickens and wine. I asked them about it and learned that it was Tudor Rock.

古文：遂南半里，抵隐山，候炊于朝阳庵。
现代文：于是向南半里，到达隐山，在朝阳庵中等待煮饭吃。
English: So he walked half a mile to the south, reached Hidden Mountain, and waited for the rice to be cooked and eaten in the morning sun hermitage.

古文：复由庵后入洞谒老君，穿上下二岩，乃出，饭庵中。
现代文：再由庵后进洞拜见老君，穿过上、下两个岩洞，这才出来在庵中吃饭。
English: After that, they went into the cave behind the hermitage to pay homage to the old man, and walked through the upper and lower caves before coming out to eat in the hermitage.

古文：僧月印力言： 六洞之下，水深路嫱，必不可入。 
现代文：僧人月印竭力劝说： 六个洞的下面，水深路塞，必定不能进去。 
English: Monk Yueyin tried his best to persuade him: "The bottom of the six caves is a deep-water roadblock, you must not go in.

古文：余言： 邓老曾许为导。 
现代文：我说： 邓老曾答应作向导。 
English: I said, "Deng Lao once agreed to be my guide."

古文：僧曰： 此亦谩言骗人的话，不可信而以身试也。 
现代文：僧人说： 这也是骗人的话，不可信以为真以身相试。 
English: The monk said, "This is also a lie, you can't believe it's true.

古文：既饭，又半里，南过邓老所居，邓老方运斤斫木，余告以来求导游之意。
现代文：饭后，又行半里，向南去探访邓老居住的地方，邓老正在挥动斧头砍木头，我把求他作导游的来意告诉了他。
English: After dinner, we walked another half-mile to the south to visit the place where Deng Lao lived. Deng Lao was swinging an axe to chop wood, and I told him about my intention to ask him to be a tour guide.

古文：邓老曰： 既欲游洞，何不携松明来。
现代文：邓老说： 既然想游洞，为什么不带着松明来。
English: Deng Lao said: Since you want to swim in the cave, why don't you bring a torch?

古文：余无觅处，君明晨携至，当为前驱也。 
现代文：我无处去找，先生明早带来，一定为您作前导。 
English: I can't find it anywhere, but I'll bring it to you tomorrow morning. I'll be your guide.

古文：余始怅怅，问： 松明从何得？ 
现代文：我感到怅怅不乐，间道： 松明从哪里能得到？ 
English: I felt sad and unhappy, and said, "Where can I get a torch?

古文：曰： 须往东江门。
现代文：答： 必得去东江门。
English: A: You have to go to Dongjiangmen.

古文：此处多导游七星者，故市者积者俱在焉。 
现代文：那里有许多导游七星岩的人，所以买松明的人和积储松明的人都在那里。 
English: There are a lot of Qixingyan tour guides there, so the people who buy torches and the people who store torches are all there.

古文：余复与之期，乃西过西湖桥，一里，抵小石峰下。
现代文：我再与他约好日期，就向西走过西湖桥，一里路，抵达一座小石峰下。
English: I made another appointment with him and walked west across the West Lake Bridge, a one-mile walk, to reach the foot of a small rock peak.

古文：其峰片裂如削，中立于众峰之间，东北西之三面，俱有垣环之，而南则濒阳江，接南岭，四面俱不通。
现代文：此峰片片裂开如同刀削，矗立于群峰之中，东、北、西三面，都有墙环绕着它，而南面却濒临阳江，接着南岭，四面都不通。
English: This peak is split like a knife blade, standing in the middle of a group of peaks. It is surrounded by walls on the east, north and west sides, while the south side is close to the Yangjiang River, followed by the South Ridge, and there is no access on all sides.

古文：出入大路至此折而循其北麓，乃西还阳江之涯。
现代文：出入的大路到了这里要转弯顺着它的北麓走，然后往西返回到阳江边来。
English: When you get to the main road leading in and out, turn around and walk along the northern foot of it, and then return west to the Yangjiang River.

古文：窥其垣中，不知是何橐钥。
现代文：窥视那围墙里边，不知是何等的紧要处所。
English: Peeking inside that fence, I don't know what kind of important place it is.

古文：遍绕垣外，见西北隅有逾垣之隙，从而逾之。
现代文：绕遍墙外，见墙西北角有可越过墙的裂缝，从而翻过了墙。
English: After going around the outside of the wall, he saw that there was a crack in the northwest corner of the wall that could be crossed, so he climbed over the wall.

古文：其中荆莽四塞，止有一冢在深翳中。
现代文：墙内四处阻塞着荆棘丛莽，只有一个坟丘在深草密蔽之中。
English: The wall is blocked by thorn bushes in all directions, with only one grave mound hidden in the deep grass.

古文：披其东北，指小峰南麓，则磴级依然，基砌叠缀。
现代文：分开草丛走到坟东北，指向小峰南麓，就见石瞪梯级依然可见，铺砌的石基重重叠叠点缀着。
English: Separating the grass and walking to the northeast of the grave, pointing to the southern foot of the hill, you can still see the stone steps, and the overlapping stone foundations are dotted.

古文：其峰虽小，如莲瓣之间，瓣瓣有房，第云构已湮，而形迹如画。
现代文：这座山峰虽小，如同在莲花瓣之间，瓣瓣都有莲房，只是高大壮丽的建筑物已经湮没，可形制的痕迹如画一般。
English: Although this peak is small, it is like between the lotus petals, each petal has a lotus chamber, but the tall and magnificent buildings have disappeared, and the traces that can be shaped are picturesque.

古文：其半崖坪中有石如犀角，独耸无依，四旁多磨剔成碑，但无字如泰山，令人无从摸索耳。
现代文：它山崖半腰上的平地中有块岩石如像犀牛角，独自耸立无依无靠，四旁多被磨削成石碑，但碑上无字如同泰山的无字碑一样，令人无从探索。
English: Halfway up the cliff, there is a piece of rock on the flat ground that looks like a rhinoceros horn. It stands alone, without any support. Most of its sides have been ground into stone monuments, but there are no words on the monument, just like the wordless monument of Mount Tai, making it impossible to explore.

古文：搜剔久之，知其奇而不知其名，仍西蹈莽棘，逾垣以出。
现代文：它的后部又盘空而上，片片石块如刀削似树枝一样攒聚在一起，尤为奇幻。
English: The back part of it spirals up again, and the pieces of stone are piled up like twigs, like they've been sharpened with a knife. It's especially magical.

古文：候途人问之，曰： 秋儿庄。 云昔宗室有秋英之号者，结构此山为菟裘，后展转他售，丰姓者得之，逐营为地坟地，父子连掇乡科，后为盗发，幸天明见棺而止，故窒垣断道云。
现代文：从它东边下走，山崖半中间岩石又裂成岩洞，上方刻着三个字，只能辨出其中的一个是 东 字，而后边的两个字，却再三擦拭，始终不能认出像什么字。搜寻了很久，了解了它的奇特之处却不知它的名字，仍踩着丛莽荆棘向西走，越墙而出。等候过路人问他，说： 是秋儿庄。 讲起过去皇族中有个别号叫秋英的人，在此山大兴土木作为退隐的场所，后来辗转卖给他人，姓丰的人买到了它，便改建为坟地，父子连中乡试，后来被盗墓贼挖开了坟，幸好天明时见到棺材便住手了，所以砌墙阻断了道路。
English: Walking down the eastern side of it, the rock in the middle of the cliff cracked into a rock cave. Above it, three words were carved, and only one of them could be identified as the Eastern character, while the two words on the back, but repeatedly wiped, could not recognize what kind of word. I searched for a long time, understood its peculiarity but did not know its name, still walked on the bushes of briers and thorns to the west and out of the wall. Waiting for passers-by to ask him, said: It is Qiu'erzhuang. Speaking of the past royal family, there were individuals called Qiu Ying, who built civil engineering in this

古文：秋儿者，即秋英之误也。
现代文：秋儿的名字，就是秋英的误读了。
English: Qiu Er's name is a mispronunciation of Qiu Ying.

古文：其西即阳江西来，有叠堰可渡；而南赵家山、穆陵村、中隐诸洞，隐隐在望。
现代文：它西面就是阳江从西面流来，有垒砌的堤坝可以渡过江去；而南边的赵家山、穆陵村、中隐山诸洞，隐隐约约望得见。
English: To the west of it is the Yangjiang River flowing from the west, and the embanked dams can cross the river; while the caves of Zhaojia Mountain, Muling Village, and Zhongyin Mountain in the south are faintly visible.

古文：循江北岸入。西一里，为狮子岩。
现代文：沿阳江北岸走进去，向西一里，是狮子岩。
English: Walking along the north bank of the Yangjiang River, one mile to the west, is Lion Rock.

古文：西峰顶之西，峰尽而南突，若狮之回踞而昂首者，则狮岩山也。
现代文：西峰顶的西边，山峰尽头便向南突出，好像狮子转身蹲着并昂着头的样子，这就是狮岩山了。
English: On the west side of the west peak, the end of the peak protrudes to the south, as if a lion turned around and crouched with its head held high. This is Lion Rock Mountain.

古文：其西又峙一峰，高耸特立，与狮岩相夹，下有村落，是为狮岩村，其西耸之峰，有岩东向者，凭临峭石之上，中垂一柱，旁裂双楞，正东瞰狮岩之首。
现代文：它西边又屹立着一峰，高耸独立，与狮岩山相对夹立，下边有村落，这就是狮岩村。它西边耸立的山峰，有处向东的岩洞，凭临在陡峭的山石之上，洞中一柱下垂，两旁裂成两个石窗，正对东方俯瞰着狮岩山头。
English: On the west side of it, there is also a mountain peak, towering independently, standing opposite Shiyan Mountain, with a village below, which is Shiyan Village. The mountain peak on the west side, there is a rock cave to the east, leaning on the steep rocks, one pillar in the cave is sagging, and two stone windows are broken on both sides, overlooking the Shiyan Mountain to the east.

古文：其岩不深，而轩夹有致，可以驾风凌烟。
现代文：这个岩洞不深，可高低宽窄有致，可以驾风凌云。
English: This rock cave is not deep, but it can be narrow and narrow, and it can drive the wind through the clouds.

古文：北转有洞北向，其门高穹，其内深坠。
现代文：向北转有个洞向北，洞口高大弯隆，洞内深坠下去。
English: Turning to the north, there is a cave to the north, the mouth of the cave is high and steep, and the cave is deep.

古文：土人以为中通山南，而不知其道；以为旧有观址，而不知其名。
现代文：本地人认为洞通到山的南面，但不认识洞中的路；认为有旧时道观的废址，却不知它的名字。
English: Locals believe that the cave leads to the south side of the mountain, but they do not know the way in the cave; they think that there is a waste site of the old Taoism, but they do not know its name.

古文：拭碑读之，知为天庆岩。
现代文：擦拭石碑读过碑文，知道是天庆岩。
English: Wiping the stone tablet, I read the inscription and knew it was Tianqing Rock.

古文：由级南下，中亘一壁，洞界为两，入数丈，两峡复合。
现代文：由石阶往南下走，当中横亘着一道石壁，洞被分隔为两半，进去几丈，两条峡谷重又合在一起。
English: From the stone steps to the south, there is a stone wall in the middle, the cave is divided into two halves, a few steps in, and the two canyons come together again.

古文：其北峡之上，重门复窍，悬缀甚高，可望而不可攀焉，想登此则南通不远矣。
现代文：那北边峡谷的上方，石门洞穴重重叠叠，悬缀得非常高，可望而不可登了，心想登上此处到山南就不远了。
English: Above the canyon on the northern side, the caves of Shimen are stacked on top of each other. They are so high that it is almost impossible to climb them. If you want to climb here, it is not far to the south of the mountain.

古文：出洞北下，由西北行，石山从薄间，山俱林立圆耸，人行其间，松阴石影，参差掩映。
现代文：出洞往北下山，向西北方行，在石山丛生之间，山峦林立，圆圆地耸起，人走在其间，松荫石影，参差掩映。
English: Out of the cave, go north down the mountain, go to the northwest, between the stone mountain clumps, the mountains stand, rise roundly, people walk among them, pine shade stone shadow, jagged cover.

古文：又北一里，经石山西麓，见两洞比肩俱西向。
现代文：又往北行一里，经过石山西麓，见到两个洞并肩而列，都朝向西方。
English: Another mile north, past the western foot of Stone Mountain, I saw two caves side by side, both facing west.

古文：辄扪棘披崖入，由南洞进五六丈，转从北洞出。
现代文：就抓着荆棘分开石崖进去，由南洞进去五六丈，转而从北洞出来。
English: He grabbed the thorns and went into the rock cliff. He went into the south cave about five or six meters high, and then came out of the north cave.

古文：其中宛转森寒，虽骄阳西射，而不觉其暑。
现代文：洞中弯弯转转阴森寒冷，虽然骄阳西射，但不觉得天气炎热。
English: The bends and twists in the cave are gloomy and cold. Although the sun is shining in the west, it does not feel hot.

古文：出洞再北，仰望洞上飞崖，片片欲舞，余不觉神飞。
现代文：出洞后再往北走，仰望洞上的飞崖，片片像要起舞，我不由神魂飞动。
English: After coming out of the cave, I walked further north, looking up at the flying cliffs above the cave. Some of them looked like they wanted to dance, and I couldn't help but fly.

古文：适有过者，问之，以为王知府山。
现代文：恰好有过路的人，向他打听，认为是王知府山。
English: A man who happened to be passing by asked him if he thought it was Wangchifu Mountain.

古文：其西有林木回丛在平畴间，阳江西环之，指为王知府园。
现代文：山西面有林木成丛回绕在平旷的田野间，阳江在西边环绕着它，过路人说是王知府园。
English: On the west side of the mountain, there are forests and clumps of trees circling in the open fields, and the Yangjiang River surrounds it on the west side. Passers-by say it is Wangchifu Garden.

古文：而沧桑已更，山峦是而村社非，竟不悉王知府为何代何名也。
现代文：可是沧海桑田已经改变，山峦依旧而乡村人世已非原样，竟然不能知悉王知府是哪朝人什么名字了。
English: However, the sea of clouds and the mulberry fields have changed, the mountains are still there, and life in the countryside is not as it used to be. It is not even possible to find out what dynasty Wangchifu belonged to or what his name was.

古文：余一步一转眺，将转西北隅，思其西南有坳可逾，仍还南向，从双洞之左东北而登。
现代文：我一步一转身地眺望，将要转到西北隅时，考虑此山的西南有山坳可以越过去，仍返回来向南走，从双洞的左边往东北上登。
English: I turned to look at the view step by step, and when I was about to turn to the northwest corner, I considered that there were mountains in the southwest of this mountain that I could go over, and still return to go south, and climb northeast from the left side of the double hole.

古文：忽得石磴，共一里，逾其坳间，磴断径绝，乃西攀石锷而上，静闻与顾俱不能从。
现代文：忽然间找到石瞪，共一里，穿越在山坳之间，石瞪小径断了，就向西攀着刀刃样的岩石往上爬，静闻与顾仆都不能跟随。
English: All of a sudden, they found a stone path, a total of one mile, crossing between the mountains. When the stone path broke, they climbed up the blade-like rock to the west. Jing Huan and his servant could not follow.

古文：所攀之石，利若剑锋，簇若林笋，石断崖隔，中俱棘刺，穿棘则身如蜂蝶，缘崖则影共猿鼯。
现代文：所攀的岩石，锋利如剑锋，簇聚似林间的竹笋，岩石断开石崖阻隔，中间全是荆棘刺丛，穿荆棘则身体就像蜜蜂蝴蝶一般，沿着石崖走则身驱便与猿猴姗鼠一样。
English: The rock to be climbed is sharp as a sword, clustered like bamboo shoots in the forest, the rock is separated by a cliff, and the middle is full of thorn bushes, and the body through the thorns is like a bee butterfly, and the body along the cliff is like a monkey mole.

古文：盘岭腰而西，遂出舞空石上，而为丛棘所翳，反不若仰望之明彻焉。
现代文：绕着岭腰往西走，终于走到如飞舞在空中的岩石之上，但被成丛的荆棘遮住了，反而不如抬头仰望那样清楚透彻。
English: Walking west around the ridge, I finally reached a rock that seemed to be flying in the air, but it was covered by thorn bushes, but it was not as clear as looking up.

古文：久之，仍下东坳，瞰其北麓陡绝难下，遂寻旧登之磴，共一里，下西麓，而绕出其北。
现代文：停留了很久，仍然下到东面的山坳，俯瞰山的北麓陡绝难下，便找到原来上登的石瞪，共一里，下到西麓，然后绕到山北面。
English: After staying for a long time, still descending to the eastern foothills of the mountain, overlooking the northern foot of the mountain, which is steep and extremely difficult to descend, they found the original climbing stones, a total of one mile, down to the western foot, and then around to the north face of the mountain.

古文：又北过一峰，其南有支峰叠石，亦冕云异。
现代文：又往北路过一座山峰，峰南有座支峰岩石叠垒，也像冠冕云朵一样奇异。
English: Further north, I passed a mountain peak. On the south side of the peak, there is a rock buttress, which is also as strange as a crown cloud.

古文：抵其东麓，有洞东向，亟贾勇而登，中皆列神所栖，形貌狞恶。
现代文：走到它的东麓，有个洞向东，急忙鼓足勇气上登，洞中都是众神的栖身之所，形状相貌狰狞凶狠。
English: When you get to its eastern foot, there is a cave to the east, and you muster up the courage to climb it. The cave is the shelter of the gods, and its shape is fierce.

古文：从其右内转，复得明窍，则支窦南通者也。
现代文：从神像右边向内转进去，又见到一个透进光亮的洞穴，是旁洞通到南面的地方。
English: Turning inward from the right side of the statue, you will see a cave that lets light through, which is where the side cave leads to the south.

古文：仍出洞，东望有一村在丛林中，时下午渴甚，望之东趋，共一里，得宋家庄焉。
现代文：仍旧出洞，向东望去有一座村庄在丛林中，此时是下午，口渴得厉害，望着村庄往东赶去，共走一里，到了梁家庄。
English: Still out of the cave, looking east, there is a village in the jungle, at this time is the afternoon, thirsty, looking at the village to the east, a total of one mile, to Liangjiazhuang.

古文：村居一簇，当南北两山坞间，而西则列神洞山为屏其后，东则牛角洞山为屏其前，其前皆潴水成塘，有小石梁横其上。
现代文：村子聚居成一团，位于南北两山的山坞间，而西面是有众神所在山洞的山成为屏障列于村后，东边是牛角洞山作为屏障立于村前，村前都积水成为水塘，有小石桥横在水塘上。
English: The villages are clustered together, located between the docks of the two mountains to the north and south, while to the west, the mountain with the cave where the gods are located becomes a barrier at the back of the village, and to the east, Niu Kok Dong Mountain stands as a barrier in front of the village. Water accumulates in front of the village and becomes a pond, and there is a small stone bridge across the pond.

古文：求浆村妪，得凉水一瓢共啜之。
现代文：求村妇给点水，得到一瓢凉水，几人同饮。
English: She asked the village woman for some water and received a bucket of cold water, which several people drank.

古文：随见其汲者东自小石崖边来，趋而视之，则石崖亦当两山之中，其西潴泉一方，自西崖出，盖即牛角洞西来之流也。
现代文：随后见那些汲水的人从东边的小石崖边走来，赶过去观看，就见石崖也正当两山之中，石崖西侧积着一池泉水，从西面山崖上流出来，大概就是牛角洞向西流来的水流了。
English: Then I saw those who were drawing water coming from the small stone cliff on the east side, and when I hurried over to watch, I saw that the stone cliff was also right in the middle of the two mountains. On the west side of the stone cliff, there was a pool of spring water that flowed out of the cliff on the west side. It was probably the water flowing westward from the Cattle Horn Cave.

古文：其泉清冷，可漱可咽，甘沁尘胃。
现代文：此泉清澈凉爽，可以漱口可以下咽，甘甜沁入满是尘垢的肠胃。
English: This spring is clear and cool, can be gargled and swallowed, and sweetly sipped into the stomach full of dirt.

古文：又东一里，即屏风中立牛用洞之山。
现代文：又向东一里，就是如屏风中立的牛角洞山。
English: Another mile to the east is Niu Kok Dong Mountain, which is as neutral as a screen.

古文：自闻衡、永有警，即议省城止开四门，而余俱闭塞。
现代文：从它的南麓向东赶路，又行一里，过了北峡的峡口，向北眺望西峡的半山腰，有个洞很深邃，那是清秀岩无疑了。可暮色已降临，竭力跌跌绊绊赶回城，又是一里，进入西清门。
English: From the southern foot of the canyon, I hurried eastward for another mile, passed the mouth of the North Gorge, and looked northward to the mid-mountain of the West Gorge. There was a deep cave, which was undoubtedly Qingxiu Rock. But twilight had fallen, and I stumbled back to the city, another mile, and entered the West Clear Gate.

古文：居人以汲水不便，苦求当道，止容樵汲，而行李俱屏之四门。
现代文：回头看静闻、顾仆，都很久没来到，仍赶到城门，才知两人被守门人拦住了。
English: Looking back, Jing Huan and Gu Min, both of whom had not come for a long time, still arrived at the city gate, only to learn that the two were stopped by the gatekeeper.

古文：乃与俱出，循城而北。
现代文：只好与他们一同出城，顺着城墙往北走。
English: We had no choice but to leave the city with them and walk north along the city walls.

古文：半里，过城外西悬之洞，其下有级可攀而登，日暮不及。
现代文：半里，经过城外悬在西边的山洞，它下方有石阶可以攀登上去，因天晚来不及登。
English: Half a mile away, beyond the city, there is a cave on the western side. Below it, there are stone steps that can be climbed, but it is too late to climb them.

古文：遂东转，又半里入北门焉，已昏黑矣。
现代文：于是往东转，又走半里进入北门，已经昏黑了。
English: So I turned east and walked another half mile to the north gate. It was already dark.

古文：又二里，抵唐寓。
现代文：又行二里，到达唐家寓所。
English: Another two miles later, we arrived at the Tang family's apartment.

古文：初六日，晨起，大雨如注。
现代文：初六日早晨起床，大雨如注。
English: I got up in the morning on the 6th day of the first month, and it was raining heavily.

古文：晨餐后，急冒雨赴南门，行街衢如涉溪涧。
现代文：早餐后，急忙冒雨奔赴南门，走在街道上如涉过溪涧。
English: After breakfast, I hurriedly ran to the South Gate in the rain. Walking on the streets was like wading through a stream.

古文：抵拓之家，则昨日所期仍未往拓，以墨沈墨汁翻澄支吾；再促同往，又以雨湿石润，不能着纸为解。
现代文：来到拓工的家中，可昨天讲定的却仍未去拓，用墨汁倾翻的话来搪塞；再次催促他一同前去，他又拿雨湿石润，纸不能附着的话来辩解。
English: Arriving at the excavator's home, he still did not go to the excavation as he had said yesterday, using the word "overturned" as an excuse; he urged him to go with him again, and he used the excuse that the paper could not stick to the wet stone.

古文：窥其意，不过迁延需索耳。
现代文：推测他的意思，不过是故意拖延敲诈勒索罢了。
English: To speculate as to what he meant is nothing more than a deliberate attempt to delay and blackmail.

古文：及征色发声，始再期明日往取，余乃返寓。
现代文：到变脸厉声发作时，这才再次约定明天去取，我于是返回寓所。
English: It wasn't until I had a panic attack that I made another appointment to pick it up the next day, and I returned to the apartment.

古文：是日雨阵连绵，下午少止，迨等到暮而倾倒不绝，遂彻夜云。
现代文：这一天淫雨阵阵连绵不断，下午稍微停了一下，到天晚时又倾盆不绝，竟下了一个通宵。
English: On this day, torrential downpours were incessant. In the afternoon, there was a brief pause, but by late in the day, the downpours continued, and an all-nighter was declared.

古文：初七日，夜雨达旦，市间水涌如决堤，令人临衢而叹河无舟也。
现代文：初七日夜里下雨直到天明，街市上雨水腾涌如同决堤，让人面对街道却感叹河里无船了。
English: On the night of the seventh day of the first month, it rained until dawn, and the rainwater gushed onto the streets as if it were breaking through a dike. People faced the streets but lamented that there were no boats in the river.

古文：令静闻、顾仆涉水而去索碑拓工家。
现代文：叫静闻、顾仆涉水前去拓工家索取碑贴。
English: He called Jingwen, and the attendant waded into the water to go to the excavator's house to request the plaque.

古文：余停屐寓中，览《西事珥》、《百粤风土记》。
现代文：我停息在寓所中，阅读《西事洱》、《百粤风土记》。
English: I rested in my apartment, reading "Western Affairs" and "History of Guangdong."

古文：薄暮，顾仆、静闻返命。
现代文：将近傍晚，顾仆、静闻回来复命。
English: In the late afternoon, Gu Min and Jing He came back to answer the summons.

古文：问： 何以迟迟？ 
现代文：问道： 为什么迟迟不来？ 
English: He asked: Why are you so late?

古文：曰： 候同往拓。 
现代文：答： 等着一同去拓。 
English: A: We are looking forward to exploring together.

古文：问： 碑何在？ 曰： 仍指索钱。 
现代文：问： 碑贴在哪里？  答： 仍指望要钱。 
English: Q: Where is the plaque? A: Still hoping for money.

古文：此中人之狡而贪，一至于此！
现代文：这一带人的狡诈与贪婪，竟然到了这种地步！
English: The cunning and greed of the people in this area has come to this!

古文：付之一笑而已。
现代文：付之一笑而已。
English: It was just a laugh.

古文：是日以仆去，不及午餐，迨其归执爂烧火做饭，已并作晚供矣。
现代文：这天因为仆人离开了，来不及吃午餐，等他归来才烧火做饭，已一并作为晚餐了。
English: On this day, because the servant had left, it was too late to have lunch. He had to wait until he returned to light the fire and cook the meal, and it was already served as dinner.

古文：初八日，夜雨仍达旦，不及晨餐，令静闻、顾仆再以钱索碑。
现代文：初八日夜雨仍通宵达旦，来不及吃早餐，命令静闻、顾仆再拿着钱去索取碑贴。
English: On the night of the eighth day of the first month, the rain still lasted all night, and it was too late to have breakfast. I ordered him to listen quietly, and then my servant took the money to ask for the monument.

古文：余独坐寓中，雨霏霏不止。
现代文：我独自坐在寓所中，雨霏霏不止。
English: I'm sitting alone in my apartment and it's raining.

古文：上午，静闻及仆以碑至，拓法甚滥恶，然无如之何也。
现代文：上午，静闻及仆人拿着碑贴来到，拓碑的技法极其粗糙恶劣，然而拿它无可奈何了。
English: In the morning, Jing He and his servant came with the monument. The technique of erecting the monument was extremely rough and bad, but there was nothing they could do with it.

古文：始就炊，晨与午不复并餐。
现代文：开始动手烧饭，早餐与午饭不再并在一起吃了。
English: I started to cook, and breakfast and lunch were no longer eaten at the same time.

古文：下午整束行李，为明日早行计，而静闻、顾仆俱病。
现代文：下午整理捆扎行李，为明日早晨动身做准备，但静闻、顾仆都病了。
English: In the afternoon, they packed their bags and prepared to leave tomorrow morning, but Jing Xuan and Gu Min are both ill.

古文：初九日，晨起，天色暗爽，而二病俱僵卧不行，余无如之何，始躬操爂具，市犬肉，极肥白，从来所无者。
现代文：初九日早晨起床，天色昏暗，可两个病人都僵卧着不能走路、我对他们无可奈何，开始亲自操持炊具，用饮酒吃肉来自我消遣而已。
English: I got up on the morning of the 9th day of the first month, the sky was dark, but both patients were lying motionless and unable to walk. I couldn't do anything for them, I began to operate the cooker myself, and I only drank alcohol and ate meat for my own amusement.

