古文：吴兢，汴州浚仪人。
现代文：吴兢是汴州浚仪县人。
English: Wu Jing is from Jianyi County, Luzhou.

古文：少厉志，贯知经史，方直寡谐比，惟与魏元忠、硃敬则游。二人者当路，荐兢才堪论撰，诏直史馆，修国史。
现代文：从小很有抱负，同时精通经学和史学，他的正直很少人比得上。他只和魏元忠、朱敬则交朋友，这两人当了宰相，推荐吴兢的才华能写国史，诏命在史馆任职，写国史。
English: He was very ambitious from a young age. He was proficient in both classics and history, and his honesty was unmatched by very few. He only made friends with Wei Yuanzhong and Zhu Jing. The two became prime ministers, recommended Wu Jing's talent to write national history, and ordered him to work in the history museum and write national history.

古文：迁右拾遗内供奉。
现代文：后升任右拾遗内供奉。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Right Repository of Imperial Relics.

古文：神龙中，改右补阙。
现代文：神龙年间，调任右补阙。
English: In the years of the Dragon God, he was transferred to the post of the Right Complementary Prime Minister.

古文：节闵太子难，奸臣诬构安国相王与谋，朝廷大恐。
现代文：节闵太子之乱，奸臣诬陷安国相王参与了阴谋，朝廷大惊。
English: In Prince Setsuko's Rebellion, treacherous vassals falsely accused Prime Minister An of being involved in a conspiracy. The Imperial Court was shocked.

古文：兢上言： 文明后，皇运不殊如带。
现代文：吴兢上奏说： 文明年以来，帝业一脉相承。
English: Wu Jing said: Since the beginning of civilization, the imperial lineage has been passed down.

古文：陛下龙兴，恩被骨肉，相王与陛下同气，亲莫加焉。今贼臣日夜阴谋，必欲寘之极法。
现代文：皇上复位，加恩于亲人，皇上和相王是兄弟，骨肉情深。现奸臣日夜谋划，定要把他杀死。
English: The emperor has been restored to the throne, and is beholden to his relatives. The emperor and the king are brothers, and have a deep affection for each other. The current treacherous vassal is plotting day and night to kill him.

古文：相王仁孝，遭荼苦哀毁，以陛下为命，而自托于手足。
现代文：相王仁慈孝顺，遭受苦难悲伤，和皇上相依为命，认为自己和皇上情同手足。
English: He was kind and filial to the king, suffered hardships and sorrow, and depended on the emperor for his life, believing that he and the emperor were brothers and sisters.

古文：若信邪佞，委之于法，伤陛下之恩，失天下望。
现代文：如相信奸臣，把他杀死，会有损皇上的仁德，使天下人失望。
English: If you believe a traitor and kill him, you will damage the emperor's benevolence and disappoint the world.

古文：芟刈股肱，独任胸臆，可为寒心。
现代文：杀死骨肉，一意孤行，让人寒心。
English: To kill bones and flesh, to go ahead with one's own will, is chilling.

古文：自昔翦伐宗支，委任异姓，未有不亡者。
现代文：历来杀死骨肉，任用不同姓的人，没有不灭亡的。
English: People who have always killed their own flesh and blood and used different surnames will not go unpunished.

古文：秦任赵高，汉任王莽，晋家自相鱼肉，隋室猜忌子弟，海内麋沸，验之覆车，安可重迹？
现代文：秦朝任用赵高，汉朝任用王莽，晋朝自杀骨肉，隋朝猜疑儿子和弟弟，都天下大乱，前车已倾覆，怎能还走它的老路？
English: The Qin Dynasty appointed Zhao Gao, the Han Dynasty appointed Wang Mang, the Jin Dynasty committed suicide, and the Sui Dynasty suspected their sons and brothers. The whole world was in turmoil. The cart had been overturned. How could it still follow its old path?

古文：且根朽者叶枯，源涸者游竭。
现代文：何况树根朽烂树叶就会干枯，河源枯竭河水就会断流。
English: What's more, if the roots of trees rot, the leaves will wither, and if the source of a river dries up, the river will stop flowing.

古文：子弟，国之根源，可使枯竭哉！
现代文：儿子兄弟就是国家的树根和河源，怎能杀死他们呢？
English: Sons and brothers are the roots of the country and the source of its rivers. How can they be killed?

古文：皇家枝干，夷芟略尽。
现代文：现皇家子孙，死得差不多了。
English: Now the royal offspring, almost dead.

古文：陛下即位四年，一子弄兵被诛，一子以罪谪去，惟相王朝夕左右。 斗粟 之刺，《苍蝇》之诗，不可不察。
现代文：皇上登基四年来，一个儿子起兵被杀，一个儿子因罪贬到远方，只有相王早晚陪伴。 一斗粟尚可舂，兄弟二人不相容 的歌谣 ，苍蝇间黑白，谗巧令亲疏 的诗篇，不能不引人深思。
English: In the four years since the emperor ascended to the throne, one son was killed in the military, one son was banished to a distant place for a crime, accompanied only by the king of the opposite sex morning and night. A bout of millet is not bad, the songs of the two incompatible brothers, the black and white between flies, the poems of the skillful alienation, can not but arouse deep thought.

古文：伏愿陛下全常棣之恩，慰罔极之心，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：希望皇上能保全兄弟情谊，安慰被谗言诬陷的弟弟，这是国家的万幸！ 
English: I hope that the Emperor will be able to preserve brotherhood and comfort his brother, who has been slandered. This is a great blessing for the country!

古文：累迁起居郎，与刘子玄、徐坚等并职。
现代文：他多次升官后任起居郎，和刘子玄、徐坚等人同职。
English: He was promoted many times and later served as kijiro, working alongside Liu Zixuan, Xu Jian and others.

古文：玄宗初立，收还权纲，锐于决事，群臣畏伏。
现代文：唐玄宗刚即位，收回了权力，对事务敢于决断，百官畏惧佩服。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of Tang ascended the throne, he took back power. He dared to make decisions on affairs, which made the officials fear and admire him.

古文：兢虑帝果而不及精，乃上疏曰：自古人臣不谏则国危，谏则身危。
现代文：吴兢怕皇帝果断但不细致，就上奏说： 自古以来臣子不劝谏国家就危险，但劝谏自己又危险。
English: Wu Jing was afraid that the emperor was decisive but not meticulous, so he wrote: Since ancient times, it is dangerous for a courtier not to advise the country, but it is dangerous to advise himself.

古文：臣愚，食陛下禄，不敢避身危之祸。
现代文：我领皇上给的俸禄，不敢躲避自己的危险。
English: I take the salary given by the emperor and dare not run away from my own danger.

古文：比见上封事者，言有可采，但赐束帛而已，未尝蒙召见，被拔擢。其忤旨，则朝堂决杖，传送本州，或死于流贬。
现代文：现看见上奏的人，说得可取，只赏绸缎罢了，没有受接见、被提拔；说得不合心意，就在朝廷上受杖刑，贬职回乡、或者死在流放处。
English: Now he saw that those who played the harpsichord, if they spoke what was desirable, were only rewarded with silken robes, but were not received or promoted; if they spoke what was not to their liking, they were caned at court, demoted and sent back to their hometowns, or died in exile.

古文：由是臣下不敢进谏。
现代文：因此臣子不敢劝谏。
English: Therefore, the courtiers did not dare to persuade him.

古文：古者设诽谤木，欲闻己过；今封事，谤木比也。
现代文：古代君主设有诽谤木，想知道自己的过失。现在的上奏就是古代的诽谤木。
English: The ancient monarchs had a libel stick and wanted to know their faults. The ancient libel stick is now the first string.

古文：使所言是，有益于国；使所言非，无累于朝。
现代文：如果他说得对，当然对国家有利；即使他说得不对，也对国家无害。
English: If he says the right thing, of course, it will be good for the country; even if he says the wrong thing, it will not harm the country.

古文：陛下何遽加斥逐，以杜塞直言？
现代文：皇上为什么要立即予以处罚流放，来堵住直言劝谏呢？
English: Why did the emperor immediately punish and exile him to stop him from speaking out?

古文：道路流传，相视怪愕。夫汉高帝赦周昌桀、纣之对，晋武帝受刘毅桓、灵之讥，况陛下豁达大度，不能容此狂直耶？
现代文：舆论相传，都认为奇怪，汉高祖赦免了周昌说他是夏桀、商纣王的指责，晋武帝接受了刘毅说他是汉代恒、灵帝的批评，何况皇上的胸怀宽广，难道不能容纳这些狂放和耿直的话吗？
English: Public opinion, passed down from generation to generation, all thought it was strange that Emperor Gaozu pardoned Zhou Changcun's accusation that he was Xia Yao, the king of merchants, and Emperor Jinwu accepted Liu Yi's criticism that he was the Han Dynasty's Heng, the spiritual emperor. What's more, the emperor's mind was broad. Couldn't he accommodate these wild and straightforward words?

古文：夫人主居尊极之位，颛生杀之权，其为威严峻矣。
现代文：皇上处于至尊无上的地位，掌握了臣下生死的权力，这威严够可怕了。
English: The emperor is in a supreme position and holds the power of life and death over his subjects. This is a terrible majesty.

古文：开情抱，纳谏诤，下犹惧不敢尽，奈何以为罪？
现代文：敞开胸怀，听取劝谏，臣子还害怕不敢全说，为什么还治他们的罪呢？
English: Open your heart, listen to the advice, the courtiers are still afraid to say it all, why punish them for their sins?

古文：且上有所失，下必知之。
现代文：皇上如有过失，臣民一定能知道。
English: If the emperor is at fault, his subjects will certainly know about it.

古文：故郑人欲毁乡校，而子产不听也。
现代文：所以郑国想毁掉乡校，子产不答应。
English: Therefore, Zheng Guo wanted to destroy the township school, but the children did not agree.

古文：陛下初即位，犹有褚无量、张廷珪、韩思复、辛替否、柳泽、袁楚客等数上疏争时政得失。
现代文：皇上刚即位，还有褚无量、张廷王圭、韩思复、辛替否、柳泽、袁楚客等人多次上奏争论朝政利弊。
English: The emperor had just ascended to the throne, and there were many arguments about the benefits and drawbacks of the imperial government, such as Zou Muryu, Zhang Tingwanggui, Han Sifu, Xin Tieng, Liu Ze, and Yuan Chuk.

古文：自顷上封事，往往得罪，谏者顿少。
现代文：自从近来呈上奏章的人，常常被治罪，劝谏的人立刻减少了。
English: Since recently, those who have presented a complaint have often been punished, and those who have been reprimanded have immediately decreased.

古文：是鹊巢覆而凤不至，理之然也。
现代文：这与喜鹊窝被弄翻凤凰就不来了，道理是一样的。
English: This is the same as if a magpie's nest is knocked over and the phoenix does not come.

古文：臣诚恐天下骨鲠士以谠言为戒，桡直就曲，斗方为刓，偷合苟容，不复能尽节忘身，纳君于道矣。
现代文：我确实害怕全国正直的人都不敢直言，迎合邪恶，只求活命，不再能保全节操不顾性命，使皇上不能行正道了。
English: I really fear that honest people throughout the country will not dare to speak their minds, will pander to evil, and will only seek to survive. They will no longer be able to preserve their integrity regardless of their lives, so that the emperor will not be able to walk a righteous path.

古文：夫帝王之德，莫盛于纳谏。故曰： 木从绳则正，后从谏则圣。 
现代文： 皇帝的美德，没有比接受劝谏更重要的，所以前人说： 木材经过墨线测量加工后就是直材，皇帝听从劝谏就是圣王。 
English: The emperor's virtue is nothing more important than accepting advice, so the ancients said: the wood is straight after being measured and processed by the ink line, and the emperor is a saint if he listens to advice.

古文：又曰： 朝有讽谏，犹发之有梳。猛虎在山林，藜藿为之不采。 
现代文：又说 ：朝廷里有劝谏，就好比头发有梳子，山林中有猛虎，就没人敢采野菜。 
English: He also said: "If there are persuaders in the imperial court, it is as if the hair has a comb. If there are tigers in the mountains and forests, no one will dare to pick vegetables."

古文：忠谏之有益如此。
现代文：忠直劝谏的益处就像这里所说的。
English: The benefits of honest persuasion are as described here.

古文：自古上圣之君，恐不闻己过，故尧设谏鼓，禹拜昌言。
现代文：自古以来好的君主，只担心不能听说自己的过失，所以尧设有谏鼓，禹听直言下拜。
English: Since ancient times, good monarchs have only been worried about not being able to hear about their own mistakes, so they set up a gong and drum, listen to the straight talk and bow down.

古文：不肖之主，自谓圣智，拒谏害忠，桀杀关龙逢而灭于汤，纣杀王子比干而灭于周，此其验也。
现代文：不好的君主，自认为英明，拒绝劝谏残害忠臣，夏桀杀死关龙逢因而被商汤王灭亡，商纣王杀死了王子比干因而被周朝消灭，这都是证明。
English: Bad monarchs, who thought they were wise, refused to persuade their subordinates to harm their loyal subjects. Xia Yao killed Guan Longfeng and was killed by Shang Tang Wang. Shang Qian Wang killed Prince Bi Gan and was killed by the Zhou Dynasty. These are all proofs.

古文：夫与治同道罔不兴，与乱同道罔不亡。
现代文：用古代治国的好办法治国没有治理不好的。
English: There is no such thing as a bad way to govern a country as a good way to govern a country in ancient times.

古文：人将疾，必先不甘鱼肉之味；国将亡，必先不甘忠谏之说。
现代文：用古代亡国之君的办法治国没有不灭亡的。人要害病了，一定会先不想吃鱼和肉；国家将要灭亡，必定先不认为忠言直谏好。
English: There is no way to rule a country using the method of the ancient ruined king without perishing. If people want to get sick, they must first not want to eat fish and meat; if the country is going to perish, they must first not think that being loyal is good.

古文：呜呼，惟陛下深监于兹哉！
现代文：啊，古人都很重视这呀！
English: Ah, the ancients took this very seriously!

古文：隋炀帝骄矜自负，以为尧、舜莫己若，而讳亡憎谏。乃曰： 有谏我者，当时不杀，后必杀之。 
现代文：隋炀帝骄傲自大，认为尧、舜赶不上自己，忌讳劝谏，就说： 有劝谏我的，当场不杀，以后也一定要杀死他。 
English: Sui and Qian emperors were proud and conceited. They thought that they could not catch up with themselves, and they were afraid of persuading others. So they said, "If someone persuades me, I will not kill him on the spot, but I will definitely kill him in the future."

古文：大臣苏威欲开一言，不敢发，因五月五日献《古文尚书》，帝以为讪己，即除名。
现代文：重臣苏威想劝谏，不敢开口，在五月初五献上了《古文尚书》，隋炀帝说是讥讽自己，立刻将他免职。
English: Chief minister Su Wei wanted to persuade him, but did not dare to open his mouth. On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, he presented the "Ancient Texts of the Shang Dynasty." Emperor Sui said that he was mocking himself, and immediately removed him from his post.

古文：萧瑀谏无伐辽，出为河池郡守。
现代文：萧蠫劝不要征辽，被贬出京城任河池郡太守。
English: Xiao Yan advised not to conscript Liao, and he was banished from the capital to become the governor of Hechi County.

古文：董纯谏无幸江都，就狱赐死。
现代文：董纯劝不要去江都，被关到狱中杀死了。
English: He advised Dong Chun not to go to Jiangdu, and was put in prison and killed.

古文：自是蹇谔之士，去而不顾，外虽有变，朝臣钳口，帝不知也。
现代文：从此正直的臣子，都离开了朝廷，朝外虽然出了事，朝中大臣都不敢说，隋炀帝就不知道。
English: From then on, all the honest courtiers left the imperial court. Although there was an incident outside the imperial court, the ministers in the imperial court did not dare to say anything, and Emperor Sui did not know.

古文：身死人手，子孙剿绝，为天下笑。
现代文：后自己被人杀死，子孙都灭绝了，被天下人嘲笑。
English: Later, he was killed, his children and grandchildren were exterminated, and he was ridiculed by the world.

古文：太宗皇帝好悦至言，时有魏徵、王珪、虞世南、李大亮、岑文本、刘洎、马周、褚遂良、杜正伦、高季辅，咸以切谏，引居要职。
现代文：太宗皇帝喜欢劝谏，当时有魏征、王王圭、虞世南、李大亮、岑文本、刘洎、冯周、褚遂良、杜正伦、高季辅，都因直言，被任命为重臣。
English: Emperor Taizong liked to persuade him. At that time, Wei Zheng, Wang Wang Gui, Yu Shennan, Li Dailiang, Yu Wenwen, Liu Wei, Feng Zhou, Yu Suiliang, Du Zhenglun, Gao Ji Fu, were all appointed as senior vassals because of their outspokenness.

古文：尝谓宰相曰： 自知者为难。如文人巧工，自谓己长，若使达者、大匠诋诃商略，则芜辞拙迹见矣。
现代文：他曾对宰相说 ：认识自己是难事，就像作家巧匠，认为自己不错，如让更高明的人来评论，那么短处都看出来了。
English: He once said to the Prime Minister: "It is difficult to know oneself. It is like a skilled writer who thinks that he is good. If you let a more intelligent person comment, then you will see all the shortcomings."

古文：天下万机，一人听断，虽甚忧劳，不能尽善。
现代文：国家事务繁多，一个人了解判断，虽然很尽心尽力，也不能都做好。
English: The affairs of state are manifold, and one man's judgment, however diligent, cannot do them all.

古文：今魏徵随事谏正，多中朕失，如明鉴照形，美恶毕见。 
现代文：现魏征随时劝谏，多数说中了我的过失，就像镜子照脸，好坏都看出来了。 
English: Now Wei Zheng can be persuaded at any time, and most people say that they have caught my fault. It is like a mirror looking at a face, and good and bad can be seen.

古文：当是时，有上书益于政者，皆黏寝殿之壁，坐望卧观，虽狂瞽逆意，终不以为忤。
现代文：在那时候，有对朝政有益处的上奏，他都贴到卧室的墙上，坐着躺着都看，即使是错误和不合心意的，也不认为忤逆。
English: At that time, there was a prelude to the benefits of the government, he posted it on the wall of the bedroom, and he watched it while sitting and lying down. Even if it was wrong and not what he wanted, he did not think it was rebellious.

古文：故外事必闻，刑戮几措，礼义大行。
现代文：因此朝外的事情都能知道，刑罚几乎不用了，礼义盛行全国。
English: As a result, things can be known both inside and outside the country, punishments are almost never used, and propriety prevails throughout the country.

古文：陛下何不遵此道，与圣祖继美乎？
现代文：皇上为什么不遵从这办法，在圣明祖先之后再建盛世呢？
English: Why didn't the emperor follow this method and restore prosperity after the ancestors of Shomei?

古文：夫以一人之意，综万方之政，明有所不烛，智有所不周，上心未谕于下，下情未达于上。
现代文：凭一个人的智慧，总管全国的政务，情况难以全部了解，考虑不能非常周全，皇上的用意不能被臣子全理解，下面的情况可能没反映上来。
English: With the wisdom of one person, the head of the country's government affairs, it is difficult to fully understand the situation, the consideration cannot be very thorough, the emperor's intention cannot be fully understood by the vassal, and the following situation may not be reflected.

古文：伏惟以虚受人，博览兼听，使深者不隐，远者不塞，所谓 辟四门、明四目 也。
现代文：只有虚心纳谏，多看多听，让不外露的人不隐瞒、远处的人不觉得说话困难，这就是人们说的 打开四边的门、睁开四边的眼睛 。
English: Only with an open mind, read more, see more, listen more, so that those who do not reveal do not hide, and those who are far away do not find it difficult to speak. This is what people say: Open the four doors, open the four eyes.

古文：其能直言正谏不避死亡之诛者，特加宠荣，待以不次，则失之东隅，冀得之桑榆矣。
现代文：对那些敢于直说，用正道劝谏，不怕被处死的臣下，应特别给予恩宠荣耀，破格提拔，那么即使以前有过失，今后也能弥补了。 
English: For those vassals who dare to speak frankly, use the right way to persuade others, and are not afraid of being executed, they should be given special grace, glory, and unprecedented promotion. Then, even if they have made mistakes before, they can make up for it in the future.

古文：寻以母丧去官。
现代文：不久他因给母亲守丧离职。
English: He left shortly afterwards to attend his mother's funeral.

古文：服除，自陈修史有绪，家贫不能具纸笔，愿得少禄以终余功。
现代文：守丧期满，自称写史书有了头绪，家穷不能供应纸和笔，请求给一点俸禄来完成剩余的工作。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he said that he had a clue to write a history book. His family was too poor to supply paper and pens, and he asked for a little salary to complete the remaining work.

古文：有诏拜谏议大夫，复修史。
现代文：皇帝下诏封为谏议大夫，又写国史。
English: Emperor Zhaofu appointed him as the chief adviser to the State Council, and he also wrote a national history.

古文：睿宗崩，实录留东都，诏兢驰驿取进梓宫。
现代文：唐睿宗去世了，皇帝实录留在洛阳，有诏命吴兢乘驿车取回放进灵柩中去。
English: When Tang Ruizong passed away, Emperor Shih Luo stayed in Luoyang. Wu Jing was ordered to take the carriage to retrieve and place the coffin.

古文：以父丧解，宰相张说用赵冬曦代之。
现代文：他又因父亲去世离职，宰相张说任命赵冬曦取代他。
English: He also resigned due to the death of his father, and Prime Minister Zhang said that Zhao Dongxi was appointed to replace him.

古文：终丧，为太子左庶子。
现代文：守丧期满，任太子左庶子。
English: At the end of the mourning period, the Prince's left illegitimate son was appointed.

古文：开元十三年，帝东封太山，道中数驰射为乐。
现代文：开元十三年，皇帝东行去泰山封禅，路上多次打猎取乐。
English: In the thirteenth year of the first century, the emperor traveled east to Mount Tai to meditate. On the way, he hunted several times for fun.

古文：兢谏曰： 方登岱告成，不当逐狡兽，使有垂堂之危、朽株之殆。 
现代文：吴兢进谏说： 将登泰山感谢天地的保佑，不应追猎野兽，怕出危险。 皇帝听从了。
English: Wu Jingjing said: I will climb Mount Tai to thank the blessing of heaven and earth. I should not chase wild animals for fear of danger. The emperor obeyed.

古文：帝纳之。明年六月，大风，诏群臣陈得失。兢上疏曰： 自春以来，亢阳不雨，乃六月戊午，大风拔树，坏居人庐舍。
现代文：第二年六月，起了大风，有诏要百官论吉凶所在，吴兢上奏说 ：从春天以来，久旱不下雨，到六月十二日，大风拔起树木，毁坏住户房屋。
English: In June of the following year, a gale blew up, and there was an edict calling for all the officials to discuss what was good and bad. Wu Jing reported: Since the spring, there had been no rain for a long time, and on June 12, the gale uprooted trees and destroyed the houses of the residents.

古文：传曰： 敬德不用，厥灾旱。
现代文：传中说： 不用敬德，有旱灾。
English: According to legend, there is no need to be virtuous, there is a drought.

古文：上下蔽隔，庶位逾节，阴侵于阳，则旱灾应 。
现代文：君臣隔绝，庶子超越本分，阴侵入到阳里，那么就有旱灾发生。 
English: Monarchs and ministers are cut off, illegitimate children overstep their bounds, yin intrudes into yang, and then there is a drought.

古文：又曰： 政悖德隐，厥风发屋坏木。 
现代文：又说 ：国政不当仁德不显，大风就毁屋拔树。 
English: He also said: If the national policy is not appropriate and benevolence is not apparent, a strong wind will destroy houses and uproot trees.

古文：风，阴类，大臣之象。
现代文：风是阴类，是大臣的象征。
English: The wind is female, the symbol of the minister.

古文：恐陛下左右有奸臣擅权，怀谋上之心。
现代文：恐怕皇上亲信有奸臣专权，有算计皇上的阴谋。
English: I'm afraid that the emperor's cronies have the power of treacherous vassals, and there is a calculated imperial conspiracy.

古文：臣闻百王之失，皆由权移于下，故曰： 人主与人权，犹倒持太阿，授之以柄。 
现代文：我听说很多君主的过失，都由于权力交给了臣下，因此人们说 ：帝王把权力给别人，就像倒拿太阿剑，把剑柄给了别人。 
English: I have heard that many of the faults of monarchs are due to the power given to their subjects, so people say: the emperor gives power to others, just like taking a sword and giving the hilt to others.

古文：夫天降灾异，欲人主感悟，愿深察天变，杜绝其萌。
现代文：上天降下灾害，是想使皇上醒悟，希望深入考察天气的变化，杜绝引起这变化的问题的发展。
English: The disasters sent down by heaven were intended to wake up the emperor, hoping to thoroughly investigate the changes in the weather and prevent the development of the problems that caused this change.

古文：且陛下承天后、和帝之乱，府库未充，冗员尚繁，户口流散，法出多门，赇谒大行，趋竞弥广。
现代文：皇上在武则天皇后、中宗皇帝动乱之后执政，仓库不充实，不必要的官还很多，住户人口流失，政令不一致，贿赂风行，钻营者更多了。
English: The emperor came to power after the upheavals of Empress Wu Zetian and Emperor Zhongzong. Warehouses were not full, there were still many unnecessary officials, households were losing population, government decrees were inconsistent, bribery was rampant, and there were more people engaging in illegal encampments.

古文：此弊未革，实陛下庶政之阙也，臣不胜惓惓。
现代文：这些弊政没改变，是皇上执政的缺陷，我为此非常担忧。
English: These maladministrations have not changed. They are defects of the emperor's rule, and I am very worried about this.

古文：愿斥屏群小，不为慢游，出不御之女，减不急之马，明选举，慎刑罚，杜侥幸，存至公，虽有旱风之变，不足累圣德矣。 
现代文：希望贬谪奸臣，不出去游玩，将多余的宫女放出皇宫，削减不急用的马匹，选贤举能，慎用刑罚，不用谗佞者，而用正直臣，即使有天旱刮风的变化，也不会成为圣明仁德的忧虑。 
English: It is hoped that demeaning treacherous ministers, not going out to play, releasing superfluous palace maids from the palace, reducing horses that are not urgently needed, selecting talents, using punishments carefully, not using those who are lazy, and using honest ministers, even if there are changes in drought and wind, will not become the worries of Shengming Rende.

古文：始，兢在长安、景龙间任史事，时武三思、张易之等监领，阿贵朋佞，酿泽浮辞，事多不实。
现代文：当初，吴兢在长安、景龙年间任史官，当时武三思、张易之等人主管修史，史官多阿谀权贵讨好佞臣，编造吹捧，记事多不真实。
English: At first, Wu Jing served as a historian during the Chang'an and Jinglong dynasties. At that time, Wu Sansi, Zhang Yizhi and others were in charge of revising history. Historians were too arrogant and powerful to please their subordinates, they made up and touted, and most of the records were untrue.

古文：时张说罢宰相，在家修史。
现代文：吴兢不满意，私下撰写《唐书》、《唐春秋》，没写完。
English: Wu Jing was not satisfied and privately wrote "Tang Shu" and "Tang Chunqiu" without finishing them.

古文：大臣奏国史不容在外，诏兢等赴馆撰录。
现代文：到这时，求官职领俸禄买纸笔，想能把书写成。有诏命吴兢等到史馆里去写。
English: At this time, Wu Jing had to wait until he was in the history museum to write, because he wanted to buy a pen and paper to write a book.

古文：进封长垣县男。
现代文：升任长垣县男爵。
English: He was promoted to Baron of Nagagaki County.

古文：久之，坐书事不当，贬荆州司马，以史草自随。
现代文：一段时间以后，因被判记事不恰当，贬任荆州司马，他将史书草稿带着赴任。
English: Some time later, he was demoted to Jingzhou Sima for being convicted of improper record-keeping, and he took the draft of the history book with him to his new post.

古文：萧嵩领国史，奏遣使者就兢取书，得六十馀篇。
现代文：萧嵩主管编史书后，上奏派使者到吴兢那里去拿书槁，得到了六十多篇。
English: After Xiao Song was in charge of compiling the history book, Shangso sent an emissary to Wu Jing to get the bookmark, and obtained more than sixty articles.

古文：累迁洪州刺史，坐累下除舒州。
现代文：多次升官后任洪州刺史，因受牵连贬为舒州刺史。
English: He was promoted several times to the post of Hongzhou chief historian, but was demoted to the post of Shuzhou chief historian due to the implication.

古文：天宝初，入为恒王傅。
现代文：天宝初年，进京任恒王傅。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he went to Beijing and was appointed as Hengwangfu.

古文：虽年老衰偻甚，意犹愿还史职。
现代文：虽然年老体衰背驼得厉害，心里还想再任史官。
English: Although his old age has made his body weak and his back is hunched, he still wants to be a historian.

古文：李林甫嫌其衰，不用。
现代文：李林甫嫌他衰老，不任用他。
English: Li Linfu thought he was getting old and did not appoint him.

古文：卒，年八十。
现代文：后去世了，享年八十岁。
English: He later died at the age of 80.

古文：兢叙事简核，号良史。
现代文：吴兢记事简要详备，被称为良史。
English: Wu Jing recorded events in a concise and detailed manner, and is known as a good historian.

古文：晚节稍疏牾。时人病其太简。
现代文：晚年略有简略和错误，当时人认为过简。
English: In his later years, he was a bit simplistic and erroneous, which was considered too simplistic at the time.

古文：初与刘子玄撰定《武后实录》，叙张昌宗诱张说诬证魏元忠事，颇言 说已然可，赖宋璟等邀励苦切，故转祸为忠，不然，皇嗣且殆。 
现代文：他最初和刘子玄编撰《武后实录》，记张昌宗引诱张说为魏元忠事作伪证，写道 张说已同意了，靠宋瞡等人拦着苦劝，才改变主意进忠言，不这样，皇族就危险了 。
English: At first, he and Liu Zixuan compiled the "Record of the Empress Dowager Wu," recorded that Zhang Changzong lured Zhang to commit perjury for Wei Yuan's loyalty, wrote that Zhang said that he had agreed, and only changed his mind to become a loyal adviser after being persuaded by Song Tao and others. Otherwise, the imperial family would be in danger.

古文：后说为相，读之，心不善，知兢所为，即从容谬谓曰： 刘生书魏齐公事，不少假借，奈何？ 
现代文：后来张说任宰相，看了这话，心里不高兴，知道是吴兢写的，就乘便假装对他说 ：刘子玄记魏齐公的事，一点不顾我的面子，怎么办呢？ 
English: Later, Zhang said that he was appointed prime minister. When he read this, he was not happy. Knowing that it was written by Wu Jing, he pretended to say to him: Liu Zi Xuan wrote about Wei Qi Gong, regardless of my face, what should I do?

古文：兢曰： 子玄已亡，不可受诬地下。
现代文：吴兢说： 刘子玄已去世了，不能在土里受冤枉。
English: Wu Jing said, "Liu Zixuan has passed away, he cannot be wronged on earth.

古文：兢实书之，其草故在。 
现代文：那是我写的，草稿还在。 
English: That's what I wrote. The draft is still there.

古文：闻者叹其直。
现代文：听说的人都赞叹他的耿直。
English: People who have heard of him admire his straightforwardness.

古文：说屡以情蕲改，辞曰： 徇公之情，何名实录？ 
现代文：张说多次凭感情请求他改写，他推辞说： 照顾您的私情那叫什么实录呢？ 
English: Zhang said that he had repeatedly asked him to rewrite it out of emotion, but he refused, saying: "What kind of real record is it to take care of your private affairs?

古文：卒不改。
现代文：终于没改。
English: He finally didn't change.

古文：世谓今董狐云。
现代文：当时人称他为当代的董狐。
English: At that time, people called him a contemporary of Dong Foo.

古文：韦述，弘机曾孙。
现代文：韦述是韦弘机的曾孙。
English: Wei Shu is the great-grandson of Wei Hongqi.

古文：家厨书二千卷，述为儿时，诵忆略遍。
现代文：他家藏书两千卷，韦述在幼年时，差不多都背熟了。
English: His family had a collection of two thousand volumes, and when he was a child, he memorized almost all of them.

古文：父景骏，景龙中为肥乡令，述从到官。
现代文：他父亲是韦景骏，景龙年间，任肥乡县县令，韦述跟着他赴任。
English: His father was Wei Jingyao. During the Jinglong era, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Feixiang County, and Wei Shu followed him to the post.

古文：元行冲，景骏姑子也，为时儒宗，常载书数车自随。
现代文：元行冲是韦景骏姑母的儿子，是当时的学者领袖，常常装几车书跟着自己。
English: Yuan Xingchong was the son of Wei Jingyao's aunt. He was a scholar leader at that time, and often loaded several cartloads of books with him.

古文：述入其室观书，不知寝食，行冲异之，试与语前世事，孰复详谛，如指掌然。
现代文：韦述到他家里去看书，废寝忘食，元行冲对他感到惊奇，试着和他谈古代的事，他熟悉而且确知，了如指掌。
English: Wei Xuchuan went to his home to read books, lost sleep and forgot to eat. Yuan Xingchong was surprised by him, and tried to talk to him about ancient things. He was familiar and sure, and knew everything.

古文：使属文，受纸辄就。
现代文：又要他写文章，他接过纸就一气呵成。
English: He was also asked to write an article, which he did as soon as he picked up the paper.

古文：行冲曰： 外家之宝也。 
现代文：元行冲说 ：这是我亲戚家的宝贝。 
English: Yuan Xingchong said, "This is the treasure of my relatives."

古文：举进士，时述方少，仪质陋侻，考功员外郎宋之问曰： 童子何业？ 
现代文：韦述去考进士，当时他年龄还小，身材外貌都不起眼，考功员外郎宋之问说： 小家伙有什么才能？ 
English: Wei Shu went to the entrance examination, when he was still young, his body and appearance were not eye-catching. The examiner, Wai Lang Song Zhi, asked: What talent does the little guy have?

古文：述曰： 性嗜书，所撰《唐春秋》三十篇，恨未毕，它唯命。 
现代文：韦述说： 我生性喜欢读书，写了《唐春秋》三十卷，遗憾的是没写完，其他方面随您考察。 
English: Wei Shul said: I like reading by nature. I have written 30 volumes of "Tang, Spring and Autumn," but unfortunately I have not finished it. Other aspects can be investigated with you.

古文：之问曰： 本求茂才，乃得迁、固。 
现代文：宋之问说 ：我们本来就是选拔优异人才的，果然选到了一位好史官。 
English: Song Zhiwen said, "We originally selected outstanding talents, and we have indeed selected a good historian.

古文：遂上第。
现代文：他于是考中了。
English: He passed the exam.

古文：开元初，为栎阳尉。秘书监马怀素奏述与诸儒即秘书续《七志》，五年而成。
现代文：开元初年，他担任栎阳县县尉，秘书监马怀素任命他和一些学者到秘书省续写《七志》，五年后写成了。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, he served as the county officer of Fenyang County, and the secretary supervisor Ma Huai Su appointed him and some scholars to the secretary ministry to continue writing the "Seven Histories," which was completed five years later.

古文：述好谱学，见柳冲所撰《姓族系录》，每私写怀之，还舍则又缮录，故于百氏源派为详，乃更撰《开元谱》二十篇。
现代文：韦述喜欢研究姓氏源流，看到柳冲写的《姓族系录》，每次都抽空抄一些带回去，到家后又誊正，因此详细了解了各种姓氏的源流，于是又撰写了《开元谱》二十卷。
English: Wei Shuxu liked to study the source of surnames. When he saw the "Surname and Family Genealogy" written by Liu Chong, he took time to copy some of it and bring it back with him every time. When he got home, he read it again. As a result, he had a detailed understanding of the source of various surnames. Therefore, he also wrote 20 volumes of "The Genealogy of the Yuan Dynasty."

古文：累除右补阙。
现代文：后累官任右补阙。
English: Later, he was appointed to the post of Utsubo no shosei.

古文：张说既领集贤院，荐述为直学士，迁起居舍人。
现代文：张说主持集贤院，推荐他任直学士，后升任起居舍人。
English: Zhang said that he presided over Shixian Academy, recommended him to be appointed as a direct bachelor, and later promoted him to be a resident.

古文：从封太山，奏《东封记》，有诏褒美。
现代文：他跟随皇帝去泰山封禅，写成了《东封记》呈上，皇帝下诏褒奖他。
English: He followed the emperor to Taishan Fengzen and wrote "Dongfeng Ji" to present to the emperor, who praised him with an imperial edict.

古文：先是，诏修《六典》，徐坚构意岁余，叹曰： 吾更修七书，而《六典》历年未有所适。 
现代文：此前，有诏命修订《六典》，徐坚构思了一年多，叹气说： 我修订过七部书，但过了一年还不知《六典》修订怎么动笔？ 
English: Previously, there was an imperial decree to revise the "Six Classics." Xu Jian conceived the idea for more than a year, sighing: I have revised seven books, but after a year I still don't know how to start the revision of the "Six Classics."

古文：及萧嵩引述撰定，述始摹周六官领其属，事归于职，规制遂定。
现代文：到萧嵩推荐韦述修订，韦述摹仿周朝六官分辖属官，事情归于职掌，体例才确定了。
English: It was not until Xiao Song recommended the revision of Wei Shu and Wei Shu's imitation of the six subordinate officials of the Zhou Dynasty that the matter was determined.

古文：初，令狐德棻、吴兢等撰武德以来国史，皆不能成。述因二家参以后事，遂分纪、传，又为例一篇。
现代文：当初，令狐德、吴兢等人写武德年以来的历史，都没写成，韦述在他们两人写作的基础上又增加了后来的史实，划分本纪、列传，又写了一篇凡例。
English: At first, Ling Xude, Wu Jing and others did not write the history since the Wude era. Wei Shu added the later historical facts on the basis of their writing, divided the history, listed the legends, and wrote a legend.

古文：嵩欲蚤就，复奏起居舍人贾登、著作佐郎李锐助述绩。
现代文：萧嵩想早点完成，又安排起居舍人贾登、著作佐郎李锐帮助韦述撰写。
English: Xiao Song wanted to finish it earlier, and he also arranged for Jia Deng, his live-in caretaker, and the writer Sarang Li Rui to help Wei Shu write it.

古文：逮成，文约事详，萧颖士以为谯周、陈寿之流。
现代文：写成后，文笔简练、记事详明，萧颖士认为是谯周、陈寿的水平。
English: After writing, the writing is concise and the notes are detailed. Xiao Yingshi believes that this is the level of Zou Zhou and Chen Shou.

古文：改国子司业，充集贤学士，累迁工部侍郎，封方城县侯。
现代文：后调任国子司业、集贤学士，多次升官后任工部侍郎，封爵为方城县侯。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of provincial secretary of education and scholar, and was promoted several times to the post of chamberlain of the work department, and was knighted as the lord of Fangcheng County.

古文：述典掌图书，余四十年，任史官二十年，淡荣利，为人纯厚长者，当世宗之。
现代文：韦述任职秘书省，有四十多年，当史官二十年，不追求荣誉钱财，为人是忠厚长者，当时人都崇敬他。
English: Weishu served as secretary of the ministry for more than forty years, and as a historian for twenty years. He did not pursue honor and money. He was a loyal elder, and people revered him at that time.

古文：接士无贵贱与均。
现代文：他接触人不论贵贱都平等相待。
English: He treats everyone he comes into contact with equally, no matter how high or low they are.

古文：蓄书二万卷，皆手校定，黄墨精谨，内秘书不逮也。
现代文：家中藏书有两万卷，都经亲手校勘，纸和字都精细严谨，禁中秘书省的书都比不上。
English: There are 20,000 volumes in the family's collection, all of which have been proofread by hand. The paper and characters are fine and rigorous, and cannot be compared to the books of the forbidden Chinese secretaries.

古文：古草隶帖、秘书、古器图谱无不备。
现代文：古代草书、隶书的字帖，秘本图书，古代器具图录没有不具备的。
English: There is no shortage of ancient cursive and cursive books, secret books, and ancient equipment catalogs.

古文：安禄山乱，剽失皆尽，述独抱国史藏南山。身陷贼，污伪官。
现代文：遭安禄山之乱，被抢丢失都没有了。韦述带着唐代历史躲到南山，但被叛军抓获，任命为叛贼官员。
English: During the An Lushan Rebellion, nothing was stolen or lost. Weishu took the history of the Tang Dynasty and hid in Nanshan, but was captured by the rebels and appointed as a renegade official.

古文：贼平，流渝州，为刺史薛舒所困，不食死。
现代文：叛贼平定后，将他流放到渝州，被刺史薛舒关押侮辱，他绝食饿死了。
English: After the traitor was subdued, he was exiled to Yuzhou, where he was imprisoned and insulted by Zhang Shi Xue Shu. He died of starvation.

古文：广德初，甥萧直为李光弼判官，诣阙奏事称旨。因理述 苍卒奔逼，能存国史，贼平，尽送史官于休烈，以功补过，宜蒙恩宥。 
现代文：广德初年，他的外甥萧直任李光弼的判官，到朝廷报告事情受到皇帝赏识，乘机申诉韦述： 在叛军逼近紧急的时候，能保住了国家的史书，叛贼平定后，都交给了史官于休烈，功可抵过，应予宽恕。 
English: In the first year of Guangde, his nephew Xiao Zhizhong, who was the judge of Li Guangyao, went to the imperial court to report the matter, which was appreciated by the emperor. He took the opportunity to appeal to Wei Shu: When the rebels were approaching the emergency, he was able to save the country's history books. After the traitors were defeated, they were handed over to the historian Yu Huling. The merits can be justified and should be forgiven.

古文：有诏赠右散骑常侍。
现代文：皇帝下诏赠官右散骑常侍。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to bestow officials with the right to ride horseback as regular attendants.

古文：韦氏之显者，孝友、词学则承庆、嗣立，邃音乐有万石，达礼仪则叔夏，史才博识有述。
现代文：韦家出名的：行孝友爱、善写文章的有韦承庆、韦嗣立；精通音乐的有韦万石；精通礼仪的有韦叔夏；有历史才华和知识广博的有韦述。
English: The Wei family is famous for: Wei Chengjunqing and Wei Zili, who are filial and friendly, and good at writing articles; Wei Wanshi, who is proficient in music; Wei Shuxia, who is proficient in etiquette; and Wei Shu, who has historical talent and extensive knowledge.

古文：所著书二百馀篇行于时。
现代文：韦述撰写的两百多卷书在当时流传。
English: More than two hundred volumes of books written by Wei Shuxu circulated at that time.

古文：弟逌、迪，学业亦亚述。
现代文：他的弟弟韦荄、韦迪，学问事业也和韦述接近。
English: His younger brothers, Wei Wei and Wei Di, were also close to Wei Shuxu in their academic careers.

古文：与逌对为学士，与迪并礼官，搢绅高之。
现代文：韦述和韦荄一起任学士，和韦迪一起任礼官，士人都推崇他们。
English: Wei Shuxu and Wei Xuan were both academicians, and Wei Di was a ceremonial officer. The scholars all respected them.

古文：时赵冬曦兄弟亦各有名。张说尝曰 韦、赵兄弟，人之杞梓 云。
现代文：当时赵冬曦几兄弟也都有名气，张说曾说： 韦家、赵家的兄弟们是人中的俊杰。 
English: At that time, several brothers of Zhao Dongxi were also famous. Zhang said that he once said: The brothers of the Wei family and the Zhao family are the best among the people.

