古文：五行五《五行传》曰： 治宫室，饰台榭，内淫乱，犯亲戚，侮父兄，则稼穑不成。 
现代文：《五行传》说： 修治宫室，修饰台榭，宫内淫乱，冒犯亲戚，欺侮父兄，那么就会出现庄稼禾苗异常的妖异。 
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" says: If you repair the palace, decorate the table, commit adultery in the palace, offend relatives, and bully brothers and sisters, then abnormal crops and seedlings will appear.

古文：谓土失其性而为灾也。
现代文：这是指土失其本性而造成灾变。
English: This refers to the soil losing its nature and causing a cataclysm.

古文：又曰： 思心不睿，是谓不圣。
现代文：《五行传》又说： 思虑不广，造就叫做不圣。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" also says, "If one's thoughts are not broad, one's deeds are not sacred."

古文：厥咎瞀，厥罚恆风，厥极凶短折。
现代文：它带来的灾害是昏乱，给它的惩罚是恒风，给它的惩罚是夭折短命。
English: The calamity it brings is dizziness, the punishment it brings is a constant wind, and the punishment it brings is premature death.

古文：时则有脂夜之妖，时则有华孽，时则有牛祸，时则有心腹之痾，时则有黄眚、黄祥，时则有金木水火沴土。 
现代文：有时出现脂妖夜妖，有时出现花孽，有时出现牛祸，有时出现心腹之疴，有时出现黄眚、黄祥，有时出现金木水火克土的妖异。 
English: Sometimes there is a fat demon and a night demon, sometimes there is a flower evil, sometimes there is a cow evil, sometimes there is a confidant evil, sometimes there is a yellow evil, a yellow good, and sometimes there is a golden wood, water, fire, and earth evil.

古文：班固曰： 不言 惟 而独曰 时则有 者，非一冲气所沴，明其异大也。 
现代文：逛厘说： 不说 惟 而衹说 有时出现 ，这是因为不衹是被一种相克的冲气伤害，这样说表明出现的妖异大。 
English: Zhaneli said: "Not saying 'but' but 'but' sometimes appears, this is because the 'but' is hurt by a kind of opposing impulse, so saying it indicates that the 'but' appears abnormally large."

古文：华孽，刘歆传以为蠃虫之孽，谓螟属也。
现代文：花孽，刘歆解释，认为是赢虫之孽，指螟一类带来的灾害。
English: Flower evil, Liu Wei explained, is considered to be the evil of winning insects, referring to the disasters brought about by insects such as centipedes.

古文：稼穑不成：吴孙皓时，尝岁无水旱，苗稼丰美，而实不成，百姓以饥，皞境皆然，连岁不已。
现代文：吴孙皓为帝之时，曾经出现过这样的事：一年之中没有水旱灾害，庄稼长得丰美，但果实却不成熟，百姓因而遭受饥荒。全境之内都是这样，而且连着几年不停止。
English: When Wu Sun Yat-sen was emperor, there was a time when there were no floods or droughts during the year, the crops grew well, but the fruits were not ripe, and the people suffered from famine. This was the case throughout the entire territory, and it did not stop for several years.

古文：吴人以为伤露，非也。
现代文：吴人认为是被露伤害，这是不对的。
English: Wu people think that it is harmed by dew, but it is not.

古文：按刘向《春秋说》曰： 水旱当书，不书水旱而曰大无麦禾者，土气不养，稼穑不成。 
现代文：按，刘向《春秋说》中说： 水灾旱灾应当记载下来。
English: According to Liu Xiang "Spring and Autumn" said: Floods and droughts should be recorded.

古文：此其义也。
现代文：不记载水灾旱灾。
English: Floods and droughts are not recorded.

古文：皓初迁都武昌，寻迁建业，又起新馆，缀饰珠玉，壮丽过甚，破坏诸宫，增修苑囿，犯暑妨农，官民疲怠。《月令》， 季夏不可以兴土功 。
现代文：而衹是说麦禾大面积没有收成的原因，是因为土气不养育作物，种下去的作物长不成熟。 吴国庄稼不成熟就是刘应说的这个道理。孙皓最初迁都亘疆，不久又迁回建业，又重建新造宫室，用珠玉来装饰点缀，壮丽程度远远超过规制，又毁坏众多宫殿，增修苑囿，冒着暑热动工，妨害农耕，官民都为此疲惫。《月令》说： 季夏不能够兴土木 。
English: Sun Yat-sen initially moved the capital to Wujiang, and soon moved back to Jianye, and rebuilt a new palace-building room, decorated with jewels, the degree of magnificence far exceeds the regulation, and destroyed many palaces, increased the construction of gardens, started construction in the heat, hindered farming, and the government and the people were tired of it. "Moonlight" said: Ji Xia can not do civil engineering.

古文：皓皆冒之。
现代文：还腊却触犯造条规定动工。
English: However, the construction started in violation of the article of construction.

古文：此治宫室饰台榭之罚，与《春秋》鲁庄公三筑台同应也。
现代文：庄稼不成熟是对修治宫室、营建台榭的惩罚，这和《春秋》中记载的鲁庄公三次建台带来灾祸是同样的应验。
English: The immaturity of crops is the punishment for the repair of the palace and the construction of the platform, which is the same fulfillment as the disaster caused by the construction of the platform three times by Lu Zhuangguo recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：班固曰： 无水旱之灾，而草木百谷不熟，皆为稼穑不成。 
现代文：班固说： 没有水旱灾害，但草木百谷却不长果实，这都属于稼穑不成的妖异。 
English: Bangu said: There are no floods or droughts, but all the plants and trees do not grow fruit. This is all part of the strange phenomenon of not being able to make money.

古文：晋穆帝永和十年，三麦不登，至关西亦然。
现代文：晋穆帝永和十年，三麦都不成熟，直到关西也都是这样。
English: Jin Mu Di Yong and ten years, three barley are not ripe, until Kansai is also the case.

古文：自去秋至是夏，无水旱，无麦者，如刘向说也。
现代文：从前一年秋天到这年夏天，没有水旱灾害，而麦子没有收获的原因，正像刘向所说的那样。
English: From the autumn of the previous year to this summer, there were no floods or droughts, and the reason why the wheat was not harvested was just as Liu Xiangmou said.

古文：又俗云， 多苗而不实为伤 ，又其义也。
现代文：又俗语说： 作物长得好但不结果实，就叫做伤。 
English: There is also a saying: If a crop grows well but does not bear fruit, it is called a wound.

古文：恆风：
现代文：麦子不成熟也就是这个道理。
English: This is the reason why the wheat is not ripe.

古文：魏齐王正始九年十一月，大风数十日，发屋折树；十二月戊子晦，尤甚，动太极东阁。
现代文：魏齐王正始九年十一月，大风刮了数十天，毁坏房屋，摧折树木；十二月戊子日，月末日，风刮得特别猛，吹得太极殿束合摇动。
English: In November of the ninth year of the reign of King Wei of Qi, a strong wind blew for dozens of days, destroying houses and breaking trees; on December 30, the last day of the month, the wind was particularly strong, blowing and shaking the Great Hall.

古文：魏齐王嘉平元年正月壬辰朔，西北大风，发屋折木，昏尘蔽天。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平元年正月壬辰曰，这天是初一，从西北方向刮来大风，毁坏房屋，摧折树木，灰尘遮蔽天日，天昏地暗。
English: Wei Qi Wang Jiaping in the first month of the first year of the year said that this day was the first day of the first month. A strong wind blew from the northwest, destroying houses, breaking trees, covering the sun with dust, and darkening the sky.

古文：按管辂说此为时刑，大风，执政之忧也。
现代文：据管辖的说法，这是时令在施刑，大风，是执政大臣的忧患。
English: According to the jurisdiction, this is the season in the imposition of punishment, high winds, is the ruling minister's worries.

古文：是时曹爽区瞀目专，骄僭过度，天戒数见，终不改革。
现代文：当时曹爽昏昧专权，傲慢自大，僭越常礼，上天儆戒屡屡示现，但他始终不改变自己的言行。
English: At that time, Cao Shuang's power, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance, arrogance.

古文：此思心不睿，恆风之罚也。
现代文：这是思虑不广的罪过，受到恒风之灾的惩罚。
English: It was a thoughtless crime, punished by the fury of the wind.

古文：后逾旬而爽等灭。
现代文：后来过了十天而曹爽等人就被诛杀。
English: Ten days later, Cao Shuang and the others were beaten to death.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 众逆同志，至德乃潜，厥异风。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 当众违逆与自己志向相同的人，有高尚德行的人就会潜藏起来，这种行为带来的妖异是风。
English: Jingqing "I Chuan" said: The people are contrary to the same aspirations, people with extremely high moral conduct cannot be hidden, and there is a strange wind.

古文：其风也，行不解，物不长，雨小而伤。
现代文：造风，刮起来就不止息，万物不生长，雨小却伤害作物。
English: Its wind, time is long, everything can not grow, the rain is small but there is damage.

古文：政悖德隐，兹谓乱。
现代文：政令悖乱，有德之人隐匿，造就叫做乱。
English: When the government decrees disorder, and virtuous people hide, the result is called disorder.

古文：厥风先风不雨，大风暴起，发屋折木。
现代文：那风灾是先起风不下雨，大风突然间刮起，毁坏房屋，摧折树木。
English: The disaster was caused by the fact that there was no rain at the beginning of the wind, and the wind suddenly blew, destroying houses and breaking trees.

古文：守义不进，兹谓眊。
现代文：守住道义却不推行，造就叫做吒。
English: To uphold morality but not practice it is called hypocrisy.

古文：厥风与云俱起，折五谷茎。
现代文：那出现的风灾和云同时发生，摧折五谷的茎。
English: The windstorm and the cloud appeared at the same time, breaking the stalks of grain.

古文：臣易上政，兹谓不顺。
现代文：臣下改变君王的政令，这就叫做不顺。
English: When a vassal changes the king's edict, it is called bad luck.

古文：厥风大飚发屋。
现代文：那风灾是出现狂飙，毁坏房屋。
English: The disaster was caused by a cyclone that destroyed houses.

古文：赋敛不理，兹谓祸。
现代文：赋敛安排不当，造就叫做祸。
English: If it is improperly arranged, it is called a calamity.

古文：厥风绝经纪，止即温，温即虫。
现代文：那风刮起来完全不合常规，风停下来就出现温热，温热就生出虫灾。
English: When the wind blows, it's completely out of the ordinary. When the wind stops, it's warm and hot. When it's warm and hot, there's a plague of insects.

古文：侯专封，兹谓不统。
现代文：侯在封国自行其政，造就叫做不统。
English: The lord of the manor governed the fiefdom on his own, creating what is known as heterogeneity.

古文：厥风疾而树不摇，谷不成。
现代文：那风迅疾但树木却不摇动，谷物不能成熟。
English: The wind is swift, but the trees do not shake, and the grain does not ripen.

古文：辟不思道利，兹谓无泽。
现代文：君王不思遵道，不想有利百姓的事，这就叫做无恩泽。
English: If a ruler does not think about following the path and does not want to do things that are beneficial to the people, this is called being ungrateful.

古文：厥风不摇木，旱无云，伤禾。
现代文：那风不摇动树木，天旱而无云，伤害作物。
English: The wind does not shake the trees, the weather is dry and cloudless, damaging crops.

古文：公常于利，兹谓乱。
现代文：国家公侯常谋私利，这就叫做乱。
English: Princes and statesmen often seek their own interests, and this is called chaos.

古文：厥风微而温，生虫蝗，害五谷。
现代文：那风轻微而温热，蝗虫萌生，伤害五谷。
English: The wind is light and warm. Locusts sprout and damage crops.

古文：弃正作淫，兹谓惑。
现代文：弃绝正道，崇尚淫邪，造就叫做惑。
English: Abandoning the right path and advocating sexual perversion and debauchery is called bewilderment.

古文：厥风温，螟虫起，害有益人之物。
现代文：那风温热，螟虫出现，伤害有益于人的生物。
English: The wind is warm and hot, aphids appear, harming beneficial organisms.

古文：侯不朝，兹谓叛。
现代文：侯不朝见，这就叫做叛。
English: If you don't see your husband in the morning, it's called rebellion.

古文：厥风无恆，地变赤，雨杀人。 
现代文：那风没有常性，土地寸草不生，下大雨，会淹死人。 
English: The wind is erratic, the land is too small for grass to grow, and heavy rain can drown people.

古文：吴孙权太元元年八月朔，大风，江海涌溢，平地水深八尺，拔高陵树二株，石碑蹉动，吴城两门飞落。
现代文：吴孙权太元元年八月初一，刮大风，江水泛滥，海水腾涌上岸，平地水深八尺，高陵两千棵树被连根拔起，墓碑摇动倾倒，吴城的两门飞落。
English: On the first day of August in the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu Sun Quan, a strong wind blew, the river flooded, the sea surged ashore, the flat land was eight feet deep, two thousand trees in Gaoling were uprooted, tombstones shook and toppled, and the two gates of Wucheng flew down.

古文：按华核对，役繁赋重，区瞀不睿之罚也。明年，权薨。
现代文：据华窍的对答，这是对劳役赋税繁重、昏聩而思虑不广的惩罚。第二年，孙权去世。
English: According to Huakou's reply, this was a heavy tax on laborers, a punishment for being dim-witted and lacking in foresight. The following year, Sun Quan passed away.

古文：吴孙亮建兴元年十二月丙申，大风震电。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴元年十二月丙申曰，刮大风，又有雷电。
English: Wu Sunliang Jianxing in December of the first year of the year said that the wind was blowing and there was lightning.

古文：是岁，魏遣大众三道来攻，诸葛恪破其东兴军，二军亦退。
现代文：这一年，魏派遣大军分三路来进攻县，诸葛恪击破魏从东兴来进攻的一路人马，其他两路人马也撤退了。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Wei sent a large army to attack in three directions. Zhuge Ke defeated the Sok Hing army, and the other two armies also retreated.

古文：明年，恪又攻新城，丧众大半，还伏诛。
现代文：第二年，诸葛恪又进攻新城，军队损失大半，回到京城后被杀。
English: The next year, Zhuge Ke attacked the new city again, the army lost most of its troops, and he was killed after returning to the capital.

古文：吴孙休永安元年十一月甲午，风四转五，复蒙雾连日。
现代文：吴孙休永安元年十一月甲午日。风向四面转，反复五次，接连几天都是大雾。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of November in the first year of Yongan, the wind turned in all directions, repeated five times, and it was foggy for several days in a row.

古文：是时孙綝一门五侯，权倾吴主，风雾之灾，与汉五侯、丁、傅同应也。
现代文：当时孙绋一家五人封侯，权势凌驾在吴主之上，这风雾的灾异，与莲伐五侯、工、堡时出现的情况是同样的征候。
English: At that time, the five members of the Sun Yat-sen family were vassals, and their power was superior to that of the Lord of Wu. This disaster of the wind and fog is the same symptom as the situation that occurred when the five vassals, the workers, and the castle were attacked by the lotus.

古文：十二月丁卯夜，又大风，发木扬沙。
现代文：卜二月丁卯日夜晚，又刮起大风，毁坏树木，飞沙走石。
English: In the evening of February, February, March and April, a strong wind blew again, destroying trees and blowing sand and stones.

古文：明日，綝诛。
现代文：第二天，孙绋被杀。
English: He was killed the next day.

古文：晋武帝泰始五年五月辛卯朔，广平大风折木。
现代文：晋武帝泰始五年五月辛卯日，初一，广平台大风，吹折树木。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu of the Tai Dynasty, a strong wind blew across the vast plateau, blowing down trees.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年五月，下邳、广陵大风，坏千余家，折树木。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年五月，下邳、广陵刮大风，毁坏一千余家房屋，吹折树木。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, a strong wind blew in the lower Yunnan and Guangling regions, destroying more than a thousand houses and blowing down trees.

古文：咸宁元年五月甲申，广陵、司吾、下邳大风折木。
现代文：威宁元年五月甲申曰，广陵、司吾、下邳刮大风，吹折树木。
English: In May of the first year of Wening, Jia Shen said that Guangling, Sigo, and Jiaxuan were hit by strong winds, which blew down trees.

古文：咸宁三年八月，河间大风折木。
现代文：咸宁三年八月，河间刮大风，吹折树木。
English: In August of the third year of Xianning, a strong wind blew across the river, snapping trees.

古文：晋武帝太康二年五月，济南大风，折木伤麦。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年五月，济南刮大风，吹折树木，损害麦子。
English: In May of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, a strong wind blew in Jinan, snapping trees and damaging wheat.

古文：太康二年六月，高平大风折木，发坏邸阁四十余区。
现代文：太康二年六月，高平刮大风，吹折树木，毁坏富贵者住宅四十余栋。
English: In June of the second year of Taikang, a strong wind blew in Gaoping, snapping trees and destroying more than forty houses of the wealthy.

古文：太康八年六月，郡国八大风。
现代文：太康八年六月，郡国有八处出现大风。
English: In June of the eighth year of Taikang, eight places in the county experienced strong winds.

古文：太康九年正月，京都风雹，发屋拔木。
现代文：太康九年正月，京城刮风，又下冰雹，毁坏房屋，树木被连根拔起。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Taikang, the wind blew and hail fell in Beijing, destroying houses and uprooting trees.

古文：后二年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：这以后两年，皇上驾崩。
English: In the third year, Emperor Wu died.

古文：晋惠帝元康四年六月，大风雨拔树。
现代文：晋惠帝元康四年六月，大风大雨，树木被连根拔起。
English: In June of the fourth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, it was windy and rainy, and trees were uprooted.

古文：元康五年四月庚寅夜，暴风，城东渠波浪；七月，下邳大风，坏庐舍；九月，雁门、新兴、太原、上党灾风伤稼。
现代文：元康元康五年四月庚寅日夜晚，刮暴风，城东渠中起波浪；七月，下邳刮大风，毁坏房屋；九月，雁门、新兴、太原、上党风灾伤害庄稼。
English: On the night of April Geng Yin Day in the 5th year of the Kang and Kang dynasties, a storm blew up, causing waves to rise in the canal to the east of the city; in July, a gale blew from the lower estuary, destroying houses; in September, crops were damaged by windstorms in Ganmen, Xinxing, Taiyuan, and Shangdang.

古文：明年，氐、羌反叛，大兵西讨。
现代文：第二年，氐、羌反叛，朝廷派大军西进征讨。
English: In the second year, when H and  rebelled, the imperial court sent a large army to the west to conquer them.

古文：元康九年六月，飚风吹贾谧朝服，飞数百丈。
现代文：元康九年六月，枫风把买谧的朝服吹起，飞到数百丈远的地方。
English: In June of the ninth year of the Yuan Kang, the maple wind blew the imperial robes of the Maidens up and flew to hundreds of places far away.

古文：明年，谧诛。
现代文：第二年，贾谧被杀。
English: The following year, Jia Jun was killed.

古文：元康九年十一月甲子朔，京都连大风，发屋折木。
现代文：元康九年十一月甲子日，初一，京城连续刮大风，毁坏房屋，吹折树木。
English: On the first day of the first month of the ninth year of the Yuan Kang Dynasty, the wind blew continuously in Beijing, destroying houses and blowing down trees.

古文：十二月，太子废。
现代文：十二月，太子被废黜。
English: In December, the crown prince was deposed.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年二月，大风拔木。
现代文：晋惠帝永康元年二月，刮大风，树木被连根拔起。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, a strong wind blew and trees were uprooted.

古文：三月，愍怀被害。己卯，丧柩发许还洛，是日，大风雷电，帏盖飞裂。
现代文：三月，愍怀太子被齐、己卯曰，太子的棺柩从许昌启程运回洛阳，当天，刮大风，又电闪雷鸣，车帏被吹飞，车盖被震裂。
English: In March, Prince Huai's coffin was transported from Xuchang back to Luoyang. On the same day, there was a strong wind, lightning and thunder. The carriage was blown away and the lid was cracked.

古文：永康元年四月，张华第舍飚风折木，飞缯轴六七。
现代文：永康元年四月，张华府第中飙风吹折树木，书卷被吹起六七册。
English: In April of the first year of the Yongkang era, a strong wind blew down trees in the middle of Zhangwafu, and sixty-seven volumes of books were blown up.

古文：是月，华遇害。
现代文：当月，张华被害。
English: That month, Zhang Hua was killed.

古文：永康元年十一月戊子朔，大风从西北来，折木飞石。
现代文：永康元年十一月戊午曰，初一，大风从西北方向吹过来，吹折树木，飞沙走石。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, the first day of the new year, a strong wind blew from the northwest, snapping trees and blowing sand.

古文：明年正月，赵王伦篡位。
现代文：第二年正月，趟王司马伦篡位。
English: In the first month of the second year, Zhao Wang Simarun usurped the throne.

古文：晋惠帝永兴元年正月癸酉，赵王伦祠太庙，灾风暴起，尘沙四合。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴元年正月癸酉日，赵王司马伦去太庙祭祀，灾风突然刮起，灰沙从四面飞来。
English: On the third day of the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongxing, Zhao Wang Simarun went to the Great Temple for a ritual. A disastrous wind suddenly blew, and grey sand flew in from all directions.

古文：其年四月，伦伏辜。
现代文：那年四月，司马伦因篡位罪而死。
English: In April of this year, Smalen committed a crime.

古文：晋元帝永昌元年七月丙寅，大风拔木，屋瓦皆飞。
现代文：晋元帝永昌元年七月丙寅日，刮大风，树木被连根拔起，屋瓦都被吹飞。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, a strong wind blew, trees were uprooted, and roof tiles were blown away.

古文：永昌元年八月，暴风坏屋，拔御道柳树百余株。
现代文：永昌元年八月，刮暴风，毁坏房屋，御道旁一百余棵柳树被连根拔起。
English: In August of the first year of Yongchang, a storm blew, destroying houses and uprooting more than a hundred willow trees along the main road.

古文：其风纵横无常，若风自八方来者。
现代文：那风风向变化无常，像是从四面八方吹来。
English: This wind is erratic, like the wind is blowing from all directions.

古文：十一月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：十一月，皇上驾崩。
English: In November, the emperor died.

古文：晋成帝咸康四年三月壬辰，成都大风，发屋折木。
现代文：晋成帝咸康四年三月壬辰日，成都刮大风，毁坏房屋，吹折树木。
English: On the Ides of March in the fourth year of Emperor Jiankang, Chengdu was hit by a strong wind, which destroyed houses and blew down trees.

古文：四月，李寿袭杀李期。
现代文：四月，李寿袭击并杀死李期。
English: In April, Li Shou attacked and killed Li Zong.

古文：晋康帝建元元年七月庚申，晋陵、吴郡灾风。
现代文：晋康帝建五元年七月庚申日，晋陵、吴郡刮灾风。
English: In July of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Kang of Jin Dynasty, the wind of disaster blew in Jinling and Wu County.

古文：晋穆帝升平元年八月丁未，策立皇后何氏。
现代文：晋穆帝升平元年八月丁末日，策立皇后何氏。
English: Emperor Jinmu ascended to the throne on the last day of August in the first year of the Jin Dynasty, and the Empress He was enthroned.

古文：是日疾风。
现代文：当天刮起大风。
English: On the same day, a strong wind started blowing.

古文：升平五年正月戊戌朔，疾风。
现代文：升平五年正月戊戌曰，初一，刮大风。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Heian period, a strong wind blew.

古文：晋海西公太和六年二月，大风迅急。
现代文：晋海西公太和六年二月，刮大风，风势迅疾。
English: In February of the sixth year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi of Jinhai, a strong wind was blowing.

古文：晋孝武帝宁康元年三月戊申朔，暴风迅起，从丑上来，须臾转从子上来，飞沙扬砾。
现代文：晋孝武帝宁康元年三月戊申曰，初一，暴风迅猛刮起，先从东北偏北方向刮来，一会儿转为从正北方向刮来，飞沙扬石。
English: Jin Xiaowu Emperor Ningkang said in March of the first year of Wushen that on the first day of the first month, a storm blew up rapidly, first blowing from the north-northeast direction, and then from the north-north direction, flying sand and rocks.

古文：晋孝武帝太元元年二月乙丑朔，暴风折木。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元元年二月乙丑日，初一，暴风吹折树木。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu in February of the 1st year of the 1st year of the Emperor Jinxiao Wu, a storm blew down trees.

古文：太元二年闰三月甲子朔，暴风疾雨俱至，发屋折木。
现代文：太元二年闰三月甲子，初一，暴风疾雨一同来临，毁坏房屋，吹折树木。
English: On the first day of leap March in the second year of the Taiyuan Emperor, a storm and torrential rain came together, destroying houses and blowing down trees.

古文：太元二年六月，长安大风拔苻坚宫中树。
现代文：太元二年六月，长安刮大风，把苻坚宫中树木连根拔起。
English: In June of the second year of Taiyuan, a strong wind blew in Chang'an, uprooting the trees in Jiaojian Palace.

古文：其后坚再南伐，身戮国亡。
现代文：以后苻坚两次出兵向南征伐，最终自身被杀，国家灭亡。
English: Later, Yu Jian sent troops to the south twice, and eventually he was killed and the country was destroyed.

古文：太元四年八月乙未，暴风。
现代文：太元四年八月乙末日，刮暴风。
English: On the last day of August in the year of the dragon, there was a storm.

古文：太元十二年正月壬午夜，暴风。
现代文：太元十二年正月壬子日夜晚，刮暴风。
English: On the evening of the 12th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Jinshi era, a storm blew.

古文：太元十二年七月甲辰，大风拔木。
现代文：太元十二年七月甲辰曰，刮大风，树木被连根拔起。
English: In July of the twelfth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, the wind was so strong that trees were uprooted.

古文：太元十七年六月乙未，大风折木。
现代文：太元十七年六月乙卯日，刮大风，吹折树木。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the 17th year of the Taiyuan, a strong wind blew and the trees were blown down.

古文：晋安帝元兴二年二月甲辰，大风雨，大航门屋瓦飞落。
现代文：晋安帝元兴二年二月甲辰日，大风大雨，大航浮桥入的门屋瓦全被吹得飞落。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An dynasties, there was a strong wind and heavy rain, and all the door and roof tiles entering the Dahuang Floating Bridge were blown down.

古文：明年，桓玄篡位，由此门入。
现代文：第二年，桓玄篡位，正由这道门进入京城。
English: In the second year, Kangen usurped the throne and entered through this gate.

古文：元兴三年正月，桓玄游大航南，飘风飞其卑兒盖。
现代文：元兴二年正月，桓玄游大魁浮桥南，旋风把他乘坐之车车盖吹飞。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Genxing Dynasty, Huan Xuan Yu, the Grand Duke, was riding south of the pontoon bridge when a cyclone blew the roof off the car he was riding in.

古文：三月，玄败。
现代文：三月，桓玄失败。
English: In March, Kangen failed.

古文：元兴三年五月，江陵大风折木。
现代文：元兴三年五月，江陵刮大风，吹折树木。
English: In May of the third year of Genxing, Jiangling was hit by a strong wind, which blew down trees.

古文：是月，桓玄败于峥嵘洲，身亦屠裂。
现代文：当月，桓玄在峥嵘洲战败，自己被杀，尸体被肢解。
English: In the same month, Kuan Xuan was defeated at the Battle of Junsu, and his body was also chopped into pieces.

古文：元兴三年十一月丁酉，大风，江陵多死者。
现代文：元兴三年十一月丁酉日，刮大风，江陵死了很多人。
English: In November of the third year of the Yuanxing Dynasty, Dingyao Day, a strong wind blew, and many people died in Jiangling.

古文：晋安帝义熙四年十一月辛卯朔，西北疾风起。
现代文：晋安帝义熙四年十一月辛卯日，初一，大风在西北刮起。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Emperor Jian of Andean Yixi, a gale blew up in the northwest.

古文：义熙五年闰十月丁亥，大风发屋。
现代文：义熙五年闰十月丁亥曰，刮大风，毁坏房屋。
English: Yixi five years leap October Dinghai said, blowing a gale, destroying houses.

古文：明年，卢循至蔡洲。
现代文：第二年，卢循叛军到蔡洲。
English: The following year, Lu Xun went to the tomb.

古文：义熙六年五月壬申，大风拔北郊树，树几百年也。
现代文：义熙六年五月壬申日，刮大风，城北郊祀之处树木被连根拔起，这树已经生长了近百年。
English: On Jinshin Day in May of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a strong wind blew and uprooted trees in a place of worship on the northern outskirts of the city. The tree had been growing for nearly a hundred years.

古文：琅邪、扬州二射堂倒坏。
现代文：琅邪、握业两处射堂倒塌。
English: Two shooting galleries collapsed in the Shiji and Meiji areas.

古文：是日，卢循大舰漂没。
现代文：当天，卢循的大船舰沉没。
English: On the same day, Lu Xun's great ship sank.

古文：甲戌，又风，发屋折木。
现代文：甲戌日，又刮风，毁坏房屋，吹折树木。
English: Heavy rain and strong winds brought down houses and snapped trees.

古文：是冬，王师南讨。
现代文：这年冬天，朝廷军队向南征讨。
English: In the winter of that year, the imperial army marched south.

古文：义熙十年四月己丑朔，大风拔木。
现代文：义熙十年四月己丑，初一，刮大风，树木被连根拔起。
English: April of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi was a bad one. On the first day of the first month, a strong wind blew and trees were uprooted.

古文：义熙十年六月辛亥，大风拔木。
现代文：义熙十年六月辛亥，刮大风，树木被连根拔起。
English: In June of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a strong wind blew and trees were uprooted.

古文：明年，西讨司马休之。
现代文：第二年，朝廷军队西进征讨司马休之。
English: The following year, the imperial army marched west to settle the dispute with Sima Xiu.

古文：宋少帝景平二年正月癸亥朔旦，暴风发殿庭，会席翻扬数十丈。
现代文：宋少帝景平二年正月癸亥日清晨，正是正月初一，暴风从殿庭刮起，为朝臣正会准备的座席被吹起，飞升数十丈高。
English: In the early morning of the first day of the second year of Emperor Jingping of the Song Dynasty, it was the first day of the first month. A storm blew up from the palace courtyard, and the seats prepared for the formal meeting of the courtiers were blown up, soaring dozens of feet high.

古文：五月，帝废。
现代文：五月，少帝被废黜。
English: In May, the young emperor was deposed.

古文：文帝元嘉二十六年二月庚申，寿阳骤雨，有回风云雾，广三十许步，从南来，至城西回散灭。
现代文：文帝元嘉二十六年二月庚申日，寿阳下起疾速的阵雨，旋风卷着云雾，宽大约三十余步，从南直刮过来，到城西旋风停息，云雾也消散。
English: On Goshun day of February 26th in the year of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, a rapid shower began under the Shouyang, and a cyclone rolled in clouds and fog, about thirty paces wide, blowing from the south to the west of the city, the cyclone stopped, and the clouds and fog also dissipated.

古文：当其冲者，室屋树木摧倒。
现代文：旋风刮遇的地方，房屋被吹毁，树木被吹倒。
English: Where the cyclone has hit, houses have been destroyed and trees have been blown down.

古文：元嘉二十九年三月，大风，拔木飞瓦。
现代文：元嘉二十九年三月，刮大风，树木被连根拔起，屋瓦被吹飞。
English: In March of the 29th year of Yuan Jia, a strong wind blew. Trees were uprooted and roof tiles were blown away.

古文：元嘉三十年正月，大风拔木，雨冻杀牛马，雷电晦冥。
现代文：元嘉三十年正月，刮大风，树木被连根拔起，下冻雨，冻死牛马，又打雷闪电，天地昏暗。
English: In the first month of the 30th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, a strong wind blew, trees were uprooted, freezing rain fell, cows and horses froze to death, thunder and lightning struck, and the sky was dark.

古文：二月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：二月，皇上驾崩。
English: In February, the Emperor passed away.

古文：孝武帝大明七年，风吹初宁陵隧口左标折。
现代文：孝武帝大明七年，风把初宁陵墓道口左边的墓碑吹折。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the wind broke the tombstone on the left side of the entrance to the Hatsuning Mausoleum.

古文：钟山通天台新成，飞倒，散落山涧。
现代文：钟山通天台刚刚建成，也被吹倒，石块飞起，散落山涧。
English: The roof of Zhongshan Road had just been built, but it was also blown down. Rocks flew up, scattering the hail.

古文：明年闰五月，帝崩。
现代文：第二年闰五月，孝武帝驾崩。
English: In May of the following year, Emperor Xiaowu passed away.

古文：前废帝永光元年正月乙未朔，京邑大风。
现代文：前废帝永光元年正月乙末日，初一，京城刮大风。
English: On the last day of the first month of the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, the first day of the year, a strong wind blew in Beijing.

古文：明帝泰始二年三月丙申，京邑大风。
现代文：明帝泰始二年三月丙申日，京城刮大风。
English: In March of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, a strong wind blew in Beijing.

古文：泰始二年四月甲子，京邑大风。
现代文：泰始二年四月甲子日，京城刮大风。
English: On April Fool's Day in the second year of the Taiji era, a strong wind blew through the capital.

古文：泰始二年五月丁未，京邑大风。
现代文：泰始二年五月丁末日，京城刮大风。
English: At the end of May on the first day of the second year of Taizhi, a strong wind blew in Beijing.

古文：泰始二年五月己酉，京邑大风。
现代文：泰始二年五月己酉日，京城刮大风。
English: In May of the second year of Taizhi, a strong wind blew in Beijing.

古文：泰始二年九月乙巳，京邑大风。
现代文：泰始二年九月乙巳日，京城刮大风。
English: On the second day of the ninth month of the second year of Taishi, a strong wind blew in Kyoto.

古文：后废帝元徽二年七月甲子，京邑大风。
现代文：后废帝元徽二年七月甲子，京城刮大风。
English: After Emperor Yuanhui was dethroned, a strong wind blew in Beijing in July of the following year.

古文：元徽三年三月丁卯，京邑大风。
现代文：元徽三年三月丁卯，京城刮大风。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, a strong wind blew in Beijing.

古文：元徽三年六月甲戌，京邑大风。
现代文：元徽三年六月甲戌，京城刮大风。
English: In June of the third year of the Yuanhui Dynasty, the capital city of Jiaxuan was hit by a strong wind.

古文：元徽四年十一月辛卯，京邑大风。
现代文：元徽四年十一月辛卯，京城刮大风。
English: It was a bitter November in the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, and a strong wind was blowing in Beijing.

古文：元徽五年三月庚寅，京邑大风，发屋折木。
现代文：元徽五年三月庚寅，京城刮大风，毁坏房屋，吹折树木。
English: In March of the Year of the Goat in the Year of the Dragon in the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, a strong wind blew through Beijing, destroying houses and blowing down trees.

古文：元徽五年六月甲寅，京邑大风。
现代文：元徽五年六月甲寅，京城刮大风。
English: In June of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the wind blew in Beijing.

古文：夜妖：魏高贵乡公正元二年闰正月戊戌，大风晦暝，行者皆顿伏。
现代文：魏高贵乡公正元二年闰正月戊戌，刮大风，天昏地暗，走路的人都停下或是跌倒在地上。
English: In the leap month of the first month of the second year of Wei Gao Gui Township, the wind was blowing, the sky was dark, and people walking stopped or fell to the ground.

古文：近夜妖也。
现代文：遣和夜妖相近。
English: It is similar to yakimono.

古文：刘向曰： 正昼而暝，阴为阳，臣制君也。 
现代文：刘向说： 正值白天却天昏地暗，这是因为阴胜阳，预示臣控制君。 
English: To put it bluntly: when it is day, it is dark, and when it is night, it is the vassal who controls the sovereign.

古文：时晋景王讨毋丘俭，是日始发。
现代文：当时晋景王讨伐旦丘俭，这天军队刚好出发。
English: At that time, King Jinjing was campaigning against Qiu Jian, and the army had just set out that day.

古文：魏元帝景元三年十月，京都大震，昼晦。
现代文：魏元帝景元三年十月，京城发生大地震，白天天色晦暗。
English: In October of the third year of Emperor Jingyuan of the Wei and Yuan Dynasties, a major earthquake occurred in Beijing, and the sky was dark during the day.

古文：此夜妖也。
现代文：这是夜妖。
English: This is the night demon.

古文：班固曰： 夜妖者，云风并起而杳冥，故与常风同象也。 
现代文：班固说： 夜妖，是指云风同时发生、导致天色晦暗的妖异，所以它和恒风是同样的征兆。 
English: Ban Gu said: "The night demon is a storm cloud that occurs at the same time and is dark, so it has the same symptoms as the normal wind.

古文：刘向《春秋说》云： 天戒若曰，勿使大夫世官，将令专事，冥晦。
现代文：刘向在《春秋说》中说： 上天儆戒说，不要让大夫世代为官，擅行政令，不要让他们独揽大权，否则会天昏地暗。
English: Liu Xiang said in "Spring and Autumn Annals": Heaven's precepts say, don't let doctors be officials for generations and have executive orders, don't let them monopolize power, otherwise it will be gloomy.

古文：明年，鲁季友卒，果世官而公室卑矣。 
现代文：第二年，鲁季睦死，大夫果然世代为一官而鲁公室衰微了。 
English: In the second year, Ludi Mutsu died, and the doctor was indeed an official for generations, and the Lu office declined.

古文：魏见此妖，晋有天下之应也。
现代文：魏出现这种妖异，正是晋将要占有天下的符应。
English: The appearance of this strange phenomenon in Wei is a sign that Jin owns the world.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十三年十二月乙未，大风晦暝。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十三年十二月乙未日，刮大风，天色晦暗。
English: On the eve of the 13th day of the 12th month of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu, a strong wind was blowing and the sky was dark.

古文：其后帝崩，而诸侯违命，干戈内侮，权夺于元显，祸成于桓玄。
现代文：以后孝武帝崩，而诸侯违抗朝廷的命令，率军反叛，欺侮朝廷，大权被司马元显篡夺，大祸由桓玄酿成。
English: After that, Zou Wanyu died, the lords disobeyed the imperial order, the soldiers invaded the capital, the power was seized by Yuan Xian, and the disaster was caused by Kuan Xuan.

古文：是其应也。
现代文：造就是天昏地暗的应验。
English: This is exactly the fulfillment of the demon.

古文：蠃虫之孽晋孝武咸宁元年七月，郡国螟；九月，青州又螟。
现代文：晋孝武帝咸宁元年七月，郡国出现螟虫；九月，青州又出现螟虫。
English: In July of the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, tapeworms appeared in the county; in September, tapeworms appeared in Qingzhou.

古文：咸宁元年七月，郡国有青虫食禾稼。
现代文：咸宁元年七月，郡国出现青虫啮食庄稼。
English: In July of the first year of Xianning, the county saw the emergence of caterpillars eating crops.

古文：咸宁四年，司、冀、兗、豫、荆、扬郡国皆螟。
现代文：咸宁四年，司、冀、兗、豫、荆、扬等州所属郡国都出现螟虫。
English: In the past four years in Xianning, tapeworms have appeared in counties and provinces belonging to the states of Si, Hebei, Shandong, Henan, Jing and Yang.

古文：晋武帝太康四年，会稽彭蜞及蟹皆化为鼠，甚众，覆野，大食稻为灾。
现代文：晋武帝太康四年，会稽的蟛蜞和蟹都变成鼠，很多，遍布田野，大量啮食稻，造成灾害。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the cormorants and crabs that were brought to the inspection became rats. There were many of them, and they spread all over the fields. A large number of cormorants ate rice, causing disasters.

古文：太康九年八月，郡国二十四螟，螟说与蝗同。
现代文：太康九年八月，各郡国共有二十四处出现螟虫。
English: In August of the ninth year of Taikang, aphids appeared in a total of 24 places in each county.

古文：是时帝听谗诉。
现代文：关于螟虫出现原因的说法与蝗虫相同。当时武帝听信谗言。
English: The reason for the appearance of aphids is the same as that of locusts. At that time, Emperor Wu listened to the advice.

古文：太康九年九月，虫伤稼。
现代文：太康九年九月，虫伤害庄稼。
English: In September of the ninth year of Taikang, insects began to damage crops.

古文：晋惠帝元康二年九月，带方、含资、提奚、南新、长岑、海冥、列口虫食禾叶荡尽。
现代文：晋惠帝元康二年九月，带方、含资、提奚、南新、长岑、海冥、列口等处，虫把禾苗全都吃尽。
English: In September of the second year of Emperor Jingu's reign, insects devoured all the seedlings in the areas of Bokfang, Hanzhi, Dibao, Nanshin, Changtao, Haidong and Lekou.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年七月，梁、益、凉三州螟。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年七月，梁、益、凉三州出现螟虫。
English: In July of the first year of the Yongning reign of Emperor Jinhui, tapeworms appeared in Liang, Yi, and Liang's three provinces.

古文：是时齐王冏秉政。
现代文：当时齐王司马同掌握朝政。
English: At that time, Qi Wang and Sima Tong controlled the imperial government.

古文：贪苛之应也。
现代文：螟虫出现足贪婪苛刻的应验。
English: The tapeworm appears as a greedy, demanding test subject.

古文：永宁元年十月，南安、巴西、江阳、太原、新兴、北海青虫食禾叶，甚者十伤五六。
现代文：永宁元年十月，南安、巴西、江阳、太原、新兴、北海等地青虫啮食禾叶，最严重的地方禾叶被吃去十分之五六。
English: In October of the first year of the Yongning era, caterpillars ate grain leaves in Nan'an, Brazil, Jiangyang, Taiyuan, Xinxing, Beihai and other places. In the most serious places, grain leaves were eaten by 56% of the time.

古文：永宁元年十二月，郡国八螟。
现代文：永宁元年十二月，郡国有八处出现螟虫。
English: In December of the first year of Yongning, tapeworms appeared in eight places in the county.

古文：牛祸：晋武帝太康九年，幽州塞北有死牛头语。近牛祸也。
现代文：晋武帝太康九年，幽州塞北有死牛头说话。造近于牛祸。
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, there was a dead cow's head in the north of Yuzhou. It was close to a cow accident.

古文：是时帝多疾病，深以后事为念，而托付不以至公，思心瞀乱之应也。
现代文：当时武帝多病，常病重，深深为自己死后之事忧虑，但又不用至公之，托付朝政，这是思虑昏乱的应验。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu was often ill, often seriously ill, deeply worried about his own death, but he did not have to make it public, entrusting it to the government, which was the fulfillment of his thoughts.

古文：师旷曰： 怨昚动于民，则有非言之物而言。 
现代文：师旷说： 怨恨之心、诽谤之言在百姓中产生，就会有不会说话的东西突然说话。 
English: Shigeaki said: When resentment and slander arise among the people, things that cannot speak will suddenly speak.

古文：又其义也。
现代文：死牛头说话正是这个原因。
English: That's what it means.

古文：晋惠帝太安中，江夏张骋所乘牛言曰： 天下方乱，乘我何之！ 
现代文：晋惠帝太安年间，江夏张骋驾车的牛说道： 天下将发生动乱，要我驾车去哪儿! 
English: During the reign of Emperor Taian of Jin and Hui Dynasties, the cow of Jiangxia Zhangye's driving said: There will be turmoil in the world, where should I drive!

古文：骋惧而还，犬又言曰： 归何蚤也。 
现代文：张骋因害怕而回家，家中犬又说道： 回来怎么这样早! 
English: Frightened, Zhang Yao went home. The family dog also said: "How can you come back so early!

古文：寻后牛又人立而行。
现代文：不久之后牛又像人似的站起来用两条腿走路。
English: Soon after, the cow stood up and walked like a human again.

古文：骋使善卜者卦之。
现代文：张骋请善于卜卦的人为这事占卜。
English: Zhang Ye asked someone who was good at divination to predict this.

古文：谓曰： 天下将有兵乱，为祸非止一家。 
现代文：卜卦的人对张骋说： 天下将有战乱，陷于祸害的不止一家。 
English: The soothsayer said to Zhang Ye: There will be war in the world, and more than one family will be caught in the disaster.

古文：其年张昌反，先略江夏，骋为将帅。
现代文：那一年张昌反叛，先占据江夏，张骋在他手下当将领。
English: In that year, Zhang Chang rebelled and occupied Jiangxia first. Zhang Ye was the top general under him.

古文：于是五州残乱，骋亦族灭。
现代文：于是五州陷入战乱，百姓被残害，张骋也全族被诛减。
English: As a result, the five prefectures fell into a state of war, the people were killed, and Zhang Ye's entire family was reduced to poverty.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 牛能言，如其言占吉凶。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 牛假如能说话，就按牛的话预示吉凶。 《易。
English: Kyofusa "Ikimono" says: "If a cow could speak, it would tell fortunes according to the cow's words.

古文：《易萌气枢》曰： 人君不好士，走马被文绣，犬狼食人食，则有六畜妖言。 
现代文：萌气枢》说： 君主不喜好士人，良马披上了文绣之衣，犬狼食用着人的食物，那么就会出现六畜与人交谈的妖异。 
English: "Meng Qi Zu" said: The monarch does not like the scholar, the good horse is clothed in embroidered clothes, the dog and the wolf eat human food, then the six animals will appear to talk to people.

古文：时天子诸侯不以惠下为务，又其应也。
现代文：当时天子诸侯不把向百姓施惠放在心上，又正是牛犬说话的应验。
English: At that time, the princes and lords did not care about the common people, which was a good sign.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年，曲阿门牛生犊，一体两头。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年，曲阿门有牛生下牛犊，一个身体两个头。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty, Qu Amen had a cow give birth to a calf, a body with two heads.

古文：元帝太兴元年，武昌太守王谅牛生子，两头八足，两尾共一腹。
现代文：元帝太兴元年，武昌太守王谅家的牛生下小牛，两个头、八只脚、两条尾，共一肚腹。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Yuan Dynasty, a calf was born from the cow of Wuchang Taishu Wang Yuanzhang's family, with two heads, eight legs, two tails, and one stomach.

古文：三年后死。
现代文：三年后这条小牛死去。
English: The calf died three years later.

古文：又有牛生一足三尾，皆生而死。
现代文：又有牛生下一足三尾的小牛，生下来就死了。
English: Another cow gave birth to a three-tailed calf, which died at birth.

古文：按司马彪说，两头者，政在私门，上下无别之象也。
现代文：据司马彪说，牛有两个头，是朝政掌握在大臣手中，上下没有分别的征兆。
English: According to Sima Biao, the ox has two heads, that is, the government is in the hands of the ministers, and there is no sign of separation between the top and the bottom.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 足多者，所任邪也。
现代文：京房《易传》说： 足多，是预示着任用的人中有奸邪。
English: Beijing House "Easy Biography" said: "Too much success is a sign that there is evil among those appointed.

古文：足少者，下不胜任也。 
现代文：足少，是说明在下之人不能承担重任。 
English: The fact that there are so few of them means that those at the bottom cannot shoulder the heavy responsibilities.

古文：其后皆有此应。
现代文：以后都有应验。
English: Since then, all of them have been fulfilled.

古文：晋元帝太兴四年十二月，郊牛死。
现代文：晋元帝太兴四年十二月，用来郊祀的牛死了。
English: In December of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin Dynasty, the cow that was used for suburban worship died.

古文：按刘向说《春秋》郊牛死曰，宣公区瞀昏乱，故天不飨其祀。
现代文：《春秋》中记载用来郊祀的牛死去，据刘向解说，宣公昏昧惑乱，所以上天不享用他的祭祀。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records the death of a cow that was used for suburban worship. According to Liu Xiang's explanation, Xuan Gong was confused and bewildered, so Heaven did not enjoy his sacrifice.

古文：元帝中兴之业，实王导之谋也。
现代文：元帝中兴晋室的事业，实在是王导在全力谋划。
English: The cause of the Yuan Emperor Zhongxing Jin's family was really planned by Wang Du at full capacity.

古文：刘隗探会主意，以得亲幸，导见疏外。
现代文：塑腿逢迎阿谀五童的心意，获得宠幸，玉遵被疏远，出京任职。
English: Shaping the legs coincided with the wishes of the five children of grandma and grandpa, and they were favored, while Tamazuna was alienated and sent to work in Kyoto.

古文：此区瞀不睿之祸也。
现代文：郊祀用的牛死正是昏聩而思虑不广带来的灾祸。
English: The death of a cow used for suburban worship is a calamity brought about by a dim-witted and thoughtless person.

古文：晋成帝咸和二年五月，护军牛生犊，两头六足。
现代文：晋成帝咸和二年五月，护军之牛生下牛犊，有两个头六只脚。
English: In May of the second year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, the guardian cow gave birth to a calf with two heads and six legs.

古文：是冬，苏峻作乱。
现代文：这年冬天，苏峻发动叛乱。
English: In the winter of that year, Su Jun started a riot.

古文：咸和七年，九德民袁荣家牛产犊，两头八足，二尾共身。
现代文：咸和七年，九擅百姓直荣家牛生下牛犊，两个头八只足两条尾共一个身子。
English: In the seventh year of the Xianhe era, a cow belonging to the Zhurong family of the Jiubang people gave birth to a calf with two heads, eight legs, and two tails.

古文：京房《易传》： 杀无罪，则牛生妖。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 假若杀了无罪的人，那么牛就会出现妖异。 
English: Kyobo's "Easy Biography" says: If you kill an innocent person, then the cow will appear as a monster.

古文：桓玄之国在荆州，诣刺史殷仲堪，行至鹤穴，逢一老公，驱青牛，形色瑰异。
现代文：桓玄弃官回归自己封国，在荆州去见荆州刺史殷仲堪，走到鹤穴，遇上一个老翁赶着青牛，牛的形态皮色都很突出很奇异。
English: Huan Xuan abandoned his post and returned to his fiefdom. In Jingzhou, he went to see Jingzhou scholar Yin Zhongkan. When he went to the crane pit, he met an old man driving a young cow. The shape and skin color of the cow were very prominent and strange.

古文：桓玄即以所乘牛易取。
现代文：桓玄就用自己驾车的牛把老翁的青牛换来。
English: Kuan Xuan exchanged the old man's young cow for the cow he was driving.

古文：乘至零陵泾溪，骏驶非常，因息驾饮牛。牛径入江水不出。
现代文：桓玄坐着牛车到零陵泾溪，青牛驾车急驶，与寻常的牛全不相同，桓玄就停下车让牛饮水，青牛一直走入江水中再也不出来。
English: Huan Xuan took the ox-drawn cart to Luling Yingxi. The young ox was driving fast and was completely different from ordinary oxen. Huan Xuan stopped the cart to let the ox drink water. The young ox kept going into the river and never came out again.

古文：玄遣人觇守，经日无所见。
现代文：桓玄派人在那地方察看了一整天，什么也没有见到。
English: Kuan Xuan sent guards, but they didn't see him for a day.

古文：宋文帝元嘉三年，司徒徐羡之大兒乔之行欲入广莫门。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉三年，司徒徐羡之的大儿子徐乔之乘牛车想进广莫门。
English: In the third year of Emperor Yuanjia of Song Dynasty, the eldest son of Emperor Xu Enzhi, Xu Qiaozhi, wanted to enter Guangmo Gate by ox cart.

古文：牛径将入廷尉寺，左右禁捉不能禁。
现代文：牛一直把车拉进廷尉官衙，他的随从想阻止牛却不能挡住。
English: The cow kept pulling the cart into the palace, and his attendants tried to stop the cow but couldn't.

古文：入方得出。
现代文：进廷尉官衙后又出来。
English: After entering the court as a lieutenant, he came out again.

古文：明日被收。
现代文：第二天徐羡之被收捕。
English: The next day, Xu Enzhi was arrested.

古文：元嘉二十九年，晋陵送牛，角生右胁，长八尺。
现代文：元嘉二十九年，晋陵送来牛，牛角长在右前胸，八尺长。
English: In the 29th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the Jin Mausoleum sent a cow. The horns of the cow grow on the right forechest and are eight feet long.

古文：明年二月，东宫为祸。
现代文：第二年二月，太子制造祸乱。
English: In February of the following year, the crown prince created havoc.

古文：孝武帝大明三年，广州刺史费淹献三角水牛。
现代文：孝武帝大明三年，广州刺史费淹贡献三只角的水牛。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the Guangzhou Jishi Fei Lang contributed three horned buffaloes.

古文：黄眚黄祥：蜀刘备章武二年，东伐。
现代文：蜀刘备章武二年，蜀向东进军征伐。
English: In the second year of Shu Liu Bei Zhangwu, Shu marched eastward.

古文：二月，自秭归进屯夷道。
现代文：二月，从秭归进驻夷道。
English: In February, he was transferred from Handan to Taitung.

古文：六月，秭归有黄气见，长十余里，广数十丈。
现代文：六月，秭归有黄气出现，绵延十余里，宽有数十丈。
English: In June, hanging ink mounds appeared, more than ten miles long and several tens of meters wide.

古文：后逾旬，备为陆逊所破。
现代文：过了十天以后，刘备被陆议击败。
English: Ten days later, Liu Bei was defeated by Lu Yi.

古文：近黄祥也。
现代文：这接近于黄祥之妖异。
English: This is close to the phenomenon of Huang Xiang.

古文：魏齐王正始中，中山王周南为襄邑长。
现代文：魏齐王正始年间，中山王周南任襄邑长。
English: At the beginning of the reign of King Wei Qi, Zhongshan King Zhou Nan served as the county magistrate of Xiangyi.

古文：有鼠从穴出，语曰： 王周南，尔以某日死。 
现代文：有鼠从洞穴中出来，说道： 王周南，你在某天会死。 
English: A mouse came out of the cave and said, "Wang Zhou Nan, you will die one day.

古文：南不应。
现代文：王周南不回答。
English: Wang Zhounan did not answer.

古文：鼠还穴。
现代文：鼠返回洞穴。
English: The mouse returns to its burrow.

古文：后至期，更冠帻皁衣出，语曰： 周南，汝日中当死。 
现代文：后来到了鼠所说的那个子，鼠又戴着帽子穿着黑色衣服出洞来，说道： 王周南，你今天中午将死。 
English: When the appointed day arrived, the mouse put on his turban and black robe and came out, saying, "You will be dead by noon.

古文：又不应。
现代文：王周南又不回答。
English: Du Zichun remained silent.

古文：鼠复入，斯须更出，语如向日。
现代文：鼠又进洞去，一会儿又出来，说和以前一样的话。
English: The mouse went back into the hole and came out again a moment later, saying the same words as before.

古文：适欲日中，鼠入复出，出复入，转更数语如前。
现代文：将到中午，鼠进洞又出洞，出洞又进洞，翻来覆去说前面那几句话。
English: Towards midday, the rat went in and out of the hole, in and out of the hole, repeating the first few words over and over.

古文：日适中，鼠曰： 周南，汝不应我，复何道。 
现代文：时辰正到中午，鼠说： 王周南，你不回答我，我还说什么。 
English: Just before noon, the mouse said, "Wang Zhou Nan, if you don't answer me, what else can I say?"

古文：言绝，颠蹶而死，即失衣冠。
现代文：话说完，鼠跌倒在地上死去，衣帽也顿时不见。
English: With that, the mouse fell to the ground and died, instantly losing its crest.

古文：取视，俱如常鼠。
现代文：王周南把鼠拿过来看，都和平常的鼠一样。
English: From a distance, it looks just like an ordinary mouse.

古文：案班固说，此黄祥也。
现代文：据班固的说法，这属于黄祥。
English: "It's a yellow banner," Mr. Bangu said.

古文：是时曹爽秉政，竞为比周，故鼠作变也。
现代文：当时曹爽掌握朝政，朝廷大臣竞相结党营私，所以鼠发生妖变。
English: At that time, Cao Shuang was in charge of the imperial government, and the ministers of the imperial court competed with each other to form a party to rule the country. Therefore, the rat underwent a magical transformation.

古文：宋孝武大明七年春，太湖边忽多鼠。
现代文：宋孝武帝大明七年春，太湖边忽然出现很多鼠。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Emperor Song Xiaowu's reign, many rats suddenly appeared on the edge of Lake Tai.

古文：其年夏，水至，悉变成鲤鱼。
现代文：那年夏天，水涨到太湖边，鼠全变成鲤鱼。
English: That summer, the water rose to the edge of Taihu Lake, and all the mice turned into carp.

古文：民人一日取，转得三五十斛。
现代文：百姓捕取一天，能得到三五十斛。
English: If a commoner is captured for a day, he can get thirty to fifty rupees.

古文：明年，大饥。
现代文：第二年，发生大的饥荒。
English: The next year, there was a great famine.

古文：晋元帝太兴四年八月，黄雾四塞，埃气蔽天。
现代文：晋元帝太兴四年八月，黄雾四处弥漫。灰尘遮蔽天日。
English: In August of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinguang of Taixing, a yellow fog pervaded everywhere. Dust obscured the sun.

古文：案杨宣对，近土气，乱之祥也。
现代文：据汉代杨宣的奏对，这接近于土气，是动乱的征兆。
English: According to the Han Dynasty's Yang Xuan, this is close to the local spirit and is a sign of turmoil.

古文：晋元帝永昌二年正月癸巳，黄雾四塞。
现代文：晋元帝永昌二年正月癸巳曰，黄雾四处弥漫。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, it was said that the yellow fog was pervasive everywhere.

古文：晋穆帝永和七年三月，凉州大风拔木，黄雾下尘。
现代文：晋穆帝永和七年三月，凉州刮大风，树木被连根拔起，黄雾随风飘动。
English: In March of the seventh year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, a strong wind blew in Liangzhou, trees were uprooted, and the yellow fog drifted with the wind.

古文：是时张重华纳谮，出谢艾为酒泉太守，而所任非其人。
现代文：当时张重华听信谐言，让谢艾离开凉州任酒泉太守，而张重华任用的都是不恰当的人选。
English: At that time, Zhang Chonghua listened to the truth and let Xie Ai leave Liangzhou to be the governor of Jiuquan, but Zhang Chonghua's appointments were all inappropriate candidates.

古文：至九年死，嗣子见弑。
现代文：到永和九年，张重华死，继承他职务的儿子被臣僚杀害。
English: In the ninth year of the Yonghe era, Zhang Chonghua died, and his son, who had succeeded him, was killed by his ministers.

古文：是其应也。
现代文：这正是大风黄雾的应验。
English: This is exactly the fulfillment of the demon.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 闻善不予，兹谓不知。
现代文：京房《易传》说 听到好话不赞许，造就叫做不智。
English: Jing Fang of "Easy Biography" said, "If you do not approve of what you hear, it is not wise to create."

古文：厥异黄，厥咎聋，厥灾不嗣。
现代文：因它而出现的妖异是黄，给它的责罚是聋，给它的灾祸是没人承嗣。
English: Its curse is yellow, its punishment is deafness, and its calamity is having no heirs.

古文：黄者，有黄浊气四塞天下，蔽贤绝道，故灾至绝世也。 
现代文：黄，是指有黄色浊气充塞天下，阻遏贤者，禁绝正道，所以灾祸发展到断绝禄位。 
English: Yellow means that there is a yellow miasma filling the world, obstructing sages and forbidding the righteous path, so the calamity has developed to the breaking point.

古文：晋安帝元兴元年十月丙申朔，黄雾昏浊，不雨。
现代文：晋安帝元兴元年十月丙申曰，初一，黄雾充塞，四处昏浊，却不下雨。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jian of the Andean Dynasties, he said, "On the first day of the year, the sky was full of yellow fog and it was cloudy everywhere, but it didn't rain.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十八年秋七月，天有黄光，洞照于地。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十八年秋七月，天上出现黄光，照亮大地。
English: In the autumn and July of the 18th year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, a yellow light appeared in the sky, illuminating the earth.

古文：太子率更令何承天谓之荣光，太平之详，上表称庆。
现代文：太子率更令何承天称遣为荣光，认为是天下太平的征兆，上表颂扬吉庆。
English: The prince's rate made He Zhengtian praise the appointment as a glory, consider it to be a sign of world peace, and praise the auspicious celebration.

古文：地震：吴孙权黄武四年，江东地连震。
现代文：吴孙权黄武四年，江东接连发生地震。
English: In the fourth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign in Huangwu, earthquakes occurred one after another in the East River.

古文：是时权受魏爵命，为大将军、吴王，改元专制，不修臣迹。
现代文：当时逐护接受魏的封爵和官职，为大将军、吴王，但又自己改用年号，独断专行，不按臣子的身份行事。
English: At that time, he accepted Wei's knighthood and official post one after another, and was the great general, King Wu, but he changed his name to the year, acted arbitrarily, and did not act according to the status of a vassal.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣事虽正，专必震。 
现代文：直废《易传》说： 以臣下身份事奉君王，一定要按准则办事，独断专行就一定会发生地震。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: Although the vassal behaves well, arbitrariness will surely cause an earthquake.

古文：董仲舒、刘向并云 臣下强盛，将动而为害 之应也。
现代文：董仲舒、刘血都说，地震是 臣下力量强大，将要采取行动危害君上 的应验。
English: Dong Zhongshu and Liu Xue both said that the earthquake was the fulfillment that the vassals were powerful and would take action to harm their lord.

古文：魏明帝青龙二年十一月，京都地震，从东来，隐隐有声，屋瓦摇。
现代文：魏明帝青龙二年十一月，京城地震，地震从束边传过来，伴有隆隆的声音，屋瓦被震得摇动。
English: In November of the second year of Emperor Ming's reign, there was an earthquake in Beijing. The earthquake was transmitted from Shoubian, accompanied by a rumbling sound, and the roof tiles were shaken.

古文：魏明帝景初元年六月戊申，京都地震。
现代文：魏明帝景初元年六月戊申，京城地震。
English: In June of the first year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：是秋，吴将硃然围江夏，荆州刺史胡质击退之。
现代文：这年秋天，吴将硃然围攻夏，荆州刺史胡质击退了他。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zhu Ran, the general of the State of Wu, led an army to besiege Jiangxia, but Jingzhou's Jishi Wuxiong repulsed him.

古文：又公孙渊自立为燕王，改年，置百官。
现代文：又公孙渊自立为燕王，改换年号，设置百官。
English: In addition, Gongsun Yuan established himself as the King of Swallows, changed his era name, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：明年，讨平之。
现代文：第二年，朝廷征讨扫平了他。
English: The next year, they subdued him.

古文：吴孙权嘉禾六年五月，江东地震。
现代文：吴孙权嘉禾六年五月，江东震。
English: In May of the sixth year of the reign of Sun Quan Jia He of the State of Wu, there was an earthquake in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：赤乌二年正月，地又再震。
现代文：赤乌二年正月，又发生两次地震。
English: In the first month of the second year of Akou, two more earthquakes occurred.

古文：是时吕壹专政，步骘上疏曰： 伏闻校事，吹毛求瑕，趣欲陷人，成其威福，无罪无辜，横受重刑，虽有大臣，不见信任。
现代文：当时吕壹独揽朝政，楚盐上疏说： 我听说校事官吹毛求疵，急着想要陷害人，实现他作威作福的欲望，无罪无辜的人，冤枉地遭受重刑，虽有大臣，却不被信任。
English: At that time, when Lü Yi was in sole charge of the imperial government, Chu Yan Shang Zuo said: I heard that the school official was fastidious, eager to frame people and realize his desire to dominate and bless. Innocent people were unjustly subjected to heavy punishment, and although there were ministers, they were not trusted.

古文：如此，天地焉得无变。
现代文：像这样，天地怎么会不发生灾变。
English: Like this, how can the world not have a cataclysmic change.

古文：故嘉禾六年、赤乌二年，地连震动，臣下专政之应也。
现代文：所以嘉禾六年、赤乌二年，接连发生地震，这是臣下独揽朝政的应验。
English: Therefore, in the sixth year of Jiahe and the second year of Chou, earthquakes occurred one after another, which was the fulfillment of the vassal's sole control over the government.

古文：冀所以警悟人主，可不深思其意哉！ 
现代文：上天希望用这种方式警告君主，使君主醒悟，君主能不深深地考虑上天的用意吗。 
English: Heaven and earth hope to be used to alert the emperor, can we not ponder its intention!

古文：壹后卒败。
现代文：以后吕壹最终还是败露了。
English: Lu Yi later finally failed.

古文：魏齐王正始二年十一月，南安郡地地震。
现代文：魏齐王正始二年十一月，南安郡地震。
English: In November of the second year of King Wei's reign, there was an earthquake in Nan'an County.

古文：正始三年七月甲申，南安郡地震；十二月，魏郡地震。
现代文：正始三年七月甲申曰，南安郡地震；十二月，魏郡地震。
English: At the beginning of the third year, in July, the earthquake in Nan'an County occurred; in December, the earthquake in Wei County occurred.

古文：正始六年二月丁卯，南安郡地震。
现代文：正始六年二月丁卯曰，南安郡地震。
English: At the beginning of February of the sixth year, the Nan'an County earthquake occurred.

古文：是时曹爽专政，迁太后于永宁宫，太后与帝相泣而别。
现代文：当时曹爽独揽朝政，把太后迁往永宁宫，太后和皇帝相向哭着分别。
English: At that time, Cao Shuang single-handedly took over the imperial court and moved the empress dowager to Yongning Palace. The empress dowager and the emperor separated in tears.

古文：连年地震，是其应也。
现代文：连年地震，正是这种专权行为的应验。
English: Year after year of earthquakes, that is the answer.

古文：吴孙权赤乌十一年二月，江东地仍震。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十一年二月，江东频频发生地震。
English: In February of the 11th year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the East River was hit by a series of earthquakes.

古文：是时权听谗，寻黜硃据，废太子。
现代文：当时孙权听信谗言，不久贬黜麦据，废黜太子。
English: At that time, Sun Quan listened to the advice and soon dethroned Mu Zi and dethroned the crown prince.

古文：蜀刘禅炎兴元年，蜀地震。
现代文：蜀刘禅炎兴元年，蜀地震。
English: In the first year of the revival of Shu Liu Zen, the Shu earthquake occurred.

古文：时宦人黄皓专权。
现代文：当时宦官黄皓专权。
English: At that time, the eunuch Huang Qi had absolute power.

古文：按司马彪说，奄宦无阳施，犹妇人也。
现代文：按司马彪说，宦官不能用阳气行事，如同妇人。
English: According to Sima Biao, eunuchs cannot act with masculine energy, like women.

古文：此皓见任之应，与汉和帝时同事也。
现代文：地震正是黄皓被任用的应验，逭和汉和帝时的事情相同。
English: The earthquake was exactly the fulfillment of Huang Qi's appointment, and the same thing happened with Han and Imperial times.

古文：是冬，蜀亡。
现代文：遣年冬天，蜀灭亡。
English: In the winter of that year, the State of Shu collapsed.

古文：晋武帝泰始五年四月辛酉，地震。
现代文：晋武帝泰始五年四月辛酉曰，地震。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Jinwu's reign, there was an earthquake.

古文：是年冬，新平氐、羌叛。
现代文：这年冬天，新平氐、羌叛。
English: In the winter of that year, Xinping rebelled.

古文：明年，孙皓大遗众入涡口。
现代文：第二年，孙皓派大军攻入涡口。
English: In the second year, Sun Yat-sen sent a large army to invade Workou.

古文：叛虏寇秦、凉，刺史胡烈、苏愉并为所害。
现代文：叛虏进犯秦州、凉州，刺史胡烈、苏愉都被他们杀害。
English: The rebels invaded Qinzhou and Liangzhou, and assassinated Shi Hulei and Su Yu.

古文：泰始七年六月丙申，地震。
现代文：泰始七年六月丙申日，地震。
English: In June of the seventh year of the Taisho era, there was an earthquake.

古文：武帝世，始于贾充，终于杨骏，阿党昧利，苟专权宠，终丧天下，由是也。
现代文：武帝时代，最早有贾充，最后有杨骏，结党营私，贪求财利，利用恩宠，随意弄权，置最终丢失天下，就是由此开始。
English: In the era of Emperor Wu, the earliest was Jia Chong, and the last was Yang Hui, who formed a party for personal gain, greedily pursued money and profit, took advantage of favors, arbitrarily seized power, and ultimately lost the world. This is where it all began.

古文：末年所任转敝，故亦一年六震，是其应也。
现代文：末年，任用的人更加拙劣，所以也在一年内发生六次地震，遣正是弊政的应验。
English: At the end of the year, the appointees were even more incompetent, so there were also six earthquakes in one year. The dismissal was the result of bad governance.

古文：裴叔则曰： 晋德所以不比隆尧、舜者，以有贾充诸人在朝。 
现代文：裴拯刨说： 置曲德政不能和尧、舜时代那样隆盛的原因，就是因为有贾充一类的人在朝廷中专权。 
English: Pei Zhenghao said, "The reason why the Qigong and German politics could not flourish as in the Zhou and Qian dynasties was because people like Jia Chong had absolute power in the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝咸宁二年八月庚辰，河南、河东、平阳地震。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁二年八月庚辰日，河南、河东、平阳地震。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in August of the second year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, there was an earthquake in Henan, Hedong and Pingyang.

古文：咸宁四年六月丁未，阴平、广武地震；甲子，阴平、广武地又震。
现代文：咸宁四年六月丁末日，阴平、广武地震：甲子曰，阴平、广武又发生地震。
English: The Yinping and Guangwu Earthquakes on the last day of June in Xianning in 1944: According to Kozi, another earthquake occurred in Yinping and Guangwu.

古文：晋武帝太康二年二月庚申，淮南、丹阳地震。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年二月庚申日，淮南、丹阳地震。
English: In February of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, there was an earthquake in Huainan and Danyang.

古文：太康五年正月壬辰，地震。
现代文：太康五年二月壬辰日，地震。
English: Taikang earthquake in February of the same year.

古文：太康六年七月己丑，地震。
现代文：太康六年七月己丑日，地震。
English: July of Taikang's sixth year was a bad day, an earthquake.

古文：太康七年七月，南安、犍为地震；八月，京兆地震。
现代文：太康七年七月，南安、犍为地震；八月，京兆地震。
English: In July of the 7th year of Taikang, Nan'an and Handan were hit by earthquakes; in August, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：太康八年五月壬子，建安地震；七月，阴平地震；八月，丹阳地震。
现代文：太康八年五月壬子曰，建安地震；七月，阴平地震；八月，丹阳地震。
English: In May of the eighth year of Taikang, Renzi said, Jianan earthquake; in July, Yinping earthquake; in August, Danyang earthquake.

古文：太康九年正月，会稽、丹阳、吴兴地震；四月辛酉，长沙、南海等郡国八地震；七月至于八月，地又四震，其三有声如雷。
现代文：太康九年正月，会稽、丹阳、吴兴地震；四月辛酉曰，长沙、南海等郡国共八处发生地震；七月到八月，又发生四次地震，其中三次伴有打雷似的响声。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Taikang, there were earthquakes in Heji, Danyang, and Wuxing; in April, a total of eight earthquakes occurred in counties such as Changsha and Nanhai; from July to August, four more earthquakes occurred, three of which were accompanied by thunder-like sounds.

古文：太康十年十二月己亥，丹阳地震。
现代文：太康十年十二月己亥日，丹阳地震。
English: In December of the 10th year of Taikang, the Danyang earthquake occurred.

古文：晋武帝太始元年，地震。
现代文：晋武帝太熙元年，地震。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinmu, there was an earthquake.

古文：晋惠帝元康元年十二月辛酉，京都地震。
现代文：晋惠帝元康元年十二月辛酉日，京城地震。
English: Jin Hui Di Yuan Kang was born in December of the first year of the Heian period, after the earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：元康四年二月，蜀郡山崩杀人；上谷、上庸、辽东地震。
现代文：元康四年二月，蜀郡山崩，压死了人；上谷、上卢、辽东地震。
English: In February of the fourth year of the Yuan Kang, a landslide in Shu County crushed people to death; Shanggu, Shanglu, and Liaodong earthquakes.

古文：五月壬子，寿春山崩，洪水出，城坏，地坠方三十丈，水出杀人。
现代文：五月壬子，寿春山崩，洪水涌出，城墙崩塌，有方圆三十丈的土地下陷。
English: In May, Jinsi, Shuchun landslides, floods, city walls collapsed, and a 30-meter square area of land sank.

古文：六月，寿春大雷震，山崩地坼，家人陷死，上庸郡亦如之。
现代文：六月，画画出现大雷、地震，山崩地裂，百姓陷入地下死去，上卢郡也出现同样的情况。
English: In June, there were thunderstorms, earthquakes, landslides, landslides, and people fell into the ground and died, and the same situation occurred in Shanglu County.

古文：八月，上谷地震，水出，杀百余人。
现代文：八月，上釜地震，水涌出来，淹死一百余人。
English: In August, water gushed out after the Shanggu earthquake, drowning more than a hundred people.

古文：居庸地裂，广三十六丈，长八十四丈，水出，大饥。
现代文：居庸地裂开，裂开的地方宽三十六丈，长八十四丈，水涌出，发生大饥荒。
English: Jiuyong cracked, the cracked place was 36 meters wide and 84 meters long, water gushed out, and a great famine occurred.

古文：上庸四处山崩地陷，广三十丈，长百三十丈，水出杀人。
现代文：上庸有四处山崩地裂，裂处宽三十丈，长一百三十丈，水涌出，淹死了人。
English: In Shangyong, there were four landslides and cracks. The cracks were 30 meters wide and 130 meters long. Water gushed out and drowned people.

古文：十月，京都地震；十一月，荥阳、襄城、汝阴、梁国、南阳地皆震；十二月，京都又震。
现代文：十月，京城地震；十一月，荣阳、襄城、汝南、矾国，亩区都发生地震；十二月，京城又发生地震。
English: In October, there was an earthquake in Beijing; in November, earthquakes occurred in Rongyang, Xiangcheng, Rongnan, and Shandong; in December, another earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：是时贾后乱朝，据权专制，终至祸败之应也。
现代文：这是当时置厘扰乱朝纲、窃夺大权、独揽朝政、最终导致败亡的应验。
English: This was the fulfillment of the plan of disturbing the imperial program, stealing the supreme power, monopolizing the imperial government, and ultimately leading to the fall of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：汉邓太后摄政时，郡国地震。
现代文：汉代邓太后摄政时，各郡国发生地震。
English: When the Han Dynasty's Empress Dowager Deng was regent, there was an earthquake in the county.

古文：李固以为： 地，阴也，法当安静。
现代文：李固认为： 地，其性属阴，按常理应当安静。
English: Li Gu believes: The earth is yin and yang, and should be quiet according to the law.

古文：今乃越阴之职，专阳之政，故应以震。 
现代文：现在却有人僭越阴的职分，独揽本属阳的权力，所以发生地震以作应验。 
English: Now, however, there are people who covet the position of the yin and monopolize the power of the yang, so an earthquake has occurred as a fulfillment.

古文：此同事也。
现代文：买后揽权而发生地震和汉代的事相同。
English: It was the same in the Han Dynasty when an earthquake occurred as a result of a power grab after a purchase.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 无德专禄，兹谓不顺。
现代文：京屋《易传》说： 无德却又想占有福禄，造就叫做不顺。
English: Kyo-ya "Ekiden" said: If you have no virtue, but want to possess good fortune, it is called bad luck.

古文：厥震动，丘陵涌水出。 
现代文：它的灾异是地震，摇动山陵，大水涌出。 
English: Its plagues are earthquakes that shake the mountains, and its torrents of water.

古文：又曰： 小人剥庐，厥妖山崩。
现代文：又说： 小人居于上位，剥夺百姓庐舍，它带来的妖异是山崩。
English: He also said: "Small people live in high places, depriving the people of their homes. What it brings is a landslide.

古文：兹谓阴乘阳，弱胜强。 
现代文：这就叫阴凌驾阳，弱战胜强。 
English: This is called yin dominating yang, and the weak defeating the strong.

古文：又曰： 阴背阳，则地裂。
现代文：又说： 阴抛开阳，就会出现地裂。
English: He also said: If the yin leaves the yang, the earth will crack.

古文：父子分离，夷、羌叛去。 
现代文：父子分离，夷、羌叛离。 
English: Father and son separated, and Yi and Ya rebelled.

古文：元康五年五月丁丑，地震；六月，金城地震。
现代文：元康五年五月丁丑曰，地震；六月，金城地震。
English: In May of the fifth year of the Yuan Kang Dynasty, there was an earthquake in Dingushi; in June, there was an earthquake in Jincheng.

古文：元康六年正月丁丑，地震。
现代文：元康六年正月丁丑曰，地震。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the reign of the Kangxi Emperor, there was an earthquake.

古文：元康八年正月丙辰，地震。
现代文：元康八年正月丙辰曰，地震。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Yuan Kang, there was an earthquake.

古文：晋惠帝太安元年十月，地震。
现代文：晋惠帝太安元年十月，地震。
English: In October of the first year of Emperor Taian's reign, there was an earthquake.

古文：是时齐王冏专政。
现代文：当时齐王司马同独揽朝政。
English: At that time, Qi Wang and Sima Tong monopolized the imperial government.

古文：太安二年十二月丙辰，地震。
现代文：太安二年十二月丙辰曰，地震。
English: In December of the second year of Taian, there was an earthquake.

古文：是时长沙王专政。
现代文：当时长沙王独揽朝政。
English: At that time, the king of Changsha was the sole ruler of the dynasty.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉三年十月，荆、湘二州地震。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉三年十月，荆州、湘州发生地震。
English: In October of the third year of Jin Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, an earthquake occurred in Jingzhou and Hunan.

古文：时司马越专政。
现代文：当时司马越独揽朝政。
English: At that time, Sima Yue was exclusively in charge of the imperial government.

古文：永嘉四年四月，兗州地震。
现代文：永嘉四年四月，兖州地震。
English: In April, Yongjia four years, Ganzhou earthquake.

古文：晋愍帝建兴二年四月甲辰，地震。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴二年四月甲辰曰，地震。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Jianxing's reign, there was an earthquake.

古文：是时幼主在上，权倾于下，四方云扰，兵乱不息。
现代文：当时皇帝幼小，大权全被臣下把持，四方动乱不停，如乌云涌动，战乱不止息。
English: At that time, the emperor was young, all the power was controlled by the vassals, and the unrest in all directions was incessant, like dark clouds surging, and the war did not stop.

古文：建兴三年六月丁卯，长安地震。
现代文：建兴三年六月丁卯，长安地震。
English: Jianxing three years in June Dingwu, Chang'an earthquake.

古文：晋元帝太兴元年四月，西平地震，涌水出；十二月，庐陵、豫章、武昌、西陵地震，山崩。
现代文：晋元帝太兴元年四月，西乎地震，水从地下涌出；十二月，庐陵、豫章、武昌、西陵地震，山崩。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin Dynasty, there was an earthquake in the west, and water gushed out of the ground; in December, there were earthquakes and landslides in Fuling, Yuzhang, Wuchang, and Xiling.

古文：干宝曰： 王敦陵上之应。 
现代文：王实说： 这是王敦欺凌君卜的应验。 
English: Wang Si said: This is the fulfillment of Wang Dun's bullying.

古文：太兴二年五月癸丑，祁山地震，山崩杀人。
现代文：太兴二年五月癸丑日，祁山地震，山崩，压死了人。
English: Lushan earthquake and landslide in Lushan, Taixing on May 2nd, crushed and killed people.

古文：是时相国南阳王保在祁山称晋王，不终之象也。太兴三年四月庚寅，丹阳、吴郡、晋陵地震。
现代文：当时相国南阳王旦屋堡在室业自称为置王，地震是预示他不会有好结果的征兆太兴三年四月庚寅，丹阳、吴郡、晋陵地震。
English: At that time, the king of Nanyang, Danyu Fort, in Muroye, claimed to be the king, and the earthquake was a sign that he would not have a good result.

古文：其年，南平郡山崩，出雄黄数千斤。
现代文：那年，南平郡山崩，崩塌的地方出现数千斤雄黄。
English: That year, there was a landslide in Nanping County, and thousands of cattails appeared in the collapsed area.

古文：晋成帝咸和二年三月，益州地震；四月己未，豫章地震。
现代文：晋成帝咸和二年三月，益州地震；四月己未日，更睦地震。
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, there was an earthquake in Yizhou; in April, there was an earthquake in Henmu.

古文：是年，苏峻作乱。
现代文：这年，苏峻发动叛乱。
English: That year, Su Jun caused a riot.

古文：咸和九年三月丁酉，会稽地震。
现代文：咸和九年三月丁酉曰，会稽地震。
English: In March of the ninth year of the Heian period, there was an earthquake.

古文：是时政在臣下。
现代文：当时朝政由大臣掌握。
English: At that time, the government of the Imperial Court was controlled by ministers.

古文：晋穆帝永和元年六月癸亥，地震。
现代文：晋穆帝永和元年六月癸亥日，地震。
English: In June of the first year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, there was an earthquake.

古文：是时嗣主幼冲，母后称制，政在臣下，所以连年地震。
现代文：当时继位君主年纪幼小，母后临朝听政，朝政由大臣掌握，这就是连年地震的原因。
English: At that time, the heir to the throne was young, and his mother, the Empress Dowager, listened to the government, and the government was controlled by the minister, which is the reason for the earthquakes year after year.

古文：永和二年十月，地震。
现代文：永和二年十月，地震。
English: In October of 1902, there was an earthquake.

古文：永和三年正月丙辰，地震。
现代文：永和三年正月丙辰曰，地震。
English: In the first month of the third year of Yonghe, there was an earthquake.

古文：永和四年十月己未，地震。
现代文：永和四年十月己未日，地震。
English: In October of the 4th year of the Heian period, there was an earthquake.

古文：永和五年正月庚寅，地震。
现代文：永和五年正月庚寅曰，地震。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of Yonghe, Geng Yin said that there was an earthquake.

古文：永和九年八月丁酉，京都地震，有声如雷。
现代文：永和九年八月丁酉曰，京城地震，伴有如同雷鸣那样的响声。
English: In August of 1909, Ding Jun said that the earthquake in Beijing was accompanied by a thunderous sound.

古文：永和十年正月丁酉，地震，有声如雷，鸡雉鸣呴。
现代文：永和十年正月卯日，地震，伴有如同雷鸣那样的响声，鸡雉都呜叫。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the Yonghe era, there was an earthquake, accompanied by a sound like thunder, and the roosters all crowed.

古文：永和十一年四月乙酉，地震；五月丁未，地震。
现代文：永和十一月四月乙酉曰，地震，五月丁末日，地震。
English: Yonghe, November, April, April, earthquake, the end of May, earthquake.

古文：晋穆帝升平五年八月，凉州地震。
现代文：晋穆帝升平五年八月，凉州地震。
English: In August of the same year, the Liangzhou earthquake occurred.

古文：晋哀帝隆和元年四月甲戌，地震。
现代文：晋哀帝隆和元年四月甲戌，地震。
English: The Emperor Jintao's death and the earthquake in Jiaxing in April of the first year.

古文：是时政在将相，人主南面而已。
现代文：当时朝政由将相掌握，君主空有为帝之名而已。
English: At that time, the government of the dynasty was controlled by generals, and the monarch only had the title of emperor.

古文：隆和元年四月丁丑，凉州地震，浩亹山崩。
现代文：隆和元年四月丁丑曰，凉州地震，浩台山崩。
English: In April of the first year of the Long Peace, Ding Xi said that the Liangzhou earthquake and the Houtai landslide occurred.

古文：张天锡降亡之象也。
现代文：这是张天锡投降灭亡的征兆。
English: This is a sign of Zhang Tianxi's surrender and downfall.

古文：隆和二年二月庚寅，江陵地震。
现代文：隆和二年二月庚寅，江陵地震。
English: In February of the second year of the Long Peace, the Gangneung and Gangneung Earthquakes occurred.

古文：是时桓温专政。
现代文：当时桓温独揽朝政。
English: At that time, Kuan-Wen single-handedly controlled the imperial court.

古文：晋海西太和元年二月，凉州地震水涌。
现代文：晋海西公太和元年二月，凉州地震，水从地下涌出。
English: In February of the first year of the Jinhai Xi Gongta and Liangzhou earthquake, water gushed out from the ground.

古文：晋简文帝咸安二年十月辛未，安成地震。
现代文：晋简文帝咸安二年十月辛未，安成地震。
English: In October of the second year of Emperor Jianwen's reign, the Ancheng earthquake occurred.

古文：晋孝武帝宁康元年十月辛未，地震。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元元年十月辛末日，地震。
English: Emperor Jinxiaowu in the first year of Taiyuan, the end of October, the earthquake.

古文：是时嗣主幼冲，政在将相。
现代文：当时继位君主年纪幼小，朝政由将相掌握。
English: At that time, the reigning monarch was very young, and the government of the dynasty was controlled by the generals.

古文：宁康二年七月甲午，凉州地震山崩。
现代文：太元二年七月甲午日，凉州地震山崩。
English: On the afternoon of July 1, 2nd, the earthquake and landslide in Liangzhou occurred.

古文：晋孝武帝太元二年闰月壬午，地震；五月丁丑，地震。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元二年闰月壬午曰，地震；五月丁丑曰，地震。
English: In the leap month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, there was an earthquake at noon; in the month of May, there was an earthquake at dusk.

古文：太元十一年六月己卯，地震。
现代文：太元十一年六月己卯曰，地震。
English: In June of the eleventh year of the Taiyuan era, there was an earthquake.

古文：是后缘河诸将，连岁兵役。
现代文：造以后沿着黄河防守的众将，战事连年不断。
English: After the construction of the defenses along the Yellow River, the war continued year after year.

古文：太元十五年三月己酉朔夜，地震。
现代文：太元十五年三月己酉，初一，这天夜晚，地震。
English: On the night of the first day of the third month of the 15th year of Taiyuan, there was an earthquake.

古文：太元十七年六月癸卯，地震；十二月己未，地又震。
现代文：太元十七年六月癸卯日，地震；十二月己末日，又发生地震。
English: In June 17th, there was an earthquake; in December, there was another earthquake.

古文：是时群小弄权，天下侧目。
现代文：当时一群小人在朝中滥用职权，天下人十分愤怒，侧目而视。
English: At that time, a group of villains abused their powers in the government and the people of the world were very angry and looked sideways.

古文：太元十八年正月癸亥朔，地震；二月乙未，地震。
现代文：太元十八年正月癸亥曰，初一，地震；二月乙末日，地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 18th century, there was an earthquake; on the last day of the second month, there was an earthquake.

古文：晋安帝隆安四年九月癸酉，地震。
现代文：晋安帝隆安四年九月癸酉，地震。
English: In September of the 4th year of Emperor Ande Longan, there was an earthquake.

古文：是时幼主冲昧，政在臣下。
现代文：当时君主年纪幼小，还不懂事，朝政由大臣掌握。
English: At that time, the monarch was young and inexperienced, and the government was controlled by ministers.

古文：晋安帝义熙四年正月壬子夜，地震有声；十月癸亥，地震。
现代文：晋安帝义熙四年正月王子日夜晚，地震，而且伴有响声；十月癸亥，地震。
English: On the night of the Prince's Day in the first month of the fourth year of Emperor Andei Yixi, there was an earthquake, and it was accompanied by loud noises; in October of the Year of the Dog, an earthquake.

古文：义熙五年正月戊戌夜，寻阳地震，有声如雷。
现代文：义熙五年正月戊戌夜晚，寻阳地震，伴有如同雷鸣那样的响声。
English: On the night of the first month of the fifth year of Yixi, the Huanyang earthquake occurred, accompanied by a thunderous sound.

古文：明年，卢循下。
现代文：第二年，卢循叛军进逼京城。
English: In the second year, Lu Xun failed.

古文：义熙八年，自正月至四月，南康、庐陵地四震。
现代文：义熙八年，从止月到四月，南康、庐陵等地发生四次地震。
English: In the eighth year of Yixi, from the end of the month to April, four earthquakes occurred in Nankang, Fuling and other places.

古文：明年，王旅西讨荆、益。
现代文：第二年，朝廷大军西进征讨荆州、益州。
English: In the second year, the imperial army marched west to occupy Jingzhou and Yizhou.

古文：宋文帝元嘉七年四月丙辰，地震。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉七年四月丙辰，地震。
English: Songwen Emperor Yuanjia in April of the 7th year of the 4th month, earthquake.

古文：时遣军经略司、兗。
现代文：当时朝廷派遣军队谋划经营划姐、蛮业之事。
English: At that time, the imperial court dispatched troops to plan and manage the barbaric business.

古文：元嘉十二年四月丙辰，京邑地震。
现代文：元嘉十二年四月丙辰曰，京城地震。
English: In April of the 12th year of the Yuan Jia, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：元嘉十五年七月辛未，地震。
现代文：元嘉十五年七月辛末日，地震。
English: Yuan Jia 15 years in July, the end of the Xin Dynasty, an earthquake.

古文：元嘉十六年，地震。
现代文：元嘉十六年，地震。
English: In the 16th year of Yuan Jia, there was an earthquake.

古文：孝武帝大明二年四月辛丑，地震。
现代文：孝武帝大明二年四月辛丑曰，地震。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, there was an earthquake.

古文：大明六年七月甲申，地震，有声自河北来，鲁郡山摇地动，彭城城女墙四百八十丈坠落，屋室倾倒，兗州地裂泉涌，二年不已。
现代文：大明六年七月甲申，地震，有响声从河北传过来，鲁郡山摇地动，彭城城墙上的矮墙崩塌了四百八十丈长的一段，房屋倾倒，兖州地裂，泉水涌出，两年都没停。
English: In July of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty, there was an earthquake in Jiaxun. The rumor came from Hebei Province. The Lu County Mountains shook. The low wall on the city wall of Pengcheng collapsed a 480-meter-long section. Houses collapsed, the ground cracked in Zhangzhou, and springs gushed forth. It did not stop for two years.

古文：其后虏主死，兗州刺史夏侯祖权卒。
现代文：这以后虏主死，兖州刺史夏侯祖权卒。
English: After this, the lord of the captives died, and Zhangzhou stabbed Shishi, the ancestor of the Xia clan, to death.

古文：明帝泰始二年四月，地震。
现代文：明帝泰始二年四月，地震。
English: In April of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, there was an earthquake.

古文：泰始四年七月己酉，东北有声如雷，地震。
现代文：泰始四年七月己酉日，东北方向发出雷鸣般的响声，地震。
English: In the first four years of the Taisho period, on July 6th, a thunderous sound and an earthquake occurred in the northeast direction.

古文：明帝泰豫元年闰七月甲申，东北有声如雷，地震。
现代文：明帝泰豫元年闰七月甲申，东北方向发出雷鸣般的响声，地震。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, in the leap July of Jiaxing, a thunderous sound and earthquake occurred in the northeast direction.

古文：后废帝元徽二年四月戊申，地震。
现代文：后废帝元徽二年四月戊申，地震。
English: After the abolition of Emperor Yuanhui, there was an earthquake in Boushen in April of the second year.

古文：元徽五年五月戊申，地震。
现代文：元徽五年五月戊申，地震。
English: In May of the 5th year of the Yuan Hui Dynasty, there was an earthquake in Wushin.

古文：七月，帝殒。
现代文：七月，后废帝死。
English: In July, Emperor Houwu died.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十五年，青州城南地，远望见地中如水有影，人马百物皆见影中，积年乃灭。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十五年，青州城南边有一块地，远远望去，可以看到地中有好似水映照出图像，人马以及各种物体都在图像中，经过多年这种现象才消失。
English: In the 25th year of Song Wendi Yuanjia, there was a piece of land on the south side of the city of Qingzhou. Looking far away, it can be seen that there is a water-like image on the ground. People, horses and various objects are in the image. After many years, this phenomenon disappears.

古文：山崩地陷裂：吴孙权赤乌十三年八月，丹阳、句容及故鄣、宁国诸山崩，鸿水溢。按刘向说， 山，阳，郡也；水，阴，民也。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十三年八月，丹杨、句容以及故鄣、宁国等处山崩，洪水泛滥。据刘向说， 山，其性属阳，象征君；水，其性属阴，象征民。
English: According to Liu Xiang, the mountain, whose nature is yang, symbolizes the king; the water, whose nature is yin, symbolizes the people.

古文：天戒若曰，君道崩坏，百姓将失其所也。 
现代文：上天儆戒说，君道崩坏，百姓将失去依附了 。
English: Heaven's precepts say that if the way of the ruler collapses, the people will lose their attachment.

古文：与《春秋》梁山崩，汉齐、楚众山发水同事也。 夫三代命祀，祭不越望，吉凶祸福，不是过也 。
现代文：这和《春秋》记载的梁山崩，汉齐、楚等各山中涌出水来的事情相同。 三代时祭祀山川的常例，祭祀不越过本国的名山大川，吉凶祸福的降临，不会超过这些地方 。
English: This is the same as the Liangshan collapse, Hanzi, Chu and other mountains where water gushed out, as recorded in "Spring and Autumn." It is customary to worship mountains and rivers for three generations, and the worship does not cross the famous mountains and rivers of the country, and the advent of good luck, evil and misfortune will not exceed these places.

古文：吴虽帝，其实列国，灾发丹阳，其天意矣。
现代文：吴虽然称帝，其实它的地位仅为列国，灾异在丹杨出现，恐怕是天意啊。
English: Although Wu is called an emperor, in fact, its status is only that of a nation. The emergence of disasters in Danyang is probably God's will.

古文：国主山川，山崩川竭，亡之征也。
现代文：国家以山川为祭祀之主，山崩川竭，是国家灭亡的征兆。
English: The country takes the mountains and rivers as the main sacrificial rites, and the collapse of mountains and rivers is a sign of the country's demise.

古文：后二年而权薨，薨二十六年而吴亡。
现代文：这以后二年孙权去世，孙权死后二十六年县国灭亡。
English: Two years after this, Sun Quan passed away, and in the twenty-sixth year after Sun Quan's death, the county state came to an end.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年二月，太行山崩。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年二月，太行山崩。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Hanxi of the Wei-Yuan Dynasty, a landslide occurred in Taihang.

古文：此魏亡之征也。
现代文：这是魏灭亡的征兆。
English: This is a sign of Wei's demise.

古文：其冬，晋有天下。
现代文：那年冬天，晋取代魏占有天下。
English: In the winter of that year, the Jin family owned the whole world.

古文：晋武帝太始三年三月戊子，太行山崩。
现代文：晋武帝泰始三年三月戊子日，太行山崩。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, the Taihang Mountain Collapsed on the Day of the Wuzi in March.

古文：太始四年七月，泰山崩，坠三里。
现代文：泰始四年七月，泰山崩，崩塌范围有三里。
English: In July of the same year, the Mount Tai landslide occurred, with a collapse area of three miles.

古文：此晋之咎征也。
现代文：这是晋室灾祸的征兆。
English: This is a sign of Jin's disaster.

古文：至帝晏驾，而禄去王室，怀、愍沦胥于北，元帝中兴于南，是其应也。
现代文：到武帝驾崩之后，福禄离开了晋室，怀帝、愍帝被俘死在北方，元帝在南方创中兴之业，这就是泰山崩的应验。
English: After the death of Emperor Wu, Fu Luo left the court of Emperor Jin. Emperor Huai and Emperor Zhao were captured and killed in the north, and Emperor Yuan created the cause of rejuvenation in the south. This is the fulfillment of the collapse of Mount Tai.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 自上下者为崩，厥应泰山之石颠而下，圣王受命，人君虏。 
现代文：京房《易恸说： 从上往下落叫做崩，它的应验是泰山石头坠落，而圣王接受天命，君主被俘虏。 
English: Jingfang "Ili said: Falling from above is called caving, its fulfillment is the fall of Mount Tai stone, and the holy king accepts the fate of heaven, and the monarch is captured.

古文：晋武帝太康五年丙午，宣帝庙地陷。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年丙午日，宣帝庙地面下陷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, the ground of the Xuan Di Temple caved in.

古文：太康六年三月，南安新兴县山崩，涌水出。
现代文：太康六年三月，南安新兴县山崩，水涌出。
English: In March of the sixth year of Taikang, a landslide occurred in Nan'an Xingxing County, and water gushed out.

古文：太康七年七月，硃提之大泸山崩，震坏郡舍；阴平之仇池崖陨。
现代文：太康七年七月，朱提的大泸山崩，震塌郡中房屋；阴平的仇池崖陨落。
English: In July of the 7th year of the Taikang era, a large landslide in Zhuti caused the collapse of a middle-school building in the county; the cliff of Qiuchi in Yinping fell down.

古文：太康八年七月，大雨。
现代文：太康八年七月，下大雨。
English: In July of the eighth year of Taikang, it rained heavily.

古文：殿前地陷，方五尺，深数丈。
现代文：宫殿前地面下陷，下陷面积方圆五尺，深数丈。
English: The ground in front of the palace is sunken, the sunken area is about five feet square, and the depth is several feet.

古文：晋惠帝元康四年五月壬子，地陷，方三十丈，杀人。
现代文：晋惠帝元康四年五月壬子曰，地面下陷，方圆三十丈，死了人。
English: In May of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Yuankang, Ren Zi said that the ground had sunk to a depth of 30 meters, and people had died.

古文：史阙其处。
现代文：史书漏记下陷的地点。
English: History books omit the location of the cave-in.

古文：元康四年八月，居庸地裂，广三十丈，长百三十丈，水出杀人。
现代文：元康四年八月，居庸地裂，裂处宽三十丈，长一百三十丈，水涌出，淹死了人。
English: In August of the 4th year of the Yuan Kang, the Juyong ground cracked. The crack was 30 meters wide and 130 meters long. Water gushed out and drowned people.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年三月，洛阳东北步广里地陷。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年三月，洛阳东北步广里地面下陷。
English: In March of the first year of Jin Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, the ground sank in the northeast of Luoyang.

古文：永嘉三年八月乙亥，鄄城城无故自坏七十余丈，司马越恶之，迁于濮阳。
现代文：永嘉二年八月乙亥日，鄄城有七十余丈长的城墙无缘无故自己崩塌，司马越忌讳这事，于是迁往濮阳。
English: In August of the second year of Yongjia, on the second day of the year of the boar, more than seventy long city walls of Fenyang City collapsed without any reason. Sima Yue did not want this to happen, so he moved to Fenyang.

古文：此见沴之异也。
现代文：这是因相克而出现妖异。
English: This is a strange phenomenon caused by mutual antagonism.

古文：越卒陵上，终亦受祸。
现代文：司马越以后仍欺凌君上，最终自己也受到祸害。
English: After that, Sima Yue continued to bully Jun Shang, and eventually he was also harmed.

古文：永嘉三年七月戊辰，当阳地裂三所，所广三丈，长二百余步。
现代文：永嘉三年七月戊辰，当阳三处出现地裂，每处宽三丈，长二百余步。
English: In July of the third year of Yongjia, the earth cracked at three places in Dangyang, each place was three feet wide and more than two hundred paces long.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 地坼裂者，臣下分离，不肯相从也。 
现代文：京房《易传》说： 地裂的原因，是因为臣下离心离德，互相不肯顺从。 
English: Kyobo's "I Chuan" said: The ground cracking means that the vassals are separated and refuse to follow.

古文：其后司马越、苟晞交恶，四方牧伯莫不离散，王室遂亡。
现代文：以后司马越、苟晞互相憎恨仇视，四方州郡长官个个心存异志，各怀异心，王室于是衰败灭亡。
English: After that, Sima Yue and Gou Han hated and envied each other, and the governors of Shifang County all had different ambitions and different hearts, and the royal family fell into decline.

古文：永嘉三年十月，宜都夷道山崩。
现代文：永嘉三年十月，宜都夷道山崩。
English: In October of the third year of Yongjia, there was a landslide on Yidu Road.

古文：永嘉四年四月，湘东酃黑石山崩。
现代文：永嘉四年四月，湘束酃黑石山崩。
English: In April of the fourth year of Yongjia, the Hunan Bund and the Black Rock Mountain collapsed.

古文：晋元帝太兴四年八月，常山崩，水出，滹沱盈溢，大木倾拔。
现代文：晋元帝太兴四年八月，常山崩，水从山中涌出，滹沱水盈泛滥，大树被冲得斜倒或是被连根拔起。
English: In August of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinguang of Taixing, there were frequent landslides, water gushed out of the mountains, rushing water overflowed, and large trees were washed over or uprooted.

古文：晋成帝咸和四年十月，柴桑庐山西北崖崩。
现代文：晋成帝咸和四年十月，柴桑庐山西北山崖崩塌。
English: In October of the fourth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, the northwest cliff of Mount Chaisangyu collapsed.

古文：十二月，刘胤为郭默所杀。
现代文：十二月，刘胤被郭默杀死。
English: In December, Liu Yin was killed by Guo Mei.

古文：晋惠帝元康九年六月夜，暴雷雨。
现代文：晋惠帝元康九年六月夜晚，迅雷暴雨。
English: On the night of June in the ninth year of Emperor Jingu's reign, there was a thunderstorm.

古文：贾谧斋屋柱陷入地，压谧床帐。
现代文：买谧房子的屋柱陷入地下，买谧的床帐被压坏。
English: The pillar of his house sank into the ground and his bedspread was crushed.

古文：此木沴土，土失其性，不能载也。
现代文：这是木克土，土失其本性，不能负载。
English: This is wood soil, soil loses its nature and cannot be loaded.

古文：明年，谧诛。
现代文：第二年，贾谧被杀。
English: The following year, Jia Jun was killed.

古文：晋惠帝光熙元年五月，范阳地然，可以爨。
现代文：晋惠帝光熙元年五月，范阳土地自己燃烧，燃起的火可以烹煮食物。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Guangxi's reign, the land of Fanyang burned itself, and the fire that was ignited could cook food.

古文：此火沴土也。
现代文：这是火克土。
English: This is volcanic soil.

古文：是时礼乐征伐自诸侯出。
现代文：当时礼乐制度、征伐之命令由诸侯决定。
English: At that time, the ceremonial music system and the order of conquest were decided by the lords.

古文：晋安帝义熙八年三月壬寅，山阴有声如雷，地陷深广各四尺。
现代文：晋安帝义熙八年三月壬寅，山阴发出像雷鸣似的声音，地面下陷，面积为四尺见方，陷下四尺深。
English: In March of the eighth year of Emperor Jin's reign, the mountain shade emitted a sound like thunder, the ground sank, the area was four feet square, and the fall was four feet deep.

古文：义熙十年五月戊寅，西明门地穿，涌水出，毁门扇及限。
现代文：义熙十年五月戊寅日，西明门地面出现孔洞，水从洞中涌出，毁坏门扇和门槛。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth month of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, a hole appeared in the ground of the Ximing Gate, and water gushed out of the hole, destroying the door and threshold.

古文：此水沴土也。
现代文：这是水克土的妖异。
English: This is the magic of shikko soil.

古文：《五行传》曰： 皇之不极，是谓不建。
现代文：《五行传》说： 皇上施政没有准则，逭就叫做不建。
English: "The Legend of the Five Elements" says: If there is no standard for the emperor's governance, it is called not building.

古文：厥咎眊，厥罚恆阴，厥极弱。
现代文：它带来的灾害是昏聩惑乱，给它的惩罚是常阴，它的后果是衰败。
English: The calamity it brings is bewilderment, the punishment it inflicts is gloom, and its consequence is decay.

古文：时则有射妖，时则有龙蛇之孽，时则有马祸，时则有下人伐上之痾，时则有日月乱行，星辰逆行。 
现代文：有时出现射妖，有时出现龙蛇之孽，有时出现马祸，有时出现下人伐上之疾，有时出现日月运行不遵轨道，星辰由西向东而逆行。 
English: Sometimes there is a shooting demon, sometimes there is a dragon and snake sorcery, sometimes there is a horse accident, sometimes there is a lower-class person attacking a higher-class person's malady, sometimes there is a chaotic moon and a retrograde star.

古文：常阴吴孙亮太平三年，自八月沈阴不雨，四十余日。
现代文：吴孙亮太平三年，从八月开始，四十余天连续阴天，却不下雨。
English: Wu Sunliang has been peaceful for three years. Since August, it has been cloudy for more than forty days in a row, but it has not rained.

古文：是时将诛孙綝，谋泄。
现代文：当时孙亮想要杀掉孙绋，计划泄露。
English: At that time, Sun Liang wanted to kill Sun Yao, and the plan was leaked.

古文：九月戊午，綝以兵围宫，废亮为会稽王。
现代文：九月戊午日，孙绋率兵包围宫殿，废黜彊亮，以孙亮为会稽王。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the ninth month, Sun Yat-sen and his soldiers surrounded the palace, overthrew Gu Liang, and took Sun Liang as the king of the inspection.

古文：此常阴之罚也。
现代文：这是常阴一类的惩罚。
English: This is a punishment of the yin and yang type.

古文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年十二月，太史奏久阴不雨，将有阴谋。
现代文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年十二月，太史上奏，天气久阴却不下雨，或许有人在酝酿什么阴谋。
English: Wu Sun Rong Baoding said in December that if it does not rain for a long time, there will be a conspiracy.

古文：皓深惊惧。
现代文：孙皓非常吃惊，十分害怕。
English: Sun Yat-sen was very surprised and very scared.

古文：时陆凯等谋因其谒庙废之。
现代文：当时陆凯等人暗中商议，乘瑟壁谒庙的机会废黜他。
English: At that time, Rui Kai and others plotted to depose him while he was worshiping at his ancestral temple.

古文：及出，留平领兵前驱，凯语平，平不许，是以不果。
现代文：到出宫的时候，留平领兵为先导，陆凯把计划告诉留平，留平不答应，因此计划没有成功。
English: When it was time to leave the palace, Ruiping led the troops. Lu Kai told Ruiping about the plan, but Ruiping did not agree, so the plan did not succeed.

古文：皓既肆虐，群下多怀异图，终至降亡。
现代文：孙皓肆行暴虐，群臣多半各怀异心，最终导致投降晋，国家灭亡。
English: Sun Yat-sen wreaked havoc, and most of his ministers harbored dissent, which ultimately led to the surrender of Jin and the country's demise.

古文：宋后废帝元徽三年四月，连阴不雨。
现代文：宋后废帝元徽三年四月，连着天阴却不下雨。
English: In April of the third year after the Song Dynasty and the abolition of Emperor Yuanhui, it was cloudy but it did not rain.

古文：元徽三年八月，多阴。
现代文：元徽三年八月，很长时间天阴。
English: In August of the third year of the Yuan He, it was cloudy for a long time.

古文：后二年，废帝殒。
现代文：以后两年，后废帝死。
English: Two years later, Emperor Gaozong died.

古文：射妖：蜀车骑将军邓芝征涪陵，见玄猿缘山，手射中之。
现代文：蜀车骑将军邓芝攻打涪陵，见到黑猿在山上攀缘，他亲手射猿，射中了。
English: General Deng Zhi, riding a Shu chariot, attacked Fuling. Seeing a black monkey climbing on the mountain, he shot the monkey with his own hand and hit it.

古文：猿拔其箭，卷木叶塞其创。芝曰： 嘻！
现代文：猿从身上拔出邓芝的箭，用树叶塞住自己的伤口。邓芝说： 唉!
English: The ape pulled Deng Zhi's arrow out of his body and covered his wound with leaves. Deng Zhi said: Alas!

古文：吾违物之性，其将死矣。 
现代文：我违逆物的本性，恐怕将要死了。 
English: I'm going against my nature, and I'm probably going to die.

古文：俄而卒。
现代文：不久邓芝去世。
English: Deng Zhi passed away soon after.

古文：此射妖也。
现代文：这是射妖。
English: This is called shooting demons.

古文：一曰猿母抱子，芝射中之，子为拔箭，取木叶塞创。
现代文：另一种说法是，一只母猿抱着小猿，邓芝用箭射中了母猿，小猿替母猿拔去箭，取来树叶为母猿塞住伤口。
English: Another theory is that a mother ape was holding a baby ape, Deng Zhi shot the mother ape with an arrow, the baby ape pulled the arrow for the mother ape, and fetched leaves to plug the wound for the mother ape.

古文：芝叹息，投弓水中，自知当死矣。
现代文：邓芝为之叹息，把弓投入河水中，知道自己将要死了。
English: Deng Zhi sighed and threw his bow into the river, knowing that he was about to die.

古文：晋恭帝之为琅邪王时，好奇戏，尝闭一马于门内，令人射之，欲观几箭而死。
现代文：晋恭帝为琅邪王的时候，喜欢一些古怪的游戏，他曾经命手下人把一匹马关在门内，命令手下入射马，想看看马中几箭才死。
English: When Emperor Jinguang was the evil king, he liked to play some strange games. He once ordered his men to shut a horse in a door, ordered his men to shoot the horse, and wanted to see how many arrows were in the horse before he died.

古文：左右有谏者，曰： 马，国姓也，而今射之，不祥甚矣。 
现代文：左右有人进谏，说： 马是国姓。现在射马，很不吉利。 
English: Some people chimed in, saying: "Ma is the country's surname. It's very unlucky to shoot a horse now."

古文：于是乃止，而马已被十许箭矣。
现代文：琅邪王于是才停止这游戏，而马身上已经中了大约十箭。
English: But the horse had already been shot with more than ten arrows.

古文：此盖射妖也。
现代文：这就是射妖。
English: Zou means to shoot a demon.

古文：俄而桓玄篡位。
现代文：不久桓玄篡位。
English: Soon after, Kangen usurped the throne.

古文：龙蛇之孽：魏明帝青龙元年正月甲申，青龙见郏之摩陂井中。
现代文：魏明帝直篚元年正月甲申曰，青龙在郏县尘照井中出现。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei said in the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first

古文：凡瑞兴非时，则为妖孽，况困于井，非嘉祥矣。
现代文：凡是祥瑞出现在不适当的时候，就看作是妖孽，何况龙被困在井中，不是吉兆。
English: If Xiang Rui does not appear at the right time, he will become a witch. Moreover, being trapped in a well is not an auspicious sign.

古文：魏以改年，非也。
现代文：垫因为这而改年号为直垄，是不对的。
English: That's why they changed the year, it's not the right thing to do.

古文：晋武不贺，是也。
现代文：置亘瞳不上表贺喜，是对的。
English: It is right to put Watari Hitomi on the congratulatory table.

古文：干宝曰： 自明帝终魏世，青龙黄龙见者，皆其主废兴之应也。
现代文：干实说 从明帝时代到魏灭亡，青龙黄龙出现，都是当时君主废兴的应验。
English: In fact, from the Ming Dynasty to the fall of the Wei Dynasty, the emergence of Qinglong and Huanglong was the fulfillment of the monarch's dethronement at that time.

古文：魏，土运；青，木色也，而不胜于金。黄得位，青失位之象也。
现代文：逊属土运，青是五行中木的颜色，而不能胜过金，黄得位，正是青失位的征兆。
English: Subordinate to the local fortune, blue is the color of the wood in the five elements, but can not beat gold, yellow won the place, it is the sign of the loss of the place.

古文：青龙多见者，君德国运内相克伐也。
现代文：青龙多次出现，是君主之德和国家气数在内部相克相战的应验。
English: Qinglong has appeared many times, which is the fulfillment of the struggle between the monarch's virtue and the national spirit.

古文：故高贵乡公卒败于兵。
现代文：所以高贵乡公最终在战事中失败。 
English: As a result, Tadazane Shoko suffered a final military defeat.

古文：案刘向说： 龙贵象，而困井中，诸侯将有幽执之祸也。 
现代文：据刘向说： 龙是尊贵者的象征，却被困在井中，这预示诸侯将有被囚禁的祸害。 
English: According to Liu Xiang: The dragon is the symbol of the noble, but it is trapped in the well, which indicates that the princes will be imprisoned.

古文：魏世龙莫不在井，此居上者逼制之应。
现代文：魏代龙出现没有一次不在井中，这是在君主之位的人遭受胁迫被控制的应验。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, there was not a single time when the dragon did not appear in the well, which was the fulfillment of the coercion and control of people in the position of the monarch.

古文：高贵乡公著《潜龙诗》，即此旨也。 
现代文：高贵乡公着《潜龙诗》，就是这个意思。
English: Noble Township's public wearing of the "Submerged Dragon Poem" has a meaning.

古文：魏高贵乡公正元元年冬十月戊戌，黄龙见于鄴井中。
现代文：魏高贵乡公正元元年冬十月戊戌日，黄龙在邺井中出现。
English: In the winter of the first year of Wei Gao Gui Township, in October of the first year of the year, the yellow dragon appeared in the well.

古文：魏高贵乡公甘露元年正月辛丑，青龙见轵县井中；六月乙丑，青龙见元城县界井中。
现代文：魏高贵乡公甘露元年正月辛丑日，青龙在车昵井中出现；六月乙丑日，青龙在元城县境内井中出现。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Wei Gao Gui Xiang Gong Kanlu, the blue dragon appeared in the chariot well; on the second day of the second month of June, the blue dragon appeared in the well in the territory of Yuancheng County.

古文：甘露二年二月，青龙见温县井中。
现代文：甘露二年二月，青龙在温县井中出现。
English: In February of the second year of the nectar, a blue dragon appeared in a well in Wen County.

古文：甘露三年，黄龙青龙仍见顿丘、冠军、阳夏县界井中。
现代文：甘露三年，黄龙青龙频频在顿丘、冠军、阳夏县境内井中出现。
English: In the past three years, Huanglong Qinglong frequently appeared in Dongqiu, Champion, and Yangxia County.

古文：景元三年二月，青龙见轵县井中。
现代文：景元三年二月，青龙在轵县井中出现。
English: In February of the third year of Jingyuan, Qinglong appeared in the well of Jixian County.

古文：吴孙皓天册中，龙乳于长沙民家，啖鸡雏。
现代文：吴孙皓天册年间，龙在长沙一百姓家中产子，吃小鸡。
English: In the year of Wu Sun Yat-sen's heavenly book, a dragon gave birth to a child in a commoner's home in Changsha and ate a chicken.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 龙乳人家，王者为庶人。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 龙在百姓家中产子，王者将要变为庶人。 
English: Kyofusa "Ikimon" says: Dragons give birth to children in the homes of commoners, and kings become commoners.

古文：其后皓降。
现代文：以后孙皓投降。
English: Later, Sun Yat-sen surrendered.

古文：晋武帝咸宁二年六月丙申，白龙二见于九原井中。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁二年六月内申曰，两条白龙在九原井中出现。
English: Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty said in June of the second year that two white dragons appeared in the Jiuhara well.

古文：晋武帝太康五年正月癸卯，二龙见于武库井中。
现代文：晋武帝太康五年正月癸卯曰，两条龙在武库井中出现。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, two dragons appeared in the well of the arsenal.

古文：帝见龙，有喜色，百僚将贺。
现代文：武帝见到龙，颢出欣喜的神色，百官将要恭贺嘉祥。
English: When Emperor Wu saw the dragon, he was overjoyed. Hundreds of officials came to congratulate Jiaxiang.

古文：刘毅独表曰： 昔龙漦夏庭，祸发周室；龙见郑门，子产不贺。 
现代文：刘毅却上表说： 从前龙在夏宫廷中吐涎沫，祸害在周代爆发；龙在郑国城门出现，子产并不祝贺。 
English: Liu Yi, on the other hand, said on the table: Once upon a time, the dragon vomited in the summer court, and the scourge broke out in the Zhou Dynasty; the dragon appeared at the city gate of Zheng Guo, and did not congratulate the child.

古文：帝答曰： 朕德政未修，未有以膺受嘉祥。 
现代文：武帝回答说： 我还没有很好地施行德政，没有理由接受这种嘉祥。 
English: Emperor Wu replied, "I haven't carried out the moral government well, and there is no reason to accept this blessing.

古文：遂不贺也。
现代文：于是百官不行庆贺之仪。
English: So there was no celebration.

古文：孙盛曰： 龙，水物也，何与于人，子产言之当矣。
现代文：孙盛说： 龙是水中生物，和人有什么干系，子产说的话是确当的。
English: Sun Sheng said, "Dragons are aquatic creatures, and they have nothing to do with humans. What Zi Ou said is true.

古文：但非其所处，实为妖灾。
现代文：万物衹有出现在不该出现的地方，才成为妖异。
English: All things have to appear where they shouldn't appear before they become strange.

古文：夫龙以飞翔显见为美，则潜伏幽处，非休祥也。
现代文：龙在飞翔之中显示它的美，那么龙潜伏在深幽的地方。
English: As a dragon displays its beauty in flight, so a dragon lurks in the depths.

古文：汉惠帝二年，两龙见兰陵井中，本志以为其后赵王幽死之象也。
现代文：就不是吉兆。漠惠帝二年，兰陵井中出现两条龙，记载这事的汉代的《五行志》认为这是以后叠这被囚禁而死的征兆。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Mu Hui, two dragons appeared in the Lanling Well. The Han Dynasty's "Five Elements," which recorded this event, considered this to be a sign that the emperor had died in captivity.

古文：武库者，帝王威御之器所宝藏也，室宇邃密，非龙所处。
现代文：武库是帝王收藏兵器的地方，房屋深邃而幽静，不是龙置身的地方。
English: Arsenal is the place where the emperor collects weapons, the house is deep and quiet, not a place for dragons.

古文：后七年，蕃王相害，二十八年，果有二胡僭窃神器。
现代文：这之后七年，藩王互相杀害，后二十八年，果有两个超人窃居帝位。
English: Seven years after that, the lords of the domain killed each other, and in the 28th year after that, two supermen stole the throne.

古文：勒、虎二逆皆字曰龙，此之表异，为有证矣。 
现代文：勒、虎两个叛逆的字世都有龙字。龙在武库中出现是一种显露出来的妖异，算是有验证了。 
English: Le and tiger, two rebellious characters, both have dragon characters. The appearance of a dragon in the arsenal is a kind of revealed weirdness, which is verified.

古文：史臣案龙为休瑞，而屈于井中，前史言之已祥。
现代文：史臣案：龙是一种吉祥之物，却屈居井中，这事前面说得已经很详尽。
English: Scissor Case: The dragon is an auspicious object, but it is relegated to the middle of the well. This has already been explained in detail.

古文：但兆幽微，非可臆断，故《五行》、《符瑞》两存之。
现代文：但各种征兆很深奥，不能臆断，所以《五行志》、《符瑞志》中都同时记下了这事。
English: However, all kinds of signs are very profound and cannot be deduced, so this matter was recorded simultaneously in the "Five Elements" and "Fu Rui Zhi."

古文：晋愍帝建兴二年十一月，桴罕羌妓产一龙子，色似锦文，尝就母乳，遥见神光，少得就视。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴二年十一月，袍罕羌妓生下一条小龙，皮色好似锦上的花纹，小龙曾经到它生母身边去吃奶，远远地可以看到小龙身上发散出神光，但很少有人能靠近去看。
English: In November of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, a young dragon was born to a robe-wearing prostitute. Its skin color resembled the pattern on brocade. The baby dragon used to go to its birth mother's side to suckle milk. The divine light emanating from the body of the baby dragon could be seen from far away, but few people could get close enough to see it.

古文：晋武帝咸宁中，司徒府有二大蛇，长十许丈，居听事平上，数年而人不知，但怪府中数失小兒及猪犬之属。
现代文：晋武帝威空年间，司徒府中有两条大蛇，身长大约十丈，藏身在厅堂的屋椽上，很多年人们都不知道，衹是府中多次丢失小孩以及猪犬之类，人们对此感到奇怪。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, there were two large snakes, about ten meters long, hiding in the eaves of the hall in Stowe House. For many years, people did not know that they were children and dogs that had been lost many times in the house. People were surprised by this.

古文：后一蛇夜出，伤于刃，不能去，乃觉之。
现代文：后来一条蛇夜晚出来，被刀剑刺伤，不能离去，人们才发觉。
English: Later, a snake came out at night, was stabbed by a sword and could not leave, and people only found out.

古文：发徒攻击，移时乃死。
现代文：于是调集人众击打蛇，过了一阵才把蛇打死。
English: So they gathered a crowd to beat the snake, and after a while the snake was killed.

古文：夫司徒五教之府，此皇极不建，故蛇孽见之。
现代文：司徒府是施行五教的场所，这时皇室的准则没有确立，所以蛇孽在司徒府出现。
English: As Shuto-fu was a place where the Five Precepts were practiced, the royal family's code was not established at that time, which is why snake evil appeared in Shuto-fu.

古文：汉灵帝时，蛇见御座，杨赐以为帝溺于色之应也。
现代文：汉灵帝时代，蛇出现在皇上座位上，杨赐认为这是灵帝沉溺于女色的应验。
English: In the era of Han Lingdi, a snake appeared on the emperor's seat. Yang Zi believed that this was the fulfillment of Lingdi's indulgence in womanhood.

古文：魏氏宫人猥多，晋又过之，宴游是湎，此其孽也。《诗》云： 惟虺惟蛇，女子之祥。 
现代文：魏旦妃嫔宫女很多，置丛妃嫔宫女数量又超过魏，沉湎在宴游之乐中，这就是沉湎女色导致的妖孽。《诗》中说： 见到小蛇和大蛇，是女子的征兆。 
English: There were many concubines in the Wei Dynasty, and the number of concubine concubines exceeded that of the Wei Dynasty, and they indulged in the pleasures of feasting. This is the witchcraft caused by indulging in womanly pleasures. "Poem" said: Seeing small snakes and big snakes is a sign of women.

古文：晋惠帝元康五年三月癸巳，临菑有大蛇长十余丈，负二小蛇，入城北门，径从市入汉城阳景王祠中不见。
现代文：晋惠帝元康五年三月癸巳曰，临茁有条十余丈长的大蛇，背着两条小蛇，从城的北门进来，经过集市一直进入汉城阳景王的神庙中，然后消失了。
English: In March of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Yuankang said that there was a large snake with more than ten lengths, carrying two small snakes on its back, coming in from the north gate of the city, passing through the market and entering the temple of King Yangjing in Seoul, and then disappeared.

古文：天戒若曰，齐方有刘章定倾之功，若不厉节忠慎，又将蹈章失职夺功之辱也。
现代文：上天儆戒像是说，齐王正有刘章那样安定危局的功劳，但假如不砥砺节操、保持忠诚谨慎的态度，就又将重蹈刘章的覆辙，遭受丢失官职、削去封爵的耻辱。
English: It was as if God's warning was saying that King Qi had the merit of stabilizing the critical situation as Liu Zhang did, but if he did not practice self-restraint and maintain a loyal and prudent attitude, he would repeat the mistakes of Liu Zhang and suffer the disgrace of losing his official position and being stripped of his knighthood.

古文：齐王冏不悟，虽建兴复之功，而以骄陵取祸。
现代文：齐王司马同不醒悟，虽然立下了复兴朝廷的功劳，但却因骄横欺凌君主而遭受祸害。
English: King Sima of Qi did not wake up, although he did a great job of reviving the imperial court, he suffered from the evil of arrogantly bullying the monarch.

古文：负二小蛇出朝市，皆有象类也。
现代文：大蛇背着两条小蛇在集市上出现，都有所象征。
English: A large snake carrying two small snakes on its back appears in the market, both of which are symbolic.

古文：晋明帝太宁初，武昌有大蛇，常居故神祠空树中，每出头从人受食。
现代文：晋明帝太宁初年，武昌有条大蛇，常常藏身在老的神庙的空树裹，每每伸出头来从人那裹接受食物。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming Dynasties, there was a big snake in Wuchang. It often hid in the hollow tree of the old temple, and every time it stretched out its head to receive food from people.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 蛇见于邑，不出三年，有大兵。
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 蛇在城邑中出现，不过三年，有大的战乱。
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Demon" says: Snakes appear in towns, but three years later, there is a big war.

古文：国有大忧。 
现代文：国家将有大的忧患。 
English: The country will be in big trouble.

古文：其后讨灭王敦及其党与。
现代文：以后朝廷出兵讨伐消灭王敦及其党羽。
English: Later, the imperial court sent troops to fight and eliminate Wang Dun and his followers.

古文：马祸：晋武帝太熙元年，辽东有马生角，在两耳下，长三寸。
现代文：晋武帝太熙元年，辽东有匹马长出角来，角在两耳下，长三寸。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taishi of the Jin Dynasty, a horse in the east of Liaoning Province grew horns. The horns were under the ears and three inches long.

古文：按刘向说，此兵象也。
现代文：据刘向说，这是战乱的征兆。
English: According to Liu Xiang, this is a sign of war.

古文：及帝晏驾之后，王室毒于兵祸，是其应也。
现代文：到亘游驾崩之后，王室被战乱祸害，就正是马长角的应验。
English: After the death of the emperor, the royal family was plagued by the scourge of war, which is the fulfillment.

古文：京房《易传》曰： 臣易上，政□不顺□，厥妖马生角。 
现代文：王狈《易传》说： 臣下轻慢主上，政令不顺民心，其妖异是马长角。 
English: Wang Yao's "Easy Biography" said: The vassals are contemptuous of the master, the government order is not in line with the people's heart, and the monster is the horse's long horn.

古文：又有 天子亲伐，马生角 。
现代文：又说 天子亲行征伐，马长角 。
English: It is also said that the Son of Heaven himself will go on a campaign, and the horse will go to the Long Horn.

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰： 人君失道，马有生角。 
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说： 君王无道，马长角。 
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" said: The emperor has lost his way, Ma Sheng Kok.

古文：晋惠帝元康元年十二月，皇太子将释奠，太傅赵王伦骖乘，至南城门，马止，力士推之不能动。
现代文：晋惠帝元康元年十二月，皇太子将行释奠之礼，太傅产旺司马伦陪同皇太子乘车，车走到南城门时，马停下来不走，力士用力推车马，车马都不能推动。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, the crown prince will perform the ceremony of releasing the dead. Grand Master Wang Simalen accompanied the crown prince by car. When the car came to the south gate, the horse stopped and did not go. The wrestler pushed the cart and horse hard, and the cart and horse could not be pushed.

古文：伦入轺车，乃进。
现代文：可屋俭下车坐上辊车，皇太子的车才能前进。
English: Smalen got into the car, and the horse started forward.

古文：此马祸也。
现代文：这是马祸。
English: Construction is a disaster for horses.

古文：天戒若曰，伦不知义方，终为乱逆，非傅导行礼之人。
现代文：天儆戒说，司马伦不懂礼义，不守为臣的规范，最终会成叛逆乱臣，不是辅导太子行礼之人。
English: According to Heaven's Precepts, Sima Lun does not understand the meaning of etiquette, does not observe the norms of being a vassal, and will eventually become a rebellious vassal. He is not the person to instruct the crown prince on etiquette.

古文：伦不悟，故亡。
现代文：司马伦不醒悟，所以败亡。
English: Smalen did not wake up, so he was defeated.

古文：元康九年十一月戊寅冬，有牝骝马惊奔至廷尉讯堂，悲鸣而死。
现代文：元康九年十一月戊寅，有匹母骝马受惊狂奔到廷尉讯事堂，悲鸣之后死去。
English: In November of the ninth year of the Kangxi Emperor, Wu Yin, a female horse ran frantically to the courthouse, where she died after crying.

古文：是殆愍怀冤死之象也。
现代文：这大概是愍怀太子受冤而死的征兆。
English: This is probably a sign of the wrongful death of Prince Gong Huai.

古文：见廷尉讯堂，又天意乎！
现代文：马出现在廷尉的讯事堂，大概又是天意吧。
English: The horse appears in the Lieutenant's message hall, probably by providence.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉六年二月，神马鸣南城门。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉六年二月，神马在南城门嘶鸣。
English: In February of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao and Emperor Huai Yongjia, the divine horse rode through the southern city gate.

古文：晋元帝大兴二年，丹阳郡吏濮阳杨演马生驹，两头自颈前别，生而死。
现代文：晋元帝太兴二年，丹阳郡郡吏濮阳杨演的马生下马驹，马驹从颈往前分为两个头，生下来就死了。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taixing of the Jin and Yuan Dynasties, the horse of the county official of Danyang County, Puyang Yang, gave birth to a foal. The foal was divided into two heads from the neck forward, and died at birth.

古文：按司马彪说，政在私门，二头之象也。
现代文：据司马彪说，出现两个头的妖异，正是朝政在权臣手中的象征。
English: According to Sima Biao, the appearance of the two-headed monster is a symbol of the imperial government in the hands of the powerful.

古文：是后王敦陵上。
现代文：以后王敦欺凌君主。
English: After that, Wang Dun bullied the monarch.

古文：晋成帝咸康八年五月甲戌，有马色赤如血，自宣阳门直走入于殿前，盘旋走出，寻逐莫知所在。
现代文：晋成帝咸康八年五月甲戌日，有匹颜色红得像血的马，从宣阳门一直跑到殿前，然后盘旋着跑出来，众人追着去找这匹马，没有人知道它在哪裹。
English: On May Day of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Jiankang, a horse that was red as blood ran from the Xuanyang Gate to the front of the hall, and then circled around and ran out. People chased after this horse, and no one knew where it was.

古文：己卯，帝不豫，六月崩。
现代文：己卯日，成帝生病，六月，成帝去世。
English: On the same day, Emperor Cheng fell ill. In June, Emperor Cheng died.

古文：此马祸，又赤祥也。
现代文：这是马祸，又属赤祥。
English: This is both a misfortune and a blessing.

古文：张重华在凉州，将诛其西河相张祚，祚厩马数十匹，同时悉皆无后尾。
现代文：张重华在凉州时，将要杀害他手下的西河相张祚，张祚马厩裹数十匹马，同时全都没有了马尾。
English: When Zhang Chonghua was in Liangzhou, he was about to kill his subordinate, the West River statesman Zhang Xuan. Zhang Xuan's stables were packed with dozens of horses, and all of them were missing their ponytails.

古文：晋安帝隆安四年十月，梁州有马生角，刺史郭铨送示都督桓玄。
现代文：晋安帝隆安四年十月，梁州有马长出角，梁州刺史郭铨把长角的马送给都督桓玄看。
English: In October of the fourth year of Emperor Yongan of the Jin Dynasty, there was a horse with a long horn in Liangzhou. Liangzhou sent the long-horned horse to the governor Huan Xuan.

古文：案刘向说，马不当生角，由玄不当举兵向上也。
现代文：据刘向说，马不应当生角。造就如同桓玄不应当派兵向朝廷进攻。
English: According to Liu Xiang, a horse should not have horns, just as Kuan Xuan should not have sent troops to attack the imperial court.

古文：睹灾不悟，故至夷灭。
现代文：桓玄见到灾异不醒悟，所以最终被平灭。
English: Kuan Xuan did not wake up when he saw the disaster, so he was eventually eliminated.

古文：人痾：魏文帝黄初初，清河宋士宗母化为鳖，入水。
现代文：魏文帝黄初初年，清河宋士宗之母变成鳖，进水中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang of the Qing Dynasty, the mother of Song Shizong of the Qing Dynasty became a dragonfly and went into the water.

古文：魏明帝太和三年，曹休部曲兵奚农女死复生。
现代文：魏明帝太和三年，曹休部下的士兵奚农之女死而复活。
English: In the third year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, the daughter of a soldier and tenant farmer under Cao Xiu died and was resurrected.

古文：时人有开周世冢，得殉葬女子，数日而有气，数月而能语。
现代文：当时有人挖开周代的墓，得到一个殉葬女子，过了几天，这女子渐有气息，过了几个月，这女子渐能说话。
English: At that time, someone dug up Zhou's grave and found a woman who had been buried alive. After a few days, the woman gradually regained her breath, and after a few months, the woman was gradually able to speak.

古文：郭太后爱养之。
现代文：郭太后喜欢她，把她放在宫中供养。
English: Empress Dowager Guo liked her and kept her in the palace.

古文：又太原民发冢破棺，棺中有一生妇人，问其本事，不知也。
现代文：又，太原百姓挖开墓打破棺，棺中有一个活着的妇人，挖墓的人间她以前的事情，她全不知道。
English: In addition, the Taiyuan people dug up the grave and broke the coffin. There was a living woman in the coffin. She did not know anything about her previous life among the grave diggers.

古文：视其墓木，可三十岁。
现代文：看看那坟墓上的树木，坟墓的历史大约有三十年。
English: Look at the trees on that grave. It's about 30 years old.

古文：案京房《易传》，至阴为阳，下人为上，晋宣王起之象也。
现代文：据京房《易传》， 最阴的东西变成阳，地位在下的人要居于上 。死去的女人复活，这正是晋宣王兴起的征兆。
English: According to Jing Fang's "Easy Transmission," the darkest thing turns into the sun, and people with lower status should live on the top. The dead woman is resurrected, which is a sign of the rise of King Jinxuan.

古文：汉平帝、献帝并有此异，占以为王莽、曹操之征。
现代文：汉平帝、漠献帝时都出现过这种妖异，占卜的人都认为这是王莽、曹操将要篡权的象征。
English: Both Emperor Ping and Emperor Xian of the Han Dynasty had such strange occurrences, which diviners believed to be signs of Wang Mang and Cao Cao.

古文：公孙渊炊，有小兒蒸死甑中，其后夷灭。
现代文：公孙渊家煮饭时，有一个小孩在瓦制煮器甑中被蒸死，以后公孙渊被杀。
English: When Gongsun Yuan's family was cooking rice, a child was steamed to death in the pots of a tile cooker, after which Gongsun Yuan was killed.

古文：吴孙亮建兴二年，诸葛恪将征淮南，有孝子著衰衣入其阁。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴二年，诸葛恪将出征淮南，有个正在居丧身穿丧服的孝子走进诸葛恪官府。
English: In the second year of Wu Sunliang's Jianxing, Zhuge Ke will go to Huainan, and a filial son who is in mourning and wearing mourning clothes walks into Zhuge Ke's government office.

古文：诘问，答曰： 不自觉入也。 
现代文：诸葛恪责问他，那人回答说： 我也不知道怎么进来的。 
English: Zhuge Ke questioned him, and the man replied: "I don't know how I got in.

古文：时中外守备，亦悉不见。
现代文：当时裹裹外外的守卫人员，全都没有看见那人。
English: None of the guards, who were outside at the time, saw the man.

古文：众皆异之。
现代文：众人都对这事感到奇怪。
English: Everyone was puzzled by this.

古文：及还，果见杀。
现代文：诸葛恪从淮南回来，果然被杀。
English: Zhuge Ke returned from Huainan and was indeed killed.

古文：恪已被害，妻在室，使婢沃盥，闻婢血曈。
现代文：诸葛恪被害之后，诸葛恪之妻在家裹，叫婢女用水盥洗，她嗅到婢女身上的血腥味，又见到婢女眼睛神态不同往常，于是就向婢女问起发生这些变化的原因。
English: After Zhuge's death, Zhuge's wife woke up at home and asked her maid to wash her with water. She smelled the blood on her maid's body and saw that her maid's eyes looked different from usual, so she asked her maid about the reasons for these changes.

古文：又眼目视瞻非常，妻问其故，婢蹶然跃起，头至栋，攘臂切齿曰： 诸葛公乃为峻所杀。 
现代文：婢女突然跳起来，头碰上了屋栋，捋起衣袖，伸出胳膊，咬牙切齿地说： 诸葛公是被孙峻杀害。 
English: The maid suddenly jumped up, her head hitting the roof, rolled up her sleeves, stretched out her arms, and said through gritted teeth: Zhuge Gong was killed by Sun Jun.

古文：吴孙休永安四年，安吴民陈焦死七日，复穿冢出。
现代文：吴孙休永安四年，安吴百姓陈焦死了七天。又打了个洞从坟墓裹出来。
English: Wu Sun Xiu Yong An four years, An Wu people Chen Jiao died seven days. He also made a hole and was wrapped out of the grave.

古文：干宝曰： 此与汉宣帝同事。
现代文：干实说： 这和汉宣帝时候的事情相同。
English: Let's be honest: This is the same thing that happened during the reign of Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：乌程侯皓承废故之家，得位之祥也。 
现代文：这是乌程侯孙咭以衰败的旧家子弟身份，却得以继位为帝的征兆。 
English: This was a sign that Ucheng Hou Sun Rong was able to succeed to the throne as emperor despite his status as the son of a decaying old family.

古文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年，丹阳宣骞母，年八十，因浴化为鼋。
现代文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年，丹阳宣骞的母亲，年已八十岁，在洗澡时变成鼋。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Baoding of the Wu Sun Dynasty, the eighty-year-old mother of Danyang Xuanqian became a skeleton while taking a bath.

古文：兄弟闭户卫之，掘堂上作大坎，实水其中。
现代文：宣骞兄弟几个把门关起来守护着，在厅堂上挖一个大坑，把水灌满大坑。
English: A few of the brothers shut the door and guarded it. They dug a big hole in the hall and filled it with water.

古文：鼋入坎戏一二日，恆延颈外望，伺户小开，便轮转自跃，入于远潭，遂不复还。
现代文：鼂进入坑水中戏耍了一两天，常常伸着颈子向外望，等到门稍微打开，鼋便掉转身子向外直蹦，跳进远处的深潭中，竟然再没返回。
English: The dragonfly played in the pit for a day or two, often looking out with its neck stretched. When the door opened slightly, the dragonfly turned around and jumped straight out into the deep pool in the distance, never to return.

古文：与汉灵帝时黄氏母事同，吴亡之象也。
现代文：这和汉灵童时董压母变冠的事情相同。这是吴国灭亡的征兆。
English: This is the same thing that happened when Han Ling Tong was crowned. This is a sign of the demise of the State of Wu.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年八月，襄武县言有大人见，长三丈余，迹长三尺二寸，发白，著黄巾黄单衣，柱杖，呼民王始语曰： 今当太平。 
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年八月，襄武县有人说有巨人出现，巨人身长三丈余，足迹长三尺二寸，白头发，头戴黄巾，身穿黄单衣，柱着杖。巨人把百姓王始叫过来，对他说： 天下现在将要太平。 
English: In August of the second year of the reign of Emperor Hanxi of the Wei-Yuan Dynasty, some people in Xiangwu County said that a giant appeared. The giant was more than three meters tall, his footprints were three feet two inches long, he had white hair, wore a yellow scarf on his head, wore a yellow singlet, and carried a cane. The giant called Wang Shi over and said to him: The world will be peaceful now.

古文：寻晋代魏。
现代文：不久晋惮代魏。
English: It was soon followed by the Wei Dynasty.

古文：晋武帝泰始五年，元城人年七十，生角。
现代文：晋武帝泰始五年，元个七十岁的人长出了角。
English: In the first five years of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, the first 70-year-old man grew horns.

古文：案《汉志》说，殆赵王伦篡乱之象也。
现代文：据《汉志》的说法，这大概是赵王司马伦篡位乱国的征兆。
English: According to "Han Zhi," this is probably a sign of Zhao Wang Sima Lun's usurpation of the country.

古文：晋武帝咸宁二年二月，琅邪人颜畿病死，棺敛已久，家人咸梦畿谓己曰： 我当复生，可急开棺。 
现代文：晋武帝盛宁二年二月，涂邪人颜畿病死，已经用棺木装殓了很久。一天，家裹人都梦见颜畿对自己说： 我将要复活，要赶快把棺木打开。 
English: In February of the second year of the reign of Emperor Shenning of the Jin Dynasty, the evil person Yanqi died of illness and had been decorated with a coffin for a long time. One day, everyone in the family dreamed of Yanqi and said to themselves: I will be resurrected, I must quickly open the coffin.

古文：遂出之。渐能饮食屈申视瞻，不能行语也。
现代文：家裹人于是把醒艳从棺木裹抬出来颜畿渐渐能饮食、屈伸身子、看清周围的东西，但是不能行动、不会说话。
English: The family then took Xingyan out of the coffin and gradually she was able to eat, bend over and see things around her, but she could not move or speak.

古文：二年复死。
现代文：过了两年又死了。
English: He died two years later.

古文：其后刘渊、石勒遂亡晋室。
现代文：以后刘渊、石勒竟然使晋室灭亡。
English: Later, Liu Yuan and Shi Le even caused the death of Jin's wife.

古文：晋惠帝元康中，安丰有女子周世宁，年八岁，渐化为男，至十七八，而气性成。
现代文：晋惠帝元康年间，安丰有个女孩名叫周世宁，八岁的时候，她渐渐变成男人，到了十七八岁，完全具备男子的气性。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingu, there was a girl in Anfeng named Zhou Shining. When she was eight years old, she gradually turned into a man. By the age of seventeen or eighteen, she was completely masculine.

古文：此刘渊、石勒荡覆晋室之妖也。
现代文：这是刘渊、石勒将要颠覆晋室而表现出来的妖异。
English: This is the weirdness that Liu Yuan and Shi Le will show when they are about to overthrow the Jin dynasty.

古文：汉哀帝、献帝时并有此异，皆有易代之兆。京房《传》曰： 女子化为丈夫，兹谓阴昌，贱人为王。
现代文：汉哀帝、汉献帝时也都出现这种妖异，都是预示着将要改朝换代京房《传》说： 女子变成男人，造就叫做阴气昌盛，卑贱之人将要称王。
English: This kind of weirdness also appeared during the reigns of Emperor Han Yue and Emperor Han Jian, both of which foreshadowed the change of dynasty that was to come. According to the "Biography" of Emperor Jingfang, "A woman turns into a man, the result is called yin qi and prosperity, and a lowly person will be crowned king."

古文：丈夫化为女子，兹谓阴胜阳，厥咎亡。 
现代文：男人变成女人，逭就叫做阴胜阳，它带来的灾祸是败亡。 
English: When a man turns into a woman, it is called yin-sheng-yang, and the calamity it brings is downfall.

古文：晋惠帝永宁初，齐王冏唱义兵，诛除乱逆，乘舆反正。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁初年，齐王司马同首先组织义军讨伐叛逆，诛除叛乱奸贼，让皇上恢复帝位，回到京城。
English: In the first year of Emperor Yongning's reign, King Sima Tong of Qi first organized the rebel army to fight against the rebellion, eliminate the rebels and traitors, and let the emperor restore the imperial throne and return to Beijing.

古文：忽有妇人诣大司马门求寄产。
现代文：忽然有个妇人到大司马门前要求暂借地方生小孩。
English: Suddenly, a woman appeared in front of Daesima's gate and asked to borrow a place to have a baby.

古文：门者诘之，妇人曰： 我截齐便去耳。 
现代文：守门的人责问她，妇人说： 我截断脐带就离开罢了。 
English: The doorkeeper reprimanded her and the woman said, "I'll just cut the umbilical cord and leave."

古文：是时齐王冏匡复王室，天下归功。
现代文：当时齐王司马同匡复王室，天下人认为功劳都归于他。
English: At that time, the king of Qi, Sima Tongkuang, restored the royal family, and people around the world believed that all the credit went to him.

古文：识者为其恶之。
现代文：懂得征兆应验的人深为齐王厌恶 截脐 之语。
English: People who understand the signs of fulfillment are deeply disgusted by the words of Qi Wang.

古文：后果斩戮。
现代文：后来齐王司马同果然被斩杀。
English: Later, Qi Wang Sima Tong was indeed killed.

古文：永宁元年十二月甲子，有白头公入齐王冏大司马府，大呼有大兵起，不出甲子旬，冏杀之。
现代文：永宁元年十二月甲子曰，有白头老人走进齐王屋同大司马官府，大叫道： 有大的战事将要发生，时间不超过甲子开始后的十天。 
English: Yongning said that in December of the first year of the Jiaozi, an old man with a bald head walked into the Qiwang House and the Grand Secretary Ma's government office, shouting: There will be a big war, the time will not exceed ten days after the start of the Jiaozi.

古文：明年十二月戊辰，冏败，即甲子旬也。
现代文：司马同把白头老人杀了。第二年十二月戊辰曰，司马同被害，正是甲子日开始后的那十天内。
English: In December of the following year, it was one year since Sima failed.

古文：晋惠帝太安元年四月癸酉，有人自云龙门入殿前，北面再拜曰： 我当作中书监。 
现代文：晋惠帝太安元年四月癸酉曰，有个人从云壹幽进宫走到殿前，朝北行再拜礼，说： 我将要担任中书监。 
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taian, there was a man who walked from Yunyi Yujing to the front of the palace, and then went to the north to worship. He said, "I'm going to be the librarian.

古文：即收斩之。
现代文：侍卫当时就把他收捕斩首。
English: At that time he was arrested and killed.

古文：干宝曰： 夫禁庭，尊秘之处。今贱人径入，而门卫不觉者，宫室将虚，而下人逾上之妖也。 
现代文：干宣说： 宫廷是重要而隐秘之处，现在卑贱之人可以一直进来，而门卫却不察觉，这是预示宫室将要变得空空荡荡、卑贱之人将要在宫廷随意践踏的妖异。 
English: Gan Xuan said: The court is an important and secret place. Now the lowly can always enter without the gatekeeper noticing. This is a sign that the palace room will become empty and the lowly will trample on the court at will.

古文：是后帝北迁鄴，又西迁长安，盗贼蹈籍宫阙，遂亡天下。
现代文：这以后惠帝向北迁到邺，义向西迁到垦昼，盗贼在宫廷之中随意践踏，晋室最终失去天下。
English: After this, Hui Di moved to the north to Shao, and Yi moved to the west to Shilong. Thieves trampled freely in the court, and the Jin family eventually lost the world.

古文：晋惠帝世，梁国女子许嫁，已受礼娉，寻而其夫戍长安，经年不归。
现代文：晋惠帝时代，梁国有个女子已经应允一家人家的婚约，并且已经接受聘礼，准备嫁娶，不久她的未婚夫戍守长安，多年没有回家。
English: In the era of Emperor Jinhui, there was a woman in Liang Province who had already agreed to a family's marriage contract, and had already accepted a bride price and was preparing to marry. Soon, her fiancé fled to Chang'an and did not return home for many years.

古文：女家更以适人，女不乐行，其父母逼强，不得已而去，寻得病亡。
现代文：女子家人把女子另外嫁给别人，女子不乐意嫁，她的父母强迫她，她不得已而离家再嫁，不久得病而死。
English: The girl's family took her away to marry someone else. The girl did not want to marry, her parents forced her. She had no choice but to leave home and remarry. She soon fell ill and died.

古文：后其夫还，问女所在，其家具说之。
现代文：后来她的未婚夫回家，问这女子在什么地方，女子家人把事情前后一一向他述说。
English: Later, her fiancé came home and asked where the woman was. The woman's family told him the whole story.

古文：其夫径至女墓，不胜哀情，便发冢开棺，女遂活，因与俱归。
现代文：未婚夫到女子墓前，不胜哀痛之情，于是挖开坟墓打开棺木，女子竟然复活，未婚夫就带着女子一同回家。
English: The fiancé went to the woman's grave and was overcome with grief, so he dug up the grave and opened the coffin. The woman had actually come back to life, and the fiancé took the woman home with him.

古文：后婿闻之，诣官争之，所在不能决。
现代文：她的丈夫听到这消息，到官府去告状争要造女子，当地官府不能决断。
English: When her husband heard the news, he went to the government office to sue for a daughter, but the local government office could not make a decision.

古文：秘书郎王导议曰： 此是非常事，不得以常理断之，宜还前夫。 
现代文：秘书郎王导判定说： 这是不寻常的事情，不能按常理来断决，应当把这女子断归未婚夫。 
English: Secretary Lang Wang said in his introduction: This is an unusual case, it cannot be decided with common sense, and it should be returned to the ex-husband.

古文：朝廷从其议。
现代文：朝廷听从了王导的判决。
English: The Imperial Court agreed with three opinions.

古文：晋惠帝世，杜锡家葬，而婢误不得出。
现代文：晋惠帝时代，杜锡家埋葬人，却误把一个婢女留在坟墓中不得出来。
English: In the era of Emperor Jinhui, the Du Xi family buried a person, but mistakenly left a maid in the grave and could not come out.

古文：后十余年，开冢祔葬，而婢尚生。
现代文：后来过了十余年，杜家开墓合葬，打开墓后，那婢女还活着。
English: More than ten years later, when the grave was opened and a joint funeral was held, the maid was still alive.

古文：其始如瞑，有顷渐觉。
现代文：开始婢女昏迷未醒，过一会渐渐醒过来。
English: At first, the maid was unconscious, but after a while she gradually woke up.

古文：问之，自谓当一再宿耳。
现代文：向婢女问详情，婢女自己说衹是睡了一两个晚上而已。
English: When I asked the maid for details, she said that she had only slept for one or two nights.

古文：初婢之埋，年十五六，及开冢更生，犹十五六也。
现代文：当初婢女被埋下去的时候，年纪十五六岁，到挖开坟墓婢女复活的时候，看上去还是如同十五六岁的人。
English: When the maidservant was buried, she was fifteen or sixteen years old. When the grave was opened and the maidservant was resurrected, she still looked like a fifteen-year-old.

古文：嫁之有子。
现代文：杜家把她嫁出去，她还生了孩子。
English: The Du family married her off, and she had a child.

古文：晋惠帝光熙元年，会稽谢真生子，大头有鬓，两蹠反向上，有男女两体。
现代文：晋惠帝光熙元年，会稽谢真生孩子，孩子生下来头特别大，有鬓发，两只脚掌向着上方，与普通人正相反，兼具男女的器官。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Guangxi gave birth to a child. The child was born with an unusually large head, a receding hairline, and two upward-facing feet. Contrary to ordinary people, the child had both male and female organs.

古文：生便作丈夫声，经日死。
现代文：孩子生下来便发出如同成年男子的声音，经过几天就死了。
English: The child was born with the voice of an adult man and died a few days later.

古文：晋惠、怀之世，京、洛有兼男女体，亦能两用人道，而性尤淫。
现代文：晋惠帝、晋怀帝时代，京、洛间有个人兼具男女的器官，也能既作男人又作女人与人交媾，生性特别好淫。
English: In the era of Emperor Jinhui and Emperor Jinhuai, there were individuals in Beijing and Luo that had both male and female organs, and could have intercourse with people as both men and women. They were particularly horny by nature.

古文：案此乱气之所生也。
现代文：案：这是淫乱之气导致产生的。
English: The case: It was caused by the atmosphere of debauchery.

古文：自咸宁、太康之后，男宠大兴，甚于女色，士大夫莫不尚之，天下皆相放效，或有至夫妇离绝，怨旷妒忌者。
现代文：咸宁、太康之后，宠爱男色的风气十分盛行，甚至超过女色，士大夫个个崇尚这种风气，天下人都仿效这种风气，有的还导致夫妻离绝，长期分离，互相妒忌。
English: After Xianning and Taikang, the custom of favoring men became very popular, even surpassing that of women. Every scholar and scholar advocated this custom, and people all over the world imitated this custom. Some also led to the separation of husband and wife, long-term separation, and mutual jealousy.

古文：故男女气乱，而妖形作也。
现代文：所以男女之间淫乱之气盛行，导致妖异之形出现。
English: Therefore, the spirit of fornication prevails between men and women, leading to the appearance of strange forms.

古文：元帝太兴初，又有女子阴在腹上，在扬州，性亦淫。
现代文：元帝太兴初年，扬州有个女子，阴户长在肚腹上，生性也好淫。
English: In the early years of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, there was a woman in Yangzhou who had a pussy growing on her stomach and was naturally horny.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 人生子，阴在首，天下大乱；在腹，天下有事；在背，天下无后。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 人生下孩子，生殖器长在头上，天下将会大乱；长在腹部，天下不安宁；长在背部，天下将覆亡。 
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Demon" said: When a person gives birth to a child, the genitals grow on the head, and the world will be in chaos; grow on the abdomen, and the world will be restless; grow on the back, and the world will fall.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年，吴郡吴县万祥婢生子，鸟头，两足马蹄，一手无毛，黄色，大如枕。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年，吴郡吴县万祥之婢生孩子，生下的孩子长着鸟头，两脚像马蹄，一只手，没有毛，黄色，像枕头那么大。
English: In the first year of the Yongjia Dynasty, the maid of Wanshang of Wuxiang County, Wuxiang County, gave birth to a child. The child was born with a bird's head, two feet like horseshoes, one hand, no hair, yellow, as big as a pillow.

古文：晋愍帝建兴四年，新蔡县吏任侨妻胡，年二十五，产二女，相向，腹心合同，自胸以上，齐以下，各分。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴四年，新蔡县吏任侨妻盟区，二十五岁，生下两个女孩，两人腹部相合，胸以上，脐以下，各分成两个人。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, a 25-year-old official of Xin Cai County, who was in charge of the Overseas Chinese Women's League, gave birth to two girls. The two girls were joined at the abdomen, above the chest and below the navel, and were each divided into two people.

古文：此盖天下未一之妖也。
现代文：这大概是天下未统一而出现的妖异。
English: This is probably the result of the world not being unified.

古文：时内史吕会上言： 案《瑞应图》，异根同体谓之连理，异苗同颖谓之嘉禾。
现代文：当时内史吕会上言说： 查核《瑞应图》，异根同体的树木叫做连理，异苗同颖的禾苗叫做嘉禾。
English: At that time, Inner Shi Lu said at the meeting: "Checking the Ruiying Map, trees with different roots are called Lianli, and seedlings with different seedlings are called Jiahe.

古文：草木之异，犹以为瑞，今二人同心，《易》称 二人同心，其利断金 。嘉征显见，生于陕东之国，斯盖四海同心之瑞，不胜喜踊，谨画图以上。 
现代文：草木的变异，还把它看作祥瑞，现在二人同一颗心，《易》中称 二人同心，共同的力量可以断金，吉祥的征兆现在显现，又出现在陕东之国，这正是四海同心的祥瑞，我禁不住内心的喜悦，谨画好图呈献。 
English: The variation of plants and trees is also regarded as auspicious, and now the two people have the same heart. Yi said that the two people are concentric, and the common strength can break gold. The auspicious signs are now appearing, and they appear in the country of Shaanxi and Dongguan. This is the auspiciousness of the four seas being concentric. I can't help but feel joy in my heart, and I would like to draw a good picture to present.

古文：时有识者哂之。
现代文：当时有见识的人都耻笑他。
English: At the time, anyone with any sense laughed at him.

古文：晋中兴初，有女子，其阴在腹，当齐下。
现代文：晋中兴之初，有个女子，阴户长在肚腹上，正在肚脐下。
English: At the beginning of Jinzhongxing, there was a woman whose pussy grew on her stomach, just under her navel.

古文：自中国来江东，性甚淫，而不产。
现代文：她从中原来到江束，生性特别好淫，但不生孩子。
English: She came to Jiangzhu from the Central Plains. She is extremely horny by nature, but she does not have children.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 人生子，阴在首，天下大乱；在腹，天下有事；在背，天下无后。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 人生下孩子，生殖器长在头上，天下将会大乱；长在腹部，天下不安宁；长在背部，天下将覆亡。 
English: Jing Fang's "Easy Demon" said: When a person gives birth to a child, the genitals grow on the head, and the world will be in chaos; grow on the abdomen, and the world will be restless; grow on the back, and the world will fall.

古文：晋元帝太兴三年十二月，尚书驺谢平妻生女，堕地濞濞有声，须臾便死。
现代文：晋元帝太兴三年十二月，尚书骗邀王的妻子生下个女儿，堕地时发出濞濞的声音，一会儿就死了。
English: In December of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Jin and Yuan Dynasties, Shang Shu tricked Wang's wife into giving birth to a daughter. When he fell to the ground, he made a gurgling sound and died in a moment.

古文：鼻目皆在顶上，面处如项，口有齿，都连为一，胸如鳖，手足爪如鸟爪，皆下句。
现代文：这个女孩，鼻、眼都长在头顶上，本该是脸的地方却长得像颈项，口中有牙齿，但牙齿都连成一片，胸部像鳖，手足的指爪像鸟爪，都往下勾。
English: This girl, her nose and eyes are on the top of her head, but what should have been her face looks like a neck. She has teeth in her mouth, but they are all fused together. Her chest is like a beak, and the fingernails on her hands and feet are like bird claws, all hooked downwards.

古文：京房《易妖》曰： 人生他物，非人所见者，皆为天下大兵。 
现代文：京房《易妖》说： 人生下别的生物，又是人从未见过的，那都预示着天下将有大的战事。 
English: Kyofusa's "Easy Demon" says, "There are other creatures under human beings, which people have never seen before, and that all indicates that there will be a great war in the world."

古文：后二年，有石头之败。
现代文：两年之后，出现了石头兵败。
English: Two years later, there was a stone defeat.

古文：晋明帝太宁二年七月，丹阳江宁侯纪妻死，三日复生。
现代文：晋明帝太宁二年七月，丹阳江宁侯纪妻死，三天后又复活了。
English: In July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Jin and Ming dynasties, Danyang Jiangning Houji's wife died and was resurrected three days later.

古文：晋成帝咸康四年十一月辛丑，有何一人诣南止车门自列为圣人所使。
现代文：晋成帝咸康四年十一月辛丑曰，有一个不明身份的人到南止车门，自述是圣人派来的使者。
English: In November of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinsheng, Xiankang, Xinwu said that an unidentified person came to the south gate of the car, claiming to be a messenger sent by the sage.

古文：录付光录外部检问，是东海郯县吕暢，辞语落漠，髡鞭三百，遣。
现代文：门卫把他收捕交付光禄外部查问，他是东海粪暧旦蝗，言辞夸大失实，于是处以剃去头发的髡刑，鞭打三百下，把他遣送走了。
English: The doorman arrested him and handed him over to Guanglu for external investigation. He was a locust from the East China Sea, and his words were exaggerated and untrue. He was then sentenced to be shaved, beaten with 300 lashes, and sent away.

古文：咸康五年四月，下邳民王和侨居暨阳。
现代文：咸康五年四月，下邳百姓王塑侨居暨阳。
English: In April of the 5th year of Xiankang, Wang Shuxiao, a citizen of the Lower Yunnan Province, went to live abroad.

古文：息女可，年二十，自云： 上天来还，得征瑞印绶，当母天下。 
现代文：王曲的女儿兰亘，二十岁，她自己说： 我到天上后回来，得到吉祥物和印绶，我将要作皇后，为天下人之母。 
English: Wang Qiu's daughter Lan Wai, twenty years old, said to herself: "When I go to heaven and come back, I will get a mascot and a seal. I will be a queen and the mother of all mankind."

古文：晋陵太守以为妖，收付狱。
现代文：登陆太守认为她是妖人，把她收捕，交付狱吏。
English: The governor of Jinling thought she was a monster and arrested her and put her in prison.

古文：至十一月，有人持柘杖，绛衣，诣止车门口，列为圣人使，求见天子。
现代文：到十一月，有个人拿着柘木杖，身穿绛衣，到止车门门口，自述是圣人的使者，求见天子。
English: In November, a man carrying a birch cane and dressed in sackcloth arrived at the door of the bus stop, claiming to be an emissary of the saint, asking to see the Son of God.

古文：门候受辞，列姓吕名锡。
现代文：门候听取他的自述，这人自称姓吕名塑。
English: Waiting to hear his story, the man identified himself as Lv Mingsuo.

古文：云王和女可，右足下有七星，星皆有毛，长七寸，天今命可为天下母。
现代文：并且说王曲之女王旦，右足下有七颗星，每颗星上都有毛，毛长七寸，上天现在命王可为皇后，作天下之母。
English: And she said that the queen of the king's song, Dan, had seven stars under her right foot, and each star had hair on it, and the hair was seven inches long. Now, the king of heaven could be the queen and the mother of the world.

古文：奏闻，即伏诛。
现代文：门候把逭事奏报皇上知道，吕塑因罪而被杀。
English: The concierge reported the anecdote to the emperor, and it was known that Liusuo was killed for his crime.

古文：并下晋陵诛可。
现代文：同时派人到晋陵杀死王可。
English: At the same time, they sent someone to the Jin Mausoleum to kill Wang Ke.

古文：晋康帝建元二年十月，卫将军营督过望所领兵陈渎女壹，有文在足，曰 天下之母 。
现代文：晋康帝建五二年十月，卫将军营督过望统领的兵士速遗之女速童，足上有文字，是 天下之母 几个字。
English: In October of the 52nd year of the reign of Emperor Jinkang, the commander of the battalion of the Guards, the commander of the soldiers, the daughter of the soldiers, had words on her feet, and she was the mother of the world.

古文：灸之逾明，京都喧哗。
现代文：烧灼之后就更加清楚。京城互相传说，百姓喧哗。
English: After cauterization, it is more clear. The capital is full of legends, and the people are noisy.

古文：有司收系以闻，俄自建康县狱亡去。
现代文：有关部门把陈壹收捕关押，并上奏朝廷。不久陈壹从建康县监狱逃走。
English: The relevant departments arrested and detained Chen Yi and reported to the imperial court. Chen Yi soon escaped from Jiankang County Prison.

古文：石虎末，大武殿前所图贤圣人像人头，忽悉缩入肩中。
现代文：石虎称帝末年，大武殿前画的贤人圣人的像，人头突然全都缩进肩膀裹。
English: Shihu said that in the last years of the emperor, the image of the sage saint painted in front of the Great Martial Arts Hall, the human head suddenly shrunk into the shoulders.

古文：晋孝武帝宁康初，南郡州陵女人唐氏，渐化为丈夫。
现代文：晋孝武帝宁康初年，南郡州陵有个女人唐氏，渐渐变成男人。
English: In the first year of Emperor Ningkang's reign, there was a woman named Tang who gradually turned into a man.

古文：晋安帝义熙七年，无锡人赵硃，年八岁，一旦暴长八尺，髭须蔚然，三日而死。
现代文：晋安帝义熙七年，无锡人赵朱，年龄仅八岁，一天突然长高八尺，髭须也都很浓密，过三天就死了。
English: Zhao Zhu from Wuxi, who was only eight years old, suddenly grew eight feet tall one day, and his whiskers were also very thick. He died three days later.

古文：义熙中，东阳人黄氏生女不养，埋之。
现代文：义熙年间，束阳人黄氏生下个女儿没成活，就把她埋了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yixi, the Huang clan of Sokyang gave birth to a daughter, but she did not survive and was buried.

古文：数日于土中啼，取养遂活。
现代文：敷天之后埋下去的女婴在土中啼哭，黄氏把她挖出来养，女婴竟然活下来了。
English: The baby girl who was buried after the foundation was laid was crying in the dirt. Mr. Huang dug her out and raised her. The baby girl actually survived.

古文：义熙末，豫章吴平人有二阳道，重累生。
现代文：义熙末年，豫章吴平有个人有两条阴茎，给生活带来很大麻烦。
English: At the end of the Yixi era, Yu Zhang Wu Ping had a man with two penises, which brought great trouble to his life.

古文：晋恭帝元熙元年，建安人阳道无头正平，本下作女人形体。
现代文：晋恭帝元熙元年，建安有个人阴茎没有头，前面是平的，根部以下却是女人形体。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Jian'an had a penis without a head. The front was flat, but below the base was a woman's body.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十七年，刘斌为吴郡。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十七年，刘斌任吴郡太守。
English: In the 17th year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, Liu Bin became the governor of Wu County.

古文：娄县有一女，忽夜乘风雨，怳忽至郡城内。
现代文：娄县有个女子，忽然在一个风雨之夜驾着风冒着雨疾速地来到吴郡城内。
English: On a stormy night, a woman in Handan County suddenly drove into the city of Wuxi County, braving the wind and rain.

古文：自觉去家正炊顷，衣不沾濡。
现代文：自己觉得离家衹是做一顿饭的功夫，在风雨中衣裳也未沾湿。
English: He felt that leaving home was like making a meal, and his clothes did not get wet in the wind and rain.

古文：晓在门上求通，言： 我天使也。 
现代文：早晨她在刘斌门前请求通报，说： 我是天使。 
English: In the morning, in front of Liu Bin's door, she asked for an announcement, saying: "I am an angel.

古文：斌令前，因曰： 府君宜起迎我，当大富贵。
现代文：刘斌命她走上前，她就说： 太守应当站起来迎接我，那将有大富贵。
English: Liu Bin ordered her to step forward, and she said: "The governor should stand up to greet me, that will be very rich and valuable."

古文：不尔，必有凶祸。 
现代文：不然的话，一定会有灾祸。 
English: Otherwise, there will be a disaster.

古文：斌问所以来，亦不自知也。
现代文：刘斌问她为什么来到郡城，她自己也不知道。
English: When Liu Bin asked her why she came to Guzheng, she didn't know.

古文：谓是狂人，以付狱，符其家迎之。
现代文：刘斌认为她是狂人，把她交付狱吏，并送出文书命女子家人来把她接走。
English: Believing her to be insane, Liu Bin handed her over to the prison guards and sent a letter ordering the woman's family to come and pick her up.

古文：数日乃得去。
现代文：过了几天这女子才离去。
English: It took a few days for the woman to leave.

古文：后二十日许，斌诛。
现代文：大约二十天后，刘斌被杀。
English: About twenty days later, Liu Bin was killed.

古文：孝武帝大明中，张暢为会稽郡，妾怀孕，兒于腹中啼，声闻于外。
现代文：孝武帝大明年间，张畅任会稽郡太守，其妾怀孕，胎儿在母腹中啼哭，声音传到母体之外。
English: During Emperor Xiaowu's second year of reign, Zhang Chang was appointed as the county magistrate, his concubine was pregnant, the fetus was crying in the mother's womb, and the sound was transmitted outside the mother's body.

古文：暢寻死。
现代文：不久张畅就死了。
English: Zhang Chang died soon after.

古文：大明末，荆州武宁县人杨始欢妻，于腹中生女兒。
现代文：大明末年，荆州武宁县人杨始欢之妻，从肚中生出个女儿。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, the wife of Yang Shihuan, a native of Wu Ning County, Jingzhou, gave birth to a daughter.

古文：此兒至今犹存。
现代文：这孩子至今还活着。
English: The child is still alive.

古文：明帝泰豫元年正月，巨人见太子西池水上，迹长三尺余。
现代文：明帝泰豫元年正月，巨人在太子西池水上出现，留下的足迹有三尺余长。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Ming Emperor Taiyuan, a giant appeared on the water of the Prince West Pond, leaving footprints more than three feet long.

古文：后废帝元徽中，南东莞徐坦妻怀孕，兒在腹中有声。
现代文：后废帝元徽年间，南东莞徐坦之妻怀孕，胎儿在母腹中发出声音。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuanhui, the wife of Southern Dongguan Xu Tan was pregnant, and the fetus made a sound in the mother's womb.

古文：元徽中，暨阳县女人于黄山穴中得二卵，如斗大，剖视有人形。
现代文：元徽年间，暨阳县一个女人从黄山的洞穴中找到两枚卵，卵像斗那么大，剖开来看，卵中呈现出人形。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, a woman in Jiyang County found two eggs from a cave in Huangshan Mountain. The eggs were as big as a bucket, and when cut open, the eggs revealed a doll.

古文：魏文帝黄初四年三月，宛、许大疫，死者万数。
现代文：魏文帝黄初四年三月，宛、许流行瘟疫，死去的有数万人。
English: In March of the first year of Emperor Weiwenhuang's reign, there was an epidemic of plague that killed tens of thousands of people.

古文：魏明帝青龙二年四月，大疫。
现代文：魏明帝青龙二年四月，流行瘟疫。
English: In April of the second year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, there was an epidemic of plague.

古文：青龙三年正月，京都大疫。
现代文：青龙三年正月，京都流行瘟疫。
English: In the first month of the third year of the blue dragon, there is a plague in Kyoto.

古文：吴孙权赤乌五年，大疫。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌五年，流行瘟疫。
English: In the fifth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, there was an epidemic of plague.

古文：吴孙亮建兴二年四月，诸葛恪围新城。
现代文：吴孙亮建兴二年四月，诸葛恪围攻新城。
English: In April of the second year of Wu Sun Liang's construction, Zhuge Cao besieged the new city.

古文：大疫，死者太半。
现代文：瘟疫流行，大半人死去。
English: A plague broke out, and most of the people died.

古文：吴孙皓凤凰二年，疫。
现代文：吴孙皓凤皇二年，出现瘟疫。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wu Sun Rongfeng, a plague broke out.

古文：晋武帝泰始十年，大疫。
现代文：晋武帝泰始十年，流行瘟疫。
English: In the first decade of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, there was an epidemic of plague.

古文：吴土亦同。
现代文：吴地也同样流行瘟疫。
English: Wu is also plagued by the plague.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年十一月，大疫，京都死者十万人。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年十一月，流行瘟疫，京城死去的有十万人。
English: In November of the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, there was an epidemic of plague, and 100,000 people died in Beijing.

古文：晋武帝太康三年春，疫。
现代文：晋武帝太康三年春，出现瘟疫。
English: In the spring of the third year of Emperor Taikang's reign, a plague broke out.

古文：晋惠帝元康二年十一月，大疫。
现代文：晋惠帝元康二年十一月，流行瘟疫。
English: In November of the second year of Emperor Jingu's reign, a plague broke out.

古文：元康七年五月，秦、雍二州疾疫。
现代文：元康七年五月，秦、雍二州出现大瘟疫。
English: In May of the seventh year of the Yuan Kang, a great plague broke out in the two prefectures of Qin and Yong.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年五月，秦、雍州饥疫至秋。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉四年五月，秦州、雍州发生饥荒、瘟疫，一直延续到秋天。
English: In May of the 4th year of Jin Xiao Huai Di Yongjia, famine and plague occurred in Qinzhou and Yongzhou, which lasted until the autumn.

古文：永嘉六年，大疫。
现代文：永嘉六年，流行瘟疫。
English: In the sixth year of Yongjia, there was an epidemic of plague.

古文：晋元帝永昌元年十一月，大疫，死者十二三；河朔亦同。
现代文：晋元帝永昌元年十一月，流行瘟疫，死去的人占十分之二三。河朔也同样流行瘟疫。
English: In November of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, there was an epidemic of plague, and two-thirds of the people died. The plague was also prevalent in Hexuo.

古文：晋成帝咸和五年五月，大饥且疫。
现代文：晋成帝咸和五年五月，发生饥荒而且出现瘟疫。
English: In May of the fifth year of Emperor Jincheng's reign, there was a famine and a plague.

古文：晋穆帝永和九年五月，大疫。
现代文：晋穆帝永和九年五月，流行瘟疫。
English: In May of the ninth year of Emperor Jinmu's reign, a plague broke out.

古文：晋海西太和四年冬，大疫。
现代文：晋海西公太和四年冬，流行瘟疫。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xigong of Jinhai, there was an epidemic of plague.

古文：晋孝武帝太元五年五月，自冬大疫，至于此夏，多绝户者。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元五年五月，从前一年冬天开始流行瘟疫，一直延续到这年夏天。
English: In May of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu, a plague epidemic began the previous winter and continued until this summer.

古文：晋安帝义熙元年十月，大疫，发赤班乃愈。
现代文：全家人都得病而死的很多。晋安帝义熙元年十月，流行瘟疫，病人身上出现赤斑才会病愈。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jian of An and Emperor Yixi, there was an epidemic of plague, and patients would only get better if they had red spots on their bodies.

古文：义熙七年春，大疫。
现代文：义熙七年春，流行瘟疫。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of the reign of Yixi, a plague broke out.

古文：宋文帝元嘉四年五月，京都疾疫。
现代文：晋文帝元嘉四年五月，京城出现大瘟疫。
English: In May of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Wenzhong of the Jin Dynasty, a great plague broke out in Beijing.

古文：孝武帝大明元年四月，京邑疾疫。
现代文：疫。孝武帝大明元年四月，京城地区流行大瘟。
English: Epidemic. In April of the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, there was an epidemic of plague in the Beijing area.

古文：大明四年四月，京邑疾疫。
现代文：大胆四年四月，京城地区流行大瘟疫。
English: In April of this year, a major epidemic broke out in the Beijing area.

古文：日蚀：魏文帝黄初二年六月戊辰晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：魏文帝黄初二年六月戊辰，这天是月底，日食。
English: Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang of the first two years of the sixth month of the month of June, this day is the end of the month, the solar eclipse.

古文：有司奏免太尉。
现代文：有关官员上奏，要免去太尉官职。
English: The officials concerned should be dismissed from the rank of captain.

古文：诏曰： 灾异之作，以谴元首，而归过股肱，岂禹、汤罪己之义乎？
现代文：文帝下诏说： 灾异发生，是为了谴责元首，而把过失归于左右大臣，这难道符合禹、汤引咎自责的原则吗?
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "When a disaster occurs, the purpose is to condemn the head of state, but the fault is attributed to the left and right ministers. Is this consistent with the principle of blaming oneself?

古文：其令百官各虔厥职。
现代文：还是命令百官虔敬地遵奉自己的职守。
English: Let each of the hundred officials prudently fulfill his duties.

古文：后有天地眚，勿复劾三公。 
现代文：以后天地出现灾异，不要再归罪于三公。 
English: In the future, when disasters occur in the world, don't blame the Three Wise Men.

古文：黄初三年正月丙寅朔，日有蚀之；十一月庚申晦，又日有蚀之。
现代文：黄初三年正月丙寅，初一，日食；十一月庚申，这天是月底，又出现日食。
English: In the third year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month, and the solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month, and the solar eclipse occurred on the last day of the first month, November.

古文：黄初五年十一月戊申晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：黄初五年十一月戊申曰，这天是月底，日食。
English: In November of the 5th year of the Yellow Emperor, Wushin said, "This day is the end of the month, a solar eclipse.

古文：后二年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：这以后两年，皇上驾崩。
English: In the third year, Emperor Wu died.

古文：魏明帝太和初，太史令许芝奏日应蚀，与太尉于灵台祈禳。
现代文：魏明帝太和初年，太史令许芝上奏，说是将会出现日食，要和太尉在灵台祈祷上天求福消灾。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, Emperor Taishi ordered Xu Zhi to recite a poem, saying that there would be a solar eclipse, and that he and the captain should pray to the heavens for good fortune and disaster relief.

古文：帝诏曰： 盖闻人主政有不得，则天惧之以灾异，所以谴告使得自修也。
现代文：明帝下诏说： 我听说如果君主不施德政，那么上天就会降下灾异使他戒惧，这是警告帝王，谴责他的过错，使他自己修养德性整饬德政的方式。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "I have heard that if the monarch does not conduct a virtuous government, then the heavens will bring down disasters to make him afraid. This is a way of warning the emperor, condemning his mistakes, and making him cultivate his virtue and rectify his virtue.

古文：故日月薄蚀，明治道有不当者。
现代文：所以食月食，光被阴气掩蔽，都说明治道还有不恰当的地方。
English: Therefore, the phenomenon of thin eclipses of the sun and moon has occurred, indicating that the way of governing the country is inappropriate.

古文：朕即位以来，既不能光明先帝圣德，而施化有不合于皇神，故上天有以寤之。
现代文：我即位以来，既不能光大发扬先帝圣明之德，而施行的教化又有和上天之道不相符合的地方，所以上天用这种方法使我醒悟。
English: Since I ascended the throne, I have not been able to carry forward the virtue of the holy emperors, and the enlightenment I have carried out is not consistent with the way of heaven. Therefore, heaven has used this method to awaken me.

古文：宜励政自修，以报于神明。
现代文：我们应当励精图治，修身养性以回报神明。
English: We should work hard to improve ourselves and cultivate our character to repay the gods.

古文：天之于人，犹父之于子，未有父欲责其子，而可献盛馔以求免也。
现代文：上天对待人，如同父亲对待儿子，从来没有父亲要责罚儿子、儿子却贡献丰盛的食物以求免去责罚的事情。
English: God is to man as a father is to his son. No father wants to blame his child, but he can ask for forgiveness by offering a plentiful meal.

古文：今外欲遣上公与太史令具禳祠，于义未闻也。
现代文：现在朝臣希望我派三公中之上公与太史令备礼祈祷消灾，这道理我没听说过。
English: Now, the courtier wants me to send three high-ranking officials to pray for disaster relief, which I have never heard of.

古文：群公卿士，其各勉修厥职。
现代文：群公卿士，还是各人努力尽职，整饬政务。
English: A group of noblemen and women, everyone is still working hard to do their duty and rectify government affairs.

古文：有可以补朕不逮者，各封上之。 
现代文：若有可以弥补我思虑未及的进言，可以用封事上奏。 
English: Anyone who has an opinion that can correct what I've missed should send it to me.

古文：魏明帝太和五年十一月戊戌晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：魏明帝太和五年十一月戊戌曰，这一天是月底，日食。
English: Emperor Wei of the Ming Dynasty said, "This day is the end of the month, the solar eclipse.

古文：太和六年正月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太和六年正月戊辰日，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year, the first day of the first month, the solar eclipse.

古文：魏明帝青龙元年闰月庚寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：见《吴历》。魏明帝壹垄元年闰月庚寅日，初一，日食。
English: See the "Wu Calendar." Wei Mingdi had a leap year in the first year of the leap month, the first day of the first month, and a solar eclipse.

古文：魏齐王正始元年七月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：魏变王正始元年七月戊申日，初一，日食。
English: Wei Zeng Wang was born in the first year of the seventh month of the year, the first day of the year, the solar eclipse.

古文：《纪》无。
现代文：纪》中无记载。
English: There is no record of it in the Ji.

古文：正始三年四月戊戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：正始三年四月戊戌日，初一，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the third year in April.

古文：《纪》无。
现代文：《纪》中无记载。
English: There is no record of it in the Ji.

古文：正始六年四月壬子，日有蚀之；十月戊寅朔，又日有蚀之。
现代文：正始六年四月壬子曰，日食；十月戊寅，初一，又出现日食。
English: At the beginning of the sixth year, in April, there was a solar eclipse; in October, on the first day of the new year, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：正始八年二月庚午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：正始八年二月庚午，初一，日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the morning of February 8th, the first day of the new year.

古文：是时曹爽专政，丁谧、邓飏等转改法度。
现代文：当时曹爽独揽朝政，丁谧、邓飏等人又改变法度。
English: At this time, Cao Shuang's dictatorship, Ding Xi, Deng Xi and others changed the law.

古文：会有日蚀变，诏群臣问得失。
现代文：正逢日食灾变，变王下诏向群臣询问朝政得失。
English: At the time of the solar eclipse disaster, the king-to-be asked his courtiers about the merits and demerits of the imperial government.

古文：蒋济上疏曰： 昔大舜佐治，戒在比周；周公辅政，慎于其朋。
现代文：蒋济上疏说： 从前大舜辅佐尧施治，警惕营私结党；周公辅佐成王，警惕朋党之害。
English: Jiang Jishang Soo said: In the past, the grand secretary of the CPC Central Committee and the vice-premier of the CPC Central Committee assisted Chiang Kai-shek in governing the country, and they were wary of the harm caused by the cronyism of the party.

古文：齐侯问灾，晏子对以布惠；鲁君问异，臧孙答以缓役。
现代文：齐侯询问应付灾变的措施，晏子的回答是施惠于民；鲁君询问消除妖异的办法，臧孙的回答是宽缓徭役。
English: Qi Hou inquired about the measures to cope with the disaster, and Zizi replied that they should benefit the people; Lu Jun inquired about the methods to eliminate the monsters, and the grandson's answer was to be lenient.

古文：塞变应天，乃实人事。 
现代文：堵绝灾变，顺应天道，这正是人能办到的事。 
English: Stopping catastrophes and conforming to the way of heaven, this is exactly what man can do.

古文：济旨譬甚切，而君臣不悟，终至败亡矣。
现代文：蒋济的用意十分明白，譬喻很是恰当，而君臣都不领悟，最终导致败亡。
English: Jiang Jie's intention is very clear, the metaphor is very appropriate, but the princes and ministers do not understand, and eventually lead to defeat.

古文：正始九年正月乙未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：正始九年正月乙末日，初一，日食。
English: At the end of the first month of the ninth year, on the first day of the new year, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：魏齐王嘉平元年二月己未，日有蚀之。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平元年二月己末日，日食。
English: In the first year of King Jiaping of Wei and Qi, the month of February ended with a solar eclipse.

古文：魏高贵乡公甘露四年七月戊子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：魏高贵乡公甘露四年七月戊子曰，初一，日食。
English: In July of the fourth year of Wei Gao Gui Xiang Gong Kanlu, Wuzi said that on the first day of the year, there would be a solar eclipse.

古文：甘露五年正月乙酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：甘露五年正月乙酉，初一，日食。
English: The first month of the fifth year of nectar, the first day of the year, the solar eclipse.

古文：按谷永说，正朝，尊者恶之。
现代文：据谷永的说法，正月初一发生食，是处于尊位的人畏惧的事。
English: According to Gu Yong, the occurrence of food on the first day of the first month of the year is something that people in positions of authority dread.

古文：京房占曰： 日蚀乙酉，君弱臣强。
现代文：京房推度说： 乙酉日发生日食，是因为君弱臣强。
English: Kyofusa deduced: The eclipse occurred on the day of Acetylene, because you are weak and your vassal is strong.

古文：司马将兵，反征其王。 
现代文：司马领兵，反过来攻伐自己的君主。 
English: Sima led an army to war, and his own king was conscripted in return.

古文：五月，有成济之变。
现代文：这年五月，发生了成济的变乱。
English: In May, the Genghis Khan Mutiny occurred.

古文：魏元帝景元二年五月丁未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：魏元帝景元二年五月丁未日，初一，日食。
English: Emperor Jingyuan of the Wei and Yuan Dynasties had a solar eclipse on the third day of the fifth month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jingyuan.

古文：景元三年三月己亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：景元三年三月己亥日，初一，日食。
English: In the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the Jingyuan era, the day of the Boar, the first day of the new year, the solar eclipse.

古文：晋武帝泰始二年七月丙午晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋武帝泰始二年七月丙午曰，这天是月底，日食。
English: On the afternoon of July 3rd, the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, a solar eclipse occurred at the end of the month.

古文：泰始七年五月庚辰，日有蚀之。
现代文：泰始七年五月庚辰日，日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the seventh day of the fifth month of the seventh year.

古文：泰始八年十月辛未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：泰始八年十月辛末日，初一，日食。
English: In October of the eighth year of Taishi, the last day of Xin, the first day of the year, the solar eclipse.

古文：泰始九年四月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：泰始九年四月戊辰曰，初一，食。
English: In April of the ninth year of the Tai Shi era, on the first day of the new year, there was a meal.

古文：泰始十年三月癸亥，日有蚀之。
现代文：泰始十年三月癸亥日，日食。
English: In the first ten years of the Taisho era, there was a solar eclipse on the day of the Boar in March.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年七月甲申晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年七月甲申曰，这天是月底，日食。
English: Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty wrote in July of the first year of the Jia Dynasty, "This day is the end of the month, a solar eclipse.

古文：咸宁三年正月丙子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：咸宁三年正月丙子，初一，日食。
English: In the third year of Xianning, the first day of the first month, the first day of the first month, the solar eclipse.

古文：晋武帝太康四年三月辛丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋武帝太康太康四年三月辛丑曰，初一，日食。
English: Emperor Jinwu Taikang Taikang in the fourth year of March, the first day of the year, the solar eclipse.

古文：太康六年八月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太康六年八月丙戌日，初一，日食。
English: Taikang six years in August, the first day of the first month, the solar eclipse.

古文：太康七年正月甲寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太康七年正月甲寅曰，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of Taikang, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：乙亥，诏曰： 比年灾异屡发，邦之不臧，实在朕躬。
现代文：乙亥日，武帝下诏说： 近几年灾异屡屡发生，国家不安宁，罪责都在我身上。
English: On the second day of the year of the boar, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: In recent years, disasters have repeatedly occurred, the country is restless, and the blame is on me.

古文：震蚀之异，其咎安在？
现代文：地震日食这些灾异的出现，过失在哪裹?
English: Earthquake, solar eclipse, these catastrophic occurrences, where does the fault lie?

古文：将何施行，以济其愆？ 
现代文：将要采取什么措施，可以弥补以前的遇错? 
English: What measures will be taken that can make up for previous mistakes?

古文：太尉亮、司徒舒、司空瓘逊位，弗许。
现代文：太尉司马亮、司徒魏舒、司空卫罐请求让出官职，武帝不准许。
English: Second lieutenants Sima Liang, Sittu Wei Shu, and Siku Wei Can requested to give up their official positions, but Emperor Wu did not allow them to do so.

古文：太康八年正月戊申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太康八年正月戊申，初一，日食。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Taikang, Boshin, the first day of the year, solar eclipse.

古文：太康九年六月庚子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太康九年六月庚子日，初一，日食。
English: In June of the ninth year of Taikang, Geng Zi Day, the first day of the new year, a solar eclipse.

古文：后二年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：这以后两年，宫游驾崩。
English: In the third year, Emperor Wu died.

古文：晋惠帝元康九年十月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋惠帝元康九年十一月甲子日，初一，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the ninth year of Emperor Jingu.

古文：晋惠帝永康元年四月辛卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋惠帝永康元年四月辛卯日，初一，日食。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongkang, the first day of the new year, a solar eclipse.

古文：晋惠帝永宁元年闰三月丙戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋惠帝永宁元年闰三月丙戌曰，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the leap month in the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongning, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：晋惠帝光熙元年正月戊子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋惠帝光熙元年正月戊子朔，初一，日食。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Guangxi, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：尊者恶之。七月乙酉朔，又日有蚀之既。占曰： 日蚀尽，不出三月，国有凶。 
现代文：因为是正月初一日食，地处尊位的人畏惧这事。七月乙酉曰，初一，日全食。占卜的结果说： 日全食，不出三个月，国家将有大祸事。 
English: Because it is the first eclipse of the first lunar month, people in positions of honor are afraid of it. July Acanthus said, the first day, total solar eclipse. The result of divination said: total solar eclipse, within three months, the country will have a great disaster.

古文：十一月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：十一月，塞童驾崩。
English: In November, the emperor died.

古文：十二月壬午朔，又日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月壬午，初一，又出现日食。
English: On the first day of the lunar month of December, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年十一月戊申，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年十一月戊申日，日食。
English: Jinxiao Huai Di Yongjia in November of the first year of the year, the solar eclipse.

古文：永嘉二年正月丙午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：永嘉二年正月丙午，初一，日食。
English: Yongjia 2nd year, the first day of the month, the first day of the month, the solar eclipse.

古文：永嘉六年二月壬子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：永嘉六年二月壬子日，初一，日食。
English: In February of the sixth year of Yongjia, there was a solar eclipse on the first day of the new year.

古文：明年，帝崩于平阳。
现代文：第二年，孝怀帝在工区去世。
English: The following year, Emperor Gong died in Pingyang.

古文：晋愍帝建兴四年六月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴四年六月丁巳曰，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the sixth month of the fourth year of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：十一月，帝为刘曜所虏。
现代文：十一月，愍帝被刘曜俘虏。
English: In November, Emperor Gong was captured by Liu You.

古文：十二月乙卯朔，又日有蚀之。
现代文：一二月乙卯曰，初一，又出现日食。
English: Another solar eclipse will occur on the first day of the first month of the second month of the year.

古文：明年，帝崩于平阳。
现代文：第二年，愍帝在平阳去世。食。
English: The following year, Emperor Gong died in Pingyang.

古文：晋元帝太兴元年四月丁丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋元帝太兴元年四月丁丑日，初一，日食。
English: In the first year of the Jin and Yuan Dynasties, Emperor Taixing presided over a solar eclipse on April Fool's Day, the first day of the new year.

古文：晋明帝太宁三年十一月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋明帝太宁三年十一月癸巳日，初一，曰食。
English: On the first day of the third month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month

古文：晋成帝咸和二年五月甲申朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋成帝咸和二年五月甲申曰，初一，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the second year of Emperor Jincheng.

古文：晋成帝咸康元年十月乙未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年十月乙末日，初一，日食。
English: Emperor Jinsheng passed away on the last day of October B, the first day of the year, and the solar eclipse occurred.

古文：咸康七年二月甲子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：咸康七年二月甲子曰，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the second month of the seventh year of Xiankang, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：咸康八年正月乙未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：咸康八年正月己末日，初一，日食。
English: The last day of the first month of the eighth year of Xiankang, the first day of the year, the solar eclipse.

古文：正朝，尊者恶之。六月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：正月初一出现日食，身处尊位的人忌惮这事。六月，成童驾崩。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the year, and people in high places were afraid of it. In June, an adult child died.

古文：晋穆帝永和七年正月丁酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋穆帝永和七年正月丁酉曰，初一，日食。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Jinmu's reign, the solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month.

古文：永和十二年十月癸巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：永和十二年十月癸巳日，初一，日食。
English: In October of the twelfth year of the Heian period, the first day of the new year, a solar eclipse.

古文：晋穆帝升平四年八月辛丑朔，日有蚀之，不尽如钩。
现代文：晋穆帝升平四年八月辛丑日，初一，日食，被蚀的太阳留下像钩的那么一块。
English: On the first day of the eighth month of the fourth year of Emperor Jinmu's enthronement, the sun was eclipsed, and the eclipsed sun left behind a piece like a hook.

古文：明年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：第二年，穆帝驾崩。
English: The following year, Miyake died.

古文：晋哀帝隆和元年十二月戊午朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋哀帝隆和元年十二月戊午曰，初一，日食。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the third month of the first year of the Jin Dynasty and the first day of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of

古文：晋海西公太和三年三月丁巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋海西公太和三年三月丁巳曰，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jinhai and Empress Dowager Xi, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：太和五年七月癸酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太和五年七月癸酉曰，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the fifth year of the Taihe era, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：明年，废为海西公。
现代文：第二年，司马奕帝位被废黜，贬为海西公。
English: The following year, Sima Yi's imperial throne was dethroned and he was demoted to Haixi Gong.

古文：晋孝武帝宁康三年十月癸酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋孝武帝宁康三年十月癸酉日，初一，日食。
English: Emperor Ningkang was enthroned on October 3rd, the first day of the new year, with a solar eclipse.

古文：晋孝武帝太元四年闰月己酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元四年闰月己酉曰，初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the leap month in the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao Wu, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：太元六年六月庚子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太元六年六月庚子曰，初一，日食。
English: In June of the sixth year of the Taiyuan era, Geng Zi said, "On the first day of the year, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：太元九年十月辛亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太元九年十月辛亥日，初一，日食。
English: In October of the ninth year of the Taiyuan Emperor, the first day of the year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：太元十七年五月丁卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太元十七年五月丁卯曰，初一，日食。
English: The solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the 17th year of the Taiyuan Emperor.

古文：太元二十年三月庚辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：太元二十年三月庚辰日，初一，日食。
English: Geng Chen Day, the first day of the new year, a solar eclipse.

古文：明年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：第二年，宫车游驾崩。
English: The following year, Miyake died.

古文：海西时有此变。
现代文：迤厘公在帝位时曾出现这种灾变。
English: This kind of cataclysmic change occurred during the reign of Emperor Goryeo.

古文：又曰，臣有蔽主明者。
现代文：又一种说法，这是有大臣蒙蔽主上的圣明。
English: Another way of saying this is that a minister has obscured the Lord's holy light.

古文：晋惠帝永兴元年十一月，黑气分日。
现代文：晋惠帝永兴元年十一月，一股黑气把太阳分割成两半。
English: In November of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu Yongxing, a black gas split the sun into two halves.

古文：晋惠帝光熙元年五月癸已，日散，光流如血，所照皆赤。
现代文：晋惠帝光熙元年五月癸巳日，日光浮散，光散射下来颜色如同血，照到的地方都变成片赤色。
English: On the twelfth day of the fifth month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu Guangxi, the sunlight was scattered, and the light scattered down was the color of blood, and all the places where it shone turned red.

古文：甲午，又如之。占曰： 君道失明。 
现代文：甲午曰，又出现了和癸巳曰一样的情景。占辞说： 这是为君之道不明的结果。 
English: On the afternoon of the first day, the same situation as on the morning of the second day occurred again. The fortune-teller said: This is the result of the king's path being unclear.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年十一月乙亥，黄黑气掩日，所炤皆黄。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉元年十一月乙亥闩，黄黑气掩蔽日光，曰光照到的地方都是一片黄色。
English: In November of the first year of the Jin Xiao Huai Emperor Yongjia, the yellow and black gas covered the sunlight, saying that the place where the light shined was all yellow.

古文：案《河图占》曰： 日薄也 。
现代文：据《河圃占》说： 这是曰薄。 
English: According to "Heppo Zhan": This is called thin.

古文：其说曰： 凡日蚀皆于晦朔，有不于晦朔者，为日薄。
现代文：《河图占》解说道： 凡是日食都发生在月底这一天或是初一，不在月底或是初一，曰光变暗，造就是日薄。
English: "Hutu Zhan" explained: Every solar eclipse occurs at the end of the month or on the first day of the month, not at the end of the month or on the first day of the month, that is, the light is darkened, so the sun is thin.

古文：虽非日月同宿，时阴气盛，掩薄日光也。
现代文：虽然不是曰月一同聚合，而是因为当时阴气盛，掩蔽曰光导致的结果。
English: Although it is not said that the moon is aggregated together, but because it was cloudy at that time, the result of covering the sun and the moon.

古文：占类蚀。 
现代文：它作为征兆和日食相类似。 
English: As a sign, it is similar to a solar eclipse.

古文：永喜二年二月癸卯，白虹贯日，青黄晕五重。
现代文：永嘉二年二月癸卯，白虹贯曰，出现青黄色五重闩晕。
English: In February of the second year of Yongjia, the five-fold blue-yellow halo appeared.

古文：占曰： 白虹贯日，近臣不乱，则诸侯有兵，破亡其地。 
现代文：占辞说： 白虹贯日，如果朝廷大臣不作乱，那么诸侯就会挑起战事，攻破占有国家的土地。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Bai Hong said that if the ministers of the imperial court did not make a disturbance, then the lords would provoke a war and break through the land occupied by the country.

古文：明年，司马越杀缪播等，暴蔑人主。
现代文：第二年，司马越杀死缪播等人，欺罔蔑视君主。
English: The following year, Sima Yue killed Miao Bo and others, and bullied and despised the monarch.

古文：五年，胡破京都，帝遂见虏。
现代文：永嘉五年，龃人攻破京城，孝怀帝竟然被俘虏。
English: In the fifth year of Yongjia, the Xiongnu conquered the capital, and Emperor Xiaohai was actually taken prisoner.

古文：一说王者有兵周之象。
现代文：一说，白虹贯曰是帝王将被军队包围的征兆。
English: According to one, the white rainbow is said to be a sign that the emperor will be surrounded by troops.

古文：永嘉五年三月庚申，日散，光如血，下流，所照皆赤。
现代文：永嘉五年三月庚申日，日光浮散，光的颜色如同血，往下散射，曰光照射到的地方都是一片赤红色。
English: On the day of the Hexin Festival in March of the fifth year of Yongjia, the sunlight was scattered, the color of the light was like blood, and it was scattered downwards. The place where the light was irradiated was a reddish-red color.

古文：日中有若飞燕鸟者。
现代文：太阳当中有个黑影，好像飞燕。
English: There was a dark shadow in the sun, like a swallow.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年正月庚子，白虹弥天，三日并照，日有重晕，左右两珥。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年正月庚子，白虹满天，三个太阳同时临照大地，每个太阳都被两重曰晕笼罩着，曰晕左右共有两个珥。
English: In the first month of the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty, Geng Zi, the white rainbow filled the sky, and three suns simultaneously shined on the earth. Each sun was covered by two halos, and there were two halos around the halo.

古文：占曰： 白虹，兵气也。
现代文：占辞说： 白虹，是兵气的象征。
English: The soothsayer said: The white rainbow is the breath of war.

古文：按京房占： 黑者，阴也。臣不掩君恶，令下见百姓恶君。 日重晕，天下有立王。
现代文：三、四、五、六个太阳同时出来争辉，天下将有战乱发生，自立为王的人数和太阳的个数一样。 又说： 三个太阳同时出现不超过三十天，诸侯会争着立为帝。太阳有两重曰晕，天下有人自立为王。
English: If three, four, five or six suns appear at the same time to compete for glory, there will be war in the world, and the number of people who claim to be kings will be the same as the number of suns.It is also said that if three suns appear at the same time for no more than thirty days, the princes will compete to become emperors.

古文：晕而珥，天下有立侯。
现代文：晕有环为饰，天下有人自立为侯。 
English: With a halo and a halo, the world will be established.

古文：故陈卓曰： 当有大庆，天下其参分乎？ 
现代文：所以陈卓说： 将有大的喜庆，天下恐怕将要分成三家吧。 
English: So Chen Zhuo said, "There will be a great celebration. I'm afraid the world will be divided into three families."

古文：三月而江东改元朔，胡亦改元朔，跨曹、刘疆宇。
现代文：这年三月元帝在江束更改年号和正朔，胡人也更改年号和正朔，占有原来曹、刘的疆域。
English: In March of this year, Emperor Yuan changed the era name to Zhengshuo in Jiangzhu, and the Hu people also changed the era name to Zhengshuo, occupying the original territory of Cao and Liu.

古文：于是兵连积世。
现代文：于是连年战争，延续几代。
English: As a result, the war continued for years and generations.

古文：晋元帝太兴四年三月癸亥，日有黑子。
现代文：晋元帝太兴四年三月癸亥，太阳中有黑子。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Taixing went hunting in March, and there were black spots in the sun.

古文：辛亥，帝亲录讯囚徒。
现代文：四月辛亥曰，元帝亲自审讯囚徒。
English: In April of Xinhai, Emperor Yuan personally interrogated the prisoners.

古文：晋元帝永昌元年十月辛卯，日有黑子。
现代文：晋元帝永昌元年十月辛卯日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongchang of the Jin Dynasty, a sunspot appeared in the sun.

古文：晋明帝太宁元年正月己丑朔，日晕无光；癸巳，黄雾四塞。
现代文：晋明帝太宁元年正月己丑曰，初一，太阳被晕笼罩，暗淡无光；癸巳，黄雾四处弥漫。
English: Emperor Jinming of the Tainin Dynasty said that the first day of the first month of the first year was ugly. On the first day of the first month, the sun was shrouded in a halo, dull and dark; at the end of the month, yellow fog pervaded everywhere.

古文：占曰： 君道失明，臣有阴谋。 
现代文：占辞说： 为君之道不明，臣下怀有阴谋。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The way of the king is not clear, and his vassals are plotting."

古文：是时王敦陵上，卒伏其辜。
现代文：当时王敦欺凌君主，最终他也因自己的罪过而死。
English: At that time, Wang Dun bullied the monarch, and eventually he died for his sins.

古文：晋成帝咸康元年七月，白虹贯日。
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年七月，白虹贯曰。
English: In July of the first year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign, Bai Hongzhang died.

古文：咸康八年正月壬申，日中有黑子。
现代文：咸康八年正月壬申，太阳中出现黑子。
English: In the first month of Jinshin in the eighth year of Hamkang, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：丙子，乃灭。
现代文：到丙子曰，太阳中的黑子才消失。
English: According to Xun Zi, sunspots only disappear in the sun.

古文：晋海西公太和四年四月戊辰，日晕厚密，白虹贯日中。
现代文：晋海西公太和四年四月戊辰，日晕厚而且密，白虹穿过太阳正中。
English: In April of the 4th year of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of

古文：太和六年三月辛未，白虹贯日，日晕五重。
现代文：太和六年三月辛末日，白虹贯日，有五重日晕。
English: In March of the same year, the last day of the year, a white rainbow stretched across the sky, and there were five sunspots.

古文：十一月，桓温废帝。
现代文：十一月，桓温把皇帝废为海西公。
English: In November, Emperor Kuan-Wen abolished the emperor as Haixi Gong.

古文：张重华在凉州，日暴赤如火，中有三足乌，形见分明，数旦乃止。
现代文：张重华在凉州时，一天太阳突然问变得像火那样红，太阳中有只三足乌，形象看得十分清楚，过了几天才消失。
English: When Zhang Chonghua was in Liangzhou, one day the sun suddenly turned as red as fire. There was a three-legged owl in the sun, the image was very clear, and it only disappeared after a few days.

古文：晋安帝元兴元年二月甲子，日晕，白虹贯日。
现代文：晋安帝元兴元年二月甲于日，出现日晕，白虹贯日。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jian of the Andean Dynasties, Genxing, the sun was eclipsed and a white rainbow stretched across the sky.

古文：明年，桓玄篡位。
现代文：第二年，桓玄篡位。
English: The following year, Kangen usurped the throne.

古文：晋安帝义熙元年五月庚午，日有采珥。
现代文：晋安帝义熙元年五月庚午，太阳出现彩色珥饰。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the fifth month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jian of An and Emperor Yixi of Jin, the sun appeared with a colorful halo.

古文：义熙十一年，日在东井，有白虹十余丈，在南干日。
现代文：义熙十一年，太阳正处在柬井宿的位置，有道十余丈的白虹，从南边干犯太阳。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of Yixi, the sun was in the position of the Kamdei Inn, and there was a white rainbow of more than ten meters in height, from the south side of the sun.

古文：依司马彪说，则灾在分野，羌亡之象也。
现代文：依司马彪的说法，天上的变迁应验地上的灾祸。
English: According to Sima Biao, the changes in the sky are accompanied by disasters on the ground.

古文：晋恭帝元熙二年正月壬辰，日晕，东西有直珥各一丈，白气贯之交匝。
现代文：白虹在束井宿干犯太阳，束井宿的分野在秦，所以这是羌将要灭亡的征兆。晋恭帝元熙二年正月壬辰日，出现曰晕，日晕东西各有一丈长的垂直珥饰，白气贯穿口晕并紧紧缠绕着日晕。
English: Bai Hong committed the crime of the sun in the area of Sakui-juku, and the area of Sakui-juku was in Qin, so this was a sign of the imminent demise of the cocoon. On the first day of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, the sun halo appeared. The sun halo was decorated with vertical cocoons of a certain length in the east and west, and the white gas penetrated the mouth halo and tightly wrapped around the sun halo.

古文：晋孝怀帝永嘉五年三月丙申夜，月蚀既；丁酉夜，又蚀既。
现代文：晋孝怀帝永嘉五年三月丙申日夜晚，月全食；丁酉日夜晚，又出现月全食。
English: On the night of the 6th day of the 3rd month of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao, Emperor Huai Yongjia, there was a total eclipse of the moon; on the night of the 6th day of the 3rd year of the reign of Emperor Jinxiao, there was another total eclipse of the moon.

古文：占曰： 月蚀既尽，夫人忧。 
现代文：占辞说 月被食尽，夫人心忧。 
English: The fortune-teller said that the moon was eaten up, and the lady was worried.

古文：又曰： 其国贵人死。 
现代文：又说： 那个国家有贵人将死。 
English: And he said, The noblest of his people shall die by the sword.

古文：安帝义熙九年十二月辛卯朔旦，月犹见东方。
现代文：安帝义熙九年十二月辛卯曰，初一，清晨还能在东方看见月亮。
English: In December of the ninth year of An Di's reign, Xin Wu said that on the first day of the new year, the moon could still be seen in the east in the morning.

古文：按占，谓之 侧匿。 
现代文：据占辞称这种现象为 侧匿 。
English: This phenomenon is called "sidewalking," according to fortune-tellers.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十九年十一月己卯朔，日始出，色赤如血，外生牙，塊垒不员。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十九年十一月己卯曰，初一。太阳刚刚升起，颜色便红得像血，太阳四周生出了牙，太阳形体也不圆。
English: Song Emperor Yuanjia said in November 29, the first day of the new year, that the sun had just risen, the color was red like blood, the sun had teeth around it, and the sun shape was not round.

古文：明年二月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：第二年二月，文帝驾崩。
English: In February of the following year, Emperor Wen passed away.

古文：孝武帝大明七年十一月，日始出四五丈，色赤如血，未没四五丈，亦如之。
现代文：孝武帝大明七年十一月，太阳刚刚从地平线卜升起四五丈高，颜色便红得像血，偏西离落下的地平线还距四五丈时，也是这个样子。
English: In November of the seventh year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the sun had just risen four or five altitudes above the horizon when it turned red as blood. It looked the same when it was still four or five altitudes away from the horizon.

古文：至于八年春，凡三，谓日死。
现代文：到大塱八年春，一共出现三次这样的情况，人们称这为 曰死 。
English: By the spring of 1978, there had been a total of three such occurrences, which people referred to as "day of death."

古文：闰五月，帝崩。
现代文：大明八年闰五月，孝武帝去世。
English: In the leap month of the eighth year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu passed away.

古文：后废帝元徽三年三月乙亥，日未没数丈，日色紫赤无光。
现代文：后废帝元徽三年三月乙亥曰，太阳落山前，距地平线还有几丈的时候，太阳颜色紫赤，暗淡无光。
English: According to Emperor Yuanhui in March of the third year of the Heian period, before the sun sets, when there is still some height from the horizon, the sun's color is purple-red, dim and dull.

古文：元徽五年三月庚寅，日晕五重，又重生二直，一抱一背。
现代文：元徽五年三月庚寅曰，出现五重曰晕，又重生出两道直的云气，一道微曲向曰称做抱，一道微曲向外称做背。
English: According to Geng Yin in March of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, a five-fold halo appeared, and two straight clouds were reborn, one slightly curved toward the sun as a hug, and one slightly curved outward as a back.

古文：文帝元嘉中，有两白虹见宣阳门外。
现代文：文帝元嘉年间，有两道白虹在宣阳门外显现。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, two white rainbows appeared outside the Xuanyang Gate.

古文：后废帝元徽二年八月壬子夜，白虹见。
现代文：后废帝元徽二年八月壬子日夜晚，白虹显现。
English: After Emperor Yuanhui was dethroned, the white rainbow appeared on the evening of August 2nd, Ren Zi Day.

古文：元徽四年正月己酉，白虹贯日。
现代文：元徽四年正月己酉日，白虹贯日。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the white rainbow appeared.

古文：后帝升明元年九月乙未夜，白虹见东方。
现代文：后帝升明元年九月乙末日夜晚，白虹在东方显现。
English: On the evening of the last day of September in the first year after the Emperor ascended to the throne, a white rainbow appeared in the east.

