古文：察罕亦力撒合立智理威
现代文：察罕，初名益德，姓乌密氏，唐兀族人。
English: Chahan, first name Yide, surname Wumi, a member of the Tang Dynasty Yi people.

古文：察罕，初名益德，唐兀乌密氏。父曲也怯律，为夏臣。
现代文：父亲名曲也怯律，为西夏国朝臣。察罕武勇过人，幼年牧羊时，常立竿于地上，把帽子挂在竿头，行跪拜礼，绕竿歌舞。
English: His father's famous song is also timid, he is a courtier of Western Xia. He is very brave, when he was a young shepherd, he often stood on the ground, hung his hat on the pole, kneeled, and sang and danced around the pole.

古文：鸮鸣其旁，心恶之，掷靴击之，有蛇自靴中坠。
现代文：有一日，太祖打猎行过此处，见察罕如此行动，深为奇怪，问他因何这般。察罕回答道： 听说有大人物要来，我在这演习礼节，准备迎接。 
English: One day, the great-grandfather went hunting here. He was very surprised to see Chahan acting like this, and asked him why. Chahan replied, "I heard that a great man was coming. I am practicing etiquette here, preparing to welcome him."

古文：归，以其事闻。
现代文：太祖认为这孩子非同凡人，带回宫中，命他掌管内廷事务。
English: The great-grandfather thought that this child was extraordinary, brought him back to the palace, and ordered him to take charge of the affairs of the court.

古文：帝曰： 是禽人所恶者，在尔则为喜神，宜戒子孙勿杀其类。 从帝略云中、桑乾。
现代文：察罕长大后太祖赐蒙古姓氏，配宫女弘吉剌氏为妻。随太祖征伐云中、桑乾等地。
English: After Chahan grew up, his great-grandfather gave him a Mongolian surname, and his wife was his concubine, the princess Hongjitang. He accompanied his great-grandfather to conquer Yunchu, Sangqian and other places.

古文：金将定薛拥重兵守野狐岭，帝遣察罕觇虚实，还言彼马足轻动，不足畏也。
现代文：金将定薛以重兵扼守野狐岭，察罕侦察金军虚实，回报说金军戒备不严，不足为惧。
English: The gold general Ding Xue guarded the wild fox ridge with heavy troops, and checked the reconnaissance of the gold army's truth and falsehood. In return, he said that the gold army's alertness was not strict, and he was afraid of inadequacy.

古文：帝命鼓行而前，遂破其军。
现代文：于是太祖挥军前进，斩关杀将。
English: As a result, Emperor Taizu marched forward with his army and killed the general.

古文：围白楼七日，拔之，以功为御帐前首千户。
现代文：围攻白楼，经七日城破，察罕以功升为御帐前首千户。
English: After the siege of Bai Lou, the city was defeated in seven days, and Chahan was promoted to the first thousand households.

古文：从帝征西域孛哈里、薛迷思干二城。回回国主札剌丁拒守铁门关，兵不得进。察罕先驱开道，斩其将，余众悉降。
现代文：随太祖征西域之孛哈里及薛迷思干两城，回回国王扎剌丁拒守铁门关，蒙军不得进，察罕为先锋，斩其守将，其余皆降。
English: Accompanying the Great Ancestors to conquer the two cities of Zhaohari and Xue Mingsi in the western region, returning to the king Zhaoding refused to defend the iron gate, the Mongolian army was not allowed to enter, Chahan was the vanguard, cut off his guard, and the rest all fell.

古文：又从攻西夏，破肃州。
现代文：从太祖攻西夏，破肃州，大军进抵甘州。
English: From the time of the Great Ancestor, they attacked Western Xia, defeated Suzhou, and marched into Gansu.

古文：其副阿绰等三十六人合谋，杀曲也怯律父子，并杀使者，并力拒守。城破，帝欲尽坑之，察罕言百姓无辜，止罪三十六人。
现代文：守甘州的是察罕父亲曲也怯律，察罕亲笔致书父亲，劝他归降。守城副将阿绰等三十六人，合谋杀害曲也怯律，拼死守城。城破，太祖欲将城内军全部坑杀，因察罕劝说，只杀了三十六人。
English: It was Cahan's father, Qu, who guarded Ganzhou. He wrote to his father to persuade him to surrender. Thirty-six people, including the vice-commander of the city, Achao, conspired to kill Qu, but they were too cowardly to do so. They defended the city to the death. When the city was destroyed, the great-grandfather wanted to kill all the troops in the city, but because of Cahan's persuasion, he only killed thirty-six people.

古文：进攻灵州，夏人以十万众赴援，帝亲与战，大败之。
现代文：蒙军进攻灵州，西夏以十万大军援救，为太祖所败。
English: The Mongolian army attacked Lingshou, Western Xia came to the rescue with 100,000 troops, and was defeated by Taizu.

古文：北还清水答兰答八之地，赐马三百、珠衣、金带、鞍勒。皇子阔出、忽都秃伐宋，命察罕为斥候。
现代文：西夏国王坚守中兴，太祖遣察罕入城劝降。蒙军驻扎云盘山时，太祖驾崩，诸将擒杀夏主，欲屠杀中兴城内军民，察罕劝阻。太宗即位后，察罕又随太宗征河南。皇子阔出、忽都秃领兵伐宋，命察罕为斥候。
English: The king of Western Xia held fast to Zhongxing, and the great-grandfather sent Chahan into the city to persuade him to surrender. When the Mongolian army was stationed in Yunpan Mountain, the great-grandfather died, and the generals killed the lord of Xia and wanted to massacre the soldiers and civilians in the city of Zhongxing, and Chahan dissuaded them. After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Chahan again accompanied Emperor Taizong to conquer Henan. The prince, Kuo Zi, led the bald soldiers to attack Song, and Chahan was sent as a scout.

古文：又从亲王口温不花南伐，岁乙未，克枣阳及光化军。
现代文：太宗七年从亲王口温不花南伐中原，克枣阳及光化军。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the Southern Expedition of the Central Plains, the Battle of Zaoyang and the Gwanghwa Army were launched from the mouth of Prince Wen.

古文：未几，召口温不花赴行在，以全军付察罕。丁酉，复与口温不花进克光州。
现代文：口温不花被召回，全军交付察罕统领。九年又与口温不花进克光州。
English: He was recalled, and the entire army was handed over to the leader of Chahan. In nine years, he went to Gwangju with him.

古文：父阿波古，事诸王阿鲁忽，居西域。
现代文：十年授马步军都元帅，率诸军攻克天长县及滁、寿、泗等州。
English: In the tenth year, he was awarded the title of Marshal of the Horse Infantry Corps, and led the army to conquer Tianchang County and the provinces of Handan, Shou and Handan.

古文：至元十年，择贵族子备宿卫，召亦力撒合至阙下，以为速古儿赤，掌服御事，甚见亲幸，有大政时以访之，称之曰秀才而不名。
现代文：宪宗即位，命察罕以都元帅兼领尚书省事，赐汴梁、归德、河南、怀、孟、曹、濮、太原等地民户三千余以供其租税，赐草地一万四千五百余顷，民二万余户。宪宗五年卒，赠推忠开济翊运功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封河南王，谥 武宣 。亦力撒合，曲也怯祖之孙，察罕之侄孙。父亲名阿波古，居西域。至元十年，世祖召亦力撒合入宫，掌管皇后妃的衣服、车马等事，甚得世祖宠爱，遇有重大政事也征询他的意见，叫他秀才而不呼其名。
English: When Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne, he appointed Han Yidu as the Marshal of the Capital and the Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture, and granted more than 3,000 households in Qiliang, Quide, Henan, Huai, Meng, Cao, Handan, Taiyuan and other places to pay their taxes, and granted more than 14,500 hectares of grassland to more than 20,000 households. After Emperor Xianzong died in the fifth year, he bestowed the title of the King of Henan Province, and the title of the King of the Three Provinces, to King Wu Xuan. He was also the grandson of Emperor Xizang, and the nephew of Emperor

古文：召还，赐黄金百两、银五百两，以旌其直。
现代文：曾奉诏出使河西，还朝奏报诸王只必帖木儿用官太滥，受世祖嘉奖，升任河东提刑按察使。
English: He was once sent to Hexi by imperial edict, and also reported to the emperor that the kings of the world should not use officials too much. He was commended by the founder of the dynasty and promoted to the position of inspector in charge of the execution of capital punishment in Hedong.

古文：进南台中丞。
现代文：他在河东罢黜平阳路达鲁花赤泰不花。
English: He took Pingyang Road, Daluhua, and Chetai Road in Hedong.

古文：帝出内中宝刀赐之曰： 以镇外台。 时丞相阿合马之子忽辛为江浙行省平章政事，恃势贪秽，亦力撒合发其奸，得赃钞八十一万锭，奏而诛之。
现代文：召回朝升为南台中丞。丞相阿合马之子忽辛为江浙行省平章政事，恃势贪婪。亦力撒合揭发其不法行为，得赃钞八十一万锭，奏报朝廷，判以死刑。
English: The son of the chancellor Ahma, Qu Xin, was appointed to govern the province of Jiangsu and Zhejiang. He was greedy and power-hungry. He also worked hard to expose his illegal acts, and was fined 8.11 million baht, reported to the imperial court, and sentenced to death.

古文：并劾江淮释教总摄杨辇真加诸不法事，诸道竦动。
现代文：他还弹劾江淮释教总摄杨辇真加的许多不法事实，各道为之震动。
English: He also impeached Yang Bingzheng, the head of the Jianghuai Liberation Church, for many illegal facts, which shocked everyone.

古文：二十一年，改北京宣慰使。
现代文：至元二十一年，改任北京宣慰使。
English: In the 21st year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was reappointed as the Beijing Propaganda and Consolation Envoy.

古文：诸王乃颜镇辽东，亦力撒合察其有异志，必反，密请备之。
现代文：诸王乃颜镇守辽东，亦力撒合察觉他心怀叵测，日后必反，密奏朝廷注意防备。
English: The emperors were keen to keep Liaodong under their control, and they also made concerted efforts to realize that he was harboring ill-intentions, which would inevitably backfire in the future, and to secretly warn the imperial court to be on the alert.

古文：二十三年，罢宣慰司，立辽阳行省，以亦力撒合为参知政事。
现代文：二十三年，撤销宣慰司，设立辽阳行省，以亦力撒合为参知政事。
English: In 233, the Department of Propaganda and Consolation was revoked, Liaoyang Province was established, and Liaoyang Province was merged with Liaoyang Province to form Liaoyang Province.

古文：已而乃颜果反，帝自将征之。
现代文：不久，乃颜果然反叛，世祖调各路军马，御驾亲征。
English: Not long after, Naiyan rebelled, and Shizuo sent his own troops.

古文：时诸军皆会，亦力撒合掌运粮储，军供无乏。东方平，帝嘉其先见，且饷运有劳，加左丞。
现代文：亦力撒合负责运送军粮，供应不缺。辽阳平叛后，世祖嘉奖亦力撒合有先见之明，且饷运劳苦功高，加官左丞。
English: After the rebellion of Liao Yangping, the founder of the award also praised Lixiahe for his foresight and hard work, and promoted him to the rank of assistant secretary.

古文：二十九年，再赐玉带一。
现代文：二十七年，娶诸王算吉之女为妻，改任四川行省左丞。
English: In the 27th year, he married the daughter of Zhuwang Sankichi and was appointed as the Sichuan Provincial Secretary of the Left.

古文：元贞元年，成宗即位，入朝，卒。
现代文：元贞元年成宗即位，召亦力撒合入朝。是年卒。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, Chengzong ascended to the throne, and summoned Yilisa to join the imperial court. He was a graduate of the year.

古文：立智理威驰入告急，言辞恳切，继以泣涕。
现代文：立智理威，亦力撒合之弟，在东宫为裕宗等管理文书。
English: Li Zhi Li Wei, the younger brother of Li Zha He, was the administrative instrument for Yu Zong and others in the East Palace.

古文：大臣疑其不然，帝曰： 云南朕所经理，未可忽也。 
现代文：至元十八年，任立智理威为嘉定路达鲁花赤。他在任期间克勤克谨，达到朝廷对地方官吏提出的开辟田野、平均赋税、平息盗贼、消除诉讼等要求，使百姓安居乐业。
English: In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Ren Li Zhi Li Wei was appointed as the head of Jiading Road. During his tenure, he was diligent and cautious, and achieved the requirements of the imperial court for local officials, such as opening up fields, average taxation, quelling thieves, and eliminating litigation, so that the people could live and work in peace.

古文：乃推食以劳之。
现代文：考核他政绩的朝廷使臣，回去都称道立智理威的能干。
English: The imperial court envoys who evaluated his political achievements all praised his ability to stand up for wisdom and reason when they returned.

古文：又语立智理威曰： 南人生长乱离，岂不厌兵畏祸耶？
现代文：世祖对立智理威说： 南人长期受战乱之苦，岂有不厌恶战争怕遭祸殃的？
English: The ancestor said to the opposing wisdom and reason: Southerners have long suffered from the turmoil of war. Is there anyone who does not detest war and is afraid of suffering misfortune?

古文：御之乖方，保之不以其道，故为乱耳。其归以朕意告诸将，叛则讨之，服则舍之，毋多杀以伤生意，则人必定矣。 
现代文：如果管理不好，百姓就会作乱。你回去将朕的这番意思告诉诸将，出现叛乱则进行讨伐，平服后就放宽些，不要多杀人，这样则人心安定。 
English: If the administration is not good, the people will riot. You should go back and tell the generals what I meant. If there is a riot, they will carry out a crusade. After the rebellion is quelled, they should relax a little and not kill more people. This will keep people's minds stable.

古文：立智理威至蜀，宣布上旨。
现代文：立智理威回蜀，宣布世祖的这项圣旨。
English: He returned to Shu with wisdom and authority, proclaiming this sacred will of the ancestors.

古文：俄召为泉府卿，后迁刑部尚书。
现代文：不久，召立智理威回朝任泉府卿，后升迁为刑部尚书。
English: Soon after, Zhiliwei was summoned back to the imperial court to serve as Quanfuqing, and was later promoted to Shangshu of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：有小吏诬告漕臣刘献盗仓粟，宰相桑哥方事聚敛，众阿其意，锻炼枉服。立智理威曰： 刑部天下持平，今辇毂之下，漕臣以冤死，何以正四方乎？ 
现代文：宰相桑哥极力搜括民财，下面的人对他阿谀逢迎。有一小吏诬告漕臣刘献盗官仓粮食，被屈打成招。立智理威说： 刑部执法公正，今京城之内竟有漕臣被冤死，像这样何以令全国各地公正审理案件？ 
English: Prime Minister Sango tried his best to collect the people's money, and the people below applauded him. A petty official falsely accused the warrior Liu of stealing grain from the official storehouse, and was beaten into submission. Lichiri Wei said: The criminal justice department enforces justice, and now there is a warrior in Beijing who was unjustly killed. How can this make the whole country judge cases fairly?

古文：即以实闻。以是忤丞相，出为江东道宣慰使。
现代文：将此情形奏陈于皇帝，因此得罪了丞相而出为江东道宣慰使。
English: He reported this situation to the emperor, thus offending the prime minister, and went out to comfort Jiang Zemin.

古文：在官务兴学，诸生有俊秀者，拔而用之。为政严明，豪民猾吏，缩手不敢犯，然亦无所刑戮而治。
现代文：任宣慰期间，兴办学校，选择任用优秀学生做官，为政严明，豪绅奸吏不敢放肆，但他不是靠行刑来治理百姓。
English: During his tenure of Xuancheng, he established a school, chose to appoint outstanding students as officials, was strict in politics, and did not dare to be reckless, but he did not rely on executions to govern the people.

古文：元贞二年，迁四川行省参知政事。
现代文：元贞二年，调任四川行省参知政事。
English: In the second year of Yuan Zhen, he was transferred to the post of Sichuan Provincial Councillor.

古文：立智理威曰： 驿骑所以传命令，事非有急，且不得驰，况猎乎！ 
现代文：大德三年，由四川行省参知政事调任湖南宣慰使，接着任荆湖宣慰使。荆湖地区弊政多端，以公田为甚。该地区本无公田，却强迫百姓出公田租，且水旱灾害亦不减免。立智理威将从民间调查的实情上报朝廷，从而减轻人民负担。
English: In the third year of the Taide era, he was transferred from Sichuan to the province of Sanchi to serve as the Hunan Consolation Envoy, and then as the Jinghu Consolation Envoy. The Jinghu area suffered from many maladministration, especially in public fields. The area did not have public fields, but forced the people to rent public fields, and there was no relief from droughts. Lichirivi would report the facts of the civil investigation to the imperial court, thereby reducing the burden on the people.

古文：王惮，为之止猎。
现代文：七年，再调任四川行省参知政事。八年，晋升为该行省左丞。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the post of Sichuan Provincial Councillor, and eight years later, he was promoted to the post of Sichuan Provincial Secretary.

古文：蜀人饥，亲劝分以赈之，所活甚众。有死无葬者，则以己钱买地使葬。且修宽政以抚其民，部内以治。
现代文：蜀地发生饥荒，他出官粮赈济；死者无力安葬，他拿出自己的钱买地安葬，宽政爱民，四川大治。
English: When a famine occurred in Shu, he sent official grain to help; when the dead were too weak to be buried, he took out his own money to buy land for burial.

古文：十年，入朝，帝以白金对衣锡之，加资德大夫、湖广行省左丞。
现代文：十年，奉诏入朝，成宗大加奖赏，进爵资德大夫，任命为湖广行省右丞。
English: Ten years later, Chengzong entered the imperial court with an imperial edict, received a large reward, was promoted to the peerage as a German doctor, and was appointed as the provincial right-hand man of Guangxi Province.

古文：湖广岁织币上供，以省臣领工作，遣使买丝他郡，多为奸利，工官又为刻剥，故匠户日贫，造币益恶。
现代文：湖广每年要上供丝帛绢绸，行省派去收买生丝原料的人，多损公肥私，工官剥削工匠，匠户日贫，丝织品质量低劣。
English: Hukang had to provide silk cocoons every year, and the people sent by the provincial government to buy raw silk raw materials were more damaging to the public and private, the officials exploited the craftsmen, the craftsmen were impoverished, and the quality of silk fabrics was inferior.

古文：立智理威不遣使，令工视贾人有藏丝者择买之，工不告病，岁省费数万贯。
现代文：立智理威到任后，不派专人收买生丝，而是令工匠到丝商那里去买，这样每年可省费数万贯。
English: After Li Zhi Li Wei took office, he did not send a special person to buy raw silk, but ordered craftsmen to buy it from silk merchants, thus saving tens of thousands of yuan every year.

古文：他郡推用之，皆便。
现代文：这一做法推行于别郡，都称便利。
English: It is convenient to implement this approach in Beixian County.

古文：至大三年，以疾卒于官，年五十七。
现代文：至大三年，因病去世，享年五十七岁。
English: At the age of three, he died of illness at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：初赠资德大夫、陕西行省右丞、上护军、宁夏郡公，谥忠惠。
现代文：初赠资德大夫、陕西行省右丞、上护军、宁夏郡公，谥 忠惠 。
English: The first donation was made by Dr. De, the governor of Shaanxi Province, Shanggongjun, and the governor of Ningxia County, Zou Zhonghui.

古文：再赠推诚亮节崇德赞治功臣、荣禄大夫、中书平章政事、柱国、秦国公。
现代文：后又赠推诚亮节崇德赞治功臣、荣禄大夫、中书平章政事、柱国、秦国公。
English: Later, he also gave the awards of "Chongzhengliang Festival" to "Chongde Zanzhi Gongshen," "Ronglu Dafu," "Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji," "Zhu Guo" and "Qin Guo Gong."

古文：子二人：长买讷，翰林学士承旨；次韩嘉讷，御史大夫。
现代文：子二人，长子买讷，为翰林学士承旨；次子韩嘉纳，为御史大夫。
English: They had two children, the eldest son, Mane, became a scholar of Hanlin; the second son, Han Jiana, became a doctor of history.

古文：札八儿火者，赛夷人。
现代文：札八儿火者，赛夷人。
English: Fudanpachi is a fireman, Sai is a barbarian.

古文：赛夷，西域部之族长也，因以为氏。火者，其官称也。
现代文：赛夷本西域一部族之酋长，后来就以赛夷为该部族之名。 火者 为官名。
English: Saii, the chief of a tribe in the western part of Honshu, later became the name of the tribe.

古文：札八儿长身美髯，方瞳广颡，雄勇善骑射。
现代文：札八儿身长，一把漂亮胡须，方瞳宽额，骁勇善骑射，太祖初见就觉得他非同常人。
English: With his tall stature, beautiful beard, wide-set square eyes, bravery, and skill in riding and shooting, the great-grandfather felt that he was not an ordinary person at first sight.

古文：汪罕既灭，西域诸部次第亦平。乃遣札八儿使金，金不为礼而归。
现代文：太祖在平定蒙古、西域诸部之后，遣札八儿出使金朝，金朝不以礼相待。
English: After the great-grandfather had subdued Mongolia and the western regions, he sent the eight sons of Satsuma on a mission to the Kim dynasty, which did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：金人恃居庸之塞，冶铁锢关门，布铁蒺藜百余里，守以精锐。札八儿既还报，太祖遂进师，距关百里不能前，召札八儿问计。
现代文：札八儿回来向太祖报告金人对蒙古使臣之不礼貌及其居庸关守备情形。太祖率师南伐，行至距居庸关百里之地不能进，召札八儿问计。
English: Zhabaer returned to report to the great-grandfather that the Jin people were not polite to the Mongol envoys and that they were guarding Juyongguan. The great-grandfather led the southern expedition, and he could not enter the land that was a hundred miles away from Juyongguan, so he called Zhabaer to ask about the plan.

古文：对曰： 从此而北，黑树林中有间道，骑行可一人，臣向尝过之。
现代文：札八儿说 ：从此向北有一条小路，臣曾走过，大军若悄悄从此道而行，一晚即可通过关口。 
English: Zabara said, "From here, there is a small road to the north. My father-in-law once walked along it. If a large army were to travel quietly along this road, they could pass through the pass in one night.

古文：比惊起，已莫能支吾，锋镝所及，流血被野。关既破，中都大震。已而金人迁汴。
现代文：太祖令札八儿率轻骑为前导，日暮进入山谷，黎明就到平地，迅速进军南口，若自天而降，金军从睡梦中惊起时，已不能抵御了。居庸关破，中都大震，金朝迁都汴梁。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Zhabaer to lead the light cavalry as a forerunner. At dusk, they entered the valley, and at dawn they reached the plain, and quickly marched to the south entrance. If they fell from the sky, when the Golden Army woke up from their sleep, they would not be able to resist. Juyongguan was broken, there was a great earthquake in Zhongdu, and the Golden Dynasty moved the capital to Jianliang.

古文：太祖览中都山川形势，顾谓左右近臣曰： 朕之所以至此者，札八儿之功为多。 
现代文：太祖察看中都的山川形势，高兴地对左右近臣说 ：朕之所以能到这好地方，多亏了札八儿。 
English: The great-grandfather observed the situation of the mountains and rivers in the central capital, and happily said to his left and right vassals, "I was able to get to this good place thanks to the eight sons of Satsuma.

古文：授黄河以北铁门以南天下都达鲁花赤，赐养老一百户，并四王府为居第。札八儿每战，被重甲舞槊，陷阵驰突如飞。
现代文：又对札八儿说： 你引弓射箭，箭射到什么地方，这一带都是你的。 太祖北归，留札八儿与诸将守中都，并授他为黄河以北、铁门以南地方的都达鲁花赤。札八儿每次战斗都是身穿重甲，骑着骆驼，手执长槊，冲锋陷阵，无人敢挡。
English: He also said to Zabar: "You can lead a bow and shoot arrows, and wherever the arrows are shot, this area is yours. The great-grandfather returned to the north, leaving Zabar with the generals to guard the central capital, and awarded him the Dalu flower red color for the areas north of the Yellow River and south of the Iron Gate. In every battle, Zabar was wearing heavy armor, riding a camel, holding a long scepter, charging into battle, and no one dared to stop him.

古文：他日偶坐，问札八儿曰： 公欲极一身贵显乎？欲子孙蕃衍乎？ 
现代文：道士丘真人者，隐居于昆仑山中。太祖闻其名，命札八儿去聘请。丘真人问札八儿 ：公是想自己一身荣华富贵，还是想子孙相继不绝？ 
English: The Taoist priest, Yuchujin, lived in seclusion in the Kunlun Mountains. The Great Ancestor heard of his name and ordered Fata Bakhir to hire him. Yuchujin asked Fata Bakhir: "Does the emperor want to be rich and glorious all by himself, or does he want to have an endless line of descendants?"

古文：札八儿曰： 百岁之后，富贵何在？子孙无恙，以承宗祀足矣。 
现代文：札八儿说： 百岁之后，还有什么富贵可言，但愿子孙无恙，传宗接代就足矣。 
English: Zhabaer said, "After one hundred years old, there is nothing left to say about wealth. I hope my children and grandchildren will be rich, and it will be enough to pass down the family line.

古文：丘曰： 闻命矣。 后果如所愿云，卒年一百一十八。
现代文：后来果如所愿。札八儿长寿一百一十八岁。
English: Later, the wish came true. Zhabaer lived to be 118 years old.

古文：赠推忠佐命功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封凉国公，谥武定。
现代文：赠推忠佐命功臣、太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封凉国公，谥 武定 。
English: He bestowed the titles of "loyal vassal," "heroic vassal," "great vassal," "chief vassal," "chief vassal," "chief vassal," "chief vassal," "chief vassal," "chief vassal," "chief vassal," "chief vassal," and "chief vassal."

古文：二子：阿里罕，明里察。
现代文：子二人：阿里罕、明里察。
English: Two children: Arikhan and Minricha.

古文：厥后太祖即位，命其子孙各因其名为氏，号五投下。
现代文：术赤台，姓兀鲁兀台氏。其曾祖为剌真八都，势力强大，称雄于诸部。
English: His great-grandfather was Shizhen Hattou, a powerful man who held sway over many provinces.

古文：朔方既定，举六十五人为千夫长，兀鲁兀台之孙曰术赤台，其一也。
现代文：祖父即兀鲁兀台。
English: His grandfather was Gong Lu Xingtai.

古文：术赤台有胆略，善骑射，勇冠一时。
现代文：术赤台有胆略，善骑射，勇冠当时。
English: He was a daredevil, a good rider and a good archer, and he was the champion at that time.

古文：初，怯列王可汗之子鲜昆有智勇，诸部畏之。
现代文：怯列王可汗之子鲜昆有智谋，诸部族都惧怕他。
English: Shankun, the son of the Cowardly King Khan, is a cunning strategist, feared by all the tribes.

古文：近臣忽因答儿等驰告太祖曰： 事急矣，群下忠勇无逾术赤台者，宜急遣之拒敌。 从之。术赤台承命，单骑陷阵，射杀鲜昆，降其大将失列门等，遂并有怯列之地。
现代文：怯列亦等率众侵犯太祖领地，战于哈剌哈真沙陀之地，太祖军不利，近臣忽因答儿急请太祖派术赤台出战御敌。术赤台单骑陷阵，射杀鲜昆，大将失列门等归降，于是并吞了怯列之地。
English: Qiu Lai also led the crowd to invade the ancestral territory and fought in the land of Haruhajinshado. The ancestral army was unfavorable, and his close vassals suddenly asked the ancestor to send Shih Chia-tai to fight against the enemy. Shih Chia-tai rode alone and killed Xian Kun. The general lost the gate and surrendered, so he annexed the land of Qiu Lai.

古文：乃蛮、灭儿乞台合兵来侵，诸部有阴附之者，不虞太祖领兵卒至，诸部溃去，乘胜败之，术赤台俘其主紥哈坚普及二女以归，诸部悉平，与紥哈坚普盟而归之。
现代文：乃蛮、灭儿乞台合兵来侵，诸部族有暗中与他们勾结者，却不料太祖领兵忽至，诸部溃散，太祖军乘胜攻击，术赤台俘乃蛮酋长札哈坚普及其二女，平定诸部，太祖军与札哈坚普盟誓而归。
English: The Naomans, the Zhaer, and the Tai jointly invaded, and some tribes secretly collaborated with them. Unexpectedly, however, the Great Ancestor's army suddenly arrived, and the various tribes scattered. The Great Ancestor's army attacked in triumph. The Naomans' chieftain, Zha Jianpu, and his two daughters were captured by the Jiu Chia-Tai, and the various tribes were subdued. The Great Ancestor's army and Zha Jianpu returned with an oath.

古文：未几，乃蛮复叛，术赤台以计袭紥哈坚普，杀之，遂平其国。
现代文：不久，乃蛮又叛，术赤台用计杀死札哈坚普，平定乃蛮。术赤台随太祖征讨怯列亦，从罕哈起程，经班真海子，万里长途，历经艰险。
English: Not long after, Naaman rebelled again, and Shukdai used a stratagem to kill Zaha Khenpo and subdue Naaman. Shukdai also followed the line of emperors, starting from Hanha, passing through Ban Zhenhai, thousands of miles long, and going through hardships.

古文：自怯台而下凡九人，皆封郡王云。
现代文：术赤台在每次战斗中，必为先锋。
English: In every battle, Shushakidai must be the vanguard.

古文：镇海镇海，怯烈台氏。
现代文：太祖曾称赞他说： 朕之望你，如同高山前之日影。 
English: The great-grandfather once praised him, saying, "I look up to you like the shadow of the sun in front of a high mountain.

古文：初以军伍长从太祖同饮班朱尼河水。
现代文：令世代统领兀鲁兀之四千人。子怯台，武艺过人。自太宗到世祖四朝，怯台都竭力效劳，因功封为德清郡王，赐金印。
English: There are four thousand people in the generation of the general leader Gong Lucheng. His son, Zhudaidai, is an outstanding martial artist. From Emperor Taizong to the four dynasties of the ancestors, Zhudaidai worked hard, and was awarded a gold seal for his achievement as the king of Deqing County.

古文：与诸王百官大会兀难河，上太祖尊号曰成吉思皇帝。
现代文：镇海，姓怯列台氏。最初为太祖的军伍长，在与诸王百官大会于兀难河时，镇海请上尊号，称太祖为成吉思汗帝。
English: Zhenhai, surnamed Zhuleidai. He was originally the commander of the great-grandfather's army. When he was at the general assembly of the kings and officials at the Fenan River, Zhenhai asked for the honorific title and called the great-grandfather Genghis Khan.

古文：岁庚午，从太祖征乃蛮有功，赐良马一。
现代文：太祖五年，镇海因从征乃蛮有功，赐良马一匹。
English: In the fifth year of his grandfather's reign, Zhenhai was awarded a fine horse for his meritorious service.

古文：壬申，从攻曲出诸国，赐珍珠旗，佩金虎符，为阇里必。从攻塔塔儿、钦察、唐兀、只温、契丹、女直、河西诸国，所俘生口万计，悉以上献，赐御用服器白金等物。
现代文：太祖七年，从攻曲出、塔塔儿、钦察、唐兀、只温、契丹、女直、河西诸国，俘人口以万计。
English: In the seventh year of Taizu's reign, the states of Tatar, Qincha, Tanggu, Tawen, Khitan, Mianzhong, and Hexi emerged from Taichu, with a captive population of tens of thousands.

古文：命屯田于阿鲁欢，立镇海城戍守之。
现代文：又奉命屯田于阿鲁欢，在那里设立镇海城以戍守。
English: He was also ordered to establish a garrison in Aruhana, where he set up a naval town to defend it.

古文：壬申，从太祖谋定汉地，师次隆兴，与金将忽察虎战，矢中臆间，裹疮而出者复数四，军声为之大振。
现代文：同年又随太祖进攻金国，在隆兴与金将忽察虎大战。镇海四次中箭，仍带伤继续战斗，全军声威大振。
English: In the same year, he followed his great-grandfather to attack Jin, and in Longxing, he fought against Jin's general, Huucha the Tiger. Zhenhai was hit by arrows four times, but he continued to fight with injuries, and the whole army was very proud.

古文：既破燕，太祖命于城中环射四箭，凡箭所至圆池邸舍之处，悉以赐之。
现代文：攻下燕京之后，太祖命他在城中向四面射箭，凡箭所落处以内地区的园池邸舍，悉赐给他。
English: After capturing Yanjing, the great-grandfather ordered him to shoot arrows in the city in all directions. Wherever the arrows landed, he was given a garden and pool house in the inner area.

古文：寻拜中书右丞相。
现代文：不久拜为中书右丞相。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of Chushujo-jo-sho (Minister of Central Affairs).

古文：己丑，太宗即位，扈从至西京，攻河中、河南、钧州。
现代文：太宗即位的那年，镇海护驾至西京，进攻河中、河南、钧州。
English: In the year of Emperor Taizong's accession to the throne, Zhenhai escorted him to West Beijing and attacked central Hebei, Henan and Ganzhou.

古文：癸巳，攻蔡州。以功赐恩州一千户。
现代文：太宗五年，攻克蔡州有功，赐恩州一千户。
English: In the fifth year of Taizong's reign, he made a great achievement in conquering Caizhou and granted a thousand households in Caizhou.

古文：以病乞谢事，特授保定路达鲁花赤，赐钱一万贯，归老于家，卒年八十一。肖乃台肖乃台，秃伯怯烈氏，以忠勇侍太祖。
现代文：在此以前，太祖收天下童男童女及工匠在弘州置局，后又得西域丝织工匠三百余户及汴京毛织工匠三百户，均隶属于弘州，由镇海掌管其事。定宗即位，因镇海是先朝老臣，拜为中书右丞相。年八十四岁而卒。肖乃台，姓秃伯怯烈氏，为人忠勇，侍卫太祖。
English: Prior to this, the great-great-grandfather received the world's sons and daughters and craftsmen to set up a bureau in Hongzhou, and later obtained more than three hundred silk weaving craftsmen in the western region and three hundred woolen weaving craftsmen in Beijing, all of which were subordinated to Hongzhou and managed by Zhenhai. Ding Zong ascended the throne, because Zhenhai was a senior courtier of the first dynasty and was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Central Government. He died at the age of eighty-four. Xiao Nai Tai, surnamed Zhao Bo Qiu Lie, was a loyal and brave man and served the great-grandfather.

古文：时木华黎、博儿术既立为左右万户，帝从容谓肖乃台曰： 汝愿属谁麾下为我宣力？ 对曰： 愿属木华黎。 即日命佩金符，领蒙古军，从太师国王为先锋。
现代文：木华黎、博尔术分别为左右万户，问肖乃台愿归属哪个万户，肖乃台表示愿属木华黎，于是立即命佩金符，领蒙古军，从太师国王木华黎征战，常为先锋。
English: Muhuarai and Bolshu were about 10,000 households, respectively, and asked Xiao Naitai which 10,000 households he would like to belong to. Xiao Naitai said he would like to belong to Muhuarai, so he immediately ordered Peijin Fu, the leader of the Mongolian army, to fight from King Muhuarai, often as the vanguard.

古文：兵至河北，史天泽之父率老幼数千诣军门降。
现代文：蒙古大军至河北，史天泽之父率老幼投降。
English: The Mongolian army reached Hebei, and Shi Tianze's father led the old and young to surrender.

古文：国王承制，授天泽兄天倪河北西路都元帅，领真定。
现代文：木华黎按制授天泽兄天倪为河北西路都元帅，领辖真定。
English: Tian Ze's brother Tian Ni is the marshal of the west road of Hebei Province, and the jurisdiction is Zhending.

古文：会日暮，阻水为营。
现代文：定宗皇后元年，真定副帅武仙乘天泽送母回白靅，举兵反叛，杀史天倪。
English: In the first year of Empress Jojong's reign, Jojong's second-in-command Wu Xian took Tian Ze to send his mother back to Baekje, raised an army to rebel, and killed Shi Tian Ni.

古文：肖乃台料其气索，必宵遁，乘胜复进击，大败之，擒铁枪。
现代文：木华黎命肖乃台率精兵三千，与天泽合兵进围中山。仙遣其将葛铁枪来援，肖乃台撤中山之围迎战葛铁枪于新乐，大败之，乘胜追击，擒获铁枪。
English: Mu Huali ordered Shoneitai to lead 3,000 of his best soldiers to encircle Zhongshan with the help of Tianze. Shoneitai withdrew from the encirclement of Zhongshan to fight against Ge Tiegun in Xinle, but was soundly defeated. He chased after the victory and captured Ge Tiegun.

古文：中山守将亦宵遁，遂克中山，取无极，拔赵州。仙弃真定，奔西山抱犊寨。
现代文：中山守将亦弃城而逃。蒙军攻取无极，占据赵州，武仙弃真定，奔西山抱犊寨。
English: Zhongshan's governor also abandoned the city and fled. The Mongolian army conquered everywhere, occupied Zhaozhou, the Wuxian abandoned Zhending, and ran to the West Mountain to hold Bozhai.

古文：肖乃台与天泽入城，抚定其民。未几，仙潜结水军为内应，夜开南门纳仙，复据其城。
现代文：蒙军进驻真定后不久，武仙又暗中勾结水军为内应，夜开南门，使武仙再度占据真定。
English: Shortly after the Mongolian army entered Zhending, Wuxian secretly colluded with the navy for internal support and opened the south gate at night, so that Wuxian once again occupied Zhending.

古文：肖乃台曰： 金氏慕国威信，傒我来苏，此民为贼所驱胁，有何罪焉？若不胜一朝之忿，非惟自屈其力，且坚他城不降之心。 
现代文：肖乃台仓猝率步兵七十人退奔藁城。天刚亮，肖乃台的部属都来会集于藁城，兵威复振，再度攻克真定，武仙又弃城而逃。
English: At first light, the subordinates of Xiao Naitai gathered in Shicheng, regained their military might, and once again conquered Zhending, while Wu Xian abandoned the city and fled.

古文：乃皆释之。初，仙之叛也，其弟质国王军中，闻之遁去。肖乃台遣弟撒寒追及于紫荆关，斩之，俘其妻子而还。
现代文：将士们恼怒真定人民反复无常，把万余人赶出城要进行屠杀，肖乃台制止。武仙之弟原在蒙军中做人质，闻武仙反叛，也逃走了。肖乃台遣弟撒寒追杀于紫荆关，俘其妻子而还。
English: Enraged by the capriciousness of the Zhending people, the generals drove more than ten thousand people out of the city to carry out massacres, but were stopped by Xiao Naitai. The younger brother of Wuxian, who had been a hostage in the Mongolian army, heard of Wuxian's rebellion and also fled. Xiao Naitai sent his younger brother Sakhan to chase and kill him in Zhiwu Pass, but he captured his wife and returned.

古文：乃整兵前进，下太原，略太行，拔长胜寨，斩仙守将卢治中，围仙于双门寨，仙遁去。
现代文：进而整兵前进，攻下太原，拔太行山之长胜寨，斩武仙守将卢治中，将武仙围困于双门寨，武仙仓惶逃遁。
English: Then, the whole army advanced, captured Taiyuan, pulled out Changshengzhai of Taihang Mountain, defeated Wuxian, besieged Wuxian in Shuangmenzhai, and Wuxian fled in panic.

古文：引兵出太行山东，遇宋将彭义斌，与战，败之，追至火炎山，破其营，擒义斌斩之。
现代文：肖乃台引兵出太行山东，遇宋将彭义斌，击败宋军，追至火炎山，破其营，擒斩义斌。
English: Xiao Naitai led his troops out of Taihang to Shandong, met Song general Peng Yibin, defeated the Song army, chased him to Flaming Mountain, broke his camp, and beheaded Yibin.

古文：立刚走涟水，金守将弃城遁，他将邀击败之，遂定东平。
现代文：蒙军至大名，守将苏元帅开门投降。引兵攻东平，败安抚王立刚于阳谷，围东平，立刚退走涟水，金守将弃城而逃，夺取东平。
English: The Mongolian army reached Daimyo, and the garrison opened the door to surrender to the Soviet marshal. The troops were led to attack Dongping, defeated and pacified Wang Ligang in Yanggu, surrounded Dongping, Ligang retreated to Surabaya, and Kim Shou abandoned the city and fled, capturing Dongping.

古文：又与蒙古不花徇河北、怀、孟、卫，从国王定益都。
现代文：肖乃台又与蒙古不花进攻河北、怀州、孟州、卫州，随木华黎平定益都。
English: In addition, Shoneitai and Mongolia attacked Hebei, Huizhou, Mengzhou, and Weizhou at the same time.

古文：二十四年，移镇潮州，值贼张文惠、罗半天等啸聚江西，行枢密院檄讨之，领兵破贼寨，斩贼首罗大老、李尊长等，获其伪银印三。
现代文：太宗四年，肖乃台领兵渡黄河，向汴京进军，至睢州，遇金将完颜庆山奴，战败金军，追斩庆山奴。金朝皇帝迁往蔡州，诸军重重包围。肖乃台、史天泽攻城北，连日血战。灭亡金朝，肖乃台功多，赐东平户三百。
English: In the fourth year of Taizong, Xiao Naotai led an army across the Yellow River, marched to Beijing, and arrived in Zhangzhou. When he encountered Jin, he defeated Qingshan Niu, defeated the Jin army, and chased Qingshan Niu. The Emperor of the Jin Dynasty moved to Caizhou, and the army was heavily surrounded. Xiao Naotai and Shi Tianze attacked the north of the city, and fought a bloody battle for several days. For the destruction of the Jin Dynasty, Xiao Naotai did a lot of work, and awarded 300 Dongping households.

古文：卒于军。
现代文：以老病卒于东平。
English: He died of an old disease in Dongping.

古文：吾也而吾也而，珊竹氏，状貌甚伟，腰大十围。父曰图鲁华察，以武勇称。
现代文：吾也而，姓珊竹氏，身材魁伟。其父图鲁华察，以武勇著称。
English: I am also, surname Sanchiku, of great stature. His father, Tulu Huacha, was famous for his bravery.

古文：太祖五年，吾也而与折不那演克金东京，有功。
现代文：太祖五年，吾也而与折不那演攻下金朝东京有功。
English: In the fifth year of my grandfather's reign, I also played a role in the invasion of the Kim dynasty in Tokyo.

古文：九年，从太师木华黎取北京，领兵为先驱，下之。
现代文：九年，随太师木华黎攻取北京，并为先锋。
English: In the ninth year, he followed the great master Mu Huali to conquer Beijing, and was a pioneer.

古文：留抚其人，绥怀有方，自京以南，相继来降。时金将挞鲁，以惠州渔河口为隘，有众数万，图复北疆。
现代文：攻克北京后，授金紫光禄大夫、北京总管都元帅。金将挞鲁据有惠州险要之处渔河口，拥众数万，企图收复北部疆土。
English: After conquering Beijing, he awarded Jin the title of Doctor of Ziguanglu and Marshal of the Beijing General Administration. According to Huizhou, the mouth of the Yugu estuary, which is a critical place for Jin, he gathered tens of thousands of people in an attempt to recover the northern territory.

古文：吾也而以锐兵千人击摧其锋，杀数千人，获其旗鼓羊马，斩挞鲁于军中。有赵守玉者，据兴州，吾也而讨平之。
现代文：吾也而以精锐军千人袭击，杀数千人，获旗鼓羊马，斩挞鲁于军中。又有赵守玉者，占据兴州，吾也而讨平之。
English: I also attacked with a thousand elite soldiers, killed thousands of people, won the banner and the drum, and defeated the army. There was also Zhao Shouyuan who occupied Xingzhou, and I also leveled it.

古文：十五年，从征山东，大战东平，驰赴陷阵，生挟二将以还。
现代文：十一年平锦州叛将张致。十二年，兴州监军重儿叛，吾也而领兵征讨，破贼军。
English: In the 11th year of the Heian period, Zhang Zizhi, the traitor general of Jinzhou, was executed. In the 12th year of the Heian period, the supervisor of the Xingzhou army was a traitor, and I also led the army to fight and defeat the rebel army.

古文：木华黎壮之，以功上闻。
现代文：十五年从木华黎征山东，与金兵大战于东平。
English: Fifteen years of conquering Shandong from Mu Huali, and the great war with Jin soldiers in Dongping.

古文：十六年，从征延安，矢中右股，力战破之。俄又取葭、鄜二州，擒金枭将张铁枪以献。
现代文：吾也而冲锋陷阵，生擒敌将二人，木华黎大加奖赏，上报其功。十六年，从木华黎征延安，取葭、鹿二州，擒金朝勇将张铁枪。
English: I, too, charged into the fray and killed two enemy generals. Mu Huali received a large reward and reported his exploits. In the 16th year, Yan'an was conquered from Mu Huali, Shishu and Lu were taken, and Jin Chaoyong was shot with an iron gun.

古文：十七年，克凤翔及所属州郡。
现代文：十七年攻克凤翔所属州郡。
English: It has been seventeen years since Fengxiang conquered its county.

古文：十八年，从帝亲征河西，明年下之。
现代文：十八年，从太祖征河西，第二年攻克。
English: In the 18th year, he conquered Hexi from Taizu, and conquered it the following year.

古文：诏赐吾也而马五匹、甲一事。二十年，从木华黎围益都。越二年，下三十余城。
现代文：二十年随木华黎围益都，又过二年在山东连克三十余城。
English: Twenty years later, the capital of Yiwu was surrounded by Huali, and two years later, more than 30 cities in Lianke, Shandong.

古文：太宗元年，入觐。命与撒里答火儿赤征辽东，下之。
现代文：太宗元年，吾也而回京朝见皇帝，帝命他与撒里答火儿赤征辽东。
English: In the first year of Taizong, I also returned to Beijing to see the emperor, and the emperor ordered him and Sarri to answer the call of the Red Expedition to Liaodong.

古文：三年，又与撒里答征高丽，下受、开、龙、宣、泰、葭等十余城。
现代文：三年，又与撒里答征高丽，攻克安北、开、龙、宣、泰、嘉等十余城。
English: Three years later, he and Sarri answered the call to conquer Korea, conquering more than ten cities including Anbei, Kai, Long, Xuan, Tai, and Jia.

古文：高丽惧，请和。吾也而谕之曰： 若能以子为质，当休兵。 
现代文：高丽请和，吾也而谕高丽王说： 若能送其子来为人质，我们便罢兵。 
English: Goryeo sued for peace, and I also sent word to the king of Goryeo, saying, "If we can send his son as a hostage, we will give up the war."

古文：十三年，遣其子綧从吾也而来朝。
现代文：十三年，高丽王遣其子纟享随吾也而来朝。
English: In the thirteenth year, the King of Goryeo sent his son, Seongjo, to accompany me to Korea.

古文：帝大悦，厚加赐予，俾充北京东京广宁盖州平州泰州开元府七路征行兵马都元帅，佩虎符。
现代文：太祖大喜，任吾也而为北京、东京、广宁、盖州、平州、泰州、开元府七路征行兵马都元帅，佩虎符。
English: Great-great-grandfather was overjoyed and appointed me to be the marshal of the seven routes of Beijing, Tokyo, Guangning, Gaizhou, Pingzhou, Taizhou and Kaiyuan, wearing a tiger emblem.

古文：年九十六。子四人，霅礼最有名，太宗时授北京等路达鲁花赤。
现代文：不久因病归。七年，又来朝，宪宗怜其年老，对他说： 自太祖时效劳至今的，只有卿无过失。 
English: He soon returned home due to illness. In the seventh year, he came to the Imperial Court again, and Emperor Genso took pity on his old age and said to him, "From the time I served my grandfather until now, only you have no faults.

古文：至元七年，改授昭勇大将军、河间路总管。曷思麦里曷思麦里，西域谷则斡儿朵人。
现代文：赏赐甚厚，授其子阿海为都元帅。八年九月初六卒，享年九十六岁。曷思麦里，西域谷则斡儿朵人。
English: He was very richly rewarded, and his son, Ahai, was awarded the title of Marshal of the Capital. He died at the age of ninety-six at the beginning of September in the year eight. He was born in Shishimeli, and grew up in the West Valley.

古文：初为西辽阔儿罕近侍，后为谷则斡儿朵所属可散八思哈长官。
现代文：初为西辽阔儿罕的侍臣，后为谷则斡儿朵所属可散八思哈长官。
English: At first, he was a courtier of the west vastness, and later he was the chief of Kosanbashiha, which belonged to Gu Zerao.

古文：帝亲征至薛迷思干，与其主紥剌丁合战于月恋揭赤之地，败之。
现代文：太祖西征，曷思麦里率可散等城酋长降太祖。太祖命他随大将哲伯攻乃蛮，并为先锋。战胜乃蛮，斩其主曲出律。
English: The great-grandfather led the western expedition, and the city chieftains such as Juximeli led the dispersal. The great-grandfather ordered him to attack Naomaru with the general Zhe Bo, and he was the vanguard. He defeated Naomaru, and his main song was out of tune.

古文：追袭紥剌丁等于阿剌黑城，战于秃马温山，又败之。追至憨颜城西寨，又败之。紥剌丁逃入于海。
现代文：可失哈儿、押儿帝、斡端诸城，皆望风归附。曷思麦里随太祖征你沙不儿城，连续在月恋揭赤、阿剌黑城、秃马温山、憨颜城西寨击败你沙不儿城国王扎剌丁，把他赶入海中。
English: However, the cities that were lost, pushed away, and mediated by the emperors all surrendered to the wind. Shumaili followed his great-grandfather to conquer the city of Saber, and successively defeated the king of the city of Saber, Zhaoping, and drove him into the sea in the city of moonlight, the city of black, the city of bald horse, the city of Wenshan, and the city of Xizhai.

古文：曷思麦里收其珍宝以还。
现代文：曷思麦里取其珍宝而还。
English: The hazelnut took its treasure and gave it back.

古文：取玉儿谷、德痕两城。
现代文：以后又攻克玉儿谷、德痕及憨颜等城。
English: Later, they conquered the cities of Yule Valley, De Yan and Yan Yan.

古文：又招降黑林城，进击斡罗思于铁儿山，克之，获其国主密只思腊，哲伯命曷思麦里献诸术赤太子，诛之。
现代文：太祖命哲伯讨钦察，曷思麦里奉命招降了曲儿忒、失儿湾沙等城，又征服了谷儿只部及阿速部。其后又招降了黑林城，在铁儿山大败斡罗思军，俘其国王密只思腊，献与术赤太子而诛之。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Zhe Bo to discuss with Qin Zha, and Shimei was ordered to recruit and surrender the cities of Qu'er Tuo, Shou'er Wan Sha, and conquer Gu'er Tuo Bu and Ahwa Bu. Later, he recruited and surrendered the city of Hei Lin, defeated the Luo Si army in Tie'er Mountain, captured its king, Shimei Tuo Bu, and dedicated it to the Red Prince and killed him.

古文：寻征康里，至孛子八里城，与其主霍脱思罕战，又败其军，进至钦察亦平之。
现代文：不久，征讨康里，在孛子八里城击败其国王霍脱思罕所统率的军队，进而征服钦察。
English: Soon after, he conquered Kangri, defeated the army led by its king, Khotushan, in the city of Jizi Baili, and then conquered Chincha.

古文：未几，曷思麦里奏，往者尝招安到士卒留亦八里城，宜令扈从征河西，许之，命常居左右。
现代文：班师后不久，哲伯即卒。曷思麦里随太祖征河西。太祖对群臣说 ：哲伯常上报曷思麦里的战功。他身材虽小，而名声却很大。 
English: Shortly after the formation, Zhe Bo passed away. Gu Simei followed the great-grandfather to conquer Hexi. The great-grandfather said to the courtiers: Zhe Bo often reported the war exploits of Gu Simei. Although he was small in stature, he was very famous.

古文：至也吉里海牙，又讨平失的儿威。
现代文：蒙军至也吉里海牙，讨平失的儿威。
English: The Mongolian army went to The Hague in Yagiri to make up for the lost prestige.

古文：从太祖征汴，至怀孟，令领奥鲁事。
现代文：其后，又随太宗进军金首都汴梁。至怀孟，曷思麦里奉命主管蒙军后勤诸事。
English: Later, he followed Taizong to the Mongolian capital, Suiliang, and then to Huai Meng, where he was ordered to be in charge of the Mongolian army's logistics.

古文：帝由白坡渡黄河，会睿宗兵攻金将合达，败之，回驻金莲川。
现代文：太宗由白坡渡过黄河，与睿宗所领蒙古军会合，击败金将合达。回军驻金莲川。
English: Taizong crossed the Yellow River from Baipo, met with the Mongolian army led by Ruizong, defeated Jin Zhao Heda, and returned to Jinlianchuan.

古文：壬辰，授怀孟州达鲁花赤，佩金符。
现代文：太宗四年授曷思麦里为怀孟州达鲁花赤，佩金符。
English: Taizong four-yearly award of Juximeli is the red of the Daru flower of Waimeng State, and it is a platinum badge.

古文：癸巳，金将强元帅围怀州，曷思麦里率其众及昔里吉思、锁剌海等力战，金兵退。又遣蒲察寒奴、乞失烈札鲁招谕金总帅范真率其麾下军民万余人来降。
现代文：五年与昔里吉思、锁剌海等打退金将强元帅对怀州的围攻，遣蒲察寒奴、乞失烈扎鲁招谕金总帅范真率军民万余人来降。
English: In the past five years, Guisi, Locke and Bohai repulsed Marshal Jin Qiang's siege of Huai Zhou, and sent Pu Cha Kansu and Zalu to invite General Kim Fan Zhen and more than 10,000 soldiers and civilians to come down.

古文：己亥六月，帝以曷思麦里从军西域，宣力居多，命其长子捏只必袭为怀孟达鲁花赤，次子密里吉袭为必阇赤，令曷思麦里为紥鲁火赤，归西域。
现代文：太宗十一年六月，太宗以曷思麦里从军征西域劳苦有功，命其长子捏只必继为怀孟达鲁花赤，次子密里吉为必赤，命曷思麦里为扎鲁火赤。
English: In June of the eleventh year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Taizong gave the order to his eldest son Pinch to become Huai Meng Daru Huacheng, his second son Mirikhi to become Huacheng, and Emperor Taizong gave the order to his second son Wu Simaili to become Zaru Huacheng.

古文：庚子，进怀孟河南二十八处都达鲁花赤，所隶州郡不从命者，制令籍其家。
现代文：十二年，曷思麦里晋升为怀孟、河南二十八处达鲁花赤。
English: In 2012, Juximeli was promoted to the 28th Daruhana Red Star of Huai Meng and Henan.

古文：乙卯五月卒。
现代文：宪宗五年卒。
English: Five years have passed since Kenzo's graduation.

