古文：母曰恭宪皇太后王氏。
现代文：昭宗名晔，是懿宗的第七个儿子。母亲是恭宪皇太后王氏。
English: He was the seventh son of Emperor Zhaozong and the son of Empress Dowager Wang.

古文：始封寿王。
现代文：起初被封为寿王。
English: At first, he was given the title of Shouwang.

古文：乾符三年，领幽州卢龙军节度使。
现代文：僖宗乾符三年，李晔兼任幽州卢龙军节度使。
English: During the three years of Emperor Xizong of Qianfu, Li Jie also served as the festival envoy of the Yuzhou Lulong Army.

古文：僖宗遇乱再出奔，寿王握兵侍左右，尤见倚信。
现代文：僖宗遭逢变乱一再离京奔波，李晔握持兵器在僖宗身边侍卫，更被倚重信赖。
English: Emperor Taizong was repeatedly forced to flee from Beijing in times of turmoil, while Emperor Li Rong guarded Emperor Taizong with weapons, and was even more trusted by the emperor.

古文：文德元年三月，僖宗疾大渐，群臣以吉王长，且欲立之。
现代文：文德元年三月，僖宗病势危重，群臣因吉王李保年长，想要立吉王继承皇位。
English: In March of the first year of the Bunde era, Shizong was critically ill, and the courtiers wanted to set up King Jijie to succeed to the throne because King Jijie was too old.

古文：观军容使杨复恭率兵迎寿王，立为皇太弟，改名敏。
现代文：观军使杨复恭率领军队迎还寿王，立寿王为皇太弟，改名李敏。
English: Yang Fuzhong led the troops to welcome back Shou Wang, who was the younger brother of the crown prince and changed his name to Li Min.

古文：乙巳，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：初八，在僖宗灵柩前，李敏就皇帝位。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, before the funeral of Emperor Taizong, Li Min ascended to the throne.

古文：四月戊辰，孙儒陷扬州，自称淮南节度使，杨行密奔于庐州。
现代文：四月初一，孙儒攻破扬州，自称淮南节度使，杨行密逃往庐州。
English: On the first day of April, Sun Ru broke through Yangzhou, claiming to be the envoy of Huainan Festival, and Yang Xingmi fled to Zhangzhou.

古文：庚午，追尊母为皇太后。
现代文：初三，昭宗追尊生母为皇太后。
English: On the third day of his junior year, Akimune succeeded his biological mother as Empress Dowager.

古文：韦昭度为中书令，孔纬为司空。
现代文：韦昭度任中书令，孔纬任司空。
English: Wei Zhaodu was appointed as the middle secretary, and Kong Wei was appointed as the second secretary.

古文：乙亥，张全义陷孟州，李罕之奔于河东。
现代文：初八，张全义攻破孟州，李罕之逃往河东。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Quanyi invaded Mengzhou, and Li Hanji fled to Hedong.

古文：成汭陷江陵，自称留后。
现代文：成攻破江陵，自称留后。
English: After successfully conquering Gangneung, he claimed to be left behind.

古文：辛卯，硃全忠及秦宗权战于蔡州，败之。
现代文：二十四日，朱全忠与秦宗权在蔡州作战，打败秦宗权。
English: On the 24th, Zhu Quanzhong and Qin Zongquan fought in Caizhou, defeating Qin Zongquan.

古文：五月壬寅，赵德諲以襄州降，以德諲为忠义军节度使、蔡州四面行营副都统。
现代文：五月初六，赵德献出襄州归降朝廷，昭宗委任赵德为忠义军节度使、蔡州四面行营副都统。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month, Zhao De offered to surrender Xiangzhou to the imperial court, and Zhao Zong appointed Zhao De as the delegate of the loyalist army and the deputy governor of all four sides of Caizhou.

古文：六月，阆州防御使王建陷汉州，执刺史张顼，遂寇成都。
现代文：六月，阆州防御使王建反叛，攻破汉州，俘虏了刺史张顼，趁势进犯成都。
English: In June, the defense of Zhangzhou made Wang Jian rebel, break through Hanzhou, capture Zhang Jian, and take advantage of the situation to attack Chengdu.

古文：韦昭度罢为剑南西川节度副大使，兼两川招抚制置使。
现代文：韦昭度被免去中书令职务，担任剑南西川节度副大使，兼两川招抚制置使。
English: Wei Zhaodu was removed from the post of the Chinese Calligrapher, and served as the Deputy Ambassador of the Jianan West River Festival, as well as the Ambassador of the Two Rivers.

古文：十月，陈敬瑄反。
现代文：十月，陈敬蠧反叛。
English: In October, Chen Jingyao rebelled.

古文：辛卯，葬惠圣恭定孝皇帝于靖陵。十一月丙申，秦宗权陷许州，执忠武军节度使王缊。
现代文：二十七日，将僖宗安葬于靖陵。十一月初三，秦宗权攻破许州，俘虏了忠武军节度使王。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizong was buried in the Jingling Mausoleum. On the 3rd day of the first month of November, the Qin Emperor broke through Huzhou and captured the loyal troops of the King of the Festival.

古文：辛酉，奉国军将申丛执秦宗权。
现代文：二十八日，奉国军的将领申丛活捉秦宗权。
English: On the 28th, the general Shin Cong of the Hokkoku army captured Qin Zongquan alive.

古文：十二月丁亥，韦昭度为行营招讨使，及永平军节度使王建讨陈敬瑄。
现代文：十二月二十四日，韦昭度任行营招讨使，与永平军节度使王建一道讨伐陈敬蠧。
English: On December 24th, Wei Zhaodu was appointed as an envoy of the Yongping Army, and Wang Jian, the envoy of the Yongping Army, fought against Chen Jingyao.

古文：山南西道节度使杨守厚陷夔州。
现代文：山南西道节度使杨守厚反叛攻破夔州。
English: Yang Shouhou's rebellion was defeated by Shannan Xi Dao.

古文：龙纪元年正月癸巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：龙纪元年正月初一，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Dragon era, an amnesty was implemented and the year name was changed.

古文：翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎刘崇望同中书门下平章事。
现代文：翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎刘崇望任同中书门下平章事。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zong Zi, and Liu Chong Wang, the attendant of the military department, were appointed to the same middle school.

古文：壬子，宣武军将郭璠杀奉国军留后申丛，自称留后。
现代文：二十日，宣武军将领郭杀了奉国军留后申丛，自称留后。
English: On the 20th, Guo, the commander of the Xuanwu army, killed the remaining troops of the Fengguo army, and then claimed to be the remaining troops.

古文：二月戊辰，硃全忠俘秦宗权以献。
现代文：二月初六，朱全忠将秦宗权献给朝廷。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, Zhu Quanzhong presented the Qin suzerainty to the imperial court.

古文：己丑，宗权伏诛。
现代文：二十七日，秦宗权伏法处死。
English: On the 27th, Qin Zongquan was executed.

古文：三月，孔纬为司徒，杜让能为司空。
现代文：三月，孔纬任司徒，杜让能任司空。
English: In March, Kong Wei was appointed as an assistant, and Du Zhaneng was appointed as an assistant.

古文：丙申，钱升陷苏州，逐刺史徐约。
现代文：初五，钱升攻破苏州，驱逐了刺史徐约。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Qian Sheng broke through Suzhou and drove out Xu Yu, the assassin.

古文：六月，李克用寇邢州。
现代文：六月，李克用进犯邢州。
English: In June, Li Kezhen invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：昭义军节度使孟方立卒，其弟迁自称留后。
现代文：昭义军节度使孟方立去世，其弟孟迁自称留后。
English: Meng Fangli was killed by the Shao Yi Army, and his brother Meng Qian claimed to be his successor.

古文：杨行密陷宣州，宣歙观察使赵锽死之。
现代文：杨行密攻破宣州，宣歙观察使赵丧命。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked and broke through Xuanzhou, and Xuanwu's observation caused Zhao's death.

古文：庐州刺史蔡俦叛附于孙儒。
现代文：庐州刺史蔡俦反叛依附孙儒。
English: Zhang Zhou rebelled against Cai Qi and followed Sun Ru.

古文：八月甲戌，孟迁叛附于李克用。
现代文：八月十五日，孟迁反叛，依附李克用。
English: On August 15, Meng Qian rebelled and sided with Li Keyan.

古文：十月，平卢军节度使王敬武卒，其子师范自称留后，陷棣州，刺史张蟾死之。
现代文：十月，平卢军节度使王敬武去世，其子王师范自称留后，攻占棣州，刺史张蟾丧命。
English: In October, the Pinglu Military Festival caused the death of Wang Jingwu. His son Wang Shifan claimed to have stayed behind to conquer Zhangzhou, and stabbed Zhang Ye to death.

古文：宣歙观察使杨行密陷常州，刺史杜陵死之。
现代文：宣歙观察使杨行密反叛，攻占常州，刺史杜陵丧命。
English: Xuanzang's observation caused Yang Xingmi to rebel, capture Changzhou, and stab Shi Duling to death.

古文：钱升陷润州。
现代文：钱升攻破润州。
English: Qian Sheng attacked and defeated Runzhou.

古文：十一月丁未，朝献于太清宫。戊申，朝享于太庙。
现代文：十一月十九日，昭宗在太清宫举行受祭人扮饰者享用祭礼的仪式。二十日，在太庙祭祖。
English: On November 19th, Shozong held a ceremony at the Taiqing Palace for the recipients of the offerings to enjoy the festival. On the 20th, the ancestors were celebrated at the Imperial Temple.

古文：己酉，有事于南郊，大赦。
现代文：二十一日，在京城南郊举行祭天大典，施行大赦。
English: On the 21st, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Beijing to celebrate the amnesty.

古文：十二月，孙儒陷常、润二州。
现代文：十二月，孙儒攻破常、润二州。
English: In December, Sun Ru conquered the two states of Chang and Run.

古文：戊午，孙纬为太保，杜让能为司徒。
现代文：初一，孔纬任太保，杜让能任司徒。
English: On the first day of the new year, Kong Wei was appointed as the imperial guard, and Du Zheneng was appointed as the tutor.

古文：壬申，眉州刺史山行章叛附于王建。
现代文：十五日，眉州刺史山行章反叛、依附王建。
English: On the 15th, Meizhou Zhishishan Xingzhang rebelled and adhered to Wang Jian.

古文：大顺元年正月戊子，群臣上尊号曰圣文睿德光武弘孝皇帝，大赦，改元。
现代文：大顺元年正月初一，群臣给昭宗敬加尊号为 圣文睿德光武弘孝皇帝 ；昭宗施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Great Shun era, a group of ministers gave Akimune the honorific title of Emperor Shengwenrui Deguangwu Hongxiao; Akimune implemented an amnesty and changed the year.

古文：壬寅，简州将杜有迁执其刺史员虔嵩，叛附于王建。
现代文：十五日，简州的将领杜有迁抓了本州刺史员虔嵩，反叛依附王建。
English: On the 15th, Du Youqian, the general of Jianzhou, arrested Honshu's chief historian, Qian Song, and rebelled against Wang Jian.

古文：二月己未，资州将侯元绰执其刺史杨戡，叛附于建。
现代文：二月初三，资州的将领侯元绰抓住了本州刺史杨戡，反叛依附王建。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the general of Zhizhou, Houyuanqiao, seized the Honshu vassal, Yang Jie, and the rebels clung to Wang Jian.

古文：三月戊申，昭义军节度使李克修卒，其弟克恭自称留后。
现代文：三月二十二日，昭义军节度使李克去世，他的弟弟李克恭自称留后。
English: On March 22, Li Ke passed away on the occasion of the Shouyi Army Day. His younger brother Li Keqiang said that he would stay behind.

古文：四月丙辰，宿州将张筠逐其刺史张绍光。
现代文：四月初一，宿州的将领张筠驱逐了本州刺史张绍光。
English: On the first day of April, Zhang Ye, the general of Cangzhou, expelled Zhang Shaoguang, the governor of Cangzhou.

古文：丙寅，嘉州刺史硃实叛附于王建。
现代文：十一日，嘉州刺史朱实反叛依附王建。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhushi Zhushi rebelled and sided with Wang Jian.

古文：丙子，戎州将文武坚执其刺史谢承恩，叛附于建。
现代文：二十一日，戎州的将领文武坚抓了本州刺史谢承恩，反叛依附王建。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wen Wu Jian, the general of Eonju, captured Honshu's assassin, Shi Xiecheng, and rebelled against Wang Jian.

古文：五月，张浚为河东行营都招讨宣慰使，京兆尹孙揆副之；幽州卢龙军节度使李匡威为北面招讨使，云州防御使赫连鐸副之；硃全忠为南面招讨使，王熔为东面招讨使，以讨李克用。
现代文：五月，张浚任河东行营都招讨宣慰使，京兆尹孙揆担任副宣慰使；幽州卢龙军节度使李匡威任北面招讨使，云州防御使赫连铎担任副招讨使；朱全忠任南面招讨使，王任东面招讨使，协同讨伐李克用。
English: In May, Zhang Jun, commander of the Hedong Campaign, sent envoys to solicit condolences, with Jing Zhao and Yin Sun Rong as deputy envoys; Li Kuangwei, commander of the Yuzhou Lulong Army, sent envoys to solicit condolences from the north, and Hereng Yao, commander of the Yunnan Defense Force, sent envoys to solicit condolences from the south; Zhu Quanzhong sent envoys to solicit condolences from the south, and Wang Rong sent envoys to solicit condolences from the east, in coordination with Li Ke.

古文：壬寅，昭义军将安居受杀其节度使李克恭，叛附于硃全忠。
现代文：十七日，昭义军的将领安居受杀了本军节度使李克恭，反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On the 17th, Anju, the general of the Shouyi Army, was killed, leading Li Keqiang, the commander of the Shouyi Army, to rebel and attach himself to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：癸丑，剑南东川节度使顾彦朗卒，其弟彦晖自称留后。
现代文：二十八日，剑南东川节度使顾彦朗去世，其弟顾彦晖自称留后。
English: On the 28th, the Jianan Dongchuan Festival caused Gu Yanlang to pass away, and his younger brother Gu Yanqi said that he would stay behind.

古文：六月辛酉，雅州将谢从本杀其刺史张承简，叛附于王建。
现代文：六月初七，雅州的将领谢从本杀了本州刺史张承简，反叛依附王建。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, the general Xie of Yazhou killed Zhang Chengjian, the assassin of Yazhou, and rebelled against Wang Jian.

古文：辛未，硃全忠为河东东面行营招讨使。
现代文：十七日，朱全忠任河东东面行营招讨使。
English: On the 17th, Zhu Quanzhong was appointed as the envoy to the east of the river.

古文：是月，河东将安知建以邢、洺、滋三州叛附于全忠。
现代文：本月，河东的将领安知建献出邢、氵名、磁三个州，反叛依附朱全忠。
English: This month, the general of Hedong, An Zhi Jian, offered three states, namely, Sheng, Shennai and Zheng, to rebel against Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：七月，杨行密陷润州。
现代文：七月，杨行密攻破润州。
English: In July, Yang Xingzhu launched a secret attack on Runzhou.

古文：戊申，李克用执昭义军节度使孙揆。
现代文：二十四日，李克用俘虏了昭义军节度使孙揆。
English: On the 24th, Li Ke used to capture the Shao Yi Army's military commander Sun Yat-sen.

古文：八月，钱升杀苏州刺史杜孺休。
现代文：八月，钱升杀了苏州刺史杜孺休。
English: In August, Qian Sheng killed Suzhou thorn Du Yuxiu.

古文：杨行密陷苏州。
现代文：杨行密攻破苏州。
English: Yang Xingmi breaks through Suzhou.

古文：海南节度使孙儒陷润州。
现代文：淮南节度使孙儒反叛，攻破润州。
English: The Huainan Festival made Sun Ru rebel and invade Rongzhou.

古文：庚午，硃全忠为中书令。
现代文：十七日，委任朱全忠为中书令。
English: On the 17th, Zhu Quanzhong was appointed as the Clerk.

古文：九月，李克用陷潞州。
现代文：九月，李克用攻破潞州。
English: In September, Li Ke used it to break through Zhangzhou.

古文：杨行密陷润、常二州。
现代文：杨行密攻破润、常二州。
English: Yang Xingmi broke the run and won two states.

古文：闰月，孙儒陷常州。
现代文：闰九月，孙儒攻破常州。
English: In leap September, Sun Ru broke through Changzhou.

古文：壬戌，邛州将任可知杀其刺史毛湘。
现代文：初九，邛州的将领任可知杀了本州刺史毛湘。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, the general in charge of Zhangzhou was known to have killed the head of the state, Mao Xiang.

古文：十月癸未，蜀州刺史李行周叛附于王建。
现代文：十月初一，蜀州刺史李行周反叛依附王建。
English: On the first day of October, Li Xingzhou rebelled and sided with Wang Jian.

古文：李克用陷邢、洺、滋三州。
现代文：李克用攻破邢、氵名、磁三个州。
English: Li Ke used to break through the three states of Ren, Renmei and Magnetism.

古文：十一月丁卯，李匡威陷蔚州。
现代文：十一月十五日，李匡威攻破蔚州。
English: On November 15, Li Kuangwei invaded and defeated Ulsan.

古文：是月，张浚及李克用战于阴地，败绩。
现代文：本月，张浚在阴地与李克用作战，大败。
English: This month, Zhang Jun was defeated in a battle with Li Ke in Yin Di.

古文：孙儒陷苏州。
现代文：孙儒攻破苏州。
English: Sun Ru conquered Suzhou.

古文：十二月，李克用陷晋州。
现代文：十二月，李克用攻破晋州。
English: In December, Li Kezhen broke through Jinzhou.

古文：二年正月庚申，孔纬、张浚罢。
现代文：大顺二年正月初九，孙纬、张浚被免职。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the second year of Dashun, Sun Wei and Zhang Jun were dismissed.

古文：翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎崔昭纬，御史中丞徐彦若为户部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎崔昭纬，御史中丞徐彦若任户部侍郎，二人并任同中书门下平章事。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi, Hyobu Attendant Cui Zhaowei, and Goshi Junior Middle Officer Xu Yanwu were appointed as household attendants, and the two were also appointed as junior high school students.

古文：甘露镇使陈可言陷常州。
现代文：甘露镇使陈可言反叛攻破常州。
English: The town of Kamloops inspired Chen Keyan to rebel and invade Changzhou.

古文：钱升陷苏州。
现代文：钱升攻破苏州。
English: Qian Sheng defeated Suzhou.

古文：二月乙巳，赦陈敬瑄。
现代文：二月二十五日，昭宗赦免反叛的陈敬蠧。
English: On February 25, Zhaozong pardoned the rebel Chen Jingyao.

古文：丁未，诏王建罢兵，不受命。
现代文：二十七日，下诏命令王建停止对朝廷军队作战，王建不接受诏令。
English: On the 27th, Wang Jian was ordered to stop fighting against the imperial army. Wang Jian did not accept the order.

古文：是春，淮南大饥。
现代文：本年春，淮南地区发生大饥荒。
English: In the spring of this year, a major famine occurred in the Huainan region.

古文：四月庚辰，有彗星入于太微。
现代文：四月初一，有彗星流入太微星垣。
English: On the first day of April, a comet streaked into the Milky Way.

古文：甲申，大赦，避正殿，减膳，彻乐。
现代文：初五，昭宗施行大赦，避离正殿，减少膳食，停止宫内奏乐。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Shōzō granted amnesty, withdrew from the main hall, reduced the number of meals, and stopped playing music in the palace.

古文：赐两军金帛，赎所略男女还其家。
现代文：赐给两军黄金、布帛，赎还被他们虏去的男女民众各归其家。
English: He gave gold and cloth to the two armies, and redeemed the male and female people who had been taken captive by them, and they all returned to their homes.

古文：民年八十以上及疾不能自存者，长吏存恤。
现代文：对平民中八十岁以上的老人和有疾病不能独立生活的人，派当地长官进行慰问抚恤。
English: For civilians over the age of 80 and those who are unable to live independently due to illness, local governors will be sent to provide condolences and pensions.

古文：访武德功臣子孙。
现代文：访问高祖武德年间功臣的子孙。
English: Visiting the descendants of the meritorious vassals during the Gaozhuwude era.

古文：癸卯，王建寇成都。
现代文：二十四日，王建进犯成都。
English: On the 24th, Wang Jian invaded Chengdu.

古文：五月，孙儒陷和、滁二州。
现代文：五月，孙儒攻破和州、滁州。
English: In May, Sun Ru conquered and conquered Hezhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：六月，杨行密陷和、滁二州。
现代文：六月，杨行密攻破和州、滁州。
English: In June, Yang Xingmi broke through Hezhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：丙午，封子祐为德王。
现代文：二十八日，昭宗封儿子李为德王。
English: On the 28th, Li, the son of Zhaozongfeng, became the German king.

古文：七月，李克用陷云州，防御使赫连鐸奔于退浑。
现代文：七月，李克用攻破云州，防御使赫连铎逃往退浑。
English: In July, Li Ke used the attack to break through Yunnan, and the defense to make Khelian fled to Biehun.

古文：孙儒焚扬州以逃。
现代文：孙儒焚烧扬州后逃跑。
English: Sun Ru burned Yangzhou and then ran away.

古文：八月庚子，王建陷成都，执剑南西川节度使陈敬瑄，自称留后。
现代文：八月二十三日，王建攻破成都，俘虏了剑南西川节度使陈敬蠧，自称留后。
English: On August 23rd, Wang Jian invaded Chengdu and captured Chen Jingyao, the governor of Jian'nan and Xichuan, claiming to be his heir.

古文：十月壬午，硃全忠陷宿州。
现代文：十月初五，朱全忠攻破宿州。
English: On the fifth day of October, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Shuzhou.

古文：十一月己未，曹州将郭铢杀其刺史郭词，叛附于全忠。
现代文：十一月十三日，曹州的将领郭铢杀了本州刺史郭词，反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On November 13th, the general of Caozhou, Guo Zheng, killed the Honshu assassin, Guo Zhi, and the rebels followed Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：辛未，全忠陷寿州。
现代文：二十五日，朱全忠攻破寿州。
English: On the 25th, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Shoushou.

古文：景福元年正月己未，硃全忠陷孟州，逐河阳节度使赵克裕。
现代文：景福元年正月十四日，朱全忠攻破孟州，驱逐了河阳节度使赵克裕。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the first year of Jingfu, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Mengzhou and expelled the Heyang governor Zhao Keyu.

古文：丙寅，大赦，改元。
现代文：二十一日，昭宗施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the 21st, Shozong implemented an amnesty and changed the year.

古文：二月，刘崇望罢。
现代文：二月，刘崇望被免职。
English: In February, Liu Chongwang was removed from his post.

古文：钱升陷苏州。
现代文：钱升攻破苏州。
English: Qian Sheng defeated Suzhou.

古文：甲申，硃全忠寇郓州，天平军节度使硃宣败之。
现代文：初九，朱全忠进犯郓州，天平军节度使朱宣将其打败。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Bozhou, and Zhu Xuan defeated the Tianping Army.

古文：三月，户部尚书郑延昌为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：三月，户部尚书郑延昌任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In March, Zheng Yanchang, a member of the Household Division of Shangshu, was appointed as the attendant of Zhongshu, and the subordinate disciple of Zhongshu, He Ping.

古文：乙巳，杨行密陷楚州，执刺史刘瓚；又陷常州，刺史陈可言死之。
现代文：初一，杨行密攻破楚州，俘虏了刺史刘瓒；又攻破常州，刺史陈可言丧命。
English: On the first day of the first month, Yang Xingmi broke through Chuzhou and captured the assassin Liu Ye; he also broke through Changzhou, and the assassin Chen was killed.

古文：丙辰，武定军节度使杨守忠、龙剑节度使杨守贞会杨守厚兵寇梓州。
现代文：十二日，武定军节度使杨守忠、龙剑节度使杨守贞反叛，会同杨守厚的军队进犯梓州。
English: On the twelfth day, the Wu Ding Army and the Long Jian Army rebelled against Yang Shuzhong and Yang Shuzhen, and together with Yang Shuzhong's army invaded Zizhou.

古文：丙寅，福建观察使陈岩卒，护闽都将范晖自称留后。
现代文：二十二日，福建观察使陈岩去世，护闽都将范晖自称留后。
English: On the 22nd, Fujian observation made Chen Yan die, and the guards all claimed to leave Fan Yu behind.

古文：庚午，泉州刺史王潮寇福州。
现代文：二十六日，泉州刺史王潮反叛、进犯福州。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Quanzhou's king of kings rebelled and attacked Fuzhou.

古文：四月辛巳，杜让能为太尉。
现代文：四月初八，杜让能任太尉。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month, Dujan Neng was appointed captain.

古文：六月戊寅，杨行密陷扬州。
现代文：六月初六，杨行密攻破扬州。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of June, Yang Xingmi broke through Yangzhou.

古文：己巳，凤翔陇右节度使李茂贞陷凤州，感义军节度使满存奔于兴元，遂陷兴、洋二州。
现代文：己巳日，凤翔陇右节度使李茂贞反叛，攻破凤州，感义军节度使满存逃往兴元；李茂贞趁势攻破兴、洋两个州。
English: On the very same day, the Fengxiang right-wing festival caused Li Maozhen to rebel and defeat Fengzhou, and the feeling of the volunteer army festival caused Manchukuo to flee to Xingyuan; Li Maozhen took advantage of the situation to defeat Xing and Yang two states.

古文：八月壬申，寇兴元，杨守亮、满存奔于阆州。
现代文：八月初一，李茂贞进犯兴元，杨守亮、满存逃亡阆州。
English: On the first day of August, Li Maozhen attacked Xingyuan, Yang Shouliang and Mancun fled Zhangzhou.

古文：丙戌，降京畿、关辅囚罪，免淮南、浙西、宣州逋负。
现代文：十五日，昭宗对京畿、关辅一带的罪犯减刑，免除淮南、浙西、宣州拖欠的赋税。
English: On the 15th, Zhaozong commuted the sentences of criminals in Gyeonggi and Gwanju and exempted Huainan, West Zhejiang and Xuanzhou from tax arrears.

古文：十月，蔡俦以庐州叛附于硃全忠，河东将李存孝以邢州叛附于全忠。
现代文：十月，蔡俦献出庐州反叛依附朱全忠，河东的将领李存孝献出邢州反叛依附朱全忠。
English: In October, Cai Wei offered the Zhangzhou rebels to support Zhu Quanzhong, and the general Li Cunxiao from Hedong offered the Zhangzhou rebels to support Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：十一月，有星孛于斗、牛。
现代文：十一月，有彗星进入斗、牛二星宿之间。
English: In November, a comet passed between the constellations of Taurus and Taurus.

古文：辛丑，武宁军将张燧、张谏以濠、泗二州叛附于硃全忠。
现代文：初一，武宁军的将领张王遂、张谏献出濠、泗二州反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On the first day of the new year, the generals of the Wu-Ning army, Zhang Wang Sui and Zhang Ye, presented the scepter, and Zhu Quanzhong became the adherent of the two-state rebellion.

古文：乙巳，硃友裕陷濮州，执刺史邵儒。
现代文：初五，朱友裕攻破濮州，俘虏了刺史邵儒。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Youyu conquered Zhangzhou and captured Zhang Shi and Shao Ru.

古文：孙儒将王坛陷婺州，刺史蒋瑰奔于越州。
现代文：孙儒的部将王坛攻破婺州，刺史蒋耡逃往越州。
English: Sun Ju's troops defeated Wang Tan in Bozhou, and Chiang Kai-shek fled to Yuezhou.

古文：是岁，明州刺史钟文季卒，其将黄晟自称刺史。
现代文：本年，明州刺史钟文季去世，其部将黄晟自称刺史。
English: This year, Mingzhou chief historian Zhong Wenzhi passed away, and his subordinate Huang Qi claimed to be the chief historian.

古文：二年正月，徐彦若罢为凤翔陇右节度使，李茂贞为山南西道节度使。茂贞不受命。
现代文：景福二年正月，徐彦若被免职、担任凤翔陇右节度使；委任李茂贞任山南西道节度使，李茂贞不接受任命。
English: In the first month of the second year of Jingfu, Xu Yanlu was removed from his post and appointed as the right-hand festival envoy of Feng Xiangjun; Li Maozhen was appointed as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, but Li Maozhen did not accept the appointment.

古文：二月，杨行密陷常州。
现代文：二月，杨行密攻破常州。
English: In February, Yang Xingmi broke through Changzhou.

古文：三月辛酉，幽州卢龙军兵马留后李匡筹逐其兄匡威，自称节度留后。
现代文：三月二十二日，幽州卢龙军兵马留后李匡筹驱逐了其兄李匡威，自称节度留后。
English: On March 22, after the soldiers and horses of the Yuzhou Lulong Army stayed behind, Li Kuangqiao drove out his brother Li Kuangwei, claiming to stay behind for the festival.

古文：四月乙亥，王建杀陈敬瑄及剑南西川监军田令孜。
现代文：四月初七，王建杀了陈敬蠧及剑南西川监军田令孜。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month, Wang Jian killed Chen Jingyao and Jianan Nishikawa Supervisor Tian Lingzi.

古文：乙酉，有彗星入于太微。
现代文：十七日，有彗星进入太微星垣。
English: On the 17th, a comet entered the faint star field.

古文：丁亥，王熔杀李匡威。
现代文：十九日，王杀了李匡威。
English: On the 19th, Wang killed Li Kongwei.

古文：戊子，硃全忠陷徐州，武宁军节度使时溥死之。
现代文：二十日，朱全忠攻破徐州，武宁军节度使时溥丧命。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Quanzhong broke through Xuzhou, and the Wu Ning Army's victory brought Shizhao's death.

古文：五月庚子，王潮陷福州，范晖死之，潮自称留后。
现代文：五月初二，王潮攻破福州，范晖丧命；王潮自称留后。
English: On the second day of the fifth month, Wang Chao defeated Fuzhou, and Fan Qi died; Wang Chao claimed to stay behind.

古文：七月，杨行密陷庐州，蔡俦死之。
现代文：七月，杨行密攻破庐州，蔡俦丧命。
English: In July, Yang Xingmi broke through Zhangzhou, and Cai Wei was killed.

古文：八月丙申，嗣覃王嗣周为京西路招讨使，神策大将军李铁副之，以讨李茂贞。
现代文：八月初一，嗣覃王李嗣周任京西面招讨使，神策大将军李钅岁任副招讨使，讨伐李茂贞。
English: On the first day of August, King Zhiqi and King Li Zhou were appointed as the envoys to Beijing and Xiamen, and the great general Li Shunli was appointed as the deputy envoy to fight against Li Maozhen.

古文：庚子，升州刺史张雄卒，其将冯弘鐸自称刺史。
现代文：初五，升州刺史张雄去世，其部将冯弘铎自称刺史。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Xiong, the secretary of Shengzhou, died, and his subordinate Feng Hongyao claimed to be the secretary.

古文：是月，杨行密陷歙州。
现代文：本月，杨行密攻破歙州。
English: This month, Yang Xingmi broke through Zhangzhou.

古文：九月壬午，嗣覃王嗣周及李茂贞战于兴平，败绩。
现代文：九月十七日，嗣覃王李嗣周在兴平与李茂贞作战，大败。
English: On September 17th, the King of Succession, Li Shizhou, fought against Li Maozhen in Xingping and was soundly defeated.

古文：甲申，茂贞犯京师。
现代文：十九日，李茂贞侵犯京都。
English: On the 19th, Li Maozhen invaded Kyoto.

古文：乙酉，茂贞杀观军容使西门重遂、内枢密使李周讠童、段诩。
现代文：二十日，李茂贞杀了观军容使西门重遂，内枢密使李周讠童、段诩。
English: On the 20th, Li Maozhen killed Guan Jun Rong and made Xi Men a second time, and the Inner Privy Council secretaries Li Zhou, Xing Tong and Duan Yu were executed.

古文：贬杜让能为梧州刺史。
现代文：昭宗将杜让能贬为梧州刺史。
English: Zhaozong relegated Dujangneng to a footnote in the history of Wuzhou.

古文：壬辰，东都留守、检校司徒韦昭度为司徒，御史中丞崔胤为户部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，东都留守、检校司徒韦昭度任司徒，御史中丞崔胤任户部侍郎，二人并任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Dongdu stayed behind, and Wei Zhaodu, the inspector of the school, was appointed as the inspector, Mi Shi Zhongzheng Cui Yan was appointed as the attendant of the household department, and both of them were appointed as the junior high school students and junior high school students.

古文：是月，升州刺史冯弘鐸叛附于杨行密。
现代文：本月，升州刺史冯弘铎反叛依附杨行密。
English: This month, Yang Xingmi, the rebel follower of Feng Hongtao, the statesman of the Song Dynasty, was hanged.

古文：十月乙未，杀杜让能及户部侍郎杜弘徽。
现代文：十月初一，杀戮杜让能与户部侍朗杜弘徽。
English: On the first day of October, "Killing Dujan Neng" starred Du Honghui, the head of the Household Division.

古文：杨行密陷舒州。
现代文：杨行密攻破舒州。
English: Yang Xingmi broke through Shuzhou.

古文：十二月，韦昭度为太傅。
现代文：十二月，韦昭度任太傅。
English: In December, Wei Zhaodou was appointed taifu.

古文：邵州刺史邓处讷陷潭州，钦化军节度使周岳死之，处讷自称留后。
现代文：邵州刺史邓处讷攻破潭州，钦化军节度使周岳丧命，邓处讷自称留后。
English: Deng Shunna, the famous Shaozhou poet, conquered Tanzhou. Zhou Yue was killed by the Jinhua army, and Deng Shunna claimed to be left behind.

古文：是岁，建州刺史徐归范、汀州刺史钟全慕叛附于王潮。
现代文：本年，建州刺史徐归范、汀州刺史钟余慕反叛依附王潮。
English: This year, Xu Guifan from Jianzhou and Zhong Yu from Tingzhou rebelled and followed Wang Chao.

古文：乾宁元年正月，有星孛于鹑首。
现代文：乾宁元年正月，有彗星出现在黄道带的十二次鹑首星官。
English: In the first month of the first year of Qianning, a comet appeared in the zodiac for the twelfth time.

古文：乙丑，大赦，改元。
现代文：初一，昭宗施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the first day of the new year, Akimune issued an amnesty and changed the year.

古文：李茂贞以兵来朝。
现代文：李茂贞率兵朝见昭宗。
English: Li Maozhen led his soldiers to see Emperor Akimune.

古文：二月，右散骑常侍郑綮为礼部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月，右散骑常侍郑綮任礼部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In February, Zheng Yao, the right rider's attendant, was appointed as the attendant of the etiquette department, and Ping Zhang, the junior high school student, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：彰义军节度使张钧卒，其兄钅番自称留后。
现代文：彰义军节度使张钧去世，其兄张钅番自称留后。
English: Zhang Ye passed away on the day of the pro-independence military parade, and his brother Zhang Ye said that he would stay behind.

古文：三月甲申，李克用寇邢州，执李存孝杀之。
现代文：三月二十一日，李克用进犯邢州，俘虏并杀了李存孝。
English: On March 21, Li Ke used to invade Zhangzhou, captured and killed Li Cunxiao.

古文：五月丙子，王建陷彭州，威戎军节度使杨晟死之。
现代文：五月十五日，王建攻破彭州，威戎军节度使杨晟丧命。
English: On May 15th, Wang Jian defeated Pengzhou, and the Wei Rong Army killed Yang Hui.

古文：是月，郑延昌罢。
现代文：本月，郑延昌被免职。
English: This month, Zheng Yanchang was removed from his post.

古文：孙儒将刘建锋、马殷陷潭州，武安军节度使邓处讷死之，建锋自称留后。
现代文：孙儒的部将刘建锋、马殷攻破潭州，武安军节度使邓处讷丧命，刘建锋自称留后。
English: Sun Ru's generals Liu Jianfeng and Ma Yin attacked and broke through Tanzhou, and the Wu'an Army killed Deng Zhanna. Liu Jianfeng claimed to stay behind.

古文：武冈指挥使蒋勋陷邵州。
现代文：武冈指挥使蒋勋攻破邵州。
English: The commander of Wookang ordered Jiang Xun to invade Shaoshou.

古文：六月，大同军防御使赫连鐸及李克用战于云州，死之。
现代文：六月，大同军防御使赫连铎在云州与李克用作战，丧命。
English: In June, the defense of the Datong Army caused Hereng Yao to fight against Li Ke in Yunnan, and he was killed.

古文：戊午，翰林学士承旨、礼部尚书李磎同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，翰林学士承旨、礼部尚书李石奚任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Hanlin Scholar, Li Shijun of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and Li Shijun of the Ministry of Education and Culture were appointed as the co-chairmen of the ceremony.

古文：庚申，磎罢。
现代文：二十九日，李石奚被免职。
English: On the 29th, Li Shijun was removed from office.

古文：御史大夫徐彦若为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：御史大夫徐彦若任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Goshi no daibu (Master of History) Tsuyohiko served as Chusho no jijiro (chamberlain) and Shitaira no shoji (chamberlain) of the same school.

古文：七月，以雨霖避正殿，减膳。
现代文：七月，昭宗因连绵大雨避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: In July, due to continuous heavy rain, Akimune avoided the main hall and reduced meals.

古文：郑綮罢。
现代文：郑綮被免职。
English: Zheng Qi was removed from his post.

古文：李茂贞陷阆州。
现代文：李茂贞攻破阆州。
English: Li Maozhen defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：八月，杨守亮伏诛。
现代文：八月，杨守亮伏法被处死。
English: In August, Yang Shouliang was executed.

古文：癸巳，减京畿、兴元、洋金商州赋役。
现代文：初四，对京畿、兴元以及洋、金、商州减征赋税、徭役。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Gyeonggi and Heungwon, as well as Yangon, Gimhae, and Jeonju, will enjoy tax reductions and tax exemptions.

古文：九月庚申，李克用陷潞州，昭义军节度使康君立死之。
现代文：九月初一，李克用攻破潞州，昭义军节度使康君立丧命。
English: On the first day of September, Li Ke used to break through Zhangzhou, Shouyi Army Festival to make Kangjunli killed.

古文：十月丁酉，封子祤为棣王，禊虔王，禋沂王，祎遂王。
现代文：十月初八，昭宗封儿子李礻羽为棣王，李禊为虔王，李聐为沂王，李为遂王。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of October, the son of Zhaozongfu, Li Qianyu, became the king of Jia, Li Qian became the king of Qian, Li Qian became the king of Jia, and Li Qian became the king of Sui.

古文：十一月，李克用陷武州。
现代文：十一月，李克用攻破武州。
English: In November, Li Ke used it to break through Wuzhou.

古文：十二月，陷新州。
现代文：十二月，李克用攻破新州。
English: In December, Li Ke used it to break through Xinzhou.

古文：甲寅，幽州卢龙军节度使李匡筹奔于沧州，义昌军节度使卢彦威杀之。
现代文：二十六日，幽州卢龙军节度使李匡筹逃往沧州，义昌军节度使卢彦威杀了李匡筹。
English: On the 26th, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival made Li Kuangqiao flee to Cangzhou, and the Yichang Army Festival made Lu Yanwei kill Li Kuangqiao.

古文：丙辰，李克用陷幽州。
现代文：二十八日，李克用攻破幽州。
English: On the 28th, Li Ke used the rope to break through Yuzhou.

古文：是冬，杨行密陷黄州，执刺史吴讨。
现代文：这年冬，杨行密攻破黄州，俘虏了刺史吴讨。
English: In the winter of that year, Yang Xingmi broke through Huangzhou and captured Zhi Shi Wu Tang.

古文：二年正月己巳，给事中陆希声为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：乾宁二年正月十一日，给事中陆希声任户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the second year of Qianning, Lu Xisheng was appointed as the attendant of the household department, and the bookkeeper of the same department, Xia Ping, was appointed.

古文：壬申，护国军节度使王重盈卒，其子珂自称留后。
现代文：十四日，护国军节度使王重盈去世，他的儿子王珂自称留后。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Wang Chung-ying passed away at the National Guard Festival. His son, Wang Ke, said that he would stay behind.

古文：二月乙未，太子太傅李磎为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二月初七，太子太傅李石奚任户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month of the year, the Prince's Daifu, Li Shijun, was appointed as the head of the household, and the bookkeeper of the same school, He Ping, was appointed.

古文：三月，崔胤、李磎罢。
现代文：三月，崔胤、李石奚被免职。
English: In March, Cui Yin and Li Shijun were removed from their posts.

古文：户部侍郎、判户部王搏为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：户部侍郎、判户部王抟任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: He served as the head of the household and the judge of the household, and he was appointed as the secretary of the middle school and the head of the middle school.

古文：杨行密陷濠州，执刺史张燧。
现代文：杨行密攻破濠州，俘虏了刺史张王遂。
English: Yang Xingmi broke through Zhangzhou and captured the assassin Zhang Wangsui.

古文：庚午，河东地震。
现代文：十三日，河东发生地震。
English: On the 13th, an earthquake occurred in Hedong.

古文：四月，苏州大雨雪。
现代文：四月，苏州降下大雪。
English: In April, heavy snow fell in Suzhou.

古文：陆希声、韦昭度罢。
现代文：陆希声、韦昭度被免职。
English: Lu Xisheng and Wei Zhaodu were dismissed.

古文：泰宁军节度使硃瑾及硃全忠战于高梧，败绩，其将安福庆死之。
现代文：泰宁军节度使朱瑾在高梧与朱全忠作战，大败，他的部将安福庆丧命。
English: The Tai Ning Army Festival caused Zhu Xi to fight with Zhu Quanzhong in Gaowu, and he was defeated, and his subordinate An Fuqing was killed.

古文：杨行密陷寿州，执刺史江从勖。
现代文：杨行密攻破寿州，俘虏了刺史江从勖。
English: Yang Xingmi broke through Shoushou and captured Zishi Jiang Conglu.

古文：五月甲子，静难军节度使王行瑜、镇国军节度使韩建及李茂贞犯京师，杀太保致仕韦昭度、太子少师李磎。
现代文：五月初八，静难军节度使王行瑜、镇国军节度使韩建反叛，与李茂贞进袭京都，杀了太保致仕韦昭度、太子少师李石奚。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, Wang Xingyu led the Jingnan Army Festival, and Han Jian rebelled with the Zhenguo Army Festival. He and Li Maozhen attacked Kyoto, and killed Wei Zhaodu, the Taibo, and Li Shijuan, the prince's apprentice.

古文：是月，李克用陷绛州，刺史王瑶死之。
现代文：本月，李克用攻破绛州，刺史王瑶丧命。
English: This month, Li Ke used it to break through Zhangzhou, stabbing Wang Xi to death.

古文：六月庚寅，镇海军节度使钱升为浙江东道招讨使。
现代文：六月初四，镇海军节度使钱升任浙江东道招讨使。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month, the naval festival of the town promoted Qian to the post of the Zhejiang host recruiting envoy.

古文：癸巳，吏部尚书孔纬为司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初七，吏部尚书孔纬任司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the seventh year of his junior high school career, he was appointed as the secretary of the clerk's office, as well as the attendant of the disciple, and the subordinate of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：七月丙辰，李克用以兵屯于河中。
现代文：七月初一，李克用将军队屯驻河中。
English: On the first day of July, Li Ke used the general to station troops in Hechu.

古文：戊午，匡国军节度使王行约奔于京师。
现代文：初三，匡国军节度使王行约逃往京都。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Wang Xingyo was forced to flee to Kyoto by the Kuangguo Army.

古文：庚申，左右神策军护军中尉骆全瓘刘景宣、指挥使王行实李继鹏反。
现代文：初五，左右神策军护军中尉骆全馞、刘景宣，指挥使王行实、李继鹏反叛。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, Lieutenant Luo Quanzhang and Liu Jingxuan, both of whom were guards of the Shen Zhao Army, and Commander Wang Xingshi and Li Jipeng rebelled.

古文：行在莎城。
现代文：昭宗移驾至莎城。
English: Zhaozong moved to Shacheng.

古文：嗣薛王知柔权知中书事。
现代文：嗣薛王李知柔暂代主持中书省事物。
English: Xue Wang's heir, Li Zhirou, will temporarily preside over the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：壬戌，李克用陷同州。
现代文：初七，李克用攻破同州。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Li Ke used to break through the same state.

古文：甲子，次石门。
现代文：初九，昭宗停驻石门。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, Akimune stopped at Shimen.

古文：前护国军节度使崔胤为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：前护国军节度使崔胤任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: At the time of the former National Protection Army Festival, Choi In was appointed as the junior secretary of the middle school and the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：八月戊戌，李克用为邠宁四面行营招讨使，保大军节度使李思孝为北面招讨使，定难军节度使李思谏为东北面招讨使，彰义军节度使张鐇为西面招讨使。
现代文：八月十四日，李克用被任命为宁四面行营招讨使，保大军节度使李思孝被任命为北面招讨使，定难军节度使李思谏被任命为东北面招讨使，彰义军节度使张钅番被任命为西面招讨使。
English: On August 14th, Li Kegui was appointed as the envoy to call up troops from all four sides of Ning, Li Sihiao was appointed as the envoy to call up troops from the north side due to the Baoding Grand Army Festival, Li Sijun was appointed as the envoy to call up troops from the northeast side due to the Dingan Army Festival, and Zhang Yifan was appointed as the envoy to call up troops from the west side due to the Changyi Army Festival.

古文：辛丑，李克用为邠宁四面行营都统。
现代文：十七日，李克用被任命为宁四面行营都统。
English: On the 17th, Li Kegui was appointed as the leader of Ning.

古文：李继鹏伏诛。
现代文：李继鹏伏法被处死。
English: Li Jipengfu was executed.

古文：赦李茂贞。
现代文：昭宗赦免李茂贞。
English: Zhaozong pardoned Li Maozhen.

古文：辛亥，至自石门。
现代文：二十七日，昭宗自石门返回京都。
English: On the 27th, Akimune returned to Kyoto from Shimen.

古文：壬子，崔昭纬罢。
现代文：二十八日，崔昭纬被免职。
English: On the 28th, Cui Zhaowei was removed from office.

古文：九月丙辰，徐彦若为司空。
现代文：九月初三，徐彦若任司空。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, Xu Yanru took the post of Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：癸亥，孔纬薨。
现代文：初十，孔纬去世。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Kong Wei passed away.

古文：前昭义军节度使李罕之为邠宁四面行营副都统。
现代文：前昭义军节度使李罕之任宁四面行营副都统。
English: The festival of the former Shao Yi Army made Li Hanzhi Renning travel to all four sides of the capital.

古文：十月，京兆尹孙偓为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十月，京兆尹孙亻屋任户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In October, Jing Zhao, Yin Sun, and Zhaiya were appointed as household attendants, and he was promoted to the position of junior high school teacher.

古文：丙戌，李克用及王行瑜战于梨园，败之。
现代文：初三，李克用与王行瑜在梨园作战，打败王行瑜。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Li Kezhen fought with Wang Xingyu in the pear orchard and defeated Wang Xingyu.

古文：庚寅，王行约焚宁州以逃。
现代文：初七，王行约焚烧宁州后逃跑。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Wang Xing fled after burning Ningzhou.

古文：义武军节度使王处存卒，其子郜自称留后。
现代文：义武军节度使王处存去世，他的儿子王郜自称留后。
English: The festival of the volunteer army caused the death of Wang Shuxuan, and his son Wang Yao claimed to stay behind.

古文：十一月丁巳，李克用及王行瑜战于龙泉，败之。
现代文：十一月初五，李克用与王行瑜在龙泉作战，打败王行瑜。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Li Kezhen fought with Wang Xingyu in Longquan and defeated Wang Xingyu.

古文：辛酉，衢州刺史陈儒卒，其弟岌自称刺史。
现代文：初九，衢州刺史陈儒去世，其弟陈岌自称刺史。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Chen Ru, a painter from Zhangzhou, passed away. His younger brother Chen Du claimed to be a painter.

古文：丁卯，王行瑜伏诛。
现代文：十五日，王行瑜伏法被处死。
English: On the 15th, Wang Xingyubo was executed.

古文：壬申，齐州刺史硃琼叛附于硃全忠。
现代文：二十日，齐州刺史朱琼反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Qiong rebelled and followed Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：丁丑，王建陷利州，刺史李继颙死之。
现代文：二十五日，王建攻破利州，刺史李继丧命。
English: On the 25th, Wang Jian invaded Lizhou, stabbing Shi Li Jie to death.

古文：十二月癸未，赦京师，复大顺以来削夺官爵非其罪者。
现代文：十二月初一，昭宗对京都施行赦免，恢复大顺年以来，被削夺官职、爵位的人员中，论罪处罚不当的人们的官位、爵级。
English: On the first day of December, Akimune pardoned Kyoto and restored the ranks and ranks of those who had been deprived of official posts and peerages since the beginning of the year.

古文：甲申，阆州防御使李继雍、蓬州刺史费存、渠州刺史陈璠叛附于王建。
现代文：初二，阆州防御使李继雍、蓬州刺史费存、渠州刺史陈反叛，依附王建。
English: On the second day of the first semester, the defense of Zhangzhou made Li Jiyong, Pengzhou stabbed Feicun, and Quzhou stabbed Chen rebel and cling to Wang Jian.

古文：丙申，建寇梓州。
现代文：十四日，王建进犯梓州。
English: On the 14th, Wang Jian invaded Zizhou.

古文：戊辰，通州刺史李彦昭叛附于建。
现代文：十六日，通州刺史李彦昭反叛依附王建。
English: On the 16th, Tongzhou assassin Li Yan Zhao rebelled and sided with Wang Jian.

古文：是岁，安州防御使宣晟陷桂州，静江军节度使周元静部将刘士政死之，晟自称知军府事。
现代文：本年，安州防御使宣晟攻破桂州，静江军节度使周元静的部将刘士政丧命，宣晟自称主持军府事务。
English: This year, the defense of Anzhou made Xuan Ye break through Guizhou, and the military festival of Jingjiang made Liu Shizheng, the commander of Zhou Yuan Jing, die. Xuan Ye claimed to preside over the military affairs.

古文：三年正月癸丑，王建陷龙州，刺史田昉死之。
现代文：乾宁三年正月初一，王建攻破龙州，刺史田日方丧命。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of Qianning, Wang Jian defeated Longzhou, and stabbed the Japanese side to death.

古文：闰月丁亥，果州刺史周雄叛附于建。
现代文：闰正月初五，果州刺史周雄反叛依附王建。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the leap year, Guozhou assassin Zhou Xiong rebelled and clung to Wang Jian.

古文：四月壬子，武安军乱，杀其节度使刘建峰，其将马殷自称留后。
现代文：四月初一，武安军发生动乱，杀了本军节度使刘建锋，刘的部将马殷自称留后。
English: On the first day of April, the Wu'an Army was in turmoil. Liu Jianfeng, the commander of the army, was killed, and Liu's subordinate, Ma Yin, claimed to be left behind.

古文：五月癸未，杨行密陷苏州，执刺史成及；陷光州，刺史刘存死之。
现代文：五月初三，杨行密攻破苏州，俘虏了刺史成及；又攻破光州，刺史刘存丧命。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, Yang Xing attacked Suzhou in secret and captured the assassin, Shi Chengyi; he also attacked Gwangju, and the assassin, Liu Cun, was killed.

古文：庚寅，成汭陷黔州，武泰军节度使王建肇奔于成都。
现代文：初十，成攻破黔州，武泰军节度使王建肇逃往成都。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Chengdu defeated Bozhou, and Wang Jian Zhao fled to Chengdu.

古文：乙未，董昌伏诛。
现代文：十五日，董昌伏法被处死。
English: On the 15th, Dong Changfu was executed.

古文：是月，蕲州刺史冯行章叛附于杨行密。
现代文：本月，蕲州刺史冯行章反叛依附杨行密。
English: This month, Zhangzhou Zishi Feng Xingzhang rebelled against Yang Xingmi.

古文：六月庚戌，李茂贞犯京师，嗣延王戒丕御之。
现代文：六月初一，李茂贞进犯京都，嗣延王李戒丕进行抵御。
English: On the first day of June, Li Maozhen attacked Kyoto, followed by Yan Wang Li Jiechi.

古文：丙寅，及茂贞战于娄馆，败绩。
现代文：十七日，李戒丕在娄馆与李茂贞作战，大败。
English: On the seventeenth day, Li Jingyao fought with Li Maozhen in Shuguang Hall and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：七月癸巳，行在渭北。
现代文：七月十四日，昭宗移驾至渭北。
English: On the 14th of July, Zhaozong moved to the north of Shandong Province.

古文：甲午，韩建来朝，次华州。
现代文：十五日，韩建前来朝见昭宗；昭宗停驻华州。
English: On the 15th, Han Jian came to see Zhaozong in the morning; Zhaozong stopped in Huazhou.

古文：乙巳，崔胤罢。
现代文：二十六日，崔胤被免职。
English: On the 26th, Choi In was dismissed.

古文：丙午，翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞陆扆为户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞陆任户部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, Shang Shuxu Zu Rong, Lu Ren, Hubei Chamberlain, and Dongzhong Shumen Shimo Ping were ordained.

古文：八月甲寅，王抟罢。
现代文：八月初六，王抟被免职。
English: On August 6, Wang Yao was removed from his post.

古文：乙丑，国子《毛诗》博士硃朴为左谏议大夫、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十七日，国子《毛诗》博士朱朴任左谏议大夫、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 17th, Zhu Pu, the doctor of Kuniko "Mao Shi," was appointed as the doctor of the left side, and Ping Zhang, the teacher of the same school, was promoted.

古文：九月乙未，武安军节度使崔胤为中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎崔远：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月十七日，武安军节度使崔胤任中书侍郎，翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎崔远，一并任同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 17th, the Wu'an Army Festival appointed Cui Yan as the junior secretary of the middle school, Hanlin as the junior secretary of the middle school, and Cui Yuan as the junior secretary of the military department, together with the junior secretary of the middle school.

古文：丁酉，贬陆扆为峡州刺史。
现代文：十九日，将陆贬为峡州刺史。
English: On the 19th, Lu was relegated to a footnote in the history of Xiaozhou.

古文：十月，李克用及罗弘信战于白龙潭，败之。
现代文：十月，李克用在白龙潭与罗弘信作战，打败罗弘信。
English: In October, Li Kezhen fought with Luo Hongxin in Bailongtan and defeated Luo Hongxin.

古文：壬子，孙偓持节凤翔四面行营节度、诸军都统、招讨、处置使。
现代文：初五，孙亻屋担任持节凤翔四面行营节度、诸军都统、招讨、处置使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Sun Yat-sen's son, Sun Yat-sen's grandson, Sun Yat-sen's grandson, Sun Yat-sen's grandson, Sun Yat-sen's grandson, Sun Yat-sen's grandson, Sun Yat-sen's grandson, Sun Yat-sen's grandson, Sun Yat-sen's grandson

古文：戊午，威胜军节度使王抟为吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，威胜军节度使王抟任吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the festival of the victorious army made Wang Xuan be appointed as the head of the personnel department of Shangshu and the head of the middle school of Shangshu.

古文：十一月戊子，忠国军节度使李师悦卒，其子继徽自称留后。
现代文：十一月十二日，忠国军节度使李师悦去世，其子李继徽自称留后。
English: On November 12, Li Shiyue passed away on the National Day of the People's Republic of China, and his son Li Jihui claimed to be his successor.

古文：四年正月乙酉，韩建以兵围行宫，杀扈跸都将李筠。
现代文：乾宁四年正月初九，韩建率兵包围昭宗的行宫，杀了扈跸都将李筠。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Qianning, Han Jian and his soldiers surrounded the palace of Emperor Zhaozong, and killed Li Xi.

古文：丙申，硃全忠陷郓州，天平军节度使硃宣死之。
现代文：二十日，朱全忠攻破郓州，天平军节度使朱宣丧命。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zhangzhou, and the Tianping Army killed Zhu Xuan.

古文：己亥，孙偓罢都统。
现代文：二十三日，孙亻屋被免去诸军都统职务。
English: On the 23rd, Sun Yat-sen was relieved of his duties as commander-in-chief.

古文：二月，硃全忠寇兗州，泰宁军节度使硃瑾奔于淮南，其子用贞以兗州叛附于全忠。
现代文：二月，朱全忠进犯兖州，泰宁军节度使朱瑾逃往淮南，他的儿子朱用贞献出兖州反叛依附朱全忠。
English: In February, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Bozhou. Taining's army made Zhu Xi flee to Huainan. His son, Zhu Yizhen, betrayed Bozhou to rebel against Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠陷沂、海、密三州。
现代文：朱全忠攻破沂、海、密三个州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong conquered the three provinces of Jiu, Hai and Mi.

古文：保义军节度使王珙寇河中。
现代文：保义军节度使王珙进犯河中。
English: Wang Yao was pushed into the river by the festival of the loyalist army.

古文：韩建杀太子詹事马道殷、将作监许岩士。
现代文：韩建杀死太子詹事马道殷、将作监许岩士。
English: Han Jian killed Prince Zhan Shima Daoyin, and will be the supervisor of Iwashi.

古文：杨行密为江南诸道行营都统。
现代文：杨行密被任命为江南诸道行营都统。
English: Yang Xingmi was appointed as the leader of the Southern Jiangsu Province.

古文：癸丑，王建陷泸州，刺史马敬儒死之。
现代文：初八，王建攻破泸州，刺史冯敬儒丧命。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wang Jian conquered Zhangzhou and stabbed Feng Jingru to death.

古文：己未，立德王裕为皇太子，太赦，飨于行庙。
现代文：十四日，昭宗立德王李裕为皇太子，施行大赦，在临时建立的祖庙举行祭礼仪式。
English: On the 14th, Zhaozong established King Li Yu as the crown prince, implemented an amnesty, and held a ceremony at the temporarily established ancestral temple.

古文：辛未，王建陷渝州。
现代文：二十六日，王建攻破渝州。
English: On the 26th, Wang Jian invaded Yuzhou.

古文：乙亥，孙偓、硃朴罢。
现代文：三十日，孙亻屋、朱朴被免职。
English: On the 30th, Sun Yuya and Zhu Pu were dismissed.

古文：五月壬午，硃全忠陷黄州，刺史矍璋死之。
现代文：五月初八，朱全忠攻破黄州，刺史矍璋丧命。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth lunar month, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Huangzhou and killed Zhi Shi.

古文：六月，贬王建为南州刺史。
现代文：六月，昭宗将王建贬为南州刺史。
English: In June, Zhaozong relegated Wang Jianxuan to the position of Nanshou goblin.

古文：以李茂贞为剑南西川节度使，嗣覃王嗣周为凤翔陇右节度使，茂贞不受命，嗣周及茂贞战于奉天，败绩。
现代文：委任李茂贞为剑南西川节度使，嗣覃王李嗣周为凤翔陇右节度使；李茂贞不接受任命，李嗣周在奉天与李茂贞作战，大败。
English: He appointed Li Maozhen as the envoy to the Jianan West River Festival, and the king's heir, Li Shizhou, as the envoy to the Fengxiang West River Festival; Li Maozhen did not accept the appointment, and Li Shizhou fought with Li Maozhen in Mingtian and was defeated.

古文：八月，韩建杀通王滋、沂王禋、韶王、彭王、嗣韩王、嗣陈王、嗣覃王嗣周、嗣延王戒丕、嗣丹王允。
现代文：八月，韩建杀了通王李滋、沂王李聐、韶王、彭王、嗣韩王、嗣陈王、嗣覃王李嗣周、嗣延王李戒丕、嗣丹王李允。
English: In August, Han Jian killed King Tong Li Zhi, King Gong Li Zhi, King Gong, King Peng, King Han's heir, King Chen's heir, King Gong's heir, King Li Zhou's heir, King Yan's heir, King Li Jing's heir, and King Dan's heir, King Li Yun.

古文：九月，钱升陷湖州，忠国军节度使李继徽奔于淮南。
现代文：九月，钱升攻破湖州，忠国军节度使李继徽逃往淮南。
English: In September, Qian Sheng invaded Huzhou, and the loyalist army made Li Jihui flee to Huainan.

古文：彰义军节度使张琏为凤翔西北行营招讨使，静难军节度使李思谏为凤翔四面行营副都统，以讨李茂贞。
现代文：彰义军节度使张琏任凤翔西北行营招讨使，静难军节度使李思谏任凤翔四面行营副都统，讨伐李茂贞。
English: According to the schedule of the Zhangyi Army, Zhang Jun was appointed as the envoy of Fengxiang's northwest campaign, and according to the schedule of the Jingnan Army, Li Siyu was appointed as the deputy commander of Fengxiang's four-sided campaign to fight against Li Maozhen.

古文：十月壬子，遂州刺史侯绍叛附于王建。
现代文：十月初十，遂州刺史侯绍反叛依附王建。
English: On the 10th day of the 10th month of the lunar calendar, Suizhou Jishi Hossao rebelled and sided with Wang Jian.

古文：乙卯，合州刺史王仁威叛附于建。
现代文：十三日，合州刺史王仁威反叛依附王建。
English: On the 13th, Wang Renwei rebelled and followed Wang Jian.

古文：庚申，建陷梓州，剑南东川节度使顾彦晖死之。
现代文：十八日，王建攻破梓州，剑南东川节度使顾彦晖丧命。
English: On the 18th, Wang Jian invaded Zizhou, and the Jianan Dongchuan Festival led to Gu Yanqi's death.

古文：甲子，封子秘为景王，祚辉王，祺祁王。
现代文：二十二日，昭宗封儿子李礻必为景王，李祚为辉王，李祺为祁王。
English: On the 22nd, Zhaozongfu's son, Li Qiye, will become King of Jing, Li Qiye will become King of Hui, and Li Qiye will become King of Yao.

古文：十一月癸酉，杨行密及硃全忠战于消口，败之。
现代文：十一月初二，杨行密与朱全忠在清口作战，打败朱全忠。
English: On November 2, Yang Xingmi and Zhu Quanzhong fought in Qingkou and defeated Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：丙子，钱升陷台州。
现代文：初五，钱升攻破台州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Qian Sheng defeated Taizhou.

古文：十二月丁未，威武军节度使王潮卒，其弟审知自称留后。
现代文：十二月初六，威武军节度使王潮去世，其弟王审知自称留后。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the festival of the Great Martial Arts Army caused the death of Wang Chao, and his brother Wang Xizhi claimed to stay behind.

古文：光化元年正月，徐彦若为司徒。
现代文：光化元年正月，徐彦若任司徒。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Guanghua era, Xu Yanru was appointed as a disciple.

古文：二月，赦李茂贞。
现代文：二月，昭宗赦免李茂贞。
English: In February, Zhaozong pardoned Li Maozhen.

古文：三月，幽州卢龙军节度使刘仁恭之子守文陷沧州，义昌军节度使卢彦威奔于汴州。
现代文：三月，幽州卢龙军节度使刘仁恭之子刘守文攻破沧州，义昌军节度使卢彦威逃往汴州。
English: In March, the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival made Liu Shouwen, the son of Liu Rengong, conquer Cangzhou, and the Yichang Army Festival made Lu Yanwei flee to Zhangzhou.

古文：四月丙寅，立淑妃何氏为皇后。
现代文：四月二十七日，昭宗立淑妃何氏为皇后。
English: On the 27th of April, Shosong made Shuhei Ho the empress.

古文：五月己巳，大赦。
现代文：五月初一，昭宗施行大赦。
English: On the first day of May, Akimune granted a general amnesty.

古文：辛未，硃全忠陷洺州，刺史邢善益死之；又陷邢州。
现代文：初三，朱全忠攻破氵名州，刺史邢善益丧命；又攻破邢州。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Shimeizhou, stabbed Shi Shizhen and killed him; he also defeated Shizhou.

古文：壬午，陷磁州，刺史袁奉韬死之。
现代文：十四日，朱全忠攻破磁州，刺史袁奉韬丧命。
English: On the 14th, Zhu Quanzhong broke through the magnetic state, stabbed Shi Yuan Fengyao to death.

古文：是月，马殷陷邵、衡、永三州，刺史蒋勋、杨师远、唐旻死之。
现代文：本年，马殷攻破邵、衡、永三个州，刺史蒋勋、杨师远、唐丧命。
English: This year, Ma Yin broke through the three states of Shao, Heng and Yong, and killed Shi Jiangxun, Yang Shiyuan and Tang.

古文：七月丙申，硃全忠陷唐州，又陷隋州，执刺史赵匡璘。
现代文：七月二十八日，朱全忠攻破唐州，又攻破隋州，俘虏了刺史赵匡瞞。
English: On July 28th, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Tangzhou and Suizhou, and captured the statesman Zhao Kuangcheng.

古文：八月戊午，陷邓州，执刺史国湘。
现代文：八月二十一日，朱全忠攻破邓州，俘虏了刺史国湘。
English: On August 21st, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Dengzhou and captured Shishi Guoxiang.

古文：壬戌，至自华州。
现代文：二十五日，昭宗自华州返回京城。
English: On the 25th, Zhaozong returned to Beijing from Huazhou.

古文：甲子，大赦，改元。
现代文：二十七日，施行大赦，更改年号。
English: On the 27th, an amnesty was implemented and the year was changed.

古文：九月丙子，有星陨于北方。
现代文：九月初九，有流星陨落在北方。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, a meteorite fell in the north.

古文：甲申，钱升陷苏州。
现代文：十七日，钱升攻破苏州。
English: On the 17th, Qian Sheng defeated Suzhou.

古文：十月，魏博节度使罗弘信卒，其子绍威自称留后。
现代文：十月，魏博节度使罗弘信去世，其子罗绍威自称留后。
English: In October, the Wei Bo Festival caused Luo Hongxin to die, and his son Luo Shaowei claimed to be his successor.

古文：己亥，硃全忠陷安州，刺史武瑜死之。
现代文：初三，朱全忠攻破安州，刺史武瑜丧命。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Anzhou and stabbed Shi Wuyu to death.

古文：十一月，衢州刺史陈岌叛附于杨行密。
现代文：十一月，衢州刺史陈岌反叛依附杨行密。
English: In November, Chen Du rebelled against and clung to Yang Xingmi in Zhangzhou.

古文：甲寅，封子禛为雅王，祥琼王。
现代文：十九日，昭宗封儿子李礻真为雅王，李祥为琼王。
English: On the 19th, Li Shizhen, the son of Zhaozongfu, became Ya Wang, and Li Xiang became Qiong Wang.

古文：十二月癸未，李罕之陷潞州，自称节度留后。
现代文：十二月十八日，李罕之攻破潞州，自称节度留后。
English: On December 18th, Li Hanzhi invaded Zhangzhou, claiming to stay behind.

古文：李克用陷泽州。
现代文：李克用攻破泽州。
English: Li Ke used it to break through Zezhou.

古文：二年正月乙未，给复绵、剑二州二年。
现代文：光化二年正月初一，免除绵、剑二州的徭役二年。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Gwanghwamun, he was exempted from military service in Mian and Jian Provinces for two years.

古文：丁未，崔胤罢。
现代文：十三日，崔胤被免职。
English: On the 13th, Choi In was dismissed.

古文：兵部尚书陆扆同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部尚书陆任同中书门下平章事。
English: Hyobusho Sho Riku was appointed to the same position as Chushomon Shimon Shimohei.

古文：是月，李罕之陷沁州。
现代文：本月，李罕之攻破沁州。
English: This month, Li Hanzhi broke through Zhangzhou.

古文：刘仁恭陷贝州。
现代文：刘仁恭攻破贝州。
English: Liu Rengong attacked Beizhou.

古文：二月甲子，硃全忠陷蔡州，奉国军节度使崔洪奔于淮南。
现代文：二月初一，朱全忠攻破蔡州，奉国军节度使崔洪逃往淮南。
English: On the first day of February, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Caizhou, and sent troops to force Cui Hong to flee to Huainan.

古文：三月丁巳，全忠陷泽州。
现代文：三月二十四日，朱全忠攻破泽州。
English: On March 24th, Zhu Quanzhong invaded and defeated Zezhou.

古文：六月丁丑，保义军乱，杀其节度使王珙，其将李璠叛附于全忠。
现代文：六月十五日，保义军发生动乱，杀了节度使王珙，其部将李反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On June 15, a riot broke out among the loyalist troops, and they killed the regent Wang Qi, whose subordinate Li rebelled and clung to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：七月壬辰，海州戍将陈汉宾以其州叛附于杨行密。
现代文：七月初一，海州戍将陈汉宾献出本州反叛依附杨行密。
English: On the first day of July, the Haizhou Emperor presented Chen Hanbin to the rebel Yang Xingmi.

古文：马殷陷道州，刺史蔡结死之。
现代文：马殷攻破道州，刺史蔡结丧命。
English: Ma Yin invaded and conquered Daozhou, and stabbed Shi Cai Jie to death.

古文：八月，李克用陷泽、潞、怀三州。
现代文：八月，李克用攻破泽、潞、怀三个州。
English: In August, Li Ke used the offensive to break through Zhe, Handan and Huai three states.

古文：十一月，徐彦若为太保，王抟为司空。
现代文：十一月，徐彦若任太保，王抟任司空。
English: In November, Xu Yanru was appointed to the position of the eunuch, and Wang Xi was appointed to the position of the secretary.

古文：马殷陷郴、连二州，刺史陈彦谦、鲁景仁死之。
现代文：马殷攻破郴、连二州，刺史陈彦谦、鲁景仁丧命。
English: Ma Yin broke through the shackles, even two states, stabbed Chen Yanqian and Lu Jingren to death.

古文：辛丑，保义军将硃简杀其节度使李璠，叛附于硃全忠。
现代文：十一日，保义军将领朱简杀了节度使李，反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhu Jian, the commander of the loyalist army, killed Li, the regent, and Zhu Quanzhong became a rebel.

古文：三年四月辛未，皇后及皇太子享于太庙。
现代文：光化三年四月十四日，皇后何氏与皇太子李裕到祖庙祭祀。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the 3rd year of the Gwanghwa era, Empress Ho and Crown Prince Ri Yu went to the ancestral temple for a ritual.

古文：六月丁卯，清海军节度使崔胤为尚书左仆射，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月十一日，清海军节度使崔胤任尚书左仆射，兼任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On June 11th, the Qing Navy Day, Cui Yan was appointed as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, concurrently serving as a subordinate attendant and a subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：王抟罢。
现代文：王抟被免职。
English: Wang Qi was dismissed from his post.

古文：己巳，杀之。
现代文：十三日，杀了王抟。
English: On the 13th, he killed Wang Yao.

古文：七月，浙江溢。
现代文：七月，浙江洪水泛滥。
English: In July, Zhejiang was flooded.

古文：八月庚辰，李克用陷洺州，执刺史硃绍宗。
现代文：八月二十五日，李克用攻破氵名州，俘虏了刺史朱绍宗。
English: On August 25th, Li Ke used his army to break through Yanmeizhou, and captured the assassin Zhu Shaosong.

古文：九月，硃全忠陷洺州。
现代文：九月，朱全忠攻破氵名州。
English: In September, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Shengmeizhou.

古文：钱升陷婺州，刺史王坛奔于宣州。
现代文：钱升攻破婺州，刺史王坛逃往宣州。
English: Qian Sheng defeated Zhangzhou, and Wang Tan fled to Xuanzhou.

古文：衢州刺史陈岌叛附于钱升。
现代文：衢州刺史陈岌反叛依附钱升。
English: Zhangzhou stabbed Chen precariously and rebelled to attach Qian Sheng.

古文：乙巳，徐彦若罢。
现代文：二十日，徐彦若被免职。
English: On the 20th, Xu Yanruo was removed from office.

古文：丙午，崔远罢。
现代文：二十一日，崔远被免职。
English: On the 21st, Cui Yuan was removed from office.

古文：戊申，刑部尚书裴贽为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十三日，刑部尚书裴贽任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 23rd, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Peiwen, was appointed as the secretary of the middle school, and the teacher of the middle school, Heping Zhangji.

古文：甲寅，硃全忠陷瀛州。
现代文：二十九日，朱全忠攻破瀛州。
English: On the 29th, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：十月丙辰，陷景州，执刺史刘仁霸。
现代文：十月初二，朱全忠攻破景州，俘虏了刺史刘仁霸。
English: At the beginning of October 2, Zhu Quanzhong broke through Jingzhou and captured Liu Renba.

古文：辛酉，陷莫州。
现代文：初七，攻破莫州。
English: 7th year of junior high school, break through Mozhou.

古文：辛巳，陷祁州，刺史杨约死之。
现代文：二十七日，攻破祁州，刺史杨约丧命。
English: On the 27th, he broke through Zhangzhou, and stabbed Shi Yang to death.

古文：甲申陷定州，义武军节度使王郜奔于太原。
现代文：三十日，攻破定州，义武军节度使王郜逃往太原。
English: On the 30th, Dingzhou was conquered, and Wang Yao was forced to flee to Taiyuan.

古文：十一月己丑，左右神策军中尉刘季述、王仲先、内枢密使王彦范、薛齐偓作乱，皇帝居于少阳院。
现代文：十一月初五，左右神策军中尉刘季述、王仲先，内枢密使王彦范、薛齐亻屋作乱，昭宗被迫住进少阳院。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the 11th month, Liu Jishu and Wang Zhongxian, both of whom were lieutenants of the Shenzhao Army, and Wang Yanfan and Xue Qiqianya, both of whom were envoys of the Inner Privy Council, rioted, and Shao Zong was forced to live in Shao Yang Yuan.

古文：辛卯，季述以皇太子裕为皇帝。
现代文：初七，刘季述立皇太子李裕为皇帝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Liu Qishu proclaimed the crown prince Li Yu as emperor.

古文：丁未，太白昼见。
现代文：二十三日，白昼出现太白金星。
English: On the 23rd, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：十二月，刘季述杀睦王倚。
现代文：十二月，刘季述杀了睦王李倚。
English: In December, Liu Jishu killed the King of Goodwill, Li Jie.

古文：是岁，马殷陷桂、宜、岩、柳、象五州。
现代文：本年，马殷攻破桂、宜、岩、柳、象五个州。
English: This year, Ma Yin broke through the five states of Gui, Yi, Yan, Liu and Xiang.

古文：睦州刺史陈晟卒，其弟询自称刺史。
现代文：睦州刺史陈晟去世，他的弟弟陈询自称刺史。
English: The Mutsuzhou stabber Chen Yao passed away, and his younger brother Chen Ying claimed to be the stabber.

古文：天复元年正月乙酉，左神策军将孙德昭、董彦弼、周承诲以兵讨乱，皇帝复于位。
现代文：天复元年正月初二，左神策军将领孙德昭、董彦弼、周承诲率兵讨平宫廷祸乱，昭宗恢复皇位。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Tianfu, Sun Dezhao, Dong Yanqi, and Zhou Chengyu, the generals of the Zuo Sheng army, led the troops to quell the palace disaster, and Shozong restored the throne.

古文：刘季述、薛齐偓伏诛，降封皇太子裕为德王。
现代文：刘季述、薛齐亻屋伏法被处死，将皇太子李裕降封为德王。
English: According to Liu Ji, Xue Qiqianya Fuba was put to death, and the crown prince Li Yu was demoted to the position of German king.

古文：戊申，硃全忠陷绛州。
现代文：二十五日，朱全忠攻破绛州。
English: On the 25th, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：壬子，崔胤为司空。
现代文：二十九日，崔胤任司空。
English: On the 29th, Cui Yin was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：硃全忠陷晋州。
现代文：朱全忠攻破晋州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong defeated Jinzhou.

古文：二月甲寅，以旱避正殿，减膳。
现代文：二月初一，昭宗因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On the first day of February, Akimune avoided the main hall due to the drought and cut down on meals.

古文：戊辰，硃全忠陷河中，执护国军节度使王珂。
现代文：十五日，朱全忠攻破河中，俘虏了护国军节度使王珂。
English: On the 15th, Zhu Quanzhong broke through the middle of the river and captured Wang Ke, the commander of the National Guard.

古文：辛未，封全忠为梁王。
现代文：十八日，昭宗封朱全忠为梁王。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Zhaozong made Zhu Quanzhong the Prince of Liang.

古文：是月，翰林学士、户部侍郎王溥为中书侍郎，吏部侍郎裴枢为户部侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：本月，翰林学士、户部侍郎王溥任中书侍郎，吏部侍郎裴枢任户部侍郎，二人并任同中书门下平章事。
English: This month, Hanlin Baccalaureate and Household Attendant Wang Xuan was appointed as the Secretary of the Middle School, and the Secretary of the General Staff, Pei Zu, was appointed as the Secretary of the Household, and the two were also appointed as the Secretary of the Middle School.

古文：三月辛亥，昭义军节度使孟迁叛附于硃全忠。
现代文：三月二十九日，昭义军节度使孟迁反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On March 29th, the Shao Yi Army's festival made Meng Qian rebel and cling to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：四月壬子，全忠陷沁、泽二州。
现代文：四月壬子日，朱全忠攻破沁、泽二州。
English: In April, on Jinsi Day, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zou and Ze Erzhou.

古文：丁巳，仪州刺史张鄂叛附于全忠。
现代文：初五，仪州刺史张鄂反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zhang E rebelled against Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：甲戌，享于太庙。
现代文：二十二日，昭宗到太庙祭祖。
English: On the 22nd, Akimune went to the Imperial Temple to celebrate the ancestor.

古文：丙子，大赦，改元。
现代文：二十四日，施行大赦，更改年号为 天复 。
English: On the 24th, an amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed to Tianfu.

古文：武德、贞观配飨功臣主祭子孙叙进之，介公、酅公后予一子九品正员官。
现代文：高祖武德年间、太宗贞观年间的功臣，凡神位附祭于太庙的后代主持祭祀的子孙，按级依次进级授职；受封为介公、阝公的后代，授予其中一个儿子任九品正员官职。
English: During the reign of Gao Zuwude and the reign of Taizong Zhenguan, the descendants of the gods enshrined in the Great Temple and the descendants of the heroes who presided over the sacrifices were promoted in order of rank; they were appointed as the descendants of Jie Gong and Jie Gong, and one of the sons was awarded the official post of the ninth grade official.

古文：免光化以来畿内逋负。
现代文：免除自立光化年号以来，京畿之内各地拖欠的赋税。
English: Since the year of Gwanghwamun's independence, tax arrears in various regions of Gyeonggi Province have been exempted.

古文：五月，李茂贞来朝。
现代文：五月，李茂贞朝见昭宗。
English: In May, Li Maozhen went to see Shoson in the morning.

古文：六月，李克用陷隰、慈二州。
现代文：六月，李克用攻破隰、慈二州。
English: In June, Li Ke used it to break through Shao and Cizhou.

古文：十月戊戌，硃全忠犯京师。
现代文：十月二十日，朱全忠进犯京都。
English: On October 20, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Kyoto.

古文：十一月己酉，陷同州。
现代文：十一月初一，朱全忠攻破同州。
English: On the first day of November, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Tongzhou.

古文：壬子，如凤翔。
现代文：初四，昭宗迁往凤翔。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Akimune moved to Fengxiang.

古文：丁巳，硃全忠陷华州，镇国军节度使韩建叛附于全忠。
现代文：初九，朱全忠攻破华州，镇国军节度使韩建反叛依附朱全忠。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Huazhou, and garrisoned the national army to make Han Jian rebel and cling to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：辛酉，兵部侍郎卢光启权句当中书事。
现代文：十三日，兵部侍郎卢光启暂主管中书省事务。
English: On the 13th, Lu Guangqi, the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was temporarily in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：癸亥，李茂贞及硃全忠战于武功，败绩。
现代文：十五日，李茂贞在武功与朱全忠作战，大败。
English: On the 15th, Li Maozhen fought with Zhu Quanzhong in martial arts and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：丁卯，卢光启为右谏议大夫，参知机务。
现代文：十九日，卢光启任右谏议大夫，参预主持军机要务。
English: On the 19th, Lu Guang was appointed as the doctor of the Right Hand Council, and presided over the important tasks of military aircraft.

古文：戊辰，硃全忠犯凤翔。
现代文：二十日，朱全忠进犯凤翔。
English: On the 20th, Zhu Quanzhong attacked Fengxiang.

古文：辛未，陷邠州，静难军节度使李继徽叛附于全忠。
现代文：二十三日，攻破州，静难军节度使李继徽叛变依附朱全忠。
English: On the 23rd, after breaking through the state, the Jingnan Army staged a coup to make Li Jihui defect to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：甲戌，崔胤、裴枢罢。
现代文：二十六日，崔胤、裴枢被免职。
English: On the 26th, Cui Yin and Pei Zu were dismissed.

古文：十二月，钟传陷吉州。
现代文：十二月，钟传攻破吉州。
English: In December, Zhong Chuan defeated Jizhou.

古文：是岁，清海军节度使徐彦若卒，行军司马刘隐自称留后。
现代文：本年，清海军节度使徐彦若去世，行军司马刘隐自称留后。
English: This year, the Qing Navy Festival caused the death of Xu Yanru, and the marching secretary, Ma Liuyin, claimed to stay behind.

古文：武贞军节度使雷蒲卒，其子彦威自称留后。
现代文：武贞军节度使雷满去世，其子雷彦威自称留后。
English: Emperor Wu Zhen's military edict caused Lei Man's death, and his son Lei Yanwei claimed to be his successor.

古文：二年正月丁卯，给事中韦贻范为工部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：天复二年正月二十日，给事中韦贻范任工部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the second year of the Tenpō era, Wei Yifan was appointed as an attendant of the engineering department, and Shimon Shimpei was appointed as a secretary of the same department.

古文：丙子，给事中严龟为汴、岐和协使。
现代文：二十九日，给事中严龟任汴、岐和协使。
English: On the 29th, Yan Kame was appointed as a special envoy for the two countries.

古文：二月己亥，盗发简陵。
现代文：二月二十二日，强徒掘开简陵。
English: On February 22, Qiangtu excavated and opened the Jianling Mausoleum.

古文：王建陷利州，昭武军节度使李继忠奔于凤翔。
现代文：王建攻破利州，昭武军节度使李继忠逃往凤翔。
English: Wang Jian invaded Lishu, and the Shouwu army defeated Li Jitong and forced him to flee to Fengxiang.

古文：三月庚戌，昼晦。
现代文：三月初四，白昼一片昏暗。
English: On the 4th of March, the day is dark.

古文：癸丑，硃全忠陷汾州。
现代文：初七，朱全忠攻破汾州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：乙卯，浙西大雨雪。
现代文：初九，浙西地区降落大雪。
English: In early September, heavy snow fell in western Zhejiang.

古文：戊午，硃全忠陷慈、隰二州。
现代文：十二日，朱全忠攻破慈、隰二州。
English: On the twelfth day, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Cixi and Shandong provinces.

古文：丁卯，李克用陷汾、慈、隰三州。
现代文：二十一日，李克用攻破汾、慈、隰三个州。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Ke used it to break through the three states of Zhai, Cixi and Handan.

古文：四月，卢光启罢。
现代文：四月，卢光启被免职。
English: In April, Lu Guangqi was removed from office.

古文：丙申，温州刺史硃褒卒，其兄敖自称刺史。
现代文：二十日，温州刺史朱褒去世，其兄朱敖自称刺史。
English: On the 20th, the Wenzhou assassin Zhu Bo died, and his brother Zhu Xi claimed to be the assassin.

古文：杨行密陷升州。
现代文：杨行密攻破升州。
English: Yang Xingmi broke through Shengzhou.

古文：五月丙午，李茂贞及硃全忠战于武功，败绩。
现代文：五月初一，李茂贞在武功与朱全忠作战，大败。
English: On the first day of May, Li Maozhen fought Zhu Quanzhong in a martial arts contest and was soundly defeated.

古文：庚午，韦贻范罢。
现代文：二十五日，韦贻范被免职。
English: On the 25th, Wei Yifan was removed from office.

古文：六月丙子，中书舍人苏检为工部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：六月初二，中书舍人苏检任工部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Su Jian, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was appointed as a chamberlain of the engineering department, and Xia Ping Zhang, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was appointed.

古文：丙戌，硃全忠陷凤州。
现代文：十二日，朱全忠攻破凤州。
English: On the 12th, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Fengzhou.

古文：七月甲辰，陷成州。
现代文：七月初一，朱全忠攻破成州。
English: On the first day of July, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Chengdu.

古文：乙巳，陷陇州。
现代文：初二，攻破陇州。
English: In the second year of junior high school, they broke through Zhangzhou.

古文：八月己亥，韦贻范起复。
现代文：八月二十六日，重新启用韦贻范。
English: On August 26th, Weiqi Van was reopened.

古文：辛丑，王建陷兴元，山南西道节度使王万弘叛附于建。
现代文：二十八日，王建攻破兴元，山南西道节度使王万弘叛变依附王建。
English: On the 28th, Wang Jian defeated Xingyuan, and the Shannan West Road Festival made Wang Wanhong rebel and attach himself to Wang Jian.

古文：九月戊申，李茂贞及硃全忠战于槐林，败绩。
现代文：九月初五，李茂贞在槐林与朱全忠作战，大败。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, Li Maozhen fought Zhu Quanzhong in Yulin and was soundly defeated.

古文：武定军节度使拓拔思恭叛附于王建。
现代文：武定军节度使拓拔思恭叛变依附王建。
English: The Wuding Army's victory made Tuoba Shigong's rebellion dependent on Wang Jian.

古文：十月癸酉，杨行密为东面诸道行营都统，及湖南节度使马殷讨硃全忠。
现代文：十月初一，杨行密任东西诸道行营都统，与湖南节度使马殷一道讨伐朱全忠。
English: On the first day of October, Yang Xingmi was appointed as the commander of the eastern and western military camps, and together with Ma Yin, the governor of Hunan Province, he fought against Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：王建陷兴州。
现代文：王建攻破兴州。
English: Wang Jian attacked and defeated Xingzhou.

古文：十一月癸卯，保大军节度使李茂勋以兵援凤翔。
现代文：十一月初一，保大军节度使李茂勋出兵援助凤翔守军。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Li Maoxun sent troops to aid the Fengxiang garrison.

古文：丙辰，韦贻范薨。
现代文：十四日，韦贻范去世。
English: On the 14th, Wei Yifan passed away.

古文：十二月癸巳，温州将丁章逐其刺史硃敖。
现代文：十二月二十一日，温州的将领丁章驱逐了本州刺史朱敖。
English: On December 21st, Ding Zhang, the general of Wenzhou, expelled Zhu Xi, the governor of Wenzhou.

古文：己亥，硃全忠陷鄜州，保大军节度使李茂勋叛附于全忠。
现代文：二十七日，朱全忠攻破州，保大军节度使李茂勋叛变依附朱全忠。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, Zhu Quanzhong attacked and broke the state, and the Baodai Army's festival caused Li Maoxun to defect to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：是岁，卢光稠陷韶州。
现代文：本年，卢光稠攻破韶州。
English: This year, Lu Guangzou defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：岳州刺史邓进思卒，其弟进忠自称刺史。
现代文：岳州刺史邓进思去世，其弟邓进忠自称刺史。
English: Yuezhou assassin Deng Jinshi passed away, and his brother Deng Jintao claimed to be the assassin.

古文：三年正月丙午，平卢军节度使王师范取兗州。
现代文：天复三年正月初四，平卢军节度使王师范收复兖州。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Tianfu, the Pinglu Army's festival made Wang Shifan recover Ganzhou.

古文：戊申，杀左右神策军护军中尉韩全诲张彦弘、内枢密使袁易简周敬容。
现代文：初六，昭宗杀了左右神策军护军中尉韩全诲、张彦弘，内枢密使袁易简、周敬容。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Zhaozong killed Han Zhengyi and Zhang Yanhong, both lieutenants of the Shen Zhe army, and Yuan Yi Jian and Zhou Jing Rong, both secret emissaries of the Inner Court.

古文：辛亥，翰林学士姚洎为汴、岐和协使。
现代文：初九，翰林学士姚洎任汴、岐和协使。
English: At the age of nine, Yao Wei, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as an assistant to Zhou, Qi and He.

古文：壬子，工部尚书崔胤为司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：初十，工部尚书崔胤任司空，兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the tenth year of his junior high school, Choi Tan, a member of the Department of Engineering, was appointed as a secretary, and also served as a junior attendant, and as a junior high school student, a junior high school student.

古文：甲子，幸硃全忠军。
现代文：二十日，昭宗亲临朱全忠军部。
English: On the 20th, Akimune personally visited Zhu Quanzhong's military department.

古文：己巳，至自凤翔，哭于太庙，大赦。
现代文：二十七日，昭宗由凤翔返回京都，到太庙痛哭，施行大赦。
English: On the 27th, Akimune left Fengxiang and returned to Kyoto, where he wept bitterly at Taimyo and granted amnesty.

古文：庚午，崔胤及硃全忠杀中官七百余人。
现代文：二十八日，崔胤与朱全忠杀戮中官七百余人。
English: On the 28th, Cui Yin and Zhu Quanzhong killed more than seven hundred middle-ranking officers.

古文：辛未，胤判六军十二卫事。
现代文：二十九日，崔胤兼管六军十二卫事务。
English: On the 29th, Cui Yin also took charge of the affairs of the Six Armies and Twelve Guards.

古文：丁章伏诛。
现代文：丁章伏法被处死。
English: Ding Zhangfu was executed.

古文：二月，雨土。
现代文：二月，空降土雨。
English: In February, airborne rain.

古文：甲戌，贬陆扆为沂王傅，分司东都。
现代文：初三，将陆贬为沂王傅，作为朝廷分支官员派往东都。
English: In the third year of his junior high school, Lu was relegated to the position of Shao Wangfu and sent to Dongdu as a branch official of the imperial court.

古文：丙子，王溥罢。
现代文：初五，王溥被免职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wang Xi was dismissed.

古文：硃全忠杀苏检、吏部侍郎卢光启。
现代文：朱全忠杀了苏俭和吏部侍郎卢光启。
English: Zhu Quanzhong killed Su Jian and Lu Guangqi, a servant of the cadre department.

古文：戊寅，降京畿、河中凤翔兴德府、同邠鄜三州死罪以下。
现代文：初七，昭宗下诏对京畿、河中的凤翔、兴德府、同州、州、州死罪以下的罪犯减刑。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Emperor Zhao Zong issued an edict to commute the sentences of those who had committed crimes punishable by death or less in Gyeonggi Province, Fengxiang County, Hsingde Prefecture, Hebei Province, Gyeonggi Province, Gyeonggi Province and Gyeonggi Province.

古文：己卯，辉王祚为诸道兵马都元帅；庚辰，硃全忠为太尉、中书令副之。
现代文：初八，辉王李祚任诸道兵马都元帅；初九，朱全忠被委任为太尉、中书令、诸道兵马副都元帅。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, King Hui Li Xi was appointed as the marshal of all the armies and horses; on the ninth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong was appointed as the first lieutenant, the second secretary, and the deputy marshal of all the armies and horses.

古文：崔胤为司徒。
现代文：崔胤任司徒。
English: Choi Tan as the apprentice.

古文：乙未，清海军节度使裴枢为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十四日，清海军节度使裴枢任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 24th, the Qing Navy Festival made Baizhu serve as a subordinate attendant and subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：三月，硃全忠陷青州。
现代文：三月，朱全忠攻破青州。
English: In March, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Qingzhou.

古文：杨行密陷密州，刺史刘康乂死之。
现代文：杨行密攻破密州，刺史刘康耣丧命。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked and broke through the secret state, stabbing Liu Kangyao to death.

古文：酉月己卯，硃全忠判元帅府事。
现代文：四月初九，朱全忠兼任元帅府事。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong also assumed the post of marshal.

古文：五月壬子，荆南节度使成汭及杨行密战于君山，死之。
现代文：五月十二日，荆南节度使成在君山与杨行密作战，丧命。
English: On May 12th, Jingnan Jiedu forced Cheng to fight with Yang Xinglong in Junshan, and he was killed.

古文：武贞军节度使雷彦威之弟彦恭陷江陵。
现代文：武贞军节度使雷彦威的弟弟雷彦恭攻破江陵。
English: Emperor Wu Zhen's army sent Lei Yanwei's younger brother, Lei Yan Gong, to attack and destroy Jiangling.

古文：六月乙亥，硃全忠陷登州。
现代文：六月初六，朱全忠攻破登州。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of June, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Dengzhou.

古文：九月，杨行密杀奉国军节度使硃延寿。
现代文：九月，杨行密杀了奉国节度使朱延寿。
English: In September, Yang Xing secretly killed Zhu Yanju, the minister of the National Day of the Communist Party of China.

古文：辛亥，硃全忠陷棣州，刺史邵播死之；陷密州。
现代文：十四日，朱全忠攻破棣州，刺史邵播丧命；接着攻破密州。
English: On the 14th, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Zhangzhou, stabbed Shi Shaohan to death, and then defeated Myizhou.

古文：戊午，平卢军节度使王师范叛附于全忠。
现代文：二十一日，平卢军节度使王师范叛变依附朱全忠。
English: On the 21st day of the month, the Pinglu military festival caused Wang Shifan to defect to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：十月，忠义军将赵匡明陷江陵，自称留后。
现代文：十月，忠义军的将领赵匡明攻破江陵，自称留后。
English: In October, Zhao Kuangming, the general of the loyalist army, broke through Jiangling and claimed to stay behind.

古文：王建陷忠、万、施三州。
现代文：王建攻破忠、万、施三个州。
English: Wang Jian defeated three provinces of Zhongzhong, Wan and Shi.

古文：甲戌，陷夔州。
现代文：初八，又攻破夔州。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, it broke through Zhangzhou again.

古文：丁丑，平卢军将刘鄩以兗州叛附于硃全忠。
现代文：十一日，平卢军的将领刘寻阝献出兖州叛变依附朱全忠。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the general of the Pinglu army, Liu Xingyao, betrayed the Zhangzhou mutiny to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：十二月，裴贽罢。
现代文：十二月，裴贽被免职。
English: In December, Pei was removed from his post.

古文：杨行密陷宣州，宁国军节度使田頵死之。
现代文：杨行密攻破宣州，宁国军节度使田君页丧命。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked and broke through Xuanzhou, and the Ningguo Army's retreat caused the death of Tian Junshi.

古文：辛巳，礼部尚书独孤损为兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十五日，礼部尚书独狐损任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, he was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and was promoted to the position of the Vice-Minister of Military Affairs.

古文：丙申，硃全忠杀尚书左仆射致仕张浚。
现代文：三十日，朱全忠杀了尚书左仆射致仕张浚。
English: On the 30th, Zhu Quanzhong killed Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, and shot Zhang Jun.

古文：天祐元年正月乙巳，崔胤罢。
现代文：天祐元年正月初九，崔胤被免职。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of Tenyu, Cui Yin was dismissed.

古文：裴枢判左三军事，独孤损判右三军事。
现代文：裴枢兼管左三军事务，独孤损兼管右三军事务。
English: Peizhu was also in charge of the affairs of the three armies on the left, and he was also in charge of the affairs of the three armies on the right.

古文：兵部尚书崔远为中书侍郎，翰林学士、右拾遗柳璨为右谏议大夫：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：兵部尚书崔远任中书侍郎，翰林学士、右拾遗柳璨任右谏议大夫，二人并任同中书门下平章事。
English: Shangshu Cui Yuan of the Ministry of Military Affairs served as the chancellor of the middle school, Hanlin Biao and Yu Zhiyulong of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right Division of the Right.

古文：己酉，硃全忠杀太子少傅崔胤及京兆尹郑元规、威远军使陈班。
现代文：十三日，朱全忠杀了太子少傅崔胤与京兆尹郑元规、威远军使陈班。
English: On the thirteenth day, Zhu Quanzhong killed the young prince Fu Cuiyin, Jing Zhao Yin Zheng Yuanbi, and Wei Yuan's military envoy Chen Ban.

古文：戊午，全忠迁唐都于洛阳。
现代文：二十二日，朱全忠将唐朝都城迁往洛阳。
English: On the 22nd, Zhu Quanzhong moved the Tang capital to Luoyang.

古文：二月丙寅，日中见北斗。
现代文：二月初一，白昼中午出现北斗星。
English: On the first day of February, the Big Dipper appeared at noon.

古文：戊寅，次陕州。
现代文：十三日，昭宗停驻陕州。
English: On the 13th, Zhaozong stopped in Shaanxi.

古文：硃全忠来朝。
现代文：朱全忠来朝见昭宗。
English: Zhu Quanzhong came to see me in the morning.

古文：甲申，封子祯为端王，祁丰王，福和王，禧登王，祐嘉王。
现代文：十九日，昭宗封其子李祯为端王，李祁为丰王，李禧为和王，李福为登王，李祜为嘉王。
English: On the 19th, Zhaozong appointed his son Li Xi as the ruler of Huan, Li Xi as the ruler of Feng, Li Xi as the ruler of He, Li Fu as the ruler of Deng, and Li Xi as the ruler of Ji.

古文：三月丁未，硃全忠兼判左右神策及六军诸卫事。
现代文：三月十二日，朱全忠兼任左右神策军与六军诸卫职务。
English: On March 12th, Zhu Quanzhong concurrently served as the commander of the Left and Right Divisions of the Sacred Artillery Corps and the guards of the Sixth Army.

古文：闰四月壬寅，次谷水。
现代文：闰四月初八，昭宗停驻谷水。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th lunar month, Shoson stopped at Gusui.

古文：硃全忠来朝。
现代文：朱全忠前来朝见。
English: Zhu Quanzhong came to see me in the morning.

古文：甲辰，至自西都。
现代文：初十，昭宗由西都抵达京都。
English: At the age of ten, Akimune arrived in Kyoto from the western capital.

古文：享于太庙。
现代文：祭祀太庙。
English: The rituals of the Imperial Temple are over.

古文：大风，雨土。
现代文：刮起大风，降落土雨。
English: Blowing up a gale, the downpour.

古文：乙巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：十一日，施行大赦，更改年号为 天祐 。
English: On the 11th, an amnesty was implemented, and the year name was changed to Tianyu.

古文：六月，静难军节度使杨崇本会李克用、王建兵以讨硃全忠。
现代文：六月，静难军节度使杨崇本会合李克用、王建的军队讨伐朱全忠。
English: In June, the Jingnan Army Festival made Yang Chong, Li Ke, and Wang Jian's army fight Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：七月乙丑，全忠以兵屯于河中。
现代文：七月初三，朱全忠将军队屯驻在河中。
English: On the third day of the seventh month, Zhu Quanzhong stationed his army in the middle of the river.

古文：八月壬寅，全忠以左右龙武统军硃友恭、氏叔琮、枢密使蒋玄晖兵犯宫门；是夕，皇帝崩，年三十八。
现代文：八月十一日，朱全忠依靠左右龙武统军朱友恭、氏叔琮，枢密使蒋玄晖的军队进袭宫门；当晚，昭宗逝世，终年三十八岁。
English: On August 11th, Zhu Quanzhong relied on Zhu Youqiong, Uji Shuxuan, the leader of the left and right Longwu unification army, and secretly sent the army of Jiang Xuanqian to attack the palace gate; that night, Zhaozong died at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：明年，起居郎苏楷请更谥 恭灵庄闵 ，庙号襄宗。
现代文：次年，起居郎苏楷请准将昭宗谥号改为 恭灵庄闵 ，庙号襄宗。
English: The following year, Kijiro Sukai requested permission to change the family name from Akimune to Goryeong, and the temple name from Goryeong to Jangseong.

古文：至后唐同光初，复故号谥云。
现代文：至后唐庄宗同光初年，恢复原有的皇帝尊号与谥号。
English: Later, in the first year of Tangzhuangzongguang, the original emperor's honorific title and posthumous title were restored.

古文：昭宣光烈孝皇帝讳祝，昭宗第九子也。
现代文：昭宣光烈孝皇帝李木兄，是昭宗的第九个儿子。
English: Emperor Zhaoxuan was the ninth son of Emperor Zhaozong.

古文：母曰皇太后何氏。
现代文：母亲是皇太后何氏。
English: His mother was Empress Dowager He.

古文：始封辉王。
现代文：起初被封为辉王。
English: At first, he was given the title of King Hui.

古文：硃全忠已弑昭宗，矫诏立为皇太子，监军国事。
现代文：朱全忠杀害昭宗后，传布伪诏将他立为皇太子，监军国事务。
English: After Zhu Quanzhong killed Zhaozong, he promulgated a false edict to appoint him as crown prince to supervise military affairs.

古文：天祐元年八月丙午，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：天祐元年八月十五日，李木兄在昭宗灵柩前就皇帝位。
English: On August 15, 1010, Li Mu'er ascended to the throne before the funeral of Emperor Zhaozong.

古文：衢州刺史陈璋、睦州刺史陈询叛附于杨行密。
现代文：衢州刺史陈璋、睦州刺史陈询叛变依附杨行密。
English: Zhangzhou's Chen Xuan and Mengzhou's Chen Xun defected to Yang Xingmi.

古文：九月庚午，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：九月初九，哀帝尊奉昭宗的皇后为皇太后。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the Empress of the Empress Dowager of the Empress Dowager of the Empress Dowager.

古文：十月辛卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月初一，日月合朔，有日食现象。
English: On the first day of October, at the new moon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸巳，硃全忠来朝。
现代文：初三，朱全忠前来朝见。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Zhu Quanzhong came to see me.

古文：甲午，全忠杀硃友恭、氏叔琮。
现代文：初四，朱全忠杀了朱友恭、氏叔琮。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, Zhu Quanzhong killed Zhu Youqiong and Uji Shuxuan.

古文：十一月，全忠陷光州。
现代文：十一月，朱全忠攻破光州。
English: In November, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Gwangju.

古文：是岁，虔州刺史卢光稠卒，衙将李图自称知州事。
现代文：本年，虔州刺史卢光稠去世，衙将李图自称执掌州政。
English: This year, the governor of Gyeongju, Sulu Kwang-soo, passed away, and the warlord, Litu, claimed to be in charge of state affairs.

古文：二年正月，卢约陷温州。
现代文：天祐二年正月，卢约攻破温州。
English: In the first month of the second year of Tenyu, Luyo defeated Wenzhou.

古文：杨行密杀平卢军节试使安仁义。
现代文：杨行密杀了平卢节度使安仁义。
English: Yang Xing conspired to kill Pinglu Jiedu and An Renyi.

古文：丁丑，盗焚乾陵下宫。
现代文：十八日，盗贼焚烧乾陵下宫。
English: On the 18th, thieves set fire to the lower palace of the Qianling.

古文：二月，杨行密陷鄂州，武昌军节度使杜洪死之。
现代文：二月，杨行密攻破鄂州，武昌军节度使杜洪丧命。
English: In February, Yang Xingmi invaded Ezhou, and the Wuchang army killed Du Hong.

古文：戊戌，硃全忠杀德王裕及棣王祤、虔王禊、遂王祎、景王秘、祁王祺、琼王祥。
现代文：初九，朱全忠杀了德王李裕、棣王李礻羽、虔王李禊、遂王李、景王李衤必、祁王李祺、琼王李祥。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Zhu Quanzhong killed King De Li Yu, King Gong Li Yu Yu, King Kian Li Yu, King Sui Li, King Jing Li Yu Bi, King Gong Li Yu, and King Qiong Li Xiang.

古文：己酉，葬圣穆景文孝皇帝于和陵。
现代文：二十日，哀帝将昭宗安葬在和陵。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Aye buried Shoson in peace.

古文：三月甲子，裴枢罢。
现代文：三月初五，裴枢被免职。
English: On March 5, Pei Zu was removed from his post.

古文：戊寅，独孤损罢。
现代文：十九日，独孤损被免职。
English: On the 19th, he was relieved of his duties.

古文：礼部侍郎张文蔚同中书门下平章事。
现代文：礼部尚书张文蔚任同中书门下平章事。
English: Zhang Wenwei, Vice-Dean of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was appointed as the Vice-Dean of the Middle School.

古文：甲申，崔远罢。
现代文：二十五日，崔远被免职。
English: On the 25th, Cui Yuan was removed from office.

古文：吏部侍郎杨涉同中书门下平章事。
现代文：吏部侍郎杨涉任同中书门下平章事。
English: Yang Wanzhong, an attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as a disciple of the disciple of the disciple of the disciple.

古文：四月乙未，以旱避正殿，减膳。
现代文：四月初七，哀帝因旱灾避离正殿，减少膳食。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month, Emperor Ai left the main hall due to drought and reduced his diet.

古文：庚子，有彗星出于酉北；甲辰，出于北河。
现代文：十二日，有彗星在西北方向出现。十六日，在北河地区上空出现彗星。
English: On the 12th, a comet appeared in the northwest direction. On the 16th, a comet appeared in the sky over the Beihe area.

古文：辛亥，降京畿死罪以下，给复山陵役者一年。
现代文：二十三日，对京畿内各地死罪以下囚犯减刑，免除征至山陵服徭役者的服役一年。
English: On the 23rd, the sentences of prisoners convicted of crimes punishable by death or less in various parts of Gyeonggi Province were commuted, and those who had been conscripted to serve in the military were exempted from military service for one year.

古文：五月，王建陷金州，戎昭军节度使冯行袭奔于均州。
现代文：五月，王建攻破金州，戎昭军节度使冯行袭逃往均州。
English: In May, Wang Jian invaded Jinzhou, and Feng Xing attacked and fled to Junzhou.

古文：六月，行袭克金州。
现代文：六月，冯行袭攻破金州。
English: In June, Feng Xing attacked and broke through Jinzhou.

古文：杨行密陷婺州，执刺史沈夏。
现代文：杨行密攻破婺州，俘虏了刺史沈夏。
English: Yang Xingmi broke through Zhangzhou and captured the assassin Shen Xia.

古文：戊子，硃全忠杀裴枢及静海军节度使独孤损、左仆射崔远、吏部尚书陆扆、工部尚书王溥、司空致仕裴贽、检校司空兼太子太保致仕赵崇、兵部侍郎王赞。
现代文：初一，朱全忠杀了裴枢及静海军节度使独孤损、左仆射崔远、吏部尚书陆、工部尚书王溥、司空致仕裴贽、检校司空兼太子太保致仕赵崇、兵部侍郎王赞。
English: On the first day of the new year, Zhu Quanzhong killed Pei Zu and Jing Naval Festival to cause a single loss, the left-hand man shot Cui Yuan, the personnel department Shang Shulu, the engineering department Shang Shul Wang Qi, the secretary of the sky to the secretary Pei Qi, the inspector of the sky and the crown prince Taibo to the secretary Zhao Chong, and the attendant of the military department Wang Zan.

古文：七月，卜郊。
现代文：七月，占卜选定郊祭日期。
English: In July, divination selected the date of the suburb festival.

古文：岳州刺史邓进忠叛附于马殷。
现代文：岳州刺史邓进忠叛变依驸马殷。
English: Yuezhou stabbed Deng Jintao, rebelled, and clung to Ma Yin.

古文：九月甲子，硃全忠陷襄州，忠义军节度使赵匡凝奔于淮南。
现代文：九月初八，朱全忠攻破襄州，忠义军节度使赵匡凝逃往淮南。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, Zhu Quanzhong invaded Xiangzhou, and the loyalist army forced Zhao Kuangge to flee to Huainan.

古文：丙寅，封弟裕为颍王，祐蔡王。
现代文：初十，哀帝封其弟李礻是为颍王，李为蔡王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, his younger brother, Li Xi, was crowned as the King of Qi, and Li was crowned as the King of Cai.

古文：硃全忠陷江陵，留后赵匡明奔于成都。
现代文：朱全忠攻破江陵，留后赵匡明逃往成都。
English: Zhu Quanzhong defeated Jiangling, leaving Zhao Kuangming to flee to Chengdu.

古文：乙酉，改卜郊。
现代文：二十九日，改变占卜选定的郊祭日期。
English: On the 29th, change the date of the suburb festival selected by divination.

古文：十月丙戌，硃全忠为诸道兵马元帅。
现代文：十月初一，朱全忠被委任为诸道兵马元帅。
English: On the first day of October, Zhu Quanzhong was appointed Marshal of the Armies of All Provinces.

古文：十一月庚午，三卜郊。
现代文：十一月十六日，第三次占卜选择郊祭日期。
English: On November 16th, the third divination chose the date for the suburb festival.

古文：庚辰，淮南节度使杨行密卒，以其子渥为淮南节度副大使、东面诸道行营都统。
现代文：二十六日，淮南节度使杨行密去世，朝廷委任他的儿子杨渥任淮南节度副大使、东西诸道行营都统。
English: On the 26th day of the Huainan Festival, Yang Xingmi passed away, and the imperial court appointed his son Yang Wou as deputy ambassador of the Huainan Festival, and unified the Eastern and Western Dynasties.

古文：辛巳，硃全忠为相国，总百揆，封魏王。
现代文：二十七日，朱全忠担任相国，总领百官，封为魏王。
English: On the 27th, Zhu Quanzhong served as the chief of a hundred officials, and was named the King of Wei.

古文：十二月乙未，全忠为天下兵马元帅，杀蒋玄晖及丰德库使应顼、尚食使硃建武。
现代文：十二月十一日，朱全忠担任天下兵马元帅，杀了蒋玄晖及丰德库使应顼、尚食使朱建武。
English: On December 11th, Zhu Quanzhong served as the world's general of the cavalry, and killed Jiang Xuanqi, Feng Deku's envoy Ying Tong, and Shang Shigu's envoy Zhu Jianwu.

古文：癸卯柳璨为司空。
现代文：十九日，柳璨任司空。
English: On the 19th, Yanagisawa was appointed as Jikku.

古文：戊申，硃全忠杀皇太后。
现代文：二十四日，朱全忠杀了皇太后。
English: On the 24th, Zhu Quanzhong killed the empress dowager.

古文：辛亥，罢郊。
现代文：二十七日，停止郊祭。
English: On the 27th, the suburb festival was stopped.

古文：癸丑，贬柳璨为登州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，将柳璨贬为登州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Liu Ye was relegated to a footnote in history.

古文：甲寅，杀璨及太常卿张廷范。
现代文：三十日，杀了柳璨与太常卿张廷范。
English: On the 30th, he killed Liu Xuan and Zhang Tingfan.

古文：三年正月壬戌，淮南将王茂章以宣、歙二州叛附于钱升。
现代文：天祐三年正月初八，淮南的将领王茂章献出宣、歙二州叛变依附钱升。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the third year of Tenyu, Wang Maozhang, the general of Huainan, issued a proclamation, and the two states rebelled and adhered to Qian Sheng.

古文：二月，杨渥陷岳州。
现代文：二月，杨渥攻破岳州。
English: In February, Yang Wo broke through Yuezhou.

古文：癸巳，王建陷归州。
现代文：初十，王建攻破归州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Wang Jian defeated and returned to the state.

古文：四月癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月初一，日月合朔，有日食现象。
English: On the first day of April, at the new moon, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：镇南军节度使钟传卒，其子匡时自称留后。
现代文：镇南军节度使钟传去世，其子钟匡时自称留后。
English: The festival of the Southern Army of the town caused the death of Zhong Chuan, and his son Zhong Kuang Shi claimed to stay behind.

古文：六月，钱升陷衢、睦二州，刺史陈璋、陈询奔于淮南。
现代文：六月，钱升攻破衢州、睦州，刺史陈璋、陈询逃往淮南。
English: In June, Qian Sheng defeated Zhangzhou and Mengzhou, stabbed Chen Xi, and Chen Yue fled to Huainan.

古文：七月，杨渥陷饶州。
现代文：七月，杨渥攻破饶州。
English: In July, Yangwo defeated Raozhou.

古文：八月癸未，硃全忠陷相州。
现代文：八月初二，朱全忠攻破相州。
English: On the second day of August, Zhu Quanzhong defeated Xiangzhou.

古文：九月，杨渥陷洪州，执钟匡时。
现代文：九月，杨渥攻破洪州，俘虏了钟匡附。
English: In September, Yang Wo broke through Hongzhou and captured Zhong Kuangfu.

古文：乙亥，匡国军节度使刘知俊陷坊州，执刺史刘彦晖。
现代文：二十五日，匡国军节度使刘知俊攻破坊州，俘虏了刺史刘彦晖。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the Kuomintang army sent Liu Zhijun to attack Fangzhou and captured Liu Yanlu.

古文：十月辛巳，杨崇本会凤翔、泾原、鄜延、秦陇兵以讨硃全忠，战于美原、败绩。
现代文：十月初一，杨崇本会合凤翔、泾原、延、秦陇的军队讨伐朱全忠，在美原与朱作战，大败。
English: On the first day of October, the armies of Fengxiang, Xuan Yuan, Yan Yan and Qin Hui, which were assembled by Yang Chong, attacked Zhu Quanzhong and fought with him in Meihara, but were soundly defeated.

古文：十一月，忠国军节度使高彦卒，其子澧自称留后。
现代文：十一月，忠国军节度使高彦去世，其子高澧自称留后。
English: In November, the Loyalty Army Festival caused Takahiko's death, and his son, Takahiro, declared that he would stay behind.

古文：闰十二月戊辰，李克用陷潞州，昭义军节度使丁会叛附于克用。
现代文：闰十二月二十日，李克用攻破潞州，昭义军节度使丁会叛变依附李克用。
English: On the 20th day of the 12th month, Li Ke used to break through Zhangzhou, and the Shao Yi Army staged a rebellion to make the Ding Association follow Li Ke.

古文：乙亥，震电，雨雪。
现代文：二十七日，雷霆大作，雨雪交加。
English: On the 27th, thunderstorms, rain and snow.

古文：四年三月，刘守光囚其父仁恭，自称幽州卢龙军节度使。
现代文：天祐四年三月，刘守光囚禁他的父亲刘仁恭，自称为幽州卢龙军节度使。
English: In March of the 4th year of Tianyu, Liu Shuguang imprisoned his father, Liu Rengong, who called himself the envoy of the Yuzhou Lulong Army Festival.

古文：四月戊午，钱升陷温州。
现代文：四月十二日，钱升攻破温州。
English: On April 12, Qian Sheng defeated Wenzhou.

古文：甲子，皇帝逊于位，徙于曹州，号济阴王。
现代文：十八日，哀帝让位，迁居曹州，号称济阴王。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Ai abdicated and moved to Caozhou. He was known as the King of Jilin.

古文：梁开平二年二月遇杀，年十七，谥曰哀帝。
现代文：后梁太祖开平二年二月，李木兄遇害身亡，年纪十七岁，谥号为哀帝。
English: In February of the second year of Emperor Gaozong's reign, Li Mu's brother was killed and died at the age of seventeen. His posthumous name was Yadei.

古文：后唐明宗追谥昭宣光烈孝皇帝，陵曰温陵。
现代文：后唐明宗时，追赠李木兄号为昭宣光烈孝皇帝，陵墓称温陵。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, Li Mu's posthumous name was Emperor Zhaoxuan, and his mausoleum was called Wenling.

古文：赞曰：自古亡国，未必皆愚庸暴虐之君也。
现代文：评说：自古以来，国家灭亡，不一定都是愚昧无能、暴虐无道的君主。
English: Comment: Since ancient times, the demise of a country has not necessarily been caused by a stupid, incompetent, tyrannical monarch.

古文：其祸乱之来有渐积，及其大势巳去，适丁斯时，故虽有智勇，有不能为者矣，可谓真不幸也，昭宗是已。
现代文：导致亡国的祸乱，由逐渐累积而成，等到它大势已去，适逢他正当位之时，这时他纵然有智有勇，终有无能为力之处了，实在可说是真正的不幸，昭宗就是这样一个君主。
English: The calamity that led to the downfall of the country was built up gradually, and by the time its full force had passed, it was time for him to take his rightful place. At that time, even though he was wise and courageous, he was ultimately powerless. It can truly be said to be a real misfortune. Zhaozong was such a monarch.

古文：昭宗为人明隽，初亦有志于兴复，而外患已成，内无贤佐，颇亦慨然思得非常之材，而用匪其人，徒以益乱。
现代文：昭宗为人明智、才能出众，开初也有志于兴邦复国，然而，朝廷之外祸患已经酿成，朝廷之内没有贤臣辅佐；他也经常慨叹朝中无人，希望得到不同寻常的人才，却又用人不当，只是更加添乱。
English: Zhaozong was a man of great wisdom and talent. At the beginning, he also aspired to revive the nation and restore the country. However, outside the imperial court, a disaster had already been brewed, and there was no wise assistant in the imperial court. He also often lamented that there was no one in the imperial court, hoping to get unusual talents, but using people improperly, only adding to the chaos.

古文：自唐之亡也，其遗毒余酷，更五代五十余年，至于天下分裂，大坏极乱而后止。
现代文：自从唐朝灭亡，它遗留下的祸患灾难，历经五代五十余年时间，致使天下四分五裂，败坏已尽、动乱至极之后才告终止。
English: Since the demise of the Tang Dynasty, the evils and disasters it left behind have lasted for five generations and more than 50 years, causing the world to be torn apart, the corruption has been exhausted, and the turmoil has come to an end.

古文：迹其祸乱，其渐积岂一朝一夕哉！
现代文：推考唐朝灭亡的祸乱，它是逐渐累积而成，而非一朝一夕的事情。
English: In terms of the calamity of the Tang Dynasty's demise, it was a gradual accumulation, not an overnight event.

