古文：汾阳王宅在亲仁里，大启其第，任人出入不问。
现代文：原文唐代汾阳郡王郭子仪的住宅建在京都亲仁里，他的府门经常大开，任凭人们出入并不查问。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the residence of Guo Ziyi, the king of Shiyang County, was built in Chijin-ri, Kyoto. The gate of his residence was often wide open, allowing people to enter and leave without asking questions.

古文：麾下将吏出镇来辞，王夫人及爱女方临妆，令帨汲水，役之不异仆隶。
现代文：他属下的将官们出外任藩镇之职来府中辞行，郭子仪的夫人和女儿若正在梳妆，就让这些将官们拿手巾、打洗脸水，像对仆人一样役使他们。
English: If Guo Ziyi's wife and daughter are putting on their make-up, let these generals take hand towels and face wash and serve them as if they were servants.

古文：他日子弟列谏，不听，继之以泣，曰： 大人功业隆赫，而不自崇重，贵贱皆游卧内，某等以为虽伊、霍不当如此。 
现代文：后来有一天，家中子弟们都来劝谏郭子仪不要这样做，他不听。子弟们继续劝说，说着说着竟然哭了起来，他们说： 大人功勋显赫可是自己不尊重自己，不论贵贱人等都能随便出入卧室之中。
English: Later, one day, the children of the family all came to persuade Gong Guo Zi Yi not to do this, but he did not listen. The children continued to persuade, talking and talking, and even cried. They said: Adults have outstanding achievements, but they do not respect themselves. Regardless of whether they are noble or common, they can freely enter and leave the bedroom.

古文：公笑谓曰： 尔曹固非所料。
现代文：我们觉得即使是历史上有名的伊尹、霍光这些德高望重的大臣，也不会这样做。 
English: We feel that even such highly respected ministers as Yi Yun and Huo Guang, who are famous in history, would not do this.

古文：且吾马食官粟者五百匹，官饩者一千人，进无所往，退无所据。
现代文：郭子仪笑着对他们说： 我这样做是你们所考虑不到的。而且我们家由公家供给五百匹马的粮草，一千人的伙食费用，位至极品，不能再高了，可是想退隐以避妒忌也不可能。
English: Guo Ziyi smiled and said to them, "You would never think of me doing such a thing. Moreover, our family is provided with grain and grass for five hundred horses and food for a thousand people by the public sector. This is the ultimate, and it can't be any higher, but it's impossible to retire to avoid jealousy.

古文：向使崇垣扃户，不通内外，一怨将起，构以不臣，其有贪功害能之徒成就其事，则九族齑粉，噬脐莫追。
现代文：假如我们家筑起高墙、关紧门户，内外密不相通，一旦有人结怨报复，就会编造我们种种越出臣子本分的罪状，如果有贪功害贤之人从中陷害成功，我们家将九族人都化为齑粉，后悔莫及。
English: If our family builds a high wall, closes the gate, and does not communicate with the outside world, once someone takes revenge, they will fabricate all kinds of crimes that exceed our duties as a vassal. If someone who is greedy for merit and harms the virtuous succeeds in framing, our family will turn the nine ethnic groups into powder, and we will regret it.

古文：今荡荡无间，四门洞开，虽谗毁欲兴，无所加也! 
现代文：现在家中坦坦荡荡毫无遮拦，四门大开随便出入，即使有人想加以毁谤，也找不出借口来！ 
English: Now the home is open and uninhibited, the doors are wide open and anyone can come and go, even if someone wants to slander them, they can't find an excuse!

古文：诸子拜服。
现代文：这番话说得子弟们一个个拜服不已。
English: The children obeyed his words one by one.

古文：鱼朝恩阴使人发郭氏墓，盗未得。
现代文：唐代宗时，宦官鱼朝恩暗地派人盗挖郭子仪家族的墓地，未能偷到什么东西。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the eunuch fish Chao En secretly sent people to dig up the cemetery of the Guo Ziyi family, but they failed to steal anything.

古文：子仪自泾阳来朝，帝唁之，即号泣曰： 臣久主兵，不能禁士残人之墓。人今亦发先臣墓，此天谴，非人患也! 
现代文：郭子仪从驻地泾阳回京朝拜皇上，皇上就盗墓之事向郭子仪表示慰问，郭子仪当即哭着说： 微臣长期领兵在外，未能禁止士兵掘毁别人的坟墓，现在有人盗发微臣祖上的坟墓，这是老天爷对我的惩罚，不能怪别人啊！ 
English: Guo Ziyi returned to Beijing from his residence in Shenyang to pay homage to the emperor. The emperor expressed his condolences to Guo Ziyi for the grave robbery. Guo Ziyi immediately cried and said: We have been leading soldiers for a long time, failing to prohibit soldiers from digging up other people's graves, and now someone has stolen the grave of Weizhong's ancestor. This is God's punishment for me, I can't blame others!

古文：朝恩又尝修具邀公，或言将不利公，其下愿裹甲以从。
现代文：鱼朝恩又曾经备下酒宴请郭子仪，有人说这是鱼朝恩想害郭子仪，部下们闻说愿意穿着铠甲随从而往。
English: Yu Chaon also once prepared a wine banquet to invite Guo Ziyi. Some people said that this was because Yu Chaon wanted to harm Guo Ziyi. His subordinates heard that he was willing to wear armor to follow him.

古文：子仪不许，但以家僮数人往。
现代文：郭子仪不同意，只带着几个家童前往赴宴。
English: Guo Ziyi disagreed and went to the banquet with only a few children.

古文：朝恩曰： 何车骑之寡？ 
现代文：鱼朝恩问道： 为什么随从的车马这样少呀？ 
English: Yu Chaon asked, "Why are there so few chariots and horses accompanying you?"

古文：子仪告以所闻。朝恩惶恐曰： 非公长者，得无致疑。 
现代文：郭子仪把听到的话告诉给他，鱼朝恩惶恐害怕地说： 如果不是像您这样贤明的人，能不产生疑虑吗！ 
English: Guo Ziyi told him what he had heard, and Fuchang En said with trepidation and fear: "If I were not a wise person like you, would I not have doubts?"

古文：德宗以山陵近禁屠宰。
现代文：评译唐德宗下令禁止在帝王陵墓的附近进行屠宰。
English: Emperor Dezong of Tang ordered a ban on slaughtering in the vicinity of the imperial tomb.

古文：郭子仪之隶人犯禁，金吾将军裴谞奏之。
现代文：郭子仪的一个仆隶犯了禁令，金吾卫将军裴谞把此事奏报给了皇帝。
English: One of Guo Ziyi's servants violated the ban, and King Wuwei's general Pei Jun reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：或谓曰： 君独不为郭公地乎？ 
现代文：有人说： 你难道不能给郭公留点面子吗？ 
English: Some people said: Can't you give Guo Gong some face?

古文：谞曰： 此乃所以为之地也。
现代文：裴谞说： 我如此做正是为郭公着想啊!
English: Pei Yao said: I am doing this for Guo Gong's sake!

古文：郭公望重，上新即位，必谓党附者众，故我发其小过，以明郭公之不足畏，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：郭公德高望重，而皇上即位不久，一定会认为他党羽庞大，所以我才检举他的小过失，以表明郭公是无所畏惧的，不是很好吗？ 
English: Guo Gongde is highly respected, and soon after the emperor's accession to the throne, he will certainly think that his party is huge, so I only reported his minor fault to show that Guo Gongde is fearless, isn't it great?

古文：若谞者，可谓郭公之益友矣。
现代文：裴谞此人，真可说是郭公的益友。
English: Pei Jun, this person, can truly be said to be Guo Gong's best friend.

古文：看郭汾阳，觉王翦、萧何家数便小。
现代文：比起郭子仪来，萧何、王翦的避祸方式就显得器量太小了。
English: Compared to Guo Ziyi, Xiao He and Wang Xi's way of avoiding disasters is too small.

