古文：○王颁
现代文：○王颁
English: ○King's Award

古文：王颁，字景彦，太原祁人也。
现代文：王颁字景彦，是太原祁地人。
English: Wang awarded the title to Jing Xiu, and Taiyuan was named after him.

古文：祖神念，梁左卫将军。
现代文：他的祖父王神念，梁代时任左卫将军。
English: His grandfather, Wang Shennian, was the General of the Left Guards during Liang's reign.

古文：父僧辩，太尉。
现代文：他的父亲王僧辩，任太尉。
English: His father, Wang Sofen, was a captain.

古文：颁少俶傥，有文武干局。
现代文：王颁少时风流倜傥，文武双全。
English: When he was a young boy, Wang Zi had a charming demeanor and was a talented writer.

古文：其父平侯景，留颁质于荆州，遇元帝为周师所陷，颁因入关。
现代文：他的父亲平定了侯景之乱，留下王颁在荆州作人质，适逢元帝被周朝的军队所困陷，王颁因此入关。
English: His father quelled the Houjing Rebellion, leaving Wang Zi as a hostage in Jingzhou. At the right time, Emperor Yuan was trapped by the army of the Zhou Dynasty, so Wang Zi was taken into custody.

古文：闻其父为陈武帝所杀，号恸而绝，食顷乃苏，哭泣不绝声，毁瘠骨立。
现代文：当他听到他的父亲被陈武帝所杀后，大叫一声而昏厥，过了好半天才苏醒，醒后又哭声不断，他形容枯槁，骨瘦如柴。
English: When he heard that his father had been killed by Emperor Chen Wudi, he cried out and fainted. It took him half an hour to wake up, and when he did, he cried again and again. He described himself as withered and scrawny.

古文：至服阕，常布衣蔬食，藉藁而卧。
现代文：服丧期间，经常粗茶淡饭，睡在藁草上。
English: After the mourning period is over, Wang Zi often wears cloth clothes, eats vegetables, and sleeps on the reeds.

古文：周明帝嘉之，召授左侍上士，累迁汉中太守，寻拜仪同三司。
现代文：周明帝嘉许他，授官左侍上士，累次升迁为汉中太守，不久官拜仪同三司。
English: Zhou Mingdi commended him, awarded him the post of left attendant staff sergeant, repeatedly promoted him to Han Zhong Dazhong, and soon he was promoted to the position of official worship and the third division.

古文：开皇初，以平蛮功，加开府，封蛇丘县公。
现代文：开皇初年，因为王颁平定蛮人有功，加官开府，封为蛇丘县公。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, because of the king's success in subduing the barbarians, he was promoted to the post of prefect and appointed as the governor of Shekou County.

古文：献取陈之策，上览而异之，召与相见，言毕而歔欷，上为之改容。
现代文：他献上攻取陈国之计策，皇上看后很惊异，召他来相见，他谈完后就呜咽不已，皇上为之动容。
English: He presented a plan to capture Chen Guo. The emperor was very surprised when he saw it and called him to meet him. After he finished talking, he sobbed uncontrollably. The emperor was moved by it.

古文：及大举伐陈，颁自请行，率徒数百人，从韩擒先锋夜济。
现代文：等到大举进攻陈国时，王颁请求同往，率领士兵几百人，跟随韩擒虎夜渡长江。
English: When the time came to attack Chen Guo in a big way, Wang Zi requested to go with him, led several hundred soldiers, and followed Han Xinghu to cross the Yangtze River at night.

古文：力战被伤，恐不堪复斗，悲感呜咽。
现代文：英勇拼杀而受伤，他担心自己不能再战，而伤心得呜咽起来。
English: Injured in a heroic fight, he worried that he wouldn't be able to fight again, and sobbed inconsolably.

古文：夜中因睡，梦有人授药，比寤而创不痛，时人以为孝感。
现代文：夜中模模糊糊，梦见有人授药于他。醒来时伤口不疼，当时的人认为是他的孝心感动了上天。
English: Vaguely in the middle of the night, he dreamed that someone was giving him medicine. When he woke up, the wound did not hurt, and people at the time thought that it was his filial piety that moved heaven.

古文：及陈灭，颁密召父时士卒，得千余人，对之涕泣。
现代文：等到灭了陈国，王颁秘密召见父亲旧时的士卒，有一千多人，面对他们就哭泣起来。
English: After the destruction of Chen Guo, Wang Zi secretly summoned his father's old-time soldiers, more than a thousand of them, and wept in front of them.

古文：其间壮士或问颁曰： 郎君来破陈国，灭其社稷，雠耻已雪，而悲哀不止者，将为霸先早死，不得手刃之邪？
现代文：其中有个壮士问王颁： 你是来攻取陈国的，现在灭了他的国家，已报仇雪恨了，但你悲伤不已，大概是陈霸先早死了，未能亲手杀了他的缘故吧？
English: One of them asked Wang Zi: You came to conquer Chen's country, and now you have destroyed his country. You have avenged him, but you are sad. It is probably because Chen Ba died earlier and you could not kill him with your own hands.

古文：请发其丘垄，断榇焚骨，亦可申孝心矣。 
现代文：请让我们发掘他的坟墓，开他的棺烧他的骨，也可表达孝心。 
English: Please let us excavate his grave, open his coffin and burn his bones, and also express our filial piety.

古文：颁顿颡陈谢，额尽流血，答之曰： 其为帝王，坟茔甚大，恐一宵发掘，不及其尸，更至明朝，事乃彰露，若之何？ 
现代文：王颁叩头以表感谢，以致额上流血。又说： 他是帝王，坟墓很大，恐怕一夜难以发掘开，挖不到他尸体，而到了第二天早晨，事情就暴露了，那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Wang Zi bowed his head and thanked him with a table, causing his forehead to bleed. He also said: He is the emperor, the tomb is very large, I am afraid it will be difficult to excavate overnight, his body cannot be dug out, and by the next morning, the matter will be exposed, so what should we do?

古文：诸人请具锹锸，一旦皆萃。
现代文：大家请求准备锹锸，王颁一切准备就绪。
English: Everyone asked for preparations, and everything was ready.

古文：于是夜发其陵，剖棺，见陈武帝须并不落，其本皆出自骨中。
现代文：于是连夜就挖掘陈武帝的陵墓，打开棺材，见陈武帝须未脱落，发根都出自骨肉中。
English: Therefore, they excavated Emperor Chen Wu's mausoleum overnight, opened the coffin, and saw that Emperor Chen Wu's beard had not fallen off, and the hair roots were all from the bone and flesh.

古文：颁遂焚骨取灰，投水而饮之。
现代文：王颁于是烧其骨，取其灰，投入水中而饮之。
English: The king then burned his bones, took his ashes, put them in water and drank them.

古文：既而自缚，归罪于晋王。
现代文：接着以绳自缚，到晋王那里请罪。
English: Next, he tied himself with a rope and went to Jin Wang to plead guilty.

古文：王表其状，高祖曰： 朕以义平陈，王颁所为，亦孝义之道也，朕何忍罪之！ 
现代文：晋王向皇上说明了当时的情形，高祖说： 我凭借道义而攻下陈国，王颁所做的，也是孝义之道，我怎么忍心问他的罪呢！ 
English: Jin Wang explained to the emperor the situation at that time. Gao Zu said: I conquered Chen Province by virtue of morality. What Wang Zia did was also the way of filial piety. How could I bear to ask him about his sins!

古文：舍而不问。
现代文：放下这事不再过问。
English: Not to be traced.

古文：有司录其战功，将加柱国，赐物五千段，颁固辞曰： 臣缘国威灵，得雪怨耻，本心徇私，非是为国，所加官赏，终不敢当。 
现代文：有司记录下王颁的战功，将要加封柱国，赐物五千段，王颁坚决推辞说： 我因为凭借国家的威势，才得以报仇雪恨，本心是徇私情的，并不是为了国家，给我的加官封赏，终究不敢接受。 
English: There is a record of Wang Zi's war exploits, which will be sealed with a pillar state and a gift of five thousand dan. Wang Zi firmly declined, saying: I was only able to take revenge because of the power of the state. My original intention was to be selfish, not for the sake of the country. After all, I dare not accept the award for my promotion.

古文：高祖从之。
现代文：高祖听从了他的意见。
English: Gaozu listened to him.

古文：拜代州刺史，甚有惠政。
现代文：后官拜代州刺史，很有惠政。
English: He was appointed as the State Historian of Daejeon and had a good political record.

古文：母忧去职。
现代文：他母亲去世后离职。
English: Resigned after his mother's death.

古文：后为齐州刺史，卒官，时年五十二。
现代文：后来又担任齐州刺史，死于位上，终年五十二岁。
English: Later, he also served as the chief historian of Qizhou, and died on the throne at the age of fifty-two.

