古文：国无常强，无常弱。
现代文：一个国家不可能永远强大，也不可能一直衰弱。
English: A country cannot always be strong, nor can it always be weak.

古文：奉法者强，则国强；奉法者弱，则国弱。
现代文：君主依法办事，国家就强大；君主不依法办事，国家就衰弱。
English: If the monarch acts in accordance with the law, the country will be strong; if the monarch does not act in accordance with the law, the country will be weak.

古文：荆庄王并国二十六，开地三千里；庄王之氓社稷也，而荆以亡。
现代文：楚庄王曾并吞二十六个国家，开拓三千里疆域；楚庄王死后，楚国便随之衰弱。
English: King Chu Zhuang once annexed 26 countries and explored 3,000 miles of territory. After the death of King Chu Zhuang, the state of Chu was weakened.

古文：齐桓公并国三十，启地三千里；桓公之氓社稷也，而齐以亡。
现代文：齐桓公吞并了三十个国家，开辟了三千里疆土；齐桓公死后，齐国因此衰弱。
English: Prince Qi Huan annexed thirty countries and opened up three thousand miles of territory; after the death of Prince Qi Huan, Qi was weakened as a result.

古文：燕襄王以河为境，以蓟为国，袭涿、方城，残齐，平中山，有燕者重，无燕者轻；襄王之氓社稷也，而燕以亡。
现代文：燕昭王以黄河作为国界，以蓟城为国都，又将涿、方城作为国都的外城，攻破了齐国，消灭了中山国，得到燕国支持的国家威望就重，没有燕国支持的国家威望就轻；燕昭王死后，燕国也因此衰弱。
English: King Yan Zhao took the Yellow River as the national border, with Fucheng as the national capital, and Fucheng and Fangcheng as the outer cities of the national capital. He defeated Qi and eliminated Zhongshan. The national prestige supported by Yan was heavy, and the national prestige not supported by Yan was light. After the death of King Yan Zhao, Yan was also weakened.

古文：魏安釐王攻燕救赵，取地河东；攻尽陶、魏之地；加兵于齐，私平陆之都；攻韩拔管，胜于淇下；睢阳之事，荆军老而走；蔡、召陵之事，荆军破；兵四布于天下，威行于冠带之国；安釐王死而魏以亡。
现代文：魏安釐王攻打燕国救援赵国，夺回了河东魏国的故地，完全攻占了定陶和卫国领土；对齐国用兵，夺取了齐国的平陆之都；攻占了韩国的管地，又在淇水下游取胜；在睢阳的战事中，楚军因长期作战疲惫不堪而逃走；在蔡和召陵的战争中，楚军被打败；魏国的军队布满天下，威风传遍中原文明发达的国家；魏安釐王死后魏国随之衰弱。
English: Wei Anhui attacked Yan Guo to rescue Zhao Guo, recaptured the hometown of Wei Guo to the east of the river, and completely captured Dingtao and the territory of the defending country; aligned the troops of Qi Guo and captured the flat-land capital of Qi Guo; occupied the territory of South Korea and won in the lower reaches of Qi Shui; in the battle of Poyang, the Chu army fled due to long-term battle fatigue; in the war of Cai He Zhaoling, the Chu army was defeated; Wei Guo's army spread all over the world, and its prestige spread throughout the countries with developed civilization in the Central Plains; Wei Guo

古文：故有荆庄、齐桓公，则荆、齐可以霸；有燕襄、魏安釐，则燕、魏可以强。
现代文：所以有了楚庄王、齐桓公，楚、齐就可以称霸；有了燕昭王、魏安釐王，燕、魏就可以强盛。
English: Therefore, with Chu Zhuang Wang and Qi Huan Gong, Chu and Qi can dominate; with Yan Zhao Wang and Wei Anqi Wang, Yan and Wei can flourish.

古文：今皆亡国者，其群臣官吏皆务所以乱而不务所以治也。
现代文：现在这些国家都衰弱了，是因为群臣官吏都去干那些使国家动荡而不是使国家安定的事情。
English: Now these countries are weak, because the government officials are doing things that destabilize the country, rather than stabilizing the country.

古文：其国乱弱矣，又皆释国法而私其外，则是负薪而救火也，乱弱甚矣！
现代文：这些国家本已经混乱衰弱了，他们的群臣又都丢掉国法而营私舞弊，这就如同背着干柴去救火，国家会更加混乱和衰弱。
English: These countries are already chaotic and weak, and their ministers have all abandoned the law of the land to engage in self-dealing. This is like carrying firewood to put out a fire, and the country will become even more chaotic and weak.

古文：故当今之时，能去私曲就公法者，民安而国治；能去私行行公法者，则兵强而敌弱。
现代文：如今这个时代，一个国家能够除掉奸邪谋私之行而遵循国家法令的，老百姓就能安宁国家也就能安定；能杜绝图谋私利的行为而实行国家法令的，军队就会强大而敌人相对弱小。
English: In this day and age, if a country can eliminate acts of treachery and selfishness and abide by the laws of the country, the people will be peaceful and the country will be stable; if it can eliminate acts of selfishness and abide by the laws of the country, the army will be strong and the enemy will be relatively weak.

古文：故审得失有法度之制者，加以群臣之上，则主不可欺以诈伪；审得失有权衡之称者，以听远事，则主不可欺以天下之轻重。
现代文：所以明察得失又有法度的规定，凌驾于群臣之上，那么这样的君主就不可能被臣下欺诈；明察得失而又以法度作为标准以了解远方的事情，那么君主就不可能被天下轻重颠倒的事所欺骗。
English: Therefore, a monarch who is aware of his rights and wrongs and has the provisions of the law, and is above his subjects, cannot be cheated by his subjects; a monarch who is aware of his rights and wrongs, and uses the law as a standard to understand distant things, cannot be cheated by the world's ups and downs.

古文：今若以誉进能，则臣离上而下比周；若以党举官，则民务交而不求用于法。
现代文：现在如果按声誉选用人才，群臣就会背离君主在私下结党营私；如果根据朋党的关系来推荐官员，那么老百姓就会致力于结党勾结而不求依法办事。
English: Nowadays, if the selection of talents is based on reputation, the courtiers will deviate from the monarch and secretly form a party; if the officials are recommended based on the relationship with the party, then the common people will be committed to forming a party and colluding without seeking to act according to the law.

古文：故官之失能者其国乱。
现代文：官员不称职，国家就会混乱。
English: If officials are incompetent, the country will fall into chaos.

古文：以誉为赏，以毁为罚也，则好赏恶罚之人，释公行，行私术，比周以相为也。
现代文：以虚假的名声为依据奖赏，以诽谤的流言作为依据施行处罚，那么喜欢奖赏而厌恶处罚的人，就会丢掉国家法定的职责，玩弄个人手段，互相包庇利用。
English: People who reward on the basis of false reputation and punish on the basis of slanderous rumors, who like to reward but hate to punish, will lose their national legal responsibilities, play with personal means, and cover up and take advantage of each other.

古文：忘主外交，以进其与，则其下所以为上者薄也。
现代文：因此忠臣无罪却遭遇危难而死，奸邪之臣没有功劳却坐享安乐利益。
English: Therefore, the loyal vassal is not guilty but is in danger and dies, and the treacherous vassal has no merit but enjoys the benefits of peace and happiness.

古文：此亡之本也。
现代文：这是国家衰亡的根本原因。
English: This is the root cause of the country's decline.

古文：若是，则群臣废法而行私重，轻公法矣。
现代文：如果像这样，群臣就会废弃法度而设法捞取个人权势，不把国家的法令当回事了。
English: If this is the case, the ministers will abandon the law and try to gain personal power, and will not take the country's laws seriously.

古文：数至能人之门，不一至主之廷；百虑私家之便，不一图主之国。
现代文：屡次进出奸臣的家门，一次也不到君主的朝廷去；天天想着自己的好处，一点也不考虑君主国家的利益。
English: He repeatedly entered and left the homes of his treacherous vassals, but never once went to the monarch's court; he thought about his own interests every day, and did not consider the interests of the monarchy at all.

古文：属数虽多，非所尊君也；百官虽具，非所以任国也。
现代文：君主的下属官吏虽然很多，但都不是朝廷所需用来尊崇君主的；各种官员虽然一应俱全，但却不是君主所需用来承担国家大事的。
English: Although there are many officials under the monarch, they are not needed by the court to honor the monarch; although various officials are readily available, they are not needed by the monarch to undertake national affairs.

古文：然则主有人主之名，而实托于群臣之家也。
现代文：所以下臣我说：衰亡的国家朝廷中没有人。
English: Therefore, I said to my subordinate: There is no one in the court of the declining country.

古文：故臣曰：亡国之廷无人焉。廷无人者，非朝廷之衰也；家务相益，不务厚国；大臣务相尊，而不务尊君；小臣奉禄养交，不以官为事。
现代文：朝廷里没有人，不是朝廷中的臣子少了；私家致力于互谋私利，不致力于富强国家；大臣们致力于相互推崇，不致力于尊崇君主；小臣们拿国家的俸禄去培养私交，不把官员职责当回事。
English: There is no one in the imperial court, not because there are fewer courtiers in the imperial court. Privates are committed to mutual self-interest, not to a rich and powerful country. Ministers are committed to promoting each other, not to honoring the monarch. Junior ministers use their state salaries to cultivate personal relationships, and do not take their official duties seriously.

古文：此其所以然者，由主之不上断于法，而信下为之也。
现代文：之所以会造成这种局面，是因为君主在上面不依法决断政事，而听凭下面的大臣胡作非为。
English: The reason for this situation is that the monarch does not decide political affairs in accordance with the law at the top, but leaves it to the ministers below to behave badly.

古文：故明主使法择人，不自举也；使法量功，不自度也。
现代文：所以圣明的君主用法制来选拔人才，不凭自己的意愿来用人；按法制来考核臣下的功绩，而不靠自己的主观来推测。
English: Therefore, the holy monarchs use the legal system to select talents, and do not employ people according to their own wishes; they evaluate the merits of their subjects according to the legal system, and do not rely on their own subjective speculation.

古文：能者不可弊，败者不可饰，誉者不能进，非者弗能退，则君臣之间明辩而易治，故主仇法则可也。
现代文：有才能的人不被埋没，坏人坏事无从掩饰，徒有虚名的人不能进用，遭受诽谤的人不被免职，那么君主就能明辨臣下的功过是非而国家就容易治理，所以君主依法办事就可以了。
English: Talented people are not buried, bad people and bad things cannot be covered up, people with false names cannot be used, and people who have been slandered are not dismissed. Then the monarch can clearly distinguish the merits and demerits of his subjects and the country is easy to govern, so the monarch can act according to the law.

古文：贤者之为人臣，北面委质，无有二心。
现代文：贤能的人做臣子，面北献礼，效忠君主，没有二心。
English: Virtuous people are courtiers, face north and offer gifts, are loyal to the monarch, and have no second thoughts.

古文：朝廷不敢辞贱，军旅不敢辞难；顺上之为，从主之法，虚心以待令，而无是非也。
现代文：在朝廷不敢推辞卑贱的任务，在军队不敢推辞难事；顺从君主的行为，遵从君主的法令，虚心等待命令，不挑弄是非。
English: In the court dare not refuse menial tasks, in the army dare not refuse difficult tasks; obey the monarch's actions, obey the monarch's decrees, humbly wait for orders, do not provoke.

古文：故有口不以私言，有目不以私视，而上尽制之。
现代文：所以臣子有口不为自己的私利辩说，有眼不为个人的目的察看，君主控制着他们的一切。
English: Therefore, courtiers have mouths that do not argue for their own selfish interests, and eyes that do not see for personal purposes. The monarch controls everything for them.

古文：为人臣者，譬之若手，上以修头，下以修足；清暖寒热，不得不救；镆铘傅体，不敢弗搏慼，无私贤哲之臣，无私事能之士。
现代文：做臣子的，就像人的双手，上用来理头，下用来理脚；冷暖寒暑，不能不管；刀剑近身，不敢不拼。不要因私使用贤明臣子，不要因私使用智能之士。
English: To be a courtier is to be like a man's hands, the upper being used to shave the head, the lower to shave the feet; cold and heat cannot be ignored; the sword is close at hand, one dare not not not fight. Don't use a wise courtier for selfish reasons, and don't use an intelligent person for selfish reasons.

古文：故民不越乡而交，无百里之感。
现代文：所以百姓不离乡私交，没有远道奔走的忧虑。
English: Therefore, the people do not leave their hometowns and have no worries about traveling long distances.

古文：贵贱不相逾，愚智提衡而立，治之至也。
现代文：贵贱不僧越，愚智各得其所，这是治的最高境界。
English: The nobler the monk, the lower the rank, and the greater the stupidity. This is the highest realm of governance.

古文：今夫轻爵禄，易去亡，以择其主，臣不谓廉。
现代文：对现今那种轻视爵禄，轻易流亡，去选择他的主子的，我不认为是廉。
English: I don't think it's laziness to despise the peerage, to easily go into exile, to choose one's master.

古文：诈说逆法，倍主强谏，臣不谓忠。
现代文：谎言抗法，违背君主而强行进谏，我不认为是忠。
English: I don't think it's loyalty to lie, defy the law, and forcibly march into battle against the sovereign.

古文：行惠施利，收下为名，臣不谓仁。
现代文：施行恩惠，收买人心来抬高自己的声望，我不认为是仁。
English: I don't think it's benevolence to do favors and buy people's hearts to enhance one's reputation.

古文：离俗隐居，而以诈非上，臣不谓义。
现代文：避世隐居，而用谎言非议君主，我不认为是义。
English: I don't think it's righteous to live in seclusion and criticize the monarch with lies.

古文：外使诸候，内耗其国，伺其危险之陂，以恐其主曰； 交非我不亲，怨非我不解 。而主乃信之，以国听之。卑主之名以显其身，毁国之厚以利其家，臣不谓智。
现代文：出使他国，损害祖国，候着祖国陷入危境，便恐吓君主说，交往没有他就不能亲近，积怨没有他就不能解除；而君主也便相信他，把国家托付给他；这样，贬低君主名声来抬高自己，损害国家利益来便利私家，我不认为是智。
English: When he goes abroad to the detriment of his country, when his country is in danger, he threatens the sovereign, saying that without him there can be no intimacy, without him there can be no resolution of the accumulated grievances; and the sovereign believes him and entrusts the state to him. In this way, I do not think it is wise to belittle the reputation of the sovereign in order to elevate oneself, and to damage the interests of the state in order to facilitate private interests.

古文：此数物者，险世之说也，而先王之法所简也。
现代文：这几种行为，是乱世君主喜欢的，先王法治看轻的。
English: These types of actions were favored by the monarchs of the chaotic era, and were looked down upon by the former king.

古文：先王之法曰： 臣毋或作威，毋或作利，从王之指；无或作恶，从王之路。 古者世治之民，奉公法，废私术，专意一行，具以待任。 
现代文：先王法令说： 臣下不要逞威，不要牟利，顺从君主旨意；不要作恶，跟随君主脚步。 古代太平社会的百姓，奉行公法，废止私术，一心一意为君主办事，准备条件来等待任用。
English: The king's edict said: "Vassals, don't be arrogant, don't make profits, obey the will of the monarch; don't do evil, follow the footsteps of the monarch; the people of the ancient Taiping society, follow public law, abolish self-dealing, work wholeheartedly for the monarch, and prepare conditions to wait for appointment."

古文：夫为人主而身察百官，则日不足，力不给。
现代文：做君主的亲自考察百官，就会时间不够，精力不足。
English: If the monarch personally inspects a hundred officials, there will not be enough time and energy.

古文：且上用目，则下饰观；上用耳，则下饰声；上用虑，则下繁辞。
现代文：而且君主用眼睛看，臣子就修饰外表；君主用耳朵听，臣子就修饰言辞；君主用脑子想，臣子就夸夸其谈。
English: Moreover, the monarch sees with his eyes, but the vassal adorns his appearance; the monarch hears with his ears, but the vassal adorns his words; the monarch thinks with his brain, but the vassal boasts.

古文：先王以三者为不足，故舍己能而因法数，审赏罚。
现代文：先王认为这三种器官不够，所以放弃自己的才能而依赖法术，严明赏罚。
English: The previous king thought that these three organs were not enough, so he gave up his talent and relied on spells, strictly rewarding and punishing.

古文：先王之所守要，故法省而不侵。
现代文：先王掌握着关键，所以法令简明而君权不受侵害。
English: The king holds the key, so the laws are simple and the royal power is not infringed.

古文：独制四海之内，聪智不得用其诈，险躁不得关其佞，奸邪无所依。
现代文：独自控制四海之内，聪明多智的人不能使用欺诈手段，阴险浮躁的人不能使用花言巧语，奸邪的人就没有什么可依赖。
English: With the four seas under one's sole control, the clever and intelligent cannot use deception, the insidious and impetuous cannot use rhetoric, and the treacherous have nothing to rely on.

古文：远在千里外，不敢易其辞；势在郎中，不敢蔽善饰非；朝廷群下，直凑单微，不敢相逾越。
现代文：臣子远在千里之外，不敢改变说辞；地位处在郎中，不敢隐善饰非；朝廷的群臣，集中的或单独的，不敢相互逾越职守。
English: The courtiers are thousands of miles away and dare not change their words; the position is in the middle of the family, and dare not conceal good or embellish bad; the courtiers of the imperial court, concentrated or separate, dare not exceed their duties.

古文：故治不足而日有馀，上之任势使然之。
现代文：所以政事不多而时间有余，是君主运用权势所得来的。
English: Therefore, the fact that there are not many political affairs and there is plenty of time is the result of the monarch's use of power.

古文：夫人臣之侵其主也，如地形焉，即渐以往，使人主失端，东西易面而不自知。
现代文：臣子侵害君主，就像行路时的地形一样，由近及远，地形渐变，让君主迷失方向，东西方向改变了还不知道。
English: A vassal's encroachment on the monarch is like the topography of a journey. From near and far, the topography gradually changes, leaving the monarch disoriented. It is not yet known whether the east-west direction has changed.

古文：故先王立司南以端朝夕。
现代文：所以先王设置指南仪器来判断东西方向。
English: Therefore, the first king set up a guide instrument to judge the east-west direction.

古文：故明主使其群臣不游意于法之外，不为惠于法之内，动无非法。
现代文：所以明君不让他的群臣在法律之外乱打主意，在法令规定的范围内谋求利益，举动没有不合法的。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun did not allow his vassals to make decisions outside the law and seek benefits within the scope of the law. The move was not illegal.

古文：峻法，所以凌过游外私也；严刑，所以遂令惩下也。
现代文：严峻的法令是用来禁止犯罪、排除私欲的，严厉的刑法是用来贯彻法令、惩办臣下的。
English: Severe laws are used to prohibit crime and eliminate selfishness, and severe criminal laws are used to implement laws and punish subjects.

古文：威不贰错，制不共门。
现代文：威势不能分置，权力不能同享。
English: There can be no separation of power, and power cannot be shared.

古文：威、制共，则众邪彰矣；法不信，则君行危矣；刑不断，则邪不胜矣。
现代文：威势权力与别人同享，奸臣就会公然活动；法令不坚定，君主的行为就危险了；刑罚不果断，就不能战胜奸邪。
English: If the power is shared with others, treacherous ministers will act openly; if the laws are not firm, the actions of the monarch will be dangerous; if the punishment is not decisive, it will be impossible to defeat treachery.

古文：故曰：巧匠目意中绳，然必先以规矩为度；上智捷举中事，必以先王之法为比。
现代文：所以说：巧匠目测合乎墨线，但必定先用规矩作标准；智商高者办事敏捷合乎要求，必定用先王的法度作依据。
English: Therefore, it is said that: a skilled craftsman's eyes measure according to the ink line, but must first use the rules as the standard; a person with a high IQ can work quickly according to the requirements, and must use the law of the king as the basis.

古文：故绳直而枉木断，准夷而高科削，权衡县而重益轻，斗石设而多益少。
现代文：所以墨线直了，曲木就要砍直；测准器平了，高坛挞就要削平；称具拎起，就要减重补轻；量具设好，就要减多补少。
English: Therefore, if the ink line is straight, the curved wood must be cut straight; if the aligner is flat, the high altar bead must be cut flat; if the weighing instrument is lifted, it is necessary to reduce the weight and make up the weight; if the measuring instrument is set up, it is necessary to reduce the weight and make up the weight.

古文：故以法治国，举措而已矣。
现代文：所以用法令治国，不过是制定出来、推行下去罢了。
English: Therefore, the use of laws to govern the country is just a matter of formulating and implementing it.

古文：法不阿贵，绳不挠曲。
现代文：法令不偏袒权贵，墨绳不迁就弯曲。
English: The law does not favor the powerful and the rich, and the ink rope bends without yielding.

古文：法之所加，智者弗能辞，勇者弗敢争。
现代文：法令该制裁的，智者不能逃避，勇者不敢抗争。
English: When the law decrees this sanction, the wise cannot evade it, and the brave dare not oppose it.

古文：刑过不辟大臣，赏善不遗匹夫。
现代文：惩罚罪过不回避大臣，奖赏功劳不漏掉平民。
English: Punish the crime without avoiding the minister, reward the merit without omitting the civilians.

古文：故矫上之失，诘下之邪，治乱决缪，绌羡齐非，一民之轨，莫如法。
现代文：所以矫正上面的过失，追究下面的奸邪，治理纷乱，判断谬误，削减多余，纠正错误，统一民众的规范，没有比得上法的。
English: Therefore, correcting the faults above, investigating the treachery below, governing chaos, judging fallacies, reducing redundancy, correcting errors, and unifying the norms of the people are not comparable to the law.

古文：厉官威民，退淫殆，止诈伪，莫如刑。
现代文：整治官吏，威慑民众，除去淫乱怠惰，禁止欺诈虚伪，没有比得上刑的。
English: There is nothing like punishment to rectify officials, deter the public, eliminate laziness and lasciviousness, and prohibit fraud and hypocrisy.

古文：刑重，则不敢以贵易贱；法审，则上尊而不侵。
现代文：刑罚重了，就不敢因地位高轻视地位低的；法令严明，君主就尊贵不受侵害。
English: If the punishment is severe, they will not dare to despise the low status because of the high status; the laws are strict, and the dignity of the monarch will not be infringed.

古文：上尊而不侵，则主强而守要，故先王贵之而传之。
现代文：尊贵不受侵害，君主就强劲而掌握要害。所以先王重法并传授下来。
English: If dignity is not infringed, the monarch will be strong and hold the key. Therefore, the first king strengthened the law and passed it down.

古文：人主释法用私，则上下不别矣。
现代文：君主弃法用私，君臣之间就没有区别了。
English: The monarch abandoned the law and used me, and there was no difference between the sovereign and the vassal.

