古文：齐宣王见孟子于雪宫。
现代文：齐宣王在自己的雪宫里接见孟子。
English: King Qi Xuan received Mencius in his Snow Palace.

古文：王曰： 贤者亦有此乐乎？ 
现代文：宣王说： 贤德的人也会有这种享乐吗？ 
English: Xuan Wang said, "Can a virtuous person also have this kind of enjoyment?"

古文：孟子对曰： 有。
现代文：孟子回答说： 有的。
English: Mencius replied, "Yes.

古文：人不得，则非其上矣。
现代文：人们要是得不到这种享乐，就会埋怨他们的国君。
English: If people do not get this pleasure, they will blame their sovereign.

古文：不得而非其上者，非也；为民上而不与民同乐者，亦非也。
现代文：得不到这种享乐就埋怨国君是不对的；可是作为百姓的君王不与民同乐也是不对的。
English: It is not right to blame the sovereign for not being able to enjoy such pleasures, but it is also not right for the sovereign, who is a citizen, not to enjoy the same pleasures as the citizens.

古文：乐民之乐者，民亦乐其乐；忧民之忧者，民亦忧其忧。
现代文：国君以百姓的快乐为快乐，百姓也会以国君的快乐为快乐。国君以老百姓的忧愁为忧愁，老百姓也会以国君的忧愁为忧愁。
English: The sovereign is happy when the people are happy, and the people are happy when the sovereign is happy. The sovereign is sad when the people are sad, and the people are sad when the sovereign is sad.

古文：乐以天下，忧以天下，然而不王者，未之有也。
现代文：以天下人的快乐为快乐，以天下人的忧愁为忧愁，这样还不能够使天下归服，还从来没有过。
English: Taking the happiness of the people of the world as happiness and the sorrow of the people of the world as sorrow, this has not yet been able to subdue the world, and has never done so.

古文：昔者齐景公问于晏子曰： 吾欲观于转附、朝儛，遵海而南，放于琅邪。
现代文：从前齐景公问晏子说： 我想到转附、朝舞两座山去游览一下，然后沿着海岸向南行，一直到琅邪。
English: Once upon a time, Qi Jing Gong asked his mule, "I'd like to visit the two mountains of Zhenshu and Chaowu, and then go south along the coast all the way to Shiji."

古文：吾何修而可以比于先王观也？ 晏子对曰： 善哉问也！
现代文：我该怎样做才能够和古代圣贤君王的巡游相比呢？ 晏子回答说： 问得好呀！
English: What should I do to be able to compare with the procession of the ancient sages and kings? The cripple replied, "Good question!

古文：天子适诸侯曰巡狩，巡狩者巡所守也；诸侯朝于天子曰述职，述职者述所职也。
现代文：天子到诸侯国家去叫做巡狩。巡狩就是巡视各诸侯所守疆土。诸侯去朝见天子叫述职。述职就是报告在他职责内的工作。
English: When the prince of heaven goes to the country of the lords, it is called inspection. Inspection is to inspect the territory guarded by the lords. When the lords go to see the prince of heaven in the morning, it is called reporting. Reporting is to report the work within his duties.

古文：无非事者。
现代文：这些活动没有不是结合着政事进行的。
English: These activities have not been carried out without a connection to politics.

古文：春省耕而补不足，秋省敛而助不给。
现代文：春天查看耕种，补贴种粮不足的百姓；秋天里巡视收获情况，对歉收的农户给予补助。
English: In the spring, inspect those who have difficulties in spring farming subsidies, and in the autumn, inspect the collection situation and help those who are not enough.

古文：夏谚曰： 吾王不游，吾何以休？
现代文：夏朝的谚语说： 我王不出来游历，我怎么能得到休息？
English: A summer proverb says: If my king does not travel, how can I rest?

古文：吾王不豫，吾何以助？
现代文：我王不出来巡视，我怎么能得到救助？
English: If my king doesn't come out to inspect, how can I get help?

古文：一游一豫，为诸侯度。 
现代文：一游历一巡视，足以作为诸侯的法度。 
English: One tour and one inspection is enough to be the law of the lords.

古文：今也不然：师行而粮食，饥者弗食，劳者弗息。
现代文：现在就不同了，国君一出游就兴师动众，索取粮食。饥饿的人没有饭吃，劳苦的人得不到休息。
English: It's different now. As soon as the sovereign goes on a trip, he rallies the masses and asks for grain. The hungry have no food to eat, and the hard-working have no rest.

古文：睊睊胥谗，民乃作慝。
现代文：大家侧目而视，怨声载道，违法乱纪的事情也就做出来了。
English: Everyone looked the other way, complaints were heard, and illegal and undisciplined things were done.

古文：方命虐民，饮食若流。
现代文：这是放弃先王教导，虐害百姓，大吃大喝如流水。
English: This is abandoning the teachings of the former king, abusing the people, eating and drinking like water.

古文：流连荒亡，为诸侯忧。
现代文：这种流连荒亡，诸侯也为之担忧。
English: The lords were also worried about this wandering desolation.

古文：从流下而忘反谓之流，从流上而忘反谓之连，从兽无厌谓之荒，乐酒无厌谓之亡。
现代文：什么叫流连荒亡呢？从上游向下游的游玩乐而忘返叫做流；从下游向上游的游玩乐而忘返叫做连；打猎不知厌倦叫做荒；嗜酒不加节制叫做亡。
English: What is called wandering and desolation? From the upstream to the downstream of the play and forget it is called the flow; from the downstream to the upstream of the play and forget it is called the company; hunting without getting tired is called the desert; alcoholism without restraint is called death.

古文：先王无流连之乐，荒亡之行。
现代文：古代圣贤君王既无流连的享乐，也无荒亡的行为。
English: The ancient sages and kings had neither the pleasure of wandering nor the behavior of desolation.

古文：惟君所行也。 
现代文：至于大王您的行为，只有您自己选择了。 
English: As for your actions, Your Majesty, you alone chose them.

古文：景公说，大戒于国，出舍于郊。
现代文：齐景公听了晏子的话非常高兴，先在都城内作了充分的准备，然后驻扎在郊外，打开仓库赈济贫困的人。
English: Qi Jinggong was very happy to hear this. First, he made full preparations in the capital, and then stationed in the suburbs to open a warehouse to help the poor.

古文：于是始兴发补不足。
现代文：又召集乐官说： 给我创作一些君臣同乐的乐曲！ 
English: He also summoned the music officials and said, "Create for me some music for the common enjoyment of the emperor and the people!"

古文：畜君者，好君也。 
现代文：这就是《徴招》、《角招》。
English: This is "Zhaozhao" and "Hengzhao."

