古文：永那跋摩法度通公阿专师阿秃师稠禅师释知苑法喜法琳徐敬业
现代文：永那跋摩法度通公阿专师阿秃师稠禅师释知苑法喜法琳徐敬业
English: Yongna bama dharma dongguan ah guru achen guru achen guru cheng zen guru shu chien dharma hi dharma lin xu dongye

古文：骆宾王
现代文：骆宾王
English: The king of camellias

古文：永那跋摩
现代文：永那跋摩
English: Yonabatama

古文：永那跋摩者，西域僧也。宋元嘉中，东游渡江，居于金陵祗园寺。
现代文：永那跋摩是个西域的僧人，刘宋元嘉年间，东游过江，住在金陵祗园寺中。
English: Yongna Bama was a monk from the western region. During the reign of Liu Song and Yuan Jia, he traveled east across the Yangtze River and lived in Jinling Garden Temple.

古文：宋文帝常谓之曰： 弟子恒愿持斋，不杀生命，以身徇物，不获其志。
现代文：宋文帝经常对他说： 弟子我很愿意遵守佛教戒律，不杀生灵，以身从物；然而一直不能如愿。
English: Emperor Songwen often said to him: "Disciple, I am very willing to abide by the Buddhist precepts, not to kill living beings, and to help others; however, I have not been able to do so.

古文：法师不远万里，来化此国，将何以教之？ 
现代文：法师您不怕万里之遥，前来我国游化，您将怎样教导我呢？ 
English: Master, you are not afraid to travel thousands of miles to visit our country. How will you teach me?

古文：对曰： 道在心，不在事；法由己，非由人。
现代文：永那跋摩答道： 是否遵奉教规，贵在心地虔诚，不在具体做什么事情；办法在于自己领会，不在别人如何劝导。
English: Yongna Bama replied, "Whether or not to follow the rules and regulations, and whether or not to be pious, are not specific things to do; the solution lies in one's own understanding, not in how to persuade others.

古文：且帝王与凡庶，所修亦有殊矣。
现代文：况且帝王与平民庶人修道的方式与要求是不一样的。
English: Moreover, the way and requirements for emperors and commoners to become monks are different.

古文：若凡庶者，身贱名微，德不及远，其教不出于门庭，其言不行于仆妾。若不苦身刻己，行善持诫，将何以用其心哉？
现代文：凡属平民庶人，由于身份卑贱名声微小，影响范围也就有限，他们的教化只限于自己一家之内，他们的言论又不被仆婢与妻妾采纳；这样一来，他们如不能严格要求自己，行善事而守戒观，信奉佛教的心愿还有什么方式来实现呢？
English: All common people, because of their lowly status and small reputation, have a limited sphere of influence. Their enlightenment is limited to their own family, and their words are not accepted by their servants and concubines. So, if they cannot strictly require themselves to do good deeds and keep the precepts, what other way is there to realize the wish to believe in Buddhism?

古文：帝王以四海为家，万民为子，出一嘉言，则士庶咸悦，布一善政，则人神以和。
现代文：帝王则以四海为家，以万民为子，每说一句有利于众生的话，天下百姓都感到高兴，每颁行一项有益于社会的政令，就会得到众人与神灵的拥护。
English: Emperors, on the other hand, regard the four seas as their home and all people as their children. Whenever they say a word that is beneficial to all living beings, the people all over the world feel happy. Whenever they issue a decree that is beneficial to society, they will receive the support of many people and gods.

古文：刑清则不夭其命，役简则无劳其力。
现代文：刑罚清明了就能使百姓不会无辜丧生，徭役减轻了就能使百姓不会劳累无度。
English: If the punishment is clear, the people will not be killed, and if the punishment is lightened, the people will not be overworked.

古文：然后辨钟律，正时令。钟律辨则风雨调，号令时则寒暑节。
现代文：这样就能分辨钟律，端正时令；钟律分清了就能风调雨顺，号令适时就能寒暑有节。
English: In this way, you can distinguish the clock rhythm and correct the time; if the clock rhythm is clear, you can adjust the wind and rain, and the weather can be cold and hot at the right time.

古文：乃曰： 俗人迷于远理，沙门滞于近教；迷远理者谓为虚说，滞近教者拘恋章句。如法师者，真所谓开悟明达，可以言天人之际矣。
现代文：如能做到这样，就是最大的遵守戒律了，不被杀害的生命也已经相当多了。那能在乎少吃一两顿斋饭与能否保全一只禽鸟的生命呢，这是普济众生之举呀！ 文帝以手拍案，连连赞叹称好。于是说道： 一般人迷信于佛教的深远道理，僧人们则滞留于眼前的说教；迷信于深远道理的人实际是迷信空洞的理论，滞留于眼前说教的人则仅仅拘泥于佛经的个别章句。象法师您这样的见解，真称得上是理解透彻、融会贯通，可以与您谈论天与人之间的种种事情了 
English: If this can be done, it will be the greatest observance of the precepts, and the number of lives that will not be killed will be quite large. If it is possible to eat one or two fewer meals and save the life of a bird, then this is the act of all sentient beings! Emperor Wen clapped his hands and praised the act. He then said: Ordinary people are superstitious about the far-reaching principles of Buddhism, while monks are stuck in the preaching in front of them; people who are superstitious about the far-reaching principles are actually superstitious about empty theories, while people who are stuck in the preaching in front of them are only stuck in the individual chapters of Buddhist scriptures

古文：法度
现代文：法度
English: Rule of law

古文：释法度，黄龙人也。
现代文：佛教僧侣法度，黄龙人。
English: Buddhist monk Fadu, the Yellow Dragon Man.

古文：南齐初，游于金陵。
现代文：南齐初年，云游于金陵。
English: In the first year of Nanqi, Yunyou stayed in Jinling.

古文：高士齐郡名僧绍，隐居琅琊之摄山，挹度清真，待以师友。
现代文：高士齐。郡名僧绍，隐居于琅琊的摄山，敬慕法度清明真纯，以师友相待。
English: Gao Shi Qi. County famous monk Shao, who lives in seclusion in the mountains of Zheng, admires the purity of the law, and treats each other as teachers and friends.

古文：及亡，舍所居山为栖霞寺。
现代文：他死的时候，将自己居住的摄山上的宅院。施舍出来作为栖霞寺院。
English: At the time of his death, he donated the house on the mountain where he lived to be used as a temple.

古文：先是有道士欲以寺地为观，住者辄死。
现代文：在这之前，有个道士想把寺院的地方作为道观，结果是谁住在这里谁就死。
English: Before this, there was a Taoist who wanted to make the temple area a Taoist temple. As a result, whoever lived here would die.

古文：后为寺，犹多恐惧。
现代文：后来这个地方作为佛寺，仍有许多令人恐惧的现象发生。
English: Later, this place was used as a Buddhist temple, and many frightening phenomena still occurred.

古文：自度居之，群妖皆息。
现代文：自从法度住在这里之后，各种妖怪都平息了。
English: Since Fado lived here, all kinds of monsters have subsided.

古文：经岁余，忽闻人马鼓角之声，俄见一人投刺于度曰： 靳尚。 
现代文：过了一年多，忽然听到人马鼓角之声，顿见一人跑过来投名片请谒见在法度面前，自称： 靳尚 。
English: After more than a year, I suddenly heard the sound of people and horses beating drums. Suddenly, I saw a person running over to give a business card and ask for an audience in front of the law, calling himself: "Yang Shang."

古文：度命前之。
现代文：法度叫他靠近些。
English: The law tells him to come closer.

古文：尚形甚闲雅，羽卫亦众。
现代文：靳尚的相貌非常闲雅，随从的人也很多。
English: Gong Shang's appearance is very leisurely and elegant, and he has many followers.

古文：致敬毕，乃言： 弟子主有此山，七百余年矣。神道有法，物不得干。
现代文：他向法度致敬之后，便说道： 我们占有此山七百多年了，神仙道士有法术，他物不能侵犯。
English: After paying homage to the law, he said: "We have occupied this mountain for more than seven hundred years. Immortal Taoists have magic, and other things cannot be infringed.

古文：前后栖托，或非真实。故死病继之，亦其命也。法师道德所归，谨舍以奉给，并愿受五戒，永结来缘。 
现代文：至于前一辈与后一辈互相转换托生的事，恐怕不是真实的，所以死于疾病的人相继出现，这也是他们的命运该当如此，法师您乃是道德所归，现仅以此山奉送给您。并且，我本人愿意接受佛教五戒。与佛教永结未来之缘。 
English: As for the previous generation and the next generation switching to each other to save lives, I'm afraid that's not true, so people who die of illness appear one after another, which is also their fate should be so. Master, you are the source of morality, and I'm only giving you this mountain. And, I myself am willing to accept the Five Precepts of Buddhism. I'm forever bound to the future with Buddhism.

古文：度曰： 人神道殊，无容相屈，且檀越血食世祀，此最五戒所禁。 
现代文：法度说： 人与神仙所信奉的道理不一样，不能委屈哪一方服从对方，况且施主您是讲究以血肉食品当作祭礼的，这是佛门五戒之中最为禁忌的。 
English: The law says: The principles that people and gods believe in are not the same, and it cannot be wronged which side obeys the other side. Moreover, the donor is particular about using flesh-and-blood food as a ritual, which is the most taboo among the Five Precepts of Buddhism.

古文：尚曰： 若备门庭，辄先去杀。 
现代文：靳尚说： 如有祭品设在门前，我就首先去掉杀牲之物。 
English: Gong Shang said: If there is a sacrificial offering placed in front of the door, I will first remove the animal kill.

古文：于是辞去。
现代文：于是告辞而去。
English: So he said goodbye and left.

古文：明旦，一人送钱一万，并香烛等，疏云： 弟子靳尚奉供。 
现代文：第二天，有个人送来一万个钱，还有香烛之类，上面注明： 弟子靳尚奉供。 
English: The next day, someone sent ten thousand yuan and some incense sticks, with a note saying: "This is a donation from a disciple."

古文：至其月十五日，度为设会，尚又来，同众礼拜行道，受戒而去。
现代文：到了这个月的十五日那天，法度为他举办法会，靳尚来到后，与众僧一起礼拜行道，受完斋戒就走了。
English: On the fifteenth day of this month, the Dharma Council held a meeting for him. When he arrived, he joined the monks in the prayer procession, fasted, and then left.

古文：既而摄山庙巫梦神告曰： 吾已受戒于度法师矣，今后祠祭者勿得杀戮。 
现代文：后来摄山庙里的巫师梦见神仙告诉他说： 我已经在法度法师门下受戒了，今后祭祀时不要杀戮生灵了。 
English: Later, the sorcerer in the mountain temple dreamed that the immortal told him: I have been ordained under the law of the mage, in the future, do not kill living beings during the sacrifice.

古文：由是庙中荐献菜饭而已。
现代文：从此，摄山庙里的祭品只有菜蔬饭食之类，再无腥荤之物。
English: From then on, the only sacrificial offerings in the Zhaoshan Temple were vegetables and food, and nothing else.

古文：通公
现代文：通公
English: Tonggong

古文：梁末有通公道人者，不知其姓氏。
现代文：扬州有个通公道人，不知他姓什么。
English: There is a fair-minded person in Yangzhou, I don't know his surname.

古文：居处无常。
现代文：没有固定的居住场所。
English: There is no fixed place of residence.

古文：所语狂谲，然必有应验。
现代文：说话颠狂怪诞，然而肯定能应验。
English: It's a wild and wacky thing to say, but it's certainly true.

古文：饮酒食肉，游行民间。
现代文：既饮酒又吃肉，整天在民间游荡。
English: He drinks alcohol and eats meat, and spends all day wandering among the people.

古文：侯景甚信之。
现代文：侯景非常信服他。
English: Hou Jing convinced him very much.

古文：扬州未陷之日，多拾无数死鱼头，积于西明门外，又拔青草荆棘栽市里。
现代文：扬州未被侯景攻陷时，他就拾了无数死鱼头，堆放在西明门外，又拔了许多青草与荆棘栽在市区内。
English: When Yangzhou was not conquered by Houjing, he picked up countless dead fish heads and piled them up outside the Ximing Gate. He also pulled up a lot of grass and thorns and planted them in the urban area.

古文：及侯景渡江，先屠东门，一城尽毙。
现代文：侯景渡过长江后，首先屠杀了东门，后来全城都被杀光了。
English: After Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River, he first slaughtered the East Gate, and later the entire city was killed.

古文：置其首于西明门外，为京观焉。
现代文：并把砍下的头颅堆置在西明门外，当作景观。
English: The severed heads were piled up outside the Ximing Gate as a spectacle.

古文：市井破落，所在荒芜。
现代文：扬州城内市区破落，一片荒芜。
English: Yangzhou's inner city is in ruins, a wasteland.

古文：通公言说得失，于景不便。
现代文：通公诉说这件事的得失，对侯景不利。
English: According to the public prosecution, the gain and loss of this matter is unfavorable to Hou Jing.

古文：景恶之，又惮非常人，不敢加害。私遣小将于子悦将武士四人往候之。
现代文：侯景恨他，又惧于他不是平常人，不敢加害于他，于是暗中派了一员小将于子悦带领四名武士去监视他。
English: Hou Jing hated him, feared that he was not an ordinary person, and did not dare to harm him, so he secretly sent a member of the Xiao Wu Ziyue to lead four samurai to monitor him.

古文：景谓子悦云： 若知杀，则勿害；不知则密捉之。 
现代文：侯景对于子悦说： 他若知道是去杀他，就不要杀害他；如果不知道，就偷偷地捉住他。 
English: Hou Jing said to Ziyue: "If he knows you are going to kill him, don't kill him; if he doesn't know, secretly capture him."

古文：子悦立四人于门外，独入见。
现代文：于子悦让四名武士守候在门外，自己进去见通公。
English: Yu Ziyue let four samurai wait outside the door and went in to see Tong Tong himself.

古文：通脱衣燎火，逆谓子悦曰： 汝来杀我，我是何人？
现代文：通公脱下衣服正在烤火，他冲着于子悦说： 你是来杀我的。我是何许人？
English: Tonggong took off his clothes and was lighting a fire. He said to Yu Ziyue, "You have come to kill me. Who am I?

古文：汝敢辄杀。 
现代文：你竟敢杀我！ 
English: How dare you kill me!

古文：子悦作礼拜云： 不敢。 
现代文：于子悦急忙施礼拜道： 不敢！ 
English: Yu Ziyue hurriedly said, "Don't you dare!"

古文：于是驰往报景。
现代文：于是跑回去报告了侯景。
English: So he ran back and reported to Houjing.

古文：景礼拜谢之，卒不敢害。
现代文：侯景只好向他赔礼道歉，一直不敢害他。
English: Hou Jing had to apologize to him and did not dare to harm him.

古文：景后因宴召僧通，僧通取肉捏盐，以进于景。问曰： 好否？ 
现代文：侯景后来在宴会上召见通公，通公夹起一块肉捏上一把盐，送给侯景，问道： 好不好吃？ 
English: Hou Jing later invited Tong Gong to meet him at a banquet. Tong Gong picked up a piece of meat, pinched a handful of salt and gave it to Hou Jing, asking: Is it good or not?

古文：景曰： 大咸。 
现代文：侯景说： 太咸了！ 
English: Hou Jing said: It's too salty!

古文：僧通曰： 不咸则烂。 
现代文：通公则说： 不咸就会腐烂。 
English: Tong Gongzi said: If it is not salty, it will rot.

古文：及景死数日。众以盐五石置腹中，送尸于建康市。百姓争屠脍羹，食之皆尽。
现代文：等到侯景死后几天，众人将许多盐放在他的肚子里，把尸体送到建康市内，百姓争着割肉片作汤吃，把他的尸体全吃光了。
English: A few days after Hou Jing's death, people put a lot of salt in his stomach and sent the body to Jiankang City. The people fought to cut the meat into slices to make soup, and ate his entire body.

古文：后竟不知所去。
现代文：后来通公不知到什么地方去了。
English: Later, he went to I don't know where.

古文：阿专师
现代文：阿专师
English: A specialist

古文：侯景为定州刺史之日，有僧不知氏族，名阿专师。
现代文：侯景作定州刺史的时候，有个僧人，不知他姓什么，名叫阿专师，多数时间都在定州市区内活动。
English: When Hou Jing was writing the history of Dingzhou, there was a monk, I don't know what his surname was, named Ah Xuan Shi, who spent most of his time in the urban area of Dingzhou.

古文：多在州市，闻人有会社斋供嫁娶丧葬之席，或少年放鹰走狗追随宴集之处，未尝不在其间。
现代文：凡是听到有什么集会、祭典、婚丧、嫁娶之类的宴席，或者是年轻人狐朋狗党所聚乐吃喝的场合，没有他不在场的。
English: Whenever he heard of a meeting, a festival, a wedding, a funeral, a wedding banquet, or an occasion for young foxes and dogs to eat and drink together, he was not there.

古文：斗争喧嚣，亦曲助朋党。
现代文：在打架斗殴争强起哄的场面，他也总是帮助同伙推波助澜。
English: He also always helped his teammates when a fight was about to break out.

古文：如此多年。
现代文：就这样过了许多年。
English: This went on for many years.

古文：后正月十五日夜，触他长幼坐席，恶口聚骂。
现代文：在后来有一年的正月十五日夜晚，在一个聚会中，有人冒犯了他的长幼座次，他立即泼口大骂，聚众起哄。
English: One year later, on the evening of the 15th day of the first month of the year, at a party, someone offended his eldest son, and he immediately lashed out and gathered the crowd.

古文：主人欲打死之，市道之徒救解将去。
现代文：主人想要打死他，后被那帮市井无赖之徒把他救走了。
English: His master tried to kill him, but he was saved by the gang of ruffians.

古文：其家兄弟明旦扑觅，正见阿专师骑一破墙上坐，嘻笑谓之曰： 汝等此间何厌贱我？
现代文：主人家的哥几个第二天仍不罢休，到处找他抓他，后来见他正在一堵破墙上，嘻皮笑脸地对他们说： 你们这伙儿人为什么这么烦恶我？
English: The next day several of the master's brothers still did not give up, they looked for him everywhere and caught him. Later they saw him on a broken wall, he said to them with a wry smile: Why do you people annoy me so much?

古文：我舍汝去。 
现代文：我不搭理你们还不行吗？我走！ 
English: Can't I just ignore you? Let me go!

古文：扑者奋杖欲掷，前人复遮约。
现代文：抓他的人举起木棍就要往他身上扔，站在前面的人急忙上去阻挡拉劝。
English: His captors raised their sticks to hurl at him, while those in front of them rushed to stop him.

古文：阿专师复云： 定厌贱我。我去。 
现代文：阿专师又说： 既然真的这么烦恶我，我走就是了。 
English: Specialist A also said, "Since it really annoys me so much, I'll just leave."

古文：以杖击墙，口唱叱叱。所骑之墙一堵，忽然升上，可数十仞。
现代文：他以木棍敲着破墙，口中啧啧有声，像在念诵什么，只见这堵墙忽然往上升了起来，升到几十丈高。
English: He was knocking on the broken wall with a wooden stick, and there was a clicking sound in his mouth, as if he was chanting something. Suddenly, he saw that the wall had risen upwards, to a height of several dozen meters.

古文：举手谢乡里曰： 好住。 
现代文：阿专师举起手来向乡亲致谢道： 各位保重！ 
English: Specialist A raised his hand to thank the villagers and said: Take care, everyone!

古文：百姓见者，无不礼拜悔咎。
现代文：在场的百姓无不向他行礼，深表对不住他。
English: The people present all bowed to him and apologized profusely.

古文：须臾，映云而灭。
现代文：转瞬之间，只见云朵一闪，他就不见踪影了。
English: In the blink of an eye, he disappeared in a flash of cloud.

古文：可经一年，闻在长安，还如旧态。
现代文：大约一年之后，听说阿专师在长安，还和原来一个样子。
English: About a year later, I heard that Ah Xuan Shi in Chang'an was still the same as before.

古文：于后不如所终。
现代文：再往后就不知其结局如何了。
English: Beyond that, we don't know what the outcome will be.

古文：阿秃师
现代文：阿秃师
English: Master Ah Chung

古文：北齐初，并州阿秃师者，亦不知乡土姓名所出。
现代文：北齐初年，并州有个阿秃师，也不知道他藉贯何地姓啥名啥。
English: In the first year of the Northern Qi Dynasty, there was an alderman in the state of Bian, and I don't know where he came from, what his name was.

古文：尔朱未灭之前，已在晋阳，游诸郡邑，不居寺舍，出入民间。
现代文：尔朱氏未灭之前，他就已经在晋阳。整天在郡城与乡镇间游荡，不在寺庙里居住，总与平常人混在一起。
English: He was already in Jinyang before the Erju clan was extinguished. He wandered all day between the county seat and townships, did not live in a temple, and always mingled with ordinary people.

古文：语谲必有征验。
现代文：说话怪诞但很有灵验。
English: His speech is bizarre but very effective.

古文：每行市里，人众围绕之，因大呼，以手指胸曰： 怜你百姓无所知，不识并州阿秃师。 
现代文：当他在街上走的时候，总有许多人围着他看热闹，他就大声呼叫，用手指着胸脯说道： 怪你百姓无所知，不识并州阿秃师。 
English: When he was walking in the street, there were always many people around him watching the excitement, and he called out loudly, pointing to his chest with his finger and saying: Blame your people for not knowing anything, for not knowing and for being a vulture.

古文：人遂以此名焉。
现代文：于是，人们便叫他 阿秃师 。
English: As a result, people called him Ah Choong-shih.

古文：齐神武迁邺之后，以晋阳兵马之地，王业所基，常镇守并州。
现代文：北齐神武皇帝迁都邺城之后，因为晋阳是屯集兵马的军事重地，又是开创基业的地方，所以经常在并州镇守，又时时来到邺都主持朝政。
English: After the Northern Qi Emperor Shenwu moved the capital to Jinyang, because Jinyang was a military stronghold of soldiers and horses, and also a place to create a foundation, he often guarded the town in Bianzhou, and also came to Jinyang to preside over the government.

古文：时来邺下，所有军国大事，未出惟幄者，秃师先于人众间泄露。
现代文：所有的军国大事，没等运筹决策者公布，秃师就先在民间传扬起来。
English: All major military and national events, without waiting for the operational planning decision-makers to announce them, were first propagated among the people.

古文：末年，执置城内，遣人防守，不听辄出，若其越逸，罪及门司。
现代文：不到一年，秃师就被抓进城里，派人看管起来。如不听从看管再出城门，就等于逃跑，要向看守城门的人问罪。
English: Less than a year later, Baldur was caught in the city and sent to be guarded. If he did not obey the guard and left the city gate, he would be considered to have fled and the person guarding the gate would be held responsible.

古文：当日并州时三门，各有一秃师荡出，遍执不能禁。
现代文：当时并州有三座城门，每座城门都有一个秃师同时溜了出去，派人到处捉拿，也限制不住他。
English: At that time, there were three city gates in Hanzhou, and each city gate had a bald teacher who slipped out at the same time. People were sent everywhere to catch him, but they could not restrain him.

古文：未几，有人从北州来云： 秃师四月八日于雁门郡市舍命郭下。大家以香花送之，埋于城外。 
现代文：不久，有人从北州来说： 秃师四月八日那天在雁门郡市内跳楼自杀了，大家用香花给他送殡，埋葬在城外。 
English: Soon, someone from Beizhou said: Bald Master Zhuang jumped to his death in the city of Yanmen County on April 8th. Everyone gave him a funeral with fragrant flowers, and he was buried outside the city.

古文：并州人怪笑此语，谓之曰： 秃师四月八日从汾桥过，东出，一脚有鞋，一脚徒跣，但不知入何巷坊。
现代文：并州人听了都感到可笑，便对这个人说： 秃师四月八日那天从汾水桥上走过，往东去了，一只脚穿着鞋，一只脚光着，只是不知他进了哪条胡同哪家店铺就是了。
English: And the people of Shuzhou felt ridiculous when they heard this, and said to this man: On April 8th, Bald Master walked across the Surabaya Bridge and went east, with one shoe on and one shoe off, but he didn't know which alley or which store he entered.

古文：人皆见之。
现代文：当时很多人都看见他了。
English: A lot of people saw him then.

古文：何云雁门死也。 
现代文：你怎么说他在雁门死了呢。 
English: How can you say that he died at the Wild Goose Gate?

古文：此人复往北州，报语乡邑。众共开冢看之，唯有一只鞋耳。
现代文：此人返回北州把这些话告诉了乡亲们，大家一起去挖开坟墓查看，见里面只有一只鞋而已。
English: The man returned to Beizhou and told these words to the villagers. They all went to dig up the grave to check it out, and found only one shoe inside.

古文：后还游并州。
现代文：事后，秃师还在并州到处游逛。
English: After the incident, Master Balding was still wandering around the state.

古文：齐神武以制约不从，浪语不出，虑动民庶，遂以妖惑戮之。
现代文：北齐神武皇帝因为制约不住他，流言不断出现，担心民情浮动，便以妖言惑众的罪名杀害他。
English: Emperor Beiqi Shenwu couldn't restrain him, rumours were constantly appearing, and he was worried about the fluctuation of the people's feelings, so he killed him on the charge of using witchcraft to mislead the public.

古文：沙门无发，以绳钩首。
现代文：他是和尚没有头发，便用绳索套住脑袋。
English: He was a monk with no hair, so they put a rope around his head.

古文：伏法之日，举州民众。诣寺观之。秃师含笑，更无言语。
现代文：问斩的那天，全州的民众都到寺庙去看热闹，只见秃师脸上带笑，一句话也不说。
English: On the day of the beheading, people from all over the state went to the temple to watch the fun, only to see Master Balding with a smile on his face, not saying a word.

古文：刑后六七日，有人从河西部落来云：道逢秃师，形状如故，但背负一绳，笼秃师头。与语不应，急走西去。
现代文：刑后六七天，有人从河西夷人部落那里来说，在道上遇见了秃师，还是原来那个样子，只是后背上栓着一条绳索，套着秃师的光头，与他说话他也不应答，急急忙忙地往西走去。
English: Sixty-seven days after the execution, someone from the Hexi barbarian tribe said that he met Bald Master on the road. He was still the same as before, except that a rope was tied to his back and Bald Master's head was shaved. When he spoke to him, he didn't answer and hurriedly walked west.

古文：稠禅师
现代文：稠禅师
English: Chō Zenji

古文：北齐稠禅师，邺人也。
现代文：北齐年间有个稠禅师，是邺城人。
English: During the Northern Qi Dynasty, there was a famous Zen master who was from Shicheng.

古文：初落发为沙弥，时辈甚众。每休暇，常角力腾趠为戏，而禅师以劣弱见凌。
现代文：当初落发为僧时，同辈的和尚非常多，每到闲暇时间，常在一起摔跤跳越比力气玩，而禅师因为身弱无力每每受到同伙的欺侮。
English: When he was first ordained as a monk, there were many monks of the same generation. Whenever they had free time, they often wrestled and skipped together, and the Zen master was often bullied by his companions because of his weakness.

古文：绐侮殴击者相继，禅师羞之，乃入殿中闭户，抱金刚足而誓曰： 我以羸弱，为等类轻负。为辱已甚，不如死也。
现代文：等到侮辱与殴打没完没了地向他袭来时，禅师羞恼之至，便躲进殿堂里关上门来，抱着金刚塑像的脚发誓道： 我因瘦弱而被同伴瞧不起，受尽他们的欺侮，不如死了的好。
English: When the endless stream of insults and beatings reached him, the Zen master was so humiliated that he hid in the hall, closed the door, hugged the feet of the statue of King Kong, and swore: "I have been despised by my companions for my thinness, and it is better to suffer their bullying than to die."

古文：汝以力闻，当佑我。
现代文：你以强壮有力闻名，应当保护我。
English: You are known to be strong and powerful, you should protect me.

古文：我捧汝足七日，不与我力，必死于此，无还志。 
现代文：我要连续七天捧着你的脚，如不给我力气，一定死在这里，决不反悔！ 
English: I will hold your feet for seven days in a row. If you do not give me strength, I will surely die here. I will never repent!

古文：约既毕，因至心祈之。
现代文：立誓完毕，便以至诚的心思向金刚祈祷。
English: After taking the oath, he prayed to King Kong with a sincere heart.

古文：初一两夕恒尔，念益固。
现代文：头两天与平常一样，毫无效应，但他的信念更加坚定。
English: The first two days were uneventful, as usual, but his belief grew.

古文：至六日将曙，金刚形见，手执大钵，满中盛筋。谓稠曰： 小子欲力乎？ 
现代文：到第六天黎明前夕，金刚显现了原形，手里端着大钵子，满满盛着肉筋，对禅师说： 小伙子想有力气吗？  想！  心诚吗？  诚！ 
English: On the sixth day, on the eve of dawn, King Kong appeared in his original form, holding a large hammer in his hand, full of sinew, and said to the Zen master: "Young man, do you want to be powerful? Yes! Do you want to be sincere? Yes!

古文：曰： 欲。 
现代文： 能吃肉筋吗？  不能。 
English: Can you eat sinew? No.

古文： 念至乎？ 
现代文： 为什么？ 
English: Why?

古文：曰： 至。 
现代文： 因为出家杜绝吃肉呀。 
English: Because he became a monk, he stopped eating meat.

古文：神因操钵举匕，以筋视之，禅师未敢食。
现代文：金刚神便一手端钵一手举着匕首让禅师看，禅师仍然没敢吃。
English: King Kong then held up a dagger in one hand and a pickaxe in the other to show the Zen master, who still did not dare to eat it.

古文：乃怖以金刚杵，稠惧遂食。
现代文：金刚神又举起金刚杵威吓他，稠禅师恐惧了，不得不吃。
English: Vajrasattva again held up the vajra and threatened him. The Zen master was frightened and had to eat it.

古文：斯须入口，神曰： 汝已多力，然善持教，勉旃。 
现代文：刚吃下一会儿，金刚神便说： 你已很有力气了，但要好好信奉佛法，你要善自为之。 
English: Just after eating, Vajrayana said, "You are already very strong, but you should practice Buddhism well. You should be good to yourself."

古文：神去且晓，乃还所居。
现代文：金刚神离去，天也亮了，禅师便回到自己的住处。
English: The vajra departed, the sky brightened, and the Zen master returned to his home.

古文：诸同列问曰： 竖子顷何至？ 
现代文：各个同伴询问他道： 你小子这些天到哪里去了？ 
English: His companions asked him: Where has your boy been these days?

古文：稠不答。
现代文：稠禅师没有回答。
English: The Zen master did not answer.

古文：须臾，于堂中会食，食毕，请同列又戏殴。禅师曰： 吾有力，恐不堪于汝。 
现代文：不一会儿，他们都去食堂一起吃饭，吃完饭，同伴们又打闹着玩，禅师说： 我有力气，恐怕你们不能再忍受。 
English: After a while, they all went to the dining hall to eat together. When they had finished eating, their companions started to fight and have fun. The Zen master said, "I have energy, I'm afraid you won't be able to bear it any longer."

古文：同列试引其臂，筋骨强劲，殆非人也。方惊疑，禅师曰： 吾为汝试。 
现代文：同伴不大相信，拉着他的胳臂一试，发现他的筋骨强劲有力，根本不是平常人可以比的，这才感到惊疑。禅师说： 我给你们试试看。 
English: Unconvinced, his companion tugged at his arm and tried it, and was surprised to find that his sinews and bones were strong and powerful, far beyond those of an ordinary person. The Zen master said, "I'll give it a try."

古文：因入殿中，横蹋壁行，自西至东，凡数百步。
现代文：于是来到大殿里面。只见他横卧在墙上往前爬行，自西往东，爬行了几百步远。
English: So I went inside the main hall. I saw him lying on the wall and crawling forward, from west to east, crawling several hundred paces away.

古文：又跃首至于梁数四，乃引重千钧。
现代文：他又连续几次跳起来用脑袋挂在房梁上，能提千钧重的东西。
English: He also jumped up several times in a row and hung his head on the beam of the house. He could lift heavy things.

古文：其拳捷骁武，动骇物听。
现代文：他的拳脚迅疾敏捷，雄武有力，令人见了神惊胆战。
English: His fists and feet are swift and agile, and he is strong and powerful. It's frightening to watch.

古文：先轻侮者，俯伏流汗，莫敢仰视。
现代文：过去轻视、欺侮过他的人，汗流浃背地匍匐在地上，不敢抬眼看他。
English: Those who had despised and bullied him in the past were sweating profusely on the ground, not daring to look up at him.

古文：禅师后证果，居于林虑山。
现代文：禅师后来参悟得道，住在林虑山。
English: The Zen master later became enlightened and lived in Mount Lin.

古文：入山数千里，构精庐殿堂，穷极土木。
现代文：他在距离山口几千里处建造精致的寺舍殿堂，募集了大量的土石木材。
English: He built an exquisite temple hall several thousand miles away from Yamaguchi, and collected a large amount of earth and stone wood.

古文：诸僧从其禅者，常数千人。
现代文：跟他修习禅理的僧徒，多达几千人。
English: He is accompanied by several thousand monks who practice Zen.

古文：齐文宣帝怒其聚众，因领骁勇数万骑，躬自往讨，将加白刃焉。
现代文：北齐文宣帝因为聚集了这么多人而十分恼怒，便统领几万精锐人马，御驾亲征，想要杀掉他。
English: Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Dynasty was very angry because so many people had gathered, so he led tens of thousands of elite men and women to personally go and try to kill him.

古文：禅师是日，领僧徒谷口迎候。文宣问曰： 师何遽此来。
现代文：这一天，禅师带领僧徒来到山口迎候，文宣帝问他： 法师为何突然来到这里？ 
English: On this day, the Zen master led the monks to come to Yamaguchi to greet him. Emperor Wenxuan asked him: Why did the master suddenly come here?

古文：稠曰。陛下将杀贫道。恐山中血污伽蓝。故至谷口受戮。
现代文：禅师说： 陛下要杀贫道，我怕在山里流血会沾污僧院，所以来到山口听凭杀戮。 
English: The Zen master said, "Your Majesty wants to kill the beggars. I am afraid that bloodshed in the mountains will stain the monastery, so I came to Yamaguchi to listen to the slaughter.

古文：文宣大惊。降驾礼谒，请许其悔过。禅师亦无言。
现代文：文宣帝大惊，下车施礼拜见，请求他允许自己悔过，禅师也没说什么。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was shocked and got out of the car to pay his respects and ask him to allow himself to repent. The Zen master did not say anything.

古文：文宣命设馔，施毕请曰： 闻师金刚处祈得力，今欲见师效少力，可乎？ 
现代文：文宣帝命人安排饭菜，吃过饭后，向禅师请求道： 听说法师在金刚神那里祈求得到了大力气，今天想开开眼界，请法师略为施展一下，可以吗？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan ordered someone to arrange the meal, and after eating the meal, he asked the Zen master: I heard that the master prayed to the King Kong god and received great strength. Today, I want to open my eyes, can I ask the master to work a little?

古文：稠曰： 昔力者，人力耳。今为陛下见神力，欲见之乎？ 
现代文：禅师说： 当年我所有的力气，只是人力而已；今天要为陛下显显神力，乐意看吗？ 
English: The Zen master said, "Back then, all my strength was just human power; today, I want to demonstrate my divine power for Your Majesty. Would you like to watch?"

古文：文宣曰： 请与同行寓目。 
现代文：文宣帝道： 请让我们饱饱眼福。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan said, "Please let us be blessed with good eyesight."

古文：先是禅师造寺，诸方施木数千根，卧在谷口。禅师咒之，诸木起空中，自相搏击，声若雷霆，斗触摧拆，缤纷如雨。
现代文：在这之前，禅师建造佛寺，各处施舍了木材几千根，正堆放在山口，如今禅师口诵咒语，便见根根木材腾空而起，互相撞击之声宛如雷霆轰鸣，碰撞碎了的木块像雨点一样纷纷降落。
English: Before this, the Zen master had built a Buddhist temple, and he had given away thousands of pieces of wood everywhere, which were being piled up in the mountain pass. Now, when the Zen master was reciting a spell, he saw the roots of the wood rise up, and the sound of them hitting each other sounded like thunder, and the broken pieces of wood fell like raindrops.

古文：文宣大惧，从官散走。文宣叩头请止之，因敕禅师度人造寺，无得禁止。
现代文：文宣帝大为惊惶，随从的官员四散奔逃，文宣帝叩头请求停止，于是敕令禅师指挥人建造寺院，不许任何人阻止。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was greatly alarmed, and the officials accompanying him scattered and fled. Emperor Wenzhong bowed down and asked for a stop, and then ordered the Zen master conductor to build a temple and not allow anyone to stop him.

古文：后于并州营幢子，未成遘病，临终叹曰： 夫生死者，人之大分。如来尚所未免。
现代文：后来禅师在并州监督制造石刻的经幢，没等峻工就病倒了，临终前叹道： 生死本属命中有定，如来佛尚且不免一死。
English: Later, the Zen master supervised the construction of a stone-carved sutra mound in Bianzhou, but fell ill before the work was completed. Before his death, he lamented: "Life and death are predetermined, if you come to the Buddha, you will inevitably die."

古文：但功德未成，以此为恨耳。
现代文：只是建造寺庙的功德尚未完成，以此为憾而已。
English: It is just a pity that the merit of building the temple has not yet been completed.

古文：死后愿为大力长者，继成此功。 
现代文：死后愿成为大力长者，继续完成此项功业。 
English: After his death, he would like to become a vigorous elder and continue to accomplish this work.

古文：言终而化。
现代文：说完就去世了。
English: After saying this, he died.

古文：至后三十年，隋帝过并州，见此寺，心中涣然记忆，有似旧修行处，顶礼恭敬，无所不为。
现代文：过了三十年，隋朝皇帝路过并州，见到这座寺庙，心中恍惚回忆起了什么，好像这是他过去修行的地方，于是顶礼膜拜，恭敬得无所不至。
English: Thirty years later, the emperor of the Sui Dynasty was passing through Nianzhou and saw this temple. He vaguely remembered something in his mind, as if this was the place where he had practiced in the past, so he bowed down and revered everywhere.

古文：处分并州，大兴营葺，其寺遂成。
现代文：他立即传旨于并州府衙，令其全力营造修缮，这座寺庙于是建成。
English: He immediately sent an order to the provincial governor to make every effort to carry out repairs, and the temple was built.

古文：时人谓帝为大力长者云。
现代文：当时人们都说隋帝就是大力长者。
English: At that time, people said that Emperor Sui was a vigorous elder.

古文：释知苑
现代文：释知苑
English: Shichien Garden

古文：唐幽州沙门知苑，精练有学识。
现代文：唐代幽州有个僧人叫知苑，精诚干练又有学识。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk named Zhiyuan in Yuzhou. He was sincere, capable and learned.

古文：隋大业中，发心造石室一切经藏，以备法戒。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年间，他就立下誓愿，修造石屋收藏所有佛经，防备佛法戒绝。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui and Emperor Pu, he made a vow to build a stone house to collect all Buddhist scriptures, to prevent the abandonment of Buddhism.

古文：既而于幽州西山凿岩为石室，即摩四壁而以写经。
现代文：从此便在幽州西山上开凿岩石为石室，凿成之后就磨平四壁用以刻写经文。
English: Since then, a rock has been excavated from the western mountains of Yuzhou to form a stone chamber. After it was excavated, the four walls were smoothed and used to inscribe scriptures.

古文：又取方石，别更摩写，藏诸室内。
现代文：又取方形石板磨平后刻上另外的经文，存放在石室中。
English: He also took a square stone slab, smoothed it and engraved another scripture on it, and stored it in the stone room.

古文：每一室满，即以石塞门，溶铁固之。
现代文：每当一间石室放满后，就用石块堵塞门口，再熔化铁水浇灌封闭起来。
English: Whenever a stone room was full, the door was blocked with stones and then sealed with molten iron and water.

古文：时隋炀帝幸涿郡，内史侍郎萧瑀，皇后弟也，性笃信佛法。
现代文：当时隋炀帝幸驾涿郡，内史侍郎萧瑀是皇后的弟弟，生性笃诚，信奉佛教。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Sui and Qian Dynasties was in the county, and Xiao Yao, the attendant of history, was the younger brother of the empress. He was sincere by nature and believed in Buddhism.

古文：以其事白后，后施绢千匹，瑀施绢五百匹。
现代文：他把知苑凿石室藏佛经的事跟皇后说了，萧后施舍了一千匹丝绢，萧瑀也施舍丝绢五百匹。
English: He told the empress about the Buddhist scriptures kept in the chiseled stone room in Zhiyuan. Xiao Hou gave away one thousand silk cocoons, and Xiao Yu also gave away five hundred silk cocoons.

古文：朝野闻之，争共舍施，故苑得成功。
现代文：朝廷内外听说之后，争先恐后都来施舍。所以成全了知苑的功德。
English: After hearing about it, people both inside and outside the Imperial Court scrambled to give alms. Thus, Chien's merit was fulfilled.

古文：苑常以役匠既多，道俗奔凑，欲与岩前造木佛堂并食堂。
现代文：知苑常常因为工匠这么多，僧人与俗众混杂在一起，感到很不方便。就想在山岩石室的前面，建造供僧人住的木制佛堂与供俗众工匠用的木制食堂。
English: Chien often found it inconvenient to have so many craftsmen, monks and lay people mingling together, so he wanted to build a wooden Buddhist hall for monks to live in and a wooden canteen for lay craftsmen in front of the rock chamber.

古文：寐而念木瓦难办，恐繁经费，未能起作。
现代文：晚上睡下时盘算起来，感到所需大量木石难以办到，恐怕要耗费太多的经费。所以没有动工。
English: In the evening, when I went to bed, I calculated and felt that the large amount of wood and stone required was difficult to achieve, and I was afraid that it would cost too much money. Therefore, the construction did not start.

古文：忽一夜暴雷震电，明旦既晴，乃见山下有大木松柏数千万，为水所漂，积于道次。
现代文：一天夜里突然电闪雷鸣，第二天早上天晴之后，便见山下有成千上万根粗大的松柏树干被山洪漂荡下来，堆积在道路两旁。
English: One night there was sudden lightning and thunder, and the next morning, after the weather cleared, we saw thousands of thick pine and cypress tree trunks under the mountain, drifted down by the flash flood and piled up on both sides of the road.

古文：道俗惊骇，不知来处。于是远近叹服。
现代文：僧人与工匠们都惊呆了。不知道是从哪里漂来的，远近各处的人们也都纷纷叹服。
English: The monks and craftsmen were stunned. They didn't know where it had drifted from, and people from far and wide were in awe.

古文：苑乃使匠择取其木，余皆分与邑里。
现代文：知苑便叫工匠从中挑选出合用的木材，其余的都分给附近的乡亲。
English: Chien then asked the craftsmen to select suitable wood from it, and the rest was distributed to the nearby villagers.

古文：邑里喜悦而助造堂宇，顷之毕成。
现代文：乡里人十分欢喜，便来帮助建造佛殿和食堂，没过多少日子就全部建成了。
English: The villagers were so happy that they helped to build a Buddhist hall and a canteen, which were all completed in just a few days.

古文：如其志焉。
现代文：终于实现了知苑的心愿。
English: Zhiyuan's wish has finally come true.

古文：苑所造石经，已满七室。以贞观十三年卒。弟子继其功焉。
现代文：知苑刻造的石头经文已经装满了七间石室，他于贞观十三年去世，弟子们继承了他的功业。
English: The stone scriptures carved by Ji Yuan have already filled seven stone chambers. He died in the thirteenth year of Zhenguan, and his disciples inherited his work.

古文：法喜
现代文：法喜
English: Dangxi

古文：隋炀帝时，南海郡送一僧，名法喜。
现代文：隋炀帝在位的时候，南海郡守送给他一个僧人，名字叫法喜，他让安置在皇宫内。
English: When Emperor Sui was on the throne, the governor of Nanhai County gave him a monk named Faki, who was placed in the imperial palace.

古文：帝令宫内安置。于时内造一堂新成，师忽升堂观看，因惊走下阶，回顾云： 几压杀我。 
现代文：这时宫内刚刚建好一座殿堂，法喜忽然要到里面去观看，进去一看，惊慌地跑下门前的台阶，回过头去看了看说： 差一点压死我。 
English: At this time, a hall of fame had just been built in the palace. Suddenly, Fa Xi wanted to go inside to look at it. She went in, took a look, ran down the steps in front of the door in a panic, looked back and said, "I almost died."

古文：其日中夜，天大雨，堂崩，压杀数十人。
现代文：当天半夜下起了大雨，殿堂崩塌了，压死几十个人。
English: In the middle of the night, it rained heavily and the hall collapsed, crushing dozens of people to death.

古文：其后又于宫内环走，索羊头。
现代文：之后，他又在宫内转圈跑，跟人索求羊的脑袋。
English: After that, he ran around the house in circles, demanding the sheep's head.

古文：帝闻而恶之，以为狂言，命锁著一室。
现代文：隋炀帝听说后非常厌恶他，以为他是在说疯话，命人把他锁在一间屋子里。
English: When Emperor Sui Xuan heard about this, he was very disgusted with him. He thought he was talking nonsense and ordered someone to lock him in a room.

古文：数日，三卫于市见师，还奏云： 法喜在市内慢行。 
现代文：几天之后，宫内三卫在市区内见到了法喜，回去报告皇帝说： 法喜正在市内漫步。 
English: A few days later, Miyauchi Sanbei saw Faki in the city and went back to report to the emperor: Faki is strolling around the city.

古文：敕责所司，检验所禁之处，门锁如旧。守者亦云： 师在室内。 
现代文：皇帝责令主管人员检验关他的那间房子。门上锁头依然如故，看守人员也说： 法喜在屋里。 
English: The emperor ordered officials to check the house where he was being held. The lock on the door was still in place, and the guards said, "Falun Gong is in the house."

古文：于是开户入室，见袈裟覆一丛白骨，锁在项骨之上。
现代文：于是开门进屋，只看见一件袈裟盖着一堆骨头，有把锁头挂在胫椎骨上。
English: So he opened the door and entered the house, only to see a coffin covered with a pile of bones, with a lock hanging from the skull.

古文：以状奏闻。敕遣长史王恒验之，皆然。
现代文：把这些情况报告了皇帝，皇帝又派长史王恒前来检验，检验结果与报告的完全一样。
English: He reported the situation to the emperor, who sent the head of Shi Wangheng to come and inspect it. The inspection result was exactly the same as the report.

古文：帝由是始信非常人也，敕令勿惊动。
现代文：皇帝这才相信法喜并非寻常人，敕令不要惊动他。
English: This made the emperor believe that Fa Xi was not an ordinary person, and he ordered not to alarm him.

古文：至日暮，师还室内，或语或笑。
现代文：到了傍晚，法喜回到锁他的那间屋子里，又说又笑的。
English: By late afternoon, Farhi was back in his locked room, talking and laughing.

古文：守门者奏闻，敕所司脱锁，放师出外，随意所适。
现代文：守门人把这事奏报了皇帝，皇帝命令主管人员去掉了锁头，放法喜出来，让他随意到自己要去的地方。
English: The gatekeeper reported the matter to the emperor, who ordered the officials to remove the locks, let Fa Xiao out, and let him go where he wanted.

古文：有时一日之中，凡数十处斋供，师皆赴会，在在见之，其间亦饮酒噉肉。
现代文：有时候，在一天之内有几十个地方同时设斋摆供，法喜处处赴会，这几十处都见他在那里喝酒吃肉。
English: Sometimes, in one day, there are dozens of places to set up food stalls at the same time, and Fa Xi attends meetings everywhere. He is seen drinking wine and eating meat in dozens of places.

古文：俄而见身有疾，常卧床，去荐席，令人于床下铺炭火，甚热。
现代文：不久，他身患疾病，经常躺在床上，去掉铺在床上的草席，让人在床下铺上炭火，非常烤人。
English: Soon after, he fell ill and often lay in bed. He removed the straw mat that covered the bed and had someone put a charcoal fire under the bed, which was very hot.

古文：数日而命终，火炙半身，皆焦烂，葬于香山寺。
现代文：过了几天他就死了，炭火烘烤的那半边身子都焦烂了，被安葬在香山寺。
English: He died a few days later, the charcoal-roasted half of his body charred, and was buried in Xiangshan Temple.

古文：至大业四年，南海郡奏云： 法喜见还在郡。 
现代文：到了大业四年，南海郡守奏禀隋炀帝道： 法喜现已回到南郡。 
English: In the fourth year of Daye's reign, the Nanhai County governor, Sui Jian Di, said: "Falun Gong has now returned to Nan County.

古文：敕开棺视之，则无所有。
现代文：皇帝命人开棺检查，发现棺内并无法喜的尸体。
English: The emperor ordered someone to open the coffin for inspection and found a corpse inside the coffin that was not happy.

古文：法琳
现代文：法琳
English: by Farin

古文：唐武德中，终南山宣律师修持戒律，感天人韦将军等十二人自天而降，旁加卫护。
现代文：唐高祖武德年间，终南山的宣律师修习佛法严守戒律，感动了天上的韦将军等十二人自天而降，卫护在他的身旁。
English: During the time of Emperor Wu of Tang Gao, the propagandist of Nanshan practiced Buddhism and strictly abided by the precepts, which moved the heavenly General Wei and twelve others to descend from the sky, guarding his side.

古文：内有南天王子张垍，常侍于律师。
现代文：其中有南天王子张垍经常侍立在律师身边。
English: One of them, Zhang Ye, the prince of the Southern Heaven, often stands next to the lawyer.

古文：时法琳道人饮酒食肉，不择交游，至有妻子。
现代文：当时法琳道人既喝酒又吃肉，交游也不择对象和场合，甚至有老婆孩子。
English: At that time, Farin Dao people both drank and ate meat, and even had wives and children.

古文：律师在城内，法琳过之，律师不礼焉。
现代文：律师住在城里，法琳去看望他，律师并不以礼相待。
English: The lawyer lives in town, Farine visits him, and the lawyer doesn't take kindly to it.

古文：天王子谓律师曰： 自以为何如人？ 
现代文：南天王子对律师说： 你自己认为是怎样的人？ 
English: Nantian Prince said to the lawyer: What kind of person do you think you are?

古文：律师曰： 吾颇圣也。 
现代文：律师说： 我是圣人。 
English: The lawyer said, "I'm a saint.

古文：王子曰： 师未圣，四果人耳，法琳道人即是圣人。 
现代文：王子说： 师父还不算圣人。只是遵奉佛教四谛修行达到 寂天为乐 境界的人而已，法琳道人才称得上是圣人。 
English: The prince said, "Master isn't a saint yet. He's just someone who follows the Four Noble Truths of Buddhism and practices to the point where he can enjoy the serenity of heaven. Only someone who practices Falun can be called a saint."

古文：律师曰： 彼破戒如此，安得为圣？ 
现代文：律师说： 他这样破坏戒律，怎么能称得上是圣人。 
English: The lawyer said: "How can he be called a saint when he breaks the rules like this?

古文：王子曰： 彼菩萨地位，非师所知。然彼更来，师其善待之。 
现代文：王子说： 他的菩萨地位，不是师父所能理解的；但他再来的时候，师父一定要善待他。 
English: The prince said, "His status as a Bodhisattva is beyond Master's comprehension, but when he returns, Master must treat him well."

古文：律师乃改观。
现代文：律师于是改变了对他的看法。
English: The lawyer then changed his mind.

古文：后法琳醉，猝造律师，直坐其床，吐于床下，臭秽虽甚，律师不敢嫌之。
现代文：后来法琳喝醉了酒，突然来到律师住处，进门就坐到律师的床上，呕吐在床前，气味非常难闻，但律师不敢嫌恶他。
English: Later, Farin got drunk and suddenly came to the lawyer's residence. When she entered the door, she sat on the lawyer's bed and vomited in front of the bed. The smell was very bad, but the lawyer did not dare to hate him.

古文：因以手攫造功德钱，纳之袖中径去，便将沽酒市肉。钱尽复取，律师见即与之。
现代文：他又自己伸手抓了一把施主捐赠的功德钱，放在袖筒里就走了。出门就用这些钱买酒买肉，花完了再来拿，律师见了就给他。
English: He also grabbed a handful of merit money donated by his benefactor, put it in his sleeve and left. When he went out, he used the money to buy wine and meat. When he finished spending it, he came back to get it. When the lawyer saw it, he gave it to him.

古文：后唐高祖纳道士言，将灭佛法。
现代文：后来，唐高祖采纳一个道士的进言，要废除佛教。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozhu of Tang adopted the advice of a Taoist to abolish Buddhism.

古文：法琳与诸道士竞论，道士惭服。
现代文：法琳与各位道士展开辩论，这位攻击佛教的道士终于服输。
English: Farin debated with various Taoists, and the Taoist who attacked Buddhism finally conceded defeat.

古文：又犯高祖龙颜，固争佛法。
现代文：法琳又冒犯唐高祖的龙颜，为维护佛法据理力争。
English: Farin also offended the dragon face of Tang Gaozu, and fought hard to defend Buddhism.

古文：佛法得全，琳之力也。
现代文：佛法得以保全，主要靠了法琳的力争。
English: The preservation of Buddhism was mainly due to Farin's efforts.

古文：佛经护法菩萨，其琳之谓乎。
现代文：佛经上说的护法菩萨，指的不就是法琳这样的人吗？
English: Doesn't the guardian deity mentioned in the sutras refer to someone like Farin?

古文：徐敬业
现代文：徐敬业
English: Xu Jingye

古文：唐则天朝，徐敬业扬州作乱，则天讨之，军败而遁。
现代文：唐代武则天临朝执政的时候，徐敬业在扬州反叛，则天派兵讨伐，徐敬业兵败潜逃。
English: When the Tang Dynasty Wu Zetian Lin Dynasty was in power, Xu Jingye rebelled in Yangzhou. Zetian sent soldiers to fight, but Xu Jingye's soldiers were defeated and fled.

古文：敬业竟养一人，貌类于己，而宠遇之。
现代文：他平日收养了一个人，相貌酷似自己，因而待他很好。
English: He usually adopts someone who looks exactly like him and treats him well.

古文：及敬业败，擒得所养者，斩其元以为敬业。
现代文：等到敬业兵败的时候，官兵抓获了这个人，把他当作敬业斩了。
English: When the dedicated soldiers were defeated, the officers and soldiers captured this man and beheaded him as a dedicated soldier.

古文：而敬业实隐大孤山，与同伴数十人结庐不通人事。
现代文：而敬业本人实际上已经隐藏到了大孤山。他与同伴数十人住在山里，与世隔绝。
English: But Jingye himself has actually hidden in the Great Lonely Mountain. He and dozens of his companions live in the mountains, isolated from the world.

古文：乃削发为僧，其侣亦多削发。天宝初，有老僧法名住括，年九十余，与弟子至南岳衡山寺访诸僧而居之，月余。
现代文：敬业本人削发为僧，同伴也多数出了家，天宝初年，有一老僧法号叫住括，九十多岁，与弟子们到南狱衡山寺庙去访问各位僧人，在那里住了一个多月。
English: Jingye himself became a monk, and many of his companions also left home. In the first year of Tianbao, there was an old monk with the Dharma name of Jumpo, who was more than 90 years old. He and his disciples went to the Hengshan Temple in Nanzhuang to visit the monks, and they stayed there for more than a month.

古文：忽集诸僧徒，忏悔杀人罪咎。
现代文：有一天，他突然集合起各位僧徒，在他们面前忏悔自己杀人的罪过。
English: One day, he suddenly gathered all the monks and confessed his crime of killing in front of them.

古文：僧徒异之。老僧曰： 汝颇闻有徐敬业乎？
现代文：僧徒们非常惊异，这位老僧说： 你们都听说有个徐敬业吧，我就是他！
English: The monks were very surprised. The old monk said, "You've all heard of a man named Xu Jingye. I'm him!"

古文：则吾身也。吾兵败，入于大孤山，精勤修道。
现代文：当年我因兵败逃进大孤山，精心修习佛道。
English: At that time, I fled into the Great Lonely Mountain due to military defeat, and diligently practiced Buddhism.

古文：今命将终，故来此寺，令世人知吾已证第四果矣。 
现代文：如今即将命终。所以来到贵寺，要让世人知道我已参悟佛教的四谛了。 
English: Now I am nearing the end of my life, so I have come to your temple to let the world know that I have realized the four essentials of Buddhism.

古文：因自言死期。
现代文：于是他自己说出了死亡的日期。
English: So he himself named the date of his death.

古文：果如期而卒。
现代文：果然到那天就死了。
English: And sure enough, he died that day.

古文：遂葬于衡山。
现代文：便安葬在衡山。
English: He was buried in Hengshan.

古文：唐考工员外郎宋之问以事累贬黜，后放还，至江南。
现代文：唐代考工员外郎宋之问，因事屡次被贬，后来流放到江南，流放途中来到灵隐寺游览。
English: Song Zhiqian, a foreign worker in the Tang Dynasty, was repeatedly demoted due to the incident, and was later exiled to the south of the Yangtze River. On the way to exile, he came to visit Lingyin Temple.

古文：游灵隐寺，夜月极明，长廊行吟，且为诗曰： 鹫岭郁苕峣龙宫锁寂寥。 
现代文：这天夜晚明月当空，他在长廊上漫步吟诗，挖空心思地作出了第一联： 鹫岭郁苕峣，龙宫锁寂寥。 
English: On this night, when the moon was bright, he strolled along the promenade chanting poetry, and thoughtfully made the first couplet: 岭郁,龙宫锁寂寥.

古文：第一联搜奇覃思，终不如意。
现代文：又总感到不如意。
English: I always feel unsatisfied.

古文：有老僧点长命灯，坐大禅床，问曰： 少年夜久不寐，而吟讽甚苦，何耶？ 
现代文：寺内有个老僧点着长命灯，坐在大禅床上，问道： 年轻人深夜不睡觉，却在这里苦苦吟诗，到底为什么？ 
English: Inside the temple, an old monk lit a long-life lamp and sat on a large Zen bed. He asked, "Young people don't sleep late at night, but they struggle to chant poems here. Why?

古文：之问答曰： 弟子业诗，适遇欲题此寺，而兴思不属。 
现代文：宋之问答道： 弟子修业于诗学，刚才我想赋诗以题此寺，无奈兴思不来，苦吟不得佳句。 
English: Song Zhi Q&A: As a disciple majoring in poetics, just now I wanted to write a poem about this temple. I couldn't help but think about it, but I couldn't come up with a good poem.

古文：僧曰： 试吟上联。 
现代文：老僧道： 请你试吟上联。 
English: The old monk said, "Please try to sing the chorus."

古文：即吟与之，再三吟讽，因曰： 何不云楼观沧海日，门对浙江潮？ 
现代文：宋之问即吟诵第一联给他听，他听了后，反复吟唱了几遍，便说： 为何不用 楼观沧海日，门对浙江潮 这两句呢？ 
English: Song Zhi's question was to recite the first couplet to him. After listening, he repeatedly chanted it several times and said: Why not use these two sentences: "Floor view of the sea, door to Zhejiang tide"?

古文：之问愕然，讶其道丽。
现代文：宋之问十分惊讶，惊讶于这两句诗的遒劲壮丽。
English: Song Zhiwen was very surprised, surprised at the vigor and magnificence of these two poems.

古文：又续终篇曰： 桂子月中落，天香云外飘。
现代文：他又接着把这首诗吟到终篇： 桂子月中落，天香云外飘。
English: He went on to chant this poem to the end: The moon sets in Keiji, and heavenly incense wafts out of the clouds.

古文：扪萝登塔远，刳木取泉遥。
现代文：扪萝登塔远，刳木取泉遥。
English: It's a long way from the dill to the tower, and a long way from the birch tree to the spring.

古文：霜薄花更发，冰轻叶未凋。
现代文：霜薄花更发，冰轻叶未凋。
English: Frost thin flowers more hair, ice light leaves not withered.

古文：待入天台路，看余度石桥。 
现代文：待入天台路，看余度石桥。 
English: Wait until you enter Tiantai Road to see the extra stone bridge.

古文：僧所赠句，乃为一篇之警策。
现代文：老僧所赠的诗句，是全篇中最精辟的地方。
English: The verse given by the old monk is the most incisive part of the whole piece.

古文：迟明更访之，则不复见矣。
现代文：第二天，宋之问再去拜访他时，再也见不到了。
English: The next day, when Song Zhifan went to visit him again, he never saw him again.

古文：寺僧有知者曰： 此骆宾王也。 
现代文：寺中的僧人有知道底细的人说： 这位老僧就是骆宾王。 
English: A person who knows the details of the monks in the temple said: This old monk is King Luo Bin.

古文：之向诘之，答曰： 当徐敬业之败，与宾王俱逃，捕之不获。
现代文：宋之问继续盘问他，答道： 当年徐敬业兵败后，与骆宾王都潜逃了，没有抓到他们。
English: Song Zhiwen continued to cross-examine him and replied: After the defeat of Xu Jingye that year, he and Luo Bin Wang both absconded and were never caught.

古文：将帅虑失大魁，得不测罪，时死者数万人，因求类二人者函首以献。
现代文：将帅们顾虑漏掉了大头目，会落大罪名。为了找与他俩相貌相似的人，砍下头来装在盒里呈送朝廷，当时死了几万人。后来虽然知道他俩没有死，也不敢再抓捕送给朝廷。 
English: In order to find people who looked similar to the two of them, they cut off their heads and put them in a box to be sent to the imperial court. At that time, tens of thousands of people died. Later, although they knew that they were not dead, they did not dare to arrest them again and send them to the imperial court.

古文：后虽知不死，不敢捕送，故敬业得为衡山僧，年九十余乃卒。
现代文：因为这样，所以徐敬业能够成为衡山的僧人，九十多岁才死的。
English: Because of this, Xu Jingye was able to become a monk in Hengshan, and he died in his nineties.

古文：宾王亦落发，遍游名山，至灵隐，以周岁卒。
现代文：骆宾王当年也落发为僧，遍游各处名山。后来到了灵隐寺，一年之后就死了。
English: Luo Bin Wang was also ordained as a monk that year, and traveled all over the famous mountains. Later, he came to Lingyin Temple, and died a year later.

古文：当时虽败，且以兴复唐朝为名，故人多获脱之。
现代文：当年他们虽然失败了，但因兴复唐朝为名，所以人们多半俘获后又开脱了他们。
English: Although they failed that year, they were mostly captured and released in the name of restoring the Tang Dynasty.

