古文：谭纶徐王崇古方逢时吴兑郑洛张学颜张佳胤殷正茂凌云翼谭纶，字子理，宜黄人。
现代文：谭纶，字子理，宜黄人。
English: Tan Xuan, Zhizi Li, Yi Huang Ren.

古文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年的进士。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：除南京礼部主事。
现代文：授职为南京礼部主事。
English: The conferment of the post is the responsibility of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：历职方郎中，迁台州知府。
现代文：历任职方郎中，调任台州知府。
English: He was transferred to the post of Taizhou governor.

古文：纶沉毅知兵。
现代文：谭纶沉着坚毅，懂军事。
English: Tan Hui is calm and resolute, and understands military affairs.

古文：时东南倭患已四年，朝议练乡兵御贼。
现代文：当时东南边疆已经遭受了四年的倭患，朝廷商议训练地方乡兵来抵御敌人。
English: At that time, the southeastern frontier had already suffered four years of Japanese invasion, and the imperial court was discussing the training of local villagers to resist the enemy.

古文：参将戚继光请期三年而后用之。
现代文：参将戚继光请求给他三年的时间训练地方乡兵而后将他们派往前线。
English: Colonel Qi Jiguang asked him to give him three years to train local soldiers and then send them to the front.

古文：纶亦练千人。
现代文：谭纶也训练了一千人。
English: Tan Wei has also trained a thousand people.

古文：立束伍法，自裨将以下节节相制。
现代文：他制定了约束队伍的纪律，从副将以下节节相互制约。
English: He established the discipline of the team, from the vice-captain on down.

古文：分数既明，进止齐一，未久即成精锐。
现代文：分配明确，进止整齐划一，不久就成为精锐部队。
English: With clear distribution and uniform advancement, they soon became an elite force.

古文：倭犯栅浦，纶自将击之，三战三捷。
现代文：倭寇侵犯栅浦，谭纶亲自带队迎击，三战三捷。
English: The wokou invaded Zaopu, and Tan Yu personally led the team to counterattack, resulting in three battles and three victories.

古文：倭复由松门、澶湖掠旁六县，进围台州，不克而去。
现代文：倭寇又从松门、澶湖劫掠附近的六个县，进而围攻台州，没有攻克只得离去。
English: The wokou also plundered six nearby counties from Songmen and Wuhu, and then besieged Taizhou. They had no choice but to leave.

古文：转寇仙居、临海，纶擒斩殆尽。
现代文：敌人转而侵犯仙居、临海，谭纶将他们全部擒拿、斩杀。
English: The enemy turned to invade Xianju and Linhai, and Tan Xuan captured and killed them all.

古文：进海道副使，益募浙东良家子教之，而继光练兵已及期，纶因收之以为用，客兵罢不复调。
现代文：他升任海道副使，招募更多浙东地区的良家子弟加以训练，而且戚继光所训练的兵马也已经到期，谭纶趁机收编了他们，罢除外地兵，不再调派他们。
English: He was promoted to the position of vice-envoy of the sea route, recruited more good sons and daughters from the eastern Zhejiang region to train them, and the soldiers and horses trained by his relative Jiguang had also expired. Tan Yu took the opportunity to recruit them, dismissed the soldiers, and no longer transferred them.

古文：倭自象山突台州，纶连破之马岗、何家〈石览〉，又与继光共破之葛埠、南湾。
现代文：倭寇从象山冲击台州，谭纶在马岗、何家石览接连打败他们，又与戚继光一起在葛埠、南湾打败倭寇。
English: The wokou attacked Taizhou from Xiangshan, while Tan Zheng defeated them successively in Magang and Hejiashi, and together with Qi Jiguang defeated the wokou in Gebu and Nanwan.

古文：加右参政，会忧去。
现代文：他被加封为右参政，遇上父母的丧事而离职。
English: He was ennobled as a right-wing politician and left office after the death of his parents.

古文：以尚书杨博荐起，复将浙兵，讨饶平贼林朝曦。
现代文：因为尚书杨博的推荐而复出，又统率浙江的部队，讨伐饶平的乱贼林朝曦。
English: Because of the recommendation of Shangshu Yangbo, he made a comeback and led the troops of Zhejiang Province to fight the bandit Lin Chaoxi in Raoping.

古文：朝曦者，大盗张琏余党也。
现代文：林朝曦是大强盗张琏的余党。
English: Lin Chaoxi is a remnant of the great robber Zhang Ye.

古文：琏既灭，朝曦据巢不下，出攻程乡。
现代文：张琏已被消灭，林朝曦占据巢穴不投降，并攻击程乡。
English: Zhang Xuan had been eliminated, Lin Chaoxi occupied the lair, refused to surrender, and attacked Chengxiang.

古文：知县余甫宰严兵待，而遣主簿梁维栋入贼中，谕散其党。
现代文：知县徐甫宰严阵以待，并且派遣主簿梁维栋到叛贼中去，告谕乱党解散。
English: Xu Fuzai, the prefect of Zhixian County, was waiting in the line, and sent the general secretary, Liang Weidong, to the rebels to announce the dissolution of the rebel party.

古文：朝曦穷，弃巢走，纶及广东兵追擒之。
现代文：林朝曦众叛亲离，弃巢逃走，谭纶与广东兵追击并擒获了他。
English: Lin Zhaoxi abandoned his family and fled, while Tan Yu and the Guangdong soldiers pursued and captured him.

古文：寻改官福建，乞终制去。
现代文：不久，他改任福建，请求回家守完丧事去职。
English: Soon after, he was reassigned to Fujian and asked to go home to attend the funeral and leave his post.

古文：继光数破贼，浙东略定。
现代文：戚继光屡次击败倭寇，浙东略略安定。
English: Qi Jiguang repeatedly defeated the Japanese invaders, and East Zhejiang was somewhat stable.

古文：倭转入福建。
现代文：倭寇转移到了福建。
English: Wako moved to Fujian.

古文：自福宁至漳、泉，千里尽贼窟，继光渐击定之。
现代文：从福宁到漳、泉地区，千里之地尽是倭寇的穴窟，戚继光逐渐剿灭了他们。
English: From Funing to the Quan and Quan areas, thousands of miles of land are full of wako caves, and Qi Jiguang gradually annihilated them.

古文：师甫旋，其众复犯邵武，陷兴化。
现代文：部队刚刚凯旋，倭寇又侵犯邵武，攻陷了兴化。
English: The troops had just made a triumphant return, and the wako had invaded Shaowu and captured Xinghua.

古文：四十二年春，再起纶。
现代文：嘉靖四十二年春天，再次启用谭纶。
English: In the spring of the 42nd year of Jiajing, Tan Xuan was reopened.

古文：道擢右佥都御史，巡抚福建。
现代文：升任右佥都御史，辖治福建。
English: He was promoted to the post of Ueshiba Miyoshi and governed Fujian Province.

古文：倭屯崎头城，都指挥欧阳深搏战中伏死，倭遂据平海卫，陷政和、寿宁，各扼海道为归计。纶环栅断路，贼不得去，移营渚林。
现代文：倭寇驻扎在崎头城，都指挥欧阳深在激战中牺牲，倭寇占据了平海卫，攻陷了政和、寿宁，各自扼守海道作为退路，谭纶用栅栏环绕使他们的退路被截断。
English: The wokou were stationed in Sakigashira Castle, and both were commanded by Ouyang Sheng, who died in the fierce battle. The wokou occupied Pinghaewei, captured Zhenghe and Shuning, and each guarded the seaway as an escape route. Tan Yu surrounded them with a fence to cut off their escape route.

古文：继光至，纶自将中军，总兵官刘显、俞大猷将左、右军。
现代文：倭寇不能逃走，就转移到了渚林。戚继光赶到了，谭纶亲自统率中军进逼，总兵官刘显、俞大猷统率左、右军。
English: When the wokou could not escape, they moved to Nagisa Forest. When Qi Jiguang arrived, Tan Yu personally led the Chinese army to advance, and the chief military officer Liu Xian and Yu Da Yu led the left and right armies.

古文：令继光以中军薄贼垒，左右军继之，大破贼，复一府二县。
现代文：他命令戚继光率中军进攻敌阵，左右军紧随其后，大败倭寇，光复了一府二县。
English: He ordered Qi Jiguang's central army to attack the enemy front, followed by the left and right armies, defeated the wokou, and recovered one prefecture and two counties.

古文：诏加右副都御史。
现代文：诏令加封他为右副都御史。
English: The imperial edict appointed him as the right vice-governor of the capital.

古文：纶以延、建、汀、邵间残破甚，请缓征蠲赋。又考旧制，建水砦五，扼海口，荐继光为总兵官以镇守之。
现代文：谭纶认为延平、建宁、汀州、邵武地区残破不堪，请求缓期征收已经蠲免的赋税，又考察旧制，建立了五座水寨，扼守海口，推荐戚继光担任总兵官镇守该地。
English: Tan Yu believed that Yanping, Jianning, Tingzhou and Shaowu regions were in ruins, and requested a delay in the collection of taxes that had been exempted. He also examined the old system, established five water villages, guarded Haikou, and recommended Qi Jiguang to serve as the chief military officer to guard the place.

古文：倭复围仙游，纶、继光大破贼城下。
现代文：倭寇又围攻仙游，谭纶、戚继光在城下大败敌人。
English: The wokou also besieged Senoyu, and Tan Ye and Qi Jiguang defeated the enemy at the foot of the castle.

古文：已而继光破贼王仓坪、蔡丕岭，余贼走，广东境内悉定。
现代文：不久戚继光在王仓坪、蔡丕岭打败倭寇，其余的敌人逃跑了，广东境内全部安定了。
English: Soon after, Qi Jiguang defeated the wokou in Wangcangping and Caiyuling. The rest of the enemies fled, and all of Guangdong was stabilized.

古文：纶上疏请复行服，世宗许之。
现代文：谭纶上奏再次请求回乡服丧，世宗同意了。
English: Tam Yeon-soo once again requested to return to his hometown for the funeral, and Sejong agreed.

古文：四十四年冬，起故官，巡抚陕西。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年冬天，他出任原职，巡抚陕西。
English: In the winter of the 44th year of Jiajing, he took up his original post as the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：未上而大足民作乱，陷七城。
现代文：还没上任，大足县的民众就叛乱了，攻陷了七座城镇。
English: Before he took office, the people of Dafu County rebelled and captured seven towns.

古文：诏改纶四川，至已破灭。
现代文：诏令谭纶改任四川，他到任时乱民已经被平定。
English: The emperor ordered that Tan Hong be reassigned to Sichuan, and by the time he arrived, the rioters had been subdued.

古文：云南叛酋凤继祖遁入会理，纶会师讨平之。
现代文：云南叛民的首领凤继祖逃入会理，谭纶调集军队讨伐并平定了他。
English: The leader of the Yunnan rebels, Feng Jizhu, fled to join the council, and Tan Yu mobilized an army to fight and subdue him.

古文：进兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督两广军务兼巡抚广西。
现代文：谭纶被升任兵部右侍郎兼任右佥都御史，统辖两广的军务兼理广西。
English: Tan Xuan was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department and concurrently the right-hand man of the capital, overseeing the military affairs of the two provinces and Guangxi.

古文：招降岭岗贼江月照等。
现代文：将岑岗的乱贼江月照等人招降了。
English: Jiang Yueshao, the ruffian who seized the post, and others were demoted.

古文：纶练兵事，朝廷倚以办贼，遇警辄调，居官无淹岁。
现代文：谭纶熟悉兵事，朝廷依靠他对付倭寇，遇到警讯就调动他们，他任官没有满一年的。
English: Tan Xuan was familiar with military affairs. The imperial court relied on him to deal with the wokou, and when they received a warning, they were mobilized. He had been in office for less than a year.

古文：迨南寇略平，而边患方未已。
现代文：等到南部的倭寇大略平定后，北部边关的祸患却方兴未艾。
English: After the Japanese invaders in the south had been more or less subdued, the disaster at the northern border was still in the ascendant.

古文：隆庆元年，给事中吴时来请召纶、继光练兵。
现代文：隆庆元年，给事中吴时来奏请征召谭纶、戚继光训练兵马。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Wu Shilai requested the enlistment of Tan Xuan and Qi Jiguang to train soldiers and horses.

古文：诏征纶还部，进左侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：诏令谭纶回兵部，升任左侍郎兼任右佥都御史，总督蓟、辽、保定的军务。
English: The edict ordered Tan Xuan to return to the military department, and he was promoted to the position of the left attendant and concurrently the right attendant of the capital, and the military affairs of the governors Xuan, Liao, and Baoding.

古文：纶上疏曰：蓟、昌卒不满十万，而老弱居半，分属诸将，散二千里间。
现代文：谭纶上奏说： 蓟镇、昌平的兵丁不满十万人，而且老弱者占一半，分别隶属几位将领，分散于二千里的防区。
English: Tan Xuan said: The number of soldiers in Shanzhen and Changping is less than 100,000, and half of them are old and weak. They are subordinated to several generals and are scattered in a 2,000-mile defense zone.

古文：敌聚攻，我分守，众寡强弱不侔，故言者亟请练兵。
现代文：敌人集中兵力来攻，我们分兵防守，众寡强弱不等，所以言事者请求赶紧训练兵马。
English: The enemy concentrated its forces to attack, and we divided our forces to defend ourselves. The number of our troops varied from small to large, so the speaker requested that we quickly train the soldiers and horses.

古文：然四难不去，兵终不可练。
现代文：然而四大困难不解决，最终不能训练兵马。
English: However, if the four major difficulties are not solved, it will eventually be impossible to train soldiers and horses.

古文：夫敌之长技在骑，非召募三万人勤习车战，不足以制敌。
现代文： 敌人擅长骑射，不招募三万人经常练习车战是不能制服敌人的。
English: The enemy is good at cavalry shooting. It is impossible to subdue the enemy without recruiting 30,000 people to regularly practice vehicular combat.

古文：计三万人月饷，岁五十四万，此一难也。
现代文：统计三万人的月饷，每年五十四万两白银，这是一大困难。
English: It is a great difficulty to count the moonbeams of thirty thousand people, amounting to 540,000 taels of silver a year.

古文：燕、赵之士锐气尽于防边，非募吴、越习战卒万二千人杂教之，事必无成。
现代文：燕、赵的兵丁的锐气在边防中耗尽了，不招募一万二千多名熟谙战事的吴、越士兵，掺杂在他们中间教练他们，必然难以成事。
English: Yan and Zhao's soldiers were exhausted in the border defense, and without recruiting more than 12,000 Wu and Yue soldiers who were familiar with warfare and training them, it was bound to be difficult to accomplish.

古文：臣与继光召之可立至，议者以为不可。信任之不专，此二难也。
现代文：我与戚继光受召就可以立马赶到，议论的人认为不可能，不始终信任，这是第二大困难。
English: My relatives and I can arrive immediately when we are called. People who talk about it think it's impossible, but they don't always believe in it. That's the second biggest difficulty.

古文：军事尚严，而燕、赵士素骄，骤见军法，必大震骇。
现代文：军事崇尚严格，然而燕、赵的士卒一向骄惯，骤然被处以军法必然大为震惊骇然。
English: The military adheres to a strict code, but Yan and Zhao's soldiers have always been arrogant. To suddenly be punished by military law is bound to be a great shock and horror.

古文：且去京师近，流言易生，徒令忠智之士掣肘废功，更酿他患，此三难也。
现代文：况且又离京城很近，容易产生流言蜚语，徒然使忠诚、明智的士卒受到掣肘而废弃了功力，进而酿成其他祸患，这是第三大困难。
English: In addition, it is very close to the capital, and it is easy to generate gossip. In vain, loyal and wise soldiers are constrained and waste their strength, which leads to other evils. This is the third major difficulty.

古文：我兵素未当敌，战而胜之，彼不心服。能再破，乃终身创，而忌嫉易生；欲再举，祸已先至。
现代文：我方兵士一向没有直接与敌作战，就是打败了敌人，敌人不心服，能够再次打败敌人，才能使敌人终身受创，但是这容易产生忌恨与妒嫉；想再有作为，祸患已经先到了。
English: Our soldiers have never fought directly with the enemy. They have only defeated the enemy. The enemy is not satisfied. If they can defeat the enemy again, they can make the enemy suffer for life. However, this is likely to produce hatred and jealousy. If they want to do something again, the disaster has already come first.

古文：此四难也。
现代文：这是第四大困难。
English: This is the fourth difficulty.

古文：以今之计，请调蓟镇、真定、大名、井陉及督抚标兵三万，分为三营，令总兵参游分将之，而授继光以总理练兵之职。
现代文： 按现在的情况考虑，请求调集蓟镇、真定、大名、井陉和督抚的标兵三万人，分成三个营，指令总兵、参将、游击分别统率他们，而且授予戚继光总理练兵的职责。
English: According to the current situation, it is requested to mobilize 30,000 pacesetters from Shanzhen, Zhending, Daimyo, Jingyao and Guanfu, divide them into three battalions, and instruct the general, general and guerrilla to lead them separately, and give Qi Jiguang the responsibility of training soldiers.

古文：春秋两防，三营兵各移近边。
现代文：春季与秋季两个防御期，三营的兵马各自调至边关附近。
English: During the two defense periods of spring and autumn, the three battalions of soldiers and horses were transferred to the vicinity of the border.

古文：至则遏之边外，入则决死边内。二者不效，臣无所逃罪。
现代文：敌人来了就能将他们遏制在关外，敌人攻进来了就能与他们在关内决一死战。这两方面没有效果，我不逃避罪责。
English: When the enemy comes, we can contain them outside the prison, and when the enemy invades, we can fight them to the death inside the prison. These two aspects have no effect, and I do not evade culpability.

古文：又练兵非旦夕可期，今秋防已近，请速调浙兵三千，以济缓急。
现代文：而且训练兵马不是一朝一夕的事，现在秋季防御已经临近，请迅速调集三千名浙江兵，以缓解急迫的形势。
English: Moreover, the training of soldiers and horses is not an overnight thing. Now that the autumn defense is approaching, please quickly mobilize three thousand Zhejiang soldiers to ease the urgent situation.

古文：三年后，边军既练，遣还。
现代文：三年之后，边防军训练好了就遣返浙江兵。 
English: Three years later, the border guards repatriated the Zhejiang soldiers as soon as they were trained.

古文：诏悉如所请，仍令纶、继光议分立三营事宜。
现代文：世宗下诏全部同意了他的请求，仍指令谭纶、戚继光商讨分别成立三个营的事情。
English: The Sejong agreed to his request in its entirety, but still ordered Tan Ye and Qi Jiguang to discuss the establishment of three battalions separately.

古文：纶因言： 蓟镇练兵逾十年，然竟不效者，任之未专，而行之未实也。
现代文：谭纶趁机说： 蓟镇训练了十多年的兵马，然而最终不见成效，是因为任务不专一，训练也不落实。
English: Tan Wei took the opportunity to say: Shanzhen has trained soldiers and horses for more than ten years, but in the end there is no result, because the task is not specific, and the training is not implemented.

古文：今宜责臣纶、继光，令得专断，勿使巡按、巡关御史参与其间。 
现代文：现在应该责令臣谭纶与戚继光，专门负责，不要让巡按、巡关的御史参与到这中间。 
English: Now it is time to order the minister, Tan Zhuang, and his relative, Jiguang, to take special responsibility, and not let the inspectors and customs inspectors get involved in the middle.

古文：自兵事起，边臣牵制议论，不能有为，故纶疏言之。
现代文：自从战争兴起，边防大臣受舆论的牵制，不能有所作为，所以谭纶上奏陈述此事。
English: Since the outbreak of the war, the Minister of Border Defense has been constrained by public opinion and unable to make a difference, so Tan Ye made a report on the matter.

古文：而巡抚刘应节果异议，巡按御史刘翾、巡关御史孙代又劾纶自专。
现代文：而且巡抚刘应节果然有不同的意见，巡按御史刘隨、巡关御史孙代又弹劾谭纶专横。
English: Moreover, the inspector Liu Yingjie did indeed have a different opinion, and the inspector Liu followed, and the inspector Sundei also impeached the tyrannical Tan.

古文：穆宗用张居正言，悉以兵事委纶，而谕应节等无挠。
现代文：穆宗采纳了张居正的意见，将练兵作战的事情全部委托给了谭纶，并且告诫刘应节等人不要阻挠。
English: Mu Zong adopted Zhang Juzheng's opinion, entrusted all the matters of training soldiers to fight to Tan Zheng, and warned Liu Yingjun and others not to obstruct.

古文：纶相度边隘冲缓，道里远近，分蓟镇为十二路，路置一小将，总立三营：东驻建昌备燕河以东，中驻三屯备马兰、松、太，西驻石匣备曹墙、古石。
现代文：谭纶考虑边地关隘、要道的险易，道路的远近，将蓟镇分成十二防区，每个区设置一名小将，全军总共分成三个营：东营驻扎在建昌守备燕河以东的地区，中营驻扎在三屯守备马兰、松太地区，西营驻扎在石匣守备曹墙、古石地区。
English: Taking into account the border crossings, the dangers of the important roads, and the proximity of the roads, Tan Yu divided Shanzhen into twelve defense areas, each area was set up with a small general, and the whole army was divided into three battalions: the east battalion was stationed in the area east of Jianchang and Yanhe, the middle battalion was stationed in the area of Mitun and Malan and Songta, and the west battalion was stationed in the area of Shijiazhuang and Caowan.

古文：诸将以时训练，互为掎角，节制详明。
现代文：各位将领时常率兵操练，互相声援，管理办法周到明了。
English: All generals regularly lead soldiers in drills, support each other, and the management methods are thorough and clear.

古文：是岁秋，蓟、昌无警。
现代文：当年秋季，蓟镇、昌平地区没有警讯。
English: In the autumn of that year, there were no alarms in Handan Town and Changping District.

古文：异时调陕西、河间、正定兵防秋，至是悉罢。
现代文：过去调集陕西、河间、正定的兵马进行秋季防卫，到现在就全部罢除了。
English: In the past, soldiers and horses from Shaanxi, Hema and Zhengding were mobilized for the autumn defense, but now they have all been removed.

古文：纶初至，按行塞上，谓将佐曰： 秣马厉兵，角胜负呼吸者，宜于南；坚壁清野，坐制侵轶者，宜于北。 
现代文：谭纶刚刚上任在关塞巡视，对身边的将领说： 秣马厉兵，决定胜负于呼吸之间的方法适宜于南方；坚壁清野，钳制侵略之敌的方法适宜于北方。 
English: Just after taking office, Tan Yu was on a tour of the pass, and said to the generals around him: "Hold your horses, soldiers, the method of deciding between victory and defeat by breathing is suitable for the south; strong walls and clear fields, the method of restraining the enemy's aggression is suitable for the north."

古文：遂与继光图上方略，筑敌台三千，起居庸至山海，控守要害。
现代文：于是他与戚继光谋划制订作战的方针、策略，并报告给朝廷，修筑了三千多个屯兵御敌台，从居庸关到山海关，控制着要害地区。
English: Therefore, he and Qi Jiguang planned and formulated the principles and strategies of the battle, and reported to the imperial court. They built more than three thousand garrisons against the enemy, from Juyongguan to Shanhaiguan, and controlled the key areas.

古文：纶召入为右都御史兼兵部左侍郎，协理戎政。会台工成，益募浙兵九千余守之。
现代文：谭纶被召到京城担任右都御史兼任兵部左侍郎，协助处理军务，御敌台修成，他又招募了九千多名浙江兵驻守。
English: Tan Xuan was called to Beijing to serve as the Right Metropolitan Historian and also as the Left Attendant of the Military Department, to assist in dealing with military affairs, to defeat the enemy, and he recruited more than nine thousand Zhejiang soldiers to garrison.

古文：边备大饬，敌不敢入犯。
现代文：边防经过此番大整治，敌人不敢前来侵犯。
English: After this large-scale rectification of the border defense, the enemy did not dare to invade.

古文：以功进兵部尚书兼右都御史，协理如故。
现代文：他因功升任兵部尚书，兼任右都御史，协助处理原来的事务。
English: For his merits, he was promoted to the post of Hyobusho and concurrently the post of Utsunomiya Imperial Historian to assist in handling the original affairs.

古文：其冬，予告归。
现代文：当年冬天允许他回乡休假。
English: That winter, he was allowed to go back to his hometown for a vacation.

古文：神宗即位，起兵部尚书。
现代文：神宗继位，他出任兵部尚书。
English: When Shinshu succeeded to the throne, he was appointed to the position of Hyobu Shosho.

古文：万历初，加太子少保。
现代文：万历初年，被加封为太子少保。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince Minor Protector.

古文：给事中雒遵劾纶不称职。
现代文：给事中雒遵弹劾谭纶不称职。
English: The impeachment of Tan Hong is incompetent.

古文：纶三疏乞罢，优诏留之。
现代文：谭纶多次上奏请求罢职，神宗下优诏挽留他。
English: Tan Xuan repeatedly appealed for resignation, but Shenzong issued an edict to retain him.

古文：五年卒官。
现代文：万历五年，他死于任上。
English: Five years, died in office.

古文：屡败海寇林道乾、山寇张韶南等。
现代文：被赠封为太子太保，谥号襄敏。谭纶前后致力兵事三十年，歼敌二万一千五百人。
English: He was awarded the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was Xiangmin. He devoted himself to military service for 30 years, and wiped out 21,500 enemy soldiers.

古文：隆庆中，被劾罢归。
现代文：曾经酣战，刀刃上的血浸染了手腕，多次冲洗才清除。
English: Once in a fight, the blood on the blade soaked the wrists, and it took several rinses to remove it.

古文：王崇古，字学甫，蒲州人。
现代文：他与戚继光共事又共享声誉，史称 谭、戚 。王崇古，字学甫，蒲州人。
English: He and Qi Jiguang worked together and shared a reputation, historically known as Tan, Qi. Wang Chonggu, Zi Xuefu, Puzhou people.

古文：嘉靖二十年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十年的进士。
English: Jiajing has been a member for 20 years.

古文：除刑部主事。
现代文：授职为刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：由郎中历知安庆、汝宁二府。
现代文：由郎中始，历任安庆知府、汝宁知府。
English: Starting with his son, successively Anqing chifu and Ruining chifu.

古文：迁常镇兵备副使，击倭夏港，追歼之靖江。
现代文：调任兵备副使，在夏港打击倭寇，在靖江追歼了一股倭寇。
English: He was transferred to the post of deputy envoy for military preparedness, fought against Japanese pirates in Xia Gang, and chased and destroyed a group of Japanese pirates in Jingjiang.

古文：从巡抚曹邦辅战浒墅。
现代文：跟随巡抚曹邦辅在浒墅作战。
English: He followed the inspector Cao Bangyu to fight in Xuanwu.

古文：已，偕俞大猷追倭出海。
现代文：此后，与俞大猷一起将倭寇追逐出海。
English: After that, he chased the wako out to sea together with Shida Shoko.

古文：累进陕西按察使，河南右布政使。
现代文：他升任陕西按察使，河南右布政使。
English: He was promoted to the post of inspector in Shaanxi Province and the post of political envoy in Henan Province.

古文：四十三年，改右佥都御史，巡抚宁夏。
现代文：嘉靖四十三年，他改任右佥都御史，辖治宁夏地区。
English: In the 43rd year of Jiajing, he was transferred to the post of the Right Magistrate of the Capital to govern the Ningxia region.

古文：崇古喜谭兵，具知诸边厄塞，身历行阵，修战守，纳降附，数出兵捣巢。
现代文：王崇古喜欢谈论军事，完全知晓各边关的险隘要塞，亲身经历搏杀，组织抵抗防守，接受投降和归附的人，屡次出兵直捣敌人的巢穴。
English: Wang Chonggu likes to talk about military affairs. He is fully aware of the narrow fortresses on each side of the border, has personally experienced fighting and killing, organized resistance and defense, accepted those who surrendered and attached, and repeatedly sent troops to directly attack the enemy's lair.

古文：寇屡残他镇，宁夏独完。
现代文：敌寇屡屡残害其他的边镇，唯独宁夏完好。
English: Enemy raiders repeatedly destroyed other border towns, but Ningxia remained intact.

古文：隆庆初，加右副都御史。
现代文：隆庆初年，他被加封为右副都御史。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he was awarded the title of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：吉囊子吉能据河套为西陲诸部长，别部宾兔驻牧大、小松山，南扰河、湟番族，环四镇皆寇。
现代文：吉囊的儿子吉能占据河套做了西部边疆各部落的首领，另有宾兔部落在大、小松山扎营放牧，向南骚扰河、湟地区的西南少数民族，敌寇包围了四个镇。
English: Ji Neng, the son of Ji Zu, occupied Hetao and became the leader of various tribes in the western frontier. In addition, the Bintang tribe camped and grazed in the Da and Xiao Matsu Mountains, harassing the southwestern ethnic minorities in the He and Handan regions to the south. The enemy surrounded four towns.

古文：总督陈其学无威略，总兵官郭江、黄演等皆败死，陕西巡抚戴才亦坐免。
现代文：总督陈其学既无威望又无谋略，总兵官郭江、黄演等人都战败而死，陕西巡抚戴才也被免职。
English: The governor Chen Qigong had neither prestige nor strategy, the general officers Guo Jiang and Huang Yuan were defeated and died, and the governor of Shaanxi, Dai Cai, was also dismissed.

古文：其冬，进崇古兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总督陕西、延、宁、甘肃军务。
现代文：当年冬天，王崇古升任兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，统辖陕西、延绥、宁夏、甘肃地区的军务。
English: In the winter of that year, Wang Chonggu was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the capital, overseeing the military affairs of Shaanxi, Yancheng, Ningxia and Gansu regions.

古文：崇古奏给四镇旗牌，抚臣得用军法督战，又指画地图，分授诸大将赵岢、雷龙等。
现代文：王崇古上奏请求给四镇发放旗牌，使抚按大臣能够按军法督察战事，他还根据地图，划出防区，分别授予赵岢、雷龙等诸位大将。
English: Wang Chonggu made a request for the issuance of flags to the four towns, so that the minister could inspect the war in accordance with the military law. According to the map, he also delineated the defense zone and awarded it to generals such as Zhao Qian and Lei Long.

古文：数有功。
现代文：他屡次立功。
English: He has repeatedly distinguished himself.

古文：着力兔行牧河东，龙潜出兴武袭破其营，斩获多，加崇古右都御史。
现代文：着力兔在河东游牧，雷龙偷偷由兴武出发，袭击并攻破敌营，斩杀了许多人，王崇古被加封为右都御史。
English: Xinglong secretly set out from Xingwu, attacked and broke through the enemy camp, and killed many people. Wang Chonggu was awarded the title of Right Capital Imperial Historian.

古文：吉能犯边，为防秋兵所遏，移营白城子。
现代文：吉能侵犯边关，被执行秋季防守任务的部队遏制了，他们移驻白城子。
English: Ji Neng invaded the border and was contained by the troops carrying out the autumn defense mission, and they moved to Baicheng.

古文：龙等出花马池、长城关与战，大败之。
现代文：雷龙等人奔出花马池、长城关与他们作战，大败敌人。
English: Lei Long and others rushed out of the Flower and Horse Pond and the Great Wall Pass to fight with them and defeated the enemy.

古文：崇古在陕七年，先后获首功甚多。
现代文：王崇古在陕西呆了七年，前后获得很多战绩。
English: Wang Chonggu stayed in Shaanxi for seven years, gaining a lot of achievements.

古文：自河套以东宣府、大同边外，吉囊弟俺答、昆都力驻牧地也。
现代文：从河套以东到宣府、大同等边关之外，是吉囊的弟弟俺答、昆都力扎营放牧的地方。
English: From east of Hetao to Xuanfu and beyond the border, it is the place where the younger brother of Yoshizuku, Ippo and Kundu, camped and grazed.

古文：又东蓟、昌以北，吉囊、俺答主土蛮居之，皆强盛。
现代文：再向东到蓟镇、昌平以北的地区，吉囊、俺答的首领居住在那里，他们都很强盛。
English: Further to the east, in the area north of Jiu Town and Changping, the chiefs of Jizang and Mingtang lived there, and they were very prosperous.

古文：俺答又纳叛人赵全等，据古丰州地，招亡命数万，屋居佃作，号曰板升。
现代文：俺答又收留了叛贼赵全等人，占据古丰州地方，招募数万名逃亡的人，让他们建屋定居耕田，号称板升。
English: In response, we took in the traitor Zhao Quan and others, occupied the ancient Fengzhou region, recruited tens of thousands of fugitives, and let them build houses and settle in cultivated fields, known as Pan Sheng.

古文：全等尊俺答为帝，为治城郭宫殿；亦自治第，制度如王者，署其门曰开化府。
现代文：赵全等人尊奉俺答为帝王，替他筑城池，造宫殿；同时修造自己的府第，仪礼宛如王者，将门题称开化府。
English: Zhao Quan and others revered him as an emperor and built a castle and a palace for him. At the same time, they built their own palace. The ceremony was like that of a king, and the gate was called Kaifu.

古文：又日夜教俺答为兵。
现代文：他日夜教俺答练兵法。
English: He's been training me day and night.

古文：东入蓟、昌，西掠忻、代，游骑薄平阳、灵石，至潞安以北。
现代文：由东面攻入蓟、昌地区，向西劫掠忻、代地区，骑兵逼迫平阳、灵石，直到潞安以北。
English: From the east, they invaded the regions of Handan and Chang, and from the west, they plundered the regions of Handan and Dai. The cavalry forced Pingyang and Lingshi to the north of Handan.

古文：起嘉靖辛丑，扰边者三十年，边臣坐失事得罪者甚众，患视陕西四镇尤剧。
现代文：从嘉靖辛丑开始，骚扰边关达到三十年，边防大臣因为失利而被治罪的人很多，边患较陕西四镇为重。
English: From the beginning of Jiajing Xinqiu, the harassment of the border has reached thirty years. There are many people who have been punished for the failure of the Minister of Border Defense, and the border is more serious than the four towns in Shaanxi.

古文：朝廷募获全者官都指挥使，赏千金，卒不能得。
现代文：朝廷悬赏抓获赵全的人封官都指挥使，赏白银一千两，最终没有收获。
English: The imperial court offered a reward of one thousand taels of silver to anyone who captured Zhao Quan, but in the end there was no reward.

古文：边将士率贿寇求和，或反为用；诸陷寇自拔归者，辄杀之以冒功赏；敌情不可得，而军中动静敌辄知。
现代文：边关的将士都贿赂敌寇谋求和平，有人还替敌人效劳；那些落入敌手又自己逃回的人，却被边军杀头冒功请赏；对敌情不知晓，但边军的动静敌人总是先知道。
English: The soldiers at the border all bribe the enemy to seek peace, and some even work for the enemy; those who fall into the enemy's hands and escape on their own are rewarded by the border troops for their bravery; they do not know the enemy's situation, but the enemy always knows the movements of the border troops first.

古文：四年正月，诏崇古总督宣、大、山西军务。
现代文：隆庆四年正月，诏令王崇古统辖宣府、大同、山西地区的军务。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Longqing Emperor's reign, Wang Chonggu issued an edict to supervise the military affairs of Xuanfu, Datong and Shanxi regions.

古文：崇古禁边卒阑出，而纵其素通寇者深入为间。
现代文：王崇古禁止边军士兵擅自出关，却放出一向通敌的人深入敌营充当间谍。
English: Wang Chonggu forbade soldiers of the frontier army to leave the customs without authorization, but he released people who had always collaborated with the enemy to go deep into the enemy camp to act as spies.

古文：又檄劳番、汉陷寇军民，率众降及自拔者，悉存抚之。
现代文：他又发檄文慰抚少数民族和汉族陷落敌手的军民，率众来降或者自己逃回的人，全部进行安抚。
English: He also issued an imperial edict to comfort the soldiers and civilians of ethnic minorities and Han people who had fallen to the enemy, and pacified all those who led the people to surrender or fled back on their own.

古文：归者接踵。
现代文：回归的人接踵而来。
English: The returnees keep coming.

古文：西番、瓦剌、黄毛诸种一岁中降者逾二千人。
现代文：西部少数民族、瓦剌、黄毛等一年之中有两千多人归降。
English: In one year, more than 2,000 people from the western ethnic minorities, such as the Wafang and the Huangmao, surrendered.

古文：其冬，把汉那吉来降。
现代文：当年冬天，把汉那吉来投降。
English: In the winter of that year, Hanaji surrendered.

古文：把汉那吉者，俺答第三子铁背台吉子也。
现代文：把汉那吉是俺答第三个儿子铁背台吉的儿子。
English: I answered that Hannakji was the son of the third son, Tetsubetaikichi.

古文：幼失父，育于俺答妻一克哈屯。
现代文：从小失去父亲，由俺答的妻子一克哈屯抚育。
English: I lost my father when I was a child, and I was raised by my wife, Hatun.

古文：长娶大成比妓不相得。
现代文：长大后婚娶大成比妓，但关系不好。
English: After growing up, he married Taisei Biko, but the relationship was not good.

古文：把汉自聘我儿都司女，号三娘子，即俺答外孙女也。
现代文：把汉自己聘娶了我儿都司的女儿，称为三娘子，也就是俺答的外孙女。
English: Han himself was hired to marry the daughter of my son Du Si, known as the third daughter, that is, my daughter's granddaughter.

古文：俺答见其美，夺之。
现代文：俺答看到她美貌，抢夺了她。
English: I saw her beauty and snatched her up.

古文：把汉恚，又闻崇古方纳降，是年十月，率妻子十余人来归。
现代文：把汉愤恨，又听说王崇古正在接纳归降的人，当年十月率领妻子、儿女十多人归降。
English: Angered by Han, and hearing that Wang Chonggu was accepting those who surrendered, he led his wife, children and more than ten people to surrender in October of that year.

古文：巡抚方逢时以告。崇古念因此制俺答，则赵全等可除也，留之大同，慰藉甚至。
现代文：巡抚方逢时报告了此事，王崇古考虑趁此制服俺答，铲除赵全等人，将把汉等人留在大同，慰问安抚备至。
English: The inspector Fang reported the matter at the right time. Wang Chonggu considered taking advantage of this to subdue us and eradicate Zhao Quan and others. He would leave Han and others in Datong, and prepare condolences and appeasement.

古文：偕逢时疏闻于朝曰： 俺答横行塞外几五十年，威制诸部，侵扰边圉。
现代文：他与方逢时上奏朝廷： 俺答在塞外横行了几乎五十年，威镇各部，侵扰边关。
English: He and Fang both appealed to the imperial court: "I have been running rampant outside of Tibet for almost fifty years, invading and harassing border posts in various parts of Wizhen.

古文：今神厌凶德，骨肉离叛，千里来降，宜给宅舍，授官职，丰饩廪服用，以悦其心，严禁出入，以虞其诈。
现代文：现在神灵厌恶凶残，使他众叛亲离，不远千里来投降，应该给予住宅，授予官职，使衣食丰盈，以便使他心中欢喜，严禁他们出入，以防备他们的欺诈。
English: Now the gods abhorred cruelty, and separated him from his kinsmen, so that he had to come thousands of miles to surrender. He should have been given a house, an official position, and plenty of food and clothing, so that his heart would rejoice. They were strictly forbidden to go out and come in, in order to guard against their deception.

古文：若俺答临边索取，则因与为市，责令缚送板升诸逆，还被掠人口，然后以礼遣归，策之上也。
现代文：如果俺答到边寨来索取，就与他交易，责令他将赵全等逆贼绑缚送来，遣返被俘虏的人口，而后将把汉依礼遣返，为上策。
English: If I reply that I will come to the border village to collect it, I will make a deal with him and order him to send the traitors such as Zhao Quan in shackles to repatriate the captured population, and then I will repatriate Han Yili as the best strategy.

古文：若遂桀骜称兵，不可理谕，则明示欲杀，以挠其志。彼望生还，必惧我制其死命。
现代文：如果他凶暴傲慢地兴兵动武，不理睬劝谕，就明白地告诉他准备杀戮他们，令他们屈服，俺答盼望他们活着回去，必然害怕我们处死他们。
English: If he should, in his insolence and arrogance, take up arms against us, and ignore our advice, tell him plainly that he is prepared to kill them and bring them to their knees, and that I expect them to come back alive, and that he must fear that we will put them to death.

古文：志夺气沮，不敢大逞，然后徐行吾计，策之中也。
现代文：他意志被抑神情沮丧，不敢大肆逞强，然后再慢慢中了我们的计谋，是中策。
English: His will is suppressed, he looks depressed, he doesn't dare to be bold, and then he slowly falls for our trick, it's the middle way.

古文：若遂弃而不求，则当厚加资养，结以恩信。
现代文：如果他就将他们舍弃而不索求，就对把汉从厚优待，与他培养恩情和信任。
English: If he abandons them without asking, treat him with kindness and trust.

古文：其部众继降者，处之塞下，即令把汉统领，略如汉置属国居乌桓之制。
现代文：他的部下陆续来降，将他们安置在塞下，指派把汉统辖，大略如同汉代在乌桓设置属国的做法。
English: His subordinates successively came down, placed them under the jie, and assigned them to administer the Han, roughly similar to the Han Dynasty's practice of setting up a vassal state in Wuhuan.

古文：他日俺答死，子辛爱必有其众。
现代文：以后待俺答死了，他的儿子辛爱必然拥有部属。
English: After I die, his son Xin Ai will certainly have subordinates.

古文：因加把汉名号，令收集余众，自为一部。
现代文：于是给把汉加封名号，命令他收集余部，自成一体。
English: So he gave Han Jia the name and ordered him to collect the rest and make it into one.

古文：辛爱必忿争。
现代文：辛爱必然愤恨而争斗。
English: Bitter love is bound to turn to hatred and strife.

古文：彼两族相持，则两利俱存，若互相仇杀，则按兵称助。
现代文：他们两者相互僵持，则两者对我都有好处，如果他们互相仇杀，那么我们按兵不动，表示帮助。
English: If they are at each other's throats, it is to my advantage; if they are at each other's throats, we stand by and help.

古文：彼无暇侵陵，我遂得休息，又一策也。
现代文：他们没有闲暇侵扰，我们就能休养生息，也是一种策略。
English: They have no leisure intrusion, we can rest and recuperate, is also a strategy.

古文：若循旧例安置海滨，使俺答日南望，侵扰不已；又或给配诸将，使之随营立功，彼素骄贵不受驱策，驾驭苟乖，必滋怨望，顿生飏去之心，终贻反噬之祸，均为无策。 
现代文：如果依照旧例将他们安置到海滨，使俺答每天窥视南方，不断侵扰；或者将他们分配给各位将领，让他们随军立功，他们一向骄纵、富贵，不接受差遣，管制严了，必然产生怨恨，顿生逃离之心，最后遭受反咬的祸患，这都不是办法。 
English: If, in accordance with the old practice, they are placed on the seashore, so that we have to spy on the south every day and constantly intrude; or if they are assigned to the generals, so that they can make contributions to the army, they have always been arrogant, rich, do not accept assignments, strict control, inevitable resentment, sudden escape, and finally suffer the scourge of backbiting, this is not a way.

古文：奏至，朝议纷然。
现代文：奏章呈上后，朝廷议论纷纷。
English: After the report was submitted, there was much discussion in the Imperial Court.

古文：御史饶仁侃、武尚贤、叶梦熊皆言敌情叵测。
现代文：御史饶仁侃、武尚贤、叶梦熊都称敌情叵测。
English: Historians Raojin Kan, Wu Shangxian, and Ye Mengxiong all called it a miscalculation of the enemy situation.

古文：梦熊至引宋受郭药师、张彀事为喻。
现代文：叶梦熊引用宋朝收受郭药师、张珏的事情做借鉴。
English: Ye Mengxiong cited the Song Dynasty's acceptance of Guo Yajishi and Zhang Ye as a reference.

古文：兵部尚书郭乾不能决，大学士高拱、张居正力主崇古议。
现代文：兵部尚书郭乾不能决定，大学士高拱、张居正极力主张采纳王崇古的建议。
English: Shang Shuxu Guoqian of the Ministry of Military Affairs could not decide, and the scholars Gao Gong and Zhang Juzheng of the University strongly advocated the adoption of Wang Chonggu's suggestion.

古文：诏授把汉指挥使，赐绯衣一袭，而黜梦熊于外，以息异议。
现代文：诏令授予把汉指挥使的官职，赏赐一身官服，而将叶梦熊废黜，调出京城，以便平息反对意见。
English: The imperial edict conferred the official post of Han commander-in-chief, rewarded him with an official uniform, and dethroned Ye Mengxiong and transferred him out of Beijing in order to quell the opposition.

古文：俺答方掠西番，闻变急归，调辛爱兵分道入犯，索把汉甚急。辛爱佯发兵，阴择便利，以故俺答不得志。
现代文：俺答刚刚掳掠了西部少数民族，听到事变急忙回师，调集辛爱的兵马分路进犯，急切地索要把汉，辛爱佯装发兵，暗中权衡利弊，所以俺答没能遂愿。
English: I replied that I had just plundered the western ethnic minorities, and when I heard of the incident, I hurried back to the division, mobilized the soldiers and horses of Xin Ai to attack separately, eagerly asked for Han, Xin Ai to send troops, and secretly weighed the pros and cons, so I could not fulfill my wish.

古文：一克哈屯思其孙，朝夕哭，俺答患之。
现代文：一克哈屯思念她的孙子，朝夕哭泣，俺答很忧患。
English: She misses her grandson and cries every morning and evening. I am very worried.

古文：巡抚逢时遣百户鲍崇德入其营，俺答盛气待之曰： 自吾用兵，而镇将多死。 
现代文：巡抚方逢时派遣百户鲍崇德到他的军营，俺答气势很盛地接待他，说： 自从我兴兵，镇将死了很多。 
English: The governor Fang always sent the centurion Bao Chongde to his military camp, and I received him with great enthusiasm, saying: Since I raised an army, the town will die a lot.

古文：崇德曰： 镇将孰与而孙？
现代文：鲍崇德回答： 镇将怎么能与你的孙子比？
English: Bao Chongde replied: How can the town be compared with your grandson?

古文：今朝廷待而孙甚厚，称兵是速其死也。 
现代文：现在朝廷对待你的孙子很优厚，你举兵是加速他的死亡。 
English: Now the court is treating your grandson very generously, and you are raising an army to hasten his death.

古文：俺答疑把汉已死，及闻言，心动，使使诇之。
现代文：俺答怀疑把汉已经死了，等到听说此话，动心了，派使者侦察。
English: I suspected that Han was already dead, and when I heard this, I was moved to send an emissary to investigate.

古文：崇古令把汉绯袍金带见使者，俺答喜过望，崇德因说之曰： 赵全等旦至，把汉夕返。 
现代文：王崇古让把汉穿纟非袍束金带接见使者，俺答大喜过望，鲍崇德趁机游说： 赵全等人早晨送到，把汉晚上就能返回。 
English: Wang Chonggu asked the envoy to receive Han wearing a robe and a gold belt. I replied that I was overjoyed. Bao Chongde took the opportunity to lobby: Send Zhao Quan and others in the morning, and return Han in the evening.

古文：俺答大喜，屏人语曰： 我不为乱，乱由全等。
现代文：俺答很高兴，屏退随从对他讲： 我不作乱，祸乱是赵全等人所为。
English: I replied that I was very happy, and the screen retreated and the follower said to him: I will not make a mess, the disaster was caused by Zhao Quan and others.

古文：令吾孙降汉，是天遣之合也。天子幸封我为王，永长北方，诸部孰敢为患。
现代文：现在我的孙子归顺了汉族，是天意。天子分封我为王，永远辖治北方，各部落谁敢生祸乱？
English: Now that my grandson has surrendered to the Han, it is the will of heaven. The Son of Heaven has appointed me as king to rule the north forever. Who among the tribes would dare to cause trouble?

古文：即不幸死，我孙当袭封，彼受朝廷厚恩，岂敢负耶？ 
现代文：即使我不幸死去，我的孙子应当世袭封爵，他接受了朝廷的厚恩，怎敢辜负呢？ 
English: Even if I were to die, my grandson should receive a hereditary knighthood. He has accepted the generosity of the court. How dare he fail?

古文：遂遣使与崇德俱来，又为辛爱求官，并请互市。
现代文：就遣使者与鲍崇德一起回来，而且替辛爱请求官职，并请求进行互市。
English: The emissary returned with Bao Chongde and asked for an official post for Xin Ai, and also asked for an exchange market.

古文：崇古以闻，帝悉报可。
现代文：王崇古都上报了，皇帝全部答复可以。
English: Wang Chongdu has reported, and the emperor can answer everything.

古文：俺答遂缚全等十余人以献，崇古亦遣使送把汉归。
现代文：俺答就绑缚了赵全等十多人献给朝廷，王崇古也派使者将把汉送回。
English: In response, I tied up more than ten people, including Zhao Quan, and presented them to the imperial court. Wang Chonggu also sent an envoy to send Han back.

古文：帝以叛人既得，祭告郊庙，磔全等于市。
现代文：皇帝认为已经抓获叛贼，在郊庙祭祀，将赵全等人碎尸于集市。
English: The emperor thought that he had captured the traitors, held a religious service in a suburban temple, and dismembered the bodies of Zhao Quan and others in the market.

古文：加崇古太子少保、兵部尚书，总督如故。
现代文：加封王崇古为太子少保，兵部尚书，总督原来的辖区。
English: In addition, Wang Chonggu was appointed as the Prince's Junior Protector, the Secretary of the Military Department, and the Governor of the original jurisdiction.

古文：把汉既归，俺答与其妻抚之泣。
现代文：把汉回去后，俺答和他的妻子抚摸着他哭泣。
English: After bringing Han back, I told him and his wife to touch him and cry.

古文：遣使报谢，誓不犯大同。
现代文：派遣使者来答谢，发誓不侵犯大同。
English: Send an envoy to thank him and swear not to invade Datong.

古文：崇古令要土蛮、昆都力、吉能等皆入贡，俺答报如约，惟土蛮不至。
现代文：王崇古指令他要求土蛮、昆都力、吉能等部族都朝贡，俺答答复遵命，只有土蛮没有朝贡。
English: Wang Chonggu ordered him to demand tribute from tribes such as the Turban, Kunduli, and Jineng. I replied that I would comply with the order. Only the Turban did not pay tribute.

古文：崇古念土蛮势孤，蓟、昌可无患，命将士勿烧荒捣巢，议通贡市，休息边民。
现代文：王崇古思量土蛮势力孤单，蓟镇、昌平可以无忧患，命令将士不要焚烧荒地、捣毁巢穴，商议开通贡市，使边地百姓休养生息。
English: Wang Chonggu thought that the local barbarian forces were alone, and that there was no need to worry about Lucheng and Changping. He ordered the soldiers not to burn wasteland and destroy nests, and discussed the opening of Tonggong City, so that the people in the border areas could rest and recuperate.

古文：朝议复哗。
现代文：朝延议论又是哗然。
English: The morning delay discussion is in an uproar.

古文：尚书郭乾谓马市先帝明禁，不宜许。
现代文：尚书郭乾称先帝明令禁止马市，不应该授意。
English: Shang Shuxu Guoqian said that the emperor had explicitly banned horse racing, and it should not be allowed.

古文：给事中章端甫请敕崇古无邀近功，忽远虑。
现代文：给事中章端甫请求敕令王崇古不要追求眼前的功利，忽略了长远的考虑。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhang Duanfu asked Wang Chonggu not to pursue immediate utilitarianism, ignoring long-term considerations.

古文：崇古上疏曰： 先帝既诛仇鸾，制复言开市者斩，边臣何敢故违禁旨，自陷重辟。
现代文：王崇古上奏称： 先帝已经诛杀了仇鸾，定制再提开放市场的人斩首。边防大臣怎么敢故意违背禁令，自负死罪？
English: Wang Chonggu said in his report: The previous emperor had already killed his enemies and beheaded those who advocated the opening of the market. How dare the Minister of Border Defense deliberately violate the ban and take the death penalty upon himself?

古文：但敌势既异昔强，我兵亦非昔怯，不当援以为例。
现代文：但是敌人的形势已经不是昔日般的强盛，我们的兵马也不同于往昔的胆怯，不应该援引为定制。
English: However, the enemy's situation is no longer as strong as in the past, and our soldiers and horses are also different from the timidity of the past, and should not be invoked as a custom.

古文：夫先帝禁开马市，未禁北敌之纳款。
现代文：先帝禁止开放马市，却没有禁止北方的敌人朝贡。
English: The former emperor prohibited the opening of horse markets, but did not prohibit the northern enemy from paying tribute.

古文：今敌求贡市，不过如辽东、开原、广宁之规，商人自以有无贸易，非请复开马市也。
现代文：现在敌人请求开贡市，不过是如同辽东、开原、广宁的规矩，商人自己以物易物，不是请求再开放马市。
English: Now the enemy is requesting the opening of the tribute market, but it is just like the rules of Liaodong, Kaiyuan and Guangning, the merchants themselves barter, not a request to reopen the horse market.

古文：俺答父子兄弟横行四五十年，震惊宸严，流毒畿辅，莫收遏刘功者，缘议论太多，文网牵制，使边臣无所措手足耳。
现代文：俺答父子兄弟横行四、五十年，使皇帝震惊，使京郊遭受其害，没有遏制他们而创功立业的人，因为议论太多，文网的牵制，使边防大臣手足无措。
English: I answered that the father and son brothers have been running rampant for forty or fifty years, shocking the emperor and causing the suburbs of Beijing to suffer, and those who have made achievements without restraining them, because there are too many discussions and the restraint of the literary network, the Minister of Border Defense is at a loss.

古文：昨秋，俺答东行，京师戒严，至倡运砖聚灰塞门乘城之计。
现代文：去年秋天，俺答向东迁徙，京都戒严，以致倡议运来砖石、泥灰堵塞城门凭城据守。
English: Last autumn, I promised to move to the east, and Kyoto was placed under martial law, so much so that I proposed that bricks and mortar be brought in to block the gates and keep the city under siege.

古文：今纳款求贡，又必责以久要，欲保百年无事，否则治首事之罪。
现代文：现在他们请求和议通贡，又必定责成他们长久如此，以确保百年无祸患，否则就追究首倡者的罪过。
English: Now they ask for a tribute of peace, and they must oblige them to do so for a long time to ensure that there is no disaster for a hundred years, otherwise the initiator will be prosecuted.

古文：岂惟臣等不能逆料，他时虽俺答亦恐能保其身，不能制诸部于身后也。
现代文：这不仅我们不能预先料定，日后虽然是俺答也恐怕不知能否保全自身，能不能在他死后辖治各部落。
English: Not only can we not predict this, but in the future, although it is my answer, I am afraid I do not know whether I can protect myself and whether I can rule the tribes after his death.

古文：夫拒敌甚易，执先帝禁旨，一言可决。
现代文：拒绝敌人很容易，手持先帝的禁令，一句话就行了。
English: It is easy to refuse the enemy, with the emperor's ban in hand, one sentence is enough.

古文：但敌既不得请，怀愤而去，纵以把汉之故，不扰宣、大，而土蛮三卫岁窥蓟、辽，吉能、宾兔侵扰西鄙，息警无时，财务殚绌，虽智者无以善其后矣。
现代文：但是敌人请求没有结果，愤愤地离去，纵然因为把汉的原因，不骚扰宣府、大同地区，但是土蛮的三卫每年都窥视着蓟府、辽东地区，吉能、宾兔侵扰西部边疆，战事平息无期，财力耗尽，虽然是智者也不能妥善安排死后的事情。
English: However, the enemy's request was fruitless, and he left angrily. Even though he did not harass Xuanfu and Datong due to the Han invasion, the barbarian three guards peeped into Shifu, Liaodong, Jianeng, and Binhu to invade the western border every year. The war was over, the financial resources were exhausted, and even though he was a wise man, he could not properly arrange things after his death.

古文：昔也先以克减马价而称兵，忠顺王以元裔而封哈密，小王子由大同二年三贡，此皆前代封贡故事。
现代文：过去也先因为压低了马价就动武，忠顺王因为是元代后裔就分封到哈密，小王子经过大同二年三次朝贡，这都是前代封赏、通贡的故事。
English: In the past, because the price of horses was low, they first went to war, and King Zhong Shun, because he was a descendant of the Yuan Dynasty, was assigned to Hami, and the Little Prince received three tributes in the second year of Datong. These are all stories of the previous generation's rewards and tributes.

古文：夫揆之时势，既当俯从，考之典故，非今创始。
现代文：考察当时的形势，应当依从，考据典故，不是今天创始的。
English: An examination of the situation at the time should be based on the evidence and not on today's founding.

古文：堂堂天朝，容荒服之来王，昭圣图之广大，以示东西诸部，传天下万世，诸臣何疑惮而不为耶？ 
现代文：堂堂的天朝，容纳远蛮的来归，昭示国家帝业的广阔，以此告示东西各部，天下传承万世，各位大臣为何还疑虑、担忧而不敢做呢？ 
English: Why are the ministers still hesitant and apprehensive to do so, when the magnificent imperial edifice accommodates those who have come and gone from afar and shows the vastness of the country's empire, thereby announcing to all ministries in the East and West that the world will be passed down for all time?

古文：因条封贡八事以上。
现代文：于是将封赏、通贡的事情列出八件上奏。
English: As a result, eight cases of reward and tribute were listed.

古文：诏下廷议。
现代文：诏令下发到朝廷议论。
English: The imperial edict was sent to the imperial court for discussion.

古文：定国公徐文璧、侍郎张四维以下二十二人以为可许，英国公张溶、尚书张守直以下十七人以为不可许。
现代文：定国公徐文璧、侍郎张四维以下二十二人认为可以施行，英国公张溶、尚书张守直以下十七人认为不能批准。
English: Twenty-two people, including Ding Guo Gong, Xu Wenbi, and Zhang Siwei, believed that it could be implemented, while seventeen people, including British official Zhang Rong, and Shangshu Zhang Shuzhi, believed that it could not be approved.

古文：尚书朱衡等五人言封贡便、互市不便，独佥都御史李棠极言当许状。
现代文：尚书朱衡等五人称封赏、通贡很方便，互市不方便，唯独佥都御史李棠极力称道应该批准。
English: Five people, including Shangshu Zhu Heng, said that it was convenient to reward and pay tribute, but it was not convenient to trade with each other. However, Li Tang, the governor of the capital, insisted that it should be approved.

古文：郭乾悉上众议。
现代文：郭乾全部上奏皇帝。
English: Guo Jian played all the parts of the emperor.

古文：会帝御经筵，阁臣面请外示羁縻，内修守备。
现代文：遇上皇帝驾临经筵，内阁大臣当面恳请对外进行笼络，对内加强守备。
English: When the emperor arrived at Jing'an, the cabinet minister pleaded with him in person to make overtures to the outside world and strengthen defenses at home.

古文：乃诏封俺答顺义王，名所居城曰归化；昆都力、辛爱等皆授官；封把汉昭勇将军，指挥使如故。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏分封俺答为顺义王，将他居住的城题名为归化；昆都力、辛爱等人都被封官；封把汉为昭勇将军，指挥使依旧保留。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an edict assigning Han the title of Shunyi King, and the name of the city where he lived was naturalized; Kundu Li, Xin Ai and others were all sealed; Han was sealed as General Zhaoyong, and the commanding officer was still retained.

古文：俺答率诸部受诏甚恭，使使贡马，执赵全余党以献。
现代文：俺答率领各部族恭敬地接受诏书，派使者朝贡马匹，抓住赵全的余党献给朝廷。
English: I replied that I would lead all the tribes to respectfully accept the imperial edict, send emissaries with tribute horses, and capture the rest of Zhao Quan's party and offer them to the imperial court.

古文：帝嘉其诚，赐金币。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖他的忠诚，赏赐他金币。
English: The emperor commended his loyalty and rewarded him with gold coins.

古文：又杂采崇古及廷臣议，赐王印，给食用，加抚赏，惟贡使不听入京。
现代文：又博采王崇古和朝廷大臣的议论，赏赐他王印，提供饮食，增加抚慰赏赐，只是朝贡的使者不能进入京城。
English: He also took advantage of the discussions between King Chonggu and the imperial minister, rewarded him with the royal seal, provided food and drink, and increased the consolation reward, but the envoy of the tributes could not enter the capital.

古文：河套吉能亦如约请命。
现代文：河套的吉能也依约请求封赏。
English: Hetao's Yoshino also requested a reward in accordance with the agreement.

古文：以事在陕西，下总督王之诰议。
现代文：因为事情由陕西方面处理，下交给总督王之诰商议。
English: Because the matter was handled by the Shaanxi side, it was handed over to Governor Wang Zhisheng for discussion.

古文：之诰欲令吉能一二年不犯，方许封贡。
现代文：王之诰想使吉能一、二年不侵扰后，才批准他的封赏通贡的请求。
English: Wang Zhixuan only approved his request for a bounty after he wanted Yoshino to stay out of trouble for a year or two.

古文：崇古复上疏曰： 俺答、吉能亲为叔侄，首尾相应。
现代文：王崇古又上奏说： 俺答、吉能是亲叔侄，首尾呼应。
English: Wang Chonggu also spoke up and said: I answer, Yoshino is my uncle and nephew, echoing back and forth.

古文：今收其叔而纵其侄，锢其首而舒其臂，俺答必呼吉能之众就市河东宣、大；商贩不能给，而吉能纠俺答扰陕西，四镇之忧方大矣。 
现代文：现在收容了他叔叔却纵容侄子，禁锢了首脑却舒展着手臂，俺答必然招呼吉能的部众到河东的宣、大地区进行互市；商贩不能供给需求，而吉能纠集俺答骚扰陕西，四镇的忧虑就大了。 
English: Now his uncle has been accommodated but his nephew has been indulged, his head has been restrained but his arms have been stretched out. I am sure to invite Ji Neng's subordinates to conduct market exchanges in the Xuan and large areas of Hedong; merchants cannot supply demand, and Ji Neng's entanglement and harassment of Shaanxi, the worries of the four towns are great.

古文：帝然其言，亦授吉能都督同知。
现代文：皇帝认为他说的有道理，也授予吉能都督同知的官衔。
English: The emperor thought he had a point, and also conferred the official title of Tongzhu on Ji Neng.

古文：崇古乃广召商贩，听令贸易。
现代文：王崇古广招商贩，听任贸易。
English: Wang Chonggu widely recruited merchants and allowed them to trade.

古文：布帛、菽粟、皮革远自江淮、湖广辐辏塞下，因收其税以充犒赏。
现代文：布帛、菽粟、皮革从遥远的江、淮、湖广用车运到了边塞，于是征收税赋作为犒赏的开支。
English: Cloth, opium poppy and leather were transported by car from the distant Jiang, Huai and Hukang to the border fortress, so the tax was levied as a reward.

古文：其大小部长则官给金缯，岁市马各有数。
现代文：他们的大小部落头人由官府供给金银、丝织品，每年购买定数的马匹。
English: Their tribal chiefs, big and small, are supplied with gold, silver and silk by the government, and they buy a fixed number of horses every year.

古文：崇古仍岁诣弘赐堡宣谕威德。
现代文：王崇古仍然每年到弘赐堡宣告皇帝的威仪圣德。
English: Wang Chonggu still goes to Hongji Fort every year to proclaim the dignity and sanctity of the emperor.

古文：诸部罗拜，无敢哗者。
现代文：各部族依次拜见，没有敢哗变的人。
English: Each tribe visited the other in turn, and no one dared to rebel.

古文：自是边境休息。
现代文：从此边境安宁。
English: The border has been quiet ever since.

古文：东起延、永，西抵嘉峪七镇，数千里军民乐业，不用兵革，岁省费什七。
现代文：东起延绥、永平地区，西到嘉峪关七镇，数千里地军民安居乐业，不动兵兴武，每年节省十分之七的费用。
English: From Yancheng and Yongping regions in the east to Jiayuguan seven towns in the west, thousands of miles of soldiers and civilians live and work in peace and quiet, and soldiers are not immobilized, saving seven-tenths of the cost every year.

古文：诏进太子太保。
现代文：诏令晋升他为太子太保。
English: The imperial edict promoted him to Crown Prince and Protector.

古文：万历初，召理戎政。
现代文：万历初年，朝廷召他负责北方少数民族事务。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the imperial court called him to be in charge of the affairs of ethnic minorities in the north.

古文：给事中刘铉劾崇古行贿营迁，诏责铉妄言。
现代文：给事中刘铉弹劾王崇古为谋升迁而行贿，皇帝下诏责备刘铉乱说。
English: During the incident, Liu Bei impeached Wang Chonggu for bribing for promotion, and the emperor issued an edict to reprimand Liu Bei.

古文：已，加少保，迁刑部尚书，改兵部。
现代文：此后，加封他为少保，调任刑部尚书，改任兵部。
English: After that, he was given the title of Junior Security Officer, transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department, and then to the Military Intelligence Department.

古文：初，俺答诸部尝越甘肃掠西番。
现代文：起初，俺答各部曾经越过甘肃劫掠了西部少数民族。
English: At first, we said that the various ministries had crossed Gansu and plundered the western ethnic minorities.

古文：既通款，其从孙切尽台吉连岁盗番，不得志，求俺答西援。
现代文：既表示诚意，他的从孙切尽台吉连年侵扰西部少数民族，不很顺利，请求俺答向西增援。
English: Although he expressed his sincerity, his policy of encroaching on the western ethnic minorities from Suncheon to Taiji year after year was not very successful, and he asked me to send reinforcements to the west.

古文：崇古每作书止之，俺答亦报书谢。
现代文：王崇古每次修书阻止他，俺答也回函谢罪。
English: Every time Wang Chonggu stopped him from studying, I wrote back to thank him.

古文：是年，俺答请与三镇通事约誓，欲西迎佛。
现代文：此年，俺答请求与三镇通报情况，相约发誓，想到西边迎接佛祖。
English: This year, I answered the request to report the situation with the three towns, swore by mutual agreement, and thought of welcoming Buddha to the west.

古文：崇古上言： 西行非俺答意，且以迎佛为名，不可沮，宜饬边镇严守备，而阴泄其谋于番族以示恩。 
现代文：王崇古上奏说： 西行不是俺答的心意，况且以迎接佛祖的名义，不可以阻滞，应该整顿边镇严密防守，而且暗中将他的阴谋告诉西部少数民族以显示恩惠。 
English: Wang Chonggu said: "Going west is not my intention. Moreover, in the name of welcoming the Buddha, we should not delay, we should rectify the strict defense of the border town, and secretly tell his plot to the western ethnic minorities to show favor.

古文：于是铉及同官彭应时、南京御史陈堂交章论崇古弛防徇敌。
现代文：因此刘铉和同僚彭应时、南京御史陈堂接连上奏抨击王崇古松弛边防便利敌人。
English: Therefore, Liu Wei and his colleague Peng Yingxi and the Nanjing goshi Chen Tang successively criticized Wang Chonggu's lax border defense as a convenient enemy.

古文：崇古疏辩乞休。
现代文：王崇古上奏争辩并请求退休。
English: Wang Chonggu argued and asked to retire.

古文：帝优诏报之，令勿以人言介意。
现代文：皇帝下优诏答复他，指令他不要介意别人的抨击。
English: The emperor replied by issuing an edict instructing him not to mind the criticism.

古文：给事中尹瑾、御史高维崧再劾之，崇古力请致仕，帝乃允归。
现代文：给事中尹瑾、御史高维崧再次弹劾他，王崇古极力请求退休，皇帝才允许他回乡。
English: In the middle of the matter, Yin Qi and Gu Shi Gao Wei Qi again impeached him, Wang Chonggu strongly requested retirement, and the emperor allowed him to return to his hometown.

古文：俺答既死，辛爱、撦力克相继袭封。
现代文：俺答死了，辛爱、扌奢力克相继世袭封爵。
English: I said I'd give it my best shot, and I was knighted in succession.

古文：十五年，诏以崇古竭忠首事，三封告成，荫一子世锦衣千户，有司以礼存问。
现代文：万历十五年，因为王崇古竭尽忠心，三次封贡都成功了。皇帝下诏荫庇他的一个儿子任锦衣千户，有司依礼问候他。
English: In the fifteenth year of Wanli, because Wang Chonggu tried his best to be loyal, the three tributes were successful. The emperor issued an edict to protect one of his sons, Ren Jin clothing thousands of households, and Yushi greeted him according to etiquette.

古文：又二年卒。
现代文：又过了两年他去世了。
English: Two more years passed before Ma Fang died.

古文：赠太保，谥襄毅。
现代文：封赠为太保，谥号襄毅。
English: He was given the title of Taibao, and his posthumous name was Xiang Yi.

古文：崇古身历七镇，勋著边陲。
现代文：王崇古身经七镇，功勋著于边陲。
English: Wang Chonggu lived in seven towns and wrote about his exploits in Fengtai.

古文：封贡之初，廷议纷呶，有为危言撼帝者。
现代文：封贡初期，朝廷议论纷纷，有的人用危言震慑皇上。
English: In the early days of the tribute, the imperial court had many discussions, and some people shocked the emperor with alarmist talk.

古文：阁臣力持之，乃得成功。
现代文：由于阁臣的极力坚持，事情才得成功。
English: It was only due to the strong insistence of the cabinet minister that the matter was successful.

古文：卒，赠太保，谥襄敏。
现代文：顺义王归附二十年，崇古才去世。
English: It was twenty years after Shunyi's accession that Chonggu passed away.

古文：张学颜，字子愚，肥乡人。生九月失母，事继母以孝闻。
现代文：总督梅友松安抚驾驭不当，西边才出现骚扰，而边祸也较嘉靖时有缓解，宣府、大同边塞少数部族则迄明末归附不变。张学颜，字子愚，肥乡人。出生九个月就死了母亲，他对继母孝顺得出了名。
English: Governor Meiyu Song's pacification and control were improper, and the harassment only occurred in the west side, while the border disaster also eased compared to Jiajing. The minority tribes of Xuanfu and Datong border fortresses remained unchanged until the end of the Ming Dynasty. Zhang Xueyan, Zi Gu, Feixiang. His mother died when he was nine months old, and he became famous for his filial piety to his stepmother.

古文：亲丧庐墓，有白雀来巢。
现代文：在墓地结庐守丧时，有白雀前来筑巢。
English: White finches come to build nests in the cemetery when the coffin is lying in state.

古文：登嘉靖三十二年进士，由曲沃知县入为工科给事中。
现代文：他考取了嘉靖三十二年的进士，由曲沃知县入京担任工科给事中。
English: He passed the entrance examination of the 32nd year of Jiajing, and entered Beijing from Quwochi County to serve as an engineering assistant.

古文：迁山西参议，以总督江东劾去官。
现代文：调任山西参议，因为总督江东弹劾而被解职。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shanxi councillor, but was dismissed due to the impeachment of Governor Jiangdong Zou.

古文：事白，迁永平兵备副使，再调蓟州。
现代文：事情弄清楚后，调任永平兵备副使，又调到蓟州。
English: After clarifying the matter, he was transferred to Yongping Deputy Military Preparedness Envoy and then transferred to Zhangzhou.

古文：俺答封顺义王，察罕土门汗语其下曰： 俺答，奴也，而封王，吾顾弗如。 
现代文：俺答受封为顺义王，察罕土门汗对部下讲： 俺答是奴才，却分封为王，我反不如他。 
English: I answered that I was appointed as the king of Shunyi, and Chakandumen Khan said to his subordinates: I answered that I was a slave, but I was appointed as a king, but I am not as good as him.

古文：挟三卫窥辽，欲以求王。
现代文：他挟持三卫窥视辽东以求封王。
English: He took Sanwei to spy on Liaodong in order to claim the crown.

古文：而海、建诸部日强，皆建国称汗。
现代文：但是海西、建真各部族日益强大，都建立了国家并称汗。
English: However, the tribes of Haixi and Jianzhen became more and more powerful, and they all established states and claimed khanates.

古文：大将王治道、郎得功战死，辽人大恐。
现代文：大将王治道、郎得功战死，辽东人大为恐惧。
English: Generals Wang Zhi Dao and Lang De Gong were killed in the battle, and the people of Liaodong were greatly frightened.

古文：隆庆五年二月，辽抚李秋免，大学士高拱欲用学颜，或疑之，拱曰： 张生卓荦倜傥，人未之识也，置诸盘错，利器当见。 
现代文：隆庆五年二月，辽东巡抚李秋被免职，大学士高拱想启用张学颜，有人对他表示怀疑。高拱说： 张生卓越倜傥，人们不了解他，将他置于磨石。
English: In February of the fifth year of Longqing, Li Qiu, the inspector of Liaodong, was removed from his post. Some people doubted Zhang Xueyan when he wanted to open a university. Gao Gong said: Zhang Sheng is outstanding, people do not understand him, and put him on the grindstone.

古文：侍郎魏学曾后至，拱迎问曰： 辽抚谁可者？ 
现代文：上一磨就会显出利器的本色。 侍郎魏学曾后到，高拱迎面问他： 谁可以担当辽东巡抚？ 
English: The last milling will reveal the true nature of the sharp tools. When Wei Xue, the chamberlain, arrived later, Gao Gong asked him face to face: Who can be in charge of the Liaodong governor?

古文：学曾思良久，曰： 张学颜可。 
现代文：魏学曾思考了很久，回答： 张学颜可以。 
English: Wei Xue had thought for a long time and answered: Zhang Xueyan can.

古文：拱喜曰： 得之矣。 
现代文：高拱欣喜地说： 真是找到了人。 
English: Gao Gong said with joy: I really found someone.

古文：遂以其名上，进右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：于是将他的名字上报，将他升任右佥都御史、辽东巡抚。
English: Therefore, his name was reported, and he was promoted to the post of the right-hand capital governor and the Liaodong governor.

古文：辽镇边长二千余里，城砦一百二十所，三面邻敌。
现代文：辽镇的边界长达二千多里，一百二十所城寨，三面毗邻敌人。
English: The border of Liao Town is more than two thousand miles long, with one hundred and twenty walled towns, and is adjacent to the enemy on three sides.

古文：官军七万二千，月给米一石，折银二钱五分，马则冬春给料，月折银一钱八分，即岁稔不足支数日。
现代文：有七万二千名官军，每人每月供给一石米，折成银两为二钱五分，马匹在冬春两季供给饲料，每月折合银两一钱八分，即使年成好也不足维持几天。
English: There are seventy-two thousand officers and soldiers, each of whom is provided with a stone of rice per month, which is equivalent to two and a half silver coins, and horses are provided with feed in winter and spring, which is equivalent to two and a quarter silver coins per month. Even if the year is good, it is not enough to last for a few days.

古文：自嘉靖戊午大饥，士马逃故者三分之二。
现代文：自从嘉靖戊午大饥荒，士兵和马匹有三分之二逃跑。
English: Since the Jiajing and Wuyang famine, two-thirds of the soldiers and horses have fled.

古文：前抚王之诰、魏学曾相继绥辑，未复全盛之半。继以荒旱，饿莩枕籍。
现代文：前任巡抚王之诰、魏学会相继安抚、缉拿，也没有达到全盛时的一半，又经历旱灾，饿死的人遍地都是。
English: The previous governor, Wang Zhixuan, and the Wei Society successively appeased and seized, but did not reach half of the heyday, and experienced droughts, and people starved to death everywhere.

古文：学颜首请振恤，实军伍，招流移，治甲仗，市战马，信赏罚。
现代文：张学颜首先请求赈济抚恤，充实军队，招募流民，制造兵器，购买战马，明确赏罚。
English: Zhang Xueyan first requested that the government provide pensions, replenish the army, recruit refugees, manufacture weapons, purchase war horses, and clearly reward and punish.

古文：黜懦将数人，创平阳堡以通两河，移游击于正安堡以卫镇城，战守具悉就经画。
现代文：罢黜懦弱的几名将领，修筑了平阳堡以便沟通两河，调动游击部队到正安堡护卫镇城，战守全部经过谋划。
English: He ousted several cowardly generals, built the Pingyang Fort in order to connect the two rivers, and mobilized guerrilla forces to the Zheng'an Fort to guard the town. The entire defense was planned.

古文：大将李成梁敢力战深入，而学颜则以收保为完策，敌至无所亡失，敌退备如初，公私力完，渐复其旧。
现代文：大将李成梁敢于深入敌阵勇敢厮杀，而张学颜却以收缩保全为策略，敌人来了自己没有损失，敌人退却自己守备如初，公私都得以保全，渐渐恢复了旧日的势力。
English: General Li Chengliang dared to go deep into the enemy lines and fought bravely, while Zhang Xueyan took contraction and preservation as a strategy. When the enemy came, he had no loss, when the enemy retreated, he was as prepared as before, both public and private were preserved, and gradually restored the old power.

古文：十一月，与成梁破土蛮卓山，进右副都御史。
现代文：十一月他与李成梁在卓山打败了土蛮，升任右副都御史。
English: In November, he and Li Chengliang defeated the local barbarians in Zhuoshan and were promoted to the post of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：明年春，土蛮谋入寇，闻有备而止。
现代文：第二年春天，土蛮阴谋入侵，听说有防备就终止了行动。
English: In the spring of the following year, a barbarian invasion was plotted, and the operation was halted when it was learned that there were defenses in place.

古文：奸民阑出海上，踞三十六岛。
现代文：奸民擅自出海，盘踞着三十六座岛屿。
English: Rogue people went to sea without permission and occupied thirty-six islands.

古文：阅视侍郎汪道昆议缉捕，学颜谓缉捕非便。
现代文：阅视侍郎汪道昆提议进行缉拿追捕，张学颜称缉拿、追捕不便利。
English: Wang Daokun, a reading room attendant, proposed to carry out the seizure and pursuit, while Zhang Xueyan said that the seizure and pursuit were not convenient.

古文：命李成梁按兵海上，示将加诛，别遣使招谕，许免差役。
现代文：命令李成梁在海上按兵不动，显示出即将进行诛杀的样子，另外派遣使者进行招安，许诺免除他们的差役。
English: He ordered Li Chengliang to remain motionless at sea, showing the appearance of imminent battle, and sent an envoy to recruit peace, promising to exempt them from service.

古文：未半载，招还四千四百余口，积患以消。
现代文：不到半年，招安了四千四百多人，积患得以消除。
English: In less than half a year, more than 4,400 people have been recruited, and the backlog has been eliminated.

古文：秋，建州都督王杲以索降人不得，入掠抚顺，守将贾汝翼诘责之。
现代文：秋季，建州都督王杲因为索要归降的人没有得逞，掳掠了抚顺，守将贾汝翼谴责他。
English: In the autumn, Jianzhou's governor, Wang Qian, captured Fushun because those who demanded his surrender were unsuccessful, and the commander of the garrison, Jia Ruyi, denounced him.

古文：杲益憾，约诸部为寇，副总兵赵完责汝翼启衅，学颜奏曰： 汝翼却杲馈遗，惩其违抗，实伸国威，苟缘此罢斥，是进退边将皆敌主之矣。臣谓宜谕王杲送还俘掠，否则调兵剿杀，毋事姑息以蓄祸。 
现代文：王杲更加不满，邀约各部族为敌，副总兵赵完责备贾汝翼引发了灾祸。张学颜上奏说： 贾汝翼拒绝王杲的赠物，责罚他违抗圣意，实为伸张国威，倘若因此罢免他，是我方进退边将之权由敌方掌握，我认为应该告谕王杲送还俘虏和掠夺的财物，否则就调兵剿灭他，不要姑息养奸。 
English: Wang Hui was even more dissatisfied. He invited all the tribes to become enemies, and the vice-commander Zhao Can blamed Jia Ruyi for causing the disaster. Zhang Xueyan made a report: Jia Ruyi refused Wang Hui's gift and punished him for defying the sacred will, in fact, it was to uphold national dignity. If he was dismissed for this, the power of our advance and retreat commander would be controlled by the enemy. I think we should tell Wang Hui to return the captives and plundered property, otherwise we will send troops to exterminate him, do not tolerate treachery.

古文：赵完惧，馈金貂，学颜发之，诏逮完，而宣谕王杲如学颜策。
现代文：赵完惊惧，贿赂他黄金和貂皮，张学颜告发了他。诏令逮捕赵完，并依张学颜的策略告谕王杲。
English: Frightened, Zhao Can bribed him with gold and mink skins, and Zhang Xueyan denounced him. He ordered the arrest of Zhao Can, and told Wang Yao according to Zhang Xueyan's strategy.

古文：诸部闻大兵且出，悉窜匿山谷。
现代文：各部族听说大军将出击，全部逃窜隐匿山谷。
English: When the tribes heard that a large army was about to attack, they all fled and hid in the valley.

古文：杲惧，十二月约海西王台送俘获就款，学颜因而抚之。
现代文：王杲惊惧，十二月邀约海西王台送还俘虏以表诚意，张学颜趁势安抚了他。
English: Wang Yao was alarmed. In December, he invited Wang Tai of Haixi Province to return the captives as a show of sincerity. Zhang Xueyan took advantage of the situation to appease him.

古文：辽阳镇东二百余里旧有孤山堡，巡按御史张铎增置险山五堡，然与辽镇声援不接。
现代文：辽阳镇以东二百余里以前有个孤山堡，巡抚御史张铎又增设了险山五堡，却与辽镇缺乏声援之势。
English: More than 200 miles east of Liaoyang Town, there used to be a lonely mountain fortress. The governor Zhang Ye added five dangerous mountain fortresses, but they lacked solidarity with Liaozhen.

古文：都御史王之诰奏设险山参将，辖六堡一十二城，分守叆阳。
现代文：都御史王之诰奏请设立险山参将，辖治六堡十二城，分别驻守云爱阳。
English: For the grand finale of the history of the capital, please set up a dangerous mountain general to govern the twelve cities of the six castles, stationed separately in Yunaiyang.

古文：又以其地不毛，欲移置宽佃，以时绌不果。
现代文：又认为这是一片不毛之地，想移驻宽细，因为时间紧迫而没有实施。
English: He also thought that this was a barren land and wanted to relocate to a more spacious place, but it was not implemented because of time constraints.

古文：万历初，李成梁议移孤山堡于张其哈佃，移险山五堡于宽佃、长佃、双墩、长领散等。
现代文：万历初年，李成梁提议将孤山堡移至张其哈细，将险山王堡移至宽细、长细、双墩、长领散等地。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, Li Chengliang proposed to move the Lone Mountain Castle to Zhangjiakou and the King's Castle to Wanshih, Changshih, Shuangtao and Changlian.

古文：皆据膏腴，扼要害。
现代文：都占据肥沃之地，扼守着险要。
English: They all occupy fertile land and hold on to what is most important.

古文：而边人苦远役，出怨言。
现代文：但是边地人苦于远征之役，口出怨言。
English: But the outlanders suffered from the expeditionary campaign and complained.

古文：工甫兴，王杲复犯边，杀游击裴承祖。
现代文：才动工，王杲又侵犯边关，杀害游击裴承祖。
English: Only after the start of construction, Wang Xi violated the border and killed the guerrilla Pei Chengzu.

古文：巡按御史亟请罢役，学颜不可，曰： 如此则示弱也。 
现代文：巡按御史赶紧请求罢除劳役，张学颜不同意，说： 这样是显示虚弱。 
English: Zhang Xueyan disagreed, saying: This is a sign of weakness.

古文：即日巡塞上，抚定王兀堂诸部，听于所在贸易。
现代文：当天巡视塞上，安抚了王兀堂诸部，听任他们在当地贸易。
English: On the same day, the inspection was suspended, appeasing the various departments of Wang Yitang and allowing them to trade locally.

古文：卒筑宽佃，斥地二百余里。
现代文：最终修筑了宽细，开拓了两百多里地。
English: In the end, they built wide and thin, and opened up more than two hundred miles.

古文：于是抚顺以北，清河以南，皆遵约束。
现代文：因此，抚顺以北、清河以南，都遵守约束。
English: Therefore, all areas north of Fushun and south of Qinghe have complied with the restrictions.

古文：明年冬，发兵诛王杲，大破之，追奔至红力寨。
现代文：第二年冬天，他发兵讨伐王杲，大败王杲，追杀到了红力寨。
English: In the winter of the second year, he sent troops to fight Wang Qian, defeated Wang Qian, and chased him to Hongli Village.

古文：张居正第学颜功在总督杨兆上，加兵部侍郎。
现代文：张居正将张学颜的功绩列在总督杨兆之上，加封为兵部侍郎。
English: Zhang Juzheng listed Zhang Xueyan's achievements above Governor Yang Zhao, and he was awarded the title of Hyobushirou.

古文：五年夏，土蛮大集诸部犯锦州，要求封王。
现代文：万历五年夏天，土蛮大量集结诸部兵马侵犯锦州，要求封他为王。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of the Wanli era, a large number of local barbarians gathered troops and horses to invade Jinzhou, demanding that he be crowned king.

古文：学颜奏曰： 敌方凭陵，而与之通，是畏之也。
现代文：张学颜上奏说： 敌人仗势欺侮，与他们通融，是畏惧他们。
English: Zhang Xueyan said at the beginning of the recital: To bully the enemy, to be accommodating to them, is to fear them.

古文：制和者在彼，其和必不可久。
现代文：和平之权在敌方，这种和平必定不可长久。
English: The power of peace is in the hands of the enemy, and this kind of peace cannot last.

古文：且无功与有功同封，犯顺与效顺同赏，既取轻诸部，亦见笑俺答。
现代文：况且无功者与有功者一样受封，叛逆与忠顺一样赏赐，既被诸部轻视，又被俺答讥笑。
English: Moreover, the unmeritorious received the same title as the meritorious, and the rebellious were rewarded the same as the loyal. They were despised by all departments and ridiculed by me.

古文：臣等谨以正言却之。 会大雨，敌亦引退。
现代文：我们应当义正辞严地拒绝他。 遇上大雨，敌人退却了。
English: We should have rebuffed him with a straight face. The enemy retreated in the heavy rain.

古文：其冬，召为戎政侍郎，加右都御史。
现代文：当年冬天，他被召回并任命为兵部侍郎，加封右都御史。
English: In the winter of that year, he was recalled and appointed as an attendant of the military department, as well as Utsunomiya governor.

古文：未受代，而土蛮约泰宁速把亥分犯辽、沈、开原。
现代文：还没被人代替，土蛮就邀约泰宁的速把亥分路侵犯辽东、沈阳、开原。
English: Before being replaced, the barbarians invited Taining to invade Liaodong, Shenyang and Kaiyuan.

古文：明年正月破敌劈山，杀其长阿丑台等五人，学颜遂还部。
现代文：第二年正月他在辟山打败敌人，斩杀首领阿丑台等五人，然后返回兵部。
English: In the first month of the second year, he defeated the enemy at Mt. Bi and killed five people, including the leader, Ahushidai, before returning to the military headquarters.

古文：逾年，拜户部尚书。
现代文：过了一年，升任户部尚书。
English: A year later, he was promoted to head of the Household Department.

古文：时张居正当国，以学颜精心计，深倚任之。
现代文：当时张居正当权，认为张学颜工于心计，很倚重他。
English: At that time, Zhang Ju Rongquan thought that Zhang Xueyan was scheming and relied heavily on him.

古文：学颜撰会计录以勾稽出纳。
现代文：张学颜撰写会计录以便查清出纳情况。
English: Zhang Xueyan wrote accounting records in order to find out the cashier situation.

古文：又奏列清丈条例，厘两京、山东、陕西勋戚庄田，清溢额、脱漏、诡借诸弊。
现代文：又奏请列出清丈田亩的条例，核实收两京、山东、陕西的外戚庄田的厘金，清除超量的、脱漏的、诡辞假借的数额。
English: In addition, please list the regulations for clearing Zhuotian mu, verify the interest received from Zhuotian's relatives in Beijing, Shandong, and Shaanxi, and remove the excess, leakage, and fraudulent loan amount.

古文：又通行天下，得官民屯牧湖陂八十余万顷。
现代文：又在全国推行，查获官民屯垦，放牧的湖陂八十多万顷。
English: It has also been implemented across the country, and more than 800,000 hectares of grazing land have been seized.

古文：民困赔累者，以其赋抵之。
现代文：受赔偿困累的百姓，用赋税抵偿。
English: The people, who are burdened with compensation, are compensated with taxes.

古文：自正、嘉虚耗之后，至万历十年间，最称富庶，学颜有力焉。
现代文：自从正德、嘉靖年间国家耗空之后，到万历十年期间，明朝最为富庶，张学颜颇有贡献。
English: From the time of Zhengde and Jiajing, when the country was depleted, to the 10th year of Wanli, the Ming Dynasty was the most prosperous, and Zhang Xueyan made considerable contributions.

古文：然是时宫闱用度汰侈，多所征索。
现代文：然而此时后宫的开支繁多，经常索取。
English: However, at this time, the expenses of the harem are numerous, and they are often requested.

古文：学颜随事纳谏，得停发太仓银十万两，减云南黄金课一千两，余多弗能执争。
现代文：张学颜就事劝谏，得以停发了十万两太仓银，减少了云南一千两黄金的课税，其余的大都无法坚持自己的意见了。
English: Zhang Xueyan was able to stop the issuance of one hundred thousand two taicang silver and reduce the taxation of one thousand two gold in Yunnan. Most of the others were unable to adhere to their own opinions.

古文：而金花银岁增二十万两，遂为定额。
现代文：但是每年增加二十万两金花银，就成了定额。
English: But an annual increase of two hundred thousand two hundred thousand in gold and silver became a quota.

古文：人亦以是少之。
现代文：人们也因此而对他有看法。
English: People have an opinion of him because of that.

古文：十一年四月，改兵部尚书，时方兴内操，选内竖二千人杂厮养训练，发太仆寺马三千给之。
现代文：万历十一年四月他改任兵部尚书，当时刚兴起宫中练兵，挑选了二千多名宫中小臣和奴仆集中训练，拨发三千匹太仆寺的马给他们。
English: In April of the eleventh month of the lunar calendar, he was transferred to the post of military secretary. At that time, the palace's training of soldiers had just begun, and more than two thousand palace middle and junior ministers and servants were selected for intensive training, and three thousand horses from the Taipu Temple were allocated to them.

古文：学颜执不与马，又请停内操，皆不听。
现代文：张学颜坚持不给马匹，又奏请停止宫中练兵，神宗都不听。
English: Zhang Xueyan insisted not to give horses, and also asked to stop training soldiers in the palace. Shenzong did not listen.

古文：其年秋，车驾自山陵还，学颜上疏曰： 皇上恭奉圣母，扶辇前驱，拜祀陵园，考卜寿域，六军将士十余万，部伍齐肃。
现代文：当年秋天，皇帝的御车由山陵返回，张学颜上奏说： 皇上恭奉圣母，驾车前往，在陵园拜祭，占卜寿命，六军的十多万将士，全部一齐肃立。
English: In the autumn of that year, when the emperor's carriage returned from the mausoleum, Zhang Xueyan recited: The emperor paid homage to the Virgin Mary, drove to the mausoleum, worshiped at the mausoleum, divined the life span of more than one hundred thousand soldiers of the Six Armies, and all stood solemnly together.

古文：惟内操随驾军士，进止自恣。
现代文：只有宫中练兵的随从军士，举止放纵。
English: Only the attendant sergeants of the palace drill are indulgent.

古文：前至凉水河，喧争无纪律，奔逸冲突，上动天颜。
现代文：起初到达凉水河，喧哗争吵毫无纪律，奔跑冲撞，使天颜变色。
English: At first, arriving at the Liangshui River, the noise and quarrels are undisciplined, running and colliding, changing the color of the sky.

古文：今车驾已还，犹未解散。
现代文：现在御车已经返回，队伍仍未解散。
English: Now that the coach has returned, the team has not yet disbanded.

古文：谨稽旧制，营军随驾郊祀，始受甲于内库，事毕即还。
现代文：谨稽查旧制，营军随御驾到郊外祭祀，开始由内库提供装备，事情完了就归还。
English: With respect to the old system, the battalion followed you to the suburbs for the sacrifice, began to provide equipment from the inner warehouse, and returned it when the matter was over.

古文：宫中惟长随内侍许佩弓矢。
现代文：宫中只有随从的内侍首领允许佩戴弓矢。
English: In the imperial court, only the chief of the attendants were allowed to wear bows and arrows.

古文：又律：不系宿卫军士，持寸刃入宫殿门者，绞；入皇城门者，戍边卫。
现代文：又有律法：不是素来护卫的军士，手持片刃进入宫殿门，绞杀；进入皇城门，发配戍边。
English: There was also a law: if a soldier who was not a guard entered the palace gate with a blade in his hand, he was to be hanged; if he entered the imperial gate, he was to be flogged.

古文：祖宗防微弭乱之意甚深且远。
现代文：祖宗防范弭乱的考虑很深远。
English: Ancestral protection against disturbance is a far-reaching consideration.

古文：今皇城内被甲乘马持锋刃，科道不得纠巡，臣部不得检阅。
现代文：现在皇城内身披铠甲乘马持利刃的人，科道不能纠察，兵部不能检查。
English: Now in the imperial city, people wearing armor, riding horses and holding sharp blades cannot be picketed by science and technology, and cannot be inspected by the military department.

古文：又招集厮养仆隶，出入禁苑，万一骤起邪心，朋谋倡乱，哗于内则外臣不敢入，哗于夜则外兵不及知，哗于都城白昼则曰天子亲兵也，驱之不肯散，捕之莫敢撄。
现代文：又召集小厮、仆隶，出入禁宫，万一骤然产生邪念，结党谋乱，在宫内哗变但宫外的臣子不敢入内，在夜晚哗变则宫外的兵丁不知道，在都城白天哗变则称天子的亲兵，驱逐也不肯离散，追捕他们又不敢触犯。
English: He also called up courtiers and servants to go in and out of the Forbidden City, in case evil thoughts suddenly arose, parties were formed to plot disorder, there was a mutiny in the palace, but the courtiers outside the palace did not dare to enter, there was a mutiny at night, but the soldiers outside the palace did not know about it, and there was a mutiny in the capital during the day, and they were called the son of heaven's own soldiers. He did not want to disperse them, and he did not dare to pursue them.

古文：正德中，西城练兵之事，良可鉴也。 
现代文：正德年间，西城练兵的事，可以很好地借鉴。 
English: During the Zhengde era, the matter of training soldiers in Xicheng can be a good reference.

古文：疏上，宦竖皆切齿，为蜚语中伤。
现代文：奏疏呈上，宦官都切齿痛恨，就制造流言蜚语地加以中伤。
English: According to the report, the eunuchs were so disgusted that they fabricated rumors to slander him.

古文：神宗察知之，诘责主使者。
现代文：神宗觉察后，也追查这篇上书的主使人。
English: After the Shenzong became aware of this, they also tracked down the author of the article.

古文：学颜得免，然亦不能用也。
现代文：张学颜得以幸免，然而他的意见也不被接受。
English: Zhang Xueyan was spared, but his opinion was not accepted.

古文：考满，加太子少保。
现代文：考绩期满，加封为太子少保。
English: At the end of the assessment period, he was additionally awarded the title of Crown Prince Minor Protector.

古文：云南岳凤、罕虔平，进太子太保。
现代文：云南的岳凤、罕虔被平定，他升任太子太保。
English: Yunnan's Yue Feng and Han Qian were subdued, and he was promoted to crown prince.

古文：时张居正既殁，朝论大异。
现代文：当时张居正已死，朝廷的议论很不相同。
English: At that time, Zhang Jizheng had already died, and the discussion in the imperial court was very different.

古文：初，御史刘台以劾居正得罪，学颜复论其赃私。
现代文：起初，御史刘台因为弹劾张居正被治罪，张学颜又抨击他贪污。
English: At first, the governor Liu Tai was punished for impeaching Zhang Jiusheng, and Zhang Xueyan criticized him for corruption.

古文：御史冯景隆论李成梁饰功，学颜亟称成梁十大捷非妄，景隆坐贬斥。
现代文：御史冯景隆抨击李成梁粉饰功绩，张学颜赶紧称李成梁的十次胜利不是虚妄的事，冯景隆被贬职。
English: Grand Historian Feng Jinglong criticized Li Chengliang for whitewashing his achievements, Zhang Xueyan hurriedly said that Li Chengliang's ten victories were not false, and Feng Jinglong was demoted.

古文：学颜故为居正所厚，与李成梁共事久，物论皆以学颜党于居正、成梁。
现代文：张学颜以前受张居正厚爱，与李成梁共事很久，众议都认为张学颜与张居正、李成梁结党。
English: Zhang Xueyan was previously loved by Zhang Jizheng and worked with Li Chengliang for a long time. Everyone thought that Zhang Xueyan and Zhang Jizheng and Li Chengliang formed a party.

古文：御史孙继先、曾乾亨、给事中黄道瞻交章论学颜。
现代文：御史孙继先、曾乾亨，给事中黄道瞻接连上奏抨击张学颜。
English: Gu Shisun, followed by Zeng Qianheng, criticized Zhang Xueyan in succession.

古文：学颜疏辩求去，又请留道瞻，不听。明年，顺天府通判周弘禴又论学颜交通太监张鲸，神宗皆黜之于外。
现代文：张学颜上书辩解请求离职，又奏请留用黄道瞻，皇帝不听，第二年，顺天府通判周弘袍又抨击张学颜与太监张鲸勾结，神宗将他们都罢黜且逐出京城。
English: Zhang Xueyan wrote a letter to justify her request to leave the post, and also appealed to stay with the Zodiac, but the emperor did not listen. The following year, Shun Tianfu passed the sentence to Zhou Hongba and criticized Zhang Xueyan for colluding with the eunuch Zhang Hui. Shenzong dismissed them all and expelled them from Beijing.

古文：学颜八疏乞休，许致仕去。
现代文：张学颜八次上奏请求退休，皇帝允许他辞官离去。
English: Zhang Xueyan requested retirement eight times, and the emperor allowed him to resign.

古文：二十六年；卒于家。赠少保。
现代文：万历二十六年死于家中，封赠为少保。
English: He died at home at the age of 26 and was awarded the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：张佳胤，字肖甫，铜梁人。
现代文：张佳胤，字肖甫，铜梁人。
English: Zhang Jiayin, alias Xiao Fu, is a leading actor.

古文：嘉靖二十九年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年的进士。
English: The 29th year of Jiajing.

古文：知滑县。
现代文：任滑县知县。
English: Renlu County, Zhixian County.

古文：剧盗高章者，诈为缇骑，直入官署，劫佳胤索帑金。
现代文：大盗高章，伪装为锦衣卫，直闯官署，劫持张佳胤索要金钱。
English: The big thief Gao Zhang, disguised as Jin Rongwei, ran straight into the government office, kidnapped Zhang Jiayin and demanded money.

古文：佳胤色不变，伪书券贷金，悉署游徼名，召入立擒贼，由此知名。
现代文：张佳胤脸不变色，佯装书写文券借钱，全部签署的是乡里察盗官的姓名，将他们召入，立即擒获了盗贼，从此闻名。
English: Zhang Jiayin's face did not change color. He borrowed money with forged certificates, all of which were signed with the names of the township theft inspectors. He called them in, immediately caught the thieves, and has been famous ever since.

古文：擢户部主事，改职方，迁礼部郎中。
现代文：升任户部主事，刚变更职务，又调任礼部郎中。
English: He was promoted to the head of the household department, just changed his position, and was transferred to the middle of the Reibu department.

古文：以风霾考察，谪陈州同知。
现代文：因风霾考察官吏，被贬为陈州同知。
English: Due to the haze, the official was relegated to being an acquaintance of Chen Zhou.

古文：历迁按察使。
现代文：历任按察使。
English: Successive inspectors-general.

古文：隆庆五年冬，擢右佥都御史，巡抚应天十府。
现代文：隆庆五年冬天，他升任右佥都御史，巡视应天的十府。
English: In the winter of the fifth year of the Longqing Emperor, he was promoted to the post of the Right Hand of the Imperial Prefectural Historian, and inspected the ten prefectures of Yingtian.

古文：安庆兵变，坐勘狱辞不合，调南京鸿胪卿，就迁光禄。
现代文：安庆发生兵变，因为核查狱中口供不吻合而治罪，调任南京鸿胪卿，改任光禄寺卿。
English: There was a mutiny in Anqing. Because the verification of prison confessions did not match, he was punished and transferred to the post of Nanjing Hongyuqing, and then to the post of Guanglu Temple.

古文：进右副都御史，巡抚保定，道闻丧归。
现代文：晋升为右副都御史，巡抚保定地区，赴任途中听到丧讯就回乡了。
English: He was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital and governor of the Baoding region. On his way to the post, he heard the news of the death and returned to his hometown.

古文：万历七年，起故官，巡抚陕西。
现代文：万历七年出任原职，辖治陕西。
English: He held the post for seven years and governed Shaanxi Province.

古文：未上，改宣府。
现代文：没上任就改任到宣府。
English: He was transferred to Xuanwu without taking office.

古文：时青把都已服，其弟满五大犹桀骜，所部八赖掠塞外史、车二部，总兵官麻锦擒之。
现代文：当时青把都已经臣服，他的弟弟满五大仍在猖獗，部属八赖掳掠了塞外的史、车两个部族，总兵官麻锦擒获了他。
English: At that time, Qing Rongdu was already subjugated, his younger brother Meng Wugu was still rampant, his subordinate Hailai plundered the two tribes of Shi and Che outside of the Soviet Union, and the commander-in-chief Ma Jin captured him.

古文：佳胤命锦缚八赖将斩，而身驰赦之，八赖叩头誓不敢犯边。
现代文：张佳胤命令麻锦绑缚八赖准备问斩，却亲自飞骑赶到赦免了他，八赖叩头发誓不侵犯边塞。
English: Zhang Jiayin ordered Ma Jin to bind Balai in preparation for interrogation, but he personally flew to pardon him, and Balai swore not to invade the border.

古文：后与总督郑洛计服满五大。
现代文：后来他与总督郑洛设计制服了满五大。
English: Later, he and Governor Zheng Luo designed uniforms for the Five Great Kings.

古文：入为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：入京担任兵部右侍郎。
English: He entered the capital as the right hand man of the military.

古文：十年春，浙江巡抚吴善言奉诏减月饷。
现代文：万历十年春天，浙江巡抚吴善言奉诏减少月饷。
English: In the spring of the tenth year of the Wanli era, the governor of Zhejiang Province, Wu Shengyan, issued an edict to reduce the number of lunar months.

古文：东、西二营兵马文英、刘廷用等构党大噪，缚殴善言。
现代文：东、西两营的兵丁马文英、刘廷用等人结党大肆叫嚷，将吴善言绑缚着殴打。
English: The soldiers of the East and West battalions, including Ma Wenying and Liu Tingyong, shouted loudly and tied up and beat Wu Shengyan.

古文：张居正以佳胤才，令兼右佥都御史代善言。
现代文：张居正认为张佳胤有才干，命令他兼任右佥都御史代替吴善言。
English: Zhang Jizheng thought Zhang Jiayin was talented and ordered him to serve concurrently as the right imperial secretary to replace Wu Zhengyan.

古文：甫入境，而杭民以行保甲故，亦乱。
现代文：刚入境界，杭州的百姓因为推行保甲制的原因，也发生骚乱。
English: Just entering the border, the people of Hangzhou also rioted because of the implementation of the guarantee system.

古文：佳胤问告者曰： 乱兵与乱民合乎？ 
现代文：张佳胤询问报告的人说： 乱兵与乱民汇合了吗？ 
English: Zhang Jiayin asked the person who made the report: Did the disorderly soldiers and disorderly people converge?

古文：曰： 未也。 
现代文：回答： 没有。 
English: The old man said, "That's not enough!

古文：佳胤喜曰： 速驱之，尚可离而二也。 
现代文：张佳胤高兴地说： 快速前进，还可以使两者隔离。 
English: Zhang Jiayin said happily: Fast forward, you can also isolate the two.

古文：既至，民剽益甚。
现代文：他到达后，民众抢劫更严重。
English: When he arrived, the looting got worse.

古文：佳胤从数卒佯问民所苦，下令除之。
现代文：张佳胤随同几名士卒假装询问百姓的困苦，下令除去保甲制。
English: Zhang Jiayin, along with several officials, pretended to inquire about the hardships of the people and ordered the removal of the armor system.

古文：众益张，夜掠巨室，火光烛天。
现代文：民众更加嚣张，夜晚劫掠大户人家，火光映红了天空。
English: The people became more arrogant. At night, they looted the homes of large families. The sky was red with the glow of the fires.

古文：佳胤召游击徐景星谕二营兵，令讨乱民自赎。
现代文：张佳胤召见游击徐景星告知两营的士兵，命令他们讨伐乱民为自己赎罪。
English: Zhang Jiayin summoned the guerrilla Xu Jingxing to inform the soldiers of the two battalions and ordered them to fight the disorderly people to atone for their sins.

古文：擒百五十人，斩其三之一。
现代文：擒获一百五十人，斩杀三分之一。
English: One hundred and fifty people were captured, and one-third of them were killed.

古文：乃佯召文英、廷用，予冠带。
现代文：这才佯装召见马文英、刘廷用，授予他们官职。
English: It was only then that he pretended to summon Ma Wenying and Liu Tingyong to confer official positions on them.

古文：而密属景星捕七人，并文英、廷用斩之。
现代文：却秘密嘱咐徐景星逮捕了七个人，连同马文英、刘廷用一起斩杀。
English: However, he secretly ordered Xu Jingxing to arrest seven people, and together with Ma Wenying and Liu Tingyong, they were executed.

古文：二乱悉定。
现代文：两股叛乱势力全部平定。
English: Both rebel forces have been completely subdued.

古文：帝优诏褒美。
现代文：皇帝下优诏褒扬他。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict praising him.

古文：寻以左侍郎还部，录功，加右都御史。
现代文：不久回到兵部任左侍郎，记录功勋，加封右都御史。
English: Soon after, he returned to the military and was appointed as the left attendant, recorded his merits, and was awarded the title of Utsunomiya governor.

古文：未几，拜戎政尚书，寻兼右副都御史，总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：不久，就任兵部尚书，不久又兼任右副都御史，统辖蓟、辽、保定的军务。
English: Soon after, he assumed the post of military secretary of the military department, and soon he also served as the right vice-governor of the capital, overseeing the military affairs of Min, Liao, and Baoding.

古文：以李成梁击斩逞加努功，加太子少保。
现代文：因为李成梁打击并斩杀逞加努的功绩，被加封为太子少保。
English: Because Li Chengliang cracked down on and killed Gan Gan's exploits, he was awarded the title of crown prince minor protector.

古文：成梁破土蛮沈阳，复进太子太保。
现代文：李成梁在沈阳打败土蛮，他又被加封为太子太保。
English: Li Chengliang defeated the barbarians in Shenyang, and he was crowned as the crown prince.

古文：召还理部事。
现代文：被召回京都负责兵部事务。
English: He was recalled to Kyoto to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：叙劳，予一品诰。
现代文：陈述功劳，授予一品的御令。
English: An order to present merit and award a prize was issued.

古文：御史许守恩劾佳胤营获本兵，御史徐元复劾之，遂三疏谢病归。
现代文：御史许守恩弹劾张佳胤经营亲兵，御史徐元又弹劾此事，于是他多次上奏称病回乡。
English: Grand Historian Xu Shouen impeached Zhang Jiayin for managing his own soldiers, and Grand Historian Xu Yuan also impeached the matter, so he repeatedly reported that he was ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：越二年卒。赠少保。
现代文：过了两年去世，封赠为少保。
English: Two years later, he passed away and was awarded the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：天启初，谥襄宪。
现代文：天启初年，谥号襄宪。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, the nickname "Xiang Xian" appeared.

