古文：《春秋》之义，大水，鼓用牲於社。
现代文：按照《春秋》上说的道理， 发生水灾，应当在祭祀土地神的地方击鼓献上牲畜。 
English: According to the principle mentioned in "Spring and Autumn," in the event of a flood, drums should be beaten and livestock should be offered in the place where the land god is worshipped.

古文：说者曰： 鼓者，攻之也。 
现代文：解释《春秋》的人说： 击鼓，就表示攻击土地神。 
English: The person who explained "Spring and Autumn" said: To beat the drums is to attack the earth god.

古文：或曰： 胁之。 
现代文：有人又说： 威胁土地神。 
English: Another said: "Threatening the god of the land."

古文：胁则攻矣。
现代文：威胁也就是攻击了。
English: A threat is an attack.

古文：胜，攻社以救之。
现代文：阴胜过阳，就攻击土地神以此来消除水灾。
English: The yin prevailed over the yang, so they attacked the earth god in order to eliminate the flood.

古文：或难曰：攻社谓得胜负之义，未可得顺义之节也。
现代文：有人责难说：攻击土地神这种说法，可以认为符合争胜负的道理，但是不能认为符合礼义的规定。
English: Some people reproachfully said: Attacking the land god can be considered to be in line with the principle of competition, but it cannot be considered to be in line with the rules of etiquette.

古文：人君父事天，母事地。
现代文：君王把天当作父亲来侍奉，把地当作母亲来侍奉。
English: The prince serves heaven as his father and earth as his mother.

古文：母之党类为害，可攻母以救之乎？
现代文：母亲的亲族造成祸害，可以攻击母亲来消除祸害吗？
English: My mother's relatives caused the evil, can I attack my mother to eliminate the evil?

古文：以政令失道阴阳缪戾者，人君也。
现代文：由于政令违犯了正道，致使阴阳错乱的人，是君王。
English: He is a king who, by his decrees, disturbs the right path and causes the yin and yang to become disordered.

古文：不自攻以复之，反逆节以犯尊，天地安肯济？
现代文：不责备自己以消除阴阳错乱所造成的灾祸，反而违背礼义冒犯尊长，天地怎么肯帮助他呢？
English: How can heaven and earth help him if he does not reproach himself for eliminating the calamity caused by the disorder of yin and yang, but offends his elders in violation of etiquette?

古文：使湛水害伤天，不以地害天，攻之可也。
现代文：如果大水伤害的是天，从不该以地害天的道理上，攻击土地神是可以的。
English: If it is the sky that is harmed by the flood, it is possible to attack the land god on the principle that the earth should never be used to harm the sky.

古文：今湛水所伤，物也。
现代文：现在大水伤害的是万物。
English: Now the flood is harming everything.

古文：万物於地，卑也。
现代文：万物与土地相比，是卑贱的。
English: Compared to the land, all things are worthless.

古文：害犯至尊之体，於道违逆，论《春秋》者，曾不知难。
现代文：因灾害而冒犯最尊贵的土地之体，这是与道义相违反的。论述《春秋》的人，竟然不知道责难。
English: It is immoral to offend the body of the most precious land through disasters. Those who discuss "Spring and Autumn" do not know how to rebuke.

古文：案雨出於山，流入於川，湛水之类，山川是矣。
现代文：考察雨是产生于深山之中，流入于河川里面，大水这类东西，是山川所造成的。
English: The rain is produced deep in the mountains and flows into the rivers. Such things as floods are caused by the mountains and rivers.

古文：大水之灾，不攻山川。
现代文：大水的灾害产生，人们不攻击山川。
English: When a great water disaster occurs, people do not attack the mountains and rivers.

古文：社，土也。
现代文：社，是土地神。
English: Society is the god of the land.

古文：五行之性，水土不同。
现代文：五行的性质，水与土是不相同的。
English: According to the nature of the five elements, water and earth are different.

古文：以水为害而攻土，土胜水。攻社之义，毋乃如今世工匠之用椎凿也？
现代文：因为大水造成灾害而攻击土地神，土是克水的，攻击土地神的道理，不就像当今世上的工匠使用槌子和凿子的道理一样吗？
English: Isn't the principle of attacking the god of the land because of the disaster caused by the flood, and the principle of attacking the god of the land because the earth is made of water, the same as the principle of using hammers and chisels by craftsmen in today's world?

古文：以椎击凿，令凿穿木。
现代文：用槌子敲击凿子，使凿子穿进木头。
English: Hit the chisel with a mallet to drive it into the wood.

古文：今傥攻土，令厌水乎？
现代文：现在如果说攻击土地神是想让它去克水吗？
English: Now, if we say that attacking the land god is trying to make it go away?

古文：且夫攻社之义，以为攻阴之类也。
现代文：而且攻击土地神的理由，又把它说成是攻击阴的同类事物了。
English: Moreover, the reason for attacking the earth god is also said to be the same kind of thing as attacking yin.

古文：甲为盗贼，伤害人民，甲在不亡，舍甲而攻乙之家，耐止甲乎？
现代文：某甲成了盗贼，伤害人民，某甲还在没有逃跑，抛开某甲而去攻击某乙之家，能制止某甲盗窃吗？
English: So-and-so has become a thief, hurting people. So-and-so still hasn't run away. So-and-so has left So-and-so to attack So-and-so's house. Can So-and-so stop stealing?

古文：今雨者，水也。
现代文：现在雨就是水。
English: Now the rain is water.

古文：水在，不自攻水，而乃攻社。
现代文：水还在，不去攻击水神，反倒去攻击土地神。
English: The water is still there, so instead of attacking the water god, they attack the earth god.

古文：案天将雨，山先出云，云积为雨，雨流为水。
现代文：考察天将要下雨，深山里先出现云，云聚集而变成雨，雨又流为水。
English: During the investigation, it was about to rain. In the deep mountains, clouds appeared first. The clouds gathered and turned into rain, and the rain turned into water.

古文：然则山者，父母；水者子弟也。
现代文：这样，山就好比是父母；水就好比是子弟。
English: In this way, the mountain is like a parent; the water is like a child.

古文：重罪刑及族属，罪父母子弟乎？
现代文：犯了重罪的人受刑罚要牵连他的亲族，应该惩罚他的父母子弟吗？
English: If a person who has committed a serious crime is to be punished, his relatives should be implicated. Should his parents and children be punished?

古文：罪其朋徒也？
现代文：惩罚他的朋友徒弟吗？
English: Punish his fellow apprentice?

古文：计山水与社，俱为雨类也，孰为亲者？
现代文：衡量山、水与土地神，同样属于两类，哪一个更亲近呢？
English: The gods who measure mountains, water and land also belong to two categories. Which one is closer?

古文：社，土也。五行异气，相去远。
现代文：社，是土地神，五行中水、土属于不同的气，性质相距很远，所以攻击土地神是没有道理的。
English: Society is the land god, and water and earth belong to different qi in the five elements, and their properties are far apart, so it is unreasonable to attack the land god.

古文：殷太戊桑谷俱生。
现代文：殷代太戊在位时，桑树穀树忽然一齐生长在宫廷中。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taewu of the Yin Dynasty, mulberry trees suddenly sprung up all over the palace.

古文：或曰高宗。
现代文：有人说此事发生在殷高宗的时候。
English: Some people say that this happened when Yin Gaozong was still alive.

古文：恐骇，侧身行道，思索先王之政，兴灭国，继绝世，举逸民，明养老之义，桑谷消亡，享国长久。 
现代文：殷高宗惊恐害怕，惶惶不安地执行天道，思索执行先王的政治，复兴灭亡了的国家，接续断绝了的贵族世家，起用被遗落了的隐士，发扬奉养老人的道理，桑树穀树就消失了，国家就长治久安。
English: Yin Gaozong was shocked and frightened, he carried out the heavenly way with trepidation and anxiety, thought about implementing the politics of the former king, revived the country that had perished, continued the severed aristocratic family, used the abandoned hermit, and promoted the principle of serving the elderly. The mulberry tree and the grain tree disappeared, and the country enjoyed long-term peace.

古文：此说《春秋》所共闻也。
现代文：这是解释《春秋》的人所共同知道的事情。
English: This is something that everyone who interprets "Spring and Autumn" knows.

古文：水灾与桑谷之变何以异？
现代文：水灾与桑树穀树的变异有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between a flood and a mutation of the mulberry tree?

古文：殷王改政，《春秋》攻社，道相违反，行之何从？
现代文：殷王改变政治，《春秋》上攻击土地神，与道理相违反，应当遵循哪一种做法呢？
English: Yin Wang changes politics, "Spring and Autumn" attacks the land god, contrary to reason, which approach should be followed?

古文：周成王之时，天下雷雨，偃禾拔木，为害大矣。
现代文：周成王的时候，天降大雷雨，禾苗倒伏大树被连根拔起，造成的灾害很大。
English: During the reign of King Zhou Chengxing, the sky rained heavy thunderstorms, and large trees with their seedlings upside down were uprooted, causing great disasters.

古文：成王开金滕之书，求索行事周公之功，执书以泣遏，雨止风反，禾、大木复起。
现代文：周成王打开金縢之书，搜寻历年往事，看见了周公的功绩，手捧周公祈祷的册书流泪悔过，遏止住了风雨，禾苗复原，大树又立了起来。
English: Zhou Chengwang opened the Book of the Golden Calf, searched the past events of the past years, saw Zhou Gong's exploits, held Zhou Gong's prayer book in his hand, wept and repented, stopped the wind and rain, restored the seedlings, and the trees stood up again.

古文：大雨久湛，其实一也。
现代文：大雨和长久的水灾，其实是一回事。
English: Heavy rain and long-term flooding are actually the same thing.

古文：成王改过，《春秋》攻社，两经二义，行之如何？
现代文：周成王改正过错，《春秋》上攻击土地神，两种经书两种说法，按照哪一种说法执行呢？
English: Zhou Chengwang corrected the mistake, "Spring and Autumn" attacked the land god, two scriptures, two statements, according to which statement should it be implemented?

古文：月令之家，虫食谷稼，取虫所类象之吏，笞击僇辱以灭其变。
现代文：按照 月令之家 的说法，害虫吃谷禾庄稼，就捕捉害虫所象征的官吏，加以鞭打污辱，用这种办法去消灭虫害。
English: According to the Lunar House, pests eat grains and crops, and the official symbolized by the pest is caught, whipped and insulted, and this method is used to eliminate pests.

古文：实论者谓之未必真是，然而为之，厌合人意。
现代文：据实论事的人认为这种做法不一定真能起作用，然而这样做了，可以满足迎合人们的心愿。
English: According to realists, this approach may not really work, but if it does, it can satisfy people's wishes.

古文：今致雨者，政也、吏也，不变其政，不罪其吏，而徒攻社，能何复塞？
现代文：现在招致久雨的原因在于政治和官吏本身，不改变这种政治，不惩罚那些官吏，而仅仅去攻击土地神，怎么能够消除和制止久雨呢？
English: The reason for the heavy rain now lies in the politics and officials themselves. Without changing this politics, without punishing those officials, but only attacking the land god, how can the heavy rain be eliminated and stopped?

古文：苟以为当攻其类，众阴之精，月也，方诸乡月，水自下来，月离於毕，出房北道，希有不雨。
现代文：假如认为应当攻击它的同类，那么所有阴类事物的精华是月亮。用方诸向着月亮，露水自然会下来。月亮靠近毕宿，出入于房星北边一道，很少有不下雨的。
English: If one thinks that one should attack one's own kind, then the essence of all yin-like things is the moon. If one directs one's efforts toward the moon, dew will naturally fall. The moon is close to the zodiac, and it enters and exits along the north side of the house star, and it rarely does not rain.

古文：月中之兽，兔、蟾蜍也。
现代文：月亮中的动物，是兔子和蟾蜍。
English: The animals in the moon are a rabbit and a badger.

古文：其类在地，螺与蚄也。
现代文：它们在地下的同类，是螺和蚌。
English: Their underground cousins are the snail and the earthworm.

古文：月毁於天，螺、蚄舀缺，同类明矣。
现代文：月亮在天空亏缺之时，螺蚌肉也会缩小，它们同属一类是很明白的。
English: When the moon is lacking in the sky, the snail's meat will also shrink, it is clear that they belong to the same category.

古文：雨久不霁，攻阴之类，宜捕斩兔、蟾蜍，椎被螺、蚄，为其得实。
现代文：雨下了很久天不放晴，攻击属于阴物的同类，就应当捕捉斩杀兔子和蟾蜍，槌破螺蚌的壳，这才符合它的道理。
English: If it has been raining for a long time and the sky does not clear, the attack belongs to the same kind of negative things, it should catch and kill rabbits and centipedes, and break the shell of the snail with a hammer. This is in line with its reason.

古文：蝗虫时至，或飞或集。
现代文：蝗虫经常出现，或飞舞或聚落。
English: Locusts often appear, either flying or gathering.

古文：所集之地，谷草枯索。
现代文：蝗虫聚落的地方，谷草全部枯败。
English: Where the locusts have settled, all the grass has withered away.

古文：吏卒部民，堑道作坎，榜驱内於堑坎，杷蝗积聚以千斛数。正攻蝗之身，蝗犹不止。况徒攻阴之类，雨安肯霁？
现代文：官吏差役和当地的老百姓，在路上挖濠沟掏坑穴，扑打驱赶蝗虫到濠沟坑穴里，把蝗虫耙在一起堆集之多要以千斛来计算，直接攻击蝗虫本身，蝗灾还不能制止，何况仅仅去攻击阴类事物，雨怎么能够停止呢？
English: The officials and the local people dig trenches and pits on the road, beat and drive the locusts into the trenches and pits, and the number of locusts gathered together must be calculated in thousands of baht. Directly attacking the locusts themselves, the locust plague cannot be stopped. Moreover, only attacking the female things, how can the rain be stopped?

古文：《尚书》《大传》曰： 烟氛郊社不修，出川不祝，风雨不时，霜雪不降，责於天公。
现代文：《尚书》大传上说： 祭祀天地的时候不认真举行仪式，不祭祀山川之神，风雨失调，霜雪不按时而降，就对天公进行责罚。
English: According to the legend of "Shoshu" (Book of Proverbs): If you don't hold a serious ceremony when you worship heaven and earth, if you don't worship the gods of mountains and rivers, if the wind and rain are out of kilter, and if the frost and snow don't fall on time, you will be punished by Heaven.

古文：臣多弑主，孽多杀宗，五品不训，责於人公。
现代文：臣下不应弑君而弑君，庶子不应弑嫡长子而弑，五常紊乱，就对人公进行责罚。
English: A vassal should not slander a vassal, but a vassal should not slander a vassal, and an illegitimate child should not slander a legitimate eldest son, but the eldest son should not slander the legitimate eldest son. If the five regularities are disordered, the human rights should be punished.

古文：城郭不缮，沟池不修，水泉不隆，水为民害，责於地公。 
现代文：不修治城墙，不清理沟池，水泉不旺盛，水给百姓造成了灾害，就对地公进行责罚。 
English: If the city wall is not repaired, the ditches are not cleaned, the water springs are not vigorous, and the water has caused disasters to the people, the magistrate will be punished.

古文：王者三公，各有所主；诸侯卿大夫，各有分职。
现代文：君王设置三公，各有所主管的事务，诸侯卿大夫，各有份内的职责。
English: The monarch set up three princes, each of whom was in charge of affairs, and the princes and lords, each of whom had their own duties.

古文：大水不责卿大夫而击鼓攻社，何？
现代文：大水成灾不责罚卿大夫，而去击鼓攻击土地神，怎么知道不能这样做呢？
English: How do you know that you can't beat the drums and attack the earth god without punishing the doctor?

古文：不然，鲁国失礼，孔子作经，表以为戒也。
现代文：鲁国因此而违背了礼，孔子修《春秋》才指明它并以此作为警戒。
English: Lu thus violated the rite, and Confucius' "Spring and Autumn" only pointed it out and used it as a warning.

古文：公羊高不能实，董仲舒不能定，故攻社之义，至今复行之。
现代文：公羊高不能正确加以解释，董仲舒也不能作出定论，所以攻击土地神的作法，到现在仍然在实行。
English: Ram Gao can't explain it correctly, and Dong Zhongshu can't make a conclusion, so the practice of attacking the land god is still in practice.

古文：使高尚生，仲舒未死，将难之曰： 久雨湛水溢，谁致之者？
现代文：假使公羊高还在活着，董仲舒也没有死，我将要责问他们说：长时间下雨大水漫溢，是谁引起的？
English: If Gao Yang is still alive and Dong Zhongshu is not dead, I will ask them: Who caused the long rain and overflowing water?

古文：使人君也，宜改政易行以复塞之。如人臣也，宜罪其人以过解天。
现代文：如果是君王，应当改革政治改变操行，以此来消除制止灾害；如果是臣下，应当惩罚那个人，把他的过失禀告上天。
English: If he is a prince, he should reform his politics and change his behavior in order to eliminate and stop disasters; if he is a vassal, he should punish that person and report his wrongdoing to heaven.

古文：如非君臣，阴阳之气偶时运也，击鼓攻社，而何救止？
现代文：如果不是君王和臣下的过失，而是当时阴阳之气的运行偶然造成的，采用击鼓攻击土地神的办法，怎么能救治和制止水灾呢？
English: If it was not the fault of the king and his subjects, but the accidental result of the operation of yin and yang at that time, how could the flood be cured and stopped by using drumming to attack the land god?

古文：《春秋》说曰： 人君亢阳致旱，沈溺致水。 
现代文：关于《春秋》的解释说道： 君王骄横就会招来旱灾，迷恋酒色就会引来水灾。 
English: Regarding the interpretation of "Spring and Autumn," he said: The king's arrogance will cause droughts, and infatuation with wine will cause floods.

古文：夫如是，旱则为沈溺之行，水则为亢阳之操，何乃攻社？
现代文：如此说来，旱灾是君王骄横的行为引起的，水灾是君王迷恋酒色的行为引起的，为什么却要攻击土地神呢？
English: So, droughts are caused by the arrogant behavior of kings, floods are caused by the behavior of kings infatuated with wine, but why attack the land god?

古文：攻社不解，硃丝萦之，亦复未晓。
现代文：攻击土地神的道理既不可理解，用红绳把社坛围绕起来，这种做法，仍然也不可理解。
English: It is incomprehensible to attack the principle of the land god, and it is still incomprehensible to encircle the social arena with red ropes.

古文：说者以为社阴、硃阳也，水阴也，以阳色萦之，助鼓为救。
现代文：解释这件事的人认为社属于阴，红色属于阳。水，属于阴，用红色围绕它，辅以击鼓可以救治水灾。
English: The person who explained the matter thought that the company belongs to yin, red belongs to yang. Water, belongs to yin, surrounding it with red, supplemented by drumming, can help flood relief.

古文：夫大山失火，灌以壅水，众知不能救之者，何也？
现代文：如果大山上失火，用瓦罐装水去浇灭，众人都知道这样不能灭火，为什么呢？
English: If there is a fire on a large mountain and you use water from a watering can to put it out, everyone knows that you can't put out a fire that way. Why?

古文：火盛水少，热不能胜也。
现代文：火势盛大而水极少，热气使水不能压灭它。
English: For the fire is so great, and the water is so little, that the heat of the fire cannot quench it.

古文：今国湛水，犹大山失火也；以若绳之丝，萦社为救，犹以壅水灌大山也。
现代文：现在一个国家发生水灾，好比大山失火一样。用像绳子一样的朱丝，围绕社坛来救治水灾，就好比用瓦罐装水去浇灭大山上的大火一样。
English: Nowadays, if a country experiences a flood, it is like a mountain catching fire. Using jute, which is like a rope, to rescue and treat the flood around the community center is like using water in jars to extinguish the fire on the mountain.

古文：原天心以人意，状天治以人事。人相攻击，气不相兼，兵不相负，不能取胜。
现代文：根据人的心意来推求天的心意，用人间的事情来比喻上天所治理的事情，人们互相攻击，气力不超过别人一倍，兵力不超过别人一倍，就不能取得胜利。
English: To seek the will of heaven according to the will of man, to use human affairs as a metaphor for the affairs governed by heaven, people attack each other, and if their strength is not more than double that of others, and their military strength is not more than double that of others, they cannot achieve victory.

古文：今一国水，使真欲攻阳，以绝其气，悉发国人操刀把杖以击之，若岁终逐疫，然後为可。
现代文：现在一个国家发生水灾，如果真想要攻阴，以断绝造成水灾的阴气的话，应该把全国人都发动起来，拿着刀和棍子去攻击土地神，就像年终驱逐疫鬼那样，这样做了以后才是适合的。
English: Now, when a country is hit by a flood, if you really want to attack the evil spirits and cut off the evil spirits that caused the flood, you should mobilize everyone in the country to attack the earth god with swords and sticks, just like expelling the pestilence at the end of the year. It is only appropriate after doing this.

古文：楚、汉之际，六国之时，兵革战攻，力强则胜，弱劣则负。
现代文：楚、汉相争的时候，六国征战的时期，各国发兵战守攻防，力量强大就获胜，力量弱小就失败。
English: When Chu and Han fought against each other, during the Six-Nation War, all countries sent troops to fight and defend, the strong won, and the weak lost.

古文：攻社一人击鼓，无兵革之威，安能救雨？
现代文：攻击土地神，一个人击鼓，没有军队的威力，怎么能够救治大雨造成的灾害呢？
English: Attacking the god of the land, a man beating a drum, without the power of an army, how can he cure the disasters caused by heavy rain?

古文：夫一旸一雨，犹一昼一夜也；其遭若尧、汤之水旱，犹一冬一夏也。
现代文：一天晴一天雨，好比一昼一夜一样。国家如果遭到像尧、汤那时的洪水和久旱，就好比一冬一夏一样。
English: A sunny day and a rainy day is like a day and a night. If the country is hit by floods and long droughts like floods and droughts, it is like a winter and a summer.

古文：如或欲以人事祭祀复塞其变，冬求为夏，夜求为昼也。
现代文：如果有人想用人间祭祀的办法去消除水旱灾害，就像想使冬天变成夏天，夜晚变成白天一样。
English: If someone wants to use human sacrifice to eliminate floods and droughts, it is like wanting to turn winter into summer and night into day.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证实这一点呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：久雨不霁，试使人君高枕安卧，雨犹自止。
现代文：长久下雨不天晴，试让君王在高枕上安心躺着，雨仍然会自行停止。
English: If it rains for a long time, it will not be fine. Try to let the king lie on a high pillow, and the rain will still stop by itself.

古文：止久至於大旱，试使人君高枕安卧，旱犹自雨。
现代文：雨停久了就出现大旱，试让君王在高枕上安心躺着，旱久了就仍然会自行下雨。
English: If the rain stops for a long time, there will be a big drought. Try to let the king lie down on a high pillow. If it is dry for a long time, it will still rain by itself.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：极反阴，阴极反。故夫天地之有湛也，何以知不如人之有水病也？
现代文：天气晴、早到了极点，就会转变成阴、雨；天气阴、雨到了极点就会转变成晴、旱。所以天地之间出现了大水，凭什么知道不像有水肿病的人呢？
English: If the weather is fine and reaches its peak early, it will turn into cloudy and rain; if the weather is cloudy and rains at its peak, it will turn into sunny and dry. So there is a big water between heaven and earth, how do you know that it is not like a person with dropsy?

古文：其有旱也，何以知不如人有瘅疾也？
现代文：天地之间出现了久旱，凭什么知道不像有黄疸病的人呢？
English: There has been a long drought between heaven and earth. How do you know that you are not like a person with jaundice?

古文：祷请求福，终不能愈，变操易行，终不能救；使医食药，冀可得愈；命尽期至，医药无效。
现代文：祷告祈求神灵赐福，病终究不会痊愈；改变道德行为，最终也不能够挽救。请医生诊病吃药，才有希望痊愈。命里注定的寿限完了，死期到了，医药也就毫无效果。
English: If you pray and ask for the blessing of the gods, the disease will not be cured after all; if you change your moral behavior, it will not be able to save you in the end. If you ask a doctor to diagnose the disease and take medicine, you can only hope to be cured. The fated life span is over, the time to die has come, and medicine has no effect.

古文：尧遭洪水，《春秋》之大水也，圣君知之，不祷於神，不改乎政，使禹治之，百川东流。
现代文：尧在位时遭受洪水之灾，这是《春秋》上记载的大水。圣君尧知道了此事，不对神祷告，不改变政治，派大禹去治理洪水，所有的河流都疏通向东流去。
English: When he was on the throne, he suffered a flood disaster, which is the great water recorded in the Spring and Autumn Annals. The saint knew this, did not pray to God, did not change politics, sent Dayu to control the flood, and all the rivers were dredged to flow eastward.

古文：夫尧之使禹治水，犹病水者之使医也。
现代文：尧派大禹治水，好比水肿病人求医治病。
English: It is like a patient with edema seeking medical treatment.

古文：然则尧之洪水，天地之水病也；禹之治水，洪水之良医也。
现代文：然而尧在位时的洪水，是天地的水肿病；大禹去治水，好比是洪水的良医。
English: However, the flood at the time of Zou's reign was an edematous disease of heaven and earth; Dayu went to treat the water, as if he was a good doctor of the flood.

古文：说者何以易之？攻社之义，於事不得。
现代文：解释《春秋》的人怎么能改变这个事实呢？
English: How can those who explain "Spring and Autumn" change this fact?

古文：雨不霁，祭女娲，於礼何见？
现代文：攻击土地神的做法，不符合于事理。久雨不止，祭祀女娲，在礼制上哪里见到过呢？
English: The practice of attacking the land deities is not consistent with the facts. After a long period of rain, where have you ever seen the ritual of sacrificing a maiden?

古文：伏羲、女娲，俱圣者也。舍伏羲而祭女娲，《春秋》不言。
现代文：伏羲、女娲，都是圣人，抛开伏羲而祭祀女娲，《春秋》上没有讲过这件事。
English: Both Fuxi and Niang are saints, and it is not mentioned in "Spring and Autumn" that Fuxi and Niang were sacrificed in place of Niang.

古文：董仲舒之议，其故何哉？
现代文：董仲舒这种祭女娲的建议，其理由是什么呢？
English: What is the reason for Dong Zhongshu's suggestion of sacrificing a young maiden?

古文：夫《春秋经》但言 鼓 ，岂言攻哉？
现代文：《春秋经》上只是说到 击鼓 ，哪里说是 攻击 呢？
English: The "Spring and Autumn Annals" only mentions drumming, but where does it say attack?

古文：说者见有 鼓 文，则言攻矣。
现代文：解释《春秋》的人见有 鼓 字，就认为是 攻击 了。
English: People who interpret "Spring and Autumn" see the word "drum" and think it's an attack.

古文：夫鼓未必为攻，说者用意异也。
现代文：讲到击鼓未必就是攻击，解释者的用意和《春秋》经文有区别。
English: When it comes to drumming, it is not necessarily an attack. There is a difference between the intention of the interpreter and the "Spring and Autumn" text.

古文：季氏富於周公，而求也为之聚敛而附益之。
现代文：季孙氏比鲁国的公室还富裕，冉求却又帮他实行田赋制度，替他增加财富。
English: The Ji Sun clan was wealthier than the government of Lu, but Ran Kui helped him implement the rice field system to increase his wealth.

古文：孔子曰： 非吾徒也，小子鸣鼓攻之，可也。 
现代文：孔子说： 冉求不是我的学生了，你们学生可以公开攻击他。  
English: Confucius said, "Ran Cui is no longer my student, you students can openly attack him.

古文：攻者，责也，责让之也。
现代文：攻的意思是责备，是斥责他。
English: To attack means to reprove, to rebuke him.

古文：六国兵革相攻，不得难此，此又非也。
现代文：因此六国用兵相互攻战的事例，是不能用来指责攻社这件事的。
English: Therefore, the example of six countries attacking each other with soldiers cannot be used to blame the attack on the company.

古文：以卑而责尊，为逆矣。
现代文：这种说法又不对了。以卑下的身份去责备尊贵的人，是逆礼行事。
English: This is not true. It is impolite to reproach an honorable person in a lowly capacity.

古文：或据天责之也？
现代文：或许是按照天意来谴责土地神吧。
English: Perhaps it is God's will to condemn the gods of the land.

古文：王者母事地，母有过，子可据父以责之乎？
现代文：君王把土地当作母亲来侍奉，母亲有过错，儿子可以按照父亲的意志来谴责母亲吗？
English: The prince serves the land as a mother, the mother is at fault, can the son condemn the mother according to the father's will?

古文：下之於上，宜言谏。
现代文：下对于上，应该用 谏 。
English: Down for up, you should use.

古文：若事，臣子之礼也；责让，上文礼也。
现代文：这样做，是臣和子应遵守的礼节；斥责，是君王应遵守的礼节。
English: To do so is the proper etiquette for a vassal and a son; to rebuke is the proper etiquette for a prince.

古文：乖违礼意，行文如何？
现代文：违反礼节，怎么去行动呢？
English: Violation of etiquette, how to act?

古文：故警戒下也。
现代文：按照礼仪，击鼓是用来助长呐喊，使声音更响亮的。
English: According to the etiquette, drumming is used to encourage shouting and make the sound louder.

古文：必以伐鼓为攻此社，此则钟夫礼以鼓助号呼，明声响也。
现代文：古时候，君王将要外出，就要撞钟击鼓，本来是用来警戒臣民的。
English: In ancient times, when the king was about to go out, he would ring a bell and beat a drum, which was originally used to warn his subjects.

古文：古者人君将出，撞钟击鼓，声鼓鸣攻击上也。
现代文：一定要把击鼓说成是攻击土地神，这就等于把钟响鼓鸣说成是攻击君王了。
English: The beating of the drum must be said to be an attack on the god of the land, just as the ringing of the bells is said to be an attack on the king.

古文：大水用鼓，或时再告社，阴之太盛，雨湛不霁。
现代文：大水时采用击鼓的方式，也许是为了进一步向土地神告急。阴气太盛，久雨成涝天不放晴，阴气过盛阳气衰微，与天道不相适宜。
English: When there is a lot of water, the method of drumming is used, perhaps in order to further alert the land god. The yin is too strong, the rain lasts for a long time and the sky does not clear, the yin is too strong and the yang is weak, which is not suitable for the heavenly way.

古文：阴盛阳微，非道之宜，口祝不副，以鼓自助，与日食鼓用牲於社，同一义也。
现代文：光凭嘴祷祝还不够，另外用击鼓来辅助，与日蚀时击鼓用牲口祭祀土地神是同一个道理。
English: Praying with one's lips is not enough. Drumming is also used as an aid. It is the same reason that during a solar eclipse, drums are used to sacrifice animals to the land god.

古文：俱为告急，彰阴盛也。
现代文：都是向土地神告急，表明阴气过盛了。
English: All of them are in a hurry to the land god, indicating that the gloom is overpowering.

古文：事大而急者用锺鼓，小而缓者用铃，彰事告急，助口气也。
现代文：事情重大而紧急就使用钟鼓，事情不大不急就使用铃箫，表明告急之书，辅助光用嘴祷告。
English: If the matter is serious and urgent, the bell and drum are used; if the matter is not serious and urgent, the bell is used; if the matter is urgent, the book is used; if the matter is auxiliary, the light is used; if the matter is not urgent, the bell is used; and if the matter is not urgent, the book is used.

古文：大道难知，大水久湛，假令政治所致，犹先告急，乃斯政行。
现代文：天道难以明白，大水久不消退，如果是由于政治所引起的，仍然先要告急，这才修政改行。
English: It is difficult to understand the way of heaven. The flood has not subsided for a long time. If it is caused by politics, it is still necessary to express urgency first. Only then can the government be reformed and changed.

古文：盗贼之发，与此同操。
现代文：盗贼之事发生，与此同样办理。
English: If there is a case of theft, it will be handled in the same way.

古文：盗贼亦政所致，比求阙失，犹先发告。
现代文：盗贼出现也是由于政治所造成的，等到寻求政治上的过失时，仍然是先发布文告。
English: The appearance of thieves is also caused by politics, and when looking for political fault, the announcement is still issued first.

古文：鼓用牲於社，发觉之也。
现代文：击鼓用牲口祭祀土地神，是让它发现觉察到阴气过盛了。
English: Drumming an animal sacrifice to the god of the land is a way of letting him know that he has overdone the yin.

古文：社者，众阴之长，故伐鼓使社知之。
现代文：社，是所有阴类之首，所以击鼓使社知道阴气过盛了。
English: Society is the first of all the yin types, so the drumming society knows that yin is overflowing.

古文：说鼓者以为攻之，故攻母逆义之难，缘此而至。
现代文：解释 鼓 字的人认为击鼓是攻击土地神，所以 攻母 、 逆义 之类的非难，就由此产生了。
English: People who interpret the drum characters believe that drumming is an attack on the earth god, so accusations such as "attacking the mother" and "contradictory meaning" have arisen from this.

古文：今言告以阴盛阳微，攻尊之难，奚从来哉？
现代文：现在说击鼓是为了告诉土地神阴气盛，阳气衰，那么攻击尊上的这种指责，又从何而来呢？
English: Now it is said that drumming is to tell the earth that God's yin is strong and his yang is weak, so where did this accusation against His Eminence come from?

古文：且告宜於用牲，用牲不宜於攻。
现代文：而且祷告适宜于用牺牲，用牺牲并不适合于攻击。
English: Moreover, prayer is appropriate for the use of sacrifice, and the use of sacrifice is not appropriate for attack.

古文：告事用牲，礼也；攻之用牲，於礼何见？
现代文：祷告事由奉献牺牲，是讲礼仪；攻击而奉献牺牲，在礼仪上哪儿见到过呢？
English: Where in the liturgy have we seen that prayer is offered and sacrificed for the sake of offering and sacrificing, while attack is offered and sacrificed?

古文：硃丝如绳，示在旸也。
现代文：用朱丝或红绳把社坛围绕起来，是表示阳气的存在。
English: Surrounding the community with jus or red ropes indicates the presence of yang.

古文：旸气实微，故用物微也。
现代文：阳气实在太微弱了，所以只能用细微的东西来表示。
English: Yang is really too weak, so it can only be expressed with subtle things.

古文：投一寸之针，布一丸之艾於血脉之蹊，笃病有瘳。
现代文：在经络穴位上投入一寸长的针，施放一丸艾绒，重病也能治好。
English: Insert a one-inch-long needle into the meridians and apply a round of mugwort, and even serious illnesses can be cured.

古文：硃丝如一寸之针、一丸之艾也？
现代文：朱丝好比一寸之针、一丸之艾绒也能起作用。
English: Zhu Si is like a one-inch needle, and a round of Ai Rong can also work.

古文：吴攻破楚，昭王亡走，申包胥间步赴秦，哭泣求救，卒得助兵，却吴而存楚。
现代文：吴国攻破楚国都城，楚昭王逃奔出走，申包胥偷跑到秦国，向秦国哭泣请求救援，终于得到救兵，打退了吴军而保存了楚国。
English: Wu broke through the capital city of Chu, Chu Zhao Wang fled and ran away, Shen Baojun secretly ran to Qin, cried to Qin for rescue, finally got the rescue, repelled the Wu army and preserved Chu.

古文：击鼓之人，如何耳；使诚若申包胥，一人击得。
现代文：击鼓之人就看他诚意怎么样了。假使诚意像申包胥一样，有一个人击鼓就可以了。
English: It is up to the person playing the drum to see how sincere he is. If the sincerity is like Shen Baozhen, one person playing the drum is enough.

古文：假令一人击鼓，将耐令社与秦王同感，以土胜水之威，却止云雨。
现代文：假如让一个人击鼓，将能让土地神同秦王一样受感动，以土能克水的威力，就能消退制止云雨之气。
English: If you let a person beat a drum, you will be able to make the earth god as moved as the king of Qin. With the power of earth energy and water, you can subside and stop the clouds and rain.

古文：云雨气得与吴同恐，消散入山，百姓被害者，得蒙霁晏，有楚国之安矣。
现代文：云雨之气就会和吴国害怕秦国一样，消散退入山中，遭受水灾之害的老百姓，就会得到雨止天晴的好处，有像楚国一样的安全。
English: The rain clouds will dissipate and retreat into the mountains, just as Wu feared the Qin, and the people who suffered from the floods will receive the benefits of rain and sunshine, and have the same security as Chu.

古文：迅雷风烈，君子必变，虽夜必兴，衣冠而坐，惧威变异也。
现代文：迅猛的炸雷猛烈的刮风，君子也要改变常态，即使在半夜里也要爬起来，穿戴好衣帽，正襟危坐，畏惧出现什么异常情况。
English: Rapid thunderstorms, violent windstorms, gentlemen also have to change their normal state, even in the middle of the night they have to get up, put on their clothes and hats, sit up straight, and are afraid of any abnormal situation.

古文：夫水旱，犹雷风也，虽运气无妄，欲令人君高枕幄卧，以俟其时，无恻怛忧民之心。
现代文：水旱灾害就像雷风一样，即使是阴阳之气造成的意外之灾，如果君王高枕安卧，等待晴天的到来，就表明君王没有怜悯百姓的伤痛之心。
English: Flood and drought disasters are like thunderstorms. Even if it is an unexpected disaster caused by the yin and yang, if the monarch lies down and waits for the arrival of a sunny day, it shows that the monarch has no pity for the people's pain.

古文：尧不用牲，或时上世质也。
现代文：尧不奉献牺牲，或许是因为古代的人纯朴的缘故。
English: Perhaps it was because of the simplicity of the ancients that they did not offer sacrifices.

古文：仓颉作书，奚仲作车，可以前代之时无书、车之事，非後世为之乎？
现代文：仓颉创造文字，奚仲制造车子，能因为前代之时没有文字车子这样的东西，就非议后世制作这些东西吗？
English: Cangkun created characters, and Shuzhong made cars. Can we blame future generations for making these things because there was no such thing as a character car in the previous generation?

古文：时同作殊，事乃可难；异世易俗，相非如何？
现代文：时代相同而做法不一样，对这样的事才能进行非难；时代不同，风俗习惯有所改变，怎么能相互非难呢？
English: If the times are the same but the practices are different, how can such things be criticized; if the times are different and the customs and habits have changed, how can we criticize each other?

古文：俗图画女娲之象为妇人之形，又其号曰 女 。
现代文：世俗之人图画女娲的像，把她画成妇人的形体，又号称她为 女 。
English: Secular people draw the image of a maiden, draw her into the shape of a woman, and also call her a woman.

古文：仲舒之意，殆谓女娲古妇人帝王者也。
现代文：董仲舒的原意，大概认为女娲是古代的女帝王。
English: The original meaning of Dong Zhongshu is probably that the empress dowager was an ancient empress.

古文：男阳而女阴，阴气为害，故祭女娲求福佑也。
现代文：男属阳女属阴，阴气造成灾害，因此祭祀女娲求她给予福祐。
English: Men are yang and women are yin, and yin causes disasters, so the sacrificial maiden asks her to give blessings.

古文：传又言：共工与颛顼争为天子，不胜，怒而触不周之山，使天柱折，地维绝。
现代文：传上又说： 共工与颛顼争战想当天子，不能取胜，愤怒地撞碰不周山，使得天柱折断，地的四角塌陷。
English: It was also said in the legend: When the co-worker wanted to fight with the dragonfly, but could not win, he angrily hit the mountain, causing the pillar to break and the four corners of the earth to collapse.

古文：女娲消炼五色石以补苍天，断鰲之足以立四极。
现代文：女娲熔炼五色石来修补苍天，砍断鳌的四足来支撑大地的四边。 
English: The pentacle smelted the five-colored stone to mend the sky, and cut off the four legs of the dragonfly to support the four sides of the earth.

古文：仲舒之祭女娲，殆见此传也。
现代文：董仲舒之所以要祭祀女娲，大约是见到过这本传。
English: The reason why Dong Zhongshu wants to sacrifice the maiden is probably because he has seen this legend.

古文：本有补苍天、立四极之神，天气不和，阳道不胜，傥女娲以精神助圣王止雨湛乎！
现代文：女娲本来就具有修补苍天、支撑大地四极的神通，天气不调和，阳道胜不过阴道，也许女娲可以用她的精神帮助圣王止雨消涝吧！
English: The maiden was originally endowed with the power to mend the heavens and support the four poles of the earth. The weather is not harmonious, and the sun porch is no better than the vagina. Perhaps the maiden can use her spirit to help the holy king stop the rain and eliminate the hail!

