古文：张文蔚，字右华，河间人也。
现代文：张文蔚，字右华，河间人。
English: Zhang Wenwei, also known as Yuhua, is a native of Kawama.

古文：父裼，唐僖宗朝，累为显官。
现代文：父亲张衤易，在唐僖宗朝代，接连任显要官职。
English: His father, Zhang Xiyi, was successively appointed to important official positions in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：文蔚幼砺文行，求知取友，蔼然有佳士之称。
现代文：张文蔚幼小时即砥砺文章德行，求知交友，有名士的声誉。
English: When Zhang Wenwei was very young, she honed the virtues of writing, seeking knowledge and making friends, and gained a reputation as a celebrity.

古文：唐乾符初，登进士第，时丞相裴坦兼判盐铁，解褐署巡官。
现代文：唐乾符初年，登进士第，当时丞相裴坦兼管盐铁事务，张文蔚进入仕途暂任巡官。
English: In the first year of Tang Qianfu, he was promoted to the rank of scholar. At that time, the prime minister Pei Tan was also in charge of salt and iron affairs, and Zhang Wenwei entered the career as a temporary inspector.

古文：未几，以畿尉直馆。
现代文：不久，服家丧，以孝行闻名。
English: Soon after, he went into seclusion and became known for his filial piety.

古文：丁家艰，以孝闻。中和岁，僖宗在蜀，大寇未灭，急于军费，移盐铁于扬州，命李都就判之，奏为转运巡官。
现代文：中和年间，僖宗在蜀地，大寇未灭，急需军费，到扬州征收盐铁赋税，命李都就任掌管，李都上奏朝廷任张文蔚为转运巡官。
English: During the years of the Sino-Japanese War, Emperor Taizong in Shunde, with the great bandit still alive and in urgent need of military funds, went to Yangzhou to collect the salt and iron tax. He ordered Li Du to take charge, Li Du reported to the imperial court and appointed Zhang Wenwei as the transit inspector.

古文：驾还长安，除监察御史，迁左补阙侍御史、起居舍人、司勋吏部员外郎，拜司勋郎中、知制诰，岁满授中书舍人。
现代文：驾返长安后，任监察御史，迁任左补阙、侍御史、起居舍人、司勋吏部员外郎，拜司勋郎中、知制诰，一年后任中书舍人。
English: After returning to Chang'an, he was appointed as the inspector of history, moved to the position of the left assistant secretary, the attendant of history, the living room attendant, the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary.

古文：丁母忧，退居东畿，哀毁过礼。
现代文：服母丧，退居京城东郊，哀伤损毁了身体。
English: In mourning for his mother, he retreated to the eastern suburbs of Beijing, and his body was ravaged by grief.

古文：服阕，复拜中书舍人，俄召入翰林，为承旨学士。
现代文：丧满，又任中书舍人，不久应召进翰林院，任承旨学士。
English: At the end of his life, he was appointed as a junior high school teacher. Soon, he was called to Hanlin Academy and appointed as a junior high school teacher.

古文：属昭宗初还京阙，皇纲浸微，文蔚所发诏令，靡失厥中，论者多之。
现代文：遇上昭宗初返京城，皇纲朝纪毁坏衰微，张文蔚所起草诏令，不失中正，舆论赞誉他。
English: When Emperor Zhaozong returned to Beijing for the first time, the imperial system of government was in a state of decline, and the imperial edict drafted by Zhang Wenwei was still in effect, the public praised him.

古文：转户部侍郎，仍依前充职，寻出为礼部侍郎。
现代文：转任户部侍郎，仍兼任前职，不久出任礼部侍郎。
English: He was transferred to the position of Household Attendant, still holding his previous position, and soon became the Ceremonial Attendant.

古文：天祐元年夏，拜中书侍郎、平章事，兼判户部。
现代文：天元年夏，任中书侍郎、平章事，兼管户部事务。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed to the post of chūshujirō (chancellor's secretary) and the post of hirajitsugoto (secretary), and was also in charge of the household affairs.

古文：时柳璨在相位，擅权纵暴，倾陷贤俊，宰相裴枢等五家及三省而下三十余人，咸抱冤就死；缙绅以目，不敢窃语其是非，余怒所注，亦不啻十许辈。
现代文：这时柳灿居相位，擅行权力恣意暴虐，排斥陷害贤俊之士，宰相裴枢等五家以及三省以下三十多人，全抱冤就死，缙绅之士侧目以视，不敢私下谈论他的罪行，柳灿所仇恨的对象，还不下十多人。
English: At this time, Liu Can was in the limelight, exercising power arbitrarily and tyrannically, ostracizing and framing the wise men, five families including Prime Minister Pei Zu and more than 30 people from three provinces and below, all of whom died with grievances. The gentleman looked sideways and did not dare to talk about his crimes in private. Liu Can hated more than a dozen people.

古文：文蔚殚其力解之，乃止，士人赖焉。
现代文：张文蔚尽力解救他们，才得免，士人都有赖于他。
English: Zhang Wenwei tried his best to save them, but he was spared. The scholars all depended on him.

古文：璨败死，文蔚兼度支盐铁使。
现代文：柳灿罪行败露而死，张文蔚兼度支盐铁使。
English: Liu Can's crime was exposed and he died, and Zhang Wenyi also became a salt and iron envoy.

古文：天祐四年，天子以土运将革，天命有归，四月，命文蔚与杨涉等总率百僚，奉禅位诏至大梁。
现代文：天四年，天子因为社稷将有转移，天命另有归属，四月，命张文蔚与杨涉等领百官，奉送禅让帝位的诏令到大梁。
English: In the fourth year of heaven, the heavenly son, because of the transfer of the social power, the destiny of heaven, had another attribution. In April, the leading officials such as Zhang Wenwei and Yang Watan were ordered to send the imperial edict to Daliang.

古文：居两制之重，祖述前载，甚得王言之体。
现代文：太祖接受帝位后，张文蔚等未改变官位。
English: After the great-grandfather accepted the throne, Zhang Wenwei and others did not change their official positions.

古文：《北梦琐言》云：晓貌如削玉，有制诰之才。
现代文：开平二年春天，突然死在任上，诏令追赠为右仆射。
English: He died suddenly in office in the spring of the second year of the Heian period, and was posthumously awarded the title of "Right Handed Shooter."

古文：及典秩尚书，志气甚远，一旦非分而殁，咸冤惜焉。
现代文：张文蔚深沉重厚，有大臣的风度，在家中孝顺父母爱护兄弟，虽位至高官，仍与二弟、三弟一起，在太夫人膝下，全与布衣平民相同。
English: Zhang Wenwei was profound and dignified, he had the demeanor of a minister, he was filial to his parents and loved his brothers at home. Although he was a high-ranking official, he was still with his second and third brothers, and under the knees of his wife, they were all the same as commoners in cloth.

古文：岂三世为相，道忌太盛欤！
现代文：弟弟张济美，早年患有心脏病，张文蔚照看护养近三十年，士人君子都称扬他。
English: His younger brother, Zhang Jimei, suffered from heart disease in his early years, and Zhang Wenwei took care of him for nearly thirty years. He was praised by all the scholars and gentlemen.

古文：敬翔，字子振，同州冯翊人。
现代文：敬翔，字子振，同州冯翊人。
English: Jing Xiang, Zizi Zhen, and Feng Xunren from the same province.

古文：唐神龙中平阳王晖之后也。
现代文：唐神龙年间平阳王敬晖的后代。
English: Descendants of Pingyang King Jingyu during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：曾祖琬，绥州刺史。
现代文：曾祖敬琬，是绥州刺史。
English: Zengzu Jingyao is the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：祖忻，同州掾。
现代文：祖父敬忻，为同州掾吏。
English: His grandfather, Jingyao, was a county magistrate.

古文：父衮，集州刺史。
现代文：父亲敬衮，任集州刺史。
English: His father, Jingyao, was appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：翔好读书，尤长刀笔，应用敏捷。
现代文：敬翔爱好读书，特别擅长于文章写作，应用敏捷自如。
English: Qixiang likes to read, and is particularly good at writing articles. He is quick and easy to use.

古文：乾符中，举进士不第。
现代文：乾符年间，考进士落第。
English: During the Kofu era, he failed the entrance examination.

古文：及黄巢陷长安，乃东出关。
现代文：到黄巢攻陷长安，才东出函谷关。
English: It was only after the fall of Chang'an in Huang Chao that Hanzhongguan emerged in the east.

古文：时太祖初镇大梁，有观察支使王发者，翔里人也，翔往依焉，发以故人遇之，然无由荐达。
现代文：这时太祖刚镇守大梁，有位叫王发的观察支使，是敬翔的同乡，敬翔前往依附于他，王发以故人的礼遇接待，但无从推荐使之显达。
English: At this time, Grandfather Gang was guarding the girders, and there was an observer named Wang Fa, who was a compatriot of Qixiang. Qixiang went to attach himself to him, and Wang Fa received him with the courtesy of the deceased, but he could not recommend him.

古文：翔久之计窘，乃与人为笺刺，往往有警句，传于军中。
现代文：敬翔久后无计可施，于是替人家写写书信名牒度日，常有名言警句出现，在军中传诵。
English: After a long time, there was nothing he could do, so he spent his days writing letters for others. Famous sayings and aphorisms often appeared and were recited in the army.

古文：太祖比不知书，章檄喜浅近语，闻翔所作，爱之，谓发曰： 知公乡人有才，可与俱来。 
现代文：太祖没读过书，文章喜欢用浅显明白的话，听到敬翔写的文辞，喜爱它，对王发说： 听说你的老乡很有才华，可带他一起来见我。 
English: The great-grandfather did not read the book, the article likes to use simple and clear words, heard the words written by Jingxiang, loved it, and said to Wang Fa: I heard that your fellow countryman is very talented, you can bring him to see me.

古文：及见，应对称旨，即补右职，每令从军。
现代文：到谒见太祖对，敬翔的应对很合太祖心意，于是补任右职，常让他随军。
English: When he came to see his great-grandfather, Jingxiang's response was very much in line with the great-grandfather's wishes, so he was appointed to the right post, often letting him follow the army.

古文：翔不喜武职，求补文吏，即署馆驿巡官，俾专掌檄奏。
现代文：敬翔不喜欢武职，请求补任文官，于是暂任馆驿巡官，让他专管檄文奏章。
English: Qixiang disliked military service and requested to be appointed as a civil servant, so he was temporarily appointed as a museum seal inspector, and he was put in charge of the seal of the Song Dynasty.

古文：太祖与蔡贼相拒累岁，城门之外，战声相闻，机略之间，翔颇预之。
现代文：太祖与蔡州贼人相拒连年，城门之外战声相闻，军机要略之事，敬翔经常参予其间。
English: The great-grandfather and the thief from Caizhou have been opposing each other for years. Outside the city gate, the sounds of battle are familiar. When it comes to military aircraft, Qixiang often participates.

古文：太祖大悦，恨得翔之晚，故军谋政术，一以谘之。
现代文：太祖非常高兴，遗憾得到敬翔太晚，所以军机政略，都向他咨询。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy, but regretted that he got respect too late, so he consulted him on military and political strategies.

古文：蔡贼平，奏授太子中允，赐绯。
现代文：蔡州贼寇平定后，太祖上奏朝廷任敬翔为太子中允，赐穿绯衣。
English: After the defeat of the Caizhou Thieves and Robbers, the great-great-grandfather appealed to the imperial court to appoint Qianxiang as the prince's middle son, and gave him the right to wear the imperial robe.

古文：从平兗、郓，改检校水部郎中。
现代文：跟随太祖平定兖州、郓州，改任检校水部郎中。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in pacifying Bozhou and Zhangzhou, and was appointed as the junior vice-minister of the Ministry of Water Resources.

古文：太祖兼镇淮南，授扬府左司马，赐金紫。
现代文：太祖兼镇淮南时，任敬翔为扬府左司马，赐给他金紫服色。
English: When he was the great-grandfather and the town of Huainan, Ren Jingxiang was the secretary of the Yangfu Left Division, and he was given a gold-and-purple dress.

古文：乾宁中，改光禄少卿充职。
现代文：乾宁年间，改任光禄少卿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianning, he was appointed as Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：天复中，授检校礼部尚书，遥领苏州刺史。
现代文：天复年间，任检校礼部尚书，遥任苏州刺史。
English: During the years of Tianfu, he was appointed as the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of the proctor of Suzhou.

古文：昭宗自岐下还长安，御延喜楼，召翔与李振登楼劳问，翔授检校右仆射、太府卿，赐号迎銮协赞功臣。
现代文：昭宗从岐下回到长安，御临延喜楼，召敬翔与李振登楼慰劳，授敬翔为检校右仆射、太府卿，赐与迎銮叶赞功臣的名号。
English: When Akimune returned to Chang'an from Kisaki, he came to Yanqi Tower, summoned Jingxiang and Li Zhen to the tower for consolation, conferred on Jingxiang the title of "school inspector, right-hand servant, and governor-general," and gave him the title of "welcoming and praising meritorious vassals."

古文：太祖受禅，自宣武军掌书记、前太府卿，授检校司空，依前太府卿勾当宣徽院事。
现代文：太祖接受禅让登上帝位，敬翔从宣武军掌书记、前太府卿，被授与检校司空。接着改枢密院为崇政院，以敬翔掌管院中事务。
English: The great-great-grandfather accepted the enthronement of Zen Zhen on the throne, and Keixiang was promoted from the secretary of the commander-in-chief of the Xuanwu army and the former prefectural governor to the inspector of the school. Then the Privy Council was changed to the Supreme People's Court, and Keixiang was put in charge of the affairs of the court.

古文：《五代会要》云：以 金銮 为名，非典也。
现代文：开平三年夏四月，太祖因州、岐下侵扰，派刘知俊西征州、延州，深忧事情不能成功，因而设宴顾问敬翔，以询问西征之事。
English: In the summer and April of the third year of the Heian period, Emperor Taizu sent Liu Zhijun to invade Western Zhengzhou and Yanzhou because of the invasion of Western Zhengzhou and Qishan. He was deeply worried that things would not succeed, so he set up a banquet for the adviser Qixiang to inquire about the Western Zhengzhou.

古文：大学士与三馆大学士同。翔自释褐东下，遭遇霸王，怀抱深沉，有经济之略，起中和岁，至鼎革大运，其间三十余年，扈从征伐，出入帷幄，庶务丛委，恆达旦不寝，惟在马上稍得晏息。
现代文：敬翔剖析山川城邑虚实，军粮多少，全部条分缕析上奏，就像平素熟悉的一样，旁人无不惊异，太祖赞叹良久。乾化元年，进封光禄大夫爵位，代理兵部尚书、金銮殿大学士，掌管崇政院事务，被封平阳郡侯。敬翔自从进入仕途东下以后，遭逢霸王之主，胸怀志向深远，有经国济世之略，从中和年间开始，到太祖接受帝位，其间三十多年，随从征伐，出入帷幄之中，众务集于一身，常通宵达旦不眠，只在马上稍得休息。
English: In the first year of the Qianhua era, he was awarded the title of Countess of Guanglu, acting as the Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Academician of the University of Jinqiao, in charge of the affairs of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and was awarded the title of the Marquis of Pingyang County. Since he began his career in the east and west, he has been the master of the overlord. His heart is far-reaching, and he has a strategy to benefit the country and the world. It began in the Middle Ages and lasted until his father accepted the throne. During the more than thirty years, he followed the conquest, went in and out of

古文：每有所裨赞，亦未尝显谏，上俯仰顾步间微示持疑尔，而太祖意已察，必改行之，故裨佐之迹，人莫得知。
现代文：每有补益之言，也不曾公开进谏，皇上在举止行为间对某事稍有怀疑，敬翔就察知其意，必改而行之，所以辅佐皇上的方法，别人都不得而知。
English: Whenever there is a word of complement, there is no public comment, the emperor has a slight doubt about something in his behavior, and respect is aware of his intention and must change it, so the method of assisting the emperor is unknown to others.

古文：及太祖大渐，召至御床前受顾托之命，且深以并寇为恨，翔鸣咽不忍，受命而退。
现代文：到太祖病情加重，召敬翔到御床前接受托顾之命，并且深以并州贼寇未平为憾，敬翔呜咽不忍，受命而退。
English: When the illness of the great-grandfather worsened, he called Jing Xiang to receive the order of care before the imperial bed, and deeply regretted that he was not able to defeat the bandit, he could not bear the sobbing and was ordered to retreat.

古文：庶人友珪之篡位也，以天下之望，命翔为宰相。
现代文：庶人朱友王圭篡夺帝位时，因为敬翔声望满天下，命他为宰相。
English: When the commoner Zhu Yu Wang Gui usurped the imperial throne, he appointed him as prime minister because of his worldwide reputation.

古文：友珪以翔先朝旧臣，有所畏忌，翔亦多称病，不综政事。
现代文：朱友王圭因为敬翔是先朝旧臣，有所畏忌，敬翔也总是推托有病，不理政事。
English: Zhu You Wang Gui was afraid of Qixiang because he was a former minister of the previous dynasty. Qixiang always denied that he was ill and did not deal with political affairs.

古文：末帝即位，赵、张之族皆处权要，翔愈不得志。
现代文：末帝即位后，赵、张一类人都处于权位要职，敬翔更不得志。
English: After the last emperor ascended to the throne, people like Zhao and Zhang were in important positions of power, and Qixiang was even less ambitious.

古文：及刘鄩失河朔，安彦之丧杨刘，翔奏曰： 国家连年遣将出征，封疆日削，不独兵骄将怯，亦制置未得其术。陛下处深宫之中，与之计事者皆左右近习，岂能量敌之胜负哉！
现代文：到刘寻阝丢失河朔，安彦之丧失杨刘，敬翔上奏说 ：国家连年派兵出征，而国土一天天减削，不仅仅是因为兵骄将怯，朝廷的筹划安排也有不当，陛下处于深宫之中，与陛下筹划大事的都是身旁近臣，哪里能预料决战外敌的胜败呢？
English: To Liu Xingyao's loss of Heshaku, Yasuhiko's loss of Yang Liu, and Jingxiang's ascension to the throne, he said: The country has been sending troops to the front year after year, and the country is shrinking day by day, not only because of the soldiers' arrogance and cowardice, but also because of the improper planning arrangements of the imperial court. His Majesty is in the depths of the palace, and the people who are planning major events with His Majesty are the close vassals around him. How can we predict the victory or defeat of a foreign enemy in a decisive battle?

古文：先皇时，河朔半在，亲御虎臣骁将，犹不得志于敌人。今寇马已至郓州，陛下不留圣念，臣所未喻一也。
现代文：先皇在世时，河朔一半在手中，先皇亲领猛虎般的臣子和骁勇的战将出征，尚且不能对敌人随意而为，现在敌人兵马已到郓州，陛下不留意于此，这是我不能理解的第一点。
English: When the former emperor was alive, half of Hebei Province was in his hands. The former emperor led his tiger-like courtiers and brave generals to war, yet he could not do whatever he wanted to the enemy. Now the enemy soldiers and horses have arrived in Zhangzhou. Your majesty does not pay attention to this. This is the first point that I cannot understand.

古文：臣闻李亚子自墨缞统众，于今十年，每攻城临阵，无不亲当矢石，昨闻攻杨刘，率先负薪渡水，一鼓登城。
现代文：我听说李亚子从居丧而统兵征战，到现在已有十年，每次攻城对阵，无不亲自冒着弓矢炮石，前日听说进攻杨刘时，李亚子率先背负柴草渡河，一鼓登上城墙。
English: I heard that Li Yazi has been leading the army since his death. It has been ten years now. Every time the city is attacked, he personally braves the bows and arrows. The day before, I heard that when Yang Liu was attacked, Li Yazi took the lead in carrying firewood and grass across the river and climbed the city wall.

古文：陛下儒雅守文，未尝如此，俾贺瑰辈与之较力，而望攘逐寇戎，臣所未喻二也。
现代文：陛下温文儒雅，未曾像这样，派贺瑰之类与敌人相抗争，而指望驱除敌寇，这是我不能理解的第二点。
English: The second thing I don't understand is that His Majesty, who is mild-mannered and gentle, has never before sent the likes of Hoxha to fight the enemy and hope to drive away the enemy raiders.

古文：陛下所宜询于黎老，别运沉谋，不然，则忧未艾也。
现代文：陛下应当向耆老旧臣征询计策，另外筹划长远的计策，否则忧患就没有停止的时日。
English: His Majesty should consult with his long-serving ministers and make long-term plans, otherwise there will be no end to his troubles.

古文：臣虽驽怯，受国恩深，陛下必若乏材，乞于边陲效试。 
现代文：我虽然鲁钝懦怯，然而深受国恩，陛下如果确实缺乏人材，请让我到边疆试用效力。 
English: Although I am dull and cowardly, I am deeply favored by the state. Your Majesty, if there is indeed a shortage of human resources, please let me go to the frontier to test my effectiveness.

古文：末帝虽知其恳恻，竟以赵、张辈言翔怨望，不之听。
现代文：末帝虽然心知敬翔内心诚恳隐恻，但终因赵、张之谄言，说敬翔心怀怨恨，而不听他的。
English: Although the last emperor knew in his heart that Qian Xiang was sincere, he did not listen to him because Zhao and Zhang slandered him, saying that Qian Xiang harbored resentment.

古文：及王彦章败于中都，晋人长驱而南，末帝急召翔，谓之曰： 朕居常忽卿所奏，果至今日。
现代文：到王彦章在中都战败，晋军长驱南来时，末帝紧急召见敬翔，对他说 ：朕平常忽略了您的上奏，果有今日之患。
English: When Wang Yanzhang was defeated in Zhongdu and the Jin army was driven south, the late emperor urgently summoned Qixiang and said to him, "I usually ignore your overture, but today is the day.

古文：事急矣，勿以为怼，且使朕安归？ 
现代文：事情紧急了，请不要记恨，您将让我怎么办？ 
English: It's an emergency. Please don't hold a grudge. What are you going to make me do?

古文：翔泣奏曰： 臣受国恩，仅将三纪，从微至著，皆先朝所遇，虽名宰相，实硃氏老奴耳。
现代文：敬翔哭着奏言说 ：臣受国家恩惠，将近三十年，从低微到显赫，都是先朝的恩遇，虽名为宰相，实际上是朱家的老奴而已。
English: Keixiang wept as he delivered his speech, saying, "For nearly thirty years, from the lowly to the eminent, I have been favored by the state. Although I am called the prime minister, I am actually just an old slave of the Zhu family.

古文：事陛下如郎君，以臣愚诚，敢有所隐！
现代文：服事陛下就如郎君，凭臣的良心，哪敢有所隐瞒！
English: To serve His Majesty is to be like a vassal. With the conscience of a vassal, how dare you hide anything!

古文：陛下初任段凝为将，臣已极言，小人朋附，致有今日。
现代文：陛下当初任用段凝为将领，臣已极力进言劝谏，而小人结帮袒护，以致有今天。
English: His Majesty originally appointed Duan Jeng as a general, and the vassal has been trying his best to persuade him, while the villain has been helping and protecting him, so that there is today.

古文：晋军即至，段凝限水。欲请陛下出居避敌，陛下必不听从；欲请陛下出奇应敌，陛下必不果决。
现代文：晋军即将来临，如果请陛下出奔狄地避祸，陛下必不听从；如果请陛下出奇计对付敌人，陛下必定没有果断决策。
English: The Jin army is approaching. If you ask Your Majesty to go out to dodge the disaster, Your Majesty will not listen; if you ask Your Majesty to take drastic measures against the enemy, Your Majesty will not make a decisive decision.

古文：纵良、平复生，难以转祸为福，请先死，不忍见宗庙陨坠。 
现代文：纵使张良、陈平再生，也难以转祸为福，请让我先死，我不忍心眼见国家宗庙陨坠。 
English: Even if Zhang Liang and Chen Ping are reborn, it is difficult to turn misfortune into blessing. Please let me die first. I can't bear to see the national ancestral temple collapse.

古文：言讫，君臣相向恸哭。
现代文：说罢，君臣相向痛哭。
English: Let it be said, lords and ministers weep bitterly at each other.

古文：及晋主陷都城，有诏赦梁氏臣僚，李振谓翔曰： 有制洗涤，将朝新君。 
现代文：到晋王攻陷都城，下诏令赦免梁朝大臣，李振对敬翔说： 诏令赦免我们，准备朝见新君吧。 
English: When King Jin conquered the capital city and issued a decree to pardon the Liang Dynasty minister, Li Zhen said to Qixiang: The decree pardons us, prepare to meet the new king in the morning.

古文：翔曰： 新君若问，其将何辞以对！ 
现代文：敬翔说 ：新君如果问起我们，将用什么话回答？ 
English: Qian Xiang said: If the new prince asks about us, what will he answer with?

古文：是夜，翔在高头里第，宿于车坊。
现代文：这夜，敬翔在高头里住宅，宿于车坊之中。
English: That night, Keixiang stayed at the Gaotouli residence, in the middle of the carriage house.

古文：欲曙，左右报曰： 崇政李太保已入朝。 
现代文：天将亮，身边人报告说 ：崇政李太保已入朝拜见新君了。 
English: As dawn broke, people around him reported: "Suzheng Li Taibao has entered the imperial court to meet the new emperor."

古文：翔返室叹曰： 李振谬为丈夫耳！
现代文：敬翔回室中叹息说 ：李振枉自为一男子汉啊！
English: Back in the room, Jingxiang sighed and said, "Li Zhenwu considers himself a man!"

古文：硃氏与晋仇雠，我等始同谋画，致君无状，今少主伏剑于国门，纵新朝赦罪，何面目入建国门也！ 
现代文：朱家与晋人是仇敌，我等当初为朱家出谋划策，而使君王失去威仪名声，现在少主在建国门伏剑而死，即使新朝赦免我们的罪过，我又有何面日再进建国门啊。 
English: The Zhu family and the Jin family are enemies. At the beginning, we made a plan for the Zhu family, which caused the king to lose his prestige and reputation. Now, the young master died at the gate of the founding of the country. Even if the new dynasty forgives our sins, how many more days will I have to enter the gate of the founding of the country.

古文：乃自经而卒。
现代文：于是上吊自杀而死。
English: He then hanged himself and died.

古文：数日，并其族被诛。
现代文：几天后，他的家人全被诛杀。
English: A few days later, his entire family was killed.

