古文：诸去大军为前御之备者，边县列候，相去三、五里。
现代文：在主力前方担任警戒的，是边境上的地方部队，他们在彼此相距三至五里的地方，一听到主力出动，就立即做好戒备措施。
English: In front of the main force, it is the local troops on the border who are on alert. They are three to five miles away from each other, and as soon as they hear the main force, they immediately take precautionary measures.

古文：闻大军为前御之备，战则皆禁行，所以安内也。
现代文：战时，边境一律要禁止通行，这是为了保障国家安全的缘故。
English: In wartime, all border crossings must be closed to traffic in order to ensure national security.

古文：内卒出戍，令将吏授旗鼓戈甲。
现代文：内地士兵去守卫边疆时，应使将吏发给旗鼓戈甲。
English: When soldiers from the inland go to guard the frontier, they should send officers to Qigong Goga.

古文：发日，后将吏及出县封界者，以坐后戍法。
现代文：到了出发的日罪，如有士兵在将吏之后离开县界的，应以后期出境论罪。
English: On the day of departure, if there are soldiers who leave the county border after the officers, they should leave the country at a later date to discuss the crime.

古文：兵戍边一岁，遂亡不候代者，法比亡军。父母妻子知之，与同罪；弗知，赦之。
现代文：士兵守卫边疆一年，而不等到接替的人到来就擅自离开的，应同逃兵一样治罪，父母妻子知道情况的，与犯人同罪，不知道情况的，免罪。
English: If a soldier has been guarding the frontier for one year and leaves without waiting for a replacement to arrive, he shall be punished in the same way as a deserter. If his parents or wife knew about the situation, they are guilty of the same crime as the prisoner. If they did not know about the situation, they are not guilty.

古文：卒后将吏而至大将所一日，父母妻子尽同罪。
现代文：士兵在将吏之后一日至大将处所报到的，父母妻子都与他同罪。
English: The soldier reported to the general's office one day after the officer, and both his parents and wife were found guilty of the same crime.

古文：卒逃归至家一日，父母妻子弗捕执及不言，亦同罪。
现代文：士兵逃亡到家已过一日，父母妻子既不拘捕又不报告的，也与他同罪。
English: It has been a day since the soldier fled to his home, and his parents and wife, who neither arrested him nor reported him, are also guilty.

古文：诸战而亡其将吏者，及将吏弃卒独北者，尽斩之。
现代文：凡是在战斗中，士兵擅自脱离将吏的，以及将吏抛弃所属部队自逃跑的，都应处死。
English: Any soldier who, without authorization, separates from his officers during battle, or who abandons his officers and flees from his unit, shall be put to death.

古文：前吏弃其卒而北，后吏能斩之而夺其卒者，赏。
现代文：前方的将吏抛弃他所属部队逃跑的，后方的将吏能杀掉他，并把他的部队收容在一起的有赏。
English: If the general in front abandons his troops and runs away, the general in the rear can kill him and keep his troops together as a reward.

古文：军无功者，戍三岁。
现代文：在战斗中没有立功的，罚戊守边疆三年。
English: Those who have not distinguished themselves in battle will be punished with three years of guarding the border.

古文：三军大战，若大将死，而从吏五百人以上不能死敌者斩，大将左右近卒在陈中者皆斩，余士卒有军功者夺一级，无军功者戍三岁。
现代文：三军大战，如果大将战死，其部下凡是带领五百人以上的将吏，没有与敌死战的都处死，大将左右的亲兵凡当时在阵中的，都一律死，其余士兵有军功的降一级，没有军功的罚戍边三年。
English: In the Great War of the Three Armies, if a general died in battle, his subordinates who led more than five hundred officers and did not fight to the death with the enemy were all executed, the general's relatives and soldiers who were in the battle at that time were all killed, and the remaining soldiers had their military merit reduced by one level, and those who did not have military merit were punished for three years.

古文：战亡伍人，及伍人战死不得其尸，同伍尽夺其功，得其尸，罪皆赦。
现代文：战斗时伍内有逃亡的人，以及伍内有人战死而不能夺回他的尸体的，同伍的人都要剥夺军功，能够收回死者尸体的，都赦免其罪。
English: If there is a fugitive in the ranks at the time of battle, or if there is a member of the ranks who dies in battle and his body cannot be recovered, the members of the same ranks shall be deprived of military merit, and if they are able to recover the dead body, their sins shall be pardoned.

古文：军之利害，在国之名实。
现代文：军队的利害得失，在于国家的编制名额与实际人数是否相符。
English: The military's gains and losses lie in whether the country's establishment quota is consistent with the actual number.

古文：今名在官，而实在家，官不得其实，家不得其名。
现代文：现在不少士兵的名字列在军队，而本人却在家中，军队没有实际的兵员，家中没有本人的名字。
English: Now many soldiers' names are listed in the army, but I am at home. The army does not have actual soldiers, and I do not have my own name at home.

古文：聚卒为军，有空名而无实，外不足以御敌，内不足以守国，此军之所以不给，将之所以夺威也。
现代文：国家调集士兵编成军队时，只有空的名额而无实际的兵员，对外不足以抵抗敌人，对内不足以守卫国家，这就是军队之所以战力不强，将帅之所以丧失威望的缘故。
English: When a country mobilizes soldiers to form an army, there is only an empty quota and no actual soldiers. It is not enough to resist the enemy externally, and it is not enough to defend the country internally. This is the reason why the army is not strong and why the generals have lost their prestige.

古文：臣以谓卒逃归者，同舍伍人及吏罚入粮为饶，名为军实，是有一军之名，而有二实之出。国内空虚，自竭民岁，曷以免奔北之祸乎？
现代文：我认为现在士兵逃亡回家的，就对原籍同伍的五家人和主管官吏，罚以粮食，充实仓库，作为军需物资，这样一来，名义上是一支军队，而民众却有两倍的负担，弄得国内空虚，民不聊生，怎能避免失败的灾难呢?
English: I think that now, when a soldier flees to return home, the five members of his family and the officials in charge, who are originally from the same army, should be punished with grain and the warehouse should be filled with it as military supplies. In this way, it is nominally an army, but the people have twice the burden, making the country empty and the people bored with life. How can we avoid the disaster of failure?

古文：今以法止逃归、禁亡军，是兵之一胜也。
现代文：现在以法令禁止士兵逃亡，能禁止士兵逃亡，这是战争取得胜利的第一个因素。
English: Now that soldiers are prohibited by law from fleeing, the ability to prohibit soldiers from fleeing is the first factor in the victory of the war.

古文：什伍相联，及战斗，则卒吏相救，是兵之二胜也。
现代文：平时什伍之内能互相联保，战时官兵就能互相救援，这是战争取得胜利的第二个因素。
English: In peacetime, soldiers and officers can protect each other, and in wartime, soldiers and officers can rescue each other. This is the second factor for victory in war.

古文：将能立威，卒能节制，号令明信，攻守皆得，是兵之三胜也。
现代文：将帅能够树立威信，士兵能够听从指挥，号令明确坚定，攻守运用得当，是战争取得胜利的第三个因素。
English: The general can establish prestige, the soldiers can obey the command, the command is clear and firm, and the attack and defense are used properly, which is the third factor for the victory of the war.

古文：臣闻古之善用兵者，能杀士卒之半，其次杀其十三，其下杀其十一。
现代文：我听说古代善于用兵的人，能使半数士卒甘愿战死，其次能使十分之三的士卒甘愿战死，其下能使十分之一的士卒甘愿战死。
English: I heard that in ancient times, those who were good at using soldiers could make half of the soldiers willing to die in battle, followed by three-tenths of the soldiers willing to die in battle, and then one-tenth of the soldiers willing to die in battle.

古文：能杀其半者，威加海内；杀其十三者，力加诸侯；杀其十一者，令行士卒。
现代文：能使半数士卒甘愿战死的，威势可以驾凌天下。能使十分之三的士卒甘愿战死的，武力可以驾凌诸侯。能使十分之一的士卒甘愿战死的，号令可使士卒贯彻执行。
English: If you can make half of your soldiers willing to die in battle, you can dominate the world. If you can make three-tenths of your soldiers willing to die in battle, you can dominate the provinces by force. If you can make one-tenth of your soldiers willing to die in battle, you can make your soldiers carry out your orders.

古文：故曰：百万之众不用命，不如万人之斗也；万人之斗，不如百人之奋也。
现代文：所以说，百万之众如不贯彻执行命令，还抵不上一万人齐心协力去战斗。用万人进行战斗，如果不贯彻执行命令，还抵不上百人齐心战斗。
English: Therefore, if a million people do not carry out the order, it is still not enough for ten thousand people to fight together. If ten thousand people fight, if they do not carry out the order, it is still not enough for a hundred people to fight together.

古文：赏如日月，信如四时，令如斧钺，如干将，士卒不用命者，未之有也。
现代文：因此，奖赏要象日月当空那样光明，守信要象四时交替那样准确，号令要象斧钺那样威严，决断要象干将那样锐利。这样，士兵不服从命令的，就不会有了。
English: Therefore, the reward should be as bright as the sun and the moon in the sky, the loyalty should be as accurate as the four-hour alternation, the command should be as majestic as the axe, and the decision should be as sharp as the general. In this way, there will be no soldiers who disobey orders.

