古文：昔王充著述，制《养气》之篇，验己而作，岂虚造哉！
现代文：从前王充进行著作，曾写《养性》一书，该书对养气进行论述的篇章，全是他自己体验后写出的，难道是凭空制造的吗？
English: Wang Chongwu used to write books, he once wrote a book "Nourishing," the chapter of the book discussing the cultivation of qi was all written by him after his own experience, is it made out of thin air?

古文：夫耳目鼻口，生之役也；心虑言辞，神之用也。
现代文：人的耳、目、口、鼻，是为生命服务的；心思、言辞，则是精神的运用。
English: Human ears, eyes, mouth, and nose are for the service of life; thoughts and words are for the use of the spirit.

古文：率志委和，则理融而情畅；钻砺过分，则神疲而气衰：此性情之数也。
现代文：顺着情感的发展而自然和谐，就能思理融和而情绪顺畅；如果钻研过度，就精神疲乏而元气衰损：这就是性情的一般原理。
English: If there is a natural harmony with the development of the emotions, the mind will be harmonious and the emotions will be smooth; if there is too much study, the spirit will be tired and the vitality will decay: this is the general principle of temperament.

古文：夫三皇辞质，心绝于道华；帝世始文，言贵于敷奏。
现代文： 三皇 时代文章语言朴质，思想和华靡的特性毫无关系。 五帝 时代文章开始具有文采，敷陈进奏时很重视语言用词。
English: The three emperors' era articles are simple in language, and their thoughts have nothing to do with the glamorous characteristics.The five emperors' era articles begin to have literary style, and attach great importance to language words when writing.

古文：三代春秋，虽沿世弥缛，并适分胸臆，非牵课才外也。
现代文：从夏商周三代到春秋时代，虽然各代越来越重视文采辞意，但话语还都是从心中发出，且分量恰当，不会勉强牵扯到才力之外。
English: From the third generation of summer merchants to the Spring and Autumn period, although each generation has paid more and more attention to the literary style, the words are still issued from the heart, and the weight is appropriate, and will not be involuntarily involved beyond talent.

古文：战代技诈，攻奇饰说，汉世迄今，辞务日新，争光鬻采，虑亦竭矣。
现代文：战国时代思想产生分歧和好诡诈的特征，出现专门研究奇谲道理和粉饰游说的言辞文章。从汉代到今天，人们对用来修饰的文辞每天都力求新奇，相互之间竞逐光华，炫耀才华，心思也用空了。
English: From the Han Dynasty to the present day, people have been striving for novelty in the rhetoric used to embellish, competing with each other for brilliance, showing off their talents, and their minds are empty.

古文：故淳言以比浇辞，文质悬乎千载；率志以方竭情，劳逸差于万里。
现代文：所以用质朴的言辞来比较华丽浮夸的文辞，文采和质朴相差千里；用顺从心志愉快创作和竭尽精力苦思冥想做比较，劳累和安逸相差万里。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to use simple words to compare the gorgeous and pompous words, and there is a great difference between the poetry and the simplicity; it is necessary to use the obedience of the mind to create happily and the effort to meditate, and there is a great difference between the fatigue and the ease.

古文：古人所以馀裕，后进所以莫遑也。
现代文：这是古人之所以从容，后代之所以忙碌的原因。
English: This is the reason why the ancients took their time and why the descendants are so busy.

古文：凡童少鉴浅而志盛，长艾识坚而气衰，志盛者思锐以胜劳，气衰者虑密以伤神，斯实中人之常资，岁时之大较也。
现代文：青少年常是阅历较浅而志气旺盛，老年人则认识力强而体质虚弱；志气旺盛的人，思考敏锐而经得起劳累，体质虚弱的人，思考周密却损伤精神：这是一般人的资质，因为年龄大小不同而出现的概况。
English: Adolescents are often relatively inexperienced and ambitious, while the elderly are cognitively strong but physically weak; people with strong morale, think keenly and can withstand fatigue, people with weak constitution, think carefully but damage the spirit: this is the qualification of the average person, the general situation due to different ages.

古文：若夫器分有限，智用无涯；或惭凫企鹤，沥辞镌思。于是精气内销，有似尾闾之波；神志外伤，同乎牛山之木。
现代文：至于人的才能，都有一定的限度，而智力的运用却是无穷的；有人对自己如鸭般的短足胫感到惭愧，羡慕鹤的长足胫，练辞运意，呕心沥血，于是消耗精气，像水流到无底洞；神思损伤于外，像牛山上的草木被砍得精光。
English: As for human talents, they all have a certain limit, but the use of intelligence is infinite; some people feel ashamed of their short-legged duck-like beak, envy the long-legged beak of the crane, practice rhetoric, and are disgusted with blood, so they consume energy, like water flowing to a bottomless pit; the mind is damaged externally, like the grass on the cow mountain is cut to the bone.

古文：怛惕之盛疾，亦可推矣。
现代文：过分的惊惧紧张必将造成疾病，也就可想而知了。
English: It goes without saying that excessive fear and tension are bound to cause illness.

古文：至如仲任置砚以综述，叔通怀笔以专业，既暄之以岁序，又煎之以日时，是以曹公惧为文之伤命，陆云叹用思之困神，非虚谈也。
现代文：至于王充在门窗墙柱上放满笔墨以进行著作，曹褒在走路睡觉时都抱着纸笔而专心于礼仪，既累月不断地苦思，又整天不停地煎熬：所以曹操曾担心过分操劳会伤害性命，陆云曾感叹过分用心使精神困乏，都不是没有根据的空话。
English: As for Wang Chong, he put pen and ink on the door and window wall posts to write, while Cao Bo held a pen and paper while walking to sleep and concentrated on etiquette. He thought about it for months on end and suffered all day long. Therefore, Cao Cao once worried that excessive labor would harm his life, and Lu Yun once lamented that excessive efforts would make his spirit tired. These are not unfounded empty words.

古文：夫学业在勤，故有锥股自厉；志于文也，则有申写郁滞。故宜从容率情，优柔适会。
现代文：学习在于勤奋，所以有人用锥子刺股来激励自己；至于做文章则不一样，那要排除心头的郁闷，适宜保持从容不迫的顺畅感情，宽舒泰然地去适应时会。
English: Learning lies in diligence, so some people use a cone to stimulate themselves; as for writing articles, it is different, it is necessary to eliminate the depression of the heart, it is appropriate to maintain a smooth and unhurried feeling, and it is easy to adapt.

古文：若销铄精胆，蹙迫和气，秉牍以驱龄，洒翰以伐性，岂圣贤之素心，会文之直理哉！
现代文：倘使损耗精力，伤害和顺的体气，拿着纸张去催促性命，挥洒着笔墨去损害本性，难道这是圣贤之人平常的本心，是写文章的正确道理吗？
English: If wasting energy, harming a healthy body, holding a paper to hasten life, and splashing pen and ink to damage nature, is this the ordinary true heart of a sage, and is it the correct way to write an article?

古文：且夫思有利钝，时有通塞，沐则心覆，且或反常；神之方昏，再三愈黩。
现代文：况且文思有时锐敏有时迟钝，写作时机有时流畅有时阻塞，这就像洗头的时候前倾弯着身子，心的位置会发生翻覆，因此甚至会违反常情去考虑问题一样，在神志不清晰的时候，如果再三用它做文章，文章和神志只会更加的昏乱。
English: Moreover, the writing is sometimes sharp and sometimes dull, the writing time is sometimes smooth and sometimes blocked. This is like leaning forward while washing your hair, the position of the heart will be overturned, so it will even violate the common sense to consider the problem. When the mind is not clear, if you repeatedly use it to write an article, the article and the mind will only be more confused.

古文：是以吐纳文艺，务在节宣，清和其心，调畅其气，烦而即舍，勿使壅滞，意得则舒怀以命笔，理伏则投笔以卷怀，逍遥以针劳，谈笑以药倦，常弄闲于才锋，贾馀于文勇，使刃发如新，腠理无滞，虽非胎息之万术，斯亦卫气之一方也。
现代文：所以抒写文辞，务必要在调节疏导心情方面下功夫，以使内心清明舒畅，性气调和通达，如果心情烦躁的话就立即放开，不要使思路拥堵阻滞，心情舒畅时便恣意投入写作，文思潜伏时，就放下笔不再思索，用逍遥自在的方法来解除身心劳累，用谈笑风生的方法来赶走心神疲倦。经常用闲暇时间来培养才华锋芒，在写作上保持多余的精力，使自己的笔锋像新磨的刀刃一般，宰牛时对分解肌肉的纹理没有一丝迟钝，这虽然不是气功的技法，也是养气的一个方式。总结：
English: Therefore, when writing, it is necessary to make efforts in regulating and guiding the mood, so as to make the heart clear and comfortable, the temperament and accessibility, if the mood is irritable, then immediately let go, do not make the train of thought congested, when the mood is comfortable, then arbitrarily put into writing, when the thought lurks, put down the pen and stop thinking, use the leisurely method to relieve physical and mental fatigue, and use the style of laughter to drive away mental fatigue. Often use leisure time to cultivate talent sharpness, maintain excess energy in writing, make your pen edge like a newly sharpened blade, and when slaughtering cattle, there is no trace of

古文：赞曰∶纷哉万象，劳矣千想。
现代文：天地间万事万物是纷纭复杂的，千百度思考这些现象十分劳神。
English: Everything in heaven and earth is complex and complicated, and it is very difficult to think about these phenomena in a thousand ways.

古文：玄神宜宝，素气资养。
现代文：人的精神应该珍惜，恒常的精气有待保养。
English: The human spirit should be cherished, the constant spirit needs to be maintained.

古文：水停以鉴，火静而朗。
现代文：停止奔流的水才更为清明，静止不动的火就显得明亮。
English: Water that has stopped flowing is clearer, and a fire that has not moved is brighter.

古文：无扰文虑，郁此精爽。
现代文：要不扰乱创作的思虑，就应保持精神爽朗。
English: If you don't want to disturb your creative thoughts, you should keep your spirits up.

