古文：齐宗室诸王上
现代文：高睿，小名叫须拔，从小失去了父亲。
English: Gao Rui, whose nickname is Subat, lost his father at a young age.

古文：睿小名须拔，幼孤，聪慧夙成，特为神武所爱，养于山公主也。令游娘母之，恩异诸子。
现代文：天生的聪明敏慧，很为神武帝高欢喜爱，将他养在宫中，命游娘做他的母亲，对他的恩遇不同于其他子侄。
English: He was naturally clever and keen, and was very much loved by Emperor Gao Huan. He was raised in the palace, and his daughter was his mother. His treatment was different from other nephews and nieces.

古文：魏兴和中，袭爵南赵郡公。
现代文：东魏兴和年间，继承他父亲赵郡王高琛的爵位为南赵郡公。
English: During the Eastern Wei Xinghe period, he inherited the title of Nan Zhao Guo from his father, Zhao Guo Wang Gaoqi.

古文：年至四岁，未尝识母。
现代文：长到四岁，他还没有见过自己的生母。
English: When he was four years old, he still hadn't met his birth mother.

古文：其母魏华阳山主也。其从母姊郑氏戏谓曰： 汝是我姨兒，何倒亲游氏？ 
现代文：他的母亲是东魏的华阳公主，他从母的姐姐郑氏开玩笑对他说： 你是我的姨外甥，为什么倒去亲近游氏？ 
English: His mother was Princess Huayang of the Eastern Wei Dynasty. He jokingly said to his mother's sister Zheng: You are my niece and nephew, why did you get close to Yu?

古文：睿因访问，遂失精神。
现代文：他因而到处访问，以至失去了正常的情绪。
English: As a result, he visited everywhere and lost his normal mood.

古文：神武疑其感疾，睿曰： 兒无患苦，但闻有所生，欲得暂见。 
现代文：神武帝怀疑他得了病，他说： 我没有病，只是听说我有生身母亲，想见上一面。 
English: Emperor Shenwu suspected that he was ill. He said, "I am not ill. I just heard that I have a biological mother, and I want to see her."

古文：神武惊，命元夫人至，就宫见之。
现代文：神武帝很是惊奇，命他的生母来宫中见面。
English: Emperor Shenwu was very surprised and ordered his birth mother to come to the palace to meet him.

古文：睿前跪拜，因抱颈大哭。
现代文：他先向前跪拜母亲，继而抱着母亲的脖子大声痛哭。
English: He first knelt forward to worship his mother, then hugged his mother's neck and cried loudly.

古文：神武甚悲伤，谓平秦王曰： 此兒至孝，吾子无及者。 
现代文：神武帝十分悲伤，对平素王说： 这孩子特别孝顺，我的孩子中没有能赶上他的。 
English: Emperor Shenwu was very sad and said to King Ping Su, "This child is especially filial, none of my children can catch up with him."

古文：遂为休务一日。
现代文：便为他停止了一天的公务。
English: He was suspended from his duties for a day.

古文：睿读《孝经》，至 资于事父 ，辄流涕嘘欷。
现代文：他读《孝经》读到 资于事父 一句，常流泪感叹。
English: When he read the "Filial Piety Sutra," he often shed tears and sighed when he read the sentence, "I owe everything to my father."

古文：十岁丧母，神武亲送至领军府。
现代文：十岁时他的母亲去世，神武帝亲自送他到领军府，让他为母亲举哀。
English: When he was ten years old, his mother died, and Emperor Shenwu personally sent him to the army headquarters to mourn for his mother.

古文：为发哀，举声殒绝，三日水浆不入口。
现代文：他痛哭失声，以至昏厥，三天没有吃一口水和饭。
English: He cried so hard that he lost his voice and fainted. He didn't have a sip of water or a meal for three days.

古文：神武与武明太后殷勤敦譬，方渐顺旨。
现代文：神武帝与武明太后反复劝慰，他才渐渐听从。
English: Emperor Jinwu and Empress Dowager Wu Ming repeatedly consoled him, and he gradually obeyed.

古文：居丧长斋，骨立，杖而后起。
现代文：居丧时长时间斋戒自身，哀毁骨立，拄着木杖才能站起。
English: At the time of his death, he fasted for a long time, grieved his bones, and could only stand up with a cane.

古文：神武令常山王与同卧起，日夜喻之，并敕左右，不许进水。
现代文：神武帝命常山王与他一同起居，日夜劝告。神武帝还命左右侍奉他的人也不许进水。
English: Emperor Jimmu ordered King Jozan to live with him and advise him day and night. Emperor Jimmu also ordered those who served him not to go into the water.

古文：虽绝清漱，午辄不肯食，由是神武食必呼与同案。
现代文：他虽然连清水漱口都不用，到中午仍不肯吃饭。因此，神武帝每到吃饭一定喊他与自己同案而食。
English: Although he did not even need to rinse his mouth with clean water, he still refused to eat until noon. Therefore, whenever Emperor Shenwu came to eat, he would call him to eat with him.

古文：神武崩，哭泣呕血。
现代文：神武帝去世，他痛哭得吐出血来。
English: When Emperor Jimmu died, he cried so hard that he vomited blood.

古文：及壮，将婚，貌有戚容。
现代文：长大后将要结婚，脸上却出现了悲愁的颜色。
English: He is going to get married when he grows up, but the color of sadness has appeared on his face.

古文：文襄谓曰： 我为尔娶郑述祖女，何嫌而不乐？ 
现代文：文襄帝高澄问他 ：我为你娶了郑述祖的女儿，你为什么不高兴？ 
English: Emperor Gaocheng asked him, "I married Zheng Shuzhu's daughter for you, why aren't you happy?"

古文：对曰： 自痛孤遗，方从婚冠，弥用感切。 
现代文：他答道： 我自己痛心从小失去父母，只剩孤身一人，现在将要结婚，有许多感慨。 
English: He replied, "I myself have been heartbroken since I lost my parents when I was a child. I was left all alone, and now I am about to get married. I have a lot of emotions.

古文：言未卒，鸣咽不自胜，文襄为之悯然。劢之勤学，常夜久方罢。
现代文：话没有说完，又呜咽哭泣，不能自禁。文襄帝也很可怜他，劝他勤奋学习，他常常读书到深夜才休息。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he began to sob and cry, unable to restrain himself. Emperor Wenxiang also felt sorry for him and advised him to study hard. He often read until late at night before taking a break.

古文：文宣受禅，进爵为王。
现代文：北齐文宣帝高洋即皇帝位，封高睿为王。
English: Emperor Gaoyang of the Northern Qi and Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi was enthroned as emperor, and Gao Rui was crowned king.

古文：睿身长七尺，容仪其伟，闲习吏事，有知人之鉴。
现代文：他身高七尺，仪表伟岸，十分熟悉做官的政务，有知人之明。
English: He is seven feet tall, has a great appearance, is very familiar with the government affairs of officials, and knows people well.

古文：天保二年，出为定州刺史、六州大都督。时年十七，称为良牧。
现代文：天保二年，他出任定州刺史、六州大都督，当时年龄才十七岁，被人们称赞是一位优秀的地方长官。
English: In the second year of the Tenpo era, he served as the governor of Dingzhou and the grand governor of six states. He was only 17 years old at the time, and was praised as an excellent local governor.

古文：六年，诏睿领兵监筑长城。
现代文：天保六年，朝廷命他领兵监管修筑长城。
English: In the sixth year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court ordered him to lead soldiers to supervise the construction of the Great Wall.

古文：于时六月，睿途中屏盖扇，亲与军人同劳苦。
现代文：当时正值六月盛暑，他在路上撤去伞盖，亲自与士兵们同劳共苦。
English: At that time, it was the heat of June, he removed the umbrella cover on the road and personally worked with the soldiers.

古文：定州先常藏冰，长史宋钦道以睿冒热，遣倍道送冰，正遇炎盛，咸谓一时之要。
现代文：定州常贮藏冰块，长史宋钦道因高睿冒着暑热监工，派人日夜兼程送来冰块。正是炎夏酷暑，都认为这是很必需的。
English: Denzhou often stores ice cubes, and the mayor Song Qin Dao sent someone to deliver ice cubes day and night because Gao Rui was a hot-tempered supervisor. It was the summer heat, and everyone thought it was very necessary.

古文：睿对之叹曰： 三军皆饮温水，吾何义独进寒冰！ 
现代文：高睿却对着冰块叹息说 ：三军将士都喝被晒热了的水，我怎么能独自喝冰水呢？ 
English: Gao Rui, however, sighed at the ice and said, "All three soldiers drink water that has been heated by the sun. How can I drink ice water alone?"

古文：遂至销液，竟不一尝，兵人感悦。
现代文：便让冰块慢慢消融成水，他竟一口也不尝，士兵们为之感慨喜悦。
English: He let the ice slowly melt into water, and the soldiers were delighted that he didn't even taste a bite of it.

古文：先是役罢，任其自归，丁壮先返，羸弱多致僵殒。
现代文：原先服完役后，让力役们自己还家，年轻力壮的都回去，老弱病残的大多死在边地。
English: After completing their original service, the soldiers were allowed to return home on their own, the young and strong returned home, and the old, weak, and sick mostly died in the outlying areas.

古文：睿于是亲帅营伍，强弱相持，赖全者十三四焉。
现代文：他因此亲自指挥军队，命身体强壮的与身体病弱的互相扶持，赖以保全的十有三四。
English: As a result, he personally commanded the army, and the strong and the weak supported each other.

古文：八年，除都督、北朔州刺史。
现代文：天保八年，他被任命为都督、北朔州刺史。
English: In the eighth year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the governor of the city and the governor of Beishuozhou.

古文：睿抚慰新迁，量置烽戍，备有条法，大为兵人所安。
现代文：他安抚刚从外地迁来的移民，设置烽火台加强戍守，一切都井井有条，很被军民们称道。
English: He pacified immigrants who had just moved from other places, set up campfires to strengthen their defense, and everything was well organized, which was highly praised by the military and the people.

古文：无水处祷而掘井，泉源涌出，至今号曰赵郡王泉。
现代文：他在没有水的地方祈祷天地，挖井凿池，泉水源源不断地涌出，至今仍称为赵郡王泉。
English: He prayed to heaven and earth in a place where there was no water, dug a well and dug a pond, and the spring water gushed out continuously. It is still known as the King Spring of Zhao County.

古文：九年，济南以太子监国，因立大都督府，与尚书省分理众事，仍开府置佐史。
现代文：天保九年，济南派太子监国，因而设立大都督府，与尚书省分理所有的政务。
English: In the 9th year of the Tenpo era, Jinan sent the crown prince to supervise the country, thus establishing the Grand Governor's Office and dividing all government affairs with Shangshu Province.

古文：文宣特崇其选，除睿侍中，摄大都督府长史。
现代文：仍在开建的府署设置佐史职，文宣帝尤其重视佐史一职的人选，便命高睿为侍中，任大都督府长史。
English: The prefectural government office, which was still under construction, set up the post of Sashi, and Emperor Wenzhong paid particular attention to the candidate for the post of Sashi. He appointed Gao Rui as an attendant and appointed him as the governor of the prefecture.

古文：睿后因侍宴，帝从容谓常山王演等曰： 由来亦有如此长史不？ 
现代文：他后来因陪同文宣帝参加宴会，文宣帝很从容地对常山王高演等人说 ：古往今来会有这样称职的长史吗？ 
English: Later, when he accompanied Emperor Manchu to a banquet, Emperor Manchu calmly said to King Gao of Changshan and others, "Has there ever been such a long history of competent people?

古文：皇建初，兼并州事。孝昭帝临崩，预受顾托，奉迎武成于鄴，拜尚书令。
现代文：皇建初年，他兼管并州的政务，孝昭帝临终之前，把预立新帝的事委托给他，他在邺城奉迎武成帝高湛，被朝廷封为尚书令。
English: In the first year of imperial construction, he was also in charge of the government affairs of the annexed state. Before the death of Emperor Xiao Zhaotong, he was entrusted with the matter of appointing a new emperor. He was in Shicheng to welcome Emperor Gaozhan and was awarded the title of Shang Shuling by the court.

古文：天统中，追赠父琛假黄钺；母元氏赠赵郡王妃，谥曰贞昭，华阳长公主如故。
现代文：后主天统时，追赠他的父亲高琛可以享受皇帝的仪仗；母亲元氏被追赠为赵郡王妃，谥号贞昭，华阳长公主的封号仍然不变。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, his father Gaozhuang was posthumously awarded the title of emperor; his mother Yuan was posthumously awarded the title of Princess of Zhao County, and her posthumous name Zhen Zhao, and the title of Princess of Huayang Chang remained unchanged.

古文：有司备礼仪，就墓拜授。
现代文：有司按照礼仪，在他父母的墓地赐赠封号。
English: In accordance with the etiquette, Yushi gave the seal number to the cemetery of his parents.

古文：时隆冬盛寒，睿跣步号哭，面皆破裂，呕血数升。
现代文：当时正值隆冬严寒季节，他光着脚走路，嚎啕大哭，脸上都破裂了，吐了好几升鲜血。
English: It was the dead of winter, he was barefoot, crying profusely, his face cracked, and he vomited several liters of blood.

古文：及还，不堪参谢。
现代文：回家后，身体疲惫得不能参拜和感谢天子。
English: After returning home, I was too tired to worship and thank God.

古文：帝亲就第看问，拜司空、摄录尚书事。
现代文：后主高纬亲自到他家里看望慰问，封他为司空、摄录尚书事。
English: Afterward, Master Gao Wei personally visited his home to offer his condolences, and appointed him as the Secretary of the Air Force, the Director of Photography and Calligraphy.

古文：河清三年，周师及突厥至并州。
现代文：河清三年，北周和突厥的军队进至并州。
English: In the third year of Heqing, the Northern Zhou and Turkic armies marched into and annexed the prefecture.

古文：武成戎服，将以宫人避之，睿叩马谏，乃止。
现代文：武成帝穿上作战的戎装，准备带上后宫的人去躲避。高睿拦住马叩头劝谏，武成帝才停止逃跑。
English: Emperor Wucheng put on his battle uniform and prepared to take his harem to hide. Gao Rui stopped the horse and advised him to bow down. Only then did Emperor Wucheng stop running away.

古文：帝亲御戎，六军进止，并令取睿节度，而使段孝先总焉。
现代文：他亲自统率军队抗敌，并命高睿节度军务，命段孝先亲自指挥。
English: He personally led the army to resist the enemy, and ordered Gao Rui to manage the military affairs, and personally commanded Meituan Xiaoqian.

古文：帝与宫为被绯甲，登故北城以望，军营甚整。
现代文：武成帝与宫人身披衣甲，登上旧城的北城观阵，军营十分整齐肃穆。
English: Emperor Wucheng and the palace staff put on their armor and went up to the north observation post of the old city. The military camp was very neat and solemn.

古文：突厥咎周人曰： 尔言齐乱，故来伐之。
现代文：突厥人埋怨北周人说 ：你们说北齐内部混乱，所以我们才来讨伐。
English: The Turks complained to the Northern Zhou people, saying: "You say that there is chaos within Northern Qi, that is why we have come to fight.

古文：今齐人眼中亦有铁，何可当邪！ 
现代文：现在齐人部伍整齐，眼中射出杀气，怎么可以抵挡呢？ 
English: Now the ranks are neatly aligned, the eyes shoot murderous gas, how can you resist it?

古文：乃还。
现代文：急忙退兵。
English: So I came back.

古文：至陉岭，冻滑，乃铺氈以度。
现代文：到了陉岭，道路冻滑，便铺上毛毡翻越。
English: When I got to Fuling, the road was icy and slippery, so I covered it with felt and climbed over it.

古文：胡马寒瘦，膝已下皆无毛，比至长城，死且尽。乃截槊杖之以归。
现代文：突厥兵骑的马匹因寒冷变得十分瘦弱，膝盖以下皮已脱尽。到了长城，马匹死亡殆尽，士兵们把长矛的枪杆截短做拐杖，拄着才回到家。
English: The horses ridden by the Turkish soldiers had become very thin due to the cold, and the skin from the knees down had peeled off. When they reached the Great Wall, the horses were all dead, and the soldiers shortened the spears to make crutches and walked home with them.

古文：是役也，段孝先持重，不与贼战，自晋阳失道，为虏所屠，无遗类焉。
现代文：这一战，段孝先老成持重，不与敌兵作战。在晋阳迷失道路，被敌人屠杀殆尽。
English: In this battle, Duan Xiaoxian was determined not to fight with the enemy soldiers. He lost his way in Jinyang and was massacred by the enemy.

古文：斛律光自三堆还，帝以遭大寇，抱其头哭。
现代文：斛律光从三堆赶来，武成帝因遭受敌人大的进犯，抱着斛律光的头大哭。
English: Pelican Light came from three piles, and Emperor Wu Chengdi, who had suffered a great attack from the enemy, held Pelican Light's head and cried.

古文：任城王湝进曰： 何至此！ 
现代文：任城王高氵皆进前说 ：何至于这样痛哭？ 
English: All the high-ranking officials came forward and said, "Why are you crying so hard?

古文：乃止。
现代文：他才止住哭声。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：光面折孝先于帝前，曰： 段婆善为送女客。 
现代文：斛律光在皇帝面前讽刺段孝先说 ：你这个像老太婆一样的家伙只善于送女客，却不会打仗。 
English: In front of the emperor, Pi Lu Guang said sarcastically to Duan Xiaoyan: "You, like an old woman, are only good at seeing off female guests, but you can't fight.

古文：于是以睿为能，加尚书令，封宣城郡公，拜太尉，监五礼。
现代文：于是，大家都认为高睿很有才能，加封他为尚书令、宣城郡公，拜为太尉，监管五礼。
English: As a result, everyone thought that Gao Rui was very talented, and he was awarded the titles of Shang Shuling and Xuancheng County official, promoted to the rank of captain, and supervised the Five Rites.

古文：晚节颇以酒色为和士开所构。
现代文：晚年时常因贪于酒色被和士开攻击。
English: In his later years, he was often attacked by wascari because of his fondness for alcohol.

古文：睿久典朝政，誉望日隆，渐被疏忌。
现代文：他长时间管理朝政，声望越来越高，逐渐被朝臣们疏远嫉妒。
English: He managed the court politics for a long time, his reputation grew higher and higher, and he was gradually alienated and envied by the courtiers.

古文：乃撰古忠臣义士，号曰《要言》，以致其意。
现代文：他便撰写古代忠臣义士的言行，书名叫《要言》，以申述自己的志向。
English: He then wrote about the words and deeds of ancient loyal subjects and righteous men in a book called "The Essentials" in order to express his own aspirations.

古文：武成崩。葬后数日，睿与冯翊王润、安德王延宗及元文遥奏后主云： 和士开不宜仍居内。 
现代文：武成帝去世，埋葬以后数日，他与冯翊王高润、安德王高延宗，以及元文遥奏报后主高纬说 ：和士开不应该仍然住在宫中。 
English: A few days after Emperor Wucheng died and was buried, he, along with King Gaorun of Fenghuang, King Gaoyanzong of Ande, and Emperor Gaowei of the Yuan Dynasty, said, "Wang Shikai should not still live in the palace.

古文：并入奏太后。因出士开为衮州刺史。
现代文：并又向太后陈奏，因而，朝廷命和士开出任兖州刺史。
English: He also played for the empress dowager, so the imperial court ordered him to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：太后欲留过百日，睿正色不许。
现代文：太后想留他过了一百天再走，高睿脸色严肃地予以拒绝。
English: The empress dowager wanted to keep him for a hundred days and then let him go, but Gao Rui refused with a serious face.

古文：太后令酌酒赐睿，睿正色曰： 今论国家大事，非为厄酒。 
现代文：太后命人斟酒赐给他，他严厉地说： 现在讨论国家大事，不是为了一杯酒。 
English: The Empress Dowager ordered a glass of wine to be poured for him, and he said sternly: "We are discussing national affairs now, not for a glass of wine.

古文：言讫便出。
现代文：说罢便走出去。
English: Just say the word and walk out.

古文：其夜，睿方寝，见一人长可丈五尺，臂丈余，当门向床，以臂压睿，良久遂失。
现代文：这天夜里，他正睡觉，看见一个人身高一丈五尺，臂长一丈多，从门口向床前走来，用胳膊压住他，很久才放开。
English: That night, as he was sleeping, he saw a man, five feet tall, with long arms, walk from the door to the bed, hold him down with his arms, and hold him down for a long time.

古文：甚恶之，起坐叹曰： 大丈夫运命一朝至此！ 
现代文：他十分厌恶，坐起来叹道： 大丈夫的命运到今天就完结了。 
English: He was very disgusted, sat up and sighed: My husband's fate is over today.

古文：旦欲入朝，妻子咸谏止之。睿曰： 社稷事重，吾当以死效之。
现代文：第二天早晨准备入朝，妻子劝阻他，他说 ：国家的事情重大，我应当以死报效。
English: The next morning, as he prepared to enter the imperial court, his wife dissuaded him, saying, "The affairs of the state are so important that I should repay them with my death."

古文：吾宁死事先皇，不忍见朝廷颠沛。 
现代文：我宁肯为先王献出生命，也不忍心看着朝廷如此混乱。 
English: I would rather give my life for the late king than see the court in such disarray.

古文：至殿门，又有人曰： 愿勿入。 
现代文：到了宫殿门口，又有人劝他说： 希望您不要进去。 
English: When he arrived at the palace gate, another person advised him: "I hope you don't go in."

古文：睿曰： 吾上不负天，死亦无恨。 
现代文：他说： 我上不负苍天，死也没有什么悔恨的。 
English: He said, "I'm as good as heaven, and I have no regrets about dying."

古文：入见太后，太后复以为言，睿执之弥固。
现代文：入宫见到太后，太后又重复昨天的话，高睿的态度更加坚决。
English: On entering the palace, Gao Rui's attitude became more resolute when he saw the empress dowager. The empress dowager repeated what she had said yesterday.

古文：出至永巷，被送华林园，于雀离佛院令刘桃枝拉杀之，时年三十六。
现代文：出宫走到永巷，被抓住送到华林园，在雀离佛院被刘桃枝杀害，时年仅三十六岁。
English: After leaving the palace, he walked to Yongxiang, was caught and sent to Huarim Garden, and was killed by Liu Taozhi at the age of only thirty-six in Jiali Buddhist Temple.

古文：子整信嗣，好学有行检，位仪同三司，后终于长安。
现代文：他死后，大雾弥漫三日，朝野上下都认为他冤枉，并替他惋惜。
English: After his death, a thick fog hung over the country for three days, and people at all levels thought he had been wronged and felt sorry for him.

古文：清河王岳，学洪略，神武从父弟也。
现代文：朝廷下诏允许以王的身份举行葬礼，却没有封赠谥号。清河王高岳，字洪略，神武帝高欢从父的兄弟。
English: The imperial edict allowed the funeral to be held in the king's capacity, but no posthumous name was bestowed. King Gao Yue of the Qing River, known as Hong Liu, was the brother of Emperor Gao Huan from his father.

古文：父翻，字飞雀，以器度知名，卒于侍御中散。
现代文：他的父亲高翻，字飞雀，以有器识风度出名，死于侍御史中散的官职上。
English: His father was a high-flier with a quick wit and was known for his ability to read people's moods. He died in the middle of his career as an attendant.

古文：元象中，赠假黄钺、大将军、太傅、太尉、录尚书事，谥孝宣公。
现代文：元象年间，朝廷封赠他为假黄钺、大将军、太傅、太尉、录尚书事，谥号为孝宣公。
English: During the Yuan Zhao era, the imperial court awarded him the titles of pseudo Huang Xuan, grand general, taifu, taifu, and recorded in the official records, and his posthumous name was Xiao Xuan Gong.

古文：岳幼孤贫，人未之知。
现代文：高岳少时父亲去世，家境贫寒，人们都不认识他。
English: When Gao Yue was young, his father died. His family was poor, and people did not know him.

古文：长而敦直，姿貌嶷然，深沉有器量。
现代文：年长之后，为人淳厚正直，身材魁伟，性情深沉，很有器量。
English: When he was older, he was honest and upright, with a tall stature, a deep disposition, and a great deal of ability.

古文：初居洛邑，神武每使入洛，必止岳舍。
现代文：最初住在洛阳，神武帝每次到洛阳来，一定到他家去看望。
English: At first, he lived in Luoyang. Whenever Emperor Shenwu came to Luoyang, he would visit his home.

古文：岳母山氏尝夜起，见神武室中无火而有光。
现代文：他的母亲山氏晚上曾起床，看见神武帝的住室中没有灯火却发出光来。
English: His mother, Yamuji, once got up in the evening and saw that there was no light in Emperor Jinmu's room, but there was light.

古文：移于别室，如前所见。
现代文：神武帝住在别的屋子，也仍然发出光来。
English: Emperor Jimmu lives in another room and still emits light.

古文：怪之。诣卜者筮，遇《乾》之《大有》。占者曰： 吉，《易》称 飞龙在天，大人造也 ，贵不可言。 
现代文：山氏很奇怪，到占卜的人那里算卦，遇上了 乾 的 大有 卦，占卜者说： 这是个很吉利的卦，《易经》上说 ：有飞龙在天，是大贵人的卦象啊。 这个人将来贵不可言。 
English: It was very strange for Mr. Yamashiro to go to a fortune-teller for fortune-telling and encounter such a great fortune-teller. The fortune-teller said, "This is a very auspicious fortune-teller. According to the I Ching, there is a flying dragon in the sky, which is the fortune-teller's elephant. This person will be very valuable in the future."

古文：山氏归报神武。
现代文：山氏回去告诉了神武帝。
English: Yamushi went back and told Emperor Jinmu about it.

古文：神武后起兵于信都，山氏谓岳曰： 赤光之瑞，今当验矣，汝可从之。 
现代文：神武帝后来在信都起兵，山氏对高岳说： 赤光的祥瑞，今天当应验了，你可以去跟从他。 
English: Later, Emperor Jimmu raised an army in Shintō, and Yamaji said to Takaoka, "Red-lighted Xiangrui, today should be fulfilled, you can go and follow him."

古文：岳遂往信都，神武见之大悦。
现代文：高岳便赶赴信都，神武帝见了他很高兴。
English: Gao Yue then rushed to Xindu, and Emperor Shenwu was very happy to see him.

古文：及战于韩陵，神武将中军，高昂将左军，岳将右军。
现代文：神武帝在韩陵与尔朱氏的军队决战时，神武帝亲率中军，高昂指挥左军，高岳指挥右军。
English: During the decisive battle between Emperor Shenwu and the army of the Erju clan in Hanling, Emperor Shenwu personally led the central army, Gao An commanded the left army, and Gao Yue commanded the right army.

古文：中军败，岳举麾大呼，横冲贼阵，神武因大破贼。
现代文：中军失败，高岳举起军旗大声呼喊，攻入敌阵左冲右杀，神武帝因而才大破敌兵。
English: When the Chinese army failed, Gao Yue raised his banner and shouted loudly, stormed into the enemy lines and killed them left and right, and only then did Emperor Shenwu defeat the enemy soldiers.

古文：以功除卫将军、左光禄大夫，封清河郡公。
现代文：高岳因建立军功被命为卫将军、左光禄大夫，封为清河郡公。
English: Because of his military exploits, Gao Yue was appointed as Wei general, Zuo Guanglu doctor, and Qinghe county magistrate.

古文：母山氏封郡君，授女侍中，入侍皇后。
现代文：他的母亲山氏被封为郡君，授予女侍中的官职，进入宫中侍奉皇后。
English: His mother, Yamuji, was given the title of county head, the official position of lady-in-waiting, and entered the palace to serve the queen.

古文：天平二年，除侍中、六州军事都督，寻加开府。
现代文：天平二年，高岳又被朝廷任命为侍中、六州军事都督，不久加封为开府。
English: In the second year of the Tenpyo era, Takaoka was again appointed by the imperial court as a chamberlain and military governor of six prefectures, and was soon given the additional title of kaifu.

古文：岳辟引时贤以为僚属，论者美之。
现代文：他选拔当时德才兼备的人作为自己的僚属，人们议论起来都称赞他。
English: He chose as his colleague a man who was both talented and virtuous at the time, and people praised him when they talked about it.

古文：寻授使持节、六州大都督、冀州大中正。
现代文：不久，朝廷又授予他使持节、六州大都督、冀州大中正。
English: Soon after, the imperial court also awarded him the title of Jizhixing, the governor of six states, and the vice-president of Jizhou University.

古文：俄拜京畿大都督，其六州事悉隶京畿。
现代文：不几天，又被封为京畿大都督，原来六州的军事都划归京畿管辖。
English: Not a few days later, he was appointed as the governor of Gyeonggi Province. Originally, the military capitals of six provinces were placed under the jurisdiction of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：时神武统务晋阳，岳与侍中孙腾等京师辅政。
现代文：这时，神武帝在晋阳统管政务军务，高岳与侍中孙腾等在京师辅助朝政。
English: At this time, Emperor Shenwu was in charge of the government and military affairs in Jinyang, and Gao Yue and his attendant Sun Teng were assisting the government in Beijing.

古文：岳性至孝，母疾，衣不解带。
现代文：他生性十分孝顺，母亲有病，他衣不解带，在旁边侍奉。
English: He was very filial by nature. His mother was ill, and he had to serve alongside her.

古文：及遭丧去职，哀毁骨立。神武忧之，每日遣人劳勉。
现代文：等到母亲去世，他辞去职务，悲痛欲绝，哀毁骨立，神武帝很担忧他的身体，每天派人来慰问劝勉。
English: When his mother died, he resigned from his post, grief-stricken and heartbroken. Emperor Jimmu was very worried about his health, and sent someone every day to offer condolences and encouragement.

古文：寻起复本位，历冀、晋二州刺史、西南道大都督，有绥边之称。
现代文：不久恢复他原来的官职，又历任冀、晋二州的刺史、西南道大都督，他管辖的地方，有安全边境之称。
English: He soon resumed his former official position, and successively served as the governor of Ji Province, the governor of Jin Province, and the governor of Southwest Province. The area under his jurisdiction is known as a safe border.

古文：及神武崩，侯景叛，梁武乘间遣其贞阳侯明于寒山，拥泗水灌彭城，与景为掎角声援。
现代文：神武帝去世，侯景叛乱，梁武帝乘机派贞阳侯萧明在寒山掘开泗水淹灌彭城，与侯景互为犄角，互相声援。
English: Emperor Shenwu died, Houjing rebelled, Emperor Liangwu took the opportunity to send Zhengyang Hou Xiaoming to dig water in the mountains to flood Pengcheng, and Houjing and Zhengyang supported each other.

古文：岳总诸军南讨，与行台慕容绍宗击破明，禽之。
现代文：高岳率领军队南讨，与行台慕容绍宗攻破萧明的军队，并将他擒获。
English: Gao Yue led the army to the south, and together with Gongtai Murong Shaosong defeated Xiao Ming's army and captured him.

古文：景仍于涡阳与左卫将军刘丰等相持。岳又破之。
现代文：侯景在涡阳与左卫将军刘丰等相对峙，高岳率兵将他打败。
English: Hou Jing confronted the left guard general Liu Feng and others in the Vortex, and Gao Yue and his soldiers defeated him.

古文：以功除太尉。
现代文：因建立功勋，高岳被封为太尉。
English: For his service to the establishment, Gao Yue was awarded the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：又统慕容绍宗、刘丰等攻王思政于长社。岳引洧水灌城。
现代文：他又统领慕容绍宗、刘丰等人进攻王思政驻扎在长社的西魏军队，他引淆水浇灌敌人的城池。
English: He also led Murong Shaozong, Liu Feng and others to attack Wang Sizheng's West Wei army stationed in Changsha, and he brought water to the enemy's castle.

古文：绍宗、刘丰为思政所获。西魏出兵援思政，岳内外防御，城不没者三板。
现代文：慕容绍宗、刘丰被王思政抓获，西魏也派兵救援王思政，高岳指挥军队内外防御，城墙没有被水淹没的只有三块木块那样高。
English: Murong Shaosong and Liu Feng were captured by Wang Shizheng. The Western Wei Dynasty also sent troops to rescue Wang Shizheng. Gao Yue commanded the internal and external defense of the army. The city wall was only as high as three blocks when it was not flooded.

古文：会文襄亲临，数日克城，获思政等。
现代文：在形势危急时，恰逢文襄帝高澄亲临战场指挥，不几天将敌兵占领的城池攻克，俘获了王思政等人。
English: When the situation was critical, Emperor Gaocheng of the Manchurian Empire commanded the battlefield in person, and conquered the city occupied by the enemy soldiers in a few days, capturing Wang Sizheng and others.

古文：以功别封真定县男。
现代文：高岳因立功另外被封为真定县男。
English: In addition, Gao Yue was awarded the title of "Man of Jinding County" for his meritorious service.

古文：文襄以为己功，故赏典不弘。
现代文：高澄认为这一仗主要是自己的功劳，所以封赏的面不宽。
English: Takasumi believes that this battle is mainly his own merit, so the reward is not wide-ranging.

古文：文襄崩，文宣出抚晋阳，令岳以本官兼尚书左仆射，留镇鄴。
现代文：高澄去世，文宣帝到晋阳安抚，命高岳以原来的职务兼任尚书左仆射，留下来镇守邺都。
English: After Gaocheng's death, Emperor Wenzhong went to Jinyang to pacify the situation. Gao Yue was assigned to his original position as Shang Shushi's right-hand man and left to guard the capital.

古文：天保初，进封清河郡王。
现代文：天保初年，他被晋封为清河郡王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to King of Qinghe County.

古文：五年，加太保。为西南道大行台，统司徒潘相乐等救江陵。
现代文：天保五年，朝廷加封他为太保，不久，任西南道大行台，统率司徒潘相乐等人救援江陵。
English: In the 5th year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court appointed him as the Taipo, and soon he was appointed as the governor of the Southwestern Province, leading the scholar Pan Xiangle and others to rescue Gangneung.

古文：师次义阳，西魏克荆州。因略地，克郢州，获梁郢州刺史陆法和，送鄴。
现代文：军队到达义阳，西魏的军队攻克荆州，因为要扩充土地，他率军攻克南梁的郢州，俘获梁的郢州刺史陆法和，派人押送至郢城。
English: The army arrived in Yiyang, the Western Wei army conquered Jingzhou, because he wanted to expand the land, he led the army to conquer the southern Liang's Bozhou, captured Liang's Bozhou Zhishilufo, and sent someone to escort him to Shicheng.

古文：诏岳旋师。
现代文：朝廷下诏命他率军返回。
English: The imperial court ordered him to return with his army.

古文：岳自讨寒山、长社，及出随、陆，并有功，威名弥重。
现代文：高岳自从进兵讨伐寒山、长社，以及出征随、陆一带，都立有大功，威望名声越来越大。
English: Since Gao Yue's entry into the army to fight against the cold mountains and Changsha, as well as to accompany the expedition and the land area, he has made great achievements, and his prestige and reputation are growing.

古文：性华侈，尤悦酒色，歌姬舞女，陈鼎击钟，诸王皆莫及。
现代文：他性情奢侈，追求华丽，尤其喜欢醇酒美女。他家的歌姬舞女，钟鼓器乐，各王都赶不上。
English: His temperament is extravagant, he pursues splendor, and he especially likes beautiful women who drink alcohol. He can't keep up with his family's singers, dancers, and gong and drum players.

古文：初，高归彦少孤，神武令岳抚养。
现代文：早先，高归彦幼年丧父，神武帝命高岳抚养他。
English: Earlier, when Takakihiko lost his father at a young age, Emperor Jinmu ordered Takaoka to raise him.

古文：轻其年幼，情礼甚薄，归彦内衔之。
现代文：高岳因归彦年少而轻视，对他在情礼上十分刻薄，归彦内心里很不满意。
English: Gao Yue despised Gui Yan because he was young, and was very mean to him in the love ritual. Gui Yan was very dissatisfied.

古文：及归彦为领军，岳谓其德己，更倚仗之。
现代文：等到高归彦任领军，高岳认为他会感激自己，更加倚仗他的权势。
English: When Takagurehiko was appointed to lead the army, Takaoka thought that he would be grateful to him and rely more on his power.

古文：归彦密构其短，奏岳造城南大宅，僭拟为永巷，但无阙耳。
现代文：归彦却暗中收集他的罪状，奏报他逾越名分，在城南建造一片规模宏大的住宅，准备作为嫔妃们的住宅，只是院内没有建造宫殿。
English: Kunihiko, however, secretly collected evidence of his guilt, reported that he had overstepped his bounds, and built a large-scale residence in the south of the city to be used as a residence for his concubines, but no palace was built in the courtyard.

古文：帝后夜行，见壮丽，意不平。
现代文：皇帝每晚出行，看到这片住宅高大宏丽，很不高兴。
English: The emperor, who travelled every night, was not happy to see this large and magnificent house.

古文：仍属帝召鄴下妇人薛氏入宫，而岳先尝迎之，至宅，由其姊也。
现代文：文宣帝召邺下的妇人薛氏入宫，而高岳却首先将她接到自己家中，办这件事的是薛氏的姐姐。
English: Emperor Wenxuan invited his wife, Lady Xue, to enter the palace, but Gao Yue first invited her to his home. It was Lady Xue's sister who took care of the matter.

古文：帝县薛氏姊而锯杀之，让岳，以为奸人女。
现代文：文宣帝捉获薛氏的姐姐而将她杀死，指责高岳奸污了别人家的女儿。
English: Emperor Wenxuan captured Mr. Xue's sister and killed her, accusing Gao Yue of raping someone else's daughter.

古文：岳曰： 臣本欲取之，嫌其轻薄，非奸也。 
现代文：高岳说 ：我本来想娶她，嫌她轻薄，不是奸污。 
English: Takaoka said, "I originally wanted to marry her, because I thought she was frivolous, not because she was an adulteress.

古文：帝益怒，使高归彦就宅赐以鸩。
现代文：文宣帝更加恼怒，派高归彦到他家里赐给鸠酒。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was even more angry and sent Gao Guihong to his home to give him wine.

古文：岳曰： 臣无罪。 
现代文：高岳说 ：我没有罪。 
English: Takaoka said, "I am not guilty."

古文：赠太宰、太傅、假黄钺、给辒辌车，谥曰昭武。
现代文：高归彦厉声说： 喝下去！ 高岳喝后死去。朝野上下都替他惋惜，死时仅三十四岁。
English: Takatake died after drinking it. People all over the country felt sorry for him. He was only thirty-four years old when he died.

古文：敕以城南宅为庄严寺。
现代文：朝廷下诏让大鸿胪办理丧事，下令将他城南的住宅改为庄严寺。
English: The imperial court ordered Dahongye to handle the funeral and ordered that his residence in the south of the city be converted into a solemn temple.

古文：初，岳与神武经纶天下，家有私兵戎器，储甲千余领。
现代文：开初，高岳与高欢开创天下，他家养有私兵，贮存有兵器甲胄一千多件。
English: At the beginning, Gao Yue and Gao Huan created the world. His family raised a private army and stored more than a thousand pieces of armor.

古文：文襄末，岳表求纳之，文襄推心相任，不许。
现代文：文襄帝末年，他曾上表，请求交给国家，文襄帝与他推心置腹，十分信任，不让他上交。
English: In the last years of Emperor Wenxiang, he had petitioned to be handed over to the state. Emperor Wenxiang put his trust in him and did not allow him to be handed over.

古文：文宣时，亦频请纳，又不许。
现代文：文宣帝时，他也多次请求交纳，也不被允许。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenxuan, he also repeatedly asked for payment, but was not allowed.

古文：将薨，遗表谢恩，并请上甲。葬毕，方许纳焉。
现代文：将要被处死时，他写遗表向朝廷谢恩，并请求将兵器衣甲上交，埋葬以后，才允许收交。
English: When he was about to be put to death, he wrote a will thanking the imperial court and requesting that his armor and clothing be handed over. He was only allowed to hand them over after he was buried.

古文：皇建中，配享文襄庙庭。
现代文：皇建时，朝廷赐他配享文襄帝高澄的庙廷。
English: When the emperor built it, the imperial court gave him the right to enjoy the temple court of Emperor Gaozhen.

古文：后归彦反，武成知其前谮，以归彦良贱百口赠岳家。赠岳太师、太保，余如故。
现代文：后来，高归彦谋反，武成帝知道他以前被冤屈，把高归彦家的一百口人赐赠给他家，追赠他为太师、太保，其他封赠不变。
English: Later, when Gao Guihang plotted a rebellion, Emperor Wucheng, knowing that he had been wronged before, gave a hundred members of Gao Guihang's family to his family, posthumously making him Grand Master and Grand Protector. Other gifts remained unchanged.

古文：子劢。
现代文：高劢，字敬德，高岳之子。
English: Gao Yao, the son of Gao Yue, the son of Gao Yue.

古文：劢字敬德，幼聪敏，美风仪，以仁孝闻。
现代文：他幼时聪明敏捷，容貌秀美，风度翩翩，以仁爱孝顺出名。
English: When he was young, he was smart and agile, handsome and graceful, and was famous for his benevolence and filial piety.

古文：七岁袭爵清河王，十四为青州刺史。历祠部尚书、开府仪同三司，改封安乐侯。
现代文：七岁时继承父亲高岳的爵位为清河王，十四岁任青州刺史，历任祠部尚书、开府仪同三司，朝廷又改封他为安乐侯。
English: At the age of seven, he succeeded his father Gao Yue's title of Qinghe King, and at the age of fourteen, he was appointed as the Qingzhou engraving historian, and successively served as the secretary of the ancestral hall, the secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and the three departments. The court also changed his title to the prince of Anle.

古文：性刚直，有才干。斛律光雅敬之，每征伐则引为副。
现代文：他性情刚烈正直，卓有才干，斛律光很敬重他，每次出兵打仗，都举荐他作副将。
English: He had a strong and honest character, and was extremely talented. Zhaoliguang respected him very much, and every time he went to war, he recommended him to be vice-general.

古文：迁侍中、尚书右仆射。
现代文：他后来又迁任侍中、尚书右仆射。
English: With the Emperor's edict, the summer lord ordered the detailed relocation of the attendants, and Shangshu's right-hand man was shot.

古文：及后主为周师所败，劢奉太后归鄴。
现代文：后主高纬被北周的军队打败，他保护着太后回到邺都。
English: After Lord Gaowu was defeated by the Northern Zhou army, he protected the empress dowager and returned to Shendu.

古文：进宦官放纵，仪同苟子溢尤幸。
现代文：当时宦官专权，仪同苟子溢尤被宠幸。
English: At that time, eunuchs had exclusive power, and eunuchs were especially favored.

古文：劢将斩以徇，太后救之，乃得释。
现代文：高劢准备把他斩首，以祭殉战场上死难的将士。太后救助苟子溢，才被释放。
English: Gao Yao prepared to behead him as a sacrifice to the soldiers who died on the battlefield. Only after the Empress Dowager came to his rescue was he released.

古文：刘文殊窃谓劢曰： 子溢之徒，言成祸福，何得如此！ 
现代文：刘文殊悄悄对他说 ：苟子溢这些人，一句话就能定人的祸福，您怎么能这样对待他？ 
English: Liu Wenshu quietly said to him, "These people who are overflowing with children, one sentence can determine a person's fortune and misfortune. How can you treat him like this?"

古文：劢攘袂曰： 今西军日侵，朝贵多叛，正由此辈弄权。
现代文：他扯着衣襟说 ：现在北周的军队步步进逼，朝中大臣大多背叛，朝政弄成这个样子，正是由于这些宦官弄权误国造成的。
English: He tugged his forelock and said, "Now that the Northern Zhou army is advancing step by step, most of the ministers of the North and Central Korean governments have betrayed us, and the North Korean government has become like this, precisely because these eunuchs have misused their power and misled the country."

古文：若今日杀之，明日就诛，无恨。 
现代文：如果我今天杀了他们，明天就将我处死，也没有怨言。 
English: If I kill them today, they will put me to death tomorrow, without complaint.

古文：文殊甚愧之。
现代文：刘文殊听了十分惭愧。
English: Liu Wenshu was very ashamed to hear this.

古文：劢劝后主，五品已下家略，悉置三台上，胁之曰： 若战不捷，则烧之。
现代文：高劢劝告后主，将五品以上官员的家属，都安置在金凤、圣应、崇光三座宫殿内，并威胁他们：如果战争不能取胜，就把这三座宫殿连同他们的亲属都烧掉。
English: Gao Yao advised his successor to place the families of officials with more than five peerages in the three palaces of Jinfeng, Shengying and Chongguang, and threatened them: if the war could not be won, they would burn down the three palaces together with their relatives.

古文：此辈必死战，乃可捷也。 
现代文：这些人一定拼死杀敌，可以获取胜利。
English: These people will fight to the death, and they can win.

古文：后主不从，遂弃鄴东迁。劢恆后殿，为周军所得。
现代文：后主不听从他的建议，便放弃邺城向东迁徙，高劢常率兵断后，他被周军抓获。
English: After the lord did not listen to his advice, he abandoned the city of Handan and moved eastward. After Gao Handan's soldiers left, he was captured by Zhou's army.

古文：武帝与语，大悦，因问齐亡所由，劢发言流涕，悲不自胜，帝为改容。授开府仪同三司。
现代文：周武帝得到他十分高兴，同他谈话时问他北齐灭亡的原因，他一说话就痛哭流涕，悲不自禁，周武帝听了也改变容色，授予他开府仪同三司。
English: Zhou Wudi was very happy to get him. When talking with him, he asked him the reason for the death of Beiqi. As soon as he spoke, he cried bitterly and couldn't help but be sad. Zhou Wudi also changed his appearance after listening to him, and awarded him the ceremony of opening the government and the three departments.

古文：隋文帝为丞相，谓曰： 齐亡由任邪佞，公父子忠良，闻于邻境，宜善自爱。 
现代文：隋文帝杨坚任北周的丞相，对高劢说 ：北齐灭亡是由于朝廷任用权奸佞臣，你们父子二人的忠诚良善，邻国的人都有所闻，今后你要自重自爱。 
English: Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty, who was the prime minister of Northern Zhou, said to Gao Qi, "The fall of Northern Qi was due to the imperial court's appointment of power-hungry vassals. Your father and son are both loyal and good, and people in neighboring countries have heard of them. In the future, you should respect and love yourself."

古文：劢拜谢曰： 劢，亡齐末属，不能扶危定倾，既蒙获宥，已多优幸，况滥叨名级，致速官谤。 
现代文：高劢叩拜致谢说 ：我是灭亡了的北齐的一个官员，不能扶持国家的危困，使她安定于将倾之时。既然蒙受您的宽宥，已很感荣幸，况且又滥充官位，因不称职，所以很快招致诽谤。 
English: "I am an official of the ruined Northern Qi, and I cannot support the country's crisis and keep it stable when it is about to fall. Since I have received your forgiveness, I feel very honored. Moreover, I have abused my official position, and because of my incompetence, I quickly attracted slander.

古文：帝甚器之。
现代文：杨坚很器重他。
English: Yang Jian holds him in high regard.

古文：再迁楚州刺史。
现代文：他又升任楚州刺史。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Chuzhou chief historian.

古文：城北有伍子胥庙，其俗敬鬼，祈者必以牛酒，至破产业。
现代文：楚州城北有一座伍子胥庙，当地的风俗常在这里拜祭鬼神。祈祷者必定献上杀牲的耕牛和酒，以至于为此倾家荡产。
English: In the north of the city of Chuzhou, there is a Wuzihong Temple, where local customs often worship ghosts. Those who pray are sure to offer sacrificial oxen and wine, so much so that they end up bankrupt.

古文：劢叹曰： 子胥贤者，岂宜损百姓乎！ 
现代文：他叹息道 ：伍子胥是一位贤者，怎么会损害百姓呢？ 
English: He sighed: Wu Zixuan was a wise man, how could he harm the people?

古文：告谕所部，自是遂止。百姓赖之。
现代文：便告诫他管辖的军民，从此以后不准再在这里祭祀鬼神，百姓们都很高兴。
English: He then warned the military and civilians under his jurisdiction that henceforth they would no longer be allowed to offer sacrifices to ghosts and gods here. The people were delighted.

古文：开皇七年，转光州刺史。
现代文：开皇七年，他转任光州刺史，上表说： 南朝陈氏数年以来荒谬滋长，越来越甚。
English: In the seventh year of the emperor's reign, he was transferred to the post of Gwangju chief historian. The above table says: The Southern Chen Dynasty has grown increasingly absurd over the past few years.

古文：上表曰： 陈氏数年已来，荒悖滋甚，天厌乱德，妖实人兴。或空里时有大声，或行路共传鬼怪，或刳人肝以祠天狗，或自舍身以厌妖讹。
现代文：上天厌恶道德混乱的国家，妖魔怪异的事情不断出现。或者空中时时响起很大的声音，或者行路的人都传说遇上了妖魔鬼怪，或者挖出人的心肝供奉天狗，或自舍自身以满足妖魔的所谓需求。
English: In a country where heaven abhors moral chaos, strange demonic things continue to appear. Or loud noises are heard in the air all the time, or people on the road are said to have encountered demons, or dig out people's hearts and offer them to Tengu, or give themselves up to satisfy the so-called needs of demons.

古文：人神怨愤，怪异荐发。
现代文：那里真是人神共愤，怪异丛生。
English: It's really a place where man and god are angry together, and it's full of weird things.

古文：臣以庸才，猥蒙朝寄，频历蕃守，与其邻接。
现代文：我以庸陋之才，多次担任边地的守土官吏，与南陈接壤，对那里的情形了解得很清楚。
English: With my mediocre talent, I have repeatedly served as a land protection official in the border area, bordering Nanchen, and I understand the situation there very well.

古文：密迩仇仇，知其动静。
现代文：上天讨伐有罪的国君，正在这个时候。
English: Heaven's crusade against the guilty sovereign begins at this very moment.

古文：天讨有罪，此即其时。若戎车雷动，戈船电迈，臣虽驽怯，请效鹰犬。 
现代文：如果我军战车的车轮响起如雷滚动的声音，战船竞发，如闪电行空，向南陈开进，我虽然才能低劣，也愿效犬马之劳。 
English: If the wheels of our army's chariots resounded with the sound of rolling thunder, if our warships raced like lightning to the south, I, with my inferior talent, would be willing to do the work of a dog and a horse.

古文：并上平陈五策，帝嘉之，答以优诏。
现代文：并奏上平陈的五种方略，隋文帝十分称许，用美好的词句写成诏书答复他。
English: And he played the five strategies of Ping Chen, which was highly praised by the Sui Emperor, who wrote an edict with beautiful words to reply to him.

古文：及大举伐陈，以劢为行军总管，从宜阳公王世积下陈江州，以功拜上开府，赐物三千段。
现代文：大举讨伐南陈时，任他为行军总管，跟随宜阳公王世积攻下陈国的江州。因立功被授予上开府的官职，赐给物品三千段。
English: He was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops during the large-scale campaign against Southern Chen, and followed Yiyang Prince Shijian to conquer the Jiangzhou of Chen. For his meritorious service, he was awarded the official post of Shangkaifu, and was given 3,000 pieces of goods.

古文：时陇右诸羌，数为寇乱。朝廷以劢有威名，拜洮州刺史。
现代文：这时，陇右羌族各个部落多次发生变乱，朝廷因高劢威名远播，便任命他为洮州刺史。
English: At this time, there were many upheavals in the various tribes of the Yao and Yao people, and the imperial court appointed Gao Yao as the governor of Zhangzhou because of his fame.

古文：天平三年，薨于位，赠假黄钺、太尉、太师、录尚书事。无子，以兄子子瑗嗣。
现代文：上任之后，大家都很崇拜他的威望和恩惠，汉人和夷人都高兴地归附，豪猾奸恶的不逞之徒销声匿迹，社会安定，路不拾遗，他因善于管理地方受到朝野称赞，后来，吐谷浑族前来进犯，他正在患病，不能领兵抗御，敌兵大肆掠夺而去。
English: After he took office, everyone admired his prestige and grace. The Han and the barbarians were happy to join him. The cowardly traitors disappeared. The society was stable and there was no trace of them. He was praised by the court and the field for his good management of the region. Later, the Tugu Huns came to attack. He was ill and could not lead the soldiers to resist. The enemy soldiers plundered and went away.

古文：天保初，改封平昌王，卒于魏尹。
现代文：宪司奏报他丢失了人口，被朝廷免去官职，他在家中去世。
English: The registrar reported that he had lost his population, was removed from office by the court, and died at home.

古文：阳州公永乐，神武从祖兄子也。
现代文：高永乐，神武帝高欢从祖兄的儿子。
English: Gao Yongle, the son of Emperor Gao Huan's paternal uncle.

古文：太昌初，封阳州县伯，进爵为公，累迁北豫州刺史。
现代文：太昌初年，被封为阳州县伯，又晋爵为公，多次升迁，官至北豫州刺史。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was awarded the title of Yangzhou County magistrate, and promoted to the rank of peer. He was promoted many times, and was appointed to the post of North Henan County magistrate.

古文：河桥之战，司徒高昂失利奔退，永乐守洛阳南城。昂走趣城南，西军追者将至，永乐不开门，昂遂为西军所禽。
现代文：河桥之役，司徒高昂作战失利，败退奔逃。他把守河阳南城，高昂奔向城南，西魏的军队将要追来，他不打开城门接纳败军，高昂便被敌兵抓去。
English: In the Battle of Heqiao, Stut Gaoang lost the battle and fled in defeat. He guarded the southern city of Heyang, Gaoang ran to the south of the city, the West Wei army was about to chase him. If he did not open the city gate to receive the defeated army, Gaoang would be captured by the enemy soldiers.

古文：神武大怒，杖之二百。
现代文：神武帝非常恼怒，打了他二百军棍。
English: Emperor Shenwu was very angry and beat him with 200 truncheons.

古文：后罢豫州，家产不立。
现代文：后来，他被罢免了豫州刺史的职务，离任时却没有什么家产。
English: Later, he was removed from the post of chief historian of Yuzhou, but left office with little family property.

古文：神武问其故，对曰： 裴监为长史，辛公正为别驾，受王委寄，斗酒只鸡不敢入。 
现代文：神武帝问他原因，他答道： 裴监任我的长史，辛公正任我的别驾，他们两人受您的指派，弄得我一杯酒一只鸡都不敢要。 
English: Shenwu Di asked him the reason, and he replied: "Pei Guan is responsible for my long history, Xin Zhengyi is responsible for my good conduct. Both of them were appointed by you, and they made me afraid to ask for a glass of wine or a chicken.

古文：神武乃以永乐为济州，仍以监、公正为长史、别驾。
现代文：神武帝又命他任济州刺史，仍让裴监、辛公正分别任他的长史和别驾。
English: Emperor Jimmu also ordered him to be the governor of Jeju Province, but he still let Pei Guan and Xin Zhengyi be in charge of his long history and other matters.

古文：谓永乐曰： 尔勿大贪，小小义取莫复畏。 
现代文：神武帝对他说 ：你不要太贪心，多少收取一点也不要害怕。 
English: Emperor Jinwu said to him, "Don't be too greedy, and don't be afraid to charge a little.

古文：永乐至州，监、公正谏不见听，以状启神武。
现代文：他到任以后果然贪取财货，裴监、辛公正劝阻，他又不采纳，二人便把情况奏报给神武帝。
English: After he took office, he was indeed greedy for money and goods. Pei Guan and Xin Justly dissuaded him, but he did not accept, and the two of them reported the situation to Emperor Shenwu.

古文：历位司空、太傅，薨于官。
现代文：神武帝拿着二人的奏书让他看，然后知道这两个人果然清廉正直，都被提拔使用。
English: Emperor Shenwu took the two men's record books and showed them to him, and then he knew that the two men were indeed clean and honest, and had both been promoted and used.

古文：子元海，累迁散骑常侍，愿处山林，修行释典，文宣许之。
现代文：高永乐在济州刺史任上去世，朝廷追赠他为太师、太尉、录尚书事，谥号武昭。高元海，多次升迁，官至散骑常侍，却愿意独处山林之中，研读佛家经典，文宣帝准许了他的请求。
English: Gao Yongle died in Jeju on the post of chief historian. The imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of grand master, first lieutenant, and recorder, and gave him the nickname "Wu Zhao." Gao Yuanhai, who had been promoted many times and had served as a cavalry officer, was willing to stay alone in the mountains and study Buddhist classics. Emperor Wenzhong granted his request.

古文：乃入林虑山，经二年，绝弃人事。
现代文：他住进林虑山寺院，过了两年，与尘世隔绝。
English: He went to live in the Lin Qishan Temple, and after two years, he was cut off from the world.

古文：志不能固，自启求归。
现代文：但志向不坚，又上表请求回朝任职。
English: However, his ambition was not firm, and he requested to return to the DPRK to take up the post.

古文：徵复本任，便纵酒肆情，广纳姬侍。
现代文：他仍任原来的官职，便纵情饮酒，肆意享乐，纳了许多姬妾侍女。
English: He still held his original official position, he indulged in drinking, indulged in pleasure, and hired many concubines and maids.

古文：又除领军将军。器小志大，颇以智谋自许。
现代文：又升任为领军将军，见识短浅却志向远大，常以广有智谋自诩。
English: He was also promoted to be the leading general. Although he was short-sighted, he had high aspirations. He often prided himself on his extensive wisdom.

古文：皇建末，孝昭幸晋阳，武成居守，元海以散骑常侍留典机密。
现代文：皇建末年，孝昭帝到达晋阳，让他的弟弟长广王高湛留守京城，高元海以散骑常侍的身份留下来参与机密大事的商讨。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Jian, Emperor Xiaozhao arrived in Jinyang. He asked his younger brother, Changguang Wang Gaotan, to stay in the capital, while Gao Yuanhai stayed behind to participate in confidential discussions.

古文：初，孝昭之诛杨愔等，谓武成云，事成，以汝为皇太弟。
现代文：早先，孝昭帝诛杀杨忄音，对高湛说：事情成功之后，封你当皇太弟。
English: Earlier, Emperor Xiao Zhaodi tried to kill Yang Xuanying and said to Gao Zhan: "After the success of the matter, I will make you the crown prince."

古文：及践位，乃使武成在鄴主兵，立子百年为皇太子，武成甚不平。
现代文：孝昭帝即皇帝位后，便让高湛在邺城统率军队，却立了他的儿子高百年为皇太子，高湛心里很不满意。
English: After Emperor Xiaozhao ascended the throne, he let Gaozhan lead the army in Lucheng, but made his son Gaozhan crown prince. Gaozhan was very dissatisfied.

古文：先是，恆留济南于鄴，除领军厍狄伏连为幽州刺史，以斛律丰乐为领军，以分武成之权。
现代文：早些时候，孝昭帝常留济南王在邺城，任命领军库狄伏连为幽州刺史，任命斛律丰乐为领军，以分散高湛的权力。
English: Earlier, Emperor Xiaozhao often stayed with the king of Jinan in Shicheng, appointed the leader of the army, Kudivulian, as the governor of Yuzhou, and appointed Baolu Fengle as the leader of the army, in order to disperse Gaozhan's power.

古文：武成留伏连而不听丰乐视事。
现代文：高湛留下库狄伏连而不允许斛律丰乐上任。
English: Gao Zhan left Cudi Furen and did not allow Baolu Fengle to take office.

古文：乃与河阳王孝瑜伪猎，谋于野，暗乃归。
现代文：他与河南王高孝瑜假装打猎，在野外计谋，暗中回到邺城。
English: He and the Henan king Gao Xiaoyu pretended to hunt, plotted in the field, and secretly returned to Lucheng.

古文：先是童谣云： 中兴寺内白凫翁，四方侧听声雍雍，道人闻之夜打钟。 
现代文：这之前，童谣传播说 ：中兴寺内白凫翁，四方侧听声雍雍，道人闻之夜打钟。 
English: Prior to this, the nursery rhyme spread that: the egrets in the Zhongxing Temple, the four sides listen to the sound of the Yong Yong, and the Taoists hear the bell at night.

古文：时丞相府在北城中，即旧中兴寺也；凫翁谓雄鸡，盖指武成小字步落稽也；道人，济南王小名也；打钟，言将被击也。
现代文：当时，丞相府在北城里面，也即过去的中兴寺；凫翁即是公鸡，指的是高湛的小名步落稽；道人，是济南王的小名；打钟，说的即将被敲击。
English: At that time, the Prime Minister's Office was located in Beicheng, which was the former Zhongxing Temple; Shao Weng was a rooster, referring to Gao Zhan's nickname; Tao Man was the nickname of the King of Jinan; and the bell was about to be struck.

古文：既而太史奏言，北城有天子气，昭帝以为济南应之，乃使平秦王归彦之鄴，迎济南赴并州。
现代文：不久，太史奏报说，北城上空有天子的气象，孝昭帝认为是济南王应了这股帝王之气，便命平秦王高归彦回邺城，调济南王到并州。
English: Not long after, the Taishi Sonpo said that the weather over Beicheng was divine, and Emperor Xiaozhao believed that the King of Jinan responded to this imperial spirit, so he ordered Ping Qin Wang Gao to return to Lushan City and transferred the King of Jinan to Bianzhou.

古文：武成先告元海，并问自安之计。
现代文：高湛先将情况告诉高元海，向他询问自安的计策。
English: Gao Zhan first told the situation to Gao Yuanhai and asked him about Zi An's strategy.

古文：元海曰： 皇太后万福，至尊孝性非常，殿下不须别虑。 
现代文：元海说 ：皇太后身体康健，天子非常孝顺，殿下您不要有别的顾虑。 
English: Motohai said, "The empress dowager is in good health, the emperor is very filial, and Your Imperial Highness should not have any other concerns."

古文：武成曰： 此岂我推诚之意邪？ 
现代文：高湛说 ：这难道是同我推心置腹说的话吗？ 
English: Gao Zhan said, "Is this really what I said with all my heart?"

古文：元海乞还省一夜思之。
现代文：元海请求回去，晚上好好想一想，高湛留元海住在后堂。
English: Yuanhai asked him to go back and think about it in the evening. Gao Zhan stayed with Yuanhai in the back hall.

古文：武成即留元海后堂，元海达旦不眠，唯绕床徐步。夜漏未尽，武成遽出曰： 神算如何？ 
现代文：他提心吊胆没有睡觉，只是绕着床慢慢地踱来踱去。天色未明，高湛突然来问： 你的神算怎么样？ 
English: Worried, he did not sleep, but paced slowly around the bed. In the early morning, Gao Zhan suddenly asked: How is your god?

古文：答云： 夜中得三策，恐不堪用耳。 
现代文：他答道 ：夜晚我考虑再三，得到三条计策，恐怕不堪被采用。 
English: He answered, I have thought the night over, and have three stratagems, which I am afraid I cannot adopt.

古文：因说梁孝王惧诛入关事，请乘数骑入晋阳，先见太后求哀，后见主上，请去兵权，以死为限，求不干朝政，必保太山之安，此上策也；若不然，当具表云威权大盛，恐取谤众口，请青、齐二州刺史，沉靖自居，必不招物议，此中策也。
现代文：因而叙说梁孝王惧怕被诛杀而入关的事，劝高湛带几名随从到晋阳，先见太后向她哀告，再去见主上，请求免去自己的兵权，以死作保证，请求不再参与朝政，一定会保住自身，像泰山一样安稳，这是上策。如果不这样做，便上表说自己权势太大，恐怕被众人议论诽谤，请求辞去别的职务，只保留青、齐二州刺史的职务，自己沉静自处，必定不会招致别人的议论，这是中策。
English: Therefore, he recounted that Liang Xiaowang was afraid of being killed and was taken into custody, and advised Gaotan to take several followers to Jinyang. The foresight of the empress dowager lamented to her, and then went to see the Lord, asked to be exempted from his military power, guaranteed by death, and asked to no longer participate in court politics. He would certainly keep himself safe and stable like Mount Tai, which was the best strategy. If he did not do so, he would say that his power was too great, and he was afraid of being slandered by everyone. He asked to resign from other positions, only retaining the positions of Qing and Qi

古文：更问下策，曰： 发言即恐族诛。 
现代文：再问他下策，他说 ：说出来恐怕会被灭族。 
English: When asked about his next move, he said: "I'm afraid I'll be exterminated if I speak out."

古文：因逼之，答曰： 济南世嫡，主上假太后令而夺之，今集文武，示以此敕，执丰乐，斩归彦，尊济南，号令天下，以顺讨逆，此万世一时也。 
现代文：高湛追问他，他回答： 济南王世代继承王位，主上却假借太后的谕旨夺取了他的封爵。现在召集文武百官，拿出这个诏命，抓捕斛律丰乐，将高归彦斩首，推举济南王称帝，号令天下，用正道去讨伐邪恶，这是万世难逢的好机会呀！ 
English: Gao Zhan questioned him, and he replied: The Jinan king had succeeded to the throne for generations, but the Lord had usurped his knighthood by pretending to use the empress dowager's decree. Now, gather all the civil and military officials, take out this edict, arrest Yao Liufengle, behead Gao Guihang, promote the Jinan king to be emperor, command the world, and use the right way to fight evil. This is a rare opportunity in the world!

古文：武成大悦，狐疑，竟未能用。
现代文：高湛听了大为高兴，但又狐疑不决，竟没有按他的意见办。
English: Gao Zhan was very happy to hear this, but he was hesitant and did not act according to his opinion.

古文：乃使郑道谦卜之，皆曰： 不利举事，静则吉。 
现代文：高湛又让郑道谦占卜这件事，结果是： 不利于举兵起事，静待则大吉大利。 
English: Gao Zhan also asked Zheng Daoqian to predict this matter, and the result was: It is not good to raise an army, but it is good to wait.

古文：又召曹魏祖问之国事，对曰： 当有大凶。 
现代文：他召请曹魏祖询问国事的变化，魏祖说： 当会有大的变乱。 
English: He summoned Cao Wei Zu to inquire about the changes in state affairs. Wei Zu said, "There will be great turmoil."

古文：又时有林虑令姓籓，知占候，密谓武成曰： 宫车当晏驾，殿下为天下王。 
现代文：当时有一位林虑县姓潘的县令，精于占卜，暗中对高湛说 ：天子不久就会去世，殿下您就要成为天下的君主。 
English: At that time, a county magistrate of Linxian County, surnamed Pan, who was good at divination, secretly said to Gao Zhan: "The heavenly son will soon pass away, and your highness will become the monarch of the world."

古文：武成拘之于内以候之。
现代文：高湛将他关压在内廷等待。
English: Gao Zhan waited for him in the Inner Court.

古文：又令巫觋卜之，多云不须举兵，自有大庆。
现代文：他又让巫祝们占卜，都说不用举兵起事，自然会有大喜大庆的事情降临。
English: He also asked the sorcerers and fortune-tellers to tell fortunes, and they all said that there was no need to raise an army, and that things of great joy and celebration would naturally come.

古文：武成乃奉诏，令数百骑送济南于晋阳。
现代文：高湛便按照孝昭帝的诏书行事，派数百名骑兵将济南王护送到晋阳。
English: Gaotan then acted in accordance with the edict of Emperor Xiaozhao and sent hundreds of cavalry to escort the King of Jinan to Jinyang.

古文：及孝昭崩，武成即位，除元海侍中、开府仪同三司、太子詹事。
现代文：孝昭帝果然驾崩，高湛称帝，即为武成帝，封高元海为侍中、开府仪同三司、太子詹事。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao indeed died, Emperor Gaozhan was proclaimed emperor, that is, Emperor Wucheng, and Gao Yuanhai was appointed as a chamberlain, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Prince Zhanji.

古文：河清二年，元海为和士开谮，被马鞭六十，责云： 尔在鄴城说我以弟反兄，几许不义！
现代文：河清二年，他被和士开陷害，朝廷下诏抽打他六十马鞭，武成帝指责他说： 你在邺城劝我反叛我的哥哥，一点也不仁义！
English: In the second year of Heqing, he was set up by He Shikai, and the imperial court whipped him with sixty horsewhips. Emperor Wu Cheng accused him and said: You advised me to rebel against my brother in Lucheng, and you are not at all benevolent!

古文：以鄴城兵马抗并州，几许无智！不义无智，若为可使？ 
现代文：用邺城的兵马抗击并州的敌兵，没有一点智谋，不义而又无智，难道能够担负重任？ 
English: Using the soldiers and horses of Lushan to resist the enemy soldiers of the annexation of the state, without a bit of cleverness, injustice and stupidity, can it bear the heavy responsibility?

古文：出为兗州刺史。
现代文：命他出任兖州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：元海后妻，陆太姬甥也，故寻被追任使。
现代文：高元海的后妻是陆太姬的外甥女，所以他不久又恢复了原来的职务。
English: Gao Yuanhai's second wife was the niece of Lu Taichi, so he soon resumed his original duties.

古文：武平中，与祖珽共执朝政。
现代文：武平时，他与祖王廷共同执掌朝政。
English: At the time of Wu Ping, he and the ancestor Wang Ting jointly presided over the imperial government.

古文：元海多以太姬密语告珽。
现代文：他常把陆太姬的话告诉祖王廷。
English: He often told Lu Taiji's words to the ancestral king.

古文：珽求领军，元海不可，珽乃以其所告报太姬。姬怒，出元海为郑州刺史。
现代文：祖王廷请求担任领军一职，元海不答应，他便把元海告诉给他的那些又报告给太姬，太姬很恼火，将元海调出京城，任郑州刺史。
English: Zu Wangting asked to be the leader of the army, but Yuanhai did not agree, so he reported to the Empress Dowager those that Yuanhai told him. The Empress Dowager was very angry and transferred Yuanhai out of Beijing and appointed him as the historian of Zhengzhou.

古文：鄴城将败，徵为尚书令。
现代文：邺城即将被北周攻陷，又任他为尚书令。
English: Lucheng was about to be invaded by the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and he was appointed as the commander.

古文：周建德七年，于鄴城谋逆，伏诛。
现代文：建德七年，他在邺城谋反，被诛杀。
English: In the seventh year of Jiande, he plotted a rebellion in Lucheng and was killed.

古文：元海好乱乐祸，然诈仁慈，不饮酒啖肉。
现代文：高元海喜好淫乱，乐于为祸，然而却诈称仁慈，不喝酒不吃肉。
English: Gao Yuanhai likes fornication and is happy to do evil, yet he pretends to be benevolent and does not drink or eat meat.

古文：文宣天保末年，敬信内法，乃至宗庙不血食，皆元海所为。
现代文：齐文宣帝天保末年，朝廷崇信佛法，就连宗庙祭祀也不杀生，都是元海的主张。
English: In the last years of Emperor Tenpo's reign, the imperial court revered Buddhism, and even the sacrificial rites at the ancestral temple did not kill any living beings, all of which were Motohai's ideas.

古文：及为右仆射，又说后主禁屠宰，断酤酒。
现代文：他任右仆射，又劝说后主下令禁止屠宰和卖酒。
English: He appointed his right-hand man to shoot, and persuaded his successor to order a ban on slaughtering and the sale of alcohol.

古文：然本心非靖，故终致覆败。
现代文：然而他的本心并不纯净，所以终于导致失败。
English: However, his original intention was not pure, so it finally led to failure.

古文：思宗弟思好，本浩氏子也，思宗养以为弟，遇之甚薄。
现代文：高思好，本来是浩姓人家的孩子，上洛王高思宗将他收养，当作自己的弟弟，却对他十分刻薄。
English: Gao Sihao was originally a child of a family with the surname Hao. Shangluo King Gao SiZong adopted him as his younger brother, but he was very mean to him.

古文：少以骑射事文襄。
现代文：他从小以骑马射箭侍奉文襄帝高澄。
English: As a child, he served Emperor Gaocheng by riding a horse and shooting arrows.

古文：及文宣受命，为左卫大将军。
现代文：文宣帝高洋即皇帝位，封他为左卫大将军。
English: Emperor Gaoyang was enthroned by Emperor Wenxuan, and he was given the title of General of the Left Division.

古文：本名思孝，天保五年讨蠕蠕，文宣悦其骁勇，谓曰： 尔击贼如鹘入鸦群，宜思好事。 
现代文：他原名叫思孝，天保五年，讨伐蠕蠕族，文宣帝很喜欢他的骁勇善战，对他说： 你进攻敌人，有如勇猛的鹘舟鸟冲入了鸦群，像思念好事。 
English: His original name was Si Xiao. In the 5th year of Tianbao, he fought against the Cree Cree people. Emperor Wenxuan was very fond of his bravery and skill in battle. He said to him, "When you attack the enemy, it is like a brave peregrine falcon rushing into a flock of crows. It is like missing a good thing."

古文：故改名焉。
现代文：所以，他改名为思好。
English: So he changed his name to Siho.

古文：累迁尚书令、朔州道行台、朔州刺史、开府、南安王。
现代文：多次升迁，官至尚书令、朔州道行台、朔州刺史、开府、南安王。
English: He was promoted many times, including Shang Shuling, Shuozhou Daogangdai, Shuozhou Zhishi, Kaifu, and Nan'an Wang.

古文：甚得边朔人心。
现代文：很得北地边境的人心。
English: It is very popular on the northern border.

古文：后主时，斫骨光弁奉使至州，思好迎之甚谨。光弁倨傲，思好因心衔恨。
现代文：后主受禅后，斫骨光弁奉朝廷使命到朔州，思好迎接他极为谨慎周到，而光弁却态度傲慢，思好心里十分恼恨。
English: After the master's acceptance of Zen, Zibo Guangben went to Shuozhou on a mission from the imperial court. He was greeted with extreme caution and thoughtfulness, but Guangben had an arrogant attitude, and he was very angry in his heart.

古文：武平五年，遂举兵反，与并州诸贵书曰： 主上少长深宫，未辨人之情伪，昵近凶狡，疏远忠良。
现代文：武平五年，便举兵反叛，他写给并州官吏士绅的信中说： 主上从小长在深宫，不辨人情的真伪，亲近凶狠狡猾的匪类，疏远忠诚善良的好人。
English: In the fifth year of Wuping's reign, he raised an army and rebelled. In a letter he wrote to nobles and state officials, he said: "The Lord has grown up in the Deep Palace since childhood. He does not distinguish between the truth and falsehood of human feelings. He is close to vicious and cunning bandits and estranged from good and loyal people.

古文：遂使刀锯刑余，贵溢轩阶；商胡丑类，擅权帷幄。
现代文：使得在严刑峻法之后，借此幸进的权贵们站满朝堂；商贾胡人这些丑类，掌握了朝廷大权。
English: As a result, after the severe punishment and harsh law, the dignitaries who were fortunate enough to enter the court were standing all over the palace; these ugly people, the Jiahu merchants, took control of the great power of the court.

古文：剥削生灵，劫掠朝市，暗于听受，专行忍害。
现代文：他们残害生灵，抢掠集市，不接纳意见，肆意祸害百姓。
English: They mutilated living beings, plundered markets, did not accept opinions, and wantonly harmed the people.

古文：幽母深宫，无复人子之礼；二弟残戮，顿绝孔怀之义。
现代文：后主将生母幽禁在深宫，没有做人子的礼法；他的二弟被他杀戮，断绝了兄弟间互相思念的感情。
English: His second brother was killed by him, severing the feeling of missing each other between the brothers.

古文：仍纵子立夺马于东门，光弁制鹰于西市；驳龙得仪同之号，逍遥受郡君之名。犬马班位，荣冠轩冕，人不堪役，思长乱阶。
现代文：他放纵子立在东门抢夺人家的马匹，斫骨光弁在西市带着苍鹰耀武扬威。如蛟如龙一样凶狠的人能得到仪同的封号。逍遥自在，无所用心的人也得到州郡牧守的官职，犬马不如的家伙排列朝班，荣耀冠于士大夫之上。人民不堪忍受他们的统治，早就萌发出反叛的思想。
English: He allowed his son to stand at the east gate to snatch people's horses, and the shinbone Guangben to show off his military prowess with a goshawk in the west city. People who are as fierce as the dragon can get the seal of the ceremony. People who are free and easy, and who have nothing to do, also get the official position of the state and county shepherd, and people who are not as good as dogs and horses are lined up in the morning shift, and glory is crowned over the shidafu. The people cannot bear their rule, and have long since sprouted the idea of rebellion.

古文：赵郡王睿，实曰宗英，社稷惟寄。左相斛律明月，世为元辅，威著邻国，并非有辜，奄见诛殄。
现代文：赵郡王高睿，实在是宗室的英才，国家的希望；左丞相斛律明月，世代都为国家的首辅大臣，威望著于邻近的国家。他们并没有犯什么罪，却突然被诛杀。
English: Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui was truly a great talent of the family and the hope of the country; Zuo Jiao Minister Yao Lu Ming Yue was the first and second vice-minister of the country for generations and was respected by neighboring countries. They did not commit any crime, but they were suddenly killed.

古文：孤既忝预皇枝，实蒙殊奖，今便拥率义兵，指除君侧之害。
现代文：我本是皇室的一支，蒙受宗族的许多殊荣，今天率领义军，为了清除天子旁边的佞臣。
English: I am a member of the royal family, I have received many honors from my family, and today I am leading the rebel army in order to purge the vassals next to the Son of Heaven.

古文：幸悉此怀，无致疑惑。 
现代文：希望天下人都要理解我的做法，不要产生别的疑惑。 
English: I hope that people around the world will understand my actions and not have any other doubts.

古文：行台郎王行思之辞也。
现代文：这是行台郎王行思替他起草的。
English: This was drafted for him by Gyodairo Wang Gyoshu.

古文：思好至阳曲，自号大丞相，置百官，以行台左丞王尚之为长史。
现代文：高思好率军至阳曲，自称为大丞相，设置百官，任行台左丞王尚之为长史。
English: Gao Sihao led the army to Yangqu, called himself the grand chancellor, set up hundreds of officials, and had a long history as the king of the left chancellors.

古文：武卫赵海在晋阳掌兵，时仓卒，不暇奏，矫诏发兵拒之。
现代文：武卫赵海在晋阳掌握兵权，因时间仓促，来不及奏闻朝廷，自己假借朝廷的诏书发兵抗拒思好。
English: Wuwei Zhao Hai seized military power in Jinyang. Due to the time pressure, he was too late to report to the imperial court. He thought it would be a good idea to use the imperial edict to send troops to resist.

古文：军士皆曰： 南安王来，我辈唯须唱万岁奉迎耳。 
现代文：而他的部下却说 ：南安王高思好如果来到，我们只须高呼万岁迎接他。 
English: But his subordinates said, "If the King of Nan'an, Gao Si, comes, we only need to shout "long live" to welcome him."

古文：帝闻变，使唐邕、莫多娄敬显、刘桃枝、中领军厍狄士文驰之晋阳，帝勒兵续进。
现代文：后主听到发生事变，派唐邕、莫多娄敬显、刘桃枝、中领军厍狄士文赶赴晋阳。
English: After the lord heard of the incident, he sent Tang Xuan, Modo Xuan Jingxian, Liu Tao Zhi, and the middle leader of the army, Zou Di Shwen, to Jinyang.

古文：思好军败，与行思投水而死。
现代文：后主又率兵接踵而来，思好的军队失败，他与王行思投水而死。
English: Later, the lord led his soldiers one after another, and the good army failed, and he and Wang Xingsi were drowned.

古文：韩长鸾女适思好子，故奏言有人诬告诸贵，事相扰动，不杀无以息后，乃斩之。
现代文：他的部下二千人被刘桃枝包围，刘桃枝一边杀害一边招降，没有一个人投降，以至于全部被杀。思好暴尸七天，然后被肢解焚烧。
English: Two thousand of his subordinates were encircled by Liu Tao Zhi. Liu Tao Zhi killed them and invited them to surrender, but no one surrendered, so all of them were killed. The mutilated bodies were kept for seven days and then dismembered and burned.

古文：思好既诛，死者弟伏阙下诉求赠兄，长鸾不为通也。平秦王归彦，字仁英，神武族弟也。
现代文：王尚之的尸体在邺城内被烹煮。思好的嫔妃也在宫内被箭射杀，然后用火焚烧。平秦王高归彦，字仁英，神武帝高欢的族弟。
English: The body of Wang Shangzhi was boiled in the city of Zou. The conniving Zoufei was also shot with arrows in the palace and then burned with fire. Ping Qin Wang Gao Gui Yan, Zi Renying, the younger brother of Emperor Shenwu Gao Huan.

古文：父徽，魏末坐事当徙凉州。行至河、渭间，遇贼，以军功得免流。
现代文：父亲高徽，北魏末年犯罪，应当流放到凉州，行至黄河、渭水之间遇上贼寇，由于立功得以免除流放。
English: Gao Hui's father, who committed a crime at the end of the Northern Wei Dynasty, should have been exiled to Liangzhou. He went as far as the Yellow River and Surabaya and encountered bandits, but was able to be exempted from exile due to his meritorious service.

古文：因于河州积年，以解胡言为西域大使，得胡师子，以功行河东事，遂死焉。
现代文：因为在河州多年，能听懂胡人说话，被朝廷任命为西域大使，得到胡地的一头狮子。建立功勋代行河州牧守，死在任上。
English: Because he had been in Hezhou for many years, he was able to understand the Hu people's speech, was appointed by the court as the ambassador to the western region, and received a lion from the Hu region. He was awarded the establishment of the merits of acting as the herdsman of Hezhou, and died in office.

古文：徽于神武，旧恩甚笃。
现代文：高徽对于高欢恩情十分深厚。
English: Gao Hui is deeply grateful to Gao Huan.

古文：及神武平京洛，迎徽丧，与穆同营葬。
现代文：高欢平定洛阳后，将他的尸骨迁至洛阳安葬。
English: After Gao Huan subdued Luoyang, his remains were moved to Luoyang for burial.

古文：赠司徒，谥曰文宣。
现代文：追赠他为司徒，谥号文宣。
English: He was posthumously given the posthumous title of "Wenxuan."

古文：初，徽尝过长安市，与妇人王氏私通而生归彦，至是年已九岁，神武追见之，抚对悲喜。
现代文：早先，高徽曾路过长安市，与妇人王氏私通，生下了高归彦。他已有九岁时，高欢见了又悲又喜。
English: Earlier, Gao Hui had passed through Chang'an City, had sexual intercourse with a woman named Wang Shi, and gave birth to Gao Gui Yan. He was nine years old, and seeing Gao Gui Yan was both sad and happy.

古文：稍迁徐州刺史。
现代文：不久，命他为徐州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed to write the history of Xuzhou.

古文：归彦少质朴，后更改节，放纵好声色，朝夕酣歌。
现代文：归彦少年时真诚朴实，长大后性格发生变化，放纵自为，喜好犬马声色，朝夕饮酒酣歌。
English: When he was a boy, Gui Yan was sincere and simple, but his personality changed when he grew up. He was self-indulgent, liked dogs and horses, and drank alcohol in the morning and evening.

古文：妻魏上党王元天穆女也，貌不美而甚娇妒。数忿争，密启文宣求离，事寝不报。
现代文：他的妻子是北魏上党王元天穆的女儿，容貌不美而性情娇惯好妒，两个人多次争执，归彦密奏文宣帝请求离异，事情被压了下来。
English: His wife was the daughter of the Northern Wei Upper Party King Yuan Tianmu, her appearance was not beautiful and her temperament was spoiled and jealous. The two quarreled many times, and Gui Yanmi asked Emperor Wenxuan for a divorce, and the matter was suppressed.

古文：天保元年，封平秦王，嫡妃康及所生母王氏，并为太妃。善事二母，以孝闻。
现代文：天保元年，朝廷封归彦为平秦王，他的长母康氏和生母王氏一起被封为太妃，他善于侍奉两位母亲，以孝顺闻名。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court crowned Kugihiko as the King of Pingqin. His eldest mother, Kangji, and his birth mother, Wangji, were both crowned as empresses. He was good at serving his two mothers and was known for his filial piety.

古文：徵为兼侍郎，稍被亲宠。
现代文：被征用兼任侍郎，逐渐被朝廷亲近宠幸。
English: He was requisitioned to serve concurrently as a chamberlain, and gradually became a favorite of the imperial court.

古文：以讨侯景功，别封长乐郡公，除领军大将军。
现代文：因讨伐侯景建立军功，另外被封为长乐郡公，任领军大将军。
English: He was awarded the title of Changle County official and became a leading general for his military exploits in the suppression of Houjing.

古文：领军加大，自归彦始也。
现代文：将军的前面加一个大字，就从他这里开始。
English: Put a capital letter in front of General and start with him.

古文：文宣诛高德正，金宝财货，悉以赐之。
现代文：文宣帝诛杀高德正，将德正家的金银财宝全部赐给了归彦。
English: Emperor Wenxuan killed Gao Dezheng and gave all the gold and silver treasures of the Dezheng family to Guihang.

古文：乾明初，拜司徒，仍总知禁卫。
现代文：乾明初年，封他为司徒，仍然总领禁卫。
English: In the first year of the Qianming Dynasty, he was appointed as a magistrate, and was still the head of the imperial guards.

古文：济南自晋阳之鄴，杨愔宣敕，留从驾兵五千于西中，阴备非常。
现代文：济南王从晋阳到邺城，杨忄音宣布朝廷命令：留下保护天子的卫兵五千人驻扎在西中，暗中防备非常之变。
English: When the king of Jinan went from Jinyang to Shicheng, Yang Yuyin announced the imperial order: to leave five thousand guards to protect the son of heaven, stationed in the west, secretly guarding against extraordinary changes.

古文：至鄴数日，归彦乃知之，由是阴怨杨、燕等。
现代文：到了邺城数日，归彦才知道这道赦命，因此，暗中怨恨杨、燕等人。
English: A few days after arriving in Lucheng, Gui Yan only learned about this pardon, and therefore secretly resented Yang, Yan and others.

古文：杨、燕等欲去二王，问计于归彦。归彦诈喜，请共元海量之。
现代文：杨、燕等想除去二王，问高归彦应该怎么办，归彦假装很高兴，请他们与高元海一起商量。
English: Yang, Yan and others want to remove the two kings and ask Gao Guihang what should be done. Guihang pretends to be happy and asks them to discuss with Gao Yuanhai.

古文：元海亦口许心违，驰告长广。长广于是诛杨、燕等。
现代文：元海也口中答应，内心不愿，派人迅速报告给长广王高湛，长广王因此诛杀了杨、燕等人。
English: Yuanhai also verbally agreed, but inwardly did not want to, and sent someone to quickly report to Changguang Wang Gaotan. Changguang Wang therefore killed Yang, Yan and others.

古文：孝昭将入云龙门，都督成休宁列仗拒而不内，归彦谕之，然后得入。
现代文：孝昭帝将要到云龙门，都督成休宁列队拒绝，不放他进城，归彦谕告休宁，然后才放孝昭帝入城。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhao was about to arrive at Yunlongmen, the governor, Cheng Xuning, lined up and refused to let him enter the city. He ordered Xiaozhao to report to Xuning, and only then let Emperor Xiaozhao enter the city.

古文：进向柏阁、永巷亦知之。
现代文：进向柏阁、永巷也是这个样子。
English: This is also the case for the approach to Park Pavilion and Yongxiang.

古文：孝昭践阼，以此弥见优重。每入，常在平原王段韶上。
现代文：孝昭帝登基，因此对归彦更加优礼厚待，他每次入宫，位置都排在平原王高段韶前面。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhao ascended to the throne, he treated Guihang with more courtesy. Every time he entered the palace, he was placed in front of Wang Gaodan of the Plain.

古文：以为司空，兼尚书令。
现代文：朝廷封他为司空，兼尚书令。
English: The imperial court appointed him as Siku, and he also held the title of Shurei.

古文：齐制，宫内唯天子纱帽，臣下皆戎帽。特赐归彦纱帽以宠之。
现代文：北齐的制度，宫内只允许天子戴纱帽，做臣的都戴戎帽，孝昭帝特赐归彦戴纱帽以示对他的宠信。
English: According to the Beiqi system, only the emperor was allowed to wear a cap in the imperial court, and all officials had to wear a military cap. Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi gave Gui Yan a cap to show his favor.

古文：孝昭崩，归彦从晋阳迎武成于鄴。
现代文：孝昭帝驾崩，归彦从晋阳迎接武成帝至邺都。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozhao, Guihang traveled from Jinyang to Shandong to meet Emperor Wu Chengdi.

古文：及武成即位，进位太傅，领司徒，常听将私部曲三人，带刀入仗。
现代文：武成帝即位，晋封他为太傅，统领司徒，常允许他带领私人卫士三人，带着刀进入宫中。
English: Emperor Wucheng ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to Taifu, the leader of the imperial guards, and he was often allowed to lead three personal guards and enter the palace with a sword.

古文：从武成还都，诸贵戚等竞要之。其所往处，一坐尽倾。
现代文：自从武成帝回到邺都，所有的贵戚都竞相与归彦交结，所到达的地方，举座都被他倾倒。
English: Since Emperor Wu Chengdu returned to Shidu, all the noble relatives have been competing to make friends with Gui Yan, and wherever he has arrived, he has been overturned.

古文：归彦既地居将相，志气盈满，发言陵侮，傍若无人。
现代文：归彦位居将相，志得意满，出言傲慢无理，旁若无人。
English: Kunihiko is in the position of commander-in-chief, he is full of pride, his words are arrogant and unreasonable, and there is no one around.

古文：议者以威权震主，必为祸乱。
现代文：人们议论认为他的权威震慑天子，必定会造成国家的祸乱。
English: It was said that his authority was a threat to the emperor and would surely bring disaster to the country.

古文：上亦寻其前翻覆之迹，渐忌之。
现代文：武成帝也发现他过去反复无常的事情，对他渐渐疏远。
English: Emperor Wucheng also found that he had been capricious in the past, and gradually distanced himself from him.

古文：高元海、毕义云、高乾和等咸数言其短。
现代文：高元海、毕义云、高乾和等人都多次揭发他的短处。
English: Gao Yuanhai, Bi Yiyun, Gao Qianhe and others have repeatedly exposed his shortcomings.

古文：上幸归彦家，召魏收对御作诏草，欲加右丞相。
现代文：武成帝到归彦家，召见魏收当面起草诏书，想加封他为丞相。
English: Emperor Wucheng went to Guihang's house and summoned Wei Hui to draft an edict in person, wanting to add him as chancellor.

古文：收曰： 至尊以右丞相登帝位，今为归彦威名太盛，故出之，岂可复加此号？ 
现代文：魏收说 ：陛下您以右丞相的身份即皇帝位，今天因为归彦的威名太盛，所以才将这个职位让出，怎么能再加封这个职衔呢？ 
English: Wei Jie said, "Your Majesty, you ascended to the throne as the minister of the right, that is, the emperor. Today, because Gui Yan's prestige is too great, you have to give up this position. How can you add this title?

古文：乃拜太宰、冀州刺史。即乾和缮写。
现代文：武成帝便授予归彦太宰、冀州刺史的职务，当即让高乾和起草加封的诏命。
English: Emperor Wucheng then conferred the positions of Guihang Dazai and Jizhou Shishi, and immediately ordered Gao Qianhe to draft and seal the edict.

古文：昼日，仍敕门司不听辄内。
现代文：天亮，便命门司不允许旁人入内。
English: At dawn, the doorkeepers were ordered not to allow anyone else to enter.

古文：时归彦在家纵酒，经宿不知，至明欲参。至门知之，大惊而退。
现代文：当时，归彦正在家纵酒豪饮，一个晚上竟然不知道武成帝早已到家里来，天明想上朝参拜，到门口才知道，大惊失色，连忙退回。
English: At that time, Gui Yan was drinking heavily at home. One night, he did not know that Emperor Wu Chengdi had already arrived at home. Tian Ming wanted to go to the temple in the morning. When he got to the door, he was shocked and hurried back.

古文：及通名谢，敕令早发，别赐钱帛、鼓吹、医药，事事周备。
现代文：等到他通名谢罪，武成帝的诏命早已发出，另外赐给他钱币、布帛、仪仗、医药，样样都很周详完备。
English: By the time he confessed his sins, Emperor Wu Chengdu's edict had already been issued, and he was also given coins, cloth, ceremonial weapons, and medicine, all of which were very detailed and complete.

古文：又敕武职督将，悉送至清阳宫。
现代文：又命武职官员，全部到清阳宫。
English: He also ordered all military officials to go to the Qingyang Palace.

古文：拜而退，莫敢共语。唯与赵郡王睿久语，时无闻者。
现代文：归彦拜谢后退出，不敢与武成帝说话，只同赵郡王高睿说了很长时间的话，当时却没有人听见。
English: After bowing and thanking, Gui Yan withdrew, not daring to speak with Emperor Wu Cheng. He only spoke with Zhao Guo Wang Gao Rui for a long time, but no one heard him at that time.

古文：至州不自安，谋逆，欲待受调讫，班赐军士。
现代文：归彦回到州中，心里很不安分，便阴谋叛变，想等到被朝廷调动完毕，再赏赐将士。
English: When Gui Yan returned to Shuzhong, he was very uneasy in his heart, so he plotted a mutiny and wanted to wait until he was transferred by the court before rewarding the soldiers.

古文：望车驾如晋阳，乘虚入鄴。
现代文：他看到武成帝到了晋阳，便率兵乘虚进入邺都。
English: When he saw that Emperor Wu Cheng had arrived in Jinyang, he led his soldiers to take advantage of the situation and enter the capital.

古文：为其郎中令吕思礼所告，诏平原王段韶袭之。
现代文：被他的部下郎中令吕思礼告发，武成帝命平原王段韶进攻他。
English: When he was denounced by his subordinate, the middle-ranking general Lü Sili, Emperor Wucheng ordered Pingyuan Wang Duanzhang to attack him.

古文：归彦旧于南境置私驿，闻军将逼，报之，便婴城拒守。
现代文：归彦过去在南境私自设置驿站，听到将要进攻的消息，报告给了他。他便派兵坚守城池。
English: In the past, Kunihiko had set up a private post on the southern border, and when he heard the news of the impending attack, he reported to him. He then sent soldiers to defend the castle.

古文：先是，冀州长史宇文仲鸾、司马李祖挹、别驾陈季璩、中从事房子弼、长乐郡守尉普兴等疑归彦有异，使连名密启，归彦追而获之，遂收禁仲鸾等五人。
现代文：早先，冀州长史宇文仲鸾、司马李祖挹、别驾陈季遽、中从事房子弼、长乐郡守尉普兴等怀疑归彦有异常的举动，便联名密报朝廷，归彦听说后，派人将他们的密报追获，并将他们五个人拘押起来。
English: Earlier, the governor of Hebei Province, Shi Yuwen Zhongyao, Sima Li Zuyao, the deputy governor of Hebei Province, Chen Ji Xuan, the vice-governor of Hebei Province, and the governor of Changle County, Pu Xing, suspected that Gui Yan had acted abnormally, and jointly reported to the imperial court. After Gui Yan heard about it, he sent someone to track down their secret report and detained the five of them.

古文：仍并不从，皆杀之。
现代文：这五个人不跟他一起叛乱，便将他们杀死。
English: These five men would not rebel with him, so he killed them.

古文：军已逼城，归彦登城大叫云： 孝昭皇帝初崩，六军百万众，悉由臣手，投身向鄴迎陛下。当时不反，今日岂有异心？
现代文：平原王率领的军队已逼近邺城，他登城大声喊叫： 孝昭皇帝刚刚崩殂时，六军的百万之众都归我指挥，我却到邺城奉迎武成帝即位，当时不反，今天难道会有二心？
English: The army led by the Plain King has approached Shicheng. He went to the city and shouted loudly: When Emperor Xiaozhao had just died, the million people of the six armies were under my command, but I went to Shicheng to welcome Emperor Wu Cheng to the throne. At that time, there was no opposition. Will there be two hearts today?

古文：正恨高元海、毕义云、高乾和诳惑圣上，疾忌忠良。但为杀此三人，即临城自刎。 
现代文：我是因为恨高元海、毕义云、高乾和欺蒙圣上，妒恨忠臣良将，我只为了杀这三个人，目的实现后就临城自尽。 
English: I did it because I hated Gao Yuanhai, Bi Yiyun, Gao Qian, and Zhimou Sheng, and I was jealous of the loyal general. I only wanted to kill these three people, and after achieving my goal, I went to the city to commit suicide.

古文：其后城破，单骑北走。
现代文：后来邺城被攻破，他单人独骑向北逃走。
English: Later, when Lucheng was breached, he fled north alone.

古文：至交津，见获，锁送鄴。
现代文：到了交津被抓获，被戴上枷锁送到邺城。
English: Arrived in Jiaozuo, he was arrested and sent to Lucheng in shackles.

古文：帝令赵郡王睿私问其故，归彦曰： 使黄颔少兒牵挽我，何可不反？ 
现代文：武成帝命赵郡王高睿又私下里问他谋反的原因，他说： 让那些下巴上没毛的小儿牵制着我，我为何不反？ 
English: Emperor Wucheng ordered Zhao Gu Wang Gao Rui to ask him in private the reason for his rebellion, and he said: Let those children with no hair on their chins hold me back, why don't I rebel?

古文：曰： 谁邪？ 
现代文：赵郡王问： 指的是谁呀？ 
English: Zhao Guowang asked: Who is referring to?

古文：归彦曰： 元海、乾和，岂是朝廷老宿？
现代文：他答道： 高元海、高乾和，难道是朝廷中的老臣？
English: He replied, "Are Gao Yuanhai and Gao Qianhe old courtiers in the imperial court?"

古文：如赵家老公时，又讵怀怨？ 
现代文：像赵家老公，我怎么会心怀怨恨？ 
English: Like Zhao Jia's husband, how could I hold a grudge?

古文：于是帝又使让焉。对曰： 高元海受毕义云宅，用作本州刺史，给后部鼓吹，臣为蕃王、太宰，仍不得鼓吹。
现代文：于是，武成帝又派人指责他，他对答说： 高元海接受毕义云的房宅，毕义云被任命为本州刺史，给后部鼓吹的仪仗；我身为藩王、太宰，仍得不到鼓吹的仪仗。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu Cheng also sent someone to accuse him, to which he replied: Gao Yuanhai accepted Bi Yiyun's house, Bi Yiyun was appointed as the head of Honshu and preached to the rear; I, as the king of the clan and the Dazai, still do not get to preach.

古文：正杀元海、义云而已。 
现代文：所以要杀高元海、毕义云才能解恨。 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to kill Gao Yuanhai and Bi Yiyun in order to get rid of hatred.

古文：上令都督刘桃枝牵入，归彦犹作前语，望活。
现代文：武成帝命刘桃枝将他押入宫中，归彦仍然说前面的那些话，并乞求活命。
English: Emperor Wucheng ordered Liu Taoji to push him into the palace, but Gui Yan still said the previous words and begged for his life.

古文：帝命议其罪，皆云不可赦。
现代文：武成帝命朝臣议定他的罪恶，大家都说不可赦免。
English: Emperor Wucheng ordered his courtiers to discuss his crimes, and they all said that he could not be pardoned.

古文：乃载以露车，衔枚面缚，刘桃枝临之以刃，击鼓随之，并子孙十五人，皆弃市。
现代文：便用露车载上他，让他口中衔枚，蒙住脸，刘桃枝用刀将他杀死，并随之击鼓。他的十五名子孙也一起被斩首弃市。
English: They put him on a camper van, forced him to eat with a fork in his mouth and covered his face. Liu Tao Zhi killed him with a knife, accompanied by drumming. His fifteen children and grandchildren were also beheaded and abandoned.

古文：赠仁州刺史。魏时山崩，得石角二，藏在武库。
现代文：北魏时山崩，得到两件石制的兵器，保存在武器库中。
English: After a landslide in the Northern Wei Dynasty, he obtained two stone weapons and kept them in his arsenal.

古文：文宣入库，赐从臣兵器，特以二石角与归彦，谓曰： 尔事常山不得反，事长广得反，反时，将此角吓汉。 
现代文：文宣帝进入库中，赏赐给从臣们兵器，特把这两件兵器送给归彦，对他说： 你侍奉常山王高演不能反叛，侍奉长广王高湛可以谋反。反的时候，可用这两件武器威吓人。 
English: Emperor Wenxuan entered the storehouse and rewarded his vassals with weapons. He specially sent these two weapons to Gui Yan and said to him: You serve the King of Changshan, Gao Yuan, you cannot rebel; you serve the Chief of Guang Wang, Gaotan, you can plot a rebellion. When you rebel, you can use these two weapons to intimidate people.

古文：归彦额骨三道，着帻不安。文宣见之怒，使以马鞭击其额，血被面曰： 尔反时，当以此骨吓汉。 
现代文：归彦的额骨长有三道，戴头巾很不舒服，文宣帝见了大怒，用马鞭抽他的额头，血流满面，说： 你造反的时候，想用这块额骨吓唬人吗？ 
English: Gui Yan had three long frontal bones, and it was very uncomfortable to wear a headscarf. When Emperor Wensun saw Gui Yan's great anger, he whipped his forehead with a horsewhip, and blood streamed down his face. He said, "When you rebel, do you want to use this frontal bone to scare people?"

古文：永安简平王浚字定乐，神武第三子也。
现代文：文宣帝说他会造反，竟应验了。永安简平王高浚，字定乐，神武帝高欢的第三个儿子。
English: Emperor Wenxuan said he would rebel, and it came to pass. Yongan Jianping Wang Gaojun, literally Dingle, was the third son of Emperor Shenwu Gaohuan.

古文：初，神武纳浚母，当月而有孕。
现代文：开初，高欢娶高浚的母亲，当月就有了身孕。
English: At the beginning of the year, Gao Huan married Gao Jun's mother, and became pregnant that month.

古文：及产浚，疑非己类，不甚爱之。
现代文：高浚出生后，他怀疑不是自己的孩子，因而不十分喜欢。
English: After Gao Jun was born, he suspected that Gao Jun was not his child, so he did not like him very much.

古文：而浚早慧，后更被宠。
现代文：而高浚很小的时候就十分聪慧，后来逐渐被父亲宠爱。
English: But Gao Jun was very smart when he was very young, and later he was gradually favored by his father.

古文：年八岁，谓博士卢裕曰： 祭神如神在，为有神邪？无神邪？ 
现代文：他八岁时问博士卢景裕 ：祭祀神，就好像有神在，到底是有神呢，还是没有神呢？ 
English: When he was eight years old, he asked Dr. Lu Jingyu: "Sacrificing to the gods, as if there are gods, are there really gods, or are there no gods?"

古文：对曰： 有。 
现代文：卢景裕回答说： 有神。 
English: Yao Jia replied: There is such a thing.

古文：浚曰： 有神，当云祭神神在，何烦如字？ 
现代文：高浚又问： 如果有神，应当说是祭神神在，为什么非要加上一个如字。 
English: Gao Jun also asked: If there is a god, it should be said that the deity is present, why do you have to add a word like.

古文：景裕不能答。
现代文：景裕竟答不上来。
English: Jingyu couldn't answer at all.

古文：及长，嬉戏不节。
现代文：长大后，嬉戏玩闹，不加节制。
English: When they grow up, they will play and have fun without restraint.

古文：曾以属请受纳，大见杖罚，拘禁府狱，既而见原。
现代文：曾经因被请托受人财货，被狠狠地杖责了一顿，拘押在府中的监狱，不久被放出。
English: He was once severely beaten with a cane for being asked to collect people's money and goods, detained in the central prison, and soon released.

古文：后稍折节，颇以读书为务。元象中，封永安郡公。
现代文：后来，稍有改变，很知道用功读书。元象时，被封为永安郡公。
English: Later, with a slight change, he knew how to study hard. At the time of Yuan Xiang, he was awarded the title of Yong'an County.

古文：豪爽有气力，善骑射，为文襄所爱。
现代文：为人豪爽慷慨，力气很大，善于骑马射箭，被文襄帝高澄所钟爱。
English: He was courageous and generous, very strong, good at riding and archery, and was loved by Emperor Gao Cheng.

古文：文宣性雌懦，每参文襄，有时洟出。
现代文：文宣帝高洋性情怯懦，每次参见文襄帝，有时紧张得流鼻涕。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was a coward with a lofty disposition. Every time I see Emperor Wenzhong, I sometimes get a runny nose from nervousness.

古文：浚恆责帝左右： 何因不为二兄拭鼻？ 
现代文：高浚常责怪文宣帝左右的人说 ：为何不给我二哥擦鼻子？ 
English: Gao Jun often blamed the people around Emperor Wenxuan and said, "Why didn't you wipe my second brother's nose for me?

古文：由是见衔。
现代文：因此，被文宣帝衔恨。
English: Therefore, he was hated by Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：累迁中书监、兼侍中。
现代文：他多次升迁，官至中书监、兼侍中。
English: He was promoted several times, rising to the post of junior high school librarian and junior high school attendant.

古文：出为青州刺史。虽颇好畋猎，聪明矜恕，上下畏悦之。
现代文：出任青州刺史，很爱好打猎，为人聪明严肃宽厚，上下对他既敬畏又喜欢。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Qingzhou, was fond of hunting, was intelligent, serious and generous, and was both revered and liked by all.

古文：保定初，进爵为王。
现代文：天保初年，被封爵为王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was knighted.

古文：文宣末年多酒，浚谓亲近曰： 二兄旧来，不甚了了，自登阼已后，识解顿进。
现代文：文宣帝后来嗜酒如命，高浚对亲近的人说 ：二哥过去对事情不甚明白；登基以来，见解大有长进。
English: Emperor Wenxuan later drank to excess, and Gao Jun said to those close to him: "The second brother did not understand things very well in the past; since he ascended the throne, his views have greatly improved.

古文：今因酒败德，朝臣无敢谏者。
现代文：现在因嗜酒败坏道德，朝臣没有人敢劝阻的。
English: Now, no one dares to dissuade the courtiers from drinking and corrupting morals.

古文：大敌未灭，吾甚以为忧。
现代文：敌人还没有被消灭，我很为他担忧。
English: The enemy has not yet been eliminated, and I am very worried about him.

古文：欲乘驿至鄴面谏，不知用吾不？ 
现代文：想骑马到邺城当面进谏，不知他是否听从我的意见？ 
English: I want to ride a horse to Shicheng and enter Shicheng in person. I don't know if he will listen to my advice.

古文：人有知，密以白帝，又见衔。
现代文：有人听到了，秘密报告给文宣帝，又遭到衔恨。
English: Someone heard about it, reported the secret to Emperor Wenxuan, and was hated again.

古文：八年，来朝，从幸东山。
现代文：天保八年，高浚到邺都朝拜，与文宣帝一起到东山游玩。
English: In the eighth year of the Tenpo era, Gaozhun went to the capital of Shandong Province to worship, and went to Dongshan to play with Emperor Wenzhong.

古文：帝裸裎为乐，杂以妇女，又作狐掉尾戏。
现代文：文宣帝以光着身子作为快乐，并与妇女在一起，又爱作狐狸掉尾巴的游戏。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was fond of playing naked for fun and with women, and also liked to play the game of a fox losing its tail.

古文：浚进言，此非人主所宜。帝甚不悦。
现代文：高浚劝他，说这不是国家的君主所应该做的，文宣帝很不高兴。
English: Gao Jun advised him that this was not what the monarch of the country should do, and Emperor Wenzhong was very unhappy.

古文：浚又于屏处召杨遵彦，讥其不谏。
现代文：他又叫左右的人退下，召见杨遵彦，批评他不向皇帝劝谏。
English: He also told those on his right and left to step back, summoned Yang Zunyan, and criticized him for not advising the emperor.

古文：帝时不欲大臣与诸王交通，遵彦惧，以奏帝。大怒曰： 小人由来难忍！ 
现代文：文宣帝当时不想让大臣与各位藩王联系，杨遵彦害怕，把高浚召见他的事奏报给文宣帝，文宣帝大为愤怒，说 ：我对这个小人从来就难于忍受！ 
English: At that time, Emperor Wenzong did not want the minister to contact the feudal lords. Yang Zunyan was afraid and reported to Emperor Wenzong that Gao Jun had summoned him. Emperor Wenzong was very angry and said, "I have never been able to tolerate this villain!"

古文：遂罢酒还宫。浚寻还州，又上书切谏。
现代文：便罢去酒宴回到宫中，高浚不久回到青州，又上书恳切劝谏。
English: Gao Jun then left the banquet and returned to the palace. Gao Jun soon returned to Qingzhou and sent a letter to the emperor to earnestly persuade him.

古文：诏令徵浚，浚惧祸，谢疾不朝。
现代文：文宣帝下诏征调他进京，他畏惧祸患，以有病辞谢不朝。
English: Emperor Wenxuan issued an edict to transfer him to Beijing. He was afraid of the evil and used the excuse that he was ill.

古文：上怒，驰驿收浚，老幼泣送者数千人。
现代文：文宣帝恼怒，派人飞驰青州，将高浚收押。青州的男女老幼哭泣着为他送行的有数千人。
English: Enraged, Emperor Wenxuan sent someone to fly to Qingzhou to arrest Gao Jian. Thousands of men, women and children in Qingzhou wept to see him off.

古文：至，盛以铁笼，与上党王涣俱置北城地牢下，饮食溲秽，共在一所。
现代文：到京城后，用铁笼将他关押，与上党王高涣都被放置在北城的地牢里，吃饭和大小便都在一起。
English: After arriving in Beijing, he was detained in an iron cage. He was placed in a dungeon in Beicheng, together with the top Party leader Gao Wei. They ate and urinated together.

古文：明年，帝亲将左右，临穴歌讴，令浚等和之。
现代文：第二年，文宣帝亲自带上亲近的人，到地牢里唱歌，让高浚等人唱和。
English: In the second year, Emperor Wenzhong personally took people close to him to the dungeon to sing, and let Gao Jun and others sing along.

古文：浚等惶怖且悲，不觉声战。
现代文：高浚等惶恐害怕，并且十分悲哀，不觉声音颤抖。
English: Gao Jun and others were panicked and scared, and they were very sad, and their voices trembled.

古文：帝为怆然，因泣，将赦之。
现代文：文宣帝听了为之怆然泣下，准备赦免他。
English: Emperor Wenxuan was moved to tears and prepared to pardon him.

古文：长广王湛先与浚不睦，进曰： 猛兽安可出穴？ 
现代文：长广王高湛与高浚过去有矛盾，进谏说 ：猛兽怎么可以放出坑穴？ 
English: Changguang Wang Gao Zhan and Gao Jun had a conflict in the past. Jin Yao said, "How can a ferocious beast dig a pit?"

古文：帝默然。
现代文：文宣帝默然不语。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：浚等闻之，呼长广王小字曰： 步落稽，皇天见汝！ 
现代文：高浚等听了，喊着长广王的小名说： 步落稽，皇天会看见你的！ 
English: Gao Jun waited and listened, then called out the nickname of Chang Guang Wang and said: "Walk slowly, the emperor will see you!"

古文：左右闻者，莫不悲伤。
现代文：左右的人听了无不悲伤。
English: People on both sides were sad to hear it.

古文：浚与涣皆有雄略，为诸王所倾服。帝恐为害，乃自刺涣，又使壮士刘桃枝就笼乱刺。
现代文：高浚与高涣都有雄才大略，为各路藩王所倾服，文宣帝恐怕他们还会威胁自己，便拿长予亲自刺向高涣，又让壮士刘桃枝向笼中乱刺。
English: Both Gao Jun and Gao Yao had great talents and were admired by the kings of all the domains. Emperor Wenzhong was afraid that they would threaten him, so he personally stabbed Gao Yao, and let the strong man Liu Taoji stab into the cage.

古文：槊每下，浚、涣辄以手拉折之，号哭呼天，于是薪火乱投笼，烧杀之，填以石土。
现代文：长矛每刺来，高浚和高涣都用手将它折断，大声号哭，呼叫苍天。文宣帝又命用柴火胡乱投向铁笼，将他们烧死，并埋上石块和土。
English: Gaozhun and Gaozhun broke every spear with their hands, cried loudly, and called out to the heavens. Emperor Wenzhong also ordered them to throw firewood at the iron cage, burn them to death, and bury them with stones and soil.

古文：后出，皮发皆尽，尸色如炭，天下为之痛心。
现代文：后来扒出，他的皮肤头发都已经烧尽，尸体的颜色就像木炭，天下的人都为之痛彻肝肠。
English: He was later exhumed, his skin and hair all burned away, his corpse the color of charcoal, and the world was outraged.

古文：性沉谨，以宽厚称。河清三年，薨于晋阳，或云以鸩终。
现代文：后来，文宣帝又把高浚的妃子陆氏配给仪同刘郁捷。郁捷是文宣帝过去的家丁，因立有军功受宠。当时，他又命刘郁捷杀害高浚，所以将陆氏配给他。
English: Later, Emperor Wenzhong assigned Gaozhun's concubine Lu to Liu Yujie. Yu Jie was a member of Emperor Wenzhong's family in the past and was favored for his military exploits. At that time, he also ordered Liu Yujie to kill Gaozhun, so Lu was assigned to him.

古文：还葬鄴，赠假黄钺、太宰、录尚书事。
现代文：过了几天，文宣帝又因陆氏先前不被高浚所宠爱，命刘郁捷与她离异。
English: A few days later, Emperor Wenxuan ordered Liu Yujie to divorce Lu because she had not been favored by Gao Jun.

古文：子德素嗣。彭城景思王浟，字子深，神武第五子也。
现代文：彭城景思王高浟，字子深，神武帝高欢的第五个儿子。
English: Pengcheng Jingsi Wang Gaoqi, the fifth son of Emperor Gao Huan.

古文：元象二年，拜通直散骑常侍，封长乐郡公。
现代文：元象二年，被授予通直散骑常侍，封为长乐郡公。
English: In the second year of Yuanxiang, he was awarded the title of Zongzhichangzhanjie zhangzhi, and was appointed as the head of Changle County.

古文：博士韩毅教浟书，见浟笔迹未工，戏浟曰： 五郎书画如此，忽为常侍开国，今日后，宜更用心！ 
现代文：博士韩毅叫他写字，见他的笔体不工整，开玩笑对他说： 五郎写成这样的画，忽然被授予常侍开国，从今以后，应该更用心一些！ 
English: Dr. Han Yi asked him to write. Seeing that his handwriting was not well-prepared, he jokingly said to him: "Goro wrote such a picture, suddenly he was awarded the position of a regular attendant to the founding of the country. From now on, he should be more careful!"

古文：浟正色答曰： 昔甘罗为秦相，未闻能书。
现代文：他却面色严肃地回答 ：过去甘罗任秦国的丞相，没有听说善于书法。
English: However, he replied with a serious expression on his face, "In the past, Gan Luo was the prime minister of Qin, but I didn't hear that he was good at calligraphy."

古文：凡人唯论才具何如，岂必勤勤笔迹。
现代文：对人只论他的才能如何，为什么一定只看他的字写得好坏？
English: For a person, no matter how talented he is, why do you only have to look at how well his handwriting is?

古文：博士当今能者，何为不作三公？ 
现代文：博士您是当今最善于书法的人，为什么不任三公？ 
English: Doctor, you are the best at calligraphy today. Why not be one of the three princes?

古文：时年盖八岁矣。毅甚惭。
现代文：他当时才八岁，韩毅听后十分惭愧。
English: He was only eight years old at the time, and Han Yi was very ashamed after listening.

古文：武定六年，出为沧州刺史。
现代文：武定六年，他出任沧州刺史。
English: In the sixth year of Wuding, he served as the chief historian of Cangzhou.

古文：为政严察，部内肃然。
现代文：为政严厉明察，境内一片肃然。
English: With a stern eye on politics, the whole country was awestruck.

古文：守令参佐，下及胥吏，行游往来，皆自赍粮食。
现代文：上至守土长官、幕僚佐臣，下至胥吏役卒，往来办理公事，都自己带上口粮。
English: From the highest to the land steward, staff officer and vassal, and down to the eunuch, they all brought their own rations when they came and went on official business.

古文：浟纤介知人间事，有隰沃县主簿张达，尝诣州，夜投人舍，食鸡羹，浟察知之。
现代文：社会上的事，一点一滴他都了解。湿沃县的主簿张达曾到州里办事，晚上到百姓家中喝鸡汤。
English: He understands everything about society. Zhang Da, the chief accountant of Shuwao County, once went to the state to do business, and in the evening he went to people's homes to drink chicken soup.

古文：守令毕集，浟对众曰： 食鸡羹何不还他价直也？ 
现代文：他察知后，让守令们集合在一处，对众人说： 吃鸡汤为什么不给人家钱呢？ 
English: After he became aware of this, he asked the guards to gather in one place and said to everyone: Why not give people money to eat chicken soup?

古文：达即伏罪，合境号为神明。
现代文：张达立即跪下来认罪，全境都称赞他的神奇明察。
English: Zhang Da immediately knelt down and confessed, and the whole country praised his miraculous insight.

古文：又有一人从幽州来，驴驮鹿脯。
现代文：还有一个人从幽州来，用驴驮着鹿肉，走到沧州境内，因脚痛走得很慢。
English: Another person came from Yuzhou, walked to Cangzhou with a donkey carrying venison, and walked very slowly due to foot pain.

古文：至沧州界，脚痛行迟，偶会一人为伴，遂盗驴及脯去。明旦告州，浟乃令左右及府僚吏分市鹿膊，不限其价。
现代文：他偶然遇上一个人作伴，这人将驴和鹿肉偷去。第二天，幽州人到州中报案，高浟便命左右的人和府中的幕僚官吏分别到集市上买鹿肉，不要问价格。
English: He happened to meet a companion, who stole the donkey and venison. The next day, the Yuzhou people reported the case to the middle of the state, and the people around Gao Wei and the staff officers of the central government went to the market to buy venison, do not ask the price.

古文：其主见脯识之，推获盗者。
现代文：失主见到鹿肉便认出来哪是自己的，进而抓到了盗贼。
English: When the owner saw the venison, he recognized it as his own and caught the thief.

古文：转都督、定州刺史。
现代文：他又转任都督、定州刺史。
English: He was also transferred to the post of governor of the capital, Dingzhou.

古文：时有人被盗黑牛，背上有白毛。
现代文：当时，有一户人家的黑牛被偷盗，牛背上长有白毛。
English: At that time, a family's black cow was stolen, and white hair grew on the cow's back.

古文：长史韦道建谓中从事魏道胜曰： 使君在沧州日，禽奸如神。
现代文：长史韦道建对中从事魏道胜说： 使君在沧州任刺史时，擒拿奸人像神一样明断迅速。
English: Long Shi Wei Daojian, who was engaged in Wei Daosheng, said: When the prince was in Cangzhou, he was determined to capture the traitor as quickly as a god.

古文：若捉得此贼，定神矣。 
现代文：如果捉住了这个偷牛的盗贼，他就更神了。 
English: If he catches the cow thief, he will be even more godlike.

古文：浟乃诈为上符，市牛皮，倍酬价直。
现代文：高浟便诈称上面有命令，让买牛皮，加倍给钱。
English: Gao Kun then fraudulently claimed that there was an order from above for him to buy cowhide and pay double.

古文：使牛主认之，因获其盗。
现代文：让牛的主人来辨认收购的牛皮，因而抓住了盗贼。
English: The thieves were caught when the cow's owner asked them to identify the cowhide.

古文：建等叹服。
现代文：韦道建等人十分佩服。
English: Wei Daojian and others are very impressed.

古文：又有老母姓王，孤独，种菜三亩，数被偷。
现代文：还有一个老婆婆姓王，孤独一人，种了三亩菜，多次被人偷盗。
English: There is also an old woman surnamed Wang, who is all alone, grows three mu of vegetables, and has been robbed many times.

古文：浟乃令人密往书菜叶为字，明日，市中看菜叶有字，获贼。
现代文：高浟便派人偷偷在菜叶上写上字，第二天到集市上看菜叶上的字抓住了盗贼。
English: Gao Gan then sent someone to secretly write the characters on the vegetable leaves. The next day, he went to the market to read the characters on the vegetable leaves and caught the thief.

古文：尔后境内无盗，政化为当时第一。
现代文：以后，定州境内再也没有人偷盗，政治教化为当时第一。
English: After that, no one in Dingzhou ever stole again, and political indoctrination was the top priority at the time.

古文：天保初，封彭城王。
现代文：天保初年，他被封为彭城王。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was named the king of Pengcheng.

古文：四年，徵为侍中，人吏送别悲号。
现代文：天保四年被征至朝廷任侍中，官吏和百姓都哭喊着为他送别。
English: In the fourth year of the Tenpo era, he was conscripted into the Imperial Court to serve as an attendant, and both officials and commoners cried and shouted to see him off.

古文：有老公数百人，相率具馔白浟曰： 自殿下至来五载，人不识吏，吏不欺人。
现代文：有数百名老者一个接一个地带着酒食来对他说 ：自从殿下到定州已有五载，百姓不认识官吏，官吏不欺压百姓。
English: One after another, hundreds of elderly people came with food and drink to say to him: It has been five years since Your Highness came to Dingzhou. The people do not know the officials, and the officials do not oppress the people.

古文：百姓有识已来，始逢今化。
现代文：我们从记事以来，才遇上今天这样好的风化。
English: We haven't had such good manners as we have today since I can remember.

古文：殿下唯饮此乡水，未食百姓食，聊献疏薄。 
现代文：殿下只喝我们这里的水，没有吃过我们一口饭，我们来聊献一点菲薄的情意。 
English: Your highness only drinks the water we have here, and has never eaten a bite of our food. Let's talk and offer a small token of our affection.

古文：浟重其意，为食一口。
现代文：他尊重老者们的情意，吃了一口他们送来的饭菜。
English: He respected the feelings of the elderly and took a bite of the food they had brought.

古文：七年，转司州牧，选从事皆取文才士明剖断者，当时称为美选。
现代文：天保七年，他又转任司州牧守。他选拔官吏都取那些有才华，明于剖断的读书人。当时人们称颂这是一次公平正确的选拔。
English: In the seventh year of the Tenpo era, he was transferred to the position of Shishu Makimori. He selected officials who were talented and discerning readers. At the time, people praised this as a fair and correct selection.

古文：州旧案五百余，氵攸未期悉断尽。
现代文：州中积压旧案五百多件，他来后不到一月全部处理完毕。
English: The state has a backlog of more than 500 old cases, all of which were cleared within a month of his arrival.

古文：别驾羊脩等恐犯权戚，乃诣阁谘陈。浟使告曰： 吾直道而行，何惮权戚？
现代文：别驾羊修等人恐怕冒犯权臣贵戚，便到州府中陈说咨问，高浟对他们说： 我遵循正道行事，为什么害怕权臣贵戚？
English: For fear of offending the dignitaries and nobles, Zhuge Yang Xiu and others went to the state capital to make a report. Gao Yao said to them, "I am following the right path, why am I afraid of the dignitaries and nobles?"

古文：卿等当成人之美，反以权戚为言！ 
现代文：你们要成人之美，不要拿畏惧权臣贵戚作借口！ 
English: You want adult beauty, don't use the fear of powerful relatives as an excuse!

古文：脩等惭悚而退。
现代文：羊修等人惭愧惶恐离去。
English: Yang Xiu and the others left in shame and fear.

古文：后加特进，兼司空、太尉，州牧如故。
现代文：后来加封为特进，兼司空、太尉，州刺史的职务不变。
English: Later, he was appointed as a special envoy, and concurrently held the positions of secretary of the Air Force, lieutenant, and state secretary of history.

古文：太妃薨，解任。
现代文：太妃去世，解去职务。
English: He was relieved of his duties after Tohei's death.

古文：寻诏复本官。
现代文：不久，朝廷下诏恢复他原来的官职。
English: Soon after, the Imperial Court issued an edict restoring him to his former official position.

古文：俄拜司空，兼尚书令。
现代文：很快又拜为司空，兼尚书令。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Siku, and also became a calligrapher.

古文：济南嗣位，除开府仪同三司、尚书令，领大宗正卿。
现代文：济南王高殷继承帝位，他被授予开府仪同三司、尚书令，领大宗正卿。
English: Gao Yin, the king of Jinan, succeeded to the imperial throne. He was awarded the title of Kefu Yi, along with the titles of Sanji, Shang Shuling, and Daizong Zhengqing.

古文：皇建初，拜大司马，兼尚书令，转太保。
现代文：皇建初年，他又被封为大司马，兼尚书令，又转任太保。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed to the post of grand steward, and he was also appointed to the post of imperial secretary, and he was also transferred to the post of imperial bodyguard.

古文：武成入承大业。迁太师、录尚书。
现代文：武成帝即位，高浟又迁任太师、录尚书。
English: Emperor Wucheng ascended to the throne, and Gao Jiong was transferred to the position of Grand Master and recorded in the Imperial Rescript.

古文：浟明练世务，果于断决，事无大小，咸悉以情。
现代文：他对世务明察练达，决断敏捷，事情不论大小，都处理得合情合理。
English: He is a well-practiced observer of world affairs, quick to make decisions, and deals with things, no matter how big or small, in a reasonable manner.

古文：赵郡李公统预高归彦之逆，其母崔氏，即御史中丞崔昂从父姊，兼右仆射魏收之内妹也。
现代文：赵郡的李公统参与了高归彦的叛乱，他的母亲崔氏是御史中丞崔昂的从父的姐姐，兼右仆射魏收的内妹。
English: Li Gongtong of Zhao County took part in Gao Guihang's rebellion. His mother, Cui, was the elder sister of the imperial historian Cui Ang and the younger sister of his right-hand man, Sha Wei Jie.

古文：依令，年出六十，例免入官。
现代文：按照律令：年过六十，照例要没籍入官。
English: According to the law: after the age of sixty, it is customary to be registered as a civil servant.

古文：崔增年陈诉，所司以昂、收故，崔遂获免。
现代文：崔氏增加年龄陈诉，所司因崔昂、魏收的缘故，崔氏被赦免入官。
English: Mr. Cui filed a lawsuit to increase his age, but because of Cui Ang and Wei Hui, he was pardoned and appointed to the post.

古文：浟摘发其事，昂等以罪除名。
现代文：高浟揭发了这件事，崔昂等因而获罪被免去官职。
English: Gao Yao exposed the affair, and Cui Ang and others were convicted and removed from office.

古文：自后车驾巡幸，浟常留鄴。
现代文：自此以后，天子外出巡游，高浟常留守邺城。
English: Since then, Tianzi has been out on tour, and Gao Yao has often stayed in Lucheng.

古文：河清三年三月，群盗白子礼等数十人，谋劫浟为主。
现代文：河清三年三月，盗贼白子礼等数十人阴谋将高浟劫去做他们的首领。
English: In March of the third year of Heqing, the thief Bai Zili and dozens of others plotted to rob Gao Zi and become their leader.

古文：诈称使者，径向浟第。
现代文：他们诈称是使者，直接到他的府第。
English: They pretended to be envoys and went directly to his residence.

古文：至内室，称敕呼浟，牵上马，临以白刃，欲引向南殿。
现代文：到了他的卧室，喊着他的名字，将他扶上马，用刀逼着他，想把他领到南殿。
English: They went to his bedroom, called his name, put him on a horse, forced him with a knife, and tried to lead him to the south hall.

古文：浟大呼不从，遂遇害，时年三十二。朝野痛惜焉。
现代文：他大声喊叫着不依从，便被盗贼杀害。年仅三十二岁，朝野上下都为他的死感到无比痛惜。
English: He shouted loudly that he would not obey, and was killed by thieves. He was only thirty-two years old, and the government and the people all felt great regret for his death.

古文：初浟未被劫前，其妃郑氏梦人斩浟头持去，恶之。
现代文：未被劫持以前，他的妃子郑氏梦见有人将他的头拿走，不几天他就被杀。
English: Before he was kidnapped, his concubine Zheng Shi dreamed that someone took his head away, and he was killed a few days later.

古文：数日而浟见杀。赠假黄钺、太师、太尉、录尚书事，给辒辌车。子宝德嗣。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为假黄钺、太师、太尉、录尚书事，送给他鍂车京丧车一辆。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of pseudo-yellow envoy, grand master, grand lieutenant, and recorded records, and gave him a Beijing funeral carriage.

古文：位开府，兼尚书左仆射。上党刚肃王涣，字敬寿，神武第七子也。天姿雄杰，俶傥不群。
现代文：上党刚肃王高涣，字敬寿，神武帝的第七个儿子。他天生的姿貌英迈雄杰，倜傥风流，卓尔不群。
English: He was the seventh son of Emperor Shenwu. He was born with a heroic and heroic appearance. He had a unique style.

古文：虽在童幼，恆以将略自许。
现代文：年纪虽然还是幼童，却常以有大将的谋略自我称许。
English: Although he is still a toddler, he often praises himself for having a general's strategy.

古文：神武壮而爱之，曰： 此兒似我。 
现代文：神武帝对他很是欣赏和喜爱，说： 这个孩子像我。 
English: Emperor Jimmu appreciated and loved him very much, saying, "This child is like me.

古文：及长，力能扛鼎，材武绝伦。
现代文：他长大后，力能扛鼎，才干武艺，超迈群伦。
English: When he grew up, his strength was at its peak, and his talent for martial arts was second to none.

古文：每谓左右曰： 人不可无学，但要不为博士耳。 
现代文：他常对左右的人说： 人不可以不学习，但不要读书太多而成为博士。 
English: He often said to people around him: "One must not not study, but don't read too much and become a doctor.

古文：故读书颇知梗概，而不甚耽习。
现代文：所以，他读书只是了解大致的梗概，而不去认真研习。
English: Therefore, he only reads to understand the general outline, but does not study seriously.

古文：元象中，封平原郡公。
现代文：元象时，被封为平原郡公。
English: At the time of Yuan Zhao, he was made the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：文襄之遇贼，涣年尚幼，在西学。闻宫中讠雚，惊曰： 大兄必遭难矣！ 
现代文：文襄帝高澄被盗贼杀害，高涣年纪尚小，正在西学读书，听到宫中喧哗，吃惊地说 ：大哥一定遭到灾难了。 
English: Emperor Gaocheng was killed by a thief. Gao Yao, who was still young and was studying at a Western school, was surprised to hear the noise in the palace and said, "Big brother must have met with a disaster."

古文：弯弓而出。
现代文：拿上弓箭就出来。
English: Take your bow and arrows and come out.

古文：武定末，除冀州刺史，在州有美政。
现代文：武定末年，任冀州刺史，在州中享有美好的政声。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province and enjoyed a good reputation in the province.

古文：天保初，封上党王，历中书令、尚书左仆射。与常山王演等筑伐恶诸城。
现代文：天保初年，朝廷封他为上党王。历任中书令、尚书左仆射，与常山王高演等一起修筑伐恶等城池。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, the imperial court made him the king of the upper party. Successive Chushurei and Shoshuzuke built castles such as Faku together with the king of Mt.

古文：遂聚鄴下轻薄，陵犯郡县，为法司所纠。
现代文：他纠集邺城中一些轻薄无赖，侵犯郡县，被法司纠劾。
English: He gathered some light and thin scoundrels in Lucheng, violated counties, and was impeached by the legal department.

古文：文宣戮其左右数人，涣亦被谴。
现代文：文宣帝处死他左右的几个人，他也遭到谴责。
English: Emperor Wenxuan executed several people around him, and he was also condemned.

古文：六年，率众送梁王萧明还江南，仍破东关，斩梁特进裴之横等，威名甚盛。
现代文：天保六年，他率军护送梁王萧明回南，打破梁的东关，斩杀梁的特进裴之横等人，威名很大。
English: In the sixth year of Tianbao, he led the army to escort Liang Wang Xiao Ming back to the south, broke Liang's east pass, and killed Liang's special envoy Pei Zhi Heng and others, with great prestige.

古文：八年，录尚书事。
现代文：天保八年，他被封为录尚书事。
English: In the eighth year of the Tenpo era, he was awarded the title of "Recorded Biography."

古文：初，术士言亡高者黑衣，由是自神武后每出行不欲见桑门，为黑衣故也。
现代文：早先，术士说灭亡高姓的一定是穿黑衣服的人，从此自神武帝以后，天子每次出行都不想见到寺院的门，就是因为黑色的缘故。
English: Earlier, the sorcerer said that the death of Gao surnamed must be a person wearing black clothes. From then on, since Emperor Shenwu, Tianzi did not want to see the door of the temple every time he traveled, because of the black color.

古文：是时文宣幸晋阳，以所忌问左右曰： 何物最黑？ 
现代文：这时，文宣帝到晋阳，把他的忌讳问左右的人 ：什么东西最黑？ 
English: At this time, Emperor Wenxuan went to Jinyang and asked the people around him about his taboo: What is the darkest thing?

古文：对曰： 莫过漆。 
现代文：左右的人回答 ：最黑莫过于油漆。 
English: People on both sides answer: the darkest thing is paint.

古文：帝以涣第七，为当之，乃使库真都督破六韩伯升之鄴徵涣。
现代文：文宣帝因高涣排行第七，认为指的就是他，便派库真都督破六韩伯升到邺城抓捕高涣。
English: Emperor Wenzhong, who ranked Gao Yao seventh, thought that he was the one he was referring to, so he sent the governor Ku Zhen to break through the six Han Bo to capture Gao Yao in Shicheng.

古文：涣至紫陌桥，杀伯升以逃，凭河而度，土人执以送帝。
现代文：走到紫陌桥，他杀死破六韩伯升逃跑，涉水渡河，当地人将他抓住送给文宣帝。
English: When he reached the Zi Miao Bridge, he killed Han Bo Sheng and fled, wading across the river. The locals caught him and sent him to Emperor Wenxuan.

古文：铁笼盛之，与永安王浚同置地牢下。岁余，与浚同见杀，时年二十六。
现代文：文宣帝将他关押在铁笼子里，与永安王高浚一起放在地牢中，过了一年多，与高浚一起被杀，时年仅二十六岁。
English: Emperor Wenxuan imprisoned him in an iron cage and put him in a dungeon together with Yongan Wang Gao Jun. More than a year later, he was killed together with Gao Jun, at the age of only twenty-six.

古文：以其妃李氏配冯文洛，是帝家旧奴，积劳位至刺史。
现代文：朝廷把他的妃子李氏配给了冯文洛。文洛是文宣帝的家奴，积累功劳当上了刺史。
English: The imperial court assigned his concubine, the Li clan, to Feng Wenluo. Wenluo was a household slave of Emperor Wenzhong, and his accumulated merits have become history.

古文：帝令文洛等杀涣，故以其妻妻焉。
现代文：文宣帝命文洛等人杀害高涣，所以把高涣的妃子嫁给他。
English: Emperor Wenxuan ordered Wenluo and others to kill Gao Yao, so he married Gao Yao's concubine to him.

古文：至乾明元年，收二王余骨葬之，赠司空，谥曰刚肃。
现代文：乾明元年，朝廷将高涣、高浚的余骨重新安葬，追赠高涣为司空，谥号刚肃。
English: In the first year of the Qianming era, the Imperial Court reburied the remaining bones of Gaozhu and Gaozhu, posthumously awarding Gaozhu the title of Siku and the posthumous title of Gansu.

古文：有敕李氏还第，而文洛尚以故意，修饰诣李。
现代文：并命他的妃子李氏回家。而冯文洛还因过去同她一起生活过，修饰打扮一下，去看望她。
English: He also ordered his concubine Li to return home, and Feng Wenluo, who had lived with her in the past, dressed up and went to visit her.

古文：周师入鄴，亮于启夏门拒守，诸军皆不战而败，周军于诸城门皆入，亮军方退走。
现代文：李氏把许多家人排列两边，让冯文洛站在阶下，数落他说： 我遭家难流离失所，以至受到奇耻大辱。
English: Mr. Li lined up many family members on both sides and let Feng Wenluo stand at the bottom of the steps. Counting down, he said: I was displaced by family difficulties and suffered great shame.

古文：亮入太庙行马内，恸哭拜辞，然后为周军所执。
现代文：因志气节操淡薄，不能自尽殉夫。幸蒙朝廷恩诏。
English: He could not commit suicide because of his weak self-discipline. Fortunately, the imperial court issued an edict.

古文：入关，依例授仪同，分配远边，卒于龙州。
现代文：能够回到王府，你是谁家的奴才，还想来污辱我！ 
English: You can go back to the royal palace, but you are a slave to someone, and you still want to insult me!

古文：任城王湝，神武第十子也。
现代文：于是命打冯文洛一百杖，血流满地。任城王高氵皆，神武帝的第十个儿子。
English: As a result, Feng Wenluo was sentenced to a hundred strokes of the cane, and blood flowed all over the ground.

古文：少明慧，天保初封。
现代文：从小聪慧颖敏，天保初年受封。
English: From Xiao Cong Hui Ying Min, Tian Bao received the first year.

古文：自孝昭、武成时，车驾还鄴，尝令湝镇晋阳，总并省事。
现代文：在孝昭帝、武成帝时，天子回邺城，都命他镇守晋阳，总领并州的事务。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Xiaozhao and Emperor Wucheng, when the emperor returned to Lushan, he was ordered to guard Jinyang and take charge of the affairs of the unified state.

古文：历司徒、太尉、并省录尚书。
现代文：历任司徒、太尉、并省录尚书。
English: Successive officers, captains, and provincial records.

古文：天统三年，拜太保，并州刺史，别封正平郡公。
现代文：天统三年，封为太保、并州刺史，另封为正平郡公。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was awarded the titles of Taiho and Shuzushi, and was also awarded the title of Zhengping County.

古文：时有妇人临汾水浣衣，有乘马人换其新靴驰而去者。
现代文：有一次，一妇人在汾河洗衣服，一个骑马的人脱掉自己的旧靴，穿上那位妇人的新靴，骑上马飞驰而去。
English: Once, when a woman was washing clothes in the Li River, a man on horseback took off his old shoes, put on the woman's new shoes, mounted his horse and rode away.

古文：妇人持故靴诣州言之。
现代文：妇人拿着旧靴到州中告状。
English: The woman took the old shoes to the state to file a complaint.

古文：湝召居城诸妪，以靴示之，绐曰： 有乘马人于路被贼劫害，遗此靴，焉得无亲属乎？ 
现代文：高氵皆召集全城的百姓，把靴子拿来让他们看，假称 ：有一个骑马的人在路上被盗贼抢劫杀害，留下这双靴子，难道他没有亲属吗？ 
English: The high-ranking officials called together all the people of the city and brought the boots for them to see, pretending: a man on horseback was robbed and killed on the road by thieves, leaving behind this pair of boots. Didn't he have any relatives?

古文：一妪抚膺哭曰： 兒昨着此靴向妻家。 
现代文：一个女的捶着胸脯哭着说 ：我的儿子昨天穿着这双靴子到他的岳丈家。 
English: One woman sobbed as she clutched her chest and said: "My son wore these boots to his in-laws' house yesterday.

古文：如其语，捕获之，时称明察。
现代文：根据她的话，将抢靴的人抓到，当时人们都称赞高氵皆明察秋毫。
English: According to her, she caught the person who stole the shoes, and at the time, people praised Gao for her quick thinking.

古文：武平初，迁太师、司州牧。
现代文：武平初年，他迁任太师、司州牧。
English: In the first year of Wu Ping, he was transferred to the position of Taishi and Sishu Maki.

古文：出为冀州刺史，加太宰，迁右丞相、都督、青州刺史。
现代文：出任为冀州刺史，加封为太宰，迁任右丞相、都督、青州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the Jizhou chief historian, was given the additional title of Dazai, and was transferred to the posts of minister of the right, governor, and chief historian of Qingzhou.

古文：湝频牧大蕃，虽不洁己，然宽恕，为吏人所怀。
现代文：他多次管理大的州郡，虽然不能洁己率属，然而对人宽厚忠恕，被官吏百姓所怀念。
English: He repeatedly managed large counties and prefectures. Although he could not lead his subordinates with purity, he was generous and loyal to others. He is fondly remembered by officials and the people.

古文：五年，青州人崔蔚波等夜袭州城。
现代文：武平五年，青州人崔蔚波等乘夜进攻州城。
English: In the fifth year of Wuping, the Qingzhou people Cui Uibo and others attacked the state capital at night.

古文：湝部分仓卒之际，咸得齐整，击贼大破之。
现代文：高氵皆率部分军队在仓促混乱之际，能够整齐严肃，进击敌人，并将敌人打得大败。
English: Some of the troops led by Gao Bingguan were able to march into the enemy in an orderly and serious manner, and defeat the enemy in a big way in a time of hasty chaos.

古文：拜左丞相，转瀛州刺史。
现代文：他被封为左丞相，转任瀛州刺史。
English: He was given the title of minister of the left and transferred to the post of secretary of state of Zhangzhou.

古文：及后主奔鄴，加湝大丞相。
现代文：后主高纬受北周军队逼迫，奔向邺城，加封高氵皆为大丞相。
English: Later, the lord Gao Wei was persecuted by the Northern Zhou army and rushed to Shicheng, and Gao Wei was awarded the title of grand chancellor.

古文：及安德王称尊号于晋阳，使刘子昂修启于湝： 至尊出奔，宗庙既重，群公劝迫，权主号令。事宁终归叔父。 
现代文：安德王高延宗在晋阳自称为帝，派刘子昂带上书信给高氵皆，说： 天子出奔，宗庙重大，群臣劝进逼迫，我暂且称帝发号施令，事情平定之后终归让叔父您当皇帝。 
English: Gao Yan Zong, the King of Ande, proclaimed himself emperor in Jinyang and sent Liu Ziang to bring a letter to the Gaozhou people, saying: "The Son of Heaven has fled, the ancestral temple is important, the ministers are persuading and persecuting, I will temporarily call myself emperor to issue orders, and after the matter is settled, I will eventually return to let your uncle be emperor."

古文：湝曰： 我人臣，何容受此启。 
现代文：高氵皆说 ：我是臣子，怎么能接受这样的书信？ 
English: They all said, "I am a courtier, how can I accept such a letter?"

古文：执子昂送鄴。
现代文：他逮捕了刘子昂并送到邺城。
English: He arrested Liu Zi'ang and sent him to Handan.

古文：帝至济州，禅位于湝，竟不达。
现代文：天子到了济州，让位给高氵皆，他始终不接受。
English: When Tianzi arrived in Jeju, he gave up his seat to Gao Bingguan, which he never accepted.

古文：湝与广宁王孝珩于冀州召募，得四万余人，拒周军。
现代文：他与广宁王高孝珩在冀州招募人马，得到四万多人，以抗拒北周的军队。
English: He and Guangning Wang Gao Xiaojuan recruited men and women in Jizhou and obtained more than forty thousand people to resist the army of Beizhou.

古文：周齐王宪来伐，先遣送书，并赦诏。湝并沉诸井。
现代文：周齐王宇文宪率兵前来讨伐，先派人送来书信，又送来赦免罪过的诏书，高氵皆都把它们扔进井里。
English: Zhou Qi, Wang Yuwen and the gendarmes came to fight. First, they sent people to send letters, and then they sent a decree to pardon the sins. The high priests all threw them into the well.

古文：战败，湝、孝珩俱被禽。
现代文：两军交战，北齐军失败，高氵皆、高孝珩都被俘获。
English: The two armies engaged in battle, the North Qi army failed, and both Gao Yu and Gao Xiaolu were captured.

古文：宪曰： 任城王，何苦至此！ 
现代文：宇文宪说： 任城王，你何苦至此呢？ 
English: Uwen Xian said, "You are the king of the city, why did you have to come to this?

古文：湝曰： 下官神武帝子，兄弟十五人，幸而独存。逢宗社颠覆，今日得死，无愧坟陵。 
现代文：高氵皆说 ：我是神武帝的儿子，兄弟十五人只剩下我一个，遭逢宗庙瓦解，今日如果死，也无愧于祖先的坟陵。 
English: They all said, "I am the son of Emperor Jimmu, I am the only one left of fifteen brothers, my ancestral temple collapsed, and if I die today, I will be worthy of my ancestors' graves."

古文：宪壮之，归其妻子。
现代文：宇文宪很佩服他，归还给他妻子。
English: Yu Wenxian admired him very much and returned him to his wife.

古文：将至鄴城，湝马上大哭。自投于地，流血满面。
现代文：快到达邺城时，他在马上失声痛哭，一头栽到地上，血流满面。
English: When he was about to reach Lucheng, he immediately lost his voice and cried bitterly, fell to the ground, and his face was covered with blood.

古文：至长安，寻与后主同死。
现代文：到长安后，不久与后主高纬一同死去。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, he soon died together with his successor Gao Wei.

古文：妃卢氏，赐斛斯徵。
现代文：他的妃子卢氏，被赐给了周将斛斯征。
English: His concubine, Lu, was given to Zhou Jinsheng.

古文：卢蓬首垢面，长斋不言笑，徵放之，乃为尼。
现代文：她天天蓬头垢面，长时间斋戒，不说也不笑。
English: She is disheveled and dirty every day, fasts for a long time, and does not speak or smile.

古文：隋开皇三年，表请文帝，葬湝及五子于长安北原。
现代文：斛斯征将她放还，她便削发为尼，隋开皇三年，她上表请求隋文帝将高氵皆和他的五个孩子埋葬在长安的北原。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong released her, she became a nun. Three years after the founding of the Sui Dynasty, she petitioned Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty to bury Gao Bingguan and his five children in the North Plain of Chang'an.

古文：高阳康穆王湜，神武第十一子也。
现代文：高阳康穆王高，神武帝的第十一个儿子。
English: Goyang Kangmu Wanggao, the eleventh son of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：天保元年封。十年，稍迁尚书令。
现代文：天保元年受封，天保十年，迁任尚书令。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was given the title, and in the tenth year of the Tenpo era, he was transferred to the position of Shoshorei.

古文：以滑稽便辟，有宠于文宣。
现代文：因滑稽多智，善于奉迎受到文宣帝的喜欢。
English: Emperor Wenzhong was fond of him because he was witty and good at entertaining.

古文：在左右行杖，以挞诸王，太后深衔之。
现代文：他拿着一根木杖站在文宣帝的左右，专门打其他各王，太后很不喜欢他。
English: He stood to the right and left of Emperor Wenxuan with a wooden cane, and specialized in beating other kings. The empress dowager did not like him very much.

古文：其妃父护军长史张晏之，尝要道拜湜，湜不礼焉。
现代文：他的妃子的父亲是护军长史张宴之，曾顺便来拜访他，他不还礼。
English: The father of his concubine was the chief of the military escort, Zhang Yingru, who had dropped by to pay him a visit, but he did not return the courtesy.

古文：帝问其故，对曰： 无官职汉，何须礼！ 
现代文：文宣帝问他其中的原因，他答道： 没有官职的汉人，何须我还礼？ 
English: Emperor Wenxuan asked him the reason for this, and he replied: "As a Han Chinese without an official position, why should I return the courtesy?

古文：帝于是擢拜晏之为徐州刺史。
现代文：文宣帝于是提拔张宴之任徐州刺史。
English: Emperor Wenzhong then promoted Zhang Ye to the post of Xuzhou chief historian.

古文：文宣崩，湜兼司徒，导引梓官。
现代文：文宣帝驾崩，他兼司徒，在送葬队伍前面引导皇帝的棺木。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan died, he also served as an attendant, leading the coffin of the emperor in front of the funeral procession.

古文：吹笛云： 至尊颇知臣不？ 
现代文：吹着笛子说： 天子您很了解我吗？ 
English: He played the flute and said: Son of God, do you know me well?

古文：又击胡鼓为乐。
现代文：又敲击胡鼓以取乐。
English: And they beat on the cymbals for joy.

古文：后事发，王氏赐死，诏杖凝一百，其愚如此。
现代文：太后打了他一百多杖，不久死去。太后哭得十分悲哀，说 ：我恐怕你不成才，才打你，谁想到你带着创伤死去了！ 
English: The empress dowager beat him with more than a hundred canes and died soon after. The empress dowager cried very sadly and said, "I'm afraid you didn't make it, that's why I beat you. Who would have thought that you died with a wound!"

古文：冯翊王润，字子泽，神武第十四子也。
现代文：冯翊王高润，字子泽，神武帝的第十四个儿子。
English: Feng Yu Wang Gao Run, Zizhe, the fourteenth son of Emperor Shenwu.

古文：幼时，神武称曰： 此吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：幼小时，神武帝称赞他说： 这是我家的千里驹呀！ 
English: When he was a child, Emperor Shenwu praised him saying, "This is my family's milestone!"

古文：天保初封，历位东北道行台右仆射、都督、定州刺史。
现代文：天保初年受封，历任东北道行台右仆射、都督、定州刺史。
English: He was appointed in the first year of the Tenpo era, and successively held the positions of Northeastern Governor, Governor of Taiwan, and Governor of Dingzhou.

古文：润美姿仪。
现代文：他容貌俊秀，仪表出众。
English: He is handsome and has a distinguished appearance.

古文：年十四五，母郑妃与之同寝，有秽杂之声。
现代文：年龄已十四五岁，他的母亲郑妃还与他睡在一起，外面颇有污秽的传闻。
English: At the age of fourteen or fifteen, his mother Zhengfei was still sleeping with him, and there were quite dirty rumors outside.

古文：及长，廉慎方雅，习于吏职。
现代文：长大后，廉洁谨慎，端方文雅，熟悉官吏的职责。
English: When he grew up, he was honest, prudent, polite, and familiar with the duties of officials.

古文：至于摘发隐伪，奸吏无所匿其情。
现代文：善于揭发隐匿巧伪，使奸吏无法隐藏他们的罪恶。
English: Good at exposing hidden tricks, so that crooks can't hide their crimes.

古文：开府王回洛，与六州大都督独孤枝侵窃官田，受纳贿赂，润按举其事。
现代文：开府王回洛与六州大都督独孤枝侵吞官田，收受贿赂，高润纠劾这件事。
English: The king of Kaifu, Huiluo, and the six prefectural governors of the six prefectures were the only ones to encroach on government-owned land, accept bribes, and take advantage of the situation.

古文：二人表言：王出送台使，登魏孝文旧坛，南望叹息，不测其意。
现代文：这两个人都上表说：冯翊王送南朝的使者，登上魏孝文帝旧时的高坛，向南眺望，并常常叹息，不知道是什么意思。
English: Both of them said on the table: Feng Xuan Wang sent an envoy to the Southern Dynasty, ascended the high altar of Wei Xiaowen Emperor in the old days, looked southward, and often sighed, I don't know what it means.

古文：武成使元文遥就州宣敕曰： 冯翊王少小谨慎，在州不为非法，朕信之熟矣。
现代文：武成帝派元文遥到定州宣布诏命说： 冯翊王从小就很谨慎，在州中不干非法的事。
English: Emperor Wucheng sent Yuanwen to Dingzhou to announce the imperial edict, saying: King Feng Rong has been very cautious since childhood and does not do anything illegal in the state.

古文：登高远望，人之常情，鼠辈欲轻相间构，曲生眉目。 
现代文：我对他非常了解。登高远望，是人之常情，小人们想挑拨我们兄弟间的关系，所以任意编造。 
English: I know him very well. It's human nature to want to be the best, but the little people wanted to disturb the relationship between our brothers, so they made up stories.

古文：于是回洛决鞭二百，独孤枝决杖一百。
现代文：于是，王回洛被抽了二百皮鞭，独孤枝被打了一百杖。
English: As a result, Wang Hailo was whipped 200 times and beaten with 100 canes.

古文：寻为尚书令，领太子少师，历司徒、太尉、大司马、司州牧、太保、河南道行台、录尚书，别封文成郡公，太师、太宰，复为定州刺史。
现代文：不久，任尚书令，领太子少师，历任司徒、太尉、大司马、司州牧、太保、河南道行台、录尚书，另外又封为文成郡公、太师、太宰，又任定州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as Shang Shuling, leading the Prince's Junior Division, and successively appointed as Sitoro, Tai Li, Da Sima, Shuzhou Maki, Tai Bao, Henan Dao Xing Tai, Luo Shang Shuling, in addition, he was appointed as Wencheng County official, Taishi, Dazai, and appointed as Dingzhou Shishi.

古文：薨，赠假黄钺、左丞相。
现代文：去世。
English: He died.

