古文：政和、宣和间，朝廷置书局以数十计，其荒陋而可笑者莫若《博古图》。予比得汉匜，因取一册读之，发书捧腹之余，聊识数事于此。
现代文：宋徽宗政和、宣和年间，朝廷没里几十所修书机构，所修书籍中最荒唐粗陋而令人可笑的要数《博古图》了，我接连得到几个汉代的皿，因而取来一册阅读，打开书捧腹大笑之后，姑且记几件可笑的事在这里。
English: During the reign of Emperor Songhui and the proclamation of the First Sino-Japanese War, the imperial court set up dozens of book-repair institutions. The most absurd, crude and ridiculous of the books repaired was "Bogutu." I got several Han Dynasty plates one after another, so I took a book to read. After opening the book and laughing, let me write down a few ridiculous things here.

古文：父癸匜之铭曰： 爵方父癸 。
现代文：父癸匜的铭文 爵方父癸 。
English: His father's inscription reads "爵方父."

古文：则为之说曰： 周之君臣，其有癸号者，惟齐之四世有癸公，癸公之子曰哀公，然则作是器也，其在哀公之时欤？
现代文：于是对此解释道： 周代君臣，其中封号有癸字的，只有齐的第四代癸公，癸公的儿子是哀公，既然如此，那么制作这个器物，大约是在哀公时期吧？
English: He then explained: In the Zhou Dynasty, among the princes and ministers whose seal had the character "," there was only Qi, the fourth generation of Emperor Zogong. Emperor Zogong's son was Emperor Aigong. If this is the case, then the making of this object must have been around the time of Emperor Aigong, right?

古文：故铭曰 父癸 者此也。 
现代文：所以铭文为 父癸 的原因就是这个了。 
English: So this is the reason why the inscription reads "Father and Son."

古文：夫以十干为号，及称父甲，父丁、父癸之类，夏、商皆然，编图者固知之矣，独于此器表为周物，且以为癸公之子称其父，其可笑一也。
现代文：用十天干为称号以及称父甲、父丁、父癸之类，夏、商两朝都是如此，编图的人原本懂得这些，单单把这件器物的时代标为周朝，并把铭文解释为癸公的儿子称其父，这是书中可笑的一例。
English: It is a ridiculous example in the book that the cartographer originally knew these things, but simply marked the era of this artifact as the Zhou Dynasty, and interpreted the inscription as the son of Xing Gong calling his father.

古文：周义母匜之铭曰： 仲姞义母作 。则为之说曰： 晋文公杜祁让偪姞而己次之，赵孟云 母义子贵 ，正谓杜祁，则所得仲姞者自名也，义母者襄公谓杜祁也。 
现代文：周义母匜的铭文是 仲姑义母作 ，于是对此解释说： 晋文公的姬妾杜祁谦让偪姞而把自已的位次排在她后面，赵孟说 母义子贵 ，说的正是杜祁，那么所谓仲姞，就是杜祁的自称，义母就是襄公对杜祁的称谓。 
English: Zhou Yimou's inscription was written by Zhonggu's mother-in-law, so he explained: Jin Wengong's concubine, Du Qianqian, gave up her title and put her own rank behind her. Zhao Meng said mother-in-law, and it was Du Qianqian who said that, so the so-called Zhong Qianqian is the self-proclaimed name of Du Qianqian, and the mother-in-law is the title of Xiang Gong for Du Qianqian.

古文：夫周世姞姓女多矣，安知此为偪姞，杜祁但让之在上，岂可便为母哉？
现代文：周代姑姓女子太多了，怎知这里就是偪姞？杜祁只是表示谦让，使她位次排在前边，怎么就成了襄公的母亲了呢？
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, there were too many women with the surname of aunt, so how did they know that this was the cormorant? Cucumber was just showing modesty, so that she was in the front of the queue, how did she become the mother of Xianggong?

古文：既言仲姞自名，又以为襄公为杜祁所作，然则为谁之物哉？
现代文：既说仲姞是杜祁自称，又认为此皿是襄公为杜祁制作的；那么究竟是谁的器物呢？
English: Not only did Zhongyi claim to be a cuckoo, but he also believed that this dish was made by Prince Xiang for the cuckoo; so whose utensil is it?

古文：其可笑二也。
现代文：这是书中可笑的例子之二。
English: This is one of the more ludicrous examples in the book.

古文：汉注水匜之铭曰： 始建国元年正月癸酉朔日制。 
现代文：汉注水匜的铭文是 始建国元年正月癸酉朔日制。 
English: The inscription on the Han-choked water jars reads, "From the first month of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China to the first day of the new year."

古文：则为之说曰： 汉初始元年十二月改为建国，此言元年正月者，当是明年也。 
现代文：于是对此解释说： 汉代初始元年十二月改年号为建国，这里指元年正月，应当是指第二年。 
English: He then explained: Since December of the first year of the Han Dynasty was renamed as the founding year, here it refers to the first month of the first year, it should refer to the second year.

古文：按《汉书》王莽以初始元年十二月癸酉朔日，窃即真位，遂以其日为始建国元年正月，安有明年却称元年之理？
现代文：查考《汉书》，王莽在初始元年十二月初一窃据帝位，于是把那一天定为始建国元年正月，哪有第二年再倒回来称元年的道理？
English: According to the study of the "Hanshu," Wang Mang stole the imperial throne at the beginning of December of the first year of the first century, so he set that day as the first month of the first year of the founding of the country. Is there any reason to return the second year and call it the first year of the first year?

古文：其可笑三也。
现代文：这是可笑处之三。
English: This is the third part of the joke.

古文：楚姬盘之铭曰： 齐侯作楚姬宝盘 。
现代文：楚姐盘的铭文是 齐侯作楚姐宝盘 。
English: The inscription of the Chu Sister Dish is "Qi Hou made the Chu Sister Dish."

古文：则为之说曰： 楚与齐从亲，在齐湣王之时，所谓齐侯，则湣王也。周末诸侯自王，而称侯以铭器。尚知止乎礼义也。 
现代文：于是对此解释说： 楚国与齐国合纵相亲，在齐湣王时期，所谓齐侯，就是指湣王，周朝末期诸侯自封为王，而在器物铭文上称侯，是还懂得在礼义方面克制一下。 
English: He then explained: The states of Chu and Qi had a long-term relationship. During the reign of King Qi, the so-called Qi Hou referred to the king of Qi. At the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the princes declared themselves kings, and they called themselves Hou on the inscriptions of their utensils. They also knew how to exercise restraint in terms of etiquette.

古文：夫齐、楚之国，各数百年，岂必当湣王时从亲乎？
现代文：齐、楚作为诸侯国，都有数百年了，难道一定要在湣王时合纵相亲吗？
English: As princely states, Qi and Chu have been around for hundreds of years. Is it necessary to have a long-term relationship at the time of King Qian?

古文：且湣王在齐诸王中最为骄暴，尝称东帝，岂有肯自称侯之理？
现代文：再说湣王在齐的所有国君中是最骄横强暴的，曾自称东帝，哪有肯自称为侯的道理？
English: Moreover, among all the sovereigns of the world, King He is the most arrogant and violent. He once claimed to be the Eastern Emperor. Who would claim to be a lord?

古文：其可笑四也。
现代文：这是可笑处之四。
English: This is the fourth part of the joke.

古文：汉梁山鋗之铭曰 梁山铜造 。
现代文：汉梁山鋗的铭文是 梁山铜造 。
English: The inscription on the Han Liangshan gong is made of Liangshan copper.

古文：则为之说曰： 梁山铜者，纪其所贡之地，梁孝王依山鼓铸，为国之富，则铜有自来矣。 
现代文：于是对此解释说： 梁山铜，是记此进贡的地点。梁孝王靠山治铜铸钱，使封国富裕，那么铜也就是有来由的了。 
English: He then explained: Liangshan Copper is the place where this tribute was recorded. Liang Xiaowang relied on the mountain copper to mint money and make the fief rich, so the copper also has a reason.

古文：夫即山铸钱，乃吴王濞耳，梁山自是山名，属冯翊夏阳县，于梁国何预焉？
现代文：靠山铸钱，只是吴王濞而已，梁山本是山名，属冯裕夏阳县，跟梁国有何相干？
English: It's just that Wu Wangtao is the patron of minting money. Liangshan is the name of the mountain, which belongs to Fengyu Xayang County. What does it have to do with Liang Guozhou?

古文：其可笑五也。
现代文：这是可笑处之五。
English: This is one of the five ridiculous things.

古文：观此数说，他可知矣。
现代文：只看这几条解释，其它便可知道了。
English: Just look at these few explanations, and the rest will become clear.

