古文：◎庄烈帝一
现代文：庄烈帝一
English: Zhuge Liang Diyi

古文：庄烈愍皇帝，讳由检，光宗第五子也，万历三十八年十二月生。
现代文：庄烈愍皇帝，名叫朱由检，光宗第五子，生于万历三十八年十二月。
English: Emperor Zhu Rongzhi, named Zhu Yu Jian, the fifth son of Emperor Guangzong, was born in December of the 38th year of Wanli.

古文：母贤妃刘氏，早薨。
现代文：其母贤妃刘氏，早已去世。
English: His mother, Princess Liu, has long since passed away.

古文：天启二年，封信王。
现代文：天启二年被封为信王。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, he was given the title of Prince of Believers.

古文：六年十一月，出居信邸。
现代文：天启六年十一月，出居信邸。
English: In November of the sixth year of the Apocalypse, he moved out of the house.

古文：明年八月，熹宗疾大渐，召王入，受遗命。
现代文：天启七年八月，熹宗病危，召信王入宫，接受遗命。
English: In August of the seventh year of the Apocalypse, Emperor Taizong was critically ill and summoned Emperor Xian to the palace to accept his death.

古文：丁巳，即皇帝位。
现代文：二十四日，朱由检即位。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhu Gaoqing ascended to the throne.

古文：大赦天下，以明年为崇祯元年。
现代文：大赦天下，以第二年为崇祯元年。
English: The second year was the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen.

古文：九月甲申，追谥生母贤妃曰孝纯皇后。
现代文：九月二十一日，追加其生母贤妃刘氏谥号叫孝纯皇后。
English: On September 21, she added that her birth mother, Princess Liu, was called Empress Xiaochun.

古文：丁亥，停刑。
现代文：二十四日，停止用刑。
English: On the 24th, the sentence was suspended.

古文：庚寅，册妃周氏为皇后。
现代文：二十七日，册宫妃周氏为皇后。
English: On the 27th, Princess Zhou became empress.

古文：冬十月甲午朔，享太庙。
现代文：十月初一日，祭享太庙。
English: On the first day of October, it is time to celebrate the temple.

古文：癸丑，南京地震。
现代文：二十日，南京发生地震。
English: On the 20th, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：十一月甲子，安置魏忠贤于凤阳。
现代文：十一月一日，将魏忠贤安置于凤阳。
English: On November 1, Wei Zhongxian was placed in Fengyang.

古文：戊辰，撤各边镇守内臣。
现代文：五日，撤回各边镇镇守内臣。
English: On the fifth day, all the provincial governors were withdrawn.

古文：己巳，魏忠贤缢死。
现代文：六日，魏忠贤上吊自杀。
English: On the 6th, Wei Zhongxian hanged himself.

古文：癸酉，免天启时逮死诸臣赃，释其家属。
现代文：十日，减免天启年间被逮捕处死诸臣赃物，释放其家属。
English: On the 10th, he pardoned and pardoned the vassals who were arrested and executed during the Apocalypse, and released their families.

古文：癸巳，黄立极致仕。
现代文：三十日，黄立极辞官退职。
English: On the 30th, Huang Lijie resigned from his post.

古文：十二月，前南京吏部侍郎钱龙锡、礼部侍郎李标、礼部尚书来宗道、吏部侍郎杨景辰、礼部侍郎周道登、少詹事刘鸿训俱礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十二月，前南京吏部侍郎钱龙锡、礼部侍郎李标、礼部尚书来宗道、吏部侍郎杨景辰、礼部侍郎周道登、少詹事刘鸿训全部为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: In December, Qian Longxi, the attendant of the former Nanjing cadre, Li Bian, the attendant of the ceremony, Yang Jingcheng, the attendant of the ceremony, Zhou Daodeng, the attendant of the ceremony, and Liu Hongxun, the attendant of the ceremony, were all the attendants of the ceremony and Dongge University, and participated in important affairs.

古文：魏良卿、客氏子侯国兴俱伏诛。
现代文：魏良卿、客氏子侯国兴全部诛杀。
English: Wei Liangqing and Kake's son, Hou Guoxing, all fought and died.

古文：崇祯元年春正月辛巳，诏内臣非奉命不得出禁门。
现代文：崇祯元年正月十九日，下诏内臣没得到命令不得跨出禁门。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, it was decreed that if a vassal did not receive an order, he was not allowed to step out of the forbidden gate.

古文：壬午，尊熹宗后为懿安皇后。
现代文：二十日，尊熹宗后为懿安皇后。
English: On the 20th, she became the Empress of An.

古文：丙戌，戮魏忠贤及其党崔呈秀尸。
现代文：二十四日，斩戮魏忠贤及其同伙崔呈秀尸体。
English: On the 24th, the bodies of Wei Zhongxian and his accomplice Cui Chengxiu were decapitated.

古文：二月乙未，禁章奏冗蔓。
现代文：二月三日，禁止奏章杂乱冗长。
English: On February 3, the chaotic and lengthy movement was banned.

古文：癸丑，御经筵。
现代文：二十一日，亲临经筵听讲经论史。
English: On the 21st, he attended a lecture on the history of the sutras.

古文：丁巳，戒廷臣交结内侍。
现代文：二十五日，禁止群臣与内部侍卫交往通好。
English: On the 25th, it was forbidden for the courtiers to communicate with the internal guards.

古文：三月己巳，葬悊皇帝于德陵。
现代文：三月八日，葬胐皇帝于德陵。
English: On March 8th, the emperor's funeral was held in Deling.

古文：癸未，施凤来、张瑞图致仕。
现代文：二十二日，施凤来、张瑞图辞官退职。
English: On the 22nd, Shi Fenglai and Zhang Ritu resigned from their posts.

古文：乙酉，赠恤冤陷诸臣。
现代文：二十四日，追封并抚恤死于冤案诸臣。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, a number of ministers were purged and died as a result of unjust cases.

古文：夏四月癸巳，赐刘若宰等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：四月二日，赐刘若宰等进士及第及不同出身。
English: On April 2nd, Liu Ruzai and others were conferred the title of "Distinguished Scientist" and "Distinguished Scientist."

古文：甲午，袁崇焕为兵部尚书，督师蓟、辽。
现代文：三日，袁崇焕为兵部尚书，领导蓟、辽军务。
English: On the third day, Yuan Chonghuan was appointed as the military secretary of the military department, leading the military affairs of Shandong and Liaoning.

古文：庚戌，指挥卓铭请开矿，不许。
现代文：十九日，指挥卓铭请求开矿，皇帝没有准许。
English: On the 19th, commander Zhuo Ming requested to open the mine, but the emperor did not give permission.

古文：五月己巳，李国〈木普〉致仕。
现代文：五月九日，李国木普辞官退职。
English: On May 9, Li Guomup resigned from his post.

古文：庚午，毁《三朝要典》。
现代文：十日，烧毁《三朝要典》。
English: On the 10th, the "Three Dynasties Guidebook" was burned.

古文：甲戌，裁各部添注官，辛巳，祷雨。
现代文：十四日，裁减各部添注官员。二十一日，祈祷雨。
English: On the 14th, officials from all ministries were dismissed. On the 21st, they prayed for rain.

古文：乙酉，复外吏久任及举保连坐之法，禁有司私派。
现代文：二十五日，恢复外官长久任职及推举连坐之法，禁止官吏私下摊派。
English: On the 25th, the long-term appointment of foreign ministers and the law on the election of co-chairs were restored, prohibiting officials from privately apportioning.

古文：六月，削魏忠贤党冯铨、魏广微籍。
现代文：六月，魏忠贤同伙冯铨、魏广微革职。
English: In June, Wei Zhongxian's associates, Feng Yu and Wei Guang, were forced to resign.

古文：壬寅，许显纯伏诛。
现代文：十三日，许显纯被诛杀。
English: On the 13th, Xu Xianjun was beaten to death.

古文：壬子，来宗道、杨景辰致仕。
现代文：二十三日，来宗道、杨景辰辞官退职。
English: On the 23rd, Yang Jingchen resigned from his post.

古文：秋七月癸酉，召对廷臣及袁崇焕于平台。
现代文：七月十四日，在平台召对廷臣及袁崇焕。
English: On July 14th, he summoned the courtiers and Yuan Chonghuan to the platform.

古文：壬午，浙江风雨，海溢，漂没数万人。
现代文：二十三日，浙江出现大风雨，海水暴涨，淹没数万人。
English: On the 23rd, Zhejiang was hit by heavy rain and wind, and the sea surged, flooding tens of thousands of people.

古文：癸未，海寇郑芝龙降。
现代文：二十四日，海盗郑芝龙投降。
English: On the 24th, the pirate Zheng Zhilong surrendered.

古文：甲申，宁远兵变，巡抚都御史毕自肃自杀。
现代文：二十五日，宁远发生兵变。巡抚都御史毕自肃自杀。
English: On the 25th, there was a mutiny in Ningyuan. The governor of the capital, Gishi, committed suicide.

古文：八月乙未，诏非盛暑祁寒，日御文华殿与辅臣议政。
现代文：八月七日，下诏不要在盛暑季节祈祷凉爽，当天白天在文华殿与各位辅佐大臣讨论政事。
English: On August 7th, he issued an edict not to pray for coolness during the hot season. During the day, he discussed political affairs with the assistant ministers at the Palace of Literature.

古文：九月丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：九月十日，京师发生地震。
English: On September 21, an earthquake occurred in the capital city of Kyoto.

古文：冬十月戊戌，刘鸿训罢，寻遣戍。
现代文：十月十一日，刘鸿训停职，不久派遣戍边。
English: On October 11th, Liu Hongxun was suspended from his duties, and shortly after, he was sent to Lijiang.

古文：十一月癸未，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十一月二十六日，在南郊祭天。
English: On November 26th, the Southern Suburbs held a festival.

古文：十二月丙申，韩爌复入阁。
现代文：十二月十日，韩火广又入阁。
English: On December 10, Han Huiguang joined the cabinet again.

古文：是年，革广宁及蓟镇塞外诸部赏。
现代文：这年，革除广宁及蓟镇塞外各部赏赐。
English: This year, the award was given to all departments except Guangning and Shanzhu.

古文：诸部饥，告籴，不许。
现代文：各部饥荒，请求朝廷平价卖粮，没有得到同意。
English: The various ministries of famine requested the imperial court to sell grain at a parity price, but did not receive consent.

古文：陕西饥民苦加派，流贼大起，分掠鄜州、延安。
现代文：陕西饥民对加赋摊派十分痛苦，到处抢劫作乱，分别抢掠州、延安。
English: The starving people in Shaanxi were very distressed by the increase in the apportionment of funds. They looted and rioted everywhere, especially in Shuzhou and Yan'an.

古文：二年春正月丙子，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：崇祯二年正月二十日，隆重祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the second year of Chongzhen, a grand ceremony was held to pay tribute to the forerunner of Confucius.

古文：丁丑，定逆案，自崔呈秀以下凡六等。
现代文：二十一日，确定逆案，从崔呈秀以下共六等。
English: On the twenty-first day, the adverse case was determined, with a total of six grades from Cui Chengxiu down.

古文：二月戊子，祀社稷。
现代文：二月二日，祭祀社稷。
English: On February 2nd, the ritual ended.

古文：庚寅，皇长子慈烺生，赦天下。
现代文：四日，皇长子朱慈火良降生，赦免天下。
English: On the fourth day, the eldest son of the emperor, Zhu Cihailiang, was born and pardoned by the world.

古文：三月戊寅，蓟州兵变，有司抚定之。
现代文：三月二十二日，蓟州发生兵变，官吏安抚平定。
English: On March 22, there was a mutiny in Zhangzhou, which was pacified by officials.

古文：夏四月甲午，裁驿站。
现代文：四月九日，裁减驿站。
English: On April 9th, the reduction of stations began.

古文：闰月癸亥，流贼犯三水，游击高从龙战殁。
现代文：闰四月八日，流贼侵犯三水，游击高从龙战死。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month, the bandits invaded Sanshui, and the guerrilla Gao Conglong was killed in the battle.

古文：癸未，祀地于北郊。
现代文：二十八日，在北郊祭地。
English: On the 28th, at the North Suburbs Festival Grounds.

古文：五月乙酉朔，日有食之。庚子，议改历法。
现代文：五月初一，有日食。十六日，讨论修改历法。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. On the 16th, the revision of the calendar was discussed.

古文：六月戊午，袁崇焕杀毛文龙于双岛。
现代文：六月五日，袁崇焕在双岛杀掉毛文龙。
English: On June 5, Yuan Chonghuan killed Mao Wenlong in Shuangdao.

古文：癸亥，以久旱，斋居文华殿，敕群臣修省。
现代文：十日，因天气干旱了太久，居文华殿行斋，命群臣修身反省。
English: On the 10th day, because the weather had been dry for too long, Ju Wenhua Hall held a fasting ceremony, and the ministers were ordered to practice self-criticism.

古文：秋八月甲子，总兵官侯良柱、兵备副使刘可训击斩奢崇明、安邦彦于红土川，水西贼平。
现代文：八月十二日，总兵官侯良柱、兵备副使刘可训在红土川击斩奢崇明和安邦彦，平定水西贼乱。
English: On August 12th, Hou Liangzhu, the commander-in-chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, and Liu Kexun, the vice-commander of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, defeated Shuo Chongming and An Bangyan in Hongtu River to quell the Western Water Bandit Rebellion.

古文：甲戌，熹宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：二十二日，熹宗神牌附祭于太庙。
English: On the 22nd, the memorial ceremony for the god of the Jurchen Sect was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：九月丁未，杨镐弃市。
现代文：九月二十六日，杨镐被弃尸示众。
English: On September 26th, Yang Hui's abandoned body was displayed to the public.

古文：冬十月戊寅，大清兵入大安口。
现代文：十月二十七日，大清兵进入大安口。
English: On October 27th, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty entered the Da'an Pass.

古文：十一月壬午朔，京师戒严。
现代文：十一月初一，京师戒严。
English: On the first day of November, martial law was imposed in Beijing.

古文：乙酉，山海关总兵官赵率教战没于遵化。
现代文：四日，山海关总兵官赵率教在遵化战死。
English: On the 4th, the chief military officer of the Shanhaiguan Customs, Zhao Liankao, died in battle in Zunhua.

古文：甲申，大清兵入遵化，巡抚都御史王元雅、推官何天球等死之。
现代文：五日，大清兵进入遵化，巡抚都御史王元雅、推官何天球等战死。
English: On the fifth day, the Great Qing soldiers entered Zunhua, and the governor of the capital, Wang Yuanya, and the commander, He Tianqiu, died in battle.

古文：丁亥，总兵官满桂入援。
现代文：六日，总兵官满桂入京增援。
English: On the 6th, the commander-in-chief, General Mankei, arrived in Beijing to reinforce the troops.

古文：己丑，吏部侍郎成基命为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：七日，吏部侍郎成基命为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On the 7th, the attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Cheng Ji, was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Donggak University to participate in military affairs.

古文：召前大学士孙承宗为兵部尚书中极殿大学士，视师通州。
现代文：召前大学士孙承宗为兵部尚书中极殿大学士，去通州视察军队。
English: Sun Chengzong, a former university scholar, was called up as a scholar of the Military Department, and went to Tongzhou to inspect the army.

古文：辛卯，袁崇焕入援，次蓟州。
现代文：八日，袁崇焕入京救援，临时住蓟州。
English: On the 8th, Yuan Chonghuan went to Beijing for rescue and temporarily lived in Zhangzhou.

古文：戊子，宣、大、保定兵相继入援。
现代文：九日，宣府、大同、保定兵相继入京救援。
English: On the 9th, soldiers from Xuanfu, Datong, and Baoding successively entered Beijing for rescue.

古文：征天下镇巡官勤王。
现代文：征调天下镇巡官入京勤王。
English: The world town inspector was transferred to Beijing to serve the king.

古文：辛丑，大清兵薄德胜门。
现代文：十九日，大清兵逼进德胜门。
English: On the 19th, the Qing soldiers forced their way into Deshengmen.

古文：甲辰，召袁崇焕等于平台，崇焕请入城休兵，不许。
现代文：二十二日，在平台召见袁崇焕等人，袁崇焕请求入城后休整军队，皇帝不许。
English: On the 22nd, Yuan Chonghuan and others were summoned to the platform. Yuan Chonghuan requested to enter the city to rest and reorganize the army, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：下兵部尚书王洽于狱。
现代文：兵部尚书王洽被下狱。
English: Hyobusho Wangchao was released from prison.

古文：十二月辛亥朔，再召袁崇焕于平台，下锦衣卫狱。
现代文：十二月初一日，再次召见袁崇焕于平台，下锦衣卫狱中。
English: On the first day of December, Yuan Chonghuan was once again summoned to the platform and taken to the prison.

古文：甲寅，总兵官祖大寿兵溃，东出关。
现代文：四日，总兵官祖大寿兵败，东出山海关。
English: On the fourth day, the commander-in-chief, Zu Dashou, was defeated, and the Dongdishan Customs was established.

古文：乙卯，孙承宗移驻山海关。
现代文：五日，孙承宗移师驻扎山海关。
English: On the 5th, Sun Chengzong transferred his division to be stationed at the Shanhaiguan Customs.

古文：庚申，谕廷臣进马。
现代文：十日，告诉廷臣进献马匹。
English: On the tenth day, he told courtiers to bring horses.

古文：丁卯，遣中官趋满桂出战，桂及前总兵官孙祖寿俱战殁。
现代文：十七日，派中官督促满桂出战，满桂和前总兵官孙祖寿全部战死。
English: On the seventeenth day, a lieutenant general was sent to urge Man Gui to go to war, and Man Gui and the former general officer Sun Zu Shou all died in battle.

古文：总兵官马世龙总理援军。
现代文：由总兵官马世龙领导援军。
English: The reinforcements were led by General Ma Shilong.

古文：壬申，钱龙锡罢。
现代文：二十二日，钱龙锡罢官。
English: On the 22nd, Qian Longxi resigned.

古文：癸酉，山西援兵溃于良乡。
现代文：二十三日，山西援兵在良乡溃败。
English: On the 23rd, the Shanxi reinforcements were defeated in Liangxiang.

古文：丁丑，礼部侍郎周延儒、尚书何如宠、侍郎钱象坤俱礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十七日，礼部侍郎周延儒、尚书何如宠、侍郎钱象坤同为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与国家重大事务。
English: On the 27th, Zhou Yanru, Shangshu He Ruzhong, and Qian Xiangkun, the attendants of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were also the attendants of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Dongge University, and participated in major national affairs.

古文：三年春正月甲申，大清兵克永平，副使郑国昌、知府张凤奇等死之。
现代文：崇祯三年正月四日，大清兵攻克永平，副使郑国昌、知府张凤奇等死于战火。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Chongzhen, the Qing soldiers defeated Yongping. Vice-envoy Zheng Guochang and prefect Zhang Fengqi died in the war.

古文：丙戌，瘗城外战士骸。
现代文：六日，掩埋京师城外暴露尸骨。
English: On the sixth day, they buried him outside the city and exposed his bones.

古文：戊子，大清兵克滦州。
现代文：八日，大清兵攻克滦州。
English: On the 8th, the Qing Dynasty soldiers conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：庚寅，逮总督蓟辽都御史刘策下狱，论死。
现代文：十日，逮捕总督蓟辽都御史刘策下狱处死。
English: On the 10th, Liu Ce, the governor of Liaodong, was arrested and sentenced to death.

古文：乙未，禁抄传边报。
现代文：十五日，禁止抄传边境情报。
English: On the 15th, it was forbidden to copy and transmit border intelligence.

古文：韩爌致仕。
现代文：韩火广辞官退职。
English: Han Huiguang resigned and retired.

古文：壬寅，兵部右侍郎刘之纶败没于遵化。
现代文：二十二日，兵部右侍郎刘之纶败没于遵化。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Zhisheng, the right-hand man of the military department, was defeated and died in Zunhua.

古文：是月，陕西诸路总兵官吴自勉等帅师入卫，延绥、甘肃兵溃西去，与群寇合。
现代文：这月，陕西各路总兵官吴自勉等率师入京增援，延绥、甘肃兵败西逃，与流寇会合。
English: This month, Wu Zimin, the commander-in-chief of the armies of Shaanxi, and other generals led reinforcements to Beijing. The defeated soldiers from Yancheng and Gansu fled to the west and joined the fleeing bandits.

古文：二月庚申，立皇长子慈烺为皇太子，大赦。
现代文：二月十日，立皇长子朱慈火良为皇太子，大赦天下。
English: On February 10, the eldest son of the emperor, Zhu Cihailiang, was proclaimed crown prince, and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：三月壬午，李标致仕。
现代文：三月二日，李标退职辞官。
English: On March 2, Li Bei resigned from his post.

古文：戊申，流贼犯山西。
现代文：二十八日，流寇侵犯山西。
English: On the 28th, the bandits invaded Shanxi Province.

古文：夏四月乙卯，以久旱，斋居文华殿，谕百官修省。
现代文：四月六日，因天旱很久，居文华殿行斋，告诉百官修身反省。
English: On April 6th, due to the long drought, Ju Wenhua Hall held a fasting, and told the officials to practice self-criticism.

古文：丁丑，流贼陷蒲县。
现代文：二十八日，流贼攻陷蒲县。
English: On the 28th, the bandits invaded Puxian.

古文：五月辛卯，马世龙、祖大寿诸军入滦州。
现代文：五月十二日，马世龙、祖大寿各军进入滦州。
English: On May 12, the armies of Ma Shilong and Zu Dashou entered Zhangzhou.

古文：壬辰，大清兵东归，永平、迁安、遵化相继复。
现代文：十三日，大清兵向东退回，永平、迁安、遵化相继收复。
English: On the 13th, the Great Qing soldiers retreated to the east, and Yongping, Qian'an, and Zunhua were successively recovered.

古文：六月癸丑，流贼王嘉胤陷府谷，米脂贼张献忠聚众应之。
现代文：六月五日，流贼王嘉胤攻陷府谷，米脂人张献忠聚众响应。
English: On June 5th, the bandit Wang Jia-yin invaded Fugu, and Zhang Xianzhong, a member of the Communist Party of China, rallied the public in response.

古文：己未，授宋儒邵雍后裔《五经》博士。
现代文：十一日，授与宋儒邵雍后裔《五经》博士。
English: On the 11th, the descendants of Song Ryu Shaoyong were awarded the doctorate of "Five Classics."

古文：辛酉，礼部尚书温体仁、吴宗达并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十三日，礼部尚书温体仁、吴宗达一起兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 13th, Shang Shouwen Tizhen and Wu Zongda of the Ministry of Ceremonies, who are also Dongge University scholars, took part in the important business.

古文：秋八月癸亥，杀袁崇焕。
现代文：八月十六日，杀死袁宗焕。
English: On August 16, he killed Yuan Zonghuan.

古文：九月己卯，逮钱龙锡下狱。
现代文：九月三日，逮捕钱龙锡下狱。
English: On September 3, Qian Longxi was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：冬十月癸亥，停刑。
现代文：十月十八日，停止用刑。
English: On October 18, the sentence was suspended.

古文：丙寅，巡抚延绥副都御史洪承畴、总兵官杜文焕败贼张献忠于清涧。
现代文：二十一日，巡抚延绥副都御史洪承畴、总兵官杜文焕在清涧打败张献忠。
English: On the 21st, the governor of Yancheng and vice-governor of the capital, Shi Hongcheng, and the commander-in-chief, Du Wenhuan, defeated Zhang Xianzhong in Qingcheng.

古文：十一月壬辰，破贼于怀宁。
现代文：十一月十七日，又在怀宁打败张献忠。
English: On November 17th, he defeated Zhang Xianzhong again in Huaining.

古文：甲午，山西总兵官王国梁追贼于河曲，败绩。
现代文：十九日，山西总兵官王国梁追击张献忠于河曲，官军溃败。
English: On the 19th, the Shanxi general officer Wang Guoliang Liang pursued Zhang Xianzhong to Hequ, and the government army was defeated.

古文：十二月乙巳朔，增田赋充饷。
现代文：十二月一日，增派田赋充当军饷。
English: On December 1st, more rice fields were assigned to serve as military barracks.

古文：戊午，流贼陷宁塞。
现代文：十四日，流贼攻陷宁塞。
English: On the 14th, the bandits captured Ningce.

古文：是年，乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: This year, Wuxi paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：四年春正月己卯，流贼陷保安。
现代文：崇祯四年正月五日，流贼攻陷保安。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the Chongzhen Emperor, a bandit ambushed the guards.

古文：丁酉，御史吴甡振延绥饥民。
现代文：二十三日，御史吴生生赈救延绥饥民。
English: On the 23rd, Governor Wu Shengzheng came to the rescue of the starving people in Yancheng.

古文：己亥，召对内阁、九卿、科道及入觐两司官于文华殿。
现代文：二十五日，在文华殿召对内阁、九卿、科道及入觐两司官员。
English: On the 25th, officials from the cabinet, the nine nobles, the two departments of science and technology, and the imperial court were summoned to Wenhua Palace.

古文：命都察院严核巡按御史。
现代文：命都察院严格考核巡抚御史。
English: The Meidosha-in strictly evaluates the governor's record.

古文：二月壬子，流贼围庆阳，分兵陷合水。
现代文：二月八日，流贼围攻庆阳，分兵攻陷合水。
English: On February 8th, the rebels besieged Qingyang, and a detachment of soldiers captured Heshui.

古文：三月丁丑，副将张应昌等击败之，庆阳围解。
现代文：三月三日，副将张应昌等击败流贼，庆阳解围。
English: On March 3, Vice-General Zhang Yingchang and others defeated the bandits and lifted the siege of Qingyang.

古文：癸未，总督陕西三边军务侍郎杨鹤招抚流贼于宁州，群贼伪降，寻复叛。
现代文：九日，总督陕西三边军务侍郎杨鹤在宁州招抚流贼，其他流贼佯装投降，不久又反叛。
English: On the 9th, Yang He, the governor of Shaanxi and the trilateral military aide-de-camp, went to Ningzhou to entice the ruffians. Other ruffians pretended to surrender, but soon rebelled.

古文：己丑，赐陈于泰等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十五日，赐陈于泰等进士及第及不同的出身。
English: On the 15th, Chen Yutai and other talented young people from different backgrounds were awarded.

古文：夏四月庚戌，祷雨。
现代文：四月七日，祈祷雨。
English: April 7th, praying for rain.

古文：辛酉，诏廷臣条时政。
现代文：十八日，下诏廷臣分条陈述当时政事。
English: On the 18th, the courtier made a detailed statement on the political situation at that time.

古文：是月，延绥副将曹文诏击贼于河曲，王嘉胤败死。
现代文：这月，延绥副将曹文诏在河曲攻打流贼，王嘉胤兵败而死。
English: This month, Yancheng's vice-commander Cao Wenzhao fought against the pirates in Hequ, and Wang Jiayin was killed in the battle.

古文：五月甲戌朔，步祷于南郊。
现代文：五月初一日，步行到南郊祈祷。
English: On the first day of May, I walked to the southern suburbs to pray.

古文：庚辰，戍钱龙锡。
现代文：七日，遣钱龙锡戍边。
English: On the seventh day, the money was sent to Longxi Lvbian.

古文：六月丁未，钱象坤致仕。
现代文：六月五日，钱象坤辞官退职。
English: On June 5, Qian Xiangkun resigned from his post.

古文：秋七月甲戌，总兵官王际恩败贼于鄜州，降贼首上天龙。
现代文：七月二日，总兵官王承恩在州打败流贼，降服贼首上天龙。
English: On July 2nd, the general officer Wang Cheng'en defeated the bandits in the state and surrendered to the bandits.

古文：八月癸卯，总兵官贺虎臣击斩贼刘六于庆阳。
现代文：八月二日，总兵官贺虎臣在庆阳击败并斩杀刘六。
English: On August 2, General He Huchen defeated and killed Liu Li in Qingyang.

古文：丁未，大清兵围祖大寿于大凌城。
现代文：六日，大清兵将祖大寿围困于大凌城。
English: On the 6th, the Qing soldiers besieged Zu Dashou in Daling City.

古文：丙辰，何如宠致仕。
现代文：十五日，何如宠辞官退职。
English: On the 15th, He Rongzhi resigned from his post.

古文：九月庚辰，内臣王应朝、邓希诏等监视关、宁、蓟镇兵粮及各边抚赏。
现代文：九月九日，内臣王应朝、邓希诏等监视关、宁、蓟镇兵粮及各边抚恤赏赐之物。
English: On September 9, the vassals Wang Yingchao, Deng Xizhao and others went to Guan, Ning and Shanzhen to monitor the soldiers' food and the rewards given by each side.

古文：甲午，逮杨鹤下狱，论戍。
现代文：二十三日，逮捕杨鹤下狱，处罚戍边。
English: On the 23rd, Yang He was arrested, released from prison, and punished.

古文：洪承畴总督三边军务。
现代文：洪承畴总督三边军务。
English: Hong Chengzheng is the governor of the trilateral military affairs.

古文：丁酉，太监张彝宪总理户、工二部钱粮，给事中宋可久等相继谏，不听。
现代文：二十六日，太监张彝宪总理户、工二部钱粮，给事中宋可久等相继进谏，皇帝不听。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the eunuch Zhang Xianxian sent money and grain to the Prime Minister's household and the Second Department of the Ministry of Labor, and Song Kegui and others were successively promoted to the imperial court, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：戊戌，山海总兵官宋伟等援大凌，败于长山，监军太仆少卿张春被执。
现代文：二十七日，山海总兵官宋伟等救援大凌，但才到长山就遭到失败，监军太仆少卿张春被捉拿。
English: On the 27th, Song Wei, the commander-in-chief of the mountain and sea forces, and others went to the rescue of Daling, but they were defeated when they reached Changshan. Zhang Chun, the overseer of the army, was captured.

古文：冬十月辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：十月一日，有日食。
English: On October 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：戊辰，祖大寿杀副将何可纲。
现代文：二十八日，祖大寿杀副将何可纲。
English: On the 28th, Zu Dazhou killed Vice Admiral He Ke Gang.

古文：己巳，大寿自大凌脱归，入锦州。
现代文：二十九日，祖大寿从大凌脱身而归，进入锦州。
English: On the 29th, Zu Dashou escaped from Daling and returned to Jinzhou.

古文：十一月丙戌，太监李奇茂监视陕西茶马，吴直监视登岛兵粮、海禁，群臣合疏谏，不听。
现代文：十一月十七日，太监李奇茂监视陕西茶马，吴直监视登岛兵粮、海禁。文武百官合力奏书进谏，皇帝不听。
English: On November 17th, the eunuch Li Qimao monitored the Shaanxi tea horses, and Wu Zhi monitored the food for soldiers landing on the island and the naval blockade. Hundreds of civil and military officials jointly submitted a report to the emperor, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：壬辰，孙承宗致仕。
现代文：二十三日，孙承宗辞官退职。
English: On the 23rd, Sun Chengzong resigned from his post.

古文：癸巳，召对廷臣于文华殿，历询军国诸务。语及内臣，帝曰： 诸臣若实心任事，朕亦何需此辈。 
现代文：二十四日，在文华殿召对廷臣，多次询问军国事务，言语涉及内臣，皇帝说： 各位大臣若是诚心做好份内之事，朕又何需此辈。 
English: On the 24th, he summoned courtiers at the Palace of Literature and Culture, and repeatedly asked them about military affairs. The words concerned the vassals. The emperor said, "If the ministers are sincerely doing their duty, why do I need them?

古文：己亥，流贼罗汝才犯山西。
现代文：三十日，流贼罗汝才侵犯山西。
English: On the 30th, the bandit Luo Ru invaded Shanxi.

古文：闰月乙丑，陕西降贼复叛，陷甘泉，杀参政张允登。
现代文：闰十一月二十六日，陕西降贼再次反叛，攻陷甘泉，杀参政张允登。
English: On the 26th day of the 11th month of the leap year, the rebels in Shaanxi rebelled again, captured Ganquan, and killed Zhang Yunden, a politician.

古文：丁卯，登州游击孔有德率师援辽，次吴桥反，陷陵县，连陷临邑、商河、齐东，屠新城。
现代文：二十八日，登州游击孔有德率师增援辽州，到吴桥反叛，攻陷陵县，接连攻陷临邑、商河、齐东，屠杀新城军民。
English: On the 28th, Kong Youde, a guerrilla from Dengzhou, led his division to reinforce Liaozhou, rebelled to Wuqiao, invaded Ling County, successively invaded Lin'yi, Shanghe, and Qidong, and massacred the soldiers and civilians of Xincheng.

古文：十二月丙子，济南官军御贼于阮城店，败绩。
现代文：十二月八日，济南官军在阮城店与流贼相战，官军溃败。
English: On December 8th, the Jinan government army fought against the bandits in Ruancheng, and the government army was defeated.

古文：丁丑，以大凌筑城招衅夺孙承宗官。
现代文：九日，因大陵筑城引起事端，削夺孙承宗官职。
English: On the 9th, because of the trouble caused by the construction of the Great Mausoleum, the official position of Sun Chengzong was taken away.

古文：是冬，延安、庆阳大雪，民饥，盗贼益炽。
现代文：这年冬天，延安、庆阳降大雪，百姓饥荒，盗贼趁机大肆作乱。
English: This winter, heavy snow fell in Yan'an and Qingyang, the people were starving, and thieves took the opportunity to make trouble.

古文：五年春正月辛丑，孔有德陷登州，游击陈良谟战死，总兵官张可大死之。
现代文：崇祯五年正月三日，孔有德攻陷登州，游击陈良谟战死，总兵官张可大死。
English: On the 3rd day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Chongzhen, Kong Youde attacked and trapped Danzhou, guerrilla Chen Liangmu died in battle, and general officer Zhang Ke Da died.

古文：巡抚都御史孙元化、副使宋光兰等被执，寻纵还。
现代文：巡抚都御史孙元化、副使宋光兰等被捉，不久放回。
English: The governor of the capital, Sun Yuanhua, and the deputy envoy, Song Guanglan, were captured and soon released.

古文：辛亥，孔有德陷黄县。
现代文：十三日，孔有德攻陷黄县。
English: On the 13th, Kong Youde invaded Huang County.

古文：丙寅，总兵官杨御蕃、王洪率师讨孔有德，败绩于新城镇。
现代文：二十八日，总兵官杨御蕃、王洪率兵攻打孔有德，在新城镇失败。
English: On the 28th, the general officers Yang Yixuan and Wang Hong led the troops to attack Kong Youde, and failed in the new town.

古文：二月己巳朔，孔有德围莱州，巡抚都御史徐从治固守。
现代文：二月一日，孔有德围攻莱州，巡抚都御史徐从治誓死固守。
English: On February 1, Kong Youde besieged Laizhou, and the governor of the capital, Shi Xu, swore to defend it to the death.

古文：辛巳，孔有德陷平度。
现代文：十三日，孔有德攻陷平度。
English: On the 13th, Kong Youde attacked and leveled the valley.

古文：三月壬寅，兵部侍郎刘宇烈督理山东军务，讨孔有德。
现代文：三月五日，兵部侍郎刘宇烈领导并监督山东军务，征讨孔有德。
English: On March 5th, Liu Yulei, an attendant of the military department, led and supervised the military affairs of Shandong Province to recruit Kong Youde.

古文：夏四月甲戌，刘宇烈败绩于沙河。癸未，徐从治中伤卒。
现代文：四月七日，刘宇烈在沙河失败。十六日，徐从治受伤而死。
English: On April 7, Liu Yulei failed in Shahe. On the 16th, Xu Congzhi was injured and died.

古文：是月，总兵官曹文诏、杨嘉谟连破贼于陇安、静宁，贼奔水落城，平凉、庄浪饥民附之，势复炽。
现代文：这月，总兵官曹文诏、杨嘉谟连续在陇安、静宁打败孔贼。流贼逃奔到水落城，平凉、庄浪平民跟着逃去，贼势更加壮大。
English: This month, the chief petty officers Cao Wenzhao and Yang Jia Mu successively defeated the bandits in Lu'an and Jingning. The bandits fled to Shuiyuan, and the civilians in Pingliang and Zhuanglang followed them, and the bandits became more powerful.

古文：五月丙午，参政朱大典为佥都御史，巡抚山东。
现代文：五月九日，参政朱大典为佥都御史，巡抚山东。
English: On May 9, Zhu Datian, a member of the Political Consultative Conference, was appointed as the governor of Shandong Province.

古文：辛亥，礼部尚书郑以伟、徐光启并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十四日，礼部尚书郑以伟、徐光启一同兼任东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 14th, Zheng Yiwei and Xu Guangqi of the Ministry of Ceremonies also served as Dongge University scholars to participate in important affairs.

古文：六月，京师大雨水。
现代文：六月，京师下大雨。
English: In June, it rained heavily in Kyoto.

古文：壬申，河决孟津。
现代文：六日，孟津黄河决堤。
English: On the 6th, the Mengjin section of the Yellow River burst its banks.

古文：秋七月辛丑，太监曹化淳提督京营戎政。
现代文：七月五日，太监曹化淳领导京师军政事务。
English: On July 5, the eunuch Cao Hua Jun took over the leadership of military and political affairs in Beijing.

古文：癸卯，孔有德伪降，诱执登莱巡抚都御史谢琏，莱州知府朱万年死之。
现代文：七日，孔有德假装投降，引诱擒捉登莱巡抚都御史谢琏，莱州知府朱万年死。
English: On the seventh day, Kong Youde pretended to surrender, lured and captured the governor of Denglai, Gu Shi Xie, and the governor of Laizhou, Zhu Wannian, died.

古文：己未，孙元化弃市。逮刘宇烈下狱，论戍。
现代文：二十三日，孙元化被丢尸弃市，逮捕刘宇烈下狱，遣送戍边。
English: On the 23rd, Sun Yuanhua's body was thrown out of the city, Liu Yulei was arrested and sent to Lijiang.

古文：八月甲戌，洪承畴败贼于甘泉，贼首白广恩降。
现代文：八月九日，洪承畴在甘泉打败流贼。首领白广恩投降。
English: On August 9, Hong Chengzong defeated the bandits in Ganquan. The leader Bai Guang'en surrendered.

古文：甲申，朱大典督军救莱州，前锋参将祖宽败贼于沙河。
现代文：十九日，朱大典领导援军救援莱州，前锋参将祖宽在沙河打败流贼。
English: On the 19th, Zhu Dadian led the reinforcements to rescue Laizhou, and the forward general Zu Kuan defeated the bandits in Shahe.

古文：乙酉，莱州围解。
现代文：二十日，莱州解围。
English: On the 20th, the siege of Laizhou was lifted.

古文：癸巳，官军大败孔有德于黄县，进围登州。
现代文：二十八日，官军在黄县大败孔有德，进而围困登州。
English: On the 28th, the government army defeated Kong Youde in Huang County, and then besieged Dengzhou.

古文：九月丁酉，海贼刘香寇福建。
现代文：九月二日，海盗刘香侵犯福建。
English: On September 2, the pirate Liu Xiang invaded Fujian.

古文：是秋，陕西贼入山西，连陷大宁、泽州、寿阳，分部走河北，犯怀庆，陷修武。
现代文：这年秋天，陕西流贼进入山西，连续攻陷大宁、泽州、寿阳，其余部分从黄河以北侵犯怀宁，攻陷修武。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Shaanxi bandits entered Shanxi, and successively invaded and occupied the cities of Daning, Zezhou, and Shouyang. The rest of the bandits invaded Huaining from the north of the Yellow River, and invaded and occupied Shouwu.

古文：冬十一月戊戌，刘香寇浙江。
现代文：十一月四日，刘香侵犯浙江。
English: On November 4, Liu Xiang invaded Zhejiang.

古文：六年春正月癸卯，曹文诏节制山、陕诸将讨贼。
现代文：崇祯六年正月十一日，曹文诏节制山西、陕西诸将征讨流贼。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 6th year of Chongzhen, Cao Wen issued an edict to restrain Shanxi and Shaanxi generals from recruiting and expelling thieves.

古文：丁未，副将左良玉破贼于涉县，贼走林县山中，饥民争附之。
现代文：十五日，副将左良玉在涉县攻破盗贼军，流贼逃入林县山林中，饥民争先恐后跟着逃往山中。
English: On the 15th, vice-commander Zuo Liangyu defeated the bandit army in Shixian, the bandits fled into the forests of Lin County, and the starving people scrambled to flee into the mountains.

古文：庚申，遣使分督直省逋赋。
现代文：二十八日，派使者分别监督直隶欠交赋税。
English: On the 28th, envoys were sent to supervise the tax arrears of direct reports.

古文：是月，曹文诏击山西贼，屡败之。
现代文：当月，曹文诏多次打败山西流贼。
English: That month, Cao Wenzhao repeatedly defeated the Shanxi bandits.

古文：二月壬申，削左副都御史王志道籍。
现代文：二月十日，左副都御史王志道被革职。
English: On February 10, Left Vice-Governor Wang Zhidou was dismissed from his post.

古文：癸酉，流贼犯畿南。
现代文：十一日，流贼侵犯畿南。
English: On the 11th, the bandits invaded the Gyeongnam Province.

古文：戊子，总兵官陈洪范等克登州水城。
现代文：二十六日，总兵官陈洪范等攻克登州水城。
English: On the 26th, the commander-in-chief Chen Hongfan and others attacked Dengzhou Water Town.

古文：辛卯，孔有德遁入海，山东平。
现代文：二十九日，孔有德逃到海上，山东平定下来。
English: On the 29th, Kong Youde fled to the sea, and Shandong was pacified.

古文：三月癸巳，敕曹文诏诸将限三月平贼。
现代文：三月二日，命令曹文诏等将在三个月之内平定流贼。
English: On March 2, Cao Wenzhao and others were ordered to subdue the rebels within three months.

古文：夏四月己巳，免延安、庆阳、平凉新旧辽饷。
现代文：四月八日，免延安、庆阳、平凉新旧辽饷。
English: On April 8th, Yan'an, Qingyang, Pingliang, and Liaoning Province were liberated.

古文：壬申，总兵官邓玘、左良玉剿河南贼。
现代文：十一日，总兵官邓王巳、左良玉征剿河南盗贼。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the general officers Deng Wangmi and Zuo Liangyu went to subdue the thieves in Henan.

古文：五月乙巳，太监陈大金等分监曹文诏、张应昌、左良玉、邓玘军。
现代文：五月十四日，太监陈大金等分别监督曹文诏、张应昌、左良玉、邓王巳军队。
English: On May 14, the eunuch Chen Dajin and others supervised the troops of Cao Wenzhao, Zhang Yingchang, Zuo Liangyu and Deng Wangsi.

古文：壬子，孔有德及其党耿仲明等航海降于我大清。
现代文：二十一日，孔有德及其党徒耿仲明等航海向大清兵投降。
English: On the 21st, Kong Youde and his party members, including Geng Zhongming, sailed to surrender to the Qing soldiers.

古文：癸丑，河套部犯宁夏，总兵官贺虎臣战没。
现代文：二十二日，河套部侵犯宁夏，总兵官贺虎臣战死。
English: On the 22nd, the Hetao Division invaded Ningxia, and the commander-in-chief, He Huchen, died in the battle.

古文：六月辛酉朔，太监高起潜监视宁、锦兵饷。
现代文：六月初一日，太监高起潜监视宁、锦兵饷。
English: On the first day of June, eunuchs Gao Qijian monitored Ning and Jin Bingyao.

古文：乙丑，郑以伟卒。
现代文：五日，郑以伟死。
English: On the fifth day, Zheng Yiwu passed away.

古文：庚辰，周延儒致仕。
现代文：二十日，周延儒辞官退职。
English: On the 20th, Zhou Yanru resigned and retired.

古文：甲申，延绥副将李卑援剿河南。
现代文：二十四日，延绥副将李卑增兵征剿河南。
English: On the 24th, Yancheng Vice-General Li Bei increased the number of soldiers to recruit in Henan.

古文：庚寅，太监张彝宪请催逋赋一千七百余万，给事中范淑泰谏，不听。
现代文：三十日，太监张彝宪请求催促拖欠赋税一千七百余万石，给事中范淑泰进谏，皇帝不听。
English: On the 30th, the eunuch Zhang Yixian asked Fan Shu-tai to hurry up the tax arrears of more than 17 million koku. Fan Shu-tai intervened, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：秋七月甲辰，大清兵取旅顺，总兵官黄龙死之。
现代文：七月十四日，大清兵夺取旅顺，总兵官黄龙死。
English: On July 14th, the Qing soldiers captured Lushun, and the general officer Huang Long died.

古文：癸丑，改曹文诏镇大同，山西巡抚都御史许鼎臣请留文诏剿贼，不许。
现代文：二十三日，改曹文诏镇守大同，山西巡抚都御史许鼎臣请求留曹文诏征剿流贼，没得到允许。
English: On the 23rd, Cao Wenzhao was changed to Datong Town Guard, and the Shanxi Governor, the Grand Historian Xu Dingchen, requested that Cao Wenzhao be retained to collect the ruffians, but was not allowed.

古文：八月己巳，曹文诏败贼于济源，又败之于怀庆。
现代文：八月十日，曹文诏相继在济源、怀庆打败流贼。
English: On August 10, Cao Wenzhao defeated the bandits in Jiyuan and Huaiqing successively.

古文：九月庚戌，南京礼部侍郎钱士升为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：九月二十一日，南京礼部侍郎钱士升为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与国家机密大事。
English: On September 21, Qian Shi, the attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, was promoted to the honor of the Ceremonial Department and the Dongge University, and participated in the state secret event.

古文：冬十月戊辰，徐光启卒。
现代文：十月九日，徐光启死。
English: On October 9, Xu Guangqi died.

古文：十一月癸巳，礼部侍郎王应熊、何吾驺俱礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十一月五日，礼部侍郎王应熊、向吾驺并兼礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On November 5th, Wang Ying Xiong, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Xiang Wuxuan, also a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Dongge University, participated in important affairs.

古文：辛亥，诏保定、河南、山西会兵剿贼。
现代文：二十三日，下诏保定、河南、山西会兵征剿流贼。
English: On the 23rd, the Baoding, Henan and Shanxi Association issued an edict to conscript the ruffians.

古文：壬子，贼渡河。
现代文：二十四日，流贼渡过黄河。
English: On the 24th, the bandits crossed the Yellow River.

古文：乙卯，陷渑池。
现代文：二十七日，攻陷渑池。
English: On the 27th, the city of Tsugaike was captured.

古文：十二月，连陷伊阳、卢氏，分犯南阳、汝宁，遂逼湖广。
现代文：十二月，连续攻陷伊阳、卢氏，分道侵犯南阳、汝宁、逼进湖广。
English: In December, they invaded Iyang and Lu in succession, and invaded Nanyang and Runing separately, and forced their way into Hukang.

古文：是年，安南入贡。
现代文：当年，安南来朝进贡。
English: That year, Annan came to the DPRK to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月己丑，广鹿岛副将尚可喜降于我大清。
现代文：崇祯七年正月二日，广鹿岛副将尚可喜向大清投降。
English: On the 2nd day of the 1st month of the 7th year of Chongzhen, the vice-commander of Guangkajima surrendered to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：设河南、山、陕、川、湖五省总督，以延绥巡抚陈奇瑜兼兵部侍郎为之。
现代文：设置河南、山、陕、川、湖五省总督。以延绥巡抚陈奇瑜兼兵部侍郎为五省总督。
English: The governors of the five provinces of Henan, Shan, Shaanxi, Sichuan and Hubei were set up, with the governor of Yancheng, Chen Qiyu, and the attendant of the military department as the governors of the five provinces.

古文：庚寅，总兵官张应昌渡河，败贼于灵宝。
现代文：三日，总兵官张应昌渡过黄河，在灵宝打败流贼。
English: On the third day, General Zhang Yingchang crossed the Yellow River and defeated the bandits in Lingbao.

古文：壬辰，贼自郧阳渡汉。
现代文：五日，流贼从郧阳渡过汉水。
English: On the fifth day, the bandits crossed the Han River from Shenyang.

古文：癸巳，犯襄阳，连陷紫阳、平利、白河，南入四川。
现代文：六日，侵犯襄阳，连续攻陷紫阳、平利、白河，向南进入四川。
English: On the 6th, it invaded Xiangyang, and successively invaded Ziyang, Pingli, Baihe, and moved south into Sichuan.

古文：二月戊寅，陷夔州，大宁诸县皆失守。
现代文：二月二十一日，攻陷夔州，大宁各县全部失守。
English: On February 21, Shanzhou was invaded, and all the counties of Danning were lost.

古文：甲申，耕耤田。
现代文：二十七日，耕种謖田。
English: On the 27th, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：乙酉，张献忠突商、雒，凡十三营流入汉南。
现代文：二十八日，张献忠突袭商、洛，共十三营流入汉水以南。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Xianzhong raided Shang and Luo, and a total of thirteen battalions flowed into the south of Hanshui.

古文：是月，振登、莱饥，蠲逋赋。
现代文：这一月，赈救登、莱二州饥荒。
English: This month, famine broke out in the two prefectures of Nanning and Laiyang.

古文：三月丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：减免欠交赋税。三月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of March, the sun and the moon are new, and there is a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，赐刘理顺等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐刘理顺等进士及第，出身各有不同。
English: On the 18th, Liu Lishun and others were promoted to the first and second ranks, with different origins.

古文：乙巳，张应昌击贼于五岭山，败绩。
现代文：十九日，张应昌在五岭山攻击流贼，官军溃败。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Yingchang attacked the bandits in Wuling Mountain, and the government army was defeated.

古文：庚戌，贼自四川走湖广，副将杨世恩追败之于石河口。
现代文：二十四日，流贼从四川到湖广，副将杨世恩追击于石河口打败流贼。
English: On the 24th, the bandits traveled from Sichuan to Hunan. Vice Admiral Yang Shien pursued and defeated the bandits at the mouth of the Shih River.

古文：山西自去年不雨至于是月，民大饥。
现代文：山西从去年直到本月没下雨，民间大发饥荒。
English: From last year until this month, there was no rain in Shanxi, and the people were starving.

古文：夏四月，贼自湖广走卢氏、灵宝。
现代文：四月，流贼从湖广到卢氏、灵宝。
English: In April, the bandits went from Hukang to Lu and Lingbao.

古文：癸酉，发帑振陕西、山西饥。
现代文：十八日，发放钱币赈救陕西、山西饥荒。
English: On the 18th, coins were distributed to relieve the famine in Shaanxi and Shanxi.

古文：五月丙申，副将贺人龙等败贼于蓝田。
现代文：五月十一日，副将贺人龙在蓝田打败流贼。
English: On May 11th, Vice Admiral He Rintong defeated the Drifters in Lantian.

古文：六月辛未，总督侍郎陈奇瑜、郧阳抚治都御史卢象升会师于上津，剿湖广贼。
现代文：六月十七日，总督侍郎陈奇瑜、郧阳抚治都御史卢象升在上津会师，征剿湖广流贼。
English: On June 17th, Chen Qiyu, the governor's valet, and Shilu Xiang, the governor of Fuzhi in Shenyang, went to join forces in Shangjin to conquer the bandits in the Guangliu region of Wuhu.

古文：甲戌，河决沛县。
现代文：二十日，沛县黄河决堤。
English: On the 20th, the Yellow River in Pei County broke through the dike.

古文：是夏，官军围高迎祥、李自成诸贼于兴安之车箱峡两月。
现代文：这年夏天，官军围剿高迎祥、李自成于兴安车箱峡达两月之久。
English: In the summer of that year, the government army besieged Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng in Xing'an Box Canyon for two months.

古文：贼食尽，伪降。
现代文：高迎祥、李自成因弹尽粮绝，佯装投降。
English: Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng ran out of food due to shelling and pretended to surrender.

古文：陈奇瑜受之，纵出险。
现代文：陈奇瑜受降，让他们出险关。
English: Chen Qiyu accepted the surrender and let them escape.

古文：复叛，陷所过州县。
现代文：待高迎祥、李自成再次反叛时，攻陷所经过的州县。
English: When Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng rebelled again, the states and counties they invaded were listed.

古文：张应昌自清水追贼，败绩。
现代文：张应昌从清水追击，失败。
English: Zhang Yingchang chased from Shimizu and failed.

古文：秋七月壬辰，大清兵入上方堡，至宣府。
现代文：七月八日，大清兵攻入上方堡，到宣府。
English: On July 8th, the Qing soldiers entered the Shangfang Fort and went to Xuanfu.

古文：乙未，诏总兵官陈洪范守居庸，巡抚保定都御史丁魁楚等守紫荆、雁门。
现代文：十一日，下诏由总兵官陈洪范据守居庸关，巡抚保定都御史丁魁楚等镇守紫荆、雁门。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the general officer Chen Hongfan was appointed to guard Juyongguan, and the governor of Baoding, Gu Shi, Ding Kui Chu, and others guarded Bijie and Ganmen.

古文：辛丑，京师戒严。
现代文：十七日，京师戒严。
English: On the 17th, martial law was imposed in Beijing.

古文：庚戌，大清兵克保安，沿边诸城堡多不守。
现代文：二十六日，大清兵攻克保安，沿边诸城堡大多没有守备。
English: On the 26th, the soldiers of the Great Qing conquered the security, and most of the castles along the border were not guarded.

古文：八月，分遣总兵官尤世威等援边。
现代文：八月，分别派遣总兵官尤世威等支援边境。
English: In August, General You Shiwei and others were dispatched separately to support the border.

古文：戊辰，宣大总督侍郎张宗衡节制各镇援兵。
现代文：十五日，宣大总督侍郎张宗衡节制各镇援兵。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Zongheng, an aide-de-camp to the governor of Xuanda, came to restrain the reinforcements from the towns.

古文：闰月甲申，贼陷隆德、固原，参议陆梦龙赴援，败没。
现代文：闰八月一日，流贼攻陷隆德、固原，参议陆梦龙赶赴救援，失败而死。
English: On the first day of the leap month of August, the bandits invaded Lund and Gouyuan. Councillor Lu Menglong rushed to the rescue, but failed and died.

古文：丁亥，大清兵克万全左卫。
现代文：四日，大清兵攻克万全左卫。
English: On the fourth day, the soldiers of the Great Qing Army defeated the left guard of Wanquan.

古文：庚寅，旋师出塞。
现代文：七日挥师出塞。
English: On the seventh day, the teachers were sent out.

古文：壬寅，李自成围贺人龙于陇州。
现代文：十九日，李自成将贺人龙围困于陇州。
English: On the 19th, Li Zicheng besieged Hetianlong in Luzhou.

古文：九月庚申，盔甲厂灾。
现代文：九月七日，盔甲厂发生火灾。
English: On September 7, a fire broke out in an armour factory.

古文：庚辰，洪承畴解陇州围。
现代文：二十一日，洪承畴解陇州围。
English: On the twenty-first day, Hong Chengzong lifted the siege of Luzhou.

古文：甲戌，以贼聚陕西，诏河南兵入潼、华，湖广兵入商、雒，四川兵由兴、汉，山西兵出蒲州、韩城，合剿。
现代文：二十七日，因流贼聚集于陕西，下诏调河南兵进入潼、华，湖广兵进入商、洛，四川兵由兴、汉，山西兵出蒲州、韩城，合力征剿李自成。
English: On the 27th, the rebels gathered in Shaanxi, and ordered the soldiers from Henan Province to go to Shandong and Huai, the soldiers from Guangxi Province to go to Shang and Luo, the soldiers from Sichuan Province to go to Xing and Han, and the soldiers from Shanxi Province to go to Puzhou and Hanzhong.

古文：冬十月庚戌，湖广兵援汉中，副将杨正芳战死。
现代文：十月二十七日，湖广兵救援汉中，副将杨正芳英勇战死。
English: On October 27th, Vice Admiral Yang Zhengfang died heroically while rescuing Han soldiers in Hukang.

古文：十一月庚辰，逮陈奇瑜下狱，论戍。
现代文：十一月二十八日，逮捕陈奇瑜下狱，论罪戍边。
English: On November 28th, Chen Qiyu was arrested and released from prison.

古文：乙酉，洪承畴兼摄五省军务。
现代文：乙酉日，洪承畴兼处理五省军务。
English: On the same day, Hong Chengdu also handled the military affairs of the five provinces.

古文：是冬，陕西贼分犯湖广、河南，李自成陷陈州。
现代文：这年冬天，陕西流贼分别侵犯湖广、河南，李自成攻陷陈州。
English: This winter, the Shaanxi bandits invaded Hukang and Henan, respectively, and Li Zicheng invaded Chenzhou.

古文：是年，暹罗入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗入朝进贡。
English: This year, Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月乙卯，贼陷上蔡，连陷汜水、荥阳、固始。
现代文：崇祯八年正月四日，李自成攻陷上蔡，连续攻陷汜水、荥阳、固始。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the 8th year of Chongzhen, Li Zicheng attacked and captured Shangcai, and successively attacked and captured Surabaya, Shenyang, and Gushi.

古文：己未，洪承畴出关讨贼。
现代文：八日，洪承畴出关征剿流贼。
English: On the 8th, Hong Chengzheng went out to collect the ruffians.

古文：辛酉，张献忠陷颍州。
现代文：十日，张献忠攻陷颍州。
English: On the 10th, Zhang Xianzhong invaded and occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：丙寅，陷凤阳，焚皇陵楼殿，留守朱国相等战死。
现代文：十五日，攻陷凤阳，焚烧皇陵阁殿宇，留守朱国相等英勇战死。
English: On the 15th, Fengyang was captured, the Imperial mausoleum was burned, and Zhu Guozhong, who stayed behind, died a heroic death.

古文：壬申，徐州援兵至凤阳。
现代文：二十一日，徐州援兵赶到凤阳。
English: On the 21st, reinforcements from Xuzhou arrived in Fengyang.

古文：张献忠犯庐州，寻陷庐江、无为。
现代文：张献忠进攻庐州。不久，庐江、无为相继沦陷。
English: Zhang Xianzhong attacked Zhangzhou. Soon, Zhangjiang and Muxing fell one after another.

古文：李自成走归德，与罗汝才复入陕西。
现代文：李自成趋兵归德，与罗汝才进入陕西。
English: Li Zicheng joined the army to return to Germany, and entered Shaanxi with Luo Ru.

古文：二月，张献忠陷潜山、罗田、太湖、新蔡，应天巡抚都御史张国维御却之。
现代文：二月，张献忠攻陷潜山、罗田、太湖、新蔡，应天巡抚都御史张国维击退张献忠。
English: In February, Zhang Xianzhong led the troops to invade Qianshan, Luotian, Taihu, and Xincai, and Zhang Guowei, the governor of the capital, repulsed Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：甲午，以皇陵失守，逮总督漕运尚书杨一鹏下狱，寻弃市。
现代文：十三日，因皇陵失守，逮捕总督漕运尚书杨一鹏下狱，不久弃市。
English: On the 13th, because of the loss of the imperial mausoleum, the governor Cao Yun Shangshu Yang Yipeng was arrested and imprisoned, and soon abandoned the city.

古文：丁酉，总兵官邓玘败贼于罗山。
现代文：十六日，总兵官邓王巳在罗山打败流贼。
English: On the 16th, the commander-in-chief Deng Wangxi defeated the bandits in Luoshan.

古文：是月，曹文诏败贼于随州。
现代文：三月，曹文诏在随州打败流贼。
English: In March, Cao Wenzhao defeated the bandits in Suizhou.

古文：夏四月，张献忠复走汉中，犯平凉、凤翔。
现代文：四月，张献忠从汉中侵犯平凉、凤翔。
English: In April, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Pingliang and Fengxiang from Hanzhong.

古文：丁亥，郑芝龙击败海贼刘香，香自杀，众悉降。
现代文：八日，郑芝龙打败海盗刘香，刘香兵败自杀，余部全部投降。
English: On the eighth day, Zheng Zhilong defeated the pirate Liu Xiang, Liu Xiang's soldiers committed suicide, and the rest all surrendered.

古文：辛卯，洪承畴会师于汝州，分部诸将防豫、楚要害。
现代文：十二日，洪承畴会师于汝州，分部诸将防守豫、楚要害之地。
English: On the 12th, Hong Chengzong will hold a division in Ruzhou, and the division will defend Yu and Chu key areas.

古文：乙巳，川兵变于樊城，邓玘自杀。
现代文：二十六日，四川兵在樊城发动兵变，邓王巳自杀。
English: On the 26th, Sichuan soldiers launched a mutiny in Lucheng, and Deng Wangsi committed suicide.

古文：丙午，洪承畴西还，驻师灵宝。
现代文：二十七日，洪承畴从西边返回，驻扎灵宝。
English: On the 27th, Hong Chengzheng returned from the west and stationed at Lingbao.

古文：五月乙亥，吴宗达致仕。
现代文：五月二十六日，吴宗达辞官退职。
English: On May 26, Wu Zongda resigned from his post.

古文：六月己丑，官军遇贼于乱马川，败绩。
现代文：六月十一日，官军在乱马川与流贼相遇，官军失败。
English: On June 11th, the government army encountered the bandits in the turbulent Ma River, and the government army failed.

古文：壬辰，副将艾万年、柳国镇击李自成于宁州之襄乐，战没。
现代文：十四日，副将艾万年、柳国镇在宁州襄乐与李自成相战，兵败而死。
English: On the 14th, Vice-General Ai Wannian and Li Guozhen fought against Li Zicheng in Xiangle, Ningzhou, and died in defeat.

古文：丙午，曹文诏追贼至真宁之湫头镇，遇伏，力战死之。
现代文：二十八日，曹文诏追击李自成，在真宁湫头镇遇到伏兵，奋力相战而死。
English: On the 28th, Cao Wenzhao chased Li Zicheng, encountered an ambush in Shantou Town of Janning, fought hard and died.

古文：秋七月甲戌，少詹事文震孟、刑部侍郎张至发俱礼部侍郎兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：七月二十六日，少詹事文震孟、刑部侍郎张至发同为礼部侍郎兼东阁大学士，参与军国大事。
English: On July 26th, Shozhan Ji Wen Zhen Meng and Zhang Zhi Tong, the chamberlain of the criminal justice department, were appointed as the chamberlain of the ceremonial department and a scholar of Dongge University to participate in the military affairs.

古文：是月，张献忠突朱阳关，总兵官尤世威败绩，贼复走河南。
现代文：这月，张献忠突袭朱阳关，总兵官尤世威惨遭失败。张献忠遂进入河南。
English: This month, Zhang Xianzhong raided Zhuyang Pass, and the commander-in-chief, You Shwei, failed miserably. Zhang Xianzhong successfully entered Henan.

古文：八月，李自成陷咸阳，贼将高杰降。
现代文：八月，李自成攻克咸阳，将领高杰投降。
English: In August, Li Zicheng conquered Xianyang, and General Gao Jie surrendered.

古文：壬辰，诏撤监视总理内臣，惟京营及关、宁如故。
现代文：十五日，下诏撤回监视总理内臣，只有京师营兵及关、宁保持原来一样。
English: On the fifteenth day, the imperial edict was issued withdrawing the supervision of the prime minister's vassal. Only the Beijing division battalion and Guan and Ning remained the same as before.

古文：辛丑，卢象升总理直隶、河南、山东、湖广、四川军务。
现代文：二十四日，卢象升总理直隶、河南、山东、湖广、四川军务。
English: On the 24th, Lu Xiangsheng, the direct subordinate of the Prime Minister, led the military affairs of Henan, Shandong, Hougang and Sichuan.

古文：九月辛亥，洪承畴督副将曹变蛟等败贼于关山镇。
现代文：九月四日，洪承畴监督副将曹变蛟等在关山镇打败李自成。
English: On September 4th, Cao Zhenyao, deputy commander of Hongcheng Province, defeated Li Zicheng in Guanshan Town.

古文：李自成东走，与张献忠合。
现代文：李自成向东逃去，与张献忠会合。
English: Li Zicheng fled to the east to join Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：壬戌，官军败绩于沈丘之瓦店，总兵官张全昌被执。
现代文：十五日，官军在沈丘瓦店失败，总兵官张全昌被捉。
English: On the fifteenth day, the government army failed at the Sheng Zhuwa store, and the general officer Zhang Quanchang was captured.

古文：壬申，王应熊致仕。
现代文：二十五日，王应熊辞官退职。
English: On the 25th, Wang Yingxiong resigned and retired.

古文：冬十月庚辰，下诏罪己，辟居武英殿，减膳撤乐，示与将士同甘苦。
现代文：十月三日，下诏责罚自己，避居武英殿，减少膳食，不兴音乐，表示与将士同甘共苦。
English: On October 3rd, he issued an edict to punish himself by avoiding residence at the Imperial Palace, cutting down on meals, and refraining from playing music, saying that he wanted to share the joys and sorrows with his soldiers.

古文：丙戌，户部尚书侯恂请严征新旧逋赋，从之。
现代文：九日，户部尚书侯恂请求严格征收新旧欠交赋税，皇帝采纳了他的建议。
English: On the 9th, the head of the household, Shang Shuhou, requested the strict collection of old and new tax arrears, and the emperor adopted his suggestion.

古文：辛卯，李自成陷陕州。
现代文：十四日，李自成攻克陕州。
English: On the 14th, Li Zicheng conquered Shaanxi Province.

古文：十一月庚戌，何吾驺、文震孟罢。
现代文：十一月四日，何吾驺、文震孟辞官退职。
English: On November 4, He Wuxuan and Wen Zhenmeng resigned from their posts.

古文：庚申，祀天于南郊。
现代文：十四日，祭祀天于京师南郊。
English: On the 16th, the Southern Suburbs Festival will be held.

古文：总兵官祖宽破贼于汝州。
现代文：总兵官祖宽在汝州攻破流贼。
English: Commander-in-chief Zu Kuan defeated the bandits in Ruzhou.

古文：十二月戊寅，城凤阳。
现代文：十二月二日，驻兵于凤阳。
English: On December 2, the soldiers stationed in Fengyang left.

古文：乙酉，卢象升、祖宽败李自成于确山。
现代文：九日，卢象升、祖宽在确山打败李自成。
English: On the 9th, Lu Xiangsheng and Zu Kuan defeated Li Jicheng in Jingshan.

古文：戊子，左良玉败贼于阌乡。
现代文：十二日，左良玉在阌乡打败流贼。
English: On the twelfth day, Zuo Liangyu defeated the bandits in Handan Township.

古文：癸巳，贼犯江北，围滁州。
现代文：十七日，流贼侵犯长江北岸，围攻滁州。
English: On the 17th, the bandits invaded the north bank of the Yangtze River and besieged Ganzhou.

古文：乙巳，老回回诸贼自河南犯陕西，洪承畴败之于临潼。
现代文：二十九日，老回回诸贼从河南侵犯陕西，被洪承畴打败于临潼。
English: On the 29th, the bandits of Lao Hui Hui invaded Shaanxi from Henan and were defeated by Hong Chengzhuang in Linyi.

古文：是年，安南、暹罗、琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、暹罗、琉球来朝进贡。
English: This year, Annan, Siam, and Ryukyu came to pay tribute to the DPRK.

古文：九年春正月甲寅，总理侍郎卢象升、祖宽援滁，大败贼于朱龙桥。
现代文：崇祯九年正月八日，总理侍郎卢象升、祖宽救援滁州，大败流贼于朱龙桥。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of Chongzhen, Lu Xiangsheng, the Prime Minister's valet, and Zu Guang came to the rescue of Zhangzhou, and defeated the bandits in Zhu Longqiao.

古文：丁卯，前礼部侍郎林钎以原官兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十一日，前礼部侍郎林钅干以原官兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the former attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Lin Yigang, took part in important affairs as a former official and a scholar of Donggak University.

古文：二月，前副将汤九州及贼战嵩县，败没。
现代文：二月，前副将汤九州在嵩县与流贼战斗中战死。
English: In February, the former vice-general, Tang Kyushu, was killed in a battle with bandits in Song County.

古文：山西大饥，人相食。
现代文：山西大饥荒，人相残食。
English: Famine in Shanxi, people eating leftovers.

古文：乙酉，宁夏饥，兵变，杀巡抚都御史王楫，兵备副使丁启睿抚定之。
现代文：十日，宁夏饥荒，发动兵变，杀巡抚都御史王楫。兵备副使丁启睿抚安平定宁夏。
English: On the 10th, due to the famine in Ningxia, a mutiny was launched and the governor of the capital, Wang Xi, was killed. The deputy military commander, Ding Qi Ruifu, pacified Ningxia.

古文：辛卯，以武举陈起新为给事中。
现代文：十六日，以武举人陈起新为给事中。
English: On the 16th, Chen Jizhong, a martial arts practitioner, was appointed as the new leader.

古文：三月，卢象升、祖大乐剿河南贼。
现代文：三月，卢象升、祖大乐征剿河南流贼。
English: In March, Lu Xiangsheng and Zu Daile sing the song "Henan Rogue."

古文：高迎祥、李自成分部入陕西，余贼自光化走湖广。
现代文：高迎祥、李自成分部进入陕西，余部从光化进入湖广。
English: Gao Yingxiang and Li Zijian went to Shaanxi, and the rest went from Gwanghwa to Hukang.

古文：振南阳饥，蠲山西被灾州县新旧二饷。
现代文：赈救南阳饥民，免山西受灾州县新、旧二饷。
English: To save the starving people in Nanyang, the new and old districts of the affected prefectures in Shanxi were exempted.

古文：夏四月戊子，钱士升致仕。
现代文：四月十四日，钱士升辞官退职。
English: On April 14th, Qian Shizheng resigned from his post.

古文：五月壬子，诏赦协从诸贼。
现代文：五月九日，下诏赦免协助作乱诸贼。
English: On May 9, the emperor pardoned the thieves who had aided the riot.

古文：愿归者，护还乡，有司安置；原随军自效者，有功一体叙录。
现代文：愿意归附的，护送其回乡，官吏安排职务；愿意随军效力的，有功一样记录在案并赏赐。
English: Those who are willing to join the army will be escorted back to their hometowns, and officials will arrange positions for them. Those who are willing to serve in the army will be recorded as meritorious and rewarded.

古文：丙辰，延绥总兵官俞冲霄击李自成于安定，败绩，死之。
现代文：十三日，延绥总兵官俞冲霄在安定攻打李自成，失败而死。
English: On the 13th, Yan Xun's general officer Zou Chongxiao attacked Li Zicheng in the stable and died in defeat.

古文：李自成犯榆林，贺人龙击败之。
现代文：李自成侵犯榆林，被贺人龙打败。
English: Li Zicheng invaded Yulin and was defeated by He Renlong.

古文：癸酉，免畿内五年以前逋赋。
现代文：三十日，免畿内五年以前欠交赋税。
English: On the 30th, tax arrears from five years ago in the Kinai region were waived.

古文：六月乙亥，林钎卒。
现代文：六月二日，林钅干死。
English: On June 2nd, Lin Yuxuan died.

古文：甲申，吏部侍郎孔贞运，礼部尚书贺逢圣、黄士俊，俱礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：十一日，吏部侍郎孔贞运，礼部尚书贺逢圣、黄士俊，均为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 11th day, Kong Zhengyu, the attendant of the personnel department, He Fengsheng and Huang Shijun of the ceremonial department, both of whom are the ceremonial department and the Dongge University, participated in important affairs.

古文：己亥，总兵官解进忠抚贼于淅川，被杀。
现代文：二十六日，总兵官解进忠在淅川安抚流贼，被杀害。
English: On the 26th, the commander-in-chief, He Jinzhong, was killed while trying to pacify the ruffians in the Li River.

古文：秋七月甲辰，内臣李国辅等分守紫荆、倒马诸关。
现代文：七月二日，内臣李国辅等分守紫荆、倒马诸关。
English: On July 2nd, the vassal Li Guo-Fu and others were assigned to guard the Bauhinia and Inverted Horse Passes.

古文：庚戌，成国公朱纯臣巡视边关。
现代文：八日，成国公朱纯臣巡视边关。
English: On the 8th, Zhu Chuncheng, the Prince of Chengguo, inspected the border.

古文：癸丑，诏诸镇星驰入援。
现代文：十一日，下诏各镇星夜兼程赴京救援。
English: On the 11th day of the month, all the towns and villages made a trip to Beijing for rescue.

古文：己未，大清兵入昌平，巡关御史王肇坤等死之。
现代文：十七日，大清兵进入昌平，巡关御史王肇坤战死。
English: On the 17th, the Great Qing soldiers entered Changping, and the gatekeeper Wang Zhaokun died in the battle.

古文：壬戌，巡抚陕西都御史孙传庭击擒贼首高迎祥于盩厔，送京师伏诛。
现代文：二十日，巡抚陕西都御史孙传庭在銩稨捉拿流贼首领高迎祥，押送京师杀害。
English: On the 20th, the governor of the Shaanxi capital, Sun Chuanting, caught the leader of the bandits, Gao Yingxiang, in Handan and sent him to Beijing to be killed.

古文：癸亥，谕廷臣助饷。
现代文：二十一日，告诉廷臣帮助军饷。
English: On the twenty-first day, he told the courtiers to help the soldiers.

古文：甲子，兵部尚书张凤翼督援军，高起潜为总监。
现代文：二十二日，兵部尚书张凤翼领导援军，高起潜为总监。
English: On the 22nd, the head of the military department, Shangshu Zhang Fengyi, led the reinforcements, and Gao Zhixuan became the director.

古文：是月，大清兵入宝坻，连下近畿州县。
现代文：这月，大清兵进入宝坻，接连攻克近畿州县。
English: This month, the Great Qing soldiers entered Baodi and successively conquered Kinki Prefecture.

古文：八月癸酉，括勋戚文武诸臣马。
现代文：八月二日，收集勋戚文武诸臣马匹。
English: On August 2nd, the horses of the honored relatives, scholars and warriors were collected.

古文：乙未，卢象升入援，次真定。
现代文：二十四日，卢象升入京救援，临时驻扎真定。
English: On the 24th, Lu Xiangsheng entered Beijing to rescue and temporarily stationed in Zhending.

古文：丙申，唐王聿键起兵勤王，勒还国，寻废为庶人。
现代文：二十五日，唐王朱聿键起兵救援京师，勒令其回到封国，不久废为庶人。
English: On the 25th, Tang King Zhu Rongji led an army to rescue the Beijing Division and ordered it to return to its fiefdom. It was soon abolished as a commoner.

古文：是月，大清兵出塞。
现代文：本月，大清兵出塞。
English: This month, the soldiers of the Great Qing Army left the country.

古文：九月辛酉，改卢象升总督宣大、山西军务。
现代文：九月二十日，改用卢象升总督宣府、大同、山西军务。
English: On September 20, Lu Xiangsheng, the governor of Xuanfu, Datong, and Shanxi Military Affairs, was used instead.

古文：冬十月乙亥，工部侍郎刘宗周以论内臣及大学士温体仁削籍。
现代文：十月四日，工部侍郎刘宗周因谈论内臣及大学士温体仁被革职。
English: On October 4, Liu Zongzhou, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, was dismissed from his post for talking about Naishin and the university scholar Wen Tizhen.

古文：甲申，张献忠犯襄阳。
现代文：十三日，张献忠侵犯襄阳。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Xianzhong invaded Yangyang.

古文：丙申，命开银铁铜铅诸矿。
现代文：二十五日，命令开银、铁、铜、铅各矿。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the mines of silver, iron, copper and lead to be opened.

古文：十一月丁未，蠲山东五年以前逋赋。
现代文：十一月七日，减免山东五年以前欠交赋税。
English: On November 7th, Shandong's five-year-old tax arrears were reduced and exempted.

古文：十二月，大清兵征朝鲜。
现代文：十二月，大清兵出征朝鲜。
English: In December, the Qing soldiers left for Korea.

古文：是年，洪承畴败贼于陇州，贼走庆阳、凤翔。
现代文：当年，洪承畴在陇州打败李自成，李自成逃往庆阳、凤翔一带。
English: In that year, Hong Chengzheng defeated Li Zicheng in Bozhou, and Li Zicheng fled to Qingyang and Fengxiang.

古文：暹罗入贡。
现代文：暹罗入朝进贡。
English: Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：十年春正月辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：崇祯十年正月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 10th year of Chongzhen, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丙午，老回回诸贼趋江北，张献忠、罗汝才自襄阳犯安庆，南京大震。
现代文：六日，老回回诸贼直趋长江以北，张献忠、罗汝才从襄阳侵犯安庆，南京大为震慑。
English: On the 6th, Zhang Xianzhong and Luo Rucai invaded Anqing from Xiangyang, and Nanjing was greatly shocked.

古文：二月甲戌，遣使督直省逋赋。
现代文：二月四日，派使者监督直隶省欠交赋税。
English: On February 4, an envoy was sent to supervise the tax arrears of Zhili Province.

古文：丁酉，贼犯潜山，总兵官左良玉、副使史可法败之于枫香驿。
现代文：二十七日，贼军进攻潜山，被总兵官左良玉、副使史可法在枫香驿打败。
English: On the 27th, the rebel army attacked the hidden mountain, and was defeated by the general officer Zuo Liangyu and the deputy envoy Shi Kefa in Fengxianglu.

古文：是月，朝鲜降于我大清。
现代文：这月，朝鲜向大清兵投降。
English: This month, North Korea surrendered to the Qing soldiers.

古文：三月辛亥，振陕西灾。
现代文：三月十二日，赈救陕西灾害。
English: March 12th, the disaster relief in Shaanxi Province.

古文：丁巳，赐刘同升等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐刘同升等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the 18th, Liu Tongsheng was awarded the title of the highest-ranking cadre, with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：甲子，官军援安庆，败绩于酆家店。
现代文：二十五日，官军救援安庆，在丰家店惨遭失败。
English: On the 25th, the rescue of Anqing by the government army failed miserably in the Fengjia store.

古文：夏四月戊寅，大清兵克皮岛，副总兵金日观力战死之，总兵官沈冬魁走石城岛。
现代文：四月九日，大清兵攻克皮岛，副总兵金日观奋力战死，总兵官沈冬魁败走石城岛。
English: On April 9, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty invaded Kepi Island. The vice-chief soldier Kim Il-gwan died in battle, and the chief officer Shen Dong-kui was defeated and left Shicheng Island.

古文：癸巳旱，清刑狱。
现代文：二十四日，天旱，清理刑狱。
English: On the 24th, due to the drought, the prison was cleaned up.

古文：是月，洪承畴剿贼于汉南。
现代文：本月，洪承畴在汉水以南征剿流贼。
English: This month, Hong Chengzong led a raid on bandits south of Hanshui.

古文：闰月壬寅，敕群臣洁己爱民，以回天意。
现代文：闰四月四日，命令群臣自己廉洁，爱护平民，以使上天回心转意。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the leap year, he ordered his ministers to be honest and to love the common people in order to change God's mind.

古文：江北贼分犯河南，总督两广都御史熊文灿为兵部尚书，总理南京、河南、山、陕、川、湖军务，驻郧阳讨贼。
现代文：长江以北流贼分别侵犯河南，总督两广都御史熊文灿为兵部尚书，总理南京、河南、山西、陕西、四川、湖广军务，驻兵郧阳征讨流贼。
English: The bandits north of the Yangtze River invaded Henan separately, and the governor of the two Guangdong capitals, Xiong Wencang, was the military secretary, the prime ministers of Nanjing, Henan, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Sichuan and Hougang were in charge of military affairs, and the soldiers stationed in Fenyang were recruited to fight the bandits.

古文：五月戊寅，李自成自秦州犯四川。
现代文：五月十一日，李自成从秦州侵犯四川。
English: On May 11, Li Zicheng invaded Sichuan from Qinzhou.

古文：六月戊申，温体仁致仕。
现代文：六月十一日，温体仁辞官退职。
English: On June 11, Wen Tianzhen resigned from his post.

古文：是夏，两畿、山西大旱。
现代文：当年夏天，两畿、山西大旱。
English: In the summer of that year, there was a severe drought in the Kinki and Shanxi regions.

古文：秋七月，山东、河南蝗，民大饥。
现代文：七月，山东、河南蝗灾，平民饥荒。
English: In July, Shandong and Henan suffered from locust plagues and famine.

古文：八月己酉，吏部侍郎刘宇亮、礼部侍郎傅冠俱礼部尚书，佥都御史薛国观为礼部侍郎，并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：八月十四日，吏部侍郎刘宇亮、礼部侍郎傅冠均为礼部尚书，佥都御史薛国观为礼部侍郎，一同兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On August 14th, Liu Yuliang, the attendant of the personnel department, and Fu Guan, the attendant of the ceremony department, were both the honorable members of the ceremony department, and Xue Guokuan, the attendant of the ceremony department, was also a scholar of Dongge University, and participated in important affairs.

古文：庚申，阅城。
现代文：二十五日，检查城防情况。
English: On the 25th, the city's defenses were inspected.

古文：九月丙子，左良玉败贼于虹县。
现代文：九月十一日，左良玉在虹县打败流贼。
English: On September 11th, Zuo Liangyu defeated the bandits in Hongxian.

古文：辛卯，洪承畴败贼于汉中。
现代文：二十六日，洪承畴在汉中打败流贼。
English: On the 26th, Hong Chengzong defeated the bandits in Hanzhong.

古文：癸巳，李自成陷宁羌。
现代文：二十八日，李自成攻陷宁羌。
English: On the 28th, Li Zicheng captured Ningbo.

古文：冬十月丙申，自成自七盘关入西川。
现代文：十月二日，李自成从七盘关进入西川。
English: On October 2, Li Zicheng entered the West River from Qipan Pass.

古文：壬寅，陷昭化、剑州、梓潼，分兵趋潼川、江油、绵州，总兵官侯良柱战死，遂陷彰明、盐亭诸县。
现代文：八日，攻陷昭北、剑州、梓潼，分兵直趋潼川、江油、绵州，总兵官侯良柱战死，于是攻克彰明、盐亭各县。
English: On the eighth day, the Zhaobai, Jianzhou, and Zizhou were invaded, and the detachment of soldiers went straight to Luchuan, Jiangyou, and Mianzhou. The commander-in-chief Hou Liangzhu was killed in the battle, and then the counties of Zhangming and Yanting were conquered.

古文：庚戌，逼成都。
现代文：十六日，逼近成都。
English: On the 16th, it approached Chengdu.

古文：十一月庚辰，以星变修省，求直言。
现代文：十一月十六日，因星宿变化命令修身反省，要求讲直话。
English: On November 16th, due to the change of the stars, he ordered his disciples to self-reflect and asked them to speak frankly.

古文：十二月癸卯，黄士俊致仕。
现代文：十二月九日，黄士俊辞官退职。
English: On December 9, Huang Shijun resigned from his post.

古文：癸亥，洪承畴、曹变蛟援四川，次广元。
现代文：二十九日，洪承畴、曹变蛟增援四川，住于广元。
English: On the 29th, Hong Chengzong and Cao Zhengyi reinforced Sichuan and lived in Guangyuan.

古文：是年，安南、琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、琉球入朝进贡。
English: This year, Annan and Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

