古文：天文四宋武帝永初元年十月辛丑，荧惑犯进贤。占曰： 进贤官诛。 
现代文：宋武帝永初元年十月卒丑，火星犯进贤星。占辞说： 这天象表示进贤官将被杀。 
English: In October of the first year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wu Yong passed away, and the Martian Emperor Jin Xianxing died. The horoscope said: This celestial elephant indicates that Jin Xianxing will be killed.

古文：十一月乙卯，荧惑犯填星于角。
现代文：十一月乙卯，火星在角宿犯土星。
English: On November 1st, Mars will square Saturn.

古文：占曰： 为丧，大人恶之。 一曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 造表示将有丧乱，王公贵族交恶。 另一说： 将有战争。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This signifies that there will be turmoil, princes and nobles will be at odds with each other," and another said, "There will be war."

古文：十二月庚子，月犯荧惑于亢。
现代文：十二月庚子，月于亢宿犯火星。
English: In December, Geng Zi, the moon will be in Pochu and Mars will be in Pisces.

古文：占曰： 为内乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 逭天象表示将有内乱。 
English: Divination says: There will be civil unrest.

古文：一曰： 贵人忧。
现代文：另一说： 贵人有忧患。
English: Another said, "The nobleman is in trouble."

古文：角为天门，亢为朝廷。 
现代文：角宿代表天门，亢宿代表朝廷。 
English: Kakunodate represents Heaven's Gate, and Shibuya represents the Imperial Court.

古文：三年五月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：三年五月，武帝去世。
English: In May of the third year, Yuan Tong passed away.

古文：七月，太傅长沙景王道怜薨。
现代文：七月，太傅长沙景王刘道怜去世。
English: In July, the Grand Master of Changsha Jing Wang Liu Dao Rong passed away.

古文：索头攻略青、司、兗三州。
现代文：索头进攻侵掠青、司、兖三州。
English: Sokotou attacked and plundered the three prefectures of Qing, Shih, and Yan.

古文：于是禁兵大出，是后司徒徐羡之、尚书令傅亮、领军谢晦等废少帝，内乱之应。
现代文：于是大量禁兵出征。此后司徒徐羡之、尚书令傅亮、领军谢晦等废黜少帝，这些都是内乱的应验。
English: As a result, a large number of soldiers were forbidden to go to war. Subsequently, the dethronement of young emperors, such as Stut Xu Enzhi, Shang Shuling Fu Liang, and the leader of the army Xie Hui, were all the fulfillment of civil unrest.

古文：永初元年十二月甲辰，月犯南斗。
现代文：永初元年十二月甲辰，月犯南斗。
English: In December of the first year of the Yongzheng era, the first month of the month of the month of the month of the month.

古文：占曰： 大臣忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象表示大臣有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This day's appearance indicates that the minister is in distress.

古文：三年七月，长沙王薨。
现代文：三年七月，长沙王去世。
English: In July of the third year, Changsha Wang passed away.

古文：索虏寇青、司二州，大军出救。
现代文：索虏侵掠青、司二州，朝廷派遣大军出救。
English: The Sorru invaded and plundered Shandong and Shandong, and the imperial court sent a large army to rescue them.

古文：永初二年六月甲申，太白昼见。
现代文：永初二年六月甲申，金星白天出现。
English: In June of the second year of the Heian period, Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：占： 为兵丧，为臣强。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示将有战乱，臣太强。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there will be a war, and the vassal is too strong.

古文：三年五月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：三年五月，武壶去世。
English: In May of the third year, Yuan Tong passed away.

古文：寻遣兵出救青、司。
现代文：不久派遣军队出救青、司二州。
English: Soon after, the army was dispatched to rescue the two states of Qing and Shiji.

古文：其后徐羡之等秉权，臣强之应也。
现代文：其后徐羡之等专权，这是臣强的应验。
English: After that, Xu Enzhi and other autocratic powers, this is the fulfillment of the strong vassal.

古文：永初二年六月乙酉，荧惑犯氐。
现代文：永初二年六月乙酉，火星犯氐宿。
English: In June of the second year of the Yongzheng era, the Martian Convict resettled.

古文：乙巳，犯房。
现代文：乙巳，犯房宿。
English: Now, let's go to the rooming house.

古文：占曰： 氐为宿宫，房为明堂，人主有忧。
现代文：占辞说： 氐宿代表皇帝宿宫，房宿代表明堂，君主有忧患。
English: The fortune-teller said, "The emperor's palace is represented by the inn, the emperor's hall of residence is represented by the hall of light, and the monarch is troubled.

古文：房又为将相，将相有忧。
现代文：房宿又代表将相，将相有忧患。
English: Lodging also represents the future phase, which will be fraught with difficulties.

古文：氐、房又兗、豫分。 
现代文：氐、房二宿又对应兖、豫二州。 
English: and 房二宿 also correspond to  and 豫二州.

古文：三年五月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：三年五月。远童去世。
English: In May of the third year, Yuan Tong passed away.

古文：七月，长沙王薨，王领兗州也。景平元年，庐陵王义真废，王领豫州也。永初二年十月，太白犯填星于亢。
现代文：七月，童州刺史长沙土去世。景干元年，豫州刺史庐陵王刘义真被废黜。永初二年十月，金星在亢宿犯土星。
English: In July, the prince of Tongzhou, Chang Sa Tu, passed away. In the first year of Jing Gan, the prince of Yuzhou, Liu Yizhen, was dethroned. In October of the second year of Yongchu, Venus offends Saturn in Poyang.

古文：亢，兗州分，又为郑。
现代文：亢宿与兗州对应，又与郑地对应。
English: Shishuku corresponds to Bozhou, which corresponds to Zhengzhou.

古文：占曰： 大星有大兵，金土合为内兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 大星表示禁兵南斗。有大战，金星与土星合则表示有内战。 
English: Fortune-telling says: The great star indicates the prohibition of the Southern Expedition. There is a great war, and the conjunction of Venus and Saturn indicates a civil war.

古文：三年，索头攻略青、冀、兗三州，禁兵大出，兗州失守，虎牢没。
现代文：三年，索头攻占掠夺青、冀、兗三州，禁兵大出，兗州失守，虎牢陷落。
English: In three years, Sokotou occupied and plundered the three states of Qing, Hebei and Fujian, the forbidden soldiers came out in large numbers, Luzhou lost its defense, and the tiger prison fell.

古文：永初三年正月丁卯，月犯南斗，占同元年。
现代文：永初三年正月丁卯，月犯南斗。占辞同元年。
English: In the first month of the third year of Yongchun, Dingwu, the moon committed Nandou. The prediction is the same as the first year.

古文：一曰： 女主当之。 
现代文：另一说： 皇后应此灾。 
English: Another said: "The Queen has to deal with this."

古文：二月辛卯，有星孛于虚危，向河津，扫河鼓。
现代文：二月辛卯，有彗星出现在虚、危二宿，运行向河津，扫遇河鼓。
English: In February, there was a comet that appeared in the virtual and dangerous second quarter, running towards Kawazu and sweeping away the river drums.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示将有战争及国丧。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：五月，宫车晏驾。
现代文：五月，武帝去世。
English: In May, the head boy passed away.

古文：明年，遣军救青、司。
现代文：第二年，派遣军队救援青、司二州。
English: In the second year, the army was dispatched to rescue young and middle-aged people in two prefectures.

古文：二月，太后萧氏崩。
现代文：二月。太后萧氏去世。
English: In February, Empress Dowager Lu died.

古文：永初三年二月壬辰，填星犯亢。
现代文：永初三年二月壬辰，土星犯亢宿。
English: In February of the 3rd year of the 7th month of the 7th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of

古文：占曰： 诸侯有失国者，民多流亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 有诸侯丧失国土，民多逃亡。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Some lords lost their lands, and many people fled.

古文：一曰： 廷臣为乱。
现代文：另说： 朝廷之臣作乱。
English: Another said: "The courtiers of the imperial court are starting a riot."

古文：亢，兗州分，又为郑。 
现代文：亢宿与兖州对应，又与郑对应。 
English: Shishuku corresponds to Bozhou, which corresponds to Zhengzhou.

古文：其年，索头攻围司、兗，兗州刺史徐琰委守奔败，司州刺史毛德祖距守陷没，缘河吏民，多被侵略。
现代文：同年，塞玺围攻旦、变二州，童业刺史涂堕弃城逃亡，司州刺史王毛德拒守陷落，董回沿岸官民多被掠夺。
English: In the same year, Sayu was besieged by the Dan Dynasty and turned into two provinces, Tongye stabbed history and abandoned the city to escape, Sizhou stabbed history and Wang Maode refused to defend and fell, and most of the officials and people along the coast of Dong Hui were plundered.

古文：永初三年三月壬戌，月犯南斗，占同正月。
现代文：永初三年三月壬戌，月犯南斗。占辞同正月。
English: In March of the third year of the Yongchu era, there was a lunar eclipse, and the lunar calendar was changed to the lunar calendar.

古文：五月丙午，犯轩辕。
现代文：五月丙午，犯轩辕。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of May, Xuan Xuan died.

古文：占曰： 女主当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 皇后应验这天象所预示的灾难。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The lady must bear the consequences foretold by this star.

古文：六月辛巳，月犯房。
现代文：六月辛巳，月犯房宿。
English: June is a tough month, so it's time to book a room.

古文：占曰： 将相有忧，豫州有灾。 
现代文：占辞说： 遣表示将相有忧患，豫州有灾。 
English: The fortune-teller said: "The sending of the envoys indicates that there will be sorrow, and there will be disaster in Yuzhou."

古文：癸巳，犯岁星于昴。
现代文：癸巳。月在昴宿犯木星。占辞说： 遣预示赵？
English: Suddenly, the moon was in conjunction with Jupiter. The fortune-teller said, "Does this foretell Zhao?"

古文：庐陵王义真废，王领豫州也。
现代文：魏之地将有战争、饥荒。 同年，胡虏进攻青、兖、司三州。邀业刺史庐陵王刘义真被废黜。
English: In the land of Wei, there will be war and famine. In the same year, the Huns attacked the three states of Qing, Yan, and Shizhou. Liu Yizhen, the king of Fuling, was deposed.

古文：二月，太后萧氏崩。
现代文：二月，太后盖旦去世。
English: In February, Empress Dowager Lu died.

古文：元嘉三年，司徒徐羡之等伏诛。
现代文：五台三年，司徒途重之等人被杀。
English: In the third year of Wudai, Suttu Chusei and others were killed.

古文：永初三年九月癸卯，荧惑经太微犯左执法。
现代文：永初三年九月癸卯，火星经太微垣而犯左执法星。
English: In September of the 3rd year of the 7th lunar month, the planet Mars was too far away from the Earth and became a law enforcement planet.

古文：己未，犯右执法，占悉同上。
现代文：己未，犯右执法星。
English: He's not a criminal, he's a law enforcement star.

古文：十月癸酉，太白犯南斗。
现代文：占辞全部与前面相应天象相同。十月癸酉，金星犯南斗。
English: The words of the horoscope are all the same as those of the corresponding celestial object in the foreground.

古文：占曰： 国有兵事，大臣有反者。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示国家将有战争，有大臣反叛。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there will be a war in the country, and a minister will rebel.

古文：辛巳，荧惑犯进贤。
现代文：辛巳。火星犯进贤星。
English: It's hard to believe, but the Martian Prisoner has become a star.

古文：占曰： 进贤官诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 进贤官将被杀。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The superior officer will be killed."

古文：明年，师出救青、司。
现代文：第二年，军队出救宣、司二州。
English: The next year, the army came to the rescue of Xuan and Si in the two states.

古文：景平二年，徐羡之等废帝徙王。
现代文：景平二年，徐羡之等人废黜尘。
English: In the second year of Jingping, Xu Enzhi and others were eliminated.

古文：元嘉三年，羡之及傅亮、谢晦悉诛。
现代文：壶迁徙诸王。元台三年，途羞之及仅亮、谢晦被杀。
English: The pot migrated to all the kings. In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Shameful and the Bright and the Shameful were killed.

古文：永初三年十一月戊午，有星孛于室壁。
现代文：永初三年十一月戊午，有彗星出现于室壁二宿。
English: In the early morning of November in the 3rd year of the Heian period, a comet appeared in Murobi Nijuku.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 逭表示将有战争、丧事。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：明年，兵救青、司。
现代文：第二年，出兵救援直、司二州。
English: In the second year, troops were dispatched to rescue Zhili and Shiji in two provinces.

古文：二月，太后萧氏崩。
现代文：二月，太后萧氏去世。
English: In February, Empress Dowager Lu died.

古文：营室，内宫象也。
现代文：营室代表皇帝内宫。
English: The camp room represents the emperor's inner palace.

古文：永初三年十一月癸亥，月犯亢、氐。
现代文：占辞说： 这预示国家将有忧患。 十二月戊戌，火星犯房宿。
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the country will have troubles. In December, Mars will make a house call.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 十二月戊戌，荧惑犯房。
现代文：房宿代表明堂，火星犯之则王者交乙。十二月戊戌，荧惑犯房。
English: Myeong-dong is the representative of the rooming house, and the king of the Mars prisoners is the second.

古文：房为明堂，王者恶之。
现代文：房为明堂，王者恶之。
English: The house is the bright hall, the king is the evil one.

古文：一曰： 将相忧。 
现代文：十司一业司恶。另一说： 这表示将相有忧患。 
English: Another said, "It means there will be trouble ahead."

古文：景平二年，羡之等废帝，因害之。
现代文：景平二年，徐羡之等人先废黜尘帝又将他杀害。
English: In the second year of Jingping, Xu Enzhi and others first dethroned and then killed Emperor Qianfeng.

古文：元嘉三年，羡之等伏诛。
现代文：元嘉三年，徐羡之等人被杀。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, Xu Enzhi and others were killed.

古文：少帝景平元年正月乙卯，有星孛于东壁南，白色，长二丈余，拂天苑，二十日灭。
现代文：少帝景平元年正月乙卯，有白色、长二丈余的彗星出现在东壁之南，拂遇天苑，二十天后消失。
English: In the first month of the second month of the first year of the Young Emperor Jingping, a white, two-meter-long comet appeared south of the east wall, brushed Tianyuan, and disappeared after twenty days.

古文：二月，太后萧氏崩。
现代文：二月，太后芦压去世。
English: In February, Empress Dowager Lu died.

古文：十月戊午，有星孛于氐北，尾长四丈，西北指，贯摄提，向大角，东行，日长六七尺，十余日灭。
现代文：十月戊午，有彗星出现于氐宿之北，其尾长四丈，西北指向，横贯摄提星而指向大角，向东运行，每天增长六七尺，十余曰后消失。
English: In October at noon, a comet appeared to the north of Oshuku. Its tail was four feet long and pointed to the northwest. It crossed the shooting star and pointed to the great horn. It moved eastward, growing sixty-seven feet a day, and disappeared after more than ten days.

古文：明年五月，羡之等废帝。
现代文：明年五月，徐羡之等人废黜少壶。
English: In May of the next year, Xu Enzhi and others dethroned Shao Jiu.

古文：文帝元嘉元年十月，荧惑犯心。
现代文：文帝元嘉元年十月，火星犯心宿。
English: In October of the first year of Emperor Wen's reign, Mars was imprisoned.

古文：元嘉三年正月甲寅夜，天东南有黑气，广一丈，长十余丈。
现代文：元嘉三年正月甲寅之夜，天东南出现宽一丈，长十余丈的黑气。
English: On the night of the first month of the third year of Yuan Jia, the southeast sky appeared to be wide and dark with a length of more than ten meters.

古文：元嘉六年五月，太白昼见经天。
现代文：五台六年五月，金星经天而白天出现。
English: In May of the fifth month of the sixth year, Venus appeared in the sky during the day.

古文：元嘉七年三月，太白犯岁星于奎。
现代文：五台七年三月，金星在奎宿犯木星。
English: In the 5th month of the 7th year of the 3rd month of the 5th year of the 7th year of the 3rd year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 7th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 7th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5

古文：六月，荧惑犯东井舆鬼，入轩辕。
现代文：六月，火星犯东井、舆鬼二宿，入轩辕。
English: In June, Mars Criminals Dongjing and Public Ghosts Erjuku went into hibernation.

古文：月犯岁星。
现代文：月犯木星。
English: The moon-criminal Jupiter.

古文：十一月癸未，西南有气，上下赤，中央黑，广三尺，长三十余丈，状如旌旗。
现代文：十一月癸未，西南出现上下红色而中央黑色的气，其宽三尺，长三十余丈，形状像旌旗。
English: In late November, red gas appeared in the southwest and black gas in the center. It was three feet wide, more than 30 feet long, and shaped like a swastika.

古文：十二月丙戌，有流星头如甕，尾长二十余丈，大如数十斛船，赤色，有光照人面，从西行经奎北大星南过，至东壁止。
现代文：十二月丙戌。有颗像瓮一样的流星，其尾长二十余丈，大如几十斛的船，红色且光照人面，从西运行经过奎宿北大星之南，至东壁停止。
English: In December, there was a shooting star like a dragonfly, with a tail more than twenty meters long, as big as a ship of several dozen fathoms, red and bright, traveling from the west through the south of the North Star of Kuishuku, and stopping at the east wall.

古文：其年，索虏寇青、司，杀刺史，掠居民。
现代文：同年，索虏进攻青、司二州，杀死刺史，虏掠居民。
English: In the same year, the Sorru attacked the two prefectures of Qing and Shiji, killing the Sashishi and plundering the residents.

古文：遣征南大将军檀道济讨伐，经岁乃归。
现代文：朝廷派遣征南大将军檀道济讨伐，经一年才返回。
English: The imperial court dispatched the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Dang Dao, to aid the crusade, but he only returned after a year.

古文：元嘉八年四月辛未，太白昼见，在胃。
现代文：元嘉八年四月辛未，金星白天在胃宿出现。
English: In April of the eighth year of Yuan Jia, Venus appeared in the daytime in the stomach.

古文：五月，犯天关东井。
现代文：五月，犯天关及束井宿。
English: In May, Hanten Pass and Sakui-juku were destroyed.

古文：六月庚午，荧惑入东井。
现代文：六月庚午，火星入束井之宿。
English: In the late afternoon of June, the planet Mars enters Sokui-juku.

古文：七月壬戌夜，白虹见东方。
现代文：七月壬戌夜，白虹在东方出现。
English: On a clear night in July, a white rainbow appears in the east.

古文：丁丑，太白犯上将。
现代文：丁丑。金星犯上将星。
English: Ding Ugly. Jin Xing Guan Zheng Zong Xing.

古文：八月癸未，太白入太微右掖门内，犯左执法。
现代文：八月癸未，金星入太微垣右掖门内，犯左执法星。
English: On the last day of August, Venus entered the right side of the right gate of the Taiyukagaki, and violated the left law enforcement star.

古文：乙未，荧惑犯积尸。
现代文：乙未，火星犯积尸。
English: Eighteen years later, the dead bodies of the Martian prisoners are piling up.

古文：九月丙寅，流星大如斗，赤色，发太微西蕃，北行，未至北斗没，余光长三丈许。
现代文：九月丙寅，有赤色大如斗的流星，发于太微垣西蕃向北运行，未至北斗而消失，其余光长三丈多。
English: In September, there was a red meteor as big as a dipper. It originated in the west of Taiyuegaki and moved northward. It did not reach the Big Dipper and disappeared. The remaining light was more than three times as long.

古文：十月丙辰，金土相犯，在须女，月奄天关东井。
现代文：十月丙辰，金星舆土星在须女之宿相犯。月掩天关东井。
English: At the crescent of October, Venus and Saturn collide at Susume no Yado. The Moon hides behind the East Gate.

古文：十二月，月犯房钩钤。
现代文：十二月，月犯房宿钩钤星。
English: In December, the monthly criminal room accommodation hooked the star.

古文：十年，仇池氐寇汉中，梁州失戍。
现代文：十年，仇池氐进攻汉中，梁州失守。
English: In the tenth year, Qiu Chihong attacked Hanzhong, and Liangzhou was defeated.

古文：元嘉九年正月庚午，荧惑入舆鬼。
现代文：元嘉九年正月庚午，火星入舆鬼宿。
English: In the afternoon of the first month of the ninth year of Yuan Jia, Mars entered the ghost town.

古文：三月，月犯轩辕。
现代文：三月，月犯轩辕。
English: In March, the monthly offender Xuan Xuan passed away.

古文：四月，犯左角，岁星入羽林。
现代文：四月，犯左角。木星入羽林。
English: In April, the left angle is broken. Jupiter enters the fallow forest.

古文：月犯房钩钤。
现代文：月犯房宿钩铃。
English: There is a hook bell in the monthly detention room.

古文：己丑，太白入积尸。
现代文：己丑，金星入积尸。
English: Self-loathing, Venus into a pile of corpses.

古文：五月，犯轩辕，月掩南斗第六星。
现代文：五月，犯轩辕。月掩南斗第六星。
English: In May, he was arrested. The moon covered the sixth star of the Southern Cross.

古文：辛酉，荧惑入太微右掖门，犯右执法。
现代文：辛酉，火星入太微垣右掖门，犯右执法星。
English: Xin Zhen, Mars enters the right gate of the Taibo wall, and the right law enforcement star is formed.

古文：七月丙午，月蚀左角。
现代文：七月丙午，月食于左角。
English: On the afternoon of July 3rd, the lunar eclipse is in the left corner.

古文：八月癸未，太白犯心前星。
现代文：八月癸未，金星犯心宿前星。
English: On the last day of August, Venus is the pre-dawn star.

古文：乙酉，犯心明堂星。
现代文：乙酉，犯心宿明堂星。
English: Acetylene, the star of sin.

古文：元嘉十年十月，有流星大如甕，尾长二十余丈。
现代文：元嘉十年十月，有像瓮一样大的流星出现，其尾长二十余丈。
English: In October of the 10th year of Yuan Jia, a meteor as large as a dragonfly appeared, with a tail more than 20 meters long.

古文：元嘉十一年二月庚子，月犯毕，入毕口而出，因晕昴、毕，西及五车，东及参。
现代文：元嘉十一年二月庚子，月犯毕宿，入毕宿之口而出，接着晕昴、毕二宿，向西延及五车，向东延及参宿。
English: In February of the 11th year of the Yuan Jia, Geng Zi, a lunar offender, went to the end of the lodging, went out of the entrance of the end of the lodging, then went to the second lodging, extended to the west and the fifth car, extended to the east and the third lodging.

古文：三月丙辰，太白昼见，在参。
现代文：三月丙辰，金星白天在参宿出现。
English: On the third day of the month of March, Venus appears in the daytime in Betelgeuse.

古文：闰月戊寅，太白犯五诸侯。
现代文：闰月戊寅，金星犯五诸侯。
English: The intercalary moon, Wu Yin, and the planet Venus are the five princes.

古文：己丑，月入东井，犯太白。
现代文：己丑，月入束井之宿而犯金星。
English: I'm ugly, and I'm going to stay at a hotel in Sakui, and I'm going to commit jinsei.

古文：于时司徒彭城王义康专权。
现代文：当时司徒彭城王刘义康专权。
English: At that time, Liu Yikang, the king of Stubai Pengcheng, had absolute power.

古文：元嘉十二年五月壬戌，月犯右执法。
现代文：元嘉十二年五月壬戌，月犯右执法星。
English: In May of the 12th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, he became the star of the monthly criminal right law enforcement.

古文：七月壬戌，荧惑犯积尸，奄上将。
现代文：七月壬戌，火星犯积尸，掩上将星。
English: July, Mars  ,    .

古文：十月丙午，月犯右执法。
现代文：十月丙午，月犯右执法星。
English: On the afternoon of October 3rd, the monthly criminal right law enforcement star.

古文：十二月甲申，太白犯羽林。
现代文：十二月甲申，金星犯羽林。
English: In December, the first day of the lunar new year, Venus will make a feather forest.

古文：十七年，上将执法皆被诛。
现代文：十七年，上将与执法大臣都被杀。
English: In the seventeenth year, the Admiral and the Minister of Law Enforcement were both killed.

古文：元嘉十三年正月庚午，月犯荧惑。
现代文：元嘉十三年正月庚午，月犯火星。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 13th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the lunar new year falls on the first day of the lunar new year.

古文：二月，月犯太微东蕃第一星。
现代文：二月，月犯太微垣束蕃第一星。
English: In February, he became the first star of the monthly crime drama Taikogaki Sokken.

古文：十一月辛亥，岁星犯积尸。
现代文：十一月辛亥，木星犯积尸。
English: November Xinhai, Jupiter makes a pile of corpses.

古文：十二月戊子，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：十二月戊子，火星入羽林。
English: In December, the phoenix rises and the rooster crows.

古文：后年，废大将军彭城王义康及其党与；凡所收掩，皆羽林兵出。
现代文：后年大将军堑越王刘义康及其同党都被废黜。所有的拘捕行动都由羽林军执行。
English: In the following year, the general Liu Yikang and his party were deposed, and all arrests were carried out by the Ulin Army.

古文：月犯东井。四月丁未，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：元嘉十四年正月，有黄赤色、大如橘子一样的客星黄昏前出现在东北方井宿左右。月犯东井之宿。四月丁未，金星犯舆鬼之宿。
English: In the first month of the fourteenth year of the Yuan Jia, a yellow-red, large as an orange, guest star appeared before dusk around the northeastern well-staying place. The moon was in the east well-staying place. In April, it was in the west, and Venus was in the ghost-staying place.

古文：五月丙子，太白昼见，在太微。
现代文：五月丙子，金星白天在太微垣出现。
English: The crescent moon of May and the planet Venus appear in the daytime in Taibiao.

古文：七月辛卯，岁星入轩辕。
现代文：七月辛卯，木星入轩辕。
English: July is hot, Jupiter is in the ascendant.

古文：八月庚申，荧惑犯上将。
现代文：八月庚申，火星犯上将星。
English: In August, Koshin, the Martian war criminal, becomes a general.

古文：九月丙戌，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：九月丙戌，火星犯左执法星。
English: In September, he starred as a law enforcement officer who is a Martian criminal.

古文：其后，皇后袁氏崩，丹阳尹刘湛诛，尚书仆射殷景仁薨。
现代文：其后皇后袁氏去世。丹阳尹刘湛被杀。尚书仆射殷景仁去世。
English: After that, Empress Yuan died, Danyang Yin Liu Zhan was killed, and Shang Shuxu's servant Shoin Jingren died.

古文：元嘉十五年四月己卯，月犯氐。
现代文：元嘉十五年四月己卯，月犯氏宿。
English: In April of the fifteenth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, it became the residence of the Moon Criminals.

古文：十月壬戌，流星大如鸭子，出文昌，入紫宫，声如雷。
现代文：十月壬戌，有大如鸭蛋的流星出文昌而入紫宫，伴有如雷之声。
English: At the end of October, a meteor as big as a duck's egg came out of Wenchang and entered the Purple Palace, accompanied by a thunderous sound.

古文：十一月癸未，荧惑入羽林。
现代文：十一月癸未，火星入羽林。
English: At the end of November, Mars enters the fallow forest.

古文：丁未，月犯东井钺星。
现代文：丁未，月犯束井宿铁星。
English: Ding Wei, a monthly offender from Sakui, stayed with Tiexing.

古文：其后，诛丹阳尹刘湛等。
现代文：其后杀且区尹塑瞪等人。
English: He then killed and dismembered others, including Yin Shudao.

古文：元嘉十六年二月，岁星逆行犯左执法。
现代文：元嘉十六年二月，木星逆行而犯左执法星。
English: In February of the 16th year of the Yuan Jia, Jupiter retrograde and left the law enforcement star.

古文：五月丁卯，太白昼见胃、昴间。
现代文：五月丁卯，金星白天在胃宿、昴宿之间出现。
English: In May, Venus appears in the daytime between the stomach and the abdomen.

古文：月入羽林，太白犯毕，岁星犯左执法。
现代文：月入羽林。金星犯毕宿。木星犯左执法星。
English: The moon enters the eagle's nest. Venus commits suicide. Jupiter commits suicide.

古文：七月，月会填星。
现代文：七月，月与土星相会。
English: In July, the Moon meets Saturn.

古文：八月，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：八月，金星犯轩辕。
English: In August, Jin Xing fell into a coma.

古文：明年，皇后袁氏崩。
现代文：第二年，皇后袁氏去世。
English: The following year, Empress Yuan passed away.

古文：荧惑犯太微西上将，太白昼见，在翼。
现代文：火星犯太微垣西上将星。金星白天在翼宿出现。
English: Mars is too close to the west, and Venus appears during the day in Pleiades.

古文：九月，荧惑同入太微相犯。
现代文：九月，火星与金星同入太微垣且相犯。
English: In September, Mars and Venus will be too close together and will collide.

古文：太白犯左执法，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：金星犯左执法星。火星犯右执法星。
English: Venus is the left law enforcement star. Mars is the right law enforcement star.

古文：十月，岁星荧惑相犯，在亢。
现代文：十月，木星与火星在亢宿相犯。
English: In October, Jupiter and Mars collide at Pleiades.

古文：十一月，荧惑犯房北第一星。
现代文：十一月，火星犯房宿北第一星。
English: In November, Mars will be the first star in the northern sky.

古文：明年，大将军义康出徙豫章，诛其党与。
现代文：第二年，大将军刘义康被迁徙至豫章，其同党被杀。
English: The following year, General Liu Yikang was moved to Yuzhang, and his comrades were killed.

古文：尚书仆射、扬州刺史殷景仁薨。
现代文：尚书仆射、扬州刺史殷景仁死亡。
English: Shang Shuxu, Yang Zhou, Yin Jingren died.

古文：元嘉十九年九月，客星见北斗，渐为彗星，至天苑末灭。
现代文：元嘉十九年九月，有客星出现在北斗，渐渐变为彗星，运行至天苑末消失。
English: In September of the 19th year of the Yuan Jia, a guest star appeared in the Big Dipper, gradually turned into a comet, and ran until it disappeared at the end of Tianyuan.

古文：元嘉二十年二月二十四日乙未，有流星大如桃，出天津，入紫宫；须臾，有细流星或五或三相续，又有一大流星从紫宫出，入北斗魁；须臾，又一大流星出，贯索中，经天市垣，诸流星并向北行，至晓不可称数。
现代文：元嘉二十年二月二十四日乙未，有像桃子一样大的流星，出天津入紫宫，不久有三五成群的小流星相续，又有一大流星从紫宫出而入北斗魁，不久又有一大流星出而横贯索中，经天市垣，所有的流星都向北运行，至天亮时已数不胜数。
English: On the 24th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 20th year of the Yuan Jia, a meteor as big as a peach came out of Tianjin and entered the Purple Palace. Soon, there were three or five groups of small meteors in succession. Another large meteor came out of the Purple Palace and entered the Big Dipper. Soon, another large meteor came out and crossed the rope and passed through the sky fence. All the meteors were moving northward, and by dawn there were countless.

古文：流星占并云： 天子之使。 
现代文：有关流星的占辞都说： 流星代表皇帝的使者。 
English: The astrological terms for meteors say: Meteors represent the emissaries of the emperor.

古文：又曰： 庶民惟星。
现代文：又说： 老百姓即为星。
English: He also said, "The people are the stars."

古文：星流，民散之象。 
现代文：星流则民众流散。 
English: The people were dispersed by the stellar current.

古文：至二十七年，索虏残破青、冀、徐、兗、南兗、豫六州，民死太半。
现代文：至二十七年，索虏攻破残杀青、冀、徐、兗、南兗、豫六州，民众死去大半。
English: By the 27th year, the Sorbs had invaded and brutally killed Qing, Hebei, Xu, Handan, Nanxun, and Henan in six prefectures, killing most of the people.

古文：元嘉二十二年二月，金火木合东井。
现代文：元嘉二十二年二月，金星、火星及木星合于东井宿。
English: In February of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, Venus, Mars and Jupiter converged on Dongjing.

古文：四月，月犯心，太白入轩辕。
现代文：四月，月犯心宿。金星入轩辕。
English: In April, the heart of the month is the criminal. Venus is in the ascendant.

古文：七月，太白昼见。
现代文：七月，金星白天出现。
English: In July, Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：其冬，太子詹事范晔谋反伏诛。
现代文：同年冬天，太子詹事范晔因谋反而被杀。
English: In the winter of the same year, Prince Zhan Zhi Fan Rong was killed for plotting a rebellion.

古文：元嘉二十三年正月，金火相烁。
现代文：元嘉二十三年正月，金星与火星发光闪动。
English: In the first month of the 23rd year of the Yuan Jia, Venus and Mars glowed and twinkled.

古文：其月，索虏寇青州，驱略民户。
现代文：同月，索虏进攻青州，驱赶掠走民众。
English: In the same month, the Sokru attacked Qingzhou, drove away and plundered the people.

古文：元嘉二十四年正月，月犯心大星。
现代文：元嘉二十四年正月，月犯心宿大星。
English: In the first month of the twenty-fourth year of the Yuan Jia, the moon crime is a big star.

古文：天星并西流，多细，大不过如鸡子，尾有长短，当有数百。
现代文：有数百颗流星向西流，其中多数细小，大不过鶸蛋，尾有长有短，大概有数百颗星。
English: Hundreds of meteors streamed westward, most of them tiny, no bigger than quail's eggs, with long and short tails and perhaps hundreds of stars.

古文：至旦，日光定乃止，有入北斗紫宫者。
现代文：至第二天凌晨时才停止，有的进斗紫宫。
English: It didn't stop until the early hours of the next morning, with some marching into the Purple Palace.

古文：占： 流星群趋所之者，兵聚其下，有大急。 
现代文：占辞说： 流星群趋向的地方，兵聚其下，预示将有大急难。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Where the meteor shower is heading, soldiers will gather under it, indicating that there will be a great emergency.

古文：又占： 众星并流，将军并举兵。
现代文：又说： 众星并流则众将军并起兵。
English: He also said, "If all the stars align, then all the generals will muster."

古文：随星所之，以应天气。 
现代文：星所流至的地方即为兵所聚之地，以应验天意。 
English: The place where the star flows to is the place where the soldiers gather, in order to fulfill the will of heaven.

古文：又占： 流星入紫宫，有丧，水旱不调。 
现代文：又有占辞说： 流星入紫宫表示有丧乱，水旱不调。 
English: There is also a fortune-telling saying: A meteor entering the Purple Palace indicates that there will be turmoil, and droughts and floods will not be adjusted.

古文：又占： 流星入北斗，大臣有系者。 
现代文：又说： 流星入北斗表示有大臣被逮捕。 
English: He also said: A meteor entering the Big Dipper indicates that a minister has been arrested.

古文：又占： 流星为民，大星大臣流，小星小民流。 四月，太白昼见。
现代文：又说： 流星代表民，大流星表示将有大臣流亡，小流星表示老百姓将流亡 四月，金星白天出现。
English: He also said: Meteors represent the people, large meteors indicate that ministers will be exiled, small meteors indicate that the people will be exiled In April, Venus appears during the day.

古文：八月，征北大将军衡阳王义季薨；豫章民胡诞世率其宗族破郡县，杀太守及县令
现代文：八月，征北大将军衡阳王刘义季死亡。豫章民胡诞世率领其宗族攻破郡县，杀死郡太守及县令。
English: In August, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Hengyang Wang Liu Yiji, died. Yu Zhangmin Hu Zhixing led his clan to break through the county, killing the county governor and the county magistrate.

古文：元嘉二十五年正月，火、水入羽林。
现代文：元嘉二十五年正月，水星、火星入羽林。
English: In the first month of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, Mercury and Mars entered the feather forest.

古文：月犯岁星，太白昼见经天。
现代文：月犯木星。金星经天而白天出现。
English: The moon offends Jupiter. Venus passes through the sky and appears during the day.

古文：元嘉二十六年十月，彗星入太微。
现代文：元嘉二十六年十月，彗星入太微。
English: In October of the 26th year of Yuan Jia, the comet was too faint.

古文：十一月，白气贯北斗。
现代文：十一月，白气贯北斗。
English: In November, the white wind runs through the Big Dipper.

古文：二十七年夏，太白昼见经天。
现代文：二十七年夏天，金星经天而白天出现。
English: In the summer of the 27th year, Venus appeared in the sky during the day.

古文：九月，太白犯岁星。
现代文：九月，金星犯木星。
English: In September, Venus trumps Jupiter.

古文：十月，荧惑入太微。
现代文：十月，火星入太微垣。
English: In October, Mars enters the solar system.

古文：元嘉二十八年五月，彗星见卷舌，入太微，逼帝座，犯上相，拂屏，出端门，灭翼、轸。
现代文：元嘉二十八年五月，彗星出现在卷舌，入太微垣，逼近帝座，犯上相星，拂过屏而出端门，消失在翼、轸二宿。
English: In May of the 28th year of the Yuan Jia, the comet appeared in the roll of the tongue, entered the tao weigaki, approached the imperial throne, hit the phase star, swept through the screen and the exit door, and disappeared into the wings and the second quarter.

古文：翼、轸，荆州分。太白昼见犯哭星。
现代文：翼、轸二宿与荆州对应金星白天出现且犯哭星。
English: Tsubasa, Kagero and Jingzhou correspond to Venus, which appears during the day and is a crying star.

古文：三十年，太子巫蛊咒诅事觉，遂杀害朝臣。
现代文：三十年，太子进行巫蛊咒诅的事情被发觉，于是杀害朝中之臣。
English: Thirty years later, it was discovered that the prince had performed a witchcraft curse, and he killed a courtier.

古文：孝建元年，荆、江二州反，皆夷灭。
现代文：孝建元年，荆、江二州反叛被平定。
English: In the first year of the Xiao Jian era, the rebellion in the two states of Jing and Jiang was suppressed.

古文：卷舌，咒诅之象。彗之所起，是其应也。
现代文：卷舌是咒诅的象征，彗星在卷舌出现应验了太子咒诅之事。
English: The rolled tongue is a symbol of a curse, and the appearance of the comet in the rolled tongue fulfilled the prince's curse.

古文：元嘉二十九年正月，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：元嘉二十九年正月，金星经天且白天出现。
English: In the first month of the 29th year of Yuan Jia, Venus passed through the sky and appeared during the day.

古文：明年，东宫弑逆。
现代文：第二年，东宫太子杀皇上。
English: The following year, the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court assassinated the Emperor.

古文：孝武孝建元年二月，有流星大如月，西行。其年，豫州刺史鲁爽反诛。
现代文：孝武孝建元年二月，有像月一样大的流星向西运行同年，逸业刺史叠垄反叛被杀。
English: In February of the first year of Xiaowu Xiao Jian, there was a meteor as big as the moon moving westward. In the same year, the rebel Yingye Zhi Lianrong was killed.

古文：孝建元年九月壬寅，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：孝建元年九月壬寅，火星犯左执法星。
English: In September of the first year of Xiao Jian's reign, Ren Yin, a Martian criminal, became a law enforcement star.

古文：尚书左仆射建平王宏表解职，不许。
现代文：尚书左仆射建平王塑速上表请求解除自己的职务，孝武帝没有同意。
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not agree to Shangshu's left-hand servant, Jianping Wang Shuxiao's request to be relieved of his duties.

古文：孝建元年十月乙丑，荧惑犯进贤星。
现代文：孝建元年十月乙丑，火星犯进贤星。
English: In October of the first year of Xiao Jian's reign, Mars was retrograde, and Mars was retrograde.

古文：吏部尚书谢庄表解职，不许。
现代文：吏部尚书谢蓝亡表请求解除自己的职务，孝武帝未同意。
English: Emperor Xiaowu did not agree to the request of the head of the personnel department, Shang Shu Xie Lan, to be relieved of his duties.

古文：孝建二年五月乙未，荧惑入南斗。
现代文：孝建二年五月乙未，火星入南斗。
English: In May of the second year of Xiao Jian's reign, Mars entered the Southern Cross.

古文：十月甲辰，又入南斗。
现代文：十月甲辰，又入南斗。
English: In October, Jia Chen entered Nan Dou again.

古文：大明元年夏，京师疾疫。
现代文：大明元年夏天，京师瘟疫。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, a plague swept through Beijing.

古文：孝建三年四月戊戌，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：孝建三年四月戊戌，金星犯舆鬼宿。
English: Xiao Jian in April of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the

古文：占曰： 民多疾。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示民众多疾病。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that the people have many diseases.

古文：明年夏，京邑疫疾。
现代文：第二年夏天，京城瘟疫。
English: In the summer of the following year, a plague broke out in Kyoto.

古文：孝建三年八月甲午，太白入心。
现代文：孝建三年八月甲午，金星入心宿。
English: In the afternoon of August in the third year of Xiao Jian, Venus enters the heart.

古文：占曰： 后九年，大饥至。 
现代文：占辞说： 后九年，将有大饥荒。 
English: The fortune-teller said: In the last nine years, there will be a great famine.

古文：大明八年，东土大饥，民死十二三。
现代文：大明八年，东土出现大饥荒，民众死者十有二三。
English: In the 8th year of the Ming Dynasty, a great famine occurred in the eastern part of the country, and 23 out of every 10 people died.

古文：大明元年三月癸亥，太白在奎南，犯岁星。
现代文：大明元年三月癸亥，金星在奎宿之南犯木星。
English: In March of the first year of the Taiming era, Venus collided with Jupiter in the south of Kuizhu.

古文：占曰： 有灭诸侯。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有诸侯被消灭。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that the princes will be destroyed."

古文：三年，司空竟陵王诞反诛。
现代文：三年，司空竟陵王刘诞因反叛被杀。
English: Three years later, Siku was killed for rebelling against the mausoleum king, Liu Xing.

古文：大明元年六月丙申，月在东壁，掩荧惑。
现代文：大明元年六月丙申，月在东壁掩火星。
English: In June of the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, the moon occulted Mars on the eastern wall.

古文：占曰： 将军有忧，期不出三年。 至三年，司空竟陵王诞反。
现代文：占辞说： 时间不超过三年，将军有忧患。 至大明三年，司空竞陵王刘诞反叛。
English: The fortune-teller said: The time is no more than three years, the general is in trouble. In the third year of the Ming Dynasty, the Siku King Liu rebelled.

古文：大明二年三月辛未，荧惑入东井。
现代文：大明二年三月辛未，火星入束井之宿。
English: In March of the second year of the Daimyo era, the planet Mars entered Sokui no Yado.

古文：四月己亥，荧惑在东井犯北轩辕第二星。
现代文：四月己亥，火星在束井宿之北犯轩辕第二星。
English: On April Fool's Day, Mars makes its second appearance in the northern constellation of Tsukai-juku.

古文：井，雍州分。
现代文：井宿与壅州对应。
English: Ijuku corresponds to Bozhou.

古文：其年四月，海陵王休茂为雍州刺史，五年，休茂反诛。
现代文：同年四月，海陵王刘休茂被任命为壅州刺史，太塱五年因反叛被杀。
English: In April of the same year, Liu Xiumao, the king of Hailing, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou. Taisheng was killed for his rebellion five years later.

古文：大明二年七月己巳，月掩轩辕第二星。
现代文：大明二年七月己巳，月掩轩辕第二星。
English: In July of the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, he became the second star.

古文：十月辛卯，月掩轩辕。
现代文：十月辛卯，月掩轩辕。
English: October is hard, but the moon hides behind the clouds.

古文：十一月丙戌，月又掩轩辕。
现代文：十一月丙戌，月又掩轩辕。
English: The month of November is over, and the new moon has risen.

古文：轩辕，女主。
现代文：轩辕代表皇后。
English: Xuanzang represents the empress.

古文：时民间喧言人主帷薄不修。
现代文：当时民间盛传皇帝家门淫乱。
English: At that time, there was a popular rumor that the emperor's family was sexually promiscuous.

古文：大明二年十一月庚戌，荧惑犯房及钩钤。
现代文：大明二年十一月庚戌，火星犯房宿及钩钤星。
English: In November of the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, Geng Zheng, Mars made a room and hooked a star.

古文：壬子，荧惑又犯钩钤。
现代文：壬子，火星又犯钩钤。
English: Once again, Mars has fallen foul of the weather.

古文：占曰： 有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：其年，索虏寇历下，遣羽林军讨破之。
现代文：同年，索虏进攻历下，被朝廷派遣羽林军打败。
English: In the same year, under the attack of Sauru, it was defeated by the Imperial Army dispatched by the Imperial Court.

古文：大明三年春正月夜，通天薄云，四方生赤气，长三四尺，乍没乍见，寻皆消灭。
现代文：大明三年春正月之夜，满天薄云，四方出现长三四尺的赤气，忽隐忽现，不久都消失。
English: On the night of the first day of the first month of spring in the year of Daming, the sky was covered with thin clouds, and red gas with a length of three to four feet appeared in all directions, appearing and disappearing, and soon disappearing.

古文：占名隧星，一曰刀星，天下有兵，战斗流血。
现代文：占书上把这称为隧星，又为刀星，它的出现预示天下将有战争流血之事发生。
English: In the horoscope, this is called the tunnel star, also known as the sword star, and its appearance indicates that there will be war and bloodshed in the world.

古文：月入太微，犯次将。
现代文：月入太微垣，犯次将星。
English: Tsukiiri is too weak, and the offense will be a star.

古文：占曰： 有反臣死，将诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有反臣死，将领被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foreshadows the death of a traitor and the killing of a general."

古文：三月，月在房，犯钩钤，因蚀。
现代文：三月，月在房宿，犯钩钤，接着月食。
English: In March, the moon is in the room, the hook is broken, followed by a lunar eclipse.

古文：占曰： 人主恶之，将军死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示君主交恶，将军死。 
English: The fortuneteller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the monarch's fall into evil and the general's death.

古文：三月，土守牵牛。
现代文：三月，土星守于牵牛。
English: In March, Saturn is in the sign of the cowherd.

古文：占曰： 大人忧疾，兵起，大赦，奸臣贼子谋欲杀主。 
现代文：占辞说： 逭预示王公有忧患，战争起，大赦，奸臣贼厂图谋杀死君主。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The dragonfly foretells that the prince is in trouble, that war will break out, that there will be a general amnesty, and that traitors and thieves are plotting to kill the monarch."

古文：四月，犯五诸侯。
现代文：四月，犯五诸侯。
English: In April, five lords were convicted.

古文：占曰： 诸侯诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有诸侯被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that some princes will be killed."

古文：金、水合西方。
现代文：金星、水星合于西方。
English: Venus and Mercury conjoin in the west.

古文：占曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: Let war arise.

古文：五月，岁星犯东井钺。
现代文：五月，木星犯东井钹。
English: In May, Jupiter invaded Dongjing.

古文：占曰： 斧钺用，大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将动刑罚，杀大臣。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "This indicates that the punishment will be carried out, and the minister will be killed."

古文：六月，月入南斗。
现代文：六月，月入南斗。
English: In June, the moon enters the Southern Cross.

古文：占曰： 大臣大将军诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 大臣大将军被杀。 
English: The fortuneteller said: The minister general has been killed.

古文：南兗州刺史竟陵王诞寻据广陵反，遣车骑大将军沈庆之领羽林劲兵及豫州刺史宗悫、徐州刺史刘道隆众军攻战。
现代文：南兖州刺史竟陵王璺蜒不久后占据尘陵反叛，朝廷派遣车骑大将军边麈之率领羽林精兵及豫州刺史塞整、金蛆刺史刘这坠众军攻战。
English: Shortly after the rebellion in Nanlu County, the imperial court dispatched the cavalry of the army led by the great general Bian Xuan, the elite soldiers of Ulin, the troops of Yuzhou County and Jinlu County to attack the rebels.

古文：及屠城，城内男女道俗，枭斩靡遗。将军宗越偏用虐刑，先刳肠决眼，或笞面鞭腹，苦酒灌创，然后方加以刀锯。
现代文：屠城时，城内不论男女、出家人或世俗之人都被斩杀无遗将军塞越偏用残酷的刑法，先剖出入的肠子，挖出眼睛，或者鞭打面部腹部，再用苦酒灌到伤口上，然后才杀死。
English: During the massacre, all the people in the city, whether men or women, religious or secular, were slaughtered without exception. General Ziyue used a cruel criminal law, first dissecting the intestines, gouging out the eyes, or whipping the face and abdomen, and then pouring bitter wine on the wound before killing.

古文：大兵之应也。
现代文：这是有大战的应验。
English: This is the fulfillment of the Great War.

古文：八月，月犯太白，太白犯房。
现代文：八月，月犯金星。金星犯房宿。
English: August, the month of Venus. Venus in the room.

古文：占曰： 人君有忧，天子恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示君主有忧患，天子交恶。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that the sovereign is in distress, and that the heavenly sons are at loggerheads."

古文：荧惑守毕。
现代文：火星守毕宿。
English: The Mars-guard is no more.

古文：占曰： 万民饥，有大兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 万民饥饿，有大战。 
English: The fortune-teller said: All the people are starving, there will be a great war.

古文：九月，太白犯南斗。
现代文：九月，金星犯南斗。
English: In September, Venus collided with the Southern Cross.

古文：占曰： 大臣有反者。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示有大臣谋反。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that a minister is plotting a rebellion.

古文：九月，月在胃而蚀，既，又于昴犯荧惑。
现代文：九月，在胃宿发生月全食，后月又于昴宿犯火星。
English: In September, a total lunar eclipse occurred in Gastoshuku, and in the following month, a total lunar eclipse occurred in Shinsaibashi.

古文：占曰： 兵起，女主当之，人主恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有战争，皇后、公主当此灾祸，君主交恶。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that there will be a war, the queen and the princess will meet with disaster, and the prince will meet with evil."

古文：一曰： 女主忧，国王死，民饥。 
现代文：另一说： 皇后、公主有忧患，国王死，民众饥。 
English: Another said: "The queen and princess are in distress, the king is dead, and the people are starving."

古文：十月，太白犯哭星。
现代文：十月，金星犯哭星。
English: In October, Venus is the crying star.

古文：占曰： 人主有哭泣之声。 
现代文：占辞说： 君主将有哭泣之声。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The monarch will have a crying voice.

古文：自后六宫多丧，公主薨亡，天子举哀相系。
现代文：此后六宫多有丧亡，公主死，天子举哀相继。
English: After that, most of the six palaces were lost, the princess died, and the heavenly son mourned one after another.

古文：岁大旱，民饥。
现代文：同年大旱，民饥
English: In the same year, there was a severe drought, and people were starving.

古文：大明四年正月，月奄氐。占曰： 大将死。 
现代文：大明四年正月，月掩氏宿占辞说： 这预示大将死。 
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, Tsukibakushi-juku divination said: This portends the death of the general.

古文：又犯房北第二星。
现代文：又犯房宿北第二星。
English: He also committed the crime of lodging in the second star of the north.

古文：占曰： 有乱臣谋其主。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有乱臣圃谋君主。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This indicates that there is a disorderly vassal plotting against the monarch."

古文：二月，有赤气，长一尺余，在太白帝坐北。
现代文：二月，有长一尺多的赤气出现在金星帝座之北。
English: In February, a foot-long streak of red gas appeared north of the planet Venus.

古文：占曰： 兵起，臣欲谋其君。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有战争，臣下想图谋君主。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there will be a war, and the subjects want to plot against the monarch.

古文：五月，月入太微。
现代文：五月，月入太微垣。
English: In May, the moon enters Taikogaki.

古文：占曰： 有反臣，大臣死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有反臣，大臣将死。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that there will be a rebel minister, and the minister will die."

古文：六月，太白犯井钺。
现代文：六月，金星犯井宿之钹星。
English: In June, Venus enters the sign of Virgo in the constellation of Virgo.

古文：占曰： 兵起，斧钺用，大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争，用大刑，杀大臣。 
English: The fortuneteller said: There will be war, there will be capital punishment, there will be the killing of ministers.

古文：月犯心前星。
现代文：月犯心宿前星。
English: A monthly crime is a harbinger of the future.

古文：占曰： 有乱臣，太子恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示有乱臣，太子交恶。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that there will be unruly vassals and that the prince will fall into evil."

古文：月入南斗魁中。
现代文：月入南：卜魁之中。
English: He entered the Nanto-kui middle school.

古文：占曰： 大人忧，女主恶之。 七月，岁星犯积尸。
现代文：占辞说： 逭预示大人有忧患，皇后交恶、 七月，木星犯积尸。
English: The fortune-teller said: The dragonfly foretells that the adults will have sorrow, the queen will be evil, and in July, Jupiter will make the dead pile up.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有大臣被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister will be killed.

古文：十二月，月犯心中央大星。
现代文：十二月，月犯心宿中央大星。
English: In December, Tsukihonshinshuku Chuo Daisei closed.

古文：占曰： 大人忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示王公贵族有忧患。 
English: Divination says: A high-ranking person has worries.

古文：十二月，通天有云，西及东北并生，合八所，并长四尺，乍没乍见，寻消尽。
现代文：十二月，通天有云，生于西方及东北方，总共八处，每处长四尺，忽隐忽现。不久消失殆尽。
English: In December, there are clouds in the sky, born in the west and northeast, a total of eight, each four feet long, appearing and disappearing. Soon they disappear completely.

古文：占曰： 天下有兵。 十二月，月犯箕东北星，女主恶之。
现代文：占辞说： 这预示天下将有战争 十二月，月犯箕宿东北星。皇后交恶。
English: The fortune-teller said, "This indicates that there will be war in the world. In December, the moon offends the north-east star. The empress is evil."

古文：明年，雍州刺史海陵王休茂反。太白犯东井，雍州兵乱之应也。
现代文：第二年，雍州刺史海陵王刘休茂反叛金星犯束井之宿即为雍州兵乱的预兆。
English: In the second year, Liu Xumo, the king of the Mausoleum of Liu Xumo, rebelled against Jin Xing, and the lodging of Shuxui was a harbinger of the Yongzhou Rebellion.

古文：大明五年正月，岁星犯舆鬼积尸。
现代文：大明五年止月，木星犯舆鬼宿积尸。
English: In the last month of the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, Jupiter made the ghosts stay and accumulate corpses.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛，主有忧，财宝散。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有大臣被杀，君主有忧患，财宝流散。 
English: The soothsayer said: This portends that the minister will be killed, the monarch will be troubled, and the treasure will be dispersed.

古文：月入南斗魁中。
现代文：月入南斗魁中。
English: He entered the Nanto-kui middle school.

古文：占曰： 大人忧，天下有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示王公大臣有忧患，天有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that the prince and the minister will have sorrow and that there will be war."

古文：火、土同在须女。
现代文：火星、木星同时出现在须女之宿。
English: Mars and Jupiter appear at the same time in the house of the pupa.

古文：占曰： 女主恶之。 三月，月掩轩辕。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示皇后交恶。 三月，月掩轩辕。
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foretells that the empress will turn evil. In March, the moon hides behind the clouds.

古文：占曰： 女主恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示皇后交恶。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that the queen will fall into evil."

古文：有流星数千万，或长或短，或大或小，并西行，至晓而止。
现代文：有流星敷千万，都向西运行，有长有短，有大有小，至天亮时停止。
English: There are tens of thousands of meteors, all moving westward, long and short, large and small, until they stop at dawn.

古文：占曰： 人君恶之，民流亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示君主交恶，民众流亡。 
English: The soothsayer said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the monarch's fall into evil and the people's exile.

古文：四月，太白犯东井北辕。
现代文：四月，金星犯束井宿北辕。
English: In April, Jinsei committed a crime at the North Tower of the Sokujin Dormitory.

古文：占曰： 大臣为乱，斧钺用。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示大臣作乱，动用大刑。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The minister will make a disturbance and use punishment.

古文：太白犯舆鬼。占曰： 大臣诛，斧钺用，人主忧。 
现代文：金星犯舆鬼宿占辞说： 大臣将被杀，动用大刑，君主有忧患。 
English: According to the horoscope of Venus, the minister will be killed, capital punishment will be used, and the monarch will be in trouble.

古文：六月，有流星白色，大如瓯，出王良，西南行，没天市中，尾长数十丈，没后余光良久。
现代文：六月，有白色像瓯大的流星出于王良而向西南运行，消失在天市垣之中，其尾长数十丈，消失后余光还延续了很久。
English: In June, a white meteor, as big as a cow, came out of Wangliang and moved to the southwest, disappearing into the sky. Its tail was dozens of meters long, and the afterglow lasted for a long time after it disappeared.

古文：占曰： 天下乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天下将大乱。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that the world will be in a state of chaos.

古文：八月，荧惑入东井。
现代文：八月，火星入东井之宿。
English: In August, the Martian entered Higashii no Yado.

古文：占曰： 大臣当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 大臣应此灾。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The minister should bear the calamity foretold by the celestial phenomenon."

古文：十月，岁星犯太微上将星。
现代文：十月，木星犯太微垣上将星。
English: In October, Jupiter will be in the sign of Virgo.

古文：太白入亢，犯南第二星。
现代文：金星入亢宿犯南第二星。
English: Venus enters Pengshu, making it the second star in the south.

古文：占曰： 上将有忧，辅臣有诛者，人君恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示上将有忧患，辅政大臣被杀，王者交恶。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there will be sorrow, the Vice-Minister of State will be killed, and the king will be evil.

古文：十月，太白入氐中，荧惑入井中。
现代文：十月，金星入氐宿之中。火星入井宿之中。
English: In October, Venus enters the sign of Pisces and Mars enters the sign of Cancer.

古文：占曰： 王者亡地，大赦，兵起，为饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将有王失地，大赦，战争起，饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said: This celestial phenomenon foretells the loss of territory, amnesty, war, and famine.

古文：月入太微，掩西蕃上将，犯岁星。
现代文：月入太微垣，掩西蕃上将星，犯木星。
English: The moon sets too close to the horizon, obscuring the westward-pointing Admiral's Star and offending Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 有反臣死。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有反臣死。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "There will be a death of a traitor."

古文：大星大如斗，出柳北行，尾十余丈，入紫宫没，尾后余光良久乃灭。
现代文：有大如斗的大星出柳宿向北运行，其尾十余丈，入紫宫而消失，尾后余光很久才消失。
English: A large star, as big as a dipper, moves northward from the Willow Inn. Its tail is more than ten meters long, and it disappears into the Purple Palace. The afterglow lasts for a long time before disappearing.

古文：占曰： 天下凶，有兵丧，天下恶之。 十一月，月掩心前星，又犯大星。占曰： 大人忧，兵起，大旱。 
现代文：占辞说： 天下凶险。将有战争及丧乱，天子交恶： 十一月，月掩心宿前星，又犯大星占辞说： 王公大臣将有忧患，有战争，大旱。 
English: The horoscope said: The world is in peril. There will be war and turmoil, and the sons of heaven will come to blows. In November, the moon will cover the heart with the pre-star, and the great star horoscope said: The prince will have sorrow, war, and drought.

古文：十二月，太白犯西建中央星。
现代文：十二月，金星犯西建中央星。
English: In December, Venus invaded the West Jian Central Star.

古文：占曰： 大臣相谮。 
现代文：占辞说： 造表示大臣相害。 
English: The fortune-teller said: 造 indicates that the minister will be harmed.

古文：月犯左角。
现代文：月犯左角。
English: The monthly offender is in the left corner.

古文：占曰： 天子恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天子交恶。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This celestial appearance foretells that the Son of Heaven will become evil."

古文：后三年，孝武帝、文穆皇后相系崩；嗣主即位一年，诛灭宰辅将相，虐戮朝臣，祸及宗室，因自受害。
现代文：后三年，孝武查、文穆皇后相继去世，嗣王继皇位一年，杀辅政将相，杀戮朝臣，祸及皇族宗室，因而自己也被杀害。
English: In the last three years, Empress Xiaowucha and Empress Wenmu passed away one after another, and the heir to the throne, who had been on the throne for one year, killed the vice-ministers, killed the courtiers, and brought misfortune to the royal family, and was himself killed.

古文：大明六年正月，月在张，犯岁星。
现代文：大明六年正月，月在张宿犯木星。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, Jupiter stayed in Zhangye for a month.

古文：占曰： 民饥流亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 民众饥饿流亡。 
English: In the words of a fortune teller: The people are starving and in exile.

古文：月犯心后星。
现代文：月犯心宿后星。
English: A monthly delinquent is destined for the afterlife.

古文：占曰： 庶子恶之。 二月，月掩左角。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示皇帝庶子不利。 ，二月，月掩左角。
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foretells that the emperor's illegitimate son will be unfavorable., February, the moon hides the left corner.

古文：占曰： 天子恶之。 三月，荧惑入舆鬼。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示料主交恶 三月，火星入舆鬼宿。
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the main conflict between good and evil. In March, Mars enters the house of ghosts.

古文：占曰： 有兵，大臣诛，天下多疾疫。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争，大臣被杀，天下多瘟疫。 
English: The fortuneteller said: There will be a war, a minister will be killed, and there will be a plague.

古文：五月，月在张，又入太微，犯荧惑。
现代文：五月，月在张宿，又入太微垣，犯火星。
English: In May, I stayed in Zhangjuku for a month, and then I went back to Taibeigaki and had sex.

古文：占曰： 国主不安，女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示君主不安宁，皇后有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the monarch is restless and the queen is worried.

古文：火犯木在翼。
现代文：火星在翼宿犯木星。
English: Mars stalks Jupiter on the wing.

古文：占曰： 为饥，为旱，近臣大臣谋主。 
现代文：占辞说： 这表示将有饥荒，旱灾，近臣大臣圆谋皇帝。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This indicates that there will be famine, drought, and the emperor will be plotted against by his ministers."

古文：有星前赤后白，大如瓯，尾长十余丈，出东壁北，西行没天市，啾啾有声。
现代文：有大如瓯的星先赤色后变为白色，其尾长十余丈，出束壁宿之北而向西运行，消失在天市垣，伴有啾啾之声。
English: There was a large star like a dragonfly, red at the beginning and then turning white. Its tail was more than ten meters long, and it flew to the west from the north of the bunch wall, disappearing into the sky, accompanied by the sound of a dragonfly.

古文：占曰： 其下有兵，天下乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 这星的下面将有战争，天下将乱。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Underneath this star there will be war, the world will be in turmoil.

古文：月掩昴七星。占曰： 贵臣诛，天子破匈奴，胡主死。 
现代文：月掩昴宿七星占辞说： 这预示贵臣将被杀，天子打败鲤丝，胡主死。 
English: The Moon occulted the Pleiades and the seven stars, and the fortune-teller said, "This foretells that the noblemen will be killed, the heavenly son will defeat the dragonfly, and the evil lord will die."

古文：岁星犯上将。
现代文：木星犯上将星。
English: Jupiter is the general's planet.

古文：占曰： 辅臣诛，上将忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示辅政大臣将被杀，上将有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This foretells that the Vice-Minister of State will be killed, and the Emperor will be troubled."

古文：六月，月入太微，犯右执法。
现代文：六月，月入太微垣犯右执法星。
English: In June, Tsukiyori Taikogaki, a right-wing law enforcement star, was arrested.

古文：占曰： 人主不安，天下大惊，主不吉，执法诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示君主不安宁，天下大惊，君主不吉利，执法大臣被杀。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the monarch is restless, the world is shocked, the monarch is unlucky, and the Minister of Law Enforcement is killed.

古文：月犯心后星。
现代文：月犯心宿后星。
English: A monthly delinquent is destined for the afterlife.

古文：占曰： 庶子恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示皇帝庶子交恶。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the evil of the emperor's illegitimate son.

古文：七月，月犯箕。
现代文：七月，月犯箕宿。
English: In July, the month-long detention ended.

古文：占曰： 女主恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示皇后交恶。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that the queen will fall into evil."

古文：八月，月入南斗魁中。占曰： 大臣诛，斧钺用，吴、越有忧。 
现代文：八月，月入南斗魁中占辞说： 这预示大臣被杀，动用大刑，吴、越之地有忧患。 
English: In August, he said in his speech at the Nantou Qui, "This foreshadows that the minister will be killed, capital punishment will be used, and there will be trouble in Wu and Yue.

古文：明年，扬、南徐州大旱，田谷不收，民流死亡。
现代文：明年，握州、直俭州大旱，田谷无收，民众流散逃亡。
English: Next year, there will be a severe drought in Jiaozhen and Jiaozhen, no crops will be harvested in Tianya, and the people will disperse and flee.

古文：自后三年，帝后仍崩，宰辅及尚书令仆诛戮，索虏主死，新安王兄弟受害，司徒豫章王子尚薨，羽林兵入三吴讨叛逆。
现代文：此后三年，皇帝、皇后去世，宰相及尚书令、尚书仆射被杀，索虏主死，新安王兄弟被害，司徒豫章王刘子尚死，羽林兵进入三呈征讨叛逆。
English: In the following three years, the emperor and empress died, the prime minister and Shang Shuling and Shang Shuling's servant were killed, the sorcerer died, the brothers of Xin'an Wang were killed, the king of Sidu and Yu Zhang, Liu Zi, was still dead, and the soldiers of Ulin entered Sancheng to recruit rebels.

古文：大明七年正月夜，通天薄云，四方合有八气，苍白色，长二三丈，乍见乍没，名刀星。
现代文：大明七年正月之夜，满天薄云，四方共有八气，苍白色，长二三丈，忽隐忽现，称为刀星。
English: On the night of the first month of the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the sky was covered with thin clouds, and there were eight gasses in all directions, pale white, two or three meters long, appearing and disappearing, known as the sword star.

古文：占曰： 天下有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示天下将有战争。 
English: Divination says: There will be war.

古文：三月，月犯心后星。占曰： 庶子恶之。 
现代文：三月，月犯心宿后星占辞说： 这天象预示皇帝庶子不利。 
English: In March, the astrologer said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that the emperor's illegitimate son will be unfavorable."

古文：四月，火犯金，在娄。
现代文：四月，火星在娄宿犯金星。
English: In April, Mars attacks Venus in Pleiades.

古文：占曰： 有丧，有兵，大战。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有丧乱，军事行动及大战。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that there will be turmoil, military action and war.

古文：六月，月犯箕。
现代文：六月，月犯箕宿。
English: In June, the month-long detention ended.

古文：占曰： 女主恶之。 太白入东井。
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示皇后交恶。 金星入东井之宿。
English: The fortune-teller said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that the empress will fall into evil, and Venus will enter the inn of the East Well."

古文：占曰： 大臣当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 大臣当承受这天象预示的灾祸。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The minister should bear the calamity foretold by the celestial phenomenon."

古文：太白犯东井。
现代文：金星犯束井之宿。
English: Venus impinging on the perpetrator of the Sokujuku.

古文：占曰： 大臣为乱，斧钺用。 
现代文：占辞说： 大臣将作乱而动用刑罚。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The minister will make a disturbance and use punishment.

古文：七月，荧惑入东井。
现代文：七月，火星入束井之宿。
English: In July, Mars entered Tsukii-juku.

古文：占曰： 兵起，大将当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有军事行动，大将应承受这天象预示的兆应。 
English: The fortuneteller said: There will be military operations, and the general should bear the omen of this celestial phenomenon.

古文：月入南斗魁，犯第二星。
现代文：月入南斗魁犯第二星。
English: He became the second star of the South Korean cheerleading team.

古文：占曰： 大人忧，吴郡当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 王公贵族将有忧患。
English: The fortune-teller said: Princes and nobles will have troubles.

古文：太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：吴郡应承受这天象预示的灾祸。 金星犯舆鬼之宿。
English: Wu County should bear the calamity foreshadowed by this celestial phenomenon.

古文：占曰： 兵起，大将诛，人主忧，财帛出。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示战争将起而大将被杀，君主有忧患，皇宫财帛散出。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that war will break out, the emperor will be killed, the monarch will be troubled, and the wealth of the imperial palace will be dispersed."

古文：八月，月入哭星中间，太白犯轩辕少微星。
现代文：八月，月入哭星中。金星犯轩辕少微星。
English: In August, the moon is in the crying star. Venus is a minor star.

古文：占曰： 人主忧，哭泣之声，民饥流亡。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示君主有忧患，有哭泣之声，民众饥饿流散逃亡。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that the monarch will be troubled and will weep, and that the people will be hungry and will run away."

古文：太白入太微。
现代文：金星入太微垣。
English: Venus enters the Great Wall.

古文：占曰： 近臣起兵，国不安。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有近臣起兵，国家不安宁。 
English: The fortune-teller said: A close retainer will raise an army, and the country will not be at peace.

古文：荧惑犯鬼，太白犯右执法。
现代文：火星犯鬼宿。金星犯右执法星。
English: Mars is associated with haunted houses. Venus is associated with law enforcement.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有大臣被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister will be killed.

古文：十月，金水相犯。
现代文：十月，金星与水星相犯。
English: In October, Venus and Mercury square off.

古文：占曰： 天下饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 天下将有饥荒。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be a famine in the land."

古文：荧惑守轩辕第二星。
现代文：火星守轩辕第二星。
English: Mars Guardian Xuan Ye is the second star.

古文：占曰： 宫中忧，有哀。 十一月，岁星入氐。
现代文：占辞说： 宫中有忧患，有哀伤之事 十一月，木星入氐宿。
English: The fortune-teller said: There is sorrow in the palace, there are sad things. In November, Jupiter entered the mansion.

古文：占曰： 诸侯人君有入宫者。 十二月，月犯五车。
现代文：占辞说： 诸侯之中有进入皇宫为君者 十二月，月犯五车。
English: The fortune-teller said, "Among the princes, those who enter the imperial palace become sovereigns." In December, there were five car thefts.

古文：占曰： 天库兵动。 
现代文：占辞说： 天库兵器将被动用。 
English: Fortune-telling says: Heaven's storehouse weapons will be used.

古文：后二年，帝后崩，大臣将相诛灭，皇子被害，皇太后崩，四方兵起，分遗诸军推锋外讨。
现代文：后二年，皇帝、皇后相继去世，大臣将相被杀，皇子被害，皇太后去世，四方战争纷起，朝廷分遣各车出外征讨。
English: In the last two years, the emperor and empress passed away one after another, a minister was killed, the prince was killed, the empress dowager died, a four-sided war broke out, and the imperial court dispatched vehicles to fight abroad.

古文：大明八年正月，月掩舆鬼。
现代文：左明八年正月，月掩舆鬼宿。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Zuo Ming, the moon covered the ghost town.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示大臣将被杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister will be killed.

古文：月入南斗魁中，掩第二星。占曰： 大人忧，女主恶之。 
现代文：月入南斗魁中掩其第二：星占辞说： 这天象预示王公大臣有忧患，皇后之恶。 
English: The Moon's entry into the Southern Dragon Boat Race covered the second: the horoscope said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadowed the prince's distress and the evil of the queen.

古文：二月，月犯南斗第四星，入魁中。
现代文：二月，月犯南斗第四星，入魁中。
English: In February, he became the fourth star of the monthly criminal Nandou and entered the middle school.

古文：占曰： 大人有忧，女主当之。
现代文：占辞说： 王公大臣将有忧患，皇后应此灾。
English: The fortune-teller said: The prince-minister will have sorrow, and the queen will respond to this calamity.

古文：豫章受灾。 
现代文：豫章受灾。 
English: Yuzhang was affected by the disaster.

古文：四月，月入南斗魁中，犯第三星。
现代文：四月入南斗魁中犯其第三星。
English: In April, he made his third appearance in the South Pacific Games.

古文：占曰： 大人有忧，女主恶之。丹阳当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示王公大臣有忧患，皇后交恶。丹阳当此灾。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that the prince and minister will have sorrow, and the empress will be evil. Danyang will be affected by this calamity."

古文：太白入东井，入太微，犯执法。
现代文：金星入束井宿，入太微垣而犯执法星。
English: Venus enters the Sukui Inn, enters the Taikogaki and becomes a law enforcement star.

古文：占曰： 执法诛，近臣起兵，国不安。 
现代文：占辞说： 执法大臣将被杀，近臣起兵，国家不安宁。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The minister of law enforcement will be killed, close vassals will raise an army, and the country will not be at peace.

古文：六月，岁星犯氐。
现代文：六月，木星犯氐宿。
English: In June, Jupiter is retrograde.

古文：占曰： 岁大饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 本年大饥荒。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This year there will be a great famine.

古文：有流星大如五斗瓯，赤色有光，照见人面，尾长一丈余，从参北东行，直下经东井，过南河，没。
现代文：有像五斗的瓯那样大的流星，赤色且光能照到人面，尾长一丈余，从参宿之北向东运行，再直下经东井宿，遇南河然后消失。
English: There is a meteor as big as a five-dippered kite, red in color and capable of shining light on a human face, with a tail that is more than a meter long. It travels from the north of Benjuku to the east, then straight down through Higashi Injuku, hits the Nanhe River and then disappears.

古文：占曰： 民饥，吴、越有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示民众饥荒，吴、越之地将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells famine for the people and war in the land of Wu and Yue."

古文：七月，岁星入氐。
现代文：七月，木星入氐宿。
English: In July, Jupiter enters Pisces.

古文：十月，太白守房。
现代文：十月，金星守房宿。
English: In October, Venus will stay in your house.

古文：占曰： 有兵，大丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有大战，大丧乱。 
English: The fortune-teller said: There will be a great war, a great disaster.

古文：月掩食房。
现代文：月掩且食于房宿。
English: The moon hides and eats in the room.

古文：占曰： 有丧，大饥。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有丧乱，大饥荒。 
English: The oracle said, "There will be great destruction and famine."

古文：此后国仍有大丧，丹阳尹颜师伯、豫章王子尚死。
现代文：这以后国家有大丧，丹阳尹颜师伯、豫章王刘于尚死。
English: After this, there was a great mourning in the country. Danyang Yinyan's teacher and colleague, Yu Zhangwang Liu Yu, died.

古文：明年，昭太后崩，四方贼起，王师水陆征伐，义兴晋陵县大战，杀伤千计。
现代文：第二年。昭太后去世。四方贼兵纷起，朝廷军队水陆征伐，义兴晋陵县发生大战，伤亡以千计。
English: In the second year, Empress Dowager Zhao passed away. There were thousands of casualties in the great war that broke out in Jinling County, Yixing, as the imperial army invaded by land and sea, and the bandits from all sides rose up.

古文：前废帝永光元年正月丁酉，太白掩牵牛。牵牛，越分。
现代文：前废帝永光元年正月丁酉，金星掩牵牛牵牛属越地分野。
English: In the first month of the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, Venus occulted the cowherd, and the cowherd belonged to the Viet field.

古文：其月庚申，月在虚宿，犯太白。
现代文：同月庚申，月在虚宿犯金星。
English: In the same month, Koshin, the month of the false criminal Venus.

古文：虚，齐地。
现代文：虚宿与齐地对应。
English: The imaginary and the real correspond to each other.

古文：二月甲申，月入南斗。
现代文：二月甲申，月入南斗。
English: In February, it was Jiaxun, and in March, Nanto.

古文：南斗，扬州分野，又为贵臣。
现代文：南斗与荡州对应。又对应贵臣。
English: Nanto corresponds to Shizuoka. It also corresponds to Gosen.

古文：三月庚子，月入舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：三月庚子，月入舆鬼宿犯积尸。
English: In March, Geng Zi, in the month of Yulin, the ghosts of the criminals are piled up.

古文：舆鬼，主斩戮。
现代文：舆鬼宿掌管斩杀之事。
English: The haunted house is in charge of the killing.

古文：六月庚午，荧惑入东井。
现代文：六月庚午，火星入束井宿。
English: In the late afternoon of June, the planet Mars enters Sokui-juku.

古文：东井，雍州分。
现代文：束井宿与雍州对应。
English: Sokai-juku corresponds to Yongzhou.

古文：其月壬午，有大流星，前赤后白，入紫宫。
现代文：同月壬午，有前部赤色后部白色的大流星入紫宫。
English: In the morning of the same month, a large meteor with a red front and white back entered the Purple Palace.

古文：景和元年九月丁酉，荧惑入轩辕，在女主大星北。
现代文：景和元年九月丁酉，火星入轩辕，在女主大星之北。
English: In September of the first year of the Jinghe era, the Mars entered the Heian era, in the north of the female main star.

古文：十月，荧惑入太微，犯西上将。
现代文：十月，火星入太微垣犯西上将星。
English: In October, Mars will enter Taikogaki and attack the Western General Star.

古文：十一月丁未，太白犯哭星。
现代文：十，月丁未，金星犯哭星。
English: Ten, the moon is waning, Venus is a crying star.

古文：其月乙卯，月犯心，心为天王。
现代文：同月乙卯，月犯心宿。心宿对应天王。
English: In the same month, A, B, and C, the offender's heart will go to heaven. The heart will go to the heavenly king.

古文：其年，太宰江夏王义恭、尚书令柳元景、尚书仆射颜师伯等并诛。
现代文：同年，太宰江夏王刘义恭、尚书令柳元景、尚书仆射颜师伯等人被杀。
English: In the same year, the Dazai of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, Shang Shuling, Liu Yuanjing, and Shang Shuling's servant, Sheyan Shi Biao, were killed.

古文：太尉沈庆之薨。
现代文：太尉选庆之去世。
English: Second Lieutenant Yuan Qingzhi passed away.

古文：庐陵王敬先、南平王敬猷、南安侯敬渊并赐死。废帝殒。
现代文：庐陵王刘敬先、南平王刘敬猷、南安侯刘敬渊都被皇帝赐死废童死亡。
English: Liu Jingxian, King of Fuling, Liu Jingyao, King of Nanping, and Liu Jingyuan, Prince of Nan'an, were all given death sentences by the emperor.

古文：明年，会稽太守寻阳王子房、广州刺史袁昙远、雍州刺史袁顗、青州刺史沈文秀并反。
现代文：第二年，会稽太守寻阳王刘子房、广州刺史袁昙远、雍州刺史袁顗、青州刺史沈文秀全部反叛。
English: In the second year, Liu Zifang, the inspector general of the Qinghai-Yangzhou Railway, Yuan Xuanyuan, the inspector general of the Guangzhou Railway, Yuan Xuan, the inspector general of the Yongzhou Railway, and Shen Wenshu, the inspector general of the Qingzhou Railway, all rebelled.

古文：昭太后崩。
现代文：昭太后去世。
English: The empress dowager passed away.

古文：明帝泰始元年十二月己巳，太白入羽林。
现代文：明帝奉始元年十二月己巳，金星入羽林。
English: In December of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, it was time for Venus to enter the forest of feathers.

古文：占曰： 羽林兵动。 
现代文：占辞说： 羽林兵将有行动。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "The feathered warriors will take action."

古文：乙亥，白气入紫宫。
现代文：乙亥，白气入紫宫。
English: In the second year of the boar, the white gas enters the purple palace.

古文：占曰： 有丧事。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有丧乱。 
English: The fortune-teller said: There will be a riot.

古文：明年，羽林兵出讨。
现代文：第二年，羽林兵出征。
English: The next year, the Uebayashi soldiers went to war.

古文：昭太后崩。
现代文：昭太后去世。
English: The empress dowager passed away.

古文：泰始二年正月甲午，荧惑逆行在屏西南。
现代文：泰始二年正月甲午，火星逆行在屏西南。
English: In the afternoon of the first month of the second year of Taizhi, Mars retrograde in the southwest of Ping.

古文：占曰： 有兵在中。 
现代文：占辞说： 宫中将有战斗。 
English: The fortuneteller said: There will be a battle in the palace.

古文：其月丙申，月晕五车，通毕、昴。
现代文：其月丙申，月晕五车。往来毕、昴二宿之间。
English: In the same month, there were five cars in the moonlight. After commuting back and forth, they went back and forth between the two houses.

古文：占曰： 女主恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示皇后交恶。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "This celestial phenomenon foretells that the queen will fall into evil."

古文：其月庚子，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：同月庚子，月犯舆鬼宿。
English: In the same month, Genko, a monthly delinquent, entered a haunted house.

古文：占曰： 将军死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示将军死。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：其月甲寅，流星从五车出，至紫宫西蕃没。
现代文：同月甲寅，有流星从五车出，至紫宫西蕃而消失。
English: In the same month of Kacho, a meteor went out from the Five Chariots to the west of the Purple Palace and disappeared.

古文：占曰： 有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be war.

古文：其月丙辰，黑气贯宿。
现代文：同月丙辰，黑气贯宿。
English: In the same month, Hsin-Chen and Kuroki moved in together.

古文：占曰： 王侯有归骨者。 
现代文：占辞说： 王侯之中有死于外而归葬者。 
English: Fortune-telling says: Among princes, there are those who die outside and are buried.

古文：三月乙未，有流星大小西行，不可称数，至晓乃息。
现代文：三月乙未，有数不胜数的大小流星向西运行，至天亮时才停止。
English: In March, countless large and small meteors streaked westward, stopping only at dawn.

古文：占曰： 民流之象。 
现代文：占辞说： 这是预示民众流散的天象。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This is a sign of the dispersion of the people."

古文：四月壬午，荧惑入太微，犯右执法。
现代文：四月壬午，火星入太微垣犯右执法星。
English: In April at noon, the Mars enters the Taibo fence and the criminal right law enforcement star.

古文：月在丙子，岁星昼见南斗度中。
现代文：丙子之月，木星白天出现在南斗之中。
English: In the month of He Zi, Jupiter appears in the Southern Cross during the day.

古文：占曰： 其国有军容，大败。 
现代文：占辞说： 国家有兵戈，大败。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The country has a war, it is a big defeat.

古文：其月己卯，竟夜有流星百余西南行，一大如瓯，尾长丈余，黑色，从河鼓出。
现代文：同月己卯，整夜有百余颗流星向西南运行，其中一颗大如瓯，尾长丈余，黑色，从河鼓而出。
English: In the same month, more than a hundred meteors streaked toward the southwest throughout the night, one of which was as large as a cormorant, with a long, black tail, and came out of the river drum.

古文：又曰： 有兵。 
现代文：又说： 将有战争。 
English: And he said, There shall be war.

古文：其月壬午，太白在月南并出东方，为犯。
现代文：同月壬午，金星在月的南面与月一起出于东方且相犯。
English: At noon of the same month, Venus is in the south of the moon, together with the moon, out of the east and collide.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有军队被打败，将军死，王失地。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister will be killed.

古文：其月乙卯，荧惑犯氐。
现代文：七月甲午月犯与宋地对应的心宿。同月丙午，月犯南。占辞说： 将有大臣被杀。 
English: In July, in the afternoon of the first lunar month, the criminals of the first lunar month will go to the heartland corresponding to the Song Dynasty. In the afternoon of the second lunar month, the criminals of the first lunar month will go to the south. The fortune-telling said: A minister will be killed.

古文：氐，兗州分野。
现代文：同月乙卯，火星犯与兖州对应的氏宿。
English: Shishuku corresponds to barbarism.

古文：十月辛巳，太白入氐。占曰： 春谷贵。 
现代文：卜月卒巳，金星入氐宿，与辞说： 春天时谷价将很高。 
English: Now that the moon is waning and Venus has entered the sign of Aries, it is said that the valley prices will be high in the spring.

古文：十一月癸巳，太白犯房。
现代文：十一月癸巳，金星犯房宿。
English: By November, Venus had left the house.

古文：占曰： 牛多死。 
现代文：占辞说： 牛多死亡。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Cows often die.

古文：其年，四方反叛，内兵大出，六师亲戎。
现代文：同年，四方反叛，禁兵大出，六军亲征。
English: In the same year, the four sides rebelled, the ban on soldiers was lifted, and the six armies were conscripted.

古文：昭太后崩。
现代文：昭太后去世。
English: The empress dowager passed away.

古文：大将殷孝祖为南贼所杀。
现代文：大将殷孝祖被南兵所杀。
English: General Yin Xiaozu was killed by South Korean soldiers.

古文：尚书右仆射蔡兴宗以荧惑犯右执法，自解，不许。
现代文：尚书右仆射蔡兴宗因火星犯右执法星而请求解除自己的职务，皇上未答应。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Cai Xingzong, requested to be relieved of his duties because of the Mars criminal right-hand law enforcement star, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：九月，诸方反者皆平，多有归降者。
现代文：九月，各方反叛者都被平定，其中多有归降之人。
English: In September, the rebels on all sides were subdued, with many of them surrendering.

古文：后失淮北四州地，彭城、兗州并为虏所没，民流之验也。
现代文：后来失去进韭四州之地，茎球、查州部被胡虏所攻陷，这是民众流散的应验。
English: Later, they lost access to the four provinces of Yunnan, and Zhuge and Chazhou were conquered by the Khuriks, which was the fulfillment of the people's dispersion.

古文：彭城，宋分也。是春，谷贵民饥。
现代文：彭城属宋地分野同年春，谷贵民饥。
English: In the spring of the same year, the people of Pengcheng, which belonged to the Song Dynasty, were starving.

古文：明年，牛多疾死，诏太官停宰牛。
现代文：第二年，牛多发病而死，诏令太官停止宰牛。
English: In the second year, many cattle died from the disease, and the emperor ordered the eunuchs to stop slaughtering cattle.

古文：泰始三年六月甲辰，月犯东井。
现代文：泰始三年六月甲辰，月犯束井之宿。
English: In the first three years of the Taisho period, the month of June, the month of June, the month of June, the month of June, the month of June, the month of June, the month of June.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示军中之将死。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：荧惑犯舆鬼。占曰： 金钱散。 
现代文：火星犯舆鬼宿，占辞说： 皇宫金钱流散。 
English: The Mars robs the ghost house, and the fortune-teller says: The imperial palace's money is scattered.

古文：又曰： 不出六十日，必大赦。 
现代文：又说： 不出六十天必有大赦。 
English: He also said: Within sixty days there will be a general amnesty.

古文：八月癸卯，天子以皇后六宫衣服金钗杂物赐北征将士。
现代文：八月癸卯，天子把皇后六宫的衣服金钗杂物赐给北征将士。
English: At the end of August, the emperor gave the clothes, gold brooches and other items from the Empress's sixth palace to the Northern Expedition soldiers.

古文：明年二月，护军王玄谟薨。
现代文：明年二月，护军工玄谟去世。
English: In February of the next year, the military engineer Genmu passed away.

古文：泰始四年六月壬寅，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：泰始四年六月壬寅，金星犯舆鬼宿。
English: In the first four years of the Taisho period, June was the month of Renin, and Venus committed a ghost house.

古文：占曰： 民大疾，死不收。 
现代文：占辞说： 民众有瘟疫，死而无人收尸。 
English: The soothsayer said, "The people are plagued with a plague, they are dying and no one is collecting their bodies."

古文：其年，普天大疫。
现代文：当年天下流行瘟疫。
English: That year, a plague swept the country.

古文：泰始五年二月丙戌，月犯左角。
现代文：泰始五年二月丙戌，月犯左角。
English: In February of Taishi's fifth year, the monthly offender is in the left corner.

古文：占曰： 三年天子恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 逭天象预示三年后天子交恶。 
English: The fortune-teller said: "This celestial phenomenon foretells that three years from now the Son of Heaven will become evil."

古文：三月庚申，月犯建星。
现代文：三月庚申，月犯建星。
English: March is Koshin, and the moon is Jianxing.

古文：占曰： 易相。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将更换宰相。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This indicates that the prime minister will be replaced.

古文：十月壬午，月犯毕。
现代文：十月壬午，月犯毕宿。
English: At the end of October, the month-long holiday is over.

古文：占曰： 天子用法，诛罚急，贵人有死者。 
现代文：占辞说： 天子利用重法紧急诛杀惩罚，有显贵之人死。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The Son of Heaven used the heavy law to punish the emergency killing, and some dignitaries died.

古文：其月丙申，太白犯亢。
现代文：同月丙申，金星犯亢宿。
English: In the same month, Hsin, Jin Xing committed seppuku.

古文：占曰： 收敛国兵以备北方。 
现代文：占辞说： 将集结军队以防备北方。 
English: The fortuneteller said: The army will be assembled to guard the north.

古文：其年冬，建安王休仁解扬州，桂阳王休范为扬州。
现代文：同年冬天，桂阳王刘休范替代建安王刘休仁为扬州牧。
English: In the winter of the same year, Guiyang King Liu Xuan replaced Jianan King Liu Xuren as Yangzhou herdsman.

古文：扬州牧前后常宰相居之，易相之验也。
现代文：扬州牧历来由宰相担任，这是更换宰相的应验。
English: Yangzhou pastoral has always been held by the prime minister, which is the fulfillment of the replacement of the prime minister.

古文：七年，晋平王休祐、建安王休仁并见杀。时失淮北，立戍以备防北虏。
现代文：七年，晋平王刘休佑、建安王刘休仁都被杀当时失淮北，因此建立戍卫以防备北虏。
English: In the seventh year, Jinping King Liu Xiu You and Jian'an King Liu Xiu Ren were both killed when they lost Huaibei, so they set up a defense to guard against the northern invasion.

古文：后三年，宫车晏驾。
现代文：后三年，明帝去世。
English: Three years later, Emperor Ming died.

古文：泰始六年正月辛巳，月犯左角，同前占。
现代文：泰始六年正月辛巳，月犯左角。占辞与前面相同。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Taizhi era, the moon is in the left corner. The horoscope is the same as the previous one.

古文：八月壬辰，荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：八月壬辰，火星犯与吴地对应的南斗。
English: In August, Imjin, Martian Prisoner, and Nandou, corresponding to Wu Di, will be held.

古文：南斗，吴分。十一月乙亥，月犯东北辕。
现代文：十一月乙亥，月犯东北辕。
English: In November of the second month of the Chinese year of the boar, the monthly crime in Northeastern China ended.

古文：占曰： 大人当之。 又曰： 大臣有诛者。 
现代文：占辞说： 王公大臣当此天象预示的灾祸。 又说： 有大臣被杀。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The disaster foretold by the celestial object happened to the prince and minister on this day." He also said, "A minister was killed."

古文：二年，杀扬州刺史王景文。
现代文：二年后杀扬州刺史王景文。
English: Two years later, Yangzhou assassinated Wang Jingwen.

古文：宫车晏驾。
现代文：明帝逝世。
English: Emperor Ming died.

古文：后废帝元徽三年七月丙申，太白入角，犯岁星。占曰： 角为天门，国将有兵事。 
现代文：后废帝元徽三年七月丙申，金星入角宿，犯木星占辞说： 角宿代表天门，国家将有战争。 
English: After the abolition of the imperial emblem, in July of the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Venus entered the horns of the inn, and Jupiter said: The horns of the inn represent the gates of heaven, and the country will have war.

古文：占，于角太白与木星会，杀军在外，破军杀将。
现代文：考查占书可知，金星与木星在角宿相会，则有军队在外被打败，将军被杀死。
English: An examination of astrological books shows that when Venus and Jupiter meet in Capricorn, an army is defeated outside and a general is killed.

古文：其月丁巳，太白入氐。
现代文：同月丁巳，金星入氐宿。
English: In the same month, Venus entered Pisces.

古文：氐为天子宿宫，太白兵凶之星。
现代文：氐宿代表天子的宿宫，金星是掌管战事的行星。
English: Omotesando represents the heavenly son's home, and Venus is the planet that governs war.

古文：八月己巳，太白犯房北头第二星。
现代文：八月己巳，金星犯房宿北头第一：星。
English: It's August already, and Venus has made the first move to North Head: a star.

古文：占曰： 王失德。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示君王违德。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that the king will be immoral."

古文：九月癸卯，太白犯南斗第三星。
现代文：九月癸卯，金星犯南：卜第三星。
English: At the end of September, Venus turns south: Bo is the third planet.

古文：占曰： 大人当之，国易政。 十月丙戌，岁星入氐。占曰： 诸侯人君有来入宫者。 
现代文：占辞说： 王公大臣当承受这天象预示的灾祸，将更换君王 十月丙戌，木星入氏宿占辞说： 这预示诸侯之中有入宫为君者。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "When the prince-minister suffers the calamity foretold by this celestial phenomenon, he will replace the monarch. In October, Jupiter will enter the house of the lord." The fortune-teller said, "This foretells that among the princes, there will be one who will enter the palace as the monarch."

古文：十一月庚戌，月入太微，奄屏西南星。占曰： 贵者失势。 四年七月，建平王景素据京口反。
现代文：十一月庚戌，月入太微垣，掩屏西南星占辞说： 显贵之人将失去权势 四年月，建平王刘景素占据京口反叛。
English: In November, Geng Zi, the moon was too far away, and the south-west star occulted the screen and said: The dignitaries will lose their power. In the fourth year, the Jianping King Liu Jingsu occupied the capital and rebelled.

古文：时废主凶慝无度，五年七月殒，安成王入篡皇阼。
现代文：当时后废帝凶恶无度，五年七月死亡，安成王进宫继皇位。
English: At that time, the deposed emperor was extremely vicious. He died in July of the fifth year, and Ancheng Wang entered the palace to succeed to the throne.

古文：三年，齐受禅。
现代文：三年后，齐高帝接受顺帝的惮让。
English: Three years later, Emperor Qi Gao accepted Emperor Shun's abdication.

古文：元徽四年三月乙巳，月犯房北头第一星，进犯键闭星。
现代文：元徽四年三月乙巳，月犯房宿北头第一丛，进而犯键闭星。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Yuanhui Dynasty, the first group of prisoners were sent to the Beidou Prison for a month, and then the prison was closed.

古文：占曰： 有谋伏甲兵在宗庙中，天子不可出宫下堂，多暴事。 
现代文：占辞说： 有入图谋在宗庙之中埋伏甲兵，天子不宜出宫下殿堂，将有凶暴之事。 
English: The fortune-teller said: If there is an attempt to ambush armored soldiers in the ancestral temple, the heavenly son should not leave the palace hall, there will be violence.

古文：九月甲辰，填星犯太微西蕃。
现代文：九月甲辰，木星犯太微垣西蕃。
English: At the stroke of the first hour of September, Jupiter is too close to the west.

古文：占曰： 立王。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将有立王之事。 
English: The soothsayer said, "This foretells that a king will be established."

古文：一曰： 徙王。 
现代文：另一说： 将有王被迁徙。 
English: Another said: "A king will be displaced."

古文：又曰： 大人忧。 时废帝出入无度，卒以此殒，安成王立。
现代文：又说： 王公将有忧患 当时废帝出入无度，最后因此而死，安成王继立为君。
English: He also said, "The prince will have troubles. At that time, the dethroned emperor had many ups and downs, and finally died as a result. King Ancheng succeeded to the throne.

古文：元徽五年正月戊申，月犯南斗第五星。与前同占。
现代文：元徽五年正月戊申，月犯南；第五星、占辞与前面相同。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the moon was in the south; the fifth star and the divination were the same as before.

古文：四月丁巳，荧惑犯舆鬼西北星。
现代文：四月丁巳，火星犯舆鬼宿之西北星。
English: April ding-mi, the northwestern star of the Martian ghost town.

古文：占曰： 大人忧，近期六十日，远期六百日。 
现代文：占辞说： 最多六百天，最少六十天，王公将有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: At the most six hundred days, at the least sixty days, the prince will have sorrow.

古文：又曰： 人君恶之。 其月丙子，太白犯舆鬼西北星。
现代文：又说： 这天象预示君主交恶 同月丙子，金星犯舆鬼宿之西北星。
English: He also said: This celestial phenomenon foreshadows the monarch's evil deeds. In the same month, Cixi, Venus, and the northwest star of the devil's abode.

古文：占曰： 大赦。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有大赦。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be an amnesty.

古文：五月戊申，太白昼见午上，光明异常。
现代文：五月戊申，金星白天出现在午之上，光亮异常。
English: In May, Venus appears during the day above the noon, unusually bright.

古文：占曰： 更姓。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将改朝换代。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This foreshadows a change of dynasty.

古文：六月壬戌，月犯钩钤星。
现代文：六月壬戌，月犯钩铃星。
English: June Rinpoche, moon-criminal hook-bell star.

古文：占曰： 有大令。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有重大诏令。 
English: The fortune-teller said: There will be a major edict.

古文：其月乙丑，月犯南斗第四星。
现代文：同月乙丑，月犯南斗第四星。
English: In the same month, Yixiu, the fourth star of the monthly criminal Nandou.

古文：与前同占。
现代文：占辞与前面相同。
English: The fortune-telling is the same as before.

古文：七月，废帝殒，大赦天下。
现代文：七月，废帝去世，大赦天下。
English: In July, the deposed emperor died and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：后二年，齐受禅。
现代文：二年后齐高帝接受顺帝的让位。
English: Two years later, Emperor Qigong accepted Emperor Shun's abdication.

古文：顺帝升明元年八月庚申，月入南斗，犯第三星，与前同占。
现代文：顺帝升明元年八月庚申，月入南斗犯第三星。占辞与前面相同。
English: Emperor Shun ascended to the throne in August of the first year of the Heian period, and the moon entered the third sign of the Southern Cross. The divination was the same as before.

古文：九月丁亥，太白在翼，昼见经天。
现代文：九月丁亥，金星在翼宿经天而白天出现。
English: In September Dinghai, Venus appears in the daytime in the constellation of Aquila.

古文：占曰： 更姓。 
现代文：占辞说： 这预示将改朝换代。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This foreshadows a change of dynasty.

古文：闰十二月癸卯夜，月奄南斗第四星，与前同占。
现代文：闰十二月癸卯之夜，月掩南斗第四星。占辞与前面相同。
English: On the night of leap December, the moon hides the fourth star of the Southern Cross. The horoscope is the same as before.

