古文：张宽汉武帝醴泉淮南子扬雄刘向袁安樊英五石精律吕陈业陈实三州人魏任城王吕虔管宁河间男子宜阳女子张应南郡掾蒲坂精舍吴兴经堂南徐士人徐祖刘京何敬叔萧子懋萧睿明解叔谦宗元卿匡昕曾康祖
现代文：张宽汉武帝醴泉淮南子扬雄刘向袁安樊英五石精律吕陈业陈实三州人魏任城王吕虔管宁河间男子宜阳女子张应南郡掾蒲坂精舍吴兴经堂南徐士人徐祖刘京何敬叔萧子懋萧睿明解叔谦宗元卿匡昕曾康祖
English: Zhang Kuan, Emperor Wu of Han, Quan Huai, Nan Zi, Yang Xiong, Liu Xiang, Yuan An, Xiong Ying, Five Stones, Jing Rui, Lv Chen, Chen Shizhi, Three States, Wei Ren, City King, Lv Qian, Guan Ning, River Man, Yiyang Woman, Zhang Ying, Nan County, Shubusaka, Jing House, Wu Xing, Jing Temple, Nan Xu, Xuxi Man, Xu Zu, Liu Jing, He Jing, Uncle Xiao, Zi, Xiao Rui, Ming Jie, Uncle Qian Zong, Yuan Qian Zong, Yuan Qian

古文：张宽
现代文：张宽
English: Zhang Kuan

古文：张宽字叔文，汉时为侍中，从祀于甘泉。
现代文：张宽的字是叔文，汉武帝时他是侍中。一次跟随皇帝去甘泉举行祭祀活动。
English: Zhang Kuan's Chinese character is 叔文, and he was an attendant when Emperor Hanwu was in power. He once followed the emperor to Gansu to hold a religious service.

古文：至渭桥，有女子浴于渭水，乳长七尺。
现代文：车队行驶到渭河桥上，看见有一个女子在渭河里洗澡，两只乳房竟有七尺长。
English: The motorcade drove onto the Lugu River Bridge and saw a woman bathing in the Lugu River with two breasts that were seven feet long.

古文：上怪其异，遣问之，女曰： 帝后第七车，知我所来。 
现代文：皇帝觉得她太奇怪了，派人去询问那个女子。女子说： 皇帝后面的第七辆车，知道我从那里来。 
English: The emperor thought she was very strange and sent someone to ask the woman. The woman said, "The seventh carriage behind the emperor knows where I came from."

古文：时宽在第七车，对曰： 天星主祭祀者，斋戒不严，即女人星见。 
现代文：第七辆车上坐的正是张宽，他说：天上主持祭祀的星宿，遵守吃斋的戒律不严格，所以女人星出现。
English: It was Zhang Kuan who was sitting in the seventh carriage. He said, "The stars in the sky preside over the sacrificial rites. Observing the precepts of fasting is not strict. That is why the female star appeared."

古文：汉武帝
现代文：汉武帝
English: Emperor Hanwu

古文：汉武帝尝微行造主人家，家有婢国色，帝悦之，仍留宿。
现代文：汉武帝曾经穿着普通人的衣服来到一户人家，这家有一个女仆长得异常美丽，汉武帝很喜欢她，便住下来，晚上和这个女仆一起睡觉。
English: Emperor Hanwu once came to a family in ordinary clothes. The family had a maid who was extraordinarily beautiful. Emperor Hanwu liked her very much, so he stayed and slept with the maid at night.

古文：有一书生，亦寄宿。善天文，忽见客星将掩帝座，甚逼，书生大惊惧，连呼咄咄，不觉声高。
现代文：有一个书生也寄宿在这户人家，他会看星相，忽然发现客星将要遮盖帝星，并且越逼越听。书生心中非常害怕，大声惊呼，不由得声音太大了。
English: There was a scholar who was also lodging in this household. He would look at the stars and suddenly find that the guest star was about to cover the imperial star, and he listened more and more. The scholar was very afraid in his heart and exclaimed loudly, which made his voice too loud.

古文：仍又见一男子，操刀将入户。闻书生声急，谓为己故，遂缩走，客星应时而退。
现代文：这时有一个男子，手中拿着一把刀子正要进屋行凶，听到书生叫喊，以为发现了自己便退了回去。天上的客星也相应地离开帝星，就这样反复了好几次。
English: At this time, a man, holding a knife in his hand, was about to enter the house and commit a crime. When he heard the scholar shouting, he thought he had found himself and retreated. The heavenly guest star also left the emperor star accordingly, and this was repeated several times.

古文：如此者数过。帝闻其声，异而问之。书生具说所见。帝乃悟曰，必此人婿也，将欲肆凶恶于朕。仍召集期门羽林，语主人曰： 朕天子也。 
现代文：汉武帝也听到了书生的喊叫，奇怪地询问发生了什么事，书生将看到的星相说了，汉武帝明白这必然是女仆的丈夫，想要对他行凶，便将侍卫们叫来，对这家的主人说： 我是天子。 
English: Emperor Hanwu also heard the call of the scholar, and strangely asked what had happened. The scholar told the astrologer what he had seen. Emperor Hanwu understood that this must be the maid's husband, and wanted to do something to him, so he called the guards and said to the master of the house: I am the son of heaven.

古文：于是擒奴，问而款服，乃诛之。
现代文：下命令将那个男子抓来，审讯中全都招认了，于是将这个男子杀了。
English: He gave the order to arrest the man, who confessed everything during the interrogation, and then he killed the man.

古文：帝叹曰： 斯盖天启书生之心，以扶祐朕躬。 
现代文：汉武帝感叹着说： 这都是上天启发了书生，以扶助和保佑我啊！ 
English: Emperor Hanwu sighed and said, "All of this was inspired by Heaven to help and bless me!"

古文：乃厚赐书生焉。醴泉
现代文：于是重重地赏赐了书生。醴泉
English: As a result, the students were rewarded heavily.

古文：太行之东有醴泉，其形如井，本体是石也。
现代文：太行山的东部有眼泉水，水质甘甜这眼泉水的形状像一口井，井体是石头的。
English: In the eastern part of Taihang Mountain, there is an eye spring with sweet water. The shape of this eye spring is like a well, and the well body is made of stone.

古文：欲取饮者，皆洗心跪而挹之，则泉水如流，多少足用。
现代文：想要喝水的人，都必须去掉邪恶之心，跪着舀水，则泉水像溪流一样涌出，喝多少就有多少。
English: Those who want to drink water must get rid of their evil hearts. They have to kneel to draw water, and then the spring water gushes out like a stream. You can drink as much as you want.

古文：若或污慢，则泉缩焉。
现代文：但是如果心存邪念，态度傲慢，则泉水便缩回去，不再涌出。
English: But if you harbor evil thoughts and have an arrogant attitude, the spring water will shrink back and will no longer gush forth.

古文：盖神明之常志者也。淮南子淮南子曰： 东风至而酒泛溢。 
现代文：这都是因为体现了神灵的意志！淮南子《淮南子》记载说： 春风吹来酒就会沸动外溢。 
English: This is all because it embodies the will of the gods! Huainanzi "Huainanzi" records that: When the spring wind blows, the wine will boil and overflow.

古文：许慎云： 东风震方也。酒泛清酒也。木味酸，相感故也。 
现代文：许慎说： 春风从东方吹来，酒就会沸动变清，味道就会变酸，这是相互感应的结果。 
English: Xu Shen said: The spring breeze blows from the east, the wine will boil and turn clear, and the taste will turn sour. This is the result of mutual induction.

古文：高诱云： 酒泛为米面曲之泛者，风至而沸动。 
现代文：高诱说： 酒的沸动和米面曲子的发酵，都是因为春风吹来而发生的变化。 
English: Gao Yu said: The boiling of wine and the fermentation of rice noodles are all changes caused by the spring breeze.

古文：李淳风又按：今酒初熟，瓮上澄清时，恒随日转。
现代文：李淳风还说： 酒刚刚酿造出来，放入酒瓮里澄清时，酒的清浊随着太阳而变化。
English: Li Junfeng also said: When the wine is just brewed and put into the bottle to clarify, the clarity of the wine changes with the sun.

古文：在旦则清者在东畔，午时在南，日落在西，夜半在子。
现代文：早晨时，靠近东方的酒比较清澈；中午时，南侧的酒比较清澈；日落的时候，西侧的酒比较清澈；半夜时，中间的酒比较清澈。
English: In the morning, the wine near the east is clearer; at noon, the wine on the south side is clearer; at sunset, the wine on the west side is clearer; at midnight, the wine in the middle is clearer.

古文：扬雄扬雄读书，有人语云： 无为自苦，玄故难传。 忽然不见。
现代文：清澈的部位总是靠着太阳的方向。还有在春夏之交，在树荫下面放置新酿造出来的酒时，酒瓮里酒液表现漂浮的杂质总是随着风向而移动，虽然酒在瓮内很深的地方。不是风吹动了酒滓，而是感应才发生的变化。
English: The clear part is always in the direction of the sun. Also, in the spring and summer, when the newly brewed wine is placed under the shade of the trees, the impurities floating in the wine always move with the wind, although the wine is very deep in the crucible. It is not the wind that moves the crucible, but the change that occurs by induction.

古文：雄著玄，梦吐白凤皇集上，顷之而灭。扬雄读书，听到有个人在旁边说： 没有意义的自找苦吃，深奥的道理难以领会。 
现代文：扬雄扬雄读书，听到有个人在旁边说： 没有意义的自找苦吃，深奥的道理难以领会。 
English: Yang Xiong Yang Xiong was reading a book when he heard someone say: "There is no point in self-inflicted suffering. It is difficult to understand the profound truth."

古文：然后就没有声息了。
现代文：然后就没有声息了。
English: And then there was silence.

古文：扬雄撰写著作，趴在桌子上睡着了，梦见自己的嘴里吐出一只白凤凰到书上，顷刻之间就不见了。
现代文：扬雄撰写著作，趴在桌子上睡着了，梦见自己的嘴里吐出一只白凤凰到书上，顷刻之间就不见了。
English: Yang Xiong fell asleep on his desk while writing a book. He dreamed that a white phoenix spit out of his mouth onto the book and disappeared in an instant.

古文：刘向汉刘向，于成哀之际，校书于天禄阁，专精覃思。
现代文：刘向汉朝的刘向，在成帝哀帝的时期，在天禄阁校对书稿，非常认真地进行研究和思考。
English: Liu Xiang, the Liu Xiang of the Han Dynasty, during the period of Emperor Chengdu and Emperor Puyi, proofread the manuscript in Tianlu Pavilion, and studied and thought very seriously.

古文：夜有老人，着黄衣，藜杖扣阁而进。
现代文：夜晚有个老头，身穿黄色的长袍，手拿用藜草的老茎制成的手杖敲门走进天禄阁内。
English: In the evening, an old man, dressed in a yellow robe and holding a cane made from the old stems of rushes, knocked on the door and entered the attic.

古文：见向暗中独坐诵书，老人乃吹杖端，烂然火明，因以照向。
现代文：看见刘向正独自在黑暗中朗读书稿。老人向手杖的顶端吹了一口气，手杖的顶端立刻放射出光芒，照向刘向。
English: Seeing Liu Xiang reading a book aloud in the dark, the old man blew on the tip of his cane. The tip of the cane immediately emitted light, shining on Liu Xiang.

古文：至曙而去，请问姓名，云： 我是太乙之精，闻金卯之姓，有博学者，下而观之焉。 
现代文：老人回答说： 我是天上的太乙之精，所说人间姓刘的里面，出了一个博学多才的人，所以到下界来看你。
English: The old man replied, "I am the spirit of the Heavenly Lady. It is said that from the human surnamed Liu, a learned and talented person emerged. Therefore, I have come to the lower realm to see you.

古文：乃出怀中竹榜，有关天文地图之事。
现代文：说着又从怀里拿出用竹简连接而成的有关天文地理方面内容的图书。
English: As he spoke, he took out of his arms a book about astronomy and geography, which was connected with bamboo strips.

古文：子歆，从向授此术。袁安袁安为陰平长，有惠化。
现代文：刘向又把这些知识传授给他的儿子刘歆。袁安袁安为阴平长，有惠化。
English: Liu Xiang also passed on this knowledge to his son Liu Yao.Yuan AnYuan An is Yin Ping Chang and has Hui Hua.

古文：县先有雹渊，冬夏未尝消释。
现代文：县先有雹渊，冬夏未尝消释。
English: The county was first hit by floods, which have not abated in the winter and summer.

古文：岁中辄出，飞布十数里，大为民害。
现代文：岁中辄出，飞布十数里，大为民害。
English: It broke out in the middle of the year and flew more than a dozen miles, causing great harm to the people.

古文：安乃推诚洁斋，引愆贬己。
现代文：安乃推诚洁斋，引愆贬己。
English: Peace and tranquility promote sincerity, purity, and abstinence.

古文：至诚感神，雹遂为之沉沦，伏而不起，乃无苦雨凄风焉。
现代文：他的至诚感动了神灵，深潭里的冰块竟沉到水底，不再浮起，并且再也没有发生暴雨狂风等灾害。
English: His sincerity moved the gods, and the ice in the deep pond actually sank to the bottom of the water and no longer floated, and there were no more disasters such as rainstorms and strong winds.

古文：樊英
现代文：樊英
English: Zou Ying

古文：汉樊英善图纬，洞达幽微。
现代文：汉朝的樊英懂得利用河图和六经上的经义来推断事物的学问，并且达到了精通微末细节的造诣。
English: Qian Ying of the Han Dynasty knew how to use the river map and the meaning of the Six Classics to deduce the knowledge of things, and achieved the accomplishment of mastering the smallest details.

古文：永泰中，见天子，因西向南唾。
现代文：安帝永宁中年，樊英朝见皇帝时，站在西边朝南吐了一口唾沫。
English: In the middle age of Andi Yongning, Zou Ying stood on the west side of Chaonan and spat a mouthful of spit when he met the emperor.

古文：诏问其故，对曰： 成都今日火。 
现代文：皇帝问他为什么吐唾沫，他回答说： 成都今天有火灾。 
English: The emperor asked him why he was spitting, and he replied, "There is a fire in Chengdu today.

古文：后蜀郡上言火灾，如英所道。云，时有雨从东北来，故火不为大害。
现代文：事后果然接到了蜀郡报告火灾的公文，情况如同樊安说： 当时有雨从东北方向来，所以火灾没有造成大的损失。 
English: In the aftermath of the incident, the official document of Shu County reporting the fire was received, and the situation was as Yan'an said: At that time, rain came from the northeast direction, so the fire did not cause major losses.

古文：英尝忽被发拔刀，斫击舍中。妻怪问其故，英曰： 郗生遇贼。 
现代文：樊英有一次突然披发拔刀向屋里砍了一刀，妻子奇怪地询问他是什么原因。樊英说： 郗生遇到贼了。 
English: On one occasion, Hao Ying suddenly slashed a knife into the house with a hair-pulling knife. His wife strangely asked him what the reason was. Hao Ying said: "My son has met a thief."

古文：郗生者名巡，是英弟子，时远行。
现代文：郗生的名字叫郗巡，是樊英的学生，当时正出门在外。
English: Zou's name was Jun. He was a disciple of Zou Ying and was on a long journey at the time.

古文：后还说，于道中逢贼，赖一被发老人来相救，故得免。
现代文：郗生回来以后说，他在路上碰到了强盗，被个披散头发的老人解救了。
English: When he returned, he said he had encountered a robber on the road and was rescued by an old man with disheveled hair.

古文：永建时，殿上钟自鸣，帝忧之，公卿莫能解。
现代文：永建时期，皇宫大殿上的铜钟没有人去敲，自己就响了起来。
English: During the Yongjian period, the bronze bell on the main hall of the Imperial Palace rang when no one was there to strike it.

古文：乃问英。
现代文：皇帝的心中很忧虑，大臣们都无法解释，便去问樊英。
English: The emperor was very worried, and his ministers were at a loss to explain, so they went to ask Zou Ying.

古文：英曰： 蜀岷山崩，母崩子故鸣，非圣朝灾也。 
现代文：樊英说： 蜀郡的岷山发生山崩，母亲崩塌，儿子便鸣叫起来，并不是汉朝要发生灾祸的先兆。 
English: Hao Ying said: A landslide in Lushan, Shu County, where a mother collapsed and her son cried out, was not a harbinger of disaster for the Han Dynasty.

古文：寻上蜀山崩事。
现代文：过不久四川上奏岷山山崩的事。
English: Not long after, the story of the landslide in Lushan Mountain was reported in Sichuan Province.

古文：五石精
现代文：五石精
English: Five stone essence

古文：《论衡》曰：阳燧取火，方诸取水，二物皆当以形势得。
现代文：《论衡》上说： 利用阳燧这种器物取火和用方诸取水，都是因为两种器物有特殊的形状，并在特殊的条件下才能够取得成功。
English: "On Balance" said: The use of impotence as a tool to start a fire and the use of methods to draw water are both due to the fact that these two tools have special shapes and can only be successful under special conditions.

古文：阳燧若偃月，方诸若圬杯。若二器如板状，安能得水火也。
现代文：阳燧像个半月形凸出来，方诸像个瓦刀形杯子，如果这两种器物的形状像块木板，又怎么能够取到水和火呢？
English: The penis protrudes like a half-moon, and the rectum is shaped like a crock pot. If these two objects are shaped like a board, how can water and fire be obtained?

古文：铸阳燧，用五月丙午日午时，炼五色石为之，形如圆镜，向日即得火。
现代文：制造阳燧，要在五月丙午日中午十一点到一点之间，冶炼五色石来铸造，制成的阳燧形状像一面圆圆的镜子。把它朝向太阳，就可以取得火。
English: To make an impotence stone, it is necessary to smelt the five-colored stone to cast it between 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. on the afternoon of May 3rd. The impotence stone made is shaped like a round mirror. If you put it towards the sun, you can obtain fire.

古文：方诸，以十一月壬子夜半时，炼五色石为之，状如圬杯，向月即得津水。
现代文：制造方诸，要在十一月壬子日半夜时分，冶炼五色石来铸造，制造出来的方诸形状像个瓦刀形的杯子。把它朝向月亮，就可以承接到露水。
English: The five-colored stones are smelted and cast in the middle of the night in November, the middle of the month of Jinsi. The resulting square is shaped like a crockpot-shaped cup. If it is placed facing the moon, it can receive the dew.

古文：今取大蚌蛤向月，亦有津润。
现代文：如果用大蚌壳朝向月亮，也可以取到露水。 
English: If you use a large clam shell facing the moon, you can also get dew.

古文：《淮南子》云：阳燧见日，烧而为火。方诸见月，津而为水。
现代文：《淮南子》说： 阳燧朝向太阳，燃烧形成火；方诸朝向月亮，润泽形成水。 
English: "Huainanzi" said: "When the yang and the yin face the sun, they burn and form fire; when the yang and the yang face the moon, they moisten and form water."

古文：注云，皆五石之精。
现代文：注释说： 这都是五色石精的精灵所发挥的作用。
English: Comment: This is all the work of the elves of the five-colored stone elves.

古文：阳燧圆以仰日，得火；方诸圬而向月，得水。
现代文：阳燧圆形的凸面朝向太阳，可以取得火种；方诸以瓦刀的形状朝向月亮，所以承接到露水。 
English: The round convex surface faces the sun and can obtain fire; the square one faces the moon in the shape of a cinder block, so it receives dew.

古文：又云，阳燧之取火于日，方诸之取露于月，天地之间，玄微忽恍，巧历所不能推其数。
现代文：又说： 阳燧能够从太阳采集火种，方诸能够从月亮取得露水，天地之间的关系，非常微妙，高深的历法也无法推算出来。
English: He also said: Impotence can collect kindling from the sun, Fangzhu can obtain dew from the moon, the relationship between heaven and earth is very subtle, and the profound calendar cannot be calculated.

古文：然以掌握之中，引类于太极之上，而水火可立致者，阴阳相感动然之也。
现代文：掌握了这种方法，就可以来认识天地万物之间的变化规律。然而能够取到水和火的真正原因，还是阴阳之间的相互感应的结果。
English: If you master this method, you will be able to understand the law of change between heaven and earth and all things. However, the real reason why you can get water and fire is still the result of mutual induction between yin and yang.

古文：律吕
现代文：律吕
English: Ruling Lu

古文：《物理论》云：十二律吕候气，先于平地为室三重，重有三重壁，扬子所谓九闭之巾也。
现代文：《物理论》说：十二个音调和节气相对应。先在平地建造有三层墙壁的房子，而每一层墙壁又分为三层，正如扬子所说的 封闭覆盖一共九层 。
English: "Physics Theory" says: Twelve tones correspond to the solar terms. First, a house with three layers of walls is built on flat ground, and each layer of walls is divided into three layers. As Yangzi said, the enclosure covers a total of nine layers.

古文：外室南户，以布为幔；次室北户；内室南户，并以布为幔。
现代文：外面一层房屋的门朝南开，并用布做的门帘挡上，次外墙壁或者叫房屋的门朝北开，内室的门朝南开，并且都用布做的门帘挡上。
English: The door of the house on the first floor outside opens to the south, and the door curtain made of cloth is closed. The door of the second outer wall or the door of the house opens to the north, and the door of the inner room opens to the south, and the door curtain made of cloth is closed.

古文：皆上圆下方，闭密无风。
现代文：三层房屋都是上圆下方的形状，封挡得密不透风。
English: The three-storey houses are all in the shape of the top and bottom of a circle, sealed tightly against the wind.

古文：人居其中，三日观之，十二律各以木为按，每律各内庳外高，以律加其上，依位安置之。
现代文：人在里面，三天以后观察。用木头十二支具有十二种声调的一种叫做 管 的乐器，每个音调的管都是内部低沉，外部高亢。
English: A man is inside, observed after three days, and a musical instrument called a pipe is made of wood with twelve stems and twelve tones, each tone of the pipe being internally low and externally high.

古文：以河内葭莩灰实其端，若气至，吹灰去管首，小动为和，大动为臣强。
现代文：如果将这十二只管按照十二个声调的顺序排列起来，用芦苇里面的薄膜烧成的灰放置在管的一端，如果节气到了，则相对应声调的管的顶端的灰就会被 吹 掉，动的轻微叫做和谐，动的大叫做臣强。
English: If these twelve pipes are arranged in the order of the twelve tones, and the ash burned with the film inside the reed is placed at one end of the pipe. If the solar terms arrive, the ash at the top of the pipe corresponding to the tone will be blown off. A slight movement is called harmony, and a large movement is called strong.

古文：李淳风云：自古言乐声律吕者，皆本于十二管，以气应灰飞为验。
现代文：李淳风说： 自古以来的各种乐器，都起源于十二种音调的管，以节气 吹 掉管上的灰作为音调准确与否的检验依据。 
English: Li Junfeng said: Since ancient times, all kinds of musical instruments have originated from twelve-tone pipes, and the solar terms are used to blow away the ash on the pipe as a basis for testing whether the tone is accurate or not.

古文：后魏末，孙僧化造六甲一周历，其序云，以管律候某月某时律气应推校。
现代文：后来魏朝末期，孙僧将音律和历法相附会，他在著作的序言里说： 以管的音调和某月某时的节气相对应，可以推算和校验事物。 
English: Later, at the end of the Wei Dynasty, Sun Zang combined the music and the calendar. In the preface to his book, he said, "By matching the tone of the tube with the solar terms of a certain month and a certain time, it is possible to calculate and check things.

古文：前后五六事，皆不与算历家术数相符。
现代文：但是实际上总是和历法以及数学运算的结果不一致。
English: But in reality, it always disagrees with the calendar and the results of mathematical operations.

古文：此外诸书，无言候气得应验者。以理推寻，恐无实录。
现代文：其它书籍没有提到音调和气候相对应的，按照道理推断，恐怕不大可能有成功的记录。
English: Other books do not mention the tones and climates corresponding to the rhythms, which, logically speaking, are unlikely to have a successful track record.

古文：后魏信都芳，自云，造风扇候二十四气，每一气至，其扇辄举。斯又验矣。
现代文：后魏信都芳说： 造一种比较灵敏的代表二十四节气的风扇，每一个节气到了，相对应的风扇就会自动地抬起来，则又验证了它们之间的相互感应。
English: Later, Wei Xindufang said: Build a more sensitive fan representing the 24 solar terms. When each solar term arrives, the corresponding fan will automatically lift up, and then verify the mutual induction between them.

古文：陈业
现代文：陈业
English: Chen Ying

古文：陈业字文理。
现代文：陈业的字是文理。
English: The Chinese character for "study" is "文理."

古文：业兄渡海倾命。时同依止者五六十人，骨肉消烂，而不可辨别。
现代文：他的哥哥渡海时死了，同时死亡的有五六十人，尸体腐烂，无法辨认。
English: His brother died during the crossing, along with 50 or 60 other people, their bodies decomposed and unrecognisable.

古文：业仰皇天誓后土曰： 闻亲戚者，必有异焉。 
现代文：陈业对着皇天后土发誓说： 我听说亲戚之间，必然有与别人不同的某种联系。 
English: Chen Ye swore to the empress Dowager Earth and said: I heard that between relatives, there must be some kind of connection that is different from others.

古文：因割臂流血，以洒骨上，应时歃血，余皆流去。
现代文：然后割破胳膊，将血洒在尸体的骨头上。他哥哥的骨头染上并留存他的血，其他人骨头上的血很快就流了下去。
English: Then he cut his arm and sprinkled the blood on the bones of the corpse. His brother's bones became stained and retained his blood, while the blood on the bones of the others quickly drained away.

古文：陈实颖川陈实有子元方，次曰仲方，并以名德称。
现代文：陈实颖川陈实有子元方，次曰仲方，并以名德称。
English: Chen Shih Yingchuan Chen Shih has a son named Yuan Fang, the next name is Zhong Fang, and he is called by the name of virtue.

古文：兄弟孝养，闺门雍睦，海内慕其风。
现代文：兄弟孝养，闺门雍睦，海内慕其风。
English: Brotherly filial piety, daughter-in-law harmony, the sea and the wind.

古文：四府并命，无所屈就。
现代文：四府并命，无所屈就。
English: The four prefectures are living side by side, and there is no place to give in.

古文：兄弟尝过同郡荀爽，夜会饮宴，太史奏：德星聚。
现代文：有一次兄弟俩人去拜访同郡的学者荀爽，夜晚三人在一起喝酒，主管天文和历法的太史向皇帝报告： 天上的德星聚到一块了。 
English: On one occasion, the two brothers went to visit the scholar Gao Shuang in the same county. At night, the three of them drank together. Tai Shi, who was in charge of astronomy and calendars, reported to the emperor: The stars in the sky have come together.

古文：州人
现代文：州人
English: State residents

古文：晋三州人，纪为父子。
现代文：晋朝三州人，大概是父子。
English: A native of the Three Provinces during the Jin Dynasty, probably father and son.

古文：父令二人作舍于大泽中，欲成，父曰： 不如河边。 
现代文：父亲叫两个儿子在沼泽里修建房屋，快要完工的时候，父亲说： 不如在河边建好。 
English: A father asked his two sons to build a house in a swamp. When they were about to finish, the father said, "Let's build it by the river."

古文：乃徙焉。又几成，父曰： 不如河中。 
现代文：于是两个儿子又移到河边修建房屋，又要完工了，父亲说： 不如在河里建好。 
English: So the two sons moved to the river to build a house, and when it was about to be finished, the father said, "Let's build it in the river."

古文：二人乃负土填河，三旬不立。
现代文：两个人又运土填河，三十多天也没有填完。
English: Two people also carried soil to fill the river, and they did not finish filling it for more than 30 days.

古文：有书生过，为缚两土豚投河中。
现代文：有个书生路过这里。为他们装了两袋沙土扔进河里。
English: A student who was passing by loaded two sacks of sand for them and threw them into the river.

古文：父乃止二人曰： 何尝见江河填耶？吾观汝行耳。 
现代文：父亲制止两个儿子说： 什么时候看见过将江河填平的，我只是为了观察你们的品德和行动罢了！ 
English: The father stopped his two sons and said, "When have I ever seen anyone fill up a river? I'm just observing your character and actions!"

古文：明回至河边，河中土为高丈余，袤广十余里，因居其上。
现代文：第二天他们来到河边，发现河里的土已经高出河面一丈多，方圆十多里地，于是他们将房子盖在上面。
English: The next day, they came to the river and found that the soil in the river was already much higher than the river surface, more than ten miles in circumference, so they built the house on top.

古文：魏任城王
现代文：魏任城王
English: Wei Ren, the king of the city

古文：魏任城王章薨，如汉东平王礼葬。
现代文：魏任城王章死了，比照汉朝东平王的规格办理丧事。
English: When Zhang, the king of Wei Ren City, died, the funeral was handled according to the specifications of Dongping Wang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：及丧出，闻空中数百人泣声。
现代文：出殡这一天，听到天空中有数百人哭泣的声音。
English: On the day of the funeral, the sound of hundreds of people crying was heard in the sky.

古文：送者言，昔乱军杀伤者皆无棺椁，王之仁惠，收其朽骨。死者欢于地下，精灵以之怀感焉。
现代文：送葬的人说： 当年被乱军杀死的人都没有棺木，任成王仁义善良，收集死者的死骨进行安葬，使死者的灵魂在地下高兴。
English: The mourners said: Those who were killed by the rebels that year did not have coffins. Ren Chengwang was kind and collected the dead bones of the dead for burial, making the souls of the dead happy underground.

古文：吕虔
现代文：吕虔
English: Lyu Qian

古文：魏长沙郡久雨。太守吕虔令户曹掾斋戒，在社三日三夜，祈晴。
现代文：魏国的长沙郡连日下雨，太守吕虔命令掌握民户、祀祠、农桑的官署户曹掾吃斋沐浴，遵守戒律，祭祀神灵三天，祈求晴天。
English: It rained for days on end in Changsha County, Wei Province, and Emperor Lv Qian ordered Cao Pi to seize private households, shrines, and official households of farmers and mulberry growers, to fast and bathe, to observe the precepts, to offer sacrifices to the gods for three days, and to pray for a sunny day.

古文：梦见白头翁曰： 汝来迟，明日当霁。 
现代文：当天晚上吕虔梦见一个白头发的老头对他说： 你来晚了，明天可以停止下雨，变为晴天。 
English: That night, Lu Qian dreamed of a white-haired old man who said to him: "You are late, tomorrow it can stop raining and turn into a sunny day.

古文：果然。
现代文：果然第二天雨住天晴。
English: Sure enough, the next day it rained and stayed fine.

古文：管宁
现代文：管宁
English: Kauning

古文：管宁死辽东三十七年，归柩而阻海风。
现代文：管宁死在辽东已经三十七年了，装运他的棺材的船在海上遇到风暴，同行的几十条船全都沉没了。
English: It has been thirty-seven years since Guan Ning died in Liaodong. The ship transporting his coffin encountered a storm at sea, and all the dozens of ships that accompanied it sank.

古文：同行数十船俱没，惟宁船望见火光，投之得岛屿。及上岸，无火亦无人。
现代文：只有装着管宁尸骨的船看见前面有火光，朝着火光驶去停靠到一个小岛上，等到船上的人上了岸，发现岛上既没有火也没有人。
English: Only the boat with the cremated remains saw a light ahead, sailed towards it and docked on a small island. When the people on board came ashore, they found that there was neither fire nor people on the island.

古文：玄晏先生以为积善之感。
现代文：玄晏先生认为，这是管宁生前行善所得到的报应。
English: Mr. Xuanzang believes that this is the retribution that Guan Ning received for his good deeds during his lifetime.

古文：河间男子
现代文：河间男子
English: Kawama men's wrestling

古文：晋武帝世，河间郡有男女相悦，许相配适。
现代文：晋武帝的时候，河间有一对青年男女相爱，并且订下了婚约。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jinwu, a young man and woman fell in love and entered into a marriage contract.

古文：既而男从军积年，父母以女别适人。无几而忧死。
现代文：订婚以后男青年当兵走了好几年，女青年的父母又把她嫁给了别人，她悲愤过度死了。
English: After the betrothal, the young man served in the army for several years. The young woman's parents married her off to someone else, and she died of grief and anger.

古文：男还悲痛，乃至冢所，始欲哭之，不胜其情。
现代文：男青年当兵回来非常悲伤，来到女青年的坟前想要大哭一场，但是由于悲愤难忍，便将坟挖开，将棺材打开了，女青年竟苏醒过来。
English: The young man was very sad when he returned from being a soldier. He came to the grave of the young woman and wanted to cry, but because of his grief and anger, he dug up the grave and opened the coffin, and the young woman actually woke up.

古文：遂发冢开棺，即时苏活，因负还家，将养数日平复。
现代文：男青年将她背回家里，调养几天以后恢复了体力。
English: The young man carried her back home and regained his strength after a few days of treatment.

古文：其夫乃往求之。
现代文：女青年的丈夫知道以后赶去，要把媳妇要回去。
English: The young woman's husband knew that he would have to rush back later and wanted his daughter-in-law to come back.

古文：其人不还，曰： 卿妇已死。天下岂闻死人可复活耶？
现代文：男青年不给，并且对他说： 你的媳妇已经死了，天下有谁听过死人还能复活的！
English: The young man refused, and said to him: "Your daughter-in-law is dead. Who in the world has ever heard of a dead person coming back to life?

古文：于是相讼，郡县不能决；谳于廷尉，廷尉奏以精诚之至，感于天地，故死而更生，在常理之外，非理之所处，刑之所裁。断以还开冢者。
现代文：这个媳妇是天赐给我的，不是你原来的媳妇。 俩人争执不下去打官司，县官和郡守都无法判决，便上报给廷尉审理。廷尉认为，这都是男青年的精诚所至。感动了天地，所以才使女青年死而复生。这件事在常理之外。所以也不能用常理来进行推断和量刑，于是将这个死而复活的女青年判给了挖开坟墓的男青年。
English: This daughter-in-law was given to me by heaven, not your original daughter-in-law. The two of them couldn't continue their dispute and filed a lawsuit. The county officials and the county governor couldn't make a decision, so they reported it to the imperial lieutenant for trial. The imperial lieutenant believed that this was all the result of the young man's sincerity. Heaven and earth were moved, which is why the young woman was brought back to life after her death. This matter is beyond common sense. Therefore, it is impossible to use common sense to make inferences and impose a sentence, so the young woman who died and came back to life was sentenced to the young man who dug up the

古文：宜阳女子
现代文：宜阳女子
English: Yiyang women's team

古文：晋永嘉之乱，郡县无定主，强弱相暴。
现代文：晋朝怀帝永嘉年间，天下大乱，郡县没有固定的官员进行管理，盗贼四起，恃强凌弱。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongjia of the Jin Dynasty, the country was in turmoil, there were no fixed officials to manage counties and counties, thieves were everywhere, and the strong bullied the weak.

古文：宜阳县有女子，姓彭名娥。父母昆弟十余口，为长沙贼所杀。
现代文：宜阳县有个少女叫彭娥，家里的父母兄弟姐妹十多口人，全都被长沙的强盗给杀了。
English: There is a young girl in Yiyang County named Peng'e. Her parents, siblings and more than ten members of her family were all killed by robbers from Changsha.

古文：时娥负器出汲于溪间，贼至走还，正见墙壁已破，不胜其哀，与贼相格。
现代文：当时彭娥正背着取水的器物到溪边取水，回到家里看见房屋被强盗毁坏了，非常生气，便与强盗搏斗起来，被强盗抓住了。
English: At that time, Peng E was carrying water collection equipment to the stream to collect water. When she returned home and saw that the house had been destroyed by the robbers, she was very angry. She fought with the robbers and was caught by the robbers.

古文：贼缚娥，驱出溪边，将杀之。
现代文：强盗将她带到溪边，准备杀害她。
English: The robbers took her to a stream and prepared to kill her.

古文：溪际有大山，石壁高数十丈。
现代文：溪边就是大山，山崖的石壁有十多丈高。
English: Beside the stream is a large mountain, the stone walls of the cliff are more than ten meters high.

古文：仰呼曰： 皇天宁有神否？
现代文：彭娥抬头喊到： 天上难道没有神仙吗！
English: Peng'e looked up and shouted: Isn't there a fairy in the sky?

古文：我为何罪，而当如此。 
现代文：我有什么罪？却要被杀害！ 
English: What am I guilty of? I am going to be killed!

古文：因奔走向山，山立开广数丈，平路如砥，群贼亦逐娥入山，山遂崩合，泯然如初。贼皆压死，娥遂隐不复出。
现代文：喊完就向石壁跑去。山崖立刻裂开几丈宽的一条平坦的道路，强盗们也追赶彭娥跑进山中。山崖突然合拢，变得跟当初一样，强盗们都被挤压死了，彭娥也隐没在山崖里再也没有出来。
English: After shouting, he ran to the stone wall. The cliff immediately cracked a flat road several feet wide, and the robbers also chased Peng E and ran into the mountain. The cliff suddenly closed and became the same as before, the robbers were all squeezed to death, and Peng E also disappeared into the cliff and never came out.

古文：娥所舍汲器，化为石，形似鸡。
现代文：彭娥丢下的取水的器物变成了石头，形状像是一只鸡。
English: The water-collecting utensil that Peng E left behind turned into a stone, shaped like a chicken.

古文：土人因号曰石鸡山女娥潭。
现代文：当地人便将这座山叫做石鸡山，将这条溪流的水潭叫做女娥潭。
English: The local people called the mountain Shiqiu Mountain and the pond of the stream Mei'e Lake.

古文：张应
现代文：张应
English: Zhang Ying

古文：晋历阳郡张应，先奉魔，娶佛家女为妇。
现代文：晋朝历阳郡的张应，一开始信奉魔教，娶的媳妇却是信奉佛教人家的姑娘。
English: Zhang Ying of Liyang County in the Jin Dynasty initially believed in magic, but married his daughter-in-law, a Buddhist girl.

古文：咸和八年，移居芜湖。妻病，因为魔事，家财略尽，而病不瘥。
现代文：咸和八年，他搬到芜湖居住，妻子生病了，因为请求魔神消灾治病，将家里的钱财花光了，可是病仍然没有治好。
English: In the eighth year of Xianhe, he moved to Wuhu to live. His wife fell ill, and he spent all the family's money and wealth because he asked the devil to eliminate the disaster and cure the disease, but the disease was still not cured.

古文：妻曰： 我本佛家女，为我作佛事。 
现代文：妻子说： 我本是信奉佛教人家的女儿，为我求神治病，应该到寺庙里去。 
English: My wife said: I am the daughter of a Buddhist family, and I should go to the temple to ask God to cure me.

古文：应即往精舍中，见竺昙镜。镜曰： 普济众生，但君当一心受持耳。 
现代文：张应来到庙里，见到了竺昙镜和尚，和尚对他说： 佛教拯救一切生灵，但是你必须一心一意地拜佛修行。
English: Zhang Ying came to the temple and met the mirror monk. The monk said to him, "Buddhism saves all sentient beings, but you must worship the Buddha single-mindedly.

古文：昙镜期明，当向其家。
现代文：昙镜明天可以到你家去。 
English: You can take the mirror to your house tomorrow.

古文：应夕梦一人，长五六尺，趋步入门曰： 此家寂寂，乃尔不净。 
现代文：陈应回到家里，当天晚上梦见一个人，身高有五六尺，快步走进门来对他说： 这户人家冷落寂寞，就是因为你的心灵不干净。 
English: Chen Ying returned home, and that night he dreamed of a man, five or six feet tall, who walked quickly into the door and said to him: This family is lonely and lonely, because your soul is not clean.

古文：见镜随此人后，白曰： 此家始欲发意，未可责之。 
现代文：看见昙镜跟在这个人的身后，于是又说： 这户人家就要走上正路并恢复兴旺，不应该再受到责备了。 
English: Seeing the mirror behind the man, he said, "This family is about to return to the right path and prosperity. They should not be blamed any more."

古文：应眠觉，便把火作高座及鬼子母座。
现代文：张应睡醒了以后，便点燃火把连夜赶制高座及鬼子母座。
English: After Zhang Ying woke up, he lit a torch to drive away the high seat and the demon mother seat overnight.

古文：镜食时往，高座之属，具足已成，应具向说梦，遂夫妻受五戒，病亦得瘥。
现代文：昙镜在吃早饭时来到。佛龛已经做成。张应将所做的梦说了出来，于是夫妻俩人开始遵守佛教的五种戒律，诚心拜佛，妻子的病很快就好了。
English: The mirror arrived while they were having breakfast. The Buddha image had been made. Zhang Ying told her about the dream she had, and the couple began to observe the five precepts of Buddhism and sincerely worship Buddha. His wife's illness soon improved.

古文：南郡掾
现代文：南郡掾
English: Minami-gun Town

古文：晋南郡议曹掾姓欧，得病经年，骨消肉尽，巫医备至，无复方计。
现代文：晋朝南郡的议曹掾姓欧，得病一年了，被折磨得只剩下皮包着骨头，求医求神多方治疗无效，再也想不出办法了。
English: Cao Wei, surnamed Ou, a member of the Jin Dynasty Southern County, has been ill for a year. He was tortured so much that he was left with only skin and bones. Seeking medical treatment and praying to God were ineffective. He couldn't think of any other way.

古文：见诸沙门。问佛为何神？沙门为说事状。
现代文：他的儿子夜如睡觉，梦见许多和尚来看望他的父亲，第二天，他到庙里问和尚说： 佛是什么神？ 
English: His son fell asleep at night and dreamed that many monks came to visit his father. The next day, he went to the temple and asked the monk, "What kind of god is Buddha?"

古文：便将诸道人归，请读经。
现代文：和尚便把佛教的简单知识讲给他听，他便将和尚们请回家中，为父亲诵经消灾。
English: The monk then explained the simple knowledge of Buddhism to him, and he invited the monks to his home to chant the sutras for his father.

古文：再宿，病人自觉病如轻。
现代文：晚上病人就感觉病症减轻了。
English: In the evening, the patient felt that the symptoms had eased.

古文：昼得小眠，如举头，见门中有数十小儿，皆五彩衣，手中有持幡杖者，持刀矛者，于门走入。
现代文：第二天白天睡了一会儿。夜如一抬头，看见门外有几十个小孩，全都穿着五彩衣服，有的手中拿着幡，有的拿着杖，有的拿着刀，有的拿着矛，从大门走进来。
English: The next day, I slept for a while during the day. At night, I looked up and saw dozens of children outside the door, all dressed in colorful clothes, some with flags, some with sticks, some with knives, and some with spears, walking in through the gate.

古文：有两小儿在前，径至帘前。忽便还走，语后众小人云： 住居中总是道人。 遂不复来前。
现代文：有两个小孩走在前面，走到门帘前面，忽然又往回走，并对后面的小孩说： 住的都是和尚，以后不要来了。 
English: Two children were walking ahead, came to the front of the door curtain, suddenly walked back again, and said to the children behind: Monks live here, don't come any more.

古文：自此后病渐渐得差。
现代文：从这以后他的病便逐渐好了。
English: Since then, his condition has gradually improved.

古文：蒲坂精舍
现代文：蒲坂精舍
English: Kamisaka Seisho

古文：宋元嘉八年，河东蒲坂城大失火，不可救。
现代文：南朝宋文帝元嘉八年，黄河东岸的蒲坂城发生特大火灾，无法扑灭。
English: In the eighth year of the Southern Dynasty of Emperor Songwen Yuanjia, a huge fire broke out in Busan City on the east bank of the Yellow River, which could not be extinguished.

古文：惟精舍大小俨然，及白衣家经像，皆不损坠。百姓惊异，倍共发心。
现代文：只有大小寺庙没有倒塌，佛像也没有烧毁，老百姓都非常惊奇，更加从心里信奉佛教。
English: Only the large and small temples did not collapse, and the Buddha statues were not burned. The people were very surprised, and more wholeheartedly believed in Buddhism.

古文：吴兴经堂
现代文：吴兴经堂
English: Wu Xingjing Hall

古文：宋元嘉中，吴兴郡内尝失火，烧数百家荡尽。惟有经堂草舍，俨然不烧。时以为神。
现代文：宋元嘉年间，吴兴郡发生火灾，将几百户的房屋烧成平地，只有寺庙的草房，完好无损，当时的人们都认为是有神灵保佑。
English: During the Song and Yuan Dynasties, a fire broke out in Wuxing County, burning hundreds of houses to the ground. Only the grass house of the temple was intact. At that time, people believed that they were blessed by the gods.

古文：南徐士人
现代文：南徐士人
English: Nan Xu Shiren

古文：宋少帝时，南徐有一士子，从华山往云阳。见客舍中有一女子，年可十八九。
现代文：南朝宋少帝时期，南徐有一个青年男子，从华山去云阳，在旅店中看到一个女子，年龄十八九岁，男子对这女子非常爱慕但没有办法相互交往，相思成病。
English: During the Southern Song Dynasty, Nan Xu had a young man who went from Huashan to Yunyang. He saw a woman, aged eighteen or nineteen, in an inn. The man was very fond of this woman, but they had no way of communicating with each other. The love affair turned into an illness.

古文：悦之无因，遂成心疾。母问其故，具以启母。
现代文：他母亲问他，他将生病的原因告诉了母亲。
English: His mother asked him if he had told her the reason for his illness.

古文：母往至华山云阳，寻见女子，具说之。
现代文：他母亲前往华山云阳找到了那个女子，将男子的相思和病情告诉了女子。
English: His mother went to Huashan Yunyang to find the woman and told the woman about the man's love and illness.

古文：女闻感之，因脱蔽膝，令母密藏于席下，卧之当愈。
现代文：女子听了很受感动，将自己围裙解下来交给男子的母亲，叫她偷偷地放在男子睡觉的席子底下，可以医治男子的病。
English: The woman was so moved by what she heard that she took off her apron and gave it to the man's mother, telling her to secretly put it under the mat where the man was sleeping so that she could cure the man's illness.

古文：数日果瘥。忽举席，见蔽膝，持而泣之，气欲绝，谓母曰： 葬时从华山过。 
现代文：男子的母亲回家后按照女子所说的做了，过了一些日子，男子的病果然好了。一次男子偶然掀开席子，看到了女子的围裙，捧在手里，哭得就要昏死过去。他对母亲说： 埋葬我的时候，要从华山经过。 
English: After returning home, the man's mother did as the woman said, and after a few days, the man's illness was cured. Once, the man accidentally lifted the mat, saw the woman's apron, held it in his hand, and was about to cry himself to death. He said to his mother: "When I am buried, I want to pass through Huashan."

古文：母从其意。比至女门，牛打不行，且待须臾。
现代文：他死后，他的母亲按照他的意愿办理丧事，走到女子的门前，拉车的牛怎么打也不往前走了。
English: After his death, his mother carried out the funeral in accordance with his wishes, walked to the woman's door, and the oxen that pulled the cart did not go any further.

古文：女妆点沐浴竟而出，歌曰： 华山畿，君既为侬死，独活为谁施。
现代文：等了一会儿，女子沐浴梳妆完毕走了出来，哀婉地唱道： 华山连绵千里，你既然为我而死，我还活着是为了谁呢？
English: After waiting for a while, the woman finished bathing and dressing and walked out, singing mournfully: Huashan stretches for thousands of miles. Since you died for me, for whom am I still alive?

古文：君若见怜时，棺木为侬开。 
现代文：如果你真的怜爱我，请为我打开棺材。 
English: If you really feel sorry for me, please open the coffin for me.

古文：言讫，棺木开，女遂透棺中。
现代文：唱完，棺材果然开了，女子跳进棺材。
English: After the singing, the coffin did open, and the woman jumped into the coffin.

古文：因合葬，呼曰神士冢。
现代文：于是便将两个人合葬在一起，人们都叫做 神士冢 。
English: As a result, two people were buried together, and they were both called Shenshihaku.

古文：徐祖
现代文：徐祖
English: Xu Zu

古文：嘉兴徐祖，幼孤，叔隗养之如所生。
现代文：嘉兴的徐祖，从小失去父母，叔叔隗抚养他像自己的亲儿子一样。
English: Jiaxing's Xu Zu lost his parents at a young age, but his uncle Zhou raised him like his own son.

古文：隗病，祖营侍甚勤。
现代文：一天他叔叔病了，他非常勤快周到地侍候他叔叔。
English: One day, his uncle fell ill, and he served him diligently and thoughtfully.

古文：是夜，梦一神人告云： 汝叔应合死也。 
现代文：当天晚上他梦见一个神仙对他说： 你叔叔应该死了。 
English: That night he had a dream in which a genie told him, "Your uncle should be dead."

古文：祖扣头祈请哀愍，二神人云： 念汝如此，为汝活。 
现代文：徐祖叩头祈求不让叔叔死，两个神仙说： 看在你如此孝顺的份上，让他继续为你活着吧。 
English: Xu Zu bowed his head and prayed that his uncle would not die. The two immortals said, "For your filial duty, let him continue to live for you."

古文：祖觉，叔乃瘥。
现代文：徐祖睡醒了，叔叔的病果然好了。
English: When Xu Zu woke up, his uncle's illness had been cured.

古文：刘京
现代文：刘京
English: Liu Jing

古文：临江郡民刘京，孝行乡里推敬。
现代文：临江郡的居民刘京，孝顺老人被乡里的乡亲们所称赞。
English: Liu Jing, a resident of Linjiang County, was praised by the villagers for his filial piety.

古文：时江水暴溢，居者皆漂溺。京负其母号泣。
现代文：一次江水暴涨，不少居民都淹死在水里，刘京背着母亲大哭起来。
English: One time, the river water surged, and many residents drowned in the water. Liu Jing burst into tears with her mother behind her.

古文：忽有大龟至其前，举家七口，俱上龟背。然行十许里，及一高岸，龟遂失之。
现代文：忽然来了一只巨大的乌龟，他们全家七口人都爬到乌龟的背上，游了十多里地，将他们送到一个高地上，乌龟就没了。
English: Suddenly, a huge turtle came. Their whole family of seven climbed onto the turtle's back and swam more than ten miles. They were sent to a highland, but the turtle was gone.

古文：何敬叔
现代文：何敬叔
English: Uncle He Jing

古文：何敬叔少奉佛法。作一檀像，未有木。
现代文：何敬叔信奉佛教，想要刻一尊佛像，但是没有木头。
English: Uncle He Jing, a Buddhist, wanted to carve a Buddha statue, but there was no wood.

古文：先梦一沙门，衲衣杖锡来云： 县后何家桐甚惜，苦求遮可得。
现代文：他睡觉梦见一个和尚，披着袈裟，拄着锡杖对他说： 县衙后面的老何家有桐木但非常珍惜，你如果苦苦去哀求能够要到手。
English: While he was sleeping, he dreamed of a monk, wearing a robe and carrying a tin cane, who said to him: "There is a family behind the county seat that has paulownia wood, but they treasure it very much. If you go to great lengths to beg for it, you can get it.

古文：如梦求之，果获。
现代文：何敬叔按照梦中和尚的指点去找，果然要到了桐木。
English: Uncle He Jing followed the advice of the monk in his dream and went to look for the dragonfly. As expected, he found it in Kiri.

古文：萧子懋
现代文：萧子懋
English: Starring Xiao Zixuan

古文：齐晋安王萧子懋，字云昌，武帝之子也。始年七岁，阮淑媛尝病危笃，请僧行道。
现代文：齐国的晋安王萧子懋，字叫云昌，是武帝的儿子，刚刚七岁，阮淑媛得病非常沉重危险，请来和尚诵经。
English: The king of Jinan in Qi, Xiao Zixuan, known as Yunchang, was the son of Emperor Wu. He was just seven years old, and Nguyn Xuân Thun was very sick and in danger. He invited a monk to chant.

古文：有献莲华供佛者，众僧以铜罂盛水浸之，如此三日而花不萎。
现代文：有人献来莲花供佛，和尚用一种小口大肚子的铜瓶装上水，然后将莲花插在瓶里，三天以后花仍不枯萎。
English: Someone brought a lotus flower to offer to the Buddha. The monk filled a large-mouthed copper bottle with water and then placed the lotus flower in the bottle. Three days later, the flower still hadn't withered.

古文：子懋流涕礼佛。誓曰： 若使阿姨因此胜缘，遂获冥祐，愿华竟斋如故。 
现代文：萧子懋哭着在佛像前敬礼发誓说： 如果能够使生病的阿姨痊愈，我祝愿莲花开放得与当初一样。 
English: Xiao Zi cried and saluted in front of the Buddha statue and swore: "If I can make my sick aunt recover, I wish the lotus flower to bloom as it did in the beginning."

古文：七日斋华，色更鲜红。看视罂中，稍有根须。
现代文：七天诵经结束，莲花的颜色更加鲜艳了，观察瓶子里，已经生出了一点根须。
English: At the end of the seven days of chanting, the color of the lotus flower has become more vivid, and a little whisker has appeared in the bottle.

古文：淑媛病寻瘥，当世称其孝感。
现代文：淑媛的病也好了。大家都称赞是萧子懋的孝顺感动了佛祖。
English: Everyone praised that Xiao Zixuan's filial piety had moved the Buddha.

古文：萧睿明
现代文：萧睿明
English: Xiao Ruiming

古文：齐松滋令兰陵萧睿明，母患积年，睿明昼夜祈祷。
现代文：北齐的松滋县令萧睿明是兰陵人，他的母亲患病多年，萧睿明日夜向神灵祈祷，以保佑母亲早日康复。
English: Xiao Ruiming, the governor of Songzhi County in North Qi, is from Lanling. His mother has been ill for many years. Xiao Ruiming will pray to the gods tomorrow night to bless his mother's early recovery.

古文：时寒冻，睿明下泪，凝结如箸。额上扣血，成水不溜。
现代文：当时天寒地冻，萧睿明流下的眼泪在脸颊上冻成的冰像筷子一样长，磕头把前额碰出了血，流出的血水冻成一个小冰柱。
English: At that time, the sky was freezing cold, and the tears shed by Xiao Ruiming froze into ice on his cheeks as long as chopsticks. The steamed bread head touched his forehead to draw blood, and the blood that flowed out froze into a small icicle.

古文：忽有一人，以石函授之曰： 此能治太夫人病。 
现代文：一天忽然来了一个人，给了他一个石匣，对他说： 这个石匣可以治你母亲的病。 
English: One day, a man suddenly came, gave him a stone box, and said to him, "This stone box can cure your mother's illness."

古文：睿明跪而受之，忽然不见。
现代文：萧睿明跪着接了过来，来人不见了。
English: Xiao Ruiming kneeled down and picked it up. The stranger was gone.

古文：以函奉母，中惟三寸绢，丹书为日月字。母病即愈。
现代文：他将石匣拿给母亲，见里面只有一块三寸长的丝绢，上面写着两个红色的字 日月 ，从此他母亲的病就好了。
English: He took the stone box to his mother and saw that there was only a three-inch-long silk scarf inside, with two red characters "日月" (sun and moon) written on it. His mother's illness was cured from then on.

古文：解叔谦
现代文：解叔谦
English: Uncle Xie Qian

古文：齐雁门解叔谦，征为朝请，不赴。
现代文：齐朝雁门的解叔谦，朝廷要聘任他为朝请，他因为母亲有病没有去。
English: Qi Zhaojuqian of Ganmen, the imperial court wanted to hire him to invite the emperor, but he did not go because his mother was ill.

古文：母疾，叔谦夜于庭中，稽颡祈福。闻空中云： 得丁公藤为酒便差。 
现代文：夜晚他在院子里磕头，祈求神灵医治他母亲的病。忽然听到天空有人说： 用丁公藤泡酒便可以治好。 
English: At night, he was scratching his head in the courtyard, praying to the gods to cure his mother's illness. Suddenly, he heard someone in the sky say: "If you use Ding Gong Rattan to brew wine, you will be cured."

古文：访医及本草，无识者。
现代文：他查阅《本草》，向医生请教，都不知道什么是丁公藤。
English: He looked up "Hengcao" and consulted a doctor, but did not know what Dinggong wisteria was.

古文：乃崎岖求访，至宜都境，遥见山中老翁伐木，问其所用，答曰： 此丁公藤，治风尤验。 
现代文：没有办法，他只好出门到各地去打听寻找。一天他来到宜都境内，远远看见一个老头在山上砍树。他去问老头砍树有什么用，老头说： 这是丁公藤，治疗风症非常有效。 
English: One day, he came to the territory of Yidu and saw an old man cutting trees on the mountain far away. He went to ask the old man what was the use of cutting trees, and the old man said: This is Ding Gong rattan, it is very effective in treating rheumatism.

古文：叔谦再拜流涕，具款行求之意。
现代文：解叔谦哭着请求老人将丁公藤给他为母亲治病。
English: Uncle Xie Qian cried and asked the old man to give him Ding Gong Rattan to treat his mother's illness.

古文：此翁怆然，以藤与之，并示其渍酒之法。
现代文：老头很同情他，将丁公藤送给他，并传授他泡酒的具体方法，解叔谦记在心里。
English: The old man sympathized with him very much, gave him the Ding Gong vine, and taught him the specific method of brewing wine.

古文：叔谦受领，此人不复知处。依法为酒，母疾便愈。
现代文：齐朝南阳的宗元卿有很高尚的品德和行为。他从小丧父，由母亲抚养成人。
English: Zongyuanqing of Nanyang in the Qi Dynasty had a very noble character and behavior. He lost his father at a young age and was raised by his mother.

古文：宗元卿齐南阳宗元卿有至行，早孤，为母所养。母病，元卿在远，辄心痛： 大病则大痛，小病则小痛。
现代文：母亲生病了，他出门在很远的地方突然感到心痛，母亲病得严重，他疼得便厉害，母亲病得轻，他疼得也轻，从此形成了必然的规律。
English: When his mother was ill, he went out and suddenly felt heartache in a faraway place. When his mother was seriously ill, his pain was severe. When his mother was mildly ill, his pain was also mild. From then on, it formed an inevitable pattern.

古文：以此为常则。乡里宗敬，率号宗曾子。
现代文：乡亲们非常尊敬他孝敬母亲的行为，认为他就像孔夫子的弟子曾子一样品德高尚，称他为 宗曾子 。
English: The villagers greatly respected his filial piety to his mother, and considered him to be as virtuous as the great-grandson of Confucius' disciple, calling him the great-grandson.

古文：匡昕
现代文：匡昕
English: Kuang Chun

古文：齐庐陵匡昕隐金华山，服食不与常人交。
现代文：齐朝庐陵的匡昕隐居在金华山中，生活饮食都不同常人交往。
English: Kuangtao of the Qin Dynasty lived in seclusion in the Jinhua Mountains, and his diet was different from that of ordinary people.

古文：母亡已经数日，昕奔还号叫，母便苏。
现代文：他母亲死了已经有好几天了，他奔跑哭叫着回到母亲身边，他母亲突然苏醒过来。
English: His mother had been dead for days, and he ran crying back to his mother, who had suddenly woken up.

古文：孝感致也。曾康祖
现代文：这是他孝敬母亲，母子间心灵互相感应的结果。曾康祖
English: This is the result of his filial piety to his mother and the mutual inspiration between mother and son.

古文：齐扶风曾康祖，母患乳痈，诸医不能疗。
现代文：齐朝时扶风的曾康祖的母亲患乳痈，请了很多医生都治不了。
English: The mother of Zeng Kangzu, who was a leader of the Qi Dynasty, suffered from mastitis, and many doctors were unable to cure her.

古文：康祖乃跪，以两手捧乳，大悲泣。母痈即瘥。
现代文：曾康祖跪在地上，两手捧着他母亲的乳房大哭，他母亲患的乳痈就好了。
English: Zeng Kangzu knelt on the ground, holding his mother's breasts with both hands and crying loudly. His mother's coeliac disease was cured.

