古文：齐孝公来伐鲁，臧文仲欲以辞告。病焉，问于展禽。
现代文：齐孝公出兵讨伐鲁国，臧文仲想写一篇文辞谢罪，请求齐国退兵，但找不到适当的措辞，求问于展禽。
English: After Qi Xiaogong dispatched troops to fight against Lu, Zou Wenzhong wanted to write a letter of apology, requesting Qi to withdraw its troops, but he could not find the appropriate wording and asked Zhanji.

古文：对曰： 获闻之，处大教小，处小事大，所以御乱也，不闻以辞。
现代文：回答说： 我听说，大国要做好小国的表率，小国要事奉好大国，这样才能防备祸乱，没听说用言辞就能解决问题的。
English: He replied: I have heard that the big countries should set a good example for the small countries, and the small countries should serve the big countries well, so as to prevent disasters. I have not heard that problems can be solved with words.

古文：若为小而崇，以怒大国，使加己乱，乱在前矣，辞其何益？ 
现代文：倘若作为小国却自高自大，激怒大国，使它把祸乱加到自己身上，那么大难当头，言辞又有什么用处？ 
English: If, as a small nation, it puffs itself up and provokes a great power to bring disaster upon itself, what is the use of words?

古文：文仲曰： 国急矣！百物唯其可者，将无不趋也。
现代文：文仲说： 国家已经危急了，各种贵重的物品，只要可以送礼的，没有舍不得割爱的。
English: Wen Zhong said: The country is already in a critical situation. All kinds of valuable items, as long as they can be given as gifts, are not reluctant to be cut off.

古文：愿以子之辞行赂焉，其可赂乎？ 
现代文：希望凭着你的说辞去给齐国送礼，能否试一试呢？ 
English: I hope to send a gift to Qi Province with your resignation, can I try it?

古文：展禽使乙喜以膏沫犒师，曰： 寡君不佞，不能事疆场之司，使君盛怒，以暴露于弊邑之野，敢犒舆师。 齐侯见使者曰： 鲁国恐乎？ 
现代文：展禽让乙喜带着不值钱的润发膏去慰劳齐国军队，说： 我们国君不才，没有侍奉好贵国边界上的官员，让您非常生气，以至带兵来到我国的郊野经受风雨，所以派我斗胆前来慰劳贵国的大军。 齐孝公接见使者问道： 鲁国害怕了吗？ 
English: "Our sovereign is incompetent, he did not serve the officials on the border of your country well, which made you very angry, so much so that he brought soldiers to the countryside of our country to weather the storm, so he sent me with courage to come and comfort the great army of your country." Qi Xiaogong received the envoy and asked: "Is the country of Lu afraid?"

古文：对曰： 小人恐矣，君子则否。 
现代文：回答说： 小人倒是怕了，但君子并不怕。 
English: He answered, "The ruffian is afraid, but the gentleman is not."

古文：公曰： 室如悬磬，野无青草，何恃而不恐？ 
现代文：孝公说： 你们国库空虚，农村大旱，凭仗什么不怕？ 
English: Xiaogong said: Your treasury is empty, the countryside is in drought, what are you not afraid of?

古文：对曰： 恃二先君之所职业。
现代文：回答说： 我们凭仗着周公和太公的职守。
English: He replied, "We rely on the duties of Zhou Gong and the Grand Duke.

古文：昔者成王命我先君周公及齐先君太公曰： 女股肱周室，以夹辅先王。
现代文：从前周成王命令我们两国的始祖周公和太公说： 你们要全力支持王室，辅佐先王。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou Chengdu ordered the founding fathers of our two countries, Zhou Gong and Taigong, to say: You must fully support the royal family and assist the former king.

古文：赐女土地，质之以牺牲，世世子孙无相害也。 
现代文：赐给你们土地，你们要用牺牲祭祀天地，立誓以为质信，世世代代、子子孙孙不互相侵害。 
English: And I will give you the land, and ye shall sacrifice sacrifice unto the heavens and to the earth, and shall swear by the Lord that ye will not hurt one another, neither your children, nor your children's children, from generation to generation.

古文：君今来讨弊邑之罪，其亦使听从而释之，必不泯其社稷；岂其贪壤地，而弃先王之命？
现代文：现在你来讨伐我国的过失，目的也是让我们知错顺从就宽恕了，一定不会灭亡鲁国。难道还会贪图我们的土地，而抛弃先王的遗命吗？
English: Now you've come to attack our country's faults, with the aim of making us admit our mistakes, obey and forgive, so that Lu will not perish. Will you still covet our land and abandon the legacy of the former king?

古文：其何以镇抚诸侯？
现代文：那样还怎么能称霸诸侯？
English: How else could they dominate the lords?

古文：恃此以不恐。 
现代文：凭仗这个所以不怕。 
English: That's why I'm not afraid.

古文：齐侯乃许为平而还。
现代文：齐孝公于是同意讲和，退兵而还。
English: Qi Xiaogong then agreed to make peace, withdrew and returned.

