古文：起著雍涒滩四月，尽阏蒙单阏九月，凡七年有奇。
现代文：起著雍涒滩四月，尽阏蒙单阏九月，凡七年有奇。
English: The month of April, the month of September, the month of October, the month of November, the month of December, the month of December, the month of December, the month of December, the month of January, the month of February, the month of March, the month of April, the month of May, the month of June, the month of July, the month of August, the month of September, the month of October, the month of November, the month of December.

古文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝下之下
现代文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝下之下
English: Emperor Taizong, Emperor Wenwu, Emperor Sheng, Emperor Guangxiao,

古文：贞观二十二年戊申，公元六四八年夏，四月，丁巳，右武候将军梁建方击松外蛮，破之。
现代文：唐太宗贞观二十二年夏季四月，丁巳，右武候将军梁建方击败松外蛮。
English: In the summer of April in the 22nd year of Tang Taizong Zhenguan, Liang Jianfang, the right military general, defeated Matsugai Ban.

古文：初，巂州都督刘伯英上言： 松外诸蛮暂降复叛，请出师讨之，以通西洱、天竺之道。 
现代文：起初，州都督刘伯英上书言道： 松外各个蛮族暂时降附如今又叛乱，请求出兵讨伐，以打通朝廷通往西洱、天竺的道路。 
English: At first, Liu Boying, the prefectural governor, wrote in a letter: "All barbarian tribes outside Song temporarily surrendered, but now they are rebelling again, and they are requesting that troops be dispatched to fight, so that the imperial court can open the road to Xidi and Tianzhu.

古文：敕建方发巴蜀十二州兵讨之。
现代文：太宗敕令梁建方征发巴蜀十三州兵马讨伐他们。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Liang Jianfang to send soldiers and horses from the thirteen states of Bashu to fight them.

古文：蛮酋双舍帅众拒战，建方击败之，杀获千馀人。
现代文：松外蛮族首领双舍率众抵抗，建方将其击败，杀死俘获共有一千多人。
English: The leader of the Matsugai barbarians, Doshe, led the resistance, and the construction side defeated him, killing and capturing a total of more than a thousand people.

古文：群蛮震慑，亡窜山谷。
现代文：众蛮族大为震动，纷纷逃窜到山谷之中。
English: The barbarians were so shaken that they fled into the valley.

古文：建方分遣使者谕以利害，皆来归附，前后至者七十部，户十万九千三百，建方署其酋长蒙和等为县令，各统所部，莫不感悦。
现代文：建方分派使者说明利害关系，于是他们都来归附，前后有七十个部落，十万九千三百户，建方委任其首领蒙和等人为县令，各自统率本部，众人感激涕零。
English: The founding party dispatched emissaries to explain the interests, so they all came to join. There were seventy tribes and 109,300 households. The founding party appointed its leader Meng He and others as county magistrates, each leading the headquarters. Everyone was grateful.

古文：因遣使诣西洱河，其帅杨盛大骇，具船将遁，使者晓谕以威信，盛遂请降。
现代文：建方又派使者到西洱河，当地将领杨盛大为恐慌，准备好船只想要逃跑，使者晓以大唐军队的威严与信用，杨盛于是请求投降。
English: Jianfang also sent an envoy to the Xidi River. The local general Yang Sheng panicked and prepared ships to escape. The envoy took advantage of the dignity and trust of the Great Tang Army. Yang Sheng then asked to surrender.

古文：其地有杨、李、赵、董等数十姓，各据一州，大者六百，小者二、三百户，无大君长，不相统壹，语虽小讹，其生业、风俗，大略与中国同，自云本皆华人，其所异者以十二月为岁首。
现代文：该地区有杨、李、赵、董等几十个大姓，各自据守一州，大的六百户，小的有二、三百户，没有大的君王，互不统属，方言土语虽然有小的差异，但其生活状况与风俗习惯等大略与中原相同，自称原本都是汉人，所不同的是以十二月为一年的开始。
English: In this region, there are dozens of big surnames such as Yang, Li, Zhao, and Dong, each of which is based on a prefecture. There are six hundred big families and two or three hundred small families. There are no big kings, and they do not belong to each other. Although there are small differences in dialect, their living conditions and customs are roughly the same as those in the Central Plains. They claim that they were originally Han Chinese, but the difference is that December is the beginning of the year.

古文：己未，契丹辱纥主曲据帅众内附。以其地置玄州，以曲据为刺史，隶营州都督府。
现代文：己未，契丹首领曲据率领兵众归附唐朝，唐朝在其居住地设置玄州，任命曲据为刺史，隶属营州都督府。
English: Before long, the Khitan leader Qu Zuo led the troops to be annexed to the Tang Dynasty. The Tang Dynasty set up Xuanzhou in his place of residence, appointed Qu Zuo as the chief historian, and subordinated to the Yingzhou Governor's Office.

古文：甲子，乌胡镇将古神感将兵浮海击高丽，遇高丽步骑五千，战于易山，破之。
现代文：甲子，乌胡镇守将领古神感领兵渡海进攻高丽，与高丽五千步骑兵遭遇，在易山激战，将其击败。
English: Gao Zi, Wuhu Town Guard General Gu Shengang led troops across the sea to attack Goryeo, encountered Goryeo's five thousand foot cavalry, fought fiercely in Yishan, and defeated them.

古文：其夜，高丽万馀人袭神感船，神感设伏，又破之而还。
现代文：当天夜里，高丽一万多名士兵袭击古神感的船只，神感设下埋伏，将高丽兵打得大败，然后回师。
English: On the night of the same day, more than ten thousand soldiers from Goryeo attacked Gojongseon's ships. Gojongseon set up an ambush, defeated the Goryeo soldiers, and then returned to his division.

古文：初，西突厥乙毘咄陆可汗以阿史那贺鲁为叶护，居多逻斯水，在西州北千五百里，统处月、处密、始苏、歌逻禄、失毕五姓之众。
现代文：起初，西突厥乙毗咄陆可汗任命阿史那贺鲁为叶护，居住在多逻斯河畔，在西州以北一千五百多里的地方，统辖处月、处密、始苏、歌逻禄、失毕五个部落的兵众。
English: At first, the West Turk Bifur Khan appointed Ashina Horu as Yegu, who lived on the banks of the Doluos River, more than 1,500 miles north of Xizhou, and controlled the soldiers of the five tribes of Zhizhong, Zhenmi, Shi Su, Gologlu, and Shibi.

古文：乙毘咄陆奔吐火罗，乙毘射匮可汗遣兵迫逐之，部落亡散。
现代文：乙毗咄投奔吐火罗时，乙毗射匮可汗曾派兵追击，咄部落散亡。
English: At the time of the invasion of Tibet, the Khan had sent troops to pursue the invaders, and the tribes had dispersed.

古文：乙亥，贺鲁帅其馀众数千帐内属，诏处之于庭州莫贺城，拜左骁卫将军。
现代文：乙亥，阿史那贺鲁率领其残余力量几千帐归附唐朝，太宗降诏让他们居住在庭州莫贺城，贺鲁官拜左骁卫将军。
English: Eihei, Ashina Horu led the remnants of their forces to attach several thousand accounts to the Tang Dynasty, Taizong issued a decree to let them live in Moga City, Niizhou, and Horu officials paid homage to General Zuo Liwei.

古文：贺鲁闻唐兵讨龟兹，请为乡导，仍从数十骑入朝。
现代文：贺鲁听说唐朝军队讨伐龟兹，便请求做为向导，于是率领几十名骑兵到朝廷。
English: When Horu heard that the Tang Dynasty army was fighting against the turtles, he asked to be a guide, so he led dozens of cavalry to the imperial court.

古文：上以为昆丘道行军总管，厚宴赐而遣之。
现代文：太宗任命他为昆丘道行军总管，盛宴款待，厚加赏赐，让他回到原居地。
English: Emperor Taizong appointed him as the general manager of the march of Kunqiu Road, feasted and entertained, and rewarded him generously to let him return to his original place.

古文：五月，庚子，右卫率长史王玄策击帝那伏帝王阿罗那顺，大破之。
现代文：五月，庚子，右卫率长史王玄策进攻帝那伏帝王阿罗那顺，将其打得大败。
English: In May, Geng Zi and the head of the right guard, Shi Wang Xuan Zhao, attacked the Nahua emperor, Arona Shun, and defeated him.

古文：初，中天竺王尸罗逸多兵最强，四天竺皆臣之，玄策奉使至天竺，诸国皆遣使入贡。
现代文：起初，中天竺国王尸罗逸多兵力最强，东、西、南、北四天竺都臣服于他，王玄策奉使节到天竺，各国都派使者进献贡品。
English: At the beginning, the Middle Kingdom's King Luo Yidu had the strongest army. The four kingdoms of the East, West, South and North were all subject to him. King Xuanzhe sent envoys to the Middle Kingdom, and all countries sent envoys to offer tribute.

古文：会尸罗逸多卒，国中大乱，其臣阿罗那顺自立，发胡兵攻玄策；玄策帅从者三十人与战，力不敌，悉为所擒，阿罗那顺尽掠诸国贡物。
现代文：恰巧尸罗逸多去世，国内大乱，大臣阿罗那顺自立为王，征发胡族兵进攻玄策，玄策率领随从三十人与他们激战，抵御不住，全都被其擒获，阿罗那顺将各国的贡品掠夺干净。
English: It so happened that Luo Yidu passed away, and there was a great turmoil in the country. The minister Arona Shun established himself as the king, and sent Hu soldiers to attack Xuanzhe. Xuanzhe led thirty followers to fight fiercely against them, and they could not resist, and all of them were captured by him. Arona Shun plundered the tributes of all countries.

古文：玄策脱身宵遁，抵吐蕃西境，以书征邻国兵，吐蕃遣精锐千二百人、泥婆国遣七千馀骑赴之。
现代文：玄策乘夜间只身脱逃，到达吐蕃西部边境，发文书给邻国征调兵马，吐蕃派精兵一千二百人，泥婆国派七千多名骑兵赴战。
English: Xuanzhe escaped alone at night, reached the western border of Tubo, issued a document to recruit soldiers and horses to neighboring countries, sent 1,200 elite soldiers to Tubo, and sent more than 7,000 cavalry to Mu Bao.

古文：玄策与其副蒋师仁帅二国之兵，进至中天竺所居茶馎和罗城，连战三日，大破之，斩首三千馀级，赴水溺死者且万人。
现代文：王玄策与副使蒋师仁率领二国的兵马进逼到中天竺的居住地茶和罗城，激战三天，大败天竺兵，杀死三千多人，水中溺死者将近一万人。
English: Wang Xuanzhe and the deputy envoy Jiang Shiren led the soldiers and horses of the two countries to the middle of Tianyao's residence, Cha and Luocheng, fought for three days, defeated Tianyao's soldiers, killed more than three thousand people, and drowned nearly ten thousand people.

古文：阿罗那顺弃城走，更收馀众，还与师仁战；又破之，擒阿罗那顺。
现代文：阿罗那顺弃城逃走，重新纠集残余力量，掉过头来与蒋师仁战斗；蒋师仁又将其打败，并生擒阿罗那顺。
English: Arona Shun abandoned the city and fled. He regrouped his remaining forces and turned around to fight against Jiang Shiren. Jiang Shiren defeated him and captured Arona Shun alive.

古文：馀众奉其妃及王子，阻乾陀卫江，师仁进击之，众溃，获其妃及王子，虏男女万二千人。
现代文：剩余的天竺人拥戴阿罗那顺的妃子及王子，在乾陀卫江阻截唐军，蒋师仁向其发动进攻，天竺兵众溃败，其妃子及王子被擒，其余被俘男女一万二千人。
English: The remaining Tianyao people supported the concubine and prince of Aronasun, blocked the Tang army in the Qiantawu River, Jiang Shiren launched an attack on it, the Tianyao soldiers were defeated, his concubine and prince were captured, and the remaining 12,000 men and women were captured.

古文：于是天竺响震，城邑聚落降者五百八十馀所，俘阿罗那顺以归。
现代文：于是天竺国内大受震动，共有五百八十多个城邑和部落先后投降，玄策等人俘虏阿罗那顺，班师回朝。
English: As a result, the country of Tianzhu was greatly shaken, and a total of more than five hundred and eighty towns and tribes surrendered successively. Xuanzhe and others captured Arona Shun, and the team returned to the imperial court.

古文：以玄策为朝散大夫。
现代文：朝廷任命玄策为朝散大夫。
English: The imperial court appointed Hyunsaku as Chosan no daibu.

古文：六月，乙丑，以白别部为居延州。
现代文：六月，乙丑，唐朝以白别部所居地为居延州。
English: In June, the second month of the year of the Ugly Goat, the Tang Dynasty made Bai Beibe's place of residence Yanzhou.

古文：癸酉，特进宋公萧瑀卒，太常议谥曰 德 ，尚书议谥曰 肃 。
现代文：癸酉，特进宋公萧去世，太常寺议定其谥号为德，尚书省议定谥号为隶。
English: After the death of Song Gongxiao, Taizhong Temple agreed that his posthumous name would be De, and Shangshu Province agreed that his posthumous name would be Ri.

古文：上曰： 谥者，行之迹，当得其实，可谥曰贞褊公。 
现代文：太宗说： 谥号本是标明人的行迹的，应当符合实际，可加谥号为贞褊公。 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "The imperial seal was originally used to mark a person's whereabouts, and it should be consistent with reality. The imperial seal can be added as Zhengyanggong.

古文：子锐嗣，尚上女襄城公主。
现代文：萧的儿子萧锐继承其父的食邑爵位，并娶太宗女儿襄城公主为妻。
English: Xiao's son, Xiao Rui, inherited his father's title of Count of Cuisine and married Emperor Taizong's daughter, Princess Xiangcheng.

古文：上欲为之营第，公主固辞，曰： 妇事舅姑，当朝夕侍侧，若居别第，所阙多矣。 
现代文：太宗想要为他营建新的宅第，公主执意辞退，并说： 媳妇侍奉公婆，应当早晚都在身边，假如居住在别处，必然会有较多的缺失。 
English: Emperor Taizong wanted to build him a new mansion, but the princess stubbornly refused, saying, "A daughter-in-law serves her parents-in-law and should be around sooner or later. If she lived elsewhere, there would inevitably be more defects."

古文：上乃命即瑀第而营之。
现代文：太宗于是命令就在萧的原住所为他们营建新居。
English: Emperor Taizong then ordered to build a new house for them in Xiao's original residence.

古文：上以高丽困弊，议以明年发三十万众，一举灭之。
现代文：太宗认为高丽正值穷困凋弊，议定在明年征发三十万兵力，一举灭掉它。
English: Taejong thought that Goryeo was in a poor state and agreed to send 300,000 troops next year to wipe it out at one stroke.

古文：或以为大军东征，须备经岁之粮，非畜乘所能载，宜具舟舰为水运。
现代文：有人认为大军东征，必须储备一年的粮食，而牲畜并不能运载那么多，应当准备舟船用水运。
English: Some people believe that a large army must reserve a year's supply of grain for the eastward march, while livestock cannot carry so much, and should be prepared to be transported by boat and water.

古文：隋末剑南独无寇盗，属者辽东之役，剑南复不预及，其百姓富庶，宜使之造舟舰。
现代文：隋朝末年惟独剑南地区没有寇盗与兵乱，近来辽东之战，剑南又一次不受牵累，当地百姓生活富庶，应当让他们修造舟船。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, only the southern region of Jian was free from banditry and military turmoil. Recently, during the Battle of Liaodong, the southern region of Jian was once again unaffected. The local people live in affluence, so they should be allowed to build boats.

古文：上从之。
现代文：太宗依从其建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：秋，七月，遣右领左右府长史强伟于剑南道伐木造舟舰，大者或长百尺，其广半之。
现代文：秋季，七月，派右领左右府长史强伟在剑南道伐木造舟船，大船有的长一百尺，宽五十尺。
English: In the autumn, in July, the right-wing faction led by the governor Shi Qiangwei cut down trees on Jianan Road to build boats, some of which were 100 feet long and 50 feet wide.

古文：别遣使行水道，自巫峡抵江、扬，趣莱州。
现代文：造好后另派使者，走水路，从巫峡直抵江州、扬州，再驶往莱州。
English: After it was built, another envoy was sent to travel by water from Wuxia straight to Jiangzhou and Yangzhou, and then to Cangzhou and Laizhou.

古文：庚寅，西突厥相屈利啜请帅所部从讨龟兹。
现代文：庚寅，西突厥丞相屈利啜请求率领本部跟从唐军讨伐龟兹。
English: Geng Yin and Western Turkic Minister Qu Lishu requested the headquarters to follow the Tang army to fight against the Turtles.

古文：初，左武卫将军武连县公武安李君羡直玄武门，时太白屡昼见，太史占云： 女主昌。 
现代文：起初，左武卫将军、武连县公、武安人李君羡掌管玄武门宿卫，当时金星多次在白天出现，太史占卜说： 女主将兴起。 
English: At the beginning, General Zuo Wuwei, the governor of Wulian County, and Li Junen, a native of Wu'an, were in charge of the innkeeper of the Xuanwu Gate. At that time, Venus appeared many times during the day. Taishi divination said: The mistress will rise.

古文：民间又传《秘记》云： 唐三世之后，女主武王代有天下。 
现代文：民间又广传《秘记》中言： 唐朝三代之后，女主武王取代李氏据有天下。 
English: The folk also widely spread the saying in "The Secret": After the third generation of the Tang Dynasty, the mistress King Wu replaced the Li clan as the ruler of the world.

古文：上恶之。
现代文：太宗听后非常厌恶。
English: Taizong was disgusted after listening to it.

古文：会与诸武臣宴宫中，行酒令，使各言小名。
现代文：正赶上太宗在宫中与众位武将饮宴，行酒令，让每个人各讲小名。
English: Just in time for Taizong to have a banquet in the palace with all the generals, he ordered the wine and asked everyone to say their names.

古文：君羡自言名五娘，上愕然，因笑曰： 何物女子，乃尔勇健！ 
现代文：李君羡自称小名五娘，太宗非常惊讶，进而笑着说： 什么女子，竟这么勇健！ 
English: Li Junen claimed to be the youngest of five daughters. Taizong was very surprised, and then smiled and said: What a woman, so brave!

古文：又以君羡官称封邑皆有 武 字，深恶之，后出为华州刺史。
现代文：又因为君羡官衔封爵籍贯都有一个 武 字，非常厌恶，随后让他出任华州刺史。
English: Also, because Jun envied the official title of nobility and always had a "Wu" character, he was very disgusted, and then let him serve as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：有布衣员道信，自言能绝粒，晓佛法，君羡深敬信之，数相从，屏人语。
现代文：有个布衣名叫员道信，自称能够不进饮食，通晓佛法，李君羡非常敬慕相信他，多次与他形影相随，窃窃私语。
English: There was a clothed man named Guan Daoxin, who claimed to be able to abstain from eating and drinking, and to be familiar with Buddhism. Li Junen admired and believed in him very much, and often walked with him, whispering to him.

古文：御史奏君羡与妖人交通，谋不轨。
现代文：御史上奏称君羡勾通妖人，图谋叛乱。
English: According to the historical record, it is said that the king envied the sorcerer and plotted a rebellion.

古文：壬辰，君羡坐诛，籍没其家。
现代文：壬辰，李君羡因此事定罪处斩，全家被抄没。
English: Imjin, Li Junen was convicted and executed for this matter, and the whole family was confiscated.

古文：上密问太史令李淳风： 《秘记》所云，信有之乎？ 
现代文：太宗曾秘密地问太史令李淳风： 《秘记》上所说的谣传，真有其事吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong once secretly asked the Grand Historian Li Chunfeng: "Is the rumor mentioned in the Secret Records true?

古文：对曰： 臣仰稽天象，俯察历数，其人已在陛下宫中，为亲属，自今不过三十年，当王天下，杀唐子孙殆尽，其兆既成矣。 
现代文：答道： 我仰观天象，俯察历数，这个人现在已在陛下宫中了，是陛下亲属，从今往后不超过三十年，这个人当做天下的君王，并将大唐皇室子孙杀得不剩几个，其征兆已经形成了。 
English: He replied, "I looked up at the celestial bodies and looked down at the calendar. This man is now in Your Majesty's palace. He is Your Majesty's relative. From now on, it will not be more than thirty years. This man will be the king of the world, and he will kill all the descendants of the Great Tang Dynasty. The signs are already taking shape.

古文：上曰： 疑似者尽杀之，何如？ 
现代文：太宗说： 凡是有怀疑的统统杀掉，怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said: How about killing everyone who has doubts?

古文：对曰： 天之所命，人不能违也。
现代文：李淳风答道： 此乃天命，人们不能够违抗。
English: Li Junfeng replied, "This is the will of heaven, people cannot go against it."

古文：王者不死，徒多杀无辜。
现代文：未来称王的人死不了，反而白白地杀死无辜。
English: The future king cannot die, but kills innocents in vain.

古文：且自今以往三十年，其人已老，庶几颇有慈心，为祸或浅。
现代文：而且今后三十年，那个人也已经老了，也许该存有慈善心肠，祸害可能会小些。
English: And in the next thirty years, that person is already old, perhaps should have a charitable heart, the scourge may be less.

古文：今借使得而杀之，天或生壮者肆其怨毒，恐陛下子孙，无遗类矣。 
现代文：如今即使找到此人将其杀死，老天或许会降生更加强壮的人大肆发泄怨恨，恐怕陛下的子孙就没有幸免的了。 
English: Now, even if they find this person and kill him, God willing, there may be a stronger person who will vent his anger, and I am afraid that your descendants will not be spared.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：太宗于是不再过问此事。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：司空梁文昭公房玄龄留守京师，疾笃，上微赴玉华宫，肩舆入殿，至御座侧乃下，相对流涕，因留宫下，闻其小愈则喜形于色，加剧则忧悴。
现代文：司空梁文昭公房玄龄留守在京城，病情加重，太宗征召他到玉华宫，乘坐轿子进入殿内，到太宗御座旁边才下轿，与太宗相对流泪，太宗将房玄龄留在宫中，听说病情好转则喜形于色；病情加重则忧虑憔悴。
English: Emperor Taizong summoned him to the Jade Emperor's Palace, and he took a palanquin and entered the palace. He got off the palanquin next to Emperor Taizong's throne, and he shed tears. Emperor Taizong left him in the palace. When he heard that Emperor Taizong's condition had improved, he was overjoyed; when his condition had worsened, he was worried.

古文：玄龄谓诸子曰： 吾受主上厚恩，今天下无事，唯东征未已，群臣莫敢谏，吾知而不言，死有馀责。 
现代文：房玄龄对他的儿子们说： 我蒙受皇上的隆恩，如今天下无事，只有东征高丽一事没有停止，众位大臣都不敢劝谏，我明知其非而不说话，真是死有余辜啊。 
English: Fang Xuanling said to his sons, "I have received a lot of grace from the emperor. If nothing happens today, only the Eastern Expedition to Korea has not been stopped, and all the ministers do not dare to persuade me, I would not speak, knowing that it was wrong. I am really very sorry."

古文：乃上表谏，以为： 《老子》曰： 知足不辱，知止不殆。 
现代文：于是上表章劝谏，认为： 《老子》说： 知道满足，不会遭到困辱，知道适可而止，不会遇到危险。 
English: "Lao Zi" said: "If you know how to be satisfied, you will not be humiliated; if you know when to stop, you will not be in danger."

古文：陛下功名威德亦可足矣，拓地开疆亦可止矣。且陛下每决一重囚，必令三覆五奏，进素膳，止音乐者，重人命也。
现代文：陛下的功名威德也可以知足了，开拓疆土也当适可而止，而且陛下每次叛决一个死刑犯人，一定要三次复议五次上奏，进素食，停止音乐，这正是重视人的性命啊。
English: His Majesty's merits and virtues can also be satisfied, and the expansion of the territory should also be stopped. Moreover, every time His Majesty rebelled against a death-row prisoner, he must reconsider three times, play five times, eat vegetarian food, and stop music. This is precisely the importance of human life.

古文：今驱无罪之士卒，委之锋刃之下，使肝脑涂地，独不足愍乎！
现代文：如今驱使无罪的士卒，让他们往刀口上送，使之肝脑涂地，难道他们单单不足以怜悯吗！
English: Is it not enough for them to have mercy, that they now drive innocent soldiers to the point of putting them to the sword?

古文：向使高丽违失臣节，诛之可也；侵扰百姓，灭之可也；他日能为中国患，除之可也。
现代文：假使当初高丽违背臣属的礼节，可以诛罚他们；假若侵扰老百姓，可以灭掉他们。以后会成为中原的祸患，也可以除掉他们。
English: If Goryeo initially violated the etiquette of its subjects, it could punish them; if it disturbed the common people, it could exterminate them. Later, it would become a scourge of the Central Plains, and they could be eliminated.

古文：今无此三条而坐烦中国，内为前代雪耻，外为新罗报仇，岂非所存者小，所损者太乎！
现代文：如今没有这三条原因而只是无故烦劳中原百姓，我们对内无非称为前代雪耻，对外不过称为新罗报仇，岂不是所得到的很少，失去的很大吗！
English: Nowadays, without these three reasons, we are just bothering the Central Plains people for no reason. We are nothing more than the shame of the previous generation, and we are nothing more than the revenge of Silla. Isn't it true that what we have gained is very little, and what we have lost is great!

古文：愿陛下许高丽自新，焚陵波之船，罢应募之众，自然华、夷庆赖，远肃迩安。
现代文：希望陛下容许高丽悔过自新，焚毁准备渡海用的船只，停止召募兵众，自然华、夷庆幸有靠，远服近安。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will allow Goryeo to repent and reform, burn the ships preparing to cross the sea, and stop conscripting soldiers.

古文：臣旦夕入地，傥蒙录此哀鸣，死且不朽！ 
现代文：我很快要死去的，倘若承蒙陛下采纳将死者的哀鸣，死了也将不朽。 
English: I am soon to die, and if Your Majesty will hear the lamentation of the dead, death will be immortal.

古文：玄龄之遗爱尚上女高阳公主，上谓公主曰： 彼病笃如此，尚能忧我国家。 
现代文：房玄龄的儿子房遗爱娶太宗女儿高阳公主为妻，太宗对公主说： 你的公公病得这么厉害，还能为国家的事忧心忡忡。 
English: Fang Xuanling's son, Fang Youai, married Princess Gaoyang, the daughter of Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong said to the princess, "Your father-in-law is so ill that he still worries about the affairs of the state.

古文：上自临视，握手与诀，悲不自胜。
现代文：太宗亲去探视，握着房玄龄的手与他告别，悲痛得不能自禁。
English: Emperor Taizong's relatives went to visit him and said goodbye to him, holding his hand. They were so sad that they couldn't help themselves.

古文：癸卯，薨。
现代文：癸卯，房玄龄去世。
English: Fu Xuanling passed away.

古文：柳芳曰：玄龄佐太宗定天下，及终相位，凡三十二年，天下号为贤相；然无迹可寻，德亦至矣。
现代文：柳芳曰：房玄龄辅佐太宗平定天下，直到死于宰相位上，一共三十二年，天下人号称为贤相；然而没有多少事迹可寻，道德也达到至高境界。
English: Liu Fang said: "Fang Xuanling assisted Emperor Taizong in pacifying the country, until he died on the prime minister's throne, a total of thirty-two years, the world's reputation as a sage; however, there are not many deeds to be found, and morality has reached the highest level.

古文：故太宗定祸乱而房、杜不言功，王、魏善谏诤而房、杜让其贤，英、卫善将兵而房、杜行其道，理致太平，善归人主。
现代文：所以太宗平定祸乱而房、杜二人不居功；王、魏徵善于谏诤而房、杜二人不争其贤名；李世、李靖善于领兵作战而房、杜二人辅行文道，使国家太平，将功劳归诸君主。
English: Therefore, Emperor Taizong is good at pacifying disasters, but Du two are not meritorious; Wang and Wei Zheng are good at waging wars, but Du two are not good at waging wars, but Du two are not good at waging wars; Li Shih and Li Jing are good at leading troops into battle, but Du two are good at literature and literature, so that the country is peaceful, and the credit goes to the monarchs.

古文：为唐宗臣，宜哉！
现代文：房玄龄被称为有唐一代的宗臣，是很适宜的。
English: It is very appropriate that Fong Xuanling is known as a Tang Dynasty vassal.

古文：八月，己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月，己酉朔，出现了日食。
English: In August, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丁丑，敕越州都督府及婺、洪等州造海船及双舫千一百艘。
现代文：丁丑，敕令越州都督府以及婺、洪等州修造海船及双舫船一千一百艘。
English: Dingwu, the emperor ordered the governor-general's office of Yue Prefecture, as well as that of Min and Hong Provinces, to build 1,100 seagoing ships and double-hulled ships.

古文：辛未，遣左领军大将军执失思力出金山道击薛延陀馀寇。
现代文：辛未，派遣左领军大将军执失思力从金山道出兵进攻薛延陀残余势力。
English: Xinwei dispatched the general of the left leading army to attack the remaining forces of Xueyanta from Jinshan Road.

古文：九月，庚辰，昆丘道行军大总管阿史那社尔击处月、外密，破之，馀众悉降。
现代文：九月，庚辰，昆丘道行军大总管阿史那社尔进攻处月、处密，将其击败，余众全部投降。
English: In September, Gengchen, the general manager of the march of Kunqiu Road, Ashinashal, attacked Shunyue and Shunmi, defeated them, and all the rest surrendered.

古文：癸未，薛万彻等伐高丽还。
现代文：癸未，薛万彻等人征伐高丽返回朝廷。
English: Soon after, Xue Wancher and others returned to the imperial court after conquering Goryeo.

古文：万彻在军中，使气陵物，裴行方奏其怨望，坐除名，流象州。
现代文：万彻在军中，恃才傲物，盛气凌人，裴行方上奏称其有怨言，因而被罢官除掉名籍，流放到象州。
English: In the army, Wan Che was arrogant and arrogant. Pei Xing reported that he had a complaint, so he was removed from his post and exiled to Xiangzhou.

古文：己丑，新罗奏为百济所攻，破其十三城。
现代文：己丑，新罗向朝廷上奏表称百济进攻其国，攻克十三座城。
English: Embarrassed, Silla sent a report to the imperial court saying that Baekje had attacked their country and conquered thirteen cities.

古文：己亥，以黄门侍郎褚遂良为中书令。
现代文：己亥，任命黄门侍郎褚遂良为中书令。
English: Ji Hai, appointed Huangmen waiter Zou Suiliang to be the middle secretary.

古文：强伟等发民造船，役及山獠，雅、邛、眉三州獠反。
现代文：强伟等人征发百姓造船，山獠人也去做力役，雅、邛、眉三州獠民造反。
English: Qiang Wei and others conscripted and dispatched people to build ships, the people of Shanxi also went to do forced labor, and the people of the three states of Ya, Yao and Mei revolted.

古文：壬寅，遣茂州都督张士贵、右卫将军梁建方发陇右、峡中兵二万馀人以击之。
现代文：壬寅，朝廷派茂州都督张士贵、右卫将军梁建方征发陇右、峡中的士兵二万多人进攻獠民。
English: At the same time, the imperial court sent the governor of Maozhou, Zhang Shigui, and the right guard general, Liang Jianfang, to recruit and dispatch more than 20,000 soldiers from the right and middle of the gorge to attack the people.

古文：蜀人苦造船之役，或乞输直雇潭州人造船；上许之。
现代文：蜀人苦于造船的劳役，有人请求出价钱雇佣潭州人造船，太宗允许。
English: The people of Shu were suffering from the hard labor of shipbuilding. Someone asked for an offer to hire the people of Tanzhou to build a ship, which was allowed by Taizong.

古文：州县督迫严急，民至卖田宅、鬻子女不能供，谷价踊贵，剑外骚然。
现代文：州县官吏督促过急，百姓们甚至卖田地宅院、卖儿卖女都供不上，粮价猛涨，引起剑外一带骚动。
English: State and county officials urged too hastily, the people could not even afford to sell their fields, houses, and daughters, and grain prices soared, causing turmoil in the Jianwai area.

古文：上闻之，遣司农少卿长孙知人驰驿往视之。
现代文：太宗听说后，派司农寺少卿长孙知人飞奔前往视察。
English: After Taizong heard about it, he sent the Junior Secretary of the Agricultural Temple and the eldest grandson of a friend to rush to inspect it.

古文：知人奏称： 蜀人脆弱，不耐劳剧。
现代文：知人上奏称： 蜀人身体虚弱，不能承受剧烈劳动。
English: An acquaintance said: Shu people are physically weak and cannot bear strenuous labor.

古文：大船一艘，庸绢二千二百三十六匹。
现代文：大船一艘，雇人要给绢二千二百三十六匹。
English: There was a great ship with two thousand two hundred and thirty-six asses.

古文：山谷已伐之木，挽曳未毕，复征船庸，二事并集，民不能堪，宜加存养。 
现代文：山谷之中已经砍伐的树木，还没有全部运出来，又要征调船庸，二件事并在一起，百姓们承受不了，应当加以存恤养护。 
English: The trees that have already been cut down in the valley have not all been transported out, and the navy has to be conscripted. The two things together are unbearable for the people, and they should be preserved and conserved.

古文：上乃敕潭州船庸皆从官给。
现代文：太宗于是敕令雇潭州人的造船费用由政府支给。
English: Emperor Taizong then ordered the government to pay for the shipbuilding costs of the people from Tanzhou.

古文：冬，十月，癸丑，车驾还京师。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸丑，太宗车驾回到京城。
English: In winter, in October, when the weather is gloomy, Taizong drives back to Beijing.

古文：回纥吐迷度兄子乌纥蒸其叔母。
现代文：回纥吐迷度的侄子乌纥娶其婶婶为妻。
English: Wu Yao, the nephew of a wandering disciple, married his aunt.

古文：乌纥与俱陆莫贺达官俱罗勃，皆突厥车鼻可汗之婿也，相与谋杀吐迷度以归车鼻。
现代文：乌纥与俱陆莫贺侍从官俱罗勃，都是突厥车鼻可汗的女婿，二人互相谋划杀掉吐迷度归附车鼻。
English: Wu Xi and Moga Moga, both sons-in-law of the Turkic Khagan Khan, plotted to kill each other.

古文：乌纥夜引十馀骑袭吐迷度，杀之。
现代文：乌纥乘夜晚带领十多个骑兵袭击吐迷度，将他杀死。
English: During the night, Wu Gan led more than ten cavalrymen to attack Tu Fu, killing him.

古文：燕然副都护元礼臣使人诱乌纥，许奏以为瀚海都督，乌纥轻骑诣礼臣谢，礼臣执而斩之，以闻。
现代文：燕然副都护元礼臣派人诱降乌纥，答应他上奏太宗封他为瀚海都督，乌纥骑马到元礼臣处面谢，礼臣将他抓起来杀死，上报朝廷。
English: Yan Ran, the vice-governor of the capital, and the former courtier sent someone to seduce Wu Xi, and promised him to ascend to the throne and make him the governor of the Han Sea. Wu Xi rode to the former courtier to thank him, and the courtier arrested and killed him, and reported to the imperial court.

古文：上恐回纥部落离散，遣兵部尚书崔敦礼往安抚之。
现代文：太宗担心回纥各部落分散，派兵部尚书崔敦礼前往安抚。
English: Taizong was worried that the tribes in Hui Province would disperse, so he sent the military commander Shangshu Cui Dunli to pacify them.

古文：久之，俱罗勃入见，上留之不遣。
现代文：又过了一些天，俱罗勃到朝中拜见太宗，太宗将他留下，不让他回去。
English: A few days later, Kurobe went to the court to visit Taizong. Taizong kept him and did not let him go back.

古文：阿史那社尔既破处月、处密，引兵自焉耆之西趋龟兹北境，分兵为五道，出其不意，焉耆王薛婆阿那支弃城奔龟兹，保其东境。
现代文：阿史那社尔打败处月、处密后，领兵从焉耆的西面直抵龟兹北部边境，分兵五路，出其不意，焉耆国王薛婆阿那支弃城投奔龟兹，据守其东部边境。
English: After Ashnasal defeated Chuy and Chuy, he led his army from the west of Yancheng straight to the northern border of Kuez. He divided his army into five parts. Unexpectedly, Yancheng's king, Xie Baana, abandoned the city and fled to Kuez to guard his eastern border.

古文：社尔遣兵追击，擒而斩之，立其从父弟先那准为焉耆王，使修职贡。
现代文：阿史那社尔派兵追击，生擒并杀掉他，立他的堂弟先那准为焉耆国王，让他继续向唐朝进贡。
English: Ashina-sar sent troops to pursue, capture and kill him, and set up his cousin Senanajun as the king of Yan'an, so that he could continue to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：龟兹大震，守将多弃城走。
现代文：龟兹大为震动，守城将士多弃城逃走。
English: The tremors were so great that many of the castle's defenders abandoned the castle and fled.

古文：社尔进屯碛口，去其都城三百里，遣伊州刺史韩威帅千馀骑为前锋，骁卫将军曹继叔次之。
现代文：阿史那社尔进驻碛口，离龟兹都城三百里，派伊州刺史韩威率领一千多骑兵为前锋，骁卫将军曹继叔紧随其后。
English: Ashinashal entered Hekou, three hundred miles from the capital city, and sent Izhou Shishi Han Wei to lead more than a thousand cavalry as a striker, followed by Wei general Cao Jishu.

古文：至多褐城，龟兹王诃利布失毕、其相那利、羯猎颠帅众五万拒战。
现代文：到了多褐城，龟兹国王诃利布失华、丞相那利、羯猎颠率领五万兵众抵抗。
English: When they arrived at the city of Dohuk, the Kuez king, Qulib, lost his glory, and the chieftains, Nali and Qiuhuang, led fifty thousand soldiers to resist.

古文：锋刃甫接，威引兵伪遁，龟兹悉众追之，行三十里，与继叔军合。
现代文：短兵相接，韩威引兵假装后退，龟兹兵倾巢出兵追击，跑了有三十里，韩威与曹继叔的军队会合。
English: The short soldiers met, Han Wei's leading soldiers pretended to retreat, and the tortoise soldiers rushed out to pursue. After running for thirty miles, Han Wei and Cao Jisun's army met.

古文：龟兹惧，将却，继叔乘之，龟兹大败，逐北八十里。
现代文：龟兹兵害怕，想要退却，曹继叔乘机反击，龟兹大败，北逃八十里。
English: The tortoise soldiers were afraid and wanted to retreat. Cao Jishun took the opportunity to fight back. The tortoise was defeated and fled 80 miles north.

古文：甲戌，以回纥吐迷度子翊左郎将婆闰为左骁卫大将军、大俟利发、瀚海都督。
现代文：甲戌，唐朝任命回纥吐迷度的儿子、翊左郎将婆闰为左骁卫大将军、大俟利发、瀚海都督。
English: Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the Tang Dynasty appointed Gao Zaro, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao Jian, the son of Gao J

古文：十一月，庚子，契丹帅窟哥、奚帅可度者并帅所部内属。
现代文：十一月，庚子，契丹将领窟哥、奚族将领可度者一同率领本部归附唐朝。
English: In November, Geng Zi, Khitan general Gu Ge, and Qiang general Kedu led the headquarters to be annexed to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：以契丹部为松漠府，以窟哥为都督；又以其别帅达稽等部为峭落等九州，各以其辱纥主为刺史。
现代文：朝廷将契丹本部改为松漠府，任命窟哥为都督；又以其将领达稽等部为峭落等九州，各自任命他们的首领为刺史。
English: The imperial court changed the headquarters of the Khitan Empire to Songpan Prefecture and appointed Gu Ge as the governor; it also appointed its generals such as Dachi as Qiaolou and other Kyushu, and each appointed their leaders as Shishi.

古文：以奚部为饶乐府，以可度者为都督；又以其别帅阿会等部为弱水等五州，亦各以其辱纥主为刺史。
现代文：以奚族本部为铙乐府，任命可度者为都督；又以其将领阿会等部为弱水等五州，也是各任命其部族首领为刺史。
English: With the headquarters of the Yi people as the capital of the Yi Le Prefecture, the one who can be defeated is appointed as the governor; and with the general of the Ya Association and other departments as the weak water and other five states, and each appoints its tribal leader as the chief historian.

古文：辛丑，置东夷校尉官于营州。
现代文：辛丑，在营州设置东夷校尉官。
English: Xin ugly, set up in Yingzhou Dongyi lieutenant.

古文：十二月，庚午，太子为文德皇后作大慈恩寺成。
现代文：十二月，庚午，太子李治为文德皇后建造大慈恩寺竣工。
English: In the late afternoon of December, Prince Li Zhi completed the construction of Dai Ci En Temple for Empress Wente.

古文：龟兹王布失毕既败，走保都城，阿史那社尔进军逼之，布失毕轻骑西走。
现代文：龟兹国王布失毕兵败后，退保都城，阿史那社尔急行军逼近，布失毕率领轻骑出城西逃。
English: After the defeat of the king of Kuez, Bu Zuobi, the capital was abandoned, and the army of Ashnasher was approaching. Bu Zuobi led a light cavalry to escape from the west of the city.

古文：社尔拔其城，使安西都护郭孝恪守之。
现代文：社尔攻下其都城，让安西都护郭孝恪守卫此城。
English: Sal captured its capital city, leaving Anxi Capital Guard Guo Xiao to guard the city.

古文：沙州刺史苏海政、尚辇奉御薛万备帅精骑追布失毕，行六百里，布失毕窘急，保拨换城，社尔进军攻之四旬，闰月，丁丑，拔之，擒布失毕及羯猎颠。
现代文：沙州刺史苏海政、尚辇奉御薛万备率领精锐骑兵追击布失毕，行军六百里，布失毕慌慌张张，据守拨换城，社尔领兵攻城，用了四十天，闰十二月，丁丑，攻陷城池，生擒布失毕以及羯猎颠。
English: Shu Hai Zheng, the governor of Shazhou, and Shang Xuan, the vassal of Xue Wan Bei, led the elite cavalry in pursuit of the lost cloth. They marched for six hundred miles. The lost cloth panicked and panicked. The city was transferred to the defenders. The leader of the army of the city of Shaer attacked the city. It took forty days, leap December, Dingwu, to capture the city, the lost cloth and the hunting.

古文：那利脱身走，潜引西突厥之众并其国兵万馀人，袭击孝恪。
现代文：那利只身逃走，暗中勾引西突厥的兵力与本国兵力合在一处共一万多人，袭击郭孝恪。
English: Nali fled alone, secretly lured the West Turk's forces to join his own forces in a place with a total of more than ten thousand people, and attacked Guo Xiaojia.

古文：孝恪营于城外，龟兹人或告之，孝恪不以为意。
现代文：郭孝恪在城外安营扎帐，有的龟兹人告诉他那利即将赶来，孝恪不以为意。
English: Guo Xiaoqiu camped outside the city. Some turtle people told him that Nali was about to arrive, but Xiaoqiu did not believe them.

古文：那利奄至，孝恪帅所部千馀人将入城，那利之众已登城矣。城中降胡与之相应，共击孝恪，矢刃如雨。孝恪不能敌，将复出，死于西门。
现代文：那利忽然大兵压境，郭孝恪率领本部一千多人想要进入城里，那利兵众已经登上城墙，城内投降的胡兵与那利里应外合，共同夹击郭孝恪，万箭齐发，刀剑如雨，孝恪抵挡不住，想要再次冲出来，被射死在西门。
English: Suddenly, the soldiers pressed the border, Guo Xiaoqiu led the headquarters of more than a thousand people want to enter the city, the soldiers have boarded the city wall, the Hu soldiers who surrendered in the city and Nariri should meet outside, jointly clamped Guo Xiaoqiu, thousands of arrows fired, swords rained, Xiaoqiu could not resist, wanted to rush out again, was shot dead at the West Gate.

古文：城中大扰，仓部郎中崔义超召募得二百人，卫军资财物，与龟兹战于城中，曹继叔、韩威亦营于城外，自城西北隅击之。
现代文：城中大乱，仓部郎中崔义超召募得二百人，保卫军需财物，与龟兹兵在城中展开激战，曹继叔、韩威也在城外扎营，从城西北角进攻龟兹。
English: The city was in turmoil. Cui Yichao, the head of the warehouse department, recruited two hundred people to defend the army's property and fought a fierce battle with the turtle soldiers in the city. Cao Jizhi and Han Wei also camped outside the city and attacked the turtles from the northwest corner of the city.

古文：那利经宿乃退，斩首三千馀级，城中始定。
现代文：经过一夜激战，那利兵撤退，唐军杀死龟兹兵三千多人，城中才安定下来。
English: After a night of fierce fighting, the Nali soldiers retreated, the Tang army killed more than three thousand Kuez soldiers, and the city settled down.

古文：后旬馀日，那利复引山北龟兹万馀人趣都城，继叔逆击，大破之，斩首八千级。
现代文：十多天之后，那利又带引山北龟兹一万多人逼近都城，曹继叔迎击，将其打败，杀死八千人。
English: More than ten days later, Nari again led more than ten thousand people to approach the capital city, Cao Jishu counterattacked, defeated it, and killed eight thousand people.

古文：那利单骑走，龟兹人执之，以诣军门。
现代文：那利一个人骑马逃走，龟兹人将他抓住，送到军门。
English: Nali fled alone on horseback, and the turtle people caught him and took him to the military gate.

古文：阿史那社尔前后破其大城五，遣左卫郎将权祗甫诣诸城，开示祸福，皆相帅请降，凡得七百馀城，虏男女数万口。
现代文：阿史那社尔前后共攻下大城五座，派左卫郎将权祗甫到各个城中，晓以祸福，各城相继请求投降，共得七百多城，俘虏男女几万人。
English: A total of five large cities were captured before and after Ashina-shal, and Zaweiro sent Quanzhang Fu to each city to ask for good or bad fortune, and each city successively requested surrender. In total, more than seven hundred cities were captured, and tens of thousands of men and women were captured.

古文：社尔乃召其父老，宣国威灵，谕以伐罪之意，立其王之弟叶护为主，龟兹人大喜。
现代文：社尔于是召集城中父老，宣示朝廷的威严神灵，讲明征伐有罪之国的道理，立龟兹国王的弟弟叶护为国王；龟兹人非常高兴。
English: Sal then called together the elders of the city to proclaim the majesty of the imperial court and the gods, to explain the principle of conquering the guilty country, and to appoint the king's brother Ye Guo as king; the people of Gezi were very happy.

古文：西域震骇，西突厥、于阗、安国争馈驼马军粮，社尔勒石纪功而还。
现代文：西域地区震骇，西突厥、于阗、安国争着送骆驼马匹和军粮，社尔刻石碑纪功，而后班师回朝。
English: The western region was shaken. West Turkistan, Yunnan, and An Province vied with each other to send camels, horses, and military supplies, as well as a stone monument commemorating their feats, and the rest of the division returned to the North.

古文：戊寅，以昆丘道行军总管、左骁卫将军阿史那贺鲁为泥伏沙钵罗叶护，赐以鼓纛，使招讨西突厥之未服者。
现代文：戊寅，唐朝任命昆丘道行军总管、左骁卫将军阿史那贺鲁为泥伏沙钵罗叶护，赐给鼓和大旗，让他招抚讨伐未归服的西突厥人。
English: In Wuyin, the Tang Dynasty appointed the general manager of the march of Kunqiu Road, General Ashina Horu of the Left Division of the National Guard, as the muddy guardian, and gave him a drum and a large flag to encourage him to fight the Western Turks who had not surrendered.

古文：癸未，新罗相金春秋及其子文王入见。
现代文：癸未，新罗国丞相金春秋与他的儿子金文王来到唐朝拜见太宗。
English: Soon after, Jin Chunqiu, the prime minister of Silla, and his son, King Jinwen, came to Tang Dynasty to pay homage to Emperor Taizong.

古文：春秋，真德之弟也。
现代文：金春秋是金真德的弟弟。
English: Jin Chunqiu is the younger brother of Jin Zhende.

古文：上以春秋为特进，文王为左武卫将军。
现代文：太宗封春秋为特进，文王为左武卫将军。
English: Emperor Taizong designated Prince Chunqiu as a special envoy, while King Wen became General Zuowei.

古文：春秋请改章服从中国，内出冬服赐之。
现代文：春秋请求按照唐朝的式样改革新罗官员的礼服，太宗拿出冬服赐给他。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Emperor Taizong requested that the ceremonial dress of Silla officials be reformed according to the Tang Dynasty style, and Emperor Taizong took out winter clothes and gave them to him.

古文：贞观二十三年己酉，公元六四九年
现代文：贞观二十三年
English: The 23rd year of Zhengu

古文：春，正月，辛亥，龟兹王布失毕及其相那利等至京师，上责让而释之，以布失毕为左武卫中郎将。
现代文：春季正月，辛亥，龟兹国王布失毕及其丞相那利等人被押到了京城，太宗予以责备后将他们放了，任命布失毕为左武卫中郎将。
English: In the first month of spring, Xinhai, King Bu Xubi and his prime minister, Nari, were taken to the capital. Taizong reprimanded them and released them, appointing Bu Xubi as the Middle Captain of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：西南徒莫祗等蛮内附，以其地为傍、望、览、丘四州，隶朗州都督府。
现代文：西南地区徒莫祗等蛮族归附唐朝，以其辖地设傍、望、览、丘四州，隶属于朗州都督府。
English: The barbarian tribes such as the Tu Mo Yan in the southwestern region were attached to the Tang Dynasty, and the four prefectures of Bin, Wang, Zhan and Qiu were set up under their jurisdiction, and they were subordinate to the Langzhou Governor's Office.

古文：上以突厥车鼻可汗不入朝，遣右骁卫郎将高侃发回纥、仆骨等兵袭击之。
现代文：太宗因突厥车鼻可汗不来朝见，派右骁卫郎将高侃征发回纥、仆骨等兵马袭击突厥。
English: Emperor Taizong did not come to the imperial court to meet the Turkic Khagan, so he sent Gao Kan to attack the Turk with his soldiers and horses.

古文：兵入其境，诸部落相继来降。
现代文：军队到了突厥境内，各部相继前来投降。
English: The army arrived in Turkish territory, and all the ministries came one after another to surrender.

古文：拔悉密吐屯肥罗察降，以其地置新黎州。
现代文：拔悉密首领肥罗察投降，唐朝在其原地设置新黎州。
English: Fat Luocha, the leader of Buximei, surrendered, and the Tang Dynasty set up Xinli Prefecture in its place.

古文：二月，丙戌，置瑶池都督府，隶安西都护；戊子，以左卫将军阿史那贺鲁为瑶池都督。
现代文：二月，丙戌，唐朝设置瑶池都督府，隶属于安西都护；戊子，任命左卫将军阿史那贺鲁为瑶池都督。
English: In February, the Tang Dynasty set up the Dangchi Governor's Office, which was subordinate to the Anxi Capital Guard, and appointed the Left Guard General Ashina Horu as the Dangchi Governor.

古文：三月，丙辰，置丰州都督府，使燕然都护李素立兼都督。
现代文：三月，丙辰，唐朝设置丰州都督府，由燕然都护李素立兼任都督职。
English: In March, the Tang Dynasty set up the Fengzhou Governor's Office in Binchen, with Yan Ran as the governor and Li Suri as the deputy governor.

古文：去冬旱，至是始雨。
现代文：上一年冬季大旱，到此时才下了第一场雨。
English: Last year, there was a severe drought in the winter, and it was only at this time that the first rain fell.

古文：辛酉，上力疾至显道门外，赦天下。
现代文：辛酉，太宗支撑病体到了显道门外，大赦天下。
English: Sincerely, Taizong's supporting body has arrived outside the gate of Xian Dao, and it is amnestied by the world.

古文：丁卯，敕太子于金液门听政。
现代文：丁卯，太宗敕令太子李治在金液门听政。
English: Dingwu, Emperor Taizong ordered Prince Li Zhi to listen to the government in Jinshu Gate.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，上行幸翠微宫。
现代文：夏季四月，乙亥，太宗行幸翠微宫。
English: In the summer of April, the Year of the Boar, Taizong Xingxing Tsui Weiguang was born.

古文：上谓太子曰： 李世勣才智有馀，然汝与之无恩，恐不能怀服。
现代文：太宗对太子说： 李世才智有余，然而你对他没有恩德，恐怕不能够敬服你。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the crown prince, "Li Shidong has more than enough talent and wisdom, but you are not kind to him. I'm afraid I can't respect you.

古文：我今黜之，若其即行，俟我死，汝于后用为仆射，亲任之；若徘徊顾望，当杀之耳。 
现代文：我现在将他降职，假如他即刻就走，等我死后，你以后可再重用他为仆射，视为亲信；如果他俳徊观望，应当杀掉他。 
English: If I demote him now, if he leaves immediately, when I die, you can use him again as a minion, as a confidant; if he lingers, you should kill him.

古文：五月，戊午，以同中书门下三品李世勣为叠州都督；世勣受诏，不至家而去。
现代文：五月，戊午，任命同中书门下三品李世为叠州都督；世接受诏令后，没有回家即去上任。
English: In the afternoon of May, he appointed Li Shih, the third in line to the throne and a scholar of Chinese classics, as the governor of Meizhou. After accepting the imperial edict, Li Shih went to take office without returning home.

古文：辛酉，开府仪同三司卫景武公李靖薨。
现代文：辛酉，开府仪同三司卫景武公李靖去世。
English: Xin Zhen, Kaifu Yi and the Third Division of Wei Jingwu Gong Li Jing passed away.

古文：上苦利增剧，太子昼夜不离侧，或累日不食，发有变白者。
现代文：太宗病情加重，上吐下泄，太子昼夜不离身边，有时一连几日不进食，头发有的已变白。
English: Taizong's condition worsened, he vomited and leaked, the prince did not leave his side day and night, sometimes he did not eat for several days in a row, and some of his hair had turned white.

古文：上泣曰： 汝能孝爱如此，吾死何恨！ 
现代文：太宗流着泪说： 你这么孝敬疼爱我，我死了还有什么遗憾！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Taizong said, "You are so filial to me, you love and respect me so much, how can you regret my death?

古文：丁卯，疾笃，召长孙无忌入含风殿。
现代文：丁卯，太宗病情危急，召长孙无忌到含风殿。
English: Dingwu, Taizong's condition was critical, so he summoned his eldest grandson to the Hall of the Winds.

古文：上卧，引手扪无忌颐，无忌哭，悲不自胜；上竟不得有所言，因令无忌出。
现代文：太宗躺在床上，伸出手摸着长孙无忌的腮，无忌大声痛哭，不能自己；太宗竟说不出话来，于是令无忌出宫。
English: Taizong lay on the bed, stretched out his hand to touch the eldest grandson Muji's eyelid, Muji cried loudly and couldn't help himself; Taizong couldn't even speak, so he let Muji out of the palace.

古文：己巳，复召无忌及褚遂良入卧内，谓之曰： 朕今悉以后事付公辈。
现代文：己巳，又召长孙无忌与褚遂良进入卧室内，对他们说： 朕如今将后事全都托付给你们。
English: He then called his eldest grandson, Muji, and his son, Suiliang, into the bedroom and said to them, "I am entrusting all future matters to you now.

古文：太子仁孝，公辈所知，善辅导之！ 
现代文：太子仁义孝敬，你们也都知道的，望你们善加辅佐教导！ 
English: As you all know, the prince is benevolent, righteous and filial. I hope you will be kind enough to help and guide him!

古文：谓太子曰： 无忌、遂良在，汝勿忧天下！ 
现代文：对太子说： 有无忌、遂良在，你不用为大唐江山担忧！ 
English: He said to the prince, "You don't have to worry about the Great Tang Dynasty, because Sui Liang is here!

古文：又谓遂良曰： 无忌尽忠于我，我有天下，多其力也。我死，勿令谗人间之。 
现代文：又对褚遂良说： 无忌对我竭尽忠诚，我能拥有大唐江山，无忌出力较多，我死之后，不要让小人进谗言挑拨离间。 
English: He also said to Zou Suiliang: "You must be loyal to me to the best of your ability. If I can have a great Tang Dynasty, I must be able to contribute more. After my death, don't let villains sow discord.

古文：仍令遂良草遗诏。
现代文：于是令褚遂良草拟遗诏。
English: Therefore, he ordered Sui Liang to draft the will.

古文：有顷，上崩。
现代文：过了不久，太宗去世。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong passed away.

古文：太子拥无忌颈，号恸将绝。无忌揽涕，请处分众事以安内外。太子哀号不已，无忌曰： 主上以宗庙社稷付殿下，岂得效匹夫唯哭泣乎！ 
现代文：太子抱着长孙无忌的脖子，号淘痛哭，悲痛欲绝，长孙无忌抹去眼泪，请求太子处理众事以安朝内外，太子不停地哀嚎，无忌说： 皇上将宗庙社稷交付给殿下，怎么能效法一般人只知道哭泣呢？ 
English: The prince hugged the neck of his eldest grandson, crying bitterly, grief-stricken, the eldest grandson wiped away his tears and asked the prince to deal with all matters in and out of the An Dynasty. The prince kept mourning and said: The emperor handed over the family temple charter to his highness, how can he follow the example of ordinary people who only know how to cry?

古文：乃秘不发丧。
现代文：于是秘不发丧。
English: As a result, there was no mourning.

古文：庚午，无忌等请太子先还，飞骑、劲兵及旧将皆从。
现代文：庚午，长孙无忌等人请求太子先回到皇宫，飞骑、精悍步兵及旧将领纷纷跟随。
English: In the late afternoon, the eldest grandson Muji and others asked the prince to return to the palace first, followed by the cavalry, the infantry and the old generals.

古文：辛未，太子入京城；大行御马舆，侍卫如平日，继太子而至，顿于两仪殿。
现代文：辛未，太子进入京城；辞世的天子所用的马车，侍卫兵如同平时一样，继太子之后到达京城，安顿在两仪殿。
English: Xinwei, the prince entered the capital; the carriage used by the deceased prince, the attendants and guards, as usual, arrived in the capital after the prince and settled in the two halls.

古文：以太子左庶子于志宁为侍中，少詹事张行成兼侍中，以检校刑部尚书、右庶子、兼吏部侍郎高季辅兼中书令。
现代文：任命太子左庶子于志宁为侍中，少詹事张行成兼任侍中，任命检校刑部尚书、右庶子、兼吏部侍郎高季辅兼任中书令。
English: The prince's left illegitimate son, Yu Shining, was appointed as a chamberlain, the minor Zhan Zhi, Zhang Xingcheng, also served as a chamberlain, and the school inspector of the Criminal Investigation Department, the right illegitimate son, and the clerk of the Criminal Investigation Department, Gao Jisuke, also served as a junior clerk.

古文：壬申，发丧太极殿，宣遗诏，太子即位。
现代文：壬申，在太极殿发丧，宣示太宗遗诏，太子即皇帝位。
English: Jinshin mourned at the Taiji Hall and proclaimed the Emperor Taizong's last will and testament, proclaiming that the crown prince was the emperor.

古文：军国大事，不可停阙；平常细务，委之有司。
现代文：军国大事，不可停下不办；平常琐细事务，委托给有关官署。
English: Military and national affairs must not be left unattended; ordinary trivial affairs should be entrusted to the relevant government departments.

古文：诸王为都督、刺史者，并听奔丧，濮王泰不在来限。
现代文：诸王在外任都督、刺史的，都听凭他们前来奔丧，但濮王李泰不在奔丧的范围内。
English: All the kings and emperors who served as governors-general or satirists in foreign countries had them come to their funerals, but King Li Tai was not within the scope of the funerals.

古文：罢辽东之役及诸土木之功。
现代文：废止辽东的征战及各项土木工程。
English: The military expedition to Liaodong and various civil engineering projects were cancelled.

古文：四夷之人入仕于朝及来朝贡者数百人，闻丧皆恸哭，剪发、剺面、割耳，流血洒地。
现代文：四方各部族在朝做官及来朝进贡的几百人，听说太宗死了，都失声痛哭，剪头发、用刀划脸、割耳朵等，流血满地。
English: When they heard that Taizong had died, the hundreds of people from all the tribes in the four directions who had served as officials in the imperial court and who had come to the imperial court to pay tribute all broke down in tears, cut their hair, slashed their faces with knives, cut their ears, and so on, and bled all over the ground.

古文：六月，甲戌朔，高宗即位，赦天下。
现代文：六月，甲戌朔，高宗李治即位，大赦天下。
English: In June, Gaozong Li Zhi ascended to the throne.

古文：丁丑，以叠州都督李勣为特进、检校洛州刺史、洛阳宫留守。
现代文：丁丑，任命叠州都督李世为特进、检校洛州刺史、洛阳宫留守。
English: Ding Yuxi appointed Li Shih, the governor of Liaozhou, as a special envoy to inspect the school, inspect the history of Lozhou, and inspect the Luoyang Palace.

古文：先是，太宗二名，令天下不连言者勿避；至是，始改官名犯先帝讳者。
现代文：先前，太宗 世民 二字，令天下不连在一起写的不用避讳；到了此时，开始更改犯先帝名讳的官名。
English: Previously, there was no need to shy away from writing the words "Taizong Shimin" (Tai Zong Shimin) to make the world stand together; at this time, they began to change the official names of those who had offended the former emperor's reputation.

古文：癸未，以长孙无忌为太尉，兼检校中书令，知尚书、门下二省事。
现代文：癸未，任命长孙无忌为太尉，兼检校中书令，掌管尚书、门下二省事务。
English: At the same time, he appointed his eldest grandson to be the first lieutenant, and also the inspector of the school, in charge of the school and the affairs of the two provinces under him.

古文：无忌固辞知尚书省事，帝许之，仍令以大尉同中书门下三品。
现代文：无忌执意辞退掌管尚书省，高宗答允，于是命他为太尉同中书门下三品。
English: Without hesitation, Gaozong declined to take charge of Shangshu Province, and Gaozong agreed, so he ordered him to be a lieutenant and the third grade of Zhongshu.

古文：癸巳，以李勣为开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
现代文：癸巳，任命李世为开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
English: At the same time, Li Shih was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong and the third grade of the middle school of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：阿史那社尔之破龟兹也，行军长史薛万备请因兵威说于阗王伏阇信入朝，社尔从之。
现代文：阿史那社尔打败龟兹后，行军长史薛万备请求借着军队威慑劝说于阗国王伏信入京朝见，社尔听从其意见。
English: After Ashina Sal defeated Kuez, the commander of the march, Shi Xue Wanbei, requested that the army be used as a deterrent to persuade King Fuxin of Yunnan to visit the imperial court in Beijing, and Sal followed his advice.

古文：秋，七月，己酉，伏阇信随万备入朝，诏入谒梓宫。
现代文：秋季，七月，己酉，伏信随薛万备入朝，高宗下诏让他谒见太宗灵柩。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ji Ye, Fuxin followed Xue Wan Bei into the imperial court, and Gao Zong issued an edict to let him see Emperor Taizong's coffin.

古文：八月，癸酉，夜，地震，晋州尤甚，压杀五千馀人。
现代文：八月，癸酉，夜里，发生地震，晋州震情尤其严重，死五千多人。
English: In August, in the middle of the night, an earthquake occurred. The earthquake in Jinzhou was particularly severe, killing more than five thousand people.

古文：庚寅，葬文皇帝于昭陵，庙号太宗。
现代文：庚寅，安葬太宗皇帝于昭陵，庙号太宗。
English: Geng Yin, Emperor Taizong was buried in Zhaoling, and the temple name was Taizong.

古文：阿史那社尔、契苾何力请杀身殉葬，上遣人谕以先旨不许。
现代文：阿史那社尔、契何力请求自杀殉葬，高宗派人告诉他们先帝遗旨不允许。
English: Ashina Sal and Chi Ho Li requested suicide and martyrdom, but the high-sect followers told them that the last emperor's will was not allowed.

古文：蛮夷君长为先帝所擒服者颉利等十四人，皆琢石为其像，刻名列于北司马门内。
现代文：被太宗擒获归服的各部族首领颉利等十四人，都雕刻他们的石人像，并刻上名字排列在北司马门内。
English: Fourteen people, including the chiefs of various tribes who were subjugated by Emperor Taizong, carved their stone statues and engraved their names and arranged them inside the North Sima Gate.

古文：丁酉，礼部尚书许敬宗奏弘农府君庙应毁，请藏主于西夹室；从之。
现代文：丁酉，礼部尚书许敬宗奏请应毁掉弘农府君庙，请将供奉的神主藏在太庙的西夹室，高宗依准。
English: Ding Xuan, the Rectification Department's Shangshu Xu Jing Zongso requested that the Hongnongfu Jun Temple should be destroyed, and that the enshrined deity should be hidden in the west wing of the Great Temple. Gao Zong complied.

古文：九月，乙卯，以李勣为左仆射。
现代文：九月，乙卯，任命李世为尚书左仆射。
English: In September, Emperor Wu appointed Li Si as Shang Shushi's second-in-command.

古文：冬，十月，以突厥诸部置舍利等五州隶云中都督府，苏农等六州隶定襄都督府。
现代文：冬季，十月，在突厥各部设置舍利等五州隶属于云中都督府，苏农等六州隶属定襄都督府。
English: In winter and October, five prefectures such as Sheli, which were set up in various Turkic provinces, were subordinated to the Yunnan governor's office, and six prefectures such as Sunong were subordinated to the Dingxiang governor's office.

古文：乙亥，上问大理卿唐临系囚之数，对曰： 见囚五十馀人，唯二人应死。 
现代文：乙亥，高宗询问大理寺卿唐临在押的囚犯数目，答道： 现关押五十多人，只有二人应当处死。 
English: Eihei, Gaozong inquired about the number of prisoners detained by Tang Lin, the head of the Dali Temple, and replied: There are more than fifty people currently detained, but only two should be executed.

古文：上悦。
现代文：高宗听后十分高兴。
English: The second generation is very happy.

古文：上尝录系囚，前卿所处者多号呼称冤，临所处者独无言。
现代文：高宗曾亲自讯问犯人的罪状，前任大理寺卿处置过的犯人多大声喊冤。唐临处置的犯人却不发一言。
English: Gao Zong had personally interrogated the crimes of the prisoners. The prisoners who had been dealt with by his predecessor, Dalijiqing, shouted their grievances loudly. The prisoners dealt with by Tang Lin did not utter a word.

古文：上怪，问其故。
现代文：高宗感到奇怪，问他们是何原因。
English: Gao Zong felt strange and asked them what the reason was.

古文：囚曰： 唐卿所处，本自无冤。 
现代文：犯人们说： 唐临判处的，本来就无冤枉。 
English: The criminals said: There was nothing wrong with the sentence handed down by Tang Lin.

古文：上叹息良久，曰： 治狱者不当如是邪！ 
现代文：高宗感叹很久，说道： 治理刑狱的官员不应当如此吗！ 
English: Gao Zong sighed for a long time and said, "Isn't that how prison officials should be!"

古文：上以吐蕃赞普弄赞为驸马都尉，封西海郡王。
现代文：高宗任命吐蕃赞普弃宗弄赞为驸马都尉，封为西海郡王。
English: Gaozong appointed Tuyanzang Puyangzong Nanzang as the commander of the cavalry and crowned him the king of Xihai County.

古文：赞普致书于长孙无忌等云： 天子初即位，臣下有不忠者，当勒兵赴国讨除之。 
现代文：赞普寄书给长孙无忌等人写道： 大唐天子刚刚即位，大臣有不忠诚的，理当率兵赴国内讨伐除灭。 
English: Zampu wrote in a letter to his eldest grandson Muji and others: Datang Tianzi has just ascended to the throne, and some ministers are not loyal, so it is reasonable to lead soldiers to the country to fight and eliminate them.

古文：十二月，诏濮王泰开府置僚属，车服珍膳，特加优异。
现代文：十二月，高宗颁布诏令允许濮王李泰开设府署设置僚属，车马服饰与珍贵膳食等，特加优惠供给。
English: In December, Emperor Gaozong issued an imperial edict to allow Emperor Taizong to open a government office, set up subordinates, chariot and horse costumes and precious meals, etc., with special preferential supply.

古文：高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝上之上
现代文：高宗天皇大圣大弘孝皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Gaozong is superior to Emperor Daishodaihongko

古文：永徽元年庚戌，公元六五零年
现代文：唐高宗永徽元年春季正月，辛丑朔，改年号为永徽。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Tang Gaozong Yonghui, Xin uglishuo, the year was changed to Yonghui.

古文：春，正月，辛丑朔，改元。丙午，立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：丙午，高宗立妃子王氏为皇后。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Emperor Gaozong made Princess Wang the empress.

古文：后，思政之孙也。
现代文：皇后乃是王思政的孙女。
English: The empress is the granddaughter of Wang Sizheng.

古文：以后父仁祐为特进、魏国公。
现代文：封皇后的父亲王仁为特进、魏国公。
English: The queen's father, Wang Ren, was a special envoy and Wei Guogong.

古文：己未，以张行成为侍中。
现代文：己未，任命张行成为侍中。
English: Zhang Xing was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：辛酉，上召朝集使，谓曰： 朕初即位，事有不便于百姓者悉宜陈，不尽者更封奏。 
现代文：辛酉，高宗召见各地的朝集使，对他们说： 朕刚刚即位，有对百姓不便利的事情你们都应奏陈，未说透彻的再次上书启奏。 
English: Hsin-tao and Gaozong summoned the imperial envoys from all over the country and said to them, "I have just ascended the throne. If there is anything that is inconvenient to the people, you should report it to the emperor. If you do not report it to the emperor, it should be thoroughly reported to the emperor.

古文：自是日引刺史十人入阁，问以百姓疾苦，及其政治。
现代文：从此每天带十名刺史进入阁中，询问民间百姓疾苦，及其从政措施。
English: Since then, he has brought ten reporters into the cabinet every day to inquire about the hardships of the people and their political measures.

古文：有洛阳人李弘泰诬告长孙无忌谋反，上立命斩之。
现代文：有一个洛阳人李弘泰诬告长孙无忌谋反，高宗命令即刻处斩。
English: A Luoyang citizen, Li Hongtai, falsely accused his eldest grandson of plotting a rebellion, and Gao Zong ordered him to be beheaded immediately.

古文：无忌与褚遂良同心辅政，上亦尊礼二人，恭己以听之，故永徽之政，百姓阜安，有贞观之遗风。
现代文：无忌与褚遂良齐心协力辅佐高宗治理朝政，高宗也尊重礼遇二人，谦恭地听从二人的意见，故而永徽年间的朝政，百姓安康，有贞观朝的遗风。
English: He and Gong Suiliang worked together to support Gaozong in governing the court. Gaozong also respected the courtesy of the two and humbly listened to the opinions of the two. Therefore, the court politics during the Yonghui era, the people were healthy, and there was a legacy of chastity in the court.

古文：太宗女衡山公主应适长孙氏，有司以为服既公除，欲以今秋成昏。
现代文：太宗的女儿衡山公主应当下嫁长孙氏，有关官员认为天子既已因公脱去丧服，想让公主在当年秋季成婚。
English: Princess Hengshan, the daughter of Emperor Taizong, was supposed to marry the eldest grandson of Emperor Taizong. The relevant officials believed that Emperor Taizong had already taken off his mourning clothes for official reasons and wanted to marry the princess in the autumn of that year.

古文：于志宁上言： 汉文立制，本为天下百姓。
现代文：于志宁上书言道： 汉文帝立下不必穿丧服三年的制度，本来是为了天下的百姓。
English: Yu Shining wrote: The three-year system of not having to wear mourning clothes under the Han Emperor was originally for the people of the world.

古文：公主服本斩衰，纵使服随例除，岂可情随例改，请俟三年丧毕成昏。 
现代文：公主服丧本应穿上粗麻布做的衣服，纵使援照汉代旧例脱去了丧服，哀情怎么可以随着旧例一下子就改变了呢，请待三年服丧期满后再批准成婚。 
English: According to the old custom of the Han Dynasty, a mourning princess should wear a dress made of coarse linen. Even if she takes off her mourning dress according to the old custom of the Han Dynasty, how can her sorrow change all of a sudden? Please wait until the three-year mourning period is over before approving the marriage.

古文：上从之。
现代文：高宗依准。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：二月，辛卯，立皇子孝为许王，上金为杞王，素节为雍王。
现代文：二月，辛卯，立皇子李孝为许王，李上金为杞王，李素节为雍王。
English: In February, Xinwu established the prince Li Xiao as the King of Xu, Li Shangjin as the King of Qi, and Li Su Jie as the King of Yong.

古文：夏，五月，壬戌，吐蕃赞普弄赞卒，其嫡子早死，立其孙为赞普。
现代文：夏季，五月，壬戌，吐蕃赞普弃宗弄赞去世，他的嫡长子早已死去，便立他的孙子为赞普。
English: In the summer, in May, Rinchen and Tubo Zampu abandoned Zanzan and died. His eldest son had already died, so he set up his grandson as Zampu.

古文：赞普幼弱，政事皆决于国相禄东赞。
现代文：赞普年幼懦弱，政事都由吐蕃的丞相禄东赞裁决。
English: Zampu was young and weak, and all political affairs were decided by Lu Dongzan, the prime minister of Tubo.

古文：禄东赞性明达严重，行兵有法，吐蕃所以强大，威服氐、羌，皆其谋也。
现代文：禄东赞性情通达严肃，治军有方，吐蕃之所以强盛壮大，威震摄服氐、羌族，都是由于他的谋略。
English: Lu Dongzan had a serious disposition and was skillful in governing the army. The reason why Tubo became strong and powerful, and was able to defeat the Xiongnu and Yao people, was all due to his strategy.

古文：六月，高侃击突厥，至阿息山。
现代文：六月，高侃进攻突厥，到达阿息山。
English: In June, Gao Kan attacked the Turks and reached Mount Ashi.

古文：车鼻可汗召诸部兵皆不赴，与数百骑遁去。
现代文：车鼻可汗征召各部兵马都不赴命，无可奈何率领几百名骑兵逃走。
English: The chariot-nosed khan conscripted soldiers and horses from all the ministries, but they did not fight to the death. He had no choice but to lead several hundred cavalrymen to escape.

古文：侃帅精骑追至金山，擒之以归，其众皆降。
现代文：高侃率领精锐骑兵追到金山，生擒车鼻可汗后返回，其手下兵众纷纷投奔。
English: Gao Kan led the elite cavalry in pursuit to the Jinshan Mountain, returning after a hard fight, and his soldiers fled in droves.

古文：初，阿史那社尔虏龟兹王布失毕，立其弟为王。
现代文：起初，阿史那社尔俘虏了龟兹国王布失毕，立他的弟弟为国王。
English: At first, Ashnasir captured the Kuez king, Buthubi, and made his brother king.

古文：唐兵既还，其酋长争立，更相攻击。
现代文：唐朝军队返回朝廷后，各部落首领争夺王位，相互攻击。
English: After the Tang army returned to the imperial court, the tribal leaders fought for the throne and attacked each other.

古文：秋，八月，壬午，诏复以布失毕为龟兹王，遣归国，抚其众。
现代文：秋季，八月，壬午，高宗颁布诏令让布失毕重新做龟兹国王，派遣他回到本国，安抚民众。
English: In the autumn, in August, at noon, Gaozong issued a royal decree to make Bu Zibi the king of Kuez again, and sent him back to his home country to appease the people.

古文：九月，庚子，高侃执车鼻可汗至京师，释之，拜左武卫将军，处其馀众于郁督军山，置狼山都督府以统之。
现代文：九月，庚子，高侃将车鼻可汗押送到京城，释放了他，拜官左武卫将军，将突厥剩余民众安置在郁督军山，并设置狼山都督府以统率他们。
English: In September, Geng Zi and Gao Kan escorted Chexuan Khan to Beijing, released him, and placed the remaining Turkic people in Iduku Junshan, and set up the Wolf Mountain Governor's Office to lead them.

古文：以高侃为卫将军。
现代文：任命高侃为卫将军。
English: Gao Kan was appointed as Wei general.

古文：于是突厥尽为封内之臣，分置单于、瀚海二都护府。
现代文：从此突厥人全部为大唐封土内的臣民，分别设置单于、瀚海二个都护府。
English: From then on, the Turks were all subjects within the Great Tang fiefdom, and two tutelary capitals were set up, one in Xian and one in Hanhai.

古文：单于领狼山、云中、桑干三都督，苏农等一十四州；瀚海领瀚海、金徽、新黎等七都督，仙萼等八州；各以其酋长为都督、刺史。
现代文：单于都护府统领狼山、云中、桑干三个都督府，苏农等十四个州；瀚海都护府管辖瀚海、金徽、新黎等七个都督府，仙萼等八个州；各自任命其部落首领为刺史、都督。
English: In addition to the Capital Protectorate, there are three governorates, including Wolf Mountain, Yunzhong and Sanggang, and 14 prefectures, including Sunan; the Hanhai Capital Protectorate has jurisdiction over seven governorates, including Hanhai, Jinhui and Xinli, and eight prefectures, including Xiancai; each appoints its tribal leader as chief historian and governor.

古文：癸亥，上出畋，遇雨，问谏议大夫昌乐谷那律曰： 油衣若为则不漏？ 
现代文：癸亥，高宗出城游猎，遇上大雨，便问谏议大夫昌乐人谷那律： 遮雨的油衣怎么样才能不漏水？ 
English: One day, Gao Zong was out hunting in the city. When it was raining heavily, he asked the discussion doctor Changle Ren Gu: How can a rainproof oil coat prevent water leakage?

古文：对曰： 以瓦为之，必不漏。 
现代文：答道： 用瓦片做的，肯定不会漏。 
English: He replied, "If it's made of tiles, it certainly won't leak."

古文：上悦，为之罢猎。
现代文：高宗听后高兴，为此停止打猎。
English: Gao Zong was pleased to hear this and stopped hunting for this reason.

古文：李勣固求解职；冬，十月，戊辰，解勣左仆射，以开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
现代文：李世绩执意请求辞职；冬季，十月，戊辰，解除李世的尚书左仆射职务，仍任开府仪同三司、同中书门下三品。
English: Li Shigong persistently requested to resign; in the winter, October, Wu Chen, Li Shigong was relieved of his duties as the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand of the left hand

古文：己未，监察御史阳武韦思谦劾奏中书令褚遂良抑买中书译语人地。
现代文：己未，监察御史、阳武人韦思谦上奏疏弹劾中书令褚遂良压价购买中书省翻译人员的土地。
English: At the same time, Wei Siqian, the inspector general of history and Yang Wujin, reported to the impeachment of the Chinese book order, and Suiliang bought the land of the translators of the Chinese book ministry at a reduced price.

古文：大理少卿张睿册以为准估无罪。
现代文：大理寺少卿张睿册认为是依估定价格购买，没有罪。
English: Zhang Ruizhuang, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, believed that the purchase was made according to the estimated price, and there was no crime.

古文：思谦奏曰： 估价之设，备国家所须，臣下交易，岂得准估为定！
现代文：思谦上奏说： 设置估定价格，是预备国家需要时征收用的，臣下之间的交易，怎么能够按照估定的价格呢？
English: Si Qian said at the beginning of the report: The setting of the appraised price is to prepare for the collection of the country's needs. How can the transactions between the vassals be based on the appraised price?

古文：睿册舞文，附下罔上，罪当诛。 
现代文：睿册利用文书舞弊，附和臣下，欺罔皇上，按其罪行应当处死。 
English: Ruizhu used fraudulent documents, sided with his vassals, and bullied the emperor. According to his crimes, he should be put to death.

古文：是日，左迁遂良为同刺史，睿册循州刺史。
现代文：当天，将褚遂良降职为同州刺史，张睿册降为遁州刺史。
English: On the same day, Zou Suiliang was demoted to the post of the provincial chief historian, and Zhang Ruizhu was demoted to the post of the provincial chief historian.

古文：思谦名仁约，以字行。
现代文：思谦名仁约，通常以字称呼。
English: Shih-hsien-mei-ren-yuo, usually referred to by its Chinese name.

古文：十二月，庚午，梓州都督谢万岁、兗州都督谢法兴与黔州都督李孟尝讨琰州叛獠；万岁、法兴入洞招慰，为獠所杀。
现代文：十二月，庚午，梓州都督谢万岁、兖州都督谢法兴，与黔州都督李孟尝合兵讨伐琰州反叛的獠民；万岁、法兴二人进入獠民居住的山洞里招抚他们，被獠民杀死。
English: On the afternoon of December, the governor of Zizhou, Xie Wanlong, and the governor of Zhangzhou, Xie Fa Xing, joined forces with the governor of Zhangzhou, Li Mengya, to fight against the rebellious people of Zhangzhou; the two went into the cave where the people of Zhangzhou lived and killed them.

古文：永徽二年辛亥，公元六五一年春，正月，乙巳，以黄门侍郎宇文节、中书侍郎柳奭并同中书门下三品。
现代文：永徽二年春季正月，乙巳，唐朝任命黄门侍郎宇文节、中书侍郎柳二人为同中书门下三品。柳是柳亨的侄子，王皇后的舅舅。
English: In the first month of the spring of the second year of Yonghui, the Tang Dynasty appointed Huangmen waiter Uwen Jie and Zhongshu waiter Rong Liu to be the three prizes under the same Zhongshu. Liu is the nephew of Liu Heng, the uncle of the queen.

古文：奭，亨之兄子，王皇后之舅也。左骁卫将军、瑶池都督阿史那贺鲁招集离散，庐帐渐盛，闻太宗崩，谋袭取西、庭二州。
现代文：左骁卫将军、瑶池都督阿史那贺鲁招集当地离散的百姓，草庐帐篷渐渐多起来，听说唐太宗驾崩后，便谋划着偷袭攻取西、庭二州。
English: General Zuo Rongwei and the governor of Dianchi, Ashina Horu, called together the scattered local people, and the grass-thatched tents gradually increased. After hearing that Tang Taizong had died, they planned a sneak attack to capture the west and the two states of Ting.

古文：庭州刺史骆弘义知其谋，表言之，上遣通事舍人桥宝明驰往慰抚。
现代文：庭州刺史骆弘义得悉他的计谋，上表给朝廷讲明其事，高宗派通事舍人桥宝明飞奔前往安抚。
English: Luo Hongyi, the statesman of Tingzhou, learned of his scheme, and sent a report to the imperial court to clarify the matter. Gao Zongfa, who had been involved in the matter, hurried to the bridge to appease Baoming.

古文：宝明说贺鲁，令长子咥运入宿卫，授右骁卫中郎将，寻复遣归。
现代文：宝明劝说阿史那贺鲁，让他的长子运到朝中当宿卫官，授官为右骁卫中郎将，不久唐朝又遣送运回去。
English: Bao Ming persuaded Ashina Horu to have his eldest son, Zhuang, transported to the Middle Kingdom to serve as a night watchman. He was given the title of Middle Captain of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards, and was soon sent back to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：咥运乃说其父拥众西走，击破乙毘射匮可汗，并其众，建牙于双河及千泉，自号沙钵罗可汗，咄陆五啜、努失毕五俟斤皆归之，胜兵数十万，与乙毘咄陆可汗连兵，处月、处密及西域诸国多附之。
现代文：运于是劝说他父亲领兵往西走，打败乙毗射匮可汗，兼并其兵众，在双河及千泉建立牙帐，自称为沙钵罗可汗，咄陆五部和努失毕五部都归顺他，拥有兵力几十万，又与乙毗咄陆可汗的军队联合，处月、处密以及西域各国都依附于他们。
English: Yun then persuaded his father to lead his army to the west, defeat Ebisu Shah Khan, annex his troops, establish a garrison in Shuanghe and Qianquan, call himself Shaju Luo Khan, and have hundreds of thousands of troops, and unite with the army of Ebisu Shah Khan. Every month, every month, and all countries in the western region are attached to them.

古文：以咥运为莫贺咄叶护。
现代文：封运为莫贺咄叶护。
English: The sealed shipment is from Moga.

古文：焉耆王婆伽利卒，国人表请复立故王突骑支；夏，四月，诏加突骑支右武卫将军，遣还国。
现代文：焉耆国王婆伽利去世，本国人上表请求重新拥立老王突骑支；夏季，四月，高宗下诏加封突骑支为右武卫将军，让他回到国中。
English: After the death of King Bhagali, the local people petitioned for the re-establishment of the Lao Wang Tujia branch; in the summer, in April, Gao Zong issued an edict to seal the Tujia branch as the Right Wuwei General, and let him return to the country.

古文：金州刺史滕王元婴骄奢纵逸，居亮阴中，畋游无节，数夜开城门，劳扰百姓，或引弹弹人，或埋人雪中以戏笑。
现代文：金州刺史、滕王李元婴骄奢淫逸，为太宗守丧期间，无节制地游猎，多次夜间大开城门，惊扰老百姓，有时用弹弓弹人，有时又将人埋在雪里取笑。
English: During the mourning period for Emperor Taizong, he hunted without restraint, opened the city gate many times at night, startled the common people, sometimes hit people with a slingshot, and sometimes buried people in the snow for fun.

古文：上赐书切让之，且曰： 取适之方，亦应多绪，晋灵荒君，何足为则！
现代文：高宗寄书对他深加责备，且说： 讨乐趣的办法也有多种多样，晋灵公那样的荒唐君主，怎么值得效法呢？
English: Gaozong sent a letter to him, severely reprimanding him and saying, "There are many different ways to have fun. How can a preposterous monarch like Jinling Gong be worth emulating?

古文：朕以王至亲，不能致王于法，今书王下上考以愧王心。 
现代文：朕与你是亲属，不忍心将你绳之于法，如今定你的考课等第为下等之上，以便使你的心里觉得惭愧。 
English: I am your kinsman, and I could not bear to bring you to the law, but I have made your examination a grade higher than the lowest, so that your heart may be humbled.

古文：元婴与蒋王恽皆好聚敛，上尝赐诸王帛各五百段，独不及二王，敕曰： 滕叔、蒋兄自能经纪，不须赐物；给麻两车以为钱贯。 
现代文：李元婴与蒋王李恽都喜好收敛财物，高宗曾经赐给众王每人五百段绢帛，惟独没有滕、蒋二王的，敕令说： 滕王皇叔与蒋王皇兄自己能够经营聚敛，不必赐给财物；只给麻两车串钱用。 
English: Li Yuan Rong and Jiang Wang Lijun both liked to accumulate wealth. Gao Zong once gave each of the kings five hundred taels of silver. However, if there was no Teng or Jiang Er Wang, the imperial edict said, "Uncle Teng Wang Wang Rong and Brother Jiang Wang Wang Rong can accumulate wealth by themselves, so there is no need to give them wealth; only two cartloads of money should be given."

古文：二王大惭。
现代文：二王大为羞愧。
English: The two kings were greatly ashamed.

古文：秋，七月，西突厥沙钵罗可汗寇庭州，攻陷金岭城及蒲类县，杀略数千人。
现代文：秋季七月，西突厥沙钵罗可汗进犯庭州，攻陷金岭城以及蒲类县，杀死抢夺几千人。
English: In the autumn of July, the West Turk Shahrukh Khan invaded Tingzhou, captured Jinling City and Putuo County, and killed and robbed thousands of people.

古文：诏左武候大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契苾何力为弓月道行军总管，右骁卫将军高德逸、右武候将军薛孤吴仁为副，发秦、成、岐、雍府兵三万人及回纥五万骑以讨之。
现代文：高宗下诏任命左武候大将军梁建方、右骁卫大将军契何力为弓月道行军总管，右骁卫将军高德逸、右武候将军薛孤吴仁为副总管，征发秦、成、岐、雍府兵力三万人，以及回纥五万骑兵讨伐突厥。
English: Gao Zong issued an edict appointing the Left Military Governor General Liang Jianfang and the Right Military Governor General Qi He Lijian as the commander-in-chief of the Yunyue March, the Right Military Governor General Gao Deyi and the Right Military Governor General Xue Guo Wu Ren as the deputy commander-in-chief, and sent 30,000 soldiers from Qin, Chengdu, Qi and Yongfu, and 50,000 cavalrymen from Huizhou to fight the Turks.

古文：癸巳，诏诸礼官学士议明堂制度，以高祖配五天帝，太宗配五人帝。
现代文：癸巳，高宗下诏令各位礼仪官、学士们商议朝廷的明堂制度，将高祖皇帝配享五位天帝，太宗皇帝配享五位人帝。
English: At this time, Emperor Gao Zong issued an edict to all etiquette officials and scholars to discuss the Ming Hall system of the imperial court, assigning Emperor Gao Zu to five heavenly emperors and Emperor Taizong to five human emperors.

古文：八月，己巳，以于志宁为左仆射，张行成为右仆射，高季辅为侍中；志宁、行成仍同中书门下三品。
现代文：八月，己巳，任命于志宁为尚书左仆射，张行成为右仆射，高季辅为侍中；于志宁、张行成仍为同中书门下三品。
English: In August, Ji Si appointed Yu Shining as Shang Shuxu's left-hand retainer, Zhang Xing as his right-hand retainer, and Gao Ji Fu as an attendant; Yu Shining and Zhang Xing Cheng were still the third-ranked students of the same school.

古文：己卯，郎州白水蛮反，寇麻州，遣左领军将军赵孝祖等发兵讨之。
现代文：己卯，郎州白水蛮族人反叛，进犯麻州，唐朝派左领军将军赵孝祖等人发兵讨伐。
English: The barbarians of Baishui in Lanzhou rebelled and attacked Mashu, and the Tang Dynasty sent the left-leading army general Zhao Xiaozu and others to launch a military campaign.

古文：九月，癸巳，废玉华宫为佛寺。
现代文：九月，癸巳，废掉玉华宫，改为佛寺。
English: In September, the Jade Palace was abolished and changed to a Buddhist temple.

古文：戊戌，更命九成宫为万年宫。
现代文：戊戌，将九成宫改名为万年宫。
English: Wuzhen changed the name of Jiu Cheng Gong to Wan Nian Gong.

古文：庚戌，左武候引驾卢文操逾墙盗左藏物，上以引驾职在纠绳，乃自为盗，命诛之。
现代文：庚戌，左武候引驾卢文操越过宫墙偷盗国库物资，高宗认为引驾的职责在于昼夜巡视纠查违失，却监守自盗，下令将其处死。
English: Gaozong thought that the duty of the driver was to patrol the palace day and night to check for violations, but the driver was caught stealing and was ordered to be put to death.

古文：谏议大夫萧钧谏曰： 文操情实难原，然法不至死。 
现代文：谏议大夫萧钧劝谏说： 卢文操犯罪情形实在难以原谅，然而依法不至于判死罪。 
English: "The circumstances of Lu Wenxu's crime are really hard to forgive, but according to the law, he will not be sentenced to death.

古文：上乃免文操死，顾侍臣曰： 此真谏议也！ 
现代文：高宗于是赦免文操死罪，对身边的侍臣称赞萧钧说： 这才是真正的谏议大夫呀！ 
English: Gaozong then pardoned Wen Du's capital crime, and praised Xiao Yao to the attendants around him, saying, "This is the true doctor of deliberation!"

古文：闰月，长孙无忌等上所删定律令式，甲戌，诏颁之四方。
现代文：闰九月，长孙无忌等人进呈所删定的律令式；甲戌，高宗下诏将其颁行全国。
English: In leap September, the eldest grandson, Mu Boi, and others submitted the deleted ritsuryo form; the Emperor Gao issued it nationwide.

古文：上谓宰相曰： 闻所在官司，行事犹互观颜面，多不尽公。 
现代文：高宗对宰相们说： 听说你们所在的官署，官员们还要互相观察脸色行事，大多不能完全公正。 
English: Gao Zong said to the prime ministers: I have heard that the officials in your government offices have to watch each other's faces and act accordingly, and most of them cannot be completely fair.

古文：长孙无忌对曰： 此岂敢言无；然肆情曲法，实亦不敢。
现代文：长孙无忌答道： 这些怎么能敢说没有呢？然而徇情枉法，也实在不敢。
English: The eldest grandson replied without hesitation, "How can I dare to say no to these things? However, I really don't dare to be unreasonable."

古文：至于小小收取人情，恐陛下尚不能免。 
现代文：至于说稍稍地考虑一些人表因素，恐怕陛下也不能避免。 
English: I'm afraid your majesty can't avoid taking a few appearance factors into consideration.

古文：无忌以元舅辅政，凡有所言，上无不嘉纳。
现代文：无忌以元舅身份辅佐朝政，凡有所建言，高宗无不赞许采纳。
English: As a former uncle, he assisted the imperial government, and whenever he had a suggestion, Emperor Gaozong approved it.

古文：冬，十一月，辛酉，上祀南郊。
现代文：冬季，十一月，辛酉，高宗到南郊祭祀。
English: In winter, in November, during the coldest time of the year, Gao Zong went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：癸酉，诏： 自今京官及外州有献鹰隼及犬马者，罪之。 
现代文：癸酉，高宗颁布诏令： 今后朝中官员及外州有进献鹰鹘及狗马者，一律定罪。 
English: At that time, Gaozong issued an edict: In the future, all officials in the DPRK and China, as well as those from foreign states who have donated eagles, falcons, dogs and horses, will be convicted.

古文：戊寅，特浪羌酋董悉奉求、辟惠羌酋卜檐莫各帅种落万馀户诣茂州内附。
现代文：戊寅，特浪羌族首领董悉奉求、辟惠羌族首领卜檐莫各自率领本部落一万多户到茂州归附唐朝。
English: Wu Yin, the leader of the Terang Yi people, Dong Xie, complied with the request, and the leader of the Hui Yi people, Bu Yimo, led more than 10,000 households of the tribe to Maozhou to accede to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：窦州、义州蛮酋李宝诚等反，桂州都督刘伯英讨平之。
现代文：窦州、义州蛮族首领李宝诚等人谋反，桂州都督刘伯英予以讨伐平定。
English: Douzhou, Yizhou barbarian leader Li Baocheng and others plotted a rebellion, and Guizhou Governor Liu Boying led a crusade to quell it.

古文：郎州道总管赵孝祖讨白水蛮，蛮酋秃磨蒲及俭弥于帅众据险拒战，孝祖皆击斩之。
现代文：郎州道总管赵孝祖讨伐白水蛮族人，其首领秃磨蒲及俭弥于率领兵众占据险要抵抗，孝祖将他们全都杀死。
English: Zhao Xiaozu, the general manager of the Lanzhou Highway, fought against the Baishui barbarians. Their leaders, Zhao Mabu and Jianya, led the troops to occupy and almost resist, and Xiaozu killed them all.

古文：会大雪，蛮饥冻，死亡略尽。
现代文：正赶上天降大雪，蛮族人饥寒交迫，大多数人死掉。
English: Just in time for the heavy snow to fall, the barbarians were starving and freezing, and most of them died.

古文：孝祖奏言： 贞观中讨昆州乌蛮，始开青蛉、弄栋为州县。
现代文：赵孝祖上奏称： 贞观年间讨伐昆州乌蛮人，开始开辟青蛉、弄栋为州县。
English: Zhao Xiaozu said in his report: During Zhenguan's reign, he fought against the Quanzhou Wuban people and began to open up Qingyuan and Nodong into prefectures.

古文：弄栋之西有小勃弄、大勃弄二川，恒扇诱弄栋，欲使之反。
现代文：弄栋西面有小勃弄、大勃弄二川，一直煽动引诱弄栋，想要让弄栋反叛朝廷。
English: On the west side of the moat, there is a small moat, a large moat and two rivers, which have been inciting and tempting the moat, trying to make the moat rebel against the court.

古文：其勃弄以西与黄瓜、叶榆、西洱河相接，人众殷实，多于蜀川，无大酋长，好结仇怨，今因破白水之兵，请随便四讨，抚而安之。 
现代文：勃弄以西与黄瓜、叶榆、西洱河交界，百姓富足，超过蜀川地区，没有大的首领，因而容易结下仇怨，如今正好借着攻破白水的兵力，请求顺便向西讨伐，将它们安抚。 
English: Boasting the junction of the Yishui, Cucumber, Yehui and Xidi Rivers, the people are rich, exceeding the Shu River area, and there is no big leader, so it is easy to create a grudge. Now, just by breaking through the troops of the White Water, it is requested to go to the west to pacify them.

古文：敕许之。
现代文：高宗敕令听从其意见。
English: Emperor Gao Zongzong ordered to listen to his opinion.

古文：十二月，壬子，处月硃邪孤注杀招慰使单道惠，与突厥贺鲁相结。
现代文：十二月，壬子，处月部落的朱邪孤注杀死唐朝的招慰使单道惠，与突厥阿史那贺鲁相勾结。
English: In December, Jinsi, Zhu Yanzhong, a member of the Guizhong tribe, made a desperate bid to kill the Tang Dynasty's Consoler, and colluded with the Turk Ashi Nahorussi.

古文：是岁，百济遣使入贡，上戒之，使 勿与新罗、高丽相攻，不然，吾将发兵讨汝矣。 
现代文：这一年，百济国派使者进献贡品，高宗告诫来使，让百济 不要与新罗、高丽相互攻伐，不然的话，我大唐将要征发大军讨伐你们。 
English: In that year, Baekje sent an envoy to offer tribute, and Gaozong warned the envoy not to fight against Silla and Goryeo, otherwise, I, the Great Tang, would send a large army to fight against you.

古文：永徽三年壬子，公元六五二年春，正月，己未朔，吐谷浑、新罗、高丽、百济并遣使入贡。
现代文：永徽三年春季正月，己未朔，吐谷浑、新罗、高丽、百济纷纷派使者到朝廷进献贡品。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Yonghui, it was not yet spring, and Tugukhun, Silla, Goryeo, and Baekje sent envoys to the imperial court to offer tribute.

古文：癸亥，梁建方、契苾何力等大破处月硃邪孤注于牢山。
现代文：癸亥，梁建方、契何力等人在牢山大败处月朱邪孤注的军队。
English: Zou Hai, Liang Jianfang, Qi He Li and others were defeated in the dungeon by the evil army.

古文：孤注夜遁，建方使副总管高德逸轻骑追之，行五百馀里，生擒孤注，斩首九千级。
现代文：孤注乘夜间逃跑，梁建方派副总管高德逸率领轻骑追赶，追了五百多里路，生擒孤注，杀死九千人。
English: Desperate to escape at night, Liang Jianfang sent Gao Deyi, deputy head of the bureau, to lead a light cavalry pursuit, chasing more than five hundred miles. He killed nine thousand people.

古文：军还，御史劾奏梁建方兵力足以追讨，而逗留不进；高德逸敕令市马，自取骏者。
现代文：军队撤回，御史弹劾梁建方，说他的兵力足可以继续追击，却逗留没有行进；高德逸下令买马，却给自己选取好马。
English: The army withdrew, and the imperial historian impeached Liang Jianfang, saying that his troops had enough strength to continue the pursuit, but did not march; Gao Deyi ordered to buy a horse, but chose a good horse for himself.

古文：上以建方等有功，释不问。
现代文：高宗认为建方等人杀敌有功，搁置下来不予问罪。
English: Gao Zong believed that Jiangfang and the others had done a good job of killing the enemy, and they would not be held accountable.

古文：大理卿李道裕奏言： 德逸所取之马，筋力异常，请实中厩。 
现代文：大理寺卿李道裕上奏书言道： 高德逸自取的那些马，脚力非常好，请求充实皇厩。 
English: Li Daoyu, Lord of Dali Temple, read from the book, saying, "Those horses that Gao Deyi took from himself have very good footwork, and I request that the imperial stables be replenished."

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 道裕法官，进马非其本职，妄希我意；岂朕行事不为臣下所信邪！
现代文：高宗对身边大臣说： 李道裕本是一个执法官，进马一事并非他的职权范围，却妄自迎合朕的意图；难道是朕做事不能为臣下们所信任吗？
English: Gao Zong said to the minister next to him: Li Daoyu was originally a magistrate, and the matter of entering the horse was not within his scope of authority, but he arrogantly catered to my intention; is it that I can't be trusted by my subjects?

古文：朕方自咎，故不复黜道裕耳。 
现代文：朕正在自责，所以不再罢黜道裕。 
English: I'm beating myself up, so I won't beat myself up any more.

古文：己巳，以同州刺史褚遂良为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：己巳，任命同州刺史褚遂良为吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: At the same time, he appointed Tongzhou's magistrate, Jian Suiliang, as the head of the personnel department and the third-ranked scholar of the middle school.

古文：丙子，以飨太庙；丁亥，飨先农，躬耕籍田。
现代文：丙子，高宗祭献太庙；丁亥，祭献神农祠，高宗躬行藉田礼。
English: Cun Zi, Gao Zong made offerings to the Imperial Temple; Ding Hai, made offerings to the Shinto Shrine, Gao Zong bowed and performed the rice field ritual.

古文：二月，甲寅，上御安福门楼，观百戏。
现代文：二月，甲寅，高宗亲临安福门城楼，观看各种杂耍。
English: In February, Gao Yin and Gao Zong visited the Anfu Gate Tower in person to watch various jugglers.

古文：乙卯，上谓侍臣曰： 昨登楼，欲以观人情及风谷奢俭，非为声乐。
现代文：乙卯，高宗对身边大臣说： 昨日登上城楼，想要观察风俗民情的奢侈与节俭，并非为了声乐之娱。
English: Second, Gao Zong said to the ministers around him: Yesterday, I climbed the tower to observe the luxury and frugality of customs and folk customs, not for the entertainment of vocal music.

古文：朕闻胡人善为击鞠之戏，尝一观之。
现代文：朕听说西域人擅长击的游戏，曾想亲自看一看。
English: I heard that the people of the Western Regions are good at the game of hitting, and I wanted to see it for myself.

古文：昨初升楼，即有群胡击鞠，意谓朕笃好之也。
现代文：昨日初次登上城楼，即有众多的西域人击，好像以为朕笃好击。
English: When I went up to the castle for the first time yesterday, there were a lot of people from the western region, so I thought I had a good shot.

古文：帝王所为，岂宜容易。
现代文：帝王所作所为，岂能那么随意轻率？
English: Is it possible for the emperor to act so carelessly?

古文：朕已焚此鞠，冀杜胡人窥望之情，亦因以自诫。 
现代文：朕已经将那焚烧，希望以此来杜绝西域人窥探帝王喜好的想法，也是引以为戒。 
English: The idea that I have burned it in the hope of preventing Westerners from prying into the emperor's preferences is also a cautionary tale.

古文：三月，辛巳，以宇文节为侍中，柳奭为中书令，以兵部侍郎三原韩瑷守黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
现代文：三月，辛巳，任命宇文节为侍中，柳为中书令，任命兵部侍郎三原人韩瑗代理黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品。
English: In March, Xin Si appointed Uwen Jie as a chamberlain, Liu as a chancellery official, and appointed Hyobu chamberlain Sanyuanjin Han Qi as acting Huangmen chamberlain, and the three subordinate chancellors of the same chancellery.

古文：夏，四月，赵孝祖大破西南蛮，斩小勃弄酋长殁盛，擒大勃弄酋长杨承颠。
现代文：夏季，四月，赵孝祖大败西南蛮族人，杀死小勃弄首领殁盛，生俘大勃弄首领杨承颠。
English: In the summer, in April, Zhao Xiaozu defeated the southwestern barbarians, killed the leader of the small Boer war, Hao Sheng, and captured the leader of the large Boer war, Yang Chengbui.

古文：自馀皆屯聚保险，大者有众数万，小者数千人，孝祖皆破降之，西南蛮遂定。
现代文：其他屯聚兵马自保的蛮族部落，大的有兵数万人，小的几千人，孝祖一一将其击败降伏，西南蛮族于是平定。
English: Other barbarian tribes that had gathered troops and horses to protect themselves, the large ones had tens of thousands of soldiers, the small ones a few thousand. Xiaozu defeated and surrendered them one by one, and the southwestern barbarians were then pacified.

古文：甲午，澧州刺史彭思王元则薨。
现代文：甲午，澧州刺史、彭思王李元则去世。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Li Yuan, the prince of Bozhou and Pengshi, passed away.

古文：六月，戊申，遣兵部尚书崔敦礼等将并、汾步骑万人往茂州。
现代文：六月，戊申，高宗派兵部尚书崔敦礼等人统率并、汾州步骑兵一万人前往茂州。
English: In June, Wu Shen, Gao Zong sent the military department Shang Shuxu Cui Dunli and others to lead, and 10,000 Zhangzhou infantry and cavalry went to Maozhou.

古文：发薛延陀馀众渡河，置祁连州以处之。
现代文：征调薛延陀剩余民众渡过黄河，设置祁连州安置他们。
English: He conscripted the remaining people of Xueyantuo to cross the Yellow River, and set up Qilian Prefecture to resettle them.

古文：秋，七月，丁巳，立陈王忠为皇太子，赦天下。
现代文：秋季七月，丁巳，高宗立陈王李忠为皇太子，大赦天下。
English: In the autumn of July, Ding Si and Gao Zong made Chen Wang Lizhong the crown prince and pardoned the world.

古文：王皇后无子，柳奭为后谋，以忠母刘氏微贱，劝后立忠为太子，冀其亲己；外则讽长孙无忌等使请于上。
现代文：王皇后没有子嗣，柳为皇后谋划，因李忠生母刘氏出身微贱，劝说皇后立李忠为太子，希望他能亲近自己；对外面则暗示长孙无忌等人，让他们向高宗请求立李忠，高宗依从。
English: Empress Wang had no children, and Liu planned for the empress. Since Li Zhong's birth mother was from the lowly Liu clan, he persuaded the empress to make Li Zhong the crown prince, hoping that he could be close to him. To the outside world, he implied that there was no reason for the eldest grandson and others to ask Gao Zong to make Li Zhong the crown prince, and Gao Zong complied.

古文：上从之。乙丑，以于志宁兼太子少师，张行成兼少傅，高季辅兼少保。
现代文：乙丑，任命于志宁兼任太子少师，张行成兼任太子少傅，高季辅兼任太子少保。
English: Yixiu, appointed Yu Zhining as the prince's junior teacher, Zhang Xingcheng as the prince's junior tutor, Gao Jifu as the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：丁丑，上问户部尚书高履行： 去年进户多少？ 
现代文：丁丑，高宗问户部尚书高履行： 去年增加了多少户口？ 
English: On the 22nd, the emperor asked the head of the household department, Shang Shugao, to fulfill: How many households were added last year?

古文：履行奏： 去年进户总一十五万。 
现代文：履行奏称： 去年增加户口总计十五万。 
English: Fulfillment report: Last year, a total of 150,000 accounts were added.

古文：因问隋代及今日见户，履行奏： 隋开皇中，户八百七十万，即今户三百八十万。 
现代文：进而询问隋代与今日户口数，履行奏道： 隋朝开皇年间，有八百七十万户，本朝现有三百八十万户。 
English: He then inquired about the number of households in the Sui Dynasty and today, and gave the following answer: During the reign of the Sui Dynasty, there were 8.7 million households, and there are currently 3.8 million households in this dynasty.

古文：履行，士廉之子也。
现代文：履行是高士廉的儿子。
English: Fulfillment is the son of Gao Shilian.

古文：九月，守中书侍郎来济同中书门下三品。
现代文：九月，任命代理中书侍郎来济为同中书门下三品。
English: In September, he appointed the acting junior secretary, Lai Jie, as the junior secretary of the same junior high school.

古文：冬，十一月，庚寅，弘化长公主自吐谷浑来朝。
现代文：冬季，十一月，庚寅，弘化长公主从吐谷浑回来朝见。
English: In winter, in November, Geng Yin, the eldest princess of Honghua, came back from Tugu Hun to see the morning.

古文：癸巳，濮恭王泰薨于均州。
现代文：癸巳，濮王李泰在均州去世。
English: Soon after, the King of Gong, Li Tai, passed away in Junzhou.

古文：散骑常侍房遗爱尚太宗女高阳公主，公主骄恣甚，房玄龄薨，公主教遗爱与兄遗直异财，既而反谮遗直。
现代文：散骑常侍房遗爱娶太宗女儿高阳公主为妻，公主十分骄横，房玄龄死后，公主教唆遗爱和他的兄长遗直分财产，过后又反过来诬陷遗直。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong's daughter, Princess Gaoyang, the princess was very arrogant. After the death of Emperor Xuanling, the prince suggested that Princess Gaoyang and her brother Prince Zizhi divide their property. Later, the prince in turn framed Prince Zizhi.

古文：遗直自言，太宗深责让主，由是宠衰，主怏怏不悦。
现代文：房遗直自我申辩，太宗对公主大加责备，由此失宠；公主闷闷不乐。
English: Fang Yizhi defended himself, and Emperor Taizong severely reprimanded the princess, which caused her to fall out of favor; the princess was sullen.

古文：会御史劾盗，得浮屠辩机宝枕，云主所赐。
现代文：恰巧此时御史弹劾盗窃案，搜得僧人辩机的宝枕，辩机称是公主赐给他的。
English: Coincidentally, at this time of the historical impeachment theft case, the treasure of the monk's debate machine was found. The debate machine was said to have been given to him by the princess.

古文：主与辩机私通，饷遗亿计，更以二女子侍遗爱。
现代文：公主与辩机私通，送给他无以数计的财物，改让另两个女人侍候房遗爱。
English: The princess fornicated with the debater, gave him countless possessions, and let two other women wait on the heiress.

古文：太宗怒，腰斩辩机，杀奴婢十馀人；主益怨望，太宗崩，无戚容。
现代文：太宗得知此事大怒，下令腰斩辩机，杀死奴婢十多人；公主更有怨言，太宗驾崩时，面无悲戚面容。
English: When Emperor Taizong learned of this, he flew into a rage and ordered the execution of more than ten servants and maids; the princess complained even more. When Emperor Taizong died, his face showed no signs of grief.

古文：上即位，主又令遗爱与遗直更相讼，遗爱坐出为房州刺史，遗直为隰州刺史。
现代文：高宗即位后，公主又让遗爱与遗直相互诉讼分财产，遗爱因此获罪，降职出任房州刺史，遗直为隰州剌史。
English: After Gao Zong ascended to the throne, the princess had Ye Ai and Ye Zhizhong sue each other to divide the property. Ye Ai was found guilty and demoted to the post of Fangzhou magistrate, while Ye Zhizhong became Zhangzhou magistrate.

古文：又，浮屠智勖等数人私侍主，主使掖庭令陈玄运伺宫省禨祥。
现代文：此外，僧人智勖等几个人私下侍奉公主，公主让掖庭令陈玄运窥探皇宫内祈求鬼神祸福之事。
English: In addition, several people such as the monk Zhisheng served the princess in private, and the princess asked the court to order Chen Xuanyun to spy on the palace to pray for the evil and good of ghosts and gods.

古文：先是，驸马都尉薛万彻坐事除名，徙宁州刺史，入朝，与遗爱款昵，对遗爱有怨望语，且曰： 今虽病足，坐置京师，鼠辈犹不敢动。 
现代文：先前，驸马都尉薛万彻获罪被除去名籍，降职为宁州刺史。到朝廷来，与房遗爱十分亲近，与遗爱讲到对朝廷有怨言的话，而且说： 我如今虽然有脚病，安坐京城，那些人倒还不敢轻举妄动。 
English: Previously, Lieutenant Xue Wanchie was stripped of his title and demoted to the position of Ningzhou chief historian after being found guilty. When he came to the imperial court, he was very close to Fang Youlian. He spoke to Youlian about his complaints against the imperial court and said, "Although I now have a foot disease and am sitting in the capital, those people still dare not make any rash moves.

古文：因与遗爱谋： 若国家有变，当奉司徒荆王元景为主。 
现代文：进而与遗爱谋划： 假如朝廷有变化，我们应当尊奉司徒荆王李元景为君王。 
English: Then, he made a plan with his last love: If there is a change in the imperial court, we should honor Stutthof, King Jing, and Li Yuanjing as monarchs.

古文：元景女适遗爱弟遗则，由是与遗爱往来。
现代文：李元景的女儿嫁给房遗爱的弟弟遗则，因此元景与遗爱二人往来密切。
English: Li Yuanjing's daughter married Fang Ziyi's brother Ziyi, so Yuanjing and Ziyi had a close relationship.

古文：元景尝自言，梦手把日月。
现代文：李元景曾自称做梦用手握住太阳月亮。
English: Li Yuanjing once said that he dreamed of holding the sun and moon in his hands.

古文：驸马都尉柴令武，绍之子也，尚巴陵公主，除卫州刺史，托以主疾留京师求医，因与遗爱谋议相结。
现代文：驸马都尉柴令武，是柴绍的儿子，娶太宗女儿巴陵公主，官拜卫州刺史，托辞公主有病留在京城求医，因而与房遗爱相互串通谋划。
English: Lieutenant of the Horse Chai Lingwu, the son of Chai Shao, married Princess Baling, the daughter of Emperor Taizong. The official paid tribute to the history of Weizhou, saying that the princess was ill and stayed in Beijing to seek medical treatment, thus colluding with Fang Youai.

古文：高阳公主谋黜遗直，夺其封爵，使人诬告遗直无礼于己。
现代文：高阳公主图谋罢免遗直官职，夺掉他的封爵，让人诬告遗直对自己无礼。
English: Princess Goyang plotted to remove him from his official position, take away his knighthood, and have people falsely accuse him of being disrespectful to himself.

古文：遗直亦言遗爱及主罪，云： 罪盈恶稔，恐累臣私门。 
现代文：遗直也上书列举房遗爱与公主的罪状，并说： 他们恶贯满盈，恐怕牵累到臣下的家门。 
English: The widow also wrote a letter listing the crimes of her husband and the princess, and said: They are full of evil, and I am afraid that they will drag down the families of my subjects.

古文：上令长孙无忌鞫之，更获遗爱及主反状。
现代文：高宗令长孙无忌审问其事，又得到房遗爱与公主谋反的证状。
English: Gao Zong ordered his eldest grandson to inquire into the matter, and obtained a certificate that Fang Youai had conspired with the princess.

古文：司空、安州都督吴王恪母，隋炀帝女也。
现代文：司空、安州都督、吴王李恪的母亲，是隋炀帝的女儿。
English: The mother of Siku, the governor of Anzhou, and Wu Wang Li Ke, was the daughter of Emperor Sui.

古文：恪有文武才，太宗常以为类己，欲立为太子，无忌固争而止，由是与无忌相恶。
现代文：李恪文武全才，太宗常常觉得他像自己，想要立他为太子，长孙无忌极力争辩才作罢，由此李恪与长孙无忌关系恶化。
English: Li Ke was an all-round talent in literature and martial arts. Emperor Taizong often felt that he was like himself, and wanted to make him the crown prince. The eldest grandson had to argue with him, and the relationship between Li Ke and the eldest grandson deteriorated.

古文：恪名望素高，为物情所向，无忌深忌之，欲因事诛恪以绝众望。
现代文：李恪平素名望较高，为人心所向，无忌非常忌恨他，想要找借口诛灭李恪以断绝众望。
English: Li Kaiping had a high reputation and was popular with the people, so they hated him very much and wanted to find an excuse to destroy Li Kaiping to break the popular hope.

古文：遗爱知之，因言与恪同谋，冀如纥干承基得免死。
现代文：房遗爱得悉实情后，便自称与李恪是同谋，希望像当年纥干承基密告太子谋反那样得免一死。
English: After learning the truth, Fang Youai claimed to be a co-conspirator with Li Ke, hoping to avoid death, just as Yu Gan Rongji had betrayed the crown prince and plotted a rebellion.

古文：永徽四年癸丑，公元六五三年
现代文：永徽四年
English: Four years in Yonghui

古文：春，二月，甲申，诏遗爱、万彻、令武皆斩，元景，恪、高阳、巴陵公主并赐自尽。
现代文：春季二月，甲申，高宗诏令将房遗爱、薛万彻、柴令武处斩，李元景、李恪、高阳公主、巴陵公主一并赐其自尽。
English: In the spring of February, in Jiaxing, Gao Zong issued an edict to behead Fang Youai, Xue Wancher, and Chai Lingwu, and Li Yuanjing, Li Ke, Princess Gaoyang, and Princess Baling were also ordered to commit suicide.

古文：上润谓侍臣曰： 荆王，朕之叔父，吴王，朕兄，欲匄其死，可乎？ 
现代文：高宗流着泪对身边的大臣说： 荆王是朕的叔父，吴王是朕的兄长，想求他们不死，可以吗？ 
English: Gao Zong shed tears and said to the ministers around him: Jing Wang is my uncle, Wu Wang is my elder brother. Can I ask them not to die?

古文：兵部尚书崔敦礼以为不可，乃杀之。
现代文：兵部尚书崔敦礼认为不可，于是将他们处死。
English: The commander of the military department, Shangshu Cui Dunli, thought it was impossible, so he put them to death.

古文：万彻临刑大言曰： 薛万彻大健儿，留为国家效死力，岂不佳，乃坐房遗爱杀之乎！ 
现代文：薛万彻临刑前大声言道： 薛万彻也算是个豪杰，留着为国家效力，岂不是更好吗？只因受房遗爱牵连就杀掉他吗！ 
English: Before his execution, Xue Wancher said in a loud voice: Xue Wancher is also a hero, wouldn't it be better to keep him to serve the country? Would it be better to kill him just because he was involved in a love affair?

古文：吴王恪且死，骂曰： 长孙无忌窃弄威权，构害良善，宗社有灵，当族灭不久！ 
现代文：吴王李恪临死的时候，大骂道： 长孙无忌擅弄威权，残害忠良，假如宗庙有灵的话，会在不久后灭他一族。 
English: When King Li Ke of Wu was on the verge of death, he cursed loudly: "The eldest grandson will not hesitate to abuse his authority and destroy the faithful. If there is a spirit in the ancestral temple, it will soon destroy his family."

古文：乙酉，侍中兼太子詹事宇文节，特进、太常卿江夏王道宗、左骁卫大将军驸马都尉执失思力并坐与房遗爱交通，流岭表。
现代文：乙酉，侍中兼太子詹事宇文节，特进、太常寺卿江夏王李道宗，左骁卫大将军、驸马都尉执失思力，均因与房遗爱交结串通而获罪，流放到岭表。
English: Acetylene, the chamberlain and prince Zhan Zhi Yu Wenjie, Tejin, the chief priest of Taizhong Temple, Jiangxia King Li Daozong, General Zuo Jianwei, and Lieutenant Xingma lost their minds, were all convicted of colluding with Fang Youai and exiled to Lingbo.

古文：节与遗爱亲善，及遗爱下狱，节颇左右之。
现代文：宇文节与房遗爱关系亲密，等到遗爱关在狱中，宇文节颇为他开罪辩护。
English: Uwenjie had a close relationship with Fang Youai. When Youai was in prison, Uwenjie defended him.

古文：江夏王道宗素与长孙无忌、褚遂良不协，故皆得罪。
现代文：江夏王李道宗平时即与长孙无忌、褚遂良不和睦，故而都有罪。
English: Li Daozong, the King of Jiangxia, was not on good terms with his eldest grandson Muji and his son Suiliang in peacetime, so they were both guilty.

古文：戊子，废恪母弟蜀王愔为庶人，置巴州；房遗直贬春州铜陵尉，万彻弟万备流交州；罢房玄龄配飨。
现代文：戊子，将与李恪同母的弟弟蜀王李废为平民，安置在巴州；房遗直贬为春州铜陵尉，薛万彻的弟弟万备流放交州。罢除房玄龄在太宗庙陪祭的殊荣。
English: Wu Zi, along with Li Ke's younger brother Shu Wang Li Ren, will be reduced to a commoner and resettled in Baju; Fang Yizhi will be demoted to the rank of Chunzhou Tongling Lieutenant, and Xue Wancher's younger brother Wan Bei will be exiled to Jiaozhou. The special honor of accompanying the festival at the Taizong Temple will be removed from Fang Xuanling.

古文：开府仪同三司李勣为司空。
现代文：改任开府仪同三司李世为司空。
English: He was reappointed to the opening ceremony of the new government, and the third secretary, Li Shih, became the second secretary.

古文：初，林邑王范头利卒，子真龙立，大臣伽独弑之，尽灭范氏。
现代文：起初，林邑国王范头利死后，他的儿子真龙即位，大臣伽独杀死真龙，将范氏宗族斩尽杀绝。
English: At first, after the death of King Fan Touli of Linyi, his son Zhenlong ascended to the throne, and Minister Ga Du killed Zhenlong and exterminated the Fan clan.

古文：伽独自立，国人弗从，乃立头利之婿婆罗门为王。
现代文：伽独自立为国王，国人都不从命，于是立头利的女婿婆罗门为国王。
English: Gā alone was made king, but the people did not follow his orders, so his son-in-law, Brahman, was made king.

古文：国人咸思范氏，复罢婆罗门，立头利之女为王。
现代文：国内百姓都思念范氏一家，又罢免婆罗门，立头利的女儿为国王。
English: The people of the country all miss the Fan family, and depose the brahman and install the daughter of the headman as the king.

古文：女不能治国，有诸葛地者，头利之姑子也，父为头利所杀，南奔真腊，大臣可伦翁定遣使迎而立之，妻以女王，众然后定。
现代文：他的女儿不能够治理国政，有个名叫诸葛地的，是头利姑母的儿子，父亲被头利杀死后，向南投奔到真腊。大臣可伦翁定派使者将他迎回来立为国王，让女王嫁给他，由此百姓们才稳定下来。
English: His daughter was not able to govern the country. There was a man named Zhuge Di, who was the son of Touli's aunt. After his father was killed by Touli, he fled south to Zhenla. The minister Keren Ong sent an envoy to welcome him back and establish him as king, and let the queen marry him. This is how the people stabilized.

古文：夏，四月，戊子，遣使入贡。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊子，林邑派使者入朝进贡。
English: In the summer, April, Wuzi and Lin sent envoys to the North to pay tribute.

古文：秋，九月，壬戌，右仆射北平定公张行成薨。
现代文：秋季，九月，壬戌，尚书左仆射北平定公张行成去世。
English: In September of the autumn, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Shabei Pingding Gong Zhang Xingcheng, passed away.

古文：甲戌，以褚遂良为右仆射，同中书门下三品如故，仍知选事。
现代文：甲戌，任命褚遂良为尚书右仆射，照旧为同中书门下三品，并掌管选举官吏事。
English: Kuching, appointed Zou Suiliang as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and as usual, he was the third-ranked scholar of the same school, and was in charge of the election officials.

古文：冬，十月，庚子，上幸骊山温汤；乙巳，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚子，高宗巡幸骊山温泉；乙巳，回到宫中。
English: In winter, October, Geng Zi, Gao Zong toured Lushan Hot Spring; Yi Si, returned to the palace.

古文：初，睦州女子陈硕贞以妖言惑众，与妹夫章叔胤举兵反，自称文佳皇帝，以叔胤为仆射。
现代文：起初，睦州女子陈硕真用妖术筮言蛊惑民众，与妹夫章叔胤举兵反唐，自称文佳皇帝，任命叔胤为仆射。
English: At first, Chen Shuozhen, a woman from Mutsu Province, used magic to deceive the people. She and her brother-in-law, Zhang Shuyin, raised an army against the Tang Dynasty, calling themselves Emperor Wenjia and appointing Shuyin as their minion.

古文：甲子夜，叔胤帅众攻桐庐，陷之。
现代文：甲子夜里，叔胤率领兵众攻打桐庐，最后攻陷此城。
English: In the middle of the night, Shuhei led the troops to attack Tonglu, and finally captured the city.

古文：硕真撞钟焚香，引兵二千攻陷睦州及於潜，进攻歙州，不克。
现代文：陈硕真撞钟烧香，领兵二千人攻陷睦州及於潜县。又进攻歙州，未能攻下。
English: Chen Shuozhen struck a bell and burned incense, and led 2,000 soldiers to attack and capture Mutsuzhou and Jian County. He also attacked Zhangzhou, but failed to capture it.

古文：敕扬州刺史房仁裕发兵讨之。
现代文：高宗敕令扬州刺史房仁裕征调军队讨伐。
English: Gao Zongxuan ordered Yangzhou to assassinate the historian Fang Renyu and to mobilize the army for a crusade.

古文：硕真遣其党童文宝将四千人寇婺州，刺史崔义玄发兵拒之。
现代文：陈硕真派其同伙童文宝带领四千人进犯婺州，刺史崔义玄征调兵力抵御。
English: Chen Shuozhen sent his accomplice Tong Wenbao to lead four thousand people to invade Zhangzhou, prompting Cui Yixuan to mobilize troops to resist.

古文：民间讹言硕真有神，犯其兵者必灭族，士众凶惧。
现代文：民间百姓盛传陈硕真有神灵，触犯其军队者必遭灭族之灾，士兵们十分恐惧。
English: It was widely believed by the common people that Chen Shuo really had a god, and that anyone who offended his army would be exterminated. The soldiers were very afraid.

古文：司功参军崔玄籍曰： 起兵仗顺，犹且无成，况凭妖妄，其能久乎！ 
现代文：司功参军崔玄籍说： 起兵依仗正道，尚且不一定能最后成功，何况凭借妖术，岂能长久！ 
English: Choi Hyun Suk, the secretary for meritorious service and participation in the army, said, "The recruitment of soldiers is based on the right path, but it may not be successful in the end. Moreover, with the help of magic, it will not last long!

古文：义玄以玄籍为前锋，自将州兵继之，至下淮戍，遇贼，与战。
现代文：崔义玄任命崔玄籍为前锋，自己率领本州兵马随后，到达下淮戍，遇见陈硕真部众，双方激战。
English: Cui Yixuan appointed Cui Xuan to be the striker. He led the Honshu soldiers and horses, and then arrived in Lower Huai'an. He met Chen Shuozhen's followers, and the two sides fought fiercely.

古文：左右以楯蔽义玄，义玄曰： 刺史避箭，人谁致死！ 
现代文：崔义玄身边的卫士用盾牌掩护他，义玄说： 如果刺史躲避刀箭，那么谁还能去拼死作战。 
English: The guards around Cui Yixuan shielded him. Yixuan said, "If the assassin avoids the sword and arrow, then who can fight to the death?"

古文：命撤之。
现代文：命令撤去盾牌。
English: Ordered to remove shields.

古文：于是士卒齐奋，贼众大溃，斩首数千级。
现代文：于是士兵们合力奋战，陈硕真军大败溃逃。几千人被杀。
English: As a result, the soldiers fought together, and Chen Shuozhen's army was defeated and fled. Several thousand people were killed.

古文：听其馀众归首；进至睦州境，降者万计。
现代文：朝廷军队听任硕真的余众归降；行军到睦州境内，投降的人数以万计。
English: The imperial army allowed the remaining troops to surrender; the army marched to the territory of Mutsu Province, and the number of those who surrendered was in the tens of thousands.

古文：十一月，庚戌，房仁裕军合，获硕真、叔胤，斩之，馀党悉平。
现代文：十一月，庚戌，房仁裕的军队合围包抄，抓获陈硕真、章叔胤将他们斩首，余党全部平定。
English: In November, the troops of Geng Biao and Fang Renyu encircled and captured Chen Shuozhen and Zhang Shuyin and beheaded them, and the rest of the party was completely subdued.

古文：义玄以功拜御史大夫。
现代文：崔义玄以此战功官拜御史大夫。
English: Cui Yixuan paid homage to Dr. Goshi as a war hero.

古文：癸丑，以兵部尚书崔敦礼为侍中。
现代文：癸丑，任命兵部尚书崔敦礼为侍中。
English: He appointed Choi Tun-ri, the head of the military department, as an aide-de-camp.

古文：十二月，庚子，侍中蓚宪公高季辅薨。
现代文：十二月，庚子，侍中宪公高季辅去世。
English: In December, Geng Zi, a courtier of Emperor Gao, passed away.

古文：是岁，西突厥乙毘咄陆可汗卒，其子颉苾达度设号真珠叶护，始与沙钵罗可汗有隙，与五弩失毕共击沙钵罗，破之，斩首千馀级。
现代文：这一年，西突厥乙毗咄陆可汗死，他的儿子颉达度设自号真珠叶护，开始与沙钵罗可汗有隔阂，与五弩失毕联合进攻沙钵罗，大败沙钵罗，杀死一千多人。
English: In the same year, the West Turk Bifidhar Khan died, and his son, Gundad, who called himself the Pearl-leaf Protector, began to distance himself from the Shah Rukh Khan, and jointly attacked the Shah Rukh Khan with the Wuzhongbi, defeated the Shah Rukh Khan, and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：永徽五年甲寅，公元六五四年春，正月，壬戌，羌酋冻就内附，以其地置剑州。三月，戊午，上行幸万年宫。
现代文：永徽五年春季正月，壬戌，羌族首领冻就归附朝廷，在其所在地设置剑州。三月，戊午，高宗行幸万年宫。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Yonghui, the leader of the Yi people, Jinyu, was annexed to the imperial court, and Jianzhou was set up in its location. In March, at noon, Gao Zongxing went to the Palace.

古文：庚申，加赠武德功臣屈突通等十三人官。
现代文：庚申，追赠武德朝功臣屈突通等十三人的官爵。
English: Goshun posthumously bestowed the title of nobility on thirteen people, including the Wu De dynasty meritorious vassal Qu Du Tong.

古文：初，王皇后无子，萧淑妃有宠，王后疾子。
现代文：起初，王皇后没有儿子，萧淑妃得高宗宠幸，王皇后十分忌妒。
English: At first, Empress Wang did not have a son. Xiao Shuxi became Gao Zong's favorite, and Empress Wang was very jealous.

古文：上之为太子也，入侍太宗，见才人武氏而悦之。
现代文：高宗做太子的时候，进寝宫侍奉太宗，看见才人武氏便十分喜欢。
English: When Gao Zong was crown prince, he entered the bedchamber to serve Emperor Taizong. When he saw the talented man, he liked him very much.

古文：太宗崩，武氏随众感业寺为尼。
现代文：太宗驾崩后，武氏随着众位妃嫔到感业寺当尼姑。
English: After the death of Taizong, Takeuji, along with numerous concubines, became a nun at Sangye Temple.

古文：忌日，上诣寺行香，见之，武氏泣，上亦泣。
现代文：到了太宗的忌日，高宗到感业寺行香拜佛，见到了她，武氏哭泣，高宗也流泪。
English: On the day of Taizong's death, Gao Zong went to Sangye Temple to make incense and worship Buddha. When he saw her, Takeuji cried, and Gao Zong also shed tears.

古文：王后闻之，阴令武氏长发，劝上内之后宫，欲以间淑妃之宠。
现代文：王皇后听说后，暗中让武氏留发，劝说高宗纳武氏入后宫，想要以武氏来离间高宗对萧妃的宠爱。
English: After hearing of this, Empress Wang secretly asked Gaozong to let the Takeshi clan stay away, and persuaded Gaozong to allow the Nabu clan to enter the harem, hoping to use the Takeshi clan to break Gaozong's affection for Xiaofei.

古文：武氏巧慧，多权数，初入宫，卑辞屈体以事后。
现代文：武氏机敏聪慧，善施权术，刚进宫时，侍奉皇后十分谦恭有礼；皇后十分喜欢她，多次在高宗面前称赞她。
English: When she first entered the palace, she was very polite and courteous in serving the empress. The empress liked her very much and praised her many times in front of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：后爱之，数称其美于上。未几大幸，拜为昭仪，后及淑妃宠皆衰，更相与共谮之，上皆不纳。
现代文：不久大得宠幸，拜为昭仪，皇后与萧妃均失宠，二人又一同诬告武氏，高宗均不予采纳。
English: Soon, she became very popular, and Bae Shoyi, the empress, and Xiaofei all fell out of favor. Both of them falsely accused Takeuji, and Gaozong was not accepted.

古文：昭仪欲追赠其父而无名，故托以褒赏功臣，遍赠屈突通等，而武士彟预焉。乙丑，上幸凤泉汤；己巳，还万年宫。
现代文：武昭仪想要追赠他的父亲武士的官爵，而苦于没有什么名义，于是便假托要褒奖赏赐十三位功臣，其中便有武士。乙丑，高宗巡幸凤泉汤；己巳，回到万年宫。
English: Wu Zhaoyi wanted to give his father a knighthood, but suffered from having no name, so he pretended to reward thirteen meritorious vassals, including a samurai. Yixiu, Gaozong Jucheng Fengquan Tang; Zimi, returned to the Palace.

古文：夏，四月，大食发兵击波斯，杀波斯王伊嗣侯，伊嗣侯之子卑路斯奔吐火罗。
现代文：夏季，四月，大食国出兵进攻波斯国，杀死波斯国王伊嗣侯，伊嗣侯的儿子卑路斯投奔吐火罗。
English: In the summer, in April, the great food country sent troops to attack the Persian country, killing the Persian king, Ishi, and Ishi's son, Belus, fled to Tuvaro.

古文：大食兵去，吐火罗发兵立卑路斯为波斯王而还。
现代文：大食军队退去，吐火罗派兵护送卑路斯回到国中，立为波斯国王。
English: When the Persian army retreated, Tiglath-Pileser sent an army to escort Pelus back to his country and crowned him king of Persia.

古文：闰月，丙子，以处月部置金满州。
现代文：闰五月，丙子，唐朝在处月部设置金满州。
English: In leap May, Cixi, the Tang Dynasty set up Manchukuo in the lunar part of the month.

古文：丁丑，夜，大雨，山水涨溢，冲玄武门，宿卫士皆散走。
现代文：丁丑，夜里，天下大雨，山洪爆发，大水冲击玄武门；宿卫士兵纷纷逃散。
English: Dingwu, at night, the world heavy rain, flash floods broke out, the flood hit the Xuanwu Gate; the soldiers of the night watchman fled in succession.

古文：右领军郎将薛仁贵曰： 安有宿卫之士，天子有急而敢畏死乎！ 
现代文：右领军郎将薛仁贵说： 怎么能出现天子有急难而宿卫士兵怕死的情况？ 
English: General Xue Rengui, the right-hand man, said, "How can it be that the Son of Heaven is in an emergency and the guards are scared to death?

古文：乃登门桄大呼以警宫内。
现代文：于是登门框大声呼喊警告皇宫里的人。
English: So the bouncer shouted loudly to warn the people in the palace.

古文：上遽出乘高，俄而水入寝殿，水漂溺卫士及麟游居人，死者三千馀人。
现代文：高宗急忙走出宫内登上高处，一会儿大水漫入寝殿，溺淹卫士及住在麟游县的人，死三千多人。
English: Gaozong hurriedly stepped out of the palace and climbed to a high place. A moment later, the floodwaters entered the bed chamber, drowning the guards and the people living in Linyou County. More than three thousand people died.

古文：壬辰，新罗女王金真德卒，诏立其弟春秋为新罗王。
现代文：壬辰，新罗女王金真德去世，高宗下诏立她的弟弟金春秋为新罗国王。
English: In Imjin, Silla Queen Jin Zhende passed away, and Gao Zong decreed her brother Jin Chunqiu as the King of Silla.

古文：六月，丙午，恒州大水，呼沱溢，漂溺五千三百家。
现代文：六月，丙午，恒州发大水，呼沱河水涨满，淹没五千三百家。
English: In June, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 6th month, there was a big flood in Hengzhou, and the water of the Hulun River was full, flooding 5,300 houses.

古文：中书令柳奭以王皇后宠衰，内不自安，请解政事；癸亥，罢为吏部尚书。
现代文：中书令柳因为王皇后失宠，内心很不安稳，请求解除相职；癸亥，罢黜柳中书令，改任吏部尚书。
English: Because the king and queen fell out of favor, Liu Zhongshuling was very uneasy and requested to be relieved of his duties; Wei Hai dismissed Liu Zhongshuling and was reassigned to Shangshu, the personnel department.

古文：秋，九月，丁酉，车驾至京师。
现代文：秋季七月，丁酉，高宗车驾回到京城。
English: In the autumn of July, Ding Xi, Gao Zong drove back to Beijing.

古文：戊戌，上谓五品以上曰： 顷在先帝左右，见五品以上论事，或仗下面陈，或退上封事，终日不绝；岂今日独无事邪，何公等皆不言也？ 
现代文：戊戌，高宗对五品以上官员说： 以前在先帝身边，看见五品以上官员议论朝政，有的在立仗的诸卫士之前当面陈情，有的退朝后上书奏事，连日不断；难道惟独现在无事可奏吗，你们为什么都不上书言事呢？ 
English: At last, Gaozong said to the officials of the Fifth Rank and above, "In the past, when I was around the former emperor, I saw officials of the Fifth Rank and above discussing the government of the dynasty. Some of them made their cases in front of the guards who were at war, and some of them submitted written reports after they retired from the throne. This went on day after day. Is it only now that there is nothing to report? Why don't you submit written reports?

古文：冬，十月，雇雍州四万一千人筑长安外郭，三旬而毕。
现代文：冬季十月，朝廷雇佣雍州四万一千人修筑长安外城，三十天后竣工。
English: In the winter of October, the imperial court hired 41,000 people from Yongzhou to build the Chang'an Outer City, which was completed 30 days later.

古文：癸丑，雍州参军薛景宣上封事，言： 汉惠帝城长安，寻晏驾；今复城之，必有大咎。 
现代文：癸丑，雍州参军薛景宣上书言事，说道： 汉惠帝修筑长安城，不久死去；如今又要修城，一家会有大的不幸。 
English: Unfortunately, Xue Jing, a member of the Yongzhou army, issued a proclamation, saying: Han Hui Di built Chang'an City and died soon after; now he wants to rebuild the city, the family will have great misfortune.

古文：于志宁等以景宣言涉不顺，请诛之。
现代文：于志宁等人认为景宣言语涉于妖妄，请求将他处斩。
English: Yu Zhining and others believed that Jing's proclamation was a delusion and requested that he be beheaded.

古文：上曰： 景宣虽狂妄，若因上封事得罪，恐绝言路。 
现代文：高宗说： 景宣虽然出言狂妄，如果因为上书言事而获罪，恐怕会断绝言路。 
English: Gao Zong said: Although Jing Xuan Rong's words are arrogant, if he is found guilty of writing a letter and saying something, I am afraid he will break his promise.

古文：遂赦之。
现代文：于是宽赦了薛景宣。
English: So he pardoned him.

古文：高丽遣其将安固将高丽、靺鞨兵击契丹；松漠都督李窟哥御之，大败高丽于新城。
现代文：高丽国派其将领安固统率高丽、军队进攻契丹；松漠都督李窟哥率兵抵抗，在新城大败高丽军队。
English: Koryo dispatched its general, Angur, to lead the Koryo army to attack Khitan; Songpa's governor, Ri Gukgo, led the resistance and defeated the Koryo army in Sinchon.

古文：是岁大稔，洛州粟米斗两钱半，粳米斗十一钱。
现代文：这一年大丰收，洛州粟米一斗才值两钱半，粳米一斗十一钱。
English: This year was a bumper harvest. A barrel of Loshou corn was worth two and a half yuan, while a barrel of glutinous rice was worth eleven yuan.

古文：王皇后、萧淑妃与武昭仪更相谮诉，上不信后、淑妃之语，独信昭仪。
现代文：王皇后、萧淑妃与武昭仪之间相互诬告诽谤，高宗不相信王后、萧妃的话，惟独信任武昭仪。
English: Empress Wang, Xiao Shufei and Wu Zhaoyi slandered each other. Gaozong did not believe the words of the queen and Xiao Fei, but trusted Wu Zhaoyi.

古文：后不能曲事上左右，母魏国夫人柳氏及舅中书令柳奭入见六宫，又不为礼。
现代文：王皇后不会曲意事奉高宗身边的人，她的母亲魏国夫人柳氏及舅舅中书令柳进见六宫妃嫔，又不讲礼节。
English: Empress Wang would not deign to serve Gaozong's entourage. Her mother, Wei Guo's wife Liu Shi, and uncle Zhong Shu ordered Liu to see the concubines of the Sixth Palace, and did not speak of etiquette.

古文：武昭仪伺后所不敬者，必倾心与相结，所得赏赐分与之。
现代文：武昭仪观察到皇后讨厌的人，便与之倾心相交，所得到的赏赐也要分给她们。
English: Wu Zhaoyi observed that the queen hated people, so she fell in love with them, and the rewards she received were also given to them.

古文：由是后及淑妃动静，昭仪必知之，皆以闻于上。
现代文：因此王皇后与萧妃的一举一动，武氏都知道，并且都告诉给高宗。
English: Therefore, every move of Empress Wang and Empress Xiao was known to the Wu clan, and they all told Gao Zong.

古文：后宠虽衰，然上未有意废也。
现代文：王皇后虽然失宠，但高宗并未有废后的想法。
English: Although Empress Wang had fallen out of favor, Gaozong had no intention of abdicating.

古文：会昭仪生女，后怜而弄之，后出，昭仪潜扼杀之，覆之以被。
现代文：正巧此时武昭仪生下一个女孩，皇后怜爱她并逗弄她玩，皇后走出去后，武氏趁没人将女孩掐死，又盖上被子。
English: Just at this time, Wu Zhaoyi gave birth to a girl, the queen pitied her and teased her to play. After the queen went out, Mr. Wu took advantage of no one to strangle the girl and covered her with a quilt.

古文：上至，昭仪阳欢笑，发被观之，女已死矣，即惊啼。
现代文：正好高宗来到，武氏假装欢笑，打开被子一同看孩子，发现女婴已经死了，武氏大声哭闹。
English: Just as Gao Zong arrived, Mr. Wu pretended to laugh, opened the quilt to look at the child together, found that the baby girl had died, and Mr. Wu began to cry loudly.

古文：问左右，左右皆曰： 皇后适来此。 
现代文：问身边的人是怎么回事，身边的人都说： 皇后刚刚来过这里。 
English: When I asked the people around me what was going on, they all said: "The Queen has just been here."

古文：上大怒曰： 后杀吾女！ 
现代文：高宗勃然大怒，说道： 皇后杀了我的女儿！ 
English: Gaozong flew into a rage and said, "The queen has killed my daughter!"

古文：昭仪因泣诉其罪。
现代文：武昭仪借机哭泣着数落其罪过。
English: Wu Zhaoyi took the opportunity to weep and count her sins.

古文：后无以自明，上由是有废立之志。
现代文：皇后无法申辩，高宗从此有了废皇后立武昭仪为后的打算。
English: The empress was unable to defend herself, and Gaozong planned to abolish the empress and install Wu Zhaoyi as the next emperor.

古文：又畏大臣不从，乃与昭仪幸太尉长孙无忌第，酣饮极欢，席上拜无忌宠姬子三人皆为朝散大夫，仍载金宝缯锦十车以赐无忌。
现代文：又担心大臣们不服，于是便和武氏一道临幸太尉长孙无忌的宅第，宴饮酣畅欢乐到极点，酒席上将无忌宠姬的三个儿子都拜为朝散大夫，又命人装载金银财宝、锦缎丝绸等共十车赐给无忌。
English: He was also worried that the ministers would not be satisfied, so he and the Takeshi clan went to the residence of the eldest grandson of the first lieutenant of fortune, the eldest grandson of Mubi, and had a banquet full of joy. At the banquet, Mubi's three sons were all worshipped as Chosan doctors, and a total of ten carts loaded with gold, silver and treasure, brocade and silk, etc. were given to Mubi.

古文：上因从容言皇后无子以讽无忌，无忌对以他语，竟不顺旨，上及昭仪皆不悦而罢。昭仪又令母杨氏诣无忌第，屡有祈请，无忌终不许。礼部尚书许敬宗亦数劝无忌，无忌厉色折之。永徽六年乙卯，公元六五五年春，正月，壬申朔，上谒昭陵；甲戌，还宫。
现代文：礼部尚书许敬宗也曾多次劝说无忌，无忌正言厉色斥责了他。永徽六年春季，正月，壬申朔，高宗亲谒昭陵；甲戌，回到宫中。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Yonghui, in the first month of the year, Jinshen Shuo, Gao Zong's relatives were buried in the Zhao Mausoleum; Jia Jia, returned to the palace.

古文：己丑，巂州道行军总管曹继叔破胡丛、显养、车鲁等蛮于斜山，拔十余城。
现代文：己丑，州道行军总管曹继叔在斜山一带打败胡丛、显养、车鲁等蛮族，攻克十余座城。
English: At the same time, Cao Jizhong, the general manager of the State Highway Marching Corps, defeated barbarians such as Hu Cong, Xian Yang and Che Lu in the area of the sloping mountains, and conquered more than ten cities.

古文：庚寅，立皇子弘为代王，贤为潞王。
现代文：庚寅，立皇子李弘为代王，李贤为潞王。
English: Emperor Go-In made Prince Ri Hong the acting king and Ri Hyon the regent.

古文：高丽与百济、靺鞨连兵，侵新罗北境，取三十三城；新罗王春秋遣使求援。
现代文：高丽与百济、合兵一处，侵犯新罗北部边境，攻取三十三座城；新罗国王金春秋派使者到唐朝请求援助。
English: Goryeo and Baekje jointly invaded the northern border of Silla and captured thirty-three cities; King Jinchunqiu of Silla sent an envoy to the Tang Dynasty to request assistance.

古文：二月，乙丑，遣营州都督程名振、左卫中郎将苏定方发兵击高丽。
现代文：二月，乙丑，唐朝派营州都督程名振、左卫中郎将苏定方征发军队进攻高丽。
English: In February, the second month of the Ugly, the Tang Dynasty sent the governor of Yingzhou, Cheng Nafran, and the left guard, Zhongro, to recruit and dispatch the army of the Soviet Union to attack Korea.

古文：夏，五月，壬午，名振等渡辽水，高丽见其兵少，开门渡贵端水逆战。名振等奋击，大破之，杀获千馀人，焚其外郭及村落而还。
现代文：夏季五月，壬午，程名振等人渡过辽水，高丽看见唐军兵力很少，便大开城门渡过贵端水迎战，名振等人奋勇出击，大败高丽兵，杀死并俘虏一千多人，焚烧其外城及村庄，而后返回。
English: In the summer of May, around noon, Cheng Nian Zhen and others crossed the Liao Shui River. When Goryeo saw that the Tang army had few troops, it opened the city gate wide to cross the Guidan Shui River to meet the battle. Nian Zhen and others bravely attacked, defeated the Goryeo soldiers, killed and captured more than a thousand people, burned their outlying cities and villages, and then returned.

古文：癸未，以右屯卫大将军程知节为葱山道行军大总管，以讨西突厥沙钵罗可汗。
现代文：癸未，任命右屯卫大将军程知节为葱山道行军大总管，讨伐西突厥沙钵罗可汗。
English: Soon after, he appointed the Right Tunwei General Cheng Zhi Jie as the commander-in-chief of the march on the Qianshan Road to fight against the West Turk Shah Rukh Khan.

古文：壬辰，以韩瑗为侍中，来济为中书令。
现代文：壬辰，任命韩瑗为侍中，来济为中书令。
English: Imjin, appointed Han Zheng as a chamberlain, and Lai Jie as a secretary.

古文：六月，武昭仪诬王后与其母魏国夫人柳氏为厌胜，敕禁后母柳氏不得入宫。
现代文：六月，武昭仪诬陷王皇后和她的母亲魏国夫人柳氏求巫施厌胜术诅咒昭仪，高宗敕令禁止皇后母亲柳氏进入宫内。
English: In June, Wu Zhaoyi falsely accused Empress Wang and her mother, Lady Liu of Wei, of seeking sorcery, casting a curse on Zhaoyi, and Emperor Gao Zong's edict forbade Empress Mother Liu to enter the palace.

古文：秋，七月，戊寅，贬吏部尚书柳奭为遂州刺史。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊寅，将吏部尚书柳贬为遂州刺史。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wu Yin relegated the cadre of Shang Shuliu to Suizhou Shishi.

古文：奭行至扶风，岐州长史于承素希旨奏奭漏泄禁中语，复贬荣州刺史。
现代文：柳赴任走到扶风县，岐州长史于承素揣摸圣意上奏称柳泄漏宫禁秘密，又贬为荣州刺史。
English: Liu went to Fufeng County after taking office, and the governor of Qi pretended that Liu had divulged the secret of the palace ban, and he was relegated to the position of the governor of Rongzhou.

古文：唐因隋制，后宫有贵妃、淑妃、德妃、贤妃皆视一品。
现代文：唐朝因袭隋朝制度，后宫有贵妃、淑妃、德妃、贤妃，都是正一品。
English: Due to the Sui Dynasty system inherited from the Tang Dynasty, there were Guifei, Shuifei, Defei, and Xianfei in the harem, all of which were the same.

古文：上欲特置宸妃，以武昭仪为之，韩瑗、来济谏，以为故事无之，乃止。
现代文：高宗想要特别设置一个宸妃，封给武昭仪，韩瑗、来济谏阻，认为无旧例可循，于是作罢。
English: Gao Zong wanted to specially set up a concubine to be given to Wu Zhaoyi, Han Zheng, to help the resistance, and thought that there was no precedent to follow, so he abandoned it.

古文：中书舍人饶阳李义府为长孙无忌所恶，左迁壁州司马。
现代文：中书舍人、饶阳人李义府为长孙无忌所厌恶，降职为壁州司马。
English: Li Yifu, a scholar and Raoyang resident, was detested by his eldest grandson, and was demoted to the position of Bishu Sima.

古文：敕未至门下，义府密知之，问计于中书舍人幽州王德俭，德俭曰： 上欲立武昭仪为后，犹豫未决者，直恐宰臣异议耳。
现代文：敕令还未到门下省，李义府已经暗中得知，便向中书舍人、幽州人王德俭问计，德俭说： 高宗想要立武昭仪为皇后，正在犹豫不决，一直担心宰相们会有异议。
English: Before the edict reached his province, Li Yifu had already learned about it secretly, so he asked Wang Dejian, a scholar of Chinese literature and a resident of Yuzhou, for advice. Dejian said: Gao Zong is hesitating to make Wu Zhaoyi the empress, and has been worried that the prime ministers would have objections.

古文：君能建策立之，则转祸为福矣。 
现代文：你如果能提建议立武氏为后，则转祸为福了。 
English: If you can make a suggestion to appoint Mr. Wu as the successor, it will be a blessing in disguise.

古文：义府然之，是日，代德俭直宿，叩阁上表，请废皇后王氏，立武昭仪，以厌兆庶之心。
现代文：李义府同意他的话，这一天，他代替德俭值宿，叩门向高宗上表章，请求废掉王皇后，立武昭仪为后，以满足黎民百姓的愿望。
English: Li Yifu agreed with his words. On this day, he was on duty in place of De Jian, knocking on the door to present the medal to Gao Zong, requesting the abolition of the king and queen, and the establishment of Wu Zhaoyi as the queen, in order to meet the wishes of the people of Li.

古文：上悦，召见，与语，赐珠一斗，留居旧职。
现代文：高宗十分高兴，亲自召见李义府，与他谈话，赐给珍珠一斗，留下他官居原职。
English: Gao Zong was very happy, personally summoned Li Yifu, talked with him, gave him a barrel of pearls, and left him in his original position.

古文：昭仪又密遣使劳勉之，寻超拜中书侍郎。
现代文：武氏又暗中派人慰劳勉励他，不久破格提拔为中书侍郎。
English: The Takeshi clan also secretly sent someone to comfort and encourage him, and he was soon promoted to the position of chusho-sajiro.

古文：于是卫尉卿许敬宗、御义大夫崔义玄、中丞袁公瑜皆潜布腹心于武昭仪矣。
现代文：在此之后，卫尉卿许敬宗、御史大夫崔义玄、御史中丞袁公瑜都暗中向武氏表达其效忠之心。
English: After this, Captain of the Imperial Guards Xu Jingzong, Grand Historian Cui Yixuan, and Grand Historian Yuan Gongyu all secretly expressed their loyalty to the Wu clan.

古文：乙酉，以侍中崔敦礼为中书令。
现代文：乙酉，任命侍中崔敦礼为中书令。
English: and appointed the chamberlain, Choi Tun Lee, as the chancellor.

古文：八月，尚药奉御蒋孝璋员外特置，仍同正员。
现代文：八月，尚药局奉御蒋孝璋为定员二人之外的特置人员，品级仍同正员。
English: In August, the Shang Pharmaceutical Bureau appointed Jiang Xiaohui as a special employee in addition to the two regular employees, and the grade was still the same as that of the regular employee.

古文：员外同正自孝璋始。
现代文：员外同正的官职从孝璋开始。
English: The official duties of non-commissioned officers begin with filial piety.

古文：长安令裴行俭闻将立武昭仪为后，以国家之祸必由此始，与长孙无忌、褚遂良私议其事。
现代文：长安县令裴行俭听说朝廷将要立武昭仪为皇后，认为国家的祸患必定从此开始，便与长孙无忌、褚遂良私下议论此事。
English: When Chang'an County Governor Pei Xingjian heard that the imperial court was going to make Wu Zhaoyi the empress, he thought that the country's woes would surely begin from here, so he discussed the matter privately with his eldest grandson, Mu Muhui, and Zou Suiliang.

古文：袁公瑜闻之，以告昭仪母杨氏，行俭坐左迁西州都督府长史。
现代文：袁公瑜听说后，将这一情况告诉武氏母亲杨氏，行俭因此获罪，贬为西州都督府长史。
English: After hearing about this, Yuan Gongyu told the situation to Wu's mother, Yang. As a result, Gao Jian was found guilty and demoted to the post of governor of Xizhou.

古文：行俭，仁基之子也。
现代文：行俭是裴仁基的儿子。
English: He is the son of Pei Renji.

古文：九月，戊辰，以许敬宗为礼部尚书。
现代文：九月，戊辰，任命许敬宗为礼部尚书。
English: In September, Wu Chen appointed Xu Jingzong as the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：上一日退朝，召长孙无忌、李勣、于志宁、褚遂良入内殿。
现代文：有一天高宗退朝后，宣召长孙无忌、李世、于志宁、褚遂良进入内殿。
English: One day, after Gaozong's abdication, he summoned his eldest grandson, Mu Mu, Li Shih, Yu Zhining, and Zou Suiliang to enter the inner hall.

古文：遂良曰： 今日之召，多为中宫，上意既决，逆之必死。
现代文：褚遂良说： 今天皇上宣召，多半是为了后宫的事，皇上的主意既已定了，违抗者必是死罪。
English: Zou Suiliang said, "The emperor's proclamation today is mostly for the sake of the harem. The emperor's mind is already made up, and anyone who defies him will be sentenced to death."

古文：太尉元舅，司空功臣，不可使上有杀元舅及功臣之名。
现代文：太尉是元舅，司空是功臣，不可以让皇上承担杀元舅与功臣的不好名声。
English: The captain is a former uncle, and the secretary is a meritorious subject. The emperor should not bear the bad reputation of killing the former uncle and meritorious subject.

古文：遂良起于草茅，无汗马之劳，致位至此，且受顾托，不以死争之，何以下见先帝！ 
现代文：我褚遂良乃是自平民起家，没有汗马功劳，到了今日这个地位，而且接受先帝托孤，不以死谏诤，无颜去见先帝！ 
English: I, Suiliang, started out as a commoner. I did not have to work hard to get to where I am today. Moreover, I accepted the emperor's patronage. I would not die, and I would not dare to meet the emperor!

古文：勣称疾不入。
现代文：李世称病没去内殿。
English: Li Shiyi said that he did not go to the inner hall due to illness.

古文：无忌等至内殿，上顾谓无忌曰： 皇后无子，武昭仪有子，今欲立昭仪为后，何如？ 
现代文：无忌等人到了内殿，高宗对他们说： 皇后没有子嗣，武昭仪有，如今朕想立武昭仪为皇后，你们看怎么样？ 
English: When they arrived at the inner hall, Gaozong said to them, "The empress has no children, but Wu Zhaoyi does. Now I want to make Wu Zhaoyi the empress. What do you think?

古文：遂良对曰： 皇后名家，先帝为陛下所娶。
现代文：褚遂良答道： 皇后出身名家，是先帝为陛下娶的。
English: Zou Suiliang replied: The empress was from a famous family, and the former emperor married her.

古文：先帝临崩，执陛下手谓臣曰： 朕佳儿佳妇，今以付卿。 
现代文：先帝临死的时候，拉着陛下的手对我说： 朕的好儿子好儿媳，如今就交付给你了。 
English: When the late emperor was about to die, he took His Majesty's hand and said to me, "My good son, my good daughter-in-law, I now hand over to you.

古文：此陛下所闻，言犹在耳。
现代文：这些话都是陛下亲耳听到的，言犹在耳。
English: His Majesty heard these words with his own ears, and they still ring in his ears.

古文：皇后未闻有过，岂可轻废！
现代文：未听说皇后有什么过错，怎么能够轻易废掉呢！
English: How can it be scrapped so easily without the Queen being told what's wrong with it?

古文：臣不敢曲从陛下，上违先帝之命！ 
现代文：我不敢曲意顺从陛下，以违背先帝的遗愿！ 
English: I dare not bend to your majesty's will and go against the last wishes of the former emperor!

古文：上不悦而罢。
现代文：高宗十分不高兴，只好作罢。
English: Gao Zong was very unhappy and had to give up.

古文：明日又言之，遂良曰： 陛下必欲易皇后，伏请妙择天下令族，何必武氏！
现代文：第二天又言及此事，褚遂良说： 陛下一定要更换皇后，我请求遴选全国的世家望族，何必非武氏不可。
English: The next day, referring to the matter again, Zou Suiliang said, "Your Majesty must replace the empress. I request that you select a respected family from all over the country. Why not the Wu clan?"

古文：武氏经事先帝，众所共知，天下耳目，安可蔽也。
现代文：武氏曾经侍奉过先帝，这是众所周知，天下人的耳目，怎么能遮掩呢？
English: It is well known that the Wu clan once served the former emperor. How can they hide this from the eyes and ears of the world?

古文：万代之后，谓陛下为如何！
现代文：千秋万代之后，人们又将怎么评价陛下呢？
English: After thousands of generations, how will people evaluate His Majesty?

古文：愿留三思！
现代文：愿陛下三思而后行！
English: May His Majesty think twice before proceeding!

古文：臣今忤陛下，罪当死！ 
现代文：我今日触怒陛下，罪该处死。 
English: I have offended your majesty today, for which I deserve to die.

古文：因置笏于殿阶，解巾叩头流血曰： 还陛下笏，乞放归田里。 
现代文：说完将朝笏放在殿内台阶上，解下头巾磕头直到血流满面，说道： 还给陛下朝笏，乞求放我回老家去。 
English: Having said this, he placed the hajj on the steps of the hall, removed his turban and kneeled until his face was covered in blood, and said: "Return the hajj to His Majesty and beg him to let me go back to my hometown."

古文：上大怒，命引出。
现代文：高宗勃然大怒，命人将他带出去。
English: Gaozong flew into a rage and ordered someone to take him out.

古文：昭仪在帘中大言曰： 何不扑杀此獠！ 
现代文：武昭仪在隔帘内大声说道： 何不就地杀了这老东西！ 
English: Wu Zhaoyi said loudly in the curtain: Why not kill this old thing on the spot!

古文：无忌曰： 遂良受先朝顾命，有罪不可加刑！ 
现代文：长孙无忌说： 褚遂良是先朝顾命大臣，有罪也不可以加刑。 
English: The eldest grandson said without hesitation: Zou Suiliang was the minister in charge of the protection of the emperor's life in the previous dynasty, and the punishment cannot be increased for the guilty.

古文：于志宁不敢言。
现代文：于志宁不敢说话。
English: Yu Shining did not dare to speak.

古文：韩瑗因间奏事，涕泣极谏，上不纳。
现代文：韩瑗找个时机上奏疏，流泪极力劝阻废皇后，高宗不予采纳。
English: Han Zheng found an opportunity to play the dulcimer and shed tears to dissuade the empress, but Gao Zong would not accept it.

古文：明日又谏，悲不自胜，上命引出。
现代文：他第二天又劝谏，悲伤得不能自已，高宗命人将他带出去。
English: The next day, he pleaded with Gao Zong again, he was so sad that he couldn't help himself. Gao Zong ordered someone to take him out.

古文：瑗又上疏谏曰： 匹夫匹妇，犹相选择，况天子乎！
现代文：韩瑗又上奏疏劝谏道： 一般的夫妇，还要相互选择后再结合，何况天子呢？
English: Han Zheng again played the role of a dissuader and advised her: Ordinary couples have to choose each other and then combine, what about the heavenly son?

古文：皇后母仪万国，善恶由之，故嫫母辅佐黄帝，妲己倾覆殷王，《诗》云： 赫赫宗周，褒姒灭之。 
现代文：皇后乃是天下妇女的仪范，善恶由她而生，所以说嫫母辅佐黄帝；妲己倾覆殷朝，《诗经》说： 赫赫有名的宗周，就灭在褒姒之手。 
English: The empress is the model of women in the world. Good and evil are born from her. Therefore, it is said that the queen mother assisted the Yellow Emperor; she overthrew the Yin Dynasty. "The Book of Songs" says: The famous Zong Zhou was destroyed by the hand of Bo Xun.

古文：每览前古，常兴叹息，不谓今日尘黩圣代。
现代文：每次观览前朝史事，常会发出感慨，没想到今天圣明之世也会受到玷污。
English: Every time I watch the historical events of the previous morning, I often feel emotion. I didn't expect that today's sacred world would also be tarnished.

古文：作而不法，后嗣何观！
现代文：作事不依法度，后世将如何看呢！
English: If you don't do things according to the law, how will future generations look at you?

古文：愿陛下详之，无为后人所笑！
现代文：希望陛下再三考虑，不要让后人讥笑。
English: I hope His Majesty will think twice before allowing future generations to ridicule him.

古文：使臣有以益国，菹醢之戮，臣之分也！
现代文：假使臣下我的话有益于国家，即使被剁成肉酱，臣也死得其所！
English: If the words of my vassal are beneficial to the country, even if he is chopped up into meat sauce, the vassal will still die in his rightful place!

古文：昔吴王不用子胥之言而麋鹿游于姑苏。
现代文：当年吴王不听伍子胥的话，结果吴都姑苏破败，麋鹿出没。
English: At that time, the king of Wu did not listen to Wu Zixuan's words. As a result, Wu Du Gu Su was ruined, and elk haunted it.

古文：臣恐海内失望，棘荆生于阙庭，宗庙不血食，期有日矣！ 
现代文：臣下我担心陛下令海内之人失望，使宫廷长满荆棘，宗庙不能继续享有祭祀的情况，为期不远了！ 
English: Subordinate, I am worried that Your Majesty has ordered the people at home to be disappointed, so that the palace is full of thorns, and the ancestral temple cannot continue to enjoy the sacrificial rites. The time is not far away!

古文：来济上表谏曰： 王者立后，上法乾坤，必择礼教名家，幽闲令淑，副四海之望，称神祇之意。
现代文：来济上表章劝谏说： 君主册立皇后，应该依据天地之理，必须选择名门礼教之家的淑女，幽雅娴静，贤淑美好，才可与人的厚望相副，也能称神灵的意图。
English: Lai Jizhi wrote on his epitaph to persuade her: A monarch should choose a queen according to the principles of heaven and earth, and must choose a lady from a prestigious family of etiquette, elegant and quiet, virtuous and beautiful, so that she can match the high expectations of people, and can also be called the intention of the gods.

古文：是故周文造舟以迎太姒，而兴《关雎》之化，百姓蒙祚；孝成纵欲，以婢为后，使皇统亡绝，社稷倾沦。
现代文：所以说周文王造船迎接太姒，这才有《关雎》的教化，百姓承受福祚；汉成帝纵欲成性，以婢女为皇后，使皇统断绝，社稷倾覆。
English: Therefore, it is said that Zhou Wenzhong's shipbuilding met the emperor, which led to the enlightenment of "Guanzhong" and the people received blessings; Emperor Hancheng indulged in sexual indulgence and took a maid as his queen, which led to the break-up of the imperial system and the overthrow of the social order.

古文：有周之隆既如彼，大汉之祸又如此，惟陛下详察！ 
现代文：周代的隆盛是那样，汉代的祸患又是这样，希望陛下明察！ 
English: The prosperity of the Zhou Dynasty was like that, and the calamity of the Han Dynasty was like that. I hope Your Majesty can see it clearly!

古文：上皆不纳。
现代文：高宗对这些谏言都不予采纳。
English: Gaozong did not accept any of these criticisms.

古文：它日，李勣入见，上问之曰： 朕欲立武昭仪为后，遂良固执以为不可。
现代文：又一天，李世进宫见高宗，高宗问他： 朕想要立武昭仪为皇后，褚遂良固执己见认为不可以。
English: The next day, Li Shixin went to the palace to see Gaozong. Gaozong asked him: "I want to make Wu Zhaoyi the empress, but I don't think it's right for Sui Liang to stick to his own opinion."

古文：遂良既顾命大臣，事当且已乎？ 
现代文：褚遂良既是顾命大臣，他反对，那么事情就应该停止吗？ 
English: Gong Suiliang is the minister in charge of protecting the lives of the people. If he is against it, should it be stopped?

古文：对曰： 此陛下家事，何必更问外人！ 
现代文：李世答道： 这是陛下的家事，何必又去问外人呢！ 
English: Li Shih replied, "This is your majesty's family business, why do you need to ask outsiders?"

古文：上意遂决。
现代文：高宗废后主意于是定了下来。
English: After Gao Zong's retirement, the decision was made.

古文：许敬宗宣言于朝曰： 田舍翁多收十斛麦，尚欲易妇；况天子欲立一后，何豫诸人事而妄生异议乎！ 
现代文：许敬宗在朝中扬言道： 庄稼汉多收了十斛麦子，还想着要换个老婆呢？何况天子要立皇后，人们又何必管那么多事而妄生异议呢？ 
English: Xu Jingzong threatened in the court: "If a farmer receives an extra ten stalks of wheat, does he still want to change his wife? Not to mention that the Son of Heaven wants to set up a queen, why do people have to be in charge of so many things and create dissent?

古文：昭仪令左右以闻。
现代文：武昭仪让身边的人将此话讲给高宗听。
English: Wu Zhaoyi asked the people around her to tell this to Gao Zong.

古文：庚午，贬遂良为潭州都督。
现代文：庚午，将褚遂良贬为潭州都督。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Zou Suiliang was demoted to the governor of Tanzhou.

