古文：李弥逊，字似之，苏州吴县人。
现代文：李弥逊，字似之，苏州吴县人。
English: Li Mison, also known by his nickname, is from Suzhou's Wuxian County.

古文：弱冠，以上舍登大观三年第，调单州司户，再调阳谷簿。
现代文：刚成年时以上舍生身份考取大观三年进士，调任单州司户，又调任阳谷主簿。
English: When he became an adult, he took the Taikan three-year advancement exam as a student, was transferred to the single-state steward, and was transferred to the main book of Yanggu.

古文：政和四年，除国朝会要所检阅文字。
现代文：政和四年，调入国朝会要所审阅校勘文字讹误。
English: In the fourth year of the Meiji Restoration, he was transferred to the important office of the Imperial Household Agency to review and correct the mistakes in the text.

古文：引见，特迁校书郎，充编修六典校阅，累官起成郎。
现代文：经人推荐被钦宗召见，因表现突出升校书郎，充当编修六典校阅，连任校书郎。
English: He was recommended by his teacher to be called by Kinzong, and because of his outstanding performance, he was promoted to school librarian, served as editor of the sixth grade school reading, and was re-elected school librarian.

古文：以封事剀切，贬知卢山县，改奉嵩山祠。
现代文：因在密封的奏章中言词犀利、切中时弊被贬为庐山知县，后来又改任嵩山祠宫观官。
English: He was demoted to Shaoshan Zhixian for his sharp and incisive speech in the sealed record, and later he was appointed as an observer of the Songshan Ancestral Palace.

古文：废斥隐居者八载。
现代文：李弥逊贬官后在家乡隐退闲居达八年时间。
English: After his demotion, Li Yishun retired to his hometown and lived in seclusion for eight years.

古文：宣和末，知冀州。
现代文：宋徽宗宣和末年，李弥逊任冀州知州。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, Li Yisong was appointed as the governor of Jizhou and Chizhou.

古文：金人犯河朔，诸郡皆惊备，弥逊损金帛，致勇士，修城堞，决河护堑，邀击其游骑，斩首甚众。
现代文：金军大举进犯河朔地区，各州郡都加强警备，严阵以待，李弥逊花费大量金钱，招募了一批勇敢善战的将士，修筑加固了城防工事，将护城河水决开以保护护城河及壕沟，不断击败金人的骑兵，杀死了很多金兵。
English: The Jin army invaded the Hexuo area in a big way. All the states and counties strengthened their vigilance and waited in a tight line. Li Mishong spent a lot of money, recruited a group of brave and warlike soldiers, built and strengthened the city defense works, broke the moat water to protect the moat and trench, and constantly defeated the cavalry of the Jin people and killed many gold soldiers.

古文：兀术北还，戒师毋犯其城。
现代文：金军统帅兀北归金国后，再三告诫他的军队不要侵犯冀州城池。
English: After the commander-in-chief of the Chinese army, Zou Bei, returned to China, he repeatedly warned his army not to invade the city of Jizhou.

古文：靖康元年，召为卫尉少卿，出知瑞州。
现代文：宋钦宗靖康元年，李弥逊被任命为卫尉少卿，不久又出任筠州知州。
English: In the first year of Song Qinzong's reign of peace and prosperity, Li Mison was appointed as a junior captain of the imperial guard, and soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：二年，建康府牙校周德叛，执帅宇文粹中，杀官吏，婴城自守，势猖獗。
现代文：靖康二年，江宁府牙校周德叛变投敌，拘捕了统帅宇文粹中，杀死朝廷官吏，据城自守，气焰十分嚣张。
English: In the second year of Jingkang, Zhou De, a dental school in Jiangning Prefecture, defected to the enemy, arrested the commander U Wenzhong, killed the imperial officials, defended the city, and was very arrogant.

古文：弥逊以江东判运领郡事，单骑扣贼围，以蜡书射城中招降。
现代文：李弥逊以江东判运身份管理郡中事，他一人骑马至建康城外叩门，将封在蜡里的书信射入城中招降判军。
English: Li Mison managed the affairs of the county as the judge of the East River. He rode to Jiankang alone, knocked on the gate outside the city, and sent a letter sealed in wax into the city to recruit the judge's army.

古文：贼通款，开关迎之，弥逊谕以祸福，勉使勤王。
现代文：周德叛军通报了愿意投降的消息，并打开城门迎接宋军，李弥逊向他们晓以利害得失，勉励他们全力勤王，保卫大宋江山。
English: Zhou De's rebels reported the news of their willingness to surrender, and opened the city gate to welcome the Song army. Li Mison told them about the advantages and disadvantages, and encouraged them to do their best to serve the king and defend the Great Song Dynasty.

古文：时李纲行次建康，共谋诛首恶五十人，抚其余党，一郡帖然。
现代文：当时李纲正率领部队到达建康，与李弥逊商议后诛杀首恶分子五十人，安抚了叛军余党，江宁郡从此得以安定。
English: At that time, Li Gang was leading the troops to Jiankang, and after discussing with Li Mishun, he killed the first fifty villains, pacified the remaining rebels, and Jiangning County has been stable ever since.

古文：改淮南运副。后奉兴国宫祠，知饶州，召对，首奏 当坚定规模，排斥奸言 。
现代文：李弥逊改任淮南运副，后又主管兴国宫，任饶州知州，宋高宗召他入宫谈论时政，李弥逊首先上奏指出： 应当稳定朝政建制、格局，排斥奸佞小人的邪恶言论。 
English: Li Mison was appointed deputy of Huainan Movement, and later he was put in charge of the Xingguo Palace, and he was also put in charge of Raozhou and Zhizhou. Song Gaozong invited him to the palace to talk about current affairs. Li Mison pointed out at the beginning of his speech: It is necessary to stabilize the political system and pattern of the dynasty, and reject the evil speech of the villains.

古文：又谓： 朝廷一日无事，幸一日之安，一月无事，幸一月之安，欲求终岁之安，已不可得，况能定天下大计乎？ 帝嘉其谠直。
现代文：又说 ：国家一天没有战事，则庆幸有一天的安全，一月没有战事，则庆幸有了一月的安全，想求得终年平定，那是不可能的奢望，又怎么能制定天下的大政方针呢？ 宋高宗赞赏他正直无畏。
English: He also said, "If the country has no war for a day, it is fortunate to have security for a day; if there is no war for a month, it is fortunate to have security for a month. If you want to achieve peace all year round, that is an impossible dream. How can you formulate the world's major policies? Song Gaozong appreciated his honesty and fearlessness.

古文：辅臣有不悦者，以直宝文阁知吉州。
现代文：辅臣中有人对李弥逊不满，李弥逊以直宝文阁身份任吉州知州。
English: Some of the vassals were dissatisfied with Li Mison, who was appointed to Chizhou, Jizhou, in his capacity as a member of the Naobao Cabinet.

古文：陛辞，帝曰： 朕欲留卿，大臣欲重试卿民事，行召卿矣。 
现代文：李弥逊向高宗辞行，高宗说： 我本想将你留在宫中，大臣们建议让你去州郡任职以体察民情，临行之前我想见见你。 
English: Li Mishong resigned to Gao Zong, and Gao Zong said: I originally wanted to keep you in the palace, the ministers suggested that you go to the state and county office to experience the people's feelings, I want to see you before I go.

古文：七年秋，迁起居郎。
现代文：绍兴七年秋，李弥逊升任起居郎。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of Shaoxing, Li Yisong was promoted to the post of kijiro.

古文：弥逊自政和末以上封事得贬，垂二十年，及复居是职，直前论事，鲠切如初。
现代文：自政和末年李弥逊因上密封的奏章直言朝政被贬官，几乎已经二十年了，及至重新担任这个职务后，议论朝政大事，犀利耿直、切合实际还和二十年前一样。
English: It's been almost 20 years since Zi Zheng and the late Li Mison were demoted for speaking out against the imperial court in a sealed document. Now that they have resumed their posts, they discuss the important events of the imperial court with the same sharpness and practicality as they did 20 years ago.

古文：冬，试中书舍人，奏六事曰： 固蕃维以御外侮，严禁卫以尊朝廷，练兵以壮国势，节用以备军食，收民心以固根本，择守帅以责实效。 时驻跸未定，有旨料舟给卒以济宫人。
现代文：这年冬天，李弥逊升任中书舍人，上奏疏阐明六件事说 ：加固边界屏障以抵御外敌的侵略，严格禁卫制度以维护朝廷的安全，训练军队以壮大国家的威势，节约开支以储备军队的粮草，收取民心才能巩固国家的统治，选择良将以责成军队卓有功效。 当时皇上准备出行，途中停留暂住地点还未确定，就下旨准备粮船、卫队以便宫中大小嫔妃随行。
English: In the winter of that year, Li Mishong was promoted to the post of the CPSC's secretary, and in his report to the CPSC, he clarified six things: to strengthen the border barrier to resist foreign invasion, to strictly enforce the guard system to maintain the safety of the imperial court, to train the army to strengthen the country's power, to save expenses to reserve the army's grain and grass, to collect the people's hearts to consolidate the country's rule, and to choose well will be effective in instructing the army. At that time, the emperor was preparing to travel, and the stopover was not yet determined, so he ordered the preparation of grain ships and guards

古文：弥逊缴奏曰： 六飞雷动，百司豫严，时方孔艰，宜以宗社为心，不宜于内幸细故，更勤圣虑，事虽至微，惧伤大体。 帝嘉纳之。
现代文：李弥逊立即呈上奏疏指出： 陛下南行之事，犹如雷声震动，各个部门紧急行动起来，现在正值各地艰难之时，不应该为了宫中宠幸之人的小事而影响陛下的声望，恳切希望陛下认真考虑，这件事虽然很小，但恐怕会伤害国家根本啊。 
English: Li Mison immediately submitted a report and pointed out: The matter of His Majesty's trip to the south was like a thunderclap, and all departments took urgent action. Now is a difficult time for all regions. It should not affect His Majesty's reputation for the sake of a small matter of a favorite person in the palace. I sincerely hope that His Majesty will seriously consider this matter. Although it is small, I am afraid it will hurt the country fundamentally.

古文：试户部侍郎。
现代文：高宗高兴地采纳了他的意见。李弥逊升任户部侍郎。
English: Gao Zong gladly accepted his opinion, and Li Yisong was promoted to the position of household attendant.

古文：秦桧再相，惟弥逊与吏部侍郎晏敦复有忧色。
现代文：秦桧第二次担任宰相后，只有李弥逊和吏部侍郎晏敦复感到很忧虑。
English: After Qin Hui's second term as prime minister, only Li Mison and the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, Zhai Dunfu, were very worried.

古文：八年，弥逊上疏乞外甚力，诏不允。
现代文：绍兴八年，李弥逊上奏疏竭力要求任朝外官，高宗没有允许。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, Li Mison made a petition to the emperor to be appointed foreign minister, but Gao Zong did not allow it.

古文：赵鼎罢相，桧专国，赞帝决策通和。
现代文：赵鼎被罢免宰相职务后，秦桧独揽朝政大权，怂恿高宗做出决策与金人议和。
English: After Zhao Ding was removed from the post of prime minister, Qin Hui took sole control of the political power of the dynasty, and Gaozong made a decision to negotiate peace with the Jin people.

古文：金国遣乌陵思谋等入界，索礼甚悖，军民皆不平，人言纷纷。
现代文：金国派遣使者乌陵思谋等人南来，他们索要礼物且态度横蛮，盛气凌人，军民都愤愤不平，朝野上下议论纷纷。
English: China sent envoys such as Wuling Zhimo and others to the south. They demanded gifts and were rude and domineering. The military and the people were indignant, and there was a lot of discussion between the government and the people.

古文：桧于御榻前求去，欲要决意屈己从和。
现代文：秦桧在高宗御榻前请求使金，准备不顾众人反对委屈自己向金人求和。
English: In front of the imperial bed of Emperor Gaozong, Qin Hui asked for money and was ready to make peace with the emperor despite the opposition of many people.

古文：枢密院编修官胡铨上疏乞斩桧，校书郎范如圭以书责桧曲学背师，忘仇辱国，礼部侍郎曾开抗声引古谊以折桧，相继贬逐。
现代文：枢密院编修官胡铨上奏疏请求杀死秦桧，校书郎范如圭上奏疏谴责秦桧歪曲真理、违背师训、忘却世仇、丧权辱国，礼部侍郎曾开引用古人的行为道德准则以驳斥秦桧，这些人相继被贬官流放外地。
English: The editor-in-chief of the Privy Council, Hu Rong, appealed to the emperor to kill Qin Yu. The school scribe, Fan Rougui, appealed to the emperor to condemn Qin Yu for distorting the truth, violating the teacher's teaching, forgetting the world's enmity, and humiliating the country. The attendant of the ceremonial department quoted the ancient code of conduct to refute Qin Yu. These people were successively demoted and exiled.

古文：弥逊请对，言金使之请和，欲行君臣之礼，有大不可。
现代文：李弥逊请求入宫对话，指出金国使者来议和，想让我们对他们行君臣的礼节，这是万万行不通的。
English: Lee Myeong-sun asked to enter the palace for a dialogue, pointing out that the envoys of the Kim dynasty came to negotiate peace and wanted us to treat them with the etiquette of a prince and a minister, which would never work.

古文：帝以为然，诏廷臣大议，即日入奏。
现代文：高宗认为很有道理，下诏让朝中大臣展开广泛的讨论，当天上奏。
English: Gao Zong thought it was very reasonable, and issued an edict that the ministers of the two Koreas should have an extensive discussion, and the edict was issued the same day.

古文：弥逊手疏力言： 陛下受金人空言，未有一毫之得，乃欲轻祖宗之付托，屈身委命，自同下国而尊奉之，倒持太阿，授人以柄，危国之道，而谓之和可乎？
现代文：李弥逊手持奏疏慷慨陈词： 陛下受到金人花言巧语的欺骗，没有得到丝毫实际利益，就准备轻易放弃祖宗的重托，委曲求全，将国家的命运交付敌国，自己甘当附庸而尊奉金国，倒拿着宝剑，白白将权柄授与别人，明明是危害、伤害国家利益的行为，又怎么能够说是为了国家的和平？
English: Li Mishong, holding a flute, made a generous statement: His Majesty was deceived by the goldsmith's rhetoric and did not get the slightest practical benefit, so he was ready to easily give up the great trust of his ancestors, compromise, and hand over the fate of the country to the enemy country. He was willing to be a vassal and respect the gold country, but he held a sword and freely conferred power to others. It was clearly an act that harmed and harmed the interests of the country, but how could it be said to be for the sake of national peace?

古文：借使金人姑从吾欲，假以目前之安，异时一有无厌之求，意外之欲，从之则害吾社稷之计，不从则衅端复开，是今日徒有屈身之辱，而后患未已。 又言： 陛下率国人以事仇，将何以责天下忠臣义士之气？ 力陈不可者三。
现代文：假如金人姑且满足我们的要求，假如我们仅仅满足于眼前安全，他日贪得无厌的金人一有不能满足的要求，没有预料到的欲望，满足他们就会危害国家社稷的利益，不满足他们战争就会再次爆发，因此今天不过是枉受卑躬屈膝的耻辱，以后则是后患无穷啊。 又说 ：陛下率领全国百姓去侍奉我们的世代仇敌，又将用什么去鞭策激励普天之下忠臣义士的抗敌勇气呢？ 李弥逊再三强调不能签订和约。
English: Even if the goldsmiths were to satisfy our demands, if we were to be satisfied only with immediate safety, the insatiable goldsmiths of the future would have insatiable demands, unforeseen desires, and if they were satisfied, they would endanger the interests of the country and society, and if they were not satisfied, war would break out again. Therefore, today is nothing more than the humiliation of groveling in vain, and there will be endless troubles in the future. He also said, "Your Majesty led the people of the whole country to serve our generation's enemy, and what will you use to spur and encourage the courage to resist the enemy of loyal subjects and righteous men throughout the world?"

古文：桧尝邀弥逊至私第，曰： 政府方虚员，苟和好无异议，当以两地相浼。 答曰： 弥逊受国恩深厚，何敢见利忘义。
现代文：秦桧曾经邀请李弥逊到他的私人住宅，说： 目前政府官员正空缺，假如你能够对宋金和议不再提反对意见，我当会请你去两地同时任职。 李弥逊回答 ：我李弥逊受国家恩惠已经很多，怎么敢因一些小利而忘记国家民族大义呢。
English: Qin Hui once invited Li Mison to his private residence, saying: At present, government officials are vacant, if you can no longer raise objections to the Song and Kim peace talks, I should invite you to serve in two places at the same time.Li Mison replied: I, Li Mison, have received a lot of state favors, how dare I forget the great national interests of the country because of some small profits.

古文：顾今日之事，国人皆不以为然，独有一去可报相公。 桧默然。
现代文：看看现在正在进行的宋金和议一事，举国上下都不认为应该这样做，我只有离开这里以报答相公的恩典了。 秦桧无言以对。
English: Looking at the Song-Jin peace talks that are currently underway, the whole country does not think that this should be done. I have no choice but to leave here to repay the grace of my father-in-law. Qin Yu is speechless.

古文：次日，弥逊再上疏，言愈切直，又言： 送伴使揣摩迎合，不恤社稷，乞别选忠信之人，协济国事。 桧大怒。
现代文：第二天，李弥逊再次上奏疏，言词急切直率，又指出： 送伴使察言观色、百般逢迎金国使者，不顾及国家利益，不体恤百姓感情，请求另选忠义之士辅助处理国事。 秦桧更加愤怒。
English: The next day, Li Mison once again made a speech, his words were eager and forthright, and he also pointed out: Sending a companion to inspect the speech and meet the envoy of the Golden State, disregarding the national interests, not sympathizing with the feelings of the people, and requesting that another loyal person be selected to assist in handling state affairs.

古文：弥逊引疾，帝谕大臣留之。
现代文：李弥逊准备称疾引退，高宗告诉大臣挽留他。
English: When Li Mison was about to retire, citing illness, Gaozong told the minister to keep him on.

古文：时和议已决，附会其说者，至谓 向使明州时，主上虽百拜亦不问 ，议论靡然。
现代文：当时宋金和议已经决定，有赞成和议的人至此说： 过去金人出使明州时，钦宗虽然多次向金人跪拜也没有大臣们抗议。 朝野舆论一片哗然。
English: At that time, the Song-Kim peace talks had been decided, and those who were in favor of the peace talks thus said: In the past, when the Jin people sent envoys to Mingzhou, although Qin Zong knelt to the Jin people many times, the ministers did not protest. The public opinion of the court and the palace was in an uproar.

古文：赖弥逊廷争，桧虽不从，亦惮公论。
现代文：由于李弥逊在朝廷努力抗争，秦桧虽然不肯听从他的意见，但也害怕公众的舆论。
English: As Li Mison fought hard in the imperial court, although Qin Hui did not want to listen to his opinion, he was also afraid of public opinion.

古文：再与金使者计，议和不受封册，如宰相就馆见金使，受其书纳入禁中，多所降杀，惟君臣之礼不得尽争。
现代文：南宋再次与金使商谈和议条件时，决定议和但不接受金人的册封，金宋不以君臣之礼相待，宰相秦桧去使馆面见金使，可以接受他们的国书放入宫中，金人许多条件都得到了满足，只有君臣之礼没有谈判的余地。
English: When the Southern Song Dynasty once again negotiated the terms of peace with the Jin envoy, it was decided to negotiate peace but not accept the canonization of the Jin people. The Jin and Song dynasties did not treat each other with the courtesies of princes and ministers. Prime Minister Qin Hui went to the embassy to meet the Jin envoy and could accept their national book to be placed in the palace. Many of the conditions of the Jin people were met, only the courtesies of princes and ministers had no room for negotiation.

古文：九年春，再上疏乞归田，以徽猷阁直学士知端州，改知漳州。
现代文：绍兴九年春，李弥逊再次上奏疏要求辞宫回归田里，以徽猷阁直学士身份任筠州知州，不久又改任漳州知州。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Shaoxing, Li Mison once again petitioned for resignation and returned to the field. He was appointed as a direct bachelor of Huizhong Academy in Ganzhou Chizhou, and soon changed to Ganzhou Chizhou.

古文：十年，归隐连江西山。
现代文：绍兴十年，在连江西山隐居。
English: Shaoxing for ten years, living in seclusion in the mountains of Lianjiang.

古文：是岁，兀术分四道入侵，明年，又侵淮西，取寿春，竟如弥逊言。
现代文：这一年，金兀分四路大举进攻南下，第二年又入侵淮西，攻进寿春，一切竟如李弥逊的预言。
English: That year, the Jin Dynasty launched a four-pronged attack to the south, and invaded Huaixi and Shuchun in the following year, all of which was just as Li Mison had predicted.

古文：十二年，桧乘金兵既败，收诸路兵，复通和好，追仇向者尽言之臣，嗾言者论弥逊与赵鼎、王庶、曾开四人同沮和议。
现代文：绍兴十二年，秦桧乘着金兵失败后收兵北归，将诸路军马全部撤回，再次乞求与金人和谈。秦桧开始追究过去那些仗义直言敢于反抗他的大臣之罪，秦桧的走狗立即指出李弥逊和赵鼎、王庶、曾开四人曾同时阻止宋金和议。
English: In the twelfth year of Shaoxing, after the defeat of the Jin soldiers, Qin Hui returned to the north, withdrew all the troops and horses, and once again begged for peace talks with Jin. Qin Hui began to investigate the crimes of those ministers who dared to oppose him in the past. Qin Hui's lackeys immediately pointed out that four people, Li Mison, Zhao Ding, Wang Shiao and Zeng Kai, had simultaneously prevented Song Jin from negotiating peace.

古文：于是弥逊落职，十余年间不通时相书，不请磨勘，不乞任子，不序封爵，以终其身，常忧国，无怨怼意。
现代文：李弥逊于是被撤职，十余年间不准与朝廷有书信往来，不得考课升迁，不能荫庇自己的儿子做官，不能按次序获得封爵，且以上禁令终生不能改变，李弥逊仍然常常忧国忧民，没有丝毫对朝廷的怨恨。
English: Li Mison was then removed from his post. For more than ten years, he was not allowed to have correspondence with the imperial court, he was not allowed to take examinations for promotion, he could not shadow his son to become an official, he could not be knighted in order, and the above prohibitions could not be changed throughout his life. Li Mison still often worried about the country and the people, and did not have the slightest resentment towards the imperial court.

古文：二十三年，卒。朝廷思其忠节，诏复敷文阁待制。
现代文：绍兴二十三年，皇上怀念他，考虑到他忠诚有气节，特下诏恢复李弥逊敷文阁待制官职。
English: In the 23rd year of Shaoxing, the emperor missed him and, considering his loyalty and virtue, issued a special decree to restore Li Mison to the post of Shibunkaku.

古文：有奏议三卷，外制二卷，《议古》三卷，诗十卷。
现代文：李弥逊著有奏议三卷、外制二卷、《议古》三卷、诗十卷。
English: Li Mison has written three volumes of recitations, two volumes of extemporaneous works, three volumes of "Recitation" and ten volumes of poems.

古文：弟弥大。
现代文：有一弟李弥大。
English: He has a younger brother, Li Yida.

