古文：裴忌孙瑒裴忌，字无畏，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴忌字无畏，河东闻喜人。
English: Pei is fearless, and Hedong is happy.

古文：祖髦，梁中散大夫。
现代文：祖父裴髦，是梁朝的中散大夫。
English: His grandfather, Pei Xiang, was a middle-ranking doctor in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父之平，倜傥有志略，召补文德主帅。
现代文：父亲裴之平，卓越豪迈而有志向才略，官府征召补任为文德主帅。
English: His father, Pei Zhiping, was an outstanding, courageous and ambitious talent. He was recruited by the government to serve as Wen De's coach.

古文：梁普通中众军北伐，之平随都督夏侯亶克定涡、潼，以功封费县侯。
现代文：梁普通年间数路大军北伐，裴之平随都督夏侯直攻下涡、潼两地，因战功被封为费县侯。
English: During the years of Liang Zhongguo, several large armies marched to the north, and Pei Zhiping, with the help of the governor Xia Hou, directly conquered Shimo-Urumu and Shijiazhuang, and was awarded the title of Fei County Marquis for his military exploits.

古文：会衡州部民相聚寇抄，诏以之平为假节、超武将军、都督衡州五郡征讨诸军事。
现代文：适逢衡州辖区有人聚集成伙骚乱抢劫，天子下旨任命裴之平为假节、超武将军、都督衡州五郡征讨诸军事。
English: At the same time, a group of rioters and robbers gathered in the jurisdiction of Henzhou, and the emperor issued an order to appoint Pei Zhiping as the false festival, the super general, and the governor of the five counties of Henzhou to solicit the military.

古文：及之平至，即皆平殄，梁武帝甚嘉赏之。
现代文：当裴之平到任以后，境内骚乱全部平定，梁武帝非常赞赏他。
English: When Pei Zhiping took office, all domestic riots were quelled, and Emperor Liang appreciated him very much.

古文：元帝承圣中，累迁散骑常侍、右卫将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：梁元帝承圣年间，连续升官任散骑常侍、右卫将军、晋陵太守。
English: During Emperor Liangyuan's succession to the throne, he was successively promoted to the posts of cavalry aide-de-camp, general of the right guard, and governor of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：世祖即位，除光禄大夫，慈训宫卫尉，并不就，乃筑山穿池，植以卉木，居处其中，有终焉之志。
现代文：世祖承接帝位，先后任命他为光禄大夫，慈训宫卫尉，他都不肯赴任就职，却筑假山挖清池，栽花卉种树木。自己静居在裹面，有在那裹终老一生的意愿。
English: The ancestor succeeded to the throne, and successively appointed him as the doctor of Guanglu and the palace guard of Cixi. He did not want to take up the post, but he built a rockery, dug a pond, planted flowers and planted trees. He lived quietly in Wucheng, and had the intention to live there for the rest of his life.

古文：天康元年卒，赠仁威将军、光禄大夫，谥曰僖子。
现代文：后来在天康元年去世，被追赠为仁威将军、光禄大夫，谧号是僖子。
English: Later, he died in the first year of Tian Kang, and was posthumously given the titles of General Ren Wei and Doctor Guang Lu. His posthumous name was Yu Zi.

古文：忌少聪敏，有识量，颇涉史传，为当时所称。
现代文：裴忌少年时就聪明机敏，有见识度量，又阅让了大量的史书传记，为当时的人们所称道。
English: When he was a young boy, Pei Hui was smart and astute, had insight and measurement, and read a large number of history books and biographies, which was praised by the people at that time.

古文：解褐梁豫章王法曹参军。
现代文：初入仕为凿逊童王法曹参军。
English: His first enlistment was as a drill sergeant in the army.

古文：侯景之乱，忌招集勇力，随高祖征讨，累功为宁远将军。
现代文：谜作乱时，苤显招集勇士，随从高祖陈霸先征剿，累计战功被封为宁远将军。
English: When the enigma caused chaos, Zou Xian called up warriors and followed the great ancestor Chen Ba to recruit soldiers. He was awarded the title of General Ningyuan for his accumulated war exploits.

古文：及高祖诛王僧辩，僧辩弟僧智举兵据吴郡，高祖遣黄他率众攻之，僧智出兵于西昌门拒战，他与相持，不能克。
现代文：当高祖诛杀王僧辩时，王僧辩的弟弟王僧智起兵叛据昱巫，产担派董他率兵进击，王仅贺从西昌门出兵顽抗，董他与他相持苦战，不能取胜。
English: When Emperor Gaozong killed Wang Sofen, Wang Sofen's younger brother Wang Sochi led an army to rebel against Emperor Gaozong. The local warlord sent Dong He to lead the army to attack. Wang Youhe sent troops from Xichang Gate to resist. Dong He fought a hard battle with Wang Sofen and could not win.

古文：高祖谓忌曰： 三吴奥壤，旧称饶沃，虽凶荒之馀，犹为殷盛，而今贼徒扇聚，天下摇心，非公无以定之，宜善思其策。 
现代文：高祖对裴忌说： 三吴一带深处腹地，一向被称为富饶肥沃之区，即使是灾年荒岁，也仍然是物阜民丰，如今叛贼们互相煽动聚集在那裹，可能会动摇天下民心。除了你就没有人能安定那裹，你可要想出一个万全之策来。 
English: Gao Zu said to Pei Hui: The hinterland in the depths of the Sanwu area has always been known as a rich and fertile area. Even if it is a disaster year or a barren year, it is still a bounty for the people. Now the traitors are inciting each other to gather there, which may shake the hearts of the people around the world. Except you, no one can stabilize that area. You have to come up with a perfect plan.

古文：忌乃勒部下精兵，轻行倍道，自钱塘直趣吴郡，夜至城下，鼓噪薄之。僧智疑大军至，轻舟奔杜龛，忌入据其郡。
现代文：于是裴忌率领本部精兵，轻装急进日夜兼程，从钱塘直奔吴郡，晚上到达城下，击鼓呐喊佯为强攻，王僧智疑惧对方重兵压境，就从水路轻舟脱身逃奔到杜宠那裹去了，裴忌随即控制了吴郡。
English: As a result, Pei Boi led the elite soldiers of the headquarters, lightly loaded and rushed day and night, from Qiantang straight to Wuxian, and arrived at the bottom of the city in the evening, drumming and shouting as a strong attack. Wang Xizhi suspected that the other side was under heavy military pressure, and escaped from the waterway light boat and fled to Duchina. Pei Boi immediately controlled Wuxian.

古文：高祖嘉之，表授吴郡太守。
现代文：高祖嘉奖他，表奏天子任命他为吴郡太守。
English: Gao Zu commended him and appointed him as the governor of Wu County.

古文：高祖受禅，征为左卫将军。
现代文：高祖受惮为帝，下旨征召他入朝为左卫将军。
English: Gaozhu was honored by the emperor, and he was conscripted into the imperial army as the General of the Left Division.

古文：天嘉初，出为持节、南康内史。
现代文：天嘉初年，裴忌出京担任持节、南康内史。
English: In the first year of Tian Jia, Pei Bo went to Beijing to serve as the secretary of the Jixi Festival and the secretary of the Southern Kangnai.

古文：时义安太守张绍宾据郡反，世祖以忌为持节、都督岭北诸军事，率众讨平之。
现代文：这时义安太守张绍宾在该郡反叛，世祖任命裴忌为持节、都督岭北诸军事，率领兵马前往讨伐。
English: At this time, Zhang Shaobin, the governor of Yian, rebelled in the county, and the ancestor appointed Pei Bo as the military commander and the military governor of Lingbei, and led the soldiers and horses to the crusade.

古文：还除散骑常侍、司徒左长史。
现代文：裴忌凯旋回京后，被任命为散骑常侍、司徒左长史。
English: After Pei Jing's triumphant return to Beijing, he was appointed as a knight-errant, and Sittu Zuo Changshi.

古文：五年，授云麾将军、卫尉卿，封东兴县侯，邑六百户。
现代文：五年，又被任命为云麾将军、卫尉卿，封为东兴县侯，食邑六百产。
English: Five years later, he was also appointed as the general of Yunnan Province, the captain of the Imperial Guards, and the lord of Dongxing County, with a food production of 600 tons.

古文：及华皎称兵上流，高宗时为录尚书辅政，尽命众军出讨，委忌总知中外城防诸军事。
现代文：当华皎在长江上游起兵作乱，逭时高宗总领尚书事主持朝政，命令各路大军全部进发征讨，同时委任裴忌全权主持京城内外城防诸军事。
English: When the Huayu revolted in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, the commander-in-chief Gaozong Shang presided over the affairs of the court, ordered all the armies to go and collect, and at the same time appointed Pei Wei to preside over the military defense inside and outside the capital.

古文：及皎平，高宗即位，太建无年，授东阳太守，改封乐安县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：到茎丝被消灭后，产塞即帝位，立建元年，任命苤墨为束阳太守，改封为乐安县侯，食邑一千户。
English: After the stem was eliminated, the imperial throne was born, and in the first year of the establishment of the first year of the year, he appointed Su Mo as the governor of Sokyang, and changed his title to the governor of Le'an County, with a thousand households.

古文：四年，入为太府卿。
现代文：四年，入朝任太府卿。
English: Four years later, he entered the imperial court and was appointed Dafu-kyo.

古文：五年，转都官尚书。
现代文：五年，转任都官尚书。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the post of Tokyo Metropolitan Government official, Shosho.

古文：吴明彻督众军北伐，诏忌以本官监明彻军。
现代文：吴明彻统领各路大军北伐时，天子下旨命令盏疆以现任官职的身份为监军。
English: When Wu Mingcher led the armies of all directions in the Northern Expedition, Tianzi issued a decree ordering Zhanjiang to supervise the army in the capacity of the current official.

古文：淮南平，授军师将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：淮南平定后，任命他为军师将军、豫州刺史。
English: After Huainan was pacified, he was appointed as the general of the military division and the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：忌善于绥抚，甚得民和。
现代文：裴忌为官在任善于安抚，很受民众的爱戴。
English: As an official, Pei Boi is good at appeasing and is well-liked by the public.

古文：改授使持节、都督谯州诸军事、谯州刺史。
现代文：改任为使持节、都督谯业诸军事、遮业刺史。
English: He was reappointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the capital, and the historian.

古文：未及之官，会明彻受诏进讨彭、汴，以忌为都督，与明彻掎角俱进。
现代文：还来不及到任，恰逢吴明翅奉旨进讨彭、洼地区，同时天子也任命裴忌为都督，率领另一支部队与吴明彻军合成掎角之势共同进发。
English: He was too late to take office, which coincided with Wu Mingyuan's order to march into the Peng and Wa regions. At the same time, Tianzi also appointed Pei Hui as the governor, leading another army to march together with Wu Mingche's army.

古文：吕梁军败，陷于周，周授上开府。
现代文：后来全军在吕梁覆没，裴忌被俘，留在韭眉，韭周授予他上开府之职。
English: Later, the whole army was annihilated in Luliang, Pei Boi was captured and stayed in Meimei, and Zhou granted him the post of Shangkaifu.

古文：隋开皇十四年，卒于长安，时年七十三。
现代文：隋朝开皇十四年，裴忌在长安去世，这年七十三岁。
English: Fourteen years after the Sui Dynasty was founded, Pei Boi died in Chang'an at the age of seventy-three.

古文：孙瑒，字德琏，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：孙瑒字德琏，吴郡吴人人。
English: Sun Yat-sen's character De Yao, and Wu County's Wu Renren.

古文：祖文惠，齐越骑校尉、清远太守。
现代文：祖父孙文惠，是齐朝的越骑校尉、清远太守。
English: His grandfather, Sun Wenhui, was a Yue cavalry captain in the Qi Dynasty and the governor of Qingyuan.

古文：父循道，梁中散大夫，以雅素知名。
现代文：父亲孙循道，是梁朝的中散大夫，以风雅质朴闻名于世。
English: His father, Sun Yudo, was a middle-ranking doctor in the Liang Dynasty and was famous for his elegant and simple style.

古文：瑒少倜傥，好谋略，博涉经史，尤便书翰。
现代文：孙瑒年轻时就卓越超群，喜欢研究战术攻略，阅读了大量的经书史传，尤其熟习书牍文札。
English: When he was young, Sun Yat-sen excelled beyond his peers. He liked to study tactics and strategies, read a large number of books and histories, and was especially familiar with calligraphy.

古文：起家梁轻车临川嗣王行参军，累迁为安西邵陵王水曹中兵参军事。
现代文：在家中以布衣身份直接出任梁朝轻车临川嗣王代理参军，经多次升迁任安西邵陵王水曹中兵参军事。
English: At home, he directly served as Liang Chao's light car Linchuan King's representative to join the army, and after several promotions, he served as Anxi Shaoling King's water boy in the military.

古文：王出镇郢州，瑒尽室随府，甚被赏遇。
现代文：邵箧王出镇坚州，瑟墨全家随王府一同前往，因此很受赞赏和礼遇。
English: Shao Jun Wang went to Jianzhou from the town, and the whole family of Shumo went together with the royal court, so they were highly appreciated and treated with courtesy.

古文：太清之难，授假节、宣猛将军、军主。
现代文：太清年间侯景叛乱时，逐墨被任命为假节、宣猛将军、军主。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing during the Qing Dynasty, he was appointed as a false festival, a fierce general, and a military leader.

古文：王僧辩之讨侯景也，王琳为前军，琳与瑒同门，乃表荐为戎昭将军、宜都太守，仍从僧辩救徐文盛于武昌。
现代文：王僧辩讨伐侯景时，王琳领兵马前军，因为与孙踢是同学，于是上表推荐孙埸为戎昭将军、宜都太守，随即跟从王僧辩前往武昌救援徐文盛。
English: When Wang Sangye was fighting against Houjing, Wang Lin led the vanguard of soldiers and horses, because he was a classmate of Sun Kick. Therefore, the above table recommended that Sun Pi be the general of Rong Zhao and the governor of Yidu, and then followed Wang Sangye to Wuchang to rescue Xu Wensheng.

古文：会郢州陷，乃留军镇巴陵，修战守之备。
现代文：适逢郢州失陷，于是孙场的部队就留在巴陵镇守，作好攻守战备。
English: When Luzhou fell, Sun Yat-sen's troops stayed in Baling to guard the town and prepare for battle.

古文：俄而侯景兵至，日夜攻围，瑒督所部兵悉力拒战，贼众奔退。
现代文：不多久侯景的叛军杀到，不分昼夜地进攻巴陵外围阵地，孙埸督领所部尽全力抵御，结果叛军败退奔逃。
English: Not long after, the rebels of Houjing arrived and attacked the outlying positions of Baling day and night. The territorial headquarters of Sun Yat-sen tried their best to resist, but the rebels were defeated and fled.

古文：瑒从大军沿流而下，及克姑熟，瑒力战有功，除员外散骑常侍，封富阳县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：于是孙场随从大部队沿长江东下，在攻克姑熟时，孙场力战有功，被任命为员外散骑常侍，封为富阳县侯，食邑一千户。
English: As a result, Sun Yat-sen followed the large army along the Yangtze River to the east. When he conquered Guju, Sun Yat-sen did a good job in the battle. He was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, a free rider, and a lord of Fuyang County, with a thousand households.

古文：寻受假节、雄信将军、衡阳内史，未及之官，仍迁衡州平南府司马。
现代文：不久又被任命为假节、雄信将军、衡阳内史，他还没有赴任，随即又升任为衡州平南府司马。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the General of the False Festival, the General of the Heroic Faith, and the Inner Historian of Hengyang. He had not yet taken office, but was immediately promoted to the Secretary of the Hengzhou Pingnan Prefecture.

古文：破黄洞蛮贼有功，除东莞太守，行广州刺史。
现代文：在任期内破黄洞蛮贼寇有功，被任命为东莞太守，代理广州刺史。
English: During his term of office, he was appointed as the governor of Dongguan and the acting governor of Guangzhou.

古文：寻除智武将军，监湘州事。
现代文：不久又被任命为智武将军，监理湘州事务。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as General Zhiwu to supervise the affairs of Hunan.

古文：敬帝嗣位，授持节、仁威将军、巴州刺史。
现代文：梁敬帝继承帝位后，任命他为持节、仁威将军、巴州刺史。
English: After Emperor Liang Jing succeeded to the imperial throne, he appointed him to hold the title of Jijie, General of Renwei, and Governor of Bazhou.

古文：高祖受禅，王琳立梁永嘉王萧庄于郢州，征瑒为太府卿，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：高祖受惮为帝，王琳在郢州另外奉立梁朝的永嘉王萧庄为梁朝之主，并下诏书征召孙场为太府卿，加授通直散骑常侍。
English: Gaozhu was crowned as emperor, and Wang Lin in Zhangzhou additionally appointed Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang, who established the Liang Dynasty, as the lord of the Liang Dynasty, and issued an imperial edict to recruit Sun Bao as the Grand Prefect, and to award him the title of Tongzhi Sanzhi Changzhi.

古文：及王琳入寇，以瑒为使持节、散骑常侍、都督郢、荆、巴、武、湘五州诸军事、安西将军、郢州刺史，总留府之任。
现代文：当王琳顺流束下向内地进犯时，又任命孙场为使持节、散骑常侍、都督郢荆巴武湘五州诸军事、安西将军、郢州刺史，总管留守府大小事务。
English: When Wang Lin led his troops to attack the mainland, he also appointed Sun Ba as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military governor of the five states of Hunan, the general of Anxi, and the chief administrator of the general affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：周遣大将史宁率众四万，乘虚奄至，瑒助防张世贵举外城以应之，所失军民男女三千馀口。
现代文：北周派大将史宁率兵四万，突然袭击郢州城，孙埸部下协助防务的张世贵献外城接应周兵，郢州城因此损失军民男女三千余人。
English: Northern Zhou sent General Shi Ning with 40,000 soldiers to suddenly attack Zhangzhou City. Zhang Shigui, who was assisted by Sun Yat-sen's subordinates in defense, offered to meet the Zhou soldiers outside the city. As a result, Zhangzhou City lost more than 3,000 men and women.

古文：周军又起土山高梯，日夜攻逼，因风纵火，烧其内城南面五十馀楼。
现代文：周兵又堆起土山高架云梯，日夜攻城进逼，且又乘风纵火，烧掉了内城南部的五十多幢楼房。
English: Zhou soldiers also piled up earth mounds and elevated ladders, attacked the city day and night, and set fire to the wind, burning more than fifty buildings in the southern part of the inner city.

古文：时瑒兵不满千人，乘城拒守，瑒亲自抚巡，行酒赋食，士卒皆为之用命。
现代文：适时孙埸的士卒不足一千人，都登上城楼守御作战，孙场亲自巡视抚慰，向士卒敬酒劝食，士卒都乐于为他献身效力。
English: At the right time, less than a thousand of Sun Yat-sen's soldiers went up to the castle tower to defend the battle. Sun Yat-sen personally inspected and consoled the soldiers, and offered them a toast. The soldiers were all willing to devote themselves to him.

古文：周人苦攻不能克，乃矫授瑒柱国、郢州刺史，封万户郡公。
现代文：周兵竭尽全力也没能攻下内城，于是假传周主旨意任命孙埸为柱国、郢州刺史，封为万户郡公。
English: Zhou soldiers tried their best but failed to capture the inner city, so it was falsely rumored that the will of Zhou appointed Sun Yat-sen as the pillar country, the governor of Zhangzhou, and the governor of Wanyu County.

古文：瑒伪许以缓之，而潜修战具，楼雉器械，一朝严设，周人甚惮焉。
现代文：孙埸假装同意作为缓兵之计，同时暗中加紧修整作战用的装备，敌楼、城墙和守城器械等，一天之内整治如新，周兵对他非常害怕。
English: Sun Yat-sen pretended to agree as a delaying tactic, and at the same time secretly stepped up the repair of combat equipment, enemy buildings, city walls and city defense equipment, etc. Within one day, the repairs were as good as new. Zhou Bing was very afraid of him.

古文：及闻大军败王琳，乘胜而进，周兵乃解。
现代文：到后来听说陈朝主力军已经打败了王琳，即将乘胜而进，周兵遣才解围而去。
English: Later, he heard that the main force of the Chen Dynasty had defeated Wang Lin and was about to take advantage of the victory. Zhou sent soldiers to break the siege and leave.

古文：瑒于是尽有中流之地，集其将士而谓之曰： 吾与王公陈力协义，同奖梁室，亦已勤矣。
现代文：于是孙场控制了长江中流的全部地域，他召集将士并对他们说： 我和王琳共展才力同尽臣责，一道辅助梁室，也可以算是很努力了。
English: As a result, Sun Yat-sen controlled the entire area in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River. He summoned his generals and said to them, "I and Wang Lin have worked hard together to develop our talents and fulfill our duties, and together we have assisted the Liang family.

古文：今时事如此，天可违乎！ 
现代文：现在速堑取代了銮曲，墅隧也失败了，既然这样，天意难道能够违抗么! 
English: Now, the speed kite has replaced the kite, and the villa tunnel has also failed. In this case, can the will of heaven be defied?

古文：遂遣使奉表诣阙。
现代文：于是派遣使者恭送表文到朝廷，表示归顺。
English: As a result, an envoy was sent to present a petition to the imperial court, signifying submission.

古文：天嘉元年，授使持节、散骑常侍、安南将军、湘州刺史，封定襄县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：天嘉元年，孙场被任命为使持节、散骑常侍、安南将军、湘州刺史，封为定襄县侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, Sun Yat-sen was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the general of Annan, the history of Hunan Province, and the lord of Dingxiang County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：瑒怀不自安，乃固请入朝，征为散骑常侍、中领军。
现代文：孙场内心不安，一再请求入朝以表明自己并无异心，于是天子征召他为散骑常侍、中领军。
English: Sun Yat-sen was uneasy in his heart and repeatedly asked to be allowed to enter the imperial court to show that he had no ill will against the emperor. Therefore, the emperor called him to serve as a cavalryman and the leader of the army.

古文：未拜，而世祖从容谓瑒曰： 昔硃买臣愿为本郡，卿岂有意乎？ 
现代文：孙场还没有赴任，世祖从容平静地对他说： 以前西汉的朱买臣希望在故乡吴郡为官，你是否也有这样的意愿呢? 
English: Before Sun Yat-sen took office, the patriarch calmly said to him, "In the past, Zhu Bai-shen of the Western Han Dynasty wanted to be an official in his hometown, Wuxian County. Do you also have such a wish?"

古文：仍改授持节、安东将军、吴郡太守，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：于是改任他为持节、安束将军、吴郡太守，赏赐鼓吹乐一部。
English: As a result, he was reappointed as Jisetsu, Anzaku General, and Wu County Governor, and was awarded a part of the propaganda music.

古文：及将之镇，乘舆幸近畿饯送，乡里荣之。
现代文：当起程赴任的那天，天子亲自到城郊为他饯行，乡亲邻里也为之感到光荣。
English: On the day of his departure for office, the heavenly son himself went to the outskirts of the city to walk for him, and the villagers and neighbors felt honored.

古文：秩满，征拜散骑常侍、中护军，鼓吹如故。
现代文：任期届满，天子征召他入朝任散骑常侍、中护军，赏赐的鼓吹乐保留。
English: At the end of his term of office, the Emperor conscripted him into the imperial cavalry, the middle guard, and he kept the award for his propaganda music.

古文：留异之反东阳，诏瑒督舟师进讨。
现代文：留异在塞坠反叛，天子下旨命令孙场督领水军进讨。
English: Remaining dissidents rebelled in Jiekang, and the Emperor issued an order to Sun Yat-sen to lead the navy to investigate.

古文：异平，迁镇右将军，常侍、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：留墨被平定之后，茎墨升任镇右将军，常侍职务、赏赐的鼓吹乐仍旧。
English: After Remaining Ink was subdued, Tsuchimoku was promoted to Zhenyu Shogun, and his duties as a regular attendant and the propaganda music of rewards remained the same.

古文：顷之，出为使持节、安东将军、建安太守。
现代文：不久，出京任使持节、安东将军、建安太守。
English: Soon after, he was sent to Beijing as the envoy of Jichisai, the general of Andong, and the governor of Jian'an.

古文：光大中，以公事免，寻起为通直散骑常侍。
现代文：光大年间，因公事被免职，但没多久又复职任通直散骑常侍。
English: During his time at Kōdai, he was removed from his post for official business, but was soon reinstated as a regular attendant.

古文：高宗即位，以瑒功名素著，深委任焉。
现代文：高宗即帝位，认为孙场的功绩名望一向昭着，对他非常信任倚重。
English: Gao Zong is the emperor, and he believes that Sun Zang's achievements and reputation have always been well-known, and he has great trust in him.

古文：太建四年，授都督荆、信二州诸军事、安西将军、荆州刺史，出镇公安。
现代文：太建四年，任命他为都督荆信二州诸军事、安西将军、荆州刺史，出京镇守公安。
English: In the fourth year of Tai Jian, he was appointed as the military governor of the two states of Jingxin, the general of Anxi, and the governor of Jingzhou, and went to Beijing to guard the public security.

古文：瑒增修城池，怀服边远，为邻境所惮。
现代文：孙场到任后，高筑城墙深挖城壕。恩威并用远近顺服，为周围境外的人所敬畏。
English: After Sun Yat-sen took office, he built high walls and dug deep trenches. He was admired and obeyed from near and far, and was revered by people outside the surrounding area.

古文：居职六年，又以事免，更为通直散骑常侍。
现代文：在职六年，又因事被免职，调任通直散骑常侍。
English: After six years of service, he was relieved of his duties due to an incident and transferred to the position of Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi.

古文：及吴明彻军败吕梁，授使持节、督缘江水陆诸军事、镇西将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：到吴旦旦彻北伐大军在旦凿失败后，茎墨被任命为使持节、统率沿辽水陆诸军事、镇西将军，赏赐鼓吹乐一部。
English: After the defeat of the Northern Expeditionary Force in the Battle of Wudang, Zhu Mo was appointed as the Envoy of the Festival, the leader of the military along the Liao Shui, and the general of Zhenxi, and was awarded a part of the propaganda music.

古文：寻授散骑常侍、都督荆、郢、巴、武、湘五州诸军事、郢州刺史，持节、将军、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：没多久又被任命为散骑常侍、都督荆郢旦武姻五州诸军事、坚业刺史，持节、将军二职以及赏赐的鼓吹乐仍旧。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as a knight-errant, a military governor of the five states, a military commander of the five states, a military commander of the five states, a military commander of the five states, a military commander of the five states, a military commander of the five states, a military commander of the five states, a military commander of the five states.

古文：十二年，坐疆埸交通抵罪。
现代文：十二年，因在国境上犯有内外交往罪被免职抵罪。
English: In 2012, he was removed from his post and fined for committing domestic and foreign crimes on the border.

古文：后主嗣位，复除通直散骑常侍，兼起部尚书。
现代文：高宗继承了帝位，恢复孙埸官职任命他为通直散骑常侍，兼起部尚书。
English: Gao Zong inherited the imperial throne, restored Sun Yat-sen's official position, and appointed him as a regular attendant of the imperial cavalry, and also became the minister of the imperial rescript.

古文：寻除中护军，复爵邑，入为度支尚书，领步兵校尉。
现代文：不多久又任命他为中护军，恢复爵位和食邑，入朝为度支尚书，兼任步兵校尉。
English: Not long after, he appointed him as a middle protector, restored his peerage and food town, entered the court as a duke, and also served as an infantry lieutenant.

古文：俄加散骑常侍，迁侍中、祠部尚书。
现代文：随即加任散骑常侍，升任侍中、祠部尚书。
English: He was immediately promoted to the position of Sanzhi (free-riding) regular attendant, and was promoted to the post of Samurai Junior High School and the post of priest of the ancestral shrine.

古文：后主频幸其第，及著诗赋述勋德之美，展君臣之意焉。
现代文：多次驾临他家看望慰问，还吟诗作赋赞颂茎墨的功勋品德，展示君臣之间的亲近之意。
English: He visited his home many times to offer his condolences, and also chanted poems to praise the merits and virtues of Zhu Xi, showing the closeness between monarchs and ministers.

古文：又为五兵尚书，领右军将军，侍中如故。
现代文：茎璺又担任五兵尚书，领右军将军，侍中职务仍然担任。
English: Zhu Xi also served as the commander of the Five Armies, the leader of the right-wing army, and still held the position of chamberlain.

古文：以年老累乞骸骨，优诏不许。
现代文：因为年老，多次请求退休，但天子下旨屡屡挽留。
English: Because of his old age, he repeatedly asked to retire, but God's will was repeatedly withheld.

古文：祯明元年卒官，时年七十二。
现代文：祯明元年在职去世，这年七十二岁。
English: He died in office in the first year of the new year, at the age of 72.

古文：后主临哭尽哀，赠护军将军，侍中如故，给鼓吹一部，朝服一具，衣一袭，丧事量加资给，谥曰桓子。
现代文：篷王亲自吊唁致哀，追赠为护军将军，侍中职位保留，赏赐鼓吹乐一部，出席大典礼的专用礼服全副，常用官衣一套，丧事费用由国库优厚供给，谧号是桓子。
English: Tuo Wang personally offered condolences and condolences, posthumously became the general of the escort, retained the position of the chamberlain, awarded a part of the propaganda music, attended the grand ceremony with a full set of special ceremonial dress, a set of regular official clothes, and the funeral expenses were generously provided by the state treasury. His nickname was Hanzi.

古文：瑒事亲以孝闻，于诸弟甚笃睦。
现代文：孙瑒侍奉父母以孝顺闻名，对几位弟弟非常厚道和睦。
English: Sun Yat-sen was known for his filial piety while serving his parents, and he was very kind and amicable to several younger brothers.

古文：性通泰，有财物散之亲友。
现代文：生性通脱平和，有财物就散发给亲友。
English: They have a relaxed and peaceful nature, and if they have any property, they distribute it to their relatives and friends.

古文：其自居处，颇失于奢豪，庭院穿筑，极林泉之致，歌钟舞女，当世罕俦，宾客填门，轩盖不绝。
现代文：但他自己的住处却有追求奢侈豪华的缺陷，庭院之间修筑蹊径蜿蜒相通，极尽林泉胜境之美，诸多歌曲、乐器、舞蹈、女伎，都是当时很少有谁能比得上的，家中已经高朋满座，仍然车水马龙络绎不绝。
English: However, his own residence had the defect of pursuing luxury and luxury, the construction of winding paths between courtyards, the beauty of the forest and springs, and many songs, musical instruments, dances, and female comedians. At that time, there were few who could match them. The house was already full of people, and there was still a lot of traffic.

古文：及出镇郢州，乃合十馀船为大舫，于中立亭池，植荷芰，每良辰美景，宾僚并集，泛长江而置酒，亦一时之胜赏焉。
现代文：当他出京镇守郢州时，竟然把十多艘船只联结成庞然大舫，在大舫中建造亭榭池苑，种植荷花菱角，每逢良辰美景，则邀请许多宾客同僚，盛设酒宴而泛流长江，可以说是当时最佳的游赏方式了。
English: When he went to Beijing to guard Bozhou, he actually linked more than ten ships into a huge raft, built a pavilion pond garden in the raft, planted lotus and rhododendron, and invited many guests and colleagues whenever the weather was good. He held a wine banquet while the Yangtze River was flowing. It can be said that it was the best way to enjoy the scenery at that time.

古文：常于山斋设讲肆，集玄儒之士，冬夏资奉，为学者所称。
现代文：孙场还常常在名山的学斋裹开设讲堂，招集玄言儒学之士讲学，冬夏两季还供给资财费用，很为学者们所称颂。
English: Sun Yat-sen also often opened lecture halls at famous mountain retreats, inviting scholars of Confucianism to give lectures. He also provided financial support during the winter and summer, which was highly praised by scholars.

古文：而处己率易，不以名位骄物。
现代文：而他为人则率直平易，不因自己名声大地位高就瞧不起别人。
English: He, on the other hand, is straightforward and easygoing, and does not look down on others because of his fame and high status.

古文：时兴皇寺朗法师该通释典，瑒每造讲筵，时有抗论，法侣莫不倾心。
现代文：当时兴皇寺朗法师对佛学了解全面精通佛典，孙场每次造访他讲经之处，与他讨论经义时有争论，僧侣们对他没有不仰慕敬服的。
English: At that time, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche of Heunggwangsa Temple was well versed in Buddhism. Every time Sun Yat-sen visited the place where he gave a sermon, there were arguments with him when discussing the meaning of the sutras. The monks had nothing but admiration and respect for him.

古文：又巧思过人，为起部尚书，军国器械，多所创立。
现代文：再者他巧妙的构思超越常人，担任起部尚书时，对许多军用民用器械，都有创造改进。
English: Moreover, his ingenious conception surpasses ordinary people, and when he served as the head of Shangshu, he created and improved many military and civilian devices.

古文：有鉴识，男女婚姻，皆择素贵。
现代文：孙埸还具有对人的鉴赏识别能力，男女婚嫁，都选择自己平素所看重的人。
English: Sun Yao also has the ability to appreciate and recognize people. Both men and women choose the people they value when they get married.

古文：及卒，尚书令江总为其志铭，后主又题铭后四十字，遣左民尚书蔡徵宣敕就宅镌之。
现代文：当他去世后，尚书令江总为他写了墓志铭，后主又在墓志铭后面题写了一段四十个字的悼词，派左民尚书蔡征前往宣读并到墓地镑刻在石碑上。
English: After his death, Shang Shuling Jiang wrote an epitaph for him, and his successor inscribed a forty-character eulogy behind the epitaph, sent the left-wing citizen Shang Shuling Cai Zheng to read it and engraved it on the stone monument at the cemetery.

古文：其词曰： 秋风动竹，烟水惊波。
现代文：这段悼词是： 秋风动竹，烟水惊波。
English: This part of the eulogy is: The autumn wind is stirring, the smoke and water are alarming.

古文：几人樵径，何处山阿？
现代文：几人樵径，何处山阿?
English: Where is the mountain?

古文：今时日月，宿昔绮罗。
现代文：今时日月，宿昔绮罗。
English: At present, the sun and the moon are rising in Suqian.

古文：天长路远，地久云多。
现代文：天长路速，地久云多。
English: The road speed is long and the weather is cloudy.

古文：功臣未勒，此意如何。 
现代文：功臣未勒，此意如何? 
English: The hero is yet to be crowned, what do you think?

古文：时论以为荣。
现代文：当时舆论以此为荣。
English: At the time, public opinion was proud of this.

古文：瑒二十一子，咸有父风。
现代文：孙瑒有二十一个儿子，都具有他们父亲的风度。
English: Sun Yat-sen had twenty-one sons, all of whom had the manners of their father.

古文：世子让，早卒。
现代文：世子孙让，早年去世。
English: His great-grandson Jean died at an early age.

古文：第二子训，颇知名，历临湘令，直阁将军、高唐太守。
现代文：第二子孙训，颇有知名度，先后担任过临临湘令，直阁将军、高唐太守。
English: The second son and grandson, Xun, is quite well-known, having served successively as Lin Xiangling, Zhokou General, and Gaotang Governor.

古文：陈亡入隋。
现代文：陈朝亡后为隋朝臣民。
English: After the death of the Chen Dynasty, they became subjects of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：史臣曰：在梁之季，寇贼实繁，高祖建义杖旗，将宁区夏，裴忌早识攀附，每预戎麾，摧锋却敌，立功者数矣。
现代文：史臣曰：梁朝末年，盗寇乱贼实在是太多了，高祖擎举义旗，志在安宁中原，裴忌早就看清了遣点因而追随高祖，每海参预作战，摧败敌人，立下了许多战功。
English: Shichen said: At the end of the Liang Dynasty, there were too many thieves and bandits. Gao Zu raised the banner of righteousness and aspired to a peaceful Central Plains. Pei Yi had already seen the starting point and followed Gao Zu. He participated in the pre-war operations in every sea, defeated the enemy, and made many war feats.

古文：孙瑒有文武干略。见知时主，及行军用兵，师司马之法，至于战胜攻取，屡著勋庸，加以好施接物，士咸慕向。
现代文：孙场富有文才武略，为时代的英主所赏识，当行军用兵之时，他效法司马穣苴的军事法则，所以能战必胜攻必克，屡次建立功勋，加上喜欢施恩布惠善于待人接物，所以军入朝士都仰慕他。
English: Sun Yat-sen was rich in literary talent and strategy, and was appreciated by the British masters of the time. When he was a military soldier, he emulated Sima Qian's military law, so he could win the battle and repeatedly built up merits. In addition, he liked to do favors and was good at dealing with people, so the soldiers and courtiers all admired him.

古文：然性不循恒，频以罪免，盖亦陈汤之徒焉。
现代文：但他生性不守常规，以至于几次因罪免职；大概是西汉陈汤式的人物吧。
English: But he was unconventional by nature, so much so that he was removed from office several times for crimes; he was probably a Western Han Dynasty Chen Tang-type figure.

