古文：武宗武宗至道昭肃孝皇帝讳炎，穆宗第五子，母曰宣懿皇后韦氏。
现代文：武宗，谥号至道昭肃孝皇帝，名李炎，为穆宗第五个儿子，母亲是宣懿皇后韦氏。
English: Wu Zong, the pen name of Emperor Daozhao Su Xiao, was named Li Yan. He was the fifth son of Mu Zong, and his mother was the Empress Wei of Xuanwu.

古文：元和九年六月十二日生于东宫。
现代文：武宗于元和九年六月十二日生于东宫。
English: Bu Zong was born on June 12th, 1799 in Donggong.

古文：长庆元年三月，封颍王，本名瀍。
现代文：长庆元年三月被封为颍王，本名李瀍。
English: In March of the first year of the Changqing era, he was named the King of Gong. His real name was Li Yu.

古文：开成中加开府仪同三司、检校吏部尚书，依百官例，逐月给俸料。
现代文：开成年间加封开府仪同三司、检校吏部尚书，依照百官的成例，按月发给职俸津贴钱。
English: In accordance with the practice of hundreds of officials, salary allowance money will be paid monthly.

古文：初，文宗追悔庄恪太子殂不由道，乃以敬宗子陈王成美为皇太子，开成四年冬十月宣制，未遑册礼。
现代文：当初，文宗追悔庄恪太子不走正路而死，便立敬宗的儿子陈王李成美为皇太子，开成四年冬十月宣布了这一决定，没有来得及举行册封之礼。
English: At first, Emperor Wenzong regretted that Prince Zhuang did not follow the right path and died, so he appointed Emperor Keizong's son, Chen Wang Licheng Mei, as crown prince. This decision was announced in October of the following year, before the investiture ceremony could be held.

古文：五年正月二日，文宗暴疾，宰相李珏、知枢密刘弘逸奉密旨，以皇太子监国。
现代文：开成五年正月初二，文宗患暴病，宰相李珏、知枢密院事刘弘逸奉文宗密旨，令皇太子监国主政。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fifth year of the Heian period, Emperor Wenzong fell violently ill, and the Prime Minister, Li Xi, and the Secretary of the Privy Council, Liu Hongyi, carried out the secret order of Emperor Wenzong and ordered the crown prince to supervise the state affairs.

古文：两军中尉仇士良、鱼弘志矫诏迎颍王于十六宅，曰： 朕自婴疾疹，有加无瘳，惧不能躬总万机，日厘庶政。
现代文：两军中卫仇士良、鱼弘志假传圣旨从十六宅迎取颍王，说 朕自从患病以来，病势加重，不得痊愈，恐怕不能够亲自管理诸事，每天处理日常事务。
English: Qiu Shiliang and Yu Hongzhi, the middle guards of the two armies, falsely transmitted the holy will to welcome the king from the 16th house, saying, "Since I have been ill, my condition has worsened and I cannot recover. I am afraid that I will not be able to manage everything personally and deal with daily affairs every day."

古文：稽于谟训，谋及大臣，用建亲贤，以贰神器。
现代文：查考于谋略的古训，并和大臣们商议，以便册立亲近贤明的人作为皇帝的辅佐。
English: Study the ancient teachings on strategy, and consult with the ministers in order to appoint a close and wise person as the emperor's assistant.

古文：亲弟颍王瀍昔在籓邸，与朕常同师训，动成仪矩，性禀宽仁。
现代文：朕的亲弟颍王李氵廛，从前封为藩王的时候，就同朕常常共同蒙受师长的教诲，举止合乎礼仪规矩，性情禀赋宽厚仁慈。
English: My own younger brother, King Yi, when he was the former feudal lord, often received the teachings of the teacher together with me. He behaved according to the rules of etiquette and was endowed with a generous and benevolent disposition.

古文：俾奉昌图，必谐人欲。
现代文：令他承奉昌盛的国家，必定能合乎人们的愿望。
English: For him to succeed to a prosperous country is certainly in line with people's wishes.

古文：可立为皇太弟，应军国政事，便令权勾当。
现代文：可立他为皇太弟，所有的军国重务，即令他暂时处理管辖。
English: He can be appointed as the crown prince's younger brother, and all the important military and state affairs can be temporarily handled and governed by him.

古文：百辟卿士，中外庶臣，宜竭乃心，辅成予志。
现代文：百官卿士，中外臣民，应当竭尽你们的心志，辅佐他成就我的愿望。
English: A hundred officials, lords and ladies, Chinese and foreign subjects, should do your utmost to assist him in fulfilling my wish.

古文：陈王成美先立为皇太子，以其年尚冲幼，未渐师资，比日重难，不遑册命，回践硃邸，式协至公，可复封陈王。 
现代文：陈王李成美原先立为皇太子，因他年龄尚幼小，没有长期地经由师长疏导，近日灾难重重，来不及册封制命，可返回王府，以天下至公为榜样，重新封为陈王。 
English: Chen Wang Li Chengmei was originally set up as crown prince, because he was still young and small, and did not have a long-term guidance by the division chief. Recently, there have been many disasters, and it is too late to record the appointment, so he can return to the royal palace, take the world as an example, and re-appointed as Chen Wang.

古文：是夜，士良统兵士于十六宅迎太弟赴少阳院，百官谒见于东宫思贤殿。
现代文：当夜，仇士良率领士兵从十六宅迎取皇太弟前往少阳院，百官在东宫思贤殿谒见皇太弟。
English: That night, Qiu Shiliang led the soldiers to welcome the crown prince from the 16th house to Shaoyang Courthouse, and hundreds of officials came to see the crown prince at the East Palace of Shixian Palace.

古文：三日，仇士良收捕仙韶院副使尉迟璋杀之，屠其家。
现代文：正月初三，仇士良搜捕仙韶院副使尉迟璋将其杀害，并屠杀他的全家。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Qiu Shiliang searched for and arrested Xian Ye Yuan, the deputy envoy of Xian Ye Yuan, killed him, and slaughtered his entire family.

古文：四日，文宗崩，宣遗诏：皇太弟宜于柩前即皇帝位，宰相杨嗣复摄冢宰。
现代文：五月初四，文宗驾崩，仇士良宣读文宗遗诏：皇太弟应当在灵柩前即皇帝位，由原宰相杨嗣复暂署冢宰之职。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of May, after the death of Emperor Wenzong, Qiu Shiliang read out the last will and testament of Emperor Wenzong: the crown prince should be crowned emperor before the coffin, and the former prime minister Yang Xi should temporarily assume the post of crown prince.

古文：十四日，受册于正殿，时年二十七。
现代文：五月十四日，皇太弟在正殿接受皇帝的册命文书，时年二十七岁。
English: On May 14th, at the age of twenty-seven, the crown prince received the imperial decree in the main hall.

古文：陈王成美、安王溶殂于邸第。
现代文：陈王李成美、安王李溶都死于府邸中。
English: Chen Wang Li Chengmei and An Wang Li Rong both died in the mansion.

古文：初，杨贤妃有宠于文宗，而庄恪太子母王妃失宠怨望，为杨妃所谮，王妃死，太子废。
现代文：当初，杨贤妃为文宗所宠爱，而庄恪太子的母亲王妃因失宠而心怀怨望，被杨妃以谗言毁谤，王妃死去，太子被废掉。
English: At first, Empress Yang Xianfei was favored by Emperor Wenzong, while Prince Zhuang's mother, Empress Dowager Wangfei, harbored resentment due to her loss of favor. She was slandered by Empress Yang with slanderous words. Empress Dowager Wangfei died, and the prince was abolished.

古文：及开成未年，帝多疾无嗣，贤妃请以安王溶嗣，帝谋于宰臣李珏，珏非之，乃立陈王。
现代文：到开成末年，文宗皇帝多病，没有子嗣，杨贤妃请求立安王李溶为嗣子，皇帝与宰臣李珏商量此事，李珏不赞成，便立陈王李成美为嗣子。
English: Towards the end of Kaisei's reign, Emperor Wenzong was very ill and had no children. Empress Yang Xianfei asked Emperor Gaozong to make King An and King Lirong his heirs. Emperor Gaozong discussed the matter with Vice-Minister Lixuan. Lixuan did not approve, so Emperor Gaozong made King Chen and King Lichengmei his heirs.

古文：至是，仇士良立武宗，欲归功于己，乃发安王旧事，故二王与贤妃皆死。
现代文：到这时，仇士良立武宗，想要归功于自己，便举发安王求嗣的旧事，故而陈王、安王和杨贤妃都死去。
English: At this time, the enemy warrior Liang Lianwuzong, who wanted to take credit for the victory, brought up the old matter of King An's request for an heir. As a result, King Chen, King An and Yang Xianfei all died.

古文：二月，制穆宗妃韦氏追谥宣懿皇太后，帝之母也。
现代文：二月，决定将穆宗之妃韦氏追谥为宣懿皇太后，她是皇帝的母亲。
English: In February, it was decided that Mu Zong's wife, Princess Wei, would be crowned Empress Dowager of Xuan Zang. She was the mother of the emperor.

古文：上御正殿，降德音，以开府、右军中尉仇士良封楚国公，左军中尉鱼弘志为韩国公，太常卿崔郸、户部尚书判度支崔珙并本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：皇上驾临正殿，颁降圣旨，将开府、右军中尉仇士良封为楚国公，左军中尉鱼弘志封为韩国公，太常卿崔郸、户部尚书执掌度支崔珙均以本职任中书门下同平章事。
English: The emperor arrived at the main hall and issued the imperial decree of abdication, appointing Keppu and the right army lieutenant Qiu Shiliang as the Duke of Chu, the left army lieutenant Yu Hongzhi as the Duke of Korea, and the Tai Changqing Cui Wei and the head of the household, Shang Shu, and the subordinate Cui Wei as the same rank.

古文：敕二月十五日玄元皇帝降生日宜为降圣节，休假一日。
现代文：敕令将二月十五日玄元皇帝降生这日作为降圣节，休假一日。
English: The imperial edict made February 15th, the day of the birth of Emperor Xuan Yuan, a holy day, with one day off.

古文：三月，诏宫人刘氏、王氏并为妃。
现代文：三月，诏令将宫人刘氏、王氏均封为妃。
English: In March, the imperial edict made both Liu and Wang, members of the imperial court, princesses.

古文：敕朔望入阁对刑法官，是日非便，宜停。
现代文：敕令，因每月朔日和望日皇帝临幸便殿均面对刑法官，这天于事情有所不便，应当停止。
English: According to the imperial edict, since the Emperor Linxing and the Empress Dowager Linxing both face the criminal judge on the New Year's Day and the Day of Hope every month, there is some inconvenience in the matter on this day and it should be stopped.

古文：五月，中书奏：六月十二日，皇帝载诞之辰，请以其日为庆阳节。
现代文：五月，中书省上奏说：六月十二日是皇上的寿诞之日，请把这一天作为庆阳节。
English: In May, the Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture issued a proclamation: "June 12 is the birthday of the emperor, please take this day as the Qingyang Festival.

古文：祔宣懿太后于太庙。
现代文：将宣懿太后附祭于太庙。
English: Empress Dowager Xuan Zang will be enshrined in the Great Temple.

古文：初，武宗欲启穆宗陵祔葬，中书门下奏曰： 园陵已安，神道贵静。
现代文：当初，武宗想要打开穆宗的陵墓，以宣懿太后附葬其中，中书门下省上奏说： 墓园陵寝已经安定，神灵以宁静为贵。
English: At first, Emperor Wuzong wanted to open the mausoleum of Emperor Mu Zong and have Empress Dowager Xuan Rong be buried in it. When he opened the door, he said, "The tomb in the cemetery has been stabilized, and the deities value tranquility."

古文：光陵二十余载，福陵则近又修崇。
现代文：穆宗所葬的光陵已经二十多年，太后的福陵则近日又修葺加高。
English: The light mausoleum where Mu Zong is buried has been in use for more than 20 years, while the tomb of Empress Dowager Fu has recently been renovated and raised.

古文：窃惟孝思，足彰严奉。
现代文：我们想，只要心中孝顺，就足以显扬父母了。
English: We think that as long as we are filial in our hearts, it is enough to show our parents.

古文：今若再因合祔，须启二陵，或虑圣灵不安，未合先旨。
现代文：如今如果再因为要合葬附祭，而必须打开两座陵墓，或恐令圣灵忧虑不安，不合乎先圣心中的愿望。
English: Now, if it is necessary to open two mausoleums in order to bury the sacrificial offering together, or if it may cause anxiety to the Holy Spirit, it is not in accordance with the wishes of the first saint's heart.

古文：又以阴阳避忌，亦有所疑。
现代文：又因为男女阴阳应当避忌，也会有所疑虑。
English: In addition, because the yin and yang of men and women should be avoided, there will also be doubts.

古文：不移福陵，实协典礼。 
现代文：不迁葬福陵，确实符合典则礼仪。 
English: It is indeed in accordance with the rules of etiquette not to move the tomb.

古文：乃止。就旧坟增筑，名曰福陵。
现代文：便停止了迁葬，依据旧坟增建，名称叫做 福陵 。
English: Therefore, the relocation of graves was stopped, and new graves were built according to the old graves, and the name was changed to Fuling.

古文：又奏： 准今年二月八日赦文，应京诸司勒留官，令本处克留手力杂给与摄官者。
现代文：又奏说 ：按照今年二月八日的赦文，所有京师各司署被勒令停职的官员，令其本署克日留其小吏杂项的职俸津贴给予代理他们任职的官员。
English: He also said: According to the amnesty on February 8 this year, all officials of the Beijing Division and various departments who were ordered to suspend their duties were ordered to pay the salary allowance of their subordinates and miscellaneous items to the officials acting on their behalf.

古文：臣等检详，诸道正官料钱绝少，杂给手力即多，今正官勒留，亦管公事，料钱少于杂给，刻下事未得中。
现代文：臣等经过详细核查，各道的正官职俸津贴极少，给予小吏的杂项钱则较多，如今正官虽被勒令停职，仍在处理公务，津贴钱却少于吏员的杂项钱，目前事情尚未处置得当。
English: After detailed verification by ministers and others, the salaries and allowances of officials in each province are very small, and the miscellaneous money given to minor officials is more. Nowadays, although officials have been suspended, they are still handling official duties, but the allowance money is less than the miscellaneous money of officials. At present, things have not been handled properly.

古文：臣等商量，其正官料钱杂给等钱，望每贯留二百文与摄官，余并如旧。 
现代文：臣请商量，各署正官的津贴及吏员的杂项，望每贯分留二百文与代理官员，其余依旧。 
English: Ministers are requested to discuss that the allowance of the officials of each department and the miscellaneous items of the officials are expected to be two hundred mon and acting officials, and the rest is still the same.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：秋七月，制检校礼部尚书、华州刺史陈夷行复为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：秋，七月，决定检校礼部尚书、华州刺史陈夷行重行担任中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the autumn and July, it was decided that Shang Shu from the proctoring department and Chen Yi Xing from the Huazhou proctoring department would be re-appointed as the secretary of the middle school and the secretary of the same level.

古文：八月十七日，葬文宗皇帝于章陵。
现代文：八月十七日，安葬文宗皇帝于章陵。
English: On August 17th, Emperor Wenzong was laid to rest in the mausoleum.

古文：知枢密刘弘逸、薛季稜率禁军护灵驾至陵所，二人素为文宗奖过，仇士良恶之，心不自安，因是掌兵，欲倒戈诛士良、弘志。
现代文：知枢密院事刘弘逸、薛季眣率领禁军护送灵柩到陵墓所在地，二人一向被文宗所奖掖优遇，仇士良很厌恶他们，他们心中不安，因这件事而掌握兵权，想要倒戈诛杀仇士良、鱼弘志。
English: Liu Hongyi and Xue Jizhe, both members of the Privy Council, led the Imperial Guard to escort the coffin to the mausoleum. The two had always been treated well by the Emperor Wenzong. Qiu Shiliang was disgusted with them. They were uneasy in their hearts. Because of this, they seized military power and wanted to kill Qiu Shiliang and Yu Hongzhi.

古文：卤簿使兵部尚书王起、山陵使崔稜觉其谋，先谕卤簿诸军。
现代文：卤簿使兵部尚书王起、山陵使崔眣察觉了他们的谋划，先行晓谕卤簿军。
English: Emperor Shangshu of the War Department and Emperor Cui of the Mountain Mausoleum were made aware of their plans by the scrolls, and the armies of the scrolls were told in advance.

古文：是日弘逸、季稜伏诛。
现代文：当天刘弘逸、薛季眣即被处死。
English: On the same day, Liu Hongyi and Xue Jizhe were executed.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事杨嗣复检校吏部尚书、潭州刺史，充湖南都团练观察使；中书侍郎、同平章事李珏检校兵部尚书、桂州刺史，充桂管防御观察等使；御史中裴夷真为杭州刺史：皆坐弘逸、季稜党也。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事杨嗣复任检校吏部尚书、潭州刺史，充任湖南都团练观察使；中书侍郎、同平章事李珏任检校兵部尚书、桂州刺史，充任桂管防御使、观察使等；御史中丞裴夷直任杭州刺史：他们都因为是刘弘逸、薛季眣一党而获罪。
English: Subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji Yang Zi, was reinstated as inspector of schools, Shangshu, and Tanzhou Shishi, and served as Hunan Capital Rehearsal Observation Envoy; Chinese attendant, Tongping Zhangji Li Jie, was appointed inspector of schools, Shangshu, and Guizhou Shishi, and served as Guizhou Defense Envoy, Observation Envoy, and so on; and imperial historian, Zhongzheng Pei Yi, was appointed Hangzhou Shishi: they were all guilty of being a party of Liu Hongyi and Xue Jizhe.

古文：易定军乱，逐节度使陈君赏。
现代文：易定的军人作乱，驱逐节度使陈君赏。
English: Yi Ding's soldiers rioted, and the expulsion of the festival made Chen Jun boo.

古文：君赏鸠合豪杰数百人，复入城，尽诛谋乱兵士，军城复安。
现代文：陈君赏纠合了数百名豪杰重新进城，将谋划叛乱的士兵全部杀死，军城又重新安定下来。
English: Chen Junbo entangled hundreds of heroes to re-enter the city, killed all the soldiers who planned the rebellion, and the military city was re-settled.

古文：九月，以淮南节度使、检校尚书左仆射李德裕为吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事，寻兼门下侍郎；以宣武军节度使、检校吏部尚书、汴州刺史李绅代德裕镇淮南。
现代文：九月，任命淮南节度使、检校尚书左仆射李德裕为吏部尚书、中书门下省同平章事，不久又兼任门下侍郎；任命宣武军节度使、检校吏部尚书、汴州刺史李绅代替李德裕为淮南节度使。
English: In September, Li Deyu, the deputy of Huainan Festival and the left-hand man of the inspecting officer of the school, was appointed as the deputy of the administrative department of Huainan Festival. Li Deyu, the subordinate of the inspecting officer of the school, was appointed as the deputy of the administrative department of Huainan Festival. Li Deyu, the subordinate of the inspecting officer of the school and the left-hand man of the inspecting officer of the school, was appointed as the deputy of the administrative department of Huainan Festival. Li Deyu, the subordinate of the inspecting officer of the school and the left-hand man of the inspecting officer of the

古文：帝在籓时，颇好道术修摄之事，是秋。召道士越归真等八十一人入禁中，于三殿修金箓道场。帝幸三殿，于九天坛亲受法箓。
现代文：皇帝在当藩王时，很喜欢道术修炼保养之事，这年秋天，征召道士赵归真等八十一人来到宫禁中，在三殿修建金道场，皇帝临幸三殿，在九天坛亲自接受符。
English: When the emperor was the king of the domain, he was very fond of the cultivation and maintenance of Taoism. In the autumn of that year, he summoned eighty-one people, including the Taoist Zhao Guizhen, to come to the palace to build a gold dojo in the third hall, and the emperor himself visited the third hall to personally receive the amulet at the Nine-Heaven Altar.

古文：右拾遗王哲上疏，言王业之初，不宜崇信过当，疏奏不省。
现代文：右拾遗王哲上疏，说王业开始之时，不应当过分崇尚迷信，疏奏不能使皇上省悟。
English: According to Wang Zhe Shangsuo, when the king's career begins, he should not be too superstitious, and he should not be too introspective.

古文：十一月，盐铁转运使奏江淮已南请复税茶，从之。
现代文：十一月，盐铁转运使上奏请求免除江淮以南的茶税，皇上允从。
English: In November, the Emperor acceded to the request of the Salt and Iron Transportation Company to exempt the tea tax south of the Yangtze and Huai Rivers.

古文：魏博节度使何进滔卒，三军推其子重霸知留后事。
现代文：魏博节度使何进滔去世，三军将士推举他的儿子何重霸执掌节度留后事务。
English: Wei Bo Jiedu caused the death of He Jintao, and the three armies elected his son He Chongba to take charge of the affairs after the death of Jiedu.

古文：会昌元年正月壬寅朔。
现代文：会昌元年正月初一为壬寅日。
English: The first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Huichang will be Ren Yin Day.

古文：庚戌，有事于郊庙，礼毕，御丹凤楼，大赦，改元。
现代文：正月初九，皇上在太庙举行祭祀，典礼完毕之后临幸丹凤楼，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the emperor held a religious service at Taimiao. After the ceremony, he visited Danfeng Tower, granted amnesty to the world, and changed the year.

古文：二月壬寅，以淮南节度使、检校吏部尚书李绅为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二月初一，任命淮南节度使、检校吏部尚书李绅为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the first day of February, the Huainan Festival Delegate and the school inspector, Shangshu Lishen, was appointed as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：中书奏： 南宫六曹皆有职分，各责官业，即事不因循。
现代文：中书省上奏说 ：尚书省的六曹都有各自的职责，各按要求完成官中事务，事情就不会拖沓停滞。
English: A spokesperson for the Ministry of Education and Culture said, "The six commissioners of the Ministry of Education and Culture all have their own responsibilities, and each of them will complete the affairs of the ministry according to the requirements, and things will not be delayed.

古文：近者户部度支多是诸军奏请，本司郎吏束手闲居。
现代文：近来户部的钱粮收支，大多是由各军上奏请求，度支司本府的官员都无事闲居。
English: Recently, the income and expenditure of money and grain of the Household Department were mostly requested by the various armies, and the officials of the General Administration of Customs and Excise were idle.

古文：今后请祗令本行分判，委中书门下简择公干才器相当者转授。 
现代文：从今以后请只令其本司掌管各军钱粮，委托中书门下省挑选处理公务的能力与职位相当的官员将钱粮转授各军。 
English: From now on, please only let his department be in charge of the money and grain for each army, and entrust the central government to select officials with the ability to handle official duties and equivalent positions to transfer the money and grain to each army.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：车驾幸昆明池。
现代文：皇上驾临昆明池。
English: The Emperor arrived at Kunming Pool.

古文：赐仇士良纪功碑，诏右仆射李程为其文。
现代文：赐给仇士良纪功碑，下诏令右仆射李程撰写碑文。
English: He gave the enemy soldier Liang Ji a monument, and ordered his right-hand man Li Cheng to write the inscription.

古文：三月，贬湖南观察使杨嗣复潮州司马，桂管观察使李珏端州司马，杭州刺史裴夷直驩州司户。
现代文：三月，将湖南观察使杨嗣复贬职为潮州司马，桂管观察使李珏贬职为端州司马，杭州刺史裴夷直贬职为州司户。
English: In March, the Hunan observation demoted Yang Shifu to the post of Chaozhou secretary, the Guizhou observation demoted Li Jie to the post of Danzhou secretary, and the Hangzhou observation demoted Zhi Pei Yizhi to the post of state secretary.

古文：宰臣李德裕进位司空。
现代文：宰臣李德裕晋位为司空。
English: Vice-Minister Li Deyu was promoted to Siku.

古文：三月壬申，宰相李德裕、陈夷行、崔珙、李绅等奏： 宪宗皇帝有恢复中兴之功，请为百代不迁之庙。 
现代文：三月初一，宰相李德裕、陈夷行、崔珙、李绅等上奏说： 宪宗皇帝有恢复庙社，中兴帝室的功劳，请为他建造一座永久性的祠庙。 
English: On the first day of March, the prime ministers Li Deyu, Chen Yixing, Cui Wei and Li Sheng sent a message saying: Emperor Xianzong has the merit of restoring temples and shrines and rejuvenating the imperial court, please build a permanent ancestral temple for him.

古文：帝曰： 所论至当。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：你们说得对极了。 
English: The emperor said, "You are absolutely right.

古文：续议之，事竟不行。
现代文：命继续讨论这件事，然而事情竟未能实行。
English: Life continued to discuss the matter, however, things failed to materialize.

古文：赠故中书令、晋国公裴度太师。
现代文：追赠已故中书令、晋国公裴度为太师。
English: The late Chushirei was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master, and Jin Guo Gong Peidu became Grand Master.

古文：山南东道蝗害稼。
现代文：山南东道蝗虫伤害庄稼。
English: Locusts damage crops in Shannan Province.

古文：造灵符应圣院于龙首池。
现代文：在龙首池建造灵符应圣院。
English: The construction of Lingfu Ying Sheng Yuan in Longshou Pond.

古文：四月辛丑，敕： 《宪宗实录》旧本未备，宜令史官重修进内。
现代文：四月初一，敕令： 《宪宗实录》的旧本尚未完备，应当令史官重修时增补进内。
English: On the first day of April, the imperial edict was issued: The old copy of the "Constitutional Law Record" was not yet complete, and the historian should be ordered to add to it when it was repaired.

古文：其旧本不得注破，候撰成同进。 
现代文：然而增入的文字不能损害旧本内容，待新撰写的内容完成后同时进呈。 
English: However, the added text cannot damage the old content, and it will be submitted at the same time after the newly written content is completed.

古文：时李德裕先请不迁宪宗庙，为议者沮之，复恐或书其父不善之事，故复请改撰实录，朝野非之。
现代文：当时李德裕先请求为宪宗修建永久性祠庙，被参与议论的官员所阻止，又害怕有人把他父亲不好的事写进去，因此又请求改写实录，在朝和在野的人都非议他。
English: At that time, Li Deyuxian requested to build a permanent ancestral temple for the Constitutionalists, but was prevented by the officials involved in the discussion. He was also afraid that someone would write bad things about his father, so he also requested to rewrite the record. Both in the government and in the field, people criticized him.

古文：五月辛未，中书门下奏： 据《六典》，隋置谏议大夫七人，从四品上。
现代文：五月初一，中书门下省上奏说： 隋朝根据《六典》设置谏议大夫七人，秩禄为从四品上。
English: On the first day of May, the provincial superior of the Chinese Academy of Letters said: According to the "Six Classics," the Sui Dynasty set up seven doctors for deliberation, and the rank was from the fourth grade up.

古文：大历二年，升门下侍郎为正三品，两省遂阙四品。
现代文：大历二年，把门下侍郎的秩禄升格为正三品，中书、门下两省便空缺了四品官。
English: In the second year of the great calendar, the rank of the servant under the door was upgraded to the third grade, and the fourth grade officer was vacant in Chushu and the two provinces under the door.

古文：建官之道，有所未周。
现代文：建置官员的体制，就有不够周到的地方。
English: The system of appointing officials is not thorough enough.

古文：诗云 衮职有阙，仲山甫补之 。
现代文：《诗经》上说 ：天子治政有了缺漏，由仲山甫补足。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: There was a gap in the governance of the heavenly son, and it was filled by Zhongshan Fu.

古文：周、汉大臣，愿入禁闼，补过拾遗。
现代文：周朝、汉朝的大臣愿意入宫禁中任职，是为了替天子弥补过失，提醒失误。
English: Zhou Dynasty and Han Dynasty ministers were willing to serve under palace ban in order to make up for mistakes and remind mistakes.

古文：张衡为侍郎，常居帷幄，从容讽谏。
现代文：张衡担任侍郎，常常待在皇帝的幄幕中，从容不迫地对皇帝进行讽喻劝谏。
English: Zhang Heng served as a waiter, often staying in the emperor's pavilion, calmly advising the emperor with similes.

古文：此皆大臣之任，故其秩峻，其任重，则敬其言而行其道。
现代文：这都是大臣的责任，因而其俸禄很高，其责任则很重大，天子则尊重他们的意见，施行他们的主张。
English: These are all the responsibilities of the minister, so his salary is high, his responsibilities are great, and the Son of Heaven respects their opinions and implements their ideas.

古文：况蹇谔之地，宜老成之人，秩未优崇，则难用耆德。
现代文：更何况正直敢言的地方，应该用老成持重的人，秩禄不够优厚，则难以任用年高德厚的人。
English: What's more, in places where one dares to speak honestly, one should use a person who has the weight of seniority. If the rank is not high enough, it is difficult to appoint a person of high moral character.

古文：其谏议大夫望依隋氏旧制，升为从四品，分为左右，以备两省四品之阙。
现代文：谏议大夫的职俸希望按照隋朝的旧制，升格为从四品，并分为左、右谏议大夫，以补充中书、门下两省四品秩禄的空缺。
English: In accordance with the old system of the Sui Dynasty, it is hoped that the salary of the doctor will be upgraded from the first to the fourth grade, and divided into the left and right doctor, to supplement the vacancy of the fourth grade in the middle school and the two provinces.

古文：向后与丞出入迭用，以重其选。
现代文：以后与丞官、郎官交错更迭任用，以加强它的铨选。
English: Later, he was appointed in a staggered manner, alternating with the chancellor and vice-chancellor, in order to strengthen his power.

古文：又御史中丞为大夫之贰，缘大夫秩崇，官不常置，中丞为宪台之长。
现代文：又，御史中丞是御史大夫的副职，因为御史大夫的品秩较高，不经常设置这项官职，御史中丞便成为御史台的长官。
English: In addition, goshi chujo was an assistant post to goshi daifu, and since goshi daifu had a higher rank, this post was not often created, and goshi chujo became the chief of goshi daidai.

古文：今寺监、少卿、少监、司业、少尹并为寺署之贰，皆为四品。
现代文：现在的寺监、少卿、少监、司业、少尹都是寺署中的副职，秩禄均为四品。
English: Present-day supervisors of temples, Shokei, Shonan, Shigeyo, and Shonin are all subordinate positions in the temple office, and all of them have the rank of Shihon.

古文：中丞官名至重，见秩未崇，望升为从四品。 
现代文：御史中丞的名位极为重要，而现在的秩禄却不高，希望升格为从四品。 
English: The title of goshi chujo is extremely important, but the current rank is not high, and it is hoped that it will be upgraded to the fourth grade.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：六月，有秃鹙鸟集于禁苑。
现代文：六月，有秃秋鸟鸟聚集在宫中的苑囿中。
English: In June, birds gather in the courtyard of the palace.

古文：庚子夜五更，小流星五十余旁午流散。
现代文：六月初一夜五更时，有五十余颗小流星缤纷交错地流散。
English: At the time of the full moon in early June, more than 50 small meteors streamed out in a dazzling display.

古文：制以魏博兵马留后何重霸检校工部尚书、魏州大都督府长史，充天雄军节度使，仍赐名重顺。
现代文：决定任命魏博兵马留后何重霸为检校工部尚书、魏州大都督府长史，充任天雄军节度使，并赐名为 重顺 。
English: It was decided to appoint He Chongba as the head of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department.

古文：中书奏请依姚璹故事，宰相每月修时政记送史馆，从之。
现代文：中书省奏请依照姚王寿的旧例，由宰相每月撰写时政记送交史馆，皇上允从。
English: In accordance with the old example of Yao Wangshou, the Chinese Ministry of Books requested that the Prime Minister write a monthly chronicle of politics and submit it to the history museum, and the emperor complied.

古文：以衡山道士刘玄靖为银青光禄大夫，充崇玄馆学士，赐号广成先生，令与道士赵归真于禁中修法箓。
现代文：任命衡山道士刘玄靖为银青光禄大夫，充任崇玄馆学士，赐号 广成先生 ，命他与道士赵归真一起在宫中修撰法。
English: He appointed the Hengshan Taoist Liu Xuanjing as the silver Qing Guanglu doctor, and appointed him as the academician of the Chongxuan Hall, and gave him the title of Mr. Guangcheng, and ordered him to work with the Taoist Zhao Guizhen to write the law in the palace.

古文：左补阙刘彦谟上疏切谏，贬彦谟为河南府户曹。
现代文：左补阙刘彦谟上疏恳切地劝止，皇上将刘彦模贬职为河南府户曹。
English: Emperor Xuanzong earnestly dissuaded Liu Yanmo, the left-hand vicar, and the emperor demoted Liu Yanmo to the post of Henan prefectural chief.

古文：敕： 自前中外上封论事，有所纠举，则请留中。
现代文：敕令 ：自从先前朝内外进献封奏论事，有所纠弹或举荐的事，则请求皇帝把奏章留在宫中。
English: Imperial edict: Since there had been a dispute over the presentation of the musical score inside and outside the court, and there had been a correction or recommendation, the emperor was requested to keep the musical score in the palace.

古文：今后并云 请付御史台 ，不得云 留中不下 。
现代文：今后这类奏章都只说 请付御史台 ，不得说 留在禁中不下达 。
English: In the future, these types of musical scores will only say "please pay to the Imperial History Channel," and will not be allowed to say "stay in the ban and not be issued."

古文：如事关军国，理须宥密，不在此限。
现代文：如果奏事关系到军国大事，理由必须全面、严密，不在此限。
English: If the report is related to military and national affairs, the reasons must be comprehensive and rigorous, without limitation.

古文：如台司勘当后，若得事实，必奖奉公。
现代文：奏章如经过御史台审察完毕之后，事情确实如此，必定奖励其奏事秉公。
English: If this is indeed the case after the report has been examined by the Imperial Historical Records Bureau, he will be rewarded for his fair report.

古文：苟涉加诬，必当反问。
现代文：如果涉及到诬陷的行为，也必定反坐其罪。
English: If it involves the act of framing, it must also counteract the crime.

古文：告示中外，明知此意。 
现代文：将此事告知朝内外，使大家都明确地知晓此意。 
English: The matter will be made known inside and outside the DPRK so that everyone will clearly know the intention.

古文：七月己巳，北方有流星，经天良久。
现代文：七月初一，北方出现流星，长久地行经天宇。
English: On the first day of July, a meteor appeared in the north and traveled across the sky for a long time.

古文：关东大蝗伤稼。
现代文：关东出现大量蝗虫伤害庄稼。
English: A large number of locusts have appeared in Kanto, damaging crops.

古文：襄、郢、江左大水。
现代文：襄州、郢州、江州以东发生大水。
English: Flooding occurred in the east of Xiangzhou, Zhangzhou and Jiangzhou.

古文：彗复出室壁之间。
现代文：彗星重复出现在室宿和壁宿之间。
English: The comet repeatedly appeared between Murojuku and Kabejuku.

古文：八月，回鹘乌介可汗遣使告难，言本国为黠戛斯所攻，故可汗死，今部人推为可汗。
现代文：八月，回鹘的乌介可汗派遣使臣前来陈告祸难，说本国遭到黠斯部族的进攻，原来的可汗已死，现在他被部族中人推举为可汗。
English: In August, the Uji Khan of the Uighurs sent an envoy to complain that his country had been attacked by the Xiongnu tribe. The original khan had died, and now he had been elected khan by the tribe.

古文：缘本国破散，今奉太和公主南投大国。
现代文：因为本国已经破败离散，如今侍奉太和公主向南前来投奔大国。
English: Because the country has been ruined and scattered, now the maidservant and the princess have come south to join the big country.

古文：时乌介至塞上，大首领嗢没斯与赤心宰相相攻，杀赤心，率其部下数千帐近西城。
现代文：当时乌介来到边塞，大首领没斯与宰相赤心互相攻伐，没斯杀死赤心，率领他的几千帐部下逼近西城。
English: At that time, Utsuke came to the border fortress, and the great leader Meng Si and the prime minister Chixin attacked each other. Meng Si killed Chixin and led his several thousand subordinates to approach the West City.

古文：天德防御使田牟以闻。
现代文：天德军防御使田牟将以上情况奏闻皇上。
English: The defense of the German army caused Tamu to report the above situation to the emperor.

古文：乌介又令其相颉干迦斯上表，借天德城以安公主，仍乞粮储牛羊供给。
现代文：乌介又令他的宰相颉干迦斯奉上表章，借天德城以安顿太和公主，并请求供给粮食和牛羊。
English: Utsuke also ordered his prime minister, Shogangkas, to send the seal, to use the city of Tiantecheng to settle the princess and the princess, and to request the supply of grain, cattle and sheep.

古文：诏金吾大将军王会、宗正少卿李师偃往其牙宣慰，令放公主入朝，赈粟二万石。
现代文：皇上下诏，令金吾大将军王会、宗正少卿李师偃前往其军营慰问，命放太和公主入朝，赈济粮食二万石。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Kingu General Wang Hui and Zongzheng Shaoqing Li Shizhen to go to his military camp to offer condolences, and ordered that the Empress Dowager and the princess be allowed to enter the imperial court, and that 20,000 koku of grain be provided.

古文：九月，幽州军乱，逐其帅史元忠，推牙将陈行泰为留后。
现代文：九月，幽州军队作乱，驱逐其元帅史元忠，推举其偏将陈行泰为幽州节度留后。
English: In September, the Yuzhou army made a riot, expelled its marshal Shi Yuanzhong, and chose Chen Xingtai as the Yuzhou Festival.

古文：三军上章请符节，朝旨未许。
现代文：三军奉上表章请求赐给符节，皇上未予应允。
English: At the request of the three armies, the Emperor did not grant them the festival.

古文：十月，幽州雄武军使张绛遣军吏吴仲舒入朝，言行泰惨虐，不可处将帅之任，请以镇军加讨，许之。
现代文：十月，幽州雄武军使张绛派遣军吏吴仲舒入朝。说陈行泰残酷暴虐，不能够担任将帅的职务。请求派遣节镇的军队对他进行讨伐。
English: In October, Yuzhou Xiongwu's military envoy Zhang Qian sent military official Wu Zhongshu to the imperial court. He said that Chen Xingtai was cruel and tyrannical and could not serve as a general. He requested that troops from Jiezhen be sent to fight him.

古文：十月，诛行泰，遂以绛知兵马使。
现代文：皇上允准。十月，将陈行泰处死，便任命张绛任兵马使。
English: The emperor agreed. In October, Chen Xingtai was put to death, and Zhang Ye was appointed as the envoy.

古文：车驾校猎咸阳。
现代文：皇上的车驾在咸阳用木栏围猎禽兽。
English: The emperor's carriage drove in Xianyang with a wooden fence around hunting animals.

古文：十一月丁酉朔。
现代文：十一月初一为丁酉日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Ding Xi Day.

古文：壬寅夜，大星东北流，其光烛地，有声如雷，山崩石陨。
现代文：十一月初六夜间，有大星从东北方飞过，其光芒照亮大地，发出雷鸣般的声音，山体崩塌，岩石滚落。
English: On the night of the 6th day of the 11th month, a great star flew over from the northeast. Its light illuminated the earth and emitted a thunderous sound. Mountains collapsed and rocks tumbled down.

古文：其彗起于室，凡五十六日而灭。
现代文：彗星起自室宿天区，共五十六天才消失。
English: It took the comet a total of 56 days to disappear from the Muroshuku sky region.

古文：太和公主遣使入朝，言乌介自称可汗，乞行策命，缘初至漠南，乞降使宣慰，从之。
现代文：太和公主派遣使臣入朝，说乌介自称可汗，请求对他进行册封，因为刚刚来到大漠以南，请派遣使臣进行慰问，皇上允从。
English: The Empress Dowager sent an envoy to the Imperial Court, saying that Usuke claimed to be a khan, and requested that he be canonized, because he had just arrived south of the desert. Please send an envoy to offer condolences, and the Emperor agreed.

古文：十二月，中书门下奏修实录体例： 旧录有载禁中之言。
现代文：十二月，中书门下省奏明修撰实录的体例 ：原有的实录中载有宫禁中的言论。
English: In December, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) issued a request to the author to revise the style of the transcript: the original transcript contained remarks made during the imperial ban.

古文：伏以君上与宰臣、公卿言事，皆须众所闻见，方可书于史册。
现代文：皇帝和宰臣、公卿大员谈论事情，都必须是众人所听见的，才可以书写在史册上。
English: When the emperor and his vassals and nobles talked about things, it had to be heard by many people before it could be recorded in the history books.

古文：且禁中之语，在外何知，或得之传闻，多涉于浮妄，便形史笔，实累鸿猷。
现代文：再说宫禁中的话，外面如何得知，有的是从传闻中得到的，大多涉及虚浮妄想的事，随意地形诸于史笔，实在有累于宏伟的谋略。
English: Furthermore, in the case of the palace ban, how did the outside world know that some were obtained from hearsay, most of which involved false and delusional things, random topography was recorded in historical pens, and there was really a grand strategy.

古文：今后实录中如有此色，并请刊削。
现代文：今后实录中如果有这类内容，请全部删掉。
English: If there is any such content in future reports, please delete it completely.

古文：又宰臣与公卿论事，行与不行，须有明据。
现代文：又，宰臣与公卿谈论的事情，实行还是不实行，必须有明确的依据。
English: In addition, there must be a clear basis for whether or not the matters discussed by the Vice-Minister and the Kugyo will be implemented.

古文：或奏请允惬，必见褒称；或所论乖僻，因有惩责。
现代文：如果奏请之事公允而令皇上满意，必定会被褒奖称许；如果所论乖戾怪僻，定会因此而惩处责备。
English: If the petition is fair and satisfies the emperor, it will certainly be praised; if it is harsh and eccentric, it will certainly be punished and reproved.

古文：在籓镇上表，必有批答，居要官启事者，自有著明，并须昭然在人耳目。
现代文：藩镇的将帅奉上表章，皇上一定会有批示答复，居于要职的官员启奏事情，自然会著录明白，并须鲜明地留在人们的耳目中。
English: When a military commander of a province or town is presented with a badge, the emperor will certainly have a reply. When an official in an important position makes an announcement, it will naturally be recorded and understood, and must remain clearly in people's eyes and ears.

古文：或取扌舍存于堂案，或与夺形于诏敕，前代史书所载奏义，罔不由此。
现代文：或者朝堂的案卷中保存着对奏议的取舍，或者皇帝的诏令强行改变了奏疏的内容，前代的史书所记载的奏议，无不由此而保存下来。
English: Either the records of the Imperial Court preserved the selection of the report, or the Emperor's edict forcibly changed the content of the report. The reports recorded in the previous history books were all preserved as a result.

古文：近见实录多载密疏，言不彰于朝听，事不显于当时，得自其家，未足为信。
现代文：近来看到实录上载有许多秘密的奏疏，其言论既不彰明于朝堂的听闻，其事实也不显扬于当时，得自于他自己一家的东西，是不能够作为凭信的。
English: Recently, I have seen that there are many secret transcripts on the record. His remarks were not made known to the imperial court, and his facts were not revealed at the time. What was obtained from his own family cannot be relied upon.

古文：今后实录所载章奏，并须朝廷共知者，方得纪述，密疏并请不载。
现代文：从今以后实录上所记载的表章奏疏，都必须是朝廷所共知的，才能够记述，秘密的奏疏均请不必刊载。
English: From now on, the transcripts and transcripts of speeches recorded in the record must be known to the Imperial Court in order to be recorded. Please do not publish any secret transcripts.

古文：如此则理必可法，人皆向公，爱憎之志不行，褒贬之言必信。 
现代文：这样，则实录所表明的道理必定可以取法，人人都会心怀公正，个人爱憎的私情必然行不通，文章中褒贬的言论一定会取信于人。 
English: In this way, the truth expressed in the report can certainly be used, everyone will be fair-minded, personal feelings of love and hate will inevitably not work, and the praise and criticism in the article will certainly be trusted by people.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：李德裕奏改修《宪宗实录》所载吉甫不善之述，郑亚希旨削之。德裕更此条奏，以掩其迹。
现代文：李德裕奏请修改《宪宗实录》中所记载李吉甫不好的行为，郑亚希望皇上下旨删除，李德裕更提出这条奏议，以掩盖他的心迹。
English: Li Deyu requested to amend Li Jifu's bad behavior recorded in the "Constitutional Record." Zheng Ya hoped that the Emperor's order would be deleted. Li Deyu even proposed this petition to cover up his intentions.

古文：搢绅谤议，武宗颇知之。
现代文：官场中人对于李德裕的指责、议论，武宗颇知道一些。
English: People in the government know a lot about Li Deyu's criticisms and discussions.

古文：二年春正月丙申朔，以抚王纮为开府仪同三司、幽州大都督府长史，充幽州卢龙节度大使。
现代文：会昌二年春，正月初一，任命抚王李为开府仪同三司、幽州大都督府长史，充任幽州卢龙节度大使。
English: In the spring of the second year of Huichang, on the first day of the first month of the year, Fow Wang Li was appointed as the chief historian of the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony and the governor of Yuzhou, and served as the ambassador of the Yuzhou Lulong Festival.

古文：以雄武军使张绛检校左散骑常侍，兼幽州左司马，知两使留后，仍赐名仲武。
现代文：任命雄武军使张绛为检校左散骑常侍，兼任幽州左司马，执掌两节度使留后事务，并赐名为 仲武 。
English: He appointed Zhang Jun, the military envoy of Xiongwu, as the left rider of the inspection of the school, and also served as the left assistant of Yuzhou. He was in charge of the affairs of the two sections of the envoy, and was given the name Zhongwu.

古文：中书奏百官议九宫坛本大祠，请降为中祠。
现代文：中书省上奏百官的建议：九宫坛本为大祠，请降格为中祠。
English: China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy played up the suggestion of a hundred officials: the Jiugong Altar was originally a large ancestral hall, please downgrade it to a small ancestral hall.

古文：宰相崔珙、陈夷行奏定左右仆射上事仪注。
现代文：宰相崔珙、陈夷行奏请确定左、右仆射奏事的仪节。
English: Prime Minister Cui Rong and Premier Chen Yi, please determine the timing of the left and right servants' firing ceremony.

古文：二月丙寅，中书奏： 准元和七年敕，河东、凤翔、鄜坊、邠宁等道州县官，令户部加给课料钱岁六万二千五百贯。
现代文：二月初一，中书省上奏说： 今后依据元和七年的敕令，河东、凤翔、坊、宁等道的州县官，命户部加给津贴钱，每年共六万二千五百贯。
English: On the first day of February, the report of the General Office of the Ministry of Education and Culture said: In the future, according to the imperial decrees of the Yuan Dynasty and the last seven years, the prefectural and county officials of Hedong, Fengxiang, Fang, Ning and other provinces will order the household department to add allowance money, with a total of 62,500 yuan per year.

古文：吏部出得平留官数百员，时以为当。
现代文：吏部除去平留官数百人，当时人们认为很恰当。
English: At that time, it was considered appropriate for the Ministry of Personnel to remove hundreds of non-commissioned officers.

古文：自后户部支给零碎不时，观察使乃别将破用，徒有加给，不及官人，所以选人惮远，不乐注受。
现代文：自此以后，户部发给的津贴零零碎碎，而且不及时，各道观察使便将此钱分剖作为别用，加给津贴钱徒有虚名，不能落实到官员们身上，因此受到铨选的人害怕去远地，不乐于接受任命。
English: Since then, the allowances issued by the Ministry of Households have been piecemeal and untimely, and various observations have led to the separation of this money as a special use. The money added to the allowance is only fictitious and cannot be implemented on officials. Therefore, the people who have been selected are afraid to go far away and are not willing to accept the appointment.

古文：伏望令部都与实物，及时支遣。
现代文：希望皇上令户部给予实物，及时交付。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will order the household department to give the goods in kind and deliver them in time.

古文：诸道委观察判官知给受，专判此案，随月支给，年终计帐申户部。
现代文：各道委派判官执掌收受，专门掌管此事，按月付给，年终时统计账目申报户部。
English: Each provincial committee will assign a judge to be in charge of receiving and receiving, specifically in charge of this matter, paid on a monthly basis, and at the end of the year, the statistical accounts will be declared to the account department.

古文：又赴选官人多京债，到任填还，致其贪求，罔不由此。
现代文：又，前去铨选的官员，在京均负有高利贷债务，到任之后再填还，以致官员们贪赃求财，没有不是经由这个途径的。
English: In addition, the officials who went to the election all had usurious debts in Beijing, which they had to repay after taking office, so that the officials were greedy for money, and none of them did not go through this way.

古文：今年三铨，于前件州府得官者，许连状相保，户部各借两月加给料钱，至支时折下。
现代文：今年三次铨选官员，凡是在前任州府中获得官职的，允许连名具状互相担保，户部各借给他们两个月的津贴钱，到支取的时候再扣下。
English: For the third time this year, all the elected officials who were appointed in the previous state capitals were allowed to jointly and severally guarantee each other's certificates. The Ministry of Households each lent them two months' allowance money, and then deducted it when it was withdrawn.

古文：所冀初官到任，不带息债，衣食稍足，可责清廉。 
现代文：所希望的是初次到任的官员，不负有高利贷的债务，衣食稍许丰足，可以求得清正廉洁。 
English: What is hoped for is that the officials who come to office for the first time, do not bear the debt of usury, have enough food and clothing, and can be honest and clean.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：太子太师致仕萧俯卒。
现代文：离任退休的太子太师萧亻免去世。
English: Retired Prince and Grandmaster Xiao Yuanzhong passed away.

古文：牂柯、南诏蛮遣使入朝。
现代文：柯、南诏蛮派遣使臣入朝。
English: Ke and Nanzhao sent envoys to the imperial court.

古文：三月，遣使册回纥乌介可汗。
现代文：三月，派遣使臣册封回纥的乌介可汗。
English: In March, he dispatched an envoy to seal the return of Ushie Khan.

古文：以振武麟胜节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射、单于大都护、兼御史大夫、彭城郡开国公、食邑二千户刘沔可检校右仆射，兼太原尹、北京留守。充河东节度、管内观察处置等使，代苻澈。
现代文：任命振武、麟胜节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射、单于大都护、兼职御史大夫、彭城郡开国公、食邑二千户刘沔担任检校右仆射，兼太原尹、北京留守，充任河东节度使、辖区内州郡观察处置使，以代替苻澈。
English: He appointed Zhenwu, Lin Sheng, the festival delegate, Yin Qingguanglu, the inspector of the school, Shang Shu, the deputy inspector of the school, Shan Yu Daduo, the part-time superintendent of history, Pengcheng County, the founding father of the country, and Liu Wei, who served as the deputy inspector of the school, as well as Taiyuan Yin, who stayed in Beijing and served as the festival delegate of Hedong and the observation and disposal delegate of the county in the jurisdiction, to replace Zou Jie.

古文：时回纥在天德，命沔以太原之师讨之。
现代文：当时回纥部在天德城，皇上命刘沔率领太原的军队讨伐他们。
English: At that time, the Hui were in Tiantecheng, and the emperor ordered Liu Bei to lead the Taiyuan army to fight them.

古文：四月乙丑朔，光禄大夫、守司空、兼门下侍郎、平章事李德裕，银青光禄大夫、守右仆射、门下侍郎、平章事崔珙，银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事李绅，金紫光禄大夫、检校司徒、兼太子太保牛僧孺等上章，请加尊号曰仁圣文武至神大孝皇帝。
现代文：四月初一，光禄大夫、署理司空、兼门下侍郎、平章政事李德裕，银青光禄大夫、署理右仆射、门下侍郎、平章政事崔珙，银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事李绅，金紫光禄大夫、检校司徒、兼太子太保牛僧孺等奉上表章，请求皇上加尊号为 仁圣文武至神大孝皇帝 。
English: On the first day of April, Dr. Guanglu, Acting Secretary Kuang, and his attendant, Pingzhang's political secretary Li Deyu, Dr. Yinqing Guanglu, Acting Right Footman, and his attendant, Pingzhang's political secretary Cui Jie, Dr. Yinqing Guanglu, and his attendant, Zhongshu, and his attendant, Tongping's political officer Li Sheng, and his attendant, Jinzhuanglu, and his attendant at the school inspection, and his attendant, Taibo Niu, and his attendant, requested that the emperor be given the honorific title of "Ren Shengwenwu,

古文：戊寅，御宣政殿受册。
现代文：四月十四日，皇上驾临宣政殿接受册命。
English: On April 14th, the Emperor arrived at the Imperial Palace to receive his investiture.

古文：是月九日雨，至十四日转甚，乃改用二十三日。
现代文：当月九日下雨，到十四日转为大雨，便改用二十三日为接受册命的日期。
English: It rained on the 9th of that month and turned into heavy rain on the 14th, so the 23rd was used as the date to accept the appointment.

古文：时有纤人告中尉仇士良，言宰相作赦书，欲减削禁军衣粮马草料。
现代文：当时有个小人告诉右军中尉仇士良，说宰相作赦书，打算削减禁军的衣粮和马匹的草料钱。
English: At that time, a villain told Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang of the Right Army that the prime minister had issued a pardon and intended to reduce the cost of clothing, grain and hay for horses of the forbidden army.

古文：士良怒曰： 必若有此，军人须至楼前作闹。 
现代文：仇士良发怒说： 如果一定要这样做，军人必然会到楼前闹事的。 
English: Qiu Shiliang said angrily, "If we have to do this, soldiers will inevitably come to the front of the building to cause trouble."

古文：宰相李德裕等知之，请开延英诉其事。
现代文：宰相李德裕等知道了这件事，请皇上开启延英殿向他申诉这件事。
English: When Prime Minister Li Deyu learned of this, he asked the emperor to open the Yan Ying Palace to appeal to him.

古文：帝曰： 奸人之词也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这是奸人说的话。 
English: The emperor said, "These are the words of an impostor.

古文：召两军中尉谕之曰： 赦书出自朕意，不由宰相，况未施行，公等安得此言？ 
现代文：便召来两军中尉，告诉他们说： 赦书出自朕的意图，不是由宰相提出的，何况还没有施行，你们从哪里得到这样的话。 
English: He then summoned the two army lieutenants and told them: "The pardon came from my intention, it was not proposed by the prime minister, and it has not been implemented. Where did you get such a statement?

古文：士良惶恐谢之。
现代文：仇士良惶恐地向皇帝谢罪。
English: The enemy soldier bowed to the emperor in fear.

古文：是日晴霁。
现代文：这天雨住天晴。
English: On this day, it rained and rained.

古文：中书奏： 元日御含元殿，百官就列，唯宰相及两省官皆未开扇前立于栏槛之内，及扇开，便侍立于御前。
现代文：中书省上奏说 ：每年正月初一皇上临幸含元殿，百官大臣都进入班列，只有宰相及中书门下两省的官员，在皇帝没有来到之前都站在栏杆之内，待掌扇分列，皇帝驾临，便侍立在皇帝面前。
English: "Every year, on the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor comes to the Imperial Palace, including the Yuan Dynasty, and hundreds of officials and ministers enter the procession. Only the prime minister and the officials of the two provinces under the Chinese Academy of Sciences stand within the railing before the emperor arrives, waiting for the palms to be separated, and then stand in front of the emperor when the emperor arrives.

古文：三朝大庆，万邦称贺，唯宰相侍臣同介胄武夫，竟不拜至尊而退，酌于礼意，事未得中。
现代文：正月初一这三朝大庆典，万邦都称颂拜贺，惟有宰相侍臣和身穿甲胄的武士，竟不向皇帝下拜就退朝，斟酌礼仪的含义，事情不够恰当。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the great celebration of the three dynasties, all nations praised the worship, but only the prime minister's attendants and armor-clad warriors actually withdrew without bowing to the emperor. Considering the meaning of etiquette, the matter is not appropriate.

古文：臣等请御殿日昧爽，宰相、两省官斗班于香案前，俟扇开，通事赞两省官再拜，拜讫，升殿侍立。 
现代文：臣等请求皇上临幸含元殿之日的黎明时，宰相和中书门下两省的官员在香案前分左右两班站立，待掌扇分列两边，皇帝驾到，礼仪官两次赞唱，两省官员叩拜，叩拜完毕，再登上殿阶侍立在皇帝面前。 
English: At the dawn of the day when the ministers requested the emperor to visit the Yuan dynasty, the prime minister and the officials of the two provinces under the Chinese government stood in two groups in front of the incense case, waiting for the palms to be lined up on both sides, the emperor arrived, the etiquette officer sang twice, the officials of the two provinces worshiped, and after the worship, they ascended the palace steps and stood in front of the emperor.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：天德奏，回纥族帐侵扰部内。
现代文：天德城上奏，回鹘部族侵扰境内的地方。
English: Tiantecheng is played at the top, and the place where the Uighur tribe invades the territory is played at the bottom.

古文：敕： 劝课种桑，比有敕命，如能增数，每岁申闻。
现代文：敕令： 劝勉种田织帛以交纳赋税，已屡屡下达敕令，如能增加赋税的数量，每年均得申报奏闻。
English: Executive Order: A number of executive orders have been issued to encourage farmers to pay taxes. If the amount of taxes can be increased, it must be reported every year.

古文：比知并无遵行，恣加翦伐，列于鄽市，卖作薪蒸。
现代文：近日得知敕令并未得到遵守实行，只是任意砍伐山林，摆列在市场上，卖作柴薪。
English: Recently, it was learned that the imperial edict had not been complied with and implemented, but that the mountains and forests had been arbitrarily cut down and placed on the market to be sold as firewood.

古文：自今州县甩由，切宜禁断。 
现代文：从今以后州县的主管官员，必须对此禁绝。 
English: From now on, officials in charge of prefectures and counties must forbid this.

古文：五月，敕庆阳节百官率醵外，别赐钱三百贯，以备素食合宴，仍令京兆府供帐，不用追集坊市乐人。
现代文：五月，敕令皇上的生辰庆阳节除了百官凑钱饮宴之外，另外赐钱三百贯，以准备用素食聚会宴请群臣，并令京兆府供应所需物品，不必求取、聚集坊市中的乐工。
English: In May, for the Emperor's birthday, the Qingyang Festival, in addition to the hundreds of officials who pooled their money for the banquet, he also gave another 300 yuan to prepare a vegetarian banquet for the courtiers, and ordered the Jingzhao Prefecture to supply the necessary items, without having to ask for them, and to gather the musicians in the city.

古文：天德军使田牟奏：回纥大将嗢没斯与多览将军将吏二千六百人请降，遣中人赍诏慰劳之。
现代文：天德军使田牟上奏说 ：回纥大将没斯与多览将军的将吏二千六百人请求归降。 派遣宦官携带诏书前去慰劳他们。
English: Tian Mou, the envoy of the Heavenly German Army, said, "Two thousand six hundred officers and men of General Hui Xuan and General Duan Xuan have requested to surrender; send eunuchs to comfort them with the edict."

古文：宰相李德裕兼守司徒。
现代文：宰相李德裕兼守司徒。
English: Prime Minister Lee De-yu and Governor Sito.

古文：太子太师致仕郑覃卒。
现代文：退休离任的太子太师郑覃去世。
English: Retired Crown Prince Zheng Jun passed away.

古文：六月甲子朔，火星犯木。
现代文：六月初一，火星干犯木星。
English: On the first day of June, Mars attacks Jupiter.

古文：丙寅，太白犯东井。
现代文：六月初三，太白金星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, the star Venus is too bright to commit a crime.

古文：回纥降将嗢没斯将吏二千六百余人至京师。
现代文：回鹘的降将没斯率领将吏二千六百多人抵达京师。
English: More than 2,600 people arrived at the Beijing Division, led by the commander-in-chief Meng Si.

古文：制以嗢没斯检校工部尚书，充归义军使，封怀化郡王，仍赐姓名曰李思忠；以回纥宰相受耶勿为归义军副使、检校右散骑常侍，赐姓名曰李弘顺。
现代文：决定任命没斯为检校工部尚书，充任归义军使，封为怀化郡王，并赐姓名为 李思忠 ；任命回鹘宰相受耶勿为归义军副使、检校右散骑常侍，赐姓名为 李弘顺 。
English: It was decided to appoint Meng Si as the vice-minister of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection department of the inspection.

古文：七月，岚州人田满川据郡叛，刘沔诛之。
现代文：七月，岚州人田满川占据郡城叛乱，刘沔将其处死。
English: In July, Tianmanchuan, a resident of Zhangzhou, occupied the county seat in a rebellion, and Liu Bei executed him.

古文：八月，回纥乌介可汗过天德，至杷头烽北，俘掠云、朔北川，诏刘沔出师守雁门诸关。
现代文：八月，回鹘的乌介可汗经过天德军，抵达杷头烽的北面，抢掠云州、朔州北川一带，皇上下诏，令刘沔出兵防守雁门关等关隘。
English: In August, Ujie Khan, who had returned to Yunnan, passed through the German army and arrived at the north side of Shantou. He plundered Yunnan and Shuozhou Beichuan areas, and ordered Liu Bei to send troops to defend Yanmen Pass and other passes.

古文：回纥首领屈武降幽州，授左武卫将军同正。
现代文：回鹘的首领屈武投降幽州，授予他左武卫将军同正之职。
English: The leader of the Uighurs, Qu Wu, surrendered to Yuzhou and was awarded the post of General Zuo Wei.

古文：诏以回纥犯边，渐浸内地，或攻或守，于理何安？令少师牛僧孺、陈夷行与公卿集议可否以闻。
现代文：皇上下诏，回鹘进犯边境并逐渐侵入内地，对他们是进攻还是防守，怎样才算是合理办法，令太子少师牛僧孺、陈夷行与公卿大臣们集体商议可否实行，以奏闻皇帝。
English: When the emperor issued the edict that the Uighurs had invaded the border and were gradually penetrating the inland, and whether they should be attacked or defended, what would be a reasonable method? He ordered the young princes, Niu Sang Hui and Chen Yixing, and the noble ministers to collectively discuss whether or not to implement the edict and report to the emperor.

古文：僧孺曰： 今百僚议状，以固守关防，伺其可击则用兵。 
现代文：牛僧孺说 ：现在百官分析情况，认为固守关隘防地，等待可以进击敌军的时候再用兵为妥。 
English: Niu Sengyu said: Now, hundreds of officials have analyzed the situation and believe that it is appropriate to stick to the narrow defenses and wait until it is possible to attack the enemy.

古文：宰相李德裕议： 以回匕所恃者嗢没、赤心耳，今已离叛，其强弱之势可见。
现代文：宰相李德裕认为 ：因为回鹘所倚仗的不过是没斯、赤心罢了，现在他们已经叛离回鹘，其前后强弱不同的形势已很明显。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu believed that: because the Uighurs relied on nothing but their own strength and determination, now that they have betrayed the Uighurs, the situation of their different strengths and weaknesses has become obvious.

古文：戎人犷悍，不顾成败，以失二将，乘忿入侵，出师急击，破之必矣。
现代文：戎人粗犷凶悍，不顾及成败的后果，因为失去了两员大将，乘着一时的气愤而入侵内地，出兵快速进攻，一定会击败敌军。
English: The envoys were rude and fierce, and did not care about the consequences of success or failure. Because they lost two generals, they took advantage of their momentary anger to invade the mainland, dispatched troops for a quick attack, and would surely defeat the enemy army.

古文：守险示弱，虏无由退。
现代文：防守险要只表现出力弱，敌人不会认为自己有退兵的理由。
English: If the defense insurance only shows a weak output, the enemy will not think that they have a reason to withdraw.

古文：击之为便。 
现代文：进攻敌人较为有利。 
English: It is more advantageous to attack the enemy from behind.

古文：天子以为然。
现代文：皇帝认为这话很对。
English: The emperor thought this was quite right.

古文：乃征发许、蔡、汴、滑等六镇之师，以太原节度使刘沔为回纥南面招讨使；以张仲武为幽州卢龙节度使、检校工部尚书，封兰陵郡王，充回纥东面招讨使；以李思忠为河西党项都将，回纥西南面招讨使：皆会军于太原。制以皇子岘为益王，岐为兗王，皇长女为昌乐公主，第二女为寿春公主，第三女永宁公主。
现代文：便征派许州、蔡州、汴州、滑州等六个军镇的军队，任命太原节度使刘沔为回鹘南面招讨使；任命张仲武为幽州、卢龙节度使、检校工部尚书，封为兰陵郡王，充任回鹘东面招讨使：各军均在太原会师。决定封皇子李岘为益王，李岐为兖王，皇长女封为昌乐公主，第二女封为寿春公主，第三女封为永宁公主。
English: The troops of six military towns including Xuzhou, Caizhou, Zhangzhou, and Nanzhou were conscripted and dispatched, and the Taiyuan Festival was appointed to make Liu Ye the envoy to the southern side of Uighur; Zhang Zhongwu was appointed to be the envoy to Yuzhou, Lulong Festival was appointed to be the envoy to the southern side of Uighur, Shang Shu of the inspection and inspection department was appointed to be the king of Lanling County and to be the envoy to the eastern side of Uighur: all the troops were in the Taiyuan Division. It was decided to make the prince Li Qian the king of Y

古文：上御麟德殿，见室韦首领督热论等十五人。
现代文：皇上驾临麟德殿，接见室韦部族的首领督热论等十五人。
English: The emperor arrived at the Linder Hall to meet with fifteen people, including the leader of the Murowe tribe, Dudu Zeon.

古文：太原奏回纥移帐近南四十里，索叛将嗢没斯，日昨至横水俘虏，兼公主上表言食尽，乞赐牛羊事。
现代文：太原方面上奏说，回鹘向南面迁移帐幕接近四十里，索取叛将没斯，昨日到横水抢掠人口财物，并奏公主上表说食物已尽，请求赐给牛羊等事。
English: The Taiyuan side reported that the Uighurs had moved the tent to the south for nearly forty miles, demanded that there be no traitors, went to Hengshui yesterday to loot people and property, and reported to the princess that the food had run out and asked for cattle and sheep.

古文：赐乌介诏曰：
现代文：皇上赐给乌介的诏书说：
English: The imperial edict given to Ushuke by the emperor said:

古文：朕自临寰区，为人父母，唯好生为德，不愿黩武为名。
现代文： 朕自从登上统治国家的帝位，作为百姓的父母，只是以爱护生灵作为德性，不愿意得到好战黩武的名声。
English: Since I ascended the throne of the ruling country, as the parents of the people, I have only cared for living beings as a virtue, and I do not want to get the reputation of being belligerent.

古文：故自彼国不幸为黠戛斯所破，来投边境，已历岁年，抚纳之间，无此不到。
现代文：因此，自从你们的国家被黠斯部族所攻破，前来投奔朕的边境，已经过了好几年了，在安抚接纳你们期间，给予了你们无所不至的帮助。
English: Therefore, it has been several years since your country was invaded by the Xiongnu, who came to our borders and gave you every assistance during your pacification.

古文：初则念其饥歉，给以粮储；旋则知其破伤，尽还马价。
现代文：开始时想到你们饥饿缺粮，给你们以粮食储存；接着知道你们的国家破灭毁伤，把马价钱尽数还给你们。
English: At first I remembered your famines and your lack of grain, and I stored up grain for you; then, when I learned that your country was ruined and destroyed, I returned to you the full amount of the price of the horses.

古文：前后遣使劳问，交驰道途。
现代文：先后多次派遣使臣进行慰问，他们交相奔驰在路途上。
English: Envoys were repeatedly sent to offer condolences, and they passed each other on the way.

古文：小小侵扰，亦尽不计。
现代文：对朕的疆土进行小小的侵犯骚扰，也全都不予计较。
English: Even small encroachments and harassment on our territory are completely disregarded.

古文：今可汗尚此近塞，未议还蕃。
现代文：如今可汗据有着这靠近边塞的地方，不商量返回蕃地的事。
English: Today, the khan owns this place near the border fort and does not discuss returning to the ploughed land.

古文：朝廷大臣，四方节镇，皆怀疑忿，尽请兴师，虽朕切务含弘，亦所未谕。
现代文：朝廷的大臣，四方的节镇，都胸怀疑惑、愤怒，尽都请求起兵讨伐，即令朕极力做到胸怀宽大，也是他们所不能理解的。
English: The ministers of the imperial court, the towns of the four directions, were all suspicious, bewildered and angry, and all asked for an army to fight. Even if I tried my best to be broad-minded, they could not understand it.

古文：一昨数使回来。皆言可汗只待马价，及令付之次，又闻所止屡迁，或侵掠云、朔等州，或劫夺羌、浑诸部，未知此意，终欲如何？
现代文：前些时候，几个使臣回来，都说可汗只等着要马价钱，待令人交付的时候，又听说停留的地方屡次迁移，你们有时候去侵夺云州、朔州，有时候去抢劫羌、浑各部，不知道你们的意图，终究想要怎么样？
English: Some time ago, several envoys came back and said that the Khan was only waiting to ask for the price of the horse, to be delivered. They also heard that the place of stay was repeatedly moved. Sometimes you went to invade Yunnan and Shuozhou, sometimes to rob Yunnan and Hunan provinces. I don't know your intentions. What do you want in the end?

古文：若以未交马价，须近塞垣，行止之间，亦宜先告边将。
现代文：如果是因为没有把马价钱交付给你们，必须靠近边塞，则当有所举动的时候，也应当事先告知边将。
English: If you have to be close to the border because the horse price has not been delivered to you, you should also inform the border guard in advance when there is any action.

古文：岂有倏来忽往，迁徙不常。
现代文：怎能够忽来忽往，不合常情地迁徙。
English: How is it possible to move back and forth, to migrate erratically?

古文：虽云随逐水草，动皆逼近城栅。
现代文：虽然嘴里说是逐水草而居，而行动上都是逼近城垣栅寨。
English: Although they say that they live by the water and the grass, their actions are always close to the city walls and fences.

古文：遥揣深意，似恃姻好之情；每睹踪由，实为弛突之计。
现代文：遥遥地捉摸你们内心的意图，似乎是依仗着两国结为姻亲的交情；每次观察你们行踪的目的，实际上是为了实行驰马突击的计谋。
English: It seems to rely on the affinity between the two countries, which are like in-laws, to fathom your inner intentions from afar; the purpose of every observation of your whereabouts is actually to carry out the strategy of horse-riding assault.

古文：况到横水栅下，杀戮至多。
现代文：何况在横水栅下，你们杀戮的人极多。
English: Besides, you killed a lot of people under the sluice gate.

古文：蕃、浑牛羊，岂吝驰掠；黎庶何罪，皆被伤夷。
现代文：吐蕃、吐谷浑的牛羊，难道会吝惜你们驰驱抢掠；而黎民百姓又有什么罪过，竟都遭到伤害死亡。
English: Would the cattle and sheep of Tubo and Tuboghoun begrudge you riding out to pillage and plunder? And what was the sin of the Liren people, that they were all injured and killed?

古文：所以中朝大臣皆云： 回纥近塞，已是违盟；更戮边人，实背大义。 
现代文：所以朝内的大臣们都说： 回鹘逼近边塞，已经算是违背了盟约；更加上杀戮边民，的确是违背了大义。 
English: Therefore, the ministers of the imperial court all said, "It is already considered to be a violation of the treaty for the Uighurs to approach the border fortress; it is indeed a violation of justice to kill the border people even more.

古文：咸愿因此翦逐，以雪殂谢之冤。
现代文：都希望借此机会驱逐、消灭你们，以昭雪那死亡、萎谢的冤魂。
English: They all hope to take advantage of this opportunity to expel and destroy you, to shed light on the dead, withered ghosts.

古文：然朕志在怀柔，情深屈己，宁可汗之负德，终未忍于幸灾。
现代文：然而朕的志向在于使外族归附而安定，情怀的深厚在于愿意委屈自己，宁可可汗负德于朕，终究不忍心对人幸灾乐祸。
English: However, my aspiration is to make foreigners adhere and be stable, and the depth of my feelings is that I am willing to be wronged, I would rather be a traitor to myself, and after all, I can't bear to gloat over others.

古文：石戒直久在京城，备知人实愤惋，发于诚恳。固请自行。
现代文：石戒直长期留在京城，完全知道人们确实愤慨、惋惜，出自于诚恳，坚决请求自行离去。
English: Shi Jiazhong stayed in Beijing for a long time, fully aware that people were indeed indignant, regretful, sincere, and resolutely requested to leave on their own.

古文：嘉其深见事机，不能违阻。
现代文：嘉许他深刻地看到了事情的机变，不能够违背、阻止他。
English: He is to be commended for his profound insight into the dynamics of the situation, and for not being able to resist or stop him.

古文：可汗审自问遂，速择良图，无至不悛，以贻后悔。
现代文：可汗应仔细地询问明白，迅速选择正确的对策，不要怙恶不悛，以留下后悔。 
English: Khan should carefully inquire clearly, quickly choose the right countermeasures, do not indulge in bad habits, so as to leave regrets.

古文：诏太原起室韦沙陀三部落、吐浑诸部，委石雄为前锋。
现代文：皇上诏令太原发动室韦、沙陀的三个部落、吐谷浑各部，委派石雄为前锋。
English: The emperor issued a decree to Taiyuan to mobilize the three tribes of Shuwae and Shado, as well as the provinces of Tugu and Hun, and appointed Shi Xiong as the vanguard.

古文：易定兵千人守大同军，契苾通、何清朝领沙陀、吐浑六千骑趋天德，李思忠率回纥、党项之师屯保大栅。
现代文：易定州的一千名士兵镇守大同军，契艹必通、何清朝率领沙陀、吐谷浑的六千名骑兵前往天德军，李思忠率领回鹘、党项的军队驻守在保大栅。
English: One thousand soldiers from Yidingzhou garrisoned the Datong Army, six thousand cavalrymen led by Qi Bingtong, He Qingdang, Shatou, and Tu Guhun went to the Tiande Army, Li Sizhong led the troops back to Kunming, and the troops of the Party Items were stationed in Baodasi.

古文：十月，吐蕃赞普卒，遣使论普热入朝告哀，诏将作少监李璟入蕃吊祭。
现代文：十月，吐蕃的赞普去世，派使臣论普热入朝报告凶信，诏令将作少监李王景前往吐蕃吊祭。
English: In October, Zampu of Tubo died, and he sent an envoy to report the grim news to the emperor about the arrival of Pu Ze in the imperial court. Li Wangjing, a young prisoner, was ordered to go to Tubo for the hanging ceremony.

古文：帝幸泾阳，校猎白鹿原。
现代文：皇帝抵达泾阳，在白鹿原围猎。
English: The emperor arrived in Fenyang and went hunting in Bailuyuan.

古文：谏议大夫高少逸、郑朗等于阁内论： 陛下校猎太频，出城稍远，万机废驰，星出夜归，方今用兵，且宜停止。 
现代文：谏议大夫高少逸、郑朗等人在殿阁上说 ：陛下围猎过于频繁，出城稍远，各种事务就会废弃、松弛，天未明就动身，深夜才返回，如今正在打仗用兵，应当停止围猎。 
English: In the hall of the palace, the doctors Gao Shaoyi, Zheng Lang and others said: His Majesty's hunting is too frequent. If you go out of the city a little further, all kinds of affairs will be abandoned and slack. You leave at dawn and return late at night. Now you are fighting with soldiers. You should stop the hunting.

古文：上优劳之。
现代文：皇上从优奖励了他们。
English: Emperor Zongyou rewarded them.

古文：谏官出，谓宰相曰： 谏官甚要，朕时闻其言，庶几减过。 
现代文：谏官退出之后，皇上对宰相说： 谏官非常重要，朕时时听到他们的建议，过失大概已减少了。 
English: After the eunuchs left, the emperor said to the prime minister, "The eunuchs are very important. I always listen to their advice, and my mistakes have probably decreased."

古文：三年春正月，以宿师于野，罢元会。
现代文：会昌三年春，正月，因为军队打仗还露宿在野外，停止元旦的朝会。
English: Huichang in the spring of the third year, the first month, because the army was still camping in the field, the New Year's Day morning meeting was stopped.

古文：敕新授银州刺史、本州押蕃落、银川监牧使何清朝可检校太子宾客、左龙武大将军，令分领沙陀、吐浑、党项之众赴振武，取刘沔处分。
现代文：敕令新授任的银州刺史、本州押蕃落、银川监牧使何清朝仍任检校太子宾客、左龙武大将军，令其分掌沙陀、吐谷浑、党项的部众前往振武，取代刘沔处理军务。
English: He ordered the newly appointed Yinzhou chief historian, Honshu overseer, and Yinchuan overseer, He Qing, who was still the prince guest of the inspection, and General Zalongwu, to send his subordinates from Shadu, Tugu, and the party to Zhenwu to replace Liu Bei to deal with military affairs.

古文：二月，先诏百官之家不得于京城置私庙者，其皇城南向六坊不得置，其闲僻坊曲即许依旧置。
现代文：二月，先前诏令百官的家族不得在京城中设置私家祠庙的规定，其中皇城南面的六坊不得设置，那些偏僻的坊曲中依旧允许设置。
English: In February, the families of officials were forbidden from setting up private ancestral temples in the capital, among which the six temples in the south of the imperial city were not allowed to be set up, but those in the outlying villages were still allowed to be set up.

古文：太原刘沔奏： 昨率诸道之师至大同军，遣石雄袭回鹘牙帐，雄大败回鹘于杀胡山，乌介可汗被创而走。
现代文：太原刘沔上奏说 ：不久前率领各道的军队抵达大同军，派石雄袭击回鹘的主帅衙帐，石雄在杀胡山将回鹘军打得大败，乌介可汗受伤而逃走。
English: Taiyuan Liu Ye's report said: Not long ago, he led the troops of various provinces to arrive at Datong Army, and sent Shi Xiong to attack the commander of the Uighurs. Shi Xiong defeated the Uighurs in the Battle of Hu Mountain, and Wuchai Khan was injured and fled.

古文：已迎得太和公主至云州。 
现代文：已将太和公主迎接到云州。 
English: He has already welcomed the Queen Mother and the Princess to Yunnan.

古文：是日，御宣政殿，百僚称贺。
现代文：当天，皇上驾临宣政殿，百官向皇上道贺。
English: On the same day, the Emperor arrived at the Imperial Palace, and hundreds of officials came to congratulate the Emperor.

古文：制曰：
现代文：皇上下制令说：
English: The release said:

古文：夫天之所废，难施继绝之恩；人之所弃，当用侮亡之道。
现代文： 皇天所废除的，难以让他延续其断绝的恩惠；人世所抛弃的，必定是因为其轻慢无状的处世之道。
English: What the emperor abolished, it is difficult for him to continue his severed grace; what the world abandoned, must be because of his careless way of life.

古文：朕每思前训，岂忘格言。
现代文：朕每想到前人的教训，怎能忘记这格言。
English: How can I forget this maxim when I think of the lessons of my predecessors?

古文：回鹘比者自恃兵强，久为桀骜，凌虐诸部，结怨近邻。
现代文：近来回鹘自己以为军队强大，长期桀骜凶悍，欺凌、虐害各部族，结怨于近邻。
English: Recently, they have been thinking that their army is strong, but for a long time they have been fierce, bullying and abusing various tribes, and harboring grudges against their neighbors.

古文：黠戛斯潜师彗扫，穹居瓦解，种族尽膏于原野，区落遂至于荆榛。
现代文：黠斯部秘密发兵当初犹如彗星横扫天际，而后却穹庐瓦解，种族尽都涂膏于原野之上，居住的地方便成为满目荆榛。
English: The secret dispatch of troops by the Ministry of Education and Culture initially swept across the sky like a comet, but then the dome collapsed, the races were all smeared on the field, and the place where they lived became full of thorns and thistles.

古文：今可汗逃走失国，窃号自立，远逾沙漠，寄命边陲。
现代文：如今可汗逃走而失去国土，窃据尊号以自立，远远地越过沙漠，将命运寄托在边陲。
English: Now the khan fled and lost his land, stole the honorific to become independent, far across the desert, and pinned his fate on the borderlands.

古文：朕念其衰残，寻加赈飖。
现代文：朕念及他的衰落残破，立即加以救济、抚恤。
English: I thought about his decline and ruin, and immediately gave him relief and a pension.

古文：每陈章表，多诈谀之词；接我使臣，如全盛之日。
现代文：而他每次陈奏表章，总有许多欺诈奉承的话；接待我的使臣，就像还处在全盛之日一样。
English: And every time he wears a badge, there is always a lot of false flattery; he receives my envoys as if he were still in his prime.

古文：无伤禽哀鸣之意，有因兽犹斗之心。
现代文：没有受伤禽鸟的哀鸣之意，倒有困兽犹斗之心。
English: There is no sense of the plaintive cry of a wounded bird, but there is the fighting spirit of a trapped animal.

古文：去岁潜入朔川，大掠牛马；今春掩袭振武，逼近城池。
现代文：去年暗中潜入朔川一带，大肆劫掠牛马；今春又偷偷袭击振武地区，逼近城池。
English: Last year, they secretly sneaked into the Shuo River area and plundered cattle and horses; this spring, they secretly attacked the Zhenwu area and approached the city.

古文：可汗皆自率兵，首为寇盗，不耻破败，莫顾姻亲。
现代文：每次可汗都亲自领兵，带头作盗寇，不以失败为耻，也不顾两国是姻亲。
English: Each time, the khan personally led the troops, took the lead in robberies, and was not ashamed of failure, regardless of the fact that the two countries were relatives by marriage.

古文：河东节度使刘沔料敌伐谋，乘机制胜，发胡貉之骑以为前锋，搴翎侯之旗伐彼在穴。
现代文：河东节度使刘沔揣度敌人，从谋略上打击对方，抓住机遇以获取胜利，派出胡族的骑兵作为前锋，攻到敌方的巢穴拔取敌帅的大旗。
English: The Hedong Festival made Liu Bei think about the enemy, strike the other side from the strategy, seize the opportunity to win, send the Hu cavalry as a striker, attack the enemy's lair and pull out the enemy's flag.

古文：短兵鏖于帐下，元恶抶于彀中。
现代文：在军帐下短兵相接地鏖战，元凶巨将被俘获而受到惩罚。
English: Under the military account, the short soldiers will fight against each other, and the main villain will be captured and punished.

古文：况乘匪六飞，众才一旅，储备已竭，计日可擒。
现代文：何况他们所乘坐的并不是六龙飞驾，部众只有一旅之师，储备的粮草已经枯竭，用不了多久就可擒获。
English: What's more, what they're riding on isn't a six-dragon flying chariot. The group only has one traveling teacher, and the grain and grass reserves have been depleted, so it won't take long to capture them.

古文：太和公主居处不同，情义久绝。
现代文：太和公主生活的地方不同于内地，感情恩义长久断绝。
English: The place where the princess and the princess live is different from the mainland, and the feelings of gratitude are cut off for a long time.

古文：怀土多思，亟闻黄鹄之歌；失位自伤，宁免《绿衣》之叹。
现代文：怀念家乡而愁思很多，迫切希望听到《黄鹄》之歌；丧失品位而自伤身世，怎能够避免《绿衣》的哀叹。
English: I miss my hometown and feel sad a lot, I desperately hope to hear the song of "Huang Qi"; how can I avoid the lament of "Green Coat" if I lose my taste and hurt myself?

古文：念其羁苦，常轸朕心。
现代文：想到她羁留异域的痛苦，常常使我心中悲痛。
English: The thought of her suffering in captivity in a foreign land has often filled my heart with sorrow.

古文：今已脱于豺狼，再见宫阙，上以摅宗庙之宿愤，次以慰太皇太后之深慈，永言归宁，良用欣感。
现代文：如今已经脱离豺狼，重新见到宫阙，首先可以抒发皇室的旧恨，其次可以宽慰太皇太后深厚的慈心，永久地回归家中，令人十分欣慰感动。
English: Now that she has been freed from the wolves and has seen the imperial concubine again, first of all, she can express the old hatred of the imperial family, and secondly, she can comfort the deep compassion of the great empress dowager and return home permanently, which is very gratifying and moving.

古文：其回纥既以破灭，义在翦除，宜令诸道兵马使同进讨。
现代文：那回鹘既然已经战败灭亡，重要的还在于剪除消灭，应当命令各道兵马使共同进军征讨。
English: At that time, since the Kuomintang had already been defeated and perished, what was important was to eradicate and exterminate it, and it was necessary to order the soldiers and horses of all sects to march together to conquer it.

古文：河东立功将士已下，优厚赏给，续条疏处分。
现代文：河东自将士以下的立功者，均给予优厚的奖赏，仍旧按照条例处置。
English: For meritorious service below the rank of general of the Eastern Military District, a generous reward will be given, and they will still be dealt with in accordance with the regulations.

古文：应在京外宅及东都修功德回纥，并勒冠带，各配诸道收管。
现代文：应在京师以外的地方以及东都修建征伐回鹘的功德碑，均刻上功臣的名字，各分配给诸道收管。
English: A monument to the merits of the conquest of Yunnan should be built in places other than Beijing and Dongdu, and the names of the heroes should be engraved, and each should be allocated to the provinces.

古文：其回纥及摩尼寺庄宅、钱物等，并委功德使与御史台及京兆府各差官点检收抽，不得容诸色人影占。
现代文：那些回鹘人及摩尼寺庙的庄屋、钱财物资等，均委派功德使和御史台，以及京兆府的各个差官清点收取，不得容许各种人隐匿占有。
English: The manor houses, money and materials of the Uighurs and the Mani Temple were all counted and collected by the Merit Messenger and the Historian's Office, as well as various police officers in Beijing and Shandong Province. All kinds of people should not be allowed to secretly occupy them.

古文：如犯者并处极法，钱物纳官。
现代文：如有违犯者均处以极刑，钱物交纳给官府。
English: If there are violators, they will all be sentenced to capital punishment, and the money and goods will be handed over to the government.

古文：摩尼寺僧委中书门下条疏闻奏。
现代文：摩尼寺僧侣的情况委托中书门下省逐条写明奏闻皇帝。 
English: The situation of the monks of the Mani Temple was entrusted to the provincial governor to write down the emperor's report.

古文：以麟州刺史、天德行营副使石雄为银青光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍、丰州刺史、御史大夫，充丰州西城中城都防御、本管押蕃落等使。
现代文：任命麟州刺史、天德军行营副使石雄为银青光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍、丰州刺史、御史大夫，充任丰州西城中城都防御使、本管区押蕃落使等。
English: He appointed Linzhou's chief historian and deputy commander of the Tiande Army, Shi Xiong, as the doctor of silver, blue and gold, the attendant of the left cavalry of the inspection of the school, the chief historian of Fengzhou and the chief historian, and served as the defense envoy of the west city of Fengzhou and the central city, and the overseer of the region.

古文：刘沔检校尚书左仆射，张仲武检校尚书右仆射，余并如故。
现代文：刘沔任检校尚书左仆射，张仲武任检校尚书右仆射，其余的仍旧和原来一样。
English: Liu Wei as the school inspector, Shang Shu as the left-hand man, Zhang Zhongwu as the school inspector, Shang Shu as the right-hand man, and the rest are still the same as before.

古文：黠戛斯使注吾合素入朝，献名马二匹，言可汗已破回鹘，迎得太和公主归国，差人送公主入朝，愁回鹘残众夺之于路。
现代文：黠斯部的使臣注吾合素入朝，献上名马二匹，说可汗已经击败回鹘，迎得太和公主归国，派人护送公主入朝，担心回鹘残余的部众在路上夺取公主。
English: Envoys from the Ottoman Empire's Ministry of Foreign Affairs invited the princess to the court and presented her with two famous horses. They said that the khan had defeated the Uighurs and welcomed the princess back to the country. They sent someone to escort the princess to the court, fearing that the remnants of the Uighurs would capture the princess on the way.

古文：帝遂遣中使送注吾合素往太原迎公主。
现代文：皇帝便派遣宦官护送注吾合素前往太原迎接公主。
English: The emperor then dispatched eunuchs to escort Chuguo to Taiyuan to meet the princess.

古文：时乌介可汗中箭，走投黑车子，诏黠戛斯出兵攻之。
现代文：当时乌介可汗中箭受伤，逃去投奔黑车子，皇上诏令黠斯出兵攻打他。
English: At that time, Ushiekhan was wounded by an arrow and fled to the Black Car. The emperor ordered his troops to attack him.

古文：三月，太和公主至京师，百官班于章敬寺迎谒，仍令所司告宪宗、穆宗二室。
现代文：三月，太和公主抵达京师，百官在章敬寺列班谒见，于是令有关司署祭告宪宗、穆宗两处祭室。
English: In March, the Empress Dowager and the Princess arrived in Kyoto, and hundreds of officials lined up to see them at the Jokyo-ji Temple. Therefore, the relevant priests ordered the priests to report to the two temples of Genso and Muzo.

古文：四月，昭义节度使刘从谏卒，三军以从谏侄稹为兵马留后，上表请授节钺。
现代文：四月，昭义军节度使刘从谏去世。三军推戴刘从谏的侄儿刘稹为节度使兵马留后，向朝廷奉上表章请求授给符节、斧钺。
English: In April, Liu Conglu, the nephew of Liu Conglu, died at the Shouyi Army Festival. After the three armies recommended Liu Conglu's nephew Liu Conglu to keep the soldiers and horses for the festival, Liu Conglu sent a request to the imperial court to grant the festival and the axe.

古文：寻遣使赍诏潞府，令稹护从谏之丧归洛阳。
现代文：皇上随即派遣使臣携带诏书前往潞州府，命刘稹护送刘从谏的灵柩返回洛阳。
English: The emperor immediately dispatched an envoy to carry the edict to Zhangzhou, and ordered Liu Bei to escort Liu from Zhang's coffin back to Luoyang.

古文：稹拒朝旨。
现代文：刘稹拒不执行朝旨。
English: Liu Bei refused to carry out the imperial edict.

古文：诏中书门下两省尚书御史台四品已上、武官三品已上，会议刘稹可诛可宥之状以闻。
现代文：皇上诏令中书门下两省的尚书，以及御史台四品以上、武官三品以上的官员，集中议论刘稹可处死还是宽赦的意见奏闻上报。
English: In the Emperor's edict, Shang Shu of the two provinces under Shumen, as well as officials of the Imperial Historian's Office with four or more awards, and military officers with three or more awards, concentrated on the issue of whether Liu Xuan could be executed or pardoned.

古文：五月，敕诸道节度使置随身不过六十人察使不得过四十人，经略、都护不得过三十人。
现代文：五月，敕令： 各道的节度使设置随身的侍从不得超过六十人，观察使不得超过四十人，经略使、都护不得超过三十人。 
English: In May, the imperial edict stated that the number of attendants should not exceed 60 for the festivals of each province, the number of observers should not exceed 40, and the number of courtiers and guardians should not exceed 30.

古文：筑望仙观于禁中。
现代文：在宫禁中修筑望仙观。
English: He built the Wangxian Temple during his confinement.

古文：宰臣百僚进议状： 以昆戎未殄，塞上用兵，不宜中原生事，潞府请以亲王遥领，令稹权知兵马事，以俟边上罢兵。 
现代文：宰臣和百官进呈商量的意见： 因为昆戎尚未灭亡，边塞还在用兵，不宜在中原再生事端，潞府请任命一位亲王遥领，命刘稹暂时掌管兵马方面的事务，以等待边境罢兵休战。 
English: The opinions discussed and submitted by the vice-minister and the hundred officials were as follows: Since Kun Rong had not yet perished, and the border fortress was still using soldiers, it was not appropriate to revive the incident in the Central Plains. Therefore, the Gyeongbuk government requested to appoint a prince, Prince Yao, to temporarily take charge of the affairs of the soldiers and horses, in order to wait for the border troops to strike a truce.

古文：独李德裕以为泽潞内地，前时从谏许袭，已是失断，自后跋扈难制，规胁朝廷。
现代文：独有李德裕认为泽潞地处内地，从前允许刘从谏袭职，已属失于决断，从此以后藩镇飞扬跋扈，难以控制，窥伺、威胁朝廷。
English: Li Deyu was the only one who thought that Zhejiang was located in the inland, and that it was a loss of decision to allow Liu Zongyi to attack the post in the past. Since then, the town has been flying, it is difficult to control, spy and threaten the imperial court.

古文：以稹竖子，不可复践前车，讨之必殄。
现代文：面对刘稹这小子，不可再踏上前车的覆辙，讨伐他一定会把他消灭。
English: In the face of Liu Ye, this boy, he must not step on the same path as the previous car, and he will definitely destroy him.

古文：武宗性雄俊，曰： 吾与德裕同之，保无后悔。 
现代文：武宗的性情雄杰敏慧，说道： 我和李德裕的看法相同，担保不会后悔。 
English: Wu Zong's temperament is heroic and keen, said: I have the same opinion as Li Deyu, I guarantee that I will not regret it.

古文：自是谏官上疏言不可用兵相继。
现代文：从此以后谏官上疏说不可用兵的一个接一个。
English: From then on, the eunuchs were told one by one that they could not use soldiers.

古文：六月，西内神龙寺灾。
现代文：六月，西内的神龙寺发生火灾。
English: In June, a fire broke out at Shennong Temple in the west of the city.

古文：左军中尉楚国公仇士良卒。
现代文：左军中尉楚国公仇士良去世。
English: Chu Guogong Qiu Shiliang, a lieutenant of the Left Army, passed away.

古文：秋七月戊子，宰相奏： 秋色已至，将议进军，幽州须早平回鹘，镇、魏须速诛刘稹，各须遣使谕旨，兼侦三镇军情。
现代文：秋，七月初一，宰相上奏说 ：秋天已经来临，将要商议进军的事，幽州的军队必须早日平定回鹘，镇州、魏州必须迅速诛灭刘稹，各地都须派遣使臣前去宣读圣旨，兼察看三处节镇的军情。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, the prime minister made a report: Autumn has come, and the matter of marching into the army will be discussed. The army of Yuzhou must be pacified as soon as possible, Zhenzhou and Weizhou must quickly annihilate Liu Bei, and all regions must send envoys to read the holy will and inspect the military situation of the three towns.

古文：今日延英面奉圣旨，欲遣张贾充使。臣等续更商量，张贾干济有才，甚谙军中体势，然性刚负气，虑不安和，不如且命李回。
现代文：今日在延英殿当面接奉圣旨，想要派遣张贾充任使臣，臣等接着又作商量，认为张贾干练而有才华，非常熟悉军中的体制、情况，然而性情刚直容易负气，恐怕不能安定和谐，不如暂且命李回充任使臣。
English: Today, in the interview at Yan Ying Palace, he wanted to send Zhang Jia as an envoy, and the ministers then discussed it. They thought that Zhang Jia was capable and talented, and was very familiar with the system and situation in the army. However, his temperament was rigid and easily negative, and I was afraid that it would not be stable and harmonious. It would be better to temporarily send Li back as an envoy.

古文：若以台纲阙人，即兵部侍郎郑涯久为征镇判官，情甚精敏，虽无词辩，言事分明，官重事闲，最似相称。 
现代文：如果因为御史台缺人，现任兵部侍郎的郑涯曾长期担任节镇判官，性情十分精细敏锐，虽然不善于辩论，但叙述事情非常清楚，官职重要，事务清闲，以他担任使臣似乎最为合适。 
English: If, due to the lack of personnel at the Imperial Historian's Office, the current attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Zheng Ya, had long served as the judge of the festival town, his temperament was very fine and keen, although he was not good at debating, he described things very clearly, his official position was important, and his affairs were idle, it seemed most appropriate for him to serve as an envoy.

古文：上曰： 不如令李回去。 
现代文：皇上说 ：不如派李回去。 
English: The emperor said: It is better to send Li back.

古文：即遣回奉使三镇。
现代文：立即派遣李回奉命出使三镇。
English: Immediately dispatch Li He to the three towns.

古文：八月壬戌，火星自七月苍赤色，动摇井中，至是月十六日犯舆鬼。
现代文：八月初六，火星从七月开始变为暗红色，在井宿中移动，到本月十六日干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, Mars began to turn dark red from July, moving in the well, and on the 16th day of this month, it entered the ghostly heaven.

古文：万年县东市火。
现代文：万年县的东市发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Dongshi, Mannin County.

古文：黠戛斯使谛德伊斯难珠入朝。
现代文：黠斯部的使臣谛德伊斯难珠入朝。
English: It was difficult for the envoys of the Ottoman Empire to enter the imperial court.

古文：以右仆射、平章事陈夷行检校司空，兼河中尹、御史大夫，充河中节度、晋绛慈隰观察等使。
现代文：任命右仆射、平章政事陈夷行为检校司空，兼任河中尹、御史大夫，充任河中节度使、晋绛慈隰观察使等。
English: He appointed his right-hand man, Ya, and the political officer, Pingzhang Chenyi, to act as inspectors of the school, concurrently serving as the Vice-governor of the Middle Yangtze River, the Vice-governor of the Middle Yangtze River, the Vice-governor of the Mid-Yangtze River, the Vice-governor of the Mid-Yangtze River, the Vice-governor of the Mid-Yangtze River and the Vice-governor of the Mid-Yangtze River.

古文：九月，制：
现代文：九月，制命说：
English: In September, the order said:

古文：定天下者，致风俗于大同；安生人者，齐法度于画一。
现代文： 稳定天下，要求风尚大致相同；安定人民，要使得法度整齐划一。
English: In order to stabilize the world, it is required that the customs are roughly the same; in order to stabilize the people, it is necessary to make the laws neat and uniform.

古文：虽晋之栾、赵，家有旧勋；汉之韩、黥，身为佐命。至于干乱纪律，罔不枭夷，禁暴除残，古今大义。
现代文：即使是晋国的栾书、赵盾，家族建立过旧勋；汉朝的韩信、黥布，自身担任过君王的辅佐，一旦达到干犯、扰乱纪纲法律的程度，没有不被枭首灭族的，禁绝暴乱，扫除凶顽，这是古今一致的大义。
English: Even in the case of Jinshu and Zhao Dun of the Jin Dynasty, the family had established the old order of merit; Han Xin and Zibo of the Han Dynasty, they had served as the king's assistants. Once they reached the level of interfering in crimes and disturbing the laws of discipline, there was no one who would not be wiped out by the dagger, forbidding riots and sweeping away villains. This is the same great justice from ancient times to the present.

古文：故昭义节度刘悟，顷居海岱，尝列爪牙。
现代文： 原昭义军节度使刘悟，居住在海岱，曾经布列爪牙。
English: Liu Wuguo, a former member of the Shao Righteous Army, who lived in Haizhu, used to distribute minions.

古文：属师道阻兵，王师问罪，三面开纲，一境离心，乘此危机，遂能归命。
现代文：时当李师道阻挡朝廷的用兵之势，王师前去问罪，三面张开了法网便使得全境的部众离心，到了这危急的时机，刘悟才得以归顺朝廷。
English: At that time, when Li Shidao blocked the use of troops by the imperial court, Wang Shidao went to ask for punishment, and the legal net was opened on three sides, which made the subordinates of the whole territory distracted. It was only at this critical time that Liu Wugu was able to submit to the imperial court.

古文：宪宗嘉其诚款，授以南燕；穆宗待以腹心，委之上党。
现代文：宪宗赞许他的诚恳，授予他南燕的重任；穆宗对待他若腹心，委任他上党的要职。
English: Kenzong praised his sincerity and gave him the important task of Nanyan; Mu Zong treated him like a subordinate and appointed him to an important position in the party.

古文：招致死士，固护一方，迨于未年，已亏臣节。
现代文：他招纳死党，固守一方，待到他的晚年，已经有亏于臣节。
English: He has recruited die-hard supporters, stuck to one side, and stayed until his old age, which is already a loss to the vassal.

古文：刘从谏生禀戾气，幼习乱风。
现代文：刘从谏生来禀赋着狠戾气性，年幼时就习染了乱臣的家风。
English: Liu was born with a fierce temperament, and when he was young, he was accustomed to the family style of chaotic vassals.

古文：因跋扈之资，以专封上；恃纪纲之力，以袭兵符。
现代文：凭借着跋扈不驯的资性而专权于封地；仗恃着朝廷纪纲的力量以承袭了兵权。
English: By virtue of his unruly qualities, he gained exclusive power in the fiefdom; by virtue of the power of the imperial discipline, he inherited the military power.

古文：暂展执圭之仪，终无上绶之请。
现代文：暂时展现着高官显爵的威仪，终究不会委之以重任。
English: For the time being, he is displaying the dignity of a high-ranking official, but in the end, he will not be entrusted with important duties.

古文：隙驹为喻，魏豹姑务于绝河；井蛙自居，孙述颇闻于恃险。
现代文：白驹过隙比喻那魏豹只不过暂时挣扎于黄河的绝地；公孙述所听说的仗恃险要，实际是井蛙自居。
English: The egret crossing the gap is just a metaphor for the panther temporarily struggling in the wilderness of the Yellow River; the fight and danger that Gongsun heard about is actually a frog in the well.

古文：诱受户命，妄作妖言，中罔朝廷，潜图左道。
现代文：他引诱、接纳亡命之徒，狂妄地造作妖言，心中没有朝廷，暗中图谋邪道。
English: He seduces and accepts the desperate, arrogantly fabricates evil sayings, has no heart for the imperial court, and secretly plots evil.

古文：接壤戎帅，屡奏阴谋，顾髫龀之所矜，岂渊鱼之是察。
现代文：和他相邻的戎帅，屡次上奏他的阴谋，但是小孩子引以为自骄的事情，难道像察看深渊中的鱼那样难于看到么？
English: His adjoining generals have repeatedly exposed his machinations, but is it so difficult to see what a child regards as arrogance, as it is to look into the depths of a fish?

古文：洎乎沈痼，曾靡哀鸣，犹驻将尽之魂，恣行邪僻之志，罔或奋拔，自树狡童。
现代文：一个病势沉重的人，竟不发出哀鸣，还想留下那将要穷尽的生命，恣意实行邪僻的志向，不奋力自拔，反以聪明人自诩。
English: For there is no cry of the afflicted, nor any cry of him who is overtaken, nor of him who is brought low, nor of him who is crushed in spirit, nor of him who is crushed in spirit, nor of him who is crushed in spirit.

古文：中使授医，莫睹其朝服；近臣衔命，不入于垒门。
现代文：朝廷派宦官授给箭囊，竟不能目睹其本人；皇帝的近臣奉命前往，不能进入他的营门。
English: The court sent a eunuch to award the quiver, but he could not see it himself; the emperor's courtiers were ordered to go and could not enter his camp gate.

古文：逆节甚明，人神共弃。
现代文：他背逆臣节已经十分明显，人神一起弃绝了他。
English: His treachery to the Imperial House Law has become very obvious, and both humans and gods have abandoned him.

古文：其赠官及先所授官爵、并刘稹在身官爵，宜并削夺。
现代文：其死后追赠的官职，以及原来所授予的官爵，连同刘稹在职的官爵，应当全部削除、褫夺。
English: The official post that was posthumously awarded to him, as well as the official title that was originally awarded to him, together with the official title that Liu Ye held while in office, should all be removed and confiscated.

古文：成德军节度使王元逵、魏博节度使何弘敬，或姻连王室，或任重籓维，恳陈一至之诚，愿扬九伐之命。
现代文：成德军节度使王元逵、魏博节度使何弘敬，一个婚姻与王室相连，一个在藩镇承担重任，他们恳切地陈奏极大的忠诚，愿意发扬九伐的使命。
English: Chengde Military Festival made Wang Yuanjun, Wei Bo Festival made He Hongjing, one marriage is connected with the royal family, one is responsible for heavy duties in the town, they earnestly demonstrate great loyalty and are willing to carry forward the mission of the Nine Dances.

古文：吴汉任职，受诏而初无办严；卜式朴忠，未战而义形于色。
现代文：吴汉任职，接受了诏命而开始并没有严格的治理；卜式朴实忠厚，还未作战正义就表现在神色上。
English: Wu Han took office, accepted the imperial edict and did not have strict governance at the beginning; Bo style was simple and loyal, and it was not until the war that justice was manifested in the countenance.

古文：况成德军尝以枭骑横陈，首破硃滔。
现代文：何况成德军曾经以勇猛的骑兵横贯敌阵，首先击败了朱滔。
English: What's more, the German army had crossed the enemy lines with brave cavalry, first defeating Zhu Tao.

古文：战气方酣，再回鲁阳之日；鼓音不息，三周不注之山。
现代文：作战的气势正酣畅，能够像当初鲁阳城押戈一样，诚心使太阳再返回；战鼓的声音尚未停息，正重重围困着不注之山。
English: The momentum of the battle is brisk, and it can sincerely make the sun return again, just like the Luyang City Siege at the beginning. The sound of the war drums has not yet stopped, and they are encircling the mountains.

古文：魏博军顷以大旆涉河，竟歼师道。
现代文：魏博军最近以大军渡过黄河，竟歼灭了李师道的队伍。
English: Wei Bo's army recently crossed the Yellow River with a large army and annihilated Li Shidao's army.

古文：建十二郡之旗鼓，以列降人；削六十年之历阶，尽归皇化。
现代文：在十二郡建立了朝廷的权威，以安置降将；削除了六十年的祸端，尽都归服于皇家的教化。
English: The authority of the imperial court was established in the twelve counties, with the establishment of subordinate generals; the 60-year disaster was eliminated, and all of them were subjected to the enlightenment of the royal family.

古文：士传余勇，军有雄名，必能禀酂侯之指纵，成葛亮之心伐。
现代文：士卒传布余勇，军队有着雄名。必能秉承赞阝侯萧何传授之法，完成诸葛亮的攻心之术。
English: The soldiers are very brave, and the army has a great reputation. They will surely be able to uphold the method taught by Zhan Hou Xiao He and complete Zhuge Liang's offensive strategy.

古文：咨尔二帅，朕所注怀，元逵可本官充北面招讨泽潞使，弘敬充东面招讨泽潞使。
现代文：这两名将帅，是朕所关注于心的，王元逵以本职充任北面招讨泽潞使，何弘敬充任东面招讨泽潞使。
English: These two generals are what I am concerned about. Wang Yuanzhang is in charge of the north side to recruit the envoys, and He Hongjing is in charge of the east side to recruit the envoys.

古文：曩者列祖在籓，先天启圣。
现代文： 从前列祖们尚未登上帝位，就先于天时地开启了圣象。
English: Since our forefathers had not yet ascended to the throne of God, they opened the holy place ahead of time.

古文：符瑞昭晰，彩绘焕于泗亭；銮辂巡游，金石刻于代邸。
现代文：祥瑞显示得清清楚楚，彩绘焕发在泗亭；銮车巡幸出游，碑石铭刻于代郡的府邸。
English: Xiang Rui is clearly shown, the color painting is radiant in the pavilion; the carriage tour is out of the country, and the monument is inscribed in the mansion of the county.

古文：实谓可封之俗，久为仁寿之乡。
现代文：这些地方确实有可以封侯的风俗，长久地成为仁厚而长寿的地方。
English: These places do have customs that can be sealed, and have long been places of benevolence and longevity.

古文：寇难以来，颇著诚节，必非同恶，咸许自新。
现代文：贼寇兴难以来，这地方的人们很能表现出忠诚和节操，那些不是一定要与贼寇共同作恶的人，都允许他们改过自新。
English: Since the rise of the bandits, the people of this area have been able to demonstrate their loyalty and self-restraint. Those who did not necessarily commit evil together with the bandits were allowed to reform.

古文：其昭义旧将士及百姓等，如保初心，并赦而不问。
现代文：昭义军旧日的将士和百姓等，如能保持善心，均予以赦免而不追究。
English: If the soldiers and people of the former Shouyi Army can maintain a good heart, they will all be pardoned without being investigated.

古文：如能扌舍逆效顺，以州郡兵众归降者，必厚加封赏。
现代文：如果能抛弃逆贼，报效朝廷，率领州郡的军队归降，一定给以优厚的封赏。
English: If you can abandon the traitors, serve the imperial court, and lead the troops of the county to surrender, you will certainly be rewarded with a generous reward.

古文：如能擒送刘稹者，别授土地，以报勋庸。
现代文：如果能够生擒刘稹送交朝廷，另外授给土地，以报答他的勋劳。
English: If Liu Bei could be delivered alive to the imperial court, he would be given land in return for his distinguished service.

古文：顷随刘悟郓州旧将校子孙，既有义心，宜思改悔。
现代文：近时追随刘悟的郓州旧将校的子孙，既有忠义之心，就应当想到悔改。
English: The sons and daughters of the former officers of Bozhou who have recently followed Liu Wuxu should think about repentance as long as they have a loyal heart.

古文：如能感喻刘稹，束身归朝，必当待之如初，特与洗雪。
现代文：如果能感化劝谕刘稹，令他束手归降朝廷，一定会像当初一样地对待他，特地为他洗雪叛逆之名。
English: If he could persuade Liu Bei to surrender to the imperial court, he would certainly treat him as he did at the beginning, especially to clear his name of treason.

古文：尔等旧校，亦并酬劳。
现代文：你们这些旧将，也都会给予酬劳。
English: Those of you who are veterans will also reward you.

古文：仍委夷行、沔、王茂元各进兵同力攻讨。
现代文：同时委派陈夷行、刘沔、王茂元各自进军，齐心协力地进攻、讨伐贼军。
English: At the same time, Chen Yixing, Liu Hui, and Wang Maoyuan were each assigned to march into the army, and they worked together to attack and fight the thief army.

古文：其诸道进军，并不得焚烧庐舍，发掘坟墓，擒执百姓以为俘囚。
现代文：希望各道在进军的时候，均不得焚烧屋舍，发掘坟墓，捕捉百姓作为战俘。
English: It is hoped that all provinces will not burn houses, excavate graves, and capture people as prisoners of war when marching.

古文：桑麻田苗，各许本户为主。
现代文：桑麻田苗，各允许本户的百姓作为主人。
English: In the case of mulberry field seedlings, each allowed the people of its own household to be the owner.

古文：罪止元恶，务拯生灵。
现代文：治罪的只是元凶首恶，务必拯救百姓的生命。 唉！
English: It is only the culprit who must be punished, and the lives of the people must be saved. Alas!

古文：于戏！蕃维大臣，抗疏于外；髦俊旧老，昌言于朝。
现代文：藩镇的大臣，对抗诏令于外；俊才和元老，提供善言于朝。
English: The minister of the town of the domain opposes the edict to the outside world; the talented person and the elder statesman offer kind words to the government.

古文：戒朕以祖宗之法，不可私一族；弄赏之柄，新以正万邦。
现代文：警戒朕不可把祖宗之法作为一个家族之私；掌握赏罚的大权，是为了整治国家。
English: We must be careful not to regard the law of our ancestors as a private matter of the family; we must grasp the power of reward and punishment in order to rectify the country.

古文：宜用甲兵，陈于原野。
现代文：应当调集军队，部署在原野上。
English: Troops should be mobilised and deployed in the field.

古文：虽朕以恩不听，而群臣以义固争，询自佥谋，谅非获已。
现代文：即使朕的恩诏不能听从，而群臣以君臣大义坚决相争，咨询的谋略完全相同，确实也是不得已。
English: Even if my edict cannot be obeyed, and the courtiers resolutely compete with each other on the basis of the principle of monarch and vassal, the strategy of consultation is exactly the same, and it is indeed a last resort.

古文：布告中外，明体朕怀。
现代文：向朝内外宣告，希望明白地体察朕的心怀。 
English: I declare to the imperial court and beyond that I hope you can clearly feel my heart.

古文：仍以徐泗节度使李彦佐为泽潞西南面招讨使。
现代文：并任命徐泗节度使李彦佐为泽潞西南面招讨使。
English: He also appointed Xu Bing to send an envoy to invite Li Yanzao to the southwestern part of Zhejiang.

古文：河阳节度使王茂元以本军屯万善。
现代文：河阳节度使王茂元率领本军屯驻在万善。
English: At the time of the Heyang Festival, Wang Maoyuan led his army to settle in Wanshan.

古文：彦佐制下后逾月未出师，朝廷疑其持重，乃以天德军石雄为彦佐之副。
现代文：李彦佐在朝廷的命令下达之后，过了一个月还不出兵，朝廷怀疑他过于拘谨稳重，便派天德军的石雄为李彦佐的副手。
English: After the imperial court's order was issued, Li Yanzu did not leave the army for a month. The court suspected that he was too prudent and stable, and sent Shi Xiong from the Tiande Army as Li Yanzu's deputy.

古文：刘稹牙将李丕降，用为忻州刺史。
现代文：刘稹的偏将李丕投降，任用他为忻州刺史。
English: Liu Bei's second-in-command, Li Xi, surrendered, and he was appointed as the leader of Zhangzhou.

古文：以陈许节度使王宰充泽潞南面招讨使。
现代文：任命陈许节度使王宰充任泽潞南面招讨使。
English: Appointed Chen Xu Jiedu to make Wang Zaicheng as the south side recruiting envoy of Zhejiang Province.

古文：河阳节度使王茂元卒，赠司徒。
现代文：河阳节度使王茂元去世，追赠为司徒。
English: Wang Maoyuan died on the festival day of the River Yang, and was posthumously awarded the title of Sitoru.

古文：王宰代茂元总万善之师。
现代文：王宰代替王茂元统领万善的军队。
English: Wang Zai took the place of Wang Maoyuan in commanding the troops of Wanzhong.

古文：十月，宰相监修国史李绅、兵部郎中史馆修撰判馆事郑亚进重修《宪宗实录》四十卷，颁赐有差。
现代文：十月，宰相监修国史李绅，兵部郎中、史馆修撰掌馆事郑亚进奉重修的《宪宗实录》四十卷，颁赐给他们奖赏，各不相同。
English: In October, the Prime Minister supervised the revision of the forty volumes of the "Constitutional History" by Li Sheng, the superintendent of the National History Department, and Zheng Yajinbo, the superintendent of the National History Department, supervised the revision of the forty volumes of the "Constitutional History" by Zheng Yajinbo, the superintendent of the National History Department, and awarded them different rewards.

古文：晋绛行营副招讨石雄奏收贼砦五。
现代文：晋绛行营副招讨石雄奏称收复贼寨五处。
English: Shixiong, vice-inviter of the Jinhui Campaign, claimed to have recaptured five thief villages.

古文：以河东节度使刘沔检校司空，兼滑州刺史、御史大夫，充义成军节度、郑滑濮观察等使。
现代文：任命河东节度使刘沔为检校司空，兼任滑州刺史、御史大夫，充任义成军节度使、郑滑濮观察使等。
English: He appointed Liu Wei as the inspector of the inspection of the school, concurrently serving as the inspector of the history of Lishu and the inspector of the history, and acting as the inspector of the Yicheng Army and the observer of the Zhenglai Army.

古文：以荆南节度使、检校右仆射、同平章事李石可检校司空、平章事，兼太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度、管内观察等使。
现代文：任命荆南节度使、检校右仆射、同平章事李石仍任检校司空、平章政事，兼太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使、辖区内观察使等。
English: Appointed Jing Nan as the festival envoy, inspection of the school as the right-hand man, Li Shi as the inspector of the school, Ping Zhang as the political affairs, and Taiyuan Yin and Beidou as the festival envoy of Hedong and the observation envoy in the jurisdiction.

古文：十一月，敕： 中外官员，过为繁冗，量宜减省，以便军民。
现代文：十一月，敕令： 朝内外的官员，过于繁杂冗滥，应当酌量裁减，以有利于军民。
English: November, Imperial edict: Officials inside and outside the DPRK are too complicated and cumbersome, and should be reduced as much as possible in order to benefit the military and the people.

古文：宜令吏部条疏合减员数以闻。 
现代文：应当令吏部依据条令将应当裁减官员的数字呈报上来。 
English: The Ministry of Public Administration should be ordered to report the number of officials who should be reduced in accordance with the regulations.

古文：十二月，王宰奏收天井关。
现代文：十二月，王宰奏称收复天井关。
English: In December, Wang Zaixiao announced the recovery of the ceiling.

古文：榆社行营都将王逢奏兵少，乞济师，诏太原军二千人赴之。
现代文：榆社行营都将王逢上奏说兵卒太少，请求增派援兵，诏令太原军二千名士卒前往增援。
English: Wang Fengsheng was informed by the commander of the Yanshe camp that there were too few soldiers and requested reinforcements. He ordered two thousand soldiers of the Taiyuan Army to go to reinforce.

古文：初，刘沔破回鹘，留三千人戍横水，至是，李石以太原无兵，抽横水戍卒一千五百人以赴王逢。
现代文：当初刘沔击败回鹘，留下三千人守横水，到这时，李石以太原无兵为理由，抽调横水的守兵一千五百人以赴援王逢。
English: At the beginning, Liu Bei defeated Hui Xuan and left three thousand people to guard Hengshui. At this time, Li Shih, on the grounds that there were no soldiers, transferred fifteen hundred guards from Hengshui to aid Wang Feng.

古文：是月二十八日，横水军至太原，请出军优给。
现代文：当月二十八日，横水士卒抵达太原，请求对出征的士兵给以优赏。
English: On the 28th day of the month, Hengshui soldiers arrived in Taiyuan and requested that the soldiers who went to war be given a reward.

古文：旧例第一军绢二疋，时刘沔交代后，军库无绢。
现代文：按照旧例，每名士兵赏绢二匹，当时刘沔办理移交之后，军库已经无绢。
English: According to the old practice, each soldier was awarded two yakitori. At that time, after Liu Ye handled the handover, the military depot had no yakitori.

古文：石以己绢益之。方可人给一疋，便催上路。
现代文：李石把自己的绢增加进去，才做到每人给一匹绢，便催促士兵们出发上路。
English: Li Shi added his shovel to the pile, and only after everyone had given a shovel to a horse, did he urge the soldiers to set out on the road.

古文：军人以岁将除，欲候过岁，期既速，军情不悦。
现代文：士兵们因为一年将尽，本想要等过年之后再出发，日期既然提前，士兵们的情绪都很不痛快。
English: As the year was drawing to a close, the soldiers had wanted to wait until after the New Year before setting off. Now that the date has been brought forward, the soldiers are in an unhappy mood.

古文：都头杨弁乘士卒流怨，激之为乱。
现代文：都头杨弁乘兵卒们流布怨言的机会，激发他们作乱。
English: Yang Ben, the head of the capital, used the opportunity for soldiers to air their grievances to incite them to riot.

古文：四年春正月乙酉朔，以泽潞用兵，罢元会。
现代文：会昌四年春，正月初一，因为泽潞正打仗用兵，停止元旦的朝会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Heichang Spring, the imperial meeting on New Year's Day was suspended because Zecheng was at war.

古文：其日，杨弁逐太原节度使李石。
现代文：当天，杨弁驱逐太原节度使李石。
English: On the same day, Yang Ben expelled Li Shi from the Taiyuan Festival.

古文：敕： 斋月断屠，出于释氏，国家创业，犹近梁、隋、卿相大臣，或沿兹弊。
现代文：敕令： 斋月的时候停止屠宰，出自于佛教，国家创业的时候，离梁朝、隋朝还很近，卿相大臣，或许还沿袭着这个弊端。
English: The imperial edict: to stop slaughtering during the month of Ramadan, comes from Buddhism. When the country started its business, it was still very close to the Liang Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty.

古文：鼓刀者既获厚利，纠察者潜受请求。
现代文：动刀杀生的人既能获取厚利，纠弹检查的人便会受到请求。
English: Those who use knives to kill people can make a lot of money, while those who check for stray bullets will be asked to do so.

古文：正月以万物生植之初，宜断三日。
现代文：正月正当万物生长的开始，应当停止屠宰三日。
English: In the first month of the year, when all things begin to grow, slaughter should be stopped for three days.

古文：列圣忌断一日。
现代文：列圣忌讳停止一日。
English: The list of sacred taboos was suspended for one day.

古文：仍准开元二十二年敕，三元日各断三日，余月不禁。 
现代文：仍旧遵照开元二十二年的敕令，正月、七月、十月的三个初一各禁屠宰三日，其余各月不禁。 
English: In accordance with the imperial edict of the 22nd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, slaughter is still prohibited on three days in each of the first three months of the year, July and October, and is not prohibited in the remaining months.

古文：壬子，河东监军使吕义忠收复太原，生擒杨弁，尽斩其乱卒，百僚称贺。
现代文：正月二十八日，河东监军使吕义忠收复太原，生擒杨弁，将那些作乱的士卒全部斩首，百官向皇上称贺。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the year, Lyu Yitong, the military governor of Hedong, recovered Taiyuan, captured Yang Ben alive, and beheaded all the rioting soldiers. Hundreds of officials congratulated the emperor.

古文：二月甲寅朔。
现代文：二月初一为甲寅日。
English: The first day of February is "Kato-in" day.

古文：丁巳，制河中晋、绛、慈、隰等州节度观察等使、中散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、河中尹、御史大夫、上柱国、博陵县开国男、食邑三百户崔元式可检校礼部尚书，兼太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度观察等使。
现代文：二月初四，决定河中晋绛慈隰等州节度使观察使、中散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、河中尹、御史大夫、上柱国、博陵县开国男、食邑三百户崔元式仍任检校礼部尚书，兼任太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使观察使等。
English: On the 4th day of February, it was decided that the provincial festival envoys such as Hanzhong Jinshan, Cixi and other provincial festival envoys, Dr. Zhongsan, the left rider of the inspection of the school, Hanzhong Yin, Dr. Gushi, Shangzhuang Guo, the founding father of Boling County, and the 300 households of the food village, Cui Yuan style, would still serve as the inspection of the school, and concurrently serve as Taiyuan Yin and Beidou, and serve as the observation envoys of the festival in Hedong.

古文：戊午夜，太白犯镇星。
现代文：二月初五夜间，太白金星干犯土星。
English: On the night of the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, the very white Venus attacks Saturn.

古文：辛酉，太原送杨弁与其同恶五十四人来献，斩于狗脊岭。
现代文：二月初八，太原押送杨弁和与他共同作恶的五十四人来献于朝，将他们斩首于狗脊岭。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, Taiyuan escorted Yang Ben and the fifty-four people who worked with him to commit evil to the North, and beheaded them at the Dog Ridge.

古文：三月，以晋绛副招讨石雄为泽潞西面招讨，以汾州刺史李丕为副。
现代文：三月，任命晋绛副招讨使石雄为泽潞西面招讨使，以汾州刺史李丕为副使。
English: In March, he was appointed as the vice-envoy of Jinqi, and Shi Xiong was appointed as the vice-envoy of the west side of Zhejiang Province, and Li Jun, the vice-envoy of Zhangzhou Province, was appointed as the vice-envoy.

古文：以道士赵归真为左右街道门教授先生。
现代文：任命道士赵归真为左右街道门教授先生。
English: Appointed Taoist Zhao Guizhen as a professor of the left and right street gate.

古文：时帝志学神仙，师归真。
现代文：当时皇帝矢志学习神仙，拜赵归真为师。
English: At that time, the emperor was determined to study the gods, and Baizhao Guizhen became his teacher.

古文：归真乘宠，每对，排毁释氏，言非中国之教，蠹耗生灵，尽宜除去，帝颇信之。
现代文：赵归真乘着宠幸的机会，每次与皇上谈话，都斥责毁骂佛教，说佛教不是中国的宗教，只是损害着中国的生灵，应当全部除掉，皇帝很相信他的话。
English: Zhao Guizhen took advantage of the favorable opportunity, and every time he talked to the emperor, he scolded and cursed Buddhism, saying that Buddhism was not a Chinese religion, but only harmed Chinese beings, and should all be eliminated. The emperor believed his words very much.

古文：四月，王宰进军攻泽州。
现代文：四月，王宰进军攻打泽州。
English: In April, Wanzai marched to attack Zezhou.

古文：五月，以司农卿薛元赏为京兆尹。
现代文：五月，任命司农卿薛元赏为京兆尹。
English: In May, he appointed Xue Yuan Rong as the Minister of Agriculture.

古文：六月，金紫光禄大夫、尚书右仆射、中书侍郎、同平事、判度支崔珙贬澧州刺史。
现代文：六月，金紫光禄大夫、尚书右仆射、中书侍郎、同平章事、掌度支事崔珙被贬职为澧州刺史。
English: In June, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, Shang Shu Yu minion, Shang Shu waiter, Tongping secretary, and Shudu branch secretary Cui Wei were demoted to the position of Zhangzhou secretary.

古文：癸丑，敕： 谏官论事，所见不同，连状署名，事同纠率。
现代文：六月初一，敕令： 谏官论事，看法各不相同，文状上连名签署，就如同把不同的绳索纠缠在一起一样。
English: On the first day of June, the imperial edict: Eunuchs discuss the matter, opinions vary, the document is signed jointly, just like entangling different ropes together.

古文：此后凡论公事，各随己见，不得连署姓名。
现代文：从此以后，凡属谈论公事，各自陈述己见，不得连署姓名。
English: From now on, those who are talking about public affairs should make their own statements and should not sign their names.

古文：如有大政奏论，即可连署。 
现代文：如果有关于大政方针的奏议，则可以连署。 
English: If there is a motion on major policies, it can be co-signed.

古文：制追削故左军中尉仇士良先授官及赠官，其家财并籍没。
现代文：决定追夺、削除已故左军中尉仇士良原先授予的官职和追赠的官职，其家财全部没收。
English: It was decided to pursue and remove the official post originally awarded to the late Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang of the Left Army and the posthumous official post, and confiscate all of his family wealth.

古文：士良死后，中人于其家得兵仗数千件，兼发士良宿罪故也。
现代文：这是因为仇士良死后，宦官在他家里搜得武器甲仗数千件，并揭发了他原来的罪行。
English: This is because after the death of Qiu Shiliang, the eunuchs found thousands of weapons and armor in his home and exposed his original crime.

古文：敕责授官银青光禄大夫、澧州刺史、上柱国、安平郡开国公、食邑二千永崔珙再贬恩州司马员外置，以珙领盐铁时欠宋滑院盐铁九十万贯。
现代文：敕令将谪授的官员银青光禄大夫、澧州刺史、上柱国、安平郡开国公、食邑二千户崔珙，再贬职为恩州司马，列置于定员之外，因为崔珙掌管盐铁时欠损宋滑院盐铁款九十万贯。
English: The imperial edict excluded from the quota the officials who had received imperial awards, including Dr. Yin Qing Guanglu, Zhangzhou Zhi Shi, Shangzhuang Guo, Anping County Kaigong, and 2,000 households of food villages, and demoted them to the position of Enzhou Sima, because when he was in charge of salt iron, he lost 900,000 yuan worth of salt iron from Songpu Academy.

古文：帝令度支、盐铁、转运合为一使。
现代文：皇帝命将度支使、盐铁使、转运使合为一使。
English: By order of the emperor, the posts of the Bureau of Railways, the Bureau of Salt and Iron, and the Bureau of Transportation were merged into a single post.

古文：七月，以淮南节度使、检校司空杜忭守尚书右仆射、兼门下侍郎、同平章事，仍判度支，充盐铁转运等使。
现代文：七月，任命淮南节度使、检校司空杜暂署尚书右仆射、兼门下侍郎、同平章事，仍旧执掌度支事务，充任盐铁转运使等。
English: In July, he appointed the Huainan festival envoy, the school inspector of the Kuangdu, the temporary secretary of the Shangshu right minion, the concurrently subordinate attendant, and the Tongping chapter, still in charge of the expenditure and expenditure affairs, and acting as the salt and iron transfer envoy.

古文：又制银青光禄大夫、守尚书右仆射、兼门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、赵郡开国公、食邑二千户李绅可检校司空、平章事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：又决定银青光禄大夫、署理尚书右仆射、兼门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、赵郡开国公、食邑二千户李绅仍任检校司空、平章政事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使，执掌节度使事务。
English: It was also decided that Dr. Yin Qingguanglu, Acting Secretary Shang Shuxu Minjuan, and his attendant, Tongping Zhangji, supervising the national history, Shangzhuang Guo, Zhao County's founding father, and Li Sheng of the two thousand households in the food village, would still serve as the school inspection officer, Pingzhang Zhengji, Yangzhou governor, and deputy ambassador of Huainan Festival, in charge of the festival.

古文：吏部条奏中外合减官员一千一百一十四员。
现代文：吏部分条上奏朝内外应当裁减官员一千一百一十四员。
English: The official part of the article reported that 1,114 officials should be reduced inside and outside the DPRK.

古文：王元逵奏邢州刺史裴问、别将高元武以城降。
现代文：王元逵奏报：邢州刺史裴问、偏将高元武献城投降。
English: Wang Yuanxiao Newspaper: Zhangzhou stabbed Shi Peiqian, forcing Gao Yuanwu to surrender the city.

古文：洺州刺史王钊、磁州刺史安玉以城降何弘敬。
现代文：氵名州刺史王钊、磁州刺史安玉向何弘敬献城投降。
English: Wang Qian, the magistrate of Meizhou, and An Yu, the magistrate of Zhengzhou, surrendered the city to He Hongjing.

古文：山东三州平。
现代文：山东三州平定。
English: The three prefectures of Shandong Province have been pacified.

古文：潞州大将郭谊、张谷、陈扬廷遣人至王宰军，请杀稹以自赎。
现代文：潞州大将郭谊、张谷、陈扬廷派人到王宰军中，请求以杀死刘稹来自赎罪过。
English: Zhangzhou generals Guo Rui, Zhang Gu, and Chen Yangting sent someone to Wang Zai's army to request that Liu Xi be killed to atone for his sins.

古文：王宰以闻，乃诏石雄率军七千入潞州，谊斩刘稹首以迎雄，泽、潞等五州平。
现代文：王宰上奏皇上，皇上便诏令石雄率七千名士兵进入潞州，郭谊将刘稹斩首以迎接石雄，泽州、潞州等五州平定。
English: Wang Zai reported to the emperor, and the emperor ordered Shi Xiong to lead seven thousand soldiers into Ganzhou, Guo Yi beheaded Liu Bei to welcome Shi Xiong, and five states including Zhejiang and Ganzhou were pacified.

古文：八月戊戌，王宰传稹首与大将郭谊等一百五十人，露布献于京，上御安福门受俘，百僚楼前称贺。
现代文：八月十八日，王宰传送刘稹的首级，与潞州大将郭谊等一百五十人，以捷报呈献于京师，皇上驾临安福门接受战俘，百官在楼前向皇上称贺。
English: On August 18th, Wang Zai sent Liu Bei's head, together with Zhangzhou's General Guo Yi and other 150 people, to present to the Beijing division. The emperor drove to the Anfu Gate to accept prisoners of war, and hundreds of officials congratulated the emperor in front of the building.

古文：以魏博节度使、检校尚书右仆射、同平间事何弘敬进封庐江郡开国公，食邑二千户；以成德军节度使王元逵检校司空、兼太子太师、同平章事，进封太原郡开国公，食邑二千户。
现代文：将魏博节度使、检校尚书右仆射、同平章事何弘敬晋封为庐江郡开国公，食邑二千户；任命成德军节度使王元逵为检校司空，兼太子太师、同平章事；晋封为太原郡开国公，食邑二千户。
English: He Hongjing was appointed as Wei Bo's festival delegate, inspector of schools Shang Shu Yu Fu Sha, and Tong Ping's secretary He Hongjing was appointed as the founding father of Liangjiang County, feeding two thousand households; Wang Yuanqi was appointed as the German army's festival delegate, inspector of schools Siku, and prince's grandmaster, Tong Ping's secretary; He was appointed as the founding father of Taiyuan County, feeding two thousand households.

古文：宰相李德裕守太尉，进封卫国公，加食邑一千户。
现代文：宰相李德裕暂署太尉，晋封卫国公，增加食邑一千户。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu was temporarily promoted to the rank of captain, promoted to the rank of prince, and increased the number of counties by one thousand.

古文：以兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨崔铉为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨崔铉为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: He appointed the attendant of the military department and the scholar of Hanlin, Cui Wei, as the attendant of the middle school and the official of the same level.

古文：河东节度使陈夷行卒。
现代文：河东节度使陈夷行去世。
English: Chen Yigang died at the instigation of the Hedong Festival.

古文：九月，以天德军使、晋绛行营招讨使石雄检校兵部尚书、河中严、兼御史大夫、河中晋绛慈隰等州节度使。
现代文：九月，任命天德军使、晋绛行营招讨使石雄为检校兵部尚书、河中尹，兼御史大夫、河中晋绛慈隰等州节度使。
English: In September, Tian De's military envoy was appointed, and Shih Xiong was appointed as the state festival envoy, including Shang Shu of the inspection military department, Yin Kechu, concurrently the chief historian, and Cixi Kechu.

古文：以前山南东道节度使卢钧检校尚书左仆射、潞州大都督府长史，充昭义军节度使、泽潞邢洺观察等使。
现代文：任命前山南东道节度使卢钧为检校尚书左仆射、潞州大都督府长史，充任昭义军节度使、泽潞邢氵名观察使等。
English: The former Shannan host of the festival appointed Lu Wei as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the governor of the prefecture, the governor of the prefecture, the festival envoy of the Shouyi Army, and the observation envoy of the Zeyun name.

古文：以忠武军节度、陈许蔡等州观察处置等使、河阳行营诸军招讨使、金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射、兼御史大夫、上柱国、太原郡开国公、食邑二千户王宰检校司空、太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度、管内观察处置等使。
现代文：任命忠武军节度使、陈许蔡等州观察处置使、河阳行营诸军招讨使、金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射、兼御史大夫、上柱国、太原郡开国公、食邑二千户王宰为检校司空、太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使、管区内观察处置使等。
English: Appointed the festival delegate of the Zhongwu Army, Chen Xu Cai and other state observation and disposal delegates, the Hebei Campaigning Army Recruitment Delegate, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, the inspection of the school, Shangshu Upu Ya, concurrently the history master, Shangzhu Guo, the founder of Taiyuan County, the ruler of two thousand households in the food village as the school inspection secretary, and Taiyuan Yin, who stayed in the north, served as the Hedong festival delegate, the observation and disposal delegate in the region, etc.

古文：制曰： 逆贼郭谊等，狐鼠之妖，依丘穴而作固；牛羊之力，得水草而逾凶。
现代文：制命说： 逆贼郭谊等人，本是狐鼠之类的妖孽，依靠山丘和洞穴作为牢固的据点；只有牛羊一般的力量，得了水草却变得格外凶狠。
English: The commanding officer said, "The traitor Guo Yi and others are originally foxes and rats, relying on hills and caves as a stronghold; they only have the strength of cattle and sheep, but when they get water plants, they become particularly ferocious.

古文：久从叛臣，皆负逆气。
现代文：他们长久地依附于叛臣，都带上了叛逆的气息。
English: They have long been attached to the traitor, and have all taken on a rebellious air.

古文：刘从谏背德反义，掩贼藏奸，积其怙乱之谋，无非亲吏之计。
现代文：刘从谏背离道德，反叛大义，掩盖贼心，藏匿奸邪，积聚乘乱而动的阴谋，无非靠着亲吏献计谋划。
English: Liu Zongchen deviated from morality, rebelled against the great righteousness, covered up the thief's heart, hid the treachery, and accumulated the conspiracy of taking advantage of the turmoil, all of which were planned by relying on the personal contribution of officials.

古文：刘公直、安全庆等各凭地地险，屡抗王师，每肆悖言，罔怀革面。
现代文：刘公直、安全庆等各凭着地势险要，屡次抗拒王师，每每放肆地发出悖逆之言，从没有洗心革面之心。
English: Liu Gongzhi, Jianchengqing, etc. each took advantage of the critical situation, repeatedly resisted Wang Shi, and each time brazenly issued rebellious words. They never had the heart to reform.

古文：况郭谊、王协闻邢、洺归款，惧义旅覆巢，卖孽童以图全，据坚城而请命。
现代文：何况郭谊、王协只是听说邢州、氵名州纳款归降，害怕朝廷的义军倾覆他们的巢穴，才出卖孽童刘稹以自图保全，据守着坚城而求取性命。
English: What's more, Guo Jiyi and Wang Xie only heard that the tributes of Zhangzhou and Zhangye had been surrendered, and they were afraid that the rebels of the imperial court would overthrow their lair, so they betrayed the evil boy Liu Xuan in order to protect themselves, and to protect the stronghold and seek their lives.

古文：昔伍被诣吏，不免就诛；延岑出降，终亦夷族。
现代文：从前伍被前去投靠府吏，仍不免于被处死；延岑出城投降，终究还是灭族。
English: Those who went to join the government officials from the previous ranks were still not exempted from being put to death; those who went out of the city to surrender were still exterminated.

古文：致之大辟，无所愧怀。 
现代文：将他们处以极刑，心中并无惭愧之处。 
English: There is no shame in putting them to death.

古文：郭谊、刘公直、王协、安全庆、李道德、李佐尧、刘稹、稹母阿裴、稹弟曹九满郎君郎、妹四娘五娘、从兄洪卿汉卿周卿鲁卿匡尧、张谷男涯、解愁、陈扬廷弟宣、男丑奴、张溢男欢郎三宝、门客甄戈、伎术人郭谂蒋党、李训兄仲京、王涯侄孙羽、韩约男茂章茂宝、王璠男圭等，并处斩于独柳。
现代文：郭谊、刘公直、王协、安全庆、李道德、李佐尧、刘稹、刘稹的母亲阿裴、刘稹的弟弟刘曹九、刘满郎、刘君郎、妹妹刘四娘、刘五娘、堂兄刘洪卿、刘汉卿、刘周卿、刘鲁卿、刘匡尧、张谷之子张涯、解愁、陈扬廷之弟陈宣、陈扬廷之子陈丑奴、张溢之子张欢郎、张三宝、门客甄戈、伎艺人郭谂、蒋党、李训之兄李仲京、王涯的侄孙王羽、韩约之子韩茂章、韩茂宝、王之子王王圭等，均在独柳处斩。
English: Guo Jiyi, Liu Gongzhi, Wang Xie, Jianchengqing, Li Daode, Li Zuojun, Liu Shun, Liu Shun's mother Apei, Liu Shun's brother Liu Cao Jiu, Liu Man Lang, Liu Jian Lang, sister Liu Si Daughters, Liu Wu Daughters, cousin Liu Hong Jie, Liu Han Jie, Liu Zhou Jie, Liu Lu Jie, Liu Kuang Jie, Zhang Gu's son Zhang Lai, Qixing, Chen Yang Ting's brother Chen Xuan, Chen Yangting's son Chen Xiu Nu, Zhang Yue's son Zhang Huan

古文：敕以河阳三城镇遏使为孟州，割泽州隶焉，与怀、孟、泽为节度，号河阳。
现代文：敕令以河阳三城镇遏使治理孟州，割取泽州隶属于它，合怀州、孟州、泽州为一个节镇，号称河阳。
English: According to the imperial edict, the three towns of Heyang were used to govern Mengzhou, and Zezhou was subordinated to it. Hwaizhou, Mengzhou and Zezhou were designated as a festival town, known as Heyang.

古文：制以皇子愕为开府仪同三司、夏州刺史、朔方军节度大使。时党项叛，命亲王以制之。
现代文：决定任命皇子李愕为开府仪同三司、夏州刺史、朔方军节度大使，当时党项部族叛乱，命亲王前去制服。
English: It was decided to appoint the prince Li Zhen as the ambassador of the Kaifu ceremony, the three divisions, the Xiazhou sashimi, and the Shuo Fang Army. At that time, the party and the tribe rebelled, and the prince was ordered to go to the uniform.

古文：十月，车驾幸鄠县。
现代文：十月，皇帝临幸县。
English: In October, the emperor went to Linxing County.

古文：十一月，幸云阳。
现代文：十一月，皇帝临幸云阳。
English: In November, Emperor Linxing went to Yunyang.

古文：十二月，敕： 郊礼日近，狱囚数多，案款已成，多有翻覆。
现代文：十二月，敕令： 郊祀的典礼日益临近，狱中的罪囚数量很多，案犯的罪状已经成立，却又有许多反复。
English: December, imperial edict: the ceremony of suburb worship is getting closer and closer, the number of prisoners in prison is large, the criminal's guilt has been established, but there are many repetitions.

古文：其两京天下州府见系囚，已结正及两度翻案伏款者，并令先事结断讫申。 
现代文：希望东西两京及全国各州府现今在押的囚犯，已经结案以及两度翻案后仍服罪款的，均令对其先行结案判决，完毕后申报朝廷。 
English: It is hoped that the prisoners currently in custody in the eastern and western capitals as well as the state capitals across the country, whose cases have been closed and who are still serving their sentences after having their cases overturned twice, will be ordered to complete their sentences first, and then report to the Imperial Court.

古文：时左仆射王起频年知贡举，每贡院考试讫，上榜后，更呈宰相取可否。
现代文：当时左仆射王起连年执掌科举考试，每次贡院考试结束，名单上榜后，都要再呈奉给宰相，听可否录取的意见。
English: At that time, the left-hand man, Sha Wang, was in charge of the entrance examination for several years. At the end of each examination, after the list was on the list, it had to be submitted to the Prime Minister again to hear whether it could be accepted.

古文：后人数不多，宰相延英论言： 主司试艺，不合取宰相与夺。
现代文：后来录取的人数不多，宰相在延英殿发表意见说 ：主管部门考试举子的才能，不应该取决于宰相参与定夺。
English: Later, the number of people admitted was small, and the prime minister expressed his opinion at Yan Yingden: the ability of the competent department to take the examination should not depend on the prime minister's participation in the decision-making.

古文：比来贡举艰难，放入绝少，恐非弘访之道。 
现代文：近来贡举的考试很艰难，因此录取的人极少，恐怕不合广泛地访求人才之道。 
English: The examinations for the recent tribute have been very difficult, so very few people have been admitted, and I am afraid that it is not a good idea to make extensive searches for talent.

古文：帝曰： 贡院不会我意。
现代文：皇帝说 ：贡院没有领会我的意图。
English: The emperor said, "Kung-in did not understand my intention.

古文：不放子弟，即太过，无论子弟、寒门，但取实艺耳。 
现代文：不录取贵胄的子弟，就太过分了。无论是贵胄子弟，还是出身于寒门，只是求取其实际水平罢了。 
English: It would be going too far not to admit the sons and daughters of noblemen. Whether they are sons and daughters of noblemen or born in a poor family, it is only a matter of obtaining their actual level.

古文：李德裕对曰： 郑肃、封敖有好子弟，不敢应举。 
现代文：李德裕回答说 ：郑肃、封敖有好子弟，不敢参加应试。 
English: Li Deyu replied: Zheng Su and Feng Yao have good sons, and they dare not take the exam.

古文：帝曰： 我比闻杨虞卿弟朋比贵势，妨平人道路。
现代文：皇帝说 ：我最近听说杨虞卿兄弟和有权势的贵官结成一党，阻碍平民的进身之路。
English: The emperor said, "I have recently heard that Yang Yuqing's brothers and powerful dignitaries have formed a party to obstruct the advancement of commoners.

古文：昨杨知至、郑朴之徒，并令落下，抑其太甚耳。 
现代文：不久前杨知至、郑朴这类人，都让他们落榜了，压制得太厉害了。 
English: Not long ago, people like Yang Zhizhi and Zheng Puk, they all made it to the bottom of the list, the suppression was too severe.

古文：德裕曰： 臣无名第，不合言进士之非。
现代文：李德裕说： 臣没有科第的名位，不应该谈进士的不好。
English: Li Deyu said: "A minister does not have the title of a scientist, so he should not talk about the disadvantages of being a scientist.

古文：然臣祖天宝末以仕进无他伎，勉强随计，一举登第。
现代文：但臣的祖父在天宝末年因为没有别的办法进入仕途，勉强随分参加应试，一试而登上进士及第。
English: However, in the last years of Tianbao, because there was no other way to enter the career, the grandfather of the minister reluctantly took part in the exam, and was promoted to the first and second.

古文：自后不于私家置《文选》，盖恶其祖尚浮华，不根艺实。
现代文：从此以后不在私宅中放置《文选》，大约是厌恶这本书崇尚浮华，不植根于实际才能。
English: From now on, I will not place "Selected Works" in my private home, probably because I detest this book, which advocates pomposity and is not rooted in actual talent.

古文：然朝廷显官，须是公卿子弟。
现代文：然而朝廷的显贵官员，必须是公卿大臣的子弟。
English: However, a high-ranking official of the Imperial Court must be the child of a noble minister.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：自小便习举业，自熟朝廷间事，台阁仪范，班行准则，不教而自成。
现代文：他们从小便学习举业，自然就熟悉朝廷中的事。台省内阁的仪节规范，排班列行的准则，不教而自己懂得。
English: They learn their duties from an early age and are naturally familiar with the affairs of the imperial court. They do not need to be taught to understand the ceremonial norms of Taiwan's cabinet and the rules of the line-up.

古文：寒士纵有出人之才，登第之后，始得一班一级，固不能熟习也。
现代文：寒门出身的人即令有超出众人的才华，登第之后，才能懂得一个班列、一个级别，当然不能熟悉了。
English: Even if a person from a poor family has a talent that exceeds that of many people, after being promoted to the first grade, he can only understand a class, a level, and of course can not be familiar with it.

古文：则子弟成名，不可轻矣。 
现代文：那么，贵胄子弟的成名，也就不能轻视了。 
English: In that case, the fame of Guizhang's son cannot be taken lightly.

古文：五年春正月己酉朔，敕造望仙台于南郊坛。
现代文：会昌五年春，正月初一，敕令在南郊的坛上建造望仙台。
English: In the spring of the 5th year of Huichang, on the first day of the 1st month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the construction of Sendai Lookout on the altar in the southern suburb.

古文：时道士赵归真特承恩礼，谏官上疏，论之延英。
现代文：当时道士赵归真得到皇上特别的恩宠、礼遇，谏官上疏，在延英殿谈论这件事。
English: At that time, the Taoist Zhao Guizhen received special grace and courtesy from the emperor, and eunuchs were scarce. They discussed this matter at Yan Ying Dian.

古文：帝谓宰臣曰： 谏官论赵归真，此意要卿等知。
现代文：皇帝对宰臣说 ：谏官谈赵归真的事，这件事的想法要让卿等知道。
English: The emperor said to the aide-de-camp, "The eunuch is talking about Zhao Guizhen, and I want you to know his thoughts on this matter."

古文：朕宫中无事，屏去声技，但要此人道话耳。 
现代文：朕在宫中没有什么事，已经屏弃了声色伎艺，只是要这个人谈话罢了。 
English: There is nothing wrong with me in the palace, I have given up my vocal skills, I just want this person to talk.

古文：李德裕对曰： 臣不敢言前代得失，只缘归真于敬宗朝出入宫掖，以此人情不愿陛下复亲近之。 
现代文：李德裕回答说 ：臣不敢评说前代的得失，只因为赵归真在敬宗朝出入宫廷，因此人们心里不希望陛下再亲近他。 
English: Li Deyu replied, "The minister does not dare to comment on the gains and losses of the previous generation, only because Zhao Guizhen enters and leaves the court in honor of the Emperor, so people do not want His Majesty to be close to him again.

古文：帝曰： 我尔时已识此道人，不知名归真，只呼赵链师。
现代文：皇帝说： 我那时已经认识这个道人，不知道他名归真，只喊他赵炼师。
English: The emperor said: At that time, I already knew this Taoist, but I did not know his real name. I only called him Zhao Refiner.

古文：在敬宗时亦无甚过。
现代文：他在敬宗时也没有什么过错。
English: He did nothing wrong in honoring the emperor.

古文：我与之言，涤烦尔。
现代文：我和他谈话，不过是消除烦闷罢了。
English: When I talk to him, it's just to get rid of the boredom.

古文：至于军国政事，唯卿等与次对官论，何须问道士。
现代文：至于军国政事，只有和卿等依次对谈的官员们议论，哪里用得着问道士。
English: As for military, political and national affairs, only officials who talk to each other in turn, such as Sir, discuss them, and there is no need to ask a questioner.

古文：非直一归真，百归真亦不能相惑。 
现代文：不只是一个赵归真，就是一百个赵归真也不能迷惑我。 
English: Not just one Zhao Guizhen, even a hundred Zhao Guizhen cannot confuse me.

古文：归真自以涉物论，遂举罗浮道士邓元起有长年之术，帝遣中使迎之。
现代文：赵归真自认为引起了人们的议论，便举荐罗浮道士邓元起有长生不老之术，皇帝派宦官去迎接他。
English: Zhao Guizhen thought that he had aroused people's discussion, so he recommended Luo Bu Daoist Deng Yuanqi to have the immortality. The emperor sent eunuchs to meet him.

古文：由是与衡山道士刘玄靖及归真胶固，排毁释氏，而拆寺之请行焉。
现代文：因此皇帝与衡山道士刘玄靖以及赵归真关系密切，牢不可分，斥骂佛教，而请求拆毁寺庙的事也就发生了。
English: Therefore, the emperor had a close and inseparable relationship with the Hengshan Taoist Liu Xuanjing and Zhao Guizhen, and the matter of reviling Buddhism and requesting the demolition of the temple also occurred.

古文：宰臣李德裕社忭李让夷崔铉、太常卿孙简等率文武百僚上徽号曰仁圣文武章天成功神德明道皇帝。
现代文：宰臣李德裕、杜、李让夷、崔铉，太常寺卿孙简等，率文武百官向皇帝敬献徽号为：仁圣文武章天成功神德明道皇帝。
English: Vice-Minister Li Deyu, Du, Li Jangyi, Cui Jiong, and Grand Priest Sun Jian led hundreds of military and civilian officials to present the Emperor with a badge of honor: Emperor Jin Shengwenwu Zhaotian Chenggongjin Demingdao.

古文：辛亥，有事于郊庙，礼毕，御承天门，大赦天下。
现代文：正月初三，在郊庙举行祭祀大典，祭典完毕，皇上驾临承天门，大赦天下。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, a grand ritual was held in the suburb temple. After the ceremony, the emperor came to the Gate of Heaven and pardoned the whole world.

古文：庚申，义安太后崩，敬宗之母也。
现代文：正月十二日，义安太后崩，她是敬宗的母亲。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the year, Empress Dowager Yian passed away. She was the mother of Emperor Keizong.

古文：遗令皇帝三日听政，十三日小祥，二十五日大祥，二十七日释服。
现代文：太后临终留下遗令，皇帝于第三日处理政务，十三日举行小祥祭典，二十五日举行大祥祭典，二十七日除去丧服。
English: The empress dowager left a last will and testament, and the emperor dealt with government affairs on the third day, held a small auspicious festival on the 13th, held a big auspicious festival on the 25th, and removed the mourning clothes on the 27th.

古文：兵部尚书归融奏： 事贵得中，礼从顺变，配祔之礼，宜有等差。
现代文：兵部尚书归融上奏说 ：事情以适中为贵，礼仪应当顺天而变，配祭的礼制，应该有等级的差别。
English: Shang Shuxu of the Ministry of Military Affairs said, "Moderation is the most important thing, etiquette should change with the times, and there should be a difference in rank when it comes to the ritual of offering sacrifices."

古文：请服期，以日易月，十二日释服。
现代文：请降低除去丧服的日期，以日数换月数，十二日除下丧服。
English: Please reduce the date of removing the mourning clothes, change the number of days to the number of months, and remove the mourning clothes on the 12th.

古文：内外臣僚，亦请以其日释服。
现代文：朝内外的官员，也都请在这一天除去丧服。
English: Officials at home and abroad are also asked to remove their mourning clothes on this day.

古文：陵园制度，请无降杀。 
现代文：陵园丧葬的规格，请不要降低。 
English: Please do not lower the standards for funerals in cemeteries.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：以前太原节度使、检校司空李石以本官充东都留守。
现代文：任命前太原节度使、检校司空李石以本职充任东都留守。
English: Before the appointment, Taiyuan's ceremonial envoy and the inspector of schools, Ku Liishi, stayed behind to fulfill their duties.

古文：二月戊寅朔，太白掩昴之北侧。
现代文：二月初一，太白金星掩蔽昴宿的北侧。
English: On the first day of February, the too-white Venus occults the northern side of Omotesando.

古文：谏议大夫、权知礼部贡举陈商选士三十人中第，物论以为请托，令翰林学士白敏中覆试，落张渎、李玗、薛忱、张觌崔凛、王谌、刘伯刍等七人。
现代文：谏议大夫、暂掌礼部贡举陈商铨选应举者，有三十七人被录取，人们议论认为有的请托了人情，皇上令翰林学士白敏中主持复试，张渎、李王于、薛忱、张觌、崔凛、王谌、刘伯刍等七人落选。
English: Thirty-seven candidates were accepted, and it was believed that some of them asked for favors. The emperor ordered Hanlin Baccalaureate Bai Minzhong to preside over the retest. Zhang Zhao, Li Wang Yu, Xue Zhen, Zhang Xuan, Cui Rin, Wang Xuan, Liu Bo Xuan and seven others were not selected.

古文：三月，崔铉罢知政事，出为陕虢观察使。
现代文：三月，崔铉停止执掌政务，出京任陕虢观察使。
English: In March, Cui Gan ceased to be in charge of government affairs and went to Beijing to serve as the Shaanxi and Fujian observation envoy.

古文：以御史中丞、兼兵部侍郎李回本官同平章事。
现代文：任命御史中丞、兼兵部侍郎李回以本职任同平章事。
English: The appointment of Goshi Chujo and concurrently Hyobushiroushiro Lee Gakuen to their respective posts on an equal footing.

古文：夏四月，皇第四女封延庆公主，第五女封靖乐公主。
现代文：夏，四月，皇上第四女封延庆公主，第五女封靖乐公主。
English: In the summer and April, the Emperor's fourth daughter, Princess Yanqing, and fifth daughter, Princess Jingle, were enthroned.

古文：敕祠部检括天下寺及僧尼人数。大凡寺四千六百，兰若四万，僧尼二十六万五百。
现代文：敕命祠部查核、登记全国的寺庙及僧尼的人数，大约大寺四千六百所，僧舍四万处，僧尼共二十六万零五百人。
English: The Department of Ancestral Temples and Shrines has checked and registered the number of monks and nuns in temples across the country. There are approximately 4,600 large temples, 40,000 monks' residences, and a total of 260,500 monks and nuns.

古文：宰相杜忭罢知政事。
现代文：宰相杜停止执掌政务。
English: Prime Minister Du ceased to hold the reins of government.

古文：以户部侍郎、判户部崔元式同平章事。
现代文：任命户部侍郎、掌户部事崔元式为同平章事。
English: The appointment of Choi Won-shik, the head of the Household Division, to the post of Tonghei Shoji.

古文：六月丙子，敕： 汉、魏已来，朝廷大政，必下公卿详议，博求理道，以尽群情。
现代文：六月初一，敕令： 汉、魏以来，朝廷的大政方针，必定下达给公卿大臣们详加讨论，广泛地寻求治理国家的办法，以令百官尽情地发表意见。
English: On the first day of June, the imperial edict: Since the Han and Wei Dynasties, the major policies of the imperial court must be given to the noblemen and ministers to discuss in detail and extensively seek ways to govern the country, so that the officials can express their opinions as much as possible.

古文：所以政必有经，人皆向道。
现代文：政令之所以必定合于常理，是因为人人都向往正道。
English: The reason why the decree must be reasonable is that everyone yearns for the right path.

古文：此后事关礼法，群情有疑者，令本司申尚书都省，下礼官参议。
现代文：从今以后，如果事情关系到礼法，人们有所疑惑的。令主管司署向尚书省申报，再下达给礼部的官员讨论。
English: From now on, if the matter is related to etiquette, people have doubts. Let the competent department report to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and then send it to the officials of the Ministry of Education and Culture for discussion.

古文：如是刑狱，亦先令法官详议，然后申刑部参覆。
现代文：如果事关刑狱，也先由执法官员详加讨论，然后向刑部申报、由刑部审察。
English: If the case involves a penal institution, it will also be discussed in detail by law enforcement officials first, and then reported to and examined by the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：如郎官、御史有能驳难，或据经史故事，议论精当，即擢授迁改以奖之。
现代文：如果郎官、御史有能提出反驳责难，或者根据经典典籍上的旧闻，议论精辟公允的，立即提拔升迁以作为奖励。
English: If a vassal or imperial historian is able to offer a rebuttal or criticism, or if he or she is able to make an incisive and fair argument based on old news from classic books, he or she will be immediately promoted as a reward.

古文：如言涉浮华，都无经据，不在申闻。 
现代文：如果内容涉及浮华，全无根据，不在申奏上报之列。 
English: If the content involves glitz and is completely unfounded, it will not be included in the petition.

古文：神策奏修望仙楼及廊舍五百三十九间功毕。
现代文：神策军奏报望仙楼及廊庑房舍五百三十九间已建造完毕。
English: The construction of the 539-room Wangxian Building and the corridor building has been completed.

古文：秋七月庚子，敕并省天下佛寺。
现代文：秋，七月，敕令合并、减少天下的佛寺。
English: In autumn and July, imperial edicts were issued to merge and reduce the number of Buddhist temples around the world.

古文：中书门下条疏闻奏： 据令式，诸上州国忌日官吏行香于寺，其上州望各留寺一所，有列圣尊容，便令移于寺内；其下州寺并废。
现代文：中书门下省分列条款奏闻皇上说： 根据法令，各个上州的官吏，在各忌日都去寺庙进香，希望在上州各保留寺庙一所，凡有列圣的画像，便令其迁移到寺内；下州的寺庙均予以废除。
English: According to the imperial edict, all the officials of Shangzhou should go to the temple to offer incense on the day of their death, hoping to retain one temple in each of Shangzhou. If there is a picture of a canonized saint, it should be moved to the temple; all the temples in Shangzhou should be abolished.

古文：其上都、东都两街请留十寺，寺僧十人。 
现代文：其中上都、东都两街请保留十座寺院，每寺保留十名僧侣。 
English: Among them, please retain ten temples in the two streets of Shangdu and Dongdu, and retain ten monks in each temple.

古文：敕曰： 上州合留寺，工作精妙者留之；如破落，亦宜废毁。
现代文：敕令说： 上州应当保留寺院，把建造精细美妙的保留下来；如果破落了，也应该废弃拆毁。
English: The imperial edict said: Shangzhou should preserve the temples, and keep the fine and beautiful buildings; if they are ruined, they should also be abandoned and demolished.

古文：其合行香日，官吏宜于道观。
现代文：应该进香的那天，官吏应改在道观进香。
English: On the day when incense should be offered, government officials should instead offer incense according to Taoism.

古文：其上都、下都每街留寺两所，寺留僧三十人。
现代文：上都、下都每街保留两所寺院，每座寺院保留三十名僧侣。
English: Two temples will be reserved for each street in the upper and lower capital, and 30 monks will be reserved for each temple.

古文：上都左街留慈恩、荐福，右街留西明、庄严。 
现代文：上都左街保留慈恩寺、荐福寺，右街保留西明寺、庄严寺。 
English: On the left street of Shangdu, Jiongji Temple and Jianfu Temple are preserved, and on the right street, Ximing Temple and Solemn Temple are preserved.

古文：中书又奏： 天下废寺，铜像、钟磬委盐铁使铸钱，其铁像委本州铸为农器，金、银、鍮石等像销付度支。
现代文：中书省又奏说： 天下废弃的寺庙中的铜像、钟磬等物，委派盐铁使铸造铜钱，那铁像则委派各州铸成农具，金、银、黄铜等像销熔后交给度支司。
English: The People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Culture also said: The bronze statues, bell towers and other objects in the abandoned temples around the world were commissioned by the salt iron to cast copper money, and the iron statues were commissioned by the states to cast agricultural tools, and the gold, silver, brass and other image pins were melted and handed over to the State Council.

古文：衣冠士庶之家所有金、银、铜、铁之像，敕出后限一月纳官，如违，委盐铁使依禁铜法处分。
现代文：官宦和百姓之家所有的金、银、铜、铁铸造的像，在敕令发出之后限一个月交纳给官府，如果违令，委派盐铁使根据禁铜法论处。
English: All statues made of gold, silver, copper, and iron in the official residences and people's homes must be submitted to the government within one month after the issuance of the royal decree. If the order is violated, the salt and iron envoy will be appointed to deal with the matter according to the copper ban law.

古文：其土、木、石等像合留寺内依旧。 
现代文：那些土、木、石之类塑像则应当依旧保留在寺内。 
English: Those statues made of earth, wood and stone should still remain in the temple.

古文：又奏： 僧尼不合隶祠部，请隶鸿胪寺。
现代文：又奏说： 僧人、尼姑不应当隶属于祠部，请将其隶属于鸿胪寺管理。
English: He also said, "Monks and nuns should not be subordinate to the ancestral hall, but should be subordinate to the management of Hongye Temple."

古文：如外国人，送还本处收管。 
现代文：如果是外地人，送回其本地收管。 
English: If it is a foreigner, it will be sent back to its local collection authority.

古文：八月，制：
现代文：八月，制令说：
English: In August, the order said:

古文：朕闻三代已前，未尝言佛，汉魏之后，像教浸兴。
现代文： 朕听说夏、商、周三代以前，未曾谈过佛教的事，自汉、魏以后，佛教逐渐兴起。
English: I heard that before the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, there was no talk of Buddhism, but after the Han and Wei dynasties, Buddhism gradually emerged.

古文：是由季时，传此异俗，因缘染习，蔓衍滋多。
现代文：由这衰微的末世，才传下这异国的风俗。借着机缘，人们互相感染成习，蔓延得越来越多。
English: It was from this waning eschaton that this foreign custom was transmitted, and through chance, people infected one another with the custom, and it spread more and more.

古文：以至于蠹耗国风而渐不觉。诱惑人意，而众益迷。
现代文：达到损害国家风气的地步，逐渐严重却不能觉察；诱惑人心，因而人们愈加迷恋。
English: Reaching the point of damaging the national morale, gradually serious but imperceptible; tempting people, so people are more and more infatuated.

古文：洎于九州山原，两京关，僧徒日广，佛寺日崇。
现代文：浸蚀到九州的山陵和平原以及东西两京的市坊和宫阙，僧众一天天增多，佛寺一天天受推崇。
English: The mountains and plains of Kyushu have been eroded, as well as the city squares and courtyards of the eastern and western capitals. The number of monks is increasing day by day, and Buddhist temples are respected day by day.

古文：劳人力于土木之功，夺人利于金宝之饰，遗君亲于师资之际，违配偶于戒律之间。
现代文：在建造寺庙的土木功夫上耗费人力，在金佛宝殿的装饰上夺人利益。在以僧人为师之中遗忘了君王和亲长，在佛法的戒律中违反夫妇之伦。
English: In the construction of temples, manpower is expended on civil engineering, in the decoration of the golden Buddha treasure hall, profits are made, in the use of monks as teachers, kings and relatives are forgotten, and in the precepts of Buddhism, marital relations are violated.

古文：坏法害人，无逾此道。
现代文：败坏法制，坑害人民，没有比这种宗教更严重的了。
English: There is nothing more serious than this kind of religion that corrupts the legal system and harms the people.

古文：且一夫不田，有受其饥者；一妇不蚕，有受其寒者。
现代文：再说只要一个农夫不种田，就有因他而挨饿的人；只要一个织女不养蚕，就有因她而受冻的人。
English: Besides, as long as a farmer does not grow crops, there will be people who go hungry because of him; as long as a weaver does not raise silkworms, there will be people who freeze because of her.

古文：今天下僧尼，不可胜数，皆待农而食，待蚕而衣。
现代文：如今天下的僧尼，多得数都数不清，都等着农夫种田而吃饭，等着织女养蚕而穿衣。
English: For example, today's monks and nuns are too numerous to count. They all wait for the farmer to cultivate the fields and eat, and wait for the weaver to raise the silkworms and dress.

古文：寺宇招提，莫知纪极，皆云构藻饰，僭拟宫居。
现代文：寺院僧徒，不懂得限度，都是构筑高耸入云，文彩藻饰，非法地模拟皇家的宫室。
English: Temple monks, not knowing the limits, are building towering clouds, decorated with paintings, illegally simulating the royal palace.

古文：晋、宋、齐、梁，物力凋瘵，风俗浇诈，莫不由是而致也。
现代文：晋、宋、齐、梁几朝，物力凋残病萎，风俗浅薄诈伪，无不是由崇尚佛教而带来的。
English: During the Jin, Song, Qi, and Liang dynasties, material resources withered, diseases withered, and customs were shallow and fraudulent, all of which were brought about by advocating Buddhism.

古文：况我高祖、太宗，以武定祸乱，以文理华夏，执此二柄，足以经邦，岂可以区区西方之教，与我抗衡哉！
现代文：何况我朝的高祖、太宗，以武功平定祸乱，以文治治理华夏，抓住了这两条，就足以整治好国家了，怎么可以用这小小的西方之教与我国抗衡呢！
English: What's more, the great-grandfather of my dynasty, Emperor Taizong, used martial arts to quell the calamity and literature to govern China. If he grasped these two principles, it would be enough to rectify the country. How could he use this small Western religion to compete with our country?

古文：贞观、开元，亦尝厘革，剷除不尽，流衍转滋。
现代文：贞观、开元年间也曾经厘正改革佛教，铲除未尽，经过流传蔓延变得更加严重。
English: During the Zhenguan and the beginning of the first century, Buddhism was also rectified and reformed, but the eradication was not complete, and the spread became more serious as it spread.

古文：朕博览前言，旁求舆议，弊之可革，断在不疑。
现代文：朕广泛地阅览前人的著作，又从旁征求舆论的见解，弊端可以革除，是断然无可怀疑的。
English: There is absolutely no doubt that the drawbacks can be eliminated if we widely read the works of our predecessors and solicit opinions from the public.

古文：而中外诚臣，协予至意，条疏至当，宜在必行。
现代文：而朝内外忠诚的大臣们，和我的想法非常一致，呈上的奏疏极其恰当，必然应当实行。
English: On the other hand, the loyal ministers inside and outside the DPRK are very much in line with my thoughts. The proposal is extremely appropriate and must be implemented.

古文：惩千古之蠹源，成百王之典法，济人利众，予何让焉。
现代文：惩治千古蠹害的根源，成就百代帝王的典则，救助于人，有利于众，我有什么可谦让的呢！
English: Punishing the root cause of thousands of years of evil, achieving the code of a hundred emperors, helping people, and benefiting the public, what can I be modest about!

古文：其天下所拆寺四千六百余所，还俗僧尼二十六万五百人，收充两税户，拆招堤、兰若四万余所，收膏腴上田数千万顷，收奴婢为两税户十五万人。
现代文：全国所拆除的寺院四千六百多座，还俗的僧尼总共二十六万零五百人，收取他们充作交纳春秋两税的民户，拆除僧人居住的屋舍和庙堂四万余所，收回肥美的上好土地数千万顷，收容十五万奴婢使之成为交纳春秋两税的税户。
English: More than 4,600 temples were demolished across the country, and a total of 260,500 monks and nuns were returned to the secular world. They were used as private households to pay spring and autumn taxes, more than 40,000 houses and temples where monks lived were demolished, tens of millions of hectares of fertile good land were recovered, and 150,000 slaves and maidservants were accommodated to become tax households to pay spring and autumn taxes.

古文：隶僧尼属主客，显明外国之教。
现代文：把僧侣和尼姑隶属于主客司管辖，以明白地显示佛教是外国的宗教。
English: It clearly shows that Buddhism is a foreign religion by placing monks and nuns under the jurisdiction of the masters and guests.

古文：勒大秦穆护、袄三千余人还俗，不杂中华之风。
现代文：勒令大秦国的传教士和拜火教徒三千余人还俗为民，不让其淆乱中华的民风。唉！
English: He ordered the more than three thousand missionaries and fire-worshippers of the Great Qin State to become ordinary citizens, so that they would not confuse the Chinese people's customs. Alas!

古文：于戏！前古未行，似将有待；及今尽去，岂谓无时。
现代文：这是前人未曾实行的事，似将可以有所期待；如今把他们全部清除，难道能说不合时宜么！
English: This is something that has never been done before, and it seems that there will be something to look forward to; is it not time to get rid of them all now?

古文：驱游惰不业之徒，已逾十万；废丹雘无用之室，何啻亿千。
现代文：驱逐游荡懒惰、不务正业之徒，已经超过十万；废弃用彩色装饰、无用的僧房，何止万千。
English: More than 100,000 wandering, lazy, non-dutiful monks have been expelled, and thousands of colorfully decorated, useless monks' residences have been abandoned.

古文：自此清净训人，慕无为之理；简易齐政，成一俗之功。
现代文：从此以后可以不再烦忧地教诲人民，仰慕顺应自然的天理；坦然和怡地整顿朝政，完成统一人风的功业。
English: From now on, we can no longer worry about educating the people, admire the heavenly principle of conforming to nature; calmly and pleasantly rectify the imperial government, and complete the work of unifying the people.

古文：将使六合黔黎，同归皇化。
现代文：这将使普天之下的黎民百姓，共同归向皇天的教化。
English: This will enable the people of Lai under the whole world to jointly return to the enlightenment of the emperor.

古文：尚以革弊之始，日用不知，下制明廷，宜体予意。
现代文：现在尚处于革除弊端的开始，还不了解百姓的日常生活费用，颁下制令使廷臣洞明，应当体察我的用心。 
English: Now, we are still at the beginning of eliminating the drawbacks, and we still do not know the daily living expenses of the people. I should be aware of my intentions when I issue an order to make it clear to courtiers.

古文：制第六女封乐温公主，第七女封长宁公主。
现代文：皇上决定封第六女为乐温公主，封第七女为长宁公主。
English: The emperor decided to crown the sixth daughter as Princess Le Wen and the seventh daughter as Princess Changning.

古文：中书奏： 伏见公主上表称 妾某者 ，伏以臣妾之义，取其贱称；家人之礼，即宜区别。
现代文：中书省上奏说 ：看见公主所上的表章自称 妾某者 ，借用臣妾的含义，而选用它作为贱称；家属的礼节，应当和一般人有所区别。
English: According to the commentary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, when seeing the badge on the princess, some people called themselves "concubine," borrowing the meaning of "vassal and concubine" and using it as a lowly title; the etiquette of family members should be different from that of ordinary people.

古文：臣等商量，公主上表，请如长公主之例，并云 某邑公主几女上表 ，郡、县主亦望依此例称谓。 
现代文：臣等商议，公主所上的表章，请按照长公主的先例，都称 某邑公主第几女上表 ，郡主、县主也希望依照这个例子称谓自己。 
English: The courtiers and others deliberated, and in accordance with the precedent of the eldest princess, the watch badge on the princess should be called the watch of the first daughter of the princess of a certain town, and the princess and the county lord also hoped to call themselves according to this example.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：九月，火星犯上将。
现代文：九月，火星干犯上将星。
English: In September, Mars will interfere with the general star.

古文：十月乙亥，中书奏： 氾水县武牢关是太宗擒王世充、窦建德之地，关城东峰有二圣朔容，在一堂之内。
现代文：十月初一，中书省上奏说： 汜水县武牢关是太宗皇帝擒获王世充、窦建德的地方，城关东面的山上有两位圣王的塑像，在同一处殿堂之内。
English: On the first day of October, the official report of the General Office of the People's Republic of China said: Wuyongguan, Surabaya County, is the place where Emperor Taizong captured Wang Shichong and Dou Jiande. There are statues of the two holy kings on the mountain to the east of the city gate, in the same hall.

古文：伏以山河如旧，城垒犹存，威灵皆盛于轩台，风云疑还于丰沛。
现代文：因为那山河如旧，城垒犹存，故而它的威灵之气比宫内的轩台还要旺盛，看那风云变幻使人怀疑又回到了帝乡。
English: Because the mountains and rivers are as old as ever, the city walls still exist, and therefore its air of well-being is even more exuberant than that of the palace, seeing the changes makes people doubt that they have returned to the imperial town.

古文：诚宜百代严奉，万邦式瞻。
现代文：确实应当永远严肃地祀奉，天下都当作楷模来瞻仰。
English: Indeed, it should always be solemnly revered, and the whole world should look up to it as a model.

古文：西汉故事，祖宗尝行幸处，皆令邦国立庙。
现代文：按照西汉的旧例，凡属祖宗曾经临幸过的地方，都令当地建立祠庙。
English: According to the old practice of the Western Han Dynasty, all ancestral temples were established in the places where the ancestors had been fortunate enough to visit.

古文：今缘定觉寺例合毁拆。望取寺中大殿材木，于东峰以造一殿，四面置宫墙，伏望名为昭武庙，以昭圣祖武功之盛。
现代文：如今由于定觉寺照例应当拆毁，希望选取寺中大殿的梁木，在城关以东的山上建造一座殿堂，四周建置宫墙，希望取名为昭武庙，以昭示圣祖武功的兴盛。
English: Now, since Jokyo-ji Temple should be demolished as usual, it is hoped that the beams of the main hall in the temple will be selected to build a hall on the hill to the east of the castle gate, surrounded by palace walls. It is hoped that it will be named Shomu-ji Temple to show the prosperity of the holy ancestor's martial arts.

古文：委怀孟节度使差判官一人勾当。
现代文：委托怀孟节度使差遣一名判官办理。
English: It was entrusted to the Huai Meng Festival to send a judge to handle the case.

古文：缘驿像年代已久，望令李石于东都拣好画手，就增严饰。
现代文：因为圣像年代已经很久，希望令李石在东都挑选出色的画工，立即增添端庄的装饰。
English: Because the icon has been around for a long time, it is hoped that Li Shi will select an outstanding painter in Dongdu and immediately add a dignified decoration.

古文：初兴功日，望令东都差分司官一员荐告。 
现代文：开始动工的日子，望皇上命东都派一名分司官前去祭告。 
English: On the day of the start of construction, Emperor Mochihito ordered Tōdō to send a district magistrate to announce the start.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十一月甲辰，敕： 悲田养病坊，缘僧尼还俗，无人主持，恐残疾无以取给，两京量给寺田赈济。
现代文：十一月初一，敕令： 原佛寺济贫的悲田养病坊，因为僧尼还俗为民，无人主持，恐怕病残废疾的人无处供给取食，两京酌情赐给寺庙的田地以赈济他们。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the imperial edict was issued: the former Buddhist temples should help the poor and raise the sick in the fields of compassion, because the monks and nuns were still ordinary people and there was no one to preside over them. I am afraid that the sick, the disabled and the diseased would have nowhere to get food. The two capitals should give the fields of the temples to help them.

古文：诸州府七顷至十顷，各于本管选耆寿一人勾当，以充粥料。 
现代文：各州府拨出七顷至十顷田，各在本管辖区选一名年老寿高的人管理，以田地上的出产作为救济粮。 
English: Each prefectural government allocates seven to ten hectares of farmland, and each chooses a person of advanced age to manage it, using the produce of the fields as relief food.

古文：十二月，车驾幸咸阳。
现代文：十二月，皇帝临幸咸阳。
English: In December, Emperor Linxing went to Xianyang.

古文：给事中韦弘质上疏，论中书权重，三司钱谷不合宰相府兼领。
现代文：给事中韦弘质上疏，认为中书省的权力太大，中书、门下、御史三司的钱粮不应当由相府兼管。
English: However, Wei Hong, who was not involved in the matter, believed that the power of the Ministry of Education and Culture was too great, and that the money and grain of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the three departments of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports and Science should not be managed by the State Council.

古文：相奏论之曰：
现代文：宰相对此上奏说：
English: The Prime Minister said:

古文：臣等昨于延英对，恭闻对旨常欲朝廷尊，臣下肃，此是陛下深究理本也。
现代文： 臣等昨日在延英殿与皇上奏对，恭听圣旨说总希望朝廷尊严，臣下恭肃，这是因为陛下深刻地探究了事理的根本。
English: Yesterday, at the Palace of Yan Ying, the courtiers argued with the Emperor, saying that they always hoped for the dignity of the Imperial Court, and the courtiers were respectful. This was because His Majesty had deeply explored the fundamentals of the matter.

古文：臣按《管子》云： 凡国之重器，莫重于令。
现代文：臣按《管子》上说： 所有国家的宝器，没有比法令更重要的了。
English: According to "The Pipe," the minister said: "Of all the treasures of a country, nothing is more important than its laws and regulations.

古文：令重则群尊，君尊则国安。
现代文：法令重要则君王尊贵，君王尊贵则国家太平。
English: If the law is important, then the king is honorable, and if the king is honorable, then the country is peaceful.

古文：故国安在于奠君，尊君在于行令。
现代文：因此国家太平在于尊奉君王，尊奉君王在于执行法令。
English: Therefore, national peace lies in honoring the king, and honoring the king lies in enforcing the law.

古文：君人之理，本莫要于出令。
现代文：君王和臣民关系的道理，从根本上说没有比制定法令更重要的了。
English: Fundamentally, there is no more important principle of the relationship between the sovereign and the subjects than the enactment of laws.

古文：故曰：亏令者死，益令者死，不得令者死，不从令者死。
现代文：因此，损害法令者灭亡，繁增法令者灭亡，不执行法令者灭亡，不服从法令者灭亡。 
English: Therefore, those who damage the law will perish, those who multiply the law will perish, those who do not implement the law will perish, and those who do not obey the law will perish.

古文：又曰：令行于上，而下论不可，是上失其威，下系于人也。 
现代文：又说 ：法令由长上实行，而下吏认为可执行也可不执行，这就使长上失去威信，而受到了下吏的牵制。 
English: He also said: "Orders are implemented by superiors, but subordinate officials think that they can be implemented or not implemented. This causes superiors to lose their prestige and be constrained by subordinate officials."

古文：自大和已来，其风大弊，令出于上，非之于下。
现代文：自从大和年间以来，风气已经大坏，法令出自于上，臣民否定于下。
English: Since the Yamato era, the culture has become very bad, with decrees coming from above and subjects denying them from below.

古文：此弊不除，无以理国也。
现代文：这项弊端不除，是无法治理国家的。
English: Without eliminating this evil, it is impossible to govern the country.

古文：昨韦弘质所论宰相不合兼领钱谷。臣等辄以事体陈闻。
现代文： 昨日韦弘质所谈宰相不应当兼管钱粮的问题，臣等就以这件事奏闻于皇上。
English: Yesterday, Wei Hongjie talked about the issue that the prime minister should not be in charge of money and grain, and the ministers reported this to the emperor.

古文：昔匡衡所以云： 大臣者，国家之股肱，万姓所瞻仰，明王所慎择。 
现代文：从前匡衡这样说 ：大臣是国家的栋梁，被万民所瞻仰，明君谨慎地选择。 
English: Once upon a time, Kuangheng said this: The minister is the pillar of the country, respected by all the people, and carefully selected by the emperor.

古文：《传》曰： 下轻其上，贱人图柄，则国家摇动，而人不静。 
现代文：《传》阐释说： 如果臣下轻视其长上，品格卑劣的人就图谋权柄，国家就会动荡，而人民就不安定。 
English: "Biography" explained: If the vassals despise their superiors, and people of despicable character seek power, the country will be unstable, and the people will be unstable.

古文：弘质受人教导，辄献封章，是则贱人图柄矣。
现代文：韦弘质受了别人的教唆引诱，就献上加封的奏章，这正是卑劣的人图谋权柄。
English: Wei Hongjie was seduced by the instigation of others, and presented the additional seal, which is just a despicable person's attempt to gain power.

古文：萧望之汉朝名儒重德，为御史大夫，奏云： 今首岁日月少光，罪在臣等， 上以望之意轻丞相，乃下侍中御史诘问。
现代文：萧望之是汉朝的名儒，注重德行，担任御史大夫，上奏说 ：今年正月日月不明亮，罪过在臣等身上。 皇帝认为萧望之的用意是轻视丞相，便派侍中去询问御史。
English: Xiao Wangzhi was a famous Confucian of the Han Dynasty, who focused on virtue and served as the imperial historian, and the report said: This year's New Year's Day is not bright, and the sin is on the subjects. The emperor thought that Xiao Wangzhi's intention was to despise the prime minister, so he sent an attendant to inquire about the imperial history.

古文：贞观中，监察御史陈师合上书云： 人之思虑有限，一人不可兼总数职。 
现代文：贞观年间，监察御史陈师合上书说： 人的思虑是有限度的，一个人不能兼管几个职务。 
English: During the Zhenguan era, Chen Shi, the inspector general of history, concluded his letter by saying: "There is a limit to people's thoughts. One person cannot hold several positions at the same time.

古文：太宗曰： 此人妄有毁谤，欲离间我君臣。 
现代文：太宗说 ：此人狂妄地进行诽谤，想要离间我君臣关系。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "This man is insolently slandering me and trying to sever the relationship between the emperor and the people.

古文：流师合于岭外。
现代文：把陈师合流放到岭外。 
English: Chen Shishi was exiled outside of Ling.

古文：贾谊云： 人主如堂，群臣如陛，陛高则堂高。 
现代文：贾谊说 ：人君像厅堂，群臣像台阶，台阶高则厅堂也就高。 
English: Jia Yi said: "People are like the hall, the courtiers are like the steps, and if the steps are high, the hall is also high."

古文：亦由将相重则君尊，其势然也。
现代文：也认为将相重要则君王尊贵，其趋势使他这样。
English: He also believed that the most important thing was the dignity of the king, and his tendency made him so.

古文：如宰相奸谋隐匿，则人人皆得上论。
现代文：如果宰相的奸谋隐匿不露，则人人都可以上奏揭露。
English: If the Prime Minister's treachery is concealed and not revealed, then everyone can report it and expose it.

古文：至于制置职业，固是人主之柄，非小人所得干议。
现代文：至于安排职务，从来都是君王的柄权，不是一般人所能干涉议论的。
English: As for the arrangement of posts, it has always been the authority of the monarch, not the ordinary people can interfere in the discussion.

古文：古者朝廷之上，各守其官。思不出位。
现代文：古代的朝廷上，各自安守自己的官职，思考不越出自己的地位。
English: In the ancient imperial court, each of them guarded his official position and did not think beyond his own status.

古文：弘质贱人，岂得以非所宜言上渎明主，此是轻宰相挠时政也。
现代文：韦弘质这样卑劣的人，怎能用不宜于由他说的话来亵渎英明的人主呢！这正是轻视宰相干扰时政。
English: How can such a despicable person as Wei Hongjie use words that are not suitable for him to blaspheme a wise man! This is precisely despising the prime minister for interfering in current politics.

古文：昔东汉处士横议，遂有党锢事起，此事深要惩绝。
现代文：从前东汉的读书人对朝政横加议论，便有了党锢之祸的发生，此事一定要惩办、禁绝。
English: Once upon a time, when readers in the Eastern Han Dynasty began to discuss the politics of the imperial court, the scourge of partisanship occurred. This must be punished and prohibited.

古文：伏望陛下详其奸诈，去其朋徒，则朝廷安静，制令肃然。
现代文：望陛下细察他的奸邪伪诈，除去其朋比的徒党，则朝廷安宁，制令严肃。
English: If His Majesty carefully scrutinizes his treachery and duplicity, and removes his cronies from the clique, then the court will be peaceful and order-making will be serious.

古文：臣等不胜感愤之至。
现代文：臣等不胜激动、愤怒之至。 
English: The vassals were very excited and angry.

古文：弘质坐贬官。
现代文：韦弘质因此获罪而贬官。
English: Wei Hongjian was found guilty and demoted.

古文：又奏曰： 天宝已前，中书除机密迁授之外，其他政事皆与中书舍人同商量。
现代文：宰相又上奏说 ：天宝年以前，中书省除了机密的升职授官外，其他的政务都与中书舍人共同商量。
English: The Prime Minister also reported that before the Tianbao Year, in addition to the confidential promotion and appointment of officials, the other government affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture were jointly discussed with the people of the Ministry of Education.

古文：自艰难已来，务从权便，政颇去于台阁，事多系于军期，决遣万机，不暇博议。
现代文：自从政局艰难以来，一切从临时方便出发，政令很多离开中书省作决定，事情大多与军事行动的时间相联系，决定种种事务，来不及进行广泛的讨论。
English: Since the political situation has been difficult, everything has been based on temporary convenience. Many government decrees have left the People's Republic of China and the People's Republic of China to make decisions. Things are mostly related to the time of military operations, and various matters are decided before it is time for extensive discussion.

古文：臣等商量，今后除机密公事外，诸候表疏、百僚奏事、钱谷刑狱等事，望令中书舍人六人，依故事先参详可否，臣等议而奏闻。 
现代文：臣等商量，今后除了机密公事之外，藩镇的表章、百官的奏疏、钱粮刑狱等事务，希望先令中书舍人六人按照旧例参与详议是否可行，臣等再商议奏闻皇上。 
English: The courtiers and others discussed that in the future, in addition to confidential business, there would be matters such as the seal of the domain, the report of the hundred officials, and the prison of Qian Rong. It was hoped that the six people who were in the middle of the shilling would participate in the detailed discussion in accordance with the old example. The courtiers and others then discussed the report to the emperor.

古文：从之。李德裕在相位日久，朝臣为其所抑者皆怨之。
现代文：皇上允从，李德裕居于相位的时间长了，被他所压抑的朝臣都很怨恨他。
English: The emperor agreed, and Li Deyu stayed in the position for a long time. The courtiers who were oppressed by him resented him.

古文：自崔铉、杜忭罢相后，中贵人上前言德裕太专，上意不悦，而白敏中之徒，教弘质论之，故有此奏。
现代文：自从崔铉、杜被罢相之后，宦官在皇上面前说李德裕太专横，皇上的心里不高兴，而白敏中之类人教唆韦弘质上疏谈这件事，因此便有了这道奏章。
English: Since Cui Yong and Du Du were dismissed from their posts, the eunuchs said in front of the emperor that Li Deyu was too domineering, the emperor was not happy, and Bai Minzhong and other people encouraged Wei Hong to talk about the matter, so there was this play.

古文：而德裕结怨之深，由此言也。
现代文：而李德裕结怨一天天的深，也是由这道奏章引起的。
English: And Li Deyu's deep-rooted resentment is also caused by this piece.

古文：六年春正月癸卯朔。
现代文：会昌六年春，正月初一为癸卯日。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Huichang, the first day of the first month is the first day of the second month.

古文：丁巳，左散骑常侍致仕冯定卒，赠工部尚书。
现代文：正月十五日，离任退休的左散骑常侍冯定去世，追赠为工部尚书。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the year, Feng Ding, a retired left-handed horseback riding attendant, passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Shang Shu of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：己未，南诏、契丹、室韦、渤海、牂柯、昆明等国遣使入朝，对于麟德殿。
现代文：正月十七日，南诏、契丹、室韦、渤海、柯、昆明等国派遣使臣入朝，皇上与他们在麟德殿谈话。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the year, Nanzhao, Khitan, Murowe, Bohai, Ke, Kunming and other countries sent envoys to the imperial court, and the emperor had a conversation with them at the Lin De Palace.

古文：兵部侍郎、判度支卢商奏： 诸道兵讨伐党项，今差度支郎官一人往所在有粮料州郡，先计度支给。 
现代文：兵部侍郎、掌度支事的卢商上奏说 ：各道军队讨伐党项族，现在应派一名度支郎官到那些有粮草的州郡，计算数目支付给各军。 
English: Lu Shangzhuo, the attendant of the military department and the person in charge of the dispatch, said: the armies of each province should fight against the party and clan, and now a dispatch officer should be sent to those states and counties that have grain and grass, and the calculated number should be paid to each army.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己丑，渤海王子大之萼入朝。
现代文：正月二十三日，渤海国王子大之萼入朝。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month, the son of the king of Bohai entered the imperial court.

古文：东都太微宫修成玄元皇帝、玄宗、肃宗三圣容，遣右散骑常侍裴章往东都荐献。
现代文：东都的太微宫建成玄元皇帝、玄宗、肃宗三座圣像，派右散骑常侍裴章前往东都祭祀，贡奉祭品。
English: The three holy statues of Emperor Xuanzong, Emperor Xuanzong and Emperor Suizong were built in the Taibigu Palace in the eastern capital, and the right-hand rider and attendant Peizhang was sent to the eastern capital to offer sacrifices and pay tribute.

古文：监察元寿奏前彭州刺史李铁买本州龙兴寺婢为乳母，违法，贬随州长史。
现代文：监察元寿奏称，前彭州刺史李钅夫买本州龙兴寺的婢女为乳母，违法，贬职为随州长史。
English: Supervisor Yuan Shuxiao said that the former Pengzhou assassin Li Yanfu bought the maid of the Longxing Temple in Honshu as a nanny, which is illegal, and the demotion is the history of the governor.

古文：二月壬申朔。
现代文：二月初一为壬申日。
English: The first day of February is Jinshin Day.

古文：癸酉，以时雨愆候，诏： 京城天下系囚，除官典犯赃、持仗劫杀、忤逆十恶外，余罪递减一等，犯轻罪者并释放。
现代文：二月初二，因为雨水不调，下诏说： 京城和全国拘禁的囚犯，除了犯贪污罪的官员、手持凶器抢劫杀人、忤逆犯上十恶不赦的之外，其余的罪犯均递减一等，犯轻罪的均予释放。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, because the rain was not adjusted, the following edict was issued: Inmates detained in Beijing and throughout the country, except for officials who committed corruption, armed robbery and murder, and traitors who committed the most heinous crimes, the remaining criminals were reduced by one grade, and those who committed minor crimes were released.

古文：征党项行营兵士，不得滥有杀伤。 
现代文：征伐党项的各军营士兵，不得随意杀人伤人。 
English: The soldiers of the various military camps of the party must not kill or injure people at will.

古文：丁丑，左拾遗王龟以父兴元节度使起年高，乞休官侍养，从之。
现代文：二月初六，左拾遗王龟因为父亲兴元节度使王起年老，请求休官侍养，皇上允从。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, Zuo Zhi You Wang Ge, because his father's Xingyuan Festival had caused Wang Qi to grow old, asked to be relieved of his duties as an attendant, and the emperor agreed.

古文：是夜，月犯毕大星，相去三寸。
现代文：当夜，月亮干犯毕宿的大星，相距仅三寸。
English: That night, the moon interfered with the great star, which was only three inches away.

古文：庚辰，以夏州节度使米暨充东北道招讨党项使。
现代文：二月初九，任命夏州节度使米暨充任东北道招讨党项使。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, he was appointed as the North-East Invitation and Invitation Party Envoy.

古文：壬午，右庶子吕让进状： 亡兄温女，大和七年嫁左卫兵曹萧敏，生二男。开成三年，敏心疾乖忤，因而离婚。
现代文：二月十一日，右庶子吕让进呈诉状说： 亡兄吕温的女儿，太和七年嫁左卫兵曹萧敏为妻，生有二子，开成三年，萧敏心情烦郁性情乖戾，因而离婚。
English: On February 11th, Lv Zhanjin, the son-in-law of the deceased brother Lv Wen, filed a complaint saying: The daughter of the deceased brother Lv Wen, the mother and seven years old married the left guard Cao Xiaomin as a wife, had two sons, three years old, Xiaomin was depressed and grumpy, so they divorced.

古文：今敏日愈，却乞与臣侄女配合。 
现代文：现在萧敏一天天好转，却请求和臣的侄女重新婚配。 皇上允从。
English: Now that Xiao Min is getting better day by day, he has asked the courtier's niece to remarry, and the emperor has complied.

古文：从之。乙酉，前太子少保刘沔可太子太保致仕。
现代文：二月十四日，前太子少保刘沔允许以太子太保离任。
English: On February 14th, Liu Ye, the former crown prince's younger bodyguard, allowed Ethereal's bodyguard to leave his post.

古文：前寿州刺史王镇贬潞州长史。
现代文：前寿州刺史王镇贬为潞州长史。
English: Former Shoushu governor Wang Zhen was demoted to Shoushu governor.

古文：丁亥夜，月色少光，至一更一点，犯荧惑，相去四寸。
现代文：二月十六日夜，月色少光，至一更一点时干犯荧惑星，相距仅四寸。
English: On the night of February 16th, the moon was fainter, and at one o'clock it collided with the fluorescent planet, only four inches apart.

古文：后良久，其光烛地，在轸七度。
现代文：过了好一会，月光照亮地面，在轸宿天区七度。
English: After a while, the moonlight illuminates the ground, and it is seven degrees in the sky.

古文：壬辰，以翰林学士、起居郎孙谷为兵部员外郎充职。
现代文：二月二十一日，任命翰林学士、起居郎孙谷充任兵部员外郎。
English: On February 21st, Hanlin Baccalaureate and Kijiro Sunya were appointed to the post of military attaché.

古文：以旱，停上巳曲江赐宴。
现代文：因为旱灾，皇上取消在曲江亭赐宴。
English: Because of the drought, the emperor cancelled the imperial banquet at Qujiangting.

古文：敕： 比缘钱重币轻，生人转困，今新加鼓铸，必在流行，通变救时，莫切于此。
现代文：敕令： 近来因为钱的价值重，帛的价值轻，百姓变得困苦，现在重新增加鼓冶铸钱，务必使其流通。通达变化以挽救时弊，没有比这更急迫的事了。
English: Imperial edict: Recently, because the value of money is heavy and the value of money is light, the people have become poor. Now, it is necessary to increase the supply of gongye minted money and make it circulate. There is nothing more urgent than to achieve change to save the times.

古文：宜申先甲之令，以儆居货之徒。
现代文：应当重申先前的法令，以警告那些囤积物资的人。
English: The previous decree should be reiterated to warn those who hoard.

古文：京城诸道，宜起来年正月已后，公私行用，并取新钱。
现代文：京城及各道，应当从明年正月以后开始，公私都重新铸铜钱通行使用。
English: From the first month of next year, the capital city and all the provinces should begin to re-mint copper coins for public and private use.

古文：其旧钱权停三数年。
现代文：旧钱则暂时停用三年。
English: The old money will be suspended for three years.

古文：如有违犯，同用铅锡钱例科断。
现代文：如有违犯者，与用铅锡铸的假钱案例同样判罪。
English: If there are violators, they will be convicted in the same way as the case of counterfeit money made of lead and tin.

古文：其旧钱并没纳。 
现代文：其旧钱均予没收。 
English: All his old money will be confiscated.

古文：又敕： 诸道铸钱，已有次第，须令旧钱流布，绢价值增。
现代文：又敕令 ：各道铸造的钱币，已经有先后顺序，须令旧钱流通，使绢帛的价值稍许增高。
English: He also ordered that the coins minted in each province should be sequenced, and that the old money should be circulated so that the value of the ingots would increase slightly.

古文：文武百僚俸料，起三月一日，并给见钱一半。
现代文：文武百官的职俸津贴钱，从三月一日开始，均只给现钱的一半。
English: Starting from March 1, civil and military officials will only be paid half of their current salaries and allowances.

古文：先给疋段，对估时价，皆给见钱。 
现代文：先前所给的绢帛匹段，按照当时的价格相应估算，都支付现钱。 
English: All of the previously given amounts were paid in cash, according to the corresponding estimates of the prices at that time.

古文：贬舒州刺史苏涤为连州刺史。
现代文：将舒州刺史苏涤贬为连州刺史。
English: He downgraded the Shuzhou stabbing history of Suya to the Lianzhou stabbing history.

古文：涤李宗闵党，前自给事中为德裕所斥，累年郡守，至是李绅言其无政故也。
现代文：苏涤是李宗闵一党，先前从给事中的任上被李德裕所斥逐，连年担任州郡地方官，这时候李绅说他没有政绩，因而贬职。
English: Su Dara was a member of Li Zongyao's party. He had previously been ousted by Li Deyu from the post in question, and had served as a state and county local official for several years. At this time, Li Sheng said that he had no political achievements, and was demoted.

古文：以邠宁节度使高承恭充西南面讨党项使。
现代文：任命宁节度使高承恭充任西南面招讨党项使。
English: Ning Jiedu appointed Gao Chenggong as the party envoy to the southwest.

古文：丙申夜，月掩牛南星，又犯岁星。
现代文：二月二十五日夜，月亮掩蔽牛宿的南星，又干犯木星。
English: On the night of February 25th, the moon occulted the southern star of the Cow Inn and interfered with Jupiter.

古文：丁酉，新罗使金国连入朝。
现代文：二月二十六日，新罗国使臣金国连入朝。
English: On February 26, the envoy of Silla, Kim Kwok-lien, arrived in Korea.

古文：辛丑夜，东北流星如桃，色赤，其光烛地，尾迹入大角，西流穿紫微垣。
现代文：二月二十九日夜，东北方向出现一颗如桃大的流星，色红，光芒照亮地面，尾迹进入大角星，向西穿过紫微垣。
English: On the night of February 29th, a meteor as big as a peach appeared in the northeastern direction. It was red in color, and its light illuminated the ground. Its trail entered the Arcturus constellation and passed westward through the purple haze.

古文：三月壬寅，上不豫，制改御名炎。
现代文：三月初一，皇上身体不适，决定改名为李炎。
English: On the first day of March, the emperor fell ill and decided to change his name to Li Yan.

古文：帝重方士，颇服食修摄，亲受法箓。
现代文：皇帝看重方士，颇喜服药保养，亲自接受符。
English: The emperor attached great importance to the fortuneteller, and was quite happy to take medicine and receive charms in person.

古文：至是药躁，喜怒失常，疾既笃，旬日不能言。
现代文：到这时药性躁热发作，皇上变得喜怒无常，病势沉重以后，十余日不能说话。
English: By this time, drug-induced mania had set in, the emperor had become moody, and he was unable to speak for more than ten days after the illness became severe.

古文：欲革斯弊，以俟河清，昭肃明照，听斯弊矣。
现代文：宰相李德裕等请求拜见，皇上不许。朝内外都不知道皇上是否平安，人们心中恐惧。当月二十三日，皇上宣布遗诏，以皇太叔光王在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu and others asked to see him, but the emperor would not allow it. Both inside and outside the court did not know whether the emperor was safe, and people were afraid. On the 23rd of that month, the emperor announced his last will and testament, with Emperor Taishu Guangwang in front of the coffin as the emperor.

古文：宣宗宣宗圣武献文孝皇帝讳忱，宪宗第十三子，母曰孝明皇后郑氏。
现代文：当天皇帝驾崩，时年三十三岁。追加谥号为至道昭肃孝皇帝，庙号 武宗 ，当年八月安葬于端陵，德妃王氏附葬于此。宣宗圣武献文孝皇帝名忱，宪宗第十三个儿子，母亲是孝明皇后郑氏。
English: The emperor passed away on the same day, at the age of thirty-three. His additional posthumous name was Emperor Zhi Dao Zhaoxiao, and his temple name was Wuzong. He was buried in August of that year in the Duan Mausoleum, and the Tefui Wang clan was also buried here. Xuan Zong Shenwu was dedicated to Emperor Wenxiao Mianzhen, the thirteenth son of Emperor Xianzong, and his mother was Empress Xiaoming Zheng.

古文：元和五年六月二十二日，生于大明宫。
现代文：元和五年六月二十二日，出生在大明宫。
English: He was born in Daming Palace on June 22nd, 1500.

古文：长庆元年三月，封光王，名怡。
现代文：长庆元年三月，封为光王，名为怡。
English: In March of the first year of Changqing, he was given the title of Guangwang and given the name Yi.

古文：会昌六年三月一日，开宗疾笃，遗诏立为皇太叔，权勾当军国政事。
现代文：会昌六年三月一日，武宗病危，遗诏立李忱为皇太叔，暂且主管军国政事。
English: On the first day of March in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Huichang, Emperor Wuzong was critically ill, and he bequeathed Li Zhen as the Emperor's uncle, temporarily in charge of military and political affairs.

古文：翌日，柩前即帝位，改今名，时年三十七。帝外晦而内朗，严重寡言，视瞻特异。
现代文：第二天，李怡在武宗灵柩前即皇帝位，改现在的名字为忱，当时三十七岁，皇上外表隐晦而内心明朗，为人严肃庄重很少言语，看问题不同寻常。
English: The next day, Li Yi was enthroned as emperor in front of the tomb of Emperor Wuzong, and changed his name to Zhen. At that time, he was thirty-seven years old. The emperor was obscure on the outside but clear on the inside. He was serious and solemn and rarely spoke, and his way of looking at things was unusual.

古文：幼时宫中以为不慧。
现代文：年幼时宫中认为他不聪明。
English: When he was young, his parents didn't think he was smart.

古文：十余岁时，遇重疾沈缀，忽有光辉烛身，蹶然而兴，正身拱揖，如对臣僚。乳媪以为心疾。穆宗视之，扶背曰： 此吾家英物，非心惫也。 
现代文：十多岁时，害了重病，越来越沉重，忽然有光辉照耀其身，便马上一跃而起，端正身体拱手作揖，像对待臣下一样，奶母认为是心病，穆宗看他后，抚摸着他的背说： 这孩子是我家英明人物，不是心病。 
English: When he was more than ten years old, he fell seriously ill and became heavier and heavier. Suddenly, a bright light shone on his body. He immediately jumped up, straightened his body and made a fist, just like he did with his vassals. His wet nurse thought it was a heart disease. Mu Zong looked at him, stroked his back and said, "This child is a wise person in my family, not a heart disease."

古文：赐以玉如意、御马、金带。
现代文：穆宗赐给他玉如意、御马、金带。
English: Mu Zong gave him jade, a horse, and a gold belt.

古文：常梦乘龙升天，言之于郑后，乃曰： 此不宜人知者，幸勿复言。 
现代文：皇上常常梦见乘龙上天，向母亲郑皇后告之，郑皇后于是对他说 ：这个梦不应该让旁人知道，希望你不要再说。 
English: The emperor often dreamed of ascending to heaven on a dragon. He told this to his mother, Empress Zheng, who then said to him, "This dream should not be told to others. I hope you will not repeat it."

古文：历大和、会昌朝，愈事韬晦，群巨游处，未尝有言。
现代文：经过大和、会昌两朝，对事情愈加隐晦不露，和大家在一起时，不曾说过做梦的话。
English: After the two dynasties of Yamato and Hoechang, he became more and more secretive about things. When he was with everyone, he never said anything about dreaming.

古文：文宗、武宗幸十六宅宴集，强诱其言，以为戏剧，谓之 光叔 。
现代文：文宗、武宗驾到十六宅宴饮集会，勉强引导他说话，把这作为玩笑，叫他为 光叔 。
English: Wenzong and Wuzong drove to the 16th house for a banquet and meeting, and reluctantly led him to speak, taking it as a joke and calling him Guangzhuang.

古文：武宗气豪，尤不为礼。及监国之日，哀毁满容，接待群僚，决断庶务，人方见其隐德焉。
现代文：武宗气势豪迈，尤其对他不拘礼法，等到他代理国政之日，满脸悲伤接待臣下，决断事务，人们这才见到他深厚的品德。
English: Emperor Wuzong was a man of great dignity. He was especially devoid of formal etiquette. It was not until the day he took over state affairs, when he received his vassals with a sad face and made decisions, that people saw his deep moral character.

古文：四月辛未，释服，尊母郑氏曰皇太后。
现代文：四月一日，脱掉了丧服，尊奉母亲郑氏为皇太后。
English: On April 1, she took off her mourning clothes and honored her mother, Empress Zheng, as empress dowager.

古文：以兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨白敏中守本官、同中书门下平章事；以特进、守太尉、门下侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、卫国公、食邑二千户李德裕检校太尉、同平章事、江陵尹、荆南节度使；以中散大夫、大理卿马植为金紫光禄大夫、刑部侍郎，充诸道盐铁等使。
现代文：以兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨白敏中守本官同中书门下平章事；以特进、守太尉、门下侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、卫国公、食邑二千户李德裕任检校太尉、同平章事、江陵尹、荆南节度使；以中散大夫、大理卿马植为金紫光禄大夫、刑部侍郎，充诸道盐铁等使。
English: He appointed Bai Min, the attendant of the military department, and Han Lin, the bachelor, as the head of the middle management and the subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordin

古文：以成德军节度使王元逵检校太保，山南西道节度使王起检校司空，魏博节度使何弘敬、淮南节度使李绅并检校司空，剑南西川节度使崔郸检校尚书右仆射，同中书门下平章事并如故。
现代文：以成德军节度使王元逵任检校太保，山南西道节度使王起任检校司空，魏博节度使何弘敬、淮南节度使李绅都任检校司空，剑南、西川节度使崔郸任检校尚书右仆射，同中书门下平章事都依从前一样。
English: The Chengdu German Army Festival appointed Wang Yuanjun as the school inspector, the Shannan West Road Festival appointed Wang Ji as the school inspector, the Weibo Festival appointed He Hongjing, the Huainan Festival appointed Li Shengtu as the school inspector, and the Jianan and West River Festival appointed Cui Jian as the school inspector. The same as before.

古文：东都留守李石奏修奉太庙毕，所司迎奉太微宫神主祔庙讫。
现代文：东都留守李石上奏说修理太庙已经完毕，有关部门迎奉太微宫神主到庙附祭也已完毕。
English: Li Shisheng, who stayed behind in Dongdu, said that the repair of the Taimiao had been completed, and the relevant departments had also completed the ceremony to welcome the god of the Taimiao to the temple.

古文：东都太庙者，本武后家庙，神龙中中宗反正，废武氏庙主，立太祖已下神主付之。安禄山陷洛阳，以庙为马厩，弃其神主，而协律郎严郢收而藏之。
现代文：东都太庙，本是武后家庙，神龙中期中宗反正，废除了武氏庙主，立太祖以下神主到太庙附祭，安禄山攻陷了洛阳，以太庙为马厩，弃除了所有神主，然而协律郎严郢将神主收藏起来了。
English: Dongdu Taimiao, originally the temple of the Empress Dowager Wu, in the middle of the period of the Dragon God, the Middle Sect of Buddhism was established, abolishing the temple head of the Wu clan, establishing the deities of the ancestors to the temple, Anlu Mountain conquered Luoyang, and the Taimiao was a stable, abandoning all the deities, but the conciliator Yan Yan collected the deities.

古文：史思明再陷洛阳，寻又散失。
现代文：史思明第二次攻陷洛阳，不久神主又散失了。
English: Shi Siming invaded Luoyang for the second time, and soon the god was dispersed.

古文：贼平，东京留守卢正己又募得之。庙已焚毁，乃寄主于太微宫。
现代文：贼人被平定，东京留守卢正己又招募得到了神主，太庙已经被焚毁，于是将神主寄托在太微宫。
English: The thieves were subdued, and Lu Zhengji, who was left behind in Tokyo, recruited and obtained the god. The Imperial Temple had already been burned, so the god was placed in the Taibigu Palace.

古文：大历十四年，留守路嗣恭奏重修太庙，以迎神主。
现代文：大历十四年，留守路嗣恭上奏请重修太庙，以迎接神主。
English: In the 14th year of the lunar calendar, the remaining path heirs made a solemn appeal to rebuild the ancient temple to welcome the god.

古文：诏百官参议，纷然不定，礼仪使颜真卿坚请归祔，不从。
现代文：皇上诏令百官议论，纷纷提议而不能决定，礼仪使颜真卿坚决请求将神主归附，皇上不从。
English: The Emperor's edict was discussed by hundreds of officials, who made proposals one after another but could not come to a decision. The etiquette made Yan Zhenqing firmly request that the deity be attached, but the Emperor did not comply.

古文：会昌五年，留守李石因太微宫正殿圮陊，以废弘敬寺为太庙，迎神主祔之。
现代文：会昌五年，留守李石因为太微宫正殿崩塌，以废弃的弘敬寺为太庙，迎接神主附祭。
English: Five years after Huichang, Li Shishi, who was left behind because the main hall of the Imperial Palace collapsed, used the abandoned Gongye Temple as the Imperial Temple to welcome the Lord's Festival.

古文：又下百僚议，皆言准故事，无两都俱置之礼，唯礼部侍郎陈商议云： 周之文、武，有镐、洛二庙，今两都异庙可也。
现代文：又下给百官议论，都说按照旧例，没有东、西两都都设置太庙礼，惟有礼部侍郎陈商议论道 ：周朝文王、武王，有镐京、洛阳两个太庙，只要让两都太庙不同就可以了。
English: Afterward, the discussion was given to the hundred officials, who all said that according to the old example, there was no East and West both set up the imperial temple ceremony, but the attendant of the ceremony department, Chen Sheng, argued: King Wen and King Wu in the Zhou Dynasty, there were two imperial temples in Beijing and Luoyang, as long as the two imperial temples were different, it was fine.

古文：然不宜置主于庙，主宜依礼瘗庙之北墉下。 
现代文：然而不应该在太庙设置神主，神主应该依照礼法埋葬在太庙的北墙之下。 
English: However, the deity should not be placed in the ancient temple, and the deity should be buried under the northern wall of the ancient temple according to the etiquette.

古文：事未行而武宗崩。
现代文：事未实行而武宗去世。
English: However, the plan was not carried out, and Takemune died.

古文：宣宗即位，因诏有司迎太微宫寓主，祔废寺之新庙，而知礼者非之。
现代文：宣宗即位，因而诏令有关官员把太微宫存放之神主迎出，放到新庙附祭，然而知礼仪的人认为不对。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he issued an imperial edict ordering the relevant officials to take out the deities stored in the Imperial Palace and place them in the new temple, but people who know the etiquette thought it was wrong.

古文：制皇长男温可封郓王，二男泾可封雅王，第三男滋可封蕲王，第四男沂可封庆王。
现代文：皇上下令，长子温可封郓王，二子泾可封雅王，三子滋可封蕲王，四子沂可封庆王。
English: According to the imperial edict, the eldest son, Wen, could be crowned king, the second son, Zi, could be crowned king, the third son, Zi, could be crowned king, and the fourth son, Zi, could be crowned king.

古文：五月，左右街功德使奏： 准今月五日赦书节文，上都两街留四寺，外更添置八所。
现代文：五月，左右街功德使上奏： 请准许这个月五日下赦书节制修饰，上都两街除了留下旧的四寺以外，请另添置八所。
English: In May, the left and right streets were decorated with merit: Please allow the Fifth Day of this month to forgive and decorate. In addition to leaving the old four temples in the two streets of Shangdu, please add eight more.

古文：两所依旧名兴唐寺、保寿寺。
现代文：其中两所依旧用旧名为兴唐寺、保寿寺。
English: Two of them still use their old names, Kōtō-ji and Hōjō-ji.

古文：六所请改旧名，宝应寺改为资圣寺，青龙寺改为护国寺，菩提寺改为保唐寺，清禅寺改为安国寺，法云尼寺改为唐安寺，崇敬尼寺改为唐昌寺。
现代文：另六所请允许更改旧名，宝应寺改为资圣寺，青龙寺改为护国寺，菩提寺改为保唐寺，清禅寺改为安国寺，法云尼寺改为唐安寺，崇敬尼寺改为唐昌寺。
English: Another six requested permission to change their old names, with Hoyo-ji Temple changing to Shisho-ji Temple, Seiryu-ji Temple changing to Hokoku-ji Temple, Bodai-ji Temple changing to Houtang-ji Temple, Seizen-ji Temple changing to Ankoku-ji Temple, Fayuni-ji Temple changing to Tangan-ji Temple, and Chongine-ji Temple changing to Tangchang-ji Temple.

古文：右街添置八所。
现代文：右街添置八所。
English: Right Street added eight stations.

古文：西明寺改为福寿寺，庄严寺改为圣寿寺，旧留寺。二所旧名，千福寺改为兴元寺，化度寺改为崇福寺，永泰寺改为万寿寺，温国寺改为崇圣寺，经行寺改为龙兴寺，奉恩寺改为兴福寺。 敕旨依奏。
现代文：西明寺改为福寿寺，庄严寺改为圣寿寺，千福寺改为兴元寺，化度寺改为崇福寺，永泰寺改为万寿寺，温国寺改为崇圣寺，经行寺改为龙兴寺，奉恩寺改为兴福寺。 皇上下旨依功德使所奏请。
English: Ximing Temple was changed to Fuzhou Temple, Solemn Temple was changed to Seongju Temple, Senfu Temple was changed to Xingyuan Temple, Kado Temple was changed to Sofu Temple, Yongtai Temple was changed to Wanzhou Temple, Wenguo Temple was changed to Sofu Temple, Jingye Temple was changed to Longxing Temple, Bongun Temple was changed to Xingfu Temple.

古文：诛道士刘玄靖等十二人，以其说惑武宗，排毁释氏故也。
现代文：杀了道士刘玄靖等十二人，因为他们的学说蛊惑武宗，排斥诋毁佛教的缘故。
English: killed Taoist priest Liu Xuanjing and twelve others, because their doctrine seduced the warrior monks, rejected and slandered Buddhism.

古文：今月五日赦书节文，吏部三铨选士，祗凭资考，多匪实才，许观察使、刺史有奇才异政之士，闻荐试用。
现代文：今月五日皇上下赦书要节制修饰，吏部三次铨叙考试选拔士人，只凭资格，多不是实际有才学的，准许观察使、刺史凡有奇秀和特殊治政才干之人士，有人推荐即可试用。
English: On the fifth day of this month, the Emperor's pardoning letter should be moderately decorated. The Ministry of Personnel will select scholars only by qualification, mostly not by actual talent. Those who are allowed to observe and study history, and those who have extraordinary and special political talents can be recommended for trial use.

古文：又观察使、刺史交代之时，册书所交户口如能增添至千户，即与超迁；如逃亡至七百户，罢后三年内不得任使。
现代文：另外观察使、刺史交接工作之时，册书所交户口如果能增添到一千户，就可以超级升迁；如果户口逃亡到七百户，罢免职位后三年仍不能任命其他官职。
English: In addition, it was observed that at the time of the handover of the work of the envoy and the historian, if the registered address can be increased to one thousand households, it can be super-promoted; if the registered address escapes to seven hundred households, it is still impossible to appoint other official positions three years after the position is dismissed.

古文：又徒流人在天德、振武者，管中量借粮种，俾令耕田以为业。以剑南东川节度使、检校礼部尚书卢商为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：另外在天德振武、流放的人，管辖地根据情况借给粮食种子，以便使他们耕田为职业，以剑南、东川节度使、检校礼部尚书卢商为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: In addition, the people who were exiled in Zhenwu, Tiande, were lent grain seeds according to the situation in the jurisdiction, so that they could cultivate the fields as their occupation, with Jiannan, Dongchuan, and Shangshulu merchants as attendants of the military department, and Tongping Zhangji as attendants of the military department.

古文：六月，以户部侍郎、充诸道盐铁转运使马植本官同平章事。
现代文：六月，以户部侍郎、充任诸道盐铁转运使马植以本官任同平章事。
English: In June, it was decided that Ma Zheyi would be promoted to the same rank as his father, with the title of Household Department's chamberlain, and assigned to the transportation of salt and iron in all directions.

古文：七月，以兵部尚书李让夷为剑南东川节度使。
现代文：七月，以兵部尚书李让夷为剑南东川节度使。
English: In July, Shangshu Li Jangyi of the Ministry of Military Affairs was appointed as the Jianan Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：十月，敕： 太庙祫享，合以功臣配。
现代文：十月，皇上下令： 在太庙集中远近祖先神主祭祀，应该以功臣配享。
English: In October, the emperor issued the following order: In temples where the ancestors of gods and goddesses from near and far are worshipped, they should be distributed among meritorious subjects.

古文：其宪宗庙，以裴度、杜黄裳、李愬、高崇文等配享。 
现代文：命令在宪宗庙，以裴度、杜黄裳、李朔心、高崇文附在太庙祭祀。 
English: The order was given to hold the ritual with Pei Du, Du Huang Xiang, Li Shuo Xin and Gao Chongwen at the Jianzhong Temple.

古文：以荆南节度使李德裕为东都留守。
现代文：以荆南节度使李德裕为东都留守。
English: The Jingnan Festival kept Li Deyu away from the capital.

古文：祝文称弟未当，请改为 嗣皇帝 。 
现代文：十一月，有关部门祭祀太庙，穆宗宫室文字曰 皇兄 。
English: In November, the relevant departments held a memorial service at the Imperial Temple, and the words "Imperial Brother" were inscribed on the walls of the imperial palace.

古文：从之。京兆府奏： 京师百司职田斛斗，请准会昌三年例，许人永自送纳京师，亲冀州县无得欺隐。 
现代文：太常博士闵庆之奏称 ：礼有尊敬崇高者，而不应该称呼亲人，祷告之文称呼为 弟 不恰当，请求改为 嗣皇帝 。 
English: Dr. Taizang Zou Qingzhi said: It is polite to respect the sublime, and relatives should not be called. It is inappropriate to call the prayer text "brother," and the request should be changed to "emperor."

古文：从之。以江西观察使周墀为义成军节度使、郑滑观察等使。
现代文：皇上从之，以江西观察使周墀为义成军节度使、郑滑观察使。
English: The emperor followed his advice, and appointed Zhou Qi as the festival envoy of the Yicheng Army and Zhenglu observation envoy to observe Jiangxi.

古文：道涂郡吏有迎送之劳，乡里庶民无苏息之望。自今须满三十六个月，永为常式。 
现代文：十二月，刑部尚书、兼任度支使崔元式上奏： 应以七月二日皇上命令为准，次品不结实的绫、纱、绢等成匹成段的绸缎，都要同时一起禁绝，不得织造。
English: In December, Cui Yuan, the head of the Department of Criminal Law and also the assistant to the Minister of Justice, issued a proclamation: The July 2nd imperial order should prevail. The inferior products, such as weak satin, gauze, and satin, should be banned at the same time, and they should not be woven.

古文：二月丁卯，制宪宗第十七子惕封彭王，第十八子惴为棣王；皇第五子泽为濮王，第六子润为鄂王。
现代文：臣想要与盐铁、户部三司同时上疏，先勘查左藏库，让人从中分辨出成匹成段的次品绫、纱、绢，就命令本道官员搜索狭小的纺织机，令人烧毁。那些已经收纳了次品绫、纱、绢的，要详细地向上报告，让上面了解。 皇上从之。大中元年二月一日，皇上下令宪宗第十七子惕封为彭王，第十八子惴封为棣王；皇第五子泽为濮王，第六子润为鄂王。
English: If a vassal wanted to get rid of yarns at the same time as the Salt and Iron Department and the Three Household Departments, he should first inspect the left-hand storeroom, so that people could distinguish between the piles of yarns, yarns, and cocoons, and then order the local officials to search for a narrow textile machine and burn it. Those who have already received the yarns, yarns, and cocoons should report to the upper echelon in detail, so that the upper echelon could understand. The emperor agreed. On February 1, 1861, the emperor and the lower echelon ordered the seventeenth son of Emperor Gens

古文：敕修百福殿。
现代文：皇上命令修百福殿。
English: The emperor ordered the construction of the Baifu Palace.

古文：以检校太尉、东都留守李德裕为太子少保，分司东都；以给事中郑亚为桂州刺史、御史中丞、桂管防御观察等使。
现代文：以检校太尉、东都留守李德裕为太子太保，分管东都；以给事中郑亚为桂州刺史、御史中丞、桂管防御使、观察使。
English: Li Deyu, who was the inspecting school captain and stayed in Dongdu, was appointed as the prince's eunuch and in charge of Dongdu; Zheng Ya, who was in charge of affairs, was the Guizhou chief historian, chief historian, Guizhou defense envoy, and observation envoy.

古文：二月丁酉，礼部侍郎魏扶奏： 臣今年所放进士三十三人，其封彦卿、崔琢、郑延休等三人，实有词艺，为时所称，皆以父兄见居重位，不令中选。 
现代文：三月一日，礼部侍郎魏扶上奏： 臣今年所放进士三十三人，封彦卿、崔琢、郑延休等三人，确实有文词技艺，被时尚所称道，但由于他们的父兄现在位居重臣，不能让他们三人中进士之选。 
English: On March 1st, Wei Fu, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, gave a speech: The 33 young men who were promoted this year, including Feng Yanqing, Cui Tuo, and Zheng Yanxiu, indeed had literary skills and were praised by the fashion, but because their father and brother were now senior ministers, they could not be promoted among the three.

古文：诏令翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎韦琮重考覆，敕曰： 彦卿等所试文字，并合度程，可放及第。
现代文：皇上诏令翰林学士承旨，户部侍郎韦琮重复考核回复皇上，皇上命令道： 封彦卿等三人所考核的文字，都达到了水平，可以放他们进士及第。
English: The emperor decreed that Hanlin, the scholar, should carry out the imperial edict, and Wei Wei, the steward of the household, repeated the examination to reply to the emperor. The emperor ordered: The characters examined by the three people, including Fuhiko-kyo, have all reached the level, and they can be promoted to the third rank.

古文：有司考试，祗在至公，如涉请托，自有朝典。
现代文：有关部门考试，只在于大公无私，如果牵涉到托人说情，自有典章国法。
English: The relevant departments only examine the matter of selflessness, and if the trustee is involved, they have their own regulations and national laws.

古文：今后但依常例放榜，不别有奏闻。 
现代文：今后只应依照常例放榜，不应该有另外的奏闻。 
English: In the future, the list should only be released in accordance with the usual practice, and there should be no other reports.

古文：帝雅好儒士，留心贡举。
现代文：皇上非常喜欢儒士，留意科举。
English: The emperor is very fond of Confucianism and pays attention to the imperial examinations.

古文：有时微行人间，采听舆论，以观选士之得失。
现代文：有时候穿私服悄悄走到常人之间，采摘听取舆论，以此来观察选拔士人之得失。
English: Sometimes he wears civilian clothes and quietly walks among ordinary people, listening to public opinion, in order to observe the gains and losses of the selection of scholars.

古文：每山池曲宴，学士诗什属和，公卿出镇，亦赋诗饯行。
现代文：每次在山水池边宴请臣下，学士们都作诗篇应和；公卿们出京去地方镇守，也赋诗为他们饯行。
English: Every time they invited their vassals to a banquet by the pond, the scholars would compose poems to accompany them; the nobles would go to the capital to visit the local town guards, and they would also compose poems for them.

古文：凡对臣僚，肃然拱揖，鲜有轻易之言。
现代文：大凡对待臣属，都是严肃地拱手揖让，很少有轻视不礼貌的言语。
English: When dealing with subordinates, they are serious about making concessions, and there are few words that are disrespectful.

古文：大臣或献章疏，即烧香盥手而览之。
现代文：大臣们有的献上奏疏，皇上就洗手烧香而观看。
English: Some of the ministers presented musical scores, and the emperor washed his hands and burned incense while watching.

古文：当时以大中之政有贞观之风焉。
现代文：当时认为大中之政有贞观之风气。
English: At that time, it was thought that politics at university was dominated by a culture of chastity.

古文：又敕： 自今进士放榜后，杏园任依旧宴集，有司不得禁制。 
现代文：皇上又命令： 从今开始，进士放榜以后，仍然在杏园宴集，有关官员不得禁止。 
English: The emperor also ordered: From now on, after the Jin Shi was released, it was still a banquet in the apricot garden, and the relevant officials must not prohibit it.

古文：武宗好巡游，故曲江亭禁人宴聚故也。
现代文：从前武宗喜欢巡游，所以曲江亭禁止人们宴会聚集。
English: In the past, Emperor Wuzong liked parades, so Qujiang Pavilion prohibited people from gathering for banquets.

古文：闰三月，敕： 会昌季年，并省寺宇。
现代文：闰三月，皇上命令道： 会昌末年，合并和减少寺庙。
English: In leap March, the emperor ordered: In the last year of Huichang, merge and reduce temples.

古文：虽云异方之教，无损致理之源。
现代文：虽然佛教是异方他国之教，但无损于它是说明道理的源泉。
English: Although Buddhism is a foreign religion, it does not detract from the fact that it is a source of enlightenment.

古文：中国之人，久行其道，厘革过当，事体未弘。
现代文：中国的人，长期信仰佛教，改革过分，事体不可能扩大。
English: The Chinese people have long believed in Buddhism, the reform is excessive, and things cannot be expanded.

古文：其灵山胜境、天下州府，应会昌五年四月所废寺宇，有宿旧名僧，复能修创，一任住持，所司不得禁止。 
现代文：那些灵山美景，天下州府，当会昌五年四月所废弃的寺庙，有些老和尚和有名的僧人，他们能重新修复，那就应当让他们住持，有关官员不得禁止。 
English: Those beautiful scenery of Lingshan Mountain, the world's provincial capitals, the temples abandoned in April of the 5th year of Dang Huichang, some old monks and famous monks, if they can be restored, then they should be allowed to become abbots, and the relevant officials should not prohibit it.

古文：四月，积庆太后萧氏崩，谥曰贞献，文宗母也。
现代文：四月，积庆太后萧氏去世，谥号曰贞献，是文宗的母亲。
English: In April, Empress Dowager Jieqing Xiao passed away. Her nickname was Zhenxian, and she was the mother of Emperor Wenzong.

古文：六月，以义成军节度使周墀为兵部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：六月，以义成军节度使周墀为兵部侍郎，并兼任度支使。
English: In June, on the occasion of the Yicheng Army Festival, Zhou Qi was appointed as the attendant of the military department, and also served as the deputy commander.

古文：册黠戛斯王子为为英武诚明可汗，命鸿胪卿李业入蕃册拜。
现代文：皇上册封黠戛斯王子为英武诚明可汗，命令鸿胪卿李业到蕃邦册封。
English: The emperor conferred the title of Yingwu Chengming Khan on the prince of Gansu, and ordered Hongyuqing Liye to go to Shan State to confer the title.

古文：以金紫光禄大夫、守太子少保分司东都、上柱国、奇章郡开国公、食邑二千户牛僧孺守太子太师，银青光禄大夫、行太子宾客、上柱国、陇西郡开国公、食邑二千户李彦佐为太子太保。并依前分司。
现代文：以金紫光禄大夫、兼任太子少保分管东都、上柱国、奇章郡开国公、食邑二千户牛僧孺兼任的太子太师，以银青光禄大夫、兼任太子宾客、上柱国、陇西郡开国公、食邑二千户李彦佐为太子太保，都依照先前一样分管东都。
English: With Jin Zi Guanglu as the doctor and concurrently serving as the prince's assistant in charge of Dongdu, Shangzhuang, and Qizhang counties, and the prince's teacher in charge of 2,000 households in Zhucheng, and with Yin Qing Guanglu as the doctor and concurrently serving as the prince's guest, Shangzhuang, and Shansi counties, and the prince's assistant in charge of 2,000 households in Zhucheng, the eastern capital was divided as before.

古文：以左谏议大夫庾简休为虢州刺史，以正议大夫、行尚书考功郎中、知制诰、上柱国崔玙为中书舍人，以中散大夫、前湖州刺史、彭阳县开国男、食邑三百户令狐綯行尚书考功郎中、知制诰。
现代文：以左谏议大夫庾简休为虢州刺史，以正议大夫、兼任尚书考功郎中、知制诰、上柱国崔王与为中书舍人，以中散大夫、前任湖州刺史、彭阳县开国男、食邑三百户令狐謋兼任尚书考功郎中、知制诰。
English: Zuo Jianxiu, the left-hand columnist, was the historian of Zhangzhou; Zheng Jianxiu, the right-hand columnist, also served as the meritorious student of Shangshu examination and the scholar of wisdom; Shangzhu Guo Cui Wanghe, the upper columnist, was the scholar of Chinese literature; Zhongsan Dafu, the former meritorious student of Huzhou, the founding father of Pengyang County, also served as the meritorious student of Shangshu examination and the scholar of wisdom.

古文：秋七月，制以正议大夫、尚书户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士承旨、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋韦琮以本官同中书门下平章事。
现代文：秋七月，皇上命令以正议大夫、尚书户部侍郎、知制诰、翰林学士承旨、柱国、赐紫金鱼袋韦琮凭本官职位任同中书门下平章事。
English: In the autumn of July, the emperor ordered the appointment of Chushomon Shimohei Shokaku to the posts of the chief councilor doctor, Shang Shukubuchibu waiter, Chisei Shokaku, Hanlin bachelor, Shokoku, and Wei Wei with the purple gold fish bag.

古文：以太子少保分司东都、卫国公李德裕为人所讼，贬潮州司马员外置同正员。
现代文：以太子少保分管东都、卫国公李德裕被人所告发，贬为潮州司马员外，置同正职。
English: Li Deyu, who was in charge of the East Capital and the Defense of the Fatherland, was denounced by people and demoted to Chaozhou Sima member, and placed in the same position.

古文：八月，工部尚书、中书侍郎、平章事卢商出为鄂岳观察使，神策军奏修百福殿成，名其殿曰雍和殿，楼曰亲亲楼，凡廊舍屋宇七百间，以会诸王子孙。
现代文：八月，工部尚书、中书侍郎、平章事卢商出任鄂岳观察使。神策军上奏说修建百福殿已成，殿名为雍和殿，楼曰亲亲楼，总计回廊房屋七百间，以会集诸王子孙。
English: In August, Shang Shu of the Ministry of Industry, Zhong Shu Zhi Lang, and Ping Zhang Zhi Lu Shang served as the observation envoy of Mount Etu. Shinsuke reported to the army that the construction of Baifu Hall had been completed. The hall was named Yonghe Hall, and the building was called Xinxin Hall, with a total of 700 corridor houses to gather the grandchildren of princes.

古文：九月，前永宁县尉吴汝纳诣阙称冤，言： 弟湘会昌四年任扬州江都县尉，被节度使李绅诬奏湘赃罪，宰相李德裕曲情祔绅，断臣弟湘致死。 
现代文：九月，前任永宁县尉吴汝纳到朝廷称诉冤屈，说： 弟弟吴湘，会昌四年任扬州江都县尉，被节度使李绅诬奏说吴湘犯贪赃之罪，宰相李德裕徇私附和李绅，判臣弟吴湘以至于死罪。 
English: In September, the former Yongning County lieutenant Wu Runa went to the imperial court to complain about his grievances, saying: His younger brother Wu Xiang, who had served as Yangzhou Jiangdu County lieutenant for four years, was made by the governor Li Sheng to falsely say that Wu Xiang was guilty of embezzlement. Premier Li Deyu and Li Sheng agreed with Li Sheng and sentenced his younger brother Wu Xiang to death.

古文：诏下御史台鞫按。
现代文：皇上下诏让御史台重新审查定罪。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to have the Imperial History Channel re-examine the conviction.

古文：二年春正月壬戌，宰臣率文武百僚上徽号曰圣敬文思和武光孝皇帝，御宣政殿受册讫，宣德音。
现代文：二年春正月壬戌是朔日，初一，宰相们率领文武百官上徽号曰圣敬文思和武光孝皇帝，皇上驾到宣政殿接受封册完毕，宣布恩典诏书。
English: On the first day of the second year of Spring, it was the New Year's Day. On the first day of the first month, the prime ministers led the hundred officials of the armed forces and armed forces on the coat of arms, and the emperor drove to the Xuancheng Palace to accept the sealed book and announce the grace of the imperial rescript.

古文：神策军修左银台门楼、屋宇及南面城墙，至睿武楼。
现代文：神策军修建左银台门楼、屋宇及南面城墙，一直修到睿武楼。
English: Shenshe's army built the gate tower, buildings and the southern wall of Zuo Yintai, and continued to build up to Ruiwu Tower.

古文：二月，制剑南西川节度、光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、同平章事、成都尹、上柱国、陇西郡开国公、食邑二千户李回责授湖南观察使，桂州刺史、御史中丞、桂管防御观察使郑亚贬循州刺史，前淮南观察判官魏铏贬吉州司户，陆浑县令元寿贬韶州司户，殿中侍御史蔡京贬澧州司马。
现代文：二月，皇上命令剑南西川节度、光禄大夫、检校吏部尚书、同平章事、成都尹、上柱国、陇西郡开国公、食邑二千户李回降职贬为湖南观察使，桂州刺史、御史中丞、桂管防御使、观察使郑亚贬为循州刺史，前任淮南观察判官魏钅刑贬为吉州司户，陆浑县令元寿贬为韶州司户，殿中侍御使蔡京贬为澧州司马。
English: In February, the emperor ordered Jiannan Xichuan Jiedu, Guanglu doctor, school inspector Shang Shu, Tongping Zhang Ji, Chengdu Yin, Shangzhuang Guo, Shaanxi county founding father, food village of two thousand households Li Hui demoted and demoted to Hunan observer, Guizhou historian, historian, Guizhou defense envoy, observer Zheng Ya demoted to Xuzhou historian, former Huainan observation judge Wei Yingjie demoted to Jizhou steward, Lukun County Lingyuan Shou demoted to Zhangzhou steward, and palace attendant Cai Jing demoted to Zhangzhou steward.

古文：御史台奏：
现代文：御史台衙门上奏：
English: Goshidai koto, first movement:

古文：据三司推勘吴湘狱，谨具逐人罪状如后：扬州都虞候卢行立、刘群，于会昌二年一月十四日，于阿颜家吃酒，与阿颜母阿焦同坐，群自拟收阿颜为妻，妄称监军使处分，要阿颜进奉，不得嫁人，兼擅令人监守。
现代文： 根据三法司审问吴湘案件，谨具告各人罪状如后：扬州都虞候卢行立、刘群，在会昌二年五月十四日，在阿颜家吃酒，与阿颜之母阿焦同坐一起，刘群自己打算收阿颜为妻，并妄自称这是监军使的决定，要阿颜自己进奉给刘群，不得嫁人，而且擅自派人监视守候。
English: According to the Wu Xiang case interrogated by the Three Courts of Justice, the charges against each person are as follows: Yangzhou Governor Lu Xingli and Liu Qun, on May 14, 2000, in Huichang, drank wine at Ayan's house and sat together with Ayan's mother Agiao. Liu Qun himself planned to take Ayan as his wife, and falsely claimed that this was the decision of the supervising envoy. He wanted Ayan to serve Liu Qun himself, not to marry anyone, and sent someone to watch and wait without authorization.

古文：其阿焦遂与江都县尉吴湘密约，嫁阿颜与湘。
现代文：阿焦于是与江都县尉吴湘密约，将阿颜嫁给吴湘。
English: Agio then made a secret agreement with Wu Xiang, the lieutenant of Jiangdu County, to marry Ayan to Wu Xiang.

古文：刘群与押军牙官李克勋即时遮栏不得，乃令江都百姓论湘取受，节度使李绅追湘下狱，计赃处死。
现代文：刘群与押军牙官李克勋当时阻拦不成，于是让江都百姓告吴湘贪污受贿，节度使李绅将吴湘追捉下狱，以贪污处死罪。
English: Liu Qun and Li Kexun, the army's dental officer, were unable to stop him at that time, so they asked the people of Jiangdu to sue Wu Xiang for corruption and bribery. The court made Li Sheng chase Wu Xiang to prison and sentenced him to death for corruption.

古文：具狱奏闻。
现代文：具备案件文书上奏朝廷。
English: Have the case documents to report to the Imperial Court.

古文：朝廷疑其冤，差御史崔元藻往扬州按问，据湘虽有取受，罪不至死。
现代文：朝廷怀疑吴湘冤枉，差遣御史崔元藻前往扬州重新审问，根据查核吴湘贪污情况虽然属实，但罪不至于死。
English: The imperial court suspected that Wu Xiang had been wronged and sent the imperial envoy Cui Yuanmao to Yangzhou for re-interrogation. According to the investigation of Wu Xiang's corruption, although it was true, the crime would not lead to death.

古文：李德裕党附李绅，乃贬元藻岭南，取淮南元申文案，断湘处死。今据三司使追崔元藻及淮南元推判官魏铏并关连人款状，淮南都虞候刘群、元推判官魏铏、典孙贞高利钱倚黄嵩、江都县典沈颁陈宰、节度押牙白沙镇遏使傅义、左都虞候卢行立、天长县令张弘思、曲张洙清陈回、右厢子巡李行璠、典臣金弘举、送吴湘妻女至澧州取受钱物人潘宰、前扬府录事参军李公佐、元推官元寿吴珙翁恭、太子少保分司李德裕、西川节度使李回、桂管观察使郑亚等，伏候敕旨。
现代文：李德裕偏私附和李绅，竟贬崔元藻到岭南，取淮南原来申告的文案，判处吴湘死罪加以处死，现在根据三司使追论崔元藻及淮南原审判官魏钅刑以及有关连的人的案件案卷情况，淮南都虞候刘群，原来审案的判官魏钅刑、淮南县典孙贞、高利、钱倚、黄嵩、江都县典沈颁、陈宰、节度押牙白沙镇遏使傅义、左都虞候卢行立、天长县令张弘思、县典张洙清、陈、右厢子巡李行、典臣金弘举、送吴湘妻女到澧州取受钱物之人潘宰、前任扬府录事参军李公佐、原推官元寿、吴珙、翁恭、太子少保分司李德裕、西川节度使李回、桂管观察使郑亚等人，等候皇上下旨处分。 
English: Now, according to the case files of the three departments for the prosecution of Cui Yuanmao and the original judge of Huainan, Wei Xuan, and the related persons, Huainan Duyu, Liu Qun, the original judge of the case, Wei Xuan, Huainan County Fensun Zhen, Gaoli, Qian Ying, Huang Song, Jiangdu County Fenshen, Chen Zai, Jiedu of Baisha Town, Fu Yi, Zuo Duyu, Lu Xingli, Tianchang County Commander Zhang Hongsi, County Fensun Qing, Chen, Right

古文：其月，敕：
现代文：当月，皇上下令：
English: That month, the emperor issued the following order:

古文：李回、郑亚、元寿、魏铏已从别敕处分。
现代文： 李回、郑亚、元寿、魏钅刑已经分别下令处分。
English: Li Hui, Zheng Ya, Yuan Shou and Wei Wei have been separately sentenced.

古文：李绅起此冤诉，本由不真，今既身殁，无以加刑。
现代文：李绅发起了这个冤案，根本情由不真实，现在既然李绅已死，不能再加刑。
English: Li Sheng initiated this unjust case. The underlying reason is not true. Now that Li Sheng is dead, the sentence can no longer be increased.

古文：粗塞众情，量行削夺，宜追夺三任官告，送刑部注毁。
现代文：粗略地堵塞一下众人不满的情绪，据情削夺李绅原来官职，则应该追夺三任官诰，送到刑部注销。
English: Roughly plugging the dissatisfaction of the people, according to the circumstances of depriving Li Sheng of his original official position, he should be deprived of three official posts and sent to the criminal department for cancellation.

古文：其子孙稽于经义，罚不及嗣，并释放。
现代文：他的子孙处分，考查古代经义，处罚不连及后代，都释放。
English: His children and grandchildren were punished, the ancient scriptures were examined, and the punishment did not extend to future generations, and they were all released.

古文：李德裕先朝委以重权，不务绝其党庇，致使冤苦，直到于今，职尔之由，能无恨叹！
现代文：李德裕先朝曾委任他重大权力，不能断绝对党羽的庇护，以致使冤枉痛苦直到今天，由于职务的关系竟然犯法，怎能不让人遗憾慨叹。
English: Li Deyu of the previous government had entrusted him with great power, and he could not break the absolute protection of the party, so that he caused unjustified suffering to this day. How can people not regret that he broke the law because of his position?

古文：昨以李威所诉，已经远贬。俯全事体，特为从宽，宜准去年敕令处分。
现代文：昨日因为李威所诉讼，已经将他远远地贬去，俯察全部罪状，特别从宽发落，应按去年命令为准处分。
English: Yesterday, because of Li Wei's lawsuit, he has been far and away demoted, and all the charges, especially the lenient ones, should be punished according to last year's order.

古文：张弘思、李公佐卑吏守官，制不由己，不能守正，曲附权臣，各削两任官。
现代文：张弘思、李公佐官职低下，在法制上身不由己，但不能守正不阿，错误地依附有权之大臣，每人削去两任官职。
English: Zhang Hongsi and Li Guanzhong are low-ranking officials. They can't help themselves in the legal system, but they can't abide by the law. They mistakenly rely on ministers with authority, and each of them has lost two official positions.

古文：崔元藻曾受无辜之贬，合从洗雪之条，委中书门下商量处分。
现代文：崔元藻曾受到无辜的贬谪，符合洗雪之条例，委任中书省、门下省商量处理。
English: Cui Yuanmao had been innocently demeaned, in line with the snow-cleaning regulations, and appointed the Ministry of Education and Culture and the subordinate provinces to discuss and deal with it.

古文：李恪详验款状，蠹害最深，以其多时，须议减等，委京兆府决脊杖十五，配流天德。
现代文：李恪详细地验明了案件，但毒害最深，因为时间很久了，须要议论减罪一等，委任京兆府将李恪打脊背五十杖，充军到天德。
English: Li Ke verified the case in detail, but the damage was the deepest, because the time was long, it was necessary to discuss the first-class reduction of crime, and the Beijing and Shanghai Municipal People's Government was appointed to beat Li Ke with fifty sticks and send him to Germany.

古文：李克勋欲收阿颜，决杖二十，配流硖州。
现代文：李克勋想要收阿颜，将他脊背打二十杖，充军到硖州。
English: Li Kexun wanted to recruit Ayan, so he beat his back with twenty canes and sent him to Zhangzhou.

古文：刘群据其款状，合议痛刑，曾效职官，不欲决脊，决臀杖五十，配流岳州。
现代文：刘群的罪状依据其条款，合议应严加刑罚，他曾经效命任职，不应打脊背，打屁股五十杖，充军到岳州。
English: Liu Qun's crime is based on its terms, the collegiality should impose a severe punishment, he once served his duty, should not hit the back, spank fifty sticks, and join the army to Yuezhou.

古文：其卢行立及诸典吏，委三司使量罪科放讫闻奏。
现代文：卢行立及其他主管司法官员，委任三司使衡量他们的罪条治罪，然后上报。 
English: Lu Xingli and other competent judicial officials, appointed by the three departments to measure their crimes, and then reported.

古文：三月己酉，兵部侍郎、判度支周墀本官平章事。
现代文：三月辛酉是朔日，初一，兵部侍郎、兼任度支使周墀凭本官任平章事。
English: It was the first day of the new year in March, and on the first day of the new year, Zhou Yu, the attendant of the military department and the concurrent chief of staff, was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：以礼部尚书、盐铁转运使马植本官同平章事。
现代文：以礼部尚书、盐铁转运使马植凭本官任平章事。
English: He was awarded the Medal of Honor for his service in the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Medal of Honor for his service in the salt and iron transport.

古文：日本国王子入朝贡方物。王子善棋，帝令侍诏顾师言与之对手。
现代文：日本国王子入朝贡献土特产，王子善于下围棋，皇上命令待诏顾师言与王子作弈棋的对手。
English: The son of the king of Japan came to the imperial court to contribute local specialties, the prince was good at playing Go, and the emperor ordered the emperor to take care of the opponent who played Go with the prince.

古文：五月己未，日有蚀之。
现代文：五月己未是朔日，初一，有日蚀。
English: May is not the new moon, the first day of the month, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：六月己丑，太皇太后郭氏崩，谥懿安，宪宗妃，穆宗之母也。
现代文：六月己丑是朔日，初一，太皇太后郭氏去世。谥号为懿安，她是宪宗之妃子，穆宗之母亲。
English: It was New Year's Day in June, and on the first day of the month, the Dowager Empress Dowager Guo died. Her nickname was Yan'an, and she was the concubine of Emperor Xianzong and the mother of Emperor Mu.

古文：户部侍郎，兼御史大夫、判度支崔龟从奏： 应诸司场院官请却官本钱后，或有欺隐欠负，征理须足，不得苟从恩荡，以求放免。
现代文：户部侍郎、兼御史大夫、兼任度支使崔龟从上奏 ：所有各司负责钱粮官员罢官清退官府钱粮后，有的欺骗还有欠负，按理必须征调补足，不得苟且等待皇上恩典，以求放宽免除。
English: Choi Kame, the head of the Household Department, concurrently the Chief of the Imperial Household, concurrently the Chief of Staff of the Imperial Household, concurrently the Chief of Staff of the Imperial Household, reported from the top: After all the officials in charge of money and grain in each division were dismissed and retired from the government, there were some deceptions and shortcomings. According to the principle, they must be conscripted and transferred to make up the shortfall, and they must not wait for the emperor's grace in order to seek relaxation and exemption.

古文：今后凡隐盗欠负，请如官典犯赃例处分。
现代文：今后凡是暗中偷盗欠负钱粮者，请求按国家法律以贪赃枉法论处。
English: In the future, anyone who steals or owes money or grain secretly will be punished according to the national law.

古文：纵逢恩赦，不在免限。 
现代文：即使逢到降恩赦免，也不在宽免之限。 
English: Even if there is a pardon, there is no limit to forgiveness.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：七月戊午，以前山南西道节度使高元裕为吏部尚书。
现代文：七月戊午是朔日，初一，以前任山南西道节度使高元裕为吏部尚书。
English: July Wu afternoon is the New Year's Day, the first day of the year, the former Shannan West Road Festival made Gao Yuanyu the head of the personnel department.

古文：八月戊子，朝散大夫、中书舍人、充翰林学士、上柱国、平阴县开国男、食实封三百户赐紫金鱼袋毕諴为刑部侍郎。
现代文：八月戊子是朔日，初一，朝散大夫、中书舍人、充任翰林学士、上柱国、平阴县开国男、实封食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋毕讠咸任刑部侍郎。
English: August Bosi is the New Year's Day, the first day of the year, the morning sun doctor, the Chinese calligrapher, the full-time Hanlin scholar, the upper pillar country, the founding father of Pingyin County, the three hundred households of the real seal food village, and the purple gold fish bag Bi Yuxian as the waiter of the criminal department.

古文：九月，敕： 比有无良之人，于街市投匿名文书，及于箭上或旗幡上纵为奸言，以乱国法。
现代文：九月，皇上下令： 近来有些不良分子，在街市投匿名文书，以及在箭上或旗帜上放纵地书写妖言惑众的话，以扰乱国法。
English: In September, the emperor issued an order: "Recently, some bad elements have been throwing anonymous documents in the streets, as well as indulgently writing demonic words on arrows or flags, in order to disrupt the national law.

古文：此后所由切加捉搦，如获此色，便仰焚瘗，不得上闻。 
现代文：今后对这类人要严加拘捕，如果遇到这类败法乱国文书，切望焚烧埋葬，不得让朝廷听到。 
English: In the future, such people should be strictly arrested. If they encounter such documents of overthrowing the law and overthrowing the country, they should be eagerly burned and buried, and must not be heard by the imperial court.

古文：十一月，兵部侍郎、判户部事魏扶奏： 天下州府钱物、斛斗、文簿，并委录事参军专判，仍与长史通判，至交代时具数申奏。
现代文：十一月，兵部侍郎、兼任主管户部之事魏扶上奏： 天下州府钱物、斛斗、文簿，都委托录事参军专门管理，可仍旧与长史共同管理，到交代时详细按数字申报。
English: In November, Wei Fu, the attendant of the military department and the person in charge of the household department, made the following announcement: All the money, property, and documents of the prefectures of the world were entrusted to the special management of the record of joining the army, but they could still be jointly managed with Chang Shi, and they would be declared in detail according to the numbers when they were replaced.

古文：如无悬欠，量与减选注拟。 
现代文：如果没有欠负，然后量才拟定官职。 
English: If there is no deficiency, then the official position will be drawn up by quantity.

古文：敕： 路随等所修《宪宗实录》旧本，却仰施行。
现代文：又下令 ：路随等所修《宪宗实录》旧本，切望施行。
English: He also ordered that the old version of the "Constitutional Record" edited by Lu Sui et al. should be eagerly implemented.

古文：其会昌新修者，仰并进纳。
现代文：会昌年新修者，切望同时进献。
English: New practitioners in the year of Huichang are eager to make a donation at the same time.

古文：如有钞录得，敕到并纳史馆，不得辄留，委州府严加搜捕。 
现代文：如果有人抄录得，命令一到都应交纳史馆，不能自己留存，委任州府严加搜捕。 
English: If someone has copied it, the order should be handed over to the history museum as soon as it arrives, it cannot be kept by itself, and the state government should be appointed to carry out a strict search and arrest.

古文：以户部侍郎、判度支崔龟从本官同平章事。
现代文：以户部侍郎、兼任度支使崔龟从凭本官任同平章事。
English: With the appointment of Choi Kame, who was concurrently the chamberlain of the household department and the chief of staff, he was promoted to the same rank as himself.

古文：银青光录大夫、门下侍郎，兼礼部尚书、同平章事韦琮为太子詹事，分司东都。
现代文：银青光禄大夫、门下侍郎，兼礼部尚书、同平章事韦琮为太子詹事、分司东都。
English: Yin Qingguanglu was a doctor, his disciple was a waiter, and he was also a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Tongping Zhangji Wei Jun was the prince Zhanji, and the sub-branch of Dongdu.

古文：三年春正月丙寅，泾原节度使康季荣奏，吐蕃宰相论恐热以秦、原、安乐三州及石门等七关之兵民归国。
现代文：大中三年春正月十一日，泾原节度使康季荣上奏，吐蕃宰相论恐热以秦、原、安乐三州及石门七关口的军众、人民归附唐朝。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the spring of the third year of high school, Kang Jirong, the prime minister of Qin, Yuan and Anle, and the military and people of the seven gates of Shimen were annexed to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：诏太仆卿陆耽往喻旨，仍令灵武节度使硃叔明、邠宁节度使张君绪，各出本道兵马应接其来。
现代文：诏令太仆卿陆耽前往宣达皇上旨意，仍旧令灵武节度使朱叔明、宁节度使张君绪、各发出本道兵马接应他们前来。
English: The emperor ordered the eunuch Lu Dang to go to proclaim the emperor's will, and still ordered the Lingwu Festival to send Zhu Shuming and the Ning Festival to send Zhang Junxu, and each sent soldiers and horses to meet them.

古文：以太常卿封敖检校兵部尚书，为兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：以太常卿封敖为检校兵部尚书，为兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: Tai Changqing Fongqian was the inspector of the military department of the school, and Xing Yuanyin and Shannan Xi Dao Jietuo were the inspectors.

古文：三月乙卯，敕待诏官宜令与刑法官、谏官次对。银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、汝南县开国子、食邑五百户周墀检校刑部尚书、梓州刺史，充剑南东川节度使。
现代文：三月乙卯是朔日，初一。银青光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、汝南县开国子、食邑五百户周墀任检校刑部尚书、梓州刺史、充任剑南东川节度使。
English: March 1st is the New Year's Day, the first day of the year. Yin Qingguanglu doctor, Chinese book waiter, Tongping Zhangji, supervisor of national history, Shangzhuang Province, Runan County's founding father, 500 households in food villages, Zhou Yi as school inspection department, Shangshu, Zizhou stabbing history, acting as Jianan Dongchuan festival envoy.

古文：四月，以正议大夫、守中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、赐紫金鱼袋马植为太子宾客，分司东都；以正议大夫、守御史大夫、上柱国、博陵县开国子、食邑五百户、赐紫金袋崔铉可中书侍郎、平章事；正议大夫、行兵部侍郎、判户部事、上柱国、钜鹿县开国男、食邑五百户、赐紫金鱼袋魏扶可本官、平章事。
现代文：四月，以正议大夫、兼任中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、赐紫金鱼袋马植为太子宾客，分司东都。以正议大夫、兼任御史大夫、上柱国、博陵县开国子、食邑五百户、赐紫金鱼袋崔铉任中书侍郎、平章事；正议大夫、兼任兵部侍郎、兼管户部事、上柱国、巨鹿县开国男、食邑五百户、赐紫金鱼袋魏扶可以凭本官职任平章事。
English: In April, Ma Zhe, who was the chief doctor of the council, concurrently served as the chancellor's secretary, Tongping Zhangji, a member of Jixianden University, and Ma Zhe, who was awarded the purple gold fish bag, were the guests of the crown prince, the governor of Dongdu. Ma Zhe, who was the chief doctor of the council, concurrently served as the minister of the history, Shangzhu Province, the founder of Boling County, 500 households in Shuxi County, and Cui Zhe, who was awarded the purple gold fish bag, served as the chancellor of the council, Ping Zhangji; Ma Zhe, who was the chief

古文：五月，幽州节度使、检校司徒、平章事张仲武卒，三军以其子直方知留后事。
现代文：五月，幽州节度使、检校司徒、平章事张仲武去世，幽州三军以张仲武之子张直方主持幽州留后事。
English: In May, Zhang Zhongwu, Yuzhou's ceremonial envoy, school inspector, and military attaché, passed away. Zhang Zhongwu's son, Zhang Naofang, presided over the Yuzhou Three Armies' stay in Yuzhou.

古文：六月癸未，五色云见于京师。
现代文：六月癸未是朔日，初一，有五色云彩在京师出现。
English: On the first day of the new year in June, five-colored clouds appeared in Beijing.

古文：敕：先经流贬罪人，不幸殁于贬所，有情非恶逆，任经刑部陈牒，许令归葬，绝远之处，仍量事官给棺椟。
现代文：皇上命令：先前曾经贬谪流放的罪人，不幸在被贬处死亡，有罪但无大恶叛逆，经过刑部发出公文，同意让他们归家安葬，特别遥远的地方，让当地官员给予棺木。
English: The Emperor's order: the criminals who had been banished and deported before, unfortunately died after being banished, guilty but without great evil rebellion, issued a document through the criminal department, agreed to let them return home and be buried, especially far away places, let local officials give coffins.

古文：康季荣奏收原州、石门驿藏木峡制胜六盘石峡等六关讫。
现代文：康季荣上奏收复原州、石门、驿藏、木峡、制胜、六盘、石硖等六关完毕。
English: Kang Jirong completed six levels, including the restoration of Wonju, Shimen, Gozang, Mokgyo, Shengcheng, Liupan and Shijie.

古文：邠宁张君绪奏，今月十三日暇复萧关。
现代文：宁张君绪上奏，今月十三日收复了萧关。
English: On the 13th of this month, Ning Zhangjun finally recovered from the depression.

古文：御史台奏，义成军节度使韦让于怀真坊侵街造屋九间，已令毁拆讫。
现代文：御史台上奏，义成军节度使韦让在怀真坊侵占街道造房屋九间，已令人拆毁完毕。
English: According to the historical record, the Yicheng Army Festival made Wei Zhan occupy the streets and build nine houses in Wai Zhenfang, and the demolition has been completed.

古文：可崖州司户参军，所在驰驿发遣，纵逢恩赦，不在量移之限。
现代文：皇上命令在肖关设置武州，改长乐为威州。七月，三州七关军人和百姓，都是河、陇遗留下来的人民，数千人在宫阙之下出现。
English: The emperor ordered to set up Wuzhou in Xiaoguan and change Changle to Weizhou. In July, the soldiers and people of the three states and seven passes were the people left behind by He and Zou, and thousands of people appeared under the imperial seal.

古文：以起居郎庾道蔚、礼部员外郎李文儒并充翰林学士。
现代文：皇上驾到延喜门安抚慰问，让他们解开发辫，赐给他们冠带，共赐绢十五万匹。八月，凤翔节度使李王比上奏收复了秦州。
English: The emperor drove to Yanxi Gate to appease and console, let them untie the cormorants, gave them crown belts, and granted a total of 150,000 cormorants. In August, the Fengxiang Festival enabled Li Wangbi to recover Qinzhou.

古文：十月辛巳，京师地震，河西、天德、灵夏尤甚，戍卒压死者数千人。
现代文：十月辛巳是朔日，初一，京师地震，河西、天德、灵夏尤其厉害，防守的士兵被压死数千人。
English: It was the first day of October, the first day of the month, when the Beijing Earthquake occurred. It was particularly severe in Hexi, Tiantai and Lingxia. Thousands of soldiers on the defensive were crushed to death.

古文：十一月，东川节度使郑涯、凤翔节度使李玭奏修文川谷路，自灵泉至白云置十一驿，下诏褒美。
现代文：十一月，东川节度使郑涯、凤翔节度使李王比上奏修建文川谷路，从灵泉一直修到白云，共设置十一个驿站，皇上下诏表扬。
English: In November, the Dongchuan Festival made Zheng Ya and Feng Xiang Festival made Li Wangbi to build the Wenchuan Valley Road, from Lingquan to Baiyun, setting up a total of eleven stations, which was praised by the emperor.

古文：经年为雨所坏，又令封敖修斜谷旧路。
现代文：由于常年被雨所毁坏，皇上又命令封敖修建斜谷旧路。
English: Due to the fact that it was destroyed by the rain all year round, the emperor also ordered the government to build the old road in the valley.

古文：以刑部侍郎韦有翼为御史中丞，以职方员外郎郑处诲兼御史知杂。
现代文：以刑部侍郎韦有翼为御史中丞，以职方员外郎郑处诲兼任御史知杂。
English: Wei Youyi, an attendant of the criminal investigation department, was appointed as the vice-president of the history department, and Zheng Shizhen, a member of the official party, was also appointed as the secretary of the history department.

古文：幽州军乱，逐其留后张直方，军人推其衙将周綝为留后。
现代文：幽州军骚乱，驱逐他们的幽州留后张直方，军人们推举周纟林为幽州留后。
English: The Yuzhou army rioted, expelling their Yuzhou stay-behind Zhang Naifang, and the soldiers nominated Zhou Yulin as the Yuzhou stay-behind.

古文：十二月，追谥顺宗曰至德大圣大安孝皇帝，宪宗曰昭文章武大圣孝皇帝。
现代文：十二月，追谥顺宗为至德大圣大安孝皇帝，宪宗谥号曰昭文章武大圣孝皇帝。
English: In December, Emperor Suizong Shunzong was crowned the Emperor of the Great Peace and Security of the German Empire, and Emperor Gensong was given the title of Emperor of the Great Peace and Security of the German Empire.

古文：初以河、湟收复，百僚请加徽号，帝曰： 河、湟收复，继成先志，朕欲追尊祖宗，以昭功烈。 
现代文：当初由于河、湟收复，百官请求加徽号，皇上道： 河、湟收复，继续完成了先人之志，朕想要追尊祖宗以此表彰功业。 
English: At the beginning, due to the recovery of rivers and streams, hundreds of officials requested the addition of the emblem, and the emperor said: the recovery of rivers and streams has continued to fulfill the aspirations of our ancestors, and I want to honor my ancestors in recognition of their achievements.

古文：白敏中等对曰： 非臣愚昧所能及。 
现代文：白敏中等人对答说 ：这不是愚昧的臣下们所能及。 
English: Bai Min replied, "This is beyond the power of our ignorant subjects.

古文：至是，上御宣政殿行事，及册出，俯楼目送，流涕呜咽。
现代文：至此，皇上驾到宣政殿行事，等到册封奉出，皇上抬头用目光远送，呜咽流泪。
English: At this point, the emperor drove to Xuancheng Palace to act, and when the seal was issued, the emperor looked up and sent it away with his eyes, sobbing and shedding tears.

古文：崖州司户参军李德裕卒于贬所。
现代文：崖州司户参军李德裕在被贬处所去世。
English: Li Deyu, a member of the military of Yalang Prefecture, passed away at the place where he was demoted.

古文：四年春正月，以追尊二圣，御正殿，大赦天下。
现代文：大中四年春正月，因为追尊两个皇上，驾到正殿，大赦天下。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of high school, because of the two emperors, he drove to the main hall and pardoned the world.

古文：徒流比在天德者，以十年为限，既遇鸿恩，例减三载。但使循环添换，边不阙人，次第放归，人无怨苦。
现代文：徒刑流放而近在天德年者，以十年为期限，既然遇到皇上大恩，按例减刑三年，只要使充军循环添换，边关不缺人守卫，可以依次逐渐放回，人们就不会怨望痛苦。
English: For those who were sentenced to exile and are close to the Year of Heaven and Earth, the term is ten years. Since they have met with the emperor's great favor, the sentence is reduced by three years as usual. As long as the army is replenished and the border is not short of guards, they can be gradually released one by one. People will not resent the pain.

古文：其秦、原、威、武诸州、诸关，先准格徒流人，亦量与立限，止于七年，如要住者，亦听。
现代文：秦、原、威、武各州、各关，先前的充军犯人，也根据情况给他们立个限期，只限在七年，七年以外想要住在当地，则听其自便。
English: Qin, Yuan, Wei, Wuzhou, and Guanzhong provinces, as well as former prisoners of war, also set a deadline for them according to the situation, limited to seven years. If they want to live in the local area beyond seven years, they can do so at their own convenience.

古文：诸州府县官如请工假，一月巳下，权差诸判官；一月已上，即准勾当例，其课料等据数每贯刻二百文，与见判案官添给。
现代文：各州府县官如果请求给工料钱，一个月以下的小工，权且由各道判官批给；一月以上大工程，就按照主管公事旧例，所有课料据数每贯钱限定二百文，由现任判案官添给。
English: If the prefectural and county officials of each prefecture request to pay materials, the judges of each province shall have the power to grant the right to small workers for less than one month; for large projects for more than one month, in accordance with the old practice of the competent public affairs, the number of all materials shall be limited to two hundred yuan per thousand yuan, and shall be added by the current judge.

古文：三月己卯，刑部奏： 监临主守，应将官物私自贷使并贷借人，及以己物中纳官司者，并专知别当主掌所由有犯赃，并同犯入己赃，不在原赦之限。 
现代文：有故意杀人者，即使已经受伤还未死，或者死而复生，或意欲杀伤人，但偶然未造成伤害，都按已经杀人条款处置。二月，皇上之女儿万寿公主下嫁给右拾遗郑颢，以郑颢为银青光禄大夫，兼任起居郎、驸马都尉。
English: In February, the Emperor's daughter, Princess Manshou, married Zheng Yao, the Right Hand of the Empress Dowager, with Zheng Yao as the doctor of Yin Qing Guanglu, and concurrently serving as the groom and the steward of horses.

古文：从之。以幽州节度副大使检校工部尚书张直方为左金吾卫将军。
现代文：三月，以幽州节度副大使、检校工部尚书张直方为左金吾卫将军。
English: In March, Vice-Ambassador of the Yuzhou Festival and Vice-Minister of the School Inspection Department, Shangshu Zhang Naokata, was appointed as the General of the Left Kinguwei.

古文：四月，敕： 法司用刑，或持巧诈，分律两端，遂成其罪。
现代文：四月，皇上下令： 法官用刑法，有的用巧诈之法，支解法律，于是构成犯人之罪。
English: In April, the emperor issued an order: "Judges use criminal law, and some use clever deception to interpret the law, thus constituting the crime of criminals."

古文：既奸吏得计，则黎庶何安？
现代文：既然奸诈之官得计，那么百姓怎么能安定？
English: Since the treacherous officials have their way, how can the people be stable?

古文：自今后应书罪定刑，宜直指其事，不得舞文，妄有援引。 
现代文：从今以后凡是书写罪过判定刑法，应该直接指出犯罪事由，不得舞文弄墨，妄自援引，弄虚作假。 
English: From now on, whenever the criminal law is written to judge a crime, the cause of the crime should be directly pointed out, and it is not allowed to tamper with the text, arbitrarily invoke it, or falsify it.

古文：又刑部奏： 淮今年正月一日敕节文，据会昌元年三月二十六日敕，窃盗赃至一贯文处死，宜委所司重详定条目奏闻。
现代文：另外刑部上奏 ：按照今年正月一日皇上命令之文，根据会昌元年三月二十六日的命令，偷窃、盗窃赃物达到一千文者处死，应该委任有关官员详细拟定条目奏闻朝廷。
English: In addition, the criminal investigation department reported: According to the text of the emperor's order issued on the first day of the first month of this year, according to the order of March 26, Huichang, if the person who steals or steals stolen goods reaches one thousand, he should be executed, and the relevant officials should be appointed to elaborate the article and report to the imperial court.

古文：臣等检校，并请准建中三年三月二十四日敕，窃盗赃满三疋已上决杀，如赃数不充，量请科放。 
现代文：臣等人核查，都请按照建中三年三月二十四日命令，偷窃赃物满三匹绸缎以上者杀头，如果偷盗数目不够，请求衡量按律释放。 
English: In accordance with the order of March 24th, the third year of the middle school, if the number of stolen goods is more than three silk cocoons, please kill the head. If the number of stolen goods is not enough, please request to release according to the law.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：七月丙子，大理卿刘蒙奏： 古者悬法示人，欲使人从善远罪，至于不犯，以致刑措。
现代文：七月丙子是朔日，初一，大理卿刘氵蒙上奏： 古时制定法令让人看，是想要使人弃恶而从善，甚至于不犯法，以至于刑法停止不用。
English: July is the first day of the new year, and on the first day of the new year, Liu Yimeng, the Lord of Dali, gave a speech: In ancient times, laws and regulations were enacted to make people abandon evil and do good, and even not to break the law, so that the criminal law would cease to be used.

古文：准大和二年十月二十六日刑部侍郎高釴条疏，准勘节目一十一件，下诸州府粉壁书于录事参军食堂，每申奏罪人，须依前件节目。
现代文：按照大和二年十月二十六日刑部侍郎高钅弋按条上疏章，按照核对的刑法项目共十一件，下到各州府，让他在录事参军的食堂用白面粉写在墙壁上。
English: In accordance with the article-by-article summary of criminal law items, a total of eleven items in accordance with the verified criminal law items, he went to each prefectural capital and asked him to write on the walls with white flour in the canteen where he was enlisting in the army.

古文：岁月滋久，文字湮沦，州县推案，多违漏节目。
现代文：每次上奏罪人，说要依照先前核定的法律条文办事。但由于年月愈来愈久，文字湮没，州县审案，大多违背或遗漏前述十一件条文。
English: Each time a criminal was reported, it was said that the previously approved legal provisions should be followed. However, due to the passage of time, the disappearance of the text, and the state and county trials, most of them violated or omitted the aforementioned eleven articles.

古文：今后请下诸道，令刻石置于会食之所，使官吏起坐观省，记忆条目，庶令案牍周详。 
现代文：今后请求下发到各道，让他们将法令条文刻在石上放在大众吃饭的地方，使官吏随时观看思考，记忆法律条目，这样差不多会使法律案卷周到详备。 
English: In the future, the request will be sent to all provinces, asking them to engrave the provisions of the law on the stone and place it in the place where the public eats, so that officials can watch, think and memorize the legal items at any time. This will almost make the legal case file thoughtful and detailed.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：八月，刑部侍郎、御史中丞魏掞奏： 诸道州府百姓诣台诉事，多差御史推劾，臣恐烦劳州县，先请差度支、户部、盐铁院官带宪衔者推劾。
现代文：八月，刑部侍郎、御史中丞魏上奏 ：各道、州、府百姓到御史台上诉，大多差遣御史审问，臣恐烦劳州县，先请度支、户部、盐铁院官又带有御史衔的官员审问。
English: In August, Wei Shangsoo, the attendant of the Ministry of Justice and the Vice-Minister of History, appealed to the Historian's Office: the people of various provinces, prefectures, and prefectures appealed to the Historian's Office, and most of them were sent to the Historian's Office for interrogation.

古文：又各得三司使申称，院官人数不多，例专掌院务，课绩不办。
现代文：另外从三司使声称，院官人数不多，按老例专门主管三司使的工作，其他事不办。
English: In addition, the envoys from the three departments claimed that the number of abbots was small, and according to the old practice, they were only in charge of the work of the envoys from the three departments, and did not do other things.

古文：今诸道观察使幕中判官，少不下五六人，请于其中带宪衔者委令推劾。
现代文：现在各道观察使幕中的判官，最少也不下五六人，请求把其中带有御史台的衔头者委令他们专门审问。
English: At present, there are at least five or six judges in the court of observation in each province, requesting that those with the title of Imperial Historian be ordered to be specially interrogated.

古文：如累推有劳，能雪冤滞，御史台阙官，便令奏用。 
现代文：如果多次审问有了劳绩，能够洗雪冤枉，如果御史台缺官，便可以上奏对他加以使用。 
English: If there is merit in multiple interrogation, it can clear the snow of injustice, and if there is a vacancy in the Imperial Historian's Office, it can be used against him.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：九月，以朝请大夫、检校礼部尚书、孟州刺史、河阳三城节度使李拭为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度等使。
现代文：九月，以朝请大夫、检校礼部尚书、孟州刺史、河阳三城节度使李拭为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: In September, he invited Li Wu, a doctor, Shang Shu, a member of the school inspection and etiquette department, Meng Zhou, a historian, and a delegate from the three cities of Heyang to be the delegate to the Taiyuan Yin Festival, the Beidou Left-Behind Festival, and the Hedong Festival.

古文：幽州节度周綝卒，军人立其牙将张允伸为留后。
现代文：幽州节度使周纟林去世，军人立他们的牙将张允仲为留后。
English: At the Yuzhou Festival, Zhou Yulin passed away, and the soldiers left their commander Zhang Yunzhong behind.

古文：十月，中书侍郎、平章事魏扶罢知政事。
现代文：十月，中书侍郎、平章事魏扶罢免知政事。
English: In October, Zhongshu's chamberlains, Ping Zhang and Wei Fu were removed from their posts.

古文：十一月己亥，敕： 收复成、维、扶等三州，建立已定，条令制置，一切合同。
现代文：十一月乙亥是朔日，初一，皇上命令 ：收复了成、维、扶等三州，建官立署已经确定，律令制度，俱已完备。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an order: the three prefectures of Chengdu, Wei and Fuzhou had been recovered, the establishment of government agencies had been determined, and the ritsuryo system had been completed.

古文：其已配到流人，宜淮秦、原、威、武等州流例，七年放还。 
现代文：那些已经发配的流徒，应该按照秦、原、威、武等州流放旧例，七年以后放还原籍。 
English: Those exiles who have already been dispatched should be exiled to Qin, Yuan, Wei, Wu and other provinces according to the old practice, and returned to their original homes after seven years.

古文：以户部侍郎、判本司事令狐綯为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：以户部侍郎、兼管本司事的令狐謋为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: With the head of the household, who is also in charge of the steward, the fox fox is the head of the household, who is also the head of the household.

古文：十二月，以华州刺史周敬复为光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍，兼洪州刺史、江南西道团练观察使，赐金紫。
现代文：十二月，以华州刺史周敬复为光禄大夫、检校左散骑常侍，兼任洪州刺史、江南西道团练使、观察使，赐给金鱼袋和紫衣。
English: In December, Zhou Qianfu, the governor of Huazhou Province, was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu and the attendant of the inspection of the school. He also served as the governor of Hongzhou Province, the training envoy and the observation envoy of the West Jiangnan Province, and was given a goldfish bag and a purple robe.

古文：五年春正月甲戌，制皇第七子洽封怀王，第八子汭为昭王，第九子汶为康王。
现代文：大中五年春正月甲戌是朔日，初一，皇上命令皇第七子洽封为怀王，第八子封为昭王，第九子汶封为康王。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of junior high school, the emperor ordered the seventh son of the emperor to be named King Huai, the eighth son to be named King Zhao, and the ninth son to be named King Kang.

古文：敕两京天下州府，起大中五年正月一日已后，三年内不得杀牛。
现代文：皇上命令两京及天下州府，从大中五年正月一日以后，三年内不得杀牛。
English: The emperor ordered the two capitals and all prefectures not to kill cows within three years from the first day of the fifth year of junior high school.

古文：如郊庙享祀合用者，即以诸畜代。
现代文：如果在郊外祭天，太庙祭祀需用牛者，就以其他牲畜代替。
English: If cattle are needed for temple rituals in the suburbs, other livestock should be used instead.

古文：二月，户部侍郎裴休充诸道盐铁转运等使。
现代文：二月，户部侍郎裴休充任诸道盐铁使、转运使。
English: In February, Pei Xiu, the steward of the household department, was appointed as the salt and iron envoy to various provinces and the transfer envoy.

古文：四月癸卯，刑部侍郎刘彖奏：据今年四月十三日已前，凡二百二十四年，杂制敕计六百四十六门，二千一百六十五条，议轻重，名曰《大中刑法统类》，欲行用之。
现代文：四月癸卯是朔日，初一，刑部侍郎刘王彖上奏：根据今年四月十三日以前计算，总计二百二十四年，皇上的各种诏令计六百四十六门，二千一百六十五条，议论其轻重得失，名叫《大中刑法统类》，想要施行使用它。
English: On the first day of the first month of the new year, Liu Wangyun, the attendant of the Criminal Law Department, made a report: according to the calculation before April 13 this year, a total of 224 years, 646 imperial decrees and 2,165 articles, discussed the importance of its gains and losses, called "university and middle school criminal law classification," and wanted to implement it.

古文：五月，以太原尹、河东节度使李拭为凤翔节度使；李业检校户部尚书、太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度使；守司空、门下侍郎、太原郡开国伯、食邑一千户白敏中检校司徒、同平章事邠州刺史，充邠宁节度观察、东面招讨党项等使；以户部侍郎、判户部事魏謩本官同平章事。
现代文：五月，以太原尹、河东节度使李拭为凤翔节度使；以李业为检校户部尚书、太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使；守司空、门下侍郎、太原郡开国伯、食邑一千户白敏中任检校司徒、同平章事、州刺史，充任宁节度使、观察使、东面招讨党项使；以户部侍郎、判户部事魏凭本官任同平章事。
English: In May, the Taiyuan Yin and the Hedong Festival appointed Li Wu as the Fengxiang Festival Envoy; the Li Ye as the inspection of the school, the Shangshu, the Taiyuan Yin and the Beidou left, acting as the Hedong Festival Envoy; the Guoji Ku, the servant of the door, the Taiyuan County Kaifeng Bo, the Bai Min middle-ranking official of the thousand households in the food village, the Ning Festival Envoy, the Observation Envoy, and the Dongmen Invitation Party Envoy; the household servant and the judge of the household department were appointed as the Dongping Festival Envoy.

古文：七月，宰相监修国史崔龟从续柳芳《唐历》二十二卷上之。
现代文：七月，宰相监修国史崔龟从续柳芳著《唐历》二十二卷奉上朝廷。
English: In July, the twenty-two-volume "Tang Calendar" by Liu Fang was presented to the imperial court.

古文：缘未有明敕处分，多被无良人吏致使恐吓，或致言讼。
现代文：八月，皇上下令曰： 公主封地掌管财物的官员，擅自发出公文，恐怕有很多隐瞒或庇护，对法律有所紊乱。
English: In August, the imperial edict said: "The officials in charge of the property of the princess's fiefdom have issued official documents without authorization. I am afraid that there is a lot of concealment or shelter, and there is some disorder in the law."

古文：起今后应刺史下担什物，及除替后资送钱物，但不率敛官吏，科配百姓，一任各守州县旧例色目支给。
现代文：今后公主除了任用征召封地官员外，不得让封地掌管财物的官员发文书到府县，如果因为公事，应该让封地官员申报宗正寺，让宗正寺官员参与斟酌事体施行。 
English: In the future, in addition to appointing and conscripting fief officials, the princess must not allow the officials in charge of property in the fief to send documents to the prefectures. If it is for official business, the officials of the fief should declare Sojo-ji Temple, and the officials of Sojo-ji Temple should participate in the implementation.

古文：如无公廨，不在资送之限。若辄有率配，以入己赃论。 
现代文：沙州刺史张义潮派遣兄长张义泽携瓜、沙、伊、萧等十一州户口前来奉献，自从河、陇沦陷给吐蕃一百多年，至此才全部收复陇右原来土地。朝廷以张义潮为瓜、沙、伊等州节度使。
English: Zhang Yichao, the statesman of Shazhou, dispatched his brother Zhang Yize to come to the dedication with the household accounts of eleven states, including Gua, Sha, Yi, and Xiao. It has been more than a hundred years since He and Zou fell to Tubo, and it is only now that they have all regained their original lands. The imperial court used Zhang Yichao as the state festival envoy for Gua, Sha, and Yi.

古文：以正议大夫、兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使、上柱国、河东县开国子裴休守礼部尚书，进阶金紫；以前宣歙观察使、太中大夫、检校左散骑常侍裴谂权知兵部侍郎。
现代文：九月，以正议大夫、兵部侍郎、诸道盐铁转运使、上柱国、河东县开国子裴休兼任礼部尚书，进官阶服金鱼袋紫衣；以前任宣歙观察使、太中大夫、检校左散骑常侍裴谂暂代主持兵部侍郎。
English: In September, Pei Xiu, the son of the founder of Shangzhu Province and Hedong County, concurrently served as the ceremonial secretary, wearing the goldfish-purple robe as he was promoted to the official rank; Pei Xiu, who had previously served as the Xuanwu observation envoy, the official junior high school doctor, and the regular attendant of the inspection of schools, temporarily presided as the ceremonial secretary of the military.

古文：十月己亥，京兆尹韦博奏： 京畿富户为诸军影占，苟免府县色役，或有追诉，军府纷然。
现代文：十月己亥是朔日，初一，京兆尹韦博上奏 ：京畿富户被诸军隐藏，假如免除府县各种名目的劳役，如有的人追问，军府就喧哗起哄。
English: October Ji Hai is the New Year's Day, the first day of the year, Jing Zhao Yin Weibo plays up: Gyeonggi rich households are hidden by the army, if exempted from labor service of various names in prefectures, if some people ask, the military government will make a lot of noise.

古文：请准会昌三年十二月敕，诸军使不得强夺百姓入军。 
现代文：请求按照会昌三年十二月命令，诸军使不得强行逼迫百姓入军中。 
English: The request is in accordance with the order issued by Hoechang in December of the third year, that the military should not force the people to join the army.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十一月，中书侍郎，兼吏部尚书、平章崔龟从检校尚书估仆射、汴州刺史，充宣武军节度使。
现代文：十一月，中书侍郎、兼吏部尚书、平章事崔龟从任检校尚书左仆射、汴州刺史、充任宣武军节度使。
English: In November, the attendant of the Chinese classics, and also the secretary of the clerk's department, Shangshu, and the secretary of the Taira chapter, Cui Gui, were appointed as the inspector of the school, Shangshu Zuopuzha, and the governor of Zhangzhou, and served as the festival envoy of the Xuanwu army.

古文：沙州置归义军，以张义潮为节度使。
现代文：沙州设置归义军，以张义潮为节度使。
English: Shazhou was set up to belong to the rebels, with Zhang Yichao as the commander.

古文：太子詹事姚康献《帝王政纂》十卷；又撰《统史》三百卷，上自开辟，下尽隋朝，帝王美政、诏令、制置、铜盐钱谷损益、用兵利害，下至僧道是非，无不备载，编年为之。
现代文：太子詹事姚康献上《帝王政纂》十卷；又撰写《统史》三百卷，上从开天辟地写起，下一直写到隋朝为止，帝王的善政、诏令、制度设置、铜、盐、钱、谷减少、增多、用兵利害，下至和尚、道士的是非，无不详细记载，用编年体编写。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Yao Kang presented ten volumes of the "Imperial Political Compilation"; he also wrote three hundred volumes of the "History of the United States," writing from the beginning of the world to the Sui Dynasty. The emperor's good governance, imperial decrees, system settings, copper, salt, money, grain reduction, increase, interest in the use of soldiers, down to the rights and wrongs of monks and Taoists, all detailed records, compiled in chronological form.

古文：国子祭酒冯审奏： 文宣王庙，始太宗立之，睿宗书额，武后窃政之日，改篆题 大周 二字，请削之。 
现代文：国子祭酒冯审上奏 ：文宣王庙，太宗开始建立，睿宗书写庙名，武后窃取政权之日，改为篆字题写 大周 二字，请求加以削除。 
English: Emperor's son festival wine Feng Xun played: Wen Xuan Wang Temple, Taizong began to build, Ruizong wrote the name of the temple, the day of Wu's theft of power, changed to a cursive inscription Dazhou two words, requested to be deleted.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十二月，盗斫景陵神门戟，京兆尹韦博罚两月俸，贬宗正卿李文举睦州刺史，陵令吴阅岳州司马，奉先令裴让隋州司马。
现代文：十二月，强盗砍坏了景陵的神门戟，为此，京兆尹韦博罚两个月薪俸，贬宗正卿李文举为睦州刺史，景陵令吴阅贬为岳州司马，奉先县令裴让贬为隋州司马。
English: In December, robbers cut down the sacred gate of Jingling. As a result, Jing Zhaoyun Weibo was fined two months' salary, the Patriarch of the Zhengde Emperor Li Wenju was demoted to Muzhou Sima, the Jingling Emperor Wu Yue was demoted to Yuezhou Sima, and the Fengxian Emperor Peijan was demoted to Suizhou Sima.

古文：是岁，湖南大饥。
现代文：这年，湖南大荒年。
English: This year, Hunan experienced a severe drought.

古文：六年春正月戊辰，以陇州防御使薛逵为秦州刺史、天雄军使，兼秦、成两州经略使。
现代文：大中六年春正月戊辰是朔日，初一，以陇州防御使薛逵为秦州刺史、天雄军使，兼任秦、成两州经略使。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring of the sixth year of the middle school, the first day of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the

古文：二月，右卫大将军郑光以赐田请免租税。
现代文：二月，右卫大将军郑光凭借皇上所赐的田请求免除租税。
English: In February, the right guard general Zheng Guang came to request tax exemption with the help of the rice fields given by the emperor.

古文：宰相魏謩奏曰： 郑光以国舅之亲，赐田可也，免税无以劝蒸民。 
现代文：宰相魏上奏曰 ：郑光凭借国舅的亲人关系，赐给他的田是可以的，如果免税就无法鼓励老百姓。 
English: Prime Minister Wei Shangso said: Zheng Guang's land given to him by virtue of his uncle's kinship is acceptable, but if it is tax-free, it will not encourage the people.

古文：敕曰： 一依人户例供税。 
现代文：皇上道 ：全部依照普通人家老例交税。 
English: Emperor's Road: All taxes will be paid in accordance with the long-standing practice of ordinary people.

古文：三月，陇州刺史薛逵奏修筑定成关工毕。
现代文：三月，陇州刺史薛逵上奏说，修筑定成关工程完毕。
English: In March, Zhangzhou Zishi Xuejun said in his report that the construction of the completed project was completed.

古文：四月丁酉，敕： 常平义仓斛斗，每年检勘，实水旱灾处，录事参军先勘人户多少，支给先贫下户，富户不在支给之限。 
现代文：四月丁酉是朔日，初一，皇上命令： 常平义仓的粮食，每年检查核实，充实水灾旱灾之处，录事、参军先行核实人户多少，支给首先是给贫苦下等户，富户不在支给范围内。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the new year, the emperor ordered: the grain of Changping Yiguang should be inspected and verified every year, the places of floods and droughts should be enriched, and the number of households should be verified in advance by records and joining the army. The payment is first given to the poor and lower-class households, and the rich households are not within the scope of the payment.

古文：以礼部尚书、诸道盐铁转运等使裴休可本官同平章事。
现代文：准许礼部尚书、诸道盐铁使、转运使裴休可以凭本官任同平章事。
English: It is allowed that the ceremonial secretary, the salt and iron envoy, and the transportation envoy can be appointed to the same rank as the official.

古文：五月，敕： 天下军府有兵马处，宜选会兵法能弓马等人充教练使，每年合教习时，常令教习。
现代文：五月，皇上命令： 天下军府有兵马之处，应该挑选会兵法、善于用弓马的人充任教练使，每年应该教习时，常常让他们教习。
English: In May, the emperor issued an order: Since there are so many soldiers and horses in the military, it is necessary to choose a person who knows the art of war and is good at using bows and horses to serve as an instructor. Every year, when it is time to teach, they should be allowed to teach.

古文：仍于其时申兵部。 
现代文：仍然在适当之时申报兵部。 
English: They still report to the military at the appropriate time.

古文：御史台奏： 诸色刑狱有关连朝官者，尚书省四品已上、诸司三品已上官，宜先奏取进止。
现代文：御史台上奏： 各种案件有关连朝廷官员的，尚书省四品以上、诸司三品以上官员，应该先奏报朝廷而后决定抛弃还是留用。
English: Report to the Imperial Court: For various cases involving Imperial Court officials, officials with four or more pins in the Ministry of Education and Culture and three or more pins in various departments should first report to the Imperial Court and then decide whether to abandon or retain.

古文：如取诸色官状，即申中书取裁。 
现代文：如果取各类官员居官的情况，就申报中书省取用裁定。 
English: If the situation of various types of officials staying in office is taken, the application shall be ruled by the Ministry of Justice.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：秋七月丙辰，前淮南节度使、金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、兼扬州大都督府长史、御史大夫、上柱国、赞皇郡开国公、食邑一千五百户李珏卒，赠司空。
现代文：秋七月丙寅是朔日，初一，前任淮南节度使、金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、兼扬州大都督府长史、御史大夫、上柱国、赞皇郡开国公、食邑一千五百户李珏去世，赠司空衔。
English: On the first day of the new year, the former Huainan Festival envoy, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, school inspector Shang Shuxi Zuopu Ya, and Yangzhou governor, chief historian, chief historian, Shangzhu Guo, Zhanghuang County founding father, and 1,500 households in food villages Li Wei passed away, and was awarded the vacant title.

古文：敕犯赃人平赃，据律以当时物价上旬估。
现代文：皇上下令，赦免退还完赃物的贪赃犯人，依据法律以当时上旬的物价估价。
English: The emperor issued an order to pardon the corrupt criminals who returned the stolen goods. According to the law, the price was estimated at the beginning of that time.

古文：请取所犯之处，其月内上旬时估平之。
现代文：请求取所犯贪赃之处，以当月上旬的物价估价让犯人退赃。
English: The request was to take the place of the embezzlement committed, and let the prisoner return the embezzlement with the price estimate at the beginning of the month.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：检校司空、太子少师、上柱国、范阳郡开国公、食邑二千户卢钧可太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：检校司空、太子少师、上柱国、范阳郡开国公、食邑二千户卢钧可以任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使。
English: The school inspector, the prince, the young teacher, the head of Shangzhu Province, the founding father of Fanyang County, and the ruler of two thousand households in food villages can be appointed as Taiyuan Yin, Beidou left-behind, and Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：九月，敕起居郎转官月限，宜以二十个月。
现代文：九月，皇上命令起居郎转任官职的月限，应该以二十个月为限。
English: In September, the Emperor ordered that the time limit for Kojiro to transfer to a new post should be limited to twenty months.

古文：七年春正月壬辰，金紫光禄大夫、守太子少傅分司、上柱国、晋陵郡开国公、食邑二千户归融卒，赠右仆射。
现代文：大中七年春正月壬辰是朔日，初一，金紫光禄大夫、兼任太子少傅分司、上柱国、晋陵郡开国公、食邑二千户归融去世，赠给右仆射。
English: On the first day of the seventh year of junior high school, the first day of spring, the first day of the new year, Jin Zi Guanglu, the doctor of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of

古文：宗正卿李文会贬睦州刺史。
现代文：宗正卿李文举贬为睦州刺史。
English: Zong Zhengqing Li Wenju was relegated to the history of Mutsu Province.

古文：四月，以御史大夫郑朗为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：四月，以御吏大夫郑朗为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In April, Zheng Lang, an official of the Imperial Household Agency, was appointed to the post of Chusho-sajiro (chancellor of the Imperial Household Agency) and Tonghei-shoji.

古文：五月，左卫率府仓曹张戣集律令格式条件相类一千二百五十条，分一百二十一门，号曰《刑法统类》，上之。
现代文：五月，左卫率府仓曹张癸戈集中法令条文相类似的条目一千二百五十条，分为一百二十一门，号称曰《刑法统类》，奉上朝廷。
English: In May, Cao Zhang Rongguo, the commander of the Left Division of the General Headquarters of the People's Liberation Army, centralized 1250 articles of similar articles of the law, divided into 121 categories, and submitted to the imperial court, claiming to be the "Classification of Criminal Law."

古文：七月，以正议大夫、尚书左丞、上柱国、赐金鱼袋崔璪为刑部尚书，以银青光禄大夫、行兵部侍郎、知制诰、充翰林学士苏涤为尚书左丞，权知户部侍郎崔玙可权知兵部侍郎。
现代文：七月，以正议大夫、尚书左丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔为刑部尚书，以银青光禄大夫、兼任兵部侍郎、知制诏、充任翰林学士苏涤为尚书左丞，暂时主持户部侍郎崔王与可以暂时主持兵部侍郎工作。
English: In July, he was appointed as the official secretary of the Department of Justice with the titles of the official secretary of the Department of Justice, the official secretary of the Department of Justice with the titles of the official secretary of the Department of Justice, the official secretary of the Department of Justice with the titles of the official secretary of the Department of Justice, the official secretary of the Department of Justice with the titles of the official secretary of the Department of Justice, the official secretary of the Department of Justice with the titles of the official secretary of the Department of Justice, the official secretary of the Department of Justice with the titles of the official secretary of the Department of Justice, the official secretary of the Department of Justice with the titles of the official secretary

古文：十月，尚书左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士崔铉进《续会要》四十卷，修撰官杨绍复、崔彖、薛逢、郑言等，赐物有差。
现代文：十月，尚书左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士崔铉奉上《续会要》四十卷，修撰官员杨绍复、崔蠪、薛逢、郑言等，按等级分别赐物。
English: In October, the forty volumes of "The Resumption of the Meeting" were presented to Yang Shuxu Zuoxia, his subordinate attendant, Ping Zhangji, an envoy of the Taiqing Palace, and Cui Yan, a scholar of the Hongwen Library, and the editing officials Yang Shaofu, Cui Yan, Xue Feng, Zheng Yan, etc. were presented according to their ranks.

古文：八年春正月，陕州黄河清。
现代文：大中八年春正月，陕州黄河水清。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of junior high school, the waters of the Yellow River in Shaanxi Province were clear.

古文：二月，南蛮进犀牛，诏还之。
现代文：二月，南蛮进贡犀牛，皇上诏令还给他们。
English: In February, South Africa paid a tribute of rhinoceroses, which were returned to them by imperial decree.

古文：三月，敕以旱诏使疏决系囚。
现代文：三月，皇上命令因为旱灾特派人清理积压的被关押囚犯。
English: In March, the emperor ordered a special envoy to clear the backlog of prisoners because of the drought.

古文：宰相监修国史魏謩修成《文宗实录》四十卷，上之，修史官给事中卢耽、太常少卿蒋偕、司勋员外郎王沨、右补阙卢吉，颁赐银器、锦彩有差。
现代文：宰相监修国史魏谟修撰成《文宗实录》四十卷奉上朝廷，修史官给事中卢耽、太常少卿蒋偕、司勋员外郎王氵风、右外阙卢吉，按等级颁赐给他们银器、锦缎。
English: The forty volumes of "Wen Zong Shih Lu" compiled by Wei Mu Xiu, the prime minister's overseer, were sent to the imperial court. The historian gave Lu Tan, Taichang Shaoqing Jiang Qian, and the officers of the Order, Wai Lang Wang Qianfeng, and Zuoying Lu Ji, according to their ranks. Silverware and brocades were awarded to them.

古文：以山南东道节度使、检校户部尚书、襄州刺史、上柱国、酒泉县开国子、食邑三百户李景让为吏部尚书。
现代文：以山南东道节度使、检校户部尚书、襄州刺史、上柱国、酒泉县开国子、食邑三百户李景让为吏部尚书。
English: Li Jingzhang was the host of the festival in Shannan, the head of the inspection of schools, the history of Xiangzhou, the history of Shangzhuang, the founding of Jiuquan County, and the 300 households of food villages.

古文：五月，以中书舍人、翰林学士韦澳为京兆尹；以户部侍郎、翰林学士承旨、上柱国、武功县开国子、食邑三百户苏涤检校兵部尚书，兼江陵尹、御史大夫，充荆南节度管内观察处置等使。
现代文：五月，以中书舍人、翰林学士韦澳为京兆尹；以户部侍郎、翰林学士承旨、上柱国、武功县开国子、食邑三百户苏涤任检校兵部尚书，兼江陵尹、御史大夫、充任荆南节度使管辖内观察处置使。
English: In May, Wei Ao, a scholar of Chinese classics and a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun; Shang Zhuo Guo, a scholar of Hanlin, a scholar of Shang Zhuo Guo, a scholar of Wukong County, and a scholar of 300 households in Suqo, were appointed as Shang Shu, the inspector of the school and the military department; and Jiang Ling Yin, a doctor of history, was appointed as Jing Nan Jiedu, the inspector of the festival and the inspector of the jurisdiction.

古文：七月，银青光禄大夫、守门下侍郎、同平章事魏謩兼户部尚书。
现代文：七月，银青光禄大夫、兼任门下侍郎、同平章事魏兼任户部尚书。
English: In July, Yin Qingguanglu became a doctor, concurrently serving as a subordinate attendant, and Tongping Zhang also served as a household secretary.

古文：八月，以司农卿郑助为检校左散骑常侍，兼夏州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户、夏绥银宥等州节度营田观察处置押蕃落安抚平夏党项等使。
现代文：八月，以司农卿郑助为检校左散骑常侍，兼任夏州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户、夏、绥、银、宥等州节度使、营田使、观察处置使、押蕃落安抚丰夏、党项使。
English: In August, Zheng Su, the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, was appointed as the Left-Handed Cavalryman of the inspection of the school, and concurrently served as the governor of Xia Prefecture, the governor of Shangzhu Province, the founding father of Shenyang County, the governor of 300 households in Shiyang County, the governor of Xia Province, the governor of Shiyang Province, the governor of Yin Province, the governor of Yin Province, the governor of Yunnan Province, the governor of Yantian Province, the governor of Yantian Province, the governor of Yantian Province, the governor of Yunnan Province, the governor of Yunnan Province,

古文：九年春正月辛巳，银青光禄大夫、秘书监、许昌县开国男陈商卒，赠工部尚书。
现代文：大中九年春正月辛巳是朔日，初一，银青光禄大夫、秘书监、许昌县开国男陈商去世，赠工部尚书衔。
English: On the first day of the spring of the ninth year of junior high school, the first day of the first year, the silver Qing Guanglu doctor, the secretary supervisor, and the founding father of Xu Chang County, Chen Shang passed away, and was awarded the title of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：二月，中书侍郎，兼礼部尚书、同平章事裴休检校吏部尚书，兼汴州刺史、御史大夫，充宣武军节度使、汴宋亳颍观察处置等使。
现代文：二月，中书侍郎兼礼部尚书、同平章事裴休任检校吏部尚书，兼汴州刺史、御史大夫、充任宣武军节度使、汴、宋、亳、颍观察使、处置使。
English: In February, Zhongshu Zhi Rong served as the secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Tongping Zhangji Pei served as the secretary of the Ministry of Inspection of Schools, and also served as the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education, the secretary of the Ministry of Education,

古文：三月，试宏词举人，漏汇题目，为御史台所劾，侍郎裴谂改国子祭酒，郎中周敬复罚两月俸料，考试官刑部郎中唐枝出为处州刺史，监察御史冯颛罚一月俸料。
现代文：三月，考试博学宏词科应试举人，泄漏了题目，被御史台所弹劾，侍郎裴谂改任国子祭酒，郎中周敬复罚两个月薪俸和食料钱，考试官刑部郎中唐枝贬出京城为处州刺史，监察御史冯颛罚一月的薪俸和食料钱。
English: In March, the examiner of the Erudition and Rhetoric Department, Hong Li, was impeached by the Historian's Office for failing to divulge the exam questions. The chamberlain, Pei Yao, was transferred to the National Children's Festival, and the steward, Zhou Keifu, was fined two months' salary and food money. The examiner of the Criminal Investigation Department, Tang Zhi, was expelled from the capital city for leaking the history of the state, and the supervisor, Feng Yao, was fined one month's salary and food money.

古文：其登科十人并落下。
现代文：那些已经考取登上科第的十个人都作为落第。
English: Those ten people who have been admitted to board the Kodi have all failed.

古文：其吏部东铨委右丞卢懿权判。
现代文：吏部东铨委托右丞卢懿暂时兼任。
English: The East Eunuch of the Ministry of Civil Affairs entrusted the Right Eunuch, Lu Xun, to take over the post temporarily.

古文：以吏部侍郎郑涯检校礼部尚书，兼定州刺史、御史大夫，充义武军节度、易定州观察处置、北平军等使。
现代文：以吏部侍郎郑涯任检校礼部尚书，兼定州刺史、御史大夫，充任义武军节度使，易州、定州观察处置使、北平军等使。
English: Zheng Ya, the attendant of the cadre department, was appointed as the inspector of the school's etiquette department, and also as the historian of Dingzhou and the chief historian. He was also appointed as the festival envoy of the Volunteer Army, the observation and disposition envoy of Yizhou and Dingzhou, and the envoy of the Peiping Army.

古文：御史台据正月八日礼部贡院捉到明经黄续之、赵弘成、全质等三人伪造堂印、堂帖，兼黄续之伪著绯衫，将伪帖入贡院，令与举人虞蒸、胡简、党赞等三人及第，许得钱一千六百贯文。
现代文：御史台依据正月八日礼部贡院捉到考试明经的黄续之、赵弘成、全质等三人伪造宰相印及宰相所下的判定文书，而黄续之公然冒充四、五品官员穿绯色衣衫，拿着伪造的宰相下达的文书进入贡院，令举人虞蒸、胡简、党赞等人中选考取，他们答应给黄续之一千六百贯钱。
English: On the basis of the 8th day of the first month of the year, the gongin of the Ministry of Ceremonies caught three people who passed the examination and forged the seal of the prime minister and the judgment document issued by the prime minister, such as Huang Cui Zhi, Zhao Hongcheng and Zeng Qi, while Huang Cui openly impersonated a four or five grade official wearing a navy blue shirt and entered the gongin with a forged document issued by the prime minister, forcing people such as Yu Steaming, Hu Jian and Party Zhan to be selected for the examination. They promised to give Huang Cui one thousand six hundred crowns.

古文：据勘黄续之等罪款，具招造伪，所许钱未曾入手，便事败。
现代文：据查黄续之等人对其罪状全部招供。虞蒸等人答应给他的贿赂钱未曾入手，便事情败露。
English: According to the investigation, Huang Cui and others confessed to all of their crimes. If the bribe money promised to him by Yu Steam and others was not obtained, the matter would be exposed.

古文：奉敕并准法处死。
现代文：奉皇上命令，将上述六人都依法处死。
English: By order of the emperor, the above-mentioned six people were all executed in accordance with the law.

古文：主司以自获奸人，并放。
现代文：因为主管官员是自己捉到罪犯，对他们的失职不予追究。
English: Because the officers in charge caught the criminals themselves, they were not prosecuted for dereliction of duty.

古文：七月，以河东节度使、检校司空、太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、范阳郡开国公、食邑三千户卢钧守尚书右仆射。
现代文：七月，以河东节度使、检校司空、太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、范阳郡开国公、食邑二千户卢钧兼任尚书右仆射。
English: In July, he was appointed as the envoy to the Hedong Festival, the school inspection officer of the sky, the Taiyuan Yin, the Beidou left, the Shangzhu Guo, the Fanyang County founding father, and the food village of two thousand households.

古文：八月，以门下侍郎、守尚书右仆射、监修国史、博陵县开国伯、食邑一千户崔铉检校司空、同平章事，兼扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度副大使、知节度使事。
现代文：八月，以门下侍郎、兼任尚书右仆射、监修国史、博陵县开国伯、食邑一千户崔铉任检校司空、同平章事、兼任扬州大都督府长史、充任淮南节度副大使、主持节度使工作。
English: In August, he served as a junior chamberlain, concurrently held the posts of Shangshu Umenchu, supervised the national history, the founding of Boling County, and the food of a thousand households, served as the school inspection officer, Tongping Zhangji, concurrently served as the governor of Yangzhou, served as the deputy ambassador of Huainan Festival, and presided over the festival.

古文：宣宗宴饯，赋诗以赐之。
现代文：皇上设宴送崔铉上任，赋诗来送行。
English: The emperor held a banquet to send Choe Heon off to his new post, and sent him off with a poem.

古文：九月，昭义节度使、检校礼部尚书，兼潞州大都督府长史、御史大夫、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑涓检校刑部尚书、太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫，充河东节度、管内观察处置等使。
现代文：九月，昭义节度使、检校礼部尚书、兼潞州大都督府长史、御史大夫、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑涓为检校刑部尚书、太原尹、北都留守、御史大夫，充任河东节度使、管辖区内观察处置使。
English: In September, Zhao Yiyi was appointed as the festival envoy, Shang Shu of the ceremonial inspection department, Chang Shi of the prefectural governor of Zhangzhou, Miao Shi of the prefectural governor, Shang Zhuo of the prefectural governor, Zheng Wei of the criminal inspection department, Taiyuan Yin of the prefectural governor, and Bei Du of the prefectural governor, and Miao Shi of the prefectural governor. He was appointed as the festival envoy of Hedong and the observation and disposition envoy in the jurisdiction area.

古文：十一月，以河南尹刘彖检校工部尚书、汴州刺史、兼御史大夫、充宣武军节度、宋亳汴颍观察处置等使。
现代文：十一月，以河南尹刘王彖任检校工部尚书、汴州刺史、兼任御史大夫、充任宣武军节度使、宋、亳、汴、颍等州观察处置使。
English: In November, with the role of Henan Yin Liu Wangyao, he served as the inspector of the school inspection department, the inspector of Zhangzhou, concurrently served as the inspector of history, and served as the inspector of the Xuanwu Army Festival, and the inspector of Song, Jia, Jia, Jia and other states.

古文：以中书舍人郑颢为礼部侍郎。
现代文：以中书舍人郑颢为礼部侍郎。
English: Zheng Qi, a scholar from the Middle School, is the page boy.

古文：十年春正月乙巳，以正议大夫、华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使、上柱国、陇西县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋李讷检校左散骑常侍，兼越州刺史、御史大夫、浙江东道都团练观察等使。
现代文：大中十年春正月乙巳是朔日，初一，以正议大夫、华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使、上柱国、陇西县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋李讷任检校左散骑常侍，兼任越州刺史、御史大夫、浙江东道都团练使、观察使。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring of the tenth year of high school, the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first day of the first

古文：三月，中书门下奏： 据礼部贡院见置科目，《开元礼》、《三礼》、《三传》、《三史》、学究、道举、明算、童子等九科，近年取人颇滥，曾无实艺可采，徒添入仕之门。
现代文：三月，中书省、门下省上奏 ：根据礼部科举考试的贡院现在设置科目，《开元礼》、《三礼》、《三传》、《三史》、学究、道举、明算、童子等九科，近年来录取举人太滥，完全没有可采的实际学业，白白增添入仕做官的门径。
English: In March, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) and its subordinate ministries issued the following announcement: According to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MOSST) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MOSST) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MOSST) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MOSST) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MOSST) and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science

古文：须议条疏，俾精事业。
现代文：需要重新议定条例，以使考试后学业稍进。
English: The regulations need to be renegotiated so that students can make some progress after the exams.

古文：臣已于延英面论，伏奉圣旨，将文字来者。
现代文：臣等已经在延英殿当面论述，奉了皇上圣旨，将书面文字下达。
English: The ministers have already discussed the matter in person at the Yan Ying Palace, and, with the Emperor's blessing, have handed down the written text.

古文：其前件九科，臣等商量，望起大中十年，权停三年，满后，至时赴科试者，令有司据所举人先进名，令中书舍人重覆问过。
现代文：前述九科，臣等商量，希望从大中十年起，暂时停止三年，期满以后，到时赴科场考试的人，命令有关官员依据该地举荐之人，先送上名字，令中书舍人复查。
English: The above-mentioned nine subjects, ministers and others have discussed and hope to temporarily suspend three years from the 10th year of college and secondary school. After the expiration of the period, those who go to the science field examination at the time should order the relevant officials to send their names first according to the person recommended by the place, and order the middle school students to review.

古文：中有本业稍通，堪备朝廷顾问，即作等第进名，候敕处分。
现代文：如果有本行学业渐渐通晓，可以备朝廷顾问，就作为择优送礼部考试的士子，等候皇上命令安排。
English: If there is a person who is gradually familiar with this field of study and can prepare an imperial court adviser, he will serve as a scholar for the merit-based gift-giving department examination, waiting for the emperor's order to arrange.

古文：如有事业荒芜，不合送名数者，考官即议朝责。
现代文：如果有的举子学业荒废，不合乎送名数资格者，考官就可计议在朝堂上责问。
English: If there is a child whose academic performance is poor and does not meet the qualifications for the number of students to be sent, the examiner may recommend that the child be reprimanded in the morning hall.

古文：其童子近日诸道所荐送者，多年齿已过，伪称童子，考其所业，又是常流。
现代文：关于童子科近来各道所推荐送上的，大多年龄已经超过，伪诈为童子，考察他们的学业，又是平常之辈。
English: Regarding the children's science recently recommended by various provinces, most of them are over the age, fake as children, examine their studies, and are ordinary people.

古文：起今日后，望今天下州府荐送童子，并须实年十一、十二已下，仍须精熟一经，问皆全通，兼自能书写者。
现代文：从大中十年今日起，希望天下州郡推举送上的童子，都须要实际年龄在十一、十二岁以下，仍旧须要精通背熟一经，问时能全通晓，而且自己能书写这一经者。
English: From today, the tenth year of junior high school, all the boys who wish to be recommended by Tianzhou County must be under the age of eleven or twelve. They still need to be proficient in memorizing the sutra, be able to understand it completely when asked, and be able to write the sutra themselves.

古文：如违制条，本道长吏亦议惩法。 从之。
现代文：如果州郡送上童子违背童子科规定的条例，本道地方高级长官也要从严议处。 皇上从之。
English: If a prefecture or county sends a child in violation of the regulations of the Department of Pediatrics, the local high-ranking officials of the province should also be severely punished.

古文：四月癸丑，以刑部郎中卢搏为庐州刺史，以给事中、渤海郡开国公、食邑二千户高少逸检校礼部尚书、华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使。
现代文：四月癸酉是朔日，初一，以刑部郎中卢搏为庐州刺史，以给事中、渤海郡开国公、食邑二千户高少逸为检校礼部尚书、华州刺史、潼关防御使、镇国军使。
English: The first day of April is the New Year's Day, the first day of the year, with Lu Bo, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice, as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and with Shang Shu, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Rectification, Shang Guan defense envoy, and Zhenguo military envoy as the secretary of the Ministry of Rectification.

古文：六月，以兵部郎中裴夷直为苏州刺史。
现代文：六月，以兵部郎中裴夷直为苏州刺史。
English: In September, the authority to preside over the ceremonial department's imperial examinations was transferred to the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：六月，以兵部郎中裴夷直为苏州刺史。
现代文：九月，以中书舍人杜审权主持礼部科举考试。
English: In September, the authority to preside over the ceremonial department's imperial examinations was transferred to the person in charge of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：九月，以中书舍人杜审权知礼部贡举。十月，邠宁庆节度使、检校礼部尚书、邠州刺史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋諴为检校兵部尚书、潞州大都府长史、御史大夫，充昭义节度副大使、知节度使、潞邢洺等州观察使。
现代文：十月，以宁节度使、检校礼部尚书、州刺史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋毕讠咸为检校兵部尚书、潞州大都督府长史、御史大夫、充任昭义节度副大使，主持节度使、潞、邢、氵名等州观察使工作。桂管观察使令狐定去世，赠礼部尚书衔。
English: In October, with Ning as the festival envoy, the school inspection ceremonial department Shangshu, the state inspection history, the upper pillar country, and the purple gold fish bag Bi Yuxian as the school inspection military department Shangshu, the governor of the prefectural capital of Zhangzhou, the chief historian, and the deputy ambassador of the Shouyi festival, presided over the work of the festival envoys, the state observation envoys of Zou, Zou, and Yanming. The Guizhou observation envoy Xuding died, and the title of the gift department Shangshu was given.

古文：桂管观察使令狐定卒，赠礼部尚书。十一年春正月，以银青光禄大夫、守吏部尚书、上柱国、酒泉县开国男、食邑三百户李景让为御史大夫；以朝请大夫、守御史中丞，兼尚书右丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋夏侯孜为户部侍郎、判户部事；以朝散大夫、守京兆尹、上柱国、扶风县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋韦澳检校工部尚书、孟州刺史、御史大夫，充河阳三城节度、孟怀泽观处置等使。
现代文：大中十一年春正月，以银青光禄大夫、兼任吏部尚书、上柱国、酒泉县开国男、食邑三百户李景让为御史大夫；以朝请大夫、兼任御史中丞、兼尚书右丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋夏侯孜为户部侍郎、兼管户部事；以朝散大夫、兼任京兆尹、上柱国、扶风县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋韦澳为检校工部尚书、孟州刺史、御史大夫、充任河阳三城节度使、孟、怀、泽观察处置使。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year of the junior high school, Li Jingzhang, with the silver Qingguanglu doctor, concurrently serving as the secretary of the personnel department, Shangzhu country, the founding father of Jiuquan County, and the 300 households of the food village, was appointed as the secretary of the history department; with the morning invitation doctor, concurrently serving as the secretary of the history department, concurrently serving as the secretary of the senior high school, concurrently serving as the secretary of the senior high school, concurrently serving as the secretary of the senior high school, concurrently serving as the secretary of the senior high school, concurrently serving as the secretary

古文：先是，车驾将幸华清宫，两省官进状论奏，诏曰： 朕以骊山近宫，真圣庙貌，未尝修谒，自谓阙然。
现代文：先前，皇上车驾将到华清宫，中书、门下两省官员进献陈述申诉的文状，皇上诏曰： 朕因为骊山接近皇宫，真圣庙宇，未曾修建装饰晋谒，自认为这是缺陷。
English: Previously, the emperor's chauffeur would drive to the Huaqing Palace, and the Chinese government and the two provincial officials under him would submit a complaint letter. The emperor's edict said: "Because Lushan is close to the imperial palace and the true holy temples, I have not built a decorative Jinbei, and I consider this to be a defect.

古文：今属阳和气清，中外事简，听政之暇，或议一行。
现代文：今年恰巧天下平安，朝中内外事情简单易行，在听朝之闲暇，有人提议华清宫一行。
English: This year, coincidentally, the world is at peace, and things inside and outside the country are simple and easy to do. While listening to the morning's leisure, someone suggested a trip to the Huaqing Palace.

古文：盖崇礼敬之心，非以逸游为事。
现代文：这大概是崇尚礼敬之心，不是以安逸游玩为乐事。
English: It's probably a matter of reverence, not pleasure.

古文：虽申敕命，兼虑劳人。
现代文：虽然表明这是皇上命令，但又忧虑劳累人民。
English: Although he made it clear that this was an order from the emperor, it worried and exhausted the people.

古文：卿等职备禁闱，志勤奉上，援据前古，列状上章，载陈恳到之词，深睹尽忠之节。
现代文：卿等的职务是备宫廷顾问，志向勤勤恳恳敬奉皇上，援引依据古代，上表章陈述情况，陈述的都是恳切周到之词，深深看出他们尽忠皇上的气节。
English: The duties of the lords and others are to prepare palace advisers, aspire to diligently, earnestly and sincerely serve the emperor, and cite the above table chapter to report the situation according to ancient times. The statements are all earnest and thoughtful words, and deeply understand that they are loyal to the emperor.

古文：已允来请，所奏咸知。 
现代文：已经同意请求，所上奏的都知道了。 
English: The request has been granted and all is known.

古文：以剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事、管内观察处置统押近界诸蛮及西山八国云南安抚等使、特进、检校司徒、同中书门下平章事、兼成都尹、上柱国、太原郡开国公、食邑二千户白敏中以本官兼江陵尹，充荆南节度、管内观察处置等使。
现代文：以剑南西川节度副大使，主持节度事、管辖内观察处置使统统监管近界诸蛮族及西山八国云南安抚等使、特进、检校司徒、同中书门下平章事、兼成都尹、上柱国、太原郡开国公、食邑二千户白敏中凭本官兼任江陵尹，充任荆南节度使，管辖区内观察处置使。
English: With the deputy ambassador of Jian'nan Xichuan Festival, presiding over the festival affairs, supervising and supervising the barbarians in the vicinity and the Yunnan pacification envoys in the eight countries of the West Mountain, the special envoy, the school inspector, the subordinate Ping Zhang affairs in the middle school, and the Chengdu Yin, Shangzhuang Province, Taiyuan County, and the 2,000 households of Bai Min in the food village, the official also served as the Jiangling Yin, the Jingnan Festival Envoy, and the observation and disposition envoy in the jurisdiction.

古文：二月，以夏绥银宥节度使、通议大夫、检校左散骑常侍、夏州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋郑助为检校工部尚书、邠州刺史，充邠宁庆节度、管内营田观察处置，兼充庆州南路救援、盐州及当道沿路镇寨粮料等使；以右金吾卫将军田在宾校右散骑常侍，兼夏州刺史，代郑助为夏、绥、银、宥节度等使。
现代文：二月，以夏、绥、银、宥节度使、通议大夫、检校左散骑常侍、夏州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋郑助为检校工部尚书、州刺史、充任、宁、庆节度使、管辖区内营田使观察使、处置使、兼充任庆州南路救援、盐州及当道沿路镇寨粮料等使。以右金吾卫将军田在宾任检校右散骑常侍，兼夏州刺史，代替郑助为夏、绥、银、宥等州节度使。
English: In February, with Xia, Zhou, Yin, and Yu as the delegates of the inspection, the doctor of general discussion, the left-hand straggler of the inspection, Xia Zhou as the historian, the right-hand historian, Shangzhu Guo, the founding father of Shenyang County, the three hundred households of the food village, Zheng Sui as the inspector of the inspection department, Zhou Zhi Shi, Zheng Ren, Ning, and Qing as the delegates of the inspection, Ying Tian as the observer in the jurisdiction, the disposition envoy, and Zheng Ren as the envoy of the rescue of Gyeongju South Road, Yanzhou and the town of

古文：以荆南节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校兵部尚书、兼江陵尹、御史大夫、上柱国、武功郡开国男、食邑三百户苏涤为太常卿。
现代文：以荆南节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校兵部尚书、兼江陵尹、御史大夫、上柱国、武功郡开国男、食邑三百户苏涤为太常卿。
English: Jing Nan was appointed as the deputy governor, Yin Qing Guanglu as the doctor, Shang Shu as the inspector, Jiang Ling Yin as the inspector, Goshi as the doctor, Shang Zhuo as the governor, Wugong County as the founding father, and 300 households in Shuyuan as the Tai Changqing.

古文：以银青光禄大夫、守门下侍郎、兼户部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国魏謩检校户部尚书、同平章事，兼成都尹，充剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：以银青光禄大夫、兼任门下侍郎、兼户部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国魏任检校户部尚书、同平章事，兼成都尹，充任剑南、西川节度副大使，主持节度使工作。
English: With silver Qingguanglu doctor, concurrently served as a subordinate attendant, concurrently head of the household, Tongping Zhangji, supervised the national history, the upper pillar of the state Wei, served as a school inspector, head of the household, Tongping Zhangji, and Chengdu Yin, served as deputy ambassador of the Jianan and West River Festival, presided over the festival work.

古文：以太中大夫、守工部尚书、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔慎由为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：以右中大夫、兼任工部尚书、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔慎由为中书侍郎、同平间事。
English: Choi Shin-yeh was appointed to the post of Right Junior Doctor, concurrently held the posts of Shosho of the Engineering Department and Joju no Kuni, and was given a purple and gold fish bag. Choi Shin-yeh was appointed to the post of Chusho-sajiro, and the relationship between the two was strained.

古文：以成德军节度、镇冀深赵观察处置等使、起复云麾将军、守左金吾卫大将军同正、检校兵部尚书、镇州大都督府长史王绍鼎为银青光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射，余官如故。
现代文：以成德军节度使、镇、冀、深、赵观察处置使，复用云麾将军、兼任同正的左金吾卫大将军、任检校兵部尚书、镇州大都督府长史王绍鼎为银青光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射，其余官职与前一样。
English: Chengdu, Zhen, Hebei, Shenyang and Zhao observation and disposition envoys were appointed as the German army's commander-in-chief, General Yun Qi was appointed as the commander-in-chief, General Zuo Jinguwei was appointed as the commander-in-chief, Shang Shu was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the inspection school, Shi Wang Shao Ding was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the inspection school, and Shang Shu was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the inspection school. The rest of the official positions were the same as before.

古文：以通议大夫、守中书门下侍郎、兼礼部尚书、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑朗可监修国史。
现代文：以通议大夫、兼任中书门下侍郎、兼任礼部尚书、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑朗可以任监修国史。
English: Zheng Lang can supervise the study of national history as a doctor of general discussion, concurrently serving as a junior attendant of the middle school, concurrently serving as a junior attendant of the etiquette department, a peer of the same level, a scholar of the Jixian Palace, a member of the upper class, and a recipient of the Purple Gold Fish Bag.

古文：太中大夫、守工部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔慎由可集贤院大学士。
现代文：太中大夫、兼任工部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔慎由可以任集贤院大学士。
English: Choi Shin-yeol, who is also the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, may be appointed as a member of Jixian Academy.

古文：三月，起复朝请大夫、深州刺史、御史大夫，兼成德军节度判官王绍懿可检校左散骑常侍、镇府左司马、知府事，充成德军节度副使，兼充都知兵马使。
现代文：三月，起复朝请大夫、深州刺史、御史大夫、兼成德军节度判官王绍懿可以任检校左散骑常侍、镇府左司马、主持镇府事，充任成德军节度副使、兼充任都知兵马使。
English: In March, after the restoration of imperial power, Wang Shaoqi, who was a doctor, a historian of Shenzhou, a historian, and a judge of the Chengdu German Army Festival, was invited by the emperor to serve as a regular attendant of the school inspection, a secretary of the town government, and to preside over the affairs of the town government. He also served as a deputy envoy of the Chengdu German Army Festival, and concurrently as a military envoy of the capital.

古文：以成德军中军兵马使、银青光禄大夫、检校太子宾客、兼监察御史、上柱国王景胤可本官、深州刺史、本州团练守捉使。
现代文：以成德军中军兵马使、银青光禄大夫、检校太子宾客、兼监察御史、上柱国王景胤可以凭本官任深州刺史、本州团练守捉使。
English: In order to become an envoy of the German army, a doctor of the silver Qingguanglu, a guest of the prince of the inspection of the school, and an inspector of the history, King Jingyin, the upper pillar, can be appointed as a shenzhou stabbing history and a Honshu regimental guarding and capturing envoy.

古文：检校左散骑常侍、右神武大交军知军事王绍孚可落起复，依前右神武大将军。
现代文：检校左散骑常侍、右神武大将军主持军事王绍孚起复，依旧像先前一样任右神武大将军。
English: After the inspection of the school, the left cavalryman, the right general Shenwu, presided over the restoration of the military king, Shaofu, and continued to serve as the right general Shenwu as before.

古文：绍懿、绍孚，镇州王绍鼎之弟也。
现代文：王绍懿、王绍孚，镇州王绍鼎之弟也。
English: Wang Shaoqi, Wang Shao Fu, also the younger brother of Zhenzhou Wang Shao Ding.

古文：景胤，绍鼎子也。
现代文：王景胤，是王绍鼎的儿子。
English: Wang Jingyin is the son of Wang Shao Ding.

古文：以朝请大夫、检校刑部尚书、华州刺史、上柱国、酂县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋萧俶为太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：以朝请大夫、检校刑部尚书、华州刺史、上柱国、赞阝县开国男、食邑三百户，赐紫金鱼袋萧亻叔为太子宾客、分司东都。
English: In the morning, he invited the doctor, the school inspector, the criminal investigation department, the governor of Huazhou, the governor of Shangzhu, the founding father of Zhangye County, and 300 households of the food village, and gave the purple gold fish bag to Xiao Junshu as the prince's guest and the branch manager of Dongdu.

古文：四月，以职方郎中、知制诰裴坦为中书舍人。
现代文：四月，以职方郎中、知制诰裴坦为中书舍人。
English: In April, he was appointed as a junior high school teacher by his father-in-law.

古文：以朝议大夫、权知京兆尹崔郢为濮王傅，分司东都，以决杀府吏也；以江西观察使、洪州刺史、御史中丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋张毅夫为京兆尹。
现代文：以朝议大夫、暂时代理主持京兆尹崔郢为濮王傅、分司东都，让他有权判决府吏死刑。以江西观察使、洪州刺史、御史中丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋张毅夫为京兆尹。
English: The doctor of the imperial council and the temporary acting president, Jing Zhaoyun Cuiqi, was appointed the king's butler and the sub-secretary of the East Capital, which gave him the power to sentence officials to death. The Jiangxi Observer, Hong Zhou Zhishi, Mishi Zhongzheng, Shangzhu Guo, and Zhang Yifu, who was given a purple gold fish bag, were appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：以凤翔节度使、正议大夫、检校户部尚书，兼凤翔尹、上柱国、袭晋国公、食邑三千户、袭实封一百五十户裴识可许州刺史，充忠武军节度、陈许蔡观察等使；以吏部侍郎卢懿检校工部部尚书，兼凤翔尹、御史大夫、凤翔陇右节度使；以中书舍人郑宪为洪州刺史、御史中丞、江南西道都团练观察处置待使，仍赐紫金鱼袋。
现代文：以凤翔节度使、正议大夫、检校户部尚书，兼凤翔尹、上柱国、承袭晋国公、食邑三千户、承袭实际封户一百五十户裴识可以任许州刺史、充任忠武军节度使、陈、许、察等州观察使。以吏部侍郎卢懿任检校工部尚书，兼任凤翔尹、御史大夫、凤翔、陇右节度使；以中书舍人郑宪为洪州刺史、御史中丞、江南西道都团练使、观察处置使，仍旧赐给紫金鱼袋。
English: With Feng Xiang as the delegate of the festival, the doctor of deliberation, and the inspector of the school, and Feng Xiangyin and Shangzhu Guo as the successors of Jin Guo, the 3,000 households of the food village, and the 150 households of the actual closure as the successors, Pei Xuan can be appointed as the delegate of the festival of the Huzhou, the delegate of the festival of the loyal army, Chen, Xu, Zha and other state observers. With Lu Xuan, the attendant of the personnel department, as the delegate of the inspection of the school, and the delegate of the Feng Xiangyin, the delegate of the history, Feng Xiang

古文：以安南宣慰使、右千牛卫大将军宋涯为安南都护、御史中丞、本管经略招讨处置等使。
现代文：以安南宣慰使、右千牛卫大将军宋涯为安南都护、御史中丞、本管辖区内经略使、招讨使、处置使。
English: With Annan as the messenger of consolation, Song Lai, the general of the Right Qian Niu Guards, as the guardian of the capital of Annan, the vice-president of history, the delegate of economy, the delegate of invitation, and the delegate of disposition in this jurisdiction.

古文：以幽州节度使张允伸弟允中为荆州刺史，允千檀州刺史，允辛安塞军使，允举纳降军使，并兼御史中丞。
现代文：以幽州节度使张允伸之弟允中为荆州刺史，允千为檀州刺史、允辛为安塞军使，允举为纳降军使，以上四人都兼任御史中丞。
English: At the Yuzhou Festival, the younger brother of Zhang Yunxin, Yunzhong, was appointed as the Jingzhou chief historian, Yuncheng as the Danzhou chief historian, Yunxing as the Ansai military envoy, Yunhe as the Nanyuan military envoy, and all of the above four were concurrently appointed as the chief historian.

古文：以前邠宁节度使、朝议大夫、检校工部尚书、邠州刺史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼柳憙可检校礼部尚书、河南尹。
现代文：以前任宁节度使、朝议大夫、检校工部尚书、州刺史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋柳可以任检校礼部尚书、河南尹。
English: Formerly appointed as Ning Jiedu Envoy, Doctor of the Council of State, Inspector of the School Inspection Department, State Historian, Upper Column State, Zhe Zijin Yu Peng Liu can be appointed as Inspector of the School Inspection Department, Henan Yin.

古文：五月，以职方郎中李玄为寿州刺史。
现代文：五月，以职方郎中李玄为寿州刺史。
English: In May, he wrote a history of Shoushu with the help of his father-in-law, Li Xuan.

古文：六月，以朔方灵武定远等城节度使、朝散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、灵州大都督府长史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘潼为郑州刺史，驰驿赴任，以给边兵粮不及时也。
现代文：六月，以朔方、灵武、定远等城节度使、朝散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、灵州大都督府长史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘潼为郑州刺史，骑驿站快马赴任，因为其供给边疆兵马的粮食不及时的缘故。
English: In June, with the city festival envoys such as Shuo Fang, Lingwu and Dingyuan, the doctor of Choshan, the attendant of the left cavalry of the inspection of the school, the governor of the great capital of Lingzhou, the upper pillar of the country, and Liu Wei, who was awarded the purple gold fish bag, as the history of Zhengzhou, he rode the fast horse of the mule station to take office, because it was too late to supply the grain to the soldiers and horses in the frontier.

古文：以安南都护宋涯为容州刺史、容管经略招讨处置等使。
现代文：以安南都护宋涯为容州刺史、容管经略招讨使、处置使。
English: With Annan dogu Songliao as the Yongzhou stabbing history, Yongguan Jingli as the recruiting envoy and the disposition envoy.

古文：制皇第三男灌封卫王，第十一男澭封广王。
现代文：皇上下令，皇上的第三个儿子灌封为卫王，第十一个儿子氵雍封为广王。
English: According to the emperor's order, the third son of the emperor was crowned as the king of Wei, and the eleventh son of the emperor was crowned as the king of Guang.

古文：以朝散大夫、守尚书兵部侍郎、判度支、上柱国、彭城县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋萧鄴本官同平章事、判度支。
现代文：以朝散大夫、兼任尚书兵部侍郎、兼任度支使、上柱国、彭城县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋萧邺凭本官任同平章事、兼任度支使。
English: He was appointed as Chosan doctor, concurrently served as the attendant of the Shoshu military department, concurrently served as the imperial envoy, Shangzhu country, the founding father of Pengcheng county, 300 households of food villages, awarded the purple gold fish bag Xiao Wei, and was appointed to the same level as the official, concurrently served as the imperial envoy.

古文：以右监门将军、知内府省事、清河公崔巨淙为淮南监军。
现代文：以右监门将军、主持内府省事、清河公崔巨淙为淮南监军。
English: With the Right Supervisor Gate General, presiding over the internal affairs of the province, and Qinghe Gong Cui Juxuan as the supervisor of Huainan.

古文：以特进、检校司空、兼太子太傅分司东都、上柱国、扶风郡开国公、食邑二千户杜忭本官判东都尚书省、兼御史大夫，充东都留守、东畿汝都防御使。
现代文：以特进、检校司空、兼太子太傅分司东都、上柱国、扶风郡开国公、食邑二千户杜凭本官兼任东都尚书省、兼御史大夫、充任东都留守、东畿、汝等州都防御使。
English: He held the posts of special inspector, school inspector, crown prince, taifu, branch chief of Dongdu, Shangzhuo Province, and Fufeng County, and the founding father of the country, and the head of 2,000 households of food villages. He also served as the provincial governor of Dongdu, the provincial governor of Shangshu, the provincial governor of Goshi, the provincial governor of Dongdu, the provincial governor of Donggu, and the provincial defense minister of Donggu and You.

古文：七月，以飞龙使、宫闱局令王归长守内侍省内常侍，知省事，充内枢密使。
现代文：七月，以飞龙使、宫闱局令王归长兼任内侍省内常侍职务，主持内侍省事，充任内枢密使。
English: In July, with the help of the Flying Dragon Envoy and the Imperial Household Agency, Wang Guizhong was appointed as the head of the Imperial Household Agency, concurrently holding the position of the Imperial Household Minister, presiding over the affairs of the Imperial Household Agency, and serving as the Imperial Privy Envoy.

古文：责授邠州员外司马张直方为右骁卫大将军。
现代文：贬授州员外司马张直方为右骁卫大将军。
English: State Councilor Ma Zhang Naofang was awarded the title of General of the Right Division of the National Guard.

古文：八月，成德军节度使、检校尚书右仆射王绍鼎卒，赠司空，赙布帛三百段。
现代文：八月，成德军节度使、检校尚书右仆射王绍鼎去世，赠司空衔，赠给布匹绸缎三百匹以帮助丧事。
English: In August, the Chengde Army's festival envoy and the right-hand man of the school inspector Shang Shuxu, Shaowang Shao Ding, passed away. He was given the vacant title of secretary, and three hundred silk reeds were given to Bu Pi to help with the funeral.

古文：以皇子昭王汭为开府仪同三司、守镇州大都督府长史、成德军节度、镇冀深赵观察等大使；以成德军节度副使、都知兵马使、左司马、知府事、御史中丞王绍懿为成德军副使留后。
现代文：以皇子昭王为开府仪同三司、兼任镇州大都督府长史、成德军节度使、镇、冀、深、赵等州观察使。以成德军节度副使、都知兵马使、左司马、主持府事、御史中丞王绍懿为成德军副使留后。
English: Prince Zhao Wang was appointed as the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies, concurrently served as the governor of the Zhenzhou Grand Duchy, the chief historian of the Zhenzhou Grand Duchy, the festival delegate of the Chengdu Army, and the observer of the Zhen, Hebei, Shenyang, Zhao and other states. He was followed by the deputy delegate of the Chengdu Army, the delegate of the Sichuan Army, the left delegate of the Sichuan Army, the presiding officer of the prefectural affairs, and the deputy delegate of the Chengdu Army, Wang Shaoqi.

古文：以义武军节度、易定观察等使、检校礼部尚书、定州刺史、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户郑涯检校户部尚书、汴州刺史、上柱国，充宣武军节度副大使、知节度事、宋亳观察、亳州太清宫等使；以四镇北庭行军、泾原渭武节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、泾州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、范阳县开国男、食邑三百户卢简求可检校工部尚书、定州刺史、义武节度使、易定观察、北平军等使；以盐州防御押蕃落诸军防秋都知兵马使、度支乌池榷税使、检校右散骑常侍、盐州刺史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋陆耽代简求为泾原节度使。
现代文：以义武军节度、易、定等州观察使、检校礼部尚书、定州刺史、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户郑涯任检校户部尚书、汴州刺史、上柱国、充任宣武军节度副大使、主持节度事、宋、亳观察使、亳州太清宫使。以四镇北庭行军、泾、原、渭、武节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校右散骑常侍、泾州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国、范阳县开国男、食邑三百户卢简求可以任检校工部尚书、定州刺史、义武节度使、易、定二州观察使、北平军使；以盐州防御使、押蕃落诸军防秋都知兵马使、度支乌池榷税使、检校右散骑常侍、盐州刺史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋陆耽代替卢简求为泾原节度使。
English: He served as the deputy ambassador of the Xuanwu Army Festival, presided over the festival, the Song Dynasty, the Song Dynasty observation envoy, the Xuanwu Palace envoy of the Taiching Dynasty, marched in the north yard of the four towns, the Xuanwu, the Yuan Dynasty, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Xuanwu, the Song

古文：以翰林学士、朝散大夫、中书舍人、赐紫金鱼袋曹确权知河南尹。
现代文：以翰林学士、朝散大夫、中书舍人、赐紫金鱼袋曹确暂代主持河南尹之职。
English: Cao Jizhi temporarily presided over the post of Henan Yin with the title of Hanlin Scholar, Choshan Doctor, Chinese Calligrapher, and Zi Zijin Fish Bag.

古文：汝州防御使令狐绪有善政，郡人诣阙请立德政碑颂。
现代文：汝州防御使令狐绪有较好的政绩，郡人到朝廷请求竖立德政碑以颂扬。
English: The defense of Ruzhou made Lingfuxu have a better political record, and the county people went to the imperial court to request the erection of a political monument to praise him.

古文：绪以弟綯在中书，上表乞寝，从之。
现代文：令狐绪之弟令狐謋在中书省，上表章请求停止竖德政碑，皇上从之。
English: Ling Xuxu's younger brother, Ling Juxu, was in China's Shandong Province. He requested the emperor to stop erecting the monument, and the emperor complied.

古文：以太常卿苏涤为兵部尚书、权知吏部铨事，以银青光禄大夫、守散骑常侍、上柱国、渤海郡开国伯、食邑七百户封敖为太常卿。
现代文：以太常卿苏涤为兵部尚书，暂时代替主持吏部选拔官吏之事；以银青光禄大夫、兼任散骑常侍、上柱国、渤海郡开国伯、食邑七百户封敖为太常卿。
English: Tai Changqing Su Diao was appointed as the secretary of the military department, temporarily acting as the chairman of the personnel department for the selection of officials; he was appointed as the silver Qingguanglu doctor, and also served as the horseback riding attendant, Shangzhuang Province, the opening of the county of Bihai County, and the seven hundred households of the food village.

古文：是月，荧惑犯东井。
现代文：这一月，荧惑星侵犯东井星。
English: This month, a fluorescent planet encroached on the Higashii star.

古文：仍谓崔慎由曰： 为吾言于谏官，虽少翁、栾大复生，不能相惑。如闻轩辕生高士，欲与之一言耳。 宰相郑朗累月请告，三章求免。是月乙未，彗出于房初度，长三尺。十月，制通议大夫、守中书侍郎、礼部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑朗可检校尚书右仆射，兼太子少师。
现代文：九月，以秦州刺史李承勋为朝散大夫、检校工部尚书、泾州刺史、充任四镇、北庭、泾、原、渭、武等州节度使；以礼部郎中杨知温充任翰林学士；以中散大夫、尚书礼部侍郎、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋杜审权为陕州大都督府长史、兼御史大夫、陕虢都防御使、观察处置使；以银青光禄大夫、检校司空、兼太子太傅、上柱国、范阳郡开国公、食邑二千户卢钧为检校司空、同中书门下平章事、兴元尹、充任山南西道节度使。右补阙陈嘏、左拾遗王谱、右拾遗薛廷杰上奏疏劝谏皇上不要派太监前往罗浮山迎轩辕先生。宰相郑朗数月请求，上了三次奏章请求免除迎接轩辕先生。十月，皇上命令通议大夫、兼任中书侍郎、礼部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋郑朗可以任检校尚书右仆射、兼太子少师。
English: In September, Li Chengxun, a Qinzhou scholar, was appointed as the Chosan doctor, Shangshu, a Qinzhou scholar, was appointed as the Four Towns, Beiting, Handan, Huanan, Handan, Wuxi, and other state festival envoys; Yang Zhiyuan, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was appointed as the Hanlin scholar; Zhongshan doctor, Shangshu, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangzhu, and Shangzhu were appointed as the Governor of the Great Capital of Shaanxi, and also as the Minister of History, and Shaanxi and Fujian were appointed as the defense envo

古文：以山南西道节度使、中散大夫、检礼校部尚书、兴元尹、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋蒋系权知刑部尚书，宰相崔慎由兼修国史，萧鄴兼集贤殿大学士。
现代文：以山南西道节度使、中散大夫、检校礼部尚书、兴元尹、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋蒋系暂时代理主持刑部尚书工作，宰相崔慎由兼修国史，萧邺兼集贤殿大学士。
English: Shannan West Road Festival Envoy, Dr. Zhong San, School Inspection Ceremonial Department Official, Xing Yuan Yin, Shang Zhuo Guo, Zhe Zi Jin Yubang Jiang temporarily acting as acting head of the Criminal Department Official, Prime Minister Cui Shanyu also studied national history, and Xiao Wei was also a scholar of Jixian Temple University.

古文：以华州刺史高少逸为左散骑常侍，以苏州刺史裴夷直为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军等使，以太常少卿崔钧为苏州刺史。
现代文：以华州刺史高少逸为左散骑常侍，以苏州刺史裴夷直为华州刺史、潼关防御、镇国军使，以太常卿崔钧为苏州刺史。
English: Gao Shaoyi, the governor of Huazhou, was appointed as the left riding attendant, Pei Yizhong, the governor of Suzhou, was appointed as the governor of Huazhou, the defense of Shaoguan, and the military envoy of Zhenguo, and Tai Changqing Cui Wei was appointed as the governor of Suzhou.

古文：入回鹘册礼使、卫尉少卿王端章贬贺州司马，副使国子《礼记》博士李寻为郴州司马，判官河南府士曹李寂永州司马。
现代文：入回鹘册礼使、卫尉少卿王端章贬为贺州司马，副使国子《礼记》博士李浔为郴州司马，判官河南府士曹李寂为永州司马。
English: Wang Duanzhang, a courier and guard sergeant of the imperial retinue, was demoted to the position of Hezhou Sima, the vice-envoy Guo Zi, a doctor of "Li Ji," was the position of Hezhou Sima, and the judge Cao Li Zha, a sergeant of Henan Prefecture, was the position of Yongzhou Sima.

古文：端章等出塞，黑车子阻路而回故也。
现代文：他们被贬，是因为他们出塞，黑车子阻路而返回的缘故。
English: They were demoted because they got out of the traffic jam and the black car blocked the road and went back.

古文：以成德军观察留后、御史中丞、赐紫金鱼袋王绍懿检校工部尚书，兼镇州大都督府长史、御史大夫，充成德军节度、镇冀深赵观察等使。
现代文：以成德军观察留后、御史中丞、赐紫金鱼袋王绍懿任检校工部尚书、兼镇州大都督府长史、御史大夫、充任成德军节度使、镇、冀、深、赵观察使。
English: After staying in Chengdu to observe the German army, he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education of the Inspection Department, the Vice-Governor of Zhenzhou, the Vice-Minister of History, the Vice-Minister of History, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, and the Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：以中书舍人李籓权知礼部贡院。
现代文：以中书舍人李藩暂时代理主持礼部科举考试的贡院。
English: Li Fan, a Chinese scholar, has been temporarily acting as the procurator of the ceremonial department of the imperial examinations.

古文：十一月，太子少师郑朗卒，赠司空。
现代文：十一月，太子少师郑朗去世，赠司空衔。
English: In November, Zheng Lang, the prince's apprentice, passed away, leaving the position vacant.

古文：银青光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、兼太子太保、充右羽林统军、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户郑光卒，辍朝三日，赠司徒，仍令百官奉慰。上之元舅也。
现代文：银青光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、兼太子太保、充任右羽林统军、御史大夫、上柱国、荥阳县开国男、食邑三百户郑光去世，皇上停止上朝三天，赠郑光司徒衔，并命令百官奉圣旨抚慰，郑光是皇上的大舅。
English: Zheng Guang, the doctor of Yin Qing Guang Lu, the inspector of schools, Shang Shu Zuo Fu Sha, and also the prince's eunuch, served as the commander of the right feather forest, the doctor of history, the country of Shang Zhu, the founding father of Shenyang County, and the 300 households of the food village, died. The emperor stopped the imperial court for three days, presented Zheng Guang with the title of the disciple, and ordered the 100 officials to be consoled by the holy will. Zheng Guang was the emperor's uncle.

古文：宰相崔慎由为中书侍郎兼礼部尚书，尚书萧鄴兼工部尚书，余并如故。
现代文：宰相崔慎由为中书侍郎兼礼部尚书，尚书萧邺兼工部尚书，其余官职如原来一样。
English: Prime Minister Cui Shanyu is the secretary of the Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of Culture, and the secretary of the Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of Culture, and the secretary of the Ministry of Culture and the Ministry of Industry, and the rest of the official positions are the same as before.

古文：十二月，以昭义军节度使、朝议大夫、检校工部尚书、上柱国、平阴县开国男、食邑三百户毕諴为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使；朝议大夫、检校礼部尚书、兼太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘彖为尚书户部侍郎、判度支。
现代文：十二月，以昭义军节度使、朝议大夫、检校工部尚书、上柱国、平阴县开国男、食邑三百户毕讠咸为太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使；朝议大夫、检校礼部尚书、兼太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘王彖为尚书户部侍郎、兼任度支使职务。
English: In December, Shao Yijun's delegate to the festival, doctor of the Imperial Court, inspector of the school inspection department, Shangshu of Shangzhu Province, the founding father of Pingyin County and the founder of 300 households of the food village, Bi Yuxian, was Taiyuan Yin, the governor of the Northern Capital, and the delegate to the festival of the Eastern Capital; Liu Wangyao, doctor of the Imperial Court, inspector of the school inspection department, Shangshu of the ceremonial department, concurrently the governor of Taiyuan Yin, the governor of the Northern Capital, and Shangzhu Province, and the bearer of the purple gold fish bag, was

古文：以翰林学士承旨、通议大夫、守尚书户部侍郎、知制诰、上护军、赐紫金鱼袋蒋伸为兵部侍郎，充职。
现代文：以翰林学士承旨、通议大夫、兼任尚书户部侍郎、知制诰、上护军、赐紫金鱼袋蒋伸为兵部侍郎。
English: With the approval of Hanlin, he was appointed as a scholar, a doctor of general discussion, and concurrently served as an attendant of the household department of Shang Shuxu, an attendant of the military department of Zhisheng, an attendant of Shang Guojun, and a attendant of the military department of Jiang Sheng.

古文：以金紫光禄大夫、守太子少保分司东都、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑五百户裴休检校户部尚书兼潞州大都督府长史、昭义军节度副大使、知节度事、潞磁邢洺观察等使。
现代文：以金紫光禄大夫、兼任太子少保分司东都、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑五百户裴休任检校户部尚书、兼任潞州大都督府长史、昭义军节度副大使、主持节度事及潞、磁、邢、氵名观察使。
English: With Jin Zi Guanglu as the doctor, concurrently serving as the East Capital, Shangzhu Province, and the founding father of Hedong County, the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of the 500 households of

古文：以正议大夫、行尚书兵部侍郎、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋柳仲郢本官兼御史大夫，充诸道盐铁转运使。
现代文：以正议大夫、兼任尚书兵部侍郎、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋柳仲郢凭本官兼御史大夫，充任诸道盐铁转运使。
English: He was appointed as the chief councilor, concurrently served as the attendant of the Shangshu Military Department, the founder of Shangzhu Province and Hedong County, the founder of three hundred households, and was awarded the Purple Gold Fish Bag by Liu Zhongyao. He also served as the salt and iron transport envoy to various provinces.

古文：以正议大夫、检校户部尚书、兼太子宾客、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋孔温业本官分司东都，以病请告故也。
现代文：以正议大夫、检校户部尚书、兼太子宾客、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋孔温业凭本官分司东都，这是因为他患病请求告退的缘故。
English: It was because of his illness that he asked to resign from his position as the chief of the East Capital Division, which included the position of the chief medical officer, the position of the inspector of schools, the position of the head of the household, the position of the prince's guest, the position of the head of the state, the position of the purple goldfish bag, and the position of Kong Wenye.

古文：礼部郎中杨右温本官知制诰，充翰林学士。
现代文：礼部郎中杨知温凭本官任知制诰、充任翰林学士。
English: Yang Zhiyuan, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was appointed to the post of Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the post of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：以幽州中军使、检校国子祭酒、幽府左司马、知府事、御史中丞张简真检校右散骑常侍，允伸之子也。
现代文：以幽州中军使、检校国子祭酒、幽府左司马、主持幽府事、御史中丞张简真任检校右散骑常侍，他是张允伸的儿子。
English: Zhang Jianzhen, the son of Zhang Yunxin, was appointed as the middle envoy of the military in Yuzhou, the national son of the school inspection, the left steward of Yufu, the presiding officer of Yufu affairs, and the right rider of the school inspection.

古文：以中散大夫、权知刑部尚书、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋蒋系检校户部尚书、凤翔尹、御史大夫、凤翔陇右节度观察处置等使。
现代文：以中散大夫、暂时代理主持刑部尚书、上柱国、赐紫服金鱼袋蒋系任检校户部尚书、凤翔尹、御史大夫、凤翔、陇右节度使、观察处置使。
English: With Dr. Zhong San, acting as acting head of the criminal department, Shang Shu, Shangzhu Guo, giving purple clothing, goldfish bag, Jiang line as school inspection department, Shang Shu, Feng Xiang Yin, Goshi doctor, Feng Xiang, Zou Yu, observation and disposal.

古文：是岁，舒州吴塘堰有众禽成巢，阔七尺，高七丈，而水禽、山鸟、鹰隼、燕雀之类，无不驯狎。
现代文：这一年，舒州吴塘堰有众多禽鸟筑成巢，阔七尺、高七丈，而水禽、山鸟、鹰隼、燕雀之类，无一不驯顺玩耍。
English: This year, many birds built nests in Wutang Weir, Shuzhou, which are seven feet wide and seven feet high. Waterfowl, mountain birds, eagles, and chaffinches all play there.

古文：又有鸟人面缘毛，爪喙皆绀色，其声曰 甘 ，人呼为 甘虫 。
现代文：又有一鸟人面绿毛，爪子和嘴都是青色，它的叫声为 甘 ，人们称之为 甘虫 。
English: There is also a bird with green fur on its face, and its claws and beak are blue. Its call is "Gan," and people call it "Sweetworm."

古文：十二年春正月，以晋阳令郑液为通州刺史。
现代文：大中十二年春正月，以晋阳令郑液为通州刺史。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 12th year of junior high school, the history of Tongzhou was written in the name of Jinyangling Zhengshu.

古文：罗浮山人轩辕集至京师，上召入禁中，谓曰： 先生遐寿而长生可致乎？ 
现代文：罗浮山人轩辕集到京师，皇上召他入宫中，对他说： 先生，长寿长生可以做到吗？ 
English: Luo Fu Shan people gathered in Beijing, the emperor called him into the palace and said to him: Sir, can you live a long life?

古文：曰： 彻声色，去滋味，哀乐如一，德施周给，自然与天地合德，日月齐明，何必别求长生也。 
现代文：轩辕集道 ：撤去音乐美色，悲哀、快乐一样，广泛地施行恩德，自然与天地合德，与日月齐明，何必另外求长生。 
English: Xuan Xuan Ji Dao: Remove the music and beauty, sadness and happiness are the same, widely implement benevolence, nature and heaven and earth are the same, and the sun and moon are the same, why do we have to seek eternal life separately.

古文：留之月余，坚求还山。
现代文：皇上留他在京城一个多月，他坚决要求回山。
English: The emperor kept him in the capital for more than a month, but he insisted on returning to the mountains.

古文：以前乡贡进士于琮为秘书省校书郎，寻尚皇女广德公主，改银青光禄大夫、守右拾遗、驸马都尉。
现代文：以前任乡贡进士于琮为秘书省校书郎，不久又高攀皇上的女儿广德公主，改任银青光禄大夫、兼任右拾遗、驸马都尉。
English: Formerly, the township gongjin was the secretary of the provincial school librarian, and soon the emperor's daughter, Princess Guangde, was promoted to the doctor of silver, the doctor of light, the doctor of right and the captain of horses.

古文：以安南本管经略招讨处置使、朝散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、安南都护、御史大夫、赐紫金鱼袋李弘甫为宗正卿。
现代文：以安南本管辖区经略使、招讨处置使、朝散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、安南都护、御史大夫、赐紫金鱼袋李弘甫为宗正卿。
English: Annan was appointed as the Minister Delegate of this jurisdiction, the Minister of Invitation and Disposition, the Doctor of the Morning Sun, the Left-Handed Riding Attendant of the School Inspection, the Guardian of the Capital of Annan, the Doctor of History, and Li Hongfu, who was awarded the Purple Gold Fish Bag, as the Zong Zhengqing.

古文：以中大夫、守京兆尹、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋张毅夫为鄂州刺史、御史大夫、鄂岳蕲黄申等州都团练观察使。
现代文：以中大夫、兼任京兆尹、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋张毅夫为鄂州刺史、御史大夫、鄂、岳、蕲、黄、申等州都团练观察使。
English: With Dr. Zhong, concurrently serving as Dr. Jing Zhaoyun, Dr. Shang Zhuang, and Zhang Yifu of the Purple Gold Fish Bag, he is the observer of the state capital group training of Huzhou, Gushi, E, Yue, Handan, Huang, and Shen.

古文：以太中大夫、福州刺史、御史中丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋杨发检校右散骑常侍、广州刺史、御史大夫，充岭南东道节度观察处置等使。
现代文：以太中大夫、福州刺史、御史中丞、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋杨发任检校右散骑常侍、广州刺史、御史大夫、充任岭南东道节度使、观察处置使。
English: Dr. Tai Zhong, Dr. Fuzhou Shishi, Dr. Shishi Zhongzheng, Dr. Shang Zhuo Guo, Dr. Zi Zijin Yu Bao Yang Fa appointed as the right-hand rider of the inspection of the school, Dr. Guangzhou Shishi, Dr. Shishi, appointed as the host of the Lingnan Festival, and the observation and disposition.

古文：以朝散大夫、守康王傅分司东都、上柱国、袭魏郡开国公、食邑二千户、赐紫金鱼袋王式为安南都护、兼御史中丞，充安南本管经略招讨处置等使。
现代文：以朝散大夫、兼任康王傅分司东都、上柱国、袭任魏郡开国公、食邑二千户、赐紫金鱼袋王式为安南都护、兼御史中丞、充任安南本管辖区内经略使、招讨使、处置使。
English: He was appointed as Chosan doctor, concurrently served as Kangwangfu branch chief of Dongdu, Shangzhu Province, succeeded as Wei County founding governor, fed two thousand households, awarded the purple gold fish bag as Annan tutelary, concurrently served as Goshi chujo, and served as Annan's economic envoy, invitation envoy, and disposition envoy in this jurisdiction.

古文：以朝请大夫、前守太了宾客分司东都、上柱国、酂县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋萧俶守太子少保分司。
现代文：以朝请大夫、前任兼任太子宾客分司东都、上柱国、赞阝县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋萧亻叔兼任太子少保分司东都。
English: In the morning, I invited the doctor, the former concurrently serving as the prince's guest branch director of Dongdu, Shangzhu Country, the founding father of Zhanlu County, 300 households of Shiyou, and the purple gold fish bag Xiao Yu uncle concurrently serving as the prince's minor security branch director of Dongdu.

古文：以朝请大夫、检校左散骑常侍、右金吾将军、充右街使、上柱国、袭太原郡开国公、食邑二千户、赐紫金鱼袋王镇为检校左散骑常侍、使持节都督福州诸军事，福州刺史、御史大夫，充福建等州都团练观察处置等使。
现代文：以朝请大夫、检校左散骑常侍、右金吾大将军、充任右街使、上柱国、承袭太原郡开国公、食邑二千户、赐紫金鱼袋王镇为检校左散骑常侍、使持节、总督福州所有军事，兼福州刺史、御史大夫，充任福建等州都团练使、观察处置使。
English: With the morning to invite the doctor, the school inspection left strolling attendant, the right Kingu general, to serve as the right street envoy, the upper pillar country, to inherit the founding of Taiyuan County, to feed two thousand households, to give the purple gold fish bag Wang Zhen as the school inspection left strolling attendant, to hold the festival, to be the governor of Fuzhou for all military, and to be the Fuzhou stabbing history, the doctor of history, to serve as the Fujian and other state capital group training envoy, observation and disposition envoy.

古文：以翰林学士、朝议郎、守尚书司勋郎中、知制诰、赐绯鱼袋孔温裕为中书舍人，充职。
现代文：以翰林学士、朝议郎、兼任尚书司勋郎中、知制诰、赐绯衣银鱼袋孔温裕为中书舍人，充任真职。
English: With Hanlin as the scholar, Choheiro as the councillor, Shoshoji as the honorable junior, Chisetsuko as the chancellor, and Kongunyu as the vice-chancellor, he fulfilled his real duties.

古文：以右骁卫上将军李正源守大内皇城留守。
现代文：以右骁卫上将军李正源兼任大内皇城留守。
English: On the other hand, Admiral Yi Zhengyuan, who was also in charge of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, stayed behind in Dainai Imperial City.

古文：以朝议大夫、守尚书户部侍郎、判度支、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘彖本官同平章事，依前判度支。
现代文：以朝议大夫、兼任尚书户部侍郎、兼任度支使、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘王彖凭本官任同平章事，依旧如前兼任度支使。
English: With the title of Doctor of the Imperial Court Council, concurrently serving as the Chamberlain of the Household Department, concurrently serving as the Chief of the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Chief of the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Chief of the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Chief of the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Imperial Household Agency, serving as the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：以太中大夫、守中书侍郎、兼礼部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔慎由检校礼部尚书、梓州刺史、御史大夫、剑南东川节度副大使、知节度事，代韦有翼；以有翼为吏部侍郎。
现代文：以太中大夫、兼任中书侍郎、兼任礼部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋崔慎由任检校礼部尚书、梓州刺史、御史大夫、剑南东川节度副大使、主持节度事，代替韦有翼；以韦有翼为吏部侍郎。
English: Eta junior high school teacher, concurrently served as a junior high school secretary, concurrently served as a vice principal of the ceremony department, a vice principal of the same grade, a supervisor of the national history, a superintendent of the country, and awarded a purple gold fish bag, Cui Shen was appointed as a vice principal of the school inspection ceremony department, a vice principal of the Azusa school history, a vice principal of the history department, a vice ambassador of the Jianan Dongchuan festival, and presided over the festival affairs, replacing Wei Youyi; Eta junior high school teacher Wei Youyi was a vice principal of the personnel department.

古文：二月，以前邕管经略招讨处置使、朝议郎、邕州刺史、御史中丞、赐紫金鱼袋段文楚为昭武校尉、右金吾卫将军；以朝议郎、守中书舍人、权知礼部贡举、上柱国、赐绯鱼袋李籓为尚书户部侍郎。
现代文：二月，以前任邕管经略使、招讨处置使、朝议郎、邕州刺史、御史中丞、赐紫服金鱼袋段文楚为昭武校尉，右金吾卫将军；以朝议郎、兼任中书舍人、暂时主持礼部科举考试、上柱国、赐绯衣银鱼袋李藩为尚书户部侍郎。
English: In February, the former vice-minister of the Ministry of Education, the Minister of Invitation and Disposition, the Vice-Minister of the Council, the Vice-Minister of History, the Vice-Minister of History, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Minister of Education, the Vice-Min

古文：以朝散大夫、守工部尚书、同平章事、充集贤殿大学士、上柱国、彭城县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋萧鄴为监修国史。
现代文：以朝散大夫、兼任工部尚书、同平章事、充任集贤殿大学士、上柱国、彭城县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫服金鱼袋萧邺为监修国史。
English: He supervised the national history with Dr. Chosan, concurrently held the posts of Shangshu of the Ministry of Engineering, Tongping Zhangji, appointed as a scholar of Jixian Palace University, Shangzhuang Province, the founding father of Pengcheng County, 300 households of food villages, and granted purple clothing and goldfish bag to Xiao Yao.

古文：以朝议大夫、守户部侍郎、同平章事、判度支、主柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘彖可充集贤院学士。
现代文：以朝议大夫、兼任户部侍郎、同平章事、兼任度支使、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋刘王彖可以充任集贤院学士。
English: Liu Wangyao, who was appointed as a doctor of the Imperial Court Council, concurrently served as an attendant of the Household Department, concurrently held the position of Tongping Zhangji, concurrently held the position of the Secretary of the State Council, held the position of Shangzhu Guo, and was given a purple gold fish bag, can be appointed as a scholar of the Jixian Academy.

古文：以渤海国王弟权知国务大虔晃为银青光禄大夫、检校秘书监、忽汗州都督，册为渤海国王。
现代文：以渤海国王弟暂时主持国务大虔晃为银青光禄大夫、检校秘书监、忽汗州都督，册封为渤海国王。
English: With the brother of the king of Bohai temporarily presiding over the State Great Prayer, he became the doctor of silver, the secretary of school inspection, and the governor of Khukhan State, and was crowned the king of Bohai.

古文：以兵部侍郎柳仲郢为刑部尚书。
现代文：以兵部侍郎柳仲郢为刑部尚书。
English: Ryuchunakata Yanagi, a waiter of the Imperial Guard, is depicted as the head of the Imperial Guard.

古文：以朝议大夫、守尚书户部侍郎、判户部事、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋夏侯孜为兵部侍郎，充诸道盐铁转运使；以朝请大夫、权知刑部侍郎、赐紫金鱼袋杜胜为户部侍郎、判户部事。
现代文：以朝议大夫、兼任户部侍郎、兼管户部事、上柱国、赐紫服金鱼袋夏侯孜为兵部侍郎，充任诸道盐铁转运使；以朝请大夫、暂时代理主持刑部侍郎、赐紫服金鱼袋杜胜为户部侍郎、兼管户部事。
English: He appointed Xia Houzhe, a doctor of the Imperial Court Council, as a doctor of the Imperial Court Council, concurrently serving as a steward of the Household Department, and also in charge of the Household Department Affairs, Shangzhu Country, and gave him a purple dress and a goldfish bag to serve as a steward of the Military Department, and to serve as a salt and iron transportation envoy to all provinces; he appointed a doctor of the Imperial Court Council, temporarily acting as a steward of the Criminal Department, and gave him a purple dress and a goldfish bag to serve as a steward of the Household Department, and concurrently to serve as a steward of the Household Department.

古文：光禄大夫、守左领军卫大将军分司东都、上柱国、会稽县开国公、食邑一千五百户康季荣可检校尚书右仆射，兼右卫上将军分司。
现代文：以光禄大夫、兼任左领军卫大将军分司东都、上柱国、会稽县开国公、食邑一千五百户康季荣可以任检校尚书右仆射，兼左卫上将军分司。
English: KANG Ji Rong, a doctor of Guanglu, who also served as the left leader of the army, the division chief of the East Capital, Shangzhu Province, the founding of the county, and the 1,500 households of the food village, can be appointed as the school inspector, the secretary of the left guard, and the division chief of the left guard.

古文：贬前利州刺史杜仓为贺州司户，蔡州刺史李丛邵州司马。
现代文：贬前任利州刺史杜仓为贺州司户，贬蔡州刺史李丛为邵州司马。
English: Dismissed former Lizhou chief Li Cong as Shima of Shima of Shima of Shima of Shima.

古文：以工部郎中、知制诰于德孙，库部郎中、知制诰苗恪，并可中书舍人，依前翰林学士。
现代文：以工部郎中、知制诰于德孙，库部郎中、知制诰苗恪，都可以任中书舍人，依前一样任翰林学士。
English: For example, the junior vice-ministers of the Ministry of Industry and the Ministry of Education and Culture, and the junior vice-ministers of the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Education and Culture, can be appointed as junior scribes, and as before, as scholars of Hanlin.

古文：以前右金吾卫将军郑汉璋，前鸿胪少卿郑汉卿，并起复授本官，国舅光之子也。
现代文：以前任右金吾卫将军郑汉璋、前任鸿胪少卿郑汉卿，都重新起用授予本来官职，这两人都是国舅郑光的儿子。
English: Zheng Han Rong, the former General of the Right-Handed King Wuwei, and Zheng Han Rong, the former Junior Secretary of Hong Rong, were both reappointed and granted their original official positions. Both of them are the sons of the uncle of the country, Zheng Guang.

古文：以银青光禄大夫、行给事中、驸马都尉卫洙为工部侍郎，前濮王傅分司皇甫权为康王傅分司。
现代文：以银青光禄大夫、兼任给事中、驸马都尉卫洙为工部侍郎，前任濮王傅分司皇甫权为康王傅分司。
English: With Yin Qingguanglu as the doctor and concurrently serving as the middle-ranking official, Xi Ma Duyi Wei Wei as the chamberlain of the work department, and the former Wang Fu branch secretary Wang Fucheng as the Kang Wang Fu branch secretary.

古文：以库部员外郎、史馆修撰李涣为长安令。
现代文：以库部员外郎、史馆修撰李涣为长安令。
English: The Chang'an edict was signed by the treasury department member, Wairo, and the editor of the history museum, Li Yao.

古文：闰二月，以司农少卿卢籍为代州刺史，前江陵少尹杜恽为司农少卿。
现代文：闰二月，以司农少卿卢籍为代州刺史，前任江陵少尹杜恽为司农少卿。
English: In leap February, the history of Daizhou was written with the name of Lu, Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, and the former Jiangling Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, Yin Duyun, became Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：以河东马步都虞候段威为朔州刺史，充天宁军使，兼兴唐军沙陀三部落防遏都知兵马使。
现代文：以河东马步都虞候段威为朔州刺史，充任天宁军使，兼任兴唐军、沙陀三部落防遏都知兵马使。
English: Duan Wei, the capital of Mabu in the east of Hebei Province, was appointed as the military envoy of Tianning, as well as the military envoy of Xingtang Army, and the military envoy of Shatou Three Tribes for the prevention and control of the Sichuan-Tang Dynasty.

古文：五月，以兵部侍郎、盐铁转运使夏侯孜本官同平章事。
现代文：五月，以兵部侍郎、盐铁转运使夏侯孜凭本官任同平章事。
English: In May, he was appointed to the post of Hyobushirō (Minister of the Ministry of War) and Salt and Iron Transportation.

古文：六月，南蛮攻安南府。
现代文：六月，南蛮攻打安南府。
English: In June, Nanban attacked Annan Prefecture.

古文：八月，洪州贼毛合、宣州贼康全大攻掠郡县，诏两浙兵讨平之。
现代文：八月，洪州贼毛合、宣州贼康全大攻掠郡县，皇上诏令两浙之兵讨伐平定他们。
English: In August, the Hongzhou bandit Mao He and the Xuanzhou bandit Kang Quan led a large-scale attack on counties and counties. The emperor ordered the two Zhejiang soldiers to fight and subdue them.

古文：十二月，太子少保魏掞卒，赠司徒。
现代文：十二月，太子少保魏去世，赠司徒衔。
English: In December, the young crown prince Bao Wei passed away and was given the title of prince.

古文：十三年春正月，以虢陕观察使杜审权为户部侍郎、判户部事。
现代文：大中十三年春正月，以陕虢观察使杜审权为户部侍郎，兼任户部事。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 13th year of junior high school, he was appointed as an attendant of the household department and concurrently served as a household department official.

古文：三月，宰相萧鄴罢知政事，守吏部尚书。
现代文：三月，宰相肖邺罢免知政事，兼任吏部尚书。
English: In March, the prime minister, Xiao Wei, was removed from his post of political advisor and concurrently assumed the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：四月，以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰蒋伸本官同平章事。
现代文：四月，以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰蒋伸凭本官任同平章事。
English: In April, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, Heibei Attendant, and Zhizhuo Jiang Shenbi were appointed to the same rank.

古文：五月，上不豫，月余不能视朝。
现代文：五月，皇上身体不适，一月多不能上朝。
English: In May, the Emperor became unwell and was unable to travel to the Imperial Palace until January.

古文：八月七日，宣遗诏立郓王为皇太子，勾当军国事。
现代文：八月七日，皇上宣布遗诏立郓王为皇太子，暂时代理军国大事。
English: On August 7th, the Emperor announced his last wishes, appointing Prince Hao as Crown Prince, temporarily in charge of military and state affairs.

古文：是日，崩于大明宫，圣寿五十。
现代文：这一天，皇上在大明官去世，享年五十。
English: On this day, the Emperor passed away at the age of fifty.

古文：诏门下侍郎、平章事令狐綯摄冢宰。
现代文：诏令门下侍郎、平章事令狐謋代理吏部尚书。
English: Zhao Ling's subordinate attendant, Ping Zhang's subordinate attendant, and the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy of the deputy.

古文：群臣上谥曰圣武献文孝皇帝，庙号宣宗。
现代文：群臣上谥号曰圣武献文孝皇帝，庙号宣宗。
English: The senior vassal's posthumous name was Emperor Shenwu Xianwen Xiao, and his temple name was Xuan Zong.

古文：十四年二月，葬于贞陵。
现代文：大中十四年二月，安葬在贞陵。
English: In February of his 14th year of junior high school, he was buried in Zhengrong Mausoleum.

