古文：有天象，必有人事焉。
现代文：如果有异常的天象显示，人间就必定有大事发生。
English: If there is an abnormal celestial phenomenon, there must be a major event in the human world.

古文：幸臣一星，列于帝座。
现代文：宠臣逭颗星，位于帝王的星座。
English: Beloved is a star in the constellation of the emperor.

古文：经礼立教，亦著近臣之服。
现代文：传播树立礼教，也离不开身穿近臣之服的宠臣。
English: The propagation and establishment of etiquette is also inseparable from the favorite who wears the clothes of a vassal.

古文：亲幸之义，其来已久。
现代文：偏爱宠臣的做法由来已久。
English: The practice of favouring favourites goes back a long way.

古文：爰自衰周，侯伯专命，桓、文霸主，至于战国，宠用近习，不乏于时矣。
现代文：从衰微的周朝开始，诸侯就不奉上命而擅自行事。春秋五霸中齐桓、晋文两位霸主，直到战国，君主宠用亲幸之臣的事时有发生。
English: From the decline of the Zhou Dynasty onwards, the lords did not follow orders and acted on their own. In the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties, Qi Huan and Jinwen were the two overlords, and up until the Warring States period, it sometimes happened that the monarch favored a close relative.

古文：汉文幸邓通，虽钱遍天下，位止郎中。
现代文：汉文帝宠幸邓通，虽然邓通自行铸钱，以致邓氏钱币遍布天下，他的官位衹止于郎中。
English: Emperor Hanwen favored Dantong, although Dantong minted money on his own, so that Dang's coins spread all over the world, his official position remained in his retinue.

古文：孝武韩嫣、霍去病，遂至侍中大司马。
现代文：漠武帝的时候，韩嫣、霍去病受宠，甚至荣升到侍中大司马的职位。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mengwu, Han Zheng and Huo De were favored by the emperor, and were even promoted to the position of grand steward.

古文：迄于魏、晋，世任权重，才位稍爽，而信幸唯均。
现代文：到了魏、晋时期，世代任用掌握重权的宠臣，虽然裁夺官位逐渐明亮清朗，可是听信宠臣却同前代一样。
English: During the Wei and Jin dynasties, each generation appointed a favorite who wielded great power. Although the selection of officials gradually became clearer and clearer, the loyalty of the favorite was the same as that of previous generations.

古文：中书之职，旧掌机务。
现代文：中书的职责，历来掌管机要的事务。
English: The responsibilities of the CPC Central Committee, has always been in charge of the most important affairs.

古文：汉元以令仆用事，魏明以监令专权，及在中朝，犹为重寄。
现代文：汉元帝用尚书令与尚书仆射执政，魏明帝用中书监、中书令专当大权，到中朝时，仍旧委以重任。
English: Emperor Han Yuan used Shang Shuling and Shang Shuling's lackeys to govern, Emperor Wei Ming used the Central Scrivener and the Central Scrivener to be in charge, and when it came to the Middle Kingdom, they were still entrusted with important duties.

古文：陈准归任上司，荀勖恨于失职。
现代文：陈准归任到土司，荀勖抱恨自己失职。
English: Chen Jun was relegated to the post of steward, and Yao held a grudge for his dereliction of duty.

古文：《晋令》舍人位居九品，江左置通事郎，管司诏诰。
现代文：《晋令》舍人的官位放在了九品，东晋设置了通事郎，管理负责诏书文诰。
English: According to the "Jinling" edict, the official position of the courier was placed in Jiuping, and the East Jin Dynasty set up a courier, and the person in charge of the administration of the imperial edict was Zeng.

古文：其后郎还为侍郎，而舍人亦称通事。
现代文：这以后郎又称为侍郎，而舍人也被称为通事。
English: After this, roshi was also called jiro, and shojin was also called tsuji.

古文：元帝用琅邪刘超，以谨慎居职。
现代文：晋元帝任用琅邪的刘超，他在职位上谨慎从事。
English: Emperor Jin Yuan appointed Gong Liu Chao to this post, and he was cautious in his duties.

古文：宋文世，秋当、周纠并出寒门。
现代文：宋文帝的时代，秋当、周纠都出身于贫寒之家。
English: In the Song Dynasty, both Qutang and Zhou Ordu were born into poor families.

古文：孝武以来，士庶杂选，如东海鲍照，以才学知名。
现代文：孝武帝以来，贵族平民混杂选用，比如柬海的鲍照，因为有才学而闻名于时。
English: Since Emperor Xiaowu, nobles and commoners have been mixed, such as Baozhao of Cambodia, who was famous in his time for his talent in learning.

古文：又用鲁郡巢尚之，江夏王义恭以为非选。
现代文：又任用鲁郡的巢遍之，汪夏王盏巷认为不应该选用他。
English: Lu County's Deng Quanzhi was also appointed, and Wang Xia Wangqian Xiang believed that he should not be selected.

古文：帝遣尚书二十余牒，宣敕论辩，义恭乃叹曰： 人主诚知人。 
现代文：而孝武帝派巢尚之送二十多件文书给尚书省，发布诏书进行论辩，义恭才感叹说： 皇上确实知道如何用人。 
English: However, Emperor Xiaowu sent more than 20 documents to the Ministry of Education, and issued an edict for discussion. It was only then that Yi Qiong sighed and said, "The emperor really knows how to employ people."

古文：及明帝世，胡母颢、阮佃夫之徒，专为佞倖矣。
现代文：等到明帝时代，胡母颢、阮佃夫之徒，专做奸巧非分之事。
English: By the time of Emperor Ming, the followers of Hu Muxun and Nguyn Xuân Phúc were exclusively engaged in treachery.

古文：齐初亦用久劳，及以亲信。关谳表启，发署诏敕。
现代文：齐开始时也用劳苦功高之臣，范围涉及他们的亲信参与狱案材料、文书奏表的撰写，可以签署发布诏书命令。
English: At the beginning of Qi, they also used the hard work of high-ranking courtiers, the scope of which involved their cronies participating in the writing of prison case materials and documents, and they could sign and issue imperial decrees.

古文：颇涉辞翰者，亦为诏文，侍郎之局，复见侵矣。
现代文：稍有文笔的人，也可撰写诏文，侍郎的权限，又被侵犯了。
English: Anyone with a bit of writing ability can also write an imperial edict, and the waiter's authority has once again been violated.

古文：建武世，诏命殆不关中书，专出舍人。
现代文：建武时代，诏书命令开始不由中书掌管，而专门由舍人负责。
English: During the Jianwu era, imperial edicts were no longer controlled by the chancellor, but were exclusively the responsibility of the regent.

古文：省内舍人四人，所直四省，其下有主书令史，旧用武官，宋改文吏，人数无员。
现代文：省内设四个舍人，分管四省的文书，它的下面有主书令史，从前任用武官，末时改成文官，人数没有固定的名额限制。
English: There are four clerks in the province, responsible for the paperwork of the four provinces. Below it is the history of the main document, from the former military officer to the civilian officer at the end. There is no fixed quota limit on the number of people.

古文：莫非左右要密，天下文簿板籍，入副其省，万机严秘，有如尚书外司，领武官，有制局监，领器仗兵役，亦用寒人被恩幸者。
现代文：所执掌的都是有关国家机要秘密的，天下的册簿文书，都被送交省里备案，各种机务十分严密，就像尚书外司。重要的武官，有制局监，负责管理器物仪仗及兵役之事，也任用出身寒门而受皇帝恩宠的人。
English: Those in charge were all secret about the state apparatus, and all the books and documents of the world were sent to the provinces for filing. All kinds of mechanisms were very strict, such as the secretary of state for foreign affairs. Important military attachés, the inspector of the Bureau of Military Affairs, responsible for the management of ceremonial objects and military service, also appointed people who were from the poor and favored by the emperor.

古文：今立《幸臣篇》，以继前史之末云。
现代文：现在单立《幸臣篇》，使前代的史事得以接续。
English: Now, "The Story of Yukitomi" stands alone, allowing the historical events of the previous generation to continue.

古文：纪僧真，丹阳建康人也。
现代文：纪僧真，是丹阳建康人。
English: Ji Sangzhen is a Danyang Jiankang person.

古文：僧真少随逐征西将军萧思话及子惠开，皆被赏遇。
现代文：僧真少年时就追随征西将军萧思话和他的儿子惠开，得到两人的赏识。
English: When he was a boy, he followed the general of the Western Expedition, Xiao Siwei, and his son Hui Kai, and was appreciated by both of them.

古文：惠开性苛，僧真以微过见罚，既而委任如旧。
现代文：惠开性情苛刻，僧真因为小的过失被他责罚，但不久又像以前一样重新任用。
English: Being of a stern disposition, he reprimanded Sangjin for a minor fault, but soon reappointed him as before.

古文：及罢益州还都，不得志，僧真事之愈谨。惠开临终叹曰： 纪僧真方当富贵，我不见也。 
现代文：等到萧惠开从益州罢职回京，抑郁不得志，僧真跟随他做事更加谨慎惠开临终前叹息说： 纪僧真曰后定当富贵腾达，可惜我见不到这一天了。 
English: When Xiao Huikai resigned from his post in Yizhou and returned to Beijing, he was depressed and discouraged. Sozhen followed him and did things more carefully. On his deathbed, Huikai sighed and said: Ji Sozhen said that he would be rich and prosperous, but unfortunately I will not see this day.

古文：乃以僧真托刘秉、周颙。
现代文：于是把僧真托付给刘秉、周颐。
English: So he entrusted the truth of the monk to Liu Bing and Zhou Ye.

古文：初，惠开在益州，土反，被围危急，有道人谓之曰： 城围寻解。
现代文：当初惠开在益州的时候，被当地造反的土人包围起来情况十分危急，有个道人告诉他说： 城被围困的事很快就会被解救。
English: When Hui Kai was in Yizhou at the beginning, the situation was very critical as he was surrounded by local natives who had rebelled. A Taoist told him: "The siege of the city will soon be relieved."

古文：檀越贵门后方大兴，无忧外贼也。 
现代文：施主家是富贵之门，曰后定当大大兴旺，不必忧虑外贼侵扰。 
English: The donor's house is the gate to wealth. It is sure to prosper greatly in the future, and there is no need to worry about intrusion by outsiders.

古文：惠开密谓僧真曰： 我子弟见在者，并无异才。
现代文：惠开私下告诉僧真说： 我家现在的子弟，都没有什么异才。
English: Hui Kai told Sang Zhen in private, "The current children in my family do not have any special talents.

古文：政是道成耳。 
现代文：他所指的可能正是道成吧。 
English: He may have been referring to Doushige.

古文：僧真忆其言，乃请事太祖。
现代文：僧真想起他的话，于是请求追随太祖。
English: The monk remembered his words and asked to follow the great ancestor.

古文：随从在淮阴，以闲书题，令答远近书疏。
现代文：随从太祖在淮阴，以消闲之书为名，负责应答远近的文书信札。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in Huaiyin and was in charge of answering correspondence from near and far in the name of leisure reading.

古文：自寒官历至太祖冠军府参军、主簿。
现代文：从地位卑下的官职依次升任太祖冠军府参军、主簿。
English: From the official position of inferior status, he was successively promoted to the grand ancestor champion of the army and the main book.

古文：僧真梦蒿艾生满江，惊而白之。
现代文：僧真梦见江面上生满了蒿艾，十分惊异，告诉了太祖。
English: Monk Zhen dreamed that the surface of the river was covered with reeds, was very surprised, and told the great ancestor.

古文：太祖曰： 诗人采萧，萧即艾也。
现代文：太祖说： 诗人采萧，萧就是艾。
English: The great-grandfather said: The poet is Choe Soo, Soo is Ai.

古文：萧生断流，卿勿广言。 
现代文：萧生断流，你不要到处对别人说。 
English: Xiao Sheng broke the flow, you don't go around telling others.

古文：其见亲如此。
现代文：僧真被太祖亲信到这种地步。
English: You can see how close they are.

古文：元徽初，从太祖顿新亭，拒桂阳贼。萧惠朗突入东门，僧真与左右共拒战。
现代文：元徽初年，跟从太祖驻扎新亭，抗拒桂阳的贼人萧惠朗攻入东门，僧真与左右兵士共同抗拒作战。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he resisted Xiao Huilang, a thief from Guiyang, who was stationed in Xinting with his great-grandfather, from entering the East Gate, and he resisted the battle with soldiers from both sides.

古文：贼退，太祖命僧真领亲兵，游逻城中。
现代文：贼人被打退，太祖命令僧真率领亲兵在城中巡逻。
English: The thieves were repulsed, and the great-grandfather ordered the monk Zhen to lead his soldiers to patrol the city.

古文：事宁，除南台御史、太祖领军功曹。
现代文：事态平息后，升任南台御史、太祖领军功曹。
English: After the situation calmed down, he was promoted to the post of Nantai Imperial Historian, and was given the title of Grand Patriarch and Military Leader.

古文：上将废立，谋之袁粲、褚渊。僧真启上曰： 今朝廷猖狂，人不自保，天下之望，不在袁、褚。
现代文：太祖打算废除刘宋而自立，与袁粲、褚渊商议，僧真对太祖说： 现在朝廷肆意妄行，人人不能自保，天下的希望，电不在袁、褚二人。
English: The great-grandfather planned to abolish Liu Song and stand up for himself, and discussed with Yuan Shao and Yu Yuan. The monk Zhen said to the great-grandfather: Now the imperial court is acting wantonly, everyone cannot protect themselves, and the hope of the world is not in Yuan Shao and Yu Yuan.

古文：明公岂得默己，坐受夷灭。
现代文：您难道能够沉默无所作为，而坐等被人消灭。
English: Can you remain silent, do nothing, and wait to be annihilated?

古文：存亡之机，仰希熟虑。 
现代文：存亡的重要时刻，真诚地希望您深思熟虑。 
English: The key to survival, please think about it.

古文：太祖纳之。
现代文：太祖采纳了他的意见。
English: The great-grandfather adopted his opinion.

古文：太祖欲度广陵起兵，僧真又启曰： 主上虽复狂衅，虐加万民，而累世皇基，犹固盘石。
现代文：太祖想要从广陵起兵，僧真又对他说： 现在的皇上即使再狂乱暴虐，残暴侵害百姓，可是累世的皇帝基业，仍旧坚如磐石。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to raise an army from Guangling, and the monk Zhen said to him: Even if the current emperor is wild and brutal, and brutally violates the people, but the emperor's inheritance over the ages is still as solid as a rock.

古文：今百口北度，何必得俱。
现代文：现在您率百口人北度，不一定都能得到保全。
English: Now you are leading hundreds of people north, and not all of them can be saved.

古文：纵得广陵城，天子居深宫施号令，目明公为逆，何以避此？
现代文：纵然得到广陵城，天子仍旧在幽深的宫中发布号令，指您为叛逆，您怎么能逃避这种罪名呢?
English: Even though you have gained Guangling City, the Son of Heaven still issues a decree in the depths of the palace, calling you a rebel. How can you escape this accusation?

古文：如其不胜，则应北走胡中，窃谓此非万全策也。 
现代文：如果这次不能得胜，衹能败走胡入之地，臣下认为遣不是万全之策。 
English: If he couldn't win this time, his vassals thought it was not a good idea to send him to a place where he could lose and go astray.

古文：上曰： 卿顾家，岂能逐我行耶。 僧真顿首称无贰。升明元年，除员外郎，带东武城令。
现代文：太祖说： 你顾全自己的家室，怎么能跟随我去呢 僧真以头叩地而拜，称自己无二：心升明元年，授员外郎，兼带东武城令。
English: The great-grandfather said, "You take care of your own family, how can you follow me?" Sozhen prostrated himself with his head on the ground, saying that he was no different from anyone else: he was born in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Geiro, and he was also given the title of Tobu-jo.

古文：寻除给事中、邵陵王参军。
现代文：不久又授给事中、邵陵王参军。
English: Soon after, Shao Ling Wang joined the army.

古文：太祖坐东府高楼，望石头城，僧真在侧。
现代文：太祖坐在东府高楼，观望石头城，僧真在他旁边。
English: Taizu is sitting in a high-rise building in the eastern prefecture, watching the stone city, and Sozen is next to him.

古文：上曰： 诸将劝我诛袁、刘，我意不欲便尔。 
现代文：太祖说： 诸位将领劝我讨伐袁、刘我的意思是不想马上就这样做。 
English: Grandfather said: Generals, please advise me to fight Yuan and Liu. I don't want to do it right away.

古文：及沈攸之事起，从太祖入朝堂。
现代文：等到沈攸之反叛的事发生，僧真跟从太祖进入朝堂。
English: When Shen You's rebellion occurred, Sozhen followed his grandfather into the imperial court.

古文：石头反夜，太祖遣众军掩讨。
现代文：石头城反叛的夜裹，太祖派遣军队讨伐挽救。
English: On the night of the rebellion in Stone Town, Taizu sent an army to fight and save the city.

古文：宫城中望石头火光及叫声甚盛，人怀不测。
现代文：在宫城中望见石头城内火光和叫声非常盛大，人们心中都疑惑不定。
English: In Miyagi, the sight of fire and shouting in the stone city is very grand, and people are puzzled in their hearts.

古文：僧真谓众曰： 叫声不绝，是必官军所攻。
现代文：僧真对众人说： 叫声不断，一定是因为官军在进攻。
English: Monk Zhen said to the crowd, "The constant shouting must be because the government army is attacking.

古文：火光起者，贼不容自烧其城，此必官军胜也。 
现代文：有火光，是因为贼人自知保不住城而烧城，逭一定是官军胜利丫。 
English: If there are flames, it is because the thieves know they cannot hold the city and are burning it. The government army must be victorious.

古文：寻而启石头平。
现代文：不久果然报告石头城被乎定。
English: Soon it was reported that Stone Town had indeed been captured.

古文：上出顿新亭，使僧真领千人在帐内。
现代文：太祖出兵驻扎新亭，派僧真率领一千人在军帐内。
English: The great-grandfather sent troops to be stationed in Xinting, and sent the monk Zhen to lead a thousand people in the military account.

古文：初，上在领军府，令僧真学上手迹下名，至是报答书疏，皆付僧真，上观之，笑曰： 我亦不复能别也。 
现代文：当初，太祖在领军府，命令僧真学习太祖手迹代太祖签名，自此凡是应答书疏信札，都交付垣真，本担观看后，笑着说。我也真假难辨了。 
English: At first, the great-grandfather ordered Sangjin to study the great-grandfather's handwriting and sign on behalf of the great-grandfather at the military headquarters. Since then, all the reply cards have been handed over to Kakizane. After looking at the original, he said with a smile, "I can't tell if it's true or not."

古文：初，上在淮阴治城，得古锡趺，大数尺，下有篆文，莫能识者。僧真曰： 何须辨此文字，此自久远之物，九锡之征也。 
现代文：当初，太祖在淮阴修理城垣，得到一个锡做的趺坐，大有数尺，下面有篆文，没有人能够认识僧真说： 何必定要辨别这些文字，这本来是时代久远的东西，是将要得到九锡的证验， 去担说： 你不要乱说。 
English: At that time, the great ancestor was repairing the city wall in Huaiyin. He obtained a seat made of pewter, several feet in size, with inscriptions below. No one could recognize the monk. He said, "Why do you have to distinguish these inscriptions? This is something that has been around for a long time. It is something that will be verified by the nine pewters." He said, "Don't talk nonsense."

古文：太祖曰： 卿勿妄言。 及上将拜齐公，已克日，有杨祖之谋于临轩作难。
现代文：等到太祖将要拜为齐公，已经确定时日，有个叫杨祖之的人谋划在殿前起事。
English: By the time the great-grandfather was about to bow to the emperor, the time had already been set, and a man named Yang Zu planned to rise up in front of the hall.

古文：僧真更请上选吉辰，寻而祖之事觉。
现代文：僧真请求太祖另选吉利的时辰，不久祖之的事被发觉。
English: The monk sincerely asked the great-grandfather to choose another auspicious time, and soon the matter of the great-grandfather was discovered.

古文：上曰： 无卿言，亦当致小狼狈，此亦何异呼沲之冰。 
现代文：太祖说： 没有你说那些话，我也一定招致小小的难堪窘迫，这又同呼沲之冰有什么差异。 
English: Grandfather said: Without you saying those words, I must have caused a little embarrassment, which is no different from the ice of whistling.

古文：转齐国中书舍人。
现代文：僧真转为齐国中书舍人。
English: Sozhen became a school dropout in Qi.

古文：建元初，带东燕令，封新阳县男，三百户。
现代文：建元初年，任东燕令，封为新阳县男，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year after the founding of the People's Republic of China, Dong Yanling was appointed as the man of Xinyang County, with more than 300 households in the county.

古文：转羽林监，加建威将军，迁尚书主客郎，太尉中兵参军，令如故。
现代文：转为羽林监，加封建威将军，转迁尚书主客郎，太尉中兵参军，仍旧任东燕令。
English: He was transferred to the position of Ulin supervisor, he was added to the feudal Jian Wei general, he was transferred to the position of Shang Shushi guest, he was transferred to the position of Taifu lieutenant, and he was still assigned to the position of Dongyanling.

古文：复以本官兼中书舍人。
现代文：又在本官之外兼任中书舍人。
English: In addition to this post, he also served as a librarian.

古文：太祖疾甚，令僧真典遗诏，永明元年，丁父丧，起为建威将军，寻除南泰山太守，又为舍人，本官如故。
现代文：太祖病重，命令僧真掌管遗诏。永明元年，在家守丧，后起用为建威将军，不久官拜南泰山太守，又做舍人，原先已有的官职照样保留。
English: The great-grandfather was seriously ill and ordered the monk Zhen to take charge of the last will. In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, he held a funeral at home, and was later appointed as General Jian Wei. Soon, he was appointed as the governor of Nanshan Taishan, and also as a layman. The existing official positions were still retained.

古文：领诸王第事。
现代文：兼管诸王府第之事。
English: He was also in charge of the royal residences.

古文：僧真容貌言吐，雅有士风。
现代文：僧真的容貌谈吐，儒雅有士入的风度。
English: The monk really looks like a talkative person, with a refined and refined demeanor.

古文：世祖尝目送之，笑曰： 人何必计门户，纪僧真常贵人所不及。 
现代文：世祖曾经目送他，笑着说： 人何必计较门户，纪僧真的风度常常连贵人也比不上。 
English: The founder of the world once saw him off and said with a smile, "Why should anyone care about the gate? The true demeanor of a disciplined monk is often not even comparable to that of a nobleman."

古文：诸权要中，最被盼遇。
现代文：诸多重臣显官当中，僧真最受恩宠。
English: Among the many high-ranking dignitaries, Sangjin was the most favored.

古文：除越骑校尉，余官如故。
现代文：授子越骑校尉，其余的官如故。
English: His son-in-law became a cavalry captain, and the rest of the officials remained the same.

古文：出为建武将军，建康令。
现代文：外任建武将军，建康令。
English: General Jianwu from outside, Jiankang order.

古文：还除左右郎将，泰山太守。
现代文：还朝授左右郎将，泰山太守。
English: He was also awarded the title of General of the Left and Right Armies by the Emperor, and became the Governor of Mount Tai.

古文：加先驱使。
现代文：加封先驱使。
English: The sealing of the seal is the first step.

古文：寻除前军将军，遭母丧，开冢得五色两头蛇。
现代文：不久授前军将军。遇到母亲去世，开墓时得到五色的两头蛇。
English: He was soon promoted to general of the former army. When his mother died, he found a five-colored two-headed snake when opening the grave.

古文：世祖崩，僧真号泣思慕。
现代文：世祖驾崩，僧真号哭思慕世祖。
English: The ancestor passed away, and the monk Zhen cried and thought about the ancestor.

古文：明帝以僧真历朝驱使，建武元年，除游击将军，兼司农，待之如旧。欲令僧真治郡，僧真启进其弟僧猛为镇蛮护军、晋熙太守。
现代文：明帝因为僧真曾为几代皇帝效劳，在建武元年，授给他游击将军，兼任司农，对他像从前一样想让僧真治理郡县，僧真启奏推荐他的弟弟僧猛为镇蛮护军、晋熙太守。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, the Ming Emperor awarded him the title of guerrilla general and concurrently the position of farmer to him because he had served several generations of emperors. To him, he wanted to let him govern the county as he had done in the past. Sozhen Qisong recommended his younger brother, So Meng, to be the protector of the town and the governor of Jinxi.

古文：永泰元年，除司农卿。
现代文：永泰元年，授给他司农卿。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, he was awarded the title of Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：明帝崩，掌山陵事。
现代文：明帝驾崩，僧真掌管山陵之事。
English: After the death of Emperor Ming, the monk Zhen took charge of the affairs of the mountain.

古文：出为庐陵长内史，年五十五，卒。
现代文：出任为庐陵内史，去世时五十五岁。
English: He was appointed as the official historian of Fuling, and was 55 years old at the time of his death.

古文：宋世道人杨法持，与太祖有旧。
现代文：宋时的道人杨法持，从前与太祖有交情。
English: Yang Faji, a Taoist from the Song Dynasty, once had a friendship with Taizu.

古文：元徽末，宣传密谋。
现代文：元邀末年，传布密谋。
English: In the last years of the Yuan dynasty, conspiracies were spread.

古文：升明中，以为僧正。
现代文：升明年间，让他做了僧正。
English: After his ordination, he was made a monk.

古文：建元初，罢道，为宁朔将军，封州陵县男，三百户。
现代文：建元初年，停止修道，任宁朔将军，封他为州陵县男，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he stopped practicing and was appointed Ningshuo general. He was given the title of the man of Shuling County, with 300 households in Shuling.

古文：二年，虏围朐山，遣法持为军主，领支军救援。
现代文：建元二年，北方敌人围困朐山，派法持为军主，率兵前往救援。
English: In the second year of the first century, when the northern enemy besieged Lushan, he sent Fa Zhi as the commander and led the soldiers to the rescue.

古文：永明四年，坐役使将客，夺其鲑禀，削封。
现代文：永明四年，因役使将客获罪，被停发薪俸粮米，削去封爵。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, he was found guilty of serving the commander, suspended from salary and grain, and stripped of his knighthood.

古文：卒。
现代文：后去世。
English: To die.

古文：刘系宗，丹阳人也。
现代文：刘系宗是丹阳人。
English: Liu Keizong is from Danyang.

古文：少便书画，为宋竟陵王诞子景粹侍书。诞举兵广陵，城内皆死，敕沈庆之赦系宗，以为东宫侍书。
现代文：少年时就能书善画，任家竟陵王诞的儿子量控侍书诞从广陵举兵，城里的人都被杀死，却命令选庆之赦免系宗，让他做丁东宫侍书。
English: When he was a boy, he was good at calligraphy and painting. The son of the family of King Lingzhao, the son of King Lingzhao, raised an army from Guangling, and the people in the city were all killed. However, he ordered the pardon of Zengqing, and let him be the attendant of the Dingdong Palace.

古文：泰始中为主书，以寒官累迁至勋品。
现代文：蠢始年间，任主书。从地位卑下的官职屡经升迁至勋品。
English: In the early years, he was the chief scribe. He was repeatedly promoted from a low-ranking official post to a decoration.

古文：元徽初为奉朝请，兼中书通事舍人，员外郎。
现代文：元徽初年，任奉朝请，兼任中书通事舍人，员外郎。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as a guest of the Emperor, and also served as a secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC, and a member of the outer circle.

古文：封始兴南亭侯，食邑三百七十户。
现代文：封为始兴南亭堡，食邑有三百七十户。
English: It was named Shixing Nanting Fort, and there were 370 households in the food village.

古文：带秣陵令。
现代文：兼任拯堕令。
English: He also served as a rescue order.

古文：太祖废苍梧明旦，呼正直舍人虞整，醉不能起，系宗欢喜奉命。
现代文：太祖废苍梧，天明时召见正直舍人虞整，虞整喝醉酒不能起床，系宗欢喜地接受命令。
English: The great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great

古文：太祖曰： 今天地重开，是卿尽力之日。 
现代文：太祖说： 现在是天地重开的变革时代，也是你为国尽力的时候。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Now is the era of transformation when heaven and earth are reopened, and it is also the time for you to do your best for the country."

古文：使写诸处分敕令及四方书疏。
现代文：派他负责撰写韶书命令，以及来自四方的奏疏书札。
English: He was put in charge of writing the orders for the edict, as well as the report cards from the four sides.

古文：使主书十人书吏二十人配之，事皆称旨。
现代文：派主书十人，书吏二十人属于他，事事都符合皇帝旨意。
English: He appointed ten scribes and twenty clerks, all in accordance with the emperor's wishes.

古文：除羽林监，转步兵校尉。
现代文：诐任为羽林监，转为步兵校尉。
English: He was appointed as a forest inspector and later became an infantry lieutenant.

古文：仍除龙骧将军，出为海盐令。
现代文：又授龙骧将军，出任海盐令。
English: He was also awarded the rank of General Longyu, and served as the Commander of the Sea Salt Fleet.

古文：太祖即位，除龙骧将军、建康令。
现代文：太祖即位，授给他龙骧将军、建康令。
English: When the great-grandfather ascended the throne, he was bestowed with the generalship of Longjing and Jiankang.

古文：永明元年，除宁朔将军，令如故。
现代文：永明元年，授宁朔将军，仍任建康令。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was awarded the title of Ningshuo General, and still held the title of Jiankang.

古文：寻转右军将军、淮陵太守，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：不久转为右军将军、淮陵太守，兼任中书通事舍人。
English: He soon became the general of the right army and the governor of Huairing, and also served as the secretary-general of the Central Military Commission.

古文：母丧自解，起为宁朔将军，复本职。
现代文：母亲去世时自动辞官，服丧未满而被起用为宁朔将军，恢复本来职位。
English: When his mother died, he automatically resigned from the post, and was appointed to the post of Ningshuo General before his funeral. He resumed his original position.

古文：四年，白贼唐宇之起，宿卫兵东讨，遣系宗随军慰劳，遍至遭贼郡县。
现代文：永明四年，北方贼人唐寓之起兵作乱，官军守卫部队东征讨伐，派遣系宗跟随军队慰问犒劳。系宗走遍被贼人袭击的郡县。
English: In the fourth year of the Yongming era, the Northern Thieves of the Tang Dynasty started a riot, and the government army's guard force went to the East to fight, and sent the lineage to follow the army to offer condolences. The lineage went all over the counties that were attacked by the thieves.

古文：百姓被驱逼者，悉无所问，还复民伍。
现代文：被驱使逼迫的百姓，系宗一律不加责罚，让他们恢复原先的民籍。
English: The people who were driven to persecute were all expelled without punishment, and they were allowed to restore their original citizenship.

古文：系宗还，上曰： 此段有征无战，以时平荡，百姓安怗，甚快也。 
现代文：系宗回来，武帝说： 这一段时间衹有出兵征伐而无战争，所以时代安定，百姓安宁，我很高兴。 
English: After returning home, Emperor Wu said, "During this period, there were no military expeditions and no wars, so the times were stable and the people were peaceful. I am very happy.

古文：赐系宗钱帛。
现代文：赐给系宗钱财锦缎。
English: He bestowed money and wealth on the lineage head.

古文：上欲修治白下城，难于动役。
现代文：武帝想要修建白下城，发愁没有可以动用的民工。
English: Emperor Wu wanted to build Baixia Town, but was worried about the lack of available migrant workers.

古文：系宗启谪役在东民丁随宇之为逆者，上从之。
现代文：系宗劝他动用跟随寓之叛逆而被发配到东边的民工充当劳役，武帝听从了他的意见。
English: Emperor Wu listened to the advice of Keizong, who advised him to use the migrant workers who had been dispatched to the east to serve as laborers after the rebellion of the followers of Fuxi.

古文：后车驾讲武，上履行白下城，曰： 刘系宗为国家得此一城。 
现代文：后来娄壶讲习武事，亲自登上白下城，说： 是刘系宗为国家得到这座城的。 
English: Later, he attended a martial arts class and went to Baixia Town in person, saying, "It was Liu Jiezong who won this town for the country.

古文：永明中，虏使书常令系宗题答，秘书书局皆隶之。
现代文：永明年间，敌国使臣送来的书信常由系宗签署应答，秘书书局都归他管理。
English: Over the years, the letters sent by the envoys of the enemy country were often signed and answered by Keizong, and the secretary and the bookstore were all managed by him.

古文：再为少府，迁游击将军、鲁郡太守。
现代文：又任少府，迁游击将军、鲁郡太守。
English: He was also appointed as a minor prefect, the general of the relocation of the guerrillas, and the governor of Lu County.

古文：郁林即位，除骁骑将军，仍除宁朔将军、宣城太守。
现代文：郁林王即位，授系宗骁骑将军，又授宁朔将军、宣城太守。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne, bestowed the lineage of Zongxing riding general, and also conferred the Ningshuo general, Xuancheng Dazhou.

古文：系宗久在朝省，闲于职事。
现代文：系宗长期在朝廷官署做事，十分熟悉职事。
English: He had worked in the Imperial Household Agency for a long time and was very familiar with the job.

古文：明帝曰： 学士不堪治国，唯大读书耳。
现代文：明帝说： 学者不能够治理国家，他们衹知道读书。
English: Emperor Ming said: Scholars are not able to govern the country, they do not know how to read.

古文：一刘系宗足持如此辈五百人。 
现代文：一个刘系宗就足够抵得上那样的读书人五百人了。 
English: One Liu Jiezong is enough to be worth five hundred such readers.

古文：其重吏事如此。
现代文：系宗受重视居要职的情况就是这样。
English: This is what happens when a lineage is elevated to a position of importance.

古文：建武二年，卒官，年七十七。
现代文：建武二年，系宗在官位上死去，终年七十七岁。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Keizong died in office, at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：茹法亮，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：茹法亮是吴兴武康人。
English: Rufa Liang is Wu Xingwu Kangren.

古文：宋大明中出身为小史，历斋干扶侍。
现代文：宋大明年间，作过小吏，当过书斋的服侍。
English: During the next year of Song University, he worked as a clerk and served as a librarian.

古文：孝武末年作酒法，鞭罚过度，校猎江右，选白衣左右百八十人，皆面首富室，从至南州，得鞭者过半。
现代文：宋孝武帝末年时设立酒法，鞭罚超过限度，在江右围猎，选了一百八十个小吏作随从，都是富家男宠，跟从到南州，遭受鞭刑的人超过一半。
English: At the end of his life, Emperor Song Xiaowu set up a liquor law, punished whipping exceeding the limit, hunted in the right bank of the river, and selected one hundred and eighty minor officials to be his followers. They were all rich men's favorites. They followed him to Nanzhou, and more than half of them were whipped.

古文：法亮忧惧，因缘启出家得为道人。
现代文：法亮担忧恐惧，于是藉机出家当了道人。
English: Fa Liang was worried and afraid, so he took the opportunity to become a Taoist.

古文：明帝初罢道，结事阮佃夫，用为兖州刺史孟次阳典签。
现代文：宋明帝初年，停止修道，结交事奉阮佃夫，被任用为兖州刺史盂次阳的典签。
English: In the first year of Emperor Songming, he stopped his religious practice, befriended and served Nguyn Văn Thiệu, and was appointed as the legate of Qung Sn Văn Thiệu.

古文：累至太祖冠军府行参军。
现代文：累官至齐太祖冠军府行参军元徽初年，授宫殿中将军。
English: In the first year of joining the army, he was awarded the title of palace middle general.

古文：元徽初，除殿中将军，为晋熙王郢州典签，除长兼殿中御史。
现代文：为晋熙王郢州典签，授官长兼殿中御史。
English: It was signed by King Jinxi of Bozhou and awarded to the head of the government and the history of the palace.

古文：世祖镇盆城，须旧驱使人，法亮求留为上江州典签，除南台御史，带松滋令。
现代文：世祖镇守盆城，需要任用亲售下属，法亮请求留为上江州典签，授官南台御史，兼松滋令。
English: The founder of the town was in charge of Bincheng, and it was necessary to appoint subordinates who were personally sold, and the leader requested to remain as the signer of the Shangjiang Province, and was awarded the post of Nantai Imperial Historian and Kanematsu Shirei.

古文：法亮便辟解事，善于承奉，稍见委信。
现代文：法亮处事逢迎谄媚，善于奉承，逐渐被委托信任。
English: Fa Liang was always charming, good at flattery, and was gradually entrusted with trust.

古文：从还石头。
现代文：跟从世祖回到石头。
English: Back to the stone with the ancestors.

古文：建元初，度东宫主书。除奉朝请，补东宫通事舍人。
现代文：建元初年，官居束宫主书被任为奉朝请，补授柬宫通事舍人。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, the chief clerk of Guanzhuzoku Palace was appointed to serve the North Korean government, and he was given the additional post of the secretary of the Cambodian Palace.

古文：世祖即位，仍为中书通事舍人。
现代文：世祖即位，法亮仍为巾书通事舍人。
English: When the founder ascended to the throne, Fa Liang was still a stickler for protocol.

古文：除员外郎，带南济阴太守。
现代文：授官员外郎，兼南济阴太守。
English: He was the second son of a high-ranking official and also the governor of South Jilin Province.

古文：永明元年，除龙骧将军。
现代文：永明元年，授官龙骧将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was awarded the rank of General Longyu.

古文：明年，诏曰： 茹法亮近在盆城，频使衔命，内宣朝旨，外慰三军。义勇齐奋，人百其气。
现代文：第二年，皇上下韶书说： 茹法亮在盆城受到宠爱，屡次奉命出使，对内宣传朝廷旨意，对外抚慰三军正义勇敢之士共同奋发，人人气势百倍。
English: In the second year, the imperial edict said, "Rufa Liang was favored in Boncheng. He was repeatedly sent on missions to promote the will of the imperial court at home and to appease the righteous and brave men of the three armies abroad. Everyone was a hundred times more powerful."

古文：险阻艰难，心力俱尽。
现代文：历尽艰难险阻，用尽全部心力。
English: After all the hardships and obstacles, exhausted all the heart.

古文：宜沾茅土，以甄忠绩。 封望蔡县男，食邑三百户。转给事中，羽林监。
现代文：应该授封土地，以表彰嘉奖他的忠绩 封为望蔡县男，食邑三百户转为给事中，羽林监。
English: He should be awarded land to commend and reward his loyalty. He should be awarded the title of the Man of Wangcai County, and the 300 households in the food village should be awarded the title of the Mid-level Forest Supervisor.

古文：七年，除临淮太守，转竟陵王司徒中兵参军。
现代文：永明七年，授官临淮太守，转为竞陵王司徒中兵参军。
English: In the seventh year, he was appointed as the governor of Linhuai, and then he was transferred to the army as a soldier in the army of King Jingling.

古文：巴东王子响于荆州杀僚佐，上遣军西上，使法亮宣旨慰劳，安抚子响。
现代文：巴东王子响在荆州杀害属官，皇上派军队向西进发，派法亮传达圣旨，慰劳军队，安抚子响。
English: Prince Badong killed his subordinate officers in Jingzhou, the emperor sent troops to the west, sent Fa Liang to convey the holy will, comforted the troops, and pacified Zixing.

古文：法亮至江津，子响呼法亮，法亮疑畏不肯往。
现代文：法亮来到江津，子响召唤法亮，法亮怀疑畏惧，不肯前往。
English: Fa Liang came to Jiangjin, Zixing summoned Fa Liang, Fa Liang was suspicious and afraid, and refused to go.

古文：又求见传诏，法亮又不遣。
现代文：子响又请求法亮递送传达诏书，法亮又不送去。
English: Zixing also requested Falyang to deliver the imperial rescript, but Falyang did not send it.

古文：故子响怒，遣兵破尹略军。
现代文：所以子响大怒，派兵攻破尹略的军队。
English: Therefore, he was furious and sent troops to defeat Yin Liang's army.

古文：事平，法亮至江陵，刑赏处分，皆称敕断决。
现代文：事情平息以后，法亮来到江陵，奖赏惩罚，都声称皇上的命令审理判决。
English: After things calmed down, Fa Liang came to Gangneung to reward and punish, claiming that the emperor's order to hear the verdict was the best.

古文：军还，上悔诛子响，法亮被责。
现代文：军队回来，皇上后悔杀了广响，法亮被责罚。
English: When the army returned, the emperor regretted having killed Guang Xing, and Fa Liang was punished.

古文：少时，亲任如旧。
现代文：不多久，又像从前一样亲信重用他。
English: It didn't take long before he was being used by his cronies again, just as before.

古文：郁林即位，除步兵校尉。
现代文：郁林王即位，授法亮步兵校尉。
English: Emperor Yulin ascended to the throne, and he was awarded the title of brilliant infantry captain.

古文：延兴元年，为前军将军。
现代文：延兴元年，法亮任前军将军延昌殿是世祖的私室。
English: In the first year of the Yanxing Dynasty, Yanchang Palace, a former military general, was the ancestor's private residence.

古文：延昌殿为世祖阴室，藏诸御服。二少帝并居西殿，高宗即位住东斋，开阴室出世祖白纱帽防身刀，法亮歔欷流涕。
现代文：藏有世祖生前衣的二少帝一起住在西殿，高宗即位住在束斋，打开私室取出世祖的白纱帽防身刀，法亮哀叹抽泣。
English: The two young emperors, who had kept the ancestor's tunic, lived together in the West Hall. Gao Zong, who was enthroned, lived in the Bund, opened his private room to take out the ancestor's white gauze hat and knife, and Fa Liang lamented and sobbed.

古文：除游击将军。
现代文：授官游击将军。
English: He was promoted to the rank of guerrilla general.

古文：高武旧人鲜有存者，法亮以主署文事，故不见疑，位任如故。
现代文：高武时旧任官吏很少有在位的，法亮因为主管文书之事，所以不被怀疑，仍像从前一样职位不变。
English: At the time of Gao Wu, few of the former officials were still in power. Because Fa Liang was in charge of documents, he was not suspected and his position remained unchanged as before.

古文：永泰元年，王敬则事平，法亮复受敕宣慰。
现代文：永泰元年，王敬则事件平息，法亮又受皇帝诏命安抚。
English: In the first year of Yongtai, Wang Jing quelled the incident, and Fa Liang was pacified by the emperor's edict.

古文：出法亮为大司农。中书势利之职，法亮不乐去，固辞不受，既而代人已至，法亮垂涕而出。
现代文：任命法亮为大司农，中书是涉及到权势与财利的职位，法亮不愿意离去，坚决推辞不肯接受，不久代替的人已经到了，法亮低头流泪而出。
English: The appointment of Fa Liang as the chief secretary of farmers, the Chinese book is a position involving power and financial interests, Fa Liang is unwilling to leave, resolutely refuses to accept, soon the replacement has arrived, Fa Liang bowed his head and burst into tears.

古文：年六十四，卒官。
现代文：六十四岁时死于官位。
English: He died in office at the age of sixty-four.

古文：吕文显，临海人也。初为宋孝武斋干直长。
现代文：吕文显是临海人开始时任宋孝武帝书斋的直长。
English: Lu Wenxian was the immediate head of the study of Emperor Song Xiaowu at the beginning of the Linhai people.

古文：升明初为太祖录尚书省事，累位至殿中侍御史，羽林监，带兰陵丞、令，龙骧将军，秣陵令。
现代文：升明初年，被太祖任命为录尚书省事，屡经升迁官至殿中侍御史，羽林监，兼兰陵丞、令，龙骧将军，秣陵令。
English: In the first year after ascending the throne, he was appointed by his great-grandfather to be in charge of record-keeping and the management of affairs, and he was repeatedly promoted to the position of serving the emperor in the palace, as well as the position of forest inspector, the position of Lanling cheng, the position of Longjing general, and the position of Fuling.

古文：封刘阳县男。
现代文：受封为刘阳县男。
English: He was awarded the title of Liuyang County Man.

古文：永明元年，除宁朔将军，中书通事舍人，本官如故。
现代文：永明元年，授官宁朔将军，中书通事舍人，原来担任的官职不变。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was awarded the post of Ningshuo General, but he refused to be a Chinese scholar. The official position he originally held remained unchanged.

古文：文显治事以刻核被知。
现代文：文显因为做事苛刻而为人所知。
English: Wen Xian is known for being a hard worker.

古文：三年，带南清河太守。
现代文：永明三年，兼任南清河太守。
English: In the third year of Yongming, he also served as the governor of South Qinghe.

古文：与茹法亮等迭出入为舍人。并见亲幸。
现代文：与茹法亮等人轮流担任舍人，一起被皇帝宠幸。
English: He took turns to serve as an attendant with Ruffray and others, and was favored by the emperor.

古文：四方饷遗，岁各数百万，并造大宅，聚山开池。
现代文：四处送来的馈赠。他们每年各自取走数百万，都修造高大的住宅，积土成山。开辟池馆。
English: Gifts from all over the place. They each take millions every year, build tall houses, pile soil into mountains. Open a pond museum.

古文：五年，为建康令，转长水校尉，历带南泰山、南谯太守，寻为司徒中兵参军，淮南太守，直舍人省。
现代文：永明五年，文显任建尘令，转为长水校尉，做过南泰山、南谯太守，不久任司徒中兵参军，淮南太守，任职舍人省。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, Wen Xian was appointed to the position of Jiancheng, transferred to the position of Changshui lieutenant, served as the governor of Nantai Mountain and Nanlu, and was soon appointed to the position of Sittu soldier in the army, governor of Huainan, and served as the provincial governor.

古文：累迁左中郎将，南东莞太守，右军将军。
现代文：屡经升迁为左中郎将，南东莞太守，右军将军。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to General of the Left Division, Governor of South Dongguan, and General of the Right Division.

古文：高宗辅政，以文显守少府，见任使。
现代文：高宗辅政时，让塞题守少府，被信任差遣委用。
English: When Gao Zong was a vice-premier, he was trusted by the Dispatching Committee to serve as a minor prefect.

古文：历建武、永元之世，尚书右丞，少府卿。
现代文：历经建武、永元时代，做过尚书右丞，少府卿。
English: After experiencing the Jianwu and Yongyuan eras, he served as Shangshu Rongzheng and Shofuqing.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：吕文度，会稽人，宋世为细作金银库吏，竹局匠。
现代文：吕文度是会稽人宋时任细作金银库吏，竹局匠。
English: Lu Wentu was the auditor of the Song Dynasty, a gold and silver hoarder, and a bamboo craftsman.

古文：元徽中为射雉典事，随监莫修宗上郢。
现代文：永明年间，任射雉典事，随从典监莫脩宗去了郢。
English: In the middle of the year of Yonghe, after the ceremony of the appointment of the firing squad, he went to the capital with the overseer of the ceremony, Mo Xizong.

古文：世祖镇盆城拒沈攸之，文度仍留伏事，知军队杂役，以此见亲。
现代文：世祖镇守盆城抗拒沈攸之，文度仍留在那裹服侍，管理军队杂役，因此而被世祖亲幸。
English: King Sejong, the garrison commander of Boncheng, resisted Shen Youzhi, but Mengdu still remained there to serve and manage the army's miscellaneous services, so he was personally blessed by King Sejong.

古文：从还都，为石头城监，仍度东宫。
现代文：跟从些担回到都城，任互玺越监，仍在东宫做事。
English: He followed some officials back to the capital, and was appointed as the deputy inspector of Vietnam, still working in the East Palace.

古文：世祖即位，为制局监，位至员外郎，带南濮阳太守。
现代文：世祖即位，文度任制局监，官至员外郎，兼任南濮阳太守。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended the throne. He was appointed as the inspector of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, the highest-ranking official in the government, and also served as the governor of Nan Poyang.

古文：殿内军队及发遣外镇人，悉关之，甚有要势。
现代文：殿内军队和向外派遣镇守的人，都与他有关，十分有权势。
English: The troops in the palace and the people who sent the town guards out were all related to him and very powerful.

古文：故世传越州尝缺，上觅一直事人往越州，文度启其所知费延宗合旨，上即以为刺史。
现代文：所以传说越州曾经有一个官缺，皇上想要找一个能任事的人前往越州，主度启奏皇上说他的交好费延宗符合要求，皇上于是任命费延宗为刺史。
English: Therefore, it is said that there was once a vacancy in Yuezhou, and the emperor wanted to find someone who could do the job and go to Yuezhou. The chief of staff told the emperor that his friend Feiyanzong met the requirements, and the emperor then appointed Feiyanzong as the chief historian.

古文：永明中，敕亲近不得辄有申荐，人士免官，寒人鞭一百。
现代文：永明时，皇上下令左右亲信不得擅自推荐人，不然，为官的要被免官，普通人要被罚一百鞭。
English: At the time of the Yongming Emperor, the emperor's subordinates and those close to him were not allowed to recommend anyone without authorization. Otherwise, officials were to be dismissed and ordinary people were to be punished with a hundred lashes.

古文：上性尊严，吕文显尝在殿侧咳声高，上使茹法亮训诘之，以为不敬，故左右畏威承意，非所隶莫敢有言也。
现代文：皇上性情尊贵严厉，吕文显曾经在殿旁高声咳嗽，皇上派茹法亮责问他，认为他不敬，所以周围的人畏惧皇上的威风，顺承皇帝旨意，不是自己管理的事都不敢说什么。
English: The emperor's disposition was dignified and stern. Lu Wenxian once coughed loudly next to the hall. The emperor sent Zhufa Liang to reprimand him, thinking that he was disrespectful. Therefore, the people around him were afraid of the emperor's authority, obeyed the emperor's will, and did not dare to say anything about things that were not managed by themselves.

古文：时茹法亮掌杂驱使簿，及宣通密敕；吕文显掌谷帛事；其余舍人无别任。
现代文：当时茹法亮掌管杂驱使簿，以及宣布通告皇帝密令；吕文显掌管谷物丝帛之事；其他的舍人没有另外的职任。
English: At that time, Zhufaliao was in charge of the dispatch book and the announcement of the announcement of the emperor's secret order; Lu Wenxian was in charge of the grain silkworm; other couriers had no other duties.

古文：虎贲中郎将潘敞掌监功作。
现代文：虎贲中郎将潘敞掌管诸监的土木营造工程。
English: The middle brother of Tigress put Pan Zhang in charge of the civil construction project of the prisoners.

古文：上使造禅灵寺新成，车驾临视，甚悦。
现代文：皇上派他造禅灵寺，新近落成，皇上亲自前往观看，非常高兴。
English: The emperor sent him to build a Zen temple, which was recently completed. The emperor went to see it in person and was very pleased.

古文：敞喜，要吕文显私登寺南门楼，上知之，系敞上方，而出文显为南谯郡，久之乃复。
现代文：潘敞心中欢喜，邀请吕文显私下登惮灵寺南门楼，皇上知道这件事，把潘敞拘禁起来，而贬文显为南谯郡太守，很久以后才复职。
English: With joy in his heart, Pan Zhan invited Lu Wenxian to privately visit the south gate tower of Shao Ling Temple. The emperor knew about this and put Pan Zhan under arrest, and demoted Wen Xian to the position of the governor of Nanlu County, only to reinstate him a long time later.

古文：济阳江瞿昙、吴兴沈徽孚等，以士流舍人通事而已，无权利。
现代文：济阳的江瞿昙、吴兴的沈徽孚等人，是由士人的地位而当上舍人通事的，并没有实际的权势。
English: Jiang Qian of Jiyang, Shen Huifu of Wuxing and others, who were appointed by the status of scholars, did not have actual power.

古文：徽孚粗有笔札。
现代文：徽孚略有一些文采。
English: Hu Fu slightly has some literary merit.

古文：建武中文诏多其辞也。
现代文：建武年间的文书诏令，多出自他的手笔。
English: Most of the documents issued by Emperor Jianwu during his reign were written by him.

古文：官至黄门郎。
现代文：官至黄门郎。
English: The last official to leave was Huangmenro.

古文：史臣曰：中世已来宰御天下，万机碎密，不关外司，尚书八座五曹各有恒任，系以九卿六府，事存副职。
现代文：史臣曰：本朝中叶已来，宰相权倾天下，各种事务细碎严密，都与外司无关。尚书省八座五曹，各自有固定的职任，连结着九卿六府，下设副职。
English: Shichen said: "The middle of this century has come, the power of the prime minister has fallen to the world, all kinds of affairs are detailed and strict, and have nothing to do with the foreign secretary. Shangshuo Province has eight seats and five departments, each with a fixed position, linked to nine counties and six prefectures, with a subordinate position.

古文：咸皆冠冕搢绅，任疏人贵，伏奏之务既寝，趋走之劳亦息。
现代文：都是什宦大夫，职任稀疏地位却十分显贵，没有什么申奏的事务，也没有什么奔走的辛劳。
English: They are all Shifu doctors, but their positions are sparse, but they are very prominent. There is no paperwork, and there is no hard work of running around.

古文：关宣所寄，属当有归，通驿内外，切自音旨。
现代文：有关宣布传达圣旨的事寄托于他们，文书嘱托亦归他们所管，皇宫内外消息的交流传递，都与他们密切相关。
English: They are entrusted with matters concerning the proclamation and transmission of the Holy Will, and they are also in charge of the entrustment of documents. The exchange and transmission of information inside and outside the Imperial Palace are closely related to them.

古文：若夫环缨敛笏，俯仰晨昏，瞻幄座而竦躬，陪兰槛而高眄，探求恩色，习睹威颜，迁兰变鲍，久而弥信，因城社之固，执开壅之机。
现代文：至于说戴着官帽手持笏板，早晚朝请，每天耸立鞠躬，陪立于大殿栏杆边而向高处观看，习惯于探求皇上脸色，潜移默化，时间长了，愈发受到宠信，凭藉自己强大的靠山，控制各种机关。
English: As for wearing an official cap and holding a scepter, in the morning and evening, every day, he stood up and bowed, accompanied by standing on the edge of the hall railing and looking up, accustomed to exploring the emperor's face, gradually, over time, he became more and more favored, and controlled various organs with his strong support.

古文：长主君世，振裘持领，赏罚事殷，能不逾漏，宫省咳唾，义必先知。
现代文：长期把持国家大事，提纲挈领，众多赏罚之事，都能不拖延时刻，宫内宫外的动静，必定事先知晓。
English: Long-term control of national affairs, the outline of policies, and many rewards and punishments can be done without delay. The movements inside and outside the palace must be known in advance.

古文：故能窥盈缩于望景，获骊珠于龙睡。
现代文：所以他们能在月圆之时看出其盈缺变化，能于龙睡觉之时获得骊珠。
English: Therefore, they can see the change of their surplus and shortage when the moon is full, and can obtain the pearl when the dragon is sleeping.

古文：坐归声势，卧震都鄙。
现代文：坐在那裹声望权势归属于他，躺在那裹威风震动都城乡野。
English: Sitting there wrapped in prestige, power belongs to him, lying there wrapped in majesty, shaking the capital and the countryside.

古文：贿赂日积，苞苴岁通。富拟公侯，威行州郡。
现代文：贿赂一天天积蓄，礼物年年增多，像公侯一样富有，威风横行于州郡。
English: Bribes are accumulating day by day, gifts are increasing year by year, they are as rich as princes, and power is rampant in prefectures and counties.

古文：制局小司，专典兵力，云陛天居，互设兰锜，羽林精卒，重屯广卫。
现代文：制局这样的小官署，专权主管兵力。地位尊贵，出入常设置兵器架，羽林军精兵重重叠叠地驻屯护卫。
English: A small government agency such as the Bureau of Construction, the military force in charge of the exclusive power. The status is noble, the weapons rack is often set up, and the elite soldiers of the Ulin Army are stationed in overlapping guards.

古文：至于元戎启辙，式候还麾，遮迾清道，神行案辔，督察来往，驰骛辇毂，驱役分部，亲承几案，领护所摄，示总成规。若征兵动众，大兴民役，行留之仪，请托在手；断割牢禀，卖弄文符，捕叛追亡，长戍远谪；军有千龄之寿，室无百年之鬼。害政伤民，于此为蠹。
现代文：至于大将出行，或式候还都，则列队遮拦，清扫道路，疾驰慢行，监督来往之人，奔跑于皇帝车边，驱遣役使，分配部署，亲自承接皇命，率领所属，集结总领，白成常规、如若征兵动众，大兴民役，去留的准则，私自决定，割断军粮的供给，卖弄官府的文书诏命，缉捕叛逆、追索逃亡，让他们长期戍守边防或者远谪他乡军中有千年的寿龄，室中没有百年的鬼魂，侵害国家政治，伤害姓，在这点 他们是天下的蠹虫。
English: As for the general's travel, or waiting for the capital, they will line up to block, sweep the road, speed up and slow down, supervise the people coming and going, run alongside the emperor's car, drive the envoys, distribute the deployment, personally undertake the imperial order, lead the subordinates, assemble the general leader, become a routine, such as if conscription is popular, Daxing civil service, the criteria for going and staying, private decision, cut off the supply of military food, show off the government's written order, arrest rebellion, pursue escape, let them long-term hold the border or go far away, the army has a thousand years of age, there is

古文：况乎主幼时昏，其为谗慝，亦何可胜纪也！
现代文：何况皇上年幼时代昏暗，他们所做的用谗言蒙蔽君主的行为，又如何写得清呢。
English: What's more, the emperor's early years were dark, and how can the actions they took to deceive the monarch with slander be written clearly?

古文：赞曰：恩泽而侯，亲幸为旧。
现代文：赞曰：受到恩惠而成为侯，因为有老交情而被宠幸。
English: Zang said: I was favored to become a Hou, and I was favored because I had old friendships.

古文：便烦左右，既贵且富。
现代文：花言巧语善于逢迎的近臣，既尊贵又富足。
English: A close retainer who is good at flattering is both honorable and rich.

