古文：卢文纪，字子持，京兆万年人。
现代文：卢文纪，字子持，京兆万年人。
English: Lu Wenqi, Zizi holding, Jingzhao Wanrenrenren.

古文：案：此下有阙文。长兴末，为太常卿。
现代文：后唐长兴末年，任太常卿。
English: In the last years of the post-Tang Changxing, he was appointed as Tai Changqing.

古文：文纪形貌魁伟，语音高朗，占对铿锵，健于饮啖。
现代文：卢文纪相貌魁武伟岸，声音高昂清朗，对答响亮铿锵，饮食量大。
English: Lu Wenji's appearance is strong and powerful, his voice is high and clear, his answers are loud and clear, and his diet is large.

古文：奉使蜀川，路由岐下，时唐末帝为岐帅，以主礼待之，观其仪形旨趣，遇之颇厚。
现代文：奉命出使川蜀，经过岐下，当时唐末帝为岐下主帅，以主人的身分礼遇接待他，观察卢文纪的仪态志趣，招待颇为周到热情。
English: He was ordered to send an envoy to Chuanshu, passing through Qishita. At that time, the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty was the coach of Qishita, and he received him with courtesy as the master. He observed Lu Wenji's manners and interests, and the invitation was quite thoughtful and enthusiastic.

古文：清泰初，中书阙辅相，末帝访之于朝，左右曰： 臣见班行中所誉，当大拜者，姚顗、卢文纪、崔居俭耳。 
现代文：清泰初年，中书省缺宰相，末帝在朝臣中寻找，身旁臣子说： 我们看见一班朝廷中有名望，当授以重任的，不过姚岂页、卢文纪、崔居俭而已。 
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, there was a shortage of prime ministers in the province of calligraphy, so the last emperor looked for them among the courtiers. The courtiers around him said, "We saw a group of people in the imperial court who are famous and should be given important responsibilities, but they are only Yao Qizhe, Lu Wenji, and Cui Juzhen.

古文：或品藻三人才行，其心愈惑。
现代文：又比较过三人的文才德行，更不知如何是好。
English: I have also compared the literary talents and virtues of the three people, and I don't know what to do.

古文：末帝乃俱书当时清望达官数人姓名，投琉璃瓶中，月夜焚香，祷请于天，旭旦以箸挟之，首得文纪之名，次即姚顗。
现代文：末帝于是将当时多位有清名的高官姓名写在纸条上，投进琉璃瓶中，在月夜焚香，向上天祷告祈求，第二天一早用筷子挟纸团，第一下就挟到了写有卢文纪名字的纸团，其次就是姚岂页。
English: The last emperor then wrote the names of many well-known high-ranking officials at that time on a piece of paper, put it in a glass bottle, burned incense on a moonlit night, prayed to the heavens, and the next morning used chopsticks to hold the paper group. At first, he held a paper group with the name of Lu Wenji, followed by Yao Qizhe.

古文：末帝素已奇待，欢然命之，即授中书侍郎、同平章事，与姚顗同升相位。
现代文：末帝早希望如此，便欣然任命他们，授卢文纪为中书侍郎、同平章事，与姚岂页一同登上相位。
English: The last emperor had long hoped for this, and he gladly appointed them, conferring Lu Wenji as the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, Tongping Zhangji, and ascended the stage together with Yao Xizhe.

古文：时朝廷兵革之后，宗社甫宁，外寇内侵，强臣在境。
现代文：当时朝廷在战乱之后，国家刚刚安宁，外有寇兵入侵，内有强臣在境。
English: At that time, the imperial court was in turmoil after the war, the country had just been pacified, there was an invasion of invaders from the outside, and there were strong ministers in the country.

古文：文纪处经纶之地，无辅弼之谋，所论者爱憎朋党之小瑕，所纠者铨选拟抡之微类。
现代文：卢文纪身处国家中枢之地，却没有治国安邦的大计，所谈论的是所憎朋党的小过失，所纠查的是选举任免的小事情。
English: Lu Wenji is in the center of the country, but he does not have a grand plan to govern the country. What he talks about is the small mistakes of the party he hates, and what he investigates are the small things of election, appointment and removal.

古文：时有蜀人史在德为太常丞，出入权要之门，评品朝士，多有讥弹，乃上章云： 文武两班，宜选能进用。
现代文：当时有叫史在德的蜀人任太常丞，进入权贵要人家庭，评论比较朝廷众官，多有讥讽抨击，呈上奏章说： 文武两班官员，应选择有才干的人提拔使用。
English: At that time, there was a Shu man named Shi Zande named Ren Taizhong, who entered the family of a powerful and important person. He commented on the comparison of the imperial court officials, mostly with ridicule and criticism, and presented a report saying: The officials of the two classes of literature and military affairs should choose talented people to promote and use.

古文：见在军都将校、朝廷士大夫，并请阅试澄汰，能者进用，否者黜退，不限名位高下。 
现代文：现有的军都将校和朝廷士大夫，请均加以审核考察，分别删汰，有才干的提拔任用，无能平庸的罢免屏弃，不限于名位的高低。 
English: Existing generals and imperial doctors, please review and examine them, and delete them separately, promote and appoint the talented, and dismiss the incompetent and mediocre, not limited to the level of the rank.

古文：疏下中书，文纪以为非己，怒甚，召谏议大夫卢损为覆状，辞旨芜漫，为众所嗤。
现代文：奏疏上到中书省，卢文纪认为这是非议自己，非常生气，召来谏议大夫卢损写成答复的公文，文辞意义混乱芜杂，被众人讥笑。
English: Lu Wenji thought that this was a reproach to himself, and he was very angry. He summoned the reproach doctor Lu Qi to write a reply document. The meaning of the words was confused and mixed, and he was ridiculed by everyone.

古文：三年夏，晋祖引契丹拒命，既而大军挫衄，官寨受围。
现代文：唐末帝清泰三年，晋高祖领来契丹人与朝廷抗命，不久朝廷大军受挫，军营被围。
English: In the third year of Qing Tai, the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty, Jingao Zu led the Khitan people and the imperial court to disobey orders. Soon, the imperial army suffered a setback, and the military camp was surrounded.

古文：八月，亲征，过徽陵，拜于阙下，休于仗舍。文纪扈从，帝顾谓之曰： 朕闻主忧臣辱，予自凤翔来，首命卿为宰相，听人所论，将为便致太平，今寇孽纷纷，令万乘自行战贼，于汝安乎？ 
现代文：八月，末帝亲征，卢文纪随从，末帝对他说： 我听说君主忧虑是臣子的耻辱，我从凤翔到京即位，首先任您做宰相，听别人议论，说您将使国家太平，现在贼寇纷扰，让我以皇上的身分亲自出征与贼寇作战，你内心也安宁吗？ 
English: In August, the last emperor personally led the expedition, and Lu Wenji followed. The last emperor said to him, "I heard that it is a disgrace for a vassal to worry about the emperor. I ascended the throne from Fengxiang to Beijing. First, I appointed you as prime minister, listened to others' discussions, and said that you would make the country peaceful. Now, the bandits are causing trouble. Let me personally go out to fight the bandits as the emperor. Are you at peace?

古文：文纪惶恐致谢。
现代文：卢文纪惶恐致歉。
English: Lu Wenji panicked and apologized.

古文：时末帝季年，天夺其魄，声言救寨，其实倦行。
现代文：当时末帝在晚年，已失去了锐气，声称援救唐军营寨，实际上厌倦出征。
English: At that time, the late emperor, in his old age, had lost his spirit, claiming to rescue the Tang army camp, but actually tired of going to war.

古文：初次河阳，召文纪、张延朗谋议。
现代文：开始到达河阳时，末帝召来卢文纪、张延朗商议。
English: When he first arrived in Kheyang, the late emperor summoned Lu Wenji and Zhang Yanlang for consultation.

古文：文纪曰： 敌骑倏往忽来，无利则去，大寨牢固，足以枝梧，况已有三处救兵，可以不战而解。
现代文：卢文纪说： 敌人骑兵忽来忽往，无利可图就离开，我军大营牢固，足以相抗衡，况且已有三处救兵来到，可以不战而解大营之围，派人去督促，责令他们战胜，御驾暂时停在河桥，详观形势的变化。
English: Lu Wenji said: The enemy cavalry comes and goes, and leaves when it is not profitable. Our army's large camp is strong enough to compete. Moreover, three rescuers have come, which can relieve the encirclement of the large camp without fighting. Send someone to urge and order them to win. Stop at the river bridge for a while to observe the changes in the situation in detail.

古文：使人督促，责以成功，舆驾且驻河桥，详观事势，况地处舟车之要，正当天下之心，必若未能解围，去亦非晚。 
现代文：河桥地处舟车往来的交通要道，正当天下的中心地带，即使不能解除大营的包围，再离开此地前征也不晚。 
English: Heqiao is located on a major transportation route for boats and cars, and is the center of the world. Even if the encirclement of the large camp cannot be lifted, it is not too late to leave this place and march forward.

古文：会延朗与赵延寿款密，傍奏曰： 文纪之言是也。 
现代文：恰好这时张延朗正与契丹赵延寿暗中勾通，于是在旁边上奏说： 卢文纪的话是对的。 
English: Just at this time, Zhang Yanlang was secretly colluding with the Khitan Zhao Yanshou, so he said in an aside: Lu Wenji's words are right.

古文：故令延寿北行，末帝坐俟其败。
现代文：所以只令赵延寿北往，末帝坐等大营的失败。
English: As a result, Zhao Yanshou was forced to head north, while the last emperor waited for the defeat of the great camp.

古文：晋祖入洛，罢相为吏部尚书，再迁太子少傅。
现代文：晋高祖进入洛阳后，罢免卢文纪相位，任吏部尚书，再迁任太子少傅。
English: After Jin Gaozu entered Luoyang, he was removed from the position of Lu Wenji, appointed as the secretary of the cadre department, and then transferred to the position of the prince's younger brother.

古文：少帝嗣位，改太子太傅。
现代文：少帝即位，改任太子太傅。
English: The young emperor ascended the throne and was appointed Crown Prince and Grand Duke.

古文：汉祖登极，转太子太师。
现代文：汉高祖即位，转任太子太师。
English: Emperor Gaozu ascended the throne and was appointed Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：时朝官分司在洛，虽有留台御史，纪纲亦多不整肃，遂敕文纪别令检辖。
现代文：当时朝官有部分在洛阳任职，虽设有留台御史予以监察，但朝纲法纪不甚严整，于是另令卢文纪去检察统辖。
English: At that time, some of the imperial officials worked in Luoyang, and although there was an imperial historian to supervise them, the imperial legal code was not very strict, so Lu Wenji was ordered to go to the procuratorate.

古文：侍御史赵砺及纠分司朝臣中有行香拜表疏怠者，杨邠怒，凡疾病不在朝谒者，皆与致仕官。
现代文：侍御史赵砺以及洛阳的朝官中有举行行香拜佛之礼而放松上表奏疏的，杨大怒，凡有疾病而不朝拜谒见的人，都让他们辞官退休。
English: Yang Dafuang was furious that some of the imperial officials in Luoyang and Zhao Ye, the attendant of the imperial secretary, held a ritual of incense and Buddha worship to relax their stiff upper lip. Anyone who was ill and did not pay homage to the emperor was asked to retire.

古文：时文纪别令检辖之职，颇甚滋章，因疾请假，复为留台所奏，遂以本官致仕。
现代文：这时卢文纪另任检察统辖之职，事情非常麻烦，因病请假，又被留台御史报告皇上，于是以本官的身分让他退休。
English: At this time, Lu Wenji was appointed to another post under the procuratorate, and things were very troublesome. He took a leave of absence due to illness, and was left to report to the emperor, so he retired as his own official.

古文：广顺元年夏卒，年七十六。赠司徒，辍视朝一日。
现代文：广顺元年夏天去世，年七十六岁，追赠为司徒，皇上为他停止上朝两天。
English: Guang Shun died in the summer of the first year of the year, at the age of seventy-six. He was posthumously awarded the title of Stut, and the emperor stopped his ascension to the throne for two days.

古文：文纪平生积财巨万，及卒，为其子龟龄所费，不数年间，以至荡尽，由是多藏者以为诫焉。
现代文：卢文纪一生积累亿万财富，他死后，被他儿子卢龟龄糜费，不到几年，挥霍殆尽，因此家多积蓄的人都以此为戒。
English: Lu Wenji accumulated hundreds of millions of wealth in his lifetime. After his death, he was squandered away by his son, Lu Jiaoling, within a few years. Therefore, people who have more savings in their family should take this as a warning.

