古文：觐礼。至于郊，王使人皮弁用璧劳。
现代文：朝觐的礼仪：指侯到达王城的近郊，天子派人穿皮弁服，用玉去慰劳。
English: The etiquette of the hajj: When the pilgrims reach the outskirts of the royal city, the Son of Heaven sends someone to wear a leather bento and comfort them with jade.

古文：侯氏亦皮弁迎于帷门之外，再拜。使者不答拜，遂执玉，三揖。
现代文：诸侯也穿皮弁服在帷宫门外迎接，两次行拜礼，使者不回拜，拿着璧玉前行，诸侯三次拱手行礼。
English: The lords also wore leather jackets to meet outside the gate of the Curtain Palace. They performed two prostrations. The messenger did not return the prostration, but marched forward holding the gems. The lords bowed three times.

古文：至于阶，使者不让，先升。
现代文：到台阶前，使者不谦让，先登坛。
English: Before reaching the steps, the emissary did not make any concessions and ascended the altar first.

古文：侯氏升听命，降，再拜稽首，遂升受玉。
现代文：诸侯登坛听取天子的命令，下坛再拜稽首，然后登坛接受璧玉。
English: The princes ascended the altar to listen to the order of the heavenly son, then bowed their heads, and then ascended the altar to receive the gems.

古文：使者左还而立，侯氏还璧，使者受。
现代文：使者向左转身站立，诸侯送还璧玉，使者接受。
English: The envoy turned to the left and stood up. The princes returned the gems, and the envoy accepted them.

古文：侯氏降，再拜稽首，使者乃出。
现代文：诸侯下坛，再拜稽首，然后使者出。
English: The princes go down from the altar, bow their heads again, and then the emissaries leave.

古文：侯氏及止使者，使者乃入。
现代文：诸侯于是阻止使者离去，使者于是又进入。
English: The princes then prevented the messenger from leaving, and the messenger then re-entered.

古文：侯氏与之让升。
现代文：诸侯和使者相互谦让登坛。
English: Princes and emissaries humbly make room for each other on the altar.

古文：侯氏先升，授几。
现代文：诸侯先登坛，把几交给使者。
English: The lords ascended the altar first, and gave some to the messenger.

古文：侯氏拜送几；使者设几，答拜。
现代文：诸侯为送上几行拜礼。使者放下几，回拜。
English: Princes send up a few lines of prayer. Emissaries send down a few, and they are returned.

古文：侯氏用束帛、乘马傧使者，使者再拜受。
现代文：诸侯用束帛、四匹马做礼物送给使者表示敬意，使者两次行拜礼接受。
English: The lords presented the envoy with a gift of a yakitori and four horses to show their respect, and the envoy received them with two rounds of prayer.

古文：侯氏再拜送币。
现代文：诸侯为送上礼物两次行拜礼。
English: The lords made two pilgrimages in order to present the gifts.

古文：使者降，以左骖出。
现代文：使者下坛，牵着左边的马出门。
English: The messenger comes down from the altar and leads the horse on the left out of the door.

古文：侯氏送于门外，再拜。
现代文：诸侯送到门外，两次行拜礼。
English: The princes were sent outside the gate, and they prayed twice.

古文：侯氏遂从之。
现代文：诸侯于是随使者到朝。
English: The princes therefore followed the emissary to the court.

古文：天子赐舍，曰： 伯父，女顺命于王所，赐伯父舍！ 
现代文：天子赐给诸侯馆舍。使者说： 伯父，您顺命到天子的地方朝觐，天子赐给伯父馆舍。 
English: The messenger said, "Uncle, you have been commanded to make a pilgrimage to the place of the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven has given my uncle a house.

古文：侯氏再拜稽首，傧之束帛、乘马。
现代文：诸侯再拜稽首。把束帛和四匹马送给使者表示敬意。
English: The lords bowed their heads again. To show their respect, they gave the messenger a saddle and four horses.

古文：天子使大夫戒，曰： 某日，伯父帅乃初事。 
现代文：天子派大夫通告说： 某天，伯父依循朝觐旧典朝拜。 
English: Tianzi sent the doctor a notice saying, "One day, my uncle went to pay homage in accordance with the old custom of the hajj.

古文：侯氏再拜稽首。
现代文：诸侯再拜稽首。
English: The lords bow their heads again.

古文：诸侯前朝，皆受舍于朝。
现代文：众诸侯在朝觐的前一天，都在文王庙门外接受天子赐予的馆舍。
English: On the day before the hajj, all the lords accepted the buildings given by the Son of Heaven outside the gate of the King Wen Temple.

古文：同姓西面北上，异姓东面北上。
现代文：同姓诸侯面朝西以北为上位；异姓诸侯面朝东以北为上位。
English: Princes with the same family name ranked higher in the west than in the north; princes with different family names ranked higher in the east than in the north.

古文：侯氏裨冕，释币于祢。
现代文：诸侯穿裨衣，戴冕冠，到祢庙放下礼物。
English: Princes wear robes, crowns and wreaths, and leave gifts at Your temple.

古文：乘墨车，载龙旂、弧韣乃朝以瑞玉，有缫。
现代文：乘坐墨车，车上载有交龙图饰的旗，张挂龙旗的弓、盛弓的套子，带着有丝垫的圭玉去朝觐天子。
English: He rode in a chariot with a dragon-drawing flag, a dragon-drawing bow, a set of bows, and a silk-padded jewel to the Imperial Court.

古文：天子设斧依于户牖之间，左右几。
现代文：天子在室的门、窗中间摆设绣有斧状图案的屏风，屏风左右是玉几。
English: In the middle of the door and window of the room, Tianzi set up a screen embroidered with an axe-shaped pattern. Around the screen is a jade table.

古文：天子衮冕，负斧依。
现代文：天子穿着衮衣，戴着冕冠，背向屏风站立。
English: The heavenly son is dressed in a robe and crown, standing with his back to the screen.

古文：啬夫承命，告于天子。
现代文：啬夫把诸侯的话传给上摈，上摈报告给天子。
English: The miser passed on the words of the lords to the chief eunuch, and the chief eunuch reported to the emperor.

古文：天子曰： 非他，伯父实来，予一人嘉之。
现代文：天子说： 不是别人，是伯父为朝觐而来，我嘉奖他。
English: The heavenly son said, "It was no one else but my uncle who came for the Hajj, and I commend him.

古文：伯父其入，予一人将受之。 侯氏入门右，坐奠圭，再拜稽首。
现代文：让伯父进来，我接待他。 诸侯从门的右边进入，跪着放置圭玉，再拜稽首。
English: Let my uncle come in, and I will receive him.The princes enter from the right side of the door, kneel down and place the key stone, and then bow their heads.

古文：摈者谒。
现代文：上摈向天子报告。
English: Go to heaven and report.

古文：侯氏坐取圭，升致命。
现代文：诸侯跪下拿取圭玉，登堂表述来意。
English: The lords knelt down to take the key gems and went to the hall to express their thoughts.

古文：王受之玉。
现代文：天子接受他的圭玉。
English: The Son of God accepts his lot.

古文：侯氏降，阶东北面再拜稽首。
现代文：诸侯下堂，在西阶东边面朝北再拜稽首。
English: The princes went down to the hall and bowed their heads facing north on the east side of the west steps.

古文：摈者延之，曰： 升！ 
现代文：摈者延请他说： 请登堂。 
English: Shangguan Yan invited the lords to say: Please come to the hall.

古文：升成拜，乃出。
现代文：诸侯登堂再拜稽首，然后出门。
English: The princes go to court, bow their heads, and then go out.

古文：四享皆束帛加璧，庭实唯国所有。
现代文：三次进献都用束帛放上璧玉，庭实只用进献国所出产的物品。
English: All three offerings were made with bundles of jade beads, and only items made in the country of the offering were used.

古文：奉束帛，匹马卓上，九马随之，中庭西上，奠币，再拜稽首。
现代文：诸侯捧着束帛，有甲素旳书着国名的一匹马在前，其余九匹马随在后边，陈列在中庭，以西为上位，诸侯放下礼物，再拜稽首。
English: The princes hold bundles of straw. A horse with the name of the country written on its crest is in front, and the remaining nine horses follow behind. They are displayed in the atrium, with the west at the top. The princes put down their gifts and bow their heads.

古文：摈者曰： 予一人将受之。 
现代文：摈者说： 天子将接受礼物。 
English: The eunuch said, "The Son of God will receive gifts."

古文：侯氏升，致命。
现代文：诸侯登堂表述来意。
English: This is the meaning of the expression "the princes enter the hall."

古文：王抚玉。
现代文：天子抚摸圭玉。
English: The Son of Heaven caresses Gui Yue.

古文：侯氏降自西阶，东面授宰币，西阶前再拜稽首，以马出，授人，九马随之。
现代文：诸侯由西阶下堂，面朝东把礼物交给太宰。在西阶前再拜稽首。诸侯牵着一匹马出来，交给天子的人，九匹马跟随着出来。
English: The lords went down the hall from the west steps, facing east, to give the gift to the Dazaifu. They bowed their heads again in front of the west steps. The lords led a horse out and handed it to the man of God, followed by nine horses.

古文：事毕。
现代文：三次进献完毕。
English: The three presentations are over.

古文：乃右肉袒于庙门之东。乃入门右，北面立，告听事。摈者谒诸天子。
现代文：然后，诸侯在庙门的东边袒露右臂，由门的右边进入，面朝北站立，告诉上摈转告天子： 自己要报告自己所做之事并听从天子处理。 
English: Then, the princes exposed their right arm on the east side of the temple gate, entered from the right side of the gate, stood facing north, and told the upper gate to tell the heavenly son: I want to report what I have done and listen to the heavenly son.

古文：天子辞于侯氏，曰： 伯父无事，归宁乃邦！ 
现代文：上摈把诸侯的话报告给天子。天子对诸侯说： 伯父没做有过失的事，回去用心治理、安定你的邦国。 
English: The chief eunuch reported the words of the lords to the heavenly son. The heavenly son said to the lords: Uncle did not do anything wrong, go back and govern and stabilize your country with your heart.

古文：侯氏再拜稽首，出，自屏南适门西，遂入门左，北面立，王劳之。
现代文：诸侯再拜稽首，出来。由屏风的南边到门的西边，穿好上衣，然后从门的左边进入，面朝北站立。天子慰劳他。
English: The princes bowed their heads again and came out. They walked from the south side of the screen to the west side of the door, put on their coats, then entered from the left side of the door and stood facing north. The Son of Heaven consoled him.

古文：再拜稽首。
现代文：诸侯再拜稽首。
English: Comrade Zicheng kowtows again.

古文：摈者延之，曰： 升！ 
现代文：上摈延请诸侯说： 请登堂。 
English: Shangguan Yan invited the lords to say: Please come to the hall.

古文：升成拜，降出。
现代文：诸侯登堂再拜稽首，下堂出去。
English: The princes bowed their heads again as they entered the hall, and then left.

古文：天子赐侯氏以车服。迎于外门外，再拜。
现代文：天子赐给诸侯车辆，命服，诸侯到大门外迎接，再拜稽首。
English: The Son of Heaven gave the lords vehicles and life jackets. The lords went outside the gate to greet them and bow their heads.

古文：路先设，西上，路下四，亚之，重赐无数，在车南。
现代文：车先摆放，以西为上位，驾车的四匹马挨着车从东陈列。贵重的赏赐不计数，陈列在车的南边。
English: The chariot is placed at the front, with the west at the top, and the four horses driving the chariot are displayed next to the chariot from the east. Countless valuable rewards are displayed on the south side of the chariot.

古文：诸公奉箧服，加命书于其上，升自西阶，东面，大史是右。
现代文：三公捧着装有命服的箱子，天子的诏书放在箱上，由西阶登堂，面朝东，太史在他的右边。
English: San Gong holds a box containing a life jacket. The emperor's edict is placed on the box. He enters the hall from the west steps, facing east. Taishi is on his right.

古文：侯氏升，西面立。
现代文：诸侯登堂，面朝西站立。
English: The princes entered the hall and stood facing west.

古文：大史述命。
现代文：太史宣读天子诏书。
English: Taishi read out the Imperial Rescript.

古文：侯氏降两阶之间；北面再拜稽首，升成拜。
现代文：诸侯下堂，在东西阶之间，面朝北再拜稽首。登堂再拜稽首。
English: The princes go down the hall, between the east and west steps, face north and bow again. They go up the hall and bow again.

古文：大史加书于服上，侯氏受。
现代文：太史把诏书放在命服上，诸侯接受。
English: Emperor Taishi put the imperial edict on his life jacket, and the lords accepted it.

古文：使者出。
现代文：使者出去。
English: Send out the messengers.

古文：侯氏送，再拜，傧使者，诸公赐服者，束帛、四马，傧大史亦如之。
现代文：诸侯送行，两次行拜礼。送礼物给使者表达敬意，送给赐予命服的三公的是束帛和四匹马。送给太史的礼物也是如此。
English: The princes saw him off and performed two religious services. Gifts were given to the envoy to show their respect, and the three princes who were given their life jackets were given a sash and four horses. The same was true of the gifts given to Taishi.

古文：同姓大国则曰伯父，其异姓则曰伯舅。
现代文：对同姓大国国君，就称 伯父 ；对异姓大国国君，就称 伯舅 。
English: For those with the same surname as Okuni no Kuni, they are called uncles; for those with a different surname, they are called uncles.

古文：同姓小邦则曰叔父，其异姓小邦则曰叔舅。
现代文：对同姓小国国君，就称 叔父 ；对异姓小国国君就称 叔舅 。
English: People with the same surname as Oguni no Kuni are called "uncle"; people with a different surname than Oguni no Kuni are called "uncle."

古文：飨，礼，乃归。
现代文：行过飨礼、食礼、燕礼后，诸侯才归国。
English: The lords returned to the country only after they had performed the imperial salute, the meal salute, and the swallow salute.

古文：诸侯觐于天子，为宫方三百步，四门，坛十有二寻、深四尺，加方明于其上。
现代文：诸侯到天子的地方朝觐，要在国门外方圆三百步壝土为宫墙，有四个门。用土筑坛，方圆九十六尺，高四尺，把上下四方神明的像放在坛上。
English: The princes went to the place of the son of heaven for a pilgrimage. They had to dig a mound of earth three hundred paces outside the gate to make a wall for the palace. There were four gates. They built an altar of earth, ninety-six feet in circumference and four feet high, and placed the statues of the gods in the four directions on the altar.

古文：方明者，木也，方四尺，设六色，东方青，南方赤，西方白，北方黑，上玄，下黄。
现代文：上下四方神明的像是木制的。四尺见方，涂六种颜色；东方青色，南方赤色，西方白色，北方黑色，上方玄色，下方黄色。
English: The wooden statues of the four deities are four feet square and painted in six colors: blue in the east, red in the south, white in the west, black in the north, black above and yellow below.

古文：设六玉，上圭，下璧，南方璋，西方琥，北方璜，东方圭。
现代文：用六种玉装饰：上为圭；下为璧；南方璋；西方琥；北方璜；东方圭。
English: It is decorated with six kinds of beads: the upper one is Gui; the lower one is Bi; the southern one is Gui; the western one is Gui; the northern one is Gui; the eastern one is Gui.

古文：上介皆奉其君之旂，置于宫，尚左。
现代文：上介都捧着他的国君的旗，树在宫中，以左边为上位。
English: The higher-ups are all holding the flags of their sovereigns, and the tree is in the middle of the palace, with the one on the left being higher.

古文：公、侯、伯、子、男，皆就其旂而立。
现代文：公、侯、伯、子、男，都靠近他的旗子站立。
English: Princes, lords, great-grandfathers, sons, men, all stood close to his banner.

古文：四传摈。天子乘龙，载大旂，像日月、升龙、降龙；出，拜日于东门之外，反祀方明。
现代文：摈者四次传命，天子乘坐龙马驾的车，车上载着太常旗，旗上画有日月升龙、降龙的图案。
English: The eunuch passed on his life four times, and the heavenly son rode in a car driven by a dragon and a horse. The car was carrying the flag of Taizhong, and the flag was painted with the patterns of the rising and falling dragons of the sun and moon.

古文：礼日于南门外，礼月与四渎于北门外，礼山川丘陵于西门外。
现代文：出王城门，在南门外礼拜太阳，返回来在坛上祭祀上下四方神明，在南门外礼拜太阳，在北门外礼拜月亮和江、河、淮、济四水，在西门外礼拜山川丘陵。
English: Go out of the King's Gate, worship the sun outside the South Gate, return to worship the gods of the four directions on the altar, worship the sun outside the South Gate, worship the moon and the rivers, rivers, Huai and Jishui outside the North Gate, and worship the mountains and hills outside the West Gate.

古文：祭川，沉。祭地，瘗。记。
现代文：祭天，积柴焚烧；祭山、丘陵，要到高处；祭川要向水中投入祭物；祭地要埋牲、玉。
English: To offer sacrifices to the heavens, firewood should be burned; to offer sacrifices to the mountains and hills, it is necessary to go to a high place; to offer sacrifices to the rivers, it is necessary to throw offerings into the water; to offer sacrifices to the earth, it is necessary to bury animals and jade.

古文：几，俟于东箱。
现代文：几，放在东厢。
English: A few, placed in the east wing.

古文：偏驾不入王门。
现代文：偏驾的车不进入王门。
English: Cars that are driving too fast will not be allowed to enter the King's Gate.

古文：奠圭于缫上。
现代文：诸侯把圭放在缫上。
English: The lords put the key on the beak.

