古文：张纯子奋曹褒郑玄张纯字伯仁，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：◆张纯传，张纯，字伯仁，京兆杜陵人。
English: ◆Zhang Chun Chuan, Zhang Chun, Zhaofeng, Jing Zhaoduling.

古文：高祖父安世，宣帝时为大司马卫将军，封富平侯。
现代文：高祖父张安世，宣帝时做大司马卫将军，封富平侯。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zhang Anshi, was the grand secretary of General Ma Wei when Emperor Xuan was crowned.

古文：父放，为成帝侍中。
现代文：父亲张放，做过成帝的侍中。
English: His father, Zhang Fang, served as an aide-de-camp to Emperor Chengdu.

古文：纯少袭爵士，哀、平间为侍中，王莽时至列卿。
现代文：张纯少时承袭父亲的爵土，哀帝、平帝时做侍中，王莽时做到列卿。
English: When Zhang Chun was young, he inherited his father's noble land. When Emperor Ming and Emperor Ping, he was a chamberlain. When Emperor Wang Mang, he was a nobleman.

古文：遭值篡伪，多亡爵士，纯以敦谨守约，保全前封。
现代文：正遇王莽篡位，许多人失去了爵土，而张纯因为敦厚谨慎，遵守法制，得以保全前代的封号。
English: At the time of Wang Mang's usurpation, many people lost their peerage, but Zhang Chun was able to preserve the previous generation's title because he was prudent and obeyed the law.

古文：建武初，先来诣阙，故得复国。
现代文：建武初年，先到朝廷，所以得致复国。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, he went to the imperial court first, so he had to restore the country.

古文：五年，拜太中大夫，使将颍川突骑安集荆、徐、杨部，督委输，监诸将营。
现代文：五年，拜为太中大夫。朝廷派他统率颍川突骑安集荆州、徐州、杨部，督促转运，监督诸将营。
English: In the fifth year, he was appointed as the Taizhong Doctor. The imperial court sent him as the leader of the Qinchuan raid to Anji, Jingzhou, Xuzhou and Yangbu, to urge the transfer and supervise the general camp.

古文：反又将兵屯田南阳，迁五官中郎将。
现代文：后来又带兵屯田在南阳，升为五官中郎将。
English: Later, he led the troops to Tonden in Nanyang and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：有司奏，列侯非宗室不宜复国。
现代文：有官吏上奏，列侯不是刘姓宗室不应复国。
English: If there is a government official, the family of a vassal whose surname is not Liu should not be allowed to return to the country.

古文：光武曰： 张纯宿卫十有余年，其勿废，更封武始侯，食富平之半。 
现代文：光武帝说 ：张纯提任宿卫十多年，不能废止，改封为武始侯，俸禄取富平县的一半。 
English: Emperor Guangwu said: Zhang Chun has been appointed as a night watchman for more than ten years, it cannot be abolished, he will be renamed as Wuchihou, and his salary will be half of that of Fuping County.

古文：纯在朝历世，明习故事。
现代文：张纯在朝时间久，对旧事很熟悉。
English: Zhang Jun has been in the North for a long time and is very familiar with the past.

古文：建武初，旧章多阙，每有疑议，辄以访纯，自郊庙婚冠丧纪礼仪义，多所正定。
现代文：建武初年，旧章程多残缺，每有疑议，就去访问张纯。自郊庙祭祀、婚、冠、丧礼等仪节，多由张纯正定。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, many of the old regulations were incomplete. Whenever there was a doubt, he would visit Zhang Chun. From the suburban temples, rituals, marriages, crowns, funerals and other ceremonies were mostly determined by Zhang Chun.

古文：帝甚重之，以纯兼虎贲中郎将，数被引见，一日或至数四。
现代文：皇帝十分重视，用张纯兼任虎贲中郎将，多次被引见，有时一天引见四次。
English: The emperor attached great importance to Zhang Jun, who also served as the vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment, and was introduced to him many times, sometimes four times a day.

古文：纯以宗庙未定，昭穆失序，十九年，乃与太仆朱浮共奏言： 陛下兴于匹庶，荡涤天下，诛锄暴乱，兴继祖宗。窃以经义所纪，人事众心，虽实同创革，而名为中兴，宜奉先帝，恭承祭祀者也。
现代文：张纯认为宗庙未定，昭穆的次序紊乱，十九年，便与太仆朱浮一同上奏道： 陛下从百姓中兴起，平定天下，扫除暴乱，兴继祖宗的基业，臣下认为经义所载，人事众心，虽然实际等于创造革新，而名义上叫中兴，应该奉祀先帝，恭承祭祀大典。
English: Zhang Chun thought that the ancestral temple was undecided, and the order of Zhaomu was disordered. In nineteen years, he and the eunuch Zhu Fu jointly recited: His Majesty arose from the people, pacified the world, swept away the riots, and succeeded the ancestral inheritance. His subjects believed that it was written in the scriptures that the hearts of all people, although actually equal to creation and innovation, but nominally called Zhongxing, should worship the former emperor and respect the grand ceremony of sacrifice.

古文：元帝以来，宗庙奉祠高皇帝为受命祖，孝文皇帝为太宗，孝武皇帝为世宗，皆如旧制。
现代文：元帝以来，宗庙奉祀高皇帝为受命之祖，孝文皇帝为太宗，孝武皇帝为世宗，都照旧制办事。
English: Since the Yuan Dynasty, the ancestral temples have honored Emperor Gao as the designated ancestor, Emperor Xiaowen as the great ancestor, and Emperor Xiaowu as the world ancestor, and have all operated according to the old system.

古文：又立亲庙四世，推南顿君以上尽于舂陵节侯。
现代文：又立亲庙四世，推南顿君以上到舂陵节侯为止。
English: He was also the fourth generation to establish a family temple, and has been in charge of the temple from the time of Tun Nandun to the time of the Fuling Festival.

古文：礼，为人后者则为之子，既事大宗，则降其私亲。
现代文：按礼记所载，为人后者就算是他的儿子，既然侍奉元帝为大宗，就应降其私亲。
English: According to the etiquette, even if the latter is his son, since he served Emperor Yuan for a long time, he should give up his relatives.

古文：今禘祫高庙，陈序昭穆，而舂陵四世，君臣并列，以卑厕尊，不合礼意，设不遭王莽，而国嗣无寄，推求宗室，以陛下继统者，安得复顾私亲，违礼制乎？
现代文：现在礻帝礻合之祭行于高庙，陈列左昭右穆，而舂陵四世，君臣并列，卑位混在尊位，不合礼意。如果不遭王莽篡位，而国家嗣续无所寄托，推求宗室，用陛下继承先统，怎能又照顾私亲，违背礼制么？
English: At present, the festival of the enthronement of the emperor is held in the high temple, and the statues of the emperors and emperors are displayed side by side, and the emperors and ministers are side by side. It is not polite. If the throne is not usurped by the king, and the country has nothing to rely on, how can we take care of our relatives and violate the etiquette?

古文：昔高帝以自受命，不由太上，宣帝以孙后祖，不敢私亲，故为父立庙，独群臣侍祠。
现代文：从前高皇帝认为自己受命于天，不由太上，宣帝以孙立在祖后，不敢私亲，所以替父立庙，独群臣侍祠。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Gao believed that he was ordered by heaven, not by the Empress Dowager. Emperor Xuan placed his grandson on the throne after his mother, and did not dare to be unmarried. Therefore, he built a temple for his father and a small shrine for his retainers.

古文：臣愚谓宜除今亲庙，以则二帝旧典，愿下有司博采其议。 
现代文：臣的愚见认为该废除现在的亲庙，模仿二帝的旧典，希望下诏有司广泛听取意见。 
English: The minister's foolish view is that the current family temple should be abolished and the old scriptures of the two emperors should be imitated. He hopes that the emperor will listen to opinions widely.

古文：诏下公卿，大司徒戴涉、大司空窦融议： 宜以宣、元、成、哀、平五帝四世代今亲庙，宣、元皇帝尊为祖、父，可亲奉祠，成帝以下，有司行事，别为南顿君立皇考庙。
现代文：诏书下到公卿，大司徒戴涉、大司空窦融奏议道： 应以宣帝、元帝、成帝、哀帝、平帝等五帝四世代替今之宗庙，宣帝、元帝尊为祖、父，可亲奉祠，成帝以下，有司行事，另为南顿君立皇考庙。
English: The imperial decree was sent to the court nobles, and Dai Zhuang, the grand secretary, and Ku Dou, the grand secretary, argued in unison: The five emperors of four generations, including Xuan Di, Yuan Di, Cheng Di, Lai Di, and Ping Di, should be used as the current ancestral temple. Xuan Di and Yuan Di are respected as ancestors and fathers, and can be personally worshipped. Below Cheng Di, there are priests, and it is also the Nantong Royal Examination Temple.

古文：其祭上至舂陵节侯，群臣奉祠，以明尊尊之敬，亲亲之恩。 
现代文：它的祭祀上至舂陵节侯，群臣奉祠，以表明尊其所尊的敬意，亲其所亲的恩德。 
English: Its sacrificial rites go as far as the Fuling Festival, when a group of courtiers pay homage to the shrine to show their respect and gratitude.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：是时宗庙未备，自元帝以上，祭于洛阳高庙，成帝以下，祠于长安高庙，其南顿四世，随所在而祭焉。
现代文：这时宗庙不完备，从元帝以上，祭于洛阳高庙，成帝以下，祠于长安高庙，南顿君四世，随所在之处而祭祀。
English: At this time, the ancestral temple was not complete. From Emperor Yuan onward, sacrifices were held at the Luoyang High Temple. From Emperor Cheng below, the ancestral shrine was at the Chang'an High Temple, and Nandongjun IV was worshipped wherever he was.

古文：明年，纯代朱浮为太仆。
现代文：第二年，张纯代替朱浮做太仆。
English: The following year, Zhang Chun replaced Zhu Fu as Taibu.

古文：二十三年，代杜林为大司空。
现代文：二十三年代替杜林做大司空。
English: In the twenties and thirties, he was the chief aide to Du Lin.

古文：在位慕曹参之迹，务于无为，选辟椽史，皆知名大儒。
现代文：他在位时，羡慕曹参继承萧何的事迹，对旧法无所变更。选拔椽史，都是知名的大儒。
English: When he was on the throne, he envied Cao San for inheriting the deeds of Xiao He, and there was no change to the old law.

古文：明年，上穿阳渠，引洛水为漕，百姓得其利。
现代文：明年，把阳渠打通，引洛水为漕运，百姓得到好处。
English: Next year, the canals will be opened, the Luo River will be used for transportation, and the people will benefit.

古文：二十六年，诏纯曰： 禘、祫之祭，不行已久矣。 三年不为礼，礼必坏；三年不为乐，乐必崩 。
现代文：二十六年皇帝下诏给张纯道： 礻帝礻合的祭礼，好久没有举行了。古人说： 三年不为礼，礼必坏；三年不为乐，乐必崩。 
English: In the twenty-sixth year, the emperor issued an edict to Zhang Chundao: The festival of the enthronement of the emperor and the enthronement of the emperor has not been held for a long time. The ancients said: Three years without courtesy, courtesy will be bad; three years without pleasure, pleasure will be destroyed.

古文：宜据经典，详为其制。 
现代文：应根据经典，详细作出制度。 
English: A detailed system should be made in accordance with the classics.

古文：纯奏曰： 《礼》，三年一祫，五年一禘。
现代文：张纯奏道： 《礼记》上说，三年一礻合，五年一礻帝。
English: Zhang Chunso said: "The Book of Rites" says that every three years there is a marriage, and every five years there is an emperor.

古文：《春秋传》曰： 大祫者何？
现代文：《春秋》传说 ：大礻合者何？
English: "Spring and Autumn" legend: What is the great unifier?

古文：合祭也。 
现代文：合祭也。 
English: It's also the end of the festival.

古文：毁庙及未毁庙之主皆登，合食乎太祖，五年而再殷。
现代文：毁庙和未毁庙之主都列在上面，合食在太祖之庙，五年再举行一次。
English: The head of the destroyed temple and the head of the undestroyed temple are listed above, and the meal is held in the temple of the great ancestor, and it will be held again in five years.

古文：汉旧制三年一祫，毁庙主合良高庙，存庙主未尝合祭。
现代文：汉朝的旧制三年一礻合，毁庙之主合食于高庙，存庙之主不曾合祭。
English: According to the old system of the Han Dynasty, there was a festival every three years. The head of the temple that was destroyed had a festival at the high temple, while the head of the temple that survived did not have a festival.

古文：元始五年，诸王公列侯庙会，始为禘祭。
现代文：元始五年诸王公列侯庙会，才开始礻帝祭。
English: It was not until the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty that the Kings and Princes Temple Festival began.

古文：又前十八年亲幸长安，亦行此礼。
现代文：又前十八年，皇帝亲自到长安，也行这礼。
English: Eighteen years ago, the emperor himself came to Chang'an to perform this ceremony.

古文：礼说三年一闰，天气小备；五年再闰，天气大备。
现代文：礼说三年一闰，天气小备，五年再闰，天气大备。
English: It is said that if there is a leap year in three years, the weather will be better, and if there is a leap year in five years, the weather will be better.

古文：故三年一祫，五年一禘。
现代文：所以三年举行一次礻合礼，五年举行一次礻帝礼。
English: Therefore, the enthronement ceremony is held once every three years and the enthronement ceremony is held once every five years.

古文：禘之为言谛，谛定昭穆尊卑之义也。
现代文：礻帝就是谛的意思，谛定昭穆尊卑的意思。
English: "Shan Di" is the meaning of "Essence" and "Essence" is the meaning of "Zhao Mu" and "Xiao Mu."

古文：禘祭以夏四月，夏者阳气在上，阴气在下，故正尊卑之义也。
现代文：礻帝祭在夏四月，夏天阳气在上，阴气在下，所以正尊卑的意思。
English: The Summer Emperor Festival is held in the summer in April. In the summer, the yang is up and the yin is down, so the meaning of positive and inferior is high.

古文：祫祭以冬十月，冬者五谷成孰，物备礼成，故合聚饮食也。
现代文：礻合祭在冬十月，冬天五谷成熟，物备礼成，所以合聚饮食。
English: The festival is held in winter and October. In winter, the grain is ripe and the food is well-prepared, so people eat together.

古文：斯典之废，于兹八年，谓可如礼施行，以时定议。 
现代文：这个典礼废掉已经八年，可以照礼办事，按时定下来。 
English: It's been eight years since this ceremony was abolished, so it can be done according to etiquette and set on time.

古文：定从之，自是禘、祫遂定。
现代文：皇帝听从了，从此礻帝、礻合的祭祀就规定下来了。
English: The emperor obeyed, and from then on, the sacrificial rites of enthroning the emperor and embracing the emperor were prescribed.

古文：时，南单于及乌桓来降，边境无事，百姓新去兵革，岁仍有年，家给人足。
现代文：当时南单于和乌桓来投降，边境无事，百姓刚刚去掉兵革，年成很好，家给人足。
English: At that time, Nan Danyu and Wu Huan came to surrender, there was no trouble at the border, the people had just removed the war leather, the year was good, and the family was full of people.

古文：纯以圣王之建辟雍，所以崇尊礼义，既富而教者也。
现代文：张纯认为圣王的建学校，为的是提倡礼义，在富民的基础上进行教育。
English: Zhang Jun believed that the school was built by the holy king in order to promote etiquette and education on the basis of enriching the people.

古文：乃案七经谶、明堂图、河间《古辟雍记》、孝武太山明堂制度，及平帝时议，欲具奏之。
现代文：于是按照七经谶、明堂图、河间《古辟雍记》、孝武太山明堂制度，和平帝时议，想具体启奏。
English: Therefore, in accordance with the seven sutras, the Myeongdong map, the Hema "Ancient Records" and the Xiaowu Taishan Myeongdong system, the Emperor Heping deliberated and wanted to play a specific opening.

古文：未及上，会博士桓荣上言宜立辟雍、明堂，章下三公、太常，而纯议同荣，帝乃许之。
现代文：没有呈上去，恰逢博士桓荣上书建议立辟雍、明堂，奏章下达到三公、太常，而张纯的意见正与桓荣相同，皇帝就同意了。
English: However, it was not presented, just as Dr. Huan Rong submitted a letter suggesting the establishment of Yong and Ming Halls, and reaching the Three Kingdoms and Taizheng under the Song Dynasty. Zhang Chun's opinion was the same as Huan Rong's, and the emperor agreed.

古文：三十年，纯奏上宜封禅，曰： 自古受命而帝，治世之隆，必有封禅，以告成功焉。《乐动声仪》曰： 以《雅》治人，《风》成于《颂》。 
现代文：三十年张纯上奏应该举行封禅，奏章上说： 自古以来受天命而做皇帝的人，太平之世，一定有封禅之礼，来宣告成功。《乐动声仪》说： 以《雅》治人，《风》成于《颂》。 
English: Thirty years of pure asceticism should be held to seal Zen, the score said: Since ancient times, those who have been called by heaven to be emperors, in the world of peace, must have the ceremony of sealing Zen to declare success. "Music and Sound" said: To govern people with "Ya," and "Wind" became "Ode."

古文：有周之盛，成、康之间，郊配封禅，皆可见也。
现代文：周朝盛世，成王、康王年间，郊配封禅，都有史实可见。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty's golden age, during the reigns of King Cheng and King Kang, there are historical facts to be seen.

古文：书曰： 岁二月，东巡狩，至于岱宗，祡 ，则封禅之义也。
现代文：《书经》说： 岁二月，东巡狩，至于岱宗，此示。 就是封禅的意思。
English: "Scripture" says: In February of the year, the Eastern inspection tour, as for Shizong, this is indicated.

古文：臣伏见陛下受中兴之命，平海内之乱，修复祖宗，抚存万姓，天下旷然，咸蒙更生，恩德云行，惠泽雨施，黎元安宁，夷狄慕义。
现代文：臣下看到陛下接受中兴的天命，平定海内的乱局，修复祖宗的庙宇，抚存百姓的安宁，天下安然无恙，百姓获得再生，恩德像云之行天，惠泽像雨之下降，百姓安居乐业，夷狄羡慕仁义。
English: His subjects saw that His Majesty accepted the heavenly mandate of ZTE, calmed the chaos at sea, restored the ancestral temples, and maintained the tranquility of the people. The world is safe and sound, and the people have been regenerated. Grace is like the movement of clouds, and benefit is like the fall of rain. The people live in peace and enjoy their work, and they are envious of benevolence.

古文：《诗》云： 受天之祜，四方来贺。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 受天之祜，四方来贺。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Caused by heaven's decree, the four directions come to congratulate.

古文：今摄提之岁，仓龙甲寅，德在东宫。
现代文：今年正是寅年，仓龙甲寅，德在东宫。
English: This year is the Year of the Tiger, and the Canglong, Jiaotong, and De are in the East Palace.

古文：宜及嘉时，遵唐帝之典，继孝武之业，以二月东巡狩，封于岱宗，明中兴，勒功勋，复祖统，报天神，禅梁父，祀地祇，传祚子孙，万世之基也。 
现代文：应趁大好时光，遵从唐尧的典章，继承孝武帝的大业，二月举行东巡狩，封泰山，表明中兴之主，记载功勋，恢复祖宗的传统，上报天神，禅梁父，下祀地神，传福祚于子孙，这是万世的基业。 
English: It is necessary to take advantage of the good times, follow the regulations of Tang Xuan, inherit the great cause of Emperor Xiaowu, hold an eastward inspection in February, seal Mount Tai, show the Lord of ZTE, record the merits, restore the tradition of the ancestors, report the gods, Zen Liang father, worship the earth gods, and pass on the blessings to the children and grandchildren. This is the foundation of the world.

古文：中元元年，帝乃东巡岱宗，以纯视御史大夫从，并上元封旧仪及刻石文。
现代文：中元元年，皇帝便东巡泰山，用张纯比照御史大夫随行，并上元封曲仪和刻石文。
English: In the first year of the Middle Ages, the emperor went on an eastward tour of Mount Tai, accompanied by the imperial historian Zhang Jun and accompanied by the imperial seal and stone carvings.

古文：三月，薨，谥曰节候。
现代文：三月，张纯死了，谥称节侯。
English: In March, Zhang Chun died, but he called himself a "feudal lord."

古文：奋字稚通。
现代文：◆曹褒传，曹褒，字叔通，鲁国薛人。
English: ◆ Cao Bozhuan, Cao Bozhuan, Zha Shutong, Lu Guo Xue Ren.

古文：曹褒字叔通，鲁国薛人也。父充，持《庆氏礼》，建武中为博士，从巡狩岱宗，定封禅礼，还，受诏议立七郊、三雍、大射、养老礼仪。
现代文：父亲曹充，坚持学习《庆氏礼》，建武年间做了博士，跟随皇上巡狩泰山，定封禅礼，回来后，受诏议立七郊、三雍、大射、养老等礼仪。
English: His father, Cao Chong, insisted on studying the "Gyeongju Rite" and became a doctor during the Jianwu era. He followed the emperor on a hunting tour of Mount Tai and held a ceremonial seal-setting ceremony. After his return, he received the imperial edict to establish the seven suburbs, Sanyong, Dasha, and old-age rites.

古文：显宗即位，充上言： 汉再受命，仍有封禅之事，而礼乐崩阙，不可为后嗣法。
现代文：显宗即位，曹充上言道： 汉朝再受天命，仍有封禅之事，可是礼乐残缺，不可作后代的榜样。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, Cao Zheng said, "The Han Dynasty has once again received the Mandate of Heaven, and there is still the matter of enshrining Zen, but the ritual music is incomplete and cannot serve as an example for future generations.

古文：五帝不相沿乐，三王不相袭礼，大汉当自制礼，以示百世。 
现代文：五帝不相互继承音乐，三王不互相因袭旧礼，大汉应自己制定礼仪，用来给百代子孙作典范。 
English: The five emperors do not inherit each other's music, the three kings do not inherit each other's old rites, and the great man should formulate his own etiquette and use it to set an example for hundreds of generations.

古文：帝问： 制礼乐云何？ 
现代文：帝问： 礼乐怎么制法？ 
English: The emperor asked: How is ceremonial music made?

古文：充对曰： 《河图括地象》曰： 有汉世礼乐文雅出。 
现代文：充答道： 《河图括地象》说： 有汉世礼乐文雅出。 
English: Susumu replied, "The River Map and the Landscape" says, "There is a refined Hanseatic music."

古文：《尚书琁机钤》曰： 有帝汉出，德洽作乐，名予。  
现代文：《尚书·机钤》说： 有帝汉出，德洽作乐，名予 。 
English: "Shangshu · Ji Gang" said: There are emperors and emperors, virtues and virtues make music, and give names.

古文：帝善之，下诏曰： 今且改太乐官曰太予乐，歌诗曲操，以俟君子。 
现代文：皇帝很赞赏，下诏书道： 现在改太乐官叫太予乐，歌诗曲操，等以后的君子来补充。 
English: The emperor was very appreciative, and issued the following edict: Now, change the title of Tairekwan to Taiyu Le, Song and Poetry, and wait for future gentlemen to supplement it.

古文：拜充侍中。
现代文：拜曹充作侍中。
English: Baicao served as a chamberlain.

古文：作章句辩难，于是遂有庆氏学。
现代文：作章句辩难，于是就有了《庆氏学》问世。
English: It is difficult to argue with a passage, so "Gyeongju Studies" was published.

古文：褒少笃志，有大度，结发传充业，博雅疏通，尤好礼事。
现代文：曹褒年少时有大志，气量大，二十岁时继承父亲的学业，学问广博，尤其爱好礼事。
English: When Cao Bao was young, he was ambitious and full of energy. At the age of 20, he inherited his father's studies. He has a wide range of knowledge, and is particularly fond of ceremonial affairs.

古文：常感朝廷制度未备，慕叔孙通为汉礼仪，昼夜研精，沉吟专思，寝则怀抱笔札，行则诵习文书，当其念至，忘所之适。
现代文：常觉得朝廷制度不完备，羡慕叔孙通替汉朝制立礼仪，于是早晚研究，潜心思考，睡觉时怀中抱着书札，走路时也诵习文书，当他想得入迷时，竟忘记自己该往哪方走。
English: He often felt that the imperial system was incomplete and envied his uncles and grandsons for establishing etiquette for the Han Dynasty. Therefore, he studied morning and evening, concentrated on thinking, held a bookplate in his arms when he slept, and also recited documents when he walked. When he was lost in thought, he actually forgot where he should go.

古文：初举孝廉，再迁圉令，以礼理人，以德化俗。
现代文：曹褒起初被举为孝廉，又提为圉县县令，用礼治人，用德化俗。
English: At first, Cao Bao was praised for his filial piety, and was also mentioned as the county magistrate of Jixian County, using courtesy to govern people, and using virtue to break away from vulgarity.

古文：时它郡盗徒五人来入圉界，吏捕得入，陈留太守马严闻而疾恶，风县杀之。
现代文：当时别郡盗徒五人来入圉县境内，官吏捕到手，陈留太守马严听了十分痛恨，下令到县要杀了他们。
English: At that time, five bandits from Bie County entered the territory of Handan County, and the officials caught them. Chen Liu Taishou Ma Yan was very angry and ordered to go to the county to kill them.

古文：褒敕吏曰： 夫绝人命者，天亦绝之。
现代文：曹褒对吏说： 断绝人命的人，老天也会断绝他。
English: Cao Bao said to the officials: "Whoever cuts off human life, God will also cut him off."

古文：皋陶不为盗制死刑，管仲遇盗而升诸公。
现代文：听说皋陶不曾为盗贼制定死刑，管仲遇了盗贼反而提升为公臣。
English: It is said that Juntao did not prescribe the death penalty for thieves, but promoted Guanzhong to the position of a public official when he encountered a thief.

古文：今承旨而杀之，是逆天心，顺府意也，其罚重矣。
现代文：现在奉上面旨意而杀了他们，这是违背天意，顺从府尹，处罚太重。
English: Now, killing them in accordance with the will of the above, this is against the will of heaven, obeying the government, and the punishment is too heavy.

古文：如得全此人命而身坐之，吾所愿也。 
现代文：如果能保全贼人性命而让我受处分，我很愿意。 
English: If I can save a thief's life and get punished, I'm happy to do it.

古文：遂不为杀。
现代文：于是没有杀那五人。
English: So they didn't kill the five.

古文：严奏褒耎弱，免官归郡，为功曹。
现代文：马严上奏说曹褒软弱，免了他的职，回到郡里，做了功曹。
English: Ma Yan said that Cao Bo was weak, dismissed him from his post, returned to the county, and made a great contribution.

古文：征拜博士。
现代文：后来，曹褒被征召做了博士。
English: Later, Cao Bo was called up to become a doctor.

古文：会肃宗欲制定礼乐，元和二年下诏曰： 《河图》称 赤九会昌，十世以光，十一以兴 。
现代文：正巧肃宗想制定礼乐。元和二年下诏书道 ：《河图》称 赤九会昌，十世以光，十一以兴。 
English: It just so happened that Su Zong wanted to establish a ritual music. In the first and second years of the Yuan Dynasty, the following edict was issued: "The river map" said that the red nine would be prosperous, the tenth would be bright, and the eleventh would be prosperous.

古文：《尚书琁机钤》曰： 述尧理世，平制礼乐，放唐之文。 
现代文：尚书·机钤》说： 述尧理世，平制礼乐，放唐之文。 
English: Shangshu · Caixuan "said: the story of the world, the flat system of liturgy, and the Tang Dynasty.

古文：予末小子，托于数终，曷以缵兴，崇弘祖宗，仁济元元？
现代文：我是末代小子，托于数终，怎样继承先辈，宏大祖宗基业，拯济黎民呢？
English: I am the last generation child, entrusted to the end of the number, how can I inherit the ancestors, the great ancestors' inheritance, and save the people?

古文：《帝命验》曰： 顺尧考德，题期立象。 
现代文：《帝命验》说： 顺尧考德，题期立象。 
English: "Imperial Mandate Examination" said: Shun Shun Cao De, the question period is standing.

古文：且三五步骤，优劣殊轨，况予顽陋，无以克堪，虽欲从之，末由也已。
现代文：况且三皇五帝的步骤，优劣不同，何况我很顽陋，没法承担，即使想照办，也做不到。
English: Moreover, the steps of the three emperors and five emperors are different in their merits and demerits. Moreover, I am very ugly and cannot bear it. Even if I wanted to do it, I could not do it.

古文：每见图书，中心恧焉。 
现代文：每次看到图书，内心很是惭愧。 
English: Every time I see a book, I feel ashamed.

古文：褒知帝旨欲有兴作，乃上疏曰： 昔者圣人受命而王，莫不制礼作乐，以著功德。
现代文：曹褒知道皇上的旨意是想有所作为，于是上疏道： 从前圣人受天命为王，没有不制礼作乐，来显示功德。
English: Cao Bao knew that the emperor's will was to make a difference, so he said: Once upon a time, a sage was appointed king by heaven, and he did not make music without etiquette to show his merits.

古文：功成作乐，化定制礼，所以救世俗，致祯祥，为万姓获福于皇天者也。今皇天降祉，嘉瑞并臻，制作之符，甚于言语。
现代文：功成作乐，化定制礼，为的是救治世俗，招来祯祥，替万姓造福。现在皇天降福，好兆头都出现了，制作的符录，甚过言语的记载。
English: In order to save the world, to bring good fortune, and to benefit all families, Gongcheng made music and made a custom ceremony. Now that the emperor has been blessed, good omens have appeared, and the produced charms are more than verbal records.

古文：宜定文制，著成汉礼，丕显祖宗盛德之美。 
现代文：应该制定文字，著成汉礼，大显祖宗盛德之美。 
English: It is necessary to formulate the characters, write down the Chinese etiquette, and show the beauty of the ancestral morals.

古文：章下太常，太常巢堪以为一世大典，非褒所定，不可许。
现代文：奏章下达太常，太常巢堪认为一世之大典，不是曹褒一人定得下来，不同意。
English: It's not often that a musical composition is commissioned, and it's not often that it's considered a once-in-a-lifetime achievement. It's not up to Cao Bao alone to decide, I disagree.

古文：帝知群僚拘挛，难与图始，朝廷礼宪，宜时刊立，明年复下诏曰： 朕以不德，膺祖宗弘烈。
现代文：皇帝知道官吏们太拘谨了，很难和他们商量出头绪来。而朝廷的礼法，必须及时定下来，第二年又下诏道： 我本身品德不够，身当祖先的大业。
English: The emperor knew that the officials were too formal, and it was difficult to come to an agreement with them. The etiquette of the imperial court, however, had to be established in time. The following year, he issued another edict: "I myself am not virtuous enough to be the great cause of my ancestors.

古文：乃者鸾凤仍集，麟龙并臻，甘露宵降，嘉谷滋生，赤草之类，纪于史官。
现代文：近来鸾凤集飞，麟龙出现，晚上甘露下降，嘉谷四处滋生，还有赤草之类的吉祥物，史官都有记载。
English: Historians have recorded that recently, crested phoenixes have gathered to fly, unicorns and dragons have appeared, nectar has fallen in the evening, jia valley has been breeding everywhere, and there are mascots such as red grass.

古文：朕夙夜祗畏，上无以彰于先功，下无以克称灵物。
现代文：我早晚十分敬畏，对上不能表彰先帝的功勋，对下不好与灵物相照应。
English: In the morning and evening, I am very awestruck. I can't praise the merits of the former emperor, and it's not good to correspond with the spirit.

古文：汉遭秦余，礼坏乐崩，且因循故事，未可观省，有知其说者，各尽所能。 
现代文：汉朝接在秦后，礼乐残缺不齐，况且照旧例办事，也没有什么好处。如有知道这方面的知识的人，各尽所能。 
English: Since the Han Dynasty succeeded the Qin Dynasty, the ceremonial music is incomplete, and it is no good to act as usual. If there are people who know this knowledge, they will do their best.

古文：褒省诏，乃叹息谓诸生曰： 昔奚斯颂鲁，考甫咏殷。
现代文：曹褒琢磨旨意，就叹息着对诸生说： 从前奚斯歌颂鲁国，考甫咏叹商朝。
English: Cao Bao pondered the will, then sighed and said to all living beings: Once upon a time, the Song Dynasty eulogized the State of Lu, and the Qofu Dynasty eulogized the Shang Dynasty.

古文：夫人臣依义显君，竭忠彰主，行之美也。
现代文：人臣依着大义显彰君主，表彰皇上，这是美德。
English: It is a virtue for courtiers to honor the monarch and commend the emperor in accordance with the great principles.

古文：当仁不让，吾何辞哉！ 
现代文：当仁不让，我何必推辞呢？ 
English: Why should I refuse when I'm not allowed to?

古文：遂复上疏，具陈礼乐之本，制改之意。
现代文：于是又上疏，陈述礼乐的根本以及制改的意思。
English: Therefore, it was again simplified, stating the essence of the ritual music and the meaning of the reform.

古文：拜褒侍中，从驾南巡，既还，以事下三公，未及奏，诏召玄武司马班固，问改定礼制之宜。
现代文：皇上便授职曹褒作郎中，跟着御驾南巡，回来之后，把制礼之事下达给三公，没有来得及上奏，又诏召玄武司马班固，询问改定礼制等事宜。
English: The emperor then conferred the post of Cao Bao to his son-in-law, followed by a tour of the south. After returning, he issued the matter of the etiquette to the three princes, but did not have time to perform it. He also summoned Ma Banggu, the head of the Xuanwu Clan, to inquire about matters such as the revised etiquette.

古文：固曰： 京师诸儒，多能说礼，宜广招集，共议得失。 
现代文：班固说 ：京师许多儒生，多能说礼，应该广泛招集，一起议论得失。 
English: Bangu said, "There are many Confucian students in Beijing, and most of them can speak politely. We should invite them widely and discuss the gains and losses together."

古文：帝曰： 谚言 作舍道边，三年不成 。会礼之家，名为聚讼，互生疑异，笔不得下。
现代文：皇上说 ：俗话说 ：大路旁边盖房子，三年也盖不成，集合会礼之家，表面上是讨论，实质是互相猜疑，迟迟不能下笔。
English: The emperor said, "As the saying goes, 'If you build a house next to a highway, it will not be completed in three years. If you build a house next to a meeting hall, on the surface it will be a discussion, but in reality it will be mutual suspicion, and you will not be able to put pen to paper.

古文：昔尧作《大章》，一夔足矣。 
现代文：从前尧帝作《大章》，用一个叫夔的大臣就足够了。 
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Zou wrote "Grand Chapter" and it was enough to use a minister named Zou.

古文：章和元年正月，乃召褒诣嘉德门，令小黄门持班固所上叔孙通《汉仪》十二篇，敕褒曰： 此制散略，多不合经，今宜依礼条正，使可族行。
现代文：章和元年正月，召曹褒到嘉德门，命令小黄门拿着班固所上的叔孙通著的《汉仪》十二篇，下令给曹褒道 ：这篇《汉仪》很散略，多处不合经义，现在应作些修改，使它切实可行。
English: In the first month of the first year of Zhang He, Cao Bao was summoned to the Jiade Gate, and Xiao Huangmen was ordered to take the twelve chapters of "Chinese Rites" written by his great-uncle and great-grandson on the Ben Gu, and ordered Cao Bao to say: "This "Chinese Rites" is very sketchy, many parts are not consistent with the scriptures, and now some modifications should be made to make it practical.

古文：于南宫、东观尽心集作。 
现代文：你可在南宫、东观尽心集作。 
English: You can do your best to collect works in the South Palace and the East View.

古文：褒既受命，及次序礼事，依准旧典，杂以《五经》谶记之文，撰次天子至于庶人冠婚吉凶终始制度，以为百五十篇，写以二尺四寸简。其年十二月奏上。
现代文：曹褒接受命令，便排列礼数次序，依据旧典，杂以《五经》谶记之文，写出从天子到小百姓冠婚吉凶等礼仪终始制度，共一百五十篇，用二尺四寸的竹简写成，在当年十二月奏上。
English: Cao Bao accepted the order, and then arranged several orders of etiquette. According to the old book, mixed with the text of the "Five Classics," he wrote out the final and initial system of etiquette from the heavenly son to the common people, such as the auspicious and inauspicious marriage, a total of one hundred and fifty articles, written with a two-foot-four-inch bamboo stick, in December of that year.

古文：帝以众论难一，故但纳之，不复令有司平奏。
现代文：皇帝认为大家的议论难得一致，所以只收下了，不再叫官吏们评奏。
English: The emperor thought that everyone's discussion was rarely consistent, so he only accepted it, and no longer asked officials to comment.

古文：会帝崩，和帝即位，褒乃为作章句，帝遂以《新礼》二篇冠。
现代文：恰逢皇帝驾崩，和帝即位，曹褒便写成章句，皇帝便用《新礼》二篇放在最前面。
English: Coinciding with the death of the emperor and the enthronement of the emperor, Cao Bao wrote a chapter, and the emperor put the two articles of "Xin Li" at the front.

古文：擢褒监羽林左骑。
现代文：提拔曹褒监羽林左骑。
English: The promotion of Cao Bao Supervisor Ulin left riding.

古文：永元四年，迁射声校尉。
现代文：永元四年，升为射声校尉。
English: In 1904, he was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：后太尉张、尚书张敏等奏褒擅制《汉礼》，破乱圣术，宜加刑诛。
现代文：后来太尉张酉甫、尚书张敏等奏褒擅自制作《汉礼》，破乱圣术，应该杀头。
English: Later, Lieutenant Zhang Yifu, Shangshu Zhang Min and others played the role of unauthorized production of "Han Li," breaking the chaos of the sacred art, should be killed.

古文：帝虽寝其奏，而《汉礼》遂不行。
现代文：皇帝虽然把奏折搁下来，但《汉礼》也就没有施行。
English: Although the emperor shelved the record, the "Hanli" was not implemented.

古文：褒在射声，营舍有停棺不葬者百余所，褒亲自履行，问其意故。
现代文：曹褒在射声校尉时，营舍里有停棺不葬的百多所，曹褒亲自调查，问是什么原故。
English: When Cao Bao was the captain of the firing squad, there were more than a hundred places in the camp where coffins were not buried. Cao Bao personally investigated and asked what the reason was.

古文：吏对曰： 此等多是建武以来绝无后者，不得埋掩。 
现代文：官吏答道 ：这些多是建武以来无后代之人，所以死后不得掩埋。 
English: The official replied: These are mostly people who have no descendants since the founding of the military, so they cannot be buried after death.

古文：褒乃怆然，为买空地，悉葬其无主者，设祭以祀之。
现代文：曹褒听了十分难过，于是买一块空地，全部用来埋葬那些无主的人，并设祭以祀之。
English: Cao Bao was very sad to hear this, so he bought a piece of vacant land, all of which was used to bury those who had no owner, and set up an offering to enshrine them.

古文：迁城门校尉、将作大匠。
现代文：升为城门校尉、将作大匠。
English: He was promoted to captain of the castle gate and became a master carpenter.

古文：时有疾疫，褒巡行病徒，为致医药，经理饘粥，多蒙济活。
现代文：当时疾疫流行，曹褒巡视病人，替他们找医药，还准备稠粥，救活了不少人。
English: At that time, the epidemic was prevalent. Cao Bo inspected the patients, found medicine for them, and prepared thick porridge, which saved many people.

古文：七年，出为河内太守。
现代文：七年，做了河内太守。
English: Seven years later, he became the governor of Hanoi.

古文：时春夏大旱，粮谷踊贵。
现代文：这时春夏大旱，粮食价格高涨。
English: At this time, there was a severe drought in the spring and summer, and grain prices soared.

古文：褒到，乃省吏并职，退去奸残，澍雨数降。
现代文：曹褒到任后，就裁减官员，清退坏人，霖雨降了几次。
English: After Cao Bo took office, he reduced the number of officials, purged the bad people, and the rain fell several times.

古文：其秋大孰，百姓给足，流冗皆还。
现代文：这年秋天大丰收，百姓家给人足，流浪在外的都回来。
English: This autumn, there was a bumper harvest, people's homes were full, and those who had been wandering outside came back.

古文：后坐上灾害不实免。
现代文：后来曹褒因犯了上报灾情不实罪被免职。
English: Cao Bao was later removed from his post for the crime of falsely reporting the extent of the disaster.

古文：有顷征，再迁，复为侍中。
现代文：不久又征召、升迁，又做了侍中。
English: Soon he was conscripted, promoted, and became a chamberlain.

古文：褒博物识古，为儒者宗。
现代文：曹褒知识渊博，懂得古文化，为儒者的宗师。
English: Cao Bo is knowledgeable, understands ancient culture, and is the master of Confucianism.

古文：且乐非夔、襄，而新音代起，律谢皋、苏，而制令亟易，修补旧文，独何猜焉？
现代文：十四年死在官位上。他写了《通义》十二篇，演经杂论一百二十篇，又传《礼记》四十九篇，教授学生千多人 ，庆氏学 便通行于世。
English: He died in office at the age of fourteen. He wrote twelve chapters of "Tongyi," one hundred and twenty sermons, and forty-nine chapters of "Li Ji," and taught more than a thousand students, making Keiji's learning popular all over the world.

古文：礼云礼云，曷其然哉！郑玄字康成，北海高密人也。
现代文：◆郑玄传，郑玄字康成，是北海高密人。
English: ◆ Zheng Xuan Chuan, Zheng Xuan Zi Kangcheng, was a high-ranking secret agent in the North Sea.

古文：八世祖崇，哀帝时尚书仆射。
现代文：他的第八代祖先郑崇，汉哀帝时任尚书仆射。
English: His eighth-generation ancestor, Zheng Chong, was a clerk to Emperor Han.

古文：玄少为乡啬夫，得休归，尝诣学官，不乐为吏，父数怒之，不能禁。
现代文：郑玄少年时做乡下掌管诉讼和收赋税的小吏，每逢休假回家，总要到学校读书，不乐于做小吏。他的父亲多次因此发怒，也不能禁止他。
English: When Zheng Xuan was a boy, he was a minor official in charge of litigation and tax collection in the countryside. Every time he came home from vacation, he always had to go to school. He did not like being a minor official. His father was angry many times because of this, and he could not forbid him.

古文：遂造太学受业，师事京兆第五元先，始通《京氏易》《公羊春秋》《三统历》《九章算术》。
现代文：于是他到京城太学里学习，拜京兆人第五元先为师，才精通《京氏易》、《公着春秋》、《三统历》、《九章算术》。
English: Therefore, he went to study at the Beijing City Taigong Middle School. He was first taught by the fifth generation of Beijing Zhaoren, and only then did he become proficient in "Beijing Yi," "Public Dress in Spring and Autumn," "Three Calendars," and "Nine Chapters of Arithmetic."

古文：又从东郡张恭祖受《周官》《礼记》《左氏春秋》《韩诗》《古文尚书》。
现代文：他又从东郡张恭祖学习《周官》、《礼记》、《左氏春秋》、《韩诗》、《古文尚书》。
English: He also studied "Zhou Guan," "Li Ji," "Zuo Shi Chunqiu," "Han Poetry" and "Ancient Chinese Literature" from Zhang Gongzu of Dong County.

古文：以山东无足问者，乃西入关，因涿郡卢植，事扶风马融。
现代文：因为山东无人可以质疑问难的，于是他西行入关，经过涿郡卢植的介绍，拜扶风马融为师。
English: Because no one in Shandong can question the difficult, so he entered the westbound, after the introduction of Lu County Lu Zhi, and became a teacher of Fu Feng Ma Rong.

古文：融门徒四百余人，升堂进者五十余生。
现代文：马融有学生四百多人，登堂入室得到马融亲自教导的只有五十多人。
English: Ma Rong has more than 400 students, but only more than 50 people have been personally taught by Ma Rong.

古文：融素骄贵，玄在门下，三年不得见，乃使高业弟子传授于玄。
现代文：马融秉性骄贵，郑玄在他的门下，三年也没有见到过他。马融只是派遣他的高足弟子来辅导郑玄。
English: Ma Rong was a proud man. Zheng Xuan was under his tutelage, and he had not seen him for three years. Ma Rong only sent his tall disciple to tutor Zheng Xuan.

古文：玄日夜寻诵，未尝怠倦。
现代文：郑玄日夜攻读，从不懈怠。
English: Zheng Xuan studied day and night, never slacking.

古文：会融集诸生考论图纬，闻玄善算，乃召见于楼上，玄因从质诸疑义，问毕辞归。
现代文：一天，马融召集他的学生研讨图纬，听说郑玄精通算学，便在楼上召见了他。郑玄趁此机会向马融询问许多疑难之处。
English: One day, when Ma Rong gathered his students to discuss graphs and dimensions, he heard that Zheng Xuan was good at mathematics, so he summoned him upstairs. Zheng Xuan took the opportunity to ask Ma Rong many difficult questions.

古文：融喟然谓门人曰： 郑生今去，吾道东矣。 
现代文：问完便告别马融回到山东故里。马融很有感慨地对他的学生道： 郑生现在离我而去，我的学说便会向东传播了。 
English: After asking, he bid farewell to Ma Rong and returned to his hometown in Shandong. Ma Rong said to his students with great emotion: Zheng Seng is leaving me now, and my doctrine will spread to the east.

古文：玄自游学，十余年乃归乡里。
现代文：郑玄自从外出游学，十多年才回到故里。
English: Zheng Xuan has not returned to his hometown for more than ten years since he went abroad to study.

古文：家贫，客耕东莱，学徒相随已数百千人。
现代文：他家里贫穷，到东莱为人耕种。跟随他学习的学生已有成百上千人了。
English: His family was poor, and he went to Donglai to work as a farmer. There are hundreds of thousands of students who have studied with him.

古文：及党事起，乃与同郡孙嵩等四十余人俱被禁锢，遂隐修经业，杜门不出。
现代文：等到党锢之祸发生，郑玄跟同郡孙嵩等四十多人都被禁锢。于是他埋头研习经学，闭门不出。
English: When the calamity of the Party's purge occurred, Zheng Xuan and his compatriot Sun Song and more than forty others were imprisoned. So he buried his head in studying the Bible and never left his home.

古文：时任城何休好《公羊》学，遂著《公羊墨守》、《左氏膏肓》、《穀梁废疾》；玄乃发《墨守》，针《膏肓》，起《废疾》。
现代文：当时，任城人何休喜爱《公羊》学说，遂著作《公羊墨守》、《左氏膏肓》、《谷梁废疾》。郑玄就写了驳正《墨守》、《膏肓》和《废疾》的文章。
English: At that time, many people in Rencheng loved the "Ram" theory, so they wrote "Ram Mochu," "Zao Shi Mochu" and "Guliang Wasting Disease." Zheng Xuan wrote an article to refute "Mochu," "Mochu" and "Wasting Disease."

古文：休见而叹曰： 康成入吾室，操吾矛，以伐我乎！ 
现代文：何休见到了，感叹道： 郑康成走进我的房子，拿起我的戈矛，来讨伐我啊！ 
English: He Xiu saw this and exclaimed, "Zheng Kangcheng walked into my house, picked up my spear, and came to fight me!

古文：初，中兴之后，范升、陈元、李育、贾逵之徒争论古今学，后马融答北地太守刘瑰及玄答何休，义据通深，由是古学遂明。
现代文：当初，东汉初年，范升、陈元、李肓、贾逵之徒，争论古今学说，后来马融回答北地太守刘墨和郑玄回答何休，因为义理考据，博达精深，从此古文经学才昌明起来。
English: At first, in the first year of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Fan Sheng, Chen Yuan, Li Yu and Jia Yu's followers argued about the teachings of ancient and modern times. Later, Ma Rong replied to the governor of the North, Liu Mo, and Zheng Xuan replied to He Xiu. Because of the examination of the principles of logic and the profoundness of Boda, the study of ancient scriptures only flourished from then on.

古文：灵帝末，党禁解，大将军何进闻而避之。
现代文：汉灵帝末年，党禁解除，大将军何进听到郑玄的名声，便征召他。
English: In the last years of the Han Dynasty, when the party ban was lifted, General He Jin heard of Zheng Xuan's reputation and conscripted him.

古文：州郡以进权威，不敢违意，遂迫胁玄，不得已而诣之。
现代文：州郡认为何进是有权势的贵戚，不敢违背他的意愿，于是迫使郑玄听从召唤，郑玄不得已就前去应诏。
English: The prefectural government believed that He Jin was a powerful noble relative and did not dare to go against his wishes, so it forced Zheng Xuan to obey the summons. Zheng Xuan had no choice but to go to answer the summons.

古文：进为设几杖，礼待甚优。
现代文：何进为他设置了几案手杖，礼遇非常优厚。
English: He Jin set up several canes for him, and the courtesy was very generous.

古文：玄不受朝服，而以幅巾见。
现代文：郑玄没有收下朝服，而是戴着头巾以儒者服饰来见何进。
English: Zheng Xuan did not accept the morning dress, but wore a headscarf with Confucian clothing to see He Jin.

古文：一宿逃去。
现代文：他住了一个晚上，便逃走了。
English: He stayed one night and then ran away.

古文：时年六十，弟子河内赵商等自远方至者数千。
现代文：当时郑玄年已六十，他的学生从遥远的地方来的如河内人赵商等，计有几千人。
English: At that time, Zheng Xuan was sixty years old, and his students came from far away places, such as Hanoi's Zhao Shang, totaling several thousand.

古文：后将军袁隗表为侍中，以父丧不行。
现代文：后来将军袁隗上表推荐他为侍中，他因父丧没有就任。
English: Later, General Yuan Shao recommended him as a chamberlain, but he did not take up the post due to his father's death.

古文：国相孔融深敬于玄，履履造门。告高密县为玄特立一乡，曰： 昔齐置 土乡 ，越有 君子军 ，皆异贤之意也。
现代文：国相孔融非常崇敬郑玄，急促地来到他家，并指示高密县令为他特别设立一个乡，说： 从前齐国设置过 士乡 ，越国设有 君子军 等，都是优礼对待贤人的意思。
English: The minister of state, Kong Rong, greatly revered Zheng Xuan, hurriedly came to his home and instructed Gaomi County to set up a special township for him, saying: In the past, Qi Province set up a township for scholars, Yue Province set up a gentleman's army, and so on, all of which were meant to treat the wise man with courtesy.

古文：郑君好学，实怀明德。
现代文：郑玄君好学，具有崇高的德性。
English: Zheng Xuanjun was eager to learn and possessed lofty virtues.

古文：昔太史公、廷尉吴公、谒者仆射邓公，皆汉之名臣。
现代文：昔者太史公、廷尉吴公，谒者仆射邓公，都是前汉的名臣。
English: The ancients Taishi, the courtier Wu, and the eunuch Dosha Deng, were all famous ministers of the former Han Dynasty.

古文：又南山四皓有园公、夏黄公，潜光隐耀，世嘉其高，皆悉称公。
现代文：又南山四皓有园公、夏黄公，才德隐伏不露。世人敬重他们的清高，都称他们为 公 。
English: In addition, Nanshan Mountain has the Garden King and the Summer Yellow King, whose talents are hidden. The world respects their clearness, and they are all called the King.

古文：然则公者仁德之正号，不必三事大夫也。
现代文：既是这样，那么所谓 公 就是具有仁德之人的正当名号。不必做太尉、司徒、司空的大夫才称为 公 。
English: If this is the case, then the so-called gong is the rightful name of a person with benevolence. You don't have to be a captain, an officer, or a doctor to be called a gong.

古文：今郑君乡宜曰 郑公乡 。
现代文：现在郑玄这个乡应该取名为 郑公乡 。
English: Now Zheng Xuan Township should be named Zheng Gong Township.

古文：昔东海于公仅有一节，犹或戒乡人侈其门闾，矧乃郑公之德，而无驷牡之路！
现代文：过去东海于公仅有一个公平断狱的品德，他还告诫乡人扩大自己里巷的大门，以备后世子孙出任高官。
English: In the past, Donghai Yu Gong only had the virtue of breaking out of prison fairly. He also admonished the villagers to expand the gates of their alleys in order to prepare for future generations to become high-ranking officials.

古文：可广开门衢，令容高车，号为 通德门 。 
现代文：何况郑玄有这样的美德，怎能没有行走驷马高车的道路。应该扩大郑玄里巷的大门，加宽他门前的道路，让它能通过高盖大车。这可命名为 通德门 。 
English: Moreover, Zheng Xuan has such a virtue, how can he not walk on the road of the horse-drawn carriage. The gate of Zheng Xuanli Alley should be expanded, and the road in front of his door should be widened so that it can pass through the high-roofed carriage. This can be named the Tongde Gate.

古文：董卓迁都长安，公卿举玄为赵相，道断不至。
现代文：董卓迁都到长安，公卿推荐郑玄为赵相，因为道路阻隔未能赴任。
English: Dong Zhuo moved the capital to Chang'an. The noble recommended Zheng Xuan as Zhao Xiang, but he was unable to take up the post because of the roadblocks.

古文：会黄巾寇青部，乃避地徐州，徐州牧陶谦接以师友之礼。
现代文：碰上黄巾军进攻青州地区，郑玄就到徐州避难。徐州牧陶谦用师友之礼接待他。
English: When the Yellow Turban Army attacked the Qingzhou region, Zheng Xuan took refuge in Xuzhou. Xuzhou Mu Tao Qian received him with the courtesy of a teacher and friend.

古文：建安元年，自徐州还高密，道遇黄巾贼数万人，见玄皆拜，相约不敢入县境。
现代文：建安元年，郑玄从徐州回到高密，路上遇到数万黄巾军。黄巾军见了郑玄都下拜，大家相约不得进入高密县境。
English: In the first year of Jianan, Zheng Xuan returned to Gaomi from Xuzhou, and encountered tens of thousands of Yellow Turban troops on the road. When the Yellow Turban troops saw Zheng Xuan, they all bowed down, and everyone agreed not to enter Gaomi County.

古文：玄后尝疾笃，自虑，以书戒子益恩曰：吾家旧贫，不为父母群弟所容，去厮役之吏，游学周、秦之都，往来幽、并、兗、豫之域，获觐乎在位通人，处逸大儒，得意者咸从捧手，有所受焉。
现代文：后来，郑玄患了一次重病，恐自己不久于人世，于是写信告诫他的儿子郑益恩说： 我们家过去很贫困，得到父母和诸弟的宽容、支持，辞掉了像贱役一样的小吏，到周、秦等地游学，往来于幽、并、兖、豫等州，能够觐见那些在位的博通古今的大师，和隐居的著名学者。最使我得意的是这些通儒接受了我的请教，对我有所传授。
English: Later, Zheng Xuan suffered a serious illness and feared that he would not live long, so he wrote a letter to his son, Zheng Yi En, saying: Our family was very poor in the past. I received tolerance and support from my parents and brothers. I quit being a minor official like a common laborer, traveled to Zhou, Qin and other places to study, and traveled to and from You, Nian, Lu and Yu and other states. I was able to meet those reigning masters of ancient and modern wisdom, and famous scholars who lived in seclusion. What I am most proud of is that these sages accepted my request for advice and taught me something.

古文：遂博稽《六艺》，粗览传记，时睹秘书纬术之奥。
现代文：于是，我广泛查考《六艺》，浏览传记，还不时阅读珍秘的国书，窥见国谶的奥秘。
English: As a result, I extensively examined the "Six Arts," browsed biographies, read rare national books from time to time, and peeked into the mysteries of the Great Seal.

古文：年过四十，乃归供养，假田播殖，以娱朝夕。
现代文：过了四十岁，才回家供养父母，租田耕种以欢度时日。
English: Only after the age of forty did he return home to support his parents, renting land and farming to pass the time.

古文：遇阉尹擅势，坐党禁锢，十有四年，而蒙赦令，举贤良方正有道，辟大将军三司府。
现代文：碰上宦官独揽权力，我被党人牵连而遭禁锢，过了十四年才获赦免。后来多次被推举为贤良、方正、有道诸种人才，被大将军、三司府征召任职，两次被朝廷征召。
English: When I encountered eunuchs monopolizing power, I was implicated by party members and imprisoned, and it took fourteen years before I was pardoned. Later, I was repeatedly selected as a virtuous, upright, and virtuous person, was conscripted by the general and the three departments, and was twice conscripted by the imperial court.

古文：公车再召，比牒并名，早为宰相。
现代文：和我同列征召名牒的其他人，有的早已做了宰相。
English: Some of the other people on my list of those to be conscripted have already become prime ministers.

古文：惟彼数公，懿德大雅，克堪王臣，故宜式序。
现代文：想到那几位具有美德高才的人，他们能够胜任大臣的职责，因此应当任用。
English: Think of the few virtuous and talented people who are capable of fulfilling the duties of a minister and should therefore be appointed.

古文：吾自忖度，无任于此，但念述先圣之元意，思整百家之不齐，亦庶几以竭吾才，故闻命罔从。
现代文：我估量自己没有才能担任这类职务，只想阐述先圣孔子儒家学说的本意，统一各家歧异，也希望竭尽自己的才智，所以接到征召而没有应命。
English: I thought that I did not have the talent to hold such a position. I only wanted to explain the original meaning of the Confucian doctrine of Confucius, unify the differences between different families, and also hope to do my best. Therefore, I received a call and did not follow the order.

古文：而黄巾为害，萍浮南北，复归邦乡。
现代文：黄巾造，使我南北奔走，行踪漂泊，现在才返回故乡。
English: The yellow scarf made me run from north to south, my whereabouts drifted, and only now have I returned to my hometown.

古文：入此岁来，已七十矣。
现代文：到这一年我已经七十岁了。
English: By this year I was already seventy years old.

古文：宿素衰落，仍有失误，案之礼典，便合传家。
现代文：旧时的学业素养已经荒疏，还有些失误之处。根据典礼规定，就应该把家事传给儿子管理了。
English: According to the regulations of the ceremony, the family affairs should be handed over to the son to manage.

古文：今我告尔以老，归尔以事，将闲居以安性，贾思以终业。
现代文：现在我告诉你，我老了，家事都交给你承担，我将闲居安性，深入思考以完成事业。
English: Now I tell you, I'm old, I'm leaving the housework to you, I'm going to be idle, and I'm going to think deeply to complete my career.

古文：自非拜国君之命，问族亲之忧，展敬坟墓，观省野物，胡尝扶杖出门乎！
现代文：除非接受国君的命令，慰问亲族的疾苦，察看祭扫坟墓，观览省察野物，我何曾拄杖出过门呢？
English: Unless I accept the order of the sovereign, console the suffering of my relatives, inspect the sacrificial offerings, sweep the graves, observe and inspect the wild animals, why did I ever go out with a cane?

古文：家事大小，汝一承之。
现代文：大小家事，全由你承担。
English: You will be responsible for all household chores, big and small.

古文：咨尔一夫，曾无同生相依。
现代文：可叹你独自一人，没有兄弟姐妹可以依靠。
English: Too bad you're all alone with no brothers or sisters to lean on.

古文：其勖求君子之道，研钻勿替，敬慎威仪，以近有德。
现代文：你一定要奋勉努力，追求君子的修养，钻研不懈。要谨慎地注意自己的态度仪表，亲近那些有德行的人。
English: You must work hard, pursue the cultivation of a gentleman, and study tirelessly. You must carefully pay attention to your attitude and appearance, and be close to those who are virtuous.

古文：显誉成于僚友，德行立于已志。
现代文：显赫的声誉是由同事、朋友促成的，德行是靠自己的志向建立的。
English: Great reputations are made by colleagues and friends; virtues are built by one's own aspirations.

古文：若致声称，亦有荣于所生，可不深念邪！
现代文：如果得到了好名声，亦可光耀父母，这些，岂可不深思吗？
English: If you get a good reputation, you can also glorify your parents. Shouldn't you think about this?

古文：可不深念邪！吾虽无绂冕之绪，颇有让爵之高。
现代文：我虽然没有高官的显赫，但有让爵的清高，以评论整理经典的事业自乐，希望不会落得后人的讥笑。
English: Although I don't have the prominence of a high-ranking official, I have the nobility of a peerage, and I enjoy the cause of reviewing and sorting out the classics. I hope I won't be ridiculed by posterity.

古文：自乐以论赞之功，庶不遗后人之羞，末所愤愤者，徒以亡亲坟垄未成，所好群书率皆腐敝，不得于礼堂写定，传与其人。
现代文：最后，我的心不能平静的，是死去的双亲坟墓没有修成，所喜爱的群书大都腐烂，不能于讲学习礼的堂内写成定稿，传给应该传授的人。
English: In the end, my heart could not be at peace. My dead parents' grave was not repaired, and most of my favorite books were rotten. I could not write a final draft in the classroom and pass it on to those who should teach it.

古文：日西方暮，其可图乎！
现代文：我就像西下的太阳，将近迟暮，还能完成这些事业吗？
English: I'm like the setting sun, it's getting late, can I still accomplish these things?

古文：家今差多于昔，勤力务时，无恤饥寒。
现代文：我们家比过去稍好一些了。只要勤奋努力，爱惜光阴，就不怕缺衣少食。
English: Our family is a little better off than before. As long as you work hard and value your time, you won't have to worry about not having enough food or clothes.

古文：菲饥食，薄衣服，节夫二者，尚令吾寡恨。
现代文：粗茶淡饭，简朴衣裳，如果能在这两方面加以节制，就算让我没有什么遗憾了。
English: Coarse tea and light meals, simple clothes, if I can control myself in these two aspects, I won't have any regrets.

古文：若忽忘不识，亦已焉哉！
现代文：如果忘记了我这些话，体会不到我的一片苦心，那也就算了吧。 
English: If you forget these words of mine and fail to appreciate my painstaking efforts, then forget it.

古文：时，大将军袁绍总兵冀州，遣使要玄，大会宾客，玄最后至，乃延升上坐。
现代文：这时，大将军袁绍在冀州统领大军。
English: At this time, General Yuan Shao was leading a large army in Jizhou.

古文：身长八尺，饮酒一斛，秀眉明目，容仪温伟。
现代文：他派使者邀请郑玄，大会宾客。郑玄最后到达，袁绍把他延入上座。郑玄身材高大，能饮酒一斛，眉清目秀，容貌仪表，温和伟岸。
English: He sent an envoy to invite Zheng Xuan, the guest of the congress. Zheng Xuan finally arrived, and Yuan Shao extended him to the upper seat. Zheng Xuan is tall, can drink a cup of wine, has a clear brow, a handsome appearance, and is gentle and strong.

古文：绍客多豪俊，并有才说，见玄儒者，未以通人许之，竞设异端，百家互起。
现代文：袁绍的客人大都是俊秀豪杰，有才气，善辩论，他们看到郑玄是个儒者，以为他并不是什么通博的人。
English: Most of Yuan Shao's guests were handsome, talented, and good at debate. They saw that Zheng Xuan was a Confucian and thought that he was not a scholar.

古文：玄依方辩对，咸出问表，皆得所未闻，莫不嗟服。
现代文：于是大家争相设想一些刁钻古怪的问题，各家学派的观点纷杂提出。
English: As a result, everyone scrambled to come up with some outlandish questions, and the views of various schools of thought were put forward.

古文：时汝南应劭亦归于绍，因自赞曰： 故太山太守应中远，北面称弟子何如？ 
现代文：郑玄依照儒家正统的观点答辩应对，内容都超出了提问的范围。大家获得了闻所未闻的知识，没有人不叹服敬佩郑玄的。这时，汝南人应劭也归附袁绍，于是自我介绍道： 前秦山太守应中远，向您北面称弟子，怎么样？ 
English: Zheng Xuan answered the questions in accordance with the Confucian orthodox view, and the contents were beyond the scope of the questions. Everyone gained unprecedented knowledge, and no one admired Zheng Xuan. At this time, the people of Yunnan also joined Yuan Shao, so he introduced himself: How about the former Qinshan governor Ying Zhongyuan calling you a disciple?

古文：玄笑曰： 仲尼之门考以四科，回、赐之徒不称官阀。 
现代文：郑玄笑着说： 孔子的学生，要考德行、言语、政事、文学四科，颜渊、子贡这些学生向来不称自己的官衔和门第。 
English: Zheng Xuan said with a smile: Students of Confucius should pass the four subjects of morality, language, politics and literature. These students, Yan Yuan and Zigong, have never referred to themselves by their official title or lineage.

古文：劭有惭色。
现代文：应劭听了感到很惭愧。
English: Ying Yao felt very ashamed after listening to it.

古文：绍乃举玄茂才，表为左中郎将，皆不就。
现代文：于是，袁绍荐举郑玄为茂才，上表推荐他为左中郎将。郑玄都没有就任。
English: As a result, Yuan Shao recommended that Zheng Xuan be promoted to Mao Cai, and the above table recommended that he be promoted to Zuo Zhong Lang. Zheng Xuan did not take office.

古文：公车征为大司农，给安车一乘，所过长吏送迎。
现代文：朝廷征召他为大司农，给了他一辆安车，并规定凡是他所经过的地方，主管官员都要迎送。
English: The court conscripted him as the chief farmer, gave him a standard car, and stipulated that wherever he passed, the responsible officials should greet him.

古文：玄乃以病自乞还家。
现代文：郑玄都以有病请求还家。
English: Zheng Xuan returned home with a sick request.

古文：时袁绍与曹操相拒于官度，令其子谭遣使逼玄随军，不得已，载病到元城县，疾笃不进，其年六月卒，年七十四。
现代文：袁绍命令他的儿子袁谭派使者逼迫郑玄随军，郑玄没有办法，只好带病到元城县，终因病重不能前进。这一年的六月郑玄去世，终年七十四岁。
English: Yuan Shao ordered his son Yuan Tan to send an envoy to force Zheng Xuan to join the army. Zheng Xuan had no choice but to take ill and go to Yuancheng County. He was too ill to go. In June of that year, Zheng Xuan died at the age of seventy-four.

古文：遗令薄葬。
现代文：郑玄遗嘱薄葬。
English: Before his death, he ordered a simple burial.

古文：自郡守以下尝受业者，缞绖赴会千余人。
现代文：届时曾在郑玄门下当过学生的，自郡守以下官员一千多人，都穿着隆重的丧服前来送葬。
English: At that time, more than a thousand officials from the county governor on down, who had been students under Zheng Xuan, came to the funeral wearing ceremonial mourning clothes.

古文：门人相与撰玄答诸弟子问《五经》，依《论语》作《郑志》八篇。
现代文：郑玄的学生共同撰写郑玄生前回答诸弟子从《五经》中提出的问题，依照《论语》的体例编为《郑志》共八篇。
English: Zheng Xuan's students co-wrote Zheng Xuan's answer to the questions raised by his disciples from the "Five Classics" before his death, and compiled a total of eight "Zheng Zhi" according to the style of "Analects."

古文：凡玄所注《周易》《尚书》《毛诗》《仪礼》《礼记》《论语》《孝经》《尚书大传》《中候》《乾象历》，又著《天文七政论》《鲁礼义》《六艺论》《毛诗谱》《驳许慎五经异义》《答临孝存周礼难》，凡百余万言。
现代文：总计郑玄所注释的书，有《周易》、《尚书》、《毛诗》、《仪礼》、《礼记》、《论语》、《孝经》、《尚书大传》、《中候》、《车乞象历》。郑玄自著的书有《天文七政论》、《鲁礼礻帝礻合义》、《六艺论》、《毛诗谱》、《驳许慎五经异义》、《答临孝存周礼难》，共一百多万字。
English: In total, the books annotated by Zheng Xuan include "Zhou Yi," "Shang Shu," "Mao Poetry," "Rites," "Rites," "Analects," "Filial Piety," "Great Biography of Shang Shu," "Middle Ages," and "Beggar's Calendar." Zheng Xuan's own books include "Seven Political Theories of Astronomy," "Rule of Lu," "Six Arts," "Compendium of Mao's Poems," "Dismissing the Contradictions of the Five Classics," and "Responding to the Difficulties of Maintaining Filial Piety," totaling more than one million words

古文：玄质于辞训，通人颇讥其繁。至于经传洽孰，称为纯儒，齐、鲁间宗之。
现代文：郑玄对于经典辞义训释，力求质朴实在，博通的人多讥刺这种做法太繁琐，至于说到经典传注的丰富熟悉，他可能称为纯正的儒者。齐鲁一带的人们都尊奉他为宗师。
English: As for Zheng Xuan's interpretation of the classics, he tried to be simple and real, which was ridiculed by many well-read people as being too cumbersome. As for his rich familiarity with the classics, he may be called a pure Confucian. People around Qilu all revered him as their guru.

古文：其门人山阳郗虑至御史大夫，东莱王基、清河崔琰著名于世。
现代文：他的学生山阳人郗虑官至御史大夫，东莱人王荃、清河人崔琰在当地都很有名气。
English: His students, including Shanyang people such as Yu Xianguan and Gu Shi Du Fu, Donglai people such as Wang Tsuen, and Qinghe people such as Cui Yao, are all famous in the local area.

古文：又乐安国渊、任嘏，时并童幼，玄称渊为国器，嘏有道德，其余亦多所鉴拔，皆如其言。
现代文：又乐安人国渊、任古段当时很年幼。郑玄称道国渊是国家栋梁之材，任古段有崇高的品德，其余的人也多有评定和推荐。
English: At that time, Le An's son Guoyuan and Ren Guodan were very young. Zheng Xuan said that Dao Guoyuan was a pillar of the country, Ren Guodan had a noble character, and the rest of the people were also rated and recommended.

古文：玄唯有一子益恩，孔融在北海，举为孝廉；及融为黄巾所围，益恩赴难损身。
现代文：后来这些人的成就都像他所说的那样。郑玄只有一个儿子叫郑益恩，孔融作北海相时，举荐他为孝廉。等到孔融被黄巾军围困，益恩赴难身亡。
English: Later, the achievements of these people were as he said. Zheng Xuan had only one son named Zheng Yi En. When Kong Rong was the minister of the North Sea, he recommended him as a filial son. When Kong Rong was besieged by the Yellow Turban Army, Yi En died.

古文：有遗腹子，玄以其手文似己，名之曰小同。
现代文：益恩有一遗腹子，郑玄因为他的手纹与自己的手纹相似，便给他取名叫郑小同。
English: Yi En had a stillborn son. Zheng Xuan named him Zheng Xiaodong because his handprints were similar to his own.

