古文：起强圉赤奋若，尽著雍摄提格，凡二年。
现代文：起，止，一共两年。晋纪十二晋元帝建武元年
English: It lasted for a total of two years, starting in the 12th year of the Jin Dynasty and ending in the 1st year of Emperor Jianwu.

古文：中宗元皇帝上建武元年春，正月，汉兵东略弘农，太守宋哲奔江东。
现代文：春季，正月，汉军向东进攻弘农郡，太守宋哲逃奔江东。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, the Chinese army attacked Hongnong County to the east, and the governor Song Zhe fled to the east of the river.

古文：黄门郎史淑、侍御史王冲自长安奔凉州，称愍帝出降前一日，使淑等赍诏赐张实，拜实大都督、凉州牧、侍中、司空，承制行事，且曰： 朕已诏琅邪王时摄大位，君其协赞琅邪，共济多难。 
现代文：黄门郎史淑、侍御史王冲从长安逃奔凉州，称说西晋愍帝出降前一天，派他们携带诏书赐封张，拜张为大都督、凉州牧、侍中、司空，禀承制书处理事宜。诏书还说： 朕已下诏琅邪王及时代摄帝位，希望你们协助琅邪王，共渡多难之秋。 
English: Huangmen Lang Shi Shu and attendant Shi Wang Chong fled from Chang'an to Liangzhou, saying that the day before the departure and surrender of the West Jin Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong sent them to carry the edict to grant Zhang a seal, and to ask Zhang to be the grand governor, the pastor of Liangzhou, the chamberlain, and the secretary to handle the book production. The edict also said: I have issued the edict to overthrow the evil king and the era of imperial succession. I hope you can help overthrow the evil king and pass the difficult autumn together.

古文：淑等至姑臧，实大临三日，辞官不受。
现代文：史淑等到达姑臧，张隆重哭奠愍帝三天，辞谢不接受封职。
English: Shi Shuk and others arrived in Guzheng, Zhang solemnly cried for three days to pay tribute to the emperor, and refused to accept the appointment.

古文：初，实叔父肃为西海太守，闻长安危逼，请为先锋入援。
现代文：当初，张的叔父张肃任西海太守，听说晋都长安危亡在即，自请任先锋赴援。
English: At first, Zhang's uncle, Zhang Su, who was the governor of the West Sea, heard that Chang'an, the capital of Jin, was on the verge of death, and he volunteered to go as a pioneer to help.

古文：实以其老，弗许。
现代文：张以他年老为由不同意。
English: Zhang disagreed, citing his old age.

古文：及闻长安不守，肃悲愤而卒。
现代文：等到听说长安失守，张肃悲愤而死。
English: When he heard that Chang'an was lost, Zhang Su died of grief and anger.

古文：实遣太府司马韩璞、抚戎将军张阆等帅步骑一万东击汉，命讨虏将军陈安、安故太守贾骞、陇西太守吴绍各统郡兵为前驱。
现代文：张派遣太府司马韩璞、抚戎将军张阆等率领步兵和骑兵共一万人向东攻击汉军，命令讨虏将军陈安、安故太守贾骞、陇西太守吴绍各自统领本郡兵马为前驱。
English: Zhang sent a total of ten thousand infantry and cavalry to the east to attack the Chinese army, led by the governor of Taifu, Sima Han Rong, and the general of Fuxiong, Zhang Rong, and ordered the general Chen An, the governor of Ankou, Jia Rong, and the governor of Western Shaanxi, Wu Shao, to lead the troops and horses of the county as the forerunners.

古文：又遗相国保书曰： 王室有事，不忘投躯。
现代文：又送信给相国司马保说： 晋王室遇有灾祸，我没忘投身报效。
English: He also sent a message to his brother-in-law, Sima Bao, saying: "When the Jin royal family encountered a disaster, I did not forget to devote myself to repaying the favor.

古文：前遣贾骞瞻公举动，中被符命，敕骞还军。
现代文：以前曾派遣贾骞视先生举动行事，后来接受符命，敕令贾骞回军。
English: In the past, he had sent Mr. Jia Jia to act, and later he accepted the order and ordered Jia Jia to return to the army.

古文：俄闻寇逼长安，胡崧不进，麹允持金五百，请救于崧，遂决遣骞等进军度岭。会闻朝廷倾覆，为忠不遂，愤痛之深，死有馀责。
现代文：不久听说敌寇进逼长安，胡崧屯兵不前，允带着五百金向他求救，于是我决定派遣贾骞等翻山越岭进军赴援，刚好听说朝廷已经倾覆，未能实现尽忠的愿望，我悲痛心情之深重，虽死也有余责。
English: Soon after, I heard that the enemy raiders had entered Chang'an and forced Hu Yao's garrison to stop advancing, so I decided to send Jia Yao and others to march over the mountains to help. Just as I heard that the imperial court had been overthrown and failed to fulfill my desire to be loyal, I was deeply saddened. Even though I was dead, I still had responsibilities.

古文：今更遣璞等，唯公命是从。 
现代文：现在重新派遣韩璞等率军前往，一切听从您的命令。 
English: Now re-send Han Xuan and the rest of the army to go, and obey your orders in everything.

古文：璞等卒不能进而还，至南安，诸羌断路，相持百馀日，粮竭矢尽。
现代文：韩璞等人的军队始终不能东进，只好退军。军队行至南安，被多支羌人部族截断退路，双方相持一百多天，韩璞等人的军队箭尽粮绝。
English: The army of Han Xuan and others could not advance eastward, and had to retreat. The army marched to Nan'an, and was cut off from retreating by many Xiongnu tribes. The two sides held each other for more than a hundred days, and the army of Han Xuan and others ran out of food.

古文：璞杀车中牛以飨士，泣谓之曰： 汝曹念父母乎？ 曰： 念。 
现代文：韩璞把拉车之牛杀掉犒饷士卒，流着眼泪对他们说： 你们思念父母吗？ 士卒回答： 思念。 
English: Han Xuan killed the ox that was pulling the cart and said to the officers with tears streaming down his face, "Do you miss your parents?" The officers replied, "I miss them."

古文： 念妻子乎？ 
现代文： 思念妻子儿女吗？ 
English: Do you miss your wife and children?

古文：曰： 念。 
现代文：回答说： 思念。 
English: He replied, "My thoughts are with you."

古文： 欲生还乎？ 
现代文： 想活着回家吗？ 回答说： 想。 
English: Do you want to go home alive?

古文：曰： 欲。  从我令乎？ 
现代文：韩璞又问： 愿意听从我的号令吗？ 
English: Han Yan asked again: Are you willing to follow my orders?

古文：曰： 诺。 
现代文：士卒回答说： 愿意。 
English: My wife said, "That's fine.

古文：乃鼓噪进战。
现代文：于是擂鼓呐喊，进击博战。
English: Then, to the sound of drums and shouts, they marched into battle.

古文：会张阆帅金城兵继至，夹击，大破之，斩首数千级。
现代文：适逢张阆率金城士兵随后赶到，夹击羌人，大破敌军，斩首数千。
English: At the right time, Jincheng soldiers led by Zhang Xuan arrived later, clamped down on the Xuan people, defeated the enemy army, and beheaded thousands.

古文：先是，长安谣曰： 秦川中，血没腕，唯有凉州倚柱观。 
现代文：长安失陷以前，曾有民谣说： 秦川之中，血流没腕，唯有凉州倚柱旁观。 
English: Before the fall of Chang'an, there was a folk song that said: "Among the Qin River, blood flow has no arms, only Liangzhou leans on a pillar to watch."

古文：及汉兵覆关中，氐、羌掠陇右，雍、秦之民，死者什八九，独凉州安全。
现代文：等到汉军攻陷关中，氐族、羌族攻掠陇右，雍州、秦州的人民十有八九死亡，唯独凉州安然无恙。
English: By the time the Chinese army attacked and captured Guanzhong, the Yi and Yao people had attacked and plundered the right side of Guanzhong, and the people of Yongzhou and Qinzhou were all dead, except for Liangzhou, which was safe and sound.

古文：二月，汉主聪使从弟畅帅步骑三万攻荥阳，太守李矩屯韩王故垒，相去七里，遣使招矩。
现代文：二月，汉主刘聪派堂弟刘畅率领步兵、骑兵三万进攻荥阳，荥阳太守李矩屯兵韩王故旧壁垒，双方相距七里，刘畅派遣使者招降李矩。
English: In February, the Han ruler Liu Cong sent his cousin Liu Chang to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Fenyang. The Fenyang Emperor sent Li Jian to garrison Han Wang's old fortress. The two sides were seven miles apart. Liu Chang sent an envoy to invite Li Jian to surrender.

古文：时畅兵猝至，矩未及为备，乃遣使诈降于畅。
现代文：当时刘畅的军队突然到达，李矩来不及设备防御，于是派遣使者见刘畅，诈称愿降。
English: At that time, Liu Chang's army suddenly arrived, and Li Rui was too late to defend the equipment, so he sent an emissary to see Liu Chang, falsely claiming that he was willing to surrender.

古文：畅不复设备，大飨，渠帅皆醉。
现代文：刘畅不再防备，大肆犒劳士卒，主要将领都喝醉了。
English: Liu Chang was no longer prepared to defend himself, and he lavished praise on his subordinates. The main generals were all drunk.

古文：矩欲夜袭之，士卒皆恇惧，矩乃遣其将郭诵祷于子产祠，使巫扬言曰： 子产有教，当遣神兵相助。 
现代文：李矩打算乘夜偷袭，但手下士卒都心存畏惧，李矩便派部将郭诵到子产祠祝祷，让巫祝扬言说： 子产神灵告知，到时会派遣神兵相助 。
English: Li Rui planned to make a surprise attack at night, but his subordinates and soldiers were afraid. Li Rui then sent his subordinates to recite the Guo to the Childbirth Shrine to pray, and let Wu Rui threaten: Tell the Childbirth God Spirit that he will send divine soldiers to help at that time.

古文：众皆踊跃争进。
现代文：众人都踊跃争先。
English: Everyone is eager to get ahead.

古文：矩选勇敢千人，使诵将之，掩击畅营，斩首数千级，畅仅以身免。
现代文：李矩挑选勇士千人，令郭诵率领他们，突然袭击刘畅军营，斩首数千。刘畅只身逃出，仅免于死。
English: Li An selected a thousand warriors and ordered Guo Chiao to lead them in a surprise attack on Liu Chang's military camp, beheading thousands. Liu Chang escaped unharmed, only to be saved from death.

古文：辛巳，宋哲至建康，称受愍帝诏，令丞相琅邪王睿统摄万机。
现代文：辛巳，宋哲到达建康，称说奉晋愍帝诏书，令丞相、琅邪王司马睿总摄国家所有事宜。
English: Soon after, Song Zhe arrived in Jiankang and said that he would carry out the imperial edict of Emperor Jinpyeong and order the prime minister and the evil king, Sima Rui, to take charge of all state affairs.

古文：三月，琅邪王素服出次，举哀三日。
现代文：三月，琅邪王换上素色服装，避居于别室，举哀三天。
English: In March, the evil king changed into plain clothes, took refuge in another room, and mourned for three days.

古文：于是西阳王羕及官属等共上尊号，王不许。
现代文：此时西阳王司马和官员、部属等共同进上皇帝尊号，琅邪王不肯即位。
English: At this time, Xiyang King Sima and officials, subordinates, etc. jointly advanced to the title of emperor, and the evil king refused to ascend the throne.

古文：羕等固请不已，王慨然流涕曰： 孤，罪人也。
现代文：司马等坚持请求，不肯罢休。琅邪王感慨地流着眼泪说： 孤是有罪之人。
English: Sima and the others persisted in their request, refusing to give up. With tears streaming down his face, the evil king said with emotion, "You alone are the guilty one."

古文：诸贤见逼不已，当归琅邪耳！ 
现代文：诸位贤良如果逼我不止，我将返归琅邪封国。 
English: If you good people force me to do more than that, I will return to the Evil Empire.

古文：呼私奴，命驾将归国。
现代文：并传呼私人奴仆，让他们驾车准备返回封国。
English: He also summoned his personal servants and told them to prepare to return to China by car.

古文：羕等乃请依魏、晋故事，称晋王；许之。
现代文：司马等于是请求琅邪王依照魏、晋旧有成例，称晋王。琅邪王同意了。
English: Sima was basically asking the Evil King to follow the precedent of the Wei and Jin dynasties and be called Jin Wang. The Evil King agreed.

古文：辛卯，即晋王位，大赦，改元；始备百官，立宗庙，建社稷。
现代文：辛卯，琅邪王即晋王位，大赦天下，改年号为建武，开始设置百官，建立宗庙和社稷。
English: In Xinwu, the evil king, that is, the Jin throne, amnestied the world, changed the year name to Jianwu, began to set up hundreds of officials, and established the ancestral temple and shrine.

古文：有司请立太子，王爱次子宣城公裒，欲立之，谓王导曰： 立子当以德。 
现代文：主掌官员请求立太子，晋王喜爱次子宣城公司马裒，想立他为太子，对王导说： 立太子应当视其德行。 
English: The leading officials asked for the crown prince to be appointed. The king of Jin loved the second son of the Xuancheng Company, Ma Jun, and wanted to appoint him as the crown prince. He said to Wang Du: The crown prince should be appointed according to his virtue.

古文：导曰： 世子、宣城，俱有朗俊之美，而世子年长。 
现代文：王导说： 世子与宣城公，都有清朗隽秀的美德，但世子年长。 
English: Wang Du said, "Both the heir apparent and the Lord of Xuancheng have the virtues of being clear and handsome, but the heir apparent is older.

古文：王从之。
现代文：晋王听从了王导的意见。
English: King Qin agreed to Wang Yao's request.

古文：丙辰，立世子绍为王太子；封裒为琅邪王，奉恭王后；仍以裒都督青、徐、兗三州诸军事，镇广陵。
现代文：丙辰，晋王立世子司马绍为王太子，封司马裒为琅邪王，继承恭王的祭祀；仍任司马裒为都督青、徐、兖三州诸军事，镇守广陵。
English: Hsin-Chen, the king of Jin, made his son Sima Shao the crown prince, and appointed Sima Jie as the prince of evil to succeed the sacrificial rites of King Gong; Sima Jie still served as the military governor of the three states of Qing, Xu, and Jie, and guarded Guangling.

古文：以西阳王羕为太保，封谯刚王逊之子承为谯王。
现代文：任西阳王司马为太保，封谯刚王司马逊的儿子司马承为谯王。
English: Sima, the king of Xiyang, was appointed as the eunuch, and Sima Cheng, the son of Sima Xiong, the king of Yunnan, was appointed as the eunuch.

古文：逊，宣帝之弟子也。
现代文：司马逊是晋宣帝弟弟的儿子。
English: Sima Xun was the son of Emperor Jinxuan's younger brother.

古文：又以征南大将军王敦为大将军、江州牧，扬州刺史王导为骠骑将军、都督中外诸军事、领中书监、录尚书事，丞相左长史刁协为尚书左仆射，右长史周顗为吏部尚书，军谘祭酒贺循为中书令，右司马戴渊、王邃为尚书，司直刘隗为御史中丞，行参军刘超为中书舍人，参军事孔愉长兼中书郎；自馀参军悉拜奉车都尉，掾属拜驸马都尉，行参军舍人拜骑都尉。
现代文：又任征南大将军王敦为大将军、江州牧；扬州刺史王导为骠骑将军、都督内外诸军事、领中书监和录尚书事。丞相左长史刁协被任为尚书左仆射，右长史周被任为吏部尚书，军谘祭酒贺循任中书令，右司马戴渊、王邃为尚书，司直刘隗任御史中丞，行参军刘超为中书舍人，参军事孔愉长兼中书郎，其余参军全部封官奉车都尉，部属封驸马都尉，行参军舍人官拜骑都尉。
English: Wang Dun, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, was also appointed as the general and governor of Jiangzhou; Wang Du, the general of the Yangzhou Expeditionary Army, was appointed as the general of the cavalry, the military inside and outside the capital, the supervisor of the army and the supervisor of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record of the record.

古文：王敦辞州牧，王导以敦统六州，辞中外都督，贺循以老病辞中书令，王皆许之，以循为太常。
现代文：王敦辞谢江州牧的官职，王导因为王敦已统领六州，辞谢都督内外诸军事的职务，贺循因年老多病辞去中书令，都获得晋王的同意。任命贺循为太常。
English: Wang Dun's resignation from the post of Jiangzhou pastor, Wang Du's resignation from military posts both at home and abroad because Wang Dun had already ruled six states, and He Xun's resignation from the position of Chinese envoy due to old age and illness were all approved by the king of Jin. He Xun was appointed as the first secretary.

古文：是时，承丧乱之后，江东草创，刁协久宦中朝，谙练旧事，贺循为世儒宗，明习礼学，凡有疑议，皆取决焉。
现代文：此时承续西晋的丧乱之后不久，江南东晋政权刚刚草创，因刁协久在西晋时为官，熟悉旧制；贺循为当世儒学泰斗，精通礼学，所以凡遇疑碍难决的问题，都由他们定夺。
English: At this time, shortly after the succession of the West Jin Rebellion, the Jiangnan Dongjin regime had just been created. Because Zou Jie had been an official in the West Jin for a long time, he was familiar with the old system; He Xun was a contemporary Confucian scholar and proficient in etiquette, so they decided all the difficult questions.

古文：刘琨、段匹磾相与歃血同盟，期以翼戴晋室。
现代文：刘琨和段匹歃血盟誓，相约共同拥戴和辅佐晋王室。
English: Liu Ye and Duan Pi made a blood oath to jointly support and assist the Jin royal family.

古文：辛丑，琨檄告华、夷，遣兼左长史、右司马温峤，匹磾遣左长史荣邵，奉表及盟文诣建康劝进。
现代文：辛丑，刘琨发布檄文遍告汉族和其他民族，自己派遣兼左长史、右司马温峤，段匹派遣左长史荣邵，共同奉呈上表和盟约誓文前往建康进劝晋王即帝位。
English: Xin Xiu and Liu Bei issued a proclamation to the Han and other ethnic groups, dispatching the concurrently Left Long History, the Right Long History, the Right Long History, and the Left Long History to jointly present the above table and the oath of the covenant to Jian Kangjin to persuade the King of Jin to take the throne.

古文：峤，羡之弟子也。峤之从母为琨妻，琨谓峤曰： 晋祚虽衰，天命未改，吾当立功河朔，使卿延誉江南。
现代文：温峤是温羡兄弟的儿子，其姨母是刘琨的妻子，刘琨对温峤说： 晋朝国运虽然中衰，但天命尚未变易，我将建立功名于河朔，让你的声誉流播江南。
English: Wen Xuan was the son of the brothers Wen Xian and his aunt was the wife of Liu Xuan. Liu Xuan said to Wen Xuan, "Although the Jin Dynasty is in decline, the fate of the country has not changed. I will establish my fame in Hexuo and let your reputation spread to the south of the Yangtze River."

古文：行矣，勉之！ 
现代文：去吧，努力为之！ 
English: Go on, go for it!

古文：王以鲜卑大都督慕容廆为都督辽左杂夷流民诸军事、龙骧将军、大单于、昌黎公，廆不受；征虏将军鲁昌说廆曰： 今两京覆没，天子蒙尘，琅邪王承制江东，为四海所系属。
现代文：晋王任命鲜卑大都督慕容为都督辽左杂夷、流民诸军事、龙骧将军、大单于、昌黎公，慕容辞谢不受。征虏将军鲁昌劝说慕容道： 现在洛阳、长安两座京城沦陷，天子流亡失位，琅邪王接爱制诰于江东，四海归心。
English: Jin Wang appointed the Grand Dictator of Xianbei, Murong, as the governor of Liao, Zuo and Yi, the exiles and the military, the general of Longjing, Datan and Changli, and Murong's resignation was not accepted. The conscript general Lu Chang persuaded Murong: Now Luoyang and Chang'an, the two capital cities, have fallen, the son of heaven has been exiled and lost his throne, the evil king has taken over the East River, and the four seas have returned to their hearts.

古文：明公虽雄据一方，而诸部犹阻兵未服者，盖以官非王命故也。
现代文：贤君虽然雄据一方，但仍有许多部族拥兵不听从号令，这是因为您的官职不是晋王正式任命的缘故。
English: Although Xianjun prevailed, there were still many tribal supporters who did not obey the order, because your official position was not officially appointed by Jin Wang.

古文：谓宜通使琅邪，劝承大统，然后奉诏令以伐有罪，谁敢不从！ 
现代文：我认为应当派遣使者见琅邪王，劝他承续晋国帝位，然后遵奉皇上诏令攻伐有罪之人，谁敢不听从号令！ 
English: I think we should send an envoy to see the Evil King and persuade him to succeed to the throne of Jin, and then follow the emperor's edict to attack the guilty. Who would dare not obey the order!

古文：处士辽东高诩曰： 霸王之资，非义不济。
现代文：处士辽东人高诩说： 霸王之业，不义不能成功。
English: Gao Wei, an official from Liaodong Province, said: "If you want to be a tyrant, you cannot succeed if you are unjust.

古文：今晋室虽微，人心犹附之，宜遣使江东，示有所尊，然后仗大义以征诸部，不患无辞矣。 
现代文：现在晋王室虽然衰微，仍然是民心所向，应当派遣使者至江东，以示所有尊崇，然后倚仗君臣大义征伐各部族，不愁没有正当的理由。 
English: Now, although the Jin royal family is in decline, it is still popular with the people. They should send an envoy to the east of the river to show all respect, and then rely on the great justice of the princes and ministers to conquer the tribes. There is no legitimate reason.

古文：廆从之，遣长史王济浮海诣建康劝进。
现代文：慕容听从他们的意见，派遣长史王济由海路前往建康劝晋王即帝位。
English: Murong listened to their advice and sent the warlord Shi Wangji by sea to Jiankang to persuade the king to abdicate the throne.

古文：汉相国粲使其党王平谓太弟义曰： 适奉中诏，云京师将有变，宜衷甲以备非常。 
现代文：汉丞相刘粲让党羽王平对太弟刘说： 刚刚奉受国主密诏，说京师将有变乱发生，应当内穿甲衣以备不测。 
English: The Han chancellor Liu Wei let the party leader Wang Ping say to the great-brother Liu: I have just received a secret order from the head of state, saying that there will be turmoil in Beijing, and I should wear a coat to be prepared for any eventuality.

古文：义信之，命宫臣皆衷甲以居。
现代文：太弟刘信从，令东宫臣属都在外衣内穿上甲衣。
English: The great-brother Liu Xin obeyed, so that the East Palace vassals all put on the coat of armor inside the coat.

古文：粲驰遣告靳准、王沈。准以白汉主聪曰： 太弟将为乱，已衷甲矣！ 
现代文：刘粲派人驰告靳准、王沈，靳准禀报汉主刘聪说： 太弟刘准备作乱，手下已内着甲衣了。 
English: Liu Bei sent people to report to Yu Zhen and Wang Shen, and Yu Zhen reported to Liu Cong, the lord of Han, saying: Great-brother Liu is preparing to make trouble, and his men are already wearing armor.

古文：聪大惊曰： 宁有是邪！ 
现代文：刘聪大惊，说： 怎么会有这种事情！ 
English: Liu Cong was shocked and said, "How could such a thing happen!

古文：王沈等皆曰： 臣等闻之久矣，屡言之，而陛下不之信也。 
现代文：王沈等人都说： 我们早已听说太弟刘有犯上作乱之心，多次上言，但陛下不信我们的话。 
English: Wang Shen and others all said, "We have already heard that your great-brother Liu is guilty of creating turmoil and has made repeated insults, but Your Majesty does not believe our words.

古文：聪使粲以兵围东宫。
现代文：刘聪令刘粲率军包围东宫。
English: Liu Cong ordered Liu Ye to surround the East Palace with his army.

古文：粲使准、沈收氐、羌酋长十馀人，穷问之，皆悬首高格，烧铁灼目，酋长自诬与义谋反。
现代文：刘粲让靳准、王沈拘捕了听命于东宫的氐、羌酋长十多人，严刑拷问，把他们的头颅都枷锢于高木格之上，烧红铁器炙灼双目，酋长们便诬陷自己和刘共同谋反。
English: Liu Bei had Zou Zhen and Wang Shen arrest more than ten Zou and Zou chieftains who were following orders in the East Palace. They were severely interrogated, their heads were shackled on the high wooden grate, and their eyes were burned with red-hot iron tools. The chieftains then framed themselves and Liu for jointly plotting rebellion.

古文：聪谓沈等曰： 吾今而后知卿等之忠也！
现代文：刘聪对王沈等人说： 我现在才知道你们的忠心！
English: Liu Cong said to Wang Shen and others: I only know your loyalty now!

古文：当念知无不言，勿恨往日言而不用也！ 
现代文：你们应当追念知无不言的训诫，不要怨恨过去上言而不被信用！ 
English: You should remember the unspoken admonition, do not resent the past for not being trusted!

古文：于是诛东宫官属及义素所亲厚，准、沈等素所憎怨者大臣数十人，坑士卒万五千馀人。
现代文：于是诛杀东宫属官，又诛杀平素与刘亲近、交厚而被靳准、王沈等人憎恶怨恨的大臣数十人，坑杀士卒一万五千多人。
English: As a result, he killed dozens of subordinate officials of the East Palace, as well as ministers who were close to Liu and had a good relationship with him, such as Wang Shen, who was hated and resented, and killed more than 15,000 people.

古文：夏，四月，废义为北海王，粲寻使准贼杀之。
现代文：夏季，四月，废黜刘太弟身份，改封北部王，不久刘粲让靳准谋杀了他。
English: In the summer, in April, he dethroned Liu Taidi's status and changed his title to the King of the North. Soon after, Liu Yanzhang murdered him.

古文：义形神秀爽，宽仁有器度，故士心多附之。
现代文：刘形神秀爽，为人宽仁而雅量，所以士人大多心存景仰。
English: Liu Ge was very handsome, generous and elegant, so most scholars held him in high esteem.

古文：聪闻其死，哭之恸，曰： 吾兄弟止馀二人而不相容，安得使天下知吾心邪！ 
现代文：刘聪听说刘列讯，悲恸痛哭说： 我们兄弟仅剩二人却不能相容，怎么才能使天下人知晓我内心的情感呢！ 
English: When Liu Cong heard of Liu Lie's death, he wept with grief and said, "There are only two of us brothers left, but we are incompatible. How can I let the world know my inner feelings?

古文：氐、羌叛者甚众，以靳准行车骑大将军，讨平之。
现代文：氐族、羌族反叛的很多，刘聪让靳准代行车骑大将军职务，征讨平定了叛乱。
English: There were many rebels from the Yao and Shan ethnic groups. Liu Cong appointed Zou Jun as the acting cavalry general to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：五月，壬午，日有食之。
现代文：五月，壬午，发生日食。
English: In May, at noon, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：六月，丙寅，温峤等至建康，王导、周顗、庾亮等皆爱峤才，争与之交。
现代文：六月，丙寅，温峤等人到达建康。王导、周、庚亮等都喜爱温峤有才，争相和他交结。
English: In June, Hsin Yin, Wen Qi and others arrived in Jiankang. Wang Du, Zhou, Geng Liang and others all loved Wen Qi and were eager to make contact with him.

古文：是时，太尉、豫州牧荀组、冀州刺史邵续、青州刺史曹嶷、宁州刺史王逊、东夷校尉崔毖等皆上表劝进，王不许。
现代文：此时，太尉、豫州刺史荀组和冀州刺史邵续、青州刺史曹嶷、宁州刺史王逊、东夷校尉崔毖等人都上表劝晋王即帝位，晋王不同意。
English: At this time, Taifu, Yuzhou Zhishihong group, Jizhou Zhishihong group, Qingzhou Zhishihong group, Ningzhou Zhishihong group, Dongyi captain Cui Wei and others all went to the table to persuade Jin Wang to accept the throne, but Jin Wang did not agree.

古文：初，流民张平、樊雅各聚众数千人在谯，为坞主。
现代文：当初，流民张平和樊雅在谯地各自聚集数千人，自任坞主。
English: At first, Zhang Heping and Henya, both exiles, gathered thousands of people in Handan and appointed themselves as dock masters.

古文：王之为丞相也，遣行参军谯国桓宣往说平、雅，平、雅皆请降。
现代文：晋王司马睿任愍帝丞相时，曾派遣行参军、谯国人桓宣前往劝说张平、樊雅，二人自请归降。
English: When the Jin king Sima Rui was the prime minister of Emperor Qianlong, he sent troops to join the army, and the Qianlong people, Huan Xuan, went to persuade Zhang Ping and Huiya, and the two asked to surrender.

古文：及豫州刺史祖逖出屯芦洲，遣参军殷义诣平、雅。
现代文：等到豫州刺史祖逖出兵屯居芦洲，派遣参军殷拜会张平和樊雅。
English: Wait until the Yuzhou Emperor Zhu Xi sent troops to settle in Luzhou and dispatched soldiers to pay homage to Zhang Heping and Lingya.

古文：义意轻平，视其屋，曰： 可作马厩。 
现代文：殷瞧不起张平，观视张平的屋宇，说： 可以当马厩。 
English: Yin looked down on Zhang Ping, looked at Zhang Ping's house, and said: It can be used as a stable.

古文：见大镬，曰： 可铸铁器。 
现代文：看见大镬，又说： 可以熔铸铁器。 
English: And when he saw the great hail, he said, Behold, the iron is smelted.

古文：平曰： 此乃帝王镬，天下清平方用之，奈何毁之！ 
现代文：张平说： 这是帝王的镬，天下清平时才能使用，怎么能轻易毁坏！ 
English: Zhang Ping said: This is the emperor's scepter, it can only be used when the world is at peace, how can it be easily destroyed!

古文：义曰： 卿未能保其头，而爱镬邪！ 
现代文：殷则说： 你不能保有自己的头颅，却吝惜什么铁锅！ 
English: Yin said, "You can't keep your own head, but you don't mind what kind of iron pot it is!"

古文：平大怒，于坐斩义，勒兵固守。
现代文：张平大怒，在座位上斩杀了殷，率军固守。
English: Zhang Ping flew into a rage, killed Yin on the seat, and led the army to hold fast.

古文：逖攻之，岁馀不下，乃诱其部将谢浮，使杀之；逖进据太丘。
现代文：祖逖领兵攻击他们，一年多未能攻克。祖逖便诱使张平部将谢浮，让他杀掉了张平，祖逖进军占据太丘。
English: Zhu Xi led the troops to attack them, but failed to conquer them for more than a year. Zhu Xi then induced Zhang Ping's general Xie Bu to kill Zhang Ping, and Zhu Xi marched to occupy Taiyuan.

古文：樊雅犹据谯城，与逖相拒。
现代文：当时樊雅还占据着谯城，与祖逖对抗。
English: At that time, Lingya was still occupying Lucheng and was in confrontation with Zuyu.

古文：逖攻之不克，请兵于南中郎将王含。
现代文：祖逖久攻不下，向南中郎将王含请求援兵。
English: Zu Xi could not be conquered for a long time, so he went to Nan Zhongro to ask Wang Han for reinforcements.

古文：桓宣时为含参军，含遣宣将兵五百助逖。
现代文：桓宣当时任王含的参军，王含派遣桓宣率兵五百人援助祖逖。
English: At that time, Kuan Xuan was appointed by Wang Han to join the army, and Wang Han sent Kuan Xuan and five hundred soldiers to help Zu Xi.

古文：逖谓宣曰： 卿信义已著于彼，今复为我说雅。 
现代文：祖逖对桓宣说： 你的信义已为对方所了解，这次再为我劝说樊雅。 
English: Zu Xi said to Huan Xuan: Your loyalty has been understood by the other side. This time, I will try to persuade Huan Ya.

古文：宣乃单马从两人诣雅曰： 祖豫州方欲平荡刘、石，倚卿为援；前殷义轻薄，非豫州意也。 
现代文：桓宣于是一人独骑，只带二人随从于后，进见樊雅说： 祖逖正准备荡平刘聪、石勒，仰仗你为后援。前次殷轻薄无礼，并非祖逖本意。 
English: Huan Xuan then rode alone, with only two people following behind, and said to Jin Mi Ya: "The Ancestor is preparing to crush Liu Cong and Shi Le, relying on you for support. The last time, he was rude and disrespectful, which was not the original intention of the Ancestor.

古文：雅即诣逖降。
现代文：樊雅立即拜会祖逖，请求归降。
English: Hanya immediately went to see her ancestor and begged him to surrender.

古文：逖既入谯城，石勒遣石虎围谯，王含复遣桓宣救之，虎解去。
现代文：祖逖进入谯城以后，石勒派遣石虎围困谯城，王含又派桓宣率军救援，石虎解围而去。
English: After Zu Xi entered Lucheng, Shi Le sent the Stone Tiger to besiege Lucheng. Wang Han also sent Huan Xuan and his army to rescue, and the Stone Tiger went to relieve the siege.

古文：逖表宣为谯国内史。
现代文：祖逖上表请任桓宣为谯国内史。
English: The ancestor of the above table asked Kuan Xuan to be appointed as the domestic history of the table.

古文：己巳，晋王传檄天下，称： 石虎敢帅犬羊，渡河纵毒，今遣琅邪王裒等九军，锐卒三万，水陆四道，径造贼场，受祖逖节度。 
现代文：己巳，晋王传布檄文于天下，内称： 石虎胆敢率领犬羊乌合之众，渡过黄河荼毒民众，现派遣琅邪王司马裒等九军、精锐士卒三万，由水、陆四路直赴贼寇所在地，受祖逖指挥。 
English: Now, the King of Jin has spread the message to the world, which reads: Shi Hu Daring, led by dogs and sheep, crossed the Yellow River to poison the people, and is now sending nine armies and 30,000 elite soldiers, including the evil king Sima Qian, to the location of the bandits from the four directions of land and water, under the command of Zu Xi.

古文：寻复召裒还建康。
现代文：不久又召司马裒返回建康。
English: Soon after, Sima Ye was called back to Jiankang.

古文：秋，七月，大旱；司、冀、并、青、雍州大蝗；河、汾溢，漂千馀家。
现代文：秋季，七月，旱情严重。司州、冀州、并州、青州、雍州发生严重蝗灾。黄河、汾水发生洪灾，淹没一千多户。
English: In autumn, in July, the drought was severe. Serious locust plagues occurred in Shizhou, Jizhou, Ganzhou, Qingzhou, and Yongzhou. The Yellow River and Surabaya flooded, inundating more than a thousand households.

古文：汉主聪立晋王粲为皇太子，领相国、大单于，总摄朝政如故。
现代文：汉主刘聪立晋王刘粲为皇太子，领相国职务、大单于称号，总摄朝政一如往昔。
English: Liu Cong, the lord of the Han Dynasty, established the Jin king Liu Bei as the crown prince. He held the position of minister of state, and the title of grand vizier, and he was the regent of the dynasty as in the past.

古文：大赦。
现代文：实行大赦。
English: Amnesty for criminals.

古文：段匹磾推刘琨为大都督，檄其兄辽西公疾陆眷及叔父涉复辰、弟末柸等会于固安，共讨石勒。
现代文：段匹推举刘琨为大都督，用檄书邀请其兄长辽西公疾陆眷、叔父涉复辰、弟段末等在固安聚会，共同征讨石勒。
English: Duanpi nominated Liu Ye as the grand governor, and invited his brother Liao Xi Gongzhi, uncle Zhan Fuchen, and younger brother Duanmai to gather in Gu'an to jointly fight against Shi Le.

古文：末柸说疾陆眷、涉复辰曰： 以父兄而从子弟，耻也；且幸而有功，匹磾独收之，吾属何有哉！ 
现代文：段末游说疾陆眷、涉复辰说： 以父辈、兄长的身份追从子侄、兄弟，是一种耻辱；况且侥幸立功，段匹独收其利，我们能得到什么！ 
English: At the end of the paragraph, Zhi Lu's relatives and Zhan Fuchen said: It is a shame to follow one's nephews and brothers with the status of fathers and brothers; moreover, it is a fluke to make a contribution, and one can only benefit from one's own efforts, what can we get!

古文：各引兵还。
现代文：于是疾陆眷、涉复辰、段末各自领军退还。
English: As a result, Zhi Lu Xin, Zhan Fuchen, and Duan Duan finally led their respective armies back.

古文：琨、匹磾不能独留，亦还蓟。
现代文：刘琨、段匹不能单独留守固安，也回师蓟州。
English: Liu Wei and Duan Pi could not stay in Gu'an alone, so they also went back to their teachers in Luzhou.

古文：以荀组为司徒。
现代文：晋王任荀组为司徒。
English: Jin Wang appointed Yao group as the leading disciple.

古文：八月，汉赵固袭卫将军华荟于临颖，杀之。初，赵固与长史周振有隙，振密谮固于汉主聪。
现代文：八月，汉将赵固在临颍击杀卫将军华荟。当初，赵固与长史周振不和，周振私下在汉主刘聪面前诋毁赵固。
English: In August, Han general Zhao Gu killed Wei general Hua Xi in Linyi. At first, Zhao Gu was at odds with Changshi Zhou Zhen, and Zhou Zhen privately slandered Zhao Gu in front of Han lord Liu Cong.

古文：李矩之破刘畅也，于帐中得聪诏，令畅既克矩，还过洛阳，收固斩之，以振代固。
现代文：在李矩攻破刘畅的战役中，李矩曾于军帐中发现刘聪的诏令，诏令让刘畅攻克李矩之后，回军经过洛阳，收捕赵固并杀掉，用周振取代赵固。
English: In Li Momi's campaign to defeat Liu Chang, Li Momi had found Liu Cong's edict in the military records. After the edict allowed Liu Chang to defeat Li Momi, the returning army passed through Luoyang, captured and killed Zhao Gu, and replaced Zhou Zhen with Zhao Gu.

古文：矩送以示固，固斩振父子，帅骑一千来降；矩复令固守洛阳。
现代文：李矩将此诏送给赵固看，赵固斩杀了周振父子，率骑兵千人投降东晋。李矩仍然命令赵固戍守洛阳。
English: Li Yan sent this edict to Zhao Guan, Zhao Guan killed Zhou Zhen and his son, and led a thousand cavalry to surrender to the Eastern Jin Dynasty. Li Yan still ordered Zhao Guan to defend Luoyang.

古文：郑攀等相与拒王廙，众心不壹，散还横桑口，欲入杜曾。
现代文：郑攀等人共同抗拒王，因众心不齐，退散至横桑，打算投靠杜曾。
English: Zheng Pang and others jointly resisted the king, and because of the discord, they dispersed to Hengshan, intending to support Du Zeng.

古文：王敦遣武昌太守赵诱、襄阳太守硃轨击之，攀等惧，请降。
现代文：王敦派遣武昌太守赵诱、襄阳太守朱轨率军攻击，郑攀等人畏惧，请求归降。
English: Wang Dun dispatched the Wuchang governor Zhao Yu and the Xiangyang governor Zhu Rail to attack the army, and Zheng Pang and others were afraid and asked to surrender.

古文：杜曾亦请击第五猗于襄阳以自赎。
现代文：杜曾也自请袭击襄阳第五猗的军队，以赎其罪。
English: Du Zeng also invited himself to attack the army of the Fifth Army of Xiangyang to atone for his sins.

古文：廙将赴荆州，留长史刘浚镇扬口垒。
现代文：廙将前往荆州，留下长史刘浚镇守扬口壁垒。
English: Zhai will go to Jingzhou, leaving the long history of Liu Junzhen to guard the Yangkou barrier.

古文：竟陵内史硃伺谓廙曰： 曾，猾贼也，外示屈服，欲诱官军使西，然后兼道袭扬口耳。
现代文：竟陵内史朱伺对廙说： 杜曾是狡猾之徒，公开表示屈服，是想诱使官军往西，然后迅速突袭扬口。
English: Zhu Wei, the historian of the imperial mausoleum, said to Zou: Du was a cunning person. He publicly expressed his submission in order to lure the government army to the west and then quickly raid Yangkou.

古文：宜大部分，未可便西。 
现代文：应当增强军力部署，不能立即西进。 
English: It is necessary to strengthen the deployment of military forces, and it is not possible to immediately advance westward.

古文：廙性矜厉自用，以伺为老怯，遂西行。
现代文：廙性格矜持严厉、自以为是，认为朱伺是年老怯懦，于是率军西进。
English: He was reserved, stern and self-righteous. He thought Zhu Bei was old and cowardly, so he led his army westward.

古文：曾等果还趋扬口；廙乃遣伺归，裁至垒，即为曾所围。
现代文：杜曾等果然回军直奔扬口。廙这才派遣朱伺回军，刚至壁垒之中，很快被杜曾军队包围。
English: Du Zeng waited for the returning army to go straight to Yangkou. It was only then that Zhu Wei sent the returning army. As soon as they reached the barriers, they were quickly surrounded by Du Zeng's army.

古文：刘浚自守北门，使伺守南门。
现代文：刘浚自已守御北门，让朱伺守御南门。
English: Liu Jun himself guarded the north gate, leaving Zhu to guard the south gate.

古文：马俊从曾来攻垒，俊妻子先在垒中，或欲皮其面以示之。伺曰： 杀其妻子，未能解围，但益其怒耳。 
现代文：马隽跟随杜曾前来攻垒，而他的妻子儿女原先留在垒中，有人想剥其妻子儿女的脸皮向马隽示戒，朱伺说： 杀了他们并不能解围，只能加剧马隽的恨怒罢了。 
English: Ma Xuan followed Du Zeng to attack the fortress, while his wife and children had previously remained in the fortress. Someone wanted to show Ma Xuan a warning by skinning his wife and children. Zhu Wei said: "Killing them will not solve the siege, it will only aggravate Ma Xuan's hatred."

古文：乃止。
现代文：这才罢休。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：曾攻陷北门，伺被伤，退入船，开船底以出，沉行五十步，乃得免。
现代文：杜曾攻陷北门，朱伺受伤，退走上船，打开船底入水，在水底潜行了五十步，才得以幸免。
English: Du Zeng captured the north gate, Zhu Wei was injured, retreated onto the boat, opened the bottom of the boat into the water, and sneaked under the water for fifty paces before being spared.

古文：曾遣人说伺曰： 马俊德卿全其妻子，今尽以卿家内外百口付俊，俊已尽心收视，卿可来也。 
现代文：杜曾派人游说朱伺说； 马隽感激您保全了他妻子儿女的性命，我现在已把您全军老小百十口人交托给马隽，马隽尽心照看，您可回来。 
English: Du Zeng sent someone to lobby Zhu Wei and said: Ma Yu is grateful to you for saving the lives of his wife and children, I have now entrusted your entire army of one hundred people to Ma Yu. Ma Yu will take good care of you, you can come back.

古文：伺报曰： 吾年六十馀，不能复与卿作贼，吾死亦当南归，妻子付汝裁之。 
现代文：朱伺回答说： 我年龄已超过六十岁，不能再与你同作叛贼，即便死了也要回到南方，妻子儿女等就交由你处置。 
English: Zhu Wei replied, "I am over sixty years old. I can no longer be a traitor with you. Even if I die, I will return to the south. My wife, children, etc. will be at your disposal."

古文：乃就王廙于甑山，病创而卒。
现代文：于是前往甑山投奔王，伤重而死。
English: He then went to Lushan to fight for the king, but was seriously wounded and died.

古文：戊寅，赵诱、硃轨及陵江将军黄峻与曾战于女观湖，诱等皆败死。
现代文：戊寅，赵诱、朱轨及陵江将军黄峻与杜曾交战于女观湖，赵诱等人都兵败战死。
English: Wu Yin, Zhao Yu, Zhu Lai and the Lingjiang general Huang Jun fought with Du Zeng in Nian Gu Lake, and Zhao Yu and others were defeated and killed.

古文：曾乘胜径告沔口，威震江、沔。
现代文：杜曾乘胜直抵沔口，威震长江、沔水一带。
English: Du Zeng took the victory straight to Hukou, and the Yangtze River and Surabaya area were shaken.

古文：王使豫章太守周访击之。访有众八千，进至沌阳。
现代文：晋王派豫章太守周访进攻杜曾的军队，周访拥有八千兵众，进至沌阳。
English: The Jin king sent Yu Zhang, the eunuch Zhou You, to attack Du Zeng's army. Zhou You had eight thousand soldiers and marched to Chaoyang.

古文：曾锐气甚盛，访使将军李恒督左甄，许朝督右甄，访自领中军。
现代文：杜曾的军队锐气很盛，周访让将军李恒督守军阵左翼，许朝督守右翼，自己坐镇中军。
English: Du Zeng's army was full of vigor. Zhou Ying asked General Li Hengdu to guard the left wing of the army, Xu Chaodu to guard the right wing, and himself to sit in the middle of the army.

古文：曾先攻左、右甄，访于阵后射雉以安众心，令其众曰： 一甄败，鸣三鼓；两甄败，鸣六鼓。 
现代文：杜曾先攻左、右两翼，周访在阵后发箭以安军心，命令士卒说： 一翼兵败，呜鼓三声；两翼都败，鸣鼓六声。 
English: Du Zeng attacked the left and right flanks first, and Zhou Bei sent arrows to reassure the troops after the battle. He ordered the soldiers to say: If one wing is defeated, three drums will be sounded; if both wings are defeated, six drums will be sounded.

古文：赵诱子胤，将父馀兵属左甄，力战，败而复合，驰马告访。
现代文：赵诱的儿子越胤统领父亲部下剩存士兵从属左翼，奋勇作战，失败以后又聚集起来，骑马禀告周访。
English: Zhao Yu's son, Yue Yin, led the remaining soldiers of his father's subordinates to the left wing, fought bravely, gathered again after the defeat, and rode a horse to visit.

古文：访怒，叱令更进，胤号哭还战。
现代文：周访发怒，叱斥让他继续进击，赵胤大哭，返身作战。
English: Zhou Hui became angry and reprimanded him to continue the attack. Zhao Yan burst into tears and returned to battle.

古文：自旦至申，两甄皆败。访选精锐八百人，自行酒饮之，敕不得妄动，闻鼓音乃进。
现代文：从早上激战至下午申时，周访军阵两翼都战败，周访挑选精锐士兵八百人，亲自斟酒劝饮，令他们不得妄动，听到鼓声再进攻。
English: From the morning of the fierce battle to the afternoon of the ninth hour, both wings of the Zhouqi army were defeated. Zhouqi selected 800 elite soldiers, personally poured wine and persuaded them to drink, so that they would not move rashly, and then attacked when they heard the drums.

古文：曾兵未至三十步，访亲鸣鼓，将士皆腾跃奔赴，曾遂大溃，杀千馀人。
现代文：杜曾军队前行不到三十步，周访亲自击鼓，将士们都腾跃赴敌，杜曾军队因此大败，被杀一千多人。
English: Du Zeng's army advanced less than thirty paces, Zhou Yu personally beat the drum, and the soldiers all leapt to the enemy. As a result, Du Zeng's army was defeated, and more than a thousand people were killed.

古文：访夜追之，诸将请待明日，访曰： 曾骁勇能战，向者彼劳我逸，故克之；宜及其衰乘之，可灭也。 
现代文：周访连夜追击，众将请求等待明日，周访说： 杜曾骁勇善战，以往我们以逸待劳，所以胜敌。现在应当乘其衰败之时追袭，才能歼灭他。 
English: Chou Chou said: Du Zengqi is brave and good at fighting. In the past, we used to wait and wait, so we defeated the enemy. Now we should take advantage of the time of his decline and attack in order to annihilate him.

古文：乃鼓行而进，遂定汉、沔。
现代文：于是鸣鼓进军，平定了汉水、沔水流域。
English: As a result, they marched in with drums beating, and leveled the Hanshui and Surabaya watersheds.

古文：曾走保武当。
现代文：杜曾逃跑保守武当。
English: Du Zeng ran away to save Wu Tang.

古文：王廙始得至荆州。
现代文：王这才得以到达荆州。
English: It was only then that Wang was able to reach Jingzhou.

古文：访以功迁梁州刺史，屯襄阳。
现代文：周访因军功升迁任梁州刺史，屯军襄阳。
English: Due to his military achievements, Zhou Zhi was promoted to the post of Liangzhou Military Historian and stationed in Yangyang.

古文：冬，十月，丁未，琅邪王裒薨。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁未，琅邪王司马裒去世。
English: In the winter, October, Ding Wei, the evil king Sima Ye passed away.

古文：十一月，己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，己酉朔，出现日食。
English: In November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：丁卯，以刘琨为待中、太尉。
现代文：丁卯，晋王任命刘琨为侍中、太尉。
English: Dingwu, the Jin king appointed Liu Ye as a chamberlain and second lieutenant.

古文：征南军司戴邈上疏，以为： 丧乱以来，庠序隳废；议者或谓平世尚文，遭乱尚武，此言似之，而实不然。
现代文：征南军司戴邈上疏，认为： 自王室丧乱以来，学校废毁。议政者有的以为清平之世尚文，遭逢世乱尚武，此言似是而非。
English: Dai Xuan Shang So, Secretary of the Southern Expeditionary Army, said: Since the royal family was overthrown, schools have been abolished and destroyed. Some politicians think that the world is peaceful and the world is violent, but this is not true.

古文：夫儒道深奥，不可仓猝而成。比天下平泰，然后修之，则废坠已久矣。
现代文：儒家道义渊深玄奥，不可能仓猝学成，等到天下安宁然后修习，那就废毁已久了。
English: Confucian morality is profound and profound, and it is impossible to learn it in a hurry. If you wait until the world is peaceful and then practice, it will have been destroyed for a long time.

古文：又，贵游之子，未必有斩将搴旗之才，从军征戍之役，不及盛年使之讲肄道义，良可惜也。
现代文：再者，富贵人家的游闲子弟，未必有斩将拔旗的英才，却从军征伐戍守，不乘壮年让他们研讨道义，实在可惜。
English: Moreover, it is a pity that the idle children of the rich and noble do not necessarily have the ability to raise the flag, but they are conscripted from the army and do not take advantage of their prime years to study morality.

古文：世道久丧，礼俗日弊，犹火之消膏，莫之觉也。
现代文：世道衰微日久，礼俗日渐凋弊，如同燃火消熔油脂一样，不知不觉。
English: The world has been in decline for a long time, and manners and customs have been gradually withering away, just as fire melts grease, imperceptibly.

古文：今王业肇建，万物权舆，谓宜笃道崇儒，以励风化。 
现代文：现在王业初建，万事方兴，我认为应当笃守道义、尊崇儒家，以勉励世风好转。 
English: Now that everything is going well, I think we should adhere to morality, respect Confucianism, and encourage the world to improve.

古文：王从之，始立太学。
现代文：晋王听从了他的意见，开始设立太学。
English: Jin Wang listened to his advice and began to establish Taigaku.

古文：汉主聪出畋，以愍帝行车骑将军，戎服执戟前导。
现代文：汉主刘聪出猎，让已经投降的西晋愍帝权充车骑将军，穿上军服手持画戟作为先导。
English: The Han ruler Liu Cong went on a hunting trip, let the already surrendered Western Jin Dynasty emperor power charge the car and ride the general, put on the military uniform and hand-held the thumbtack as a guide.

古文：见者指之曰： 此故长安天子也。 
现代文：看见的人指着他说： 这就是过去在长安的皇帝。 
English: People who saw him pointed at him and said, "This is the emperor who used to live in Chang'an."

古文：聚而观之，故老有泣者。
现代文：众人聚集观望，西晋遗老有的潸然泪下。
English: Many people gathered to watch, and Xi Jin Yi burst into tears.

古文：太子粲言于聪曰： 昔周武王岂乐杀纣乎？
现代文：太子刘粲对刘聪说： 古时周武王怎会以杀商纣为乐事呢？
English: Prince Liu Yi said to Liu Cong: In ancient times, how could King Zhou Wu take pleasure in killing merchants?

古文：正恐同恶相求，为患故也。
现代文：只是惟恐恶人聚集其身边，酿成祸患。
English: But he was afraid that the wicked would gather around him and cause trouble.

古文：今兴兵聚众者，皆以子业为名，不如早除之！ 
现代文：现在聚众起兵之人，莫不以降帝司马邺之名相号召，不如早些除掉他。 
English: Those who are now gathering to raise an army cannot help but invoke the name and image of Dismas Mahmud. It would be better to get rid of him earlier.

古文：聪曰： 吾前杀庾珉辈，而民心犹如是。吾未忍复杀也，且小观之。 
现代文：刘聪说： 当年我虽杀了庾珉、王隽及晋怀帝等人，但民心仍然如此，我不忍再杀司马邺，暂且观察一段时间。 
English: Liu Cong said: Although I killed Zhai, Wang Hui and Jin Huai Di and others that year, the people's hearts are still like that. I can't bear to kill Sima Yu again, so I will observe for a while.

古文：十二月，聪飨群臣于光极殿，使愍帝行酒洗爵，已而更衣，又使之执盖；晋臣多涕泣，有失声者。
现代文：十二月，刘聪在光极殿大宴群臣，让愍帝斟酒洗杯，又让他拿盖。晋旧臣见了，不少人潸然泪下，有的甚至哭出了声。
English: In December, Liu Cong led a group of courtiers to a grand banquet at the Hall of Light, and asked Emperor Zhaozong to pour the wine, wash the glasses, and let him take the lid. When Jin's former courtiers saw this, many of them burst into tears, and some even cried out.

古文：尚书郎陇西辛宾起，抱帝大哭，聪命引出，斩之。
现代文：尚书郎陇西人辛宾起身，抱着愍帝大哭，刘聪令人将他带出斩首。
English: Shang Shulang Xinbin, a Shaanxi native, stood up, hugged Emperor Zou and cried loudly. Liu Cong had him beheaded.

古文：赵固与河内太守郭默侵汉河东，至绛，右司隶部民奔之者三万馀人。
现代文：赵固和河内太守郭默进犯汉国河东，到达绛县，右司隶部的人民投奔而去的有三万多人。
English: Zhao Gu and Guo Mei, the governor of Hanoi, invaded the eastern part of the Han Dynasty and arrived in Handan County. More than 30,000 people from the Right Division's subordinate units rushed there.

古文：骑兵将军刘勋追击之，杀万馀人，固、默引归。
现代文：骑兵将军刘勋追袭他们，杀一万多人，赵固、郭默领军退回。
English: The cavalry general Liu Xun pursued them and killed more than ten thousand people. Zhao Gu and Guo Mei led the army back.

古文：太子粲帅将军刘雅生等步骑十万屯小平津，固扬言曰： 要当生缚刘粲以赎天子。 
现代文：汉太子刘粲率将军刘雅生等步骑兵十万屯居小平津，赵固扬言说： 誓当活捉刘粲赎回愍帝。 
English: The Han prince Liu Bei led General Liu Yasheng and 100,000 infantry and cavalry troops to settle in Xiaopingjin. Zhao Gu said, "I swear to capture Liu Bei alive to redeem Emperor Qian.

古文：粲表于聪曰： 子业若死，民无所望，则不为李矩、赵固之用，不攻而自灭矣。 
现代文：刘粲上表给刘聪说： 如果司马邺死了，民众无所期望，就不会再被李矩、赵固驱用，将不攻自灭。 
English: Liu Zhen said to Liu Cong on the table: If Sima Zhen dies, the people have nothing to expect, they will no longer be driven by Li Rui and Zhao Gu, and will not attack and self-destruct.

古文：戊戌，愍帝遇害于平阳。
现代文：戊戌，愍帝司马邺在平阳遇害。
English: Ms. Wu and Mr. Di Sima were killed in Pingyang.

古文：粲遣雅生攻洛阳，固奔阳城山。
现代文：刘粲派遣刘雅生进攻洛阳，赵固逃奔阳城山。
English: Liu Bei sent Liu Yasheng to attack Luoyang, and Zhao Gu fled to the mountains of Yangcheng.

古文：是岁，王命课督农功，二千石、长吏以入谷多少为殿最，诸军各自佃作，即以为禀。
现代文：这年，晋王下令考核、督促农业生产，俸禄二千石的官员、长官依据交纳谷物的数量多少考评政绩高下，各地驻军各自耕作，所获充当军队给养。
English: In this year, Jin Wang ordered the assessment and supervision of agricultural production. The officials and superintendents with a salary of 2,000 koku were evaluated according to the amount of grain they paid. The military garrisons in various regions cultivated their own crops, and what they received served as military supplies.

古文：氐王杨茂搜卒，长子难敌立，与少子坚头分领部曲；难敌号左贤王，屯下辨，坚头号右贤王，屯河池。
现代文：氐族酋长杨茂搜死去，长子杨难敌继位，和小儿子杨坚头分别统领部曲。杨难敌号称左贤王，屯驻下辨，杨坚头号称右贤王，屯驻河池。
English: The chief of the Yi people, Yang Maoshuo, died, and his eldest son, Yang Nanchong, succeeded to the throne, and his younger son, Yang Jiantu, took over the leadership separately. Yang Nanchong, known as the left wise king, was stationed in Shideban, and Yang Jian, known as the right wise king, was stationed in Hechi.

古文：河南王吐谷浑卒。
现代文：河南王吐谷浑死去。
English: The king of Henan, Tu Gu, has died.

古文：吐谷浑者，慕容廆之庶兄也，父涉归，分户一千七百以隶之。
现代文：吐谷浑是慕容的异母兄长，父亲涉归曾划给他一千七百户为部曲。
English: Tu Guhun is Murong's older half-brother. When his father returned to China, he was given 1,700 households as his inheritance.

古文：及廆嗣位，二部马斗，廆遣使让吐谷浑曰： 先公分建有别，奈何不相远异，而令马有斗伤 吐谷浑怒曰： 马是六畜，斗乃其常，何至怒及于人！
现代文：等到慕容继承鲜卑酋长位，吐谷浑和慕容双方的马群争斗。慕容派使者斥责吐谷浑说： 先父划分的部族本来不同，你为什么不离得远点儿，而让马群争斗致伤！ 吐谷浑生气地说： 马是六畜之一，争斗本是常事，哪至于迁怒于人！
English: When Murong succeeded to the position of Xianbei chieftain, the horses of both Tu Gu Hun and Murong fought. Murong sent an envoy to rebuke Tu Gu Hun, saying, "The tribes divided by my father were originally different, why didn't you stay away from them and let the horses fight and cause injuries!" Tu Gu said angrily, "Horses are one of the six animals, fighting is a regular occurrence, and as for getting angry with people!

古文：欲远别甚易，恐后会为难耳！
现代文：要想远远分开很容易，只怕将来相会就难了！
English: It is easy to be far apart, but it is difficult to meet in the future!

古文：今当去汝万里之外。 
现代文：我现在要离开你到万里之外。 
English: Now I'm going to leave you thousands of miles away.

古文：遂帅其众西徙。
现代文：于是带领部众向西迁徙。
English: So he led his followers to migrate westward.

古文：廆悔之，遣其长史乙郍娄冯追谢之。吐谷浑曰： 先公尝称卜筮之言云： 吾二子皆当强盛，祚流后世。 
现代文：慕容后悔此事，派长史乙娄冯追上道歉，吐谷浑说： 先公曾经传述卜筮之语说： 我的两个儿子都会强盛的，统治权力将延续到后世。 
English: Murong regretted the matter, the leader of the faction, Shi Yijun Feng, followed up with an apology, and Tu Guhun said: The forefather once passed on the words of Bo Gui, saying: Both of my sons will be powerful, and the ruling power will continue to future generations.

古文：我，孽子也，理无并大。
现代文：我非正妻之子，按理不能与嫡子并重。
English: I am not the son of a legitimate wife, so by rights I cannot have the same status as a legitimate son.

古文：今因马而别，殆天意乎！ 
现代文：现在因为马群之事分开，大概是天意吧！ 
English: Now that they are separated because of the horses, it's probably God's will!

古文：遂不复还，西傅阴山而居。
现代文：于是不再回去，向西傍依阴山居住。
English: As a result, he did not go back and lived on the west side of Mount Yin.

古文：属永嘉之乱，因度陇而西，据洮水之西，极于白兰，地方数千里。
现代文：当永嘉之乱时，吐谷浑借机越过陇右向西发展，占据洮水以西地区，至于白兰，方圆数千里。
English: At the time of the Yongjia Rebellion, Tuguan Hun took advantage of the opportunity to develop westward beyond Surabaya, occupying the area west of Surabaya. As for Bran, it was thousands of miles in radius.

古文：鲜卑谓兄为阿干，廆追思之，为之作《阿干之歌》。
现代文：鲜卑语把哥哥叫作 阿干 ，慕容遥思兄长，因此作《阿干之歌》。
English: In Xianbei, the elder brother is called Agan, and Murong Yao thought of him as his elder brother, hence the "Song of Agan."

古文：吐谷浑有子六十人，长子吐延嗣。
现代文：吐谷浑有六十多个儿子，长子吐延继承王位。
English: He had more than sixty sons, and his eldest son, Tuyan, succeeded to the throne.

古文：吐延长大有勇力，羌、胡皆畏之。
现代文：吐延高大勇武，羌人、胡人都怕他。
English: Tuyan is tall and brave, and is feared by both the Xiongnu and Hu.

古文：中宗元皇帝上太兴元年春，正月，辽西公疾陆眷卒，其子幼，叔父涉复辰自立。段匹磾自蓟往奔丧；段末柸宣言： 匹磾之来，欲为篡也。 
现代文：太兴元年春季，正月，辽西公疾陆眷死，儿子幼小，叔父涉复辰自立为王。段匹由蓟州出发去奔丧，段末扬言说： 段匹此来，是想篡位。 
English: In the spring of the first year of the Taixing Dynasty, in the first month of the year, Liao Xi died of illness, his son was young, and his uncle, Zhan Fuchen, became king. Duan Pi set out from Bozhou to go to the funeral, and at the end of the journey he threatened: Duan Pi came here to usurp the throne.

古文：匹磾至右北平，涉复辰发兵拒之。末柸乘虚袭涉复辰，杀之，并其子弟党与，自称单于。
现代文：段匹到达右北平，涉复辰发兵阻拦，段末乘虚击杀涉复辰，兼并其子弟、党羽，自称单于。
English: Duanpi arrived at the right Beiping, and sent troops to block Wafu Chen. Duanmei took advantage of the false attack to kill Wafu Chen, annexed his sons and party members, and claimed to be alone.

古文：迎击匹磾，败之；匹磾走还蓟。
现代文：段末迎战段匹并战胜了他，段匹逃回蓟州。
English: At the end of the passage, he met and defeated Duanpi, and Duanpi fled back to Zhangzhou.

古文：三月，癸丑，愍帝凶问至建康，王斩縗居庐；百官请上尊号，王不许。
现代文：三月，癸丑，愍帝死讯传至建康，晋王服斩衰丧服，别居倚庐。百官奏请晋王使用皇帝尊号，晋王不同意。
English: In March, the news of Emperor Jiankang's death reached Jiankang, and Jin Wang was in mourning, with no home to go to. The centurion asked Jin Wang to use the emperor's honorific title, but Jin Wang did not agree.

古文：纪瞻曰： 晋氏统绝，于今二年，陛下当承大业；顾望宗室，谁复与让！
现代文：纪瞻说： 晋政权灭亡，至今已经两年，陛下应当继承大业。遍观皇室子弟，又有谁值得推让！
English: Ji Zhan said: It has been two years since the fall of the Jin regime, and His Majesty should inherit the great cause. Look around at the royal children, and who is worth pushing aside!

古文：若光践大位，则神、民有所凭依；苟为逆天时，违人事，大势一去，不可复还。
现代文：陛下如果荣登皇位，那么祖先神灵和国民都能有所依凭；如果拂逆天命，违背人心，大势一旦失去，就无法挽回了。
English: If His Majesty ascends to the throne, then the ancestors, gods and people can rely on him; if he defies fate and goes against the will of the people, once the momentum is lost, it cannot be recovered.

古文：今两都燔荡，宗庙无主，刘聪窃号于西北，而陛下方高让于东南，此所谓揖让而救火也。 
现代文：现在洛阳、长安两座京城被毁，国家无主，刘聪在西北自立国号，而陛下却在东南清高地推谢帝位，这就如同急于救火却恭礼谦让。 
English: Now, the two capital cities of Luoyang and Chang'an have been destroyed, and the country is without an owner. Liu Cong has become an independent country in the northwest, while His Majesty has abdicated the throne in Qingdao in the southeast. This is like rushing to put out a fire while bowing and scraping.

古文：王犹不许，使殿中将军韩绩彻去御坐。
现代文：晋王还是不同意，让殿中将军韩绩撤去摆好的皇帝宝座。
English: Jin Wang still did not agree, so he asked the palace general Han Ji to remove the emperor's throne that had been set up.

古文：瞻叱绩曰： 帝坐上应列星，敢动者斩！ 
现代文：纪瞻喝斥韩绩说： 皇帝之座与天上列星相应，敢搬动的斩首！ 
English: Ji Zhan rebuked Han Bi, saying: The emperor's throne corresponds to the stars in the sky, and the decapitation of those who dare to move!

古文：王为之改容。
现代文：晋王脸色为之一变。
English: Jin Wang's face changed completely.

古文：奉朝请周嵩上疏曰： 古之王者，义全而后取，让成而后得，是以享世长久，重光万载也。
现代文：奉朝请周嵩上疏说： 古代帝王，道义周全而后撷取，谦让顺成而后据有，所以能长久地统治国家，恩泽被服万世。
English: Bongchong asked Zhou Song to say: Ancient emperors, morally perfect and then captured, humble and obedient and then possessed, so they can rule the country for a long time, and the grace is served for all eternity.

古文：今梓宫未返，旧京未清，义夫泣血，士女遑遑。
现代文：现在愍帝的梓宫尚未返国，故都耻辱尚未涤清，胸怀节义者痛心泣血，士子民女惶惶失措。
English: Now Emperor Zhaozong has not yet returned to China, so all the shame has not yet been wiped clean. The righteous in the festival are heartbroken and weep blood, and the scholars and the people are panicked.

古文：宜开延嘉谋，训卒厉兵，先雪社稷大耻，副四海之心，则神器将安适哉！ 
现代文：应当广开言路征求良好的建议，训练士卒、整备兵器，先洗雪国家覆亡的大耻，实现天下人民的共同愿望，那么君临天下的大权还能给谁呢！ 
English: It is necessary to seek good advice, train soldiers and equip weapons, first wash away the great shame of the country's downfall, and realize the common aspirations of the people of the world. Then, who can be given the power to rule the world?

古文：由是忤旨，出为新安太守，又坐怨望抵罪。
现代文：周嵩的上疏违背了晋王的旨意，被贬黜出京，任新安太守。又因心怀怨谤被夺职。
English: Zhou Song's Shang Zuo violated the will of the Jin king, was banished from Beijing and appointed as the new An governor. He was also deprived of his post for harboring a grudge.

古文：嵩，顗之弟也。
现代文：周嵩是周的兄弟。
English: Zhou Song is Zhou's brother.

古文：丙辰，王即皇帝位，百官皆陪列。
现代文：丙辰，晋王即帝位，文武百官陪列于两侧。
English: Hsin-Chen, Jin Wang, that is, the throne, accompanied by hundreds of civil and military officials on both sides.

古文：帝命王导升御床共坐，导固辞曰： 若太阳下同万物，苍生何由仰照？ 
现代文：元帝令王导登御床同坐，王导坚决拒绝，说： 如果太阳与天下万物等同，怎么能俯照苍生！ 
English: Emperor Yuan ordered Wang Du to ascend to the imperial bed and sit with him, but Wang Du resolutely refused, saying: If the sun is equal to all things under heaven, how can it shine down on all living things!

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：元帝便不再坚持。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：大赦，改元，文武增位二等。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号为太兴，文武官员都晋升二级爵位。
English: The country was amnestied, the era name was changed to Taixing, and all civil and military officials were promoted to the second level of peerage.

古文：帝欲赐诸吏投刺劝进者加位一等，民投刺者皆除吏，凡二十馀万人。
现代文：元帝打算对所有曾经投贴建议自己接受皇位的人格外优宠，凡官吏都增加爵位一等，平民都提升为官吏，总计有二十多万人。
English: Emperor Yuan planned to give special favors to all those who had proposed to accept the throne. All officials were given first-class titles, and all commoners were promoted to officials, a total of more than 200,000 people.

古文：散骑常侍熊远曰： 陛下应天继统，率土归戴，岂独近者情重，远者情轻！
现代文：散骑常待熊远说： 陛下顺应天命，继承皇位，普天之下莫不拥戴，岂止左近之人情深，偏远之人情浅！
English: The straggler often waited for Xiong Yuan and said, "Your majesty should follow the fate of heaven and succeed to the imperial throne. There is no one under the whole world who would not support you. It is not only those who are close to you who are deep-hearted, but those who are far away are shallow-hearted!"

古文：不若依汉法遍赐天下爵，于恩为普，且可以息检核之烦，塞巧伪之端也。 
现代文：不如依照汉朝的做法，普遍赐封臣民官爵，这样皇恩浩荡，而且可以省去考察核实的烦劳，堵塞弄虚作假的渠道。 
English: It would be better to follow the Han Dynasty's practice of generally awarding titles of nobility to vassals, so that the royal favor would be abundant, and it would save the trouble of inspection and verification, and block the channels of fraud.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：元帝不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：庚午，立王太子绍为皇太子。
现代文：庚午，立王太子司马绍为皇太子。
English: On the 24th, Crown Prince Sima Shao was appointed Crown Prince.

古文：太子仁孝，喜文辞，善武艺，好贤礼士，容受规谏，与庾亮、温峤等为布衣之交。
现代文：太子仁义而有孝道，喜欢文学，爱好武艺，礼贤下士，从谏如流，与庾亮、温峤等结为平民之交。
English: The prince was benevolent and had filial piety, liked literature, loved martial arts, and was a virtuous corporal. He became a friend of the common people through his friendship with Gong Liang, Yan Liang and others.

古文：亮风格峻整，善谈老、庄，帝器重之，聘亮妹为太子妃。
现代文：庾亮为人端庄肃正，擅长谈论老子、庄子之学，元帝很器重他，礼聘其妹为皇太子妃。
English: Yan Liang was a dignified and upright person. He was good at talking about the teachings of Lao Zi and Zhuang Zi. The Yuan Emperor held him in high esteem and appointed his sister as the crown princess.

古文：帝以贺循行太子太傅，周顗为少傅，庾亮以中书郎侍讲东宫。
现代文：元帝任命贺循行使太子太傅职权，周为少傅，庾亮以中书郎身份侍讲东宫。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed He Xun to exercise the powers of the prince's grand tutor, Zhou to be the junior tutor, and Zou Liang to serve as the junior scribe to the Eastern Palace.

古文：帝好刑名家，以《韩非》书赐太子。
现代文：元帝喜好刑名之学，曾把《韩非子》一书赠送给太子。
English: Emperor Yuan liked the study of surnames, and once presented the book "Han Feizi" to the prince.

古文：庾亮谏曰： 申、韩刻薄伤化，不足留圣心。 
现代文：庾亮规谏太子说： 申不害、韩非行事刻薄有伤圣教，不值得圣上留心。 
English: The crown prince said, "It is not worth the attention of the Holy Father to say that it is not harmful, and it is not worthy of the attention of the Holy Father to be mean to Han Fei.

古文：太子纳之。
现代文：太子听从了。
English: The prince obeyed.

古文：帝复遣使授慕容廆龙骧将军、大单于、昌黎公，廆辞公爵不受。
现代文：元帝再次派遣使者任命慕容为龙骧将军、大单于、昌黎公，慕容推辞昌黎公的爵位不肯接受。
English: Emperor Yuan once again sent an envoy to appoint Murong as General Longyu, Great Dan Yu, and Grand Duke Changli. Murong declined the title of Grand Duke Changli and refused to accept it.

古文：廆以游邃为龙骧长史，刘翔为主簿，命邃创定府朝仪法。
现代文：慕容任命游邃为龙骧长史，刘翔为主簿，让游邃创定军府礼仪。
English: Murong appointed Youjun as the Long History of Longjing, Liu Xiang as the main book, and let Youjun create the military etiquette.

古文：裴嶷言于廆曰： 晋室衰微，介居江表，威德不能及远，中原之乱，非明公不能拯也。
现代文：裴嶷对慕容说： 晋王室衰微，孤独地处于江南，国威和恩德都不能覆及远方，中原的战乱局面，除了贤君您无人能够拯救。
English: Pei Yao said to Murong: The Jin royal family is in decline and is alone in the south of the Yangtze River. Neither the national prestige nor the national wealth can cover the distance. The Central Plains are in a war-torn situation. No one can save you but the wise ruler.

古文：今诸部虽各拥兵，然皆顽愚相聚，宜以渐并取，以为西讨之资。 
现代文：现在各部族虽然各自拥有军队，但都是由顽钝愚昧的族人聚合而成，应当逐个兼并，充实征讨中原的实力。 
English: Now, although each tribe has its own army, they are all made up of stubborn and ignorant tribesmen. They should be merged one by one to fully exploit the strength of the Central Plains.

古文：廆曰： 君言大，非孤所及也。
现代文：慕容说： 您所说的宏图远大，不是孤现在所能做的。
English: Murong said, "The grand plan you mentioned is far-reaching, and it is not something that can be done alone.

古文：然君中朝名德，不以孤僻陋而教诲之，是天以君赐孤而祐其国也。 
现代文：不过您是朝中名贤，不因为孤的僻陋而加以教诲，这是上天把您赐给孤而护国家。 
English: However, you are a famous person in the court, not because of the remoteness of the lonely and teach them, this is the heaven to give you to the lonely and protect the country.

古文：乃以嶷为长史，委以军国之谋；诸部弱小者，稍稍击取之。
现代文：于是任裴嶷为长史，委托他策划军国之事，对势力弱小的部族，逐步以武力兼并。
English: Therefore, he entrusted Ren Peiqi with the long history of planning the military affairs and gradually annexing the weak tribes by force.

古文：李矩使郭默、郭诵救赵固，屯于洛汭。
现代文：李矩派郭默、郭诵救援赵固，屯兵洛水、水一带。
English: Li Rui sent Guo Mei and Guo Xie to rescue Zhao Gu, and sent troops to Luoshui and the water area.

古文：诵潜遣其将耿稚等夜济河袭汉营，汉贝丘王翼光觇知之，以告太子粲，请为之备。
现代文：郭诵悄悄派遣部将耿稚等人夜间渡过黄河偷袭汉军军营，汉国具丘王翼光得到消息，传告太子刘粲，请求做好防备。
English: Guo Chih quietly dispatched General Geng Wanzhi and others to cross the Yellow River at night to raid the Chinese army camp. When the Han Guoqiu Wang Yiguang received the news, he sent a message to Prince Liu Bei, asking him to be prepared.

古文：粲曰： 彼闻赵固之败，自保不暇，安敢来此邪！毋为惊动将士！ 
现代文：刘粲说： 他们听说赵固兵败，自顾不暇，哪儿还敢到这儿来，不要因此惊动将士！ 
English: Liu Wei said: They have heard that Zhao Gu has been defeated and is too busy to take care of himself. How dare they come here? Don't alarm the soldiers!

古文：俄而稚等奄至，十道进攻，粲众惊溃，死伤太半，粲走保阳乡。
现代文：不久，耿稚等人率军扑来，分十路围攻，刘粲所部惊慌溃逃，死伤过半。刘粲奔逃保守阳乡。
English: Not long after, Geng Zhi and others led the army to attack and besieged in ten directions. Liu Xizhong's army panicked and fled, with more than half of them being killed or injured. Liu Xizhong fled to Yangxiang.

古文：稚等据其营，获器械、军资不可胜数。
现代文：耿稚等占据其军营，缴获的兵器和军事物资不计其数。
English: Geng Zhi and others occupied his military camp, and seized countless weapons and military supplies.

古文：及旦，粲见稚等兵少，更与刘雅生收馀众攻之，汉主聪使太尉范隆帅骑助之，与稚等相持，苦战二十馀日，不能下。
现代文：到了天亮，刘粲看见耿稚等人兵力不多，又和刘雅生收拾残余部队反攻，汉主刘聪派太尉范隆率骑兵助战，与耿稚等相持，苦战二十多天，不能攻克。
English: At dawn, Liu Bei saw that Geng Wuzhi and others did not have much troops, and he and Liu Yasheng gathered the remaining troops to counterattack. The Han ruler Liu Cong sent Lieutenant Fan Long to lead the cavalry to assist in the battle. He was at odds with Geng Wuzhi and others, and fought hard for more than twenty days, unable to defeat them.

古文：李矩进兵救之，汉兵临河拒守，矩兵不得济。
现代文：李矩进军救援耿稚，汉军凭借黄河拒守，李矩的军队无法渡河。
English: Li Rui marched in to rescue Geng Zhi, the Han army refused to defend themselves by relying on the Yellow River, and Li Rui's army was unable to cross the river.

古文：稚等杀其所获牛马，焚其军资，突围，奔虎牢。
现代文：耿稚等人杀掉缴获的牛马，烧掉军事物资，突围奔向虎牢。
English: Geng Zhi and others killed the captured cattle and horses, burned the military supplies, and broke through to the tiger prison.

古文：诏以矩都督河南三郡诸军事。
现代文：元帝下诏让李矩总领河南三郡军务。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed that Li Rui should lead the military affairs of the three counties in Henan Province.

古文：汉螽斯则百堂灾，烧杀汉主聪之子会稽王康等二十一人。
现代文：汉国螽斯则百堂发生火灾，烧死汉主刘聪的儿子会稽王刘康等二十一人。
English: A fire broke out in a hundred churches in Wuxi, Hunan Province, burning to death twenty-one people, including Liu Cong, the son of the Han emperor Liu Cong.

古文：聪以其子济南王骥为大将军、都督中外诸军事、录尚书，齐王劢为大司徒。
现代文：刘聪任命其子济南王刘骥为大将军、都督中外诸军事、录尚书，任命齐王刘劢为大司徒。
English: Liu Cong appointed his son, the king of Jinan, Liu Ye, as the general, the military governor of various provinces, and the recorder of records, and appointed the king of Qi, Liu Ye, as the grand steward.

古文：焦嵩、陈安举兵逼上邽，相国保遣使告急于张寔，寔遣金城太守窦涛督步骑二万赴之。
现代文：焦嵩、陈安起兵进逼上，相国司马保派人向张告急，张派金城太守窦涛督率步、骑兵二万人赴援。
English: Jiao Song and Chen An raised an army to force their way in, the neighboring country Sima Bao sent people to Zhang to express their urgency, and Zhang sent Dou Tao Gu, the governor of Jincheng, and 20,000 cavalry to help.

古文：军至新阳，闻愍帝崩，保谋称尊号。
现代文：军队行至新阳，听说愍帝死，司马保策划自立为帝。
English: The army marched to Xinyang, where they heard that Emperor Zou had died and Sima Bao was plotting to make himself emperor.

古文：破羌都尉张诰言于寔曰： 南阳王，国之疏属，忘其大耻而亟欲自尊，必不能成功。
现代文：破羌都尉张诜对张说： 南阳王司马保是晋皇室中血统疏远的宗族，把巨大的耻辱忘于脑后，急于想自己称帝，一定不会成功。
English: Zhang Ye said to Zhang: Nanyang King Sima Bao is a distant bloodline in the Jin royal family. He has forgotten the great shame and is anxious to proclaim himself emperor. He will not succeed.

古文：晋王近亲，且有名德，当帅天下以奉之。 
现代文：晋王司马睿是皇室近亲，而且有贤名，应当率天下之人共同奉他为主。 
English: Jin Wang Sima Rui is a close relative of the imperial family, and has a reputation for wisdom, and should lead the people of the world to jointly worship him as the Lord.

古文：寔从之，遣牙门蔡忠奉表诣建康；比至，帝已即位。
现代文：张听从，派遣牙门蔡忠奉呈劝进表书去建康。等到了建康，晋王已即帝位。
English: Zhang obeyed and sent the dentist Cai Zhong with a letter of recommendation to Jiankang. By the time Jiankang was established, Jin Wang had already ascended the throne.

古文：寔不用江东年号，犹称建兴。
现代文：张不用江南新改的年号，仍用愍帝建兴的年号。
English: Zhang did not use the year name newly changed in the south of the Yangtze River, but still used the year name of Emperor Jianxing.

古文：夏，四月，丁丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁丑朔，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：加王敦江州牧，王导骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：元帝加任王敦为江州牧，王导为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed Wang Dun as the governor of Jiangzhou, Wang Du as the commander of the cavalry, and Kaifu Yi as the third secretary.

古文：导遣八部从事行扬州郡国，还，同时俱见。
现代文：王导分遣八部从事八人行察扬州所属八郡，回来后同时召见。
English: Wang Du sent eight detachments to go on an eight-man patrol to investigate eight counties belonging to Yangzhou, and summoned them at the same time after returning.

古文：诸从事各言二千石官长得失，独顾和无言。
现代文：各位从事纷纷禀告二千石官长的为政得失，唯独顾和默默无言。
English: All of you are engaged in the political gains and losses of the 2,000-stone officials who have been accused one after another, but you are silent.

古文：导问之，和曰： 明公作辅，宁使网漏吞舟，何缘采听风闻，以察察为政邪！ 
现代文：王导询问他，顾和说： 贤君您辅佐国政，宁可使法网宽松以至可以漏过大鱼，为什么又要搜集、听信道听途说，以斤斤计较来治理政事呢！ 
English: Wang Du asked him, Gu He said: "You are a wise man, you are assisting the national politics, you would rather make the legal net loose so that you can miss the big fish, why do you have to collect, listen to the faith and hearsay, and use cunning to govern the political affairs!

古文：导咨嗟称善。
现代文：王导感叹称赞。
English: Wang Du sighed with praise.

古文：和，荣之族子也。
现代文：顾和是顾荣的同族子侄。
English: Gu He is the nephew of Gu Rong.

古文：成丞相范长生卒；成主雄以长生子侍中贲为丞相。
现代文：成汉丞相范长生故去，成汉主李雄任命其子侍中范贲为丞相。
English: After the death of the Minister of the Han Dynasty, Fan Chang Sheng, the Lord of the Han Dynasty, Li Xiong, appointed his son, the Vice-Minister of the Han Dynasty, Fan Yu Sheng, as the Minister of the Han Dynasty.

古文：长生博学，多艺能，年近百岁，蜀人奉之如神。
现代文：范长生博学多能，享年近百岁，蜀地人民尊奉他有如神灵。
English: Fan Changsheng was an erudite and capable man. He was nearly 100 years old when he died, and the people of Shu respected him like a god.

古文：汉中常侍王沈养女有美色，汉主聪立以为左皇后。
现代文：汉国中常侍王沈的养女容颜美丽，汉主刘聪立她为左皇后。
English: The adopted daughter of the Chinese middle-ranking courtier, King Shen, was beautiful. The Han ruler, Liu Cong, made her the Left Empress.

古文：尚书令王鉴、中书监崔懿之、中书令曹恂谏曰： 臣闻王者立后，比德乾坤，生承宗庙，没配后土。必择世德名宗，幽闲令淑，乃副四海之望，称神祗之心。
现代文：尚书令王鉴、中书监崔懿之、中书令曹恂进谏说： 臣听说帝王册立王后，效法乾坤相配之理，在世时承嗣宗庙祭祀，去世后配祀土神，必须选择道德传家、名门显族的女子，本人也应幽闲贤淑，才能与四海之民的期望相称，使神祗满意。
English: Shang Shuling Wang Jian, Chinese Book Supervisor Cui Yanzhi, and Chinese Book Supervisor Cao Yanzhong said: "The minister heard that the emperor should appoint a queen, follow the principle of compatibility, inherit the ancestral temple sacrifice while alive, and worship the local god after death. It is necessary to choose a moral heir, a woman of a famous family, and I should also be quiet and virtuous, in order to be commensurate with the expectations of the people of the four seas and make the gods satisfied.

古文：孝成帝以赵飞燕为后，使继嗣绝灭，社稷为墟，此前鉴也。
现代文：汉成帝立赵飞燕为皇后，结果使子嗣灭绝，社稷毁为废墟，这是前代的教训。
English: Emperor Hancheng made Zhao Feiyan his empress, which resulted in the extinction of his descendants and the ruin of the society. This is the lesson of the previous generation.

古文：自麟嘉以来，中宫之位，不以德举。
现代文：本期从麟嘉年间开始，选立皇后不以道德为准绳。
English: In this period, starting from the Lin Jia years, the selection of the empress was not based on morality.

古文：借使沈之弟女，刑馀小丑，犹不可以尘污椒房，况其家婢邪！
现代文：即便是王沈的妹妹或亲女儿，也不过如同阉宦丑类，尚且不能让她们沾污后妃之位，更何况王沈的婢女呢！
English: Even Wang Shen's younger sister or his own daughter were nothing more than ugly creatures, yet they could not defile the position of empress, let alone Wang Shen's maidservant!

古文：六宫妃嫔，皆公子公孙，奈何一旦以婢主之！
现代文：君王六宫的嫔妃，都是王公贵胄的子孙，怎能轻率地让婢女做她们的主人！
English: The concubines of the six palaces of kings are all the descendants of princes and noblemen, how can they rashly let the maidservants be their masters!

古文：臣恐非国家之福也。 
现代文：臣恐怕这不是国家的福兆。 
English: I'm afraid it's not a good omen for the country.

古文：聪大怒，使中常侍宣怀谓太子粲曰： 鉴等小子，狂言侮慢，无复君臣上下之礼，其速考实！ 
现代文：刘聪大为生气，让中常侍宣怀对太子刘粲说： 王鉴这帮小子，口出狂言，侮慢尊上，不再有君臣上下的礼节，望从速定罪！ 
English: Liu Cong was very angry, so he asked the Vice-Chamberlain Xuan Huai to say to the Crown Prince Liu Ye: Wang Jian's gang of brats, uttering wild words, insulting their superiors, no longer have the etiquette of monarchs and ministers, and hope to be convicted immediately!

古文：于是收鉴等送市，皆斩之。
现代文：于是收捕王鉴等人送往刑场斩首。
English: As a result, Wang Jian and others were arrested and sent to the execution site to be beheaded.

古文：金紫光禄大夫王延驰将入谏，门者弗通。
现代文：金紫光禄大夫王延骑马赶来，要进宫规谏，守门者不给通报。
English: Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor Wang Yan arrived on horseback and wanted to enter the palace, but the gatekeepers would not give him notice.

古文：鉴等临刑，王沈以杖叩之曰： 庸奴，复能为恶乎！
现代文：王鉴等人临刑前，王沈用手杖叩击他们说： 无用奴才，还能再作恶吗？
English: Before Wang Jian and the others were executed, Wang Shen beat them with a cane and said, "Useless slaves, can you still do evil?

古文：乃公何与汝事！ 
现代文：老公关你们什么事！ 
English: What's the matter with you old PR people!

古文：鉴瞋目叱之曰： 竖子，灭大汉者，正坐汝鼠辈与靳准耳！
现代文：王鉴目叱骂说： 小子！覆灭大汉的人，正是你这样的鼠辈和靳准之流！
English: Wang Jianme scolded: "Kid! The one who overthrows the great man is just like you, a member of the rat generation and a member of the grasshopper generation!

古文：要当诉汝于先帝，取汝于地下治之。 
现代文：我一定要向先帝控告你，把你拘到地下治罪。 
English: I will definitely sue you to the former emperor, take you underground and punish you.

古文：准谓鉴曰： 吾受诏收君，有何不善，君言汉灭由吾也！ 
现代文：靳准对王鉴说： 我接受诏命拘捕你，有什么不对，你却说汉国覆灭是因为我？ 
English: Yan Zheng said to Wang Jian: I accept the imperial order to arrest you, what is wrong, but you say that the destruction of China is because of me?

古文：鉴曰： 汝杀皇太弟，使主上获不友之名。
现代文：王鉴说： 你杀死皇太弟，使主上蒙受不友爱的恶名。
English: Wang Jian said, "You killed the crown prince's younger brother and brought the Lord a bad name of unfriendliness.

古文：国家畜养汝辈，何得不灭！ 
现代文：国家畜养你这样的人，怎能不灭亡！ 
English: How can people like you, who are bred by the state, not perish?

古文：懿之谓准曰： 汝心如枭獍，必为国患，汝既食人，人亦当食汝。 
现代文：崔懿之对靳准说： 你的心像枭和破镜这种畜类一样残忍，必定是国家的祸害。你既然要吃人，别人也会吃掉你。 
English: Cui Yanzhi said to Zou Zi: "Your heart is as cruel as animals such as cormorants and broken mirrors, it must be a scourge of the country. Since you want to eat people, others will also eat you."

古文：聪又立宣怀养女为中皇后。
现代文：刘聪又立宣怀的养女为中皇后。
English: Liu Cong also made Xuan Huai's adopted daughter the Middle Empress.

古文：司徒荀组在许昌，逼于石勒，帅其属数百人渡江。
现代文：司徒荀组在许昌，被石勒所逼，率领部属数百人渡过长江。
English: Szeto's group was in Xuchang and was forced by Shi Le to lead hundreds of subordinates across the Yangtze River.

古文：诏组与太保西阳王羕并录尚书事。
现代文：元帝下诏让荀组和太保、西阳王司马同录尚书事。
English: Emperor Yuan issued an edict to have the records of Shigeki, Taibo, and Siyang Wang Sima recorded together.

古文：段匹磾之奔疾陆眷丧也，刘琨使其世子群送之。
现代文：段匹为疾陆眷奔丧时，刘琨让自己的嫡长子刘群陪送。
English: When Duanpi was rushing to the funeral for his ailing relative, Liu Wei let his eldest son Liu Qun accompany him.

古文：匹磾败，群为段末柸所得。
现代文：段匹兵败，刘群被段末俘获。
English: Duanpi was defeated and Liu Qun was captured by Duanbei.

古文：末柸厚礼之，许以琨为幽州刺史，欲与之袭匹磾，密遣使赍群书，请琨为内应，为匹磾逻骑所得。
现代文：段末对他非常有礼，并答应让刘琨当幽州刺史，想和刘琨共同攻击段匹。段末秘密派遣使者携带刘群写的信，请刘琨当内应，结果被段匹的巡逻骑兵抓获。
English: He was very courteous to him at the end of the paragraph, and promised to let Liu Xuan be sent to Yuzhou to make history, and wanted to jointly attack Duanpi with Liu Xuan. At the end of the paragraph, he secretly sent an envoy to carry a letter written by Liu Qun, and asked Liu Xuan to respond, and the result was captured by Duanpi's patrol cavalry.

古文：时琨别屯征北小城，不知也，来见匹磾。
现代文：当时刘琨单独屯兵于征北小城，不知内情，来见段匹。
English: At that time, Liu Ye was stationed alone in a small town in the north of Zhengzhou. He did not know the inside story and came to see Duanpi.

古文：匹磾以群书示琨曰： 意亦不疑公，是以白公耳。 
现代文：段匹把刘群的信给他看，并说： 我心中也没有怀疑您，所以告诉您。 
English: Duanpi showed him Liu Qun's letter and said, "I didn't doubt you in my heart, so I'll tell you.

古文：琨曰： 与公同盟，庶雪国家之耻，若儿书密达，亦终不以一子之故负公而忘义也。 
现代文：刘琨说： 我和您共同结盟，但愿能洗雪国家的耻辱，即便儿子的信秘密地送到我手中，我最终也不会因为一个儿子的缘故辜负您而忘大义。 
English: Liu Yao said, "I have made an alliance with you, and I hope we can wash away the country's shame. Even if my son's letter is secretly delivered to me, I will not betray you for the sake of one son and forget the great cause.

古文：匹磾雅重琨，初无害琨意，将听还屯。
现代文：段匹素来看重刘琨，本来也没有加害刘琨的意思，准备听任他返回驻屯地。
English: Duan Ping always valued Liu Ye, and originally had no intention of harming Liu Ye, and was prepared to let him return to the garrison.

古文：其弟叔军谓匹磾曰： 我，胡夷耳；所以能服晋人者，畏吾众也。
现代文：但段匹的弟弟段叔军对他说： 我们是胡夷族，之所以能够让晋国人服从我们，是因为畏惧我们人数众多。
English: But Duan's younger brother, Duan Shijun, said to him: "We are Hui, and the reason why we can make the Jin people obey us is because they are afraid of our large number.

古文：今我骨肉乖离，是其良图之日；若有奉琨以起，吾族尽矣。 
现代文：现在我们骨肉不和，正是晋人图谋我们的良机，如果有人推奉刘琨为首而起兵，我们这一族就完了。 
English: Now that our flesh and blood are at odds, it is the Jin people who are trying to take advantage of our good opportunity. If someone pushes Liu Bei to lead an army, our family will be finished.

古文：匹磾攻拔之。
现代文：段匹于是羁留了刘琨，不让他返回。
English: Duanpi then detained Liu Yao and did not allow him to return.

古文：代郡太守辟闾嵩、后将军韩据复潜谋袭匹磾，事泄，匹磾执嵩、据及其徒党，悉诛之。
现代文：刘琨的庶长子刘遵惧怕因此被杀，和刘琨的左长史杨桥等人闭门自守，被段匹攻破。代郡太守辟闾嵩、后将军韩据又密谋偷袭段匹，事情泄露，段匹抓获辟闾嵩、韩据及其党徒，一并处决。
English: Liu Zun, the eldest illegitimate son of Liu Hui, feared that he would be killed as a result, and Liu Hui's left-hand man Shi Yangqiao and others closed their doors and defended themselves, but were broken by Duanpi. The acting county governor Di Binglong and the future general Han Zheng also conspired to secretly attack Duanpi, the matter was leaked, Duanpi captured Di Binglong, Han Zheng and his party members, and they were executed together.

古文：五月，癸丑，匹磾称诏收琨，缢杀之，并杀其子侄四人。
现代文：五月，癸丑，段匹假称奉诏拘捕刘琨，把他勒死，并杀掉他子、侄四人。
English: In May, Duanpi pretended to arrest Liu Yao, strangled him, and killed his son and four nephews.

古文：琨从事中郎卢谌、崔悦等帅琨馀众奔辽西，依段末柸，奉刘群为主；将佐多奔石勒。
现代文：刘琨的从事中郎卢谌、崔悦等率领刘琨余部逃奔辽西，依附段末，尊奉刘群为主，将佐们大多投奔石勒。
English: Liu Kun's middlemen Lu Kun and Cui Yue led the rest of Liu Kun's followers to flee to the west of Liaoning Province. At the end of the paragraph, Liu Kun was the most respected, and most of the generals went to Shilu.

古文：悦，林之曾孙也。
现代文：崔悦是崔林的曾孙。
English: Cui Yue is Cui Lin's great-grandson.

古文：朝廷以匹磾尚强，冀其能平河朔，乃不为琨举哀。
现代文：朝廷因为段匹势力尚强，希望他能平定河朔，于是不为刘琨发丧。
English: Because Duanpi's influence was still strong, the imperial court hoped that he would be able to pacify Heshaku, and therefore did not mourn for Liu Bei.

古文：温峤表： 琨尽忠帝室，家破身亡，宜在褒恤。 
现代文：温峤上表称颂： 刘琨尽忠于晋室，家破身亡，应当褒扬优恤。 
English: Wen Rong praised on the table: Liu Rong was loyal to Jin's wife, his family was destroyed, and he should be commended.

古文：卢谌、崔悦因末柸使者，亦上表为琨讼冤。
现代文：卢谌、崔悦通过段末的使节，也上表为刘琨诉冤。
English: Lu Wei and Cui Yue appealed for justice for Liu Wei through the envoy at the end of the paragraph.

古文：后数岁，乃赠琨太尉、侍中，谥曰愍。
现代文：过了几年，才追赠刘琨太尉、侍中，谥号为 愍 。
English: It took a few years before he was posthumously awarded the rank of lieutenant and chamberlain, and his posthumous name was.

古文：于是夷、晋以琨死故，皆不附匹磾。
现代文：此时夷人、晋人因为刘琨之死，都不再附从段匹。
English: At this time, because of Liu Ye's death, both the Emishi and the Jin were no longer attached to the Danbi.

古文：末柸遣其弟攻匹磾，匹磾帅其众数千将奔邵续，勒将石越邀之于盐山，大败之，匹磾复还保蓟。
现代文：段末派他兄弟进攻段匹，段匹率其部众数千人准备投奔邵续，石勒部将石越在盐山截击段匹，重创其军。
English: Duan Duan sent his brothers to attack Duan Dui at the end of the year. Duan Dui led thousands of his troops to prepare to rush to Shao Rui. Shi Le's troops intercepted Duan Dui in Yanshan, severely damaging his army.

古文：末柸自称幽州刺史。
现代文：段匹又回头保守蓟州。段末自称幽州刺史。
English: At the end of the paragraph, he claimed to be a historian from Yuzhou.

古文：初，温峤为刘琨奉表诣建康，其母崔氏固止之，峤绝裾而去。
现代文：初，温峤受刘琨之命奉呈上表到建康，母亲崔氏坚持阻拦，温峤断袖而去。
English: At the beginning of the year, Ong Yao was ordered by Liu Bei to go to Jiankang. His mother, Cui, insisted on stopping him, and Ong Yao left.

古文：既至，屡求返命，朝廷不许，会琨死，除散骑侍郎。
现代文：到达建康以后，温峤多次请求返回复命，朝廷不同意。适逢刘琨死，元帝提升温峤任散骑侍郎。
English: After arriving in Jiankang, Wen Kun repeatedly requested to return to resume his life, but the imperial court did not agree. When Liu Kun died, the Yuan Emperor promoted Wen Kun to the position of Sanzhi attendant.

古文：峤闻母亡，阻乱不得奔丧、临葬，固让不拜，苦请北归。
现代文：温峤听说母亲亡故，因战乱阻隔不能前去奔丧并安葬，所以坚持辞谢封职，苦苦请求北归家乡。
English: On hearing of his mother's death, Wen Rong could not go to the funeral and burial because of the war, so he insisted on resigning his post and begged to return to his hometown.

古文：诏曰： 凡行礼者，当使理可经通。
现代文：元帝下诏说： 凡是遵循礼节的人，行为应当常常符合大道理。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed: Anyone who follows etiquette should always act in accordance with the Great Principle.

古文：今桀逆未枭，诸军奉迎梓宫犹未得进，峤以一身，于何济其私难而不从王命邪！ 
现代文：现在逆贼未能翦除，奉迎愍帝梓宫的军队尚且无法北进，温峤怎能让自己只顾个人私难，不听从王命呢！ 
English: Now that the traitors have not been eliminated, and the army of Emperor Zi Gong has not yet been able to advance northward, how can Wen Rong allow himself to be concerned only with personal difficulties and not obey the king's order!

古文：峤不得已受拜。
现代文：漫峤不得已，只好接受封职。
English: As a last resort, he had no choice but to accept the post.

古文：初，曹嶷既据青州，乃叛汉来降。
现代文：当初，曹嶷已经占据青州，于是背叛汉国来投降东晋。
English: At first, Cao Pi had already occupied Qingzhou, so he betrayed China to surrender the Eastern Jin Dynasty.

古文：又以建康悬远，势援不接，复与石勒相结，勒授嶷东州大将军、青州牧，封琅邪公。
现代文：又因为建康遥远，威势、军援均不能及远，又与石勒勾结。石勒委授崔嶷为东州大将军、青州牧，封琅邪公。
English: Also, because Jiankang was far away, the power and military support could not be far away, and it colluded with Shiller. Shiller Commission awarded Cui Jun as the Dongzhou General, Qingzhou herdsman, and sealed him as an evil lord.

古文：六月，甲申，以刁协为尚书令，荀崧为左仆射。
现代文：六月，甲申，元帝任刁协为尚书令，荀崧为左仆射。
English: In June, in Jiaxing, the former emperor appointed Xie Xie as Shang Shuling (尚書令) and Xie Zuo Shu Ya (左仆射).

古文：协性刚悍，与物多忤，与侍中刘隗俱为帝所宠任；欲矫时弊，每崇上抑下，排沮豪强，故为王氏所疾，诸刻碎之政，皆云隗、协所建。
现代文：刁协性情刚烈，对事常有不同意见，和侍中刘隗都是元帝所宠爱、信任的人。他们想纠正时弊，总是抑制臣下的势力以崇奉君主的权威，排挤豪强，所以被王氏所恨，许多严酷、劳民的政策，都说是刘隗、刁协的主意。
English: Yan Xie was a strong-willed person, and often had different opinions on things. He and Liu Xie, his aide, were both loved and trusted by the Yuan Emperor. They wanted to correct the ills of the times, and always restrained the power of their subjects to worship the authority of the monarch and push out the powerful. Therefore, they were hated by the Wang clan, and many harsh policies for the working people were said to be the idea of Liu Xie and Yan Xie.

古文：协又使酒放肆，侵毁公卿，见者皆侧目惮之。
现代文：刁协本人又酗酒任性，放浪无羁，攻讦公卿大臣，见到他的人都畏惧而不敢正视。
English: He was also a self-indulgent, drunken vagabond who attacked nobles and ministers. People who saw him were afraid to look him in the face.

古文：戊戌，封皇子晞为武陵王。
现代文：戊戌，元帝封皇子司马为武陵王。
English: On the 23rd, the crown prince Sima Yu was enthroned as King of Wuling.

古文：刘虎自朔方侵拓跋郁律西部。
现代文：刘虎从朔方侵犯拓跋郁律的西部。
English: Liu Hu invaded the western part of Tuoba Yutu from the Shuo side.

古文：秋，七月，郁律击虎，大破之。
现代文：秋季，七月，拓跋郁律攻击刘虎，大胜。
English: In the autumn, in July, Tuoba Yu Li attacked Liu Hu, and won a great victory.

古文：虎走出塞，从弟路孤帅其部落降于郁律。
现代文：刘虎逃到塞外，堂弟刘路孤率部落民众投降拓跋郁律。
English: Liu Hu fled to outside of Serbia, while his cousin Liu Lu led the tribesmen to surrender.

古文：于是郁律西取乌孙故地，东兼勿吉以西，士马精强，雄于北方。
现代文：于是拓跋郁律向西攻取乌孙故地，向东兼并了勿吉以西地区，兵强马壮，称雄于北方。
English: As a result, Tuoba Yu Lu conquered Wusun's hometown to the west and annexed the area west of Baiji to the east. He had a strong army and was a hero in the north.

古文：汉主聪寝疾，征大司马曜为丞相，石勒为大将军，皆隶尚书事，受遗诏辅政。
现代文：汉主刘聪病重，征召大司马刘曜任命为丞相，石勒任大将军，都领尚书事，禀受遗诏辅佐国政。
English: Emperor Liu Cong was gravely ill, and the Grand Secretary Ma Liu You was called up to be appointed as chancellor, and Shi Le was appointed as general. He was in charge of administration and supported the government.

古文：曜、勒固辞。乃以曜为丞相、领雍州牧，勒为大将军、领幽、冀二州牧，勒辞不受。
现代文：刘曜、石勒固执地推辞，于是任刘曜为丞相，兼雍州牧，石勒为大将军，兼领幽州、冀州牧，石勒推辞不接受。
English: Liu You and Shi Le stubbornly refused to resign, so Liu You was appointed as chancellor and Yongzhou magistrate, and Shi Le was appointed as grand general and Yuzhou and Jizhou magistrate. Shi Le did not accept the resignation.

古文：以上洛王景为太宰，济南王骥为大司马，昌国公顗为太师，硃纪为太傅，呼延晏为太保，并录尚书事；范隆守尚书令、仪同三司，靳准为大司空、领司隶校尉，皆迭决尚书奏事。
现代文：任上洛王刘景为太宰，济南王刘骥为大司马，昌国公刘为太帅，朱纪为太傅，呼延晏为太保，同领尚书事；范隆仍为尚书令、仪同三司，靳准任大司空、领司隶校尉，轮流决断尚书所奏事宜。
English: Liu Jing, the king of Luo, was appointed as Dazai, Liu Ye, the king of Jinan, as Daishima, Liu, the prince of Changguo, as Taishai, Zhu Ji, as Taifu, Huyan Ye, as Taibo, and Shang Shuxi, the leader; Fan Long was still Shang Shuling, Yidong Sanji, Zhaozhun, the leader of the air force, and the leader of the army, and took turns to decide the matters raised by Shang Shul.

古文：癸亥，聪卒。
现代文：癸亥，刘聪故去。
English: In the end, Liu Cong passed away.

古文：甲子，太子粲即位。尊皇后靳氏为皇太后，樊氏号弘道皇后，武氏号弘德皇后，王氏号弘孝皇后；立其妻靳氏为皇后，子元公为太子。
现代文：甲子，太子刘粲即位，尊皇后靳氏为皇太后，樊氏号称弘道皇后，武氏号称弘德皇后，王氏号称弘孝皇后；立妻子靳氏为皇后，儿子刘元公为太子。
English: His eldest son, Prince Liu Bei, ascended the throne, and His Majesty the Empress Dowager Zou became empress dowager. The Zou family was called the Empress of Hongdao, the Wu family was called the Empress of Hongde, and the Wang family was called the Empress of Hongxiao. His wife, the Zou family, became empress, and his son, Liu Yuan Gong, became prince.

古文：大赦，改元汉昌。
现代文：大赦天下，改年号为汉昌。
English: The country was amnestied, and the year name was changed to Hanchang.

古文：葬聪于宣光陵，谥曰昭武皇帝，庙号烈宗。
现代文：刘聪葬于宣光陵，谥号是昭武皇帝，庙号烈宗。
English: Liu Cong was buried in Xuan Guang Mausoleum. His posthumous name was Zhaowu Emperor, and his temple name was Retsong.

古文：靳太后等皆年未盈二十，粲多行无礼，无复哀戚。
现代文：靳太后等人年龄都不到二十岁，刘粲多行非礼之举，并无悲哀神色。
English: Empress Dowager Zou and the others were all less than twenty years old. Liu Yao often committed indecent acts, but he did not look sad.

古文：靳准阴有异志，私谓粲曰： 如闻诸公欲行伊、霍之事，先诛太保及臣，以大司马统万机，陛下宜早图之！ 
现代文：靳准私下怀有异志，悄悄对刘粲说： 好像听说诸位公卿准备像商代伊尹、汉代霍光那样代摄朝政，杀掉太保呼延晏和我，让大司马刘骥统领万机，陛下应当早作准备。 
English: secretly harbored a secret ambition, and quietly said to Liu Bei: "It seems that I have heard that you nobles are preparing to take over the regency of the dynasty, just like the Shang Dynasty's Yi Yin and the Han Dynasty's Houguang, and kill the courtier Hu Yan and I, and let the chief steward Ma Liu Bei rule the country. Your majesty should have made preparations earlier."

古文：粲不从。
现代文：刘粲不听。
English: Liu Ye didn't listen.

古文：准惧，复使二靳氏言之，粲乃从之。
现代文：靳准恐惧，又让皇太后靳氏和皇后靳氏二人劝说，刘粲于是听从。
English: Out of sheer fear, he asked the empress dowager and the empress dowager to persuade him, and Liu Bei obeyed.

古文：收其太宰景、大司马骥、骥母弟车骑大将军吴王逞、太师顗、大司徒齐王劢，皆杀之。
现代文：收捕太宰刘景、大司马刘骥、刘骥的同母弟车骑大将军吴王刘逞、太帅刘和大司徒齐王刘劢，全部处死。
English: They arrested Dazai Liu Jing, Daishi Ma Liu Ye, Liu Ye's brother-in-law General Wu Wang Liu Gang, Taisai Liu, and Daishi Tutu Qi Wang Liu Ye, all of whom were executed.

古文：硃纪、范隆奔长安。
现代文：朱纪和范隆逃奔长安。
English: Zhu Ji and Fan Long fled to Chang'an.

古文：八月，粲治兵于上林，谋讨石勒。
现代文：八月，刘粲在上林练兵，准备征讨石勒。
English: In August, Liu Ye went to Shanglin to train soldiers in preparation for the campaign against Shi Le.

古文：以丞相曜为相国、都督中外诸军事，仍镇长安；靳准为大将军、录尚书事。
现代文：任丞相刘曜为相国，总督内外军事事宜，仍然镇守长安。任靳准为大将军，领尚书事。
English: Appointed chancellor Liu You as a relative of the country, governor of domestic and foreign military affairs, still the town guard of Chang'an. Appointed general Zou Jun as a general, leading Shang affairs.

古文：粲常游宴后宫。军国之事，一决于准。
现代文：刘粲经常在后宫游乐，军国大事，全由靳准决断。
English: Liu Bei often had fun in the harem, and all military affairs were decided by the emperor.

古文：准矫诏以从弟明为车骑将军，康为卫将军。
现代文：靳准假称诏令，让堂弟靳明任车骑将军，靳康为卫将军。
English: Zou Zhen pretended to be a decree, and let his cousin Zou Ming serve as the general of chariot and cavalry, and Zou Kang as the general of defense.

古文：准将作乱，谋于王延。
现代文：靳准将要作乱，与王延商议。
English: He is about to start a riot, so he consults with Wang Yan.

古文：延弗从，驰，将告之；遇靳康，劫延以归。
现代文：王延不肯依从，驰马准备告发，路上遇见靳康，被劫持回来。
English: Wang Yan refused to comply and prepared to denounce on horseback. On the way, he met Yu Kang and was abducted.

古文：准遂勒兵升光极殿，使甲士执粲，数而杀之，谥曰隐帝。
现代文：靳准便领兵登上光极殿，派甲士抓住刘粲，数落他的罪名并杀了他，谥号隐帝。
English: He then led the soldiers to board the Hall of Light, and sent an officer to capture Liu Bei, convicted him, and killed him. His posthumous name was Emperor Jing.

古文：刘氏男女，无少长皆斩东市。
现代文：刘氏的男男女女，不分老幼都斩杀于东市。
English: The men, women and children of the Liu clan, both old and young, were all killed in Dongshi.

古文：发永光、宣光二陵，斩聪尸，焚其宗庙。
现代文：又挖掘永光、宣光两座陵墓，斩断刘聪尸身，焚毁刘氏宗庙。
English: They also excavated the two mausoleums of Yongguang and Xuanguang, cut off the body of Liu Cong, and burned the Liu family temple.

古文：准自号大将军、汉天王，称制，置百官，谓安定胡嵩曰： 自古无胡人为天子者，今以传国玺付汝，还如晋家。 
现代文：靳准自称大将军、汉天王，行使皇帝权力，设置百官。靳准对安定人胡嵩说： 自古以来没有胡人当天子的，现在把传国玉玺交给你，还给晋王室。 
English: Gongjun claimed to be the great general, the king of Han, and exercised the power of the emperor, setting up hundreds of officials. Gongjun said to Hu Song, the man of stability: Since ancient times, there has been no son of Hu, and now I will give you the Jade Scepter, which has been handed down from generation to generation, and return it to the Jin royal family.

古文：嵩不敢受；准怒，杀之。
现代文：胡嵩不敢接受，靳准发怒，杀胡嵩。
English: Hu Song didn't dare to accept it, so he got angry and killed Hu Song.

古文：遣使告司州刺史李矩曰： 刘渊，屠各小丑，因晋之乱。矫称天命，使二帝幽没。
现代文：靳准派使者告诉司州刺史李矩说： 刘渊是匈奴屠各部的小丑，乘晋内乱，矫称天命为天子，使得晋怀帝、晋愍帝被俘身死。
English: An emissary sent by Zou Jun told the Sizhou assassin Li Ru that: Liu Yuan was a clown of the Xiongnu butchery departments, who took advantage of the Jin civil war and pretentiously called the Mandate of Heaven as the Son of Heaven, causing Emperor Jinhuai and Emperor Jinbi to be captured and killed.

古文：辄帅众扶侍梓宫，请以上闻。 
现代文：我立即率众扶侍二帝梓宫送往南方，请报知皇帝。 
English: I will immediately lead the attendants of the Second Emperor Zi Gong to the south, please inform the emperor.

古文：矩驰表于帝，帝遣太常韩胤等奉迎梓宫。
现代文：李矩急速上表元帝，元帝派太常韩胤等人奉迎梓宫。
English: Li Rui quickly became the emperor of the Yuan Dynasty, and the Yuan Dynasty sent Taizhang Hanlin and others to serve the Ziyang Palace.

古文：汉尚书北宫纯等招集晋人，堡于东宫，靳康攻灭之。
现代文：汉国尚书北宫纯等招集晋国民众，在东宫建堡固守，被靳康攻灭。
English: Shang Shu of Han, Bei Gongjun and others summoned the people of Jin to build a fortress in the East Palace, which was attacked and destroyed by Yan Kang.

古文：准欲以王延为左光禄大夫，延骂曰： 屠各逆奴，何不速杀我！以吾左目置西阳门，观相国之入也；右目置建春门，观大将军之入也！ 
现代文：靳准想让王延任光禄大夫，王延骂道： 屠各族的逆奴，为什么不快把我杀了，把我的左眼放在西阳门，好看相国刘曜攻进来；把右眼放在建春门，好看大将军石勒攻进来！ 
English: Zhenjun wanted to make Wang Yan the doctor of Guanglu, Wang Yan scolded: "Butcher the rebel slaves of all ethnic groups, why not kill me quickly, put my left eye on the Xiyang Gate, so as to see the invasion of the sister country Liu You; put my right eye on the Jianchun Gate, so as to see the invasion of the great general Shi Le!

古文：准杀之。
现代文：靳准杀了王延。
English: He must have killed Wang Yan.

古文：相国曜闻乱，自长安赴之。
现代文：相国刘曜听说国中有乱，由长安前来救难。
English: His partner, Liu You, heard that there was a disturbance in the country and came from Chang'an to help.

古文：石勒帅精锐五万以讨准，据襄陵北原。
现代文：石勒率五万精兵讨伐靳准，占据襄陵以北平原。
English: Shi Le led fifty thousand elite soldiers to occupy the plains north of Xiangling.

古文：准数挑战，勒坚壁以挫之。
现代文：靳准多次挑战，石勒坚壁不出，耗去敌人锐气。
English: He met many challenges, but could not break through the stone wall, which drained the enemy's spirit.

古文：冬，十月，曜至赤壁。
现代文：冬季，十月，刘曜到达赤壁。
English: In winter, in October, Liu You arrived in Chibi.

古文：太保呼延晏等自平阳归之，与太傅硃纪等共上尊号。
现代文：太保呼延晏等从平阳来归附，与太傅朱纪等共同拟上皇帝尊号。
English: Taiho Huyan and others came from Pingyang to join, and together with Taifu Zhu Ji and others, they imitated the emperor's honorific title.

古文：曜即皇帝位，大赦，惟靳准一门不在赦例。
现代文：刘曜便即帝位，大赦天下，只有靳准一族不在赦免之列。
English: Liu You then ascended the throne and granted amnesty to the whole world. Only the Yu Jun family was not included in the amnesty.

古文：改元光初。
现代文：改年号为光初。
English: The new year's name is "Kohatsu."

古文：以硃纪领司徒，呼延晏领司空，太尉范隆以下悉复本位。
现代文：以朱纪领司徒，呼延晏领司空，太尉范隆以下诸人都官复原职。
English: With Zhu Ji as the leader of the cadets, Huyan as the leader of the cadets, and Taifu Fanlong as the leader of the cadets, all of them were reinstated.

古文：以石勒为大司马、大将军，加九锡，增封十郡，进爵为赵公。
现代文：任石勒为大司马、大将军，加九锡，增封十郡为私邑，进爵为赵公。
English: Shi Le was appointed as the grand steward and general, Jiuxi was added, ten counties were added as private towns, and Zhao Gong was ennobled.

古文：勒进攻准于平阳，巴及羌、羯降者十馀万落，勒皆徙之于所部郡县。
现代文：石勒在平阳进攻靳准，巴人、羌人和羯族人投降的有十多万人，石勒把他们全部迁徙到自己统治的郡县内。
English: Shi Le attacked Shijian in Pingyang, and more than one hundred thousand Ba, Han, and Dong people surrendered. Shi Le moved all of them to the counties under his rule.

古文：汉主曜使征北将军刘雅、镇北将军刘策屯汾阴，与勒共讨准。
现代文：汉主刘曜派征北将军刘雅、镇北将军刘策屯兵汾阴，与石勒共同讨伐靳准。
English: The Han ruler Liu You sent the Northern General Liu Ya and the Northern General Liu Cetun to join forces with Shi Le in a joint crusade against the Jurchen.

古文：十一月，乙卯，日夜出，高三丈。
现代文：十一月，乙卯，夜间出现太阳，高三丈。
English: In November, at dusk, the sun appears in the night, and the height of the three-story building rises.

古文：诏以王敦为荆州牧，加陶侃都督交州诸军事。
现代文：元帝下诏任命王敦为荆州牧，授予陶侃都督交州军事。
English: Emperor Yuan decreed that Wang Dun be appointed as the governor of Jing Province, and that Tao Kan be appointed as the military governor of Jiaozhou Province.

古文：敦固辞州牧，乃听为刺史。
现代文：王敦坚持辞谢，于是听任他为刺史。
English: Wang Dun insisted on resigning, so he was left to do the history.

古文：庚申，诏群公卿士各陈得失。
现代文：庚申，元帝下诏让群臣公卿各陈国政得失。
English: According to Goshun, Emperor Yuan issued an edict to let the courtiers and nobles decide the fate of Chen Guozhen.

古文：御史中丞熊远上疏，以为： 胡贼猾夏，梓宫未返，而不能遣军进讨，一失也；群官不以仇贼未报为耻，务在调戏、酒食而已，二失也；选官用人，不料实德，惟在白望，不求才干，惟事请托，当官者以治事为俗吏，奉法为苛刻，尽礼为谄谀，从容为高妙，放荡为达士，骄蹇为简雅，三失也；世之所恶者，陆沈泥滓；时之所善者，翱翔云霄。是以万机未整，风俗伪薄。
现代文：御史中丞熊远上疏认为： 胡族寇贼作乱华夏，二帝梓宫未还，却不能派军征讨，这是第一个过失；官员们不以仇敌未报为耻，只顾饮宴调侃，这是第二个过失；选官用人，不考察实际的德行，只看虚名，不求有才干，只重关系，当官的人把治理政事看作是俗吏所为，把遵奉法律看作是苛刻，把尽守礼仪看作谄谀，把无所事事看作高妙，把放荡不羁之人看作通达之士，把骄傲怠慢看作简雅，这是第三个过失。时俗所憎恶的人，沉沦于尘埃，时俗所褒扬的人，得以翱翔云霄，所以万事未备，而风俗却虚伪、刻薄。
English: Grand Historian Zhongzheng Xiong Yuan Shangsuo believes: Hu bandits caused chaos in China, the second emperor Zi Gong did not return, but could not send troops to collect, this is the first mistake; officials are not ashamed of the enemy, but only care about the banquet, this is the second mistake; the selection of officials does not consider the actual virtue, only the false name, does not seek talent, only the relationship, the people in power regard the governance of politics as the work of commoners, regard the observance of the law as harsh, regard the observance of etiquette as a disgrace, regard idleness as noble, regard the unruly person as a man of

古文：朝廷群司，以从顺为善，相违见贬，安得朝有辨争之臣，士无禄仕之志乎！
现代文：朝廷众官，以顺从为善，意见不合便遭贬责，这怎能使朝廷有抗辩谏诤的大臣，怎能使士人没有为俸禄做官之心呢！
English: How can it be that the officials of the imperial court regard obedience as a virtue and disparage those who disagree with them? How can it be that the imperial court has ministers who have the courage to speak out, and how can it be that the officials do not have the heart to become officials for the sake of their salaries?

古文：古之取士，敷奏以言；今光禄不试，甚违古义。
现代文：古代选拔人才，根据他们陈述的言论，现在光禄大夫不举行考试，大大违背古制。
English: The ancient selection of talents, according to their statements, now Dr. Guanglu does not hold examinations, greatly violating the ancient system.

古文：又举贤不出世族，用法不及权贵，是以才不济务，奸无所惩。
现代文：再加上推举贤良不超出豪强世族，刑律实施不到权贵们头上，所以有才能的人不能成功立业，奸佞之人无从惩治。
English: In addition, the selection of the virtuous does not exceed the powerful world, and the implementation of the criminal law does not reach the heads of the powerful, so the talented people cannot succeed in starting a business, and the traitors cannot be punished.

古文：若此道不改，求以救乱，难矣！ 
现代文：如果这种做法不改变，希望拯救乱政是太困难了！ 
English: If this practice does not change, it is too difficult to hope to save the chaotic government!

古文：先是，帝以离乱之际，欲慰悦人心，州郡秀、孝至者，不试，普皆署吏。
现代文：以前，元帝因为正当战乱离散之世，想抚慰、取悦人心，州郡荐举的秀才、孝廉进京不必考试，普遍署任为官吏。
English: In the past, Emperor Yuan wanted to appease and please the people because he came to power in a time of just war and dispersion. The talented person recommended by prefectures and counties, Xiaolian, did not have to take an exam to enter Beijing, and was generally appointed as an official.

古文：尚书陈頵亦上言： 宜渐循旧制，试以经策。 
现代文：尚书陈也上言说： 应当逐渐恢复过去的制度，考试经策。 
English: Shangshu Chen also said: It is necessary to gradually restore the past system and examination policy.

古文：帝从之，仍诏： 不中科者，刺史、太守免官。 
现代文：元帝听从，于是下诏说： 凡荐举的秀才、孝廉考试不合格的，所在地的刺史、太守免职。 
English: Emperor Yuan obeyed, and issued the following edict: If any of the recommended talents or filial piety did not pass the examination, the local magistrate or governor would be removed from office.

古文：于是秀、孝皆不敢行，其有到者，亦皆托疾，比三年无就试者。
现代文：这样被荐举出来的秀才、孝廉都不敢来参加考试，即使有来的，也都以生病为由推托，连续三年没有应试者。
English: Even if they did come, they all put it down to illness, and there were no candidates for three years in a row.

古文：帝欲特除孝廉已到者官，尚书郎孔坦奏议，以为： 近郡惧累君父，皆不敢行；远郡冀于不试，冒昧来赴。
现代文：元帝想将已到京的孝廉按特例处理授予他们官职，尚书孔坦上奏发表意见，认为： 附近州郡的孝廉怕牵累长官、家人，都不敢来，而远处州郡的孝廉寄希望于免予考试，冒昧前来。
English: Emperor Yuan wanted to grant official positions to the filial pagans who had arrived in Beijing according to a special case, and Shangshu Kongtang issued an opinion, saying: The filial pagans in the nearby prefectures were afraid of involving their superiors and families, and did not dare to come, while the filial pagans in the distant prefectures hoped to be exempted from the examination and dared to come.

古文：今若偏加除署，是为谨身奉法者失分，侥幸投射者得官，颓风伤教，恐从此始。
现代文：现在如果一律只授予他们官职，那么持身严谨、奉尊法令的人便失去了机会，而心存侥幸、冒险一试的人却得到了官职，风气败坏、教化不行，恐怕从此开始。
English: Now, if only they are given official positions, then those who are strict and respect the law will lose their opportunities, while those who are lucky and take risks will get official positions. I am afraid that this is the beginning of a corrupt culture and indoctrination.

古文：不若一切罢归，而为之延期，使得就学，则法均而令信矣。 
现代文：不如所有的人都不授职，推延策试日期，让他们再去学习，这样法令便公正而诚信。 
English: It would be better if all the people were not appointed, and the trial date was postponed, and they were allowed to study again, so that the decree would be fair and honest.

古文：帝从之，听孝廉申至七年乃试。
现代文：元帝听从，任凭策试孝廉推迟七年才举行。
English: Emperor Yuan obeyed, and allowed the examination to be postponed for seven years.

古文：坦，愉之从子也。
现代文：孔坦是孔愉的侄子。
English: Kong Tan is Kong Yu's nephew.

古文：靳准使侍中卜泰送乘舆、服御，请和于石勒，勒囚泰，送于汉主曜。
现代文：靳准派侍中卜泰赠送车驾、服御给石勒，向他请和。石勒囚禁卜泰，押送到汉主刘曜那里。
English: Zheng Zeng sent his chamberlain, Bu Tai, to present a chariot and robe to Shi Le and ask him to make peace. Shi Le imprisoned Bu Tai and escorted him to the Han lord, Liu You.

古文：曜谓泰曰： 先帝末年，实乱大伦。
现代文：刘曜对卜泰说： 先帝刘粲末年，行为实在是违背人伦。
English: Liu You said to Bu Tai: In the last years of Emperor Liu Bei, his behavior was really against human ethics.

古文：司空行伊、霍之权，使朕及此，其功大矣。
现代文：大司空靳准行使伊尹、霍光那样的权利，使得朕能登上君位，功劳很大。
English: It is a great achievement for Daishi Kuangjun to exercise the same rights as Yi Yin and Huo Guang, enabling me to ascend to the throne.

古文：若早迎大驾者，当悉以政事相委，况免死乎！
现代文：如果能早日迎奉大驾，我会把政事全部委托他管辖，何况免除一死呢！
English: If I could meet the Great Leader as soon as possible, I would entrust all my political affairs to his jurisdiction, not to mention being spared death!

古文：卿为朕入城，具宣此意。 
现代文：你为我进城去向靳准原原本本地传达我的意思。 
English: You went into the city for me to convey my meaning to the original local.

古文：泰还平阳，准自以杀曜母兄，沈吟未从。
现代文：卜泰回到平阳转告靳准，靳准自己觉得杀害了刘曜的母亲、兄弟，犹豫不决。
English: Bu Tai returned to Pingyang to tell Zou Jian that Zou Jian felt that he had killed Liu You's mother and brother, and hesitated.

古文：十二月，左、右车骑将军乔泰、王腾、卫将军靳康等相与杀准，推尚书令靳明为主，遣卜泰奉传国六玺降汉。
现代文：十二月，左、右车骑将军乔泰、王腾、卫将军靳康等，合谋杀了靳准，推举尚书令靳明为主，派遣卜泰奉送传国的六颗印信投降汉国。
English: In December, the left and right chariot cavalry generals Qiaotai, Wang Teng, Wei general Jikang, and so on, conspired to murder Jiaojun, elected Shang Shuling as the main one, and sent six seal letters sent by Putai to surrender to China.

古文：石勒大怒，进军攻明；明出战，大败，乃婴城固守。
现代文：石勒大为恼怒，进军攻击靳明，靳明出兵迎战，大败，于是环城固守。
English: Shi Le was very angry. He marched to attack Zhiming, and Zhiming sent troops to fight against him. They were soundly defeated, so Huancheng held fast.

古文：丁丑，封皇子焕为琅邪王。
现代文：丁丑，晋元帝封皇子司马焕为琅邪王。
English: Ding Yuxi, the prince of the Jin and Yuan dynasties, Sima Huan, became the evil king.

古文：焕，郑夫人之子，生二年矣，帝爱之，以其疾笃，故王之。己卯，薨。
现代文：司马焕是郑夫人所生，已经两岁了，元帝宠爱他。因为他生病很重，所以封他为王。己卯，司马焕死。
English: Sima Huan was born to Lady Zheng. He was already two years old, and Emperor Yuan loved him. Because he was very ill, he was made king. However, Sima Huan died.

古文：帝以成人之礼葬之，备吉凶仪服，营起园陵，功费甚广。
现代文：元帝依照成人的礼仪安葬他，准备吉凶仪服，营造园陵，花费的人力、财力很多。
English: Emperor Yuan buried him according to the adult etiquette, prepared auspicious and inauspicious ceremonial clothes, and built a garden, spending a lot of manpower and financial resources.

古文：琅邪国右常侍会稽孙霄上疏谏曰： 古者凶荒杀礼，况今海内丧乱，宪章旧制，犹宜节省。而礼典所无，顾崇饰如是乎！
现代文：琅邪国右常侍、会稽人孙霄上书规谏说： 古时候凶年、荒年都要简化繁文缛节，何况当今宇内正处于丧乱之中，即便是宪章旧制，尚且应当简化，而礼典本无之事，难道应当这样大肆铺张吗！
English: "In ancient times, we had to simplify red tape and regulations in bad years and years of war," said Sun Xiao Shangshu, the Right Attendant of the State Council and the auditor of the National People's Congress. "Moreover, today's world is in turmoil. Even if the old charter system should be simplified, and the book of etiquette is nothing, should it be so extravagant?"

古文：竭已罢之民，营无益之事，殚已困之财，修无用之费，此臣之所不安也。 帝不从。
现代文：穷尽已经疲惫的民众，去干无益的事情，耗干已经困乏的财力，用以修建无用的东西，这使我深感不安。 元帝不听。
English: Exhausting the exhausted people to do useless things and draining the exhausted financial resources to build useless things made me deeply uneasy. Emperor Yuan did not listen.

古文：彭城内史周抚杀沛国内史周默，以其众降石勒。
现代文：彭城内史周抚杀沛国内史周默，率其部众投降石勒。
English: Pengcheng's internal historian Zhou Fu killed the domestic historian Zhou Miao, and led his subordinates to surrender to Shi Le.

古文：诏下邳内史刘遐领鼓城内史，与徐州刺史蔡豹、泰山太守徐龛共讨之。
现代文：晋元帝下诏令下邳内史刘遐兼任彭城内史职，和徐州刺史蔡豹、泰山太守徐龛共同讨伐他。
English: Emperor Jin Yuan issued an imperial edict to appoint Liu Wei, the lower eunuch, as the Pengcheng eunuch, and he and Cai Pan, the Xuzhou eunuch, and Xu Wei, the Taishan eunuch, jointly fought against him.

古文：豹，质之玄孙也。
现代文：蔡豹是蔡质的玄孙。
English: Cai Pan is the great-great-grandson of Cai Jian.

古文：石虎帅幽、冀之兵会石勒攻平阳，靳明屡败，遣使求救于汉。
现代文：石虎率领幽州、冀州的军队与石勒会合，进攻平阳。靳明多次战败，派遣使者向汉主求救。
English: Shihu led the armies of Yuzhou and Jizhou to meet with Shilou and attack Pingyang. Zouming was defeated many times and sent envoys to the Han emperor to ask for help.

古文：汉主曜使刘雅、刘策迎之，明帅平阳士女万五千人奔汉。
现代文：汉主刘曜派刘雅、刘策相迎，靳明率平阳士民一万五千人逃奔汉国。
English: The Han ruler Liu You sent Liu Ya and Liu Zhe to meet him, and Hunming led 15 thousand Pingyang soldiers and civilians to flee to Han.

古文：曜西屯粟邑，收靳氏男女，无少长皆斩之。
现代文：刘曜驻屯西部的粟邑，拘捕靳氏家人，不分老幼全都杀掉。
English: Liu You was stationed in the western town of Siaoyu. He arrested the family members of the Xing family and killed all of them, regardless of whether they were old or young.

古文：曜迎其母胡氏之丧于平阳，葬于粟邑，号曰阳陵，谥曰宣明皇太后。
现代文：刘曜从平阳迎回母亲胡氏的灵柩，安葬于粟邑，号称阳陵，上谥号为宣明皇太后。
English: Liu You returned from Pingyang to receive the coffin of his mother Hu, who was buried in Maoyu, known as Yangling. Her posthumous name was Empress Dowager Xuanming.

古文：石勒焚平阳宫室，使裴宪、石会修永光、宣光二陵，收汉主粲已下百馀口葬之，置戍而归。
现代文：石勒焚毁平阳的宫室，让裴宪、石会修复永光、宣光二座陵墓，收敛汉主刘粲以下一百多人尸体入土埋葬，安排好戍守的军队，然后返回。
English: Shi Le burned the palace of Pingyang, let Pei Xian and the Stone Association repair the two mausoleums of Yongguang and Xuanguang, gathered more than a hundred corpses from the Han ruler Liu Bei and buried them in the ground, arranged the army to stay, and then returned.

古文：成梁州刺史李凤数有功，成主雄兄子稚在晋寿，疾之。
现代文：成汉的梁州刺史李凤多次立功，成汉国主李雄兄长的儿子李稚在晋寿县，嫉恨李凤。
English: Li Fang, the son of Li Chong, the eldest brother of Li Xiong, the ruler of the State of Chenghan, made many meritorious deeds in Liangzhou of the State of Chenghan. Li Zhi, the son of the elder brother of Li Xiong, was born in Jinzhou County and envied Li Feng.

古文：凤以巴西叛，雄自至涪，使太傅骧讨凤，斩之；以李寿为前将军，督巴西军事。
现代文：李凤占据巴西背叛成汉。李雄亲自到涪县，派太傅李骧征讨李凤，将李凤斩杀。任李寿为前将军，督察巴西军事事宜。
English: Li Feng occupied Brazil and betrayed Chenghan. Li Xiong personally went to Lixian County and sent the grand marshal Li Xi to recruit Li Feng, and Li Feng was beheaded. Li Shou was a former general and an inspector of Brazilian military affairs.

