古文：萧明，兰陵人，梁武帝长兄长沙王懿之子。
现代文：萧明，兰陵人，梁武帝长兄长沙王萧懿的儿子。
English: Xiao Ming, a native of Lanling, was the son of Emperor Liangwu's eldest brother, Changsha King Xiao Yao.

古文：在其本朝，甚为梁武所亲爱。
现代文：在当朝，很为梁武帝所亲爱。
English: In those days, it was very dear to Emperor Wu of Liang.

古文：少历显职，封浈阳侯。
现代文：年轻时历任显要的职务，封为演阳侯。
English: When he was young, he held various important positions and was given the title of Enyang Hou.

古文：太清中，以为豫州刺史。
现代文：太清年间，让他任豫州刺史。
English: During the Taiching Dynasty, he was appointed as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：梁主既纳侯景，诏明率水陆诸军趋彭城，大图进取。
现代文：梁主已经接纳了侯景，诏令萧明率领水陆诸军奔向彭城，谋划大举进兵。
English: Emperor Liang had already accepted Houjing, and ordered Xiao Ming to lead the army and navy to rush to Pengcheng and plan a large-scale invasion.

古文：又命兖州刺史南康嗣王会理总驭□帅，指授方略。
现代文：又命令兖州刺史南康嗣王会理总领众帅，指示方略。
English: He also ordered the commander-in-chief of the Zhangzhou Zhishen South Kangxi Wang Association to instruct the strategy.

古文：明渡淮未几，官军破之，尽俘其□。
现代文：萧明渡过淮河没有多久，官军就攻破他，全部俘虏了他的部下。
English: Not long after Xiao Ming crossed the Huai River, the government army defeated him and captured all of his subordinates.

古文：魏帝升门楼，亲引见明及诸将帅，释其禁，送于晋阳。
现代文：魏帝登上城楼，亲自引见萧明和众将帅，解除对他们的囚禁，送往晋阳。
English: Emperor Wei ascended the city tower, personally introduced Xiao Ming and the generals, released them from imprisonment, and sent them to Jinyang.

古文：世宗礼明甚重，谓之曰： 先王与梁主和好十有余年，闻彼礼佛文，常云奉为魏主，并及先王，此甚是梁主厚意。
现代文：世宗对萧明的礼节非常隆重，对他说： 先王同梁主和好十多年，听说他拜佛的文辞常说敬奉魏主，以及先王，这很是梁主厚意。
English: The Sejong treated Xiao Ming with very grand etiquette, and said to him, "The previous king and the Lord Liang have been reconciled for more than ten years. I heard that when he worshipped Buddha, he often said that he revered the Lord Wei, as well as the previous king. This was very kind of the Lord Liang.

古文：不谓一朝失信，致此纷扰。
现代文：不料一朝失信，导致这场纷扰。
English: Unexpectedly, a breach of trust led to this disturbance.

古文：自出师薄伐，无战不克，无城不陷，今自欲和，非是力屈。
现代文：自出师征伐，作战没有不胜利的，攻城没有不陷落的，今天想要和好，不是武力疲惫。
English: Since the division went out to conquer, there is no battle that is not victorious, no siege that does not fall. If you want to make peace today, it is not because of the exhaustion of force.

古文：境上之事，知非梁主本心，当是侯景违命扇动耳。
现代文：边境上的事情，知道不是梁主的本意，应当是侯景违命煽动所致。
English: The situation at the border was not the original intention of Mr. Liang, but was instigated by Mr. Hou Jing in violation of his orders.

古文：侯可遣使谘论，若犹存先王分义，重成通和者，吾不敢违先王之旨，侯及诸人并即放还。 
现代文：您可派使者询问斟酌，如果还念先王情义，重新往来友好，我不敢违背先王的旨意，您及众人一并马上放回。 
English: You can send an envoy to inquire and consider, if you still think of the former king's feelings and re-establish friendly exchanges, I dare not violate the former king's will, and you and everyone will be released immediately.

古文：于是使人以明书告梁主，梁主乃致书以慰世宗。
现代文：于是让人把萧明的信报告梁主，梁主就送信来慰问世宗。
English: So someone reported Xiao Ming's letter to Liang Lord, and Liang Lord sent it to console Sejong.

古文：天保六年，梁元为西魏所灭，显祖诏立明为梁主，前所获梁将湛海珍等皆听从明归，令上党王涣率□以送。
现代文：天保六年，梁元被西魏灭亡，显宗诏令立萧明为梁主，从前所抓获的梁将湛海珍等人都跟随萧明归还，命令上党王高涣率部下送行。
English: In the sixth year of the Tenpo era, Liang Yuan was destroyed by the Western Wei Dynasty, and Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to make Xiao Ming the master of Liang. Liang general Zhan Haizhen and others who had been captured earlier all returned with Xiao Ming, and it was ordered that the party king Gao Jun and his subordinates escort him away.

古文：是时梁太尉王僧辩、司空陈霸先在建邺，推晋安王方智为丞相。
现代文：造时梁太尉王僧辩、司空陈霸先在建邺，推举晋安王方智任丞相。
English: At that time, Liang Taifu Wang Sofen and Siku Chen Baxian were in Jianye, and Wang Fangzhi of Jin'an was elected as chancellor.

古文：显祖赐僧辩、霸先玺书，僧辩未奉诏。
现代文：显祖赐予僧辩、霸先玺书，僧辩没有接受韶书。
English: Emperor Xianzu bestowed the imperial edict on Sofen, but Sofen did not accept the edict.

古文：上党王进军，明又与僧辩书，往复再三，陈祸福，僧辩初不纳。
现代文：上党王进兵，萧明又给僧辩写信，往来再三，陈述利害，僧辩起初不接受。
English: When the king of the upper party marched into the army, Xiao Ming also wrote to Sofen, and they repeatedly exchanged letters, stating their interests. Sofen did not accept it at first.

古文：既而上党王破东关，斩裴之横，江表危惧。
现代文：不久上党王攻破东关，杀了裴之横，江南危急恐惧。
English: Soon after, the king of the party broke through Dongguan and killed Pei Zhi Heng. The south of the Yangtze River was in a state of panic.

古文：僧辩乃启上党求纳明，遣舟舰迎接。
现代文：僧辩就启奏上党要求接纳萧明，派船迎接。
English: In response to the party's request to accept Xiao Ming, the party sent a ship to welcome him.

古文：王飨梁朝将士，及与明刑牲歃血，载书而盟。
现代文：上党王以酒食款待梁朝的将士，舆萧明杀牲歃血，订立了盟约。
English: Shangdang Wang entertained the soldiers of Liang Dynasty with wine and food, and Miao Xiaoming killed animals and shed blood, and concluded a covenant.

古文：于是梁舆东度，齐师北反。
现代文：于是梁的车马束渡长江，齐的军队向北返回。
English: As a result, Liang's army went to the east and Qi's army returned to the north.

古文：侍中裴英起□送明入建邺，遂称尊号，改承圣四年为天成元年，大赦天下，宇文黑獭、贼等不在赦例。
现代文：侍中裴英起护送萧明进入建邺，于是称帝，改承圣四年为天成元年，大赦天下。宇文黑獭、贼人萧誓不在赦免之列。
English: The chamberlain, Pei Ying, escorted Xiao Ming into Jianye, whereupon he proclaimed himself emperor, changed the year of succession to the first year of Tiancheng, and granted amnesty to the whole world. Wu Wen Hei and the thief Xiao Wei were not included in the amnesty.

古文：以方智为太子，授王僧辩大司马。
现代文：立方智为太子，授任王僧辩大司马。
English: Kubota no Satoshi was crowned the prince and appointed Wang Soen as the grand steward.

古文：明上表遣第二息章驰到京都，拜谢宫阙。
现代文：萧明上表派第二子萧章乘马疾驰到京都，拜谢君王。
English: Xiao Ming sent his second son, Xiao Zhang, on horseback to Kyoto to pay homage to the king.

古文：冬，霸先袭杀僧辩，复立方智，以明为太傅、建安王。
现代文：冬天，霸先袭击杀死僧辩，又立方智，以萧明为太傅、建安王。
English: In winter, He attacked and killed Sofen first, and also Qiu Zhi, with Xiao Ming as Taifu and King Jian'an.

古文：霸先奉表朝廷，云僧辩阴谋篡逆，故诛之。
现代文：霸先给朝廷上表，说僧辩阴谋篡逆，所以杀了他。
English: He first reported to the imperial court that the monk was plotting to usurp power, so they killed him.

古文：方智请称臣，永为藩国，齐遣行台司马恭及梁人盟于历阳。
现代文：方智请求称臣，永远作属国，齐派行台司马恭和梁人在历阳订立盟约。
English: Fang Zhi pleaded with his vassal to be a vassal state forever, and sent the Taiji Chief Magong and Liang Zhen to conclude a treaty in Liyang.

古文：明年，诏征明。
现代文：第二年，诏令萧明前往。
English: The following year, Xiao Ming was ordered to go.

古文：霸先犹称藩，将遣使送明，会明疽发背死。
现代文：霸先还称属国，将派使者送萧明，适逢毒疮发作于背而死。
English: He also said that he belonged to the country and that he would send an envoy to Xiao Ming, but he died of a poisonous sore on his back.

古文：梁将王琳在江上与霸先相抗，显祖遣兵纳梁永嘉王萧庄主梁祀。
现代文：梁将王琳在长江上游与霸先抗衡，颢祖派兵接梁永嘉王萧庄回国作梁主。
English: Liang put Wang Lin in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to compete with the hegemon, and sent troops to pick up Liang Yongjia and Wang Xiaozhuang to return to China as the leader of Liang.

古文：九年二月，自湓城济江，三月，即帝位于郢州，年号天启，王琳总其军国，追谥明曰闵皇帝。
现代文：九年二月，从湓城渡江，三月，在郢州即帝位，年号为天启，王琳总领国政，追赠萧明的谧号为闵皇帝。
English: In February of the ninth year, he crossed the Yangtze River from Fucheng, and in March, he ascended the throne in Fuzhou. The year was the Apocalypse, and Wang Lin was the general in charge of state affairs. Xiao Ming's posthumous nickname was the Emperor of Fuzhou.

古文：明年庄为陈人所败，遂入朝，封为侯。
现代文：第二年萧庄被陈人打败，于是入朝，封为侯爵。
English: The next year, Xiao Zhuang was defeated by the Chen people, so he entered the imperial court and was made a marquis.

古文：朝廷许以兴复，竟不果。
现代文：朝廷答应恢复他的帝位，最终没有结果。
English: The court promised to restore his imperial throne, but in the end there was no result.

古文：后主亡之日，庄在邺饮气而死。
现代文：后主灭亡之日，萧庄在邺忍气死去。
English: On the day of the death of the latter, Xiao Zhuang died of impatience.

古文：萧祗，字敬式，梁武弟南平王伟之子也。
现代文：萧祗，字敬式，梁武之弟南平王萧伟的儿子。
English: Xiao Wei, the son of Nanping Wang Xiao Wei, the younger brother of Liang Wu.

古文：少聪敏，美容仪。
现代文：年少总明机敏，仪容美丽。
English: Young people are always bright and alert, and their appearance is beautiful.

古文：在梁，封定襄侯，位东扬州刺史。
现代文：在梁朝，封为定襄侯，官位为束扬州刺史。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, he was given the title of Ding Xiang Hou and the official rank of Soku Yangzhou Sashi.

古文：于时江左承平，政宽人慢，祗独□以严切，梁武悦之。
现代文：逭时江柬太平，政令宽和，人心松弛，惟独萧祗治理严厉，梁武喜欢他。
English: At that time, the Yangtze River and the Cambodian people were at peace, the government decrees were lenient, and the people's hearts were relaxed. However, Xiao Yao's governance was strict, and Liang Wu liked him.

古文：迁北兖州刺史。
现代文：改任北兖州刺史。
English: He was reappointed as the governor of North Luzhou.

古文：太清二年，侯景围建邺。
现代文：太清二年，侯景包围建邺。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Houjing besieged Jianye.

古文：祗闻台城失守，遂来奔。
现代文：萧祗得知台城失守，就跑到齐国。
English: When Xiao Yao learned that Taicheng was lost, he fled to Qi Province.

古文：以武定七年至邺，文襄令魏收、邢卲与相接对。
现代文：在武定七年到邺，文襄命令魏收、邢邵接待他。
English: When Wu Ding was seven years old, Wen Xiang ordered Wei Jie and Zou Shao to receive him.

古文：历位太子少傅，领平阳王师，封清河郡公。
现代文：历任太子少傅，兼任平阳王的老师，封为清河郡公。
English: Successive prince junior tutor, also served as the teacher of King Pingyang, and was appointed as the governor of Qinghe County.

古文：齐天保初，授右光禄大夫，领国子祭酒。
现代文：齐天保初年，授任右光禄大夫，兼任国子祭酒。
English: In the first year of Qi Tianbo, he was awarded the title of Uguanglu Doctor, and also served as the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：时梁元帝平侯景，复与齐通好，文宣欲放祗等还南。
现代文：当时梁元帝平定侯景，重新与齐往来友好，文宣想放萧祗等人回南方。
English: At that time, Emperor Liang Yuan had subdued Houjing and re-established friendly relations with Qi. Wen Xuan wanted to send Xiao Yao and others back to the south.

古文：俄而西魏克江陵，遂留邺都，卒。
现代文：不久西魏攻克江陵，萧祗就留在邺都，去世。
English: Soon after the Western Wei conquered Jiangling, Xiao Yao stayed in Shendu and passed away.

古文：赠中书监、车骑大将军，扬州刺史。
现代文：追赠中书监、车骑大将军，扬州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of middle school librarian, car and bicycle general, and Yangzhou historian.

古文：萧退，梁武帝弟司空鄱阳王恢之子也。
现代文：萧退，梁武帝之弟司空鄱阳王萧恢的儿子。
English: Xiao Dui, the son of Emperor Liangwu's brother Siku and Yang Wang Xiao Hui.

古文：退在梁，封湘潭侯，位青州刺史。
现代文：萧退在梁，封湘潭侯，任青州刺史。
English: Xiao retired in Liang, sealed Xiangtan marquis, and served as Qingzhou chief historian.

古文：建邺陷，与从兄祗俱入东魏。
现代文：建邺陷落，舆堂兄萧祗一起进入东魏。
English: After the fall of Jianye, my cousin Xiao Yao entered the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：齐天保中，位金紫光禄大夫，卒。
现代文：齐天保年间，任金紫光禄大夫，去世。
English: During the Qi Tianbo era, he was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and passed away.

古文：子慨，深沉有礼，乐善好学，攻草隶书。
现代文：儿子萧慨，深沉有礼貌，乐善好学，专心研习草书和隶书。
English: His son is depressed, deep and polite, happy and eager to learn, concentrating on studying cursive and calligraphy.

古文：南士中称为长者。
现代文：在南朝士人之中被称为德高望重的人。
English: He was known as a person of high moral standing among the Southern Court nobles.

古文：历著作佐郎，待诏文林馆，卒于司徒从事中郎。
现代文：历任著作佐郎，待韶文林馆，在司徒从事中郎的官位上去世。
English: He was the author of the works "Saro" and "Taisho Bunrin-kan" and passed away while he was in the middle of his duties in Sito.

古文：萧放，字希逸，随父祗至邺。
现代文：萧放，字希逸，随父亲萧祗到邺。
English: Xiao Fang, the character Xiyi, followed his father Xiao Yao to Zhengzhou.

古文：祗卒，放居丧以孝闻。
现代文：萧祗去世，萧放居丧以孝闻名。
English: Xiao Yao passed away, and Xiao Fangrui mourned his death. He was famous for his filial piety.

古文：所居庐室前有二慈乌来集，各据一树为巢，自午以前，驯庭饮啄，午后更不下树，每临时，舒翅悲鸣，全似哀泣。
现代文：所住房舍前有两只慈乌前来停聚，各占一树筑巢，在午时以前，驯服地生活在庭院中饮水啄食，午时之后再不下树，每次到时，展翅悲鸣，完全像哀泣。
English: In front of our house, two cormorants came to rest, each occupying a tree to build a nest. Before noon, they lived tamely in the courtyard, drinking water and eating. After noon, they did not leave the tree, and every time they arrived, they spread their wings and wailed, completely like crying.

古文：家人伺之，未常有阙。
现代文：家人饲养它们未曾间断。
English: The family has been raising them non-stop.

古文：时以为至孝之感。
现代文：当时认为是至孝的感应。
English: At the time, it was thought to be a sign of filial piety.

古文：服阕，袭爵。
现代文：守孝期满脱去丧服，承袭爵位。
English: At the end of the period of filial piety, he took off his mourning clothes and inherited the peerage.

古文：武平中，待诏文林馆。
现代文：武平年间，待诏文林馆。
English: During the Wuping era, it was called the Wenlin Pavilion.

古文：放性好文咏，颇善丹青，因此在宫中披览书史及近世诗赋，监画工作屏风等杂物见知，遂被眷待。
现代文：萧放生性喜好诗文，很善于绘画，因此在宫中阅览典籍和近代诗赋，督察画工制作屏风等杂物为人所知，于是被爱重款待。
English: Xiao Huo was known to be fond of poetry and good at painting, so he read classic books and modern poems in the palace, and supervised painters to make screens and other miscellaneous items. Therefore, he was loved and treated with great hospitality.

古文：累迁太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
现代文：多次升迁任太子中庶子、散骑常侍。
English: He was promoted several times to the position of Prince's junior illegitimate son, and to the position of errand boy.

古文：徐之才，丹阳人也。父雄，事南齐，位兰陵太守，以医术为江左所称。
现代文：徐之才，丹阳人，父宗徐雄，在南齐做事，任兰陵太守，因臀术高明为江束称颂。
English: Xu Zhicai, from Danyang, father of Zong Xu Xiong, worked in Nanqi and served as the governor of Lanling. He was praised by Jiang Zou for his skill in hip surgery.

古文：之才幼而□发，五岁诵孝经，八岁略通义旨。
现代文：之才幼年时便才华外溢，五岁诵读《孝经》，八岁大略通晓意义宗旨。
English: When he was young, his talent overflowed. At the age of five, he recited the "Filial Piety Sutra," and at the age of eight, he was roughly aware of the meaning and purpose.

古文：曾与从兄康造梁太子詹事汝南周舍宅听老子。
现代文：曾舆堂兄徐康到梁太子詹事汝南周舍住处听讲老子》。
English: Zeng Myou's cousin Xu Kang went to Prince Liang Zhan's residence to listen to Lao Zi.

古文：舍为设食，乃戏之曰： 徐郎不用心思义，而但事食乎？ 
现代文：周舍为他们准备饭食，就舆他开玩笑说： 徐郎不用心探究旨义，而衹为了吃饭? 
English: When Zhou She was preparing food for them, he joked, "Xulang doesn't need to study the meaning of the word, but the dragonfly does for eating?

古文：之才答曰： 盖闻圣人虚其心而实其腹。 
现代文：之才回答说： 听说圣人是使他的心空虚而让他的腹充实。 
English: "I have heard that the sage empties his heart and fills his belly.

古文：舍嗟赏之。
现代文：周舍很赞赏他。
English: Zhou Xie appreciated him very much.

古文：年十三，召为太学生，粗通礼、易。
现代文：十三岁召为太学生，粗通《礼记》、易经》。
English: At the age of thirteen, he was called to be a student, and he is familiar with "Li Ji" and "I Ching."

古文：彭城刘孝绰、河东裴子野、吴郡张嵊等每共论周易及丧服仪，酬应如响。
现代文：彭城刘孝绰、河东裴子野、吴郡张嵊等人每次一起谈论《周易》及《丧服》的礼仪，应答如回声。
English: Pengcheng Liu Xiaochu, Hedong Peizhino, Wu County Zhang Ye and others talk about the etiquette of "Zhou Yi" and "Funeral Dress" together every time, and the response is like an echo.

古文：咸共叹曰： 此神童也。 
现代文：都赞叹说： 这是神童。 
English: They all said with admiration: This is a child prodigy.

古文：孝绰又云： 徐郎燕颔，有班定远之相。 
现代文：孝绰又说： 徐郎相貌威武，有班定远的封侯之相。 
English: Xiaoqiao also said: Xulang's appearance is powerful, and he has the appearance of a distant feudal lord.

古文：陈郡袁昂领丹阳尹，辟为主簿，人务事宜，皆被顾访。
现代文：陈郡袁昂兼任丹阳尹，征召徐之才为主簿，关于人和事的安排和处理，都要拜访他。
English: Chen County Yuan Ang also served as Danyang Yin, and recruited Xu Zhicai as the main book. Regarding the arrangement and handling of people and things, they should visit him.

古文：郡廨遭火，之才起望，夜中不着衣，披红服帕出房，映光为昂所见。
现代文：郡官署起火，之才起身望见，夜裹没有穿衣，披着红色的盛服出房，火光映照中被袁昂看见。
English: The county magistrate's office caught fire, and it was only when he got up that he could see it. At night, he did not wear clothes, and he went out of the house wearing a red ceremonial robe. He was seen by Yuan Ang in the light of the fire.

古文：功曹白请免职，昂重其才术，仍特原之。
现代文：郡功曹陈请免去他的官职，袁昂看重他的才能和医术，就特别原谅了他。
English: The county gong Cao Chen asked him to be relieved of his official position, and Yuan Ang, who valued his talent and medical skills, especially forgave him.

古文：豫章王综出镇江都，复除豫章王国左常侍，又转综镇北主簿。
现代文：豫章王萧综外出镇守江都，又任豫章王国左常侍；又改任萧综的镇北主簿。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Xiao Zomei went out to guard Jiangdu, and was appointed as the left attendant of Yuanzhang Kingdom; he was also appointed as the main book of Xiao Zomei in the north of the town.

古文：及综入魏，三军散走，之才退至吕梁，桥断路绝，遂为魏统军石茂孙所止。
现代文：到萧综降魏，三军失败逃跑，之才退到吕梁，桥断路绝，于是被魏统军石茂孙所留。
English: At the time of Xiao Zong's surrender to Wei, the three armies failed to escape, and only then did they retreat to Luliang. The bridge was cut off, so they were left behind by Shi Maosun of the Wei Unification Army.

古文：综入魏旬月，位至司空。
现代文：萧综降魏一个月，官至司空。
English: Xiao Simi was demoted to Wei for one month, and the post of secretary was vacant.

古文：魏听综收敛僚属，乃访之才在彭泗，启魏帝云： 之才大善医术，兼有机辩。 
现代文：魏听任萧综收敛属官，就在彭泗寻访之才，启奏魏帝说： 之才非常擅长医术，并机智长于言辞。 
English: Wei listened to Xiao Zuo's advice to restrain his subordinate officials, so he went to Penghu to search for Zi Cai, after which Wei Di said: Zi Cai is very good at medicine, and his wit is better than words.

古文：诏征之才。
现代文：诏令征之才。
English: It's time to declare martial law.

古文：孝昌二年，至洛，□居南馆，礼遇甚优。
现代文：孝昌二年，到洛，帝令居住在南馆，礼节待遇优厚。
English: In the second year of Xiaochang, when he arrived in Luo, the emperor lived in the South Pavilion, and he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：从祖謇子践启求之才还宅。
现代文：从祖徐謇的儿子徐践启奏请求之才还乡。
English: It was only after a request from Xu Jianqi, the son of ancestor Xu Xi, that he returned to his hometown.

古文：之才药石多□，又窥涉经史，发言辩捷，朝贤竞相要引，为之延誉。
现代文：之才药石治病多有效果，又涉猎经史，能言善辩，才思敏捷，朝廷争相邀迎荐举，给他播扬声誉。
English: He was a talented and effective healer, a scholar of history, an eloquent speaker, and a quick thinker. The imperial court was eager to invite and recommend him and give him a good reputation.

古文：武帝时，封昌安县侯。
现代文：武帝时，封为昌安县侯。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, he was given the title of Hou of Chang'an County.

古文：天平中，齐神武征赴晋阳，常在内馆，礼遇稍厚。
现代文：天平年间，齐神武征召到晋阳，常在内馆，礼节待遇逐渐丰厚。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Qi Shenwu was conscripted to Jinyang, often in the inner hall, and the treatment of etiquette was gradually rich.

古文：武定四年，自散骑常侍转秘书监。
现代文：武定四年。自散骑常侍改任秘书监。
English: In the fourth year of Wuding, he was promoted from the position of horseback riding attendant to the position of secretary supervisor.

古文：文宣作相，普加黜陟。
现代文：文宣做丞相，百官普遍调整。
English: Wen Xuan became chancellor, and there was a general reshuffling of officials.

古文：杨愔以其南土之人，不堪典秘书，转授金紫光禄大夫，以魏收代领之。
现代文：杨情因为他是南方人，不胜任秘书监的职务，改任金紫光禄大夫，让魏收代替他兼任这个职务。
English: Yang Rong, because he is a southerner, is not qualified to hold the post of secretary, so he was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and Wei Hui replaced him to hold this post.

古文：之才甚怏怏不平。
现代文：之才很是快怏不平。
English: They are very quick to complain.

古文：之才少解天文，兼图谶之学，共馆客宋景业参校吉凶，知午年必有革易，因高德政启之。
现代文：之才略懂天文，兼治图谶之学，同馆客宋景墓参照比较吉凶，知道午年一定有变革，通过高彊堕启奏这件事。
English: He only knew a little about astronomy and the study of constellations. Fellow visitor Song Jingbo compared the fortunes of the year with reference to the auspicious and inauspicious. He knew that there would be a change in the year of the horse, and that this would be triggered by the fall of Gaozhou.

古文：文宣闻而大悦。
现代文：塞宣听说而大喜。
English: Sai Xuan was overjoyed when he heard the news.

古文：时自娄太后及勋贵臣，咸云关西既是劲敌，恐其有挟天子令诸侯之辞，不可先行禅代事。
现代文：当时自玺立后到勋贵朝臣，都说关西已是劲敌，恐怕他们有挟天子令诸侯的藉口，不可先行惮让和接替帝位的事情。
English: At that time, nobles and courtiers said that Kansai was already a strong enemy, and they feared that they would have an excuse to blackmail the princes, and that they should not make concessions and succeed to the throne.

古文：之才独云： 千人逐兔，一人得之，诸人咸息。
现代文：惟独之才说： 一千个人迫一只兔子，一个人得到它，众人都会停止。
English: The only thing he said was: A thousand men chase a rabbit, one gets it, and they all stop.

古文：须定大业，何容翻欲学人。 
现代文：必须定业，怎么允许反过来要学别人。 
English: You have to be a professional, how can you allow yourself to learn from others?

古文：又援引证据，备有条目，帝从之。
现代文：又援引证据，完备而有条理，帝听从了他。
English: He also quoted the evidence, complete and orderly, and the emperor obeyed him.

古文：登祚后，弥见亲密。
现代文：登基后，更被亲密。
English: After ascending to the throne, they became even closer.

古文：之才非唯医术自进，亦为首唱禅代，又戏谑滑稽，言无不至，于是大被狎昵。
现代文：之才不惟靠医术自谋仕进，也因为首倡禅让和接替帝位，又诙谐滑稽，说话没有不精深的，于是很被亲近。
English: His talent was not only self-made by medical skills, but also because he was the first to advocate the transfer and succession of the imperial throne, and he was witty and funny, and his speech was very profound, so he was very close.

古文：寻除侍中，封池阳县伯。
现代文：不久任侍中，封池阳县伯。
English: He was soon appointed as a chamberlain and given the title of Count of Chikyang County.

古文：见文宣政令转严，求出，除赵州刺史，竟不获述职，犹为弄臣。
现代文：见文宣政令变严，要求外出做官，任赵州刺史，竟然未得供职，还是作宠幸狎玩之臣。
English: See Wen Xuan's decree became stricter, requiring him to go out to work as an official, appointing Zhao Zhou as a historian, but he was not allowed to serve, and he was still a favorite.

古文：皇建二年，除西兖州刺史。
现代文：皇建二年，授任西兖州刺史。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jian, he was awarded the title of West Luzhou Provincial Historian.

古文：未之官，武明皇太后不豫，之才疗之，应手便愈，孝昭赐采帛千段、锦四百疋。
现代文：没有到任，武明皇太后有病，之左给她治疗，随手便愈，孝昭赐予他彩帛千段、锦四百匹。
English: When he didn't arrive, Empress Dowager Wu Ming was ill, so he gave her some medicine. As soon as he could, Xiao Zhao gave him a thousand pieces of colored enamel and 400 pieces of brocade.

古文：之才既善医术，虽有外授，顷即征还。
现代文：之才擅长医术，即使授官外任，顷刻便召回。
English: They are only good at medicine, and even if they are assigned to outside positions, they will be recalled in an instant.

古文：既博识多闻，由是于方术尤妙。
现代文：已经博学多闻，因此对于方术尤其高妙。
English: Already well-read and well-informed, he is particularly adept at the art of the square.

古文：大宁二年春，武明太后又病。
现代文：大宁二年春天，武明太后又生了病。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Daning Dynasty, Empress Dowager Wu Ming fell ill again.

古文：之才弟之范为尚药典御，□令诊候。
现代文：之立弟之整为尚药典御，帝令诊治。
English: His younger brother, Zhi Li Zhi, was a doctor of medicine, and he was ordered by the emperor to treat patients.

古文：内史皆令呼太后为石婆，盖有俗忌，故改名以厌制之。
现代文：内史都让称太后为石婆，大概有世俗的忌讳，所以改名来驱避病灾。
English: According to Chinese history, the empress dowager was called Shiba, which was probably a secular taboo, so she changed her name to avoid illness.

古文：之范出告之才曰： 童谣云：今太后忽改名，私所致怪。 
现代文：之范出来告诉之才说： 童谣说： 周里跤求伽，豹祠嫁石婆，斩冢作媒人，惟得一量紫蜒靴，今天太后忽然改名，私下感到奇怪。 
English: The children's rhyme says: Zhou Lili wrestles with the witch, the panther's shrine marries the stone maiden, the beheading is the matchmaker, but only one pair of purple shoes is gained. Today, the empress dowager suddenly changed her name. Privately, she felt strange.

古文：之才曰： 跂求伽，胡言去已。
现代文：之才说： 肢求伽，胡语 去已，之意。
English: Zhi Cai said: "The limbs are begging, the Hu language has gone, meaning.

古文：豹祠嫁石婆，岂有好事？
现代文：豹祠嫁石婆，难道有好事?
English: A leopard's shrine marrying a stone woman, is that a good thing?

古文：斩□作媒人，但令合葬自斩□。
现代文：斩冢作媒人，衹是让他们合葬在斩冢。
English: 斩 as a matchmaker,  is to let them buried together in 斩.

古文：唯得紫綖靴者，得至四月，何者？
现代文：惟得紫蜒靴，得到四月份，为什么呢?
English: But why did the purple shoes win the month of April?

古文：紫之为字下，者熟，当在四月之中。 
现代文：紫作为字是 此 下有 系， 蜒 是熟，当在四月当中。 
English: Zi as a character is a lower-case character, while 蜒 is a lower-case character, and should be used in the middle of April.

古文：之范问靴是何义。
现代文：之范问靴是何义。
English: The model asked what the meaning of shoes was.

古文：之才曰： 靴者革旁化，宁是久物？ 
现代文：之才说： 靴，革旁加化，难道是久长之物? 
English: Zhi Cai said, "Shoes, with the addition of leather, have been around for a long time.

古文：至四月一日，后果崩。
现代文：到四月一日，太后果然逝世。
English: On April 1, the emperor died suddenly.

古文：有人患□跟肿痛，诸医莫能识。
现代文：有人患脚跟肿痛，众医没有人能诊断。
English: Someone has a swollen heel and no doctor can diagnose it.

古文：之才曰： 蛤精疾也，由乘船入海，垂□水中。 
现代文：之才说： 蛤精造成的病，因乘船入海，垂脚水中所致。 
English: Zhi Cai said: The disease caused by the cadmium was caused by the boat entering the sea and the water dripping from the feet.

古文：疾者曰： 实曾如此。 
现代文：有病的人说： 确实曾经这样。 
English: People with the disease say: It really was like that.

古文：之才为剖得蛤子二，大如榆荚。
现代文：之才为他剖开得到蛤子两个，大如榆荚。
English: So he cut it open and found two large cocoons, about the size of a pea.

古文：又有以骨为刀子靶者，五色班斓。
现代文：又有用骨头做刀把的，五彩斑斓。
English: They also use bones to make handles, which are multi-coloured.

古文：之才曰： 此人瘤也。 
现代文：之才说： 此是人的瘤。 
English: Zhi Cai said: This is a human tumor.

古文：问得处，云于古□见髑髅额骨长数寸，试削视，有文理，故用之。
现代文：问得到的地方，说是在古墓见到髑髅额骨长数寸，试削着看，有花纹，所以用它。
English: When I asked where I could get it, they said that they had seen a skull-forehead bone in an ancient tomb that was several inches long. When I tried it on, I saw that it had a pattern, so I used it.

古文：其明悟多通如此。
现代文：他的聪明颖悟渊博通达大都如此。
English: His cleverness, wit, and broad-mindedness are mostly so.

古文：天统四年，累迁尚书左仆射，俄除兖州刺史，特给铙吹一部。
现代文：天统四年，几次升任为尚书左仆射，不久任免刺史，特供给演奏铙歌的军乐队一部。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was promoted several times to the position of Shangshu Zuopuzha, and was soon appointed to the post of Sanshan Shi, and was specially provided with a part of the military band that played Yingge.

古文：之才医术最高，偏被命召。
现代文：之才医术最高，特别被命召。
English: He is the most talented doctor and has been specially appointed.

古文：武成酒色过度，怳惚不恒，曾病发，自云初见空中有五色物，稍近，变成一美妇人，去地数丈，亭亭而立。
现代文：武成酒色过度，恍惚不定，曾经发病，自己说起初见空中有五色物，逐渐靠近，变成一个美丽的妇人，离地几丈，亭亭玉立。
English: Wucheng was drunk, delirious, and had an illness. She said that at first she saw a five-colored object in the sky, which gradually approached her and turned into a beautiful woman, several meters above the ground, standing tall and beautiful.

古文：食顷，变为观世音。
现代文：一顿饭的时间，变为观世音。
English: The time of a meal becomes a time for contemplation.

古文：之才云： 此色欲多，大虚所致。 
现代文：之才说： 这是色欲过多，大虚所致。 
English: Zhi Cai said, "This is the result of too much sexual desire and too much emptiness.

古文：即处汤方，服一剂，便觉稍远，又服，还变成五色物，数剂汤，疾竟愈。
现代文：就开药方，服了一剂，便觉得渐远，又服，还原变成五色物，服数剂药，病终于痊愈。
English: He prescribed a medicine, took one dose, and then felt distant. He took another dose, and the reduction turned into a five-color thing. He took several doses of medicine, and the disease was finally cured.

古文：帝每发动，蹔遣骑追之，针药所加，应时必□，故频有端执之举。
现代文：帝每次疾病发作，突然派人骑马召他，针药施加之处，即刻见效，所以频频有赏赐。
English: Every time the emperor had an attack of illness, he would suddenly send someone on horseback to summon him. Where the injection was applied, it had an immediate effect, so there were frequent rewards.

古文：入秋，武成小定，更不发动。
现代文：入秋，武成稍微安定，不再发病。
English: In the autumn, Wucheng was somewhat stable and no longer had the disease.

古文：和士开欲依次转进，以之才附籍兖州，即是本属，遂奏附除刺史，以胡长仁为左仆射，士开为右仆射。
现代文：和士题想依次改任晋升，因之才是户籍附入兖州的外地人，也就是当地人，于是奏请归任刺史，以胡垦仁为左仆射，题为右仆射。
English: He and Shi Jie wanted to be promoted one after another, because they were the only foreigners whose household registration was attached to Ganzhou, that is, the local people, so they asked to be assigned to the history, with Hu Yujen as the left archer, entitled the right archer.

古文：及十月，帝又病动，语士开云： 恨用之才外任，使我辛苦。 
现代文：到十月，帝又病发，对士开说： 遣憾让之才在外地任职，使我受苦。 
English: By October, the emperor fell ill again, and said to Shikai: "I am sorry to have made you suffer by letting you serve in a foreign country.

古文：其月八日，□驿追之才。
现代文：这个月八日，帝令用驿车追回之才。
English: On the eighth day of this month, the imperial command used a carriage to recover it.

古文：帝以十日崩，之才十一日方到，既无所及，复还赴州。
现代文：帝在十逝世，之才十一日才到，已无有用，又返回奔赴兖州。
English: The emperor died on the 10th, and it was not until the 11th day that he arrived, and he was no longer useful, and he returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：在职无所侵暴，但不甚闲法理，颇亦疏慢，用舍自由。
现代文：在职其间没有侵犯暴掠，衹是不很熟悉法律，也很轻忽怠慢，用舍自由。
English: During his tenure, there was no violent robbery, he was not very familiar with the law, he was also negligent and careless, and he used his freedom.

古文：五年冬，后主征之才。
现代文：五年冬天，后主召之才。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, she was summoned by the Empress.

古文：寻左仆射阙，之才曰： 自可复禹之绩。 
现代文：不久左仆射官位空缺，之才说： 自然可以恢复禹的业绩。 
English: Soon after, the position of the left-hand man was vacant, and it was only then that he said, "Naturally, we can restore Yu's performance."

古文：武平元年，重除尚书左仆射。
现代文：武平元年，重任尚书左仆射。
English: In the first year of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, he was given the important post of Shangshu Zuopuzha.

古文：之才于和士开、陆令萱母子曲尽卑狎，二家苦疾，救护百端。由是迁尚书令，封西阳郡王。
现代文：之才对和士开、陆令萱母子竭尽谦敬亲近，两家病苦，百般救护，由此升任尚书令，封西阳郡王。
English: Zhi Cai was very close to the mother and son of He Shikai and Lu Lingjun, and the two families suffered from illness and received all kinds of help. As a result, he was promoted to Shang Shuling, the king of Xiyang County.

古文：祖珽执政，除之才侍中、太子太师。
现代文：祖挺执政，任之才侍中、太子太师。
English: Zu Ting was in power, and he appointed Zetai as a chamberlain and the prince as a teacher.

古文：之才恨曰： 子野沙汰我。 
现代文：之才痛恨地说： 子野淘汰我。 
English: Then he said bitterly, "Kobono eliminated me."

古文：珽目疾，故以师旷比之。
现代文：祖埏眼有疾，所以用师旷比喻他。
English: Zhu Xi has an eye disease, so he used Shi Kuang to compare him.

古文：之才聪辩强识，有兼人之敏，尤好剧谈体语，公私言聚，多相嘲戏。
现代文：之才聪明善辩记忆力强，有过人的机敏，尤其是喜欢畅谈反切隐语，因公务和私事聚会，常常相互嘲戏。
English: Talented, clever, good at debating, strong memory, superior agility, especially like to talk freely, often mocking each other due to business and private gatherings.

古文：郑道育常戏之才为师公。
现代文：郑道育常戏称之才为师公。
English: Zheng Daoyu often called him his mentor.

古文：之才曰： 既为汝师，又为汝公，在三之义，顿居其两。 
现代文：之才说： 既为你的老师，又为你的祖父，在三义之中，顿时占有其中的两种。 
English: Zhi Cai said, "Being both your teacher and your grandfather, among the three meanings, Zhi Cai immediately possesses two of them.

古文：又嘲王昕姓云： 有言则□，近犬便狂，加颈足而为马，施角尾而为羊。 
现代文：又嘲戏王昕的姓说： 加上言就是注，靠近犬便是狂，加颈项和脚就成了马，施以角尾就成了羊。 
English: He also made fun of Wang Yao's surname, saying, "Adding one's name is a mark, getting close to a dog is madness, adding one's neck and feet is a horse, and adding a horned tail is a sheep."

古文：卢元明因戏之才云： 卿姓是未入人，名是字之误，当为也。 
现代文：卢元明于是嬉戏之才说： 你的姓是未入人，名是字的错， 之 当为 乏 。 
English: Lu Yuanming then playfully said, "Your surname is not a member, your name is a misspelling, it should be 乏.

古文：即答云： 卿姓在亡为虐，在丘为虚，生男则为虏，养马则为驴。 
现代文：立即回答说： 你的姓在亡为虐，在丘为虚，生男就是虏，养马就是驴。 
English: He immediately replied, "Your family name is in shambles and in vain. A man born is a captive, a horse bred is a donkey.

古文：又尝与朝士出游，遥望□犬竞走，诸人试令目之。
现代文：又曾与朝臣出游，远远看到一群狗争着跑，众人让试着用眼看它们。
English: He also went on a trip with courtiers and saw a group of dogs running in a race in the distance. Everyone asked him to try to see them with his own eyes.

古文：之才即应声云： 为是宋鹊，为是韩卢，为逐李斯东走，为负帝女南徂。 
现代文：之才立即应声说： 当是良犬宋鹊，当是良犬韩卢，为追逐李斯束走，为背着帝女南往。 
English: Zhi Cai immediately said in response: "If you are a good dog, Song Tao, if you are a good dog, Han Lu, you will chase Li Si away and carry the princess southward."

古文：李谐于广坐，因称其父名，曰： 卿嗜熊白生否？ 
现代文：李谐在广众之下，称他父亲之名说： 你喜欢熊白生否? 
English: Li Jinli called out his father's name in front of the crowd and said, "Do you like being born in vain?

古文：之才曰： 平平耳。 
现代文：之才说： 平平罢了。 
English: Zhi Cai said, "It's just ordinary."

古文：又曰： 卿此言于理平否？ 
现代文：又说： 你遣话在理平否? 
English: And he said, Speakest thou this parable?

古文：谐遽出避之，道逢其甥高德正。
现代文：李谐急忙出去躲避他，路上遇到他的外甥高德正。
English: Li Hani hurried out to avoid him and met his nephew Gao Dezheng on the road.

古文：德正曰： 舅颜色何不悦？ 
现代文：德正说： 舅舅的面色为什么不高兴? 
English: Dezheng said, "Why is my uncle's face not happy?

古文：谐告之故。
现代文：李谐把原因告诉他。
English: Li Jinli told him the reason.

古文：德正径造坐席，连索熊白。
现代文：德正直到座席，接连寻找熊白。
English: De Zheng walked to his seat and searched for the bear.

古文：之才谓坐者曰： 个人讳底？ 
现代文：之才对在座的人说： 这个人家讳是什么? 
English: "What is this person's family name?

古文：□莫知。
现代文：众人不知。
English: No one knows.

古文：之才曰： 生不为人所知，死不为人所讳，此何足问？ 
现代文：之才说： 生不为人所知，死不为人所讳，这种人有什么值得问的? 
English: Zhitai said, "If one's birth is not known and one's death is not concealed, what is there to ask of such a person?"

古文：唐邕、白建方贵，时人言云： □州赫赫唐与白。 
现代文：唐邕、白建正显贵，当时人说： 并州赫赫唐与白。 
English: Tang Xuan and Bai Jianzhen were prominent, and people said at the time: "Let's unite the state of Tang and Bai."

古文：之才蔑之。
现代文：之才轻蔑他们。
English: That's why they despise them.

古文：元日，对邕为诸令史祝曰： 见卿等位当作唐、白。 
现代文：正月初一，当着唐邕为诸令史祝贺说： 看你们诸位当作唐、白。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, in front of Tang Xuan, he congratulated Zhu Rongshi and said: "Look at you all as Tang and Bai.

古文：又以小史好嚼笔，故尝执管就元文遥口曰： 借君齿。 
现代文：又因小吏好嚼笔，所以曾拿着笔靠近元文遥的嘴说： 借您的齿。 
English: Also, because the minor official was fond of chewing pens, he once held a pen close to Yuan Wenyao's mouth and said, "Let me borrow your teeth."

古文：其不逊如此。
现代文：他不谦逊到这个地步。
English: He's not humble enough for that.

古文：历事诸帝，以戏狎得宠。
现代文：历事诸帝，以善于戏狎得宠。
English: Throughout history, emperors have been favored by being good at banter.

古文：武成生齻牙，问诸医。尚药典御邓宣文以实对，武成怒而挞之。
现代文：武成生最后的臼齿，问众医，尚药典御邓宣文如实回答，亘噬发怒打他一顿。
English: Wu Cheng Sheng's last molars, asked the doctors, Shang Yuquan Emperor Deng Xuanwen truthfully answered, he was furious and beat him up.

古文：后以问之才，拜贺曰： 此是智牙，生智牙者聪明长寿。 
现代文：后来用这件事问之才，拜贺说： 这是智牙，生智牙的人聪明长寿。 
English: Later, when asked about it, Bai He said, "This is a wisdom tooth. People with wisdom teeth are smart and live long.

古文：武成悦而赏之。
现代文：武成很高兴并赏赐了他。
English: Takeshige was pleased and rewarded him.

古文：为仆射时，语人曰： 我在江东，见徐勉作仆射，朝士莫不佞之。
现代文：作仆射时，对人说： 我在江束时，见徐勉作仆射，朝臣没有谁不对他阿谀奉承。
English: When he was a courier, he said to people: When I was in Jiangzhu, I saw Xu Mian as a courier, and there was no courtier who did not flatter him.

古文：今我亦是徐仆射，无一人佞我，何由可活！ 
现代文：现在我也是徐仆射，没有一个人奉承我，如何可活! 
English: Now that I am also a Xu pupil, no one flatters me, how can I live!

古文：之才妻魏广阳王妹，之才从文襄求得为妻。
现代文：之才妻是魏广阳王的妹妹，之才从文襄那裹求来作妻子。
English: Zi Cai's wife was the sister of the Wei Guangyang King, and Zi Cai came from Wenzhong to beg for a wife.

古文：和士开知之，乃淫其妻。之才遇见而避之，退曰： 妨少年戏笑。 
现代文：和士开知道逭件事，就奸淫了他的妻子，之才遇见后反而躲避，还说： 别妨碍了少年戏笑。 
English: When she found out, she raped his wife, but when she met him, she avoided him, saying, "Don't get in the way of the boy's play."

古文：其宽纵如此。
现代文：他宽和放纵到这个地步。
English: He's been loose and loose to this point.

古文：年八十，卒。
现代文：八十岁去世。
English: He died at the age of eighty.

古文：赠司徒公、录尚书事，谥曰文明。
现代文：追赠司徒公、录尚书事，谧号文明。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shitukong, and his name was recorded in the records.

古文：长子林，字少卿，太尉司马。
现代文：长子林，字少卿，为太尉司马。
English: The eldest son, Lin, nicknamed Shaoqing, became Second Lieutenant Sima.

古文：次子同卿，太子庶子。
现代文：次子回卿，为太子庶子。
English: The second son, Haikyo, was the Prince's illegitimate son.

古文：之才以其无学术，每叹云： 终恐同广陵散矣。 
现代文：之才因他没有学识，每每叹息说： 最终恐怕同《广陵散》啊。 
English: It was because of his lack of knowledge that he sighed every time and said, "I'm afraid I'll end up like Guangling San."

古文：弟之范，亦医术见知，位太常卿，特听袭之才爵西阳王。
现代文：弟之范，也以医术知名，任太常卿，特别让他承袭了之左的酉垦旺爵位。
English: His younger brother, Zhi Fan, also known for his medical skills, was appointed to the position of Tai Changqing, and in particular, he inherited Zhi Zuo's Xiangwang peerage.

古文：入周，授仪同大将军。
现代文：到固，授任仪同大将军。
English: Arriving at the fortress, he was given the same ceremony as a general.

古文：开皇中卒。
现代文：盟皇年间去世。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Ming.

