古文：苏秦从燕之赵，始合从，说赵王曰： 天下之卿相人臣，乃至布衣之士，莫不高贤大王之行义，皆愿奉教陈忠于前之日久矣。
现代文：苏秦从燕国到赵国开始倡导联合崤山以东六国对抗秦国的合纵策略。他游说赵王说： 普天之下，各诸侯国的卿相大臣，乃至普通老百姓，没有一个不尊崇大王施行仁义的行为的，很长时间以来，他们都愿接受您的教诲，向大王进献忠心。
English: From Yan to Zhao, Su Qin began to advocate the strategy of uniting the six countries east of Lushan to fight against Qin. He lobbied Zhao Wang to say: Under the whole heaven, the ministers of the princes of the states, and even the ordinary people, there is no one who does not respect the great king to carry out benevolent and righteous behavior. For a long time, they have been willing to accept your teachings and devote their loyalty to the great king.

古文：虽然，奉阳君妬，大王不得任事，是以外宾客游谈之士，无敢尽忠于前者。
现代文：然而，奉阳君妒嫉贤能，使得大王不能专理国事，以致宾客疏远，游说之士都不敢到大王的近前来进献忠言。
English: However, Bongyangjun's jealousy of virtue made the king unable to manage state affairs, so that guests were alienated, and lobbyists did not dare to come near the king to offer loyal advice.

古文：今奉阳君捐馆舍，大王乃今然后得与士民相亲，臣故敢献其愚，效愚忠。
现代文：现在奉阳君死掉了，大王才能够和各方面的人士接近，我才敢到大王的近前来进献忠言。
English: Now that Bongyang is dead, the great king can get close to people from all walks of life, and I dare to come close to the great king to offer my advice.

古文：为大王计，莫若安民无事，请无庸有为也。
现代文：我为大王考虑，没有比让人民安居乐业、国家平安无事更好的了。
English: I think for the great king, there is nothing better than letting the people live and work in peace, and the country is safe and sound.

古文：安民之本，在于择交，择交而得则民安，择交不得则民终身不得安。
现代文：让百姓安居乐业的根本在于选择好诸侯国并与其建立良好邦交。有好的邦交人民就安定，没有好的邦交百姓终生都不得安宁。
English: The fundamental way to let the people live and work in peace is to choose a good vassal state and establish good diplomatic relations with it. If there are good diplomatic relations, the people will be stable. If there are no good diplomatic relations, the people will not be at peace for the rest of their lives.

古文：请言外患：齐、秦为两敌，而民不得安；倚秦攻齐，而民不得安；倚齐攻秦，而民不得安。
现代文：我再说说外敌入侵的祸患：秦国是您的敌国，所以赵国人民不得安定；依靠秦国进攻齐国，百姓不能安定；依靠齐国进攻秦国，百姓也不能安定。
English: Let me talk about the scourge of foreign invasion: Qin is your enemy, so the people of Zhao cannot be stable; if you rely on Qin to attack Qin, the people cannot be stable; if you rely on Qin to attack Qin, the people cannot be stable.

古文：故夫谋人之主，伐人之国，常苦出辞断绝人之交，愿大王慎无出与口也。
现代文：可见图谋他国国君，讨伐别的国家，常常会口出恶言，并与他国断交，所以我请大王要谨慎，不要说这样的话。
English: It can be seen that the sovereigns of other countries, who are plotting to attack other countries, often use bad language and break off diplomatic relations with other countries, so I ask the great king to be careful not to say such things.

古文： 请屏左右，曰言所以异，阴阳而已矣。
现代文：请您回避左右侍臣，我来说说合纵、连横的差别。
English: Please avoid the left and right attendants. Let me tell you the difference between vertical and horizontal.

古文：大王诚能听臣，燕必致毡裘狗马之地，齐必致海隅鱼盐之地，楚必致桔柚云梦之地，韩、魏皆可使致封地汤沐之邑，贵戚父兄皆可以受封侯。
现代文：大王真能听从我的忠言，燕国一定会把出产毡、裘、狗、马的好地方献给您，齐国一定会把海边出产鱼盐的地盘献给您，楚国一定会把出产橘柚的云梦之地献给您，韩国、魏国也必然献出很多城池和供您洗盥费用的县邑，大王的亲人父兄都可以有封侯的土地。
English: The great king can really listen to my loyal advice. Yan country will surely offer you a good place to produce cormorants, choughs, dogs, and horses. Qi country will surely offer you a place to produce fish salt by the sea. Chu country will surely offer you a dream place to produce tangerine and grapefruit. South Korea and Wei country will also surely offer a lot of cities and counties for your laundry expenses. The great king's relatives can have land.

古文：夫割地效实，五伯之所以复军禽将而求也；封侯贵戚，汤、武之所以放杀而争也。
现代文：割取别国土地得到别国财货，乃是五霸不惜牺牲将士性命都要去追求的；使贵戚得以封侯，也是从前商汤放逐夏桀、周武王讨伐殷纣王才夺取的。
English: Taking land from other countries to obtain wealth and goods from other countries is what the Five Dynasties pursued at the cost of sacrificing the lives of their soldiers; making it possible for a noble relative to be made a vassal was also something that Shang Tang exiled Xia Yao and King Zhou Wu defeated King Yin Yao.

古文：今大王垂拱而两有之，是臣之所以为大王愿也。
现代文：现在大王不费力气就可以得到两种东西，这是我为大王感到欣慰的。
English: Now the great king can get two things without any effort, which I am pleased for the great king.

古文：大王与秦，则秦必弱韩、魏；与齐，则齐必弱楚、魏。魏弱则割河外，韩弱则效宜阳。
现代文：大王如果与秦国结盟，秦国必然去侵略韩、魏；大王与齐国结盟，齐国必然去侵略楚、魏；魏国衰弱后就必然割河外之地；韩国衰弱了，就会献出宜阳。
English: If the great king allied with Qin, Qin would inevitably invade Han and Wei; if the great king allied with Qi, Qi would inevitably invade Chu and Wei; if Wei weakened, it would inevitably cut off the land outside the river; if Korea weakened, it would sacrifice Yiyang.

古文：宜阳效则上郡绝，河外割则道不通。楚弱则无援。
现代文：献出了宜阳，则通往上郡的路就切断了；河外割让了，道路就不能通行到上郡；楚国衰弱，赵国就孤立无援。
English: If Yiyang is surrendered, the road to Shang County will be cut off; if Hewai is ceded, the road cannot pass to Shang County; if Chu is weakened, Zhao will be left alone.

古文：此三策者，不可不熟计也。
现代文：这三项计策，是不能不慎重考虑的。
English: These three measures must be carefully considered.

古文：夫秦下轵道则南阳动，劫韩包周则赵自销铄，据卫取淇则齐必入朝。
现代文：秦国攻下轵道，那么南阳就会动摇；再劫持韩国包围周室，那么赵国就会自行削弱；秦国再占领卫都濮阳夺取淇水之地，那么齐国必然会到秦国称臣。
English: If Qin conquered Shandong, then Nanyang would be shaken; if Qin captured Korea and encircled Zhoushu, then Zhao would be weakened; if Qin reoccupied the capital of Wei, Shenyang, and seized the land of Qishui, then Qi would inevitably come to Qin to claim the throne.

古文：秦欲已得行于山东，则必举甲而向赵。
现代文：假如秦国能在山东得到这些，必然就会进攻赵国。
English: If Qin could get these in Shandong, it would inevitably attack Zhao.

古文：秦甲涉河逾漳，据番吾，则兵必战于邯郸之下矣。
现代文：秦军渡过黄河，穿过漳水，占据番吾，那么秦兵必将交战于邯郸城下。
English: The Qin army crossed the Yellow River, passed through Surabaya, and occupied Fango, so the Qin soldiers will certainly fight under the city of Surabaya.

古文：此臣之所以为大王患也。
现代文：这就是我为大王感到担忧的事情啊！
English: This is where I worry for the king.

古文： 当今之时，山东之建国，莫如赵强。
现代文：看现在的形势，崤山以东这几个国家，没有哪个国家像赵国这么强大。
English: Looking at the current situation, no country east of Lushan is as powerful as Zhao.

古文：赵地方二千里，带甲数十万，车千乘，骑万匹，粟支十年；西有常山，南有河、漳，东有清河，北有燕国。
现代文：赵国土地方圆两千里，精兵数十万，战车千辆，战马万匹，军粮可供应军队十年之用，西边有常山，南边有黄河、漳水，东边有清河，北边有燕国。
English: Zhao's territory is 2,000 miles in circumference, with hundreds of thousands of elite soldiers, thousands of chariots, and tens of thousands of horses. The military food can supply the army for ten years. To the west is Changshan, to the south is the Yellow River and Surabaya, to the east is the Qinghe River, and to the north is Yan country.

古文：燕固弱国，不足畏也。
现代文：燕国本是一个弱国，不足畏惧。
English: Yan, by nature, is a small and weak country. It is not worth being afraid of.

古文：且秦之所畏害于天下者，莫如赵。
现代文：在天下各诸侯国中，秦国最害怕的是赵国。
English: Of all the vassal states in the world, the one that Qin feared the most was Zhao.

古文：然而秦不敢举兵甲而伐赵者，何也?
现代文：那秦国不敢发兵讨伐赵国的原因是什么呢？
English: What is the reason why Qin did not dare to send troops to fight Zhao?

古文：畏韩、魏之议其后也。
现代文：是因为秦国担心韩、魏两国在后边算计它。
English: It was because Qin feared that Han and Wei were plotting against it from behind.

古文：然则韩、魏，赵之南蔽也。
现代文：这样看来，韩、魏两国就是赵国南边的蔽障。
English: Since this is the case, Han and Wei can be considered a barrier on the southern side of Zhao.

古文：秦之攻韩、魏也，则不然。
现代文：如果秦国攻打韩、魏，情况就不是这样了。
English: If Qin attacked Han and Wei, this would not be the case.

古文：无有名山大川之限，稍稍蚕食之，傅之国都而止矣。
现代文：韩、魏没有名山大川的阻隔，秦国只要对它进行吞食，一直把国都吞食完为止就可以了。
English: Han and Wei did not have the barrier of famous mountains and rivers. As long as Qin swallowed it, it would be enough to swallow the whole country.

古文：韩、魏不能支秦，必入臣。
现代文：韩、魏不能抗拒秦国，必然会向秦称臣。
English: Han and Wei could not resist Qin, and would inevitably become its vassals.

古文：韩、魏臣于秦，秦无韩、魏之隔，祸中于赵矣。
现代文：韩、魏臣服于秦后，秦国就没有韩、魏的障碍了，战祸就将降到赵国头上。
English: After Han and Wei subjects submit to Qin, Qin will no longer have the obstacle of Han and Wei, and the war disaster will fall on the head of Zhao.

古文：此臣之所以为大王患也。
现代文：这也是我为大王忧虑的地方。
English: This is where I worry for the king.

古文： 臣闻，尧无三夫之分，舜无咫尺之地，以有天下。
现代文： 我听说，尧帝最初的时候所拥有的土地不超过三百亩，舜帝最初根本就没有土地，但他们都拥有了整个天下。
English: I heard that the land owned by Emperor Gong did not exceed three hundred mu at the beginning, and Emperor Gong did not have any land at all at the beginning, but they all owned the whole world.

古文：禹无百人之聚，以王诸侯。
现代文：禹帝最初的时候所拥有的不过是一个不到百人的小部落，但最终能够在各诸侯中称王。
English: At first, Emperor Yu had only a small tribe of less than a hundred people, but eventually he was able to become king among the princes.

古文：汤、武之卒不过三千人，车不过三百乘，立为天子。
现代文：商汤、周武王所拥有的士兵不超过三千人，战车不超过三百辆，最后也成为天子。
English: Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu had no more than three thousand soldiers and no more than three hundred chariots, and finally became the son of Heaven.

古文：诚得其道也。
现代文：这都是因为他们确实掌握了治理国家的规律。
English: This is all because they have really mastered the rules of governing the country.

古文：是故明主外料其敌国之强弱，内度其士卒之众寡、贤与不肖，不待两军相当，而胜败存亡之机节，固已见于胸中矣，岂掩于众人之言，而以冥冥决事哉!
现代文：所以说英明的国君，对外要预料到敌国的强弱，对内要考察士卒的多寡、贤与不贤，不必等到两军短兵相接、胜败存亡的关键和环节，就都已经了然于胸了，怎么能被众人的观点所蒙蔽，糊涂之下就决定事情呢！
English: Therefore, it is said that a wise sovereign should anticipate the strength and weakness of the enemy country to the outside world, and should examine the number of officers and men, the wise and the unwise to the inside. It is not necessary to wait until the two armies are in close contact, and the key and links of victory and defeat are already clear in the chest. How can you be blinded by the views of many people and decide things under confusion!

古文： 臣窃以天下地图案之。诸侯之地五倍于秦，料诸侯之卒，十倍于秦。
现代文：我私下察看天下各国的地图，诸侯的土地相当于秦国的五倍，诸侯的兵力相当于秦国的十倍。
English: Privately, I looked at the maps of all the countries in the world. The land of the princes is equivalent to five times that of Qin, and the military strength of the princes is equivalent to ten times that of Qin.

古文：六国并力为一，西面而攻秦，秦必破矣。
现代文：如果六国能够团结一致，合力西去攻打秦国，秦国必定灭亡。
English: If the six countries can be united and work together to attack Qin, Qin will surely perish.

古文：今见破于秦，西面而事之，见臣于秦。
现代文：现在各国将要被秦国灭亡，却面朝西方共同侍奉秦国，向秦国称臣。
English: Now all countries are about to be destroyed by Qin, but they face the West to jointly serve Qin and show their allegiance to Qin.

古文：夫破人之与破于人也，臣人之与臣于人也，岂可同日而言之哉!
现代文：灭掉别国或被别国灭掉，让别国臣服或臣服于别国，两者绝不能相提并论。
English: Destroying other countries or being destroyed by other countries, making other countries submit or submit to other countries, the two can never be compared.

古文：夫横人者，皆欲割诸侯之地以与秦成。
现代文：那些主张连横的人，他们都想割让诸侯的土地来与秦国谈和。
English: Those who advocated the continuation of the war, they all wanted to cede the land of the princes to negotiate peace with Qin.

古文：与秦成，则高台，美宫室，听竽瑟之音，察五味之和，前有轩辕，后有长庭，美人巧笑，卒有秦患，而不与其忧。
现代文：一旦能和秦国讲和，他们就可以高筑台榭，美化住宅别墅，倾听美女姣笑，然而一旦秦国突然发兵攻打诸侯，他们却不与诸侯共同承担忧患。
English: Once they can make peace with Qin, they can build high towers, beautify houses and villas, and listen to beautiful women's laughter. However, once Qin suddenly sent troops to attack the princes, they did not share the sorrow with the princes.

古文：是故横人日夜务以秦权恐猲诸侯，以求割地，愿大王之熟计之也。
现代文：因此主张连横的人日夜寻求靠秦国的权势来恐吓诸侯，以求得向秦国割地。请大王深思熟虑。
English: Therefore, those who advocate Lianyang seek day and night to rely on the power of the Qin State to intimidate the princes in order to obtain land from the Qin State.

古文： 臣闻，明王绝疑去谗，屏流言之迹，塞朋党之门，故尊主广地强兵之计，臣得陈忠于前矣。
现代文：我听说贤明的君主不怀疑所任用的人，不听信谗言，摒弃一切流言蜚语的传播，杜绝朋党之间的争斗，所以对使国君尊贵、疆地扩大、增强兵力的计策，我才能够有机会献给大王，在大王的面前效忠了。
English: I have heard that a wise monarch does not doubt the person he has appointed, does not listen to gossip, abandons the spread of all gossip, and puts an end to the struggle between friends and parties. Therefore, I was able to have the opportunity to devote myself to the great king and be loyal in front of the great king.

古文：故窃本大王计，莫如一韩、魏、齐、楚、燕、赵六国从亲，以傧畔秦。
现代文：所以我私下里为大王考虑，不如联合韩、魏、齐、楚、燕、赵，六国合纵，结为盟友，来抗拒秦国。
English: Therefore, I secretly considered for the great king, it would be better to unite Korea, Wei, Qi, Chu, Yan and Zhao, the six countries, and make allies to resist Qin.

古文：令天下之将相，相与会于洹水之上，通质刑白马以盟之。
现代文：通令各国的将相，都到洹水岸边集会，交换质子，杀白马缔结盟约。
English: The leaders of all countries were ordered to gather on the shore of Surabaya to exchange protons and conclude an alliance.

古文：约曰： 秦攻楚，齐、魏各出锐师以佐之，韩绝食道，赵涉河、漳，燕守常山以北。
现代文：盟约可以这样说： 如果秦国进攻楚国，齐、魏都要各出精兵帮助楚国，韩国军队负责切断秦国的粮道，赵国军队渡过黄河、漳水，燕国军队防守在常山以北。
English: The treaty can be described as follows: If Qin attacked Chu, both Qi and Wei would send their best soldiers to help Chu; the Korean army would be responsible for cutting off Qin's food supply; Zhao's army would cross the Yellow River and Surabaya; and Yan's army would defend north of Changshan.

古文：秦攻韩、魏，则楚绝其后，齐出锐师以佐之，赵涉河、漳，燕守云中。
现代文：如果秦国攻打韩、魏两国，楚国军队切断秦国的后路，齐国派出精兵帮助韩、魏，赵国军队渡过黄河、漳水，燕国军队防守在云中。
English: If Qin attacked Han and Wei, Chu's army would cut off Qin's rear, Qi would send elite soldiers to help Han and Wei, Zhao's army would cross the Yellow River and Surabaya, and Yan's army would be on the defensive.

古文：秦攻齐，则楚绝其后，韩守成皋，魏塞午道，赵涉河、漳、博关，燕出锐师以佐之。
现代文：如果秦国进攻齐国，那么楚国军队负责切断秦国的后路，韩国军队防守成皋，魏国军队截断午道，赵国军队越过黄河、漳水、博关，燕国派出精兵支援齐国。
English: If Qin attacked Qi, then Chu's army would be responsible for cutting off Qin's back route, the South Korean army would defend it, Wei's army would cut off the noon road, Zhao's army would cross the Yellow River, Surabaya, and Boguan, and Yan's army would send elite soldiers to support Qi.

古文：秦攻燕，则赵守常山，楚军武关，齐涉渤海，韩、魏出锐师以佐之。
现代文：如果秦国进攻燕国，那么赵国军队防守在常山，楚国军队驻扎在武关，齐国军队渡过渤海，韩、魏两国各出精兵支援燕国。
English: If Qin attacked Yan, then Zhao's army would defend Changshan, Chu's army would be stationed in Wuguan, Qi's army would cross the Bohai Sea, and Han and Wei would each send elite soldiers to support Yan.

古文：秦攻赵，则韩军宜阳，楚军武关，魏军河外，齐涉渤海，燕出锐师以佐之。
现代文：如果秦国进攻赵国，那么韩国军队防守宜阳，楚国军队驻扎在武关，魏国军队驻扎在河外，齐国军队渡过渤海，燕国派出精兵援救赵国。
English: If Qin attacked Zhao, then the Korean army would defend Yiyang, the Chu army would be stationed in Wuguan, the Wei army would be stationed outside the river, the Qi army would cross the Bohai Sea, and Yan would send elite soldiers to rescue Zhao.

古文：诸侯有先背约者，五国共伐之。
现代文：六个国家当中有先背叛盟约的，其他五个国家共同出兵讨伐它。
English: Of the six nations, the first to renege on the covenant, the other five nations will join forces to fight it.

古文：六国从亲以摈秦，秦必不敢出兵函谷关以害山东矣。
现代文：只要六个国家形成合纵，联合起来抵抗秦国，秦国一定不敢出兵函谷关，来侵犯山东六国了。
English: As long as six countries form a united front and unite to resist Qin, Qin will not dare to invade the six countries in Shandong.

古文：如是则伯业成矣。 
现代文：如果这样的话，大王的霸业就可以成就了。 
English: If this is the case, the hegemony of the great king can be achieved.

古文：赵王曰： 寡人年少，莅国之日浅，未尝得闻社稷之长计。
现代文：赵肃侯说： 我年纪小，即位的时间又短，还没有听到过治国的大计。
English: Zhao Suhou said: I am young, the time of enthronement is short, and I have not yet heard the general plan for governing the country.

古文：今上客有意存天下，安诸侯，寡人敬以国从。 
现代文：现在您有意拯救天下、安定诸侯，我非常愿意缔结合纵之盟。 
English: Now that you are interested in saving the world and stabilizing the states, I am very willing to enter into an alliance with you.

古文：乃封苏秦为武安君，饰车百乘，黄金千镒，白璧百双，锦绣千纯，以约诸侯。
现代文：于是赵肃侯就封苏秦为武安君，拨给他战车一百辆，黄金千镒，白璧百双，锦锈一千匹，用这些财物去与诸侯缔结合纵之约。
English: As a result, Zhao Su Hou appointed Su Qin as Wu Anjun and allocated him one hundred chariots, one thousand ingots of gold, one hundred pairs of white pearls, and one thousand pieces of brocade, and used these assets to make a long-term alliance with the princes.

