古文：起上章敦牂，尽玄黓涒滩，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。齐武帝永明八年
English: and lasted for a total of three years. In the eighth year of Emperor Yongming,

古文：世祖武皇帝中永明八年春，正月，诏放隔城俘二千馀人还魏。
现代文：春季正月，南齐武帝颁下诏令，命令释放在隔城战斗中俘虏的二千多名士卒，送还北魏。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Wu of the Southern Qi issued a decree, ordering the release of more than two thousand soldiers captured in battles across the city and sent back to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：乙丑，魏主如方山；二月，辛未，如灵泉；壬申，还宫。
现代文：乙丑，北魏孝文帝前往方山，二月，辛未，又前往灵泉；壬申，返回宫中。
English: Emperor Wu of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Fangshan. In February, Emperor Xin of the Northern Wei Dynasty also went to Lingquan. Emperor Jinshin of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to the palace.

古文：地豆干频寇魏边，夏，四月，甲戌，魏征西大将军阳平王颐击走之。
现代文：地豆干部落多次寇犯北魏边境。夏季，四月，甲戌，北魏征西大将军、阳平王拓跋颐击退了他们。
English: The Zhuogang tribe repeatedly invaded the Northern Wei border. In the summer, in April, the Armor, the Northern Wei General of the Western Expedition and the Yangping King Tuobao repelled them.

古文：颐，新城之子也。
现代文：拓跋颐是拓跋新城的儿子。
English: Tuobao is the son of Tuobao Xincheng.

古文：甲午，魏遣兼员外散骑常侍邢产等来聘。
现代文：甲午，北魏派遣兼员外散骑常侍邢产等人来访。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, the Northern Wei Dynasty dispatched part-time officers and non-commissioned officers to visit.

古文：五月，己酉，库莫奚寇魏边，安州都将楼龙儿击走之。
现代文：五月，己酉，库莫奚部落寇犯北魏边境，被北魏安州都将楼龙儿击退。
English: In May, the Ji'nan and Kumo'nan tribes trespassed on the Northern Wei border and were repulsed by the Northern Wei An Prefecture.

古文：秋，七月，辛丑，以会稽太守安陆侯缅为雍州刺史。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛丑，南齐任命会稽太守、安陆侯萧缅为雍州刺史。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xin Ug, Nanzhi appointed the auditor-general of the association, and Anlu Hou Xiao Meng became the history of Yongzhou.

古文：缅，鸾之弟也。
现代文：萧缅是萧鸾的弟弟。
English: Xiao Ming is Xiao Yao's younger brother.

古文：缅留心狱讼，得劫，皆赦遣，许以自新，再犯乃加诛；民畏而爱之。
现代文：萧缅十分重视民间诉讼，逮捕到小偷强盗，他全都予以赦免释放，允许他们改过自新，如果第二次又犯法了，才加以诛斩。因此，老百姓对他既敬畏又爱戴。
English: Xiao Ming attached great importance to civil lawsuits. He pardoned and released all arrested thieves and robbers, allowed them to reform, and only beheaded them if they broke the law a second time. Therefore, the common people both feared and loved him.

古文：癸卯，大赦。
现代文：癸卯，南齐实行大赦。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：丙午，魏主如方山；丙辰，遂如灵泉池；八月，丙寅朔，还宫。
现代文：丙午，孝文帝前往方山；丙辰，前往灵泉池，八月，丙寅朔，返回宫中。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd month, Emperor Xiaowen went to Fangshan; in the morning of the 3rd month, he went to Lingquan Pond; and in the morning of the 3rd month, he returned to the palace.

古文：河南王度易侯卒；乙酉，以其世子伏连筹为秦、河二州刺史，遣振武将军丘冠先拜授，且吊之。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗、河南王慕容度易侯去世。乙酉，南齐朝廷任命他的世子慕容伏连筹为秦、河二州刺史，派振武将军丘冠先前往宣布任命，同时祭吊慕容度易侯。
English: Tuyuhun Khan and Murong Duyi, the king of Henan, passed away. At the same time, the Nanqi court appointed his heir, Murong Fu Liancho, as the Qin and He Erzhou prefect, and sent Zhenwu General Qiu Guan to go first to announce the appointment, and at the same time to pay tribute to Murong Duyi.

古文：伏连筹逼冠先使拜，冠先不从，伏连筹推冠先坠崖而死。
现代文：慕容伏连筹逼迫丘冠先叩拜他，丘冠先不同意，慕容伏连筹将丘冠先推下悬崖摔死。
English: Murong Fulianqiao forced Qiu Guan firstly to worship him, Qiu Guan firstly disagreed, Murong Fulianqiao pushed Qiu Guan firstly off the cliff and fell to his death.

古文：上厚赐其子雄；敕以丧委绝域，不可复寻，仕进无嫌。
现代文：武帝丰厚地赏赐了丘冠先的儿子丘雄，并下诏说丘冠先身死绝域，不能再找到尸首，做儿子的应好好报效国家，不要有其他顾忌。
English: Emperor Wu generously rewarded Qiu Xiong, the son of Qiu Guanxian, and issued an edict saying that Qiu Guanxian's body had been lost and could no longer be found, and that sons should serve the country well and not have any other scruples.

古文：荆州刺史巴东王子响，有勇力，善骑射，好武事，自选带仗左右六十人，皆有胆干；至镇，数于内斋以牛酒犒之。
现代文：刘宋荆州刺史、巴东王萧子响，勇猛有力量，精于骑马射箭，喜欢军事，他亲自挑选六十名贴身武装侍卫，这些人都很有胆量和才干。他就任荆州刺史后，多次在自己的内宅设宴，用牛肉、美酒犒劳侍从。
English: Liu Song, the ruler of Jingzhou, and Xiao Zixing, the king of Ba Dong, were brave and powerful. They were good at horse riding, archery, and liked the military. He personally selected sixty close-knit armed bodyguards, all of whom were very courageous and talented. After he became the ruler of Jingzhou, he repeatedly held banquets in his own house, with beef and wine to entertain the hard-working attendants.

古文：又私作锦袍、绛袄，欲以饷蛮，交易器仗。
现代文：同时，萧子响又私下制作了锦绣长袍、红色短袄，打算将这些东西送给那里的蛮族，换取武器。
English: At the same time, Xiao Zi Xiang also privately made a brocade robe and a red jacket, intending to give these things to the barbarians there in exchange for weapons.

古文：长史高平刘寅、司马安定席恭穆等连名密启。
现代文：长史高平人刘寅、司马安定人席恭穆二人联名暗中把这件事报告武帝。
English: Long history Gaoping Liu Yin, Sima Dingan, and Chairman Gongmu jointly reported the matter to Emperor Wu.

古文：上敕精检。
现代文：武帝下诏要求深入调查。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict demanding an in-depth investigation.

古文：子响闻台使至不见敕，召寅、恭穆及咨议参军江悆、典签吴修之、魏景渊等诘之，寅等秘而不言；修之曰： 既已降敕，政应方便答塞。 
现代文：萧子响听说官差到来但没看见武帝的诏令，于是，他就把刘寅、席恭穆和谘议参军江、典签吴之、魏景渊召集在一起，盘问他们，刘寅等人仍保守秘密，不回答。吴之说： 既然皇上已经下了诏令，就应该设法搪塞过去。 
English: Xiao Zixing heard that the officials had arrived, but did not see Emperor Wu's edict, so he gathered Liu Yin, Xi Gongmu, and the advisers, Shang Junjiang, Wu Zhi, who signed the edict, and Wei Jingyuan, and interrogated them. Liu Yin and the others still kept the secret and did not answer. Wu Zhi said: Since the emperor has issued the edict, we should try to prevent it.

古文：景渊曰： 应先检校。 
现代文：魏景渊说： 我们应该先做调查。 
English: Wei Jingyuan said: We should do an investigation first.

古文：子响大怒，执寅等八人，于后堂杀之，具以启闻。
现代文：萧子响勃然大怒，就把刘寅等一行八人抓起来，在后堂将他们杀了，并将这一情况全都报告给了武帝。
English: Xiao Zixing flew into a rage, arrested Liu Ying and a group of eight others, killed them in the back hall, and reported the whole situation to Emperor Wu.

古文：上欲赦江悆，闻皆已死，怒。
现代文：武崐帝本来打算赦免江，但听说他们全都被杀死了，大怒。
English: Emperor Wu Rong originally planned to pardon Jiang, but when he heard that they had all been killed, he was furious.

古文：壬辰，以随王子隆为荆州刺史。
现代文：壬辰，任命随王萧子隆为荆州刺史。
English: Imjin, appointed Wang Xiao Zilong as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：上欲遣淮南太守戴僧静将兵讨子响，僧静面启曰： 巴东王年少，长史执之太急，忿不思难故耳。
现代文：武帝打算派淮南太守戴僧静率兵讨伐萧了响。戴僧静当面报告说： 巴东王年龄小，而长史刘寅等人逼得太急，所以，一时生气，而没有想到后果。
English: Emperor Wu's plan to send Huainan's eunuch Dai Sojing to lead the troops in the crusade was a resounding success. Dai Sojing reported in person: King Badong is young, and Changshi Liu Yin and others were too hasty, so they were angry for a while without thinking about the consequences.

古文：天子儿过误杀人，有何大罪！
现代文：天子的儿子由于过失误杀他人，有什么大罪！
English: What a great sin it is for the Son of God to kill someone by mistake!

古文：官忽遣军西上，人情惶惧，无所不至。僧静不敢奉敕。 
现代文：陛下忽然派大军西上，使人们感到恐慌，就什么事都干得出来。因此，我不敢接受圣旨。 
English: Your Majesty suddenly sent a large army to the west, which made people panic, and they could do anything. Therefore, I did not dare to accept the edict.

古文：上不答而心善之。
现代文：武帝没有说什么，但心里很赞赏戴僧静的话。
English: Emperor Wu did not say anything, but he sincerely appreciated the words of Dai Sangjing.

古文：乃遣卫尉胡谐之、游击将军尹略、中书舍人茹法亮帅斋仗数百人诣江陵，检捕群小，敕之曰： 子响若束手自归，可全其命。 
现代文：于是，派卫尉胡谐之、游击将军尹略和中书舍人茹法亮率领几百名武装侍卫前往江陵，搜捕萧子响左右那些小人。并且下诏说： 萧子响如果放下武器，主动回到建康请罪，还可以保全他的性命。 
English: As a result, he sent several hundred armed guards to Gangneung, led by Guardsman Hu Xunzhi, guerrilla general Yin Liang and Chinese scholar Zhufa Liang, to search for those villains around Xiao Zi Xiang, and issued the following edict: If Xiao Zi Xiang puts down his weapons and voluntarily returns to Jiankang to plead guilty, he can still save his life.

古文：以平南内史张欣泰为谐之副。
现代文：任命平南内史张欣泰做胡谐之的副手。
English: He appointed Zhang Xintai, a historian from Pingnan, as Hu's deputy.

古文：欣泰谓谐之曰： 今段之行，胜既无名，负成奇耻。
现代文：张欣泰对胡谐之说： 这次出行，胜利了没有什么名，而失败了却要成为奇耻大辱了。
English: Zhang Xintai said to Hu Huning: This trip, there is no fame if you win, but if you fail, it will be a great shame.

古文：彼凶狡相聚，所以为其用者，或利赏逼威，无由自溃。
现代文：萧子响聚集的是一帮凶狠狡诈的人，他们之所以听从他的指挥，是因为有的人是贪图赏赐，有的人是害怕他的声威，因此，他们还不会自行溃败。
English: Xiao Zixing gathered a group of fierce and cunning people. They obeyed his command because some were greedy for rewards, and some were afraid of his voice. Therefore, they would not collapse on their own.

古文：若顿军夏口，宣示祸福，可不战而擒也。 
现代文：如果我们在夏口驻扎军队，向他们讲明利害、福祸关系，就可以用不着动武而能抓获罪人。 
English: If we station troops in Xiakou and explain to them the interests and the relationship between good and evil, we can catch the criminals without using force.

古文：谐之不从。
现代文：胡谐之没有接受张欣泰的建议。
English: Hu Junzhi did not accept Zhang Xintai's suggestion.

古文：欣泰，兴世之子也。
现代文：张欣泰是张兴世的儿子。
English: Zhang Xintai is the son of Zhang Xingshi.

古文：谐之等至江津，筑城燕尾洲。
现代文：胡谐之等率领大军抵达江津后，在燕尾洲兴筑了城垒。
English: Hu Linzhi and others went to Jiangjin and built a city on Yanweizhou.

古文：子响白服登城，频遣使与相闻，曰： 天下岂有儿反！
现代文：萧子响也穿上便服登上城楼，多次派使者到胡谐之这里陈述说： 天底下哪有儿子反叛父亲的呢？
English: Xiao Zixing also put on civilian clothes and went up to the city tower. He repeatedly sent envoys to Hu Huning here to state: Under heaven, is there a son who rebels against his father?

古文：身不作贼，直是粗疏。
现代文：我不是想抗拒朝廷，只不过是做事粗心鲁莽。
English: I'm not trying to resist the imperial court, I'm just being careless and reckless.

古文：今便单舸还阙，受杀人之罪，何筑城见捉邪！ 
现代文：现在，我就乘一只船回到朝廷，接受杀人罪的处罚，你们何必兴筑城垒，派大军来抓我呢？ 
English: Now, I am going back to the court in a boat to accept the punishment for murder. Why do you need to build a fortress and send a large army to catch me?

古文：尹略独答曰： 谁将汝反父人共语！ 
现代文：尹略一个人回答使者说： 谁跟你这种叛父的逆子讲话！ 
English: One of them, Yin Liang, replied to the messenger, "Who would talk to a renegade like you!

古文：子响唯洒泣；乃杀牛，具酒馔，饷台军，略弃之江流。
现代文：萧子响只是哭泣流泪。于是，他杀牛备酒，要犒赏朝廷派来的大军，尹略却把这些酒菜扬到了江里。
English: Xiao Zixing only cried and shed tears. Therefore, he killed cattle to prepare wine to reward the large army sent by the court, but Yin Liang took these wine and vegetables to the river.

古文：子响呼茹法亮；法亮疑畏，不肯往。
现代文：萧子响又喊茹法亮，茹法亮疑虑畏惧也不肯前去。
English: Xiao Zi rang and called Rufa Liang, Rufa Liang hesitated and did not want to go.

古文：又求见传诏；法亮亦不遣，且执录其使。
现代文：最后，萧子响又请求会见传达武帝诏令的官差，茹法亮也不肯派官差前去，反而将萧子响派来的使者关押起来。
English: Finally, Xiao Zi Xiang also requested to meet with the official sent to convey Emperor Wu's edict. Ru Far Liang also refused to send the official, but instead detained the envoy sent by Xiao Zi Xiang.

古文：子响怒，遣所养勇士收集府、州兵二千人，从灵溪西渡；子响自与百馀人操万钧弩，宿江堤上。
现代文：萧子响大怒，将他平时所训练出来的勇士和州衙、自己府上的二千多名士卒组织起来，从灵溪渡河向西进发。萧子响亲自率领一百多人，携带万钧弩箭，在长江江堤上驻防。
English: Enraged, Xiao Zixiang organized the warriors he had trained in peacetime, together with the state eunuchs and more than two thousand soldiers from his own household, and marched westward across the Lingxi River. Xiao Zixiang personally led more than one hundred people, carrying thousands of arrows, and stationed them on the Yangtze River embankment.

古文：明日，府、州兵与台军战，子响于堤上发弩射之，台军大败；尹略死，谐之等单艇逃去。
现代文：第二天，他的军队和朝廷派来的大军展开激战，萧子响在江堤上用弩射击，结果，朝廷军大败，尹略战死，胡谐之等人跳上一只小艇逃走。
English: The next day, his army and the army sent by the court launched a fierce battle. Xiao Zixing fired with a crossbow on the river embankment. As a result, the court army was defeated, Yin Luo died in battle, and Hu Huning and others jumped on a dinghy and fled.

古文：上又遣丹阳尹萧顺之将兵继至，子响即日将白衣左右三十人，乘舴艋沿流赴建康。
现代文：武帝又派丹杨尹萧顺之率军继续讨伐。萧子响当天就率领平民侍从三十人，乘坐小船，顺江而下，直赴建康。
English: Emperor Wu also sent the army led by Danyang Yin Xiao Shun to continue the crusade. On the day of the earthquake, Xiao Zixiang led thirty civilian attendants, took a small boat, sailed down the river, and went straight to Jiankang.

古文：太子长懋素忌子响，顺之之发建康也，太子密谕顺之，使早为之所，勿令得还。
现代文：太子萧长懋平时就忌恨萧子响，当萧顺之从建康出发时，萧长懋就秘密告诉他，让他早点儿把萧子响置于死地，不要让他活着回到建康。
English: Prince Xiao Changyu hated Xiao Zixing in ordinary times. When Xiao Shunzhi set out from Jiankang, Xiao Changyu secretly told him to put Xiao Zixing to death as soon as possible, and not to let him return to Jiankang alive.

古文：子响见顺之，欲自申明；顺之不许，于射堂缢杀之。
现代文：萧子响途中遇上萧顺之，打算自己申诉明白，但萧顺之没有答应，就在演习堂里用绳子把萧子响勒死了。
English: Xiao Shunzhi met Xiao Zixing on the way and planned to appeal to him, but Xiao Shunzhi did not agree and strangled Xiao Zixing with a rope in the drill hall.

古文：子响临死，启上曰： 臣罪逾山海，分甘斧钺。
现代文：萧子响临死前，给武帝写了一封信，报告说： 臣的罪过已超过了山河湖海，理应甘心接受惩罚。
English: Before his death, Xiao Zixiang wrote a letter to Emperor Wu, reporting: The minister's sins have exceeded mountains, rivers, lakes and seas, and he should be willing to accept punishment.

古文：敕遣谐之等至，竟无宣旨，便建旗入津，对城南岸筑城守。
现代文：可是，您下诏派胡谐之等人前来，竟然没有宣读圣旨，就树起大旗进入要塞地区，在与我的城池相对的南岸，兴筑城池防守。
English: However, you sent Huninshi and others to come, and without even reading out the edict, they raised a large flag and entered the fortress area to build a castle defense on the south bank opposite my castle.

古文：臣累遣书信呼法亮，乞白服相见；法亮终不肯。
现代文：臣几次派人送信呼唤茹法亮，乞求穿便服见他一面，但茹法亮却始终不肯见我。
English: The minister sent messengers several times to summon Ruffray, begging to see him in civilian clothes, but Ruffray still refused to see me.

古文：群小惧怖，遂致攻战，此臣之罪也。
现代文：手下一群小人又恐惧害怕，于是导致了双方的激战，这些都是臣的罪过。
English: A group of villains under his command were afraid and scared, which led to a fierce battle between the two sides. These are the sins of the minister.

古文：臣此月二十五日，束身投军，希还天阙，停宅一月，臣自取尽，可使齐代无杀子之讥，臣免逆父之谤。
现代文：臣本月二十五日，放下武器，孤身一人投奔朝廷军队，希望能回到京城，在家里呆一个月，然后，臣自己自杀，这样也可以不让人讥刺齐国这一代诛杀皇子，我也得以免去忤逆父亲的恶名。
English: On the 25th day of this month, my father-in-law laid down his weapons and joined the imperial army alone, hoping to return to Beijing and stay at home for a month. Then, my father-in-law committed suicide, so that no one would ridicule the generation of Qi Guo for killing the prince, and I could also avoid the bad reputation of my rebellious father.

古文：既不遂心，今便命尽。
现代文：可是，还是没能遂心如愿，今天我马上就要结束生命。
English: However, I still couldn't fulfill my wish, and today I'm about to end my life.

古文：临启哽塞，知复何陈！ 
现代文：临死前写信给你，哭泣哽咽，为之话塞，不知再说些什么了！ 
English: I am dying to write to you, choked with tears, choked with words, I don't know what else to say!

古文：有司奏绝子响属籍，削爵土，易姓蛸氏；诸所连坐，别下考论。
现代文：有关部门奏请要断绝萧子响与皇族的关系，削除他的爵位和封地，改姓氏为 蛸 ，其他被牵连进去的，另行定罪。
English: Relevant departments requested to sever the relationship between Xiao Zihang and the royal family, remove his title and fiefdom, change his surname to, and convict others who were implicated.

古文：久之，上游华林园，见一猿透掷悲鸣，问左右，曰： 猿子前日坠崖死。 
现代文：很久以后，武帝在华林园游赏，看见一只猿猴跌跌撞撞，不住地悲号哀鸣，就询问左右侍从这是怎么回事，侍从说： 它的孩子前天从悬崖上摔下去死了。 
English: A long time later, Emperor Wu was taking a tour of the Hualin Garden. When he saw an ape stumbling around and wailing in agony, he asked the attendants on either side what was going on. The attendant said, "His child fell off a cliff the day before yesterday and died."

古文：上思子响，因呜咽流涕。
现代文：武帝一下子就想起了萧子响，忍不住呜咽起来，泪流满面。
English: Emperor Wu suddenly remembered Xiao Zixing, couldn't help sobbing and burst into tears.

古文：茹法亮颇为上所责怒，萧顺之惭惧，发疾而卒。
现代文：茹法亮受到武帝的严厉责备，萧顺之内心惭愧恐惧，也由此而发病，不久去世。
English: Emperor Wu severely reprimanded Zhu Farang, which made Xiao Shun feel ashamed and afraid. He also fell ill as a result, and died soon after.

古文：豫章王嶷表请收葬子响；不许，贬为鱼复侯。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷上书，请求收殓安葬萧子响的尸体，武帝没有批准，并追贬萧子响为鱼复侯。
English: Emperor Wu did not approve the request of Yuanzhang Wang Xiao Xuan to receive and bury the body of Xiao Zi Xiang, and relegated Xiao Zi Xiang to the position of Fugu Fuhou.

古文：子响之乱，方镇皆启子响为逆，兗州刺史垣荣祖曰： 此非所宜言。正应云： 刘寅等孤负恩奖，逼迫巴东，使至于此。  
现代文：萧子响引起这场战乱后，各方镇都纷纷指控谴责萧子响的叛逆行为，兖州刺史垣荣祖说： 不应该说这样的话，倒应该说： 刘寅等人辜负了皇帝对他的恩典，以致逼迫巴东王，使他走上了这条路。  
English: After Xiao Zi Xiang caused this war, all the towns accused and condemned Xiao Zi Xiang's rebellious behavior. Zhangzhou's chief historian, Guan Rongzu, said: It is not right to say such things, but it should be said: Liu Yin and others betrayed the emperor's grace to him, so they persecuted the King of Padang and made him take this path.

古文：上省之，以荣祖为知言。
现代文：武帝仔细想想，认为垣荣祖有真知灼见。
English: Emperor Wu thought about it carefully and thought that Emperor Wuzhong had true knowledge and insight.

古文：台军焚烧江陵府舍，官曹文书，一时荡尽。
现代文：朝廷军队放火焚烧江陵府建筑，官府的文书档案刹时全都被烧掉。
English: The imperial army set fire to the buildings of Gangneung Prefecture, and the government's documents and archives were all burned.

古文：上以大司马记室南阳乐蔼屡为本州僚佐，引见，问以西事。蔼应对详敏，上悦，用为荆州治中，敕付以修复府州事。
现代文：武帝因为大司马记室南阳人乐蔼多次任荆州幕僚，所以就特别召见他，向他打听荆州的事，乐蔼回答详尽，反应敏捷，武帝大为高兴，任命他为荆州治中，下令让他负责修缮荆州州府。
English: Emperor Wu specially summoned him to inquire about Jingzhou because the chief secretary of the Nanyang People's Horse Records Office, Le Ai, had served as a staff member of Jingzhou several times. Le Ai answered in detail and was quick to respond. Emperor Wu was very pleased and appointed him as the governor of Jingzhou and ordered him to be responsible for the renovation of the Jingzhou State Capital.

古文：蔼缮修廨舍数百区，顷之咸毕，而役不及民，荆部称之。
现代文：乐蔼修缮了几百栋州府官舍，很快全都修完了，而且也没役使一个老百姓，所以，荆州府十分称赞他。
English: Leqian repaired several hundred state government buildings, which were all completed quickly, and did not help a single citizen. Therefore, the Jingzhou government highly praised him.

古文：九月，癸丑，魏太皇太后冯氏殂；高祖勺饮不入口者五日，哀毁过礼。
现代文：九月，癸丑，北魏太皇太后冯氏去世。为此，孝文帝五天没喝一口水，悲哀伤痛超过了应尽的礼数。
English: In September, the ugly, Northern Wei Great Empress Dowager Feng died. For this reason, Emperor Xiaowen did not drink a single sip of water for five days. The sorrow and pain exceeded the number of courtesies that should be performed.

古文：中部曹华阴杨椿谏曰： 陛下荷祖宗之业，临万国之重，岂可同匹夫之节以取僵仆！
现代文：中部曹华阴人杨椿劝阻说： 陛下肩负祖宗留下的大业，亲临统治万国的重任，怎么可以像一个普通人一样，为了讲究小节而伤害自己的身体，倒地不起呢？
English: Yang Chin, a Cao Huayin from central Cao Huayin, dissuaded him, saying, "Your majesty, shouldering the great cause left by your ancestors and the important task of ruling the world, how can you, like an ordinary person, hurt your body and fall to the ground in order to be particular about the melody?

古文：群下惶灼，莫知所言。
现代文：文武百官为此惶惑焦急，不知该说些什么好。
English: Hundreds of military and civilian officials are confused and anxious about this, and don't know what to say.

古文：且圣人之礼，毁不灭性；纵陛下欲自贤于万代，其若宗庙何！ 
现代文：况且，圣人的礼节要求，再大的悲哀也不可以毁伤性命。即使陛下想要在万代之中树立贤人的榜样，那么，皇家宗庙祭祀又怎么办呢？ 
English: Moreover, the etiquette of a saint requires that no amount of sorrow can destroy life. Even if His Majesty wants to set an example of a wise man among all generations, what about the royal ancestral temple ritual?

古文：帝感其言，为之一进粥。
现代文：孝文帝很受感动，并为此吃了一次稀粥。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very moved and ate gruel for this.

古文：于是诸王公等皆诣阙上表， 请时定兆域，及依汉、魏故事，并太皇太后终制，既葬，公除。 
现代文：这样一来，各王公大臣也都开始到朝廷上书， 请求赶快确定太皇太后的安葬地点，按照汉、魏时期的惯例，并遵照太皇太后的临终遗嘱，安葬以后脱崐去丧服。 
English: As a result, various princes and ministers also began to write to the imperial court, requesting that the burial place of the great empress dowager be determined as soon as possible, in accordance with the practices of the Han and Wei dynasties, and in accordance with the last will and testament of the great empress dowager, after burial, she would take off her shackles and wear mourning clothes.

古文：诏曰： 自遭祸罚，慌惚如昨，奉侍梓宫，犹希仿佛。
现代文：孝文帝下诏令说： 自从遭受灾祸和惩罚，恍惚之间，一切就好像发生在昨天。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said in his edict: "Ever since the calamity and punishment, everything seems to have happened yesterday.

古文：山陵迁厝，所未忍闻。 
现代文：我侍奉太皇太后的灵柩，好像看见了她的身影。
English: I served the casket of the great empress dowager, and it was as if I saw her shadow.

古文：冬，十月，王公复上表固请，诏曰： 山陵可依典册；衰服之宜，情所未忍。 
现代文：安葬太皇太后的陵寝墓地，我实在不忍听到这些。 冬季，十月，王爵、公爵们又一次上书，坚决请求安葬太皇太后，于是，下诏说： 太皇太后安葬的时间和地点，可以依照以往惯例。如果让我脱下丧服，从感情上说，我忍受不了。 
English: I really can't bear to hear this. In the winter, in October, the dukes and duchesses once again sent a letter, firmly requesting the burial of the great empress dowager, and then issued the following edict: The time and place of the great empress dowager's burial can be in accordance with past practice. If I take off my mourning clothes, emotionally speaking, I can't bear it.

古文：帝欲亲至陵所，戊辰，诏： 诸常从之具，悉可停之；其武卫之官，防侍如法。 
现代文：孝文帝打算自己亲自到太皇太后安葬的地方，戊辰，下诏说： 平常跟随的各仪仗队，都不用跟从。武装保卫的侍官，像以往一样进行防守保卫。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen intended to personally visit the place where Empress Dowager Wu was buried, and issued the following edict: "All the honor guards that usually follow do not need to follow. The attendants of the armed guards will carry out the defense and protection as before.

古文：癸酉，葬文明太皇太后于永固陵。
现代文：癸酉，在方山永固陵安葬了文明太皇太后。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the Empress Dowager Wenming was buried in the Yonggu Mausoleum.

古文：甲戌，帝谒陵，王公固请公除。
现代文：甲戌，孝文帝祭拜太皇太后陵墓，各王公大臣坚决请求孝文帝以国家利益为重，脱下丧服，换上平时穿的衣服。
English: Emperor Xiaowen paid homage to the tomb of the great empress and empress dowager, and the princes and ministers firmly requested Emperor Xiaowen to take the national interests as the priority, take off the mourning clothes and put on the clothes he usually wears.

古文：诏曰： 比当别叙在心。 
现代文：孝文帝下诏说： 另外一起再说吧。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen decreed: Let's talk about it together.

古文：己卯，又谒陵。
现代文：己卯，孝文帝再次祭拜太皇太后陵墓。
English: Once again, Emperor Xiaowen paid homage to the tomb of the Empress Dowager.

古文：庚辰，帝出至思贤门右，与群臣相慰劳。
现代文：庚辰，孝文帝走出皇宫，来到皇宫南门思贤门门西，和文武百官相见，相互安慰勉励。
English: Geng Chen and Emperor Xiaowen walked out of the imperial palace and came to the south gate of the imperial palace, Shixian gate, west gate, and met with hundreds of civil and military officials to comfort and encourage each other.

古文：太尉丕等进言曰： 臣等以老朽之年，历奉累圣；国家旧事，颇所知闻。
现代文：太尉拓跋丕等趁机向孝文帝建议说： 我们都已经到了老朽的年纪了，一直侍奉历代圣君明主，对于国家以往的旧典章，也相当熟悉。
English: Captain Tuobao and others took the opportunity to suggest to Emperor Xiaowen: "We have all reached the age of decrepitude, have been serving the past generations of saints, and are quite familiar with the country's past old ordinances.

古文：伏惟远祖有大讳之日，唯侍送梓宫者凶服，左右尽皆从吉；四祖三宗，因而无改。
现代文：回想以前祖先们去世时，只有侍奉跟随灵柩的人才穿上丧服，其他人仍全都穿平时的衣服。四祖三宗都沿袭下来，遵循到现在没有改变。
English: When our ancestors passed away in the past, only the attendants who followed the casket wore mourning clothes, while everyone else still wore their usual clothes. All four ancestors and three sects have been passed down and followed until now.

古文：陛下以至孝之性，哀毁过礼。
现代文：如今，陛下天性极其孝敬，哀伤痛苦，毁害身体，已经超过了礼法的要求。
English: Nowadays, His Majesty's nature is extremely filial, sorrowful, painful, and destructive of the body, which has exceeded the requirements of etiquette.

古文：伏闻所御三食不满半溢，昼夜不释绖带。
现代文：又听说陛下一日三餐的饭量，竟吃不满半碗，无论是白天还是夜晚，都不解下腰间的丧带。
English: I also heard that His Majesty eats less than half a bowl of food for his three meals a day, and he never loosens the mourning band around his waist, day or night.

古文：臣等叩心绝气，坐不安席。
现代文：为此，我们大家扪心闭气，坐立不安。
English: For this reason, we all hold our breath and fidget nervously.

古文：愿少抑至慕之情，奉行先朝旧典。 
现代文：只愿陛下稍稍克制一下自己对太皇太后的敬慕之情，按照前代人订下的典章行事。 
English: I only wish that His Majesty would restrain his admiration for the Grand Empress Dowager for a moment and act in accordance with the rules established by the previous generation.

古文：帝曰： 哀毁常事，岂足关言！
现代文：孝文帝说： 悲哀而伤害了身体，这是经常发生的事，哪里值得专门上奏。
English: Xiaowen Di said: Sad and hurt the body, this is a frequent occurrence, where it is worth specially playing.

古文：朝夕食粥，粗可支任，诸公何足忧怖！
现代文：虽然我早晚只吃稀粥，但我的健康大致还能维持下去，诸公有什么可忧虑恐惧的呢！
English: Although I only eat gruel in the morning and evening, my health can still be maintained to a large extent. What do you have to worry about?

古文：祖宗情专武略，未修文教；朕今仰禀圣训，庶习古道，论时比事，又与先世不同。
现代文：祖宗在世时，一心只专于武装征伐，没有时间进行文明教化方面的事情。如今，朕接受前代圣人留下的教训，平时不断学习古代典范常道，无论是从时代上说，还是从事理上说，都和前代有了很大不同。
English: When our ancestors were alive, their sole focus was on armed conquest, and they had no time for things related to civilization and enlightenment. Today, we accept the lessons left behind by the saints of the previous generation, and constantly study the ancient models and practices. Both in terms of time and in terms of reason, it is very different from the previous generation.

古文：太尉等国老，政之所寄，于典记旧式或所未悉，且可知朕大意。
现代文：太尉等等都是国家元老，朝廷政治都依托于你们，对前代经典和古代丧礼仪式，你们有的人可能还不十分熟悉，姑且先了解我大致的意思。
English: The captains and so on are the elders of the country, and the politics of the imperial court rely on you. Some of you may not be very familiar with the classics of the previous generation and the ancient funeral rites, even if you understand my general meaning first.

古文：其馀古今丧礼，朕且以所怀别问尚书游明根、高闾等，公可听之。 
现代文：对于那些有关古今丧礼仪式，朕暂且把想法提出来，与尚书游明根、高闾等人讨论，你们可以仔细听着。 
English: For those related to ancient and modern funeral ceremonies, I will put forward my thoughts for the time being and discuss with Shang Shuyuan Minggen, Gao Qi and others. You can listen carefully.

古文：帝因谓明根等曰： 圣人制卒哭之礼，授服之变，皆夺情以渐。今则旬日之间，言及即吉，特成伤理。 
现代文：接着，孝文帝对尚书游明根等人说： 古代圣人制订了卒哭的礼仪，丧服的变更程序也都是以哀痛的情绪为标准逐渐改变，如今仅在一天之内，就要劝说我脱下丧服，换上平时的衣服，这实在违背情理。 
English: Then, Emperor Xiaowen said to Shang Shuyuan Minggen and others, "Ancient sages established the etiquette of weeping, and the procedures for changing mourning clothes are also gradually changed according to the standard of grief. Now, in just one day, I have to be persuaded to take off my mourning clothes and put on my usual clothes, which is really against reason.

古文：对曰： 臣等伏寻金册遗旨，逾月而葬，葬而即吉；故于下葬之初，奏练除之事。 
现代文：游明根回答说： 臣等得到太皇太后留下的遗言书，说在她去世一个月后就立即安葬，下葬后就要立刻脱下丧服，穿上平日的衣服。
English: You Minggen replied, "Our ministers have obtained the last will and testament left by the great empress dowager, saying that she will be buried immediately one month after her death. After the funeral, you must immediately take off your mourning clothes and put on your everyday clothes.

古文：帝曰： 朕惟中代所以不遂三年之丧，盖由君上违世，继主初立，君德未流，臣义不洽，故身袭兗冕，行即位之礼。
现代文：因此，我们在太皇太后安葬的时候，立即奏请脱下丧服的。 孝文帝说： 朕认为，中古时代之所以不实行三年守丧的制度，是由于旧君主刚刚去世，而新君主刚刚即位，君主的恩德还没有传播开去，对臣属们的情义还没能和协周遍，因此，新君主才必须身穿礼服、头戴冕旒，举行登基即位大典。
English: Therefore, when the great empress dowager was buried, we immediately requested her to take off her mourning clothes. Emperor Xiaowen said: I believe that the reason why the three-year mourning system was not implemented in the Middle Ages was because the old monarch had just died, and the new monarch had just ascended the throne. The monarch's grace had not spread, and the feelings of his subjects had not been harmonized. Therefore, the new monarch must wear a gown and a crown, and hold the enthronement ceremony.

古文：朕诚不德，在位过纪，足令亿兆知有君矣。
现代文：朕的德行还不够，但朕做皇帝也已经超过十二年了，这是以让亿万人民知道有朕。
English: My virtue is not enough, but I have been emperor for more than twelve years. This is to let hundreds of millions of people know that I exist.

古文：于此之日而不遂哀慕之心，使情礼俱失，深可痛恨！ 
现代文：在这种时候，如果不能顺遂自己表达儿孙的哀痛和怀念的心愿，无论是在感情上，还是在礼节上，全都丧失殆尽，这实在是令人沉痛遗憾的事。 
English: At such a time, it would be a matter of great regret if the desire to express the grief and memory of one's children and grandchildren, whether emotionally or in terms of etiquette, were to be completely lost.

古文：高闾曰： 杜预，晋之硕学，论自古天子无有行三年之丧者，以为汉文之制，暗与古合，虽叔世所行，事可承踵。是以臣等㥪㥪干请。 
现代文：高闾说： 杜预是晋王朝的饱学之士，他曾经论述过，自古以来天子没有实行守丧三年的制度。杜预认为，汉文帝所制订的制度和古代制度不谋而合，这看起来虽然是近世实行的制度，但实际上他们也都是追寻古人的制度，跟着古人的脚后走。
English: Gao Wei said: Du Yueh is a well-educated person of the Jin Dynasty. He once discussed that since ancient times, the heavenly sons have not implemented the three-year mourning system. Du Yueh believed that the system established by Emperor Hanwen coincided with the ancient system. Although this seems to be a system implemented in the modern world, in fact they are also systems that pursue the ancients and follow the footsteps of the ancients.

古文：帝曰： 窃寻金册之旨，所以夺臣子之心，令早即吉者，虑废绝政事故也。
现代文：正因为如此，臣等才小心谨慎地多次请求陛下能够遵循。 孝文帝说： 朕自己认真领会太皇太后遗书的主旨，太皇太后之所以要阻止臣属、孙子表达自己的悲哀之情，命令早点儿穿上平日的衣服，是因为她担心我们会为此荒废了国家大事。
English: It is for this reason that courtiers and others have repeatedly and cautiously requested that Her Majesty be allowed to follow suit. Emperor Xiaowen said, "I myself seriously understand the essence of the great empress dowager's last will and testament. The reason why the great empress dowager wanted to prevent her subjects and grandchildren from expressing their sorrow and ordered them to put on their everyday clothes early was because she was worried that we would waste a national event.

古文：群公所请，其志亦然。
现代文：你们大家的请求，其用心也在这里。
English: The request of all of you, its intention is also here.

古文：朕今仰奉册令，俯顺群心，不敢暗默不言以荒庶政；唯欲衰麻废吉礼，朔望尽哀诚，情在可许，故专欲行之。
现代文：因此，如今，朕向上可以按照太皇太后的遗言去做，向下也顺遂文武百官的心愿，不敢沉默不语而致荒废对国家大事的处理。只是朕打算穿着麻布丧服，取消守丧十天就马上改穿日常衣服的制度。每逢初一和十五日二天，朕该尽到做儿孙哀思怀念的诚心，从情理上讲也是允许的，所以，我打算就这样去做。
English: Therefore, today, I can do according to the last words of the great empress dowager upwards, and I can also do according to the wishes of the civil and military officials downwards, and I dare not be silent and waste the handling of national affairs. However, I plan to wear a sackcloth mourning dress, and cancel the system of wearing everyday clothes on the tenth day of mourning. On the second day of the first day and the fifteenth day, I should do my best to be the sincerity of the children and grandchildren's sorrow and nostalgia, which is reasonable, so I plan to do so.

古文：如杜预之论，于孺慕之君，谅闇之主，盖亦诬矣。 
现代文：像杜预所议论的那些，对于深深地怀念去世者、处在服丧期间的君主来说，大概也是不符合事实的。 
English: For a monarch who is in the midst of a period of mourning and who deeply remembers the deceased, statements such as those made by Du Yueh probably do not correspond to reality.

古文：秘书丞李彪曰： 汉明德马后保养章帝，母子之道，无可间然，及后之崩，葬不淹旬，寻已从吉。然汉章不受讥，明德不损名。
现代文：秘书丞李彪说： 汉明德马皇后辛勤抚养章帝刘长大成人，母亲慈爱，儿子孝敬，二人的和睦关系是没有什么能把他们分隔开的，等到明德马皇后去世，下葬后还不满十天，刘随即穿上了日常衣服，但是，刘并没有因此受到别人的讥刺，明德马皇后的声誉也没有受到丝毫毁损。
English: Secretary-general Li Biao said: Empress Han Mingde Ma diligently raised Emperor Zhang Liu to adulthood. Mother is loving, son is filial. Nothing can separate the two people's harmonious relationship. When Empress Mingde Ma died, less than ten days after the funeral, Liu immediately put on everyday clothes. However, Liu was not ridiculed by others, and the reputation of Empress Mingde Ma was not damaged in the slightest.

古文：愿陛下遵金册遗令，割哀从议。 
现代文：愿陛下能遵照太皇太后的遗嘱去做，克制哀思，接受大家的建议。 
English: May His Majesty be able to follow the will of the Grand Empress Dowager, restrain his grief, and accept everyone's advice.

古文：帝曰： 朕所以眷恋衰绖，不从所议者，实情不能忍，岂徒苟免嗤嫌而已哉！
现代文：孝文帝说： 朕之所以心甘情愿穿丧服，而不接受你们的建议，实在是因为朕在感情无法忍受，哪里只是为了避免别人的讥刺批评而这么去做的呢！
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "The reason why I am willing to wear mourning clothes and not accept your suggestion is because I can't bear it emotionally. Why would I do it just to avoid the ridicule and criticism of others?

古文：今奉终俭素，一已仰遵遗册；但痛慕之心，事系于予，庶圣灵不夺至愿耳。 
现代文：如今，安葬的礼仪节俭、朴素，全是遵照太皇太后的遗言去做的。可是，悲痛怀念之情，已紧紧抓住了朕的心，盼望太皇太后的在天之灵不强迫朕去改变。 
English: Today, the etiquette of burial is frugal and simple, all in accordance with the last words of the great empress dowager. However, grief and nostalgia have firmly grasped my heart, hoping that the spirit of the great empress dowager will not force me to change.

古文：高闾曰： 陛下既不除服于上，臣等独除服于下，则为臣之道不足。
现代文：高闾说： 陛下在上边已经决定不改变继续穿丧服的意愿，那么，臣等在下边单单脱去丧服，这样做，就表示臣属的没有尽到责任。
English: Gao Wei said: His Majesty has decided not to change his will to continue to wear mourning clothes on the upper side, so if his vassals simply take off their mourning clothes on the lower side, it means that they have not fulfilled their responsibilities.

古文：又亲御衰麻，复听朝政，吉凶事杂，臣窃为疑。 
现代文：况且，陛下穿着丧服，亲自处理朝廷事务，吉利和不吉利的事情混合在一起，臣私下里感到疑虑。 
English: Moreover, His Majesty was dressed in mourning clothes and personally handled the affairs of the imperial court. The auspicious and inauspicious events were mixed together, and the vassal privately felt doubtful.

古文：帝曰： 先后抚念群下，卿等哀慕，犹不忍除，奈何令朕独忍之于至亲乎！
现代文：孝文帝说： 太后崐关心爱护她的臣属，卿等悲伤怀念她，还不忍心脱下丧服，为什么单单让朕对自己至亲的人去忍心这么做？
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "Empress Dowager Cixi cares for and cherishes her subjects. Sirs and other mourners miss her, but they cannot bear to take off their mourning clothes. Why do I only allow those who are close to me to do so?

古文：朕今逼于遗册，唯望至期；虽不尽礼，蕴结差申。
现代文：如今，朕受太皇太后的遗嘱所迫，不敢违抗，只是希望能把丧服穿满一年，尽管还不合乎古礼，但内心的悲哀伤痛总算还能表示出来。
English: Now, forced by the will of the great empress dowager, I dare not disobey, but hope to wear the mourning clothes for a full year. Although it is not in accordance with ancient etiquette, my inner sorrow and pain can finally be expressed.

古文：群臣各以亲疏、贵贱、远近为除服之差，庶几稍近于古，易行于今。 
现代文：各位大臣可以考虑自己与太皇太后关系的亲疏、贵贱、远近，来作为自己脱去丧服的标准，分别对待，这样既能稍稍接近古代仪礼，在今天也容易行得通。 
English: The ministers can consider their own relationship with the Grand Empress Dowager as the standard for removing their mourning clothes, and treat them separately. In this way, they can be slightly closer to the ancient ritual, and it is easy to work today.

古文：高闾曰： 昔王孙裸葬，士安去棺，其子皆从而不违。
现代文：高闾说： 从前，杨王孙死后，赤身裸体地安葬；皇甫谧去世安葬时不用棺柩，他们的儿子也都按照他们的遗愿去执行，没有做任何违背遗言的事。
English: Gao Yao said: Once upon a time, after the death of Yang Wangsun, he was buried naked; when the Empress Dowager died and was buried, there was no coffin. Their sons also carried out their last wishes, and did not do anything against their last words.

古文：今亲奉遗令而有所不从，臣等所以频烦干奏。 
现代文：如今，陛下亲自接受太皇太后的遗嘱，在有些方面却不按照遗嘱中说的去做，因此，臣等才不断地打扰奏请。 
English: Today, His Majesty personally accepts the will of the Grand Empress Dowager, but he does not follow the will in some aspects, which is why his courtiers are constantly disturbing him.

古文：李彪曰： 三年不改其父之道，可谓大孝。
现代文：李彪说： 一个人在三年之内，不改变他父亲的准则规定，这可以说是大孝。
English: Li Biao said: A person who does not change his father's principles and regulations within three years can be said to be a great filial son.

古文：今不遵册令，恐涉改道之嫌。 
现代文：而如今，陛下不遵照太皇太后的遗嘱，恐怕就有改变规定的嫌疑。 
English: But now, if His Majesty does not follow the will of the Grand Duchess, I am afraid there will be a suspicion of changing the rules.

古文：帝曰： 王孙、士安皆诲子以俭，及其遵也，岂异今日！
现代文：孝文帝说： 杨王孙和皇甫谧都教诲他们的儿子节俭，他们的儿子遵奉遗训，这和今天朕做的有什么不同！
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Yang Wangsun and Emperor Fuxiong both taught their sons to be frugal, and their sons followed their teachings. How is this different from what I am doing today!

古文：改父之道，殆与此殊。
现代文：更改父亲的规定，恐怕和朕所做的不是一回事。
English: Changing my father's rules, I'm afraid, is not the same as what I did.

古文：纵有所涉，甘受后代之讥，未忍今日之请。 
现代文：即使有所涉嫌，那么，朕也心甘情愿地接受后代人的讥讽批评，而不能忍受你们今天的请求。 
English: Even if there is a suspicion, then I am willing to accept the ridicule and criticism of future generations, but I cannot bear your request today.

古文：群臣又言： 春秋烝尝，事难废阙。 
现代文：文武官员们又说： 春秋的宗庙祭祀，无论如何是难以停止或废弃的。 
English: The civil and military officials also said: In any case, it is difficult to stop or abandon the spring and autumn ancestral temple rituals.

古文：帝曰： 自先朝以来，恒有司行事；朕赖蒙慈训，常亲致敬。
现代文：孝文帝说： 自从祖先建立国家以来，皇家祖庙的祭祀活动，一直都是由有关主管部门办理的。朕有赖于慈爱的太皇太后的训导，才经常亲自前去祭拜。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Since the founding of the country by our ancestors, the sacrificial activities of the Royal Ancestral Temple have always been handled by the relevant authorities. I rely on the guidance of the benevolent Grand Empress Dowager to often go to worship in person.

古文：今昊天降罚，人神丧恃，赖宗庙之灵，亦辍歆祀。
现代文：如今，苍天降下大灾惩罚我们，人与神灵都失去可以依赖的对象，皇家祖庙的神灵，也应该停止接受祭拜香火。
English: Now, a great calamity has fallen from the sky to punish us, and both people and gods have lost an object they can rely on. The gods of the royal ancestral temple should also stop accepting the worship of incense.

古文：脱行飨荐，恐乖冥旨。 
现代文：假如朕一旦前去祭祀，恐怕会在冥冥之中违背了他们的旨意。 
English: If I were to go to a religious service, I'm afraid I'd go against their wishes.

古文：群臣又言： 古者葬而即吉，不必终礼，此乃二汉所以经纶治道，魏、晋所以纲理庶政也。 
现代文：文武官员接着又说： 古代在将死者下葬后就穿上日常衣服，而没有必要一定要等到守丧满三年之后再脱下丧服，这就是两汉王朝所用来治理国家的准绳，是魏、晋所用来推行的总则。 
English: The literary and military official went on to say: In ancient times, people put on everyday clothes after burying the dead, and there is no need to wait until three years after the funeral before taking off the funeral clothes. This is the criterion used by the Han Dynasty to govern the country, and is the general principle used by the Wei and Jin Dynasties.

古文：帝曰： 既葬即吉，盖季欲多乱，权宜救世耳。
现代文：孝文帝说： 下葬后就立即脱下丧服、穿上日常衣服，这大概是在国家到了末代，动乱太多，所采用的权宜之计，以求能拯救行将灭亡的国家。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: Immediately after the burial, they took off the mourning clothes and put on everyday clothes. This was probably a stopgap measure adopted in the last generation of the country, when there were too many upheavals, in order to save the dying country.

古文：二汉之盛，魏、晋之兴，岂由简略丧礼、遗忘仁孝哉！
现代文：而两汉的鼎盛和魏、晋的兴隆，难道是由他们丧礼简单、忘记了仁义和道而实现的吗？
English: But did the Han dynasty's prosperity and the rise of the Wei and Jin dynasties come about because their funerals were simple and they forgot about benevolence, righteousness and morality?

古文：平日之时，公卿每称当今四海晏然，礼乐日新，可以参美唐、虞，比盛夏、商。
现代文：平常的时候，各位公卿大人每次都称赞当今之世，四海安宁和平，礼仪、音乐一天一天兴盛，甚至可以和尧、舜及夏、商时代媲美。
English: In normal times, the nobles praised the current world every time, saying that the four seas are peaceful and tranquil, and the etiquette and music are flourishing day by day, even comparable to the times of the Song Dynasty, the Han Dynasty, the Xia Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty.

古文：及至今日，即欲苦夺朕志，使不逾于魏、晋。
现代文：可到了今天，就打算强迫改变朕的心愿，让朕不能超越魏、晋时代。
English: But today, they want to force me to change my will, so that I cannot surpass the Wei and Jin dynasties.

古文：如此之意，未解所由。 
现代文：你们这种用意，朕不明白为的是什么。 
English: I don't understand what you're up to.

古文：李彪曰： 今虽治化清晏，然江南有未宾之吴，漠北有不臣之虏，是以臣等犹怀不虞之虑。 
现代文：李彪说： 现在，我们虽然处于政治清明、教化普及的时代，但是，长江以南还仍有不肯宾服的吴人，沙漠以北还有不肯称臣的胡虏，所以臣等还深怀忧虑之心，唯恐发生不测，让我们难以防守。 
English: Li Biao said: Now, although we are in an era of political clarity and the spread of enlightenment, there are still Wu people south of the Yangtze River who refuse to be subservient, and there are still Hu people north of the desert who refuse to be subordinates. Therefore, the vassals are still deeply worried, lest something unexpected happens and it is difficult for us to defend ourselves.

古文：帝曰： 鲁公带绖从戎，晋侯墨衰败敌，固圣贤所许。
现代文：孝文帝说： 鲁公伯禽身穿丧服出兵作战，晋襄公把身上的白色丧服染黑，击败了敌人，这种情况本来就是圣贤们所允许的。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: It was originally permitted by the sages that Lu Gongpiao went into battle wearing mourning clothes, while Jin Xianggong dyed his white mourning clothes black and defeated the enemy.

古文：如有不虞，虽越紼无嫌，而况衰麻乎！
现代文：如果遇到没有预料到的事情发生，那么，即使是跳越过牵引灵柩的绳索，也不会让人在意，更何况只是要脱下麻布丧服呢。
English: If something unexpected happens, then even if you jump over the rope pulling the coffin, it won't bother anyone, let alone just take off the sackcloth mourning clothes.

古文：岂可于晏安之辰豫念军旅之事，以废丧纪哉！
现代文：哪里能够在详和安宁的日子里就能事先料到会发生战争，以至于废弃守丧的礼教呢！
English: Where, on a day of peace and quiet, can war be anticipated in advance to the point of abandoning the rituals of mourning?

古文：古人亦有称王者除衰而谅闇终丧者，若不许朕衰服，则当除衰拱默，委政冢宰。
现代文：古人中也有君王，脱下丧服后就闭口不说话了，一直到三年服丧期满，如果今天你们不允许朕穿丧服，那么，我就应该在脱下丧服后开始保持沉默，将国家事务交给宰相们处理。
English: Among the ancients, there were also kings who, after taking off their mourning clothes, shut their mouths and did not speak until the three-year mourning period was over. If today you do not allow me to wear mourning clothes, then I should start to keep silent after taking off my mourning clothes and hand over the affairs of state to the prime ministers.

古文：二事之中，唯公卿所择。 
现代文：这两种情况请你们选择一种。 
English: In both cases, please choose one.

古文：游明根曰： 渊默不言，则不政将旷；仰顺圣心，请从衰服。 
现代文：游明根说： 保持沉默而不说话，那么，国家的重大事务将要被搁置、荒废。我们顺从您的圣明心意，请您继续穿着丧服处理朝廷事务。 
English: Yu Minggen said: "If you remain silent and do not speak, then the important affairs of the country will be put on hold and wasted. We obey your sacred intention and ask you to continue to deal with the affairs of the imperial court while wearing mourning clothes."

古文：太尉丕曰： 臣与尉元历事五帝，魏家故事，尤讳之后三月，必迎神于西，禳恶于北，具行吉礼，自皇始以来，未之或改。 
现代文：太尉拓跋丕听后，说： 臣和尉元一共侍奉过五位皇帝，我们魏朝旧有的惯例都是，在人死特别忌讳的三个月过去后，一定要向西方祈祷迎奉神灵，向北方祈祷消除灾祸，这一切全都是穿着日常的衣服进行的，这一规矩，自从皇始年间以来到现在，都没有谁丝毫改动过。 
English: After listening to Captain Tuoba, he said: Minister and Lieutenant Yuan served a total of five emperors. Our old practice in the Wei Dynasty was that after three months, when human death was especially taboo, we must pray to the west to welcome the gods and pray to the north to eliminate the disaster. All of this was done in everyday clothes. This rule has not been changed since the beginning of the imperial era.

古文：帝曰： 若能以道事神，不迎自至；苟失仁义，虽迎不来。
现代文：孝文帝说： 如果能够用道义侍奉神灵，那么不用特意去迎接，神灵自然而然就会来到；假如丧失了仁义之心，即使是特意迎奉，神灵也不会来的。
English: Emperor Xiaowen said: "If you can serve the gods with morality and righteousness, then you don't need to specially welcome them, the gods will naturally come; if you lose the heart of benevolence and righteousness, even if you specially welcome them, the gods will not come."

古文：此乃平日所不当行，况吾丧乎！
现代文：这就是说，以往本来就不应该那么做，更何况是处在守丧时期呢！
English: That said, it should never have been done in the first place, let alone at a time of mourning!

古文：朕在不言之地，不应如此喋喋；但公卿执夺朕情，遂成往复，追用悲绝。 
现代文：朕正处在守丧时期，应该闭口不讲话，所以，不应该这样喋喋不休地说个没完。只是各位公卿坚持要改变我的想法，于是，就变成了反反复复的争论，想起来真令人悲痛欲绝。 
English: I was in a period of mourning, when one should hold one's tongue, so it was not right to go on and on like that, but the Lords insisted on changing my mind, and it became a back-and-forth argument, which is quite distressing to think about.

古文：遂号恸，群官亦哭而辞出。
现代文：于是号啕大哭起来，在场的文武官员们也跟着哭了起来，随后告辞出来。
English: As a result, the trumpet wailed loudly, and the military and civilian officials present also cried, and then resigned.

古文：初，太后忌帝英敏，恐不利于己，欲废之，盛寒，闭于空室，绝其食三日；召咸阳王禧，将立之。
现代文：当初，太皇太后对孝文帝的聪敏机警很是忌怕，害怕他的存在会给自己带来不利，因此，就打算废弃他。在严冬盛寒的时候，太皇太后把他禁闭在一间空旷的屋子里，三天不给他吃的东西。冯太后又征召成阳王拓跋禧，打算立拓崐跋禧为北魏皇帝。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Cixi was very wary of Emperor Xiaowen's shrewdness, fearing that his presence would be detrimental to herself, so she planned to discard him. In the dead of winter, when it was very cold, Empress Dowager Cixi confined him to an open room and did not give him anything to eat for three days. Empress Dowager Cixi also conscripted Chengyang Wang Tuoba Xi, intending to establish Tuoba Xi as the Emperor of Northern Wei.

古文：太尉东阳王丕、尚书右仆射穆泰、尚书李冲固谏，乃止。
现代文：当时，由于太尉东阳王拓跋丕、尚书右仆射穆泰和尚书李冲的竭力劝谏，冯太后才没有执行废立。
English: At that time, as a result of the strenuous efforts of the Tai Li Dongyang Wang Tuobao, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man She Mu Tai and Shang Shuxu's Li Chong, Empress Dowager Feng did not carry out the abolition.

古文：帝初无憾意，唯深德丕等。
现代文：但孝文帝一开始对冯太后就没有一点儿怨恨的想法，只是加深了对拓跋丕等人的感激之情。
English: However, from the very beginning, Emperor Xiaowen did not harbor any grudge against Empress Dowager Feng, but only deepened his feelings of gratitude towards Tuobao and others.

古文：泰，崇之玄孙也。
现代文：穆泰是穆崇的玄孙。
English: Mu Tai is the great-great-grandson of Mu Chong.

古文：又有宦者谮帝于太后，太后杖帝数十；帝默然受之，不自申理；及太后殂，亦不复追问。
现代文：后来，又有一位宦官在冯太后面前陷害孝文帝，冯太后听后，下令打了孝文帝几十大棍，孝文帝默默地忍受，而没有辩解、申述理由，冯太后去世以后，也不再追究。
English: Later, another eunuch framed Emperor Xiaowen in front of Empress Feng. After listening to her, Empress Feng ordered to beat Emperor Xiaowen with dozens of sticks. Emperor Xiaowen silently endured, but did not justify or explain the reason. After the death of Empress Feng, he would no longer be investigated.

古文：甲申，魏主谒永固陵。
现代文：甲申，孝文帝祭拜冯太后陵墓永固陵。
English: In Jiaxing, Emperor Xiaowen paid homage to Empress Dowager Feng's mausoleum, Yonggu Mausoleum.

古文：辛卯，诏曰： 群官以万机事重，屡求听政。
现代文：辛卯，下诏说： 各位文武百官因为国家大事，事关重大，多次请求朕亲自处理这些事务。
English: Xinwu, the next emperor said: All civil and military officials, because of national events, matters of great importance, have repeatedly requested me to personally deal with these matters.

古文：但哀慕缠绵，未堪自力。
现代文：只是朕仍处在哀痛追念时期，不断的悲伤与怀念使朕已经没有力量一个人去处理朝廷事务。
English: However, I am still in a period of grief and reminiscence. The constant sorrow and reminiscence have made me no longer have the strength to deal with the affairs of the imperial court alone.

古文：近侍先掌机衡者，皆谋猷所寄，且可委之；如有疑事，当时与论决。 
现代文：在我近旁的侍从中有人从前主管过机要、处理过国家大事，而且他们也都是有智慧、有谋略的人，国家大事完全可以托付给他们。如果发生一些疑难事情，朕自然会及时和他们讨论，帮助他们决定。 
English: Among the attendants near me, there are people who have been in charge of important matters and handled national affairs in the past, and they are also people with wisdom and strategy, and national affairs can be entrusted to them. If some difficult things happen, I will naturally discuss with them in time to help them decide.

古文：交州刺史清河房法乘，专好读书，常属疾不治事，由是长史伏登之得擅权，改易将吏，不令法乘知。
现代文：南齐交州刺史清河人房法乘，特别喜欢读书，经常借口有病而不处理州事，因此，就使得长史伏登之得以擅自运用大权，随意调动、更换官员武将，而不让房法乘知道。
English: In the Southern Qi Jiaozhou, there was a person named Fong Fucheng, who was particularly fond of reading and often used the excuse of illness to avoid dealing with state affairs. As a result, Fong Fucheng was able to arbitrarily use his power to transfer and replace officials and generals at will, without letting Fong Fucheng know.

古文：录事房季文白之，法乘大怒，系登之于狱十馀日。
现代文：后来，录事房季文把这一情况报告给了房法乘，房法乘气愤异常，立刻下令将伏登之逮捕入狱，关押了十多天。
English: Later, the recording room Jiwen reported this situation to the house of Fa Chun. The house of Fa Chun was extremely angry and immediately ordered the arrest and imprisonment of Fuden, who was detained for more than ten days.

古文：登之厚赂法乘妹夫崔景叔，得出，因将部曲袭州，执法乘，谓之曰： 使君既有疾，不宜烦劳。 
现代文：伏登之用厚礼赂贿房法乘的妹夫崔景叔后，才得以释放。于是，伏登之率领自己的部曲袭击了州府，将房法乘抓了起来，并对他说： 你既然有病，就不应该再劳心费神地处理州事了。 
English: He was released only after he had bribed his brother-in-law, Choi Kyung-seok, who was the brother-in-law of Fong Ho-hyun, with a large gift. Therefore, Fong Fook led his troops to attack the state capital, arrested Fong Ho-hyun, and said to him, "Since you are ill, you should not bother to deal with state affairs."

古文：囚之别室。
现代文：将房法乘囚禁在另外一间房子里。
English: and imprisoned him in another house.

古文：法乘无事，复就登之求书读之，登之曰： 使君静处，犹恐动疾，岂可看书！ 
现代文：房法乘没什么事可做，就又向伏登之请求，送给他一些书来读。伏登之说： 让你安安静静地呆着，还害怕你万一发病了，怎么还可以让你继续看书呢。 
English: There was nothing to do, so he asked Fuden to give him some books to read. Fuden said, "If I let you stay quietly, and I'm afraid that you might get sick, how can I let you continue to read?"

古文：遂不与。
现代文：于是，没有把书给房法乘。
English: As a result, the book was not given to Fong.

古文：乃启法乘心疾动，不任视事。
现代文：接着，伏登之就向朝廷奏报，说房法乘犯了神经病，没有能力处理事务。
English: Next, Fudenzhi reported to the imperial court that Fongfa had become mentally ill and was incapable of handling affairs.

古文：十一月，乙卯，以登之为交州刺史。
现代文：十一月，乙卯，任命伏登之为交州刺史。
English: In November, Fudan was appointed as the new governor of Gyeongju.

古文：法乘还，至岭而卒。
现代文：房法乘回建康，走到大庾岭时去世。
English: Fang Fa took the train back to Jiankang and passed away on the way to Dalatling.

古文：十二月，己卯，立皇子子建为湘东王。
现代文：十二月，己卯，南齐武帝立皇子萧子建为湘东王。
English: In December, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi crowned Prince Xiao Zi as the King of Eastern Hunan.

古文：初，太祖以南方钱少，更欲铸钱。
现代文：当初，南齐高帝认为，南方的钱币缺乏，打算重新大量铸钱。
English: At first, Emperor Gao of the Southern Qi believed that there was a shortage of coins in the south, and planned to mint a large amount of money again.

古文：建元末，奉朝请孔觊上言，以为： 食货相通，理势自然。
现代文：建元末年，奉朝请孔上书朝廷认为： 食物与钱币相互交换，这是自然而然的发展趋势。
English: At the end of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the imperial court requested Kong to submit a letter to the court, saying: Food and money are exchanged with each other, which is a natural development trend.

古文：李悝云： 籴甚贵伤民，甚贱伤农。 
现代文：李悝曾说： 米太贵会伤害老百姓，米太贱会伤害种粮的农夫。 
English: Li Wei once said: Rice that is too expensive will hurt the common people, while rice that is too cheap will hurt grain farmers.

古文：甚贱甚贵，其伤一也。
现代文：那么，米无论是昂贵还是便宜，它所造成的伤害都是一样的。
English: So, whether rice is expensive or cheap, the damage it causes is the same.

古文：三吴，国之关奥，比岁时被水潦而籴不贵，是天下钱少，非谷贱，此不可不察也。
现代文：三吴地区是国家的关键地区，那里接连几年经常发生水灾，却没有因为水灾而使米价上涨，这是因为天下的钱币太少，而不是谷米价格太贱所造成的，这一点，朝廷不能不仔细加以考察。
English: The Sanwu region is a key region of the country, where floods have occurred frequently for several years in a row, but rice prices have not risen as a result of the floods. This is due to the fact that there are too few coins in the world, not because the price of grain rice is too low. The imperial court must carefully examine this.

古文：铸钱之弊，在轻重屡变。
现代文：铸造钱币的弊病，在于钱币的轻重多次变化更改。
English: The drawback of minting money lies in the repeated changes in weight.

古文：重钱患难用，而难用为累轻；轻钱弊盗铸，而盗铸为祸深。
现代文：钱太重，担心它不便流通，但流通不便所带来的损害不大。钱太轻的弊病在于人们容易偷偷自己伪造，伪造钱币所带来的灾祸却是相当严重的。
English: When money is too heavy, people worry that it is inconvenient to circulate, but the damage caused by the inconvenience of circulation is small. The drawback of money being too light is that people can easily forge it secretly. However, the disaster caused by counterfeiting coins is quite serious.

古文：民所以盗铸，严法不能禁者，由上铸钱惜铜爱工也。
现代文：人们之所以很容易地就能偷偷伪造钱币，连严格的法令都禁止不了，就是因为官府铸钱时，过于珍惜铜，又不能精心加工的缘故。
English: The reason why it is so easy for people to secretly forge money, and why even strict laws cannot prohibit it, is that when the government mints money, it values copper too much and cannot process it carefully.

古文：惜铜爱工者，意谓钱为无用之器，以通交易，务欲令质轻而数多，使省工而易成，不详虑其为患也。
现代文：官府爱惜铜，又不加以精工铸造，就是因为认为钱币是没有用处的东西，只要可以用它作为交换媒介，那就一定要让它质地轻而且数量多，这样就可以降低工本而且容易铸成，却没有仔细考虑这样做所带来的后患。
English: The government treasured copper, but did not carefully cast it, because they thought that money was useless. As long as it could be used as a medium of exchange, it must be light in quality and large in quantity, so that the cost could be reduced and it could be easily cast. However, they did not carefully consider the consequences of doing so.

古文：夫民之趋利，如水走下。
现代文：百姓追求利，就好像水往低处流一样。
English: People's pursuit of profit is like water flowing downhill.

古文：今开其利端，从以重刑，是导其为非而陷之于死，岂为政欤！
现代文：如今，打开了人们偷偷铸钱、追求厚利的缺口，却又将他们处以重刑，这是在引导他们犯法，又将他们置于死地，这哪里是在治理国家！
English: Now, opening a gap for people to secretly mint money and pursue high profits, but punishing them severely, it is leading them to break the law, and putting them to death, this is not governing the country!

古文：汉兴，铸轻钱，民巧伪者多。
现代文：汉朝兴起时期，由于钱币铸造得很轻，所以偷偷伪造的人很多。
English: During the rise of the Han Dynasty, coins were lightly minted, so there were many people who secretly forged them.

古文：至元狩中，始惩其弊，乃铸五铢钱，周郭其上下，令不可磨取鋊，而民计其费不能相偿，私铸益少，此不惜铜不爱工之效也。
现代文：到了元狩中期，才开始改正这种弊病，于是，铸制了五铢钱，周边凸出，使人无法磨取铜屑，同时，五铢钱的铸制工本费高，铸制费用与使用费用相互抵消，不能获利，所以，民间偷偷铸钱的人也就越来越少了。这就是不吝啬铜和不惜精工铸造的效果。
English: It was not until the middle of the Yuan Dynasty that this problem began to be rectified. As a result, five-baht coins were minted with protruding edges, which made it impossible to grind out the copper shavings. At the same time, the cost of casting five-baht coins was high, and the cost of casting and the cost of use were offset against each other, making it impossible to make a profit. As a result, there were fewer and fewer people who secretly minted money. This is the effect of not being stingy with copper and sparing no effort in precision casting.

古文：王者不患无铜乏工，每令民不能竞，则盗铸绝矣。
现代文：君王不必担心没有铜铸造钱，也不用担心做工不精，每次只要让人们不能仿造，那么，偷偷伪造钱币的人自然而然也就消失了。
English: The king does not have to worry about not having copper to mint money, nor does he have to worry about poor workmanship. As long as people can not imitate, then the people who secretly counterfeit coins will naturally disappear.

古文：宋文帝铸四铢，至景和，钱益轻，虽有周郭，而镕冶不精，于是盗铸纷纭而起，不可复禁。
现代文：宋文帝时，铸造了四铢钱，到了景和年间，钱的重量也越发轻了，虽然钱币周边还有凸起的轮廓，可是冶炼得不够精细，从那时起，偷偷伪造钱币的风气又开始兴起，不再能禁止。
English: During the reign of Emperor Songwen, four-baht coins were minted. During the Qing Dynasty and Qing Dynasty, the weight of the coins became lighter and lighter. Although there was a raised outline around the coins, the smelting was not refined enough. Since then, the culture of secretly counterfeiting coins has begun to rise again, and it can no longer be prohibited.

古文：此惜铜爱工之验也。
现代文：这就是吝啬铜，又不能精工细做的结果。
English: This is the result of being stingy with copper and not being able to make fine work.

古文：凡铸钱，与其不衷，宁重无轻。
现代文：大凡铸造钱币，如果不能适中，则宁可取其重，而不取其轻。
English: If it is not possible to mint a coin in the right proportion, it is better to take the heavy one rather than the light one.

古文：自汉铸五铢至宋文帝，历五百馀年，制度世有废兴，而不变五铢者明其轻重可法、得货之宜故也。
现代文：从汉代铸制五铢钱到宋文帝时期，历时五百多年，各朝各代的制度有立有废，但却自始至终使用五铢钱的原因，就是因为人们明白五铢钱轻重恰当、交易方便。
English: It took more than five hundred years from the Han Dynasty to the Song Dynasty, and the system of each dynasty and generation had its ups and downs. However, the reason why the five yuan coin was used from beginning to end was because people understood the importance of the five yuan coin and it was convenient for transactions.

古文：案今钱文率皆五铢，异钱时有耳。
现代文：考察当代钱币虽也都在花纹上仿制五铢钱，但别的钱币也时常有。
English: Although the examination of contemporary coins also imitated the pattern of the five-baht coin, other coins also often exist.

古文：自文帝铸四铢，又不禁民翦凿，为祸既博，钟弊于今，岂不悲哉！
现代文：从宋文帝铸造了四铢钱，又不禁止人们把钱削边、凿坏，于是，酿成的灾祸大大流行起来，这一流弊甚而延续到了现在，这难道不是很令人悲哀吗？
English: Isn't it very sad that Emperor Songwen minted four kinds of money without prohibiting people from cutting the edges and chiseling the money, so the resulting disaster became very popular, and this kind of evil has even continued to this day?

古文：晋氏不铸钱，后经寇戎水火，耗散沈铄，所失岁多，譬犹磨砻砥砺，不见其损，有时而尽，天下钱何得不竭！
现代文：晋朝不铸造铢币，只用原来的钱币，后来，经过盗贼入侵、战乱、水灾、火灾等等，钱币耗损、失散、埋藏和销熔，每年都大量地被损耗掉，就恰恰像是一块石磨或者磨刀石看不见它在减少，可终有一天它会被磨完。天下的钱币，又怎么能不会枯竭呢！
English: The Jin Dynasty did not mint counterfeit money, but only used the original coins. Later, after the invasion of thieves, wars, floods, fires, etc., the coins were worn out, scattered, buried and melted down. Every year, a large number of coins were worn out. It is just like a stone mill or grindstone, you can't see it is decreasing, but one day it will be worn out. How can the world's coins not be depleted!

古文：钱竭则士、农、工、商皆丧其业，民何以自存！
现代文：钱币枯竭，士、农、工、商都会失去他们的工作，老百姓又凭借什么生存呢？
English: When the money runs out, the clerks, farmers, workers, and merchants will all lose their jobs. What will the common people rely on to survive?

古文：愚以为宜如旧制，大兴镕铸，钱重五铢，一依汉法。
现代文：我认为，朝廷应该恢复以前的制度，由官府大量铸造钱币，钱的重量是五铢，所有这些，全都依照汉朝的办法。
English: In my opinion, the imperial court should restore the previous system, with the government minting coins in large quantities. The weight of the money is five yuan, and all of this is in accordance with the methods of the Han Dynasty.

古文：若官铸者已布于民，便严断翦凿，轻小破缺无周郭者，悉不得行。
现代文：如果官府铸造的钱币已经在民间广泛流通起来，就要严厉禁止磨缺、毁损钱币，对于那些轻、小、破碎、残缺、没有周边凸出和轮廓的钱币，都不能流通使用。
English: If the coins minted by the government have been widely circulated in the private sector, it is necessary to strictly prohibit the wear and tear and damage of coins. For those coins that are light, small, broken, mutilated, and without protruding edges and contours, they cannot be circulated and used.

古文：官钱细小者，称合铢两，销以为大，利贫良之民，塞奸巧之路。
现代文：官府铸造的钱币，如果有细小不合标准的，应查明重量，销毁改铸成标准大钱，这样，对贫穷安分的老百姓既有好处，也堵塞了偷机取巧、偷铸钱币的人的邪路。
English: If there are small coins that are not up to standard, the weight of the coins minted by the government should be ascertained, and they should be destroyed and replaced by standard large coins. In this way, it is not only beneficial to the poor and peaceful people, but also blocks the evil way of those who steal and secretly mint coins.

古文：钱货既均，远近若一，百姓乐业，市道无争，衣食滋殖矣。 
现代文：钱币和货物相应，远近各处一样，老百姓也就能安居乐业，市场、路上都不会发生争执，衣着和食物也就慢慢增加起来了。 
English: With the unification of coins, far and near are the same, the people can enjoy their work, there is no dispute in market transactions, and clothing and food will be rich and prosperous.

古文：太祖然之，使诸州郡大市铜炭。
现代文：高帝认为孔的建议很有道理，就下令各州郡大量购买黄铜、煤炭，准备开工铸钱。
English: Gao Di thought that Kong's suggestion was very reasonable, so he ordered all the states and counties to buy a large amount of brass and coal in preparation for starting to mint money.

古文：会晏驾，事寝。
现代文：不巧，这时正好高帝去世，这件事也就搁置下来了。
English: Unfortunately, at that time, Emperor Gao died, and the matter was shelved.

古文：是岁，益州行事刘悛上言： 蒙山下有严道铜山，旧铸钱处，可以经略。 
现代文：这一年，益州行事刘悛又上书说： 蒙山下边有一座叫严道的铜山，这座铜山是过去铸钱的地方，可以利用。 
English: In the same year, Liu Ye, an official of Yizhou, also wrote: At the foot of Meng Mountain, there is a copper mountain called Yan Dao. This copper mountain was a place where money was minted in the past, and it can be used.

古文：上从之，遣使入蜀铸钱。
现代文：于是，武帝批准了刘悛的请求，派人到巴蜀铸造钱币。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu approved Liu Bei's request and sent someone to Bashu to mint coins.

古文：顷之，以功费多而止。
现代文：不久，由于铸制钱币开支太大，也就停止不再铸制。
English: Soon, because the cost of minting coins was too high, they stopped minting.

古文：自太祖治黄籍，至上，谪巧者戍缘淮各十年，百姓怨望。
现代文：自从高帝整理户籍，直到武帝，被贬谪的偷机取巧、作奸犯科的人，要沿着淮河沿岸戍守十年，为此，人们怨声载道。
English: From the time of Emperor Gao's household registration to the time of Emperor Wu, the dethroned thieves and criminals had to stay along the coast of the Huai River for ten years. People complained about this.

古文：乃下诏： 自宋升明以前，皆听复注；其有谪役边疆，各许还本；此后有犯，严加翦治。 
现代文：于是颁布诏令说： 在宋升崐明年以前犯罪的人，都允许他们按照他们个人的志愿，恢复他们的户籍。其中被贬谪到边疆服役的人，一律释放，允许他们返回自己的故乡。从此以后，如果再犯，就将严厉惩治。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict was issued, saying: Those who committed crimes before Song Shengkun next year were allowed to restore their household registration according to their personal wishes. Among them, those who were demoted to the frontier to serve were all released and allowed to return to their hometowns. From now on, if they reoffend, they will be severely punished.

古文：长沙威王晃卒。
现代文：长沙威王萧晃去世。
English: Changsha Wei King Xiao Yang passed away.

古文：吏部尚书王晏陈疾自解，上欲以古昌侯鸾代晏领先，手敕问之。
现代文：吏部尚书王晏多年患病，自己请求辞职，武帝打算任命西昌侯萧鸾接替王晏担任吏部尚书，就给王晏写了一封敕书，征求王晏的意见。
English: Wang Xi, the secretary of the general staff, had been ill for many years and asked for his resignation. Emperor Wu planned to appoint Xiao Xi, the lord of Xichang, to succeed Wang Xi as secretary of the general staff, so he wrote a letter to Wang Xi to solicit Wang Xi's opinion.

古文：晏启曰： 鸾清干有馀；然不谙百氏，恐不可居此职。 
现代文：王晏报告说： 萧鸾才干有余，但不熟悉豪门士族，恐怕不能担当这项职务。 
English: Wang Yao reported: Xiao Yao has more than enough talent, but he is not familiar with the great men, so I am afraid he can't take on this position.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：武帝就没有任命。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：以百济王牟大为镇东大将军、百济王。
现代文：南齐任命百济王国国王牟大为镇东大将军、封为百济王。
English: Nanqi appointed King Mu Da of the Baekje Kingdom as Zhen Dongda General and named him King of Baekje.

古文：高车阿伏至罗及穷奇遣使如魏，请为天子讨除蠕蠕，魏主赐以绣袴褶及杂彩百匹。
现代文：高车王阿伏至罗和太子阿伏穷奇，派遣使者前往北魏，请求代替皇帝讨伐柔然汗国。孝文帝将绣花的裤子、夹衣以及各种各样颜色的丝绸共计一百匹赏赐给了使者。
English: The king of Gaocho, Avu Ziro, and the prince, Avu Qianqi, sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty, requesting that the emperor be sent to fight against the Jurchen Empire. Emperor Xiaowen rewarded the envoy with embroidered trousers, jackets, and a total of one hundred silks of various colors.

古文：世祖武皇帝中永明九年
现代文：永明九年
English: The ninth year of Sun Myung Moon

古文：春，正月，辛丑，上祀南郊。
现代文：春季正月，辛丑，南齐武帝前往建康南郊祭天。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi went to the southern suburb of Jiankang to hold a festival.

古文：丁卯，魏主始听政于皇信东室。
现代文：丁卯，北魏孝文帝开始到皇信东室处理朝廷事物。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty began to go to the East Room of Emperor Xian to deal with the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：诏太庙四时之祭：荐宣皇帝，起面饼、鸭隺；孝皇后，笋、鸭卵；高皇帝，肉脍、菹羹；昭皇后，茗、粣、炙鱼：皆所嗜也。
现代文：武帝下诏令皇家祖庙四季的祭品：在宣皇帝灵牌前供献起面饼和鸭肉羹；孝皇后灵牌前供奉嫩笋和鸭蛋；高皇帝灵牌前供奉细肉和肉酱粥；在昭皇后灵牌前供奉清茶、粽子和烤鱼。
English: Emperor Wu decreed the offerings for the four seasons of the Royal Ancestral Temple: noodles and duck meat soup were offered in front of Emperor Xuan's spirit tablet; tender clams and duck eggs were offered in front of Empress Xiao's spirit tablet; thin meat and meat sauce porridge were offered in front of Emperor Gao's spirit tablet; and clear tea, hazelnuts and grilled fish were offered in front of Empress Zhao's spirit tablet.

古文：上梦太祖谓己： 宋氏诸帝常在太庙从我求食，可别为吾致祠。 
现代文：这些供奉物，都是他们生前平时最喜欢吃的东西。武帝梦见高帝对他说： 宋朝那些皇帝常常挤到太庙里，跟着我要食物，你可以另找一个地方祭祀我。 
English: These offerings were their favorite things to eat during their lifetimes. Emperor Wu dreamed that Emperor Gao said to him, "In the Song Dynasty, those emperors often crowded into the Great Temple and followed me to ask for food. You can find another place to worship me."

古文：乃命豫章王妃庾氏四时祠二帝、二后于清溪故宅。牲牢、服章，皆用家人礼。
现代文：于是，命令豫章王萧嶷的妃子庾氏，春夏秋冬四季，在清溪旧宅里祭祀祖父母和父母，祭祀时所使用祭品以及要穿什么样的衣服，都按照家庭中的礼节进行。
English: As a result, he ordered Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi's concubine, Yan, to offer sacrifices to her grandparents and parents in the spring, summer, autumn and winter in the old house in Qingxi. The sacrificial offerings used during the sacrifice and what kind of clothes to wear were all carried out according to the etiquette in the family.

古文：臣光曰： 昔屈到嗜芰，屈建去之，以为不可以私欲干国之典，况子为天子，而以庶人之礼祭其父，违礼甚矣！
现代文：臣司马光曰：从前，屈到最喜欢吃菱角，但他的儿子屈建祭祀时把菱角撤掉了，他认为，不可以因为个人的嗜好而冒犯国家的祭典。更何况，儿子做皇帝，却用平民的礼仪去祭祀父亲，这就太违背礼教了。
English: The retainer Sima Guang said: In the past, Qu was the most fond of eating horse mackerel, but his son Qu Jian removed the horse mackerel during the sacrifice. He believed that it was not possible to offend the national festival because of personal hobbies. What's more, it was against the etiquette for a son to sacrifice his father with a commoner's etiquette when he was the emperor.

古文：卫成公欲祀相，宁武子犹非之；而况降祀祖考于私室，使庶妇尸之乎！
现代文：卫成公打算祭祀姒相，大夫宁武子还责怪他不该这么做。更何况武帝现在把祭祀祖父母和父母的仪式降到在自己的私宅中进行，而且还让自己庶子的妻子来主持！
English: Wei Chenggong was planning to offer sacrifices to the gods, but his doctor, Ning Wuzhong, accused him of not doing so. What's more, Emperor Wu has now relegated the ritual of offering sacrifices to grandparents and parents to his own private residence, and even let his son-in-law's wife preside over it!

古文：初，魏主召吐谷浑王伏连筹入朝，伏连筹辞疾不至，辄修洮阳、泥和二城，置戍兵焉。
现代文：最初，孝文帝征召吐谷浑可汗慕容伏连筹到平城朝见，慕容伏连筹声称有病，没有前来，接着，他就开始修缮洮阳、泥和两座城池，并派兵戍守。
English: At first, Emperor Xiaowen conscripted Murong Fuliancho, the Tugu Hun Khan, to come to Heijo to meet the emperor. Murong Fuliancho claimed to be ill and did not come. Next, he began to repair Fenyang, Mud and the two castles, and sent soldiers to guard them.

古文：二月，乙亥，魏枹罕镇将长孙百年请击二戍，魏主许之。
现代文：二月，乙亥，北魏罕的镇将长孙百年请求前去袭击洮阳、泥和两城，孝文帝批准。
English: In February, the town of Yihai in northern Weihan requested the great-grandson of a hundred years to attack Fenyang, Mudan and the two cities, and Emperor Xiaowen approved.

古文：散骑常侍裴昭明、散骑侍郎谢竣如魏吊，欲以朝服行事。
现代文：南齐散骑常侍裴昭明、散骑侍郎谢竣，前往北魏吊唁冯太后，他们准备穿平常的官服去祭祀。
English: Pei Zhaoming and Xie Shun, the Nanzhi horseback riding attendants, went to the Northern Wei Dynasty to pay condolences to Empress Dowager Feng. They were prepared to wear ordinary official uniforms to the sacrifice.

古文：魏主客曰： 吊有常礼，何得以硃衣入凶庭！ 
现代文：北魏的主客说： 吊丧有一定的礼节，怎么可以穿着红色的官服进入令人悲痛的祭堂。 
English: The host and guest of the Northern Wei Dynasty said: There is a certain etiquette for mourning, how can you wear a red official uniform to enter the grieving hall.

古文：昭明等曰： 受命本朝，不敢辄易。 
现代文：裴昭明等人回答说： 我们是接受本国朝廷的命令前来吊丧的，没有胆量轻易地更换服装。 
English: Pei Zhaoming and others replied: We have accepted the order of our country's imperial court to come to the funeral, and we do not have the courage to change clothes easily.

古文：往返数四，昭明等固执不可。
现代文：双方来来往往，反反复复争论了很多次，裴昭明等人最后仍坚持不换服装。
English: The two sides came and went back and forth and argued many times. In the end, Pei Zhaoming and others still insisted on not changing their clothes.

古文：魏主命尚书李冲选学识之士与之言，冲奏遣著作郎上谷成淹。
现代文：于是，孝文帝下令尚书李冲挑选饱学之士和裴昭明等人辩论。李冲推荐了著作朗上谷人成淹。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen ordered Shangshu Li Chong to select scholars to debate with Pei Zhaoming and others. Li Chong recommended the book Long Shangguan Rencheng.

古文：昭明等曰： 魏朝不听使者朝服，出何典礼？ 
现代文：裴昭明等人说： 魏朝不允许外国使节穿他们本国的官服，这一规定出自哪一部经典？ 
English: Pei Zhaoming and others said: The Wei Dynasty did not allow foreign envoys to wear their national official uniforms. Which classic book did this rule come from?

古文：淹曰： 吉凶不相厌。
现代文：成淹说： 喜事和丧事是不能同时并存的。
English: Chengyun said, "It is impossible for joy and sorrow to coexist at the same time.

古文：羔裘玄冠不以吊，此童稚所知也。
现代文：一个人身穿羔羊皮袍、头戴朝冠，是不可以前去吊丧的，这一点，连三岁的孩子都明白。
English: Even a three-year-old understands that a person wearing a lambskin robe and a crown is not allowed to go to the funeral.

古文：昔季孙如晋，求遭丧之礼以行。
现代文：从前，季孙前往晋国就是学习了领国遭遇丧事的礼节才动身的。
English: In the past, when Ji Sun went to Jin Province, he only set out after learning the etiquette of the funeral of the leading country.

古文：今卿自江南远来吊魏，方问出何典礼；行人得失，何其远哉！ 
现代文：如今，你们从长江之南远道而来吊丧，却要问穿丧服吊丧是出自哪一本经典。使节之间的得与失，怎么相差得这么远呢！ 
English: Today, you have come all the way from the south of the Yangtze River to mourn, but you have to ask which classic is the source of mourning in mourning clothes. How can the gains and losses between envoys be so far apart?

古文：昭明曰： 二国之礼，应相准望。
现代文：裴昭明说： 两个国家的交往礼节，应该相互平等，有一个共同的标准。
English: Pei Zhaoming said: The etiquette of exchanges between two countries should be equal and have a common standard.

古文：齐高皇帝之丧，魏遣李彪来吊，初不素服，齐朝亦不以为疑，何至今日独见要逼！ 
现代文：齐高帝去世时，北魏派李彪前去吊丧，他最初没穿白色的丧服，齐朝也并没有认为有什么不合适的地方，为什么今天我们却被紧紧逼迫呢？ 
English: When Emperor Qigong died, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent Li Biao to attend the funeral. At first, he did not wear white mourning clothes, and the Qi Dynasty did not think there was anything inappropriate. Why are we being closely persecuted today?

古文：淹曰： 齐不能行亮阴之礼，逾月即吉。
现代文：成淹说： 齐朝的君主不能严格地遵守居丧的礼仪，安葬以后，过了一个月，就穿上平日的衣服。
English: Chengyun said: The monarchs of the Qi Dynasty could not strictly abide by the etiquette of the funeral. After the burial, after a month, they put on ordinary clothes.

古文：彪奉使之日，齐之君臣，鸣玉盈庭，貂珰曜目。
现代文：李彪奉命出使齐朝，君主和官员们都佩戴着宝玉挤满了房屋，貂尾和黄金首饰闪闪发光，耀人眼目。
English: Li Biao was ordered to send envoys to Qi Dynasty, the monarchs and officials were all wearing gems and jade, the houses were crowded, the irises and gold jewelry sparkled and dazzled the eyes.

古文：彪不得主人之命，敢独以素服厕其间乎？
现代文：李彪如果没有得到齐朝主人的许可，怎么敢一个人穿着白色丧服置身于这令人眼花缭乱的人群中呢！
English: If Li Biao did not have the permission of the master of Qi Dynasty, how dare a person wearing a white mourning dress stand in the midst of this dazzling crowd!

古文：皇帝仁孝，侔于有虞，执亲之丧，居庐食粥，岂得以此方彼乎？ 
现代文：我们皇上仁义孝敬，和圣明的虞舜差不多，他亲自前来守丧，住在简陋的房子里，喝稀粥，这怎么可以拿来和你们相比较呢？ 
English: The benevolence, righteousness, and filial piety of our emperor is almost the same as that of Shengming's magpie. He came to the funeral in person, lived in a humble house, and drank gruel. How can this be compared to you?

古文：昭明曰： 三王不同礼，孰能知其得失！ 
现代文：裴昭明说： 夏、商、周三代，制度礼仪各不相同，有谁能够判断出哪个好、哪个坏呢！ 
English: Pei Zhaoming said: Xia, Shang and San dynasties, the system and etiquette are different, who can judge which is good and which is bad!

古文：淹曰： 然而虞舜、高宗皆非邪？ 
现代文：成淹说： 这么说来，难道虞舜、商代高宗的做法都不对吗？ 
English: Chengyun said, "So, are the practices of Yu Xi and Gao Zong of the Shang Dynasty wrong?

古文：昭明、竣相顾而笑曰： 非孝者无亲，何可当也！ 
现代文：裴昭明和谢悛二人相互看了一眼，笑着说： 责怪别人孝行的人，心中没有亲近的人，我们哪里敢这样做呢。 
English: Pei Zhaoming and Xie Yao glanced at each other and said with a smile, "Those who blame others for their filial piety, and those who have no relatives in their hearts, how dare we do this?

古文：乃曰： 使人之来，唯赍袴褶，此既戌服，不可以吊，唯主人裁其吊服！
现代文：于是二人又说： 我们前来吊丧，只带了短裤短袄，这些都是武官穿的服装，不能穿它们去吊丧，只有请主人给我们裁制丧服！
English: Then the two said, "We have come to pay our respects, but we have only brought shorts and sandals. These are the clothes worn by military attachés. We cannot wear them to pay our respects. We can only ask our master to make our funeral clothes!"

古文：然违本朝之命，返必获罪。 
现代文：可是，这样做违背我们朝廷的命令，我们回去后一定会被朝廷治罪。 
English: However, doing so is against the order of our court, and we will certainly be punished by the court after we return.

古文：淹曰： 使彼有君子，卿将命得宜，且有厚赏。
现代文：成淹说： 假使你们国家有君子之才，那么，你们接受朝廷命令出使他国，言谈举止恰当得体，就将会得到厚厚的赏赐。
English: Cheng Juan said: If your country has the talent of a gentleman, then you will receive a generous reward if you accept the order of the imperial court to go to other countries, and speak and behave appropriately.

古文：若无君子，卿出而光国，得罪何妨！自当有良史书之。 
现代文：如果没有君子，你们代表朝廷出使他国，也使你们的国家得到了荣耀，即使这么做你们受到了处罚，又有什么关系呢！
English: If there are no gentlemen, what does it matter if you go abroad on behalf of the court and bring glory to your country, even if you are punished for doing so?

古文：乃以衣、臽给昭明等，使服以致命。
现代文：将来，这件事自会有优秀的史官把它记载下来的。 
English: In the future, this event will be recorded by excellent historians.

古文：己丑，引昭明等入见，文武皆哭尽哀。
现代文：于是，就把吊丧时需要的丧服，帽子等等借给了裴昭明等人，让他们穿这些丧服去完成自己的使命。
English: As a result, he lent the mourning clothes, hats, etc. needed for the funeral to Pei Zhaoming and others, and let them wear these mourning clothes to complete their mission.

古文：魏主嘉淹之敏，迁侍郎，赐绢百匹。
现代文：己丑，成淹带着裴昭明等人进入，文武百官全都痛哭失声，极尽哀痛。孝文帝嘉许成淹的聪敏，提升他为侍郎，赏赐给他一百匹绢。
English: He was so ugly that Cheng Hun entered with Pei Zhaoming and others, and all the civil and military officials wept and lost their voices, and were extremely sad. Emperor Xiaowen praised Cheng Hun's cleverness, promoted him to the position of attendant, and rewarded him with a hundred horses.

古文：昭明，骃之子也。
现代文：裴昭明的裴的儿子。
English: The son of Bae Shoaiming Bae.

古文：始兴简王鉴卒。
现代文：南齐始兴简王萧鉴去世。
English: Xiao Jian, the first king of the Southern Qi Dynasty, passed away.

古文：三月，甲辰，魏主谒永固陵。
现代文：三月，甲辰，孝文帝祭拜太皇太后的永固陵。
English: In March, Jiachen, Emperor Xiaowen paid homage to the Yonggu Mausoleum of the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：夏，四月，癸亥朔，设荐于太和庙。魏主始进蔬食，追感哀哭，终日不饭；侍中冯诞等谏，经宿乃饭。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸亥朔，在太和庙设置进献祭品，孝文帝开始吃了点儿蔬菜，追思伤感，悲哀痛哭一整天没有吃饭。侍中冯诞等人劝谏，过了一夜后，孝文帝才开始吃饭。
English: In the summer, in April, at the time of the Year of the Pig, when the sacrificial offerings were set up in the Taihe Temple, Emperor Xiaowen began to eat some vegetables. He did not eat for a whole day, thinking about sad feelings and crying bitterly. The attendant Feng Xizhao and others persuaded him, and after one night, Emperor Xiaowen began to eat.

古文：甲子，罢朝夕哭。
现代文：甲子，孝文帝停止早晚各哭一次的仪式。
English: Emperor Gao Zi and Emperor Xiaowen stopped the ritual of crying once in the morning and once in the evening.

古文：乙丑，复谒永固陵。
现代文：乙丑，再次祭拜永固陵。
English: Second ugly, worship Yonggu mausoleum again.

古文：魏自正月不雨，至于癸酉，有司请祈百神，帝曰： 成汤遭旱，以至诚致雨，固不在曲祷山川。
现代文：北魏从正月开始就不下雨，一直持续到了四月癸酉，有关部门请求向百神祈祷，孝文帝说： 商代汤王遇到旱灾时，用他至诚的心感动了上苍，才下起了雨，本就不在于曲意祈祷山河大川。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, it did not rain from the beginning of the first month and lasted until the end of April. The relevant departments asked to pray to the hundred gods, and Emperor Xiaowen said: When Tang Wang of the Shang Dynasty encountered a drought, he touched the heavens with his sincere heart, and then it rained. It was not about the melody of praying for mountains and rivers.

古文：今普天丧恃，幽显同哀，何宜四气未周，遽行祀事！
现代文：如今，普天之下失去了他们赖以依仗的人，无论是阴间还是阳间都在哀痛，怎么可以在四季还没有过完，就马上要开始去祭祀祈祷百神！
English: Today, all over the world, people have lost those on whom they depended. Both the underworld and the sun are in mourning. How can it be that the four seasons have not yet passed, and we must immediately begin to sacrifice and pray to the hundred gods!

古文：唯当责躬以待天遣。 
现代文：我们只应该深深责怪、反省自己，等待上天对我们的惩罚。 
English: We should only deeply reproach and reflect on ourselves, and wait for Heaven to punish us.

古文：甲戌，魏员外散骑常侍李彪等来聘，为之置燕设乐。
现代文：甲戌，北魏员外散骑常侍李彪等人来访。南齐武帝特意为他们置办了宴席，安排了礼乐。
English: Emperor Wu of Southern Qi specially arranged a banquet for them and arranged ceremonial music.

古文：彪辞乐，且曰： 主上孝思罔极，兴坠正失。
现代文：李彪推辞礼乐仪式，并且说： 我们君主仁义孝敬之心广博，正在振兴以前帝王遗失的典章，恢复过去被曲解误会的制度，而遵守三年守丧的规矩。
English: Li Biao concluded the music ceremony, and said: "Our monarch has a broad heart of benevolence, righteousness and filial piety. He is reviving the lost ordinances of previous emperors, restoring the system that was misinterpreted and misunderstood in the past, and observing the three-year mourning rules.

古文：去三月晦，朝臣始除衰绖，犹以素服从事，是以使臣不敢承奏乐之赐。 
现代文：直到三月晦，朝廷文武官员们才开始脱下丧服，却还仍然穿着白色衣服处理事务，为此，使臣我也不敢接受演奏音乐的赏赐。 
English: It was not until the end of March that the court officials began to take off their mourning clothes, but they still wore white clothes to handle affairs. For this reason, the envoy did not dare to accept the reward of playing music.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷接受了他的想法。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：彪凡六奉使，上甚重之。
现代文：李彪代表北魏朝廷前后出使齐国有六次之多，武帝对他十分敬重。
English: On behalf of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Li Biao sent envoys to Qi State as many as six times, and Emperor Wu highly respected him.

古文：将还，上亲送至琅邪城，命群臣赋诗以宠之。
现代文：李彪将要回国时，武帝亲自把他送到琅邪城，并下令文武官员赋诗相送，来表示给李彪的荣耀。
English: When Li Biao was about to return to China, Emperor Wu personally sent him to Shanyi City, and ordered the literary and military officials to send poems to honor Li Biao.

古文：己卯，魏作明堂，改营太庙。
现代文：己卯，北魏兴建明堂，改建太庙。
English: Later, the Northern Wei Dynasty built the Ming Hall and rebuilt the Imperial Temple.

古文：五月，己亥，魏主更定律令于东明观，亲决疑狱；命李冲议定轻重，润色辞旨，帝执笔书之。
现代文：五月，己亥，孝文帝在东明观修订法律，亲自裁决有疑问的诉讼案件。命令尚书李冲裁定刑罚轻重，为判词润色，孝文帝亲自抄录下来。
English: In May, Ji Hai, Emperor Xiaowen revised the law in Dongmingyuan and personally adjudicated the doubtful litigation cases. He ordered Shangshu Li Chong to adjudicate the severity of the punishment. To polish the sentence, Emperor Xiaowen personally copied it down.

古文：李冲忠勤明断，加以慎密，为帝所委，情义无间；旧臣贵戚，莫不心服，中外推之。
现代文：李冲忠诚勤奋，明智果断，加上又谨慎周密，所以深受孝文帝拓跋宏的信赖和倚重，二人之间情投义合，没有隔阂。
English: Li Chong was loyal and diligent, wise and decisive, as well as prudent and meticulous. Therefore, he was deeply trusted and relied on by Emperor Xiaowen Tuobaohong. There was no separation between the two men.

古文：乙卯，魏长孙百年攻洮阳、泥和二戍，克之，俘三千馀人。
现代文：无论是多年的朝廷官员，还是显贵的皇亲国戚，没有人不对他心服口服的，全国上下内外对他也一致推崇。乙卯，北魏桴罕镇将长孙百年进攻洮阳、泥和两座城池，攻克城池，并俘虏了三千多人。
English: Whether he was a long-serving official of the imperial court or a distinguished relative of the emperor, there was no one who was not impressed by him, and he was unanimously respected at home and abroad. Second, in the Northern Wei Dynasty, the town of Shuhan attacked the eldest grandson of Shenyang, Mudan and two castles for a hundred years, conquered the castle, and captured more than three thousand people.

古文：丙辰，魏初造五辂。
现代文：丙辰，北魏首次制造皇家专用的玉车、金车、象车、革车、木车五种车辆。
English: For the first time, the Northern Wei Dynasty made five kinds of royal special vehicles, including jade car, gold car, elephant car, leather car and wooden car.

古文：六月，甲戌，以尚书左仆射王奂为雍州刺史。
现代文：六月，甲戌，南齐任命尚书左仆射王奂为雍州刺史。
English: In June, Jiaxuan and Nanqi appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Wangtao, as Yongzhou's chief historian.

古文：丁未，魏济阴王郁以贪残赐死。
现代文：丁未，北魏济阴王拓跋郁因为贪污残暴被赐自尽。
English: Ding Wei, Northern Wei Jian Wang Tuoba Yu was sentenced to suicide because of corruption and brutality.

古文：秋，闰七月，乙丑，魏主谒永固陵。
现代文：秋季，闰七月，乙丑，孝文帝祭拜永固陵。
English: In autumn, leap July, the second Ugly, Emperor Xiaowen worshiped Yonggu Mausoleum.

古文：己卯，魏主诏曰： 烈祖有创业之功。世祖有开拓之德，宜为祖宗，百世不迁。
现代文：己卯，孝文帝颁下诏令，说： 道武帝有开创大业的功绩，太武帝有拓展疆域的贡献，应该追尊他们为祖宗，祭庙永远不废。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued a decree, saying: Emperor Daowu had the merit of creating a great cause, Emperor Taowu had the contribution of expanding the territory, they should be revered as ancestors, and temples should never be wasted.

古文：平文之功少于昭成，而庙号太祖，道武之功高于平文，而庙号烈祖，于义未允。
现代文：平文帝的功绩比昭成帝要小，可是他的庙号却是太祖。道武帝的功绩要比平文帝高得多，可是他的庙号却是烈祖，这在道义上是不公平的。
English: The achievements of Emperor Pingwen are smaller than those of Emperor Zhaocheng, but his temple name is Taizu. The achievements of Emperor Daowu are much higher than those of Emperor Pingwen, but his temple name is Retsu, which is morally unfair.

古文：朕今奉尊烈祖为太祖，以世祖、显祖为二祧，馀皆以次而迁。 
现代文：朕现在尊奉烈祖为太祖，把世祖、显祖作为灵位应该迁移的远祖。
English: I now venerate the martyred ancestor as the great-grandfather, and regard the world ancestor and the enlightened ancestor as the distant ancestor whose spiritual position should be transferred.

古文：八月，壬辰，又诏议养老及禋于六宗之礼。
现代文：其余的都按照顺序迁移灵位。 八月，壬辰，孝文帝又颁下诏令，讨论关于养老及祭祀天皇、五帝等六宗的礼仪。
English: In August, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict to discuss the etiquette of the six sects regarding the care and worship of the emperor and the five emperors.

古文：先是，魏常以正月吉日于朝廷设幕，中置松柏树，设五帝座而祠之。
现代文：在这之前，北魏经常在正月吉利之日，在朝廷设立篷帐，其中摆上松树柏树，供奉五帝座位，然后开始祭祀。
English: Prior to this, the Northern Wei Dynasty often set up a tent in the imperial court on the auspicious day of the first month. Pine trees and cypress trees were placed in it to offer seats to the five emperors, and then the sacrifice began.

古文：又有探策之祭。
现代文：同时，还有一种预卜世系多崐少的探策祭祀。
English: At the same time, there is also a kind of probing ritual that predicts the lineage of more or less.

古文：帝皆以为非礼，罢之。
现代文：现在，孝文帝认为它们都不合乎古礼，所以下令取消这几种祭祀活动。
English: Now, Emperor Xiaowen believes that they are not in accordance with the ancient rituals, so he ordered the cancellation of these kinds of sacrificial activities.

古文：戊戌，移道坛于桑干之阴，改曰崇虚寺。
现代文：戊戌，将道教祭坛迁移到了桑干河河南，改称为崇虚寺。
English: He moved the Taoist altar to the south of the Sanggan River in Henan Province, renaming it the Chongxu Temple.

古文：乙巳，帝引见群臣，问以  禘祫 ，王、郑之义，是非安在？ 
现代文：乙巳，孝文帝召见文武百官，向大家征询意见，问大家说： 关于五年大祭和三年大祭，王肃和郑玄的解释不一样，他们谁对谁错？ 
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen summoned hundreds of civil and military officials to solicit opinions from everyone and asked them: Regarding the five-year festival and the three-year festival, Wang Su and Zheng Xuan's explanations are different. Who is right and who is wrong?

古文：尚书游明根等从郑，中书监高闾等从王。
现代文：尚书游明根等人认为郑玄正确，中书监高闾等人则赞成王肃的解释。
English: Shang Shuyou Minggen and others believed that Zheng Xuan was correct, while Gao Yao, the Chinese librarian, and others agreed with Wang Su's interpretation.

古文：诏： 圜丘、宗庙皆有禘名，从郑：禘祫并为一祭，从王：著之于令。 
现代文：最后，孝文帝颁下诏令： 天坛祭天，皇庙祭祖，都是五年大祭，可以依照郑玄的解释。
English: Finally, Emperor Xiaowen issued a decree: The Temple of Heaven Festival and the Imperial Temple Festival are both five-year grand festivals, which can be interpreted according to Zheng Xuan.

古文：戊午，又诏： 国家飨祀诸神，凡一千二百馀处；今欲减省群祀，务从简约。 
现代文：将五年大祭和三年大祭合在一块进行，可以依照王肃的解释进行。明令公布让大家都知道。 戊午，又下诏： 国内到处祭祀的各种神祗，共有一千二百多处，现在，打算减少，以求节约省俭。 
English: The five-year festival and the three-year festival can be combined into one, according to Wang Su's explanation. It was announced to let everyone know. In the afternoon, it was announced again: There are more than 1,200 shrines that are worshiped all over the country, and now, it is planned to reduce them in order to save money.

古文：又诏： 明堂、太庙，配祭、配享，于斯备矣。
现代文：又下诏说： 皇家明堂和皇家祖庙，附祀配享的亡灵品，现在都已经完备了。
English: He also issued the following edict: The Royal Ming Hall and the Royal Ancestral Temple, as well as the funerary objects for the dead, are now complete.

古文：白登、崞山、鸡鸣山庙，唯遣有司行事。
现代文：白登庙、崞山庙、鸡鸣山庙由有关主管部门负责祭祀。
English: The relevant competent departments are responsible for the sacrificial rites of the Baidong Temple, the Lushan Temple and the Jining Temple.

古文：冯宣王庙在长安，宜敕雍州以时供祭。 
现代文：冯宣王的祭庙在长安，下令雍州州府进行祭祀。 
English: Feng Xuanwang's temple in Chang'an ordered the Yongzhou government to carry out the ritual.

古文：又诏： 先有水火之神四十馀名及城北星神，今圜丘之下既祭风伯、雨师、司中、司命，明堂祭门、户、井、灶、中霤，四十神悉可罢之。 
现代文：又下诏说： 以前，祭祀水神、火神共计四十多位神，还有城北的星神。现在，天坛下面祭祀了风神、雨神、司中和司命之神，皇家明堂祭祀了门神、户神、井神、灶神和院神，那四十种神的祭祀活动全都要免去。 
English: He also issued the following edict: In the past, a total of more than forty gods were worshipped, including the gods of water and fire, as well as the star god of the north of the city. Now, the gods of wind, rain, the middle and the god of life are worshipped under the altar of heaven, and the door god, the door god, the well god, the hearth god and the god of the courtyard are worshipped in the Royal Ming Temple. All of the forty gods are to be sacrificed.

古文：甲寅，诏曰： 近论朝日、夕月，皆欲以二分之日于东、西郊行礼。
现代文：甲寅，颁下诏令，说： 近来谈论朝日和夕月的祭祀，大家都主张在春分、秋分，分别在平城的东郊和西郊举行祭祀仪式。
English: Katoin issued an edict, saying, "Recently, people have been talking about the morning sun and the evening moon sacrifice, and everyone is in favor of holding the sacrifice ceremony on the vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox, respectively, in the eastern and western suburbs of Pingcheng.

古文：然月有馀闰，行无常准。若一依分日，或值月于东而行礼于西，序情即理，不可施行。
现代文：可是，每个月的天数多少不一样，因此，无法把日子固定下来，如果我们按照春分、秋分的日子来确定，有的时候正赶上月亮在东方，而我们却在西方祭祀，这样一来，无论是在人情上，还是在道理上，都行不通。
English: However, the number of days in each month is somewhat different, so it is not possible to fix the days. If we determine the days according to the vernal and autumnal equinoxes, sometimes the moon is catching up in the east, but we are worshiping in the west. In this way, both in terms of human feelings and in terms of reason, it does not work.

古文：昔秘书监薛谓等以为朝日以朔，夕月以朏。卿等意谓朔朏、二分，何者为是？ 
现代文：过去，秘书监薛谓等人认为，每月初一早上祭祀朝日，每月初三晚上祭祀夕月，你们认为初一和初三和春分、秋分，哪种办法为好？ 
English: In the past, Secretary Supervisor Xue Zhizhe and others believed that the morning sun should be sacrificed in the morning of the first day of each month, and the evening moon should be sacrificed in the evening of the first three days of each month. Which method do you think is better for the first day of the month, the first three days of the month, the vernal equinox, and the autumnal equinox?

古文：尚书游明根等请用朔朏，从之。
现代文：尚书游明根等人请求初一、初三祭祀，孝文帝批准实行。
English: Shang Shuyou Minggen and others requested the first and third day of the New Year's festival, and Emperor Xiaowen approved the implementation.

古文：丙辰，魏有司上言，求卜祥日。
现代文：丙辰，北魏有关部门上书孝文帝，请求占卜吉祥的日子。
English: The relevant departments of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent a letter to Emperor Xiaowen, asking him to predict the auspicious day.

古文：诏曰： 筮日求吉，既乖敬事之志，又违永慕之心；今直用晦日。 
现代文：孝文帝下诏令说： 用占卜的方法决定吉祥的日子，这样做，既违背了谨慎敬业的原则，也伤害了永远怀念亲人的感情。现在就直接使用每月的最后一天。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued a decree saying, "Using divination to determine the auspicious day is not only against the principle of prudence and dedication, but also hurts the feelings of forever missing relatives. Now, use the last day of the month directly."

古文：九月，丁丑夜，帝宿于庙，帅群臣哭已，帝易服缟冠、革带、黑屦，侍臣易服黑介帻、白绢单衣、革带、乌履，遂哭尽乙夜。
现代文：九月，丁丑夜晚，孝文帝住在皇家祖庙里，率领文武百官哀哭完毕，孝文帝换上祭服，戴上素色帽子，腰束皮带，脚穿黑色鞋子，其余的文武官员们也都换上祭服，戴上黑色帽子，穿上白色绢丝单衣，腰束皮带，脚穿黑鞋。于是哀哭直到二更的时候。
English: In September, on a gloomy evening, Emperor Xiaowen was staying at the Royal Ancestral Temple. After he and the hundred officials of the civil and military forces had finished weeping, Emperor Xiaowen changed into ceremonial clothes, put on a plain-colored hat, a belt around his waist, and black shoes on his feet. The other officials of the civil and military forces also changed into ceremonial clothes, put on black hats, and white silk blouses, belts around their waists, and black shoes on their feet. So they wept until two o'clock.

古文：戊子晦，帝易祭服，缟冠素纰、白布深衣、麻绳履，侍臣去帻易臽。
现代文：戊子晦，孝文帝脱下白带滚边的帽子、上下一体白布做的连裤衣服，以及黑色麻鞋等祭祀服装。
English: On the eve of the festival, Emperor Xiaowen took off his white-banded cap, white trousers, and black hemp shoes.

古文：既祭，出庙，帝立哭。
现代文：文武官员们也跟着脱下黑色帽子，换上白纱帽子。
English: The civil and military officials also took off their black hats and put on white gauze hats.

古文：久之，乃还。冬，十月，魏明堂、太庙成。
现代文：祭祀典礼完成后，退出祭庙，孝文帝站在那里痛哭，过了很久，才起程回宫。冬季十月，北魏明堂、太庙落成。
English: After the completion of the sacrificial ceremony, Emperor Xiaowen left the temple and stood there crying bitterly. It took him a long time to return to the palace. In October of the winter, the Northern Wei Ming Hall and the Imperial Temple were completed.

古文：庚寅，魏主谒永固陵，毁瘠犹甚。
现代文：庚寅，孝文帝祭拜永固陵，因哀伤过度，身体异常削瘦衰弱。
English: Emperor Go-In and Emperor Xiaowen worship the Yonggong Mausoleum, and due to excessive grief, their bodies are abnormally thin and weak.

古文：司空穆亮谏曰： 陛下祥练已阕，号慕如始。
现代文：于是，司空穆亮规劝孝文帝说： 陛下服丧已经行过了一周年，悲哀痛苦之情，仍然和亲人刚刚去世时一样。
English: As a result, Siku Mu Liang advised Emperor Xiaowen, saying, "The first anniversary of your Majesty's funeral has passed, and the feelings of sadness and pain are still the same as when your relative just passed away.

古文：王者为天地所子，为万民父母，未有子过哀而父母不戚，父母忧而子独悦豫者也。
现代文：君王，是天地神灵的儿子，是万民的父母。从来没有儿子过于悲伤而父母心里不难受的情况，也没有父母过于忧虑而儿子单独高兴快乐的情况。
English: The king is the son of the gods of heaven and earth, the parent of all people. There has never been a situation where the son is too sad and the parents are not upset, nor a situation where the parents are too worried and the son is happy alone.

古文：今和气不应，风旱为灾，愿陛下袭轻服，御常膳，銮舆时动，咸秩百神，庶使天人交庆。 
现代文：如今，我们境内气候反常，狂风、大旱造成大灾，希望陛下能改穿轻便的服装，使饭量恢复到正常水平，乘坐辇车经常出宫走动走动，按照顺序祭祀百神，以使苍天和百姓交相庆幸。 
English: Nowadays, the climate in our country is abnormal, with violent winds and droughts causing great disasters. I hope that His Majesty can change to light clothing, restore the amount of meals to a normal level, often go out of the palace in a carriage, and worship the hundred gods in order, so that the heavens and the people can celebrate each other.

古文：诏曰： 孝悌之至，无所不通。
现代文：孝文帝下诏说： 孝敬父母与友爱兄弟达到极点，就没有什么不能感通。
English: Emperor Xiaowen decreed: When filial piety to parents and brotherly love have reached their peak, there is nothing that cannot be understood.

古文：今飘风、旱气，皆诚慕未浓，幽显无感也。
现代文：如今，狂风肆虐，大旱逼迫，都是由于我的诚心还不够虔笃，阴间和阳间没有得到感应所致。
English: Today, the raging winds and the impending drought are all due to the fact that my sincerity is not pious enough, and I have not been able to feel the yin and yang.

古文：所言过哀之咎，谅为未衷。 
现代文：说这些灾难是由于哀痛所导致，恐怕并不合适。 
English: To say that these disasters are caused by grief is probably not appropriate.

古文：十一月，己未朔，魏主禫于太和庙，兗冕以祭。
现代文：十一月，己未朔，孝文帝在太和庙举行脱下丧服的典礼。
English: In November, before the new year, Emperor Xiaowen took off his mourning clothes in a ceremony at the Taihe Temple.

古文：既而服黑介帻，素纱深衣，拜陵而还。
现代文：接着改穿了服装，他头戴黑色帽子，身穿由白色纱做的上下连为一体的连裤装，祭拜完冯太后的陵墓后返回宫中。
English: He then changed his attire, donning a black cap and trousers made of white yarn, and returned to the palace after paying his respects at Empress Feng's mausoleum.

古文：癸亥，冬至，魏主祀圜丘，遂祀明堂，还，至太和庙，乃入。
现代文：癸亥，冬至，孝文帝前往平城南郊天坛祭礼，接着，又到了明堂进行祭祀，回宫途中，又到了太和庙，然后才回来。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, Emperor Xiaowen went to the Temple of Heaven in the southern suburb of Pingcheng for the festival, and then went to the Ming Hall for the sacrifice. On his way back to the palace, he went to the Taihe Temple, and then came back.

古文：甲子，临太华殿，服通天冠，绛纱袍，以飨群臣。乐县而不作。
现代文：甲子，孝文帝登临太华殿，头戴冕旒，身穿礼服，设宴款待文武百官，设置乐器，但没有演奏。
English: The first son, Emperor Xiaowen, arrived at the Taihua Palace, wearing a crown and ceremonial robes. He hosted a banquet for the military and civilian officials, and set up musical instruments, but there was no performance.

古文：丁卯，服兗冕，辞太和庙，帅百官奉神主迁于新庙。
现代文：丁卯，孝文帝戴着通天帽，身穿衮龙袍，向太和庙辞别，率领文武百官把供奉祖先的牌位迎送到新落成的皇家祖庙。
English: Dingwu, Emperor Xiaowen, wearing a top hat and a dragon robe, bade farewell to the Taihe Temple and led hundreds of civil and military officials to welcome the plaques dedicated to the ancestors to the newly completed royal ancestral temple.

古文：乙亥，魏大定官品。
现代文：乙亥，北魏朝廷制定了完整的官员等级制度。
English: At the end of the 19th century, the Northern Wei Dynasty established a complete official hierarchy.

古文：戊戌，考诸牧守。
现代文：戊戌，又对各州各郡的州郡长们进行了考核检验。
English: In addition, an assessment test was carried out on the county governors of each county in each state.

古文：魏假通直散骑常侍李彪等来聘。
现代文：北魏的假通直散骑常侍李彪等人来访。
English: Li Biao and others from the Northern Wei Dynasty visited.

古文：魏旧制，群臣季冬朝贺，服袴褶行事，谓之小岁；丙戌，诏罢之。
现代文：北魏旧有的制度规定，文武百官在深冬时节朝贺时，要穿短袄短裤前来，一般称为 小岁 。丙戍，下诏废除这一制度。
English: The old system of the Northern Wei Dynasty stipulates that the civil and military officials should wear short-sleeved shorts when they come to congratulate in the late winter season, which is generally called Xiaolai.

古文：十二月，壬辰，魏迁社于内城之西。
现代文：十二月，壬辰，北魏把祭祀农神的祭坛迁到平城内城西边。
English: In December, the Northern Wei Dynasty moved the altar dedicated to the farmer god to the west side of the inner city of Pingcheng.

古文：魏以安定王休为太傅，刘郡王简为太保。
现代文：北魏任命安定王拓跋休为太傅，齐郡王拓跋简为太保。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Tuobaoxu of Anhui Province as Taifu, and Wang Tuobaoxu of Qi Province as Taibo.

古文：高丽王琏卒，寿百馀岁。
现代文：高句丽国王高琏去世，享年一百多岁。
English: Goguryeo's King Goguryeo passed away at the age of over one hundred.

古文：魏主为之制素委貌，布深衣，举哀于东郊；遣谒者仆射李安上策赠太傅，谥曰康。
现代文：孝文帝为高琏特地做了一种素委帽和布质连裤服装，穿上在平城东郊举行哀悼祭祀。又派遣谒者仆射李安上前去高句丽，宣布追赠高琏为太傅，谥号康。
English: Emperor Xiaowen specially made a kind of vegetarian hat and cloth trousers for Gao Qi, and put it on to hold a mourning ceremony in the eastern suburb of Pingcheng. He also sent Gao's servant Li An to go to Goguryeo and announced that Gao Qi would be posthumously awarded the title of Taifu, and his posthumous name would be Kang.

古文：孙云嗣立。
现代文：接着，高琏的孙子高云继承了王位。
English: Then, Gao Jun's grandson Gao Yun succeeded to the throne.

古文：乙酉，魏主始迎春于东郊。
现代文：乙酉，孝文帝开始到平城南郊举行迎春典礼。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen began to hold the Spring Festival ceremony in the southern suburb of Pingcheng.

古文：自是四时迎气皆亲之。
现代文：从此以后，北魏每年举行迎接四季的活动时，孝文帝都亲自主持。
English: From then on, Emperor Xiaowen personally presided over the annual activities held by the Northern Wei Dynasty to welcome the four seasons.

古文：初，魏世祖克统万及姑臧，获雅乐器服工人，并存之。
现代文：当初，北魏太武帝攻克了统万和姑臧，将得到的雅乐乐器、乐服、乐师，全都保留了下来。
English: At the beginning, the Northern Wei Emperor Taivu conquered Tongwan and Guzheng, and all the aristocratic musical instruments, musical clothing, and musicians were preserved.

古文：其后累朝无留意者，乐工浸尽，音制多亡。
现代文：从这以后，经过了几朝却没有人对他们关心留意，乐师慢慢死尽，很多乐谱也都散失。
English: Since then, several dynasties have passed, but no one has paid attention to them, the musicians have slowly died out, and many musical scores have been lost.

古文：高祖始命有司访民间晓音律者，议定雅乐，当时无能知者。
现代文：这时，孝文帝开始命令有关部门，到民间去查访通晓音乐的人，商议制定皇家高雅的音乐，可是，民间当时已经没有人能懂了。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaowen began to order the relevant departments to visit the people who were familiar with music to discuss the formulation of royal elegant music, but at that time, no one could understand the people.

古文：然金、石、羽旄之饰，稍壮丽于往时矣。
现代文：不过，皇家仪仗上的金银、宝石、羽毛旗帜等装饰物，却比以前各个时代都要齐备、华丽。
English: However, the gold, silver, jewels, feather flags and other decorations of the royal ceremonial are more complete and gorgeous than in previous eras.

古文：辛亥，诏简置乐官，使修其职，又命中书监高闾参定。
现代文：辛亥，诏命选拔设置乐官让他整理音乐，又命令中书监高闾参与审定。
English: Xinhai, the imperial edict ordered the selection of a music official to let him organize the music, and also ordered the Chinese librarian Gao Jun to participate in the approval.

古文：初，晋张斐、杜预共注《律》三十卷，自泰始以来用之。
现代文：当初，西晋帝国的张斐、杜预共同对三十卷的《律》进行了注解，从晋武帝泰始年间以来就一直使用此注本。
English: At the beginning, Zhang Fei and Du Yueh of the Western Jin Empire jointly annotated the thirty-volume "Law," and have been using this annotation since the first year of Emperor Wu of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：《律》文简约，或一章之中，两家所处，生杀顿异，临时斟酌，吏得为奸。
现代文：《律》行文简明扼要，有的在一章中，张斐和杜预的注解恰恰相反，对一个人，按这个注本可以判生，按另一个注本就可以判死，而这一切则需要审判官临时斟酌情形，加以选择，这样一来，也使官吏们贪赃枉法、滥用职权获得了机会。
English: The "Law" is concise and concise. In some chapters, Zhang Fei and Du Yu's annotations are exactly the opposite. A person can be sentenced to life according to this annotation, and can be sentenced to death according to another annotation. And all of this requires the judge to consider the situation at the time and make a choice. In this way, it also gives officials the opportunity to corrupt the law and abuse their powers.

古文：上留心法令，诏狱官详正旧注。
现代文：南齐武帝十分注意法律条令，他颁下诏令，命令狱官详细订正以前张斐和杜预的旧注。
English: Emperor Nanqiwu paid great attention to legal regulations. He issued a decree, ordering the prison officials to revise the old notes of Zhang Fei and Du Yu in detail.

古文：七年，尚书删定郎王植集定二注，表奏之。
现代文：永明七年，尚书删定郎王植将张斐和杜预二家注解集中订正之后，上表奏报。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, after Wang Zhi, the editor of Shangshu, revised Zhang Fei and Du Yu's two commentaries, the above table was reported.

古文：诏公卿、八座参议考正，竟陵王子良总其事；众议异同不能壹者，制旨平决。
现代文：武帝下诏，命令公卿和八座在一起讨论、修正，由竟陵王萧子良总揽全局。对于大家意见不能取得一致的地方，奏报武帝裁决。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict, ordering the nobles to discuss and amend the matter with the eight emperors, and Xiao Ziliang, the king of the imperial mausoleum, to handle the overall situation. If the opinions of everyone could not reach a consensus, the Emperor Wu's ruling would be reported.

古文：是岁，书成。
现代文：这一年，此书修正完毕。
English: This year, the book was amended.

古文：廷尉山阴孔稚珪上表，以为： 《律》文虽定，苟用失其平，则法书徒明于帙里，冤魂犹结于狱中。
现代文：廷尉山阴人孔稚又上书武帝，认为： 《律》文虽然已经确定下来，但是，如果使用起来审判并不公正，那么，这部法律也就只不过是白白地放在书套里，冤屈的灵魂也还仍然被滞留在牢狱。
English: The courtier and mountain hermit Kongzhi also wrote to Emperor Wu, saying: Although the "Law" text has been determined, if the use of the trial is not fair, then this law will only be placed in the book cover in vain, and the wronged soul will still be detained in prison.

古文：窃寻古之名流，多有法学；今之士子，莫肯为业。
现代文：我私下里曾稽考了古代的知名人士，他们大多都了解法律规章。而现在的读书人，却没有谁肯于把研究执行法律作为自己的事业。
English: I have privately examined eminent men of antiquity, and most of them knew the laws and regulations, but none of the present-day readers are willing to take up the study of law enforcement as their career.

古文：纵有习者，世议所轻，将恐此书永沦走吏之手矣。
现代文：即使是有人研究学习它，也被人们所轻视，因此，将来恐怕这部书也要永远沦落在那些低级官吏手中。
English: Even if someone studies and studies it, it is despised by people, so I am afraid that in the future this book will always fall into the hands of those low-level officials.

古文：今若置《律》助教，依《五经》例，国子生有欲读者，策试高第，即加擢用，以补内外之官，庶几士流有所劝慕。 
现代文：我建议，现在设立《律》文助教，依照《五经》的办法，国子学校的学生中，有想要研究法律的，只要能考试及格，就可依照考试成绩，依次提升任用，用以补充朝廷内外官职的空额，希望这样一来能对读书人及在职的官吏们有所鼓励和吸引。 
English: I suggest that a "Law" assistant professor be set up now. According to the "Five Classics" method, among the students of the Guozi School who want to study law, as long as they can pass the examination, they can be promoted in order according to the examination results, to supplement the vacancies in official positions inside and outside the imperial court. I hope that this will encourage and attract readers and current officials.

古文：诏从其请，事竟不行。
现代文：武帝下诏，要求按照孔稚的建议办，可是，此事竟然没有实行得了。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict demanding that the matter be handled according to Kongzhu's suggestion, but the matter was not implemented.

古文：初，林邑王范阳迈，世相承袭，夷人范当根纯攻夺其国，遣使献金簟等物。
现代文：当初，林邑国王范阳迈，世代承袭王位。后来，夷族首领范当根纯攻占了林邑国，接着，范当根纯又派使节向南齐进贡用金丝编织的席子等东西。
English: At first, Fan Yangmai, the king of Linyi, inherited the throne from generation to generation. Later, the leader of the Yi people, Fan Danggenchun, conquered Linyi Province. Then, Fan Danggenchun also sent envoys to Nanqi to bring tribute such as mats woven with gold wire.

古文：诏以当根纯为都督缘海诸军事、林邑王。
现代文：武帝下诏任命范当根纯为都督缘海诸军事和林邑王。
English: Emperor Wu issued an imperial edict appointing Fan Danggenchun as the military governor of the Eastern Sea Provinces and the king of Lin County.

古文：魏冀州刺史咸阳王禧入朝。有司奏： 冀州民三千人称禧清明有惠政，请世胙冀州。 
现代文：北魏冀州刺史、咸阳王拓跋禧朝见孝文帝，有关部门上奏说： 冀州三千老百姓，一致称赞拓跋禧清廉公正，施行德政，请求陛下允许他世代承袭冀州刺史的官职。 
English: The history of Northern Wei and Jizhou and the accession of Xianyang King Tuoba Xi to the throne of Emperor Xiaowen, the relevant departments reported: The three thousand people of Jizhou unanimously praised Tuoba Xi for his integrity and fairness, for his implementation of moral government, and asked His Majesty to allow him to inherit the official post of the history of Jizhou for generations.

古文：魏主诏曰： 利建虽古，未必今宜；经野由君，理非下情。 
现代文：孝文帝颁下诏令说： 以前建立的世袭制度虽宜于古代，但用在今天，恐怕不一定合适。分疆割土，要由君王作主，按理说不是臣属的请求所能决定的。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued a decree saying: Although the hereditary system established in the past is suitable for ancient times, it may not be suitable for use today. The division of territory should be decided by the monarch, and it is not possible to decide on the request of a subject.

古文：以禧为司州牧、都督司、豫等六州诸军事。
现代文：于是，改命拓跋禧为司州牧，都督司、豫等六州诸军事。
English: As a result, he changed his name to Tuoba Zhi and became the provincial governor, the governor of the capital, and the military commander of six provinces.

古文：初，魏文明太后宠任宦者略阳苻承祖，官至侍中，知都曹事，赐以不死之诏。
现代文：当初，北魏冯太后宠爱信任宦官略阳人苻承祖，官位一直做到了侍中和知都曹事，同时，冯太后还赏赐给他一道免死的诏令。
English: At the beginning of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Empress Dowager Feng loved and trusted eunuch Liang Yangren Zongcheng Zu, and the official rank has always achieved the position of attendant and scholar. At the same time, Empress Dowager Feng also awarded him a death-free edict.

古文：太后殂，承祖坐赃应死，魏主原之，削职禁锢于家，仍除悖义将军，封佞浊子，月馀而卒。
现代文：冯太后去世后，苻承祖因为贪赃枉法应该处以死刑，孝文帝宽宥赦免了他，只是撤销了他的官职，将他关在自己的私宅里，还给了他一个悖义将军的官衔，封他为佞浊子。苻承祖一个多月后就去世了。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Feng, Emperor Xiaowen forgave and pardoned Yu Chengzu, who should have been sentenced to death for corruption. He only revoked his official position, locked him up in his private home, gave him the official title of General of Perfidy, and made him a mule. Yu Chengzu died more than a month later.

古文：承祖方用事，亲姻争趋附以求利。
现代文：在苻承祖当权时，他的亲戚争相跑来依附他，以此谋求自己的私利。
English: When his father was in power, his relatives scrambled to cling to him for their own benefit.

古文：其从母杨氏为姚氏妇独否，常谓承祖之母曰： 姊虽有一时之荣，不若妹有无忧之乐。 
现代文：苻承祖的姨母杨氏嫁给了姚家，只有她不这样做，她经常对苻承祖的母亲说： 姐姐你虽然有一时的荣华富贵，却不如妹妹我有无忧无虑的乐趣。 
English: Gong Chengzu's aunt, Ms. Yang, married into the Yao family. She was the only one who did not do so. She often said to Gong Chengzu's mother: "Sister, although you were once rich and noble, you are not as good as my sister. I have carefree fun.

古文：姊与之衣服，多不受；强与之，则曰： 我夫家世贫，美衣服使人不安。 
现代文：苻承祖的母亲送给她衣服时，她多半都不肯收下。如果强行给她，她崐就说： 我丈夫家世代贫穷，穿上华丽的衣服会让我们内心不得安宁。 
English: When Zou Chengzu's mother gave her clothes, she mostly refused to accept them. If she was forced to give them to her, she would say: My husband's family has been poor for generations, and putting on gorgeous clothes would make our hearts restless.

古文：不得已，或受而埋之。
现代文：在迫不得已情况下，她收下来，但还是把它们用土埋了起来。
English: Under pressure, she took them down, but buried them in the ground.

古文：与之奴婢，则曰： 我家无食，不能饲也。 
现代文：苻承祖的母亲又送给她奴仆和婢女，她就说： 我家没有多余的粮食，不能养活她们。 
English: And his mother gave unto her young men and maidens; and she said, My house is not able to bear, because there is no bread.

古文：常著弊衣，自执劳苦。
现代文：她经常穿着破旧的衣服，凡事总是自己亲自动手去做，不辞劳苦。
English: She often wore worn-out clothes and always did everything with her own hands, sparing no effort.

古文：承祖遣车迎之，不肯起；强使人抱置车上，则大哭曰： 尔欲杀我！ 
现代文：苻承祖有一次曾派车辆迎接她，她就是不肯上车。苻承祖让婢女们强抱她上车，她就大哭着说： 你想要杀我！ 
English: On one occasion, Zou Chengzu sent a car to meet her, but she refused to get on. Zou Chengzu had her maids force her onto the car, and she burst into tears and said: "You want to kill me!"

古文：由是苻氏内外号为 痴姨 。
现代文：从此，苻家里外外的人都叫她为 痴姨 。
English: From then on, people at home and abroad called her "stupid aunt."

古文：及承祖败，有司执其二姨至殿廷。其一姨伏法。
现代文：苻承祖案发，有关部门将苻承祖的两个姨妈抓了起来，送到金銮殿，其中一位姨妈被斩首了。
English: In the case of Gong Cheng Zu, the relevant departments arrested Gong Cheng Zu's two aunts and sent them to the Golden Pavilion. One of the aunts was beheaded.

古文：帝见姚氏姨贫弊，特赦之。
现代文：孝文帝看到姚家姨妈那么贫寒，特别赦免了她。
English: Emperor Xiaowen saw that Aunt Yao was so poor and pardoned her specially.

古文：李惠之诛也，思皇后之昆弟皆死。
现代文：北魏诛杀李惠时，李惠的女儿思皇后李贵人的亲兄弟也都全被处死。
English: When Li Hui was killed by the Northern Wei Dynasty, all the brothers and sisters of Li Hui's daughter, Queen Si, were also executed.

古文：惠从弟凤为安乐王长乐主簿，长乐坐不轨，诛，凤亦坐死。
现代文：李惠的堂弟李凤曾经任安乐王拓跋长乐的主簿，后来，拓跋长乐因图谋不轨罪被处死，李凤也受到牵连，诛杀。
English: Li Hui's cousin, Li Feng, once served as the head of Tuoba Changle, the king of Anle. Later, Tuoba Changle was executed for plotting a crime, and Li Feng was also implicated and killed.

古文：凤子安祖等四人逃匿获免，遇赦乃出。
现代文：李凤的儿子李安祖等四人逃亡躲藏起来，才免于一死，后来遇到朝廷大赦，才得以露面。
English: Four people, including Li Feng's son, Li Anzu, fled and went into hiding, only to be spared from death. Later, they were able to show their faces after receiving an amnesty from the imperial court.

古文：既而魏主访舅氏存者，得安祖等，皆封候，加将军。
现代文：过了一阵，孝文帝寻访舅父家现在仍然活着的亲人，查出了李安祖等人，于是，给他们全都封了候爵，加授将军官衔。
English: After a while, Emperor Xiaowen visited his uncle's relatives who were still alive and found out about Li Anzu and others, so he knighted them all and gave them the rank of general.

古文：既而引见，谓曰： 卿之先世，再获罪于时。
现代文：不久，孝文帝又接见李安祖等四人，对他们说： 你们的先人，当年曾两次犯罪。
English: Soon after, Emperor Xiaowen met with Li Anzu and four others and said to them, "Your ancestors committed two crimes that year.

古文：王者设官以待贤才，由外戚而举者，季世之法也。
现代文：君王设立官职，是要任用贤能、有才干的人，因为皇亲国戚而被推举做官，是末朝乱世才有的情况。
English: When a monarch established an official position, it was to appoint a virtuous and talented person, who was chosen to be an official because he was a relative of the emperor. This was only the case at the end of the dynasty and during the turbulent times.

古文：卿等既无异能，且可还家。
现代文：你们既然没有什么特别的才能，暂且可以回到故乡。
English: Since you don't have any special talents, you can return to your hometown for the time being.

古文：自今外戚无能者视此。 
现代文：从此以后，凡是皇亲国戚没有才能的人，都要照此处理。 
English: From then on, anyone who was not a talented relative of the emperor had to be dealt with in the same way.

古文：后又例降爵为伯，去其军号。
现代文：以后，将四人爵位降为伯，撤销他们将军的名号。
English: Later, the four knighthoods were reduced to knighthoods, and their military titles were revoked.

古文：时人皆以为帝待冯氏太厚，待顾氏太薄；太常高闾尝以为言，帝不听。
现代文：当时的人们都认为，孝文帝待冯太后家过于优厚，而待李氏家过于刻薄。太常高闾为此也曾经为此提过意见，孝文帝没听从。
English: People at that time all believed that Emperor Xiaowen treated Empress Dowager Feng's family too generously and treated the Li family too harshly. Emperor Gao Zheng also made suggestions to this end, but Emperor Xiaowen did not listen.

古文：及世宗尊宠外家，乃以安祖弟兴祖为中山太守，追赠李惠开府仪同三司、中山公，谥曰庄。
现代文：直到宣武帝时期，才追尊、宠信外祖母娘家人，任命李安祖的弟弟李兴祖为中山太守，追赠李惠为开府仪同三司、中山公爵，谥号庄。
English: It was not until the time of Emperor Xuanwu that the family of his grandmother's daughter was honored and favored, and Li Xingzu, the younger brother of Li Anzu, was appointed as the governor of Zhongshan, and Li Hui was posthumously awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, the Duke of Zhongshan, and the title of Zhuangzhuang.

古文：世祖武皇帝中永明十年
现代文：永明十年
English: 10 years of Sun Life

古文：春，正月，戊午朔，魏主朝飨群臣于太华殿，悬而不乐。
现代文：春季正月，戊午朔，北魏孝文帝在太华殿大宴文武百官，乐器摆在那里，但未演奏。
English: In the first month of spring, at the crack of dawn, Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty held a grand banquet for hundreds of military and civilian officials at the Taihua Palace. Musical instruments were placed there, but were not played.

古文：己未，魏主宗祀显祖于明堂以配上帝，遂登灵台以观云物，降居青阳左个，布政事。
现代文：己未，北魏孝文帝在明堂祭祀献文帝，把献文帝的牌位放在天帝牌位旁边，共享香火。
English: In the past, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen held a sacrifice for the Emperor Xianwen in the Ming Hall, and placed the tablet of the Emperor Xianwen next to the tablet of the Emperor of Heaven to share the incense.

古文：自是每朔依以为常。
现代文：然后登上灵台，开始观察太阳四周云气。
English: Then he climbed onto the platform and began to observe the clouds around the sun.

古文：散骑常侍庾荜等聘于魏，魏主使侍郎成淹引荜等于馆南，瞻望行礼。
现代文：下来后，停留在东堂北部偏殿，处理国家大事。从此以后，每月初一都举行这项活动，形成惯例。南齐散骑常侍庾荜等人出访北魏，孝文帝派侍郎成淹，带着庾荜等人来到宾馆南边，在远处看孝文帝在明堂举行祭祀仪式。
English: After coming down, he stayed in the north hall of the east hall to deal with national events. Since then, this activity has been held on the first day of every month, forming a practice. Nanzhi strolling attendants and others visited the Northern Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowen sent his attendant, Chengyun, and brought the attendants and others to the south side of the hotel to watch Emperor Xiaowen hold a sacrificial ceremony in the Ming Hall in the distance.

古文：辛酉，魏始以太祖配南郊。
现代文：辛酉，北魏第一次把太祖道武帝的灵位作为南郊天神的配享，一同祭祀。
English: For the first time, the Northern Wei Dynasty regarded the spiritual position of the great-grandfather Emperor Daowu as the distribution of the gods of the southern suburbs, and they worshiped together.

古文：魏主命群臣议行次。
现代文：孝文帝命令文武百官讨论水、木、金、火、土五行的顺序问题。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ordered hundreds of civil and military officials to discuss the order of the five elements: water, wood, metal, fire and earth.

古文：中书监高闾议，以为： 帝王莫不以中原为正统，不以世数为与夺，善恶为是非。
现代文：中书监高闾发表见解，认为： 历代帝王，没有不把中原作为立国的正统的，并不崐完全把传世多少作为努力竞争的对象，把君王的善恶作为是与非的标准。
English: Gao Yao, the book supervisor of the People's Republic of China, expressed his opinion, saying: The emperors of all ages have not failed to regard the Central Plains as the country's founding orthodoxy, have not completely regarded the lineage as the object of competition, and have regarded the king's good and evil as the standard of right and wrong.

古文：故桀、纣至虐，不废夏、商之历；厉、惠至昏，无害周、晋之录。
现代文：因此，夏桀和商纣王虽然那么暴虐，但并没有被排除在夏、商王朝之外。周厉王与晋惠帝虽然那么昏庸，也没有妨碍他们是周、晋的帝王之一。
English: Therefore, although the Xia and Shang dynasties were so brutal, they were not excluded from the Xia and Shang dynasties, and although the Zhou Li and Jin Hui dynasties were so dull, it did not prevent them from being one of the emperors of Zhou and Jin.

古文：晋承魏为金，赵承晋为水，燕承赵为木，秦承燕为火。
现代文：晋承继曹魏是金德，赵继承晋为水德，燕承继赵为木德，秦继燕为火德。
English: Jin succeeded Cao Wei as Jin De, Zhao succeeded Jin as Water De, Yan succeeded Zhao as Wood De, and Qin succeeded Yan as Fire De.

古文：秦之既亡，魏乃称制玄朔；且魏之得姓，出于轩辕；臣愚以为宜为土德。 
现代文：秦灭亡之后，魏就在北方正式建立，而且，魏皇家拓跋这一姓氏，是出自轩辕帝那里。臣认为，魏应该是土德。 
English: After the death of Qin, Wei was officially established in the north, and the surname of Wei Royal Tuoba came from Emperor Xuan Zang. The minister believed that Wei should be German.

古文：秘书丞李彪、著作郎崔光等议，以为： 神元与晋武往来通好，至于桓、穆，志辅晋室，是则司马祚终于郏鄏，而拓跋受命于云代。
现代文：秘书丞李彪、著作郎崔光等人认为： 我们神元皇帝和晋武帝来往密切，关系不错，后来，到了桓帝和穆帝，他们仍然一心辅佐晋王朝。
English: Li Biao, the secretary, Cui Guang, the author, and others believed: Our Emperor Shenyuan and Emperor Jinwu had close contacts and a good relationship. Later, when it came to Emperor Kuan and Emperor Mu, they still supported the Jin Dynasty.

古文：昔秦并天下，汉犹比之共工，卒继周为火德；况刘、石、苻氏，地褊世促，魏承其弊，岂可舍晋而为土邪？ 
现代文：这就说明司马氏的命运在郏已经告终，而拓跋是在云中、代郡接受天命兴起来的一支。以前，秦王朝统一天下，汉王朝把秦王比作共工，而最终直接继承了周王朝，为火德。何况刘渊、石勒、苻氏所建的王朝，国土狭小，世代短促，魏所接受的混乱局面比汉朝继承秦朝的情况都不如，怎么能够舍弃晋王朝，而定为土德呢？ 
English: This shows that the fate of the Sima clan has come to an end in Handan, while the Tuoba clan is a branch that rose up in Yunzhong and Dai County to accept the fate of heaven. Previously, the Qin Dynasty unified the country, the Han Dynasty compared the Qin King to a co-worker, and eventually directly succeeded the Zhou Dynasty, as a fire god. Moreover, the dynasties built by Liu Yuan, Shilou, and the Handan clan have a small territory and a short generation, and the chaotic situation accepted by Wei is not as good as the situation of the Han Dynasty inheriting the Qin Dynasty. How can we abandon the Jin Dynasty and make it

古文：司空穆亮等皆请从彪等议。
现代文：司空穆亮等人都请求采纳李彪等人的建议。
English: Siku Mu Liang and others have requested that the proposal of Li Biao and others be adopted.

古文：壬戌，诏承晋为水德，神申、腊辰。
现代文：壬戌，孝文帝下诏，规定北魏继承晋王朝为水德，接着规定，年初第一个申日祭祀祖先，而年终最后一个辰日，举行腊祭。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict stipulating that the Northern Wei Dynasty would succeed the Jin Dynasty. He also stipulated that the first day of the year should be dedicated to the ancestors, and the last day of the year should be held as a wax festival.

古文：甲子，魏罢租课。
现代文：甲子，北魏下令，严禁人们赤背裸体。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered that people were strictly forbidden to be naked.

古文：魏宗室及功臣子孙封王者众，乙丑，诏： 自非烈祖之胄，馀王皆降为公，公降为候，而品如旧。 
现代文：北魏皇室以及功臣的子孙，被封为王爵的人有很多。乙丑，孝文帝下诏说： 除了烈祖的后裔，其余的所有王爵全都降为公，公爵则降为侯爵，品级一仍其旧。 
English: In addition, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict: Except for the descendants of the martyrs, all the remaining dukes were reduced to dukes, and dukes were reduced to marquesses, and the first rank remained the same.

古文：蛮王桓诞亦降为公；唯上党王长孙观，以其祖有大功，特不降。
现代文：蛮王桓诞也被降为公。只有上党王长孙观，因为他的祖先立过显赫的功劳，所以，特别照顾不降爵位。
English: The barbarian king Kansatsu was also demoted to court rank. Only the upper party king Chosun Kan, because his ancestors had made outstanding contributions, took special care not to be demoted.

古文：丹阳王刘昶封齐郡公，加号宋王。
现代文：丹杨王刘昶降为齐郡公，特别加号为宋王。
English: The King of Danyang, Liu Ye, was demoted to King of Qi County, with a special additional title of King of Song.

古文：魏旧制，四晨祭庙皆用中节，丙子，始诏用孟月，择日而祭。
现代文：北魏旧制度规定，每年四季祭祀，都要在季中月份举行。丙子，孝文帝下诏，命令以后改为在每季度的第一个月中，选择吉祥的日子祭祀。
English: According to the old system of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the annual four-season sacrifice should be held in the middle month of the season. However, Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict, and the order was later changed to choose the auspicious day for the sacrifice in the first month of each quarter.

古文：以竟陵王子良领尚书令。
现代文：南齐任命竟陵王萧子良兼任尚书令。
English: Nanqi appointed Xiao Ziliang, the king of Jingling, as Shang Shuling.

古文：魏主毁太华殿，为太极殿。
现代文：孝文帝下令，拆毁太华殿，改建太极殿。
English: Emperor Xiaowen ordered the Taihua Hall to be demolished and the Taiji Hall to be rebuilt.

古文：二月，戊子，徙居永乐宫。以尚书李冲领将作大匠，与司空穆亮共营之。
现代文：戊子，孝文帝迁居到永乐宫，任命尚书李冲兼任将作大匠，和司空穆亮一同主持建筑工程工事。
English: Emperor Wu Zi and Emperor Xiaowen moved to Yongle Palace, and appointed Shangshu Li Chong to be the grand master, and Siku Mu Liang to preside over the construction project.

古文：辛卯，魏罢寒食乡飨。
现代文：辛卯，北魏废除寒食节祭祀祖先的仪式。
English: Xinwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty abolished the ceremony of sacrificing ancestors during the Cold Food Festival.

古文：甲午，魏主始朝日于东郊。
现代文：甲午，孝文帝开始在平城东郊主持祭日仪式。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Emperor Xiaowen began to preside over the festival ceremony in the eastern suburb of Pingcheng.

古文：自是朝日、夕月皆亲之。
现代文：从此以后，无论是祭日仪式，还是祭月仪式，孝文帝都亲自前来主持。
English: From then on, Emperor Xiaowen himself came to preside over both the festival day ceremony and the festival month ceremony.

古文：丁酉，诏祀尧于平阳，舜于广宁，禹于安邑，周公于洛阳，皆令牧守执事；其宣尼之庙，祀于中书省。
现代文：丁酉，孝文帝下诏，命令在平阳祭祀尧帝，在广宁祭祀舜帝，在安邑祭祀大禹，在洛阳祭祀周公，这些祭祀活动，都要由当地地方官员主持进行。至于孔子庙的祭礼，则要在中书省举行。
English: Emperor Dingwu and Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict, ordering that the sacrifices should be held in Pingyang for Emperor Shun, in Guangning for Emperor Shun, in An'yur for Emperor Dayu, and in Luoyang for Emperor Zhou. These sacrificial activities should be presided over by local officials. As for the festival of the Confucius Temple, it should be held in the province of Zhongshu.

古文：丁未，改谥宣尼曰文圣尼父，帝亲行拜祭。
现代文：丁未，将孔子的谥号宣尼改称为文圣尼父，孝文帝拓跋宏亲自前来中书省祭拜。
English: Ding Wei changed the name of Confucius's nickname Xuan Ni to Wen Shen Ni Father, and Xiao Wen Di Tuobahong came to worship in Shuzhou in person.

古文：魏旧制，气岁祀天于西郊，魏主与公卿从二千馀骑，戎服绕坛，谓之蹹坛。
现代文：北魏旧制度规定，每年要在平城西郊祭祀天神，皇帝和各公卿，率领二千多骑兵，穿上武装，环绕祭坛进行祭祀，这种祭祀活动称为踏坛。
English: According to the old system of the Northern Wei Dynasty, every year in the western suburb of Pingcheng, the emperor and the nobles would lead more than two thousand cavalrymen to worship the gods, put on weapons, and surround the altar for sacrifice. This kind of sacrificial activity is called stepping on the altar.

古文：明日，复戎服登坛致祀，已又绕坛，谓之绕天。
现代文：第二天，再次穿上武装，登上祭坛开始祭天，祭过之后，再次环绕祭坛行走，称为绕天。
English: The next day, they put on their armor again, ascended the altar, and began to offer sacrifices to heaven. After the sacrifice, they walked around the altar again, which is called circumambulating heaven.

古文：三月，癸酉，诏尽省之。
现代文：三月，癸酉，下诏命令将这一活动全部免去。
English: In March, the emperor issued an order to completely eliminate this activity.

古文：辛巳，魏以高丽五云为督辽海渚军事、辽松公、高句丽王，诏云遣其世子入朝。云辞以疾，遣其从叔升于随使者诣平城。
现代文：辛巳，北魏任命高句丽国王高云为督辽海诸军事、辽东公、高句丽王。诏令高云派他的世子到北魏平城朝见，高云以有病作借口加以崐推辞，而派堂叔高升干随同使节前往平城。
English: Soon after, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the King of Goguryeo, Gao Yun, as the military governor of Liaohai, the ruler of Liaodong, and the King of Goguryeo. The imperial edict ordered Gao Yun to send his heir to the Northern Wei Dynasty, Pingcheng, for a court appearance. Gao Yun used his illness as an excuse to excuse himself, and sent his uncle, Gao Shenggan, to accompany the envoy to Pingcheng.

古文：夏，四月，丁亥朔，魏班新律令，大赦。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁亥朔，北魏朝廷颁布新修订的《律令》，实行大赦。
English: In the summer, in April, the Northern Wei court promulgated the newly amended "Law and Order" and implemented an amnesty.

古文：辛丑，豫章文献王嶷卒，赠假黄钺、都督中外诸军事、丞相，丧礼皆如汉东平献王故事。
现代文：辛丑，南齐豫章文献王萧嶷去世，武帝下令，追赠萧嶷假黄钺和都督中外诸军事、丞相，丧礼规模仪式，完全和汉东平献王刘苍的一样。
English: Xinxiu, Nanqi Yuanzhang Literature Wang Xiaohui passed away, Emperor Wu ordered that Xiaohui be posthumously presented with a fake yellow scepter, and the military and chancellors from all over the world, the scale of the funeral ceremony, completely the same as the Han Dongping presented to King Liu Cang.

古文：嶷性仁谨廉俭，不以财贿为事。
现代文：萧嶷生性仁善、恭谨、廉洁、节俭，从来不追求金钱，不接受贿赂。
English: Xiao Xuan is benevolent, respectful, honest and frugal. He never pursues money and does not accept bribes.

古文：斋库失火，烧荆州还资，评直三千馀万，主局各杖数十而已。
现代文：他自己家的库房发生火灾时，将他从荆州带回家的资产全都烧光了，当时估计约有三千多万，但是，他最后不过责打了库房负责人各几十棍而已。
English: When a fire broke out in his own family's warehouse, all the assets he brought home from Jingzhou were burned out. At that time, it was estimated to be more than 30 million yuan. However, in the end, he only beat the person in charge of the warehouse with dozens of sticks.

古文：疾笃，遗令诸子曰： 才有优劣，位有通塞，运有贫富，此自然之理，无足以相陵侮也。 
现代文：他病得很厉害时，立下遗嘱，命令他的几个儿子说： 才能，有优劣好坏之分；官位，有亨通受阻之分；运气，有贫穷高足之分，这是自然而然的道理，你们所处的位置还不足以让你们仗势欺人。 
English: When he was very ill, he made a will, ordering his sons to say: Talent, there are good and bad points; official position, there are obstacles to success; luck, there are poor and high points. This is a natural truth. Your position is not enough for you to deceive others.

古文：上哀痛特甚，久之，语及嶷，犹歔欷流涕。
现代文：萧嶷去世，武帝万分伤心，直到很久以后，一提起萧嶷，还是抽泣流泪。
English: Xiao Yao passed away, Emperor Wu was extremely sad, until much later, when Xiao Yao was mentioned, he still sobbed and shed tears.

古文：嶷卒之日，第库无见钱，上敕月给嶷第钱百万；终上之世乃省。
现代文：萧嶷去世那天，他家里没有一点儿现钱，武帝下令每月接济萧嶷家一百万钱，直到武帝去世，这种接济才停止。
English: On the day of Xiao Yao's death, his family did not have a single bit of cash. Emperor Wu ordered to give Xiao Yao's family one million yuan every month, and this kind of help did not stop until Emperor Wu died.

古文：五月，己巳，以竟陵王子良为扬州刺史。
现代文：五月，己巳，武帝任命竟陵王萧子良为扬州刺史。
English: In May, Emperor Wu appointed Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum, as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：魏文明太后之丧，使人告于吐谷浑。
现代文：北魏文明太后冯太后去世时，派使节前往吐谷浑汗国报丧。
English: When Empress Dowager Feng of the Northern Wei Dynasty passed away, she sent an envoy to the Kingdom of the Huns in Tuvalu to pay her respects.

古文：吐谷浑王伏连筹拜命不恭，群臣请讨之，魏主不许；又请还其贡物，帝曰： 贡物乃人臣之礼。
现代文：吐谷汗可汗慕容伏连筹在接受北魏报丧的消息时，态度不恭谨，因此，文武百官们请求孝文帝出兵讨伐，孝文帝没有批准。文武百官们又请求将吐谷浑汗国进贡的东西退还回去。孝文帝说： 进贡物品是作为臣属应该具有的礼节。
English: When receiving the news of the death of the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Tugu Khan, Khan Murong Fulen Choe, did not have a respectful attitude. Therefore, the civil and military officials requested Emperor Xiaowen to send troops to fight. Emperor Xiaowen did not approve. The civil and military officials also requested that the tribute items of the Tugu Khanate be returned. Emperor Xiaowen said: Tribute items are the etiquette that should be possessed as a subject.

古文：今而不受，是弃绝之，彼虽欲自新，其路无由矣。 
现代文：如今我们不接受他们的进贡物品，这是继绝与他们的关系，这样一来，他们虽然打算改过自新，也无路可走了。 
English: Now we are not accepting their tributes, this is a severing of ties with them, so they have nowhere to go, even if they want to reform.

古文：因命归洮阳、泥和之俘。
现代文：所以，孝文帝又下令，将在洮阳、泥和俘获的人全部还给吐谷浑汗国。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaowen also ordered that Poyang, Mudan and all the captured people be returned to the Tuyun Khanate.

古文：秋，七月，庚申，吐谷浑遣其世子贺虏头入朝于魏。
现代文：秋季七月，庚申，吐谷浑可汗慕容伏连筹派他的世子慕容贺虏头，到北魏朝廷晋见。
English: In the autumn of July, Goshun, the Tugu Hun Khan, Murong Fulian, sent his heir, Murong Harkutou, to the Northern Wei court to meet Jin.

古文：诏以伏连筹为都督西垂诸军事、西海公、吐谷浑王，遣兼员外散骑常侍张礼使于吐谷浑。
现代文：孝文帝下诏，任命慕容伏连筹为都督西垂诸军事、西海公、吐谷浑王，并派遣兼员外散骑常侍张礼出使吐谷浑汗国。
English: Emperor Xiaowen issued an edict, appointing Murong Fulian as the military governor of Xittu, the governor of the West Sea, and the king of Tuganhun, and dispatched Zhang Li, a non-commissioned officer and a cavalryman, as the envoy of Tuganhun.

古文：伏连筹谓礼曰： 曩者宕昌常自称名而见谓为大王，今忽称仆，又拘执使人；欲使偏师往问，何如？ 
现代文：慕容伏连筹对张礼说： 以前，宕昌国国王经常是自称名字，而称呼我为 大王 。现在，却突然自称 仆 ，而且又拘捕了我派去的使节，为此，我打算派一支军队前去宕昌国询问一下，你认为怎么样？ 
English: Murong Fulianqiao said to Zhang Liyi, "In the past, the King of Tangchang often called himself by his first name, and called me the Great King. Now, he suddenly called himself a servant, and also arrested the envoy I sent. For this reason, I plan to send an army to Tangchang to inquire, what do you think?

古文：礼曰： 君与宕昌皆为魏籓，比辄兴兵攻之，殊违臣节。
现代文：张礼说： 您和岩昌国国王都是魏的藩属，如果动不动就要出兵攻击，这实在是违犯了做藩属的规定。
English: Zhang Li said: You and the king of Iwachang are both Wei's vassals. If you do not move, you will have to send troops to attack. This is really a violation of the rules of being a vassal.

古文：离京师之日，宰辅有言，以为君能自知其过，则籓业可保；若其不悛，祸难将至矣。 
现代文：在我离开平城那天，宰辅就告诉我，他认为您如果能自知自己的过错，那么，您作为吐谷浑可汗的大业就可以继续保存下去；如果您不改正错误的话，大祸灾难将会降临到您的头上。 
English: On the day I left Pingcheng, Zhai Yu told me that he thought that if you could recognize your own mistakes, then your great cause as Tuyuhun Khan could continue to be preserved; if you did not correct your mistakes, great disasters would befall you.

古文：伏连筹默然。
现代文：慕容伏连筹听后，没有说话。
English: Murong Fulian did not speak after the hearing.

古文：甲戌，魏遣兼员外散骑常侍广平宋弁等来聘。
现代文：甲戌，北魏派遣兼员外散骑常侍、广平人宋弁等前来访问。
English: Armor, the Northern Wei dispatched part-time non-commissioned officers, horseback riding attendants, Guangping people, Song Ben and so on came to visit.

古文：及还，魏主问弁： 江南何如？ 
现代文：宋弁等人回国后，孝文帝问宋弁说： 长江以南形势怎么样？ 
English: After Song Ben and others returned to China, Emperor Xiaowen asked Song Ben: How is the situation south of the Yangtze River?

古文：弁曰： 萧氏父子无大功于天下，既以逆取，不能顺守；政令苛碎，赋役繁重；朝无股肱之臣，野有愁怨之民。
现代文：宋弁回答说： 萧家父子对国家没有大的贡献，既然他们是用不正当的手段获取的政权，那么，他们也当然不能用顺应人心的政策来保护他们的江山。他们政令苛刻而崐琐碎，赋税差役繁多而沉重。朝廷内没有德高望重可做柱石的大臣，田野上却充满了哀愁怨愤的老百姓。
English: Song Ben replied: Xiao Jia and his son have not made a great contribution to the country. Since they gained power by illegal means, they certainly cannot protect their country with policies that are popular. Their government decrees are harsh and petty, and their taxes are numerous and heavy. There is no dignified minister in the imperial court to serve as a pillar, but the fields are full of sad and angry people.

古文：其得没身幸矣，非贻厥孙谋之道也。 
现代文：他能保持终身已经是万幸的了。他所采取的措施，也已经不是为子孙的长久考虑。 
English: He is lucky to be able to keep it for life. The measures he has taken are no longer a long-term consideration for his descendants.

古文：八月，乙未，魏以怀朔镇将阳平王颐、镇北大将军陆睿皆为都督，督十二将，步骑十万，分为三道以击柔然：中道出黑山，东道趣士卢河，西道趣侯延河。
现代文：八月，乙未，北魏任命怀朔镇将、阳平王拓跋颐以及镇北大将军陆睿，同时担任都督，督统十二位大将，十万名步兵、骑兵，分兵三路，袭击柔然汗国。中路大军进攻黑山，东路大军直接进攻士卢河，西路大军奔向侯延河。
English: In August, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the general of the town of Huai Shuo, Yang Ping Wang Tuobao and the general of the town of Beibei, Lu Rui, at the same time as the governor, the governor of the twelve generals, 100,000 infantry and cavalry, and the detachment of three routes to attack the Juran Khanate. The middle route army attacked Montenegro, the east route army directly attacked the Shilu River, and the west route army rushed to the Houyan River.

古文：军过大碛，大破柔然而还。
现代文：北魏大军渡过大沙漠，大败柔然军队后返回。
English: The Northern Wei army crossed the great desert and returned after a crushing defeat.

古文：初，柔然伏名敦可汗与其叔父那盖，分道击高车阿伏至罗，伏名敦屡败，那盖屡胜。
现代文：当初，柔然汗国伏名敦可汗郁久闾豆仑和他的叔父郁久闾那盖，分头袭击高车王阿伏至罗，但郁久闾豆仑不断地打败仗，而郁久闾那盖却是不断地取胜。
English: In the beginning, Ikukyu Shizoron, the famous duke of Juran Khanate, and his uncle, Ikukyu Shinnagae, divided their forces to attack the chariot king, Avu Ziro, but Ikukyu Shinnagae continually won battles while Ikukyu Shinnagae continually lost them.

古文：国人以那盖为得天助，乃杀伏名敦而立那盖，号候其伏代库者可汗，改元大安。
现代文：当时柔然汗国的百姓认为郁久闾那盖得到了上天的帮助，于是，就杀死了郁久闾豆仑，立郁久闾那盖为可汗，称他为候其伏代库者可汗，改年号为太安。
English: At that time, the people of the Juran Khanate thought that Ikukyu Shinnagae had received help from heaven, so they killed Ikukyu Shizuren, established Ikukyu Shinnagae as a khan, called him a khan who awaited his vodeyku, and changed his era name to Taian.

古文：魏司徒尉元、大鸿胪卿游明根累表请老，魏主许之。
现代文：北魏司徒尉元和大鸿胪卿游明根多次上书，因年事已高，请求辞职，孝文帝批准了二人的请求。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty approved the two men's request to resign because of their advanced age.

古文：引见，赐元玄冠、素衣，明根委貌、青纱单衣，及被服杂物等而遣之。
现代文：孝文帝接见他们，把黑色的冠帽和白色的衣服赏赐给尉元，把委貌冠帽和青纱单衣赏赐给游明根，同时，又给了二人被褥行李等其他物品，然后让他们回家养老。
English: Emperor Xiaowen received them, and gave the black crown cap and white clothes to Lieutenant Yuan, the crown cap and gauze singlet to You Minggen, and gave the two other items such as bedding and luggage, and then let them go home to retire.

古文：魏主亲养三老、五更于明堂。
现代文：孝文帝在明堂亲自主持了送三老、五更回乡养老的典礼。
English: Emperor Xiaowen personally presided over the ceremony of sending the Three Elders and Five Elders back to their hometowns in Ming Hall.

古文：己酉，诏以元为三老，明根为五更。
现代文：己酉，下诏任命尉元为三老，游明根为五更。
English: In the following edict, Ji Yuan was appointed as the Third Elder, and You Minggen as the Fifth Elder.

古文：帝再拜三老，亲袒割牲，执爵而馈；肃拜五更；且乞言焉，元、明根劝以孝友化民。
现代文：孝文帝向三老尉元叩拜两次，亲自挽袖露臂，切割祭肉，举起酒杯向他敬酒。接着，又向五更游明根一揖，并且请求他们对国家大事提出意见，尉元和游明根建议孝文帝用孝敬父母、友爱兄弟之道教化百姓。
English: Emperor Xiaowen bowed twice to the three old lieutenants, and personally rolled up his sleeves, cut the sacrificial meat, and raised a glass to toast him. Next, he bowed to the five younger lieutenants and asked them to put forward their opinions on national events. The younger lieutenants and the younger lieutenants suggested that Emperor Xiaowen educate the people with the way of filial piety, respect for parents, and brotherly love.

古文：又养国老、庶老于阶下。
现代文：然后，又在台阶下主持了敬老仪式，向庶老和国老行礼致敬。
English: Then, he presided over a ceremony of respect for the elderly at the foot of the steps, paying tribute to the elderly and the elderly.

古文：礼毕，各赐元、明根以步挽车及衣服，禄三老以上公，五更以元卿。
现代文：行礼结束后，分别赏赐了尉元和游明根人力拉的车辆和衣服。发给三老上公的俸禄，发给五更元卿的俸禄。
English: After the ceremony was over, the vehicles and clothes that Lt. Yuan and Yu Minggen pulled by hand were awarded, respectively. The salary was given to the three elders, and the salary was given to Wu Jianyuan.

古文：九月，甲寅，魏主序昭穆于明堂，祀文明太后于玄室，辛未，魏主以文明太后再期，哭于永固陵左，终日不辍声，凡二日不食。
现代文：九月，甲寅，北魏孝文帝在明堂排定祖先牌位顺序，接着，又在北堂祭祀了文明太后冯太后。辛未，孝文帝因为这天是冯太后去世二周年的祭日，所以，他在永固陵西侧悲哭起来，整天哭声不断，一连两天没有吃饭。
English: In September, Emperor Gao of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty arranged the order of the ancestor plaques in the Ming Hall, and then sacrificed the civilized Empress Dowager Feng in the North Hall. Emperor Xiaowen of the Xin Wei Dynasty, because this day was the second anniversary of the death of Empress Dowager Feng, he began to cry on the west side of Yonggu Mausoleum. He cried all day and did not eat for two days.

古文：甲戌，辞陵，还永乐宫。
现代文：甲戌，才辞别冯太后墓地，返回永乐宫。
English: Armor, only to bid farewell to the Empress Dowager Feng cemetery, returned to Yongle Palace.

古文：武兴氐王杨集始寇汉中，至白马。
现代文：武兴氐王杨集始进犯汉中，率军抵达白马。
English: King Yang Ji of Wuxing invaded Hanzhong and led his army to Baima.

古文：梁州刺史阴智伯遣军主桓卢奴、阴冲昌等击破之，俘斩数千人。
现代文：梁州刺史阴智伯派军主桓卢奴、阴冲昌等人率领大军迎击杨集始，俘虏及斩杀了杨集始军队几千名将士。
English: According to the history of Liangzhou, Yin Zhibo led a large army to fight against Yang Jizhi, and captured and killed several thousand soldiers of Yang Jizhi's army.

古文：集始走还武兴，请降于魏；辛巳，入朝于魏。魏以集始为南秦州刺史、汉中郡侯、武兴王。
现代文：杨集始逃回到武兴，向北魏请求投降。辛巳，杨集始朝见孝文帝，北魏任命杨集始为南秦州刺史、汉中郡侯、武兴王。
English: Yang Jizhi fled back to Wuxing and asked the Northern Wei Dynasty for surrender. Soon, Yang Jizhi met Emperor Xiaowen, and the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Yang Jizhi as the governor of Southern Qin Province, the prince of Hanzhong County, and the king of Wuxing.

古文：冬，十月，甲午，上殷祭太庙。
现代文：冬季十月，甲午，南齐武帝在太庙举行大规模祭祀活动。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of October in winter, Emperor Wu of the Southern Qi Dynasty held a large-scale sacrificial activity in the Great Temple.

古文：庚戌，魏以安定王休为大司马，特进冯诞为司徒。
现代文：庚戌，北魏任命安定王拓跋休为大司马，任命特进冯诞为司徒。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Tuoba as the grand steward and Feng Zhao as the steward.

古文：诞，熙之子也。
现代文：冯诞是冯熙的儿子。
English: Feng Zhao is the son of Feng Xi.

古文：魏太极殿成。
现代文：北魏太极殿建成。
English: The Northern Wei Taiji Hall was completed.

古文：十二月，司徒参军萧琛、范云聘于魏。
现代文：十二月，南齐司徒参军萧琛、范云出使北魏。
English: In December, Xiao Yao and Fan Yun, the Southern Qi scholars, joined the army and were sent to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏主甚重齐人，亲与谈论。顾谓群臣曰： 江南多好臣。 
现代文：孝文帝对他们非常尊重，亲自和他们谈话，并回头对身边的文武百官说： 江南有很多优秀的官员。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen respected them very much, talked to them in person, and turned to the hundreds of civil and military officials around him and said: There are many excellent officials in Jiangnan.

古文：侍臣李元凯对曰： 江南多好臣，岁一易主；江北无好臣，百年一易主。 
现代文：他的侍臣李元凯回答说： 长江南边有很多优秀的官员，但他们几乎每年更换一次帝王；长江北边没有优秀的官员，但一百年左右才换一次帝王。 
English: His aide-de-camp Li Yuankai replied: There are many excellent officials on the south side of the Yangtze River, but they change emperors almost every year; there are no excellent officials on the north side of the Yangtze River, but they only change emperors once every hundred years or so.

古文：魏主甚惭。
现代文：孝文帝非常惭愧。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very ashamed.

古文：上使太子家令沈约撰《宋书》，疑立《袁粲传》，审之于上。
现代文：南齐武帝命令太子家令沈约撰写《宋书》，沈约不能确定是否写《袁粲传》，请求武帝决定。
English: Nanqi Emperor Wu ordered the prince's family to order Shen You to write "Song Book." Shen You could not be sure whether to write "Yuan Yu Biography" and asked Emperor Wu to decide.

古文：上曰： 袁粲自是宋室忠臣。 
现代文：武帝说： 袁粲当然是宋室的忠臣。 
English: Emperor Wu said: Yuan Shao is, of course, a loyal vassal of the Song dynasty.

古文：约又多载宋世祖、太宗诸鄙渎事。
现代文：沈约又记载了刘宋孝武帝和明帝许多卑鄙、荒淫的事。
English: Shen You also recorded many despicable and lewd things about Emperor Liu Song, Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Ming.

古文：上曰： 孝武事迹，不容顿尔。
现代文：武帝说： 孝武帝的各种事情，不能这么写。
English: Emperor Wu said, "You can't write about Emperor Xiaowu's various affairs in such a way.

古文：我昔经事明帝，卿可思讳恶之义。 
现代文：我当过明帝的臣属，侍奉过他，你应该想到为尊者讳的《春秋》大义。 
English: I was once a vassal of Emperor Ming and served him. You should think of "Spring and Autumn," which was written for His Holiness.

古文：于是多所删除。
现代文：于是，沈约删去了很多。
English: As a result, Shen Yu deleted a lot.

古文：是岁，林邑王范阳迈之孙诸农，帅种人攻范当根纯，复得其国。
现代文：这一年，林邑王国前任国王范阳迈的孙子范诸农，率领自己部落的人进攻篡夺王位的范当根纯，夺回了政权，收回了自己的国土。
English: In this year, Fan Zhunong, the grandson of Fan Yangmai, the former king of Linyi Kingdom, led the people of his tribe to attack Fan Danggenchun, who usurped the throne, to regain power and reclaim his own land.

古文：诏以诸农为都督缘海诸军事、林邑王。
现代文：南齐武帝任命范诸农为都督缘海诸军事、林邑王。
English: Emperor Nanqiwu appointed Fan Zhunong as the military governor of the sea and the king of the forest.

古文：魏南阳公郑羲与李冲婚姻，冲引为中书令。
现代文：北魏南阳公爵郑羲，和李冲结成姻亲关系，于是，经李冲推荐任中书令。
English: Zheng Xuan, Duke of Nanyang in Northern Wei, and Li Chong forged a relationship as in-laws. Therefore, after Li Chong's recommendation, he was appointed to the post.

古文：出为西兗州刺史，在州贪鄙。
现代文：后来郑羲又任西兖州刺史，在任职期间，他贪婪卑鄙。
English: Later, Zheng Rong also served as the governor of Xishuanzhou. During his tenure, he was greedy and despicable.

古文：文明太后为魏主纳其女为嫔，征为秘书监。
现代文：文明太后冯太后曾为孝文帝纳娶郑羲的女儿为妃嫔，所以又把他调回任秘书监。
English: Empress Dowager Feng, the empress dowager of civilization, had married Zheng Yao's daughter as a concubine for Xiao Wentina, so she transferred him back to the post of secretary supervisor.

古文：及卒，尚书奏谥曰宣。诏曰： 盖棺定谥，激扬清浊。
现代文：郑羲去世时，尚书上奏追谥他为宣，孝文帝下诏说： 盖上棺材后决定谥号，显示逝者是清还是浊。
English: When Zheng He passed away, Emperor Xiaowen issued the following edict: After the coffin was covered, the coffin number was decided, indicating whether the deceased was Qing or Han.

古文：故何曾虽孝，良史载其缪丑；贾充有劳，直士谓之荒公。
现代文：晋武帝时的何曾虽然孝顺，但优秀的史官们却把他称为 缪丑 ；贾充对国家有功，但正直的人却称他为 荒公 。
English: At the time of Emperor Jinwu, although He Zeng was filial, the excellent historians called him "Miu Jiu"; Jia Chong was of great service to the country, but honest people called him "Aragong."

古文：羲虽宿有文业，而治阙廉清。
现代文：郑羲虽然在文学上很有造诣，但为政时却不廉洁清白。
English: Although Zheng Qi was very accomplished in literature, he was not honest and clean when he was in politics.

古文：尚书何乃情遗至公，愆违明典！
现代文：尚书怎么能这样只顾人情，而违背公理，触犯国家圣明的典章制度呢！
English: How could Shangshu only care about human feelings in this way, while violating justice and violating the national sacred code system?

古文：依《谥法》： 博闻多见曰文，不勤成名曰灵。 
现代文：接照《谥法》上所说的：见多识广叫做文，不辛勤劳苦却有名声叫做灵。
English: According to what is said in the "Law of the Dragon": Seeing much and knowing much is called "Wen," and not working hard but having a good reputation is called "Ling."

古文：可赠以本官，加谥文灵。 
现代文：可以追赠他临终前的官职秘书监，追加谥号为文灵。 
English: He can be posthumously awarded the post of official secretary before his death, with the additional title of Wenling.

