古文：起屠维协洽，尽玄黓阉茂，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。汉哀帝元寿元年
English: a total of four years. In the first year of Emperor Han's reign

古文：孝哀皇帝下元寿元年春，正月，辛丑朔，诏将军、中二千石举明习兵法者各一人，因就拜孔乡侯傅晏为大司马、卫将军，阳安侯丁明为大司马、票骑将军。
现代文：春季，正月，辛丑朔，哀帝下诏，要求将军、中二千石官员，各推举通晓军事、熟悉兵法者一人，借此授任孔乡侯傅晏为大司马、卫将军，阳安侯丁明为大司马、票骑将军。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Xin uglishuo, the emperor issued an edict, demanding that the general and the middle two thousand stone officials should each nominate one person who was familiar with military affairs and the laws of war, thereby awarding Kongxiang Hou Fuyao as the grand steed and general of the guard, and Yangan Hou Dingming as the grand steed and general of the cavalry.

古文：是日，日有食之。
现代文：当天，出现日食。
English: On the same day, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：上诏公卿大夫悉心陈过失；又令举贤良方正能直言者各一人。
现代文：哀帝诏令公卿大夫尽心陈述过失。又令举荐贤良、方正、能直言进谏者各一人。
English: The emperor decreed that the court noble and doctor should sincerely explain the fault. He also ordered to recommend one person each who was virtuous, upright, and able to speak frankly.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：丞相嘉奏封事曰： 孝元皇帝奉承大业，温恭少欲，都内钱四十万万。
现代文：丞相王嘉上密封奏书说： 孝元皇帝继承大业，温良谦恭，少有欲望，国库存钱达四十亿。
English: The imperial secretary Wang Jia said in a sealed report: Emperor Xiaoyuan inherits a great cause, is gentle and courteous, has few desires, and the national inventory amounts to four billion.

古文：尝幸上林，后宫冯贵人从临兽圈，猛兽惊出，贵人前当之，元帝嘉美其义，赐钱五万。
现代文：元帝曾前往上林苑，后宫冯贵人跟随一起到了兽圈，猛兽受惊窜出，冯贵人挺身向前，用身体遮挡住皇帝。元帝嘉勉她的义勇，赏赐不过五万钱。
English: Emperor Xiaoyuan once went on a pleasure tour to the forest. Feng Guijin, the harem master, followed her to the animal enclosure. The ferocious beast was startled out of the enclosure. Guijin stepped forward to block Emperor Yuan. Emperor Yuan commended her for her good deed and gave her 50,000 coins.

古文：掖庭见亲，有加赏赐，属其人勿众谢。
现代文：在深宫后庭，对宠爱的人加以特别的赏赐，元帝总要嘱咐她，不要在众人面前谢恩。
English: When members of the imperial court met with relatives who had received awards, they told them not to thank them in public.

古文：示平恶偏，重失人心，赏赐节约。
现代文：这是为了表示公平，不愿被人指责不公，看重人心的得失，而且赏赐节约。
English: Showing peace, abhorring perversion, valuing the loss of the human heart, rewarding thrift.

古文：是时外戚赀千万者少耳，故少府、水衡见钱多也。
现代文：当时外戚资产达千万的很少，因而少府、水衡的积钱才很多。
English: At that time, there were very few relatives with assets of tens of millions, so there was a lot of accumulated money from less government and water balance.

古文：虽遭初元、永光凶年饥馑，加以西羌之变，外奉师旅，内振贫民，终无倾危之忧，以府臧内充实也。
现代文：虽然遭受初元、永光年间的灾荒饥馑，再加西羌部族的叛变，对外要供给作战部队的需要，对内要赈济贫苦的灾民，然而国家始终没有倾覆崩溃的忧虑，是因为国库积藏充实。
English: Although the country suffered from famine and famine in the early years of the Yuan Dynasty and the Yongguang Dynasty, as well as the rebellion of the Xidi tribe, it was necessary to supply the needs of the fighting forces to the outside world and to help the poor victims at home. However, the country has never been worried about the collapse of the country, because the state treasury is well-stocked.

古文：孝成皇帝时，谏臣多言燕出之害，及女宠专爱，耽于酒色，损德伤年，其言甚切，然终不怨怒也。
现代文：孝成皇帝时，谏臣大多提出皇帝私自出宫的危害，并说到专宠美女，耽于酒色，有损德行，伤身短寿等，言词非常激烈，然而成帝始终不怨恨发怒。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaocheng, his courtiers often talked about the harms of traveling with little clothing, the exclusive love of a female favorite, indulging in alcohol, damaging moral conduct and reducing life expectancy. These remarks were very sincere, but Emperor Xiaocheng never resented or got angry.

古文：宠臣淳于长、张放、史育，育数贬退，家赀不满千万，放斥逐就国，长榜死于狱，不以私爱害公义，故虽多内讥，朝廷安平，传业陛下。
现代文：宠臣淳于长、张放、史育三人，史育多次被贬退，家资不满千万；张放被斥退逐回封国；淳于长在监狱中被拷打致死。成帝并不以私爱而妨害公义，因此，虽然因宠爱内宫而招致很多讥讽，但是朝廷安定平稳，这才能把大业传给陛下。 陛下在封国之时，喜好《诗经》、《书经》，崇尚节俭。
English: His three favorite vassals, Jun Yu Chang, Zhang Fang, and Shi Yu, were the best. Shi Yu was degraded many times, and his family wealth was less than ten million; Zhang Fang was expelled back to the fiefdom; Jun Yu Chang was tortured to death in prison. Emperor Chengdu did not obstruct justice with his personal love. Therefore, although he attracted a lot of ridicule because of his fondness for the inner palace, the imperial court was stable and stable in order to pass the great cause to His Majesty. At the time of the fiefdom, His Majesty liked the "Book of Songs" and "Book of Songs" and advocated frugality.

古文：陛下在国之时，好《诗》、《书》，上俭节，征来，所过道上称诵德美，此天下所以回心也。
现代文：征召前来长安时，一路经过的地方，都称颂陛下的美德，这正是天下之人把希望转而寄托在陛下身上的原因。
English: When he was summoned to Chang'an, the places he passed along the way praised His Majesty's virtues, which is why people around the world put their hopes on His Majesty.

古文：初即位，易帷帐，去锦绣，乘舆席缘绨缯而已。
现代文：初即位时，陛下更换帷帐，撤去锦绣，车马和座席的靠垫不过用绨缯包边而已。
English: His Majesty has just ascended the throne, replaced the curtains, removed the gorgeous silk fabrics, and only used thick silk fabrics to trim the edges of his clothes.

古文：共皇寝庙比当作，忧闵元元，惟用度不足，以义割恩，辄且止息，今始作治。
现代文：每逢共皇寝庙应当兴建，都因怜悯百姓劳苦，考虑国家经费不足，为了公义割舍亲情，总是暂停修建，直到最近才开始动工。
English: Every time the Emperor's Mausoleum was to be built, the construction was always suspended out of compassion for the people's hard work, considering the shortage of state funds, and for the sake of justice, and the construction did not start until recently.

古文：而驸马都尉董贤亦起官寺上林中，又为贤治大第，开门乡北阙，引王渠灌园池，使者护作，赏赐吏卒，甚于治宗庙。
现代文：可是附马都尉董贤，也在上林苑中兴建官衙，陛下还为他修建了宏大的宅第，开门朝着皇宫的北门，引王渠灌注园林水池，陛下派使者监督施工，赏赐吏卒，超过修建宗庙之时。
English: However, Tongxian, the commander of the imperial horse, was building a government office in Shanglin, and also building a mansion for Dongxian. He opened the door to the north gate, led the king canal to pour the garden pond, sent an emissary to monitor the work, and rewarded the officials and soldiers. The scale was even larger than the construction of the ancestral temple.

古文：贤母病，长安厨给祠具，道中过者皆饮食。
现代文：董贤母亲患病，由官家长安的厨官提供祈祷的用具和食品，道路过往行人都可获得施舍的饮食。
English: Dong Xian's mother was ill. Chefs in Chang'an provided sacrificial food, and pedestrians encountered on the way to the blessing were given food.

古文：为贤治器，器成，奏御乃行，或物好，特赐其工。
现代文：陛下为董贤制造器具，做成后，必须奏报陛下审查，才可送去。如果工艺精巧，还特别赏赐工匠。
English: His Majesty makes tools for Dong Xian. After they are made, they must be reported to His Majesty for review before they can be sent. If the craftsmanship is exquisite, the craftsman will be specially rewarded.

古文：自贡献宗庙、三宫，犹不至此。
现代文：即便是奉献宗庙、奉养三宫太后，也没有达到这种程度。
English: Even the dedication of the ancestral temple and the maintenance of the Empress Dowager of the Three Kingdoms did not reach this level.

古文：贤家有宾婚及见亲，诸官并共，赐及仓头、奴婢人十万钱。
现代文：遇到董贤家招待宾客、举办婚礼以及亲戚相见崐，由各官署一起供献财物，甚至赏赐仆人、奴婢的钱，一人达十万钱。
English: When Dong Xian's family invited guests, held a wedding and relatives met, all government departments together provided donations, and even rewarded servants and slaves with money, up to 100,000 yuan each.

古文：使者护视、发取市物，百贾震动，道路讙哗，群臣惶惑。
现代文：董贤家去街市购买物品，有圣上派的使者陪同，监视交易，百商震恐，路人喧哗，群臣为之惶惑。
English: When the Dongxian family went to the market to buy goods, they were accompanied by a holy emissary who monitored the transaction. Hundreds of merchants were terrified, passers-by were noisy, and the courtiers were confused.

古文：诏书罢苑，而以赐贤二千馀顷，均田之制从此堕坏。
现代文：陛下诏令裁撤皇家苑林，却用来赏赐董贤两千余顷土地，官员限田的制度从此破坏。
English: His Majesty's edict abolished the royal gardens and forests, but was used to reward Dong Xian with more than two thousand hectares of land. The system of restricting land for officials has since been destroyed.

古文：奢僭放纵，变乱阴阳，灾异众多，百姓讹言，持筹相惊，天惑其意，不能自止。
现代文：奢侈僭越，横行放纵，变乱阴阳，灾异众多，流言在百姓中传播，路人手持禾秆麻秆惊恐奔走，上天也对百姓的流言和奔走感到迷惑，不能使他们自行停止。
English: Extravagant extravagance, rampant indulgence, chaotic yin and yang, numerous disasters, rumors spread among the people, passers-by run in fear holding straw and nettles, and heaven is also puzzled by the rumors and running of the people and cannot make them stop on their own.

古文：陛下素仁智慎事，今而有此大讥。孔子曰： 危而不持，颠而不扶，则将安用彼相矣！ 
现代文：陛下一向仁慈智慧，行事谨慎，而今却有这些过失被人大肆嘲讽。 孔子说： 国家有危险不去解救，见颠覆不去匡扶，要你们这些宰相有什么用！ 
English: His Majesty has always been kind, wise and prudent, but now these faults are being ridiculed. Confucius said: The country is in danger of not being rescued, seeing subversion and not being supported, what use are you prime ministers!

古文：臣嘉幸得备位，窃内悲伤不能通愚忠之信；身死有益于国，不敢自惜。
现代文：臣王嘉有幸能够位居丞相，自已私下常内心悲伤，无法使陛下相信我的愚忠。如果身死能够有益于国家，我不敢爱惜自己的生命。
English: As a vassal of Wang Jia, I am fortunate to be able to be in the limelight. My private sadness cannot convey my loyalty. If my death is beneficial to the country, then I dare not spare my own life.

古文：唯陛下慎己之所独乡，察众人之所共疑！
现代文：请陛下审慎地对待自己的偏宠，细察众人共同的疑惑！
English: Please, Your Majesty, be prudent about your own preferences, and carefully examine the common doubts of everyone!

古文：往者宠臣邓通、韩嫣，骄贵失度，逸豫无厌，小人不胜情欲，卒陷罪辜，乱国亡躯，不终其禄，所谓 爱之适足以害之 者也！
现代文：从前邓通、韩嫣骄横显贵没有限度，逸乐无厌，小人不能克制情欲，终于犯下大罪，把国家搞乱，使自己丧生，不能最终保全富贵。正所谓 爱他，却恰恰足以害他 。
English: In the past, there was no limit to the arrogance and pomposity of Duntong and Han Zheng, and their pleasure was insatiable. The villain could not restrain his lust, and finally committed a great crime, disrupted the country, lost his own life, and could not ultimately preserve his wealth. The so-called love for him, however, was just enough to harm him.

古文：宜深览前世，以节贤宠，全安其命。 
现代文：应该深察前世的教训，节制对董贤的宠爱，以保全他的生命。 
English: You should deeply learn from the previous generation, so as to restrain your love for Dong Xian and save his life.

古文：上由是于嘉浸不说。
现代文：哀帝由此对王嘉渐渐不满。
English: As a result, Emperor Ai gradually became dissatisfied with Wang Jia.

古文：前凉州刺史杜鄴以方正对策曰： 臣闻阳尊阴卑，天之道也。
现代文：前凉州刺史杜邺，以方正的身份，回答策问说： 我听说阳尊阴卑，是上天之道。
English: The former Liangzhou priest Shidong, in his capacity as the founder, answered the question and said: I heard that the yang is superior to the yin and the yang is inferior to the yang, which is the way to heaven.

古文：是以男虽贱，各为其家阳，女虽贵，犹为其国阴。
现代文：因而男子即便卑贱，仍然各自是本家之阳；女子即便尊贵，仍然是本国之阴。
English: Therefore, men, even if they are lowly, are still the sun of their own family; women, even if they are noble, are still the shade of their country.

古文：故礼明三从之义，虽有文母之德，必系于子。
现代文：因此礼教明确规定 三从 的内容。即令有文王之母的盛德，也必须依附于儿子。
English: Therefore, in the etiquette, it is necessary to clarify the norms of the three obediences. Even if there is a literary mother's virtue, she must be bound by her son.

古文：昔郑伯随姜氏之欲，终有叔段篡国之祸；周襄王内迫惠后之难，而遭居郑之危。
现代文：从前郑伯放任母亲姜氏对幼子的溺爱，终于酿成叔段篡国的大祸。周襄王内迫母亲惠后的压力，而遭受流亡郑国的危难。
English: Once upon a time, Zheng Bo listened to Jiang's desire, and the calamity of Uncle Duan's usurpation finally occurred; King Zhou Xiang was forced to move to Zheng Guo due to the difficulty of benefiting his descendants.

古文：汉兴，吕太后权私亲属，几危社稷。
现代文：汉朝兴起，吕太后把朝廷大权私自交给她的亲属，几乎动摇了社稷。
English: With the rise of the Han Dynasty, Empress Dowager Lv privately handed over the supreme power of the imperial court to her relatives, which almost shook the social order.

古文：窃见陛下约俭正身，欲与天下更始，然嘉瑞未应，而日食、地震。
现代文：我看陛下节俭克已，持身以正，想要振兴天下，开创新的局面。然而，祥瑞没有应验降临，反而发生了日食、地震。
English: I think that His Majesty is frugal and upright, and wants to revitalize the world and open up a new situation. However, Xiangrui did not come true, but there was a solar eclipse and an earthquake.

古文：案《春秋》灾异，以指象为言语。
现代文：考察《春秋》记载灾异，是以景象所指示的含意作为语言，来警告世人。
English: An examination of "Spring and Autumn" records disasters, using the meaning indicated by the scene as a language to warn the world.

古文：日食，明阳为阴所临。
现代文：日食，表明阳被阴侵犯。
English: A solar eclipse indicates that the yang is being encroached upon by the yin.

古文：坤以法地，为土，为母，以安静为德；震，不阴之效也。
现代文：阴为坤，坤被用来表示地，所以称 坤 为 土 ，为 母 ，以安静为美德。发生地震，是阴气失控，不遵循常轨的证明。
English: Yin is Kun, Kun is used to represent earth, so Kun is called earth, mother, and quietness is a virtue. If an earthquake occurs, it is proof that Yin is out of control and does not follow the normal course.

古文：占象甚明，臣敢不直言其事！
现代文：占验情况非常明显，我岂敢不直言此事！
English: The horoscope is very clear, how dare I not say these things!

古文：昔曾子问从令之义，孔子曰： 是何言与！ 
现代文：从前，曾参问孔子听从父命可算孝顺的道理，孔子说： 这是什么话！ 
English: Once, when his son asked him about the principle of obeying one's father, Confucius said: "What is this saying?

古文：善闵子骞守礼不苟从亲，所行无非理者，故无可间也。
现代文：孔子赞扬闵子骞守礼，不苟且听从父母的命令，所行之事没有非理的，所以别人无法离间他与父母及亲人的关系。
English: Confucius praised the son of a mule for his strict adherence to etiquette, his meticulous obedience to his parents' orders, and the things he did were not unreasonable, so others could not sever his relationship with his parents and relatives.

古文：今诸外家昆弟，无贤不肖，并侍帷幄，布在列位，或典兵卫，或将军屯，宠意并于一家，积贵之势，世所希见、所希闻也。
现代文：而今诸外戚家的兄弟，不管贤能或败类，都在宫廷任职，分布要位。或者掌管禁卫，或者率军屯驻，恩宠集中于一家，越来越显贵的声势，世所罕见，世所罕闻。
English: But now all the brothers of foreign relatives, whether they are good or bad, are working at the court, distributing important positions. Either in charge of the guards, or leading the army, the grace is concentrated in one family, more and more prominent reputation, rare in the world, rare in the world.

古文：至乃并置大司马、将军之官，皇甫虽盛，三桓虽隆，鲁为作三军，无以甚此！
现代文：甚至发展到同时设立两个大司马、将军的官职。古时皇甫虽强盛，三桓虽势大，鲁国虽建立三军，然而与今天的皇亲国戚相比，就逊色了！
English: It even developed to the point where two official positions of grand steward and general were established at the same time. In ancient times, although the emperor was strong, the three emperors were powerful, and the state of Lu established three armies, compared to today's imperial relatives, they were inferior!

古文：当拜之日，晻然日食。
现代文：就在拜大司马、将军官职的当天，太阳昏暗，发生日食。
English: On the very day of the enthronement of the Grand Master and the generals, the sun dimmed and a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：不在前后，临事而发者，明陛下谦逊无专，承指非一，所言辄听，所欲辄随，有罪恶者不坐辜罚，无功能者毕受官爵，流渐积畏，过在于是，欲令昭昭以觉圣朝。
现代文：不前不后，在拜官的时刻发生日食，说明陛下太过谦逊，不敢专断，不只一次地顺承太后的旨意，所说的话都听从，所要求的东西都满足。外戚中有罪恶的，不受法律制裁；无功无能的，全崐都加封官爵。这类事情逐渐发展加剧，越积越多，陛下的过失正在于此。我想讲清这些过失，从而使圣明的天子醒悟。
English: The constant occurrence of solar eclipses at the time of worship shows that His Majesty is too modest and does not dare to be arbitrary. He has obeyed the will of the empress dowager more than once, he has listened to what was said, and everything that was asked for has been satisfied. Relatives who commit crimes are not subject to legal sanctions; those who are ineffectual are all given official titles. These kinds of things are gradually developing and intensifying, accumulating more and more, and this is where His Majesty's fault lies. I want to clarify these faults, so that the holy son of heaven can wake up.

古文：昔诗人所刺，《春秋》所讥，指象如此，殆不在它。
现代文：过去被诗人所抨击、被《春秋》所讥讽的，正是这类现象，恐怕不是针对其他。
English: As the poet once pointed out, the ironic scene in "Spring and Autumn" refers to this, and probably not to other aspects.

古文：由后视前，忿邑非之。
现代文：由后世来看前代发生的事情，会忿怒忧郁地指摘其错误。
English: Future generations will look back at what happened in the past and point out their mistakes with anger and sadness.

古文：逮身所行，不自镜见，则以为可，计之过者。
现代文：等到自己去做，就不能像照镜子一样看见自己的过失，自以为合适，其实计策已失误了。
English: Until you do it yourself, you can't see your own mistakes as if you were looking in a mirror. You think you're doing the right thing, but in fact your strategy has failed.

古文：愿陛下加致精诚，思承始初，事稽诸古，以厌下心，则黎庶群生无不说喜，上帝百神收还威怒，祯祥福禄，何嫌不报！ 
现代文：但愿陛下更加精诚治国，回顾即位之初，每事都参考遵照古代的规定，以满足下民的心愿。如此，则黎民百姓无不喜悦，上天和众神灵也会收回怒气，为什么要疑心吉祥福禄不回报降临！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will govern the country more conscientiously. Looking back at the beginning of his reign, everything will be done in accordance with the ancient regulations to meet the wishes of the people. In this way, the people will not be unhappy, and heaven and the gods will withdraw their anger. Why should we doubt that good fortune will not return!

古文：上又征孔光诣公车，问以日食事，拜为光禄大夫，秩中二千石，给事中，位次丞相。
现代文：哀帝又征召孔光到公车，询问关于日食之事。授任孔光为光禄大夫，官秩中二千石，任给事中，地位仅次于丞相。
English: Emperor Ai also summoned Kong Guang to the bus to inquire about the solar eclipse. Kong Guang was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the official rank of the middle two thousand, and the position was second only to the prime minister.

古文：初，王莽既就国，杜门自守。
现代文：当初，王莽返回封国后，闭门不见宾客，以求自保。
English: At first, after Wang Mang returned to the closed country, he closed the door and did not see the guests in order to protect himself.

古文：其中子获杀奴，莽切责获，令自杀。
现代文：他的次子王获杀死家奴，王莽严厉责备王获，命他自杀。
English: His second son, Wang Huo, killed a family slave. Wang Mang severely reprimanded Wang Huo and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：在国三岁，吏民上书冤讼莽者百数。
现代文：在封国三年，官吏百姓上书为王莽呼冤的，数以百计。
English: During the three years of national enfeoffment, hundreds of officials and commoners wrote to Wang Meng to appeal for justice.

古文：至是，贤良周护、宋崇等对策，复深讼莽功德。
现代文：到本年，贤良周护、宋崇等在朝廷对策时，又大大颂扬王莽的功德，为他辩冤。
English: By this year, Zhou Kuo, Song Chong and others praised Wang Mang's merits and defended him when the imperial court made countermeasures.

古文：上于是征莽及平阿侯仁还京师，侍太后。
现代文：哀帝于是征召王莽以及平阿侯王仁回到京师，让他们侍奉太皇太后。
English: Emperor Ai then conscripted Wang Mang and Ping Ahou Wang Ren to return to Beijing to serve the great empress dowager.

古文：董贤因日食之变以沮傅晏、息夫躬之策，辛卯，上收晏印绶，罢就第。
现代文：董贤利用发生日食这一变异，阻止傅晏、息夫躬对匈奴挑动战争的计策。辛卯哀帝收缴傅晏印信绶带，罢免官职，让他离开朝廷，回到宅第。
English: Dong Xian took advantage of the solar eclipse to prevent Fu Xi and his sons from provoking a war against the Xiongnu. Emperor Xinwu collected Fu Xi's letter and ribbon, dismissed him from his post, and let him leave the imperial court and return to his residence.

古文：丁巳，皇太太后傅氏崩，合葬渭陵，称孝元傅皇后。
现代文：丁巳，皇太太后傅氏驾崩，与元帝合葬渭陵，称为 孝元傅皇后 。
English: Ding Si, the Empress Dowager Fu died and was buried with the Yuan Emperor in the imperial mausoleum, known as the Empress Xiao Yuan Fu.

古文：丞相、御史奏息夫躬、孙宠等罪过，上乃免躬、宠官，遣就国；又罢侍中、诸曹、黄门郎数十人。
现代文：丞相、御史上奏，弹劾息夫躬、孙宠等人的罪过。哀帝于是罢免息夫躬、孙宠官职，遣回封国。又罢黜侍中、诸曹、黄门郎等数十人。
English: The prime minister, the imperial secretary, impeached the sins of Sifu Mu, Sun Zhaotong and others. The emperor then dismissed Sifu Mu and Sun Zhaotong from their official posts and sent them back to the feudal state. He also dismissed dozens of attendants, Zhu Cao, Huang Men Lang and others.

古文：鲍宣上书曰： 陛下父事天，母事地，子养黎民。
现代文：鲍宣上书说： 陛下把上天当作父亲，把大地当作母亲来侍奉，把人民当作儿女来抚养。
English: Bao Xuan wrote in his letter: "Your Majesty regards heaven as the father, the earth as the mother to serve, and the people as the children to bring up.

古文：即位已来，父亏明，母震动，子讹言相惊恐。
现代文：即位以来，上天缺少光明，大地发生震动，百姓流传讹言，互相惊扰。
English: Since the enthronement, the sky has lacked light, the earth has been shaken, and the people have spread rumors and disturbed each other.

古文：今日食于三始，诚可畏惧。
现代文：而今，元旦年月日 三始 之时就发生日食，实在令人畏惧。
English: Now, a solar eclipse occurs on New Year's Day at the beginning of the third day, which is really frightening.

古文：小民正朔日尚恐毁败器物，何况于日亏乎！
现代文：小民在平常元旦之日尚且害怕毁坏器物，何况发生日食呢！
English: On an ordinary New Year's Day, people are still afraid of damaging things, let alone a solar eclipse!

古文：陛下深内自责，避正殿，举直言，求过失，罢退外亲及旁仄素餐之人，征拜孔光为光禄大夫，发觉孙宠、息夫躬过恶，免官遣就国，众庶歙然，莫不说喜。
现代文：陛下深刻地在内心责备自己，避开正殿，举荐直言之士，征求对过失的批评，罢黜斥退外戚以及身边白吃饭不干事的人，征召任命孔光为光禄大夫，察觉了孙宠、息夫躬的罪恶，把他们免官遣回封国。民众一致，无不欢喜。
English: Your majesty can deeply reproach yourself, avoid the main hall, use those who dare to stand up straight to review their own mistakes, dismiss your relatives and those useless people around you who are wasting their salaries, recruit Kong Guang as a doctor of Guanglu, examine the mistakes and sins of your grandchildren and grandchildren, and let them return to their own principality. Everyone is happy and encouraged.

古文：天人同心，人心说则天意解矣。
现代文：天人同心，人心欢悦了，则天心的愤怒自然化解。
English: Heaven and man are of the same mind. When the hearts of people are in harmony, it is the will of heaven to reconcile.

古文：乃二月丙戌，白虹干日，连阴不雨，此天下忧结未解，民有怨望未塞者也。
现代文：然而，二月丙戌，白气侵犯太阳，天气连阴不雨，这表示天下尚有忧愁纠结在一起没有化解，百姓还有怨气没有平息。
English: However, February is hot and humid, the sun is invaded by white gas, and the weather is cloudy and rainy. This indicates that there are still sorrows in the world that have not been resolved, and the people's resentment has not subsided.

古文：侍中、驸马都尉董贤，本无葭莩之亲，但以令色、谀言自进，赏赐无度，竭尽府臧，并合三第，尚以为小，复坏暴室。
现代文：侍中、驸马都尉董贤，本来与陛下无丝毫亲戚关系，可是凭着他的媚色和巧言阿谀，博取了陛下的欢心，对他赏赐没有限度，竭尽了府库的积藏，合并三座宅第赐给他，还认为太小，又拆除宫廷暴室来扩充面积。
English: The equerry, Captain Dong Xian, was originally not related to His Majesty in the slightest, but with his charm and clever words, he won His Majesty's favor, and there was no limit to his reward. He exhausted the reserves of the prefectural treasury, merged three homesteads and gave them to him. He also considered them too small, and demolished the palace violence room to expand the area.

古文：贤父、子坐使天子使者，将作治第，行夜吏卒皆得赏赐，上冢有会，辄太官为供。
现代文：董贤和他的父亲可以坐着支使崐天子的使者，将作大匠为他修建宅第，连夜间为他巡逻的吏卒都得到赏赐。他家祭扫祖坟和举行聚会，都由太官供应。
English: Dong Xian and his father could sit and support the envoys of the Son of Heaven, build a mansion for him as a master craftsman, and even the officials who patrolled for him at night were rewarded. His family festival, the sweeping of ancestral graves and the holding of gatherings were all provided by the eunuch.

古文：海内贡献，当养一君，今反尽之贤家，岂天意与民意邪！
现代文：各地的贡献，本应当奉养一位君主，而今反而全到了董贤的家里。这难道是天意和民意吗！
English: The contributions from all over the country, which should have supported a monarch, have now all gone to Dong Xian's family. Is this the will of heaven and the people?

古文：天不可久负，厚之如此，反所以害之也！
现代文：天意不可长久地背逆，对董贤如此厚待，反而会因此害了他！
English: Heaven's will must not be defied for long. Treating Dong Xian so generously will only harm him!

古文：诚欲哀贤，宜为谢过天地，解雠海内，免遣就国，收乘舆器物还之县官，如此，可以父子终其性命；不者，海内之所仇，未有得久安者也。
现代文：如果真要怜惜董贤，应该为他向天地谢罪，解除天下对他的仇视，罢免他的官职，遣回封国，没收所赐的御用器具，归还皇上。只有这样，才可保全他父子的性命。不然的话，作为全国所仇恨的人，他不可能获得长久的安宁。
English: If you really want to have mercy on Dong Xian, you should repent to heaven and earth for him, remove the world's hatred for him, dismiss him from his official post, send him back to the country, confiscate the royal utensils given to him, and return them to the emperor. Only in this way can the life of his father and son be preserved. Otherwise, as a person hated by the whole country, he cannot obtain long-term peace.

古文：孙宠、息夫躬不宜居国，可皆免，以视天下。
现代文：孙宠、息夫躬不应该再拥有封国，应该全部免去，以向天下表示彻底改过。
English: Sun Zhao and his son-in-law should no longer have the title of state, and should be completely exempted, so as to show the world that they have been completely reformed.

古文：复征何武、师丹、彭宣、傅喜，旷然使民易视，以应天心，建立大政，兴太平之端。 
现代文：重新征召何武、师丹、彭宣、傅喜，使百姓看到一个全新明朗的局面，以顺应天意，建立大政，开始复兴太平盛世。 
English: He Wu, Shi Dan, Peng Xuan and Fu Xi were re-recruited, so that the people could see a new and clear situation, and in accordance with God's will, establish a great government and begin to revive the Taiping prosperous era.

古文：上感大异，纳宣言，征何武、彭宣；拜鲍宣为司隶。
现代文：哀帝感到非常惊奇，采纳了鲍宣的建议，征召何武、彭宣，并授任鲍宣为司隶。
English: The Emperor was very surprised and accepted Bao Xuan's suggestion to conscript He Wu and Peng Xuan, and appointed Bao Xuan as his subordinate.

古文：上托傅太后遗诏，令太皇太后下丞相、御史，益封董贤二千户，赐孔乡侯、汝昌侯、阳新侯国。
现代文：哀帝假托傅太后的遗诏，请太皇太后下令给丞相、御史，要他们增加董贤采邑二千户人家，并赐给孔乡侯、汝昌侯、阳新侯封国。
English: In the last will and testament of the Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager was asked to issue an order to the Prime Minister and the Grand Historian, asking them to increase the number of households in Dongxian County by two thousand, and to grant fiefs to Kongxiang Hou, Ruchang Hou, and Yangxin Hou.

古文：王嘉封还诏书，因奏封事谏曰： 臣闻爵禄、土地，天之有也。
现代文：王嘉把诏书封起来退回，并上密封奏书劝谏说： 我听说爵位、俸禄、土地，是上天所有的。
English: Wang Jia sealed up the imperial edict and returned it to the emperor. He also sealed the imperial edict to persuade the emperor, saying, "I have heard that the title of nobility, the salary, and the land are all owned by Heaven.

古文：《书》云： 天命有德，五服五章哉！ 
现代文：《书经》说： 皇天命有德之人列居天子、诸侯、卿、大夫、士之位，穿表示尊卑的五种服装，色彩图案各不相同。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The Emperor decrees that those who are virtuous shall occupy the ranks of heavenly sons, princes, lords, doctors, and scholars, and wear five kinds of clothing, each with a different color pattern, to express their superiority and inferiority.

古文：王者代天爵人，尤宜慎之。
现代文：君王代表上天给人封爵，尤其应该谨慎。
English: It is especially prudent to be cautious when appointing someone as a knight on behalf of the king.

古文：裂地而封，不得其宜，则众庶不服，感动阴阳，其害疾自深。
现代文：划地分封采邑，如果处理不当，则民心不服，民众的怨气感动阴阳，就会深深损害陛下的身体。
English: It is not appropriate to divide the land to grant the seal, the people are not convinced, and it touches the yin and yang. Such a disadvantage is a serious harm to their own health.

古文：今圣体久不平，此臣嘉所内惧也。
现代文：现在陛下圣体久不康复，这是我内心所恐惧的事情。
English: Now your body has been unwell for a long time. This is what Minister Wang Jia is worried about.

古文：高安侯贤，佞幸之臣，陛下倾爵位以贵之，单货财以富之，损至尊以宠之，主威已黜，府臧已竭，唯恐不足。
现代文：高安侯董贤，是奸佞的宠臣，陛下把爵位封给他，使他显贵，竭尽财货赐与他，使他富足，损害圣上的利益去宠爱他，君王的权威已被降低，国库的储积已经枯竭，还唯恐不足。
English: Gao An Hou, Dong Xian, is the favorite of the treacherous scoundrel. His majesty has given him a title of nobility to make him prominent, and has given him all the wealth and goods to make him rich, and has damaged the sacred interests to pamper him. The authority of the monarch has been reduced, and the reserves of the treasury have been depleted, and they are afraid of being insufficient.

古文：财皆民力所为，孝文皇帝欲起露台，重百金之费，克己不作。
现代文：财富都是百姓创造的，孝文帝想兴建露台，因为看重那百金的修建费而克制自己不去兴建。
English: The Emperor Xiaowen wanted to build a terrace, but he was reluctant to spend the money and refrained from building it.

古文：今贤散公赋以施私惠，一家至受千金，往古以来，贵臣未尝有此，流闻四方，皆同怨之。
现代文：如今董贤却把国家的赋税作为私人恩惠随意施舍，甚至一家就可得到千金的赏赐。古往今来的贵臣，还从未有这样的。有关董贤的流言传播四方，人们全都怨恨他。
English: Today, however, Dong Xian treats the state's tax as a personal favor and gives it out freely. Even a family can receive a reward of thousands of dollars. There has never been such a thing among the dignitaries from ancient times to the present. Rumors about Dong Xian spread in all directions, and people all resent him.

古文：里谚曰： 千人所指，无病而死， 臣常为之寒心。
现代文：俗谚说： 千夫所指，无病而死。 我常为他感到寒心。
English: As the saying goes, "A man of a thousand faces dies a disease-free death." I often feel chilled for him.

古文：今太皇太后以永信太后遗诏诏丞相、御史，益贤户，赐三侯国，臣嘉窃惑。
现代文：现在，太皇太后根据永信宫傅太后的遗诏，而下诏给丞相、御史，要增加董贤采邑人户，赐给三位侯爵封国，臣王嘉感到十分困惑。
English: Now, the great empress dowager, according to the last will and testament of the great empress dowager Yongxin Palace Fu Yuan, and the next decree to the prime minister and the minister of history, to increase the number of nobles and nobles, to grant the three marquesses the fiefdom, the minister Wang Jia was very confused.

古文：山崩、地动、日食于三朝，皆阴侵阳之戒也。
现代文：山崩、地震、日食，同时发生在元旦 三始 之日，这都是上天因为阴侵阳而显示的警告啊。
English: Landslides, earthquakes, solar eclipses, and the simultaneous occurrence of New Year's Day on the third day of the month, these are all warnings shown by heaven because of the invasion of the sun by the yin.

古文：前贤已再封，晏、商再易邑，业缘私横求，恩已过厚，求索自恣，不知厌足，甚伤尊尊之义，不可以示天下，为害痛矣！
现代文：前些时，董贤已再次封爵，傅晏，傅商也再次改换封国采邑，郑业则利用私情横求。陛下所施恩惠已太厚了，他们仍恣意求索，不知满足。这已深深伤害了尊崇傅太后的本意，无法向天下人公布，为害至大！
English: In the past, Dong Xian had been given the title of nobility twice, Fu Xi and Fu Shang also changed their fiefdoms twice, Zheng Ye arbitrarily asked for favors out of selfishness. The favors were already too profound, and his desire to seek wealth and position and indulge his own desires could not be satisfied. This seriously damaged the great cause of reverence for His Holiness, and he was not able to show these things to the people of the world. The harm was extremely serious!

古文：臣骄侵罔，阴阳失节，气感相动，害及身体。
现代文：臣属骄横，就会冒犯欺骗主上，使阴阳失去调节，阴气阳气互相冲突，伤害身体。
English: If the minister is arrogant and cunning, the yin and yang lose control, and the qi and qi are in conflict, it will harm the body.

古文：陛下寝疾久不平，继嗣未立，宜思正万事，顺天人之心，以求福祐，奈何轻身肆意，不念高祖之勤苦，垂立制度，欲传之于无穷哉！
现代文：陛下卧病久不痊愈，又未立继承人，应该考虑使万事步入正轨，顺应天心民心，以求上天的保佑，怎么能忽视自身健康而肆意放纵，不念高祖创业的勤奋艰苦，留下所建立的制度，要使它传于无穷呢！
English: His Majesty, who has been ill for a long time and has not recovered, and has not yet appointed a successor, should consider putting everything on the right track, conforming to the heavenly heart and the people's hearts, and seeking the blessing of heaven. How can he ignore his own health and indulge in wanton indulgence, not remembering the hard work and hardship of his great-grandfather's entrepreneurship, and leaving the system established, so that it can be passed on to infinity!

古文：臣谨封上诏书，不敢露见。
现代文：我谨把诏书封还，不敢显露让别人看见。
English: I would like to return the imperial rescript sealed, I dare not show it for others to see.

古文：非爱死而不自法，恐天下闻之，故不敢自劾。 
现代文：并非因爱惜生命而不敢以违抗诏旨之法自劾，实而是恐怕天下人知道，因此不敢自我弹劾。 
English: It is not because they value their lives that they do not dare to impeach themselves by defying the edict. In fact, they are afraid that the whole world will know, so they do not dare to impeach themselves.

古文：初，廷尉梁相治东平王云狱，时冬月未尽二旬，而相心疑云冤狱，有饰辞，奏欲传之长安，更下公卿覆治。
现代文：当初，廷尉梁相审理东平王刘云一案时，冬月只剩下二十日，而梁相心里怀疑刘云一案是冤案，供辞有虚饰不实的地方，因而上奏哀帝，请求把一干人犯押解长安，改由公卿复审。
English: At first, when the courtier Liang Xiang tried the Dongping King Liu Yun case, there were only twenty days left in the month of winter, and Liang Xiang suspected in his heart that the Liu Yun case was an unjust case, and that the confession was false and untrue, so he appealed to the emperor and requested that a criminal be sent to Chang'an and be reviewed by the nobles.

古文：尚书令鞫谭、仆射宗伯凤以为可许。
现代文：尚书令鞫谭、仆射宗伯凤认为可以准许。
English: Shang Shuling, Zhu Tan, and Zhu Jia Zongbofeng thought that it could be approved.

古文：天子以为相等皆见上体不平，外内顾望，操持两心，幸云逾冬，无讨贼疾恶主雠之意，免相等皆为庶人。
现代文：哀帝则认为，梁相等人都见皇上病情没有起色，内外顾望，怀有二心，希图刘云一案侥幸拖过冬季，则可减刑免死，没有痛恨奸恶、为主上讨贼报仇的忠心，于是罢免了梁相等人的官职，都贬为平民。
English: On the other hand, Emperor Pai believed that Liang Sang and others all saw that the Emperor's condition had not improved, and they had double-minded expectations both at home and abroad. They hoped that if Liu Yun's case could be dragged out through the winter, they could commute the sentence and avoid death. They did not have the loyalty to hate treachery and seek revenge on thieves. Therefore, Liang Sang and others were dismissed from their official positions and all were reduced to civilians.

古文：后数月，大赦，嘉荐 相等皆有材行，圣王有计功除过，臣窃为朝廷惜此三人。 
现代文：数月后，大赦天下。王嘉举荐说： 梁相等人都有才干德行，圣明的君王对臣下总是计其功劳、抹去过失，我私下里为朝廷怜惜这三个人才。 
English: A few months later, he was pardoned by the emperor. Wang Jia recommended him, saying: Liang Xiang and the others are all talented and virtuous. The king of wisdom always considers his merits and erases his mistakes for his subjects. I secretly pity these three talents for the imperial court.

古文：书奏，上不能平。
现代文：奏书呈上，哀帝愤愤不平。
English: The Emperor was very displeased when the report was submitted.

古文：后二十馀日，嘉封还益董贤户事，上乃发怒，召嘉诣尚书，责问以 相等前坐不忠，罪恶著闻，君时辄已自劾；今又称誉，云 为朝廷惜之 ，何也？ 
现代文：过了二十余日，王嘉封还为董贤增加封国户数的诏书，哀帝于是大怒，召王嘉到尚书那里，令尚书责问他： 梁相等人前些时犯了对天子不忠之罪，罪恶昭著，人所共闻，当时你也曾自我弹劾。现在却又称誉赞美他们，说 为朝廷怜惜他们 ，这是为什么？ 
English: After more than 20 days, Wang Jiahu also issued an imperial edict to increase the number of state-owned households for Dong Xian. The emperor was so angry that he summoned Wang Jiahu to Shang Shu and ordered him to ask him: Liang Xiang and others committed the crime of disloyalty to the heavenly son some time ago. The crime is notorious and well-known to all. At that time, you also impeached yourself. Now, you praise and praise them, saying that the imperial court pities them. Why is this?

古文：嘉免冠谢罪。
现代文：王嘉脱下官帽谢罪。
English: Wang Jia took off his imperial crown to plead guilty.

古文：事下将军中朝者，光禄大夫孔光等劾 嘉迷国罔上，不道，请谒者召嘉诣廷尉诏狱。 
现代文：哀帝把此案交付将军和当时入朝的官员讨论。光禄大夫孔光等弹劾王嘉说： 王嘉迷惑国家，欺骗主上，大逆不道，请派谒者召王嘉前往廷尉诏狱。 
English: Emperor A sent the case to the general to discuss with the officials who had entered the court at that time. Guanglu doctor Kong Guang and others impeached Wang Jia, saying: Wang Jia has confused the country, deceived the Lord, and committed great treason. Please send someone to summon Wang Jia to the imperial prison.

古文：议郎龚等以为 嘉言事前后相违，宜夺爵土，免为庶人。 
现代文：议郎龚等认为： 王嘉的奏言前后不一致，应该剥夺爵位采邑，免去官职，贬为平民。 
English: He said that Wang Jia's speech was inconsistent, and he should be stripped of his title, removed from his post, and demoted to a commoner.

古文：永信少府猛等以为 嘉罪名虽应法，大臣括发关械，裸躬就笞，非所以重国，褒宗庙也。 
现代文：永信少府猛等认为： 王嘉的罪名虽然应该依法惩处，但是把大臣束住头发，锁上刑具，裸露身体，鞭笞拷打，这不是使国家受到尊重，宗庙受到褒美的作法。 
English: Yongxin Shofu Meng et al. believed that: Although Wang Jia's crime should be punished according to law, tying the minister's hair, locking the torture device, exposing his naked body, and whipping him is not a way to make the country respected and the ancestral temple rewarded.

古文：上不听，三月，诏 假谒者节，召丞相诣廷尉诏狱。 
现代文：哀帝不听猛的劝告，诏令使者： 凭谒者的符节，召丞相到廷尉诏狱。 
English: The emperor did not listen to the fierce exhortation and ordered the envoy: On the basis of the ruffian's code, summon the chancellor to the imperial officer's prison.

古文：使者既到，府掾、史涕泣，共和药进嘉，嘉不肯服。
现代文：使者到了丞相府，丞相府的掾、史等官员流泪哭泣，共同调和毒药请王嘉喝，王嘉不肯服用。
English: The envoy arrived at the Prime Minister's Office, where officials such as Gong and Shi shed tears and wept, and together they mixed the poison and asked Wang Jia to drink it. Wang Jia refused to take it.

古文：主簿曰： 将相不对理陈冤，相踵以为故事，君侯宜引决。 
现代文：主簿说： 将相不面对执法官为自己诉冤，这种作法世代相沿，已成为惯例，君侯应当自裁！ 
English: The registrar said: It is an old custom not to appear before a judge to plead one's case, you should commit suicide.

古文：使者危坐府门上，主簿复前进药。
现代文：使者严肃地坐在府门那边，主簿再次上前送上前送上毒药。
English: The messenger sat solemnly on the other side of the palace gate, and the host once again brought forward the poison.

古文：嘉引药杯以击地，谓官属曰： 丞相幸得备位三公，奉职负国，当伏刑都市，以示万众。
现代文：王嘉拿起药杯扔到地下，对相府官属们说： 丞相我有幸位居三公，如果奉职不谨慎，辜负了国家，理应在都市上伏刑受死，向万众宣告。
English: Wang Jia picked up the medicine cup and threw it into the ground, saying to the officials and subordinates of the cabinet of ministers: "Mr. Prime Minister, I am fortunate to be in the third rank. If you are not prudent in the performance of your duties and fail the country, you should be sentenced to death in the city and announced to everyone.

古文：丞相岂儿女子邪！
现代文：丞相难道是小儿小女吗！
English: Is the prime minister a child?

古文：何谓咀药而死！ 
现代文：为什么要吃毒药而死！ 
English: Why take poison and die!

古文：嘉遂装，出见使者，再拜受诏；乘吏小车，去盖，不冠，随使者诣廷尉。
现代文：于是王嘉穿戴官服，出来见使者，再拜，接受诏书，然后乘上小吏坐的小车，去掉车篷，脱下官帽，随使者到了廷尉官衙。
English: So Wang Jia put on his official uniform, came out to see the envoy, bowed again, accepted the imperial rescript, and then took the carriage in which the minor officials were sitting, removed the hood, took off his official cap, and followed the envoy to the palace.

古文：廷尉收嘉丞相、新甫侯印绶，缚嘉载致都船诏狱。
现代文：廷尉收缴了王嘉的丞相和新甫侯印信绶带，把他捆绑起来，押送到都船诏狱。
English: The imperial lieutenant took back the seal of Wang Jia, the new prince's chancellor, and bound Wang Jia and took him by car to the Duxunye prison.

古文：上闻嘉生自诣吏，大怒，使将军以下与五二千石杂治。
现代文：哀帝听说王嘉活着亲自去见廷尉，勃然大怒，派将军以下官员和五名二千石官员，共同审讯。
English: When the emperor heard that Wang Jia had seen the officials while he was still alive, he was furious and sent an official below the rank of general and five officials of 2,000 koku to deal with the matter together.

古文：吏诘问嘉，嘉对曰： 案事者思得实。
现代文：官吏审问王嘉时，他回答说： 审理案件的人，希望得到事实真相。
English: Wang Jia was questioned by the prison officers. Wang Jia replied, "People who investigate prison cases hope to get the facts.

古文：窃见相等前治东平王狱，不以云为不当死，欲关公卿，示重慎，诚不见其外内顾望，阿附为云验，复幸得蒙大赦。
现代文：我见梁相等过去审理东平王一案，并不认为刘云不该处死，只是希望公卿参与审理，以表示慎重。实在看不出他们有内外顾望怀有二心，阿谀攀附刘云的罪证。以后他们又有幸蒙恩获得大赦。
English: I saw Liang Xiang and others tried Dongping Wang's case in the past, and I do not think that Liu Yun should not be put to death, but I hope that the noblemen will participate in the trial to show caution. I really do not see that they have internal and external solicitation, harboring double-mindedness, and clinging to Liu Yun's evidence of guilt. Later, they were fortunate to receive amnesty.

古文：相等皆良善吏，臣窃为国惜贤，不私此三人。 
现代文：梁相等都是优秀的官吏，我是为国惜才，并不是偏袒他们三人。 
English: Both Leung Sang-wah and I are excellent officials. I cherish talent for the country, and do not favor the three of them.

古文：狱吏曰： 苟如此，则君何以为罪？
现代文：狱吏说： 假如是这样，那么你为什么有罪？
English: The warden said, "If that's the case, why are you guilty?"

古文：犹当有以负国，不空入狱矣。 
现代文：你还是有负国的行为，不是凭白入狱的。 
English: You still committed treason, you didn't go to prison for nothing.

古文：吏稍侵辱嘉，嘉喟然仰天叹曰： 幸得充备宰相，不能进贤、退不肖，以是负国，死有馀责。 
现代文：狱吏逐渐开始侵犯凌辱王嘉，王嘉喟然仰天叹息说： 我有幸能够充任丞相，不能引进贤能，斥退奸佞，因此是犯有负国之罪，死有余辜。 
English: The prison guards gradually began to abuse and humiliate Wang Jia, and Wang Jiaxuan looked up to heaven and sighed and said: I am fortunate to be able to serve as the prime minister, but I can't introduce talent and expel traitors. Therefore, I am guilty of betraying the country, and I have more than enough guilt to die.

古文：吏问贤、不肖主名。嘉曰： 贤：故丞相孔光、故大司空何武，不能进；恶：高安侯董贤父子，佞邪乱朝，而不能退。
现代文：狱吏问贤者和奸佞者的名崐字，王嘉说： 贤者，前丞相孔光、前大司空何武，却不能举荐引进他们；恶者，高安侯董贤父子奸佞乱朝，却不能斥退他们。
English: When the warden asked the names of the wise men and the traitors, Wang Jia said: The wise men, the former prime minister Kong Guang and the former grand secretary Ku He Wu, could not introduce them; the wicked men, Gao An Hou, Dong Xian and his son, who plotted to overthrow the government, could not expel them.

古文：罪当死，死无所恨！ 
现代文：罪当处死，死无所憾！ 
English: If the crime is punishable by death, there is nothing to regret!

古文：嘉系狱二十馀日，不食，欧血而死。
现代文：王嘉被关押在监狱二十余天，不进饮食，吐血而死。
English: Wang Jia was detained in prison for more than 20 days, did not eat, vomited blood and died.

古文：已而上览其对，思嘉言，会御史大夫贾延免，夏，五月，乙卯，以孔光为御史大夫。秋，七月，丙午，以光为丞相，复故国博山侯；又以汜乡侯何武为御史大夫。
现代文：不久，哀帝看到王嘉的供词，考虑他的话，正好御史大夫贾延被免去官职，于是在夏季五月乙卯，任命孔光为御史大夫，秋季，七月，丙午，再擢升孔光为丞相，恢复他从前的博山侯爵位和封国。又任用乡侯何武为御史大夫。
English: Soon, the Emperor saw Wang Jia's confession and considered his words. It was just at that time that Jia Yan, the Grand Historian, was dismissed from his official post. Therefore, in the summer of May, he appointed Kongguang as the Grand Historian. In the autumn, in July, in the afternoon, he promoted Kongguang to the Minister of War and restored his former title of the Marquis of Boshan. He also appointed He Wu as the Grand Historian.

古文：上乃知孔光前免非其罪，以过近臣毁短光者，曰： 傅嘉前为侍中，毁谮仁贤，诬诉大臣，令俊艾者久失其位，其免嘉为庶人，归故郡。 
现代文：哀帝这才明白，孔光以前被免职，并不是他真有罪，而是自己所亲近的那些臣子诋毁诬陷孔光造成的。于是说： 傅嘉先前为侍中，诋毁仁智贤能者，诬陷大臣，使杰出的人才长时间失去官位。现在罢免傅嘉的官职，贬为平民，遣返原郡。 
English: It was only then that Emperor Ai understood that Kong Guang's previous removal from office was not due to his real guilt, but was caused by those courtiers close to him slandering and framing Kong Guang. So he said: Fu Jia was previously a chamberlain, slandering the benevolent, wise and virtuous, framing ministers, and causing outstanding talents to lose their official positions for a long time. Now remove Fu Jia's official position, reduce him to a commoner, and repatriate him to his original county.

古文：八月，何武徙为前将军。
现代文：八月，调任何武为前将军。
English: In August, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：辛卯，光禄大夫彭宣为御史大夫。
现代文：辛卯，任命光禄大夫彭宣为御史大夫。
English: Xinwu, appointed Guanglu doctor Peng Xuan as the goshi doctor.

古文：司隶鲍宣坐摧辱宰相，拒闭使者，无人臣礼，减死髡钳。
现代文：司隶鲍宣因折辱丞相，闭门拒绝使者，违背臣子之礼而获罪，被减免死罪，剃发，身带刑具服役。
English: The courtier Bao Xuan was convicted of insulting the prime minister, refusing the envoy behind closed doors, and violating the courtesy of a vassal. He was commuted from the death penalty, had his hair shaved, and served in the army with instruments of torture.

古文：大司马丁明素重王嘉，以其死而怜之；九月，乙卯，册免明，使就第。
现代文：大司马丁明一向敬重王嘉，对他的死感到怜惜。九月，乙卯，哀帝下策书，罢免丁明的官职，让他离开朝廷，回到宅第。
English: Daishi Martin Ming had always respected Wang Jia and felt pity for his death. In September, the Emperor mourned the death of Ding Ming and dismissed him from his official post, allowing him to leave the imperial court and return to his residence.

古文：冬，十一月，壬午，以故定陶太傅、光禄大夫韦赏为大司马、车骑将军。
现代文：冬季，十一月，壬午，任用前定陶国太傅、光禄大夫韦赏为大司马、车骑将军。
English: In winter, in November, at noon, he appointed the previously appointed Tao Guotaifu and Guanglu Doctor Wei Yun as the grand secretary of horses and chariots.

古文：己丑，赏卒。
现代文：己丑，韦赏去世。
English: Self-loathing, Wei Yun passed away.

古文：十二月，庚子，以侍中、驸马都尉董贤为大司马、卫将军，册曰： 建尔于公，以为汉辅！
现代文：十二月，庚子，任命侍中、驸马都尉董贤为大司马、卫将军。任命策书上说： 树立你为三公，作为汉朝的辅佐！
English: In December, Geng Zi appointed Dong Xian, a chamberlain and lieutenant of the Horse Guards, as the grand steward and general of the Guards. The appointment policy said: "Establish you as the Three Princes, as an assistant of the Han Dynasty!"

古文：往悉尔心，匡正庶事，允执其中！ 
现代文：我一向知道你的忠心，能匡正众事，真诚地坚持中庸之道。 
English: I have always known your loyalty, your ability to set things right, and your sincere adherence to the middle way.

古文：是时贤年二十二，虽为三公，常给事中，领尚书，百官因贤奏事。
现代文：当时董贤二十二岁，虽然为三公，但常在宫中随侍，主管尚书事务，百官必须通过董贤才可奏事。
English: At that time, Dong Xian was twenty-two years old. Although he was the third prince, he was often an attendant in the palace, in charge of book-keeping affairs. All officials had to go through Dong Xian before they could perform their duties.

古文：以父卫尉恭不宜在卿位，徙为光禄大夫、秩中二千石；弟宽信代贤为驸马都尉。
现代文：哀帝又因为董贤的父亲卫尉董恭不再适合处在卿位，就把他调升为光禄大夫，官秩为中二千石。董贤的弟弟董宽信，接替董贤为驸马都尉。
English: In addition, because Dong Xian's father, Wei Fei Dong Qiong, was no longer fit to hold the title of nobility, Emperor Ai promoted him to Guanglu Daifu, with an official rank of 2,000 koku. Dong Xian's younger brother, Dong Guangxin, succeeded Dong Xian as Baima Duifu.

古文：董氏亲属皆侍中、诸曹、奉朝请，宠在丁、傅之右矣。
现代文：董氏亲属都成为侍中、诸曹，能够定期朝见皇帝，荣宠在丁、傅两家之上。
English: The relatives of the Dong family all became attendants, Zhu Cao, and were able to meet the emperor on a regular basis. They were favored over the two families of Ding and Fu.

古文：初，丞相孔光为御史大夫，贤父恭为御史，事光。
现代文：当初，丞相孔光为御史大夫时，董贤的父亲董恭为御史，要事奉孔光。
English: At first, when the chancellor Kong Guang was the imperial historian, Dong Xian's father, Dong Gong, was the imperial historian and had to serve Kong Guang.

古文：及贤为大司马，与光并为三公。
现代文：等到董贤当上大司马，与孔光同为三公。
English: When Dong Xian became the grand steward, he and Kong Guang became the same as the three princes.

古文：上故令贤私过光。光雅恭谨，知上欲尊宠贤。
现代文：不敢用接待同等地位宾客的礼节来接待董贤。
English: He did not dare to receive Dong Xian with the etiquette of receiving guests of equal status.

古文：及闻贤当来也，光警戒衣冠出门待，望见贤车乃却入，贤至中门，光入阁，既下车，乃出，拜谒、送迎其谨，不敢以宾客钧敌之礼。上闻之，喜，立拜光两兄子为谏大夫、常侍。
现代文：哀帝听说后，喜在心头，立即授孔光的两个侄子为谏大夫、常侍。
English: Upon hearing the news, the Emperor was overjoyed and immediately appointed Kong Guang's two nephews as his doctor and attendant.

古文：贤由是权与人主侔矣。
现代文：从此，董贤的权势与皇帝相等了。
English: From then on, Dong Xian's power was equal to that of the monarch.

古文：是时，成帝外家王氏衰废，唯平阿侯谭子去疾为侍中，弟闳为中常侍。
现代文：这时，成帝的外戚王氏家族已经衰微了，只有平阿侯王谭的儿子王去疾担任侍中，弟弟王闳担任中常侍。
English: At this time, the Wang family, the maternal relatives of Emperor Chengdu, had already declined. Only the son of Ping Ahou Wang Tan, Wang Dezi, served as an attendant, and his brother Wang Qian served as a regular attendant.

古文：闳妻父中郎将萧咸，前将军望之子也，贤父恭慕之，欲为子宽信求咸女为妇，使闳言之。
现代文：王闳的岳父是中郎将萧咸，萧咸是过去的前将军萧望之的儿子。董贤的父亲董恭对萧咸很仰慕，想为儿子董宽信求娶萧咸的女儿为妻，就请王闳去对萧咸说明这个意思。
English: Wang Yao's father-in-law was the middle-ranking general Xiao Ham, the son of the former general Xiao Wanzhi. Dong Xian's father, Dong Qiong, admired Xiao Ham very much and wanted to marry Xiao Ham's daughter for his son, Dong Guangxin, so he asked Wang Yao to explain this to Xiao Ham.

古文：咸惶恐不敢当，私谓闳曰： 董公为大司马，册文言 允执其中 ，此乃尧禅舜之文，非三公故事，长者见者莫不心惧。
现代文：萧咸惶恐不敢答允，私下对王闳说： 任命董公为大司马时，策书上说： 真诚地坚持中庸之道。 这是尧将大位禅让给舜时所说的一句话，不是拜三公所惯用的语言。前辈们见到的，元不感到恐惧。
English: Xiao Xianpeng was afraid to agree, so he said to Wang Xuan privately, "When Dong Gong was appointed as the grand steward, the policy book said, "Sincerely adhere to the middle way." This is a sentence said by Xuan when he gave the position of Zen to Xuan, and it is not the language used by Baisan Gong. The predecessors did not feel fear when they saw it.

古文：此岂家人子所能堪邪！ 
现代文：这岂是我们普通人家的孩子，所能承当得起的？ 
English: How can a commoner's son be in charge of this?

古文：闳性有知略，闻咸言，心亦悟；乃还报恭，深达咸自谦薄之意。
现代文：王闳生性聪明，有谋略，听了萧咸的话，也醒悟了。于是回报董恭，转达了萧咸自感地位卑微，高攀不上的意思，代致深深的歉意。
English: Wang Xuan was clever and had a strategy. After listening to Xiao Xian's words, he also came to his senses. So he returned the favor to Dong Qiong and conveyed Xiao Xian's feeling that he was in a lowly position and could not climb higher, causing deep apologies on his behalf.

古文：恭叹曰： 我家何用负天下，而为人所畏如是！ 
现代文：董恭叹息说： 我家怎么对不起天下，而竟被人畏惧到这种程度！ 
English: Dong Qian sighed and said, "What is it about my family that makes people so afraid?"

古文：意不说。
现代文：感到不悦。
English: I'm not happy.

古文：后上置酒麒麟殿，贤父子、亲属宴饮，侍中、中常侍皆在侧，上有酒所，从容视贤，笑曰： 吾欲法尧禅舜，何如？ 
现代文：后来，哀帝在麒麟殿设酒宴，与董贤父子、亲属一起宴饮，侍中、中常侍都在旁边侍候。哀帝喝多了点酒，从容地看着董贤，笑着说： 我打算效法尧禅位于舜，怎么样？ 
English: Later, Emperor Ai held a wine banquet at the Kirin Hall, dining with Dong Xian, father and son, and relatives, with the chamberlains and regular attendants waiting nearby. Emperor Ai drank a little too much wine, looked at Dong Xian calmly, and said with a smile, "I'm going to follow the example of Yu Zhen and stay in Yu, how about that?"

古文：王闳进曰： 天下乃高皇帝天下，非陛下之有也！
现代文：王闳插话说： 天下乃高皇帝的天下，并非陛下所有！
English: Wang Yao chimed in and said, "The whole world belongs to Emperor Gao, it is not owned by His Majesty!

古文：陛下承宗庙，当传子孙于亡穷，统业至重，天子亡戏言！ 
现代文：陛下承继宗庙，应当传子孙于无穷。王统帝业是至关重大的事情，天子不可戏言！ 
English: His Majesty inherits the ancestral temple and should pass it on to his children and grandchildren to infinity. Reigning over the empire is a crucial matter, and the Son of Heaven must not be trifled with!

古文：上默然不说，左右皆恐。
现代文：哀帝默然不悦，左右都感到震惊。
English: The emperor was silent and unhappy, and everyone around him was terrified.

古文：于是遣闳出归郎署。
现代文：于是哀帝命王闳出宫，回到郎署，不许再随侍禁中。
English: As a result, Emperor Ai ordered Wang Xi to leave the palace and return to his steward's office, and he was no longer allowed to remain under house arrest.

古文：久之，太皇太后为闳谢，复召闳还。
现代文：很久之后，太皇太后为王闳向哀帝表示道歉，哀帝才又召回王闳。
English: After a long time, the Grand Empress Dowager apologized to Emperor Pai for Wang Yao, and Emperor Pai recalled Wang Yao.

古文：闳遂上书谏曰： 臣闻王者立三公，法三光，居之者当得贤人。
现代文：王闳就上书规谏说： 我听说君王设立三公的官职，是效法日、月、星三光，居此位者必须是贤能的人。
English: Wang Yao said, "I heard that the king established the post of the Three Princes by following the example of the sun, the moon and the three stars. The holder of this post must be a man of virtue.

古文：《易》曰： 鼎折足，覆公餗， 喻三公非其人也。
现代文：《易经》说： 鼎折了脚，里面的食物就会倾倒出来。 
English: "I Ching" says: If the top of the foot is broken, the food inside will spill out.

古文：昔孝文皇帝幸邓通，不过中大夫；武皇帝幸韩嫣，常赐而已，皆不在大位。
现代文：用来比喻担任三公的人不是贤能者所造成的后果。从前孝文皇帝宠爱邓通，不过让他担任中大夫而已；武帝宠爱韩嫣，也不过加以赏赐而已，他们二人都不在高位。
English: The person who serves as the Three Wise Men is not the result of a virtuous person. In the past, Emperor Xiaowen favored Duntong, but only let him serve as a middle doctor; Emperor Wu favored Han Zheng, but only rewarded him, and neither of them was in a high position.

古文：今大司马、卫将军董贤，无功于汉朝，又无肺腑之连，复无名迹高行以矫世，升擢数年，列备鼎足，典卫禁兵，无功封爵，父子、兄弟横蒙拔擢，赏赐空竭帑藏，万民喧哗，偶言道路，诚不当天心也！
现代文：而今大司马、卫将军董贤，对汉朝没有什么功劳，跟皇家又没有丝毫亲属关系，又没有清白的名声、优秀的事迹、高尚的品行，可以作为世人的表率，却一连数年擢升，列位三公，成为鼎足之一，而且掌管禁卫军队。他无功加封侯爵，父了兄弟凭空受到提拔擢升，赏赐之多，使国库空虚。万民喧哗，在道路上议论纷纷，实在是不合天意！
English: However, the current Grand Master of the Horse and General of the Guards, Dong Xian, has nothing to do with the Han Dynasty, is not related to the royal family in the slightest, and does not have a clean reputation, outstanding deeds, and noble conduct, and can serve as a role model for the world. However, he has been promoted for several years in a row, ranked as one of the Three Princes, and is in charge of the Imperial Guard Army. He was awarded the title of marquis without merit, and his father and brother were promoted and promoted out of thin air, and received many rewards, leaving the national treasury empty. The noise of the people, and the discussions on the road, are

古文：昔褒神蚖变化为人，实生褒姒，乱周国，恐陛下有过失之讥，贤有小人不知进退之祸，非所以垂法后世也！ 
现代文：从前，褒国的神蛇变化为人，生下美女褒姒，从而使周朝大乱。我恐怕陛下会因过失受到讥讽，董贤会有小人不知进退的灾祸。陛下现在的所作所为，是不可以传给后世效法的！ 
English: Once upon a time, the divine snake of Bao Guo changed into a human and gave birth to a beautiful woman, Bao Quan, thus causing great turmoil in the Zhou Dynasty. I am afraid that Your Majesty will be ridiculed for negligence, and Dong Xian will have the scourge that villains do not know whether to advance or retreat. What Your Majesty is doing now cannot be passed on to future generations!

古文：上虽不从闳言，多其年少志强，亦不罪也。
现代文：哀帝虽然听不进王闳的劝告，但欣赏他年少志壮，也就没有加罪。
English: Although Aidi did not listen to Wang Yao's advice, he appreciated that he was young and strong-willed, which did not add to his guilt.

古文：孝哀皇帝下元寿二年
现代文：元寿二年
English: In the second year of his life

古文：春，正月，匈奴单于及乌孙大昆弥伊秩靡皆来朝，汉以为荣。
现代文：春季，正月，匈奴单于以及乌孙大昆弥伊秩靡都到长安朝见，汉朝认为很荣耀。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Xiongnu Shan Yu and the great-grandson of Wusun, Kunmai Chichimai, both came to Chang'an to meet the emperor. The Han Dynasty considered it a great honor.

古文：是时西域凡五十国，自译长至将、相、侯、王皆佩汉印绶，凡三百七十六人；而康居、大月氏、安息、罽宾、乌弋之属，皆以绝远，不在数中，其来贡献，则相与报，不督录总领也。
现代文：这时西域共有五十个王国，自译长到将、相、侯、王，都佩带汉朝颁赐的印信、绶带，共有三百七十六人。而康居、大月氏、安息、宾、乌弋等国，都因离汉朝太远，不包括在五十国之内。当他们来贡献，汉朝就给予相当的还报，不把他们归属在西域都护管辖范围。
English: At this time, there were a total of fifty kingdoms in the Western Regions, and there were three hundred and seventy-six people in the Western Regions, including generals, ministers, lords, and kings, who all wore the seal letter and sash given by the Han Dynasty. However, countries such as Kangju, the Otsuki clan, Shibuya, Bin, and Wuyi were not included in the fifty countries because they were too far away from the Han Dynasty. When they came to contribute, the Han Dynasty gave a considerable return, and did not belong to the jurisdiction of the Western Regions.

古文：自黄龙以来，单于每入朝，其赏赐锦绣、缯絮，辄加厚于前，以慰接之。
现代文：自黄龙年间以来，单于每次来崐长安朝见，天子赏赐的锦绣、丝绸、丝绵，都比前一次多，用安抚来接待他们。
English: Since the time of the Yellow Dragon, each time the emperors came to Chang'an to meet the emperor, the emperor rewarded them with more brocade, silk and silk fabric than the previous time, and received them with appeasement.

古文：单于宴见，群臣在前，单于怪董贤年少，以问译。上令译报曰： 大司马年少，以大贤居位。 
现代文：单于在天子闲暇时进见天子，群臣正在殿前，单于对董贤的年轻感到惊奇，就向翻译询问，哀帝命翻译回答说： 大司马虽年轻，却是因为有大贤能才居高位的。 
English: Just because he was seen in his leisure time and the courtiers were in front of the palace, and just because he was surprised by Dong Xian's youth, he asked the translator. The translator replied, "Although Da Sima is young, he holds a high position because of his great ability."

古文：单于乃起，拜贺汉得贤臣。
现代文：单于于是起身，拜贺汉朝得此贤臣。
English: So he got up, and congratulated the Han Dynasty for having gained such a wise minister.

古文：是时上以大岁厌胜所在，舍单于上林苑蒲陶宫，告之以加敬於单于；单于知之，不悦。
现代文：这年，哀帝因太岁在申，压伏南方，就安排单于住在长安之南的上林苑蒲陶宫，告诉单于说，为了更加尊敬单于才这样安排。后来单于知道了内情，感到不悦。
English: This year, because Emperor Aye was too old to be in Shen and had to stay in the south, he arranged for Jie to live in Shanglinyuan Putao Palace in the south of Chang'an. He told Jie that he had arranged for this in order to have more respect for Jie. Later, Jie learned the inside story and felt displeased.

古文：夏，四月，壬辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬辰晦，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, at the end of the lunar calendar, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：五月，甲子，正三公官分职。
现代文：五月，甲子，正式确定三公官名和各自的分工职掌。
English: In May, the names of the three public officials and their respective duties were officially determined.

古文：大司马、卫将军董贤为大司马；丞相孔光为大司徒；御史大夫彭宣为大司空，封长平侯。六月，戊午，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：任命大司马、卫将军董贤为大司马；丞相孔光为大司徒；彭宣为大司空，封长平侯。六月，戊午，哀帝在未央宫驾崩。
English: He appointed the grand steward and Wei general Dong Xian as the grand steward; the chancellor Kong Guang as the grand steward; Peng Xuan as the grand steward Ku, and Ping Hou as the chief steward. In June, at noon, the emperor died in the Weiyang Palace.

古文：帝睹孝成之世禄去王室，及即位，屡诛大臣，欲强主威以则武、宣。
现代文：哀帝目睹了孝成皇帝时代政权脱离王室情形，及至登极，他屡次诛杀大臣，想效法汉武帝和汉宣帝，加强君主之威。
English: Emperor Pai witnessed the separation of the imperial power from the royal family during the reign of Emperor Xiaocheng, and when he ascended to the throne, he repeatedly assassinated ministers, wanting to emulate Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Han Xuan and strengthen the authority of the monarch.

古文：然而宠信谗谄，憎疾忠直，汉业由是遂衰。
现代文：然而他宠任奸佞，听信谗言，憎恨忠直的之臣，汉朝的大业从此便衰落了。
English: However, he favored traitors, listened to gossips, and hated loyal vassals, and the great cause of the Han Dynasty declined from then on.

古文：太皇太后闻帝崩，即日驾之未央宫，收取玺绶。
现代文：太皇太后得到哀帝驾崩的消息，当天就驾临未央宫，收走了皇帝的玉玺、绶带。
English: When the Empress Dowager received the news of the Emperor's death, she arrived at the Miyang Palace on the same day and took away the Emperor's jade bracelet and sash.

古文：太后召大司马贤，引见东箱，问以丧事调度。
现代文：太后召大司马董贤，在东厢接见，询问他关于哀帝丧事的布置安排。
English: The empress dowager summoned the grand secretary Ma Dongxian and met him in the east wing to inquire about the funeral arrangements for the deceased emperor.

古文：贤内忧，不能对，免冠谢。
现代文：董贤内心忧惧，不能回答，只有脱下官帽谢罪。
English: Uneasy in his heart, Dong Xian couldn't answer correctly, so he went to the top to apologize.

古文：太后曰： 新都侯莽，前以大司马奉送先帝大行，晓习故事，吾令莽佐君。 
现代文：太后说： 新都侯王莽，先前曾以大司马身份，办理过先帝的丧事，熟悉旧例，我命他来辅佐你。 
English: The empress dowager said: Wang Mang, the prince of the new capital, had previously handled the funeral of the former emperor as the chief steward, and was familiar with the old custom. I ordered him to assist you.

古文：贤顿首： 幸甚！ 
现代文：董贤叩头说： 那就太好了！ 
English: Dong Xian kowtowed and said: That would be great!

古文：太后遣使者驰召莽。诏尚书，诸发兵符节、百官奏事、中黄门、期门兵皆属莽。
现代文：太后派使者骑马速召王莽，并下诏给尚书：所有征调军队的符节、百官奏事、中黄门和期门武士等，都归王莽掌管。
English: The empress dowager sent an envoy on horseback to summon Wang Mang, and issued an edict to Shangshu: all the conscription of the army, the report of the centurion, the warriors of the Middle Yellow Gate and the Time Gate, etc. were all under the control of Wang Mang.

古文：莽以太后指，使尚书劾贤帝病不亲医药，禁止贤不得入宫殿司马中；贤不知所为，诣阙免冠徒跣谢。
现代文：王莽遵照太后旨令，命尚书弹劾董贤，说他在哀帝病重时不亲自侍奉医药，因此禁止董贤进入宫殿禁卫军中。董贤不知如何才好，到皇宫大门，脱下官帽，赤着脚叩头谢罪。
English: Wang Mang, in accordance with the order of the empress dowager, ordered Shang Shu to impeach Dong Xian, saying that he did not personally serve medicine when he was seriously ill, and therefore banned Dong Xian from entering the palace guards. Dong Xian did not know what to do, went to the palace gate, took off his official cap, and bowed his head with bare feet.

古文：己未，莽使谒者以太后诏即阙下册贤曰： 贤年少，未更事理，为大司马，不合众心，其收大司马印绶，罢归第！ 
现代文：己未，王莽派谒者拿着太后诏书，就在宫门口罢免了董贤，说： 董贤年轻，未经历过事理，当大司马不合民心。着即收回大司马印信、绶带，免去官职，遣回宅第。 
English: Not long after, Wang Mang sent an envoy to take the empress dowager's edict and dismissed Dong Xian at the gate of the palace, saying: Dong Xian is young and has not experienced the truth, and being the grand steward is not in line with the people's will. He immediately withdrew the grand steward's seal letter and sash, removed him from his official position, and sent him back to his residence.

古文：即日，贤与妻皆自杀；家惶恐，夜葬。
现代文：当天，董贤与妻子都自杀了。其家人惶恐万分，趁夜将他悄悄埋葬。
English: On the same day, Dong Xian and his wife both committed suicide. Panicked, his family took advantage of the night to quietly bury him.

古文：莽疑其诈死。有司奏请发贤棺，至狱诊视，因埋狱中。
现代文：王莽疑心他诈死，于是主管官员奏请发掘董贤棺柩，把棺柩抬到监狱验视，就将他埋葬在狱中。
English: Wang Meng suspected that he had faked his death, so the responsible officials requested the excavation of Dong Xian's coffin, carried the coffin to the prison for inspection, and buried him in prison.

古文：太皇太后诏 公卿举可大司马者 。
现代文：太皇太后诏令 公卿举荐可担任大司马的人选。 
English: The empress dowager issued an imperial edict that the candidate recommended by the public secretary could serve as the grand steward.

古文：莽故大司马，辞位避丁、傅，众庶称以为贤，又太皇太后近亲，自大司徒孔光以下，举朝皆举莽。独前将军何武、左将军公孙禄二人相与谋，以为 往时惠、昭之世，外戚吕、霍、上官持权，几危社稷；今孝成、孝哀比世无嗣，方当选立近亲幼主，不宜令外戚大臣持权。
现代文：王莽从前是大司马，为避开丁、傅两家才辞去职务，众人都认为他贤能，又是太皇太后的近亲，满朝文武百官自大司徒孔光以下，全都推举他担任大司马，只有前将军何武和左将军公孙禄持异议，两人相互磋商，认为： 往昔，惠帝、昭帝时，外戚吕、霍、上官氏把持朝政，几乎危及刘氏江山，而今孝成、孝哀两帝接连没有后嗣，正应当选立刘氏近支亲属为新帝，不应再让外戚大臣独专朝廷大权。
English: Wang Mang used to be the grand steward. He only resigned his post to avoid the two families of Ding and Fu. Everyone thought he was capable and a close relative of the great empress dowager. All the military and civilian officials of the dynasty, from the grand steward to Kong Guang, all recommended him as the grand steward. Only the former general He Wu and the left general Gong Sun Lu disagreed. The two consulted with each other and thought: In the past, when Hui and Zhao were emperors, the maternal relatives Lu, Huo and Shangguan ruled the imperial government, almost endangering the Liu clan. Now that the two emperors, Xiaocheng and Xiao

古文：亲疏相错，为国计便。 
现代文：应让外戚跟其他官员互相掺杂，治国之策以此为宜。 
English: Relatives and other officials should be allowed to mingle with each other. This is an appropriate way to govern the country.

古文：于是武举公孙禄可大司马，而禄亦举武。
现代文：于是何武举荐公孙禄为大司马人选，而公孙禄也举荐何武。
English: Therefore, He Wu's choice, Gongsun Lu, can be the grand steward, and Gongsun Lu's choice, He Wu, is the best.

古文：庚申，太皇太后自用莽为大司马、领尚书事。
现代文：庚申，太皇太后自定任用王莽为大司马，主管尚书事务。
English: Goshun, the Great Empress Dowager herself appointed Wang Mang as the chief secretary, in charge of the book affairs.

古文：太皇太后与莽议立嗣。
现代文：太皇太后与王莽商议选立皇位继承人。
English: The Empress Dowager consults with Wang Mang to choose an heir to the throne.

古文：安阳侯王舜，莽之从弟，其人修饬，太皇太后所信爱也，莽白以舜为车骑将军。
现代文：安阳侯王舜，是王莽的堂弟，为人正直谨慎，受到太皇太后的信任宠爱，王莽就奏请太皇太后，任命王舜为车骑将军。
English: Wang Mang, a cousin of Wang Yang, was honest and prudent, and was trusted and favored by the Empress Dowager. Wang Mang asked the Empress Dowager to appoint Wang Mang as the General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：秋，七月，遣舜与大鸿胪左咸使持节迎中山王箕子以为嗣。
现代文：秋季，七月，派王舜和大鸿胪左咸持符节迎接中山王刘箕子，立为皇位继承人。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wang Qian and Dahong Qian Zuohan held a festival to welcome the King of Zhongshan, Liu Zizi, and made him the heir to the throne.

古文：莽又白太皇太后，诏有司以皇太后前与女弟昭仪专宠锢寝，残灭继嗣，贬为孝成皇后，徙居北宫。又以定陶共王太后与孔乡侯晏同心合谋，背恩忘本，专恣不轨，徙孝哀皇后退就桂宫，傅氏、丁氏皆免官爵归故郡，傅晏将妻子徙合浦。
现代文：王莽又奏报太皇太后，让她下诏书给主管官署：因为皇太后赵飞燕与妹妹赵昭仪，专宠专房，禁锢其他美女进御，残害灭绝成帝嗣子，将赵飞燕贬为孝成皇后，迁到北宫居住；又因定陶共王太后傅氏与孔乡侯傅晏同心合谋，背恩忘本，专断放肆，图谋不轨，现将孝哀皇后贬到桂宫，傅氏、丁氏两家族全部免官罢职，剥夺爵位，遣回原郡，傅晏带同妻儿全家迁居合浦。
English: Wang Mang also reported to the Grand Empress Dowager, and asked her to issue an edict to the competent authority: because the Empress Dowager Zhao Feiyan and her sister Zhao Zhaoyi, a special favorite, imprisoned other beautiful women to enter the imperial court, mutilated and exterminated the emperor's heir, reduced Zhao Feiyan to the Empress Xiaocheng, and moved to the North Palace; and because the Ding Tao Communist Empress Dowager Fu and the Kong Township Hou Fu Xi conspired together, forgot the book, arbitrarily presumptuous, and attempted to deviate from the track, and now reduced the Empress Xiao Ai to the Gu

古文：独下诏褒扬傅喜曰： 高武侯喜，姿性端悫，论议忠直，虽与故定陶太后有属，终不顺指从邪，介然守节，以故斥逐就国。
现代文：太皇太后唯独下诏褒奖赞扬傅喜说： 高武侯傅喜，性情端正谨严，言论和主张忠诚正直。虽然跟已故定陶太后有亲属关系，但始终不肯顺从旨意，附合邪恶，孤高耿直，严守节操，因此才被斥逐回封国。
English: The Dowager Empress Dowager Ding Tao was the only one to praise Fu Xi with an imperial edict, saying: Gaowu marquess Fu Xi is the best, his temperament is upright and rigorous, his speech and advocacy are loyal and honest. Although he is related to the late Dowager Empress Ding Tao, he has always refused to obey the will, adhered to evil, stood tall and upright, and strictly abided by ethics, so he was expelled back to the feudal state.

古文：《传》不云乎： 岁寒然后知松柏之后凋也。 
现代文：经传书不是说： 岁寒，然后才知松柏不易凋谢。 
English: The textbook does not say, "It takes years of cold weather before you know that conifers do not wither easily."

古文：其还喜长安，位特进，奉朝请。 
现代文：现召傅喜回到长安，官位特进，可以定期朝见天子。 
English: Fu Xi has now been called back to Chang'an, and has been promoted to a special official rank, so that he can regularly see the Son of Heaven.

古文：喜虽外见褒赏，孤立忧惧；后复遣就国，以寿终。
现代文：傅喜虽在外表上受到褒奖，但内心深感孤立和忧惧。以后又被遣回封国，终其天年。
English: Although Fu Xi received praise on the outside, he was deeply isolated and worried inside. Later, he was sent back to the feudal country, where he lived out the rest of his days.

古文：莽又贬傅太后号为定陶共王母，丁太后号曰丁姬。
现代文：王莽又把傅太后的称号贬为定陶共王母，贬丁太后为丁姬。
English: Wang Mang also belittled the title of Fu's mother-in-law as Ding Tao's mother-in-law, and belittled Ding's mother-in-law as Ding Ji.

古文：莽又奏董贤父子骄恣奢僭，请收没入财物县官，诸以贤为官者皆免。
现代文：王莽又上奏：董贤父子骄横放纵，奢侈僭越，请求没收他家财物入官府。凡因董贤的关系做官的，一律罢免。
English: Wang Mang went on to say that Dong Xian and his son were arrogant and indulgent, indulged in extravagance, and requested the confiscation of his family's property to the government office. Anyone who was an official because of his relationship with Dong Xian would be dismissed.

古文：父恭、弟宽信与家属徙合浦，母别归故郡巨鹿。
现代文：董贤的父董恭、弟弟董宽信及其家属迁往合浦。特准董贤的母亲回归原郡钜鹿。
English: His father, Dong Qiong, his brother, Dong Quanxin, and their families moved to Hapu, while his mother returned to her hometown, Menglu County.

古文：长安中小民欢哗，乡其第哭，几获盗之。
现代文：长安城中的小民喧闹纷纷，向着董贤的府第哭泣，企图进行盗窃。
English: The little people in Chang'an City were noisy, crying at Dong Xian's mansion, and trying to steal.

古文：县官斥卖董氏财，凡四十三万万。
现代文：官府变卖董氏财产，一共四十三亿之多。
English: The government sold Mr. Dong's property for a total of 4.3 billion.

古文：贤所厚吏沛硃诩自劾去大司马府，买棺衣，收贤尸葬之。
现代文：与董贤交厚的官吏沛人朱诩自我弹劾，辞去大司马府的职务，买了棺材寿衣等，收殓董贤的尸体安葬。
English: Zhu Xi, an official who was friendly with Dong Xian, self-impeached, resigned from the post of the chief secretary of the Ma government, bought a coffin and a shroud, and collected Dong Xian's body for burial.

古文：莽闻之，以它罪击杀诩。
现代文：王莽听说后，用其他的罪名杀了朱诩。
English: After Wang Mang heard about this, he used other charges to kill Zhu Rong.

古文：莽以大司徒孔光名儒，相三主，太后所敬，天下信之，于是盛尊事光，引光女婿甄邯为侍中、奉车都尉。
现代文：王莽因为大司徒孔光是名儒，在三位皇帝手下担任过丞相，太皇太后对他也很敬重，天下人也信赖他，因此对孔光毕恭毕敬，引荐孔光的女婿甄邯为侍中、奉车都尉。
English: Wang Mang, because the great disciple Kong Guang was a famous Confucian, served as the prime minister under three emperors, the great empress dowager also respected him, and the people of the world also trusted him. Therefore, he was very respectful to Kong Guang, and introduced Kong Guang's son-in-law Zhen Yi as an attendant and a carriage captain.

古文：诸素所不说者，莽皆傅致其罪，为请奏草，令邯持与光，以太后指风光。
现代文：王莽对自己平素不喜欢的人，都附会罗织罪名，写下弹劾奏章草稿，让甄邯拿给孔光，用太后的意思暗示孔光。
English: Wang Mang wrote down a draft of the impeachment report, and asked Zhenya to give it to Kongguang, using the meaning of the empress dowager to hint to Kongguang.

古文：光素畏慎，不敢不上之；莽白太后，辄可其奏。
现代文：孔光一向胆小谨慎，不敢不以自己的名义呈递。然后王莽再向太后陈述自己的意见，太后总是予以批准。
English: Kong Guang has always been timid and cautious, daring not to submit it in his own name. Wang Mang then presents his opinion to the Empress Dowager, who always approves it.

古文：于是劾奏何武、公孙禄互相称举，皆免官，武就国。
现代文：于是，弹劾何武、公孙禄互相称颂保举，两个都被免去官职，何武被遣回封国。
English: As a result, He Wu and Gong Sun Lu were impeached for praising and commending each other. Both of them were removed from office, and He Wu was sent back to the feudal state.

古文：又奏董宏子高昌侯武父为佞邪，夺爵。
现代文：又弹劾高昌侯董武的父亲董宏行为奸佞邪恶，剥夺董武爵位。
English: He also impeached the father of Gaochang marquis Dongwu, Dong Hong, for treachery and evil, and deprived Dongwu of his peerage.

古文：又奏南郡太守毋将隆前为冀州牧，治中山冯太后狱，冤陷无辜，关内侯张由诬告骨肉，中太仆史立、泰山太守丁玄陷人入大辟，河内太守赵昌谮害郑崇，幸逢赦令，皆不宜处位在中土，免为庶人，徙合浦。
现代文：又奏称：南郡太守毋将隆，先前担任冀州牧时，审理中山冯太后一案，冤枉陷害无辜；关内侯张由诬告皇家骨肉；中太仆史立、泰山太守丁玄，陷害人至死刑；河内太守赵昌，诬害郑崇。他们幸而遇到大赦令，可免一死，但都不适宜留住中原地区，将他们免去官职，贬为平民，放逐到合浦。
English: It was also reported that: Nam County's grand marshal, Zhao Long, when he previously served as the pastor of Jizhou, tried the case of Zhongshan's Empress Dowager Feng, and falsely framed the innocent; Guanai's lord Zhang Yu falsely accused the royal bone and flesh; the middle eunuch Shi Li, Taishan's grand marshal Ding Xuan, framed people to the death penalty; Hanoi's grand marshal Zhao Chang, falsely persecuted Zheng Chong. They were fortunate to encounter an amnesty order and could be spared one death, but they were not suitable to stay in the Central Plains region, and they were removed from

古文：中山之狱，本立、玄自典考之，但与隆连名奏事；莽少时慕与隆交，隆不甚附，故因事挤之。
现代文：中山一案，本是史立、丁玄亲自刑讯处理的，只与毋将隆联名上奏而已。王莽年轻时仰慕毋将隆，想与其结交，但毋将隆却不太接近他，王莽因此找借口把他排挤掉了。
English: The Zhongshan case was originally handled by Shi Li and Ding Xuan through torture and interrogation in person, and it was just a name-and-shame game with Bo Xilong. When Wang Meng was young, he admired Bo Xilong and wanted to make friends with him, but Bo Xilong was not very close to him, so Wang Meng found an excuse to push him out.

古文：红阳侯立，太后亲弟，虽不居位，莽以诸父内敬惮之，畏立从容言太后，令己不得肆意，复令光奏立罪恶： 前知定陵侯淳于长犯大逆罪，多受其赂，为言误朝。
现代文：红阳侯王立，是太皇太后的亲弟弟，虽已不在官位，但王莽因他是叔父的缘故，内心对他又尊敬又忌惮，害怕王立在太后面前可以从容谈论朝廷政事，使自己不能随心所欲。就又让孔光弹劾王立的罪恶说； 从前，王立明知定陵侯淳于长犯了大逆不道之罪，却为他辩护说情，贻误朝廷。
English: Wang Li, the Prince of Hongyang, was the younger brother of Wang Liguo, the great empress dowager. Although Wang Liguo was no longer in office, Wang Meng respected and feared him because he was his uncle. He was afraid that Wang Liguo could speak freely about the affairs of the imperial court in front of the great empress dowager, so he could not do whatever he wanted. So he asked Kong Guang to impeach Wang Liguo for his sin. Once upon a time, Wang Liguo knew that Prince Chun Yuchang had committed the crime of high treason, but he pleaded for him and misled the imperial court.

古文：后白以官婢杨寄私子为皇子，众言曰： 吕氏少帝复出。 
现代文：以后，又提议以官婢杨寄的私生子为皇子，大家都说： 吕氏跟少帝的局面要再度出现。 
English: Later, it was proposed that the prince should be the illegitimate son of the official's maid Yang Ying, and everyone said, "The situation of the Lü clan and the young emperor is about to reappear."

古文：纷纷为天下所疑，难以示来世，成襁褓之功。
现代文：天下人对他的动机纷纷表示怀疑，使他难以向后世交待，完成辅立幼主的功业。
English: People around the world have expressed doubts about his motives, making it difficult for him to pass on to future generations and complete the work of supporting the young master.

古文：请遣立就国。 
现代文：请求遣送王立回封国。 
English: Please let Wang Li go back to his fiefdom.

古文：太后不听。
现代文：太后不同意。
English: The Queen Mother did not follow his advice.

古文：莽曰： 今汉家衰，比世无嗣，太后独代幼主统政，诚可畏惧。
现代文：王莽说： 现在汉王朝已衰落，连续两个皇帝都没有子嗣，太后独自代替幼主主持国政，实在令人畏惧。
English: Wang Mang said: Now that the Han Dynasty has declined, two successive emperors have no children, and the empress dowager alone presides over state affairs in place of the young lord, it is really frightening.

古文：力用公正先天下，尚恐不从；今以私恩逆大臣议，如此，群下倾邪，乱从此起。
现代文：即使勉力做到公正无私，先为天下着想，仍然恐怕人心不服。现在因为私人亲情而反对大臣的建议，这样一来，群下将倾轧作恶，祸乱将由此而起。
English: Even if you do your best to be fair and selfless, thinking of the world first, you may still not be accepted by the people. If you now oppose the minister's proposal because of personal affinity, then your subordinates will plunge into evil, and disaster will ensue.

古文：宜可且遣就国，安后复征召之。 
现代文：最好先暂时让王立返回封国，等局势安定后，再把他召回。 
English: He should be sent back to China for a while, and then brought back when the country is a little more stable.

古文：太后不得已，遣立就国。
现代文：太后不得已，只好遣王立回封国。
English: The empress dowager had no choice but to let Wang Li return to his fiefdom.

古文：莽之所以胁持上下，皆此类也。
现代文：王莽胁持上下的手段，都类似于此。
English: This is also true of the means Wang Mang used to persecute and blackmail the empress dowager and her vassals.

古文：于是附顺莽者拔擢，忤恨者诛灭，以王舜、王邑为腹心，甄丰、甄邯主击断，平晏领机事，刘秀典文章，孙建为爪牙。
现代文：于是，攀附、顺从王莽的人，得到提拔；忤逆王莽、被他忌恨的人，被诛杀灭绝。王莽任用王舜、王邑作为心腹骨干；甄丰、甄邯主管弹劾及司法刑狱；平晏主管机要；刘秀掌管起草诏书文告；孙建负责军事。
English: As a result, those who clung to and obeyed Wang Mang were promoted; those who rebelled against Wang Mang and were hated by him were killed and exterminated. Wang Mang appointed Wang Xi and Wang Yu as the backbone of his inner circle; Zhenfeng and Zhen Xi were in charge of impeachment and judicial imprisonment; Ping Xi was in charge of the machine; Liu Xiu was in charge of drafting the imperial edict; Sun Jian was responsible for military affairs.

古文：丰子寻、秀子棻、涿郡崔发、南阳陈崇皆以材能幸于莽。
现代文：甄丰的儿子甄寻、刘秀的儿子刘、涿郡人崔发、南阳人陈崇，都因为有才干而受到王莽的器重。
English: Zhenfeng's son Zhenxing, Liu Xiu's son Liu, Qi County resident Cui Fa, and Nanyang resident Chen Chong were all valued by Wang Mang for their talents.

古文：莽色厉而言方，欲有所为，微见风采，党与承其指意而显奏之。
现代文：王莽外表严厉，言谈方直，想要做什么，只略微做出一点暗示，底下的党羽就会按照他的意图公然上奏。
English: Wang Mang looks stern, talks straight, and what he wants to do, he only makes a slight hint, and the party under him will play openly according to his intention.

古文：莽稽首涕泣，固推让，上以惑太后，下用示信于众庶焉。
现代文：王莽却叩头涕泣，坚持推让。用这种办法，他对上迷惑太后，对下向众人显示他的谦恭可信。
English: Wang Mang, however, bowed his head and wept, insisting on making concessions. In this way, he fooled the empress dowager and showed his humility and trustworthiness to everyone.

古文：八月，莽复白太皇太后，废孝成皇后、孝哀皇后为庶人，就其园。
现代文：八月，王莽再次上奏太皇太后，要求废黜孝成皇后、孝哀皇后，贬为平民，遣送到成帝和哀帝的陵园守墓。
English: In August, Wang Mang once again petitioned the Grand Empress Dowager, demanding that she depose Empress Xiaocheng and Empress Xiaomei, demote them to commoners, and send them to the cemeteries to guard the tombs of Emperor Chengdu and Emperor Puyi.

古文：是日，皆自杀。
现代文：当天，两位皇后都自杀子。
English: On the same day, both queens committed suicide.

古文：大司空彭宣以王莽专权，乃上书言： 三公鼎足承君；一足不任，则覆乱美实。
现代文：大司空彭宣因王莽专权，上书说： 三公象鼎的三只脚，一起承奉君王，如果有一只脚不能胜任，就会使鼎倾覆，破坏里面的美食。
English: Peng Xuan, the grand secretary of the imperial court, wrote in a letter, "The three legs of the three-legged elephant serve the king together. If one leg is not up to the task, it will topple the tripod and destroy the delicious food inside.

古文：臣资性浅薄，年齿老眊，数伏疾病，昏乱遗忘，愿上大司空、长平侯印绶，乞骸骨归乡里，俟寘沟壑。 
现代文：我资质浅薄，年纪又老，多次患病卧床，头脑昏乱，记忆力衰退。愿缴上大司空、长平侯的印信、绶带，请求批准我辞职退休，返回乡里，等待辞世。 
English: My qualifications are shallow, my age is old, I have been bedridden with illness many times, my mind is confused, and my memory is fading. I am willing to submit the seal letter and umbilical cord of Daishi Ku and Changping Hou to request approval of my resignation and retirement, return to the countryside, and wait for my death.

古文：莽白太后策免宣，使就国。
现代文：王莽报告太后，太后下策书，免去彭宣的官职，让他返回封国。
English: Wang Mang reported to the empress dowager, and the empress dowager made a proposal to remove Peng Xuan from his official post and let him return to his fiefdom.

古文：莽恨宣求退，故不赐黄金、安车、驷马。
现代文：王莽对彭宣的请求退休深为忌恨，故意不按惯例赐给他黄金、安车、驷马。
English: Wang Mang was deeply resentful of Peng Xuan's request to retire, and deliberately did not give him gold, a safe car, and a horse according to the usual practice.

古文：宣居国数年，薨。
现代文：彭宣在封国居住数年后去世。
English: Peng Xuan died after living in exile for several years.

古文：班固赞曰：薛广德保县车之荣，平当逡巡有耻，彭宣见险而止，异乎苟患失之者矣！
现代文：班固赞曰：薛广德能保持悬车的荣耀；平当拒绝封爵，明礼知耻；彭宣发现危险而中止做官。他们与苟且患失之辈，截然不同！
English: Ban Guzan said: Xue Guangde can maintain the glory of the suspended car; if you refuse to be knighted, you should be ashamed; Peng Xuan found danger and stopped being an official. They are completely different from those who are in trouble!

古文：戊午，右将军王崇为大司空，光禄勋东海马宫为右将军，左曹、中郎将甄丰为光禄勋。
现代文：戊午，任命右将军王崇为大司空，光禄勋、东海人马宫为右将军，左曹、中郎将甄丰为光禄勋。
English: In the afternoon, Wang Chong, the right general, was appointed as the grand secretary of the Air Force, Guang Rukun and Donghaishenma Gong as the right general, and Zhenfeng, the left sergeant and middle sergeant, as Guang Rukun.

古文：九月，辛酉，中山王即皇帝位，大赦天下。
现代文：九月，辛酉，中山王刘箕子即帝位，大赦天下。
English: In September, Xin Zhen, the king of Zhongshan, Liu Zhenzi, ascended to the throne.

古文：平帝年九岁，太皇太后临朝，大司马莽秉政，百官总己以听于莽。
现代文：平帝时年九岁，太皇太后临朝听政，大司马王莽把持国政。百官各自负责本职，最后都听王莽裁决。
English: When Emperor Ping was nine years old, the Grand Empress Dowager Lin was in charge of listening to the government, and the Grand Secretary Ma Wang Mang was in charge of the national government. The hundred officials were each responsible for their duties, and finally they all listened to Wang Mang's ruling.

古文：莽权日盛，孔光忧惧，不知所出，上书乞骸骨；莽白太后，帝幼少，宜置师傅，徙光为帝太傅，位四辅，给事中，领宿卫、供养，行内署门户，省服御食物。
现代文：王莽的权势日益上升，孔光忧虑恐惧，不知如何才好，上书请求退休。王莽奏报太后，认为皇帝年幼，应该为他配置师傅。于是调任孔光为皇帝的太傅，位居四辅，兼给事中，负责皇宫宿卫和皇帝的供养，兼管禁中官署门户、察看皇帝服饰、御用、食物等。
English: Wang Mang's power was increasing day by day, and Kong Guang, worried and fearful, and not knowing what to do, sent a letter requesting retirement. Wang Mang reported to the empress dowager that he thought the emperor was too young and that he should assign a teacher for him. Therefore, Kong Guang was transferred to be the emperor's taifu, he was in the fourth auxiliary, he was also in charge of things, he was responsible for the palace guards and the emperor's support, he was also in charge of the portal of the Central Government Office, and he inspected the emperor's clothing, royal use, food, etc.

古文：以马宫为大司徒，甄丰为右将军。
现代文：任命马宫为大司徒，甄丰为右将军。
English: He appointed Ma Gong as the chief disciple and Zhen Feng as the right general.

古文：冬，十月，壬寅，葬孝哀皇帝于义陵。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬寅，将孝哀皇帝安葬在义陵。
English: In winter, in October, in Ren Yin, the Emperor Xiao Ai was buried in the Yili Mausoleum.

古文：孝平皇帝上
现代文：孝平皇帝上
English: Emperor Xiaoping

古文：孝哀皇帝下元始元年
现代文：汉平帝元始元年
English: In the first year of Emperor Hanping's reign

古文：春，正月，王莽风益州，令塞外蛮夷自称越裳氏重译献白雉一、黑雉二。
现代文：春季，正月，王莽暗示益州地方官，命令塞外蛮族自称越裳氏部落，通过几道翻译，向天子进献一只白野鸡，两只黑野鸡。
English: In the spring, in the first month, Wang Mang hinted to the local officials of Yizhou and ordered the barbarians outside the country, who called themselves the Yuexiang tribe, to present a white pheasant and two black pheasants to the heavenly son through several translations.

古文：莽白太后下诏，以白雉荐宗庙。
现代文：王莽向太皇太后报告此事，建议太后下诏，用白野鸡祭献宗庙。
English: Wang Mang reported the matter to the Grand Empress Dowager and suggested that she issue an edict to dedicate the family temple with a white pheasant sacrifice.

古文：于是群臣盛陈莽功德，致周成白雉之瑞，周公及身在而托号于周，莽宜赐号曰安汉公，益户畴爵邑。
现代文：于是群臣大肆歌颂王莽的功德，认为他 像周公姬旦使周成王获得白野鸡的祥瑞一样。姬旦活着时就被称为 周公 ，因此王莽也应该被赐号为 安汉公 ，并增加他的采邑人户，使与公爵爵位相称。 
English: As a result, the courtiers praised Wang Mang's merits, believing that he was like Zhou Gong Hidan, who made Zhou Cheng Wang obtain the auspiciousness of the white pheasant. Hidan was called Zhou Gong when he was alive, so Wang Mang should also be given the title of Anhan Gong, and increase his territory to make it commensurate with the ducal title.

古文：太后诏尚书具其事。
现代文：太皇太后诏令尚书备办此事。
English: The empress dowager ordered Shang Shu to prepare the matter.

古文：莽上书言： 臣与孔光、王舜、甄丰、甄邯共定策；今愿独条光等功赏，寝置臣莽，勿随辈列。 
现代文：王莽上书说： 我与孔光、王舜、甄丰、甄邯共同制定迎立今上的国策，现在我希望仅让孔光等人论功行赏，抛开我王莽，不要与他们列在一起。 
English: Wang Mang said in his letter: I worked with Kong Guang, Wang Xi, Zhen Feng, and Zhen Xi to jointly formulate the national policy to usher in the modern era. Now I hope that only Kong Guang and others will be rewarded for their merits. I, Wang Mang, should not be listed with them.

古文：甄邯白太后下诏曰：  无偏无党，王道荡荡。 
现代文：甄邯向太皇太后报告，太皇太后下诏说： 《尚书》说： 不偏向，不结党，圣王之道，宽广坦荡。 
English: The Empress Dowager Zhenxuan said in her eulogy: "No partiality, no favoritism, the righteous path taken by the former king is broad and level.

古文：君有安宗庙之功，不可以骨肉故蔽隐不扬，君其勿辞！ 
现代文：你有安定宗庙的大功，不能因为你是我的骨肉亲戚，就遮盖隐讳，不加宣扬褒奖。请你不要推辞了。 
English: You have the great merit of stabilizing the ancestral temple. You can't cover up your secret without publicizing the award just because you are my flesh-and-blood relative. Please don't refuse.

古文：莽复上书固让数四，称疾不起。
现代文：王莽又四次上书坚持推让，称病不上朝。
English: Wang Mang wrote four more times insisting on concessions, saying that he would not go to the imperial court due to illness.

古文：左右白太后， 宜勿夺莽意，但条孔光等，莽乃肯起。 
现代文：左右臣子对太后说： 还是不要硬改变王莽谦让的心意，只论功赏赐孔光等人吧。 王莽才肯起床。
English: The courtiers on the right and left said to the empress dowager, "Don't forcefully change Wang Mang's heart, just reward people like Kong Guang. Only then will Wang Mang be willing to get up."

古文：二月，丙辰，太后下诏； 以太傅、博山侯光为太师，车骑将军、安阳侯舜为太保，皆益封万户。
现代文：二月，丙辰，太皇太后下诏： 任命太傅、博山侯孔光为太师，车骑将军、安阳侯王舜为太保，均增加采邑民户到万户。
English: In February, the Empress Dowager Cixin issued an edict: the appointment of Taifu, Boshan Hou Kongguang as Taishi, and Cheji Shogun, Anyang Hou Wangye as Taibo, all of which increased the number of households in the county to 10,000.

古文：左将军、光禄勋丰为少傅，封广阳侯。
现代文：任命左将军、光禄勋甄丰为少傅，封广阳侯。
English: Zhenfeng, General of the Left and a member of the Guanglu Order, was appointed as a minor official, and Guangyang was given the title of marquis.

古文：皆授四辅之职。
现代文：以上三人都分别授与四辅的职务。
English: All of the above three were separately awarded the four auxiliary positions.

古文：侍中、奉车都尉邯封承阳侯。 
现代文：封侍中、奉车都尉甄邯为承阳侯。 
English: In the middle of the feudal retainers, the lieutenant of the imperial carriage, Zhenya, became the lord of Chengyang.

古文：四人既受赏，莽尚未起。
现代文：四人接受封赏后，而王莽尚未起来上朝理事。
English: After the four people accepted the award, Wang Mang had not yet risen to become a director.

古文：群臣复上言： 莽虽克让，朝所宜章，以时加赏，明重元功，无使百僚元元失望！ 
现代文：群臣又进言： 王莽虽然克己谦让，但朝廷对应当表彰的大臣，还是应及时加以封赏，以表明重视元勋，不要使百官和人民失望！ 
English: The group of ministers also made a suggestion: Although Wang Mang restrained himself and made concessions, the imperial court should still reward the ministers who should be commended in a timely manner to show that they attach importance to the Yuanxun, and not to disappoint the hundreds of officials and people!

古文：太后乃下诏： 以大司马、新都侯莽为太傅，干四辅之事，号曰安汉公，益封二万八千户。 
现代文：于是太皇太后下诏： 任命大司马、新都侯王莽为太傅，主管四辅事务，称 安汉公 ，增加采邑民户到二万八千户。 
English: As a result, the Empress Dowager issued an edict: Appoint the grand secretary Ma and the new capital lord Wang Mang as Tai Fu, in charge of the four auxiliary affairs, called An Han Gong, and increase the number of households in the province to 28,000.

古文：于是莽为惶恐，不得已而起，受太傅、安汉公号，让还益封事，云： 愿须百姓家给，然后加赏。 
现代文：于是王莽惶恐，不得已而起来，接受太傅、安汉公的封号，但推辞了增加的采邑民户。他说： 我愿等到百姓家家自足，然后才能接受赏赐。 
English: So Wang Mang panicked and had no choice but to stand up and accept the titles of Taifu and Anhan Gong, but he rejected the increase in the number of peasants. He said: I am willing to wait until the people are self-sufficient before I can accept the reward.

古文：群臣复争，太后诏曰： 公自期百姓家给，是以听之，其令公奉赐皆倍故。
现代文：群臣又力争，太皇太后下诏说： 安汉公自己约定要等到百姓家家自足之后才接受赏赐，因此，听从安汉公的意见，不过要让俸禄和赏赐都增加一倍。
English: The courtiers also fought hard, and the empress dowager issued an edict saying: Prince Anhan himself agreed not to accept the reward until the people were self-sufficient. Therefore, listen to Prince Anhan's opinion, but let the salary and reward be doubled.

古文：百姓家给人足，大司徒、大司空以闻。 
现代文：等到百姓家家自崐足时，大司徒、大司空再行奏报。 
English: Wait until the common people are well-fed and well-clothed, and the chief priests and the chief magistrates will report to you.

古文：莽复让不受，而建言褒赏宗室群臣。
现代文：王莽仍然谦让不接受，而建议褒奖赏赐宗室和群臣。
English: Wang Mang still humbly refused to accept, and suggested that the reward be given to the family and the ministers.

古文：立故东平王云太子开明为王；又以故东平思王孙成都为中山王，奉孝王后；封宣帝耳孙信等三十六人皆为列侯；太仆王恽等二十五人皆赐爵关内侯。又令诸侯王公、列侯、关内侯无子而有孙若同产子者，皆得以为嗣；宗室属未尽而以罪绝者，复其属；天下令比二千石以上年老致仕者，参分故禄，以一与之，终其身。
现代文：于是，立已故东平王刘云的太子刘开明为东平王；又立已故东平思王的孙子刘成都为中山王，为中山孝王的后嗣；封汉宣帝的曾孙刘信等三十六人都为列侯；又赐太仆王恽等二十五人爵位，均为关内侯；又命诸侯王公、列侯、关内侯，凡无儿子，但有孙子或同母兄弟的儿子的，都可作为继承人；皇族近亲支系的后裔，因犯罪而被开除宗室谱籍的，恢复原来的身份；全国官秩为比二千石以上的官员，年老退休的，以原俸禄的三分之一作为退休金，直到死亡。
English: As a result, Liu Kaiming, the prince of the late Dongping King Liu Yun, was appointed Dongping King; Liu Chengdu, the grandson of the late Dongping Si King, was appointed Zhongshan King and the heir of Zhongshan Takao King; Liu Xin, the great-grandson of Emperor Han Xuan, and thirty-six others were appointed as princes; and twenty-five people such as the eunuch Wang Xi were given peerages, all of which were Kuanai princes; and princes, lords and princes of Kuanai, who had no sons, but had grandsons or sons of the same mother, could be appointed as heirs; descendants of close relatives of the

古文：下及庶民鳏寡，恩泽之政，无所不施。
现代文：下至平民百姓、鳏夫寡妇，都使用恩惠照顾政策，无所不施。
English: From the common people to widows and widowers, they all use the policy of benevolent care and do everything.

古文：莽既媚说吏民，又欲专断，知太后老，厌政，乃风公卿奏言： 往者吏以功次迁至二千石，及州部所举茂材异等吏，率多不称，宜皆见安汉公。
现代文：王莽已经讨好取悦于吏民，又想独断专行。他知道太皇太后年老了，厌倦政事，就暗示公卿上奏说： 以往根据官吏的功绩和资历，按顺序逐阶提升到二千石。各州部刺史所举荐的茂材、异能等被委任为官吏，大多数不称职。应该让他们都去谒见安汉公。
English: Wang Mang had already tried to please the officials and the people, and he wanted to have his own way. He knew that the empress dowager was old and tired of politics, so he hinted to the nobles and said: In the past, according to the merits and qualifications of the officials, they were promoted to two thousand koku in order. Most of the officials were incompetent. They should all go to see An Han.

古文：又，太后春秋高，不宜亲省小事。 
现代文：另外，太皇太后年事已高，不适宜亲自过问这些小事。 
English: In addition, the empress dowager is very old, and it is not appropriate for her to personally inquire about these minor matters.

古文：令太后下诏曰： 自今以来，唯封爵乃以闻，他事安汉公、四辅平决。
现代文：让太皇太后下诏说： 从今以后，只有封爵之事才禀告我，其他事项，由安汉公和四辅裁决处理。
English: Let the Grand Empress Dowager issue a decree saying: From now on, only the matter of knighting will be reported to me, and other matters will be handled by the Anhan and the four auxiliary rulings.

古文：州牧、二千石及茂材吏初除奏事者，辄引入，至近署对安汉公，考故官，问新职，以知其称否。 
现代文：新任命的州牧、二千石以及茂材出身的官吏奏报情况，就直接引到安汉公官署回答所问问题，安汉公考核过去官吏的治绩，询问到任后打算如何施政，以了解他们是否能称职。 
English: The newly-appointed provincial governors, officials of 2,000 koku and officials from Mosai were directly led to the Anhan Public Administration Office to answer the questions asked, and the Anhan Public Examination examined the performance of officials in the past and inquired about how they planned to govern after taking office, in order to understand whether they were competent.

古文：于是莽人人延问，密致恩意，厚加赠送，其不合指，显奏免之，权与人主侔矣。
现代文：于是王莽对这些官员一一接见询问，关怀备至，示以恩意，赠送厚重的礼品。对那些不迎合他的旨意的人，就公开奏报，予以免职。王莽的权力几乎与皇帝相等了。
English: As a result, Wang Mang interrogated these officials one by one, took care of them, showed his gratitude, and gave them heavy gifts. For those who did not cater to his will, he publicly reported and dismissed them. Wang Mang's power was almost equal to that of the emperor.

古文：置羲和官，秩二千石。
现代文：设置羲和官，官秩为二千石。
English: The post of Imperial and Military Attaché was established, with an official rank of 2,000 koku.

古文：夏，五月，丁巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，五月，丁巳朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer, in May, at dusk, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：公卿以下举敦厚能直言者各一人。
现代文：让公卿及以下官员举荐： 敦厚 和 直言 各一名。
English: Let the nobles and the following officials recommend: Atsuhisa and Tadakazu, one each.

古文：王莽恐帝外家卫氏夺其权，白太后： 前哀帝立，背恩义，自贵外家丁、傅，桡乱国家，几危社稷。
现代文：王莽恐怕平帝的外戚卫氏夺去他的权力，禀告太后说： 从前哀帝即位，背叛恩义，自行使外戚丁、傅两家显贵，扰乱了国家，几乎危害社稷。
English: Wang Mang feared that Ping's maternal relative Wei would usurp his power, and he wrote an obituary to the empress dowager saying: Once upon a time, Emperor Ming ascended the throne, betrayed the emperor's kindness, made his maternal relatives Ding and Fu two prominent families, disrupted the country, and almost harmed the society.

古文：今帝以幼年复奉大宗为成帝后，宜明一统之义，以戒前事，为后代法。 
现代文：而今平帝年岁幼小，又奉大宗，成为成帝后嗣，应该明确一统的大义，以防备再出现从前的事情，作为后代效法的榜样。 
English: Now that Emperor Ping is too young and too young to become the heir of Emperor Cheng, it is necessary to clarify the great justice of unification in order to prevent the previous events from happening again, as an example for future generations to follow.

古文：六月，遣甄丰奉玺绶，即拜帝母卫姬为中山孝王后。
现代文：六月，派甄丰奉玺印、绶带，就在中山国拜平帝的母亲卫姬为中山孝王后。
English: In June, Pai Zhenfeng presented the imperial seal and sash, and Emperor Ping's mother, Wei Ji, became Queen of Zhongshan Xiao in Zhongshan Province.

古文：赐帝舅卫宝、宝弟玄爵关内侯。
现代文：赐平帝舅父卫宝、卫宝的弟弟卫玄为关内侯。
English: Uncle Wei Bao and brother Wei Xuan Jie were given the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：赐帝女弟三人号曰君，皆留中山，不得至京师。
现代文：赐平帝三个妹妹尊号为君。命令这些亲属全部留居中山国，不准许到京师。
English: He gave Emperor Ping's three younger sisters the honorific title of Jun, and ordered all of these relatives to stay in Zhongshan and not be allowed to go to Beijing.

古文：扶风功曹申屠刚以直言对策曰： 臣闻成王幼少，周公摄政，听言下贤，均权布宠，动顺天地，举措不失；然近则召公不说，远则四国流言。
现代文：扶风功曹申屠刚，以 直言 身份，在朝廷策问时回答说： 我听说周成王年幼，周公摄政，能听取直言，礼贤下士，平均权力，广布恩宠，所为均顺天地之心，举措没有失当之处。然而，近处的召公不高兴，远处的四国都传布流言。
English: Fu Feng Gong, Cao Shen Tu Gang, in his capacity as a straight talker, replied when questioned by the imperial court: I heard that King Zhoucheng is young, Zhou Gong is a regent, he can listen to straight talk, he is a courteous corporal, he has average power, he is widely favored, his actions are in line with the heart of the world, and there is nothing improper about his actions. However, the nearby Zhao Gong is not happy, and the distant four countries are spreading rumors.

古文：今圣主始免襁褓，即位以来，至亲分离，外戚杜隔，恩不得通。
现代文：如今圣主刚离襁褓，即位以来，就与至亲骨肉分离，与外戚断绝来往，不能互通亲情。
English: Today, since His Holiness ascended the throne, he has been separated from his closest relatives, cut off from his relatives, and unable to communicate with them.

古文：且汉家之制，虽任英贤，犹援姻戚，亲疏相错，杜塞间隙，诚所以安宗庙，重社稷也。
现代文：况且汉家制度，虽然任用英杰贤才，仍然要引进外戚，使亲疏交错，阻塞间隙，这实在是为了安定宗庙，以国家为重。
English: Moreover, the Han system, although the appointment of outstanding talents is at the top, still needs to introduce relatives, make relatives intertwined, and block gaps. This is really in order to stabilize the ancestral temple, with the country as the focus.

古文：宜亟遣使者征中山太后，置之别宫，令时朝见，又召冯、卫二族，裁与冗职，使得执戟亲奉宿卫，以抑患祸之端。
现代文：所以应该赶快派遗使者征召中山太后到京师，安顿在另外的宫殿，使时常能够朝见。再征召冯、卫崐两家亲属到京，只安排担任闲散官职，使他们能亲执武器，充当宿卫，以抑止祸患的发生。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to quickly send emissaries to summon the Empress Dowager Zhongshan to Beijing, to settle in another palace, so that she can often see the emperor, and to summon two relatives of the Feng and Wei families to Beijing, only to arrange for them to serve as idle officials, so that they can personally hold weapons and act as guards, in order to deter the occurrence of disasters.

古文：上安社稷，下全保傅。 
现代文：上可以令国家安定，下可以保全四辅。 
English: On the one hand, it can make the country stable, and on the other hand, it can preserve the four auxiliary forces.

古文：莽令太后下诏曰： 刚所言僻经妄说，违背大义。 
现代文：王莽让太皇太后下诏说： 申屠刚的话，违反儒家经典，背叛大义！ 
English: Wang Mang asked the empress dowager to issue an edict saying, "The words of Shen Tuogang violate the Confucian classics and betray the Great Righteousness!

古文：罢归田里。
现代文：罢免他的官职，遣回家乡。
English: Remove him from office and send him home.

古文：丙午，封鲁顷公之八世孙公子宽为褒鲁侯，奉周公祀；封褒成君孔霸曾孙均为褒成侯，奉孔子祀。
现代文：丙午，封鲁顷公的八世孙公子宽为褒鲁侯，事奉周公的祭祀。封褒成君孔霸的曾孙孔均为褒成侯，事奉孔子的祭祀。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the 8th generation grandson of Emperor Lu Hegong, Gong Zi Kuan, was awarded the title of Prince of Lu, and served the sacrifice of Zhou Gong. The great-grandsons of Emperor Lu Hegong, Kong Ba, were all awarded the title of Prince of Lu, and served the sacrifice of Confucius.

古文：诏： 天下女徒已论，归家，出雇山钱，月三百。复贞妇，乡一人。大司农部丞十三人，人部一州，劝农桑。 
现代文：太皇太后下诏： 天下凡已判定徒刑的女犯人，准予释放回家，但每月须缴三百钱的雇山钱，由官府雇人从事劳役；每乡核定一名贞节女子，免除她家的徭役；派遣十三名大司农部丞，一人一州，劝导农民从事耕田植桑。 
English: The Empress Dowager issued a decree: All female prisoners who have been sentenced to imprisonment are allowed to go home, but they must pay a monthly fee of 300 yuan to hire a laborer; the government will hire a laborer; each township will approve a chaste woman and exempt her family from the corvee; send thirteen senior officials of the Ministry of Agriculture, one per state, to persuade farmers to engage in cultivating fields and planting mulberry trees.

古文：秋，九月，赦天下徒。
现代文：秋季，九月，赦免天下囚犯。
English: In the autumn, in September, prisoners were pardoned all over the world.

古文：孝哀皇帝下元始二年
现代文：元始二年
English: The first two years

古文：春，黄支国献犀牛。
现代文：春季，黄支国贡献犀牛。
English: In the spring, Huangzhi Province contributed rhinoceroses.

古文：黄支在南海中，去京师三万里。
现代文：黄支国在南海，距京师三万里。
English: Huangshi Province is in the South China Sea, 30,000 miles away from Beijing.

古文：王莽欲耀威德，故厚遗其王，令遣使贡献。
现代文：王莽想要炫耀他的威望和盛德，所以先向黄支国王赠送厚重的礼物，让国王派遣使节到长安贡献。
English: Wang Mang wanted to show off his prestige and virtue, so he first presented a heavy gift to the king of Huang Zhi and asked the king to send an envoy to Chang'an to make a contribution.

古文：越巂郡上黄龙游江中。
现代文：越郡官员奏报，发现有黄龙在长江中游动。
English: Yue County officials reported that a yellow dragon was spotted swimming in the Yangtze River.

古文：太师光、大司徒宫等咸称 莽功德比周公，宜告祠宗庙。 
现代文：太师孔光、大司徒马宫等都称赞说： 王莽的功德可以比得上周公，应该把他的功德禀告祭祀宗庙。 
English: Daishi Kongguang, Daishi Tutu Magong, and others all praised Wang Mang, saying, "Wang Mang's merits can be compared to that of last week's emperor, and his merits should be reported to the ancestral temple for sacrifice."

古文：大司农孙宝曰： 周公上圣，召公大贤，尚犹有不相说，著于经典，两不相损。
现代文：大司农孙宝说： 周公是崇高的圣人，召公是伟大的贤人，这两人仍然有不和，这种情况被记载在儒学经典中，但对两人的形象，都没有损伤。
English: Chief Superintendent Sun Bao said: Zhou Gong is a lofty sage, Zhao Gong is a great sage, the two still have discord, this situation is recorded in the Confucian classics, but there is no damage to the image of the two.

古文：今风雨未时，百姓不足，每有一事，群臣同声，得无非其美者？ 
现代文：如今风雨不依时节，百姓衣食不足，然而每遇到一件事，群臣都异口同声赞颂，难道就没有不赞美的人吗？ 
English: Nowadays, the wind and rain do not follow the seasons, the people are short of food and clothing, but every time something happens, the ministers all praise in unison, is there no one who does not praise?

古文：时大臣皆失色。
现代文：当时大臣们都大惊失色。
English: At the time, ministers were stunned.

古文：甄邯即时承制罢议者。
现代文：甄邯立即宣布：奉旨停止讨论。
English: Zhen Rong immediately announced that he had been instructed to stop the discussion.

古文：会宝遣吏迎母，母道病，留弟家，独遣妻子。
现代文：这时正赶上孙宝派遣属吏去迎接母亲，母亲在途中患病，就留居孙宝弟弟家里，只让孙宝的妻儿赶到长安。
English: Just as Sun Si sent officials to meet his mother, she fell ill on the way and stayed at his brother's house, sending only his wife and children to the capital.

古文：司直陈崇劾奏宝，事下三公即讯。
现代文：司直陈崇上奏弹劾孙宝。
English: Secretary Chen Chong went to impeach Sun Bao.

古文：宝对曰： 年七十，悖眊，恩衰共养，营妻子，如章。 
现代文：此案交付三公立即审讯，孙宝回答说： 我年纪已七十，糊涂昏聩，供养母亲的恩义衰退，只知照顾妻儿，正如奏章所说。 
English: The case was handed over to the Three Rulers for immediate trial. Sun Bao replied, "I am 70 years old, confused and confused. I am no longer able to provide for my mother, and I only know how to take care of my wife and children, as the record says.

古文：宝坐免，终于家。
现代文：孙宝因而获罪，被免去官职，寿终于家。
English: As a result, Sun Bao was dismissed from his post and ended up staying at home.

古文：帝更名衎。
现代文：平帝改名为刘。
English: Emperor Ping changed his name to Emperor Liu.

古文：三月，癸酉，大司空王崇谢病免，以避王莽。
现代文：三月，癸酉，大司空王崇为了避开王莽，称病要求辞职，被免去官职。
English: In March, in order to avoid Wang Mang, the chief of Ku Wang Chong called in sick and asked to resign, and was dismissed from his post.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，左将军甄丰为大司空，右将军孙建为左将军，光禄勋甄邯为右将军。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁酉，任命左将军甄丰为大司空，右将军孙建为左将军，光禄勋甄邯为右将军。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Hui appointed the left general Zhen Feng as the grand secretary of the Air Force, the right general Sun Jian as the left general, and the honorable award Zhen Hui as the right general.

古文：立代孝王玄孙之子如意为广宗王，江都易王孙盱台侯宫为广川王，广川惠王曾孙伦为广德王。绍封汉兴以来大功臣之后周共等皆为列侯及关内侯，凡百一十七人。
现代文：立代孝王玄孙的儿子刘如意为广宗王；江都易王的孙子、盱台侯刘宫为广川王；广川惠王的曾孙刘伦为广德王；赐汉朝兴起以来大功臣的后裔周共等人继承爵位，都被封为列侯及关内侯，共一百一十七人。
English: Liu Ruyi, the son of the great-great-grandson of Emperor Xiaowang, was the King of Guangzong; Liu Gong, the grandson of King Jiangdu Yi and the Marquis of Xingtai, was the King of Guangchuan; Liu Lun, the great-grandson of King Hui of Guangchuan, was the King of Guangde; and Zhou Gong, the descendant of the great hero since the rise of the Han Dynasty, and others who inherited the peerage were all made princes and princes of Guanai, a total of one hundred and seventeen people.

古文：郡国大旱，蝗，青州尤甚，民流亡。
现代文：郡国发生大旱灾、蝗灾，青州尤其严重，人民逃荒流亡。
English: Major droughts and locust plagues occurred in the county and state, with the most serious in Qingzhou. People fled from the famine everywhere.

古文：王莽白太后，宜衣缯练，颇损膳，以示天下。
现代文：王莽禀告太皇太后：应该改穿没有花纹的丝帛服装，减省御用膳食，以向天下表示克已节约。
English: Wang Mang told the empress dowager that she should change to silk embroidered clothing without patterns and cut back on royal meals to show the world that she had economized.

古文：莽因上书愿出钱百万，献田三十顷，付大司农助给贫民。
现代文：王莽乘机上书，愿意拿出百万钱的捐款和献田三十顷，交付大司农以救助贫民。
English: Wang Mang took the opportunity to write that he was willing to donate one million yuan and donate 30 hectares of land to the farmers to help the poor.

古文：于是公卿皆慕效焉，凡献田宅者二百三十人，以口赋贫民。
现代文：于是公卿大臣都敬仰而仿效，共有二百三十人捐献田宅，把这些田宅按人口数分配给贫民。
English: As a result, nobles and ministers admired and followed suit. A total of 230 people donated farmhouses, and these farmhouses were distributed to the poor according to population.

古文：又起五里于长安城中，宅二百区，以居贫民。
现代文：又在长安城中兴建五个里，盖民宅二百所，用来安置贫民居住。
English: In Chang'an City, another five residential districts were built in 200 districts for the poor to live in.

古文：莽帅群臣奏太后，言： 幸赖陛下德泽，间者风雨时，甘露降，神芝生，蓂荚、硃草、嘉禾，休征同时并至。
现代文：然后王莽率领群臣奏报太皇太后说： 有幸仰赖陛下的盛德恩泽，最近以来，风雨依时，甘露从天而降，灵芝生长，荚、朱草、嘉禾等诸般美好祥瑞的征兆，同时并至。
English: Then Wang Mang led a group of courtiers to report to the Grand Empress Dowager and said: I am fortunate to rely on Your Majesty's great favor. Recently, the wind and rain have been in accordance with the time, the nectar has fallen from the sky, the reishi has grown, and various signs of beautiful auspiciousness, such as alfalfa, vermilion grass, and jiahe, have come at the same time.

古文：愿陛下遵帝王之常服，复太官之法膳，使臣子各得尽欢心，备共养！ 
现代文：愿陛下仍然遵照规定穿帝王正常的服装，恢复太官的正常膳食供应。使做臣子的各自都能尽力使陛下有和乐之心，精心周到地供养陛下。 
English: May His Majesty continue to wear the Emperor's normal clothes according to the regulations, and resume the normal meal supply of the eunuchs, so that each of the courtiers can do their best to make His Majesty have a peaceful heart and provide for His Majesty carefully and thoughtfully.

古文：莽又令太后下诏，不许。
现代文：王莽又让太皇太后下诏，表示不同意。
English: Wang Mang also asked the Empress Dowager to issue an edict, expressing his disagreement.

古文：每有水旱，莽辄素食，左右以白太后，太后遣使者诏莽曰： 闻公菜食，忧民深矣。
现代文：每遇水旱灾害，王莽就吃素食。左右侍臣将此情况报告太皇太后，太皇太后派使者诏令王莽说： 听说安汉公只吃素食，真是忧民至深。
English: Whenever there was a flood or drought, Wang Mang would eat vegetarian food. The attendants around him would report this to the Grand Empress Dowager. The Grand Empress Dowager sent an envoy to Wang Mang to say, "I heard that Prince Anhan only eats vegetarian food. I am deeply worried about the people."

古文：今秋幸孰，公以时食肉，爱身为国！ 
现代文：今年秋天幸而庄稼丰收，请公及时吃肉，为国家爱护自己的身体！ 
English: This autumn, we are fortunate to have a bumper harvest of crops. Please eat meat in time and take care of your body for the country!

古文：六月，陨石于巨鹿二。
现代文：六月，两颗陨石坠落在钜鹿。
English: In June, two meteorites fell in Elk.

古文：光禄大夫楚国龚胜、太中大夫琅邪邴汉以王莽专政，皆乞骸骨。
现代文：光禄大夫楚国人龚胜、太中大夫琅邪人邴汉，因为王莽专权，都请求辞职退休。
English: Because of Wang Mang's autocratic power, both Guanglu Doctor Chu Guozhen and Taizhong Doctor Zhanhan were asked to resign and retire.

古文：莽令太后策诏之曰： 朕愍以官职之事烦大夫，大夫其修身守道，以终高年。 
现代文：王莽教太后下策书诏令他们说： 朕不忍心用官职上的事务烦扰两位大夫，你们就好自为之，修养品德，严守正道，以终高年吧。 
English: The empress dowager Wang Mang ordered them in a decree: "I can't bear to bother the two doctors with official affairs. You should do your own thing, cultivate your moral character, strictly abide by the right path, and live to a ripe old age."

古文：皆加优礼而遣之。
现代文：对他们都给予优厚的待遇，遣送回家。
English: They were all treated well and sent home.

古文：梅福知王莽必篡汉祚，一朝弃妻子去，不知所之。
现代文：梅福知道王莽必定要篡夺汉朝皇位，有一天，忽然抛弃妻子而走开，不知到什么地方去了。
English: Meifu knew that Wang Mang was bound to usurp the imperial throne of the Han Dynasty. One day, he suddenly abandoned his wife and left for I don't know where.

古文：其后，人有见福于会稽者，变姓名为吴市门卒云。
现代文：以后，有人在会稽看见了他，他已改换姓名，当吴城市场的守门卒了。
English: Later, someone saw him in the auditorium. He had changed his name and became the gatekeeper of the Wucheng market.

古文：秋，九月，戊申晦，日有食之，赦天下徒。
现代文：秋季，九月，戊申晦，出现日食，赦免天下囚犯。
English: In autumn, in September, in the waning of the waxing gibbous moon, there is a solar eclipse, and the prisoners are pardoned.

古文：遣执金吾候陈茂谕说江湖贼成重等二百馀人皆自出，送家在所收事。
现代文：派遣执金吾候陈茂，劝说江湖盗匪成重等二百余人投降，使盗匪全部出来自首，把他们送回各自家乡，为当地官府供应劳役。
English: He dispatched Chen Mao, the chief magistrate, to persuade more than 200 bandits to surrender, so that all the bandits surrendered and sent them back to their hometowns to provide forced labor for the local government.

古文：重徙云阳，赐公田宅。
现代文：成重则迁移安顿在云阳，赐给他公田和屋宅。
English: Cheng Ju, on the other hand, moved and settled in Yunyang, where he was given public land and a house.

古文：王莽欲悦太后以威德至盛，异于前，乃风单于令遣王昭君女须卜居次云入侍太后，所以赏赐之甚厚。
现代文：王莽想显示太皇太后的威望和恩德已达至盛，超过了前代，以此取悦于太皇太后，就暗示单于，让单于派遣王昭君的女儿须卜居次云到长安侍奉太后，因此而给予单于的赏赐非常丰厚。
English: Wang Mang wanted to show that the prestige and benevolence of the Grand Empress Dowager had reached its peak, surpassing the previous generation, in order to please the Grand Empress Dowager, he hinted that he would send Wang Zhaojun's daughter Subu Jiuyun to Chang'an to serve the Grand Empress Dowager. Therefore, the reward given to Shan Yu was very rich.

古文：车师后王国有新道通玉门关，往来差近，戊己校尉徐普欲开之。
现代文：车师后王国有一条新道直通玉门关，往来交通比原先的道路要近。戊己校尉徐普打算开辟它。
English: There is a new road in the Kingdom of the Chariot Masters that leads directly to the Jade Gate, and the traffic is closer than the original road. Lieutenant Xu Pu intends to open it.

古文：车师后王姑句以当道供给使者，心不便也。
现代文：车师后王姑句因为车师后王国正当新道，汉朝派往西域的使者的旅途供给将由他们负担，心感不便。
English: The car driver, Queen Wang Gu, said that because the car driver, Queen Wang Gu, was a legitimate new road, the travel expenses of the envoys sent to the western region by the Han Dynasty would be borne by them, which was inconvenient.

古文：普欲分明其界，然后奏之，召姑句使证之；不肯，系之。
现代文：徐普想要勘明新道的路线分界，然后奏报朝廷，就召来姑句，让他对新道线路给以证实，姑句不肯，徐普就把姑句关押起来。
English: Xu Pu wanted to investigate the route demarcation of the new road, and then report to the court. He summoned Gu Gu and asked him to confirm the new road route. Gu Gu refused, and Xu Pu detained Gu Gu.

古文：其妻股紫陬谓姑句曰： 前车师前王为都护司马所杀，今久系必死，不如降匈奴！ 
现代文：姑句的妻子股紫陬对姑句说： 从前车师前王被都护司马杀死，如今你被囚禁这么久，必死无疑，不如投降匈奴。 
English: Aunt Gu's wife, Quan Ziqi, said to Aunt Gu: Once upon a time, the chariot driver, the former king, was killed by the tutelary horse. Now that you have been imprisoned for so long, there is no doubt that you will die. It is better to surrender to the Xiongnu.

古文：即驰突出高昌壁，入匈奴。
现代文：姑句等人就骑马突围，冲出高昌城，逃到匈奴。
English: So he rode out of Gaochang and surrendered to the Xiongnu.

古文：又去胡来王唐兜与赤水羌数相寇，不胜，告急都护，都护但钦不以时救助。唐兜困急，怨钦，东守玉门关；玉门关不内，即将妻子、人民千馀人亡降匈奴。
现代文：此外，去胡来王唐兜与赤水羌多次相互侵犯，这次唐兜战败，向西域都护告急，都护但钦没有及时救助，唐兜被困危急，怨恨但钦不救援，于是往东退走，想拒守玉门关，玉门关守将不准许他入关，他便率妻儿、百姓千余人逃亡投降匈奴。
English: In addition, to Hu Lai Wang, Tang Tak and Chishui Yao repeatedly violated each other. This time, Tang Tak was defeated. He sent an urgent message to the western regions. The tutelary Dang Qin did not rescue him in time. Tang Tak was trapped in a critical situation. He resented Dang Qin for not rescuing him, so he retreated to the east. He wanted to refuse to guard Yumen Pass. The guards of Yumen Pass would not allow him to enter the pass. He then led his wife and children and more than a thousand people to flee and surrender to the Xiongnu.

古文：单于受，置左谷蠡地，遣使上书言状，曰： 臣谨已受。 
现代文：单于接纳了姑句和唐兜，把他们安置在左谷蠡王所居地区，并派遣使者到长安上书，讲明情况，说： 我已经接纳了他们。 
English: He only accepted Gu Gu and Tang Dao, and placed them in the area where Zuogu Shao Wang lived, and sent an envoy to Chang'an to write a letter explaining the situation, saying: I have accepted them.

古文：诏遣中郎将韩隆等使匈奴，责让单于；单于叩头谢罪，执二虏还付使者。
现代文：太皇太后下诏派遣中郎将韩隆等出使匈奴，责备单于。单于叩头谢罪，拘捕了姑句和唐兜，交付给使者。
English: The Empress Dowager issued an imperial edict to send Han Long and other middlemen as envoys to the Xiongnu, reprimanded Shan Yu. Shan Yu apologized for kowtowing, arrested Gu Gu and Tang Diao, and handed them over to the envoy.

古文：诏使中郎将王萌待于西域恶都奴界上。
现代文：太皇太后下诏派中郎将王萌在西域恶都奴边界上等待接收两个俘虏。
English: The Empress Dowager sent a middle-ranking official to wait for Wang Meng on the western border of the Evil Capital to receive the two captives.

古文：单于遣使送，因请其罪；使者以闻。
现代文：单于派遣使者护送汉使押解俘虏，乘机请求汉朝宽恕两王的背叛之罪。
English: He only sent an envoy to escort the Han envoy to escort the prisoners, and took the opportunity to ask the Han Dynasty to forgive the two kings for the crime of betrayal.

古文：莽不听，诏会西域诸国王，陈军斩姑句、唐兜以示之。
现代文：汉使回到长安，向王莽报告了单于的意思，王莽不听，下诏召集西域各国国王到长安，陈列军队，当众斩杀姑句、唐兜给大家看。
English: The Han envoy returned to Chang'an and reported to Wang Mang the meaning of "single," but Wang Mang did not listen, and issued an edict to summon the kings of the Western Regions to Chang'an, display their armies, and publicly slaughter Gu Gu and Tang Tuo for everyone to see.

古文：乃造设四条，中国人亡入匈奴者，乌孙亡降匈奴者，西域诸国佩中国印绶降匈奴者，乌桓降匈奴者，皆不得受。
现代文：又制定四条规定：凡逃亡到匈奴的中国人，凡逃亡到匈奴的乌孙国人，凡投降匈奴的西域诸国佩带中国印信绶带者，凡投降匈奴的乌桓人，匈奴一律不准接纳。
English: Four articles were also formulated: All Chinese who had fled to the Huns, all Ussun people who had fled to the Huns, all countries of the Western Regions that had surrendered to the Huns and had worn the Chinese seal, and all Wuhuan people who had surrendered to the Huns were not allowed to be received by the Huns.

古文：遣中郎将王骏、王昌、副校尉甄阜、王寻使匈奴，班四条与单于，杂函封，付单于，令奉行；因收故宣帝所为约束封函还。
现代文：派遣中郎将王骏、王昌、副校尉甄阜、王寻出使匈奴，向单于颁布四条规定，把四条文件与诏书同函封好，交付单于，命令他执行。并就此收回先前宣帝制定的约束匈奴的诏令，封好带回。
English: He dispatched his lieutenant to find the envoys of the Xiongnu, Wang Qian, Wang Chang, and the vice-captains Yan Fu and Wang, and ordered him to issue the four articles to the envoy, seal the four documents together with the edict, deliver the document to the envoy, and order him to implement it. In this regard, he withdrew the edict to restrict the Xiongnu previously formulated by Emperor Xuan and sealed it and brought it back.

古文：时莽奏令中国不得有二名，因使使者以风单于，宜上书慕化，为一名，汉必加厚赏。
现代文：这时王莽上奏，要求命令中国人不准取两个字的名字。因而让使者暗示单于应该上书表示仰慕中国古代文化风俗，要改成一个字的名字，汉朝必定加以优厚的赏赐。
English: At this time, Wang Mang played the trumpet and demanded that the Chinese be ordered not to take two-character names. Therefore, the envoy hinted that it was only necessary to send a letter to express admiration for ancient Chinese culture and customs, to change to a one-character name, and the Han Dynasty would certainly give a generous reward.

古文：单于从之，上书言： 幸得备籓臣，窃乐太平圣制。臣故名囊知牙斯，今谨更名曰知。 
现代文：单于听从了，就上书说： 我有幸能充当中国的藩国臣属，对太平圣制十分喜欢，我原名囊知牙斯，现在谨改名叫 知  。
English: As soon as he obeyed, he wrote a letter saying: I am fortunate to serve as a vassal of the Chinese state, and I am very fond of the Taiping Holy System. My original name was Cang Zhijas, but now I would like to change my name to Zhi.

古文：莽大说，白太后，遣使者答谕，厚赏赐焉。
现代文：王莽大为高兴，奏报太皇太后，派遣使者到匈奴致以答辞，并给单于以丰厚的赏赐。
English: Wang Mang was very happy and told the Empress Dowager to send an emissary to reply, and he was rewarded very richly.

古文：莽欲以女配帝为皇后以固其权，奏言： 皇帝即位三年，长秋宫未建，掖廷媵未充。
现代文：王莽想把女儿嫁给平帝为皇后，以巩固自己的权力。就上奏说： 陛下即位已三年，还没有立皇后，后宫嫔妃也空缺。
English: Wang Mang wanted to marry his daughter to Emperor Ping as empress in order to consolidate his power, so he made a report saying: It has been three years since His Majesty ascended the throne, but there is no empress yet, and there is no harem concubine.

古文：乃者国家之难，本从无嗣，配取不正，请考论《五经》，定取后礼，正十二女之义，以广继嗣，博采二王后及周公、孔子世、列侯在长安者適子女。 
现代文：以往国家的灾难，本由于无继承人，后妃的来路不正所引起。请考查讨论儒学五经的有关记载，制定聘娶皇后之礼，使古代天子娶十二个女子的规定，纳入正轨，以广求继嗣。广泛地在殷、周天子的后裔，周公、孔子的后代，以及在长安的列侯之家中，挑选合适的女子。 
English: The calamity of the country in the past was caused by the fact that there was no heir and the way of the empress consort was not right. Please check the relevant records of the Five Classics of Confucianism, formulate the rules for hiring and marrying empresses, make the ancient emperor marry twelve women, incorporate them into the right track, and widely seek successors. Widely select suitable women from the descendants of Yin, Zhou Tianzi, Zhou Gong, and Confucius, as well as from the families of princes in Chang'an.

古文：事下有司，上众女名，王氏女多在选中者，莽恐其与己女争，即上言： 身无德，子材下，不宜与众女并采。 
现代文：太皇太后将此事交付有关主管机关办理，主管官员呈上众女的名单，王氏家族的女子多在被选中。王莽恐怕王氏其他人的女儿会与自己的女儿争当皇后，就上书说： 我本身没有高尚的品德，女儿的资质才能又为下等，她不适宜与众女子一起被挑选。 
English: The empress dowager submitted the matter to the relevant authorities for handling. The officials in charge presented a list of all the women to Wang, and most of the women from the Wang family were selected. Wang Mang, fearing that the daughters of other members of the Wang family would compete with his own daughter to become empress, wrote a letter saying, "I myself do not have a noble character, and my daughter's qualifications and abilities are inferior. She is not suitable to be selected together with the other women."

古文：太后以为至诚，乃下诏曰： 王氏女，朕之外家，其勿采。 
现代文：太皇太后以为他是诚心诚意谦虚，就下诏说： 王氏家族的女子，是我娘家人，就不要参加挑选了。 
English: The empress dowager thought he was acting out of sincerity, so she wrote a letter saying: The daughters of the Wang family are my daughters, do not choose them.

古文：庶民、诸生、郎吏以上守阙上书者日千馀人，公卿大夫或诣廷中，或伏省户下，咸言： 安汉公盛勋堂堂若此，今当立后，独奈何废公女，天下安所归命！
现代文：平民、诸生、郎吏及以上官吏，守候在皇宫大门上书的，每天有一千余人。公卿大夫，有的前往廷中，有的俯伏在宫内官署的门下，都要求说： 安汉公的盛大功勋，如此辉煌，如今应当立他的女儿为皇后，为什么单单剔除了安汉公的女儿，天下人将把期望归聚到哪一位身上呢！
English: Every day, more than a thousand people, including commoners, relatives, retainers, and higher-ranking officials, wait at the gates of the Imperial Palace to post their letters. Court nobles and doctors, some of whom go to the court, and some of whom prostrate themselves at the door of the Imperial Household Agency, all demand: An Hankong's grand exploits, so brilliant, should now make his daughter the empress. Why did they single out An Hankong's daughter? To whom will the people of the world place their hopes?

古文：愿得公女为天下母！ 
现代文：我们希望能让安汉公的女儿做天下之母！ 
English: We hope to make Ahn Han-gong's daughter the mother of the world!

古文：莽遣长史以下分部晓止公卿及诸生，而上书者愈甚。
现代文：王莽派遣长史及以下官员，分别去劝说阻止公卿及诸生的请愿，然而上书请愿的人崐反而愈来愈多。
English: Wang Mang sent Chang Shi and the following officials to persuade the petitioners to stop the petition of the nobles and the living, but the number of petitioners was increasing.

古文：太后不得已，听公卿采莽女。
现代文：太皇太后不得已，就听从公卿的意见，挑选王莽的女儿为皇后。
English: The empress dowager had no choice but to let the prince's ministers choose Wang Mang's daughter.

古文：莽复自白： 宜博选众女。 
现代文：王莽又为自己辩白说： 应该广选众女。 
English: Wang Mang also confessed: It should be widely selected among the many women.

古文：公卿争曰： 不宜采诸女以贰正统。 
现代文：公卿争辩说： 再选取其他女子，就会出现两个正统，是不应当的。 
English: The Lord Chancellor argued: To choose another woman would create two orthodoxies, which is not right.

古文：莽乃白： 愿见女。 
现代文：王莽只好说： 请察看我的女儿吧。 
English: Wang Mang had to say: Please look at my daughter.

