古文：高祖孝文皇帝讳宏，献文皇帝之太子也。
现代文：高祖孝文皇帝名宏，原是献文皇帝的太子。
English: Emperor Gaozu Xiaowen's great-great-grandson, Nagahiro, was originally the prince of Emperor Xianwen.

古文：母曰李夫人。
现代文：母亲为李夫人。
English: His mother was Mrs. Li.

古文：皇兴元年八月戊申，生于平城紫宫，神光照室，天地氛氲，和气充塞。
现代文：皇兴元年八月二十九日，生于平城的紫宫。出生时有神光照亮一室，天地之间充满祥和之气。
English: Emperor Xing was born on August 29th, 1st year of the Heian period, in the Purple Palace in Heijo. When he was born, a divine light illuminated a room, and the atmosphere between heaven and earth was filled with peace.

古文：帝洁白有异姿，襁褓岐嶷，长而弘裕仁孝，绰然有人君之表。
现代文：孝文帝长得洁白可爱，有特异的姿容，从襁褓时就聪明灵慧，长大以后气度宽宏而十分仁孝，高瞻远瞩有帝王的气派。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was white and lovely, with a unique appearance. He was clever and wise from a young age. When he grew up, he was generous and very filial. He was far-sighted and had the air of an emperor.

古文：献文尤爱异之。
现代文：献文帝格外疼爱他。
English: The emperor especially loved him.

古文：三年六月辛未，立为皇太子。
现代文：皇兴三年六月初三，立为皇太子。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xing, he was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：五年，受禅。
现代文：皇兴五年，受禅为帝。
English: In the fifth year of the Emperor's reign, Zen was enthroned.

古文：延兴元年秋八月丙午，皇帝即位于太华前殿，改皇兴五年为延兴。
现代文：延兴元年秋八月二十，孝文帝在太华前殿即位，改皇兴五年为延兴元年。
English: On the 20th day of the 8th month in the autumn of the first year of Yanxing, Emperor Xiaowen ascended the throne in the front hall of the Taihua Palace, and the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xing was changed to the first year of Yanxing.

古文：丁未，宋人来聘。
现代文：二十一日，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the twenty-first day, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：九月壬戌，诏在位及人庶进直言。
现代文：九月初七，诏令各在职官员和民众直言进谏。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, the Emperor ordered all officials in office and the public to come forward.

古文：壬午，青州高阳人封辨聚党自号齐王，州军讨平之。
现代文：二十七日，青州高阳人封辨聚众造反，自称齐王，被青州守军讨平了。
English: On the 27th, the Gaoyang people of Qingzhou staged a rebellion, claiming to be the King of Qi. They were defeated by the Qingzhou defenders.

古文：冬十月丁亥，沃野、统万二镇敕勒叛，诏太尉、陇西王源贺追击至枹罕，灭之。徙其遗迸于冀、定、相三州为户。
现代文：冬十月初二，沃野、统万两镇敕勒部人叛乱，诏令太尉、陇西王源贺追击到粃罕，歼灭了他们，把剩余的人迁移并入冀州、相州、定州三州作为营户。
English: On the second day of October in the early winter, when the people of the two towns of Wano and Tongwan rebelled, the captain of the imperial order and the king of Shaanxi, Yuan He, pursued them to Shanhan, annihilated them, and moved the remaining people into the three states of Jizhou, Xiangzhou and Dingzhou as tenants.

古文：十二月乙酉，封驸马都尉穆亮为赵郡王。
现代文：十二月初一，封驸马都尉穆亮为赵郡王。
English: On the first day of December, Captain Mu Liang was crowned King of Zhao County.

古文：壬辰，诏求舜后，获东莱人妫苟之。复其家毕世，以彰盛德之不朽。
现代文：初八，下诏寻找舜帝的后裔，找到了东莱人妫苟之，免全家终生的赋税，以表彰大德千古不朽。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：复前濮阳王孔雀本封。
现代文：恢复原濮阳王孔雀本来的封号。
English: The original seal of the Peacock of the King of Shinyang was restored.

古文：辛丑，徙赵郡王穆亮为长乐王。
现代文：十七日，改封赵郡王穆亮为长乐王。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Gu Wang Mu Liang was renamed Changle Wang.

古文：癸卯，日有蚀之。
现代文：十九日，日食。
English: On the 19th, a solar eclipse.

古文：二年春正月，大阳蛮酋桓诞率户内属，拜征南将军，封襄阳王。
现代文：二年春正月，大阳蛮族首领桓诞带部众归附朝廷，封为征南将军、襄阳王。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the leader of the Dayang barbarians, Huan Xizhe Bu Cong, was annexed by the imperial court and given the title of General of the Southern Expedition and King of Xiangyang.

古文：曲赦京师及河西，南至秦、泾，西至枹罕，北至凉州及诸镇。
现代文：特赦京城及河西，南到秦州、泾州，西到粃罕，北到凉州及各镇罪人。
English: He pardoned criminals in Beijing and Hexi, Qinzhou and Zhangzhou in the south, Shuhan in the west, and Liangzhou and other towns in the north.

古文：诏假员外散骑常侍邢祐使于宋。
现代文：诏令代领员外散骑常侍邢出使宋国。
English: The representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the representative of the

古文：二月丁巳，诏曰： 顷者，淮徐未宾，尼父庙隔非所，致令祠典寝顿，礼章殄灭，遂使女巫妖觋淫进非礼。
现代文：二月二十二日，下诏说： 不久前，淮徐一带未宾服，孔庙隔绝，致使正常祭典停顿，礼节泯灭，而让女巫、妖觋们滥用不合礼节的东西。
English: On February 22, the next edict said: Not long ago, the Huai and Xu regions did not have guest clothes, and the Confucius Temple was isolated, resulting in the suspension of normal festivals, the extinction of etiquette, and the abuse of things that are not etiquette by witches and witches.

古文：自今有祭孔庙，制用酒脯而已，不听妇女杂合，以祈非望之福。
现代文：从今以后，凡祭祀孔庙，规定只用酒肉而已，不让妇女杂居其中，以祈求不应有的福分。
English: From now on, whenever a temple of Confucius is dedicated, it is stipulated that only meat and wine are to be used, and women are not allowed to live together in order to pray for undeserved blessings.

古文：犯者以违制论。
现代文：违反者以违犯法制论处。
English: Violators will be punished for violating the legal system.

古文：其公家有事，自如常礼。 
现代文：凡公家有事，自然照常礼祭。 
English: Whenever there is an incident involving a member of the public, it is natural for the usual rituals to take place.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞，太上皇帝次于北郊，诏诸将讨之，悉皆遁走。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯边境，太上皇帝前往北郊，诏令众将讨伐，蠕蠕全军逃走。
English: The emperor invaded the border, the emperor went to the northern suburb, the emperor ordered the people to fight, and the whole army fled.

古文：北部敕勒叛，奔蠕蠕。
现代文：北部敕勒人叛乱，投奔蠕蠕。
English: The northern Mule people rebelled and went over to the Cree.

古文：太上皇帝追至石碛，不及而还。
现代文：太上皇帝追到石碛，未能赶上，回师。
English: Emperor Taizong chased him to Shijiazhuang, but he could not catch up and returned to his division.

古文：三月戊辰，以散骑常侍、驸马都尉万安国为大司马、大将军，封安城王。
现代文：三月十六日，任命散骑常侍驸马都尉万安国为大司马、大将军，封安城王。
English: On March 16th, he appointed Wan An Guo, commander of the cavalry, to be the grand steward, general, and king of Feng'an City.

古文：庚午，亲耕籍田。
现代文：十八日，皇帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: On the 18th, the emperor personally cultivated his home field.

古文：连川敕勒谋叛，徙配青、徐、齐、兗四州为营户。
现代文：连川敕勒人阴谋叛乱，把他们分别迁移到青州、徐州、兖州、齐州四州作为军队管辖的营户。
English: The people of Lianchuan County plotted a rebellion, and they were relocated to the four provinces of Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Ganzhou, and Qizhou as military-administered residents.

古文：夏四月庚子，诏工商杂伎，尽听赴农。
现代文：夏四月十八日，诏令工匠、商人、各种技艺人，全让他们务农。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor ordered craftsmen, merchants, and all kinds of artisans to all work in agriculture.

古文：诸州课人益种菜果。
现代文：各州督促缴税人多种蔬菜和水果。
English: States are urging taxpayers to buy more fruits and vegetables.

古文：辛亥，宋人来聘。
现代文：二十九日，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the 29th, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：癸酉，诏沙门不得去寺，行者以公文。
现代文：癸酉日，诏令僧人不得离开寺庙，行者必须有官府的文书。
English: On the following day, the emperor decreed that monks were not allowed to leave the temple, and that practitioners must have official documents.

古文：是月，宋明帝殂。
现代文：当月，宋明帝死去。
English: In the same month, Emperor Song Ming died.

古文：五月丁巳，诏军警给玺印传符，次给马印。
现代文：五月初六，诏令军队警戒，给予玺印和传符，其次给马印。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, the emperor ordered the army to be on alert, and gave them the imperial seal and the courier mark, followed by the horse seal.

古文：六月，安州遭水雹，诏丐租振恤。
现代文：六月，安州遭受冰雹，诏令免租并开仓赈济民众。
English: In June, Anzhou was hit by hailstorms, and the government ordered rent to be waived and warehouses to be opened to help the people.

古文：丙申，诏： 今年贡举，尤为猥滥。
现代文：十五日，下诏说： 今年贡举到朝廷的人，特别低劣和滥选。
English: On the fifteenth day, the following edict was issued: "This year's tribute to the imperial court is particularly inferior and indiscriminate.

古文：自今所遣，皆可门尽州郡之高，才极乡闾之选。 
现代文：从今以后，凡举荐到朝廷的人士，必须门第为州郡中的极高品，而才能也是乡闾中最拔尖的人。 
English: From now on, anyone who is recommended to the imperial court must be of the highest quality in the prefecture and county, and must also be the best in the township.

古文：戊午，行幸阴山。
现代文：戊午日，巡行到达阴山。
English: At noon on the 3rd, the procession reached the gloomy mountain.

古文：秋七月壬寅，诏州郡县各遣二人才堪专对者，赴九月讲武，当亲问风俗。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，诏令各州郡县各举派二位有才能善于应付的人，参加九月里举行的讲武大会，到时皇帝将亲自询问各地风俗。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor issued an edict that each state, county, and prefecture should send two people with the ability to cope well to participate in the martial arts conference held in September. At that time, the emperor would personally inquire about the customs of various regions.

古文：八月，百济遣使请兵伐高丽。
现代文：八月，百济派使者来请求发兵攻打高丽。
English: In August, Baekje sent an envoy to request the dispatch of troops to attack Goryeo.

古文：九月辛巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月初二，车驾回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：戊申，统万镇将、河间王闾武皮坐贪残赐死。
现代文：二十八日，镇守统万的将军、河间王闾武皮犯有贪污和残暴的罪而被赐死。
English: On the 28th, the general of the town guard of Tongman, Kawama Wang Yao Wupi, was found guilty of corruption and cruelty and was sentenced to death.

古文：己酉，诏以州镇十一水旱，丐其田租，开仓振恤。
现代文：二十九日，下诏说： 由于州镇中有十一处遭受水旱灾害，免去田租，开仓赈济。 
English: On the 29th, the next edict said: Since eleven of the prefectural towns suffered from floods and droughts, they were exempted from land rent and were allowed to open warehouses to earn money.

古文：又诏流迸之人，皆令还本，违者徙边。
现代文：又令流亡在外的人都回归故乡，违反命令的迁移到边境。
English: They also forced the exiles to return to their hometowns and move to the border in violation of the order.

古文：冬十月，蠕蠕犯塞，及五原。
现代文：冬十月，蠕蠕进犯边境，到达五原。
English: In the winter of October, the creepy-crawlies invaded the border and reached Wuhuan.

古文：十一月，太上皇帝亲讨之，将度漠。
现代文：十一月，太上皇帝亲自领兵征讨，准备越过大沙漠。
English: In November, the empress dowager personally led the army to prepare to cross the great desert.

古文：蠕蠕闻之，北走数千里。
现代文：蠕蠕知道消息后，北退几千里。
English: After Creep Creep learned the news, he retreated several thousand miles north.

古文：丁亥，封皇叔略为广川王。
现代文：初九，封皇叔拓跋略为广川王。
English: In the early 9th century, Emperor Tuoba crowned him as the King of Guangchuan.

古文：壬辰，分遣使者巡省风俗，问人疾苦。
现代文：十四日，分派使者到各地巡察风土习俗，访问民间疾苦。
English: On the 14th, an envoy was dispatched to various regions to inspect local customs and visit the people's sufferings.

古文：帝每月一朝崇光宫。
现代文：皇帝每月一次到崇光宫朝见太上皇。
English: Once a month, the emperor goes to the Sogo Palace to see the emperor.

古文：十二月庚戌，诏曰： 顷者以来，官以劳升，未久而代。牧守无恤人之心，竞为聚敛，送故迎新，相属于路，非所以固人志、隆政道也。
现代文：十二月初二，下诏说： 近时以来，官吏因劳积而晋升，在位不久就有人替代，使州牧郡守没有体恤百姓之心，竞相聚敛财物，送旧任迎新官，沿路络绎不绝，这不是稳定人心、兴隆政道的办法。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the next imperial edict said: Recently, officials have been promoted due to hard work, and some have been replaced shortly after taking office. This has made the governors of counties and prefectures have no sympathy for the people, competing to accumulate wealth, send the old officials to welcome the new officials, and follow the same path. This is not a way to stabilize the people's hearts and prosper the political course.

古文：自今牧守温良仁俭、克己奉公者，可久于其任。岁积有成，迁位一级；其贪残非道，侵削黎庶者，虽在官甫尔，必加黜罚。
现代文：从今以后，凡郡守州牧中善良仁爱、俭朴克己以奉公的人，可以久留在任职的地方，政绩突出的，晋升一级；凡贪残霸道，祸害剥削百姓的，虽在职时间不长，也必须加以罢黜和惩治。
English: From now on, all good-natured, benevolent, thrifty and frugal people who have devoted themselves to public service can stay in their posts for a long time, and those with outstanding political achievements can be promoted to the first level; those who are greedy and domineering, and exploit the people, must be dismissed and punished even if they have not been in office for long.

古文：著之于令，以为彝准。 
现代文：写成条令，作为准则。 
English: Write up a rule as a guideline.

古文：诏以代郡事同丰沛，代人先配边戍者免之。
现代文：下诏将代郡视同西汉的丰沛，代人过去被发配戍边的都免除服役。
English: The following edict equated the generational county with the affluence of the Western Han Dynasty, and the generational people were exempted from service in the past.

古文：是岁，高丽、地豆干、库莫奚、高昌等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、地豆干、库莫奚、高昌等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Dokdo, Kumgang, Gochang and other countries sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：三年春正月庚辰，诏员外散骑常侍崔演使于宋。
现代文：三年春正月初三，诏令员外散骑常侍崔演出使宋朝。
English: On the third day of the third month of the first month of the third year of the spring, the imperial commanding officer rode around the Song Dynasty.

古文：丁亥，改崇光宫为宁光宫。
现代文：初十，崇光宫改名为宁光宫。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the name of the Soguang Palace was changed to the Ningguang Palace.

古文：二月戊午，太上皇帝至自北讨，饮至策勋，告于宗庙。
现代文：二月十一，太上皇帝北伐归来，在宗庙大宴群臣，论功行赏，告祭宗庙。
English: On February 11, when Emperor Taizong returned from the Northern Expedition, he held a grand banquet for his retainers at the ancestral temple, where they discussed and rewarded the merits of the war effort, and offered sacrifices to the ancestral temple.

古文：甲戌，诏县令能静一县劫盗者，兼理二县，即食其禄；能静三县者，三年迁为郡守。
现代文：二十七日，下诏说，县令能够使一县没有抢劫偷盗案件的，可以同时管理两个县，并得到两份俸禄。能够让三个县没有上述罪行的，三年以后晋升为郡守。
English: On the 27th, the next edict said that if the county order can make one county have no robbery and theft cases, it can manage two counties at the same time and get two salaries. If it can make three counties have no such crimes, it will be promoted to county governor after three years.

古文：二千石能静二郡上至三郡，亦如之，三年迁为刺史。
现代文：食禄二千石的官员能够治理两郡直到三郡的，也照上述方法晋升，三年后升任为刺史。
English: Officials with a stipend of two thousand koku who can govern two counties up to three counties are also promoted according to the above method, and after three years they are promoted to Shishi.

古文：三月壬午，诏诸仓屯谷麦充积者，出赐贫人。
现代文：三月初六，诏令各粮仓中所积存的谷、麦已堆满仓的，放粮送给贫困人家。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, it was decreed that the grain and wheat stored in each granary would be released to the poor if the granary was full.

古文：夏四月戊申，诏假司空、上党王长孙观等讨吐谷浑拾寅。
现代文：夏四月初二，诏令代理司空、上党王长孙观等人征讨吐谷浑拾寅。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, Siku, the deputy of the imperial edict, and Sun Gu, the king of the upper party, and others went to solicit Hunchin of Tugu.

古文：壬子，诏以孔子二十八世孙鲁郡孔乘为崇圣大夫，给十户以供洒扫。
现代文：初六，下诏任命孔子第二十八代孙鲁郡的孔乘任崇圣大夫，赐给十户人家供他洒扫之用。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict appointing the 28th generation of Confucius, Confucius of Sunlu County, as the Chong Sheng doctor, and gave him ten households to sweep.

古文：六月甲子，诏曰： 往年县召秀才二人，问守宰善恶，而赏者未几，罪者众多，肆法伤生，情所未忍。
现代文：六月十九日，下诏说： 往年各县召来秀才二人，以询问郡守县令的善恶，受赏的不多，而得罪的众多，滥用刑法，伤害生命，为常情所不忍。
English: On June 19th, the following edict was issued: In previous years, each county summoned two distinguished persons to inquire about the merits and demerits of the county magistrate's edict. Few were rewarded, but many were offended. The abuse of criminal law and the loss of life were intolerable.

古文：诸为人所列者，特原其罪，尽可代之。 
现代文：所有在列的人，特令赦免他们的罪名。 
English: All those on the list are hereby pardoned of their crimes.

古文：秋七月，诏河南六州人，户收绢一匹、绵一斤、租三十石。
现代文：秋七月，诏令在河南六州，每户收绢一匹，绵絮一斤，租三十石。
English: In the autumn and July, the imperial edict was issued in six states of Henan, each household received one horse, one cattail, and the rent was 30 kilos.

古文：丁亥，行幸阴山。
现代文：二十四日，巡行至阴山。
English: On the 24th, they marched to Yin Mountain.

古文：八月庚申，帝从太上皇帝幸河西。
现代文：八月初四，皇帝跟着太上皇巡行河西。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth lunar month, the emperor followed the emperor on a parade to the west of Hexi.

古文：拾寅谢罪请降，许之。
现代文：拾寅谢罪并请求归降，皇帝应许了他。
English: He repented and asked to be allowed to return, and the emperor granted his request.

古文：九月辛巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：九月初八，车驾回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：丁亥，宋人来聘。
现代文：己亥，宋人来聘问。
English: Ji Hai, Song people come to ask questions.

古文：己亥，诏曰： 今京师及天下囚未判，在狱致死，无近亲者，给衣衾棺椟葬之，不得暴露。 
现代文：二十六日，下诏说 ：现今在京城的以及天下的囚犯未经判决，在狱中致死而没有近亲的人，给衣被棺木埋葬，不得暴露在野外。 
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: "Prisoners currently in Beijing and all over the world who have not been sentenced and who die in prison and have no close relatives shall be buried in coffins and shall not be exposed to the open air.

古文：辛丑，诏遣十使，循行州郡，捡括户口。
现代文：二十八日，下诏命令十位使者，巡行各州郡，检查户口。
English: On the 28th, the emperor ordered ten emissaries to go on a tour of all prefectures and counties to check household registration.

古文：冬十月，太上皇帝将南讨，诏州郡之人，十丁取一，充行；户租五十石，以备军粮。
现代文：冬十月，太上皇帝准备南征，诏令各州郡民众，十个男丁出一人，补充军队；每户交租五十石，以备军粮。
English: In the winter of October, when the emperor was preparing for the southern expedition, he ordered the people of each state and county to send one man out of ten to supplement the army; each household had to pay fifty koku in rent in order to prepare military food.

古文：十一月戊寅，诏以河南州郡牧守多不奉法，致新邦百姓莫能上达。遣使者观风察狱，黜陟幽明，搜扬振恤。
现代文：十一月初五，下诏说因河南的州牧郡守大多不奉公守法，以致新归降地区民情难以上达，特派使者观察各地风俗民情，察看讼狱；罢黜贪官污吏，提拔贤智之士；弘扬正气，体恤民间疾苦。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the 11th month of the year, the following edict said that because most of the county magistrates of Zhumu County in Henan did not follow the Public Law, so that the people's conditions in the newly returned areas were difficult to reach, special envoys were sent to observe the customs and people's conditions in various regions, inspect the prisons; remove corrupt officials and promote wise men; promote righteousness, and sympathize with the people's sufferings.

古文：癸巳，太上皇帝南巡至怀州，所过问人疾苦，赐高年孝悌力田布帛。
现代文：二十日，太上皇帝南巡到达怀州，所经过的地方询问民间疾苦，赏赐布帛给老年人和孝悌力田的人。
English: On the 20th, the Empress Dowager's Southern Inspection arrived in Huizhou. She inquired about the people's sufferings in the places she passed, and awarded cloth bags to the elderly and the filial piety.

古文：十二月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：庚戌，诏关外苑囿，听人樵采。
现代文：初八，诏令关外的皇家园林，让人前去砍柴刈草。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the imperial edict ordered the royal gardens outside of Guan to let people go to cut firewood and mow grass.

古文：是岁，高丽、契丹、库莫奚、悉万斤等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、契丹、库莫奚、悉万斤等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Khitan, Kumo and Siwanjin sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：州镇十一水旱，丐人田租，开仓振恤。
现代文：由于十一个州镇遭受水旱灾害，减免田租，开仓赈济。
English: As eleven prefectural towns suffered from floods and droughts, farm rents were reduced or exempted, and storehouses were opened to provide relief.

古文：相州人饿死者二千八百四十五人。
现代文：相州人饿死的有二千八百四十五人。
English: A total of 2,845 people starved to death in Sangju.

古文：妖人刘举自称天子，齐州刺史、武昌王平原捕斩之。
现代文：会妖术的刘举自称天子，齐州刺史、武昌王平原把他抓来斩首。
English: Liu Jiu, a conjurer who claimed to be the son of heaven, was captured and beheaded by Qizhou Shishi and Wuchang Wang Pingyuan.

古文：四年春正月癸酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：四年春正月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁丑，太尉、陇西王源贺以病辞位。
现代文：初五，太尉、陇西王源贺因病而辞去职位。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Tai Lai and Shaanxi Wang Yuan He resigned from his post due to illness.

古文：二月甲辰，太上皇帝至自南巡。
现代文：二月初三，太上皇帝南巡归来。
English: On the third day of the second month, the emperor returned from his southern tour.

古文：辛未，禁寒食。
现代文：三十日，禁止民间寒食。
English: On the 30th, cold food for the general public was banned.

古文：三月丁亥，诏员外散骑常侍许赤武使于宋。
现代文：三月十五日，诏令员外散骑常侍许赤武出使宋国。
English: On the 15th of March, the imperial commanding officer, non-commissioned officer, horseback rider, and regular attendant, Xu Akwu, sent an envoy to Song.

古文：夏四月丁卯诏：自今非谋反大逆，干纪外奔，罪止其身而已。
现代文：夏四月二十七日下诏：从今以后，如果不是犯有叛反朝廷的大罪和冒犯国家法纪、投奔敌国等重犯，只追究本人的罪责。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: From now on, if a person does not commit the grave crime of rebelling against the imperial court, offend national laws and regulations, flee to an enemy country, and other serious crimes, only that person will be held accountable.

古文：秋七月己卯，曲赦仇池。
现代文：秋七月初十，特赦仇池罪犯。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, a general amnesty was declared for criminals in Chuchi.

古文：八月戊申，大阅于北郊。
现代文：八月初十，在北郊大阅兵。
English: At the beginning of August, there was a large military parade in the northern suburbs.

古文：九月，以宋乱故，诏将军元兰等伐蜀汉。
现代文：九月，因宋朝内乱，诏令将军元兰等人领兵攻打蜀汉之地。
English: In September, due to the civil unrest in the Song Dynasty, the emperor ordered General Yuan Lan and others to lead the troops to attack the land of Shu Han.

古文：冬十月庚子，宋人来聘。
现代文：冬十月初三，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the third day of winter in early October, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：十一月，分遣侍臣循河南七州，观察风俗，抚慰初附。
现代文：十一月，分别派遣侍卫大臣巡察河南的七州，以观察民间风俗，安抚初来归附的民众。
English: In November, the Minister of the Imperial Guard was separately dispatched to inspect the seven states of Henan to observe folk customs and pacify the people who had just come to the country.

古文：是岁，粟特、敕勒、吐谷浑、高丽、曹利、阔悉、契丹、库莫奚、地豆干等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，粟特、敕勒、吐谷浑、高丽、曹利、阔悉、契丹、库莫奚、地豆干等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Sogdia, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo

古文：州镇十三大饥，丐人田租，开仓振之。
现代文：州镇中有十三处发生饥荒，免去田租，开仓赈济。
English: Thirteen of the prefectural towns suffered from famine, and were exempted from paying farm rents and opening warehouses to earn money.

古文：五年春二月癸丑，诏定考课，明黜陟。
现代文：五年春二月十八日，诏令制定考察官吏的标准，公开进行升降和赏罚。
English: On February 18 of the spring of the fifth year, the imperial edict formulated the standards for inspecting officials, and the promotion and demotion and rewards and punishments were carried out openly.

古文：夏四月，诏禁畜鹰鹞，开相告之制。
现代文：夏四月，诏令禁止畜养鹰鹞，开相互告发的法令。
English: In the summer of April, the imperial edict prohibited the raising of eagle owls, and a mutual denunciation decree was issued.

古文：五月丙午，诏员外散骑常侍许赤武使于宋。
现代文：五月十二日，令员外散骑常侍许赤武出使宋朝。
English: On May 12th, Xu Akawu, an envoy of the Song Dynasty, was dispatched.

古文：丁未，幸武州山。
现代文：十三日，前往武州山。
English: On the 13th, he went to Mount Buzhou.

古文：辛酉，幸车轮山。
现代文：二十七日，到达车轮山。
English: On the 27th, they arrived at Zhulun Mountain.

古文：六月庚午，禁杀牛马。
现代文：六月初七，下令禁止杀死牛马。
English: On the 7th of June, a ban on the killing of cattle and horses was ordered.

古文：壬申，曲赦京师死罪，遣备蠕蠕。
现代文：初九，专赦京都犯有死罪的人，派他们去防备蠕蠕人。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he pardoned all those who had committed capital crimes in Kyoto and sent them to guard against criminals.

古文：秋九月癸卯，洛州人贾伯奴称恆农王，豫州人田智度称上洛王，郡讨平之。
现代文：秋九月十一日，洛州人贾伯奴自称为恒农王，豫州人田智度自称上洛王，被郡守讨平。
English: On the 11th day of the 9th month of the autumn, Jia Bonu, a man from Lozhou, called himself the King of Hengnong, and Tian Zhidu, a man from Yuzhou, called himself the King of Shangluo. They were leveled by the county magistrate.

古文：冬十月，太上皇帝大阅于北郊。
现代文：冬十月，太上皇帝在北郊大阅兵。
English: In the winter of October, the Emperor held a grand military parade in the northern suburbs.

古文：十二月丙寅，改封建昌王长乐为安乐王。
现代文：十二月初六，改封建昌王长乐为安乐王。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Jianchang Wang Changle was changed to Anle Wang.

古文：己丑，城阳王长寿薨。
现代文：二十九日，城阳王长寿去世。
English: On the 29th, Chengyang Wang Changshou passed away.

古文：庚寅，宋人来聘。
现代文：三十日，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the 30th, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：是岁，高丽、吐谷浑、龟兹、契丹、库莫奚、地豆干、蠕蠕等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、吐谷浑、龟兹、契丹、库莫奚、地豆干、蠕蠕等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Tukguk, Gyeongju, Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do, Gyeonggi-do

古文：承明元年春二月，司空、东郡王陆定国坐事免官爵为兵。
现代文：承明元年春二月，司空、东郡王陆定国因事被免去爵位充当兵士。
English: In the spring and February of the following year, Siku and the king of Dong County, Lu Dingguo, were stripped of their titles and forced to serve as soldiers.

古文：夏五月，冀州人宋伏龙聚众自称南平王。
现代文：夏五月，冀州人宋伏龙聚众自称南平王。
English: In the summer of May, Song Fulong from Jizhou gathered a crowd and called himself the King of Nanping.

古文：郡县捕斩之。
现代文：当地郡县抓住他并处斩了。
English: The local county caught him and executed him.

古文：六月甲子，诏中外戒严。
现代文：六月初六，诏令京城内外戒严。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the year.

古文：分京师见兵为三等，第一军出，遣第一兵，二等亦如之。
现代文：把京城现有军队分为三等，第一军出发，派第一兵；二等的也照此办理。
English: The existing troops in Beijing will be divided into three classes. The first army will set out and send the first soldier; the second class will do the same.

古文：辛未，太上皇帝崩。
现代文：十三日，太上皇帝驾崩。
English: On the 13th, the emperor died.

古文：壬申，大赦，改元。
现代文：十四日，大赦天下，改年号。
English: On the 14th, there was a general amnesty and the year was changed.

古文：大司马、大将军、安城王万安国坐法赐死。
现代文：大司马、大将军、安城王万安国犯法被赐死。
English: Dai Sima, Dai Gen, and Ancheng Wang were all sentenced to death for breaking the law.

古文：戊寅，以征西大将军、安乐王长乐为太尉；尚书左仆射、南平公目辰为司徒，进封宜都王；以南部尚书李为司空。
现代文：二十日，任命征西大将军、安乐王长乐为太尉；尚书左仆射、南平公目辰为司徒，晋封爵号宜都王；任命南部尚书李讠斤为司空。
English: On the 20th, he appointed the general of the Western Expedition, Anle Wang Changle as the first lieutenant; Shangshu Zuofu as the second lieutenant, Nanping Gongmenchen as the second lieutenant, and Yi Du Wang as the knight; and appointed Nanfang Shangshu Li Yujin as the second lieutenant.

古文：尊皇太后为太皇太后，临朝称制。
现代文：尊封皇太后为太皇太后，临朝代行皇帝的职权。
English: The revered empress dowager became the great empress dowager and assumed the duties of acting emperor for the Lin Dynasty.

古文：秋七月甲辰，追尊皇妣李贵人为思皇后。
现代文：秋七月十七，追封皇帝的母亲李贵人为思皇后。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor's mother, Li Guiguo, became the empress.

古文：濮阳王孔雀有罪赐死。
现代文：濮阳王孔雀有罪被赐死。
English: King Peacock of Shenyang was found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：八月甲子，诏群公卿士，有便人益国者，具状以闻。
现代文：八月初七，诏令众公卿大臣，凡是有方便民众和有益于国家的建议，都陈述于朝廷。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the year, the Emperor ordered the nobles and ministers to present to the imperial court all proposals that were convenient for the people and beneficial to the country.

古文：甲戌，以长安二蚕多死，丐人岁赋之半。
现代文：二十七日，因长安的两种蚕大多死去，免除每人当年一半赋。
English: On the 27th, because most of the two types of silkworms in Chang'an died, each person was exempted from half of the year.

古文：九月丁亥，曲赦京师。
现代文：九月初一，在京城实行大赦。
English: On the first day of September, an amnesty was implemented in the capital.

古文：冬十月丁巳，起七宝永安行殿。
现代文：冬十月初一，修建七宝永安行殿。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the construction of Qibao Yongan Xingden was completed.

古文：乙丑，进假东阳王丕爵为王。
现代文：初九，晋封代东阳王丕的爵位为王爵。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Wang Yao of the Eastern Yang Dynasty was promoted to the rank of prince.

古文：己未，诏群官卿士下及吏人，各听上书，直言极谏，勿有所隐。
现代文：初三，诏令众官员卿士下至吏人，都可以自由上书朝廷，直言进谏，不要有所隐瞒。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued an edict ordering all officials, from noblemen to bureaucrats, to freely submit letters to the Imperial Court, to speak frankly, and not to hide anything.

古文：诸有益政利人可以正风俗者，有司以闻。
现代文：凡是有益于国政和有利民众可以用来端正风气的人和事，各有关官员上奏朝廷。
English: All officials concerned shall report to the Imperial Court all persons and matters that are beneficial to national politics and beneficial to the people that can be used to rectify the culture.

古文：辛未，幸建明佛寺，大宥罪人。
现代文：十五日，前往建明佛寺，大赦罪人。
English: On the 15th, he went to Jianming Buddhist Temple to grant amnesty to criminals.

古文：进济南公罗拔为王。
现代文：晋封济南公罗拔爵位为王。
English: Jinan Duke Luo was promoted to the throne.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、高丽、库莫奚、波斯、契丹、宕昌、悉万斤等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，蠕蠕、高丽、库莫奚、波斯、契丹、宕昌、悉万斤等国都派使者来朝贡。
English: In that year, the following countries sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court: Crewe, Goryeo, Kumo, Persia, Khitan, Goseong, and Siwanjin.

古文：太和元年春正月乙酉，改元。
现代文：太和元年春正月初一，改年号。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：辛亥，起太和、安昌二殿。
现代文：二十七日，建太和、安昌两座宫殿。
English: On the 27th, the two palaces of Jiantaihe and Anchang were built.

古文：己酉，秦州略阳人王元寿聚众，自号冲天王。
现代文：二十五日，秦州略阳人王元寿聚众造反，自称为冲天王。
English: On the 25th, Wang Yuan Shou, a Yang person from Qinzhou, gathered a crowd to rebel and called himself Chong Tian Wang.

古文：云中饥，开仓振恤。
现代文：云中发生饥荒，下令开仓赈济。
English: When famine broke out, he ordered the opening of storehouses to provide food.

古文：二月辛未，秦益二州刺史、武都公尉洛侯讨破王元寿。
现代文：二月十七日，秦、益两州刺史、武都公尉洛侯打败王元寿。
English: On February 17th, Qin, Yixian, Shishi from the two states, and Luo, a military officer from the capital, defeated Wang Yuanshou.

古文：三月庚子，以雍州刺史、东阳王歪为司徒。
现代文：三月十七日，任命雍州刺史、东阳王丕为司徒。
English: On March 17th, Yangzhou Zishi and Dongyang Wang Qi were appointed as scholars.

古文：丙午，诏曰： 去年牛疫，死伤大半。
现代文：二十三日，下诏说： 去年牛瘟，耕牛死伤大半。
English: On the 23rd, the next edict said: Last year's rinderpest, most of the deaths and injuries of farm cattle.

古文：今东作既兴，人须肄业，其敕在所督课田农，有牛者加勤于常岁，无牛者倍庸于余年。
现代文：今年春耕开始，民众应尽力耕作，特令各地督促农务，有牛的要比往年更加努力耕作，无牛的加倍用功于常年。
English: When spring ploughing begins this year, people should do their best to plough the land, and all regions should be ordered to supervise agricultural work. Those with cattle should work harder than in previous years, and those without cattle should work twice as hard all year round.

古文：一夫制田四十亩，中男二十亩，无令人有余力，地有遗利。 
现代文：一个成年男子耕种田四十亩，未成年男子耕种二十亩，不要让人有余力，地有遗利。 
English: An adult male cultivates forty mu of farmland, and a minor male cultivates twenty mu. Don't let people have too much energy, and the land will be wasted.

古文：夏四月，乐安王良薨。
现代文：夏四月，乐安王良去世。
English: In the summer of April, Le An Wang Liang passed away.

古文：诏复前东郡王陆定国官爵。
现代文：诏令恢复原东郡王陆定国的官职爵位。
English: The imperial edict restored the official rank and title of the former East County King Lu Dingguo.

古文：五月，车驾祈雨于武州山，俄而澍雨大洽。
现代文：五月，皇帝到武州山求雨，不久便时雨大下。
English: In May, the emperor went to Mount Wuzhou to pray for rain, but it soon began to rain heavily.

古文：秋七月壬辰，京兆王子推薨。
现代文：秋七月十一，京兆王子推去世。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, Prince Keizho passed away.

古文：庚子，定三等死刑。
现代文：十九日，规定三等死刑。
English: On the 19th, the third-class death penalty was stipulated.

古文：己酉，起硃明、思贤门。
现代文：二十八日，建朱明、思贤门。
English: On the 28th, Jian Zhuming and Shixianmen arrived.

古文：是月，宋人杀其主昱。
现代文：当月，宋人杀了国君刘昱。
English: In the same month, the Song people killed the country's ruler Liu Bei.

古文：八月壬子，大赦。
现代文：八月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of August, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 工商皁隶，各有厥分，而有司纵滥，或染清流。
现代文：二十五日，下诏说 ：工商差役，各有其本分，而有司放纵杂滥，有的变成清流中人。
English: On the 25th, the next edict said: "Industry and commerce officials each have their duty, but some indulge in excesses, and some become people in the clear stream."

古文：自今户内有工役者，唯止本部丞，已下准次而授。
现代文：从今以后，户内有工匠差役的，只能在本部丞以下官员中依次授给爵级。
English: From now on, if there are craftsmen and clerks in the household, they can only be awarded a peerage in succession among the officials below Honbujo.

古文：若阶藉元勋以劳定国者，不从此制。 
现代文：如果品级是靠为国立有大功有安定国家的劳绩的，不在此例。 
English: This is not the case if the grade is based on the merits of being a national hero and a stable country.

古文：戊寅，宋人来聘。
现代文：二十七日，宋人前来问聘。
English: On the 27th, Song people came to inquire.

古文：九月乙酉，诏群臣定律令于太华殿。
现代文：九月初五，令群臣在太华殿制定法令。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, he ordered his ministers to draw up a decree in the Taihua Palace.

古文：庚子，起永乐游观殿于北苑，穿神泉池。
现代文：二十日，在北苑建永乐游观殿，挖神泉池。
English: On the 20th, the Yongle Yu Kuan Hall was built in the North Garden, and the Shenshen Spring Pool was dug.

古文：冬十月辛亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月初一，日食。
English: Winter On the first day of October, a solar eclipse.

古文：癸酉，宴京邑耆老年七十已上于太华殿，赐以衣服。
现代文：二十三日，在太华殿宴请京城中七十岁以上的老年人，并赏赐给衣服。
English: On the 23rd, a banquet was held at the Taihua Palace for senior citizens over the age of 70 in Beijing, and they were given clothes.

古文：诏七十已上一子不从役。
现代文：下令凡年纪七十以上的老人一个儿子不必服役。
English: Ordering that no man over the age of seventy should have a son in military service.

古文：宋葭芦戍主杨文度遣弟鼠袭陷仇池。
现代文：宋守卫葭芦的将领杨文度派弟弟杨鼠攻打并占领了仇池。
English: The general of Song guarding Huludao, Yang Wendu, sent his brother Yangzi to attack and occupy Qiuchi.

古文：十一月丁亥，怀州人伊祁苟自称尧后，应王，聚众于重山。
现代文：十一月初七，怀州人伊祁苟自称是尧帝的后裔，应当做皇帝，聚众在重山起事。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, Iqengo, a native of Waizhou, claimed to be a descendant of Emperor Qian and should be the emperor, and gathered people to rise up in Chongshan.

古文：洛州刺史冯熙讨平之。
现代文：被洛州刺史冯熙讨平了。
English: He was evened out by the Los Angeles acolyte Feng Xi.

古文：闰月庚午，诏员外散骑常侍李长仁使于宋。
现代文：闰十一月二十一，诏令员外散骑常侍李长仁出使宋国。
English: On the 21st day of the 11th month of the leap year, Li Changren, the imperial commanding officer, sent an envoy to Song.

古文：十二月壬寅，征西将军皮喜攻陷葭芦，斩杨文度，传首京师。
现代文：十二月二十三日，征西将军皮喜攻克葭芦，斩了杨文度，把首级传到京都。
English: On December 23rd, Pi Xi, the general of the Western Conquest, conquered Ke Hulou, beheaded Yang Wenda, and sent the head to Kyoto.

古文：丁未，州郡八水旱蝗，人饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：二十八日，八个州郡发生了水、旱、蝗灾，民间饥荒，下令开仓赈济。
English: On the 28th, water, drought, locust plagues, and famine occurred in eight states and counties, and it was ordered to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：是岁，高丽、契丹、库莫奚、蠕蠕、车多罗、西天竺、舍卫、叠伏罗、栗杨婆、员阔等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、契丹、库莫奚、蠕蠕、车多罗、西天竺、舍卫、叠伏罗、栗杨婆、员阔等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, envoys from Goryeo, Khitan, Kumo, Demog, Che Dor, West Tieng, Shewei, Samchevro, Churyangpo, and Manggok were sent to pay tribute.

古文：二年春正月丁巳，封昌黎王冯熙第二子始兴为北平王。
现代文：二年春正月初九，封昌黎王冯熙二儿子始兴为北平王。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Spring, the son of Feng Xi II, the King of Changli, was named the King of Peiping.

古文：二月丁亥，行幸代之汤泉，所过问人疾苦，以宫女赐贫人无妻者。
现代文：二月初九，巡行至代州的汤泉，所经过的地方访问民众疾苦，并把宫女赐给贫困无力娶妻子的人。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month, he went on a tour to Tangquan in Daizhou, visiting the places he passed to visit the people's sufferings, and gave the princess to the poor who were unable to marry a wife.

古文：癸卯，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十五日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 25th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：乙酉晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：乙酉为晦日，日食。
English: Acetylene for New Year's Eve, solar eclipse.

古文：三月丙子，以河南公梁弥机为宕昌王。
现代文：三月二十九日，封河南公梁弥机为宕昌王。
English: On March 29th, Henan Gongliang Yiji was crowned King of Tangchang.

古文：夏四月己丑，宋人来聘。
现代文：夏四月十二日，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the 12th day of the 4th month of summer, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：京师旱。
现代文：京城大旱。
English: There is a drought in the capital.

古文：甲辰，祈天灾于北苑，亲自礼焉，减膳避正殿。
现代文：二十七日，因天灾而在北苑向天帝祈祷，皇帝亲自主持祭礼，减少饮食。避正殿。
English: On the 27th, due to the natural disaster, he prayed to the Heavenly Emperor in the North Courtyard. The Emperor himself held a ritual and reduced his diet. He avoided the main hall.

古文：丙午，澍雨大洽，曲赦京师。
现代文：二十九日，时雨大下，在京师特赦。
English: On the 29th, when it was raining heavily, there was an amnesty for teachers in Beijing.

古文：五月，诏曰： 乃者人渐奢尚，婚葬越轨。
现代文：五月，下诏说： 近来民间崇尚奢华之风，婚姻丧葬都越轨办理。
English: In May, the next edict said: Recently, the people have advocated the luxury style, and marriages and funerals have gone off the rails.

古文：又皇族贵戚及士庶之家，不惟氏族高下，与非类婚偶。
现代文：从皇亲贵戚下至士民之家，不论氏族门户高低，和不同类别人家婚配。
English: From the imperial family to the house of commoners, regardless of the level of the clan portal, they marry with different types of other families.

古文：先帝亲发明诏，为之科禁。
现代文：先帝曾亲自下达明令，严加禁止。
English: The former emperor had personally issued a clear order to strictly prohibit it.

古文：而百姓习常，仍不肃改。
现代文：而百姓习以为常，仍不严加更改。
English: But the people are accustomed to it and still do not strictly change it.

古文：朕念宪章旧典，永为定准，犯者以违制论。 
现代文：我以为国家的宪令法典，应永为标准，违犯的人以违犯法令论处。 
English: I think that the country's constitutional code should always be the standard, and those who violate it should be punished by violating the law.

古文：六月庚子，皇叔若薨。
现代文：六月二十四日，皇叔拓跋若去世。
English: On June 24th, Uncle Tuoba passed away.

古文：丙辰，曲赦京师。
现代文：秋八月，分派使者，考察各地方守宰，访问民间疾苦。
English: In the autumn and August, envoys were dispatched to inspect local governors and visit the suffering of the people.

古文：冬十月壬辰，诏员外散骑常侍郑发使于宋。
现代文：十一日，诏令免除各州进贡禽兽的规定。九月初一，日食，十二日，在京都特赦。冬十月十八日，令员外散骑常侍郑羲出使宋国。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict exempted the states from the requirement of bringing in tribute animals and beasts. On the first day of September, the solar eclipse, and on the 12th day, there was an amnesty in Kyoto. On the 18th day of October in winter, the emperor sent an envoy to the Song Dynasty.

古文：十二月癸巳，诛南郡王李惠。
现代文：十二月二十，杀南郡王李惠。
English: On December 20th, Wang Lihui of Nan County was killed.

古文：是岁，龟兹国献名驼龙马珍宝甚众。
现代文：当年，龟兹进献有名的驼龙马和大量珍宝。
English: In that year, the famous camel dragons and horses and a large number of precious treasures were presented to the emperor.

古文：吐谷浑、蠕蠕、勿吉等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：吐谷浑、蠕蠕、勿吉等国派使者朝贡。
English: Envoys from as far away as Tukugan, Crum Crum, and Bekichi came to pay tribute.

古文：州镇二十余水旱，人饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：二十多个州镇发生水旱灾害，民众饥荒，诏令开仓赈济。
English: Floods and droughts occurred in more than 20 prefectures and towns, people were starving, and the imperial edict was issued to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：三年春正月癸丑，坤德六合殿成。
现代文：三年春正月十一，坤德六合殿建成。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the third year of the Spring, the Kunde Six-Way Hall was completed.

古文：庚申，诏罢行察官。
现代文：十八日，下诏废除巡察官员。
English: On the 18th, the next edict abolished the inspecting officers.

古文：二月辛巳，帝、太皇太后幸代郡汤泉，问人疾苦。
现代文：二月初九，皇帝、太皇太后巡行至代郡温泉，访问民间疾苦。
English: On the ninth day of the second month of the year, the emperor and the empress dowager went on a tour to the hot springs in Dayi County to visit people suffering from illnesses.

古文：鳏寡贫者妻以宫女。
现代文：给鳏夫且贫困的人以宫女为妻。
English: A widower in poverty is given a concubine as a wife.

古文：己亥，还宫。
现代文：二十七日，回宫。
English: On the 27th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：三月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月初一为朔日，日食。
English: The first day of March is the New Year's Day, with a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，曲赦京师。夏四月壬申，宋人来聘。
现代文：初二在京都特赦。夏四月初一，宋人前来聘问。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, there was an amnesty in Kyoto. In the summer, on the first day of April, Song people came to ask questions.

古文：癸未，乐良王乐平薨。
现代文：十二日，乐良王乐平去世。
English: On the 12th, King Leping of Le Liang passed away.

古文：甲午，宋顺帝禅位于齐。
现代文：二十二日，宋顺帝禅位于齐。
English: On the 22nd, Emperor Song Shun and Emperor Zen were in Qi.

古文：庚子，进淮阳公尉元爵为王。
现代文：二十九日，晋封淮阳公尉元的爵位为王爵。
English: On the 29th, Huaiyang Public Lieutenant Yuan was promoted to the rank of peer.

古文：宜都王目辰有罪赐死。
现代文：宜都王目辰有罪被赐死。
English: Guilty, Wang Muchen of Yidu was sentenced to death.

古文：五月丁巳，帝祈雨于北苑，闭阳门，是日澍雨大洽。
现代文：五月十六日，皇帝在北苑求雨，关闭阳门，当日时雨大下。
English: On May 16th, the emperor asked for rain in the North Garden and closed the sun gate. On that day, it rained heavily.

古文：六月辛未，以雍州人饥，开仓振恤。
现代文：六月初一，因雍州民众饥荒，开仓赈济。
English: On the first day of June, due to the famine of the people of Yongzhou, the opening of warehouses to provide relief.

古文：起文石室灵泉殿于方山。
现代文：在方山修建石室灵泉殿。
English: In Fangshan, the stone chamber of Lingquan Hall was built.

古文：秋七月壬寅，诏免宫人年老及病者。
现代文：秋七月初二，下诏免除宫人中年老和有病的人的徭役。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the emperor issued an edict exempting the elderly and the sick from serving as palace attendants.

古文：八月壬申，诏群臣进直言。
现代文：八月初三，诏令群臣进言直谏。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, the imperial edict ordered the courtiers to make a direct speech.

古文：乙亥，幸方山，起思远佛寺。
现代文：初六，巡幸方山，建思远佛寺。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, he went on a tour of Mount Koshikata and built a Buddhist temple.

古文：丁丑，还宫。
现代文：初八，回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：九月壬子，以司徒、东阳王丕为太尉；赵郡公陈建为司徒，进爵魏郡王；河南公苟颓为司空，进爵河东王。
现代文：九月十三日，任命司徒、东阳王丕为太尉；赵郡公陈建为司徒，晋爵为魏郡王；河南公苟颓为司空，晋爵位为河东王。
English: On September 13th, he appointed Sito and Dongyang Wang Yao as Tai Lai; Zhao County official Chen Jian as Sito and Jin Jiao as Wei County official; Henan County official Guo Yao as Sikuo and Jin Jiao as Hedong County official.

古文：进太原公王睿中山王，陇东公张祐新平王。
现代文：加封太原公王睿又为中山王，陇东公张为新平王。
English: King Rui of Taiyuan was also the king of Zhongshan, and King Zhang of Shandong was the king of Xinping.

古文：乙未，定州刺史、安乐王长乐有罪赐死。
现代文：二十日，定州刺史、安乐王长乐有罪被赐死。
English: On the 20th, Dingzhou Sashih and Anle Wang Changle were convicted and sentenced to death.

古文：庚申，陇西王源贺薨。
现代文：二十一日，陇西王源贺去世。
English: On the 21st, King Yuan He of Shaanxi passed away.

古文：冬十月己巳朔，大赦。
现代文：冬十月初一，大赦天下。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, a general amnesty is declared.

古文：十一月癸卯，赐京师贫穷高年疾患不能自存衣服布帛各有差。
现代文：十一月初五，赏赐京城中贫困、年纪大和有病而不能自给的人衣服布帛，数量不等。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th month, clothing and cloth bags were given to the poor, the elderly and the sick in the capital who were unable to provide for themselves, in varying quantities.

古文：癸丑，进假梁郡公元嘉爵为假王，督二将出淮阴；陇西公元琛三将出广陵；河东公薛豹子三将出广固，至寿春。
现代文：十五日，晋封假梁郡公元嘉的爵位为假王，率领两位将领出兵淮阴；陇西公元琛等三位将领出兵广陵；河东公薛豹子等三位将领出兵广固，到达寿春。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the peerage of Zhang Liang County, Jia Dynasty, was given to Zhang Wang. He led two generals to lead the troops to Huaiyin; three generals led the troops to Guangling in the west of Shaanxi Province, and three generals led the troops to Guanggu in the east of Hebei Province, and arrived in Shuchun.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑、高丽、蠕蠕、地豆干、契丹、库莫奚、龟兹、粟特、州逸、河龚、叠伏罗、员阔、悉万斤等国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，吐谷浑、高丽、蠕蠕、地豆干、契丹、库莫奚、龟兹、粟特、州逸、河龚、叠伏罗、员阔、悉万斤等国派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, envoys from Tugu, Goryeo, Koryo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, Goryeo, G

古文：四年春正月癸卯，乾象六合殿成。
现代文：四年春正月初六，乾象六合殿建成。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of spring, the Qianxiang 6th Hall was completed.

古文：乙卯，广川王略薨。
现代文：十八日，广川王拓跋略去世。
English: On the 18th, Guangchuan Wang Tuobao passed away.

古文：丁巳，罢畜鹰鹞之所，以其地为报德佛寺。
现代文：二十日，下令废除畜养鹰鹞的场所，把这块土地用来修建报德佛寺。
English: On the 20th, it was ordered to abolish the place for raising eagles, and the land was used to build a Buddhist temple.

古文：戊午，襄城王韩颓有罪，削爵徙边。
现代文：二十一日，襄城王韩颓有罪，削去爵位流放边境。
English: On the twenty-first day, the king of Xiangcheng, Han Xuan, was found guilty, stripped of his title and exiled to the border.

古文：二月癸巳，以旱故，诏天下祀山川群神及能兴云雨者，修饰祠堂，荐以牲璧。
现代文：二月二十七日，由于大旱，下令祭祀天下山川群神以及能够带来风雨的神礻氏，修建和装饰祠堂，以牲畜和玉璧祭祀。
English: On February 27th, due to the drought, it was ordered to offer sacrifices to the gods of the world's mountains and rivers, as well as to the Shinran clan, which can bring wind and rain, to build and decorate the ancestral hall, and to offer sacrifices with livestock and jade.

古文：人有疾苦，所在存问。
现代文：让各地官员访查民众疾苦。
English: Let officials from various regions visit and investigate the people's sufferings.

古文：夏四月乙卯，幸廷尉、籍坊二狱，引见诸囚。
现代文：夏四月十四日，前去巡察廷尉和籍坊两处监狱，引见了囚犯。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, he went to inspect the two prisons of the Lieutenant of the Court and the Registry Office, and met the prisoners.

古文：诏随轻重决遣，以赴耕耘。
现代文：下令按罪行轻重判决加快遣送，以参加耕耘。
English: Ordered to speed up the deportation according to the severity of the crime to participate in the cultivation.

古文：甲申，赐天下贫人一户之内无杂财谷帛者廪一年。
现代文：十九日，赐给天下每一户没有其他余财和谷物布帛的穷人一年粮食。
English: On the 19th, he gave a year's supply of grain to every poor family in the world that had no other money or grain.

古文：六月丁卯，以澍雨大洽，曲赦京师。
现代文：六月初二，因时雨大下，特赦京城罪人。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, due to heavy rain, an amnesty for the capital's criminals began.

古文：秋七月辛亥，行幸火山。
现代文：秋七月十七日，巡行至火山。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, the parade went to the volcano.

古文：壬子，诏会京师耆老，赐锦彩衣服几杖稻米蜜面，复家人不徭役。
现代文：十八日，下诏会见京中老人，赏赐给锦采衣服、小几、手杖、稻米、蜂蜜、面粉，免除家人徭役。
English: On the 18th, the emperor met with the elderly in Beijing and rewarded Jinzo with clothes, a small table, a cane, rice, honey, and flour, and exempted his family from labor.

古文：闰月丁亥，幸兽圈，亲录囚徒，轻者皆免之。
现代文：闰七月二十三日，前往畜养野兽的兽圈，亲自检查记录囚徒罪行的材料，轻罪的一律赦免。
English: On July 23rd, he went to the animal enclosure where the animals were kept, and personally checked the materials recording the prisoners' crimes. All misdemeanors were pardoned.

古文：壬辰，顿丘王李钟葵有罪赐死。
现代文：二十八日，顿丘王李钟葵有罪被赐死。
English: On the 28th, Dongqiu King Li Zhongkai was found guilty and sentenced to death.

古文：八月乙酉，诏诸州置冰室。
现代文：八月二十二日，诏令各州设置冰室。
English: On August 22nd, the Emperor ordered all prefectures to set up ice rooms.

古文：九月乙亥，思义殿成。
现代文：九月十二日，思义殿竣工。
English: On September 12th, Siyi Hall was completed.

古文：壬午，东明观成。
现代文：十九日，东明观建成。
English: On the 19th, the East Mingguan Tower was completed.

古文：戊子，诏曰： 隆寒雪降，可遣侍臣诣廷尉狱及囚所，察饥寒者给以衣食，桎梏者代以轻锁。 
现代文：二十五日，下诏说 ：严寒降雪，可派遣侍臣到廷尉所在的监狱及所有囚禁犯人的地方察看，饥饿寒冷的给予食品和衣服，戴脚镣手铐的，换成轻锁。 
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: Due to the severe cold and snow, courtiers may be sent to inspect the prison where the courtier is being held and all places where prisoners are being held. Those who are hungry and cold will be given food and clothing, and those who are wearing leg irons and handcuffs will be changed to light locks.

古文：是岁，郡镇十八水旱，人饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：当年，十八个郡镇发生水旱灾害，民众饥荒，诏令开仓赈济。
English: In that year, eighteen counties and towns suffered from floods and droughts, the people were starving, and the imperial edict was issued to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：蠕蠕、悉万斤等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：蠕蠕、悉万斤等国都派使者朝贡。
English: Countries such as Cm Cm and Sìm Văn Cn all sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月乙卯，南巡。
现代文：五年春正月十八，南巡。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the Southern Inspection began.

古文：丁亥，至中山，亲见高年，问人疾苦。
现代文：二十六日，到达中山，亲自接见年纪大的人，访问疾苦。
English: On the 26th, he arrived at Zhongshan and personally met with the elderly and visited the sick.

古文：二月辛卯朔，大赦。
现代文：二月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of February, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：赐孝悌力田孤贫不能自存者，谷帛各有差。
现代文：赐谷物布帛给孝悌力田和因孤寡贫困难以维持生计的人，数量多少不等。
English: Grain cloth bags are given to filial sons and daughters, and to those who are struggling to make ends meet due to poverty and isolation, in varying amounts.

古文：免宫人之老者，还其亲。
现代文：免宫中年老人服役，让他们回去和亲人团聚。
English: exempting middle-aged people from military service and allowing them to reunite with their families.

古文：丁酉，至信都，存问如中山。癸卯，还中山。
现代文：初七，到达信都，像在中山那样慰问百姓。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he arrived at Xindu and consoled the people as he did in Zhongshan.

古文：己酉，讲武于唐水之阳。
现代文：十三日，返回中山。十九日，在唐水北面讲习武艺。
English: On the 13th, he returned to Zhongshan, and on the 19th, he took a martial arts class in the north of Tangshui.

古文：庚戌，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 20th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：沙门法秀谋反，伏诛。
现代文：僧人法秀谋反被杀。
English: The monk, Fa Xiu Mu, was killed.

古文：假梁郡王嘉大破齐，俘获三万余口，送京师。
现代文：代梁郡王嘉大破齐国，俘虏三万多人送往京城。
English: Wang Jia Da, the governor of Liang County, defeated Qi Guo, and more than 30,000 prisoners were sent to Beijing.

古文：三月辛酉朔，幸肆州。
现代文：三月初一，皇帝到达肆州。
English: On the first day of March, the emperor arrived in Wuzhou.

古文：癸亥，讲武于云水之阳。
现代文：初二，在云水北面讲习武艺。
English: In the second year of junior high school, martial arts were taught in the north of Yunshui.

古文：所经考察守宰，黜陟之。
现代文：对已经过考核的地方守宰官员，贬斥或予以晋升。
English: For local officials who have passed the assessment, they will be demoted or promoted.

古文：己巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：初八，车驾回宫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I drove back to the palace.

古文：诏曰： 法秀妖诈乱常，妄说符瑞。
现代文：下诏说 ：法秀以妖言欺诈祸乱纲常，乱说符瑞。
English: The next imperial edict said: "Dajuang used magic words to deceive and cause trouble, and his lies brought good fortune."

古文：兰台御史张求等一百余人招结奴隶，谋为大逆。
现代文：兰台御史张求等一百多人聚集奴隶，阴谋反叛朝廷。
English: More than a hundred people, including the Lantai governor Zhang Qiu, gathered slaves and plotted to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：有司科以族诛，诚合刑宪。
现代文：有关部门处以灭族之罪，确实合乎刑典。
English: The relevant departments punish the crime of extermination, which is indeed in line with the Criminal Code.

古文：但矜愚重命，犹所不忍。
现代文：但无论是自以为贤能的或愚蠢的，都重视生命，所以我心中不忍。
English: But no matter whether they think they are wise or foolish, they all value life, so I can't bear it in my heart.

古文：其五族者降止同祖，三族止一门，门诛止身。 
现代文：凡应诛五族的降为仅灭同祖父者，诛三族的仅灭一门，诛一门的仅杀其本人。 
English: Those who were relegated to killing only their grandfathers from the five clans, only one clan from the three clans, and only themselves from the one clan.

古文：夏四月己亥，行幸方山。
现代文：夏四月初十，巡行至方山。
English: In the summer, on the 10th day of the 4th month, the parade will go to Fangshan.

古文：建永固石室，于山立碑焉。铭太皇太后终制于金册。
现代文：修建永固石室，在山上立碑，铭刻上为太皇太后守丧的册文。
English: The Yonggu Stone Room was built, and a monument was erected on the mountain, inscribed with the obituary of the great empress dowager.

古文：又起鉴玄殿。
现代文：又修建鉴玄殿。
English: Jigen-den hall was also built.

古文：甲寅，以旱故，诏所在掩骸骨，祈衤寿神祇。
现代文：二十五日，因发生旱灾饥荒，诏令各地掩埋死者的尸骨，祈祷神灵。
English: On the 25th, due to drought and famine, the emperor ordered all regions to bury the bones of the dead and pray to the gods.

古文：任城王云薨。
现代文：任城王拓跋云去世。
English: The king of the city, Tuobao passed away.

古文：五月庚申，以农月时耍，诏天下勿使有留狱。
现代文：五月初一，因农时紧迫，诏令天下不要让犯人滞留监狱。
English: On the first day of May, due to the urgency of the agricultural season, the emperor ordered the world not to let the prisoners stay in prison.

古文：六月甲辰，中山王睿薨。
现代文：六月十六，中山王睿又去世。
English: On June 16, Zhongshan Wang Rui passed away again.

古文：戊午，封皇叔简为齐郡王，猛为安丰王。
现代文：三十日，封皇叔拓跋简为齐郡王，拓跋猛为安丰王。
English: On the 30th, the emperor's uncle Tuoba Jian became the king of Qi County, and Tuoba Meng became the king of Anfeng.

古文：秋七月庚申朔，日有蚀之。甲子，齐人来聘。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。初五，齐人前来聘问。
English: On the first day of autumn and the first day of July, there was a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month of the year, all kinds of people came to ask questions.

古文：九月庚午，阅武于南郊，大飨群臣。
现代文：九月十三，在南郊检阅军队，大宴群臣。
English: On September 13, troops were reviewed in the southern suburbs, and a large banquet was held for the ministers.

古文：齐使车僧朗以班在宋使殷灵诞后，辞不就席。
现代文：齐国的使者车僧朗因为排列在宋国使者殷灵诞的后面，辞谢不肯就座。
English: The envoy of Qi, Che Zonglang, declined to take his seat because he was lined up behind the envoy of Song, Yin Ling Xizhi.

古文：宋降人解奉君刃僧朗于会中。
现代文：宋国投降过来的解奉君在大会中刺杀了僧朗。
English: Ge Bongjun, who had surrendered from Song, assassinated Monk Lang in the assembly.

古文：诏诛奉君等。
现代文：皇帝下令杀解奉君等人。
English: The emperor ordered the killing of Fongjun and the others.

古文：乙亥，封昌黎王冯熙世子诞为南平王。
现代文：十八日，封昌黎王冯熙的世子冯诞为南平王。
English: On the 18th, Feng Xiu, the son of Feng Changli King Feng Xi, was born as Nanping King.

古文：冬十二月癸巳，州镇十二饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：冬十二月初七，十二处州镇发生饥荒，下令开仓赈济。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of winter, famine occurred in 12 prefectures and towns, and it was ordered that storehouses be opened to provide relief.

古文：是岁，邓至、蠕蠕等国并使朝贡。
现代文：当年，邓至、蠕蠕等国派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, emissaries from countries such as Deng Zhi and Crome Crome were sent to pay tribute.

古文：六年春正月甲戌，大赦。
现代文：六年春正月十九，大赦天下。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Spring, the general amnesty began.

古文：二月辛卯，诏以灵丘郡土既褊脊，又诸州路冲，复其人租十五年。
现代文：二月初六日，下诏说，灵丘郡土地贫瘠，又为各州交通要地，免除灵丘郡人十五年田租。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the year, the next imperial edict said that Lingqiu County's land was barren, and it was an important transportation area for all states, exempting Lingqiu County's people from fifteen years of land rent.

古文：癸巳，白兰王吐谷浑翼世以诬罔伏诛。
现代文：初八，白兰王吐谷浑翼世因诬告和蒙骗被杀。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the year, the King of the White Lanterns, Tu Gu Hun Yuxi, was killed because of false accusations and deception.

古文：乙未，诏曰： 萧道成逆乱江淮，戎旗频举。七州之人既有征运之劳，深乖轻徭之义，其复常调三年。 
现代文：初十，下诏说： 萧道成作乱于江淮之间，战祸频繁，七州的民众因而深受征战和运输的劳务，大大违背了轻徭役的本意，特免去三年的户调。 
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the next edict said: Xiao Dao became a turbulent place between Jianghuai and Huai, and the war disasters were frequent. As a result, the people of the seven states were deeply affected by the labor of war and transportation, which greatly violated the original intention of the light duty, and were exempted from the three-year household transfer.

古文：癸丑，赐王公已下清勤著称者，谷帛有差。
现代文：二十三日，赏赐自王公以下以清廉勤政著称的人谷物和布帛，数量不等。
English: On the 23rd, people famous for their honesty and hard work, from the prince on down, were rewarded with varying amounts of grain and cloth.

古文：三月庚辰，幸兽圈。
现代文：三月二十六日，前去兽圈。
English: March 26th, off to the zoo.

古文：诏曰： 武狼猛暴，食肉残生，从今勿复捕贡。 
现代文：下诏说： 虎狼凶猛残暴，吃肉食伤害生命，从今以后不再捕捉和进贡。 
English: The next edict said: "Tigers and wolves are ferocious and cruel, and they eat meat and harm life. From now on, there will be no more capture and tribute.

古文：辛巳，幸武州山石窟寺，赐贫老衣服。
现代文：二十七日，前往武州山石窟寺，赏赐贫困老人衣服。
English: On the 27th, he went to the Wuzhou Mountain Grottoes Temple to give clothes to poor elderly people.

古文：是月，齐高祖殂。
现代文：当月，齐高帝去世。
English: In the same month, Emperor Qigong died.

古文：夏四月甲辰，赐畿内鳏寡孤独不能自存者，粟帛各有差秋七月，发州郡五万人修灵丘道。
现代文：夏四月二十日，赐京畿内因鳏寡独身难以生存的人粮食和布帛，数量不等。秋七月，各州郡出五万人修灵丘路。
English: On the 20th day of the 4th month of the summer, people in Gyeonggi Province who were widowed or single and had difficulty surviving were given food and cloth bags in varying quantities. In the 7th month of the autumn, 50,000 people from all prefectures and counties went out to build Lingqiu Road.

古文：八月癸未朔，分遣大使巡行天下遭水之处，丐其租赋，贫俭不自存者，赐以粟帛。
现代文：八月初一为朔日，分派大使巡行天下遭受水灾的地区，免去租赋。贫困而难以维持的，赐给粮食布帛。
English: On the first day of August, the New Year's Day, ambassadors were dispatched to tour the flood-stricken areas around the world, exempt from rent. Those who were poor and difficult to maintain were given grain baskets.

古文：庚子，罢山泽禁。
现代文：十八日，废除对山林和沼泽的禁令。
English: On the 18th, the ban on logging in mountain forests and swamps was lifted.

古文：九月辛酉，以氐杨后起为武都王。
现代文：九月初十，封氐人杨后起为武都王。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month of the year, Yang Hou, the person who had the imperial seal, became the King of Wudu.

古文：是岁，地豆干、吐谷浑等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，地豆干、吐谷浑等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, many countries, such as Jidokan and Tukugan, sent emissaries to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月庚申，诏曰： 朕每思知百姓疾苦以增修宽政，故具问守宰苛虐之状于州郡使者。
现代文：七年春正月十一，下诏说： 我经常想要知道百姓的疾苦，以便更多实行宽容的政策，所以向各州郡派来的人详细询问州郡长官的苛政和暴虐的情形。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the following edict said: I often want to know the hardships of the people, so that I can implement a more tolerant policy, so I ask the people sent to the states and counties in detail about the harsh government and tyranny of the state and county governors.

古文：今秀孝计掾对多不实，甚乖朕虚求之意。
现代文：如今前来的秀才、孝廉、会计、吏掾等的对答之辞大多不真实，极大背离了我虚心求问的本意。
English: Most of the answers from the scholars, filial piety, accountants, officials and so on who have come forward today are not true, and greatly deviate from my original intention of asking questions with an open mind.

古文：宜案以大辟，明罔上必诛。
现代文：应当论罪斩首，以表明蒙蔽朝廷必须处死。
English: He should be beheaded for the crime, to show that he must be executed for deceiving the imperial court.

古文：然情犹未忍。
现代文：可是我心中不忍，现在宽恕他们的罪责由他们回去。
English: But in my heart, I can't bear to forgive them and let them go back.

古文：可恕罪听归，申下天下，使知后犯无恕。 
现代文：但要通报天下人，让知道后来重犯的不再恕罪。 
English: However, it is necessary to inform the people of the world to let them know that those who later repeat the crime will no longer be forgiven.

古文：丁卯，诏青、齐、光、东徐四州户，运仓粟一十万石送瑕丘、琅邪，复租算一年。
现代文：十八日，令青、齐、光、东徐四州民众，运仓粮二十万石送到瑕丘、琅笽，免一年的租赋。
English: On the 18th, the people of the four prefectures of Lingqing, Qi, Guangxi, and Dongxu sent 200,000 koku of grain to Kexiu and Handan, and were exempted from one year's rent.

古文：三月甲戌，以冀、定二州饥，诏郡县为粥于路以食之，又弛关津之禁。
现代文：三月二十五日，由于冀州、定州二州饥荒，令各郡县熬粥在路上给饥民食用，同时放宽关城津渡的限制。
English: On March 25th, due to the famine in Jizhou and Dingzhou, all counties were ordered to make porridge on the road for the hungry, and the restrictions on Guancheng-Tsingdu were relaxed.

古文：夏四月庚子，幸崞山，赐所过鳏寡不能自存者衣服粟帛。壬寅，车驾还宫。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，前往崞山，赐衣服、布帛、粮食给所经过的地方的鳏夫寡妇和不能维持生存的人。二十四日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, he went to Lushan to give clothes, cloth and grain to the widows, widowers and those who could not survive in the places he passed. On the 24th day, he drove back to the palace.

古文：闰月癸丑，皇子生，大赦。
现代文：闰四月初五，皇子出生，大赦天下。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month, the prince was born, and the world was at peace.

古文：六月，定州上言，为粥所活九十四万七千余口。
现代文：六月，定州上奏说，因粥而救活的有九十四万七千多人。
English: In June, Dingzhou Shangsoo said that more than 947,000 people were saved by porridge.

古文：秋七月甲申，诏假员外散骑常侍李彪使于齐。
现代文：秋七月初八，令假员外散骑常侍李彪出使齐国。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Li Biao, the general officer of the cavalry, sent an envoy to Qi.

古文：改封济南王罗拔为赵郡王。
现代文：改封济南王罗拔为赵郡王。
English: King Robert of Jinan was renamed King of Zhao County.

古文：九月壬寅，诏求谠言。
现代文：九月二十七日，下诏广求直言进谏。
English: On September 27th, the following edict was issued: "Guangqiu bluntly entered the imperial palace."

古文：冀州上言，为粥所活七十五万一千七百余口。
现代文：冀州上奏说，因施粥而得活命的有七十五万一千七百多人。
English: Jizhou Shangsuo said that more than 751,700 people were able to live because of the porridge.

古文：冬十月戊午，皇信堂成。
现代文：冬十月十三日，皇信堂落成。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, the Emperor's Hall was completed.

古文：十一月辛丑，齐人来聘。
现代文：十一月二十七日，齐人前来聘问。
English: On November 27th, a group of people came for an interview.

古文：十二月乙巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十二月初一为朔日，日食。
English: The first day of December is the New Year's Day, with a solar eclipse.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 夏、殷不嫌一族之婚，周世始绝同姓之娶。
现代文：初七，下诏说： 夏、商不嫌弃同族间的婚姻，周代开始禁止同姓间的婚娶。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Xia and Shang did not disapprove of marriages between people of the same race, and Zhou began to prohibit marriages between people with the same surname.

古文：斯皆教随时设，政因事改者也。
现代文：这也是教令随时而设，政令因事而改的。
English: This is also set by the edict at any time, and the decree is changed according to the circumstances.

古文：皇运初基，日不暇给，古风遗朴，未遑厘改。
现代文：皇家大业初建时，每日杂务纷繁，况且古风淳朴遗传，未及更改。
English: When the Royal Palace was first built, there were a lot of daily chores, and moreover, the old style of simplicity was inherited and has not changed.

古文：自今悉禁绝之，有犯者以不道论。 
现代文：从今以后一律禁绝，违反者以不道论处。 
English: From now on, it is strictly forbidden, and violators will be punished with a fine.

古文：庚午，开林虑山禁，与人共之。
现代文：十四日，开林虑山的禁令，与民共享。
English: On the 14th, the ban on Kailin Qianshan was shared with the people.

古文：州镇十三饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：州镇中十三处发生饥荒，下令开仓赈济。
English: Famine occurred in thirteen places in the state town, and it was ordered to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：八年春正月，诏陇西公琛、尚书陆睿为东西二道大使，褒善罚恶。
现代文：八年春正月，令陇西公琛、尚书陆睿又分别任东西二道大使，褒奖善政，惩罚恶人。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of the Spring, Gongjun Shaanxi and Lu Rui Shangshu were appointed as ambassadors of the East and West respectively, to commend good governance and punish evildoers.

古文：夏五月己卯，诏振赐河南七州戍兵。
现代文：夏五月初九，下诏赏赐河南七州的驻守部队。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month of summer, the garrison troops of the seven states in Henan Province were awarded.

古文：甲申，诏员外散骑常侍李彪使于齐。
现代文：十二日，令员外散骑常侍李彪出使齐国。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Li Biao, the general's aide, sent an envoy to Qi.

古文：六月丁卯，诏曰： 置官班禄，行之尚矣。
现代文：六月二十六日，下诏说： 设置官吏，颁发俸禄，行自上古。
English: On June 26th, the following edict was issued: The establishment of officials and the awarding of salaries have been carried out since ancient times.

古文：自中原丧乱，兹制中绝。
现代文：自从中原丧乱之后，此制中断。
English: After the Central Plains War, this system was discontinued.

古文：先朝因循，未遑厘改。
现代文：先朝因于旧习，未及更改。
English: The previous government did not change it because of old customs.

古文：朕顾宪章旧典，始班俸禄，罢诸商人，以简人事。
现代文：我阅读宪章旧典，开始颁发俸禄，免去中间的商人，以简省人事。
English: I read the old charter, started paying salaries, got rid of the middlemen, and reduced the number of employees.

古文：户增调三匹、谷二斛九斗，以为官司之禄。
现代文：每户增收调赋三匹布，谷物两斛九斗，做为官吏的俸禄。
English: Each household was given three pieces of cloth and two bushels of grain to supplement their income, which was used to pay the salaries of government officials.

古文：均预调为二匹之赋，即兼商用。
现代文：户丁平均交调赋二匹布，兼作商用。
English: The average household has two horses, and it is also a commercial business.

古文：虽有一时之烦，终克永逸之益。
现代文：虽然一时烦扰，终收永逸之效。
English: Although a momentary annoyance, the effect is permanent.

古文：禄行之后，赃满一匹者死。
现代文：颁发俸禄之后，受贿满一匹的处死。
English: After awarding the reward, the bribe taker will have to kill one horse.

古文：变法改度，宜为更始，其大赦天下，与之惟新。 
现代文：变法改制，应当从头开始，特大赦天下，咸与维新。 
English: In changing the law and reforming the system, it is necessary to start from scratch, with a special general amnesty for the whole country, and reform and renewal.

古文：戊辰，武州水坏人居。
现代文：二十七日，武州大水冲毁民众住房。
English: On the 27th, people's houses were washed away by the flood in Wuzhou.

古文：秋八月甲辰，诏以班制俸禄，更兴刑书，宽猛未允，人或异议。
现代文：秋八月初四，下诏说，因有颁发俸禄的新制，应当更改刑法，如宽严不当，人们便有不同意见。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the autumn, the next imperial edict said that the criminal law should be changed due to the new system of awarding salaries. If it was too lenient, people would have different opinions.

古文：制百辟卿士工商吏人各上便宜，勿有所隐。
现代文：令自朝中官员至工商小吏各自上书发表意见，不要有所忌讳。
English: Let officials from the central and local governments to petty officials of industry and commerce each submit a letter to express their opinions, and do not be taboo.

古文：九月甲午，齐人来聘。
现代文：九月二十四日，齐人前来聘问。
English: On September 24th, Qi people came to ask questions.

古文：戊戌，诏俸制十月为首，每季一请。
现代文：二十八日，下令颁发俸禄，从十月份开始，每季度一次分发。
English: On the 28th, it was ordered to issue a salary, which will be distributed quarterly starting in October.

古文：于是内外百官，受禄有差。
现代文：于是朝廷内外百官均受数量不等的俸禄。
English: As a result, hundreds of officials both inside and outside the imperial court received varying amounts of salary.

古文：冬十一月乙未，诏员外散骑常侍李彪使于齐。
现代文：冬十一月二十六日，令员外散骑常侍李彪出使齐国。
English: On the 26th day of the 11th month of winter, Li Biao, the imperial equerry, was dispatched to Qi.

古文：十二月，州镇十五水旱，人饥，诏使者开仓振恤。
现代文：十二月，州镇中十五处发生水旱灾害，民众饥荒，诏令使者开仓赈济。
English: In December, floods and droughts occurred in fifteen places in Zhouzhen, the people were starving, and the emissary was ordered to open a warehouse to provide relief.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、高丽等国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，蠕蠕、高丽等国都各派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, the capitals of Korea and Goryeo sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：九年春正月戊寅，诏禁图谶秘纬及名《孔子闭房记》，留者以大辟论。
现代文：九年春正月初十，下诏禁止各种图谶和秘纬书籍以及《孔子闭房记》，私自留存的处以死刑。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the ninth year of spring, the following edict banned all kinds of illustrated books and secret books as well as "Confucius's Diary of a Secluded Life," and those who kept them secretly were sentenced to death.

古文：又诸巫觋假称神鬼，妄说吉凶，及委巷诸非坟典所裁者，严加禁断。
现代文：又严厉禁止请巫觋假托神鬼、胡说吉凶以及街谈巷议不符合经典记载的种种行为。
English: In addition, it is strictly forbidden to invite sorcerers to pretend to be gods and ghosts, to talk nonsense about good and evil, and to engage in all kinds of behaviors that do not conform to the classical records.

古文：癸未，大飨群臣于太华殿，班赐皇诰。
现代文：十五日，在太华殿大宴群臣，皇帝颁赐爵位和官职。
English: On the fifteenth day, at a grand banquet held at the Taihua Palace, the emperor bestowed peerages and official posts.

古文：二月己亥，制皇子封王者、皇孙皇曾孙绍封者、皇女封者，岁禄各有差。
现代文：二月初二，规定皇子被封王爵的、皇孙曾皇孙继封的、皇女受封爵位的，每年有数量不等的爵禄。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, it was stipulated that there would be a varying number of peerages each year for the prince to be knighted, the royal grandson to be knighted, the great-grandson to be knighted, and the princess to be knighted.

古文：封广阳王建第二子嘉为广阳王。
现代文：封广阳王建的二儿子嘉为广阳王。
English: Fang Guangyang Wang Jian's second son Jia became Guangyang Wang.

古文：乙巳，诏百辟卿士工商吏人各上书极谏，靡有所隐。
现代文：初八，令百官卿士及工商吏人各上书直言进谏，不必隐讳。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, hundreds of officials, nobles, and people in charge of industry and commerce were ordered to write to the emperor, and they must not conceal their opinions.

古文：三月丙申，封皇弟禧为咸阳王，干为河南王，羽为广陵王，雍为颍川王，勰为始平王，详为北海王。
现代文：三月二十九日，封皇弟禧为咸阳王，干为河南王，羽为广陵王，雍为颍川王，勰为始平王，详为北海王。
English: On March 29th, Feng Wang Dixi was crowned King of Xianyang, Gan was crowned King of Henan, Yu was crowned King of Guangling, Yong was crowned King of Shichuan, Zou was crowned King of Shihping, and more specifically, he was crowned King of the North Sea.

古文：夏五月，齐人来聘。
现代文：夏五月，齐人前来聘问。
English: In the summer of May, a group of people came to ask questions.

古文：秋七月丙午朔，新作诸门。
现代文：秋七月初一，新建各门。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, each gate is newly built.

古文：癸未，遣使拜宕昌王梁弥机兄子弥承为宕昌王。
现代文：十八日，派使者拜封宕昌王梁弥机哥哥的儿子弥承为宕昌王。
English: On the 18th, an envoy was sent to the Tang Dynasty to worship the Tang Dynasty's king, Liang Yicai, and his brother's son, Ya Zheng, became the king.

古文：八月庚申，诏曰： 数州灾水，饥馑荐臻，致有卖鬻男女者。
现代文：八月二十六日，下诏说： 九州水灾，饥荒并至，致使有买卖男女的情形。
English: On August 26th, the following edict was issued: "Floods and famine in Kyushu have led to a situation in which men and women are being bought and sold.

古文：天谴在予一人，百姓横罹艰毒。
现代文：天之谴责在我一人，百姓横遭艰辛苦毒。
English: I am the only one condemned by heaven, and the people are suffering from hardships and hardships.

古文：今自太和六年已来，买定、冀、幽、相四州饥人良口者，尽还所亲。
现代文：今凡自太和六年以来，买定、冀、幽、相四州饥荒人口的，全部归还原来的亲人。
English: Now, all the famine-stricken people in the four prefectures of Biaoding, Hebei, Yunnan and Sichuan have been returned to their original relatives since the sixth year of Tahe.

古文：虽娉为妻妾，遇之非理，情不乐者，亦离之。 
现代文：虽已受聘为妻妾的，但没有以礼相待及感情不好的，也都可以离婚。 
English: Although they have been employed as a wife and concubine, if they do not treat each other with courtesy and their feelings are not good, they can also divorce.

古文：冬十月丁未，诏使者循行州郡，与牧守均给天下之田，还受以生死为断。
现代文：冬十月十三日，诏令使者巡行各州郡，和州牧郡守一起平均分给百姓田地，归还和授给均以死亡和出生为期限。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, the emissary of the imperial edict made a tour of all prefectures and counties, and together with the prefect of the prefectures and counties, he equally distributed the fields to the people, and the return and award were subject to death and birth.

古文：劝课农桑，兴富人之本。
现代文：督劝致力耕田蚕桑，作为致富的根本。
English: Persuade them to devote themselves to the cultivation of silkworms and mulberries as the foundation of getting rich.

古文：辛酉，司徒、魏郡王陈建薨。
现代文：二十七日，司徒、魏郡王陈建去世。
English: On the 27th, King Chen Jian of Szeto and Wei County passed away.

古文：诏员外散骑常侍李彪使于齐。
现代文：令员外散骑常侍李彪出使齐国。
English: Li Biao, the general's aide-de-camp, was sent to Qi.

古文：十二月乙卯，以侍中、淮南王他为司徒。
现代文：十二月二十二日，任命原侍中、淮南王他为司徒。
English: On December 22, he appointed the former chamberlain, King Huainan, as his disciple.

古文：是岁，京师及州镇十三水旱伤稼。
现代文：当年，京都及各州镇十三处发生水旱灾害，损伤庄稼。
English: In that year, floods and droughts occurred in thirteen places in Kyoto and towns in all prefectures, damaging crops.

古文：宕昌、高丽、吐谷浑等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：宕昌、高丽、吐谷浑等国都派使者进贡。
English: Tangchang, Goryeo, and Tubo all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十年春正月癸亥朔，帝始服衮冕，朝飨万国。
现代文：十年春正月初一，孝文帝开始身穿帝服，接受各国使者朝见并宴请他们。
English: On the first day of the first month of the tenth year of the Spring, Emperor Xiaowen began to wear imperial robes, receive envoys from all over the world and invite them to a banquet.

古文：二月甲戌，初立党、里、邻三长，定人户籍。
现代文：二月十三，初次设立党、里、邻三长，确定民众的户籍。
English: On February 13, the Party, village, and neighborhood three chiefs were established for the first time, and the household registration of the people was determined.

古文：三月庚戌，齐人来聘。
现代文：三月十九日，齐人前来聘问。
English: On March 19th, Qi people came to ask questions.

古文：夏四月辛酉朔，始制五等公服。
现代文：夏四月初一，开始制定五等公服。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the fifth-class public uniforms began to be formulated.

古文：甲子，帝初法服御辇祀西郊。
现代文：初三，皇帝初次身穿法服乘车前去西郊祭祀。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the emperor, for the first time in his legal robes, rode in a car to the western suburb for a religious service.

古文：六月乙卯，名皇字曰恂，大赦。
现代文：六月二十日，给皇子起名为恂，大赦天下。
English: On the 20th of June, the prince was given the name Zou, which was given to him by the emperor.

古文：秋八月乙亥，给尚书五等品爵已上硃衣玉珮大小组绶。
现代文：秋八月十七日，赐给尚书五品等爵以上官员朱衣玉佩和系玉用的大小组绶。
English: On the 17th day of the 8th month of the autumn, officials above the rank of Shangshu Wopin and above were given Zhu Yi Yupei and a large group badge for the use of jade.

古文：九月辛卯，诏起明堂辟雍。
现代文：九月初三，下令修建明堂和辟雍。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, he ordered the construction of Myeongdong and Pyeongyong.

古文：冬十月癸酉，有司议依故事配始祖于南郊。
现代文：冬十月十六日，有关部门建议依照过去的惯例在南郊祭祀时以世祖配祭。
English: On the 16th day of winter in October, the relevant departments suggested that, in accordance with the past practice, the ancestor should be sacrificed in the southern suburb.

古文：十一月，议定州郡县官依口给俸。
现代文：十一月，议定各州郡县官员依照该地户口数量多少给予俸禄。
English: In November, it was agreed that officials of counties and counties in each state would be paid according to the number of households in the area.

古文：十二月乙酉，汝南、颍川饥，诏丐人田租，开仓振恤。
现代文：十二月二十九日，汝南、颍川发生饥荒，诏令免去民众田租，开仓赈济。
English: On December 29th, a famine occurred in southern Ryukyu and Beichuan, and the imperial edict exempted the people from land rent, and they began to open warehouses to earn money.

古文：是岁，蠕蠕、高丽、吐谷浑、勿吉等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，蠕蠕、高丽、吐谷浑、勿吉等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Cm Cm, Goryeo, Tuyn, Baekje and other countries sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十一年春正月丁亥朔，诏定乐章，非雅者除之。
现代文：十一年春正月初一，诏令确定乐曲，非雅乐的除去。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the eleventh year, the decree determined the music, and the non-elegant music was removed.

古文：二月甲子，肆州之雁门及代郡人饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：二月初八，肆州和雁门及代郡民众饥荒，诏令开仓赈济。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, the people of Zhouzhou, Yanmen and Dayi County were starving, and the imperial edict was issued to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：夏五月癸巳，南平王浑薨。
现代文：夏五月初九，南平王浑去世。
English: On the ninth day of the fifth month of summer, Nanping Wanghong passed away.

古文：甲午，诏复七庙子孙及外戚缌服已上，赋役无所与。
现代文：初十，下诏免除皇族的七庙子孙和外戚中缌服以上人家的赋税和徭役。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor issued an edict exempting the seven sons and grandsons of the imperial family and the relatives of the imperial family from taxation and service.

古文：六月辛巳，秦州人饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：六月二十七日，秦州发生饥荒，诏令开仓赈济。
English: On June 27th, famine occurred in Qin State, and the imperial edict was issued to open storehouses to provide relief.

古文：秋七月己丑，诏今年谷不登，听人出关就食。
现代文：秋七月初六，下诏说今年五谷不丰，听任民众出关求食。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, it was announced that this year's grain was not plentiful, and the people were allowed to go out to look for food.

古文：遣使者造籍，分遣去留，所在开仓振恤。
现代文：派使者编造户籍，区分外出的和留下的人员，灾荒地区开仓赈济。
English: Envoys were sent to compile household registers, distinguish between those who left and those who stayed, and open warehouses in disaster-stricken areas to provide relief.

古文：八月壬申，蠕蠕犯塞，遣平原王陆睿讨之。
现代文：八月十九日，蠕蠕侵犯边境，派平原王陆睿又讨伐。
English: On August 19th, the Cree invaded the border and sent the king of the plain, Lu Rui, to fight.

古文：庚辰，大议北伐。
现代文：二十七日，商议北伐事宜。
English: On the 27th, they discussed the Northern Expedition.

古文：辛巳，罢山北苑，以其地赐贫人。
现代文：二十八日，下令废除山北的皇家园林，以该地赏赐给穷人。
English: On the 28th, he ordered the abolition of the royal gardens in the northern part of the mountain and gave the land to the poor.

古文：冬十月辛未，诏罢起部无益之作，出宫人不执机杼者。
现代文：冬十月十九日，下令停止正在营建而又没什么用处的宗庙宫室等，放出宫女中不从事机织的人。
English: In the winter, on October 19th, he ordered to stop the construction of the useless Imperial Palace, and to release those who were not engaged in weaving.

古文：甲戌，诏曰： 乡饮之礼废，则长幼之序乱。
现代文：二十二日，下诏说 ：乡饮的礼节罢废之后，长幼的次序就发生混乱。
English: On the 22nd, the next edict said: After the etiquette of drinking in the village was abolished, the order of the eldest and youngest became chaotic.

古文：孟冬十月，人闲岁隙，宜于此时，导以德义。
现代文：初冬十月，正是农闲间隙时机，正适宜在这个时候，引导他们以道德礼义。
English: Early winter in October is the time for farmers to take a break, and it is appropriate at this time to guide them with moral etiquette.

古文：可下诸州，党、里之内，推贤而长者，教其里人父慈、子孝、兄友、弟顺、夫和、妻柔。
现代文：可以下令在各州、党、里之内，推举贤能而年纪较大的人，教育乡里人要父亲慈祥，儿子孝顺，哥哥友爱，弟弟和顺，丈夫和蔼，妻子温柔。
English: He may issue an order to nominate capable and senior people in all prefectures, the Party and villages, and educate the villagers to be kind to their fathers, filial to their sons, affectionate to their brothers, gentle to their brothers, kind to their husbands, and gentle to their wives.

古文：不率长教者，具以名闻。 
现代文：不听长者教诲的，全部将名字记录上报。 
English: Those who do not listen to the advice of the elders should record their names and report them.

古文：十一月丁未，诏罢尚方锦绣绫罗之工，百姓欲造，任之无禁。
现代文：十一月二十六日，下令停止在尚方署中制作锦绣绫罗，百姓愿意制作的，可以听由制作，不要禁止。
English: On November 26th, it was ordered to stop the production of brocade brocade in the Shangfang Department. If the people are willing to make it, they can be allowed to do so, and it should not be banned.

古文：其御府衣服金银珠玉绫锦、太官杂器、太仆乘具、内库弓矢，出其大半，班赍百官及京师人庶，下至工商皁隶，逮于六镇戍士，各有差。
现代文：皇宫御府内的衣服、金银、珠玉、绫纟由锦、太官杂器、太仆乘具、内库中的弓箭等，取出大半来，赏赐给百官和京城中的民众，下至工商和吏役，直至六镇中的防卫兵，数量多少不等。
English: Most of the clothes, gold and silver, jewels, brocades, eunuchs' knickknacks, eunuchs' harnesses, and bows and arrows in the treasury in the Imperial Palace were taken out and given to hundreds of officials and the people in the capital, down to the merchants and officials, and up to the guards in the six towns, in varying quantities.

古文：戊申，诏今寒气劲切，杖棰难任。自今月至来年孟夏，不听栲问罪人。
现代文：二十七日，下诏说今年冬天寒气格外凌厉，人身难以承受棍棒殴打，从本月起到明年初夏，不得拷打罪犯。
English: On the 27th, the next edict said that this winter's cold weather is particularly severe, and it is difficult for people to bear the beating of sticks. From this month to early summer next year, it is not allowed to torture criminals.

古文：又岁饥，轻囚宜速决了，无令薄罪久留狱犴。
现代文：又因正是饥荒的岁月，轻罪的囚犯应当尽快判决，不要让有小罪过的人长期滞留监狱。
English: Also, because it was the famine years, prisoners with minor crimes should be sentenced as soon as possible, and people with minor crimes should not be kept in prison for a long time.

古文：十二月，诏秘书丞李彪、著作郎崔光改析国记，依纪传体。
现代文：十二月，诏令秘书丞李彪、著作郎崔光改写国史，按照纪传体形式改写。
English: In December, Li Biao, the secretary of the imperial edict, and Cui Guang, the author, rewrote the national history and rewrote it in the form of a biography.

古文：是岁大饥，诏所在开仓振恤。
现代文：当年大饥荒，命令各地开仓赈济。
English: At that time, there was a great famine, and various regions were ordered to open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：吐谷浑、高丽、悉万斤等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：吐谷浑、高丽、悉万斤等国都派使者朝贡。
English: Countries such as Tukgukgun, Goryeo, and Siwanjin sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十二年春正月辛巳朔，初建五牛旌旗。
现代文：十二年春正月初一，初次设立五牛的旌旗。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 12th year, the banner of the Five Cows was set up for the first time.

古文：乙未，诏镇戍流徙之人，年满七十，孤单穷独，无成人子孙，旁无期亲者，具状以闻。
现代文：十五日，下令被流放镇守边境的人员，年过七十，孤身一人，穷困无依，没有成年子孙和没有旁系期服以内亲属的，全部写清名字上报朝廷。
English: On the 15th, it was ordered that all the exiled border town guards who were over 70 years old, single, destitute, without adult children or relatives within the period of service, should write their names clearly and report to the imperial court.

古文：二月辛亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月初一，朔日，日食。
English: First day of February, New Year's Day, solar eclipse.

古文：三月丁亥，中散梁众保等谋反，伏诛。
现代文：三月初八，中散大夫梁众保等人谋反，被杀。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Zhongshan doctor Liang Zhongbao and others conspired to rebel and were killed.

古文：夏四月甲子，大赦。
现代文：夏四月十五日，大赦。
English: On the 15th of April, the amnesty ended.

古文：己巳，齐将陈显达攻陷沣阳，长乐王穆亮率骑讨之。
现代文：二十日，齐将陈显达攻占澧阳，长乐王穆亮率领骑兵征讨。
English: On the 20th, the Qi captured Shenyang from Chen Xianda, and Changle King Mu Liang led the cavalry to attack.

古文：五月丁酉，诏六镇、云中、河西及关内郡，各修水田，通渠溉灌。
现代文：五月十八日，诏令六镇、云中、河西和关内各郡，兴修水田，疏通河渠以灌溉。
English: On May 18th, six towns, Yunzhong, Hexi and Guanai counties were ordered to build paddy fields and dredge canals for irrigation.

古文：壬寅，增置彝器于太庙。
现代文：二十三日，在太庙增设祭祀礼器。
English: On the 23rd, an additional sacrificial vessel was set up in the Great Temple.

古文：秋九月甲午，诏曰： 日蚀修德，月蚀修刑。
现代文：秋九月十七日，下诏说： 日食就要提高德行，月食就要修订刑法。
English: On the 17th day of the 9th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: The eclipse of the sun will improve moral conduct, and the eclipse of the moon will amend the criminal law.

古文：乃者癸巳夜，月蚀尽，公卿已下，宜慎刑罚，以答天意。 
现代文：近在癸巳日夜间，月全食。公卿以下官员，应当慎用刑罚，以报答天意。 
English: With the total eclipse of the moon on the night of the third day of the third month, officials below the rank of nobility should be cautious in the use of punishment to repay the will of heaven.

古文：丁酉，起宣文堂、经武殿。
现代文：二十日，建宣文堂、经武殿。
English: On the 20th, Xuanwen Hall and Jingwu Hall were built.

古文：癸卯，淮南王他薨。
现代文：二十六日，淮南王拓跋他去世。
English: On the 26th, Huainan King Tuoba passed away.

古文：冬闰十月甲子，帝观筑圆丘于南郊。十一月，雍、豫二州人饥，诏开仓振恤。
现代文：闰九月十八日，皇帝到南郊观看修建圆丘。十一月，雍州、豫州民众饥荒，诏令开仓赈济。
English: On September 18, the emperor went to the southern suburb to watch the construction of a round mound. In November, the people of Yongzhou and Yuzhou were starving, and he ordered the opening of warehouses to provide relief.

古文：梁州刺史、临淮王提坐贪纵，配北镇。
现代文：梁州刺史、临淮王提犯有贪赃、私放犯人的罪行，发配到北镇。
English: Liangzhou Zhishi and Linhuai Wang committed the crimes of embezzlement and illegal release of prisoners, and were sent to Beizhen.

古文：是岁，高丽、宕昌、吐谷浑、勿吉、武兴等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、宕昌、吐谷浑、勿吉、武兴等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Goseong, Togokgun, Baekje and Bukseong sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十三年春正月辛亥，祀圆丘，初备大驾。
现代文：十三年春正月初七，在圆丘祭祀，首次安排皇帝出行时的大驾之礼。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 13th year of the Spring, there was a ritual at the round mound, marking the first time that the emperor's grand motorcade had been arranged.

古文：乙丑，兗州人王伯恭聚众劳山，自称齐王，东莱镇将孔伯孙讨斩之。
现代文：二十一日，兖州人王伯恭聚众于崂山上，自称为齐王，东莱镇将孔伯孙攻打并斩了他。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Boqiong, a native of Zhangzhou, gathered a crowd of people on Lushan Mountain, calling himself the King of Qi. Donglai Town attacked and beheaded Kong Biao Sun.

古文：戊辰，齐人寇边，淮南太守王僧俊击走之。
现代文：二十四日，齐国人侵犯边境，被淮南太守王僧亻隽打败而退。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the people of Qi invaded the border and were defeated by the Huainan governor Wang Sengyu and retreated.

古文：二月庚子，引群臣访政道得失损益之宜。
现代文：二月二十六日，召群臣询问有关国家政道的得失和增损方面意见。
English: On February 26th, he summoned his ministers to ask their opinions on the gains and losses of the national political course.

古文：三月，夏州刺史章武王彬以贪财削封。
现代文：三月，夏州刺史章武王彬因贪财而被削去封爵。
English: In March, Zhang Wu Wangbin, a member of the Xiazhou Zhishi, was stripped of his knighthood for greed.

古文：夏四月丁丑，诏曰： 升楼散物，以赍百姓，至使人马腾践，多有毁伤。
现代文：夏四月初四，下诏说： 上高楼分发物品，以赐百姓，致使人马相互践踏，多有损伤。
English: On the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, the following edict was issued: "Go up to the high buildings and distribute goods to the people, so that people and horses trample on each other, causing many injuries."

古文：今可断之。
现代文：从今以后不再进行。
English: From now on, it will no longer take place.

古文：以本所费之物赐穷老贫独者。 
现代文：将原来所准备的物品赐给贫困的老人及孤独无依者。 
English: The originally prepared items will be given to the poor elderly and the lonely.

古文：州镇十五大饥，诏所在开仓振恤。
现代文：州镇中十五处发生大饥荒，命令所在官员开仓赈济。
English: Officials in 15 prefectures and towns were ordered to open storehouses to help the famine-stricken people.

古文：五月庚戌，祀方泽。
现代文：五月初八，祭祀地方湖泽。
English: On the 8th day of the 5th month of the year, a ritual is held at the local lake.

古文：六月，汝阴王天赐、南安王桢并坐赃贿，免为庶人。
现代文：六月，汝阴王天赐、南阳王桢因贪赃受贿而犯罪，免职为平民。
English: In June, by the grace of heaven, Nanyang Wang Yao was removed from his post as a commoner for committing the crime of corruption and accepting bribes.

古文：秋七月，立孔子庙于京师。
现代文：秋七月，在京城修建孔子庙。
English: In autumn and July, the Confucius Temple was built in Beijing.

古文：八月乙亥，诏兼员外散骑常侍邢产使于齐。
现代文：八月初四，令兼员外散骑常侍邢产出使齐国。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the year, it was ordered that the non-commissioned officers and non-commissioned officers who rode horseback and often served as attendants should be dispatched to Qi Province.

古文：九月，出宫人赐北镇人贫鳏者。
现代文：九月，放出宫女赐给戍守北方边镇的贫困鳏夫。
English: In September, the release of the concubine was given to the poor woodcutter who guarded the northern border town.

古文：冬十一月己未，安丰王猛薨。
现代文：冬十一月十九日，安丰王猛去世。
English: On November 19th, Anfeng Wang Meng passed away.

古文：十二月丙子，司空、河东王苟颓薨。
现代文：十二月初七，司空、河东王苟颓去世。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of December, Siku, the King of Hedong, passed away.

古文：甲午，齐人来聘。
现代文：二十五日，齐人前来聘问。
English: On the 25th, a group of people came for an interview.

古文：己亥，以尚书令尉元为司徒，左仆射穆亮为司空。
现代文：三十日，任命尚书令尉元为司徒，左仆射穆亮为司空。
English: On the 30th, he appointed Shang Shuling Jiu Yuan as a disciple, and Zuo Mu Liang as a disciple.

古文：是岁，高丽、吐谷浑、阴平、中赤、武兴、宕昌等国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、吐谷浑、阴平、中赤、武兴、宕昌等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Tubo, Inpyeong, Chunghak, Bukseong, and Goseong sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十四年春正月己巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十四年春二月初一，为朔日，日食。
English: On the first day of the second month of spring in the 14th year of the Heian period, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：三月戊寅，初诏定起居注制。
现代文：二月十日，首次下令制定有关起居注撰写办法。
English: On February 10th, for the first time, it ordered the formulation of a method for writing notes on moving.

古文：诏遣侍臣巡行州郡，问人疾苦。
现代文：下诏派使臣巡行各州郡，访问民间疾苦。
English: The emperor sent envoys on a tour of all prefectures and counties to visit the suffering of the people.

古文：夏四月，地豆干频犯塞。甲戌，征西大将军、阳平王熙击走之。
现代文：夏四月，地豆干多次侵犯边境，初七，征西大将军、阳平王颐出击，敌人退走。
English: In the summer of April, ground beans repeatedly invaded the border, and on the seventh day of the first month, the general of the Western Conquest, Yang Ping Wang Qi, attacked, and the enemy retreated.

古文：甲午，诏兼员外散骑常侍邢产使于颐齐。
现代文：二十七日，令兼员外散骑常侍邢产出使齐国。
English: On the 27th, it was ordered that the non-commissioned officers and non-commissioned officers who rode horseback should be sent to Qi.

古文：五月己酉，库莫奚犯塞，安州都将楼龙兒击走之。
现代文：五月十二日，库莫奚侵犯边塞，安州都将楼龙儿出击，敌人败退。
English: On May 12th, Cuomo invaded the border fortress, and Anzhou launched a counterattack, but the enemy retreated.

古文：沙门司马御惠自言圣王，谋破平原郡，禽获伏诛。
现代文：僧人司马御惠自称为圣王，企图攻占平原郡，被捕获以后被杀。
English: The monk Sima Guehi, who called himself a holy king, attempted to capture Pingyuan County, and was killed after being captured.

古文：秋七月甲辰，诏罢都牧杂制。
现代文：秋七月初八，下令废除京城地方官设立的各种杂乱规定。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of the autumn, he ordered the abolition of all kinds of disorderly regulations established by local officials in Beijing.

古文：八月，诏议国之行次。
现代文：八月，下令商议国政的施行次序。
English: In August, he ordered that the order of implementation of state policy be discussed.

古文：九月癸丑，太皇太后冯氏崩。
现代文：九月十八日，太皇太后冯氏驾崩。
English: On September 18th, Grand Empress Dowager Feng passed away.

古文：诏听籓镇曾经内侍者，前后奔赴。
现代文：下诏让各郡官员曾经在朝廷担任侍从官的，可按先后顺序奔丧。
English: The following edict allows county officials who once served as attendants in the imperial court to die in the following order.

古文：冬十月戊辰，诏将亲侍龙舆，奉诀陵隧，诸常从之具，悉可停之。
现代文：冬十月初四，下令说，皇帝准备亲自侍奉太皇太后的龙驾，到皇陵的隧道中和太皇太后诀别，所有寻常使用的器具，一律停用。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of the winter, it was decreed that the emperor was going to personally serve the dragon drive of the grand duchess and bid farewell to the grand duchess in the tunnel of the imperial mausoleum. All commonly used equipment would be suspended.

古文：其武卫之官，防侍如法。
现代文：寻常防卫的武官，防卫如常。
English: The military attaché who usually defends, defends as usual.

古文：癸酉，葬文明太皇太后于永固陵。
现代文：初九，把文明太皇太后埋葬于永固陵。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the Empress Dowager Wenming was buried in the Yonggu Mausoleum.

古文：甲戌，车驾谒永固陵。
现代文：初十，皇帝到永固陵礼拜。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor went to Yonggong Mausoleum to worship.

古文：群臣固请公除，帝不许。
现代文：文武百官力请皇帝按照公务需要而除去丧服，皇帝不同意。
English: The emperor did not agree to the request of hundreds of officials to remove the mourning clothes in accordance with the needs of official duties.

古文：己卯，车驾谒永固陵。
现代文：十五日，皇帝再拜永固陵。
English: On the 15th, the emperor paid homage to Yonggong Mausoleum again.

古文：庚辰，帝居庐，引见群僚于太和殿。
现代文：十六日，皇帝出居草庐守陵，在太和殿接见各大臣。
English: On the 16th, the emperor left his residence to stay at his mausoleum and met with his ministers at Taihe-den.

古文：太尉、东阳王丕等据权制固请。
现代文：太尉、东阳王丕等人根据从权处置的办法力请皇帝除丧。
English: Captain, Dongyang Wang Yao and others, according to the method of subordinating power to disposal, urged the emperor to remove the mourning.

古文：十二月壬午，诏依准丘井之式，遣使与州郡宣行条制。
现代文：皇帝援引古代礼仪反对，群臣才停止进谏。京兆王太兴有罪，免职，削去爵位。
English: The emperor invoked ancient etiquette to object, and the courtiers stopped entering the imperial palace. King Tae Heung was found guilty, relieved of his duties, and stripped of his title.

古文：隐口漏丁，即听附实。若朋附豪势，陵抑孤独，罪有常刑。
现代文：十二月十九日，下令依照古代丘井计赋的方法，派使者和州郡官员宣布条令，如有隐瞒户口和男丁的，立即实地查明。如果依附豪强势家，欺压孤单民众的，依照正常刑罚处置。
English: On December 19th, it was ordered to send envoys and state and county officials to announce the regulations in accordance with the method of ancient Qiu and Jing. If there is any concealment of household registration and male children, it will be immediately identified on the spot. If they rely on strong and powerful people to oppress lonely people, they will be dealt with according to normal criminal penalties.

古文：是岁，吐谷浑、宕昌、武兴、阴平、高丽等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，吐谷浑、宕昌、武兴、阴平、高丽等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, emissaries from the provinces of Tugu, Goseong, Wuxing, Yinping, and Goryeo were sent to pay tribute.

古文：十五年春正月丁巳，帝始听政于皇信东室。
现代文：十五年春正月二十四日，皇帝开始在皇信东室听政。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the fifteenth year of the Spring, the emperor began to listen to politics in the East Room of the Emperor's Office.

古文：初分置左右史官。
现代文：初次设置左右史官。
English: For the first time, the left and right historians were set up.

古文：癸亥晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三十日为晦日，日食。
English: The 30th is the last day of the year, a solar eclipse.

古文：二月己丑，齐人来聘。
现代文：二月二十六日，齐人前来聘问。
English: On February 26th, Qi people came to ask questions.

古文：三月甲辰，车驾谒永固陵。
现代文：三月十三日，皇帝拜谒永固陵。
English: On March 13, the emperor paid homage to the Yonggong Mausoleum.

古文：夏四月癸亥，帝始进蔬食。
现代文：夏四月初一，皇帝开始吃蔬菜便饭。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the emperor began to eat vegetables.

古文：乙丑，谒永固陵。
现代文：初三，拜谒永固陵。
English: On the third day of the first month, pay homage to Yonggong Mausoleum.

古文：自正月不雨至于癸酉，有司奏祈百神。
现代文：从正月以来到四月十一日，一直没有下雨。有关方面官员上奏请求祭祀百神以求雨。
English: From the first month of the year to the 11th of April, there was no rain. The officials concerned appealed to the people to make sacrifices to the hundred deities to pray for rain.

古文：诏曰： 何宜四气未周，便行礼事，唯当考躬责己，以待天谴。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：怎么能在四时之气未周全的时候就举办礼事？我自当反省和自责，以期待上天的谴罚。 
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "How can a ceremony be held when the weather is not perfect? I should reflect and reproach myself, in the hope of God's punishment."

古文：甲戌，诏员外散骑常侍李彪使于齐。
现代文：十二日，令员外散骑常侍李彪出使齐国。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Li Biao, the general's aide, sent an envoy to Qi.

古文：己卯，经始明堂，改营太庙。
现代文：十七日，开始测量营建明堂，改建太庙。
English: On the 17th, the survey of the construction of the Ming Hall and the reconstruction of the Imperial Temple began.

古文：五月己亥，议改律令。
现代文：五月初八，商议改革法令。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month, the reform decree was deliberated.

古文：于东明观折疑狱。
现代文：在东明观审理疑难案件。
English: Difficult cases to be tried at Dongmingguan.

古文：乙卯，枹罕镇将长孙百年攻吐谷浑所置洮阳、泥和二戍克之，俘获三万余人。
现代文：二十四日，粃罕镇将长孙百年攻克了吐谷浑所设置的洮阳、泥和两处戍地，俘虏了三万多人，下令全部放回。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the town of Bokhan subdued the eldest grandson of the hundred-year-old Bokyang, mud and two ploughed fields set up by Tu Guhun, captured more than thirty thousand people, and ordered all of them to be returned.

古文：诏悉免归。丙辰，诏造五辂。
现代文：二十五日，下令建造五辂之车。
English: On the 25th, he ordered the construction of a five-wheeled cart.

古文：六月丁未，济阴王郁以贪残赐死。
现代文：六月二十六日，济阴王郁因为贪婪残暴而被处死。
English: On June 26th, Jiyin Wang Yu was executed for his greed and brutality.

古文：秋七月乙丑，谒永固陵。规建寿陵。
现代文：秋七月初四，拜谒永固陵，规划建造寿陵。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was time to pay homage to the Yonggu Mausoleum and plan the construction of the Shuling Mausoleum.

古文：己卯，诏议祖宗，以道武皇帝为太祖。
现代文：十九日，下令商议祖先的称号，以道武皇帝称为太祖。
English: On the 19th, he ordered that the title of ancestor be discussed, and Emperor Daowu was called Taizu.

古文：乙酉，车驾巡省京邑，听讼而还。
现代文：二十五日，车驾巡察京都，听人诉讼后回宫。
English: On the 25th, he inspected Kyoto by car and returned to the Imperial Palace after hearing a lawsuit.

古文：八月壬辰，议养老。又议肆类上帝、禋于六宗礼，帝亲临决。
现代文：八月初三，商议养老之法；又商议祭祀上天和各种天神的礼仪，皇帝亲临并作出决断。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th month, they deliberated on the law of old-age pension; they also deliberated on the etiquette of sacrificing to heaven and various gods. The emperor came in person and made a decision.

古文：诏郡国有时物可以荐宗庙者，贡之。
现代文：诏令各郡和封国将可以献祭于宗庙的时新物品进贡。
English: According to the imperial edict, counties and fiefdoms will be able to donate new items to the ancestral temple.

古文：戊戌，移道坛于桑乾之阴，改曰崇虚寺。
现代文：初九，将道坛移到桑干河南面，改称为崇虚寺。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month, the Buddhist altar was moved to the south side of the Sangan River and was renamed the Chongxu Temple.

古文：己亥，诏诸州举秀才，先尽才学。
现代文：初十，令各州举荐秀才，优先举荐那些才学为州中之首的人。
English: On the tenth day of the month, let the states recommend the best talents, and give priority to recommending those who are the best in the state.

古文：乙巳，亲定禘祫礼。
现代文：十六日，亲自制定五年一次祭和三年一次的礻合祭宗庙的大礼。
English: On the 16th, he personally set up the grand ceremony of the five-year festival and the three-year festival.

古文：丁巳，议律令事，仍省杂祀。
现代文：二十八日，商议律法事项，仍下令免除各种非礼的杂祀。
English: On the 28th, after discussing legal matters, he still ordered the exemption of all kinds of improper miscellaneous religious services.

古文：九月辛巳，齐人来聘。
现代文：九月二十二日，齐人前来聘问。
English: On September 22nd, Qi people came to ask questions.

古文：冬十月庚寅，车驾谒永固陵。
现代文：冬十月初二，皇帝拜谒永固陵。
English: In winter, on the second day of October, the emperor paid homage to the Yonggong Mausoleum.

古文：是月，明堂太庙成。
现代文：当月，明堂和太庙落成。
English: In the same month, Myeongdong and Taemyo were completed.

古文：十一月丁卯，迁七庙神主于新庙。
现代文：十一月初九，将七庙中的神主牌位移到新修好的太庙。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, the god cards of the seven temples were moved to the newly repaired Taimiao.

古文：乙亥，大定官品。
现代文：十七日，大举确定官员的品级。
English: On the 17th, officials' ranks were determined on a large scale.

古文：戊寅，考诸牧守。
现代文：二十日，考核各州牧和郡守的政绩。
English: On the 20th, the performance of the pastors and county governors in each prefecture was evaluated.

古文：诏假通直散骑常侍李彪聘于齐。
现代文：下令代理通直散骑常侍李彪到齐国通问。
English: He ordered the agent to go straight to Li Biao, an equestrian, to inquire.

古文：丙戌，初罢小岁贺。
现代文：二十八日，首次废除祝贺小年的礼节。
English: On the 28th, the etiquette of congratulating the new year was abolished for the first time.

古文：丁亥，诏二千石考上上者，假四品将军，赐乘黄马一匹；上中者，五品将军；上下者，衣一袭。
现代文：二十九日，下诏说，二千石的官员经考核为上上等级的，为假四品将军，赐坐骑黄马一匹；为上中的，五品将军；上下的，赏赐衣服一套。
English: On the 29th, the next imperial edict said that the officials of 2,000 koku, after examination, would be given a yellow horse to ride if they were of a higher rank, and a four-rank general if they were of a lower rank; a five-rank general if they were of a higher rank; and a set of clothes if they were of a lower rank.

古文：十二月壬辰，迁社于内城之西。
现代文：十二月初五，将社神之所移至内城西面。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, the shrine was moved to the western side of the inner city.

古文：癸巳，班赐刺史已下衣冠。
现代文：初六，赏赐刺史以下官员衣服和帽子。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the school year, officials below the rank of chief inspector were awarded with new clothes and hats.

古文：以安定王休为太傅，齐郡王简为太保。
现代文：任命安定王休为太傅，齐郡王简为太保。
English: Anding Wang Xiu was appointed Taifu, and Qi County's Wang Jian was appointed Taibo.

古文：帝为高丽王琏举哀于城东行宫。
现代文：皇帝在城东的行宫为高丽王琏举行哀悼礼。二十二日，皇帝在东郊举行迎春仪式。
English: The emperor held a mourning ceremony for King Goryeo at the imperial palace in the east of the city. On the 22nd, the emperor held a spring festival ceremony in the eastern suburbs.

古文：己酉，车驾迎春于东郊。
现代文：二十四日，令挑选乐官。
English: On the 24th, the order to select musicians was issued.

古文：辛卯，诏简选乐官。是岁，吐谷浑、悉万斤、高丽、邓至、宕昌等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，吐谷浑、悉万斤、高丽、邓至、宕昌等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, emissaries from the states of Tukgukhun, Siwanjin, Goryeo, Dengzhi, and Goseong were sent to pay tribute.

古文：十六年春正月戊午朔，朝飨群臣于太华殿。
现代文：十六年春正月初一，在太华殿举行早宴，宴请群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 16th year of the Spring, a breakfast banquet was held at the Taihua Palace, inviting a group of ministers.

古文：帝始为王公兴县而不乐。
现代文：皇帝开始和王公大臣们在京城欢会，但不用乐舞。
English: The emperor began to meet with princes and ministers in the capital, but without music and dance.

古文：己未，宗祀显祖献文皇帝于明堂，以配上帝。
现代文：初二，在明堂祭祀显祖献文皇帝，以他配祭上天。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, in the Ming Hall, a sacrifice was offered to Emperor Xianzu, and he was sacrificed to the heavens.

古文：遂升台以观云物，降居青阳左个，布政事。每朔依以为常。
现代文：因而登上灵台观看天上云间各种形状。降居于明堂左侧青阳宫侧室，处置政务，每朔日习以为常。
English: As a result, he ascended to the platform to watch the various shapes in the clouds in the sky. He moved to the side room of the Qingyang Palace on the left side of the Ming Hall to handle government affairs, and it was normal for him to do so every new year.

古文：辛酉，始以太祖配南郊。
现代文：初四，首次以太祖在南郊配祭。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 1st year of junior high school, for the first time, the ethereal ancestor performed the ritual in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬戌，诏定行次，以水承金。
现代文：初五，下诏确定五行的次序，以水继承金。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the lower edict determined the order of the five elements, with water inheriting gold.

古文：甲子，诏罢袒裸。
现代文：初七，下令停止祖礻果的祭祀。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, it was ordered to stop the sacrificial rites of Zu Xiguo.

古文：乙丑，制诸远属非太祖子孙及异姓为王者，皆降为公，公为侯，侯为伯，子男仍旧。皆除将军之号。
现代文：初八，下令所有远亲不是太祖的子孙以及异性封王的人，都降为公爵，公爵的降为侯爵，侯降为伯，子爵和男爵照旧不变，全部除去将军的封号。
English: On the eighth day of the month, he decreed that all distant relatives who were not the children of the great-grandfather, as well as the opposite sex who were crowned kings, were reduced to dukes, dukes were reduced to marquises, marquises were reduced to burgesses, viscounts and barons remained unchanged, and all the titles of generals were removed.

古文：戊辰，帝临思义殿，策问秀、孝。
现代文：十一日，皇帝亲临思义殿，考问秀才和孝廉们。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the emperor himself came to the Siyi Hall to question the talented and the filial.

古文：丙子，始以孟月祭庙。
现代文：十八日，开始确定在元月祭庙。
English: On the 18th, it was determined that the New Year's festival would begin at the temple.

古文：二月戊子，帝移御永乐宫。
现代文：二月初二，皇帝移居永乐宫。
English: On the second day of February, the emperor moved to Yongle Palace.

古文：庚寅，坏太华殿，经始太极殿。
现代文：初四，拆毁太华殿，规划兴建太极殿。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the Taihua Hall was demolished and the Taiji Hall was planned to be built.

古文：辛卯，罢寒食享。
现代文：初五，废除寒食祭祀。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the cold food sacrifice was abolished.

古文：壬辰，幸北部曹，历观诸省。
现代文：初六，前往北面的部曹，一一视察各官署。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the school year, he went to the north of the department to inspect each government office.

古文：巡省京邑，听理冤讼。
现代文：巡察京城，倾听和受理各种冤情的诉讼。
English: inspect the capital, listen to and accept various grievances and lawsuits.

古文：甲千，车驾初朝日于东郊，遂以为常。
现代文：初八，皇帝初次在东郊朝拜日神，后来便成为常规之礼。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor worshipped the sun god for the first time in the eastern suburbs, which later became a regular ritual.

古文：丁酉，诏祀唐尧于平阳，虞舜于广宁，夏禹于安邑，周文于洛阳。
现代文：十一日，下诏在平阳祭祀唐尧，在广宁祭祀虞舜，在安邑祭祀夏禹，在洛阳祭祀周文王。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was decreed that Tang Xuan would be sacrificed in Pingyang, Yu Xuan in Guangning, Xia Yu in Anyi, and Zhou Wenwang in Luoyang.

古文：丁未，改谥宣尼曰文圣尼父，告谥孔庙。
现代文：二十一日，改谥仲尼的号为文圣尼父，到孔庙中陈告新谥号。
English: On the twenty-first day, he changed his name to Wen Shengni father and went to the Confucius Temple to announce his new name.

古文：三月丁卯，巡省京邑。
现代文：三月十一日，巡察京城。
English: On March 11, he inspected the capital.

古文：癸酉，省西郊郊天杂事。
现代文：十七日，视察西郊祭天的杂事。
English: On the 17th, he inspected the affairs of the Xijiao Festival.

古文：乙亥，车驾初迎气于南郊，自此为常。
现代文：十九日，皇帝初次在南郊迎接瑞气，从此成为常规。
English: On the 19th, the emperor went to the southern suburbs for the first time to welcome Ruiqi, which has since become a regular occurrence.

古文：辛巳，以高丽王琏孙云为其国王。
现代文：二十五，封高丽王琏的孙子云为高丽国王。
English: On the 25th, the grandson of King Min of Goryeo, Yun, was crowned King of Goryeo.

古文：齐人来聘。
现代文：齐人前来聘问。
English: They all came to ask questions.

古文：夏四月丁亥朔，颁新律令，大赦。
现代文：夏四月初一，颁布新的法令，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, a new decree was issued, granting amnesty to the whole world.

古文：甲寅，幸皇宗学，亲问博士经义。
现代文：二十八日，前往皇家学堂，亲自向博士询问经义。
English: On the 28th, he went to the Royal Academy and personally asked the doctor about the meaning of the sutra.

古文：五月癸未，诏群臣于皇信堂更定律条，流徒限制，帝亲临决之。
现代文：五月二十八日，令群臣在皇信堂重新制订法律条文，对流放和服劳役的期限等作出规定，皇帝亲临决断。
English: On the 28th of May, he ordered his courtiers to re-establish the legal provisions in the Emperor's Hall, to make provisions for the period of banishment and forced labor, and the emperor himself came to make a decision.

古文：秋七月壬戌，诏曰： 自今选举，每以季月，本曹与吏部铨简。 
现代文：秋七月初八，下诏说： 从今以后选用和举荐官员，每年在十二月进行，由本曹和吏部负责量才任用。 
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: From now on, the selection and recommendation of officials will be carried out every year in December, and the appointment will be made by the bachelor and the cadre department.

古文：甲戌，诏兼员外散骑常侍宋弁使于齐。
现代文：二十日，令兼员外散骑常侍宋弁出使齐国。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Song Ben, who was also a non-commissioned officer, to send an envoy to Qi.

古文：八月庚寅，车驾初祀夕月于西郊，遂以为常。
现代文：八月初六，皇帝初次在西郊祭祀月神，便作为常礼。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the emperor first offered sacrifices to the moon god in the western suburbs, and it became a regular ritual.

古文：乙未，诏阳平王颐、左仆射陆睿督十二将北讨蠕蠕。
现代文：十一日，诏令阳平王颐、左仆射陆睿又率领二十位将军北征蠕蠕。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he ordered Yangping Wang Qian and his left-hand man Sha Lu Rui to lead twenty generals to the Northern Expedition.

古文：丙午，宕昌王梁弥承来朝。
现代文：二十二日，宕昌王梁弥承来到朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, Tang Chang Wang Liang Yicheng came to the imperial court.

古文：司徒尉元以老逊位。
现代文：司徒尉元因年老离职。
English: First Lieutenant Satsumoto leaves the service due to old age.

古文：己酉，以尉元为三老，游明根为五更。
现代文：二十五日，封尉元为三老，游明根为五更。
English: On the 25th, Fong Ye Yuan became the third elder, and You Ming Ge became the fifth elder.

古文：又养国老、庶老，将行大射之礼。
现代文：又奉养国老和庶老，准备举行大射的礼节。
English: In addition, the elders of the country and the elders of the country will be held, and the etiquette of the grand shooting will be prepared.

古文：雨，不克成。
现代文：天下雨，未能举行。
English: It rained, so it couldn't be held.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 国家虽宗文以怀九服，修武以宁八荒。然于习武之方，犹为未尽。
现代文：二十九日，下诏说： 国家虽文治为本使九服怀德，修习武艺使八荒安宁，然而有关习武的方法，尚未完备。
English: On the 29th, the next imperial edict said: Although the country is based on the principles of the rule of law and the promotion of virtue, and the practice of martial arts has brought peace to the wastelands, the methods for practicing martial arts are not yet complete.

古文：将于马射之前，先行讲武之式。
现代文：准备在骑马射箭之前，先进行讲习武艺的示范。
English: Prepare for a martial arts demonstration before going horseback archery.

古文：可敕有司豫修场埒。
现代文：可令有关方面事先修好场地。
English: The relevant parties can be ordered to repair the venue in advance.

古文：其列阵之仪，五戎之数，别俟后敕。 
现代文：有关部门排列阵势的形式、五种兵器的数量，等待另外的命令。 
English: The relevant departments arranged the form of the formation, the number of five weapons, and waited for another order.

古文：九月甲寅朔，大序昭穆于明常，祀文明太皇太后于玄堂。
现代文：九月初一，在明堂排列祖庙中的昭穆次序。在玄堂祭祀文明太皇太后。
English: On the first day of September, the Shomu sequence of ancestral temples is arranged in the Ming Hall, and the Great Empress Dowager of Civilization is worshiped in the Black Hall.

古文：辛未，帝以文明太皇太后再周忌日，哭于陵左，绝膳三日，哭不辍声。
现代文：十八日，皇帝因文明太皇太后逝世二周年的忌日，哭于永固陵左侧，断绝饮食三天，哭声持续不断。
English: On the eighteenth day, the second anniversary of the death of the empress dowager, the emperor cried on the left side of Yonggu Mausoleum, cut off his diet for three days, and continued to cry.

古文：辛巳，武兴王杨集始来朝。
现代文：二十八日，武兴王杨集始前来朝见。
English: On the 28th, King Wuxing Yang Jifu came to see the emperor for the first time.

古文：冬十月己亥，以太傅、安定王休为大司马，特进冯诞为司徒。
现代文：冬十月十六日，任命太傅、安定王休为大司马，特进冯诞任司徒。
English: On the 16th day of winter in October, Tai Fu and Wang Xiu were appointed as grand stewards, and Feng Zhixing was appointed as an assistant steward.

古文：甲辰，诏以功臣配飨太庙。
现代文：二十一日，诏令以功臣在太庙中配祭。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the imperial edict decreed that meritorious vassals were to serve as sacrificial offerings in the Great Temple.

古文：庚戌，太极殿成，飨群臣。
现代文：二十七日，太极殿落成，宴请群臣。
English: On the 27th, the Taiji Hall was completed, and a banquet was held for the courtiers.

古文：十一月乙卯，依古六寝，权制三室，以安昌殿为内寝，皇信堂为中寝，四下为外寝。
现代文：十一月初三，依照古代的六寝制度，暂时设制三寝，以安昌殿为内寝，皇信堂为中寝，四下为外寝。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, in accordance with the ancient six-sleeping system, a three-sleeping system was temporarily set up, with Anchang Hall as the inner bed, Hosshindo as the middle bed, and four beds as the outer bed.

古文：十二月，赐京邑老人鸠杖。
现代文：十二月，赏赐京都老人刻有鸠形的拐杖。
English: In December, an elderly man in Kyoto was awarded a crutch engraved with a swastika.

古文：齐人来聘。
现代文：齐人前来聘问。
English: They all came to ask questions.

古文：是岁，高丽、邓至、契丹、齿、吐谷浑等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、邓至、契砫、吐谷浑等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Dengzhi, Cheju, and Tubo all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十七年春正月壬子朔，飨百寮于太极殿。
现代文：十七年春正月初一，在太极殿宴请群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventeenth year of the Spring, a banquet was held for a group of ministers in the Taiji Hall.

古文：乙丑，诏大赐诸蕃君长车、旗、衣、马、锦彩、缯纩，多者一千，少者三百，各以命数为差。
现代文：十四日，下令大赐各蕃国国王车、旗、衣服、马匹、锦采、缯纩，多的一千，少的三百，各自以赏赐的次数区别数量的多少。
English: On the fourteenth day of the same month, he gave orders to give to the kings of the three kingdoms a great number of chariots, banners, clothing, horses, spoils, and shields, to the number of a thousand at the most, and to the number of three hundred at the least, each according to the number of times it had been given.

古文：诏兼员外散骑常侍邢峦使于齐。
现代文：令兼员外散骑常侍邢产出使齐国。
English: Ordered the part-time non-commissioned officers to ride around and often attend the production to make the country better.

古文：丙子，以吐谷浑伏连筹为其国王。
现代文：二十五日，以吐谷浑伏连筹为吐谷浑的国王。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, he was crowned the king of Tugu Hunbu with the concurrence of Tugu Hunbu.

古文：庚辰，蠲大司马安定王休、太保齐郡王简朔望之朝。
现代文：二十九日，免去大司马安定王休和太保齐郡王简在朔望日的朝见礼仪。
English: On the 29th, the Grand Master Ma Anding, Wang Xiu, and the Grand Master of Qi County, Wang Jian, were exempted from the morning greeting ceremony on the New Year's Day.

古文：二月乙酉，诏赐议律令之官各有差。
现代文：二月初四，下令赏赐议定法令的官员们物品，数量不等。
English: On the 4th of February, it was decreed that the officials who had approved the decree would be rewarded with various goods.

古文：己酉，车驾始籍田于都南。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝开始在京都南面籍田。
English: On the 28th, the emperor began to cultivate his fiefs in the south of Kyoto.

古文：三月戊辰，改作后宫。
现代文：三月十八日，改建后宫。
English: On March 18th, the reconstruction of the harem began.

古文：夏四月戊戌，立皇后冯氏。
现代文：夏四月十八日，立冯氏为皇后。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Feng clan was established as the empress.

古文：是月，齐直阁将军蛮酋田益宗率部落内属。
现代文：当月，齐直阁将军蛮人首领田益宗带本部落人前来归附。
English: That month, the barbarian leader Tian Yuesong, a general of the Qizhougu, came to annex the tribe.

古文：五月壬戌，宴四庙子孙于宣文堂，帝亲与之齿，行家人礼。
现代文：五月十三日，在文宣堂宴请四庙子孙。皇帝亲自和他们排列年龄长幼，按照自家人行礼拜见。
English: On May 13th, the descendants of the four temples were invited to a banquet at Wensundang. The emperor himself lined up the eldest and youngest with them, and they paid their respects according to their own families.

古文：甲子，帝临朝堂，引见公卿以下。决疑政，录囚徒。
现代文：十五日，皇帝临朝，接见公卿以上官员，决断疑难的国家大事，审察囚犯的罪状。
English: On the 15th, the emperor went to the imperial court, met with officials of nobility and above, decided on difficult national affairs, and examined the crimes of prisoners.

古文：丁丑，以旱彻膳。
现代文：二十八日，因大旱而撤去膳食。
English: On the 28th, meals were withdrawn due to the drought.

古文：襄阳蛮酋雷婆思等率其部内徙，居于太和川。
现代文：襄阳蛮族酋长雷婆思等人带领本部落内迁，居住在太和川。
English: The Xiangyang barbarian chief Lei Bo Si and others led the tribe to move inland and live in the Taihe River.

古文：六月庚辰朔，日有蚀之。丙戌，帝将南伐，诏造河桥。
现代文：六月初一，日食。初七，皇帝准备南征，命令修建黄河大桥。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor ordered the construction of the Yellow River Bridge in preparation for the Southern Expedition.

古文：乙未，讲武。
现代文：十六日，讲习武艺。
English: On the 16th, a martial arts workshop was held.

古文：乙巳，诏曰： 比百秩虽陈，事典未叙。
现代文：二十六日，下诏说： 近来百官品级虽列，而有关事典尚未叙写。
English: On the 26th, the next imperial edict said: Although the ranks of one hundred officials have recently been listed, the relevant encyclopedia has not yet been written.

古文：自八元树位，躬加省览，作职员令二十一卷。
现代文：自八元重臣在位，亲加审察，撰职员令二十一卷。
English: Since the eight-generation chief minister has been in power, he has personally reviewed and compiled 21 volumes of staff orders.

古文：事迫戎期，未善周悉，须待军回，更论所阙。
现代文：军期紧迫，未能尽详，须待回军之时，更补所缺之处。
English: The period of military service is urgent, it is not exhaustive, and it is necessary to make up for what is missing when returning to the army.

古文：权可付外施行。 
现代文：暂且交付外面实行。 
English: For the time being, the delivery will be carried out outside.

古文：立皇子恂为皇太子。
现代文：立皇子恂为皇太子。
English: The crown prince is enthroned.

古文：秋七月癸丑，以皇太子立，诏赐人为父后者爵一级，为公士。曾为吏属者爵二级，为上造。
现代文：秋七月初五，因为已立了皇太子，下诏赏赐已经当了父亲有后嗣的人一级爵位，称为公士；曾经担任过吏员一类的赐爵二级，称为上造。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, because the crown prince had been established, the next edict rewarded those who had become fathers with heirs with a first-class knighthood, known as court nobles; those who had served as officials with a second-class knighthood, known as superiors.

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人粟五斛。
现代文：孤寡鳏独不能维持生计的，每人赐粟五斛。
English: Widows and widowers who are unable to make a living on their own will each receive five millets of millet.

古文：戊午，中外戒严。
现代文：初十，命令内外戒严。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, martial law was declared both inside and outside the country.

古文：是月，齐武帝殂。
现代文：当月，齐武帝死去。
English: In the same month, Emperor Qiwu died.

古文：八月乙酉，三老山阳郡公尉元薨。
现代文：八月初七，三老中的三阳郡公尉元去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, Sanyang County Public Officer Yuan of the Three Elders Middle School passed away.

古文：丙戌，车驾类于上帝，遂临尉元丧。
现代文：初八，皇帝祭祀上天，接着前往尉元家中问丧。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor offered a sacrifice to the heavens, and then went to Ie Yuan's home to pay his respects.

古文：丁亥，帝辞永固陵。
现代文：初九，皇帝到永固陵辞行。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the emperor went to the Yonggu Mausoleum to resign.

古文：己丑，发京师南伐，步骑三十余万。
现代文：十一日，从京都出发南征，步骑兵共三十多万人。
English: On the 11th, the Southern Expedition set out from Kyoto, with a total of more than 300,000 infantry and cavalry.

古文：太尉丕奏请以宫人从，诏以临戎不语内事，不许。
现代文：太尉丕上奏请求让宫中人员随同前往，皇帝下诏说，临敌不过问内廷事务，不答应。
English: The captain made a request to let the palace personnel go with him, and the emperor issued an edict saying that the enemy would not be allowed to inquire about the affairs of the inner court.

古文：壬寅，车驾至肆州。
现代文：二十四日，皇帝到达肆州。
English: On the 24th, the emperor arrived in Wuzhou.

古文：人年七十已上，赐爵一级。
现代文：七十以上的老年人，赐给一级爵位。
English: Senior citizens over the age of 70 are given a first-class knighthood.

古文：路见眇跛，停驾亲问，赐衣食，复终事。
现代文：路上遇到眼睛失明和跛足的行人，都要停车慰问，赐给衣服和食品，免除终身赋税。
English: When encountering blind and lame pedestrians on the road, they should stop to offer condolences, give them clothes and food, and exempt them from lifelong taxation.

古文：戊申，幸并州，亲见高年，问疾苦。
现代文：三十日，到达并州，亲自接见年岁已高的人，慰问疾苦。
English: On the 30th, he arrived in Anhui Province to personally meet the elderly and offer condolences for their suffering.

古文：九月壬子，诏兼员外散骑常侍高聪聘于齐。
现代文：九月初四，诏令兼员外散骑常侍高聪聘问齐国。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the year, Gao Cong, a non-commissioned officer and horseback rider, was invited to Qi Province.

古文：丁巳，诏车驾所经，伤人秋稼者，亩给谷五斛。
现代文：初九，下诏说，凡是军队经过的地方损伤了民众的秋庄稼，每亩给谷五斛。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the next edict said that wherever the army passed through, it damaged the autumn crops of the people, and each mu was given five mu of grain.

古文：戊辰，济河。
现代文：二十日，渡过黄河。
English: On the 20th, he crossed the Yellow River.

古文：诏洛、怀、并、肆所过四州，赐高年爵，恤鳏寡孤独各有差。
现代文：诏令军队所经过的四州洛州、怀州、并州、肆州，赐给老年人爵位，赈济鳏夫、寡妇等孤独人物品，数量不等。
English: The four prefectures through which the army passed, including Luozhou, Huaizhou, Binzhou, and Zhouzhou, were given titles to the elderly, and the number of lonely people's goods such as widowers and widows was not equal.

古文：孝悌廉义文武应求者，皆以名闻。
现代文：因孝悌、廉义和有文武方面才能前来应聘和求职的，都将名字上报皇帝。
English: Those who come to apply for jobs and seek employment due to filial piety, honesty, and literary and military talents will report their names.

古文：又诏厮养户不得与庶士婚，有文武之才积劳应进者，同庶族例，听之。
现代文：又下令地位低贱的厮养户不能和平民、士人通婚，有文武才能积累劳绩得到晋升的，和庶族同等对待，听其自便。
English: He also ordered that low-ranking peasants and their dependents could not marry commoners and nobles, and that those who had accumulated merit through military service and were promoted should be treated the same as commoners and allowed to do as they pleased.

古文：庚午，幸洛阳，周巡故宫基迹。
现代文：二十二日，到达洛阳，全面视察故宫的遗址。
English: On the 22nd, he arrived in Luoyang and inspected the site of the Forbidden City.

古文：帝顾谓侍臣曰： 晋德不修，荒毁至此！ 
现代文：皇帝对侍臣们说 ：晋人不修德行，以至国都荒废毁败成这种模样！ 
English: The emperor said to his courtiers: "The Jin people do not practice virtue, so that the country is desolate and ruined into this appearance!

古文：遂咏《黍离诗》，为之流涕。
现代文：他便吟咏了《黍离诗》，为此感慨泪下。
English: He then sang "A Separation Poem" and was moved to tears.

古文：壬申，观河桥。幸太学，观石经。
现代文：二十四日，观看洛河桥，视察原太学，看了石经。
English: On the 24th, he watched the Luohe Bridge, inspected the original Taixue, and saw the Stone Sutra.

古文：丙子，六军发轸。
现代文：二十七日，六军车队出发。
English: On the 27th, the Sixth Army's motorcade set off.

古文：丁丑，帝戎服执鞭，御马而出。
现代文：二十八日，皇帝身穿戎装、手执马鞭，骑马出发。
English: On the 28th, the emperor, dressed in military attire and holding a whip, rode out.

古文：群臣稽颡于马前，请停南伐，帝乃止。
现代文：群臣都跪拜在皇帝的马前，请求他停止南征，皇帝于是停止计划。
English: The courtiers all knelt before the emperor's horse and begged him to stop the southern expedition. The emperor then stopped the plan.

古文：仍议迁都计。
现代文：便一起商议迁都事宜。
English: They then discussed the relocation of the capital together.

古文：冬十月戊寅朔，幸金墉城。
现代文：冬十月初一，巡视金墉城。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the inspection of Jinyu City began.

古文：诏征司空穆亮与尚书李冲、将作大匠董爵经始洛京。
现代文：令召来司空穆亮和尚书李冲、将作大匠董爵，开始规划修建京城洛阳。
English: Li Chong, a monk of the Ku Mu Liang sect, was summoned to serve as the grandmaster and began to plan the construction of the capital Luoyang.

古文：己卯，幸河南城。
现代文：初二，巡视河南城。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, they inspected Henan City.

古文：乙酉，幸豫州。
现代文：初八，到达豫州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he arrived in Yuzhou.

古文：癸巳，次于石济。
现代文：十六日，到达石济。
English: On the 16th, they arrived in Sheki.

古文：乙未，解严。
现代文：十八日，解除戒严令。
English: On the 18th, martial law was lifted.

古文：设坛于滑台宫。
现代文：设祭坛在滑台宫。
English: An altar is set up in the palace.

古文：诏京师及诸州从戎者，赐爵一级。应募者，加二级。主将加三级。
现代文：下诏说，凡从京城和各州前来从征的，每人赐爵一级；应募而来的，加为二级；军队主将加三级。
English: The next edict said that anyone who came from the capital and the provinces to enlist would receive a first-class knighthood; those who were recruited would receive a second-class knighthood; and the commander of the army would receive a third-class knighthood.

古文：癸卯，幸鄴城。
现代文：二十六日，巡察邺城。
English: On the 26th, they made an inspection of Shicheng.

古文：乙巳，诏安定王休率从官迎家口于代，车驾送于漳水上。
现代文：二十八日，下诏让安定王休带领随从官员到代州接家眷。皇帝亲自到漳水上送行。
English: On the 28th, it was decreed that Wang Xiu, accompanied by officials, should go to Daizhou to pick up his family. The emperor himself went to Wuxi to see him off.

古文：初，帝之南伐，起宫殿于鄴西。
现代文：当初，皇帝南征时，已建宫殿在邺城西面。
English: At the beginning, when the emperor was marching south, he had already built a palace in the west of Lucheng.

古文：十一月癸亥，宫成，徙御焉。
现代文：十一月十六日，宫殿落成，便迁去住下。
English: On November 16th, the palace was completed, and they moved in.

古文：十二月戊寅，巡省六军。
现代文：十二月初二，巡察六军。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the inspection of the six armies began.

古文：乙未，诏隐恤军士，死亡疾病，务令优给。
现代文：十八日，下诏要求体恤战士疾苦，凡是死亡和身患疾病的，务必给予优厚的照顾。
English: On the 18th, the following edict demanded that the soldiers should be pitied for their sufferings, and that those who died or fell ill must be given generous care.

古文：是岁，勿吉、吐谷浑、宕昌、阴平、契丹、库莫奚、高丽、邓至等国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，勿吉、吐谷浑、宕昌、阴平、契丹、库莫奚、高丽、邓至等国都派使者朝贡。
English: In that year, countries such as Bukit, Tugukhun, Gochang, Yinping, Khitan, Kumo, Goryeo, and Dengzi all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：十八年春正月丁未朔，朝群臣于鄴宫澄鸾殿。
现代文：十八年春正月初一，在邺城皇宫的澄鸾殿上接见群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 18th year of spring, he received a group of courtiers at the entrance of the Chengyu Hall of the Shicheng Palace.

古文：癸亥，南巡。
现代文：十五日，南巡。
English: On the 15th, the Southern Tour began.

古文：诏相、兗、豫三州赐高年爵，恤鳏寡孤老各有差。
现代文：下诏赏赐相、兖、豫三州老年人爵位，赈济鳏夫、寡妇、孤身老人物品，数量不等。
English: The following edict awards peerages to the elderly in the three states of Jiangxi, Shandong and Henan, and provides gifts to widows, widowers and lonely old people, with quantities varying.

古文：孝悌廉义文武应求者，皆以名闻。
现代文：因孝悌、廉义和有文武才能的人前来应聘和求职的，都将名字上报。
English: Those who come to apply for jobs and seek employment due to filial piety, honesty, and literary and military talents will report their names.

古文：戊辰，经殷比干墓，祭以太牢。
现代文：二十二日，经过殷朝比干墓地，以太牢的礼节祭祀。
English: On the 22nd, after passing through the Yin Dynasty Bikan Cemetery, the ethereal ritual was held.

古文：乙亥，幸洛阳西宫。
现代文：二十九日，到达洛阳西宫。
English: On the 29th, it arrived at the West Palace of Luoyang.

古文：二月己丑，行幸河阴，规建方泽之所。
现代文：二月十四日，巡行至河阴，规划修建方池的地点。
English: On February 14th, they marched to Hexin to plan the site of the construction of the square pond.

古文：丙申，徙封河南王干为赵郡王，颍川王雍为高阳王。
现代文：二十一日，改封河南王干为赵郡王，颍川王雍为高阳王。
English: On the 21st, Henan Wang Gan was renamed Zhao County King, and Luochuan Wang Yong was renamed Gaoyang King.

古文：壬寅，北巡。
现代文：二十七日，北巡。
English: On the 27th, the northern inspection began.

古文：癸卯，齐人来聘。
现代文：二十八日，齐人前来聘问。
English: On the 28th, a group of people came for an interview.

古文：甲辰，诏喻天下以迁都意。
现代文：二十九日，下诏天下，说明迁都的意图。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict was issued, stating the intention to move the capital.

古文：闰月癸亥，次勾注陉南。
现代文：闰二月十八日，到达句注陉南面。
English: On the eighteenth day of the second lunar month, it arrived at the south side of the moon.

古文：壬辰，帝临太极殿，喻在代群臣迁移之略。
现代文：皇太子在蒲地朝见皇帝。二十七日，到达平城宫。二十八日，临朝听政，确定将官员分成留守和随迁两部分。
English: On the 27th, he arrived at the Heijo Palace. On the 28th, he listened to the government and decided to divide the officials into two parts: those who stayed and those who moved.

古文：夏五月甲戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二十九日，拜谒永固陵。三月初六，皇帝到太极殿，告诉在旧都的群臣迁都的谋略。
English: On the 29th, he paid homage to the Yonggu Mausoleum. On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the emperor went to the Taiji Hall and told the courtiers in the old capital about the strategy of moving the capital.

古文：乙亥，诏罢五月五日、七月七日飨。
现代文：夏五月初一，日食。初二，下诏停止五月五日和七月七日的宴饮。
English: The first day of summer, the first day of May, the solar eclipse, the second day of the new year, the banquet on May 5 and July 7 will be suspended.

古文：六月己巳，诏兼员外散骑常侍卢昶使于齐。
现代文：六月二十六日，令兼散骑常侍卢昶出使齐国。
English: On June 26th, the envoy of Qi State was dispatched by Lu Xun, who was also a knight errant.

古文：秋七月乙亥，以宋王刘昶为大将军。
现代文：秋七月初三，任命宋王刘昶为大将军。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Song King Liu Bei was appointed general.

古文：壬辰，北巡。
现代文：二十日，北巡。
English: On the 20th, the northern tour began.

古文：戊戌，谒金陵。
现代文：二十六日，拜谒金陵。
English: On the 26th, they paid their respects at the Golden Mausoleum.

古文：辛丑，幸朔州。
现代文：二十九日，巡行朔州。
English: On the 29th, the parade went to Shuozhou.

古文：是月，齐萧鸾杀其主昭业。
现代文：当月，齐国的萧鸾杀了国君昭业。
English: In the same month, Xiao Zhen of Qi killed the ruler of the state, Zhao Ye.

古文：八月亥亥，皇太子朝于行宫。
现代文：八月初一，皇太子在行宫朝见皇帝。
English: On the first day of August, the crown prince met the emperor at the imperial court.

古文：甲辰，行幸阴山，观云川。
现代文：初二，巡行至阴山，观看云川。
English: On the second day of junior high school, parade to the gloomy mountain, watch the cloud river.

古文：丁未，幸阅武台，临观讲武。
现代文：初五，到阅武台，在这里观看讲习武艺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, go to the martial arts parade ground and watch the martial arts training here.

古文：因幸怀朔、武川、抚冥、柔玄等四镇。
现代文：借此巡幸怀朔、武川、抚冥、柔玄等四镇。
English: With this, they visited four towns including Huai Shuo, Wuchuan, Fuding and Zhuoxuan.

古文：乙丑，南还。
现代文：二十三日，南归。
English: On the 23rd, he returned to the south.

古文：所过皆亲见高年，问人疾苦，贫窘孤老者，赐以粟帛。
现代文：所经过的地方亲自会见老年人，访问民间疾苦，贫困孤独的老人，都赏赐给粟米和布帛。
English: In the places they passed through, they met with the elderly in person, visited the suffering of the people, and the poor and lonely elderly were all rewarded with corn and cloth.

古文：丙寅，诏六镇及御夷城人年老孤贫废疾者，赐粟宥罪各有差。
现代文：二十四日，下诏对六镇和御夷城中年老孤独贫困以及残废的人，都赐给粟米并宽免他们的罪责，各有所不同。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued to the middle-aged, old, lonely, poor and disabled people in Liuzhen and Yaicheng, all of whom were given millet and relieved of their criminal responsibilities, each of which was different.

古文：戊辰，车驾次旋鸿池。
现代文：二十七日，车驾到达旋鸿地。
English: On the 27th, the car arrived at Zhunhong.

古文：庚午，谒永固陵。
现代文：二十九日，拜谒永固陵。
English: On the 29th, he paid homage to the Yonggu Mausoleum.

古文：辛未，还平城宫。
现代文：三十日，回到平城宫。
English: On the 30th, he returned to Heijo Palace.

古文：九月壬申朔，诏曰： 三载考绩，自古通经，三考黜陟，以彰能否。
现代文：九月初一，下诏说： 三年一次考绩，是自古以来通常使用的办法。
English: On the first day of September, the following edict was issued: A performance appraisal once every three years is a method that has been commonly used since ancient times.

古文：朕今三载一考，考即黜陟。
现代文：三次考绩确定其进退升降。我现在三年一次考绩，考绩之后便确定升降。
English: Three performance appraisals determine promotion and demotion. I now have a performance appraisal once every three years, and promotion and demotion are determined after the performance appraisal.

古文：欲令愚滞无妨于贤者，才能不拥于下位。
现代文：要让愚笨呆滞的不能妨碍贤能有作为的，有才能的人不屈居于下级职位。
English: We must not let the stupid and dull get in the way of the capable and effective, and talented people should not be relegated to subordinate positions.

古文：各令当曹，考其优劣为三等。
现代文：各令当曹官员，考绩时按其优劣定为三等。
English: Each order is a Cao official, and when evaluating their performance, they are ranked third according to their strengths and weaknesses.

古文：六品已下，尚书重问；五品已上，朕将亲与公卿论其善恶。
现代文：六品以下的，由尚书重新审查。五品以上的，我将亲自和公卿大臣一起评论其好坏。
English: If it is less than six products, it will be re-examined by Shang Shu. If it is more than five products, I will personally comment on its quality together with the Minister of Justice.

古文：上上者迁之，下下者黜之，中中者守其本任。 
现代文：上上等的晋升，下下等的罢黜，中中等的仍留在原位。 
English: The upper and upper classes are promoted, the lower and lower classes are dismissed, and the middle and middle classes remain in their original positions.

古文：壬午，帝临朝堂，亲加黜陟。
现代文：十一日，皇帝来到朝堂，亲自加以晋升或罢废。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor came to the court and personally promoted or dismissed them.

古文：壬辰，阴平王杨炅来朝。
现代文：二十一日，阴平王杨炅前来朝见。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Yinping King Yang Zhe came to see him in the morning.

古文：冬十月甲辰，以太尉、东阳王丕为太傅。
现代文：冬十月初三，任命太尉、东阳王丕为太傅。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, Dongyang Wang Yao was appointed as Tai Fu.

古文：戊申，亲告太庙，奉迎神主。
现代文：初七，亲自到太庙告祭，迎奉神主。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, he personally went to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifice and welcome the deity.

古文：辛亥，车驾发平城宫。
现代文：初十，车驾从平城宫出发。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, drive from Heijo Palace.

古文：壬戌，次于中山之唐湖。
现代文：二十一日，到达中山的唐湖。
English: On the twenty-first day, we arrived at Tang Lake in Zhongshan.

古文：乙丑，分遣侍臣，巡问疾苦。
现代文：二十四日，分派侍臣，巡察访问民间疾苦。
English: On the 24th, he dispatched his courtiers to inspect and visit the suffering of the people.

古文：己巳，幸信都。
现代文：二十八日，到达信都。
English: On the 28th, I arrived in Xindu.

古文：庚午，诏曰： 比闻缘边之蛮，多有窃掠，致有父子乖离，室家分绝。
现代文：二十九日，下诏说： 近来听说边境上的蛮族人经常出来抢劫掳掠，致使有的人家父子分离，家室夫妻隔绝。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued: "Recently, it has been heard that the barbarians on the border often come out to rob and plunder, causing some people to separate father and son, and isolate the husband and wife.

古文：可诏荆、郢、东荆三州，勒诸蛮人，勿有侵暴。 
现代文：可下诏荆、郢、东荆三州，管辖好各蛮族人，不要再侵害和行凶。 
English: You can issue an edict to the three prefectures of Jing, Fen and Dongjing to govern the barbarians well, and not to encroach and commit crimes.

古文：是月，齐萧鸾杀其主昭文而自立。
现代文：当月，齐国萧鸾杀了国君昭文，自立为帝。
English: In the same month, Xiao Zhen of Qi killed the sovereign, Akobun, and established himself as emperor.

古文：十一月辛未朔，诏冀、定二州，赐高年爵，恤鳏寡孤老各有差。孝义廉贞文武应求者，具以名闻。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏给冀、定二州，赏赐老年人爵位，抚恤鳏寡孤独老人财物，数量不等，凡孝悌、廉义、有文武才干应聘者，详细记下名字上奏。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, an edict was issued to the two prefectures of Ji and Ding, awarding titles to the elderly, pensions to the widows and widowers, and property to the lonely elderly, with the amounts varying. If you are filial, honest, and talented in literature and martial arts, please write down your name in detail.

古文：丁丑，幸鄴。
现代文：初七日，到达邺城。
English: On the seventh day of the first lunar month, they arrived in Shicheng.

古文：甲申，经比干墓，亲为吊文，树碑刊之。
现代文：十四日，经过比干墓，亲自撰写祭文，立碑刊刻。
English: On the 14th, after passing the Bi Gan Tomb, he personally wrote an offering, erected a monument, and had it engraved.

古文：己丑，车驾至洛阳。
现代文：十九日，车驾到达洛阳。
English: On the 19th, he drove to Luoyang.

古文：十二月辛丑朔，分命诸将南征。
现代文：十二月初一，分别任命众将南征。
English: On the first day of December, generals were separately appointed for the Southern Expedition.

古文：壬寅，革衣服之制。
现代文：初二，改革服装制度。
English: On the second day of junior high school, the clothing system was reformed.

古文：癸卯，诏中外戒严。
现代文：初三，下令内外戒严。
English: On the third day of the new year, martial law was declared at home and abroad.

古文：戊申，复代迁户租赋三岁。
现代文：初八，免除从代州迁来的民户三年租赋。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, private households that moved from Daizhou were exempted from the three-year rent.

古文：己酉，诏王、公、伯、子、男开国食邑者：王食半；公三分食一；侯、伯四分食一；子、男五分食一。
现代文：初九，下令被封为公、侯、伯、子、男立国有食邑的人，王得其国中一半赋税，公爵得三分之一，侯、伯分别得四分之一，子、男得五分之一。
English: In the ninth month of the year, it was decreed that those who were given the title of prince, lord, vassal, son, or son-in-law of the state-owned food towns, the king would receive half of the tax in his country, the duke would receive one-third, the lord and vassal would receive one-quarter, and the son and son-in-law would receive one-fifth.

古文：辛亥，车驾南伐。
现代文：十一日，车驾南征。
English: On the 11th day, the car drove south.

古文：丁卯，诏郢、豫二州赐高年爵，恤孤寡鳏老各有差。缘路之丁，复田租一岁。孝悌廉贞文武应求者，具以名闻。
现代文：二十七日，下诏赏赐郢、豫二州的老人爵级，抚恤孤寡鳏独老人财物，数量不等；沿路的男丁，免去一年田租；因孝悌、廉义、以文武才能应召的，详细写下名字上奏。
English: On the 27th, the emperor issued an edict awarding the elderly of the two prefectures of Shandong and Henan with the rank of peer, and providing them with various amounts of money and property; the men along the road were exempted from paying a year's rent; and those who answered the call of duty due to their filial piety, honesty, and ability in literature and martial arts had their names written down in detail.

古文：戊辰，车驾至悬瓠。己巳，诏寿阳、钟离、马头之师所获男女口皆放还南。
现代文：二十九日，命令寿阳、钟离、马头的军队将所俘获的男女人口都放回南方。
English: On the 29th, the army of Shouyang, Zhongli and Ma Tou was ordered to return the captured men and women to the south.

古文：是岁，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽国派使者朝贡。
English: That year, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十九年春正月辛未朔，朝飨群臣于悬瓠。
现代文：十九年春正月初一，在悬瓠为群臣举行早宴。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 19th year of the Spring, a breakfast banquet was held for the courtiers.

古文：癸酉，诏禁淮北人不得侵掠，犯者以大辟论。
现代文：初三，下令禁止淮北人进行南侵和掳掠，违犯者处死。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he issued an order prohibiting Huaibei people from invading and plundering the south, and violators would be put to death.

古文：壬午，讲武于汝水西，大赍六军。
现代文：十二日，在汝水西面讲习武艺，大赏六军。
English: On the 12th, a martial arts class was held on the west side of Your Water, which was highly appreciated by the six armies.

古文：平南将军王肃、左将军元丽并大破齐军。
现代文：平南将军王肃、左将军元丽都大败齐军。
English: The Pingnan general Wang Su and the left general Yuan Lidu defeated the Qi army.

古文：己亥，车驾济淮。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝渡过淮河。
English: On the 29th, the emperor crossed the Huai River.

古文：二月甲辰，幸八公山。路中雨甚，诏去盖。
现代文：二月初五，巡幸八公山，路上下大雨，下令去掉车的顶盖。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, during a tour of the Happo-Hakong Mountains, there was heavy rain on the road, and the top cover of the car was ordered to be removed.

古文：见军士病者，亲隐恤之。
现代文：见到兵士们生病的，皇帝亲自尽力安慰。
English: When the soldiers fell ill, the emperor himself tried his best to comfort them.

古文：戊申，车驾巡淮南，东人皆安堵，租运属路。
现代文：初九，车驾巡察淮南，东郡人都安居不受侵扰。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Huainan was inspected by car, and the people of Dong County all lived in peace and were not disturbed.

古文：丙辰，幸钟离。
现代文：送租的人沿路不绝。十七日，巡行至钟离。
English: On the 17th, the parade went to Zhongli.

古文：戊午，军士禽齐人三千。
现代文：十九日，军士们抓来三千齐人。
English: On the 19th, the sergeants arrested three thousand people.

古文：帝曰： 在君为君，其人何罪？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：居住在国君的地方就为国君做事，这些人有什么罪过呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "When you live in the place of the sovereign, you work for the sovereign. What are the sins of these people?"

古文：于是免归。
现代文：于是全部放回。
English: So they put it all back.

古文：辛酉，发钟离，将临江水。
现代文：二十二日，从钟离出发，准备到达长江边。
English: On the 22nd, they set out from Zhongli and prepared to reach the Yangtze River.

古文：司徒冯诞薨。
现代文：司徒冯诞去世。
English: Stow Fengxue passed away.

古文：壬戌，诏班师。
现代文：二十三日，下令回师。
English: On the 23rd, the division was ordered to return.

古文：丁卯，遣使临江，数齐主罪恶。
现代文：二十八日，派使者到达长江边，历数齐国国君的罪恶。
English: On the 28th, an envoy was sent to the Yangtze River to enumerate the sins of the sovereign.

古文：三月戊子，太师冯熙薨。
现代文：三月十九日，太师冯熙去世。
English: On March 19, Grand Master Feng Xi passed away.

古文：夏四月丁未，曲赦徐、豫二州，其运转之士，复租三年。
现代文：夏四月初九，特赦徐、豫两州罪犯，参加运送军需物资的人员，免除三年田租。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, Xu and Yu were pardoned, and those who participated in the transportation of military supplies were exempted from the three-year field rent.

古文：辛亥，诏赐高年爵，恤孤寡老疾各有差。德著丘园者，具以名闻。齐人降者，给复十五年。
现代文：十三日，下令赐给老年人爵位，抚恤孤寡年老有病的人数量不等物品；德行闻名于当地的人，把名字报到朝廷；齐人前来投降的，免去十五年徭役。
English: On the 13th, it was ordered that the elderly should be given titles of nobility, the widows and orphans, the old and the sick should be supported with an unequal number of goods; those who were famous for their virtue in the local area should report their names to the imperial court; and those who came to surrender should be exempted from fifteen years of forced labor.

古文：癸丑，幸小沛。使以太牢祭汉高祖庙。
现代文：十五日，视察小沛，派人以太牢礼仪祭祀汉高祖庙。
English: On the fifteenth day, Xiaopei inspected and sent people to perform the etiquette ritual of the ancestral temple of the Han Dynasty.

古文：己未，幸瑕丘。使以太牢祠岱岳。
现代文：二十一日，到达瑕丘，让人以太牢祭礼祭祀岱岳。
English: On the twenty-first day, when they arrived at Kakeoka, they held a ceremony to worship Mt.

古文：诏宿卫武官增位一级。
现代文：下令给宿卫的武官们提升一级爵位。
English: He ordered the military attachés of the Home Guard to be promoted to the first rank.

古文：庚申，幸鲁城。亲祠孔子庙。
现代文：二十二日，到达鲁城，亲自祭祀孔子庙。
English: On the 22nd, he arrived in Lucheng and personally made offerings to the Confucius Temple.

古文：辛酉，诏拜孔氏四人，颜氏二人为官。
现代文：二十三日，下令封孔姓家族中四人、颜姓家族中二人为官。
English: On the 23rd, four members of the family with the surname of Kong and two members of the family with the surname of Yan were ordered to be arrested.

古文：诏兗州刺史举部内士人堪军国及守宰政绩者，具以名闻。
现代文：下令让兖州刺史举荐州中才能足以承担军国重任的士人和担任郡守、县宰有政绩的人，把名字报送朝廷。
English: An order was issued to have the governor of Zhangzhou, Zhi Shi, recommend those capable of taking on important military and political responsibilities and those who had served as county governors and county magistrates to submit their names to the imperial court.

古文：诏赐兗州人爵及粟帛如徐州。
现代文：下诏赐给兖州人爵位和粟米布帛，如同徐州人一样。
English: The following edict bestowed the title of nobility and corn cloth to the people of Zhangzhou, just like the people of Xuzhou.

古文：又诏选诸孔宗子一人封崇圣侯，邑一百户，以奉孔子祀。
现代文：又传旨从孔家嫡传宗子中挑选一人封为崇圣侯，食邑一百户，以供奉孔子祭祀。
English: In addition, an order was sent to select one person from among the legitimate sons of the Confucius family to be made a high priest, and a hundred households were to be provided with food to offer to Confucius.

古文：命兗州为孔子起园栢，修饰坟陇，更建碑铭，褒扬圣德。
现代文：命令兖州刺史在孔府园内种植柏树，重修和装饰坟墓，重新建立碑铭，表彰和弘扬圣德。
English: He ordered Zhangzhou Zishi to plant cypress trees in the Confucius Garden, rebuild and decorate the tomb, re-establish the monument, and commend and promote holiness.

古文：戊辰，行幸碻磝。太和庙成。
现代文：三十日，巡行至郂。太和庙落成。
English: On the 30th, the procession arrived at the Imperial Palace. The Taihe Temple was completed.

古文：五月己巳，城阳王鸾赭阳失利，降为定襄县王。
现代文：五月初一，城阳王鸾在赭阳战败，降爵为定襄县主。
English: On the first day of May, Chengyang Wang Yao was defeated in Shenyang and was demoted to the peerage as the head of Dingxiang County.

古文：广川王谐薨。
现代文：广川王谐去世。
English: Hirokawa Wanghini passed away.

古文：庚午，迁文成皇后冯氏神主于太和庙。
现代文：初二，把文成皇后冯氏的神主迁移到太和庙。
English: On the second day of the school year, the deity of Empress Wencheng of the Feng Clan was moved to the Taihe Temple.

古文：甲戌，行幸滑台。
现代文：初六，巡行至滑台。
English: Sixth-year students, parade to the slide.

古文：丙子，次于石济。
现代文：初八，到达石济。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, I arrived in Shiji.

古文：庚辰，皇太子朝于平桃城。
现代文：十二日，皇太子在平桃城朝见皇帝。
English: On the 12th, the crown prince went to see the emperor in Pingtao City.

古文：癸未，车驾至自南伐。
现代文：十五日，车驾南征归来。
English: On the 15th, he returned from the Southern Expedition by car.

古文：甲申，灭闲官禄以裨军国之用。
现代文：十六日，精减闲官的俸禄以补充军国费用。
English: On the 16th, the salaries of idle officials were reduced to supplement military expenses.

古文：乙酉，行饮至礼，班赐各有差。
现代文：十七日，在宗庙欢饮，颁发奖赏，多少不等。
English: On the 17th, there will be drinking at the ancestral temple, and awards will be given out.

古文：甲午，皇太子冠于庙。
现代文：二十六日，皇太子在太庙中举行冠礼。
English: On the 26th, the crown prince held a coronation ceremony in the Great Temple.

古文：六月己亥，诏不得以北俗之语，言于朝廷。违者，免所居官。
现代文：六月初二，下令不得用北部地方方言在朝廷对话，违反命令的，免去官职。
English: On the second day of the sixth month, it was ordered that no dialogue should be conducted in the northern local dialect in the imperial court. Those who violated the order would be removed from their official posts.

古文：辛丑，诏复军士从驾渡淮者租赋三年。
现代文：初四，下令免除跟从车驾渡淮的军士三年租赋。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he ordered that the sergeant who drove to Huai should be exempted from the three-year rent.

古文：癸卯，诏皇太子赴平城宫。
现代文：初六，令皇太子前往平城宫。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the crown prince left for Heijo Palace.

古文：壬子，诏济州、东郡、荥阳及河南诸县车驾所经者，赐高年爵，恤孤寡老疾各有差。孝悌廉义文武应求者，具以名闻。
现代文：十五日，令济川、东郡、荥阳以及河南各县皇帝车驾经过的地方，赏赐老年人爵位，抚恤孤寡老病者，物品数量不等；因孝悌、廉义和有文武才能应召的人，全部将名字报送朝廷。
English: On the 15th, the emperor ordered that the places the emperor drove through, including Jichuan, Dongxun, Poyang and Henan counties, should award titles to the elderly, support the lonely and the sick, and the number of items should be different. The names of those who responded to the call for filial piety, honesty and literary and military ability should all be reported to the imperial court.

古文：癸丑，求天下遗书。秘阁所无，有裨时用者，加以厚赏。
现代文：十六日，下诏寻求天下遗留民间的书籍，凡是国家秘馆中没有，而又有补于时用的，加以重赏。
English: On the 16th, a decree was issued to seek out the world's remaining folk books, and to reward those that are not in the state secret library, but are still useful.

古文：乙卯，曲赦梁州，复人田租三岁。
现代文：十八日，特赦梁州犯人，免除民众三年田租。
English: On the 18th, Liangzhou prisoners were pardoned, and the people were exempted from the three-year field rent.

古文：丙辰，诏迁洛人，死葬河南，不得还北。
现代文：十九日，下令凡迁到洛阳来的人，死后埋在洛阳，不得回葬北方。
English: On the 19th, it was ordered that anyone who moved to Luoyang should be buried in Luoyang after death, and should not be buried in the north.

古文：于是代人南迁者，悉为河南洛阳人。
现代文：于是代州人南迁的，都成为河南洛阳人。
English: As a result, people from Daizhou who moved south became Luoyang people from Henan Province.

古文：戊午，诏改长尺大斗，依《周礼》制度，班之天下。
现代文：二十一日，下令改成长尺和大斗，按照《周礼》的制度，颁布到全国。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was ordered to change the length of the ruler and the size of the sword, and it was promulgated to the whole country in accordance with the "Zhou Li" system.

古文：秋八月，幸西宫。
现代文：秋八月，巡行西宫。
English: In autumn and August, the parade goes through the West Palace.

古文：路见坏冢露棺，驻辇埋之。
现代文：路上看见有毁坏的坟墓和暴露在地面的棺木，便停车加以掩埋。
English: On the way, they saw some destroyed graves and coffins exposed on the ground, so they stopped and buried them.

古文：乙巳，诏选天下勇士十五万人为羽林、武贲，以充宿卫。
现代文：初九，下令选拔天下的勇士十五万人当羽林军和虎贲军，以充当京城的警卫部队。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he ordered the selection of 150,000 warriors from all over the world to serve as the Uebayashi Army and the Tigress Army to serve as the guard force of the capital.

古文：丁巳，诏诸从兵从征被伤者，皆听还本。
现代文：二十一日，下令让所有跟从出征而受伤的兵士、人员，都回到本地。
English: On the 21st, he ordered that all the soldiers and personnel who had been injured in the war should return to the local area.

古文：金墉宫成。
现代文：金镛宫落成。
English: Gimhae Palace was completed.

古文：甲子，引群臣历宴殿堂。
现代文：二十八日，召见群臣观看新殿并宴饮。
English: On the 28th, a group of courtiers were summoned to view the new hall and have a banquet.

古文：九月，六宫及文武尽迁洛阳。
现代文：九月，六宫后妃及文武百官全部迁移到达洛阳。
English: In September, the Empress Dowager of the Sixth Court and hundreds of civil and military officials were all relocated to Luoyang.

古文：丙戌，行幸鄴。
现代文：二十日，巡幸邺郡。
English: On the 20th, they went on a tour of the county.

古文：丁亥，诏诸墓旧铭记见存昭然为时人所知者，三公及位从公者，去墓三十步。尚书令仆、九列，十五步。黄门、五校，十步：各不听垦殖。
现代文：二十一日，下令凡是各墓的旧铭文仍存，并且人人都知道的官员坟墓，职位为三公以及相当于三公的，离墓三十步；为尚书令仆、九列的官员，离墓十五步；黄门、五校，离墓十步远的地方，不得开垦为耕地种植。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was ordered that the tombs of officials whose tombs still had the old inscriptions and were known to everyone, and whose positions were the three dukes and the equivalent of the three dukes, should be thirty steps away from the tomb; those of officials who were the servants of the Emperor and the nine ranks should be fifteen steps away from the tomb; and those of Huangmen and Wukong, ten steps away from the tomb, should not be cleared for cultivation.

古文：壬辰，遣黄门郎以太牢祭比干墓。
现代文：二十六日，派黄门侍郎以太牢祭礼祭祀比干墓。
English: On the 26th, the Yellow Gate attendant sent the ether dungeon ritual to the Hikan tomb.

古文：乙未，车驾还宫。
现代文：二十九日，车驾回宫。
English: On the 29th, they drove back to the palace.

古文：冬十月甲辰，曲赦相州，赐高年爵，恤孤老痼疾各有差。
现代文：冬十月初九，特赦相州罪人，赐给老年人爵位，抚恤孤独老人和有重病的人，物品多少不等。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, there will be an amnesty for state criminals, a knighthood for the elderly, and a pension for the lonely elderly and the seriously ill. The number of items will vary.

古文：丙辰，车驾至自鄴。
现代文：二十一日，车驾从邺城回洛阳。
English: On the 21st, I drove from Lucheng back to Luoyang.

古文：辛酉，诏州郡举士。
现代文：二十六日，下令各州郡举荐士人。
English: On the 26th, he ordered all prefectures and counties to nominate candidates.

古文：壬戌，诏诸州牧考属官为三等之科以闻，将加亲览，以定升降。
现代文：二十七日，下诏让各州的刺史对属官进行考绩，分为三等，报送朝廷，皇帝将亲自过目，以确定升职或降职。
English: On the 27th, the next edict ordered the states to have their subordinate officials undergo a performance appraisal, which would be divided into three grades and submitted to the imperial court. The emperor would personally inspect them to determine whether they should be promoted or demoted.

古文：诏徐、兗、光、南、青、荆、洛七州严纂戎备，应须赴集。
现代文：下令徐、兖、光、南、青、荆六州加紧制作纂带，以备军队使用，务需及时送到。
English: The six prefectures of Xu, Handan, Guangming, Nan, Qing and Jing were ordered to step up the production of cassette tapes in preparation for use by the military, which must be delivered in a timely manner.

古文：十一月，行幸委粟山。
现代文：十一月，巡行到达委粟山。
English: In November, the parade arrived at the CPPCC's Aoshan.

古文：议定圆丘。
现代文：商议确定圆丘的地点。
English: The location of the mound will be determined through consultation.

古文：甲申，祀圆丘。
现代文：十九日，在圆丘祭祀。
English: On the 19th, a ritual was held at the round mound.

古文：丙戌，大赦。
现代文：二十一日，大赦天下。
English: On the 21st, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：十二月乙未朔，引见群臣光极堂，宣下品令，为大选之始。
现代文：十二月初一，在光极堂接见群臣，宣布有关品级的条令，作为大选官吏的开始。
English: On the first day of December, he received a group of ministers in Guangji Hall and announced a regulation on rank, as the beginning of the general election of officials.

古文：辛酉，以咸阳王禧为长兼太尉，复前南安王桢本爵。
现代文：二十七日，任命咸阳王禧为兼太尉，恢复前南安王桢本来的爵位。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Xianyang Wang Xiyi as a concurrent lieutenant and restored the former Nan'an Wang Xi's original rank.

古文：甲子，引见群臣光极堂，班赐冠服。
现代文：三十日，在光极堂接见群臣，颁发赐给朝臣们的头冠和制服。
English: On the 30th, he received a group of courtiers in Guangji Hall and presented the courtiers with crowns and uniforms.

古文：是岁，高丽、邓至、吐谷浑等国各遣使朝贡。
现代文：当年，高丽、邓至、吐谷浑等各派遣使者朝贡。
English: In that year, Goryeo, Deng Zi, and Tugu Hun each sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：二十年春正月丁卯，诏改姓元氏。
现代文：二十年春正月初三，下诏改姓为元氏。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 20th year of the Spring, he changed his surname to Yuan.

古文：壬辰，封始平王勰为彭城王，复封定襄王鸾为城阳王。
现代文：二十八日，封始平王勰为彭城王，又封定襄王鸾为城阳王。
English: On the 28th, King Heping was crowned King of Pengcheng, and King Xiang was crowned King of Chengyang.

古文：二月辛丑，幸华林，听讼于都亭。
现代文：二月初八，巡幸华林，在都亭听理诉讼。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, Junxing Hua Lin was in Du Ting to hear a lawsuit.

古文：壬寅，诏自非金革，皆听终三年丧。
现代文：初九，下诏说，除非遇到战争，都让守丧满三年。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the next imperial edict said that, except in the event of war, no one should be allowed to live for more than three years.

古文：丙午，诏畿内七十己上，暮春赴京师，将行养老礼。
现代文：十三日，下诏让京畿内年龄七十以上老人，在暮春三月到达京城集中，准备举行养老的礼节。
English: On the 13th, it was decreed that the elderly over the age of 70 in Gyeonggi Province should arrive in the capital in late spring and March to prepare for the retirement ceremony.

古文：庚戌，幸华林，听讼于都亭。
现代文：十七日，到华林，在都亭听理诉讼。
English: On the 17th, he went to Hualin to hear a lawsuit in Du Ting.

古文：癸丑，诏介山之邑，听为寒食，自余禁断。
现代文：二十日，下诏让介山一地，听其寒食，其余地方禁止实行。
English: On the 20th, the next edict was to let Kaishan one place, listen to its cold food, and the rest of the place was banned.

古文：三月丙寅，宴群臣及国老、庶老于华林园。
现代文：三月初三，在华林园宴请群臣和国老、庶老。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, a banquet was held in the Waring Garden for the courtiers, elders and retired elders.

古文：诏国老黄耇以上，假中散大夫、郡守。耋年以上，假给事中、县令。
现代文：下诏封国老中年寿最高的为假中散大夫、郡守，七十以上为假给事中、县令。
English: According to the imperial edict, the elders of the country with the highest middle-aged life expectancy are the fake Zhongshan doctors and county governors, and those over seventy are the fake middle-aged and county magistrates.

古文：庶老直假郡县。
现代文：庶老相当于郡县中的假守牧职务。
English: Shiro-ro is equivalent to the position of a pseudo-herdsman in a county.

古文：各赐鸠杖衣裳。
现代文：每人都赐给衣服和鸠形手杖。
English: Each was given a robe and a cane.

古文：丁丑，诏诸州中正各举其乡人望，年五十已上，守素衡门者，授以令长。
现代文：十四日，下令各州中正各举荐本地区德高望重的人，年龄在五十岁以上，一向安贫乐道的人，任命为令、长的官职。
English: On the 14th, it was ordered that each state should nominate a person of high moral standing in the region, who is over 50 years old and has always been poor and happy, to be appointed to the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：夏五月丙子，诏敦劝农功，令畿内严加课督。堕业者申以楚挞，力田者具以名闻。
现代文：夏五月十四，下诏敦促和力劝民众从事农耕，命令在京畿内严加检查督促，放弃农作的要加以鞭打和督促，致力耕田的把名字报到朝廷表彰。
English: On the 14th day of the 5th month of the summer, the emperor issued an edict urging and persuading the people to engage in farming, ordering strict inspection and supervision in Gyeonggi Province, whipping and urging them to give up farming, and reporting the names of those who were committed to farming to the imperial court for commendation.

古文：丙戌，初营方泽于河阴。
现代文：二十四日，开始在河阴营造方泽。
English: On the 24th, the construction of Fangze began in Hebei.

古文：遣使以太牢祭汉光武及明、章三帝陵。
现代文：派使者以太牢礼节祭祀汉光武帝和汉明帝、汉章帝的陵墓。
English: An emissary was sent to the mausoleum of Emperor Han Guangwu, Emperor Hanming and Emperor Han Zhang to perform the ritual.

古文：又诏汉、魏、晋诸帝陵各禁方百步不得樵苏践藉。
现代文：又下令，对汉、魏、晋各位皇帝的陵寝，方百步之内不得砍柴割草和肆意践踏。
English: He also ordered that the tombs of the emperors of the Han, Wei and Jin dynasties should not be cut with wood, mowed or trampled on within a hundred paces.

古文：丁亥，祀方泽。
现代文：二十五日，祭祀方泽。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the sacrifice to Hanzawa ended.

古文：秋七月，废皇后冯氏。
现代文：秋七月，废黜冯皇后。
English: In autumn and July, Empress Feng was deposed.

古文：戊寅，帝以久旱，咸秩群神。
现代文：十七日，皇帝因为久旱不雨，祭祀群神。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor went out to offer sacrifices to the gods because it had not rained for so long.

古文：自癸未不食至于乙酉。是夜，澍雨大洽。
现代文：从二十二日至二十四日，停止进食，当夜，时雨大下。
English: From the 22nd to the 24th, they stopped eating. That night, it rained heavily.

古文：八月壬辰朔，幸华林园，亲录囚徒，咸降本罪二等决遣之。
现代文：八月初一为朔日，皇帝亲往华林园，查阅囚犯的罪行材料，一律减罪二等加以判决处置。
English: The first day of August was the New Year's Day. The emperor personally went to the Hualin Garden to inspect the criminal materials of the prisoners, and all the crimes were reduced to the second degree to be judged and dealt with.

古文：丁巳，南安王桢薨。
现代文：二十六日，南安王桢去世。
English: On the 26th, Nan'an Wang Yao passed away.

古文：幸华林园听讼。
现代文：皇帝前往华林园听理诉讼。
English: The emperor went to Hualin Garden to hear the case.

古文：九月戊辰，车驾阅武于小平津。
现代文：九月初八，皇帝在小平津检阅军队。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the emperor inspected the troops in Xiaopingjin.

古文：癸酉，还宫。
现代文：十三日，回宫。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：丁亥，将通洛水入谷，帝亲临观。
现代文：二十七日，准备放洛水进入谷水中，皇帝亲往观看。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, they were preparing to release Luo water into the valley water, and the emperor went to watch.

古文：庚寅晦，日有蚀之。
现代文：三十日为晦日，日食。
English: The 30th is the last day of the year, a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十月戊戌，以代迁之士，皆为羽林、武贲。
现代文：冬十月初八，将从代地迁来的男士，全部挑选为羽林军和虎贲卫士。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, the men who will move from the place of substitution will all be selected as the Uebayashi army and the tiger cub guards.

古文：司州之人，十二夫调一吏，为四年更卒，岁开番假，以供公私方役。
现代文：司州人中，每十二男子挑出一位充当胥吏，每四年更换一次，每年给予轮番休假，以供公家和私用的劳役。
English: Among the people of Shizhou, one man out of every twelve was selected to serve as a bailiff, who was replaced every four years, and was granted annual leave in rotation for public and private labor.

古文：己酉，曲赦京师。
现代文：十九日，在京都特赦。
English: On the 19th, he was granted amnesty in Kyoto.

古文：十一月乙酉，复封前汝阴王天赐孙景和为汝阴王，前京兆王太兴为西河王。
现代文：十一月二十六日，重新封前汝阴王天赐的孙子景和为汝阴王，原京兆王大兴为西河王。
English: On November 26th, King Jing, the grandson of the former King Ruyin, was reinstated as the King of Ruyin, and King Daxing, the former King of Jingzhao, was reinstated as the King of the West River.

古文：十二月甲子，以西北州郡旱俭，遣侍臣巡察，开仓振恤。
现代文：十二月初六，由于西北的州郡旱灾，派侍臣前往巡察，开仓赈济。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, due to the drought in the northwestern prefectures and counties, he sent his attendants to inspect and open warehouses to provide relief.

古文：乙丑，开盐池禁。
现代文：初七，开放了盐池的禁令。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the ban on salt ponds was lifted.

古文：丙寅，废皇太子恂为庶人。
现代文：初八，废皇太子恂为庶人。
English: At the age of eight, the former crown prince became a commoner.

古文：戊辰，置常平仓。
现代文：初十，设立常平仓。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Changping warehouse was established.

古文：乐陵王思誉知恆州刺史穆泰谋反不告，削爵为庶人。
现代文：乐陵王思誉知道恒州刺史穆泰谋反而不举报，削去爵位为庶人。
English: Le Ling Wang Siyu knew that Hengzhou stabbed Shumutai, but did not report it, and was stripped of his title as a commoner.

古文：二十一年春正月丙申，立皇子恪为皇太子。
现代文：二十一年春正月初八，立皇子恪为皇太子。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the twenty-first year of the spring, Prince Kaku became crown prince.

古文：赐天下为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐天下当了父亲有后嗣的人一级爵位。
English: Give the world a first-class knighthood to a man who has become a father and has an heir.

古文：己亥，遣侍臣巡方省察，问人疾苦，黜陟守宰。
现代文：十一日，派侍臣到各处巡察，访问民间疾苦，晋升或降罚各地的太守和县宰。
English: On the 11th, he sent courtiers to inspect various places, visit the people's sufferings, and promote or reduce the punishment of the governor and county magistrate.

古文：乙巳，北巡。
现代文：十七日，北巡。
English: On the 17th, the northern tour began.

古文：二月壬戌，次于太原。亲见高年，问所不便。
现代文：二月初五，到达太原，亲自接见老年人，询问不方便的地方。
English: On the fifth day of February, arrived in Taiyuan, met with the elderly in person, and inquired about inconvenient places.

古文：乙丑，诏并州士人年六十以上，假以郡守。
现代文：初八，下诏说，并州地区六十岁以上的读书人，代理郡守职务。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the year, according to the next imperial edict, and the readers over the age of 60 in the county are acting as county guards.

古文：先是，定州人王金钩讹言自称应王。
现代文：起先，定州人王金钩造谣说他应当为王。
English: At first, King Jinhu, the ruler of Dingzhou, spread a rumor that he should be king.

古文：丙寅，州郡捕斩之。
现代文：初九这一天，州郡官员把他抓住并斩首。
English: On New Year's Day, state and county officials caught up with him and beheaded him.

古文：癸酉，车驾至平城。
现代文：十六日，车驾到达平城。
English: On the 16th, the car reached Pingcheng.

古文：甲戌，谒永固陵。
现代文：十七日，拜谒永固陵。
English: On the 17th, he paid homage to the Yonggu Mausoleum.

古文：乙未，南巡。
现代文：三月八日，南巡。
English: March 8th, Southern Tour.

古文：甲寅，诏汾州赐高年爵各有差。
现代文：二十七日，下诏赏赐汾州的老年人爵位，各有不同。
English: On the 27th, the following edict awarded titles to the elderly people of Ganzhou, each of which is different.

古文：丙辰，次平阳。使以太牢祭唐尧。
现代文：二十九日，到达平阳，派人以太牢礼节祭祀唐尧。
English: On the 29th, they arrived at Pingyang and sent people to perform the ethereal ritual of Tang Xuan.

古文：夏四月庚申，幸龙门。使以太牢祭夏禹。
现代文：夏四月初四，前往龙门，让人以太牢礼节祭祀夏禹。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：癸亥，幸蒲坂。
现代文：初七，前往蒲坂。
English: On the seventh day of junior high school, I went to Kamisaka.

古文：使以太牢祭虞舜。
现代文：派人以太牢礼节祭祀虞舜。
English: They sent someone to perform the etiquette rite of sacrificing the yakitori.

古文：修尧、舜、夏禹庙。
现代文：修尧、舜和夏禹的庙宇。
English: The temples of Shujuan, Zou and Xia Yu.

古文：辛未，幸长安。
现代文：十五日，到达长安。
English: On the 15th, we arrived in Chang'an.

古文：壬申，武兴王杨集始来朝。
现代文：十六日，武兴王杨集始前来朝见。
English: On the 16th, King Wuxing Yang Jifu came to see the emperor.

古文：乙亥，亲见高年，问所疾苦。
现代文：十九日，亲自接见老年人，询问疾苦。
English: On the 19th, he met with elderly people in person and inquired about their ailments.

古文：丙子，遣侍臣分省县邑，振赐谷帛。
现代文：二十日，派使臣分别视察各县，赈济并赐给谷物和布帛。
English: On the 20th, he sent envoys to inspect each county separately, and gave them grain and cloth.

古文：戊寅，幸未央殿、阿房宫，遂幸昆明池。
现代文：二十二日，前往未央殿和阿房宫，进而前往昆明池。
English: On the 22nd, they went to Weiyang Palace and Afang Palace, and then to Kunming Pool.

古文：癸未，宋王刘昶薨。
现代文：二十七日，宋王刘昶去世。
English: On the 27th, Song King Liu Ye passed away.

古文：丙戌，使以太牢祀汉帝诸陵。
现代文：三十日，派人以太牢礼节祭祀汉代各皇帝陵墓。
English: On the 30th, people were sent to the imperial tombs of the Han Dynasty to perform the ritual.

古文：五月丁亥朔，卫大国遣使朝贡。
现代文：五月初一，卫大国派使者朝贡。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Wei sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，车驾东旋，泛渭入河。
现代文：初三，皇帝东归，乘船从渭水入黄河。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor returned to the east and took a boat from Surabaya to the Yellow River.

古文：庚寅，诏雍州士人百年以上，假华郡太守。九十以上，假荒郡。八十以上，假华县。七十以上，假荒县。
现代文：初四，下诏说： 雍州的读书人百岁以上的假中原郡的太守；九十岁以上，假边远郡守；八十岁以上的，假中原地区的县宰；七十以上的，假边远县宰。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: The readers of Yongzhou who are over 100 years old can become the de facto governor of Central Plains counties; over 90 years old, the de facto governor of remote counties; over 80 years old, the de facto governor of Central Plains counties; and over 70 years old, the de facto governor of remote counties.

古文：庶老以年各减一等，七十已上，赐爵三级。
现代文：庶老以年龄大小各减一等。七十岁以上的，赐爵三级。
English: The eldest son and daughter-in-law will each be reduced by one rank according to their age, and those over seventy will be awarded the third rank of peerage.

古文：其营船夫，赐爵一级。
现代文：属于营户和船夫的，赐爵一级。
English: Those belonging to traders and boatmen were awarded the first rank of knighthood.

古文：孤寡鳏贫，各赐谷帛。
现代文：孤寡鳏贫的，各赏赐谷物和布帛。
English: To the orphan and the destitute, give grain and clothing.

古文：其孝友德义文武才干，悉仰贡举。
现代文：有孝悌、廉义和文武方面才能的，全部予以举荐。
English: Those with filial piety, integrity and talent in literature and martial arts should all be recommended.

古文：壬辰，使以太牢祭周文王于酆，祭周武王于镐。
现代文：初六，派人以太牢礼仪到丰都祭祀周文王，在镐京祭祀周武王。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, people were sent to offer sacrifices to King Zhouwen in Fengdu, and to offer sacrifices to King Zhouwu in Beijing.

古文：癸卯，遣使祭华岳。
现代文：十七日，派使者祭祀西岳华山。
English: On the 17th, an emissary was sent to worship Mt. Seigakuhasan.

古文：六月庚申，车驾至自长安。
现代文：六月初五，车驾从长安归来。
English: On the fifth day of June, I drove back from Chang'an.

古文：壬戌，诏冀、定、瀛、相、济五州，发卒士二十万，将以南讨。
现代文：初七，下令冀、定、瀛、湘、济五州发兵二十万，准备南征。
English: On the first day of the seventh month, he ordered the five states of Hebei, Ding, Handan, Hunan and Jizhou to send 200,000 soldiers to prepare for the southern expedition.

古文：癸亥，司空穆亮逊位。
现代文：初八，司空穆亮离位。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Siku Muryo resigned.

古文：秋七月甲午，立昭仪冯氏为皇后。
现代文：秋七月初九，立昭仪冯氏为皇后。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zhaoyi Feng became the empress.

古文：甲寅，帝亲为群臣讲《丧服》于清徽堂。
现代文：二十九日，皇帝在清徽堂亲自为群臣讲《丧服》一篇篇义。
English: On the 29th, the emperor personally delivered a sermon on "Funeral Robe" to the courtiers in Qinghui Hall.

古文：八月丙辰，诏中外戒严。
现代文：八月初一，下令内外戒严。
English: On August 1, martial law was declared at home and abroad.

古文：壬戌，立皇子愉为京兆王，怿为清河王，怀为广平王。
现代文：初七，封皇子愉为京兆王，怿为清河王，怀为广平王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Fong Zi Yu became King Jingzhao, Zi became King Qinghe, and Huai became King Guangping.

古文：戊辰，讲武于华林园。
现代文：十九日，在华林园讲习武艺。
English: On the 19th, a martial arts class was held at the Hualin Garden.

古文：庚辰，车驾南讨。
现代文：二十六日，皇帝南征。
English: On the 26th, the emperor began the Southern Expedition.

古文：九月丙申，诏司州洛阳人年七十以上无子孙，六十以上无期亲，贫不自存者，给以衣食。
现代文：九月十二日，下令司州洛阳人年龄七十以上没有子孙的，六十岁以上没有期服以内近亲的，因贫困难以生存的，给予衣服和食物。
English: On September 12, it was ordered to give clothes and food to people in Luoyang, Shizhou, who are over seventy years old and have no children or grandchildren, or over sixty years old and have no close relatives who have served their term of service, or who are living in poverty and hardship.

古文：及不满六十而有废痼之疾，无大功亲，穷困无以自疗者，皆于别坊，遣医救护，给太医师四人，豫请药物疗之。
现代文：虽然不满六十岁但患有残废或顽疾难以根治的，没有大功服的亲戚，贫困而没有办法自己求医治疗的，都在另外的地方，派医生救护，派给四名太医，先请他们用药物治疗。
English: Although they are less than sixty years old, if they are disabled or suffer from an incurable disease, if they have relatives who are not well-off, or if they are poor and have no way to seek medical treatment on their own, they are all in a different place, send a doctor to rescue them, send them to four Taiji doctors, and first ask them to treat them with drugs.

古文：辛丑，帝留诸将攻赭阳，引师南讨。
现代文：十七日，皇帝留下众将攻打赭阳，自己领军队南征。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor left his generals to attack Poyang and led the army southward.

古文：丁未，车驾发南阳，留太尉咸阳王禧、前将军元英攻之。
现代文：二十三日，车驾从南阳出发，留下太尉咸阳王禧、前将军元英攻城。
English: On the 23rd, the car drove from Nanyang, leaving Lieutenant Xianyang Wangxi and former General Yuan Ying to attack the city.

古文：己酉，车驾至新野。
现代文：二十五日，车驾到达新野。
English: On the 25th, I drove to Shino.

古文：冬十月丁巳，四面进攻不克，诏左右军筑长围以守之。
现代文：冬十月初三，虽四面进攻仍未能攻破该城，命令左右部队修建长围准备长期围困。
English: On the third day of the third month of October in winter, although the four-sided attack still failed to break through the city, he ordered the left and right forces to build a long perimeter to prepare for a long siege.

古文：乙亥，追废贞皇后林氏为庶人。
现代文：二十一日，追贬已废的贞皇后林氏为庶人。
English: On the 21st, the abolished Empress Zhen Lin was demoted to a commoner.

古文：十一月丁酉，大破齐军于沔北。于是人皆复业。
现代文：十一月十四日，在沔水北面大破齐军。于是民众都恢复家业。
English: On November 14th, the Qi army was defeated in the north of Surabaya, and the people resumed their family businesses.

古文：九十以上，假以郡守。六十五以上，假以县令。
现代文：九十岁以上的，给予郡守封号，六十五岁以上，给予县令封号。
English: Those over the age of ninety are given the title of county magistrate, and those over the age of sixty-five are given the title of county magistrate.

古文：十二月丁卯，诏流、徙之囚，皆勿决遣，登城之际，令其先锋自效。
现代文：十二月十四日，下令凡流刑和徒刑的罪犯，都不要判决和派遣，攻城的时候，让他们充当先锋以示自愿报效国家。
English: On the 14th of December, he ordered that all exiles and convicts should not be judged or sent, and that they should serve as vanguards during the siege of the city as a sign of their willingness to serve the state.

古文：戊寅，还新野。
现代文：二十五日，回到新野。
English: On the 25th, I returned to Niiro.

古文：己卯，亲行营垒，恤六军。
现代文：二十六日，亲自到各营垒中巡视，安抚六军。
English: On the 26th, he personally inspected each camp and pacified the six armies.

古文：以齐郡王子琛绍河间王若后。
现代文：以齐郡王的儿子琛做为河间王若的后嗣。
English: He chose the son of the king of Qi County, Yao, as the heir of the king of Kawama.

古文：高昌国遣使朝贡。
现代文：高昌国派使者朝贡。
English: Gaochang sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：二十二年春正月癸未朔，飨群臣于新野行宫。
现代文：二十二年春正月初一，在新野行宫中宴请群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 22nd year, he invited a group of ministers to a banquet at Shino Gyoko Palace.

古文：丁亥，拔新野，斩其太守刘忌于宛。
现代文：初五，攻克新野，在宛城斩了太守刘忌。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he conquered Shinno and beheaded the daimyō Liu Boi in Wancheng.

古文：庚午，至自新野。
现代文：二月十八日，到达新野。
English: On February 18th, they arrived in Niiro.

古文：辛未，诏以穰人首归大顺始终若一者，给复三十年，标其所居曰归义乡。
现代文：十九日，下诏说，穰人首先来归顺并且始终如一的，免除三十年的赋税徭役，将他们居住的地方称为归义乡。
English: On the 19th, the next imperial edict said that the Xiongnu people were the first to submit and were consistent, exempted from thirty years of tax and service, and called the place where they lived the Xiongnu Township.

古文：次降者，给复十五年。
现代文：稍后投降的，免除十五年。
English: Those who surrender later will be exempted from serving 15 years.

古文：三月壬午朔，大破齐将崔慧景、萧衍军于邓城。
现代文：三月初一，在邓城大败齐将崔慧景、萧衍的军队。
English: On the first day of March, the army of Cui Huijing and Xiao Yan was defeated in Dengcheng.

古文：庚寅，行幸樊城，观兵襄沔，耀武而还。
现代文：初九，巡行至樊城，在襄沔检阅军队，炫耀军威之后才回。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, they marched to Lucheng, and only returned after inspecting the troops in Xiangfan and showing off their military prowess.

古文：曲赦二荆、鲁阳。
现代文：特赦二荆和鲁阳的罪犯。
English: Amnesty for two Jing and Luyang criminals.

古文：辛亥，行幸悬瓠。
现代文：三十日，巡行到达悬瓠。
English: On the 30th, the procession arrived at the suspension bridge.

古文：夏四月，赵郡王干薨。
现代文：夏四月，赵郡王干去世。
English: In the summer of April, Zhao Gu Wang Gan passed away.

古文：秋七月壬午，诏后之私府损半。六宫嫔御、五服男女恆恤恆供，亦令减半。在戎之亲，三分省一：以供赏。
现代文：秋七月初三，下诏皇后的私人资产减半，六宫妃嫔、五服以内的皇家男女正常的供给和抚恤也减半；在军队的皇室亲属，减少三分之一，以供奖赏使用。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, the private assets of the empress dowager were reduced by half, and the normal supply and pension of the royal men and women up to the 6th palace concubine and 5 servants were also reduced by half; the royal relatives in the army were reduced by one third for reward use.

古文：是月，齐明帝殂。
现代文：当月，齐明帝死去。
English: In the same month, Emperor Qiming died.

古文：八月辛亥，皇太子自京师来朝。
现代文：八月初一，皇太子从京城前来朝见。
English: On the first day of August, the crown prince came from Kyoto to see the emperor.

古文：壬戌，高丽国遣使朝贡。
现代文：十三日，高丽国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 13th, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月己亥，帝以礼不伐丧，诏反。
现代文：九月二十一日，皇帝因为按礼不攻打发生丧事的国家，下令回军。
English: On September 21st, the emperor ordered his troops to return home, as it was proper not to attack the country where the funeral took place.

古文：丙午，车驾发悬瓠。
现代文：二十八日，车驾从悬瓠出发。
English: On the 28th, the car set off from the suspension tower.

古文：冬十月乙酉朔，曲赦二豫州殊死已下，复人田租一岁。
现代文：冬十月初一，特赦豫州死刑以下罪人，免除民众田租一年。
English: On the first day of October in winter, an amnesty was granted to the criminals below the death penalty in Yuzhou, and the people were exempted from land rent for one year.

古文：十一月辛巳，幸鄴。
现代文：十一月初四，到达邺城。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, I arrived in Handan.

古文：二十三年春正月戊寅朔，朝飨群臣于鄴。
现代文：二十三年春正月初一，在邺城大宴群臣。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 23rd year, a large banquet was held in Shicheng.

古文：先是，帝不豫，至是有瘳。
现代文：起先，皇帝身体不佳，到这时有所好转。
English: At first, the emperor was not in good health, but by this time he had improved.

古文：庚辰，群臣上寿，大飨于澄鸾殿。
现代文：初三，群臣为皇帝祝寿，在澄鸾殿欢宴。
English: On the third day of the new year, a group of courtiers wished the emperor a happy birthday and held a banquet at the Chengyu Palace.

古文：壬午，幸西门豹祠，遂历漳水而还。
现代文：初五，到西门豹祠，进而经漳水而回。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, go to the West Gate Leopard Shrine, and then return via Surabaya.

古文：戊戌，车驾至自鄴。
现代文：二十一日，车驾从邺城归来。
English: On the 21st, he drove back from Lucheng.

古文：癸卯，行饮至策勋之礼。甲辰，大赦。
现代文：二十六日，在宗庙欢宴群臣，论功行赏。二十七日，大赦天下。
English: On the 26th, a banquet was held in the ancestral temple for the ministers to discuss and reward their merits. On the 27th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：太保、齐郡王简薨。
现代文：太保、齐郡王简去世。
English: Taibo, Qi County Wang Jian passed away.

古文：二月辛亥，以长兼太尉、咸阳王禧为太尉。
现代文：二月初五，任命长兼太尉、咸阳王禧为太尉。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Xianyang Wangxi was appointed as the captain and the captain.

古文：癸亥，以中军大将军、彭城王勰为司徒。
现代文：十一日，任命中军大将军、彭城王勰为司徒。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the general of the Chinese army, Pengcheng Wangtao, was appointed as a scholar.

古文：复乐陵王思誉本封。
现代文：恢复乐陵王思誉本来的封号。
English: Restore the original seal name of Le Ling Wang Si Rong.

古文：癸酉，齐将陈显达攻陷马圈戍。
现代文：二十七日，齐国将领陈显达攻占了马圈戍。
English: On the 27th, Chen Xianda, the general of the State of Qi, captured Mahejing.

古文：三月庚辰，车驾南伐。
现代文：三月初四，车驾南征。
English: On the fourth day of March, the Southern Expedition began.

古文：癸未，次梁城。
现代文：初七，到达梁城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they arrived in Liangcheng.

古文：丙戌，帝不豫。
现代文：初十，皇帝不适。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor fell ill.

古文：丁酉，车驾至马圈。
现代文：二十一日，车驾到达马圈。
English: On the twenty-first day, the car reached the horse ring.

古文：戊戌，频战破之。
现代文：二十二日，反复进攻之后攻破了马圈。
English: On the 22nd, after repeated attacks, the ring was broken.

古文：己亥，收其戎资亿计。
现代文：二十三日，收缴了敌方各种物资数以十万计。
English: On the 23rd, hundreds of thousands of the enemy's various materials were seized.

古文：诸将追奔汉水，斩获及赴水死者十八九。
现代文：众将追赶到汉水，敌军被斩首、俘虏和跳水淹死的十分之八九。
English: The general pursued them to the Han River, and the enemy troops were decapitated, captured, and drowned by diving in eighty-nine cases out of ten.

古文：庚子，帝疾甚，车驾北次谷塘原。
现代文：二十四日，皇帝病危，车驾北进至谷塘原。
English: On the 24th, the emperor was critically ill and drove north to Gutangyuan.

古文：甲辰，诏赐皇后冯氏死。
现代文：二十八日，下诏赐皇后冯氏死。
English: On the 28th, the death of Empress Feng was announced.

古文：诏司徒勰征太子于鲁阳践阼。
现代文：令司徒勰到鲁阳召回太子继位。
English: He ordered Szeto to Luyang to recall the crown prince to succeed him.

古文：以北海王详为司空，王肃为尚书令，广阳王嘉为左仆射，尚书宋弁为吏部尚书。与太尉咸阳王禧、右仆射任城王澄等六人辅政。
现代文：任命北海王详为司空，王肃为尚书令，广阳王嘉为左仆射，尚书宋弁为吏部尚书，跟长兼太尉咸阳王禧、右仆射任城王澄等六人辅佐朝政。
English: Six people were appointed to assist the imperial government, including Beihai Wangzhao as the secretary, Wang Su as the secretary, Guangyang Wangjia as the left-hand servant, Song Ben as the right-hand servant, Xianyang Wangxi as the captain and the first lieutenant, and Shiwangcheng as the right-hand servant.

古文：夏四月丙午朔，帝崩于谷塘原之行宫，时年三十三。
现代文：夏四月初一，孝文帝死于谷塘原的行宫，享年三十三岁。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Emperor Xiaowen died on his way to the palace in Gutangyuan, at the age of 33.

古文：秘讳至鲁阳发丧，还京师。上谥曰孝文皇帝，庙曰高祖。
现代文：保守秘密直到鲁阳才发丧。回到京城后，上谥号为孝文皇帝，庙号称高祖。
English: He kept the secret until his death in Luyang. After returning to Beijing, his posthumous name was Emperor Xiaowen, and his temple name was Gaozu.

古文：五月丙申，葬长陵。
现代文：五月二十一日，埋葬于长陵。
English: He was buried in Changling Mausoleum on May 21.

古文：帝幼有至性。
现代文：皇帝自幼性情淳厚。
English: The emperor has had a pure heart since he was a child.

古文：年四岁时，献文患痈，帝亲自吮脓。
现代文：他年仅四岁时，献文帝身上长了痈，孝文帝亲自用嘴为他吸去脓血。
English: When he was only four years old, Emperor Xianwen developed warts on his body, and Emperor Xiaowen personally used his mouth to suck blood for him.

古文：五岁受禅，悲泣不自胜。
现代文：五岁接受禅位时，悲伤地哭泣不已。
English: At the age of five, when he was ordained as a Zen priest, he wept inconsolably.

古文：献文问其故，对曰： 代亲之感，内切于心。 
现代文：献文帝问他什么原因，他回答说 ：代替父亲的这种心情，痛切于心。 
English: Emperor Xianwen asked him what the reason was, and he replied, "This feeling of taking the place of my father is deeply rooted in my heart.

古文：献文甚叹异之。
现代文：献文帝十分惊讶地感叹不已。
English: Emperor Xianwen was very surprised and sighed.

古文：文明太后以帝聪圣，后或不利冯氏，将谋废帝。乃于寒月，单衣闭室，绝食三朝，召咸阳王禧将立之。
现代文：文明太后觉得孝文帝过于聪明通彻，担心以后会对冯氏家族不利，准备设计废黜皇帝，便在寒冬腊月，让他身穿单衣关在屋里，三天断绝粮食。召来咸阳王禧准备立为皇帝。
English: The Empress Dowager of Civilization felt that Emperor Xiaowen was too clever and thorough, worried that it would be unfavorable to the Fung family in the future, and prepared to design the dethronement of the emperor. In the cold winter, she locked him in the house wearing a singlet and cut off his food for three days. She summoned Xianyang Wang Xi to prepare to become emperor.

古文：元丕、穆泰、李冲固谏乃止。
现代文：元丕、穆泰、李冲坚决反对，这才没有进行。
English: Yuan Qi, Mu Tai and Li Chong resolutely opposed this, and it did not go ahead.

古文：帝初不有憾，唯深德丕等。
现代文：皇帝起初并不生气，只是十分感激元丕等人。
English: At first, the emperor was not angry, but was very grateful to Yuan Shao and the others.

古文：抚念诸弟，始终曾无纤介。
现代文：他爱护各位弟弟，兄弟之间始终没有发生过任何小的嫌隙和猜疑。
English: He loved and cared for his brothers, and there were never any small rifts or suspicions between them.

古文：惇睦九族，礼敬俱深。
现代文：他和睦九族，对他们十分敬重。
English: He made peace with the Nine Tribes and held them in high esteem.

古文：虽于大臣，持法不纵。
现代文：不过，即使是朝中大臣，他也依法行事，决不宽容和放纵。
English: However, even if he is a minister of the DPRK and China, he will act in accordance with the law and will never be tolerant and indulgent.

古文：然性宽慈，进食者曾以热羹覆帝手，又曾于食中得虫秽物，并笑而恕之。
现代文：可是他性情宽厚仁慈，送饭的人曾经把很烫的热羹翻倒在皇帝手上，又曾经在食物中发现有虫子和脏东西，皇帝都是笑笑而已，宽恕了他们的过失。
English: However, he was generous and kind-hearted. Once, the delivery man had tipped a very hot soup into the emperor's hand, and once he had found worms and dirt in the food. The emperor just smiled and forgave their mistakes.

古文：宦者先有谮帝于太后，太后杖帝数十，帝默受，不自申明。
现代文：太监曾经在太后面前说皇帝的坏话，为此太后打了皇帝几十杖，皇帝默默忍受，并不申辩。
English: The eunuch once spoke ill of the emperor in front of the empress dowager, for which the empress dowager beat the emperor with dozens of canes. The emperor silently endured and did not argue.

古文：太后崩后，亦不以介意。
现代文：太后去世以后，他也并不记仇。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, he did not take revenge.

古文：听览政事，从善如流。
现代文：平时听政理事，从善如流。
English: In ordinary times, he listens to political directors and follows their advice.

古文：哀矜百姓，恆思所以济益。
现代文：哀怜百姓疾苦，时常想方设法加以赈济和办好事。
English: He felt sorry for the people's hardships and often tried to find ways to help them and do good things.

古文：天地、五郊、宗庙、二分之礼，帝必躬亲，不以寒暑为倦。
现代文：天地、五郊、宗庙和春秋二季的祭礼，经常是事必躬亲，不因寒冬和酷暑而有所懈怠。
English: The festivals of heaven and earth, the five suburbs, the ancestral temple and the two seasons of spring and autumn are often very close, and do not slacken due to the cold winter and hot weather.

古文：尚书奏案，多自寻省；百官大小，无不留心。
现代文：尚书上奏的奏文，他大多亲自考虑处置办法。百官的大小事情，他无不留心，尽量做到周到和亲近。
English: Most of the petitions in Shang's book, he personally considered how to deal with them. He always paid attention to the big and small things of officials, and tried to be thoughtful and close.

古文：务于周洽，每言：凡为人君，患于不均，不能推诚遇物；苟能均诚，胡越之人，亦可亲如兄弟。
现代文：他常常说凡是当皇帝的，最怕的是不公正，不能以诚心对待别人。如果能够公平又诚恳，胡越两地人也可以亲如兄弟。
English: He often said that anyone who becomes emperor is most afraid of injustice and cannot treat others with sincerity. If they can be fair and sincere, the people of Hu Yue and the two places can also be as close as brothers.

古文：常从容谓史官曰： 直书时事，无讳国恶。
现代文：他经常很安详地对史官们说 ：你们要照真实写下当时的事情，不要隐讳国家丑恶的东西。
English: He would often calmly say to the historians: "Write down what really happened, don't hide the country's ugliness."

古文：人君威福自己，史复不书，将何所惧！ 
现代文：国君作威作福，史书如不记载，还有什么能够让他害怕的呢！ 
English: If the history books don't record the sovereign's arrogance as a blessing, what else could he be afraid of?

古文：南北征巡，有司奏请修道，帝曰： 粗修桥梁，通舆马便止，不须去草剷令平也。 
现代文：到南方或北方巡行，有关方面奏请修路。皇帝说： 简单修一下桥梁，能够过车马就行了，不用再割草铲平。 
English: The emperor said, "Simply repair the bridge so that horses and carriages can pass, and there is no need to mow and rake the grass.

古文：凡所修造，不得已而为之，不为不急之事，重损人力。
现代文：凡是修建的东西，都是不得已才办的，不做不急之务，浪费人力。
English: Everything that is built is done as a last resort, not as a matter of urgency, a waste of manpower.

古文：巡幸淮南，如在内地。
现代文：巡视淮南一带，就像在内地视察一样。
English: Inspecting the Huainan area is just like inspecting the Mainland.

古文：军事须伐人树者，必留绢以酬其直。
现代文：因军事行动而必须砍伐民众树木的，必定留下绢帛用来赔偿树木的价值。
English: If, as a result of military operations, it is necessary to cut down trees belonging to the people, there must be straw left to compensate for the value of the trees.

古文：人苗稼无所伤践。
现代文：对老百姓的庄稼禾苗一点也不伤害践踏。
English: The crops and seedlings of the common people will not be harmed at all.

古文：诸有禁忌禳厌之方非典籍所载者，一皆除罢。
现代文：所有禁忌以及祭祷、厌胜之类的办法，如果不是古代典籍中记载的，一概废除。
English: All taboos, as well as practices such as prayer and aversion to defeat, if they are not recorded in ancient texts, are abolished.

古文：雅好读书，手不释卷。
现代文：他十分喜爱读书，手不释卷。
English: He loves reading so much, he can't put the book down.

古文：《五经》之义，览之便讲。
现代文：《五经》的经义，他读过以后就能讲解。
English: He can explain the meaning of the "Five Classics" after reading it.

古文：学不师受，探其精奥；史传百家，无不该涉。
现代文：读书不仅听老师讲授的东西，而且深究其中精华和奥秘，史传和诸子百家之学，无不广泛涉读。
English: Reading is not only listening to what the teacher teaches, but also deeply studying the essence and mysteries, history and the teachings of hundreds of schools, all widely involved in reading.

古文：善谈庄、老，尤精释义。
现代文：善于谈论《庄子》和《老子》，尤其精于佛学。
English: He is good at talking about "Zhuang Zi" and "Lao Zi," and is especially good at Buddhist studies.

古文：才藻富赡，好为文章；诗赋铭颂，在兴而作。
现代文：才华文辞富美，喜欢写文章，诗赋铭颂，兴至而作。
English: He is talented in writing and likes to write articles, poems and eulogies.

古文：有大文笔，马上口授；及其成也，不改一字。
现代文：有关朝廷大政的文字，在马上口授，写完以后，不改一个字。
English: The text about the imperial government was immediately dictated, and after it was written, not a single word was changed.

古文：自太和十年已后，诏册皆帝文也。
现代文：从太和十年之后，诏令册文，都是皇帝自己写的。
English: Ten years after the Taisho, the Emperor himself wrote the Imperial Rescript.

古文：自余文章，百有余篇。
现代文：其余文章，有一百多篇。
English: There are more than a hundred other articles.

古文：爱奇好士，情如饥渴。
现代文：他十分喜爱奇才异士，达到如饥似渴的地步。
English: He loves the prodigy so much that he is ravenous for more.

古文：待纳朝贤，随才轻重。
现代文：厚待和接纳朝中贤能之士，根据其才能而委以轻重职责。
English: We will treat with kindness and accept the talented people of the DPRK and China, and assign them to important duties according to their talents.

古文：常寄以布素之意，悠然玄迈，不以世务婴心。
现代文：时常流露出崇尚自然朴素的心思，悠然自得而寄兴深远，不因世务的繁忙而束缚身心。
English: He often exudes thoughts of advocating nature and simplicity. He is easygoing and self-sufficient, and his interests are far-reaching. He does not bind his body and mind due to his busy life.

古文：又少善射，有膂力：年十余，能以指弹碎羊膊骨；射禽兽，莫不随行所至而毙之。
现代文：他又从小就善射，有膂力。十几岁时，就能用指头弹碎羊的肩胛骨。射杀禽兽时，无不随其所到之处而倒毙。
English: As a child, he was also a good shot and had great strength. As a teenager, he was able to break a sheep's shoulder blade with his fingers. When he shot animals, they all fell to their deaths wherever he went.

古文：至十五，便不复杀生，射猎之事悉止。
现代文：到十五岁时，就不再杀死生物，射猎活动因而完全停止。
English: By the age of fifteen, they no longer kill living beings, and hunting activities thus cease completely.

古文：性俭素，常服浣濯之衣，鞍勒铁木而已。
现代文：性情俭朴，经常穿着洗过多次的旧衣服，马鞍、马勒也是用铁木制作的。
English: He is frugal by nature and often wears old clothes that have been washed several times. His saddle and horse-drawn carriage are also made of ironwood.

古文：帝之雅志，皆此类也。
现代文：他的高雅情志，都如同此类。
English: His high-brow sentiments are like this.

