古文：姚枢姚枢，字公茂，柳城人，后迁洛阳。
现代文：姚枢，字公茂，柳城人，后迁洛阳。
English: Yao Zu, Zi Gongmao, Liu Chengren, later moved to Luoyang.

古文：少力学，内翰宋九嘉识其有王佐略，杨惟中乃与之偕觐太宗。岁乙未，南伐，诏枢从惟中即军中求儒、道、释、医、卜者。
现代文：少年时杨惟中曾同他去拜见过太宗。太宗七年，蒙古军南伐宋朝，诏令姚枢随惟中往军中寻求儒、道、释、医、卜诸色人等。
English: When he was a boy, Yang Weizhong went with him to visit Emperor Taizong. In the seventh year of Emperor Taizong's reign, when the Mongol army was in the Southern Expedition of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Taizong ordered Yao Zu to follow Emperor Weizhong to the army to seek Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism, medicine, and Buddhism.

古文：会破枣阳，主将将尽坑之，枢力辨非诏书意，他日何以复命，乃蹙数人逃入篁竹中脱死。拔德安，得名儒赵复，始得程颐、朱熹之书。
现代文：蒙军破枣阳，主将要坑杀该城居民，枢极力劝阻，说这样做并非诏书的旨意，以后如何向皇帝交代。攻下德安后找到名儒赵复，这时他才得到程颐、朱熹的著作。
English: When the Mongolian army broke through Zaoyang, the Lord was going to kill the inhabitants of the city, and the emperor tried his best to dissuade him, saying that it was not the will of the edict to do so, and how to tell the emperor in the future. After capturing De'an, he found the famous Zhu Zhao Fu, and only then did he get the works of Cheng Yu and Zhu Xi.

古文：辛丑，赐金符，为燕京行台郎中。
现代文：太宗十三年，任命姚枢为燕京行台郎中，并赐金符。
English: In the thirteenth year of Emperor Taizong, Yao Zu was appointed as one of Yanjing's emissaries to Taiwan, and was given a gold medallion.

古文：枢一切拒绝，因弃官去。携家来辉州，作家庙，别为室奉孔子及宋儒周惇颐等象，刊诸经，惠学者，读书鸣琴，若将终身。
现代文：不久因拒绝贿赂，辞官而去，携家迁居辉州，在那里建立家庙，专有一室，供奉孔子及宋儒周敦颐等，刊印经书，每日读书抚琴，打算终老于此。
English: Soon after, he resigned from his post because he refused to take bribes. He moved with his family to Huizhou, where he established a family temple, with a special room dedicated to Confucius and Song Ru Zhou Dunxi, published scriptures, read and played the fiddle every day, and planned to stay here forever.

古文：时许衡在魏，至辉，就录程、朱所注书以归，谓其徒曰： 曩所授受皆非，今始闻进学之序。 
现代文：住在魏县的许衡也跑到姚枢家中来抄录程、朱所注的经书。世祖在即位之前，派赵璧召姚枢至王府，以上宾之礼对待，询问治国之道。
English: Xu Heng, who lived in Wei County, also went to Yao Zu's home to transcribe the scriptures annotated by Cheng and Zhu. Before the ancestor ascended the throne, he sent Zhao Bi to summon Yao Zu to the royal palace, treated him as a guest, and inquired about the way of governing the country.

古文：既而尽室依枢以居。世祖在潜邸，遣赵璧召枢至，大喜，待以客礼。询及治道，乃为书数千言，首陈二帝三王之道，以治国平天下之大经，汇为八目，曰：修身，力学，尊贤，亲亲，畏天，爱民，好善，远佞。
现代文：姚枢上书数千言，首先把二帝三王治国平天下之道列为八条：修身、力学、尊贤、亲亲、畏天、爱民、好善、远佞。
English: Yao Zu wrote thousands of words, first of all, the two emperors and three kings listed eight ways to rule the country and the world: self-cultivation, mechanics, respect for the virtuous, relatives, fear of heaven, love for the people, kindness, and far-sightedness.

古文：次及救时之弊，为条三十，曰： 立省部，则庶政出一，纲举纪张，令不行于朝而变于夕。辟才行，举逸遗，慎铨选，汰职员，则不专世爵而人才出。班俸禄，则赃秽塞而公道开。定法津，审刑狱，则收生杀之权于朝，诸侯不得而专，丘山之罪不致苟免，毫发之过免罹极法，而冤抑有伸。
现代文：其次是拯救时弊三十条，大意是：设立中书省和各部，统一政令，纲举纪张；选贤举能，裁汰平庸；颁赐俸禄，堵塞贪赃；制定法律，审理刑狱，收生杀之权于朝廷，使冤者能昭雪；设置监察机关，官吏能者升，庸者降；停止征敛，使部族不能勒索诛求；精简驿传，减轻州郡的负担；修学校，提倡经书，表彰节孝，以培养人才，淳化风俗；发展农业，轻徭薄赋禁止游手好闲；严肃军政纪律不使扰民；周济贫穷，抚恤孤寡；实行屯田戍边，巩固国防；开通内河漕运，使京都仓廪充足；禁止高利贷，使借贷之家不致破产；设立常平仓以储粮备荒；建立度量衡制度，使奸商不能欺诈；杜绝诬告，以减少不应有的诉讼；等等。
English: The second is the Thirty Articles for Saving the Times and the Weaknesses, to the effect that: the establishment of the Ministry of Education and the various ministries, the unification of government decrees, the raising of standards, the selection of talents, the elimination of mediocrity, the awarding of salaries, the blocking of corruption, the enactment of laws, the trial of imprisonment, and the right to take life and death in the imperial court, so that the wrongdoers can be cleared away, the establishment of supervisory organs, the promotion of talents and the reduction of mediocrity; the cessation of extortion, so that the tribe cannot extort; the streamlining of transmission, reducing the burden on

古文：设监司，明黜陟，则善良奸窳可得而举刺。
现代文：世祖更认为姚枢才华出众，有事就召来询问，并聘请他教授其长子的经书。
English: The patriarch also thought that Yao Zu was very talented, and summoned him to inquire about something, and hired him to teach his eldest son's scriptures.

古文：阁征敛，则部族不横于诛求。
现代文：宪宗即位，令世祖总揽赤老温山以南的军政大权，群臣都来称贺，惟姚枢例外。
English: When Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne and made Emperor Xizong seize the supreme military and political power south of Mount Wenshan, all the courtiers came to congratulate him, except Yao Zu.

古文：简驿传，则州郡不困于需索。
现代文：世祖问他何故，回答说： 如今天下土地之广，人民之众，财赋之多超过了汉人所占有的区域吗？
English: The ancestor asked him why, and replied, "What if the land, the people, and the wealth of today's world exceed the area occupied by the Chinese?

古文：修学校，崇经术，旌节孝，以为育人才、厚风俗、美教化之基，使士不媮于文华。
现代文：若军民尽属殿下管辖，还要天子干什么？日后若有廷臣从中挑拨，皇帝听信，必夺你现在的权力。倒不如现只握兵权，所需财物由有关行政机关供给，这样就会安然无事。 
English: If the military and the people are all under the jurisdiction of His Imperial Highness, what do you want God to do? In the future, if there are courtiers provoked from among them, and the emperor listens, he will take away your current power. It is better to only hold military power now, and the necessary property will be supplied by the relevant administrative organs, so there will be no problem.

古文：重农桑，宽赋税，省徭役，禁游惰，则民力纾，不趋于浮伪，且免习工技者岁加富溢，勤耕织者日就饥寒。
现代文：世祖听从他的建议，并得到宪宗的批准。姚枢又建议在汴京设置屯田经略司，为攻宋做准备；在卫辉设都转运司，以便转运粮食到河南。
English: Yao Zu also proposed to set up a Tonden Economic Division in Beijing to prepare for the attack on Song, and a Capital Transportation Division in Weihui to transport grain to Henan.

古文：肃军政，使田里不知行营往复之扰攘。
现代文：宪宗大封宗室领地，世祖听从姚枢的意见，选择关中为其封地。
English: Gensong Daifu's ancestral territory, the patriarch listened to Yao Zu's opinion and chose Guanzhong as his fief.

古文：事难与较，远将受祸。莫若尽王邸妃主自归朝廷，为久居谋，疑将自释。 及世祖见宪宗，皆泣下，竟不令有所白而止，因罢钩考局。
现代文：宪宗二年夏，姚枢随世祖征大理，途中引宋太祖遣曹彬取南唐不杀一人的事例，劝世祖戒杀，世祖完全采纳。翌年蒙军至大理城，旗上大书止杀令，因此当地人民得保安全。
English: In the summer of the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Yao Zu accompanied the ancestor to conquer Dali. On the way, he quoted the Song Dynasty ancestor Cao Bin and took the example of the Southern Tang Dynasty not killing a single person to persuade the ancestor to stop killing, and the ancestor fully accepted. The next year, the Mongolian army went to Dali City, and the banner was written with the order to stop killing, so the local people were safe.

古文：世祖即位，立十道宣抚使，以枢使东平。
现代文：世祖即位，设置十道宣抚使，以姚枢为东平宣抚使。
English: The founder of the dynasty ascended to the throne, set up the Ten-District Propaganda Envoys, and appointed Yao Zu as the Dongping Propaganda Envoy.

古文：既至郡，置劝农、检察二人以监之，推物力以均赋役，罢铁官。
现代文：枢到任后平均农民的赋税负担，罢去铁官，设劝农、检察二人监理其事。中统二年，拜为太子太师，姚枢以为不妥，辞去，事见《许衡传》，又改任大司农。
English: After Zu came to office, the average farmer's tax burden increased, the iron official was dismissed, and two people were set up to advise farmers and inspectors to supervise the matter. In the second year of the unification of China, Yao Zu thought it was inappropriate to be the crown prince, and resigned. The matter was reported in "Xu Heng Chuan," and he was reappointed as the chief secretary of agriculture.

古文：二年，拜太子太师。
现代文：至元四年，拜姚枢为中书左丞。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bai Yaozhu became the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：枢曰： 皇太子未立，安可先有太师？ 以所受制还中书，事见《许衡传》。
现代文：枢奏请废除各地宗室世代为地方长官的旧制度，改由中央委派官吏。世祖大怒，姚枢上书说：太祖开创基业，超过前代，但未及治理就辞世了。
English: Yao Zuo requested the abolition of the old system in which local governors were chosen from the generation of the family head in each region, and the appointment of officials by the central government instead. The ancestor was furious, and Yao Zuo wrote in a letter: The great-grandfather created the foundation, surpassing the previous generation, but he died before he could manage it.

古文：改大司农。枢奏曰： 在太宗世，诏孔子五十一代孙元措仍袭封衍圣公，卒，其子与族人争求袭爵，讼之潜藩，帝时曰： 第往力学，俟有成德达才，我则官之。 又曲阜有太常雅乐，宪宗命东平守臣辇其歌工舞郎与乐色俎豆至日月山，帝亲临观，饬东平守臣，员阙充补，无辍肄习。
现代文：其后数朝官多滥刑，民生凋敝，陛下生来仁慈圣明，即位前就讲求治国之道，如邢州、河南、陕西这些本是最治理不好的地方，陛下在那里设置安抚、经略、宣抚三使司，选派官吏去任职，颁行俸禄，提倡廉洁，清除贪污，鼓励农桑，不到三年这些地方就治理得很好了。
English: In the following few dynasties, the officials committed more and more indiscriminate punishments, and the people's livelihoods withered. His Majesty was born merciful and saintly, and before he ascended the throne, he spoke about the way to govern the country. For example, Zhangzhou, Henan, and Shaanxi were the most poorly governed places. His Majesty set up the three envoys of appeasement, economic strategy, and propaganda, selected officials to serve, issued salaries, advocated integrity, eliminated corruption, and encouraged farmers. In less than three years, these places were well governed.

古文：且陛下闵圣贤之后《诗》、《书》不通，与凡庶等，既命洛士杨庸选孔、颜、孟三族诸孙俊秀者教之，乞真授庸教官，以成国家育材待聘风动四方之美。王镛炼习故实，宜令提举礼乐，使不致崩坏。 皆从之。诏赴中书议事，及讲定条格，且勉谕曰： 姚枢辞避台司，朕甚嘉焉。
现代文：各地百姓都在盼望陛下去拯救他们，如子女之盼母亲。先帝宪宗驾崩后，国内混乱，上天用陛下继承皇位。陛下采用中国历代制度，内立中书省及各部，外设监察院及各道按察司。自中统至今五六年间，虽外侮内叛相继不断，但能官民相安，府库仓廪也还充足，钞法通行，国用尚足，官吏正常升调，政事更新。
English: People everywhere are looking to His Majesty to come and save them, just as children look to their mothers. After the death of the previous emperor, Emperor Xianzong, there was chaos in the country, and God used His Majesty to succeed to the throne. His Majesty adopted the system of previous Chinese dynasties, setting up the Ministry of Education and Culture and various ministries, as well as setting up a supervisory authority and provincial inspectorates. In the five or six years since China's reunification, although there has been a succession of internal and external rebellions, the government and the people have been able to live in peace, the treasury is still sufficient, the banknote law is in place, the state still has

古文：迩者伏闻聪听日烦，朝廷政令日改月异，如木始栽而复移，屋既架而复毁。
现代文：其所以能保祖宗之基业，都是由于依靠和采用中国历代圣王治国之道。这样做对上符合天意，对下受百姓拥护。
English: The reason why they were able to preserve the foundation of their ancestors is due to their reliance on and adoption of the way of governing the country of the holy kings of China throughout the ages. Doing so is in line with the will of heaven on the one hand, and is supported by the people on the other.

古文：远近臣民不胜战惧，惟恐大本一废，远业难成，为陛下之后忧，国家之重害。
现代文：近来听说陛下要改变初见成效的政治设施，这如同刚栽下的树木，还未扎根就移植，已经架起的房屋，又把它毁掉，远近臣民非常担心，深恐根基一旦被废，今后大业难成。此是陛下将来的忧患，国家的大害。
English: Recently, I heard that His Majesty wants to change the political system that has been effective for the first time. This is like a newly planted tree that is transplanted before it has taken root, a house that has been erected and then destroyed. Subjects near and far are very worried, deeply afraid that once the foundation is scrapped, it will be difficult to achieve great things in the future. This is His Majesty's future sorrow, and a great harm to the country.

古文：帝怒为释。
现代文：世祖看了奏章之后，怒气消失。
English: After the patriarch saw the score, his anger faded away.

古文：十年，拜昭文馆大学士，详定礼仪事。
现代文：至元十年，拜姚枢为昭文馆大学士，命详细制定朝廷礼仪。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bai Yaozhu became a scholar of the Zhaowen Museum and was ordered to formulate the imperial etiquette in detail.

古文：扬州、焦山、淮安，人殊死战，我虽克胜，所伤亦多。
现代文：这年，蒙军攻下襄阳，计划取宋，姚枢推荐右丞相安童、知枢密院伯颜为南伐大军统帅。
English: In this year, the Mongolian army conquered Yangyang and planned to take Song. Yao Zu recommended Andong, the Minister of the Right, and Bo Yan, the Privy Councillor, as commanders of the Southern Expeditionary Force.

古文：宋之不能为国审矣，而临安未肯轻下，好生恶死，人之常情，盖不敢也，惟惧吾招徕止杀之信不坚耳。宜申止杀之诏，使赏罚必立，恩信必行，圣虑不劳，军力不费矣。 
现代文：至元十二年，姚枢针对蒙军攻宋的形势又上书说：伯颜去年出师伐宋，进军神速，西起四川，东到海滨，夺城三十余座，但今年从夏到秋，一城未降，扬州、焦山、淮安等地宋朝军民顽强抵抗，这是因为我军军官不思国家大计，不领会陛下仁爱之心，大肆抢财杀人所致。请圣上重申禁杀之令，赏罚分明，恩惠施于万民，这样不多费军力就可取胜。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Yao Zu also wrote a letter in response to the situation of the Mongolian army attacking the Song Dynasty, saying: Last year, Bao Yan sent out a division to attack the Song Dynasty, marched into the army with great speed, went from Sichuan in the west to the seashore in the east, and captured more than 30 cities. But this year, from summer to autumn, one city did not fall, and the Song Dynasty soldiers and people in Yangzhou, Jiaoshan, Huai'an and other places stubbornly resisted. This is because our army officers do not think about the national grand plan, do not appreciate His Majesty's bene

古文：又请禁宋鞭背、黥面及诸滥刑。
现代文：枢又请禁止宋朝所施行的鞭背、刺面等刑罚。
English: The Central Committee also requested that punishments such as whipping and face-piercing imposed by the Song Dynasty be prohibited.

古文：十三年，拜翰林学士承旨。
现代文：至元十三年，枢拜为翰林学士承旨。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was ordained as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：许衡，字仲平，怀之河内人也，世为农。
现代文：十七年卒，年七十八岁。谥 文献 。许衡，字仲平，怀庆路之河内人，世代务农。
English: 17 years old, 78 years old.  Literature. Xu Heng, surnamed Zhongping, a native of Hanoi on Huaiqing Road, has been farming for generations.

古文：父通，避地河南，以泰和九年九月生衡于新郑县。
现代文：父许通迁居河南。许衡于金章宗泰和九年九月出生于新郑县，七岁入学，问老师读书为何？
English: His father, Xu Tong, moved to Henan. Xu Heng was born in September of the ninth year of Jin Zhang Zong Taihe in Xin Zheng County. He entered school at the age of seven. He asked the teacher why he was studying.

古文：幼有异质，七岁入学，授章句，问其师曰： 读书何为？ 师曰： 取科第耳！ 
现代文：老师答曰： 为了考科举。 
English: The teacher replied: To pass the entrance examination.

古文：曰： 如斯而已乎？ 
现代文：又问： 仅仅是这样？ 
English: Zilu said: Is this enough?

古文：师大奇之。
现代文：老师大为惊异。
English: The teacher was very surprised.

古文：每授书，又能问其旨义。久之，师谓其父母曰： 儿颖悟不凡，他日必有大过人者，吾非其师也。 
现代文：以后每次讲书，许衡都要问个究竟，以致老师对其父母说： 令郎聪敏过人，我不能胜任，请别求名师。 辞馆而去。
English: After that, every time he gave a lecture, Xu Heng had to ask his parents what was going on, so much so that the teacher said to his parents, "Your son is extremely intelligent, I am not up to the job, please don't ask for a famous teacher.

古文：遂辞去，父母强之不能止。如是者凡更三师。
现代文：像这样连换了三位老师。
English: I changed three teachers in a row like this.

古文：稍长，嗜学如饥渴，然遭世乱，且贫无书。尝从日者家见《书》疏义，因请寓宿，手抄归。既逃难徂徕山，始得《易》王辅嗣说。
现代文：长大后更加好学，家贫无书，他曾在一个算命先生家中看到一部解释《书经》的书，便去手抄回来细读，后来逃难到徂徕山才得到一部王辅嗣注释的《易经》。
English: When he grew up, he was more eager to learn. His family was poor and had no books. He once saw a book explaining the "Book of Changes" in a fortune teller's home, so he copied it by hand and came back to read it carefully. Later, he fled to Shaoshan to get a copy of the "Book of Changes" annotated by Wang Fuxi.

古文：时兵乱中，衡夜思昼诵，身体而力践之，言动必揆诸义而后发。尝暑中过河阳，渴甚，道有梨，众争取啖之，衡独危坐树下自若。
现代文：当时虽兵荒马乱，许衡坚持日读夜思，且身体力行。有一回路过河阳，正当盛暑，口渴难忍，路边有一梨树，果实累累，同行者争相摘食，而许衡独坐树下不动，问他何故，他说： 不是自己的东西不能摘取。 
English: At that time, although the soldiers and horses were in chaos, Xu Heng insisted on reading and thinking day and night, and did his best. There was a circuit across the river Yang, the heat was just right, the thirst was unbearable, there was a pear tree on the side of the road, the fruit was tired, and his companions were competing to pick food, but Xu Heng sat alone under the tree and did not move. When he asked why, he said: It is not his own thing that cannot be picked.

古文：或问之，曰： 非其有而取之，不可也。 人曰： 世乱，此无主。 
现代文：有人说 ：在这乱世，此树哪有主？ 衡曰： 梨无主，难道我心中也无主吗？ 
English: Some people say: In this chaotic world, does this tree have a master? Heng says: Pear has no master, does my heart also have no master?

古文：曰： 梨无主，吾心独无主乎？ 
现代文：其为人如此。
English: That's just the way he is.

古文：转鲁留魏，人见其有德，稍稍从之。居三年，闻乱且定，乃还怀。往来河、洛间，从柳城姚枢得伊洛程氏及新安朱氏书，益大有得。
现代文：他到处逃难，先到鲁后到魏，在魏住了三年又回到怀庆，后又常来往于河、洛之间，在柳城从姚枢处得到伊洛程氏及新安朱氏的著作，从中获益甚大。
English: He fled everywhere, first to Lu and then to Wei, lived in Wei for three years and then returned to Huaiqing. Later, he often traveled between He and Lu. In Liucheng, he obtained the works of Yiluo Cheng and Xin'an Zhu from Yao Zu, and benefited greatly from it.

古文：寻居苏门，与枢及窦默相讲习。凡经传、子史、礼乐、名物、星历、兵刑、食货、水利之类，无所不讲，而慨然以道为己任。
现代文：后移居辉县附近之苏门山时，常与姚枢及窦默讨论学问，凡经传、子史、礼乐、名物、星历、兵刑、食货、水利之类，无不是他们讨论的话题。
English: Later, when he moved to Su Men Mountain near Hui County, he often discussed culture with Yao Zu and Dou Miao. The topics they discussed included the transmission of scriptures, children's history, ritual music, famous products, the astrological calendar, military punishment, food, and water conservancy.

古文：又思所以化秦人，乃召衡为京兆提学。
现代文：许衡曾说 ：纲常伦理国家一日不可废，如果在上者不履行，我们一般人也要履行。 
English: Xu Heng once said, "A country's code of ethics should not be discarded overnight. If the above-mentioned people do not fulfill it, we ordinary people should also fulfill it."

古文：秦人新脱于兵，欲学无师，闻衡来，人人莫不喜幸来学。郡县皆建学校，民大化之。
现代文：在实际生活也正是这样做的。宪宗四年，世祖受封于秦中，任命姚枢为劝农使，召许衡为京兆提学。该郡子弟有上学机会，莫不高兴。
English: This is exactly what he did in real life. In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the patriarch was enthroned in Qin Middle School, appointed Yao Zu as the Minister of Agriculture, and summoned Xu Heng to Beijing Zhaotian School. The children of the county had the opportunity to go to school, and they were not unhappy.

古文：世祖南征，乃还怀，学者攀留之不得，从送之临潼而归。
现代文：衡在京兆郡县广建学校。世祖南征，许衡返归怀庆，京兆学者挽留不住，送至临潼而归。
English: Heng built a school in Guangjian, Jingzha County. After the Southern Expedition, Xu Heng returned to Huaiqing. The scholars from Jingzha could not resist and were sent back to Linyi.

古文：中统元年，世祖即皇帝位，召至京师。
现代文：中统元年世祖即皇帝位，召许衡、姚枢至京师。
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, the founder of the dynasty, the emperor, summoned Xu Heng and Yao Zu to Beijing.

古文：时王文统以言利进为平章政事，衡、枢辈入侍，言治乱休戚，必以义为本。文统患之。
现代文：当时王文统为平章政事。在讨论治国安邦之道时，文统重利，而衡、枢认为必须以义为本，文统忌恨于心。
English: At that time, Wang Wenzhong was in charge of the political affairs of Pingzhang. When discussing the way to govern the country and secure the country, Wenzhong emphasized profit, while Heng and Zu believed that it was necessary to be based on righteousness, and Wenzhong hated it.

古文：且窦默日于帝前排其学术，疑衡与之为表里，乃奏以枢为太子太师，默为太子太傅，衡为太子太保，阳为尊用之，实不使数侍上也。
现代文：加上窦默在世祖面前说文统学术不正，文统怀疑许、姚、窦三人是一派，奏请委任姚枢为太子太师，窦默为太子太傅，许衡为太子太保，表面上是尊敬重用，实际上是使他们不能接近皇帝。
English: In addition, Dou Mei said in front of the patriarch that the scholarship of Wenzhong University was not correct. Wenzhong University suspected that Xu, Yao and Dou were a group of three, and requested the appointment of Yao Zu as the prince's teacher, Dou Mei as the prince's tutor, and Xu Heng as the prince's tutor. On the surface, it was respect and reuse, but in fact it was to prevent them from getting close to the emperor.

古文：改命枢大司农，默翰林侍讲学士，衡国子祭酒。
现代文：后又改命枢为大司农，默为翰林侍讲学士，衡为国子祭酒。
English: Later, they changed their names to Dazhi Nongru, Miao to Hanlin Zhi Lecturer, and Heng to Guozi Sacrificial Wine.

古文：未几，衡亦谢病归。
现代文：不久，衡因病辞官返乡。
English: Soon after, Heng returned home due to illness.

古文：至元二年，帝以安童为右丞相，欲衡辅之，复召至京师，命议事中书省。
现代文：至元二年，帝以安童为右丞相，打算许衡为辅，召至京师，命参预中书省政务。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor appointed Ando as the minister of the right, intending to supplement him with Xu Heng, and summoned him to Beijing to participate in the government affairs of the prefectural government.

古文：后累赠太师，封魏国公，谥文正。
现代文：后累赠太师，封魏国公，谥 文正 。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Grand Master, the title of Wei Guogong, and the title of Yu Wenzheng.

