古文：九年春，叔弓会楚子于陈。
现代文：九年春季，叔弓在陈在陈国会见楚灵王。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Uncle Bow met King Chuling at the National Assembly of Chen in Chen.

古文：许迁于夷。
现代文：许国迁移到夷地。
English: Xu Guo moved to Yidi.

古文：夏四月，陈灾。
现代文：夏季四月，陈地发生火灾。
English: In the summer, in April, there was a fire in Chenchi.

古文：秋，仲孙貜如齐。
现代文：秋季，仲孙貜到齐国。
English: In autumn, Nakasone went to Qi Province.

古文：冬，筑郎囿。
现代文：冬季，在郎囿筑城。
English: In the winter, it is held in Langye Chukseong.

古文：九年春，叔弓、宋华亥、郑游吉、卫赵黡会楚子于陈。
现代文：九年春季，叔弓、宋国华亥、郑国游吉、卫国赵黡在陈国会见楚灵王。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Shujun, Song Guo Hua Hai, Zheng Guo Youji, and Wei Guo Zhao Yao met King Chuling at the Chen National Congress.

古文：二月庚申，楚公子弃疾迁许于夷，实城父，取州来淮北之田以益之。伍举授许男田。
现代文：二月某日，楚国的公子弃疾把许国迁到夷地，其实就是城父。再增加州来、淮北的土田给许国，由伍举把土田授给许男。
English: On a certain day in February, the prince of Chu moved Xu Guo to Yidi, in fact, he was the father of the city. In addition, the provinces were added, the soil of Huaibei was given to Xu Guo, and the soil was given to Xu Man.

古文：然丹迁城父人于陈，以夷濮西田益之。
现代文：然丹把城父的人迁到陈地，用濮地、夷地西部的土田补给陈地。
English: Yan Dan moved the people of the city father to Chen, and used the fields in the west of Xuan and Yidi to replenish Chen.

古文：迁方城外人于许。
现代文：把方城山外边的人迁到许地。
English: The people outside Fangcheng Mountain were moved to a small area.

古文：周甘人与晋阎嘉争阎田。
现代文：周朝的甘地人和晋国的阎嘉争夺阎地的土田。
English: The Gandhis of the Zhou Dynasty and the Yan Jia of the Jin Dynasty fought over the land in Yan.

古文：晋梁丙、张趯率阴戎伐颍。
现代文：晋国的梁丙、张趯率领阴戎进攻颍地。
English: Liang He and Zhang Ye of Jin led Yin Rong's attack on Gan.

古文：王使詹桓伯辞于晋，曰： 我自夏以后稷，魏、骀、芮、岐、毕，吾西土也。
现代文：周天子派詹桓伯去谴责晋国说： 我们在夏代由于后稷的功劳，魏国、骀国、芮国、岐国、毕国，是我们的西部领土。
English: Zhou Tianzi sent Zhan Huanbo to denounce Jin Province, saying: In the Xia Dynasty, due to the merits of Hou Yi, we, Wei, Wei, Wei, Qi, and Bi, are our western territories.

古文：及武王克商，蒲姑、商奄，吾东土也。
现代文：到武王战胜商朝，蒲姑、商奄，是我们的东部领土。
English: By the time of King Wu's victory over the Shang Dynasty, Bugu and Shangmao were our eastern territories.

古文：巴、濮、楚、邓，吾南土也。
现代文：巴国、濮国、楚国、邓国，是我们的南部领土。
English: Ba Province, Shan Province, Chu Province, and Deng Province are our southern territories.

古文：肃慎、燕、亳，吾北土也。
现代文：肃慎、燕国、亳国，是我们的北部领土。
English: Suspicion, Yan Guo, and Yan Guo are our northern territories.

古文：吾何迩封之有？
现代文：我们有什么近处的封疆领土？
English: What nearby fiefdoms do we have?

古文：文、武、成、康之建母弟，以蕃屏周，亦其废队是为，岂如弁髦而因以敝之。
现代文：文王、武王、成王、康王建立同母兄弟的国家，用来护卫周室，也是为了防止周室的毁坏衰落，难道只是像不用的东西因而就抛弃了它？
English: King Wen, King Wu, King Cheng and King Kang established a brother-and-sister state to protect the Zhou dynasty, and also to prevent the destruction and decline of the Zhou dynasty. Was it just like something useless and thus abandoned it?

古文：先王居梼杌于四裔，以御螭魅，故允姓之奸，居于瓜州。
现代文：先王让梼杌住在四方边远的地方，来抵御山中的精怪，所以允姓中的坏人住在瓜州。
English: The previous king had let the baboons live in remote places in the four directions to fend off the monsters in the mountains, so the bad guys in the family name lived in Guazhou.

古文：伯父惠公归自秦，而诱以来，使偪我诸姬，入我郊甸，则戎焉取之。
现代文：伯父惠公从秦国回去，就引诱他们前来，让他们逼迫我们姬姓的国家，进入我们的郊区，戎人于是就占取了这些地方。
English: When Uncle Huigong returned from Qin, he lured them to come and let them persecute our Hime country and enter our suburbs. The soldiers then occupied these places.

古文：戎有中国，谁之咎也？
现代文：戎人占有中原，这是谁的罪责？
English: The army occupies the Central Plains. Who is to blame for this?

古文：后稷封殖天下，今戎制之，不亦难乎？
现代文：后稷缔造了天下，现在为戎人割据，不也很难吗？
English: Hou Yi created the world, and now it's divided up for the Eunuchs. Isn't that also difficult?

古文：伯父图之。我在伯父，犹衣服之有冠冕，木水之有本原，民人之有谋主也。
现代文：伯父考虑一下，我们对于伯父来说，犹如衣服之有帽子，树木流水之有本源，百姓之有谋主。
English: Uncle, think about it. For Uncle, we are like clothes with a hat, trees with a source of running water, and the people with a leader.

古文：伯父若裂冠毁冕，拔本塞原，专弃谋主，虽戎狄其何有余一人？ 
现代文：伯父如果撕毁了帽子，拔掉树木塞断水源，专断并抛弃谋主，即使是戎狄，他们心里哪里会有我这天子？ 
English: If my uncle tore off his hat, uprooted trees to cut off the water supply, and arbitrarily abandoned his advisers, even if they were soldiers, where would they have me, the son of heaven, in their hearts?

古文：叔向谓宣子曰： 文之伯也，岂能改物？
现代文：叔向对宣子说： 文公称霸诸侯，难道能改变旧制？
English: Uncle Xiang said to Xuan Zi, "Wen Gong said that he would dominate the princes. Can he change the old system?

古文：翼戴天子而加之以共。
现代文：他辅佐拥戴天子，而又加上恭敬。
English: He supports the embrace of the Son of God, but adds reverence.

古文：自文以来，世有衰德而暴灭宗周，以宣示其侈，诸侯之贰，不亦宜乎？
现代文：从文公以来，每一代都是德行衰减，而且损害、轻视王室，用来宣扬它的骄横，诸侯有三心二意，不也是应该的吗？
English: Since the time of King Wen, every generation has seen a decline in virtue, and the royal family has been undermined, despised, and used to propagate its arrogance. The princes are half-hearted, but isn't that just as it should be?

古文：且王辞直，子其图之。 
现代文：而且天子的辞令理直气壮，您还是考虑一下。 
English: Moreover, God's words are just and powerful, so please think about them.

古文：宣子说。
现代文：宣子心服。
English: Nobuko agrees wholeheartedly.

古文：王有姻丧，使赵成如周吊，且致阎田与襚，反颍俘。
现代文：周景王有姻亲的丧事，宣子就派赵成到成周吊唁，而且送去阎地的土田和入殓的衣服，遣返在颍地抓到的俘虏。
English: When Zhou Jing Wang's in-laws passed away, Xuan Zi sent Zhao Cheng to Zhou Cheng to offer condolences, and also sent him the soil and clothes from the battlefield, and repatriated the prisoners captured in the battlefield.

古文：王亦使宾滑执甘大夫襄以说于晋。晋人礼而归之。
现代文：周景王也派宾滑抓了甘地的大夫襄来讨晋国的欢心，晋国人对他加以礼遇而放他回去了。
English: King Zhou Jing also sent a guest, Gandhi's doctor, to court the favor of Jin. Jin treated him with courtesy and let him go.

古文：夏四月，陈灾。
现代文：夏季，四月，陈地发生火灾。
English: In the summer, in April, there was a fire in Chenchi.

古文：郑裨竈曰： 五年，陈将复封。封五十二年而遂亡。 
现代文：郑国的裨灶说： 过五年陈国将会重新受封，受封以后五十二年被灭亡。 
English: Zheng Guo's benefactor said: In five years, Chen Guo will be re-crowned, and after being crowned, it will be destroyed in fifty-two years.

古文：子产问其故。
现代文：子产问这样说的缘故。
English: That's why I'm asking you.

古文：对曰： 陈，水属也，火，水妃也，而楚所相也。
现代文：裨灶回答说： 陈国，是水的隶属；火，是水的配偶，而是楚国所主治。
English: He replied, "Chen is subordinate to water, and fire is the consort of water, but it is governed by Chu."

古文：今火出而火陈，逐楚而建陈也。
现代文：现在大火星出现而陈国发生火灾，这是驱逐楚国而建立陈国。
English: Now that the Great Mars has appeared and a fire has broken out in the State of Chen, this means that the State of Chu is to be expelled and the State of Chen is to be established.

古文：妃以五成，故曰五年。
现代文：阴阳五行用五来相配，所以说五年。
English: The cooperation of yin, yang and five elements is completed with the number five, so it is said to be five years later.

古文：岁五及鹑火，而后陈卒亡，楚克有之，天之道也，故曰五十二年。 
现代文：岁星过五年到达鹑火，然后陈国终于灭亡，楚国战胜而占有它，这是上天之道，所以说是五十二年。 
English: After five years, the year star reached the bonfire, and then Chen finally perished, and Chu conquered and occupied it. This is the way of heaven, so it is said to be fifty-two years.

古文：晋荀盈如齐逆女，还，六月，卒于戏阳。
现代文：晋国的荀盈到齐国去接齐女，回来，六月，死在戏阳。
English: Hao Ying from Jin Province went to Qi Province to pick up a Qi woman, came back, and died in June in Xiangyang.

古文：殡于绛，未葬。
现代文：停棺在绛地，没有安葬。
English: The coffin was parked in the burial ground, and there was no funeral.

古文：晋侯饮酒，乐。
现代文：晋平公喝酒，奏乐。
English: Jinping Gong drinks and plays music.

古文：膳宰屠蒯趋入，请佐公使尊。许之。而遂酌以饮工，曰： 女为君耳，将司聪也。
现代文：主持饮食的官员屠蒯快步走进，请求帮着斟酒，晋平公答应了，屠蒯就斟酒给乐工喝，说： 你作为国君的耳朵，职责是让它聪敏。
English: The official who presided over the meal, Tu Youyou, walked in at a brisk pace and asked for help pouring the wine. Prince Jinping agreed, and Tu Youyou poured the wine for the musicians and said, "As the ear of the sovereign, your duty is to make it smart."

古文：辰在子卯，谓之疾日。君彻宴乐，学人舍业，为疾故也。
现代文：日子在甲子乙卯，叫做忌日，国君撤除音乐，学乐的人停止演习，这是为了忌避的缘故。
English: On the day of the death of the emperor, known as the day of the death of the emperor, the emperor removed the music, and the people who studied music stopped practicing. This was to avoid the noise.

古文：君之卿佐，是谓股肱。
现代文：国君的卿佐，这叫做股肱之臣。
English: The prince's courtier, this is called "股之臣."

古文：股肱或亏，何痛如之？
现代文：股肱之臣有了亏损，多么痛心呀！
English: How sad it is for the vassal of the shareholders to have a loss!

古文：女弗闻而乐，是不聪也。 
现代文：你没有听到而奏乐，这是耳朵不灵敏。 
English: If you play without listening, it is because your ear is not sensitive.

古文：又饮外嬖嬖叔曰： 女为君目，将司明也。
现代文：又给宠臣嬖叔喝酒，说： 你作为国君的眼睛，职责是让它明亮。
English: He also gave his favorite vassal, Uncle Zou, some wine, saying, "As the eyes of the sovereign, it is your duty to make them bright.

古文：服以旌礼，礼以行事，事有其物，物有其容。
现代文：服饰用来表示礼仪，礼仪用来推行事情，事情有它的类别，类别有它的外貌。
English: Dress is used to indicate etiquette, etiquette is used to promote things, things have their categories, categories have their appearances.

古文：今君之容，非其物也，而女不见，是不明也。 
现代文：现在国君的外貌，不是他应有的类别，而你看不见，这是眼睛不明亮。 
English: Now the appearance of the sovereign is not his proper category, and you can't see it, it's because his eyes are not bright.

古文：亦自饮也，曰： 味以行气，气以实志，志以定言，言以出令。
现代文：屠蒯自己也喝了一杯，说： 口味用来让气血流通，气血用来充实意志，意志用来确定语言，语言用来发布命令。
English: Tu Youyou himself also drank a cup, saying: Taste is used to circulate qi and blood, qi and blood are used to enrich the will, the will is used to determine the language, and the language is used to issue orders.

古文：臣实司味，二御失官，而君弗命，臣之罪也。 
现代文：臣下的职责是管调和口味，两个侍候国君的人失职，而国君没有下令治罪，这是下臣的罪过。 
English: The duty of a vassal is to control and harmonize tastes. The two people who served the sovereign failed in their duty, and the sovereign did not order the crime to be punished. This is the fault of the vassal.

古文：公说，彻酒。
现代文：晋平公很高兴，撤除了酒宴。
English: Emperor Jinpyeong was so pleased that he cancelled the banquet.

古文：初，公欲废知氏而立其外嬖，为是悛而止。
现代文：当初，晋平公想要废掉荀盈而立他的宠臣，因为上述这件事就改变想法，而停止了。
English: At first, Prince Jinping wanted to depose his favorite vassal, who had been appointed by Emperor Zhaoying, but he changed his mind and stopped because of the above-mentioned incident.

古文：秋八月，使荀跞佐下军以说焉。
现代文：秋季，八月，派荀跞辅佐下军以表明自己的意思。
English: In the autumn, in August, he sent his subordinate troops to show his intention.

古文：孟僖子如齐殷聘，礼也。
现代文：孟僖子到齐国举行盛大的聘问，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper that Meng Yanzi held a grand interview in Qi Province.

古文：冬，筑郎囿，书时也。
现代文：冬季，修造郎囿。《春秋》加以记载，这是由于合于时令。
English: In winter, he repaired the rowan tree, which was recorded in "Spring and Autumn" because it was in keeping with the season.

古文：季平子欲其速成也，叔孙昭子曰： 《诗》曰： 经始勿亟，庶民子来。 
现代文：季平子想要迅速完成，叔孙昭子说： 《诗》说： 营造开始不要着急，百姓却像儿子一样自动跑来。 
English: Ji Ping Zi wanted to finish quickly, and his great-uncle Akiko said: "The poem says: Don't rush to start building, but the people came running like sons.

古文：焉用速成？
现代文：哪里用得着急于求成来劳累百姓呢？
English: What need is there to wear the people down with a rush to get things done?

古文：其以勦民也。
现代文：没有园林还是可以的，没有百姓可以吗？ 
English: Is it still possible to do without gardens, and is it possible to do without people?

