古文：韦敻字敬远。
现代文：韦夐是韦孝宽之兄，字敬远。
English: Wei Xuan was the elder brother of Wei Xiaokang, hence the name Jingyuan.

古文：志尚夷简，澹于荣利。
现代文：性格恬淡质朴，不看重功名利禄。
English: His personality is light and simple, and he doesn't care about fame and fortune.

古文：弱冠，被召拜雍州中从事，非其好也，遂谢疾去职。
现代文：二十岁时，被征召为雍州中从事，因为不合心意，就称病离职。
English: At the age of twenty, he was called up to work for the Yongzhou Middle School, but because it was not what he wanted, he called in sick.

古文：前后十见征辟，皆不应命。
现代文：先后有十次被征召为官，均不出仕。
English: He was called up for military service ten times in succession, but never served.

古文：属太祖经纶王业，侧席求贤，闻敻养高不仕，虚心敬悦，遣使辟之，备加礼命。
现代文：当时太祖筹划大业，求贤若渴，听说韦夐保持高尚志节，不愿当官，心中非常敬佩，派使者前往征召，送去任命的文书。
English: At that time, the great-great-grandfather was planning a great career, thirsting for merit, heard that Wei Wei kept a high-minded spirit, did not want to be an official, and was very admired in his heart. He sent an envoy to the conscription and sent the appointment document.

古文：虽情谕甚至，而竟不能屈。
现代文：尽管情感真挚，礼节周到，但韦夐始终不为所动。
English: In spite of his sincere feelings and thoughtful etiquette, Wei Wei was never moved.

古文：弥以重之，亦弗之夺也。
现代文：太祖因此更加看重他，但也无法改变他的初衷。
English: As a result, his great-grandfather thought more highly of him, but he was unable to change his original intention.

古文：所居之宅，枕带林泉，敻对翫琴书，萧然自乐。
现代文：韦夐的住宅，环绕着树林清泉，他对林泉而鼓琴读书，怡然自得。
English: Wei Wei's house is surrounded by woods and clear springs. He enjoys reading the drums and playing the piano by the forest springs.

古文：时人号为居士焉。
现代文：当时人称他为居士。
English: At that time, he was known as a householder.

古文：至有慕其闲素者，或载酒从之，敻亦为之尽欢，接对忘倦。
现代文：以致有人仰慕他闲静朴素，带酒来访，韦夐也同客人尽情欢饮，应对谈天，忘记疲倦。
English: So much so that some people admire him for his quiet simplicity, visiting with wine. Wei Wei also enjoys drinking with his guests, chats with them, and forgets his tiredness.

古文：明帝即位，礼敬逾厚。乃为诗以贻之曰： 六爻贞遯世，三辰光少微。
现代文：明帝登基后，对韦夐的礼遇更加崇隆，写诗赠给他： 六爻贞遁世，三辰少光微。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, the courtesy of Wei Wei was more revered, and a poem was written and presented to him: "六貞世,三辰少光微."

古文：颍阳让逾远，沧州去不归。
现代文：颍阳让逾远，沧州去不归。
English: Shenyang is too far away, Cangzhou is too far away.

古文：香动秋兰佩，风飘莲叶衣。坐石窥仙洞，乘槎下钓矶。
现代文：香动秋兰佩，风飘莲叶衣、坐石窥仙洞，乘槎下钓矶。
English: Fragrant autumn flowers, wind-blown lotus leaves, sitting on a rock peeking into a fairy cave, fishing under the armpits.

古文：岭松千仞直，岩泉百丈飞。
现代文：岭松千仞直，岩泉百丈飞。
English: The ridge pines are tall and straight, and the rock springs are towering.

古文：聊登平乐观，远望首阳薇。
现代文：聊登平乐观，远望首阳薇。
English: Chatting Dengping is optimistic, looking forward to Shouyangwei.

古文：讵能同四隐，来参余万机。 
现代文：讵能同四隐，来参余万机。 
English: You can do the same with the four secluded places, and there are more than a million opportunities to participate.

古文：敻答帝诗，愿时朝谒。
现代文：韦夐作诗回答，愿意随时朝见。
English: Wei Wei replied with a poem, ready to meet at any time in the morning.

古文：帝大悦，敕有司日给河东酒一斗，号之曰逍遥公。
现代文：皇帝十分高兴，命令官府每天送给他河东酒一斗，称他为 逍遥公 。
English: The emperor was very pleased and ordered the government to send him a barrel of wine from Hedong every day, calling him 逍遥公.

古文：时晋公护执政，广营第宅。
现代文：当时晋公宇文护执掌朝政，大建宅第。
English: At that time, Shinkong Uwenfo was in charge of the imperial court, and he built a large residence.

古文：尝召敻至宅，访以政事。
现代文：曾征召韦夐到自己宅第，询问政事。
English: He once summoned Wei Wei to his home to inquire about political affairs.

古文：敻仰视其堂，徐而叹曰： 酣酒嗜音，峻宇雕墙，有一于此，未或弗亡。 
现代文：韦夐仰视大堂，缓缓叹息道： 沉湎在美酒和音乐之中，住着高峻华丽的宅第，即使二者只占其一，恐怕也未必不会灭亡。 
English: Wei Wei looked up at the lobby and sighed slowly. He was immersed in fine wine and music, and lived in a lofty and gorgeous mansion. Even if the two were only one, I'm afraid he wouldn't be able to die.

古文：护不悦。
现代文：宇文护很不高兴。
English: Umengor is very unhappy.

古文：有识者以为知言。
现代文：有识之士认为此话很有远见。
English: People of insight consider this to be a very far-sighted statement.

古文：陈遣其尚书周弘正来聘，素闻敻名，请与相见。
现代文：陈国派遣尚书周弘正来访，他早就听说韦夐的名声，请求与韦夐会面。
English: Chen Guo dispatched Shang Shu Zhou Hong Zheng to visit. He had long heard of Wei Xuan's reputation and requested a meeting with Wei Xuan.

古文：朝廷许之。
现代文：朝廷予以允诺。
English: The Imperial Court promised to do so.

古文：弘正乃造敻，谈谑盈日，恨相遇之晚。
现代文：于是周弘正拜访韦夐，谈笑终日，只恨相见太晚。
English: As a result, Zhou Hongzheng visited Wei Wei, talked and laughed all day, only to see each other too late.

古文：后请敻至宾馆，敻时赴。
现代文：后来请韦夐到宾馆，韦夐也不时前去。
English: Later, he invited Wei Wei to the hotel, and Wei Wei also went there from time to time.

古文：弘正仍赠诗曰： 德星犹未动，真车讵肯来。 
现代文：周弘正赠诗说： 德星犹未动，真车讵肯来。 
English: Zhou Hongzheng said in a poem: The virtuous star has not yet moved, the real car will come.

古文：其为时所钦挹如此。
现代文：韦夐就是这样被时人推重仰慕。
English: In this way, Wei Wei was highly admired by the people of his time.

古文：武帝尝与敻夜宴，大赐之缣帛，令侍臣数人负以送出。
现代文：武帝曾与韦夐夜晚饮宴，赐给他许多丝织品，令侍臣数人扛着送出。
English: Emperor Wu once had a banquet with Wei Wei in the evening, and gave him many silk fabrics, which several courtiers carried on their shoulders.

古文：敻唯取一疋，示承恩旨而已。帝以此益重之。
现代文：韦夐只要了一匹，表示已经承受恩旨。武帝因此而更加推重他。
English: Wei Wei only needed one horse, indicating that he had already received the grace. Emperor Wu therefore pushed him even harder.

古文：孝宽为延州总管，敻至州与孝宽相见。
现代文：韦孝宽担任延州总管，韦夐到州城与韦孝宽相见。
English: Wei Xiaokang served as the governor of Yanzhou, and Wei Wei went to the state capital to meet with Wei Xiaokang.

古文：将还，孝宽以所乘马及辔勒与敻。
现代文：回来的时候，韦孝宽把自己骑的马以及鞍具、马勒送给韦夐。
English: When he returned, Wei Xiaokuan gave the horse he rode, as well as the saddle and bridle, to Wei Xuan.

古文：敻以其华饰，心弗欲之。笑谓孝宽曰： 昔人不弃遗簪坠履者，恶与之同出，不与同归。
现代文：韦夐看到鞍具诸物装饰华贵，不想接受，就笑着说： 前人不丢弃遗落的簪子和坠落的鞋子，是由于怀旧之情。
English: When Wei Wei saw the richly decorated saddlery and other items, he didn't want to accept them, so he said with a smile: The reason why the ancients didn't discard abandoned mules and fallen shoes was because of nostalgia.

古文：吾虽不逮前烈，然舍旧录新，亦非吾志也。 
现代文：我虽然不及前贤遗风，但舍弃旧物而换用新物，也不是我的心意。 
English: Although I am not as good as the previous sages, it is not my intention to abandon the old and use the new.

古文：于是乃乘旧马以归。
现代文：于是仍然骑着旧马返回。
English: So he still rode back on his old horse.

古文：武帝又以佛、道、儒三教不同，诏敻辨其优劣。
现代文：武帝又认为佛、道、儒三教不同，诏令韦夐分辨它们的优劣。
English: Emperor Wu also believed that Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism were different, and ordered Emperor Wei to distinguish their merits and demerits.

古文：敻以三教虽殊，同归于善，其迹似有深浅，其致理殆无等级。
现代文：韦夐认为，三教虽然不同，但都归结于善行，从表象上看深浅不一，而从教理上却分不出什么等级。
English: Wei Wei believes that although the three religions are different, they all boil down to good deeds. From the appearance, they have different depths and depths, but from the doctrine, there is no grade.

古文：乃着三教序奏之。
现代文：于是写了《三教序》上奏。
English: So I wrote the first movement of the "Three Preludes."

古文：帝览而称善。
现代文：武帝看了以后表示称赞。
English: Emperor Wu expressed his praise after watching the performance.

古文：时宣帝在东宫，亦遗敻书，并令以帝所乘马迎之，问以立身之道。
现代文：当时宣帝住在东宫，也写信给韦夐，并且令人用皇帝所乘之马去迎接他，询问立身之道。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanxuan was living in the East Palace. He also wrote to Wei Zheng, and had him meet him on the emperor's horse to inquire about how to establish himself.

古文：敻对曰： 传不云乎，俭为德之恭，侈为恶之大。
现代文：韦夐回答说： 《春秋》不是说过吗？俭约就是奉行美德，奢侈是大恶行。
English: Wei Wei replied, "Didn't "Spring and Autumn" say that thrift is a virtue and luxury is a great evil?

古文：欲不可纵，志不可满。
现代文：不可放纵欲望，不可满足意愿。
English: Desires should not be indulged, and wills should not be satisfied.

古文：并圣人之训也，愿殿下察之。 
现代文：这些都是圣人的训示，希望殿下明察。 
English: These are the instructions of a sage. I hope Your Highness will read them carefully.

古文：敻子瓘行随州刺史，因疾物故，孝宽子总复于并州战殁。
现代文：韦夐之子韦馞代理随州刺史，患病而死，韦孝宽之子韦总又在并州阵亡。
English: Wei Zheng's son Wei Zheng, the deputy of Suizhou, fell ill and died, and Wei Xiaokang's son Wei Zheng also died in the battle of Bianzhou.

古文：一日之中，凶问俱至。
现代文：一天之内，噩耗俱至。
English: Within a day, all hell broke loose.

古文：家人相对悲恸，而敻神色自若。
现代文：家里人相对悲恸，而韦夐神色如常。
English: The family members were relatively sad, but Wei Wei looked as usual.

古文：谓之曰： 死生命也，去来常事，亦何足悲。 
现代文：他对家人们说： 死生由命，人间常事，有什么值得悲伤的？ 
English: He said to his family members: "Life and death is a matter of life and death, it's a normal thing in the world, what is there to be sad about?

古文：援琴抚之如旧。
现代文：若无其事地拿过琴弹起来，同往常一样。
English: He picked up the piano and began to play, as usual.

古文：敻又雅好名义，虚襟善诱。
现代文：韦夐又十分看重名誉和道义，心胸开阔，善于诱导。
English: Wei Wei also attaches great importance to honor and morality, is open-minded and good at inducing others.

古文：虽耕夫牧竖有一介可称者，皆接引之。特与族人处玄及安定梁旷为放逸之友。
现代文：即使是农夫牧人，凡有一点可以称道的，他都愿意接待，特别与族人韦处玄和安定人梁旷结成放达闲适的朋友。
English: Even if he is a farmer or a herdsman, he is willing to receive anyone who has something to commend him, especially if he has made friends with the tribesmen Wechuan Xuan and the stable people Liang Kui.

古文：少爱文史，留情著述，手自抄录数十万言。
现代文：韦夐从少年时喜爱文史，留心著述，亲自抄录数十万字。
English: Wei Wei has loved literature and history since he was a boy. He is a diligent writer and has personally transcribed hundreds of thousands of words.

古文：晚年虚静，唯以体道会真为务。旧所制述，咸削其藁，故文笔多并不存。
现代文：晚年喜好冲虚安静，只以领悟道家真义为事，对过去的著述全都加以删削，所以文笔大多不存。
English: In his later years, he preferred to live a quiet life, only concerned with understanding the true meaning of Taoism. All of his past writings were censored, so most of his writings no longer exist.

古文：建德中，敻以年老，预戒其子等曰： 昔士安以蘧蒢束体，王孙以布囊绕尸，二贤高达，非庸才能继。
现代文：建德年间，韦夐由于年老，预先告诫儿子们说： 从前士安用粗席裹体，王孙用布囊缠尸，这两位圣贤是高洁旷达之人，平庸之人无法跟他们学。
English: During the Jiande era, because of his old age, Wei Wei warned his sons in advance, saying, "Former An used a thick cloth to wrap his body, and Wang Sun used a cloth bag to wrap his corpse. These two sages were noble and open-minded people, and ordinary people could not learn from them.

古文：吾死之日，可敛旧衣，勿更新造。
现代文：我死的那一天，可穿上旧衣安葬，不要另制新衣。
English: On the day of my death, I can be buried in my old clothes, without having to make new ones.

古文：使棺足周尸，牛车载柩，坟高四尺，圹深一丈。
现代文：让棺材能够放下尸首，用牛车载运灵柩，坟高四尺，墓穴深一丈。
English: So that the coffin can put down the body, the hearse can be transported by ox cart, the grave is four feet high, and the grave is a foot deep.

古文：其余烦杂，悉无用也。朝晡奠食，于事弥烦，吾不能顿绝汝辈之情，可朔望一奠而已。
现代文：早晚祭奠更加麻烦，我不能一下子断绝你们的思念之情，可以每月的初一、十五祭奠一次。
English: Morning and evening offerings are more troublesome. I can't cut off your yearning all at once. You can make offerings once a month on the first day or the fifteenth day.

古文：仍荐素蔬，勿设牲牢。
现代文：仍然只用素食，不要摆设牲畜。
English: Still use only vegetarian food, do not display livestock.

古文：亲友欲以物吊祭者，并不得为受。
现代文：亲友们想拿物品来祭吊的，一律不要接受。
English: Relatives and friends who want to bring items to make offerings should not accept them.

古文：吾常恐临终恍惚，故以此言预戒汝辈。
现代文：我常常担心临终时精神恍惚，所以预先把这话告诫你们。
English: I'm often worried about losing my mind when I'm dying, so I'll warn you in advance.

古文：瞑目之日，勿违吾志也。 
现代文：我去世的的那天，你们不要违背我的心意。 
English: On the day of my death, do not go against my wishes.

古文：宣政元年二月，卒于家，时年七十七。
现代文：宣政元年二月，在家中去世，当时七十七岁。
English: In February of the first year of the Xuan Zheng, he died at home, at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：武帝遣使祭，赙赗有加。
现代文：武帝派使者祭奠，资助的财物格外多。
English: Emperor Wu sent emissaries to pay tribute, and provided an extraordinary amount of financial support.

古文：其丧制葬礼，诸子等并遵其遗戒。
现代文：他的丧制葬礼，儿子们都遵照他的遗言来办。
English: His sons carried out his funeral in accordance with his last words.

古文：子世康。
现代文：儿子韦世康。
English: His son Wei Shikang.

古文：梁士彦字相如，安定乌氏人也。
现代文：梁士彦字相如，是安定乌氏人。
English: Liang Shihong's surname is the same as his father's, and he is a member of the Stable Wu clan.

古文：少任侠，好读兵书，颇涉经史。
现代文：年轻时负气仗义，爱读兵书，颇为涉猎经书史籍。
English: When he was young, he had a bad temper, loved to read military books, and was quite a dabbler in scriptures and historical books.

古文：周武帝将平东夏，闻其勇决，自扶风郡守除为九曲镇将，进位上开府，封建威县公。
现代文：周武帝将要平定束夏，听说他勇敢决断，由扶风郡太守任为九曲镇将，升任上开府，封建威县公。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu was going to pacify Sokha. Hearing of his courageous decision, he was appointed by the governor of Fufeng County to be the commander of Jiuqu Town, and was promoted to Shangkaifu, the feudal governor of Wei County.

古文：齐人甚惮之。
现代文：齐人非常害怕他。
English: Qi people are very afraid of him.

古文：后以熊州刺史从武帝拔晋州，进位大将军，除晋州刺史。
现代文：后来以熊州刺史的身份跟随武帝攻下晋州，升任为大将军，任晋州刺史。
English: Later, he followed Emperor Wu in conquering Jinzhou as the governor of Kumazhou, and was promoted to the rank of general, serving as the governor of Jinzhou.

古文：及帝还，齐后主亲攻围之，楼堞皆尽，短兵相接。
现代文：到皇帝还朝，齐后主亲自围攻晋阳，城楼矮墙尽毁，两军短兵相接。
English: When the emperor was still reigning, Qi Houjun personally besieged Jinyang, the low walls of the city were completely destroyed, and the two armies were close to each other.

古文：士彦慷慨自若，谓将士曰： 死在今日，吾为尔先。 于是勇猛齐奋，号声动天，无不一当百。
现代文：士彦慷慨自若，告诉将士说： 死在今，我为你们领先。 于是勇猛齐奋，号声震天动地，人人无不以一当百。
English: Shihiko was generous and self-assured, and told the soldiers, "I am the first to die for you, so let's fight bravely together. The sound of the trumpet shook the earth, and everyone was afraid.

古文：齐兵少却，乃令妻及军人子女昼夜修城，三日而就。武帝大军亦至，齐师围解。
现代文：齐军稍微退却，就下令妻子及军人子女日夜修城，三日成功，武帝大军也来到，齐军的围攻被解除了。
English: When the Qi army retreated slightly, he ordered the wives and children of soldiers to rebuild the city day and night. On the third day, they succeeded, Emperor Wu's army also came, and the siege of the Qi army was lifted.

古文：士彦见帝，捋帝须泣，帝亦为之流涕。
现代文：士彦拜见皇帝，抚摸着皇帝的胡须哭泣，皇帝也为之流泪。
English: Shi Yan paid a visit to the emperor, stroked the emperor's beard and cried, and the emperor shed tears for him.

古文：时帝欲班师，士彦叩马谏，帝从之。
现代文：当时皇帝想班师，士彦扣住缰绳劝谏，皇帝听从他。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to appoint a tutor, and the scholar took hold of the reins to advise him, and the emperor obeyed him.

古文：执其手曰： 朕有晋州，为平齐之基，宜善守之。 及齐平，封郕国公，位上柱国、雍州总管。
现代文：拉着他的手说： 我有晋州，是平定齐国的根基，应该好好守卫它。 到了齐国被平定，封郝国公，位上柱国、雍州总管。
English: He took him by the hand and said, "I have Jinzhou, which is the foundation for the pacification of Qi, and I should guard it well." When Qi was pacified, he was named the Prince of the State, and became the pillar of the State and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：宣帝即位，除徐州总管。
现代文：宣帝即位，任徐州总管。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne and became the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：与乌丸轨禽陈将吴明彻、裴忌于吕梁，略定淮南地。
现代文：与乌丸轨在吕梁活捉陈将吴明彻、裴忌，攻克平定淮南之地。
English: He captured Chen's generals Wu Mingche and Pei Bo in Luliang and conquered the land of Huainan.

古文：隋文帝作相，转亳州总管。
现代文：隋文帝任相国，调梁士彦任亳州总管。
English: Emperor Sui Wen was appointed as the foreign minister, and Tong Liang Shih Yan was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：尉迟迥反，为行军总管，及韦孝宽击之。
现代文：尉迟回谋反，凿土产任行军总管，与童耋直攻击他。
English: After a long delay, the lieutenant plotted a rebellion, chiseled the local production as the head of the march, and attacked him directly with the boy.

古文：令家僮梁默等为前锋，士彦继之，所当皆破。
现代文：下令家僮梁默等人为前锋，士彦接着出发，所向之处都被攻下。
English: I ordered Iyao, Liang Mei and others to be the forwards, Shihiko then set off, and they were attacked everywhere they went.

古文：及迥平，除相州刺史。
现代文：到尉迟迥被乎定，任相州刺史。
English: After reaching the rank of lieutenant, he was determined to be appointed as the governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：深见忌，乃代还京师。
现代文：被深深地猜忌，就又回朝任职返回京师。
English: Deeply suspected, he returned to the imperial court and returned to the Beijing division.

古文：闲居无事，恃功怀怨，与宇文忻、刘昉等谋反。
现代文：闲居无事，倚仗有功，心怀怨恨，与宇文忻、刘防等人谋反。
English: He lived a life of idleness, relied on his military exploits, harbored resentment, and plotted against Uwen Hui, Liu Bei, and others.

古文：将率僮仆，候上享庙之际以发机。
现代文：准备率领僮仆，等候皇帝祭祀宗庙的时候发动。
English: Prepare to lead the henchmen and wait for the emperor to arrive at the time of the sacrificial rite at the ancestral temple.

古文：复欲于蒲州起事，略取河北，捉黎阳关，塞河阳路，劫调布为牟甲，募盗贼为战士。
现代文：又想在渣州起事，攻取河北，控制黎阳关，堵塞河阳路，抢劫征调的布匹来做帽子衣服，招募盗贼来做战士。
English: He also wanted to start a riot in Jeju, capture Hebei Province, control Liyang Pass, block Heyang Road, rob the cloth to make hats and clothes, and recruit thieves to be soldiers.

古文：其甥裴通知而奏之。
现代文：他的外甥裴通知道这个消息就上奏朝廷。
English: His nephew, Pei Tong, learned the news and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：帝未发其事，授晋州刺史，欲观其志。
现代文：皇帝没有揭发他谋反的事，任他为晋州刺史，想观察他的志向。
English: The emperor did not expose him for plotting a rebellion, but allowed him to write the history of Jinzhou to observe his aspirations.

古文：士彦欣然谓昉等曰： 天也！ 
现代文：士彦高兴地告诉刘防等人说： 这是天意啊! 
English: Shihiko happily told Liu Bei and the others, "This is God's will!

古文：又请仪同薛摩儿为长史，帝从之。
现代文：又请求仪同薛摩儿任长史，皇帝听从了他。
English: He also requested that Yi and Xue Mo'er be appointed to the Long History, and the emperor listened to him.

古文：后与公卿朝谒，帝令执士彦、忻、昉等于行间。
现代文：后来与公卿入朝谒见，皇帝下令逮捕士彦、宇文忻、刘防等人于行列之间。
English: Later, he entered the imperial court to meet with court nobles, and the emperor ordered the arrest of Shi Yan, Uwen Yao, Liu Bao and others in the procession.

古文：诘之状，犹不伏，捕薛摩儿至，对之。
现代文：查问他们的情况，还是不服罪，又逮捕薛摩儿来到，进行对质。
English: After inquiring about their conditions, they still pleaded not guilty, and arrested Xue Mo'er to confront them.

古文：摩儿具论始末，云第二子刚垂泣苦谏，第三子叔谐曰 作猛兽须成班 。
现代文：摩儿说出了全部底细，说他次子梁刚垂泪苦苦劝谏，第三子梁叔谐说 作猛兽须成班 。
English: Mo'er told the whole story, saying that his second son, Liang Gang, had tearfully and painstakingly advised him, and his third son, Liang Shuxi, said that he had to become a beast of prey.

古文：士彦失色，顾曰： 汝杀我！ 
现代文：士彦大惊失色，回头说： 是你杀了我! 
English: Shihiko was shocked and turned around and said, "You killed me!"

古文：于是伏诛。
现代文：于是伏罪被杀。
English: He was killed as a result of the ambush.

古文：年七十二。
现代文：终年七十二岁。
English: He was seventy-two years old.

古文：有子五人。
现代文：有儿子五人。
English: They have five sons.

古文：操字孟德，位上开府、义乡县公，早卒。
现代文：梁操字孟德，官位上开府、义乡县公，早年死去。
English: Liang Xizhi Mengde, who rose to the rank of Kaifu and Yixiang County official, died at an early age.

古文：刚字永固，位大将军、通政县公、泾州刺史。
现代文：梁刚字永固，官位大将军、通政县公、泾州刺史。
English: Liang Gangzhi Yonggu, the official rank of general, Tongzheng County official, and Zhangzhou stabbing history.

古文：以谏父获免，徙瓜州。
现代文：因为劝谏父亲不要谋反而获免死罪，徙移到瓜州。
English: He was spared the death penalty because he advised his father not to conspire, and moved to Guazhou.

古文：叔谐坐士彦诛。
现代文：梁叔谐因受牵连而被杀。
English: Liang Shuhong was killed as a result of being implicated.

古文：梁默者，士彦之苍头也，骁武绝人。
现代文：梁默是士彦的家奴，勇猛过人。
English: Liang Mei is Shihiko's manservant, and he is incredibly brave.

古文：士彦每从征伐，常与默陷阵。
现代文：士彦每次跟随征伐，经常与梁默冲锋陷阵。
English: Every time Shihiko followed the expedition, he was often caught up in a charge with Liang Mei.

古文：仕周，位开府。
现代文：在周做官，官位为开府。
English: He served as an official in Zhou, and his official rank was Kaifu.

古文：开皇末，以行军总管从杨素征突厥，进位大将军。
现代文：开皇末年，以行军总管的身份跟随杨素征讨突厥，升位大将军。
English: In the last years of the emperor's reign, he followed Yang Su to conquer the Turks as the commander-in-chief of the march, and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：又从平杨谅，授柱国。
现代文：又跟随平定杨谅，任柱国。
English: He also followed the pacification of Yang Peng and was appointed as a pillar state.

古文：大业五年，从炀帝征吐谷浑，力战死之。
现代文：大业五年，跟随炀帝征讨吐谷浑，尽力作战而死。
English: In the fifth year of the Taiei era, he followed Emperor Qian in the conquest of Tuyugun and died in battle.

古文：赠光禄大夫。
现代文：追赠光禄大夫。
English: Dr. Kōroku received a posthumous award.

