古文：薛举，兰州金城人。
现代文：薛举是兰州金城县人。
English: Xue Jiu is from Jincheng County, Lanzhou.

古文：容貌魁岸，武敢善射。
现代文：容貌魁梧雄壮，骁勇善射。
English: He is handsome and strong. He is brave and good at shooting.

古文：殖产巨万，好结纳边豪，为长雄。
现代文：其家钱财巨万，喜欢交结边地豪杰，为其雄长。
English: His family has a huge amount of money, and he likes to associate with local heroes, which is his forte.

古文：隋大业末，任金城府校尉。
现代文：隋朝大业末年，任职金城府校尉。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, he served as a lieutenant of Jincheng Prefecture.

古文：会岁凶，陇西盗起，金城令郝瑗将讨贼，募兵数千，檄举将。
现代文：时逢年荒民饥，陇西盗贼蜂起，金城县令郝瑗为讨伐贼寇招募兵卒数千人，任薛举为将。
English: Every year, when the people were poor and hungry, the bandits in western Shaanxi Province rose up. Linyi of Jincheng County recruited thousands of soldiers to fight the bandits. Ren Xue was appointed as the commander.

古文：始授甲，大会置酒，举与子仁杲及其党劫瑗于坐，矫称捕反者，即起兵，囚郡县官，发粟以赈贫乏，自号西秦霸王，建元秦兴，以仁杲为齐公，少子仁越为晋公。
现代文：分发铠甲，大集官民，置酒飨士，薛举和儿子薛仁杲及其徒党于座中劫持郝瑗，假称收捕谋反之人，随即起兵，囚禁郡县官员，开仓散粮以赈济贫乏。自称西秦霸王，建立纪元年号为秦兴，封仁杲为齐公，小儿子仁越为晋公。
English: Armor was distributed, officials and commoners were assembled, wine was set out, and Xue Jiu and his son Xue Renqin and their followers hijacked the banquet hall, pretending to arrest the rebels. They immediately raised an army, imprisoned county officials, and opened warehouses to distribute grain to feed the poor. They called themselves the Western Qin overlords, and established the year of the first century as Qin Xing, Fong Renqin as Qi Gong, and his youngest son Ren Yue as Jin Gong.

古文：它贼宗罗睺帅众下之，以为义兴公。
现代文：别处贼寇宗罗目侯率其众归抚，封为义兴公。
English: Elsewhere, the thief and robber Zong Romu Hou led his people to subjugation and was given the title of Yixing.

古文：更招附余盗，剽马牧。
现代文：继而招附群盗，劫掠官马。
English: He then invited a group of thieves to rob the officials.

古文：兵锋锐甚，所徇皆下。
现代文：兵锋甚锐，所至皆下。
English: The battle front is very sharp, and everyone is on the move.

古文：隋将皇甫绾兵万人屯枹罕，举以精卒二千袭之，遇于赤岸。
现代文：隋将皇甫绾率兵万人屯驻木包罕，薛举选精兵二千人前往袭击，相遇于赤岸。
English: The Sui Dynasty stationed ten thousand soldiers led by Emperor Fuxi in Muboahan, while Xue Zhe selected two thousand soldiers to attack, and they met at Chagang.

古文：大风且澍，逆举阵，绾不击。
现代文：战前风雨突至，起初薛举一方逆风，而皇甫绾不出击。
English: The pre-war wind and rain suddenly came. At first, Xue raised one side against the wind, but the Emperor did not attack.

古文：俄反风绾屯，气色曀冥，部伍错乱，举介骑先众乘之，绾阵大溃，进陷枹罕。
现代文：不久反风吹向对方，天色又很昏暗，军中队伍不整，薛举骑乘甲马率先出击，皇甫绾兵队大败而逃，薛举乘势攻陷木包罕。
English: Soon, the wind blew against the other side, the sky was very dark, and the army was not well organized. Xue He, riding a horse, took the lead in the attack. The imperial army was defeated and fled, and Xue He took advantage of the situation to attack Mubo Han.

古文：岷山羌钟利俗以众二万降，举大振。
现代文：岷山羌钟利谷率众二万人归降，薛举兵势大振。
English: Lushan, Zhongli and Gu led a total of twenty thousand people to surrender, and Xue raised an army and greatly strengthened it.

古文：进仁杲为齐王、东道行军元帅，罗睺为义兴王副之；仁越晋王、河州刺史。
现代文：进封仁杲为齐王，授职东道行军元帅，罗目侯为义兴王，以辅佐仁杲；仁越为晋王，兼领河州刺史。
English: Jinfeng Rensen was the king of Qi, and was appointed as the host marshal of the march. Lomehou was the king of Yixing, and was assisted by Rensen; Rensen was the king of Jin, and was also the leader of Hezhou.

古文：因徇下鄯、廓二州。
现代文：接着又略取鄯、廓二州之地。
English: Next, he took a small piece of land and divided it into two states.

古文：不阕旬，尽有陇西地，众十三万。
现代文：不过十天，尽据陇西之地，拥兵十三万人。
English: However, ten days later, as far as the west of Shaanxi, there were 130,000 soldiers.

古文：十三年，僭帝号于兰州，以妻鞠为后，仁杲为太子。
现代文：大业十三年，僭称帝号于兰州，以其妻鞠氏为皇后，仁杲为太子。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Taiei era, he assumed the title of emperor in Lanzhou, with his wife, Lady Mu, as empress and Prince Nian as crown prince.

古文：即其先墓置陵邑，立庙城南，陈兵数万展墓讫，大飨。
现代文：在其祖先墓地建置陵邑，立庙于城南，陈兵数万人，出巡扫墓，然后大飨士卒。
English: A mausoleum was built in his ancestor's graveyard, a temple was built in the south of the city, tens of thousands of soldiers were sent out to patrol and sweep the graves, and then the great warrior died.

古文：使仁杲围秦州；仁越趋剑口，掠河池，太守萧瑀拒却之。
现代文：派仁杲围攻秦州；仁越前往剑口，攻掠河池郡，被太守萧蠫击退。
English: He sent Nien Yue to besiege Qinzhou; Nien Yue went to Jiankou, attacked and plundered Hechi County, and was repulsed by the governor Xiao Yue.

古文：遣将常仲兴度河击李轨，与轨将李赟战昌松，仲兴败，军没于轨。
现代文：派遣部将常仲兴渡过黄河进击李轨，与李轨部将李斌贝战于昌松，仲兴战败，全军陷没于李轨。
English: The dispatching department sent Changzhongxing across the Yellow River to attack Li Rail, and Li Rail Department sent Li Binbei to fight in Changsong. Zhongxing was defeated, and the whole army was trapped in Li Rail.

古文：仁杲克秦州，举往都之。
现代文：仁杲攻克秦州，薛举迁都前往该城。
English: Renya conquered Qinzhou, and Xue moved the capital to the city.

古文：仁杲寇扶风，汧源贼唐弼拒，不得进。
现代文：仁杲进犯扶风郡，源贼寇唐弼抵御，兵不能前进。
English: Ninsheng invaded Fufeng County, Yuan Zhe Kou resisted Tang Zhe, and the soldiers could not advance.

古文：初，弼立李弘芝为天子，有众十万。
现代文：起初，唐弼拥立李弘芝为天子，有众十万人。
English: At first, Tang Xuan proclaimed Li Hongzhi as the Son of Heaven, and there were hundreds of thousands of followers.

古文：举遣使招弼，弼杀弘芝从举。
现代文：薛举派遣使者诏谕唐弼，唐弼杀害李弘芝依附薛举。
English: Xue Jiu sent an envoy to Tang Xuan, Tang Xuan killed Li Hongzhi and followed Xue Jiu.

古文：仁杲间弼无备，袭之，尽夺其众，弼以数百骑走。
现代文：仁杲趁唐弼不备，袭破其军，尽有其众，唐弼仅率数百名骑兵逃走。
English: Taking advantage of Tang Xuan's unpreparedness, Nian broke through Tang Xuan's army and killed as many as possible. Tang Xuan fled with only a few hundred cavalry.

古文：军益张，号二十万。将窥京师。
现代文：薛举军势益张，号为二十万众，将入犯京师。
English: Xue raised an army of 200,000 men and marched to Beijing.

古文：会高祖入关，遂留攻扶风，秦王击破之，斩首数千级，逐北至陇还。
现代文：时逢高祖入关，便留兵攻打扶风，秦王击破其众，斩首数千级，追击溃兵至陇坻而还。
English: When Gaozhu entered the pass, he stayed behind to fight against Fufeng. King Qin defeated his troops, beheaded thousands of them, and chased the routed soldiers until he was defeated.

古文：举畏王，遂逾陇走，问其下曰： 古有降天子乎？ 
现代文：薛举畏惧秦王，便越陇逃走，问其属下说 ：古时有投降的天子吗？ 
English: Xue was afraid of King Qin, so he ran away faster and faster. He asked his subordinates, "In ancient times, was there a divine son who surrendered?"

古文：伪黄门侍郎褚亮曰： 昔赵佗以南粤归汉，蜀刘禅亦仕晋，近世萧琮，其家今存，转祸为福，尝有之。 
现代文：伪黄门侍郎褚亮说 ：从前赵佗以南粤归降汉朝，蜀汉刘禅也出仕晋朝，近代萧琮，其家族至今仍在，转祸为福，自古皆有。 
English: The pseudo-Yellow Gate attendant Gao Liang said: In the past, Zhao Gao led Nan Yue back to the Han Dynasty, Shu Han Liu Zhen also served the Jin Dynasty, modern Xiao Gao and his family are still there, turning misfortune into good fortune has existed since ancient times.

古文：卫尉卿郝瑗曰： 亮之言非也。
现代文：卫尉卿郝瑗说 ：褚亮之言不对。
English: Captain of the Guards, Zou said: Zou Liang's words are not right.

古文：昔汉祖兵屡败，蜀先主尝亡其妻子。
现代文：从前汉高祖兵马屡败，蜀先主曾亡失妻小。
English: In the past, the soldiers and horses of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty suffered repeated defeats, and Emperor Shu once lost his wife.

古文：夫战固有胜负，岂可一不胜便为亡国计乎？ 
现代文：作战本来就有胜负，怎能因一战不胜就言亡国之计呢？ 
English: In war, there is always a winner and a loser. How can a country be said to have lost a war because it did not win?

古文：举亦悔其言，乃曰： 聊试公等。 
现代文：薛举也后悔其问话，便说： 不过是试试各位而已。 
English: Xue Jiu also regretted his question and said, "I'm just testing you all."

古文：即厚赐瑗，以为谋主。
现代文：便重赏郝瑗，用他做谋主。
English: He then rewarded Zou and used him as his chief strategist.

古文：瑗请连梁师都，厚赂突厥，合从东向。
现代文：郝瑗建议与梁师都连兵，送厚礼给突厥，合兵并力，东逼京师。
English: Zhai suggested that they all join forces with Liang Shih, send gifts to the Turks, join forces, and drive the Beijing division eastward.

古文：举从之，约突厥莫贺咄设犯京师。
现代文：薛举接受此议，与突厥莫贺咄设共犯京师。
English: Xue Jiu accepted this proposal and set up an accomplice Beijing division with Turk Moga.

古文：会都水监宇文歆使突厥，歆说止其兵，故举谋塞。
现代文：时逢都水监宇文歆出使突厥，劝说莫贺咄设停止出兵，因此薛举的计划未能成功。
English: At that time, the water inspector of the capital, Uwenqiu, sent an envoy to Turkey to persuade Moga to stop sending troops, so Xueju's plan was not successful.

古文：武德元年，丰州总管张长愻击罗，举悉兵援之，屯析墌，以游军掠岐、豳。
现代文：武德元年，丰州总管张长逊进击宗罗目侯，薛举尽起其兵救援，屯驻于析土庶，派出游军劫掠岐州、州。
English: In the first year of Wude, Zhang Changsong, the governor of Fengzhou, marched into Zonglom, and Xue made every effort to rescue his soldiers, stationed in Seidi, and sent out a touring army to rob and plunder Guizhou and Guizhou.

古文：秦王御之，次高墌，度举粮少，利速斗，坚壁老其兵。
现代文：秦王率军抵御，进驻于高土庶，见薛举粮少，利于速战，便下令坚壁固守，以疲惫其军。
English: Qin Wang led the army to resist, stationed in Gaodu Subdistrict. Seeing that Xue Zhuo had less grain and was in favor of a quick war, he ordered to hold fast to the wall to exhaust his army.

古文：会王疾，卧屯不出，而举数挑战。
现代文：时逢秦王生病，卧床不出，而薛举多次挑战。
English: When King Qin fell ill and could not get out of bed, Xue repeatedly challenged him.

古文：行军长史刘文静、殷开山观兵于高墌，恃众不设备，举兵掩其后，遂大败，死者十六，大将慕容罗睺、李安远、刘弘基皆没。
现代文：行军长史刘文静与殷开山示兵于高土庶，倚仗人众而未设防，薛举派兵掩袭其后，结果唐军大败，死者达十分之六，其大将慕容罗目侯、李安远、刘弘基全都陷没。
English: Liu Wenzhing, the head of the march, and Yin Kaishan led a demonstration of troops at Gaotoshe, relying on the people and not setting up a defense, and Xue Jiu sent troops to cover up afterwards. As a result, the Tang army was defeated, with six out of ten dead, and its generals Murong Romehu, Li Anyuan, and Liu Hongji were all trapped.

古文：王还京师，举拔高墌，仁杲进逼宁州。
现代文：秦王返回京师，薛举攻拔高土庶，仁杲进逼宁州。
English: Qin Wang returned to Beijing, Xue Jie attacked Gaodoshibo, and Nianqian invaded Ningzhou.

古文：郝瑗谋曰： 今唐新破，将卒禽俘，人心摇矣，可乘胜直趋长安。 
现代文：郝瑗设谋说： 现在唐兵刚被击破，将士多被擒获，人心动摇，可乘胜直取长安。 
English: Zou Shizhao said: Now that the Tang soldiers have just been defeated and most of the generals have been captured, people's hearts are shaken, and we can take advantage of the victory to win Chang'an.

古文：至始州，掠王氏女，醉寝于野，王取屳地所佩刀斩之，送首梁州。
现代文：薛举表示同意。将出兵时生病，征召巫觋看视，说是唐兵作祟，薛举恶闻此事，不久就病死了。
English: Xue Jiu agreed. He was ill when he sent the troops, summoned Wusong to watch, and said that it was the Tang soldiers who caused the trouble. Xue Jiu heard bad things about this, and soon died of illness.

古文：诏封女为崇义夫人。
现代文：仁杲继立，伪谥薛举为武皇帝，未及安葬，仁杲就被灭亡。
English: Renzhen succeeded to the throne, and the pseudo-Emperor Xue was elevated to Emperor Wu. Before he could be buried, Renzhen was destroyed.

古文：李轨，字处则，凉州姑臧人。
现代文：李轨字处则，是凉州姑臧县人。
English: Li Rail, a native of Liangzhou, Guzheng County.

古文：略知书，有智辩。
现代文：略知书籍，颇有智辩。
English: He knows a little about books and is quite an intellectual.

古文：家以财雄边，好赒人急，乡党称之。
现代文：其家以财富称雄于边郡，喜好周济别人，受到乡人称赞。
English: His family is famous for its wealth in the border county, likes to help others, and is praised by the villagers.

古文：隋大业中，补鹰扬府司兵。
现代文：隋大业年间，补任鹰扬府司兵。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, he held the position of Yingyang prefectural secretary.

古文：薛举乱金城，轨与同郡曹珍、关谨、梁硕、李赟、安修仁等计曰： 举暴悍，今其兵必来。
现代文：薛举作乱于金城郡时，李轨与同郡人曹珍、关谨、梁硕、李斌贝、安仁等人商议说： 薛举残暴凶悍，其兵必来侵扰。
English: When Xue Jiu made a disturbance in Jincheng County, Li Liao and his fellow county people Cao Zhen, Guan Zhen, Liang Shuo, Li Binbei, Anren and others discussed and said: Xue Jiu is cruel and fierce, and his soldiers will come to disturb.

古文：吏孱怯，无足与计者。
现代文：郡吏软弱胆怯，不足以议大事。
English: The county magistrate is weak and timid, and is not strong enough to discuss important matters.

古文：欲相戮力，据河右，以观天下变，庸能束手以妻子饵人哉？ 
现代文：今应同心尽力，占据河右，以观天下变化，岂能束手让妻子儿女为人所掠呢！ 
English: Now we should make concerted efforts to occupy the right side of the river and observe the changes in the world. How can we allow our wives and children to be plundered?

古文：众允其谋，共举兵，然莫适敢主。
现代文：众人同意这个计划，议定一同举兵，然而无人敢任首领。
English: Everyone agreed to the plan and agreed to raise an army together, but no one dared to be the leader.

古文：曹珍曰： 我闻谶书，李氏当王。
现代文：曹珍说： 我闻知谶书说，李氏当称王于天下。
English: Cao Zhen said: I have heard that the Book of Zhou said that the Li clan should be called the king of the world.

古文：今轨贤，非天启乎！ 
现代文：如今李轨有贤能，岂非天意吗！ 
English: Nowadays, Li Liao is a man of virtue, isn't that the will of Heaven!

古文：遂共降拜以听命。
现代文：于是共同降阶拜见以听命李轨。
English: As a result, they jointly downgraded to see each other in order to obey orders.

古文：修仁夜率诸胡入内苑城，建旗大呼，轨集众应之，执虎贲郎将谢统师、郡丞韦士政，遂自称河西大凉王，署官属，准开皇故事。
现代文：安仁在夜间率领胡人进入内苑城中，树旗大呼，李轨集聚众人加以响应，收捕虎贲郎将谢统师、郡丞韦士政，于是自称河西大凉王，署置官属，全都依照开皇旧例。
English: Anren led the Hu people into the inner courtyard of the city at night, the tree flag waved, Li Rail gathered everyone to respond, and captured the tiger warlord Xie Tongshi and the county magistrate Wei Shizheng, so he called himself the king of the west river and appointed officials, all in accordance with the old example of the emperor.

古文：初，突厥曷娑那可汗弟达度阙设内属，保会宁川，至是称可汗，降于轨。
现代文：起初，突厥曷娑那可汗之弟达度阙设内附朝廷，保其部落于会宁川中，到此时自称可汗，降于李轨。
English: At first, the younger brother of the Turkic Jinnah Khan, Dadullah, set up an inner court to protect his tribe in the Hoenning River. At this time, he called himself a khan and descended to Li Rail.

古文：谨等议尽杀隋官，分其产。
现代文：关谨等商议尽杀隋官，分其家产。
English: Guan Zheng and others discussed killing Sui officials and dividing their family property.

古文：轨曰： 诸公既见推，当禀吾约。
现代文：李轨说： 各位既已推举本人为主，就应听我约束。
English: Li Rail said: Since you have elected me as the main, you should listen to my constraints.

古文：今军以义兴，意在救乱，杀人取财是为贼，何以求济乎？ 
现代文：如今以义起兵，意在救乱，杀人取财是贼寇行为，怎能取得成功呢？ 
English: Nowadays, raising an army in the name of righteousness is intended to save chaos, while killing people for money is the act of a bandit. How can it be successful?

古文：乃以统师为太仆卿，士政太府卿。
现代文：便任命谢统师为太仆卿，韦士政为太府卿。
English: He then appointed Xie Junshi as Taifuqing and Wei Shizheng as Dafuqing.

古文：会薛举遣兵来侵，轨遣将败之昌松，斩首二千级，悉虏其众，轨纵还之。
现代文：时逢薛举兵前来侵犯，李轨派遣将领击败于昌松，斩首二千级，其余全被俘虏，李轨放还其众。
English: Whenever Xue raised an army to invade, Li Rail dispatched generals to defeat Yu Changsong, beheaded two thousand, the rest were all captured, Li Rail was released back to his people.

古文：李赟曰： 今力战而俘，又纵以资敌，不如尽坑之。 
现代文：李斌贝说： 如今竭力奋战而俘其众，又纵还以资助敌方，不如全都坑杀为妥。 
English: Li Binbei said, "Nowadays, it is better to kill them all than to fight hard and capture their people, and even to finance the enemy.

古文：轨曰： 不然。
现代文：李轨说： 不能这样做。
English: Li Rail said: You can't do that.

古文：若天命归我，当禽其主，此皆我有也；不者，徒留何益？ 
现代文：如天命归我，应擒其主子，此辈士卒皆为我有。不然的话，留此又有何用？ 
English: If it is my destiny, I should be the master of it. Otherwise, what is the use of keeping it?

古文：遂遣之。
现代文：于是遣返其俘虏。
English: So he repatriated his captives.

古文：未几，拔张掖、炖煌、西平、枹罕，悉有河西。
现代文：不久，攻拔张掖、敦煌、西平、木包罕等郡，尽有河西之地。
English: Soon, Zhangye, Dunhuang, Xiping, Muboqan and other counties were conquered, including the land west of the river.

古文：武德元年，高祖方事薛举，遣使凉州，玺书慰结，谓轨为从弟。
现代文：武德元年，高祖正要谋攻薛举，派遣使者前往凉州，下达玺书慰劳结好，称李轨为从弟。
English: In the first year of Wu De, Gao Zu was about to attack Xue Jiu, sent an envoy to Liangzhou, issued a letter of condolence, and called Li Rail his younger brother.

古文：轨喜，乃遣弟懋入朝。
现代文：李轨大喜，派遣其弟李懋入朝。
English: Li Rail was overjoyed and sent his younger brother Li Xun to the imperial court.

古文：帝拜懋大将军，还之，诏鸿胪少卿张俟德持节册拜轨凉王、凉州总管，给羽葆鼓吹一部。
现代文：高祖拜李懋为大将军，送还凉州，下诏鸿胪少卿张俟德持节册拜李轨为凉王、凉州总管，给予羽葆鼓吹一部。
English: Gao Zu worshipped Li Gang as the great general and sent it back to Liangzhou. The next emperor, Hongtao Shaoqing Zhang Bingde, held a festival to worship Li Gang as the king of Liangzhou and the governor of Liangzhou, and gave Fei Gang a part of the propaganda.

古文：会轨僭帝号，建元安乐，以其子伯玉为太子，长史曹珍为尚书左仆射，攻陷河州。
现代文：时逢李轨僭称帝号，建立纪元年号为安乐，命其子伯玉为太子，长史曹珍为尚书左仆射，攻陷河州。
English: At that time, Li Leju was called the emperor, the year of establishment of the first century was called Anle, his son Bo Yu was appointed as the prince, and the elder statesman Cao Zhen was appointed as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man to attack and conquer Hezhou.

古文：俟德至，轨召其下议曰： 李氏有天下，历运所属，已宅京邑。
现代文：俟德到达后，李轨召集部下商议说： 李氏据有天下，是历运所属，已经占据京邑。
English: After arriving in Shunde, Li Ke summoned his subordinates for discussion and said: The Li clan is believed to rule the world, belongs to the Historical Movement, and has occupied Beijing.

古文：一姓不可竞王，今欲去帝号，东向受册，可乎？ 
现代文：一姓不可竞立，如今除去帝号，东向接受册封，行吗？ 
English: A family name cannot compete, now remove the emperor's name and accept the canonization from the east, okay?

古文：曹珍曰： 隋亡，英雄焱起，号帝王者瓜分鼎峙。
现代文：曹珍说 ：隋亡天下，英雄竞起，称王称帝，瓜分鼎峙。
English: Cao Zhen said: The Sui Dynasty passed away, and heroes began to compete, proclaiming themselves kings and emperors.

古文：唐自保关、雍，大凉奄河右，业已为天子，奈何受人官？
现代文：唐国自保关中、雍州，大凉自处河右，何况已为天子，怎能接受别人的官爵呢？
English: Since Tang is in the middle of Guoguan and Yongzhou, and Dayang is on the right side of the river, how can he accept the peerage of others, especially since he is the son of heaven?

古文：必欲以小事大，请行萧詧故事，称梁帝而臣于周。 
现代文：如非要以小事大，可依照萧察旧例，自称梁帝而称臣于周。 
English: If you have to make a big deal out of a small thing, you can follow the old example of Xiao Cao and call yourself Liang Di and claim to be a subject of Zhou.

古文：轨从之，乃遣伪尚书左丞邓晓来朝，奉书称 从弟大凉皇帝 。
现代文：李轨接受这个意见，便派伪尚书左丞邓晓来朝，奉上文书自称 从弟大凉皇帝 。
English: Li Rong accepted this opinion and sent the pseudo-emperor Deng Xiao to the North, presenting him with a document claiming to be the younger brother of Emperor Dayang.

古文：帝怒曰： 轨谓朕为兄，此不臣也。 
现代文：高祖发怒说： 李轨称我为兄，这是不愿臣服啊。 
English: Gao Zu said angrily: Li Rail called me his elder brother, this is unwillingness to submit.

古文：囚晓不遣。
现代文：囚禁邓晓而不遣还。
English: Imprisoning Deng Xiao without sending him back.

古文：初，轨以梁硕为谋主，授吏部尚书。
现代文：起初，李轨以梁硕为谋主，授职吏部尚书。
English: At first, Li Rail took Liang Shuo as the mastermind, and the conferring officer was Shang Shu.

古文：硕有算略，众惮之，尝见故西域胡种族盛，劝轨备之，因与户部尚书安修仁交怨；又轨子仲琰尝候硕，硕不为起，仲琰憾之。
现代文：梁硕有谋略，众人怕他，梁硕见从前西域迁来的胡人种族繁盛，曾劝李轨加以提防，因而与户部尚书安仁交恶；李轨之子仲琰曾问候梁硕，梁硕不为他起身，仲琰很是反感。
English: Liang Shuo had a strategy, and people were afraid of him. Liang Shuo saw the prosperity of the Hu people who had migrated from the former Western Regions, and had advised Li Luo to guard against it. As a result, he had a bad relationship with the head of the household, Shang Shuan; Li Luo's son, Zhong Yao, had greeted Liang Shuo, but Liang Shuo did not get up for him, and Zhong Yao was very disgusted.

古文：乃相与谮硕。
现代文：于是一起诬陷梁硕。
English: So they framed Liang Shuo together.

古文：轨不察，赍鸩其家杀之，繇是故人稍疑惧，不为用。
现代文：李轨不察实情，持毒于其家杀害梁硕，由此故人渐渐心怀疑惧，不为轨所用。
English: Li Ke didn't look into the facts, and killed Liang Shuo with poison at his home. As a result, the deceased became suspicious and didn't want to be used by Li Ke.

古文：有胡巫妄曰： 上帝将遣玉女从天来。 
现代文：当时有胡巫妄言 ：天帝将派遣玉女从天而降。 
English: At that time, there was a false rumor spread by witches that the Heavenly Emperor would send a young lady down from the sky.

古文：遂召兵筑台以候女，多所糜损。
现代文：便招集兵士修筑楼台以候玉女降临，靡费钱财甚多。
English: He then called up soldiers to build a platform in anticipation of the princess's arrival, spending a great deal of money.

古文：属荐饥，人相食，轨毁家赀赈之，不能给，议发仓粟，曹珍亦劝之。
现代文：时逢年饥，以致发生人吃人之事，李轨尽其家资予以赈济，仍不足供给，便商议开仓发粮，曹珍也劝他这样做。
English: At a time of year-round famine, leading to cannibalism, Li Luo did his best to provide food for his family, but the supply was still insufficient, so they discussed opening a warehouse to distribute grain, and Cao Zhen also advised him to do so.

古文：谢统师等故隋官，心内不附，每引结群胡排其用事臣，因是欲离沮其众，乃廷诘珍曰： 百姓饿死皆弱不足事者，壮勇士终不肯困。
现代文：谢统师等人是从前的隋官，内心不附李轨，常常引进群胡结为党羽，排挤其用事旧臣，想因此事离散其众，便当廷诘难曹珍说： 百姓饿死者尽是弱而不任事的人，壮勇之士终不为此困顿。
English: Xie Tongshi and others were former officials of the Sui Dynasty. Their hearts were not attached to Li Rong. They often brought in a group of Hu Jie as party members and ousted their former ministers. They wanted to scatter their people because of this. Cao Zhen said, "The people who died of starvation were all weak people who did not do anything, but the strong and brave people were not troubled by this.

古文：且储廪以备不虞，岂宜妄散惠孱小乎？
现代文：况且仓储粮食要备意外之需，岂能胡乱施惠于弱小之人呢？
English: Moreover, the storage of grain must be prepared for unforeseen needs. How can it be used indiscriminately to benefit the weak and the small?

古文：仆射苟附下，非国计。 轨曰： 善。 
现代文：仆射如想附合下情，就不是为国考虑了。 李轨说： 对。 
English: If a flunky wants to attach an ulterior motive, it is not for the sake of the country.Li Luo said: Right.

古文：乃闭粟。
现代文：便关仓而不发粮。
English: They close the storehouses without distributing food.

古文：下益怨，多欲叛去。
现代文：其部下更加怨恨，都想叛亡而去。
English: His subordinates were even more resentful and wanted to defect.

古文：会修仁兄兴贵本在长安，自表诣凉州招轨。
现代文：那时安修仁之兄兴贵本在长安，自己上表请去凉州招慰李轨。
English: At that time, An Xiu Ren's brother Xing Gui was in Chang'an, and he went to Liangzhou to solicit Li Gang.

古文：帝曰： 轨据河西，连吐谷浑、突厥，今兴兵讨击尚为难，单使弄颊可下邪？ 
现代文：高祖说 ：李轨据有河西，连结吐谷浑、突厥，如今起兵讨伐尚且感到为难，单使去说能臣服他吗？ 
English: Gao Zu said: According to Li Luo, there is the west of the river, connected with Tu Guhun and Turk, but now it is still difficult to raise an army to fight, can you subjugate him if you go alone?

古文：兴贵曰： 轨盛强诚然，若晓以逆顺祸福，宜听。
现代文：兴贵说： 李轨的确盛强，如用逆顺祸福的道理开导他，应该听从。
English: Xing Gui said, "Li Guo is indeed powerful. If you enlighten him with the principle of good and evil, he should listen to you.

古文：如凭固不受，臣世凉州豪望，多识其士民，而修仁为轨信任，典事枢者数十人，若候隙图之，无不济。 
现代文：如凭借险固而不服从的话，臣世代是凉州望族，了解其士民，而且仁受到李轨信任，职掌枢密者有数十人，如等候嫌隙以谋图取事，没有不成功的。 
English: If they do not obey by virtue of their obstinacy, the vassal generation is the most prestigious family in Liangzhou, they know their scholars and people, and they are trusted by Li Luo. There are dozens of people who hold the position of privy councilor. If they wait for a bad omen and try to take matters into their own hands, they will not be unsuccessful.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：高祖表示同意。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：兴贵至凉州，轨授以左右卫大将军，因间访兴贵以自安策。
现代文：兴贵到达凉州，李轨授以左右卫大将军之职，因空询问兴贵自安的办法。
English: When Xinggui arrived in Liangzhou, Li Lu conferred on him the position of the left and right guards general. He asked Xinggui for advice on how to keep himself safe.

古文：兴贵对曰： 凉州僻远，财力凋耗，虽胜兵十万，而地不过千里，无险固自守。
现代文：兴贵回答说 ：凉州僻远，财力不足，虽有雄兵十万，而土地不过千里，又无险固可守。
English: Xinggui replied, "Liangzhou is far away and lacks financial resources. Although there are a hundred thousand soldiers, the land is only a thousand miles away, and there is no danger to defend.

古文：又滨接戎狄，戎狄，豺狼也，非我族类。
现代文：还与戎狄接壤，戎狄心如豺狼，不与我们同族同类。
English: It also shares a border with Eunji, whose heart is like a wolf's. They are not of the same race as us.

古文：今唐家据京师，略定中原，攻必下，战必胜，盖天启也。
现代文：如今唐家天子据有京师，略定中原，每攻必下，每战必胜，有天命护佑。
English: Nowadays, the heavenly son of the Tang family is said to have the Beijing division and the Central Plains division. Every attack must be made, every battle must be won, and there is a heavenly destiny to protect.

古文：若举河西地奉图东归，虽汉窦融未足吾比。 
现代文：如举河西版图东归朝廷，虽是汉代窦融也不足与我们相比。 
English: If the eastern and western part of the map of Heze Province were to be returned to the imperial court, even the Han Dynasty Dou Rong would not be enough to compare with us.

古文：轨默不答，久之，曰： 昔吴王濞以江左兵犹称己为东帝，我今举河右，不得为西帝乎？
现代文：李轨默然不答，过了好一会儿才说： 从前吴王刘濞统率江左之兵时还称自己为东帝，我今据有河右，不能称为西帝吗？
English: Li Liao silently did not answer, and after a while he said: Once upon a time, when Wu King Liu Bei led the soldiers of the left side of the river, he also called himself the East Emperor. Now that I have the right side of the river, can I not be called the West Emperor?

古文：虽唐强大，如我何？
现代文：唐虽强大，能把我怎么样？
English: Although Tang is powerful, what can he do to me?

古文：君无为唐诱致我。 
现代文：您不要为唐引诱我了。 
English: Don't try to seduce me for Tang.

古文：兴贵惧，谢曰： 窃闻富贵不居故乡，如衣锦夜行。
现代文：兴贵害怕，假装悔谢说： 我私下听说富贵不居故乡，如穿绵绣衣服走夜路。
English: Xing Gui was afraid and pretended to be sorry, saying, "I have heard in private that if a rich person does not live in his hometown, it is like walking at night in embroidered clothes.

古文：今合宗蒙任，敢有它志！ 
现代文：如今全族子弟蒙受信任，怎敢怀有他心！ 
English: Now that the son of the whole family is trusted, how dare he harbor any other thoughts!

古文：兴贵知轨不可以说，乃与脩仁等潜引诸胡兵围其城，轨以步骑千余出战。
现代文：兴贵知道李轨不可说服，便与仁等人暗引诸胡兵马围攻其城，李轨率步骑兵一千人出战。
English: Xinggui knew that Li Liao could not be convinced, so he and Ren secretly led the Hu soldiers and horses to besiege their city. Li Liao led a thousand infantry cavalry to fight.

古文：先是，薛举柱国奚道宜率羌兵奔轨，轨许以刺史而不与，道宜怨，故共击轨。
现代文：当初，薛举柱国奚道宜率领羌兵投奔李轨，李轨答应任命他为刺史而未兑现，道宜怨恨，因此共同攻击李轨。
English: At first, Xue held up the pillar of the State Council, and Daoyi led his soldiers to rush to Li Liao. Li Liao promised to appoint him as the chief of staff, but he did not fulfill his promise. Daoyi was resentful, so they jointly attacked Li Liao.

古文：轨败入城，引兵登陴，须外援。
现代文：李轨兵败入城，引兵登上城墙守卫，以等待外援。
English: Li Rail's defeated soldiers entered the city and led the troops onto the city wall to wait for foreign aid.

古文：兴贵传言曰： 唐使我来取轨，不从者罪三族。 
现代文：兴贵传言说： 大唐天子派我来取李轨，不服从者罪及三族。 
English: A popular rumor says: Datang Tianzi sent me to take Li Rail, and those who disobey will be punished by the Three Kingdoms.

古文：于是诸城不敢动。
现代文：因此各城将士都不敢出动。
English: As a result, soldiers from all the cities were afraid to go out.

古文：轨叹曰： 人心去矣，天亡我乎？ 
现代文：李轨感叹地说： 人心已失，天亡我啊！ 
English: Li Liao sighed and said: The human heart has been lost, I'm doomed!

古文：携妻子上玉女台，属酒为别。
现代文：携同妻子儿女登上玉女台，置酒告别故国。
English: Accompanied by their wives and children, they boarded the platform and had a drink to bid farewell to their home country.

古文：脩仁执送之，斩于长安。
现代文：仁抓获他后送往京师，被斩首于长安。
English: Jin captured him and sent him to Beijing Division, where he was beheaded in Chang'an.

古文：自起至亡凡三年。
现代文：李轨从起兵到灭亡为时三年。
English: It took Li Rong three years from the time he raised an army to his death.

古文：诏兴贵为右武候大将军，封凉国公，赐帛万段；修仁左武候大将军，申国公，并给田宅，封六百户。
现代文：下诏授予兴贵右武侯大将军，封为凉国公，赐予丝帛一万段；仁为左武侯大将军，封为申国公；分别给予田宅，并食实封六百户。
English: The following edict was issued: Xinggui was awarded the title of Right Wuhu Grand General and the title of Liang Guo Guo Guo, and was given a silk purse of 10,000 dan; Ren was awarded the title of Left Wuhu Grand General and the title of Shen Guo Guo Guo Guo; they were each given a rice field and a house, and 600 households were given food stamps.

古文：未几，金刚背突厥，欲还上谷，为其追骑斩之。
现代文：当时邓晓闻知李轨失败，入朝恭贺高祖。高祖说： 你称臣于李轨，出使来此，闻其灭亡，而没一点哀容，竟然手舞足蹈来讨我欢心。
English: At that time, Deng Xiao heard that Li Rong had failed and congratulated Gao Zu on his accession to the imperial court. Gao Zu said: You claimed to be a vassal of Li Rong, sent an envoy here, heard of its demise, but without a hint of sorrow, you even danced to please me.

古文：武周亦谋归马邑，计露，突厥杀之。
现代文：你不尽心于李轨，怎能尽节于我呢？ 
English: If you don't put your heart into Li Ke, how can you put your heart into me?

古文：起兵六年而灭。
现代文：于是废弃他而不予录用。
English: So he was discarded and not hired.

古文：高开道，沧州阳信人。
现代文：高开道是沧州阳信县人。
English: Gao Kaido is from Yangxin County, Cangzhou.

古文：世煮盐为生。
现代文：其家世代靠煮盐为生。
English: His family has been living on boiled salt for generations.

古文：少矫勇，走及奔马。
现代文：少年时矫捷勇悍，跑起来追得上奔马。
English: When he was a boy, he was agile and brave. He could run after a galloping horse.

古文：隋大业末，依河间贼格谦，未甚奇之。
现代文：隋朝大业末年，投靠河间郡贼寇格谦，起初不以为奇。
English: In the last years of the Sui Dynasty, it was not surprising at first that Koga Kogken, a thief from Kawama County, would take refuge in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：会谦为隋兵围捕，左右奔散，无救者，开道独身决战，杀数十人，捕兵解，谦得免，遂引为将军。
现代文：有次格谦遭到隋兵围捕，左右奔散，不敢救援，开道只身奋战，连杀数十名隋兵，解除围攻，格谦方才免难，随即委派他为将军。
English: There was a time when Ge Qian was rounded up by Sui soldiers, he ran around and around, he did not dare to rescue, he fought alone, he killed dozens of Sui soldiers, the siege was lifted, Ge Qian was spared, and then he was appointed as a general.

古文：谦灭，与其党百余人亡海曲。
现代文：格谦灭亡之后，与其党徒百余人逃往海边。
English: After Ge Qian's death, more than a hundred of his followers fled to the seaside.

古文：后出剽沧州，众稍附，因北掠戍保，自临渝至怀远皆破有之。
现代文：后又出来劫掠沧州，贼众渐附，因而北上攻掠戍堡，从临渝到怀远尽被他攻占。
English: Later, he went out again to plunder Cangzhou, and the thieves gradually followed him, so he went to the north to attack and plunder the fortress. From Linyu to Huaiyuan, he was occupied by him.

古文：复引兵围北平，未下，隋守将李景自度不能支，拔城去，开道据其地。
现代文：接着率兵包围北平郡，未能攻下，守将李景自料不能支撑，弃城而走，开道便占据其城。
English: He then led his troops to encircle Beiping County, but failed to capture it. Li Jing, the garrison commander, could not support himself, abandoned the city, and then occupied his city.

古文：武德元年，陷渔阳郡有之。有铠马数千，众万人，自号燕王。
现代文：武德元年，攻占渔阳郡。拥有甲马数千，徒众万人，自号为燕王。
English: In the first year of Wu De, he conquered Yuyang County. He owned thousands of horses and tens of thousands of people, and called himself the King of Swallows.

古文：先是，怀戎浮屠高昙晟因县令具供，与其徒袭杀令，伪号大乘皇帝，以尼静宣为耶输皇后，建元法轮，遣使约开道为兄弟，封齐王，开道引众从之。
现代文：起初，怀戎县僧人高昙晟借县令设斋供食之机，与其僧徒袭杀县令，自称大乘皇帝，立尼姑静宣为耶输皇后，建立纪元年号为法轮。派遣使者与开道约为兄弟，封开道为齐王，开道便率众归附于他。
English: At first, Gao Jiong, a monk from Wai Rong County, borrowed the county ordinance to set up a place for fasting and offering food. He and his monks attacked and killed the county ordinance, claimed to be the Emperor of Mahayana Buddhism, established the nun Jing Xuan as the Empress of Yadu, and established the year of the first century as Falun. He sent an envoy to Kaido, who was a brother, to seal Kaido as the King of Qi, and Kaido led the people to join him.

古文：居三月，杀昙晟，并其众，复称燕王，建元，署置百官。
现代文：三个月后，开道杀掉昙晟，尽并其众，重新自称燕王，建立年号，署置百官。
English: Three months later, he opened the way to kill the dragonfly, do the same as everyone else, re-claim himself as the King of Swallows, establish the year, and appoint hundreds of officials.

古文：窦建德围罗艺于幽州，艺请救，开道以骑二千赴之，建德解去，乃因艺使请降，诏以为蔚州总管、上柱国、北平郡王，赐姓李。
现代文：窦建德围攻罗艺于幽州，罗艺求救，开道率骑兵二千人前去援助，建德解围而去。开道便借罗艺遣使奏请归降朝廷，下诏任命他为蔚州总管、上柱国，封为北平郡王，赐姓李氏。
English: Dou Jiande besieged Luo Yiyi in Yuzhou, Luo Yiyi called for help, Kaido led two thousand cavalrymen to help, and Jiande broke the siege and left. Kaido then used Luo Yiyi's envoy to ask for surrender to the imperial court, and the next imperial edict appointed him as the chief administrator of Ulshu and the upper pillar state, and he was named the king of Beiping County and given the surname Li.

古文：开道以轻骑五百抵幽州，欲图艺。
现代文：开道率轻骑五百到达幽州，想对罗艺下手。
English: The opening rate of light riding five hundred to reach Yuzhou, want to attack Luo Yi.

古文：自从数骑入都督府，且观艺，艺与张饮尽欢，知不可图，遂去。
现代文：开道带领随从骑士数人进入都督府，观察罗艺动静，罗艺设宴与他畅饮尽欢，开道明白不能下手，便离开幽州。
English: Kaido led several of his knights into the governor's residence to observe Luo Yi's movements. Luo Yi had a banquet and enjoyed drinking with him. Kaido knew he couldn't do anything, so he left Yuzhou.

古文：五年，幽州饥，开道许输以粟。
现代文：武德五年，幽州发生饥荒，开道答应输送粮食。
English: In the fifth year of Wude, famine occurred in Yuzhou, and Kaido promised to transport grain.

古文：艺遣老弱凑食，皆厚遇之。
现代文：罗艺派遣老弱前往就食。开道接待很周到。
English: Luo Yi sent the old and the weak to eat. The opening reception was very thoughtful.

古文：艺悦，不为虞，更发兵三千、车数百、马驴千往请粟，开道悉留不遣，遂北连突厥，告绝于艺，复称燕，与刘黑闼联兵入寇。
现代文：罗艺很高兴，不加提防，随即调拨兵士三千人，车数百辆、马驴千余匹前往借粮，开道全都留下而不予遣返。于是北与突厥连兵，且与罗艺断绝往来，重称燕王，并与刘黑闼共同进犯内地。
English: Luo Yiyi was very happy, and without warning, he immediately dispatched three thousand soldiers, hundreds of cars, and more than a thousand horses and donkeys to borrow grain, all of which were left without being repatriated. Therefore, the North broke off contact with the Turkish soldiers and Luo Yiyi, renamed himself Yan Wang, and invaded the mainland together with Liu Heyao.

古文：开道攻易州不克，遣将谢棱诡降于艺，请兵应接。
现代文：开道进攻易州而未能拿下，便派部将谢棱假降于罗艺，并请求派兵救援。
English: When they failed to take Yizhou, they sent a detachment to surrender Xie Renfu to Luo Yi, and requested that troops be sent to rescue him.

古文：艺众至，棱纵击破之，因导突厥俱南，恒、定、幽、易等骚然罹患。
现代文：罗艺率众接应，谢棱纵兵将其击破，接着引突厥南侵，恒、定、幽、易等州尽遭蹂躏。
English: Luo Yi led the crowd to respond, and Xie Ren's soldiers broke it, then led the Turks to invade the south, and Heng, Ding, Yu, Yi and other states were all ravaged.

古文：颉利以开道善攻具，与俱攻马邑，拔之。
现代文：颉利可汗因开道部众善用攻城器具，与他一道攻拔马邑。
English: Because of the good use of siege equipment by the members of the Kaido unit, Meli Khan went with him to attack Ma'e.

古文：时群盗相继平，开道欲降，自疑反覆得罪，犹恃突厥自安。
现代文：当时群盗相继平定，开道想归降朝廷，又怕多次反复，不能取信于人，仍然依仗突厥自保平安。
English: At that time, the bandits were successively subdued, and they wanted to surrender to the imperial court, but they were afraid of repeating themselves many times, and they could not gain the trust of others. They still relied on the Turks to keep themselves safe.

古文：然将士多山东人，思归，众益厌乱。
现代文：但将士多是山东之人，思还家乡，众人更加厌恶作乱。
English: However, most of the soldiers were from Shandong and were thinking of their hometowns, and they were even more averse to causing trouble.

古文：初，开道募壮士数百为养子，卫閤下，及刘黑闼将张君立亡归，开道命与爱将张金树分督之。
现代文：起初，开道招募壮士数百人为养子，常在阁下护卫。刘黑闼部将张君立逃归开道，开道命君立与爱将张金树分督其兵。
English: At first, Kado recruited hundreds of strong men to be his foster sons, and they often escorted him. Liu Heibe escorted Zhang Jianli back to Kado, and Kado ordered Zhang Jianli and Zhang Jinshu to divide his soldiers.

古文：金树潜令左右数人伪与诸养子戏，至夕，入閤，绝其弓弦，又取刀槊聚床下。
现代文：金树暗自命令左右数人装作与诸养子游戏，到晚上，进入阁内，偷偷地断其弓弦，又取刀矛肖藏于床下。
English: Jinshu secretly ordered several people around him to pretend to play with his foster sons, and in the evening, he entered the attic, secretly cut his bow strings, and took his sword and spear and hid them under the bed.

古文：既暝，金树以其徒噪攻之，数人者抱刀槊出閤。
现代文：天黑后，金树率其部下鼓噪来攻，先前派出的几个人抱着刀矛肖跑出阁来。
English: After dark, Jinshu led his men in a noisy attack, and several people who had been sent earlier ran out of the pavilion holding their swords and spears.

古文：诸义子将搏战，亡弓槊。
现代文：诸义子准备出战，但找不到刀矛肖。
English: They are ready to fight, but they can't find their swords and spears.

古文：君立举火外城应之，帐下大扰，养子穷，争归金树。
现代文：君立又在外城举火相应，帐下大乱，养子感到困穷，争先归附金树。
English: In response, the king and queen set fire to the outer city, the accounts were in chaos, the adopted son felt poor, and they scrambled to be the first to attach the golden tree.

古文：开道顾不免，擐甲挺刃据堂坐，与妻妾奏妓饮酒，金树畏不敢前。
现代文：开道知道此难难免，披甲持刀据堂而坐。与其妻妾奏乐酣饮，金树畏惧而不敢进逼。
English: Knowing that this was inevitable, he sat in the hall, wearing armor and holding a sword. He played music and drank with his wife and concubine, but the golden tree was afraid and did not dare to enter.

古文：天且明，开道先缢其妻妾及诸子而后自杀。
现代文：天将亮时，开道先缢死其妻妾诸子而后自杀。
English: At dawn, he strangled his wife, concubine and children before committing suicide.

古文：金树罗兵取养子，皆斩之，亦杀君立而归。
现代文：金树陈兵捕拿养子，全都斩决，又杀死张君立，而后归附朝廷。
English: Jinshu Chen's soldiers captured his adopted son, and all of them were executed. They also killed Zhang Jianli, and then they were annexed to the imperial court.

古文：开道起兵凡八年灭。
现代文：开道起兵历时八年而灭。
English: It took eight years for the movement to die out.

古文：以其地为妫州，诏以金树为北燕州都督。
现代文：以其地为妫州，下诏任命张金树为北燕州都督。
English: He named Zhang Jinshu as the governor of North Yanzhou with the following edict.

