古文：阆族弟珍，字灵智，高祖赐名焉。
现代文：韦阆的族弟韦珍，字灵智，名是由高祖赐给的。
English: Wei Zheng's younger brother Wei Zhen, also known as Ling Zhi, was given his name by Gao Zu.

古文：父尚，字文叔，乐安王良安西府从事中郎。
现代文：父亲韦尚，字文叔，任乐安王元良安西府从事中郎。
English: His father, Wei Shang, and his uncle, Zi Wen, were both appointed as middlemen to the King of Le'an, Yuan Liang, in Xi Prefecture.

古文：卒，赠安远将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：死后，赠安远将军、雍州刺史。
English: After his death, he bestowed generals Anyuan and Yongzhou Zhishi.

古文：珍少有志操。
现代文：韦珍年轻时有志气和节操。
English: When she was young, Wei Zhen was ambitious and self-disciplined.

古文：解褐京兆王子推常侍，转尚书南部郎。
现代文：出仕任京兆王元子推的常侍，转任尚书南部郎。
English: He served as a regular attendant to Prince Mototsuko of Kyocho and was transferred to the position of Nanbu no Ie of Shosho.

古文：高祖初，蛮首桓诞归款，朝廷思安边之略，以诞为东荆州刺史。
现代文：高祖在位之初，蛮地首领桓诞归诚，朝廷考虑到安抚边地的策略，以桓诞为东荆州刺史。
English: At the beginning of Gao Zu's reign, the leader of the barbarians, Huan Guo, was pardoned, and the imperial court considered the strategy of appeasing the border areas, with Huan Guo as the history of East Jingzhou.

古文：令珍为使，与诞招慰蛮左。
现代文：令韦珍为使者，与桓诞一道招安抚慰东部的蛮人。
English: He made Wei Zhen an emissary and, together with Huan Guo, recruited and pacified the barbarians in the east.

古文：珍自悬瓠西入三百余里，至桐栢山，穷淮源，宣扬恩泽，莫不降附。
现代文：韦珍从悬瓠向西行进三百余里，到达桐柏山，直到淮水之源，宣扬朝廷的恩泽，所到之处莫不降附。
English: Wei Zhen marched more than three hundred miles westward from the Hanging Plough, reaching Tongba Mountain, until the source of Huai Shui, proclaiming the benevolence of the imperial court, and everywhere he went, he was subordinate to it.

古文：淮源旧有祠堂，蛮俗恆用人祭之。
现代文：淮水的源头有一座古旧的祠堂，蛮人风俗，长期以来都用活人来祭祀。
English: At the source of Huai Shui, there is an ancient ancestral hall. According to barbarian customs, living people have long been used for sacrifices.

古文：珍乃晓告曰： 天地明灵，即是民之父母，岂有父母甘子肉味！
现代文：韦珍就晓谕当地百姓说： 天地神灵，就是人民的父母，哪里有父母要吃子女的肉的呢！
English: Wei Zhen then addressed the local people, saying: The gods of heaven and earth are the parents of the people. Where are the parents who want to eat the flesh of their children?

古文：自今已后，悉宜以酒脯代用。 
现代文：从今以后，都应当用酒肉代替人祭。 
English: From now on, human sacrifices should be replaced with meat and wine.

古文：群蛮从约，至今行之。
现代文：当地蛮人遵从他的规定，至今都照这样办。
English: The local savages obeyed his orders and have done so ever since.

古文：凡所招降七万余户，置郡县而还。
现代文：韦珍在这一带总共招降了七万余户，为他们设置郡县然后返回朝廷。
English: Wei Zhen recruited a total of more than seventy thousand households in this area, set up counties for them and then returned to the imperial court.

古文：以奉使称旨，除左将军、乐陵镇将，赐爵霸城子。
现代文：因奉使宣称圣旨有功，被授予左将军、乐陵镇将之职，赐爵为霸城子。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Left and General of Le Ling Town for his service in proclaiming the merits of the Holy Will, and was given a peerage for his efforts to take over the castle.

古文：萧道成司州民谢天盖自署司州刺史，规欲以州内附。
现代文：萧道成所属司州之民谢天盖自命为司州刺史，图谋以司州归附于朝廷。
English: Xie Tiange, a member of Xiao Daocheng's Shizhou people, appointed himself to write the history of Shizhou in an attempt to annex Shizhou to the imperial court.

古文：事泄，为道成将崔慧景攻围。
现代文：事情泄露之后，被萧道成的部将崔慧景围攻。
English: After the affair leaked out, Xiao Daocheng's subordinates besieged Cui Huijing.

古文：诏珍率在镇士马渡淮援接。
现代文：高祖令韦珍率所在镇的兵马渡过淮水援助接应。
English: Gao Zu Ling Wei Zhen led the soldiers and horses of the town to cross Huai Shui to receive assistance.

古文：时道成闻珍将至，遣将苟元宾据淮逆拒。
现代文：当时萧道成听说韦珍率军将要到来，就派部将苟元宾凭据淮水进行抵御。
English: At that time, Xiao Daocheng heard that Wei Zhen and his army were about to arrive, so he sent his general, Guo Yuanbin, to defend Huai Shui.

古文：珍乃分遣铁马，于上流潜渡，亲率步士与贼对接。
现代文：韦珍就分派一支骑兵，在淮水上游偷渡，自己率领步卒与敌军接战。
English: Wei Zhen dispatched a cavalry to smuggle across the upper reaches of Huai Shui, and led his foot soldiers into battle with the enemy.

古文：旗鼓始交，甲骑奄至，腹背奋击，破之。
现代文：两军旗鼓刚刚相交，骑兵突然杀来，腹背奋力夹击，打败了南齐军。
English: The two armies' banners and drums just intersected, and the cavalry suddenly came and clamped down with great effort, defeating the Nanqi Army.

古文：天盖寻为左右所杀，降于慧景。
现代文：谢天盖不久被他身边的人所杀，余部投降崔慧景。
English: Xie Tiankai was soon killed by the people around him, and the rest surrendered to Cui Huijing.

古文：珍乘胜驰进，又破慧景，拥降民七千余户内徙，表置城阳、刚陵、义阳三郡以处之。
现代文：韦珍乘胜奔驰前进，又打败崔慧景，把降附的民众七千余户迁徙到内地，表奏朝廷设置城阳、刚陵、义阳三郡来安顿移民。
English: Wei Zhen took advantage of the victory to advance, and defeated Cui Huijing, and migrated more than seven thousand people to the mainland, showing that the imperial court set up three counties of Chengyang, Gangneung and Yiyang to settle immigrants.

古文：高祖诏珍移镇比阳，萧赜遣其雍州刺史陈显达率众来寇。
现代文：高祖令韦珍移镇比阳，萧赜派他的雍州刺史陈显达率部前来侵犯。
English: Gao Zu ordered Wei Zhen to move to Biyang, and Xiao Gan sent his Yongzhou assassin Chen Xanda to invade.

古文：城中将士咸欲出战，珍曰： 彼初至气锐，未可便挫，且共坚守，待其攻我疲弊，击之未晚。 
现代文：城中将士都要求出战，韦珍说： 敌军初到，士气锐利，不能立即挫败它，暂且共同坚守，等到他们攻城疲惫之后，再行出击也为不晚。 
English: The generals and soldiers in the city all demanded to go out to fight, Wei Zhen said: The enemy army has just arrived, the morale is sharp, it cannot be defeated immediately, for the time being, they should stick together, and wait until they are tired of attacking the city, and then it is not too late to attack.

古文：于是凭城拒战，杀伤甚众。
现代文：于是韦珍率众凭城拒战，杀伤敌军甚多。
English: As a result, Wei Zhen led the crowd to resist the battle with the city, killing and wounding a large number of enemy troops.

古文：相持旬有二日，夜开城门掩击之，贼遂奔溃。
现代文：双方相持了十二天，韦珍趁夜打开城门偷袭敌军，敌军于是奔逃溃退。
English: The two sides held each other for twelve days. Wei Zhen took advantage of the night to open the city gate to sneak attack the enemy army. The enemy army then ran away and retreated.

古文：以功进爵为侯。
现代文：韦珍凭战功晋爵位为侯。
English: Pei Xiang was finally promoted to marquis for his achievements.

古文：车驾南讨，珍上便宜，并自陈在边岁久，悉其要害，愿为前驱。
现代文：高祖亲自率军南征，韦珍向皇帝献计献策，并且说自己在边地任职时间长久，知道那里的要害之处，愿意充当前驱。
English: Gaozu personally led the army to the south, and Wei Zhen offered his advice to the emperor. He also said that he had served in the outlying areas for a long time, knew the key points there, and was willing to act as the forerunner.

古文：诏珍为陇西公源怀卫大将军府长史，转太保、齐郡王长史。
现代文：高祖令韦珍为陇西公源怀卫大将军府长史，转任太保、齐郡王长史。
English: Gao Zu named Wei Zhen as the prefectural governor of Shaanxi Gongyuan Huaiwei General, and he was transferred to the post of Taibo and the prefectural governor of Qi County.

古文：迁显武将军、郢州刺史，在州有声绩，朝庭嘉之。
现代文：迁任显武将军、郢州刺史，他在州任上有声望有政绩，朝廷嘉奖他。
English: He was transferred to the post of Gen. Xianwu and appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou. He had a reputation and political achievements as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the imperial court commended him.

古文：迁龙骧将军，赐骅骝二匹、帛五十匹、谷三百斛。
现代文：升任为龙骧将军，赐给骅骝马二匹、帛五十匹、谷三百斛。
English: He was promoted to be the general of Longyu, and was given two horses, fifty donkeys, and 300 donkeys.

古文：珍乃召集州内孤贫者，谓曰： 天子以我能绥抚卿等，故赐以谷帛，吾何敢独当？ 
现代文：韦珍就召集州内孤贫的人，对他们说： 天子因我能够安抚你们，所以赐给我谷物布帛，我怎么敢独自享用。 
English: So she called together the poorest of the state's destitute and said to them: Son of God, since I am able to comfort you, give me a sack of grain. How dare I eat by myself?

古文：遂以所赐悉分与之。
现代文：于是把朝廷所赐的财物全部分给了他们。
English: As a result, he gave them the entire portion of the property given by the court.

古文：寻加平南将军、荆州刺史，与尚书卢渊征赭阳，为萧鸾将垣历生、蔡道贵所败，免归乡里。
现代文：不久，加授韦珍为平南将军、荆州刺史，与尚书卢渊一道征讨赭阳，被萧鸾的部将垣历生、蔡道贵打败，免官回到乡里。
English: Soon after, Wei Zhen was awarded the title of General of Pingnan and Jingzhou was awarded the title of General of Jingzhou. Together with Shangshu Luyuan, they fought to conquer Fenyang. They were defeated by Xiao Yao's generals, Gao Lisheng and Cai Daogui, and returned to the countryside without any official rank.

古文：临别谓渊曰： 主上圣明，志吞吴会，用兵机要，在于上流。
现代文：临别之时他对卢渊说： 皇上圣明，志在吞并吴会，用兵机要，实属上流。
English: At the time of parting, he said to Lu Yuan: Emperor Shengming, who aspires to annex the Wu Association and wants to do so with military means, really belongs to the upper class.

古文：若有事荆楚，恐老夫复不得停耳。 
现代文：倘若荆楚一带有事，恐怕老夫又会不得停歇啊。 
English: If Jing Chu has an accident, I'm afraid the old man will have to stop again.

古文：后车驾征樊郢，复起珍为中军大将军、彭城王勰长史。
现代文：后来皇帝征伐樊、郢，起用韦珍为中军大将军、彭城王元勰长史。
English: Later, the emperor sent Wei Zhen to be the general of the Chinese army, and Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun Changshi was appointed.

古文：沔北既平，以珍为建威将军，试守鲁阳郡。
现代文：沔水以北平定之后，以韦珍为建威将军，试守鲁阳郡。
English: After the pacification of the north of Surabaya, Wei Zhen as the general of Jianwei tried to defend Luyang County.

古文：高祖复南伐，路经珍郡，加中垒将军，正太守。
现代文：高祖再次南征，路经韦珍的郡所，加授他为中垒将军、正太守。
English: Gaozu marched south again, passing through Weizhen's county seat, and was awarded the title of Zhongbai General and Zhengda Governor.

古文：珍从至济水，高祖曰： 朕顷戎车再驾，卿常翼务中军，今日之举，亦欲与卿同行。
现代文：韦珍随从皇帝到清水，高祖说： 我近来一再亲自出征，你经常跟随我在中军任事，这一次征战，也想要与你同行。
English: Wei Zhen followed the emperor to Qingshui. Gao Zu said: Recently, I have repeatedly gone to war myself. You have often followed me to serve in the Chinese army. This time, I want to go to war with you.

古文：但三鵶险恶，非卿无以守也。 
现代文：但三鸦之地地形险恶，除了你就没有人能够固守了。 
English: However, the terrain of the Three Ravens' Land is treacherous, and no one can hold on except you.

古文：后除光州平东府长史，转荆州骠骑府司马。
现代文：因此令韦珍辞别回去。及至高祖在行宫驾崩，军队隐匿消息退回，到了韦珍的郡所才公开发丧。
English: Therefore, Wei Zhen resigned to go back. And the supreme ancestor died in the palace, the army returned the hidden news, and it was only at Wei Zhen's county seat that the public funeral was held.

古文：卒官，年四十四。嵩遵弟嵩景，武定中，燕郡太守。
现代文：韦珍还朝，被授予中散大夫，不久加授镇远将军、太尉咨议参军。
English: Wei Zhen was still in the morning, and was awarded the title of Dr. Zhong San, and was soon awarded the title of General Zhenyuan and the rank of Lieutenant for his advice to join the army.

古文：又有武功苏湛，字景俊，魏侍中则之后也。
现代文：永平元年逝世，终年七十四岁。追赠为本将军、南青州刺史，定谥号为懿。武功人苏湛，字景俊，是曹魏侍中苏则的后代。
English: Yongping died in the first year of the year, at the age of seventy-four. The posthumous gift is the general, the South Qingzhou engraved history, and the fixed name is. The martial artist Su Tan and the character Jing Jun are the descendants of Cao Wei's attendant Su Ze.

古文：晋乱，避地河右。
现代文：晋末大乱，苏氏家族避居黄河以西。
English: The Su family fled west of the Yellow River during the Jinmatsu Rebellion.

古文：世祖平凉州，还乡里。
现代文：世祖平定凉州之后，苏则回到乡里。
English: After the ancestor conquered Liangzhou, Su returned to the countryside.

古文：父拥，字天祐，秦州抚军府司马。
现代文：苏湛的父亲苏拥，字天，任秦州抚军府司马。
English: Su Zhan's father, Su Yung, Zetian, was appointed as the secretary of the Qin State Military Government.

古文：湛少有器行，颇涉群书。
现代文：苏湛年轻时颇有才器，涉猎群书。
English: When he was young, Su Zhan was quite talented and read a lot of books.

古文：年二十余，举秀才。
现代文：二十余岁时，举秀才。
English: When he was in his twenties, he became a great scholar.

古文：除奉朝请，领侍御史，转员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：后任奉朝请，领侍御史，转任员外散骑侍郎。
English: Later, he served as the chief of the Imperial Household Agency, the chief of the Imperial Household Agency, and the chief of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：萧宝夤之讨关西，以湛为行台郎中，深见委任。
现代文：萧宝夤征讨关西的时候，以苏湛为行台郎中，苏湛深受其信任。
English: When Xiao Baozhen discussed Kansai with Suzan, Suzan was deeply trusted by him.

古文：孝昌中，宝夤大败东还，朝廷以为雍州刺史。
现代文：孝昌年间，萧宝夤大败而还，朝廷任他为雍州刺史。
English: During the reign of Xiaochang, Xiao Baojun suffered a great defeat but recovered, and the imperial court appointed him to write the history of Yongzhou.

古文：后自猜惧，害中尉郦道元，乃称兵反。
现代文：后来自己猜疑畏惧，杀害中尉郦道元，于是聚兵反叛朝廷。
English: Later, suspecting and fearing for his own safety, he killed Lieutenant Zou Dao Yuan, and then rallied his troops to rebel against the imperial court.

古文：时湛卧疾于家，宝夤令姜俭报湛云： 元略受萧衍意旨，乃欲见除。
现代文：当时苏湛因病在家中卧床不起，萧宝夤派姜俭告诉苏湛说： 元略接受萧衍的意旨，想要除掉我。
English: At that time, Su Zhan was bedridden at home due to illness. Xiao Baozhu sent Jiang Jian to tell Su Zhan that: Yuan slightly accepted Xiao Yan's intention and wanted to get rid of me.

古文：郦道元之来，事不可测。
现代文：郦道元来到这里，事情不可揣测。
English: When Gong Dogen came here, things cannot be speculated.

古文：吾不能坐受死亡，今便为身计，不复作魏臣也。
现代文：我不能坐以待毙，现在只能为自身之计，不再作魏国之臣了。
English: I can't wait to die, I can only do things for myself now, I am no longer a vassal of Wei.

古文：与卿契阔，故以相报，死生荣辱，与君共之。 
现代文：我与你死生相约，所以据实相告，死生荣辱，与你相共。 
English: I have made a pact with you for life and death, so I am telling you the truth. I am with you in life and death, in honor and dishonor.

古文：湛闻之，举声大哭。
现代文：苏湛听了这番话之后，失声痛哭。
English: After listening, Su Zhan burst into tears.

古文：俭遽止之曰： 何得便尔？ 
现代文：姜俭急忙劝止说： 你怎么竟然这样痛哭？ 
English: Jiang Jian hurriedly tried to dissuade her, saying: "Why are you crying so hard?

古文：湛曰： 百口居家，即时屠灭，云何不哭！ 
现代文：苏湛说： 我百口之家，即将遭到屠灭，为什么不痛哭！ 
English: Su Zhan said: My hundred-member family is about to be slaughtered, why not cry bitterly!

古文：哭数十声，徐谓俭曰： 为我白齐王，王本以穷鸟投人，赖朝廷假王羽翼，荣宠至此。
现代文：又大哭了数十声，才慢慢对姜俭说道： 你替我转告齐王，他本来是穷鸟投林，仰仗朝廷的保护，才像今天这样荣华宠耀。
English: After crying several dozen times, she slowly said to Jiang Rong, "Tell King Qi for me that he was originally a poor bird who went into the forest and relied on the protection of the imperial court to become as glorious as he is today.

古文：属国步多虞，不能竭忠报德，乃欲乘人间隙，有不臧之心。
现代文：正值国家多难，不能尽忠报德，竟想乘别人不备，怀不善之心。
English: At a time when the country is going through many difficulties, unable to be loyal and repay virtue, he wants to take advantage of others, harboring a bad heart.

古文：信惑行路无识之语，欲以羸败之兵，守关问鼎。
现代文：听信路旁无知之人的话，想要凭弱败之兵，据关问鼎。
English: Listen to the words of the ignorant people on the roadside, who want to rely on the weak and defeated soldiers.

古文：今魏德虽衰，天命未改。
现代文：如今魏国德政虽然衰落，但天命并未改变。
English: Although the Wei Dynasty is weak now, its destiny has not changed.

古文：且王之恩义，未洽于民，但见其败，未见有成。
现代文：况且他的恩义，没有广施于人民，只能看到他的失败，不可能看到他成功。
English: Moreover, if he does not extend his gratitude to the people, they will only see his failure, and will not be able to see his success.

古文：苏湛不能以百口居家，为王族灭。 
现代文：我苏湛不能以百口之家，为了他而受到族灭。 
English: I, Suzan, can't have a hundred-member family and be wiped out because of him.

古文：宝夤复报曰： 此自救命之计，不得不尔。
现代文：萧宝夤又告诉他说： 这是我自己救命之计，不得不这样。
English: Xiao Baojun also told him: This is my own life-saving measure, I have to do this.

古文：所以不先相白者，恐沮吾计故尔。 
现代文：之所以不先告知你，是因为怕你会阻止我的计划。 
English: I didn't tell you before because I was afraid you would stop my plan.

古文：湛复曰： 凡为大事，当得天下奇士。
现代文：苏湛回复说： 凡是要成其大事，应当得到天下奇士的支持。
English: Su Zhan replied: If anything is to be great, it should be supported by the wizards of the world.

古文：今但共长安博徒小兒辈计校，办有成理不？
现代文：如今你只同长安的赌徒小儿们计议，岂有能办成大事之理？
English: Now you only consult with the gamblers in Chang'an. Is there any reason why you can accomplish great things?

古文：湛恐荆棘必生庭合。
现代文：我苏湛深恐庭院中必定会生荆棘。
English: I, Su Zhan, am deeply afraid that there will definitely be thorns in the courtyard.

古文：愿乞骸骨还乡里，脱得因此病死，可以下见先人。 
现代文：只期望求得完整的骸骨回归乡里，倘若因这次生病而死去，就可以下到黄泉去见我的祖先了。 
English: I only hope that I can return to my hometown with a complete skeleton. If I die from this illness, I will be able to go down to the underworld to meet my ancestors.

古文：宝夤素重之，以湛病，且知不为己用，听还武功。
现代文：萧宝夤素来器重苏湛，由于苏湛有病，而且知道他不会为自己所用，就听任他回到武功。
English: Xiao Baojun had always respected Su Zhan. Since Su Zhan was ill and knew that he would not be of use to him, he allowed him to return to martial arts.

古文：宝夤败，庄帝即位，征补尚书郎。
现代文：萧宝夤失败，庄帝即位，征召苏湛到京任尚书郎。
English: Xiao Baojun failed, Zhuangdi ascended to the throne, and Su Tan was summoned to Beijing as Shang Shuro.

古文：既至，庄帝曰： 前闻卿答萧宝夤，甚有美辞，为我说也。 
现代文：苏湛来到朝廷之后，庄帝对他说： 先前听说你回答萧宝夤时，多有美妙的言辞，说给我听听吧。 
English: After Su Zhan came to the imperial court, Zhuang Di said to him, "I heard that when you answered Xiao Baojun, you had many wonderful words. Let me hear them."

古文：湛顿首谢曰： 臣虽言辞不如伍被，始终不易，自谓过之。
现代文：苏湛顿首谢罪道： 臣虽然言辞不如伍被，但志节始终不改，自认为可以超过他。
English: Su Zhamden first thanked the crime: Although the minister's words are not as good as Wu Bi, he still believes that he can surpass him.

古文：然臣与宝夤周游契阔，言得尽心，而不能令其不反，臣之罪也。 
现代文：但是我与萧宝夤交游深厚并约以死生，对他所说的话只是尽我的心，但不能使他不反叛朝廷，这是臣的罪责。 
English: However, I had a deep friendship with Xiao Baojun and made a promise of life and death to him. The words I said to him were just my heart's desire, but they could not prevent him from rebelling against the imperial court. This was the vassal's fault.

古文：太尉咸阳王雅相赏爱，欲以女妻之，美拒而不纳。
现代文：庄帝听了心中喜悦，任命他为散骑都尉，仍兼任尚书郎。不久迁任中书侍郎。出帝即位之初，苏湛因病回到乡里，在家中去世。
English: Zhuangdi listened to the joy in his heart and appointed him as a cavalry captain, still concurrently serving as Shang Shuro. He was soon transferred to the position of Zhong Shushijiro. At the beginning of his accession to the throne, Suzan returned to the village due to illness and died at home.

古文：除奉朝请，亦早卒。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为散骑常侍、镇西将军、雍州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously bestowed him with the titles of strolling equerry, Zhenxi general, and Yongzhou bard.

古文：无子。务弟宣，字叔令，通辩博物，早有声誉。
现代文：裴务之弟裴宣，字叔令，知识广博颇有辩才，早年就很有声誉。
English: Pei Xuan, the younger brother of Pei Mu, was known as "Uncle Li" (叔令). He had a wide knowledge and was quite a debater. He gained a great reputation in his early years.

古文：少孤，事母兄以孝友称。
现代文：少年时丧父，侍奉母亲和兄长，以孝友著称。
English: He lost his father when he was a boy, served his mother and elder brother, and was known for his filial piety.

古文：举秀才，至都，见司空李欣，与言自旦及夕，欣嗟善不已。
现代文：裴宣举为秀才之后，来到京都，拜见司空李讠斤，同他在一起谈话，从早上谈到夜晚，李讠斤对他嗟叹不已，称赞不绝。
English: After Pei Xuanjian was praised as an outstanding talent, he came to Kyoto, met with Siku Li Yujin, and had a conversation with him. From the morning to the evening, Li Yujin was full of admiration and praise for him.

古文：司空李冲有人伦鉴识，见而重之。
现代文：司空李冲颇有鉴识人才的能力，见到裴宣后对他十分器重。
English: Siku Li Chong has the ability to recognize talent, and after seeing Pei Xuan, he is very important to him.

古文：高祖初，征为尚书主客郎，与萧赜使颜幼明、刘思效、萧琛、范云等对接。
现代文：高祖在位之初，征召裴宣为尚书主客郎，令他与萧赜派来的使者颜幼明、刘思效、萧琛、范云等人对应交接。
English: At the beginning of Gaozu's reign, Pei Xuan was conscripted to be the guest of Shang Shulun, so that he and the emissaries sent by Xiao Yao, Yan Yueming, Liu Sihei, Xiao Yao, Fan Yun and others would have a corresponding handover.

古文：转都官郎，迁员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：后来裴宣转任都官郎，迁任员外散骑侍郎。
English: Later, Pei Xuan was transferred to the post of capital official and transferred to the post of non-commissioned officer.

古文：旧令与吏部郎同班。
现代文：旧有的法令规定这个职位与吏部郎同班。
English: Under the old law, this position was in the same class as the position of librarian.

古文：囗高祖曾集沙门讲佛经，因命宣论难，甚有理诣，高祖称善。
现代文：高祖曾经聚集佛门僧人宣讲佛经，命裴宣论证疑难，他的议论很有造诣，高祖非常赞赏。
English: Gaozu once gathered Buddhist monks to preach the Buddhist scriptures, and he ordered them to argue about the difficulties of verification. His arguments were very accomplished, and Gaozu was very appreciative.

古文：迁都洛阳，以宣为采材副将。
现代文：迁都洛阳的时候，朝廷以裴宣为采材副将。
English: When the capital was moved to Luoyang, the imperial court made Pei Xuan the vice-commander of lumber.

古文：奉使称旨，遥除司空谘议参军。
现代文：裴宣承奉使命很合皇帝的意旨，朝廷让他担任司空咨议参军的官职。
English: Pei Xuan's undertaking of the mission was very much in line with the emperor's intention, and the court allowed him to serve as the official position of the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：府解，转司州治中，兼司徒右长史，又转别驾，仍长史。
现代文：这个官职解除以后，转授他为司州治中，兼司徒右长史，又转任别驾，仍旧任长史。
English: After he was relieved of this official position, he was transferred to the position of the Vice-Governor of the State, and also the Vice-President of the State Council, and then he was transferred to the position of the Vice-Governor of the State Council, but still the Vice-President of the State Council.

古文：宣明敏有器干，总摄州府，事无凝滞，远近称之。
现代文：裴宣聪明敏锐而有才干，总摄州府之事，从来没有迟滞和差错，远近之人都称道他。
English: Pei Xuan is smart, keen and talented. He has never been late or made a mistake when it comes to the overall management of the prefectural capital. People from near and far praise him.

古文：世宗初，除太中大夫，领本郡中正，仍别驾。
现代文：世宗在位之初，授任裴宣为太中大夫，兼本郡中正，仍任别驾之职。
English: At the beginning of the reign of King Sejong, Pei Xuan was appointed to the position of Tai Zhong Daifu (Grand Vice-Minister of Health) as well as the county's Vice-Minister of Health.

古文：又为司州都督，迁太尉长史。
现代文：又任司州都督，迁太尉长史。
English: He also served as the governor of Shizuoka Prefecture and was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：宣上言曰： 自迁都已来，凡战陈之处，及军罢兵还之道，所有骸骼无人覆藏者，请悉令州郡戍逻检行埋掩。
现代文：裴宣向朝廷进言说： 自从迁都以来，凡是布阵作战之处，以及收军回兵的道路上，所有尸体骸骨没有被人掩埋的，请求下令各州郡戍派人巡检，妥为掩埋。
English: Pei Xuan made a suggestion to the imperial court, saying: Since the relocation of the capital, if all the bodies and skeletons have not been buried in all the places where the battle lines have been set up, as well as on the road of collecting troops and returning soldiers, please order all the states and counties to send people to inspect and properly bury them.

古文：并符出兵之乡：其家有死于戎役者，使皆招魂复魄，祔祭先灵，复其年租调；身被伤痍者，免其兵役。 
现代文：并且明令各个送出兵丁的乡里：谁家有人死于戎役的，都让其招魂复魄，祭祀其亡灵，免除其一年的租调；家人受伤残废的，免去其兵役。 
English: Moreover, it was clearly ordered to the townships that had sent soldiers: if anyone in the family died in military service, they were to have their spirits revived, their dead were to be sacrificed, and they were to be exempted from the one-year lease; if their family members were injured or disabled, they were to be exempted from military service.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷同意了他的建议。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：出为征虏将军、益州刺史。
现代文：裴宣后出任为征虏将军、益州刺史。
English: After Pei Xuan, he was appointed as a conscript general, and the history of Yizhou was written.

古文：宣善于绥抚，甚得羌戎之心。
现代文：他善于绥靖安抚，甚得羌戎百姓之心。
English: He is good at pacifying and appeasing, and has even won the hearts of the people.

古文：复晋寿，更置益州，改宣所莅为南秦州。
现代文：朝廷克复晋寿之后，改置为益州，把裴宣所任之州改为南秦州。
English: After the imperial court reinstated Jin Shou, it was changed to Yizhou, and the state appointed by Pei Xuan was changed to South Qin.

古文：先是，有阴平氐酋杨孟孙，拥户数万，自立为王，通引萧衍，数为边患。
现代文：起先，有阴平的氐族首领杨孟孙，据有民户数万，自立为王，勾结萧衍，屡次侵犯边地。
English: At first, there was Yang Mengsun, the leader of the Yinping Yi people, who had tens of thousands of private households, established himself as king, colluded with Xiao Yan, and repeatedly invaded the borderlands.

古文：宣乃遣使招喻，晓以逆顺，孟孙感恩，即遣子诣阙。
现代文：裴宣就派使者前去招抚晓谕，晓之以逆顺祸福之理，杨孟孙感恩，就派他的儿子来到朝廷以示归附。
English: Pei Xuan sent an emissary to invite him and explain to him the principle of opposing good and evil, and Yang Mengsun was so grateful that he sent his son to the imperial court to express his gratitude.

古文：武兴氐姜谟等千余人上书乞延更限。
现代文：武兴的氐人姜谟等一千多人联名上书请求朝廷延长裴宣的任职期限。
English: More than a thousand people, including Jiang Moo, a native of Wuxing, jointly petitioned the imperial court to extend Pei Xuan's term of office.

古文：世宗嘉焉。
现代文：世宗对他十分赞赏。
English: Sejong was full of praise for him.

古文：宣家世以儒学为业，常慕廉退。
现代文：裴宣之家世代以儒学为业，他常常羡慕清廉退让之士。
English: Pei Xuan's family has been devoted to Confucianism for generations, and he often envies those who are incorruptible.

古文：每叹曰： 以贾谊之才，仕汉文之世，不历公卿，将非运也！ 
现代文：经常感叹说： 以贾谊的才能，出仕汉文之世，却不曾历公卿之任，难道不是他的时运吗？ 
English: He often lamented, "Isn't it his fortune to have served the world of Chinese literature with the talent of a courtier, but never to have held the position of a nobleman?"

古文：乃谓亲宾曰： 吾本闾阎之士，素无当世之志，直随牒推移，遂至于此。
现代文：于是对他所亲近的宾客说： 我本来是一个民间士人，向来就没有入世之志，仅只是因为朝廷文书下达催促，才使我走到这一步。
English: So he said to the guests who were close to him, "I am originally a layman, and I have never had any ambition to enter the world. It is only because of the urging issued by the Imperial Court that I have come this far.

古文：禄后养亲，道不光国，瞻言往哲，可以言归矣。 
现代文：接受俸禄用以养亲，懂得学问又不能用来为国争光，瞻顾往昔哲人的言论，我也可以辞官归民了。 
English: Accepting a salary to support relatives, understanding that learning cannot be used to compete for the country, and looking back at the words of philosophers in the past, I can also resign and return to the people.

古文：因表求解。
现代文：因而上表请求免官。
English: Therefore, the above request for removal from office.

古文：世宗不许，乃作《怀田赋》以叙心焉。
现代文：世宗不予准许，裴宣就写作《怀田赋》以表述自己的心志。
English: Sejong did not grant permission, and Bae Soon wrote "Wai Tian Fu" to express his heart's desire.

古文：永平四年，患笃，世宗遣太医令驰驿就视，并赐御药。
现代文：永平四年，裴宣患了重病，世宗派太医令从驿道骑马前往探视，并赐给御药。
English: In the fourth year of Yongping, Pei Xuan suffered from a serious illness, and the Sect's Grand Physician ordered him to visit him on horseback and give him medicine.

古文：宣素明阴阳之书，自始患，便知不起，因自克亡日，果如其言。
现代文：裴宣一向喜读阴阳之书，自从开始得病，就知道自己不会痊愈，因而自己算定了死亡的日期，结果证实了他的预言。
English: Pei Xuan had always enjoyed reading the Book of Yin and Yang. From the beginning of his illness, he knew that he would not recover, so he calculated the date of his death, and the result confirmed his prediction.

古文：时年五十八。
现代文：时年五十八岁。
English: At that time, Wang Xiong was 58 years old.

古文：世宗悼惜之。
现代文：世宗对他之死感到悲伤和惋惜。
English: Sejong was saddened and pained by his death.

古文：赠左将军、豫州刺史，谥曰定。
现代文：追赠他为左将军、豫州刺史，定谥号为定。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Left and General of the Henan Province.

古文：寻改为穆。
现代文：不久又将谥号改为穆。
English: He soon changed his nickname to Mu.

