古文：张芹汪应轸萧鸣凤齐之鸾袁宗儒许相卿顾济章侨余珊韦商臣黎贯彭汝实郑自璧戚贤刘绘钱薇洪垣周思兼颜鲸张芹，字文林，峡江人。
现代文：张芹，字文林，峡江人。
English: Zhangqin, Zhiwenlin, Qiaojiangren.

古文：弘治十五年进士。
现代文：弘治十五年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of fifteen.

古文：授福州推官。
现代文：授福州推官。
English: He was appointed as a prefect of Jufu Prefecture.

古文：正德中，召为南京御史。
现代文：正德年期间，召封为南京御史。
English: During the Zhengde era, he was appointed as the Nanjing Imperial Historian.

古文：宁夏既平，大学士李东阳亦进官荫子。
现代文：宁夏平定以后，大学士李东阳也晋官荫子。
English: After the pacification of Ningxia, Li Dongyang, a university scholar, also rose to power.

古文：芹抗疏曰： 东阳谨厚有余，正直不足；儒雅足重，节义无闻。
现代文：张芹抗疏说： 李东阳谨厚有余，正直不足；儒雅足重，节义无闻。
English: Zhang Qin Rongxiao said: Li Dongyang is more than honorable, but not honest enough; he has a heavy Confucianism, and he is not known for his righteousness.

古文：逆瑾乱政，东阳为顾命大臣，既不能遏之于始，及恶迹既彰，又不能力与之抗。
现代文：逆贼刘瑾乱政，李东阳作为顾命大臣，既不能在开始时将他遏止，等到恶迹显露出来，又不能竭力与他抗争。
English: The traitor Liu Xuan is a political ruffian, and Li Dongyang, as the minister of the people's livelihood, can neither stop him at the beginning, nor fight against him until the evil deed is revealed.

古文：脂韦顺从，惟其指使。
现代文：圆滑顺从，任其指使。
English: Smoothly obey, let it dictate.

古文：今叛贼底平，东阳何力？
现代文：现在叛贼被平定，李东阳出了什么力？
English: Now that the traitors have been subdued, what power has Li Dongyang exerted?

古文：冒功受赏，何以服人心？
现代文：冒功受赏，用什么来服众人之心？
English: What will you use to win the hearts of the people?

古文：乞立赐罢斥，夺其加恩，为大臣事君不忠者戒。 
现代文：乞求皇上立即将他罢斥，剥去加在他身上的恩赐，作为大臣事君不忠的警戒。 
English: He begged the emperor to dismiss him immediately and strip him of the gifts bestowed on him, as a warning against the minister's disloyalty.

古文：疏出，东阳涕泣不能辩。
现代文：疏章出来，李东阳涕泣不能辩解。
English: Li Dongyang's tears could not be justified.

古文：帝责芹沽名，令对状。
现代文：皇帝谴责张芹沽名钓誉，命令他自诉情状。
English: The emperor condemned Zhang Qin's reputation as a thief and ordered him to sue for damages.

古文：芹请罪，停俸三月。
现代文：张芹请罪，被停俸三个月。
English: Zhang Qin pleaded guilty and was suspended for three months.

古文：给事中窦明言事下狱，芹疏救之。
现代文：给事中窦明因言事被下狱，张芹上疏营救他。
English: During the incident, Dou Ming was sent to prison for his speech, and Zhang Qianxiao came to his rescue.

古文：帝尝驰马伤，编修王思切谏，坐远戍。
现代文：皇帝曾跑马受伤，编修王思真切上谏，被问罪戍远边。
English: The emperor was once injured on a galloping horse, and the editor Wang Sizhen cut him on the shin, and was asked about his guilt.

古文：芹曰： 彼非谏官尚尔，吾侪可坐视乎！ 
现代文：张芹说： 他不是谏官尚且如此，我等能坐视吗？ 
English: Zhang Qin said, "He is not a eunuch, but even so, can we just sit idly by?

古文：遂上疏曰： 孟子言： 从兽无厌谓之荒 。
现代文：于是上疏说： 孟子说 逐兽无厌谓之荒 。
English: So Shang Zuo said: Mencius said, "Chasing the beast is a never-ending battle."

古文：老聃曰： 驰骋田猎，使人心发狂 。
现代文：老聃说 驰骋田猎，使人心发狂 。
English: The old man said, "It's driving you crazy to go hunting in the fields."

古文：心狂志荒，何事不忘？
现代文：心狂志荒，什么事不忘记？
English: My mind is running wild, what should I not forget?

古文：皆甚言无益有害也。
现代文：他们都特别说的是这些事有害无益。
English: They all specifically say that these things are harmful and unhelpful.

古文：今轻万乘之尊，乘危冒险，万一有不可讳，皇嗣未诞，如宗庙社稷何！ 
现代文：现在皇上看轻万乘之尊，乘危冒险，万一有什么意外，连皇子还未诞生，宗庙社稷怎么办？ 
English: Now, the emperor is taking a light-hearted, risk-taking approach. In the unlikely event that there is an accident, even if the prince has not yet been born, what will the family temple do?

古文：帝不省。
现代文：皇帝不检查自己。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：寻出为徽州知府。
现代文：不久他出任徽州知府。
English: He soon became the governor of Huizhou Province.

古文：宁王宸濠反，言者以芹家江西，虑贼劫其亲属，取道出徽。
现代文：宁王宸濠造反，有人上书说张芹的家在江西，如果叛贼劫拿他的亲属，取道离开徽州怎么办？
English: Ning Wangqi rebelled, and someone wrote that Zhang Qin's home was in Jiangxi. What if the traitors kidnapped his relatives and left Huizhou?

古文：乃改知杭州。
现代文：于是改任杭州知府。
English: As a result, he was appointed governor of Hangzhou.

古文：已，复还徽州。
现代文：之后，又回到徽州。
English: After that, he returned to Huizhou.

古文：嘉靖初，迁浙江海道副使。
现代文：嘉靖初年，迁浙江海道副使。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, he was transferred to the post of deputy envoy of Zhejiang Highway.

古文：历右参政、右布政使。
现代文：历右参政、右布政使。
English: He was a right-wing politician and a right-wing political envoy.

古文：坐为海道时倭人争贡误伤居民，罢归。
现代文：后因在海道做官时倭人争贡误伤居民之罪，被罢官回到家乡。
English: Later, he was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown due to the crime of injuring residents when he was an official on the sea route.

古文：芹事继母孝，持身俭素，枲袍粝食终其身。
现代文：张芹侍奉继母，讲求孝道，持身节俭朴素，麻袍粗食地安度余生。
English: Zhang Qin served his stepmother, preached filial piety, adhered to the principles of frugality and simplicity, and spent the rest of his life living in poverty.

古文：汪应轸，字子宿，浙江山阴人。
现代文：汪应轸，字子宿，浙江山阴人。
English: Wang Yingtao, a resident of Zhizi, Shanyin, Zhejiang Province.

古文：少有志操。
现代文：少年有志向操行。
English: The boy has ambition.

古文：正德十二年成进士，选庶吉士。
现代文：正德十二年成为进士，选为庶吉士。
English: In 1912, Zhengde became a Jin Shi, and was selected as a Jung Ji Shi.

古文：十四年，诏将南巡。
现代文：十四年皇帝下诏书准备南巡。
English: Fourteen years later, the emperor issued an imperial edict to prepare for the southern inspection tour.

古文：应轸抗言： 自下诏以来，臣民旁皇，莫有固志。
现代文：汪应轸抗言说： 自从下诏书以来，臣民彷徨，不能安居。
English: Wang Yingyao said defiantly: "Since the edict was issued, our subjects have been wandering and unable to live in peace.

古文：临清以南，率弃业罢市，逃窜山谷。
现代文：临清以南，都弃业罢市，逃窜到山谷中去。
English: South of Linqing, they all gave up their jobs and went on strike, fleeing to the valley.

古文：苟不即收成命，恐变生不测。
现代文：如果不立即收回成命，恐生不测之变。
English: If we don't take back our lives immediately, we're afraid of unforeseen changes.

古文：昔谷永谏汉成帝，谓： 陛下厌高美之尊号，好匹夫之卑字。
现代文：过去谷永规劝汉成帝说： 陛下厌恶高美的尊号，喜好匹夫之卑字。
English: In the past, Gu Yong Jie advised Emperor Han Cheng that: His Majesty abhors the noble title of Gaomei and prefers the lowly title of Bifu.

古文：数离深宫，挺身晨夜，与群小相逐。
现代文：多次离开深宫，挺身晨夜，与群小相追逐。
English: He left Shamong many times, and in the morning and evening, he would go out and chase after the small flocks.

古文：典门户奉宿卫者，执干戈而守空宫 。
现代文：典门户奉宿卫的人，拿着干戈而守卫空宫。 
English: The man who served as a guard at the gate of the palace guarded the palace with a stick.

古文：其言切中于今。
现代文：这些话切中现实。
English: These words hit the nail on the head.

古文：夫谷永，谐谀之臣；成帝，庸暗之主。
现代文：谷永是谄谀之臣子；成帝是庸暗之君主。
English: Gu Yong is a vassal of Shun; Cheng Di is a monarch of mediocrity.

古文：永言而成帝容之。
现代文：谷永这样说而汉成帝宽容他。
English: Yan Yong said this, and Emperor Han Shing tolerated him.

古文：岂以陛下圣明，不能俯纳直谏哉？ 
现代文：难道以陛下的圣明，不能俯纳耿直的规劝吗？ 
English: Is it not possible, by the light of His Majesty's holiness, to accept a straightforward exhortation?

古文：疏入，留中。
现代文：疏入，留宫中不发。
English: Sono-so went inside and stayed in the center of the court.

古文：继复偕修撰舒芬等连章以请。
现代文：继而又和修撰舒芬等人一起连章请求这件事。
English: Then, together with Shosho Shufen and others, he made a request for this matter.

古文：跪阙门，受杖几毙。
现代文：跪在宫殿门口，受杖痛击几乎致死。
English: Kneeling at the palace gate, he was beaten almost to death with a cane.

古文：教习竣，拟授给事中。有旨补外，遂出为泗州知州。
现代文：训课任务结束后，吏部拟授与他给事中官职，但有圣旨让他出外任职，他于是出任泗州知州。
English: After the task of the training course was over, the cadre department intended to give him an official post, but there was a sacred will to let him serve abroad, so he served as the prefect of Zhangzhou.

古文：土瘠民惰，不知农桑。
现代文：泗州土地贫瘠，百姓懒惰，不懂耕种田地养蚕桑。
English: Luzhou's land is barren, and the people are lazy and do not know how to cultivate fields and raise silkworms.

古文：应轸劝之耕，买桑植之。募江南女工，教以蚕缫织作。
现代文：汪应轸劝他们耕种，买桑苗种植；招募江南的女工，教他们缫丝织布。
English: Wang Yingtao advised them to cultivate, buy mulberry seedlings to plant; recruit female workers in the south of the Yangtze River and teach them to weave silk.

古文：由是民足衣食。
现代文：从此百姓丰衣足食。
English: Since then, the people have been well-fed and clothed.

古文：帝方南征，中使驿骚道路。
现代文：皇帝正在南征，中使驿车骚扰道路。
English: The emperor was on a campaign to the south, in the middle of which he had a mule-drawn carriage harass the road.

古文：应轸率壮夫百余人列水次，舟至，即挽之出境。
现代文：汪应轸率领青壮男子一百多人排列水边，船到后，立即挽住皇帝出境。
English: Wang Yingtao led more than a hundred strong young men to line the water's edge. After the ship arrived, he immediately helped the emperor leave the country.

古文：车驾驻南京，命州进美妇善歌吹者数十人。
现代文：皇帝车驾驻住南京，命泗州送进的善歌舞管奏之美妇有数十人。
English: The emperor stayed in Nanjing by car, and there were dozens of beautiful women who were good singers and dancers who were sent to Zhangzhou.

古文：应轸言： 州子女荒陋，无以应敕旨。
现代文：汪应轸说 ：泗州子女粗鄙丑陋，不能称皇上圣意。
English: Wang Yingtao said: "The children of Ganzhou are coarse and ugly, and cannot be called the emperor's sacred will.

古文：臣向募有桑妇，请纳之宫中，传受蚕事。 
现代文：我先前招募有桑妇，请皇上将她们收纳在宫中，传授蚕事。 
English: I had previously recruited mulberry women and asked the emperor to house them in the palace to teach them about serpents.

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：事情才止息。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：世宗践阼，召为户科给事中。
现代文：世宗即位，召封他为户科给事中。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, he was called to be the head of the household.

古文：山东矿盗起，掠东昌、衮州，流入畿辅、河南境。
现代文：山东矿盗兴起，抢掠东昌、兖州，流入畿辅、河南境内。
English: Miners in Shandong rise up, plunder Dongchang and Zhangzhou, and flow into Kiyevsk and Henan.

古文：应轸奏言： 弭盗与御寇不同。
现代文：汪应轸上奏说： 消弭强盗与抵御敌寇不同。
English: Wang Yingjun said in his report: Eliminating bandits is different from resisting enemy bandits.

古文：御寇之法，驱之境外而已。
现代文：抵御敌寇的办法，是将他们驱逐到境外而已。
English: The only way to fend off the invaders was to expel them from the country.

古文：若弭盗而纵使出境，是嫁祸于邻国也。
现代文：如果消弭强盗而纵使他们出境，就是嫁祸给邻国。
English: If you eliminate the bandits and allow them to leave the country, you are blaming the neighboring country.

古文：凡一方有警，不行扑灭，致延蔓他境者，俱宜重论。 
现代文：凡一方有警，不实行扑灭，导致延蔓他境的人，都应当重重论罪。 
English: Anyone who has police on one side and does not extinguish the fire, leading to the spread of the fire to other areas, should be charged with a serious crime.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝答复准可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：在科岁余，所上凡三十余疏，咸切时弊。
现代文：在户科一年多，共上疏三十多次，都切中时弊。
English: In more than a year of household science, a total of more than 30 times, all of which are in the middle.

古文：以便养，乞改南，遂调南京户科。
现代文：后为便于养亲，乞求改派南方，于是调到南京户科。
English: Later, in order to make it easier to raise relatives, he begged to be reassigned to the south, so he was transferred to Nanjing Household Science.

古文：张璁、桂萼在南京，方议追尊献皇帝。
现代文：张璁、桂萼在南部，正提议追尊献皇帝。
English: Zhang Ye and Gui Calyx are in the south and are proposing a tribute to the emperor.

古文：雅知应轸名，欲倚以自助。
现代文：向来知道汪应轸名气，想倚靠他帮助自己。
English: He always knew that Wang Yingtao was famous, and he wanted to rely on him to help himself.

古文：应轸与议不合，即奏请遵礼经、崇正统，以安人心。
现代文：汪应轸与他们的提议不合，立即上奏请求遵循礼经、崇尚正统，以安定人心。
English: Wang Yingtao disagreed with their proposal and immediately appealed to them to follow the sutras and uphold orthodoxy in order to stabilize people's minds.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇帝不表态。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：嘉靖三年春，出为江西佥事。
现代文：嘉靖三年春天，他出任江西佥事。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jiajing, he took up the post of Jiangxi Anji.

古文：居二年，具疏引疾，不俟命而归，为巡按所劾。
现代文：过了二年，上疏称病，不等到命令下来就回家乡，被巡按弹劾。
English: After two years, Shang Suo claimed to be ill and went back to his hometown without waiting for the order. He was impeached by the procuratorate.

古文：朵颜花当入寇，又劾总兵官遂安伯陈鏸、中官王欣、巡抚王倬，鏸坐解职。世宗立，起谪籍。历右副都御史，巡抚江西。
现代文：皇帝诏令所司逮捕查问。汪应轸说自己双亲已老，缺少兄弟，乞求休假侍养老人。吏部也为他请求，才免去逮捕。过了很久，廷臣交互推荐他，以原官起用，巡视江西学政。
English: Wang Yingtao said that his parents were old and he lacked a brother, and he begged for a leave of absence to look after the old man. The cadre department also petitioned for him, only to be spared from arrest. After a long time, the courtiers recommended him to each other, and he was appointed to his original post to inspect Jiangxi's school administration.

古文：终户部右侍郎。齐之鸾，字瑞卿，桐城人。
现代文：不久因父丧回到家乡，后病死。齐之鸾，字瑞卿，桐城人。
English: He soon returned to his hometown due to the death of his father, and later died of illness. Qi Zhi Rong, also known as Rui Qing, was from Tongcheng.

古文：正德六年进士。
现代文：正德六年进士。
English: Zhengde has been an officer for six years.

古文：改庶吉士，授刑科给事中。
现代文：改为庶吉士，授官刑科给事中。
English: It has been changed to "joined-at-the-hip," and the Criminal Law Division is now in the process of awarding the post.

古文：十一年冬，帝将置肆于京城西偏。
现代文：十一年冬天，皇帝准备在京城西边设置店铺。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, the emperor was preparing to set up a store on the west side of the capital.

古文：之鸾上言： 近闻有花酒铺之设，或云车驾将临幸，或云朝廷收其息。
现代文：齐之鸾上言说 ：近来听说要设立花酒铺，有的说车驾将到来，有的说朝廷收其利息。
English: Qizhi Yao said, "Recently, I heard that a flower and wine shop is to be set up. Some say that a chauffeur will come, and some say that the imperial court will collect its interest.

古文：陛下贵为天子，富有四海，乃至竞锥刀之利，如倡优馆舍乎？ 
现代文：陛下贵为天子，富有四海，仍至争逐锥刀之利，这与妓馆有什么区别呢？ 
English: Your majesty is the son of heaven, rich in the four seas, still competing for profits, what is the difference between this and a brothel?

古文：应州奏捷，帝降敕： 总督军务威武大将军总兵官朱寿剿寇有功，宜特加公爵 。
现代文：应州告捷，皇帝降下敕文 ：总督军务威武大将军宋寿剿寇有功，应特加公爵。 
English: In response to the success of the state, the emperor issued a decree: the governor of the military affairs, the mighty general Song Shouwen, has made great contributions, and should be the Duke of Tega.

古文：制下，举朝大骇。
现代文：皇帝命令下来，举朝都感到非常惊骇。
English: The emperor gave the order and the whole court was shocked.

古文：之鸾偕诸给事中上言： 自古天子亦有亲临战阵勘定祸乱者，成功之后，不过南面受贺，勒之金石，播之歌颂已耳，未有加爵酬劳，如今日之颠倒者。
现代文：齐之鸾偕同诸位给事中向皇帝进言说 ：自古天子也有亲临战阵勘定祸乱的。成功之后，不过是面向南受贺，在金石上雕刻下来，传扬他的颂歌罢了，没有加爵酬劳，像今日这样颠倒的。
English: Qi Zhixuan, together with all of you, made a suggestion to the emperor in the middle of the matter, saying, "Since ancient times, the Son of Heaven has also personally come to the battlefield to settle the account of the calamity. After the success, it was just a matter of facing the south to receive congratulations, carving it down on the gold stone, and propagating his hymn. There was no extra reward, as it is today.

古文：不知陛下何所取义，为此不祥之举，以駴天下耳目，贻百世之讥笑也。 
现代文：不知陛下取的是什么意义，来做这种不祥之举，以惊天下人的耳目，让百世讥笑。 
English: I do not know what meaning His Majesty took to do such an ominous act, to shock the world's ears and eyes, and to make the world laugh.

古文：未几，请召还编修王思，给事中张原、陈鼎，御史周广、高公韶、李熙、徐文华、李稳、施儒、刘寓生，佥事韩邦奇，评事罗侨，皆不听。
现代文：不久，他请求召回编修王思和给事中张原、陈鼎，御史周六、高公韶、李熙、徐文华、李稳、刘寓生，佥事韩邦奇，平事罗侨，皇帝都不听。
English: Soon, he asked for the recall of editor Wang Sih and reporters Zhang Yuanlong, Chen Ding, Gu Shih Saturday, Gao Gongyao, Li Xi, Xu Wenhua, Li Yong, Liu Yosheng, An Ji Han Bangqi, Ping Ji Luo Qiao, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：帝将巡边，复自称威武大将军。
现代文：皇帝准备巡视边关，又自称威武大将军。
English: The emperor is preparing to inspect the border, and he also calls himself a mighty general.

古文：御史袁宗儒疏谏，大学士杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪以去就争。
现代文：御史袁宗儒上疏规劝，大学士杨廷和、蒋冕、毛纪用离职来与皇帝争辩。
English: The imperial historian Yuan Zongru was dissuaded by the imperial edict, and the scholars Yang Tinghe, Jiang Guan, and Mao Ji used their resignations to argue with the emperor.

古文：之鸾偕同官言： 三臣居师保之重，身系安危，迩者先后称疾。
现代文：齐之鸾和同僚一起说 ：三臣身居辅佐重位，身系安危，近臣先后称有病。
English: Together with his colleagues, Qizhi Yao said, "The three ministers are in the important position of assistant, their health is in danger, and their close ministers have successively said they are ill."

古文：今六飞临边逾月矣，宗庙社稷百官万姓寄空城中。
现代文：现在皇上车驾去边关超过一个月了，宗庙社稷百官万姓寄居在空城中。
English: Now, it has been more than a month since the emperor's car drove to Bianguan, and the ancestral temple community and hundreds of officials have been living in the empty city.

古文：人心危疑，几务丛积，复杜门求决去。
现代文：人们担忧疑虑，政务繁杂，而今三位大臣又要告官离去。
English: People are worried and doubtful, government affairs are complicated, and now three ministers are going to resign.

古文：万一事起仓卒，至于偾败，三臣将何辞谢天下？
现代文：万一出现突发事件，导致王朝崩溃，三臣将用什么谢罪天下？
English: In the unlikely event of a sudden event leading to the collapse of the dynasty, what will the three ministers use to apologize to the world?

古文：乞陛下以社稷为重，亟返宸居，与大臣共图治理。 
现代文：请陛下以社稷为重，急返朝廷，和大臣们一起共图治理国家。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to return to the Imperial Court as soon as possible, and work together with the ministers to govern the country.

古文：已而御史李润等复争之，卒不省。
现代文：之后御史李润等人又为此争辩，皇帝终未省悟。
English: Later, Imperial Historian Li Run and others argued about this, but the emperor did not come to his senses.

古文：之鸾再迁兵科左给事中。
现代文：齐之鸾再迁兵科左给事中。
English: The relocation of the Military Science Department to the left is in the middle of the matter.

古文：中官马永成死，诏授其家九十余人官。
现代文：中官马永成死后，皇帝下令授与他家九十多人的官职。
English: After the death of Lieutenant General Ma Yongcheng, the emperor ordered that more than 90 members of his family be given official positions.

古文：之鸾言： 永成贵显，用事十有余年，兄弟子侄皆高爵美官。
现代文：齐之鸾说： 马永成贵显，当权十多年，兄弟子侄都是高爵美官。
English: Qi Zhixuan said: Ma Yongcheng is a distinguished person. He has been in power for more than ten years. His brothers, sons and nephews are all high-ranking officials.

古文：而其侪复为陈乞，将及百人。
现代文：而他的同僚又为他陈乞官职，将达到百人。
English: And his colleagues will be queuing up for him to become an official, there will be hundreds of them.

古文：永成何功，恩滥如此，恐天下闻而解体也。 
现代文：马永成有什么功劳？皇恩如此滥用，恐怕天下听说后会解体呢。 
English: What is the merit of Ma Yongcheng? The imperial grace is so abused, I am afraid it will disintegrate after the world hears about it.

古文：帝将南巡，之鸾偕同官及御史杨秉中等交章力谏。
现代文：皇帝准备南巡，齐之鸾和同官及御史杨秉中等人交章极力规劝。
English: The emperor was preparing for a tour of the south, and Qi Zhisheng, his colleagues, and the governor Shi Yangbing all tried their best to dissuade him.

古文：章入二日，未报。
现代文：奏章进入二天，没有得到答复。
English: Two days into the process, there has been no response.

古文：之鸾等不知所出，伏阙俟命，自辰至申。
现代文：齐之鸾等人不知所出，伏在宫殿前候命，从早晨到傍晚。
English: Qi Zhixuan and the others did not know where to go, and lay in front of the palace, waiting for death, from morning to evening.

古文：帝令中官传谕，乃退。
现代文：直到皇帝让中官传达谕令，才退下去。
English: He did not retreat until the emperor asked the lieutenant general to convey the order.

古文：明日托疾免朝，欲以为之鸾等罪。
现代文：第二天皇上托病免朝，想治齐之鸾等人的罪。
English: The second emperor asked to be excused from illness and wanted to cure the sins of Qi Zixuan and others.

古文：会诸曹郎黄巩等联章力谏，乃止不行。
现代文：正巧诸曹郎黄巩等人联章极力劝阻，才止而不行。
English: Coincidentally, Cao Lang, Huang Gong and others jointly tried to dissuade him, but to no avail.

古文：然巩等下狱杖谴，之鸾辈亦不敢救也。
现代文：但黄巩等人被下诏狱且被廷杖责打，齐之鸾等人也不敢营救他们。
English: However, Huang Gong and others were sent to the imperial prison and beaten with the imperial cane, and Qi Zhixuan and others did not dare to rescue them.

古文：宸濠反，张忠、许泰等南征，命之鸾偕左给事中祝续从军纪功。
现代文：宸濠造反，张忠、许泰等人南征，命令齐之鸾偕同左给事中祝续随军记录功劳。
English: After the rebellion, Zhang Zhong, Xu Tai and others marched south, and ordered Qi Zizhong and Zuo Zuo to record their achievements in the event.

古文：未至，贼已灭。
现代文：尚未到达，叛贼已被歼灭。
English: Not yet arrived, the rebels have been annihilated.

古文：群小忌王守仁，谮毁百端，之鸾力白其诬。
现代文：众多小人憎恨王守仁，对他进行百般的诬谤，齐之鸾极力为他辩白。
English: Many villains hated Wang Shouren and slandered him in all sorts of ways, but Qi Zhixuan tried his best to defend him.

古文：忠、泰广搜逆党，株引无辜，之鸾多所开释。
现代文：张忠、许泰广泛搜捕逆党，株连无辜，很多人都被齐之鸾开脱释放。
English: Zhang Zhong and Xu Tai were extensively searched for traitors, while Zhu Lian was innocent. Many of them were acquitted and released.

古文：且请蠲田租、停力役、宽逋负，帝颇采纳。
现代文：而且请求免去田租、停止力役、放宽对逃税的追索，皇帝对他的建议颇为采纳。
English: Moreover, he requested to be exempted from land rent, to stop forced labor, and to relax the recourse against tax evasion. The emperor accepted his suggestion.

古文：初冒徐姓，至是始复焉。
现代文：起初他冒用徐姓，到这时才恢复齐姓。
English: At first, he pretended to use the surname Xu, and only then did he resume the surname Qi.

古文：世宗践阼，首上疏言： 祖宗法制，悉纷更于群小。
现代文：世宗即位，齐之鸾首先上疏说： 祖宗法制，都纷纷被那些奸佞小人更改。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, Qizong first said: The patriarchal legal system has been changed one after another by those villains.

古文：补救之道，在先定圣志，次广言路。
现代文：补救的办法在于，先坚定圣上心志，再广开言路。
English: The remedy lies in first firming up the sacred mind, and then broadening the way of speech.

古文：先朝元凶虽去，根据盘互，连蔓滋多，犹恐巧相营结，或邀定策之赏，或假迎扈之劳，以取怜固宠。
现代文：先朝元凶虽然被除去，但盘根错节，连蔓滋多，还怕他们巧相营结，或许邀定策之赏，或许假借迎圣驾之劳，来求得怜悯宠爱。
English: Although the culprits of the previous dynasties were eliminated, the tangled roots and tangled knots continue to proliferate, and it is feared that they may be cleverly intertwined, perhaps inviting the reward of strategy, perhaps pretending to welcome the work of the saint, to seek mercy and favor.

古文：天下事岂堪若辈更坏！
现代文：天下事怎能经受得起他们的更改破坏？
English: How can the world stand their changes and destruction?

古文：言者久遏于权奸，欲吐忠鲠懑愤之气，必有不顾忌讳，至于逆耳者，在嘉纳而优容之。
现代文：言官因久被权贵奸臣压抑遏止，想吐出忠鲠懑愤之气，一定有不顾忌讳之言，以至于有逆耳的话，望皇上嘉纳并宽容他们。
English: The speech officer, who had long been suppressed and restrained by the powerful and treacherous vassals, wanted to vent his loyalty and indignation. He must have spoken without regard to taboos, so that there were words that were contrary to his ears. He admired the emperor and tolerated them.

古文：若稍或抑裁，则小人又乘之以雠忠直。
现代文：如果稍加压抑制裁，那么小人又会乘机来仇视忠直之臣。
English: If a little more pressure and sanctions are imposed, then the villains will take advantage of the opportunity to hate the loyal minister.

古文：言路一塞，不可复开，大为新政累矣。
现代文：言路一经闭塞，就不容易重新开通，这将大大牵累新政。
English: Once the channel of communication is blocked, it is not easy to reopen it, which will greatly affect the New Deal.

古文：陛下诚举迩年乱政，尽返其初，中兴之烈可以立睹。 
现代文：陛下真心检举近年乱政，尽数恢复当初的清明政治，中兴的事业可以立即见到。 
English: His Majesty sincerely denounced the chaotic politics in recent years and did his best to restore the original clean politics. ZTE's cause can be seen immediately.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝嘉纳了他的话。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：又劾许泰及兵部尚书王宪，二人竟获谴。
现代文：齐之鸾又弹劾许泰和兵部尚书王宪，二人都竟然遭到了谴责。
English: Qi Zhixuan also impeached Xu Tai and the military commander Shang Shu Wang Xian, and both of them were actually condemned.

古文：其秋大计京官，被中伤，谪崇德丞。
现代文：这一年秋天大举考察京城官员，齐之鸾被人中伤，贬谪为崇德县丞。
English: In the autumn of that year, there was a large-scale inspection of Beijing officials, and Qi Zhiyao was slandered and demeaned as the leader of Chongde County.

古文：屡迁宁夏佥事。
现代文：逐渐迁至宁夏佥事。
English: Gradually moved to Ningxia.

古文：饥民采蓬子为食，之鸾为取二封，一进于帝，一以贻阁臣。
现代文：当时饥民采蓬子作为粮食，齐之鸾为此修书二封，一封进献给皇帝，一封送给阁臣。
English: At that time, the starving people were collecting poppy seeds as food. Qi Zhixuan wrote two letters for this purpose, one letter was dedicated to the emperor, and one letter was given to the cabinet minister.

古文：且言时事可忧者三，可惜者四，语极切。
现代文：并且说时事可忧的有三项，可惜的有四项，语言极其恳切。
English: And he said that there were three things to be worried about in current affairs, and four things to be regretted, using extremely earnest language.

古文：帝付之所司。
现代文：皇帝将它交给有关部门。
English: The emperor handed it over to the relevant authorities.

古文：时方大修边墙，之鸾董役。
现代文：当时正在大修边墙，齐之鸾监督管理这项工役。
English: At that time, the side wall was being overhauled, and Qi Zhixuan supervised and managed this work.

古文：巡抚胡东皋称其能，举以自代。
现代文：巡抚胡东皋说他有能力，举荐齐之鸾代替自己。
English: The governor, Hu Dongyao, said that he was capable and recommended Qi Zhong to replace him.

古文：历河南、山东副使。
现代文：齐之鸾历河南、山东副使。
English: Qi Zhixuan served as deputy envoy to Henan Province and Shandong Province.

古文：召为顺天府丞。
现代文：召为顺天府丞。
English: He was called Shuntenfujo.

古文：扈跸承天，还京卒。
现代文：还没有出发，盗贼兴起于是留下镇抚。
English: Before they set off, the thieves rise up and leave Zhen Fuzi behind.

古文：许相卿，字伯台，海宁人。
现代文：不久被提升为河南按察使。逝于官任上。许相卿，字伯台，海宁人。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of inspector of Henan Province. He died in office. Xu Xiangqing, also known as Baotai, was a native of Haining.

古文：正德十二年进士。
现代文：正德十二年进士。
English: Zhengde joined the army at the age of twelve.

古文：世宗立，授兵科给事中。
现代文：世宗登上皇帝的位置，授许相卿兵科给事中。
English: Sejong ascended to the position of emperor and granted the title of minister of war.

古文：宦官张锐、张忠有罪论死，帝复宽之。
现代文：宦官张锐、张忠有罪被判处死刑，皇帝又宽恕了他们。
English: The eunuchs Zhang Rui and Zhang Zhong were found guilty and sentenced to death, but the emperor pardoned them.

古文：给事中顾济疏争，帝下所司议，卒欲宽其死。
现代文：给事中顾济上疏争辩，皇帝将其下到主管部门讨论，终想宽恕他的死罪。
English: In the middle of the argument, the emperor sent him to the competent department for discussion, and finally wanted to pardon his capital crime.

古文：相卿言： 天下望陛下为孝皇，陛下奈何自处以正德？ 
现代文：许相卿说 ：天下希望陛下为孝宗皇帝，陛下怎么以正德自处？ 
English: Minister Xu said, "The whole world hopes that His Majesty will become Emperor Xiaozong. How can His Majesty be so virtuous?"

古文：帝议加兴献帝皇号，相卿复争之。
现代文：皇帝商议加兴献帝皇号，许相卿又争谏这件事。
English: The emperor deliberated on adding Xing to the emperor's name, and Xu Xiangqing also disputed the matter.

古文：嘉靖二年诏荫中官张钦义子李贤为锦衣世袭指挥。
现代文：嘉靖二年皇帝下诏令荫庇中官张钦义子李贤为锦衣世袭指挥，王守仁的儿子王正宪止于锦衣百户。
English: In the second year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor issued a decree that Li Xian, the son of Zhang Qinyi, the vice-governor of Jinbei, was the hereditary commander of the brocade, and Wang Zhengxian, the son of Wang Shuren, was limited to 100 brocade households.

古文：相卿言： 于谦子冕止锦衣千户，王守仁子正宪止锦衣百户。
现代文：许相卿说 ：于谦的儿子于冕止于锦衣千户。李贤是中官厮养的，反而超过他们。
English: Xu Xiangqing said: Yu Qian's son Yu Guanzhong stopped at Jin Yi thousand households. Li Xian was raised by middle-ranking officials, but he surpassed them.

古文：贤中官厮养，反过之。忠勋大臣裔曾不若近幸奴，殉国勤事之臣谁不解体？部臣彭泽、科臣许复礼、安磐相继言之，悉拒不纳。
现代文：连忠勋大臣后裔都不如近幸宠奴，殉国勤事的大臣有谁不灰心？部臣彭泽，科臣许复礼、安磐相继说这件事，都被拒而不纳。
English: Even the descendants of the loyal ministers are not as close as the lucky ones. Who of the martyred ministers is not discouraged? Minister Penza, Minister Xu Fulei, and Minister Anban successively said this matter, all of which were rejected and not accepted.

古文：毋乃重内侍而轻士大夫哉！ 
现代文：不要重内侍而轻士大夫啊。 
English: Don't focus on the chambermaid, but on the doctor.

古文：寻复言： 天下政权出于一则治，二三则乱；公卿大夫参议则治，匪人僣干则乱。
现代文：不久又说： 天下政权出于一则治，出于二三则乱；公卿大夫参议则治，行为不正之人过分干预则乱。
English: He soon went on to say: All political power in the world arises from one principle, and from two or three causes of disorder; the noble doctor's advice is the rule, and the undue interference of those who act improperly is the disorder.

古文：陛下继统之初，登用老成，嘉纳忠谠，裁抑侥幸，窜殛憸邪，可谓明且刚矣。
现代文：陛下继承皇统的初期，登用老成之人，嘉纳忠良正直之士，裁抑侥幸之小人，放逐诛杀奸邪之徒，可以说是清明又刚正啊。
English: In the early days of His Majesty's succession to the throne, His Majesty appointed men of long standing, loyal and upright men, despised those who were lucky, and banished those who committed treason. It can be said that they were clear-headed and upright.

古文：曾未再期，偏听私昵，秕政亟行，明少蔽，刚少逊，操权未得其术，而阴伺旁窃者得居中制之。
现代文：但事过不久，却偏听私昵，不良政治急行，明有所遮蔽，刚有所逊色，操权未得到它的要术，而让阴伺旁窃的人得以从中制之。
English: However, soon after the incident, it was biased towards private interests, bad political expediency, obvious cover-up, inferiority complex, and the manipulation of power did not get its essential skills, and allowed those who stole from the shadows to control it.

古文：如崔文以左道罔上，师保台谏言之而不听。
现代文：像崔文以旁门邪道欺骗皇上，辅佐官谏官上言皇上又不听。
English: Like Cui Wen, who deceived the emperor with a side door, the emperor did not listen to the words of the assistant officer and eunuch.

古文：罗洪载守职逮系，廷臣疏七十上而不行。
现代文：罗洪载忠于职守却被逮捕拘囚，廷臣上疏七十次而无效果。
English: Luo Hongzhao was loyal to his duties, but he was arrested and detained. The courtier was pardoned 70 times, but to no avail.

古文：近又庇崔文奴夺法司之守，斥林俊以违旨，怒言官之奏扰。
现代文：近来又庇护崔文，奴仆夺法司的职守，斥责林俊违抗圣旨，恼怒言官的奏扰。
English: Recently, he has also protected Cui Wen, usurped the duties of the legal department, rebuked Lin Jun for defying the holy will, and annoyed the officials.

古文：事涉中人，曲降温旨，犯法不罪，请乞必从。
现代文：事情涉及到宦官，委婉地降下情词恳切的圣旨，犯法而不问罪，有请求就必定答应。
English: If the matter involves a eunuch, he will euphemistically condescend with words of endearment and earnest wishes, break the law without asking for punishment, and if there is a request, he will certainly agree.

古文：此与正德朝何异哉！
现代文：这与正德朝有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between this and the Zhengde Dynasty?

古文：俊，国之望也，其去志决矣。
现代文：林俊是国家的名士，他离去之志很坚决。
English: Lin Jun is a national celebrity, and his desire to leave is very strong.

古文：俊去，类俊者必不留。
现代文：林俊离去，类似林俊的人必定不会留下。
English: If Lin Jun leaves, people like Lin Jun will definitely not stay.

古文：陛下将与二三近习私人共理天下乎？
现代文：陛下与二三近习私人共同治理天下吗？
English: Does His Majesty rule the world together with a few private citizens?

古文：今日天下，与先朝异。
现代文：今日的天下，与先朝不同。
English: Today's world is different from the previous one.

古文：武宗时，势已阽危，然元气犹壮，调剂适宜，可以立起。
现代文：武宗时，势已危险，但是元气还壮，调剂适应，可以立起。
English: At the time of Wuzong, the situation was already dangerous, but the vitality was still strong, the adjustment was adaptable, and it was possible to stand up.

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：承孝宗之泽也。
现代文：因为承袭孝宗的恩泽。
English: Because of the grace of inheriting the filial piety.

古文：今日病虽稍苏，而元气已竭，调剂无方，将至不起。
现代文：今日弊病虽然渐渐在复苏，但元气已经枯竭，调剂无方，将至于不能立起的境地。
English: Today, although the disease is gradually recovering, the vitality has been depleted, there is no way to adjust, and it will be unable to stand up.

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：承武宗之乱也。
现代文：因为承袭武宗乱政的缘故。
English: Because of inheriting the chaotic politics of the warrior class.

古文：伏愿深察乱机，收还政柄，取文辈置之重典。
现代文：希望陛下深察祸乱的枢机，收回政权，将崔文等人置以重刑。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will take a deep look at the evil cardinal, take back the power, and impose a heavy sentence on Cui Wen and others.

古文：然后务学亲贤，去谗远色，延访忠言，深恤民隐。
现代文：然后努力研究圣学亲近贤人，除去谗人远离美色，延访忠言，深切地体恤民间的隐情。
English: Then, he made efforts to study the sacred science close to the sages, remove the lazy people away from the beauty, extend the visit to the faithful, and deeply sympathize with the hidden feelings of the people.

古文：务使宫府一体，上下一心，而后天下可为也。 
现代文：务必使宫府一体，上下一心，而后天下可为也。 
English: It is imperative that the Imperial Household Agency work as one, with one heart and one mind, so that the world can also be a better place.

古文：同官赵汉等亦皆以文为言，帝卒不听。
现代文：同官赵汉等人也都上奏说崔文事，皇帝终不听他们的话。
English: His colleague, Zhao Han, and others also spoke out against Cui Wenji, but the emperor ultimately did not listen to them.

古文：未几，以给事中李学曾、章侨、主事林应骢皆言事夺俸，复上疏谏。指帝气骄志怠，甘蹈过愆。词甚切。
现代文：不久，因给事中李学曾、章侨，主事林应骢都因上言陈事而被夺去俸禄，许相卿又上疏规劝，指责皇帝气骄志怠，甘愿重蹈过失，语词非常恳切。
English: Soon after, Li Xuezeng, Zhang Qiao, and Lin Yinglu, who were in charge of the matter, were deprived of their salaries because of the above-said matter. Xu Xiangqing also went on a scolding, accusing the emperor of arrogance and laziness, and being willing to repeat mistakes. The words were very sincere.

古文：侨言： 奉命临时，仓皇就位，诚敬何存？ 
现代文：任给事中三年，他所说的皇帝都不听，于是推说有病而回到家乡。
English: During the three years he was in charge, the emperor did not listen to anything he said, so he returned to his hometown, saying that he was ill.

古文：帝怒，夺其俸二月。历礼科左给事中。
现代文：八年皇帝下诏说养病三年以上不到京都的人，都落职闲住，许相卿于是被废职。
English: Eight years later, the emperor issued an edict saying that anyone who did not come to Kyoto for more than three years to recuperate from illness would be dismissed and idle, and Lord Xu was dismissed.

古文：出知衡州府，终福建布政使。
现代文：夏言过去和同僚相处得很好。既然掌管政权，他招许相卿进京做事，许相卿推辞不答应。
English: In the past, Natsugen got along well with his colleagues. Now that he is in charge of the government, he invited Minister Xu to work in Beijing, but Minister Xu refused to accept his resignation.

古文：余珊，字德辉，桐城人。
现代文：余珊，字德辉，桐城人。
English: Yu Shan, alias De Hui, from Tongcheng.

古文：正德三年进士。
现代文：正德三年进士。
English: Zhengde is a three-year-old trainee.

古文：授行人，擢御史。
现代文：授官行人，提升为御史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of goshi.

古文：庶吉士许成名等罢教习，留翰林者十七人。
现代文：庶吉士许成名等完成教习任务后，留在翰林的有十七人。
English: After the completion of the teaching task, there were seventeen people left in Hanlin.

古文：珊以为滥，疏论之。
现代文：余珊以为过滥，上疏论这件事。
English: Yu Shan thought it was excessive, and discussed the matter with Shang Shao.

古文：语侵内阁，不纳。
现代文：语词侵犯内阁，不被皇帝采纳。
English: The words violated the cabinet and were not accepted by the emperor.

古文：乾清宫灾，疏陈弊政，极指义子、西僧之谬。
现代文：乾清宫发生火灾，余珊上疏陈讲弊政，极力指出义子、西僧的荒谬。
English: When a fire broke out in the Qianqing Palace, Yushan Shangshuo told Chen about the bad politics and pointed out the absurdity of the son-in-law and the western monk.

古文：巡盐长芦，发中官奸利事。
现代文：巡盐长芦，揭发中官的奸利事情。
English: patrolling the salt marshes, exposing the vice-commander's treachery.

古文：为所诬，械系诏狱，谪安陆判官。
现代文：余珊被人诬陷，枷拷拘囚于诏狱，贬谪为安陆判官。
English: Yu Shan was framed, shackled and imprisoned in the imperial prison, and denigrated as a judge of Anlu.

古文：移知澧州。
现代文：调任澧州知州。
English: He was transferred to Bozhou-Chizhou.

古文：世宗立，擢江西佥事，讨平梅花峒贼。
现代文：世宗登位，提升余珊为江西佥事，讨平梅花峒叛贼。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, promoted Yu Shan as the leader of Jiangxi Province, and dealt with the traitors of Meihua County.

古文：迁四川副使，备兵威、茂。
现代文：迁四川副使，驻防威、茂。
English: Deputy envoy to Sichuan, stationed in Wei and Mao.

古文：嘉靖四年二月应诏陈十渐，其略曰：
现代文：嘉靖四年二月应皇诏陈讲十端，大略是说：
English: In February of the fourth year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, Chen delivered a speech, roughly saying:

古文：陛下有尧、舜、汤、武之资，而无稷、契、伊、周之佐，致时事渐不克终者有十。
现代文： 陛下有尧、舜、汤、武的资质，但没有稷、契、伊、周那样的辅佐，致使时事逐渐不能完成的有十项。
English: His Majesty has the qualifications of,, 汤, and 武, but does not have the assistance of, 契, 伊, and 周. As a result, there are ten items that are gradually unable to be completed.

古文：正德间，逆瑾专权，假子乱政，不知纪纲为何物，幸陛下起而振之。
现代文： 正德年间，逆臣刘瑾专权，假借皇上来乱政，不知纪刚为何物，幸陛下起而振之。
English: During the Zhengde era, the rebellious vassal Liu Bei monopolized power and usurped power from the emperor. I don't know what Ji Gang was, but fortunately, his majesty got rid of him.

古文：未几而事乐因循，政多苟简，名实乖谬，宫府异同，纷拏泄沓。
现代文：不久而事乐于因循，政多苟且简略，名实乖谬，宫府意见出入混乱牵扯。
English: Before long, things were happy to follow suit, politics were meticulous and concise, the name and reality were perverse, and the opinions of the palace were confused and confused.

古文：以为在朝廷而不在朝廷，以为在宫省而不在宫省，遂至天子以其心为心，百官万民亦各以其心为心。
现代文：以为在朝廷而不在朝廷，以为在宫省而不在宫省，以致皇上以自己之心为心，百官万民也各以自己之心为心。
English: He thought that he was in the imperial court, but not in the imperial court, and that he was in the palace ministry, but not in the palace ministry, so that the emperor was concerned with his own heart, and all officials and people were also concerned with their own hearts.

古文：此纪纲之颓，其渐一也。
现代文：这种纪纲的颓废，是第一端。
English: The decadence of this curriculum is the first result.

古文：正德间，士大夫寡廉鲜耻，趋附权门，幸陛下起而作之。
现代文： 正德年间，士大夫寡廉鲜耻，趋附权门，幸亏陛下起身振作。
English: During the Zhengde era, the scholar-bureaucrats were shamelessly corrupt and tended to be close to power. Fortunately, His Majesty rose to his feet.

古文：乃今则前日之去者复来，来者不去。
现代文：而今则是以前除去的又被接回来，来的再没有被除去。
English: But now, what was removed before is being brought back, and what came before is no longer being removed.

古文：自夫浮沉一世之人擢掌铨衡，首取软美脂韦。
现代文：自那浮沉一世的人被提升掌管铨衡后，首取调和谄媚之人。
English: Since then, the people of the Floating and Sinking World have been promoted to take charge of the balance of power, and the first to be reconciled is the charming person.

古文：重富贵薄名检者，列之有位，致谀佞成风，廉耻道薄。
现代文：重富贵薄名检的人，列之官位，致使谀佞成风，廉耻之心日薄。
English: Those who are too rich, too valuable, and not worthy of a name check are ranked in official positions, which has led to the spread of corruption, and the spirit of shamelessness is fading.

古文：甚者侯伯专纠弹，罢吏议礼乐。
现代文：更有甚者侯伯专权纠集弹劾，罢除吏议礼乐。
English: What's more, Hou Bo's autocratic power to collect impeachment, removal of officials and ceremonial music.

古文：市门复开，贾贩仍旧。
现代文：市门又开，商贸像过去一样。
English: The gates of the city are open again, and business continues as before.

古文：此风俗之坏，其渐二也。
现代文：这种风俗的败坏，是第二端。
English: This corruption of customs is the second end of the chain.

古文：正德间，国柄下移，王灵不振，是以有安化、南昌之变，赖陛下起而整肃之。
现代文： 正德年间，国家政权下移，王灵不振，所以有安化、南昌的变乱，依靠陛下起来整肃他们。
English: During the Zhengde era, the national political power was downgraded and the king's spirit was not strong, so there were Anhua and Nanchang upheavals, relying on His Majesty to rise up and rectify them.

古文：乃塞上戍卒近益骄恣。
现代文：于是边塞上的守戍之兵近来更加骄恣。
English: As a result, the soldiers guarding the border fortress have recently become more arrogant.

古文：曩杀许巡抚而姑息，顷遂杀张巡抚而效尤。
现代文：因先前杀害许巡抚而被姑息，不久又杀害张巡抚而效法过失。
English: He was pardoned for the previous killing of Inspector Xu, and soon after, he killed Inspector Zhang.

古文：曩缚贾参将以立威，近又缚桂总兵而报怨。
现代文：以至于他们捆缚贾参将以立威，近来又捆缚桂总兵来报怨。
English: So much so that they tied up Jia Zhen to retaliate, and recently tied up Gui Zonhe to complain.

古文：致榆关妖贼效之而戕主事，北边库吏仿之而贼县官。
现代文：致使榆关的妖贼效仿他们而残害主事，北边库官效仿他们而杀害县官。
English: As a result, the bandits in Shaoguan followed their example and destroyed the main business, and the treasury officials in the north followed their example and killed the county officials.

古文：陛下惑鄙儒姑息之谈，牵俗吏权宜之计，遂使庙堂号令出于二三戍卒之口。
现代文：陛下被鄙儒的姑息论调所迷惑，拘泥俗吏权宜之计，于是使庙堂号令出于二三戍卒之口。
English: His Majesty was bewitched by the condescension of the despised Confucianism and the expediency of the clerics, so he made the temple call come out of the mouth of two or three priests.

古文：此国势之衰，其渐三也。
现代文：这种国势的衰微，是第三端。
English: This decline of national power is the third end.

古文：自逆瑾以来，以苞苴易将帅，故边防尽坏，赖陛下起而申严之。
现代文： 自从逆臣刘瑾以来，因为别人行贿而易换将帅，所以边防全部遭到破坏，依赖陛下奋起申令严治。
English: Ever since the rebellious vassal Liu Bei, because it was easy for others to bribe and replace generals, the border defenses were all destroyed, relying on His Majesty to rise up and order strict rule.

古文：然积弊已久，未能骤复。
现代文：但是积弊已久，没有能够骤然恢复。
English: However, the problems have been accumulating for a long time, and there has been no sudden recovery.

古文：今朵颜蹢躅于辽海，羌戎跳梁于西川，北狄蹂躏于沙漠。
现代文：现在朵颜在辽海徘徊，羌戎在四川跳梁，北狄在沙漠蹂躏。
English: Now, Do Yan is wandering in the Liao Sea, Gong Rong is vaulting in Sichuan, and Bei Di is ravaged in the desert.

古文：寇势方张，而食肉之徒不能早见预料，亟求制驭之方，乃假镇静之虚名，掩无能之实迹。
现代文：敌寇的气势正嚣张，而当官的不能先见预料，急求制驭敌寇的办法，才假借镇静的虚名，掩盖无能的实迹。
English: The enemy bandits were in full swing, but the officials could not foresee the situation and were in a hurry to find a way to control the bandits, so they used the false name of calm to cover up their incompetence.

古文：甚且诈饰捷功，滥邀赏赉，虚张劳伐，峻取官阶，而塞上多事日甚。
现代文：更有甚者有的还诈饰捷功，滥邀赏赐，虚张劳师伐敌，高取官阶，但边塞上的战事一天比一天厉害。
English: What's more, some of them also fraudulently embellished their achievements, solicited rewards without authorization, pretended to have fought the enemy as a laborer, and obtained higher official ranks, but the war on the frontier fortress became more and more severe day by day.

古文：此外裔之强，其渐四也。
现代文：这种外裔的强盛，是第四端。
English: This influx of foreigners is the fourth end of the spectrum.

古文：自逆瑾以来，尽天下之脂膏，输入权贵之室，是以有刘、赵、蓝、鄢之乱，赖陛下起而保护之。
现代文： 自从逆臣刘瑾以来，将天下的膏脂全部输进到权贵的家室，所以有刘、赵、蓝、鄢的叛乱，依赖陛下起来制止。
English: Ever since the rebellious vassal Liu Bei imported all of the world's grease into the homes of the powerful, there have been rebellions by Liu, Zhao, Lan, and Zou, and it is up to His Majesty to put a stop to them.

古文：乃近年以来，黄纸蠲放，白纸催征；额外之敛，下及鸡豚；织造之需，自为商贾。
现代文：近年以来，黄纸文书不发放，白纸文书催征；额外的收敛，下及到鸡猪，织造生产之需，自为商贾。
English: In recent years, yellow paper documents have not been issued, and white paper documents have been collected; the additional convergence has extended to chickens and pigs, and the need for weaving production is self-serving.

古文：江、淮母子相食，衮、豫盗贼横行，川、陕、湖、贵疲于供饷。
现代文：江、淮母子相食，兖、豫的盗贼横行，川、陕、湖、贵疲于供应粮饷。
English: Jiang, Huai and mother-child cannibalism, the thieves of Yao and Yu are rampant, and the rivers, Shaanxi, and Lake Guizhou are busy supplying grain.

古文：田野嗷嗷，无乐生之心。
现代文：田野哀鸣嗷嗷，没有乐生之心。
English: The fields wail, there is no joy.

古文：此邦本之摇，其渐五也。
现代文：这种国本的动摇，是第五端。
English: This kind of national wavering is the fifth end of the rope.

古文：正德朝，衣冠蒙祸，家国几空，幸陛下起而收录之。
现代文： 正德时期，衣冠之士蒙祸，家国几空，幸亏陛下起来收录。
English: During the Zhengde period, the rich and famous were plagued by misfortune, and the country was almost empty. Fortunately, His Majesty came to collect.

古文：乃未几而狂瞽之言，一鸣辄斥。
现代文：但不久就有放胆直言的人，一鸣即被斥逐的事发生。
English: However, it didn't take long for those who dared to speak their minds to be ostracized.

古文：昔犹谪迁外任，今或编配遐荒。
现代文：过去只谪出朝廷外任官，现在却被发配至荒远之地。
English: In the past, only non-officials of the imperial court were sent out, but now they are sent to faraway places.

古文：昔犹禁锢终身，今至箠死殿陛。
现代文：过去只禁锢终身，现在却有用鞭子打死在殿阶之下的。
English: In the past, they were only imprisoned for life, but now they are beaten to death with a whip at the foot of the palace steps.

古文：盖自吕柟、邹守益等去而殿阁空，顾清、汪俊等去而部寺空，张原、胡琼等死而言路空。
现代文：自从吕木冉、邹守益等人离去，殿阁为之一空；顾清、汪俊等人离去，部寺为之一空；张原、胡琼等人死后，言路为之一空。
English: Since the departure of Lv Mullan, Yao Shouyi and others, the palace was empty; Gu Qing, Wang Jun and others left, the temple was empty; after the death of Zhang Yuan, Hu Qiong and others, the speech path was empty.

古文：间有一二忠直士，又为权奸排挤而违之，俾不通，致陛下耳嚣目眩，忽不自知其在鲍鱼之肆矣。
现代文：间或有一二位忠诚义士，又被权奸排挤而躲避，致使言路不通，以致陛下耳目嚣混，不知自己在鲍鱼之肆。
English: From time to time, one or two loyal and righteous persons were ousted by the usurpers and evaded, resulting in a stalemate, so that His Majesty's ears and eyes were confused and he did not know where he was in the abalone.

古文：此人才之凋，其渐六也。
现代文：这种人才的凋谢，是第六端。
English: The withering away of this kind of talent is the sixth end.

古文：正德朝，奸邪迭进，忠谏不闻，幸陛下起而开通之。
现代文： 正德年间，奸邪之言交相传进，忠诚的谏言却充耳不闻，幸而陛下起来开通。
English: During the Zhengde era, the words of treachery and evil were passed on to each other, but the words of loyalty fell on deaf ears. Fortunately, His Majesty stood up and opened the door.

古文：顾阅时未久，而此风复见。
现代文：但历时不长，此风又再次出现。
English: But it didn't last long, and the wind picked up again.

古文：降心未惩其愤，逆耳或动诸颜。
现代文：抑制心志不能戒止其愤怒，逆耳忠言却能惊动诸人的颜色。
English: Suppression of the mind cannot restrain its anger, but disobedience can arouse people's anger.

古文：不剿说而折人以言，即臆度而虞人以诈。
现代文：不取人之说而用言折人，凭臆度而以诈欺人。
English: He does not accept the words of others, but uses them to deceive others, and he deceives others through his cowardice.

古文：朝进一封，暮投千里。
现代文：早晨上奏疏一封，暮晚被贬出千里。
English: In the morning, one letter was delivered, and in the evening, thousands of miles were traveled.

古文：甚至三木囊头，九泉含泣。
现代文：甚至刑具枷头，九泉含泣。
English: Even the torture device, the shackle, brought tears to my eyes.

古文：此言路之塞，其渐七也。
现代文：这种言路的闭塞，是第七端。
English: This blocking of the path of speech is the seventh end.

古文：正德朝，忠贤排斥，天下几危，赖陛下起而主持之。
现代文： 正德时期，忠贤被贬斥，天下几危，赖陛下起来主持。
English: During the Zhengde period, the loyal and virtuous were disparaged, the world was in danger, and His Majesty Lai rose to preside.

古文：岂期一转瞬间，憸邪投隙而起。
现代文：岂料一转瞬间，奸邪乘隙而起。
English: But all of a sudden, the evil took advantage of the situation.

古文：饰六艺以文奸言，假《周官》而夺汉政。
现代文：以六经之义来文饰奸言，借《周官》之制而夺取朝廷政权。
English: He used the texts of the Six Classics to embellish his lies and usurped the power of the imperial court through the system of Zhou Guan.

古文：坚白异同，模棱两可。
现代文：离坚白、和同异，模棱两可。
English: From solid white, and the same, ambiguous.

古文：是盖大奸似忠，大诈似信。
现代文：于是大奸似忠，大诈似信。
English: As a result, great treachery resembles loyalty, and great deceit resembles trust.

古文：王莽匿情于下士之日，安石垢面于入相之初。
现代文：王莽低微时隐藏奸情，王安石拜相初期不修边幅。
English: Wang Mang hid his adultery when he was low, and Wang Anshi was unkempt at the beginning of his courtship.

古文：虽有圣哲，谁其辨之？
现代文：即使有圣哲之人，有谁能辨别他们。
English: Even if there are sages, who can tell them apart?

古文：臣恐正不敌邪，群阴日盛。
现代文：我担心正不胜邪，奸邪日盛。
English: I'm worried about the rise of the right and the rise of the wrong.

古文：此邪正之淆，其渐八也。
现代文：这种正邪的混淆，是第八端。
English: This confusion of right and wrong is the eighth end of the circle.

古文：正德之世，大臣日疏，小人日亲，致政事乖乱，赖陛下绍统，堂廉复亲。
现代文： 正德的时候，大臣越来越被疏远，小人日益被亲近，致使政事乖乱，有赖陛下继承基业又亲近百官。
English: At the time of Zhengde, the minister was increasingly alienated, and the villain was increasingly close, resulting in political turmoil, relying on His Majesty to inherit the inheritance and being close to hundreds of officials.

古文：乃自大礼议起，凡偶失圣意者，谴谪之，鞭笞之，流窜之，必一网尽焉而后已。
现代文：但自从议大礼开始，凡是偶尔有失圣意的人，谴谪他们，鞭打他们，流放他们，必一网打尽而后才罢休。
English: But from the beginning of the Great Debate, all those who have occasionally lost their sanctity, reprimand them, whip them, exile them, will be beaten to a pulp and then stop.

古文：由是小人窥伺，巧发奇中，以投主好，以弋功名。
现代文：因此小人窥伺，巧发奇中，以投主好，来猎取功名。
English: Therefore, the villain spies, and in his cunning, he hunts for fame with the help of his master.

古文：陛下既用先入为主，顺之无不合，逆之无不怒。
现代文：陛下已经采用先入为主，顺之无不合，逆之无不怒。
English: His Majesty has adopted preconceived notions, conforming to what suits him, and getting angry at what does not.

古文：由是大臣顾望，小臣畏惧，上下乖戾，浸成睽孤，而泰交之风息矣。
现代文：因此大臣观望，小臣畏惧，上下乖戾，逐渐分离、孤立，而交好之风息灭。
English: As a result, ministers wait and see, junior ministers are afraid, the upper and lower echelons are grumpy, gradually separated and isolated, and the spirit of friendship is extinguished.

古文：此君臣之睽，其渐九也。
现代文：这种君臣的分离，是第九端。
English: This separation of ruler and subject is the ninth end of the rope.

古文：正德之世，天鸣地震，物怪人妖，曾无虚岁，赖陛下绍统，灾异始除。
现代文： 正德时期，天鸣地震，物怪人妖，每年都有，有赖陛下继统，灾异才消除。
English: During the Zhengde period, there were earthquakes, monsters, and demons every year. It was up to His Majesty's successors to eliminate the disasters.

古文：乃顷岁以来，雨雹杀禽兽，雷风拔树屋，妇人产子两头，无极昼晦如夜，四方早潦，奏报不绝，曾何异正德之季乎？
现代文：近年以来，雨雹杀死禽兽，雷风拔起树屋，妇女生两个头的小孩，无极县白天暗如黑夜，四方水灾旱灾，奏报不绝，这与正德时期有什么不同呢？
English: In recent years, raindrops have killed animals and beasts, thunderstorms have uprooted tree houses, women have given birth to two-headed children, the daytime in Wuji County is dark as night, floods and droughts in all directions have been reported incessantly. How is this different from the Zhengde period?

古文：且京师阴霾之气，上薄太阳，白昼冥冥，罕有晖采，尤为可畏。
现代文：而且京师的阴霾之气，上逼太阳，白昼昏暗，罕有晖彩，更加可畏。
English: Moreover, the gloomy atmosphere of the capital, with the sun beating down on it, and the daytime dim and rarely bright, is even more frightening.

古文：此灾异之臻，其渐十也。
现代文：这种灾异的到达，是第十端。
English: The arrival of this calamity is the tenth end.

古文：此十者，天子有一，无以保四海。
现代文： 这十端，天子有其中的一端，就不可能保住四海。
English: This ten ends, if the Son of Heaven has one of the ends, it is impossible to keep the four seas.

古文：陛下圣明，何以致此？
现代文：陛下圣明，怎么会到这种地步，不是辅佐的臣子招致的吗？
English: Your Majesty, how did things get to this point? Wasn't it caused by your subordinate vassals?

古文：无乃辅弼召之欤？窃见今日之为辅弼第一人者，徒以奸佞，伴食怙恩。致上激天变，下召民灾，中失物望。
现代文：我私下发现今日作为辅佐第一人的人，只用奸佞，伴食取恩。以致上激起天变，下招致民灾，中失众望。
English: Privately, I found that the person who is the first person to assist today only uses treachery to gain favor. As a result, he provoked the change of heaven and earth, and caused the disaster of the people, and lost the hope of the public.

古文：臣逆知其非天下之第一流，而陛下乃任信之，不至于鱼烂不已。
现代文：我知道他不是天下第一流的人，但陛下还信任他，以至于鱼烂不止。
English: I know he's not the best person in the world, but His Majesty trusts him so much that he'll do anything for him.

古文：愿亟去其人，更求才兼文武如前大学士杨一清，老成厚重如今大学士石珤者，并置左右，庶弊政可除，天下可治。
现代文：希望陛下紧急除去这个人，再求才兼文武像前大学士杨一清，老成厚重像现在的大学士石王缶这样的人，一同放在左右，那么弊政可除，天下可治。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will urgently remove this person, and then seek talents and martial arts like the former university scholar Yang Yiching, and old and thick like the current university scholar Shi Wang Can, and put them together on the right and left, then the bad politics can be removed and the world can be cured.

古文：臣又闻献皇帝好贤下士，容物恕人，天下所共知也。
现代文： 我又听说献皇帝好贤下士，容物恕人，是天下共知的。
English: I also heard that it is common knowledge that a good corporal who honors the emperor will be forgiven.

古文：今议礼诸臣，一言未合，辄以悖逆加之。谪配死徙，朝宁为空。
现代文：现议礼的诸位大臣，一言不与皇上相符，就加给他悖逆的罪名，或贬谪或发配或论死或迁徙，朝廷宁可被空虚。
English: The ministers of the present Diet, if a word does not agree with the Emperor, they accuse him of disobedience, or disparage him, or banish him, or speak of death or emigration. The Imperial Court would rather be empty.

古文：此岂献皇帝意？
现代文：这岂是献皇帝的意思？
English: Is this what is meant by "offering the emperor"?

古文：苟非其意，虽尊以天下，无当也。
现代文：如果不是这样的话，那么虽然是天下之尊也是不应该的。
English: If this is not the case, then it should not be done, even though it is the most respected thing in the world.

古文：陛下何不起而用之，使骏奔清庙，以慰献皇帝在天之灵哉！
现代文：陛下何不起而用之，使他们急速奔走于宗庙，以慰献皇帝的在天之灵呢？ 
English: Why didn't His Majesty use it to make them rush to the ancestral temple to console the emperor's departed soul?

古文：疏反覆万四千言，最为剀切，帝付之所司。
现代文：疏章反复共有一万四千字，最为切害，皇帝交付给所司。
English: A total of fourteen thousand words were repeated, the most harmful, and the emperor handed it over to Shoshi.

古文：其所斥辅弼第一人，谓费宏也。
现代文：他所责斥的辅佐第一人是指费宏。
English: The first assistant he rebuked was Fei Hong.

古文：珊律己清严，居官有威惠。
现代文：余珊律己清正严明，做官威严而有恩惠。
English: Yu Shan Ritsu is clear, upright and strict, and he is a dignified and gracious official.

古文：外艰归，士民祠之名宦。
现代文：因岳父之死回到家乡，士民将他当作名宦来纪念。
English: Due to the death of his father-in-law, he returned to his hometown, and the people of Shimin commemorated him as a celebrity.

古文：遭内艰去官，不复出。
现代文：后来副使胡东皋拜名宦谒祠，独看余珊感叹说： 这是我的老师啊。 
English: Later, the deputy envoy of Hu Dongyu worshipped the famous Ancestral Hall, and saw Yu Shan alone and sighed: This is my teacher.

古文：居久之，起广西提学副使，未闻命而卒。
现代文：服孝期满，他以原官职的身份莅临广东。
English: After serving his term of filial piety, he came to Guangdong as a former official.

古文：颜鲸，字应雷，慈溪人。
现代文：最后任四川按察使。颜鲸，字应雷，慈奚谷人。
English: He was the last inspector general of Sichuan Province. He was nicknamed Yan Jiu, Zi Ying Lei, and Cixi Valley Man.

古文：嘉靖三十五年进士。
现代文：嘉靖三十五年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 35th year of Jiajing.

古文：授行人。
现代文：授官行人。
English: Awarded to pedestrians.

古文：擢御史，出视仓场。
现代文：提升为御史，出朝巡视仓场。
English: Promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, he went on a tour of warehouses.

古文：奸人马汉怙定国公势，贷子钱漕卒。
现代文：当时奸人马汉倚仗定国公权势，放高利贷钱给运漕兵卒。
English: At that time, the treacherous Mahan relied on the power of the Qing Dynasty to lend money at high interest rates to transport soldiers.

古文：偿不时，则没入其粮，为怨家所诉。
现代文：如果不及时偿还，就没收他们的粮饷，被怨家所告。
English: If they do not repay in time, they will have their food rations confiscated and be sued by the offender.

古文：汉持定国书至，鲸立论杀。
现代文：马汉持定国公的信来求情，颜鲸立即将他处死。
English: Mahan sent a letter to the Duke of Ding to plead for mercy, but Yanwhal immediately put him to death.

古文：四十一年，畿辅、山东西、河南北大谂。
现代文：四十一年，畿辅、山东、山西、河南、河北大丰收。
English: In 1941, there was a bumper harvest in Kifu, Shandong, Shanxi, Henan and Hebei.

古文：鲸请州县赃罚银毋输京师，尽易粟备振，且发之。内府新钱为籴本。
现代文：颜鲸请求皇上让州县赃罚的银两不要运到京师，全部易换成粮食以防备救济饥年，并且发放内府新钱作为买进粮食的本钱。
English: Yanwhale requested the emperor not to transport the two pieces of silver from the state and county fines to Beijing Division, but to exchange them all for grain in preparation for the famine relief year, and to issue new money from the capital to buy grain.

古文：帝悉报可。
现代文：皇帝都批准了。
English: The emperor approved all of them.

古文：已，上漕政便宜六事。
现代文：之后，上奏对漕政有利的六事。
English: After that, six things favorable to Cao Zheng were recited.

古文：明年出按河南。
现代文：第二年出按河南。
English: The following year, he went to Henan Province.

古文：伊王典楧怙恶，久结掖廷中官、严嵩父子，内外应援，所请奏立下，爪牙率矿盗。
现代文：伊王典木英持杖作恶，久结宫掖廷内中官及严嵩父子，内外勾结应和，凡他所请奏的都立即批下来，他的爪牙大都是矿盗。
English: The king of the Yi Dynasty, Muxing, wielded a cane to do evil, and the court officials of the palace and the father and son of Yan Jiao, colluded with each other, and everything he asked to play was immediately approved. Most of his minions were miners.

古文：鲸欲除之，与参政耿随卿计，持王承奉王钅盬罪，钅盬日告王所谋。
现代文：颜鲸早就想除掉他，便与参政耿随卿合计，抓住伊王承奉官王鉴的罪证，王鉴当天就告发伊王的阴谋。
English: Yanwhal had wanted to get rid of him for a long time, so he made a plan with the politician Geng Suiqing to seize the incriminating evidence of Yi Wang's allegiance to the official Wang Jian. Wang Jian denounced Yi Wang's conspiracy on the same day.

古文：时嵩已败，鲸乃奏记徐阶，说诸大珰绝其援，又尽捕王侦事飞骑。
现代文：这时严嵩已倒台，颜鲸于是通报徐阶，说诸位中官阻绝伊王援请，又将伊王侦事的飞骑尽数逮捕。
English: At this time, Yan Song had already fallen, so Yan Hui informed Xu Ji, saying that all the middle-ranking officers had blocked the King of Iraq's request for assistance, and had arrested as many of the King of Iraq's investigators as possible.

古文：托言防寇，檄知府兵分屯要害地。
现代文：托言防寇，檄令知府将兵分屯要害地点。
English: He ordered the prefectural government to send troops to the key locations.

古文：乃会巡抚胡尧臣劾典楧抗旨、矫敕、僣拟、淫虐十大罪。
现代文：于是会同巡抚胡尧臣弹劾典木英抗旨、矫敕、僭拟、淫虐等十大罪状。
English: As a result, together with the governor Hu Shunchen, they impeached Teng Muying for resisting the will, coercion, imitation, sexual abuse and other ten crimes.

古文：王护卫及诸亡命几万人，不敢发。
现代文：伊王护卫和诸亡命徒几万人，不敢发动。
English: The King of Iraq's guards and the exiles, numbering in the tens of thousands, did not dare to attack.

古文：帝震怒，废王为庶人，锢之高墙，没其赀，削世封。
现代文：皇帝震怒，废伊王为庶民，禁锢在高墙之内，没收其财产，削去世封。
English: The emperor was outraged, dethroned King Yi as a commoner, confined him within high walls, confiscated his property, and cut off his personal seal.

古文：两河人鼓舞相庆。
现代文：河南河北的人鼓舞庆祝。
English: People in Henan and Hebei encouraged the celebration.

古文：景王之国，越界夺民产为庄田，鲸执治其爪牙。
现代文：景王被封藩国，越过边界抢夺民产作为庄田，颜鲸抓住他的爪牙进行治罪。
English: King Gyeongbokgung was made a vassal state, he crossed the border to seize people's property as shodato, and Yanwhale seized his minions to punish them.

古文：魏国公侵民产，假钦赐名树碑为界。
现代文：魏国公侵占民产，假借皇上赐名的树碑为界。
English: Wei Guogong invaded and occupied private property, pretending to borrow the tree monument named by the emperor.

古文：鲸仆其碑，戍其人。
现代文：颜鲸翻倒树碑，让他戍边。
English: The whale tipped over the stele, causing it to break.

古文：锦衣帅受诸侠少金，署名校尉籍中，为民害。
现代文：锦衣主帅纳诸侠一点金钱，就让其署名校尉籍中，为害百姓。
English: The captain of the brocade team gave the knights a little money and let them sign the captain's list, to the detriment of the people.

古文：列侯使王府，道路驿骚。
现代文：列侯出使王府，道路驿站骚乱。
English: The feudal lords sent envoys to the royal palace, and there was a riot at the roadside station.

古文：王府内官进奉，驾龙舟，所过恣横。
现代文：王府内官进奉，驾龙舟，所过恣横。
English: The officials of the royal court were sent out to drive the dragon boat, and they were allowed to do whatever they wanted.

古文：鲸请校尉缺从兵部补，册封改文臣，王府进奉遣属吏。
现代文：颜鲸请校尉的缺额听从兵部补员，册封改为文臣，王府进奉派遣属吏。
English: Yan Jiu requested that the shortfall in the number of captains should be filled from the military department, and that the title of vassal should be changed to civil servant, and that the royal court should dispatch subordinate officials.

古文：诏册亲王及妃遣列侯，余皆如鲸议。
现代文：皇上下诏册亲王和王妃派遣列候，其他的按颜鲸的提议。
English: The Emperor and Empress sent the Prince and Princess to wait in line, and the others followed Yan Jia's suggestion.

古文：改督畿辅学政。
现代文：后改任督畿辅学政。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Governor of Kii Province and Vice-Rector of Gakusei.

古文：大兴知县高世儒奉诏核逃役，都督朱希孝以勾军劾之，下部议。
现代文：大兴知县高世儒奉诏核查逃役，都督朱希孝以勾军的罪名弹劾他，下到部里讨论。
English: Daxing County Gao Shiju issued an edict to check draft evasion, and the governor Zhu Xixiao impeached him on the charge of joining the enemy, and went down to the ministry to discuss.

古文：鲸劾希孝乱法，言： 世儒等按籍召行户，非勾禁军。
现代文：颜鲸弹劾朱希孝乱法，说： 高世儒等人按籍召行户，不是勾结禁军。
English: Yanwhale impeached Zhu Xi's filial perversion law, saying: High-ranking Confucians and others recruit practitioners according to their nationality, not by colluding with the forbidden army.

古文：此乃禁军子弟家人倚城社，冒禁卫名，致吏不敢问。
现代文：这乃是禁军子弟家人倚靠城社，假冒禁卫之名，致使官吏不敢过问。
English: This is because the family members of the sons of the forbidden soldiers rely on the city shrine, pretending to be the name of the forbidden guards, so that the officials do not dare to ask.

古文：富人得抗诏，而贫者为沟中瘠。
现代文：富人得以抗旨，而穷人为沟中瘠。
English: The rich have been able to resist, while the poor have been left in the lurch.

古文：世儒无罪，罪在锦衣。 
现代文：高世儒无罪，罪在锦衣。 
English: High-level Confucius is not guilty, the crime is in the brocade.

古文：帝怒，责鲸诋诬勋臣，贬安仁典史。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，责斥颜鲸诋毁诬蔑勋臣，贬为安仁典史。
English: Enraged, the emperor reprimanded Yanwhale for slandering and defaming his honored vassal, and relegated him to the annals of history.

古文：隆庆元年历，湖广提学副使。
现代文：隆庆元年历湖广提学副使。
English: In the first year of the Longqing Emperor's reign, he became the vice-envoy for the study of the Guangxi calendar.

古文：以试恩贡生失张居正指，降山东参议。
现代文：因试恩贡生之失受张居正指责，降为山东参议。
English: Zhang Jizheng was blamed for the failure of the trial, and was demoted to the position of Shandong Councilor.

古文：改行太仆少卿。
现代文：后来改为太仆少卿。
English: Later it was changed to Taibu shochikyo.

古文：都御史海瑞荐鲸异才，不报。
现代文：都御史海瑞推荐颜鲸是异才，但没有回音。
English: Metropolitan Shi Hai Rui recommended Yan Jiu as a prodigy, but there was no response.

古文：鲸按河南时，黜新郑知县，其人高拱所庇也。
现代文：颜鲸出按河南的时候，罢黜新郑知县，此人为高拱所庇护。
English: When Yan Yuanyuan went to Henan Province, he went to Xin Zhengchi County. This person was sheltered by Gao Jiao.

古文：在湖广，王篆欲祀其父乡贤，执不许。
现代文：在湖广，王篆想祀他的父亲为乡贤，颜鲸坚持不允许。
English: In Hukang, Wang Qian wanted to enshrine his father as the town's wise man, but Yanwhale insisted that this was not allowed.

古文：至是，拱掌吏部，篆为考功，遂以不谨落鲸职。
现代文：到这时候，高拱掌管吏部，王篆为考功郎，于是以不谨的名义夺去颜鲸的官职。
English: At this time, Gao Gong was in charge of the personnel department, and Wang Qi was the examiner, so he took away Yan Jia's official position in the name of dishonesty.

古文：万历中，给事中邹元标、御史饶位交章荐之，报寝。
现代文：万历年间，给事中邹元标、御史饶位交章推荐颜鲸，报告上去而无结果。
English: During the years of the Wanli era, the Yanwhale was recommended by the Guan Yuanbiao and the Goshi Rao, and the report went up without result.

古文：御史顾云程言： 陛下大起遗佚，独鲸及管志道以考察格之。
现代文：御史顾云程说 ：陛下大量起用遗佚的人，唯独颜鲸和管志道因考察被格除。
English: Historian Gu Yuncheng said, "His majesty employed a large number of widows, but Yanwhale and Guanzhido were exempted from the inspection.

古文：夫相与冢宰贤，则黜幽为公典，否则驱除异己而已。
现代文：如果辅相与吏部尚书为贤臣，那么罢黜奸邪为公典，否则就是驱除异己而已。
English: If supporting each other and upholding the discipline of the cadres are virtuous, then expelling evil and treachery is a public duty; otherwise, it is just a matter of expelling dissidents.

古文：近又登用被察吴中行、艾穆、魏时亮、赵世卿，独靳鲸、志道何也？ 
现代文：近来又考察登用吴中行、艾穆、魏时亮、赵世卿，唯独奚落颜鲸、管志道，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Recently, Wu Zhongxing, Ai Mu, Wei Shiliang, and Zhao Shijing have also been investigated, but only Zou Lianyuan Whale and Guanzhi Dao have been used. Why is this?

古文：给事中姜应麟、李弘道亦言之，仅以湖广副使致仕。
现代文：给事中姜应麟、李弘道也说这件事，颜鲸仅以湖广副使退休。
English: Jiang Yinglin and Li Hongdao also said this, and Yan Jia only retired as deputy minister of Hukang.

古文：中外论荐十余疏，不果用。
现代文：朝廷中外有十多封疏章褒论推荐颜鲸，但终究没有任用他。
English: There were more than ten letters of commendation from inside and outside the imperial court recommending Yan Jia, but in the end he was not appointed.

