古文：张芸叟《与石司理书》云： 顷游京师，求谒先达之门，每听欧阳文忠公、司马温公、王荆公之论，于行义文史为多，唯欧阳公多谈吏事。
现代文：张芸臾《与石司理书》一说： 最近到京城，要求拜见前辈官员，常听欧阳文忠公、司马温公、王荆公等人的议论，在道德文章方面为多，只有欧阳公多讲居官的事情。
English: Zhang Yijuan said in "A Letter to Shi Si Li": "Recently, I went to Beijing and asked to meet senior officials. I often listened to the discussions of Ouyang Wenzhong, Sima Wen, Wang Jing and others. There were many moral articles, but only Ouyang talked more about officials.

古文：既久之，不免有请： 大凡学者之见先生，莫不以道德文章为欲闻者，今先生多教人以吏事，所未谕也。 公曰： 不然。
现代文：时间久了免不了就问他： 凡是读书人来见先生，没有不想听道德文章的，现在先生教人最多的是居官的道理，这是我不明白的。 
English: After a long time, I couldn't help but ask him: When readers come to see you, there is no one who doesn't want to listen to moral articles. What you teach people the most now is the principle of being an official, which I don't understand.

古文：吾子皆时才，异日临事，当自知之。
现代文：欧阳公说： 不是这样，你是现时的人才，以后作官理政，就会知道。
English: Ouyang Gong said, "That's not true. You are the current talent, and you will know when you become a government official."

古文：大抵文学止于润身，政事可以及物。吾昔贬官夷陵，方壮年，未厌学，欲求《史》、《汉》一观，公私无有也。
现代文：大凡文学只能使自己光彩，政事可以影响事物，我过去贬官到夷陵，正在壮年，向往学习，想找《史》、《汉书》看看，公家私人都没有。
English: Great literature can only make itself brilliant, political affairs can affect things. I used to be demoted to Yiling, I am in my prime, I yearn to learn, I want to find "History" and "Chinese Classics" to look at, but there are no public or private people.

古文：无以遣日，因取架阁陈年公案，反覆观之，见其枉直乖错不可胜数，以无为有，以枉为直，违法徇情，灭亲害义，无所不有。
现代文：无法打发日子，因此去取架上的旧案卷宗，反复阅读，见里边判冤枉判差错的，数不胜数，把理屈作为理直的，违反法律拘私情的，害死亲人破坏道义的，什么样的都有。
English: I couldn't spare the time, so I picked up the old case files on the shelf, read them over and over again, and saw that there were countless cases of wrongful convictions and errors, and that there were all kinds of people who regarded reason as rational, violated the law, kept their feelings to themselves, killed their relatives, and undermined morality.

古文：且夷陵荒远褊小，尚如此，天下固可知也。
现代文：臾陵是荒僻的小县，尚且这样，整个中国就可知道了。
English: Fuling is a small county in the middle of nowhere. Even so, the whole of China knows about it.

古文：当时仰天誓心曰：自尔遇事不敢忽也。 
现代文：当时我对天发誓说：从此处理政事，不敢疏忽大意。 
English: At that time, I swore to the heavens, "From now on, I will handle political affairs, and I will not dare to be careless."

古文：是时苏明允父子亦在焉，尝闻此语。 
现代文：当时苏明允父子也在座：曾听到这话。 
English: At that time, Su Mingyun and his son were also present: they had heard this.

古文：又有答孙子发书，多论《资治通鉴》，其略云： 温公尝曰： 吾作此书，唯王胜之尝阅之终篇，自余君子求乞欲观，读未终纸，已欠伸思睡矣。
现代文：还有《答孙子发书》，多谈论《资治通鉴》，大略说： 司马温公曾说： 我著此书，只有王胜之读完过，其余众官员，找此书想看，一页都没有读完，就打哈欠伸懒腰想睡觉了。
English: There is also the "Answer to the Grandson's Letter" and more about the "Capital Management General Guide," roughly saying: Sima Wen Gong once said: I wrote this book, only Wang Shengzhi has finished reading, the rest of the officials, looking for this book to read, have not finished reading a single page, they yawn, stretch their loins and want to sleep.

古文：书十九年方成，中间受了人多少语言陵藉  云云。
现代文：这书经过十九年才写成，中问受到了多少人的语言糟踏 。
English: It took nineteen years to write this book, and I wonder how many people abused the language.

古文：此两事，士大夫罕言之，《浮休集》百卷，无此二篇。今豫章所刊者，附之集后。
现代文：这两件事，士大夫很少谈到，《浮休集》一百卷，没有这两篇，现在豫章刊刻的《浮休集》附在了后面。
English: These two things, the scholar rarely talked about, "Floating Collection" one hundred volumes, without these two articles, now Yu Zhang engraved "Floating Collection" attached to the back.

