古文：柔兆敦牂，一年。
现代文：柔兆敦牂，一年。
English: Zhuo Zhaodong, one year old.

古文：太宗明皇帝上之下泰始二年
现代文：宋明帝泰始二年
English: Song Ming Dynasty, the first two years of the Tai Dynasty

古文：春，正月，己丑朔，魏大赦，改元天安。
现代文：春季正月，己丑朔，北魏宣布大赦，改年号天安。
English: In the first month of spring, the Northern Wei Dynasty announced an amnesty, and the new year was named Tian'an.

古文：癸巳，征会稽太守寻阳王子房为抚军将军，以巴陵王休若代之。
现代文：癸巳，刘宋明帝刘征召会稽太守寻阳王刘子房任抚军将军，命巴陵王刘休若接替刘子房的职位。
English: At that time, Emperor Liu Songming appointed Liu Zifang as the general of the army, and ordered Liu Xiu, the king of Baling, to succeed Liu Zifang.

古文：甲午，中外戒严。
现代文：甲午，刘宋朝廷内外戒严。
English: On the 8th, martial law was declared throughout the country.

古文：以司徒建安王休仁都督征讨诸军事，车骑将军、江州刺史王玄谟副之。
现代文：任命司徒建安王刘休仁为都督征讨诸军事，命车骑将军、江州刺史王玄谟做他的副手。
English: He appointed Liu Xuren, the King of Jian'an, a scholar, as the governor of the capital to recruit the military, the general to ride the chariot of destiny, and Wang Xuanmu, the Governor of Jiangzhou, as his deputy.

古文：休仁军于南州，以沈攸之为寻阳太守，将兵屯虎槛。
现代文：刘休仁驻军南州，任命沈攸之为寻阳太守，带兵驻扎虎槛。
English: Liu Xuren stationed troops in Nanzhou, appointed Shen You as the governor of Xiangyang, and stationed troops in Tigris.

古文：时玄谟未发，前锋凡十军，络绎继至。
现代文：当时，王玄谟大军还没有出发，前锋部队共十路兵马，络绎相继到达前线。
English: At that time, Wang Xuanmu's large army had not yet set out, and the forward troops, a total of ten soldiers and horses, arrived at the front line one after another.

古文：每夜各立姓号，不相禀受。
现代文：每天晚上，各军营用自己的号令，谁也不听谁的。
English: Every night, the battalions shout their own orders, and no one listens to anyone else.

古文：攸之谓诸将曰： 今众军姓号不同，若有耕夫、渔父夜相呵叱，便致骇乱，取败之道也。
现代文：沈攸之对名将领说： 现在各军营的号令不同，如果有农夫、渔夫夜里互相喊叫呵叱，便可能引起军中的惊骇，发生混乱，这是取败之道。
English: Shen Youzhi said to the generals: Now the orders of each military camp are different. If there are farmers and fishermen shouting and scolding each other at night, it may cause consternation and confusion in the army. This is the way to defeat.

古文：请就一军取号。 
现代文：我建议以一个军营的号令作为全军的号令。 
English: Please take your number according to an army.

古文：众咸从之。
现代文：众将领都同意。
English: The generals all agree.

古文：邓琬称说符瑞，诈称受路太后玺书，帅将佐上尊于晋安王子勋。
现代文：邓琬以上天显示的种种祥瑞为借口，诈称接到路太后的密诏，率领各将领、僚佐等向晋安王刘子勋奉上皇帝尊号。
English: On the pretext of various auspicious signs shown by the heavens, Deng Xuan falsely claimed to have received a secret edict from the empress dowager, and led the generals and subordinates to present the title of emperor to Liu Zixun, the king of Jinan.

古文：乙未，子勋即皇帝位于寻阳，改元义嘉。
现代文：乙未，刘子勋在寻阳登基称帝，改年号为义嘉。
English: Second, Liu Zixun ascended to the throne in Xuanyang and changed his name to Yijia.

古文：以安陆王子绥为司徒、扬州刺史；寻阳王子房、临海王子顼并加开府仪同三司；以邓琬为尚书右仆射，张悦为吏部尚书，袁顗加尚书左仆射；自馀将佐及诸州郡，除官进爵号各有差。
现代文：任命安陆王刘子绥为司徒、扬州刺史，寻阳王刘子房、临海王刘子顼，都加封为开府仪同三司，还任命邓琬为尚书右仆射，张悦为吏部尚书，加封袁为尚书左仆射。其他各将领、僚佐以及各州郡等地方长官，按等级进官加爵。
English: Liu Zixuan, the king of Anlu, was appointed as the tutor and Yangzhou as the historian, and Liu Zifang, the king of Guiyang, and Liu Zixuan, the king of Linhai, were appointed as the keeper of the imperial residences and the three offices, and Deng Wei was appointed as the right-hand servant of Shangshu, Zhang Yue as the right-hand servant of the officials, and Yuan was appointed as the left-hand servant of Shangshu. Other generals, deputy generals, and local governors of various states and counties were promoted to higher ranks according to their ranks.

古文：丙申，以征虏司马申令孙为徐州刺史。
现代文：丙申，明帝任命征虏司马申令孙为徐州刺史。
English: Yi Shen, the Ming Emperor appointed the conscript Sima Shen Ling Sun to write the history of Xuzhou.

古文：令孙，坦之子也。
现代文：申令孙是申坦的儿子。
English: Shen Ling Sun is the son of Shen Tan.

古文：置司州于义阳，以义阳内史庞孟虬为司州刺史。
现代文：在义阳建立司州府，提升义阳内史庞孟虬为司州刺史。
English: Established Shizhou Prefecture in Yiyang, and promoted Yiyang historian Pang Mengtao to Shizhou historian.

古文：徐州刺史薛安都、冀州刺史清河崔道固皆举兵应寻阳。
现代文：徐州刺史薛安都，冀州刺史清河人崔道固，都起兵响应寻阳的刘子勋。
English: Xuzhou's Zhang Shi Xue Andu and Jizhou's Zhang Shi Qinghe's Cui Daogu both raised their armies in response to Liu Zixun's search for the sun.

古文：上征兵于青州刺史沈文秀，文秀遣其将平原刘弥之等将兵赴建康。
现代文：明帝向青州刺史沈文秀征兵，沈文秀派遣他的将领刘弥之等率军南下，增援建康。
English: Emperor Ming enlisted soldiers from the Qingzhou warlord Shen Wenxiu, and Shen Wenxiu sent his general Liu Yizhi and other generals south to reinforce Jiankang.

古文：会薛安都遣使邀文秀，文秀更令弥之等应安都。
现代文：正巧，薛安都派人邀请沈文秀拥护刘子勋，沈文秀于是改命刘弥之中途去薛安都那里待命。
English: Coincidentally, Xue Andu sent someone to invite Shen Wenxiu to support Liu Zixun. Shen Wenxiu then changed his name to Liu Mi and went to Xue Andu on standby.

古文：济阴太守申阐据睢陵应建康，安都遣其从子直阁将军索儿、太原太守清河傅灵越等攻之。
现代文：济阴太守申阐据守睢陵，效忠建康朝廷。薛安都派遣他的侄儿直将军薛索儿和太原太守清河人傅灵越等攻打申阐。
English: Jiyin's grand marshal Shen Yue was loyal to Jiankang's imperial court and guarded the imperial mausoleum. Xue An sent his nephew, General Zhi Xue Sol, and Taiyuan's grand marshal Fu Ling Yue, a native of Qinghe, to attack Shen Yue.

古文：阐，令孙之弟也。
现代文：申阐是申令孙的弟弟。
English: Shen Yan is the younger brother of Shen Ling Son.

古文：安都婿裴祖隆守下邳，刘弥之至下邳，更以所领应建康，袭击祖隆。
现代文：薛安都的女婿裴祖隆驻守下邳，刘弥之到达下邳后，带着他的部众，效忠于建康朝廷，袭击裴祖隆。
English: Xue Andu's son-in-law Pei Zulong was stationed in Jiaozuo. After Liu Yizhi arrived in Jiaozuo, he and his men, loyal to the Jiankang court, attacked Pei Zulong.

古文：祖隆兵败，与征北参军垣崇祖奔彭城。
现代文：裴祖隆战败，会同征北参军垣崇祖逃到彭城。
English: When Pei Zulong was defeated, he fled to Pengcheng together with the Northern Expeditionary Army's general, Gaki Chongzu.

古文：崇祖，护之之从子也。
现代文：垣崇祖是垣护之的侄儿。
English: Kaki Takasago was the nephew of Kaki Moro.

古文：弥之族人北海太守怀恭、从子善明皆举兵以应弥之，薛索儿闻之，释睢陵，引兵击弥之。
现代文：刘弥之的同族人北海太守刘怀恭、侄儿刘善明都起兵响应刘弥之。薛索儿知道后，放弃对睢陵的攻击，发兵转攻刘弥之。
English: Liu Yizhi's compatriots, the governor of the North Sea, Liu Huaiqong, and his nephew, Liu Shanming, both raised an army in response to Liu Yizhi. After learning this, Xue Sol abandoned the attack on Fuling and sent an army to attack Liu Yizhi.

古文：弥之战败，走保北海。
现代文：刘弥之战败，逃到北海据守。
English: Liu Ya was defeated and fled to the North Sea to defend himself.

古文：申令孙进据淮阳，请降于索儿。
现代文：申令孙进据淮阳，请求薛索儿允许他投降。
English: He ordered Sun Jin to go to Huaiyang and ask Xue Sol to allow him to surrender.

古文：庞孟虬亦不受命，举兵应寻阳。
现代文：庞孟虬也背叛了朝廷，起兵响应寻阳刘子勋。
English: Pang Mengyao also betrayed the imperial court and raised an army in response to Liu Zixun's search for the sun.

古文：帝召寻阳王长史行会稽郡事孔觊为太子詹事，以平西司马庾业代之；又遣都水使者孔璪入东慰劳。
现代文：明帝征召寻阳王长史、代理会稽郡事孔觊为太子詹事，另派平西司马庾业接替孔觊的职位，又派都水使者孔到东方各郡慰劳。
English: Emperor Ming enlisted Wang Changshi of Xiangyang and the acting county auditor Kong Jun to act as the crown prince Zhan Jun. He also sent Sima Qianye of Pingxi to take over Kong Jun's position, and sent the emissary of Du Shui, Kong, to the counties in the east to perform labor.

古文：璪说凯以 建康虚弱，不如拥五郡以应袁、邓。 
现代文：孔反而游说孔觊： 建康力量虚弱，不如以所管辖的东方五个郡来响应袁、邓琬。 
English: On the contrary, Kong lobbied Kong Hao: Jiankang's strength was weak, it would be better to respond to Yuan and Deng Yao with the five counties in the east under their jurisdiction.

古文：觊遂发兵，驰檄奉寻阳。
现代文：孔觊遂下令起兵，宣布拥护刘子勋。
English: Confucius then ordered troops to be raised and declared his support for Liu Zixun.

古文：吴郡太守顾琛、吴兴太守王昙生、义兴太守刘延熙、晋陵太守袁标皆据郡应之。
现代文：一时间，吴郡太守顾琛、吴兴太守王昙生、义兴太守刘延熙、晋陵太守袁标都占据郡城响应孔觊，拥护寻阳政权。
English: For a period of time, Wu County Governor Gu Kun, Wu Xing Governor Wang Yansheng, Yixing Governor Liu Yanxi, and Jinling Governor Yuan Biao all occupied the county seat in response to Confucius and supported the Xiangyang regime.

古文：上又以庾业代延熙为义兴，业至长塘湖，即与延熙合。
现代文：明帝又命庾业接替刘延熙为义兴太守，庾业走至长塘湖，却与刘延熙联合，反叛朝廷。
English: Emperor Ming also ordered Zouye to succeed Liu Yanxi as Yixing Daju. Zouye went as far as Changtang Lake, but joined forces with Liu Yanxi and rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：益州刺史萧惠开，闻晋安王子勋举兵，集将佐谓之曰： 湘东，太祖之昭；晋安，世祖之穆；其于当璧，并无不可。
现代文：益州刺史萧惠开，听到晋安王刘子勋起兵，召集将领，对他们说： 湘东王是太祖的儿子，晋安王是世祖的儿子，无论哪一个继承皇位，都没什么不合法的。
English: Xiao Huikai, the governor of Yizhou, heard that Liu Zixun, the king of Jin'an, raised an army and summoned his generals, saying to them: "The king of Hunan is the son of the great-grandfather, the king of Jin'an is the son of the great-grandfather, no matter which one inherits the throne, there is nothing illegal.

古文：但景和虽昏，本是世祖之嗣；不任社稷，其次犹多。
现代文：刘子业虽然昏暴，却是世祖的后嗣，他虽不能继续主持国事，却还有很多弟弟。
English: Liu Ziye, although dizzy, is the heir of the founder. Although he cannot continue to preside over state affairs, he still has many younger brothers.

古文：吾荷世祖之眷，当推奉九江。 
现代文：我受世祖的恩宠，应当遵奉晋安王刘子勋。 
English: By the grace of my ancestors, I should follow Liu Zixun, the King of Jin'an.

古文：乃遣巴郡太守费欣寿将五千人东下。
现代文：于是就派遣巴郡太守费欣寿带领五千人顺江东下。
English: So he dispatched Ba County Governor Fei Xinshou to lead five thousand people eastward along the Shunjiang River.

古文：于是湘州行事何慧文、广州刺史袁昙远、梁州刺史柳元怙、山阳太守程天祚皆附于子勋。
现代文：这时，湘州行事何慧文、广州刺史袁昙远、梁州刺史柳元怙、山阳太守程天祚都起兵拥护刘子勋。
English: At this time, He Huiwen from Hunan Province, Yuan Shiyuan from Guangzhou Province, Liu Yuanqi from Liangzhou Province, and Cheng Tianyao from Sanyang Province all rallied to support Liu Zixun.

古文：元怙，元景之从兄也。
现代文：柳元怙是柳元景的堂兄。
English: Liu Yuanjun is the cousin of Liu Yuanjing.

古文：是岁，四方贡计皆归寻阳，朝廷所保，唯丹阳、淮南等数郡，其间诸县或应子勋。东兵已至永世，宫省危惧。
现代文：这一年，各地的贡品和报告都送往寻阳。建康朝廷的势力范围，只剩下丹杨、淮南等几个郡，而这几个郡中又有很多县起兵响应刘子勋，东线的反朝廷军队已到达永世。建康朝廷惊恐危急。
English: This year, tributes and reports from all over the country were sent to Xuanyang. The Jiankang imperial court's sphere of influence was reduced to just a few counties, such as Danyang and Huainan, and many of these counties raised their armies in response to Liu Zixun. The anti-imperial army on the eastern front had arrived in eternity. The Jiankang imperial court was terrified and in a critical situation.

古文：上集群臣以谋成败。
现代文：明帝召集群臣讨论国家的安危。
English: Emperor Ming summoned his ministers to discuss the country's safety and security.

古文：蔡兴宗曰： 今普天同叛，人有异志。宜镇之以静，至信待人。
现代文：蔡兴宗说： 当今之时，几乎举国一起反叛，我们应该镇静，以诚待人。
English: Cai Xingzong said: At this time, when almost the whole country is rebelling together, we should be calm and treat people with sincerity.

古文：叛者亲戚布在宫省，若绳之以法，则士崩立至，宜明罪不相及之义。
现代文：叛臣的亲戚，很多在宫廷或朝廷任职，如果绳之以法，我们就会立刻土崩瓦解。
English: If the relatives of the traitors, many of whom work in the palace or the court, are brought to justice, we will immediately fall apart.

古文：物情既定，人有战心，六军精勇，器甲犀利，以待不习之兵，其势相万耳。愿陛下勿忧。 
现代文：应该强调父子兄弟之间，犯罪互不株连的大义，民心安定之后，将士才能有斗志。朝廷的六军精练勇猛，武器犀利，用来对付那些没有经过训练的叛乱部队，形势相差很多，请陛下不要忧虑。 
English: It should be emphasized that between father and son, crime does not go hand in hand. After the people's hearts are stable, soldiers can have fighting spirit. The six armies of the imperial court are refined and brave, with sharp weapons, used to deal with those untrained rebel forces. The situation is very different, please do not worry your majesty.

古文：上善之。
现代文：明帝认为他的分析有理。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：建武司马刘顺说豫州刺史殷琰使应寻阳，琰以家在建康，未许。
现代文：建武司马刘顺劝说豫州刺史殷琰，让他响应寻阳政权。殷琰因家人都在建康，没有答应。
English: Jianwu's secretary Ma Liu Shun persuaded the governor of Yuzhou, Yin Qi, to let him respond to the pro-Yang regime. Yin Qi did not agree because his family members were all in Jiankang.

古文：右卫将军柳光世自省内出奔彭城，过寿阳，言建康必不能守。
现代文：右卫将军柳光世从朝廷逃出来，投奔彭城，路过寿阳，他说建康一定保不住。
English: The right guard general Liu Guangxie escaped from the imperial court and fled to Pengcheng, passing Shouyang. He said that Jiankang could not be saved.

古文：琰信之，且素无部曲，为土豪前右军参军杜叔宝等所制，不得已而从之。
现代文：殷琰相信他的判断，而且，殷琰一向没有自己的部曲，受到当地的豪族、前任右军参军杜叔宝等人的挟持，不得已归顺刘子勋。
English: Yin Xi trusted his judgment. Moreover, Yin Xi had never had his own piece of music. He was held hostage by the local powerful clans, the former right-wing military commander Du Shubao and others, and had no choice but to submit to Liu Zixun.

古文：琰以叔宝为长史，内外军事，皆叔宝专之。
现代文：殷琰任命杜叔宝为长史，里里外外一切军事要事，都由杜叔宝独断专行。
English: The appointment of Du Shubao by Yin Xi has a long history. Du Shubao arbitrarily handles all important military affairs at home and abroad.

古文：上谓蔡兴宗曰： 诸处未平，殷琰已复同逆；顷日人情云何？
现代文：明帝对蔡兴宗说： 各地的叛乱，还没有平息，殷琰又起兵附逆，近日来民心如何？
English: Emperor Ming said to Cai Xingzong, "The rebellions in various regions have not yet subsided, and there are rumblings of rebellion. How are the people's hearts these days?

古文：事当济不？ 
现代文：事情能够成功吗？ 
English: Will things work out?

古文：兴宗曰： 逆之与顺，臣无以辨。
现代文：蔡兴宗说： 谁是叛逆，谁是正统，我不必分辨。
English: Cai Xingzong said: I don't have to distinguish who is rebellious and who is orthodox.

古文：今商旅断绝，米甚丰贱，四方云合，而人情更安。
现代文：现在，交通中断，商旅绝迹。可是粮食积存丰富，米价便宜。四面八方风起云涌，而民心反而更加安定。
English: Now, transportation has been disrupted and business travel has disappeared. However, grain reserves are abundant and rice prices are cheap. The winds are blowing in all directions, but the people's hearts are more stable.

古文：以此卜之，清荡可必。
现代文：由此看来，动乱一定可以平息。
English: From this point of view, the turmoil can certainly be quelled.

古文：但臣之所忧，更在事后，犹羊公言： 既平之后，方当劳圣虑耳。  
现代文：我所担忧的不是眼前，而是未来，正象羊祜所说的： 夺取胜利之后，才更要劳烦陛下多多思虑。  明帝说： 正像你所说的！ 
English: What I am worried about is not the present, but the future, just as the shepherd said: After winning the victory, it is even more necessary to bother His Majesty with many thoughts.Ming Di said: Just as you said!

古文：上曰： 诚如卿言。 上知琰附寻阳非本意，乃更厚抚其家以招之。
现代文：明帝知道殷琰归附寻阳政权，并非本意，于是对殷琰留在建康的家人特别安抚厚待，招引他重新归顺。
English: Emperor Ming knew that it was not his intention for Yin Qi to join the Xuanyang regime, so he treated Yin Qi's family members who remained in Jiankang with special appeasement and generous treatment to lure him back into submission.

古文：汝南、新蔡二郡太守周矜起兵于悬瓠以应建康。
现代文：汝南、新蔡二郡太守周矜，在悬瓠起兵宣布效忠建康。
English: In the south of the country, Zhou Qi, the governor of the new Cai Er County, declared his allegiance to Jian Kang at the military parade.

古文：袁顗诱矜司马汝南常珍奇执矜，斩之，以珍奇代为太守。
现代文：袁引诱周矜崐的司马、汝南人常珍奇活捉周矜，将其斩首。于是任命常珍奇接任太守。
English: Yuan lured Zhou Qi to Sima, and the people of Yunnan captured Zhou Qi alive and beheaded him. Therefore, he appointed Zhou Qi to take over as the governor-general.

古文：上使冗从仆射垣荣祖还徐州说薛安都，安都曰： 今京都无百里地，不论攻围取胜，自可拍手笑杀；且我不欲负孝武。 
现代文：明帝派冗从仆射垣荣祖回徐州游说薛安都。薛安都说： 如今，建康势力范围，不到百里地，无论攻城还是野战，我们都可以在拍手大笑中取胜。并且，我不想辜负孝武皇帝。 
English: The Ming Emperor sent his servant, Sagaki Rongzu, back to Xuzhou to lobby Xue Andu. Xue Andu said: Nowadays, Jiankang's sphere of influence is less than a hundred miles, whether it is a siege or a field battle, we can win in applause and laughter. And, I don't want to live up to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：荣祖曰： 孝武之行，足致馀殃，今虽天下雷同，正是速死，无能为也。 
现代文：垣荣祖说： 孝武皇帝的行为，足以为他的后代留下祸殃。现在虽然天下响应，不过是加快灭亡的速度，不可能有什么作为。 
English: Gaki Rongzu said: Emperor Xiaowu's actions are enough to leave a curse for his descendants. Although the world is now responding, it is only speeding up the speed of destruction, and it is impossible to do anything.

古文：安都不从，因留荣祖使为将。
现代文：薛安都不接受，反而留下垣荣祖任职。
English: Xue An did not accept, but instead left Gaki Rongzu in office.

古文：荣祖，崇祖之从父兄也。
现代文：垣荣祖是垣崇祖的堂哥。
English: Kaki Renzo was a cousin of Kaki Sozo.

古文：兗州刺史殷孝祖之甥司法参军颍川葛僧韶，请殷孝祖入朝，上遣之。
现代文：兖州刺史殷孝祖的外甥任司法参军的葛僧韶，请求明帝征召殷孝祖来京朝见，明帝派葛僧韶前往。
English: Ge Xiangqi, the nephew of Yin Xiaozu, who was appointed as a judge and joined the army, requested the Ming Emperor to summon Yin Xiaozu to Beijing for a meeting, and the Ming Emperor sent Ge Xiangqi.

古文：时薛索儿屯据津迳，僧韶间行得至，说孝祖曰： 景和凶狂，开辟未有；朝野危极，假命漏刻。
现代文：当时，薛索儿驻军各渡口和各要道，葛僧韶绕小路北上，才得以到达，游说殷孝祖说： 刘子业凶暴疯狂，自从开天辟地以来，从未有过。朝野面临崩溃，人人生命危在旦夕。
English: At that time, Xue Sol garrisoned troops at all ferry ports and major roads, and Ge Xiang took a small road to the north to get there. He lobbied Yin Xiaozu and said, "Liu Ziye's ferocity and madness have never been seen since the heavens and earth were created. The government and the countryside are facing collapse, and everyone's life is in danger.

古文：主上夷山翦暴，更造天地，国乱朝危，宜立长君。
现代文：主上翦险凶暴，重建天下。国家沸混乱，朝廷危急，应该拥护年长者为君王。
English: The country is in turmoil, the imperial court is in crisis, and the elderly should be supported as monarchs.

古文：而群迷相煽，构造无端，贪利幼弱，竞怀希望。
现代文：想不到一群糊涂虫互相煽动，无缘无故地制造事端，利用晋安王的年幼无知，各人有各人的打算。
English: It is unimaginable that a group of dimwits would instigate each other, cause trouble for no reason, and take advantage of the young ignorance of the King of Jinan. Everyone has their own plans.

古文：使天道助逆，群凶事申，则主幼时艰，权柄不一，兵难互起，岂有自容之地！
现代文：假使上天帮助叛逆，这些坏蛋如愿以偿，而主上年幼，时势艰难，权柄不能集中，兵变事变不断发生，天下之大，岂有容身之地！
English: Assuming that heaven helps the rebels, these villains will get what they want, but the Lord is young, the situation is difficult, power cannot be concentrated, mutinies and incidents continue to occur, the world is big, there is no place to live!

古文：舅少有立功之志，若能控济主勇，还奉朝廷，非唯匡主静乱，乃可以垂名竹帛。 
现代文：舅父自小就有建功立业的大志，如能率领济水一带的义勇将士，回京保卫朝廷，不但可以扶助君王平定叛乱，而且可以名垂青史。 
English: My uncle had the ambition to make a great contribution since childhood. If he could lead the volunteers in the Jishui area and return to Beijing to defend the imperial court, he could not only help the king to suppress the rebellion, but also become famous in history.

古文：孝祖具问朝廷消息，僧韶随方酬譬，并陈兵甲精强，主上欲委以前驱之任。
现代文：殷孝祖详细询问了朝廷的情况，葛僧韶随机应变，陈述士卒强壮，武器精良，明帝准备任命他为前锋总领。
English: Yin Xiaozhu inquired in detail about the news of the imperial court, and the monk Zhuang repeatedly answered Xiaoyu, and said that the imperial soldiers and horses were strong and the weapons were sharp, and the emperor hoped to entrust him with the important task of being the vanguard of the counter-rebellion.

古文：孝祖即日委妻子于瑕丘，帅文武二千人，随僧韶还建康。
现代文：殷孝祖当天就把妻子儿女留在瑕丘，率文武官员及士卒两千人，随同葛僧韶返回建康。
English: On the same day, Yin Xiaozu left his wife and children in Keqiu, and led 2,000 officials and soldiers to return to Jiankang with Ge Xiangyao.

古文：时四方皆附寻阳，朝廷唯保丹阳一郡；而永世令孔景宣复叛，义兴兵垂至延陵，内外忧危，咸欲奔散。
现代文：此时，所有的郡县都归附寻阳政权，朝廷所保留的仅丹杨一郡。而永世县令孔景宜，也在这时背叛。义兴叛军将到达延陵，建康内外忧虑惊恐，民心瓦解，大家都想逃走。
English: At this time, all counties and counties were attached to the Xuanyang regime, and only Danyang County was retained by the imperial court. And Yongshi County, ordered by Kong Jingyi, also betrayed at this time. Yixing rebels will reach Yanling, Jiankang is worried and frightened inside and outside, people's hearts are disintegrating, everyone wants to escape.

古文：孝祖忽至，众力不少，并伧楚壮士，人情大安。
现代文：正在此时，殷孝祖忽然到达，部队浩浩荡荡，而且都是北方及荆州的精壮战士，人心大为安定。
English: Just at this time, Yin Xiaozu suddenly arrived, the troops were huge, and they were all strong soldiers from the north and Jingzhou. People's hearts were very stable.

古文：甲辰，进孝祖号抚军将军，假节、督前锋诸军事，遣向虎槛，宠赉甚厚。
现代文：甲辰，明帝提升殷孝祖为抚军将军、持节、都督前锋诸军事。派他进驻虎槛，恩庞赏赐十分优厚。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Emperor Ming promoted Yin Xiaozu to the general of the supporting army, the commander-in-chief, and the vanguard of the military. He was stationed in the Tiger's Threshold, and the reward was very generous.

古文：初，上遣东平毕众敬诣兗州募人，至彭城，薛安都以利害说之，矫上命以众敬行兗州事，众敬从之。
现代文：当初，明帝派遣东平人毕众敬到兖州招兵买马，经过彭城时，薛安都以利害关系说服毕众敬，还假造明帝的诏书，任命毕众敬管理兖州事务，毕众敬接受。
English: At first, the Ming emperor sent the Dongping people Bi Zongjian to Bozhou to recruit soldiers. When passing through Pengcheng, Xue An persuaded Bi Zongjian with interests. He also forged the Ming emperor's edict, appointed Bi Zongjian to manage the affairs of Bozhou, and Bi Zongjian accepted.

古文：殷孝祖使司马刘文石守瑕丘，众敬引兵击杀之。安都素与孝祖有隙，使众敬杀孝祖诸子。
现代文：殷孝祖让司马刘文石据守瑕丘，毕众敬率军袭击，杀了刘文石，薛安都一向与殷孝祖有矛盾，他命毕众敬把殷孝祖所有儿子全部杀掉，兖州全境全部归附毕众敬。
English: Yin Xiaozhu ordered Liu Wenshih, the second son of Yin Xiaozhu, to defend Kejiu. He attacked and killed Liu Wenshih. Xue An had always been in conflict with Yin Xiaozhu. He ordered Liu Wenshih to kill all the sons of Yin Xiaozhu, and the whole territory of Zhangzhou was annexed to Liu Wenshih.

古文：州境皆附之，唯东平太守申纂据无盐，不从。纂，钟之曾孙也。
现代文：只有东平太守申纂据守无盐，不肯投降。申纂是申钟的曾孙。
English: Only the Dongping Empress Dowager Shenzang, who was a great-grandson of Shen Zhong, refused to surrender.

古文：丙午，上亲总兵，出顿中堂。
现代文：丙午，明帝亲自统率全军到中堂驻扎。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Ming personally led the whole army to the central hall.

古文：辛亥，以山阳王休祐为豫州刺史，督辅国将军彭城刘勔、宁朔将军广陵吕安国等诸军西讨殷琰。
现代文：辛亥，任命山阳王刘休为豫州刺史，指挥辅国将军彭城人刘、宁朔将军广陵人崐吕安国等各路人马，向西讨伐殷琰。
English: Xinhai appointed Liu Xiu, the king of Shanyang, as the historian of Yuzhou, and commanded the auxiliary generals Pengcheng, Liu, Ningshuo, Guangling, Lu'an, and other people and horses to fight against Yin Xi to the west.

古文：巴陵王休若督建威将军吴兴沈怀明、尚书张永、辅国将军萧道成等诸军东讨孔凯。
现代文：命令巴陵王刘休若指挥建威将军吴兴人沈怀明、尚书张永、辅国将军萧道成等各路人马，向东讨伐孔觊。
English: He ordered Liu Xiu, the king of Baling, to command the generals Wu Xingren, Shen Huiming, Shangshu Zhangyong, and Xiao Daocheng, the general of Fu Guo, to go to the east to fight Kongjun.

古文：时将士多东方人，父兄子弟皆已附凯。
现代文：当时，建康的许多将领是东方各郡人士，父子兄弟全都投靠了孔觊。
English: At that time, many of Jiankang's generals were from various counties in the east, and his father and brothers all sided with Kong Xi.

古文：上因送军，普加宣示曰： 朕方务德简刑，使父子兄弟罪不相及，助顺同逆者，一以所从为断。
现代文：明帝因此在送他们出征时，向全军宣布说： 朕正在推行皇家恩德，减轻刑罚，使父子兄弟之间的罪行，互不株连，无论顺从或叛逆者，都以他自己的行为作判断标准。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming declared to the whole army when he sent them out to fight: "I am promoting royal grace, reducing punishments, so that the crimes between father and son, brothers and sisters, do not interfere with each other. Whether obedient or rebellious, everyone is judged by his own behavior.

古文：卿等当深达此怀，勿以亲戚为虑也。 
现代文：你们要深刻理解朕的用意，不要替亲戚担忧。 
English: You should deeply understand my intention and not worry about your relatives.

古文：众于是大悦。凡叛者亲党在建康者，皆使居职如故。壬子，路太后殂。
现代文：军心为此欢欣鼓舞，凡是叛党留在建康的亲属，都让他们像过去那样，保持原来的官职。壬子，路太后去世。
English: The military heart rejoiced at this, and all the relatives of the rebels who remained in Jiankang let them keep their original official positions as in the past.

古文：孔觊遣其孙昙瓘等军于晋陵九里，部陈甚盛。
现代文：孔觊派他的将领孙昙等驻军晋陵九里，军容盛大。
English: Confucius sent his generals Sun Yat-sen and others to garrison Jinling nine miles away, and the army was large.

古文：沈怀明至奔牛，所令寡弱，乃筑垒自固。
现代文：建康将领沈怀明抵达奔牛，率领的军队人数既少，战斗力又不强，只好修筑堡垒固守。
English: When Jiankang general Shen Huiming arrived at Bengiu, the number of troops he led was small and their combat effectiveness was not strong, so he had to build a fortress to hold out.

古文：张永至曲阿，未知怀明安否；百姓惊扰，永退还延陵，就巴陵王休若，诸将帅咸劝休若退保破冈。
现代文：尚书张永前进到曲阿，不知道前方的沈怀明胜败如何，不敢再进，而民心又惶恐，张永于是便退回延陵，与巴陵王刘休若会师，所有将领都劝刘休若撤退到破冈据守。
English: Shangshu Zhang Yong marched to Qu'a, not knowing how Shen Huiming's victory or defeat would be, he did not dare to advance further, and the people's hearts were frightened. Zhang Yong then returned to Yanling, and met with Liu Xiu, the king of Baling. All generals advised Liu Xiu to retreat to Bagaoka.

古文：其日，大寒，风雪甚猛，塘埭决坏，众无固心。
现代文：这天，天气严寒，狂风卷起大雪，很多池塘堤岸崩裂，军心动摇。
English: On this day, the weather was bitterly cold, strong winds whipped up heavy snow, the embankments of many ponds collapsed, and the morale of the troops was shaken.

古文：休若宣令： 敢有言退者斩！ 
现代文：刘休若下令： 有敢说撤退者，斩首。 
English: If Liu Xiu gave the order: Anyone who dared to say that they were withdrawing should be beheaded.

古文：众小定，乃筑垒息甲。
现代文：军心才稍稍安定，于是开始兴筑营垒，士卒得以解甲休息。
English: The morale of the soldiers was only slightly stabilized, so they began to build barracks, and the soldiers were able to take off their armor and rest.

古文：寻得怀明书，贼定未进，军主刘亮又至，兵力转盛，人情乃安。
现代文：不久，接到沈怀明报告，知道敌人仍然停止不前，而带兵将领刘亮又前来增援，兵力转强，人心终于安定。
English: Soon after receiving Shen Huiming's report, knowing that the enemy was still halted, Liu Liang, the general leading the troops, came to reinforce, the troops became stronger, and the people's hearts were finally stable.

古文：亮，怀慎之从孙也。
现代文：刘亮是刘怀慎的侄孙。
English: Liu Liang is Liu Huai Shen's grandnephew.

古文：殿中御史吴喜以主书事世祖，稍迁至河东太守。
现代文：殿中御史吴喜，原来是世祖孝武帝的主书，逐渐升到河东太守之职。
English: Historian Wu Xi, who was originally the chief scribe of Emperor Xiaowu, gradually rose to the position of the governor of Hedong.

古文：至是，请得精兵三百，致死于东。
现代文：到了这时，请求调给他精锐部队三百人，到东战场去效命。
English: At this time, he requested that three hundred of his elite troops be transferred to him to serve on the eastern battlefield.

古文：上假喜建武将军，简羽林勇士配之。
现代文：明帝暂时任命吴喜为建武将军，在羽林禁卫军中挑选勇士配备给他。
English: Emperor Ming temporarily appointed Wu Xi as Jianwu General and selected warriors from the Yulin Imperial Guard to equip him.

古文：议者以 喜刀笔主者，未尝为将，不可遣。 
现代文：有人认为： 吴喜是个拿笔杆子的文官，从来没有当过将领，不可派他作战。 
English: Some people think: Wu Xi is a civil servant with a pen and a stick, he has never been a general, he should not be sent to fight.

古文：中书舍人巢尚之曰： 喜昔随沈庆之，屡经军旅，性既勇决，又习战陈；若能任之，必有成绩。诸人纷纭，皆是不别才耳。 
现代文：中书舍人巢尚之说： 当年，吴喜曾跟随沈庆之，屡次出征，性情勇敢果决，见惯疆场阵战，如果能起用他，一定会有战绩，大家议论纷纷，都是由于不识人才。 
English: Shang Zhi, a Chinese scholar, said: In those days, Wu Xi Rong had followed Shen Qingzhi, repeatedly went to war, had a brave and decisive temperament, and was accustomed to battlefields. If he could be used, he would certainly have military achievements. Everyone talked about it, all because they did not know the talent.

古文：乃遣之。
现代文：于是命吴喜出发。
English: And when he had thus spoken, he sent him away.

古文：喜先时数奉使东吴，性宽厚，所至人并怀之。
现代文：吴喜过去曾任过朝廷的使节，多次去过东方吴地。
English: Wu Xi had served as an envoy of the imperial court in the past, and had visited Dongfang Wudi many times.

古文：百姓闻吴河东来，皆望风降散，故喜所至克捷。
现代文：他性情宽厚，所到过的地方，人民对他都很怀念，因此，老百姓听到他来，都闻风归顺或者逃散，所以吴喜所到之处，总能战胜，传出捷报。
English: He had a generous disposition, and the people missed him very much wherever he went. Therefore, when the common people heard him coming, they all surrendered or ran away. Therefore, wherever Wu Xi went, he was always able to win and spread good news.

古文：永世人徐崇之攻孔景宣，斩之，喜版崇之领县事。
现代文：永世人徐崇之攻打孔景宣，并杀了他，吴喜任命徐崇之代理永世县令。
English: Yongdian Xu Chongzhi attacked Kong Jingxuan and killed him, and Wu Xi appointed Xu Chongzhi as Yongdian County Deputy.

古文：喜至国山，遇东军，进击，大破之。
现代文：吴喜抵达国山，遇到东战场的叛军，进攻并把敌人打得大败。
English: Wu Xi arrived at Guoshan, encountered the rebels in the eastern battlefield, attacked and defeated the enemy.

古文：自国山进屯吴城，刘延熙遣其将杨玄等拒战。喜兵力甚弱，玄等众盛。喜奋击，斩之，进逼义兴。
现代文：吴喜于是又从国山推进到吴城驻扎，叛军刘延熙派他的将领杨玄等抵抗，吴喜兵力较弱，杨玄兵力强大，吴喜奋勇攻击，杀了杨玄，进逼义兴。
English: Wu Xi then advanced from Guoshan to station in Wucheng. The rebel Liu Yanxi sent his generals Yang Xuan and others to resist. Wu Xi's army was weak, Yang Xuan's army was strong, Wu Xifeng attacked, killed Yang Xuan, and forced Yixing.

古文：延熙栅断长桥，保郡自守，喜筑垒与之相持。
现代文：刘延熙立木栅拒马，阻断长桥，自保郡城。吴喜兴筑营垒，同刘延熙对峙。
English: Liu Yanxi erected a wooden gate to block the horse, blocked the long bridge, and protected the county seat. Wu Xixing built a camp and confronted Liu Yanxi.

古文：庾业于长塘湖口夹岸筑城，有众七千人，与延熙遥相应接。
现代文：寻阳政权的庾业，在长塘湖夹湖口两岸修筑城堡，部队有七千人，与刘延熙遥相呼应。
English: The Huan Yang regime built a castle on both sides of the Changtang Lake and the estuary of the lake, with seven thousand troops, echoing the rise of Liu Yanxi.

古文：沈怀明、张永与晋陵军相持，久不决。
现代文：建康将领沈怀明、张永与据守晋陵的东战场叛军正面对峙，很长时间不能决出胜负。
English: Jiankang generals Shen Huiming and Zhang Yong were directly confronted with the rebels on the eastern battlefield who were defending Jinling, and they were unable to decide the outcome for a long time.

古文：外监硃幼举司徒参军督护任农夫骁果有胆力，上以四百人配之，使助东讨。
现代文：皇宫外监朱幼推荐司徒参军督护任农夫，说他骁勇胆大，又有臂力。明帝配给他四百人，让他增援东战场。
English: The imperial palace overseer, Zhu Yu, recommended that Szeto join the army and serve as an overseer and farmer, saying that he was courageous and strong. Emperor Ming assigned him four hundred men to reinforce the eastern battlefield.

古文：农夫自延陵出长塘，农夫驰往攻之，力战，大破之，庾业弃城走义兴。
现代文：任农夫自延陵出发，攻击长塘湖崐，庾业筑城还没有完工，任农夫率军急行挺进，猛烈攻击，大破庾业军。庾业放弃城堡，逃回义兴。
English: Ren the farmer set out from Yanling and attacked Changtang Lake. The city of Yanye was not yet completed. Ren the farmer led the army to advance rapidly, attacked fiercely, and destroyed the army of Yanye. Yanye abandoned the castle and fled back to Yixing.

古文：农夫收其船仗，进向义兴，助吴喜。
现代文：任农夫接收遗留下来的武器、船只，向义兴进军，增援吴喜。
English: All the farmers received the leftover weapons and ships and marched to Yixing to reinforce Wu Xi.

古文：二月，己未朔，喜渡水攻郡城，分兵击诸垒，登高指麾，若令四面俱进者。
现代文：二月，己未朔，吴喜渡过荆溪，攻打义兴城池，同时派出军队，分别攻打其他营垒。
English: In early February, Wu Xidu crossed the Jing River and attacked the city of Yixing. At the same time, he sent troops to attack other camps.

古文：义兴人大惧，诸垒皆溃。
现代文：吴喜站在高处挥动小旗发令，像是指挥很多军队同时进攻的样子。
English: Wu Xi stood on a high place and waved a small flag to give orders, as if he was commanding many troops to attack at the same time.

古文：延熙赴水死，遂克义兴。
现代文：义兴城叛军大为恐惧，各营垒霎时崩溃，刘延熙投河自杀，吴喜于是攻克义兴。
English: The rebels in Yixing City were very afraid. All the fortifications collapsed at the same time. Liu Yanxi committed suicide by throwing himself into the river, and Wu Xi took the initiative to conquer Yixing.

古文：魏丞相太原王乙浑专制朝权，多所诛杀。
现代文：北魏丞相太原王乙浑，专制独裁，许多人被他诛杀。
English: The prime minister of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Taiyuan Wang Yihun, was an autocratic dictator, and many people were killed by him.

古文：安远将军贾秀掌吏曹事，浑屡言于秀，为其妻求称公主，秀曰： 公主岂庶姓所宜称！
现代文：安远将军贾秀掌管吏曹事务，乙浑多次告诉贾秀，想办法封他的妻子为公主，贾秀说： 公主怎么能是异姓的女儿所应该称呼的！
English: Anyuan General Jia Xiu was in charge of Cao affairs. Yihong repeatedly told Jia Xiu to find a way to make his wife a princess. Jia Xiu said: How can a princess be called by a daughter with a different surname?

古文：秀宁取死今日，不可取笑后世！ 
现代文：我宁肯今日去死，也不可为后世讥笑。 
English: I would rather die today than be laughed at by posterity.

古文：浑怒，骂曰： 老奴官，悭！ 
现代文：乙浑大怒，骂道： 老奴才，死抠门！ 
English: Yixun flew into a rage and cursed, "Old slave, get out of my way!

古文：会侍中拓跋丕告浑谋反，庚申，冯太后收浑，诛之。
现代文：正巧，侍中拓跋丕控告乙浑谋反，庚申，冯太后下令逮捕乙浑，把他斩首。
English: Coincidentally, the chamberlain, Tuobao, accused Yihun of plotting rebellion, and the Empress Dowager Feng ordered the arrest of Yihun and beheaded him.

古文：秀，彝之子；丕，烈帝之玄孙也。
现代文：贾秀是贾彝的儿子。拓跋丕是皇族祖先烈帝的玄孙。
English: Jia Xiu is the son of Jia Yao. Tuoba Yao is the great-great-grandson of the royal ancestor, the Emperor.

古文：太后临朝称制，引中书令高允、中书侍郎渔阳高闾及贾秀共参大政。
现代文：冯太后主持朝政，代皇帝行使职权。她把中书令高允、中书侍郎高闾及安远将军贾秀引进中枢机构，共同参与朝政。
English: Empress Dowager Feng presided over the imperial court and exercised her powers on behalf of the emperor. She introduced Gao Yun, the second-in-command of the Chinese imperial court, Gao Xi, the second-in-command of the Chinese imperial court, and Jia Xiu, the general of the Anyuan army, into the central organization to jointly participate in the imperial court.

古文：沈怀明、张永、萧道成等军于九里西，与东军相持。
现代文：沈怀明、张永、萧道成等驻防九里以西的地方，与东战场叛军相互僵持。
English: Shen Huiming, Zhang Yong, Xiao Daocheng and others were garrisoned west of Jiuli, and were locked in a standoff with the rebels on the eastern battlefield.

古文：东军闻义兴败，皆震恐。
现代文：叛军听到义兴战败，上下都非常惊恐。
English: When the rebels heard of the defeat of Yixing, they were very frightened.

古文：上遣积射将军济阳江方兴、御史王道隆至晋陵视东军形势。
现代文：明帝派遣积射将军济阳人江方兴、御史王道隆前往晋陵，视察东战场形势。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched Jiyang generals Jiang Fangxing and Wang Daolong to Jinling to inspect the situation on the eastern battlefield.

古文：孔凯将孙昙扞、程扞宗等列五城，互相连带。
现代文：叛军首领孔觊的部将孙昙、程宗修筑五个城堡，互相连接。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Cheng Zong, the subordinates of the rebel leader Kong Xuan, built five castles, which were connected to each other.

古文：扞宗城犹未固，王道隆与诸将谋曰： 扞宗城既未立，可以藉手，上副圣旨，下成众气。 
现代文：程宗城堡的泥土还没有凝固的时候，王道隆与各位将领谋划说： 程宗的城堡尚未完成，眼下正是下手的良机，上符皇上的意旨，下振众人士气。 
English: When the soil of Chengzong's castle had not yet solidified, Wang Daolong and the generals leading the planning said: Chengzong's castle has not yet been completed, now is a good opportunity to start, it is in line with the emperor's will, and it will shake people's morale.

古文：辛酉，道隆帅所领急攻，拔之，斩扞宗首。
现代文：辛酉，王道隆率各将领发动急攻，攻克城堡，杀了程宗。
English: Xin Yao, Wang Daolong led the generals to launch a surprise attack, conquered the castle, and killed Cheng Zong.

古文：永等因乘胜进击昙瓘等，壬戌，昙瓘等兵败，与袁村俱弃城走，遂克晋陵。
现代文：张永等乘胜进攻孙昙等。壬戌，孙昙等大败，与晋陵袁标一起弃城逃跑。于是晋陵被攻克。
English: Zhang Yong and others took advantage of the victory to attack Sun Yat-sen and others. Ren Yat-sen, Sun Yat-sen and others suffered a great defeat and abandoned the city together with Jinling Yuan Bei. As a result, Jinling was conquered.

古文：吴喜军至义乡。
现代文：吴喜进军到义乡。
English: Wu Xi marched into Yixiang.

古文：孔璪屯吴兴南亭，太守王昙生诣璪计事；闻台军已近，璪大惧，堕床，曰： 悬赏所购，唯我而已；今不遽走，将为人擒！ 
现代文：叛军孔驻防吴兴南亭，吴兴太守王昙生到孔处商讨事情。孔听说建康官军已经逼近，十分恐惧，从床上跌下来，说： 他们悬赏捉拿的就是我，今天再不逃走，无疑将被他们活捉。 
English: The rebel army of Kong was stationed at Wu Xing Nan Ting, and the governor of Wu Xing, Wang Xinsheng, went to Kong to discuss the matter. When Kong heard that the Jiankang government army had approached, he was very afraid, fell off the bed, and said: They are offering a reward to catch me. If I don't run away today, they will undoubtedly catch me alive.

古文：遂与昙生奔钱唐。
现代文：于是，与王昙生放弃城池，投奔钱唐。
English: As a result, he and Wang Xinsheng abandoned the city and went to Qiantang.

古文：喜入吴兴，任农夫引兵向吴郡，顾琛弃郡奔会稽。
现代文：吴喜于是进入吴兴。任农夫率军进攻吴郡，顾琛也弃郡投奔会稽。
English: Wu Xi then entered Wu Xing. Ren, a farmer, led the army to attack Wu County, while Gu Yao also abandoned the county to join the party.

古文：上以四郡既平，乃留吴喜使统沈怀明等诸将东击会稽，召张永等北击彭城，江方兴等南击寻阳。
现代文：明帝因四郡都已平定，才命吴喜率领沈怀明等诸将领继续东征，攻打会稽，命张永等北上，攻打彭城；命江方兴等南下，攻打寻阳。
English: As all four counties had been pacified, Emperor Ming ordered Wu Xi and other generals, led by Shen Huiming, to continue the eastward march and attack Cuiqi, ordered Zhang Yong to go north and attack Pengcheng, and ordered Jiang Fangxing to go south and attack Hanyang.

古文：以吏部尚书蔡兴宗为左仆射，侍中褚渊为吏部尚书。
现代文：明帝任命吏部尚书蔡兴宗为左仆射，侍中褚渊为吏部尚书。
English: Emperor Ming appointed the secretary, Cai Xingzong, as his left-hand man, and the chamberlain, Yu Yuan, as the secretary.

古文：丁卯，吴喜至钱唐，孔璪、王昙生奔浙东。
现代文：丁卯，吴喜率军到达钱唐，叛军孔、王昙生逃往浙东。
English: Dingwu and Wu Xi led the army to Qiantang, while the rebels Kong and Wang Yansheng fled to eastern Zhejiang.

古文：喜遣强弩将军任农夫等引兵向黄山浦；东军据岸结寨，农夫等击破之。
现代文：吴喜派强弩将军任农夫等，率军进攻黄山浦，叛军沿岸安营扎寨，任农夫等攻击崐，打败了叛军。
English: Wu Xi sent the general Qiang Rong as a farmer and led the army to attack Huangshan Pu, the rebels camped along the coast, and the farmers attacked and defeated the rebels.

古文：喜自柳浦渡，取西陵，击斩庚业。
现代文：吴喜自柳浦渡口进军，攻下西陵，斩庾业。
English: Wu Xi marched from Liupo Ferry Port, captured Xiling, and ended the rebellion.

古文：会稽人大惧，将士多奔亡，孔凯不能制。
现代文：会稽人心恐慌，将领士卒大多逃亡，孔觊不能制止。
English: The inspectors panicked, most of the generals and officers fled, and Kong Xuan could not stop them.

古文：戊寅，上虞令王晏起兵攻郡，凯逃奔嵴山；车骑从事中郎张绥封府库以待吴喜。
现代文：戊寅，上虞县令王晏起兵攻击郡城，孔觊逃往嵴山，他的部下车骑从事中郎张绥，查封州府及仓库，等待吴喜。
English: Wu Yin, Shangyu County ordered Wang Qi to attack the county seat, Kong Qi fled to Lushan, his subordinates rode in the middle Zhang Qi, sealed the state capital and warehouse, and waited for Wu Xi.

古文：己卯，王晏入城，杀绥，执寻阳王子房于别署。纵兵大掠，府库皆空；获孔璪，杀之。
现代文：己卯，王晏先行入城，杀张绥，在王府别墅中逮捕寻阳王刘子房，然后放纵士兵，大肆抢劫，官府仓库全被抢空。抓获孔，斩首。
English: Jiwu and Wang Yao entered the city first, killed Zhang Yao, and arrested Liu Zifang, the king of Guangyang, in the royal villa, and then indulged the soldiers and robbed them extensively. The government warehouse was completely emptied. They captured Kong and beheaded him.

古文：庚辰，嵴山民缚孔凯送晏，晏谓之曰： 此事孔璪所为，无预卿事，可作首辞，当相为申上。 
现代文：庚辰，嵴山村民捆绑住孔觊，送给王晏。王晏对他说： 这次背叛朝廷，都是孔一个人策划的，与你并不相干，只要你写一份自首状书，我当替你向上面申诉。 
English: Geng Chen, a Lushan villager, tied up Kong Yao and gave him to Wang Yao. Wang Yao said to him: This betrayal of the imperial court was planned by Kong alone, and has nothing to do with you. As long as you write a letter of surrender, I should appeal to the above for you.

古文：凯曰： 江东处分，莫不由身；委罪求活，便是君辈行意耳。 
现代文：孔觊说： 东战场发号施令，都由我一人作主，把责任推给别人，自己求得活命，那是你这种人才做得出来的。 
English: Confucius said, "In the Eastern Theater, I was the only one who gave orders, and I pushed the responsibility to others, and I myself fought for my life. That is what a person like you can do.

古文：晏乃斩之。
现代文：王晏于是斩孔觊。
English: Wang Yao then chopped off Kong Yao's head.

古文：顾琛、王昙生、袁标等诣吴喜归罪，喜皆宥之。
现代文：顾琛、王昙生、袁标等人都向吴喜投降，请求处分，吴喜都予以宽大处理。
English: Gu Ying, Wang Xingsheng, Yuan Biao and others all surrendered to Wu Xi and requested punishment, and Wu Xi dealt with them leniently.

古文：东军主凡七十六人，于陈斩十七人，其馀皆原宥。
现代文：东战场叛军军官共七十六人，作战阵亡的有十七人，其他的人都得到宽恕。
English: There were a total of seventy-six rebel officers on the eastern battlefield. Seventeen were killed in action, and the others were pardoned.

古文：薛索儿攻申阐，久不下；使申令孙入睢陵说阐，阐出降，索儿并令孙杀之。
现代文：薛索儿围攻申阐，很久没有攻克。薛索儿派申令孙入城说服申阐，申阐出来投降。薛索儿把申令孙、申阐一并杀掉。
English: Xue Sol besieged Shenyan and did not conquer it for a long time. Xue Sol sent Shenling Sun into the city to persuade Shenyan to surrender. Xue Sol killed Shenling Sun and Shenyan together.

古文：山阳王休祐在历阳，辅国将军刘勔进军小岘。
现代文：山阳王刘休，驻防历阳，辅国将军刘进军小岘。
English: Liu Xiu, the king of Sanyang, stationed in Liyang, and Liu Jinjun, the general of the auxiliary state, marched into Xiaojun.

古文：殷琰所署南汝阴太守裴季之以合肥来降。
现代文：傲慢自大，不可一世，宾客上门求见，有达十天之久见不到面的。
English: Arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant.

古文：邓琬性鄙暗贪吝，既执大权，父子卖官鬻爵，使婢仆出市道贩卖；酣歌博弈，日夜不休；大自矜遇，宾客到门，历旬不得前；内事悉委褚灵嗣等三人，群小横恣，竞为威福。于是士民仇怨，内外离心。
现代文：内部事务全部委托中书舍人褚灵嗣等三人，这一群卑劣小人，横行霸道，作威作福。
English: The internal affairs were all entrusted to three people, including Shushe Ren and Zou Lingzhi. This group of despicable villains were domineering and arrogant.

古文：琬遣孙冲帅龙骧将军薛常宝、陈绍宗、焦度等兵一万为前锋，据赭圻。
现代文：于是，官员百姓无不忿怨，内外都与他离心。邓琬命孙冲之任前锋，率龙骧将军薛常宝、陈绍宗、焦度等部队一万人作为前锋，进驻赭圻。
English: As a result, the officials and the people were not resentful, and they were alienated from him both at home and abroad. Deng Yu appointed Sun Chong as the vanguard, and led 10,000 troops such as Longyu generals Xue Changbao, Chen Shaozong, and Cao Du as the vanguard, and stationed in Handan.

古文：冲之于道与晋安王子勋书曰： 舟楫已办，器械亦整，三军踊跃，人争效命；便欲沿流挂帆，直取白下。
现代文：孙冲之在行军途中上疏给晋安王刘子勋说： 船只已准备妥当，粮秣武器已配备齐全，三军踊跃，人人争先恐后，以死报效晋安王。现在就要张满篷帆，直取白下。
English: Sun Chongzhi said to Liu Zixun, the king of Jinan, on the way to march: The ships have been properly prepared, the grain and weapons have been fully equipped, the three armies are enthusiastic, and everyone is scrambling to repay the king of Jinan with death. Now it is time to spread the full sail and take the white.

古文：愿速遣陶亮众军兼行相接，分据新亭、南州，则一麾定矣。 
现代文：请命陶亮率兵马随后发，接续上来，分别占领新亭、南州，一次攻击即可平定。 
English: Please order the soldiers and horses led by Tao Liang to attack later and come up successively to occupy Xinting and Nanzhou respectively. They can be pacified with one attack.

古文：子勋加冲左卫将军；以陶亮变右卫将军，统郢、荆、湘、梁、雍五州兵合二万人，一时俱下。
现代文：刘子勋加授孙冲之为左卫将军，任命陶亮为右卫将军，指挥郢、荆、湘、梁、雍五个州的部队，共计两万人，同时东下。
English: Liu Zixun appointed Sun Chong as the left guard general, and appointed Tao Liang as the right guard general, commanding the troops of five states, including Handan, Jing, Hunan, Liang and Yong, with a total of 20,000 people, and at the same time going east.

古文：陶亮本无干略，闻建安王休仁自上，殷孝祖又至，不敢进，屯军鹊洲。
现代文：陶亮本无谋略才干，听说建安王刘休仁亲自率军逆江而上，殷孝祖又随后赶到，便不敢前进，驻扎在鹊洲。
English: Tao Liang had no talent for strategy. He heard that Liu Xuren, the king of Jianan, personally led an army upstream, and Yin Xiaozu arrived later. He did not dare to advance and was stationed in Luzhou.

古文：殷孝祖负其诚节，陵轹诸将，台军有父子兄弟在南者，孝祖悉欲推治。由是人情乖离，莫乐为用。
现代文：殷孝祖自以为天下之大，只有他最忠心，常欺侮羞辱其他将领，建康军中有父子兄弟在寻阳政权辖区的，殷孝祖打算都逮捕审判，于是，军心涣散，将士愤懑，不肯听从他的指挥。
English: Yin Xiaozu thought that he was the greatest in the world, and only he was the most loyal. He often bullied and humiliated other generals. There were father and son brothers in Jiankang's army who were under the jurisdiction of the Xuanyang regime. Yin Xiaozu planned to arrest and put them on trial. As a result, the army was disorganized, the soldiers were angry, and they refused to obey his command.

古文：宁朔将军沈攸之，内抚将士，外谐群帅，众并赖之。
现代文：宁朔将军沈攸之，对内安抚官兵，对外同其他将领和睦相处，大家对他十分信赖。
English: Ningshuo General Shen Youzhi, on the inside to appease officers and soldiers, on the outside to get along with other generals, everyone trusts him very much.

古文：孝祖每战，常以鼓盖自随，军中人相谓： 殷统军可谓死将矣！今与贼交锋，而以羽仪自标显，若善射者十人共射之，欲不毙，得乎？ 
现代文：殷孝祖每次出战，常常携带显示他高贵身分的云盖和战鼓，军中同僚以及士卒都互相说： 殷孝祖可谓 死将 ，他跟敌人作战，却带着豪华的仪仗队，自己暴露自己，敌人如果挑出十个射箭能手，同时射箭，他想不死，怎么可能呢？ 
English: Every time Yin Xiaozu went to war, he often carried the cloud cover and war drums that showed his noble status. Colleagues in the army and soldiers said to each other: Yin Xiaozu can be described as a dead man. He fought with the enemy, but with a luxurious honor guard, he exposed himself. If the enemy selects ten archery experts, while shooting arrows, he does not want to die, how is it possible?

古文：三月，庚寅，众军水陆并进，攻赭圻；陶亮等引兵救之，孝祖于陈为流矢所中，死。
现代文：三月，庚寅，建康军水陆并进，攻打赭圻。陶亮等率军前来增援，殷孝祖在交战中被流箭射中，阵亡。
English: In March, Gyeong-in and Jiankang's armies marched side by side on land and sea to attack and defeat the Mongols. Tao Liang and others led the army to come for reinforcement, and Yin Xiaozu was shot by a stray arrow and died in the battle.

古文：军主范潜帅五百人降于亮。人情震骇，并谓沈攸之宜代孝祖为统。
现代文：军主崐范潜率五百人投降陶亮，军心震惊，人们都说沈攸之应该接替殷孝祖的指挥权。
English: The commander of the army, Zou Fan, was shocked by the surrender of 500 soldiers. People said that Shen Youzhi should take over the command of Yin Xiaozu.

古文：时建安王休仁屯虎槛，遣宁朔将军江方兴、龙骧将军襄阳刘灵遗各将三千人赴赭圻。
现代文：当时，建安王刘休仁驻军虎槛，派宁朔将军江方兴、龙骧将军襄阳人刘灵遗各率三千人马，前往赭圻。
English: At that time, the king of Jianan, Liu Xuren, stationed troops in the Tiger Threshold and sent the Ningshuo general, Jiang Fangxing, and the Yongkang general, Liu Lingyi from Xiangyang, each with a force of three thousand horses, to Lushan.

古文：攸之以为孝祖既死，亮等有乘胜之心，明日若不更攻，则示之以弱。
现代文：沈攸之认为殷孝祖既已阵亡，叛军陶亮等一定会乘胜进攻，官军第二天如果再不主动发起攻势，就会向敌人暴露出自己力量薄弱。
English: Shen Youzhi thought that since Yin Xiaozhu had already been killed in battle, the rebel forces such as Tao Liang would certainly take advantage of the victory to attack. If the government army did not take the initiative to launch an offensive the next day, it would expose its weak strength to the enemy.

古文：方兴各位相亚，必不为己下；军政不壹，致败之由也。
现代文：江方兴的名望和地位跟自己相等，绝不可能受自己的指挥，而军事行动不能统一，是导致失败的原因。
English: Jiang Fangxing's reputation and status are equal to his own, it is impossible to be under his own command, and the failure to unify military operations is the cause of failure.

古文：乃帅诸军主诣方兴曰： 今四方并反，国家所保，无复百里之地。
现代文：于是，就率部下各将领拜访江方兴，说： 现在，四面八方都起兵叛乱，朝廷所占据的不过百里之地。
English: Therefore, he led his subordinate generals to pay a visit to Jiang Fangxing and said, "Nowadays, soldiers are rising in rebellion in all directions, and the imperial court occupies no more than a hundred miles of land.

古文：唯有殷孝祖为朝廷所委赖，锋镝裁交，舆尸而反，文武丧气，朝野危心。
现代文：朝廷所依赖的也只殷孝祖一人，不想，刚刚兵戈相接，他就陈尸马下，文武官员全都沮丧，朝野人士提心吊胆。
English: The imperial court relied on only one person, Yin Xiaozu. If he didn't want to, he would have been killed as soon as the war came to an end. The civil and military officials were all depressed, and the people in the imperial court and in the field were worried.

古文：事之济否，唯在时旦一战；战若不捷，则大事去矣。
现代文：朝廷大事能否成功，只看明日一战。如果战而不胜，朝廷就会全盘瓦解。
English: Whether the imperial event will be successful depends on tomorrow's battle. If the battle is not won, the imperial court will completely collapse.

古文：诘朝之事，诸人或谓吾应统之，自卜懦薄，干略不如卿。
现代文：有关明日之战，将领中有人说应该由我指挥，可我自问魄力不够，才能和谋略都不如你。
English: Regarding tomorrow's battle, some of the generals said that I should command, but I am not brave enough to ask myself, and my talent and strategy are not as good as yours.

古文：今辄相推为统，但当相与戮力耳。 
现代文：所以我们现在打算推举你为统帅，大家同心协力。 
English: That's why we're going to make you commander-in-chief, and we're going to do it together.

古文：方兴甚悦，许诺。
现代文：江方兴十分喜悦，满口承诺。
English: Jiang Fangxing was very happy and full of promise.

古文：攸之既出，诸军主并尤之，攸之曰： 吾本以济国活家，岂计此之升降！
现代文：沈攸之告辞出来，各将领抱怨他，沈攸之说： 我只希望拯救国家，岂能计较官职高低！
English: Shen Youzhi's resignation came out, and the generals complained about him. Shen Youzhi said, "I only hope to save the country, I can't care about the rank!"

古文：且我能下彼，彼必不能下我。共济艰难，岂可自措同异也！ 
现代文：而且，我能向他低头，他却一定不肯向我低头，怎么可以自己先内斗起来！ 
English: Moreover, I can bow down to him, but he certainly won't bow down to me. How can he start infighting?

古文：孙冲之谓陶亮曰： 孝祖枭将，一战便死，天下事定矣，不须复战，便当直取京都。 
现代文：孙冲之对陶亮说： 殷孝祖是一员悍将，一战就把他杀死，天下大事已经定了，不必再战，现在就应该直接进攻京都。 
English: Sun Chongzhi said to Tao Liang: Yin Xiaozu is a brave general, he killed him in the first battle, the world's major events have been decided, there is no need to fight again, now we should directly attack Kyoto.

古文：亮不从。
现代文：陶亮不同意。
English: Tao Liang did not agree with Sun's opinion.

古文：辛卯，方兴帅诸军进战，建安王休仁又遣军主郭季之、步兵校尉杜幼文、屯骑校尉垣恭祖、龙骧将军济地顿生京兆段佛荣等三万人往会战，自寅及午，大破之，追奔至姥山而还。
现代文：辛卯，江方兴率领各将领进攻叛军，建安王刘休仁又派军主郭季之、步兵校尉杜幼文、屯骑校尉垣恭祖、龙骧将军京兆人段佛荣等三万人前去增援助战。自凌晨厮杀到中午，大破叛军，向北追击到姥山而回。
English: Xinwu, Jiang Fangxing led the generals to attack the rebels, and the king of Jianan, Liu Xuren, also sent 30,000 soldiers including the army commander Guo Jizhi, the infantry lieutenant Du Yuwen, the cavalry lieutenant Gaki Qiongzu, and the Longjing general Jing Zhao's man section Fo Rong to increase the assistance war. From the early morning to the noon, they defeated the rebels and chased them north to Uba Mountain and back.

古文：幼文，骥之子也。
现代文：杜幼文是杜骥的儿子。
English: Du Youwen is the son of Du Yao.

古文：孙冲子于湖、白口筑二城，军主竟陵张兴世攻拔之。
现代文：叛军孙冲之在巢湖口和白水口修筑两座城池，军主竞陵人张兴世进攻并攻克该地。
English: The rebel army of Sun Chongzhi built two fortresses at Chaohu and Baishuikou, and the commander of the army, Zhang Xingshi, attacked and conquered the place.

古文：壬辰，诏以沈攸之为辅国将军、假节，代殷孝祖督前锋诸军事。
现代文：壬辰，明帝下诏提升沈攸之为辅国将军、假节，接替殷孝祖的督前锋诸军事。
English: In the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Ming decreed that Shen You would be promoted to be the general of the auxiliary state, and he succeeded Yin Xiaozhu as the commander of the military.

古文：陶亮闻湖、白二城不守，大惧，急召孙冲之还鹊尾，留薛常宝等守赭圻；先于姥山及诸冈分立营寨，亦悉散还，共保浓湖。
现代文：陶亮听到巢湖口、白水口失守的消息，大为恐惧，急令孙冲之撤回鹊尾，而留薛常宝等驻防赭圻。在此之前在姥山及各山冈修建的营垒要塞，也分别解散撤回，士卒各返原来部队，共同保卫浓湖。
English: When Tao Liang heard the news that Chaohukou and Baishuikou had been lost, he was very frightened. He immediately ordered Sun Chongzhi to withdraw to Shanwei, and left Xue Changbao and others to stand guard. The camp fortresses previously built in Ubayama and various mountains and hills were also disbanded and withdrawn, and the soldiers each returned to their original troops to jointly defend the thick lake.

古文：时军旅大起，国用不足，募民上钱谷者，赐荒县、荒郡，或五品至三品散官有差。
现代文：当时，战乱四起，朝廷财源不足。于是号召人民捐钱捐粮，依照捐献多少，分别任命他们当荒凉偏远地区的郡守、县令以及五品至三品之间散官不等。
English: At that time, there were four wars, and the imperial court was short of financial resources. Therefore, the people were called upon to donate money and grain, and according to the amount of donation, they were appointed as county governors, county magistrates, and officials ranging from five products to three products in desolate and remote areas.

古文：军中食少，建安王休仁抚循将士，均其丰俭，吊死问伤，身亲隐恤；故十万之众，莫有离心。
现代文：军中粮秣缺乏，建安王刘休仁安抚军心，鼓励将士，平均分配物品，哀悼死者，慰问伤员，休戚与共。所以，十万大军，没有离心。
English: There was a shortage of food and water in the army, and Liu Xuren, the King of Jianan, led the army to pacify the army, encourage the soldiers, evenly distribute the goods, mourn the dead, comfort the wounded, and share the condolences. Therefore, there was no centrifugal force in the 100,000-strong army.

古文：邓琬遣其豫州刺史刘胡帅众三万、铁骑二千，东屯鹊尾，并旧兵凡十馀万。
现代文：邓琬派遣豫州刺史刘胡率领步兵三万人，精锐骑兵两千人，东行进驻鹊尾，加上原有士卒，共十余万人。
English: Deng Xiao dispatched Liu Hu, the governor of Yuzhou, to lead 30,000 infantrymen and 2,000 elite cavalrymen, marching eastward and stationed in Shanwei, together with the original soldiers, a total of more than 100,000 people.

古文：胡，宿将，勇健多权略，屡有战功，将士畏之。
现代文：刘胡是一员老将，勇敢而有谋略，屡次建立战功，将领、士卒都对他十分敬畏。
English: Liu Hu is a veteran, brave and resourceful, and has repeatedly established military exploits. Generals and soldiers are very much in awe of him.

古文：司徒中兵参军冠军蔡那，子弟在襄阳，胡每战，悬之城外；那进战不顾。
现代文：司徒中兵参军冠军人蔡那的儿子和弟弟都在襄阳。刘胡每次作战，都将蔡那的儿子悬挂城外，蔡那照样猛烈攻击毫无顾忌。
English: The son and younger brother of Cai Na, the champion of the soldiers who joined the army in Szeto, are both in Yangyang. Every time Liu Hu fights, he hangs Cai Na's son outside the city, and Cai Na still attacks violently without any scruples.

古文：吴喜既定三吴，帅所领五千人，并运资实，至于赭圻。
现代文：吴喜平定三吴之后，又率军队五千人，连同军用物品，向西增援刘休仁，进驻赭圻。
English: After Wu Xi subdued Sanwu, he also led an army of five thousand people, together with military goods, to the west to reinforce Liu Xuren and stationed in Handan.

古文：薛索儿将马步万馀人自睢陵渡淮，进逼青、冀二州刺史张永营。
现代文：薛索儿率步、骑兵一万多人，自睢陵渡过淮河，进逼青、冀二州刺史张永的营寨。
English: Xue Sol led more than ten thousand cavalrymen from Fuling across the Huai River and entered the camp of Zhang Yong, a famous general in Jiaqing and Jizhou.

古文：丙申，诏南徐州刺史桂阳王休范统北讨诸军事，进据广陵；又诏萧道成将兵救永。
现代文：丙申，明帝诏命南徐州刺史桂阳王刘休范统领北讨诸军事，进驻广陵，又命萧道成率兵增援张永。
English: According to Yi Shen, the Ming Emperor ordered the Southern Xuzhou Prince Guiyang King Liu Xuan to lead the northern army and enter Guangling. He also ordered Xiao Daoxing soldiers to reinforce Zhang Yong.

古文：戊戌，寻阳王子房至建康，上宥之，贬爵为松滋侯。
现代文：戊戌，建康官军将寻阳王刘子房由会稽押解到建康。明帝下令赦免，贬他为松滋侯。
English: In Wuzhen, Jiankang's official army transferred Liu Zifang, the King of Guanyang, from the inspection committee to Jiankang. Emperor Ming ordered a pardon and demoted him to Songzhi.

古文：庚子，魏以陕西王源贺为太尉。
现代文：庚子，北魏任命陇西王源贺太尉。
English: Geng Zi, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Prince of Shaanxi, Yuan He, as a lieutenant.

古文：上遣宁朔将军刘怀珍帅龙骧将军王敬则等步骑五千，助刘勔讨寿阳，斩庐江太守刘道蔚。
现代文：明帝派遣宁朔将军刘怀珍率领龙骧将军王敬则等步、骑兵五千人，增援刘攻打寿阳，杀了庐江太守刘道蔚。
English: Ming Emperor sent Ningshuo General Liu Huaizhen, led by Longjing General Wang Jing, and five thousand cavalry to reinforce Liu to attack Shouyang and killed Liu Daowei, the governor of the Minjiang River.

古文：怀珍，善明之从子也。
现代文：刘怀珍是刘善明的侄儿。
English: Liu Huaizhen is Liu Shanming's nephew.

古文：中书舍人戴明宝启上，遣军主竟陵黄回募兵击斩寻阳所署马头太守王广元。
现代文：中书舍人戴明宝向明帝推荐派军主竟陵人黄回招兵买马，向叛军进攻，杀了寻阳政权任命的马头太守王广元。
English: Dai Mingbao, a scholar of Chinese classics, recommended to Emperor Ming that the commander of the army should be Huang Lingren, who in turn recruited soldiers to buy horses, attacked the rebels, and killed Wang Guangyuan, the horse head warden appointed by the Huan Yang regime.

古文：前奉朝请寿阳郑黑，起兵于淮上以应建康，东扞殷琰，西拒常珍奇；乙巳，以黑为司州刺史。
现代文：前任奉朝请寿阳人郑黑，在淮河上游起兵，响应建康朝廷，东拒寿阳的殷琰，西拒驻扎悬瓠的常珍奇。乙巳，明帝任命郑黑为司州刺史。
English: Zheng He, a native of Shouyang, was invited by his predecessor to serve the imperial court. He raised an army in the upper reaches of the Huai River in response to the Jiankang imperial court. It is not uncommon for the East to reject Shouyang's invitation and the West to refuse to station a garrison. At this time, the Ming emperor appointed Zheng He as the governor of Sizhou.

古文：殷琰将刘顺、柳伦、皇甫道烈、庞天生等马步八千人东据宛唐；刘勔帅众军并进，去顺数里立营。
现代文：殷琰派部将刘顺、柳伦、皇甫道烈、庞天生等骑兵、步兵八千人，驻防东面的宛唐。刘率率各路人马，同时并进，在距刘顺阵营数里处官营扎寨。
English: Eight thousand cavalrymen and infantrymen, including Liu Shun, Liu Lun, Wangfudorai, and Pang Tien Sheng, were stationed in the eastern part of Wangtang. Liu led all the people and horses at the same time, and camped a few miles away from Liu Shun's camp.

古文：时琰所遣诸军，并受顺节度，而以皇甫道烈土豪，柳伦台之所遣，顺本卑微，唯不使经督二军。
现代文：当时，殷琰所派各方军队统一由刘顺指挥。只是因皇甫道烈原是当地的土豪，柳伦原是建康官军的军官，而刘顺出身卑微，所以不让他统率这两支军队。
English: At that time, the armies of all parties sent by Yin Xi were unified under the command of Liu Shun. However, because the Emperor Dowager Empress Dowager Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：勔始至，堑垒未立；顺欲击之，道烈，伦不同，顺不能独进，乃止。
现代文：刘刚到，营垒还没有筑成，刘顺想出击，可皇甫道烈、柳伦不同意，刘顺又不能孤军出击，只好作罢。
English: Liu Shun wanted to attack as soon as Liu Shun arrived, but Empress Dowager Dowager and Liu Lun did not agree. Liu Shun could not attack alone, so he had no choice but to give up.

古文：勔营既立，不可复攻，因相持守。
现代文：等刘筑营完成后，已不能再攻，因而两军互相对峙坚守。
English: After Liu's construction of the camp was completed, it was no longer possible to attack, so the two armies stood firm against each other.

古文：壬子，断新钱，专用古钱。
现代文：壬子，建康朝廷下令禁止用新钱，专用古钱。
English: On the 29th, the use of new money was prohibited, and only old money was used.

古文：沈攸之帅诸军围赭圻。
现代文：沈攸之率领各路人马包围赭圻。
English: Shen Youzhi led all the passers-by to surround him.

古文：薛常宝等粮尽，告刘胡求救；胡以囊盛米，系流查及船腹，阳覆船，顺风流下以饷之。
现代文：薛常宝等部粮食用尽，向刘胡求救，刘胡用布袋装米，绑在木排和船舱上，然后故意使船翻覆，船底朝天顺流而下，接济薛常宝。
English: When Xue Changbao and the others ran out of food, they asked Liu Hu for help. Liu Hu packed rice in cloth bags, tied it to a wooden plank and the cabin, and then deliberately capsized the boat. The bottom of the boat floated down the river to help Xue Changbao.

古文：沈攸之疑其有异，遣人取船及流查，大得囊米。
现代文：沈攸之怀疑这么多翻船中有诈，派人打捞翻船及木排，得了好崐多袋米。
English: Shen Yuanzhi suspected that there was fraud in so many overturned boats. He sent people to salvage overturned boats and wooden planks, and got a lot of bags of rice.

古文：丙辰，刘胡帅步卒一万，夜，斫山开道，以布囊运米饷赭圻。
现代文：丙辰，刘胡率领步兵一万人，趁着黑夜，开山凿道，用布袋装米，运送给赭圻。
English: Hunchin and Liu Hu led 10,000 infantrymen and took advantage of the darkness to cut a path through the mountains, load the rice in cloth bags, and transport it to Handan.

古文：平旦，至城下，犹隔小堑，未能入。
现代文：天将亮时，来到赭圻城下，可是还隔着一条小沟，进不了城。
English: At dawn, he came to the outskirts of the city, but he could not enter the city because of a small ditch.

古文：沈攸之帅诸军邀之，殊死战，胡众大败，舍粮弃甲，缘山走，斩获甚众。
现代文：沈攸之率领各军截击，拚死战斗，刘胡大败，丢粮弃甲，沿山逃走，被杀被抓的很多。
English: Shen Youzhi led the army to intercept, fight to the death, Liu Hu was defeated, threw away grain and abandoned armor, fled along the mountain, and many were killed and captured.

古文：胡被疮，仅得还营。
现代文：刘胡受伤，只身回营。
English: Liu Hu was injured and returned to the camp alone.

古文：常宝等惶惧，夏，四月，辛酉，开城突围，走还胡军。
现代文：薛常宝等惊慌恐惧，夏季，四月，辛酉，开城门突围，逃回刘胡军营。
English: Xue Changbao and other panicked fear, summer, April, Xinlu, open the city gate breakout, fled back to Liu Hu military camp.

古文：攸之拔赭圻城，斩其宁朔将军沈怀宝等，纳降数千人。
现代文：沈攸之攻破了赭圻城，杀了宁朔将军沈怀宝等，接受降军数千人。
English: Shen Youzhi broke through Lucheng, killed Ningshuo General Shen Huai Bao and others, and accepted the surrender of thousands of troops.

古文：陈绍宗单舸奔鹊尾。
现代文：寻阳政权的领陈绍宗乘一只小船逃走投奔鹊尾。
English: Chen Shao Zong, the leader of the Guoyang regime, fled to Shanwei in a small boat.

古文：建安王休仁自虎槛进屯赭圻。
现代文：随后，建安王刘休仁从虎槛进驻赭圻。
English: Subsequently, Liu Xuren, King of Jian'an, moved from the Tiger's Threshold to Shandong.

古文：刘胡等兵犹盛。上欲绥慰人情，遣吏部尚书褚渊至虎槛，选用将士。
现代文：刘胡的兵力仍然十分强大，明帝为安抚军心，派吏部尚书褚渊前往虎槛，征选提拔有功将士。
English: Liu Hu's military force was still very strong. In order to appease the military, the Ming Emperor sent Shang Shuxu, the head of the General Staff Department, to the Tiger's Threshold to recruit and promote meritorious soldiers.

古文：时以军功除官者众，版不能供，始用黄纸。
现代文：当时，由于有战功而被封为官的人很多，以至任命版不够用，于是开始用黄纸。
English: At that time, there were so many people who had been appointed to government posts due to their war achievements that the appointment version was not enough, so they began to use yellow paper.

古文：邓琬以晋安王子勋之命，征袁顗下寻阳，顗悉雍州之众驰下。
现代文：邓琬根据晋安王刘子勋的命令，征召袁前来寻阳。袁率领雍州所有兵将急行军南下。
English: According to the order of Liu Zixun, the king of Jin'an, Deng Yu summoned Yuan to come to Yangzhou. Yuan led all the soldiers of Yangzhou to march south.

古文：琬以黄门侍郎刘道宪行荆州事。侍中孔道存行雍州事。
现代文：邓琬任命黄门侍郎刘道宪掌管荆州，任命侍中孔道存掌管雍州。
English: Deng Xiao appointed the Yellow Gate chamberlain Liu Daoxian to be in charge of Jingzhou, and appointed the chamberlain Kong Daozun to be in charge of Yongzhou.

古文：上庸太守柳世隆乘虚袭襄阳，不克。
现代文：上庸太守柳世隆，乘襄阳空虚，发动攻击，没有攻克。
English: Shangyong governor Liu Shilong, taking advantage of the emptiness of Xiangyang, launched an attack, but failed to conquer.

古文：世隆，元景之弟子也。
现代文：柳世隆是柳元景的侄儿。
English: Liu Shilong is the nephew of Liu Yuanqing.

古文：散骑侍郎明僧暠为青州刺史。
现代文：散骑侍郎明僧聚众起兵，攻打青州刺史沈文秀，以响应建康朝廷。
English: In response to the establishment of the Kang Dynasty, the Ming monks, horsemen and attendants, gathered a large number of soldiers and attacked the Qing State Historian, Shen Wenshu.

古文：平原、乐安二郡太守王玄默据琅邪，清河、广川二郡太守王玄邈据盘阳城，高阳、勃海二郡太守刘乘民据临济城，并起兵以应建康。
现代文：壬午，建康朝廷任命明僧为青州刺史。平原、乐安两郡太守王玄默占据琅邪，清河、广川两郡太守王玄邈占据盘阳城，高阳、勃海两郡太守刘乘民占据临济城，全都起兵响应建康朝廷。
English: At noon, the Jiankang imperial court appointed the Ming monk as the official historian of Qingzhou. Wang Xuanmo, the governor of Pingyuan and Le'an counties, occupied Shiji, Wang Xuanqi, the governor of Qinghe and Guangchuan counties, occupied Panyang City, and Liu Yingmin, the governor of Goyang and Bohai counties, occupied Linji City. All troops were mobilized in response to the Jiankang imperial court.

古文：玄邈，玄谟之从弟；乘民，弥之之从子也。
现代文：王玄邈是王玄谟的堂弟；刘乘民是刘弥之的侄儿。
English: Wang Xuanqian is the cousin of Wang Xuanmu; Liu Xianmin is the nephew of Liu Ya.

古文：沈文秀遣军主解彦士攻北海，拔之，杀刘弥之。
现代文：沈文秀派部将解彦士攻击并攻克北海，杀了刘弥之。
English: Shen Wenxiu's faction attacked and conquered the North Sea and killed Liu Ya.

古文：乘民从弟伯宗，合帅乡党，复取北海，因引兵向青州所治东阳城。
现代文：刘乘民的堂弟刘伯宗，集结地方武装，再夺回北海，接着，又乘势攻打青州州府所在地东阳城。
English: Liu Xingmin's cousin, Liu Bozong, gathered local armed forces, recaptured the North Sea, and then took advantage of the situation to attack Dongyang City, the capital of Qingzhou.

古文：文秀拒之，伯宗战死。
现代文：沈文秀迎战，刘伯宗战死。
English: Shen Wenshu took up the fight, Liu Bozong died in the battle.

古文：僧暠、玄默、玄邈、乘民合兵攻东阳城，每战，辄为文秀所破，离而复合，如此者十馀，卒不能克。
现代文：明僧、王玄默、王玄邈、刘乘民合兵攻打东阳城，每次攻击都被沈文秀击败，士兵被打散又重新集结再攻，这样反复十余次，最后还是不能攻克。
English: Mingzang, Wang Xuanmu, Wang Xuanqi and Liu Rongmin led a joint army to attack Dongyang City. Each attack was defeated by Shen Wenshu. The soldiers were dispersed and regrouped to attack again. This was repeated more than ten times, but in the end they could not be defeated.

古文：杜淑宝谓台军住历阳，不能遽进；及刘勔等至，上下震恐。
现代文：豫州长史杜叔宝认为官军驻扎历阳，不能马上向前推进。刘等人到达后，历阳部队上下惊恐震动。
English: The governor of Henan Province, Shi Du Shubao, thought that the government troops were stationed in Liyang and could not advance immediately. After Liu and others arrived, the Liyang troops shook with fear.

古文：刘顺等始行，唯赍一月粮，既与勔久相持，粮尽。
现代文：部将刘顺等开始东下驻防宛唐，只带一个月的粮食，跟刘相持不下，粮食很快便吃完了。
English: Liu Shun, the commander of the division, and others began to go east to garrison Wan Tang. They only brought one month's worth of grain with them. They couldn't keep up with Liu, and soon ran out of grain.

古文：叔宝发车千五百乘，载米饷顺，自将五千精兵送之。
现代文：杜叔宝派运输车一千五百辆，装满米送给刘顺，亲自率五千精兵押送。
English: Du Shubao sent 1,500 transport vehicles filled with rice to Liu Shun and personally led 5,000 soldiers to escort him.

古文：吕安国闻之，言于刘勔曰： 顺精甲八千，而我众不能居半。
现代文：吕安国得到消息，就对刘说： 刘顺拥有精甲八千，我们的兵力不到他的一半。
English: When the State of Lu'an received the news, it said to Liu: Liu Shun has 8,000 fine-armored soldiers. Our troops are less than half of his.

古文：相持既久，强弱势殊，更复推迁，则无以自立。
现代文：相持的时间一长，强弱的差距将会更大，再托延下去，我们简直不能自存。
English: The longer we stay together, the greater the gap between the strong and the weak will be. If we continue to postpone, we simply cannot survive.

古文：所赖者，彼粮行竭，我食有馀耳。
现代文：唯一的希望是对方的粮食将要枯竭，而我们的粮食还有余。
English: The only hope is that the other side's food will run out, and we still have food to spare.

古文：若使叔宝米至，非唯难可复图，我亦不能持久。
现代文：若是让杜叔宝的米运到，我们不但难以打胜仗，而且也难以久守。
English: If we allow Du Shubao's rice to arrive, it will not only be difficult for us to win the war, but it will also be difficult for us to hold out for long.

古文：今唯有间道袭其米车，出彼不意，若能制之，当不战走矣。 
现代文：现在只有从小道出发，袭击他们的运米车队，出其不意，如果能摧毁对方，那么他们便会不战而走。 
English: The only way now is to attack their rice convoys from the back roads, take them by surprise, and if they can destroy the other side, then they will leave without a fight.

古文：勔以为然，以疲弱守营，简精兵千人配安国及龙骧将军黄回，使从间道出顺后，于横塘抄之。
现代文：刘认为这样很对，于是留下老弱残兵留守军营，选精兵一千人配备给吕安国和龙骧将军黄回，令他们从小路绕到刘顺的背后，在横塘袭击他们。
English: Liu thought this was very right, so he left the old and weak remnants to stay in the military camp, selected a thousand elite soldiers to equip the Lu'an Kingdom and the Longjing General Huang Wei, and made them go around from the path to the back of Liu Shun and attack them in Hengtang.

古文：安国始行，赍二日熟食；食尽，叔宝不至，将士欲还，安国曰： 卿等旦已一食。
现代文：吕安国出发时，仅带两天熟食。熟食吃光，还不见杜叔宝到来，将士们纷纷要求回军，吕安国说： 你们早上已吃过一顿。
English: When Lu'an Province set out, they only brought two days of cooked food. After eating all the cooked food, they did not see Du Shubao arrive. The soldiers asked to return to the army one after another. Lu'an Province said, "You have already eaten one meal in the morning."

古文：今晚米车不容不至；若其不至，夜去不晚。 
现代文：依我看，今晚运米车队不会不来，如果不到，我们夜里撤退，也为时不晚。 
English: As far as I can see, the convoys of rice will not fail to come tonight. If they do not, we will withdraw at night, and it will not be too late.

古文：叔宝果至，以米车为函箱陈，叔宝于外为游军。
现代文：杜叔宝果然到来，车队呈 函箱阵 ，杜叔宝在函箱阵外，游动搜索前进。
English: Du Shubao arrived, and the motorcade formed a line of boxes. Du Shubao swam and searched outside the box.

古文：幢主杨促怀将五百人居前，安国、回等击斩之，及其士卒皆尽。
现代文：幢主杨仲怀率五百人在车队前开路。吕安国、黄回等发动袭击，杀了杨仲怀，连同他的部下全部斩尽。
English: Yang Zhonghuai, the owner of the building, led 500 people to block the road in front of the motorcade. Lu'an, Huang Hui and others attacked and killed Yang Zhonghuai, along with all his subordinates.

古文：叔宝至，回欲乘胜击之，安国曰： 彼将自走，不假复击。 
现代文：杜叔宝赶到时，黄回打算乘胜追击，吕安国说： 他会自己逃掉，用不着再动手。 
English: When Du Shubao arrived, Huang Hui planned to take advantage of the victory to pursue him. Lu An Guo said: He will escape on his own, there is no need to do it again.

古文：退三十里，止宿。
现代文：于是，撤退三十里，停下来住宿。
English: As a result, they retreated thirty miles and stopped to stay.

古文：夜遣骑参候，叔宝果弃米车走。
现代文：夜里派骑兵前去侦察，杜叔宝果然丢下运米的车队逃跑。
English: In the night, he sent his cavalry forward to reconnoiter, and Du Shubao did indeed abandon the rice-carrying convoy and flee.

古文：安国复夜往烧米车，驱牛二千馀头而还。
现代文：吕安国就在夜里返回去，纵火烧毁米车，虏获牛两千余头而还。
English: Lu'an Province returned in the night, set fire to rice carts, captured more than two thousand heads of cattle and returned.

古文：五月，丁亥朔，夜，刘顺众溃，顺走淮西就常珍奇。
现代文：五月，丁亥朔，夜晚，刘顺的部队崩溃，向淮西投奔悬瓠的常珍奇。
English: In May, Dinghaishuo, at night, Liu Shun's troops collapsed and rushed to Huaxi.

古文：于是刘勔鼓行，进向寿阳。
现代文：此时刘擂鼓前进，向寿阳进军。
English: At this time, Liu Xuanqin marched forward and marched to Shouyang.

古文：叔宝敛居民及散卒，婴城自守；勔与诸军分营城外。
现代文：杜叔宝把城外居民及散兵聚集城内，绕城自守。刘与各路部队，分别在城外扎营。
English: Du Shubao gathered the out-of-town residents and scattered soldiers inside the city and defended himself around the city. Liu and the various troops camped separately outside the city.

古文：山阳王休祐与殷琰书，为陈利害，上又遣御史王道隆赍诏宥琰罪。
现代文：山阳王刘休写信给殷琰，分析利害得失。明帝又派御史王道隆携带诏书，赦免殷琰。
English: Liu Xiu, the king of Shanyang, wrote a letter to Yin Qi, analyzing the pros and cons. Emperor Ming also sent King Daolong of Gushi to carry an imperial edict to pardon Yin Qi.

古文：勔与琰书，并以琰兄瑗子邈书与之。
现代文：刘也写信给殷琰，并附上殷琰哥哥殷瑗的儿子殷邈的一封家书。
English: Liu also wrote to Yin Xi, and attached a family letter from Yin Xi's brother, Yin Xi's son, Yin Xi.

古文：琰与叔宝等皆有降意，而众心不壹，复婴城固守。
现代文：殷琰和杜叔宝都有投降之意，可是，大家意见不一，又继续守城。
English: Both Yin Xi and Du Shubao had the intention of surrendering, but everyone had different opinions and continued to defend the city.

古文：弋阳西山蛮田益之起兵应建康，诏以益之为辅国将军。督弋阳西山事。
现代文：弋阳西山蛮族首领田益之起兵，响应建康朝廷。明帝下诏任命田益之为辅国将军，统领弋阳西蛮的事务。
English: In response to the establishment of the Kang dynasty, Tian Yi, the leader of the Xishan barbarians in Shenyang, raised an army. Under the Ming emperor's edict, Tian Yi was appointed as an auxiliary general to lead the affairs of the Xishan barbarians in Shenyang.

古文：壬辰，以辅国将军沈攸之为雍州刺史。
现代文：壬辰，任命辅国将军沈攸之为雍州刺史。
English: of Imjin, appointed the auxiliary general Shen Yu to be the crown prince of Yongzhou.

古文：丁未，以尚书左仆射王景文为中军将军。
现代文：丁未，任命尚书左仆射王景文为中军将军。
English: Ding Wei appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Shaowang Jingwen, as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：庚戌，以宁朔将军刘乘民为冀州刺史。
现代文：庚戌，任命宁朔将军刘乘民为冀州刺史。
English: On the 15th, Ningshuo General Liu Xingmin was appointed to write the history of Jizhou.

古文：甲寅，葬昭太后修宁陵。
现代文：甲寅，刘宋在修宁陵安葬路太后，谥号为昭。
English: Jia Yin, Liu Song buried the empress dowager in Shuning Mausoleum, and his posthumous name was Zhao.

古文：张永、萧道成等与薛索儿战，大破之，索儿退保石梁；食尽而溃，走向乐平，为申令孙子孝叔所斩。
现代文：张永、萧道成等与薛索儿作战，大破薛索儿军，薛索儿退守石梁，粮尽，大军溃散，薛索儿投奔乐平，被申令孙的儿子申孝叔击杀。
English: Zhang Yong, Xiao Daocheng and others fought against Xue Sol, defeated Xue Sol's army, Xue Sol retreated to Shiliang, ran out of food, and the army was dispersed. Xue Sol went to Benleping and was killed by Shen Xiao, the son of Shen Lingsun.

古文：薛安都子道智走向合肥，诣裴季之降。
现代文：薛安都的儿子薛道智逃往合肥，到裴季之处投降。
English: Xue Daozhi, the son of Xue Andu, fled to Hefei and surrendered at Pei Ji's place.

古文：傅灵越走至淮西，武卫将军沛郡王广之生获之，送诣勔。勔诘其叛逆，灵越曰： 九州唱义，岂独在我！
现代文：傅灵越逃到淮水之西，被朝廷武卫将军沛郡人王广之活捉，押送给刘，刘指责他叛逆，傅灵越说： 全国各地纷纷起义，岂只我一人！
English: Fu Ling Yue fled to the west of Huai Shui. He was captured alive by Wang Guang, the general of the imperial guards, and sent to Liu. Liu accused him of treason. Fu Ling Yue said: There are uprisings all over the country. Am I the only one?

古文：薛公不能专任智勇，委付子侄，此其所以败也。
现代文：薛安都不能任用贤才，只信任他的儿子和侄儿，这是他失败的原因。
English: Xue An couldn't appoint a wise man and only trusted his son and nephew, which was the reason for his failure.

古文：人生归于一死，实无面求活。 
现代文：人生在世总归一死，实在没脸求活。 
English: Life in the world always comes down to death, there is really no face to live.

古文：送诣建康。上欲赦之，灵越辞终不改，乃杀之。
现代文：刘把他押送到建康，明帝打算赦免他，但傅灵越始终不肯改口，便杀了他。
English: Liu escorted him to Jiankang. Emperor Ming planned to pardon him, but Fu Ling refused to change his mind and killed him.

古文：邓琬以刘胡与沈攸之等相持，久不决，乃加袁顗督征讨诸军事。
现代文：邓琬因刘胡跟建康官军沈攸之等对阵僵持，很久分不出胜负，于是加授袁为督征讨诸军事。
English: Due to Liu Hu's standoff with Jiankang's official army led by Shen You, Deng Xiao could not tell the winner from the loser for a long time, so he promoted Yuan Weiguo to the post of military commander.

古文：六月，甲戌，顗帅楼船千艘，战士二万，来入鹊尾。
现代文：六月，甲戌，袁率楼船一千艘，兵士两万人，抵达鹊尾。
English: In June, Gao Jian and Yuan Lv, with a thousand ships and 20,000 soldiers, arrived in Shanwei.

古文：顗本无将略，性又怯桡，在军中未尝戎服，语不及战陈，唯赋诗谈义而已，不复抚接诸将；刘胡每论事，酬对甚简。
现代文：袁本无大将的才略，又性情卑怯。在军营中，他从不穿军服，谈话也不涉及战阵，而只吟诗作赋，谈论义理，对各将领既不安抚鼓励，又不肯接见。刘胡每次讨论军事，袁对他的回答和应酬都很简略、怠慢。
English: Yuan did not have the talent of a general, and he had a cowardly temperament. In the military camp, he never wore a military uniform, and his conversations did not involve the battlefield, but he only chanted poems and talked about the principles of justice. He neither encouraged nor received the generals. Every time Liu Hu discussed military affairs, Yuan's answers and entertainment to him were very brief and negligent.

古文：由此大失人情，胡常切齿恚恨。
现代文：于崐是，袁大失人心，刘胡对他恨之入骨。
English: Yu Yao said that Yuan Da had lost his heart, and Liu Hu hated him to the bone.

古文：胡以南运米未至，军士匮乏，就顗借襄阳之资，顗不许，曰： 都下两宅未成，方应经理。 
现代文：刘胡因后方补给未到，士卒缺粮，向袁借襄阳的存粮，袁拒绝，说： 京师还有两处住宅没有完工，正要用钱料理。 
English: Liu Hu, who was short of grain because supplies from the rear had not arrived, asked Yuan to borrow grain stored in Xiangyang. Yuan refused, saying, "There are still two unfinished residences in Beijing, and I am going to use the money to cook."

古文：又信往来之言，云 建康米贵，斗至数百 ，以为将不攻自溃，拥甲以待之。
现代文：又相信过路人的传言，说： 建康米价飞涨，一斗高达数百钱。 认为用不着进攻，建康将自行崩溃，所以按兵不动，坐等胜利。
English: He also believed the rumors of passers-by, saying: Jiankang rice prices have soared, reaching hundreds of dollars a barrel. He thought that there was no need to attack, Jiankang would collapse on its own, so he did not move and waited for victory.

古文：田益之帅蛮众万馀人围义阳，邓琬使司州刺史庞孟虬帅精兵五千救之，益之不战溃去。
现代文：田益之率西山蛮族军队一万多人包围义阳。邓琬派司州刺史宠孟虬率精锐部队五千人援救，田益之不敢迎战，所率军队溃散。
English: Tian Yizhi's Xishan barbarian army of more than ten thousand surrounded Yiyang. Deng Xiao sent five thousand elite troops led by Meng Yao to rescue. Tian Yizhi did not dare to fight, and his army dispersed.

古文：安成太守刘袭，始安内史王识之，建安内史赵道生，并举郡来降。
现代文：安成太守刘袭、始安内史王识之、建安内史赵道生，全部献出城池，投降朝廷。
English: Liu Wei, the governor of Ancheng, Wang Xizhi, the first governor of Ancheng, and Zhao Daosheng, the governor of Jian'an, all surrendered the city and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：袭，道怜之孙也。
现代文：刘袭是刘道怜的孙子。
English: Liu Wei is the grandson of Liu Daorai.

古文：萧道成世子赜为南康赣令，邓琬遣使收系之。
现代文：萧道成的儿子萧赜任南康赣县令，邓琬派人前去逮捕了他。
English: Xiao Daoxing's son, Xiao Jun, served as the governor of South Kangxi County, and Deng Xiao sent people to arrest him.

古文：门客兰陵桓康担赜妻裴氏及其子长懋、子良逃于山中，与赜族人萧欣祖等结客得百馀人，攻郡，破狱出赜。
现代文：萧赜的门客兰陵人桓康，担着萧赜的妻子裴氏和萧赜的两个儿子萧长懋、萧子良逃到山中。跟萧赜的同族萧欣祖等结集佃客一百余人，袭击郡城，攻破监狱，救出萧赜。
English: Xiao Yao's client, Lanling man Huan Kang, fled to the mountains carrying Xiao Yao's wife, Pei, and Xiao Yao's two sons, Xiao Changyao and Xiao Ziliang. He and Xiao Yao's compatriot Xiao Xinzu gathered more than a hundred clients, attacked the county seat, broke through the prison, and rescued Xiao Yao.

古文：南康相沈肃之帅将吏追赜，赜与战，擒之。
现代文：南康相沈肃之率将士追赶萧赜，萧赜迎战，活捉了沈肃之。
English: Nankang's vassal Shen Sui's troops chased Xiao Yao, Xiao Yao fought back and captured Shen Sui alive.

古文：赜自号宁朔将军，据郡起兵，与刘袭等相应。
现代文：萧赜于是自称宁朔将军，据郡起兵，与安成郡的刘袭等呼应。
English: Xiao Wei then called himself Ningshuo General, according to the county army, echoing the Liu attack in Ancheng County.

古文：琬以中护军殷孚为豫章太守，督上流五郡以防袭等。
现代文：邓琬任命中护军殷孚为豫章太守，总管赣江上游五个郡，防御刘袭等。
English: Deng Xiao appointed the middle guard Yin Fu as the governor of Yuzhang, the general manager of the five counties in the upper reaches of the Minjiang River, and the defense against Liu attack.

古文：衡阳内史王应之起兵应建康，袭击湘州行事何慧文于长沙。
现代文：衡阳内史王应之聚众起兵，响应建康朝廷，袭击在长沙的湘州行事何慧文。
English: In response, the king of Hengyang gathered a large number of soldiers and, in response to the Jiankang imperial court, attacked He Huiwen, who was acting in Hunan Province in Changsha.

古文：应之与慧文舍军身战，斫慧文八创，慧文斫应之断足。杀之。
现代文：王应之与何慧文离开兵士单独决斗，王应之砍伤何慧文八处，何慧文砍断了王应之一只脚并杀了他。
English: Wang Yingzhi and He Huiwen left the soldiers to fight alone. Wang Yingzhi cut He Huiwen in eight places, and He Huiwen cut off one of Wang Yingzhi's feet and killed him.

古文：始兴人刘嗣祖等据郡起兵应建康，广州刺史袁昙远遣其将李万周等讨之。
现代文：始兴人刘嗣祖等占据郡城以响应建康朝廷。广州刺史袁昙远派他的部将李万周等讨伐刘嗣祖。
English: Liu Shizhu, the founder of Xingxing, and others occupied the county seat in response to the Jiankang imperial court. Yuan Shiyuan, the governor of Guangzhou, sent his subordinate Li Wanzhou and others to fight Liu Shizhu.

古文：嗣祖诳万周云 寻阳已平 。
现代文：刘嗣祖欺骗李万周说： 寻阳战乱已平 。
English: Liu Shizhu deceived Li Wanzhou and said: "The war of seeking the sun has ended.

古文：万周还袭番禺，擒昙远，斩之。
现代文：李万周相信并回军袭击番禺，活捉袁昙远，将其斩首。
English: Li Wanzhou believed and returned to attack Panyu, capture Yuan Shiyuan alive and behead him.

古文：上以万周行广州事。
现代文：明帝任命李万周掌管广州事务。
English: Emperor Ming appointed Li Wanzhou to be in charge of Guangzhou affairs.

古文：初，武都王杨元和治白水，微弱不能自立，弃国奔魏。
现代文：最初，武都王杨元和把王府设在白水，力量薄弱，不能自存。于是抛弃部族投奔北魏。
English: At first, the king of Wu, Yang Yuanhe, set up the royal palace in Baishui. He was weak and could not survive on his own, so he abandoned the tribe and joined the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：元和从弟僧嗣复自立，屯葭芦。
现代文：杨元和的堂弟杨僧嗣又自立为武都王，驻扎在葭芦。
English: Yang Yuanhe's cousin, Yang Sangzhi, also established himself as the King of Wudu and was stationed in Huludao.

古文：费欣寿至巴东，巴东人任叔儿据白帝，自号辅国将军，击欣寿，斩之，叔儿遂阻守三峡。
现代文：费欣寿率军东下进抵巴东。巴东人任叔儿占据白帝城，自称为辅国将军，前来迎战，杀费欣寿。随后，任叔儿封锁了三峡。
English: Feixin Shou led his army eastward and arrived in Badong. The people of Badong, Ren Shou'er, occupied Baidicheng, called himself the general of the auxiliary country, came to fight, and killed Feixin Shou. Subsequently, Ren Shou'er blocked the Three Gorges.

古文：萧惠开复遣治中程法度将兵三千出梁州，杨僧嗣帅群氐断其道，间使以闻。
现代文：萧惠开第二次派治中程法度带领兵士三千人北上梁州。杨僧嗣率氐族各部落切断了程法度的道路，派人由小路奏报建康朝廷。
English: For the second time, Xiao Huikai sent 3,000 soldiers to the north of Liangzhou to deal with the middle-ranking faction. Yang Sengsu and the Yi tribes cut off the road of the middle-ranking faction and sent people to report to the Jiankang court from the side road.

古文：秋，七月，丁酉，以僧嗣为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁酉，明帝任命杨僧嗣为北秦州刺史并封为武都王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Ming appointed Yang Sangzhi as the governor of North Qin Province and crowned him as the King of Wudu.

古文：诸军与袁顗相拒于浓湖，久未决。
现代文：各路官军与袁在浓湖对峙，很久不能决出胜负。
English: The various government troops and Yuan confronted each other in the dense lake and were unable to decide the outcome for a long time.

古文：龙骧将军张兴世建议曰： 贼据上流，兵强地胜。我虽持之有馀，而制之不足。
现代文：龙骧将军张兴世建议说： 叛贼盘据上游，兵力强大，地势险要，我们的力量与他们对峙是绰绰崐有余，但不足以剿灭他们。
English: Longjing General Zhang Xingshi suggested, "The traitors are entrenched upstream, their forces are strong, and the terrain is precarious. Our strength is more than enough to confront them, but it is not enough to annihilate them.

古文：若以奇兵数千潜出其上，因险而壁，见利而动，使其首尾周遑，进退疑阻，中流既梗，粮运自艰，此制贼之奇也。
现代文：若是派出数千奇兵潜入他们的背后，在险要的地方筑城布阵，伺机发动进攻，就会使他们首尾难顾，进退两难。上游一旦被我们切断，粮食运输一定艰难，这是克制叛贼的奇妙良策。
English: If we send thousands of soldiers to sneak up behind them, build fortifications in critical places, and wait for the right time to launch an attack, they will be caught in a dilemma. Once the upstream is cut off by us, grain transportation will be difficult. This is a wonderful way to restrain traitors.

古文：钱溪江岸最狭，去大军不远，下临洄洑，船下必来泊岸，又有横浦可以藏船，千人守险，万人不能过。
现代文：钱溪一带长江两岸最为狭窄，又距大军不远，水道曲折湍急，船只经过必须紧靠岸边，那里又有天然的码头可以停船。千人把守，万人不能通过。
English: The banks of the Yangtze River around Qianxi are the narrowest, and they are not far from large armies. The waterway is tortuous and rapid, and ships must pass close to the shore. There is also a natural dock where ships can stop. A thousand people guard it, and a million people cannot pass.

古文：冲要之地，莫出于此。 
现代文：其他要害之地，都不能超过此地。 
English: There is no more important place to be than here.

古文：沈攸之、吴喜并赞其策。
现代文：沈攸之、吴喜全都赞成。
English: Shen Youzhi and Wu Xi all agreed.

古文：会庞孟虬引兵来助殷琰，刘勔遣使求援甚急，建安王休仁欲遣兴世救之。沈攸之曰： 孟虬蚁聚，必无能为，遣别将马步数千，足以相制。
现代文：这时，庞孟虬率兵前来增援殷琰，刘派人请求援兵，情况紧急。建安王刘休仁打算派张兴世率军增援刘，沈攸之说： 庞孟虬的部队，像一群蚂蚁，一定没什么作为，派遣另一位将领，交给他步、骑兵数千人，足以把庞孟虬制住。
English: At this time, Pang Mengyao led his troops to reinforce Yin Yao, and Liu sent someone to request reinforcements. The situation was urgent. King of Jian'an, Liu Shuren, planned to send Zhang Xingshi to lead an army to reinforce Liu. Shen Youzhi said: Pang Mengyao's troops, like a group of ants, must have nothing to do. Send another general and give him thousands of infantry and cavalry, enough to hold Pang Mengyao down.

古文：兴世之行，是安危大机。必不可辍。 
现代文：张兴世这次攻击，可是安危成败的关键，决不可半途而废。 
English: Zhang Xingshi this attack, but the key to success or failure, must not be abandoned halfway.

古文：乃遣段佛荣将兵救勔，而选战士七千、轻舸二百配兴世。
现代文：于是命段佛荣率军增援刘，而另外挑选战士七千人，轻快小船二百艘，配给张兴世。
English: As a result, the commander-in-chief Fo Rong led the army to reinforce Liu, and in addition selected seven thousand soldiers, two hundred light boats, and distributed them to Zhang Xingshi.

古文：兴世帅其众溯流稍上，寻复退归，如是者累日。
现代文：张兴世率二百艘小船，逆流而上，接着又返回，一连数天，都是如此。
English: Zhang Xingshi led 200 small boats upstream and then back, for several days in a row.

古文：刘胡闻之，笑曰： 我尚不敢越彼下取扬州，张兴世何物人，欲轻据我上！ 
现代文：刘胡听到消息，取笑说： 我还不敢越过他们阵地，夺取扬州，张兴世是什么东西，居然想轻易占领我的上游阵地。 
English: When Liu Hu heard the news, he made fun and said: I still dare not cross their positions and seize Yangzhou, what is Zhang Xingshi, who wants to easily occupy my upstream position.

古文：不为之备。
现代文：于是，不做防备。
English: As a result, no precautions were taken.

古文：一夕，四更，值便风，兴世举帆直前，渡湖、白，过鹊尾。
现代文：一天晚上四更，正好刮起顺风，张兴世的船队，张满风帆，向西鼓浪前进，穿过湖口、白水口，再过鹊尾。
English: One evening at four o'clock, just as a favorable wind was blowing, Zhang Xingshi's fleet, with sails full of wind, headed westward, through the mouth of the lake, the mouth of the white water, and then through Shanwei.

古文：胡既觉，乃遣其将胡灵秀将兵于东岸翼之而进。
现代文：刘胡发觉之后，急忙派他的将领胡灵秀领兵在东岸追赶，紧跟张兴世的船队前进。
English: After Liu Hu's discovery, he hurriedly sent his general, Hu Lingxiu, to lead the troops in pursuit on the east coast, closely following Zhang Xingshi's fleet.

古文：戊戌夕，兴世宿景洪浦，灵秀亦留。
现代文：戊戌，晚上，张兴世停泊于景洪浦，胡灵秀也留在此处。
English: In the evening, Zhang Xingshi anchored in Jinghongpu, and Hu Lingxiu also stayed here.

古文：兴世潜遣其将黄道标帅七十舸径趣钱溪，立营寨；己亥，兴世引兵进据之，灵秀不能禁。
现代文：张兴世暗中派遣部将黄道标，率七十条快艇直插钱溪，安营扎寨。己亥，张兴世率主力西进，直接进驻钱溪新营，胡灵秀无法阻止。
English: Zhang Xingshi secretly dispatched a detachment to set up the zodiac sign, and led 70 speedboats to directly enter Qianxi and set up camp. At the same time, Zhang Xingshi led the main force westward, directly stationed in Qianxi new camp, and Hu Lingxiu could not stop it.

古文：庚子，刘胡自将水步二十六军来攻钱溪。将士欲迎击据之，兴世禁之曰： 贼来尚远，气盛而矢骤；骤既易尽，盛亦易衰，不如待之。 
现代文：庚子，刘胡亲自率领水陆联合的二十六支军队，前来攻击钱溪，张兴世的将士打算迎战，张兴世不允许，说： 贼寇离我们还远，气势旺盛，打起仗来，箭如雨下。然而气太盛，容易衰弱，箭太多，容易枯竭，不如等待。 
English: Geng Zi, Liu Hu personally led twenty-six armies united by water and land to attack Qianxi. Zhang Xingshi's soldiers planned to fight, but Zhang Xingshi did not allow it, saying: "The bandits are still far away from us, they are powerful, when they fight, it rains arrows. However, they are too powerful, they are easily weakened, there are too many arrows, they are easily exhausted, it is better to wait."

古文：令将士治城如故。
现代文：命令将士照旧加强工事。
English: The officers were ordered to strengthen the construction as usual.

古文：俄而胡来转近，船入洄洑；兴世命寿寂之、任农夫帅壮士数百击之，众军相继并进，胡败走，斩首数百，胡收兵而下。
现代文：不久，刘胡船队接近，进入漩涡，张兴世命寿寂之、任农夫率精壮军士数百人先行攻击，主力部队相继一起前进，刘胡败退，数百人陈亡，刘胡收兵而回。
English: Soon, Liu Hu's fleet approached and entered the whirlpool. Zhang Xing, the world's loneliest man, and Ren, a farmer, led hundreds of strong soldiers to attack first. The main forces advanced together one after another. Liu Hu was defeated and retreated, hundreds of people died, and Liu Hu withdrew his troops and returned.

古文：时兴世城寨未固，建安王休仁虑袁觊并力更攻钱溪，欲分其势。
现代文：当时，张兴世营寨还不够坚固，建安王刘休仁担心袁回军与刘胡合力再攻钱溪，打算分散他们的势力。
English: At that time, Zhang Xing's encampment was not strong enough, and Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an, was worried that Yuan Hui and Liu Hu would join forces to attack Qianxi again, and planned to disperse their forces.

古文：辛丑，命沈攸之、吴喜等以皮舰进攻浓湖，斩获千数。
现代文：辛丑，命沈攸之、吴喜等用皮蒙在船上攻击浓湖，杀数千人。
English: Xin Ug, Zhisheng Youzhi, Wu Xi, and others attacked Lake Nenghu on boats with peppermints, killing thousands of people.

古文：是日，刘胡帅步卒二万、铁马一千，欲更攻兴世。未至钱溪数十里，袁觊以浓湖之急，遽追之，钱溪城由此得立。
现代文：当天，刘胡率步兵两万人，披甲骑兵一千人，打算再攻张兴世，进抵钱溪相距只有数十里时，袁因浓湖吃紧，命刘胡回兵增援。钱溪的营寨因此得以建成。
English: On the same day, Liu Hu led 20,000 infantrymen and 1,000 armored cavalrymen, intending to attack Zhang Xingshi again. When the distance to Qianxi was only dozens of miles, Yuan was in a tight spot due to the dense lake and ordered Liu Hu to return to reinforce the troops. Qianxi's camp was thus able to be built.

古文：胡遣人传唱 钱溪已平 ，众并惧，沈攸之曰： 不然。若钱溪实败，万人中应有一人逃亡得还者；必是彼战失利，唱空声以惑众耳。 
现代文：刘胡派人散布谣言说： 钱溪已经平定。 官军大为恐惧，沈攸之说： 不对，钱溪如果战败，众人中至少会有一人逃亡回来，必定是他们攻击失利，散布假情报扰乱军心。 
English: Liu Hu sent people to spread the rumor that Qianxi had been pacified, and the government army was very afraid. Shen Youzhi said, "No, if Qianxi is defeated, at least one of the people will flee back. They must have failed in their attack. Spreading false information disturbs the military spirit."

古文：勒军中不得妄动；钱溪捷报寻至。
现代文：下令军中不得妄动。不多时，钱溪捷报传到。
English: The army was ordered not to make any sudden movements. Shortly after, the Qianxi Jie Bao arrived.

古文：攸之以钱溪所送胡军耳鼻示浓湖，袁觊骇惧。
现代文：沈攸之把钱溪送来刘胡士卒的耳朵、鼻子，送给浓湖守军，袁异常惊骇恐惧。
English: Shen Youzhi sent Qianxi the ears and nose of Liu Hu Shizhu to the thick lake defenders, Yuan was extremely shocked and frightened.

古文：攸之日幕引归。
现代文：沈攸之黄昏时回军。
English: Shen Youzhi returned to the army at dusk.

古文：龙骧将军刘道符攻山阳，程天祚请降。
现代文：龙骧将军刘道符，进攻山阳，程天祚向刘道符投降。
English: Longjing general Liu Daofu attacked Shanyang, and Cheng Tianyao surrendered to Liu Daofu.

古文：庞孟虬进至弋阳，刘勔遣吕安国等迎击于蓼潭，大破之，孟虬走向义阳。
现代文：庞孟虬前进到弋阳，刘派吕安国等在蓼潭迎击，大破庞孟虬军。庞孟虬逃到义阳。
English: Pang Mengyao advanced to Fenyang, and Liu sent Lu'an Guo and others to meet the attack in Shuitan, and defeated Pang Mengyao's army. Pang Mengyao fled to Yiyang.

古文：王玄谟之子昙善起兵据义阳以应建康，孟虬走死蛮中。
现代文：王玄谟的儿子王昙善聚众起兵，夺取义阳，归附建康朝廷。庞孟虬逃到蛮族居住的山区，死在那里。
English: Wang Xuanmu's son, Wang Xishan, gathered an army and captured Yiyang and annexed it to the Jiankang court. Pang Mengyu fled to the mountains where the barbarians lived and died there.

古文：刘胡遣辅国将军薛道标袭合肥，杀汝阴太守裴季，刘勔遣辅国将军垣闳击之。
现代文：刘胡派遣辅国将军薛道标袭击合肥，杀了汝阴太守裴季之。刘派辅国将军垣闳反击。
English: Liu Hu dispatched General Xue Daobiao of the Auxiliary State to attack Hefei, and killed the Ruyin Emperor Pei Ji. Liu sent General Yu Qi of the Auxiliary State to counterattack.

古文：闳，阆之弟；道标，安都之子也。
现代文：垣闳是垣阆的弟弟。薛道标是薛安都的儿子。
English: Kakehi was the younger brother of Kakehi. Xue Daobiao was the son of Xue Andu.

古文：淮西人郑叔举起兵击常珍奇以应郑黑；辛亥，以叔举为北豫州刺史。
现代文：淮西人郑叔举起兵攻击常珍奇，响应郑黑。辛亥，朝廷任命郑叔举为北豫州刺史。
English: Zheng Shuhe, a native of Huaxi, raised an army to attack Chang Zhenqi, in response to Zheng He. In Xinhai, the imperial court appointed Zheng Shuhe as the governor of North Henan Province.

古文：崔道固为土人所攻，闭门自守。
现代文：崔道固受到当地百姓围攻，关闭城门自守。
English: When Cui Daogu was besieged by the local people, he closed the city gate to defend himself.

古文：上遣使宣慰，道固请降。
现代文：明帝派人前来安慰招抚，崔道固请求投降。
English: Emperor Ming sent someone to comfort and cajole, and Cui Daogu requested to surrender.

古文：甲寅，复以道固为徐州刺史。
现代文：甲寅，明帝又任命崔道固为徐州刺史。
English: Emperor Jiajing and Emperor Ming also appointed Cui Daogu as the chief historian of Xuzhou.

古文：八月，皇甫道烈等闻庞孟虬，并开门出降。
现代文：八月，皇甫道烈等听到庞孟虬战败，开城门出来投降。
English: In August, after hearing of the defeat of Pang Mengtao, Empress Dowager Dowager Dowager and other emperors opened the city gate and surrendered.

古文：张兴世既据钱溪，浓湖军乏食。
现代文：张兴世占领钱溪之后，叛军浓湖大营粮食开始缺乏。
English: After Zhang Xingshi occupied Qianxi, the rebels began to lack food in the thick lake camp.

古文：邓琬大送资粮，畏兴世，不敢进。
现代文：郑琬打算运送大量军需物资接济，但怕张兴世截击，不敢前进。
English: Zheng He planned to transport a large amount of military supplies to help, but was afraid of Zhang Xingshi's interception and did not dare to advance.

古文：刘胡帅轻舸四百，由鹊头内路欲攻钱溪，既而谓长史王念叔： 吾少习步战，未闲水斗。
现代文：刘胡率轻装船只四百艘，从鹊头江中内航道前进，打算攻打钱溪，中途对长史王念叔说： 我从小习惯于陆地打仗，不懂水战。
English: Liu Hu led four hundred lightly loaded ships to advance from the middle of the Shantou River, intending to attack Qianxi. Halfway, he said to his uncle Wang Nian: I grew up accustomed to fighting on land and do not understand water wars.

古文：若步战，恒在数万人中；水战在一舸之上，舸舸各进，不复相关，正在三十人中，此非万全之计，吾不为也。 
现代文：步兵作战时，我是在数万人中间，可是水上作战，只能在一条船的上边，船与船单独行进，互相不能照顾，我在一船不过三十人中间，这不是安全之计，我不去干。 
English: In infantry combat, I am in the midst of tens of thousands of men, but in water combat, I can only fight on the top of a ship. Ship and ship travel separately, and cannot take care of each other. I am in the midst of a ship with only thirty men. This is not a safe measure, and I will not do it.

古文：乃托疟疾，住鹊头不进，遣龙骧将军陈庆将三百舸向钱溪，戒庆： 不须战。张兴世吾之所悉，自当走耳。 
现代文：于是，推托得了疟疾，停靠鹊头，不敢前进。只派龙骧将军陈庆率三百艘船驶向钱溪，吩咐陈庆不要与敌人接战，说： 张兴世这个人，我非常熟悉他，他会自动逃走的！ 
English: As a result, he got malaria, docked in Shantou, and did not dare to move forward. He only sent the Dragon Boat General Chen Qing to sail to Qianxi with three hundred ships, ordered Chen Qing not to fight with the enemy, and said: Zhang Xingshi is a person, I am very familiar with him, he will escape automatically!

古文：陈庆至钱溪，军于梅根。
现代文：陈庆抵达钱溪，驻扎梅根。
English: Chen Qing arrived in Qianxi and stationed Megan.

古文：胡遣别将王起将百舸攻兴世，兴世击起，大破之。
现代文：刘胡又派部将王起率一百余艘船攻打张兴世，张兴世反击，大败王起军。
English: Liu Hu also sent more than one hundred ships led by Wang Qi to attack Zhang Xingshi. Zhang Xingshi counterattacked and defeated Wang Qi's army.

古文：胡帅其馀舸驰还，谓顗曰： 兴世营寨已立，不可猝攻；昨日小战，未足为损。
现代文：刘胡率其余的船队撤回浓湖，对袁说： 张兴世营寨已经建成，短期内不可能攻破。昨天小小交战，谈不上损失。
English: Liu Hu led the rest of the fleet to withdraw to the thick lake and said to Yuan: Zhang Xing's encampment has been built, it is impossible to break through in the short term. Yesterday, there was a small skirmish, there is no loss.

古文：陈庆已与南陵、大雷诸军共遏其上，大军在此，鹊头诸将又断其下流；已堕围中，不足复虑。 
现代文：陈庆已与南陵、大雷各军共同扼住张兴世的上游，我们大营在此，鹊头诸将领又切断了他的下游，他已坠入我们的包围圈中，不必再为此忧虑。 
English: Chen Qing, together with the forces of Nanling and Dalai, has already encircled the upper reaches of Zhang Xingru. We are encamped here, and the Shantou generals have cut off his lower reaches. He has fallen into our encirclement, and there is no need to worry about it.

古文：觊怒胡不战，谓曰： 粮运鲠塞，当如此何？ 
现代文：袁对刘胡不亲自作战，十分恼怒，对刘胡说： 运粮路线被切断，对此我们应该怎么办？ 
English: Yuan was very angry that Liu Hu did not personally fight, and said to Liu Hu: The grain transportation route was cut off, what should we do about it?

古文：胡曰： 彼尚得溯流越我而上，此运何以不得沿流越彼而下邪！ 
现代文：刘胡说： 他们能越过我们逆流而上，我们这次运粮为什么不能越过他们顺江而下呢？ 
English: Liu Hu said, "They can cross the stream and camp upstream of us, why can't we camp downstream of them?"

古文：乃遣安北府司马沈仲玉将千人步趣南陵迎粮。
现代文：于是派遣安北府司马沈仲玉带领一千人徒步前往南陵，迎接军粮。
English: As a result, Shen Zhongyu, the Anbei prefectural governor, was dispatched to lead a thousand people on foot to Nanling to receive the military rations.

古文：仲玉至南陵，载米三十万斛，钱布数十舫，竖榜为城，规欲突过。
现代文：沈仲玉到达南陵，把三十万斛的米装到船上，又装军饷、布匹等共数十船，在船上用木板钉成围墙，打算突围。
English: When Shen Zhongyu arrived at Nanling, he loaded 300,000 catties of rice onto a boat, and also loaded dozens of boats with military pay, cloth, etc. He nailed wooden planks onto the boats to form a wall, intending to break through the encirclement.

古文：行至贵口，不敢进，遣间信报胡，令遣重军援接。
现代文：可是船队行至贵口，不敢前进，派人抄小路报告刘胡，请求增派重兵前来迎接。
English: However, when the fleet reached Guikou, they did not dare to advance, so they sent someone to report to Liu Hu and request that more soldiers be sent to meet them.

古文：张兴世遣寿寂之、任农夫等将三千人至贵口击之，仲玉走还顗营，悉虏其资实；胡众骇惧，胡将张喜来降。
现代文：张兴世命寿寂之、任农夫等率三千人直奔贵口，攻击沈仲玉。沈仲玉丢下辎重，逃回袁大营，所有军用物资，全被夺走。
English: Zhang Xing, a retired general, Ren Nongfu and 3,000 others headed straight for Guikou to attack Shen Zhongyu. Shen Zhongyu dropped his baggage and fled back to Yuan Daying. All military supplies were taken away.

古文：镇东中兵参军刘亮进兵逼胡营，胡不能制。
现代文：刘胡的部队惊恐万状，部将张喜投降朝廷官军。
English: Liu Hu's troops were terrified, and General Zhang Xi surrendered to the imperial army.

古文：袁顗惧曰： 贼入人肝脾里，何由得活！ 
现代文：镇东中兵参军刘亮向前推进，直逼刘胡军营，刘胡抵抗不住，袁惊慌地崐说： 敌人已侵入人的肝脾重地中间，怎么能活命！ 
English: The soldiers in the east of the town joined Liu Liang's army and pushed forward, right up to Liu Hu's military camp. Liu Hu could not resist, Yuan panicked and said: The enemy has invaded the middle of the human liver and spleen, how can I live!

古文：胡阴谋遁去，己卯，诳觊云： 欲更帅步骑二万，上取钱溪，兼下大雷馀运。 
现代文：刘胡准备暗中逃走，己卯，谎报袁说： 我打算率步、骑兵两万人，到上游夺回钱溪，并运回积存在大雷的余粮。 
English: Liu Hu was preparing to secretly escape, so he lied about Yuan and said, "I plan to lead 20,000 foot and cavalry to the upper reaches to recapture Qianxi and transport back the surplus grain that has accumulated in Dalai.

古文：令觊悉选马配之。
现代文：要求袁挑选马匹全都配备给他。
English: He asked Yuan to choose all the horses and equip them for him.

古文：其日，胡委觊去，径趣梅根。
现代文：当天，刘胡丢下袁，直奔梅根。
English: On the same day, Liu Hu left Yuan and went straight to Megan.

古文：先令薛常宝办船，悉发南陵诸军，烧大雷诸城而走。
现代文：先命薛常宝征集船只，又命南陵各军全部出发，纵火焚烧大雷各城而逃。
English: He ordered Xue Changbao to collect ships, and ordered all the armies of Nanling to set out, set fire to the cities of Dairi, and flee.

古文：至夜，觊方知之，大怒，骂曰： 今年为小子所误！ 
现代文：当夜，袁才得知消息，勃然大怒，骂道： 今年可被这小子害苦了！ 
English: That night, Yuan only learned the news, flew into a rage, and cursed: This year, I've been hurt by this kid!

古文：呼取常所乘善马 飞燕 谓其众曰： 我当自出追之！ 
现代文：呼唤侍从牵来他平日所骑的马，名叫 飞燕 ，对他的部属说： 我要亲自追击刘胡！ 
English: He called his attendants to bring the horse he usually rode, named Feiyan, and said to his subordinates: I will personally pursue Liu Hu!

古文：因亦走。
现代文：于是也乘机逃走。
English: So he also took the opportunity to escape.

古文：庚辰，建安王休仁勒兵入觊营，纳降卒十万，遣沈攸之等追顗。
现代文：庚辰，建安王刘休仁率兵进入袁遗弃的大营，接纳十万人投降，同时派沈攸之等追捕袁。
English: Geng Chen, the king of Jianan, Liu Xuren, led his troops into the large camp abandoned by Yuan, accepted the surrender of 100,000 people, and sent Shen Youcang and others to chase Yuan.

古文：顗走至鹊头，与戍主薛伯珍并所领数千人偕去，欲向寻阳。
现代文：袁逃到鹊头，与镇守那里的主将薛伯珍会合，并带他所属的部队数千人一同向西撤退，打算前往寻阳。
English: Yuan fled to Shantou, where he met with the town's commander, Xue Bozhen, and together with thousands of troops he belonged to, retreated to the west, intending to go in search of the sun.

古文：夜，止山间，杀马以劳将士，顾谓伯珍曰： 我非不能死；且欲一至寻阳，谢罪主上，然后自刎耳。 
现代文：夜晚，住宿山间，袁杀马慰劳将士，回头对薛伯珍说： 我并不是怕死，只不过想要到寻阳，在主上面前请罪，然后自刎！ 
English: At night, while staying in the mountains, Yuan Shima comforted the laborers and turned to Xue Bozhen and said, "I'm not afraid of death, I just want to seek the sun, plead guilty before the Lord, and then commit suicide!"

古文：因慷慨叱左右索节，无复应者。
现代文：慷慨激昂，吆喝左右侍从，取来刘子勋赐给的符节，左右侍从无人理他。
English: So he cried aloud with tears, and called to those around him to find the staff, but no one answered him.

古文：及旦，伯珍请屏人言事，遂斩顗首，诣钱溪马军主襄阳俞湛之。
现代文：等到天亮，薛伯珍请求与他单独谈话，遂砍下袁人头，前往钱溪，向军主襄阳人俞湛之投降。
English: Waiting until dawn, Xue Bozhen asked to speak with him alone, so he cut off Yuan Ren's head and went to Qianxi to surrender to the commander of the army, the Xiangyang man Xuan Zhan.

古文：湛之因斩伯珍，并送首以为己功。
现代文：俞湛之斩薛伯珍，连同袁的人头一起上缴作为自己的功劳。
English: Xue Bozhen, the head of Yuanzhan, together with the heads of Yuan's men, were handed over as their own merit.

古文：刘胡帅二万人向寻阳，诈晋安王子勋云： 袁觊已降，军皆散，唯己帅所领独返；宜速处分，为一战之资。
现代文：刘胡率两万人奔回寻阳，谎报晋安王刘子勋说： 袁已经投降，全军溃散，只有我率领我的部属，单独逃回。
English: Liu Hu led twenty thousand people to run back to Huan Yang, and falsely reported to the King of Jin and An, Liu Zixun, saying: Yuan has surrendered, the whole army has broken up, only I led my subordinates and fled back alone.

古文：当停据湓城，誓死不贰。 
现代文：应紧急采取措施，决一死战，我暂时驻防湓城，誓死效忠您。 
English: Should urgent measures be taken to fight a war to the death, I will temporarily garrison Lucheng and pledge my loyalty to you to the death.

古文：乃于江外夜趣沔口。
现代文：于是，率船队从江中外航道西上，连夜直奔沔口。
English: As a result, he led the fleet from the middle of the river to the west of the outer channel and went straight to the estuary overnight.

古文：邓琬闻胡去，忧惶无计，呼中书舍人褚灵嗣等谋之，并不知所出。
现代文：邓琬听到刘胡逃走的消息，惊恐忧虑，无计可施，急忙召集中书舍人褚灵嗣等策划对策，大家都不知如何是好。
English: When Deng Xuan heard the news of Liu Hu's escape, he was alarmed and worried, and there was nothing he could do. He hurriedly called a group of scholars and scholars to plan countermeasures. Everyone did not know what to do.

古文：张悦诈称疾，呼琬计事，令左右伏甲帐后，戒之： 若闻索酒，便出。 
现代文：吏部尚书张悦假装有病，请邓琬到私宅商讨大事，密令左右全副武装，在帐后埋伏，吩咐： 听见我命你们拿酒，便出来动手。 
English: Shangshu Zhang Yue, the head of the personnel department, pretended to be ill and asked Deng Yao to go to his private residence to discuss important matters. He secretly ordered the left and right sides to be fully armed and ambushed behind the account. He ordered: "When you hear my order to take wine, come out and do it."

古文：琬既至，悦曰： 卿首唱此谋，今事已急，计将安出！ 
现代文：邓琬到后，张悦说： 你当初第一个坚持称帝，今天事已吃紧，你有什么办法？ 
English: After Deng Rong arrived, Zhang Yue said to Deng Rong: You were the first to insist on calling him emperor. Today, things are tight. What can you do?

古文：琬曰： 正当斩晋安王，封府库，以谢罪耳。 
现代文：邓琬说： 应当杀掉晋安王，查封仓库，以此来赎罪。 
English: Deng Yao said: Only by beheading King Jian'an and sealing the gold and silver in the palace could he apologize to the emperor.

古文：悦曰： 宁可卖殿下求活邪！ 
现代文：张悦说： 现在你宁可出卖殿下，也要保全自己活命吗！ 
English: Zhang Yue said, "Now you would rather betray Your Highness than save your own life!"

古文：因呼酒。子洵提刀出，斩琬。
现代文：于是呼唤拿酒，张悦的儿子张洵，提刀冲出，砍下邓琬人头。
English: So they called for wine, and Zhang Ye's son, Zhang Ye, rushed out with a sword and cut off Deng Ye's head.

古文：中书舍人潘欣之闻琬死，勒兵而至。
现代文：中书舍人潘欣之听说邓琬被杀的消息，率兵抵达张悦家门。
English: When Pan Xinzhi, a Chinese scholar, heard the news of Deng Yao's murder, he led an army to Zhang Yue's house.

古文：悦使人语之曰： 邓琬谋反，今已枭戮。 
现代文：张悦派人告诉潘欣之说： 邓琬打算谋反，已经斩首。 
English: Zhang Yue sent someone to tell Pan Xinzhi, "Deng Yao is planning to rebel and has already beheaded.

古文：欣之乃还。
现代文：潘欣之才撤回。
English: Pan Xinzhi only then withdrew.

古文：取琬子，并杀之。
现代文：张悦逮捕了邓琬的儿子，一并杀掉。
English: Zhang Yue arrested Deng Yao's son and killed him together.

古文：悦因单舸赍琬首驰下，诣建安王休仁降。
现代文：张悦于是单乘一只小船提着邓琬的人头东下，向朝廷建安王刘休仁投降。
English: Zhang Yue then loaded Deng Yao's head onto a small boat and sailed down to Jian'an King Liu Xuren to surrender.

古文：寻阳乱。蔡那之子道渊在寻阳被系作部，脱锁入城，执子勋，囚之。
现代文：寻阳大乱，蔡那的儿子蔡道渊原被囚禁在寻阳专门制造兵器的作坊里，这时挣脱枷锁，进入寻阳城，逮捕了刘子勋，投入大牢。
English: During the Poyang Rebellion, Cai's son, Cai Daoyuan, was imprisoned in a workshop specializing in the manufacture of weapons for Poyang. At this time, he broke free from the shackles, entered Poyang City, arrested Liu Zixun, and was thrown into prison.

古文：沈攸之等诸军至寻阳，斩晋安王子勋，传首建康，时年十一。
现代文：不久，沈攸之等大军抵达寻阳，杀掉刘子勋，把人头押送到建康。刘子勋时年十一岁。
English: Soon, Shen Youzhi's army arrived in Huanyang, killed Liu Zixun, and sent him to Jiankang. Liu Zixun was eleven years old.

古文：初，邓琬遣临川内史张淹自鄱阳峤道入三吴，军于上饶，闻刘胡败，军副鄱阳太守费晔斩淹以降。
现代文：当初，邓琬派遣临川内史张淹从鄱阳山路进入三吴，驻扎在上饶。听到刘胡战败，张淹部队的副统帅鄱阳太守费晔，杀掉张淹投降。
English: At first, Deng Xiaoping sent Zhang Dun, a member of the Linchuan Inner Court, to enter Sanwu from Fenyang Mountain Road and stationed in Shangrao. Upon hearing of Liu Hu's defeat, the deputy commander of Zhang Dun's troops, Fenyang Taishou Fei, killed Zhang Dun and surrendered.

古文：淹，畅之子也。
现代文：张淹是张畅的儿子。
English: Zhang Rui is the son of Zhang Chang.

古文：废帝之世，衣冠惧祸，咸欲远出。
现代文：废帝在位时，读书人或在职官员为了避免灾祸，都打算离开京师，远到他崐乡。
English: When the former emperor was on the throne, in order to avoid disaster, readers or officials in office all planned to leave Beijing and travel as far as their hometown.

古文：至是流离外难，百不一存，众乃服蔡兴宗之先见。
现代文：到今天，流离失所遭受祸难，侥幸生存的，一百人中不见得有一人，大家这才都佩服蔡兴宗的先见之明。
English: To this day, hardly one person in a hundred who was displaced by the disaster survives. This is why everyone admires Cai Xingzong's foresight.

古文：九月，壬辰，以山阳王休祐为荆州刺史。
现代文：九月，壬辰，明帝任命山阳王刘休为荆州刺史。
English: In September, Emperor Ming of the Ming Dynasty appointed Liu Xiu, the king of Shanyang, as the crown prince of Jingzhou.

古文：癸巳，解严，大赦。
现代文：癸巳，解除戒严，宣布大赦。
English: Immediately, martial law was lifted and an amnesty was declared.

古文：庚子，司徒休仁至寻阳，遣吴喜、张兴世向荆州，沈怀明向郢州，刘亮及宁朔将军南阳张敬儿向雍州，孙超之向湘州，沈思仁、任农夫向豫章，平定馀寇。
现代文：庚子，司徒刘休仁抵达寻阳，分别派吴喜、张兴世进攻荆州，沈怀明进攻郢州，刘亮及宁朔将军南阳人张敬儿进攻雍州，孙超之进攻湘州，沈思仁、任农夫进攻豫章，平定刘子勋的残余力量。
English: Geng Zi and the tutor Liu Xuren arrived in Xiangyang, and sent Wu Xi and Zhang Xingshi to attack Jingzhou, Shen Huiming to attack Zhangzhou, Liu Liang and the Ningshuo general Nanyang Zhang Jing Er to attack Yongzhou, Sun Chaozhi to attack Hunan, and Shen Siren and Ren Nongfu to attack Yuzhang, respectively, to pacify Liu Zixun's remaining forces.

古文：刘胡逃至石城，捕得，斩之。
现代文：刘胡逃到石城，被捕并被斩首。
English: Liu Hu fled to Shicheng, was arrested and beheaded.

古文：郢州行事张沈变形为沙门，潜走，追获，杀之。
现代文：寻阳政权的郢州行事张沈剃光头发，扮作和尚，暗中逃走，被追缉抓获，斩首。
English: Zhang Shen shaved his hair, disguised as a monk, secretly fled, was caught and beheaded.

古文：荆州行事刘道宪闻浓湖平，散兵，遣使归罪。
现代文：荆州行事刘道宪听说浓湖被平定，便解散部众，派人到官军驻所请求处罚。
English: Liu Daoxian, who was acting for Jingzhou, heard that the lake had been pacified, so he disbanded his troops and sent someone to the government military garrison to request punishment.

古文：荆州治中宗景等勒兵入城，杀道宪，执临海王子顼以降。
现代文：荆州治中宗景等率军进城，诛杀刘道宪，逮捕临海王刘子顼后投降。
English: Jingzhou Zhizhong Zongjing and his army entered the city, killed Liu Daoxian, arrested Linhai King Liu Zixuan, and then surrendered.

古文：孔道存知寻阳已平，遣使请降；寻闻柳世隆、刘亮当至，众悉逃溃，道存及三子皆自杀。
现代文：孔道存得知寻阳已经平定，派人到官军驻所请求投降。不久听说柳世隆、刘亮大军将要到来，孔道存和三个儿子一同自杀。
English: When Kong Daozhen learned that Xuanyang had been pacified, he sent someone to the government army garrison to request surrender. Soon, he heard that Liu Shilong and Liu Liang's army were about to arrive, and Kong Daozhen and his three sons committed suicide together.

古文：上以何慧文才兼将吏，使吴喜宣旨赦之。慧文曰： 既陷逆节，手害忠义，何面见天下之士！ 
现代文：明帝因何慧文文武全才，特命吴喜传旨赦免，何慧文说： 我既然已陷入叛逆集团，亲手加害忠义，还有什么脸面见天下人士！ 
English: The Ming Emperor pardoned Wu Xizhong because of He Huiwen's military prowess. He Huiwen said, "Since I have fallen into a rebellious group and have personally harmed loyalty, what other face can I show to the world!"

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是自杀。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：安陆王子绥、临海王子顼、邵陵王子无并赐死，刘顺及馀党在荆州者皆伏诛。
现代文：安陆王刘子绥、临海王刘子顼、邵陵王刘子元，都被明帝赐死。刘顺及其逃到荆州的余党，全部被斩首。
English: Anlu King Liu Zixuan, Linhai King Liu Zixuan, and Shaoling King Liu Ziyuan were all put to death by the Ming Emperor. Liu Shun and the rest of his party, who had fled to Jingzhou, were all beheaded.

古文：诏追赠诸死节之臣，及封赏有功者各有差。
现代文：明帝下诏，追赠守节而死的官员，并对有功的官员依照等级封赏。
English: Emperor Ming decreed that officials who died while observing the festival would be posthumously awarded, and meritorious officials would be rewarded according to their rank.

古文：己酉，魏初立郡学，置博士、助教、生员，从中书令高允、相州刺史李讠斤之请也。
现代文：己酉，北魏开始在每个郡设立学校，设置博士、助教、生员，这是采纳中书令高允、相州刺史李的建议而兴办的。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty began to establish schools in each county, setting up doctors, teaching assistants, and students. This was done by adopting the suggestions of Chinese scholars Gao Yun and Songzhou Zhishi Li.

古文：讠斤，崇之子也。
现代文：李是李崇的儿子。
English: Li is the son of Li Chong.

古文：上既诛晋安王子勋等，待世祖诸子犹如平日。
现代文：明帝已经诛杀晋安王刘子勋等，对世祖的其他儿子仍然和善如故。
English: Emperor Ming had already killed the King of Jinan, Liu Zixun, and others, but he was still kind to the other sons of the patriarch.

古文：司徒休仁还自寻阳，言于上曰： 松滋侯兄弟尚在，将来非社稷计，宜早为之所。 
现代文：司徒刘休仁从寻阳返回京师，对明帝说： 松滋侯刘子房的兄弟仍在人间，将来一定会对国家不利，应该及早打算如何处置。 
English: Liu Xuren, the tutor, returned to Beijing from Xuanyang and said to the Ming Emperor, "The brother of Liu Zifang, the Prince of Songzhi, is still alive. This will definitely be bad for the country in the future. We should plan how to deal with it as soon as possible."

古文：冬，十月，乙卯，松滋侯子房、永嘉王子仁、始安王子真、淮南王子孟、南平王子产、庐陵王子舆、子趋、子期、东平王子嗣、子悦并赐死，及镇北咨议参军路休之、司徒从事中郎路茂之、兗州刺史刘祗、中书舍人严龙皆坐诛。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙卯，明帝下诏：松滋侯刘子房、永嘉王刘子仁、始安王刘子真、淮南王刘子孟、南平王刘子产、庐陵王刘子舆、刘子趋、刘子期、东平王刘子嗣、刘子悦等全部赐死，镇北谘议参军路休之、司徒从事中郎路茂之、兖州刺史刘祗、中书舍人严龙等人都受株连被杀。
English: In the winter, in October, the Ming Emperor issued an edict: Songzhi Lord Liu Zifang, Yongjia King Liu Ziren, Shi'an King Liu Zizhen, Huainan King Liu Zimeng, Nanping King Liu Zizang, Fuling King Liu Zimou, Liu Zicheng, Liu Ziqi, Dongping King Liu Zizhi, Liu Ziyue, and so on were all put to death, and the town of Beibei was advised to join the army by Lu Xiu, the city of Shitou was engaged in Zhonglang Road by Mao Zhi, the city of Zhangzhou was attacked by Liu Zhi, and the people of

古文：世祖二十八子于此尽矣。
现代文：孝武帝共有二十八个儿子，至此杀尽。
English: Emperor Xiaowu had a total of 28 sons, and he killed them all.

古文：祗，义欣之子也。
现代文：刘祗是刘义欣的儿子。
English: Liu Wei is the son of Liu Yixin.

古文：刘勔围寿阳，垣闳攻合肥，俱未下。
现代文：刘勔包围寿阳，垣闳攻打合肥，都没攻克。
English: Liu Bei encircled Shouyang, and Qigong attacked Hefei, but failed to conquer it.

古文：勔患之，召诸将会议。马队主王广之曰： 得将军所乘马，判能平合肥。 
现代文：刘大为烦恼，召集各位将领开军事会议，马队主王广之说： 将军如将你的马送给我，我就能夺取合崐肥。 
English: Troubled, Liu Da called the generals to hold a military meeting. The leader of the horse team, Wang Guangzhi, said, "General, if you give me your horse, I will be able to seize Hefei Fertilizer."

古文：幢主皇甫肃怒曰： 广之敢夺节下马，可斩！ 
现代文：幢主皇甫肃大怒说： 王广之竟敢贪图将军的马，应该斩首。 
English: The lord of the house, Emperor Fushu, was furious and said: Wang Guangzhi dared to covet the general's horse, he should be beheaded.

古文：勔笑曰： 观其意，必能立功。 
现代文：刘却笑着说： 看他的心意，一定可以立功。 
English: Liu, however, said with a smile, "Looking at his heart, he can definitely make a contribution."

古文：即推鞍下马与之。
现代文：于是连同马鞍一齐送给王广之。
English: So it was given to Wang Guangzhi along with the saddle.

古文：广之往攻合肥，三日，克之；薛道标突围奔淮西归常珍奇，勔擢广之为军主。
现代文：王广之前去攻打合肥，只用三天时间使把它攻克。守将薛道标突围，逃往淮西，投奔常珍奇。刘提升王广之为军主。
English: Wang Guang had previously attacked Hefei, and it only took him three days to conquer it. The garrison commander Xue Daobao broke through the encirclement and fled to Huaxi. Liu promoted Wang Guang as the commander of the army.

古文：广之谓肃曰： 节下若从卿言，何以平贼！
现代文：王广之对皇甫肃说： 将军如果听你的话，怎么能平定盗贼！
English: Wang Guangzhi said to Wang Fushu: If the general listens to you, how can he subdue the thieves!

古文：卿不赏才，乃至于此！ 
现代文：你不赏识人才，才有那种想法。 
English: That's because you don't appreciate talent.

古文：肃有学术，及勔卒，更依广之，广之荐于齐世祖为东海太守。
现代文：皇甫肃很有学问，后来，刘去世，皇甫肃投靠王广之为门客。王广之把皇甫肃推荐给齐武帝萧赜，萧赜任命皇甫肃为东海太守。
English: Emperor Fushu was very learned. Later, after Liu passed away, Emperor Fushu relied on Wang Guangzhi as a patron. Wang Guangzhi recommended Emperor Fushu to Emperor Qiwu Xiaoqi, and Xiaoqi appointed Emperor Fushu as the governor of the East Sea.

古文：沈灵宝自庐江引兵攻晋熙，晋熙太守阎湛之弃城走。
现代文：沈灵宝自庐江率军攻打晋熙，晋熙太守阎湛之弃城而逃。
English: Shen Lingbao led an army from the Minjiang River to attack Jinxi. Yan Tan, the de facto ruler of Jinxi, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：徐州刺史薛安都、益州刺萧惠开、梁州刺史柳元怙、兗州刺史毕众敬、豫章太守殷孚、汝南太守常珍奇，并遣使乞降。
现代文：徐州刺史薛安都、益州刺史萧惠开、梁州刺史柳元怙、兖州刺史毕众敬、豫章太守殷孚、汝南太守常珍奇，都派使节请求归降。
English: Xuzhou governor Xue Andu, Yizhou governor Xiao Huikai, Liangzhou governor Liu Yuanqi, Zhangzhou governor Bi Zhongjing, Yuzhang governor Yin Fu, and Runan governor Chang Zhenqi all sent envoys to request the surrender.

古文：上以南方已平，欲示威淮北，乙亥，命镇军将军张永、中领军沈攸之将甲士五万迎薛安都。
现代文：明帝认为西南的叛军已经平定，打算向淮河以北的叛军炫耀威力。乙亥，下诏命镇军将军张永、中领军沈攸之率大军五万人北上迎接薛安都。
English: Emperor Ming believed that the rebels in the southwest had been subdued and intended to show off his power to the rebels north of the Huai River. Emperor Yihai issued an edict ordering the general of the town army, Zhang Yong, and the leader of the central army, Shen You, to lead a large army of 50,000 people north to meet Xue Andu.

古文：蔡兴宗曰： 安都归顺，此诚非虚，正须单使尺书。
现代文：尚书左仆射蔡兴宗说： 薛安都归顺朝廷，绝对不假，现在正需派一个人，手拿一封信，前去迎接。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Cai Xingzong, said, "Xue An has surrendered to the imperial court. This is absolutely true. Right now, we need to send someone with a letter to meet him.

古文：今以重兵迎之，势必疑惧；或能招引北虏，为患方深。
现代文：现在用重兵迎接他，他一定会惊疑忧虑，甚至可能招引北方的胡虏，灾患势必更深。
English: Now, with heavy troops to meet him, he is sure to be surprised and worried, and may even attract the Huns from the north, and the disaster is bound to be deeper.

古文：若以叛臣罪重，不可不诛，则向之所宥亦已多矣。
现代文：如果说他身为叛逆，罪恶深重，非诛杀不可，那么从前所赦免的人可太多了。
English: If he is a traitor, guilty of serious crimes, and must be killed, then there are too many people who have been pardoned in the past.

古文：况安都外据大镇，密迩边陲，地险兵强，攻围难克，考之国计，尤宜驯养；如其外叛，将为朝廷旰食之忧。 
现代文：何况薛安都在外，据守的是北战场的一个大要镇，紧接边界，地势险要，兵力强大，无论包围还是攻击，都难以克制。为了国家的利益，尤其应该使用和平手段安抚。
English: What's more, Xue'an is far away. It is defended by a major town in the northern battlefield. It is close to the border, the terrain is precarious, the troops are strong, and it is difficult to restrain whether it is a siege or an attack. In the interests of the country, it is especially necessary to use peaceful means to pacify.

古文：上不从，谓征北司马行南徐州事萧道成曰： 吾今因此北讨，卿意以为何如？ 
现代文：一旦他叛投北魏，那么朝廷就要昼夜辛劳去对付后患了。 明帝不接受他的意见，对征北司马代理南徐州事务的萧道成说： 我正想利用薛安都反抗的机会加以讨伐，你认为如何？ 
English: Once he defected to the Northern Wei Dynasty, the imperial court would have to work hard day and night to deal with the aftermath. The Ming Emperor did not accept his opinion, and said to Xiao Daocheng, who was the agent of the Southern Xuzhou Affairs, "I just want to use the opportunity of Xue Andu's resistance to make a crusade. What do you think?"

古文：对曰： 安都狡猾有馀，今以兵逼之，恐非国之利。 
现代文：萧道成回答说： 薛安都十分狡猾，今天如果用大军逼他，恐怕对朝廷没有好处。 
English: Xiao Daocheng replied, "Xue An is very cunning. If we use a large army to force him today, I'm afraid it won't be good for the imperial court.

古文：上曰： 诸军猛锐，何往不克！
现代文：明帝说： 各路人马都很精锐，哪次出击不能战胜！
English: Emperor Ming said: All the players are very elite, which attack can not be defeated!

古文：卿勿多言！ 
现代文：你不要多说了！ 
English: You don't have to say anything!

古文：安都闻大兵北上，惧，遣使乞降于魏，常珍奇亦以悬瓠降魏，皆请兵自救。
现代文：薛安都听到大军北上的消息，果然非常恐惧，派遣使节向北魏投降。常珍奇也向北魏投降，献出郡城悬瓠，二人同时请北魏发兵救援。
English: When Xue Andu heard the news of the large army heading north, he was very frightened and sent an envoy to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Chang Zhenqi also surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, presented the county town of Huanqian, and both of them asked the Northern Wei Dynasty to send soldiers to rescue them.

古文：戊寅，立皇子昱为太子。
现代文：戊寅，明帝立皇子刘昱为太子。
English: Wu Yin, the Ming emperor, made the prince Liu Ye the crown prince.

古文：薛安都以其子为质于魏，魏遣镇东大将军代人尉元、镇东将军魏郡孔伯恭等帅骑一万出东道，救彭城；镇西大将军西河公石、都督荆、豫、南雍州诸军事张穷奇出西道，救悬瓠。
现代文：薛安都把儿子送到北魏充为人质，北魏派镇东大将军代郡人尉元、镇东将军魏郡人孔伯恭等率骑兵一万人，向东支援彭城，派镇西大将军西河公拓跋石，都督荆、豫、南雍州诸军事张穷奇向西支援悬瓠。
English: Xue Andu sent his son to the Northern Wei Dynasty to serve as a hostage. The Northern Wei Dynasty sent the General of the Eastern Zhengtong Army, Lieutenant Yuan on behalf of the county, the General of the Eastern Zhengtong Army, and the General of the Western Zhengtong Army, Kong Boqiong, to support Pengcheng in the east with 10,000 cavalry. The General of the Western Zhengtong Army, Xihe Gong, sent the General of the Western Zhengtong Army, and the military commanders of Jing, Yu and Nanyang to support Zhang Qianqi in the west.

古文：以安都为都督徐、雍等五州诸军事、镇南大将军、徐州刺史、河东公；常珍奇为平南将军、豫州刺史、河内公。
现代文：任命薛安都为都督徐雍等五州诸军事、镇南大将军、徐州刺史、河东公；任命常珍奇为平南将军、豫州刺史、河内公。
English: He appointed Xue Andu as the military governor of the five states, including the governor Xu Yong, the general of Zhenan, the governor of Xuzhou, and the governor of Hedong; he appointed Chang Zhenqi as the general of Pingnan, the governor of Yuzhou, and the governor of Hanoi.

古文：兗州刺史申纂诈降于魏，尉元受之，而阴为之备。
现代文：兖州刺史申纂向北魏诈降，尉元接受但暗中严密戒备。
English: Zhangzhou Jishi petitioned to the Northern Wei Dynasty for a fraudulent surrender, which was accepted, but was secretly on high alert.

古文：魏帅至无盐，纂闭门拒守。
现代文：北魏军抵达无盐，申纂关闭城门，登城固守。
English: When the Northern Wei Army arrived at Wanshan, Shen Cao closed the city gate and went to the city to defend it.

古文：薛安都之召魏兵也，毕众敬不与之同，遣使来请降；上以众敬为兗州刺史。
现代文：薛安都向北魏求兵时，毕众敬反对，派人到朝廷来请求投降。明帝任命毕崐众敬为兖州刺史。
English: When Xue Andu appealed to the Northern Wei Dynasty for soldiers, Bi Zhuang Jing opposed and sent someone to the imperial court to request surrender. Emperor Ming appointed Bi Zhuang Jing as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：众敬子元宾在建康，先坐它罪诛。
现代文：毕众敬的儿子毕元宾原在建康，在此之前，因别的罪名被杀。
English: Bi Zongqian's son, Bi Yuan Bin, was previously killed in Jiankang on other charges.

古文：众敬闻之，怒，拔刀斫柱曰： 吾皓首唯一子，不能全，安用独生！ 
现代文：毕众敬听到这个消息，怒气冲天，拔出佩刀猛砍庭柱，说： 我白发苍苍，就这么一个儿子，却不能保全，我怎么还能一个人活着！ 
English: When the whole court heard the news, he flew into a rage, pulled out his sword and slashed the pillar, saying: "I am a white-haired old man, but I can't save my only son. How can I still live on my own!

古文：十一月，壬子，魏师至瑕丘，众敬请降于魏。
现代文：十一月，壬子，北魏军队抵达瑕丘，毕众敬于是向北魏军请求投降。
English: In November, the Northern Wei army arrived at Keqiu, and all the people respectfully asked the Northern Wei army to surrender.

古文：尉元遣部将先据其城，众敬悔恨，数日不食。
现代文：尉元派部将先占领这座城池，毕众敬后悔愤恨，几天不进饮食。
English: The lieutenant-general faction will occupy this castle first, and everyone will regret and resent, and will not eat for a few days.

古文：元长驱而进，十二月，己未，军于秺。
现代文：尉元长驱直入，十二月，己未，驻扎县。
English: The lieutenant colonel drove straight in, and in December, before he left, he was stationed in the county.

古文：西河公石至上蔡，常珍奇帅文武出迎。
现代文：北魏西河公拓跋石抵达上蔡，常珍奇率文武官员前往迎接。
English: Northern Wei's Xihe Gong Tuobaishi arrived in Shangcai, and Changzhenqi led the military and civilian officials to meet him.

古文：石欲顿军汝，北即入城，中书博士郑羲曰： 今珍奇虽来，意未可量。
现代文：拓跋石打算驻扎汝水北岸，没有立刻进城，中书博士郑羲说： 今日常珍奇虽然亲自出来迎接，但他内心诚意难以预测。
English: Tuobaishi planned to be stationed on the north bank of the Ye River, but did not immediately enter the city, said Zheng Yao, a doctor of Chinese classics. Although he came out to meet Zhenqi in person, his inner sincerity is difficult to predict.

古文：不如直入其城，夺其管籥，据有府库，制其腹心，策之全者也。 
现代文：不如直接进城，控制城门，占领仓库和官府，夺取他的要害，这是最安全的策略。 
English: It is better to enter the city directly, control the city gate, occupy warehouses and government offices, and seize his key. This is the safest strategy.

古文：石遂策马入城，因置酒嬉戏。
现代文：拓跋石于是拍马入城，在城内摆下筵席，饮酒欢乐。
English: So Tuobaishi rode his horse into the city, set up a banquet in the city, and had a good time drinking.

古文：羲曰： 观珍奇之色甚不平，不可不为之力求。 
现代文：郑羲说： 观察常珍奇的脸色，有些愤愤不平，不可不做暗中戒备。 
English: Zheng Yao said: "Observe the often curious face, some indignation, we must be on the alert.

古文：乃严兵设备。
现代文：于是严加守卫。
English: As a result, there was a strict guard.

古文：其夕，珍奇使人烧府屋，欲为变，以石有备而止。
现代文：当天晚上，常珍奇派人纵火焚烧官府房屋，打算发动变乱，但因拓跋石有严密戒备，只好中途停止。
English: In the evening of the same day, Chang Zhenqi sent people to set fire to the government buildings, intending to start a riot, but had to stop halfway due to the tight security of the rubble.

古文：羲，豁之曾孙也。
现代文：郑羲是郑豁的曾孙。
English: Zheng Hao is the great-grandson of Zheng Huan.

古文：淮西七郡民多不愿属魏，连营南奔。
现代文：淮西七郡百姓大多不愿归附北魏，村与村联合向南逃奔。
English: Most of the people in the seven counties of Huaixi did not want to join the Northern Wei Dynasty, and they fled to the south together with their villages.

古文：魏遣建安王陆馛宣慰新附民；有陷军为奴婢者，馛悉免之，新民乃悦。
现代文：北魏派建安王陆前来宣慰安抚新近归附的地区。百姓中有被军队掠夺当奴仆婢女的，陆下令全部释放，新近归附地区的百姓才欢欣鼓舞。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty sent Jianan Wang Lu to comfort and pacify the newly annexed areas. Among the people, there were slaves who had been plundered by the army. Lu ordered the release of all slaves, and the people in the newly annexed areas were delighted.

古文：乙丑，诏坐依附寻阳削官爵禁锢者，皆从原荡，随才铨用。
现代文：乙丑，明帝下诏，凡因拥护寻阳政权而被免除官爵囚禁起来的人，一律赦免，量才录用。
English: Second, Emperor Ming decreed that all those who were exempted from imprisonment for supporting the pro-democracy regime would be pardoned, and only those who could be recruited would be hired.

古文：刘勔围寿阳，自首春至于末冬，内攻外御，战无不捷，以宽厚得将士心。
现代文：刘包围寿阳，自本年初春到冬末，无论进攻还是抵抗，每战都告捷，因心肠宽厚，深得将士的拥护。
English: Liu besieged Shouyang from the beginning of spring to the end of winter this year. No matter whether it was an attack or resistance, every battle was successful. Because of his generous heart, he was deeply supported by the soldiers.

古文：寻阳既平，上使中书为诏谕殷琰，蔡兴宗曰： 天下既定，是琰思过之日。陛下宜赐手诏数行以相慰引。
现代文：寻阳政权灭亡后，明帝命中书发出诏书，向守将殷琰招降。蔡兴宗说： 天下已经平定，正是殷琰检讨自己过错的时候，陛下只要亲笔写几行字，安抚宽慰，加以引导，他就可以归降。
English: Cai Xingzong said: The world has been pacified. It is time for Yin Xi to review his mistakes. His Majesty only needs to write a few lines with his own pen, soothe and comfort him, and guide him, and he can surrender.

古文：今直中书为诏，彼必疑谓非真，非所以速清方难也。 
现代文：今天由中书颁发诏书，他一定怀疑不是真的，这不是迅速消灭一方灾难的办法。 
English: Today, the edict was issued by the Chinese emperor. He must have suspected that it was not true. This was not a way to quickly eliminate a disaster.

古文：不从。
现代文：明帝不接受。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：琰得诏，谓刘辄诈为之，不敢降。
现代文：殷琰看到诏书，果然认为是刘设下的圈套，不敢投降。
English: When Yin Xi saw the edict, he thought it was a trap set by Liu, and dared not surrender.

古文：杜叔宝闭绝寻阳败问，有传者即杀之，守备益固。
现代文：杜叔宝严密封锁寻阳政权灭亡的消息，凡是传递这些消息的人，立刻杀掉，城防越发坚固。
English: Du Shubao tightly sealed the news of the demise of the Xiangyang regime. Anyone who passed on the news was immediately killed, and the city's defenses became more and more solid.

古文：凡有降者，上辄送寿阳城下，使与城中人语，由是众情离沮。
现代文：后来，凡有人出城投降，明帝都让他们到寿阳城下，使他们与城中守军对话，守军知道外面的情况，军心开始动摇。
English: Later, whenever anyone left the city to surrender, Emperor Ming sent them to the foot of Shouyang Castle so that they could have a dialogue with the defenders in the city. The defenders knew the situation outside, and the military spirit began to waver.

古文：琰欲请降于魏，主簿谯郡夏侯详说琰曰： 今日之举，本效忠节。
现代文：殷琰打算投降北魏，主簿谯郡人夏侯详劝殷琰说： 我们今天所以拥护寻阳政权，本意是效忠皇家。
English: When Yin Xi was about to surrender to the Northern Wei Dynasty, Xia Hou, the chief secretary and a native of Jixian County, advised Yin Xi, saying, "That is why we support the pro-Yang regime today. Our intention is to be loyal to the royal family.

古文：若社稷有奉，便当归身朝廷，何可北面左衽乎！
现代文：如果朝廷有人主持，就应该归附朝廷，怎么可以投向北方，穿上左边开襟的衣服！
English: If the imperial court is presided over by someone, it should be attached to the imperial court, how can it be cast to the north and wear clothes with a left-hand collar!

古文：且今魏军近在淮次，官军未测吾之去就，若遣使归款，必厚相慰纳，岂止免罪而已。 
现代文：而且现在魏军已接近淮河，建康官军还不知道我们的意向，如果派使节去表示我们的诚心，他们一定会高兴接纳，岂止是免死而已。 
English: Moreover, now that the Wei army is close to the Huai River, the Jiankang government army still does not know our intentions. If we send envoys to express our sincerity, they will surely be happy to accept, not just to avoid death.

古文：琰乃使详出见刘勔 详说勔曰： 今城中士民知困而犹固守者，畏将军之诛，皆欲自归于魏。
现代文：殷琰于是派夏侯详出城晋见刘，夏侯详劝刘说： 现在城中军民，虽然知道陷入困境，但仍然固守的缘故，是害怕将军诛杀，因而大家都打崐算降魏。
English: Yin Zhe then sent Xia Hou Zhe out of the city to see Liu, and Xia Hou Zhe advised Liu to say: Now the soldiers and civilians in the city, although they know that they are in a predicament, but still adhere to the reason is that they are afraid of the general's battle, so everyone is counting on the fall of Wei.

古文：愿将军缓而赦之。则莫不相帅而至矣。 
现代文：希望将军不要再攻击，下令赦免，那么他们自然没有不相继来归降的了。 
English: It was hoped that the general would not attack again and would order an amnesty, and then they would naturally surrender one after the other.

古文：勔许诺，使详至城下，呼城中人，谕以勔意。
现代文：刘答应，让夏侯详到寿阳城下，呼唤城中人，转告刘的承诺。
English: Liu agreed and asked Xia Hou to go to Shouyang and call people in the city to tell them of Liu's promise.

古文：丙寅，琰帅将佐面缚出降，勔悉加慰抚，不戮一人。
现代文：丙寅，殷琰率领他的部将自行反绑双手，出城投降。
English: Hsin-Yin, Yin-Yu led his troops to march out of the city with their hands tied behind their backs.

古文：入城，约勒将士，士民赀财，秋毫无所失，寿阳人大悦。
现代文：刘全都加以安抚，不杀一个人，进城之后，对军队严格约束，于是，城中百姓的生命财产，没有丝毫损失，寿阳人欢天喜地。
English: Liu calmed everyone down and did not kill a single person. After entering the city, he strictly restricted the army. As a result, the lives and property of the people in the city were not lost in the slightest, and the people of Shouyang were overjoyed.

古文：魏兵至师水，将救寿阳；闻琰已降，乃掠义阳数千人而去。
现代文：北魏的军队已经到达师水，将要救援寿阳，听到殷琰已经投降，于是掳掠义阳数千人而回。
English: The Northern Wei army had reached Shishui and was about to rescue Shouyang. When they heard that Yin Qi had surrendered, they returned with thousands of people from Yiyang.

古文：久之，琰复仕至少府而卒。
现代文：后来，殷琰再次做官，担任少府时去世。
English: Later, Yin Qi again became an official and died while serving as a minor prefect.

古文：萧惠开在益州，多任刑诛，蜀人猜怨。
现代文：萧惠开任益州刺史时，性情残暴，随意诛杀。
English: When Xiao Hui was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, he was cruel and killed at will.

古文：闻费欣寿败没，程法度不得前，于是晋原一郡反，诸郡皆应之，合兵围成都。
现代文：蜀地人民十分怨恨，听到东下的费欣寿全军覆没，北上的程法度无法前进，于是，晋原郡首先反叛，其他各郡纷纷响应，各郡联军于是包围成都。
English: The people of Shu were very resentful. When they heard that Fei Xin Shou's entire army in the east had been wiped out, and Cheng Fa Du's army in the north could not advance, Jin Yuan County was the first to rebel, and other counties responded in succession. The allied forces of all counties then surrounded Chengdu.

古文：城中东兵不过二千，惠开悉遣蜀人出，独与东兵拒守。
现代文：成都城内的东方军队不满两千人，萧惠开把当地居民全部放出，自己单独与东方军队登城固守。
English: There were less than two thousand Eastern troops in Chengdu. Xiao Huikai released all the local residents and went to the city alone with the Eastern troops to hold out.

古文：蜀人闻寻阳已平，争欲屠城，众至十馀万人。
现代文：益州人听说寻阳政权已经灭亡，个个争先恐后，打算入城屠杀。各郡联军多达十余万人。
English: When the people of Yizhou heard that the Xuanyang regime had been overthrown, they all scrambled to enter the city to carry out massacres. There were more than 100,000 allied troops from all counties.

古文：惠开每遣兵出战，未尝不捷。
现代文：然而，萧惠开每次派兵出战，都传出捷报。
English: However, every time Xiao Huikai sent troops to fight, there were reports of success.

古文：上遣其弟惠基自陆道使成都，赦惠开罪。
现代文：明帝派萧惠开的弟弟萧惠基，从陆路前往成都，赦免萧惠开。
English: Xiao Huiki, the younger brother of Xiao Huikai sent by the Ming Emperor, traveled to Chengdu by land and pardoned Xiao Huikai.

古文：惠基至涪，蜀人遏留惠基，不听进。
现代文：萧惠基行至涪城，益州人阻止萧惠基前进。
English: Xiao Huiji marched to Handan, and the people of Yizhou stopped Xiao Huiji from marching.

古文：惠基帅部曲击之，斩其渠帅，然后得前。
现代文：萧惠基率领部曲发动攻击，杀了他们的长官，然后才得以前进。
English: Xiao Huiji led the troops to launch an attack, killed their commander, and then had to advance.

古文：惠开奉旨归降，城围得解。
现代文：萧惠开接受诏书，开城归降。成都的包围这才得有解除。
English: Xiao Huikai accepted the edict and surrendered Kaesong. Only then was the siege of Chengdu lifted.

古文：上遣惠开宗人宝首自水道慰劳益州。
现代文：明帝又派萧惠开的同族萧宝首从水路前往益州，宣慰安抚。
English: Emperor Ming also sent the head of Xiao Huikai's compatriot Xiao Bao from the waterway to Yizhou to comfort and appease.

古文：宝首欲以平蜀为己功，更奖说蜀人，使攻惠开。
现代文：萧宝首打算把平息叛乱作为自己的功劳，于是从中挑拨、煽动益州人再次起兵，攻击萧惠开。
English: Xiao Baozhong planned to take credit for quelling the rebellion, so he instigated the Yizhou people to attack Xiao Huikai again.

古文：于是处处蜂起，凡诸离散者一时还合，与宝首进逼成都，众号二十万。
现代文：一时间，各处战火重燃，已经解散了的各郡联军，再度集结，追随萧宝首，进攻成都，部众号称二十万人。
English: For a while, the flames of war reignited everywhere, and the county allied forces, which had been disbanded, regrouped, followed Xiao Bao's head, and attacked Chengdu, with a total of 200,000 soldiers.

古文：惠开欲击之，将佐皆曰： 今慰劳使至而拒之，何以自明？ 
现代文：萧惠开打算攻击，将领们说： 萧宝首是天子所派的慰劳使节，我们如果抗拒，怎么说明自己的心意！ 
English: Xiao Huikai planned to attack, and the generals said: Xiao Baozhong is the consolation envoy sent by the Son of Heaven, if we resist, how can we explain our intentions!

古文：惠开曰： 今表启路绝，不战则何以得通使京师？ 
现代文：萧惠开说： 我们前往京师的道路被切断，不打这一仗，怎么能沟通与京师的联络？ 
English: Xiao Huikai said: Our road to Beijing Division has been cut off. Without fighting this battle, how can we communicate with Beijing Division?

古文：乃遣宋宁太守萧惠训等将万兵与战，大破之，生擒宝首，囚于成都，遣使言状。
现代文：于是派宋宁太守萧惠训等率大军一万人，出城迎战，大破联军，活捉萧宝首，囚禁于成都。
English: So he sent Song Ning's eunuch Xiao Huixun and his 10,000-strong army out of the city to meet the war, defeat the allied forces, capture Xiao Bao alive, and imprison him in Chengdu.

古文：上使执送宝首，召惠开还建康。
现代文：然后派使臣到朝廷报告情况。明帝命将萧宝首押回建康，同时征召萧惠开返京。
English: Then he sent an envoy to the imperial court to report the situation. Emperor Ming ordered Xiao Bao to be sent back to Jiankang, and at the same time summoned Xiao Huikai to return to Beijing.

古文：既至，上问以举兵状。惠开曰： 臣唯知逆顺，不识天命；且非臣不乱，非臣不平。 
现代文：明帝问他为何响应寻阳政权，萧惠开说： 我只知道什么是逆，什么是顺，却不识天命所在。况且，如果不是我也不能作乱，如果不是我也无法平息叛乱。 
English: When Emperor Ming asked him why he responded to the Sun-seeking regime, Xiao Huikai said, "I only know what is contrary and what is favorable, but I don't know where the destiny lies. Moreover, if it wasn't for me, I wouldn't have been able to create turmoil, and if it wasn't for me, I wouldn't have been able to quell the rebellion."

古文：上释之。
现代文：明帝赦免了他。
English: Emperor Ming pardoned him.

古文：是岁，侨立兗州，治淮阴；徐州治钟离；青、冀二州共一刺史，治郁洲，郁洲在海中，周数百里，累石为城，高八九尺，虚置郡县，荒民无几。
现代文：这一年，刘宋设立侨居南方的兖州，治所设在淮阴，徐州治所设在钟离，青、冀二州共设一个刺史，治所设在郁州。郁州在大海之中，方圆数百里，用石头筑城，高八九尺，虚设很多郡县，但所剩百姓无几。
English: In this year, Liu Song set up the overseas Chinese in the south of Luzhou, the government office was set up in Huaiyin, the Xuzhou government office was set up in Zhongli, the two states of Qinghai and Hebei were set up together, and the government office was set up in Yuzhou. Yuzhou is in the middle of the sea, hundreds of miles in circumference, built with stone, 89 feet high, many counties were set up, but there are few people left.

古文：张永、沈攸之进兵逼彭城，军于下盖，分遣羽林监王穆之将卒五千守辎重于武原。
现代文：张永、沈攸之率军逼近彭城，驻军下。另派羽林监王穆之率兵五千人，在武原守备军用物资。
English: The army led by Zhang Yong and Shen Yu approached Pengcheng and garrisoned there. In addition, 5,000 soldiers led by Ulin Guan Wang Mu were sent to guard military supplies in Wuyuan.

古文：魏尉元至彭城，薛安都出迎。
现代文：北魏尉元抵达彭城，薛安都出城迎接。
English: Northern Wei lieutenant Yuan arrived in Pengcheng, and Xue Andu went out of the city to meet him.

古文：元遣李璨与安都先入城，收其管籥；别遣孔伯恭以精甲二千安抚内外，然后入。
现代文：尉元派部将李璨跟薛安都先行入城，控制所有城门，另派孔伯恭率精锐部队二千人，巡逻于城内外，然后进城。
English: The lieutenant general sent Li Qian and Xue An to enter the city first and control all the gates. He also sent Kong Bo Qiong and 2,000 elite troops to patrol inside and outside the city, and then enter the city.

古文：其夜，张永攻南门，不克而退。
现代文：当天晚上，张永攻击南门，不能攻克，回军。
English: In the evening of the same day, Zhang Yong attacked the south gate, could not conquer it, and returned to the army.

古文：元不礼于薛安都，安都悔降，复谋叛魏；元知之，不果发。
现代文：尉元对薛安都很不礼貌，薛安都后悔投降，打算再度背叛北魏。尉元得到报告，薛安都因此没敢发动。
English: The lieutenants were all rude to Xue An. Xue An regretted surrendering and planned to betray the Northern Wei again. The lieutenants received the report, so Xue An did not dare to attack.

古文：安都重赂元等，委罪于女婿裴祖隆而杀之。
现代文：薛安都重重地贿赂尉元等，而把罪责推给女婿裴祖隆，把他杀了。
English: Xue Andu bribed Lt. Yuan and others heavily, but shifted the blame to his son-in-law, Pei Zulong, and killed him.

古文：元使李璨与安都守彭城，自将兵击张永，绝其粮道，又破王穆之于武原。
现代文：尉元命李璨协助薛安都守卫彭城，自己率军攻打张永，切断了张永的粮道，又攻陷王穆之留守的辎重基地武原。
English: Yi Yuan ordered Li Yu to assist Xue Andu in guarding Pengcheng, and he led his army to attack Zhang Yong, cut off Zhang Yong's food supply, and captured Wang Mu's remaining heavy base, Wuyuan.

古文：穆之帅馀众就永，元进攻之。
现代文：王穆之率残余部队投奔张永，尉元率军追击他。
English: The remaining troops led by Wang Muzhi rushed to Zhang Yong, and the army led by Fei Yuan chased him.

