古文：○李德裕李德裕，字文饶，赵郡人。
现代文：李德裕字文饶，赵郡人。
English: Li Deyu is a poet from Zhao County.

古文：祖栖筠，御史大夫。
现代文：祖父李栖筠，是御史大夫。
English: His grandfather, Li Jiuyong, was a doctor of history.

古文：父吉甫，赵国忠公，元和初宰相。
现代文：父亲李吉甫，受封为赵国忠懿公，宪宗元和初年任宰相。
English: His father, Li Jifu, was given the title of Zhao Guozhong and served as prime minister for the first year.

古文：祖、父自有传。德裕幼有壮志，苦心力学，尤精《西汉书》、《左氏春秋》。
现代文：李德裕少年即有壮志，苦心致力学业，尤其精通《西汉书》、《左氏春秋》。
English: Li Deyu, a young boy, has great ambition and is diligently committed to his studies. He is especially proficient in "Western Chinese Classics" and "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi."

古文：耻与诸生同乡赋，不喜科试。
现代文：羞恶同众儒生参加州县的举荐，不喜欢科举考试。
English: Shy of the crowd of Confucian students to participate in the state and county recommendation, do not like the imperial examination.

古文：年才及冠，志业大成。
现代文：刚二十岁，就立志功业大有成就。
English: At just 20 years old, he was determined to achieve great success in his career.

古文：贞元中，以父谴逐蛮方，随侍左右，不求仕进。
现代文：德宗贞元年间，因其父被贬官到南方蛮荒之地，他在父亲身边侍奉，不求做官发迹。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong Zhengyuan, because his father was demoted to the southern wild land, he served alongside his father and did not seek to make a fortune as an official.

古文：元和初，以父再秉国钧，避嫌不仕台省，累辟诸府从事。
现代文：元和初年，因其父再度主持国政，他避嫌不任中央官署的官职，多次应征担任各幕府的从事官。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Heian period, since his father was once again presiding over national politics, he avoided taking a post in the Central Government Office and repeatedly applied to serve as an official in each shogunate.

古文：十一年，张弘靖罢相，镇太原，辟为掌书记。
现代文：元和十一年，张弘靖罢相，镇守太原，李德裕应征为他掌管文书。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Hongjing resigned as the prime minister and the town guard of Taiyuan, and Li Deyu was conscripted to be in charge of documents.

古文：由大理评事得殿中侍御史。
现代文：后由大理寺评事获得殿中侍御史官职。
English: Later, he was awarded the official position of palace attendant and historian by the assessor of Dali Temple.

古文：十四年府罢，从弘靖入朝，真拜监察御史。
现代文：元和十四年，张弘靖幕府撤销，他随张弘靖进入朝廷，实授监察御史官职。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Hongjing's shogunate was revoked, and he followed Zhang Hongjing into the imperial court, where he was given the official post of inspector and historian.

古文：明年正月，穆宗即位，召入翰林，充学士。
现代文：次年正月，穆宗登基，召他入翰林院任学士。
English: In the first month of the following year, Emperor Muzong ascended to the throne and called him to enter Hanlin Academy as a bachelor.

古文：帝在东宫，素闻吉甫之名，既见德裕，尤重之。
现代文：穆宗为太子时，已久闻李吉甫之名；见到李德裕后，对他尤为器重。
English: When Mu Zong was crown prince, he had long heard the name of Li Jifu; after seeing Li Deyu, he was particularly fond of him.

古文：禁中书诏大手笔，多诏德裕草之。
现代文：宫中的诏令文书，涉及朝廷大事的大多诏命李德裕草拟。
English: Li Deyu drafted most of the imperial edict documents in the palace, which involved the major events of the imperial court.

古文：是月，召对思政殿，赐金紫之服。
现代文：本月，穆宗在思政殿召他应对策问，赐给他标示三品以上官级的金符紫服。
English: This month, Mu Zong summoned him to answer questions at the Sisi Hall and gave him a purple gold-embroidered robe with three official ranks and above.

古文：逾月，改屯田员外郎。
现代文：一个月后，他改任屯田员外郎。
English: A month later, he was reassigned to Tondenkanshiro.

古文：穆宗不持政道，多所恩贷，戚里诸亲，邪谋请谒；传导中人之旨，与权臣往来，德裕嫉之。
现代文：穆宗不按法度办事，遇事多予宽免，致使外戚众亲属，不正当地求告，传递宦官旨意，与权臣相交往，李德裕憎恶这种现象。
English: Mu Zong did not act in accordance with the law, and in most cases he was pardoned. As a result, his relatives and relatives improperly sued, passed on the eunuch's will, and interacted with powerful ministers. Li Deyu hated this phenomenon.

古文：长庆元年正月，上疏论之曰： 伏见国朝故事，驸马缘是亲密，不合与朝廷要官往来。
现代文：长庆元年正月，他呈奏评论说： 臣恭闻本朝陈例，驸马原是皇帝亲密的人，不应当与朝廷显要官员往来。
English: In the first month of the first year of Changqing, he made a comment: "Courtesy of the court, I have listened to the precedents of this dynasty. Xingma was originally a person close to the emperor and should not have dealings with prominent officials of the imperial court.

古文：玄宗开元中，禁止尤切。
现代文：玄宗开元年间，禁止尤其严厉。
English: During the first year of Xuanzong's reign, the ban was particularly strict.

古文：访闻近日驸马辄至宰相及要官私第，此辈无他才伎可以延接，唯是泄漏禁密；交通中外，群情所知，以为甚弊。
现代文：臣访察得知，近来驸马动辄去到宰相及要官私宅，这类人物没有别的才能用来接待，惟以泄露宫中机密，交结宫廷内外人士，各种情况多所告知，臣以为弊害极大。
English: The vassal's inspection learned that recently, courtiers have been going to the private homes of the prime minister and dignitaries. Such people have no other talent to receive guests, but to divulge palace secrets, to meet people inside and outside the palace, and to inform them of various situations. The vassal thought that this was extremely harmful.

古文：其朝官素是杂流，则不妨来往。
现代文：如果现任朝廷官员为杂职一类，则不妨碍交往。
English: If the current official of the imperial court is a minor official, it will not hinder exchanges.

古文：若职在清列，岂可知闻？
现代文：倘若任职清贵，掌握机要，哪能交好、互通音信？
English: If one's position is precious and one must grasp opportunities, how can one make friends and exchange letters?

古文：伏乞宣示宰臣，其驸马诸亲，今后公事即于中书见宰相，请不令诣私第。 
现代文：敬祈陛下向宰辅大臣宣示：驸马等皇亲，今后凡属公务就在中书省会见宰相，恳请不要让他们造访私宅。 
English: His Majesty respectfully declared to the Vice-Minister: In the future, imperial relatives such as the Emperor's horse will meet with the Prime Minister in the Ministry of Education and Culture for all official business, and please do not let them visit private homes.

古文：上然之。
现代文：穆宗认为对。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：寻转考功郎中、知制诰。
现代文：不久李德裕升任考功郎中、知制诰。
English: Soon after, Li Deyu was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking meritorious student in the examination.

古文：二年二月，转中书舍人，学士如故。
现代文：长庆二年二月，他调升中书舍人，依旧充任学士。
English: In February of the second year of Changqing, he was promoted to the position of middle school teacher, and still served as a bachelor.

古文：初，吉甫在相位时，牛僧孺、李宗闵应制举直言极谏科。
现代文：当初，李吉甫任宪宗朝宰相时，牛僧孺、李宗闵应考制科选士的直言极谏科。
English: At the beginning, when Li Jifu was the prime minister of the Jianzong Dynasty, Niu Zangyao and Li Zongyao were the most outspoken candidates.

古文：二人对诏，深诋时政之失，吉甫泣诉于上前。
现代文：牛、李二人应对诏问时，痛斥当朝施政的失误，李吉甫向宪宗哭诉。
English: When the two men, Niu and Li, responded to the imperial edict, they denounced the mistakes of the current government, and Li Jifu cried to the Emperor.

古文：由是，考策官皆贬，事在《李宗闵传》。
现代文：因此，考核策对的官员全部遭贬。此事载于《李宗闵传》。
English: As a result, all officials involved in the evaluation of the policy were demoted, according to the "Biography of Li Zonglian."

古文：元和初，用兵伐叛，始于杜黄裳诛蜀。
现代文：元和初年，朝廷派兵讨伐叛逆，始于杜黄裳征讨蜀州。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court sent troops to fight against the rebels, beginning with Du Huangxiao's conquest of Shuzhou.

古文：吉甫经画，欲定两河，方欲出师而卒。继之元衡、裴度。
现代文：李吉甫负责策划，打算平定两河，正要出兵，李吉甫逝世，由武元衡、裴度继续出兵。
English: Li Jifu was in charge of planning and intended to pacify the two rivers, and was about to send troops. After Li Jifu's death, Wu Yuanheng and Pei Du continued to send troops.

古文：而韦贯之、李逢吉沮议，深以用兵为非。而韦、李相次罢相，故逢吉常怒吉甫、裴度。
现代文：但韦贯之、李逢吉反对，极力认为出兵不对；尔后韦贯之、李逢吉相继罢相，因此李逢吉总是恼恨李吉甫、裴度。
English: However, Wei Gangzhi and Li Fengji opposed it and strongly believed that it was wrong to send troops. Later, Wei Gangzhi and Li Fengji resigned one after another, so Li Fengji always resented Li Jifu and Pei Du.

古文：而德裕于元和时，久之不调，而逢吉、僧孺、宗闵以私怨恆排摈之。
现代文：因而李德裕在元和时期久不提升，并且李逢吉、牛僧孺、李宗闵总是挟怨排斥他。
English: As a result, Li Deyu did not ascend for a long time in the Yuan and He period, and Li Fengji, Niu Zengqi, and Li Zongyi always grudgingly excluded him.

古文：时德裕与李绅、元稹俱在翰林，以学识才名相类，情颇款密。而逢吉之党深恶之。
现代文：当时李德裕与李绅、元稹都在翰林院，因学问见识才华名声相近，彼此感情诚挚亲密，而李逢吉一党的人痛恶他们。
English: At that time, Li Deyu, Li Sheng and Yuan Qi were all in Hanlin Academy. They had a similar reputation for learning, insight and talent, and they were sincerely intimate with each other. The people of Li Fengji's party hated them.

古文：其月，罢学士，出为御史中丞。
现代文：本月，李德裕被免去学士，调出宫廷任御史中丞。
English: This month, Li Deyu was stripped of his bachelor's degree and transferred out of the imperial court to serve as an imperial secretary.

古文：其元稹自禁中出，拜工部侍郎、平章事。
现代文：这时元稹从宫中调出，授官工部侍郎、平章事。
English: At this time, Motonari was transferred out of the Imperial Court and given the posts of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works and Heishi no Shoji.

古文：三月，辈度自太原复辅政。
现代文：三月，裴度自太原回朝主政。
English: In March, Pei Du returned from Taiyuan to head the government.

古文：是月，李逢吉亦自襄阳入朝，乃密赂纤人，构成于方狱。
现代文：同月，李逢吉亦自襄阳入朝，便秘密贿赂小人，陷害构成于方讼案。
English: In the same month, Li Fengji also entered the imperial court from Xiangyang. He secretly bribed villains and set up a party litigation case.

古文：六月，元稹、裴度俱罢相。稹出为同州刺史。逢吉代裴度为门下侍郎、平章事。
现代文：六月，元稹、裴度同被罢相；元稹调出朝廷任同州刺史，李逢吉替代裴度任门下侍郎、平章事。
English: In June, both Yuan Zheng and Pei Du were dismissed from the position of the prime minister; Yuan Zheng was transferred out of the imperial court to be appointed as the secretary of Tongzhou, and Li Fengji replaced Pei Du as the under secretary and Ping Zhangji.

古文：既得权位，锐意报怨。
现代文：李逢吉获得权位后，一意报复泄怨。
English: After Li Fengji gained power, he was determined to take revenge.

古文：时德裕与牛僧孺俱有相望，逢吉欲引僧孺，惧绅与德裕禁中沮之；九月，出德裕为浙西观察使，寻引僧孺同平章事。
现代文：当时李德裕与牛僧孺都有任宰相的声望，李逢吉想引荐牛僧孺，害怕李绅与李德裕在宫内阻止，九月，调出李德裕任浙西观察使，不久举拔牛僧孺为同平章事。
English: At that time, both Li Deyu and Niu Zengqi had the prestige of being appointed prime minister. Li Fengji wanted to recommend Niu Zengqi, but was afraid that Li Sheng and Li Deyu would stop him in the palace. In September, Li Deyu was appointed as the Western Zhejiang Observer, and soon after, Niu Zengqi was promoted to the same rank.

古文：由是交怨愈深。
现代文：由此彼此怨恨更深。
English: This only deepened their hatred for each other.

古文：润州承王国清兵乱之后，前使窦易直倾府藏赏给，军旋浸骄，财用殚竭。
现代文：润州丞王国清兵变之后，前任使官窦易直倾尽官府财物赏赐供给军用，军队日渐骄横，官府财物耗尽。
English: After the Renshujo Kingdom-Clearing Mutiny, the previous governor, Dou Yi, exhausted the government's property to reward and supply the military, the army became increasingly arrogant, and the government's property was exhausted.

古文：德裕俭于自奉，留州所得，尽以赡军，虽施与不丰，将卒无怨。
现代文：李德裕节省自己的日常供养，将本州财赋的留用部分，全部供养军队，尽管所给不甚丰足，将士并无抱怨。
English: Li Deyu economized on his own daily support, using the retained portion of his state's wealth to fully support the army. Although what he gave was not very plentiful, the soldiers did not complain.

古文：二年之后，赋舆复集。
现代文：两年之后，军队重归安定。
English: Two years later, the military returned to stability.

古文：德裕壮年得位，锐于布政，凡旧俗之害民者，悉革其弊。
现代文：李德裕壮年获得官位，锐意布施政教，凡损害百姓的旧有习俗，尽都革除其弊端。
English: Li De obtained his official position at a young age, and was determined to spread political education. He did his best to eliminate the drawbacks of all old customs that harmed the people.

古文：江、岭之间信巫祝，惑鬼怪，有父母兄弟厉疾者，举室弃之而去。
现代文：长江、五岭之间信奉巫师，深受鬼怪之说迷惑，父母兄弟感染疫病，全家抛弃病人离去。
English: Between the Yangtze River and the Wuling Mountains, people believe in wizards and are deeply confused by ghost stories. Parents and siblings are infected with the plague, and the whole family abandons the patient and leaves.

古文：德裕欲变其风，择乡人之有识者，谕之以言，绳之以法，数年之间，弊风顿革。
现代文：李德裕打算改变这种风气，选择有见识的乡民，对他们晓之以理，绳之以法，几年之间，弊风尽除。
English: Li Deyu intends to change this culture, select knowledgeable villagers, reason with them, and bring them to justice. Within a few years, all bad habits will be eliminated.

古文：属郡祠庙，按方志，前代名臣贤后则祠之。四郡之内，除淫祠一千一十所。
现代文：所辖郡县的祠庙，依据方志，是前代的名臣贤妃才供奉；诸郡之内，拆除滥设的祠庙一千零一十所。
English: The ancestral temples of the counties under its jurisdiction, according to the party charter, were dedicated to the eminent ministers and empresses of the previous generation; within the counties, 1010 temples were demolished.

古文：又罢私邑山房一千四百六十，以清寇盗。
现代文：又毁除私家城邑、山中房屋一千四百六十处，以肃清盗贼。
English: He also demolished 1,460 private towns and villages and houses in the mountains to get rid of the thieves.

古文：人乐其政，优诏嘉之。
现代文：百姓乐于接受他的政教，朝廷特行诏书给予嘉奖。
English: The people were happy to accept his politics and religion, and the Imperial Court issued a special edict to give him an award.

古文：昭愍皇帝童年缵历，颇事奢靡。即位之年七月，诏浙西造银盝子妆具二十事进内。
现代文：昭愍皇帝一一一敬宗童年即位，颇好办奢侈浪费的事，登基这年的七月，诏令浙西制造银梳妆匣子二十件进献内宫。
English: In July of the year he ascended to the throne, Emperor Zhou Enlai, who had ascended to the throne as a child, was quite fond of extravagant and wasteful things. He ordered twenty silver dress boxes to be made in western Zhejiang and presented to the Inner Court.

古文：德裕奏曰：
现代文：李德裕呈奏说：
English: Premier Li Deyu said:

古文：臣百生多幸，获遇昌期。受寄名籓，常忧旷职，孜孜夙夜，上报国恩。
现代文： 臣一生多有幸运，得遇昌隆时期，受职著名藩镇，常忧荒废职分，朝夕勤勉奉公，报答皇上恩德。
English: The vassal was lucky in his life. During the Changlong period, he was appointed to a famous hanzhen, often worried about the waste of his post, diligently served the public in the morning and evening, and rewarded the emperor's kindness.

古文：数年已来，灾旱相继，罄竭微虑，粗免流亡，物力之间，尚未完复。
现代文：就任数年以来，水旱灾害不断，臣下竭尽绵薄心力，略能免除百姓逃荒，物资财力方面，尚未完全恢复。
English: Since he took office several years ago, floods and droughts have continued, and his subjects have made every effort to slightly exempt the people from fleeing the famine. In terms of material and financial resources, they have not yet fully recovered.

古文：臣伏准今年三月三日赦文，常贡之外，不令进献。
现代文：臣下敬遵今年三月三日赦文：例常贡赋之外，不使另有进献。
English: On March 3rd of this year, a letter of pardon was sent to his vassals: In addition to the usual tribute, no other contributions will be made.

古文：此则陛下至圣至明，细微洞照，一恐聚敛之吏缘以成奸，一恐凋瘵之人不胜其弊。
现代文：这是陛下极其圣明，洞察秋毫，一则担心横征暴敛的官吏假借进贡行诈，一则忧虑受灾凋敝的黎民不堪身受弊害。
English: This is His Majesty's extremely holy wisdom, insight into the autumn, one is worried about the officials who are violent in collecting taxes and fraud, and one is worried about the Li people who are affected by the disaster and are unable to bear the harm.

古文：上弘俭约之德，下敷恻悯之心。
现代文：陛下在上弘扬节俭美德，对下普施哀怜仁心。
English: His Majesty promotes the virtue of thrift above and compassion and mercy below.

古文：万国群氓，鼓舞未息。
现代文：万方百姓，振奋不已。
English: People from all over the country are excited.

古文：昨奉五月二十三日诏书，令访茅山真隐，将欲师处谦守约之道，发务实去华之美。
现代文：臣日前敬奉五月二十三日诏书，命臣访求茅山的真正隐士，让臣效法其处世谦逊坚行俭约的准则，发扬讲求务实摈弃浮华的美德。
English: A few days ago, the minister revered the imperial rescript of May 23 and ordered the minister to visit the real hermit of Maoyan, so that the minister could follow the principle of modesty and frugality in his life, and promote the virtues of seeking practicality and abandoning pomp.

古文：虽无人上塞丹诏，实率土已偃玄风，岂止微臣，独怀抃贺。
现代文：尽管无人进献酬报皇上的敕令，实际四海之内已息玄谈的风气。岂止微臣一人，独怀鼓掌庆贺之情？
English: Although no one paid tribute to the emperor's edict, in fact, within the four seas, the culture of gossip has died down. Is it not just a Weizhong minister who is celebrating with applause?

古文：况进献之事，臣子常心，虽有敕文不许，亦合竭力上贡。
现代文： 况且进献之事，臣下常挂在心；纵有命令不许，亦当竭力上贡。
English: Moreover, the matter of tribute is always on the minds of vassals; even if there is an order not to do so, they should make every effort to pay tribute.

古文：唯臣当道，素号富饶，近年已来，比旧即异。
现代文：只是臣所在的浙江西道，空有富饶之名，近年以来，异于往日。
English: However, the West Zhejiang Province, where the minister is located, is famous for its wealth, and in recent years, it has been different from the past.

古文：贞元中，李锜任观察使日，职兼盐铁。百姓除随贯出榷酒钱外，更置官酤，一两重纳榷，获利至厚。
现代文：贞元年间，李钅奇任浙西观察使时，兼管盐铁，除百姓按惯例缴纳酒业税外，又设官办酒业，双重征收酒税，获利极为丰厚。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, when Li Rongqi served as the western Zhejiang observation envoy, he was also in charge of salt and iron. In addition to the people paying liquor taxes according to the usual practice, he also set up a government-run liquor industry to collect double liquor taxes, and the profits were extremely rich.

古文：又访闻当时进奉，亦兼用盐铁羡余，贡献繁多，自后莫及。
现代文：臣还察访得知，当时浙西进献朝廷，又兼用盐铁经营的盈利，因此进贡名目繁多，此后再莫能及。
English: During the inspection, the minister also learned that at that time, the western part of Zhejiang was donated to the imperial court, and the profits from the salt and iron business were also used, so there were many items of tribute, which has never been equaled since.

古文：至薛苹任观察使时，又奏置榷酒。上供之外，颇有余财，军用之间，实为优足。
现代文：至薛苹任浙西观察使时，再次奏请设置酒业专营税收，进贡朝廷之外，所余钱财颇多，军费财用之中，实为优裕丰足。
English: When Xue Ping was appointed as the western Zhejiang observation envoy, he once again appealed to the emperor to set up a liquor industry franchise tax. In addition to the tribute to the imperial court, there was a lot of money left over. Among the military expenses, it was really rich and plentiful.

古文：自元和十四年七月三日敕，却停榷酤。
现代文：自元和十四年七月三日朝廷下令，业已停止酒业专营税收。
English: Since July 3, 1914, the imperial court has ordered that the liquor monopoly tax has been suspended.

古文：又准元和十五年五月七日赦文，诸州羡余，不令送使，唯有留使钱五十万贯。
现代文：又据元和十五年五月七日赦文，各州财政结余，不让缴送使府；镇使仅有各州赋税自留使用的五十万贯钱。
English: In addition, according to a document issued in the Yuan Dynasty and on May 7th, 15th, the financial balance of each state was not allowed to be sent to the embassy; only the state tax of 500,000 yuan was reserved for the use of the town.

古文：每年支用，犹欠十三万贯不足，常须是事节俭，百计补填，经费之中，未免悬欠。
现代文：每年开支用度，尚欠十三万贯空缺，凡事常须节俭，千方百计填补，财政经费之中，仍然不免长期空欠。
English: There is still a deficit of 130,000 yuan in the annual expenditure, and there are still vacancies. We must always be frugal and try our best to fill them. Among the financial funds, there are still long-term vacancies.

古文：至于绫纱等物，犹是本州所出，易于方圆。
现代文：至于采绫轻绡等物，尚属本州出产，容易变通行事。
English: As for things such as pickled eel and light eel, they are still produced in our state, so it is easy to act flexibly.

古文：金银不出当州，皆须外处回市。
现代文：金银本州不产，全须外地购回。
English: Since gold and silver are not produced in Honshu, they all have to be bought back from abroad.

古文：去二月中奉宣令进盝子，计用银九千四百余两。
现代文： 去年二月间臣奉内宫诏令，进献梳妆匣子，共用白银九千四百余两。
English: In February last year, by Imperial edict from the Imperial Household Agency, the minister presented a dressing box with a total of 9,400 taels of silver.

古文：其时贮备，都无二三百两，乃诸头收市，方获制造上供。
现代文：当时官府贮备总共不足二、三百两，去往各方收购，才得制成进贡。
English: At that time, the government's total reserves were less than two or three hundred taels, which had to be purchased from various parties before they could be made into tribute.

古文：昨又奉宣旨，今进妆具二十件，计用银一万三千两，金一百三十两。
现代文：日前又奉诏令，责成进献妆具二十件，预计需用白银一万三千两，黄金一百三十两。
English: A few days ago, by imperial decree, he was ordered to donate 20 pieces of makeup, with an estimated cost of 13,000 taels of silver and 130,000 taels of gold.

古文：寻令并合四节进奉金银，造成两具进纳讫。
现代文：臣立即命令合并四节进奉本道的金银，造成两件献到宫中。
English: The vassal immediately ordered that the gold and silver of the four sects be merged, resulting in two pieces being presented to the imperial court.

古文：今差人于淮南收买，旋到旋造，星夜不辍；虽力营求，深忧不迨。
现代文：今又派员到淮南收买金银，随到随选，连夜不停；臣虽竭力谋求，仍然深深忧虑达不到诏令要求。
English: Now, he has sent officials to Huainan to buy gold and silver, and they have been coming and going non-stop all night. Although the minister has tried his best, he is still deeply worried that he will not be able to meet the requirements of the edict.

古文：臣若因循不奏，则负陛下任使之恩；若分外诛求，又累陛下慈俭之德。
现代文：臣若依旧不奏明实情，将辜负陛下任用臣的恩典；臣若额外苛求百姓，又将损害陛下仁慈俭节的美德。
English: If I do not report as usual, I will lose the grace of His Majesty's appointment, and if I ask too much, I may ruin His Majesty's reputation for frugality.

古文：伏乞陛下览前件榷酤及诸州羡余之目，则知臣军用褊短，本末有由。
现代文：敬祈陛下过目臣下前回所呈关于以往专营酒业利税及各州赢余的账目，即知臣之军费财用的短缺，及其前因后果的缘由。
English: I respectfully ask Your Majesty to look over the accounts submitted by Your Excellency last time regarding the profits and taxes of the liquor industry and the surplus of the states in the past, that is, Your Excellency's shortage of military expenditure, and the causes and consequences.

古文：伏料陛下见臣奏论，必赐详悉，知臣竭爱君守事之节，尽纳忠罄直之心。
现代文：敬料陛下见到臣的奏议，定会赐恩详察，明白臣下竭诚爱君守职的节操，极尽献忠直言的诚意。
English: With all due respect, Your Majesty, upon seeing the report of your vassal, will surely grant you the grace to examine it in detail, and understand that your vassal sincerely loves you for your dedication to duty, and your sincerity to be loyal and outspoken.

古文：伏乞圣慈，宣令宰臣商议，何以遣臣上不违宣索，下不阙军储，不困疲人，不敛物怨，前后诏敕，并可遵承。
现代文：敬乞圣上赐以慈爱，明令宰辅大臣商议：教臣怎样能对上不违背诏令的索取，在下不空缺军费储备、不使黎民艰难贫困、不招致人心怨沸，那么先后索贡的几个诏令，臣一并皆可遵旨奉行。
English: In order to seek the mercy of the Almighty, he explicitly ordered the Vice-Minister to discuss: how can the minister of religion comply with the request of not violating the edict, not empty the military reserve, not make the people of Li difficult and poor, and not cause resentment, then the several edicts of Sogong can be followed by all the ministers.

古文：辄冒宸严，不胜战汗之至。
现代文：每每冒犯圣上威严，不胜恐惧之至。 
English: Every time you offend the sacred majesty, it is beyond fear.

古文：时准赦不许进献。逾月之后，征贡之使，道路相继。故德裕因诉而讽之。
现代文：当初按照赦令不许进献，当月一过，征贡的使臣，一路相继而至，因此李德裕随同呈诉一并劝谏。
English: At first, according to the pardon order, it was not allowed to donate, but as soon as the month passed, the envoys of the tribute came one after another, so Li Deyu accompanied the complaint and advised him.

古文：事奏，不报。
现代文：进奏之后，不予答复。
English: After the prelude, there is no answer.

古文：又诏进可幅盘条缭绫一千匹，德裕又论曰：
现代文：接着，又诏索满幅盘绦缭绫一千匹，李德裕再次奏议：
English: Next, Li Deyu once again proposed a resolution, saying:

古文：臣昨缘宣索，已具军资岁计及近年物力闻奏，伏料圣慈，必垂省览。
现代文： 臣日前依据诏令所索，已具办本道按年度计算的军费及近年物资财力报表呈奏，敬料圣上慈爱，必已惠览详察。
English: A few days ago, in accordance with the imperial decree, the minister has submitted the annual military expenditure and recent material and financial report for this province. With all due respect, Your Holiness, I am sure you have seen it in detail.

古文：又奉诏旨，令织定罗纱袍段及可幅盘条缭绫一千匹。伏读诏书，倍增惶灼。
现代文：臣又恭奉诏旨，命臣织就罗纹轻绢袍片和满幅盘绦缭绫一千匹，敬读索贡诏书，倍增惶恐焦灼。
English: The minister also respectfully obeyed the imperial edict, and ordered the minister to weave a ribbed light embroidered robe and a full-width embroidered embroidery of a thousand horses, respectfully read the Sogong imperial edict, and multiply the fear and anxiety.

古文：臣伏见太宗朝，台使至凉州，见名鹰讽李大亮献之。
现代文： 臣敬闻太宗时，朝廷使臣至凉州发现名鹰，示意都督李大亮进献。
English: When Emperor Taizong was revered by his vassals, an imperial envoy to Liangzhou found a famous eagle and asked the governor Li Dayang to present it.

古文：大亮密表陈诚。太宗赐诏云： 使遣献之，遂不曲顺。 
现代文：大亮密呈奏表力陈拒献之真情，太宗皇帝赐诏说： 使臣派献，尽可不从。 
English: The Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict, saying, "If an envoy sends an offering, it must be obeyed.

古文：再三嘉叹，载在史书。
现代文：嘉许赞叹再三，此事载于史书。
English: Repeatedly praised and admired, this event is recorded in the history books.

古文：又玄宗命中使于江南采诸鸟，汴州刺史倪若水陈论，玄宗亦赐诏嘉纳，其鸟即时皆放。
现代文：又，玄宗派宦官到江南捕捉池鹭等鸟，汴州刺史倪若水上呈奏论，玄宗亦赐诏嘉许、纳谏，所捕珍禽当即全部放掉。
English: In addition, Xuanzong sent eunuchs to the south of the Yangtze River to catch birds such as pond cormorants, and the cormorant in Zhangzhou was said to have performed well on the water. Xuanzong also gave the eunuch a certificate of commendation and a letter of commendation, and all the rare birds caught were immediately released.

古文：又令皇甫询于益州织半臂背子、琵琶扞拨、镂牙合子等，苏颋不奉诏书，辄自停织。
现代文：玄宗又命皇甫询在益州制造半臂背子、琵琶扦拨、象牙雕合等，苏廷页不受诏令，即自令停织。
English: Emperor Xuanzong also ordered the Imperial Enquiry Office to manufacture half-arm backs, lute paddles, ivory carvings, etc. in Yizhou. The sutin pages were not subject to the edict, that is, they stopped weaving by their own order.

古文：太宗、玄宗皆不加罪，欣纳所陈。
现代文：太宗、玄宗都不加罪于他们，反而欣然采纳其意见。
English: Taizong and Xuanzong did not punish them, but gladly accepted their opinions.

古文：臣窃以、镂牙，至为微细，若水等尚以劳人损德，沥款效忠。
现代文：臣暗想：池鹭牙雕，事极细微，若水等人尚且认为劳民损德，进言竭诚效忠天子。
English: The vassal thought to himself, "It's a very minor matter, but people such as Wakamizu still think that labor is a loss of virtue, and they are wholeheartedly loyal to the Son of Heaven.

古文：当圣祖之朝，有臣如此，岂明王之代，独无其人？
现代文：在圣明先祖朝代，有臣子如此忠诚；难道当今英明王朝，偏会没有这样的人？
English: In the dynasties of Shomei's ancestors, there were courtiers who were so loyal; is it possible that there are no such people in today's Shomei dynasty?

古文：盖有位者蔽而不言，必非陛下拒而不纳。
现代文：想是有权位者隐瞒不讲，定非陛下拒谏不纳。
English: Someone in a position of authority is concealing information, and it is certain that His Majesty will not accept it.

古文：又伏睹四月二十三日德音云： 方、召侯伯有位之士，无或弃吾谓不可教。
现代文： 又，敬睹陛下四月二十三日的恩诏称： 方叔、召虎那样的中兴重臣，不要有谁抛弃我、认为我不可教诲。
English: Moreover, the edict issued on April 23 to honor His Majesty said: "Uncle Fang, don't let anyone abandon me, don't let anyone think that I can't be taught, don't let anyone abandon me, don't let anyone think that I can't be taught.

古文：其有违道伤理，徇欲怀安，面刺廷攻，无有隐讳。 
现代文：若朕有违背天道伤害天理、曲从私欲贪图安逸之事，望当面批评，朝堂指责，不要有所隐藏忌讳。 
English: If I have violated the heavenly way and harmed the heavenly principle, or indulged in lust for comfort, I hope to be criticized in person, and the imperial court will be blamed. Don't have any hidden taboos.

古文：则是陛下纳诲从善，道光祖宗，不尽忠规，过在臣下。
现代文：这正是陛下纳谏从善，教导臣子光大祖风的表现；若不尽忠规谏，过失在于臣下。
English: This is exactly the manifestation of the great ancestral style of His Majesty, who teaches his vassals to be kind and good; if they do not fulfill their loyalty, the fault lies with his vassals.

古文：况玄鹅天马，椈豹盘绦，文彩珍奇，只合圣躬自服。
现代文：况且玄鹤天马，蓅豹盘绦，文彩珍奇之物，只该圣上自用。
English: Moreover, the Chinese crane, the Chinese leopard, and the Chinese painting are rare things that should only be used for sacred purposes.

古文：今所织千匹，费用至多，在臣愚诚，亦所未谕。
现代文：今命织选盘绦缭绫千匹，费用极多；臣下对圣上一心尽忠，对此也有不可理解之处。
English: There is also something incomprehensible about the fact that his vassals are loyal to him with all their hearts.

古文：昔汉文帝衣弋绨之衣，元帝罢轻纤之服，仁德慈俭，至今称之。
现代文：昔日汉文帝穿着粗质黑绨衣物，汉元帝取消轻柔纤美服饰，他们的仁爱恩泽慈善节俭，至今为人称颂。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen wore coarse black satin clothes, Emperor Han Yuan abolished soft and delicate clothing, and their benevolence, grace, charity and thrift have been praised by people to this day.

古文：伏乞陛下，近览太宗、玄宗之容纳，远思汉文、孝元之恭己；以臣前表宣示群臣，酌臣当道物力所宜，更赐节减。则海隅苍生，无不受赐。
现代文：敬祈陛下近观太宗、玄宗皇帝的宽容纳谏，远思汉文帝、孝元帝的严肃克己，将臣前回所上奏表向群臣公布考察为臣所辖区域物力所能承担的限度，对贡赋再加以节减，那么沿海地区的百姓，就将无人不受陛下恩惠。
English: I respectfully pray that Your Majesty will have a closer look at the broad tolerance of Emperor Taizong and Emperor Xuanzong, think far and wide about the serious self-restraint of Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Xiaoyuan, announce to Your Majesty's vassals that the inspection is the limit of the material resources that can be borne by the areas under Your Majesty's jurisdiction, and further reduce the tribute, so that the people in the coastal areas will not be deprived of Your Majesty's favor.

古文：臣不胜恳切兢惶之至。
现代文：臣不胜诚挚、惶恐之至。 
English: The vassal was very sincere and very frightened.

古文：优诏报之。
现代文：朝廷以特异于众的优诏答复，取消进献缭绫。
English: The imperial court responded with a special edict, cancelling the offering of the imperial crown jewels.

古文：其缭绫罢进。元和已来，累敕天下州府，不得私度僧尼。
现代文：元和以来，朝廷多次诏令全国各州府，不准私自度人离俗为僧尼。
English: Since the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court has repeatedly issued decrees to all the state capitals of the country, forbidding people to become monks and nuns.

古文：徐州节度使王智兴聚货无厌，以敬宗诞月，请于泗州置僧坛，度人资福，以邀厚利。
现代文：徐州节度王智兴搜括钱财贪得无厌，借敬宗出生之月为名，奏请在泗州设置僧坛，度人出家积福，以此牟取厚利。
English: Wang Zhixing, the administrator of the Xuzhou Festival, was insatiably greedy for money. In the name of the month of the birth of Jingzong, he requested that a Buddhist altar be set up in Zhangzhou, and that the administrator be ordained and accumulate wealth, in order to make a profit.

古文：江、淮之民，皆群党渡淮。
现代文：江、淮一带民众，尽都结伙渡过淮河。
English: People from the Jiangjiang and Huai'an regions all crossed the Huai'an River in groups.

古文：德裕奏论曰： 王智兴于所属泗州置僧尼戒坛，自去冬于江、淮已南，所在悬榜招置。
现代文：李德裕上呈奏议道： 王智兴在隶属的泗州设置僧尼传戒的法坛，自去冬起在江、淮以南，处处张榜招设僧坛。
English: Li Deyu made a speech at the meeting: Wang Zhixing set up a dharma altar for monks and nuns to preach the precepts in Zhangzhou, which is under his jurisdiction. Since last winter, the dharma altar has been set up everywhere in the south of Jiangsu and Huai.

古文：江、淮自元和二年后，不敢私度。
现代文：江、淮一带自元和二年后，无人再敢私自度人出家。
English: Since the Yuan Dynasty and two years later, no one in Jiangsu and Huai'an has dared to become a monk.

古文：自闻泗州有坛，户有三丁，必令一丁落发，意在规避王徭，影庇资产。
现代文：自从听说泗州设有僧坛，每户有三个成年男子的必让一人削发出家，意在逃避徭役，隐瞒粮产。
English: Since I heard that there is a Buddhist altar in Zhangzhou, if there are three adult men in each household, one of them must leave the house, in order to evade forced labor and conceal grain production.

古文：自正月已来，落发者无算。
现代文：从正月以来，削发为僧者无以数计。
English: Since the first month of the year, countless people have been ordained as monks.

古文：臣今于蒜山渡点其过者，一日一百余人，勘问唯十四人是旧日沙弥，余是苏、常百姓，亦无本州文凭，寻已勒还本贯。
现代文：臣这次在蒜山渡查点渡河人员，一日一百余人，经讯问仅十四人为旧日出家受戒者，其余尽是苏、常二州百姓，亦无该州所发文书，臣当即强制他们返回原籍。
English: This time, the vassal inspected more than a hundred people crossing the river at the Hiruzen ferry crossing point. After interrogation, only fourteen were former ordained monks. The rest were all people from the two states of Su and Chang, and they did not have documents issued by the state. The vassal immediately forced them to return to their place of origin.

古文：访闻泗州置坛次第，凡僧徒到者，人纳二缗，给牒即回，别无法事。
现代文：访察得知泗州所设戒坛的情形是：凡有僧徒去到僧坛，每人缴钱二千文，发给度牒即回，别无任何法事。
English: The visit learned that the situation of the Buddhist altar set up in Zhangzhou is as follows: if any monks go to the Buddhist altar, each will pay two thousand mon, and will be given a summons to return immediately. There is no other legal matter.

古文：若不特行禁止，比到诞节，计江、淮已南，失却六十万丁壮。
现代文：若不特令禁止，等到陛下华诞节日，总计江、淮以南，将失去六十万壮丁。
English: If it is not prohibited by special order, by the time of His Majesty's birthday, a total of 600,000 people south of the Yangtze River and Huai River will be lost.

古文：此事非细，系于朝廷法度。 
现代文：此事非同小可，关系到朝廷法度。 
English: This is no small matter, and it concerns the imperial court's legal system.

古文：状奏，即日诏徐州罢之。
现代文：奏章呈上后，不几天朝廷即诏令徐州取消僧坛。
English: A few days after the petition was submitted, the imperial court issued an edict ordering Xuzhou to abolish the Buddhist altar.

古文：敬宗荒僻日甚，游幸无恆；疏远贤能，昵比群小。
现代文：敬宗荒误朝政日甚一日，出游没有定规，疏远贤能人士，亲近一帮小人。
English: The Emperor Keizong's erratic policies are becoming more and more erratic day by day. There are no fixed rules for travel, which alienates people of virtue and brings them closer to a group of villains.

古文：坐朝月不二三度，大臣罕得进言。
现代文：每月上朝处理政务没有二、三次，大臣极少能够进言。
English: There are no more than two or three meetings a month to deal with government affairs, and ministers are rarely able to speak.

古文：海内忧危，虑移宗社。
现代文：国人忧惧不安，担心宗庙、社稷转移。
English: Chinese people are worried and anxious, worried about the transfer of ancestral temples and shrines.

古文：德裕身居廉镇，倾心王室，遣使献《丹扆箴》六首，曰： 臣闻 心乎爱矣，遐不谓矣 ，此古之贤人所以笃于事君者也。
现代文：李德裕身居偏远藩镇，一心向往王室。派遣使者呈献《丹箴》六首说： 臣下听说 心存敬爱，远莫能助 ，这是古代贤人专一侍奉君主的心意。
English: Li Deyu lived in a remote town and yearned for the royal family. He sent an emissary to present the six poems of "Dan Zhen" and said: "It is said that a subject should have a heart of reverence, but not be able to help others. This is the spirit of the ancient sages to exclusively serve the monarch."

古文：夫迹疏而言亲者危，地远而意忠者忤。
现代文：那些行事与君主相距甚远而言语亲密的人危险，地处远方而心志忠诚的人言不顺耳。
English: Those who are distant from the sovereign are dangerous, but those who are distant and loyal are treacherous.

古文：然臣窃念拔自先圣，偏荷宠光，若不爱君以忠，则是上负灵鉴。
现代文：但臣暗自考虑：臣由先朝圣君选拔，备受恩宠荣耀，若不忠心爱君，这就有负皇上明察。
English: However, the vassal secretly thought to himself: The vassal has been selected by the pilgrim saint and has received much grace and glory. If the vassal is not loyal to the saint and loves the prince, this would be against the emperor's wishes.

古文：臣顷事先朝，属多阴沴，尝献《大明赋》以讽，颇蒙先朝嘉纳。
现代文：臣刚侍奉先朝皇帝之初，接连发生许多昏暗不祥之事，曾献《大明赋》讽谏，皆蒙先帝赞许采纳。
English: At the beginning of the previous emperor's reign, many gloomy and ominous things happened to the vassals who served the emperor. They were all praised and adopted by the previous emperor.

古文：臣今日尽节明主，亦由是心。
现代文：臣今日尽心竭力保全臣子节操以侍奉明主，亦出于这一意念。
English: It is also with this thought in mind that I am making every effort today to preserve the practice of the Imperial Retirees' Day to serve the Lord.

古文：昔张敞之守远郡，梅福之在遐徼，尚竭诚尽忠，不避尤悔。
现代文：以往汉宣帝时，张敞出守远镇，梅福身处僻壤，尚能竭诚效忠进言，不避个人受过遭祸。
English: In the past, when Han Xuan became emperor, Zhang Zhang went out to defend the remote town, and Meifu was in a remote place, but he was still able to be loyal to the advice, and he did not avoid personal misfortune.

古文：况臣尝学旧史，颇知箴讽，虽在疏远，犹思献替。
现代文：何况臣下曾学史书，略知规谏之义，即使远离陛下，仍想诤言进谏。
English: What's more, his subjects have studied history books, know a little about the meaning of rules and regulations, and even if they are far away from His Majesty, they still want to have a say.

古文：谨献《丹扆箴》六首，仰尘睿鉴，伏积兢惶。 
现代文：敬献《丹箴》六首，圣上天聪明鉴，臣下惶恐不已。 
English: Six poems of "Danzhen" were dedicated, sacred to the wisdom of heaven, and the vassals were terrified.

古文：其《宵衣箴》曰： 先王听政，昧爽以俟。
现代文：他的《宵衣箴》说： 先王处理政务，拂晓待赴朝廷。
English: His "Evening Dress Proverbs" say: The king deals with government affairs, and waits for the dawn to go to the imperial court.

古文：鸡鸣既盈，日出而视。
现代文：金鸡报晓完毕，日出临朝听政。
English: After the golden rooster announces the dawn, the sunrise comes to listen to politics.

古文：伯禹大圣，寸阴为贵。
现代文：夏禹人间至圣，珍惜点滴光阴。
English: Xia Yu is the most sacred person in the world, cherish every bit of time.

古文：光武至仁，反支不忌。
现代文：光武皇帝至仁，凶日依旧亲政。
English: Emperor Guangwu was a benevolent ruler, but he was still a close political ally.

古文：无俾姜后，独去簪珥。
现代文：不使皇后姜氏，独自孤身就寝。
English: He did not want to disturb Empress Jiang, so he went to bed alone.

古文：彤管记言，克念前志。 
现代文：史笔直书所言，心中铭刻古训。 
English: As said in the historical book, inscribe the ancient teachings in your heart.

古文：其《正服箴》曰： 圣人作服，法象可观。
现代文：《正服箴》说： 圣人创制服饰，效法天象示意。
English: "The Proverb of the Formal Dress" says: The sage created the uniform decoration, imitating the celestial body.

古文：虽在宴游，尚不怀安。
现代文：纵然宴饮游乐，仍不贪图安逸。
English: Even though we feast, drink and play, we still do not yearn for ease.

古文：汲黯庄色，能正不冠。杨阜毅然，亦讥缥纨。
现代文：汲黯气度凛然，纠正着冠不合王礼；杨阜性格刚毅，讥刺服色不合定制。
English: He has a dignified demeanor, correcting the crown does not match the royal salute; Yang Fu has a strong character, ridiculing the color of the dress does not match the custom.

古文：四时所御，各有其官。
现代文：帝王四季所用，各有一定法则。
English: The four seasons used by emperors each have their own rules.

古文：非此勿服，惟辟所难。 
现代文：不合法度不用，以期避免灾异。 
English: Illegality is not used in order to avoid catastrophes.

古文：其《罢献箴》曰： 汉文罢献，诏还騄耳。
现代文：《罢献箴》说： 西汉文帝取消进献，诏令退还骏马马录耳。
English: "Strike and Offer" said: Western Han Emperor Wen cancelled the offering, and ordered the return of the horse, Marlowe.

古文：銮辂徐驱，焉用千里？
现代文：帝王车驾缓慢行驶，何须骏马日行千里？
English: If the emperor is driving slowly, why does the horse have to travel thousands of miles a day?

古文：厥后令王，亦能恭己。
现代文：此后历代明君，亦能严于律己。
English: Since then, successive generations of Myojun have also been able to be strict with themselves.

古文：翟裘既焚，筒布则毁。
现代文：皮裘羽衣焚毁，细布美服废弃。
English: The fur coat was burned, and the fine-cloth dress was discarded.

古文：道德为丽，慈仁为美。
现代文：王道德政为善，慈爱仁义为美。
English: The king of morality and politics is good, and loving kindness and righteousness are beautiful.

古文：不过天道，斯为至理。 
现代文：不悖天意法则，这是根本道理。 
English: It does not go against the law of providence, which is the fundamental principle.

古文：其《纳诲箴》曰： 惟后纳诲，以求厥中。从善如流，乃能成功。
现代文：《纳诲箴》说： 帝王纳谏，求其言中。从善如流，方能成功。
English: The "Admonition to the Emperor" says: Accept the emperor's advice, seek his words, and follow the virtuous path to success.

古文：汉骜流湎，举白浮钟。
现代文：汉成帝刘骜纵酒，干杯满盅一空。
English: Hancheng Emperor Liu Xuan drank a lot of wine, and his toast was empty.

古文：魏睿侈汰，凌霄作宫。
现代文：魏明帝曹睿又奢侈，建宫耸入云中。
English: Emperor Cao Rui of the Wei and Ming Dynasties was also extravagant, building a palace soaring into the clouds.

古文：忠虽不忤，善亦不从。
现代文：忠言不觉逆耳，善言亦不听从。
English: Faithful words go unheard, and kind words are not heeded.

古文：以规为瑱，是谓塞聪。 
现代文：规谏视为珥饰，此即所谓塞听。 
English: The gong is regarded as a gong ornament, which is the so-called plugging.

古文：其《辩邪箴》曰： 居上处深，在察微萌。
现代文：《辨邪箴》说： 身居帝王深宫，贵在调察微萌。
English: "Discernment of Evil" says: When you live in the deep palace of the emperor, you are investigating the tiny moth.

古文：虽有谗慝，不能蔽明。
现代文：纵有谗言恶语，不能蒙蔽圣聪。
English: Even if there are harsh words, they cannot blind the Holy Spirit.

古文：汉之有昭，德过周成。
现代文：西汉有位昭帝，盛德胜过成王姬通。
English: In Western Han Dynasty, there was a Shao Emperor, Sheng De, who was better than Cheng Wang Jitong.

古文：上书知伪，照奸得情。
现代文：奏章知其伪诈，明察奸邪得其真情。
English: Song of Songs knows its falsehood, and sees through its deception to its truth.

古文：燕、盖既折，王猷洽平。
现代文：燕公、盖公去世之后，王道依然协和稳定。
English: After the death of Yan Gong and Gai Gong, the royal road is still harmonious and stable.

古文：百代之后，乃流淑声。 
现代文：虽已经历百代，至今美誉流行。 
English: Although it has been passed down for hundreds of generations, it is still popular today.

古文：其《防微箴》曰： 天子之孝，敬遵王度。
现代文：《防微箴》说： 天子孝顺先帝，贵在谨遵法度。
English: "Prevention of Microaggressions" says: Children of heaven, be filial to the former emperor, and be careful to abide by the law.

古文：安必思危，乃无遗虑。
现代文：安乐必须思危，谋虑方无失误。
English: Safety and comfort must think about danger, and there is no mistake in the way of thinking.

古文：乱臣猖蹶，非可遽数。
现代文：作乱臣子猖狂，难以遽然觉出。
English: It is difficult to suddenly detect the rampant minions who are causing chaos.

古文：玄黄莫辨，触瑟始仆。
现代文：病害一时莫辨，遇风自会倒仆。
English: Illnesses are indistinguishable for a while, and the wind will blow them away.

古文：柏谷微行，豺豕塞路。
现代文：汉武帝微服出行柏谷，凶徒、愚人横梗挡路。
English: Hanwudi travel Kashiwaya, thugs and fools are blocking the road.

古文：睹貌献飧，斯可诫惧。 
现代文：察颜观色取悦，此应引起警惧。 
English: This should be a cause for alarm.

古文：帝手诏答曰： 卿文雅大臣，方隅重寄。
现代文：敬宗亲笔诏复说： 卿为崇尚礼制的大臣，身负重任的一方藩镇。
English: Emperor Keizong replied in his own handwriting: "Your Excellency is a minister who advocates the etiquette system, and you are a member of a domain who bears a heavy responsibility.

古文：表率诸部，肃清全吴。
现代文：以身作则统率各部，治理江南一派清平。
English: He led all departments by example and governed the south of the Yangtze River with a clear and level head.

古文：化洽行春，风澄坐啸，眷言善政，想叹在怀。
现代文：善施教化如行春风，民风清明公务轻松。回顾卿的妥善施政，朕怀念赞叹在心。
English: Good administration and education is like the spring breeze, and the people's style is clear and easy. Looking back on Sir's proper administration, I miss and admire in my heart.

古文：卿之宗门，累著声绩，冠内廷者两代，袭侯伯者六朝。
现代文：卿的亲族，屡建显功，两代居官内廷重臣之首，六代承袭侯伯封爵。
English: Sir's relatives, who have repeatedly made outstanding achievements, have been the heads of two generations of officials and senior courtiers of the Imperial Court, and six generations have inherited the title of prince.

古文：果能激爱君之诚，喻诗人之旨。在远而不忘忠告，讽上而常深虑微。
现代文：进言确能激扬挚爱君主的忠诚，显示诗人讽喻的深意；身处远方却不忘忠告朝廷，婉言劝戒而谋虑深远精微。
English: It is true that the poet's advice can inspire the loyalty of the beloved monarch, and show the deep meaning of the poet's allegory; when he is far away, he does not forget to advise the court, and he is thoughtful and subtle.

古文：博我以端躬，约予以循礼。
现代文：以自身的正直扩大我的眼界，以遵循礼法来约束我的言行。
English: To expand my horizons with my own honesty, and to restrain my words and deeds by following the etiquette.

古文：三复规谏，累夕称嗟。
现代文：你的再三劝戒，使我夜夜赞叹。
English: Your repeated admonitions amaze me night after night.

古文：置之座隅，用比韦弘之益；铭诸心腑，何啻药石之功？
现代文：将其置于案头，可受随时自警之益；铭刻在心，何止良药疗疾之功？
English: If you put it on your desk, you can benefit from self-policing at any time; if you keep it in your heart, what is the benefit of good medicine?

古文：卿既以投诚，朕每怀开谏，苟有过举，无忘密陈。
现代文：卿致以诚心之后，朕常思广开言路。若朕举止失当，莫忘及时陈奏。
English: After the Lord sent me with sincerity, I often think of a broad way to speak. If I misbehave, don't forget to play in time.

古文：山川既遐，睠属何已，必当克己，以副乃诚。 
现代文：山川遥远，眷念不已；朕定当克制自己，以与卿诚意相符。 
English: Mountains and rivers are far away, and I miss them dearly. I am determined to restrain myself and act in accordance with my lord's sincerity.

古文：德裕意在切谏，不欲斥言，托箴以尽意。
现代文：李德裕意在恳切规劝，不想直接明言，因此假托箴言尽倾心意。
English: Li Deyu intended to earnestly exhort, and did not want to speak directly, so he pretended to say the motto with all his heart.

古文：《宵衣》，讽坐朝稀晚也；《正服》，讽服御乖异也；《罢献》，讽征求玩好也；《纳诲》，讽侮弃谠言也；《辨邪》，讽信任群小也；《防微》，讽轻出游幸也。
现代文：《宵衣》暗示敬宗上朝既稀又晚；《正服》暗示敬宗服饰不合礼制；《罢献》暗示滥征玩赏物品；《纳诲》暗示轻弃正直之言；《辨邪》暗示信任众多小人；《防微》暗示轻率外出游历。
English: "Evening dress" suggests that it is both rare and late to pay homage to the previous emperor; "full dress" suggests that it is not proper to wear homage to the previous emperor; "strike" suggests the indiscriminate collection of trinkets; "instruction" suggests the abandonment of honesty; "discerning evil" suggests trusting many villains; "preventing microaggressions" suggests rash travel.

古文：帝虽不能尽用其言，命学士韦处厚殷勤答诏，颇嘉纳其心焉。
现代文：敬宗虽然不能完全采用他的意见，仍命学士韦处厚代拟殷恳的复诏，十分嘉许容受其良苦用心。
English: Although Emperor Jingzong could not fully adopt his opinion, he still ordered the scholar Wei to make a sincere reply, fully appreciating his good intentions.

古文：德裕久留江介，心恋阙廷，因事寄情，望回圣奖。
现代文：李德裕长期留任长江一带，心中依恋朝廷，借事寄托情怀，以期得到皇帝的推重。
English: Li Deyu stayed in the Yangtze River area for a long time, attached to the imperial court in his heart, and sent his feelings to the emperor in the hope of getting the emperor's support.

古文：而逢吉当轴，枳棘其涂，竟不得内徙。
现代文：但因李逢吉当政，设置重重障碍，终于不能调回朝廷。
English: However, due to the fact that Li Fengji was in power and many obstacles were set up, he was finally unable to be transferred back to the imperial court.

古文：宝历二年，亳州言出圣水，饮之者愈疾。
现代文：宝历二年，亳州传言涌出圣水，饮用它即能病愈。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, there was a rumor that holy water gushed out from Zhangzhou, and that drinking it could cure illness.

古文：德裕奏曰： 臣访闻此水，本因妖僧诳惑，狡计丐钱。
现代文：李德裕呈奏说： 臣访察得知，所谓圣水本系妖僧谎言骗人，施用狡计弄钱。
English: Li Deyu made a report, saying: The minister's visit learned that the so-called holy water-based demon priests lied and cheated people, and used cunning tricks to make money.

古文：数月已来，江南之人，奔走塞路。
现代文：数月以来，江南百姓，竞相奔往，塞满一路。
English: For the past few months, people from the south of the Yangtze River have been rushing to get there, crowding the roads.

古文：每三二十家，都顾一人取水。
现代文：每二、三十家，都派一人取水。
English: One person is sent to collect water from every twenty or thirty households.

古文：拟取之时，疾者断食荤血，既饮之后，又二七日蔬飧，危疾之人，俟之愈病。
现代文：将去取水之时，患者停食荤腥，饮水之后，又素食两个七日；危重病人，坐等病愈。
English: At the time of going to fetch water, patients should fast, and after drinking water, they should eat vegetarian food for two days and seven days; critically ill patients should wait until they are no longer ill.

古文：其水斗价三贯，而取者益之他水，沿路转以市人，老疾饮之，多至危笃。
现代文：那水每斗价钱三贯，而取水的人又掺进别的水，沿途转手倒卖；沉疴痼疾患者饮后，大多病情更加危重。
English: The water costs three times as much per bucket, and the people who fetch the water mix it with other water and resell it along the way; after drinking it, most of the patients with severe malaria are in a more critical condition.

古文：昨点两浙、福建百姓渡江者，日三五十人。
现代文：日前查点两浙、福建过江取水的百姓，每日三、五十人。
English: A few days ago, the number of people crossing the river to fetch water in Zhejiang and Fujian increased from three to 50 per day.

古文：臣于蒜山渡已加捉搦。
现代文：臣在蒜山渡已行捉拿。
English: The vassal has gone to Hiruzen to capture it.

古文：若不绝其根本，终无益黎氓。
现代文：如不断其根本，终将损害黎民。
English: If it continues to be fundamental, it will eventually harm the Lebanese people.

古文：昔吴时有圣水，宋、齐有圣火，事皆妖妄，古人所非。
现代文：以往吴国时传言有圣水，宋、齐时传言有圣火，其实都是妖异妄言，古人业已非议。
English: In the past, there were rumors of holy water in the time of Wu, and rumors of holy fire in the Song and Qi dynasties. In fact, they were all strange and delusional, and the ancients have criticized them.

古文：乞下本道观察使令狐楚，速令填塞，以绝妖源。 
现代文：敬祈下诏本道观察使令狐楚，火速令其填塞，以求断绝妖源。 
English: Respectfully pray for the observation of this path to make the fox, quickly fill it, in order to cut off the source of the demon.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷依从他的奏请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：敬宗为两街道士赵归真说以神仙之术，宜访求异人以师其道。僧惟贞、齐贤、正简说以祠祷修福，以致长年。
现代文：敬宗被两街道士赵归真用神仙法术之说游说：应当访求有仙术的异人学习他的仙术；僧人惟贞、齐贤、正简则以建庙祭神祈福游说敬宗，以求长寿。
English: Keizong was lobbied by Zhao Guizhen, a scholar of the two streets, with the saying of divine magic: one should visit a stranger who has magic to learn his magic; the monks Wei Zhen, Qi Xian, and Zheng Jian lobbied Keizong by building a temple and praying to the gods for a long life.

古文：四人皆出入禁中，日进邪说。
现代文：这四个人都能进出内宫，天天进演邪说。
English: All four of them can enter and leave the Inner Court, and they are acting out evil doctrines every day.

古文：山人杜景先进状，请于江南求访异人。
现代文：方士杜景先呈文朝廷，请派他在江南求访异人。
English: Du Jing, the messenger, first submitted a document to the imperial court, asking that he be sent to the south of the Yangtze River to visit the stranger.

古文：至浙西，言有隐士周息元，寿数百岁。帝即令高品、薛季棱往润州迎之。仍诏德裕给公乘遣之。
现代文：他到了浙西，声称有个隐士周息元年寿已数百岁，敬宗立即命高人薛季眣前往润州迎接，还下诏给李德裕派军车送他。
English: When he arrived in western Zhejiang, he claimed that there was a hermit named Zhou Siyuan whose age was several hundred years old. Emperor Jingzong immediately ordered the high official Xue Jiwen to go to Renzhou to meet him, and also issued an edict to Li Deyu to send a military vehicle to see him off.

古文：德裕因中使还，献疏曰：
现代文：李德裕趁宦官返回京都，呈进奏疏道：
English: Taking advantage of the eunuch's return to Kyoto, Li Deyu went into a rant:

古文：臣闻道之高者，莫如广成、玄元，人之圣者，莫若轩黄、孔子。
现代文： 臣听说道行至高者莫过于广成、玄元，人间至圣者莫过于轩辕、孔子。
English: It is said that there is no one higher than Guangcheng and Xuan Yuan, and there is no one holier than Xuan Zang and Confucius.

古文：昔轩黄问广成子：理身之要，何以长久？
现代文：当初轩辕黄帝询问广成子，养生的精要是什么，怎样才能长生？
English: At first, Emperor Huangdi inquired of Guangcheng, "What is the essence of health care, and how can I live forever?"

古文：对曰： 无视无听，抱神以静。
现代文：广成子回答说： 视而不见、充耳不闻、静心守神。
English: Guangcheng Zi replied: "To turn a blind eye, to turn a deaf ear, and to meditate on God.

古文：形将自正，神必自清。
现代文：身躯自会完善，心神自必纯净。
English: The body will be perfected, and the mind will be pure.

古文：无劳子形，无摇子精，乃可长生。
现代文：不要劳损肢体，不要摇荡精神，便可长生。
English: Don't strain your body, don't shake your spirit, and you will live forever.

古文：慎守其一，以处其和。
现代文：谨慎固精守一，以使身心和顺。
English: Carefully adhere to one, so as to make the body and mind harmonious.

古文：故我修身千二百岁矣，吾形未尝衰。 
现代文：因此我修养身心一千二百岁了，形体从未衰老。 
English: Therefore, I have cultivated my mind and body for twelve hundred years, and my body has never aged.

古文：又云： 得吾道者，上为皇而下为王。 
现代文：又说： 获得我的道术，上可为皇帝下可为王侯。 
English: He also said, "If you acquire my Daoism, you can become an emperor or a prince.

古文：玄元语孔子曰： 去子之骄气与多欲，态色与淫志，是皆无益于子之身。
现代文：玄元对孔子说： 去掉您的骄气与多欲、故作姿态与过分追求，这些都无益于您的身体。
English: Xuan Yuan said to Confucius, "Removing your pride and desire, your pretentious attitude and excessive pursuit, all of these are not beneficial to your body.

古文：吾所告子者是已。 
现代文：我能告诉您的就是这些了。 
English: That's all I can tell you.

古文：故轩黄发谓天之叹，孔子兴犹龙之感。
现代文：因此轩辕黄帝发出以广成子为神的赞叹，孔子产生玄元如神龙高深莫测的感慨。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong of the Yellow Emperor expressed his admiration for Guangcheng Zi as a god, and Confucius produced an unfathomable emotion as if he were a divine dragon.

古文：前圣于道，不其至乎？
现代文：先圣们关于养生之道的见地，难道不是至理吗？
English: Isn't the view of the ancients on the way of health regimen reasonable?

古文：伏惟文武大圣广孝皇帝陛下，用玄祖之训，修轩黄之术；凝神闲馆，物色异人；将以觌冰雪之姿，屈顺风之请。
现代文： 臣敬思太宗皇帝陛下，取用玄元祖师老子的教诲修性，遵循轩辕黄帝的道术养生，凝神于静舍，访求异人，是借以神遇肌肤冰雪的神人，竭尽顺应时尚的真情。
English: He revered Emperor Taizong, adopted the teachings and practices of Emperor Xuanzong's ancestor Lao Zi, followed the Taoist regimen of Emperor Xuanzong of the Yellow Emperor, concentrated on meditation, and visited strangers. He was a man of God who met the snow and ice on his skin with the help of God, and tried his best to conform to the true feelings of fashion.

古文：恭惟圣感，必降真仙。
现代文：臣敬思：受到圣上感召，必有真仙降临。
English: Minister Keishi: Inspired by the saint, there must be a true fairy to come.

古文：若使广成、玄元混迹而至，语陛下之道，授陛下之言，以臣度思，无出于此。
现代文：假若广成、玄元掩藏本相而来，告诉陛下的养生之道，传授陛下的长生真言，据臣料想，不会超出以上所讲的道理。
English: If Guangcheng and Xuan Yuan were to come from hiding, to tell His Majesty the way to maintain health, to teach His Majesty the truth of longevity, according to the expectations of the court, it would not go beyond the above-mentioned reason.

古文：臣所虑赴召者，必迂怪之士，苟合之徒，使物淖冰，以为小术，炫耀邪僻，蔽欺聪明。
现代文：臣忧虑的是应召者，必是迂阔怪诞之士，随便附合之徒，用药物消融厚冰，以他的区区小技，炫耀邪门左道，蒙蔽圣上视听。
English: What the minister is worried about is the caller, who is bound to be an erratic and grotesque person, a random follower, using drugs to melt thick ice, using his little tricks to show off the evil ways, and blinding the holy audio-visual.

古文：如文成、五利，一无可验。
现代文：就像汉朝方士少翁、栾大所当的文成大将、五利将军，虚妄之言无一可以验证。
English: Just like the Han Dynasty Fang Shi Shao Weng, General Wencheng, and General Wuli, who were supposed to be great generals, none of the false words can be verified.

古文：臣所以三年之内，四奉诏书，未敢以一人塞诏，实有所惧。
现代文：臣之所以在三年之中，四次接到诏书，不敢推荐一个所谓的异人以搪塞诏令，实在是为臣有所忧惧。
English: The reason why the minister received the imperial edict four times in three years and did not dare to recommend a so-called stranger to cancel the imperial edict is really worrying for the minister.

古文：臣又闻前代帝王，虽好方士，未有服其药者。故《汉书》称黄金可成，以为饮食器则益寿。
现代文： 臣又听说前代帝王，纵然喜爱方士，却没有服用方士药物的，因此《汉书》仅称：黄金可以炼成，用它制作饮食器皿便会延年益寿。
English: The minister also heard that the previous emperor, even though he loved the Chinese medicine, did not take the Chinese medicine, so the "Chinese Book" only said: gold can be refined, and using it to make eating utensils will prolong life.

古文：又高宗朝刘道合、玄宗朝孙甑生，皆成黄金，二祖竟不敢服。岂不以宗庙社稷之重，不可轻易！
现代文：又，高宗朝的方士刘道合、玄宗朝的方士孙甑生，都曾炼成黄金，二位皇祖终究不敢服用，难道不是因为宗庙社稷事关重大，不可轻视？
English: In addition, Liu Daohai, a founder of the Gaozong Dynasty, and Sun Yat-sen, a founder of the Xuanzong Dynasty, were both refined into gold, and the two imperial ancestors did not dare to take it after all. Is it not because the matters of the ancestral temple and shrine are important and should not be despised?

古文：此事炳然载于国史。
现代文：这些事在国史上记载得明明白白。
English: These events are clearly recorded in the country's history.

古文：以臣微见，倘陛下睿虑精求，必致真隐，唯问保和之术，不求饵药之功，纵使必成黄金，止可充于玩好。
现代文：据臣浅见，倘若陛下明智谋虑精诚求索，定能招来真正的隐士，只问保真养和的方法，不求服药长生的功效，即使终于炼成黄金，也只供观赏把玩。
English: According to my humble opinion, if His Majesty were to think wisely and search diligently, he would surely be able to attract a true hermit. He would only ask for a method of maintaining peace, not for the effect of taking medicine for longevity. Even if it were finally refined into gold, it would only be for viewing and playing with.

古文：则九庙灵鉴，必当慰悦；寰海兆庶，谁不欢心？
现代文：那么九庙供奉的历代皇祖在天之灵有鉴，定当欢欣喜悦；海内万民，谁不欢心？
English: Then, the emperors of the nine dynasties who were enshrined in the Nine Temples must have been familiar with the spirit of heaven, and they must have rejoiced with joy; all the people in the sea, who are not happy?

古文：臣思竭愚衷，以裨玄化，无任兢忧之至。
现代文：臣谒尽愚诚，以期补助教化，不胜忧惧之至。 
English: It is a matter of great concern that the vassals should be so foolish as to subsidize the indoctrination.

古文：息元至京，帝馆之于山亭，问以道术。
现代文：周息元来到京都，敬宗让他居住在山亭中，向他询问方术。
English: When Zhou Xiyuan came to Kyoto, Emperor Keizong asked him to live in a mountain pavilion and inquired about the art of tea ceremony.

古文：自言识张果、叶静能，诏写真待诏李士昉问其形状，图之以进。
现代文：周息元自称认识二百多年前的张果老、中宗时期的叶静能；敬宗下诏给写真待诏李士日方，询问周息元的形貌，并将其绘制成图进献。
English: Zhou Xiyuan claimed to know Zhang Guoluo, who lived more than 200 years ago, and Ye Jingneng, who lived during the Middle Kingdom period; Emperor Jingzong gave the photo to the Japanese side, inquired about Zhou Xiyuan's appearance, and drew it into a picture for presentation.

古文：息元山野常人，本无道学，言事诞妄，不近人情。
现代文：周息元是乡野之民，本来就没有道行学问，论事荒诞虚妄，不近人情。
English: Zhou Rongyuan was originally from the countryside. He had no knowledge of Taoism, and his theories were absurd and unrealistic.

古文：及昭愍遇盗而殂，文宗放还江左。
现代文：待到敬宗遇刺身亡，文宗将周息元放回江左。
English: When Keizong was assassinated and died, Wenzong sent Zhou Xiyuan back to Jiangzao.

古文：德裕深识守正，皆此类也。
现代文：李德裕见识深远笃守正道的言行，都与此类似。
English: Li Deyu's words and deeds, which are far-sighted, far-sighted and righteous, are similar to this.

古文：文宗即位，就加检校礼部尚书。
现代文：文宗登基，李德裕就原职加任检校礼部尚书。
English: Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, and Li Deyu took up his original post and was appointed as the proctor of the ceremonial department.

古文：太和三年八月，召为兵部侍郎，裴度荐以为相。
现代文：太和三年八月，被召回朝廷任兵部尚书，裴度举荐他任宰相。
English: In August of the third year of the Taihe era, he was recalled to the imperial court to serve as the secretary of the military department, and Pei Du recommended him to be appointed prime minister.

古文：而吏部侍郎李宗闵有中人之助，是月拜平章事，惧德裕大用。
现代文：但吏部侍郎李宗闵得到宦官帮助，同月授职平章事，害怕李德裕受重用。
English: However, with the eunuch's help, the eunuch's attendant, Li Zongyao, was promoted to the position of the eunuch in the same month. He was afraid that Li Deyu would be overworked.

古文：九月，检校礼部尚书，出为郑滑节度使。
现代文：九月，李德裕以检校礼部尚书职位，调出朝廷任郑滑节度使。
English: In September, Li Deyu was transferred out of the imperial court to serve as Zheng Niu's envoy to the imperial court, with the post of inspector of the ceremonial department.

古文：德裕为逢吉所摈，在浙西八年。虽远阙庭，每上章言事。
现代文：李德裕被李逢吉排斥，在浙西八年，虽远离朝廷，仍常常上奏议政。
English: Li Deyu was ostracized by Li Fengji, and although he was away from the imperial court for eight years in western Zhejiang, he often went to the imperial court to discuss politics.

古文：文宗素知忠荩，采朝论征之。
现代文：文宗一向知道李德裕竭忠尽心，采纳朝臣议论召他回朝。
English: Wenzong always knew that Li Deyu was loyal and devoted, and adopted the courtier's argument to call him back to the court.

古文：到未旬时，又为宗闵所逐，中怀于悒，无以自申。
现代文：回到朝廷不到十天，又被李宗闵排斥出京；他心中抑郁，无从自辩。
English: Less than ten days after returning to the imperial court, he was expelled from Beijing by Li Zongyao; he was depressed and unable to defend himself.

古文：赖郑覃侍讲禁中，时称其善；虽朋党流言，帝乃心未已。
现代文：仰赖郑覃在内宫给皇帝讲学，不时地称道李德裕的美德，尽管李宗闵一党散布流言，文宗征召李德裕回朝任职的心愿未断。
English: He relied on Zheng Rong to give lectures to the emperor in the Inner Court, and praised the virtues of Li Deyu from time to time. Despite the rumors spread by Li Zong Rong's party, Wenzong's wish to recruit Li Deyu to return to the North has not been broken.

古文：宗闵寻引牛僧孺同知政事，二憾相结，凡德裕之善者，皆斥之于外。
现代文：不久李宗闵引荐牛僧孺一同主持政务，再次结怨，凡与李德裕友好的人，全被贬斥出朝廷。
English: Soon after, Li Zongyao recommended that Niu Zangyao preside over government affairs with him. Once again, resentment arose, and all those who were friendly with Li Deyu were expelled from the imperial court.

古文：四年十月，以德裕检校兵部尚书、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事、管内观察处置、西山八国云南招抚等使。
现代文：太和四年十月，委任李德裕为检校兵部尚书、成都尹、剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事、管内观察处置、西山八国云南招抚等使臣。
English: In October of the same year, Li Deyu was appointed as the vice-ambassador of Shangshu, Chengdu Yin, Jian'nan and Xichuan Jiedu of the Inspection and Inspection Department of the People's Liberation Army, as well as the envoy of Jiedu affairs, observation and disposal within the jurisdiction, and the envoy of Xishan eight countries and Yunnan Province.

古文：裴度于宗闵有恩。度征淮西时，请宗闵为彰义观察判官，自后名位日进。
现代文：裴度曾对李宗闵有恩，裴度征讨淮西时，请求朝廷任用李宗闵为彰义观察判官，从此以后李宗闵名声、地位日益上升。
English: Pei Du had been kind to Li Zonglu. When Pei Du went to Huaixi, he asked the imperial court to appoint Li Zonglu as the judge of the Zhangyi observation. Since then, Li Zonglu's reputation and status have been rising.

古文：至是恨度援德裕，罢度相位，出为兴元节度使，牛、李权赫于天下。
现代文：到这时却怀恨裴度举荐李德裕，罢免了裴度的宰相职位，逐出朝廷任兴元节度使，牛、李权势一时天下显赫。
English: At this time, however, he held a grudge against Pei Du for recommending Li Deyu, dismissed Pei Du from the post of prime minister, and expelled Ren Xingyuan, the imperial envoy, from the imperial court. The power of Niu and Li was once prominent throughout the world.

古文：西川承蛮寇剽虏之后，郭钊抚理无术，人不聊生。
现代文：西川遭南方外族抢劫后，郭钊安抚治理无方，民不聊生。
English: After Nishikawa was robbed by foreigners from the south, there was no way for Guo Gan to pacify and govern, and the people did not want to live.

古文：德裕乃复葺关防，缮完兵守。
现代文：李德裕便整顿关隘边防，修理完善防守阵地。
English: Li Deyu rectified the border defense of Guanzhou and repaired and improved the defensive positions.

古文：又遣人入南诏，求其所俘工匠，得僧道工巧四千余人，复归成都。
现代文：又派人到南诏，寻找被虏去的工匠，寻得僧人、道士、能工巧匠四千余人，回归成都。
English: They also sent people to Nanzhao to search for the abducted craftsmen, and found more than 4,000 monks, Taoists, and skilled craftsmen to return to Chengdu.

古文：五年九月，吐蕃维州守将悉怛谋请以城降。
现代文：太和五年九月，吐蕃的维州守将悉怛谋请求献城归降。
English: In September of the 5th year of the Taihei era, the Victorian governor of Tubo made a request to surrender the city.

古文：其州南界江阳，岷山连岭而西，不知其极；北望陇山，积雪如玉；东望成都，若在井底。
现代文：维州南接江阳，岷山连绵向西，不知其边界在哪里；北望陇山，积雪如玉；东眺成都，如在井底。
English: Victoria is connected to Jiangyang to the south, and Lushan Mountain stretches to the west, and I don't know where its border is; to the north, look at Lushan Mountain, the snow is like jade; to the east, look at Chengdu, as if at the bottom of a well.

古文：一面孤峰，三面临江，是西蜀控吐蕃之要地。
现代文：背倚孤峰，三面临江，这是西蜀控制吐蕃的要地。
English: With a solitary peak behind it and three rivers in front of it, it is an important place for Xishu to control Tujing.

古文：至德后，河、陇陷蕃，唯此州尚存。
现代文：肃宗至德以后，河右、陇西被吐蕃攻占，仅维州尚存。
English: After Su Zong's arrival in Germany, the right bank of the Hebei River and the west bank of the Yangtze River were occupied by the Tuobao, and only Wizhou remained.

古文：吐蕃利险要，将妇人嫁于此州阍者。
现代文：吐蕃觉得维州险要，对它有利，将妇女嫁给此州守城门的人。
English: Victoria, he felt, was at stake, and it was to her advantage to marry a woman to the state's leading gatekeeper.

古文：二十年后，妇人生二子成长。
现代文：二十年后，这个妇人所生二子长大成人。
English: Twenty years later, the woman's two sons have grown to adulthood.

古文：及蕃兵攻城，二子内应，其州遂陷。
现代文：待到吐蕃军攻城，此二人做内应，维州因此失陷。
English: By the time the Tubo army attacked the city, the two had made a deal, and Victoria was lost.

古文：吐蕃得之，号曰 无忧城 。
现代文：吐蕃得到维州，称其为 无忧城 。
English: Victoria was given to Tubo, calling it a carefree city.

古文：贞元中，韦皋镇蜀，经略西山八国，万计取之不获，至是悉怛谋遣人送款。
现代文：德宗贞元年间，韦皋镇守蜀州，经管西山八国，用尽计谋仍无法夺回此州，直至这次悉怛谋派人致以归附诚意。
English: During the reign of Emperor Dezong in the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Weiwuizhen successfully defended Shuzhou and administered the Eight Kingdoms of the Western Hills. However, it was not possible to recapture the state after exhausting all possible means, until this time, Siyuan sent people with the sincerity of annexation.

古文：德裕疑其诈，遣人送锦袍金带与之，托云候取进止，悉怛谋乃尽率郡人归成都。
现代文：李德裕怀疑有诈，派人送锦袍金带给他，假托说是听候皇帝决定，悉怛谋便带领全郡人众归附成都。
English: Suspecting fraud, Li Deyu sent someone to bring him a gold brocade robe. On the pretext that he was waiting for the emperor's decision, he led the people of the whole county to annex Chengdu.

古文：德裕乃发兵镇守，因陈出攻之利害。
现代文：李德裕这才派兵镇守维州，并就占据此州向朝廷陈述出兵攻打吐蕃的重要性。
English: It was only then that Li Deyu sent troops to defend Wizhou, and explained to the imperial court the importance of sending troops to attack Tujing in order to occupy this province.

古文：时牛僧孺沮议，言新与吐蕃结盟，不宜败约，语在《僧孺传》。
现代文：这时遭到牛僧孺反对，说是刚与吐蕃结盟，不应毁约，语载《牛僧孺传》。
English: At this time, he was opposed by Niu Zangyu, who said that he had just made an alliance with Tubo and should not break the agreement, as recorded in "Niu Zangyu Biography."

古文：乃诏德裕却送悉怛谋一部之人还维州，赞普得之，皆加虐刑。
现代文：于是朝廷诏令李德裕将悉怛谋统率的部从全部退回维州，吐蕃首领得到他们后，全都施以酷刑。
English: As a result, the imperial court ordered Li Deyu to return all the members of the conspiracy back to Wuzhou, and after the leaders of the Tibetans got them, they were all tortured.

古文：德裕六年复修邛峡关，移巂州于台登城以扞蛮。
现代文：李德裕于太和六年重修邛峡关，将州州治迁至台登城以抵御异族进犯。
English: In the sixth year of the Taihe reign, Li Deyu rebuilt the Yingxia Pass and moved the prefectural government to Taitung City to fend off the foreign invasion.

古文：德裕所历征镇，以政绩闻。
现代文：李德裕历任方镇，均以政绩闻名。
English: Li Deyu has served Fangzhen successively and is famous for his political achievements.

古文：其在蜀也，西拒吐蕃，南平蛮、蜒。
现代文：他治蜀时，西边抵御了吐蕃的进犯，南方平定了南蛮、譙人地区。
English: When he ruled Shu, the west side resisted the attack of Tubo, and the south leveled Nanban and Humen regions.

古文：数年之内，夜犬不惊；疮痏之民，粗以完复。
现代文：数年之间，夜无犬惊，遭受创伤的黎民，民生略有恢复、充实。
English: In the space of a few years, there have been no night terrors for the traumatised people of Lebanon, and people's livelihoods have been slightly restored and enriched.

古文：会监军王践言入朝知枢密，尝于上前言悉怛谋缚送以快戎心，绝归降之义，上颇尤僧孺。
现代文：适逢监军王践言入朝主管枢密院，曾对文宗言及捆送悉怛谋使吐蕃首领快意称心，而断绝了对归降者的恩义，文宗颇为怨怪牛僧孺。
English: At the right time, the king, who was in charge of supervising the army, made a speech to the Privy Council, which was in charge of the imperial court. He praised the words and deeds of Wenzong, and tried to make the leaders of Tubo happy, but cut off the gratitude to the returnees. Wenzong was quite a grudge bearer.

古文：其年冬，召德裕为兵部尚书。僧孺罢相，出为淮南节度使。
现代文：这年冬，召李德裕入朝任兵部尚书，牛僧孺罢相，调出朝廷任淮南节度使。
English: In the winter of that year, Li Deyu was summoned to the imperial court to serve as the secretary of the military department, while Niu Sangyu resigned as the prime minister and was transferred to the imperial court to serve as the envoy to the Huainan Festival.

古文：七年二月，德裕以本官平章事，进封赞皇伯，食邑七百户。
现代文：太和七年二月，李德裕以本职位任平章事，晋封为赞皇伯，食邑七百户。
English: In February of the 7th year of the Taihei era, Li Deyu was appointed to this position and promoted to the post of Zhanwangbo, and 700 households were served.

古文：六月，宗闵亦罢，德裕代为中书侍郎、集贤大学士。
现代文：李宗闵亦罢相，李德裕代任中书侍郎、集贤大学士。
English: Li Zonglu also resigned as prime minister, and Li Deyu took his place as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the scholar of Jixian University.

古文：其年十二月，文宗暴风恙，不能言者月余。
现代文：同年十二月，文宗暴发风疾，一个多月不能说话。
English: In December of the same year, Wenzong suffered a stroke and was unable to speak for more than a month.

古文：八年正月十六日，始力疾御紫宸见百僚。
现代文：太和八年正月十六日，才强撑病体到紫宸殿接见百官。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 8th year of the Taiwa era, he had to force his sick body to go to Shishinden Hall to meet with a hundred officials.

古文：宰臣退问安否，上叹医无名工者久之。由是王守澄进郑注。
现代文：宰辅大臣在退朝后询问病好没有，文宗叹息已很久没有名医，于是王守澄举荐郑注。
English: After retiring from the imperial court, the Vice-Minister inquired whether the illness was getting better. Wenzong lamented that he had not had a famous doctor for a long time, so Wang Shoucheng recommended Zheng Zhu.

古文：初，注构宋申锡事，帝深恶之，欲令京兆尹杖杀之。
现代文：当初，郑注诬陷宋申锡的事，使文宗痛恶他，打算命京兆尹以杖刑将他杀掉。
English: At first, Zheng Zhu falsely accused Song Shensi, which made Wen Zong detest him, and planned to order Jing Zhaoyun to kill him with a cane.

古文：至是以药稍效，始善遇之。
现代文：这时因郑注下药渐渐见效，才善待他。
English: At this time, because the medicine injected by Zheng gradually took effect, he was treated well.

古文：守澄复进李训，善《易》。
现代文：王守澄又举荐李训，称其精于《易》学。
English: Wang Shuzhen also recommended Li Xun, saying that he was good at the study of Yi.

古文：其年秋，上欲授训谏官。德裕奏曰： 李训小人，不可在陛下左右。
现代文：这年秋，文宗想授予李训谏官之职，李德裕进言说： 李训是小人，不可在陛下身边。
English: In the autumn of that year, Emperor Wenzong wanted to give Li Xun the post of eunuch. Li Deyu said: Li Xun is a villain and should not be allowed to be around His Majesty.

古文：顷年恶积，天下皆知；无故用之，必骇视听。 
现代文：他近年恶行累累，天下人都知道，平白无故任用他，必定惊扰人们对朝政的看法。 
English: He has done a lot of bad things in recent years, and the whole world knows that appointing him for no reason will definitely disturb people's views on the imperial government.

古文：上曰： 人谁无过，俟其悛改。
现代文：文宗说： 人谁无过，望其悔改。
English: Wen Zong said: Anyone who has no fault is expected to repent.

古文：朕以逢吉所托，不忍负言。 
现代文：朕因李逢吉托请，不愿食言。 
English: I am not willing to go back on my word because of Li Fengjito's request.

古文：德裕曰： 圣人有改过之义。
现代文：李德裕说： 圣人有教人改过的训义。
English: Li Deyu said: The sages have teachings that have been changed by the teachers.

古文：训天性奸邪，无悛改之理。 
现代文：李训天性奸邪，没有悔改的必然趋势。 
English: Li Xun is a natural adulterer, and there is no inevitable trend of repentance.

古文：上顾王涯曰： 商量别与一官。 
现代文：文宗对王涯说： 商量一下，另给他一个官职。 
English: Wenzong said to Wang Ya: Let's discuss it and give him another post.

古文：遂授四门助教。
现代文：于是授予李训四门助教之职。
English: As a result, Li Xun was awarded the position of assistant professor.

古文：制出，给事中郑肃、韩佽封之不下。王涯召肃面喻令下。
现代文：制令发出后，给事中郑肃、韩亻次封存不下达，王涯召郑肃面告其下达制令。
English: After the issuance of the production order, Zheng Sui and Han Kui did not issue the order to seal the order, and Wang Ya called Zheng Sui to tell him to issue the production order.

古文：俄而郑注亦自绛州至。训、注恶德裕排己，九月十日，复召宗闵于兴元，授中书侍郎、平章事，代德裕。出德裕为兴元节度使。
现代文：不久郑注也从绛州至京，李训、郑注憎恨李德裕排斥自己；九月十日，从兴元再将李宗闵召回朝廷，授官中书侍郎、平章事，替代李德裕，将李德裕调出任兴元节度使。
English: Soon, Zheng Zhu also moved from Bozhou to Beijing. Li Xun and Zheng Zhu hated Li Deyu and ostracized themselves. On September 10, Li Zongya was recalled from Xingyuan to the imperial court, and Li Deyu was replaced by the secretary and the secretary, Ping Zhangji. Li Deyu was transferred to the post of Xingyuan Festival envoy.

古文：德裕中谢日，自陈恋阙，不愿出籓，追敕守兵部尚书。
现代文：李德裕进宫谢恩时，自陈眷恋朝廷，不愿出任藩镇；朝廷追发诏书任命他代理兵部尚书。
English: When Li Deyu entered the palace to express his gratitude, Chen fell in love with the imperial court and did not want to serve as a vassal; the imperial court issued an imperial rescript to appoint him as the deputy of Hyobusho.

古文：宗闵奏制命已行，不宜自便，寻改检校尚书左仆射、润州刺史、镇海军节度、苏常杭润观察等使，代王璠。
现代文：李宗闵上奏说：诏令业已发出，不应听其自便。旋即改任李德裕为检校尚书左仆射、润州刺史、镇海军节度、苏常杭润观察等使，替代王。
English: Li Zongya said: "The edict has already been issued, and it should not be left to its own convenience. Immediately, Li Deyu was appointed as the envoy of the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school, the inspection of the school."

古文：德裕至镇，奉诏安排宫人杜仲阳于道观，与之供给。
现代文：李德裕到任后，奉诏令在道观安顿宫女杜仲阳，给她供给。
English: After Li Deyu took office, he was ordered by imperial edict to settle the palace maiden Du Zhongyang in Taoism and provide her with supplies.

古文：仲阳者，漳王养母，王得罪，放仲阳于润州故也。
现代文：杜仲阳是漳王李凑的养母，漳王获罪，因此将杜仲阳放逐到润州。
English: Du Zhongyang was the foster mother of King Gong Liqin. King Gong was found guilty, so he banished Du Zhongyang to Rongzhou.

古文：九年三月，左丞王璠、户部侍郎李汉进状，论德裕在镇，厚赂仲阳，结托漳王，图为不轨。
现代文：太和九年三月，尚书左丞王、户部尚书李汉呈进诉状，给李德裕定下在藩镇厚赠杜仲阳财物、结交投身于漳王、图谋不轨的罪名。
English: In March of the ninth year of the Taihei era, Shangshu Zuojo Wang and the head of the household, Shangshu Lihan, submitted a complaint, accusing Li Deyu of giving Du Zhongyang's property in the town of the domain, making friends with and devoting himself to Shao Wang, and scheming.

古文：四月，帝于蓬莱殿召王涯、李固言、路随、王璠、李汉、郑注等，面证其事。
现代文：四月，文宗在蓬莱殿召见王涯、李固言、路随、王、李汉、郑注等人，当面对证此事。
English: In April, Wenzong summoned Wang Ya, Li Guyan, Lu Sui, Wang, Li Han, Zheng Zhu and others to the Penglai Palace to witness the matter.

古文：璠、汉加诬构结，语甚切至。
现代文：王、李汉虚构诬陷，言语非常密合。
English: Wang and Li Han are fictitious frame-ups, and their words are very close.

古文：路随奏曰： 德裕实不至此。
现代文：路随进言说： 李德裕决不至于到此地步。
English: Lu Zuijin said: Li Deyu will never come to this point.

古文：诚如璠、汉之言，徼臣亦合得罪。 
现代文：果真像王、李汉所说，微臣也该有罪。 
English: If it is true as Wang and Li Han said, the minor ministers should also be guilty.

古文：群论稍息。
现代文：众人的议论旋即平息。
English: The crowd's chatter immediately subsided.

古文：寻授德裕太子宾客，分怀东都。
现代文：不久，任李德裕为太子宾客，分管东都洛阳。
English: Soon, Ren Li Deyu became the prince's guest, in charge of the eastern capital Luoyang.

古文：其月，又贬袁州长史。
现代文：同月，又将他贬为袁州长史。
English: In the same month, he was relegated to the position of Yuan Changshi.

古文：路随坐证德裕，罢相，出镇浙西。
现代文：路随因替李德裕质证获罪，被罢相，调任镇守浙西。
English: Lu Sui was found guilty of being Li Deyu's stooge, dismissed from the post of minister and transferred to the post of town guard of western Zhejiang.

古文：其年七月，宗闵坐救杨虞卿，贬处州。李汉坐党宗闵，贬汾州。
现代文：这年七月，李宗闵因救杨虞卿获罪，贬官到处州；李汉因与李宗闵结党，贬至分州。
English: In July of that year, Li Zonglu was found guilty of saving Yang Yuqing and was demoted to the provincial level; Li Han was demoted to the provincial level for forming a party with Li Zonglu.

古文：十一月，王璠与李训造乱伏诛，而文宗深悟前事，知德裕为朋党所诬。
现代文：十一月，王与李训作乱伏法处死，因而文宗深深省悟上述事件，明白李德裕是被朋党诬陷。
English: In November, Wang and Li Xun were sentenced to death for sedition. As a result, Wen Zong deeply reflected on the above-mentioned incident and understood that Li Deyu was framed by his friends.

古文：明年三月，授德裕银青光禄大夫，量移滁州刺史。
现代文：次年三月，委任李德裕为银青光禄大夫，就近调任滁州刺史。
English: In March of the following year, Li Deyu was appointed as the silver Qingguanglu doctor, and was soon transferred to the post of Zhangzhou sashimi.

古文：七月，迁太子宾客。
现代文：七月，升任太子宾客。
English: In July, he was promoted to a guest of the crown prince.

古文：十一月，检校户部尚书，复浙西观察使。
现代文：十一月，任检校户部尚书，复任浙西观察使。
English: In November, he was appointed as the inspector of schools and resumes his duties as the western Zhejiang observation envoy.

古文：德裕凡三镇浙西，前后十余年。
现代文：李德裕共三次镇守浙西，前后十余年。
English: Li Deyu served as the garrison commander of western Zhejiang for a total of three times, for more than ten years.

古文：开成二年五月，授扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使、知节度使事，代牛僧孺。
现代文：开成二年五月，授李德裕扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使、知节度使事之职，替代牛僧孺。
English: In May of the following year, Li Deyu was appointed the governor of Yangzhou, vice-ambassador of Huainan and deputy ambassador of Jiedu, replacing Niu Xiangyao.

古文：初，僧孺闻德裕代己，乃以军府事交付副使张鹭，即时入朝。
现代文：起先，牛僧孺一听说李德裕替代自己，便把军府事务交给了副使张鹭，即刻入朝。
English: At first, as soon as he heard that Li Deyu had replaced him, Niu Xiangjun handed over the military affairs to the deputy envoy Zhang Ye and immediately entered the court.

古文：时扬州府藏钱帛八十万贯匹，及德裕至镇，奏领得止四十万，半为张鹭支用讫。
现代文：这时扬州府库有钱帛八十万贯匹，待李德裕到任，奏报朝廷：他仅领得四十万，另一半全被张鹭支用。
English: At this time, the Yangzhou government treasury had money of 800,000 rupees. When Li Deyu took office, he reported to the imperial court that he only received 400,000 rupees, and the other half was all used by Zhang Ye.

古文：僧孺上章讼其事，诏德裕重检括，果如僧孺之数。
现代文：牛僧孺上奏章诉讼此事，朝廷诏令李德裕重新核查，果然是牛僧孺所报的数字。
English: The court ordered Li Deyu to re-examine the matter, and it turned out to be the figure reported by Niu Son Gung.

古文：德裕称初到镇疾病，为吏隐欺，请罚。诏释之。补阙王绩、魏谟，崔党韦有翼、拾遗令狐綯书左仆射。
现代文：文宗下诏宽免。补阙王绩、魏慕、崔党、韦有翼，拾遗令狐腍、韦楚老、樊宗仁等，连上奏章非议李德裕谎报钱帛之数，以此倾轧牛僧孺，文宗始终不予追究。开成四年四月，就李德裕原职加任他为检校尚书左仆射。
English: In April of the following year, Li Deyu was appointed to Li Deyu's original post of school inspector, and Li Deyu was given the additional post of school inspector.

古文：五年正月，武宗即位。
现代文：开成五年正月，武宗登基。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Gojong, Emperor Gojong ascended to the throne.

古文：七月，召德裕于淮南。
现代文：七月，朝廷从淮南召回李德裕。
English: In July, the imperial court recalled Li Deyu from Huainan.

古文：九月，授门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：九月，任命他为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In September, he appointed him as a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：初，德裕父吉甫，年五十一出镇淮南，五十四自淮南复相。
现代文：当初，李德裕的父亲李吉甫，五十一岁被贬官镇守淮南，五十四岁恢复相位。
English: At first, Li Deyu's father, Li Jifu, was demoted from the post of town guard of Huainan at the age of 51, but was reinstated at the age of 54.

古文：今德裕镇淮南，复入相，一如父之年，亦为异事。
现代文：现今李德裕镇守淮南，到再入朝任宰相，年岁与他父亲完全一样，也是件奇事。
English: Today, Li Deyu is the military commander of Huainan Province, and when he re-enters the imperial court, he will be the prime minister. He is exactly the same age as his father, which is also a miracle.

古文：会昌元年，兼左仆射。
现代文：武宗会昌元年，李德裕兼左仆射。
English: In the first year of Wuzong Huichang, Li Deyu and Zuofu shot.

古文：开成末，回纥为黠戛斯所攻。战败，部族离散。乌介可汗奉太和公主南来。
现代文：在开成末年时，回纥遭到黠戛斯进攻，战败，部族离散，其首领乌介可汗送和亲的唐朝大和公主南归。
English: At the end of the Kaisei era, the Uighurs were attacked and defeated by the Qajars, and the tribe dispersed. Its leader, Ujie Khan, sent his relative, the Tang Dynasty's Emperor Daiwa and Princess Nankui.

古文：会昌二年二月，牙于塞上，遣使求助兵粮，收复本国，权借天德军以安公主。
现代文：会昌二年二月，他在边界上设立衙署，派使臣向唐朝求助军粮，以收复本国，并暂借天德军镇以安顿大和公主。
English: In February of the second year of Huichang, he set up a post on the border and sent envoys to the Tang Dynasty to ask for military supplies to recover the country, and temporarily borrowed the Tiande Military Town to settle the Yamato Princess.

古文：时天德军使田牟，请以沙陁、退浑诸部落兵击之。
现代文：这时的天德军镇守使田牟，呈请朝廷借助沙陀、退浑诸部落的军队攻打乌介可汗。
English: At this time, Tian Mu, the commander of the Tian De Army, asked the imperial court to use the armies of the Shatou and Hui Hun tribes to attack Ushie Khan.

古文：上意未决，下百僚商议，议者多云如牟之奏。
现代文：武宗主意未定，下诏群臣商议此事，参与商议者大多主张照田牟的奏请办。
English: Emperor Wuzong's mind was undecided, so he sent a group of ministers to discuss the matter, and most of those who participated in the discussion advocated that Terutamou's appeal be accepted.

古文：德裕曰： 顷者国家艰难之际，回纥继立大功。
现代文：李德裕说： 近时正当国家艰难之际，回纥连立大功。
English: Li Deyu said: "Recently, when the country is in a difficult time, Hui Xuan Lian made great achievements.

古文：今国破家亡，窜投无所，自居塞上，未至侵淫。
现代文：现在他国破家亡，无处投身，自居边界，未曾渗进扩张。
English: At present, other countries have broken up and died, have nowhere to devote themselves, have set up their own borders, and have not penetrated and expanded.

古文：以穷来归，遽行杀伐，非汉宣待呼韩邪之道也。
现代文：他穷途归附，即行杀伐，这不是汉宣帝善待呼韩邪的办法。
English: He had no choice but to join them, that is, to kill them. This was not the way for Emperor Han Xuan to be kind to evil Koreans.

古文：不如聊济资粮，徐观其变。 
现代文：不如姑且接济他军粮，慢慢观察他的变化。 
English: It would be better to give him food rations and slowly observe his changes.

古文：宰相陈夷行曰： 此借寇兵而资盗粮，非计也，不如击之便。 
现代文：宰相陈夷行说： 这如同借给暴徒兵器、资助盗贼食粮，是失策，不如攻打他有利。 
English: Prime Minister Chen Yixing said: "This is like lending weapons to rioters and financing thieves with food. It is a bad policy. It is better to attack him."

古文：德裕曰： 田牟、韦仲平言沙陀、退浑并愿击贼，此缓急不可恃也。
现代文：李德裕说： 田牟、韦仲平称沙陀、退浑一致表示愿意攻打贼军；到情势急迫时这是不可依赖的。
English: Li Deyu said: "Tamou and Wei Zhongping called themselves "Sadou" and "Fenghun" and unanimously expressed their willingness to attack the Kleptocracy; when the situation is urgent, this cannot be relied upon.

古文：夫见利则进，遇敌则散，是杂虏之常态，必不肯为国家扞御边境。
现代文：见利则争先，遇敌即离散，是部族混杂的胡人的常态，决不肯为我国捍卫边境。
English: When they see an advantage, they compete for it, and when they encounter an enemy, they scatter. This is the normal state of the Hu people, who are a mixture of tribes, and they absolutely refuse to defend the border for our country.

古文：天德一城，戍兵寡弱，而欲与劲虏结雠，陷之必矣。
现代文：天德全城，守军兵少势弱，要与强敌结仇，必定失陷。
English: In the whole city of Tiande, the defending soldiers are few and weak. If you want to make war with a strong enemy, you will certainly fall.

古文：不如以理恤之，俟其越轶，用兵为便。 
现代文：不如按名份抚恤他，等到他越轨了，再使用武力始为有利。 
English: It would be better to pardon him by name and wait until he goes off the rails before resorting to force.

古文：帝以为然，许借米三万石。
现代文：武宗认为这一主张对，准许借米三万石给回纥。
English: Emperor Wuzong thought this was a good idea, and allowed him to borrow 30,000 koku of rice to pay back the loan.

古文：俄而回纥宰相霡没斯杀赤心宰相，以其众来降。
现代文：不久，回纥宰相没斯杀了赤心宰相，带领他的部众降唐。
English: Soon after, the Hui prime minister Meng Si killed the Ch'ing prime minister and led his subordinates to surrender to Tang.

古文：赤心部族又投幽州。乌介势孤，而不与之米，其众饥乏，渐近振武保大栅、杷头峰，突入朔州州界。
现代文：赤心的部族又投奔幽州，乌介可汗势力孤单，又不给他米，他统率的部众饥锇困乏，渐渐推进到振武的保大栅、杷头峰，突袭进入朔州州界。
English: The tribes in the center of the equator also rushed to Yuzhou, the power of the Wuxia Khan was alone and did not give him rice, and his subordinates were hungry and poor, gradually advancing to the Zhenwu Baodasi and Shantou Peak, and raiding into the state border of Shuozhou.

古文：沙陁、退浑皆以其家保山险；云州张献节婴城自固。
现代文：沙陀、退浑都以险要山势自保其部族，云州张献节则加固城防以自安。
English: Shatou and Bihun both took advantage of the precarious mountain situation to protect their tribes, while Zhang Xianjie of Yunnan strengthened the city's defenses for his own safety.

古文：虏大纵掠，卒无拒者。
现代文：乌介寇军大肆劫掠，始终没有抵御者。
English: The U.S.S.R. troops plundered and pillaged extensively, and there was never any resistance.

古文：上忧之，与宰臣计事。
现代文：武宗忧心忡忡，与宰辅大臣商议对策。
English: Worried, Takemune discussed countermeasures with the Vice-Minister.

古文：德裕曰： 杷头峰北，便是沙碛，彼中野战，须用骑兵。
现代文：李德裕说： 杷头峰北面便是沙漠，在那里野战，须用骑兵。
English: Li Deyu said: The north face of Shantou Peak is a desert, and cavalry must be used to fight there.

古文：若以步卒敌之，理难必胜。
现代文：若以步兵对阵，难有必胜之理。
English: If you play against infantry, it's hard to win.

古文：今乌介所恃者公主，如令勇将出奇夺得公主，虏自败矣。 
现代文：现在乌介倚仗的是大和公主在他手里，若派勇将出奇不意地夺得公主，他就不攻自败了。 
English: Right now, it is Yamato and the princess that Usuke is relying on to win the battle. If he were to send a brave general to unexpectedly capture the princess, he would be defeated without attacking.

古文：上然之，即令德裕草制处分代北诸军，固关防，以出奇形势授刘沔。
现代文：武宗认为有理，当即责成李德裕草拟诏令部置代北诸军，加固城防，将出奇制胜的布阵权力授予刘沔。
English: Wu Zong thought it was reasonable, and immediately ordered Li Deyu to draft an edict to replace the northern troops, strengthen the city defenses, and grant Liu Ye the power to set up a surprisingly victorious army.

古文：沔令大将石雄急击可汗于杀胡山；败之，迎公主还宫，语在《石雄传》。寻进位司空。
现代文：刘沔命令大将石雄在杀胡山迅疾袭击乌介可汗，将其击败，迎接大和公主回宫，事见《石雄传》，接着，李德裕职位晋升为司空。
English: Liu Bei ordered the general Shi Xiong to quickly attack Ushie Khan in the killing of Hu Shan, defeat him, and welcome the Yamato princess back to the palace, see "Shi Xiong Biography," and then Li Deyu was promoted to the position of Siku.

古文：三年二月，赵蕃奏黠戛斯攻安西、北庭都护府，宜出师应援。
现代文：会昌三年二月，赵蕃奏报黠戛斯攻打安西和北庭都护府，该出兵救援。
English: In February of the third year of Huichang's reign, Zhao Rongxiao reported that Xi'an had attacked Anxi and Beiting's capital and sent troops to the rescue.

古文：德裕奏曰：
现代文：李德裕上奏说：
English: Premier Li Deyu said:

古文：据地志，安西去京七千一百里，北庭去京五千二百里。
现代文： 据地理志，安西离长安七千一百里，北庭离长安五千二百里。
English: According to geography, Anxi is 7,100 miles away from Chang'an, and Beiting is 5,200 miles away from Chang'an.

古文：承平时，向西路自河西、陇右出玉门关，迤逦是国家州县，所在皆有重兵。
现代文：太平时由西路从河西、陇右出玉门关，连绵不断尽是本国州县，处处都有重兵驻守。
English: During the Taiping era, the West Road from Hexi and Handan to the right led to Yumen Pass, which was continuously occupied by the country's provinces and counties, and there were heavy soldiers stationed everywhere.

古文：其安西、北庭要兵，便于侧近征发。
现代文：安西、北庭要兵，宜在附近征集。
English: Anxi and Beiting are in need of soldiers, so it is advisable to recruit them nearby.

古文：自艰难已后，河、陇尽陷吐蕃，若通安西、北庭，须取回纥路去。
现代文：自国势艰难以后，河西、陇右尽都失陷于吐蕃，若要通往安西、北庭，必须取道回纥前去。
English: After the difficult situation in their own country, both Hexi and Shiyu have been lost to Tubo. If they want to go to Anxi and Beiting, they must take the road back to Shiyu.

古文：今回纥破灭，又不知的属黠戛斯否。
现代文：现今回纥破灭，又不知它是否确已归属黠戛斯？
English: Now that it has been broken up, do we really know if it belongs to Cannes?

古文：纵令救得，便须却置都护，须以汉兵镇守。
现代文：即令能援救二地，也必须再设都护，需派汉族军队镇守。
English: Even if it is possible to rescue the two places, it is necessary to set up the capital guard again, and it is necessary to send Han troops to guard the town.

古文：每处不下万人，万人从何征发？
现代文：每处不下万人，上万的人从哪里征集？
English: There are no less than ten thousand people in each place. Where are the tens of thousands of people to be recruited from?

古文：馈运取何道路？
现代文：运送粮饷取哪条道路？
English: Which road will be used to transport the grain?

古文：今天德、振武去京至近，兵力常苦不足。无事时贮粮不支得三年，朝廷力犹不及，况保七千里安西哉！
现代文：眼下天德、振武二地离长安极近，尚且常常苦于兵力不足，无事故时贮粮不足支用三年，朝廷对它们还力所不及，何况保全七千里外的安西呢？
English: At the moment, Tiande and Zhenwu are very close to Chang'an, yet they often suffer from a shortage of troops. If there is no accident, the grain storage will be insufficient for three years. The imperial court is beyond their strength. How about preserving Anxi, which is seven thousand miles away?

古文：臣所以谓纵令得之，实昔无用也。
现代文：因此臣以为即使得到它们，实际上也毫无用处。
English: Therefore, the vassal thought that even if they were obtained, they were actually useless.

古文：昔汉宣帝时，魏相请罢车师之田；汉元帝时，贾捐之请弃珠崖郡；国朝贤相狄仁杰亦请弃四镇，立斛瑟罗为可汗，又请弃安东，却立高氏。
现代文：以往汉宣帝时，魏相请求取消在东师国的垦田；汉元帝时，贾捐之奏请放弃珠崖郡；本朝贤相狄仁杰亦曾奏请朝廷放弃四镇，在当地立斛瑟罗为可汗；又请弃安东，仍然立高氏为王。
English: In the past, when Han Xuan became emperor, Wei Xiang requested the cancellation of Putian in the Eastern Shire; when Han Yuan became emperor, Jia Dengzong requested the abandonment of Zhuyao County; this dynasty's sage Di Renjie also requested the court to abandon the four towns and establish Juxero as khan in the local area; he also requested the abandonment of Andong and still established Gao as king.

古文：盖不欲贪外虚内，耗竭生灵。
现代文：都是因为不想贪占外域而使内部空虚，黎民耗损殆尽。
English: All because they did not want to occupy foreign territory, leaving the country empty and the people exhausted.

古文：此三臣者，当自有之时，尚欲弃之，以肥中国，况隔越万里，安能救之哉！
现代文：这三位大臣，在自身富有时，尚且要舍弃外域地盘，以使中国富足；何况远隔万里之地，怎么能去控制它呢？
English: These three ministers, when they are rich themselves, still want to give up foreign territory to make China rich; not to mention the land thousands of miles away, how can they control it?

古文：臣恐蕃戎多计，知国力不及，伪且许之，邀求中国金帛。陛下不可中悔，此则将实费以换虚事，即是灭一回纥而又生之，恐计非便。
现代文：臣下担心西戎藩国诡计多端，明知我朝国力不能达到那里，以此骗取援助，希求中国的金银财帛，届时陛下又不能中途反悔，这将是拿实财去换取虚功，这就是灭掉一个回纥却又使它生存下来，恐怕出兵之计不利。 
English: His vassals were worried that the Xijun state was scheming, knowing that the national strength of the DPRK would not be able to reach there, and that they would use this as a means of defrauding aid, hoping to obtain gold, silver and money from China. At that time, His Majesty would not be able to change his mind midway. This would be taking real money in exchange for false merits. It would be like eliminating a boa constrictor but allowing it to survive. I'm afraid the strategy of sending troops would be unfavorable.

古文：乃止。
现代文：武宗准奏，阻止了出兵。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：德裕又以太和五年，吐蕃维州守将以城降，为牛僧孺所沮，终失维州，奏论之曰：
现代文：李德裕又以太和五年吐蕃的维州守将献城归降，被牛僧孺阻止，终于失掉维州，上奏议论道：
English: Li Deyu and the five-year-old and five-year-old Victorian guard will surrender the city, be stopped by the bull monk, and finally lose Victoria, the report said:

古文：臣在先朝，出镇西蜀。
现代文： 臣在前代王朝，出任西蜀镇守。
English: He was a vassal of the previous dynasty and served as the governor of West Shuxu Town.

古文：其时吐蕃维州首领悉怛谋，虽是杂虏，久乐皇风，将彼坚城，降臣本道。
现代文：那时，吐蕃维州首领悉怛谋，虽是部族混杂的胡人，却久已喜好天朝的风范教化，将他的坚固守城，归附于为臣镇守的剑南道。
English: At that time, the leader of Tu Wei Prefecture, although he was a mixed tribe of Hu people, had long been fond of the demeanor and education of the Heavenly Court, and attached his fortified city to the Southern Jian Province, which was a vassal town.

古文：臣寻差兵马，入据其城，飞章以闻，先帝惊叹。
现代文：臣旋即差遣兵马，进驻该城，并将其事急奏朝廷，先帝闻知惊喜赞叹。
English: The vassal immediately sent soldiers and horses, stationed in the city, and urgently reported it to the imperial court. The former emperor was surprised and impressed.

古文：其时与臣不足者，望风嫉臣，遽献疑言，上罔宸听，以为与吐蕃盟约，不可背之，必恐将此为辞，侵犯郊境。
现代文：那时对臣不满的人，窥察势头嫉妒为臣，急忙进献疑言，惑乱了先帝的英明决断，误以为与吐蕃已订盟约，不能违背，惟恐吐蕃以此作为借口，侵犯我朝都城近地。
English: At that time, those who were dissatisfied with the emperor, observing the momentum of jealousy for the emperor, hurried to offer doubts, confusing the wise decision of the former emperor, mistakenly believing that they had signed a treaty with Tubo and could not renege, but fearing that Tubo would use this as an excuse to invade the vicinity of the capital.

古文：诏臣还却此城，兼执送悉怛谋等，令彼自戮。
现代文：诏令臣下退还此城，并将悉怛谋等人捆送吐蕃，让其自行惩处。
English: The emperor ordered his vassals to return the city, and sent all the conspirators to Tibet in shackles to be punished by themselves.

古文：复降中使，迫促送还。
现代文：又派宫中使臣，前来急催送还。
English: He also sent an envoy from the palace to come and urgently send them back.

古文：昔白起杀降，终于杜邮致祸；陈汤见徙，是为郅支报雠。
现代文：昔日秦国白起坑杀降卒，终于招致在杜邮被迫自杀之祸；汉朝陈汤被贬戍边，这是被杀的郅支单于向他报仇。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Guo Bai started a pit to kill a subordinate, which finally led to the disaster of being forced to commit suicide in Du Po; Han Dynasty Chen Tang was demoted to the side, which was the revenge of the killed subordinate.

古文：感叹前事，愧心终日。
现代文：感叹捆送降将之事，臣下整日心中羞愧。
English: Lamenting the fact that he was sent packing, the vassal felt ashamed all day long.

古文：今者幸逢英主，忝备台司，辄敢追论，伏希省察。
现代文：现今幸逢英明君主，愧列宰辅之位，特冒昧追论往事，敬祈陛下明察。
English: Today, we are fortunate to have a wise monarch, unworthy of the position of Zheyu, who dares to delve into the past, and we pray for His Majesty's discernment.

古文：且维州据高山绝顶，三面临江，在戎虏平川之冲，是汉地入兵之路。
现代文： 维州占据高山顶峰，三面临江，地处西戎平川的要道，这是入侵我国的通路。
English: Victoria occupies the peak of a high mountain, facing the Yangtze River on three sides, and is located on the main road of the West Eunpyeong Plain River, which is the gateway for the invasion of our country.

古文：初，河、陇尽没，此州独存。
现代文：当初，河西、陇右地区全部失陷，惟有维州得以保存。
English: At first, all of Hexi and Shanyu regions were lost, only Wizhou was saved.

古文：吐蕃潜将妇人嫁与此州门子。二十年后，两男长成，窃开垒门，引兵夜入，因兹陷没，号曰 无忧 。
现代文：吐蕃暗将该族妇人嫁给此州把守城门的人，二十年后，此妇人的两个儿子长大成人，暗地打开军堡的城门，夜间引进吐蕃军队，维州因此失陷，吐蕃称其为 无忧 城。
English: Twenty years later, when the woman's two sons had grown to adulthood, she secretly opened the gates of the fortress and brought in the Tujue army at night. As a result, Victoria was lost, and Tujue called it a worry-free city.

古文：因并力于西边，遂无虞于南路，凭凌近甸，宵旰累朝。
现代文：凭借此城在我西部边界集结兵力，在其南路再无后顾之忧，从而侵扰我朝都城近地，我朝数代先皇为此日夜操心。
English: By virtue of this city, I am assembling forces on our western border, and there will be no further worries on its southern route, thus invading my capital city near the ground. My ancestors have worried about this day and night for several generations.

古文：贞元中，韦皋欲经略河湟，须以此城为始，尽锐万旅，急攻累年。
现代文：贞元年间，韦皋曾筹划治理黄河、湟水地区，须从维州开始，竭尽精兵万人，猛攻此城多年。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, Emperor Wei had planned to govern the Yellow River and Surabaya regions, and he had to attack the city for many years, starting from Wuzhou and exhausting all his soldiers.

古文：吐蕃爱惜既甚，遂遣舅论莽热来援。
现代文：吐蕃首领极其珍惜此城，因而派其舅父论莽热前来援助。
English: The chieftain of Tubo treasured the city so much that he sent his uncle Tong Dang Rong to come to its aid.

古文：雉堞高峻，临冲难及于层霄；鸟迳屈盘，猛士多糜于礧石。
现代文：维州城墙高峻，我方战车难达高耸入云的山城；一路险道盘曲，攻城猛士大多在滚石下碎骨粉身。
English: Victoria's walls are high and steep, and our chariots can hardly reach the towering mountain city; all the way, the dangerous road is twisted, and most of the storming warriors are crushed under the rolling stones.

古文：莫展公输之巧，空擒莽热而还。
现代文：无从施展鲁班似的巧技，仅只擒获论莽热而回。
English: He didn't have the same skill as Lupin, but he was able to get back from the heat.

古文：及南蛮负恩，扫地驱劫。
现代文： 及至南方诸族首领忘恩背义，将我民驱赶劫掠殆尽。
English: And the leaders of the peoples of the south have been ungrateful and wicked, and have driven out my people and plundered them until they are destroyed.

古文：臣初到西蜀，众心未安，外扬国威，中缉边备。
现代文：臣初到西蜀之时，人心仍未安定；臣正对外张扬国威，在内治理边防。
English: When the minister first arrived in Xishu, the people's hearts were still not stable; the minister was promoting national prestige to the outside world and managing border defense internally.

古文：其维州执臣信令，乃送款与臣。臣告以须俟奏闻，所冀探其情伪。
现代文：那维州的主将笃诚向善，便致臣以归附诚意，臣以尚待奏报朝廷相告，想试探其真伪。
English: The lord of Navizhou, who was sincere and good-natured, expressed his sincerity to the vassal, and the vassal said that he had yet to report to the imperial court and wanted to test its authenticity.

古文：其悉怛谋寻率一城之兵众，并州印甲仗，塞途相继，空壁归臣。
现代文：悉怛谋不久便率领全城兵众，随带州印、兵器，结队塞途而来，空其城堡归顺。
English: Soon after, he led all the soldiers of the city, accompanied by the seal of the state and weapons, and came to the castle empty-handed.

古文：臣大出牙兵，受其降礼。
现代文：臣派出大批衙府士兵，接受其归降礼仪。
English: The vassal sent a large number of Shifu soldiers to accept their return ceremony.

古文：南蛮在列，莫敢仰视。
现代文：降者在队列中，不敢仰视。
English: The relegated are in the queue, afraid to look up.

古文：况西山八国，隔在此州，比带使名，都成虚语。
现代文：况且，西山八国，隔有维州，胡人封予的镇使名位，此后都成一句空话。
English: Moreover, Xishan Eight Kingdoms, separated by Victoria, the township given by the Hu people, has since become an empty phrase.

古文：诸羌久苦蕃中征役，愿作大国王人。
现代文：羌族各部久受吐蕃的征税与服役之苦，愿做有功于大唐的臣民。
English: The various branches of the Yao people have long suffered from the taxation and service of the Tubo, and are willing to be subjects who have contributed to Datang.

古文：自维州降后，皆云但得臣信牒帽子，便相率内属。
现代文：自维州归降以后，都表示只要得到臣给予委任名义的证书，便都仿效维州归属我朝。
English: After the surrender of Victoria, they all said that as long as they received the certificate of appointment given by the minister, they would follow the example of Victoria belonging to our dynasty.

古文：其蕃界合水、栖鸡等城，既失险厄，自须抽归，可减八处镇兵，坐收千里旧地。
现代文：与维州交界的合水、栖鸡等城，失去险固关隘，自必脱离吐蕃来归，这样便可减少八处镇守兵力，自然而然收回千里旧有土地。
English: Towns such as Heshui and Siqin, which share a border with Victoria, have lost their dangerous and narrow borders, and will have to return from Tubo. In this way, the garrison strength of eight towns can be reduced, and the old land of thousands of miles can be naturally recovered.

古文：臣见莫大之利，乃为恢复之基。
现代文：臣见此莫大的利益，实是恢复疆土的基业。
English: For the vassals, this huge benefit is actually the foundation of restoring the territory.

古文：继具奏闻，请以酬赏。臣自与锦袍金带，颙俟诏书。
现代文：接连呈奏朝廷，请求赏赐降将；臣自己赠予锦袍金带，企盼诏书下达。
English: He successively appealed to the imperial court, requesting a reward for his surrender; the vassal himself presented him with a brocade robe and a gold belt, hoping that the imperial decree would be issued.

古文：且吐蕃维州未降已前一年，犹围鲁州。
现代文：而吐蕃在维州未降之前一年，仍在围攻鲁州。
English: However, the Tujue still besieged Luzhou a year before the fall of Wuzhou.

古文：以此言之，岂守盟约？
现代文：以此而言，难道它信守盟约？
English: In that sense, is it living up to the covenant?

古文：况臣未尝用兵攻取，彼自感化来降。
现代文：何况臣未曾用兵攻取维州，是它的守将自受感化来降。
English: Moreover, the vassal had never used troops to conquer Victoria, and it was its defenders who were self-induced to surrender.

古文：又沮议之人，不知事实。
现代文：况且，反对者不知事实。
English: Moreover, the opponents do not know the facts.

古文：犬戎迟钝，土旷人稀，每欲乘秋犯边，皆须数岁就食。
现代文：西戎人行动迟钝，地广人稀，每次想乘秋季犯我边境，都须移兵粮多地区数年。
English: The people of Sijon are slow to act, the land is vast and sparsely populated, and every time they want to take advantage of the autumn to break our border, they have to move to areas with more grain for several years.

古文：臣得维州逾月，未有一使入疆。
现代文：臣得到维州后一个多月，吐蕃无一使臣入境。
English: More than a month after the minister received Victoria, not a single envoy from Tibet entered the country.

古文：自此之后，方应破胆，岂有虑其后怨，鼓此游词。
现代文：从此以后，它当丧胆，哪有担心它以后生怨之理，而鼓吹这种不实之词？
English: From now on, it should be discouraged. Is there any fear that it will cause resentment in the future, and promote such untruths?

古文：臣受降之时，指天为誓，宁忍将三百余人性命，弃信偷安。
现代文： 臣受降之时，曾指天盟誓，岂忍心牺牲三百多人的性命，背信偷安。
English: When the vassal surrendered, he swore by heaven that he would not be able to sacrifice the lives of more than three hundred people and betray the trust.

古文：累表上陈，乞垂矜赦。
现代文：臣屡屡奉表上陈，敬乞下文怜恤宽赦。
English: The vassal was repeatedly punished, and begged for mercy and pardon.

古文：答诏严切，竟令执还，加以体披桎梏，舁于竹畚。及将就路，冤叫呼天。
现代文：但答诒严厉，竟然命令拘捕降将送还吐蕃；加之他们身戴枷锁，畚箕抬着，将上路时，呼天喊冤。
English: However, they responded harshly, even ordering that they would be arrested and sent back to Tibet; in addition, they wore shackles, carried shackles, and cried out to the heavens when they were on the road.

古文：将吏对臣，无不流涕。
现代文：降将降吏对臣，无不流泪。
English: The subordinate will be subordinate to the subordinate, and all of them will shed tears.

古文：其部送者，使遭蕃帅讥诮，曰： 既已降彼，何须送来？ 
现代文：那些被送还的人，立即遭到吐蕃主帅的讥嘲说： 既已投降他人，何必又送回来？ 
English: Those who were sent back were immediately ridiculed by the Sputnik commander, who said: "Once you have surrendered to others, why should you be sent back again?

古文：乃却将此降人，戮于汉界之上，恣行残害，用固携离。
现代文：随即将这些降顺我朝者，在我边界上杀戮，恣意进行残害，用以禁锢叛逆。
English: They have killed and wantonly mutilated those who surrendered to our dynasty on our borders in order to suppress the rebellion.

古文：乃至掷其婴孩，承以枪槊。
现代文：甚至于抛掷其婴孩，用长矛戳杀。
English: They even threw their babies and stabbed them to death with spears.

古文：臣闻楚灵诱杀蛮子，《春秋》明讥；周文外送邓叔，简册深鄙。
现代文：臣听说楚灵王诱杀蛮人，《春秋》直言讥刺；周文送出邓叔，书册极其鄙夷。
English: The vassal heard that King Chuling had lured and killed a barbarian, and that "Spring and Autumn" was blunt and sarcastic; Zhou Wen sent out Deng Shiu, and the book was extremely despised.

古文：况乎大国，负此异类，绝忠款之路，快凶虐之情，从古以来，未有此事。
现代文：何况天朝大国，背弃异邦小族，堵绝真诚效忠者之路，快慰凶残暴虐者之心，自古以来，从无此事。
English: Moreover, since ancient times, there has never been such a thing as a great nation under the rule of heaven betraying a small foreign nation, blocking the path of those who are sincerely loyal, and comforting the hearts of those who are cruel and brutal.

古文：臣实痛悉怛谋举城受酷，由臣陷此无辜，乞慰忠魂，特加褒赠。
现代文：臣实在痛心悉怛谋全城遭受惨祸，系由为臣坑害了这些无辜；乞请告慰忠魂，特予褒奖赠封。 
English: The vassal was truly heartbroken to see the whole city suffer such a terrible disaster, and it was because of the vassal that these innocent people were killed; I beg you to console the loyal souls and give them a special award and seal.

古文：帝意伤之，寻赐赠官。
现代文：武宗感到伤痛，不久赐赠官衔。
English: Embarrassed, the Emperor soon gave him an official title.

古文：其年，德裕兼守司徒。
现代文：这年，李德裕兼任司徒。
English: In this year, Li Deyu also served as a disciple.

古文：四月，泽潞节度使刘从谏卒，军人以其侄稹擅总留后，三军请降旄钺。
现代文：四月，泽潞节度使刘从谏亡故，军众推其侄子刘稹统兵留后，三军请求朝廷赐予军权。
English: In April, after the Zehu Festival caused the death of Liu Conglu, and the army pushed his nephew Liu Conglu to stay, the three armies asked the court to grant military power.

古文：帝与宰臣议可否，德裕曰： 泽潞国家内地，不同河朔。前后命帅，皆用儒臣。
现代文：武宗与宰辅大臣商议是否可以，李德裕说： 泽潞在国家内地，不同于河朔边防；前后任命主帅，全用文儒大臣。
English: Li Deyu said: "Zehuan is located in the interior of the country, which is different from the border defense of Hexuo; the commander is appointed before and after, and the Minister of Confucianism is used for all purposes.

古文：顷者李抱真成立此军，身殁之后，德宗尚不许继袭，令李缄护丧归洛。
现代文：往时李抱真成立此军，死后，德宗尚且不许其后嗣继位，命令其子李缄返回洛阳治丧。
English: In the past, Li Po Zhen founded this army. After his death, Emperor Dezong did not allow his heirs to succeed, and ordered his son Li Xi to return to Luoyang to mourn.

古文：洎刘悟作镇，长庆中颇亦自专。属敬宗因循，遂许从谏继袭。
现代文：自从刘悟任方镇，穆宗长庆年间他又非常擅自专断，适逢敬宗遇事拖沓从旧，于是准许刘从谏承袭父职。
English: During the reign of Mu Zong Changqing, since Liu Wuzhong was appointed to Fang Zhen, he was very arbitrary, and when Jing Zong was delayed in dealing with matters, he allowed Liu Zong Zong to inherit his father's position.

古文：开成初，于长子屯军，欲兴晋阳之甲，以除君侧；与郑注、李训交结至深，外托效忠，实怀窥伺。
现代文：文宗开成初年，刘从谏在长子驻扎，想发动晋阳军队，以清君侧，与郑注、李训交结极深，表面假托效忠朝廷，实地心中有所图谋。
English: In the first year of the establishment of the Wenzong Dynasty, Liu Conglu stationed himself in the eldest son, wanted to launch the Jinyang army, sided with the Qing Dynasty, and had a deep relationship with Zheng Zhu and Li Xun. On the surface, he pretended to be loyal to the imperial court, but on the ground, he had a plot in mind.

古文：自疾病之初，便令刘稹管兵马。
现代文：自病重之初，他便让刘稹掌管兵马。
English: From the beginning of his serious illness, he let Liu Wei take charge of the soldiers and horses.

古文：若不加讨伐，何以号令四方？
现代文：若不加以讨伐，朝廷还如何向天下传布命令？
English: Without a crusade, how else could the imperial court disseminate its orders to the world?

古文：若因循授之，则籓镇相效，自兹威令去矣！ 
现代文：如果再依旧例授任刘稹承袭叔父之职，各藩镇竞相效法，自此朝廷的权威、命令就废弃了！ 
English: If Liu Bei is once again appointed to succeed his uncle, and all the provinces and towns compete to follow suit, then the authority and orders of the imperial court will be abandoned!

古文：帝曰： 卿算用兵必克否？ 
现代文：武宗问： 卿谋算过用兵必胜吗？ 
English: Wuzong asked, "Did you plan to use troops to win?"

古文：对曰： 刘稹所恃者，河朔三镇耳。
现代文：李德裕回答说： 刘稹所依赖的，不过是河朔三镇而已。
English: Li Deyu replied, "What Liu Ye relies on is nothing more than the three towns of Heshuo.

古文：但得魏镇不与稹同，破之必矣。
现代文：只要使魏博和镇冀不与刘稹协同，打败他是肯定的了。
English: As long as Wei Bo and Zhenji do not cooperate with Liu Bei, it is certain to defeat him.

古文：请遣重臣一人，传达圣旨，言泽潞命帅，不同三镇。
现代文：请派一位重要大臣，传达圣旨，讲明泽潞主帅的委任，不同于河朔三镇。
English: Please send an important minister to convey the sacred will and explain that the appointment of the coach of Mingze County is different from that of the three towns in Hebei Province.

古文：自艰难已来，列圣皆许三镇嗣袭，已成故事。
现代文：自国难以来，历代皇帝都准许三镇的军帅以嗣子承袭，已成惯例。
English: Since the national tragedy, it has become customary for successive emperors to allow the generals of the three towns to be succeeded by their heirs.

古文：今国家欲加兵诛稹，禁军不欲出山东。
现代文：现今朝廷打算派兵诛除刘稹，京城禁军不准备派出山东。
English: Now the imperial court is planning to send troops to expel Liu Bei, but the imperial army is not prepared to send troops to Shandong.

古文：其山东三州，委镇魏出兵攻取。 
现代文：山东的三个州，委派镇冀、魏博二镇出兵攻取。 
English: In the three provinces of Shandong, Zhenji and Weibo were designated as the first two towns to be invaded.

古文：上然之，乃令御史中丞李回使三镇谕旨，赐魏镇诏书云： 卿勿为子孙之谋，欲存辅车之势。 
现代文：武宗同意此计，便命御史中丞李回出使三镇宣旨，赐给魏、镇藩镇的诏书称： 卿等不要为子孙谋虑，想与刘稹形成相依之势。 
English: Emperor Wuzong agreed to this plan, and ordered the Grand Historian Li Huidong to send envoys to the three towns to issue an edict. The edict given to Wei, Zhen, Han, and Zhen said, "Your highness, don't worry about your descendants, you want to form a relationship of mutual dependence with Liu Bei.

古文：何弘敬、王元逵承诏，耸然从命。
现代文：二镇的节度使何弘敬、王元逵收到诏令，肃然从命。
English: The festivals of the two towns made He Hongjing and Wang Yuanqi receive the imperial edict and solemnly obey the order.

古文：初议出兵，朝官上疏相继，请依从谏例，许之继袭，而宰臣四人，亦有以出师非便者。
现代文：初议出兵时，朝官相继上疏，请朝廷依从刘从谏袭职的旧例，允许刘稹承袭继职，而宰相四人中，也有认为出兵不利的。
English: At the time of the initial proposal to send troops, the imperial officials were successively absent, and the imperial court was asked to follow the old example of Liu Congyi's succession to the post and allow Liu Ye to succeed to the post. Among the four prime ministers, some thought that the dispatch of troops was unfavorable.

古文：德裕奏曰： 如师出无功，臣请自当罪戾，请不累李绅、让夷等。
现代文：李德裕上奏道： 如果出兵无功，臣请自担罪责，不连累李绅、李让夷等人。 
English: Li Deyu made a speech: If the dispatch of troops is unsuccessful, the minister should take the blame on himself, and not burden Li Sheng, Li Zhangyi and others.

古文：及弘敬、元逵出兵，德裕又奏曰： 贞元、太和之间，朝廷伐叛，诏诸道会兵，才出界便费度支供饷，迟留逗挠，以困国力。或密与贼商量，取一县一栅以为胜捷，所以师出无功。
现代文：待到何弘敬、王元逵出兵后，李德裕又进言说： 贞元、太和之间，朝廷讨伐叛逆，诏令各道集结军队，才出辖区边界便计划支用供饷，缓慢行军、避敌观望，以致国力疲惫；有的人还暗地与叛贼商量，把攻占一县一垒作为取胜告捷，所以出兵无功。
English: After waiting for He Hongjing and Wang Yuanxuan to send troops, Li Deyu said: Between Zhenyuan and Taihe, the imperial court fought against the rebellion, and ordered each province to assemble the army. Only after leaving the jurisdiction area border, they planned to use the supply raft, march slowly, and avoid watching the enemy, so that the national strength was exhausted. Some people also secretly discussed with the traitors, and took the capture of the first base in one county as a victory, so the troops were useless.

古文：今请处分元逵、弘敬，只令收州，勿攻县邑。 
现代文：现请吩咐元逵、弘敬，只许占领州城，不要攻打县邑。 
English: Now, please order Yuan Shao and Hong Kei to occupy only the state capital and not to attack the county towns.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：武宗同意。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：及王宰、石雄进讨，经年未拔泽潞。
现代文：当初王宰、石雄进讨时，连年未攻下泽潞。
English: At the beginning, when Wang Zai and Shi Xiong marched in to discuss, they did not conquer Zehuan for several years.

古文：及弘敬、元逵收邢、洺、磁三州，稹党遂离，以至平殄，皆如其算。
现代文：待到何弘敬、王元逵攻占了邢、洛、磁等三个州，刘稹一伙便分崩离析，直至被平定消灭，全都与李德裕的谋算一样。
English: When He Hongjing and Wang Yuanjun occupied the three provinces of Min, Luo, and Jiao, Liu Jun's group fell apart, until it was suppressed and eliminated, all of which was the same as Li Deyu's plan.

古文：时王师方讨泽潞。三年十二月，太原横水戍兵因移戍榆社。乃倒戈入太原城，逐节度使李石，推其都将杨弁为留后。
现代文：正当官军讨伐泽潞时，会昌三年十二月，太原府驻守横水的士兵因移防榆社，竟倒戈攻入太原城，驱逐了节度使李石，推举其部将杨牟为留后官。
English: In December of the third year of the Heichang era, when the government army was fighting against Zehuan, the soldiers stationed in Hengshui of Taiyuan Prefecture, because of the transfer of the defense of the Zehuan Company, actually defected and invaded Taiyuan City, expelled the commander of the festival Li Shi, and promoted his subordinate Yang Mou as the remaining officer.

古文：武宗以贼稹未殄，又起太原之乱，心颇忧之。
现代文：武宗因叛贼刘稹未灭，又发生太原之乱，心里非常忧愁。
English: Wu Zong was very sad because the traitor Liu Bei had not been eliminated and the Taiyuan Rebellion had broken out.

古文：遣中使马元贯往太原宣谕，觇其所为。
现代文：派宫中使臣马元贯赴太原宣布诏谕，以观察他们的所为。
English: He sent the palace envoy Ma Yuan to Taiyuan to announce the edict and observe what they were doing.

古文：元贯受杨弁赂，欲保祐之。
现代文：马元贯受杨牟贿赂，想庇护他。
English: Ma Yuan had been bribed by Yang Mou and wanted to protect him.

古文：四年正月，使还，奏曰： 杨弁兵马极多，自牙门列队至柳子，十五余里，明光甲曳地。 
现代文：会昌四年正月，马元贯返回，奏报说： 杨牟兵马极多，从衙署列队到柳子，十五里多路，明光锦甲拖至地面。 
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Huichang, Ma Yuanran returned, and the report said: Yang Mu soldiers and horses were extremely numerous, from the Shandong Department to the willow, more than 15 miles, and the Mingguang Jinjia was dragged to the ground.

古文：德裕奏曰： 李石比以城内无兵，抽横水兵一千五百人赴榆社，安能朝夕间便致十五里兵甲耶？ 
现代文：李德裕进言说： 李石近因太原无兵，抽调横水的士兵一千五百人赴榆社驻防，哪能朝夕之间便弄来列队十五里路长的士兵和锦甲呢？ 
English: Li Deyu said, "Since there are no soldiers in Taiyuan, Li Shizhen recently transferred 1,500 soldiers from Hengshui to be stationed in Yanshe. How can he get a 15-mile-long line of soldiers and armor between morning and evening?

古文：元贯曰： 晋人骁敢，尽可为兵，重赏招致耳。 
现代文：马元贯说： 晋民骁勇，都可以当兵，重赏招募来的。 
English: Ma Yuanquan said: Jin people are brave, they can all be soldiers, and they will be rewarded for being recruited.

古文：德裕曰： 招召须财，昨横水兵乱，止为欠绢一匹。
现代文：李德裕说： 招募士兵要有钱，日前横水兵变，仅仅因为欠每人绢一匹。
English: Li Deyu said: It is necessary to have money to recruit soldiers. Recently, there was a mutiny across the water, just because each person owed a donkey.

古文：李石无处得，杨弁从何致耶？
现代文：李石无从得到，杨牟从何处弄到的呢？
English: Li Shimin couldn't get it, but where did Yang Mu get it?

古文：又太原有一联甲，并在行营，安致十五里明光耶？ 
现代文：而且太原府若有一副铠甲，也全在行营之内，怎能弄到列队十五里长的士兵所穿的锦甲呢？ 
English: Moreover, if Taiyuan Prefecture has a pair of armor, and they are all in the camp, how can they get the armor worn by soldiers lined up fifteen miles long?

古文：元贯词屈。
现代文：马元贯理屈词穷。
English: Ma Yuan is poor in logical reasoning.

古文：德裕奏曰： 杨弁微贼，决不可恕！
现代文：李德裕进言说： 杨牟是卑贱的叛贼，决不可宽恕。
English: Li Deyu said, "Yang Mou is a despicable traitor and should never be pardoned.

古文：如国力不及，宁舍刘稹。 
现代文：如果国力不够，宁可放弃平定刘稹。 
English: If national strength is not enough, it is better to give up pacifying Liu Bei.

古文：即时请降诏，令王逢起榆社军，又令王元逵兵自土门入，会于太原。
现代文：当即请下诏书，命令王逢调动榆社军队，又命令王元逵的部队从土门入境，在太原会合。
English: He immediately issued an edict, ordering Wang Feng to mobilize the troops of Shansha, and ordered Wang Yuanxuan's troops to enter from Dumen and meet in Taiyuan.

古文：河东监军吕义忠闻之，即日召榆社本道兵，诛杨弁以闻。
现代文：河东监军吕义忠得知诏令，当日召集驻扎在榆社的本道军队，杀了杨牟后奏报朝廷。
English: When Lü Yizhong, the military governor of Hedong Province, learned of the imperial edict, he summoned the local troops stationed in Shansha on the same day and killed Yang Mu after reporting to the imperial court.

古文：自开成五年冬回纥至天德，至会昌四年八月平泽潞，首尾五年，其筹度机宜，选用将帅，军中书诏，奏请云合，起草指踪，皆独决于德裕，诸相无预焉。
现代文：自从开成五年冬，回纥军到达天德军，至会昌四年八月平定泽潞，前后五年，朝中适时筹谋决策，选拔任用将帅，拟制军中文书、诏令，奏请调集四方兵力，起草指挥调度指示，全由李德裕独自决定，其他宰相皆不参与。
English: Since the winter of the 5th year of the Heian period, when the Hui and Qian armies reached the peak of the Tian and German armies, and the August of the 4th year of the Heian period, when the Hui and Qian armies defeated the Zheng. For the past five years, the DPRK and China have made timely planning and decision-making, the selection and appointment of generals, the drafting of military documents and orders, the submission of requests for the mobilization of troops in the four directions, and the drafting of command and scheduling instructions, all of which were decided by Li Deyu alone. Other prime ministers did not participate.

古文：以功兼守太尉，进封卫国公，三千户。
现代文：论功兼任更高官阶的太尉职务，晋封为卫国公，食邑三千户。
English: For his meritorious service, he was also appointed to the higher rank of captain and was promoted to the post of defense minister, feeding 3,000 households.

古文：五年，武宗上徽号后，累表乞骸，不许。
现代文：会昌五年，武宗加徽号后，李德裕屡屡上表请求告老还乡，武宗不同意。
English: In the fifth year of Huichang, after Wu Zong added his emblem, Li Deyu repeatedly petitioned to return to his hometown, but Wu Zong did not agree.

古文：德裕病月余，坚请解机务，乃以本官平章事兼江陵尹、荆南节度使。
现代文：李德裕卧病一个多月，坚持请求解除军政要务，才获准以本官平章事兼江陵尹、荆南节度使。
English: Li Deyu was bedridden for more than a month and insisted on requesting to be relieved of his military and political duties. Only then was he allowed to use his official title of Pingzhangji as well as the title of Jianglingyin and Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：数月追还，复知政事。
现代文：几个月后又被召回朝廷，再度主持政事。
English: A few months later, he was recalled to the Imperial Court to preside over government affairs once again.

古文：宣宗即位，罢相，出为东都留守、东畿汝都防御使。
现代文：宣宗登基后，李德裕被罢相，调出朝廷任东都留守、东畿汝都防御使。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, Li Deyu was removed from the post of minister and transferred from the imperial court to the post of Dongdu Ruzhu, Donggi Ruzhu Defense Envoy.

古文：德裕特承武宗恩顾，委以枢衡。
现代文：李德裕特别受武宗的优遇厚待，委以权力中枢的要职。
English: Li Deyu was especially favored by Emperor Wu, and was appointed to an important position in the center of power.

古文：决策论兵，举无遗悔，以身扞难，功流社稷。
现代文：决策用兵，举措没有遗憾，以身抗御国难，功劳流布国家。
English: The decision is to use troops, the measure is not regrettable, to resist the national difficulties, and the credit goes to the country.

古文：及昭肃弃天下，不逞之伍，咸害其功。
现代文：到武宗去世，那班不得志的同僚都嫉妒他的功业。
English: By the time of his death, his disillusioned colleagues were jealous of his achievements.

古文：白敏中、令狐綯，在会昌中德裕不以朋党疑之，置之台阁，顾待甚优。
现代文：白敏中、令狐腍，在会昌年间，李德裕不因他们是政敌的党羽猜疑他们，将他们安置在台阁任职，十分优待他们。
English: During the Heichang years, Li Deyu did not distrust Bai Minzhong and Ling Huxuan because they were political enemies, but placed them in the cabinet and treated them very favorably.

古文：及德裕失势，抵掌戟手，同谋斥逐，而崔铉亦以会昌末罢相怨德裕。
现代文：到李德裕失去权势，他们拍手斥骂，同谋排挤贬黜李德裕；而崔铉也因在会昌末年被罢相怨恨德裕。
English: When Li Deyu lost power, they clapped their hands, scolded, and conspired to oust and disparage Li Deyu; and Cui Gan also resented Deyu for being dismissed at the end of Heichang.

古文：大中初，敏中复荐铉在中书，乃相与掎摭构致，令其党人李咸者，讼德裕辅政时阴事。乃罢德裕留守，以太子少保分司东都，时大中元年秋。
现代文：宣宗大中初年，白敏中再举荐崔铉在中书省任职，于是共同指摘构陷，指使其党羽李咸，指控李德裕辅政时的秘密行动，因而罢免了李德裕的留守职务，以太子少保身份分管东都，时间是大中元年秋季。
English: In the first year of Xuanzong University, Bai Minzhong again recommended Cui Wei to serve in the Ministry of Chinese Literature, so they jointly pointed out the frame-up, pointed out Li Xian, a member of his party, accused Li Deyu of secret actions when he was a vice-premier, and thus removed Li Deyu from his position as a member of the Communist Party of China. The time was the autumn of the first year of the Communist Party of China.

古文：寻再贬潮州司马。
现代文：不久再将他贬为潮州司马。
English: He was soon demoted to Chaozhou Sima.

古文：敏中等又令前永宁县尉吴汝纳进状，讼李绅镇扬州时谬断刑狱。
现代文：白敏中又指使前永宁县尉吴汝纳呈状，指控李绅镇守杨州时错断刑狱。
English: Bai Minzhong also instructed Wu Runa, a former Yongning County lieutenant, to submit a petition accusing Li Shengzhen of wrongly breaking the prison sentence while guarding Yangzhou.

古文：明年冬，又贬潮州司户。
现代文：次年冬，又将李德裕贬为潮州司户。
English: In the winter of the following year, Li Deyu was relegated to the position of Chaozhou steward.

古文：德裕既贬，大中二年，自洛阳水路经江、淮赴潮州。
现代文：李德裕被贬以后，于大中二年，从洛阳水路经江、淮赴潮州。
English: After Li Deyu was demoted, he went to Chaozhou via Luoyang waterway via the Yangtze River and Huai River in his second year of middle school.

古文：其年冬，至潮阳，又贬崖州司户。
现代文：这年冬，到达潮阳，再被贬为崖州司户。
English: This winter, after reaching Chaoyang, he was relegated to the position of Yazhou chief steward.

古文：至三年正月，方达珠崖郡。
现代文：至大中三年正月，才抵达珠崖郡。
English: It was not until the first month of the third year of junior high school that he arrived in Zhuya County.

古文：十二月卒，时年六十三。
现代文：同年十二月逝世，这年他六十三岁。
English: He died in December of the same year, aged 63.

古文：德裕以器业自负，特达不群。
现代文：李德裕以有才、建功自负，突出于众，不甚合群。
English: Li Deyu is proud of his talent and achievements, and stands out from the crowd. He does not fit in well with others.

古文：好著书为文，奖善嫉恶，虽位极台辅，而读书不辍。
现代文：喜欢著书撰文，褒奖善良憎恨邪恶；虽居宰相之位，却不中断读书。
English: He likes to write books and articles, praises goodness and hates evil; although he is the prime minister, he does not stop reading.

古文：有刘三复者，长于章奏，尤奇待之。
现代文：有个叫刘三复的人，擅长撰写奏章，李德裕特别优待他。
English: There was a man named Liu Sanfu, who was good at composing musical scores, and Li Deyu gave him special treatment.

古文：自德裕始镇浙西，迄于淮甸，皆参佐宾筵。
现代文：自李德裕开始镇守浙西，直到担任淮南节度使，刘三复都是被礼待的幕僚。
English: Since Li Deyu began to guard western Zhejiang, until he served as Huainan Festival envoy, Liu Sanfu was a well-received staff member.

古文：军政之余，与之吟咏终日。
现代文：在军政公务之余，李德裕便与他整日吟诵、推敲诗文。
English: In addition to his military and political duties, Li Deyu chanted and pondered poetry with him all day long.

古文：在长安私第，别构起草院。院有精思亭；每朝廷用兵，诏令制置，而独处亭中，凝然握管，左右侍者无能预焉。
现代文：在长安的私宅里，李德裕另建有一座起草院；院内有座精思亭，每当朝廷用兵，草拟诏书制令，他就独处亭中，凝神构思挥毫，贴身侍者也不许干扰。
English: In his private residence in Chang'an, Li Deyu also built a drafting hall; inside the hall, there is a meditation pavilion. Whenever the imperial court used soldiers to draft the edict, he would be alone in the pavilion, concentrating on his thoughts, and close attendants were not allowed to interfere.

古文：东都于伊阙南置平泉别墅，清流翠，树石幽奇。
现代文：在东都洛阳的伊阙南边，他建有平泉别墅，其中清流涓涓，细竹翠绿，树石清幽奇崛。
English: On the south side of the Yili River in Luoyang, the eastern capital, he built the Hiraizumi Villa, where the clear stream is flowing, the fine bamboo is green, and the trees and rocks are clear and strange.

古文：初未仕时，讲学其中。
现代文：尚未出仕之初，他在这里研习学问。
English: Before taking up his post, he studied here.

古文：及从官籓服，出将入相，三十年不复重游，而题寄歌诗，皆铭之于石。
现代文：到他做官担任藩镇，出将入相，三十年间未再重游，但他所题写的文字诗章，全部刻在这座别墅的石上。
English: After he became an official and served as a feudal lord, he did not revisit for thirty years, but the words and verses he inscribed are all engraved on the stone of this villa.

古文：今有《花木记》、《歌诗篇录》二石存焉。
现代文：至今还有刻写了《花木记》、《歌诗篇录》的两块石头保存。
English: To this day, two stones inscribed with "Hanakuki" and "Song of Songs" have been preserved.

古文：有文集二十卷。
现代文：他有文集二十卷。
English: Liu Xuanqiu has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：记述旧事，则有《次柳氏旧书》、《御臣要略》、《代叛志》、《献替录》行于世。
现代文：说述往事的文字，则有《次柳氏旧闻》、《御臣要略》、《伐叛志》、《献替录》流传于世。
English: Texts describing past events, such as "Ziryu's Old Stories," "Minister's Summary," "Rebellion," and "Dedication" have been passed down to the world.

古文：初贬潮州，虽苍黄颠沛之中，犹留心著述，杂序数十篇，号曰《穷愁志》。
现代文：刚被贬至潮州时，虽在仓皇颠沛之中，李德裕仍然着意著述，写有杂序数十篇，汇集总题为《穷愁志》。
English: When he was just demoted to Chaozhou, although he was in a state of panic, Li Deyu was still intent on writing, writing dozens of miscellaneous articles, with the overall title of "Poor Sorrow."

