古文：哀公问于孔子曰： 大礼何如？
现代文：哀公问于孔子说： 大礼究竟是怎么样的呢？
English: Lu Aigong asked Confucius: What is the grand ceremony?

古文：君子之言礼，何其尊也？ 
现代文：君子在谈到礼的时候，为什么态度是那样地恭敬呢？ 
English: When a gentleman talks about etiquette, why is his attitude so deferential?

古文：孔子曰： 丘也小人，不足以知礼。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 我孔丘只是一个普通百姓，没有资格来谈论礼。 
English: Confucius replied, "I, Confucius, am just an ordinary person, and I am not qualified to talk about etiquette.

古文：君曰： 否！
现代文：哀公说： 不必谦虚。
English: Aiko said, "Don't be modest.

古文：吾子言之也。 
现代文：请您一定讲一讲。 
English: Please be sure to speak up.

古文：孔子曰： 丘闻之：民之所由生，礼为大。
现代文：孔子说： 本人听说：人活这一辈子，最要紧的就是礼。
English: Confucius said, "I have heard that the most important thing for a man in this life is courtesy.

古文：非礼无以节事天地之神也，非礼无以辨君臣上下长幼之位也，非礼无以别男女父子兄弟之亲、昏姻疏数之交也；君子以此之为尊敬然。
现代文：没有礼，就无法按照一定的规矩敬奉天地之间的鬼神；没有礼，就无法辨明君臣、上下、长幼的地位；没有礼，就无法区别男女、父子、兄弟之间的亲属关系，以及姻亲、朋友之间交情的厚薄；因此之故，君子在谈到礼的时候，就态度十分恭敬。
English: Without etiquette, it is impossible to worship the ghosts and gods between heaven and earth according to certain rules; without etiquette, it is impossible to distinguish the status of monarchs and ministers, superiors and subordinates, elders and children; without etiquette, it is impossible to distinguish the relationship between men and women, fathers and sons, brothers, and the thickness of friendship between in-laws and friends; therefore, when a gentleman talks about etiquette, he is very respectful.

古文：然后以其所能教百姓，不废其会节。
现代文：然后才尽其所能来教导百姓，使他们不失时节地按礼行事。
English: Then he did what he could to teach the people, so that they would be careful to do what was right at all times.

古文：有成事，然后治其雕镂文章黼黻以嗣。
现代文：有了成效，然后再讲究什么样的人使用什么样的宫室雕刻、用什么样的族旗、穿什么样的礼服，以区别尊卑上下等级的不同。
English: With the results, they then pay attention to what kind of people use what kind of palace carving, use what kind of national flag, wear what kind of dress, in order to distinguish the difference between the upper and lower levels.

古文：其顺之，然后言其丧算，备其鼎俎，设其豕腊，修其宗庙，岁时以敬祭祀，以序宗族。
现代文：百姓既都顺从君子的领导，然后给他们讲解丧葬之礼，使他们准备好鼎姐之类的祭器，准备好猪肉干肉之类的祭品，修建宗庙，逢年过节，虔敬地按时祭祀，并借以排好族人的辈分。
English: Since the people all obeyed the leadership of the gentleman, he then explained the funeral rites to them, made them prepare the sacrificial vessels such as the three sisters, prepared the sacrificial offerings such as the dried pork, built the ancestral temple, celebrated the festivals every year, reverently performed the sacrifices on time, and used this to arrange the ranks of the people.

古文：即安其居，节丑其衣服，卑其宫室，车不雕几，器不刻镂，食不贰味，以与民同利。
现代文：此后，就教导他们在合适的地方安居，穿适合自己身份的衣服，住的房子不要太高大，乘的车子不要雕饰什么图案，用的器物不要雕饰什么花纹，吃饭也不要太讲究，不但教导百姓如此，君子自己也不能奢侈，以与民同利。
English: After that, he taught them to live in a suitable place, wear clothes suitable for their status, the house they live in should not be too tall, the car they ride should not be decorated with any patterns, the utensils they use should not be decorated with any patterns, and they should not be too particular about eating. Not only did he teach the people this, but the gentleman himself could not be extravagant in order to benefit the people.

古文：昔之君子之行礼者如此。 
现代文：从前的君子就是这样行礼的。 
English: This is how gentlemen used to salute.

古文：公曰： 今之君子胡莫行之也？ 
现代文：哀公听了这话就问道： 现在的君子为什么不这样作呢？ 
English: Upon hearing this, Aiko asked, "Why don't modern gentlemen do this?"

古文：孔子曰： 今之君子，好实无厌，淫德不倦，荒怠傲慢，固民是尽，午其众以伐有道；求得当欲，不以其所。
现代文：孔子说： 今天的君主喜好财富，贪得无厌，淫乐无度，懒惰傲慢，非把民众的财力耗尽不可。违背众人的心愿，侵害有道的人，只求满足自己的欲望而不择手段。
English: Confucius said: Today's monarchs are fond of wealth, insatiably greedy, excessively lascivious, lazy and arrogant. They must exhaust the financial resources of the people. They violate the wishes of the people, encroach on the virtuous, and only seek to satisfy their own desires by any means.

古文：昔之用民者由前，今之用民者由后。
现代文：从前君主是照我前面所说的那一套做的。
English: In the past, monarchs did exactly what I have just described.

古文：今之君子莫为礼也。 
现代文：而现在君主却是照刚才所说的这一套做的。如今的君主，没有肯实行礼教的了。 
English: Now, however, the monarch is doing exactly what I just said. Today's monarch is no longer willing to practice etiquette.

古文：孔子侍坐于哀公，哀公曰： 敢问人道谁为大？ 
现代文：孔子陪坐在哀公身边。哀公问道： 请问人伦之道，哪一条最重要？ 
English: Confucius sat next to Aigong. Aigong asked: What is the most important thing in the way of human relations?

古文：孔子愀然作色而对曰： 君之及此言也，百姓之德也！
现代文：孔子听了以后肃然动容地回答道： 您问到这句话，那便是百姓有福了。
English: After listening, Confucius solemnly replied, "You asked about this sentence, that is, the people are blessed.

古文：固臣敢无辞而对？
现代文：臣岂敢不认真回答呢？
English: How dare the minister not answer seriously?

古文：人道，政为大。 
现代文：人伦之道，最重要的便是 政 这一条最重要。 
English: The most important thing in the way of human ethics is politics.

古文：公曰： 敢问何谓为政？ 
现代文：哀公问道： 请问什么叫做 为政 ？ 
English: Aiko asked: Excuse me, what is called politics?

古文：孔子对曰： 政者正也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 所谓政，就是 正 的意思。
English: Confucius replied, "To govern is to do what is right.

古文：君为正，则百姓从政矣。
现代文：国君自身正，那么老百姓也就跟着正了。
English: If the sovereign himself is righteous, then the common people will also be righteous.

古文：君之所为，百姓之所从也。
现代文：国君的所作所为，就是老百姓的榜样。
English: The actions of the sovereign are an example for the people.

古文：君所不为，百姓何从？ 
现代文：国君所不做的事，老百姓自然也不会去做。 
English: What the sovereign does not do, the common people will naturally not do.

古文：公曰： 敢问为政如之何？ 
现代文：哀公又问： 请问应该怎样去为政呢？ 
English: Aikong asked: How should we handle political affairs?

古文：孔子对曰： 夫妇别，父子亲，君臣严。三者正，则庶物从之矣。 
现代文：孔子回答道： 夫妇有别，父子相亲，君臣相敬，这三件事做好了，所有的其他事情也就跟着做好了。 
English: Confucius replied, "When a husband and wife are separated, when a father and son are close, and when a prince and a minister respect each other, when these three things are done, all the other things will also be done.

古文：公曰： 寡人虽无似也，愿闻所以行三言之道，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：哀公说： 寡人虽然不肖，却很愿意听一听做好这三件事的办法。可以讲一讲吗？ 
English: Aiko said, "Although they are not handsome, they are very willing to listen to the way to do these three things well. Can you talk about it?

古文：孔子对曰： 古之为政，爱人为大；所以治爱人，礼为大；所以治礼，敬为大；敬之至矣，大昏为大。
现代文：孔子回答说： 古人的为政，把爱护他人看得最重要。
English: Confucius replied, "In the politics of the ancients, caring for others was the most important thing.

古文：大昏至矣！
现代文：要做到爱护他人，礼最重要。
English: In order to love others, courtesy is the most important.

古文：大昏既至，冕而亲迎，亲之也。
现代文：一要做到礼，敬最重要。要做到不折不扣的敬，大昏最重要。大昏是最最重要的了！
English: First of all, it is important to be polite and respectful. It is important to be polite and respectful. It is important to be polite and respectful. It is important to be polite and respectful.

古文：亲之也者，亲之也。是故，君子兴敬为亲；舍敬，是遗亲也。
现代文：大昏的曰子来到， 要戴着礼帽穿着礼服亲自去迎娶，这是表示亲她的意思。
English: When the drowsy father-in-law came, he wanted to marry her in person, wearing a ceremonial hat and gown, which meant kissing her.

古文：弗爱不亲；弗敬不正。
现代文：没有爱，关系就不亲密；不恭敬，行为就不端正。
English: Without love, the relationship is not intimate; without respect, the behavior is not proper.

古文：爱与敬，其政之本与！ 
现代文：所以仁爱和恭敬，大概就是政治的根本吧! 
English: Therefore, benevolence and respect are probably the fundamentals of politics!

古文：公曰： 寡人愿有言。然冕而亲迎，不已重乎？ 
现代文：哀公说: 我想问一句，像您说的这样，君主要穿了礼服亲自去迎亲，是否太隆重了？ 
English: Aiko said, "I would like to ask, as you said, is it too grand for the sovereign to wear a ceremonial dress to greet his relatives in person?

古文：孔子愀然作色而对曰： 合二姓之好，以继先圣之后，以为天地宗庙社稷之主，君何谓已重乎？ 
现代文：孔子严肃地回答: 两姓结为婚姻，为前代圣主传宗接代，成为天地宗庙社稷的主人，这么大的事，您怎么能说太隆重了呢？ 
English: Confucius replied gravely: How can you say that the marriage of the two surnames, the succession of the previous generation of the Holy Master's lineage, and becoming the master of the world and the world's ancestral temple are too grand?

古文：公曰： 寡人固！不固，焉得闻此言也。
现代文：哀公说: 我太愚钝了，不愚钝，也不会来向您请教。
English: Aiko said, "I'm too stupid. I'm not stupid, and I won't come to you for advice."

古文：寡人欲问，不得其辞，请少进！ 
现代文：我想提问，又找不到适当的辞语，请您还是接着说吧! 
English: I want to ask a question, but I can't find the right words. Please continue!

古文：孔子曰： 天地不合，万物不生。
现代文：孔子说: 天地不配合，万物就不能生育。
English: Confucius said: If the yin and yang of heaven and earth do not mix, all things will not grow.

古文：大昏，万世之嗣也，君何谓已重焉！ 
现代文：大婚，就是为千秋万世生育后代呀，您怎么能说太隆重了呢？ 
English: A grand marriage is to give birth to children for the ages. How can you say it is too grand?

古文：孔子遂言曰： 内以治宗庙之礼，足以配天地之神明；出以治直言之礼，足以立上下之敬。
现代文：孔子进一步说道: 君主和夫人，在内，治理宗庙祭祀，功德足以和天地神明相配；出外，发布朝政命令，足以使上上下下都能恭敬听命。
English: Confucius further said, "Including the monarch and his wife, if they manage the ancestral temple rites, their merits are enough to match the gods of heaven and earth; if they go abroad and issue orders for the imperial government, they are enough to make everyone respectfully obey their orders.

古文：物耻足以振之，国耻足以兴之。
现代文：这样内外都有了礼，臣子有失职之事，可以纠正；国君有错误，可以复兴。
English: In this way, both at home and abroad, there is courtesy, and if there is a dereliction of duty by a courtier, it can be corrected; if there is a mistake by a sovereign, it can be revived.

古文：为政先礼。礼，其政之本与！ 
现代文：所以说施行政治要以礼为先，礼是政治的根本。 
English: Therefore, the implementation of politics should be based on courtesy first, and courtesy is the foundation of politics.

古文：孔子遂言曰： 昔三代明王之政，必敬其妻子也，有道。
现代文：孔子又说道: 从前夏商周三代圣明天子执政的时候，都很尊重他们的妻和子，这是有道理的。
English: Confucius also said, "From the time that Xia Shangri-La took office as the regent of the Ming Dynasty, he respected their wives and children, which is reasonable.

古文：妻也者，亲之主也，敢不敬与？
现代文：所谓 妻 ，是祭祀父母时的主妇，敢不尊敬吗？
English: The so-called wife is the homemaker at the time of the parents' sacrifice. Dare we not respect her?

古文：子也者，亲之后也，敢不敬与？
现代文：所谓 子 ，是父母的后代，敢不尊敬吗？
English: The so-called child, is the offspring of the parents, dare not be respected?

古文：君子无不敬也，敬身为大。
现代文：君子对一切都应该尊敬，而尤其以尊敬自己为重要。
English: A gentleman should respect everything, but it is especially important to respect himself.

古文：身也者，亲之枝也，敢不敬与？
现代文：因为自己的身体是直接从父母这个根本上长出来的枝干，敢不尊敬吗？
English: Because one's own body is a branch that grows directly from one's parents, dare one not respect it?

古文：不能敬其身，是伤其亲；伤其亲，是伤其本；伤其本，枝从而亡。
现代文：不能尊敬自己，也就是伤害了父母。伤害父母，就是伤害了根本。伤害了根本，枝干也就要跟着灭亡。
English: If you can't respect yourself, you've hurt your parents. If you hurt your parents, you've hurt the foundation. If you hurt the foundation, the branches will also perish.

古文：三者，百姓之象也。
现代文：自身和妻、子三者，也是百姓的象征。
English: The people, like the sovereign, have themselves, their wives, and their children.

古文：身以及身，子以及子，妃以及妃，君行此三者，则忾乎天下矣，大王之道也。如此，国家顺矣。 
现代文：由自身要推想到百姓，由自己的儿子要推想到百姓的儿子，由自己的妻子要推想到百姓的妻子。君子如能实行这三点，礼就会遍行于天下，过去周太王就是这样做的。能这样做，国家就安定了。 
English: A gentleman should think of the people from himself, his son should think of the people's son, and his wife should think of the people's wife. If a gentleman can implement these three points, the ritual will be practiced all over the world. This is what King Zhou Taiwang did in the past. If he can do this, the country will be stable.

古文：公曰： 敢问何谓敬身？ 
现代文：哀公问道： 请问什么叫做尊敬自身呢？ 
English: A question: What is self-respect?

古文：孔子对曰： 君子过言，则民作辞；过动，则民作则。
现代文：孔子回答说： 君子说错的话，老百姓就会当作圣旨；君子做错的事， 老百姓也会当作榜样。
English: Confucius replied, "If a gentleman says something wrong, the common people will take it as a sacred edict; if a gentleman does something wrong, the common people will take it as an example.

古文：君子言不过辞，动不过则，百姓不命而敬恭，如是，则能敬其身；能敬其身，则能成其亲矣。 
现代文：君子如果能够不说错话，不作错事，老百姓就会不待命令而做到恭敬。如此这般地做了，就是能够尊敬自身了。能够尊敬自身，也就是给父母脸上争光了。 
English: If a gentleman can refrain from saying or doing the wrong thing, the common people will respect him without waiting for an order. If you do this, you will be able to respect yourself. If you can respect yourself, you will be able to win the favor of your parents.

古文：公曰： 敢问何谓成亲？ 孔子对曰： 君子也者，人之成名也。
现代文：哀公问道： 什么叫做给父母脸上争光？ 孔子回答说： 所谓 君子 ，是人的一种美名。
English: Aigong asked, "What is the meaning of giving your parents a happy face?" Confucius replied, "The so-called gentleman is a kind of beautiful name for a person.

古文：百姓归之名，谓之君子之子。是使其亲为君子也，是为成其亲之名也已！ 
现代文：百姓送他这样一个称呼，说他是、 君子之子 ，这也就是使其父母成为君子了，这就是给他的父母争得美名了。 
English: The people gave him the title, saying that he was the son of a gentleman, which meant that his parents were gentlemen, which meant that his parents were famous.

古文：孔子遂言曰： 古之为政，爱人为大。
现代文：孔子又接着说道： 古人的为政，把爱人看得最重要。
English: Confucius went on to say: The ancients, in their politics, regarded their loved ones as the most important.

古文：不能爱人，不能有其身；不能有其身，不能安土；不能安土，不能乐天；不能乐天，不能成其身。 
现代文：不能爱人，人将害己，这样就不能保护自身。不能保护自身，就不能安居乐业。不能安居乐业，就难免不怨天尤人。怨天尤人，就不能成就自身。 
English: If you can't love others, you will harm yourself, so you can't protect yourself. If you can't protect yourself, you can't live a happy life. If you can't live a happy life, you can't blame others. If you blame others, you can't achieve yourself.

古文：公曰： 敢问何谓成身？ 
现代文：哀公问道： 请问什么叫做成就自身？ 
English: Aiko asked: What do you call the achievement itself?

古文：孔子对曰： 不过乎物。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 凡事都不做错，就叫成就自身。 
English: Confucius replied, "If you do not do anything wrong, you will achieve success."

古文：公曰： 敢问君子何贵乎天道也？ 
现代文：哀公又问道： 请问君子为什么那祥地看重天道呢？ 
English: Aiko also asked, "Please tell me, why do gentlemen place so much importance on the heavenly way?

古文：孔子对曰： 贵其。如日月东西相从而不已也，是天道也；不闭其久，是天道也；无为而物成，是天道也；已成而明，是天道也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 看重它的永不止息，就好像曰月的东升西落永不止息，这就是天道。看重它的开通无阻，保持永久，这就是天道。看重它的无所作为而万物皆成，这就是天道。看重它的万物皆成而又明明白白，这就是天道。 
English: Confucius replied, "To regard it as never ceasing, is like saying that the rising and setting of the moon never cease, which is the way of heaven. To regard it as opening without hindrance and remaining forever, this is the way of heaven. To regard it as doing nothing and yet accomplishing everything, this is the way of heaven. To regard it as accomplishing everything and yet remaining clear and bright, this is the way of heaven.

古文：公曰： 寡人蠢愚，冥烦子志之心也。 
现代文：哀公说： 寡人愚蠢不开窍，这是您心里有数的，所以请您多加指教。 
English: Aiko said, "Many people are stupid and don't have a clue. This is what you have in mind, so please give me more advice."

古文：孔子蹴然辟席而对曰： 仁人不过乎物，孝子不过乎物。
现代文：孔子闻听此言就连忙离开座位惭愧不安地说： 仁人凡事不犯错误，孝子凡事不犯错误。
English: When Confucius heard this, he hurriedly left his seat, ashamed and uneasy, and said: "A benevolent person does not make mistakes in everything, and a filial son does not make mistakes in everything.

古文：是故，仁人之事亲也如事天，事天如事亲，是故孝子成身。 
现代文：所以仁人的孝敬父母如同孝敬上天。敬爱上天如同敬爱父母，所以孝子能够成就自身。 
English: Therefore, a benevolent person's filial piety to his parents is like filial piety to the heavens. Respect for the heavens is like respect for one's parents, so a filial son can achieve success.

古文：公曰： 寡人既闻此言也，无如后罪何？ 
现代文：哀公说： 寡人很高兴听到您这一番高论，以后不犯类似的错误怎么样？ 
English: Aiko said, "I'm so glad to hear you say this. How about not making a similar mistake in the future?"

古文：孔子对曰： 君之及此言也，是臣之福也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 您能讲出这样的话，真是作臣子的福气啊！ 
English: Confucius replied, "How fortunate you are to be able to say such a thing!

