古文：儒者之论，自说见凤皇骐驎而知之。
现代文：俗儒们谈论，自称看见凤凰、麒麟就能认识。
English: Confucianists talk about it, claiming to be able to recognize a phoenix or a unicorn when they see one.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么认识呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：案凤皇骐驎之象。
现代文：靠考察凤凰、麒麟的形状来认识。
English: By examining the shape of the phoenix and the unicorn.

古文：又《春秋》获麟文曰： 有麞而角。 
现代文：又有《春秋》上记载捕获麒麟的文章说： 形状似獐，但是长着角。 
English: There is also an article on "Spring and Autumn" that records the capture of the unicorn, saying: The shape is similar to a dragonfly, but with horns.

古文：麞而角者，则是骐驎矣。
现代文：像獐而又长角，那么就是麒麟了。
English: If it looks like a dragonfly but has long horns, then it's a giraffe.

古文：其见鸟而象凤皇者，则凤皇矣。
现代文：他们看见鸟的形状像凤凰，那只鸟便是凤凰了。
English: They saw a bird shaped like a phoenix, and that bird was a phoenix.

古文：黄帝、尧、舜、周之盛时皆致凤皇。
现代文：黄帝、尧、舜、周朝的兴盛之时，都曾招来过凤凰。
English: At the time of the prosperity of the Yellow Emperor, Zhou Dynasty, and Zhou Dynasty, phoenixes were invited.

古文：孝宣帝之时，凤皇集於上林，後又於长乐之宫东门树上，高五尺，文章五色。
现代文：汉宣帝时，凤凰停落在上林苑中，后来又停落在长乐宫东门的树上，凤凰身高五尺，花纹有五种色彩。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, the phoenix stopped in the middle of Shanglin Court, and later it stopped on the tree at the east gate of Changle Palace. The phoenix is five feet tall, and the pattern has five colors.

古文：周获麟，麟似麞而角。
现代文：东周时捕获一头麟，麟的形状似獐但长有角。
English: During the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, a head of a unicorn was captured. The shape of the unicorn is similar to a baboon, but it has horns.

古文：武帝之麟，亦如麞而角。
现代文：汉武帝时捕获一头麟，也像獐而长有角。
English: Emperor Hanwu captured a head of a unicorn, which also looked like a dragonfly and had horns.

古文：如有大鸟，文章五色；兽状如麞，首戴一角：考以图象，验之古今，则凤、麟可得审也。
现代文：如果有一只大鸟，身上花纹有五种色彩，有一种野兽形状像獐，头上长有一只角，按照画上的凤凰、麒麟的样子来考察，根据古今的历史记载来验证，那么凤凰和麒麟是可以识别的。
English: If there is a large bird with five colors of patterns on its body, a beast shaped like a dragonfly with a horn on its head, and if it is examined according to the appearance of the phoenix and the unicorn on the painting and verified according to ancient and modern historical records, then the phoenix and the unicorn can be identified.

古文：夫凤皇，鸟之圣者也；骐驎，兽之圣者也；五帝、三王、皋陶、孔子，人之圣也。
现代文：凤凰是鸟中的圣者，麒麟是兽中的圣者，五帝、三王、皋陶、孔子，是人中的圣者。
English: The phoenix is the saint among birds, the unicorn is the saint among beasts, the five emperors, the three kings, the Tao Te Ching, and Confucius are the saints among people.

古文：十二圣相各不同，而欲以麞戴角则谓之骐，相与凤皇象合者谓之凤皇，如何？
现代文：十二圣的骨相各不相同，而想把形状似獐而长角的称之为麒麟，鸟的长相与凤凰的样子相符合的称之为凤凰，这怎么行呢？
English: The bones of the Twelve Holy Hierarchs are all different, but if you want to call the shape like a crane with long horns a unicorn, and the bird's appearance consistent with the appearance of a phoenix a phoenix, how can this be done?

古文：夫圣鸟兽毛色不同，犹十二圣骨体不均也。
现代文：神圣的鸟鲁的毛色不相同，好比十二圣人的骨相形体不相同一样。
English: The sacred bird Lu has different fur colors, just as the bones of the twelve saints have different shapes.

古文：戴角之相，犹戴午也。
现代文：头上长角的形象，就同面额高满的形象一样。
English: The image of the long horn on the head is the same as the image of the high denomination.

古文：颛顼戴午，尧、舜必未然。
现代文：颛顼面额高满，尧、舜不一定也是这样。
English: face value is high,  and  are not necessarily the same.

古文：今鲁所获麟戴角，即後所见麟未必戴角也。
现代文：现在鲁国捕获的麟头上长角，那么以后见到的麟头上不一定长角。
English: Now, the unicorns captured by Lu have long horns on their heads, so the unicorns we see in the future will not necessarily have long horns.

古文：如用鲁所获麟求知世间之麟，则必不能知也。
现代文：如果依照鲁国捕获的麟的形状去识别世间上的麟，那是肯定不能误别的。
English: If we were to identify the unicorns of the world according to the shape of the unicorn captured by the State of Lu, there would be no mistaking it.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：毛羽骨角不合同也。
现代文：因为凤凰、麒麟的毛羽骨角是个个都不同的。
English: Because the feather and bone angles of phoenixes and unicorns are all different.

古文：假令不同，或时似类，未必真是。
现代文：即使毛羽骨角相同，也许有类似的，下一定真的是这种东西。
English: Even if the feathers and horns are the same, and there may be similar ones, it must really be this kind of thing.

古文：虞舜重瞳，王莽亦重瞳；晋文骈胁，张仪亦骈胁。
现代文：虞舜有双瞳人，王莽也有双瞳人；晋文公的肋骨连成一片，张仪的肋骨也连成一片。
English: Gu Yao has double pupils, Wang Mang also has double pupils; Jin Wengong's ribs are fused into one piece, Zhang Yi's ribs are also fused into one piece.

古文：如以骨体毛色比，则王莽，虞舜；而张仪，晋文也。
现代文：如果因为骨体毛色相同就是同类人，那么王莽就应该是虞舜那样的圣人了；而张仪也就应该是晋文公那样的霸主了。
English: If, because they have the same bone structure and hair color, they are the same kind of people, then Wang Mang should be a saint like Yu Yao; and Zhang Yi should be a overlord like Jinwen Gong.

古文：有若在鲁，最似孔子。
现代文：在鲁国的有若，相貌最像孔子。
English: In Lu, there is a young man who looks most like Confucius.

古文：孔子死，弟子共坐有若，问以道事，有若不能对者，何也？
现代文：孔子死后，弟子们一起推有若坐在孔子的座位上，向他请教先王之道及礼仪，有若不能问答，是什么原因呢？
English: After the death of Confucius, the disciples pushed together whether to sit on Confucius' seat and ask him about the ways and etiquette of the former king. If they could not ask and answer, what was the reason?

古文：体状似类，实性非也。
现代文：体形相貌与孔子相似，而实际上禀性和孔子并不相同。
English: The body shape and appearance are similar to those of Confucius, but in fact, Confucius' temper and personality are not the same.

古文：今五色之鸟，一角之兽，或时似类凤皇、骐驎，其实非真，而说者欲以骨体毛色定凤皇、骐驎，误矣。
现代文：现在有五色羽毛的大鸟，长有一角的野兽，也许与凤凰、麒麟形状相似，其实并不是真的，而谈论者想根据骨体毛色相似来认定是凤凰和麒麟，这就错了！
English: Now the big bird with five-colored feathers, the beast with one horn, may be similar in shape to the phoenix and the unicorn, but in fact it is not true, and the speaker wants to identify the phoenix and the unicorn based on the similarity of the bone and hair color, which is wrong!

古文：是故颜渊庶几，不似孔子；有若恆庸，反类圣人。
现代文：所以颜渊的道德学问与孔子差不多，但相貌却不像孔子；有若很平庸，相貌反而像孔圣人。
English: Therefore, Yan Yuan's moral knowledge is similar to that of Confucius, but his appearance is not like Confucius; if he is very mediocre, his appearance is like that of Confucius.

古文：由是言之，或时真凤皇、骐驎，骨体不似，恆庸鸟兽，毛色类真，知之如何？
现代文：因此说来，也许真的凤凰、麒麟，它们的骨体并不与想象的相似，而一般的鸟兽，毛色反而像真的凤凰、麒麟一样。
English: Therefore, perhaps the real phoenix and unicorn, their bones are not similar to the imagination, but the general birds and beasts, the fur color is like the real phoenix and unicorn.

古文：儒者自谓见凤皇、骐驎辄而知之，则是自谓见圣人辄而知之也。
现代文：用那些儒者的办法怎么能识别它们呢？俗儒自称见到凤凰、麒麟就能认得，那就是自称见到圣人就能认得。
English: How can they be identified with the methods of those Confucians? The vulgar Confucians claim to be able to recognize the phoenix and the unicorn when they see them, that is, they claim to be able to recognize the sage when they see him.

古文：皋陶马口，孔子反宇，设後辄有知而绝殊，马口反宇，尚未可谓圣。
现代文：皋陶生一张马嘴，孔子头顶凹陷，假如就是出现了智慧超群，并且口像马口，头像 反宇 的人，也还不能称他们为圣人。
English: Confucius was born with a concave head and a horse's mouth. Even if someone with superior wisdom, a horse's mouth, and an anti-universe head were to appear, they could not be called a saint.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：十二圣相不同，前圣之相，难以照後圣也。
现代文：十二个圣人的形相不相同，前代圣人的形相，难以比照后代圣人的形相。
English: The shapes of the twelve saints are different. It is difficult to compare the shapes of the saints of the previous generation with the shapes of the saints of the next generation.

古文：骨法不同，姓名不等，身形殊状，生出异土，虽复有圣，何如知之？
现代文：骨相不同，姓名不同，身形各有形状，出生在不同的地方，即使再有圣人出现，怎么识别呢？
English: Bones are different, names are different, bodies have different shapes, and people were born in different places. Even if another saint appears, how can they be identified?

古文：恆君山谓扬子云曰： 如後世复有圣人，徒知其才能之胜己，多不能知其圣与非圣人也。 
现代文：桓君山对杨子云说： 如果后世再有圣人出现，人们只知他的才能超过了自己，但大多不能确定他究竟是不是圣人。 
English: Huan Junshan said to Yang Ziyun, "If a saint appears again in future generations, people will only know that his talent surpasses their own, but most cannot be sure whether he is a saint or not.

古文：子云曰： 诚然。 
现代文：杨子云说： 的确如此。 
English: Yang Ziyun said: This is indeed the case.

古文：夫圣人难知，知能之美若桓、扬者，尚复不能知。世儒怀庸庸之知，赍无异之议，见圣不能知，可保必也。
现代文：圣人难以识别，像桓君山、杨子云这样智慧才能很高的人，尚且不能识别，世儒仅有平凡的才智，死抱住圣人骨相没有差别这种见解，见了圣人不能识别，可以保证必然是这样。
English: It is difficult to recognize a sage. People with high wisdom and talent, such as Huanjunshan and Yang Ziyun, cannot be recognized. Confucianism has only ordinary wisdom. There is no difference between the bones of a saint and the bones of a sage. If you can't recognize a saint, you can guarantee that it must be so.

古文：夫不能知圣，则不能知凤皇与骐驎。
现代文：不能认识圣人，就不能认识凤凰与麒麟。
English: If you can't recognize a saint, you can't recognize a phoenix or a unicorn.

古文：世人名凤皇、骐驎，何用自谓能之乎？
现代文：世人称某些动物为凤凰和麒麟，根据什么而自以为能认识它们呢？
English: The world calls some animals phoenixes and unicorns. On what basis do they think they can recognize them?

古文：夫上世之名凤皇、骐驎，闻其鸟兽之奇者耳。
现代文：古人称它们为 凤凰 、 麒麟 ，只是听说它们是鸟兽中珍奇的东西罢了。
English: The ancients called them the phoenix and the unicorn, but it was only heard that they were a rare thing among birds and beasts.

古文：毛角有奇，又不妄翔苟游，与鸟兽争饱，则谓之凤皇、骐驎矣。
现代文：它们的毛和角都有奇异之处，又不胡乱飞翔随便走动，又不与一般鸟兽争吃食物，就称它们为凤凰、麒麟了。
English: They are called phoenixes and unicorns because their hair and horns are unusual, they do not fly around randomly, and they do not compete with ordinary birds and beasts for food.

古文：世人之知圣，亦犹此也。
现代文：世人认识圣人，也是如此。
English: That is how the world knows the saints.

古文：闻圣人人之奇者，身有奇骨，知能博达，则谓之圣矣。
现代文：听说圣人是人中出奇的人，身上长有奇特的骨头，智慧才能广博通达，就称他为圣人了。
English: Having heard that a sage is an extraordinary person, with peculiar bones and a broad and penetrating intellect, he is called a sage.

古文：及其知之，非卒见暂闻而辄名之为圣也，与之偃伏，从受学，然後知之。
现代文：待他们去识别圣人的时候，并不是仓猝见一面，或匆匆忙忙地听到一句半句话，就把他称做 圣人 的。与圣人生活在一起，跟他学习，然后才知道他是不是圣人。
English: When they come to identify a saint, it is not by a quick glance or a hurried half-sentence that they call him a saint; it is by living with a saint, by studying him, that they know if he is a saint or not.

古文：何以明之。
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What is the evidence for this?

古文：子贡事孔子，一年自谓过孔子；二年，自谓与孔子同；三年，自知不及孔子。
现代文：子贡侍奉孔子，一年，自称超过了孔子；两年，自认与孔子相同；三年，自己知道不及孔子。
English: Zigong served Confucius. For one year, he said he was better than Confucius. For two years, he thought he was the same as Confucius. For three years, he thought he was inferior to Confucius.

古文：当一年、二年之时，未知孔子圣也；三年之後，然乃知之。
现代文：当子贡侍奉孔子一两年时，不知道孔子是圣人，三年之后，这才知道他是位圣人。
English: When Zigong served Confucius for one or two years, he did not know that Confucius was a saint. Three years later, he knew that he was a saint.

古文：以子贡知孔子，三年乃定。世儒无子贡之才，其见圣人不从之学，任仓卒之视，无三年之接，自谓知圣，误矣！
现代文：从子贡知道孔子是圣人，三年才能确定这件事上看，俗儒没有子贡的才能，他们见到圣人，不跟他学习，凭仓猝之间的观察，又没有三年的接触，自称知道了圣人，是完全错了！
English: Zigong knew that Confucius was a sage, and it took three years to be sure of the matter. From this point of view, laymen do not have the talent of Zigong. They see a sage, do not study with him, rely on sudden observation, and do not have three years of contact. They claim to know the sage, which is completely wrong!

古文：少正卯在鲁，与孔子并。
现代文：少正卯在鲁国，与孔子齐名。
English: Shosho was born in the State of Lu and was as famous as Confucius.

古文：孔子之门，三盈三虚，唯颜渊不去，颜渊独知孔子圣也。
现代文：孔子的门徒几次满堂，几次跑光。只有颜渊不离开孔子，惟独颜渊知道孔子是位圣人。
English: Confucius' disciples filled the hall several times and ran out several times. Only Yan Yuan did not leave Confucius, but only Yan Yuan knew that Confucius was a saint.

古文：夫门人去孔子归少正卯，不徒不能知孔子之圣，又不能知少正卯，门人皆惑。
现代文：弟子们离开孔子归附少正卯，说明他们不仅不能识别孔子是圣人，同时也不能识别少正卯的邪佞，弟子们都胡涂了。
English: The disciples left Confucius to join Shosho, indicating that they not only could not recognize Confucius as a saint, but also could not recognize Shosho's evil ways. The disciples were all deceived.

古文：子贡曰： 夫少正卯，鲁之闻人也。子为政，何以先之？ 
现代文：子贡说： 少正卯，是鲁国有名望的人，您执政以后，为什么首先要杀他呢？ 
English: Zigong said: Shao Zhengwu is a famous person in Lu. After you came to power, why did you first want to kill him?

古文：孔子曰： 赐退，非尔所及。 
现代文：孔子说： 端木赐，你走开吧，这不是你所能懂得的事。 
English: Confucius said: Take the wood and go away, this is not something you can understand.

古文：夫才能知佞若子贡，尚不能知圣。世儒见圣自谓能知之，妄也。
现代文：像子贡那样一位有才能有智慧的人，尚且不能识别圣人，俗儒见到圣人，自称能够识别，太荒诞了！
English: It is absurd that a man of talent and wisdom like Zigong cannot recognize a saint, while a layman sees a saint and claims to be able to recognize him!

古文：夫以不能知圣言之，则亦知其不能知凤皇与骐驎也。
现代文：从俗儒不能识别圣人说来，也就知道他们不能识别凤凰与麒麟。
English: From the fact that laymen cannot recognize sages, we also know that they cannot recognize the phoenix and the unicorn.

古文：使凤皇羽翮长广，骐驎体高大，则见之者以为大鸟巨兽耳。何以别之？
现代文：假如凤凰的翅膀又长又宽，麒麟的身体又高又大，那么见到它们的人认为它们不过是大鸟巨兽罢了，怎么能识别它们是凤凰、麒麟呢？
English: If the wings of the phoenix are long and wide, and the body of the unicorn is tall and large, then people who see them think they are just big birds and beasts. How can they be identified as the phoenix and the unicorn?

古文：如必巨大别之，则其知圣人亦宜以巨大。
现代文：如果一定要以形体巨大为标准来辨别是不是凤凰、麒麟，那么他们识别圣人也应该用是否巨大来衡量了。
English: If the criterion for distinguishing whether someone is a phoenix or a unicorn must be based on their physical size, then their ability to recognize a sage should also be measured by their size.

古文：春秋之时，鸟有爰居，不可以为凤皇；长狄来至，不可以为圣人。
现代文：春秋之时，鸟中有叫爰居的大鸟，不能把它当作风凰；长狄人来了，不能把它当作圣人。
English: At the time of spring and autumn, among the birds, there is a large bird that calls for roosting, and it cannot be regarded as a wind phoenix; when the Changdi people come, it cannot be regarded as a saint.

古文：然则凤皇、骐与鸟兽等也，世人见之，何用知之？
现代文：然而凤凰、麒麟与一般鸟鲁是相同的，世人见了它们，用什么去识别呢？
English: However, the phoenix and the unicorn are the same as ordinary birds. When the world sees them, how can they be identified?

古文：如以中国无有，从野外来而知之，则是瞿鹆同也。
现代文：如果认为中原一带没有，是从边远地区到来才识别了它们的，那么这就和鸜鹆一样了。
English: If it is thought that there are none in the Central Plains region, and that they were only identified when they arrived from remote areas, then this is the same as the cormorant.

古文：瞿鹆，非中国之禽也。凤皇、骐驎，亦非中国之禽兽也。
现代文：鸜鹆，不是中原一带的飞禽，凤凰、麒麟也不是中原一带的禽兽。
English: The pheasant is not a bird of the Central Plains, and the phoenix and the unicorn are not animals of the Central Plains.

古文：皆非中国之物，儒者何以谓瞿鹆恶、凤皇骐驎善乎？
现代文：都不是中原一带的动物，俗儒为什么说鸜鹆出现是凶兆，而凤凰、麒麟出现是祥瑞呢？
English: They are not animals from the Central Plains region. Why do laymen say that the appearance of a dragonfly is a bad omen, while the appearance of a phoenix or unicorn is auspicious?

古文：或曰： 孝宣之时，凤皇集於上林，群鸟从以千万数。
现代文：有人说： 汉宣帝的时候，凤凰停落在上林苑，有千千万万只鸟跟随着它。
English: Some people say: During the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, the phoenix stopped at Shanglinyuan, and thousands of birds followed it.

古文：以其众鸟之长，圣神有异，故群鸟附从。 
现代文：因为它是所有的鸟的首领，圣明神奇与众不同，所以无数的鸟随从着它。
English: Because it is the leader of all birds, sacred and magical and different, countless birds follow it.

古文：如见大鸟来集，群鸟附之，则是凤皇，凤皇审则定矣。
现代文：如果看见大鸟飞来停下，无数的鸟随从着它，那么这就是凤凰了。
English: If you see a large bird fly to a stop and countless birds follow it, then this is a phoenix.

古文：夫凤皇与骐驎同性，凤皇见，群鸟从；骐驎见，众兽亦宜随。
现代文：因此凤凰可以识别，那么，麒麟也可据此而确定了。凤凰与麒麟同一属性，凤凰出现，无数的鸟随从着它；麒麟出现，各种野兽也应该随从着它。
English: Therefore, the phoenix can be identified, then the unicorn can also be determined according to this. The phoenix and the unicorn have the same attribute, when the phoenix appears, countless birds follow it; when the unicorn appears, all kinds of beasts should also follow it.

古文：案《春秋》之麟，不言众兽随之。
现代文：考察《春秋》上记载的麒麟，没有讲各种野兽随从着它。
English: Examining the unicorn recorded in "Spring and Autumn," there is no mention of all kinds of beasts following it.

古文：宣帝、武帝皆行骐驎，无众兽附从之文。
现代文：汉宣帝、汉武帝时都获得麒麟，没有各种野兽跟随着它的记载。
English: Emperor Han Xuan and Emperor Han Wu both received the unicorn, and there are no records of various beasts following it.

古文：如以骐驎为人所获，附从者散，凤皇人不获，自来蜚翔，附从可见。《书》曰： 《箫韶》九成，凤皇来仪。 
现代文：如果因为麒麟被人所捕获，跟随它的野兽逃散了，那么凤凰不是人所捕获的，是自己飞来的，跟随它的鸟应该看得见。《尚书》上说： 《箫韶》乐曲演奏了九次，凤凰飞来朝拜。 
English: If, because the unicorn was captured by man, the beasts that followed it fled, then the phoenix was not captured by man, it flew by itself, and the bird that followed it should be visible. "Shangshu" said: "The" Gong "music was played nine times, and the phoenix flew to worship.

古文：《大传》曰： 凤皇在列树。 
现代文：《尚书大传》上说： 凤凰栖息在大树上。 
English: "Shangshu Daquan" said: The phoenix is perched on a big tree.

古文：不言群鸟从也。
现代文：没有记载无数鸟跟随它这件事。
English: There is no record of countless birds following it.

古文：岂宣帝所致者异哉？
现代文：难道宣帝时所招来的凤凰同古代的有差别吗？
English: Is there any difference between the phoenix summoned at the time of Emperor Xuan's proclamation and that of ancient times?

古文：或曰： 记事者失之。
现代文：有人说： 这是记事的人漏记了这种情况。
English: Some people said: This is because the recorders missed the situation.

古文：唐、虞之君，凤皇实有附从。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜的时候，凤凰确实有鸟跟随着它。
English: When the phoenix flies, the phoenix is indeed followed by birds.

古文：上世久远，记事遗失，经书之文，未足以实也。 
现代文：过去的时代久远了，记事难免有遗失，经书上的文字，不能完全用它来证实凤凰没有鸟跟随的说法。 
English: The past era is long gone, records are inevitably lost, and the text on the scripture cannot be fully used to prove that the phoenix is not followed by birds.

古文：夫实有而记事者失之，亦有实无而记事者生之。
现代文：既然有实际上存在而记事者漏记的事，也就会有实际上不存在而记事者凭空编造出来的事。
English: Since there are things that actually exist and are omitted by the recorder, there will also be things that do not actually exist and are made up out of thin air by the recorder.

古文：夫如是，儒书之文，难以实事，案附从以知凤皇，未得实也。
现代文：如果是这样，儒者书写的东西，很难用它来证明什么事情，根据有众鸟跟随这一点来识别凤凰，也同样得不到证实。
English: If this is the case, it is difficult to use what the Confucians wrote to prove anything, and it is equally impossible to identify a phoenix based on the fact that many birds follow it.

古文：且人有佞猾而聚者，鸟亦有佼黠而从群者。
现代文：况且人有凭着奸诈狡猾而聚集徒众的，鸟也有凭着狡诈使群鸟跟从的。
English: Moreover, just as man by cunning and craftiness brings a crowd together, even so a bird by cunning and craftiness brings a flock together.

古文：当唐、虞之时，凤悫愿，宣帝之时佼黠乎？
现代文：是不是唐尧、虞舜的时候出现的凤凰忠厚老实，汉宣帝时候出现的凤凰狡诈呢？
English: Is it true that the phoenix that appeared in the time of Tang Zheng and Yu Zheng was loyal and honest, while the phoenix that appeared in the time of Emperor Xuan of Han was cunning?

古文：何其俱有圣人之德行，动作之操不均同也？
现代文：不然，为什么它们都有圣人的品德，而行为却大不相同呢？
English: Otherwise, why do they all have the qualities of a saint, but their actions are very different?

古文：无鸟附从，或时是凤皇；群鸟附从，或时非也。
现代文：没有众鸟跟从的，也许是凤凰；有群鸟跟随的，也许并不是凤凰。
English: If it is not followed by many birds, it may be a phoenix; if it is followed by many birds, it may not be a phoenix.

古文：君子在世，清节自守，不广结从，出入动作，人不附从。
现代文：君子生活在世间，坚持清高的节操，不广泛聚集党羽，出入行动，没有人随从。
English: A gentleman lives in the world, adheres to a high standard of morality, does not gather a large number of followers, goes in and out of action, and has no followers.

古文：豪猾之人，任使用气，往来进退，士众云合。
现代文：强横狡诈的人，骄横傲慢，往来进退，有很多人跟随。
English: The cunning and crafty, the proud and haughty, go to and fro, and are followed by many.

古文：夫凤皇，君子也，必以随多者效凤皇，是豪黠为君子也。
现代文：凤凰是鸟中的君子，一定要以随从的鸟多来识别凤凰，那么狂放狡诈的人就成为君子了。
English: The phoenix is the gentleman among birds. It is necessary to identify the phoenix by the number of birds that accompany it. Then the person who is wild and cunning will become a gentleman.

古文：歌曲弥妙，和者弥寡；行操益清，交者益鲜。
现代文：歌曲越是美妙动听，跟着唱的人就愈少；行为道德越清高，和他交往的人就愈少。
English: The more beautiful the song, the fewer people will sing it; the more moral he is, the fewer people will associate with him.

古文：鸟兽亦然，必以附从效凤皇，是用和多为妙曲也。
现代文：鸟兽的情况也是如此。一定要用随从的多少来识别凤凰，这就等于把跟着唱的人多的歌曲说成是美妙的歌曲一样。
English: The same is true of birds and beasts. The number of followers must be used to identify the phoenix, which is equivalent to saying that a song with many people singing along is a wonderful song.

古文：龙与凤皇为比类。
现代文：龙与凤凰是属于同一类的。
English: The dragon and the phoenix belong to the same class.

古文：宣帝之时，黄龙出於新丰，群蛇不随。
现代文：汉宣帝的时候，在新丰这个地方出现了一条黄龙，各种蛇并没有跟随它。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, a yellow dragon appeared in this place in Xinfeng, and various snakes did not follow it.

古文：神雀鸾鸟，皆众鸟之长也，其仁圣虽不及凤皇，然其从群鸟亦宜数十。
现代文：神雀和鸾鸟，都是众鸟的首领，它们的仁义圣明虽然赶不上凤凰，但跟随它们的鸟起码也应有数十只。
English: The divine sparrow and the ostrich are the leaders of all birds. Although their benevolence and righteousness cannot catch up with the phoenix, there should be at least dozens of birds following them.

古文：信陵、孟尝，食客三千，称为贤君。汉将军卫青及将军霍去病，门无一客，亦称名将。
现代文：信陵君、孟尝君豢养三千食客，被称为贤君，西汉将军卫青和将军霍去病，门下没有一个食客，也被称为名将。
English: Xinlingjun and Meng Yijun raised three thousand diners, and were known as wise men. Western Han Dynasty generals Wei Qing and General Huo went sick, and there was not a single diner under them, and they were also known as famous generals.

古文：太史公曰： 盗跖横行，聚党数千人。
现代文：太史公说： 盗跖横行天下，聚集党徒数千人。
English: Taishigong said, "Robber gangs are rampant all over the world, gathering thousands of party members.

古文：伯夷、叔齐，隐处首阳山。 
现代文：伯夷、叔齐，隐居在首阳山中。 
English: Bo Yi and Uncle Qi lived in seclusion in Shouyang Mountain.

古文：鸟兽之操，与人相似。
现代文：鸟兽的操行，与人相类似。
English: The behaviour of birds and beasts is similar to that of humans.

古文：人之得众，不足以别贤。以鸟附从审凤皇，如何？
现代文：人即使得到许多徒众，也不足以用来识别他是否贤良，以鸟跟随的多少来识别凤凰，又怎么行呢？
English: Even if a person gets a lot of followers, it is not enough to identify whether he is virtuous or not. How can a phoenix be identified by the number of birds following it?

古文：或曰： 凤皇、骐驎，太平之瑞也。
现代文：有人说： 凤凰、麒麟，是太平盛世的祥瑞之物。
English: Some people say: the phoenix and the unicorn are auspicious things for a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：太平之际，见来至也。
现代文：太平盛世，就可以见它们到来。
English: In times of peace and prosperity, you can see them coming.

古文：然亦有未太平而来至也。
现代文：但是也有不是太平盛世时到来的。
English: However, there is also something called Taiping, which came into being during the golden age.

古文：鸟兽奇骨异毛，卓绝非常，则是矣，何为不可知？
现代文：鸟兽有奇骨异毛，卓绝与众不同，这就是凤凰、麒麟了，为什么不能够识别呢？ 
English: Birds and beasts have strange bones and hair, outstanding and unique, this is the phoenix, the unicorn, why can't we recognize it?

古文：凤皇骐驎，通常以太平之时来至者，春秋之时，骐驎尝嫌於王孔子而至。
现代文：凤凰、麒麟，通常是在太平盛世到来，春秋的时候，麒麟曾经猜测孔子要当王而出现过。
English: The phoenix and the unicorn usually arrive in times of peace and prosperity. During the spring and autumn, the unicorn once appeared, guessing that Confucius would become king.

古文：光武皇帝生於济阳，凤皇来集。 
现代文：光武皇帝在济阳出生，凤凰飞来停落在那里。
English: Emperor Guangwu was born in Jiyang, and the phoenix flew to and landed there.

古文：夫光武始生之时，成、哀之际也，时未太平而凤皇至。
现代文：光武皇帝出生的时候，正是汉成帝、汉哀帝在位的时期，当时不是太平盛世而凤凰来了。
English: When Emperor Guangwu was born, it was during the reign of Emperor Han Zheng and Emperor Han Lei. At that time, it was not a time of peace and prosperity, but the arrival of the phoenix.

古文：如以自为光武有圣德而来，是则为圣王始生之瑞，不为太平应也。
现代文：假如凤凰是因为光武皇帝有圣德而来的，这就是为圣王出生而出现的祥瑞，不是天下太平的征兆。
English: If the phoenix came because Emperor Guangwu was a saint, then it was the auspiciousness of the birth of a saint, not a sign of world peace.

古文：嘉瑞或应太平，或为始生，其实难知。
现代文：嘉瑞之物有时预兆太平盛世，有时预兆圣王出生，它实在难于预知。
English: Sometimes, the things of Kerry are a harbinger of peace and prosperity, and sometimes they are a harbinger of the birth of a holy king. It is really difficult to predict.

古文：独以太平之际验之，如何？
现代文：单凭太平的时候去检验它，怎么行呢？
English: How is it possible to test it in peacetime alone?

古文：或曰： 凤皇骐驎，生有种类，若龟龙有种类矣。
现代文：有人说： 凤凰、麒麟，出生是有族类的，像龟和龙有族类一样。
English: Some people say: phoenixes and unicorns are born with races, just as turtles and dragons have races.

古文：龟故生龟，龙故生龙，形色小大，不异於前者也。
现代文：龟固然生龟，龙固然生龙，形状色彩大小，后者与前者没有什么差别。
English: The turtle certainly gives birth to a turtle, the dragon certainly gives birth to a dragon, the shape, color and size of the latter are no different from the former.

古文：见之父，察其子孙，何为不可知？ 
现代文：看见他的父亲，就可以了解他的子孙，为什么不能识别呢？ 
English: Seeing his father, you can understand his children and grandchildren, why can't you recognize them?

古文：夫恆物有种类，瑞物无种适生，故曰德应，龟龙然也。
现代文：平常的东西都有族类，祥瑞之物没有族类是偶然出现的，所以称为 德行的征兆 。龟、龙就是这样的征兆。
English: Ordinary things have clans, but auspicious things without clans appear by chance, so they are called signs of virtue. Turtles and dragons are such signs.

古文：人见神龟、灵龙而别之乎？
现代文：人们见了神龟、灵龙能识别它们吗？
English: People have seen the tortoise, can the dragon recognize them?

古文：宋元王之时，渔者网得神龟焉，渔父不知其神也。
现代文：宋元王的时候，一个渔夫用网捕捉到一只神龟，渔夫并不知道它是神龟。
English: During the reign of King Songyuan, a fisherman caught a divine turtle in his net. The fisherman did not know that it was a divine turtle.

古文：方今世儒，渔父之类也。
现代文：现在的俗儒，如同渔夫之类的人一样。
English: Today's laymen are like fishermen and the like.

古文：以渔父而不知神龟，则亦知夫世人而不知灵龙也。
现代文：根据渔夫不能识别神龟，也就知道一般人不能识别灵龙了。
English: According to the fisherman's inability to recognize the divine turtle, it is also known that the average person cannot recognize the spiritual dragon.

古文：龙或时似蛇，蛇或时似龙。
现代文：龙有时像蛇，蛇有时像龙。
English: Dragons sometimes look like snakes, and snakes sometimes look like dragons.

古文：韩子曰： 马之似鹿者千金。 
现代文：韩非说： 像鹿的马价值千金。 
English: Han Fei said, "A horse like a deer is worth a lot of money."

古文：良马似鹿，神龙或时似蛇。
现代文：良马有像鹿的，神龙有时就像蛇。
English: A good horse is like a deer, a divine dragon is sometimes like a snake.

古文：如审有类，形色不异。
现代文：如果确实有这种族类的话，那么形状、颜色就不应当有差别。
English: If there really is such a race, then there should be no difference in shape or color.

古文：王莽时有大鸟如马，五色龙文，与众鸟数十集於沛国蕲县。
现代文：王莽的时候，有只鸟像马一样大，羽毛五色有如龙一样的花纹，与数十只鸟停落在沛国的蕲县。
English: At the time of Wang Mang, there was a bird as big as a horse, with feathers of five colors and patterns like a dragon, and dozens of birds stopped in Jixian County, Pei Province.

古文：宣帝时凤皇集於地，高五尺，与言如马身高同矣；文章五色，与言五色龙文，物色均矣；众鸟数十，与言俱集、附从等也。
现代文：汉宣帝时，有凤凰停落在地上，身高五尺，与上面讲的 如马 的大鸟身高是相同的；羽毛五色纹彩，与上面讲的 五色龙文 颜色是完全一样的；众鸟数十，与前面讲的 俱集 、 附从 是同样的。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan of Han, there was a phoenix that stood on the ground. It was five feet tall, the same height as the large horse-like bird mentioned above; its feathers were five-colored, the same color as the five-colored dragon mentioned above; and there were dozens of birds that were the same size as the ones mentioned above.

古文：如以宣帝时凤皇体色众鸟附从，安知凤皇则王莽所致鸟凤皇也。
现代文：如果根据汉宣帝时凤凰的形体、颜色以及众鸟跟随这种情况来考察识别凤凰，那么王莽时招来的鸟，就是凤凰了。
English: If we identify the phoenix according to the shape and color of the phoenix at the time of Emperor Han Xuan and the birds following this situation, then the bird summoned by Wang Mang is the phoenix.

古文：如审是王莽致之，是非瑞也。
现代文：如果确实是凤凰，那么因为它是王莽招来的，就不应该是祥瑞了。
English: If it is indeed a phoenix, then because it was summoned by Wang Mang, it should not be Xiang Rui.

古文：如非凤皇，体色附从，何为均等？
现代文：如果不是凤凰，那么它在形体、颜色、有鸟跟随这些特征上为什么又都与凤凰相同呢？
English: If it is not a phoenix, then why is it the same as a phoenix in shape, color, and birds following these features?

古文：且瑞物皆起和气而生，生於常类之中，而有诡异之性，则为瑞矣。
现代文：况且祥瑞都是由天地间的 和气 产生的，它生长于平常的事物之中，而具有奇特的本性，就成为祥瑞。
English: Moreover, Xiang Rui is produced by the harmony between heaven and earth. It grows in ordinary things, but with a strange nature, it becomes Xiang Rui.

古文：故夫凤皇之圣也，犹赤乌之集也。
现代文：所以凤凰的到来，就如赤乌的降落一样。
English: Therefore, the arrival of the phoenix is like the landing of the scarlet phoenix.

古文：谓凤皇有种，赤乌复有类乎？
现代文：说凤凰有族类，赤乌同样有族类吗？
English: Is it true that the phoenix has a race, and the scarlet ibis also has a race?

古文：嘉禾、醴泉、甘露，嘉禾生於禾中，与禾中异穗，谓之嘉禾；醴泉、甘露，出而甘美也，皆泉、露生出，非天上有甘露之种，地下有醴泉之类，圣治公平而乃沾下产出也。
现代文：嘉禾、醴泉、甘露三种东西，嘉禾生长在一般禾之中，与一般禾的穗不同，就称之为嘉禾；醴泉、甘露，出来就特别甘美，都是从一般的泉水、露水中产生出来的，并不是天上有甘露之种，地下有醴泉之类，圣君公平治理天下，醴泉、甘露才能浸润、降落而产生出来。
English: There are three kinds of things: jiahe, nectar spring, and nectar. Jiahe grows in ordinary grass, and unlike the spike of ordinary grass, it is called nectar spring. Nectar spring and nectar come out particularly sweet. They are all produced from ordinary spring water and dew water. It is not that there are nectar seeds in the sky and nectar springs in the ground. The saint governs the world fairly. Nectar spring and nectar can only be produced by infiltration and landing.

古文：蓂荚、硃草亦生在地，集於众草，无常本根，暂时产出，旬月枯折，故谓之瑞。
现代文：蓂荚、朱草也生长在地上，夹杂在众草之中，没有固定的根茎，暂时产生出来，十天半月就枯折了，所以称之为祥瑞。
English: Loquat and vermilion grass also grow on the ground, mixed in with the grasses. They do not have a fixed rhizome. They are produced temporarily, but wither and die in ten and a half days. That is why they are called Xiang Rui.

古文：夫凤皇骐驎，亦瑞也，何以有种类？
现代文：凤凰、麒麟也是祥瑞之物，它们会有什么种类呢？
English: The phoenix and the unicorn are also Xiang Rui's things. What kind of stars will they have?

古文：案周太平，越常献白雉。
现代文：考察周朝天下太平，越常贡献白雉。
English: During the inspection, the world was peaceful, and egrets contributed more and more.

古文：白雉，生短而白色耳，非有白雉之种也。
现代文：白雉，生得短小而毛是白色的罢了，并非专有白雉这种种类。
English: The egret, born short and with white fur, is not unique to the egret.

古文：鲁人得戴角之麞，谓之骐驎，亦或时生於麞，非有骐驎之类。
现代文：鲁国人捕获长有角的獐，称之为麒麟，也许它是獐生出来的，并非有麒麟这种种类。
English: The people of Lu captured a horned baboon and called it a unicorn. Perhaps it was born from a baboon, but there is no such species as a unicorn.

古文：由此言之，凤皇亦或时生於鹄鹊，毛奇羽殊，出异众鸟，则谓之凤皇耳，安得与众鸟殊种类也？
现代文：由此说来，凤凰也许是天鹅喜鹊生出来的，只是羽毛奇异特殊，它的出生与众鸟不同，就称它为凤凰罢了，怎么与众鸟是不同的种类呢？
English: Therefore, the phoenix may have been born from the swan magpie, but the feathers are strange and special. Its birth is different from other birds, so it is just called the phoenix. How is it different from other birds?

古文：有若曰： 骐驎，之於走兽，凤皇之於飞鸟，太山之於丘垤，河海之於行潦，类也。 
现代文：有若说： 麒麟对于一般走兽，凤凰对于一般飞鸟，泰山对于一般土堆，河海对于一般溪流水洼，都属于同类。 
English: Some people say: Kirin belongs to the same class as ordinary beasts, phoenixes to ordinary flying birds, Mount Tai to ordinary mounds, and rivers and seas to ordinary stream depressions.

古文：然则凤皇、骐驎，都与鸟兽同一类，体色诡耳！安得异种？
现代文：那么，凤凰、麒麟都与一般鸟兽同属一类，只不过形体、颜色奇异罢了，怎么是不同的种类呢？
English: So, the phoenix and the unicorn both belong to the same class as ordinary birds and beasts, but their shape and color are strange. How can they be different species?

古文：同类而有奇，奇为不世，不世难审，识之如何？
现代文：同类中有奇异的，奇异之物是世上不常有的，世上不常有就很难弄清楚，又怎能识别它呢？
English: There are strange things in the same kind, strange things are not often found in the world, not often found in the world, it is difficult to figure out, and how can we recognize it?

古文：尧生丹硃，舜生商均。
现代文：尧生下丹朱，舜生下商均。
English: Danzhu was born, and Shangjun was born.

古文：商均、丹硃，尧、舜之类也，骨性诡耳。
现代文：商均、丹朱，是尧、舜的后代，骨相情性不同罢了。
English: Shangjun and Danzhu are the offspring of Zou and Zou, they just have different bone affinity.

古文：鲧生禹，瞽瞍生舜。
现代文：鲧生下禹，瞽瞍生下舜。
English: If you're born under Yu, you're born under Zhou.

古文：舜、禹，鲧、瞽瞍之种也，知德殊矣。
现代文：舜、禹，是鲧、瞽瞍的后代，才智德性大不相同。
English: Yu and Yu are the descendants of Yu and Yu, and their talents and morals are very different.

古文：试种嘉禾之实，不能得嘉禾。
现代文：试种下嘉禾的种子，不一定能够长出嘉禾。
English: If you try to plant the seeds of Jiahe, you may not be able to grow Jiahe.

古文：恆见粢梁之粟，茎穗怪奇。
现代文：经常见到的粢、粱这类一般谷物，茎穗也有生得很奇异的。
English: Common cereals such as oats and bran, which are often seen, also have very unusual stalks.

古文：人见叔梁纥，不知孔子父也；见伯鱼，不知孔子之子也。
现代文：人们见了叔梁纥，不会知道他是孔子的父亲；见了伯鱼，不会知道他是孔子的儿子。
English: People will not know that he is the father of Confucius when they see his uncle Liang Kun; they will not know that he is the son of Confucius when they see his uncle Yu.

古文：张汤之父五尺，汤长八尺，汤孙长六尺。
现代文：张苍的父亲身高五尺，张苍身高八尺，张苍的孙子身高六尺。
English: Zhang Cang's father is five feet tall, Zhang Cang is eight feet tall, Zhang Cang's grandson is six feet tall.

古文：孝宣凤皇高五尺，所从生鸟或时高二尺，後所生之鸟或时高一尺。安得常种？
现代文：汉宣帝时的凤凰身高五尺，生这只凤凰的鸟也许只有二尺高，后面所生的鸟也许才只有一尺高，哪会有固定不变的种类呢？
English: The phoenix at the time of Emperor Han Xuan was five feet tall. The bird that gave birth to this phoenix may only be two feet tall, and the bird that was born later may only be one foot tall. How can there be a fixed and unchanging species?

古文：种类无常，故曾皙生参，气性不世，颜路出回，古今卓绝。
现代文：没有固定不变的种类，所以曾皙生下曾参，曾参的气质性格世上少有，颜路生下颜回，颜回是古今卓绝的人物。
English: There is no fixed and unchanging type, so Zeng Yao gave birth to Zeng Zan, Zeng Zan's temperament is rare in the world, Yan Lu gave birth to Yan Hui, Yan Hui is an outstanding figure from ancient times to the present.

古文：马有千里，不必骐之驹；鸟有仁圣，不必凤皇之雏。
现代文：有千里马，它不一定是骐骥生下的小马；有仁圣之鸟，它不一定是凤凰的幼鸟。
English: If there is a pony, it is not necessarily a foal of twins; if there is a bird of benevolence, it is not necessarily a baby bird of a phoenix.

古文：山顶之溪，不通江湖，然而有鱼，水精自为之也。
现代文：山顶上的溪流，与江湖不相连接，然而溪中有鱼，这是水中的精气自然产生的。
English: The stream on the top of the mountain is not connected to any rivers or lakes. However, there are fish in the stream, which is naturally produced by the essence in the water.

古文：废庭坏殿，基上草生，地气自出之也。
现代文：废弃朽坏了的殿庭，屋基上长了草，这是地中的精气自然产生的。
English: The abandoned and decayed palace garden and the grass growing on the foundation of the roof were naturally produced by the essence of the earth.

古文：按溪水之鱼，殿基上之草，无类而出。瑞应之自至，天地未必有种类也。
现代文：察看溪水中的鱼，殿基上的草，没有种类而产生，祥瑞之物应时而来，天地之间未必有它的种类。
English: Look at the fish in the stream, the grass on the foundation of the temple. There is no kind of species, but things of auspiciousness come from time to time. There may not be its kind between heaven and earth.

古文：夫瑞应犹灾变也。
现代文：祥瑞的出现和灾异的出现道理是相同的。
English: The emergence of auspiciousness and the emergence of calamity are the same.

古文：瑞以应善，灾以应恶，善恶虽反，其应一也。
现代文：祥瑞与善政相适应，灾变与恶政相适应，善政与恶政虽然相反，它们在作为征兆这一点上却是相同的。
English: Prosperity is compatible with good government, disaster is compatible with bad government, and good government and bad government, though opposites, are the same in that they are symptoms.

古文：灾变无种，瑞应亦无类也。
现代文：灾变之物没有种类，祥瑞之物同样也没有种类。
English: There is no category for things of calamity, just as there is no category for things of auspiciousness.

古文：阴阳之气，天地之气也，遭善而为和，遇恶而为变，岂天地为善恶之政，更生和变之气乎？
现代文：阴气与阳气，都是天地产生的气，遇到善政就成为和谐之气形成祥瑞，遇到恶政就成为变异之气造成灾变，哪里是天地有意识地根据政治的善恶，另外制造出和谐之气与灾变之气呢？
English: Yin and yang are both qi generated by heaven and earth. When good governance is encountered, it becomes the qi of harmony to form auspiciousness. When bad governance is encountered, it becomes the qi of variation to cause disaster. Where is the heaven and earth that consciously creates the qi of harmony and the qi of disaster according to the political good and evil?

古文：然则瑞应之出，殆无种类，因善而起，气和而生。
现代文：然而祥瑞之物的出现，恐怕也没有什么种类，由于遇到善政而兴起，气和谐而产生出来。
English: However, the emergence of auspicious things, I am afraid there is no kind of, due to encounter good governance and rise, qi harmony and produced.

古文：亦或时政平气和，众物变化，犹春则鹰变为鸠，秋则鸠化为鹰，蛇鼠之类辄为鱼鳖，虾蟆为鹑，雀为蜃蛤。
现代文：也有时政治安定阴阳之气和谐，但众物自身发生变生，如果在春天，那么鹰变成了鸠；在秋天，鸠就变化为鹰，蛇鼠一类的东西就变为鱼鳖，蛤蟆变为鹌鹑，雀子变成大蛤蜊等等。
English: There are also times when political stability and yin and yang are in harmony, but things themselves undergo metamorphosis. If it is spring, the eagle will turn into a stork; if it is autumn, the stork will turn into an eagle; if it is a snake or a rat, it will turn into a fish hook; if it is a dragonfly, it will turn into a beak; if it is a sparrow, it will turn into a large beak, and so on.

古文：物随气变，不可谓无。
现代文：万物随着阴阳之气变化，不能说是没有这种事。
English: All things change according to the yin and yang, it cannot be said that there is no such thing.

古文：黄石为老父授张良书，去复为石也。儒知之。
现代文：黄石变成老翁，传授兵书给张良，离去后又转变为黄石，这些事当世的儒生是知道的。
English: Huangshi became an old man, taught military books to Zhang Liang, and after he left, he was transformed into Huangshi, these things are known to contemporary Confucians.

古文：或时太平气和，麞为骐驎，鹄为凤皇。
现代文：有时天下太平阴阳之气和谐，獐变成了麒麟，天鹅变成了凤凰。
English: Sometimes the world is peaceful and the yin and yang are harmonious, the dragonfly becomes a unicorn, the swan becomes a phoenix.

古文：是故气性，随时变化，岂必有常类哉？
现代文：所以一种东西的气质特性总是随时发生变化的，怎么能断定有固定不变的种类呢？
English: Therefore, the temperamental characteristics of a thing are always changing at any time, how can we conclude that there is a fixed type?

古文：褒姒，玄鼋之子，二龙漦也。
现代文：褒姒，是黑蜥蜴的女儿，由两条龙的唾液产生而来。
English: Bohong, the daughter of a black lizard, was created from the saliva of two dragons.

古文：晋之二卿，熊罴之裔也。
现代文：晋国的范氏、中行氏，是熊罴的后代。
English: The Fan and Zhongxing clans in Jin Province are descendants of Xiong Yao.

古文：吞燕子、薏苡、履大迹之语，世之人然之，独谓瑞有常类哉？
现代文：吞吃燕卵而生契、吃薏苡而生禹、踩巨人足印而生稷的传说，世上的人都相信这种说法，怎么却偏偏说祥瑞之物有固定不变的种类呢？
English: People all over the world believe in the legend of swallowing a swallow's egg to create a child, eating a dragonfly to create a god, and stepping on a giant's footprints to create a dragonfly. But how can it be said that there are fixed and unchanging types of Xiangrui things?

古文：以物无种计之，以人无类议之，以体变化论之，凤皇、骐驎生无常类，则形色何为当同？案《礼记瑞命篇》云： 雄曰凤，雌曰皇。
现代文：根据万物没有固定不变的种类这一点来判断，根据人没有固定不变的种类这一点来分析，根据形体经常发生变化这一点来议论，凤凰、麒麟的出生没有固定不变的种类，那么它们的形体、色彩为什么一定要相同呢？考察《礼记·瑞命篇》里说： 雄的叫凤，雌的叫凰。
English: Judging from the fact that there is no fixed and unchanging kind of things, analyzing from the fact that there is no fixed and unchanging kind of people, and discussing from the fact that the shape often changes, there is no fixed and unchanging kind of phoenix and unicorn birth, so why do their shapes and colors have to be the same?

古文：雄鸣曰即即，雌鸣足足。 
现代文：雄凤的鸣叫声是 即即 ，雌凰的鸣叫声是 足足 。 
English: The male phoenix chirps "soon, soon" and the female phoenix chirps "soon, soon."

古文：《诗》云： 梧桐生矣，于彼朝阳。
现代文：《诗经》里说： 那高高的山冈上长着梧桐树。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: On that high mountain there grows a sycamore tree.

古文：菶菶萋萋，雍雍喈喈。 
现代文：在向着太阳的一面凤凰在鸣叫。梧桐树叶茂盛，凤凰叫声噰噰喈喈。 
English: On the side facing the sun, a phoenix is chirping. The leaves of the plane trees are in full bloom, and the phoenix is chirping.

古文：《瑞命》与《诗》，俱言凤皇之鸣。《瑞命》之言 即即、足足 ，《诗》云 噰々、喈喈 ，此声异也。
现代文：《瑞命篇》与《诗经》都讲了凤凰的鸣叫声，《瑞命篇》的说法是 即即、足足 ，《诗经》上的说法是 噰噰喈喈 ，这是鸣叫声不相同。
English: "Rui Muyi" and "Shijing" both talk about the chirping sound of the phoenix. "Rui Muyi" says "soon" and "soon," "Shijing" says "soon" and "soon," "Shijing" says "soon" and "soon," and "Shijing" says "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon," and "Shijing" says "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon" and "soon

古文：使声审，则形不同也；使审同，《诗》与《礼》异。
现代文：如果《瑞命》、《诗经》所记载的凤和凰的叫声确实不同，那么它们的形状就应该不一样。
English: If the cries of the phoenix and the phoenix recorded in "Suimei" and "Shijing" are indeed different, then their shapes should be different.

古文：世传凤皇之鸣，故将疑焉。案鲁之获麟云 有麞而角 。
现代文：如果凤和凰的叫声确实相同，《诗经》与《礼记》里形容它们的叫声却不相同，历代相传把它们当作凤和凰的叫声，就值得怀疑了。考察鲁国捕获麟的记载，说： 形状像獐而长着角 。
English: If the cries of the phoenix and the phoenix are indeed the same, but the cries that describe them in the Book of Songs and the Book of Rites are different, it is doubtful that they have been passed down from generation to generation as the cries of the phoenix and the phoenix.

古文：言 有麞 者，色如麞也。
现代文：说： 形状像獐 ，是它的毛色像獐的毛色。
English: He said: "It's shaped like a toad, it's fur is like a toad's fur.

古文：麞色有常，若鸟色有常矣。
现代文：獐的毛色是固定不变的，就像鸟的毛色固定不变一样。
English: The plumage of a cormorant is fixed, just as the plumage of a bird is fixed.

古文：武王之时，火流为乌，云其色赤。
现代文：周武王的时候，火落下来变成了乌鸦，说 它的毛色是红的 。
English: At the time of King Zhouwu, the fire fell down and turned into a crow, saying that its fur color was red.

古文：赤非乌之色，故言其色赤。
现代文：红不是乌鸦本来的颜色，因此说 它的毛色是红的 。
English: Red is not the crow's natural color, so it is said that its fur color is red.

古文：如似麞而色异，亦当言其色白若黑。
现代文：如果像獐但毛色不同，也应当讲清它的颜色是白的或是黑的。
English: If it is like a baboon but has a different coat color, it should also be made clear whether its color is white or black.

古文：今成事色同，故言 有麞 。
现代文：现在事实上鲁国捕获的麟与獐的颜色相同，所以说成 形状像獐 。
English: Now, in fact, the unicorn captured by Lu is the same color as the dragonfly, so it is said to be shaped like a dragonfly.

古文：麞无角，有异於故，故言 而角 也。
现代文：獐没有长角，不同于本来的样子，所以说成是 长着角 。
English: Dragonflies do not have long horns, which is different from their original appearance, so they are said to have long horns.

古文：夫如是，鲁之所得驎者，若麞之状也。
现代文：如果是这样，鲁国所捕获的麟，只是形状上像獐。
English: If this is the case, then the unicorn captured by Lu Guo only resembles a dragonfly in shape.

古文：武帝之时，西巡狩得白驎，一角而五趾。
现代文：汉武帝的时候，到西部巡狩，捕获得一只白色的麟，头上长一只角，每只蹄子上有五个脚趾。
English: When Emperor Hanwu was on a hunting tour in the west, he caught a white unicorn with a horn on its head and five toes on each hoof.

古文：角或时同，言五趾者，足不同矣。
现代文：角也许相同，讲有五个脚趾，是足不相同。
English: The horns may be the same, but the five toes are different.

古文：鲁所得麟，云 有麞 ，不言色者，麞无异色也。
现代文：鲁国捕获的麟，只讲 形状像獐 ，不讲毛色，因为与獐的毛色没有什么不同。
English: The unicorn captured by Lu only has the shape of a dragonfly, not the fur color, because it is no different from the fur color of a dragonfly.

古文：武帝云 得白驎 ，色白不类麞，故言有麞，正言白驎，色不同也。
现代文：汉帝武时讲 捕获白麟 ，毛色是白的与獐不同，所以不讲 形状像獐 ，而确切地讲 白色的麟 ，是毛色与獐不相同。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, it was said that when a white unicorn was captured, the fur color was white and different from that of a roe deer. Therefore, it was not said that the shape was like a roe deer, but rather that a white unicorn was a fur color different from that of a roe deer.

古文：孝宣之时，九真贡，献驎，状如而两角者。孝武言一，角不同矣。
现代文：汉宣帝的时候，九真郡进贡，献了一只麟，形状像鹿但长有两只角，这就和汉武帝时所说的一只角的麟不相同了。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Xuan, Jiuzhen County paid tribute and presented a unicorn, shaped like a deer but with two horns, which was different from the one-horned unicorn mentioned at the time of Emperor Han.

古文：《春秋》之麟如麞，宣帝之驎言如鹿。
现代文：春秋时的麟像獐，汉宣帝时的麟像鹿。
English: In spring and autumn, the unicorn looks like a roe deer, and in the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, the unicorn looks like a deer.

古文：鹿与麞小大相倍，体不同也。
现代文：鹿与獐大小相差一倍，体态根本不相同。
English: The difference in size between a deer and a roe deer is twice as large, and their physiques are completely different.

古文：夫三王之时，驎毛色、角趾、身体高大，不相似类。
现代文：鲁哀公、汉武帝、汉宣帝的时候，麟的毛色、角趾、身体高大各不相同。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Rui, Emperor Hanwu, and Emperor Han Xuan, the fur color, horned toes, and body height of the unicorn varied.

古文：推此准後世，驎出必不与前同，明矣。
现代文：由此情况去衡量后代，麟的出现必定不与前面出现的相同，这是很清楚的。
English: Judging future generations from this situation, it is clear that the emergence of the unicorn must not be the same as that of the previous generation.

古文：夫骐驎，凤皇之类，骐驎前後体色不同，而欲以宣帝之时所见凤皇高五尺，文章五色，准前况後，当复出凤皇，谓与之同，误矣！
现代文：麒麟、凤凰这一类东西，前后出现的麒麟形体毛色各不相同，想以汉宣帝时所见到的高有五尺，羽毛有五彩花纹的凤凰作为标准，依据前面的标准去比较后面的，倘若再出现凤凰，就说它与宣帝时所见的凤凰相同，这就错了！
English: Kirin, phoenix, these kinds of things, before and after the appearance of the Kirin-shaped body hair color are different, want to see the five-foot-tall phoenix with multicolored feathers as the standard, according to the previous standard to compare the latter, if the phoenix reappears, it is said that it is the same as the phoenix seen at the time of Emperor Xuan, which is wrong!

古文：後当复出见之凤皇、骐驎，必已不与前世见出者相似类。而世儒自谓见而辄知之，奈何？
现代文：以后倘若再出现凤凰、麒麟，必定不会和以前出现的相类似，然而俗儒自称见到它们就能识别出来，这怎么行呢？
English: In the future, if the phoenix and the unicorn appear again, they will certainly not be similar to those that have appeared before. However, the layman claims to be able to recognize them when he sees them. How can this be done?

古文：案鲁人得驎，不敢正名驎，曰 有麞而角者 ，时诚无以知也。
现代文：考察鲁国人捕获的麟，不敢确切地取名 麒麟 ，说是 像獐而长有角 ，因为当时确实无法识别它。
English: When examining the unicorn captured by the people of Lu, they did not dare to accurately name the unicorn, saying that it was like a dragonfly and had horns, because at that time it was really impossible to identify it.

古文：武帝使谒者终军议之，终军曰： 野禽并角，明天下同本也。 
现代文：汉武帝让谒者终军评论这件事，终军说： 野兽的两只角合并长在一起，象征天下都归附西汉。 
English: Emperor Hanwu asked the last army to comment on this matter. The last army said: The two horns of the beast grow together, symbolizing that the whole world belongs to the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：不正名驎而言 野禽 者，终军亦疑无以审也。
现代文：不能确切地命名为 麒麟 ，而说成 野兽 ，是因为终军也怀疑是不是麒麟而无法加以肯定的缘故。
English: He could not be named "Kirin" exactly, but was called "Beast" because the last army also doubted whether he was a unicorn and could not be sure.

古文：当今世儒之知，不能过鲁人与终军，其见凤皇、骐驎，必从而疑之非恆之鸟兽耳，何能审其凤皇、骐驎乎？以体色言之，未必等；以鸟兽随从多者，未必善；以希见言之，有瞿鹆来；以相奇言之，圣人有奇骨体，贤者亦有奇骨。圣贤俱奇，人无以别。
现代文：从随从的鸟兽多少来判断，不一定准确。从很少出现这方面来说，有鸜鹆飞来筑巢的事实。从骨相奇特来说，圣人有奇特的骨体，贤者也有奇特的骨相。
English: Judging from the number of accompanying birds and beasts, it is not necessarily accurate. From the rare occurrence of this aspect, there is the fact that there are dragonflies flying to build nests. From the point of view of bone morphology, the sage has a peculiar bone body, and the sage has a peculiar bone morphology.

古文：由贤圣言之，圣鸟、圣兽，亦与恆鸟庸兽俱有奇怪。
现代文：圣人贤人的骨相都奇特，人们就无法区别他们谁圣谁贤。就圣、贤这一点来说，圣鸟、圣兽和一般鸟兽相比也都各有奇特之处。
English: The bones of saints and sages are all peculiar, so people cannot distinguish who is a saint and who is a sage. In terms of sacredness and virtue, sacred birds and sacred beasts also have their own peculiarities compared to ordinary birds and beasts.

古文：圣人贤者，亦有知而绝殊，骨无异者；圣贤鸟兽，亦有仁善廉清，体无奇者。
现代文：然而圣人贤人之中也有智慧卓绝而骨相却没有什么特殊的；圣鸟贤兽之中也有仁慈、善良、廉洁、清高而形体并不奇特的。
English: However, among the saints and sages, there are also people with superior wisdom, but their bones are not special; among the holy birds and beasts, there are also people who are kind, good, pure, and noble, but their bodies are not special.

古文：世或有富贵不圣，身有骨为富贵表，不为圣贤验。
现代文：世上有的富贵之人，并不是圣人，身上有奇骨只是作为富贵的征象，而不是作为圣人、贤人的证明。
English: There are rich people in the world, but they are not saints. They only have strange bones on their bodies as a sign of wealth, not as proof of being a saint or a wise man.

古文：然则鸟亦有五采，兽有角而无仁圣者。
现代文：然而鸟中也有毛色五彩的，兽中有长一角的，但并不是仁圣的鸟兽。
English: However, there are also birds with colorful fur, and beasts with long horns, but they are not benevolent birds and beasts.

古文：夫如是，上世所见凤皇、骐驎，何知其非恆鸟兽？
现代文：如果是这样，前代所见到的凤凰、麒麟，怎么知道它就不是一般的鸟兽呢？
English: If so, how do we know that the phoenix and the unicorn seen in the previous generation are not ordinary birds and beasts?

古文：今之所见鹊、麞之属，安知非凤皇、骐驎也？
现代文：现在所见到的鹊、獐这类的鸟兽，又怎么知道它们不是真的凤凰和麒麟呢？
English: How do we know that the dragonflies, dragonflies and other birds and beasts we see now are not real phoenixes and unicorns?

古文：方今圣世，尧、舜之主，流布道化，仁圣之物，何为不生？
现代文：现在是圣人在位的时代，像尧、舜那样的君王，普遍地施行道德教化，仁圣的东西，为什么不产生呢？
English: Now is the era of saints on the throne. Why aren't there more kings like Zou and Zou Nan who universally carry out moral enlightenment and benevolence?

古文：或时以有凤皇、骐驎，乱於鹄鹊、麞鹿，世人不知。
现代文：也许已经有凤凰、麒麟混杂在天鹅、喜鹊、獐、鹿之中，而世上的人没有认识出来。
English: Perhaps there are already phoenixes and unicorns mixed in with the swans, magpies, storks, and deer, and the people of the world do not recognize them.

古文：美玉隐在石中，楚王、令尹不能知，故有抱玉泣血之痛。
现代文：美玉隐藏在石头中，楚王、令尹不能识别出来，所以造成卞和抱玉泣血的悲痛。
English: The beautiful jade is hidden in the stone, and King Chu and Ling Yin can't recognize it, which has caused the grief of the dragonfly and the jade weeping blood.

古文：今或时凤皇、骐驎，以仁圣之性，隐於恆毛庸羽，无一角五色表之，世人不之知，犹玉在石中也。
现代文：现在，或许凤凰、麒麟由于它们仁圣的情性，隐藏在一般的鸟兽之中，没有只长一只角或毛羽五色这样的特征把它们标志出来，世上的人因此而不能识别它们，好比宝玉隐藏在石头中，用什么去识别它们呢？
English: Now, perhaps the phoenix and the unicorn, because of their benevolent and holy disposition, are hidden among the common birds and beasts. They are not marked by characteristics such as growing only one horn or five colors of feathers. Therefore, people in the world cannot recognize them. It is like a jewel hidden in a stone. What is used to identify them?

古文：何用审之？为此论草於永平之初，时来有瑞，其孝明宣惠，众瑞并至。
现代文：因为这篇文章起草于永平初年，当时正有祥瑞出现，汉明帝布施恩惠，各种祥瑞都一齐来了。
English: Because this article was drafted in the first year of Yongping, at that time Xiang Rui was appearing, Han Ming Di was offering favors, and all kinds of Xiang Rui came together.

古文：至元和、章和之际，孝章耀德，天下和洽，嘉瑞奇物，同时俱应，凤皇、骐驎，连出重见，盛於五帝之时。
现代文：到了元和、章和年间，汉章帝发扬德教，天下太平，嘉瑞奇物，同时都应和而出，凤凰、麒麟，连接重复出现，比五帝之时更为兴盛。
English: In the Yuan and Zhang and years, Emperor Hanzhang promoted moral education, the world was peaceful, and Jia Rui was a strange thing. At the same time, it should be harmonious, and the phoenix, the unicorn, and the connection appeared repeatedly, and it was more prosperous than the time of the five emperors.

古文：此篇已成，故不得载。
现代文：这篇文章已经写完，所以就没有记载这些事情。
English: This article has already been written, so there is no record of these things.

古文：或问曰： 《讲瑞》谓凤皇、骐驎难知，世瑞不能别。
现代文：有人问道： 《讲瑞篇》中说凤凰、麒麟难以认识，世儒对祥瑞是不能识别的。
English: Someone asked: "In "Talking about Rui," it is said that the phoenix and the unicorn are difficult to recognize, and people cannot recognize Xiang Rui.

古文：今孝章之所致凤皇、骐驎，不可得知乎？ 
现代文：现在汉宣帝所招致的凤凰、麒麟，也是不可能识别的吗？ 
English: Is it impossible to recognize the phoenix and the unicorn now that Han Xuandi has invited them?

古文：曰：《五鸟》之记，四方中央，皆有大鸟，其出，众鸟皆从，小大毛色类凤皇，实难知也。故夫世瑞不能别，别之如何？
现代文：回答说：《五鸟记》中记载： 在东、南、西、北四方的中央，都有大鸟在其中。大鸟出来，众鸟都跟随着，它的大小毛色都类似凤凰。 实在难以认识，所以世儒不能够识别。
English: He replied, "It is recorded in "The Tale of the Five Birds": "In the middle of the four directions of east, south, west and north, there is a large bird. The large bird comes out, and all the birds follow it. Its size and fur color are similar to a phoenix. It is really hard to recognize, so people cannot recognize it."

古文：以政治。
现代文：用什么才能识别呢？
English: How can they be identified?

古文：时王之德，不及唐、虞之时，其凤皇、骐驎，目不亲见。然而唐、虞之瑞必真是者，尧之德明也。
现代文：根据政治、在位君王的道德来识别。没有赶上唐尧、虞舜在位的时代，那些凤凰、麒麟没有亲眼见到，然而唐尧、虞舜时代的祥瑞必然是真的，因为唐尧的道德是圣明的。
English: According to the politics and morals of the reigning monarchs, it is identified. It has not caught up with the era of Tang Xuan and Yu Xi's reign, and those phoenixes and unicorns have not been seen with their own eyes. However, the auspiciousness of the Tang Xuan and Yu Xi's era must be true, because the morality of Tang Xuan is sacred.

古文：孝宣比尧、舜，天下太平，万里慕化，仁道施行，鸟兽仁者感动而来，瑞物小大、毛色、足翼必不同类。
现代文：汉宣帝类似唐尧、虞舜，天下太平，四面八方仰慕归化，仁道普遍施行，鸟兽中的仁者，受感动而来，祥瑞之物的大小、毛色、足翼必然不会相同。
English: Han Xuandi is similar to Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan, the world is peaceful, naturalization is admired in all directions, benevolence is widely practiced, the benevolent among birds and beasts are moved, and the size, fur color and foot wings of auspicious things will not be the same.

古文：以政治之得失，主之明暗，准况众瑞，无非真者。
现代文：用政治的好坏、君王的贤明或昏庸作标准，来检验汉宣帝时的众多的祥瑞，没有一个不是真的。
English: Using the quality of politics, the wisdom or mediocrity of the monarch as the standard to test the numerous auspiciousnesses at the time of Emperor Han Xuan, none of them are not true.

古文：事或难知而易晓，其此之谓也。
现代文：有的事情看来很难懂实际上却容易理解，大概就是指这种情况说的吧。
English: Some things that seem hard to understand are actually easy to understand, probably referring to this situation.

古文：又以甘露验之。甘露，和气所生也。露无故而甘，和气独已至矣。
现代文：又用甘露的产生来检验它，甘露，是由和气而产生的，露水无缘无故地发甜，是因和气早就已经来到了。
English: And he tested it by producing nectar. The nectar was produced by the harmony. The dew was sweet for no reason, because the harmony had already come.

古文：和气至，甘露降，德洽而众瑞凑。
现代文：和气来到，甘露降临，恩德普施所以各种祥瑞都凑集来了。
English: Harmony has come, nectar has come, and all kinds of auspicious things have come together.

古文：案永平以来，讫於章和，甘露常降，故知众瑞皆是，而凤凰、骐驎皆真也。
现代文：考察永平以来，到章和年间，甘露经常降临，所以知道各种祥瑞都是真的，而凤凰、麒麟也都是真的。
English: Since the inspection of Yongping, to the chapter and year, nectar often falls, so I know that all kinds of auspiciousness are true, and the phoenix and the unicorn are also true.

