古文：姚苌，字景茂，出于南安赤亭，烧当之后也，祖柯回，助魏掎姜维于沓中，以功假绥戎校尉、西羌都督。
现代文：姚苌字景茂，生于南安赤亭，是烧当族的后代。祖父姚柯迥，协助魏把姜维牵制在沓中，因功授予绥戎校尉、西羌都督。
English: Yao Jie Zi Jing Mao, born in Chiting, Nan'an, is a descendant of the Burntang people. His grandfather, Yao Kejun, helped Wei to keep Jiang Wei in a shackle, and was awarded the title of Shun Rong lieutenant and Xi'an governor for his service.

古文：父弋仲，晋永嘉之乱，东徙榆眉。
现代文：父亲弋仲，在晋永嘉之乱时，向东迁移到榆眉。
English: His father, Jianzhong, moved east to Meimei during the Jin Yongjia Rebellion.

古文：刘曜以弋仲为平西将军，平襄公。
现代文：刘曜任命弋仲为平西将军、平襄公。
English: Liu You appointed Qizhong as the general of Pingxi and the prince of Pingxiang.

古文：后随石季龙迁于清河滠头，勒以弋仲为奋武将军，封襄平公。
现代文：后来随石季龙迁到清河滠头。石勒让弋仲做了奋武将军，封为襄平公。
English: Later, he moved to Shinghe Shantou with Shi Jilong. Shi Le asked Shizhong to make him a general of Fenwu, and he was given the title of Prince Xiangping.

古文：弋仲死，子襄代，屯于谯城。
现代文：弋仲死后，儿子姚襄代替父位，驻军在谯城。
English: After the death of Yaozhong, his son Yao Xiang took the place of his father and garrisoned in Fucheng.

古文：慕容俊以襄为豫州刺史、丹阳公，屯淮南。
现代文：慕容亻隽任命姚襄为豫州刺史，丹阳公。驻军在淮河南。
English: Murong Hui appointed Yao Xiang as the governor of Henan Province and the governor of Danyang. The troops were stationed in the south of Huaihe.

古文：自称大将军、大单于，为晋将桓温所败，奔河东。
现代文：自称为大将军、大单于，被晋朝将领桓温打败，逃向河东。
English: He called himself the great general, Daidan Yu, but was defeated by the Jin dynasty general, Kuan Wen, and fled to the east of the river.

古文：后为苻眉所杀。
现代文：后来被苻眉杀死。
English: He was later killed by Frown.

古文：弋仲有子四十二人，苌第二十四。
现代文：姚弋仲有儿子四十二人，姚苌排行第二十四。
English: Yao Yizhong has 42 sons, with Yao Yizhong ranking 24th.

古文：随兄襄征伐，襄甚奇之。
现代文：随哥哥姚襄征战，姚襄很惊异他的才能。
English: He followed his brother Yao Xiang to the war, and Yao Xiang was amazed at his talent.

古文：襄败，降于苻坚。
现代文：姚襄兵败后，他投降苻坚。
English: After Yao Xiang's defeat, he surrendered to Yan Jian.

古文：从坚征伐，频有功。
现代文：跟随苻坚征战，经常立功。
English: He followed Gao Jian into battle and often made meritorious contributions.

古文：坚伐晋，以苌为龙骧将军，督益梁州诸军事，谓苌曰： 朕本以龙骧建业，龙骧之号，初未假人，今特以相授。
现代文：苻坚代晋时，任命姚苌为龙骧将军，督领益州、梁州等军事，对姚苌说： 我当初依靠龙骧建立功业，龙骧的称号，先前没有授予他人，现在特地授予你。
English: When Yu Jian became the successor of the Jin Dynasty, he appointed Yao Jian as the general of Long Jian and the military commander of Yizhou, Liangzhou and other provinces. He said to Yao Jian: I initially relied on Long Jian to build my career. The title of Long Jian, which was not previously awarded to others, is now specially awarded to you.

古文：山南之事，一以委卿。 
现代文：太行山以南的事情，全部交付给你。 
English: Everything south of Mount Taihang is up to you.

古文：坚左将军窦中进曰： 王者无戏言，此亦不臧之徵也，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：苻坚的左将军窦冲进奏说 ：做国君的没有玩笑话，这是一种不好的征兆，希望陛下审视。 
English: Zuo Dou, the left-wing general of the Xuanjian, rushed into the recital and said, "There is no joking about being the sovereign. This is a bad omen. I hope His Majesty will examine it."

古文：坚默然。
现代文：苻坚沉默不语。
English: Yu Jian was silent.

古文：及慕容泓起兵华泽，坚遣子卫大将军睿讨之，战败，为泓所杀。
现代文：等到慕容泓在华泽起兵，苻坚派遣儿子卫大将军苻睿又讨伐他，战败，被慕容泓杀死。
English: When Murong Yao raised an army in Huazhe, Zou Jian sent his son, Wei General Zha Rui, to fight against him, but he was defeated and killed by Murong Yao.

古文：时苌为睿司马，惧罪奔马牧。
现代文：当初姚苌是苻睿又的司马，畏罪逃到马牧。
English: At the beginning, Yao Wei was a shrewd and shrewd Sima, but he fled to Mamu for fear of crime.

古文：聚众万余，自称大将军、大单于、万年秦王，号年白雀。
现代文：聚集一万多人，自称大将军、大单于、万年秦王。年号白雀。
English: More than 10,000 people gathered, claiming to be the great general, the great single, and the king of Qin for all eternity. The year is Bai Jiao.

古文：数月之间，众至十余万。
现代文：几个月之内，人数达到十多万。
English: Within a few months, the number reached more than a hundred thousand.

古文：与慕容冲连和，进屯北地。
现代文：与慕容冲联军，驻扎在北地。
English: With the Murongchong allied forces, stationed in the north.

古文：苻坚出五将山，苌执而杀之。
现代文：苻坚出奔五将山，被姚苌捉住杀死。
English: Hao Jian ran out of the Five Generals' Mountain and was caught and killed by Yao Yao.

古文：登国元年，僭称皇帝，置百官，国号大秦，年曰建初。
现代文：魏道武帝登国元年，僭越称帝，设置百官，国号大秦，年号建初。
English: When Emperor Wei Daowu ascended to the throne in the first year of the Republic of China, he proclaimed himself emperor of Yunnan and set up hundreds of officials. The country's name was Daqin, and the year was Jianchu.

古文：改长安曰常安，以其太子兴镇之。
现代文：改长安为常安，让太子姚兴镇守。
English: Chang'an was changed to Chang'an, and Prince Yao Xing became the town guard.

古文：自击苻登于安定，败之。
现代文：自己带兵在安定攻击苻坚，大败苻坚。
English: He led his soldiers in a stable attack on the Jurchen, and defeated the Jurchen.

古文：苌病，梦苻坚将天官使者、鬼兵数百，突入营中。
现代文：姚苌得病，梦见苻坚率天官使者，数百个鬼兵，冲入军营。
English: Yao Jun fell ill and dreamed of hundreds of ghost soldiers storming into the military camp, led by Yu Jian.

古文：苌惧，走后宫，宫人迎苌刺鬼，误中苌阴。
现代文：姚苌害怕，逃入后宫，宫中侍人对着姚苌刺杀鬼兵，误中姚苌下阴。
English: Yao Yao was scared and fled into the harem. The palace attendants watched Yao Yao stabbing and killing the ghost soldiers, and by mistake, Yao Yao fell down.

古文：鬼相谓曰： 正中死处。 
现代文：鬼互相说： 正刺在死命之处。 
English: The demons said to one another, "The thorn is at the place of death.

古文：拔矛，出血石余。
现代文：拔出长矛，流血有一石多。
English: He pulled out his spear, and more than a stone of blood flowed.

古文：寤而惊悸，遂患阴肿，刺之，出血如梦。
现代文：睡醒后非常警恐。因此患下阴痛肿，刺破，流血如梦中所见。
English: After waking up, I was very wary. As a result, I suffered from a pubic abscess, puncture, and bleeding as seen in a dream.

古文：苌乃狂言，或称苌， 杀陛下者臣兄襄，非臣之罪，愿不枉法。 
现代文：姚苌于是胡言乱语，有时称自己： 杀死陛下的是为臣的哥哥姚襄，不是我的罪过，希望不要枉法。 
English: Yao Yao then began to speak gibberish, sometimes saying to himself: It was his brother Yao Xiang, who was a vassal, who killed His Majesty. It was not my fault. I hope I did not do it in vain.

古文：苌死，子兴袭位，秘不发丧。
现代文：姚苌死后，他的儿子姚兴继承王位，隐瞒没有发丧。
English: After the death of Yao Xuan, his son Yao Xing succeeded to the throne, concealing that he was not in mourning.

