古文：高湖，字大渊，勃海蓚人也。
现代文：高湖，字大渊，是勃海祷县人。
English: Gaohu, also known as Dayuan, is a native of Bohaiying County.

古文：汉太傅裒之后。
现代文：汉代太傅高哀的后代。
English: Descendants of Taifu Gao Er in the Han Dynasty.

古文：祖庆，慕容垂司空。
现代文：祖父高庆，任慕容垂的司空。
English: His grandfather, Gao Qing, was a high-ranking official of the Kuomintang.

古文：父泰，吏部尚书。
现代文：父亲高泰，任吏部尚书。
English: His father, Gao Tai, was appointed to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：湖少机敏，有器度，与兄韬俱知名于时，雅为乡人崔逞所敬异。
现代文：高湖年轻时机智敏捷，有才具风度，与兄长高韬都知名于当时，很受同乡人崔逞推崇。
English: Gao Hu was young, quick-witted, talented and personable. He and his elder brother Gao Yao were well-known at that time, and were highly respected by their countryman Cui Gang.

古文：少历显职，为散骑常侍。
现代文：年轻时历任显要职务，任散骑常侍。
English: When he was young, he held various important positions and was appointed as a samurai.

古文：登国十年，垂遣其太子宝来伐也，湖言于垂曰： 魏，燕之与国。
现代文：登国十年，慕容垂派遣他的太子慕容宝来攻打，高湖对慕容垂说： 魏，是燕的友邦。
English: Ten years after his ascension to the throne, Murongdali sent his prince Murong Bao to attack. Gao Hu said to Murongdali: Wei is Yan's friend.

古文：彼有内难，此遣赴之;此有所求，彼无违者。
现代文：它有内乱。我们派人去救它；我们有什么请求，它不拒绝。
English: It's in a state of civil war. We've sent someone to rescue it; it won't refuse any request we make.

古文：和好多年，行人相继。
现代文：和好多年，使者相继。
English: For many years, envoys have been arriving one after another.

古文：往求马不得，遂留其弟，曲在于此，非彼之失。
现代文：以往求取马匹没有得到，就扣留魏主的弟弟，是我们没理，不是它的过失。
English: In the past, when we asked for horses and did not get them, we detained the brother of Wei Lord. It was our fault, not his fault.

古文：政当敦修旧好，乂宁国家，而复令太子率众远伐。
现代文：正应当努力恢复往日的友好，安宁国家，却又命令太子率领军队讨伐远方。
English: At a time when efforts should be made to restore the former friendship and tranquility of the country, he ordered the prince to lead the army to fight in a distant land.

古文：且魏主雄略，兵马精强，险阻艰难，备尝之矣。
现代文：况且魏主谋略非凡，兵强马壮，艰难险阻，都经受过。
English: Moreover, the Wei mastermind was somewhat extraordinary, the army was strong, and the difficulties and obstacles were all experienced.

古文：太子富于春秋，意果心锐，轻敌好胜，难可独行。
现代文：太子年轻，心意果敢迫切，轻敌好胜，不宜独自行事。
English: The prince is young, daring and eager, eager to win, and it is not appropriate for him to act alone.

古文：兵凶战危，愿以深虑！ 
现代文：战事凶险可怕，请深思。 
English: The war is perilous and terrible. Please think deeply.

古文：言颇切厉。
现代文：话说得比较严厉。
English: The words were rather harsh.

古文：垂怒，免湖官。
现代文：慕容垂气愤，免去高湖的官职。
English: Murong was so angry that he dismissed Gao Hu from his post.

古文：既而宝果败于参合。
现代文：不久慕容实果然在参金失败。
English: Soon after, Murong did indeed fail to win the prize money.

古文：宝立，乃起湖为征虏将军、燕郡太守。
现代文：慕容实即位，才起用直翅为征虏将军、燕郡太守。
English: When Murongshi ascended the throne, it was only then that he appointed Zhi Rong as the general of conscripts and the governor of Yan County.

古文：宝走和龙，兄弟交争，湖见其衰乱，遂率户三千归国。
现代文：慕容宝逃奔到和龙，兄弟相互争斗，高湖看到燕衰败混乱，于是率领三千户人投毯。
English: Murong Bao fled to Hulong, brothers fought with each other, Gaohu saw Yan's decline and chaos, so he led three thousand households to throw in the towel.

古文：太祖赐爵东阿侯，加右将军，总代东诸部。
现代文：友退赐爵塞迥堡，加授右将军，统领卫逻东边各部。
English: He was awarded the title of Baron of Sayenburg, promoted to General of the Right, and put in charge of the eastern part of the garrison.

古文：世祖时，除宁西将军、凉州镇都大将，镇姑臧，甚有惠政。
现代文：世担时任宁西将军、逮少噬都大将，镇守蛙越，很有惠民的政绩。
English: When he was in charge of the world, he was appointed as the general of Ningxi, the general of Fangshan, the general of Zhuhai, and the town guard of Frog Yue. His political achievements were very beneficial to the people.

古文：年七十，卒。
现代文：七十岁那年，去世。
English: He died at the age of seventy.

古文：赠镇西将军、秦州刺史，谥曰敬。
现代文：被追赠为镇西将军、秦州刺史，谧号为敬。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhenxi Shogun and Qinzhou Shishi, and his posthumous name was Jing.

古文：有四子。
现代文：有四个儿子。
English: They have four sons.

古文：第三子谧，字安平，有文武才度。
现代文：第三个儿子高谧，字安平，有文武才能和气度。
English: The third son, Gao Jun, surnamed Anping, had literary and military talent and dignity.

古文：天安中，以功臣子召入禁中，除中散，专典秘阁。
现代文：年间，作为功臣的儿子被召入宫中，任中散，专门掌管秘阁。
English: During the year, as the son of a meritorious subject, he was summoned to the imperial court, and was appointed to the position of chushan, specifically in charge of the secret cabinet.

古文：肃勤不倦，高宗深重之，拜秘书郎。
现代文：谨慎勤勉不懈怠，高宗很器重他，任命他为秘书郎。
English: Prudent, diligent and tireless, Gaozong held him in high esteem and appointed him secretary.

古文：谧以坟典残缺，奏请广访群书，大加缮写。
现代文：高谧因为古代典籍残缺，奏请广泛征求书籍，多加抄写。
English: Due to the lack of ancient classics, Gao Gan requested to widely solicit books and copy more.

古文：由是代京图籍，莫不审正。
现代文：因此代京的文籍图书，无不精审而正确。
English: Therefore, Daikyo's literature books are all accurate and accurate.

古文：显祖之御宁光宫也，谧恆侍讲读，拜兰台御史。
现代文：显祖到宁光宫，高谧常常陪侍讲学读书，被任命为兰台御史。
English: When Emperor Xianzu went to Ningguang Palace, Gao Yao often accompanied him to lecture and study, and was appointed as the official historian of the Lantai Emperor.

古文：寻转治书，掌摄内外，弹纠非法，当官而行，无所畏避，甚见称赏。
现代文：不久改任治书御史，负责整饬内外，弹劾非法官员，履行职责，无所畏惧，很受赞赏。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of chief historian, responsible for rectifying internal and external corruption, impeaching illegal officials, and performing his duties fearlessly, which was highly appreciated.

古文：延兴二年九月卒，时年四十五。
现代文：延兴二年九月去世，时年四十五岁。
English: Yanxing died in September of the following year, at the age of 45.

古文：太昌初，追赠使持节、侍中、都督青徐齐济兗五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、太尉公、青州刺史，谥武贞公。
现代文：太昌初年，被迫赠为使持节、侍中、都督青徐齐济兖五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、太尉公，青州刺史，谧号武贞公。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was forced to bestow the title of envoy, chamberlain, and governor of the Qing Dynasty to the five states of the military, the general of the cavalry, the lieutenant, the history of the Qing Dynasty, and the nickname Bushen.

古文：妻叔孙氏，陈留郡君。
现代文：妻子叔孙氏，陈留郡君。
English: His wife's great-uncle, Chen Liu County.

古文：长子树生。
现代文：长子树生。
English: The firstborn tree is born.

古文：性通达，重节义，交结英雄，不事生产，有识者并宗奇之。
现代文：为人通情达理，重视节操和义行，交结英雄豪杰，不经营产业，有见识的人都尊重赏识他。
English: He is a man of common sense, attaches great importance to self-discipline and righteousness, is a hero and heroine, does not run an industry, and people with insight respect and appreciate him.

古文：蠕蠕侵掠，高祖诏怀朔镇将、阳平王颐率众讨之。颐假树生镇远将军、都将，先驱有功。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯掳掠，高祖诏令怀朔镇将、阳平王元颐率领军队讨伐，元颐授予树生镇远将军、都将，有先行之功。
English: During the invasion and plunder, Emperor Gaozhu decreed that Wai Shuo would be the commander of the town, and Yang Ping Wang Yuanzhang led the army in the crusade, and Yuanzhang awarded Shusheng Zhenyuan with the general and commander of the town, which was a pioneering achievement.

古文：树生尚气侠，意在浮沉自适，不愿职位，辞不受赏，论者高之。
现代文：树生崇尚义气豪侠，衹愿悠闲自得，不愿当官，辞而不受赏赐，受到人们的称赞。
English: Shusheng is a hero with a strong sense of loyalty. He likes to be at ease, does not want to be an official, resigns without being rewarded, and is praised by people.

古文：居宅数有赤光紫气之异，邻伍惊恐，佥谓怪变，宅不可居。
现代文：住宅多次出现奇异的赤光紫气，邻居惊恐，都说奇怪，不能居住。
English: Strange reddish-violet gas appeared in the house several times. The neighbors were alarmed and said it was strange and uninhabitable.

古文：树生曰： 何往非善？ 
现代文：树生说： 怎么知道不好。 
English: Shuseng said, "It's not good to know."

古文：安之自若。
现代文：安然自若。
English: I feel at ease.

古文：雅好音律，常以丝竹自娱。
现代文：很爱好音律，常以音乐自娱。
English: He is very fond of music and often entertains himself with music.

古文：孝昌初，北州大乱，诏发众军，广开募赏。
现代文：孝昌初年，北方州郡大乱，韶令派遣多路军队，广泛开展招募及奖赏。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, there was a big riot in Beizhou County, and the imperial command dispatched multiple armies to carry out extensive recruitment and reward.

古文：以树生有威略，授以大都督，令率劲勇，镇捍旧蕃。
现代文：由于树生有声威谋略，被任命为大都督，命令他率领勇敢的士卒，镇守故地。
English: Since Shusheng had a voice and a powerful strategy, he was appointed the grand governor and ordered him to lead the brave soldiers to defend his hometown.

古文：二年卒，时年五十五。
现代文：第二年去世，时年五十五岁。
English: He died the following year, aged 55.

古文：太昌初，追赠使持节、都督冀相沧瀛殷定六州诸军事、大将军、太师、录尚书事，冀州刺史，追封勃海王，谥曰文穆。妻韩氏，为勃海王国太妃。
现代文：太昌初年，被迫赠为使持节、都督冀相沧瀛殷定六州诸军事、大将军、太师、录尚书事、冀州刺史，被追封为勃海王，谧号为文穆，妻子韩氏，为勃海王国太妃。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was forced to give military, generals, grand masters, records, and histories of Jizhou to the military of six states, the governor of Jizhou, the vicissitudes and vicissitudes of Yinjing, and was posthumously named the King of Bohai, the nickname was Wenmu, and his wife, Han, was the Princess of the Kingdom of Bohai.

古文：永熙中，后赠假黄钺，侍中，都督中外诸军事，加后部羽葆鼓吹，余如故。
现代文：丞些年间，又追赠为假黄钹、侍中、都督中外诸军事，给予后部羽葆仪仗队和鼓吹仪仗队，其他照售。
English: In later years, it was posthumously presented to the military, both foreign and domestic, as a fake yellow ribbon, to attendants and governors, and given to the rear feathered guard of honor and the propaganda guard of honor, and others were sold as well.

古文：长子即齐献武王也。
现代文：长子就是齐献武王。
English: The eldest son is Qi Xianwu Wang.

古文：王弟琛，字永宝。
现代文：王的弟弟琛，字永宝。
English: Wang's younger brother, Zou, became Yongbao.

古文：天平中，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、御史中尉、南赵郡开国公。
现代文：天平年间，被授予骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、御史中尉、卢垄缀开国公。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he was awarded the title of General of Cavalry, Kaifu Rites and Three Departments, Lieutenant of History, and Prince of Luyuan.

古文：子叡，袭。
现代文：儿子高叡继承爵位。
English: His son, Takaei, succeeded to the title.

古文：武定末，太子庶子。
现代文：武定末年任太子庶子。
English: In the last years of Wuding's life, he became the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：树生弟翻，字飞雀，亦以器度知名。
现代文：树生的弟弟高翻，字飞雀，也以才器和风度知名。
English: Shu Sheng's younger brother Gao Fu, also known for his talent and demeanor.

古文：卒于侍御中散。
现代文：在任侍御中散时去世。
English: He died in the middle of his term of office.

古文：元象中，赠假黄钺、使持节、侍中、都督冀定洛瀛并肆燕恆云朔十州诸军事、大将军、太傅、太尉公、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谥曰孝宣。
现代文：压象年间，追赠假黄铁、使持节、侍中、都督冀宣盗边差肆夔垣云朔十州诸军事、大将军、太傅、太尉公、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谧号为孝宣。
English: During the year of the pressure elephant, the fake yellow iron, the envoy's festival, the chamberlain, the governor of Hebei, Xuan, the robber, the border guard, the military of the ten states, the general, the taifu, the lieutenant, the record of the book, and the history of Hebei Province were awarded posthumously, and the nickname was Xiao Xuan.

古文：子岳，武定末，侍中、太傅公、清河郡开国公。
现代文：儿子高岳，武定末年任侍中、太傅公、清河郡开国公。
English: His son, Takaoka, in the last years of Wuding's life, served as an aide-de-camp, grand steward, and the founder of Qinghe County.

古文：谧长兄真，有志行。
现代文：高谧的长兄高真，有志向和操行。
English: Takahata's eldest brother, Takamasa, has ambition and drive.

古文：兄弟俱至孝，父亡，治丧墓次，甘露白雉降集焉。
现代文：兄弟都极孝顺，父亲去世，在墓旁办理丧事，甘露、白雉降落、聚集在那裹。
English: The brothers were all very filial. When their father died, they held a funeral near the grave. The nectar and the egrets descended and gathered there.

古文：有司以闻，诏标闾里。
现代文：有关部门把这事报告皇上，诏令在里巷中张榜表扬。
English: The relevant departments reported the matter to the emperor, and the imperial edict was issued to post the praise in the streets.

古文：自泾州别驾，稍迁定安太守，甚著声绩。卒，赠龙骧将军，泾州刺史。
现代文：从泾州别驾升为安定太守，政绩显著。去世后被追赠为龙骧将军、泾州刺史。
English: He was promoted from Bozhoubei to the Prince of Stability, and his political achievements were remarkable. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Longjing General and Bozhou Wangshi.

古文：囗带金城太守。
现代文：阙兼任金城太守。
English: He also served as the governor of Jincheng.

古文：神龟初卒。
现代文：神龟初年去世。
English: The tortoise died the first year.

古文：太昌元年，赠使持节、侍中、都督定相殷三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史，谥曰武康。
现代文：太昌元年被追赠为使持节、侍中、都督定相殷三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史，谧号为武康。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was posthumously awarded the title of envoy, chamberlain, and governor of the three states of the military, the general of the cavalry, the three departments of the ceremony, and the history of Dingzhou, and his nickname was Wu Kang.

古文：子仁，正光中，卒于河州别驾。
现代文：儿子高仁，正光年间任河州别驾时去世。
English: His son, Gao Ren, died while serving as the governor of Hezhou during the Zhengguang years.

古文：太昌初，赠使持节、侍中、都督青齐济三州诸军事、仪同三司、青州刺史，谥曰明穆。
现代文：太昌初年被迫赠为使持节、侍中、都督青齐济三州诸军事、仪同三司、青州刺史，谧号为明穆。
English: In the first year of his reign, Taichang was forced to give him the title of envoy, chamberlain, governor of Qingdao, military commander of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces of the Three Provinces

古文：子贯，字小胡。
现代文：儿子高贯，字小胡。
English: His son, Gao Jun, was nicknamed Xiao Hu.

古文：永兴末，通直散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫、尚食典御。
现代文：永兴末年，任通直散骑常侍、金紫光禄大夫、尚食典御。
English: At the end of Yongxing's reign, he was appointed as the imperial equerry, the doctor of gold and purple, and the emperor's butler.

古文：拔弟者兒，美容貌，膂力过人，尤善弓马。
现代文：高拔的弟弟腊儿，容貌俊美，体力过人。尤其善于射箭骑马。
English: The taller brother, Lale, is handsome and physically strong. He is especially good at archery and horseback riding.

古文：显祖时，羽林幢将。
现代文：显祖时，任羽林幢将。
English: At the time of Emperor Xianzu, Ren Yulin was a general.

古文：皇兴中，主仗令。
现代文：皇兴年间任主仗令。
English: He served as the commander-in-chief during the Emperor Heung's reign.

古文：高祖初，给事中，累迁散骑常侍、内侍长。
现代文：壶祖初年任给事中，多次升任散骑常侍、内侍长。
English: During his first year in office, Kettle's father was promoted several times to the position of samurai and chief chamberlain.

古文：坐事死。
现代文：因事获罪被处死。
English: He was sentenced to death.

古文：子香，字明珍，有器尚。
现代文：儿子高香，字明珍，有才能和志向。
English: His son, Gao Xiang, has a penchant for words, talent and ambition.

古文：初除侍御史，拜奉朝请、员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：起初任侍御史，任奉朝请、员外散骑侍郎。
English: At first, he was appointed to the post of Samurai-Goshi, then to the post of Bongcho-Matsu, and then to the post of Sanki-Samurai-ro.

古文：与叔徽俱使西域，还至河洲遇贼攻围，城陷见害。
现代文：与叔父高徽一起出使酉塑，返回到迎业，遭到贼人包围，城池被攻占后遭杀害。
English: Together with his uncle Gao Hui, he went on an expedition to cast bronze, returned to Yingye, was surrounded by thieves, and was killed after the city was captured.

古文：太昌初，赠使持节，都督冀沧二州诸军事、征东将军，冀州刺史。
现代文：太昌初年被追赠为使持节、都督冀涂二州诸军事、征东将军、冀业刺史。
English: The first year of Taichang was posthumously awarded as the Envoy Festival, the governor of Hebei, the military of the two states, the general of the Eastern Expedition, and the history of Hebei.

古文：永熙中，重赠侍中、都督青徐光三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、青州刺史，谥曰文景。
现代文：丞毖年间加赠侍中、都督青徐光三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、青州刺史，谧号为文基。
English: During the Joseon Dynasty and Joseon Dynasty, he was awarded the titles of the Vice-Commander, the Governor of Qing Dynasty, the Military Commander of the Three Provinces, the Cavalry General, the Grand Marshal of the Three Provinces, and the Grand Historian of Qing Dynasty, and his posthumous name was Wenji.

古文：子永乐，兴和中，骠骑大将军、仪同三司、济州刺史、阳川县开国公。
现代文：儿子永乐，兴和年间，任骠骑大将军、仪同三司、济州刺史、阳川县开国公。
English: His son Yongle, during the Heungwa era, held the positions of General of the Horse, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Historian of Jeju Province, and Founding Father of Yangchuan County.

古文：永乐弟弼，武定中，安西将军、营州刺史、安陵县开国男。
现代文：永乐的弟弟永弼，武定年间，任安西将军、营州刺史、安陵县开国男。
English: Yongle's younger brother Yong Yong, during the Wuding period, served as the Anxi General, the Yingzhou Sashimi, and the founding father of Anling County.

古文：者兒弟徽，字荣显，小字苟兒。
现代文：腊儿的弟弟高徽，字荣显，小字苟儿。
English: Lale's younger brother Gao Hui, Zi Rong Xian, Xiao Zi Guo Rong.

古文：聪敏有气干，为任城王澄所知赏。
现代文：聪明机敏有气魄和才干，为任城王元澄所赏识。
English: Smart and quick-witted, with courage and talent, Rencheng Wang Yuancheng appreciated him.

古文：景明中，起家奉朝请。
现代文：景明年间，开始做官任奉朝请。
English: In the middle of the next year, Jing began to serve as an official.

古文：延昌中，假员外散骑常侍，使于嚈侯，西域诸国莫不敬惮之，破洛侯、乌孙并因之以献名马。
现代文：延昌年间，任非正式的员外散骑常侍，出使到噘嚏，西域各国无不敬畏，破洛侯、乌孙都通过他献名马。
English: During the Yanchang period, he served as an unofficial member of the outside riding staff, and was dispatched to Jixi. All the countries in the western region were in awe of him, and the former lords of Luo and Wusun all presented famous horses through him.

古文：还，拜冗从仆射。
现代文：回朝，任冗从仆射。
English: Returning to the imperial court, Ren Zhaoju became a courtier.

古文：神龟中，迁射声校尉、左中郎将、游击将军。
现代文：神龟年间，升任射声校尉、左中郎将、游击将军。
English: During the years of the Divine Turtle, he was promoted to captain, left-hand captain, and guerrilla general.

古文：又假平西将军、员外散骑常侍，使嚈哒。
现代文：又任非正式的平西将军、员外散骑常侍，出使噘嚏。
English: He also served as the unofficial General of Pingxi, a non-commissioned officer who rode around on horseback and was often sent on missions.

古文：还至枹罕，属莫折念生反于秦陇。时河州刺史元祚为前刺史梁钊息、景进等招引念生攻河州，祚以忧死。
现代文：返回到袍罕，适逢莫折念生在秦陇地区造反，当时的河州刺史元祚由于前任刺史梁钊的儿子景进等招引念生攻打河州，恐惧而死。
English: When he returned to Baohan, it coincided with the rebellion of the reluctant students in the Qinhuangdao area. At that time, the Heshou assassin, Shi Yuanjun, was lured by the son of the former assassin, Liang Jun, to attack Heshou, and he died of fear.

古文：长史元永平、治中孟宾、台使元湛共推徽行河州事，绥接有方，兵士用命。
现代文：长史元永平、治中孟宾、台使元湛共同推举高徽代理河州事务，安抚有方，士兵效命。
English: Chief Historian Yuan Yongping, Secretary Meng Bin and Taiwanese envoy Yuan Zhan jointly nominated Gaohui as the representative of Hezhou affairs to appease certain parties, and the soldiers fulfilled their duties.

古文：别驾乞伏世则潜通景进，徽杀之。
现代文：别驾乞伏世则暗中勾结景进，高徽将他处死。
English: However, he secretly colluded with Kagejin, and Gaohui had him executed.

古文：徵兵于吐谷浑，吐谷浑率众救之。
现代文：向吐谷浑征调军队，吐谷浑率领军队救助他。
English: He sent an army to Tugu, and Tugu led the army to rescue him.

古文：景进败，退走，奔秦州。
现代文：景进战败，撤走，奔向秦州。
English: Jingjin was defeated, withdrew, and rushed to Qinzhou.

古文：景进寻率羌夷复来攻逼，徽遣统军六景相驰表请师，诏徽仍行河州事。
现代文：景进不久率领羌人再来强攻，高徽派遣统军六景相驰马上表请求援兵，韶令高徽仍然代理河州事务。
English: Not long after, Jingjin led the Yunnan people to attack again, and Gaohui dispatched the unified army of six provinces to rush to the table to request reinforcements. Gaohui still acted as an agent for Hezhou affairs.

古文：久无援救，力屈城陷，为贼所害。
现代文：长时间无兵援救，力竭而城池被攻占，被贼人杀害。
English: For a long time, there were no soldiers to rescue, and the city was occupied and killed by thieves.

古文：永熙中，丧还洛阳。
现代文：永熙年间，尸体运回洛阳。
English: During the Yongxi era, the body was transported back to Luoyang.

古文：赠使持节、侍中、都督冀定相瀛沧五州诸军事、司徒公、冀州刺史，谥曰文宣。
现代文：被迫赠为使持节、侍中、都督冀定相瀛沧五州诸军事、司徒公、冀州刺史，谧号为文宣。
English: He was forced to give his posthumous titles of Jizhi Festival, Chamberlain, and Governor of Hebei Province to the five military provinces of Hebei Province, Jitugong, and Jizhou Province, and his posthumous name was Wenxuan.

古文：子归义，有志烈。
现代文：儿子归义，有志向和气节。
English: His son has been rehabilitated and is ambitious and energetic.

古文：初除奉朝请，加威烈将军。
现代文：起初任奉朝请，加授威烈将军。
English: At first, he was appointed to serve the imperial court, and was given the additional title of General Vere.

古文：与父徽俱使西域。
现代文：与父亲高徽一起出使西域。
English: Together with his father Gao Hui, he was sent to the Western Regions.

古文：还都，稍迁龙骧将军、中散大夫、西征都督，每有战功。
现代文：返回都城，逐渐升任龙骧将军、中散大夫、西征都督，屡立战功。
English: Returning to the capital, he was gradually promoted to the position of Longyu general, Zhongshan doctor, and the governor of the Western Expedition, and repeatedly distinguished himself in battle.

古文：后没于阵。
现代文：后来在战斗中牺牲。
English: He was later killed in battle.

古文：太昌初，赠侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史，谥曰孝贞。
现代文：太昌初年，被迫赠为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史，谧号为孝贞。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was forced to be given the titles of Chamberlain, Cavalry General, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and Historian of Yongzhou, and his posthumous name was Yuanzhen.

古文：子普，武定末，安南将军、太子左卫率。
现代文：儿子高普，武定末年任安南将军、太子左卫率。
English: His son Gao Pu, in the last years of Wuding's life, served as General Annan and Prince Zuo Wei.

古文：归义弟归彦，武定末，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史、安喜县开国男。
现代文：归义的弟弟归彦，武定末年任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史、安喜县开国男。
English: Gui Yan, the younger brother of Gui Yi, was appointed as the cavalry general in the last years of Wuding, the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, the historian of Xuzhou, and the founding father of Anxi County.

古文：真弟各拔，广昌镇将。
现代文：高真的弟弟各拔，任广昌镇将。
English: Gao Zhen's younger brother was appointed as the general of Guangchang Town.

古文：卒，赠燕州刺史。
现代文：去世后，被追赠为燕州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Yanzhou Shishi."

古文：子猛虎，鄯善镇录事。
现代文：儿子猛虚，任鄯差鑪录事。
English: My son is very weak, so I'm going to do something about it.

古文：及居丧，以至性称，遂绝宦情。
现代文：守丧期间，以尽孝著称，遂因此断绝了做官的念头。
English: During the period of mourning, he was known for his filial piety, and therefore abandoned the idea of becoming an official.

古文：子元国，早卒。
现代文：儿子元国，早死。
English: His son, Motokuni, died young.

古文：次显国，武定末，抚军将军、汶阳男。
现代文：次子显国，武定末年，为抚军将军、汶阳男。
English: The second son, Hsien Guo, in the last years of the reign of Wu Ding, was a general of the Fuzhou army and the son of the ruler of Wenyang.

古文：显国弟达，武定中，骠骑将军、行沧州事。
现代文：显国的弟弟高达，武定年间，任骠骑将军、行沧州事。
English: Hsien Kuo's younger brother Gao Gao, during the Wuding period, served as a cavalry general and went to Cangzhou.

古文：达弟永国，征虏将军、中散大夫。
现代文：高达的弟弟永国，任征虏将军、中散大夫。
English: Gao Da's younger brother, Yong Guo, was appointed conscript general and Zhongshan doctor.

古文：永国弟子国，武卫将军。
现代文：永国的弟弟子国，任武卫将军。
English: Yong Guo's younger brother, Disciple Guo, became General Wuwei.

古文：各拔少子盛，天平中、侍中、太尉公、广平郡开国公。
现代文：各拔的小儿子高盛，天平年间，任侍中、太尉公、广平郡开国公
English: The youngest son of each battalion, Gao Sheng, served as a chamberlain, captain, and the founding father of Guangping County during the Tenpyo era.

古文：子子瑗，武定末，兼武卫将军。
现代文：儿子子瑗，武定末年，兼武卫将军。
English: His son Zibo, the last year of Wuding's life, also became General Wuwei.

古文：谧弟稚，字幼宁。
现代文：高谧的弟弟高稚，字幼宁。
English: Gao Yao's younger brother Gao Zhi, also known as Gao Yu Ning.

古文：薄骨律镇将、营州刺史。
现代文：任薄骨律镇将、营州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the mayor of Lucheng, and made history in Yingzhou.

古文：子陀，字难拖。
现代文：儿子高陀，字难陀。
English: The son of Gouda, the character of Nandu.

古文：沃野镇长。
现代文：任沃野镇长。
English: He served as the mayor of the town of Warno.

古文：卒，赠琅邪太守。
现代文：去世后，被追赠为琅邪太守。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shanyi Taishu.

古文：子雍，字景云，司徒从事。
现代文：儿子高雍，字景云，任司徒从事。
English: His son Gao Yong, also known as Jingyun, was engaged by Sito.

古文：后与少子思义俱奔萧衍，卒于江南。
现代文：后来与小儿子思义一起投奔萧衍，死在长江以南。
English: Later, he and his youngest son, Siyi, joined Xiao Yan and died south of the Yangtze River.

古文：元象初，丧还，特赠使持节、散骑常侍、都督冀定瀛沧幽五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书令、司徒公、冀州刺史。
现代文：元象初年，尸体运回，特追赠为使持节、散骑常侍、都督冀定瀛沧幽五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书令、司徒公、冀州刺史。
English: In the first year of Yuan Xiang, the body was transported back, and was specially presented as a posthumous gift for the Envoys' Day, the strolling equerry, the military of the five states, the cavalry general, Shang Shuling, Stogong, and the history of Jizhou.

古文：子思宗，武定末，中军将军、仪同三司、兗州刺史、上洛郡开国男。
现代文：儿子思宗，武定末年，任中军将军、仪同三司、兖州刺史、上洛郡开国男。
English: His son Shizong, in the last years of Wuding, served as the general of the Chinese army, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the governor of Zhangzhou, and the founding father of Shangluo County.

古文：思义，特赠使持节、散骑常侍、都督青兗齐三州军事、车骑大将军、尚书仆射、仪同三司、青州刺史。
现代文：思义，特追赠为使持节、散骑常侍、都督青兖齐三州诸军事、车骑大将军、尚书仆射、仪同三司、青州刺史。
English: Siyi, the special posthumous gifts are the Envoy's Day, the horseback riding attendants, the military of the three states, the chariot and cavalry general, Shang Shufu shooting, the three departments of the ceremony, and the history of Qingzhou.

古文：陀弟兴，早卒。
现代文：高陀的弟弟高兴，早死。
English: Gautama's brother was happy and died early.

古文：兴子贵孙，晋州刺史。
现代文：高兴的儿子贵孙，任晋州刺史。
English: His delighted son, Guizhong, was appointed as the first prime minister of Jinzhou.

古文：湖弟恆，字叔宗，慕容垂钜鹿太守。
现代文：高湖的弟弟高恒，字叔宗，任慕容垂的钜鹿太守。
English: Gao Hu's younger brother Gao Heng, nicknamed Uncle Zong, was appointed as the governor of Yangtze River.

古文：太祖时，率郡降，赐爵泾县侯，加龙骧将军，仍守钜鹿。
现代文：太祖时，率领本郡归降，赐爵为泾县侯，加授龙骧将军，仍然管理钜鹿。
English: At the time of the great-grandfather, he led the county to surrender, was given a knighthood as the lord of Yixian County, and was awarded the title of Longyuan General. He still manages the elk.

古文：卒赠安东将军、幽州刺史，谥曰惠。
现代文：去世后，被迫赠为安东将军、幽州刺史，谧号为惠。
English: After his death, he was forced to give generals Anton and Yuzhou Zhishi as gifts, and his nickname was Tsuru.

古文：子道，字始愔，袭爵。
现代文：儿子高道，字始惰，继承爵位。
English: His son Gao Dao, nicknamed "Lazy," succeeded to the peerage.

古文：拜都牧令，迁镇南将军、相州刺史。
现代文：任都牧令，升任镇南将军、相州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the chief of the capital, promoted to the position of the general of Zhenan, and became the chief historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：未及之职，卒。
现代文：未及到任，去世。
English: He died before he could take office.

古文：仍以为赠，谥曰庄。
现代文：仍以此官追赠，谧号为庄。
English: He was still posthumously awarded this post, and his posthumous name was Chuang.

古文：子干，字干奴。
现代文：儿子毫干，字干奴。
English: The son is nothing, the son is everything.

古文：好学，宽厚有雅度。
现代文：好学，宽厚有高雅的风度。
English: Eager to learn, generous and has a refined demeanor.

古文：袭爵泾县侯，后例降为伯。
现代文：继承泾县侯的爵位，后来依例降爵位为伯。
English: He inherited the peerage of the Marquis of Jixian, and later the peerage was reduced to the rank of Bo.

古文：历南青州征虏府司马、威远将军、鄯善镇远府长史。
现代文：历任壶壹业征虏府司马、威远将军、羞晒镇远府长史。
English: Successive heads of the Imperial Household Agency, the General Wei Yuan, and the Governor Shizan Zhenyuan are the best in history.

古文：仍转汾州后军府长史、白水太守。
现代文：又改任汾州后军府长史、白水太守。
English: He was also appointed as the post-military governor of Zhangzhou and the governor of Baishui.

古文：所在以廉平著称。
现代文：所到之处以廉洁公平著称。
English: Everywhere he went, he was known for his honesty and fairness.

古文：太昌初，卒。
现代文：太昌初年，去世。
English: He died in the first year of Taichang.

古文：赠使持节、都督秦雍二州诸军事、车骑大将军、司空公、雍州刺史，谥曰孝穆。
现代文：被追赠为使持节、都督秦雍二州诸军事、车骑大将军、司空公、雍州刺史，谧号为孝穆。
English: He was posthumously given the titles of the Military Commander of the Two Provinces of Qin and Yong, the General of the Cavalry, the General of the Air Force, and the Historian of Yongzhou, and his posthumous name was Xiaomu.

古文：子侃，字伯欣，袭。
现代文：儿子高侃，字伯欣，继承爵位。
English: His son Gao Kan, surnamed Bo Xin, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：除南秦州长史。
现代文：任南秦州长史。
English: He was appointed governor of South Qin Province.

古文：卒，赠辅国将军、凉州刺史，谥曰宣。
现代文：去世，被追赠为辅国将军、凉州刺史，镒号为宣。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Auxiliary Provinces and the title of Yangzhou Grand Historian. His nickname was Xuan.

古文：子绍，字广祖，袭爵。
现代文：儿子高绍，字广祖，继承爵位。
English: His son Gao Shao, surnamed Guangzu, succeeded to the title.

古文：兴和初，征虏将军、沧州刺史。
现代文：兴和初年，任征虏将军、沧州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was appointed as a conscript general and made history in Cangzhou.

古文：侃弟腾，字伏兴。
现代文：高侃的弟弟高腾，字伏兴。
English: Gao Kan's younger brother Gao Teng is called Fu Xing.

古文：卒于安东将军、光州刺史、襄城县开国公。
现代文：位居安东将军、光州刺史、襄城县开国公时去世。
English: He died in the position of General Andong, Gwangju Gishi, and Yangcheng County Founding Father.

古文：子陟，字祖迁。
现代文：儿子高陟，字祖迁。
English: His son, Gao Yao, was called Zu Qian.

古文：司空中郎、太尉主簿。
现代文：任司空中郎、太尉主簿。
English: Appointed to the position of Tsuchiroro, and became the chief secretary to the captain.

古文：陟弟憬，通直郎。
现代文：高陟的弟弟高憬，任通直郎。
English: Takatsuki's younger brother, Takakage, is named Tsuchino Nairo.

古文：憬弟翙，袭父爵。
现代文：高憬的弟弟高翩，继承父亲的爵位。
English: Gao Jing's younger brother Gao Ping inherited his father's title.

古文：腾弟隆之，武定末，太保、尚书令、平原郡开国公。
现代文：高腾的弟弟隆之，武定末年，任太保、尚书令、平原郡开国公。
English: Gao Teng's younger brother, Long Zhi, in the last years of Wu Ding's reign, served as Tai Po, Shang Shuling, and the founder of Pingyuan County.

古文：崔逞，字叔祖，清河东武城人也，魏中尉琰之六世孙。
现代文：崔逞，字叔祖，是清河东武城人，曹魏的中尉崔琰的六世孙。
English: Cui Gang, also known as Uncle Zu, was from Wucheng, east of the Qinghe River, and was the sixth-generation grandson of Cao Wei's lieutenant Cui Yao.

古文：曾祖谅，晋中书令。
现代文：曾祖父崔谅，任晋朝中书令。
English: His great-grandfather, Cui Jun, was appointed as the second secretary of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖遇，仕石虎，为特进。
现代文：祖父崔遇，在石虎手下做官，任特进。
English: His grandfather, Cui Yu, worked as an official under Shi Hu and was promoted.

古文：父瑜，黄门郎。
现代文：父亲崔瑜，任黄门郎。
English: Father Cui Yu, Ren Huangmenro.

古文：逞少好学，有文才。
现代文：崔逞年轻时好学，有写作才能。
English: When he was young, Cui Gang was eager to learn and had a talent for writing.

古文：遭乱，孤贫，躬耕于野，而讲诵不废。
现代文：遭逢祸乱，孤苦贫寒，虽然亲自种田，却不放弃读书。
English: Suffering from misfortune, lonely and poor, he did not give up his studies, even though he was a farmer himself.

古文：慕容暐时，郡举上计掾，补著作郎。撰《燕记》。
现代文：慕容晔时，被本郡举荐为上计掾，选补为著作郎，撰写《燕记》。
English: At the time of Murong's appointment, he was recommended by the county to be the chief planner, selected as the author, and wrote "The Swallow's Tale."

古文：迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：升任黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：及苻坚并慕容暐，以为齐郡太守。
现代文：苻坚吞并慕容晔后，任命他为齐郡太守。
English: After Zou Jian annexed Murongyi, he appointed him as the governor of Qi County.

古文：坚败，司马昌明以逞为清河、平原二郡太守。
现代文：苻坚失败，司马昌明任命崔逞为清河、平原二郡太守。
English: Zou Jian failed, Sima Changming appointed Cui Gang as the governor of Qinghe and Pingyuan counties.

古文：为翟辽所虏，授以中书令。
现代文：被翟辽俘获，任用为中书令。
English: He was captured by Gong Liao and appointed to the position of Zhongshu Ling.

古文：慕容垂灭翟钊，以为秘书监。
现代文：慕容垂消灭翟钊，任命他为秘书监。
English: Murongdiao eliminated the cadres and appointed him as secretary-supervisor.

古文：慕容宝东走和龙，为留台吏部尚书。
现代文：慕容宝柬去和龙，任留守机构吏部尚书。
English: Murong Baoqian went to Wulong, and was appointed as the head of the organization's personnel department.

古文：及慕容驎立，逞携妻子亡归太祖。
现代文：及至慕容膦即位，崔逞携妻儿逃奔归顺太祖。
English: When Murong Zang ascended the throne, Cui Gang and his wife and children fled to Shun Taizu.

古文：张兗先称美逞，及见，礼遇甚重。
现代文：张衮先前赞美崔逞，到相见时，以很隆重的礼仪相待。
English: Zhang Ye had previously praised Cui Gang, and when they met, they treated each other with great etiquette.

古文：拜为尚书，任以政事，录三十六曹，别给吏属，居门下省，寻除御史中丞。
现代文：任命为尚书，以政事相委任，统领三十六曹，另外派给下属官吏，在门下省办公。不久任御史中丞。
English: He was appointed as Shangshu, appointed by the Minister of Political Affairs to lead the Thirty-six Cao, and assigned to subordinate officials to work in the province under him. He was soon appointed as the Vice-Minister of History.

古文：太祖攻中山未克，六军乏粮，民多匿谷，问群臣以取粟方略。
现代文：太祖攻打史山未能攻克，军队缺粮，百姓大多藏匿谷物，向群臣询问获取粟米的策略。
English: The great ancestor attacked Shishan and failed to conquer it, the army was short of grain, and most of the people hid grain and asked the ministers about the strategy for obtaining corn.

古文：逞曰： 取椹可以助粮。
现代文：崔逞说： 取桑葚可以助军粮。
English: Cui Gang said, "Taking mulberry can help the army's rations.

古文：故飞鸮食椹而改音，《诗》称其事。 
现代文：所以飞翔的猫头鹰吃桑葚而改变声音，《诗经》述说遇遣事。 
English: So the flying owl eats the mulberry and changes its voice, and the "Song of Songs" tells of a calamity.

古文：太祖虽衔其侮慢，然兵既须食，乃听以椹当租。
现代文：塞趄虽然恨他轻慢无礼，然而军队既然需要食物，就允许用桑葚当租米。
English: Although the Saiyans hated him for his impudence, they allowed the army to use mulberry as rent rice since they needed food.

古文：逞又曰： 可使军人及时自取，过时则落尽。 
现代文：崔逞又说： 可以让军人自己及时摘取，过了时令就落完了。 
English: Cui Gang also said: It is possible to let the soldiers themselves pick it in time, and after the season, it is finished.

古文：太祖怒曰： 内贼未平，兵人安可解甲仗入林野而收椹乎？
现代文：太祖生气地说： 内部贼人没有平定，军人怎么可以解除钟甲兵器进入林木丛生的山野去收取桑葚呢?
English: The great-grandfather said angrily: The internal thieves have not been subdued, how can the soldiers disarm the bell armor weapons and enter the wooded mountains to collect the mulberry?

古文：是何言欤！ 
现代文：这是什么话呢! 
English: What kind of language is that!

古文：以中山未拔，故不加罪。
现代文：因中山没有攻克，所以没有加以惩罚。
English: Because Zhongshan was not conquered, it was not punished.

古文：天兴初，姚兴侵司马德宗襄阳戍，戍将郗恢驰使乞师于常山王遵。遵以闻。
现代文：天兴初年，姚兴侵犯司马德宗的襄阳驻防军城堡，戍将郗恢迅速派使者向常山王元遵请求援兵，元遵报告给皇上。
English: In the first year of Tianxing, Yao Xing invaded the castle of the Yangyang garrison of Sima Dezong. The general quickly sent an envoy to the King of Changshan, Yuan Zun, to request reinforcements, and Yuan Zun reported to the emperor.

古文：太祖诏逞与张衮为遵书以答。
现代文：太祖韶令崔逞舆张衮替元遵写信答覆。
English: The great-great-great-grandfather ordered Choi Gang-myo Chang-myo to reply to Yuan Zun's letter.

古文：初，恢与遵书云： 贤兄虎步中原 ，太祖以言悖君臣之体，敕逞、衮亦贬其主号以报之。
现代文：起初，郗恢给元遵的信说， 贤兄称雄中原 ，太祖因言辞违背君臣体统，敕令崔逞、张衮也贬抑他的君主的称号来报复他。
English: At first, the letter from Zou Huai to Yuan Zun said that the wise elder brother called the hero Zhongyuan, the great-grandfather violated the monarchist tradition because of his words, and Zou ordered Cui Gang and Zhang Ye to belittle his monarch's title to take revenge on him.

古文：逞、衮乃云 贵主 。
现代文：崔逞、张衮却写作 贵主 。
English: However, Cui Gang and Zhang Xuan wrote "Your Lord."

古文：太祖怒曰： 使汝贬其主以答，乃称贵主，何若贤兄也！ 
现代文：太祖忿怒地说： 要你回信贬抑他的君主，却称贵主，哪裹比得上贤兄呢! 
English: The great-grandfather angrily said, "If you reply to his letter by belittling his sovereign, but praising your lord, how can you be compared to a wise elder brother?"

古文：遂赐死。
现代文：于是赐其自杀。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowu gave Gao Qian a death sentence.

古文：后司马德宗荆州刺史司马休之等数十人为桓玄所逐，皆将来奔，至陈留南，分为二辈，一奔长安，一归广固。
现代文：后来司马德宗的荆州刺史司马休之等几十人被桓玄驱逐，都打算来投奔，到陈留以南，分为两部分，一部分奔向长安，一部分归附广固。
English: Later, dozens of people, including Jingzhou Zi Shi, Sima Xiu and others of the Sima De sect, were expelled by Huan Xuan. They all planned to flee to the south of Chenliu, divided into two parts, one part ran to Chang'an, and the other part was annexed to Guanggu.

古文：太祖初闻休之等降，大悦，后怪其不至，诏兗州寻访。获其从者，问故，皆曰： 国家威声远被，是以休之等咸欲归阙，及闻崔逞被杀，故奔二处。 
现代文：太祖起初听说休之等归降，很高兴，后来奇陆他们没有来，命令兖州寻找，找到他们的随从，问其缘故，都说： 国家的威信传布远方，因此休之等都想归顺朝廷，及至听说崔逞被杀，便投奔了那两处。 
English: At first, the great-grandfather was very happy to hear that Hui Zhi et al. had surrendered. Later, surprised that they had not come, he ordered Zhangzhou to look for them, find their followers, and ask them why. They all said: The prestige of the country spreads far and wide. Therefore, Hui Zhi et al. all wanted to surrender to the imperial court. And when they heard that Cui Gang had been killed, they fled to those two places.

古文：太祖深悔之。
现代文：太祖很后悔。
English: The great-grandfather regretted it very much.

古文：自是士人有过者，多见优容。
现代文：从此士大夫有过错的，多被特别宽容。
English: Since then, doctors who have made mistakes have been treated with special tolerance.

古文：逞七子，二子早亡，第三子义，义弟諲，諲弟祎，祎弟严，严弟赜。
现代文：崔逞有七个儿子，两个儿子早死，第三个儿子崔义，崔义的弟弟崔诬，崔谨的弟弟崔樟，崔裨的弟弟崔严，崔严的弟弟崔迹。
English: Cui Gang had seven sons, two sons died early, the third son Cui Yi, Cui Yi's brother Cui Fan, Cui Ji's brother Cui Yao, Cui Bu's brother Cui Yan, and Cui Yan's brother Cui Kuo.

古文：逞之内徙也，终虑不免，乃使其妻张氏与四子留冀州，令归慕容德，遂奔广固。
现代文：崔逞内迁，担心终究不能免祸，就让他的妻子张氏与四个儿子留在冀州，使归附慕容德，于是投奔广固。
English: Cui Gangnian moved inland, fearing that he would not be able to avoid disaster after all, so he let his wife Zhang and four sons stay in Jizhou, made them join Murongde, and then went to Guanggu.

古文：逞独与小子颐在平城。
现代文：崔逞衹与小儿子崔赜在平城。
English: Choi Gang-soo with her youngest son Choi Soo in Pyeongchang.

古文：及逞之死，亦以此为谴。
现代文：到崔逞被赐令自杀时，也以造作为罪过。
English: When Choi Gang was given the order to commit suicide, he also blamed himself.

古文：颐，字泰冲。
现代文：高颐，字泰冲。
English: Gao Yao, Zi Tai Chong.

古文：初为太子洗马，后稍迁散骑常侍，赐爵清河侯。
现代文：起初任太子洗马，后来逐渐升任散骑常侍，赐爵清河侯。
English: At first, he was appointed the prince to wash horses, and later he gradually rose to the position of horseback riding attendant, and was given the title of Qinghe Marquis.

古文：后世祖闻刘义隆以諲为冀州刺史，乃曰： 义隆知用其兄，我岂无冀州也。 
现代文：后来世祖听说刘义隆任命鲎垦为冀处刺史，就说： 盏建赏识任用他哥哥，我难道没有冀州吗。 
English: Later, when the patriarch heard that Liu Yilong had appointed Zhai as the chief historian of Ji Province, he said: "Zhan Jian appreciated the appointment of his brother. Don't I have Ji Province?"

古文：乃以颐为平东将军，冀州刺史。
现代文：于是任用崔赜为平东将军、冀蛆刺史。
English: As a result, Choe Son was appointed as the general of Pingdong and Ji Son as the general of Jinshi.

古文：又为大鸿胪，持节策拜杨难当为南秦王。
现代文：又任大鸿胪，持节策授杨塑赏为南秦王。
English: He was also known as the Great Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous Magnanimous.

古文：奉使数返，光扬朝命，世祖善之。
现代文：奉命出使迅速返回，发扬光大朝廷的命令，世祖称许他。
English: The emissary was ordered to return quickly and carry forward the order of the great imperial court, and the patriarch praised him.

古文：及骠骑大将军、乐平王丕等督诸军取上邽，使颐齑诏于丕前喻难当奉诏。
现代文：及至骠骑大将军、乐平王五歪等统领众军攻取上邦，派崔迹携带诏书当着互歪面晓谕凿当接受诏令。
English: When the commander-in-chief of the army, including the general of the imperial cavalry and King Leping Wukong, conquered Shangpang, he sent Cuihuo to carry the edict and told him to accept the edict in front of each other.

古文：后与方士韦文秀诣王屋山造金丹，不就。
现代文：后来舆方士韦文秀到王屋山炼造金丹，没有成功。
English: Later, Wei Wenshu, a merchant, went to Wangyashan to refine the jade, but was unsuccessful.

古文：真君初卒。
现代文：真君初年去世。
English: Mankun died the following year.

古文：颐五子。
现代文：崔迹有五个儿子。
English: Cui Yuan has five sons.

古文：长子秉，字公礼。
现代文：长子崔秉，字公礼。
English: The eldest son, Cui Bing, is called Gongli.

古文：早终，无子。
现代文：早死，没有儿子。
English: Early death, no son.

古文：秉弟广，字公渊，袭爵。
现代文：崔秉的弟弟崔广，字公渊，继承爵位。
English: Cui Bing's younger brother Cui Guang, alias Gongyuan, succeeded to the title.

古文：拜平东将军。
现代文：任平束将军。
English: Appointed as General Hiratsuka.

古文：子法度，早终。
现代文：儿子法度，早死。
English: His son, Fadu, died young.

古文：广弟轨，字公则。
现代文：崔广的弟弟崔轨，字公则。
English: Cui Guang's younger brother, Cui Rail, is called Gong Zheng.

古文：太子中舍人、镇南司马。
现代文：任太子中舍人、镇南司马。
English: Zhenan Sima became the crown prince.

古文：轨弟穆，字公和。
现代文：崔轨的弟弟崔穆，字公和。
English: Cui Rail's younger brother Cui Mu, known as Gonghe.

古文：早终。
现代文：早死。
English: An early death.

古文：穆弟叡，字哲，小字男季。
现代文：崔穆的弟弟崔敔，字哲，小名男季。
English: Choi Mu's younger brother Choi Min, Zetsu, plays the role of a minor boy.

古文：高祖初，以交通境外伏诛。
现代文：高祖初年，因勾结境外被处死。
English: In the first year of Gaozu, he was executed for collusion abroad.

古文：从兄景真以子思叔继叡。
现代文：堂兄景真把儿子思叔过继给崔散。
English: Cousin Jing Zhen passed his son Shizhu to Cui San.

古文：思叔，少为中书学生，迁中书博士。
现代文：思叔，年轻时为中书学生，升任中书博士。
English: Uncle Si, who was a student of Chinese literature in his youth, was promoted to Doctor of Chinese Literature.

古文：世宗时，历上党，钜鹿太守。
现代文：世宗时，历任上党、钜鹿太守。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he successively held the positions of Party Secretary and Governor of Menglu Province.

古文：自逞之死至叡之诛，三世积五十余年而在北一门尽矣。
现代文：从崔逞死亡到崔散被杀，三代共五十多年而在北方的一支没有人了。
English: From the death of Cui Gang to the killing of Cui San, three generations totaled more than fifty years, and there was no one in the north.

古文：初，三齐平，祎孙相如入国，以才学知名。
现代文：起初，三齐地区平定，崔樟的孙子相如归附本国，以才能和学问知名。
English: At the beginning, the Sanchi region was pacified, and Cui Yao's grandson Zongru was annexed to the motherland, known for his talent and learning.

古文：举冀州秀才，早卒。
现代文：被选拔为冀州秀才，早死。
English: He was selected as an outstanding talent of Jizhou and died early.

古文：相如弟彧，在《术艺传》。
现代文：相如的弟弟崔或，在《术艺传》。
English: Similar to his younger brother Cui You, in "The Art of Jiu Jitsu."

古文：逞兄适，字宁祖，亦有名于时。
现代文：崔逞的哥哥崔适，字宁祖，在当时也有名。
English: Cui Gan's brother Cui Shih, known as Ning Zu, was also famous at the time.

古文：慕容垂尚书左丞，范阳、昌黎二郡太守。
现代文：任慕容乘的尚书左丞，范阳、昌黎二郡太守。
English: Shosho Zuojo, Fanyang, and Changli, who served as Murong riders, were the two county governors.

古文：适曾孙延寿，冀州主薄。
现代文：崔适的曾孙延寿，任冀州主簿。
English: Cui Shih's great-grandson, Yan Shou, was appointed chief accountant of Jizhou.

古文：轻财好施，甚收乡曲之誉。
现代文：不吝惜钱财而喜好施舍，深受同乡人的赞誉。
English: He is generous with his money and likes to give alms. He is highly praised by his fellow villagers.

古文：延寿子隆宗，简率爱友，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：延寿的儿子隆宗，率真爱交友，守丧以孝顺闻名。
English: Enju's son, Ryuzo, was known for his genuine love of making friends and his filial piety.

古文：历位冀州别驾，兰陵、燕郡二郡太守，司空谘议参军，冀州中正，中军大将军府长史。
现代文：历任冀州别驾，兰陵、燕郡二郡太守，司空谘议参军，冀州中正，中军大将军府长史。
English: He was successively appointed as the governor of Jizhou, the governor of Lanling, the governor of the second county of Yan County, the secretary of the Air Force, the vice-governor of Jizhou, the general of the Chinese army, and the prefectural governor.

古文：仁信待物，出于至诚，故见重于世。
现代文：待人仁爱诚信，发自极真挚诚恳的心意，所以被世人推重。
English: Treating others with benevolence, love and integrity comes from a very sincere and sincere heart, so it is highly valued by the world.

古文：卒，赠前将军、齐州刺史，谥曰孝。
现代文：去世后，被迫赠为前将军、齐州刺史，谧号为孝。
English: After his death, he was forced to give the former general, Qizhou Zhishi, the nickname Xiao.

古文：子敬保，员外散骑侍郎、冀州仪同府从事中郎。
现代文：儿子敬保，任员外散骑侍郎、冀州仪同府从事中郎。
English: His son, Keiho, was appointed as an outside horseback riding attendant, and Jishu Yi was engaged as a junior steward.

古文：卒，赠冀州刺史。
现代文：去世后，被追赠为冀州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Jizhou stabbing history.

古文：子子恆，官至征虏将军、鲁郡太守。
现代文：儿子子恒，官至征虏将军、鲁郡太守。
English: His son, Zi Heng, rose to the rank of general of conscripts and became the governor of Lu County.

古文：早卒。
现代文：早死。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：子恆弟子安，冠军将军、西兗州司马。
现代文：子恒的弟弟子安，任冠军将军、西兖州司马。
English: Zi Heng's younger brother, Zi An, became a champion general, and Xizhou Sima.

古文：子安弟子升，开府参军。
现代文：子安的弟弟子升，任开府参军。
English: Zi'an's younger brother, Zi Sheng, was appointed to join the army in Kaifu.

古文：武定中，坐连元瑾事，兄弟并伏法。
现代文：武定年间，因受元瑾的事情牵连，兄弟都被依法处死。
English: During the Wuding period, the brothers were all executed according to the law because they were implicated in the matter of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：封懿，字处德，勃海蓚人也。
现代文：封懿，字处德，是勃海蓓县人。
English: Feng Qi, also known as Chu De, was from Bohai Qi County.

古文：曾祖释，晋东夷校尉。
现代文：曾祖父封释，是晋朝柬夷校尉。
English: His great-grandfather, Fuxi, was a colonel in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父放，慕容暐吏部尚书。
现代文：父亲封放，是慕容啤的吏部尚书。
English: His father was a brewer, and he was the head brewer of Murong Beer.

古文：兄孚，慕容超太尉。
现代文：哥哥封孚，是慕容超的太尉。
English: His elder brother, Fufu, was Murong Chao's first lieutenant.

古文：懿俊伟有才气，能属文，与孚虽器行有长短，然名位略齐。
现代文：封懿才智过人并且有才干和气魄，能写文章，与封孚虽然互有长短，然而官职和品位大略相当。
English: Fong Quan was a brilliant man with talent and courage, able to write articles. Although he and Fong Fu had their own strengths and weaknesses, their official positions and taste were roughly equivalent.

古文：仕慕容宝，位至中书令、民部尚书。
现代文：在慕容实手下任职，官位达到中书令、民部尚书。
English: He served under Murongshi, and his official rank reached the rank of Zhongshirong and Minbu Shangshu.

古文：宝败，归阙，除给事黄门侍郎、都坐大官、宁朔将军、章安子。
现代文：慕容宝失败，归顺朝廷，任给事黄门侍郎、都坐大官、宁朔将军、章安子。
English: Murong Bao failed and submitted to the imperial court. He was appointed to the posts of Huangmen waiter, high-ranking official, Ningshuo general, and Zhang Anzi.

古文：太祖数引见，问以慕容旧事。
现代文：太祖几次召见，以慕容宝过去的事相问。
English: The great-grandfather called him several times to ask him about Murongbao's past.

古文：懿应对疏慢，废还家。
现代文：封懿应答草率怠慢，被罢官回家。
English: He was dismissed from his post for his hasty and negligent response and sent home.

古文：太宗初，复徵拜都坐大官，进爵为侯。
现代文：太宗初年，又征入任都坐大官，晋爵位为侯。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, he was again conscripted to serve as a high-ranking official, and was promoted to the peerage as a marquis.

古文：泰常二年卒。
现代文：泰常二年去世。
English: Taizang died two years later.

古文：懿撰《燕书》，颇行于世。
现代文：所撰《燕书》，流传很广。
English: His book "The Book of Swallows" has been widely circulated.

古文：子玄之，坐与司马国璠、温楷等谋乱，伏诛。
现代文：儿子玄之，因与司马国墦、温楷等谋反，被处死。
English: His son, Xuanzhi, was executed for plotting a rebellion with Sima Guojun, Wen Kai and others.

古文：临刑，太宗谓之曰： 终不令绝汝种也，将宥尔一子。 
现代文：临刑前，太宗对他说： 终究不使你绝种，将宽宥你的一个儿子。 
English: Before his execution, Emperor Taizong said to him, "After all, I won't make you extinct, but I will pardon one of your sons."

古文：玄之请曰： 弟虔之子磨奴，字君明，早孤，乞全其命。 
现代文：玄之请求说： 弟弟虔之的儿子磨奴，字君明，早年丧父，请保全他的性命。 
English: Xuan Zhi's request said: Brother Qian Zhi's son, the miller, Zha Junming, lost his father at an early age, please save his life.

古文：乃杀玄之四子，而赦磨奴。
现代文：于是杀死玄之的四个儿子，而赦免了磨奴。
English: So he killed the four sons of Hyonjo and pardoned the miller.

古文：磨奴被刑为宦人。
现代文：磨奴受刑成为宦官。
English: The slave became a eunuch.

古文：崔浩之诛也，世祖谓磨奴曰： 汝本应全，所以至刑者，事由浩之故。 
现代文：崔浩被杀，世祖对磨奴说： 你本来应当保全，所以受刑，是因为崔浩的缘故。 
English: When Cui Hao was killed, the ancestor said to the miller: You should have protected him, so you were punished because of Cui Hao.

古文：后为中曹监，西使张掖，赐爵富城子，加建威将军、给事中。
现代文：后来任中曹监，向西出使张掖，被赐爵为富城子，加授建威将军、给事中。
English: Later, he was appointed Cao Jian, sent Zhang Ye to the west, was given the title of Fucheng, and was awarded the title of General Jian Wei.

古文：久之，出为冠军将军、怀州刺史。
现代文：许久以后，出任冠军将军、怀州刺史。
English: After a long time, he became the champion general, Waizhou Sashimi.

古文：太和七年卒。
现代文：太和七年去世。
English: Taiwa died seven years later.

古文：赠平东将军、冀州刺史、勃海公，谥曰定。
现代文：被迫赠为平束将军、冀州刺史、勃海公，谧号为定。
English: He was forced to be given the titles of General Hirazuka, Jizhou Shishi, and Bo Haigong, and his posthumous name was fixed.

古文：以族子叔念为后，高祖赐名回。
现代文：以家族子弟叔念为后代，高祖赐给他名字为回。
English: With the family's youngest son, Unnen, as the next generation, Gao Zu gave him his name in return.

古文：回父鉴，即慕容暐太尉弈之后也。
现代文：磨奴的父亲磨鉴，是慕容暐的太尉弈之的后人。
English: The miller's father, the miller's apprentice, was a descendant of Murong Yao's eunuch Taiyi Rong.

古文：回，皇兴初为中书学生。
现代文：封回，皇兴初年为中书学生。
English: In the first year, Wang Xing was a junior high school student.

古文：袭爵富城子，累迁太子家令。
现代文：继承爵位为富城子，多次升任太子家令。
English: He succeeded to the title of nobility as the son of Fucheng, and was promoted to the rank of prince several times.

古文：世宗即位，以回行华州事。
现代文：世宗即位，任命封回行茎处事。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne and appointed Huan Hui to handle the affairs of the lineage.

古文：回在州鞭中散大夫党智孙，为尚书左丞韦绩纠奏，免。
现代文：圭回在该州鞭挞中散大夫党智的孙子，被尚书左丞韦缆察举上奏，免官。
English: Gui Hui, the grandson of Dr. Dang Zhi, who was flogged in the state, was promoted and dismissed by Shang Shuzhu Zuo Wei Kan.

古文：寻除镇远将军、安州刺史。
现代文：不久任镇远将军、室业刺史。
English: He was soon appointed General Zhenyuan, and Muroya stabbed history in the back.

古文：山民愿朴，父子宾旅，同寝一室。
现代文：山裹人朴实敦厚，父子宾客，同睡一屋。
English: The mountain people are simple and unpretentious, father and son are guests, and they sleep in the same room.

古文：回下车，勒令别处，其俗遂改。
现代文：封回到任，命令分别居住，那种风俗才改变。
English: When he returned to office, he ordered them to live separately, and only then did that custom change.

古文：徵为太尉长史，频行定州、徐州事。寻除后将军、汾州刺史。
现代文：征入任太尉长史，连续多次行定州、徐业事，不久任后将军、没州刺史。
English: He was conscripted to the rank of captain-general for a long time, and was sent to Dingzhou and Xuye many times in a row. Shortly after his appointment, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：肃宗初，转凉州刺史，加右将军，固辞不拜，仍授平北将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：肃塞初年，改任疽业刺史，加授右将军，坚决辞谢不接受任命，于是任平北将军、瀛州刺史。
English: In the first year of Susa, he was reassigned to the position of Gangye stabbing history and promoted to the right general, but he resolutely refused to accept the appointment, so he was appointed as the general of Pingbei and the stabbing history of Zhangzhou.

古文：时大乘寇乱之后，加以水潦，百姓困乏。
现代文：当时是大乘派贼寇作乱之后，加上水灾，百姓困苦贫乏。
English: At that time, after the riots caused by the thieves of the Mahayana faction, coupled with the floods, the people were poor and destitute.

古文：回表求赈恤，免其兵调，州内甚赖之。
现代文：封回上表请求赈济抚恤，免除他们的军需征调，州内很依赖他。
English: The state was depending on him to return the forms requesting relief from the draft and exempting them from the payroll tax.

古文：又为度支尚书。
现代文：又任度支尚书。
English: He was also appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：寻转都官尚书、冀州大中正。
现代文：不久改任都官尚书、冀州大中正。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of the governor of the capital, Shangshu, and the vice-president of Jizhou University.

古文：荥阳郑云谄事长秋卿刘腾，货腾紫缬四百匹，得为安州刺史。
现代文：荣阳郑云谄媚讨好长秋卿刘腾，贿赂刘腾紫色缬四百匹，得以任安州刺史。
English: Rongyang Zheng Yun cozied up to Liu Teng, the Long Autumn Emperor, and bribed Liu Teng with four hundred purple yakitori so that he could be appointed as Anzhou's chief historian.

古文：除书旦出，暮往诣回，坐未定，谓回曰： 我为安州，卿知之否？
现代文：任命书早上发出，晚上就去拜访封回，还未入座，就对封回说： 我任职安州，你知道这事吗?
English: The appointment letter was issued in the morning, and in the evening he went to visit Huan Hui. Before taking his seat, he said to Huan Hui: I am in charge of Anzhou, do you know this?

古文：彼土治生，何事为便？ 
现代文：在那里经营家业，什么事便利? 
English: What are the advantages of running a family business there?

古文：回答之曰： 卿荷国宠灵，位至方伯，虽不能拔园葵，去织妇，宜思方略以济百姓，如何见造而问治生乎？
现代文：封回回答他说： 你蒙受国家的恩宠，官至一方大员，虽然不能像公仪休那样拔掉自家园中的葵菜，打发走自己家中织布的妇人，也应当考虑济民大计，为什么来访却询问经营家业呢?
English: Huan Hui replied to him, "You are favored by the state, an official and a dignitary, although you cannot pluck sunflower seeds from your home and send away the woman who weaves cloth in your home, you should also consider the plan to benefit the people. Why do you ask about the management of the family business?

古文：封回不为商贾，何以相示？ 
现代文：封回不是商人，拿什么指点你。 
English: Huan Hui is not a businessman, so why should he tell you what to do?

古文：云惭愧失色。
现代文：郑云惭愧得变了脸色。
English: Zheng Yun turned pale with shame.

古文：灵太后临朝，召百官问得失，群臣莫敢言。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，召见百官询问得失，群臣没有人敢发言。
English: After the enthronement of the Lingdai, the emperor listened to the government and summoned hundreds of officials to inquire about the gains and losses. None of the ministers dared to speak.

古文：回对曰： 昔孔丘为司寇，十日而诛少正卯，鲁国肃然，欺巧自息。
现代文：封回应答说： 过去孔子任司寇，十天就杀了少正卯，鲁国畏惧，欺诈之风自然消失。
English: Fong replied: In the past, Confucius was appointed as a scout, and he killed Shao Zhengwu in ten days. Lu Guo was afraid, and the wind of deception naturally disappeared.

古文：姬旦行戮，不避兄弟，周道用隆。
现代文：周公行刑，不徇兄弟之情，周代的局面因此昌盛。
English: The execution of Zhou Gong did not encourage brotherly feelings, and the Zhou dynasty prospered as a result.

古文：徐偃专行仁义，其国乃灭。
现代文：徐偃一味地行仁义，他的国家因而灭亡。
English: His country perished as a result of his single-minded pursuit of benevolence and righteousness.

古文：自古及今，未有不厉威刑而能治者。
现代文：从古到今，没有不厉行严厉的刑法而能治理的。
English: From ancient times to the present, there is nothing that can be governed without enforcing strict criminal laws.

古文：顷来颇由长吏宽怠，侵剥百姓，盗贼群起。
现代文：近来主要由于地方长宫松懈怠惰，盘剥百姓，盗贼聚众起兵。
English: Recently, it is mainly due to the laxity and laziness of the local chancery, the exploitation of the people, and the thieves who have gathered a large number of soldiers.

古文：请肃刑书，以惩未犯。 
现代文：请严肃刑法，以便惩戒未犯罪的人。 
English: Please take the criminal law seriously so that people who have not committed crimes can be punished.

古文：太后意纳之，而不能用。
现代文：太后内心采纳，但不能实行。
English: The Empress Dowager accepted it in her heart, but could not carry it out.

古文：转为七兵尚书，领御史中尉。
现代文：改任七兵尚书，领御史中尉。
English: He was reassigned to Shichibyo Shosho and became a lieutenant of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：尚书右仆射元钦与从父兄丽妻崔氏奸通，回乃劾奏，时人称之。
现代文：尚书右仆射元钦与堂兄封丽的妻子崔氏私通，封回于是上奏弹劾，当时的人称赞他。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Sheyuanqin, had an affair with Cui, the wife of his cousin, Fuli, and was impeached. People at the time praised him.

古文：除镇东将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：任镇束将军、冀州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Zhenzuk and the historian of Jizhou.

古文：肃宗末，徵为殿中尚书，频表逊职，以为右光禄大夫。
现代文：肃宗末年，征入任殿中尚书，连续多次上表辞职，被任命为右光禄大夫。
English: In the last years of Su Zong's reign, he was conscripted into the nobility, resigned from the nobility several times in a row, and was appointed Uguanglu doctor.

古文：庄帝初，遇害于河阴，时年七十七。
现代文：庄帝初年，在河阴遇害，当时七十七岁。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was killed in Heyin, at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：赠侍中、车骑大将军、司空公、定州刺史，谥曰孝宣。
现代文：被追赠为侍中、车骑大将军、司空公、定州刺史，谧号为孝宣。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior Officer, General of Chariot and Cavalry, Shikugo, and Jingshu Shishi, and his posthumous name was Takanobu.

古文：长子隆之，武定中，开府仪同三司，齐州刺史，安德郡开国公。
现代文：长子隆之，武定年间，任开府仪同三司、齐州刺史，安德郡开国公。
English: The eldest son, Takashi, during the Wuding era, served as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong, the first governor of Qi Province, and the first governor of Ande County.

古文：子子绘，武定中，勃海太守。
现代文：儿子子绘，武定年间，任勃海太守。
English: His son Zi Pu, during the Wuding era, was appointed the governor of the Bohai Sea.

古文：隆之弟兴之，字祖胄。
现代文：隆之的弟弟兴之，字祖胄。
English: Takashi's younger brother, Koji, is the lead character.

古文：经明行修，恬素清静。
现代文：经学博洽而德行美善，恬淡朴素清静无为。
English: Being well-educated, virtuous and good-natured, but being simple, plain and quiet.

古文：起家太学博士，员外郎。
现代文：开始做官任太学博士，员外郎。
English: He began to work as an official doctor of science, a member of the outer circle.

古文：出为瀛冀二州平北府长史，所历有当官之誉。
现代文：出任温冀二州平北府长史，所到之处有称职的声誉。
English: He served as the governor of Pingbei Prefecture of Wenzhou Second Prefecture, and gained a reputation for competence everywhere he went.

古文：孝昌中卒。
现代文：耋旦年间去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：天平中，追赠散骑常侍、抚军将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：丢垩年间，被迫赠为散骑常侍、抚军将军、雍州刺史。
English: During his exile, he was forced to give up his titles as straggler equerry, general of the army, and Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：寻重赠殿中尚书，谥曰文。
现代文：不久加赠殿中尚书，谧号为文。
English: He was soon given the posthumous title of "Wen" (文).

古文：子孝琬，字子倩。
现代文：儿子孝琬，字子倩。
English: His son, Takahiro, was nicknamed Kazuchika.

古文：武定末，开府中郎。
现代文：武定末年，任开府中郎。
English: In the last years of Wuding's life, he served as Kaifu no churo.

古文：孝琬弟孝琰，秘书郎。
现代文：孝琬的弟弟孝琰，任秘书郎。
English: Takataka's younger brother, Takataka, became the secretary.

古文：兴之弟延之，字祖业。
现代文：兴之的弟弟延之，字祖业。
English: The younger brother of Heung-Chih, Yan-Chih, is also known as Zuye.

古文：天平中，骠骑大将军、青州刺史，剡县开国子。
现代文：天平年间，任骠骑大将军、青州刺史、剡县开国子。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he held the positions of General of the Horse, Governor of Aozhou, and the founder of Aozhou County.

古文：磨奴既以回为后，请于显祖，赠鉴宁远将军、沧水太守。
现代文：磨抠既然以堑旦为后代，向题担请求，追赠封鉴为宁远将军、沧水太守。
English: Since the milling eel is a descendant of the eel eel, it requests the eel eel to be given a posthumous seal as the general of Ningyuan and the governor of Cangshui.

古文：鉴长子琳，字彦宝。
现代文：封鉴的长子封琳，字彦宝。
English: The eldest son of Fokken, Fokrin, is called Hikobo.

古文：显祖末，本州表贡，拜中书博士。
现代文：显祖末年，本州上表荐举，被任命为中书博士。
English: In the last years of Emperor Xianzu's life, he was recommended by the state and was appointed Doctor of Chinese Literature.

古文：高祖初，大军南讨，琳参镇南军事。
现代文：高祖初年，大军南伐，封琳参谋镇南军事。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, a large army marched south, and the vassal general staff headed the southern military.

古文：后为河南七州大使。
现代文：后来任黄河以南七州大使。
English: He later served as ambassador to seven states south of the Yellow River.

古文：还，拜中书侍郎，与侍中、南平王冯诞等议定律令，赐布帛六百匹，栗六百石，马牛各一。
现代文：回朝，任中书侍郎，与侍中、南平王冯诞等商议决定法令，被赏赐布帛六百匹、粟六百石、马一匹和牛一头。
English: On his return to the imperial court, he was appointed as the secretary of the court, and discussed and decided on the decree with the chamberlain and the king of Nanping, Feng Sheng, and was awarded six hundred pieces of cloth, six hundred grains of millet, a horse, and a cow.

古文：迁太尉长史，转司宗下大夫，有长者之称。
现代文：升任太尉长史，改任司宗下大夫，有长者的名声。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Tai Lai Chang Shi, and changed to the position of Shizong Shimo Daifu. He had a reputation as an elder.

古文：行东兗州事。
现代文：行束兖州事。
English: It's time to go back to the states.

古文：及改定百官，除司空长史。
现代文：及至另行确定百官，任司空长史。
English: Until another 100 officials are confirmed, he will serve as the Chief of the Air Force.

古文：出为立忠将军、南青州刺史、兼散骑常侍、持节，西道大使。
现代文：出任立忠将军、南青州刺史、兼散骑常侍、持节、西道大使。
English: He served as Risshun Shogun, Nanseishu Shishi, and also as Sanzhijishi no Tsuneishi, Mochizeki, and Saido Ambassador.

古文：还为长兼太中大夫，转广平内史，又为光禄大夫。
现代文：回朝任长兼太中大夫，改任广平内史，又任光禄大夫。
English: He returned to the imperial court to serve as chancellor and vice chancellor of the imperial court, and was appointed to the post of Guangping Inner Historian and the post of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：世宗末，除后将军、夏州刺史。
现代文：世塞末年，任后将军、夏业刺史。
English: In the last years of World War II, he became a general after being appointed to the post.

古文：徵为安东将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：征入任安柬将军、光禄大夫。
English: He was conscripted as a general of Ankam and as a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：神龟二年卒。
现代文：神龟二年去世。
English: Turtle died two years later.

古文：赠使持节、抚军将军、相州刺史。
现代文：被追赠为使持节、抚军将军、相州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Ji Ji Jie, General Fuzhong, and Sangju Shishi.

古文：子元称，元称弟子盛，并早卒。
现代文：儿子元称，元称的弟弟子盛，都过早地去。
English: His son, formerly known as, and his brother, formerly known as, Disciple Sheng, both left prematurely.

古文：子盛弟子施，武定末，沛郡太守。
现代文：子盛的弟弟子施，武定末年，任沛郡太守。
English: Zomori's younger brother and disciple Shi, in the last years of Wuding's life, became the governor of Pae County.

古文：琳子肃，在《文苑传》。
现代文：高琳的儿子高肃，在《文苑传》。
English: Gao Lin's son Gao Su, in "Wen Yuan Biography."

古文：懿从兄子恺，字思悌，弈之孙也。
现代文：高肃堂兄的儿子高恺，字思悌，是过銮的孙子。
English: Gao Su's cousin's son Gao Yao, alias Si Yao, is the grandson of Gao Yao.

古文：父劝，慕容垂侍中、太常卿。
现代文：父亲堑劝，任慕容垂的侍中、太常卿。
English: At his father's urging, he was appointed as Murongtui's chamberlain and Tai Changqing.

古文：恺，给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：封恺，任给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
English: He was awarded the imperial seal and appointed to the posts of Huangmen waiter and horseback riding attendant.

古文：后入代都，名出懿子玄之右，俱坐司马氏事死。
现代文：后来归附代都，比圭翅的儿子玄之更有名气，同样因为司马区的事被处死。
English: Later, it was attached to Deito, and was more famous than Gyeongwol's son, Hyonjo, who was also executed for the Sima District incident.

古文：恺妻，庐玄姊也。
现代文：丝恺的妻子，是卢玄的姐姐。
English: The wife of Shih Chien is the sister of Lu Xuan.

古文：恺子伯达弃母及妻李氏南奔河表，改婚房氏。
现代文：封恺的儿子隧离开母亲和妻子李氏向南投奔黄河以南，改娶崖氐。
English: Fong Yao's son, Tun, left his mother and his wife, Li, to go to Nantou, south of the Yellow River, and married Ya Yao instead.

古文：显祖末，伯达子休杰内入，祖母庐犹存，垂百岁矣，而李已死。
现代文：题担末年，值崖的儿子健送入国，祖母卢氏还在世，近百岁了，而李氏已死。
English: At the end of the year, the cliff's son Jian was sent to the country, the grandmother Lu was still alive, nearly a hundred years old, and Li was dead.

古文：休杰，高祖时以归国勋为河间太守，兼冀州咸阳王府谘议参军。
现代文：体仅，直担时因归附国家的功劳任困太守，兼冀业戚垦旺府谘议参军。
English: However, when he was directly in charge, he was appointed to the position of Empress Dowager due to his contribution to the country, and he also consulted with his relatives in Suwang to join the army.

古文：休杰从弟灵佑，仕刘义隆为青州治中、勃海太守。
现代文：休杰的堂弟灵佑，任刘义隆的青州治中、勃海太守。
English: Hu Jie's cousin Ling You was appointed by Liu Yilong as the governor of Qingzhou and the governor of Bohai.

古文：慕容白曜平三齐，灵佑率二百人诣白曜降，赐爵下密子。
现代文：慕容白曜平定三齐地区，灵佑率领二百人到白曜那裹投降，赐爵下密子。
English: Murong Baiyou pacified the Sanqi region, Lingyou led two hundred people to Baiyou to surrender, and gave the title to his son.

古文：后除建威将军、勃海太守。
现代文：后任建威将军、勃海太守。
English: He later became General Jian Wei and the governor of the Bohai Sea.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子进寿，袭爵。
现代文：儿子进寿，继承爵位。
English: His son Jin Shou inherits the peerage.

古文：肃宗时，为扬州治中，以失义州为刺史元志所杀。
现代文：肃宗时，任扬州治中，因丢失义州被刺史元志杀死。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suizong, he served as Yangzhou governor, but was killed by the assassin Yuan Zhi for losing Yizhou.

古文：事具《志传》。
现代文：事在《元志传》。
English: It's in "Origins."

古文：子子游，武定中，开府中兵参军。
现代文：儿子子游，武定年间，任开府中兵参军。
English: His son Ziyu, during the Wuding era, served as a soldier in Kaifu and joined the army.

古文：进寿弟蚌，卒于冀州别驾。
现代文：进寿的弟弟进蚌，任冀州别驾时去世。
English: Jinshou's younger brother, Jinsong, died while driving in Jizhou.

古文：蚌弟粲，起家荆州长流参军、司空水曹参军、殿中侍御史。
现代文：进蚌的弟弟进粲，初入仕途任荆州长流参军。任司空水曹参军、殿中侍御史。
English: Jinlu's younger brother, Jinlu, joined the army for the first time in his career as a member of the Jing prefectural line. He joined the army as a member of the Siku Suizao, and served as an attendant in the palace.

古文：累迁征东将军、广州长史。
现代文：多次升任征东将军、卢丛长史。
English: He was promoted to the post of Eastern Expeditionary General several times, and Lu Cong has a long history.

古文：还，除光禄大夫。
现代文：回朝，任光禄大夫。
English: He returned to Japan and became a doctor.

古文：卒，赠卫将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：去世后追赠为卫将军、冀丛刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Wei general and Ji Cong stabbing history.

古文：回族叔轨，字广度。
现代文：封回本家的叔父封轨，字广度。
English: The uncle who sealed our home sealed the track, and the width of the words has increased.

古文：沉谨好学，博通经传。
现代文：深沉谨慎好学，广泛地通晓儒学经传。
English: Profoundly prudent and studious, he is widely familiar with Confucian scriptures.

古文：与光禄大夫武邑孙惠蔚同志友善，惠蔚每推轨曰： 封生之于经义，非但章句可奇，其标明纲格，统括大归，吾所弗如者多矣。 
现代文：与光禄大夫武邑人孙塞蓝志趣相投而且友善，塞薮每每推重挝执说： 封生在经书义理方面，不但剖章析句值得称奇，他标明系统规模，总括大要，我不如他的地方多啊。 
English: Dr. Sun Ce Lan Zhi from Wuyi, Guanglu's doctor, shares the same interests and is friendly. Dr. Sun Ce Lan Zhi said, "In terms of the principles of scripture, not only is Fong Sheng's chapter analysis sentence remarkable, he indicated the scale of the system, in summary, I am not as good as him."

古文：善自修洁，仪容甚伟。
现代文：喜好修饰自己，仪表很不寻常。
English: He likes to dress up and his appearance is unusual.

古文：或曰： 学士不事修饰，此贤何独如此？ 
现代文：有人说： 学者不做修饰，怎么惟独这个贤人这样呢? 
English: Some people say, "Scholars don't embellish, so why should this sage be the only one doing so?"

古文：轨闻，笑曰： 君子整其衣冠，尊其瞻视，何必蓬头垢面，然后为贤？ 
现代文：封轨听说后，笑着说：君子使衣冠整洁，外表高贵，何必蓬头垢面，才是有德行呢。 
English: After hearing about the closing of the track, he said with a smile: A gentleman makes his clothes and crown tidy and his appearance noble. Why does he have to be unkempt and dirty in order to be virtuous?

古文：言者惭退。
现代文：说话的人惭愧地退去。
English: The speaker retreats in shame.

古文：太和中，拜著作佐郎，稍迁尚书仪曹郎中，兼员外散骑常侍。
现代文：太和年问，任著作佐郎，逐渐升任尚书仪曹郎中。兼员外散骑常侍，奉命出使高丽。
English: At the age of twenty-one, he was appointed to the post of Shosho-saro, and gradually rose to the post of Shosho-iri-soro-chū. He was also assigned to the post of non-commissioned officer, and was ordered to dispatch to Korea.

古文：衔命高丽，高丽王云恃其偏远，称疾不亲受诏。
现代文：高丽王产昼依恃地处偏远，称说有病不亲自接受韶书。
English: Goryeo's Wangzheng District is located in a remote area, and said that it would not accept the imperial edict in person if it was sick.

古文：轨正色诘之，喻以大义，云乃北面受诏。
现代文：堑孰严肃地诘问他，又用大道理晓谕，高云于是面向北方接受诏书。
English: Gao Yan questioned him seriously and told him with great reason. Gao Yun then faced the north to accept the edict.

古文：先是，契丹虏掠边民六十余口，又为高丽拥掠东归。
现代文：先前，契丹掠夺边民六十多人，又被产丽掳掠向东归去。
English: Previously, the Khitan plundered more than sixty border people, and they were abducted and plundered by the Sengli and returned to the east.

古文：轨具闻其状，移书徵之，云悉资给遣还。
现代文：挝轨得知这些情况，致书质问，高云全部资助遣回。
English: When Lao Rail learned of these circumstances, it sent a letter of inquiry, and Gao Yun fully funded the repatriation.

古文：有司奏轨远使绝域，不辱朝命，权宜晓慰，边民来苏，宜加爵赏。
现代文：有关部门上奏说，堑轨出使极远的地区，不辱使命，临时晓谕抚慰，边民因而获得休养生息，应当给予爵禄和赏赐。
English: Relevant departments made a report, saying that it is not a disgrace to send envoys to far-away regions, and it is a temporary consolation, so that the border residents can get rest and recuperation, and should be given a knighthood and reward.

古文：世宗诏曰： 权宜徵口，使人常体，但光扬有称，宜赏一阶。 
现代文：世塞诏令说： 临时索回人，是使者通常的做法，但是发扬光大使命有声誉，应当赏赐官阶一级。 
English: The edict said: It is the usual practice of emissaries to solicit temporary returnees, but carrying out the Great Commission has a reputation and should be rewarded with a higher rank.

古文：转考功郎中，除本郡中正。
现代文：改任考功郎中，任本郡中正。
English: He was reappointed as a meritorious junior high school student and appointed as the county's junior high school principal.

古文：勃海太守崔休入为吏部郎，以兄考事干轨。
现代文：勃海太守崔休被征入任吏部郎，因兄长考核的事求封轨。
English: Cui Xiu, the governor of Bohai, was conscripted to serve as a cadre, and was forced to resign because of his brother's examination.

古文：轨曰： 法者，天下之平，不可以旧君故亏之也。 
现代文：封轨说： 法令，是天下的标准，不能因与你有旧谊而损害它。 
English: "Laws and regulations are the highest standards in the world, and you can't damage them just because you have an old friendship with them," Mr. Fong said.

古文：休叹其守正。
现代文：崔休嗟叹他的恪守正道。
English: Cui Xiu lamented his adherence to the right path.

古文：轨在台中，称为儒雅。
现代文：封轨在宫中，被称为博学的儒士。
English: In the palace, he was known as an erudite Confucian.

古文：奏请遣四门博士明经学者，检试诸州学生。
现代文：奏请派遣四门博士中通晓经学的人，检查测试各州学生。
English: Please send four Ph.D. scholars to examine and test the students in each state.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令依从奏请。
English: He complied.

古文：寻除国子博士，加扬武将军。
现代文：不久任国子博士，加授扬武将军。
English: He was soon appointed Dr. Kuniko and promoted to General Yangwu.

古文：假通直散骑常侍，慰劳汾州山胡。
现代文：假通直散骑常侍，慰劳汾州山胡人。
English: A regular attendant on horseback, comforting the Shanhu people of Luzhou.

古文：司空、清河王怿表修明堂辟雍，诏百僚集议。
现代文：司空、清河王元悍上表请修明堂和辟雍，韶令百官共同评议。
English: Siku and Qinghe Wang Yuanhan invited Shuming Hall and Biyong to the table, and ordered hundreds of officials to discuss it together.

古文：轨议曰： 明堂者，布政之宫，在国之阳，所以严父配天，听朔设教，其经构之式，盖已尚矣。
现代文：封轨议论说：明堂，是宣布政教的宫殿，位于都城的南边，用来敬祖祭天，每年冬天向诸侯颁布新历和实施教化，它的营造格式由来已久了。
English: The closing argument said: Myeongdong is a palace that proclaims politics and religion. It is located in the south of the capital, and is used to worship the ancestors and the gods. Every winter, the new calendar is promulgated to the lords and the enlightenment is implemented. Its construction format has a long history.

古文：故《周官·匠人职》云：夏后氏世室，殷人重屋，周人明堂，五室、九阶、四户、八窗。
现代文：所以《周礼匠人职》说：夏后氏的世室，殷人的重屋，周人的明堂，五个室、九个台阶、四个门、八个窗。
English: Therefore, "Zhou Li's Craftsman's Office" said: Xiao's family room, Yin's heavy house, Zhou's Ming Hall, five rooms, nine steps, four doors, eight windows.

古文：郑玄曰： 或举宗庙，或举王寝，或举明堂，互之以见同制。 
现代文：郑玄说： 有的称宗庙，有的称王寝，有的称明堂，并列互举可见其制度相同。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: Some are called ancestral temple, some are called Wang Xing, and some are called Ming Hall, and it can be seen from the side-by-side comparison that their systems are the same.

古文：然则三代明堂，其制一也。
现代文：那么三代的明堂，结构是一致的。
English: So the structure of the three generations of Myeongdong is consistent.

古文：案周与夏殷，损益不同，至于明堂，因而弗革，明五室之义，得天数矣。
现代文：案周与夏殷，兴革不同，至于明堂，因袭而不变，表明五个室的意义，符合天数。
English: Xizhou is different from Xia and Yin in terms of the rise of the revolution, but the Ming Hall remains unchanged, indicating the significance of the five rooms and corresponding to the number of days.

古文：是以郑玄又曰： 五室者，象五行也。
现代文：因此郑玄又说：五个室，象征五行。
English: Therefore, Zheng Xuan also said: the five rooms symbolize the five elements.

古文：然则九阶者，法九土;四户者，达四时;八窗者，通八风。 
现代文：那么九个台阶，象征九州；四个门，使四季畅通；八个窗，八方之风顺畅。
English: The nine steps symbolize Kyushu; the four doors make the four seasons flow smoothly; and the eight windows make the wind flow smoothly in all directions.

古文：诚不易之大范，有国之恆式。
现代文：诚然是不变的大法，立国的定式。
English: It is true that the Great Law and the formula for founding the country remain unchanged.

古文：若其上园下方以则天地，通水环宫以节观者，茅盖白盛为之质饰，赤缀白缀为之户牖，皆典籍所具载，制度之明义也。
现代文：至于它的上圆下方以效法天地，通水流环绕用以节制观瞻，茅草顶盖和用蜃灰制成的白墙作为质朴的装饰，赤色饰物白色饰物施于门窗，都是典籍所记载，制度所确定的。
English: As for its upper and lower circles, they imitate heaven and earth, the water flow around it is used to control the view, the thatched roof and the white wall made of ash are used as rustic decoration, and the red ornaments and white ornaments are applied to the doors and windows, all of which are recorded in the classics and determined by the system.

古文：在秦之世，焚灭五典，毁黜三代，变更先圣，不依旧宪。
现代文：秦代焚毁上古典籍，槟弃三伐，变更先圣，不依照过去的法度。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, the classical books were burned, the three-pronged pentagram was abandoned, and the first saint was changed, which was not in accordance with the laws of the past.

古文：故吕氏月令见九室之义，大戴之礼著十二堂之论。
现代文：因此旦旦的《月令》表明了九室的意义，去越的《礼记》记载了十二堂的说法。
English: Therefore, the "Lunar Calendar" of the Tang Dynasty indicated the significance of the nine rooms, and the "Rituals" of the Tang Dynasty recorded the twelve halls.

古文：汉承秦法，亦未能改，东西二京，俱为九室。
现代文：莲伐承袭耋丛的法度，未能改变，在东西二京，都是九室。
English: The lotus cutting inherits the law of the rhododendron bush, and it has not changed. In the East and West, there are nine rooms.

古文：是以《黄图》，《白虎通》，蔡邕，应劭等，咸称九室以象九州，十二堂以象十二辰。
现代文：所以《黄图》、《白虎通》，鉴邕、塞型等，都称九室象征九州，十二堂象征十二星次。
English: Therefore, "Yellow Map," "White Tiger Road," "Jaw-Jaw" and "Jam-Jam" are all called the nine chambers symbolizing Kyushu, and the twelve halls symbolizing the twelve constellations.

古文：夫室以祭天，堂以布政。
现代文：室用以祭天，堂用以施政。
English: The room is used to worship the heavens, and the hall is used for administration.

古文：依天而祭，故室不过五;依时布政，故堂不逾四。
现代文：依据天数祭祀，所以室数不超过五；依据时令施政，所以堂数不超过四。
English: According to the number of days of worship, the number of rooms does not exceed five; according to the season of administration, the number of halls does not exceed four.

古文：州之与辰，非所可法，九与十二，其用安在？
现代文：州与星次。不可效法，九舆十二，功用在哪襄?
English: State and star. Inimitable, nine, twelve, where is the function?

古文：今圣朝欲尊道训民，备礼化物，宜则五室，以为永制。
现代文：现在朝廷打算尊重道义教导民众，完备礼仪感化外物，应当仿效五室，作为永久的制度。
English: Now that the imperial court intends to teach the people to respect morals and complete etiquette, it should follow the example of the five chambers as a permanent system.

古文：至如庙学之嫌，台沼之杂，袁准之徒已论正矣，遗论具在，不复须载。 
现代文：至于辟雍的避忌，高台池沼的组合，塞堂之徒已经分析修正，留下的见解都在，不需要再陈述。
English: As for the shunning of piedmont, the combination of high plateaus and ponds, the blockers have been analyzed and corrected, and the remaining opinions are all there, and do not need to be stated.

古文：寻以本官行东郡太守。
现代文：不久以本官衔行柬郡太守。
English: He was soon promoted to the official title of "Cambodia County Governor."

古文：迁前军将军、行夏州事。
现代文：升任前军将军、行夏州事。
English: He was promoted to the general of the former army and went to the Xia Prefecture.

古文：好立条教，所在有绩。
现代文：好立法规教令，为官有政绩。
English: Good legislation, regulations, and edicts are government achievements.

古文：转太子仆射，迁延尉少卿，加征虏将军。
现代文：改任太子仆，升任廷尉少卿，加授征虏将军。
English: He was reappointed as the prince's footman, promoted to the rank of court lieutenant, and given the additional title of conscript general.

古文：卒，赠右将军、济州刺史。
现代文：去世后追赠为右将军、济州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Right General, Jeju Sashimi.

古文：初，轨深为郭祚所知，祚常谓子景尚曰： 封轨、高绰二人，并干国之才，必应远至。
现代文：起初，封轨深为郭祚所赏识，郭祚常对儿子景尚说： 封轨、高绰二人，都是治理国家的人才，日后必然大成。
English: At first, Guo Jizhen was admired by Guo Jizhen. Guo Jizhen often said to his son Jing Shang: "Both Guo Jizhen and Gao Jizhe are talented people to govern the country, and they will surely succeed in the future."

古文：吾平生不妄进举，而每荐此二公，非直为国进贤，亦为汝等将来之津梁也。 
现代文：我平生不妄加推荐，却屡次推荐这二人，不仅为国家荐贤才，也是你等将来的津梁。 
English: I do not make recommendations in my lifetime, but I have repeatedly recommended these two people, not only for the country to recommend talents, but also for you and other future leaders.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他受人推重到如此地步。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：轨既以方直自业，高绰亦以风概立名。
现代文：封轨既以端方正直自持，高绰也因风度气概立名。
English: He was known for his honesty and integrity, as well as his good manners.

古文：尚书令高肇拜司徒，绰送迎往来，轨竟不诣。
现代文：尚书令高肇被任命为司徒，直纬送往迎来，堑塾竟然不到。
English: Shang Shuling Gao Zhao was appointed as a disciple, sent straight to usher, but did not come to the school.

古文：绰顾不见轨，乃遽归，曰： 吾一生自谓无愆规矩，今日举措，不如封生远矣。 
现代文：高绰看不到封轨，就急忙回去，说： 我一生自以为没有违背规矩，今天的举措，远不如封生啊。 
English: Gao Piao couldn't see the track being sealed, so he hurried back and said, "All my life I thought I hadn't broken any rules, but today's move is far worse than sealing the track."

古文：轨以务德慎言，修身之本；奸回谗佞，世之巨害，乃为《务德》，《慎言》，《远佞》，《防奸》四戒，文多不载。
现代文：圭邀以为致力于道德和出言谨慎，是修身的根本，奸恶邪僻谗佞的人，是天下大害，于是着《务德》、《慎言》、《远佞》、《防奸》四戒，文字多数没有流传。
English: Gui Ying believed that commitment to morality and prudence in speech were fundamental to self-cultivation, and that those who committed evil and wickedness were a great harm to the world. As a result, most of the four precepts of "Moral Conduct," "Prudence," "Forbearance," and "Prevention of Sexual Misconduct" did not spread.

古文：轨长子伟伯，字君良。
现代文：轨的长子伟伯，字君良。
English: Wei Bo, the eldest son of Guo, was nicknamed "Jun Liang."

古文：博学有才思，弱冠除太学博士，每朝廷大议，伟伯皆预焉。
现代文：博学有才思，二十岁左右任太学博士，每次朝廷集议国家大事，伟伯都参与。
English: An erudite and talented thinker, he was appointed Doctor of Theology around the age of twenty. Every time the imperial court convened to discuss national affairs, Wei Bo took part.

古文：雅为太保崔光、仆射游肇所知赏。
现代文：深为太保崔光、仆射游肇所赏识。
English: It is deeply appreciated by Taibao Cui Guang and Zhu Shaoyu Zhao.

古文：太尉、清河王怿辟参军事，怿亲为《孝经解诂》，命伟伯为《难例》九条，皆发起隐漏。
现代文：被太尉、清河王五堡征召为参军事，五惮亲自着《孝经解诂》，命仅伯写《难例》九条，都是阐发幽微的。
English: He was called up to join the military by Taiyi and Qinghe Wang Wufu, and personally wrote "Filial Piety" and was ordered to write only nine articles of "Difficult Cases," all of which were obscure.

古文：伟伯又讨论《礼》、《传》、《诗》、《易》疑事数十条，儒者咸称之。
现代文：仅迫又探讨评论《礼》、《左传》、《诗经》、《周易》中的疑难之事数十条，读书人都称扬他。
English: He has also discussed dozens of difficult things in the reviews of "Li," "Zhuan," "Shijing" and "Zhou Yi," and readers have praised him.

古文：寻将经始明堂，广集儒学，议其制度。
现代文：不久将要营造明堂，广泛招集儒家学者议定它的制度。
English: Soon, a bright hall will be built, and Confucian scholars will be widely convened to discuss its system.

古文：九五之论，久而不定。
现代文：九室五室议而不决。
English: The 9th and 5th chambers remain undecided.

古文：伟伯乃搜检经纬，上《明堂图说》六卷。
现代文：伟伯于是翻检经书和纬书，上呈《明堂图说》六卷。
English: Weber then reviewed the scriptures and scriptures, and presented six volumes of "Mingtang Illustration."

古文：正光末，尚书仆射萧宝夤以为关西行台郎。
现代文：正光末年，尚书仆射萧宝夤任命他为阗西行台郎。
English: At the end of Masamitsu's life, Shosho's servant Sho Sho Sho appointed him as the governor of Western Goryeo.

古文：及宝夤为逆，伟伯乃与南平王冏潜结关中豪右韦子粲等谋举义兵。
现代文：及至直量反叛，仅垣便与五皿暗中联合关中富豪韦子粲等谋划发动义兵。
English: When it came to the direct amount of rebellion, only Ogaki secretly planned to launch a volunteer army with the five dishes and the rich man Wei Zixuan.

古文：事发见杀，年三十六，时人惜之。
现代文：事情暴露被杀，终年三十六岁，时人为之惋惜。
English: He was thirty-six years old when the affair was exposed and he was killed. At the time, people felt sorry for him.

古文：永安中，追赠散骑常侍、征虏将军、瀛州刺史，听一子出身。
现代文：永安年间追赠为散骑常侍、征虏将军、遍州刺史，接受一个儿子为官。
English: During the Yong'an era, he posthumously became a knight errant, a conscripted general, and a historian of Henzhou, and accepted a son as an official.

古文：伟伯无子，转授第三弟翼。
现代文：伟伯没有儿子，改授第三弟封翼。
English: Wei Bo did not have a son, so he gave the third brother, Feng Rong, instead.

古文：伟伯撰《封氏本录》六卷，并诗赋碑诔杂文数十篇。
现代文：伟伯着《封氏本录》六卷，诗赋碑诛杂文几十篇。
English: Wei Bo wrote six volumes of "Feng's Record" and dozens of poems, inscriptions and miscellaneous articles.

古文：伟伯弟业，字君修。
现代文：伟伯的弟弟伟业，字君修。
English: Wei Bo's younger brother Wei Ye, also known as Jun Xiu.

古文：奉朝请，领殿中侍御史。
现代文：任奉朝请，领殿中侍御史。
English: Appointed to serve the Emperor, he served the Emperor in the front hall.

古文：早卒。
现代文：去世过早。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：业弟翼，字君赞。
现代文：封业的弟弟封翼，字君赞。
English: Feng Ye's younger brother, Feng Ye, was praised by Zha Jun.

古文：美容貌，腰带十围。
现代文：容貌美丽，束衣的带子有十围长。
English: She had a beautiful face, and the cords of her tunic were ten times as long.

古文：以兄伟伯立节之勋，除给事中。
现代文：因兄长伟伯树立节操的功勋，任给事中。
English: He was appointed to the post because of his elder brother Weber's achievements in establishing discipline.

古文：后加扬烈将军。
现代文：后来加授扬烈将军。
English: He was later promoted to General Yang Rong.

古文：武定初卒。
现代文：武定初年去世。
English: He died in the first year of Wuding.

古文：翼弟述，字君义。
现代文：封翼的弟弟封述字君义。
English: The younger brother of Fong Ying is called Fong Suo Ji Jun Yi.

古文：武定末，延尉少卿。
现代文：武定末年任廷尉少卿。
English: In the last years of Wuding's life, he was appointed a courtier and junior secretary.

古文：述弟询，字景文。
现代文：封述的弟弟封询，字景文。
English: The younger brother of the description is the inquiry, and the words are the scenery.

古文：尚书起部郎。
现代文：任尚书起部郎。
English: He was appointed as Shosho Kikitobe's assistant.

古文：史臣曰：高敬侯才鉴明远，见机而作，身名俱劭，世载人英，天所赞也。
现代文：史臣曰：高敬侯见识高明而深远，见机而作，名誉地位都美好，是世代见于记载的杰出人才，上天保佑他。
English: Shichen said: Gao Jianhou is knowledgeable, wise and far-reaching, he saw an opportunity and made it, and his reputation is good. He is an outstanding talent seen in records for generations. God bless him.

古文：崔逞文学器识，当年之俊，虑远忽微，俱以为祸。
现代文：崔逞的学问器量见识，在当时堪称杰出，忧虑长远忽视小节，都是造成祸害的原因。
English: Cui Gang's interrogator's ability to measure insight was outstanding at the time, and worries about long-term neglect of subsection were the cause of the disaster.

古文：赜有兹休烈，厥世不延。
现代文：崔赜有如此盛美的功业，他的家世却不能延续。
English: Cui Wei has such a magnificent career, but his family cannot continue.

古文：封懿获全为幸，回乃克光家，世不乏人矣。
现代文：封懿得以保全是侥幸，封回却能光大家族，世代不乏能人啊。
English: It was a fluke that the seal was preserved, but the return of the seal can light up a large family, and there are many generations of talented people.

