古文：二月二十一日，这是徐霞客游芜山后入闽游的时间出崇安南门，觅舟。
现代文：二月二十一日。
English: February 21st.

古文：西北一溪自分水关，东北一溪自温岭关，合注于县南，通郡省而入海。
现代文：我从崇安县的南城门出去，寻找可以乘坐的船只。西北方有一条溪流从分水关流出，东北面还有一条溪流从温岭关流来，两溪汇合之后一同注入崇安县县南，再通过郡省流入大海。
English: I went out of the Nancheng Gate of Chong'an County to look for a boat that I could take. In the northwest, a stream flowed out of the diversion, and in the northeast, another stream flowed from Wenling Pass. After the two streams merged, they both flowed into the south of Chong'an County, and then flowed into the sea through the county and province.

古文：顺流三十里，见溪边一峰横欹，一峰独耸。
现代文：船只顺着河流前行了三十里水路，这时我看见溪边有一座山峰横斜而生，一座山峰则独自耸立。
English: The boat sailed along the river for thirty miles, when I saw a mountain rising diagonally from the side of the stream, a mountain that stood alone.

古文：余咤而瞩目感到吃惊而注目凝望，则欹者幔亭峰，耸者大王峰也。
现代文：这种景色使我十分惊异，因此很注意它，那座横斜的山峰便是幔亭峰，高耸入云的则是大王峰。
English: This kind of scenery surprised me very much, so I paid close attention to it. That cross-sloping mountain peak is the Shanting Peak, and the towering Daowang Peak.

古文：峰南一溪，东向而入大溪者，即武彝溪也。
现代文：山峰的南面有一条溪水，向东流进大溪，是武彝溪。
English: On the south side of the mountain peak, there is a stream that flows eastward into a large stream, which is Wuyi Creek.

古文：冲祐宫傍峰临溪。
现代文：冲祜宫北面傍依着山峰，前面临着溪水。
English: To the north of Chongzheng Palace, it is flanked by a mountain peak and faces a stream.

古文：余欲先抵九曲，然后顺流探历，遂舍宫不登，逆流而进。
现代文：我想先到九曲，之后再沿着溪水探究胜景，于是不去冲祐宫，逆流而上。
English: I wanted to go to Jiuqu first, and then explore the scenery along the stream, so I didn't go to Chongyu Palace and went upstream.

古文：流甚驶，舟子跣行光着脚走路溪间以挽舟。
现代文：流水非常湍急，纤夫光着脚丫子行走在溪水中拉着船只向前走。
English: The current was very swift, and the sailor walked barefoot in the stream, pulling the boat forward.

古文：第一曲，右为幔亭峰、大王峰，左为狮子峰、观音岩。
现代文：到达第一曲处，右边是幔亭峰、大王峰，左边是狮子峰、观音岩。
English: Arriving at the first track, the right side is Shuting Peak and Daowang Peak, and the left side is Lion Peak and Guanyin Rock.

古文：而溪右之濒水者曰水光石，上题刻殆几乎遍。
现代文：然而在溪流右边那濒临溪水的叫 水光石 ，上面几乎布满了各种题刻。
English: However, on the right side of the stream, near the water, there is a stone called Suiguangshi, which is almost covered with various inscriptions.

古文：二曲之右为铁板嶂、翰墨岩，左为兜鍪ó峰、玉女峰。
现代文：二曲的右边，便是人们说的铁板幛、翰墨岩，左边是兜鍪峰、玉女峰。
English: The right side of the second curve is what people call the iron plate ridge and the Hanmo rock, and the left side is the Puppet Peak and the Jade Woman Peak.

古文：而板嶂之旁，崖壁峭立，间有三孔，作 品 字状。
现代文：铁板幛的旁侧，崖壁陡峭而笔直，其中有三个孔穴，呈 品 字形。
English: Beside the iron plate pier, the cliff wall is steep and straight, with three holes in it, in the shape of a hexagon.

古文：三曲右为会仙岩，左为小藏峰、大藏峰。
现代文：三曲的右边是会仙岩，左边是小藏峰、大藏峰。
English: On the right side of Sanqu is Huixian Rock, and on the left are Xiaozang Peak and Dazang Peak.

古文：大藏壁立千仞，崖端穴数孔，乱插木板如机杼。
现代文：大藏峰壁高可达千仞，崖顶有数处孔穴，如同织布机上的梭子一般乱七八糟地插放着许多木板。
English: The walls of the Great Tibet Peak are as high as a thousand fathoms, and there are several holes at the top of the cliff. Like a shuttle on a loom, many wooden planks are randomly inserted.

古文：一小舟斜架穴口木末，号曰 架壑舟 。
现代文：有一只小舟斜着架在这些木板末端，被称作 架壑舟 。
English: At the end of these planks there is a small boat, called a gaff, which is set up at an angle.

古文：四曲右为钓鱼台、希真岩，左为鸡栖岩、晏仙岩。
现代文：四曲的右边是钓鱼台、希真岩两处景观，左边是鸡栖岩、晏仙岩。
English: On the right side of the four curves are the two landscapes of Diaoyutai and Xizhen Rock, and on the left are Jixi Rock and Yuxian Rock.

古文：鸡栖岩半有洞，外隘狭窄中宏，横插木板，宛然埘儏īé恰似鸡巢中鸡栖小木桩。
现代文：鸡栖岩半山腰处有一石洞，外面狭窄而内部宽阔，横插着木板，好像是鸡巢中鸡栖息的木桩。
English: There is a stone cave in the middle of the mountain, narrow on the outside but wide on the inside, with wooden planks inserted horizontally, as if it were a chicken's nest.

古文：下一潭深碧，为卧龙潭。
现代文：岩下有一个水潭，潭水深邃且碧蓝，便是 卧龙潭 。
English: There is a pool under the rock, the pool is deep and blue, it is Wolong Lake.

古文：其右大隐屏、接笋峰，左更衣台、天柱峰者，五曲也。
现代文：它的右边有大隐屏、接笋峰，左边有更衣台、天柱峰的，便是五曲了。
English: On the right side of it, there is a large hidden screen and a connecting peak, and on the left side, there is a changing table and a Tianzhu peak, which is five songs.

古文：文公书院正在大隐屏下。
现代文：文公书院恰好在大隐屏峰的下面。
English: Wenguang College is just below the peak of the Great Hidden Screen.

古文：抵六曲，右为仙掌岩、天游峰，左为晚对峰、响声岩。
现代文：到达六曲时，看见右边有仙掌岩、天游峰，左边则为晚对峰、响声岩。
English: When you reach the six curves, you will see Cactus Rock and Tianyou Peak on the right, and Late Pair Peak and Ringing Rock on the left.

古文：回望隐屏、天游之间，危梯飞阁悬其上，不胜神往。
现代文：回头遥望大隐屏、天游峰之间，但见高峻陡峭的石梯和飞檐的斗阁悬于山峰之上，不禁令我神往！
English: Looking back at the distance between the Great Hidden Screen and Tianyou Peak, but seeing the tall and steep stone staircase and the flying dragon hanging over the peak, I can't help but be fascinated!

古文：而舟亦以溜急不得进，还泊曹家石。
现代文：但我所乘的小舟由于急流汹涌而不能驶进去，只好返回曹家石停泊。
English: However, the small boat I was on could not sail in due to the rapid current, so I had to return to Cao Jia Shi to moor.

古文：登陆入云窝，排云穿石，俱从乱崖中宛转得路。
现代文：踏上陆地，进入云窝，排开云彩，穿过石岩，都是在散乱的岩崖中反复寻觅才找到路。
English: Stepping onto the land, entering the cloud hole, lining up the clouds, and passing through the rock are all repeated searches in the scattered cliffs before finding the way.

古文：窝后即接笋峰。
现代文：云窝的后边是接笋峰。
English: Behind Yunwoo is Jianye Peak.

古文：峰骈á并列附于大隐屏，其腰横两截痕，故曰 接笋 。
现代文：接笋峰并排列附于大隐屏，它的峰腰横向显出分为两截的形态，因此称作 接笋峰 。
English: The junction peak is attached to the large hidden screen, and its peak and waist are divided into two sections horizontally, so it is called the junction peak.

古文：循其侧石隘，跻磴数层，四山环翠，中留隙地如掌者，为茶洞。
现代文：沿着它侧面的石岩隘口，攀爬上好几级石磴，远望四周，被碧绿的山峦所环绕，中间部分留有一块形似手掌的空地，便是 茶洞 。
English: Along the side of it is a stone rock pass, climb up several steps of the stalagmites, look around, surrounded by green mountains, in the middle of which there is a palm-shaped space, which is the tea cave.

古文：洞口由西入，口南为接笋峰，口北为仙掌岩。
现代文：茶洞口自西入，南面是接笋峰，北面是仙掌岩。
English: The entrance of the tea cave is from the west, the south side is the junction peak, and the north side is the cactus rock.

古文：仙掌之东为天游，天游之南为大隐屏。诸峰上皆峭绝，而下复攒凑，外无磴道，独西通一罅，比天台之明岩更为奇矫也。
现代文：仙掌岩东面为天游峰，天游峰的南面便是大隐屏，各座山峰的上部都十分陡峭，下部则又十分紧凑，外边没有石磴路可走，唯独在西面有一道缝隙相通连，比之天台山的明岩更显得奇巧雄健。
English: To the east of Cactus Rock is Tianyou Peak, and to the south of Tianyou Peak is Dayingping. The upper part of each peak is very steep, and the lower part is very compact. There is no stone path outside, but there is a gap in the west, which is more powerful than the bright rock of Tiantai Mountain.

古文：从其中攀跻登隐屏，至绝壁处，悬大木为梯，贴壁直竖云间。
现代文：在山峰中间攀爬，登上大隐屏，到达非常陡峭的山崖，向上的梯子是悬架着的大木头，紧紧贴着岩壁直冲云霄。
English: Climbing in the middle of the mountain, climbing up the Great Hidden Screen, reaching a very steep cliff, the upward ladder is a large suspended wood, clinging to the rock wall straight up into the sky.

古文：梯凡三接，级共八十一。
现代文：木梯用三根大木头相接而起，共有八十一级。
English: The wooden ladder is made of three large pieces of wood joined together, with a total of eighty-one rungs.

古文：级尽，有铁索横系山腰，下凿坎受足。
现代文：梯级穷尽，便有铁索横连在山腰上，下边凿有石坎可供游者踏脚。
English: When the steps are exhausted, there are iron cables across the mountainside, and a stone ridge is hewn at the bottom for tourists to step on.

古文：攀索转峰而西，夹壁中有冈介其间，若垂尾，凿磴以登，即隐屏顶也。
现代文：攀扶着铁索朝西面沿着山峰转，两边的岩壁之中有一山脊插在它的中间，仿佛下垂的尾巴，凿有石磴可以供人登高，这就是大隐屏的峰顶。
English: Climbing the iron cable to the west along the mountain peak, there is a ridge in the middle of the rock walls on both sides, like a drooping tail, with a stone coffin for people to climb, this is the peak of the Great Hidden Screen.

古文：有亭有竹，四面悬崖，凭空下眺，真仙凡夐ò远隔。
现代文：峰顶有亭子、翠竹，四周全是悬崖陡壁，凭空朝下望去，真是仙凡两界相隔甚远啊。
English: There are pavilions and green bamboo on the peak, and steep cliffs all around. Looking down from the sky, the two worlds are really far apart.

古文：仍悬梯下，至茶洞。
现代文：仍然自悬架的木梯上下来，到达茶洞。
English: Still descending from the suspended wooden ladder to reach the tea cave.

古文：仰视所登之处，崭然在云汉。
现代文：抬头仰望所到的地方，陡峻得好像在天河里。
English: Looking up, the place you have reached is so steep that it seems to be in the Heavenly River.

古文：隘口北崖即仙掌岩。
现代文：隘口北边的石崖便是仙掌岩。
English: The cliff on the north side of the pass is cactus rock.

古文：岩壁屹立雄展，中有斑痕如人掌，长盈丈者数十行。
现代文：岩壁耸立溪边，雄峭而又阔展，中间有形如人掌的斑痕，长度超过一丈的就有数十行。
English: The rock wall rises along the stream, majestic and expansive, in the middle there are spots like human palms, and there are dozens of lines longer than one story.

古文：循岩北上至岭，落照侵松，山光水曲，并加入览。
现代文：沿着山崖自北面攀爬而上，到达岭上，落日的余晖渲染着松林，山光秀美，溪流曲折，互相映衬，十分耐看！
English: Climbing up along the cliffs from the north, arriving at the ridge, the sunset afterglow renders pine forests, beautiful scenery, meandering streams, contrasting each other, very beautiful!

古文：南转，行夹谷中。
现代文：朝南转去，在狭窄的山谷中行走。
English: Turn south and walk through a narrow valley.

古文：谷尽，忽透出峰头，三面壁立，有亭踞其首，即天游峰矣。
现代文：在山谷尽头，突然看见一座山峰的顶部，三面峭壁陡立，峰顶上建有亭子，那便是 天游峰 。
English: At the end of the valley, I suddenly saw the top of a mountain peak, with steep cliffs on three sides and a pavilion on the peak. It was Tianyou Peak.

古文：是峰处九曲之中，不临溪，而九曲之溪三面环之。
现代文：天游峰处在九曲溪的中央，但并不濒临溪流，而九曲的溪水自三面环绕着它。
English: Tianyou Peak is in the middle of Jiuquan Creek, but it is not on the edge of the stream, and the water of Jiuquan Creek surrounds it from three sides.

古文：东望为大王峰，而一曲至三曲之溪环之。
现代文：向东远望是大王峰，有一曲到三曲的溪水围绕着它。
English: Looking far to the east is the Daowang Peak, with one to three streams surrounding it.

古文：南望为更衣台，南之近者，则大隐屏诸峰也，四曲至六曲之溪环之。
现代文：向南眺望是更衣台，南部最接近的是大隐屏等各座山峰，有四曲到六曲的溪水环绕着它们。
English: The view to the south is a changing table, the closest to the south are the peaks such as the Great Hidden Screen, with four to six streams surrounding them.

古文：西望为三教峰，西之近者，则天壶诸峰也，七曲至九曲之溪环之。
现代文：向西远望是三教峰，西部最靠近的是天壶峰等各座山峰，有七曲到九曲溪流环绕着它们。
English: Looking far to the west is Sanjiao Peak, and the closest peaks in the west are Tianjue Peak and other mountains, with seven to nine streams surrounding them.

古文：惟北向无溪，而山从水帘诸山层叠而来，至此中悬。
现代文：只有北边没有溪水，而水帘峰等各座山岭重重叠叠延伸而来，到此处中悬。
English: Only the north side does not have streams, while the mountains such as the water curtain peak are overlapping and extending, and they are suspended here.

古文：其前之俯而瞰者，即茶洞也。
现代文：先前我所俯身鸟瞰的地方，是茶洞。
English: The place where I looked down for a bird's-eye view earlier was a tea cave.

古文：自茶洞仰眺，但见绝壁干霄，泉从侧间泻下，初不知其上有峰可憩ì休息。
现代文：自茶洞仰身远眺，但见险峻的岩壁直入云霄，泉水自侧面岩石倾斜而下，一开始并不知道它的上边还有山峰能够游览歇息。
English: Looking up from the tea cave, I saw the precipitous rock wall plunge straight into the clouds, and the spring water sloped down from the side of the rock. At first, I didn't know that there were peaks above it that I could visit and rest.

古文：其不临溪而能尽九溪之胜，此峰固应第一也。
现代文：如果不亲自到九曲溪而想尽看九曲溪的绝美胜景，这山峰自然应属绝佳之地了。
English: If you don't want to go to Jiuquan Creek in person and want to see the beauty of Jiuquan Creek, this peak should be the best place.

古文：立台上，望落日半规，远近峰峦，青紫万状。
现代文：站在峰台上，眺望那半圆形的正在西坠的夕阳，远远近近的无数峰峦，显现出万千青紫景象。
English: Standing on the peak, looking out at the semicircular sunset that is falling to the west, the countless peaks far and near reveal a thousand blue and purple scenes.

古文：台后为天游观。
现代文：峰台的后面便是天游观。
English: Behind the peak is the view of the sky.

古文：亟辞去，抵舟已入暝矣。
现代文：我赶忙告辞离去，待返回游船时已经是黄昏了。
English: I hurriedly said goodbye and left. It was already dusk when I returned to the cruise ship.

古文：二十二日登涯，辞仙掌而西。
现代文：二十二日。登上水岸，告别仙掌岩朝西走。
English: On the 22nd, board the waterfront, bid farewell to Cactus Rock and walk westward.

古文：余所循者，乃溪之右涯，其隔溪则左涯也。
现代文：我沿着溪水的右岸走，隔着溪流的是左岸。
English: I walk along the right bank of the stream, across the stream is the left bank.

古文：第七曲右为三仰峰、天壶峰，左为城高岩。
现代文：第七曲的右面是三仰峰、天壶峰，左面是城高岩。
English: On the right side of the seventh curve are San Yang Feng and Tian Jiu Feng, and on the left is Cheng Gao Rock.

古文：三仰之下为小桃源，崩崖堆错，外成石门。
现代文：三仰峰下面是小桃源，崩裂的山崖，错落的岩石堆在外面形成了一道石门。
English: At the bottom of the three peaks is a small peach source, a cracked cliff, and the staggered rock piles have formed a stone gate outside.

古文：由门伛偻而入，有地一区，四山环绕，中有平畦í曲涧，围以苍松翠竹，鸡声人语，俱在翠微中。
现代文：自石门弯着腰进入，有一片地，四周山峦环绕，中间有平整的田畦和弯曲的涧水，苍松翠竹环绕着庭院，鸡鸣、人语之声，在青山中回荡。
English: From the stone gate, bending down to enter, there is a piece of land, surrounded by mountains on all sides, with flat fields and curved streams in the middle, thick pine trees and green bamboo surrounding the courtyard, and the sound of chickens and human speech echoing in the green mountains.

古文：出门而西，即为北廊岩，岩顶即为天壶峰。
现代文：出门朝西走，便是北廊岩，北廊岩的顶部是天壶峰。
English: If you go out and walk west, you will come to the North Corridor Rock. The top of the North Corridor Rock is the Tianju Peak.

古文：其对岸之城高岩矗然独上，四旁峭削如城。
现代文：它对岸的城高岩高高耸立着，直指云霄，四面的陡壁就像刀削似的，宛如城墙矗立。
English: On the opposite bank of the river, the Chenggao Rock stands tall, pointing straight up to the sky. The steep walls on all four sides are like blades, standing like city walls.

古文：岩顶有庵，亦悬梯可登，以隔溪不及也。
现代文：城高岩的顶部有座庵，也是通过悬架木梯攀登上去，由于隔着溪流而不能去。
English: There is a hermitage at the top of the castle rock, which is also reached by a suspended wooden ladder. It is not possible to go there because it is across the stream.

古文：第八曲右为鼓楼岩、鼓子岩，左为大廪石、海蚱石。
现代文：第八曲的右面是鼓楼岩、鼓子岩，左面是大廪石、海蚱石。
English: On the right side of the eighth track are the Drum Tower Rock and Drum Rock, and on the left are the Dazhi Rock and the Haizhi Rock.

古文：余过鼓楼岩之西，折而北行坞中，攀援上峰顶，两石兀立如鼓，鼓子岩也。
现代文：我路过鼓楼岩的西面，踅转向北，行走在山坞中，攀爬到顶峰，有两块岩石矗立着如同一面鼓，这即是 鼓子岩 了。
English: I passed the western side of Drum Tower Rock, turned north, walked in the dock, climbed to the top, and there were two rocks standing like a drum, which is Drum Rock.

古文：岩高亘亦如城，岩下深坳一带如廊，架屋横栏其内，曰鼓子庵。
现代文：鼓子岩的高度和宽度也好似城高岩一样，岩下的深山坳，似一条长廊，修建有房屋，横栏在山坳中，唤作 鼓子庵 。
English: The height and width of Drum Rock are also similar to that of Chenggao Rock. The deep ravine under the rock is like a long corridor, with houses built, and the horizontal bar in the ravine is called Drum Hermitage.

古文：仰望岩上，乱穴中多木板横插。
现代文：抬头仰望，山岩上散乱的洞穴中有很多木板横插着。
English: Looking up, there are many wooden planks in the caves scattered on the mountain rock.

古文：转岩之后，壁间一洞更深敞，曰吴公洞。
现代文：转到山岩的后面，中间有一个洞穴既深又宽，唤作 吴公洞 。
English: Turning to the back of the mountain rock, there is a cave deep and wide in the middle, called Wu Gong Cave.

古文：洞下梯已毁，不能登。
现代文：吴公洞往下的木梯早已毁损，不能行走。
English: The wooden ladders leading down from Wu Gong-dong have long been damaged and cannot be walked on.

古文：望三教峰而趋，缘山越磴，深木蓊苁ěō其上。
现代文：远望三教峰，顺着山路，越过石磴，山野里树木生长得十分繁茂。
English: Looking far and wide at the Sanjiao Peak, along the mountain road, over the stalagmites, the trees grow very luxuriantly in the mountains and fields.

古文：抵峰，有亭缀其旁，可东眺鼓楼、鼓子诸胜。
现代文：到达三教峰，有亭子点缀其旁，朝东可远眺鼓楼岩、鼓子岩各处胜景。
English: Arriving at Sanjiao Peak, there are pavilions dotted around it, and from the east you can see Drum Tower Rock and Drum Rock everywhere.

古文：山头三峰，石骨挺然并矗。
现代文：山顶有三座山峰，石岩骨架高耸，并排直立。
English: There are three peaks at the top of the mountain, and the stone skeleton is towering, standing upright side by side.

古文：从石罅间蹑磴而升，傍崖得一亭。
现代文：自石岩的缝隙踏着石磴往上爬，石岩旁边有一个亭子。
English: There is a pavilion next to the rock, and you can climb up from the crevice of the rock by stepping on the stalagmites.

古文：穿亭入石门，两崖夹峙，壁立参天，中通一线、上下尺余，人行其间，毛骨阴悚。
现代文：穿过亭子进入石门，两崖壁互相对峙，高挺入天，中间只有一线通道，上下也仅有一尺多宽，人在中间行走，顿觉毛骨悚然。
English: Passing through the pavilion and entering the stone gate, the two cliff walls stand opposite each other, high into the sky, with only a one-line passage in the middle, and only one foot wide above and below. When walking in the middle, you suddenly feel creepy.

古文：盖三峰攒立，此其两峰之罅；其侧尚有两罅，无此整削。
现代文：大约三座山峰攒簇而立，这是其中两座山峰间的缝隙；侧边还有两道缝隙，却没有如此整齐壁峭。
English: There are about three peaks clustered together, and this is the gap between two of them; there are also two gaps on the side, but they are not so neatly cliffed.

古文：已下山，转至山后，一峰与猫儿石相对峙，盘亘亦如鼓子，为灵峰之白云洞。
现代文：之后便下山，转到山的后面，看见一座山峰与猫儿石相互对峙，盘旋延伸像鼓子岩一般，这便是灵峰的 白云洞 。
English: After that, he went down the mountain, turned to the back of the mountain, and saw a mountain peak facing each other with cat rock, circling and extending like drum rock, which is the Baiyun Cave of Lingfeng.

古文：至峰头，从石罅中累级而上，两壁夹立，颇似黄山之天门。
现代文：到了峰顶，从石岩的缝隙中拾级而上，两旁峙立的崖壁间隙狭小，和黄山的天门十分相像。
English: When reaching the peak, climb up from the crevice of the stone rock. The gap between the cliff walls standing on both sides is narrow, very similar to the Heavenly Gate of Huangshan Mountain.

古文：级穷，迤逦至岩下，因崖架屋，亦如鼓子。
现代文：走完石级之后，沿着曲曲折折的山径一直通到石岩的下面，依傍着山崖架造房屋，其情形也很像鼓子岩。
English: After walking up the stone steps, we followed the winding mountain path all the way to the bottom of the stone rock, and built a house next to the cliff. The situation was very similar to that of Drum Rock.

古文：登楼南望，九曲上游，一洲中峙，溪自西来，分而不之，至曲复合为一。洲外两山渐开，九曲已尽。
现代文：登上高楼朝南远望，九曲的上游，有片小洲堆在溪水中，溪流自西流来，到此处分流，绕过小洲，到九曲处再汇为一股溪流，小洲的外面有两座山，山势渐渐开阔，到达九曲的尽头。
English: From the high-rise building, looking southward, in the upper reaches of the nine bends, there is a piece of shoal piled up in the water of the stream. The stream comes from the west, where it branches off, bypasses the shoal, and then merges into a stream at the nine bends. There are two mountains outside the shoal, and the mountains gradually open up, reaching the end of the nine bends.

古文：是岩在九曲尽处，重岩回叠，地甚幽爽。
现代文：此岩就在九曲的尽头，岩壁层叠回还，甚是清幽雅静。
English: This rock is right at the end of the nine bends, the rock walls are cascading back and forth, it is very quiet and elegant.

古文：岩北尽处，更有一岩尤奇：上下皆绝壁，壁间横坳仅一线，须伏身蛇行，盘壁而度，乃可入。
现代文：岩北的尽头，有一个岩石特别奇异：上下都是十分陡峭的石壁，石壁间横凹下去的地方只有一线宽，必须伏在地上像蛇一样爬行，绕着石壁翻过去，才能够进入。
English: At the northern end of the rock, there is a particularly strange rock: the upper and lower parts are very steep stone walls, and the place between the stone walls is only a line wide. You have to crawl like a snake on the ground and climb around the stone wall to get in.

古文：余即从壁坳行；已而渐低，壁渐危，则就而伛偻；愈低愈狭，则膝行蛇伏，至坳转处，上下仅悬七寸，阔止尺五。
现代文：我就顺着壁凹之处爬行，不大一会儿凹处逐渐低矮，石壁也逐渐险峻，便顺着地势弯下腰弓着背。岩壁凹处越往低越狭小，我便像蛇一般伏身贴地用膝盖爬着前进，到达壁坳转弯的地方，上下悬隔只有七寸，宽度也只有一尺五。
English: I crawled along the recesses of the wall, and soon the recesses became lower and lower, and the stone wall became steeper and steeper, and I bent down along the ground, hunched over. The recesses of the rock wall became narrower and narrower, and I crawled forward on my knees, like a snake, until I reached the corner of the ledge, where there was only seven inches between the top and bottom, and the width was only one and a half feet.

古文：坳外壁深万仞。余匍匐以进，胸背相摩，盘旋久之，得度其险。
现代文：壁凹外面岩壁有万仞深，我匍匐而前，胸部和背部与岩石相摩擦，如此盘旋了很长一段时间，才得以穿过那段险要之地。
English: The cliff outside the hollow was very deep, and we crawled forward, rubbing our chests and backs against the rock, and hovered like that for a long time before we were able to get through that critical section.

古文：岩果轩敞层叠，有斧凿置于中，欲开道而未就也。
现代文：石岩果然高大宽阔而且重重叠叠，其中有斧凿的痕迹，想要开凿道路却又没有完成。
English: The rock is indeed tall, wide and overlapping. There are traces of an axe, but the road is not finished.

古文：半晌，返前岩。
现代文：过了半晌，返回前岩。
English: After a while, return to the previous rock.

古文：更至后岩，方构新室，亦幽敞可爱。
现代文：又重新回到后岩，刚刚建好的新房舍，很是幽静宽敞，使人喜爱。
English: Returning to Houyan again, the newly built new building is very quiet and spacious, which makes people love it.

古文：出向九曲溪，则狮子岩在焉。
现代文：走出九曲溪便是狮子岩了。
English: Out of Jiuquan Creek is Lion Rock.

古文：循溪而返，隔溪观八曲之人面石、七曲之城高岩，种种神飞。
现代文：沿着溪流返回，隔着溪水欣赏八曲的人面石，七曲的城高岩，种种美景使人心仪神往。
English: Returning along the stream, across the stream water to enjoy the eight-curve face stone, the seven-curve city high rock, all kinds of beautiful scenery make people's hearts yearn.

古文：复泊舟，由云窝入茶洞，穹窿窈窕意即长曲深远，再至矣，再不能去！
现代文：再一次停下游船，自云窝进入茶洞，深远而又幽长曲折，第二次到达此地，使人再也不忍离开！
English: Once again, the cruise ship stopped, from the cloud nest into the tea cave, far-reaching and long-winded twists and turns, the second time arriving here, people can no longer bear to leave!

古文：已由云窝左转，入伏羲洞，洞颇阴森。
现代文：随后便从云窝向左转，进入伏羲洞，洞中十分阴森。
English: He then turned left from Yunwo and entered Fuxi Cave, which was very gloomy.

古文：左出大隐屏之阳，即紫阳书院，谒è拜见先生庙像。
现代文：自左边出来，便到了大隐屏峰的南面，即紫阳书院，进去拜谒朱熹先生的塑像。
English: Coming out from the left side, I reached the south side of the Great Hidden Peak, that is, the Ziyang Academy, and went inside to worship the statue of Mr. Zhu Xi.

古文：顺流鼓棹，两岩苍翠纷飞，翻即 反 恨舟行之速。
现代文：小船顺水疾驰，掠过两岸苍翠的山崖，反过来我又埋怨船行走得太迅疾了。
English: The boat sped along the water, skimming the verdant cliffs on both sides, and in turn I complained that the boat was going too fast.

古文：已过天柱峰、更衣台，泊舟四曲之南涯。
现代文：之后路过天柱峰、更衣台，在四曲的南岸水边停泊好游船。
English: After that, we passed Tianzhu Peak and the changing table, and moored the cruise ship on the south shore of the four bends.

古文：自御茶园登岸，欲绕出金鸡岩之上，迷荆丛棘，不得路。
现代文：自御茶园上岸，欲绕路出去，登上金鸡岩顶峰，但杂草丛生、荆棘遍野，令人迷惘找不到道路。
English: I went ashore from the tea garden and wanted to take a detour to go out and climb to the top of the Rooster Rock, but there were weeds and thorns everywhere, so I was confused and couldn't find my way.

古文：乃从岩后大道东行，冀有旁路可登大藏、小藏诸峰，复不得。
现代文：便从金鸡岩后边的大路向东行走，希望有岔路能够攀登大藏、小藏诸座山峰。
English: He walked eastwards from the main road behind the Kingfisher Rock, hoping that there would be a fork in the road that would allow him to climb the peaks of the Greater Tibet and the Lesser Tibet.

古文：透出溪旁，已在玉女峰下。
现代文：但也没能寻觅到路。穿过山岩来到溪边时，已经置身在玉女峰脚下了。
English: But he couldn't find his way. When he came to the stream through the rocks, he was already at the foot of the Jade Lady Peak.

古文：欲从此寻一线天，徬徨无可问，而舟泊金鸡洞下，迥不相闻。
现代文：想从此处寻觅一线天，彷徨四顾却没有人可以打听，而游船又停泊在金鸡洞的下边，两者相离很近但却互不相闻。
English: Wanting to search for a ray of heaven from here, wandering around but no one can ask, while the cruise ship is anchored below the Golden Rooster Cave, the two are very close but do not know each other.

古文：乃沿溪觅路，迤逦大藏、小藏之麓。
现代文：于是顺着溪岸探寻道路，在大藏峰、小藏峰山麓迤逦而行。
English: So I followed the riverbank to find the road and walked along the foot of the Dazangfeng and the Xiaozangfeng.

古文：一带峭壁高骞，砂碛崩壅，土人多植茶其上。
现代文：这一带陡壁高耸，沙石崩塌壅塞，当地的居民在上边种植了很多的茶树。
English: In this area, steep walls tower high, sand and stone collapse and block the way, and local residents have planted many tea trees on the top.

古文：从茗柯中行，下瞰深溪，上仰危崖，所谓 仙学堂 、 藏仙窟 ，俱不暇辨。
现代文：在茶树的枝叶中前进，自岩壁上俯身探望深溪，朝上仰望陡峻的高崖，所谓的 仙学堂 、 藏仙窟 等景观，都无暇分辨和欣赏了。
English: Moving forward among the branches and leaves of tea trees, leaning down from the rock wall to visit the deep stream, looking up at the steep cliff, the so-called Immortal Academy, the Caves of Immortals and other landscapes, there is no time to distinguish and appreciate.

古文：已至架壑舟，仰见虚舟宛然，较前溪中所见更悉更清楚细致。
现代文：随后到了有架壑舟的地方，抬头观望半悬在空中的架壑舟，十分逼真，比乘游船时看到的更加清楚细致。
English: Then I came to a place where there was a gondola, and I looked up to see the gondola half-suspended in the air. It was very realistic, and much more detailed and detailed than what I saw when I was on the cruise ship.

古文：大藏之西，其路渐穷。
现代文：大藏峰西面的路，逐渐到了尽头。
English: The road on the west side of the Great Tibet Peak is gradually coming to an end.

古文：向荆棘中扪壁面上，还瞰大藏西岩，亦架一舟，但两崖对峙，不能至其地也。
现代文：在荆棘杂草中攀附着岩壁向上登。回头俯视大藏峰西面的岩壁，也有一架壑舟，但是因为两座岩壁互相对峙，不能到达那里。
English: Clinging to the rock wall in the thorny weeds, the stork climbs up. Looking back down at the rock wall on the west side of the Great Tibet Peak, there is also a rowing boat, but because the two rock walls are facing each other, it cannot reach there.

古文：忽一舟自二曲逆流而至，急下山招之。
现代文：突然看见一只游船自二曲逆流而上。
English: Suddenly, I saw a cruise ship sailing upstream from the second bend.

古文：其人以舟来受，亦游客初至者，约余返更衣台，同览一线天、虎啸岩诸胜。
现代文：赶忙下山招呼船开过来，驾船的人将船划靠在岸，迎接我上船，他原来也是一位刚来此地的游客，邀请我返回更衣台，一起去游赏一线天、虎啸岩等各处名胜。
English: He hurried down the mountain to call the boat to come. The boatman rowed the boat ashore to welcome me on board. He was originally a tourist who had just arrived here, and invited me to return to the changing table and go to enjoy the first line of the sky, tiger howling rock and other places of interest.

古文：过余泊舟处，并棹顺流而下，欲上幔亭，问大王峰。
现代文：途中经过我乘坐的游船停泊的地方，于是两只船一起顺流而下，计划攀登幔亭峰，寻觅大王峰。
English: On the way, I passed the place where the cruise ship I was on was moored, so the two ships sailed down the river together, planning to climb Shuting Peak to find the Great King Peak.

古文：抵一曲之水光石，约舟待溪口，余复登涯，少入，至止止庵。
现代文：到达一曲的水光石，一同约好各自的游船在溪口等待。我便再次上岸，不久到达止止庵。
English: After reaching a bend in the stream, we both agreed to wait for our respective boats at the mouth of the stream. I went ashore again and soon arrived at Tetsujian.

古文：望庵后有路可上，遂趋之，得一岩，僧诵经其中，乃禅岩也。
现代文：发现庵后有路可上，便加快脚步，到达一石岩，其旁有僧人正在念诵佛经，这便是 禅岩 了。
English: After discovering that there was a path leading to the hermitage, they sped up their pace and arrived at a stone rock, next to which a monk was chanting Buddhist scriptures. This was Zen Rock.

古文：登峰之路，尚在止止庵西。
现代文：攀登大王峰的路，在止止庵的西边。
English: The path to climb the Da Wang Feng is on the west side of the Zhouzhuan.

古文：仍下庵前西转，登山二里许，抵峰下，从乱箐ì树木中寻登仙石。
现代文：于是回到止止庵的前面往西转，登山走了二里多路，到达大王峰下，穿过树丛寻找登仙石。
English: So he went back to the front of Shizhuan and turned west. He walked more than two miles up the mountain, reached the foot of the Great King Peak, and went through the bushes to find the climbing cactus.

古文：石旁峰突起，作仰企状，鹤模石在峰壁罅间，霜瓴朱顶，裂纹如绘。
现代文：登仙石旁山峰突起，呈现出仰首而盼的样子。鹤模石在山峰岩壁的缝隙中，白色翎羽像霜一般，头颈是红色的，而裂纹如同绘上去的图画。
English: The peaks of the mountains rise up next to the rock of Dengxian, giving the appearance of looking up. In the gap of the rock wall of the mountain peak, the white feathers of the cranes are like frost, the head and neck are red, and the cracks are like painted pictures.

古文：旁路穷，有梯悬绝壁间，蹑而上，摇摇欲堕。
现代文：旁侧已无路可走，有一木梯悬空架在陡峻的崖壁间，蹬着梯子往上爬，摇摇晃晃的仿佛要掉下来一样。
English: On the other side, there is no way to go, there is a wooden ladder suspended between the steep cliff walls, climbing up the ladder, wobbly as if it were about to fall.

古文：梯穷得一岩，则张仙遗蜕尸体也。
现代文：爬完梯子后登上一座山岩，便是张仙遗体的存放处。
English: After climbing the ladder, they ascended a mountain rock, which is where Zhang Xian's remains are stored.

古文：岩在峰半，觅徐仙岩，皆石壁不可通；下梯寻别道，又不可得；蹑石则峭壁无阶，投莽则深密莫辨。
现代文：山岩在山峰的半山腰处，寻找徐仙岩，四围都是石壁而不能通过；走下梯子重新寻觅其他道路，没能找到；想攀登石岩，但全部是峭壁，没有石级可登，走荆棘之路，草莽又深又密不能辨别方向。
English: Mountain rock in the mid-mountain of the peak, looking for Xuxian Rock, surrounded by stone walls and unable to pass; walking down the ladder to re-search for other roads, unable to find; want to climb stone rock, but all are cliffs, there are no stone steps to climb, take the road of thorns, the grass is rough and deep and dense can not distinguish the direction.

古文：佣夫在前，得断磴，大呼得路。
现代文：挑夫走在前面，找到了中断的石磴，大喊说找到了路。
English: The porter walked ahead, found the broken stone pillar, and shouted that he had found the way.

古文：余裂衣不顾，趋就之，复不能前。
现代文：我不顾衣服被荆棘乱石划破，迅速跑过去，靠近他，但仍不能往前走。
English: Despite my clothes being torn by the thorns and rocks, I quickly ran over and approached him, but I still couldn't go any further.

古文：日已西薄，遂以手悬棘，乱坠而下，得道已在万年宫右。
现代文：太阳已经西坠，于是便用手抓着荆棘胡乱往下走，待找到道路时已经在万年宫的右边了。
English: The sun had already set in the west, so he clutched the thorns with his hands and walked down, and by the time he found the road, he was already on the right side of the Palace of Ten Thousand Years.

古文：趋入宫，宫甚森敞。
现代文：快步走进万年宫，里面森严而且宽敞。
English: I walked briskly into the Palace of Ten Thousand Years, which was spacious and sparsely wooded.

古文：羽士迎言， 大王峰顶久不能到，惟张岩梯在。峰顶六梯及徐岩梯俱已朽坏。徐仙蜕已移入会真庙矣。 
现代文：道士迎着我说： 大王峰顶很久以前就不能爬上去了，只有上张仙岩的梯子还保存着，上顶峰的六级梯子和上徐仙岩的梯子全部朽破不堪，徐仙的遗体早已经移到会真庙了。 
English: The Taoist greeted me and said, "Long ago, it was impossible to climb to the top of the Great King Peak. Only the ladder of the Upper Zhangxian Rock is still preserved. The six-step ladder of the Upper Peak and the ladder of the Upper Xuxian Rock are all dilapidated. The remains of Xu Xian have already been moved to the Huizhen Temple.

古文：出宫右转，过会真庙。
现代文：走出万年宫朝右转，经过会真庙。
English: After exiting the Palace of Ten Thousand Years, turn right and walk past the Hoejin Temple.

古文：庙前大枫扶疏繁茂，荫数亩，围数十抱。
现代文：庙前的大枫树枝叶茂盛，荫庇着好几亩土地，树围也有数十抱粗。
English: The branches of the large maple tree in front of the temple are full of leaves, shading several acres of land, and there are dozens of camphor trees around the tree.

古文：别羽士，归舟。
现代文：向道士告辞后，便回到游船。
English: After bidding farewell to the priest, he returned to the cruise ship.

古文：二十三日登陆，觅换骨岩、水帘洞诸胜。
现代文：二十三日。登上陆地，寻找换骨岩、大帘洞各处胜景。
English: On the 23rd, we went ashore to look for the Bone-Changing Rocks and the Great Curtain Cave.

古文：命移舟十里，候于赤石街，余乃入会真观，谒武彝君及徐仙遗蜕。
现代文：吩咐游船前行十里，在赤石街等候。我自己进入会真观，拜谒武夷君神像以及徐仙的遗体。
English: I told the cruise ship to go ten miles ahead and wait at Chakushi Street. I entered the hall of truth myself and worshipped the statue of Wuyijun and the remains of Xu Xian.

古文：出庙，循幔亭东麓北行二里，见幔亭峰后三峰骈文，异而问之，三姑峰也。
现代文：走出会真庙，沿着幔亭峰东麓，朝北走了二里路，发现幔亭峰后面有三座山峰并排耸立，很是奇异，便询问别人，原来这是 三姑峰 。
English: After leaving the True Temple, I walked two miles northward along the eastern foot of the Apgujeong Peak. I found that there were three mountains standing side by side behind the Apgujeong Peak, which was very strange, so I asked someone else. It turned out to be the Sangu Peak.

古文：换骨岩即在其旁，望之趋。
现代文：换骨岩就在三姑峰的旁侧，我望着换骨岩马上走过去。
English: The Bone-Changing Rock is right next to the Sangu Peak. I looked at the Bone-Changing Rock and immediately walked over.

古文：登山里许，飞流汩然下泻。
现代文：上山有一里多路，就可以看见飞泻而下的流水汩汩往下奔涌。
English: There is more than a mile of road up the mountain, and you can see the streamers flying down and rushing down.

古文：俯瞰其下，亦有危壁，泉从壁半突出，疏竹掩映，殊有佳致。
现代文：俯身下看，看到高耸的岩壁，泉水自岩壁的半腰处流出，附近有稀疏的竹林相映衬，特别有情致。
English: Looking down, you can see the towering rock wall. The spring water flows out from the lower half of the rock wall, and there is a sparse bamboo forest nearby. It is particularly sentimental.

古文：然业已上登，不及返顾，遂从三姑又上半里，抵换骨岩，岩即幔亭峰后崖也。
现代文：然而已经登上三姑峰，来不及返回去看了，于是自三姑峰又上行半里，到达换骨岩，换骨岩就是幔亭峰的后崖。
English: However, I had already climbed Sangu Peak and didn't have time to go back to see the cows, so I walked another half mile up from Sangu Peak to reach the bone-changing rock. The bone-changing rock is the back cliff of Shuting Peak.

古文：岩前有庵。
现代文：换骨岩的前边有一座庵。
English: There is a hermitage in front of the metatarsal.

古文：从岩后悬梯两层，更登一岩。
现代文：自换骨岩后边架设的两层悬梯登上另一处悬岩。
English: A two-storey suspended ladder set up at the back of the self-rotating bone rock climbs up another suspended rock.

古文：岩不甚深，而环绕山巅如叠嶂。
现代文：此悬岩不是十分深邃，围绕着山巅有如叠嶂。
English: This hanging rock is not very deep and surrounds the summit like a mound.

古文：土人新以木板循岩为室，曲直高下，随岩宛转。
现代文：当地的居民用木板循着岩壁修造房舍，曲直高下，沿着岩壁蜿蜒而行。
English: Local residents use wooden planks to build houses along the rock wall, curving up and down, and winding along the rock wall.

古文：循岩隙攀跻而上，几至幔亭之顶，以路塞而止。
现代文：顺着岩壁的缝隙攀援而上，快到达幔亭峰峰顶的时候，道路被阻塞，被迫停止前行。
English: Climbing up along the crevice of the rock wall, the road was blocked and they were forced to stop when they were about to reach the peak of Shuting Peak.

古文：返至三姑峰麓，绕出其后，复从旧路下，至前所瞰突泉处。
现代文：返回三姑峰脚下，自峰后绕出来，再照原路下山，便到达以前俯视突泉的地方。
English: Return to the foot of Sangu Peak, go around the back of the peak, and then follow the original path down the mountain until you reach the place where you used to overlook the spring.

古文：从此越岭，即水帘洞路；从此而下，即突泉壁也。
现代文：自此处翻过山岭，便是通向水帘洞的路了；自此处下行，便是突泉壁了。
English: From here, climbing over the mountains is the way to the water curtain cave; from here, descending, it is the spring wall.

古文：余前从上瞰，未尽其妙，至是复造其下。
现代文：我以前自上鸟瞰，没能看尽它的妙处，如今再次来到便要好好欣赏了。
English: I used to take a bird's-eye view from above, but I couldn't see all of its beauty. Now that I'm here again, I'm going to enjoy it.

古文：仰望突泉又在半壁之上，旁引水为碓，有梯架之，凿壁为沟以引泉。
现代文：抬头仰视奔突的泉流，又在半壁之上了，附近有农人引泉水冲动石碓，有梯子架设在岩壁上，凿开岩壁变成水沟来引导泉水。
English: I looked up at the rushing stream of the spring, and it was halfway up the wall. Nearby, there were farmers guiding the spring water to impel the stalagmites, and there were ladders set up on the rock wall, chiseling the rock wall into a trench to guide the spring water.

古文：仰望突泉又在半壁之上，旁引水为碓，有梯架之，凿壁为沟以引泉。余循梯攀壁，至突泉下。
现代文：我便沿着梯子爬上岩壁，来到突泉的下边。其坳处只有二丈宽，上下都是高兀耸立的岩壁；泉水自上边的岩壁落入坳中，待充盈后再从坳中向下坠落。
English: I climbed up the rock wall along the ladder and came to the lower edge of the fountain. Its rim is only two feet wide, and the rock walls are high above and below; the spring water falls from the upper rock wall into the rim, and after being filled, it falls down from the rim.

古文：其坳仅二丈，上下俱危壁，泉从上壁堕坳中，复从坳中溢而下堕。
现代文：坳的上下四周，没有一处不是水，而中部有一块大石头突兀出来，人可以坐在上面。
English: Around the top and bottom of the raft, there is no place that is not water, and in the middle there is a big rock protruding, you can sit on it.

古文：坳之上下四旁，无处非水，而中有一石突起可坐。坐久之，下壁循竹间路，越岭三重，从山腰约行七里，乃下坞。
现代文：我在石头上坐了很长一段时间，才爬下岩壁沿着竹林中的小径前行，翻过三重山岭，又从山腰处大概行走了将近七里的路途，才到达山坞中。
English: I sat on the stone for a long time before I climbed down the cliff and followed the path through the bamboo forest, over the three mountains, and from the mountainside I walked about seven miles to get to the dock.

古文：穿石门而上，半里，即水帘洞。
现代文：这时我们穿过石门向上走，走了半里路，便到了水帘洞。
English: At this time, we walked up through the stone gate, walked half a mile, and arrived at the water curtain cave.

古文：危崖千仞，上突下嵌，泉从岩顶堕下。
现代文：在这里所看到的是千仞高崖直耸云天，上部的崖峰向外突出而下面的则向内凹嵌进去，泉水从山崖的顶部下落。
English: What we see here is the Qianlong high cliff soaring into the sky, the upper cliff peak protruding outward while the lower one is recessed inward, and the spring water falling from the top of the cliff.

古文：岩既雄扩，泉亦高散，千条万缕，悬空倾泻，亦大观也！
现代文：山岩既雄壮又开阔，泉水也是从非常高险的地方散落下来，形成万千条细小水线，如丝如缕，从半空中悬挂着向下倾泻，真可以称得上是大大的奇观呀！
English: The mountain rock is both majestic and open, and the spring water is also scattered from very high-risk places, forming thousands of tiny water lines, like threads, hanging from the middle of the air and pouring down. It can really be called a great wonder!

古文：其岩高矗上突，故岩下构室数重，而飞泉犹落槛外。
现代文：那座山岩高高地直矗而起，且上部向外突兀而出，所以山岩下面修造的房屋虽有重檐，那飞流直下的泉水仍落在房舍的栏杆外面。
English: The mountain rock rises straight up high and the upper part protrudes outward, so although the houses built under the mountain rock have heavy beams, the flying spring water still falls outside the railing of the house.

古文：先在途闻睹阁寨颇奇，道流指余仍旧路，越山可至。
现代文：先前在途中曾听说睹阁寨怪异险要，道士劝告我仍旧走原路，那样翻过山岭便能到达所要去的地方。
English: Previously, on the way, I had heard that Jiangezhai was a strange and dangerous place, and the Taoist advised me to still follow the original path, so that I could reach the place I wanted to go by crossing the mountains.

古文：余出石门，爱坞溪之胜，误走赤石街道。
现代文：于是我听从道土的劝告出了石门。我非常欣赏山坞溪水的美丽绝伦，因为这样使我误走上了去赤石街的路。
English: So I listened to the advice of the local people and went out of the stone gate. I very much appreciate the beauty of the mountain dock stream, because this made me mistakenly walk on the road to Akashi Street.

古文：途人指从此度小桥而南，亦可往。
现代文：这时有行人指点我说，从这个地方走过一座小桥向南走，也可以到达。
English: At this time, a pedestrian pointed out to me that it was also possible to get there from this place by crossing a small bridge to the south.

古文：从之，登山入一隘，两山夹之，内有岩有室，题额乃 杜辖岩 ，土人讹误传为睹阁耳。
现代文：我听后，爬上山进入一道山隘中，山隘的两旁有两座山互相夹峙，里面有山岩、房屋，上面题额写着 杜辖岩 ，当地的居民讹称它为 睹阁寨 。
English: After listening to me, I climbed up the mountain and entered a mountain pass. On both sides of the mountain pass, there were two mountains sandwiched between each other. There were rocks and houses inside, with inscriptions on them saying Duji Rock. Local residents nicknamed it Zhiguo Village.

古文：再入，又得一岩，有曲槛悬楼，望赤石街甚近。
现代文：再往前走，又看见一座山岩，有曲槛和悬起的房子，看看赤石街离得非常近。
English: Further ahead, there is another rock formation with a curve and a suspended house. Take a look at Akashi Street, which is very close.

古文：遂从旧道，三里，渡一溪，又一里，则赤石街大溪也。
现代文：于是我从原路走了三里，渡过一条溪流，再朝前走了一里，到了赤石街的大溪。
English: So I walked three miles from the original road, crossed a stream, and then walked one mile forward to the creek in Akashi Street.

古文：下舟，挂帆二十里，返崇安。
现代文：上了游船吩咐船家扬帆，走了二十里水路，返回崇安。
English: After getting on the cruise ship, he ordered the boatman to set sail, walked twenty miles along the waterway, and returned to Chong'an.

