古文：○仪象极度黄赤道中星土圭
现代文：不说话而能守信用，是天的道理。
English: To be able to keep one's word without speaking is the law of heaven.

古文：夫不言而信，天之道也。
现代文：天对人君有告诫的道理，只是用天象表示出来罢了。
English: There is a reason why the heavens admonish man, but it is only expressed in the form of a celestial elephant.

古文：天于人君有告戒之道焉，示之以象而已。故自上古以来，天文有世掌之官，唐虞羲、和，夏昆吾，商巫咸，周史佚、甘德、石申之流。
现代文：所以从上古以来，天文有世代执掌的官，就是唐尧虞舜时代的义、和，夏代的昆吾，商代的巫咸，周代的史佚、甘德、石申等天官。
English: Therefore, since ancient times, there have been generational officials in charge of astronomy, namely, Yi, He in the Tang Dynasty, Kunwu in the Xia Dynasty, Wuxian in the Shang Dynasty, and Shi, Gande and Shishen in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：居是官者，专察天象之常变，而述天心告戒之意，进言于其君，以致交修之儆焉。
现代文：担任这个官职的人，专门考察天象的常态和变化，因而叙述天心告诫的意思，向他们的君主进言，以此传达臣下须帮助君主改正过失的警告。
English: The holders of this office, who specialize in the study of the constancy and changes of the celestial bodies, thus describe the meaning of the heavenly heart's admonition and advise their monarchs, thus conveying the warning that their subjects must help the monarchs correct their mistakes.

古文：《易》曰： 天垂象，见吉凶，圣人则之。 又曰： 观乎天文，以察时变。 是也。
现代文：《周易》说 天垂象，见吉凶，圣人则之 ，又说 观乎天文，以察时变 ，就是这个意思。
English: "Zhou Yi" said that the sky is like a pendulum, see the good and bad, the sage is the same, and also said that watching the sky, to observe the time change, this is the meaning.

古文：然考《尧典》，中星不过正人时以兴民事。
现代文：可是查考《尧典》，中星运行不会错误地指示人间季节，以此兴起农事。
English: However, according to the "Analects of Confucius," the movement of the Chinese zodiac would not erroneously indicate the seasons of the human world, thus giving rise to agriculture.

古文：夏仲康之世，《胤征》之篇： 乃季秋月朔，辰弗集于房。 
现代文：夏朝仲康时代，《胤征》记载： 乃季秋月朔，辰弗集于房。 
English: In the era of the summer dynasty of Zhongkang, "Tan Zheng" records: It was the autumn of the autumn and the new moon, and Chen Fu gathered in the room.

古文：然后日食之变昉见于《书》。
现代文：此后在《尚书》中开始出现关于日食的变异。
English: After that, variations on solar eclipses began to appear in the Shangshu.

古文：观其数羲、和以 俶扰天纪 、 昏迷天象 之罪而讨之，则知先王克谨天戒，所以责成于司天之官者，岂轻任哉！
现代文：观看其中屡次以 仿扰天纪 、 昏迷天象 的罪名来声讨羲、和，就知道先王能谨慎地对待天的警戒，他们要求主管天文的官员完成任务的职责，难道能轻率地任命吗！
English: Watching them repeatedly denounce the Emperor and Empress on the charges of "disturbing celestial discipline" and "stupefying celestial beings," we know that the former king can cautiously treat the vigilance of heaven. They require the officials in charge of astronomy to complete the duties of the task. Can they be appointed carelessly?

古文：箕子《洪范》论休咎之征曰： 王省惟岁，卿士惟月，师尹惟日。 
现代文：篡子《洪范》论述吉凶的征兆说： 王省惟岁，卿士惟月，师尹惟日。 
English: The usurper "Hong Fan" discusses the signs of auspicious and inauspicious, saying: Wang Shou was only a year old, Jing Shi was only a month old, and Shi Yin was only a day old.

古文： 庶民惟星，星有好风，星有好雨。 
现代文： 庶民惟星，星有好风，星有好雨。 
English: The common people are the stars, the stars have good wind, the stars have good rain.

古文：《礼记》言体信达顺之效，则以天降膏露先之。
现代文：《礼记》说到体现诚信以达到顺利的效验，就用上天降下膏露作为先兆。
English: "Li Ji" said that when it came to embodying integrity to achieve a smooth effect, it used the ointment from heaven as a harbinger.

古文：至于周《诗》，屡言天变，所谓 旻天疾威，敷于下土 ，又所谓 雨无其极，伤我稼穑 ， 正月繁霜，我心忧伤 ，以及 彼月而微，此日而微 ， 烨烨震电，不宁不令 。
现代文：至于周代的《诗经》，屡次说到天变，所谓 曼天疾威，敷于下土 ，又所谓 雨无其极，伤我稼穑 ， 正月繁霜，我心忧伤 ，以及 彼月而微，此日而微 ， 烽烽震电，不宁不令 。
English: As for Zhou Dynasty's "Book of Poems," it repeatedly talks about the changes in the heavens, the so-called "Man Tian Zhiwei," which is laid on the ground, and the so-called "Rain Without End, Hurt My Earnings," "Frost in the First Month, My Heart Is Sad," as well as "Different Month, Different Day," "Electric Shock, Restless."

古文：孔子删《诗》而存之，以示戒也。
现代文：孔子删《诗》而保留这些诗，是用来表示警戒的。
English: The reason why Confucius deleted "Poems" and kept these poems is to express caution.

古文：他日约鲁史而作《春秋》，则日食、星变屡书而不为烦。
现代文：后来编纂鲁国的史书而作《春秋》，就屡屡写到日食、星变而不以为烦琐。
English: Later, when compiling the history book of Lu and writing "Spring and Autumn," he repeatedly wrote about solar eclipses and star changes, but did not think it was troublesome.

古文：圣人以天道戒谨后世之旨，昭然可睹矣。
现代文：圣人用天道警戒后代谨慎的意旨，可以很明白地看出来了。
English: The sage's prudent intention to warn future generations with the heavenly way can be clearly seen.

古文：于是司马迁《史记》而下，历代皆志天文。
现代文：于是自司马迁《史记》以下，历代史书都记载天文。
English: As a result, from the time of Sima Qian's "Histories" onward, all historical books have recorded astronomy.

古文：第以羲、和既远，官乏世掌，赖世以有专门之学焉。
现代文：但因为羲、和时代已经遥远，天官缺乏世袭的执掌，就依赖世间因而有了专门的天文学术。
English: However, because the Heian and Kamakura eras are long gone, and heavenly officials lack hereditary control, they rely on the world and thus have a special astronomy.

古文：然其说三家：曰周髀，曰宣夜，曰浑天。
现代文：然而他们的学说有三家：称作周髀、宣夜、浑天。
English: However, there are three schools of thought among them: they are called Zhou, Xuan, and Hun.

古文：宣夜先绝，周髀多差，浑天之学遭秦而灭，洛下闳、耿寿昌晚出，始物色得之。
现代文：宣夜之学最先断绝，周髀之学又多差错，浑天之学遭遇秦朝而灭亡，洛下闳、耿寿昌是后来出现的，纔访求得到它们。
English: Xuanwu's learning was the first to be cut off, Zhou Qi's learning was wrong, and Hun Tian's learning met with the Qin Dynasty and perished. Luo Jiaqi and Geng Shuchang appeared later, and Zhou Qi visited them to get them.

古文：故自魏、晋以至隋、唐，精天文之学者荦荦名世，岂世难得其人欤！
现代文：所以从魏、晋以至于隋、唐，精通天文的学者卓然著名于世，难道不是因为这样的人才很难得吗！
English: Therefore, from the Wei and Jin dynasties to the Sui and Tang dynasties, scholars who are proficient in astronomy are famous in the world. Isn't it because such talents are hard to get!

古文：宋之初兴，近臣如楚昭辅，文臣如窦仪，号知天文。
现代文：宋朝初兴，近臣像楚昭辅，文臣像窦仪，号称知晓天文。
English: In the early days of the Song Dynasty, close vassals such as Chu Zhaoyu and literary vassals such as Dou Yi were famous for their knowledge of astronomy.

古文：太宗之世，召天下伎术有能明天文者，试隶司天台；匿不以闻者幻罪论死。
现代文：太宗时代，召集天下有能明了天文之术的人才，经过考试隶属司天台；如果隐匿不报告的，论罪处死。
English: In the era of Emperor Taizong, talented people who could understand the art of astronomy were summoned from all over the world, and after passing the examination, they were subordinated to the Tiantai Division; if they concealed and did not report, they would be sentenced to death.

古文：既而张思训、韩显符辈以推步进。
现代文：此后，张思训、韩显符等人因为推算天文历法而进仕。
English: After that, Zhang Sihun, Han Xianfu and others entered the service because of the astronomical calendar.

古文：其后学士大夫如沈括之议，苏颂之作，亦皆底于幻眇。
现代文：其后学士大夫像沈括的奏议，苏颂的制作，也都造诣精深。
English: After that, the bachelor doctors like Shen Kuan's recitation and Su Song's production were also accomplished and profound.

古文：靖康之变，测验之器尽归金人。
现代文：靖康之变，观测察验的仪器都归了金人。
English: With the change of the Qing dynasty, the instruments for observation and inspection were all taken over by the Jin people.

古文：高宗南渡，至绍兴十三年，始因秘书丞严抑之请，命太史局重创浑仪。
现代文：高宗南渡，到绍兴十三年，纔由秘书丞严抑赛请，命令太史局重新创制浑仪。
English: Gao Zong Nandu, thirteen years after arriving in Shaoxing, ordered the Department of Space History to re-create the instrument at the request of Secretary Zheng Yanjie.

古文：自是厥后，窥测占候盖不废焉尔。
现代文：从此以后，观测天象占卜吉凶大概就不废止了。
English: Since then, the observation of celestial objects for fortune-telling has probably not been abolished.

古文：宁宗庆元四年九月，太史言月食于昼，草泽上书言食于夜。
现代文：宁宗庆元四年九月，太史说月食在白天出现，在野的人上书说在夜里出现。
English: In September of the 4th year of Ningzong Qingyuan, Tai Shi said that lunar eclipses appeared during the day, and people in the field wrote that they appeared at night.

古文：及验视，如草泽言。
现代文：等到验视的时候，果然像在野的人所说的。
English: When it came to the inspection, it was just as the people in the field had said.

古文：乃更造《统天历》，命秘书正字冯履参定。
现代文：于是再造《统天历》，命令秘书正字冯履参互校定。
English: Therefore, he reconstructed the "Unification Calendar" and ordered the secretary, Zheng Zi Feng Lu, to participate in the mutual calibration.

古文：以是推之，民间天文之学盖有精于太史者，则太宗召试之法亦岂徒哉！
现代文：从这件事情来推断，民间的天文之学大概有比太史精通的，那么太宗召集考试的办法难道也是徒劳吗！
English: From this incident, it can be inferred that the folk astronomy is probably more proficient than Taizong's history, so is Taizong's method of convening an examination also futile?

古文：今东都旧史所书天文祯祥、日月薄蚀、五纬凌犯、彗孛飞流、晕珥虹霓、精祲云气等事，其言时日灾祥之应，分野休咎之别，视南渡后史有详略焉。
现代文：如今束都旧有的史书所写的天文吉兆、日月逼近蚀食、五纬逾越相犯、彗星飞流、月晕雨珥中贯穿虹霓、阴阳之气冲荡着云气等事，其中叙述季节日期、灾异祥瑞的应验，星宿分野吉祥凶兆的分别，比照南渡以后的史书有详有略。
English: Nowadays, there are a lot of old historical books about astronomical auspicious signs, the sun and the moon approaching the eclipse, the five latitudes crossing each other, comets flying, the moon and rain passing through the rainbow, the yin and yang of the clouds, etc. They describe the seasonal dates, the fulfillment of disasters and auspiciousness, and the differences between auspicious and evil signs in the star field, which are detailed in the history books after the southern passage.

古文：盖东都之日，海内为一人，君遇变修德，无或他诿。
现代文：大概束都的时候，天下为一人所有，皇帝遇到天变就修养自己的德行，没有其它可以推诿的人。
English: Probably when the capital was bundled, the world was owned by one person. When the emperor encountered a natural change, he cultivated his own virtues. There was no one else to blame.

古文：南渡土宇分裂，太史所上，必谨星野之书。且君臣恐惧修省之余，故于天文休咎之应有不容不缕述而申言之者，是亦时势使然，未可以言星翁、日官之术有精粗敬怠之不同也。
现代文：南渡以后疆域分裂，太史所奏的事情在星宿分野的写法上必定谨慎，况且在君臣惊恐惧怕、修身反省之余，所以对于天文吉凶的应验，有不容许不条举其事而反复申明的原因，这也是时代形势使它如此，不能说是星翁、日官的技术有精细粗劣、恭敬怠慢的不同。
English: After Nandu, the territory was divided, and the events recorded by Tai Shi must be cautious in the way of writing in the star field. Moreover, after the monarchs and ministers were shocked, afraid, and self-cultivated, there is a reason for repeatedly affirming the fulfillment of astronomical fortunes and misfortunes. This is also the reason why the situation of the times made it so. It cannot be said that the skills of the stars and the Japanese officials are different from each other in terms of fineness, coarseness, and deference.

古文：今合累朝史臣所录为一志，而取欧阳修《新唐书》、《五代史记》为法，凡征验之说有涉于傅会，咸削而不书，归于传信而已矣。
现代文：现在汇合各朝史臣的记录而作一天文志，取法于欧阳修《新唐书》、《五代史记》，凡征兆效验的说法有涉于穿凿附会的，都删掉而不写，归结到传记信实罢了。
English: Now, the records of the historians and scholars of all dynasties have been brought together to make a one-day literary history, and the method is taken from Ouyang Xiu's "New Tang Dynasty Book" and "Five Dynasties History." Any reference to the effectiveness of omens that is related to the cutting and chiseling association has been deleted and not written. It boils down to the authenticity of the biography.

古文：仪象历象以授四时，玑衡以齐七政，二者本相因而成。
现代文：推算天体运行迹象来告知世人一年四季，观察璇玑玉衡的天象仪器来全面了解日月及五星，这两方面本来是相互因依而完成的。
English: Calculating the movement signs of celestial bodies to inform the world about the four seasons of the year, and observing the celestial instruments of Zou Yuheng to fully understand the sun, moon and five stars, these two aspects were originally completed in accordance with each other.

古文：故玑衡之设，史谓起于帝喾，或谓作于宓牺。
现代文：所以璇玑玉衡的设计，史书认为起于帝誉，有的认为是宓牺创造的。
English: Therefore, the design of Yu Yu Heng, the history books believe that it originated in the imperial reputation, and some believe that it was created by Yu Yu.

古文：又云璿玑玉衡乃羲、和旧器，非舜创为也。
现代文：又说璇玑玉衡乃是羲、和旧有的器械，不是舜创造制作的。
English: He also said that the jade scales were made from jade and old instruments, not created by jade.

古文：汉马融有云： 上天之体不可得知，测天之事见于经者，惟有玑衡一事。
现代文：汉朝马融曾说遇： 上天的本体不可能认识，测算天体的事在经书上见到的，只有璇玑玉衡这一件事。
English: Ma Rong of the Han Dynasty once said: It is impossible to know the essence of heaven, and the only thing that can be seen in the scriptures about measuring celestial bodies is the matter of weighing the stars.

古文：玑衡者，即今之浑仪也。 
现代文：璇玑玉衡就是现在的浑仪。 
English: Gong Yuheng is the present-day Hunyi.

古文：吴王蕃之论亦云： 浑仪之制，置天梁、地平以定天体，为四游仪以缀赤道者，此谓玑也；置望筒横箫于游仪中，以窥七曜之行，而知其躔离之次者，此谓衡也。 
现代文：三国昊王蕃的论述也说： 浑仪的机制，设置天梁、地平来固定天体，制造四游仪来连结赤道的，这叫做璇玑；在游仪中安置望筒横箫，用来窥视日月及五星的运行，因而知道它们运行轨迹的度数的，这叫做玉衡。 
English: The discussion of Hao Wangtao of the Three Kingdoms also said: The mechanism of the compass, setting up the sky beam and the horizon to fix the celestial body, making the four-way instrument to connect the equator, this is called the compass; placing the telescope cross-beam in the travel instrument, used to spy on the movement of the sun and the moon and the five stars, and thus know the degree of their trajectory, this is called the yu balance.

古文：若六合仪、三辰仪与四游仪并列为三重者，唐李淳风所作。
现代文：像六合仪、三辰仪与四游仪并列为三层的，是唐朝李淳风创造的。
English: Like the six-in-one, three-in-one and four-in-one, it was created by Li Junfeng in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：而黄道仪者，一行所增也。
现代文：而黄道仪是一行增设的。
English: The zodiac is an additional line.

古文：如张衡祖洛下闳、耿寿昌之法，别为浑象，置诸密室，以漏水转之，以合璿玑所加星度，则浑象本别为一器。
现代文：像张衡宗奉洛下闳、耿寿昌的方法，另外制作一种浑象，把它安置在密室里，用滴漏水转动它，使它符合璇玑历刻的星度，那么浑象本来是另外一种仪器。
English: Like the method of Zhang Hengzong's Bongluo and Geng Shuchang, another method is to make a mud elephant, place it in a secret room, and rotate it with dripping water to make it conform to the star rating of the lunar calendar, then the mud elephant is originally another kind of instrument.

古文：唐李淳风、梁令瓒祖之，始与浑仪并用。
现代文：唐朝李淳风、梁令瓒宗奉这一种，开始与浑仪一起用。
English: The Tang Dynasty Li Junfeng and Liang Linyi Zongzong worshipped this one, and began to use it together with the Hun instrument.

古文：太平兴国四年正月，巴中人张思训创作以献。
现代文：太平兴国四年正月，巴中人张思训把创造发明贡献出来。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Taiping Xingguo, Zhang Sixun, a person from Bachong, contributed his creation and invention.

古文：太宗召工造于禁中，逾年而成，诏置于文明殿东鼓楼下。
现代文：太宗召集工匠在宫中制造，遇了一年纔完成，诏令安置在文明殿东面鼓楼下。
English: Emperor Taizong called for craftsmen to make it in the palace. It took a year to complete and was placed under the Drum Tower on the east side of the Great Hall of the People.

古文：其制：起楼高丈余，机隐于内，规天矩地。
现代文：它的机制是：筑起一丈多高的楼，机器隐藏在楼里，天圆地方。
English: Its mechanism is: build a tall building, the machine is hidden in the building, the place is round.

古文：下设地轮、地足；又为横轮、侧轮、斜轮、定身关、中关、小关、天柱；七直神，左摇铃，右扣钟，中击鼓，以定刻数，每一昼夜周而复始。又以木为十二神，各直一时，至其时则自执辰牌，循环而出，随刻数以定昼夜短长。上有天顶、天牙、天关、天指、天抱、天束、天条，布三百六十五度，为日、月、五星、紫微宫、列宿、斗建、黄赤道，以日行度定寒暑进退。
现代文：下部设置地轮、地脚；又制造横轮、侧轮、斜轮、定身关、中关、小关、天柱；七个当值的神偶，左面的摇铃，右面的敲钟，中间的打鼓，用来确定时刻的计数，每一天一夜；走完一圈又重头开始；又用木料制作十二个神偶，每个神偶当值一个时辰，轮到哪个时辰，其神偶就拿着自己的时辰牌，循序转圈出来，随着时刻的计数来确定白天黑夜的长短；上部有天顶、天牙、天关、天指、天抱、天束、天条，分布三百六十五度，制作日、月、五星、紫微宫、列宿、斗建、黄赤道，用太阳运行的度数来确定寒冬暑夏的前进后退。
English: In the lower part, the ground wheel and the ground base are set up; the horizontal wheel, the side wheel, the inclined wheel, the anchor point, the middle point, the small point, and the pillar of heaven are also made; the seven deities of the day, the rattles on the left, the bells on the right, and the drums in the middle, are used to determine the count of the time, every day and night; after completing one circle, it starts again; and twelve deities are made of wood. Each deity is worth one hour. At which time, the deities hold their own time cards and circle out in order to determine the length of the day and

古文：开元遗法，运转以水，至冬中凝冻迟涩，遂为疏略，寒暑无准。
现代文：唐朝开元年问遣留的方法，用水使它运转，到了冬天，仪器里的水凝结冰冻，运转迟缓滞涩，就变得粗疏忽略，寒暑不准确。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, they asked about the method of heating, and used water to operate it. In winter, the water in the instrument froze and froze, the operation was slow and sluggish, and it became coarse and neglected, and the cold and heat were not accurate.

古文：今以水银代之，则无差失。
现代文：现在用水银代替水，就没有差错失误。
English: Now, with mercury replacing water, there are no mistakes.

古文：冬至之日，日在黄道表，去北极最远，为小寒，昼短夜长。
现代文：冬至这天，太阳在黄道的外圈，距离北极星最远，就是小寒，白天短，黑夜长。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the sun is in the outer circle of the ecliptic, farthest from the North Star, which is a little cold, the day is short, and the night is long.

古文：夏至之日，日在赤道里，去北极最近，为小暑，昼长夜短。
现代文：夏至这天，太阳在赤道的裹圈，距离北极星最近，就是小暑，白天长，黑夜短。
English: On the day of the summer solstice, the sun is in the equatorial circle, closest to the North Star, which is a little hot, the day is long, and the night is short.

古文：春秋二分，日在两交，春和秋凉，昼夜平分。
现代文：春分秋分逭两天，太阳在赤道黄道的两个交点，春分气候温和，秋分气候寒凉，白天黑夜时间等同。
English: The vernal equinox and the autumnal equinox are two days apart, the sun is at the two intersections of the equatorial ecliptic, the vernal equinox is mild, the autumnal equinox is cold, and the time of day and night are equal.

古文：寒暑进退，皆由于此。
现代文：天气寒冬暑夏的前进和后退，都从这里开始。
English: The advance and retreat of weather, cold winter, hot summer, all start from here.

古文：并著日月象，皆取仰视。
现代文：仪器里日月天象全都显著，都采取仰视的角度。
English: The sun, moon and stars are all prominent in the instrument, and they all take the angle of looking up.

古文：按旧法，日月昼夜行度皆人所运行。
现代文：按照旧法，日月在白天黑夜的运行度数都由人操作运转。
English: According to the old law, the operation of the sun and the moon during the day and night are operated by human operation.

古文：新制成于自然，尤为精妙。
现代文：新的机制是在自然运转中完成的，尤其精妙。
English: The new mechanism is done in a natural way and is particularly ingenious.

古文：以思训为司天浑仪丞。
现代文：任命张思训为司天浑仪丞。
English: Zhang Sixun was appointed as the Secretary of Tianhun Rong.

古文：铜候仪，司天冬官正韩显符所造，其要本淳风及僧一行之遗法。
现代文：铜候仪，是司天冬官正韩显符制造的，它的要领根据李淳风及僧一行的留传方法。
English: The bronze weather vane was made by the sultan's official, Han Xianfu, and its essentials were based on the methods passed down by Li Junfeng and the monks.

古文：显符自著经十卷，上之书府。
现代文：韩显符自己著作经书十卷献给书府。
English: Han Xianfu dedicated ten volumes of his own scriptures to Shufu.

古文：铜仪之制有九：
现代文：铜仪的机制有九个部分：
English: The mechanism of the bronze instrument has nine parts:

古文：一曰双规，皆径六尺一寸三分，围一丈八尺三寸九分，广四寸五分，上刻周天三百六十五度，南北并立，置水臬以为准，得出地三十五度，乃北极出地之度也。
现代文：一叫双规，都是直径六尺一寸三分，圆周一丈八尺三寸九分，宽四寸五分，上面刻着周天三百六十五度，南北并立，安置水臬作为衡准，必须高出地面三十五度，乃是北极星高出地平的度数。
English: One is called the double standard. They are all six feet, one inch and three minutes in diameter, with a circumference of eight feet, three inches and nine minutes and a width of four inches and five minutes. They are engraved with 365 degrees around the circumference and 365 degrees in width. The north and south stand side by side. As a standard of measurement, the otter must be placed 35 degrees above the ground, which is the degree of the North Star above the horizon.

古文：以釭贯之，四面皆七十二度，属紫微宫，星凡三十七坐，一百七十有五星，四时常见，谓之上规。
现代文：用铁圈套住，四面都是七十二度，属于紫微宫，共有星座三十七座，一百七十五颗星，四季常见，这叫上规。
English: Covered with an iron ring, all four sides are seventy-two degrees, belonging to the purple micro-palace, with a total of thirty-seven constellations, one hundred and seventy-five stars, four seasons are common, this is called the upper standard.

古文：中一百一十度，四面二百二十度，属黄赤道内外官，星二百四十六坐，一千二百八十九星，近日而隐，远而见，谓之中规。
现代文：中心一百一十度，四面二百二十度，属于黄道赤道的内官外官，星座二百四十六座，一千二百八十九颗星，接近太阳时隐没，远离太阳时出现，这叫中规。
English: The center is one hundred and ten degrees, and the four sides are two hundred and twenty degrees. It belongs to the inner and outer parts of the zodiacal equator. There are two hundred and forty-six constellations and one thousand two hundred and eighty-nine stars. It disappears when it is close to the sun and appears when it is far away from the sun. This is called the meridian.

古文：置臬之下，绕南极七十二度，除老人星外，四时常隐，谓之下规。
现代文：安置在水臬的下面，围绕南极星七十二度，除老人星之外，四季经常隐没，这叫下规。
English: Placed under the Water Margin, around the South Pole star seventy-two degrees, except for the old man's star, the four seasons are often hidden, which is called the lower regulation.

古文：二曰游规，径五尺二寸，围一丈五尺六寸，广一寸二分，厚四分，上亦刻周天，以釭贯于双规巅轴之上，令得左右运转。
现代文：二叫游规，直径五尺二寸，圆周一丈五尺六寸，宽一寸二分，厚四分，上面也刻着周天，用铁圈把它套在双规顶轴的上端，使它能够左右运转。
English: The second is called the travel gauge, with a diameter of five feet and two inches, a circumference of five feet and six inches, a width of one inch and two minutes, and a thickness of four minutes. The circumference is also engraved on it, and it is put on the upper end of the top shaft of the double gauge with an iron ring, so that it can move left and right.

古文：凡置管测验之法，众星远近，随天周遍。
现代文：凡是安置管子测验的方法，众多星星，远远近近，都随着天周转一围。
English: Whatever the method of placing the test tube, many stars, far and near, revolve around it as the heavens revolve.

古文：三曰直规，二，各长四尺八寸，阔一寸二分，厚四分，于两极之间用夹窥管，中置关轴，令其游规运转。
现代文：三叫直规，两个，各长四尺八寸，宽一寸二分，厚四分，在两极之间用来夹住窥管，当中安置关轴，使它的游规运转。
English: Three are called straight, and two, each four feet and eight inches long, one inch and two minutes wide, and four minutes thick, are used to clamp the speculum between the two poles, and place the pivot in the middle to make its travel regulation work.

古文：四曰窥管，一，长四尺八寸，广一寸二分，关轴在直规中。
现代文：四叫窥管，一个，长四尺八寸，宽一寸二分，关轴在直规当中。
English: Four are called peepers, one is four feet eight inches long, one inch two wide, and the pivot is in the middle of the straight.

古文：五曰平准轮，在水臬之上，径六尺一寸三分，围一丈八尺三寸九分，上刻八卦、十干、十二辰、二十四气、七十二候于其中，定四维日辰，正昼夜百刻。
现代文：五叫平准轮，在水臬的上面，直径六尺一寸三分，圆周一丈八尺三寸九分，上面刻着八卦、十干、十二辰、二十四气、七十二候，确定东北、东南、西北、西南四个方位的日月星辰，订正白天黑夜一百个时刻。
English: The fifth is called the leveling wheel. On top of the rill, it has a diameter of six feet, one inch and three minutes, and a circumference of eight feet, three inches and nine minutes. It is engraved with eight trigrams, ten stems, twelve hours, twenty-four airs, and seventy-two horizons. It determines the four orientations of the sun, moon, and stars in the northeast, southeast, northwest, and southwest, and corrects one hundred moments of day and night.

古文：六曰黄道，南北各去赤道二十四度，东西交于卯酉，以为日行盈缩、月行九道之限。
现代文：六叫黄道，南北各距离赤道二十四度，东西交会在卯酉，把它作为太阳运行进退、月亮运行九道的限制。
English: Six is called the ecliptic, the distance between north and south is 24 degrees from the equator, and the intersection of east and west is at dusk, which is the limit of the sun's movement and the moon's movement.

古文：凡冬至日行南极，去北极一百一十五度，故景长而寒；夏至日在赤道北二十四度，去北极六十七度，故景短而暑。
现代文：凡是冬至太阳运行到南极，距离北极一百一十五度，所以影子长而天气寒冷；夏至太阳在赤道北二十四度，距离北极六十七度，所以影子短而天气暑热。
English: At the winter solstice, the sun moves to the South Pole, 115 degrees from the North Pole, so the shadow is long and the weather is cold; at the summer solstice, the sun is 24 degrees north of the equator and 67 degrees from the North Pole, so the shadow is short and the weather is hot.

古文：月有九道之行，岁匝十二辰，正交出入黄道，远不过六度。
现代文：月亮有九条轨道运行，一年环绕十二辰，正规地交会出入黄道，偏远不超过六度。
English: The moon has nine orbits, orbits the 12 hours of the year, regularly enters and exits the ecliptic, and is no more than six degrees away.

古文：五星顺、留、伏、逆行度之常数也。
现代文：这是五星顺行、滞留、隐匿、逆行的常数。
English: This is the constant of the five stars moving forward, staying, hiding, and moving backward.

古文：七曰赤道，与黄道等，带天之纮以隔黄道，去两极各九十一度强。
现代文：七叫赤道，与黄道对等，像围着天的弦带用来隔离黄道，距离两极各九十一度强。
English: Seven is called the equator, which is equal to the ecliptic, and is used to isolate the ecliptic like a string around the sky. The distance between the two poles is more than ninety-one degrees.

古文：黄道之交也，按经东交角宿五度少，西交奎宿一十四度强。
现代文：与黄道的交角，按照经度柬面与角宿相交五度弱，西面与奎宿相交十四度强。
English: The angle of intersection with the ecliptic, according to the longitude of the Cambrian, intersects with the angle of intersection with the angle of intersection with the angle of intersection with the angle of intersection with the ecliptic, according to the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude of the longitude.

古文：日出于赤道外，远不过二十四度。冬至之日行斗宿，日入于赤道内，亦不过二十四度，夏至之日行井宿；及昼夜分，炎凉等。
现代文：太阳运行出赤道之外，偏远不超过二十四度，冬至这天太阳运行到斗宿；太阳偏入到赤道之内，也不超过二十四度，夏至这天太阳运行到井宿；直到昼夜等分，热凉等同。
English: The sun moves out of the equator, far away no more than twenty-four degrees. On the day of the winter solstice, the sun moves to Dooshuku; the sun moves into the equator, no more than twenty-four degrees. On the day of the summer solstice, the sun moves to Ijuku; until the equinox, hot and cold are equal.

古文：日、月、五星阴阳进退盈缩之常数也。
现代文：这是太阳、月亮、五星阴阳进遐长短的常数。
English: This is the constant of the sun, moon, five stars, yin and yang, and the length of the eclipse.

古文：八曰龙柱，四，各高五尺五寸，并于平准轮下。
现代文：八叫龙柱，四个，各高五尺五寸，立在平准轮的下面。
English: Eight are called dragon pillars, four, each five feet five inches high, stand below the leveling wheel.

古文：九曰水臬，十字为之，其水平满，北辰正。
现代文：九叫水臬，按照十字形制成，它的水又平又满，北辰端正。
English: Nine is called the Water Margin. It is made in the shape of a cross. Its water is flat and full.

古文：以置四隅，各长七尺五寸，高三寸半，深一寸。
现代文：把它放在四角，各长七尺五寸，高三寸半，深一寸。
English: Place it at the four corners, each seven feet five inches long, three and a half inches high, and one inch deep.

古文：四隅水平则天地准。
现代文：四角的水面平正，那么天地的位置就准确。
English: If the water surface at the four corners is flat, then the position of heaven and earth is accurate.

古文：唐贞观初，李淳风于浚仪县古岳台测北极出地高三十四度八分，差阳城四分。
现代文：唐贞观初，李淳风在浚仪县古岳台测量北极超出地高三十四度八分，跟阳城相差四分。
English: At the beginning of Tang Zhengu, Li Chunfeng measured the elevation of the North Pole at 34 degrees and 8 minutes in Gu Yue Tai, Junyi County, a difference of 4 minutes from Yangcheng.

古文：今测定北极高三十五度以为常准。
现代文：现在测定北极高三十五度作为正常的准则。
English: Thirty-five degrees is now the norm for measuring the North Pole.

古文：熙宁七年七月，沈括上《浑仪》、《浮漏》、《景表》三议。
现代文：墨宁七年七月，沈括呈上《浑仪》、《浮漏》、《景表》三个奏议。
English: In July of the seventh year of Mengning, Shen Quan submitted three proposals for "Hunyi," "Floating Leak" and "View Table."

古文：《浑仪议》曰：
现代文：《浑仪议》说：
English: "Hunyi Zhengyi" said:

古文：五星之行有疾舒，日月之交有见匿，求其次舍经劘之会，其法一寓于日。
现代文：五星的运行有快有慢，日月的交会有出现有隐匿，寻求它们的止息地点、经历摩擦的交会，它的方法完全寄托在太阳。
English: The movement of the five stars is fast and slow, the rendezvous of the sun and the moon appear and disappear, seek their resting place, experience the friction of the rendezvous, and its method is entirely based on the sun.

古文：冬至之日，日之端南者也。
现代文：冬至这天，足太阳向南运行的起点。
English: The winter solstice marks the beginning of the sun's southward movement.

古文：日行周天而复集于表锐，凡三百六十有五日四分日之几一，而谓之岁。
现代文：太阳运行天的一周而又停留在圭表标竿的尖端，共三百六十五天又接近四分之一天，因而叫它岁。
English: The sun moves in a circle of days and remains at the tip of the cusp of the cusp, a total of three hundred and sixty-five days and close to a quarter of a day, thus calling it a year.

古文：周天之体，日别之谓之度。
现代文：天一周的整体，用每一天来加以区别，称之为度。
English: The whole of a day and a week, distinguished by each day, is called a degree.

古文：度之离，其数有二：日行则舒则疾，会而均，别之曰赤道之度；日行自南而北，升降四十有八度而迤，别之曰黄道之度。
现代文：度的分离，它的计算方法有二：太阳每天的运行有慢有快，总合而平均计算，区别它叫赤道的度；太阳运行从南向北，升降四十八度而延伸，区别它叫黄道的度。
English: There are two methods of calculating the degree of separation: the sun's daily movement is slow and fast, and the total is calculated as an average, the difference is called the degree of the equator; the sun's movement extends from south to north, rising and falling by 48 degrees, the difference is called the degree of the ecliptic.

古文：度不可见，其可见者星也。
现代文：度不能看见，可以看见的是星。
English: If you can't see the degrees, what you can see are stars.

古文：日、月、五星之所由，有星焉。
现代文：太阳、月亮、五星所经由的地方，有星在那里。
English: Where the sun, moon, and five stars pass, there are stars.

古文：当度之画者凡二十有八，而谓之舍。
现代文：正对着每个度的区划的星共有二十八颗，因而叫它们舍。
English: There are twenty-eight stars directly opposite each degree, and they are called mansions.

古文：舍所以絜度，度所以生数也。
现代文：舍是用来衡量度的，度是用来滋生计算的。
English: The house is used to measure the degree, and the degree is used to breed and calculate.

古文：度在天者也，为之玑衡，则度在器。
现代文：度是在天上的，按照天制造的璇玑玉衡，那么度是在仪器中的。
English: The measure is in the heavens, and the balance according to the heavenly balance, and the measure is in the balance.

古文：度在器，则日月五星可抟乎器中，而天无所豫也。
现代文：度在仪器中，那么日月五星就可以在仪器中搏击，因而天是役什么可干预的。
English: If the sun, the moon and the five stars are in the instrument, then the sun, the moon and the five stars can fight in the instrument, so the heavens can intervene.

古文：天无所豫，则在天者不为难知也。
现代文：天没有什么可干预，那么在天上的东西也就不是很难知晓的。
English: There is nothing in the heavens to interfere, so it is not difficult to know what is in the heavens.

古文：自汉以前，为历者必有玑衡以自验迹。
现代文：从汉以前，制作历法的人一定有璇玑玉衡来自己检验轨迹。
English: Since before the Han Dynasty, people who made calendars must have had a compass to check the trajectory themselves.

古文：其后虽有玑衡，而不为历作。为历者亦不复以器自考，气朔星纬，皆莫能知其必当之数。
现代文：此后虽然有璇玑王衡，却不是因为历法而制作；制作历法的人也不再用仪器来考核自己的历法，云气吉凶、每月初一、星象和谶纬，都没有人知晓它们必定相当的计算根据。
English: After that, although there was a calendar, it was not made because of the calendar; people who made calendars no longer used instruments to evaluate their own calendars. No one knows whether the clouds are auspicious or inauspicious, the first day of the month, the stars and the meridian, and no one knows that they must be a considerable basis for calculation.

古文：至唐僧一行改《大衍历法》，始复用浑仪参实，故其术所得，比诸家为多。
现代文：到唐僧一行修改《大衍历法》，纔开始又用浑仪参碱证实，所以它的技术上的所得，比较诸家为多。
English: When a group of Tang monks revised the "Great Yin Calendar," they began to use the compass to confirm it, so its technical income is more than that of other families.

古文：臣尝历考古今仪象之法，《虞书》所谓璿玑玉衡，唯郑康成粗记其法，至洛下闳制圆仪，贾逵又加黄道，其详皆不存于书。
现代文：臣曾经普遍考察了古今仪象的方法，《虞书》上所说的璇玑玉衡，只有郑康成粗略地记下它的方法；到洛下闳制作圆仪，贾逵又加上黄道，它的详细情况都没有保存在书籍中。
English: The minister had generally examined the methods of ancient and modern instruments, and only Zheng Kangcheng roughly recorded the methods of the Yu Yu Heng mentioned in the Book of the Goat; he went to Luo to make a round instrument, and Jia Jun added the zodiac, and its details were not preserved in books.

古文：其后张衡为铜仪于密室中，以水转之，盖所谓浑象，非古之玑衡也。
现代文：此后张衡在密室中制作铜仪，用水使它转动，大概所说的浑象，不是古代的璇玑玉衡。
English: After that, Zhang Heng made a bronze instrument in a secret room and used water to turn it. The so-called "Hun Zhao" is not the ancient Yu Yu Heng.

古文：吴孙氏时王蕃、陆绩皆尝为仪及象，其说以谓旧以二分为一度，而患星辰稠穊，张衡改用四分，而复椎重难运。
现代文：三国昊孙氏的时候王蕃、陆绩都曾经制作过仪和象，他们的观点认为过去以二分为一度，而担心星辰过于繁密；张衡改用四分，而又像椎子太重而难于运转。
English: At the time of the Three Kingdoms and the Haosun Dynasty, both Wang Qian and Lu Qi had made instruments and elephants. Their view was that in the past, two was equal to one, but they were worried that the stars were too crowded; Zhang Heng changed to four, but it was too heavy and difficult to operate like a spindle.

古文：故蕃以三分为度，周丈有九寸五分寸之三，而具黄赤道焉。
现代文：所以王蕃以三分为一度，一周为一丈零九又五分之三寸，因而具备了黄道赤道。
English: Therefore, Wang Qian divided by three into one, and one week was one point nine and three-fifths of an inch, thus having the zodiacal equator.

古文：绩之说以天形如鸟卵小橢，而黄、赤道短长相害，不能应法。
现代文：陆绩的观点认为天的形状是像乌蛋一样的小椭圆形，而黄道赤道的长短互相妨害，不能适应他的方法。
English: Lu Jian's view that the shape of the sky is a small oval like a blackbird's egg, and that the length and width of the ecliptic and equator interfere with each other, does not fit with his method.

古文：至刘曜时，南阳孔定制铜仪，有双规，规正距子午以象天；有横规，判仪之中以象地；有时规，斜络天腹以候赤道；南北植干，以法二极；其中乃为游规、窥管。
现代文：到刘曜的时候，南阳孔定制作铜仪，有两个圆规，圆规正中与子午线成等距离以象征天；有横规，在仪器中划分两半来象征地；有时规，斜着缠绕天腹以占验赤道；南北立干，用作二极标准；它的里面就制成游规、窥管。
English: By the time of Liu You, Nanyang Kongding made a bronze instrument with two compasses. The compass is equidistant from the meridian to symbolize the sky; there is a horizontal compass, which divides the instrument into two halves to symbolize the sky; a time compass, which is obliquely wound around the belly of the sky to measure the equator; a north-south vertical stem, which is used as a bipolar standard; its inside is made into a gyroscope and a telescope.

古文：刘曜太史令晁崇、斛兰皆尝为铁仪，其规有六，四常定，以象地，一象赤道，其二象二极，乃是定所谓双规者也。
现代文：刘曜的太史令晁崇、斛兰都曾经制作过铁仪，它的圆规有六个，四个是正常固定的，一个象征地，一个象征赤道，其它两个象征二极，就是孔定所说的双规。
English: Liu Xiao's great-grandsons, Gong Chong and Gong Lan, both once made iron instruments. It has six compasses, four of which are normally fixed, one symbolically, one symbolizing the equator, and the other two symbolizing the two poles, which is the double standard mentioned by Kong Ding.

古文：其制与定法大同，唯南北柱曲抱双规，下有纵衡水平，以银错星度，小变旧法。
现代文：它的形制和孑定的方法大体相同，只是南北两根柱子围着双规，下面有一纵一横两个水平，用银镶嵌星度，稍微改变了过去的方法。
English: Its shape and anchoring method are roughly the same, except that the north and south pillars surround the double standard, below there is a vertical and horizontal two levels, with silver inlaid asterisks, slightly changing the past method.

古文：而皆不言有黄道，疑其失传也。
现代文：然而都不说有黄道，怀疑这是失传。
English: However, they do not say that there is a zodiac, suspecting that this is a lost tradition.

古文：唐李淳风为圆仪三重：其外曰六合，有天经双规、金浑纬规、金常规。次曰三辰，转于六合之内，圆径八尺，有璿玑规、月游规，所谓璿玑者，黄、赤道属焉。又次曰四游，南北为天枢，中为游筒可以升降游转，别为月道，傍列二百四十九交以携月游。
现代文：唐李淳风制作圆仪有三层：它的外层叫六合，有夭经双规、金浑纬规、金常规；其次一层叫三辰，在六合之内运转，圆的直径八尺，有璇玑规、月游规，是所说的璇玑，黄道、赤道都属于这层；又次一层叫四游，南北是天枢，中间是游筒，可以升降游离转动，另外开辟月亮的轨道，旁边排列着二百四十九个交会点以携带月游动。
English: Tang Li Chunfeng made the round instrument with three layers: its outer layer is called the six-axis, with the precession double standard, the golden mean latitude standard, and the golden mean longitude standard; the next layer is called the three-axis, which operates within the six-axis, the diameter of the circle is eight feet, with the ecliptic standard and the lunar eclipse standard, which is the so-called ecliptic, the ecliptic, and the equator all belong to this layer; the next layer is called the four-axis, the north and south are the celestial center, and the middle is the gyroscope, which can be freely rotated

古文：一行以为难用，而其法亦亡。
现代文：僧一行认为这很难使用，因而它的方法也就消亡了。
English: The monks found it difficult to use, and the method died out.

古文：其后率府兵曹梁令瓒更以木为游仪，因淳风之法而稍附新意，诏与一行杂校得失，改铸铜仪，古今称其详确。
现代文：此后率府兵曹梁令瓒又改用木材制作游仪，依据李淳风的方法而稍加新意，皇帝诏令他和一行共同考校得失，改为铸造铜仪，古今都称赞它的详细精确。
English: After that, Liang Lingyao, who led the prefectural soldiers, switched to using wood to make the tour instrument, according to the method of Li Chunfeng and added a little novelty. The emperor ordered him and his party to jointly test the school and change it to a cast bronze instrument, which has been praised for its detailed accuracy from ancient times to the present.

古文：至道中，初铸浑天仪于司天监，多因斛兰、晁崇之法。
现代文：至道年间，初次在司大监铸造浑天仪，很多是依据斛兰、晁崇的方法。
English: During the years leading up to the establishment of the Dao, Hun Tian Yi was cast for the first time under the supervision of the Dao, and many of them were made according to the methods of Hun Lan and Hun Chong.

古文：皇祐中，改铸铜仪于天文院，姑用令瓒、一行之论，而去取交有失得。
现代文：皇佑年问，在天文院改为铸造铜仪，姑且用梁令瓒、一行的理论，而在采纳舍弃之间互有得失。
English: Emperor Yunyin asked, in the Astronomical Institute to change to casting bronze ornaments, let alone using the theory of beam and line, and there are mutual gains and losses between adoption and abandonment.

古文：臣今辑古今之说以求数象，有不合者十有三事：
现代文：臣现在汇辑古今的说法来探求数象，有不符合的事情十三件：
English: The minister is now compiling ancient and modern sayings to explore the phenomenon, and there are thirteen things that do not conform:

古文：其一，旧说以谓今中国于地为东南，当令西北望极星，置天极不当中北。
现代文：其一，过去的说法认为现在我国的中原是处在大地的东南区域，应当朝着西北方向观望极星，安置天极不应对着正北中心的方位。
English: On the one hand, in the past, it was said that the Central Plains of our country are now located in the southeastern region of the earth, and the pole star should be observed in the northwest direction. The placement of the celestial pole should not be in the direction of the true north center.

古文：又曰：天常倾西北，极星不得居中。
现代文：又说： 天通常向西北倾斜，极星不能处在中央。 
English: He also said: The sky usually leans to the northwest, and the pole star cannot be in the center.

古文：臣谓以中国规观之，天常北倚可也，谓极星偏西则不然。
现代文：臣认为用我国中原的规观测，天常常向北偏倚是可以认同的，说极星偏西却不是这样。
English: In his opinion, it can be agreed that the sky is often inclined to the north when observed from the Central Plains of China, but it is not the case that the pole star is inclined to the west.

古文：所谓东西南北者，何从而得之？
现代文：所说的东西南北，从哪里得来的呢？
English: Where did the north-south thing come from?

古文：岂不以日之所出者为东，日之所入者为西乎？
现代文：难道不是以太阳升起的方位为束，太阳落入的方位为西吗？
English: Isn't it true that the sun rises in the east and sets in the west?

古文：臣观古之候天者，自安南都护府至浚仪太岳台才六千里，而北极之差凡十五度，稍北不已，庸讵知极星之不直人上也？
现代文：臣观察古代占验天的人，从安南都护府到浚仪大岳台纔六千里，而北极的偏差总共十五度，稍为偏北就不止，根据什么知道极星不是垂直位于人的上空呢？
English: The minister observed that the ancient diviners of the heavens traveled six thousand miles from Annam to Dungyi, while the deviation of the North Pole was a total of fifteen degrees, not more than a little northward. On what basis did he know that the pole star was not perpendicularly located above the person?

古文：臣尝读黄帝《素书》： 立于午而面子，立于子而面午，至于自卯而望酉，自酉而望卯，皆曰北面。
现代文：臣曾经读黄帝《素书》： 立于午而面子，立于子而面午，至于自卯而望酉，自酉而望卯，皆曰北面。
English: A minister once read the Yellow Emperor's "Primary Text": "Stand at noon and face the north, stand at noon and face the north, stand at noon and face the north, stand at noon and face the north, stand at noon and face the north, stand at noon and face the north, stand at noon and face the north."

古文：立于卯而负酉，立于酉而负卯，至于自午而望南，自子而望北，则皆曰南面。 
现代文：立于卯而负酉，立于酉而负卯，至于自午而望南，自子而望北，则皆曰南面。 
English: If you stand on the embankment, you are facing south, if you stand on the pier, you are facing north, and if you stand on the pier, you are facing south.

古文：臣始不谕其理，逮今思之，乃常以天中为北也。
现代文：臣开始不明白这道理，到现在思考它，就是通常认为天的中央是北。
English: The minister did not understand this principle at first, but now that he thinks about it, he usually thinks that the center of the sky is north.

古文：常以天中为北，则盖以极星常居天中也。
现代文：通常认为天的中央是北，就大概认为极星通常处于天的中央。
English: It is generally believed that the center of the sky is north, so it is roughly believed that the pole star is usually in the center of the sky.

古文：《素问》尤为善言天者。
现代文：《素问》尤其善于谈天。
English: "Subject" is particularly good at chatting.

古文：今南北才五百里，则北极辄差一度以上；而东西南北数千里间，日分之时候之，日未尝不出于卯半而入于酉半，则又知天枢既中，则日之所出者定为东，日之所入者定为西，天枢则常为北无疑矣。
现代文：现在南北纔五百旦，北极就差一度以上；而东西南北数千里间，日分的时候占验它，太阳未曾不从卯半升起而在酉半降落，就又知道天枢既已处在中央，那么太阳升起的地方肯定是束，太阳降入的地方肯定是西，天枢就经常是北，该没有疑问了。
English: Now that there are five hundred days between north and south, the North Pole is more than one degree away; but between east and west, north and south, there are thousands of miles, and when it comes to the time of the equinox, the sun has never risen from the west and set in the east, and we know that the center of the sky is already in the center, so the place where the sun rises must be the beam, the place where the sun sets must be the west, and the center of the sky is always the north, there is no doubt.

古文：以衡窥之，日分之时，以浑仪抵极星以候日之出没，则常在卯、酉之半少北。
现代文：用衡来窥测，日分的时候，用浑仪上达到极星来占验太阳的出没，那么通常在卯酉之半稍北的地方。
English: Use the balance to spy, and at the time of the equinox, use the compass to reach the pole star to predict the appearance of the sun, then it is usually a little north of the half of the cormorant.

古文：此殆放乎四海而同者，何从而知中国之为东南也？
现代文：这大概是放之四海而都相同的，从哪里知道我国中原是在大地的东南呢？
English: This is probably the same for all four seas. How do we know that the Central Plain of China is in the southeast of the earth?

古文：彼徒见中国东南皆际海而为是说也。
现代文：那些人只看到我国中原的东南都是沿海而提出这种说法。
English: Those people only see that the southeast of China's Central Plains is all coastal and put forward this argument.

古文：臣以谓极星之果中、果非中，皆无足论者。
现代文：臣认为极星果真处在中央，果真不处在中央，都不值得讨论。
English: The minister thought that whether the pole star was really in the center or not was not worth discussing.

古文：彼北极之出地六千里之间所差者已如是，又安知其茫昧几千万里之外邪？
现代文：那北极升出大地六千里之间的差距已经像这样，又怎么知道那苍茫蒙昧几千万里之外的情形呢?
English: The gap between the North Pole and the earth six thousand miles above it is already like this, so how can we know what the situation is tens of millions of miles away in the vastness and obscurity?

古文：今直当据建邦之地，人目之所及者，裁以为法。不足为法者，宜置而勿议可也。
现代文：现在直接面对据以建立邦国的土地，人们目力所及的范围，裁定下来作为法则；不足以为法则的说法，搁置而不予讨论，应该是可以的。
English: Now, directly confronting the land on which to build a state, the scope of people's vision, ruled down as a rule; it is not enough to say that the law, put aside without discussion, should be possible.

古文：其二曰：纮平设以象地体，今浑仪置于崇台之上，下敢日月之所出，则纮不与地际相当者。
现代文：其二说：弦带平摆着用来象征大地实体，现在浑仪放在高台之上，向下乌瞰日月的升起，那么弦带不和大地的边际相当。
English: The second said: The string is used to symbolize the solid earth, and now the compass is placed on a high platform, looking down at the rising of the sun and moon, then the string is not equivalent to the edge of the earth.

古文：臣详此说虽粗有理，然天地之广大，不为一台之高下有所推迁。
现代文：臣详析这种说法虽然粗略的有些道理，可是天地的广阔巨大，并不因为一座台基的高低而有所推移变动。
English: Although there is some rough truth to this statement, the vast expanse of the heavens and the earth does not change because of the height of a foundation.

古文：盖浑仪考天地之体，有实数，有准数。
现代文：大概浑仪考核天地的寅体，有实数，有准数。
English: Probably, the Hun instrument is the best in assessing the Taurus body of heaven and earth, with real numbers and accurate numbers.

古文：所谓实者，此数即彼数也，此移赤彼亦移赤之谓也。
现代文：所谓实数，是指此数即是彼敷，这里移向赤道那里也移向赤道的意思。
English: The so-called real number refers to the meaning that this number is the other place, here moved to the equator, there also moved to the equator.

古文：所谓准者，以此准彼，此之一分，则准彼之几千里之谓也。
现代文：所谓准数，用这个来衡量那个，这个的一分，就等于衡量那个的几千里的意思。
English: The so-called exact number, using this to measure that, this one point, is equal to measuring the meaning of that several thousand miles.

古文：今台之高下乃所谓实数，一台之高不过数丈，彼之所差者亦不过此，天地之大，岂数丈足累其高下？
现代文：现在台基的高低是所说的实数，一台的高度不过几丈，它们的差别也不过这几丈，天地的广大难道仅仅几丈就足以牵连它的高低吗？
English: Now the height of the foundation is said to be a real number. The height of a building is only a few feet, and their difference is only a few feet. Is the vastness of heaven and earth only a few feet enough to affect its height?

古文：若衡之低昂，则所谓准数者也。
现代文：像衡的低下昂起，就是所说的准数。
English: Like the falling and rising of the balance, it is the so-called exact number.

古文：衡移一分，则彼不知其数几千里，则衡之低昂当审，而台之高下非所当恤也。
现代文：衡移动一分，于天空就不知道几千里，那磨衡的低下昂起应当审计，而台的高低不是应当顾虑的。
English: If the balance is moved one point, the sky will not know how many thousands of miles, the low rise of the balance should be audited, and the height of the table should not be concerned.

古文：其三曰：月行之道，过交则入黄道六度而稍却，复交则出于黄道之南，亦如之。
现代文：其三说：月亮运行的轨道，经过交会就进入黄道六度而稍稍后退，再次交会就从黄道的南面出去也像这样。
English: The third said: The orbit of the moon, after the rendezvous, enters the ecliptic at six degrees and retreats slightly, and the next rendezvous goes out from the south of the ecliptic like this.

古文：月行周于黄道，如绳之绕木，故月交而行日之阴，则日为之亏；入蚀法而不亏者，行日之阳也。
现代文：月亮在黄道上环绕运行，像绳子缠绕树木，所以月亮交会而运行在太阳的阴面，太阳就因为它而亏蚀；进入日食的规律而不发生亏蚀的原因，是运行在太阳的阳面。
English: The moon orbits around the ecliptic, like a rope around a tree, so when the moon crosses it, it orbits on the dark side of the sun, and the sun is eclipsed because of it; the reason why it enters the eclipse pattern without eclipsing is that it orbits on the sun's sunny side.

古文：每月退交二百四十九周有奇，然后复会。
现代文：每当月亮退出交会，运行二百四十九周多一黠，然后再交会。
English: Every time the moon withdraws from the rendezvous, it runs one more frame for two hundred and forty-nine weeks, and then rendezvous again.

古文：今月道既不能环绕黄道，又退交之渐当每日差池，今必候月终而顿移，亦终不能符会天度，当省去月环。
现代文：现在月亮的轨道既不能环绕黄道，又退出交会时逐渐面对每天发生参差，现在一定等到月终而整顿移动，也始终不能符合交会的天度，应当省去月亮的环绕。
English: Now the moon's orbit can neither orbit the ecliptic, nor gradually face the daily fluctuation when it withdraws from the rendezvous. Now it must wait until the end of the month to rectify the movement, and it still cannot meet the nature of the rendezvous. The moon's orbit should be omitted.

古文：其候月之出入，专以历法步之。
现代文：那占验月亮的升起降落，专门用历法进行推算。
English: It measures the rising and setting of the moon and is calculated using a special calendar.

古文：其四，衡上、下二端皆径一度有半，用日之径也。
现代文：其四，衡上下两端都是直径一度半，是用太阳的直径。
English: Fourth, both ends of the balance are one and a half times the diameter, which is the diameter of the sun.

古文：若衡端不能全容日月之体，则无由审日月定次。
现代文：如果衡两端不能全部容纳日月的实体，那就没有办法审核日月的确定次序。
English: If the two ends of the balance cannot fully accommodate the entity of the sun and the moon, then there is no way to verify the determined order of the sun and the moon.

古文：欲日月正满上衡之端，不可动移，此其所以用一度有半为法也。
现代文：想要日月正处圆满状态而确定在衡的上端，不能移动，这就是它用一度半作为法则的原因。
English: If you want the sun and the moon to be in a perfect state and determined at the upper end of the balance, you can't move, which is why it uses one and a half as a rule.

古文：下端亦一度有半，则不然。
现代文：下端也是一度半，但原因不是这样。
English: The lower end is also one and a half degrees, but the reason is not the same.

古文：若人目迫下端之东以窥上端之西，则差几三度。
现代文：如果人的眼睛靠近下端的东边来测望上端的西边，那么相差几乎三度。
English: If one's eyes move closer to the east of the lower end to see the west of the upper end, the difference is almost three degrees.

古文：凡求星之法，必令所求之星正当穿之中心。
现代文：凡是探求星的方法，一定让所探求的星正处在洞孔的中心。
English: Any method of searching for a star must ensure that the star being searched for is in the centre of the hole.

古文：今两端既等，则人目游动，无因知其正中。
现代文：现在两端已经相等，那么人的眼睛游动，没有根据知道它处在正中。
English: Now that the two ends are equal, the human eye swims and there is no reason to know that it is in the middle.

古文：今以钩股法求之，下径三分，上径一度有半，则两窍相覆，大小略等。
现代文：现在用勾股法求它，下面直径三分，上面直径一度半，那么两个洞孔相互覆盖，大小大致相等。
English: Now use the hook-and-eye method to find it. The lower diameter is three minutes and the upper diameter is one and a half. Then the two holes cover each other and are roughly the same size.

古文：人目不摇，则所察自正。
现代文：人的眼睛不动摇，那么所察看的东西就自然在正中。
English: If the human eye does not waver, then what is observed is naturally in the middle.

古文：其五，前世皆以极星为天中，自祖恒以玑衡窥考天极不动处，乃在极星之末犹一度有余。
现代文：其五，前代都认为极星是天的中央，从祖佢用璇玑玉衡窥测考察天极不动的地方，就在极星的末端还有一度多。
English: Fifth, the previous generation believed that the pole star was the center of the sky, and from the time of the ancestors, the place where the celestial pole did not move was observed with a compass. It was once more at the end of the pole star.

古文：今铜仪天枢内径一度有半，乃谬以衡端之度为率。
现代文：现在铜仪天枢的内径一度半，就错误地用衡端的度数作为标准。
English: Now that the inner diameter of the gong is one and a half times larger, it is wrong to use the degree of the measuring end as the standard.

古文：若玑衡端平，则极星常游天枢之外；玑衡小偏，则极星乍出乍入。
现代文：如果璇玑玉衡端平，那么极星常常游离于天枢之外；璇玑玉衡稍微偏斜，那么极星忽然出现又忽然隐入。
English: If the ecliptic is flat, then the pole star often floats away from the celestial center; if the ecliptic is slightly skewed, then the pole star suddenly appears and suddenly disappears.

古文：令瓒旧法，天枢乃径二度有半，盖欲使极星游于枢中也。
现代文：梁令瓒的旧法，天枢就是直径二度半，大概要使极星在天枢中游动。
English: According to the old method, the celestial center is two and a half degrees in diameter, which makes the pole star swim in the center of the celestial center.

古文：臣考验极星更三月，而后知天中不动处远极星乃三度有余，则祖恒窥考犹为未审。
现代文：臣考察验证极星经历三个月，然后知道天中不动的地方距离极星是三度多，那么祖佢窥测考察还是不核实。
English: After three months of inspection and verification of the pole star, and then knowing that the place in the sky that does not move is more than three degrees away from the pole star, it is still not verified by Zuyu's observation.

古文：今当为天枢径七度，使人目切南枢望之，星正循北极枢里周常见不隐，天体方正。
现代文：现在应当制作天枢的直径七度，让人的眼睛贴着南天枢看它，星正沿着北极。在天枢裹圈运转，常常出现不隐匿，天的实体呈现方正。
English: Now it is necessary to make the diameter of the celestial body seven degrees, so that the human eye can look at it with the southern celestial body, and the star is moving along the north pole. When the celestial body moves in a circle, it often appears and does not disappear, and the celestial body appears square.

古文：其六，令瓒以辰刻、十干、八卦皆刻于纮，然纮平正而黄道斜运，当子、午之间，则日径度而道促；卯、酉之际，则日迤行而道舒。
现代文：其六，令瓒把时辰刻敷、十干、八卦都刘在弦带上，可是弦带设置平正而黄道斜着运行，正当子时午时之间，那么太阳直接穿过而道路狭促；而在卯时酉时之际，那么太阳缓慢运行而道路平坦。
English: Sixth, the emperor had the hours inscribed, the zodiac signs and the eight trigrams engraved on the ribbon, but the ribbon was set flat and the ecliptic ran diagonally. If it was between noon and dusk, the sun would pass directly through and the road would be narrow; if it was between dusk and dawn, the sun would run slowly and the road would be flat.

古文：如此，辰刻不能无谬。
现代文：这样，时辰刻敷不能没有错误。
English: In this way, the clock cannot be set without error.

古文：新铜仪则移刻于纬，四游均平，辰刻不失。
现代文：新铸铜仪就移刻到纬规上，四个游仪均匀平置，时辰刻数没有差失。
English: The newly cast bronze gauges were engraved onto the parallelogram, the four travel gauges were evenly aligned, and there was no difference in the number of hours.

古文：然令瓒天中单环，直中国人顶之上，而新铜仪纬斜络南北极之中，与赤道相直。
现代文：可是令瓒在天的中央设单环，直立于我国中原人的头顶之上，而新铸铜仪的纬规斜着连接在南北极的中间，和赤道相直。
English: However, Linglong set a single ring in the center of the sky, standing upright on the top of the heads of the Central Plains people in our country, while the latitude and longitude of the newly cast bronze instrument are obliquely connected in the middle of the South and North Poles, and are straight with the equator.

古文：旧法设之无用，新仪移之为是。
现代文：过去的方法设置它役有用处，新铸铜仪移动它是对的。
English: The old way of setting it up served a useful purpose; the new cast-bronze way of moving it around is right.

古文：然当侧窥如车轮之牙，而不当衡规如鼓陶，其旁迫狭，难赋辰刻，而又蔽映星度。
现代文：然而当从侧面测望它时像车轮的轮齿，而不当着衡规看它好像陶制的量器鼓。它的旁边紧迫狭窄，很难给予时辰刻数，而又遮蔽掩盖星度。
English: However, when viewed from the side, it looks like the teeth of a wheel, but when it is not facing the scale, it looks like a ceramic measuring drum. It is narrow and narrow next to it, making it difficult to give the hour and minute, and obscuring the magnitude.

古文：其七，司天铜仪，黄、赤道与纮合铸，不可转移，虽与天运不符，至于窥测之时，先以距度星考定三辰所舍，复运游仪抵本宿度，乃求出入黄道与去极度，所得无以异于令瓒之术。
现代文：其七，司天盛铸造的铜仪，黄赤道和弦带合在一起铸造，不能转换移动，虽然跟天的运行不符合，但是到了测望的时候，先用星度的距离考定出日月星三辰停留的地方，再运动游仪到本宿的度，就求得出入黄道的度和离开极星的度，所得的结果无不同于令瓒的方法。
English: Seventh, the bronze instrument made by Shi Tiansheng, the yellow equator and the string band are cast together, and cannot be converted and moved. Although it does not match the movement of the sky, when it is time to survey, first use the distance of the star to determine the place where the sun, moon and stars stay for three hours, and then move the travel instrument to the main lodge. The degree of entering the ecliptic and the degree of leaving the pole star can be obtained. The results obtained are no different from the method of ringing the bell.

古文：其法本于晁崇、斛兰之旧制，虽不甚精缛，而颇为简易。
现代文：他的方法根据晁崇、斛兰的旧制，虽然不很精致繁多，却很是简易。
English: His method is based on the old system of Gong Chong and Gong Lan. Although it is not very elaborate and varied, it is very simple.

古文：李淳风尝谓斛兰所作铁仪，赤道不动，乃如胶柱。以考月行，差或至十七度，少不减十度。
现代文：李淳风曾经说斛兰所作的铁仪，赤道不动，就像胶柱一样，以考察月亮的运行，相差有的达十七度，少的也不少于十度。
English: Li Chunfeng once said that the iron instrument made by Hulan, the equator does not move, just like a rubber column, to investigate the movement of the moon, the difference is up to seventeen degrees, at least not less than ten degrees.

古文：此正谓直以赤道候月行，其差如此。
现代文：这正好说明直接从赤道占验月亮的运行，它的差错像这样。
English: This just goes to show that if you measure the motion of the moon directly from the equator, it's going to be wrong like this.

古文：今黄、赤道度，再运游仪抵所舍宿度求之，而月行则以月历每日去极度算率之，不可谓之胶也。
现代文：如今把黄道赤道的度，再次运转游仪到星所停留的本宿的度上探求，而月的运行就按月历每天距离极的度计算，不能说它是胶柱。
English: Nowadays, the degree of the ecliptic equator of the zodiac is once again explored by running the travel instrument to the degree of the homestay where the star stays, and the movement of the moon is calculated according to the degree of the lunar calendar's daily distance from the pole. It cannot be said that it is a rubber column.

古文：新法定宿而变黄道，此定黄道而变宿，但可赋三百六十五度而不能具余分，此其为略也。
现代文：新的方法确定星宿却变更黄道，这里确定黄道却变更星宿，只能给予三百六十五度而不能具备纪年的零头敷，这是它疏略的地方。
English: The new method of determining the stars but changing the ecliptic, here determining the ecliptic but changing the stars, can only give three hundred and sixty-five degrees and cannot have a fraction of the year, which is where it is omitted.

古文：其八，令瓒旧法，黄道设于月道之上，赤道又次月道，而玑最处其下。
现代文：其八，令瓒的旧法，黄道设置在月亮轨道的上面，赤道又挨着月亮轨道，而璇玑处在最下。
English: Eighth, according to the old method, the ecliptic is placed above the moon's orbit, the equator is next to the moon's orbit, and the crescent is at the bottom.

古文：每月移一交，则黄、赤道辄变。
现代文：每个月移动一个交会，那么黄道赤道就变动。
English: Each month move a rendezvous, then the ecliptic equator changes.

古文：今当省去月道，徙玑于赤道之上，而黄道居赤道之下，则二道与衡端相迫，而星度易审。
现代文：现在应当省去月亮轨道，把璇玑移到赤道的上面，而黄道处在赤道的下面，那么黄赤二道和衡的顶端相互靠近，而星度就容易核实了。
English: Now we should omit the moon's orbit and move the compass to the top of the equator, while the ecliptic is below the equator, then the yellow equator and the top of the balance are close to each other, and the star rating is easy to verify.

古文：其九，旧法：规环一面刻周天度，一面加银丁。
现代文：其九，过去的方法在规环上一面刻着一周天的度，一面加刻银钉。
English: Ninth, the previous method engraved the degree of the day of the week on one side of the gauge ring, and engraved a silver nail on the other side.

古文：所以施银丁者，夜候天晦，不可目察，则以手切之也。
现代文：施加银钉的原因，夜晚占验，天色昏暗。不能用眼睛观察，就用手触摸它。
English: The reason for applying the silver nail is that the night is dark and the sky is dim. If you can't see it with your eyes, touch it with your hands.

古文：古之人以璿为之，璿者，珠之属也。
现代文：古代的人用璇玑制作它，璇就是珠子之类的东西。
English: The ancients made it out of jade, which is a kind of bead.

古文：今司天监三辰仪设齿于环背，不与横萧会，当移列两旁，以便参察。
现代文：现在司天监的三辰仪，在规环的背面设置了齿轮，不能和横箫交会，应当移开排列两旁，以便于参验观察。
English: Now, the three-hour instrument of the chief celestial inspector has a gear on the back of the gauge ring. It cannot meet the crossbow. It should be moved and arranged on both sides in order to facilitate inspection and observation.

古文：其十，旧法：重玑皆广四寸，厚四分。
现代文：其十，过去的方法双重璇玑都是广四寸，厚四分。
English: Tenth, in the past, double hoops were four inches wide and four inches thick.

古文：其他规轴，椎重朴拙，不可旋运。
现代文：其它的规轴，笨重简陋，不能旋转。
English: The other standard shafts are bulky and simple, and cannot be rotated.

古文：今小损其制，使之轻利。
现代文：现在稍稍减小它的形制，使它轻巧便利。
English: Now its shape has been slightly reduced to make it lighter and more convenient.

古文：其十一，古之人知黄道岁易，不知赤道之因变也。
现代文：其十一，古代的人知道黄道每年变动，不知道赤遒的因依变动。
English: Eleventh, the ancients knew that the zodiac changes every year, but they did not know the reason for the change of the red dragonfly.

古文：黄道之度，与赤道之度相偶者也。
现代文：黄道的度数，是和赤道的度数相对的。
English: The degree of the ecliptic is opposite to the degree of the equator.

古文：黄道徙而西，则赤道不得独胶。
现代文：黄道向西移动，那么赤道不能单独胶住不动。
English: As the ecliptic moves westward, the equator cannot stand alone.

古文：今当变赤道与黄道同法。
现代文：现在应当把赤道变成与黄道同一法则。
English: It is time to make the equator the same law as the ecliptic.

古文：其十二，旧法：黄、赤道平设，正当天度，掩蔽人目，不可占察。
现代文：其十二，过去的方法黄道赤道水平设置，正对着周天的度数，遮掩人的眼睛，不能占验观察。
English: Twelfth, the previous method of setting the ecliptic at the level of the equator, which is directly opposite the degree of the sun, obscures people's eyes and cannot be observed.

古文：其后乃别加钻孔，尤为拙谬。
现代文：此后就另外加上钻孔，尤其拙陋荒谬。
English: This was followed by additional drilling, which was particularly clumsy and absurd.

古文：今当侧置少偏，使天度出北际之外，自不凌蔽。
现代文：现在应当斜着放置稍微偏一点，让周天的度数露出北际之外，自然就不居高遮蔽。
English: Now it should be placed at a slight angle, so that the degree of the sun is exposed beyond the northern limit, and naturally it is not high shaded.

古文：其十三，旧法：地纮正络天经之半，凡候三辰出入，则地际正为地纮所伏。
现代文：其十三，过去的方法地弦正好连接着天经的一半，凡是占验日月星三辰出入，那么地际正被地弦所掩盖。
English: Thirteenth, the method of the past, the earth chord, connects exactly half of the heavenly book. Whenever the astrologer checks the sun, moon, and stars for three hours, then the earth is being covered by the earth chord.

古文：今当徙纮稍下，使地际与纮之上际相直。
现代文：现在应当移动地弦稍稍向下，使地际和地弦的上边相互垂直。
English: Now you should move the strings slightly downwards, so that the ground plane and the top of the strings are perpendicular to each other.

古文：候三辰伏见，专以纮际为率，自当默与天合。
现代文：占验日月星三辰隐藏出现，专用地弦地际作为标准，自然应当暗自与天相合。
English: When the three hidden stars of the horoscope appear, and the special earth-earth chord is used as the standard, it should naturally coincide with the sky.

古文：又言浑仪制器：
现代文：又说浑仪制作器械：
English: He also said of the instrument:

古文：浑仪之为器，其属有三，相因为用。
现代文：浑仪作为器械，它所属的有三部分，相互因依以发生作用。
English: As an instrument, the instrument has three parts, which interact with each other.

古文：其在外者曰体，以立四方上下之定位。其次曰象，以法天之运行，常与天随。其在内玑衡，玑以察纬，衡以察经。
现代文：它在外面的部分叫体，用来确立四方上下的固定方位；其次叫象，用来模仿天的运行，常常和天伴随；它在内部是璇玑玉衡，璇玑用来观察纬度，玉衡用来观察经度。
English: In the outer part, it is called the body, which is used to establish a fixed position above and below the square; secondly, it is called the elephant, which is used to imitate the movement of the sky, and is often accompanied by the sky; internally, it is called the balance, the balance is used to observe the latitude, and the balance is used to observe the longitude.

古文：求天地端极三明匿见者，体为之用；察黄道降陟辰刻运徙者，象为之用；四方上下无所不属者，玑衡为之用。
现代文：探索天地的端极、日月星三明的隐藏出现，体是为此目的而起作用的；观察黄道的下降上升、时辰刻数的运转迁移，象是为此目的而起作用的；四方上下没有不属于它的，璇玑玉衡是为此目的而起作用的。
English: To explore the extremity of heaven and earth, the hidden appearance of the sun, moon and stars, the body acts for this purpose; to observe the decline and rise of the ecliptic, the movement and migration of the hours, it seems to act for this purpose; there is nothing in the four directions that does not belong to it, and the balance acts for this purpose.

古文：体之为器，为圆规者四。
现代文：体作为器械，制成圆规四个。
English: The body, as an instrument, is made into four compasses.

古文：其规之别：一曰经，经之规二并峙，正抵子午，若车轮之植。
现代文：那些圆规的区别：一叫经，经的规是两个对峙，正面至达子牛线，像一对车轮树起来。
English: The difference between those compasses: one is called the zen, and the zen compass is two confrontations, the front up to the line of the calf, like a pair of wheels.

古文：二规相距四寸，夹规为齿，以别去极之度。
现代文：这两个规相距四寸，夹住规的是齿牙，用来分别距离极的度。
English: The two gauges are four inches apart, and the teeth that hold the gauge in place are used to measure the distance between the poles.

古文：北极出纮之上三十有四度十分度之八强，南极下纮亦如之。
现代文：北极高出地弦之上三十四又十分之八度强，南极低于地弦也像这样。
English: The North Pole is high above the Earth's magnetic field and has an octave greater than thirty-four tenths, and so is the South Pole below the Earth's magnetic field.

古文：对衔二釭，联二规以为一，釭中容枢。
现代文：相对衔着两个釭，联结着两规以合为一体，釭中容纳着天枢。
English: Opposite to it, there are two fins, which are connected to form a whole, and in the middle of the fins is the celestial center.

古文：二曰纬，纬之规一，与经交于二极之中，若车轮之倚，南北距极皆九十一度强。
现代文：二叫纬，纬的规是一个，和经的规在南北两极中交会，像车轮斜靠着，南北距离极的度都是九十一度强。
English: The second is the latitude, the latitude scale is one, and the longitude scale intersects in the north and south poles, like a wheel leaning against, and the north and south poles are more than ninety-one degrees apart.

古文：夹规为齿，以别周天之度。
现代文：夹住规的是齿，用来分别一周天的度数。
English: It is the teeth that hold the scale, which are used to separate the number of days in a week.

古文：三曰纮，纮之规一，上际当经之半，若车轮之仆，以考地际，周赋十二辰，以定八方。
现代文：三叫弦，弦的规是一个，上边正处在经的规的一半，像车轮向前倾倒，用来考察地边，一周赋予十二辰，用来确定八方。
English: Three are called chord, the scale of the chord is one, the upper edge is in the middle of the warp scale, like a wheel tipping forward, used to examine the edge of the earth, one week is given to twelve hours, used to determine the eight directions.

古文：纮之下有趺，从一衡一，刻沟受水以为平。
现代文：弦的规的下面有趺，纵的一个横的一个，刻着小沟接进水来作水平。
English: Below the scale of the chord there is a rim, a vertical one and a horizontal one, carved with a small groove connected to the water to make the level.

古文：中沟为地，以受注水。
现代文：中间的小沟象征着地，来承受注入的水。
English: The groove in the middle symbolizes the ground, to withstand the inflow of water.

古文：四末建趺，为升龙四以负纮。
现代文：沟的四端建立趺，制作飞升的龙四条来担负弦。
English: At the four ends of the trench, he set up a yoke and made four soaring dragons to carry the strings.

古文：凡浑仪之属皆属焉。
现代文：凡是浑仪的部件都归属这里。
English: All parts of the instrument belong here.

古文：龙吭为纲维之四揵以为固。
现代文：龙吭作为总纲和四维的四根柱椿是用来固定整体的。
English: The dragon's beak as the general outline and the four-dimensional four-column camellia are used to fix the whole.

古文：象之为器，为圆规者四。
现代文：象作为器械，制成圆规四个。
English: As an instrument, the elephant is made into four compasses.

古文：其规之别：一曰玑，玑之规二并峙，相距如经之度。
现代文：这些规的区别：一叫玑，玑的规是两个对峙，相距像经的度。
English: The difference between these rules: one is called the yoke, and the yoke of the yoke is two confrontations, which are as far apart as the meridian.

古文：夹规为齿，对衔二釭，釭中容枢，皆如经之率。
现代文：夹住规的是齿牙，相对衔着两个釭，釭中容纳着天枢，都像经的规的标准。
English: It is the tooth that grips the scale, the two jaws that hold it together, and the celestial center that is contained in the jaws, all of which are like the standards of the sutra.

古文：设之亦如经，其异者经胶而玑可旋。
现代文：设置它也像经一样，它们不同的是经胶住而玑可以旋转。
English: It's set up just like a kite, except they're glued on and the kite can spin.

古文：二曰赤道，赤道之规一刻，玑十分寸之三以衔赤道。
现代文：二叫赤道，赤道的规一个，刻入玑十分之三寸以衔住赤道。
English: The second is called the equator, the equator gauge is one, and three-tenths of an inch is carved into the beak to hold the equator.

古文：赤道设之如纬，其异者纬胶于经，而赤道衔于玑，有时而移，度穿一窍，以移岁差。
现代文：赤道的规设置像纬的规，它们不同的是纬胶住在经上，而赤道衔在玑中，按照规定时间移动，每一度穿一个孑，用来移动岁差。
English: The gauge of the equator is set like the gauge of the latitude. The difference between them is that the lattice is located on the meridian, while the equator is located in the umbilicus. It moves according to the specified time, and every time it passes through one umbilicus, which is used to move the precession.

古文：三曰黄道，黄道之规一，刻赤道十分寸之二以衔黄道，其南出赤道之北际二十有四度，其北入赤道亦如之。
现代文：三叫黄道，黄道的规一个，刻入赤道十分之二寸以衔住黄道，它南边超出赤道的北边二十四度，它北边低入赤道也像这样。
English: The third is called the ecliptic. The ecliptic has one scale, and two tenths of an inch are carved into the equator to hold the ecliptic. Its south side exceeds the north side of the equator by twenty-four degrees, and its north side lowers into the equator like this.

古文：交于奎、角，度穿一窍，以铜编属于赤道。
现代文：交会在奎宿、角宿，星度穿一个孔，用铜编结连接到赤道上。
English: The rendezvous is at Kui-juku, Kakuno-juku, and the star is pierced with a hole and connected to the equator with a copper braid.

古文：岁差盈度，则并赤道徙而西。
现代文：岁差满度，兢连同赤道向西移动。
English: With the precession of the equinoxes complete, it moves westward along with the equator.

古文：黄赤道夹规为齿，以别均迤之度。
现代文：黄道赤道夹住规的是齿牙，用来分别均匀延缓的星度。
English: The ecliptic-equatorial clamp is a cog, used to separate evenly delayed stars.

古文：玑衡之为器，为圆规二，曰玑，对峙，相距如象玑之度，夹规为齿，皆如象玑。
现代文：璇玑玉衡作为器械，制成圆规两个，叫玑，两相对峙，相距像象里的玑的度数，夹住规的是齿牙，都像象里的玑。
English: The yakitori yakitori, as an instrument, is made up of two circular gauges, called yakitori, and the two stand opposite each other. The distance between them is like the degree of a beak in an elephant, and the teeth that hold the gauge are like the beak in an elephant.

古文：其异者：象玑对衔二釭，而玑对衔二枢，贯于象玑天经之釭中。
现代文：它们不同的是，象裹的玑相对着衔起两个釭，而璇玑相对着衔起两个天枢，贯通在象玑天经的釭中。
English: The difference between them is that the cocoon of the elephant wraps the two cocoons, while the cocoon wraps the two heavenly centers, penetrating the cocoon of the elephant cocoon.

古文：三物相重而不相胶，为间十分寸之三，无使相切，所以利旋也。
现代文：三个对象相互重迭，而不相互胶住，形成十分之三寸的空间，不要让它们相互贴近，以有利于旋转。
English: Three objects overlap each other without sticking to each other, forming a three-tenths of an inch space. Do not let them get close to each other, so as to facilitate rotation.

古文：为横箫二，两端夹枢，属于玑，其中挟衡为横一，栖于横箫之间。
现代文：制成横箫两个，两端夹住天枢，连接到璇玑上，其中一个夹住玉衡成为一个横，栖居在横箫之间。
English: Made of two cross-beams, the two ends clamped the balance, connected to the beak, one of which clamped the balance to become a cross, perched between the cross-beams.

古文：中衡为轊，以贯横箫，两末入于玑之罅而可旋。
现代文：中间的衡是辎，用来贯通横箫，两边末端伸入璇玑的缝隙而且能够旋转。
English: The central balance is the yoke, which is used to pass through the transverse yoke, and the two ends extend into the gap of the yoke and can rotate.

古文：玑可以左右，以察四方之详；衡可以低昂，以察上下之祥。
现代文：璇玑可以左右摆动，用来观察四方的祥瑞；玉衡可以高低起伏，用来观察上下的祥瑞。
English: The balance can be swung from side to side to observe the auspiciousness of the four directions; the balance can be raised and lowered to observe the auspiciousness of the ups and downs.

古文：《浮漏议》曰：
现代文：《浮漏议》说：
English: The "Leakage Proposal" said:

古文：播水之壶三，而受水之壶一。
现代文：播放水的壶三个，而承受水的壶一个。
English: There are three kettles for pouring water and one for holding it.

古文：曰求壶、废壶，方中皆圆尺有八寸，尺有四寸五分以深，其食二斛，为积分四百六十六万六千四百六十。
现代文：叫求壶、废壶，正中都是一尺八寸圆，一尺四寸五分深，它的容量两斛，累积是四百六十六万六千四百六十分。
English: The kettle, the waste kettle, is exactly one foot eight inches in circumference and one foot four inches and five minutes in depth. It has a capacity of two urns, with a cumulative capacity of four million six hundred thousand six thousand four hundred and sixty minutes.

古文：曰复壶，如求壶之度，中离以为二，元一斛介八斗，而中有达。
现代文：叫复壶，像求壶的度量，中间分离焉两部分，元部一斛介部八斗，而中间有沟通。
English: Calling a double kettle is like asking for a measuring jug. The middle is separated into two parts, the original part and the intermediate part, and there is communication in the middle.

古文：曰建壶，方尺植三尺有五寸，其食斛有半。
现代文：叫建壶，一尺见方树立起来高三尺五寸，它的容量是一斛半。
English: He called for a kettle to be built. It was three feet and five inches high when it was set up one foot square. Its capacity was one and a half jars.

古文：求壶之水，复壶之所求也。
现代文：求壶的水，是复壶所求的。
English: The water for the jug is the water for the jug.

古文：壶盈则水驰，壶虚则水凝。
现代文：壶满，水就流动；壶空，水就不流。
English: When the pot is full, the water flows; when the pot is empty, the water does not flow.

古文：复壶之肋为枝渠，以为水节。
现代文：复壶的肋部是支渠，把它作为水节。
English: The rib of the double boiler is a branch canal, which is used as a water section.

古文：求壶进水暴，则流怒以摇，复以壶，又折以为介。
现代文：如果求壶进水急猛，那么水流狂怒而且动摇，重复用壶，又折回来把它作为介部。
English: If the water rushes into the kettle, then the water is furious and shaky, repeat the use of the kettle, and fold it back again to use it as an intermediary.

古文：复为枝渠，达其滥溢。
现代文：重复成为支渠，达到水流泛滥漫溢。
English: Repetition becomes a branch canal, reaching the overflow of water flow.

古文：枝渠之委，所谓废壶也，以受废水。
现代文：支渠水流所聚，就是所说的废壶，用来承受废水。
English: Collected by the water flow of the branch canal is the so-called waste jug, which is used to hold waste water.

古文：三壶皆所以播水，为水制也。
现代文：三个壶都是用来播放水的，是为水而设制的。
English: All three pots are used to play water, and are set up for water.

古文：自复壶之介，以玉权酾于建壶，建壶所以受水为刻者也。
现代文：从复壶的介部，用玉权流注到建壶中，建壶就是用来承受水成为时刻的。
English: From the intermediate part of the double jug, it is poured with jade power into the jug. The jug is used to withstand water.

古文：建壶一易箭，则发上室以泻之。
现代文：建壶一换箭，就打开土室来泻掉里面的水。
English: As soon as the kettle is refilled, the earth chamber is opened to drain off the water inside.

古文：求、复、建壶之泄，皆欲迫下，水所趣也。
现代文：求壶、复壶、建壶排泄的水，都要急促流下，这是水的趋势。
English: The water excreted by the calling pot, the double pot, and the building pot should all flow down quickly, which is the trend of water.

古文：玉权下水之概寸，矫而上之然后发，则水挠而不躁也。
现代文：玉权注水的水概一寸见方，把水举上之后纔打开，那么水有所阻挠而不急涌。
English: The water injected by Yu Quan is about one inch square. After lifting the water, the valve is opened, so the water is blocked and does not rush.

古文：复壶之达半求壶之注，玉权半复壶之达。
现代文：复壶所流通的水是求膏注入的一半，玉权是复壶流通的水的一半。
English: The water circulating in the double jug is half of the water injected by the ointment, and the jade power is half of the water circulating in the double jug.

古文：枝渠博皆分，高如其博，平方如砥，以为水概。
现代文：支渠的宽度都以分计算，高度像它酌宽度，平整四方像磨石，把它作为水概。
English: The width of the branch canal is calculated in minutes, the height is like its width, and the flat square is like a grindstone, and it is used as a water gauge.

古文：壶皆为之幂，无使秽游，则水道不慧。
现代文：壶都给它盖上幂，不让污秽的东西游动，如果污秽游动，那么水道不通畅。
English: The pots are covered with cocoons to prevent the filth from swimming. If the filth swims, then the waterway will not flow smoothly.

古文：求壶之幂龙纽，以其出水不穷也。
现代文：求壶的幂是龙纽，因为它流出水不穷尽。
English: The beak of the ewer is a dragon's neck, because it never runs out of water.

古文：复壶士纽，士所以生法者，复壶制法之器也。
现代文：复壶的幂是士纽，士是制定法令的人，复壶是制定法则的器具。
English: The potter's vessel is the clay, the clay is the man who makes the laws, and the potter's vessel is the instrument that makes the laws.

古文：废壶鲵纽，止水之沈，鲵所伏也。
现代文：废壶的幂是鱿纽，使水流停止过滤，是鱿潜伏的地方。
English: The crucible of the waste kettle is the crucible, so that the water flow stops filtering, is the crucible lurking place.

古文：铜史令刻，执漏政也。
现代文：铜铸史官指令时辰刻数，是执掌滴漏的政事。
English: The brass-casting historian's command to count the hours and minutes is a trickle-down policy.

古文：冬设煴燎，以泽凝也。
现代文：冬天设置火堆，用来化冻润水。
English: In winter, a fire is set up to thaw the water.

古文：注水以龙噣直颈附于壶体，直则易浚，附于壶体则难败。
现代文：流注水是由依附在壶体上的直颈龙嘴，直颈就容易疏通，依附在壶体上就难于败坏。
English: Flowing water is drawn from a straight-necked spout attached to the pot body. The straight-necked spout is easy to unclog, and it is difficult to deteriorate when attached to the pot body.

古文：复壶玉为之喙，衔于龙噣，谓之权，所以权其盈虚也。
现代文：复壶嘴是玉制的，由龙嘴衔着，叫它权，是用来权衡壶的满盈与空虚的。
English: The double spout is made of jade. It is attached by a dragon's beak and is called the balance. It is used to weigh the fullness and emptiness of the jug.

古文：建壶之执窒瓬涂而弥之以重帛，窒则不吐也。
现代文：建壶紧密堵死，涂上陶泥，再用几层绢帛充塞住，堵死就不吐水。
English: Build a pot, plug it tightly, coat it with clay, and then fill it with several layers of straw. If it is blocked, it will not spit out water.

古文：管之善利者，水所溲也，非玉则不能坚良以久。
现代文：管子好用便利，是排泄水的，不是玉制就不能坚固良好而保持长欠。
English: The tube is easy to use and convenient, it is for excreting water, and it is not made of jade, so it cannot be strong and good while maintaining a long shape.

古文：权之所出高则源轻，源轻则其委不悍而溲物不利。
现代文：玉权浮出水面高，那么水源就轻；水源轻，那么它聚水就不狠，因而排泄东西也不便利。
English: If the jade power rises high above the water surface, then the water source is light; if the water source is light, then it does not collect water, so it is not convenient to excrete things.

古文：箭不效于玑衡，则易权、洗箭而改画，覆以玑衡，谓之常不弊之术。
现代文：如果箭不为璇玑玉衡效用，就换玉权、洗箭并且改变刻划，用璇玑玉衡复核，这叫作常无弊端的方法。
English: If the arrow is not used for weighing, change the jade power, wash the arrow and change the carving, and check it with weighing. This is a method that has no drawbacks.

古文：今之下漏者，始尝甚密，久复先大者管泐也。
现代文：现在装置浮漏，开始曾是很精密的，时间长久就先从大的管子开裂。
English: Now the device leaks, it was very precise at the beginning, it took a long time to crack from the large tube.

古文：管泐而器皆弊者，无权也。
现代文：管子开裂而且器械全壤的原因，是没有权。
English: The reason why the pipes are cracking and the equipment is leaking is that there is no power.

古文：弊而不可复寿者，术固也。
现代文：败坏而不能恢复使用寿命，是它的技术所固有的。
English: It is inherent in its technology that it will deteriorate and cannot be restored to serviceable condition.

古文：察日之晷以玑衡，而制箭以日之晷迹，一刻之度，以赋余刻，刻有不均者，建壶有眚也。
现代文：观察太阳的日晷是根据璇玑玉衡的，而根据日晷的轨迹制造箭，一刻的度数，用来给其余的刻度作为标准，如果刻度有不均匀的，是建壶有毛病。
English: Observing the sun's sundial is based on the weight of the pendulum, and the arrow is made according to the trajectory of the sundial. The degree of the moment is used to give the rest of the scale as a standard. If the scale is uneven, it is a problem with the pot.

古文：赘者磨之，创者补之，百刻一度，其壶乃善。
现代文：多余的磨掉它，损伤的补齐它，刻一百个划一的度，那壶就完善。
English: Grind off what is superfluous, fill up what is lacking, carve a hundred uniform measures, and the vessel will be perfect.

古文：昼夜已复，而箭有余才者，权鄙也。
现代文：白天黑夜已经往返一周，而箭还有多出来的部位，这是玉权鄙陋。
English: Day and night have been going back and forth for a week, and the arrow still has more parts to come out, which is a disgrace to the imperial power.

古文：昼夜未复，而壶吐者，权沃也。
现代文：白天黑夜还没有往返完毕，而壶就把水吐掉，这是玉权光滑。
English: The day and night have not yet completed the round trip, and the kettle spits out the water, which is jade smooth.

古文：如是，则调其权，此制器之法也。
现代文：像这种情况，就调换玉权，这是制作器械的方法。
English: In such a case, it is necessary to change the jade power, which is the way to make the instrument.

古文：下漏必用甘泉，恶其垽之为壶眚也。
现代文：装置浮漏一定要用甘美泉水，厌恶水滓造成壶垢。
English: It is necessary to use sweet spring water when the device is leaking, and it is abhorrent for water to cause limescale.

古文：必用一源泉之冽者，权之而重，重则敏于行，而为箭之情慓；泉之卤者，权之而轻，轻则椎于行，而为箭之情驽。
现代文：一定要用同一水源，清冽的泉水，称它分量重，分量重就流动敏捷，而作为箭的性情就行动快速；浑浊的泉水，称它的分量轻，分量轻就流动笨拙，而作为箭的性情就行动迟钝。
English: Be sure to use the same water source, clear spring water, saying that it is heavy in weight, heavy in weight it flows quickly, and as an arrow's temperament it moves quickly; muddy spring water, saying that it is light in weight, light in weight it flows clumsily, and as an arrow's temperament it moves sluggishly.

古文：一井不可他汲，数汲则泉浊。
现代文：一口井不能供其它用途汲水，屡屡汲水就使泉水浑浊。
English: One well cannot be used for other purposes to draw water. Repeatedly drawing water will make the spring water cloudy.

古文：陈水不可再注，再注则行利。
现代文：用遇的陈旧的水不能第二次注入，第二次注入就会流得太快。
English: The old water used cannot be injected a second time, and the second injection will flow too fast.

古文：此下漏之法也。
现代文：这是装置浮漏的方法。
English: This is how the device leaks.

古文：箭一如建壶之长，广寸有五分，三分去二以为之厚，其阳为百刻，为十二辰。
现代文：箭的长度与建壶完全相同。宽一寸五分，宽度的三分去二作为它的厚度，它的阳面是一百刻，是十二辰。
English: The length of the arrow is exactly the same as that of the jug. The width is one inch and five minutes, the width of three points to two as its thickness, its sunny side is one hundred points, is twelve hours.

古文：博牍二十有一，如箭之长，广五分，去半以为之厚。
现代文：博牍二十一个，像箭一样长，宽五分，宽度去半作为它的厚度。
English: Boao twenty-one, as long as an arrow, width five points, width to half as its thickness.

古文：阳为五更，为二十有五筹；阴刻消长之衰。
现代文：阳面是五更，是二十五个更筹；阴面刻着时间消亡的衰落标志。
English: The sun-facing side is five times higher, is twenty-five times higher; the shadow side is engraved with the fading sign of time's demise.

古文：三分箭之广，其中刻契以容牍。
现代文：箭的宽度分为三份，中间刻槽以容纳博牍。
English: The width of the arrow is divided into three parts, with a groove in the middle to accommodate the arrow.

古文：夜算差一刻，则因箭而易牍。
现代文：如果夜里计算相差一刻，就根据箭而更换博牍。
English: If there is a one-minute difference in the calculation at night, change the bogey according to the arrow.

古文：镣匏，箭舟也。
现代文：镰匏，是箭舟。
English: , is the arrow boat.

古文：其虚五升，重一镒有半。
现代文：它的空间为五升，重一镒半。
English: It has a volume of five litres and weighs one and a half kilos.

古文：锻而赤柔者金之美者也，然后渍而不墨，墨者其久必蚀。
现代文：锻炼成赤红柔韧的金属是美好的金属，然后浸泡就不变黑，变黑的金属时间长久一定腐蚀。
English: The reddish-red flexible metal is a good metal, and then it does not turn black when soaked. The blackened metal will corrode for a long time.

古文：银之有铜则墨，铜之有锡则屑，特铜久灂则腹败而饮，皆工之所不材也。《景表议》曰：
现代文：银里有铜就会变黑，铜裹有锡就会起碎屑，但是铜长久涂漆就会里面腐败而隐没，这都是工匠认为不成材的。《影表议》说：
English: Copper in silver will turn black, copper wrapped in tin will crumble, but copper painted for a long time will rot inside and disappear, all of which craftsmen consider to be unsuitable.

古文：步景之法，惟定南北为难。
现代文：测量日影的方法，只有确定南北是最难的。
English: There are many ways to measure the shadow of the sun, but the most difficult is to determine the north and south.

古文：古法置槷为规，识日出之景与日入之景。
现代文：古代的方法设置梨杆，制作圆规，用来辨识日出的影子和日落的影子。
English: The ancient method of setting pear rods and making compasses was used to discern the shadows of sunrise and the shadows of sunset.

古文：昼参诸日中之景，夜考之极星。
现代文：白天参考中午太阳的影子，夜晚参考北极星。
English: During the day, refer to the shadow of the sun at noon, and at night, refer to the North Star.

古文：极星不当天中，而候景之法取晨夕景之最长者规之，两表相去中折以参验，最短之景为日中。
现代文：北极星不处在天的正中，而占验日影的方法是取早晨傍晚日影最长的来规划它，两个标志距离的正中对折来参互证验，最短的日影是日中。
English: The North Star is not in the middle of the sky, and the method of divining the sun shadow is to take the longest morning and evening sun shadow to plan it, and the midpoint of the distance between the two signs to participate in mutual verification. The shortest sun shadow is during the day.

古文：然测景之地，百里之间，地之高下东西不能无偏，其间又有邑屋山林之蔽，倘在人目之外，则与浊氛相杂，莫能知其所蔽，而浊氛又系其日之明晦风雨，人间烟气尘坌变作不常。
现代文：然而测定日影的地方，一百里之间，地的高低东西不能没有偏差；那中间又有城市房屋山丘林木的遮蔽，倘若在人的视力之外，就和浊气互相混杂，不能知道它所遮蔽的东西；而浊气又联系着那天的晴阴风雨，人间的烟气尘埃变化无常。
English: However, the place to measure the shadow of the sun, between a hundred miles, the height and depth of the earth can not be without deviation; in the middle there are city houses, hills, and trees. If it is outside the human vision, it will be mixed with argon gas, and it is impossible to know what it is covering; and argon gas is also related to the sunny day, the wind and rain, and the smoke and dust of the human world are fickle.

古文：臣在本局候景，入浊出浊之节，日日不同，此又不足以考见出没之实，则晨夕景之短长未能得其极数。
现代文：臣在本局占验日影，进出浊气的制约，天天不同，这又不足以考察到太阳出没的实际情况，那么早晨傍晚日影的长短就还不能得到那最后的定数。
English: The official in charge of checking the sun's shadow in this bureau, and the restrictions on the entry and exit of radon gas, are different every day, which is not enough to investigate the actual situation of the sun's appearance, so the length of the morning and evening sun's shadow can not get the final constant.

古文：参考旧闻，别立新术。
现代文：参考过去的传闻，另立新的方法。
English: Refer to past rumors to establish a new method.

古文：候景之表三，其崇八尺，博三寸三分，杀一以为厚者。
现代文：占验日影的表有三个，它们高八尺，宽三寸三分，宽度碱省零头作为厚庋。
English: There are three tables for measuring the sun's shadow. They are eight feet high, three inches and three minutes wide, and the width is reduced by a fraction to a thick rim.

古文：圭首剡其南使偏锐。
现代文：圭的头削减阳面使它偏向尖锐。
English: Kei's head slashes the sun side making it skew sharp.

古文：其趺方厚各二尺，环趺刻渠受水以为准。
现代文：它的底座的边长厚度各二尺，环绕着底座刻着小渠盛水来作为水平。
English: Its base has a thickness of two feet on each side, and around the base is engraved a small canal filled with water to serve as a level.

古文：以铜为之。
现代文：用铜制作。
English: Made of copper.

古文：表四方志墨以为中刻之，缀四绳，垂以铜丸，各当一方之墨。
现代文：表的四面刻着用墨标志的中线，连缀着四根绳子，垂吊着铜丸，分别对着一面的墨线。
English: The four sides of the table are engraved with the middle line of the ink mark, interlaced with four ropes, hanging copper balls, respectively, against one side of the ink line.

古文：先约定四方，以三表南北相重，令趺相切，表别相去二尺，各使端直。
现代文：首先约制确定四方，因为三个表南北相互重合，使底座与表贴近，表分别相距二尺，使它们各自树立正直。
English: First of all, the constraint determines the square, because the three tables coincide with each other from north to south, so that the base is close to the table, and the tables are separated by two feet, so that they each establish rectitude.

古文：四绳皆附墨，三表相去左右上下以度量之，令相重如一。
现代文：四根绳子都依附墨线，用来度量三个表左右上下之间的距离，使它们相互重合像一个似的。
English: All four strings are attached to an ink line, which is used to measure the distance between the top and bottom of the three tables, making them overlap each other like a crane.

古文：自日初出，则量西景三表相去之度，又量三表之端景之所至，各别记之。
现代文：从太阳刚刚升起，就测量西面日影在三个表相距的度数，又测量三个表的顶端的日影所达到的位置，分别记下来。
English: From the time the sun has just risen, measure the number of degrees of separation between the sun's shadow on the west side of the three tables, and also measure the position reached by the sun's shadow at the top of the three tables, and record them separately.

古文：至日欲入，候东景亦如之。
现代文：到太阳要落的时候，占验束面日影也像这样。
English: When the sun is about to set, the sun's shadow on the horizon looks like this.

古文：长短同，相去之疏密又同，则以东西景端随表景规之，半折以求最短之景。
现代文：长短相同，相距的疏密又相同，就用束面西面日影的顶端随同表的日影规划它，半折来求得最短的日影。
English: The length is the same, the density of the distance is the same, and the top of the bundled west-facing sunshade is used to plan it with the sunshade of the same table, and the shortest sunshade is obtained by half-folding.

古文：五者皆合，则半折最短之景为北，表南墨之下为南，东西景端为东西。
现代文：以上五项占验都符合，那么半折最短的日影就是北，表的南面墨线的下面是南，东西日影的顶端就是东西。
English: If all the above five tests are met, then the shortest half-folded shadow is north, the bottom of the ink line on the south side of the watch is south, and the top of the east-west shadow is east.

古文：五候一有不合，未足以为正。
现代文：上述五项占验有一项小符合，不足以为正确。
English: The above-mentioned five items have a small match, which is not enough to be considered correct.

古文：既得四方，则惟设一表，方首，表下为石席，以水平之，植表于席之南端。
现代文：已经得出四方，就只设一个表，方头，表的下面是石席，用水平来使它放平，把表树立在石席的南端。
English: Once the four sides have been drawn, only one table is set up, the square one, with a stone seat below the table. Use the level to level it, and set up the table at the southern end of the stone seat.

古文：席广三尺，长如九服冬至之景，自表趺刻以为分，分积为寸，寸积为尺。
现代文：石席宽三尺，长像全国各地。冬至日的日影长度，从表的底座刻出分的度量，分累积为寸，寸累积为尺。
English: The stone seat is three feet wide and looks like the whole country. The length of the sun's shadow on the winter solstice, the measurement of the points carved from the base of the table, the points accumulate to inches, and the inches accumulate to feet.

古文：为密室以栖表，当极为霤，以下午景使当表端。
现代文：建筑密室来安置表，正对着极的是屋檐滴水处，用下午的日影使它正对着表的顶端。
English: Building a secret room to place the table, directly opposite the pole is the eaves drip, using the afternoon sun shadow to make it directly opposite the top of the table.

古文：副表并趺崇四寸，趺博二寸，厚五分，方首，剡其南，以铜为之。
现代文：副表连同它的底座高四寸，底座宽二寸，厚五分，方头，削减阳面，用铜制作。
English: The secondary table, together with its base, is four inches high, the base is two inches wide, five points thick, square-headed, with a truncated sun face, and made of copper.

古文：凡景表景薄不可辨，即以小表副之，则景墨而易度。
现代文：凡是景表的影子淡薄不可辨识，就用小表作它的副表，那么日影墨黑而容易量度。
English: Whenever the shadow of a landscape table is too thin to be discerned, a small table is used as its sub-table, so that the sun shadow is black and easy to measure.

古文：元祐间苏颂更作者，上置浑仪，中设浑象，旁设昏晓更筹，激水以运之。
现代文：元佑年间苏颂重新制作铜仪，上面设置浑仪，中间设置浑象，旁边设黄昏拂晓的更筹，用水冲击来运转它。
English: During the Yuanwu era, Su Song re-made the bronze instrument, setting the mud instrument on top, the mud elephant in the middle, and the dusk and dawn gongs next to it, and using water impact to operate it.

古文：三器一机，吻合躔度，最为奇巧。
现代文：三个仪器一个机械，符合日月星辰运行的度数，最是奇巧。
English: Three instruments, one machine, in accordance with the frequency of the sun, moon and stars, is the most wonderful.

古文：宣和间，又尝更作之。
现代文：宣和年问，又曾经重新制作它。
English: It was remade again for the Xuanhe New Year Festival.

古文：而此五仪者悉归于金。
现代文：而这五种仪器都归了金国。
English: And these five instruments all belong to the Golden State.

古文：中兴更谋制作，绍兴三年正月，工部员外郎袁正功献浑仪木样，太史局令丁师仁始请募工铸造，且言： 东京旧仪用铜二万余，今请折半用八千斤有奇。 
现代文：南宋中兴重新谋划制作铜仪，绍兴三年正月，工部员外郎袁正功献上浑仪的木模，太史局令丁师仁开始请求招募工匠来铸遣，而且说： 束京旧的仪器使用铜二万斤，现在请求折半用八千斤多一点。 
English: In the first month of the third year of the Southern Song Dynasty, Zhongxing re-planned the production of bronze instruments. In Shaoxing, Yuan Zhenggong, a member of the Ministry of Industry, presented a wooden model of the Hun instrument. The Department of History ordered Ding Shiren to begin to request the recruitment of craftsmen to cast it, and said: The old instruments of the Bund Beijing used 20,000 catties of copper, and now they are requesting a half-time use of a little more than 8,000 catties.

古文：已而不就，盖在廷诸臣罕通其制度者。
现代文：后来没能完成，大概在朝廷的大臣们很少有通晓它的制度的。
English: Later, it was not completed, and it is likely that few ministers in the imperial court were familiar with its system.

古文：乃召苏颂子携取颂遗书，考质旧法，而携亦不能通也。
现代文：于是征召苏颂的儿子苏携拿着苏颂遗留的书籍，考证核实过去的方法，可苏携也不能通晓。
English: So Su Song's son, Su Tong, was conscripted to take the books left behind by Su Song to verify the methods of the past, but Su Tong could not understand them.

古文：至十四年，乃命宰臣秦桧提举铸浑仪，而以内侍邵谔专领其事，久而仪成。
现代文：到了十四年，就命令宰相秦桧兼管铸浑仪，而让内侍邵夸专门充任这件事，很久浑仪纔铸成。
English: In the fourteenth year, he ordered the prime minister, Qin Hui, to also supervise the casting of the Hun Yi, and let the chambermaid, Shao Qua, take on this task exclusively. The Hun Yi was cast for a long time.

古文：三十二年，始出其二置太史局。
现代文：三十二年，开始铸出第二个放在太史局。
English: Thirty-two years, began to cast a second ring placed in the Bureau of Space History.

古文：而高宗先自为一仪置诸宫中，以测天象，其制差小，而邵谔所铸盖祖是焉，后在钟鼓院者是也。
现代文：而高宗起先自己制造了一个浑仪放在宫中，用来观测天象，它的形制稍小，而邵夸铸造的浑仪大概以它为样本，后来放在钟鼓院的就是这个。
English: At first, Gao Zong made a Hun instrument himself and placed it in the palace to observe celestial objects. Its shape is slightly smaller, and the Hun instrument cast by Shao Qua probably used it as a sample. Later, this is what was placed in the Bell and Drum Academy.

古文：清台之仪，后其一在秘书省。
现代文：清台的仪器，后来其中的一个放在秘书省。
English: Qingdao's instruments, one of which was later placed in the Secretariat of the Ministry of Tongzhou.

古文：按：仪制度：表里凡三重，其第一重曰六合仪，阳经径四尺九寸六分，阔三寸二分，厚五分。
现代文：按照仪器的制度，表里共有三层：其第一层叫六合仪，阳经直径四尺几寸六分，阔三寸二分，厚五分。
English: According to the system of instruments, there are a total of three layers in the table: the first layer is called the six-in-one instrument, with a diameter of four feet and a few inches and six minutes, a width of three inches and two minutes, and a thickness of five minutes.

古文：南北正位，两面各列周天度数，南北极出入地皆三十一度少，度阔三分。
现代文：南北方向处于正位，两面分别排列着周天的度数，南北极出入地平面都是三十一度少，每度阔三分。
English: The north-south direction is in the positive position, and the degrees of Sunday are arranged on both sides. The entrance and exit planes of the north and south are 31 degrees less, and each degree is three points wider.

古文：阴纬单环大小如阳经，阔三寸二分，厚一寸八分。
现代文：阴纬单环的大小像阳经，阔三寸二分，厚一寸八分。
English: The size of the yin and yang single ring is similar to that of the yang, with a width of 3.2 inches and a thickness of 1.8 inches.

古文：上置水平池，阔九分，深四分，沿环通流，亦如旧制。
现代文：上面设置水平池，板九分，深四分，沿着单环流通，也像过去的形制一样。
English: Above, a horizontal pool is set up, with a nine-point board, four-point depth, and circulation along a single ring, just like the previous system.

古文：内外八干、十二枝，画艮、巽、坤、乾卦于四维。
现代文：内外八干、十二枝，在四维上画着艮卦、巽卦、坤卦、干卦。
English: Inside and outside, there are eight stems and twelve branches, and the four dimensions are drawn with 卦, 卦, 坤卦 and干卦.

古文：第二重曰三辰仪，径四尺三分，阔二寸二分，厚五分。
现代文：第二层叫三辰仪，直径四尺三分，阔二寸二分，厚五分。
English: The second layer is called Sanchun, with a diameter of four feet three minutes, a width of two inches two minutes, and a thickness of five minutes.

古文：釭钏刻画如阳经。
现代文：釭钏像阳经一样刻画。
English: The dragonfly is depicted like a yangjing.

古文：赤道单环，径四尺一寸四分，阔一寸二分，厚五分。
现代文：赤道单环，直径四尺一寸四分，阔一寸二分，厚五分。
English: Equatorial single ring, diameter four feet one inch four minutes, width one inch two minutes, thickness five minutes.

古文：上列二十八宿、均天度数，阔二分七厘。
现代文：上面排列着二十八星宿，均天度数，阔二分七厘。
English: Twenty-eight constellations are arranged above it, with an average number of days, and a width of 2.7 cm.

古文：黄道单环，径四尺一寸四分，阔一寸二分，厚五分，上列七十二候，均分卦策，与赤道相交，出入各二十四度弱。
现代文：黄道单环，直径四尺一寸四分，阔一寸二分，厚五分，上面排列着七十二候，均匀地分布着卦策，和赤道相交，出入地平面各是二十四度弱。
English: The zodiac is a single ring, with a diameter of four feet, one inch and four minutes, a width of one inch and two minutes, and a thickness of five minutes. Seventy-two horizons are arranged above it, evenly distributed with constellations, intersecting with the equator, and the entrance and exit planes are each less than twenty-four degrees.

古文：百刻单环，径四尺五寸六分，阔一寸二分，厚五分，上列昼夜刻数。
现代文：百刻单环，直径四尺五寸六分，阀一寸二分，厚五分，上面排列着昼夜的时辰刻数。
English: Hundreds of single rings, with a diameter of four feet, five inches and six minutes, a valve of one inch and two minutes, and a thickness of five minutes, with the hours of day and night arranged on top.

古文：第三重曰四游仪，径三尺九寸，阔一寸九分，厚五分。
现代文：第三层叫四游仪，直径三尺九寸，阔一寸九分，厚五分。
English: The third floor is called the Sanyouji, with a diameter of three feet nine inches, a width of one inch nine minutes, and a thickness of five minutes.

古文：釭钏刻画如璿玑，度阔二分半。
现代文：釭钏像璇玑一样刻画，每度阔二分半。
English: The beak is carved like a beak, two and a half times wider.

古文：望筒长三尺六寸五分，内圆外方，中通孔窍，四面阔一寸四分七厘，窥眼阔三分，夹窥径五尺三分。
现代文：望筒长三尺六寸五分，内圆外方，中间通着孔洞，四面阔一寸四分七厘，窥眼阔三分，夹窥直径五尺三分。
English: The spotting scope is three feet, six inches and five minutes long, with an inner circle and an outer circle, with a hole in the middle. It is one inch, four minutes and seven percent wide on all sides, with a three-minute wide peephole and a five-minute diameter peephole.

古文：鳌云以负龙柱，龙柱各高五尺二寸。
现代文：鳖云来承担龙柱，龙柱各高五尺=寸。
English: Yingyun to bear the dragon pillar, the dragon pillar is five feet high = inch.

古文：十字平水台高一尺一寸七分，长五尺七寸，阔五寸二分。
现代文：十字平水台高一尺一寸七分，长五尺七寸，阔五寸二分。
English: The cross-level platform is 1 foot, 1 inch, 7 minutes high, 5 feet, 7 minutes long, and 5 inches, 2 minutes wide.

古文：水槽阔七分，深一寸二分。
现代文：水槽阔七分，深一寸二分。
English: The tank is seven minutes wide and one and a half inches deep.

古文：若水运之法与夫浑象，则不复设。
现代文：至于水运的方法和那浑象，就不再设置。
English: As for the method of water transport and the mud elephant, it is no longer set up.

古文：其后朱熹家有浑仪，颇考水运制度，卒不可得。
现代文：此后朱熹家裹有浑仪，很能考核水运的制度，最终未能得到。
English: Since then, Zhu Xi's family has been wrapped in mud instruments, which is very capable of assessing the water transport system, but ultimately failed to get it.

古文：苏颂之书虽在，大抵于浑象以为详，而其尺寸多不载，是以难遽复云。
现代文：苏颂的书虽然在，大抵在浑象方面是详细的，但它的尺寸很多没有记载，因此难以很快恢复。
English: Although Su Song's book is, for the most part, detailed in terms of mud elephants, many of its dimensions are not recorded, so it is difficult to recover quickly.

古文：旧制有白道仪以考月行，在望筒之旁。
现代文：过去的制度有白道仪来考察月亮运行，在望筒的旁边。
English: The previous system had a white orb to study the moon's movement, next to a telescope.

古文：自熙宁沈括以为无益而去之，南渡更造，亦不复设焉。
现代文：从熙宁年间沈括认为它没用而去掉它，南渡重新制造，也不再设置它了。
English: From the Xining period, Sheng Guo believed that it was useless and removed it. Nandu was remade and it was no longer set up.

古文：极度极度极星之在紫垣，为七曜、三垣、二十八宿众星所拱，是谓北极，为天之正中。
现代文：极度极星在紫微垣，为七曜、三垣、二十八宿众星所环绕，这叫北极，是天的正中。
English: The extreme pole star is in the purple wisp, surrounded by the stars of the seventh, third, and twenty-eighth constellations. This is called the North Pole, which is the middle of the sky.

古文：而自唐以来，历家以仪象考测，则中国南北极之正，实去极星之北一度有半，此盖中原地势之度数也。
现代文：而从唐朝以来，星历家用仪象考察观测，那么我国中原正处在南北极的正位，实际上距极星的北边一度半，这大概是中原地势的度数。
English: However, since the Tang Dynasty, when the ephemeris has been used for home observation and observation, then the Central Plains of China is in the positive position of the South and North Poles, actually one and a half degrees north of the pole star, which is probably the degree of the Central Plains terrain.

古文：中兴更造浑仪，而太史令丁师仁乃言： 临安府地势向南，于北极高下当量行移易。 
现代文：南宋中兴重新制造浑仪，而太史令丁师仁就说： 临安府地势向南，对于北极的高低应当估量施行改变。 
English: In the Southern Song Dynasty, Zhongxing re-manufactured the Hunyi, and the Tai Shi Ling Ding Shiren said: Lin'an Prefecture's geographical position is to the south, and the elevation of the North Pole should be estimated and changed.

古文：局官吕璨言： 浑天无量行更易之制，若用于临安与天参合，移之他往必有差忒。 
现代文：局官吕璨说： 浑天没有估量施行改变的制度，如果用在临安跟天参照配合，把它移到其它地方一定有差错。 
English: Bureau official Lv Ying said: Hun Tian did not estimate the system for implementing changes. If it is used in Lin'an with reference to Tian He, it must be wrong to move it to other places.

古文：遂罢议。
现代文：于是停止议论。
English: So they stopped talking.

古文：后十余年，邵谔铸仪，则果用临安北极高下为之。
现代文：十多年后邵夸铸造仪象，就果然用临安北极高低来造它。
English: More than ten years later, when Shao Kua was casting the figurine, he actually used the Lin'an North Pole to make it.

古文：以清台仪校之，实去极星四度有奇也。
现代文：用清台的仪器来参校它，实际上距极星四度多。
English: In fact, it is more than four degrees away from the pole star.

古文：黄赤道黄赤道占天之法，以二十八宿为纲维，分列四方，南北去极各九十有一度有奇，南低而北昂，去地各三十有六度，一定不易者，名之曰赤道。
现代文：黄赤道占验天的方法，以二十八星宿为总纲和四维，分别排列在四方，南北距离极星各是九十一度多一点，南低而北高，距离地平面各是三十六度，一定不改变的，叫它赤道。
English: The method of celestial divination of the Yellow Equator, with 28 stars as the general outline and four dimensions, respectively arranged in four directions, the north-south distance from the pole star is a little more than ninety-one degrees, the south is low and the north is high, and the distance from the ground plane is thirty-six degrees, and it is certain not to change, it is called the equator.

古文：以日躔半在赤道内，半在赤道外，出入内外极远者皆二十有四度，以其行赤道之中者名之曰黄道。
现代文：因为太阳运行位置一半在赤道内，一半在赤道外，出入赤道内外最速的位置都是二十四度，把太阳在赤道之中运行的轨道取名叫黄道。
English: Because the sun's orbital position is half inside the equator and half outside the equator, and the fastest position in and out of the equator is twenty-four degrees, the orbit of the sun in the equator is called the ecliptic.

古文：凡五纬皆随日由黄道行，惟月之行有九道，四时交会归于黄道而转变焉，故有青、黑、白、赤四者之异名。
现代文：大凡五星都随着太阳经由黄道运行，只有月亮的运行有九条轨道，四季交会回归到黄道而转变运行轨道，所以有青、黑、白、赤四种不同名称。
English: All the five great stars move with the sun through the ecliptic, only the moon has nine orbits. The four seasons return to the ecliptic and change their orbits, so there are four different names: blue, black, white and red.

古文：夫赤道终古不移，则星舍宜无盈缩矣。
现代文：赤道终古不移动，那么星的位置应该没有扩大缩小的了。
English: The equator never moves, so the position of the star should not have expanded or contracted.

古文：然自唐一行作《大衍历》，以仪揆测之，得毕、觜、参、鬼四宿，分度与古不同。
现代文：可是从唐朝僧一行作《大衍历》，用仪象来观测揣度它们，测得毕宿、觜宿、参宿、鬼宿四宿，分度与古代不同。
English: However, a group of monks from the Tang Dynasty compiled the "Great Yuan Calendar" and used ritual images to observe and calculate them. They measured Bi-juku, Bi-juku, Gan-juku, and Oni-juku. The grading is different from that of ancient times.

古文：皇祐初，日官周琮以新仪测候，与唐一行尤异。
现代文：皇佑初年，日官周琮用新仪象来探测占骏，和唐朝僧一行的结果尤为不同。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, the Japanese official Zhou Yi used new ceremonial symbols to detect Zhan Yao, and the results were particularly different from those of the Tang Dynasty monks.

古文：绍圣二年，清台以赤道度数有差，复命考正。
现代文：绍圣二年，清台因为赤道度数有差错，又命令考校订正。
English: In the second year of Shaosheng, the Qing Dynasty ordered the examination to be revised because there was an error in the equatorial degree.

古文：惟牛、室、尾、柳四宿与旧法合，其他二十四宿躔度或多或寡。
现代文：只有牛宿、尾宿、室宿、柳宿四宿与过去方法相合，其它二十四宿的运行位置度数或者多了或者少了。
English: Only the Ushi-juku, O-juku, Muro-juku, and Yanagi-juku quarters are consistent with the previous method, and the other twenty-four quarters have either more or fewer running positions.

古文：盖天度之不齐，古人特纪其大纲，后世渐极于精密也。
现代文：大概天的度数不整齐，古人只记它的大略纲要，后世渐渐达到精密。
English: Probably the number of days is not uniform, the ancients only remember its general outline, and later generations gradually achieve precision.

古文：若夫黄道横络天体，列宿躔度自随岁差而增减。
现代文：至于黄道横向连络天体，各星宿的运行位置自然随着岁差而增减。
English: As for the transverse constellations of the zodiac, the positions of the stars naturally increase and decrease with the precession of the equinoxes.

古文：中兴以来，用《统元》、《纪元》及《乾道》、《淳熙》、《开禧》、《统天》、《会元》，每一历更一黄道，其多寡之异有不可胜载者，而步占家亦随各历之躔度焉。
现代文：南宋中兴以来，用《统元历》、《纪元历》及《干道历》、《淳熙历》、《开禧历》、《统天历》、《会元历》等，每一种历法变换一次黄道，其中多少的差别有不能尽载的，而天文测算占验家也随着各种历法记载的运行位置的度数进行测算占验。
English: Since the rise of the Southern Song Dynasty, each calendar has been used to transform the ecliptic once with the "Unification Era Calendar," "Epoch Era Calendar" and "Main Path Calendar," "Jun Xi Calendar," "Kai Xi Calendar," "Unification Celestial Calendar," "Meeting Era Calendar," etc. Some of the differences can not be fully recorded, and astronomical measurement and verification experts also perform measurement and verification according to the degrees of the running position recorded by various calendars.

古文：中星中星四时中星见于《尧典》，盖圣人南面而治天下，即日行而定四时，虚、鸟、火、昴之度在天，夷隩析因之候在人，故《书》首载之，以见授时为政之大也。
现代文：中星四季中星见于《尧典》，大概圣人面南背北而治理天下，就依据太阳运行而确定四季，北方虚宿、南方朱乌、东方大火、西方昴宿的度数在天，分析太平深微的原因的占验在人，所以《尚书》首先记载这些，用来看到根据天时治理政事的重大意义。
English: The four seasons are determined by the movement of the sun. The degrees of the North's imaginary abode, the South's Zhuwu, the East's great fire, and the West's abode are in the heavens. The analysis of the causes of the deep and subtle is in the people. Therefore, the Shangshu first recorded these, and used them to see the great significance of governing political affairs according to the time of day.

古文：而后世考验冬至之日，尧时躔虚，至于三代则躔于女，春秋时在牛，至后汉永元已在斗矣。
现代文：而后代考核检验冬至日的太阳，尧时运行到虚宿，到三代时就运行到女宿，春秋时在牛宿，到后汉永元问已经在斗宿了。
English: And the sun of the winter solstice, when the descendants' assessment and inspection is carried out, runs to the imaginary lodging at the beginning of the winter solstice, to the girl's lodging at the time of the third generation, to the cow's lodging at the time of spring and autumn, and to the post-Han Yongyuan question has been in the duel lodging.

古文：大略六十余年辄差一度。
现代文：大概六十多年就差一度。
English: That's a difference of about one degree in more than sixty years.

古文：开禧占测已在箕宿，校之尧时，几退四十余度。
现代文：开禧年间占验测算已经在箕宿，较之尧的时候几乎后退四十多度。
English: In the year of the jubilee, the measurement of the occupancy test was already in the middle of the year, compared to the middle of the year, it almost retreated more than forty degrees.

古文：盖自汉太初至今，已差一气有余。
现代文：大概从汉朝太初年间到现在，已经差了十五天多。
English: From roughly the first years of the Han Dynasty to the present, there has been a difference of more than fifteen days.

古文：而太阳之躔十二次，大约中气前后，乃得本月宫次。
现代文：而太阳运行十二个位置，大约在中气前后，就得出本月所在的宫次。
English: And the sun runs through twelve positions, approximately before and after the middle of the atmosphere, which gives the house number of the month.

古文：盖太阳日行一度，近岁《纪元历》定岁差，约退一分四十余秒。
现代文：大概太阳每天运行一度，近年《纪元历》确定岁差，大约后退一分四十多秒。
English: The sun probably moves once a day, and in recent years the "Chronological Calendar" has determined the precession, about one minute and forty seconds back.

古文：盖太阳日行一度而微迟缓，一年周天而微差，积累分秒而躔度见焉。
现代文：大概太阳每天运行一度而稍微迟缓，一年在天上运行一周而稍微差一点，积累分秒而运行位置就看出来了。
English: Probably the sun runs once a day and is a little slow, a year it runs in the sky for a week and is a little worse, and the accumulation of minutes and seconds shows the running position.

古文：历家考之，万五千年之后，所差半周天，寒暑将易位，世未有知其说者焉。
现代文：历家考核它，一万五千年之后，所差半周天，寒暑将换位，世间还没有懂他们说法的人。
English: The ancients have assessed it, after fifteen thousand years, the difference is half a day, the cold and heat will be transposed, the world has not understood their words.

古文：土圭土圭《周官》大司徒以土圭之法正日景，以求地中。
现代文：土圭《周官》大司徒用土圭的方法取得正确的日影，用来推求地的中心。
English: "Zhou Guan" (Chou Guan) Daishi's disciples used the method of Tu Gui to obtain the correct shadow of the sun, which they used to deduce the center of the earth.

古文：而冯相氏春夏致日，秋冬致月，以辨四时之叙。
现代文：而冯相氏在春季夏季考察太阳，在秋季冬季考察月亮，用来辨别四季的正常次序。
English: Feng Xiang observes the sun in spring and summer and the moon in autumn and winter to identify the normal order of the four seasons.

古文：汉之造历必先定东西，立晷仪，唐诏太史测天下之晷，盖校定日景，推验气节，必先乎此也。
现代文：汉朝造历法一定先确定东西，树立晷仪，唐朝诏令太史测定天下的日晷，大概由于校定日影，推验气候节物，一定要先着手于此。
English: The calendar-making method of the Han Dynasty must first determine something, establish the Puyi, and the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to determine the world's sundials. Probably due to the calibration of the sun's shadow and the inference of climatic factors, we must first proceed with this.

古文：宋朝测景在浚仪之岳台，崇宁间姚舜辅造《纪元历》，求岳台晷景，冬至后初限六十二日二十二分。
现代文：宋朝观测日影在浚仪的岳台，崇宁年间姚舜辅造《纪元历》，求得岳台日晷所测的日影，冬至后初限六十二日二十二分。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the sun's shadow was observed at Yue Tai, the location of the dredge, and during the Chongning Dynasty, Yao Zeng assisted in the creation of the "Chronological Calendar" to obtain the sun's shadow measured by the Yue Tai sundial, with an initial limit of 62 days and 22 minutes after the winter solstice.

古文：盖立八尺之表，俟圭尺上正八尺之景去冬至多寡日辰，立为初限，用减二至，得一百二十日四十二分为夏至后初限，以为后法。
现代文：大概是树立八尺的表，等待圭尺上的日影正好八尺，距离冬至多少日子时辰，立为初限，用它减去冬夏二至，得出一百二十天四十二分为夏至后初限，把它作为后来的计算法则。
English: Probably by setting up an eight-foot table, waiting for the shadow on the ruler to rise exactly eight feet, and setting the initial limit as the number of days and hours from the winter solstice, subtracting the winter solstice from it, and obtaining one hundred and twenty days and forty-two as the initial limit after the summer solstice, and using it as a later calculation rule.

古文：盖冬至之景，长短实与岁差相应，而地里远近古今亦不同焉。
现代文：大概冬至日的日影，长短实际上和岁差相应，而地下里程远近古今也不同。
English: The length of the sun's shadow around the winter solstice actually corresponds to the precession of the equinoxes, while the underground mileage varies from ancient times to the present.

古文：中兴后，清台亦立晷圭，如汴京之制，冬至必测验焉。
现代文：南宋中兴以后，清台也设立日晷土圭，像汴京的旧制，冬至日一定观测验证。
English: After the rise of the Southern Song Dynasty, the Qing Dynasty also set up the Day of the Dog, like the old system of Beijing, and the winter solstice day must be observed and verified.

古文：《统天历》、《开禧历》亦皆以六十二日数分为冬至初限，而议者谓临安之晷景当与岳台异。
现代文：《统天历》、《开禧历》也都以六十二日数分为冬至初限，而议论的人说临安日晷所测的日影应当和岳台不同。
English: The "Universal Celestial Calendar" and the "Anniversary Calendar" also divide the winter solstice into the initial limit with the number of sixty-two days, and those who discuss it say that the shadow of the sun measured by the Linyan sundial should be different from the Yue Tai.

古文：或谓当立八尺之表，俟圭景上八尺之景在四十九日有奇，当用四十九日五分为临安冬至后初限，用减二至限，得一百三十三日有奇为夏至后初限。
现代文：有人说应当树立八尺的表，等待圭尺上八尺的日影在四十九天多，应当用四十九天五分作为临安冬至后初限，用它减去冬夏二至的初限，得出一百三十三天多作为夏至后初限。
English: Some people said that an eight-foot table should be set up, waiting for the eight-foot shadow on the Gui shaku to be more than forty-nine days. Forty-nine days and five minutes should be used as the initial limit after the winter solstice, and it should be used to subtract the initial limit of the winter and summer solstice to obtain more than one hundred and thirty-three days as the initial limit after the summer solstice.

古文：参合天道，其法为密焉。
现代文：用符合天道来参验，它的方法是周密的。
English: It uses methods that are in accordance with the heavenly way to pass the examination, and its methods are meticulous.

古文：然土圭之法本以致日景，求地中，而表景不应，灾祥系焉。
现代文：然而土圭的方法本来就用来考察日影，推求地的中心，而表的日影不相应，灾异祥瑞和它相联系。
English: However, Togué's method was originally used to examine the sun's shadow and deduce the center of the earth, and the sun's shadow on the watch does not correspond, and it is associated with the auspicious and auspicious.

古文：占家知之，而亦不能知其所以然也。
现代文：占星家了解此事，但也不能知道它所以这样的原因。
English: Astrologers know about it, but they don't know why.

