古文：贺拔允，字可泥，神武尖山人也。
现代文：贺拔允，字可泥，是神武尖山县人。
English: He Bajun, the character can be muddy, is a native of Shenwu Jianshan County.

古文：祖尔头，父度拔，俱见魏史。
现代文：祖父尔头，父亲度拔，《魏书》中都有记载。
English: His grandfather, Duba, and father, Duba, are all recorded in the "Weishu."

古文：允便弓马，颇有胆略，与弟岳杀贼帅卫可肱，仍奔魏。
现代文：贺拔允熟练弯弓骑马，为人有胆略，和弟弟贺拔岳一起杀死了强盗头子卫可肱，然后投奔北魏。
English: He Banyun was skilled in riding a horse with a curved bow and was a daredevil. Together with his brother He Banyu, he killed the bandit leader Wei Ke, and then went to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：广阳王元深上允为积射将军，持节防滏口。
现代文：广阳王元深推荐他做了积射将军，持节驻防于滏口。
English: Guanyang Wang Yuancheng recommended him to be a projectile general, and he was stationed in Hekou.

古文：深败，归尔朱荣。
现代文：元深失败后，他归于尔朱荣。
English: After the failure of Yuan Sheng, he belonged to Er Zhu Rong.

古文：允父子兄弟并以武艺知名，荣素闻之。
现代文：贺拔允父子兄弟都以武艺知名于世，氽朱荣平素就听说过。
English: Both He Bajun and his brothers are famous for their martial arts, and Zhu Rong had heard of them.

古文：见允，待之甚厚。
现代文：见到贺拔允，对他很优厚。
English: When I saw He Bajun, I was very generous to him.

古文：建义初，除征东将军、光禄大夫，封寿阳县侯，邑七百户。
现代文：建义初年，拜任征束将军、光禄大夫，加封寿阳县侯，食邑七百户。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was appointed as a conscript general, a doctor of Guanglu, the lord of Jiafeng Shouyang County, and more than 700 households in food villages.

古文：永安中，除征北将军、蔚州刺史，进爵为公。
现代文：永安年间，拜任征北将军、蔚州刺史，进爵为公。
English: During the Yongan era, he was appointed as the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, the governor of Ulju Province, and knighted.

古文：魏长广王立，改封燕郡公，兼侍中。
现代文：魏长广王立为帝，贺拔允改封为燕郡公，兼任侍中。
English: Wei Changguang Wang was enthroned as emperor, and He Bajun was given the title of Yanshun Gong, and also served as a chamberlain.

古文：使茹茹，还至晋阳，值高祖将出山东，允素知高祖非常人，早自结托。
现代文：出使柔然，返回晋阳，正遇上高祖将出兵太行山东，贺拔允平时就知道高祖非等闲之辈，就早早地和他结交定下友谊。
English: The envoy, Zhu Ran, returned to Jinyang, just as he met Gao Zu, who was going to send troops to Shandong. He Ba Yun knew that Gao Zu was not an idle generation in peacetime, and made friends with him early.

古文：高祖以其北士之望，尤亲礼之。
现代文：高祖也因他是北方人士中有名望的人，特别亲近礼遇他。
English: Gaozu also treated him with special closeness and courtesy because he was a famous person among the people of the north.

古文：遂与允出信都，参定大策。
现代文：于是和贺拔允一起出兵信都，参与制定大计。
English: So, together with He Bajun, he sent troops to Xindu and participated in the formulation of the general plan.

古文：魏中兴初，转司徒，领尚书令。
现代文：北魏中兴初年转任司徒，领尚书令。
English: In the first year of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Zhongxing was transferred to the position of Sittu and received Shang Shuling.

古文：高祖入洛，进爵为王，转太尉，加侍中。
现代文：高祖进入洛阳，进爵为王，改任太尉，加任侍中。
English: Gaozu entered Luoyang, was promoted to the peerage as the king, and was reappointed to the rank of captain, and was also appointed to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：魏武帝之猜忌高祖也，以允弟岳深相委托，潜使来往。
现代文：魏武帝猜忌高祖，对贺拔允的弟弟贺拔岳委以重用，让他偷偷地与贺拔允往来刺探高祖行踪。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei suspected Gao Zu, and made heavy use of He Batyue, the younger brother of He Banyun, and had him secretly meet with He Banyun to probe Gao Zu's whereabouts.

古文：当时咸虑允为变。
现代文：当时人们都担心贺拔允会变心。
English: At that time, people were worried that He Bajun would change his mind.

古文：及岳死，武帝又委岳弟胜心腹之寄。
现代文：及至贺拔岳死，魏武帝又委任其弟贺拔胜为心腹之臣，希望他继续注视高祖行踪。
English: When He Baxian died, Emperor Wu of Wei also appointed his brother He Baxian as a trusted vassal, hoping that he would continue to follow Gao Zu's whereabouts.

古文：高祖重其旧，久全护之。
现代文：高祖看重与贺拔允的多年交情，长期保全他。
English: Gaozhu valued the friendship with He Bajun for many years and preserved him for a long time.

古文：天平元年乃赐死，时年四十八，高祖亲临哭。
现代文：到东魏天平元年才赐他一死，死时四十八岁。高祖还亲自前往吊丧祭奠。
English: In the first year of the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Gaozu died at the age of forty-eight. Gaozu himself went to the funeral to pay his respects.

古文：赠定州刺史、五州军事。
现代文：赠给他室州刺史、五州军事。
English: He was presented with the Muroshu Shishi and the Goshushu Militarism.

古文：允有三子，长子世文，次世乐，次难陀。
现代文：他有三个儿子，长子名世主，次子名世銮，三子名凿皿。
English: He had three sons, the eldest of whom was named Shoshu, the second Shoshu Shoshu, and the third Shoshu Shoshu.

古文：兴和末，高祖并召与诸子同学。
现代文：兴勉末年，直担把他们都召来与儿子们同学。
English: At the end of the year in Xingren, Zhitang called them all to go to school with his sons.

古文：武定中，敕居定州，赐其田宅。
现代文：亘逸年间下令让他们居住于室塑，赐给田地房产。
English: Over the years, he ordered them to live in Murosuke and gave them real estate in the fields.

古文：蔡俊，字景彦，广宁石门人也。
现代文：蔡俊，字景彦，是广宁郡石门县人。
English: Cai Jun, a.k.a. Jinghan, is a native of Shimen County, Guangning County.

古文：父普，北方扰乱，奔走五原，守战有功。拜宁朔将军，封安上县男，邑二百户。
现代文：父蔡普，当北方扰乱时奔向五原，守战有功，拜任宁朔将军，封为安上县男，食邑二百户。
English: Father Cai Pu, when the north was disturbed, he rushed to the Wufangyuan, played a role in defending the war, was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, was named the man of Anzhang County, and had 200 households.

古文：寻卒，赠辅国将军、燕州剌史。
现代文：不久去世，赠给他辅国将军、燕州刺史。
English: Soon after his death, he was given the auxiliary state general, Yanzhou Zhishi.

古文：俊豪爽有胆气，高祖微时，深相亲附。
现代文：蔡俊为人豪爽有胆量，高祖微贱时，便与他深相交结。
English: Cai Jun is a brave and courageous person. When Gao Zu was a lowly person, he was deeply intertwined with him.

古文：与辽西段长、太原庞苍鹰俱有先知之鉴。
现代文：他和辽西人段长、太原人庞苍鹰都有未先知的鉴识。
English: Both he and Duan Chang from western Liaoning Province and Pang Cangying from Taiyuan Province have unprecedented knowledge.

古文：长为魏怀朔镇将，尝见高祖，甚异之，谓高祖云： 君有康世之才，终不徒然也，请以子孙为托。 
现代文：段长曾任北魏怀朔镇将，曾见到高祖，十分惊异，对高祖说： 您有拯救乱世的才能，终不会虚度年月的。我愿把子孙全托付给您。 
English: The section chief was once the general of the town of Waishuo in the Northern Wei Dynasty. When he saw Gao Zu, he was very surprised and said to Gao Zu: You have the talent to save the chaotic world, and you will not waste your years. I would like to entrust all my children and grandchildren to you.

古文：兴和中，启赠司空公。
现代文：兴和年间，高祖奏请追赠他为司空公。
English: During the Xinghe era, Gao Zuo was posthumously awarded the title of Sikuo.

古文：子宁，相府从事中郎，天保初，兼南中郎将。
现代文：其子段宁，任相府从事中郎。天保初年，兼任南中郎将。
English: His son, Dan Ning, served as churo at the cabinet of ministers. In the first year of the Tenpo era, he also served as minami churo shogun.

古文：苍鹰交游豪侠，厚待宾旅，居于州城。
现代文：庞苍鹰则交游天下豪侠，厚待宾客商旅，住在晋州城裹。
English: The giant eagle, on the other hand, befriends the world's heroes, is hospitable to guests and business travelers, and lives in Jinzhou City.

古文：高祖客其舍，初居处于蜗牛庐中，苍鹰母数见庐上赤气属天。
现代文：高祖曾作客于他家，开头住在蜗牛庐中，苍鹰之母多次见蜗庐上空红光照天。
English: Gao Zu had been a guest at his home, initially living in a yakitori, and Mother Goshawk had seen the red light shining in the sky over the yakitori many times.

古文：苍鹰亦知高祖有霸王之量，每私加敬，割其宅半以奉高祖，由此遂蒙亲识。
现代文：苍鹰也知道高祖有霸王之量，常常私加敬重，分出其宅舍的一半给高祖，从此受到高祖的特别赏识。
English: Goshawk also knew that Gao Zu was a tyrant, so he often gave him extra respect and allocated half of his house to Gao Zu. From then on, he received special appreciation from Gao Zu.

古文：高祖之牧晋州，引为兼治中从事史，行义宁郡事。
现代文：高祖任晋州刺史时，引荐他为兼治中从事史，代理义宁郡守。
English: When Gao Zu was appointed as the governor of Jinzhou, he was recommended to be the governor of Yining County.

古文：及义旗建，苍鹰乃弃家间行归高祖，高祖以为兼行台仓部郎中。
现代文：及至高祖举旗起兵，庞苍鹰便舍家抄小路追上高祖，高祖用他为兼行台仓部郎中。
English: When Gao Zu raised the flag and raised an army, Pang Cang Ying left his home and followed the path to catch up with Gao Zu. Gao Zu used him as a concubine of Taitai Cang De.

古文：卒于安州刺史。
现代文：他死于安州刺史任上。
English: He died on the post of Anzhou chief historian.

古文：俊初为杜洛周所虏，时高祖亦在洛周军中，高祖谋诛洛周，俊预其计。
现代文：蔡俊初被杜洛周俘虏，那时高祖也在杜洛周军中。高祖计划杀死洛周，蔡俊参加了谋划。
English: Cai Jun was first captured by Du Luo Zhou, at that time Gaozu was also in Du Luo Zhou's army. Gaozu planned to kill Luo Zhou, and Cai Jun participated in the planning.

古文：事泄，走奔葛荣，仍背葛归尔朱荣。
现代文：事情泄露，逃奔葛荣，又背着葛荣投奔了氽朱荣。
English: When the affair leaked out, he fled to Ge Rong, and then, behind Ge Rong's back, he ran to Zhu Rong.

古文：荣入洛，为平远将军、帐内别将。
现代文：氽朱荣进入洛阳，蔡俊任平远将军、帐内别将。
English: Zhai Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, Cai Jun was appointed as the general of Pingyuan, and he was the second in charge.

古文：从破葛荣，除谏议大夫。
现代文：随军打败了葛荣，拜任谏议大夫。
English: He defeated Ge Rong with his army and was appointed as the doctor of debate.

古文：又从平元颢，封乌洛县男。
现代文：又随军平定元颢，封为乌洛县男。
English: He also followed the army to subdue the Yuan Dynasty and was named the man of Uluo County.

古文：随高祖举义，为都督。
现代文：后随高祖起兵，拜任都督。
English: Later, he followed Gao Zu in raising an army and was appointed as the new governor.

古文：高祖平邺，及破四胡于韩陵，俊并有战功。
现代文：高祖攻下邺都，又平定四胡于韩陵，蔡俊都有战功。
English: Gaozhu conquered Shidu and subdued Shihwu and Hanling, and Cai Jun had outstanding war exploits.

古文：太昌中，出为济州剌史，为治严暴，又多受纳，然亦明解有部分，吏民畏服之。
现代文：太昌年间外放任济州刺史。他为政苛严暴虐，又多收受贿赂，衹是办事有头脑，处置适当，吏民都畏服于他。
English: During the Taichang era, he was appointed as the governor of Jeju Province. He was a harsh and tyrannical ruler, and he accepted many bribes. However, he was intelligent and handled things properly. The officials and the people were afraid of him.

古文：性好宾客，颇称施与。
现代文：他为人好接交宾客，颇好施舆，这方面名声不错。
English: He is very good at receiving guests and is quite good at giving compliments. He has a good reputation in this regard.

古文：后胡迁等据兖州作逆，俊与齐州刺史尉景讨平之。
现代文：后来胡迁等人占据兖州作乱，蔡俊和齐州刺史尉景合力讨平了胡迁。
English: Later, Hu Qian and others occupied Bozhou to create turmoil, and Cai Jun and Qi Zhou's lieutenant Jing worked together to level Hu Qian.

古文：魏武帝贰于高祖，以济州要重，欲令腹心据之。
现代文：东魏武帝和高祖有矛盾，因为济州是军事要地，想让自己的心腹去把守它。
English: Emperor Wu of the Eastern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Gaozu had a conflict, because Jeju was a military important place, and they wanted their henchmen to guard it.

古文：阴诏御史构俊罪状，欲以汝阳王代俊，由是转行兖州事。
现代文：就暗中下韶叫御史罗织蔡俊的罪状，准备用汝阳王去代替蔡俊，由此蔡俊改任代理兖州刺史。
English: In response to the accusation that he had secretly ordered his subordinate, Luo Wei, to weave Cai Jun, he was prepared to use Ruyang Wang to replace Cai Jun. As a result, Cai Jun was reassigned as the acting governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：高祖以俊非罪，启复其任。
现代文：高祖认为他没有过错，要求恢复蔡俊的职权，东魏武帝不肯答应。
English: Gaozu believed that he was not at fault and demanded the restoration of Cai Jun's authority, but Emperor Wu of the Eastern Wei Dynasty refused to agree.

古文：武帝不许，除贾显智为刺史，率众赴州。
现代文：武帝任命买颢智为济州刺史，带着一批人去上任。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Ma Jianzhi as the governor of Jeju, and he took a group of people with him to take office.

古文：俊以防守严备，显智惮之，至东郡，不敢前。
现代文：蔡俊防守很严密充分，颢智很害怕，到了东郡便不敢前往了。
English: Cai Jun's defense was very tight and sufficient, and Zhai Zhi was very scared, and he did not dare to go to Dong County.

古文：天平中，为都督，随领军娄昭攻樊子鹄于兖州，又与行台元子思讨元庆和，俱平之。
现代文：天平年间，蔡俊任都督，随领军将军娄昭进攻樊子鹄于兖州，又随行台元于思讨伐元庆和，两地都平定了。
English: During the Tenpyo era, Cai Jun was appointed as the governor of the capital. He followed the leading army general Zou Zhao to attack Zizi in Zhangzhou, and also followed Taigen to think about fighting Yuan Qing He. Both places were leveled.

古文：侯深反，复以俊为大都督，率众讨之，深败走。
现代文：侯深叛变，再次用蔡俊为大都督，率兵进讨，侯深败走。
English: Hou Sheng mutinied, once again using Cai Jun as the grand governor, led the troops to advance, and Hou Sheng was defeated and left.

古文：又转扬州刺史。
现代文：又转任扬州刺史。
English: He was also appointed Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：天平三年秋，卒于州，时年四十二。
现代文：天平三年秋，死在扬州任上，时年四十二岁。
English: Tianping died in the autumn of his third year in office in Yangzhou, at the age of 42.

古文：赠持节、侍中、都督、冀州刺史、尚书令、司空公，谥曰威武。
现代文：赠给他持节、侍中、都督、冀州刺史、尚书令、司空公，谧号为威武。
English: He was given the titles of Ji Jie, Jizhong, Jizhong, Jizhong, Jizhong, Shang Shuling, and Sikuo. His nickname was Wei Wu.

古文：齐受禅，诏祭告其墓。
现代文：齐接受禅让建国时，下韶祭告于其墓前。
English: After the founding of the country, the emperor issued an edict to his tomb.

古文：皇建初，配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：皇建初年，让他陪祭于高祖之庙。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was allowed to officiate at a ceremony at the temple of Emperor Gaozu.

古文：韩贤，字普贤，广宁石门人也。
现代文：韩贤，字普贤，是广宁郡石门县人。
English: Han Xian, Zi Pu Xian, Guangning Shimen Ren.

古文：壮健有武用。
现代文：此人身体健壮，有武将之才。
English: This man is physically robust and has the talent of a warrior.

古文：初随葛荣作逆，荣破，随例至并州，尔朱荣擢充左右。
现代文：初随葛荣造反，葛荣失败，他被送到并州，尔朱荣提拔他在自己身边。
English: At first, Ge Rong rebelled with Ge Rong, Ge Rong failed, he was sent to Bozhou, and Er Zhu Rong promoted him to his side.

古文：荣妻子北走，世隆等立魏长广王晔为主，除贤镇远将军、屯骑校尉。
现代文：尔朱荣妻子北奔时，氽朱世隆等扶佐魏长广王元晔登位，任韩贤为镇远将军、屯骑校尉。
English: When Le Zhurong's wife fled to the north, Zou Zhu Shilong and others supported Wei chancellor Wang Guangyuan to ascend to the throne, and Han Xian was appointed as Zhenyuan general and Tuen Kie lieutenant.

古文：先是，世隆等攻建州及石城，贤并有战功。
现代文：这以前，世隆等攻打建州及石城，韩贤都有战功。
English: Prior to this, Shilong and others attacked Jianzhou and Shicheng, and Han Xian made great achievements.

古文：尔朱度律用为帐内都督，封汾阳县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：氽朱度律用他为帐内都督，封为汾阳县伯，食邑四百产。
English: He was appointed as the prefect of Shiyang County by Zhu Du Lu, and the food production of the county was over 400 tons.

古文：普泰初，除前将军、广州刺史。
现代文：普泰初年，拜任前将军、广州刺史。
English: In the first year of Putai, he paid tribute to the former general and the history of Guangzhou.

古文：属高祖起义，度律以贤素为高祖所知，恐其有变，遣使征之。
现代文：正逢高祖举兵起义，氽朱度律认为韩贤早为高祖所熟悉，担心生变，派使者征召他。
English: At the time of Gao Zu's uprising, Zou Zhu Duru thought that Han Xian had been familiar with Gao Zu for a long time, and was worried about his health, so he sent an envoy to recruit him.

古文：贤不愿应召，乃密遣群蛮，多举烽火，有如寇难将至。使者遂为启，得停。
现代文：韩贤不愿应召，便秘密地指使当地蛮人多处燃起烽火，似乎就要发生重大叛乱一般，使者把情况报告了，遣才免了此行。
English: Han Xian did not want to answer the summons, so he secretly ordered the local barbarians to light bonfires in many places. It seemed that a major rebellion was about to take place. The envoy reported the situation and was sent back before he was excused from the trip.

古文：贤仍潜遣使人通诚于高祖。
现代文：韩贤便暗地派人与高祖联络，向高祖表明心愿。
English: Han Xian then secretly sent someone to contact Gao Zu and express his wishes to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖入洛，尔朱官爵例皆削除，以贤远送诚款，令其复旧。
现代文：高祖大兵入洛，依例氽朱氏封置的宫爵应一律削馀，就因为韩贤老远地派人早早输诚表态，便下令让他照旧任广州刺史。
English: Gao Zu's soldiers entered Luo, and according to the rule, all the princes sealed by the Zhu clan should be reduced. Because Han Xian sent someone far away to express his position early, he ordered him to continue to serve as the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：太昌初，累迁中军将军、光禄大夫，出为建州刺史。
现代文：太昌初年，累迁任中军将军、光禄大夫，外放任建州刺史。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was successively transferred to serve as the general of the Chinese army, the doctor of Guanglu, and the secretary of Jianzhou.

古文：武帝西入，转行荆州事。
现代文：魏武帝西进，韩贤改任代理荆州刺史。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei marched westward, and Han Xian was appointed acting governor of Jingzhou.

古文：天平初，为洛州刺史。
现代文：天平初年，韩贤任洛州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, Han Xian was appointed as the governor of Lozhou.

古文：民韩木兰等率土民作逆，贤击破之，亲自按检，欲收甲仗。
现代文：当地居民韩木兰等率土人叛乱，韩贤打败了他们，亲自查核战场情况，想收集作战器材。
English: Local residents Han Mulan and others led the aboriginal rebellion, Han Xian defeated them, personally checked the nuclear battlefield situation, and wanted to collect combat equipment.

古文：有一贼窘迫，藏于死尸之间，见贤将至，忽起斫之，断其胫而卒。
现代文：有一个贼兵窘迫无路，藏身于死尸之间，见韩贤走了过来，忽然跃起举刀便砍，韩贤被砍断腿而死。
English: One thief-soldier was in a desperate situation, hiding among the dead bodies. When he saw Han Xian coming, he suddenly jumped up, raised his knife and slashed him. Han Xian was killed by cutting off his leg.

古文：贤虽武将，性和直，不甚贪暴，所历虽无善政，不为吏民所苦。
现代文：韩贤虽为武将，但个性平和正直，不太残暴，所历各地虽无惠政，也不为吏民所苦。
English: Although Han Xian was a military commander, his personality was peaceful and honest, and he was not very cruel. Although there were no favorable policies in the regions he visited, he did not suffer from officials and the people.

古文：昔汉明帝时，西域以白马负佛经送洛，因立白马寺，其经函传在此寺，形制淳朴，世以为古物，历代藏宝。
现代文：过去漠明帝时，西域人用白马驮经文送到洛阳，因而建白马寺，其经函传说就存放在此寺中。经函形制古朴，世人以它为古物，历代珍藏。
English: In the past, during the reign of Emperor Mengming, the Western Regions people sent the White Horse Sutra to Luoyang, and thus built the White Horse Temple. The legend of the sutra box is stored in this temple. The sutra box shape is quaint, the world regards it as an antique, and it has been treasured throughout the ages.

古文：贤无故斫破之，未几而死，论者或谓贤因此致祸。
现代文：韩贤无故将其砍破，不几天就死去了，议论者认为他是因此而招祸的。
English: Han Xian cut it for no reason and died a few days later, and commentators believe that he invited disaster because of this.

古文：赠侍中、持节、定营安平四州军事、大将军、尚书令、司空公、定州刺史。
现代文：朝廷赠给他侍中、持节，定州、营州、安州、平州四州诸军事，又赐给他大将军、尚书令、司空公、定州刺史。
English: The imperial court presented him with the titles of chamberlain and military commander of the four military regions of Dingzhou, Yingzhou, Anzhou and Pingzhou, and also gave him the titles of grand general, Shangshurong, Sikuogong and Dingzhou Shishi.

古文：子裔嗣。
现代文：儿子韩裔袭爵。
English: Korean-born son succeeds to peerage.

古文：尉长命，太安狄那人也。
现代文：尉长命，是太安狄那人。
English: He lived a long life. He was from the Andes.

古文：父显，魏镇远将军、代郡太守。
现代文：父亲名显，是北魏镇远将军、代郡太守。
English: His father, Meixian, was the Northern Wei general Zhenyuan and acting county governor.

古文：长命性和厚，有器识。
现代文：尉长命个性忠厚温和，有治政才干，有见识。
English: Lieutenant Changmei's personality is loyal and gentle, and he has the ability to govern and insight.

古文：扶阳之乱，寄居太原。
现代文：扶阳叛乱发生后，他寄居在太原。
English: After the Fuyang Rebellion, he lived in Taiyuan.

古文：及高祖将建大义，长命参计策，从高祖破四胡于韩陵，拜安南将军。
现代文：及至高祖准备起兵时，他参加了谋划，跟随高祖在韩陵击败了四胡，拜任安南将军。
English: When Emperor Gaozu was preparing to raise an army, he took part in the planning and followed Emperor Gaozu in defeating the Sihus at Hanling and taking the place of General Annan.

古文：樊子鹄据兖州反，除东南道大都督，与诸军讨平之。
现代文：樊子鹄窃据兖州造反时，拜任东南道大都督，和各部一起讨平了叛军。
English: At the time of the rebellion in Zhangzhou, Zou Zi Plagiarism was appointed as the grand governor of Southeastern Province, and together with other ministries, he defeated the rebels.

古文：转镇范阳城，就拜幽州剌史，督安、平二州事。
现代文：转而镇守范阳城，就地拜任幽州刺史，督理安州、平州二州军政。
English: Instead, he guarded Fanyang City, and assumed the post of Yuzhou military governor, supervising the military administration of Anzhou and Pingzhou.

古文：州居北垂，土荒民散，长命虽多聚敛，然以恩抚民，少得安集。
现代文：幽州在北方边地，土地荒瘠，民众离散，尉长命虽然好聚敛财富，不过还能以恩信安抚人心，稍稍安定了地方。
English: Yuzhou is on the edge of the north, the land is desolate, the people are scattered, and although longevity is good for accumulating wealth, it can also pacify people's hearts with grace and slightly stabilize the place.

古文：寻以疾去职。
现代文：不久因病免职。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：未几，复征拜车骑大将军、都督西燕幽沧瀛四州诸军事、幽州刺史。
现代文：不多时又被起用，拜任车骑大将军，都督西燕、幽州、沧州、瀛州四州诸军事，幽州刺史。
English: Not infrequently, he was appointed as the general of the cavalry, the military governor of Xiyan, Yuzhou, Cangzhou, and Zhangzhou, and the history of Yuzhou.

古文：卒于州。
现代文：就死在州任上。
English: He died in the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：赠以本官，加司空，谥曰武壮。
现代文：赠给他本官，并加司空名号，谧为武壮。
English: He was given his own post, and was given the title of Sikyong, and was known as Wuzhong.

古文：子兴敬，便弓马，有武艺，高祖引为帐内都督。
现代文：他儿子叫尉兴敬，娴熟弓马，有武艺，高祖引荐他做了帐内都督。
English: His son was named Fei Xingjing. He was proficient in archery and horsemanship and had martial arts skills. Gao Zu recommended him to be the governor of Chengdu.

古文：出为常山公府参军事，赐爵集中县伯。
现代文：外放任常山公府的参军事，赐给他集中县伯的爵位。
English: He was given the title of county magistrate.

古文：晋州民李小兴群聚为贼，兴敬随司空韩轨讨平之，进爵为侯。
现代文：晋州百姓李小兴招聚一帮人为盗，尉兴敬随司空韩轨前往讨平了他，进爵为侯。
English: Li Xiaoxing, a citizen of Jinzhou, recruited a group of thieves. His lieutenant, Xingjing, went with him to settle the dispute and became a marquess.

古文：高祖攻周文帝于邙山，兴敬因战为流矢所中，卒。
现代文：后来高祖攻打西周文帝于邙山，兴敬在战场上被流矢射中而亡。
English: Later, Gaozu attacked the Western Zhou Emperor in Shaoshan, and Xingjing was shot dead on the battlefield.

古文：赠泾、岐、豳三州军事，爵为公，谥曰闵庄。
现代文：赠给他泾、岐、豳三州军事，爵位为公，谧号是闵庄。
English: He was given the military titles of, 岐, and  of the three prefectures, the title of nobility, and the posthumous name of Shanzhuang.

古文：高祖哀惜之，亲临吊，赐其妻子禄如兴敬存焉。
现代文：高祖哀惜他，亲自吊丧，赐其妻子俸禄就如兴敬在世时一样。
English: Gao Zu felt sorry for him, personally mourned, and gave his wife a stipend, just as Xing Jian did when he was alive.

古文：子士林嗣。
现代文：儿子尉士林继承他的爵位。
English: His son, Lt. Shilin, succeeded to his title.

古文：王怀，字怀周，不知何许人也。
现代文：王怀，字怀周，也不知道他是哪裹人氏。
English: Wang Huai, also known as Huai Zhou, does not know who he is.

古文：少好弓马，颇有气尚，值北边丧乱，早从戎旅。
现代文：年轻时就爱好射箭骑马，为人有胆气，正逢北方丧乱，他便加入了军旅。
English: When he was young, he was fond of archery and horseback riding, and he was a man of courage. At the time of the Northern Rebellion, he joined the army.

古文：韩楼反于幽州，怀知其无成，阴结所亲，以中兴初叛楼归魏，拜征虏将军、第一领民酋长、武周县侯。
现代文：韩楼在幽州谋反，王怀知道他不会成功，便暗地交结亲朋，在中兴初年叛韩楼归魏。拜任征虏将军、第一领民酋长、武周县侯。
English: Han Lou plotted a rebellion in Yuzhou. Wang Huai knew that he would not succeed, so he secretly made friends with relatives. In the first year of ZTE, Han Lou rebelled and returned to Wei. He was appointed as a conscript general, the first leader of the people, and the lord of Wuzhou County.

古文：高祖东出，怀率其部人三千余家，随高祖于冀州。
现代文：高祖带兵束出太行，王怀率领所部三千余产随高祖大军到了冀州。
English: Gao Zu led the troops out of Taihang, and Wang Huai led more than three thousand troops from the headquarters to follow Gao Zu's army to Jizhou.

古文：义旗建，高祖以为大都督，从讨尔朱兆于广阿，破之，除安北将军、蔚州刺史。
现代文：高祖公开起兵后，拜任大都督，随高祖讨伐尔朱兆于广阿，打败了氽朱兆，拜任安北将军，蔚州刺史。
English: After Gaozu openly raised an army, he was appointed as the grand governor of Ulsan. He fought Zhu Zhao in Guang'a with Gaozu, defeated Gong Zhu Zhao, was appointed as the general of Anbei, and made history in Ulsan.

古文：又随高祖攻邺，克之，从破四胡于韩陵，进爵为侯。
现代文：又随高祖进攻邺城，攻破邺城后又随高祖击破四胡于韩陵，进为侯爵。
English: He also followed Gaozu in attacking Shicheng, and after defeating Shicheng, he followed Gaozu in defeating Shihou and Hanling, and became a marquis.

古文：仍从入洛，拜车骑将军，改封卢乡县侯。
现代文：又随军入洛阳，拜任车骑将军，改封卢乡县侯。
English: He also followed the army into Luoyang, and was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry. He was renamed the lord of Luxiang County.

古文：天平中，除使持节、广州军事。
现代文：天平年间，拜任使持节、广州军事。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he was appointed as the chief envoy of the Guangzhou Military.

古文：梁遣将湛僧珍、杨暕来寇，怀与行台元晏击项城，拔之，擒暕。
现代文：梁朝派将军湛僧珍、杨陈来侵扰，王怀和行台元晏引兵反击，攻下项城，生擒杨陈。
English: The Liang Dynasty sent generals Zhan Zongzhen and Yang Chen to invade, and Wang Huai and Xiangtai Yuanjun led troops to counterattack, captured Xiangcheng, and killed Yang Chen.

古文：又从高祖袭克西夏州。
现代文：又随高祖袭击攻克西夏州。
English: He also conquered Xixia Prefecture with Gaozu's attack.

古文：还，为大都督，镇下馆，除仪同三司。
现代文：回师后，拜任大都督，镇守下馆，拜任仪同三司。
English: After returning to the division, he was appointed as the grand governor, the town guard of the lower hall, and the appointment ceremony with the three departments.

古文：元象初，为大都督，与诸将西讨，遇疾卒于建州。
现代文：元象初年任大都督，与诸将西讨，生病死于建州。
English: Yuan Xiang, the first year of his tenure as the great governor, argued with the generals, fell ill and died in Jianzhou.

古文：赠定幽恒肆四州诸军事、刺史、司徒公、尚书仆射。
现代文：赠给他定幽恒肆四州诸军事、刺史、司徒公、尚书仆射。
English: He was given the titles of Shishu Military, Shishi, Shitoko, and Shoshu.

古文：怀以武艺勋诚为高祖所知，志力未申，论者惜其不遂。
现代文：王怀以其武艺高强，多立战功，忠于北齐而受到高祖的器重喜爱，而志向未能实现，时人为他可惜。
English: Wang Huai was greatly loved by Gao Zu for his strong martial arts, many military exploits, and loyalty to Beiqi. It was a pity for him that his ambition could not be realized.

古文：皇建初，配飨高祖庙庭。
现代文：皇建初年，朝廷决定让他陪祭于高祖之庙。
English: In the first year of imperial construction, the imperial court decided to have him officiate at the temple of Gaozu.

古文：刘贵，秀容阳曲人也。
现代文：刘贵，是秀容阳曲人。
English: Liu Gui is a famous composer.

古文：父乾，魏世赠前将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：其父刘干，是北魏所赠的前将军、肆州刺史。
English: His father, Liu Gan, was a former general of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：贵刚格有气断，历尔朱荣府骑兵参军。
现代文：刘贵为人刚强能决断，曾任尔朱荣府骑兵参军。
English: Liu Gui was a strong-willed person who could make decisions. He was once a cavalryman in Zhurong Prefecture and joined the army.

古文：建义初，以预定策勋，封敷城县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：建义初年，因为他有事先参加计议的功劳，封为敷城县伯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, because he had the merit of participating in the deliberation in advance, he was awarded the title of Shicheng County Mayor, with more than 500 households in the food village.

古文：除左将军、太中大夫，寻进为公。
现代文：拜任左将军、太中大夫，不久进爵为公。
English: He was promoted to General of the Left and Grand Vice Admiral, and soon became a peer.

古文：荣性猛急，贵尤严峻，每见任使，多惬荣心，遂被信遇，位望日重，加抚军将军。
现代文：尔朱荣性格猛急，刘贵更是严厉急苛，每次接受任务完成的都使尔朱荣十分满意，于是一天天受到分外重视，位望一天天提高，加任抚军将军。
English: Le Zhu Rong's character was extremely impatient, and Liu Gui was even more severe and demanding. Every time he accepted a task and completed it, Le Zhu Rong was very satisfied. Therefore, he received extra attention every day, his prestige increased day by day, and he was appointed as the general of the army.

古文：永安三年，除凉州刺史。
现代文：永安三年，拜任凉州刺史。
English: In the third year of Yongan, he succeeded to the post of Liangzhou chief historian.

古文：建明初，尔朱世隆专擅，以贵为征南将军、金紫光禄、兼左仆射、西道行台，使抗孝庄行台元显恭于正平。
现代文：建明初年，尔朱世隆专权，用刘贵为征南将军、金紫光禄大夫、兼左仆射、西道行台。让他去抵抗孝庄帝的行台元显恭于正平县。
English: In the first year of the Jianming era, Zhu Shilong used Liu Gui as the general of the Southern Expedition, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the assistant of Zuo Shuai, and the western road of Xingtai. He let him resist the emperor of Xiaozhuang, the emperor of Xingtai, in Zhengping County.

古文：贵破显恭，擒之，并大都督裴俊等，复除晋州刺史。
现代文：刘贵攻破显恭，俘获了他，大都督裴俊等也一并俘获。
English: Liu Gui defeated Xian Gong and captured him, and the grand governor Pei Jun and others were also captured.

古文：普泰初，转行汾州事。
现代文：又拜任晋州刺史，普泰初年又转职代理汾州刺史。
English: He also took up the post of Jinzhou chief clerk, and in the first year of Putai, he also took up the post of agent of Zhangzhou chief clerk.

古文：高祖起义，贵弃城归高祖于邺。
现代文：高祖起义，刘贵弃城归高祖于邺城。
English: Gaozu revolts, Liu Gui abandons the city and returns Gaozu to Shicheng.

古文：太昌初，以本官除肆州刺史，转行建州事。
现代文：太昌初年，以本官任肆州刺史，改代理建州刺史。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was appointed as the secretary of Zhouzhou History, and later became the secretary of Jianzhou History.

古文：天平初，除陕州刺史。
现代文：天平初年，拜任陕州刺史。
English: In the first year of Tianping, he was appointed to the post of Shaanxi Provincial Historian.

古文：四年，除御史中尉、肆州大中正。
现代文：四年，又拜任御史中尉、肆州大中正。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to Lieutenant of History and became a junior high school principal at Waseda University.

古文：其年，加行台仆射，与侯景、高昂等讨独孤如愿于洛阳。
现代文：逭一年，加任行台仆射，与侯景、高昂等讨伐独孤如愿于洛阳。
English: A year later, he was promoted to the post of Xingtaibuxi, and joined Houjing, Gao'ang and others to fight against isolationism in Luoyang.

古文：贵凡所经历，莫不肆其威酷。
现代文：塑直所到任所，没有不恣意表现其威猛酷虐的。
English: From the sculptor's studio to his office, there is no arbitrary expression of his power and brutality.

古文：修营城郭，督责切峻，非理杀害，视下如草芥。
现代文：他修造经营城郭，督责十分苛严急切，被无故杀害的不知多少，视手下如草芥。
English: He built and managed the castle, his supervision was very strict and urgent, he was killed for no reason, I don't know how many times, and he treated his subordinates like dirt.

古文：然以严断济务，有益机速。
现代文：但是由于他以威严断决时务，对军国大事的迅速处理有益。
English: However, because he resolves current affairs with dignity, it is beneficial to quickly deal with military affairs.

古文：性峭直，攻讦无所回避，故见赏于时。
现代文：他为人峭直，揭发打击无所回避，所以也得到赏识。
English: He is a straightforward person, revealing the blow without any evasion, so he is also appreciated.

古文：虽非佐命元功，然与高祖布衣之旧，特见亲重。
现代文：他虽不是辅佐建国的元老功臣，但跟高祖有患难之交，所以特别受到亲信器重。
English: Although he was not a veteran hero who assisted in the founding of the country, he had a difficult friendship with Gao Zu, so he was especially valued by his close followers.

古文：兴和元年十一月卒。
现代文：兴和元年十一月去世。
English: He passed away in November of the first year of the Heian period.

古文：赠冀定并殷瀛五州军事、太保、太尉公、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谥曰忠武。
现代文：赠给他冀定并殷瀛五州诸军事、太保、太尉公、录尚书事、冀州刺史，谧号为忠武。
English: He was given the title of "Ji Ding" and the titles of "Military," "Tai Po" and "Taifenggong" of the five states, as well as "Record of Records" and "History of Jizhou." His nickname was "Chungwu."

古文：齐受禅，诏祭告其墓。
现代文：北齐接受禅让建国后，皇帝下诏祭告于其墓。
English: After the founding of the country, the emperor issued an edict to his tomb.

古文：皇建中，配享高祖庙庭。
现代文：皇建年间决定他陪祭于高祖之庙。
English: In the middle of imperial construction, enjoy the high ancestral temple garden.

古文：长子元孙，员外郎、肆州中正，早卒。赠肆州刺史。
现代文：其长子刘元孙，历任员外郎、肆州中正，早年死去，赠为肆州刺史。
English: His eldest son, Liu Yuan Sun, who was the son-in-law of successive members and the middle-ranking official in Wuzhou, died at an early age and was given the title of Wuzhou Historian.

古文：次子洪徽嗣。
现代文：次子刘洪徽继嗣。
English: His second son Liu Honghui succeeded him.

古文：武平末，假仪同三司，奏门下事。
现代文：武平末年，任代理仪同三司，奏门下事。
English: At the end of Wu Ping's life, he was assigned to be the acting secretary of the Third Division of the Communist Party of China.

古文：任延敬，广宁人也。
现代文：任延敬，广宁人。
English: Ren Yanjing, from Guangning.

古文：伯父桃，太和初为云中军将，延敬随之，因家焉。
现代文：伯父任桃，太和初年为北魏云中军将，延敬随从他，因而定居于此。
English: His uncle, Ren Tao, was a general in the Northern Wei Dynasty in the first year of Tahe. Yan Jing followed him and settled here.

古文：延敬少和厚，有器度。
现代文：延敬年少宽厚，有治政才能。
English: Yan Jing is young, kind and has the ability to govern.

古文：初从葛荣为贼，荣署为王，甚见委任。
现代文：初随葛荣造反，葛荣让他当王，很受重用。
English: At first, he rebelled with Ge Rong. Ge Rong made him king, and he was highly respected.

古文：荣败，延敬拥所部先降，拜镇远将军、广宁太守，赐爵西河县公。
现代文：葛荣失败，延敬带领部众率先来降。拜任镇远将军、广宁太守，赐爵西河县公。
English: After Ge Rong's defeat, Yan Jing led his subordinates to take the lead in abdication. He was appointed General Zhenyuan, Governor of Guangning, and given the title of Xihe County.

古文：后随高祖建义，中兴初，累迁光禄大夫。
现代文：后随高祖起兵，中兴初年，一步步迁升任光禄大夫。
English: After Gao Zu raised an army, he was promoted step by step to the post of Guanglu doctor in the first year of ZTE.

古文：太昌初，累转尚书左仆射，进位开府仪同三司。
现代文：太昌初年，改任尚书左仆射，进位开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Taichang, he was transferred to the position of Shangshu Zuopuzha, and advanced to the position of Kaifu Yi Tong Sanshi.

古文：延敬位望既重，能以宽和接物，人士称之。
现代文：他位望高显，但能以宽和的态度接待宾客，人们称誉他。
English: He is a high-ranking official, but he is praised for being able to receive guests with a broad-minded attitude.

古文：及斛斯椿衅发，延敬弃家北走，至河北郡，因率土民据之，以待高祖。
现代文：及至斛斯椿挑起事端，他弃家北走，到了河北郡，组织当地人据城而守，以待高祖。
English: When Gaozhuan stirred up trouble, he left home and went north to Hebei County, where he organized local people to stay in the city and wait for Gaozhu.

古文：魏武帝入关，荆蛮不顺，以延敬为持节南道大都督，讨平之。
现代文：魏武帝入关，荆蛮不顺服，用延敬为持节南道大都督去征讨，平定了他们。
English: Emperor Weiwu entered the pass, Jing was very disobedient, and he used Yan Kei as the grand governor of the southern province of Jijie to go and negotiate with them, and they were pacified.

古文：天平初，复拜侍中。
现代文：天平初年，又拜任侍中。
English: In Tenpyo's first year, he was appointed to the position of chamberlain.

古文：时范阳人卢仲延率河北流人反于阳夏，西兖州民田龙聚众应之，以延敬为大都督、东道军司，率都督元整、叱列陀等讨之。
现代文：遣时范阳人卢仲延率领河北流民反于阳夏，西兖州人田龙聚众呼应。用任延敬为大都督、束道军司，率领都督元整、叱列陀等讨伐他们。
English: Lu Zhongyan of Fanyang led the exiles from Hebei to rebel against Yangxia, and the people of Tianlong in West Luzhou gathered in response. Yanjing was appointed as the grand governor and military governor of Sokudo, and led the governor, Yuan Zheng, and Zheleta to fight them.

古文：寻为行台仆射，除徐州刺史。
现代文：不久又任命延敬为行台仆射，拜任徐州刺史。
English: Soon after, Yan Jing was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou Province.

古文：时梁遣元庆和及其诸将寇边，延敬破梁仁州刺史黄道始于北济阴，又破梁俊于单父，俘斩万人。
现代文：当时，梁派元庆和及其诸将侵扰边境地方，任延敬击破梁仁州刺史黄道始于北济阴地区，又攻破梁俊于单父城，俘获斩杀上万名敌人。
English: At that time, Liang sent Yuan Qinghe and his generals to invade the border areas. Ren Yanjing defeated Liang Renzhou in the north of Jilin Province, and defeated Liang Jun in Shanzhicheng, capturing and killing tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：又拜侍中。
现代文：又拜任侍中。
English: He was also appointed to the position of chamberlain.

古文：在州大有受纳。然为政不残，礼敬人士，不为民所疾苦。
现代文：任延敬在地方大有受贿纳献行为，不过为政不残酷，又注意礼敬士人，所以没有给地方人民造成太多的痛苦。
English: Ren Yanjing did a lot of bribe-taking and offering in the local area, but he was not cruel in politics, and he paid attention to courtesy and respect for scholars, so he did not cause too much suffering to the local people.

古文：颍州长史贺若徽执刺史田迅据城降西魏，复令延敬率豫州刺史尧雄等讨之。
现代文：颖州长史贺若徽扣押了刺史田迅，占据颖州城投降了西魏，朝廷又命令任延敬率领豫州刺史尧雄等人前去讨伐他。
English: The governor of Yingzhou, Shi He, arrested the assassin, Tian Xun, occupied Yingzhou City and surrendered to the Western Wei Dynasty. The imperial court also ordered Ren Yanjing to lead the Yuzhou assassin, Shixiong, and others to go and fight him.

古文：西魏遣其将怡锋率众来援，延敬等与战失利，收还北豫，仍与行台侯景、司徒高昂等相会，共攻颍川，拔之。
现代文：西魏派他的将军怡锋率兵前来救援，延敬等人迎战失利，收兵回到北豫州，又和行台侯景、司徒高昂等会合，共同进攻颖川，打下了颖川城。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty sent its general Yi Feng and his soldiers to come to the rescue. Yan Jing and others were defeated in the battle, and returned to Beiyuzhou to collect their troops. They also met with Gangtai Houjing and Szeto Gaoang to jointly attack Yingchuan and laid down Yingchuan City.

古文：元象元年秋，卒于邺，时年四十五。
现代文：元象元年秋，延敬死于邺都，时年四十五岁。
English: In the autumn of the first year of Yuan Xiang, Yan Jing died in Shidu, at the age of forty-five.

古文：赠使持节、太保、太尉公、录尚书事、都督冀定瀛幽安五州诸军事、冀州刺史。
现代文：赠给他使持节、太保、太尉公、绿尚书事、都督冀定瀛幽安五州诸军事及冀州刺史。
English: He was presented with the title of envoy, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal, the title of grand marshal and the title of grand marshal.

古文：子胄嗣。
现代文：其子任胄嗣其职任。
English: His son succeeded him in the post.

古文：胄轻侠，颇敏惠。
现代文：胄为人轻率而好勇，颇为聪明。
English: He is reckless and brave, and quite clever.

古文：少在高祖左右，天平中，擢为东郡太守。
现代文：少年时就在高祖左右随从。天平年间，提升为东郡太守。
English: When he was a boy, he followed Gaozu around. During the Tenpyo era, he was promoted to the governor of Higashi County.

古文：家本丰财，又多聚敛，动极豪华，宾客往来，将迎至厚。
现代文：他家裹本来就富裕，又善于聚敛，他一有举动便极其奢豪，宾客往来，接待非常丰厚。
English: His family was by nature wealthy and good at collecting, and he was extremely extravagant in his every move. He had many guests and received them very generously.

古文：寻以赃污为有司所劾，高祖舍之。
现代文：不久便因贪脏污秽被有关部门弹劾，高祖不加追究。
English: He was soon impeached by the relevant authorities for corruption, and Gaozu was not prosecuted.

古文：及解郡，高祖以为都督。
现代文：及至押送到郡裹，高祖又让他当了都督。
English: When he was escorted to the county seat, Gaozu made him the governor.

古文：兴和末，高祖攻玉壁还，以晋州西南重要，留清河公岳为行台镇守，以胄隶之。
现代文：兴和末年，直担攻下型套回师，认为置姐是西南要冲之地。留下遣蚣直至为行台在此镇守，把任直归他指挥。
English: In the last years of the Xinghe era, he was directly in charge of the attack on the Sui-type Sui-back Division, and believed that Jie-jie was the place to rush to in the southwest. He left the troops to guard the town for Xinghe, and the post was directly under his command.

古文：胄饮酒游纵，不勤防守，高祖责之。
现代文：任直衹管饮酒放纵，不勤于防守，高祖责备他。
English: Ren Zhiqian indulged in drinking and was not diligent in defense, Gao Zu reproached him.

古文：胄惧，遂潜遣使送款于周。
现代文：组害怕了，便暗派人员去和北周通好，被人告发，经严厉审讯却未找到证据，高祖特地赦免了他。
English: The group was afraid, so they secretly sent people to communicate with Bei Zhou. He was denounced, but after a severe trial, no evidence was found, and Gaozu specifically pardoned him.

古文：为人纠列，穷治未得其实，高祖特免之，谓胄曰： 我推诚于物，谓卿必无此理。且黑獭降人，首尾相继，卿之虚实，于后何患不知。 
现代文：高祖对任胄说： 我对人推诚布公，我说你绝不是那样的人。再说，从宇文泰那边投奔过来的人陆续不断，你真有什么情况，今后还愁弄不清楚么? 
English: Gao Zu said to Ren Zheng: I am sincere to people, I said that you are by no means that kind of person. Moreover, the people who rushed over from the side of Yu Wentai are in succession, what is your situation, do you still worry about it in the future?

古文：胄内不自安。
现代文：任胄内心很不安。
English: Ren Yao was very uneasy inside.

古文：是时，仪同尔朱文畅及参军房子远、郑仲礼等并险薄无赖，胄厚与交结，乃阴图杀逆。
现代文：这时候，仪同尔朱文畅和参军房子远、郑仲礼等都是轻薄无赖之徒，任胄与他们多有交往，于是就阴谋杀害高担。
English: At this time, Yidonger, Zhu Wenchang, Zhouzhuangyuan, Zheng Zhongli, etc. were all light-hearted rogues. Ren Yao had many contacts with them, so he conspired to commit murder and cause great harm.

古文：武定三年正月十五日，因高祖夜戏，谋将窃发。有人告之，令捕穷治，事皆得实。胄及子弟并诛。
现代文：亘!遍三年正月十五日因为直祖夜间为戏，他们的阴谋将要实施，有人告发了这情况，下令逮捕了他们，穷加审讯，案情都落实了，任胄及其子弟都被杀死了。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the third year of the Heian period, because the direct ancestors were playing at night and their plot was about to be carried out, someone reported the situation and ordered their arrest. After exhaustive interrogation, the case was implemented, and Ren Yu and his sons were all killed.

古文：莫多娄贷文，太安狄那人也。
现代文：墓垄娄贷文，是太安狄那人。
English: Credit where credit's due, he's from the Andes.

古文：骁果有胆气。
现代文：他骁勇果敢有胆气。
English: He is courageous and daring.

古文：从高祖举义。
现代文：随从高祖起兵。
English: Follow Gao Zu to raise an army.

古文：中兴初，除伏波将军、武贲中郎将、虞候大都督。
现代文：中兴初年，拜任伏波将军、武贲中郎将、虞候、大都督。
English: In the first year of ZTE, he was appointed as General of Fuba, Vice Admiral of Buyeo, Governor of Yugou, and Governor of Dadu.

古文：从击尔朱兆于广阿，有功，加前将军，封石城县子，邑三百户。
现代文：随高祖在广阿攻打尔朱兆，有战功。加前将军，封为石城县王，食邑三百户。
English: Accompanied Gao Zu to attack Lzhu Zhao in Guang'a, and was awarded the title of "King of Shicheng County," with 300 households in Shicheng.

古文：又从破四胡于韩陵，进爵为侯。
现代文：又从高祖破四胡于韩陵，进封侯爵。
English: He was also made a marquis from Gao Zu, breaking four hu in Han Ling.

古文：从平尔朱兆于赤谼岭。
现代文：又随军平定尔朱兆于赤霉岭。
English: He also accompanied the army to quell Zhu Zhao in Gibi Ridge.

古文：兆穷迫自经，贷文获其尸。
现代文：氽朱兆走投无路，自己上吊死了，贷文得到了他的尸体。
English: Zhu Zhao, desperate, hanged himself, and the loan got his corpse.

古文：迁左厢大都督。
现代文：改任左厢大都督。
English: He was reassigned to the post of governor of the left wing.

古文：斛斯椿等衅起，魏武帝遣贾显智据守石济。
现代文：斛斯椿等生事，束魏武帝派贾颢望据守互渣。
English: The Wei and Wu emperors sent Jia Xuan to defend each other.

古文：高祖令贷文率精锐三万，与窦泰等于定州相会，同趣石济，击走显智。
现代文：产担命令堂乏塞率领精锐部队三万人马，和宣台等将在定丛会合，一同攻取互挤，把买显智等赶跑了。
English: The production supervisor ordered the lackeys to lead an elite force of thirty thousand horses, and the propaganda department and others will meet in the fixed cluster, together to capture the jostling, and drive away the buyers.

古文：天平中，除晋州刺史。
现代文：玉王年间，拜任置州刺史。
English: During the reign of the Jade King, he was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：汾州胡贼为寇窃，高祖亲讨焉，以贷文为先锋，每有战功。
现代文：捡炒胡贼作乱，产担亲自去征讨。用贷塞为先锋，多次立战功。
English: Pick up and fry the rustlers to make a disturbance, and the production supervisor will personally go to collect. Use the credit plug as a pioneer, and make war achievements for many times.

古文：还，赉奴婢三十人、牛马各五十匹、布一千匹，仍为汾、陕、东雍、晋、泰五州大都督。
现代文：归来后，就赠给奴婢三十人、牛马各五十匹、布一千匹，并拜任汾、迭、塞座、置、台五州大都督。
English: After his return, he gave away thirty slaves, fifty horses, and a thousand cloths, and was appointed the grand governor of the five provinces of Jia, Di, Jie, Za, Jie, and Tai.

古文：后与太保尉景攻东雍、南汾二州，克之。
现代文：后与太保尉量进攻塞雍和亩边两州，攻下了两州。
English: Later, he and Tai Bo attacked Sayon and Mu Bian two states, and captured two states.

古文：元象初，除车骑大将军、仪同、南道大都督，与行台侯景攻独孤如愿于金墉城。
现代文：元象初年拜任车骑大将军、仪同、南道大都督，和行台侯景一起进攻独孤如愿于金墉城。
English: In the first year of Yuan Xiang's reign, he was appointed General of Cavalry and Cavalry, General of Ceremonies, Grand Governor of Southern Province, and together with Gongtai Houjing, he attacked the lonely as he wished in Jinyuan City.

古文：周文帝军出函谷，景与高昂议整旅厉卒，以待其至。
现代文：周文帝兵出函谷，侯景与高昂商定整顿兵马，以逸待劳。
English: Emperor Chouwen's soldiers left Hakodate, and Houjing agreed with Gaoang to reorganize the soldiers and horses, and to wait for labor.

古文：贷文请率所部，击其前锋，景等固不许。
现代文：贷文请求让他带着自己的部队攻击周文帝的前锋，侯景等坚决不答应。
English: Hou Jing resolutely refused the request to let him attack Zhou Wendi's vanguard with his own troops.

古文：贷文性勇而专，不肯受命，以轻骑一千军前斥候，西过瀍涧，遇周军，战没。
现代文：贷文个性刚强而一意孤行，不肯接受约束，带着轻骑一千人，远离大本营去侦巡，寻找战机。西行到澧涧一带，遭遇周军，战死。
English: Credit personality strong and single-minded, unwilling to accept constraints, with a light cavalry of a thousand people, far away from the base camp to go on reconnaissance, looking for warplanes. Westbound to the Fen area, encountered Zhou army, died in battle.

古文：赠并肆恒云朔五州军事、并州刺史、尚书右仆射、司徒公。
现代文：赠给他并肆恒云朔五州军事、并州刺史、尚书右仆射、司徒公。
English: He was also presented with the Five Military Provinces of Hengyunshuo, as well as the Provinces of Zhishi, Shangshu Rongjiao, and Stogong.

古文：子敬显，强直勤干，少以武力见知。
现代文：贷文的儿子敬显，为人刚强干练，自幼以武力出名。
English: Jiwen's son, Jing Xian, was a strong and capable man, famous for his strength since he was a child.

古文：恒从斛律光征讨，数有战功。
现代文：常随斛律光征战，多次立功。
English: He often followed the laws of nature to wage war, and made meritorious contributions many times.

古文：光每命敬显前驱，安置营垒，夜中巡察，或达旦不睡。
现代文：斛律光常让敬显为先锋，安置营垒，夜中巡查警戒，有时通宵不眠。
English: Zhao Liguang often let Jing Xian be the vanguard, set up camp, patrol in the middle of the night, and sometimes stay up all night.

古文：临敌置陈，亦令敬显部分将士，造次之间，行伍整肃。深为光所重。
现代文：临战列阵，也是让他部署人员，在很仓促的情况下也能做得有条有理，因而深为斛律光所器重。
English: He is also known for his ability to deploy personnel in the event of a battle line-up, which allows him to do so in an orderly manner even in a very hasty situation.

古文：位至领军将军，恒检校虞候事。
现代文：官到领军将军，经常领检校虞候的职事。
English: From the official to the general leading the army, he often received the duties of waiting for the school inspection.

古文：武平中，车驾幸晋阳，每令敬显督留台兵马，纠察盗贼，京师肃然。
现代文：武平年间，皇帝车驾到晋阳，常令敬显督察邺都留台兵马，纠察盗贼，京师肃然有序。
English: During the Wuping era, the emperor drove to Jinyang and ordered the inspector Jing Xian to stay in the capital to keep the soldiers and horses, picket the thieves, and keep the capital orderly.

古文：七年，从后主平阳，败归并州，与唐邕等推立安德王称尊号。
现代文：七年，随齐后主到平阳，败归并州。他便和唐邕等人推戴安德王称帝。
English: In the seventh year, he followed his master to Pingyang, but was defeated and annexed to the state. He, together with Tang Xuan and others, promoted King Dai Andru to be emperor.

古文：安德败，文武群官皆投周军，唯敬显走还邺。
现代文：安德王失败了，文武群官都投奔了周军，惟有敬显奔回邺都。
English: King Ande failed, and the civil and military officials all joined the Zhou army, except for Jing Xian, who ran back to the capital.

古文：授司徒。
现代文：授予司徒之职。
English: Awarded the post of magistrate.

古文：周武帝平邺城之明日，执敬显，斩于阊阖门外，责其不留晋阳也。
现代文：周武帝攻下邺城的第二天，捉住了敬显把他杀死在间阖门外，惩罚他没有留在晋阳。
English: The day after Zhou Wudi captured Lucheng, he caught Jing Xian and killed him outside the city gate to punish him for not staying in Jinyang.

古文：高市贵，善无人也。少有武用。
现代文：高市贵，是善无人，年轻时就善武力。
English: High market value is good for no one, and when you are young, you are good at using force.

古文：孝昌初，恒州内部敕勒刘仑等聚众反，市贵为都督，率众讨仑，一战破之。
现代文：孝昌初年恒州内部敕勒人刘仑等聚众造反，高市贵为都督，率领兵众去讨伐刘仑，一战而胜。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang's reign, Liu Lun, a native of Mule in the interior of Hengzhou, and others rallied the masses to rebel. Gao Shigui, as the governor, led the troops to fight against Liu Lun and won the battle.

古文：累迁抚军将军、谏议大夫。
现代文：逐步升迁任抚军将军、谏议大夫。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of general of the army of the tutelage and doctor of the imperial court.

古文：及尔朱荣立魏庄帝，高贵预翼戴之勋，迁卫将军、光禄大夫、秀容大都督、第一领民酋长，赐爵上洛县伯。
现代文：及至尔朱荣拥立北魏庄帝，高市贵有参与其事的功劳，升为卫将军、光禄大夫、秀容大都督、第一领民酋长，并赐他上洛县伯的爵位。
English: When Zhu Rong supported the establishment of the Northern Wei Zhuang Emperor, Gao Gui Gui was promoted to the rank of Wei General, Guanglu Doctor, Xiurong Grand Governor, First Territorial People's Chief, and was given the title of Shangluo County Count.

古文：尔朱荣击葛荣于滏口，以市贵为前锋都督。
现代文：氽朱荣攻打葛荣于滏口，用高市贵为前锋都督。
English: Gong Zhu Rong attacked Ge Rong in Hekou, with Gao Shigui as the vanguard.

古文：荣平，除使持节、汾州刺史，寻为晋州刺史。
现代文：葛荣平定后，拜任使持节、汾州刺史，不久改任晋州刺史。
English: After Ge Rong was subdued, he was appointed to the post of envoy to hold the festival and to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian, and soon he was appointed to the post of Jinzhou chief historian.

古文：纥豆陵步藩之侵乱并州也，高祖破之，市贵亦从行有功，除骠骑大将军、仪同三司，封常山郡公，邑一千五百户。
现代文：纥豆陵步藩侵扰并塑时，直担率兵破之，高市贵也随行有战功，拜任骠骑大将军、仪同三司，封常山郡公，食邑一千五百户。
English: When the Peaslingbufang invaded and besieged, he led the troops to defeat them, and Gao Ichigui also accompanied the troops with military exploits. He was appointed as the commander of the cavalry, the third secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, the county magistrate of Changshan County, and 1,500 households in the food village.

古文：高祖起义，市贵预其谋。
现代文：高祖起义时，高市贵参加了谋划。
English: When Gaozu revolted, Gao Chigi took part in the planning.

古文：及樊子鹄据州反，随大都督娄昭讨之。
现代文：及至樊子鹄据州城造反，市贵随大都督娄昭征讨他。
English: As far as the rebellion of Zong Zi and Zhang Zhoucheng, Ichigai went with the Grand Duke Zong Zhao to fight against him.

古文：子鹄平，除西兖州刺史，不之州。
现代文：樊子鹄平定后，拜任西兖州刺史，不去州府上任。
English: After the subjugation of Shanzi County, he was appointed as the governor of West Shandong Province, but did not go to the provincial capital to take office.

古文：天平初，复除晋州刺史。
现代文：天平初年，再次拜任晋州刺史。
English: In the first year of Tianping, he was once again appointed to the post of Jinzhou chief historian.

古文：高祖寻以洪峒要险，遣市贵镇之。
现代文：高祖不久又觉得洪峒是要塞，调市贵去镇守。
English: Gaozu soon felt that Hongye was a fortress and transferred Gui to the town guard.

古文：高祖沙苑失利，晋州行事封祖业弃城而还，州民柴览聚众作逆。
现代文：高祖沙苑之战失利，晋州行事封祖业弃城而归，晋州民柴览乘机聚众作罱。
English: Gao Zu lost the battle of Sha Yuan, and returned to Jinzhou after abandoning the city. Jinzhou people Chaiyan took the opportunity to gather people to make a feast.

古文：高祖命市贵讨览，览奔柴壁，市贵破斩之。
现代文：高祖命令高市贵去讨伐他，柴览逃奔柴壁，市贵击破叛军斩了柴览。
English: Gao Zu ordered Gao Shi Gui to fight him, Chai Qian fled to Chai Wall, and Gao Shi Gui defeated the rebels and beheaded Chai Qian.

古文：是时，东雍、南汾二州境多群贼，聚为盗，因市贵平览，皆散归复业。
现代文：逭时候，束雍、南汾二州境内多有盗匪。因为市贵扫平了柴览，群盗纷纷解散回家务农。
English: At that time, there were many bandits in the two prefectures of Sok Yeong and Nam Yeon. Because the merchants swept away the chaisan, the bandits disbanded one after another to go back to farming.

古文：后秀容人五千户叛应山胡，复以市贵为行台，统诸军讨平之。
现代文：后来秀容人五千户反叛呼应山胡，又命高市贵为行台，统领各路兵马讨平了。
English: Later, Shu Rong's five thousand households rebelled in response to the mountain goat, and ordered Gao Shi Gui to march to the plateau and lead the soldiers and horses to settle the dispute.

古文：元象中，从高祖破周文帝于邙山。
现代文：元象年间，随从高祖大破周文帝于邙山。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Gaozhu Daibao followed Emperor Zhouwen to Lushan.

古文：重除晋州刺史、西道军司，率众击怀州逆贼潘集。
现代文：又一次拜任晋州刺史、西道军司，率领人马去攻击怀州逆贼潘集。
English: Once again, he was appointed as the military governor of Jinzhou and the military governor of the West Road, and led people and horses to attack the traitor Pan Zi of Huai Zhou.

古文：未至，遇疾道卒。
现代文：尚未到达目的地，就染了重病，死在军中。
English: Before reaching his destination, he fell seriously ill and died in the army.

古文：赠并汾怀建东雍五州军事、太尉公、并州刺史。
现代文：赠并汾怀建束雍五州军事、太尉公、并州刺史。
English: He also presented Huai Jianzhu Yong with five state military titles, the title of grand lieutenant, and the title of state magistrate.

古文：子可那肱贵宠，封成皋王。
现代文：其长子阿那肱名位贵盛，已封为成皋王。
English: His eldest son, Anaximenes, held a prestigious position and had been crowned King of the Jurchens.

古文：敕令其第二子孔雀承袭。
现代文：于是下令由次子高孔雀承袭高市贵的爵位。
English: He then ordered his second son, Gao Peacock, to inherit Gao's noble title.

古文：厍狄回洛，代人也。
现代文：库狄迥洛，代州人。
English: Kudaijiro, a native of Daishu.

古文：少有武力，仪貌魁伟。
现代文：年少有武力，身材魁梧，仪表堂堂。
English: He is a young man with strength, a big body, and an imposing appearance.

古文：初事尔朱荣为统军，预立庄帝，转为别将，赐爵毋极伯。
现代文：早年跟随尔朱荣作统军，参与了拥立庄帝的活动，改任别将，赐给毋极伯的爵位。
English: In his early years, he followed Er Zhu Rong as a member of the unified army, participated in the activities to support Emperor Zhuang, was appointed as a general, and was given a peerage.

古文：从破葛荣，转都督。
现代文：随军击破葛荣，转任都督。
English: With the army defeating Ge Rong, he was transferred to the post of governor-general.

古文：荣死，隶尔朱兆。
现代文：尔朱荣死，隶属于氽朱兆。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, he was subordinated to Gong Zhu Zhao.

古文：高祖举兵信都，回洛拥众归义。
现代文：高祖在信都举义旗，迥洛带着兵马来投奔，并随高祖击破四胡于韩陵。
English: Gao Zu raised the banner of righteousness in Xindu, Zhao Luo took soldiers and horses to run, and followed Gao Zu to break through the four walls of the Han Mausoleum.

古文：从破四胡于韩陵，以军功补都督，加后将军、太中大夫，封顺阳县子，邑四百户。迁右厢都督。
现代文：因战功拜任都督，加街后将军、太中大夫，封为顺阳县子、食邑四百户。迁升任右厢都督。
English: Due to his war service, he was appointed as the governor of Shunyang County, and promoted to the right wing governor.

古文：从征山胡，先锋斩级，除朔州刺史。
现代文：随军征讨山胡，任先锋，多斩杀，拜任朔州刺史。
English: Accompany the army to conquer the mountains, be the vanguard, kill more, and be appointed as the history of Shuozhou.

古文：破周文于河阳，转授夏州刺史。
现代文：击败周文帝于河堡，又改授为夏刺史。
English: He defeated Zhou Wendi at Hebei Fort, and was re-taught the history of Xia County.

古文：邙山之役，力战有功，增邑通前七百户。
现代文：邙山战役中，他力战强敌立了功劳，增其食邑到七百户。
English: In the Battle of Lushan, he fought against a strong enemy and made great achievements, increasing his food village to seven hundred households.

古文：世宗嗣事，从平颍川。
现代文：世宗掌管国家大政后，他又随从大军平定颖川。
English: After Sejong took charge of national politics, he followed the great army to pacify the Yingchuan River.

古文：天保初，除建州刺史。
现代文：天保初年拜任为建州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed as the founder of the state.

古文：肃宗即位，封顺阳郡王。
现代文：肃宗即位时，被封为顺阳郡王。
English: When Su Zong ascended the throne, he was named the King of Shunyang County.

古文：大宁初，转朔州刺史，食博陵郡干。
现代文：大空初年，转任塑刺史，食禄埋堕型干。
English: In the first year of the big sky, he was transferred to the plastic stabbing history, and the food reward was buried.

古文：转太子太师，遇疾卒。
现代文：又转任太子太师，患病去世。
English: He was also transferred to the post of Crown Prince and Grand Master, but died of illness.

古文：赠使持节、都督定瀛恒朔云五州军事、大将军、太尉公、定州刺史，赠物一千段。
现代文：赠给他使持节、都督定瀛垣塑云五州军事、大将军、太尉公，定州刺史，赠给各色杂帛一千段。
English: He was presented with an envoy festival, a five-state military, a general, a lieutenant, and a history of Dingzhou, and a thousand pieces of colorful miscellany.

古文：厍狄盛，怀朔人也。
现代文：库狄盛是怀朔人。
English: Ku Di Sheng is from Huai Shuo.

古文：性和柔，少有武用。
现代文：为人性情温和，少年习武。
English: He is a mild-mannered, martial arts-practicing teenager.

古文：初为高祖亲信都督，除伏波将军，每从征讨。
现代文：一开始就任高祖的亲信都督，拜任伏波将军，随高祖征讨四方。
English: At the beginning, he assumed the position of a close confidant of Gaozu as the governor of the capital, served as the general of Fubo, and followed Gaozu to conquer the four directions.

古文：以功封行唐县伯，复累加安北将军，幽州刺史，加中军将军，为豫州镇城都督。
现代文：因战功封为行唐县伯，又逐渐升任安北将军，幽州刺史，加中军将军，为豫州镇城都督。
English: He was awarded the title of Xingtang County magistrate for his war exploits, and was gradually promoted to the positions of Anbei General, Yuzhou Chief Historian, General of the Chinese Army, and Governor of Yuzhou Town.

古文：以勋旧进爵为公，世宗减封二百户，以增其邑。
现代文：因是功勋老臣进爵为公，世宗自己减封二百户来增加他的食邑。
English: Because it was a meritorious old minister who was knighted for public service, Shizong himself reduced two hundred households to increase his food.

古文：除征西大将军、开府仪同三司、朔州刺史。
现代文：拜任征西大将军、开府仪同三司、朔州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of General of the Western Expeditionary Force, the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the title of Shuozhou Zhishi.

古文：齐受禅，改封华阳县公。
现代文：北齐接受禅让建国后，改封为华阳县公。
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, Beiqi accepted Zen Zhen and was renamed Huayang County.

古文：又除北朔州刺史，以华阳封邑在远，随例割并州之石艾县、肆州之平寇县、原平之马邑县各数十户，合二百户为其食邑。
现代文：又拜任北朔州刺史，因华阳封邑在远方，依惯例割出并州的石艾县、肆州的干寇县、原平的马邑县各数十产，合计二百户为库狄盛的食邑。
English: He also bowed to the history of Beishuo County, because Huayang Fongyi was far away, and according to the usual practice, he cut out dozens of products from Shiai County, Ganko County, and Huanping Mayi County, all of which were annexed to the state. A total of 200 households were the food villages of Ku Di Sheng.

古文：未几，例罢，拜特进，卒。
现代文：没多长时间，按例革除，拜任特进。
English: Not long after, he was dismissed as usual and promoted to a special promotion.

古文：赠使持节、都督朔瀛赵幽安五州诸军事、太尉公、朔州刺史。
现代文：去世后，赠使持节、都督朔瀛赵幽安五州诸军事、太尉公、朔州刺史。
English: After his death, Zhao Yu'an, the military commander of the Five Provinces, the captain of the Five Provinces, and the governor of Shuozhou, was given the title of Jizhong.

古文：薛孤延，代人也。
现代文：薛孤延是代州人。
English: Xue Qianyan is from Daizhou.

古文：少骁果，有武力。
现代文：自幼勇武骁雄有胆力。
English: Ever since he was a child, the brave young man had guts.

古文：韩楼之反，延随众属焉。
现代文：韩楼谋反时，薛孤延随众归属过来。
English: When Han Lou plotted a rebellion, Xue Qianyan followed the crowd to come over.

古文：后与王怀等密计讨楼，为楼尉帅乙弗丑所觉，力战破丑，遂相率归。
现代文：后来和王怀等人秘密商讨进攻韩楼，被韩楼的尉帅乙弗丑发觉，力战而破乙弗丑军，于是相率归附。
English: Later, he secretly discussed with Wang Huai and others about attacking Hanlu. He was discovered by Hanlu's lieutenant, Yifu Ugly, and he fought hard to defeat Yifu Ugly's army, so he eventually joined in.

古文：行台刘贵表为都督，加征虏将军，赐爵永固县侯。
现代文：行台刘贵上表推荐任薛孤延为都督，并加征虏将军，赐给永固县侯的爵位。
English: Liu Gui, the governor, recommended Ren Xue Kuian as the governor on the table, and added a conscript general, giving him the title of marquis of Yonggu County.

古文：后隶高祖为都督，仍从起义。
现代文：后来隶属于高祖，任都督，并随从起义。
English: Later, it was subordinated to Gaozu, appointed governor, and followed the uprising.

古文：破尔朱兆于广阿，因从平邺，以功进爵为公，转大都督。
现代文：消灭尔朱兆于广阿，并随从攻下邺城，因功进爵为公，转任大都督。
English: He eliminated Er Zhuzhao in Guang'a, and followed him to capture Shicheng. He was promoted to the peerage for his achievements and transferred to the post of grand governor.

古文：从破四胡于韩陵，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：从高祖破四胡于韩陵，加任金紫光禄大夫。
English: From Gaozhu to Shihhu in Hanling, he was also appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：从追尔朱兆于赤谼岭，除第一领民酋长。
现代文：随高祖大军追击尔朱兆于赤霉岭，拜任第一领民酋长。
English: Accompanied by Gao Zu's army, he chased after Er Zhu Zhao in the Gibi Mountains and was appointed as the first territorial people's chief.

古文：孝静立，拜显州刺史，累加车骑将军。
现代文：孝静帝登基，拜任显州刺史，累功加任车骑将军。
English: Emperor Xiaojing ascended to the throne, and was appointed as the chief historian of Xianzhou. He was also appointed as the general of cavalry.

古文：天平四年，从高祖西伐。至蒲津，窦泰于河南失利，高祖班师，延殿后，且战且行，一日斫折刀十五口。
现代文：天平四年，随高祖西征，行至蒲津，当时宝泰在河南失利，高祖撤军，用薛孤延为殿后，且战且行，一天之内砍折了十五口大刀。
English: In the 4th year of the Tianping Dynasty, Gaozu went to the Western Expedition with Baotai and went to Pudong. At that time, Baotai was defeated in Henan Province, Gaozu withdrew his troops, and took Xue Qianyan as his second-in-command. He continued to fight, and in one day, he cut and broke 15 large swords.

古文：还，转梁州刺史。
现代文：回京后转任梁州刺史。
English: After returning to Beijing, he transferred to the post of Liangzhou magistrate.

古文：从征玉壁，又转恒州刺史。
现代文：从征玉壁，又转任恒州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Hengzhou chief historian from the post of Jade Wall.

古文：从破周文帝于邙山，进爵为县公，邑一千户。
现代文：从高祖破周文帝于邙山，进爵为县公，食邑一千户。
English: From the time of Emperor Gaozhu defeating Zhou Wendi in Lushan, he was knighted and became the county magistrate, with a thousand households in food villages.

古文：高祖尝阅马于北牧，道逢暴雨，大雷震地。
现代文：直担曾在北方大漠牧马，路上逢暴雨，雷鸣电闪，震动天地。
English: In the northern desert, he used to herd horses. On the road, there were torrential rains, thunder and lightning, which shook the world.

古文：前有浮图一所，高祖令延视之。延乃驰马按槊直前，未至三十步，雷火烧面，延喝杀，绕浮图走，火遂灭。
现代文：前方有寺庙一座，直担让茎皿延前去察看，他便鞭马横稍冲向前去，不到三十步，雷火烧脸，整巫延大声呼杀，绕佛塔而驰，雷火也就熄灭了。
English: There was a temple in front of him, so he let his horse go ahead to inspect it. He then whipped his horse sideways and rushed forward a little. Less than thirty paces later, the thunder and lightning burned his face, and he shouted loudly, and ran around the pagoda. The thunder and lightning also went out.

古文：延还，眉鬓及马鬃尾俱焦。
现代文：整巫延回来时，自己的胡须眉毛及马的鬃毛尾巴都烧焦了。
English: When she returned, her whiskers and eyebrows and the horse's mane and tail were all scorched.

古文：高祖叹曰： 薛孤延乃能与霹雳斗！ 
现代文：高祖慨叹说： 薛孤延居然能和霹雳斗一斗! 
English: Gao Zu sighed and said, "Xue Kuyan can actually fight with a dragonfly!"

古文：其勇决如此。
现代文：他就是这般勇敢。
English: That's how brave he is.

古文：又频从高祖讨破山胡，西攻玉壁。
现代文：后来又多次追随高祖攻破山胡，西攻玉壁。
English: Later, he repeatedly followed Gao Zu to break through the mountains and the west to attack the jade wall.

古文：入为左卫将军，改封平秦郡公。
现代文：入朝任左卫将军，改封为平秦郡公。
English: Entered the imperial court as General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards, and was given the title of Count of Pingqin.

古文：为左厢大都督，与诸军将讨颍州。
现代文：拜任左厢大都督，和诸军将共讨颖州。
English: He will be appointed as the governor of Zuoyang, and will work with the army to win Yingzhou.

古文：延专监造土山，以酒醉为敌所袭据。
现代文：他专门负责监造土山，因酒醉被敌人偷袭占据了土山。
English: He was in charge of supervising the construction of the earthen mound. Due to drunkenness, the enemy attacked and occupied the earthen mound.

古文：颍州平，诸将还京师，宴于华林园。
现代文：颖州平定后，诸将回到京城，在华林园宴会。
English: After Yingzhou is pacified, they will return to Beijing and have a banquet in the Hualin Garden.

古文：世宗启魏帝，坐延于阶下以辱之。
现代文：世宗向魏帝提议，让薛孤延坐在阶下来羞辱他。
English: Shizong proposed to Emperor Wei that Xue Koyan should sit down on the steps and humiliate him.

古文：后兼领军将军，出为沧州刺史，别封温县男，邑三百户。
现代文：后来兼任领军将军，外放任沧州刺史，别封为温县男，食邑三百户。
English: Later, he concurrently served as the leading general, and was appointed as the chief historian of Cangzhou and the man of Wenzhou County, with more than 300 households in the county.

古文：齐受禅，别赐爵都昌县公。
现代文：齐接受禅让建国，又封为都昌县公。
English: They all accepted the founding of the country by Zen Zhen, and were also appointed as the head of Duchang County.

古文：性好酒，率多昏醉。而以勇决善战，每大军征讨，常为前锋，故与彭、刘、韩、潘同列。
现代文：他最爱喝酒，动辄昏醉，但勇决善战，所以每逢大军征讨，常以他为前锋，所以能和彭、刘、韩、潘诸人同列。
English: He loved to drink the most and was often drunk, but he was brave and good at fighting, so whenever a large army was called up, he was often the forward, so he could be ranked with Peng, Liu, Han, and Pan.

古文：天保二年，为太子太保，转太子太傅。
现代文：天保二年拜任太子太保，改任太子太傅。
English: In the second year of the Tenpo era, the position of Crown Prince Taibo was succeeded by the position of Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：八年，除肆州刺史，加开府仪同三司，食洛阳郡干，寻改食河间郡干。
现代文：八年，拜任肆州刺史，加开府仪同三司，食禄洛阳郡干，又改为食禄河问郡干。
English: In the eighth year, he was appointed as the governor of Zhouzhou, the governor of Kaifu, the governor of Luoyang County, and the governor of Luoyang County, and was changed to the governor of Luohe County.

古文：张保洛，代人也，自云本出南阳西鄂。
现代文：张保洛，代郡人，他自己说祖上出自南阳的西鄂县。
English: Zhang Baoluo, a representative of the county, said that his ancestors came from Xie E County in Nanyang.

古文：家世好宾客，尚气侠，频为北土所知。
现代文：他家世代爱好接待宾客，有豪侠气，在北方很有名气。
English: His family has been famous in the north for generations for their hospitality and gallantry.

古文：保洛少率健，善弓马。
现代文：保洛年轻时就简率勇健，娴熟弓马。
English: When he was young, Paulo was simple, brave and skilled in archery and horsemanship.

古文：魏孝昌中，北镇扰乱，保洛亦随众南下。
现代文：北魏孝昌年间，北方扰乱，张保洛也就随众南下。
English: During the Northern Wei and Xiaochang Dynasties, the north was disturbed, and Zhang Baoluo followed the crowd to the south.

古文：葛荣僭逆，以保洛为领左右。
现代文：葛荣起兵称王时，用他为左右领军。
English: When Ge Rong raised an army and proclaimed himself king, he used him as the leader of the left and right armies.

古文：荣败，仍为尔朱荣统军，累迁扬烈将军、奉车都尉。
现代文：葛荣失败后，继续任氽朱荣的统军，逐步升迁任扬烈将军、奉车都尉。
English: After the defeat of Ge Rong, he continued to serve as the unified army of Gong Zhu Rong, and was gradually promoted to General Yang Rong and Lieutenant Feng Che.

古文：后隶高祖为都督，从讨步蕃。
现代文：不久隶属于高祖任都督，随高祖征讨步蕃。
English: Soon, it was subordinated to Gao Zu as the provincial governor, and followed Gao Zu's march.

古文：及高祖起义，保洛为帐内，从破尔朱兆于广阿。
现代文：及至高祖起义，保洛为帐内随从攻破氽朱兆于广阿。
English: As far as the Gaozu Uprising, Paolo was a follower of the campaign to break the power of Zhu Zhao in Guang'a.

古文：寻迁右将军、中散大夫，仍以帐内从高祖围邺城，既拔，除平南将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：不久迁升任右将军、中散大夫，仍以帐内身份从高祖围邺城，攻克之后拜任平南将军、光禄大夫。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Right General and Dr. Nakasansan, and still used his position in the account to besiege and capture the city from Gao Zu. After the conquest, he was appointed to the positions of General Pingnan and Dr. Guanglu.

古文：从破尔朱兆等于韩陵，因随高祖入洛，加安东将军。
现代文：又从高祖破尔朱兆等人于韩陵，因随高祖入洛阳，加任安束将军。
English: From Gaozu, Zhu Zhao and others were buried in Hanling, and because they followed Gaozu into Luoyang, they were appointed to the post of General Anzuka.

古文：后高祖启减国邑，分授将士，保洛随例封昌平县薄家城乡男一百户。
现代文：后来高祖向魏帝建议削减侯国食邑，分授于诸位将士。保洛随例封昌平县薄家城乡男一百户的食邑。
English: Later, Gao Zu suggested to Emperor Wei to reduce the number of Hokkoku shokui-yurts and distribute them to the generals. As an example, Baoluo sealed the shokui-yurts of a hundred households in the towns and villages of Boke in Changping County.

古文：魏出帝不协于高祖，令仪同贾显智率豫州刺史斛斯寿东趣济州。
现代文：束魏出帝舆高祖不和，派其仪同贾显智率豫州刺史斛斯寿束取济州。
English: When Emperor Wei and Emperor Gaozu had a disagreement, Emperor Wei sent his imperial eunuch, Jia Xian, to Yuzhou to slander Emperor Gaozu, and Emperor Gaozu sent his imperial eunuch to Jeju.

古文：高祖遣大都督窦泰济自滑台拒显智，保洛隶泰前驱。
现代文：高祖便派大都督窦泰从滑台渡河阻遏显智，保洛在宝泰属下为先锋。
English: Gao Zu then sent the Grand Duke Dou Tai to cross the river from the slipway to stop Xian Zhi, and Paulo was the vanguard under Baotai.

古文：事定，转都督。
现代文：事情解决后，转任都督。
English: After the matter was resolved, he was transferred to the post of governor-general.

古文：从高祖袭夏州，克之。
现代文：跟随高祖袭夏州，攻克州城。
English: Follow Gao Zu to invade Xiazhou and conquer Xuzhou City.

古文：万俟受洛干之降也，高祖遣保洛与诸将于路接援。
现代文：万俟受洛干来降时，高祖派保洛和诸将在途中接应支援。
English: In the unlikely event that Luo Gan came to attack, Gao Zu dispatched Paul and Zhu to meet him on the road for support.

古文：元象初，除西夏州刺史、当州大都督，又以前后功，封安武县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：元象初年，拜任西夏州刺史，并为本州大都督，又因前后历次立功，封为安武县伯，食邑四百户。
English: In the first year of Yuanxiang, he was appointed as the leading historian of Western Xia, and was the grand governor of Honshu, and because of his previous and subsequent contributions, he was awarded the title of Anwu County, 400 households.

古文：转行蔚州刺史。
现代文：改任代理蔚州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the acting Ulshu governor.

古文：从高祖攻周文帝于邙山，围玉壁，攻龙门。
现代文：又从高祖攻打周文帝于邙山，包围玉壁，进逼龙门。
English: He also attacked Zhou Wendi in Lushan from Gaozhu, encircled the Jade Wall, and forced his way into Longmen.

古文：还，留镇晋州。
现代文：返还时，保洛留镇晋州。
English: At the time of return, the town of Poloryu in Jinzhou.

古文：世宗即位，以保洛为左厢大都督。
现代文：世宗当政时，用张保洛为左厢大都督。
English: When Sejong was in power, he used Zhang Baoluo as the left wing grand governor.

古文：后出晋州，加征西将军。
现代文：后兵出晋州，加任征西将军。
English: Afterward, the soldiers left Jinzhou, and he was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：王思政之援颍州，攻围未克。
现代文：王思政兵援颖州时，围攻城池未见成效。
English: When Wang Sizheng's soldiers came to the aid of Yingzhou, they besieged the city without success.

古文：世宗仍令保洛镇杨志坞，使与阳州为掎角之势。
现代文：世宗命保洛镇守杨志坞，使与阳州成掎角之势。
English: The Sejong Emperor ordered the town of Baoluo to guard Yangzhi dock, which put it on a collision course with Yangzhou.

古文：颍川平，寻除梁州刺史。
现代文：颖川平定后，拜任梁州刺史。
English: After Yingchuan was pacified, he took over the post of Liangzhou chief historian.

古文：显祖受禅，仍为刺史，所在聚敛为务，民吏怨之。
现代文：题担接受禅让登位建国之后，他仍为刺史，所在一心聚敛，官民皆怨恨他。
English: After the enthronement of the founding of the country, he was still a bitter history, where everyone gathered together, and the officials and the people all resented him.

古文：济南初，出为沧州刺史，封敷城郡王。
现代文：济南王初即位时，外放任沧州刺史，封为敷城郡王。
English: When the king of Jinan ascended the throne for the first time, he was exiled to Cangzhou and named the king of Shicheng County.

古文：为在州聚敛，免官，削夺王爵。
现代文：因为在地方聚敛太过，被免宫，削去王爵。
English: Because he gathered too much in one place, he was dismissed from the imperial court and stripped of his title.

古文：及卒，赠以前官，追复本封。
现代文：死时，赠给他以前有的官号，并追复其封爵。
English: When he died, he gave him his former official title and restored his knighthood.

古文：子默言嗣。
现代文：其子张默言嗣其爵位。
English: His son Zhang Mugen succeeded to his peerage.

古文：武平末，卫将军。
现代文：张默言在娄子末年任卫将军，以帐内名义随高祖出兵太行山东。
English: In the last years of his life, Zhang Muyan was appointed as the general of the imperial guard and went to Shandong with Gao Zu in the name of the account.

古文：以帐内从高祖出山东，又有曲珍、段琛、牒舍乐、尉摽、乞伏贵和及弟令和、王康德，并以军功至大官。
现代文：时有曲珍、段琛、牒舍銮、尉辽、乞伏贵和以及其弟全和、王尘擅，都以军功做了大官。曲趁，字盒盗，是酉垩迺垦人。
English: At that time, Qu Zhen, Duan Zheng, Zhao She Zhen, Fei Liao, Qibu Gui He, as well as his brother Quan Zhen and Wang Qian Xuan, all became high-ranking officials with their military exploits. Qu Ben, the thief of the word box, was a lazy person.

古文：曲珍字舍洛，西平酒泉人也。壮勇善骑射。
现代文：他壮勇善骑射。
English: He is very brave and good at riding and shooting.

古文：以帐内从高祖晋州，仍起义，所在征讨。
现代文：以帐内卫士从高祖于晋州，参加起义，所在征战。
English: According to the record, the guards from Gaozu in Jinzhou took part in the uprising and went to war.

古文：武定末，封富平县伯。
现代文：迈末年，封富平县伯。
English: At the end of his life, Fong Fuping County.

古文：天保初，食黎阳郡干，除晋州刺史。
现代文：玉堡初年，食禄黎阳郡干，拜任置刺史。
English: In the first year of Yubo Castle, Shiroku Liyang County was born, and he was appointed to the position of stabbing history.

古文：武平初，迁豫州道行台、尚书令、豫州刺史，卒，赠太尉。
现代文：亘迎初年，升任邃州道行台、尚书令、豫州刺史，死后，赠太尉。
English: In the first year of Wan Ying, he was promoted to the post of Zhangzhou Daogangdai, Shang Shuling, and Yuzhou Zhishi, and after his death, he was awarded the rank of captain.

古文：段琛字怀宝，代人也。
现代文：段逐字怀宜，伐塑人。
English: Paragraph by paragraph, word by word, Huai Yi, felling plastic people.

古文：少有武用。
现代文：年轻时就好武。
English: He was good at martial arts when he was young.

古文：从高祖起义信都。
现代文：随高祖在军中，起义于信都。
English: With Gaozu in the army, the uprising started in Xindu.

古文：天保中，兖州刺史。
现代文：天保年问，任光州刺史。
English: Tenpo Nianqian, Ren Gwangju stabbed history.

古文：牒舍乐，武成开府仪同三司、营州刺史，封汉中郡公。
现代文：牒舍銮，递开府仪同三司、萱州刺史，封为汉中郡公。
English: He was awarded the title of Hanzhong County official after presenting the prefectural ceremony with the three offices and the history of the county.

古文：战殁关中。
现代文：战死在飓中。
English: He died in a hurricane.

古文：尉摽，代人也。大宁初，封海昌王。
现代文：里彊，迁入。主宁初年，被封为迤员工。
English: In the first year of Lord Ning's tenure, he was appointed as a Zou employee.

古文：子相贵嗣。相贵，武平末晋州道行台尚书仆射、晋州刺史。
现代文：其子扭贵嗣爵，亘迎末年，任置丛道行台尚书仆射、晋州刺史。
English: His son, Prince Twiggy, in his later years, was appointed to the Congdo, the Shang, the Shu, the Shu, and the Jinzhou.

古文：为行台左丞侯子钦等密启周武请帅，钦等为内应。
现代文：当时行台左丞侯王筮等密启旦亘游发兵，他们作内应。
English: At that time, Gangtai Zuozheng, Hou Wangyao and others secretly sent troops to Guizhou, and they acted on their own initiative.

古文：周武自率众至城下，钦等夜开城门引军入，锁相贵送长安。
现代文：周武帝亲统兵众直至城下，侯子钦等开城门夜引周军入城，把担岂锁了押送旦塞，不久死去。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu led all his soldiers to the outskirts of the city. Hou Ziqin opened the city gate and led the Zhou army into the city at night. He locked the burden and escorted them to Dansi. He died soon after.

古文：寻卒。弟相愿，强干有胆略。
现代文：其弟相迩，强干而有胆略。
English: His younger brother, who is the same age as him, is strong and daring.

古文：武平末，领军大将军。
现代文：武平末年，任领军大将军。
English: In the last years of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, he was appointed the leading general.

古文：自平阳至并州，及到邺，每立计将杀高阿那肱，废后主，立广宁王，事竟不果。
现代文：自卫屋到差丛及到垫垣，不时地决计要杀死高阿型泌，废去篷王，拥立广宁王，事却始终未成。
English: From time to time, the Self-Defense Force went to Zhaozong and Zhaozheng, determined to kill Gao A-type secretion, abolish the king of the canopy, and support the king of Guangning, but it was never accomplished.

古文：及广宁被出，相愿拔佩刀斫柱而叹曰： 大事去矣，知复何言！ 
现代文：及至卢空被排除，但愿拔佩刀砍柱而叹息说： 天下大事全完了，谁知还有什么好说的呢! 
English: And when Lu Kuang is eliminated, I hope he will draw his sword, chop off the pillar, and sigh and say: The world's great events are all over, who knows what else to say!

古文：贵和及令和兄弟，武平末，并开府仪同三司。
现代文：岂勉及全勉兄弟，在亘侄末年，都是开府仪同三司。
English: In the last years of his nephew's life, both brothers, Huanquan and Quanquan, were in charge of the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：令和，领军将军。
现代文：全匙任领军将军。
English: He was appointed as the general leading the army.

古文：并州未败前，与领军大将军韩建业、武卫大将军封辅相相继投周军。
现代文：差业之战未败之前，与领军大将军韩亘叁业、武卫大将军堑强超相继投入题军。
English: Before he was defeated in the Battle of Shigeya, he and the leading generals, Han Watanabe and Takei, successively entered the war.

古文：令和授柱国，封西河郡公。
现代文：全翅授柱国，封为西河郡公。
English: The whole wing was awarded the pillar of the country, and it was named the West River County.

古文：隋大业初，卒于秦州总管。
现代文：堕左塞初年，死在室蛆总管任上。
English: He died in the first year after his fall from grace, while serving as the head of Muroto.

古文：建业、辅相，俱不知所从来。
现代文：建业舆驴超二人，都不知其祖籍何在。
English: There are more than two people in the construction industry who do not know where their ancestral home is.

古文：建业授上柱国，封郇国公，隋开皇中卒。
现代文：建墓授上柱国之任，封为郇国公，堕盟皇年间去世。
English: He was given the task of building the tomb of the pillar country, and was named the prince of Shandong Province. He died during the reign of the fallen emperor.

古文：辅相，上柱国，封郡公。
现代文：鳢捣，也是上柱国，封为郡公。
English: He was also a member of Shangzhu, and was given the title of county magistrate.

古文：周武平并州，即以为朔州总管。
现代文：周武帝平定差蛆，就用他做塑总管。
English: Zhouwu Emperor used him as the general manager of the plastic industry.

古文：康德，代人也。
现代文：塞擅，也是拔墅人。
English: He is a good sailor and also a villa raiser.

古文：历数州刺史、并省尚书，封新蔡郡王。
现代文：历任好几个州的刺史，做遇差省尚书，封为新蔡郡王。
English: He has served as the governor of several states, and has been appointed as the new King of Cai County.

古文：侯莫陈相，代人也。
现代文：侯莫陈相，代郡人。
English: Hou Mo Chen Xiang, deputy county magistrate.

古文：祖伏颓，魏第一领民酋长。
现代文：其祖伏颓，任北魏第一领民酋长。
English: His ancestor, Fuxi, served as the first territorial chief of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：父斛古提，朔州刺史、白水郡公。
现代文：父亲斛古提，任朔州刺史、白水郡公。
English: His father, Zang Guti, was the governor of Shuozhou County and the governor of Baishui County.

古文：寻除蔚州刺史，仍为大行台，节度西道诸军事。
现代文：不久拜任蔚州刺史，又任大行台、节度西道诸军事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor of Ulsan, and he also served as the military governor of Daejeon and the military governor of Seodao.

古文：又迁车骑将军，显州刺史。
现代文：又迁任车骑将军、显州刺史。
English: He was also transferred to the post of chariot and cavalry general, and became Henzhou's chief historian.

古文：入除太仆卿。
现代文：入京拜任太仆卿。
English: Entered the capital and assumed the post of Taihuko-kyo.

古文：顷之，出为汾州刺史。别封安次县男，又别封始平县公。
现代文：不久之后，外放任汾州刺史，另封为安次县男，又再封为始平县公。
English: Soon after, he was exiled to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou, and was also appointed as the man of Anji County, and again as the governor of Shihping County.

古文：天保初，除太师，转司空公，进爵为白水王，邑一千一百户。
现代文：天保初年，拜任太师，转任司空公，进爵为白水王，食邑一千一百户。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was given the title of Taishi (Grand Master) and then Siku-gong (Grand Steward), and was raised to the peerage as Baishuo-wang (King of White Water).

古文：累授太傅，进食建州干，别封义宁郡公。
现代文：后来逐步升至太傅，食禄建州干，另封为义宁郡公。
English: Later, he was gradually promoted to Taifu, Jianzhou Gan, and Yining County.

古文：武平二年四月，薨于州，年八十三。
现代文：武平二年四月，死于州任上，时年八十三岁。
English: In April of the second year of Wuping, he died at the age of eighty-three.

古文：赠假黄钺、使持节、督冀定瀛沧济赵幽并朔恒十州军事、右丞相、太宰、太尉公、朔州刺史。
现代文：赠假黄锁、使持节、督冀定瀛沧济趟幽并朔恒十州军事、右丞相、太宰、太尉公、朔州刺史。
English: The gift of a fake yellow lock, the Festival of Envoys, the appointment of governors, the vicissitudes and vicissitudes of the war, and the military of Shuo Heng ten states, the Minister of the Right, the Dazai, the Taiyi, and the history of Shuo.

古文：有二子。长子贵乐，尚公主，驸马都尉。
现代文：侯莫陈相有两个儿子：长子贵乐，与公主成婚，为驸马都尉。
English: Hou Mo Chen Xiang has two sons: the eldest son, Guile, is married to a princess and is a lieutenant of the Horse Guards.

古文：次子晋贵，武卫将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：次子晋贵，任武卫将军、梁州刺史。
English: His second son, Jingui, was appointed as General Wuwei, and Liang Zhou was appointed as the first secretary.

古文：隆化时，并州失守，晋贵遣使降周，授上大将军，封信安县公。
现代文：隆化年间，并州失守，晋贵派使者投降了北周，被授予上大将军，封为信安县公。
English: During the Longhua era, and the state lost its defense, the envoys of the Jingu faction surrendered to the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and were awarded the title of Shangtao general and the title of Xinyan County official.

古文：史臣曰：高祖世居云代，以英雄见知。
现代文：史臣曰：高祖世代居住在云代一带，以英雄的声誉而广为人知。
English: Shichen said: Gao Zu's generation lived in the Yunnan area and was widely known for his reputation as a hero.

古文：后过尔朱，武功渐振，乡邑故人，弥相推重。
现代文：后来遇上尔朱氏，武功更为世人钦佩，本乡本土的故交老友，就更是倾心推重了。
English: Later, when he met the Er Zhu clan, his martial arts were even more admired by the world, and his old friends in his hometown were even more enthusiastic about him.

古文：贺拔允以昆季乖离，处猜嫌之地，初以旧望矜护，而竟不获令终，比于吴、蜀之安瑾、亮，方知器识之浅深也。
现代文：贺拔允因兄弟处于被人猜忌的位置上，起初还以故乡故友的缘故得到某些庇护，却终于不能有好下场，比起当年吴国、蜀国各自安居的诸葛瑾、诸葛亮兄弟来，造就看出了人的气量识断原是各有浅深的。
English: Because his brothers were in the position of being suspected by others, He Bajun initially received some protection because of his hometown and old friends, but in the end he could not have a good ending. Compared to Zhuge Liang and Zhuge Liang brothers who lived peacefully in Wuxi and Shu respectively, it was created to show that people's temperaments are shallow and deep.

古文：刘贵、蔡俊有先见之明，霸业始基，义深匡赞，配飨清庙，岂徒然哉。
现代文：刘贵、蔡俊有先见之明，高祖霸业刚着手打基础时，他们就全力相助，后来能陪祭于宗庙，可不是偶然获得的。
English: Liu Gui and Cai Jun had foresight. When Gao Zuaba was just starting to lay the foundation, they did their best to help. Later, they were able to accompany the sacrifice at the ancestral temple, which was not accidental.

古文：韩贤等及闻义举，竞趣戎行，凭附末光，申其志力，化为公侯，固其宜矣。
现代文：韩贤等人一旦知道高祖举义旗，就争先恐后地奔走于战场，凭藉高祖的英明调度，使他们一个个能发挥自己的才干，建功立业，成为公侯，遣说来也本当如此啊!
English: As soon as Han Xian and the others knew that Gao Zu had raised the banner of righteousness, they scrambled to rush to the battlefield. With Gao Zu's wise scheduling, they were able to give full play to their talents, make achievements, and become princes, which is really true!

古文：赞曰：帝乡之亲，世有其人。
现代文：赞曰：帝乡的亲朋，世世代代都有人才。
English: Zang said: The relatives and friends of the imperial town have been talented for generations.

古文：降灵云朔，载挺良臣。
现代文：上天把恩典降临于云朔大地，出生了这么多杰出人臣。
English: Heaven has bestowed grace on the land of Yunshuo, and so many outstanding ministers have been born.

古文：功名之地，望古为邻。
现代文：功名之地，仰慕古代高士舆之为邻。
English: A place of fame, admired by the ancient Gaozhi as a neighbor.

