古文：萧颖达，兰陵兰陵人，齐光禄大夫赤斧第五子也。
现代文：萧颖达，兰陵郡兰陵县人，南朝齐光禄大夫萧赤斧的第五个儿子。
English: Xiao Yingda, Lanling County, Lanling County, the fifth son of the Southern Dynasty Qi Guanglu doctor Xiao Chiaxu.

古文：少好勇使气，起家冠军。
现代文：从小好勇使气，起家冠军。
English: A champion from a young age.

古文：兄颖胄，齐建武末行荆州事，颖达亦为西中郎外兵参军，俱在西府。
现代文：他的哥哥萧颖胄，齐建武末年行荆州事，萧颖达也担任西中郎外兵参军，两人都在西府任职。
English: His elder brother Xiao Yingtao, Qi Jianwu, went to Jingzhou at the end of his life, and Xiao Yingda also served as the West Zhonglang Foreign Soldier to join the army. Both of them served in West Prefecture.

古文：齐季多难，颇不自安。
现代文：南齐末年，国家多难，他们颇不自安。
English: In the last years of the Southern Qi Dynasty, the country was in a difficult situation, and they were quite uneasy.

古文：会东昏遣辅国将军刘山阳为巴西太守，道过荆州，密敕颖胄袭雍州。
现代文：正好塞昏侯派遣辅国将军刘山阳为巴西太守，路过荆州，密令萧颖胄袭击雍州。
English: It was just at that time that Sae Dou Hou dispatched Liu Shanyang, the general of the auxiliary country, as the Brazilian governor, passing through Jingzhou, and secretly ordered Xiao Yingyao to attack Yongzhou.

古文：时高祖已为备矣。仍遣颖胄亲人王天虎以书疑之。山阳至，果不敢入城。
现代文：当时高祖已有所防备，就派遣萧颖胄的亲信王天虎给萧颖达和萧颖胄兄弟二人送信，使刘山阳对萧颖胄产生疑心。塑山坠到了以后，果然不敢进入荆州城。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was already prepared, so he sent Xiao Yingta's close confidant Wang Tianhu to send a letter to Xiao Yingda and Xiao Yingta's two brothers, which made Liu Shanyang suspicious of Xiao Yingta. After the plastic mountain fell, he did not dare to enter Jingzhou City.

古文：颖胄计无所出，夜遣钱塘人硃景思呼西中郎城局参军席阐文、谘议参军柳忱闭斋定议。
现代文：颖胄一时想不出什么好办法，夜裹派钱塘人朱景思叫来西中郎城局参军席阐文、谘议参军柳忱，关起门来一起商议对策。
English: Ying Yao could not think of any good way at the moment. At night, she sent Zhu Jingsi, a man from Qiantang, to the West Zhonglang City Bureau to explain and advise Liu Zhen, a member of the military, and to discuss countermeasures behind closed doors.

古文：阐文曰： 萧雍州蓄养士马，非复一日，江陵素畏襄阳人，人众又不敌，取之必不可制，制之，岁寒复不为朝廷所容。
现代文：阐文说： 萧衍在雍州招兵买马，已经不是一天两天的事了，江陵人向来害怕塞墨人，又寡不敌众，要控制他们必定办不到，即使能制服他们，最终也不会被朝廷所容忍。
English: The commentary said: It is not a matter of a day or two for Xiao Yan to recruit soldiers and horses in Yongzhou. The Jiangling people have always been afraid of the Saimo people, and they are outnumbered. It is impossible to control them. Even if they can subdue them, they will not be tolerated by the court.

古文：今若杀山阳，与雍州举事，立天子以令诸侯，则霸业成矣。
现代文：现在如果杀了刘山阳，舆雍州方面一起起兵举事，挟天子以令诸侯，那么霸业就可成了。
English: Now, if Liu Shanyang is killed, and the Yongzhou side raises an army together and threatens the princes, then hegemony can be achieved.

古文：山阳持疑不进，是不信我。
现代文：现在刘山隧迟疑不进，这是不信任我们的缘故。
English: Now Liu Shan Tunnel is hesitating to proceed. This is because they do not trust us.

古文：今斩送天虎，则彼疑可释。
现代文：我们今天如果斩了王玉虚，将其首级送给型业叠，那么就可以消除他的疑虑。
English: If we were to behead Wang Yuqiu today and give his head to the Shaped Industry Superposition, then we would be able to dispel his doubts.

古文：至而图之，罔不济矣。 
现代文：等他来了以后，再设法除掉他，没有不成功的。 
English: When he came, they tried to get rid of him, but without success.

古文：忱亦劝焉。颖达曰： 善。 
现代文：柳忱也这样劝说萧颖胄兄弟俩。萧颖达说： 好，就逭么办。 
English: Liu Zhen also persuaded Xiao Yingta's two brothers in this way. Xiao Yingta said, "Okay, let's do it."

古文：及天明，颖胄谓天虎曰： 卿与刘辅国相识，今不得不借卿头。 
现代文：第二天早晨，趸颖胄对王天虎说： 您跟刘辅国相识，现在不得不借您的头用一用。 
English: In the morning of the next day, Zhai Yingyao said to Wang Tianhu: You have met Liu Yiguo, and now you have to use your head.

古文：乃斩天虎以示山阳。
现代文：于是斩杀了王天虎，把他的首级送给了刘山阳。
English: So he killed Wang Tianhu and gave his head to Liu Shanyang.

古文：山阳大喜，轻将步骑数百到州。
现代文：刘山阳大喜，衹带领敷百名随从到荆州去见萧颖胄。
English: Liu Shanyang was overjoyed. He led hundreds of followers to Jingzhou to meet Xiao Yingyao.

古文：阐文勒兵待于门，山阳车逾限而门阖，因执斩之，传首高祖。且以奉南康王之议来告，高祖许焉。
现代文：席阐文领兵在城门口严阵以待，刘山阳所乘坐的车子一越过门槛，立即就关闭上城门，将他捉住并割下脑袋送给高祖，且告以推奉南康王萧实融为主的建议，高祖对此表示赞许。
English: Liu Shanyang's car crossed the threshold and the gate was immediately closed. He was caught and his head was cut off and given to Gaozu. Gaozu expressed his approval of Liu Shanyang's suggestion to promote Xiao Shirong, the King of Nankang.

古文：和帝即位，以颖胄为假节、侍中、尚书令、领吏部尚书、都督行留诸军事、镇军将军、荆州刺史，留卫西朝。
现代文：齐和帝即位，任命萧颖胄为假节、侍中、尚书令、领吏部尚书、都督行留诸军事、镇军将军、荆州刺史，留守西朝江陵。
English: When Emperor Qihe ascended the throne, he appointed Xiao Yingtao as the False Emperor, the Chamberlain, the Secretary, the Chief of the General Staff, the Military Governor, the General of the Towns, the General of Jingzhou, and the Historian of Jingzhou, and he stayed in Jiangling during the Western Dynasty.

古文：以颖达为冠军将军。
现代文：任命萧颖达为冠军将军。
English: Appointed Xiao Yingda as the champion general.

古文：及杨公则等率师随高祖，高祖围郢城，颖达会军于汉口，与王茂、曹景宗等攻郢城，陷之。
现代文：等到杨公则等人率师跟随高祖，高祖领兵围攻郢城时，萧颖达也会合军队于汉口，与王茂、曹景宗等人合力进攻郢城，最后攻陷了郢城。
English: When Yang Gongze and others led their division to follow Gaozu and Gaozu led his army to besiege Lucheng, Xiao Yingda also joined the army in Hankou, and together with Wang Mao, Cao Jingzong and others attacked Lucheng, and finally captured Lucheng.

古文：随高祖平江州。
现代文：之后又随高祖平定了江州。
English: After that, he followed Gaozhu in leveling Jiangzhou.

古文：高祖进江州，使与曹景宗先率马步进趋江宁，破东昏将李居士，又下东城。
现代文：高祖进驻江州，派萧颖达与曹景宗一起先率领军队向江宁挺进，大败东昏侯的将领李居士，又攻下束城。
English: Gaozu stationed in Jiangzhou, sent Xiao Yingda and Cao Jingzong together to lead the army to Jiangning, defeated the general Li Jushi, who was in the east, and conquered Sokcheng.

古文：初，义师之起也，巴东太守萧惠训子璝、巴西太守鲁休烈弗从，举兵侵荆州，败辅国将军任漾之于硖口，破大将军刘孝庆于上明，颖胄遣军拒之；而高祖已平江、郢，图建康。
现代文：当初，义兵刚起之时，巴束太守萧惠训的儿子萧璜和巴西太守鲁休烈都没有随高祖一同起事，还发兵攻打荆州，在硖口打败了辅国将军任漾之，在上明攻破了大将军刘孝庆的防守，萧颖胄发兵拒敌；而高祖当时已经平定了江州、郢城，正准备进攻建康。
English: At the beginning, when the volunteers were just beginning, neither Xiao Yu, the son of Ba Zucu Daju Xiao Hui Xun, nor the Brazilian Daju Lu Xurong rebelled with Gao Zu. Gao Zu also sent troops to attack Jingzhou, defeated the general of Fu Guo, Ren Yu Zhi, in Hekou, broke through the defense of the great general Liu Xiaoqing in Joming, and Xiao Ying Yu sent troops to repel the enemy; and Gao Zu had already leveled Jiangzhou and Lucheng at that time, and was preparing to attack Jiankang.

古文：颖胄自以职居上将，不能拒制璝等，忧愧不乐，发疾数日而卒。
现代文：颖胄认为自己官居上将，却不能制服萧坟等人，所以忧愧成疾，发病没几天就去世了。
English: Ying Qi thought that he was a high-ranking official, but he could not subdue Xiao Gu and others, so he was sad and became ill. He died within a few days of the onset.

古文：州中秘之，使似其书者假为教命。
现代文：州中封锁了萧颖胄的死讯，使舆萧颖胄笔迹相似的人假冒其名发布命令。
English: The middle of the state blocked the news of Xiao Yingyao's death, so that a person with a similar handwriting to that of Xiao Yingyao issued an order under a false name.

古文：及璝等闻建康将平，众惧而溃，乃始发丧，和帝赠颖胄丞相。
现代文：直到萧琐等人闻知建康城已危在旦夕，部下惊惧溃散，江陵方面才给萧颖胄发丧，和帝赠颖胄为丞相。
English: It was not until Xiao Zuo and others heard that Jiankang City was in danger, and his subordinates were terrified and scattered, that Jiangling mourned Xiao Yingyao, and the emperor presented Yingyao as chancellor.

古文：义师初，颖达弟颖孚自京师出亡，庐陵人循景智潜引与南归，至庐陵，景智及宗人灵祐为起兵，得数百人，屯西昌药山湖。
现代文：萧颖达刚开始起兵时，他的弟弟萧颖孚从京师建产逃出，庐陵人脩景智秘密地带他往南逃归，到了庐陵后，脩景智以及他的同族之人脩灵枯为他招集兵员，征募到好几百人，屯兵于西昌药山湖。
English: When Xiao Yingda was just beginning to raise an army, his younger brother Xiao Yingfu escaped from Beijing Shijian Production. The Fuling people secretly took him to the south to escape. After arriving in Fuling, Gao Jingzhi and his compatriot Yan Lingkou recruited soldiers for him, recruiting several hundred people, and stationed soldiers in Xichang Yushan Lake.

古文：颖达闻之，假颖孚节、督庐陵豫章临川南康安成五郡军事、冠军将军、庐陵内史。
现代文：萧颖达听说后，假题垩节、都督庐堕邃童堕丛壶尘塞盛五郡军事、冠军将军、庐堕内史。
English: After Xiao Yingda heard about it, he thought it was a fictitious festival, a capital city, a child, a dustbin, a five-county military, a champion general, and an internal history.

古文：颖孚率灵祐等进据西昌，东昏遣安西太守刘希祖自南江入湖拒之。
现代文：萧颖孚率领脩灵佑等人进据西昌，束昏侯派遣塞酉太守刘姜担从直辽进入药山湖抵抗芦题孚。
English: Xiao Yingfu led Zou Lingyou and others to Xichang, and Sokou Hou dispatched Liu Jiangtang, the governor of Jiaoliao, to enter Yushan Lake from Zhiliang to resist Lujifu.

古文：颖孚不能自立，以其兵由建安复奔长沙，希祖追之，颖孚缘山逾嶂，仅而获免。
现代文：颖孚不能依靠自己的力量打败敌军，因此又带领部下由建安逃到长沙，刘希祖尾随直迫，颖孚只好翻越险峻的高山，才免于被俘。
English: Ying Fu could not rely on his own strength to defeat the enemy army, so he led his subordinates from Jian'an to Changsha, Liu Xizu followed closely, and Ying Fu had to climb over steep mountains to avoid being captured.

古文：在道绝粮，后因食过饱而卒。
现代文：颖孚在路上粮食断绝，后来又因吃得过饱而被撑死。
English: Ying Fu ran out of food on the way, and later died from overeating.

古文：建康城平，高祖以颖达为前将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：建康城被攻克后，直担任命萧颖达为前将军、旦盐尹。
English: After Jiankang City was conquered, Xiao Yingda, a former general, and Tan Yan Yin were appointed as the direct successors.

古文：上受禅，诏曰： 念功惟德，列代所同，追远怀人，弥与事笃。
现代文：皇上受掸登基，颁布韶书说： 思念功德，历代所同，追忆往日缅怀故人，更加让人想起旧日情怀。
English: When the emperor was enthroned, he issued an imperial edict saying, "Thinking about merits is common to all generations, recalling the past and remembering the deceased is even more reminiscent of the old days.

古文：齐故侍中、丞相、尚书令颖胄，风格峻远，器珝深邵，清猷盛业，问望斯归。缔构义始，肇基王迹，契阔屯夷，载形心事。
现代文：齐已故侍中、丞相、尚书令萧颖胄，风格峻远，胸襟宽广，清明深远的谋划使帝业更加兴盛，他的名声威望将永远留在我们心中创业之初，帝业刚刚建立，他辛勤劳苦地领兵驻防于蛮夷之地，可见其心志之忠贞。
English: Xiao Yingyao, the late chamberlain, chancellor, and imperial secretary of Qi, had a far-reaching style, a broad mind, and a clear and far-reaching plan to make the empire more prosperous. His reputation and prestige will always remain in our hearts. At the beginning of the business, the empire was just established. He worked hard to lead the troops stationed in the wilderness, showing his loyalty.

古文：朕膺天改物，光宅区宇，望岱观河，永言号恸。
现代文：朕上受天命，更改前朝，平定疆域，仰望岱岳、纵观黄河，永远为他的逝去而悲号动哭。
English: I was destined by heaven to change the former dynasty, to pacify the territory, to look up at Mount Xingyue, to look across the Yellow River, and to mourn his passing forever.

古文：可封巴东郡开国公，食邑三千户，本官如故。 
现代文：可以追封他为巴束郡开国公，食邑三千户，担任的本官如故。 
English: He can be posthumously honored as the founding father of Batak County, who fed three thousand households and served as the local official until his death.

古文：赠颖孚右卫将军。
现代文：追赠萧颖孚为右卫将军。
English: Xiao Yingfu was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Right Division.

古文：加颖达散骑常侍，以公事免。
现代文：加萧颖达为散骑常侍，因公事而免官。
English: Ga Xiao Yingda is a strolling equerry and was relieved of his duties for official business.

古文：及大论功赏，封颖达吴昌县侯，邑千五百户。
现代文：到大加论功行赏时，封萧颖达为吴昌县侯，食邑一千五百户。
English: At the time of the Great Leap Forward, Xiao Yingda was the lord of Wuchang County, with 1,500 households in the county.

古文：寻为侍中，改封作唐侯，县邑如故。
现代文：不久又任命为侍中，改封为作唐侯，县邑如故。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a chamberlain, and his title was changed to "Tang Hou" (唐侯), and his county and town remained the same.

古文：迁征虏将军、太子左卫率。
现代文：迁征虏将军、太子左卫率。
English: The general of the relocation of conscripts and the prince of the left guard.

古文：御史中丞任昉奏曰：臣闻贫观所取，穷视不为。
现代文：御史中丞任防上奏说：臣听说贫则观其所取，穷则视其所不为。
English: Goshi Chujo, who served as a defense envoy, said: "When a vassal hears that he is poor, he considers what he has taken, but when he is poor, he considers what he has not done.

古文：在于布衣穷居，介然之行，尚可以激贪历俗，惇此薄夫；况乎伐冰之家，争鸡豚之利；衣绣之士，受贾人之服。
现代文：一般的平民百姓，虽穷困不得志却处世高洁，尚可用之抑制贪脏枉法之徒，劝勉世俗民风，使刻薄之人变得诚实、敦厚；何况那些贵族豪门之家，争夺鶸豚小利；衣绣颢贵之士，收受商人的东西呢。
English: The ordinary common people, though poor and destitute, live a virtuous life. They can be used to restrain the greedy and lawless, to encourage the secular folk customs, and to make the mean people honest and courageous. What's more, the families of the aristocrats compete for the small profits of the pigs, and the rich and well-dressed people receive the things of the merchants.

古文：风闻征虏将军臣萧颖达启乞鱼军税，辄摄颖达宅督彭难当到台辨问。
现代文：听说征虏将军臣萧颖达索要鱼军税，就捕拿颖达宅督彭难当到御史台接受审问。
English: Hearing that the conscript general Xiao Yingda's vassal was demanding a fish tax, he arrested Yingda's steward, Peng Nan, and took him to the Imperial History Museum for interrogation.

古文：列称 寻生鱼典税，先本是邓僧琰启乞，限讫今年五月十四日。
现代文：彭难当陈述说 谋求收取鱼典税，原本是邓僧琰所请求的，至今年五月十四日到期。
English: Peng Nandu said that the fish tax collection, originally requested by Deng Sangyao, was due on May 14 this year.

古文：主人颖达，于时谓非新立，仍启乞接代僧琰，即蒙降许登税，与史法论一年收直五十万。 
现代文：主人萧颖达当时觉得不是新设立的，就请求取代邓僧琰收税，我等就蒙主人同意收取鱼军税，跟史法论一起一年收取了五十万钱的鱼军税 。
English: Master Xiao Yingda felt that it was not newly established at that time, so he requested to replace Deng Sangyao to collect taxes. We obtained the consent of the master to collect the fish army tax. Together with the historical and legal theory, we collected a fish army tax of five hundred thousand yuan a year.

古文：如其列状，则与风闻符同，颖达即主。
现代文：据彭难当所陈述的情况，跟传闻的事实正好相符，萧颖达就是其主谋。
English: According to the situation stated by Peng Nandu, it coincides with the rumored fact that Xiao Yingda is the mastermind.

古文：臣谨案：征虏将军、太子左卫率、作唐县开国侯臣颖达，备位大臣，预闻执宪，私谒亟陈，至公寂寞。
现代文：臣谨案：征虏将军、太子左卫率、作唐县开国侯臣颖达，官居朝廷大臣，深知国家法令，却一再私自造访请托，使国库空虚。
English: Minister Zheng: Conscript general, Prince Zuo Wei's subordinate, the founder of Tang County, Prince Zhen Yingda, minister of the imperial court, was well aware of the national laws and regulations, but repeatedly made private visits to ask for support, leaving the national treasury empty.

古文：屠中之志，异乎鲍肆之求；鱼飧之资，不俟潜有之数。
现代文：这种危害朝廷的行为，决不同于一般小人的贪求之欲；为资助生活的清苦，也不应偷偷地捞取意外之财。
English: This kind of behavior that endangers the imperial court is by no means different from the greed of ordinary villains; in order to finance the hardships of life, you should not secretly obtain unexpected wealth.

古文：遂复申兹文二，追彼十一，风体若兹，准绳斯在！
现代文：因此必须重申此法令，追回钱款，风纪如此，自当依法办事。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to reiterate this decree, recover the money, the discipline is such, it is necessary to act according to the law.

古文：陛下弘惜勋良，每为曲法；臣当官执宪，敢不直绳。
现代文：皇上宽弘大量，爱惜功臣，常常为此而曲法；下臣身当执法重任，不敢违抗法纪。
English: Emperor Hirohito loved his meritorious vassals so much that he would often have them perform jujitsu for him. His vassals, who were responsible for enforcing the law, did not dare to disobey the law.

古文：臣等参议，请以见事免颖达所居官，以侯还第。
现代文：臣等共同商议，请以现有事实，免除颖达所担任官职，让其保留侯爵归还府第。
English: Ministers and others should consult together and, based on the existing facts, please exempt Ying Dazo from holding an official post, let him retain the marquisate and return the palace.

古文：有诏原之。转散骑常侍、左卫将军。
现代文：高祖下诏赦免其罪转萧颖达为散骑常侍、左卫将军。
English: Gao Zu issued an imperial edict to pardon his crime, turning Xiao Yingda into a free-riding equerry and the General of the Left Division.

古文：俄复为侍中，卫尉卿。
现代文：不久复为侍中，卫尉卿。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of chamberlain.

古文：出为信威将军、豫章内史，加秩中二千石。治任威猛，郡人畏之。
现代文：出为信威将军、豫章内史，加俸禄为中二干石、萧颖达在任上极其严厉，郡中人士都很敬畏他。
English: He was named General Xinwei, Yuzhang Naishi, and his salary was raised to the middle two dry stones. Xiao Yingda was extremely strict in his post, and people in the county were in awe of him.

古文：迁使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：迁任使持节、都督江州诸军事、江州刺史，担任将军如故。
English: He was transferred to the position of envoy of the Jisi Festival, the military governor of Jiangzhou, and the governor of Jiangzhou, and served as a general until his death.

古文：顷之，征为通直散骑常侍、右骁骑将军。
现代文：不久，征为通直散骑常侍、右骁骑将军。
English: Soon after, he was enlisted as a regular attendant of Tsuchidanchi Sanzhajima and a general of the right-hand cavalry.

古文：既处优闲，尤恣声色，饮酒过度，颇以此伤生。
现代文：由于平时生活安逸，尤其沉湎于歌舞声色，常常饮酒过度，因此颇为伤害自己的身体。
English: Due to the fact that he usually lives a comfortable life, he is particularly addicted to singing and dancing, and often drinks excessively, which is quite harmful to his body.

古文：九年，迁信威将军、右卫将军。
现代文：天监九年，迁信威将军、右卫将军。
English: In the ninth year of Tianjun, General Xinwei and General Uwei were transferred.

古文：是岁卒，年三十四。
现代文：这一年萧颖达去世，时年三十四岁。
English: That year, Xiao Yingda died at the age of thirty-four.

古文：车驾临哭，给东园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭，钱二十万，布二百匹。
现代文：高祖亲自前往哀悼，赐给束园秘器，朝服一具，衣一袭。钱二十万，布：二百匹。
English: Gaozu himself went to mourn, and gave Sakuyuen secret utensils, a royal robe, and a suit of clothes. Two hundred thousand in money, and two hundred horses for cloth.

古文：追赠侍中、中卫将军，鼓吹一部。
现代文：追赠为侍中、中卫将军，并赏赐鼓吹乐队一部。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Rank and Middle Guard General, as well as a prize for a member of the band.

古文：谥曰康。
现代文：谧号为康。
English: His nickname was Kang.

古文：子敏嗣。
现代文：儿子萧敏继承爵位。
English: His son Xiao Min succeeded to the title.

古文：颖胄子靡，袭巴东公，位至中书郎，早卒。
现代文：萧颖胄的儿子萧靡，承袭巴束公的爵位，官至中书郎，早年就去世了。
English: Xiao Yingyao's son, Xiao Mai, inherited the title of Prince Ba Sok, and was promoted to the position of middle school teacher, but died at an early age.

古文：夏侯详，字叔业，谯郡人也。
现代文：夏侯详字叔业，谯郡谯县人十六岁那年，父亲去世。
English: Xia Hou detailed his uncle's business, and his father died when he was 16 years old.

古文：年十六，遭父艰，居丧哀毁。
现代文：他为父亲守丧因过度悲哀而损伤身体。
English: He injured his body due to excessive grief at his father's funeral.

古文：三年庐于墓，尝有雀三足，飞来集其庐户，众咸异焉。
现代文：在服丧的三年时间裹。他在墓旁搭盖小屋居住，曾有三只脚的麻雀飞来停在小屋的门上，众人都感到非常诧异。
English: During the three years of mourning, he built a hut next to the grave and lived there. Once, a three-legged sparrow flew and stopped at the door of the hut, and everyone was very surprised.

古文：服阕，刺史殷琰召补主簿。
现代文：三年丧满，刺史殷琰征召他补主簿之职。
English: After three years of mourning, he was called up by Yin Xi to fill the post of chief accountant.

古文：宋泰始初，琰举豫州叛，宋明帝遣辅国将军刘勔讨之，攻守连月，人情危惧，将请救于魏。
现代文：宋泰始初年，殷琰占据豫州反叛朝廷，宋明帝派遣辅国将军刘劻前去讨伐，双方攻守连月，城内叛军人情危惧，军心动摇离散，殷琰打算向北魏求援。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, Yin Xi occupied the rebel imperial court in Yuzhou. Emperor Song Ming dispatched the auxiliary general Liu Bei to fight. Both sides attacked and defended for months. The rebel soldiers in the city were in danger, and the military spirit was shaken and scattered. Yin Xi planned to ask for help from the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：详说琰曰： 今日之举，本效忠节；若社稷有奉，便归身朝廷，何可屈身北面异域。
现代文：夏侯详劝殷琰说： 我们现在的行动，本意是对皇室表示忠节；如果今天朝廷有入主持，就应该归附朝廷，怎么可以屈身投靠北方异族呢。
English: Xia Houxiao advised Yin Qi that: Our current actions are intended to show loyalty to the royal family; if the imperial court is in charge today, it should be attached to the imperial court, how can we bow down and rely on the northern alien race.

古文：且今魏氏之卒，近在淮次，一军未测去就，惧有异图。
现代文：而且现在北魏军队已接近淮河，全军如果难测去就，怕会有反叛的圆谋。
English: Moreover, now that the Northern Wei army is close to the Huai River, if the whole army is difficult to measure, it is feared that there will be a rebel strategy.

古文：今若遣使归款，必厚相慰纳，岂止免罪而已。若谓不然，请充一介。 
现代文：现在如果就派使者去表白我们的诚意，他们一定会高兴地接纳，岂止是免除死罪呢。如果不信，请让我充任使者。 
English: Now, if we send an envoy to them to express our sincerity, they will gladly accept it, if only to be spared the death penalty. If you don't believe me, let me act as an envoy.

古文：琰许之。
现代文：殷琰同意派他前去。
English: Yin Xi agreed to send him forward.

古文：详见勔曰： 将军严围峭垒，矢刃如霜，城内愚徒，实同困兽，士庶惧诛，咸欲投魏。
现代文：夏侯详见到刘劻后说： 将军您严围壁垒，矢刃如霜，我们城中守军，实同困兽，军民害怕将军诛杀，都打算投降北魏。
English: Xia Hou said after seeing Liu Ye in detail: General, you have surrounded the ramparts tightly, the arrow blades are like frost, our defenders in the city are really trapped animals, the soldiers and civilians are afraid of the general's killing, and they all intend to surrender to the Northern Wei.

古文：仆所以逾城归德，敢布腹心。愿将军弘旷荡之恩，垂霈然之惠，解围退舍，则皆相率而至矣。 
现代文：我现在之所以出得城来，向您坦露真诚的心意，衹是希望将军您能弘浩荡之恩德，降霈然之恩惠，下令解围退兵，那么我们都会相继前来归降了、 刘劻答应了夏侯详的条件。
English: The reason why I have come out of the city now, to reveal my sincere intentions to you, is that I hope that you, the general, can spread your great kindness, your great favor, and order the lifting of the siege and the withdrawal of troops, then we will all come and surrender one after another, and Liu Bei agreed to Xia Houyao's conditions.

古文：勔许之。详曰： 审尔，当如君言，而详请反命。 勔遣到城下，详呼城中人，语以勔辞，即日琰及众俱出，一州以全。
现代文：夏侯详又说： 如果确实这样，就照您所说的办，我请求回去覆命 刘劭让他到城下，呼唤城中的守军，转告刘劻的承诺，即日殷琰及其部将全部出城投降，全州的百姓得以保全。
English: Xia Houyi also said, "If this is indeed the case, we will do as you said. I request you to go back and ask Liu Bei to let him go to the city, call the defenders in the city, and tell Liu Bei's promise that Yin Bei and his troops will all leave the city and surrender on that day, and the people of the whole state will be preserved."

古文：勔为刺史，又补主簿。顷之，为新汲令，治有异绩，刺史段佛荣班下境内，为属城表。
现代文：刘劻担任刺史时，又补夏侯详为主簿不久，夏侯详为新汲县令，由于政绩突出，刺史段佛荣将其成绩颁布境内各地，作为他下腊城邑的表率。
English: When Liu Wei served as the chief historian, he soon added Xia Houzhao as the main book. Xia Houzhao was the governor of Xinqu County. Due to his outstanding political achievements, the chief historian Fo Rong promulgated his achievements throughout the territory as a model for his cities and towns.

古文：转治中从事史，仍迁别驾。历事八将，州部称之。
现代文：夏侯详转任治中从事史，又迁别驾，历事八将，州部表扬他的政绩。
English: Xia Houya was transferred to the Central Government to engage in history, and he moved away again, eight generals in history, and the State Department praised his political achievements.

古文：齐明帝为刺史，雅相器遇。
现代文：齐明帝为刺史的时候，对他极为器重。
English: When Emperor Qiming was assassinated, he was held in high esteem.

古文：及辅政，招令出都，将大用之。
现代文：等到齐明帝辅佐朝廷政务时，招令夏侯详一同出城，准备重用他。
English: When Emperor Qiming's aide-de-camp came to the court, he invited Xia Houxiao to go out of the city with him and prepared to make heavy use of him.

古文：每引详及乡人裴叔业日夜与语，详辄末略不酬。
现代文：明帝常常整日整夜跟夏侯详及同乡裴叔业一起谈话，夏侯详却表现得漫不经心，不予酬答。
English: Emperor Ming often talked all day and all night with Xia Houzao and fellow villager Pei Shuhei, but Xia Houzao behaved carelessly and did not answer.

古文：帝以问叔业，叔业告详。
现代文：明帝就问叔业什么原因，叔业将明帝的疑问告诉夏侯详。
English: Emperor Ming asked Uncle Ye what the reason was, and Uncle Ye told Emperor Ming's question to Xia Houyao.

古文：详曰： 不为福始，不为祸先。 由此微有忤。出为征虏长史、义阳太守。
现代文：夏侯详回答说： 不为福始，不为祸先 因此明帝有点不悦，夏侯详出为征虏长史、义阳太守。
English: Xia Houxiao replied, "It is neither a blessing nor a curse." Therefore, Emperor Ming was a little displeased, and detailed Xia Houxiao as the conqueror of Changshi and the governor of Yiyang.

古文：顷之、建安戍为魏所围，仍以详为建安戍主，带边城、新蔡二郡太守，并督光城、弋阳、汝阴三郡众赴之。详至建安，魏军引退。
现代文：不久，建安戍被北魏军队围困，又任命夏侯详为建安戍主。带边城、新蔡二郡太守，并都督光城、阳和汝阴三郡的兵力前去救援夏侯详率领救兵到达建安后，北魏祇好退兵在这之前，北魏军队在淮河上游设置荆亭戍，常常出来侵犯边境劫掠财物。
English: Not long after, Jian'an was besieged by the Northern Wei army, and Xia Houxiao was appointed as the commander of Jian'an. He led the troops of Border Town, the Second County of Xin Cai, and the three counties of Guancheng, Yang and Ruyin to rescue Xia Houxiao and led the rescuers to arrive in Jian'an. Before the Northern Wei army withdrew, the Northern Wei army set up jing ting rafts in the upper reaches of the Huai River, and often invaded the border to loot property.

古文：先是，魏又于淮上置荆亭戍，常为寇掠，累攻不能御，详率锐卒攻之，贼众大溃，皆弃城奔走。建武末，征为游击将军，出为南中郎司马、南新蔡太守。齐南康王为荆州，迁西中郎司马、新兴太守，便道先到江阳。
现代文：齐军多次进攻而不能取胜，夏侯详率领精兵锐卒前去攻打，结果敌兵大败，全都弃城而逃齐建武末年，夏侯详被征为游击将军，出为南中郎司马、南新蔡太守齐南康王为荆州刺史时，夏侯详迁西中郎司马、新兴太守，上任时走近路先到汀阳。
English: The Qi army attacked many times but could not win. Xia Houyou led the elite soldiers to attack, as a result, the enemy soldiers were defeated. They all abandoned the city and fled. In the last years of Qi Jianwu, Xia Houyou was conscripted as a guerrilla general. He was appointed as the Southern Zhong Lang Sima and the Southern Xin Cai Taishou. When the Southern Kang Wang was assassinated in Jingzhou, Xia Houyou transferred to the Western Zhong Lang Sima and the Emerging Taishou. When he took office, he approached Tingyang.

古文：时始安王遥光称兵京邑，南康王长史萧颖胄并未至，中兵参军刘山阳先在州，山阳副潘绍欲谋作乱，详伪呼绍议事，即于城门斩之，州府乃安。迁司州刺史，辞不之职。
现代文：当时始安王萧遥光在京邑发动叛变，南康王长史萧颖胄还未到达，中兵参军刘山阳事先还在荆州，山阳的副将潘绍氦道萧遥光叛乱的消息之后，也策划想要举兵响应，夏侯详就假装叫潘绍前来议事，在城门口斩了他，荆州各府因此得以安定夏侯详迁司州刺史，但他却推辞而不去上任
English: At that time, the Prince of An, Xiao Yaoguang, launched a mutiny in Beijing. The Prince of Nankang, Wang Changshi, Xia Yingyao, had not yet arrived. Liu Shanyang, the Chinese soldier who joined the army, was still in Jingzhou beforehand. After the news of Shanyang's vice-general, Pan Shao Helium Dao, Xiao Yaoguang's rebellion, he also planned to raise troops in response. Xia Houzhao pretended to call Panshao to come to the meeting and beheaded him at the gate of the city. As a result, the governments of Jingzhou were able to stabilize Xia Houz

古文：高祖义兵起，详与颖胄同创大举。
现代文：高祖发兵起义时，夏侯详和萧颖胄协助高祖同创大业。
English: When Gao Zu launched a military uprising, Xia Houzhao and Xiao Yingtao assisted Gao Zu in creating a great cause.

古文：西台建，以详为中领军，加散骑常侍、南郡太守。
现代文：在江陵建立西朝后，任命夏侯详为中领军，加散骑常侍、南郡太守。
English: After the establishment of the Western Dynasty in Gangneung, Xia Houzhao was appointed as the central leader of the army, with the addition of Sanzhiyi's equerry and the governor of Nan County.

古文：凡军国大事，颖胄多决于详。
现代文：凡是军国大事，颖胄多向夏侯详求教。
English: Whenever there was a major military event, Ying Yao mostly asked Xia Hou for detailed advice.

古文：及高祖围郢城未下，颖胄遣卫尉席阐文如高祖军。详献议曰： 穷壁易守，攻取势难；顿甲坚城，兵家所忌。诚宜大弘经略，询纳群言。军主以下至于匹夫，皆令献其所见，尽其所怀，择善而从，选能而用，不以人废言，不以多罔寡。
现代文：当高祖率军围攻郢城却久攻不丸峙，颖 门氏迫卫尉席阐文到高祖军，十夏侯详向高祖献计说： 越是处境艰危的壁垒越容易坚守，而想攻取它却很困难；驻兵攻取坚城，乃是兵家之大忌确实应该多加谋划，广泛询问并采纳大家的意见，规定军主以下直至平民百姓，都把他们的见解献上来，尽其所想，择善而从，并且选用能人，不以入废言，不以多罔寡。
English: When Gao Zu led an army to besiege Jiancheng, but the attack did not come for a long time, the Yingmen clan forced the guard captain to explain to Gao Zu's army, and the ten-year-old marquis presented a detailed plan to Gao Zu, saying: The more difficult the situation is, the easier it is to hold on to the barrier, but it is very difficult to attack it; it is the great taboo of the soldiers to attack the fortified city. Indeed, it is necessary to make more plans, widely inquire and adopt everyone's opinions, and stipulate that the military leaders and the civilians should present their opinions, do their best, choose

古文：又须量我众力，度贼樵粮，窥彼人情，权其形势。
现代文：还需要正确估量自己的实力以及敌人的粮草储备，窥探敌方的军心民情，权衡双方的形势。
English: It is also necessary to correctly estimate one's own strength and the enemy's grain and grass reserves, spy on the enemy's military and civilian situation, and weigh the situation between the two sides.

古文：若使贼人众而食少，故宜计日而守之；食多而力寡，故宜悉众而攻之。
现代文：如果敌兵人多而粮食缺乏，就可以计算时曰将敌围困；如果敌兵粮多而力量薄弱，就应该率众全力攻取它。
English: If there are many enemy soldiers and food is scarce, you can calculate when to besiege the enemy; if there are many enemy soldiers and food is scarce, you should attack it with all your might.

古文：若使粮力俱足，非攻守所屈，便宜散金宝，纵反间，使彼智者不用，愚者怀猜，此魏武之所以定大业也。
现代文：如果敌人粮草兵力都很充足，就不是简单的攻守所能解决的问题，而应该多使用金银财宝，离间敌人内部，使他们智者不被重用，愚者互相猜疑，这就是魏武帝之所以能成就大业的缘故。
English: If the enemy's grain, grass and troops are all sufficient, it is not a problem that can be solved by simple attack and defense, but should use more gold, silver and treasure to separate the enemy inside, so that the wise are not reused, and the fools are suspicious of each other. This is why Emperor Weiwu can achieve great things.

古文：若三事未可，宜思变通，观于人情，计我粮谷。
现代文：如果以上三种办法都行不通，就应思变通之计，观察人心的向背，计算自己的粮草。
English: If the above three methods do not work, you should think of a workaround, observe the human heart backwards, and calculate your own grain and grass.

古文：若德之所感，万里同符，仁之所怀，远迩归义，金帛素积，粮运又充，乃可以列围宽守，引以岁月，此王剪之所以克楚也。若围之不卒降，攻之未可下，间道不能行，金粟无人积，天下非一家，人情难可豫，此则宜更思变计矣。
现代文：如果受到仁德的感召。就能万里归心远迩归义，加上平时多加蓄积财物，粮食的运送又很充足，那么就可以列围宽守，延长时间，造就是王翦之所以战胜楚国的办法如果围困而不能使敌人马上投降，进取不能取胜，反问之计行不通，平时没有积蓄财物粮食，天下列强争雄，人心难以预料，那么就应该再想想其他的变通办法了。
English: If you are inspired by benevolence, if you can travel thousands of miles to return to your heart from afar to return to righteousness, and if you increase the accumulation of wealth in normal times, and the transportation of grain is sufficient, then you can set up a wide perimeter and extend the time, which is the reason why Wang Yao defeated the state of Chu. If the siege cannot make the enemy surrender immediately, the attack cannot win, the countermeasure does not work, there is no accumulation of wealth and grain in normal times, the world is strong, and the people are unpredictable, then you should think about other workarounds.

古文：变计之道，实资英断，此之深要，难以纸宣，辄布言于席卫尉，特愿垂采。 
现代文：改变计策的方法，其实是要靠英明的决断，此中的机要事宜，不好写在纸上，就让席卫尉转述，希望您能采用。 
English: The way to change the strategy is actually to rely on wise decisions. The important matters in this are not easy to write on paper, so let the captain retell them, and I hope you can use them.

古文：高祖嘉纳焉。
现代文：高祖表示赞许并采纳了他的计谋。
English: Gaozu applauded and adopted his strategy.

古文：顷之，颖胄卒。
现代文：不久，萧颖胄去世。
English: Soon after, Xiao Yingyao passed away.

古文：时高祖弟始兴王憺留守襄阳，详乃遣使迎憺，共参军国。
现代文：当时高祖的弟弟始兴王萧怆正留守塞阳，夏侯详就派使者把萧怆接来一起参与管理军国事务。
English: At that time, Gao Zu's younger brother Shi Xing Wang Xiao Yao was staying in Sayang. Xia Hou Yao sent an envoy to bring Xiao Yao together to participate in the management of military affairs.

古文：和帝加详禁兵，出入殿省，固辞不受。
现代文：齐和帝加夏侯详禁兵，自由出入宫殿台省，夏侯详坚决辞让不肯接受。
English: Qi and Diga banned Xia Houxiao from military service and allowed him to freely enter and leave Huangtai Province. Xia Houxiao resolutely refused to accept any concessions.

古文：迁侍中、尚书右仆射。
现代文：和帝诏令夏侯详迁侍中、尚书右仆射。
English: With the Emperor's edict, the summer lord ordered the detailed relocation of the attendants, and Shangshu's right-hand man was shot.

古文：寻授使持节、抚军将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：不久又授使持节、抚军将军、荆州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was also awarded the posts of Jizhixi, Fuzhong General, and Jingzhou Sashih.

古文：详又固让于憺。
现代文：夏侯详又再三辞让，把以上官职推让给了萧怆
English: Xia Houzhi again and again refused to give in, and gave the above official post to Xiao Jun

古文：天监元年，征为侍中、车骑将军，论功封宁都县侯，邑二千户。
现代文：天监元年，夏侯详被征为侍中、车骑将军，论功封为宁都县侯，食邑二干户。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Xia Houzhao was enlisted as an attendant, chariot and cavalry general, and was awarded the title of Ningdu County Marquis, leading two households in the food village.

古文：详累辞让，至于恳切，乃更授右光禄大夫，侍中如故。
现代文：夏侯详多次辞让，言辞非常诚恳，朝廷就重新授予他右光禄大夫，担任侍中如故。
English: Xia Houxiao repeatedly resigned, his words were very sincere, and the imperial court re-awarded him the title of Uguanglu Doctor, and he continued to serve as an attendant.

古文：给亲信二十人，改封豊城县公，邑如故。
现代文：赐给他亲信二十人，改封丰垣逊公，食邑如故。
English: He was given 20 close confidants, changed his title to Toyotaki Suenko, and continued to live in Shokui.

古文：二年，抗表致仕，诏解侍中，进特进。
现代文：互监二年，上表朝廷，请求辞去官职，高祖颁韶解除他诗中之职，晋升为特进。
English: After two years of mutual supervision, he petitioned the imperial court to resign from his post, and Gaozu issued a decree to relieve him of his post in the poem and promoted him to special promotion.

古文：三年，迁使持节、散骑常侍、车骑将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：天监三年，迁使持节、散骑常侍、车骑将军、湘州刺史。
English: In the three years of the Heavenly Supervisor, the relocation of the festival, the horseback riding attendants, the carriage riding generals, and the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：详善吏事，在州四载，为百姓所称。
现代文：夏侯详善于处理政事，在湘州任职的四年时间裹。为百姓所称颂。
English: Xia Hou is good at handling political affairs, and has served in Hunan for four years. He is praised by the people.

古文：州城南临水有峻峰，旧老相传，云 刺史登此山辄被代。 
现代文：湘州城南面临水处有座险峻的山峰，古老的传说说 刺史如果登上此山官职就会被取代 。
English: There is a steep mountain facing the water in the south of Xiangzhou City. An ancient legend says that if Sashi ascends this mountain, he will be replaced.

古文：因是历政莫敢至。
现代文：因此历任的官员都不敢到那儿去。
English: That is why successive officials have not dared to go there.

古文：详于其地起台榭，延僚属，以表损挹之志。
现代文：夏侯详却命人在山上建造起亭台楼榭，延请僚属，以表达自己谦虚退让的志向。
English: However, Xia Houzhao ordered people to build pavilions on the mountain and invited his colleagues to express his humble and conceding aspirations.

古文：六年，征为侍中、右光禄大夫，给亲信二十人，未至，授尚书左仆射、金紫光禄大夫，侍中如故。
现代文：天监六年，夏侯详被征为侍中、右光禄大夫，赐给亲信二十人，还未前去接受官职，又授尚书左仆射、金紫光禄大夫，担任侍中如故。
English: In the sixth year of Tianjun, Xia Houzhao was enlisted as a chamberlain and Uguanglu doctor, and was given to twenty close friends. Before he went to accept the official post, he was also awarded the title of Shangshu Zuofusa and Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, and served as a chamberlain as before.

古文：道病卒，时年七十四，上为素服举哀，赠右光禄。
现代文：在半路上生病去世，时年七十四岁，皇上为他身着素服举行哀悼仪式，追赠右光禄。
English: On the way, he fell ill and died at the age of seventy-four. The emperor held a mourning ceremony for him in plain clothes and posthumously presented him with the Ukokoroku.

古文：先是，荆府城局参军吉士瞻役万人浚仗库防火池，得金革带钩，隐起雕镂甚精巧，篆文曰 锡尔金钩，既公且侯 。
现代文：先前，荆府城局参军吉士瞻督使上万人疏通兵器库周围的防火池，挖到一把革带金钩，雕刻的花纹非常精巧，上面的篆文刻着 赐尔金钩，既公且侯。 
English: Previously, the Jingfu City Bureau's military officer Kishi Jianzhu led tens of thousands of people to drain the fire pond around the arsenal, digging up a leather strap gold hook. The carved pattern is very delicate, and the above inscription is engraved with "Zhaier gold hook," which is both official and marital.

古文：士瞻，详兄女婿也。
现代文：吉士瞻是夏侯详哥哥的女婿。
English: Kishi Zhan is the son-in-law of Xia Hou Zhe's brother.

古文：女窃以与详，详喜佩之，期岁而贵矣。
现代文：夏侯谨的侄女将金钩偷来送给他，夏侯详高兴地佩戴在身上，一年后果然成为贵人。
English: Xia Hou Zhen's niece stole the gold hook and gave it to him. Xia Hou Zhen happily wore it on his body, and one year later he became a nobleman.

古文：蔡道恭，字怀俭，南阳冠军人也。
现代文：蔡道恭字怀俭，南阳冠军人。
English: Cai Daojun, the champion of Nanyang.

古文：父郡，宋益州刺史。
现代文：父亲蔡那，是宋益州刺史。
English: His father, Cai Na, was a member of the Song and Yizhou clans.

古文：道恭少宽厚有大量。
现代文：蔡道恭少年时为人宽厚而有雅量。
English: As a young boy, Cai Daogong was a generous and elegant person.

古文：齐文帝为雍州，召补主簿，仍除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：齐文帝为壅州刺史时，召他补主簿之职，又授予员外散骑常侍。
English: When Emperor Qianwen was writing the history of Zhangzhou, he called him to fill the position of the main book, and also awarded him the title of non-commissioned officer.

古文：后累有战功，迁越骑校尉、后军将军。
现代文：后因累有战功，迁越骑校尉、后军将军。
English: Later, due to his war exploits, he was transferred to be a cavalry lieutenant and rear army general.

古文：建武末，出为辅国司马、汝南令。
现代文：蛮建武末年。出为辅国司马、这亩县令。
English: At the end of his life, he was promoted to the position of assistant to the State Secretary, and became the Mu County magistrate.

古文：齐南康王为荆州，荐为西中郎中兵参军，加辅国将军。
现代文：蛮尘卢王任型姐刺史时，被荐为西中郎中兵参军，加辅国将军。
English: When Lu Wangren's younger sister, Lu Wangren, was assassinated, he was recommended to join the army as a West Zhonglang soldier, and became the general of Qayuo Province.

古文：义兵起，萧颖胄以道恭旧将，素著威略，专相委任，迁冠军将军、西中郎谘议参军，仍转司马。
现代文：反抗东昏侯的义兵刚起之时，芦题宣认为道苤是旧日的将领，素以威名胆略著称，因此专门委以重任，迁冠军将军、西中郎谘议参军，又转任司马。
English: At the time of the beginning of the rebellion of the East dowager's volunteer soldiers, Ruchi declared that Dousuke was an old general, known for his prestige and boldness, so he was specially entrusted with the important task of advising the champion general, Nishinakuro, to join the army, and he was transferred to Sima.

古文：中兴元年，和帝即位，迁右卫将军。
现代文：齐中兴元年。和帝即位，蔡道恭迁右卫将军。
English: In the first year of Qi Zongxing, Emperor He ascended to the throne, and Cai Dao was transferred to the General of the Right Division.

古文：巴西太守鲁休烈等自巴、蜀连兵寇上明，以道恭持节、督西讨诸军事。
现代文：巴西太守鲁休烈等人从巴、蜀联合兵力进犯上玥，萧颖胄授予基道苤持节、都督西讨诸军事。
English: Brazil's eunuch Lu Xurong and others from the joint forces of Bahia and Shu invaded Shangguan, and Xiao Yingtao was awarded the Keidong Xingzhi Festival, and the governor of Xidong was transferred to the military.

古文：次土台，与贼合战，道恭潜以奇兵出其后，一战大破之，休烈等降于军门。
现代文：蔡道恭进军土台，与敌军交战，他秘密派出一支军队出奇不意地出现在敌军后面，一交战就大败敌军，鲁休烈等人在军门投降。
English: Cai Daogong marched into the base of the army and fought with the enemy army. He secretly sent an army to appear unexpectedly behind the enemy army, and defeated the enemy army in a battle. Lu Xurye and others surrendered at the military gate.

古文：以功迁中领军，固辞不受，出为使持节、右将军、司州刺史。
现代文：蔡道恭因功迁升中领军，但他却固辞不受。出为使持节、右将军、司州刺史。
English: Cai Daogong was promoted to the middle leader due to his meritorious service, but he did not accept the resignation. He was appointed as the envoy, the right general, and the secretary of state.

古文：天监初，论功封汉寿县伯，邑七百户，进号平北将军。三年，魏围司州，时城中众不满五千人，食裁支半岁，魏军攻之，昼夜不息，道恭随方抗御，皆应手摧却。
现代文：天监初年，蔡道恭论功被封为汉寿县伯，食邑百户，进号子北将军天监三年，北魏军队围攻司州，当时城中的兵力不足五千人，粮食才够支持半年北魏军队攻城甚急，昼夜不停，道恭随机应变抵御敌军，每次交战都轻易地打败敌人的进攻。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Cai Daogong was awarded the title of Hanshou County Count, Food Town Hundred Households. In the third year of Northern General Tianjun, the Northern Wei Army besieged Sizhou. At that time, the strength in the city was less than five thousand, and the grain was only enough to support the Northern Wei Army's siege of the city for half a year. It was very urgent, and it was non-stop day and night. Daogong responded to the enemy forces at random, and easily defeated the enemy's attack in every engagement.

古文：魏乃作大车载土，四面俱前，欲以填緌，道恭辄于緌内列艨冲斗舰以待之，魏人不得进。
现代文：北魏军队就修造四面都能前进的大车，载满土，想用它来填塞护城河，道恭就在护城河裹布置艨冲战舰严阵以待，使北魏军队无法前进。
English: The Northern Wei army built a wagon that could advance on all four sides, loaded with earth, and wanted to use it to fill the moat. Dao Jiong arranged the rushing warships in the moat, so that the Northern Wei army could not advance.

古文：又潜作伏道以决緌水，道恭载土犭屯塞之。
现代文：北魏军又暗中挖掘地道想把护城河的水给放掉，道恭又命人载土将洞堵塞住。
English: The Northern Wei Army secretly dug a tunnel to release the water from the moat, and Dao Qiong ordered a man to carry soil to plug the hole.

古文：相持百余日，前后斩获不可胜计。魏大造梯冲，攻围日急，道恭于城内作土山，厚二十余丈；多作大槊，长二丈五尺，施长刃，使壮士刺魏人登城者。
现代文：两军相持了一百多天，前后斩杀捕获的敌人不可计数北魏军又大造云梯和冲城的战车，越发加紧攻城蔡道恭在城内堆积土山，厚达二：十多丈；制造很多又长又大的矛，长达二丈五尺。并在上面加上长艮的刀刃，让壮士用来刺杀登城的敌兵。
English: The two armies held each other for more than a hundred days, and the number of enemies killed and captured by the Northern Wei Army was incalculable. The Northern Wei Army also built large ladders and chariots to storm the city, and intensified the siege of the city. Cai Daogong piled up mounds of soil in the city, up to two: more than ten feet thick; made many long and large spears, up to two feet and five feet long. And added a long blade to the top, so that strong men could use it to stab and kill enemy soldiers entering the city.

古文：魏军甚惮之，将退。会道恭疾笃，乃呼兄子僧勰、从弟录恩及诸将帅谓曰： 吾受国厚恩，不能破灭寇贼，今所苦转笃，势不支久，汝等当以死固节，无令吾没有遗恨。 又令取所持节谓僧勰曰： 禀命出疆，凭此而已；即不得奉以还朝，方欲携之同逝，可与棺柩相随。 
现代文：北魏军队非常害怕，准备撤退恰在这时，道恭的病情加重，他把侄儿蔡僧勰、堂弟蔡灵恩以及其他将帅们都叫来，对他们说： 我身受朝廷恩德，却不能抵御、消灭寇贼，为国效力，现在我病情转危，势必不能支持多久了，你们应当以死来捍卫自己的气节，不要让我死有遗恨 又命人取来他所持的符节对蔡僧勰说： 禀承皇命出使边疆，所凭依的就是造个；即使现在不能将它奉还朝廷，也当要携它一同长逝。你们叮将符节放进我的灵柩，让它与我永远相随 大家都伤心落泪。
English: The Northern Wei army was very afraid. Just as they were preparing to retreat, Dao Gong's condition worsened. He called in his nephew Cai Xiangyao, his cousin Cai Ling'en, and other generals and said to them, "I was blessed by the imperial court, but I couldn't resist and destroy the invaders and serve the country. Now that my condition has turned critical, I won't be able to support you for long. You should defend your virtue with death. Don't let me die with a grudge." He also ordered someone to retrieve the rune he was holding and said to Cai Xiangyao, "To obey the imperial order to send

古文：众皆流涕。其年五月卒。魏知道恭死，攻之转急。
现代文：这一年五月蔡道恭病逝北魏军队知道蔡道恭死了，对司州城攻打得更加猛烈。
English: In May of this year, Cai Daogong died of illness. The Northern Wei army knew that Cai Daogong had died and attacked Sizhou City even more fiercely.

古文：先是，朝廷遣郢州刺史曹景宗率众赴援，景宗到凿岘，顿兵不前。
现代文：在此之前，朝廷派遣郢州刺史曹景宗率兵前去救援，曹景宗驻扎在凿岘按兵不动。
English: Prior to this, the imperial court dispatched the Bozhou statesman Cao Jingzong and his soldiers to the rescue. Cao Jingzong was stationed in Zhengzhou and did not move.

古文：至八月，城内粮尽，乃陷。
现代文：梁军坚持到八月，直至城内粮尽，才最后沦陷。
English: Liang's army held out until August, until the city ran out of food, before finally falling.

古文：诏曰： 持节、都督司州诸军事、平北将军、司州刺史、汉寿县开国伯道恭器干详审，才志通烈。
现代文：朝廷颁布诏书说： 持节、都督司州诸军事、平北将军、司州刺史、漠寿县开国伯道恭，卓有才干，办事周密审慎。
English: The imperial decree issued by the imperial court said: Ji Jie, the military governor of Zhoushu, the general of Pingbei, the governor of Zhoushu, and the founder of Mushou County, Bao Daogong, were highly talented and meticulously prudent.

古文：王业肇构，致力陕西。受任边垂，效彰所莅。
现代文：性格豁达刚烈。王业开创之初，他受命朝廷，致力于陕西的边境事务，在任期间成绩显著。
English: At the beginning of Wangye's founding, he was ordered by the imperial court to devote himself to border affairs in Shaanxi, and achieved remarkable results during his tenure.

古文：寇贼凭陵，竭诚守御，奇谋间出，捷书日至。
现代文：敌寇侵凌边境，他全力抗敌，间出奇谋，克敌制胜，捷报频传。
English: When the enemy invaded the border, he resisted the enemy with all his strength, made extraordinary plans, defeated the enemy and won, and the good news spread frequently.

古文：不幸抱疾，奄至殒丧，遗略所固，得移气朔。自非徇国忘已，忠果并至，何能身没守存，穷而后屈。言念伤悼，特兼常怀，追荣加等。抑有恒数。
现代文：却不幸身染重病，忽然丧命损逝，他留下的业绩将与曰月共长存如果不是舍身殉国，忠诚而果敢，何以能像他那样身死而守存，力穷而后屈呢，思念故人更加令人产生悲伤、哀悼的情绪。追赠荣誉、爵位，抑或自有定数。
English: But unfortunately, he fell seriously ill and died suddenly. The achievements he left behind will last forever. If he was not a self-sacrificing martyr, loyal and courageous, how could he have survived to the death like he did, and then succumbed? Thinking about the deceased is even more sad and mournful. He will be posthumously awarded honors, a knighthood, or his own quota.

古文：可赠镇西将军，使持节、都督、刺史、伯如故，并寻购丧榇，随宜资给。 
现代文：可追蹭蔡道恭为镇西将军，使持节、都督、刺史、伯爵仍然照旧，并派人寻购死者棺木，随宜发给丧葬费用。 
English: Cai Daogong can be pursued as the general of the west of the town, and the envoys of the festival, the governor, the historian, and the count are still the same, and people are sent to purchase the coffin of the deceased, and the funeral expenses are paid as appropriate.

古文：八年，魏许还道恭丧，其家以女乐易之，葬襄阳。
现代文：天监八年，北魏答应归还道恭遗体，其家属用歌舞伎去将他交换回来，埋葬在襄阳。
English: In the 8th year of Tianjun, the Northern Wei Dynasty agreed to return the body of Dao Qiong, and his family used Kabuki to exchange him and buried him in Xiangyang.

古文：子澹嗣，卒于河东太守。
现代文：他的儿子蔡澹继承爵位，死于任河东太守期间。
English: His son, Cai Qi, inherited the title and died while serving as the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：孙固早卒，国除。
现代文：孙子蔡固早年就死了。
English: His grandson, Cai Gu, died at an early age.

古文：杨公则，字君翼，天水西县人也。父仲怀，宋泰始初为豫州刺史殷琰将。
现代文：封邑被收回。杨公则字君翼，天水西县人父亲杨仲怀，宋泰始初年为豫州刺史殷琰的将领。
English: Yang Gongzhe was called Junyi, Yang Zhonghuai, the father of Tianshui West County, and Song Tai, who was the first general in the history of Henan Province, were taken back.

古文：琰叛，辅国将军刘勔讨琰，仲怀力战，死于横塘。
现代文：殷琰反叛朝廷时，辅国将军刘劻发兵讨伐，仲怀拼死决战，死于横塘。
English: When Yin Qi rebelled against the imperial court, Liu Ye, the general of the auxiliary state, sent soldiers to fight and fought to the death, and died in Hengtang.

古文：公则随父在军，年未弱冠，冒阵抱尸号哭，气绝良久，勔命还仲怀首。
现代文：杨公则当时跟随父亲在军中，还未到弱冠的年龄，冒死在阵地上抱尸痛哭，气绝许久，刘劻见后，命令部下交还仲怀首级。
English: At that time, Yang Gongze was in the army with his father. He was not yet at the age of a weak crown. He risked his life to hold the corpse on the position and cried bitterly. He was exhausted for a long time. After Liu Bei saw him, he ordered his subordinates to return Zhong Hui's head.

古文：公则殓毕，徒步负丧归乡里，由此著名。
现代文：杨公则将他父亲的尸首收殓完毕后，护送灵柩徒步回归乡里，因此而著名。
English: Yang Gong, after collecting his father's body, escorted the coffin back to the countryside on foot, which is why he is famous.

古文：历官员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：历任员外散骑侍郎。
English: All the previous members are now riding sidekicks.

古文：梁州刺史范柏年板为宋熙太守、领白马戍主。
现代文：梁州刺史范柏年任命他为宋熙太守、领白马戍主。
English: Fan Paknian, the governor of Liangzhou, appointed him as the governor of Song Dynasty and the leader of the White Horse Clan.

古文：氐贼李乌奴作乱，攻白马，公则固守经时，矢尽粮竭，陷于寇，抗声骂贼。
现代文：当时氐贼李乌奴叛乱，进攻白马，杨公则领兵固守历久，矢尽粮竭，最终被敌寇攻陷，公则被捕后高声骂贼，毫无惧色。
English: At that time, the bandit Li Wunu rebelled and attacked the White Horse. Yang Gongze, the leader of the army, held out for a long time, exhausted his resources, and was eventually captured by the enemy bandits. After Gongze was arrested, he cursed the thieves loudly and without fear.

古文：乌奴壮之，更厚待焉，要与同事。
现代文：乌奴很佩服他的英勇，反而更优厚地对待他，想招降他一同共事。
English: Wunu admires his bravery, but treats him more generously and wants to recruit him to work with him.

古文：公则伪许而图之，谋泄，单马逃归。
现代文：杨公则本想假装同意而后再图举事，结果计划泄露，杨公则只好单身骑马逃归。
English: Yang Gongzhe originally wanted to pretend to agree and then try to do something, but as a result, the plan was leaked, and Yang Gongzhe had no choice but to flee on a single horse.

古文：梁州刺史王玄邈以事表闻，齐高帝下诏褒美。
现代文：梁州刺史王玄邈将此事上奏朝廷。齐高帝下诏褒奖杨公则。
English: Liangzhou prince Wang Xuanqi reported the matter to the imperial court. Emperor Qigong issued an imperial edict commending Yang Gongzi.

古文：除晋寿太守，在任清洁自守。
现代文：授为晋寿太守，在任太守期间清正廉明，洁身自好。
English: He was awarded the title of Jinju Daju, and during his tenure as Daju, he was upright and clean.

古文：永明中，为镇北长流参军。迁扶风太守，母忧去官。
现代文：齐永明年间，杨公则任镇北长流参军，迁迭风太守，他因母亲去世而辞官守丧。
English: In the second half of the Qianlong year, Yang Gongze was appointed to the north of the town to join the army, and was transferred to the governor. He resigned from the post due to the death of his mother.

古文：雍州刺史陈显达起为宁朔将军。复领太守。
现代文：雍州刺史陈显达起用他为宁朔将军，又兼领太守。
English: Chen Xianda, the governor of Yongzhou, appointed him as the general of Ningshuo, and also made him the governor-general.

古文：顷之，荆州刺史巴东王子响构乱，公则率师进讨。
现代文：不久。荆州刺史巴束王子响发动叛乱，公则率师前去讨伐。
English: Soon after, the prince of Jingzhou, Zhishibazhong, started a rebellion, and Gongzhu led his division to fight against the rebels.

古文：事平，迁武宁太守。
现代文：事件平息后，公则迁为武宁太守。
English: After the incident subsided, he was transferred to the position of the Governor of the Province of Wu Ning.

古文：在郡七年，资无担石，百姓便之。
现代文：在担任郡守的七年裹，杨公则的家裹没有一点积蓄，百姓也因之而安居乐业。
English: During the seven years he served as the county governor, Yang Gongze's family did not have any savings, and the people lived and worked peacefully because of this.

古文：入为前军将军。
现代文：入为前军将军。
English: He was promoted to general of the former army.

古文：南康王为荆州，复为西中郎中兵参军。
现代文：南康王为荆州刺史时，杨公则又担任西中郎中兵参军。
English: When King Nankang made history in Jingzhou, Yang Gong also joined the army as a West Zhonglang soldier.

古文：领军将军萧颖胃协同义举，以公则为辅国将军、领西中郎谘议参军，中兵如故，率众东下。
现代文：领军将军芦题胄协助高祖起兵，任命杨公则为辅国将军、领西中郎诰议参军，仍然担任中兵之职，率领大军沿江东下。
English: The leader of the army, General Lu Zhisheng, assisted Gao Zu in raising an army, and appointed Yang Gongze as the auxiliary general, and the leader of the west, Zhong Lang, proposed to join the army. He still held the position of the middle soldier and led a large army along the east of the river.

古文：时湘州行事张宝积发兵自守，未知所附，公则军及巴陵，仍回师南讨。
现代文：当时湘州行事张宝积发兵自守，不知道该依附于哪一方，公则大军攻克巴陵以后，又回师南讨。
English: At that time, Zhang Bao, who was acting in Hunan Province, was accumulating troops to defend himself, and did not know which side to attach to. After the public army conquered Baling, he returned to the south to discuss.

古文：军次白沙，宝积惧，释甲以俟焉。公则到，抚纳之，湘境遂定。
现代文：大军驻扎在白沙，张宝积害怕，自动解除武装以待梁军杨公则率部进入长沙，安抚、收纳了张宝积及其部属，于是乎定了渔业境内。
English: A large army was stationed in Baisha, Zhang Baozhe was afraid, so he disarmed himself and waited for the Liang army led by Yang Gongzhe to enter Changsha, pacify and accommodate Zhang Baozhe and his subordinates, and thus settled in the territory of the fishery.

古文：和帝即位，授持节、都督湘州诸军事、湘州刺史。
现代文：鱼童即位以后，授予全锄持节、都督迎业诸军事、湘州刺史。
English: After the enthronement of the Fish Boy, it was awarded to Quanzhangzhi Festival, the military governor of Yingye, and the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：高祖勒众军次于沔口，鲁山城主孙乐祖、郢州刺史张冲各据城未下，公则率湘府之众会于夏口。
现代文：高祖统率大军驻扎在沔口，鲁山城主孙乐祖、坚丛刺史迪空都各自据城自守，久攻不下，杨公则率领湘府的兵力与高祖会合于夏旦。
English: Gao Zu Tong led a large army stationed in Hekou. Sun Lezu, the lord of Lushan Castle, and Jiancong Shidi, the leader of the Kuomintang, each defended their own city and could not be attacked for a long time. Yang Gong led the troops from Hunan Province to meet Gao Zu in Xia Dan.

古文：时荆州诸军受公则节度，虽萧颖达宗室之贵亦隶焉。
现代文：当时塑幽方面的各部兵力全都接受彊公则的指挥调遣，即使像贵为皇室宗亲的萧颖达也同样成为他的部下。
English: At that time, all the military forces in the area of Shouyu were all under the command and dispatch of Yu Gongzhe, and even Xiao Yingda, who was a royal relative like Gui, also became his subordinates.

古文：累进征虏将军、左卫将军，持节、刺史如故。
现代文：累次进升为征虏将军、左卫将军，担任持节、刺史如故。
English: He was successively promoted to General of the Conscript Army and General of the Left Division, and continued to hold the posts of commander-in-chief and secretary-general.

古文：郢城平，高祖命众军即日俱下，公则受命先驱，径掩柴桑。
现代文：平定郢城后，高祖命令各路大军即日沿江东下，遥全周受命担任前驱，直达柴桑。
English: After subduing Lucheng, Gao Zu ordered all the armies to go east along the river on the same day, and ordered Yao Quanzhou to serve as the forerunner, all the way to Chaisang.

古文：江州既定，连旌东下，直造京邑。
现代文：江州被平定以后，又连续挥师束下，直指京邑。
English: After Jiangzhou was subdued, the army continued to sweep the countryside, heading straight for Beijing.

古文：公则号令严明，秋毫不犯，所在莫不赖焉。
现代文：公则所率领的军队号令严明，秋毫无犯，所在地的百姓没有不依靠他的。
English: The army led by Guan Zheng issued strict orders, there was no crime, and the local people did not have to rely on him.

古文：大军至新林，公则自越城移屯领军府垒北楼，与南掖门相对，尝登楼望战。
现代文：大军到达新林，杨公则从越城移兵驻扎在领军府垒北楼，跟南掖门正好相对。
English: The large army reached Xinlin, and Yang Gong moved his troops from Yuecheng and stationed them in the north building of the leading military base, just opposite the South Gate.

古文：城中遥见麾盖，纵神锋弩射之，矢贯胡床，左右皆失色。公则曰： 几中吾脚。 
现代文：杨公刨曾经登楼观战，城中守军远远望见他的麾盖，就用神锋弩来射他，箭头射穿了他坐的交椅，左右随从全都大惊失色公则不经意地说： 差点射中了我的脚。 
English: Yang Gong Gua once went upstairs to watch a battle. The defenders in the city could see his skull cap from far away, so they shot him with a sacred arrow. The arrow pierced the chair he was sitting on. His followers on both sides were shocked and disgraced. Gong Zi casually said, "I almost shot my foot."

古文：谈笑如初。
现代文：仍然谈笑如初。
English: We still talk and laugh as much as ever.

古文：东昏夜选勇士攻公则栅，军中惊扰，公则坚卧不起，徐命击之，东昏军乃退。
现代文：束昏侯夜间挑选勇士前来攻打公则栅垒，军中兵士惊恐不已，公刖却仍然躺在床上，从容不迫地下令回击来犯之敌，束昏侯的军队只好撤退。
English: In a daze, warriors were selected at night to attack the fortress of Gongzheng. The soldiers in the army were terrified, but Gongzheng still lay in bed and calmly ordered them to strike back at the invading enemy. The army in a daze had no choice but to retreat.

古文：公则所领多湘溪人，性怯懦，城内轻之，以为易与，每出荡，辄先犯公则垒。
现代文：杨公则所率领的兵士多是泅溪人，历来被认为性格怯懦，城中守军很看不起他们，以为容易对付，每次出击，总是首先进犯扰公刖的营垒。
English: Most of the soldiers led by Yang Gongzhe were from Yanxi. They were always considered to be cowardly. The defenders of the city looked down on them, thinking that they were easy to deal with. Every time they attacked, they always attacked the camp of the disturbing officials first.

古文：公则奖厉军士，克获更多。及平，城内出者或被剥夺，公则亲率麾下，列阵东掖门，卫送公卿士庶，故出者多由公则营焉。
现代文：扰公型就采用奖励军士的办法，所以克敌获胜的次数更多建尘越被攻克后，从宫城中出来的人，有的被抢劫，彊公则就亲自带领部下列队于束掖门，以便护送公卿士民们，所以出城者大多从杨公则的营地经过。
English: The method of rewarding sergeants was adopted for disturbing public order, so the more times the enemy was defeated, the more victories were won. After being conquered, some of the people who came out of Miyagi were robbed. In order to escort the noblemen and commoners, Zou Gongze personally led the following teams to Sokcho Gate. Therefore, most of the people who left the city passed through Yang Gongze's camp.

古文：进号左将军，持节、刺史如故，还镇南蕃。
现代文：进号为左将军，任持节、刺史如故，还师镇守南藩。
English: His posthumous name was General Zuo, and he was appointed to hold festivals and write histories, and he also served as the commander of the Southern Domain.

古文：初，公则东下，湘部诸郡多未宾从，及公则还州，然后诸屯聚并散。
现代文：当初，杨公则沿辽东下时，翅州属下的各郡大多还没有归顺，到扰公则返回渔业后，各路屯聚的队伍都四处散逃了。
English: At first, when Yang Gongzhe went along the east of Liaoning, most of the counties under the control of Yingzhou had not yet surrendered. When Zhaogongzhe returned to the fishery, the crowds had dispersed.

古文：天监元年，进号平南将军，封宁都县侯，邑一千五百户。
现代文：天监元年，公则进号平南将军，封为宁都县侯，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, Gongzhi Jin was given the title of General Pingnan, and was made the lord of Ningdu County, with 1,500 households in the county.

古文：湘州寇乱累年，民多流散，公则轻刑薄敛，顷之，户口充复。
现代文：湘州寇乱连年，很多百姓流离失所，杨公则到任后减轻刑罚，少收赋税，很快，湘州的户口就差不多恢复到原来的数量了。
English: After years of riots in Hunan, many people were displaced. After Yang Gongze took office, he reduced penalties and taxes. Soon, the number of hukou in Hunan was almost restored to the original number.

古文：为政虽无威严，然保己廉慎，为吏民所悦。
现代文：杨公则为政虽然不重威严，但能克己廉正，谨慎小心，深为官吏、百姓所爱戴，按当时的湘俗，微贱之家常用贿赂来求取州县的官职。
English: Although Yang Gongzi was not very dignified, he was able to restrain himself and be honest, prudent and careful. He was deeply loved by officials and the people. According to the Hunan custom at that time, the Weihai family often used bribery to obtain state and county official positions.

古文：湘俗单家以赂求州职，公则至，悉断之，所辟引皆州郡著姓，高祖班下诸州以为法。
现代文：公则到任后，完全断绝了这些人的官路，所征召举用的都是州郡裹有声望的族姓，高祖布告诸州依效此项做法。
English: After he took office, he completely cut off the official path of these people, and all of them were recruited and promoted by prefectures and counties with prestigious family names. Gaozu announced that prefectures and counties should follow this practice.

古文：四年，征中护军。代至，乘二舸便发，赆送一无所取。
现代文：天监三年，杨公则被征为中护军代职的人一到，他便乘上两艘小船出发了人们所进贡的财物一无所取。
English: In the third year of the Heaven's Supervision, Yang Gongze was conscripted as the person in charge of the Middle Protection Army. As soon as the person arrived, he set out on two small boats and took nothing of the property that people paid tribute.

古文：仍迁卫尉卿，加散骑常侍。
现代文：又迁卫尉卿，加散骑常侍。
English: He was also transferred to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards, and was given the additional rank of Cavalryman.

古文：时朝廷始议北伐，以公则威名素著，至京师，诏假节先屯洛口。
现代文：当时朝廷开始商议北伐事宜，由于杨公则的威名一向很显著，到京师后，高祖韶令他假节先屯兵洛口公则受命后身患疾病。
English: At that time, the imperial court began to discuss the matter of the Northern Expedition. Since the prestige of Yang Gongze had always been very prominent, after he arrived in Beijing, Gao Zuqi ordered him to be the first to leave the festival.

古文：公则受命遘疾，谓亲人曰： 昔廉颇、马援以年老见遗，犹自力请用。今国家不以吾朽懦，任以前驱，方于古人，见知重矣。
现代文：他对亲人们说： 昔日廉颇、马援因年老而不被起用，仍极力自荐请求重用、现在朝廷不认为我老朽无用，任命我为先锋，跟古人相比，我是深受皇上器重啊。
English: He said to his relatives: In the past, Ma Yuan was not used because he was too old, but he still tried his best to recommend himself and ask for re-use. Now the imperial court does not think I am old and useless, but appoints me as a pioneer. Compared to the ancients, I am very important to the emperor.

古文：虽临途疾苦，岂可僶俛辞事。
现代文：虽临出征前得了疾病，却又怎能刚刚受命就藉口推辞呢?
English: Even though he was ill before he went to the front, how could he have just received his orders and then used that as an excuse to decline?

古文：马革还葬，此吾志也。 
现代文：马革裹尸，战死沙场，这就是我的志向啊。 
English: I want to be wrapped up in a shroud and die on the battlefield. That's my ambition.

古文：遂强起登舟。
现代文：于是勉强起来登船出发。
English: So they reluctantly got up, boarded the ship and set off.

古文：至洛口，寿春士女归降者数千户。
现代文：兵至洛口，寿春的百姓有几千户前来归降。
English: The soldiers reached Lokou, and thousands of people from Shouchun came to surrender.

古文：魏、豫州刺史薛恭度遣长史石荣前锋接战，即斩石荣，逐北至寿春，去城数十里乃反。
现代文：北魏豫州刺史薛恭度派遣长史石荣等人为前锋来迎战，杨公则当即就斩杀了石荣，追击败兵直至寿春，距离寿春城几十里才收兵。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the governor of Yuzhou, Shi Xue, dispatched Long Shi Shi Rong and others as forwards to meet the battle. Yang Gong immediately killed Shi Rong, chased and defeated the soldiers until Shouchun, and only received the soldiers dozens of miles away from Shouchun City.

古文：疾卒于师，时年六十一。
现代文：杨公则因病卒于军中，时年六十一岁。
English: Yang Gongze died of illness in the middle of the army at the age of sixty-one.

古文：高祖深痛惜之，即日举哀，赠车骑将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：高祖深感痛惜，即日举行哀悼仪式，追赠他为车骑将军，赐给鼓吹乐队一部。
English: Deeply regretting, Gaozu held a mourning ceremony on the same day, posthumously presented him as a chariot and cavalry general, and gave him a part of the band.

古文：谥曰烈。
现代文：谧号为烈。
English: 号烈.

古文：公则为人敦厚慈爱，居家笃睦，视兄子过于其子，家财悉委焉。
现代文：杨公则为人敦厚慈爱，在家裹淳厚而和睦，关心他哥哥的儿子超过自己的孩子，将家中财物全都交给他管理。
English: Yang Gong, on the other hand, was a kind and loving person. At home, he lived in harmony with his brother. He cared more about his brother's son than his own children, and left all of the family's property to him to manage.

古文：性好学，虽居军旅，手不辍卷，士大夫以此称之。
现代文：杨公则生性好学，即使常年生活在军旅之中，仍然手不释卷。士大夫们都因此而称赞他。
English: Yang Gong is naturally eager to learn, and even though he lives in the midst of military travel all year round, he still does not let go of the scroll. The scholars and doctors all praised him for this.

古文：子膘嗣，有罪国除。
现代文：杨公则的儿子杨膘继承爵位，后因犯罪而被免除。
English: Yang Gongze's son Yang Hao inherited the title, but was later pardoned for his crimes.

古文：高祖以公则勋臣，特诏听庶长子朓嗣。朓固让，历年乃受。
现代文：高祖认为杨公则有功于国家，特下诏让他的庶出长子杨朋继承爵位杨跳坚决辞让，许多年以后才接受
English: Gao Zu believed that Yang Gongzi was a credit to the country, and issued a special edict to let his illegitimate eldest son, Yang Peng, inherit the title of nobility. Yang Jie resolutely resigned, and only accepted it many years later

古文：邓元起，字仲居，南郡当阳人也。
现代文：邓元起字仲居，南郡当阳人。
English: Deng Yuan started to live in the middle of the word, and he was from Dangyang, Nan County.

古文：少有胆干，膂力过人。
现代文：年少时有胆有识，且臂力过人。
English: When he was young, he had courage and insight, and his arm strength was amazing.

古文：性任侠，好赈施，乡里年少多附之。
现代文：性任侠，好赈施，乡里少年多归附他。
English: He is a sexual daredevil, a good giver of alms, and many young people in the village follow him.

古文：起家州辟议曹从事史，转奉朝请。
现代文：起家于州辟议曹从事史，转任奉朝请。
English: He started his career as a solicitor in the prefecture, and later transferred to the imperial court.

古文：雍州刺史萧缅板为槐里令。
现代文：雍州刺史萧缅起用他为槐里令。
English: Xiao Meng, the chief of the Yongzhou imperial court, used him as the commander of the imperial court.

古文：迁弘农太守、平西军事。
现代文：迁任弘农太守、平西军事。
English: He was transferred to the post of Kononodai no kami (provincial governor of Kono Province) and the post of Hiranishi military governor.

古文：时西阳马荣率众缘江寇抄，商旅断绝，刺史萧遥欣使元起率众讨平之。
现代文：当时西阳马荣率众沿江掠夺，商旅断绝，刺史萧遥欣派元起率兵讨伐平定了。
English: At that time, Xiyang Ma Rong led the people to plunder along the river, cut off business travel, and dispatched Xiao Yaoxin to lead the soldiers to fight.

古文：迁武宁太守。
现代文：迁任武宁太守。
English: He was transferred to the position of Takenobu Taishu.

古文：永元末，魏军逼义阳，元起自郡援焉。
现代文：永元末年，魏军逼近义阳，元起从郡里去增援。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, the Wei army approached Yiyang, and Yuan went from the county to reinforce.

古文：蛮帅田孔明附于魏，自号郢州刺史，寇掠三关，规袭夏口，元起率锐卒攻之，旬月之间，频陷六城，斩获万计，余党悉皆散走。
现代文：蛮帅田孔明依附于魏，自号郢州刺史，寇掠三关。阴谋袭击夏口，元起率精锐部队攻打他们，旬月之间，一连攻陷六城，斩获数以万计，其余寇贼皆四处逃散。
English: Confucius, a very handsome man, attached himself to Wei, and, calling himself the historian of Zhangzhou, he plundered the three passes. He plotted to attack Xiakou, and at first he led an elite force to attack them. Between June and September, he captured six cities in a row, gaining tens of thousands, while the rest of the bandits fled in all directions.

古文：仍戍三关。
现代文：仍然戍守三关。
English: He is still in charge of Sanguan.

古文：郢州刺史张冲督河北军事，元起累与冲书，求旋军。
现代文：郢州刺史张冲监督黄河以北的军事，元起多次写信给张冲，要求撤军。
English: Zhang Chong, the statesman of Zhangzhou who oversaw the military north of the Yellow River, wrote to Zhang Chong many times from the beginning, demanding the withdrawal of troops.

古文：冲报书曰： 足下在彼，吾在此，表里之势，所谓金城汤池；一旦舍去，则荆棘生焉。 
现代文：张冲回信说： 足下在彼，我在此，表里之势，所谓金城汤池；一旦舍去，就会荆棘丛生。 
English: Zhang Chong replied to the letter, saying, "He is here, I am here, we have the same potential, the so-called golden city; once we give up, we will have thorns.

古文：乃表元起为平南中兵参军事。
现代文：于是上表于帝，任元起为平南中兵参军事。
English: As a result, the emperor made the above request, and from the time of Emperor Ren Yuan, the soldiers of Pingnan Province participated in the military.

古文：自是每战必捷，勇冠当时，敢死之士乐为用命者万有余人。
现代文：自此每战必捷，勇冠当时，敢死之士乐于为其卖命者有一万余人。
English: Since then, every battle must be successful. At the time of the victory, there were more than 10,000 people who were willing to die for it.

古文：义师起，萧颖胄与书招之。
现代文：义师起事时，萧颖胄来信召请他。
English: When the righteous teachers revolted, Xiao Yingyao came to summon him.

古文：张冲待元起素厚，众皆惧冲；及书至，元起部曲多劝其还郢。
现代文：张冲待元起一向宽厚，其他将士却都惧怕张冲。当颖胄的书信到来之后，元起的部下大都劝他返回郢城。
English: Zhang Chong has always been generous to Yuan, but other soldiers are afraid of Zhang Chong. When Ying Yao's letter arrived, most of Yuan's subordinates advised him to return to Lucheng.

古文：元起大言于众曰： 朝廷暴虐，诛戮宰臣，群小用命，衣冠道尽。
现代文：元起对部将大声说： 朝廷暴虐，诛戮功臣，小人得志，衣冠道尽。
English: At the beginning of the meeting, the head of the opposite party said loudly: The imperial court is tyrannical, the heroes are slaughtered, the villains are inspired, and the crown is exhausted.

古文：荆、雍二州同举大事，何患不克。
现代文：荆、雍二州同举大事，何患不克。
English: The two states of Jing and Yong should jointly hold major events, and there is nothing wrong with that.

古文：且我老母在西，岂容背本。
现代文：况且我老母在西，岂容背本。
English: Besides, my mother lives in the West, so she wouldn't allow me to learn the alphabet.

古文：若事不成，政受戮昏朝，幸免不孝之罪。 
现代文：若事不成，政受戮昏朝，幸免不孝之罪。 
English: If things do not work out, the government will be defeated, the dynasty will be weakened, and the sin of being unfilial will be spared.

古文：即日治严上道。
现代文：即日严明纪律率军返回。
English: On the same day, the army led by strict discipline returned.

古文：至江陵，为西中郎中兵参军，加冠军将军，率众与高祖会于夏口。高祖命王茂、曹景宗及元起等围城，结垒九里，张冲屡战，辄大败，乃婴城固守。
现代文：至江陵，任西中郎中兵参军，加冠军将军。率兵与高祖在夏口会面，高祖命王茂、曹景宗及元起围城，在九里筑垒，张冲屡战，大败，于是围城固守。
English: He went to Gangneung, enlisted the soldiers of West Zhonglang to join the army, and became a champion general. He led the soldiers to meet Gaozu in Xiakou. Gaozu ordered Wang Mao, Cao Jingzong and Yuan Qi to besiege the city and build a fortress in Jiuli. Zhang Chong repeatedly fought and was defeated, so he kept the siege.

古文：和帝即位，授假节、冠军将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，迁给事黄门侍郎，移镇南堂西渚。
现代文：和帝即位，授假节、冠军将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，迁给事黄门侍郎，移镇南堂西渚。
English: Emperor Go-Shirakawa's enthronement, the holiday festival, the champion general, the general of Ping Yue, and the history of Guangzhou were moved to the Yellow Gate, and the town of Nandang Nishizaki was moved.

古文：中兴元年七月，郢城降，以本号为益州刺史，仍为前军，先定寻阳。
现代文：中兴元年七月，郢城投降，他以本号任益州刺史，仍充前锋，先平定寻阳。
English: In July of the first year of the People's Republic of China, the city of Handan surrendered. He used this number to make history in Yizhou, still acting as a striker, and first sought the sun.

古文：及大军进至京邑，元起筑垒于建阳门，与王茂、曹景宗等合长围，身当锋镝。
现代文：及大军进至京邑，元起在建阳门筑起壁垒，与王茂、曹景宗等合围，身挡锋镝。
English: and the large army marched into Beijing, and originally built a barrier at Jianyang Gate, and surrounded Wang Mao, Cao Jingzong, and others to block the front.

古文：建康城平，进号征虏将军。
现代文：建康城平定后，晋号征虏将军。
English: After Jiankang City was subdued, Jin was called the Conscript General.

古文：天监初，封当阳县侯，邑一千二百户。
现代文：天监初年，封为当阳县侯，食邑一千二百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, he was given the title of Hou of Dangyang County, with 1,200 households in the food village.

古文：又进号左将军，刺史如故，始述职焉。
现代文：又晋号左将军，刺史如故，开始述职。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of General of the Left and began to report for duty.

古文：初，义师之起，益州刺史刘季连持两端；及闻元起将至，遂发兵拒守。
现代文：当初，义师起义时，益州刺史刘季连迟疑不定，等到听说元起将要到来时，才发兵拒守。
English: At first, when the Yishi Uprising broke out, Liu Jilian, the governor of Yizhou, hesitated and waited until he heard that Yuan Zi was about to arrive before sending troops to defend the city.

古文：语在《季连传》。
现代文：事迹见于《季连传》。
English: The incident is described in the "Quarterly Chronicle."

古文：元起至巴西，巴西太守硃士略开门以待。
现代文：元起至巴西，巴西太守朱士略开门以待。
English: From the beginning to Brazil, the Brazilian Governor Zhu Shili slightly opened the door to wait.

古文：先时蜀人多逃亡，至是出投元起，皆称起义应朝廷，师人新故三万余。
现代文：在此之前蜀人多逃亡，至此才出来投奔元起，皆称起义以响应朝廷，其部下新旧共三万余人。
English: Prior to this, many Shu people had fled, and it was only at this point that they came out to join the Yuan dynasty. They all called themselves the uprising in response to the imperial court, and their subordinates, old and new, totaled more than thirty thousand people.

古文：元起在道久，军粮乏绝。
现代文：元起在路上奔波的时间太长，军粮匮缺。
English: From the beginning, the time spent on the road was too long, and there was a shortage of rations.

古文：或说之曰： 蜀土政慢，民多诈疾，若俭巴西一郡籍注，困而罚之，所获必厚。 
现代文：有人劝说他： 蜀地法令懈怠，民多狡诈令人厌恶，若检查巴西一郡户口的登记情况，予以惩罚，所获必厚。 
English: Some people persuaded him: Shu laws and regulations are lax, and the cunning of many people is disgusting. If you check the registration status of a Brazilian county's household registration and punish it, you will get rich.

古文：元起然之。
现代文：元起同意了。
English: The source agreed.

古文：涪令李膺谏曰： 使君前有严敌，后无继援，山民始附，于我观德，若纠以刻薄，民必不堪，众心一离，虽悔无及，何必起疾，可以济师。
现代文：涪县县令李膺上谏说： 您前有严重的敌情，后无增援部队，山民开始附从您，摹仿我们的行为准备。如果刻薄地纠缠他们，他们必定不堪忍受。众心一离，即使后悔也来不及了，何必靠制造矛盾来救济部队呢？
English: The county magistrate of Zhixian County, Li Yujing, said: You have a serious hostile situation in front of you, and no reinforcement troops behind you. The mountain people began to follow you, imitating our behavior preparation. If you entangle them cruelly, they will certainly be unbearable. If everyone's hearts are separated, even if it is too late to regret, why rely on creating contradictions to relieve the troops?

古文：膺请出图之，不患资粮不足也。 
现代文：我请求出去解决粮源，不用担心供给不足的。 
English: I ask you to go out and solve the food source, do not worry about the supply shortage.

古文：元起曰： 善，一以委卿。 
现代文：元起说： 好，一切委任于你。 
English: The source said: OK, everything is delegated to you.

古文：膺退，率富民上军资米，俄得三万斛。
现代文：李膺下去后，率地方富户送来军粮，马上便得到三万斛。
English: After Li Yao went down, he led the local rich households to send military rations, and immediately received 30,000 baht.

古文：元起先遣将王元宗等，破季连将李奉伯于新巴，齐晚盛于赤水，众进屯西平。
现代文：元起先派将领王元宗等，在新巴攻破季连部将李奉阳，在赤水攻破齐晚盛，军队驻扎于西平。
English: Originally, the generals Wang Yuanzong and others were sent first, and they defeated the quarter company commander Li Bongyang in Xinba, defeated Qi Yansheng in Chishui, and the army was stationed in Xiping.

古文：季连始婴城自守。
现代文：季连开始固城自守。
English: Qilian began to defend the city.

古文：晚盛又破元起将鲁方达于斛石，士卒死者千余人，师众咸惧，元起乃自率兵稍进至蒋桥，去成都二十里，留辎重于郫。
现代文：齐晓盛又在斛石攻破元起将领鲁方达，士众死者千余人，将士都感到害怕，元起于是亲率部队悄悄地进至蒋桥，离成都二十里，辎重留在郫县。
English: After Qi Xiaosheng defeated the Yuan general Lu Fonda in Shishi, more than a thousand soldiers were killed, and the soldiers were afraid. Therefore, the Yuan army led by Qi Xiaosheng quietly entered Jiangqiao, twenty miles from Chengdu, and stayed in Shixian.

古文：季连复遣奉伯、晚盛二千人，间道袭郫，陷之，军备尽没。
现代文：季连再次派遣奉旧、晚盛率二千人，抄小道偷袭郫县，取得成功，军备全落入敌手。
English: Qilian again dispatched two thousand men, led by Fengguo and Baosheng, to sneak into Jixian through back roads. They were successful, and all the armaments fell into the enemy's hands.

古文：元起遣鲁方达之众救之，败而反，遂不能克。
现代文：元起遣鲁方达率兵救援，失败而返，终不能克。
English: Yuan Zi sent Lu Fonda to lead the soldiers to rescue, failed and returned, and finally could not be defeated.

古文：元起舍郫，迳围州城，栅其三面而堑焉。
现代文：元起放弃郫县，直接包围州城，三面扎上栅栏而一面挖上壕沟。
English: The original plan was to give up Min County and directly encircle Zhucheng, with a fence on three sides and a trench on one side.

古文：元起出巡视围栅，季连使精勇掩之，将至麾下，元起下舆持楯叱之，众辟易不敢进。
现代文：元起出去巡视栅栏时，季连派精兵勇士偷袭他，将至麾下，元起下车持盾叱吓他们，士兵们不敢逼近。
English: When Yuan Liang went out to inspect the fence, Ji Lian sent elite soldiers to sneak attack him, and when they arrived, Yuan Liang got out of the car and scolded them with a shield. The soldiers did not dare to approach.

古文：时益部兵乱日久，民废耕农，内外苦饥，人多相食，道路断绝，季连计穷。
现代文：当时益州地区兵乱日久，民废耕农，内外苦于饥荒，人多相食，道路不见行人，季连计穷。
English: At that time, the war in Yizhou region had been raging for a long time, the people had abandoned farming, both at home and abroad were suffering from famine, people were eating each other, there were no pedestrians on the road, and the season was poor.

古文：会明年，高祖使赦季连罪，许之降。
现代文：第二年，高祖派使者赦免季连之罪，允许他投降。
English: The following year, Emperor Gaozhu sent an envoy to pardon Qilian and allow him to surrender.

古文：季连即日开城纳元起，元起送季连于京师。
现代文：季连当日便开城门放元起入城，元起送季连至京师。
English: On the same day, Qilian opened the city gate to let Yuan Zi enter the city, and Yuan Zi sent Qilian to Beijing Division.

古文：城开，郫乃降。
现代文：州城门一开，郫县才降。
English: As soon as the state gate was opened, Handan County was the first to be downgraded.

古文：斩奉伯、晚盛。
现代文：杀奉旧、晚盛。
English: Kill the old, late.

古文：高祖论平蜀勋，复元起号平西将军，增封八百户，并前二千户。
现代文：高祖论评平定蜀地的功勋，元起再次号为平西将军，增加封邑八百户，加上以前的二千户。
English: Gao Zu commented on the merits of leveling and fixing Shu, and from the beginning he was once again called General Pingxi, increasing the fiefs by 800 households, plus the previous 2,000 households.

古文：元起以乡人庾黔娄为录事参军，又得荆州刺史萧遥欣故客蒋光济，并厚待之，任以州事。
现代文：元起以乡亲庾黔娄为录事参军，又邀请到荆州刺史萧遥欣的老熟人蒋光济一并厚加款待，把州里的政务委任给他们处理。
English: From the very beginning, he invited his old acquaintances Jiang Guangji and Xiao Yaoxin to Jingzhou, and entrusted them with the state affairs of the state.

古文：黔娄甚清洁，光济多计谋，并劝为善政。
现代文：黔娄清廉，光济多谋，一并劝其行善政。
English: He urged them to be clean and honest, to be resourceful, and to practice good governance.

古文：元起之克季连也，城内财宝无所私，勤恤民事，口不论财色。
现代文：元起攻克季连后，城内的财宝毫不居为己有，勤恤民情，口不论财色。
English: From the very beginning, after conquering Qilian, the treasures in the city did not belong to themselves, they were considerate of the people's feelings, regardless of their wealth.

古文：性本能饮酒，至一斛不乱，及是绝之。
现代文：他本身善于饮酒，至一斛也不乱性，在这里也戒了酒。
English: He was a good drinker himself and never had a bad day. He also gave up drinking here.

古文：蜀土翕然称之。
现代文：蜀人一致称赞他。
English: The people of Shu unanimously praised him.

古文：元起舅子梁矜孙性轻脱，与黔娄志行不同，乃言于元起曰： 城中称有三刺史，节下何以堪之！ 
现代文：元起舅子梁矜孙生性轻脱，与黔娄志向不同，于是向元起进言： 城中传言有三个刺史，你不感到难堪吗？ 
English: Yuanzhi's brother-in-law, Liang Xinsun, was born with a light temperament, different from Yu's ambition, so he said to Yuanzhi: The rumors in the city have three stabbing histories, don't you feel embarrassed?

古文：元起由此疏黔屡、光济，而治迹稍损。
现代文：元起因此疏远黔娄、光济，治理的成绩由此受到损害。
English: As a result, Yuanzhi alienated Yan and Guangji, and the achievements of governance were damaged as a result.

古文：在州二年，以母老乞归供养，诏许焉。征为右卫将军，以西昌侯萧渊藻代之。
现代文：任刺史二年，以母亲年老需供养为由求归故里，皇帝同意，征为右卫将军，以西昌侯萧渊藻代替他。
English: In the second year of his reign, he asked to return to his hometown on the grounds that his mother was old and needed to be supported. The emperor agreed to conscript him as the right guard general, replacing him with Xiao Yuanmao, the lord of Xichang.

古文：是时，梁州长史夏侯道迁以南郑叛，引魏人，白马戍主尹天宝驰使报蜀，魏将王景胤、孔陵寇东西晋寿，并遣告急，众劝元起急救之。
现代文：当时，梁州长史夏侯道迁据守南郑反叛，勾引魏人，白马戍主尹天宝派使者快马报告于蜀，魏将王景胤、孔陵攻打东、西晋，并遣使告急，大家劝元起紧急救援。
English: At that time, the governor of Liang Province, Shixia Hou Daoqian, rebelled against Nan Zheng and seduced the Wei people. The leader of the White Horse Clan, Yin Tianbao, sent an envoy to report to Shu. Wei sent Wang Jingyin and Kong Ling to attack East and West Jin, and sent an envoy to the emergency, urging everyone to start emergency rescue.

古文：元起曰： 朝廷万里，军不卒至，若寇贼侵淫，方须扑讨，董督之任，非我而谁？
现代文：元起说： 朝廷在万里之外，援军不会很快到来，若寇贼侵淫，正要扑讨，统率三军的责任，舍我其谁？
English: Yuan Zi said: The imperial court is thousands of miles away, reinforcements will not arrive soon, if the bandits are encroaching, they are about to pounce, who will take the responsibility of leading the three armies but me?

古文：何事匆匆便救。 
现代文：何事匆匆便救？ 
English: What's the rush?

古文：黔娄等苦谏之，皆不从。
现代文：黔娄等人苦苦劝他，都不听。
English: Zou and the others tried to persuade him, but he wouldn't listen.

古文：高祖亦假元起节，都督征讨诸军事，救汉中。比至，魏已攻陷两晋寿。
现代文：高祖也借给元起符节，都督征讨诸军事，救汉中，等到援军到达时，魏军已经攻陷了东、西两晋寿。
English: Gao Zu also lent the Yuan Dynasty the festival of the runes, and the governor conscripted the military to save Han. By the time the reinforcements arrived, the Wei army had already captured East and West Jinzhou.

古文：渊藻将至。元起颇营还装，粮储器械，略无遗者。
现代文：渊藻将要到来时，元起稍加料理便交还装备，粮储器械，无一遗漏。
English: When the deep seaweed is about to arrive, the equipment and grain storage equipment will be returned with a little cooking from the beginning, without any omissions.

古文：渊藻入城，甚怨望之，因表其逗留不忧军事。收付州狱，于狱自缢，时年四十八。
现代文：渊藻入城，非常怨恨他，因此上书责其故意逗留而不忧军事，收州狱关押，在狱中自缢身亡，时年四十八岁。
English: When Fusuma entered the city, he was very resentful of him, so he wrote a letter accusing him of deliberately staying without worrying about the military, and he was imprisoned in the state prison. He hanged himself in prison and died at the age of forty-eight.

古文：有司追劾削爵土，诏减邑之半，乃更封松滋县侯，邑千户。
现代文：有司又弹劾削其爵士，诏令减掉一半封邑，于是改封为松滋县侯，食邑千户。
English: Yushi also impeached and reduced his knighthood, and the imperial edict reduced half of his fiefs, so he changed his fief to Matsuzi County, with a thousand households in food villages.

古文：初，元起在荆州，刺史随王板元起为从事，别驾庾荜坚执不可，元起恨之。
现代文：当初，元起在荆州，刺史随王起用元起为从事，别驾庾荜坚持不同意，元起怀恨在心。
English: At the beginning, Yuanqi was in Jingzhou, and Zhang Shih followed Wang Qi in using Yuanqi as an occupation. Don't insist on disagreeing, Yuanqi held a grudge.

古文：大军既至京师，荜在城内，甚惧。
现代文：大军已经到达京城，庾荜在城内，非常害怕。
English: A large army has arrived in the capital, and they are cowering in the city, very afraid.

古文：及城平，元起先遣迎荜，语人曰： 庾别驾若为乱兵所杀，我无以自明。 
现代文：当京城安定下来后，元起先派人去迎接庚荜，对人说： 庾别驾如被乱军杀掉了，我无以自明。 
English: After the capital was stabilized, Geng initially sent someone to meet Geng Yao and told him: "Don't act as if you were killed by the rebels, I can't help myself.

古文：因厚遣之。
现代文：并厚礼相赠。
English: They also presented each other with gifts.

古文：少时又赏至其西沮田舍，有沙门造之乞，元起问田人曰： 有稻几何？ 
现代文：少时又曾到他的西沮田舍，有沙门上门乞讨，元起问农人： 有多少稻？ 
English: When he was a child, he once went to his Xidi farmhouse. A poor man came to the door to beg and asked the farmer: "How much rice do you have?"

古文：对曰： 二十斛。 
现代文：回答说： 有二十斛。 
English: And he answered, Twenty fathoms.

古文：元起悉以施之。时人称其有大度。
现代文：元起全部施舍了，当时人们称之为大度。
English: At that time, people called it generosity.

古文：元起初为益州，过江陵迎其母，母事道，方居馆，不肯出。
现代文：元起初为益州刺史，路过江陵迎接其母，其母信道教，刚居馆，不肯出。
English: Yuan was originally from Yizhou. He passed through Jiangling to meet his mother, who was a believer in Taoism and lived in Gangju Pavilion. She refused to leave.

古文：元起拜请同行。
现代文：元起拜请同行。
English: Please come with me from the beginning.

古文：母曰： 贫贱家儿忽得富贵，讵可久保，我宁死不能与汝共入祸败。 
现代文：其母说： 贫贱家儿忽得富贵，怎么可能保持长久，我宁死也不能与你共罹祸败。 
English: His mother said: "How can a poor family suddenly become rich and stay that way for a long time? I would rather die than share your misfortune."

古文：元起之至巴东，闻蜀乱，使蒋光济筮之，遇《蹇》，喟然叹曰： 吾岂邓艾而及此乎。 
现代文：元起到达巴东，闻蜀叛乱，让蒋光济卜筮，遇蹇，喟然叹曰： 吾岂邓艾而及此乎。 
English: When he arrived in Badong, he heard of the Shu Rebellion and asked Jiang Guang to help him. When he met him, he sighed and said, "How did I end up here?"

古文：后果如筮。
现代文：其后果然如卜筮所言。
English: The consequences are just as Bo Xilai said.

古文：子铿嗣。
现代文：儿子邓鉴继承。
English: His son Deng Jian succeeded him.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：永元之末，荆州方未有衅，萧颖胄悉全楚之兵，首应义举。岂天之所启，人惎之谋？
现代文：陈朝吏部尚书姚察说： 永元末年，荆州方未有衅，萧颖胄统领全楚之兵，首先响应义举，难道是天之所启，人之谋？
English: Shangshu Yao, an official of the Chen Dynasty, said: At the end of the Yongyuan Dynasty, there was no provocation from the Jingzhou side, and Xiao Yingyao led the soldiers of the whole Chu, and first responded to the righteous act. Is it a revelation from heaven, a human plot?

古文：不然，何其响附之决也？
现代文：不然，为什么响应依附的那么果断。
English: Otherwise, why respond to the attachment so decisively.

古文：颖达叔侄庆流后嗣，夏侯、杨、邓咸享隆名，盛矣！
现代文：颖达叔侄庆流后嗣，夏侯、杨、邓都享隆名，非常兴盛。
English: The heirs of Yingda's uncle and nephew Qingliu, Xia Hou, Yang and Deng all enjoyed a high reputation and were very prosperous.

古文：详之谨厚，杨、蔡廉节，君子有取焉。
现代文：详之谨慎忠厚。杨、蔡廉节，君子各有所取。 
English: Yang, Cai Lian Jie, gentlemen each have their own preferences.

