古文：萧胡睹，字乙辛。
现代文：萧胡睹，字乙辛。
English: Xiao Huzhun, Zhe Yixin.

古文：口吃，视斜，发卷，伯父孝穆见之曰： 是儿状貌，族中未尝有。 
现代文：口吃，斜视，卷发，伯父萧孝穆见了他说： 此子相貌，族中不曾有过。 
English: Stuttering, squinting, with curly hair. When his uncle Xiao Xiaomu saw him, he said, "This son has the best appearance of anyone in the family."

古文：及壮，魁梧桀傲，好扬人恶。
现代文：及至成年，身材魁梧桀骜不驯，喜欢张扬他人之过错。
English: By the time he was an adult, he was a large and unruly man who liked to point out the faults of others.

古文：重熙中，为祗候郎君。
现代文：重熙年间，任祗候郎君。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongxi, he was appointed to the post of Shuhouro-kun.

古文：俄迁兴圣宫使，尚秦国长公主，授驸马都尉。
现代文：不久迁任兴圣宫使，娶秦国长公主，授驸马都尉。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of the envoy to the Holy Palace of Xing, married the Qin Guofeng Princess, and was awarded the title of Ma Du Fu.

古文：以不谐离婚，复尚齐国公主，为北面林牙。
现代文：因为夫妇不和而离婚，又娶齐国公主，任北面林牙。
English: Because the couple did not get along and divorced, he married Princess Qi Guo, Ren Beimen Lin Ya.

古文：清宁中，历北、南院枢密副使，代族兄术哲为西北路招讨使。
现代文：清宁年间，历任北、南院枢密副使，代族兄术哲出任西北路招讨使。
English: During the Qing and Ning Dynasties, successive North and South Privy Council Vice-Envoys, and the acting elder brother Zhuzhe served as the Northwest Road Recruitment Envoy.

古文：时萧革与萧阿剌俱为枢密使，不协，革以术哲为阿剌所爱，嫉之。
现代文：当时萧革与萧阿剌同为枢密使，二人不和，萧革因为术哲乃阿剌所喜欢之人，嫉恨之。
English: At that time, Xiao Ge and Xiao Ayao were both imperial envoys. The two did not get along, and Xiao Ge was envious of Xiao Ayao because he was a person who was liked by Xiao Ayao.

古文：术哲受代赴阙，先尝借官粟，留直而去。
现代文：术哲受胡睹代任后赴京，先前曾借用官府粟米，留下付款后便走了。
English: Jutetsu went to Beijing after being replaced by Hu Jian. Previously, he had borrowed corn from the government, left the payment and then left.

古文：胡睹希革意，发其事，术哲因得罪。
现代文：胡睹附会萧革之意旨，告发其事，术哲获罪。
English: Hu Gan, with the intention of defecting, denounced the matter, and Jutetsu was convicted.

古文：胡睹又欲要权，岁时献遗珍玩、畜产于革，二人相爱过于兄弟。
现代文：胡睹又想求取权位，岁时节令都进献和赠送珍奇宝玩、畜产给予萧革，二人相爱胜过兄弟之间。
English: Hu Gan also wanted to seek power, and at the time of the year, the festivals were presented and presented with rare and wonderful treasures to play with, and livestock were given to the poor. The two loved each other more than brothers.

古文：胡睹族弟敌烈为北克，荐国舅详稳萧胡笃于胡睹，胡睹见其辨给壮勇，倾心交结。
现代文：胡睹的族弟敌烈担任北克，向胡睹推荐国舅详稳萧胡笃，胡睹见他言谈敏捷流利，且强健勇敢，便全心交结。
English: Hu Jian's younger brother, Hu Rong, served as the North Korean envoy and recommended his uncle, Zeng Jian, Xiao Hu Du, to Hu Jian. When Hu Jian saw that he spoke quickly and fluently, and was strong and brave, he wholeheartedly agreed.

古文：每遇休沐，言论终日，人皆怪之。
现代文：每逢休假，总是整日交谈，人们都觉得奇怪。
English: People find it strange that we always talk all day, even when we're on vacation.

古文：会胡睹同知北院枢密事，奏胡笃及敌烈可用，帝以敌烈为旗鼓拽剌详稳，胡笃为宿直官。
现代文：适逢萧胡睹担任同知北院枢密事，奏称胡笃及敌烈可受重用，皇上任命敌烈为旗鼓拽剌详稳，胡笃为宿直官。
English: At the right time, Xiao Huzhan served as a privy councillor of the Northern Yuan, saying that Hu Duc and the enemy soldiers could be put to good use. The emperor appointed the enemy soldiers as the banner and drum to pull the troops forward, and Hu Duc as the official in residence.

古文：及革构陷其兄阿剌，胡笃阴为之助，时人丑之。
现代文：及至萧革陷害其兄阿剌，胡笃暗中协助他，当时的人都鄙陋他们的为人。
English: Even when Xiao Ge framed his brother, Grandpa, and Hu Du secretly assisted him, people at the time despised them as human beings.

古文：耶律乙辛知北院枢密事，胡睹位在乙辛下，意怏怏不平。
现代文：耶律乙辛知北院枢密事，胡睹官位在乙辛之下，心中愤愤不平。
English: Yelu Yixin knew the secret affairs of the North Academy, and Hu Jian's official position was below Yixin, and he was indignant in his heart.

古文：初，胡睹尝与重元子涅鲁古谋逆，欲其速发。
现代文：起初，胡睹曾经与重元之子涅鲁古谋反，都希望能及早起事。
English: At first, Hu Gan had plotted a rebellion with Nelu Gu, son of Chongyuan, both hoping to start trouble as soon as possible.

古文：会车驾猎太子山，遂与涅鲁古胁弩手军犯行宫。
现代文：恰好皇上出猎于太子山，胡睹于是与涅鲁古胁迫弩手军进犯行宫。
English: The emperor happened to be hunting on Mount Taiji, so Hushan and Nehru coerced the army of eunuchs to march to the palace.

古文：既战，涅鲁古中流矢而毙，众皆逃散。
现代文：双方交战后，涅鲁古中流矢而死，余众均四散奔逃。
English: After the war between the two sides, Nehru died in the middle of the battle, and the rest fled in all directions.

古文：时同党耶律撒剌竹适在围场，闻乱，率猎夫来援。
现代文：当时其同党耶律撒剌竹正好在围场，听说叛乱发生，赶紧率领手下猎夫前来增援。
English: At that time, his comrade, Yerushalmi, happened to be in the paddock. Hearing of the rebellion, he hurriedly led his huntsmen to come for reinforcements.

古文：其党谓胡睹等曰： 我军甚众，乘其无备，中夜决战，事冀有成；若至明日，其谁从我？ 
现代文：其党徒对胡睹等说 ：我军人多势众，应该乘对方没有防备时在半夜进行决战，事情或者还有成功的希望；若等到明天再战，有谁还敢附从我们呢？ 
English: His party members said to Hu Jian and others: Our soldiers are numerous, and we should take advantage of the other side's unpreparedness to fight a decisive battle in the middle of the night. There may still be hope for success; if we wait until tomorrow to fight again, who will dare to follow us?

古文：若俟明旦，彼将有备，安知我众不携贰？
现代文：胡睹说 ：仓猝之中，黑白敌我不辨。若对方内外军里应外合，则我方会大势已去。
English: Hu Gan said: "In the rush, I can't distinguish between the black and white enemies. If the other side's domestic and foreign armies clash, then our party's momentum will be gone."

古文：一失机会，悔将无及。 
现代文：等到黎明再举事，怎么会晚呢？ 
English: How can it be too late to wait until dawn?

古文：重元、萧胡睹等曰： 今夕但可四面围之，勿令外军得入，彼何能备！ 
现代文：重元听从了胡睹的计谋，令手下四面巡视警戒等待天明。这天夜里，同党拥立重元僭位建号，胡睹自命为枢密使。
English: Chongyuan listened to Hu Jian's stratagem and ordered his subordinates to patrol the four directions and wait for the dawn. That night, Chongyuan and his party held the position and Hu Jian appointed himself as a confidential envoy.

古文：不从。迟明，投仗而走，撒剌竹战死。
现代文：第二天叛军战败，胡睹身受创伤，独身一人骑马逃走，逃至十七泊时，投水自杀。
English: The next day, the rebels were defeated, Hu Gui was traumatized, and he fled alone on horseback. When he was 17 years old, he committed suicide by throwing himself into the water.

古文：奚回离保，一名翰，字挼懒，奚王忒邻之后。
现代文：他的五个儿子，也在同日一起被诛杀。奚回离保，又名翰，字扌妥懒，奚王忒邻的后裔。
English: His five sons were also killed together on the same day. 回离保, also known as John, the word 妥懒, the descendants of the king's neighbors.

古文：善骑射，趫捷而勇，与其兄鳖里剌齐名。
现代文：擅长骑射，矫捷而勇猛，与其兄鳖里剌齐名。
English: He is good at riding and shooting, agile and brave, and is on a par with his older brother, Yu Lijun.

古文：大安中，车驾幸中京，补护卫，稍迁铁鹞军详稳。
现代文：大安年间，车驾临幸中京，补为护卫，渐升为铁鹞军详稳。
English: During the Taian era, he went to Beijing by car to supplement the escort, and gradually became a member of the Iron Curtain Army.

古文：天庆间，徙北女直详稳，兼知咸州路兵马事，改东京统军。
现代文：天庆年间，改任北女真详稳，兼知咸州路兵马事，后又改任东京统军。
English: During the Tianqing era, she was appointed as the North Women's Real-Detailed and Stable, and also knew about the soldiers and horses on the Xianzhou Road, and later she was appointed as the Tokyo unified army.

古文：既而诸蕃入寇，番破之，迁奚六部大王，兼总知东路兵马事。
现代文：不久诸蕃入境寇掠，他尽数击破之，迁为奚六部大王，兼总知东路兵马事。
English: Not long after, the Mongols invaded and plundered the country. He defeated as many of them as possible and became the great king of the Six Provinces, as well as the general of the East Road Troops and Horses.

古文：保大二年，金兵至，天祚播迁，回离保率吏民立秦晋国王淳为帝。
现代文：保大二年，金兵南侵，天祚帝流亡在外，回离保率领吏民立秦晋国王耶律淳为帝。
English: In the second year of Bao Dai, the Jin army invaded the south, Emperor Tianmu went into exile, and the leader of the civil servants of the Qin and Jin dynasties, King Ye Lu Jun, returned from exile to become emperor.

古文：淳伪署回离保知北院枢密事，兼诸军都统，屡败宋兵。
现代文：淳任回离保为知北院枢密事，兼诸军都统，屡次击败宋军。
English: Junren's return and departure of Bao was a confidential matter of Chihokuin, and also unified the armies, repeatedly defeating the Song Army.

古文：淳死，其妻普贤女摄事。
现代文：淳死，其妻普贤女摄理政事。
English: When Jun died, his wife, Fuxian, became the regent.

古文：是年，金兵由居庸关入，回离保知北院，即箭笴山自立，号奚国皇帝，改元天复，设奚、汉、渤海三枢密院，改东、西节度使为二王，分司建官。
现代文：这一年，金兵由居庸关入关，回离保知北院，在箭舘山自立为帝，号奚国皇帝，改元天复，设置奚、汉、渤海三个枢密院，改东西节度使为东西二王，分司置官。
English: In this year, Jinbei entered Guanzhong from Juyongguan, returned from Hochi Beiyuan, established himself as an emperor in Jianlushan, called himself the Emperor of Guanzhong, changed his name to Yuan Tianfu, set up three Privy Councils of Guanzhong, Han, and Bohai, changed the east-west division to the East-West two kings, and set up branch offices.

古文：时奚人巴辄、韩家奴等引兵击附近契丹部落，劫掠人畜，群情大骇。
现代文：当时奚人巴辄、韩家奴等率兵进攻附近的契丹部落，劫掠民人牲畜，使得群情大为震骇。
English: At that time, the Xiongren Baju, Han Jia Nu and other soldiers attacked the nearby Khitan tribe, looting people and livestock, which made the crowd very shocked.

古文：会回离保为郭药师所败，一军离心，其党耶律阿古哲与其甥乙室八斤等杀之，伪立凡八月。
现代文：恰逢回离保为郭药师击败，手下军心离散，其党徒耶律阿古哲与其外甥乙室八斤等杀掉了他，当时距其自立为帝仅八个月。
English: Coincidentally, Guo Yaoshi was defeated by Hui Li Bao, his subordinates dispersed, and his partisans, such as Yelu Agutetsu and his nephew Yixing Yaojin, killed him. At that time, he was only eight months away from becoming emperor.

