古文：五年春，王正月，杞叔姬来归。
现代文：五年春季，周历正月，杞叔姬投奔鲁国。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Zou Shuxi went to Lu.

古文：仲孙蔑如宋。
现代文：仲孙蔑去宋国。
English: Zhong Sun Zhi went to Song.

古文：夏，叔孙侨如会晋荀首于穀。
现代文：夏季，叔孙侨与晋国的荀首在穀地会见。
English: In summer, the uncles and grandsons of overseas Chinese meet the daggers of Jin in the grain fields.

古文：梁山崩。
现代文：梁山崩塌。
English: Liangshan collapsed.

古文：秋，大水。
现代文：秋季，发大水。
English: In autumn, there is a lot of flooding.

古文：冬十有一月己酉，天王崩。
现代文：冬季十一月乙酉日，周定王去世。
English: In the winter of November, King Zhou Dingxuan passed away.

古文：十有二月己丑，公会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、邾子、杞伯同盟于虫牢。
现代文：十二月己丑日，成公与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯、邾子、杞伯在虫牢结盟。
English: On December 6th, Cheng Gong allied with Jin Hou, Qi Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo, Cao Bo, Zang Zi, and Zou Bo in the Insect Prison.

古文：五年春，原、屏放诸齐。
现代文：五年春季，赵同、赵括把赵婴放逐到齐国。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Zhao Tong and Zhao Kuang exiled Zhao Ying to Qi Province.

古文：婴曰： 我在，故栾氏不作。
现代文：赵婴说： 有我在，所以栾氏不敢作乱。
English: Zhao Ying said: With me here, the Min clan would not dare to make trouble.

古文：我亡，吾二昆其忧哉！
现代文：我逃亡，两位兄长恐怕就有忧患了。
English: If I run away, I'm afraid my two older brothers will be in trouble.

古文：且人各有能，有不能，舍我何害？ 
现代文：而且人们各有所能，也有所不能，赦免我又有什么坏处？ 
English: Besides, people can and cannot do everything, so what harm is there in pardoning me?

古文：弗听。
现代文：赵同、赵括不听。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：婴梦天使谓己： 祭余，余福女。 
现代文：赵婴梦见天使对自己说： 祭祀我，我降福给你。 
English: Zhao Ying dreamed that the angel said to himself: "Sacrifice me, and I will bestow blessings on you."

古文：使问诸士贞伯，贞伯曰： 不识也。 
现代文：派人向士贞伯询问。士贞伯说： 不知道。 
English: They sent someone to ask Shizhenbo about it. Shizhenbo said, "I don't know."

古文：既而告其人曰： 神福仁而祸淫，淫而无罚，福也。
现代文：不久士贞伯就告诉别人说： 神灵降福给仁爱的人，而降祸给淫乱的人。淫乱而没有受到惩罚，这就是福了。
English: Before long, Shizhenbo told others, "The gods bestow blessings on those who are benevolent, but woe to those who are fornicators. Fornication without punishment is a blessing."

古文：祭其得亡乎？ 
现代文：祭祀了，难道无祸？ 
English: It's a religious service, isn't that a good thing?

古文：祭之，之明日而亡。
现代文：赵婴祭祀了神灵，第二天就逃亡了。
English: Zhao Ying sacrificed to the gods and fled the next day.

古文：孟献子如宋，报华元也。
现代文：孟献子到了宋国，这是回报华元的聘问。
English: Meng Xianzhi came to Song, which was a reward for Huayuan's recruitment.

古文：夏，晋荀首如齐逆女，故宣伯餫诸穀。
现代文：夏季，晋国的荀首去到齐国迎接齐女，所以宣伯在穀地给他馈送食物。
English: In the summer, Jin's dagger went to Qi to meet Qi's daughter, so Xuanbo fed him food in the grain field.

古文：梁山崩，晋侯以传召伯宗。
现代文：梁山崩塌，晋景公用传车召见伯宗。
English: Liangshan Collapsed, Jinjing Public Buses Called to See Baozong.

古文：伯宗辟重，曰： 辟传！ 
现代文：伯宗在路上叫一辆载重车避开，说： 为传车让路。 
English: On the road, Bozong told a truck to move out of the way, saying, "Make way for the passing vehicle."

古文：重人曰： 待我，不如捷之速也。 
现代文：押送重车的人说： 与其等我，不如走小路要快一些。 
English: The man who was escorting the truck said, "Instead of waiting for me, let's walk a little faster down the path."

古文：问其所，曰： 绛人也。 
现代文：伯宗问他是哪里人，押车人说： 绛城人。 
English: Bozong asked him where he was from, and the driver said, "I'm from Lucheng."

古文：问绛事焉，曰： 梁山崩，将召伯宗谋之。 
现代文：伯宗问起绛城的事情。押车人说： 梁山崩塌，打算召见伯宗商量。 
English: Bozong asked about Shicheng. The conductor said, "Liangshan has collapsed. I plan to summon Bozong to discuss the situation."

古文：问： 将若之何？ 
现代文：伯宗问： 准备怎么办？ 
English: Bozong asked: How to prepare?

古文：曰： 山有朽壤而崩，可若何？
现代文：押车人说： 山有了腐朽的土壤而崩塌。又能怎么办？
English: The overseer said, "The mountain has rotted soil and collapsed. What can we do?

古文：国主山川。故山崩川竭，君为之不举，降服，乘缦，彻乐，出次，祝币，史辞，以礼焉。
现代文：国家以山川为主，所以遇到山崩川竭，国君就要为它减膳撤乐、穿素服、乘坐没有彩画的车子、不奏音乐、离开寝宫、陈列献神的礼物。
English: The country is dominated by mountains and rivers, so when the mountains collapse and the rivers dry up, the sovereign will have to reduce meals and withdraw music, wear plain clothes, ride in a car without paintings, not play music, leave the palace, and display gifts dedicated to the gods.

古文：其如此而已，虽伯宗若之何？ 伯宗请见之，不可。
现代文：太史宣读祭文，以礼祭祀山川之神。就是这样罢了，即使是伯宗，还能怎么样？ 
English: Taishi read out a ritual and offered a sacrifice to the god of mountains and rivers. That was it. Even if he was a high priest, what could he do?

古文：遂以告而从之。
现代文：伯宗要求带押车人去见晋景公，他不答应。
English: He did not agree to the request of Bozong to take the driver to see Jinjing.

古文：许灵公愬郑伯于楚。
现代文：于是伯宗就把押车人的话告诉了晋景公，晋景公听从了。
English: So Baozong told Jin Jing Gong what the driver said, and Jin Jing Gong obeyed.

古文：六月，郑悼公如楚，讼不胜。楚人执皇戌及子国。
现代文：许灵公在楚国控告郑悼公。六月，郑悼公去到楚国争讼，没有取得胜利，楚国人抓住了皇戌和子国。
English: Xu Ling Gong sued Zheng Yigong in Chu State. In June, Zheng Yigong went to Chu State to litigate, but did not win. The people of Chu seized the imperial scepter and the country.

古文：故郑伯归，使公子偃请成于晋。
现代文：所以郑悼公回国以后，派遣公子偃到晋国要求讲和。
English: Therefore, after Zheng Eikou returned to China, he sent his son Zhao to Jin Province to ask for peace.

古文：秋八月，郑伯及晋赵同盟于垂棘。
现代文：秋季，八月，郑悼公和晋国的赵同在垂棘结盟。
English: In the autumn, in August, Zheng Yigong and Zhao of Jin Province allied with each other.

古文：宋公子围龟为质于楚而还，华元享之。
现代文：宋国的公子围龟在楚国当人质以后回到宋国，华元设享礼招待他。
English: The prince of Song, Wai Turtle, returned to Song after being held hostage in Chu. Huayuan held a banquet to invite him.

古文：请鼓噪以出，鼓噪以复入，曰： 习攻华氏。 
现代文：围龟请求打鼓呼叫而出华元的大门，又打鼓呼叫而进去，说： 这就是演习进攻华氏。 
English: Wai Turtle asked for a drumming call and went out of Huayuan's gate, then drummed a call and went in, saying: This is a drill to attack Huayuan.

古文：宋公杀之。
现代文：宋共公把他杀了。
English: The Song Dynasty killed him.

古文：冬，同盟于虫牢，郑服也。诸侯谋复会，宋公使向为人辞以子灵之难。
现代文：冬季，鲁成公和晋景公、齐顷公、宋共公、卫定公、郑悼公、曹宣公、邾子、杞桓公在虫牢结盟，这是由于郑国顺服。诸侯商量再次会见，宋共公派向为人以子灵事件为理由而辞谢了，不参加会见。
English: In the winter, Lu Chenggong, Jin Jinggong, Qi Hegong, Song Quangong, Wei Dinggong, Zheng Yougong, Cao Xuangong, Zang Zi, and Xuan Huangong formed an alliance in the insect prison. This was due to Zheng Guo's obedience. The princes discussed and met again, but the Song Quangong faction declined to attend the meeting on the grounds of the Ziling Incident.

古文：十一月己酉，定王崩。
现代文：十一月十二日，周定王逝世。
English: On November 12th, King Zhou Ding passed away.

