古文：高颎牛弘李德林高颎，字昭玄，一名敏，自言勃海蓚人也。
现代文：高颎字昭玄，一名敏，自称是渤海蓚人。
English: Gao Hao's character, Shao Xuan, a Min, claims to be from the Bohai Sea.

古文：其先因官北边，没于辽左。
现代文：祖先因在北部边疆做官，死在辽东。
English: An ancestor died in Liaodong due to working as an official in the northern frontier.

古文：曾祖皓，以太和中自辽东归魏，官至卫尉卿。
现代文：曾祖父高詗，太和中从辽东回到魏国，官至卫尉卿。
English: His great-grandfather Gao Jun, his mother and father-in-law returned to Wei from Liaodong and rose to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：祖孝安，位兗州刺史。
现代文：祖父孝安，曾任兖州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Xiao An, was once the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：父宾，仕东魏，位谏议大夫。
现代文：颎父高宾，出仕东魏，官居谏议大夫。
English: His father, Gao Bin, served in the Eastern Wei Dynasty and was a government official.

古文：大统六年，避谗弃官奔西魏，独孤信引宾为僚佐，赐姓独孤氏。
现代文：大统六年，为避谗害弃官投奔西魏，独孤信用高宾为幕僚，赐姓独孤氏。
English: In the sixth year of the Great Reunification, in order to avoid the harm of the persecution, he abandoned his post and went to the West Wei Dynasty. He trusted Dokuo Gaobin as a staff member and was given the surname Dokuo.

古文：及信诛，妻子徙蜀。
现代文：独孤信被杀害，高宾和妻子儿女被徙于蜀。
English: Du Guoxin was killed, and Gaobin, his wife and children were exiled to Shu.

古文：隋文献皇后以宾父之故吏，每往来其家。
现代文：隋文献皇后因为高宾是她父亲的旧属，常常出入于高宾家中。
English: Because Gaobin was her father's former relative, the empress of the Sui Dynasty often visited Gaobin's home.

古文：宾敏于从政，果敢断决。
现代文：高宾在政事上很机敏，外事果断。
English: Gao Bin is very astute in politics and decisive in foreign affairs.

古文：赐爵武阳县伯，历位齐公宪府长史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、襄州总管府司录，卒于州。
现代文：赐武阳县伯爵，历任齐公宇文宪府长史、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、襄州总管府司录，死于襄州。
English: He was given the title of Count of Wuyang County, and successively served as the prefectural governor of Qigong and Wenzhou, the commander of the cavalry, the secretary of the prefectural government, the secretary of the prefectural government of Xiangzhou, and the secretary of the prefectural government of Xiangzhou.

古文：及颎贵，开皇中，赠礼部尚书、武阳公，谥曰简。
现代文：及高颎显贵后，开皇年间，追赠礼部尚书、武阳公，隘号为简。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong, after Gaozong's rise to prominence, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Shangshu and Wuyang, and his family name was Jian.

古文：颎少明敏，有器局，略涉文史，尤善词令。
现代文：高颎自幼聪明敏捷，有大器量，学涉文史，特别擅长辞令。
English: Gao Yao has been smart and agile since childhood, has a large capacity, studies literary history, and is particularly good at rhetoric.

古文：初，孩孺时，家有柳树，高百许尺，亭亭如盖。
现代文：当初，高颎孩提时，家有柳树，高约百尺，宛如伞盖。
English: At first, when Gao Yao was a child, there was a willow tree at home, about a hundred feet high, like an umbrella cover.

古文：里中父老曰： 此家当出贵人。 
现代文：家乡父老们说 ：这一家要出大贵人。 
English: The parents back home said: This family is going to produce a great nobleman.

古文：年十七，周齐王宪引为记室。
现代文：十七岁那年，周齐王宇文宪任命他为记室。
English: At the age of seventeen, Zhou Qi Wang Yuwenxian appointed him as a recorder.

古文：袭爵武阳县伯，再迁内史下大夫。
现代文：袭父爵为武阳县伯，又升任内史下大夫。
English: He succeeded his father as the county magistrate of Wuyang County, and was promoted to the post of doctor of internal history.

古文：以平齐功，拜开府。
现代文：因平定齐国有功，晋升为开府。
English: He was promoted to the highest rank of Kaifu for his contribution to the pacification of Qi.

古文：隋文帝得政，素知颎强明，久习兵事，多计略，意欲引之入府。
现代文：隋文帝执政，平时就知道高颎精明强干，熟悉军事，智多谋广，想要把高颎召入自己府中。
English: When the Sui Emperor Wen was in power, he knew that Gao Yao was shrewd and strong, familiar with military affairs, and resourceful. He wanted to recruit Gao Yao into his government.

古文：遣邗公杨惠谕意，颎承旨忻然，曰： 愿受驱驰。
现代文：派遣邗公杨惠向高颎说明这种意思，高颎得旨后十分高兴，说： 愿效犬马之劳。
English: Yang Hui, the Duke of Zhai, was dispatched to Gao Jun to explain this meaning to him. Gao Jun was very happy after receiving the order and said, "I am willing to do the work of dogs and horses."

古文：纵公事不成，亦不辞灭族。 
现代文：即使杨公的事不能成功，也不怕灭族之祸。 
English: Even if Yang Gong's business does not succeed, he is not afraid of the scourge of ethnic extermination.

古文：于是为府司录。
现代文：于是任隋文帝府司录。
English: As a result, he was appointed as Sui Wen Di Fu's scribe.

古文：时长史郑译、司马刘昉并以奢纵被疏，帝弥属意于颎，委以心膂。尉迟迥起兵也，帝令韦孝宽伐之，军至河阳，莫敢先进。
现代文：这时，长史郑译、司马刘窻，都因奢侈纵欲被疏远，文帝更加中意高颎，视为心腹，尉迟迥起兵作乱，文帝令韦孝宽领兵讨伐，大军到了河阳，就没有人敢打头阵了。
English: At this time, Changshi Zheng and Sima Liuqi were both alienated because of their extravagant indulgence. Emperor Wen was more interested in Gao Yao and regarded him as a confidant. He was late in raising an army to make a disturbance. Emperor Wen ordered Wei Xiaokuan to lead the army to fight. When the army arrived in Heyang, no one dared to take the lead.

古文：帝以诸将不一，令崔仲方监之，仲方辞以父在山东。
现代文：文帝因诸将不和，命令崔仲方监军，仲方因父亲在山东就推辞了。
English: Emperor Wen ordered Cui Zhongfang to supervise the army because of the discord between the generals, but Zhongfang refused because his father was in Shandong.

古文：时颎见刘昉、郑译等并无去意，遂自请行，深合上旨。
现代文：这时，高颎见刘窻、郑译等人都没有去的意思，就主动请命，正合文帝的意思。
English: At this time, Gao Gan saw that Liu Ye, Zheng Zhan and others had no intention of going, so he took the initiative to ask for his life, which was in line with Emperor Wen's intention.

古文：受命便发，遣人辞母云，忠孝不可两兼，歔欷就路。
现代文：高颎受命出发，派人向母亲辞行说： 忠孝不能两全，儿上路时很悲痛。 
English: Gao Yao was ordered to set off and sent someone to tell his mother that he was quitting his job, saying: Loyalty and filial piety cannot go hand in hand. My son was very sad when he set out.

古文：至军，为桥于沁水，贼于上流纵火筏，颎预为土狗以御之。既度，焚桥而战，大破之。
现代文：到了军中，令人在泌水上建桥，贼兵在上游放下水阀，高颎事先令人用堵水的土袋防备。过河之后，焚烧浮桥，率兵力战，大破尉迟迥军。
English: When he arrived at the army, he had a bridge built over the seepage of water, the robber soldiers lowered the water valve upstream, and the high rafts were prepared in advance with earthen bags to block the water. After crossing the river, he burned the pontoon bridge, led the troops to fight, and the captain delayed the army.

古文：军还，侍宴于卧内，帝撤御帷以赐之。
现代文：从军中回京，侍宴于卧室中，文帝撤掉御用的帷帐赐给高颎。
English: After returning to Beijing from the army, the banquet was held in the bedroom, and Emperor Wen removed the royal curtains and gave them to Gao Jun.

古文：进位柱国，改封义宁县公，迁丞相府司马，任寄益隆。
现代文：擢升为柱国，改封为义宁县公，改任丞相府司马，更加得到文帝的信任。
English: He was promoted to pillar state, changed his title to Yining county official, and was appointed as the secretary of the prime minister's office, gaining more trust from Emperor Wen.

古文：及帝受禅，拜尚书左仆射、纳言，进封勃海郡公。
现代文：文帝受禅即位，任命高颎为尚书左仆射、纳言，晋爵为渤海郡公。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Zen's accession to the throne and appointed Gao Jie as Shang Shuxi's second-in-command and Na Yan, and Jinjie as the governor of Bohai County.

古文：朝臣莫与为比，帝每呼为独孤而不名也。
现代文：朝臣没有人能和他相比，文帝常常称他为独孤，而不称其名。
English: As a courtier, no one can be compared to him. Emperor Wen often called him "lonely" without mentioning his name.

古文：颎佯避权势，上表逊位，让于苏威。
现代文：高颎佯装避讳权势，上表请求辞职，位居苏威之下。
English: Gao Wei pretends to shun power, asks for resignation in the above table, and ranks below Su Wei.

古文：帝欲成其美，听解仆射。
现代文：文帝想成就他的美名，解除了高颎的仆射之职。
English: Emperor Wen wanted to make a name for himself, so he relieved Gao Yao of his position as a gunner.

古文：数日，帝曰： 苏威高蹈前朝，颎能举善。
现代文：过了几天，文帝说： 苏威高居前朝，高颎能够举荐贤才。
English: A few days later, Emperor Wen said: Su Wei was a high-ranking former emperor, and Gao Yao was able to recommend talents.

古文：吾闻进贤受上赏，宁可令去官！ 
现代文：我听说举荐贤才应该受到很高的奖赏，怎么能够让他辞官呢！ 
English: I've heard that there should be a high reward for recommending a talented person. How can he be allowed to resign?

古文：于是令颎复位。
现代文：于是令高颎官复原职。
English: As a result, the high eunuch was reinstated.

古文：俄拜左卫大将军，本官如故。
现代文：很快又拜任左卫大将军。仍兼原职。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of General of the Left Division of the National Guard. He still holds his original post.

古文：突厥屡为边患，诏颎镇遏缘边。
现代文：突厥屡屡侵犯边境，为害边民，诏令高颎镇守边关。
English: The Turks repeatedly violated the border, and in order to harm the border people, they ordered Gaocheng Town to guard the border.

古文：及还，赐马百疋，牛羊千计。
现代文：还朝时，赐马百匹，牛羊数千。
English: Back in the day, he was given hundreds of horses and thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：领新都大监，制度多出于颎。
现代文：兼任新都大监，朝迁制度多出自高颎。
English: He also served as the inspector general of the new capital. The system of moving the capital to the capital originated in Takatsuki.

古文：颎每坐朝堂北槐树下以听事，其树不依行列，有司将伐之。
现代文：高颎每次朝见都坐在朝堂北边的槐树下，那棵槐树不成行列，有司准备把它砍伐掉。
English: Every morning, Gao Yao sits under the eucalyptus tree on the north side of the morning hall. The eucalyptus tree is not in a row, and there is a company preparing to cut it down.

古文：帝特命勿去，以示后人。
现代文：文帝特意命令不要砍伐，留下来给后人做个示范。
English: Emperor Wendi specifically ordered not to cut it down, leaving it as a model for future generations.

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：文帝就是这样看重高颎。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：又拜左领军大将军。
现代文：又升任左领军大将军，仍兼原职。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of General of the Left Armies, which was still his original position.

古文：余官如故。母忧去职，二旬，起令视事。颎流涕辞让，不许。
现代文：母丧，为母守丧辞职，过了二十天，文帝令其复职处理事务，高颎痛哭流涕，推辞谦让，未获允许。
English: At the time of his mother's death, he resigned because of his mother's death. Twenty days later, Emperor Wen ordered him to resume his duties to deal with affairs. Gao Yao cried bitterly and refused to resign. He was not allowed.

古文：开皇二年，长孙览、元景山等伐陈，令颎节度诸军。
现代文：开皇二年，长孙览、元景山等领兵讨伐陈国，文帝令高颎节制调度诸军。
English: In the second year of the emperor's reign, the eldest grandson Zhan, Yuan Jingshan and other leaders led the army to fight against Chen Guo, and Emperor Wen ordered Gao Gan to control the dispatch of the army.

古文：会陈宣帝殂，颎以礼不伐丧，奏请班师。
现代文：适逢陈宣帝死，高颎因为有不伐丧之礼，请求班师。
English: When Emperor Chen Xuan died, Gao Yao requested a teacher because he was not allowed to go to the funeral.

古文：萧岩之叛，诏颎绥集江汉，甚得人和。
现代文：萧岩叛乱，诏令高颎安抚江汉之地，深得人心。
English: The land of Xiao Yan's rebellion and Emperor Gaozong's order to pacify Jianghan won the hearts of the people.

古文：帝尝问颎以取陈之策，颎曰： 江北地寒，田收差晚，江南土热，水田早熟。
现代文：文帝曾经问高颎攻取陈国的方略，高颎说： 江北地寒，收获的时间迟；江南气候热，水田热的早。
English: Emperor Wen once asked Gao Wei about the strategy for conquering Chen Guo. Gao Wei said: The north of the Yangtze River is cold, and the harvest time is late; the south of the Yangtze River has a hot climate, and the paddy field is hot early.

古文：量彼收获之际，微征士马，声言掩袭。
现代文：计算江南收获的季节，稍稍调集一些人马，虚张声势，假装进攻之势。
English: Calculate the harvest season in the south of the Yangtze River, slightly mobilize some horses, bluff, pretend to attack.

古文：贼必屯兵御守，足得废其农时。
现代文：陈兵必定屯兵防守，足可以误其农时。
English: Chen Bing will certainly defend the garrison, and the foot can be mistaken for a farmer.

古文：彼既聚兵，我更解甲，再三若此，贼以为常。
现代文：他们把兵聚集起来之后，我方就解甲归田，再三这样，陈兵习以为常。
English: After they gathered the soldiers, we dismounted and went back to the field. Repeatedly, Chen Bingzhu took it for granted.

古文：后更集兵，彼必不信，犹豫之顷，我乃济师，登陆而战，兵气益倍。
现代文：之后我方再调集兵力，他们必定不相信我方会进攻，在他们正在犹豫不决的时候，我方派大兵渡江，登陆作战，士气更加高涨。
English: After that, we mobilized more troops. They must not have believed that we would attack. While they were hesitating, we sent soldiers across the river and landed to fight. Morale was even higher.

古文：又江南土薄，舍多竹茅，所有储积，皆非地窖。
现代文：再说，江南土层浅，房屋多是用竹子茅草搭起的，储存食物，都不用地窖。
English: Besides, the soil layer in the south of the Yangtze River is shallow, and most houses are built of bamboo and thatch. People do not need cellars to store food.

古文：密遣行人，因风纵火，待彼修立，而更烧之。
现代文：秘密派遣人渡江，借风放火，等他们修建好后，再放火焚烧。
English: They secretly sent people to cross the river and set fire to it. After they had finished building it, they set it on fire again.

古文：不出数年，自可财力俱尽。 
现代文：这样做的话，用不了几年，江南的财力就会耗尽了。 
English: If this is done, the financial resources of Jiangnan will be exhausted within a few years.

古文：帝用其策，由是陈人益弊。
现代文：文帝采用高颎的计谋，陈国因此更加穷困。
English: Emperor Wen adopted Gao Gan's stratagem, and Chen Guo became even more impoverished as a result.

古文：九年，晋王广大举伐陈，以颎为无帅长史，三军皆取断于颎。
现代文：九年，晋王杨广率师大举伐陈，用为元率府长史，三军的行动皆由高颎裁断。
English: In the ninth year, Yang Guang, the king of Jin, led his army to attack Chen, and used Yuan to lead the prefectural governor Shi. The actions of the three armies were all decided by Gao Jun.

古文：及陈平，晋王欲纳陈主宠姬张丽华。
现代文：陈国既平，晋王想纳陈后主宠姬张丽华。
English: As Chen Guo was already a commoner, Jin Wang wanted to accommodate Chen's favorite queen, Ji Zhang Lihua.

古文：颎曰： 武王灭殷，戮妲己。
现代文：高颎说： 武王灭殷，杀掉妲己。
English: Gao Yao said, "Wu Wang should kill Yan, and then kill himself."

古文：今平陈国，不宜取丽华。 
现代文：如今平定陈国，不应该取张丽华。 
English: Now that Chen Guo has been pacified, Zhang Lihua should not be singled out.

古文：乃命斩之。王甚不悦。
现代文：就下令斩之，晋王很不高兴。
English: So he gave the order to behead him. Jin Wang was very unhappy.

古文：及军还，以功加上柱国，进爵齐国公，赐物九千段，定食千乘县千五百户。
现代文：大军还朝，因功加上柱国，晋爵为齐国公，赏赐丝帛九千段，确定食禄千乘县一千五百户。
English: The great army also paid tribute to the emperor, adding the pillar state and the title of prince of Qi for his merits, awarding nine thousand pieces of silk brocade, and determining the food allowance of one thousand and five hundred households in Qizheng County.

古文：帝劳之曰： 公伐陈后，人云公反，朕已斩之。
现代文：文帝犒劳他说： 公伐陈之后，有人说公要造反，朕已经把他杀了。
English: He said: "After the public felling of Chen, someone said that the public should rebel, I have killed him.

古文：君臣道合，非青蝇所间也。 
现代文：君臣和睦，不是小人能离间得了的。 
English: It is not possible for a villain to cause discord between princes and ministers.

古文：颎又逊位，优诏不许。
现代文：高颎又一次辞职，诏令不许。
English: Gao Rong resigned again, but was not allowed to return.

古文：是后右卫将军庞晃及将军卢贲等，前后短颎于帝。
现代文：此后，右卫军庞晃和将军卢贲等人，前前后后在文帝面说高颎的不是。
English: After that, the right guard Pang Kiang and General Lu Ye and others said that Gao Ye was wrong in front of Emperor Wen.

古文：帝怒，皆被疏黜。
现代文：文帝大怒，把他们都贬黜了。
English: Emperor Wen flew into a rage and disparaged them all.

古文：因谓颎曰： 独孤公犹镜也，每被磨莹，皎然益明。 
现代文：文帝于是对高颎说 ：独孤公像铜镜一样，每磨一次，都更加明亮。 
English: Emperor Wen then said to Gao Zhun: "Solitary man is like a bronze mirror, every time you grind it, it becomes brighter."

古文：未几，尚书都事姜晔、楚州行参军李君才并奏称水旱不调，罪由高颎，请废黜之。
现代文：不久，尚书都事姜晔、楚州行参军李君才一起奏称水旱不调，罪过在于高颎，请求废黜，二人皆获罪免职。
English: Not long after, Shang Shudu, Jiang Chen, and Li Juncai, who went to Chuzhou to join the army, jointly said that the drought was out of proportion, the crime was Gao Gan, and requested to be deposed. Both of them were convicted and removed from office.

古文：二人俱得罪而去，亲礼逾密。帝幸并州，留颎居守。
现代文：文帝和高颎更为亲密。文帝巡幸并州，留高颎守京师。
English: Emperor Wen and Emperor Gao were even closer. Emperor Wen went on a tour of the provinces and left Gao Gao in charge of the capital.

古文：及还，赐缣五千匹，行宫一所为庄舍。
现代文：还朝后，赐高颎缣五千匹，行宫一所作为庄舍。
English: In addition, the emperor and empress granted five thousand stilt houses, one of which was used as a manor house.

古文：其夫人贺拔氏寝疾，中使顾问不绝。
现代文：其夫人贺拔氏病死，文帝常遣使问讯不绝。
English: His wife, He Ba, died of illness, and Emperor Wen often sent envoys to inquire about her.

古文：帝亲幸其第，赐钱百万，绢万匹，复赐以千里马。
现代文：文帝亲自到高颎宅第，赐钱百万，绢万匹，又赐给一匹千里马。
English: Emperor Wen himself came to Gao Yao's residence and gave him a million of money, ten thousand horses, and a thousand-kilometer horse.

古文：尝从容命颎与贺若弼言及平陈事，颎曰： 贺若弼先献十策，后于蒋山苦战破贼。
现代文：文帝曾平静地命高颎和贺若弼说一说平定陈国之事，高颎说： 贺若弼先献十条计策，后来又在蒋山苦战破贼。
English: Emperor Wen once calmly ordered Gao Yao and He Ruo Yao to talk about how to pacify Chen Guo. Gao Yao said: He Ruo Yao first presented ten strategies, and then fought hard to defeat the bandits in Jiangshan.

古文：臣文吏耳，焉敢与猛将论功！ 
现代文：我只是一个文官，怎敢和猛将论功劳大小！ 
English: I am just a civil servant, how dare I discuss the size of my merit with a fierce general!

古文：帝大笑，时论嘉其有让。
现代文：文帝大笑，时论称赞高颎有谦让之德。
English: Emperor Wen laughed loudly and praised Gao Qi for his modesty.

古文：寻以其子表仁尚太子勇女，前后尝赐，不可胜计。
现代文：不久，其子表仁娶太子杨勇之女，前后赏赐的物品很多，无法计算。
English: Soon after, his son Umihito married the daughter of Crown Prince Yang Yong, and the gifts he bestowed on her were too numerous to count.

古文：时荧惑入太微，犯左执法。
现代文：当时有荧惑星入太微垣，侵犯左执法。
English: At that time, there was a fluorescent planet entering the Taibo fence, violating the left-hand law enforcement.

古文：术者刘晖私于颎曰： 天文不利宰相，可修德以禳之。 
现代文：术士刘晖私下对高颎说 ：天象对宰相不利，可修德以祈禳之。 
English: The sorcerer Liu Ye said to Gao Yao in private, "The celestial elephant is unfavorable to the prime minister. You can cultivate virtue by praying to it."

古文：颎不自安，以晖言奏之。
现代文：高颎惊恐不安，把刘晖的话奏知文帝。
English: Gao Gan, alarmed and uneasy, played Liu Ye's words to Emperor Wen.

古文：上厚加赏慰。
现代文：文帝厚加赏慰。
English: Emperor Wen gave him a generous reward.

古文：突厥犯塞，以颎为元帅击破之。
现代文：突厥侵犯边关，文帝命高颎为元帅，抗击突厥军。
English: The Turks invaded the border, and Emperor Wen appointed Gao Jun as a marshal to resist the Turkish army.

古文：又出白道，进图入碛，遣使请兵，近臣言颎欲反，帝未有所答，颎亦破贼而还。
现代文：兵出白道，进入沙漠，遣使入朝请求援兵，近臣说高颎要造反，文帝没有同意增援，高颎也同样大破贼兵，得胜还朝。
English: The soldiers took the high road, entered the desert, and sent envoys to the North to request reinforcements. Close vassals said that Gao Gan wanted to rebel, but Emperor Wen did not agree to reinforcements. Gao Gan also defeated the bandits and returned to the North in triumph.

古文：时太子勇失爱，帝潜有废立志，谓颎曰： 晋王妃有神告之，言王必有天下。 
现代文：这时，太子杨勇失宠，文帝有废立太子的意思，对高颎说： 有神告知晋王妃，说晋王必定享有天下。 
English: At this time, Prince Yang Yong fell out of favor, and Emperor Wen, with the intention of abolishing the position of prince, said to Gao Yao: There is a god to tell Jin Wangfei that Jin Wang must enjoy the world.

古文：颎跪曰： 长幼有序，不可废。 
现代文：高颎跪着说 ：长幼有序，太子不可废。 
English: Gao Yao knelt down and said, "The eldest son and the youngest son are in order. The crown prince must not be discarded."

古文：遂止。
现代文：文帝于是就作罢了。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：独孤皇后知颎不可夺，阴欲去之。
现代文：独孤皇后知道高颎志不可夺，阴谋除掉高颎。
English: The lonely queen knows that Gao Yao's ambition is invincible and plots to get rid of Gao Yao.

古文：初，颎夫人卒，后言于帝曰： 高仆射老矣，而丧夫人，陛下何以不为之娶？ 
现代文：当初，高颎夫人死的时候，皇后对文帝说 ：高仆射老了，死了夫人，陛下为何不替他再娶一个呢？ 
English: At first, when Lady Gao Yao died, the empress said to Emperor Wen: Gao Min is getting old, his wife is dead, why doesn't His Majesty marry another wife for him?

古文：帝以后言告颎，颎流涕谢曰： 臣今已老，退朝唯斋居读佛经而已。
现代文：文帝把皇后的话告诉高颎，高颎流泪辞谢道： 臣如今已经老了，退朝后只是斋居读佛经而已。
English: Emperor Wen told the words of the empress to Gao Qi, and Gao Qi thanked him with tears: The minister is now old, and after retiring from the imperial court, he only stayed at home to read Buddhist scriptures.

古文：虽陛下垂哀之深，至于纳室，非臣所原。 
现代文：虽然陛下十分哀怜老臣，但若说到另娶妻室，不是老臣的愿望。 
English: Although His Majesty is very sorry for the old minister, when it comes to marrying another wife, it is not the old minister's wish.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：文帝于是作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：至是，颎爱妾产男，帝闻极欢，后甚不悦，曰： 陛下当复信颎邪？
现代文：到了现在，高颎的爱妾生下一个男孩，文帝听到后很高兴，皇后非常不高兴，说： 陛下还相信高颎吗？
English: Now, Gao Gan's beloved concubine has given birth to a boy. Upon hearing this, Emperor Wen was very happy, while the Empress was very unhappy, saying: Does Your Majesty still believe in Gao Gan?

古文：始陛下欲为颎娶，颎心存爱妾，面欺陛下，今其诈已见。 
现代文：当初陛下想给高娶妻室，高颎心里想着爱妾，当面欺骗陛下，如今他的诡诈已经露出来了。 
English: At first, His Majesty wanted to give Gao a wife, but Gao Yao, thinking of his beloved concubine, deceived His Majesty to his face. Now, his deceit has been exposed.

古文：帝由是疏颎。
现代文：文帝因此疏远了高颎。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen distanced himself from Gao Yao.

古文：会议伐辽东，颎固谏不可。
现代文：适逢商议讨伐辽东，高颎坚决劝阻。
English: When it was time to discuss the conquest of Liaodong, Gao Gan resolutely dissuaded him.

古文：帝不从，以颎为元帅长史，从汉王征辽东，遇霖潦疾疫，不利而还。
现代文：文帝不听，任命高颎为元帅长史，跟从汉王杨谅征讨辽东，遇到阴雨疾役，大军不利而还。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen, and appointed Gao Jun as Marshal Chang Shi, and followed the Han King Yang Jun to conquer Liaodong. Encountering cloudy and rainy weather, the large army was unfavorable and returned.

古文：后言于帝曰： 颎初不欲行，陛上强之，妾固知其无功矣。 
现代文：皇后对文帝说 ：高颎当初就不想去，陛下勉强他去，妾本来就知道不会有什么结果。 
English: The empress said to Emperor Wen: Gao Yao didn't want to go in the first place, His Majesty forced him to go, and the concubine knew that nothing would come of it.

古文：又帝以汉王年少，专委军于颎。
现代文：文帝因汉王年少，把军队都托付给高颎。
English: Emperor Wen, due to the young age of the Han king, entrusted the army to Gao Jun.

古文：颎以任寄隆重，每怀至公，无自疑意。
现代文：高颎认为深得信任，心怀公正，从来没有疑虑。
English: Gao Yao believed that he was trustworthy, fair-minded, and never had any doubts.

古文：谅所言多不用，因甚衔之。
现代文：杨谅的话多不被采用，非常忌恨高颎。
English: Yang Peng's words were mostly not adopted, and he hated Gao Yao very much.

古文：及还，谅泣言于后曰： 免颎杀，幸矣！ 
现代文：回朝后，杨谅哭着向皇后说： 没有被高颎杀掉，就算是幸运了！ 
English: After returning to the imperial court, Yang Peng cried and said to the empress: I was lucky not to have been killed by the stilt!

古文：帝闻，弥不平。
现代文：文帝听到后，更加愤愤不平。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Wen became even more indignant.

古文：俄而上柱国王积以罪诛，当推覆之际，乃有禁中事，云于颎处得之。
现代文：不久，上柱国王积因罪被杀，审讯的时候，有宫禁之事，说是在高颎那里得知的。
English: Not long after, Shangzhu King Jie was killed for his crime. During the trial, there was a palace ban, saying that he learned about it from Gao Yao.

古文：帝欲成颎罪，闻此大惊。
现代文：文帝想定高颎的罪，听到这些十分震惊。
English: Emperor Wen was shocked to hear about Gao Yao's supposed crime.

古文：时上柱国贺若弼、吴州总管宇文幹、刑部尚书薛胄、户部尚书斛律孝卿、兵部尚书柳述等明颎无罪，帝愈怒，皆以之属吏。
现代文：这时，上柱国贺若弼、吴州总管宇文瞖、刑部尚书薛胄、户部尚书斛律孝卿、兵部尚书柳述等人，申明高颎无罪，文帝更加恼怒，把他们都交给有司处置。
English: At this time, Emperor Wenzhou was even more angry when Shangzhu Guo, Wuzhou Governor Uwen Hui, Department of Criminal Law Shangshu Xue Jun, Department of Household Law Shangshu Ruzhu Xiaoqing, and Department of Military Law Shangshu Liu Su affirmed Gao Yu's innocence, and all of them were handed over to the magistrate.

古文：自是朝臣莫敢言。
现代文：从此，朝中大臣再没有人敢说话。
English: From then on, no one dared to speak to the Minister of the Korean Peninsula.

古文：颎竟坐免，以公就第。
现代文：高颎终于连坐免官，保留爵号。
English: Gao Yao was finally relieved of his post, retaining his title.

古文：未几，帝幸秦王俊第，召颎侍宴。
现代文：过了不久，文帝到秦王杨俊的宅第，召高颎来陪宴。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wen went to Qin King Yang Jun's residence and invited Gao Yao to a banquet.

古文：颎歔欷悲不自胜，独孤皇后亦对之泣，左右皆流涕。
现代文：高颎痛哭流涕，悲不自胜，独孤皇后亦相对哭泣，手下的人亦皆痛哭。
English: Gao Yao wept bitterly, inconsolable. The lonely queen also wept, and all her subordinates also wept bitterly.

古文：帝谓曰： 朕不负公，公自负朕也。 
现代文：文帝对高颎说： 朕不辜负公，公自辜负朕。 
English: Emperor Wen said to Gao Qi: "I will live up to the public, and the public will live up to me."

古文：因谓侍臣曰： 我于高颎胜兒子，虽或不见，常似目前。
现代文：于是对侍臣说 ：我对高颎胜似儿子，虽然有时不见，但常常像在眼前。
English: So he said to his aide-de-camp: "I regard Gao Yao Sheng as my son. Although I sometimes don't see him, I often see him before my eyes."

古文：自其解落，瞑然忘之，如本无高颎。
现代文：自从他被解职，转眼就忘了，好像本来就没有高颎这个人一样。
English: Ever since he was dismissed, he was forgotten in the blink of an eye, as if he never existed.

古文：不可以身要君，自云第一也。 
现代文：不可用自己要挟国君，自称天下第一。 
English: You cannot use yourself to blackmail the sovereign and claim to be the best in the world.

古文：顷之，颎国令上颎阴事，称： 其子表仁谓颎曰： 昔司马仲达初托疾不朝，遂有天下。
现代文：此事刚过不久，高颎的属下上告高颎的阴谋之事，称 ：其子表仁对高颎说 ：昔日司马仲达开始假装有病，不朝见天子，终于得了天下。
English: Not long after this incident, Gao Yao's subordinates reported Gao Yao's conspiracy, saying: His son, Chaoren, said to Gao Yao: Once upon a time, Sima Zhongda began to pretend to be ill and did not go to see the emperor, and finally won the world.

古文：公今遇此，安知非福？ 
现代文：公今遇此事，怎么知道不是福气呢？  
English: How do you know it's not a blessing when it happens?

古文：于是帝大怒，囚颎于内史省而鞫之。
现代文：于是文帝大怒，把高颎囚禁在内史省审讯。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen flew into a rage and had Gao Yao imprisoned and interrogated at the Ministry of History.

古文：宪司复奏颎他事，云： 沙门真觉尝谓颎曰： 明年国有大丧。 
现代文：宪司又奏高颎别的事情，说： 僧徒真觉曾经对高颎说： 明年国家有大丧。 
English: The registrar also played Gao Qi on another matter, saying: The monk Zhen Jue once said to Gao Qi: Next year, the country will have a great mourning.

古文：尼令晖复云： 十七、八年，皇帝有大厄。
现代文：尼令晖又说 ：十七、八年，皇帝有大难。
English: Ni Lingyao also said: In the seventeenth and eighth years, the emperor was in great difficulty.

古文：十九年不可过。 
现代文：十九年就过不去。  
English: I can't believe it's been 19 years.

古文：帝闻益怒，顾谓群臣曰： 帝王岂可力求。
现代文：文帝听后更加恼怒，对群臣说： 帝王岂能凭强力而求。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Wen became even more enraged and said to his courtiers: "How can an emperor ask for something by force?

古文：孔丘以大圣之才，作法垂于后代，宁不欲大位邪？
现代文：孔子有大圣之才，制定法律流传后代，难道不想为天子？
English: Confucius had a great talent for making laws that would be passed down to future generations. Didn't he want to be the son of heaven?

古文：天命不可耳。
现代文：天命不允许。
English: Manifest destiny does not allow it.

古文：颎与子言，自比晋帝，此何心乎？ 
现代文：高颎和他儿子说的那些话，自比为晋帝，是何种居心！ 
English: Gao Jun and his son said those words, comparing themselves to Emperor Jin, what kind of premeditation is that!

古文：有司请斩之，帝曰： 去年杀虞庆则，今兹斩王积，如更诛颎，天下谓我何！ 
现代文：有司请斩高颎，文帝说： 去年杀了虞庆则，如今刚杀了王积，若再杀高颎，天下人会怎么说我！ 
English: "Last year, you killed Yu Qingzhe, and now you just killed Wang Qi. If you kill Gao Yao again, what will the world say about me?" said Emperor Wen.

古文：于是除颎名。
现代文：于是就将高颎除名。
English: As a result, Takahata was removed from the list.

古文：初，颎为仆射，其母诫之曰： 汝富贵已极，但有斫头耳，尔其慎之！ 
现代文：当初，高颎任仆射，其母告诫他说： 你的富贵已达到顶点，只是还有杀头的事，你要谨慎啊！ 
English: At the beginning, Gao Jiong's mother admonished him: "Your wealth has reached its peak, but there is still the matter of killing. You should be careful!"

古文：颎由是常恐祸变。
现代文：高颎因此常恐发生祸变。
English: As a result, Gao Gan often fears a calamity.

古文：及此，颎欢然无恨色，以为得免祸。
现代文：等到被除名，高颎面有欢欣，脸无恨色，以为灾祸已经免除。
English: By the time he was expelled, Gao Yao's face was radiant with joy, his face free of hatred, and he thought the disaster had been averted.

古文：炀帝即位，拜太常卿。
现代文：炀帝即位，任高颎为太常卿。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, and Gao Jian was appointed as the First Secretary of the State Council.

古文：时有诏收周、齐故乐人及天下散乐。
现代文：当时有诏令收周、齐原有的乐人和天下散乐。
English: At that time, there was a decree to close the week, and the original musicians and the world were scattered.

古文：颎奏： 此乐久废。
现代文：高颎奏道 ：这种音乐早就废除了。
English: High-pitched music: This type of music was abolished long ago.

古文：今若征之，恐无识之徒弃本逐末，递相教习。 
现代文：今天征集，恐怕无识之徒弃本逐末，互相传授。 
English: Today, I am afraid that ignorant people will abandon their books one by one and teach each other.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：炀帝不高兴了。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：帝时侈靡，声色滋甚，又起长城之役。
现代文：炀帝这时奢侈淫靡，沉湎声色，又开始修筑长城。
English: At this time, Emperor Qian began to build the Great Wall.

古文：颎甚病之，谓太常丞李懿曰： 周天元以好乐而亡，殷监不进，安可复尔！ 
现代文：高颎非常不满，对太常丞李懿说： 周天元因喜好音乐而灭亡，殷鉴不远，怎么能够再这样呢！ 
English: Gao Yao was very dissatisfied and said to Tai Changzheng Li Yao: Zhou Tianyuan died because of his liking for music, Yin Jian is not far away, how can this happen again!

古文：时帝遇启人可汗恩礼过厚，颎谓太府卿何稠曰： 此虏颇知中国虚实、山川险易，恐为后患。 
现代文：当时，炀帝对启人可汁恩礼过于优厚，高颎对太府卿何稠说： 这个外族人对中国虚实、山川险易所知甚多，恐怕成为后患。 
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan was too generous in his courtesy to Emperor Qian, and Emperor Gao said to Grand Mufu He Chouzhu: This foreigner knows a lot about China's reality and mountains and rivers, and I'm afraid he'll be a hindrance.

古文：复谓观王雄曰： 近来朝廷殊无纲纪。 
现代文：又对观王杨雄说 ：近来朝廷特别没有纲常法纪。 
English: He also said to Guan Wang Yangxiong, "Recently, the imperial court has been particularly lacking in legal discipline.

古文：有人奏之，帝以为讪谤朝政，诛之，诸子徙边。
现代文：有人把这些话奏知炀帝，炀帝认为这是诽谤朝政，杀了高颎，并把他的几个儿子发配到边疆。
English: Someone reported these words to Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao considered this to be slander against the imperial government, killed Gao Yao, and sent several of his sons to the frontier.

古文：颎有文武大略，明达政务。及蒙任寄之后，竭诚尽节，进引贞良，发天下为己任。
现代文：高颎有文韬武略，精通政务，承蒙文帝信任，竭尽忠诚，举荐贤良，以天下为己任。
English: Gao Yao was well-versed in literature, military strategy, and government affairs. He earned the trust of Emperor Wen, was loyal to the best of his ability, recommended the virtuous, and took the world as his own responsibility.

古文：苏威、杨素、贺若弼、韩禽等皆颎所荐，各尽其用，为一代名臣。
现代文：苏威、杨素、贺若弼、韩禽等人，皆是高颎举荐的，各尽其用，成为一代名臣。
English: Su Wei, Yang Su, He Ruoqi, Han Ji and others were all recommended by Gao Qi, and they each did their best to become a generation of famous ministers.

古文：自余立功立事者，不可胜数。
现代文：其余立功立事，亦是不可胜数。
English: There are countless others who have made outstanding contributions.

古文：当朝执政将二十年，朝野推服，物无异议，时致升平，颎之力也。
现代文：当朝执政近二十年，朝野人士无不赞服，没人议论是非，当时社会升平，靠的是高颎的力量。
English: When the government had been in power for nearly 20 years, people in and out of government were all in agreement, and no one was discussing the rights and wrongs. At that time, society was leveling out, thanks to the power of Takahata.

古文：论者以为真宰相。
现代文：论者认为高颎是名符其实的宰相。
English: Commentators believe that Gao Jun is a prime minister worthy of the name.

古文：及诛，天下入不伤惜，至今称冤不已。
现代文：高颎被杀，天下之人无不伤悼，至今仍为高颎鸣冤不止。
English: Gao Rong was killed, and people all over the world mourned his death. To this day, there are still many grievances against Gao Rong.

古文：所有奇策良谋及损益时政，颎皆削稿，代无知者。
现代文：所有的奇策良谋和时政方略，都是出自高颎之手，当时没有人知道这种情况。
English: At that time, no one knew about this situation, but all of Gao Yao's cunning plans and current political strategies came from his hand.

古文：子盛道，位莒州刺史，徙柳城卒。道弟弘德，封应国公，晋王记室；次弟表仁，勃海郡公。徒蜀郡。
现代文：高颎子盛道，官至莒州刺史，发配到柳城，死在那里；盛道弟弘德，封应国公，任晋王记室；次弟表仁，封渤海郡公，并徙于蜀郡。
English: Gao Yanzi's younger brother, Morimichi, was assigned to Liucheng and died there; Morimichi's younger brother, Hongde, was assigned to Jin Wang Ji's office; and Morimichi's second younger brother, Cousin, was assigned to Bohai County and moved to Shu County.

古文：牛弘，字里仁，安定鹑觚人也。
现代文：牛弘字里仁，安定鹑觚人。
English: Niu Hong (牛弘), also known as Liren, is a stable person.

古文：其先尝避难，改姓辽氏。
现代文：其先人为了避难，改姓辽氏。
English: His ancestors changed their surname to Liao in order to take refuge.

古文：祖炽，本郡中正。
现代文：祖父炽，本郡中正。
English: My grandfather, Blazing, is a middle school teacher in our county.

古文：父元，魏侍中、工部尚书、临泾公，复姓牛氏。
现代文：父元，任魏侍中、工部尚书，爵临泾公，复本姓牛氏。
English: His father was a middle-ranking Wei courtier, Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, Lord Linyi, with the family name of Niu.

古文：弘在襁褓，有相者见之，谓其父曰： 此兒当贵，善爱养之。 
现代文：弘在襁褓中，有相士见到他，对他的父亲说： 此儿命当大贵，好好地抚养他。 
English: When Hong was in kindergarten, a classmate saw him and said to his father, "Here, life is precious. Raise him well."

古文：及长，须貌甚伟，性宽裕，好学博闻。
现代文：长大后，形貌甚伟，性格宽厚，喜好读书，博闻广识。
English: When he grew up, he was very handsome, had a generous personality, liked to read, and was well-informed.

古文：仕周，历位中外府记室、内史上士、纳言上士，专掌文翰，修起居注。
现代文：任职于周朝，历任中外府记室、内史上士、纳言上士，专掌文翰，修起居注。
English: He served in the Zhou Dynasty, and successively held the posts of the Central and Foreign Prefectural Records Office, the Internal History Officer, and the Nagan Staff Sergeant.

古文：后袭封临泾公，转内史下大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：后袭封临泾公，转任内史下大夫、仪同三司。
English: Later, he succeeded to the title of Linyi Gong, and was transferred to the post of the Third Secretary of Internal History and the Third Secretary of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：开皇初，授散骑常侍、秘书监。
现代文：开皇初年，授散骑常侍、秘书监之职。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he was given the posts of imperial equerry and secretary supervisor.

古文：弘以典籍遗逸，上表请开献书之路，曰：
现代文：牛弘因典籍遗落散失，上表请求开献书之路，其表称：
English: Due to the loss of classic books, Ushihiro requested the opening of a book donation route, according to the above table:

古文：昔周德既衰，旧经紊弃。
现代文： 昔日周德既已衰微，旧经乱弃。
English: In the past, Zhou De had already declined, and the old classics had been abandoned.

古文：孔子以大圣之才，开素王之业，宪章祖述，制《礼》刊《诗》，正五始而修《春秋》，阐《十翼》而弘《易》道。
现代文：孔子凭大圣人的才能，开创大业，制定法令，制《礼》删《诗》，正五始而修撰《春秋》，阐发《十翼》，弘扬《易》道。
English: With the talent of a great sage, Confucius created a great cause, formulated laws, made "Rites" and deleted "Poems," compiled "Spring and Autumn" at the beginning of the fifth century, elaborated "Ten Wings" and promoted the "Easy" way.

古文：及秦皇驭宇，吞灭诸侯，先王坟籍，扫地皆尽。
现代文：及秦始皇统一天下，吞并诸侯，先王典籍，焚毁殆尽。
English: and Qin Shi Huang unified the country, annexed the provinces, and burned all the books of the previous king.

古文：此则书之一厄也。
现代文：这则是书籍的第一次厄难。
English: This is the first calamity of books.

古文：汉兴，建藏书之策，置校书之官。
现代文：汉朝建立，制定藏书的政策，设置校书的官职。
English: Han Dynasty, formulated the policy of collecting books, and set up the official position of school books.

古文：至孝成之代，遣谒者陈农求遗书于天下，诏刘向父子雠校篇籍。
现代文：到了孝成帝，派遣谒者陈农搜求天下的遗书。诏令刘向父子校勘篇籍。
English: When Emperor Xiaocheng arrived, he dispatched Chen Nong, a magistrate, to search the world for his suicide note. He ordered Liu Xiang to check his father's and son's school records.

古文：汉之典文，于斯为盛。
现代文：汉朝的典籍文献，到这个时候算是最盛。
English: By this time, the classic literature of the Han Dynasty was at its peak.

古文：及王莽之末，并从焚烬。
现代文：到王莽末年，全部焚烧。
English: By the end of Wang Mang's life, they had all been burned.

古文：此则书之二厄也。
现代文：这是书籍的第二次厄难。
English: This is the second woe for books.

古文：光武嗣兴，尤重经诰，未及下车，先求文雅。
现代文：光武继兴，特别重视经籍诰令，未及下车，先求文雅。
English: Guangwu Jixing, attaches great importance to the registration and registration order, before getting off the train, first seek elegance.

古文：至肃宗亲临讲肄，和帝数幸书林，其兰台、石室、鸿都、东观，秘牒填委，更倍于前。
现代文：到了肃宗，亲临讲舍，和帝数次临幸书林，兰台、石室、鸿都、东观等殿堂，满是书籍，更超过从前。
English: When he came to Suizong, he visited the lecture hall in person, and visited the imperial palace several times. The palace halls such as Lantai, Shishitsu, Hongdu and Dongguan were full of books, even more than before.

古文：及孝献移都，吏人扰乱，图书缣帛，皆取为帷囊。
现代文：及孝献迁都，吏人扰乱，图书缣帛，都被用作帷帐行囊。
English: and filial piety, the relocation of the capital, the disruption of officials, and the destruction of books, have all been used as curtains and bags.

古文：所收而西，载七十余乘，属西京大乱，一时燔荡。此则书之三厄也。
现代文：收拢起来往西京运的，装了七十多车，逢西京大乱，一时间被烧个净光，这是书籍的第三次厄难。
English: This is the third calamity for books, as the more than 70 cartloads of books that were packed up and shipped to West Beijing were burned to a crisp when the city was in turmoil.

古文：魏文代汉，更集经典，皆藏在秘书，内外三阁，遣秘书郎郑默删定旧文，论者美其硃紫有别。
现代文：魏文帝代汉自立，重新收集经典，都藏在秘书省，占用了内外三座楼阁，遣秘书郎郑默删定旧有的书籍，论者都称赞其所删优劣有别。
English: Emperor Weiwen in the Han Dynasty became independent and collected classics anew, all of which were hidden in the Ministry of Secretaries, occupying three mansions inside and outside. He sent his secretary, Lang Zhengmo, to delete the old books, and the commentators all praised the merits and demerits of what he had deleted.

古文：晋氏承之，文籍尤广。
现代文：晋朝继承魏朝，文章典籍更多。
English: The Jin Dynasty succeeded the Wei Dynasty, and there are more articles and classics.

古文：晋秘书监荀勖定魏《内经》，更著《新簿》。
现代文：晋秘书监荀勖定《魏内经》，另著《新簿》。
English: Jin's secretary Jianzhong wrote the "Wei Neijing" and the "New Book."

古文：属刘、石冯陵，从而失坠。
现代文：逢刘粲、石勒进犯，书籍又在逃遁中丢失。
English: Feng Liuqi and Shi Le attacked, and the books were lost in the escape.

古文：此则书之四厄也。
现代文：这是书籍的第四次厄难。
English: This is the fourth woe for books.

古文：永嘉之后，寇窃竞兴，其建国立家，虽传名号，宪章礼乐，寂灭无闻。
现代文：永嘉之后，寇贼四起，其建立国家，虽传名号，法令礼乐，却寂灭无闻。
English: After Yongjia, the bandits were everywhere, and although the establishment of the country was heralded with names, decrees and rituals, it went unnoticed.

古文：刘裕平姚，收其图籍，《五经》子史，才四千卷，皆赤轴青纸，文字古拙，并归江左。
现代文：刘裕平定姚氏，收其图籍，《五经》子史，总共才有四千卷，皆是赤轴青纸，文字古拙，一并归于江南。
English: Liu Yuping Dingyao, collected his books, the "Five Classics" sub-history, a total of only four thousand volumes, all of which are red-shafted blue paper, the text is old, and all belong to the south of the river.

古文：宋秘书丞王俭依刘氏《七略》，撰为《七志》。
现代文：宋秘书丞王俭依照刘氏《七略》，撰写《七志》。
English: Song secretary Zheng Wang Jian wrote "Seven Stories" according to Liu's "Seven Stories."

古文：梁人阮孝绪亦为《七录》。
现代文：梁人阮孝绪也撰写有《七录》。
English: Nguyn Hu Hu also wrote the "Seven Commentaries."

古文：总其书数，三万余卷。
现代文：总计其书数，共三万多卷。
English: The total number of his books amounts to more than 30,000 volumes.

古文：及侯景度江，破灭梁室，秘省经籍，虽从兵火，其文德殿内书史，宛然犹存。
现代文：及侯景渡江，消灭梁朝，秘书省的经籍虽经过战火，但文德殿内的书籍，依然保存了下来。
English: Although the books of the Secretary of the Ministry of Economic Affairs were destroyed in the war, the books in the Palace of Literature and Art were still preserved.

古文：萧绎据有江陵，遣将破平侯景，收文德之书及公私典籍重本七万余卷，悉送荆州。
现代文：萧绎占据江陵，派兵将平定侯景之乱，收集文德殿的书籍和公私典籍重本，计有七万余卷，全部送往荆州。
English: Xiao Yu occupied Jiangling, sent troops to quell the Houjing Rebellion, and collected the books of the Wende Hall and the heavy books of public and private classics, totaling more than seventy thousand volumes, all of which were sent to Jingzhou.

古文：及周师入郢，绎悉焚之于外城，所收十才一二。
现代文：及周兵入郢，萧绎把这些书集中在外城焚烧，所剩仅十之一二。
English: As soon as Zhou Bing was taken prisoner, Xiao Yu concentrated these books in the outer city and burned them, leaving only one-tenth of them.

古文：此则书之五厄也。
现代文：这是书籍的第五次厄难。
English: This is the fifth plague of books.

古文：后魏爰自幽方，迁宅伊洛，日不暇给，经籍阙如。
现代文： 后魏自边远之地，迁居伊洛，时间不长，没有什么经籍。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, he moved to Ilo from a faraway place. The time was not long, and there was no record of him.

古文：周氏创基关右，戎车未息。
现代文：周朝创业于关右，战乱不断。
English: The Zhou Dynasty started business in Guan Yu, and the war continued.

古文：保定之始，书止八千，后加收集，方盈万卷。
现代文：周武帝保定初年，书籍仅有八千卷，后来又经搜集，才达到一万卷。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhouwu's reign in Baoding, there were only eight thousand volumes of books, and later, after being collected, there were only ten thousand volumes.

古文：高氏据有山东，初亦采访，验其本目，残阙犹多。
现代文：高氏在太行山东建立齐国，开始的时候也采访书籍，和原本相比，残缺的特别多。
English: Gao established Qi Guo in Taihang Shandong Province. At the beginning, he also interviewed books, and compared to the original, there are a lot of remnants.

古文：及东夏初平，获其经史，四部重杂，三万余卷。
现代文：东夏刚刚平安，获得的经籍史册，四部重杂，计有三万多卷。
English: It was just before the end of the Eastern Summer, and the four heavy miscellaneous volumes of the History of Chinese Classics, totaling more than 30,000 volumes, had been obtained.

古文：所益旧书，五千而已。
现代文：增加的旧书，只有五千卷。
English: Only five thousand volumes of old books were added.

古文：今御出单本，合一万五千余卷，部帙之间，仍有残缺。
现代文：现在挑出的单本，合计一万五千多卷，部帙之间，仍有残缺。
English: The single volumes that have now been singled out, a total of more than fifteen thousand volumes, are still incomplete.

古文：比梁之旧目，止有其半。
现代文：和梁朝旧有的书目相比，仅有其半数。
English: Compared with the old bibliography of the Liang Dynasty, it is only half.

古文：至于阴阳《河洛》之篇，医方图谱之说，弥复为少。
现代文：至于阴阳、《河》、《洛》之类的书籍，医书图谱著作，更加少了。
English: As for books such as Yin and Yang, River, and Luo, as well as medical books and atlases, there are even fewer.

古文：臣以经书自仲尼迄今，数遭五厄，兴集之期，属膺圣代。
现代文： 臣以为，经书自孔子至今，遭到五次厄难，重新兴集的日子，属于我皇圣世。
English: The minister thought that since Confucius, the sutras have been subjected to five calamities, and the days of re-gathering belong to the era of the emperor.

古文：今秘藏见书，亦足披览，但一时载籍，须令大备。
现代文：如今秘书省的藏书，亦足够阅览。但一个时代的书籍，一定要大体具备。
English: Nowadays, the collection of books of the Ministry of Secretaries is also sufficient for reading. However, the books of an era must be generally available.

古文：不可王府所无，私家乃有。若猥发明诏，兼开购赏，则异典必致，观阁斯积。
现代文：不可出现王府没有，私人却有的情况，如果广发诏令，兼以购买奖赏，则必可罗致难得的典籍，满积观阁。 
English: There should not be a situation where there is no royal palace, but there is a private person. If the imperial edict is widely issued and the reward is also purchased, it will lead to a rare classic, full of spectators.

古文：上纳之，于是下诏，献书一卷，赉缣一疋。
现代文：文帝采纳牛弘的建议，于是颁布诏令，献书一卷，赏缣一匹。
English: Emperor Wen accepted Ushihiro's suggestion, and issued an imperial edict, dedicating a scroll and awarding a donkey.

古文：仰观俯察，皆有则象，足以尽诚上帝，祗配祖宗，弘风布教，作范于后矣。
现代文：一二年的功夫，典籍大体具备。牛弘晋爵为奇章公。三年，升任礼部尚书，奉旨修撰《五礼》，刻成百卷，流行于世。牛弘请求依照古制，修立明堂。
English: After 12 years of hard work, the classic books are generally available. Ushihiro Jinsaku became the Keizhanggu. In three years, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and compiled the "Five Rites" by order, engraved into hundreds of volumes, and popular in the world. Ushihiro requested that the Ming Hall be built in accordance with the old system.

古文：上以时事草创，未边制作，竟寝不行。
现代文：文帝认为各种事情刚刚开始，没有时间修造明堂，竟放下不去实施。
English: Emperor Wen thought that all kinds of things had just begun, there was no time to repair the Ming Hall, and he actually put it down and did not implement it.

古文：六年，除太常卿。
现代文：六年，牛弘官任太常卿。
English: Six years later, Ushihiro was appointed to the position of Taijo-kyo.

古文：九年，诏定雅乐，又作乐府歌词，撰定圆丘五帝凯乐，并议乐事。
现代文：九年，诏令制定雅乐，又作乐府歌词，撰定圆丘五帝凯乐，交议制乐事。
English: In the ninth year, the imperial decree formulated the elegant music, and also made the lyrics of the music, compiled the round mound five emperor's music, and submitted the music.

古文：弘上议云：
现代文：牛弘上议说：
English: Ushihiro spoke up and said:

古文：谨案礼，五声六律，十二管还相为宫。
现代文： 谨案《礼》书，五声六律，十二管循还奏出宫调。
English: The "Ritual" book, five voices and six rhythms, twelve pipes, and the palace tune are also played.

古文：《周礼》奏黄钟，歌大吕，奏太蔟，歌应钟，皆旋相为宫之义。
现代文：《周礼》奏黄钟，歌大吕，奏太蔟，歌应钟，都是循还相奏为宫调的意思。
English: "Zhouli" means to play the yellow bell, to play the big lute, to play the big gong, and to play the bell.

古文：蔡邕《明堂月令章句》曰： 孟春月则太蔟为宫，姑洗为商，蕤宾为角，南吕为徵，应钟为羽，大吕为变宫，夷则为变徵。
现代文：蔡邕《明堂月令章句》说 ：孟春月则太蔟为宫，姑洗为商，蕤宾为角，南吕为徵。应钟为羽，大吕为变宫，夷则为变徵。
English: Cai Qi's "Ming Tang's Monthly Chapter" says: Meng Chun Yue is the palace of Taqi, the merchant of Gucha, the horn of Zhibin, the symbol of Nan Lv, the feather of Ying Zhong, the palace of change of Dal Lv, and the symbol of change of Yi.

古文：他月放此。 
现代文：别的月份和这一样。 
English: Other months are like this.

古文：故先王之作律吕也，所以辨天地四方阴阳之声。
现代文：所以，先王制作音乐，是为了区别天地四方阴阳之声。
English: Therefore, the first king made music in order to distinguish heaven and earth from the four directions of yin and yang.

古文：扬子云曰： 声生于律，律生于辰。 
现代文：扬子云说 ：声生于律，律生于辰。 
English: Yang Ziyun said: "Voice is born from ritsu, and ritsu is born from chen."

古文：故律吕配五行，通八风，历十二辰，行十二月，循环转运，义无停止。
现代文：所以，律吕配合五行，沟通八风，经历十二时辰，行于十二月份，循环运转，决无停止的时候。
English: Therefore, Lulü cooperates with the five elements, communicates with the eight winds, experiences twelve hours, goes in December, circulates, and never stops.

古文：譬如立春木王火相，立夏火王土相，季夏余分，土王金相，立秋金王水相，立冬水王木相。
现代文：譬如立春木王火相，立夏火王土相，季夏之末，土王金相，立秋金王水相，立冬水王木相。
English: For example, the king of fire in spring, the king of earth in summer, the king of earth in late summer, the king of water in autumn, and the king of wood in winter.

古文：递相为宫者，谓当其王月，名之为宫。今若十一月不以黄钟为宫，十三月不以太蔟为宫，便是春木不王，夏土不相。
现代文：依次为宫者，是说当其王月，名之为宫，如今十一月不用黄钟为宫，十二月不用太蔟为宫，就是因为春木不王，夏土不相。
English: The palace in turn means that when it is the king month, the name is the palace. Nowadays, November does not use the yellow bell as the palace, and December does not use the great dragonfly as the palace, because the spring wood is not the king, and the summer soil is not the same.

古文：岂不阴阳失度，天地不通哉？
现代文：这岂不就是阴阳失调、天地不能交通吗？
English: Isn't this just the imbalance of yin and yang, and heaven and earth can't communicate?

古文：刘歆《锺律书》云： 春宫秋律，百卉必凋；秋宫春律，万物必荣；夏宫冬律，雨雹必降；冬宫夏律，雷必发声。 
现代文：刘歆《钟律书》说： 春宫秋律，百花必定周彡零；秋宫春律，万物必然茂盛；夏宫冬律，必有大雨冰雹；冬宫夏律，必定雷声大震。 
English: Liu Wei's "Book of the Laws of the Clock" says: At the Spring Palace and Autumn Palace rhythms, all flowers must bloom; at the Autumn Palace and Spring Rhythms, all things must be lush; at the Summer Palace and Winter Rhythms, there must be heavy rain and hail; at the Winter Palace and Summer Rhythms, there must be thunder and earthquake.

古文：以斯而论，诚为不易。
现代文：据此而论，律吕和阴阳天地的关系确实是不能改变的。
English: According to this view, the relationship between the yin and yang and heaven and earth cannot be changed.

古文：且律十二，今直为黄钟一均，唯用七律，以外五律竟复何施？
现代文：况且律有十二，如今仅用黄钟调节，使用的只有七律，其他五律究竟再用于什么地方呢？
English: Moreover, there are twelve rhythms, which are now only regulated by a yellow bell, and only seven rhythms are used. What are the other five rhythms used for?

古文：恐失圣人制作本意。
现代文：这恐怕已失去了圣人制作音乐的意思。
English: I'm afraid it's lost the meaning of a saint making music.

古文：故须依《礼》作还相为宫之法。
现代文：因此，必须根据《礼》书，重新制作循环为宫之法。 
English: Therefore, according to the "Rite" book, it is necessary to re-create the method of circulation as a palace.

古文：上曰： 不须作旋相为宫，且作黄钟一均也。 
现代文：皇上说： 不必制作循环为宫之法，只制作黄钟这一种调乐器就可以了。 
English: The emperor said, "You don't have to make the method of looping for the palace, just make the yellow bell, a kind of tuning instrument.

古文：弘又论六十律不可行：
现代文：牛弘又论六十律不可行：
English: Ushihiro also said that the rule of sixty is not feasible:

古文：谨案《续汉书律历志》： 元帝遣韦玄成问京房于乐府。
现代文： 谨案《续汉书·律历志》 ：元帝派遣韦玄成在音乐官署问京房。
English: The Emperor Yuan sent Wei Xuancheng to inquire about the composition of the "Continuation of the Han Dynasty and the Legal Calendar" at the Music Office.

古文：房对： 受学故小黄令焦延寿。
现代文：京房回答说 ：我师承已故小黄令焦延寿。
English: Kyofusa replied, "I am a disciple of the late Xiao Huang Ling Jiao Yan Shou."

古文：六十律相生之法：以上生下，皆三生二；以下生上，皆三生四。
现代文：六十律相生的方法是：用上生下，都是三生二；用下生上，都是三生四。
English: The method of generating the sixty laws is: using the upper square law to produce the lower square law, both at a ratio of two-thirds; using the lower square law to produce the upper square law, both at a ratio of four-thirds.

古文：阳下生阴，阴上生阳，终于中吕，十二律毕矣。
现代文：阳下生阴，阴下生阳，至中吕而终，十二律就完了。
English: The sun gives birth to the shade, the shade to the sun, until the middle of the year ends, and the twelve precepts are complete.

古文：中吕上生执始，执始下生去灭，上下相生，终于南事，六十律毕矣。
现代文：中吕上生执始，执始下生去灭，上下相生，至南事而中，六十律就尽了。
English: In the middle, the upper birth is the beginning, the lower birth is the end, the upper and lower are born together, and when it comes to the middle, the rule of sixty is exhausted.

古文：十二律之变至于六十，犹八卦之变至于六十四也。
现代文：十二律变为六十律，就像八卦变成六十四卦一样。
English: The Twelve Laws become the Sixty Laws, just as the Eight Trigrams become the Sixty-Four Trigrams.

古文：冬至之声，以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，姑洗为角，林钟为徵，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫，蕤宾为变徵。
现代文：冬至那天的声音，以黄钟为宫，太蔟为商，始洗为角，林钟为徵，南吕为羽，应钟为变宫，蕤宾为变徵。
English: The sounds of the day of the winter solstice are represented by the yellow bell as the palace, the crane as the merchant, the beginning of the bath as the horn, the forest bell as the symbol, the southern rue as the feather, the bell as the changing palace, and the guests as the changing symbol.

古文：此声气之元，五音之正也。
现代文：这是声气的开始，五音的发端。
English: This is the beginning of the tone, the beginning of the five notes.

古文：故各统一日。其余以次运行，当日者各自为宫，而商徵以类从焉。 
现代文：因此各统一日，其余的按次序运行，所当之日自己为宫，商徵因类相从。 
English: Therefore, each unified day, the rest run in order, the appropriate day itself is the palace, and the merchant is the cause of the class.

古文：房又曰： 竹声不可以度调，故作准以定数。
现代文：京房又说 ：竹器之声不能用来测度调值，所以就制作准来确定调值数。
English: Kyofusa also said, "The sound of bamboo utensils cannot be used to measure the adjustment, so a standard is made to determine the number of adjustments."

古文：准之状如瑟，长一丈而十三弦，隐间九尺，以应黄钟之律九寸。
现代文：准这种乐器形状像瑟，长一丈，十三根弦，距饰物处九尺，用来对应黄钟之律九寸。
English: This instrument is shaped like a cymbal, is one meter long, has thirteen strings, and is placed nine feet away from the ornaments. It is used to correspond to the law of the yellow bell.

古文：中央一弦，下画分寸，以为六十律清浊之节。 
现代文：中央一根弦下，刻有分寸，用来作为六十律清浊的节拍。 
English: At the bottom of the central string, there is a measure engraved, which is used as a rhythm of sixty beats.

古文：执始之类，皆房自造。
现代文：执始一类律吕名称，都是京房自己制造的。
English: The first-class Ruling Lu names are all made by Keifang itself.

古文：房云受法于焦延寿，未知延寿所承也。
现代文：京房说他师承焦延寿，不知焦延寿师承的是谁。
English: Kyofusa said that he was a disciple of Jiao Yanzhou, but I don't know who Jiao Yanzhou's disciple was.

古文：至元和元年，待诏候钟律般肜上言： 官无晓六十律以准调音者。
现代文：到了元和元年，待诏侯钟殷肜上书说： 朝廷官员没有人懂得用准这种乐器调节六十律的调值。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the 21st century, Prince Zhong Yinxuan wrote in a letter: No court official knows how to use this instrument to adjust the tuning of the sixtieth law.

古文：故待诏严嵩，具以准法教其子宣，愿召宣补学官，主调乐器。 
现代文：因此待诏严嵩，请求用准法教授他的儿子严宣，希望召严宣补学官，主持调节乐器。 
English: Therefore, he asked his son, Yan Xuan, who was a professor of the standard method, to call Yan Xuan, the academic officer, to preside over the adjustment of the musical instrument.

古文：太史丞弘试宣十二律，其二中，其四不中，其六不知何律，宣遂罢。
现代文：太史丞弘用十二律考试严宣，二律相符，四律不符，其余六个不知是什么律，严宣于是作罢。
English: Taishi Zhengyong used the Twelve Precepts Examination to strictly proclaim that two precepts matched, four precepts did not match, and the remaining six did not know what the precepts were. The strict proclamation was therefore abandoned.

古文：自此律家莫能为准施弦。
现代文：自此以后，音乐家再也无人能够调节准这种乐器。
English: Since then, no musician has been able to tune the instrument.

古文：熹平六年，东观召典律者太子舍人张光问准意。
现代文：熹平六年，东观召见主管音乐的太子舍人张光，询问准这种乐器的调制。
English: Six years later, Dongguan summoned Zhang Guang, the prince's son who was in charge of music, to inquire about the modulation of this musical instrument.

古文：光等不知，归阅旧藏，乃得其器，形制如房书，犹不能定其弦缓急，故史官能辩清浊者遂绝。
现代文：张光等人不知道，回去翻检旧藏的乐器，找到了准，形状制作和京房记载的一样，还是不能确定其弦的缓急，因此，史官能辨识准音清浊的人就没有了。
English: Zhang Guang and others do not know, went back to check the old musical instruments, found the right one, the shape is made the same as that recorded in Beijing, but still can not determine the priority of the strings, therefore, the historian can not identify the person with the right tone.

古文：其可以相传者，唯大榷常数及候气而已。 据此而论，房法汉世已不能行。
现代文：可以相传的，只有大榷常数和候气。 据此而论，京房的六十律相生之法，汉代已不能流行了。
English: The only things that can be passed down from generation to generation are the great hail constant and the weather. Therefore, the sixty-year rule for the birth of the imperial family was no longer popular in the Han Dynasty.

古文：沈约《宋志》曰： 详案古典及今音家，六十律无施于乐。 
现代文：沈约《宋志》说 ：详案，古典和今天的音乐家，已无能把六十律用于音乐的人。 
English: Shen You of "Song History" said: "For the record, classical and today's musicians are no longer able to use the sixty precepts for music.

古文：《礼》云 十二管还相为宫 ，不言六十。
现代文：《礼》云 ：十二管循环奏出宫调。 不说六十。
English: "Rei" cloud: twelve-pipe cycle played out of the palace tune. Not to mention sixty.

古文：《封禅书》云 大帝使素女鼓五十弦瑟而悲，破为二十五弦。 
现代文：《封禅书》说 ：大帝使素女弹五十弦瑟而悲伤，破为二十五弦。 
English: "Hozenshu" says: The great emperor made a virgin play a fifty-stringed flute, and she was so sad that she broke it into twenty-five strings.

古文：假令六十律为乐得成，亦所不用，取大乐必易，大礼必简之意也。
现代文：假使六十律能够成乐，也会有些不用，取的就是大乐必然省易，大礼必然简易的意思。 
English: If the rule of sixty can be made fun, it will also be somewhat unnecessary. It is taken to mean that great fun must be easy, and great courtesy must be simple.

古文：又议曰：
现代文：又论道：
English: Also on the road:

古文：案《周官》云 大司乐掌成均之法。 
现代文： 案《周官》说： 大司乐主管成均之法。 
English: "Zhou Guan" commented on the case: "The supervisor of the Daishi Music Department did the right thing.

古文：郑众注云： 均，调也。
现代文：郑众注说： 均，就是音调。
English: Zheng Zong annotated: "Hun" means "tone."

古文：乐师主调其音。 
现代文：乐师主管调节它的音调。 
English: The music director adjusts its pitch.

古文：《三礼义宗》称 《周官》奏黄钟者，用黄钟为调，歌大吕者，用大吕为调。
现代文：《三礼义宗》称： 《周官》奏黄钟，是用黄钟为调，歌大吕，是用大吕为调。
English: "Sanli Yizong" said: "Zhou Guan" is set to the tune of the Yellow Bell, and the Song of the Great Lu is set to the tune of the Great Lu.

古文：奏者谓堂下四县，歌者谓堂上所歌。
现代文：奏说的是堂下四处悬挂，歌说的是堂上所唱。
English: The performance is about what is hung around the hall, and the song is about what is sung in the hall.

古文：但以一祭之间，皆用二调。 
现代文：只是在同一次祭祀的时候，二调皆用。 
English: However, when performing the same ritual, both tones are used.

古文：是知据宫称调，其义一也。
现代文：因此可知，根据宫来确定调，意思是一样的。
English: Therefore, it can be seen that determining the tuning according to the palace has the same meaning.

古文：明六律六吕迭相为宫，各自为调。
现代文：阐明六律六吕相互为宫，各自为调。
English: It is clarified that the six laws and six precepts are each other's palace, and each of them is a tune.

古文：今见行之乐，用黄钟之宫，乃以林钟为调，与古典有违。
现代文：如今流行的音乐，用黄钟为宫，则就用林钟为调，与古制不同。
English: Today's popular music, with the yellow bell as the palace, is tuned by the forest bell, which is different from the ancient system.

古文：案晋内书监荀勖依典记，以五声十二律还相为宫之法，制十二笛。
现代文：案，晋内书监荀勖根据典籍记载，用五声十二律循环为宫之法，制成十二笛。
English: According to the records of the classics, the Jinbei Supervisor made twelve flutes by using the method of five voices and twelve rhythms to cycle.

古文：黄钟之笛，正声应黄钟，下徵应林钟，以姑洗为清角。
现代文：黄钟之笛，正声与黄钟相应，下徵与林钟相应，把姑洗作为清角。
English: In the flute of the yellow bell, the positive tone corresponds to the yellow bell, and the negative tone corresponds to the forest bell.

古文：大吕之笛，正声应大吕，下徵应夷则。
现代文：大吕之笛，正声与大吕相应，下徵与夷则相应。
English: In the flute of the Great Lynx, the positive tone corresponds to the Great Lynx, while the lower stroke corresponds to the 夷.

古文：以外诸均，例皆如是。然今所用林钟，是勖下徵之调。
现代文：其他各种音调，都像这样。然而，如今用的林钟，是荀勖的下徵调式。
English: All other tones are like this. However, today's forest bells are tuned in the descending mode of the gong.

古文：不取其正，先用其下，于理未通，故须改之。
现代文：不用其正，先用其下，于理不通，因此必须改正。 
English: Don't use it as a positive, use it as a negative first. It doesn't make sense, so it must be corrected.

古文：上甚善其议，诏弘与姚察、许善心、何妥、虞世基等正定新乐。
现代文：皇上认为牛弘的建议很好，诏令牛弘与姚察、许善心、何妥、虞世基等人订正确立新乐。
English: The emperor thought that Ushihiro's suggestion was good, and ordered Ushihiro to work with Yao Cha, Xu Zenshin, He Tuo, Yu Shiji and others to establish a new music.

古文：是后议置明堂，诏弘条上故事，议其得失。
现代文：之后，议论设置明堂，诏令牛弘条陈上代故事，论其得失。
English: Afterwards, there was a discussion on the merits and demerits of setting up a Ming-style hall and having Niu Hongzhi recite stories from the previous generation.

古文：上甚敬重之。
现代文：皇上非常敬重牛弘。
English: The Emperor has great respect for Ushihiro.

古文：时杨素恃才矜贵，贱侮朝臣，唯见弘未尝不改容自肃。
现代文：当时，杨素恃才矜持骄贵，轻贱侮辱朝中大臣，只有见到牛弘，未曾不改变面容，恭恭敬敬。
English: At that time, Yang Susun was the first to hold pride in high esteem and insult the ministers of the Middle Kingdom. Only when he saw Niu Hong did he not change his countenance and show respect.

古文：素将击突厥，诣太常与弘言别。
现代文：杨素将去征伐突厥，到太常府与牛弘话别。
English: Yang Su will go to conquer the Turks and say goodbye to Niu Hong at Tai Chang Fu.

古文：弘送素至中门而止，素谓曰： 大将出征，故来叙别，何相送之近也？ 
现代文：牛弘送杨素到中门就止步了，杨素对牛弘说： 我身为大将，出征突厥，所以特意来话别，为何送这么近？ 
English: When Niu Hong sent Yang Su to the middle gate, he stopped walking. Yang Su said to Niu Hong: I am a general and I am going to Turkey, so I specifically wanted to say goodbye. Why did you send me so close?

古文：弘遂揖而退。
现代文：牛弘就拜揖而退。
English: Ushihiro bowed and retreated.

古文：素笑曰： 奇章公可谓其智可及，其愚不可及也。 
现代文：杨素笑着说 ：奇章公真正可以说是其智可及，其愚不可及。 
English: Yang Su said with a smile: Qi Zhanggong can truly be said to be as smart as he is stupid.

古文：亦不以屑怀。
现代文：牛弘也不在意。
English: Ushihiro doesn't care either.

古文：寻授大将军，拜吏部尚书。
现代文：很快，授大将军之职，任吏部尚书。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of major general and appointed as the secretary of the General Staff.

古文：时帝又令弘与杨素、苏威、薛道衡、许善心、虞世基、崔子发等并召诸儒，论新礼降杀轻重。弘所立议，众咸推服之。
现代文：当时，文帝又令牛弘与杨素、苏威、薛道衡、许善心、虞世基、崔子发等人，一同召集众儒生，讨论新礼降杀轻重的问题，牛弘的议论，众人都很佩服。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen also ordered Niu Hong and Yang Su, Su Wei, Xue Daoheng, Xu Zenshin, Yu Shiji, Cui Zifa and others to convene all the Confucian students to discuss the issue of the importance of the New Rite. Everyone admired Niu Hong's discussion.

古文：及献皇后崩，王公已不下能定其仪注。
现代文：献皇后死，王公以下大臣不能确定用何礼仪制度。
English: After the death of the Empress Dowager, the ministers below Wang Gong could not determine what etiquette system to use.

古文：杨素谓弘曰： 公旧学时贤所仰。
现代文：杨素对牛弘说： 公学通古今，众贤敬仰。
English: Yang Su said to Niu Hong: Public school is ancient and modern, respected by all the sages.

古文：今日之事，决在于公。 
现代文：如今这件事情，就取决于您了。 
English: Now it's up to you.

古文：弘了不辞让，斯须之间，仪注悉备，皆有故实。
现代文：牛弘一点也不推让，不大一会儿，礼仪制度全部确定了，且都有过去的实例。
English: Ushihiro didn't budge at all, and before long, the entire etiquette system was established, complete with examples from the past.

古文：素叹曰： 衣冠礼乐尽在此矣，非吾所及也！ 
现代文：杨素感慨道： 衣冠礼乐都在这里了，不是我所能及的。 
English: Yang Su said with emotion, "The clothes, crowns, and music are all here. It's beyond my reach.

古文：弘以三年之丧。祥禫具有降杀，期服十一月而练者，无所象法，以闻于帝。
现代文：牛弘以为服丧三年，祥礻覃之祭的用具应减少，期服十一个月而服练，没有什么依据，就把这种想法上奏文帝。
English: Ushihiro thought that there was no basis for the idea that the mourning period should be three years, that the equipment for the Xiangqi Festival should be reduced, and that the period of mourning should be eleven months. He reported this idea to Emperor Wen.

古文：帝下诏除期练之礼，自弘始也。
现代文：文帝下诏除期练之礼，自牛弘开始。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict to cancel the period of training, starting with Ushihiro.

古文：弘在吏部，先德行后文才，务在审慎。
现代文：牛弘任吏部尚书，选拔人才先德行而后文才，十分审慎。
English: Ushihiro was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Education, and he was very prudent in selecting talents first for virtue and then for literature.

古文：虽致缓滞，所有进用，并多称职。
现代文：虽然选才有时迟缓，但所选用之人，大都称职。
English: Although the selection of talents is sometimes slow, most of the people selected are competent.

古文：吏部侍郎高孝基，鉴赏机晤，清慎绝伦，然爽俊有余，迹似轻薄，时宰多以此疑之。
现代文：吏部侍郎高孝基，识鉴快捷机敏，清正谨慎，无人可比，然而豪爽有余，显得有点轻薄，当时的宰相们多因此怀疑他是否胜任。
English: Gao Xiaoji, the head of the Ministry of Personnel, was quick and astute in discernment, upright and prudent, incomparable to anyone else, yet he was more than generous, and appeared to be a bit frivolous. Therefore, many of the prime ministers at the time doubted whether he was competent.

古文：唯弘深识其真，推心任委。
现代文：只有牛弘真正认识其人，真诚地委之以重任。
English: Only Ushihiro truly knows his people and sincerely entrusts them with important tasks.

古文：隋之选举，于斯为最，时论服弘识度之远。
现代文：隋朝的选举，这个时候最好，时论甚为佩服牛弘见识深远。
English: The election of the Sui Dynasty, this time is the best, the time is very admirable Niu Hong's far-sightedness.

古文：炀帝之在东宫，数有诗书遗弘，弘亦有答。
现代文：炀帝为东宫太子时，多次有诗书赠牛弘，牛弘也有答和。
English: When Emperor Shun was the crown prince of the Eastern Court, he gave Ushihiro poetry books many times, and Ushihiro also responded.

古文：及嗣位，尝赐弘诗曰： 晋家山吏部，魏代卢尚书，莫言先哲异，奇才并佐余。
现代文：炀帝继位，曾赐牛弘诗说 ：晋家山吏部，魏代卢尚书。莫言先哲异，奇才并佐余。
English: When Emperor Xizong succeeded to the throne, he once gave a poem to Niu Hongshi, saying: Jin Jia Shan Li Bu, Wei Dai Lu Shang Shu. Don't say you're a philosopher first, but you're still a genius.

古文：学行敦时俗，道素乃冲虚，纳言云阁上，礼仪皇运初。
现代文：学行敦时俗，道素乃冲虚。纳言云阁上，礼仪皇运初。
English: When one learns to behave in a dignified manner, one's moral standards are higher. When one's words are higher, one's etiquette is higher.

古文：彝伦欣有叙，垂拱事端居。 
现代文：彝伦欣有叙，垂拱事端居。 
English: Yulunxin has a story, and the hanging arch has a story.

古文：其同被赐诗者，至于文词赞扬，无如弘美。
现代文：一同得到赐诗的人，赞扬的文词，没有人能像牛弘这样，受到如此的赞美。
English: Together with the person who gave the poem, the words of praise, no one can receive such praise as Ushihiro.

古文：大业二年，进位上大将军。
现代文：大业二年，晋位上将军。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：三年，改右光禄大夫。
现代文：三年，改任右光禄大夫。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned to Uko Roku no daibu.

古文：从拜恆岳，坛墠珪币牲牢，并弘所定。
现代文：跟从炀帝拜南岳恒山，拜祭所需的物品，都是牛弘确定的。
English: Ushihiro determined all of the items needed to worship Nanyue Hengshan Mountain and attend the festival.

古文：还下太行山，炀帝尝召弘入内帐，对皇后赐以同席饮食。
现代文：还下太行山，炀帝曾召牛弘入内帐，当皇后之面赐同席饮食。
English: He also went to Taigang Mountain. Emperor Zhao once summoned Niu Hong to the inner account, and when the queen's face was given, they ate at the same table.

古文：其亲重如此。
现代文：其亲宠重用如此！
English: That's what happens when one's favorite pet is reused!

古文：弘谓其子曰： 吾受非常之遇，荷恩深重。
现代文：牛弘对他的儿子说 ：我受到非同寻常的礼遇，承恩深重。
English: Ushihiro said to his son, "I have been treated with extraordinary courtesy, and I am deeply grateful.

古文：汝等子孙，宜以诚敬自立，以答恩遇之隆。 
现代文：你们这些子孙，应该以诚敬自立，报答皇上丰隆的恩遇。 
English: You, the children and grandchildren, should be honest and self-reliant, and repay Emperor Honglong's kindness.

古文：六年，从幸江都，卒。
现代文：六年，跟随炀帝巡幸江都，死于途中。
English: In the sixth year, he followed Emperor Xizong on a tour of the Yangtze River, and died on the way.

古文：帝伤惜之，赗赠甚厚。
现代文：炀帝伤心痛惜，追赠非常丰厚。
English: Emperor Xuan was heartbroken and regretful, and the follow-up gift was very rich.

古文：归葬安定，赠开府仪同三司、光禄大夫、文安侯，谥曰宪。
现代文：归葬安定，追赠开府仪同三司、光禄大夫、文安侯，谥号为宪。
English: He was buried in a stable condition, and was posthumously awarded the Kaifu Rite, along with the titles of Sanji, Guanglu Daifu, and Wenan Hou. His posthumous name was Ken.

古文：弘荣宠当世，而车服卑俭，事上尽礼，待下以仁，讷于言而敏于行。
现代文：牛弘一世荣宠，但是车马服饰卑微节俭，事上尽礼，待下宽仁，说的少，做的多。
English: Ushihiro I was a favorite of the emperor, but he was modest and frugal in his horse and carriage attire, courteous in his dealings, generous in his hospitality, said little, and did much.

古文：上尝令宣敕，弘至阶下，不能言，退还拜谢，云并忘之。
现代文：皇上曾令他宣读敕书，牛弘到了台阶下，没有宣读，退回拜谢，说把敕书上的话都忘掉了。
English: The emperor had ordered him to read aloud the imperial edict. When Ushihiro reached the bottom of the steps, he did not read it aloud, but returned to bow and say that he had forgotten everything in the imperial edict.

古文：上曰： 传语小辩，故非宰臣任也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：宣旨之类的小事，本来就不是宰相们的事。 
English: The emperor said, "Minor matters such as the promulgation of edicts are not the business of prime ministers.

古文：愈称其质真。
现代文：更加赞扬牛弘诚厚耿直。
English: He praised Niu Hong Cheng Hou Geng Nao even more.

古文：大业之代，委遇弥隆。
现代文：炀帝的时候，委任恩遇更为丰隆。
English: In the time of Emperor Xuan, the appointment of favors was more prosperous.

古文：性宽厚，笃志干学，虽职务繁杂，书不释手。
现代文：牛弘性格宽厚，笃志好学，虽公务繁忙驳杂，而书却不离手。
English: Ushihiro has a generous personality and is eager to learn. Although he is busy with his official duties, he never lets go of his books.

古文：隋室旧臣，始终信任，悔吝不及，唯弘一人而已。
现代文：隋朝的旧臣，始终受到信任，而又没有悔恨的，只有牛弘一个人。
English: Niu Hong is the only one of the former ministers of the Sui Dynasty who has always been trusted and has no regrets.

古文：弟弼，好酒而酗，尝醉射杀弘驾车牛，弘还宅，其妻迎谓曰： 叔射杀牛。 
现代文：其弟牛弼，好酒而又酗酒，曾经醉酒射死了牛弘的驾车牛。牛弘回到家里，妻子迎上前说： 叔叔射死了牛。 
English: His younger brother, Niu Yao, a heavy drinker, once drunkenly shot Niu Hong's driving ox. When Niu Hong returned home, his wife greeted him and said, "Uncle shot the ox."

古文：弘闻，无所怪问，直答曰： 作脯。 
现代文：牛弘听到后，没作任何怪问，直接答道 ：作牛肉脯。 
English: When Ushihiro heard this, he didn't ask any strange questions and answered directly: "To make beef stew."

古文：坐定，其妻又曰： 叔忽射杀牛，大是异事。
现代文：坐下后，妻子又说： 叔叔忽然射死了牛，真是怪事。 
English: After sitting down, his wife said: "It's really strange that my uncle suddenly shot the cow.

古文：弘曰： 已知。 
现代文：牛弘说 ：已经知道了。 
English: Ushihiro said, "I already know."

古文：颜色自若，读书不辍。
现代文：神色自如，读书不止。
English: She looks at ease, reading more and more.

古文：李德林，字公辅，博陵安平人。
现代文：牛弘宽厚和气如此。有文集十二卷流行于世。李德林字公辅，博陵安平人。
English: Niu Hong is so generous and kind. There are twelve volumes of anthologies that are popular in the world. Li Delin is a public servant, and Boling is a peaceful person.

古文：祖寿，魏湖州户曹从事。父敬族，历太学博士、镇远将军。
现代文：祖父李寿，任魏湖州户曹从事，父敬族，历任太学博士、镇远将军。
English: His grandfather, Li Shou, served as Wei Huzhou Household Cao, and his father, Jing Zong, served as Taishu Doctor and Zhenyuan General.

古文：魏静帝时，命当世通人正定文籍，以为内校书，别在直阁省。
现代文：魏静帝时，命当世学问渊博之人订正文献图籍，任内校书，供职于直阁省。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Jing, he was appointed as a person of profound knowledge to revise documents and books, and served as a school book, and worked in Zhouguo Province.

古文：德林幼聪敏，年数岁，诵左思《蜀都赋》，十余日便度。
现代文：李德林自幼聪明机敏，年仅数岁，诵读左思《蜀都赋》，十多天就会背诵了。
English: Li Delin has been clever and astute since childhood. He is only a few years old. He can recite Zuo Si's "Shu Du Fu" for more than ten days.

古文：高隆之见而叹异之，遍告朝士云： 若假其年，必为天下伟器。 
现代文：高隆之见了，大为惊奇，告诉满朝文士说 ：待他长大后，肯定是天下了不起的人物。 
English: When Gao Long saw him, he was very surprised and told the scribe, "When he grows up, he will surely be a great man."

古文：鄴京人士多就宅观之，月余车马不绝。
现代文：邺京人士多到李德林家宅来看他，一个多月里，车马不绝。
English: Many people from Beijing came to Li Delin's home to see him. For more than a month, there was a constant stream of cars and horses.

古文：年十五，诵《五经》及古今文集，日数千言。
现代文：十五岁时，背诵《五经》和古今文集，每日几千字。
English: At the age of fifteen, he recited the "Five Classics" and the Collection of Ancient and Modern Literature, several thousand words a day.

古文：俄而该博坟典，阴阳纬候无不通涉。
现代文：很快就博览经史典籍，阴阳纬候之书亦是无不涉猎。
English: He soon became well-versed in the classics of history and literature, and also dabbled in books on yin and yang.

古文：善属文，词核而理暢。
现代文：很会写文章，文词核实，理义通畅。
English: Very good at writing articles, word verification, logical flow.

古文：魏收尝对高隆之谓其父曰： 贤子文笔，终当继温子升。 
现代文：魏收曾当着高隆之的面对李德林的父亲说： 你儿子的文章才华，终会继承温子升，成为文章大家。 
English: Wei Hui once said to Li Delin's father in front of Gao Longzhi: Your son's writing talent will eventually inherit Wen Zi Sheng and become everyone's writing.

古文：隆之大笑曰： 魏常侍殊己嫉贤，何不近比老彭，乃远求温子！ 
现代文：高隆之大笑道 ：魏常待这么妒嫉贤才，为何不近比老彭，却要远比温子升呢？ 
English: Gao Long laughed loudly, "Wei is often so jealous of geniuses, why is he not closer to Lao Peng, but far away from Wen Zi Sheng?"

古文：年十六，遭父艰，自驾灵舆，反葬故里。
现代文：李德林十六岁时死了父亲，自己驾着灵车，归葬家乡。
English: When Li Delin was sixteen, his father died and he drove the hearse to bury him in his hometown.

古文：时严寒，单缞跌足，州里人物由是敬慕之。
现代文：时值严冬，李德林穿着单薄的孝服，赤着脚，州里人们看到后，更加敬慕他。
English: It was a severe winter, and Li Delin was wearing a thin filial piety robe and bare feet. People in the prefecture admired him even more after seeing him.

古文：居贫感轲，母氏多疾，方留心典籍，无复宦情。
现代文：李德林贫穷坎坷，母亲多病，就居家读书，没有去做官的意思。
English: Li Delin was poor and bumpy, and his mother was often ill. He studied at home and had no intention of becoming an official.

古文：其后母病稍愈，逼令仕进。
现代文：后来，母亲的病稍稍好一些，就被逼令出去做官。
English: Later, when her mother's illness was a little better, she was forced to go out to work as an official.

古文：齐任城王湝为定州刺史，重其才，召入州馆，朝夕同游，殆均师友。
现代文：齐任城王高氵皆任定州刺史，看重他的才能，召入州馆，朝夕同游，像师生朋友一样。
English: Gao Wei, the reigning king of the city, was appointed as the history of Dingzhou, valued his talent, summoned to the state pavilion, and traveled together in the morning and evening, like a teacher and student friend.

古文：后举秀才，尚书令杨遵彦考为上第，授殿中将军。
现代文：后举秀才，尚书令杨遵彦考试定为优秀，授李德林殿中将军之职。
English: After the promotion of talents, Shang Shu ordered Yang Zunyan to pass the examination as excellent, and awarded Li Delin the post of junior general.

古文：及长广王作相，引为丞相府行参军。
现代文：长广王任丞相时，任命李德林为丞相府行参军。
English: When Changguang Wang served as chancellor, he appointed Li Delin as chancellor to join the army.

古文：未几，王即帝位，累迁中书舍人，加通直散骑侍郎，别典机密。
现代文：不久，长广王即皇帝位，李德林累迁中书舍人，加授通直散骑侍郎，另掌机密要务。
English: Soon, Changguang Wang became the emperor, Li Delin became the book keeper, Zhaozhuang Tongzhizan became the riding attendant, and he was also in charge of confidential affairs.

古文：寻丁母艰，以至孝闻，朝廷嘉之。
现代文：遭母丧，因十分孝顺而闻名，得到朝廷的嘉奖。
English: After his mother's death, he was known for his filial piety and received an award from the imperial court.

古文：裁百日，夺情起复，固辞不起。
现代文：守丧百日，朝廷强令复职，李德林坚辞不起。
English: After 100 days of mourning, the imperial court ordered the reinstatement of Li Delin. Li Delin refused to resign.

古文：魏收与阳休之论《齐书》起元事，百司会议。
现代文：魏收与阳休之讨论《齐书》起元之事，百司会同讨论。
English: Wei Hui and Yang Hui discuss the origin of "Qi Shu," and the Hundred Division will also discuss it.

古文：收与德林致书往复，词多不载。
现代文：魏收和李德林书信来往，商议此事，词多不载。
English: Wei Qi and Li Delin exchanged letters and discussed the matter.

古文：后除中书侍郎，仍诏修国史，时齐帝留情文雅，召入文林馆，与黄门侍郎颜之推同判文林馆事。
现代文：后任中书侍郎，仍诏令修撰国史。其时齐帝留意文章雅事，召李德林入文林馆，与黄门侍郎颜之推同判文林馆事。
English: Later, when he was the chief secretary, he still issued an imperial edict to revise the national history. At that time, Emperor Qi paid attention to the articles and elegant events, summoned Li Delin to enter the Wenlin Museum, and jointly decided the Wenlin Museum with Huangmen's secretary Yan.

古文：累迁仪同三司。
现代文：多次升迁至仪同三司。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the Third Division of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：周武帝平齐，遣使就宅宣旨云： 平齐之利，唯在于尔，宜入相见。 
现代文：周武帝平定齐国，派遣使者到李德林宅第宣读圣旨说： 平定齐国的用意，只在于你，应入京相见。 
English: Emperor Zhou sent an envoy to Li Delin's residence to read the sacred edict, saying, "The intention to pacify Qi is yours alone. You should go to Beijing to meet him."

古文：仍令从驾至长安，授内史上士，诏诰格式及用山东人物，一以委之。
现代文：就命令李德林跟随车驾到长安，授任内史上士，诏书诰命的格式和擢用山东人物一类的事情，都委托给李德林。
English: He ordered Li Delin to follow the car to Chang'an, and entrusted Li Delin with the appointment of the internal historian, the format of the imperial edict and the promotion of Shandong figures.

古文：周武谓群臣曰： 我常日唯闻李德林与齐朝作书檄，我正谓其是天上人。
现代文：周武帝对群臣说 ：我往日听说李德林为齐朝草撰书檄，我只说他是天上之人。
English: Zhou Wudi said to his courtiers, "I have heard in the past that Li Delin was the scribe of Qi Dynasty, but I only said that he was a heavenly person.

古文：岂言今日得其驱使，复为我作文书，极为大异。 
现代文：岂知今天为我所用，又替我作文书，大是奇异。 
English: Do you not know that this day you are a special people to me, and that you are my treasured possession?

古文：神武公纥豆陵毅答曰： 臣闻明主圣王，得骐驎凤皇为瑞，是圣德所感，非力能致之。
现代文：神武公纥豆陵毅回答说： 臣听说，圣明的君主得到麒麟凤凰这样的祥瑞之物，是圣德所感而致，不是人力能令他们来的。
English: Shenwu Gong Doudou Ling Yi replied, "Minister, I have heard that the emperors of the Holy Ming Dynasty obtained auspicious things such as the Kirin phoenix as a result of the feeling of holiness, not because of manpower.

古文：瑞物虽来，不堪使用。
现代文：祥瑞之物虽来，却是不能使用。
English: Even though the Shourai came, it couldn't be used.

古文：如李德林来受驱策，亦是陛下圣德感致，有大才用，胜于骐驎凤皇远矣。 
现代文：像李德林这样来受驱使，也是陛下圣德感化的结果，有大才使用，远胜于麒麟凤凰这些祥瑞。 
English: To be driven like Li Delin is also the result of the influence of His Majesty's virtue. It is far better to have a great talent to use than the auspiciousness of the Kirin phoenix.

古文：帝大笑曰： 诚如公言。 
现代文：武帝大笑道： 确实像你说的。 
English: Emperor Wu laughed loudly, "It is indeed as you said.

古文：宣政末，授御正下大夫。
现代文：宣政年末，授李德林御正下大夫之职。
English: At the end of the Xuan Zheng year, Li Delin was given the post of imperial doctor.

古文：后赐爵成安县男。
现代文：后又赠爵成安县男。
English: He was later given a knighthood as the man of Cheng'an County.

古文：宣帝大渐，隋文帝初受顾命，令邗国公杨惠谓德林曰： 朝廷赐令总文武事，今欲与公共成，必不得辞。 
现代文：宣帝病危，隋文帝初受天子遗诏，令邗国公杨惠对李德林说 ：朝廷赐命总揽文武之事，如今想和您共同理政，请您一定不要推辞。 
English: Emperor Xuan was critically ill, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty was the first to receive God's will, and Yang Hui, the Prince of the State of Sui, said to Li Delin, "The Imperial Court has given the order to recruit generals, and now I want to govern the country together with you. Please do not refuse."

古文：德林答曰： 愿以死奉公。 
现代文：德林答道 ：愿以死奉公。 
English: Delin replied, "I am willing to die in service."

古文：隋文大悦，即召与语。
现代文：隋文帝非常高兴，即召李德林叙话。
English: Sui Emperor Wen was very pleased and immediately summoned Li Delin to give a speech.

古文：刘昉、郑译初矫诏召隋文受命辅少主，总知内外兵马事。
现代文：刘窻、郑译当初假传圣旨，召隋文帝受命辅助少主，总管内外兵马事务。
English: Liu Bei and Zheng Zhan initially falsely transmitted the holy will, summoned the Sui Emperor, and was ordered to assist the young master and be in charge of internal and external military affairs.

古文：译欲授隋文冢宰，译自摄大司马，昉为小冢宰。
现代文：郑译想授隋文帝宰相之职，自摄大司马之职，刘窻任小冢宰。
English: Zheng Yi wanted to confer the post of prime minister to the Sui Emperor, the post of chief steward to the Emperor, and the post of minor steward to Liu Ye.

古文：德林私启： 宜作大丞相，假黄钺，都督内外诸军事。 
现代文：李德林私下告诉隋文帝说： 应任大丞相，假黄钺，都督内外诸军事。 
English: Li Delin privately told Emperor Sui Wen that: He should be appointed as the grand chancellor, the false Huang Di, and the military governor inside and outside the country.

古文：遂以译为相府长史。昉为相府司马，二人由是不平。
现代文：于是隋文帝就任命郑译为相府长史，刘窻为相府司马，二人因此愤愤不平。
English: As a result, Emperor Sui appointed Zheng Zhan as the prefect of the prefectural government and Liu Ye as the secretary of the prefectural government. As a result, the two were indignant.

古文：以德林为相府属，加仪同大将军。
现代文：任命李德林为相府属，加授仪同大将军。
English: Li Delin was appointed as a subordinate of the prefectural government, and was awarded the title of general.

古文：未几而三方构乱，指授兵略，皆与之参详。
现代文：不久，三方乱起，指挥调度兵马之事，隋文帝都是和李德林商议。
English: Soon, the three parties were in turmoil, and Sui Emperor Wen discussed the command and dispatch of soldiers and horses with Li Delin.

古文：军书羽檄，朝夕顿至，一日之中，动逾百数。
现代文：军书羽檄，早晚不断，一天之内，动辄超过百数。
English: More than a hundred military books were stolen in one day, morning and evening.

古文：或机速竞发，口授数人，文意百端，不加治点。
现代文：有时各种书檄急待发出，李德林就口授数人，头绪繁多，却用不着修改。
English: Sometimes all kinds of booklets are eagerly waiting to be issued, and Li Delin will dictate to several people. There are many clues, but there is no need to modify them.

古文：郧公韦孝宽为东道元帅，师次永桥，沁水长，孝宽师未得度。
现代文：郧公韦孝宽任东道元帅，大军到了永桥，沁水暴涨，孝宽的军队不能渡河。
English: When the great army arrived at Yongqiao, the water of the Yangtze River rose sharply, and the army of Xiaokang Wei could not cross the river.

古文：长史李询密启： 诸大将受尉迟迥饷金。 
现代文：长史李询秘密告诉隋文帝说 ：诸位大将都接受了尉迟迥的贿赂。 
English: The chief historian, Li Zhen, secretly told the Emperor Sui that all the generals had accepted the bribe from the lieutenant.

古文：隋文得启，以为忧，议欲代之。
现代文：隋文帝听说后，甚是忧虑，商议派人取代韦孝宽。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Sui Wen was very worried and discussed sending someone to replace Wei Xiaokuan.

古文：德林曰： 临敌代将，自古所难，乐毅所以辞燕，马服以之败赵也。
现代文：李德林说 ：临敌易将，自古以来都是件难事，乐毅就是因为临阵易将才离开了燕国，马服君也因临阵易将使赵国被打败。
English: Li Delin said: Since ancient times, it has been a difficult matter to defeat the enemy. Le Yi only left Yan Province because of the enemy's easy defeat. Ma Fu Jun will also cause Zhao Province to be defeated because of the enemy's easy defeat.

古文：公但以一腹心，明于智略，素为诸将所信伏者，速至军所，观其情伪。
现代文：您只要派一个明于智略又平素为诸将所信服的心腹之人，迅速赶到韦帅大军的驻地，观察一下真假虚实。
English: All you have to do is to send a confidant who understands the strategy and is usually convinced by the generals, quickly rush to the residence of Wei Shuai's army, and observe the truth and falsehood.

古文：纵有异意，必不敢动。 
现代文：诸将即使有其他想法，也必定不敢有什么举动。 
English: Even if the generals have other ideas, they will not dare to do anything.

古文：隋文曰： 公不发此言，几败大事！ 
现代文：隋文帝道 ：公不说这番话，几乎坏了大事！ 
English: Sui Wen Di said, "If the emperor doesn't say these words, it will almost ruin the big event!"

古文：即令高颎驰驿往军所，为诸将节度，竟成大功。
现代文：即令高赹迅速赶到大军驻地，节制调度诸将，终于大获成功。
English: Even though Gao Yao quickly rushed to the garrison of the great army and restrained the dispatch of the generals, he finally achieved great success.

古文：凡厥谋谟，皆此类也。
现代文：李德林所献的谋略，都是这一类的。
English: The strategies presented by Li Delin are all of this type.

古文：进授丞相府从事内郎。
现代文：晋升为丞相府从事内郎。
English: He was promoted to chancellor's office to work as a retainer.

古文：禅代之际，其相国总百揆、九锡殊礼诏策笺表玺书，皆德林之辞也。
现代文：隋文帝禅代之际，其总百揆、九锡殊礼诏策笺表玺书等，皆出自李德林之手。
English: At the time of the Zen Dynasty of the Sui and Wen dynasties, Li Delin was responsible for the total of one hundred sutras and nine sets of sutras.

古文：隋文癸祚之日，授内史令。
现代文：隋文帝即位那天，任命李德林为内史令。
English: On the day of the enthronement of Emperor Sui Wen, Li Delin was appointed as the Inner Historian.

古文：初，将受禅，虞庆则等劝隋文尽灭宇文氏，德林固争以为不可。
现代文：当初，文帝将要禅代时，虞庆则等人劝隋文帝杀尽宇文氏，李德林坚决争辩，认为不可那样做。
English: At first, when Emperor Wen was about to enter the Zen Dynasty, Yu Qingzhe and others urged Emperor Wen to kill all of the Uwen clan. Li Delin firmly argued that this should not be done.

古文：隋文怒，由是品位不加，唯依班例，授上仪同，进爵为子。
现代文：隋文帝恼怒李德林，因此不给他加官晋爵，只是按朝班旧例，授职上仪同，晋爵位为子。
English: Emperor Sui Wen was angry with Li Delin, so he did not give him the title of knight, but according to the old practice of the imperial court, he was given the same title and the title of knight as his son.

古文：开皇元年，敕令与太尉于翼、高颎等同修律令。
现代文：开皇元年，敕令李德林与太尉于翼、高赹等人同修律令。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Li Delin was ordered by the Emperor to revise the code of laws together with Taifu Yu Tsubasa, Gao Wei and others.

古文：讫，奏闻，别赐骏马及九环金带。
现代文：律令修讫，奏闻文帝，特赐骏马和九环金带。
English: The imperial edict was issued to amend the imperial edict, the imperial edict was delivered to Emperor Wen, and the imperial horse and the nine-ring gold belt were specially bestowed.

古文：五年，敕令撰录作相时文翰，勒成五卷，谓之《霸朝杂集》。
现代文：五年，敕令李德林撰写隋文为丞相时的文章，刻成五卷，取名为《霸朝杂集》。
English: In the fifth year, the emperor ordered Li Delin to write Sui Wen's article when he was the prime minister, engraved into five volumes, and named it "Heavy-handed Collection."

古文：隋文省读讫，明旦谓德林曰： 自古帝王之兴，必有异人辅佐。
现代文：隋文帝阅读过之后，次日天明对李德林说： 自古以来，帝王之兴必定有异人辅佐。
English: After Emperor Sui Wen read it, the next day Tianming said to Li Delin: Since ancient times, the emperor's prosperity must be assisted by others.

古文：我昨读《霸朝集》，方知感应之理。
现代文：我昨天读《霸朝集》，才知道天人感应的道理。
English: I read "The Hegemon of the Morning" yesterday, and only then did I know the truth of divine inspiration.

古文：昨宵恨夜长，不得早见公面。 
现代文：昨天夜晚只恨夜太长，不能早一点与公相见。 
English: Yesterday, I hated the night because it was too long and I couldn't meet my husband earlier.

古文：于是追赠其父定州刺史、安平县公，谥曰孝。
现代文：于是追赠李德林父为定州刺史、安平县公，谥号为孝。
English: As a result, Li Delin's father was posthumously awarded the titles of Dingzhou Shishi and Anping County official, and his posthumous name was Xiao.

古文：隋文后幸鄴，德林以疾不从。
现代文：隋文帝后临幸邺城，李德林因病没有跟随而去。
English: After the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty came to Shuncheng, but Li Delin did not accompany him due to illness.

古文：敕书追之，后御笔注云： 伐陈事意，宜自随也。 
现代文：敕令随后跟上，后面御笔注道： 征伐陈国之事，意欲相商，应随后而至。 
English: The imperial edict then followed, followed by a handwritten note: If you want to discuss the matter of conquering Chen Province, you should come later.

古文：时高颎入京，上语颎曰： 德林若患未堪行，宜自至宅，取其方略。 
现代文：这时，高赹回京师，文帝告诉高赹说： 李德林若病重不能远行，应该亲自到宅第，听取他的方略。 
English: At this time, Gao Wei returned to Beijing to teach, and Emperor Wen told Gao Wei: If Li Delin is seriously ill and cannot travel far, you should personally go to his home and listen to his strategy.

古文：帝以之付晋王广。
现代文：文帝把李德林的献策交给了晋王杨广。
English: Emperor Wen passed Li Delin's suggestion to King Yang Guang of Jin.

古文：初，大象末，文帝以逆人王谦宅赐之，寻又改赐崔谦，帝令德林自选一好宅并庄店作替。
现代文：当初，周静王大象年末，隋文帝把叛乱之人王谦的宅第赐给李德林，很快又改赐给崔谦，文帝令李德林自选一处好宅院和庄舍来替代。
English: At first, at the end of the Zhou Jing Wang elephant year, the Sui Emperor gave the house of the rebel Wang Qian to Li Delin, and soon it was given to Cui Qian. Emperor Wen ordered Li Delin to choose a good mansion and farmhouse to replace it.

古文：德林乃奏取逆人高阿那卫国县市店八十区为替。
现代文：李德林就奏请用叛逆者高阿那肱卫国县市店八十区来代替。
English: Please replace Li Delin's rendition with that of the renegade Gao Ananzhong from the 80th district of Shidian, Weiguo County.

古文：九年，车驾幸晋阳，店人表诉，称地是平人物，高氏强夺，于内造舍。
现代文：九年，文帝车驾到晋阳，市店的人上表申诉，说那片地是平民百姓的，高氏强行夺取，在里面建造房舍。
English: In the ninth year, when Wen Di's car drove to Jinyang, the people of the city store went to the table to complain, saying that the land belonged to the common people, and Gao forcibly seized it and built houses in it.

古文：上责德林。
现代文：文帝责怪李德林。
English: Wen Di blamed Li Delin.

古文：德林请勘逆人文簿及本换宅之意，上不听，悉追店给所住者。
现代文：李德林请求勘问叛乱者的文簿和当初换宅第的用意，文帝不理睬，把那些店房都追回来交给最初住在那里的人。
English: Emperor Wen ignored Li Delin's request to inquire about the rebel's books and the original intention to move to another place, and recovered those stores and handed them over to the people who originally lived there.

古文：由是嫌之。
现代文：文帝因此嫌弃李德林。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen disliked Li Delin.

古文：初，德林称其父为太尉谘议，以取赠官，李元操等阴奏之曰： 德林父终于校书，妄称谘议。 
现代文：早先，李德林说他的父亲是太尉咨议，以博取赠官，李元操等人私下上奏说： 德林的父亲官终校书，却假说是咨议。 
English: Earlier, Li Delin said that his father was the first lieutenant of the consultation, to obtain gifts from officials, Li Yuanchao and others privately reported: Delin's father's official final school book, but if it is a consultation.

古文：上甚衔之。
现代文：文帝因此非常忌恨李德林。
English: For this reason, Emperor Wen hated Li Delin very much.

古文：至是，复庭议忤意，因数之曰： 公为内史，典朕机密，比不预计议者，以公不弘耳。
现代文：到了这个地步，又庭议时违忤文帝的意思，文帝因此责怪他说 ：公为内史，主管朕的机密，近来那些不参与计议的人，都认为公不够大度。
English: At this point, the court deliberation was contrary to the intention of Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen therefore blamed him saying: "The public is the internal history, in charge of my secrets. Recently, those who do not participate in the deliberation think that the public is not big enough."

古文：朕方以孝理天下，故立五教以弘之。
现代文：朕方用孝治理天下，故立五教来弘扬孝义。
English: We govern the world with filial piety, and have established the Five Precepts to promote filial piety.

古文：公言孝由天性，何须设教。
现代文：公却说孝出自天性，不必设教。
English: Publicly, however, they say that filial piety comes from nature and does not need to be taught.

古文：然则孔子孙当说《孝经》也？
现代文：如果这样的话，孔子就不应解说《孝经》了？
English: If this is the case, shouldn't Confucius have explained the Filial Piety Sutra?

古文：又罔冒取店，妄加父官，朕实忿之而未能发。
现代文：公又妄取平民之店，妄加父亲之官，朕实在很愤慨，但又没有说出来。
English: I was really indignant, but I didn't say anything.

古文：今当以一州相遣耳。 
现代文：如今给你一个州官去做吧！ 
English: Now give you a state official to do it!

古文：因出为湖州刺史。
现代文：于是，李德林被贬出京城，出任湖州刺史。
English: As a result, Li Delin was banished from Beijing and appointed as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：在州逢旱，课人掘井溉田，为考司所贬。
现代文：在湖州时逢大旱，抽人头税用来挖井浇田，遭到考司的贬斥。
English: In Huzhou, when there was a big drought, the head tax was used to dig wells and water fields, which was criticized by the examiners.

古文：岁余，卒官，时年六十一。
现代文：过了一年多，死于官任，时年六十一岁。
English: More than a year later, he died in office at the age of sixty-one.

古文：赠大将军、廉州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：追赠将军、廉州刺史，谥号为文。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of general, and was nicknamed "Lianzhou Jishi" (廉州刺史).

古文：将葬，敕令羽林百人，并鼓吹一部，以给丧事，祭以太牢。
现代文：将要安葬的时候，敕令羽林军一百人，鼓吹一部，以供丧事之用，以太牢之礼祭之。
English: When a person is to be buried, the emperor orders a hundred soldiers of the Ulin army to go and preach a part of it, to be used for the funeral rites, the ceremonial offering of the ethereal deity.

古文：德林美容仪，善谈吐，器量沈深，时人未能测。
现代文：李德林容貌俊美，谈吐不凡，器量深沉，当时的人都不能测度。
English: Li Delin's appearance was handsome, his conversation was extraordinary, and his ability was profound. People at that time could not measure him.

古文：齐任城王湝、赵彦深、魏收、陆仰大相钦重。
现代文：齐任城王高氵皆、赵彦深、魏收、陆瞫等人对李德林十分钦敬。
English: Gao Jian, Zhao Yanshen, Wei Jie and Lu Yao, all of whom were appointed as the king of the city, had great respect for Li Delin.

古文：德林少孤，未有字，魏收谓之曰： 识度天才，必至公辅，吾辄以此字卿。 
现代文：李德林自幼丧父，有名无字，魏收对他说： 卿识度不同凡响，日后必至公辅之位，我就取公辅二字作为卿的字吧。 
English: Li Delin lost his father when he was very young. He was famous but did not have a title. Wei Jie said to him, "Sir, your literacy is extraordinary. In the future, you will be promoted to the position of public assistant. I will take the title of public assistant as the title of sir."

古文：从宦已后，即典机密，性慎密，尝言古人不言温树，何足称也。
现代文：进入仕途之后，就掌管机密要务，生性细致审慎。李德林曾经对人说过，古人为保守宫廷机密，不言温树，没有什么可称赞的。
English: After entering his career, he was in charge of confidential affairs and was meticulous and prudent by nature. Li Delin once told people that the ancients kept palace secrets, not to mention Wen Shu, there is nothing to praise.

古文：少以才学见知，及位望稍高，颇伤自任，争竞之徒，更相谮毁。
现代文：少年时就因才学出众广为人知，到有了一定的官位名望之后，就显得有些自负了，争竞钻营之徒，借机大肆谗谄诋毁。
English: When he was a boy, he was widely known for his ability to learn, and after he had a certain official position and fame, he appeared to be a bit conceited, competing with others, and taking the opportunity to slander.

古文：所以运属兴王，功参佐命，十余年间竟不徙级。
现代文：因此，虽然生逢王者之兴，功劳可与佐命大臣相比，但十多年间，竟然没有得到提升。
English: Therefore, although he was born with a king's favor, and his merit can be compared to that of the Minister of State, he has not been promoted for more than ten years.

古文：所撰文集，勒成八十卷，遭乱亡失，见五十卷行于代。
现代文：撰写的文集，刻为八十卷，因遭战乱散失许多，仅有五十卷流传于世。
English: He wrote a collection of eighty volumes, many of which were lost during the war, of which only fifty have survived.

