古文：琮字温文，性宽仁，有大度，倜傥不羁，博学有文义。
现代文：萧琮字温文，生性宽仁，待人大度，风流倜傥，放荡不羁，学识渊博。
English: Xiao Yao was mild-mannered, generous by nature, generous in his treatment of others, amorous, debauched, and well-read.

古文：兼善弓马，遣人伏地著帖，琮驰马射之，十发十中，持帖者亦不惧。
现代文：又善骑马又会射箭，令人伏在地上举起贴子，萧琮飞马而射，能十发十中，举贴的人也不害怕。
English: He is also good at riding a horse and can shoot arrows. He can make people lie down on the ground and hold up a stick. Xiao Yao can fly a horse and shoot. He can shoot ten times out of ten, and the person holding the stick is not afraid.

古文：初封东阳王，寻立为梁太子。
现代文：萧琮起初被封为东阳王，不久立为梁国太子。
English: At first, Xiao Wei was named the King of Dongyang, and soon he became the Crown Prince of Liang Province.

古文：及嗣位，上赐玺书曰： 负荷堂构，其事甚重，虽穷忧劳，常须自力。
现代文：到继承帝位时，隋文帝给萧琮玺书说： 你承担着栋梁之任，事关重大，虽然忧劳，也必须自我努力。
English: When it came to inheriting the imperial throne, Emperor Sui Wen said to Xiao Yuanshu: You bear the responsibility of the pillar, the matter is very important, although it is troublesome, you must also work hard.

古文：辑谐内外，亲任才良，聿遵世业，是所望也。
现代文：应内外和睦，亲近任用德才兼备之人，继承祖业，这就是我对你寄予的希望。
English: This is my hope for you, that you should maintain harmony at home and abroad, be close to and appoint people who are both virtuous and talented, and carry on the ancestral tradition.

古文：彼之疆守，咫尺陈人，水潦之时，特宜警备。
现代文：你的疆域，与陈国离得很近，水涨之时，应该特别警备。
English: Your territory is very close to Chen Guo. When the water rises, you should be particularly vigilant.

古文：陈氏比日虽复朝聘相寻，疆埸之间犹未清肃，唯当恃我必不可干，勿得轻人而不设备。
现代文：陈人虽然连日反复派使节来我朝问候，但疆场之间还没有清平安宁，只是因为我朝的缘故陈人还不敢冒犯你们，但你们也不要小看他们而不设防备。
English: Although the Chen people have repeatedly sent envoys to me to greet me, there is still no peace and tranquility between the battlefields. It is only because of me that the Chen people do not dare to offend you, but you should not underestimate them without being prepared.

古文：朕与梁国，积世相知，重以亲姻，情义弥厚。
现代文：我和你们梁国几代相好，加上姻亲，情义更加深厚。
English: I have been friends with you for several generations in Liangguo, and with the addition of in-laws, our feelings are even deeper.

古文：江陵之地，朝寄非轻，为国为民，深宜抑割，恆加饘粥，以礼自存。 
现代文：江陵那个地方，朝庭对它寄予了很大的希望，为国为民，对自己要多限制，对百姓多施恩惠，以礼治国安邦。 
English: In that place of Gangneung, the imperial court pinned great hopes on it. For the sake of the country and the people, they should impose more restrictions on themselves, do more favors to the people, and govern the country with courtesy.

古文：又赐梁之大臣玺书，诚勉之。
现代文：又赐给梁国大臣玺书，告诫并勉励他们。
English: He also gave an imperial edict to Minister Liang to admonish and encourage them.

古文：时琮年号广运，有识者曰： 运之为字，军走也，吾君将奔走乎？ 
现代文：当时萧琮的年号是 广运 ，有见识的人说： 运字从军从走，我们的国君将逃走吗？ 
English: At that time, Xiao Yao's era name was Guangyun, and people with insight said: If the word "yun" means "join the army" and "go," will our sovereign escape?

古文：其年，琮遣大将军戚昕以舟师袭陈公安，不克而还。
现代文：这年，萧琮派遣大将军戚昕率领水军偷袭陈国的公安，没有攻下而归。
English: In this year, Xiao Yu sent the great general Qi Yu to lead the navy to attack the public security of Chen Guo, but he did not attack and returned.

古文：征琮叔父岑入朝，拜为大将军，封怀义公，因留不遣。
现代文：文帝征召萧琮叔父萧岑入朝，拜为大将军，封怀义公，于是留在京都不放回。
English: Emperor Wen conscripted Xiao Yu's uncle Xiao Yu into the imperial court, worshipped him as a great general, and bestowed him with the title of the Prince of Righteousness, so he stayed in Kyoto and did not return.

古文：复置江陵总管以监之。
现代文：又设置江陵总管以便监视。
English: It also set up the Gangneung head office for monitoring.

古文：琮所署大将军许世武密以城召陈将宜黄侯陈纪，谋泄，琮诛之。
现代文：萧琮所任命大将军许世武秘密以城池联合陈将宜黄侯陈纪，事情泄露后，萧琮杀掉了许世武。
English: General Xu Shibu, who was appointed by Xiao Yu, secretly allied himself with Chen general Yi Huanghou and Chen Ji. After the affair was leaked, Xiao Yu killed Xu Shibu.

古文：后二岁，上征琮入朝，率其臣下二百余人朝于京师，江陵父老莫不陨涕相谓曰： 吾君其不反矣！ 
现代文：后二年，文帝召萧琮上朝，萧琮率大臣二百多人到京师朝见，江陵父老百姓没有不流泪的，他们说： 我们的国君将不会回来了！ 
English: Two years later, Emperor Wen summoned Xiao Qi to the imperial court. Xiao Qi led more than 200 ministers to meet the emperor in Beijing. The people of Jiangling were moved to tears. They said, "Our sovereign will not return!"

古文：上以琮来朝，遣武乡公崔弘度将兵戍之。军至鄀州，琮叔父岩及弟瓛等惧弘度掩袭之，遂引陈人至城下，虏居民而叛，于是废梁国。
现代文：文帝因萧琮等来朝，派武乡公崔弘度带兵戍守江陵，军队到若阝州，萧琮叔父萧严和萧琮弟弟萧等害怕崔弘度袭击，于是引陈国兵马到城下，掳走居民而反叛。
English: Because of Xiao Hongdu and others coming to the DPRK, Emperor Wen sent the military commander Cui Hongdu to guard Jiangling with soldiers, and the army went to Ruoqian. Xiao Hongdu's uncle Xiao Yan and Xiao Hongdu's brother Xiao were afraid of Cui Hongdu's attack, so they led the soldiers and horses of Chen to the city, took away the residents and rebelled.

古文：上遣左仆射高颎安集之，曲赦江陵死罪，给民复十年。
现代文：文帝于是废掉了梁国，派遣左仆射高赹安抚百姓，赦免江陵臣民死罪，又减免梁国老百姓十年赋税。
English: Emperor Wen then abolished Liang Province, sent his left-hand man Gao Jiao to pacify the people, pardoned the Jiangling subjects for the death penalty, and reduced and exempted the common people of Liang Province from paying taxes for ten years.

古文：梁二主各给守墓十户。
现代文：并为已故的梁国的二个国君，各派十户人家为他们守墓。
English: And for the two late sovereigns of Liang, ten families were sent to guard their tombs.

古文：拜琮为柱国，赐爵莒国公。
现代文：拜萧琮为上柱国，封为莒国公。
English: Bai Xiaohui was the upper pillar state, and was given the title of Duke of Xing.

古文：炀帝嗣位，以皇后之故，甚见亲重。
现代文：炀帝即位，因萧皇后的缘故，萧琮很受炀帝亲近器重。
English: Emperor Gong ascended to the throne, and because of Empress Xiao, Emperor Xiao was very fond of Emperor Gong.

古文：拜内史令，改封梁公。
现代文：拜为内史令，后改封为梁公。
English: He was given the title of Inner Historian and later changed his title to Liang Gong.

古文：琮之宗族，缌麻以上，并随才擢用，于是诸萧昆弟布列朝廷。
现代文：萧琮的同高祖的家族，一并根据才华录用，于是萧家众多兄弟都在朝庭里做官。
English: Xiao Yao's family, the same as Gao Zu's family, were all hired according to their talents, so many brothers of the Xiao family worked as officials in the imperial court.

古文：琮性淡雅，不以职务自婴，退朝纵酒而已。
现代文：萧琮性情淡泊高雅，不认真处理政务，退朝后只是放纵饮酒罢了。
English: Xiao Wei's temperament was light and elegant, he did not seriously deal with government affairs, and he only indulged in drinking after he retired.

古文：内史令杨约与琮同列，帝令约宣旨诫励，约复以私情喻之。
现代文：内史令杨约与萧琮同居朝班，炀帝令杨约向萧琮转达自己告诫勉励的意思，杨约又以私人感情告诉萧琮。
English: According to the internal history, Yang Jiao and Xiao Yao lived together in the morning shift. Emperor Qian ordered Yang Jiao to convey his admonition and encouragement to Xiao Yao, and Yang Jiao told Xiao Yao with personal feelings.

古文：琮答曰： 琮若复事事，则何异于公哉！ 
现代文：萧琮说： 我如果像以前那样管事，和你还有什么区别呢？ 
English: Xiao Yao said, "If I manage things as I did before, what is the difference between you and me?

古文：约笑而退。
现代文：杨约笑着退出。
English: Yang You laughs and leaves.

古文：约兄素，时为尚书令，见琮嫁从父妹于钳耳氏，因谓琮曰： 公，帝王之族，望高戚美，何乃适妹钳耳氏乎？ 
现代文：杨约的兄长杨素，当时是尚书令，见萧琮把堂妹嫁给钳耳氏，于是对萧琮说： 你是帝王之族，族望名美，为什么嫁堂妹给钳耳氏？ 
English: Yang Yo's elder brother Yang Su, who was a courtier at the time, saw Xiao Yao marrying his cousin to a member of the Xi'er clan, so he said to Xiao Yao: You are a member of the imperial family, and your family is famous for its beauty. Why did you marry your cousin to a member of the Xi'er clan?

古文：琮曰： 前已嫁妹于侯莫陈氏，此复何疑！ 
现代文：萧琮回答说： 先前已经把妹子嫁给侯莫陈氏，这还有什么疑问！ 
English: Xiao Yao replied, "I have already married my younger sister to Hou Mo Chen, so there is no doubt about it!

古文：素曰： 钳耳，羌也，侯莫陈，虏也，何得相比！ 
现代文：杨素说： 钳耳是羌族人，侯莫陈氏是胡虏，怎么能相比！ 
English: Yang Su said, "Wei Er is a member of the Yi people, Hou Mo Chen is a member of the Huru people, how can they be compared!

古文：素意以虏优羌劣。
现代文：杨素认为胡虏优而羌人劣。
English: Yang Su believed that Hu Rui was superior and Yan Ren was inferior.

古文：琮曰： 以羌异虏，未之前闻。 
现代文：萧琮说： 认为羌人与胡虏有什么不同，先前没有听说过这话。 
English: Xiao Yao said, "I thought that there was no difference between the Xiong people and the Huru people. I had never heard of this before.

古文：素惭而止。
现代文：杨素惭愧得无话可说。
English: Yang Su was too ashamed to say anything.

古文：琮虽羁旅，见北间豪贵，无所降下。
现代文：萧琮虽客居长安，但与北方的富贵之家相比，也没有不如的地方。
English: Although Xiao Yao is a guest in Chang'an, there is no place that is inferior to the rich home in the north.

古文：尝与贺若弼深相友善，弼既被诛，复有童谣曰： 萧萧亦复起。 
现代文：萧琮曾和贺若弼交情很深，贺若弼因事被杀后，民间有童谣说： 萧梁家又要兴盛了。 
English: Xiao Liang had a deep friendship with He Ruoqun. After He Ruoqun was killed, there was a folk nursery rhyme that said: Xiao Liang's family will prosper again.

古文：帝由是忌之，遂废于家，未几而卒。
现代文：炀帝由此忌恨他，于是废掉萧琮而为庶民，不久萧琮去世。
English: Emperor Xuan was suspicious of him, so he dismissed him and sent him home, where he died soon after.

古文：赠左光禄大夫。
现代文：炀帝追赠他为左光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Qian posthumously bestowed upon him the title of Doctor of the Left Hand.

