古文：黄帝问于伯高曰：《脉度》言经脉之长短，何以立之？
现代文：黄帝问伯高说：《脉度》篇中所说的人体经脉的长短，是依照什么标准确定的呢？
English: Huang Di asked Bo Gao: "According to what standard is the length of the human body's meridians determined?"

古文：伯高曰：先度其骨节之大小、广狭、长短，而脉度定矣。
现代文：伯高回答说：先量出各骨节的大小、宽窄、长短，然后用这个标准来确定脉的长度。
English: He replied: First, measure the size, width, and length of each bone joint, and then use this standard to determine the length of the pulse.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻众人之度。人长七尺五寸者，其骨节之大小长短各几何？
现代文：黄帝说：我想了解普通人骨度的情况，如果人的身高为七尺五寸，全身骨节的大小、长短是多少呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I would like to know the average person's bone density. If a person's height is seven feet and five inches, what is the size and length of the body's bones?

古文：伯高曰：头之大骨围二尺六寸，胸围四尺五寸，腰围四尺二寸。
现代文：伯高说：头围最大处是二尺六寸，胸围是四尺五寸，腰围是四尺二寸。
English: The largest part of the head circumference is two feet and six inches, the chest circumference is four feet and five inches, and the waist circumference is four feet and two inches.

古文：发所覆者，颅至项尺二寸。发以下至颐，长一尺。
现代文：头发覆盖的部分称为颅，从前发际到后发际，整个头颅是一尺二寸；从前发际至腮的下部是一尺。
English: The part covered by hair is called the cranium. From the anterior hairline to the posterior hairline, the entire cranium is one foot two inches; from the anterior hairline to the lower part of the skull is one foot.

古文：君子终折。结喉以下至缺盆中，长四寸。
现代文：五官端正的人，面部上、中、下三部分的长度相等。
English: People with perfect facial features have the upper, middle and lower three parts of the face of equal length.

古文：缺盆以下至𩩲骬，长九寸，过则肺大，不满则肺小。
现代文：从喉头隆起下至缺盆中间长四寸，从缺盆到胸骨剑突长九寸，如果超过九寸，则肺脏大，不足九寸则肺脏小。
English: From the laryngeal ridge down to the middle of the isthmus is four inches long, from the isthmus to the sternum is nine inches long, if more than nine inches, the lungs are large, less than nine inches, the lungs are small.

古文：𩩲骬以下至天枢，长八寸，过则胃大，不及则胃小。
现代文：从胸骨剑突至天枢穴之间八寸，超过八寸的胃大，不足八寸的胃小。
English: From the sternum to the carpal tunnel is eight inches, more than eight inches of the stomach is large, less than eight inches of the stomach is small.

古文：天枢以下至横骨，长六寸半，过则回肠广长，不满则狭短。
现代文：从天枢穴至耻骨长六寸半，超过的大肠粗而长，不足的大肠细而短。
English: From the celestial pivotal point to the pubic bone, it is six and a half inches long. The large intestine that exceeds it is thick and long, while the small intestine that falls short is thin and short.

古文：横骨长六寸半。横骨上廉以下至内辅之上廉，长一尺八寸。内辅之上廉以下至下廉，长三寸半。内辅下廉，下至内踝，长一尺三寸。内踝以下至地，长三寸。
现代文：耻骨的长度是六寸半，从耻骨上缘到股骨内侧下缘长一尺八寸，胫骨突起上缘至下缘长三寸半，胫骨突起的下缘到足内踝长一尺三寸，从内踝至地长三寸。
English: The length of the pubic bone is six and a half inches, from the upper edge of the pubic bone to the medial lower edge of the femur is one and a half feet long, the tibia protruding from the upper edge to the lower edge is three and a half inches long, the tibia protruding from the lower edge to the inner ankle is one and a half feet long, and from the inner ankle to the ground is three inches long.

古文：季胁以下至髀枢，长六寸。髀枢以下至膝中，长一尺九寸。膝以下至外踝，长一尺六寸。外踝以下至京骨，长三寸。京骨以下至地，长一寸。
现代文：从额角至锁骨长一尺，从颈根下至腋窝长四寸，从腋窝至季胁长一尺二寸，从季胁至跨关节长六寸，从跨关节至膝长一尺九，膝至外踝长一尺六寸，从外踝至京骨的突起处长三寸，从京骨的突起至地长一寸。
English: From the corner of the forehead to the clavicle is one foot long, from the base of the neck to the armpit is four inches long, from the armpit to the coccyx is one foot two inches long, from the coccyx to the straddle joint is six inches long, from the straddle joint to the knee is one foot nine, from the knee to the outer ankle is one foot six inches long, from the outer ankle to the protrusion of the radius is three inches long, and from the protrusion of the radius to the base is one inch long.

古文：耳后当完骨者，广九寸。耳前当耳门者，广一尺三寸。两颧之间，相去七寸。两乳之间，广九寸半。两髀之间，广六寸半。
现代文：耳后两高骨之间长九寸，耳前的两耳门之间长一尺三寸，两颧之间距离七寸，两乳之间宽九寸半，两股骨之间距离六寸半。
English: Nine inches between the two high bones behind the ear, one foot and three inches between the two ears in front of the ear, seven inches between the cheeks, nine and a half inches between the breasts, and six and a half inches between the two femurs.

古文：足长一尺二寸，广四寸半。
现代文：足的长度是一尺二寸，宽四寸半。
English: The length of the foot is one foot two inches and the width is four and a half inches.

古文：肩至肘，长一尺七寸。肘至腕，长一尺二寸半。腕至中指本节，长四寸。本节至其末，长四寸半。
现代文：肩至肘长一尺七寸，肘至腕长一尺二寸半，手腕至中指末节根部长四寸，中指末节根部至手指尖长四寸半。
English: The length from the shoulder to the elbow is one foot seven inches, from the elbow to the wrist is one foot two and a half inches, from the wrist to the end of the middle finger is four inches, and from the end of the middle finger to the tip of the finger is four and a half inches.

古文：项发以下至背骨，长二寸半。膂骨以下至尾骶，二十一节，长三尺，上节长一寸四分分之一，奇分在下，故上七节至于膂骨，九寸八分分之七。
现代文：从项部后发际至第一椎骨长三寸半，从第一椎骨到尾骶骨共二十一椎，总长度是三尺，上七椎每节长一寸四分一厘，共长九寸八分七厘，其余的不尽之数都在以下诸节平均计算。
English: From the occipital hairline to the first vertebrae is three and a half inches long, from the first vertebra to the coccyx is a total of twenty-one vertebrae, the total length is three feet, the upper seven vertebrae are one inch and a quarter and one percent each, a total of nine inches and a quarter and seven percent, and the remaining numbers are averaged over the following sections.

古文：此众人骨之度也，所以立经脉之长短也。
现代文：这就是普通人的骨度情况，可以用这个标准确定经脉的长度。
English: This is the bone density of an ordinary person, and the length of the meridians can be determined using this standard.

古文：是故视其经脉之在于身也，其见浮而坚，其见明而大者，多血；细而沉者，多气也。
现代文：在观察人体经脉的时候，如果呈现于体表浮浅坚实或明显粗大的，是多血的经脉；细而深伏的，是多气的经脉。
English: When observing the meridians of the human body, if they appear on the surface of the body as shallow, firm or obviously coarse, they are blood-rich meridians; if they are thin and deep, they are gaseous meridians.

