古文：沭水出琅邪东莞县西北山，大弁山与小泰山连麓而异名也。引控众流，积以成川。
现代文：沐水发源于琅邪郡东莞县西北的山中，大弃山与小泰山山麓相连而山名不同，山间许多小涧汇集起来，成为一条川流，往东南流经邢乡南面。
English: The muddy water originates from the mountains in the northwest of Dongguan County, Yuya County. The Great Abandoned Mountain is connected to the foot of Xiaotai Mountain, but the names of the mountains are different. Many small streams gather in the mountains and become a river, flowing southeast through the south of Yuya Township.

古文：东南流，径邳乡南，南去县八十许里。
现代文：环乡南距县城约八十来里。
English: The southern part of Huanxiang is about 80 li from the county seat.

古文：城有三面而不周于南，故俗谓之半城。
现代文：县城三面筑了城墙，但南面没有围进来，所以俗称半城。
English: The county seat has walls on three sides, but the southern side is not surrounded, so it is commonly known as half a city.

古文：沭水又东南流：左合岘水。
现代文：沐水又往东南流，在左边与晚水汇合。
English: The monsoon water flows to the southeast and merges with the evening water on the left.

古文：水北出大岘山，东南流，径邳乡东，东南流注于沭水也。
现代文：崛水发源于北方的大晚山，往东南流经那乡东面，往东南注入沐水。
English: The rising water originates from the Great Evening Mountain in the north, flows southeastward through the eastern part of the town, and injects fresh water to the southeast.

古文：东南过其县东，沭水左与箕山之水合。
现代文：往东南流过县东，沐水在左边与箕山之水汇合。
English: It flows southeast through the eastern part of the prefecture, and on the left, it merges with the water of Lushan Mountain.

古文：水东出诸县西箕山，刘澄之以为许由之所隐也，更为巨谬矣。
现代文：此水发源于东方诸县以西的箕山。刘澄之认为许由曾隐居在这里，这更是大错特错了。
English: This water originates from Shaoshan in the west of Dongfang counties. Liu Chengzhi thought that Xu You had lived here in seclusion, which was a big mistake.

古文：其水西南流，注于沭水也。
现代文：水往西南流，注入沐水。
English: The water flows to the southwest, injecting irrigation water.

古文：又东南过莒县东，《地理志》曰：莒子之国，盈姓也，少昊后。
现代文：又往东南流过宫县东边，《地理志》说：营县从前是营子之国，姓盈，是少昊的后代。
English: It also flowed southeast to the east of Miyagata. "Geography" said: Ying County was once the country of Yingzi. Her surname was Ying, and she was a descendant of Shao Hao.

古文：《列女传》曰：齐人杞梁殖袭莒，战死，二其妻将赴之，道逢齐庄公，公将吊之。
现代文：《列女传》说：齐国人祀梁殖在袭击营城时战死，他的妻子前去迎丧，路上碰到齐庄公，庄公正要去为祀梁殖吊丧。
English: "The Legend of the Women" says: Qi people worshiped Liang Xuan in the attack on Yingcheng and died in battle, his wife went to mourn, met Qi Zhuang on the road, Zhuang Zhengyi went to mourn for worshiping Liang Xuan.

古文：杞梁妻曰：如殖死有罪，君何辱命焉？
现代文：祀梁妻说：如果殖死得有罪，怎敢劳驾您来吊唁呢？
English: Liang's wife said, "If I am guilty of causing the death of my husband, how dare I ask you for condolences?"

古文：如殖无罪，有先人之敝庐在下，妾不敢与郊吊。
现代文：如果他死得无罪，他还有祖先留给他的旧宅在，我不敢在郊外为他吊丧。
English: If he died innocent, he still has the old house left to him by his ancestors, and I don't dare to mourn him in the suburbs.

古文：公旋车吊诸室，妻乃哭于城下，七日而城崩。
现代文：齐庄公立即回车，在他家里举行了丧礼。祀梁妻在苔城下哀哭，哭了七日，把城都哭崩了。
English: Qizhuang immediately returned to his car and held a funeral at his home. His wife, Liang, wept under the moss castle, cried for seven days, and wept the whole city away.

古文：故《琴操》云：殖死，妻援琴作歌曰：乐莫乐兮新相知，悲莫悲兮生别离。
现代文：所以《琴操》说：祀梁殖死后，他的妻子持琴歌唱道：人间的欢乐呀，哪有胜过相逢新知己；人间的悲痛呀，哪有甚于死别生离！
English: Therefore, "Qinqiu" said: After the death of Liang Xuan, his wife held a piano and sang: What is the joy of the human world, which is better than meeting new friends; What is the sorrow of the human world, which is worse than death and separation!

古文：哀感皇天，城为之堕。
现代文：她深沉的悲哀感动了上天，城也因此而崩塌了。
English: Her deep sorrow moved the heavens, and the city fell.

古文：即是城也。
现代文：说的就是此城。
English: That's what this city is about.

古文：其城三重，并悉祟峻，惟南开一门。内城方十二里，郭周四十许里。
现代文：城有三重，城墙都很高峻，只有南面开了一道城门，内城方圆十二里，外城周围四十里。
English: The city is three-storied, the walls are very high, only one gate opens on the south side, the inner city is twelve miles in circumference, and the outer city is forty miles around.

古文：《尸子》曰：莒君好鬼巫而国亡。
现代文：《尸子》说：苔君喜欢神鬼巫术之事因而亡国。
English: "The Corpse" says: Tei-kun likes the things of gods and ghosts and witchcraft, and as a result, he lost his country.

古文：无知之难，小白奔焉。
现代文：无知作乱，小白投奔营城。
English: Ignorance makes a mess, and the petty white man rushes to the camp.

古文：乐毅攻齐，守险全国。
现代文：乐毅进攻齐国时，齐军据险守住营城而保住了国家。
English: When Le Yi attacked Qi, the Qi army successfully defended the camp and saved the country.

古文：秦始皇县之。汉兴，以为城阳国，封朱虚侯章治莒。
现代文：秦始皇时把营设立为县，汉朝兴起后，把这里立为城阳国，封给朱虚侯章，治所设在营城。
English: At the time of Qin Shi Huang, the camp was set up as a county, and after the rise of the Han Dynasty, it was set up as a city-state, given to Zhu Xuchang, and the government office was set up in Yingcheng.

古文：王莽之莒陵也。
现代文：王莽时叫苔陵。
English: Wang Mangshi called the moss.

古文：光武合城阳因为琅邪国，以封皇子京，雅好宫室，穷极伎巧，壁带饰以金银。
现代文：光武帝把城阳国合并为琅邪国，封给皇子刘京，刘京很喜欢修建宫室，把百工的技艺和巧思发挥到极致，连墙壁的横木上都装饰着金银。
English: Emperor Guangwu merged Chengyang Province into Shiyan Province and gave it to his son Liu Jing. Liu Jing loved to build palaces, bringing the skills and ingenuity of a hundred craftsmen to the extreme. Even the crossbeams of the walls were decorated with gold and silver.

古文：明帝时，京不安莒，移治开阳矣。
现代文：明帝时，刘京在苔城感到不能安心，就迁到开阳。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, Liu Jing felt insecure in Moss City and moved to Kaiyang.

古文：沭水又南，袁公水东出清山，遵坤维而注沭。
现代文：沐水又往南流，有袁公水发源于东方的清山，往西南流，注入沐水。
English: The irrigation water also flows to the south. Yuan Gongshui originates from Qingshan in the east and flows to the southwest, injecting irrigation water.

古文：沭水又南，浔水注之。
现代文：沐水又往南流，得水注入。
English: The floodwaters flowed south again, and fresh water was injected.

古文：水出于巨公之山，西南流，旧堨以溉田，东西二十里，南北十五里。
现代文：得水发源于巨公之山，往西南流。过去在水上筑堰，东西二十里，南北十五里内的田地，都由此堰灌溉。
English: The water source originates from the Juguang Mountain and flows to the southwest. In the past, weirs were built on the water, and the fields within 20 miles from east to west and 15 miles from north to south were all irrigated by the weir.

古文：浔水又西南流入沭，沭水又南与葛陂水会。水发三柱山，西南流，径辟土城南，世谓之辟阳城。
现代文：得水又往西南流，注入沐水。沐水又往南流，与葛破水汇合，葛破水发源于三柱山，往西南流经辟土城南面，世人称为辟阳城。
English: The receiving water then flows to the southwest, infusing the bathing water. The bathing water then flows to the south, merging with the Qibao water. The Qibao water originates from the Three-Pillar Mountain and flows to the southwest through the south of the Qibao City, known to the world as the Qibao Yangcheng.

古文：《史记。建元以来王子侯者年表》曰：汉武帝元朔二年，封城阳共王子节侯刘壮为侯国也。
现代文：《史记•建元以来王子侯者年表》说：汉武帝元朔二年前，把这里封给城阳共王的儿子节侯刘壮，立为侯国。
English: "Chronicle of Princes and Mares Since the Founding of the Yuan Dynasty" says: Emperor Hanwu, two years before the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, gave this place to Prince Liu Zhuang, the son of King Chengyang, and established it as a princely state.

古文：其水于邑，积以为陂，谓之辟阳湖。西南流，注于沭水也。
现代文：此水在城旁积聚成破湖，称为辟阳湖，水向西南流，注入沐水。
English: This water accumulates next to the city to form a lake, known as Piyang Lake. The water flows to the southwest, injecting fresh water.

古文：又南过阳都县东，入于沂。
现代文：又往南流过阳都县东，注人沂水。
English: It also flows southward through the east of Yangdu County, injecting fresh water.

古文：柤水出于楚之祖地。
现代文：沐水从阳都县又往南流，与武阳沟水汇合。
English: The irrigation water flows south from Yangdu County and joins the water of Wuyang Ditch.

古文：《春秋》襄公十年，《经》书公与晋及诸侯会吴于柤。
现代文：武阳沟水发源于东方的仓山，山上有一座旧城，世人称为监官城，其实不是，那是从前的有利城。汉武帝元朔四年份经》载，襄公和晋及诸侯在祖与吴会晤。
English: The water of Wuyanggou originates from Cangshan in the east. There is an old city on the mountain, known to the world as the overseer city, but in fact it is not, it is the former advantageous city. In the "Fourth Year of Emperor Hanwu's Reign," Xiang Gong and Jin and the princes met with Wu in Zu.

古文：京相璠曰：宋地。
现代文：京相播说：祖是宋地。
English: Beijing's foreign minister said: "Our ancestors came from the Song Dynasty.

古文：今彭城逼阳县西北有租水沟，去逼阳八十里。东南流，径傅阳县故城东北。
现代文：现在彭城福阳县西北有一条祖水沟，离福阳八十里，往东南流经福阳县旧城东北。
English: Now there is an ancestral ditch in the northwest of Pengcheng Fuyang County, eighty miles from Fuyang, flowing southeast through the northeast of the old city of Fuyang County.

古文：《地理志》曰：故逼阳国也。
现代文：《地理志》说：这里过去是福阳国。
English: "Geography" said: This used to be Fuyang Province.

古文：《春秋左传》襄公十年夏，四月戊午，会于柤。
现代文：《春秋左传》：襄公十年夏，四月戊午日，诸侯在祖会合。
English: "Spring, Autumn and Summer": In the summer of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Xiang, on the afternoon of the 4th day of the month, the princes gathered at the ancestral hall.

古文：晋荀偃、士匄请伐逼阳而封宋向戌焉。
现代文：晋国的荀堰、士句要求攻打福阳，把这座城封给宋国的向戍。
English: Jin's Shiyan and Shiku requested to attack Fuyang and give the castle to Song's Xiangyu.

古文：荀营曰：城小而固，胜之不武，弗胜为笑。
现代文：荀窑说：这座城虽小但很坚固，打胜了不足以显示威武，打败了被人耻笑。
English: Yao said, "Although this city is small, it is very strong. If we win, it is not enough to show our might. If we are defeated, we will be ridiculed."

古文：固请，丙寅，围之，弗克。
现代文：荀堰、士旬一再请求攻城，于是就在丙寅日包围了福阳，但却打不进去。
English: Shiyan and Shishun repeatedly requested to attack the city, so they surrounded Fuyang on the day of Yin Yin, but they could not get in.

古文：孟氏之臣秦堇父，辇重如役。
现代文：孟氏的家臣秦荃父拉着猫重车随从作战。
English: Meng's vassal Qin Tsuen's father pulls a cat truck to accompany the battle.

古文：逼阳人启门，诸侯之士门焉。
现代文：福阳人打开城门，诸侯的兵士就乘机攻门。
English: The Fuyang people opened the city gate, and the soldiers of the princes took the opportunity to attack the gate.

古文：县门发，鄹人纥抉之以出门者。
现代文：城上骤然放下悬门，郭人绝使劲托起悬门，把被闸在里面的人放出来。
English: The city suddenly put down the hanging door, and Guo Ren tried his best to hold up the hanging door and let out the people who were locked inside.

古文：狄虒弥建大车之轮，而蒙之以甲，以为橹，左执之，右拔戟，以成一队。
现代文：狄旎弥造大车的轮盘，蒙上铁甲，当作大盾牌，左手执盾，右手持戟，组成一队。
English: Diệm built a chariot wheel, covered it with iron armour, used it as a large shield, held the shield in his left hand and the sceptre in his right, and formed a team.

古文：盂献子曰：《诗》所谓有力如虎者也。
现代文：孟献子说：他们就像《诗经》里所谓有力如虎的人。
English: Meng Xianzi said: They are just like the so-called powerful tiger people in "The Book of Songs."

古文：主人县布，堇父登之，及堞而绝之，坠，则又县之。
现代文：守城的主将从城上把布放下，荃父拉着布登城，快攀到城头的矮墙时，守将割断了布，荃父掉了下去。
English: The lord of the castle will put the cloth down from the castle, and Tsuen Phe pulled Buden Castle. When he quickly climbed to the low wall at the top of the castle, the keeper cut the cloth, and Tsuen Phe fell down.

古文：苏而复上者三。
现代文：上面又放下布，荃父苏醒过来，重又攀登，这样连登了三次。
English: The cloth was put down again, and Father Tsuen came to his senses and climbed again, climbing three times in a row.

古文：主人辞焉，乃退，带其断以徇于军三日。
现代文：守将向荃父道歉，他才回去，带着断布在军中夸耀，接连三日。
English: The guard would apologize to Father Tsuen, only for him to return, boasting in the army with a piece of cloth, for three days in a row.

古文：诸侯之师久于逼阳，请归。智伯怒曰：七日不克，尔乎取之，以谢罪也。
现代文：诸侯的军队围困福阳时间已久，都要求回去，智伯发怒道：七天攻不下福阳，就要你们的脑袋！
English: The lords' army had been besieging Fuyang for a long time, and they all demanded to go back. Zhi Bo became angry and said, "If we can't capture Fuyang in seven days, we want your heads!"

古文：荀偃、士匄攻之，亲受矢石，遂灭之，以逼阳子归，献于武官，谓之夷俘。
现代文：荀堰、士句又发起进攻，亲自冒着箭雨擂石指挥攻城，终于灭了福阳国。他们俘虏了幅阳子带回，把他献到武宫，称为夷俘。
English: Shiyan and Shiku also launched an attack, personally braved the rain of arrows and stones to command the siege of the city, and finally destroyed Fuyang Province. They captured Zhangyangzi and brought him back, presented him to the Imperial Palace, and called him a captive.

古文：逼阳，妘姓也。
现代文：不爵阳人都是姓坛的。
English: Unknighted Yang people are all surnamed Tan.

古文：汉以为县，汉武帝元朔三年，封齐孝王子刘就为侯国，王莽更之曰辅阳也。
现代文：汉朝时立为县，汉武帝元朔三年前，把这里封给齐孝王的儿子刘就，立为侯国，王莽时改名为辅阳。
English: It was established as a county during the Han Dynasty, and three years before Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty Yuan Shuo assigned it to Liu Rong, the son of King Qi Xiao, and established it as a principality. It was renamed Fuyang during the reign of Wang Mang.

古文：《郡国志》曰：逼阳有柤水。
现代文：《郡国志》说：福阳有柤水。
English: "County National History" said: Fuyang has Surabaya.

古文：柤水又东南，乱于沂而注于沭，谓之柤口，城得其名矣。
现代文：柤水又往东南流，与沂水混流后又注入沐水，汇流处称为柤口。城也因而得名。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, and after mixing with Surabaya water, it is injected with irrigation water. The confluence is called Surabaya mouth. This is how the city got its name.

古文：东南至朐县，入游注海也。
现代文：沐水往东南流，到朐县汇合游水，注入大海。
English: The bathing water flows to the southeast, merging with the swimming water in Jixian County and injecting it into the sea.

古文：巨洋水出朱虚县泰山北，过其县西，泰山，即东小泰山也。
现代文：巨洋水发源于朱虚县泰山，往北流过县西，泰山就是东小泰山。
English: The giant ocean water originates from Mount Tai in Zhuxu County and flows north through the west of the county. Mount Tai is the east small Mount Tai.

古文：巨洋水，即《国语》所谓具水矣。
现代文：巨洋水就是《国语》所说的具水。
English: Giant ocean water is what "Kokugo" means by "water."

古文：袁宏谓之巨昧，王韶之以为巨蔑，亦或曰朐瀰，皆一水也，而广其目焉。
现代文：袁宏把它称为巨昧，王韶之把它叫做巨蔑，也有人叫朐瀰，说的都是同一条水，只不过名称不一罢了。
English: Yuan Hong called it "monstrous ignorance," Wang Xizhi called it "monstrous slander," and some people called it "slander." They are all talking about the same water, but the names are different.

古文：其水北流，径朱虚县故城西。
现代文：水往北流经朱虚县旧城西面。
English: The water flows northward through the west side of the old city of Zhuxu County.

古文：汉惠帝二年，封齐悼惠王子刘章为侯国。
现代文：汉惠帝二年前，把这里封给齐悼惠王儿子刘章，立为侯国。
English: Two years ago, Emperor Han Hui gave this place to Liu Zhang, the son of King Qi Yi Hui, and made it a princely state.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：丹山在西南，丹水所出，东入海。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：丹山在西南面，丹水发源在那里，东流入海。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: Danshan is in the southwest, the source of Danshui is there, and it flows into the sea in the east.

古文：丹水由朱虚丘阜矣，故言朱虚。城西有长坂远峻，名为破车。
现代文：丹水流经朱虚县丘陵地带。所以有人说到朱虚城西有一条漫长高峻的山坡，名叫破车观。
English: The Dan River flows through the hilly area of Zhuxu County. Therefore, some people say that there is a long, steep hill to the west of Zhuxu City, called the Broken Car View.

古文：岘城东北二十里有丹山，世谓之凡山，县在西南，非山也。
现代文：城东北二十里有丹山，世人称为凡山，县城在丹山西南，而不是山在城的西南。
English: There are twenty Danshan in the northeast of the city, known to the world as Fanshan. The county seat is in the southwest of Danshan, not the mountain in the southwest of the city.

古文：丹、凡字相类，音从字变也。
现代文：丹、凡字形相近，于是读音也随字而变了。
English: Dan, where the glyphs are similar, the pronunciation also changes with the characters.

古文：丹水有二源，各导一山，世谓之东丹、西丹水也。
现代文：丹水有两个源头，各发源于一山，世人称为东丹水和西丹水。
English: Dan Water has two sources, each originating from a mountain, known to the world as East Dan Water and West Dan Water.

古文：西丹水自凡山北流，径剧县故城东，东丹水注之。
现代文：西丹水从凡山北流，经过剧县旧城东面，东丹水注入。
English: Xidan water flows from the north of Fanshan, passing through the east of the old city of Yunxian County, and Dongdan water is injected.

古文：水出方山，山有二水，一水即东丹水也。
现代文：东丹水发源于方山，山上有两条水，东丹水就是其中的一条。
English: Dongdan Water originates from Fangshan. There are two streams on the mountain, and Dongdan Water is one of them.

古文：北径县，合西丹水而乱流，又东北出径渏薄涧北。
现代文：东丹水往北流，经剧县与西丹水汇合，成为乱流，又往东北流去，经过倚薄涧北面。
English: The Dongdan water flows northward, merging with the Xidan water through the county, becoming a turbulent current, and flowing northeastward, passing through the north side of the thin estuary.

古文：渏水亦出方山，流入平寿县，积而为清，水盛则北注，东南流，屈而东北流，径平寿县故城西，而北入丹水，谓之鱼合口。
现代文：清水也发源于方山，流入平寿县，积聚成水湾。水大时就北注，转向东南流，又折向东北，流经平寿县旧城西面，然后北流注入丹水，汇流处称为鱼合口。
English: Clear water also originates from Fangshan, flows into Pingshou County, and accumulates into a water bay. When the water is large, it flows north, turns to the southeast stream, turns to the northeast, flows through the west of the old city of Pingshou County, and then the north stream is injected into the Danshui, and the confluence is called the fish mouth.

古文：丹水又东北径望海台东，东北注海，盖亦县所氏者也。
现代文：丹水又往东北流经望海台东面，往东北注入大海，县就是依照台命名的。
English: The Dan River flows to the northeast through the eastern side of the Wanghaidai, and flows into the sea to the northeast. The county was named after the table.

古文：又北过临胸县东，巨洋水自朱虚北入临朐县，熏冶泉水注之，水出西溪，飞泉侧濑，于穷坎之下，泉溪之上。源麓之侧，有一祠，目之为冶泉祠。
现代文：又往北流过临朐县东面，巨洋水从朱虚向北流入临朐县，熏冶泉水在此注入。此水源出西溪，飞奔的泉永在深坑下面流泻，在溪岸上，源头的山麓近旁，有一座祠庙，名为冶泉祠。
English: It also flows northward through the east of Linyi County. The giant ocean water flows northward from Zhu Qiu into Linyi County, and the smoky spring water is injected here. The source of this water comes from the West Creek, and the rushing spring is always flowing under the deep pit. On the riverbank, near the foot of the source, there is a temple, called the smoky spring temple.

古文：按《广雅》，金神谓之清明，斯地盖古冶官所在，故水取称焉。
现代文：据《广雅》，金属之神叫做清明，此处是古时冶官的驻地，水就因此取名。
English: According to "Guangya," the god of metal is called Qingming. This place was the residence of the ancient metallurgist, hence the name of the water.

古文：水色澄明，而清泠特异，渊无潜石，浅镂沙文，中有古坛，参差相对，后人微加功饰，以为嬉游之处。
现代文：熏冶泉水色澄清透明，而且特别清凉，深渊底下岩石历历可数，浅处的沙上水流荡出的波痕就像雕成一样。中间有古坛，与祠参差相对，后人稍加修饰，把它作为嬉游的处所。
English: The water color of the smoky spring is clear and transparent, and it is particularly cool. The rock beneath the abyss has a number of ages, and the ripples of the water on the sand at the shallow end are like carvings. There is an ancient altar in the middle, which is different from the ancestral hall, and later people have slightly modified it as a place for play.

古文：南北邃岸凌空，疏木交合。
现代文：南北两侧高岸凌空而起，古树枝柯交错。
English: The high banks on both sides of the north and south rise into the air, and the branches of ancient trees are interlaced.

古文：先公以太和中，作镇海岱，余总角之年，侍节东州。
现代文：太和年间先父镇守海岱，当时我还年幼，跟着父亲到东方来。
English: When I was still young, I followed my father to the East.

古文：至若炎夏火流，闲居倦想，提琴命友，嬉娱永日，桂笋寻波，轻林委浪，琴歌既洽，欢情亦畅，是焉栖寄，实可凭衿。
现代文：每当骄阳如火的炎夏，困倦无聊时，就携了琴儿，邀了好友，整天地尽情嬉游。我们荡着一叶扁舟，逐浪飘流，在岸边林木的轻荫底下，穿过低垂拂水的柔枝，我们弹琴唱歌，互相应和，彼此都十分愉快。寄身在这清幽可爱的林泉间，我们真是乐而忘返了。
English: Whenever the hot summer sun is blazing, when we are sleepy and bored, we bring the piano, invite friends, and play all day and night. We swing on a leaf boat, drifting along the waves, under the light shade of the forest trees on the shore, through the soft branches of the low-hanging water, we play the piano and sing, harmonize with each other, and are very happy with each other. Nestled in this quiet and lovely forest spring, we are really happy to forget.

古文：小东有一湖，佳饶鲜笋，匪直芳齐芍药，实亦洁并飞鳞。
现代文：稍东有一口湖，湖边出产鲜美的竹笋，不但气味芳香可与芍药相比，而且也像鱼儿一般洁白清净。
English: Slightly to the east there is a lake. The lake produces delicious bamboo shoots, which not only have a smell and aroma comparable to that of medicinal herbs, but are also as white and clean as fish.

古文：其水东北流入巨洋，谓之熏冶泉。
现代文：溪水往东北流入巨洋，称为熏冶泉。
English: The water of the stream flows into the ocean to the northeast and is called the Smoky Spring.

古文：又径临朐县故城东。城，古伯氏骈邑也。汉武帝元朔元年，封菑川懿王子刘奴为侯国。
现代文：巨洋水又流经临朐县旧城东面，此城是古时伯氏的骈邑，汉武帝元朔元年前，把这里封给苗川兹王的儿子刘奴，立为侯国。
English: The vast ocean water also flows through the eastern side of the old city of Linyi County. This city is the ancient Shibo clan's Zouyi. Before the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wu gave this place to Liu Nu, the son of King Zi of Miaochuan, and established it as a principality.

古文：应劭曰：临朐，山名也。
现代文：应劭说：临朐原是山名，县也以山命名。
English: Ying Qi said: Linyi was originally a mountain name, and the county was also named after the mountain.

古文：故县氏之。
现代文：胸，又是水名。
English: Chest, it is also the name of the river.

古文：朐亦水名，其城侧临朐川，是以王莽用表厥称焉。城上下沿水，悉是刘武皇北伐广固，营垒所在矣。
现代文：此城侧面紧临朐川，所以王莽就用作为县名。城外沿江上下，都是刘武皇北伐广固时营垒所在的地方。
English: The side of this city is close to the Min River, so Wang Mang is used as the name of the county. Outside the city, up and down along the river, are the places where Liu Wu's camp was located during the Northern Expedition.

古文：巨洋又东北径委粟山东，孤阜秀立，形若委粟。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流经委粟山东边，这是一座秀美的山丘，孤零零地耸立着，形状像一堆倒在地上的积粟。
English: The water of the ocean also flows to the northeast to the east of the EC's Maoshan, a beautiful hill that stands alone, shaped like a pile of fallen poppies.

古文：又东北，洋水注之。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流，洋水注入。
English: The giant ocean water also flows to the northeast, and the ocean water is injected.

古文：水西出石膏山西北石涧口，东南径逢山祠西。
现代文：洋水发源于西方石膏山西北的石涧口，往东南流经逢山祠西面。
English: The Yangshui originates from the northwest of the West Gypsum Mountain, and flows southeast through the west side of the Fengshan Temple.

古文：洋水又东南，历逢山下，即石膏山也。
现代文：洋水又往东南流经逢山下，逢山就是石膏山。
English: The western water also flows southeast through Fengshan, Fengshan is Gypsum Mountain.

古文：山麓三成，壁立直上，山上有石鼓，鸣则年凶。
现代文：山麓有三重，峭壁陡峻直上，山上有石鼓，鼓响就预兆着那年有灾祸。
English: There are three layers at the foot of the mountain. The steep cliff is steep and straight, and there is a stone drum on the mountain. The sound of the drum indicates that there will be a disaster in that year.

古文：郭缘生《续述征记》曰：逢山在广固南三十里，有祠并石鼓，齐地将乱，石人辄打石鼓，声闻数十里。
现代文：郭缘生《续述征记》说：逢山座落在广固南三十里。山上有祠庙和石鼓，齐地将乱时，石人就敲起石鼓，数十里内都能听到。
English: Guo Yansheng's "Continuation of the Record" said: Fengshan is located 30 miles south of Guanggu. There are ancestral temples and stone drums on the mountain. When the land is chaotic, the stone people will beat the stone drums, which can be heard within dozens of miles.

古文：洋水历其阴而东北流，世谓之石沟水。东北流，出于委粟山北，而东注于巨洋，谓之石沟口。
现代文：洋水流经山北，转向东北流，世人称为石沟水，往东北流出委粟山北面，然后东流注入巨洋水，汇流处称为石沟口。
English: The ocean current flows through the northern part of the mountain and turns to the northeastern current, known to the world as the Shigou water. It flows to the north of the Northeast Outflow Committee's Mt. Ao, and then the eastern current injects the ocean water. The confluence is called the Shigou mouth.

古文：然是水下流，亦有时通塞，及其春夏水泛，川澜无辍，亦或谓之为龙泉水。
现代文：然而这条水下流，有时畅通有时阻塞。到了每年春夏水涨时，浪涛滚滚奔流不息，也有人称为龙泉水。
English: However, this downstream water flow is sometimes smooth and sometimes blocked. When the water rises every spring and summer, the waves roll and flow incessantly. Some people also call it Longquan water.

古文：《地理志》：石膏山，洋水所出是也。
现代文：《地理志》说：石膏山是洋水的发源地。
English: "Geography" said: Gypsum Mountain is the birthplace of the Western Water Goat.

古文：今于此县，惟是渎当之，似符群证矣。
现代文：今天在临朐县只有这条水可以对得上，似乎与各书的记载相符。
English: Today, in Linyi County, only this water can be matched, which seems to be consistent with the records of various books.

古文：巨洋水又东北，得邳泉口，泉源西出平地，东流注于巨洋水。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流到郑泉口。那泉的源头出自西方的平地，东流注入巨洋水。
English: The ocean water flows to the northeast to Zhengquankou. The source of the spring comes from the western plains, and the east stream injects the ocean water.

古文：巨洋水又北会建德水，水西发逢山阜，而东流入巨洋水也。
现代文：巨洋水又北流，与建德水汇合。建德水发源于西方逢山的丘冈下，东流注入巨洋水。
English: The Giant Ocean Water also flows to the north and merges with the Jiande Water. The Jiande Water originates from under the hill on the western side of the mountain, and the eastern stream injects the Giant Ocean Water.

古文：又北过剧县西，巨洋水又东北合康浪水，水发县西南山，无事树木，而圆峭孤峙，巑岏分立。
现代文：又往北流过剧县西面，巨洋水又往东北流，与康浪水汇合。康浪水发源于剧县西南面的蟆山，山上不长树木，浑圆而峻峭的山峰互相分开，相对屹立着。
English: It flows northward through the western part of the county, and the giant ocean water flows to the northeast, merging with the Kanglang water. The Kanglang water originates from the Lushan Mountain in the southwest of the county. There are not many trees on the mountain, and the round and steep peaks are separated from each other and stand relatively upright.

古文：左思《齐都赋》曰岭镇其左是也。
现代文：左思《齐都赋》说：蟆岭雄踞于齐都左边。
English: Zuo Si said in "Qidufu" that: "The hero of Qiling is on the left of Qidufu."

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，封菑川懿王子刘错为侯国，王莽更之曰俞县也。
现代文：康浪水往北流，注入巨洋水。巨洋水又往东北流经剧县旧城西面，这里是古时的纪国。《春秋》：庄公四年把这里封给蓄川彭王的儿子刘错，立为侯国，王莽则改名为俞县。
English: Kanglang water flows to the north, injecting the giant ocean water. The giant ocean water flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Yunxian County, which is the ancient Ji County. "Spring and Autumn": Zhuang Gong four years ago gave this land to Liu Er, the son of Zhuangchuan Peng Wang, and established it as a princely state, while Wang Mang changed its name to Shixian County.

古文：城之北侧有故台，台西有方池。
现代文：城的北边有旧台，台的西面有方池。
English: There is an old platform on the north side of the city and a square pond on the west side of the platform.

古文：晏谟曰：西去齐城九十七里，耿弇破张步于临淄，追至巨洋水上，僵尸相属。即是水也。
现代文：晏漠说：这里离齐城九十七里。耿弃在临淄打败了张步，一直追击到巨洋，水上的浮尸连成一片，说的这是这条水。
English: Gong Ma said, "This is ninety-seven miles from Qi City." Geng Shuang defeated Zhang Bu in Linyi and chased him all the way to the ocean. The floating corpses on the water became one. He said, "This is the water."

古文：巨洋又东北径晋龙骧将军、幽州刺史辟闾浑墓东，而东北流。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流，经过晋龙骤将军、幽州刺史辟间浑墓东，然后又往东北流。
English: The giant ocean water flowed to the northeast again, passing through Jin Longjun Shogun and Yuzhou Zhishi to the east of Hun Tomb, and then flowed to the northeast again.

古文：墓侧有一坟，甚高大，时人咸谓之为马陵，而不知谁之丘垄也。
现代文：墓旁又有一座坟，非常高大，当时人们都称为马陵，但不知道是谁的坟墓。
English: Next to the tomb there is another tomb, very high, which was known as the horse mausoleum at the time, but it is not known whose tomb it is.

古文：巨洋水又东北径益县故城东，王莽更之曰涤荡也。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流经益县旧城东面，王莽改名为涤荡。
English: The giant ocean water flowed to the northeast to the east of the old city of Jingyi County, and Wang Mang was renamed Dairang.

古文：晏谟曰：南去齐城五十里，司马宣王代公孙渊，北徙丰人住于此城，遂改名为南丰城也。
现代文：晏漠说：这里南面离齐城五十里。司马宣王攻打公孙渊，从北面迁来丰人居住在这座城中，于是就改名为南丰城。
English: Gong Mu said, "This is fifty miles south of Qi City. King Sima Xuan attacked Gongsunyuan, and the Feng people moved from the north to live in this city, so it was renamed Nanfeng City."

古文：又东北积而为潭，枝津出焉、谓之百尺沟，西北流，径北益都城。汉武帝元朔二年封菑川懿王子刘胡为侯国。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流，积水成潭，支流从这里分出，称为百尺沟，往西北流经北益都城，汉武帝元朔二年前，把这里封给蓄川兹王的儿子刘胡，立为侯国。
English: The great ocean water flowed to the northeast, the accumulated water formed a pool, and the tributary flowed from here, known as the Hundred Foot Ditch, and flowed to the northwest through the North Yiwu City. Two years ago, Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo assigned this place to Liu Hu, the son of Zongchuanzi King, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又西北流而注于巨淀矣。
现代文：又往西北流，注入巨淀。
English: It also flows to the northwest, injecting huge amounts of water into the lake.

古文：又东北过寿光县西，巨洋水自巨淀湖东北流，径县故城西，王莽之翼平亭也。
现代文：又住东北流过寿光县西面，巨洋水从巨淀湖往东北流经寿光县旧城西面，王莽时称翼平亭。
English: Wang Mang also lived in the northeast, which flowed through the west of Shouguang County. The great ocean water flowed from Lake Jiuyang to the northeast, passing through the west of the old city of Shouguang County. Wang Mang was called Yueping Ting.

古文：汉光武建武二年，封更始子鲤为侯国。
现代文：汉光武帝建武几年，把这里封给更始帝的儿子刘鲤，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty ruled Jianwu for a few years, and gave the fief here to Emperor Qianxi's son Liu Bei, establishing it as a vassal state.

古文：城之西南，水东有孔子石室，故庙堂也。
现代文：县城西南面、巨洋水东面，有孔子石室，是旧时的庙堂。
English: Southwest of the county seat and east of the ocean, there is the Confucius Stone Room, an ancient temple.

古文：中有孔子像，弟子问经，既无碑志，未详所立。
现代文：庙中有孔子像，还有弟子间经的画像，但找不到碑文，不知是什么时候建立的。
English: There is a statue of Confucius in the temple, as well as images of his disciples, but no inscription can be found, and it is not known when it was built.

古文：巨洋又东北流，尧水注之。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流，尧水注入。
English: The giant ocean water flows to the northeast, and the brackish water is injected.

古文：水出剧县南角崩山，即故义山也，俗人以其山角若崩，因名为角扇山，亦名为角林山，皆世俗音讹也。
现代文：尧水发源于剧县南面的角崩山，就是过去的义山，因为山角看去像崩塌了似的，因此当地乡人称为角崩山，也称角林山，这都是民间音讹的缘故。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the Cangduanshan in the south of Yunxian County, which was the Yishan in the past. Because the mountain looks like it has collapsed, the local villagers call it Cangduanshan, also known as Canglin Mountain. This is all due to folk music.

古文：水，即蕤水矣。
现代文：尧水就是夔水。
English: Surabaya is Surabaya.

古文：《地理志》曰：剧县有义山，蕤水所出也。
现代文：《地理志》说：剧县有义山，羹水就发源在那里。
English: "Geography" said: There is Yishan in Yunxian County, and the spring water originated there.

古文：北径山东，俗亦名之为青山矣。
现代文：水往北流经蟆山东，民间又称哄山为青山。
English: The water flows northward through the eastern part of Lushan Mountain, which is also known as Qingshan Mountain.

古文：尧水又东北径东西寿光二城间。
现代文：尧水又往东北流经东寿光城和西寿光城之间。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast between East Shuguang and West Shuguang.

古文：应劭曰：寿光县有灌亭。
现代文：应劭说：寿光县有灌亭。
English: Ying Qi said: Shouguang County has a watering pavilion.

古文：杜预曰：在县东南，斟灌国也。
现代文：杜预说：灌亭在寿光县东南，是从前的斟灌国。
English: Du Yu said: Gan Ting is located in the southeast of Shouguang County, and was once the center of the irrigation country.

古文：又言斟亭在平寿县东南，平寿故城在白狼水西，今北海郡治。
现代文：又说：斟亭在平寿县东南。平寿旧城在白狼水西，今天是北海郡的治所。
English: He also said: Wuqing Pavilion is located in the southeast of Pingzhou County. Pingzhou Old Town is located in the west of Baiyun Shui. Today, it is the seat of Beihai County.

古文：水上承营陵县之下流，东北径城东，西入别画湖，亦曰朕怀湖。湖东西二十里，南北三十里，东北入海。
现代文：白狼水上源在营陵县，往东北流经平寿城东边，西流注入别画湖，也称联怀湖，湖东西二十里，南北三十里。水往东北流入大海。
English: The source of the White Wolf Water is in Yingling County. It flows northeast through the east side of Pingshou City, and the west stream flows into Beiga Lake, also known as Lianhuai Lake. The lake is 20 miles from east to west and 30 miles from north to south. The water flows into the sea to the northeast.

古文：斟亭在溉水东，水出桑犊亭东覆甑山。亭，故高密郡治，世谓之故郡城。山谓之塔山，水曰鹿孟水，亦曰戾孟水，皆非也。
现代文：斟亭在溉水东，溉水发源于桑犊亭东面的覆氯山，斟亭是过去高密郡的治所，人们称为故郡城，把覆靓山称为塔山，把水称为鹿孟水，也称决孟水，这都不对。
English: Pouting Pavilion is east of Irrigation Water, and Irrigation Water originates from Mount Jiankang to the east of Mulberry Pavilion. Pouting Pavilion was the former seat of Gaomi County, and people called it the former county seat. People called Mount Jiankang as Tashan, and the water as Lu Mengshui, also known as Duan Mengshui, which is all wrong.

古文：《地理志》：桑犊，北海之属县矣。有覆甑山，溉水所出，北径斟亭西北，合白狼水。
现代文：《地理志》载，桑犊是北海郡的属县，有覆颤山，溉水发源于此，往北流经斟亭西北与白狼水汇合。
English: According to the "Geography," Mulberry is a county belonging to Beihai County, with overlying Tiantiao Mountain. Irrigation water originates from here, flowing northward through the northwest of Guoting and merging with White Wolf Water.

古文：按《地理志》：北海有斟县。
现代文：据《地理志》，北海有斟县。
English: According to "Geography," there are many counties in the North Sea.

古文：京相璠曰：故斟寻国，禹后。西北去灌亭九十里。
现代文：京相播说：斟县是从前的斟寻国，大禹的后代居住在这里，西北距灌亭九十里。
English: Beijing's official broadcaster said: Yu County was once Yu Xing Guo, Dayu's descendants live here, and it is ninety miles to the northwest of Guan Ting.

古文：溉水又北径寒亭西，而入别画湖。
现代文：溉水又往北流经寒亭西边，而后注入别画湖。
English: The irrigation water then flows north through the west side of the pavilion, and then into the Beiga Lake.

古文：《郡国志》曰：平寿有斟城，有寒亭。
现代文：《郡国志》说：平寿共有斟城和寒亭。
English: "County History" said: Pingju has both a castle and a winter pavilion.

古文：薛瓒《汉书集注》云：按《汲郡古文》，相居斟灌，东郡灌是也。
现代文：薛攒《汉书集注》说：据《汲郡古文》，相居住在斟灌，就是东郡的灌。
English: Xue Nan "Chinese Classics Note" said: According to "Kwugun Ancient Texts," the relative lived in Wuguan, that is, the Wuguan of Donggun.

古文：明帝以封周后，改曰卫。
现代文：明帝把这里封给周的后裔，改称为卫。
English: Emperor Ming gave this place to Zhou's descendants, renaming it Wei.

古文：斟寻在河南，非平寿也。
现代文：斟浮在河南，不在平寿。
English: It's in Henan Province, not in Pingju.

古文：又云：太康居斟寻，羿亦居之，桀又居之。
现代文：又说：太康居住在斟寻，要也住在这里，后来柴又住在这里。
English: He also said: Taikang lived in Wenchuang, but also lived here, and later Chai lived here.

古文：《尚书序》曰：太康失国，兄弟五人，徯于河汭，此即太康之居，为近洛也。
现代文：《尚书•序》说：太康失位，兄弟五人在河纳等待着。这里就是太康居住的地方，与洛水相距不远。
English: "Shang Shu•Zhu" said: Taikang lost his position, and the five brothers waited in Hanoi. This is where Taikang lived, not far from Luoshui.

古文：余考瓒所据，今河南有寻地，卫国有观土，《国语》曰：启有五观，谓之奸子。五观，盖其名也，所处之邑，其名曰观。
现代文：我考证过薛攒所依据的典籍，现在河南还有叫寻的的地方，卫国还有观的旧地。《国语》说：启有个儿子叫五观，被称为逆子，五观是他的名字，他所居的城邑你观。
English: I have examined the classics on which Xue Han was based, and now there are still places in Henan to look for cranes, and in the old country of Guan. "National Language" said: Kai had a son named Guan, who was known as a traitor, Guan was his name, and the city where he lived was Guan.

古文：皇甫谧曰：卫地。
现代文：皇甫谧说：观是卫国地方。
English: The Empress Dowager Fuxi said: "Viewing is the place of national defense.

古文：又云：夏相徒帝丘，依同姓之诸侯于斟寻氏。
现代文：又说：夏相迁到帝丘，依附同姓诸侯斟寻氏。
English: He also said: Xia Xiang moved to Diqiu and clung to the princes of the same surname.

古文：即《汲冢书》云相居斟灌也。
现代文：就是《汲家书》所说的：相居住在斟灌。
English: That is what "Kujia Shu" said: the relative lives in the watering.

古文：既依斟寻，明斟寻非一居矣。
现代文：相既然依附斟寻，那么斟灌、斟寻显然不是同一地方了。
English: Since the phase is dependent on watering, then watering and watering are obviously not the same place.

古文：穷后既仗善射篡相，寒促亦因逢蒙弑羿，即其居以生浇，因其室而有豷。
现代文：有穷氏依仗善射的本领篡夺相的帝位，寒捉也利用逢蒙杀了奔。寒捉就占了界的住所和妻妾而生了浇和嵋。
English: There was a poor clan that usurped the imperial throne of the phase by virtue of its skill in shooting, and the cold catch also used Feng Meng to kill Ben. The cold catch occupied the residence and wife and concubine of the realm and gave birth to Ge and Zhou.

古文：故《春秋》襄公四年，魏绛曰：浇用师灭斟灌及斟寻氏，处浇于过，处豷干戈。
现代文：代春秋》：襄公四年前，魏绛说：寒泥令浇率军灭了斟灌和斟寻氏，把浇封于过，把摧封于戈。
English: On behalf of Spring and Autumn: "Xiang Gong four years ago, Wei Wei said: the army led by the pouring of the cold mud order extinguished the pouring and pouring, sealed the pouring in the past, and sealed the sealing in the past.

古文：是以伍员言于吴子曰：过浇杀斟灌以伐斟寻是也。
现代文：所以伍员对吴子说：过浇杀斟灌又攻斟寻。
English: Therefore, the soldier said to Wu Zi: "It is necessary to kill and kill and attack and attack."

古文：有夏之遗臣曰靡，事羿，羿之死也，逃于鬲氏。今鬲县也。
现代文：夏朝有一位旧臣叫靡，在界手下做事，界死后投奔•两氏，就是今天的庵县。
English: In the Xia Dynasty, there was an old retainer who was very popular. He worked under Jie, and after Jie's death, he joined the two clans. This is today's Ixian County.

古文：收斟灌、斟寻二国之余烬，杀寒浞而立少康，灭之，有穷遂亡也。
现代文：他召集了斟灌、斟寻两国的残余力量，杀了寒淀，拥立少康，灭了浇和碳的封国，有穷就此灭亡了。
English: He gathered the remaining forces of the two countries, killed the cold reservoir, supported the less well-off, and extinguished the closed country of the pouring and carbon, and the poor perished.

古文：是盖寓其居而生其称，宅其业而表其邑，纵遗文沿褫，亭郭有传，未可以彼有灌目，谓专此为非，舍此寻名，而专彼为是。
现代文：寒捉寓居于有穷氏的住宅，也就承袭了有穷的称号；占有他的产业，就以他的城邑为名，纵使留下来的文字记录，长期以来逐渐散佚，但亭和城郭还有留传至今的；不可因为那地方带有灌的地名，就以为这地方不是；撇开这地方去寻查地名，就以为只有那地方才是。
English: Kanto lived in a poor man's house, so he inherited the title of poor man; when he owned his property, he named it after his town. Although the written records left behind have been gradually dispersed for a long time, the pavilion and the castle have been preserved to this day; it is impossible to think that this place is not because it has a place name; if you leave this place to search for place names, you will think that only that place is.

古文：以土推传，应氏之据亦可按矣。
现代文：按实地来推断文字记载，应韵的说法也就可以验证了。
English: According to the field to deduce the written record, the argument of the rhyme can also be verified.

古文：尧水又东北注巨洋。
现代文：尧水又向东北注入巨洋。
English: Surabaya's waters also flow into the vast ocean to the northeast.

古文：伏琛、晏谟并言，尧尝顿驾于此，放受名焉，非也。
现代文：伏深、晏漠都说尧钟经在此处逗留过，水就因此得名，其实不是这样的。
English: Both Fushin and Jimo say that the Bell stayed here, hence the name of the water, but this is not true.

古文：《地理志》曰：蕤水自剧东北，至寿光入海。
现代文：《地理志》说：籍水从剧往东北流到寿光注入大海。
English: "Geography" said: the water from the play flows to the northeast to Shouguang into the sea.

古文：沿其径趣，即是水也。
现代文：按葵水的流程和流向斤，就是尧水了。
English: According to the process and flow of sunflower water, it is salty water.

古文：又东北入于海。
现代文：又往东北注人大海。
English: It also flows to the northeast and pours into the sea.

古文：巨洋水东北径望海台西，东北流。
现代文：巨洋水往东北流经望海台西，往东化流。
English: The great ocean water flows to the northeast through the west of Wanghaitai, and flows to the east.

古文：伏琛、晏谟并以为平望亭在平寿县故城西北八十里，古县；又或言秦始皇升以望海，因曰望海台，未详也。
现代文：伏深、晏漠都认为平望亭在平寿县旧城西北八十里，是个古县城。又有人说秦始皇登台望海，因此称为望海台，事实如何不大清楚。
English: Both Fushin and Gongmo believe that Pingbo Pavilion is located 80 miles northwest of the old city of Pingju County and is an ancient county seat. Others say that Qin Shihuang ascended the throne to watch the sea, so it is called Wanghaidai, but it is not clear how true this is.

古文：按《史记》，汉武帝元朔二年，封菑川懿王子刘赏为侯国。
现代文：据《史记》载：汉武帝元朔二年前，把这里封给苗川露王的儿子刘赏，立为侯国。
English: According to the "Histories," two years before Emperor Hanwu passed away, he assigned this place to Liu Biao, the son of King Lu of Miaochuan, and made it a vassal state.

古文：又东北注于海也。
现代文：巨洋水又往东北流，注入大海。
English: The giant ocean water flows to the northeast and pours into the sea.

古文：淄水出泰山莱芜县原山，淄水出县西南山下，世谓之原泉。
现代文：淄水发源于泰山郡莱芜县的原山，淄水发源于莱芜县西南山下，人们称为原泉。
English: The spring water originates from the original mountain in Laiwu County, Taishan County, and the spring water originates from the southwest of Laiwu County. People call it the original spring.

古文：《地理志》曰：原山，淄水所出。
现代文：《地理志》说：原山是淄水的发源地。
English: "Geography" said: the original mountain is the birthplace of the sprouts.

古文：故《经》有原山之论矣。
现代文：因此《水经》有水出原山的说法。
English: Therefore, it is said that the "Water Sutra" has water coming out of the mountain.

古文：《淮南子》曰：永出自饴山，盖山别名也。
现代文：《淮南子》说：淄水发源于怡山，那是原山的别名。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said: "Shanshui originated from Yishan, which is another name for the original mountain.

古文：东北流，径莱芜谷，屈而西北流，径其县故城南。
现代文：淄水往东北流经莱芜谷，拐弯转向西北，流经莱芜县旧城南。
English: Surabaya water flows northeast through Laiwu Valley, turns northwest and flows through the old south of Laiwu County.

古文：《从征记》曰：城在莱芜谷，当路阻绝，两山间道，由南北门。
现代文：《从征记》说：县城座落在莱芜谷，挡住过往大道，两山之间的小路，经由南北门出入。
English: "From the record" said: The county seat is located in Laiwu Valley, blocking the past avenue, the path between the two mountains, and entering and exiting through the north and south gates.

古文：汉末，有范史云为莱羌令，言莱芜在齐，非鲁所得。
现代文：汉朝末年范史云任莱芜县令，说莱芜属齐国，鲁国是不能引为己有的。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Fan Shiyun was appointed as the governor of Laiwu County. He said that Laiwu belonged to Qi, and Lu could not be claimed as its own.

古文：引旧说云：齐灵公灭莱。莱民播流此谷，邑落荒芜，故曰莱芜。
现代文：从前有个说法：齐灵公灭掉了莱，莱的百姓流散到这个山谷，城镇村落都荒芜了，所以称为莱芜。
English: There used to be a saying: Qi Ling Gong destroyed Lai, the people of Lai scattered to this valley, the towns and villages were deserted, so it was called Laiwu.

古文：《禹贡》所谓莱夷也。
现代文：《禹贡》所说的莱夷就指这里。
English: The Laiyi mentioned in "Yugong" refers to this area.

古文：夹谷之会，齐侯使莱人以兵劫鲁侯，宣尼称夷不乱华是也。
现代文：齐、鲁在夹谷相会，齐侯叫莱人以兵力来威逼鲁侯。孔子说：夷人是不到华夏中原来作乱的。
English: Qi and Lu met in the valley, and Qi Hou called on the Lai people to use military force to intimidate Lu Hou. Confucius said: "The barbarians did not start the chaos in China.

古文：余按泰无、莱柞，并山名也，郡县取目焉。汉高祖置。
现代文：我查考过，泰、无、莱、柞，都是山名，郡县都按这些山来取名，是汉高祖时所置。
English: I have checked and found that Tai, Mu, Lai and Ya are all mountain names. Counties and counties are named after these mountains, which were named by the founder of the Han Dynasty Gao.

古文：《左传》曰：与之无山及莱柞是也。
现代文：《左传》说：把无山及莱、柞给他，就是指这些山。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: "Give him no mountain, no ridge, no peak," referring to these mountains.

古文：应劭《十三州记》曰：太山莱芜县，鲁之莱柞邑。
现代文：应劭《十三州志》说：太山莱芜县就是鲁国的莱柞邑。
English: According to the "History of the Thirteen Provinces," Laiwu County in Taishan is the Laiwu of Lu.

古文：淄水又西北，转径城西，又东北流，与一水合。水出县东南，俗谓之家桑谷水。
现代文：淄水又往西北流，转弯流经城西，又往东北流，与一条水汇合，这条水发源于莱芜县东南面，俗称家桑谷水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northwest, turns to flow through the west of the city, and flows to the northeast, merging with a water. This water originates from the southeast of Laiwu County, commonly known as Jia Sangu water.

古文：《从征记》名曰圣水。
现代文：《从征记》称为圣水。
English: "From the record" is called holy water.

古文：《列仙传》曰：鹿皮公者，淄川人也，少为府小史，才巧，举手成器。
现代文：《列仙记》说：鹿皮公是淄川人，年轻时在府里当小史，他才能出众，技艺高超，一动手就能制成用具。
English: "Record of Immortals" says: Deerskin is a native of Hechuan. When he was young, he worked as a clerk in the government. His talent is outstanding, his skills are superb, and he can make tools with just one hand.

古文：山岑上有神泉，人不能到，小史白府君，请木工斤斧三十人，作转轮，造县阁，意思横生，数十日，梯道成，上其巅，作祠屋留止其旁。其二问以自固，食芝草，饮神泉，七十余年。
现代文：附近山崖上有神泉，人们都爬不上去。小史去报告府君，要求派给他三十个木工。他们制作了转车、悬阁，别出心裁，几十天后做好了梯道。他们登上崖顶建造祠屋，小史就在祠旁住下，自己安居在里面，每天吃山上的灵芝草，喝崖边的神泉水，住了七十多年。
English: There was a sacred spring on a nearby cliff, and people couldn't climb up to it. Xiao Shi went to report to the prefect and asked for thirty carpenters to be sent to him. They made a turntable and a suspended gazebo, and after a few decades, they made a stairway. They climbed to the top of the cliff to build an ancestral hall. Xiao Shi lived next to the ancestral hall, and he lived there peacefully. Every day, he ate the reishi grass on the mountain and drank the sacred spring water from the cliff. He lived there for more than seventy years.

古文：淄水来山下，呼宗族得六十余人，命上山半，水出尽漂一郡，没者万计。
现代文：淄水流到山下，小史召集宗族六十多人，叫他们上山，到了半山，水忽然急涌而出，淹没了全郡，被溺死的人数以万计。
English: The floodwater flowed to the foot of the mountain. Xiao Shi gathered more than 60 members of his clan and told them to go up the mountain. When they reached the middle of the mountain, the water suddenly gushed out, flooding the entire county. Tens of thousands of people were drowned.

古文：小史辞迫家室，令下山著鹿皮衣，升阁而去。
现代文：小史遣散家室。叫他们下山，自己穿上鹿皮衣，登上悬阁而去。
English: Xiao Shi dismissed his family. He told them to go down the mountain, put on their own deerskin clothes, climb up the ledge and leave.

古文：后百余年下，卖药齐市也。
现代文：百余年后，他下山在齐市卖药。
English: More than a hundred years later, he climbed down the mountain to sell medicine in Qi.

古文：其水西北流，注淄水，淄水又北出山，谓之莱芜口，东北流者也。
现代文：家桑谷水往西北流，注入淄水。淄水又北流出山，山口称为莱芜口，出山后水向东北流去。
English: The home of the Mulberry Valley water flows to the northwest, injecting brackish water. The brackish water also flows out of the mountain to the north, the mountain pass is called Laiwu mouth, and after leaving the mountain, the water flows to the northeast.

古文：东北过临淄县东，淄水自山东北流，径牛山西，又东径临淄县故城南，东得天齐水口，水出南郊山下，谓之天齐渊。
现代文：往东北流过临淄县东面，淄水从山里往东北流经牛山西面，又往东流经临淄县旧城南面，往东流到夭齐水口。此口的水发源于南郊山下，称为天齐渊。
English: It flows to the northeast through the eastern part of Linyi County, and the water of Linyi flows from the mountains to the northeast through the western part of Niu Mountain, and then flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Linyi County, and flows eastward to the Yauqi water outlet. The water source of this outlet originates from the southern suburb of the mountain, known as Tianqi Yuan.

古文：五泉并出，南北三百步，广十步。
现代文：这里有五条源泉一起涌出，南北三百步，宽十步。
English: There are five springs gushing together here, three hundred paces from north to south, and ten paces wide.

古文：山即牛山也。
现代文：这山就是牛山。
English: This mountain is Ushiyama.

古文：左思《齐都赋》曰：牛岭镇其南者也。
现代文：左思《齐都赋》说：牛岭雄踞于南边。
English: Zuo Si's "Qidufu" said: The bull-riding bulls live in the south.

古文：水在齐八祠中，齐之为名起于此矣。
现代文：水流经齐地八处神祠之间，齐这个国名，就起源于此。
English: Water flows through eight shrines in Qi, and Qi, the country's name, originated here.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：齐所以为齐者，即天齐渊名也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：齐国之所以名齐，就是取名于天齐渊。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: The reason why Qi Province is named Qi is that it was named after Tianqibuan.

古文：其水北流，注于淄水，淄水又东径四豪冢北。
现代文：水往北流注入淄水。淄水又往东流经四豪墓北。
English: The water flows northward into the Surabaya River. The Surabaya River then flows eastward through the northern part of the Sihao Tombs.

古文：水南山下，有四冢，方基圆坟，咸高七尺，东西直列。是田氏四王冢也。
现代文：水南山下有四座坟墓，墓基方形，坟垄却呈圆形，都有七尺来高，四座墓东西方向一字排列，这是田氏四王的坟墓。
English: There are four tombs at the foot of the mountain in the south of the country. The foundation of the tombs is square, but the ridge of the tombs is round. They are all seven feet high. The four tombs are arranged in the east-west direction. This is the tomb of the four kings of the Tian clan.

古文：淄水又东北径荡阴里西。水东有冢，一基三坟，东西八十步，是列士公孙接、田开疆、古冶子之坟也。
现代文：淄水又往东北流经荡阴里西，东岸有墓，一片墓基上筑了三座坟，东西约八十步，这就是公孙接、田开疆、古冶子三位壮士的坟墓。
English: Surabaya also flows to the northeast through the yin and yang west, and there are tombs on the east bank. Three tombs were built on a tomb base, about eighty paces from east to west. This is the tomb of the three strong men, Gongsun Zhe, Tian Kaijiang and Guyezi.

古文：晏子恶其勇而无礼，投桃以毙之。死，葬阳里，即此也。
现代文：晏矛讨厌他们蛮勇而无礼，送给他们两个桃子，让他们自相残杀，三人死后葬在阳里，就是这个地方。
English: He hated them for being so bold and impolite, so he gave them two peaches, let them kill each other, and buried the three of them in the sun. This is the place.

古文：淄水又北径其城东。城临淄水，故曰临淄，王莽之齐陵县也。
现代文：淄水又往北流经临淄县城东，城因面临淄水，所以名叫临淄，王莽时改名为齐陵县。
English: Surabaya also flows northward through the east of Linyi County. Because the city faces Surabaya, it is called Linyi. Wang Mangshu changed the name to Qiling County.

古文：《尔雅》曰：水出其前，左为营丘，武王以其地封大公望，赐之以四履，都营丘为齐。或以为都营陵。
现代文：《尔雅》说：水从县城左前方流出，就是营丘，武王把这地方封给太公望，赐予四至疆界，建都营丘，称为齐，有的说建都营陵。
English: "Yinya" said: The water flows out from the left front of the county seat, that is, Yingqiu. King Wu gave this place to Taigongwang, bestowed four borders, and built the capital Yingqiu, called Qi, and some say the capital Yingling.

古文：《史记》周成王封师尚父于营丘，东就国，道宿，行迟，莱侯与之争营丘。
现代文：《史记》载，周成王把营丘封给师尚父，师尚父东行前往自己的封国，因路上歇宿，所以到达迟了，莱侯就和他争营丘。
English: According to the "Histories," King Zhou Chenggong gave the fief of Yingqiu to his father, Shishang. Shishang's father traveled east to his fief country. Because he stopped for a rest on the way, he arrived late, and Laihou competed with him for Yingqiu.

古文：逆旅之人曰：吾同时难得而易失，客寝安，殆非就封者也。
现代文：客店里的人说：我听说机会难得却容易失掉，这位客人睡得很安宁，大概不是去接受封地的吧。
English: People in the inn said: I heard that opportunities are rare but easy to lose, this guest slept peacefully, probably not to accept the fiefdom.

古文：太公闻之，夜衣而行至营丘。
现代文：太公听到了，就连夜起来赶路，到了营丘。
English: When the great-grandfather heard this, he got up in the middle of the night to make his way to the camp.

古文：陵亦丘也。
现代文：陵也就是丘。
English: A mausoleum is also a mound.

古文：献公自营丘徙临淄。
现代文：献公从营丘迁移到临淄。
English: The dedication moved from Yingqiu to Linyi.

古文：余按营陵城南无水，惟城北有一水，世谓之白狼水，西出丹山，俗谓凡山也，东北流，由《尔雅》出前左之文，不得以为营丘矣。
现代文：按营陵城南没有河流，只在城北有一条水，世人称为白狼水，发源于西边的丹山，俗称凡山，往东北流。从《尔雅》中水从县城左前方流出那句话看，就不能认为这就是营丘了。
English: According to Yingling, there is no river in the south of the city, but there is a water in the north of the city, known to the world as the White Wolf Water, which originates in the west of the Danshan Mountain, commonly known as the Fan Mountain, and flows to the northeast. Judging from the sentence in "Lya" that the water flows out from the left front of the county seat, it cannot be considered that this is Yingqiu.

古文：营丘者，山名也。
现代文：营丘，其实是山名。
English: Yingqiu is actually the name of the mountain.

古文：《诗》所谓子之营兮，遭我乎峱之间兮。
现代文：《诗经》所说的：你到营丘来，和我在播山之间相遇。
English: The "Song of Songs" says: Come to the camp hill, and meet me between the mountains.

古文：作者多以丘陵号同，缘陵又去莱差近，咸言太公所封。
现代文：作者大多以为丘、陵同名，缘陵又与莱相距较近。这些地方据说都是太公的封地。
English: Most authors think that the hill and the tomb have the same name, and the associated tomb is closer to Lai. These places are said to be fiefs of the Tai Gong.

古文：考之《春秋经》书，诸侯城缘陵。
现代文：根据《春秋经》记载，诸侯修筑缘陵城。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn Annals" records, the lords built the imperial mausoleums.

古文：《左传》曰迁杞也。
现代文：《左传》说：后来迁到了祀。
English: "Zo Zhuan" says: Later he moved to Wuxi.

古文：《毛诗》郑注，并无营字，瓒以为非近之。
现代文：《毛诗》郑玄注也都没有营字，薛攒认为不是，这说法较为正确。
English: Zheng Xuan's commentary on "Mao Shi" does not have any characters, and Xue Yao believes that it is not, and this statement is more correct.

古文：今临淄城中有丘，在小城内，周回三百步，高九丈，北降丈五，淄水出其前，故有营丘之名，与《尔雅》相符。
现代文：今天临淄城中有一座小丘，坐落在小城内，周围三百步，高九丈，北边降低一丈万尺，淄水在丘前流出，因此有营丘这名称，与《尔雅》所记相符。
English: Today, there is a small hill in Linyi City. It is located inside the small city, with a circumference of 300 paces, a height of 9 feet, and a drop of 10,000 feet on the north side. Surge water flows out in front of the hill, hence the name Yingqiu, which is consistent with what is written in "Lya."

古文：城对天齐渊，故城有齐城之称。是以晏子言始爽鸠氏居之，逢伯陵居之，太公居之。
现代文：此城面对天齐渊，所以有齐城之称，因此晏子说，最初爽鸡氏住在这里，逢伯陵，太公也住在这里。
English: This city faces Tianqibuan, so it is known as Qi City. Therefore, Zizi said, the Shuangqi clan originally lived here, Fengbo Ling, and the Grand Duke also lived here.

古文：又曰：先君太公筑营之丘，季札观风，闻齐音曰：泱泱乎，大风也哉！
现代文：又说：先君太公，修筑了营丘。季札来齐观察民情风俗，听到齐国的音乐，不禁赞美道：多么沉雄壮美啊，真像是一阵大风！
English: He also said, "The late Emperor Taigong built a camp mound. Ji Zhaozong came to observe the folk customs, and when he heard the music of Qi, he couldn't help but praise: How majestic and magnificent, it's really like a gale!

古文：表东海者，其太公乎？
现代文：能作为东海诸国的表率的，大概就是太公了吧！
English: Like the wide East Sea, this is probably the legacy of Jiang Taigong, right?

古文：田巴入齐，过淄自镜。
现代文：田巴到了齐国，经过淄水时，从水中照见自己的面影。
English: When Tianba arrived in Qi Province and passed through Surabaya, he saw his reflection in the water.

古文：郭景纯言齐之营丘，淄水径其南及东也，非营陵明矣。
现代文：郭景纯说：齐国的营丘，淄水流经它的南面和东面。由此可见营丘分明不是营陵了。
English: Guo Jingshun said: the Yingqiu of Qi, the Surabaya water flows through its south and east. From this, it can be seen that the Yingqiu is clearly not the Yingling.

古文：献公之徙，其犹晋氏深翼名绛，非谓自营陵而之也。其外郭，即献公所徙临淄城也，世谓之虏城。言齐湣王伐燕，燕王哙死，虏其民实诸郭，因以名之。
现代文：献公的迁都，也正如晋迁到翼后又改名绛一样，并不是说从营陵迁到这里来，现在的临淄外城，就是献公当年所迁的临淄城，世人称为虏城，据说齐滑王攻燕，燕王啥死，滑王俘掳了燕的百姓，让他们居住在外城，因此名为虏城。
English: The relocation of the capital dedicated to the emperor, just like the relocation of Jin to Wuhai and the change of name to Jiu, does not mean that it was moved here from Yingling. The current Linyi Outer City is the Linyi City that was moved in the year of dedication. The world is called Krupcheng. It is said that Qi Niu Wang attacked Yan, and Yan Wang died. Niu Wang captured Yan's people and let them live in the outer city, hence the name Krupcheng.

古文：秦始皇三十四年，灭齐为郡，治临淄。
现代文：秦始皇三十四年前，灭了齐国，设立为郡，郡治在临淄。
English: Thirty-four years ago, Qin Shihuang destroyed Qi and established it as a county, with the county seat in Linyi.

古文：汉高帝六年，封子肥于齐为王国，王莽更名济南也，《战国策》曰：田单为齐相，过淄水，有老人涉淄而出，不能行，坐沙中，单乃解裘于斯水之上也。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把齐封给王子肥，立为王国。王莽改名为济南。《战国策》说：田单当齐国宰相，经过淄水时，有个老人淌过淄水，出水后冻得不能行走了，坐在沙中，田单就在水边脱下自己的皮衣给他穿。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave Qi Feng to Prince Fei and established it as a kingdom. Wang Mang changed its name to Jinan. "Strategy of Warring States" said: Tian Shan, when he was the prime minister of Qi, when passing through Surabaya, there was an old man who ran through Surabaya, froze to death after getting out of the water, and sat in the sand. Tian Shan took off his fur coat at the water's edge and gave it to him to wear.

古文：女水导川东北流，甚有神焉、化隆则水生，政薄则津竭。
现代文：又往东流过利县东边，淄水从利县往东北流经东安平城北边，又往东流经巨淀县旧城南边。
English: It also flows eastward through the east side of Lixian County, and Surabaya water flows from Lixian County to the northeast through the north side of Donganping City, and flows eastward through the south side of the old city of Jiuyuan County.

古文：燕建平六年，水忽暴竭，玄明恶之，寝病而亡。燕太上四年，女水又竭，慕容超恶之，燕祚遂沦。
现代文：征和四年很厌恶这不吉之兆，卧病而死，南燕太上四年，女水又枯竭了，慕容超也很感厌恶，燕于是亡国。
English: Zheng He, who was four years old, was disgusted by this bad omen and died of an illness. Nan Yan, who was four years old, was exhausted. Murong Chao was also disgusted, and Yan died.

古文：女水东北流，径东安平县故城南。
现代文：女水往东北流经东安平县旧城南面。
English: The Meisui River flows northeast through the southern part of the old town of Donganping County.

古文：时水又东北流，渑水庄之。
现代文：《续述征记》说：女水流到安平城南，潜入地下流了十五里，然后又流出，向北注入阳水。
English: "Continuation of the Record" said: the female water flowed to the south of Anping City, infiltrated the underground flow for fifteen miles, and then flowed out again, injecting Yangshui to the north.

古文：水出营城东，世谓之汉溱水也。
现代文：安平城是从前的都亭。《春秋》，鲁庄公三年所立，碑上题着梧台里三字。
English: Anping City was the former capital. "Spring and Autumn" was erected by Lu Zhuang in the third year. The inscription on the monument reads "Wu Tai Li San Ruo."

古文：西北流，径营城北。
现代文：系水又往西流经葵丘北面。
English: The main water flowed westward through the northern side of Kwai Chung.

古文：汉景帝四年，封齐悼惠王子刘信都为侯国。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公八年把这里封给齐悼惠王的儿子刘信都，立为侯国。
English: "Spring and Autumn": In the eighth year of Zhuang Gong's reign, Liu Xindu, the son of Qi Yi Hui Wang, was given the title of lord of the manor.

古文：渑水又西径乐安博昌县故城南。
现代文：绳水又往西流，经过乐安博昌县旧城南边。
English: The rope and water flowed westward, passing the southern edge of the old city of Le'an Bochang County.

古文：应劭曰：昌水出东莱昌阳县，道远不至，取其嘉名。
现代文：应肋说：昌水发源于东莱昌阳县，因昌阳县路远不易到达，取了这个美名。
English: Ying Li said, "Changshui originated in Changyang County, Donglai, and because the roads in Changyang County are far from easy to reach, it has gained this reputation.

古文：阚駰曰：县处势平，故曰博昌。
现代文：阐胭说：博昌县地势平旷，所以称博昌。
English: Elucidation said: Bochang County is flat and open, so it is called Bochang.

古文：渑水西历贝丘。
现代文：绳水往西流经贝丘。
English: The waters of the rope flow westward through the bayou.

古文：京相璠曰：博昌县南近渑水，有地名贝丘，在齐城西北四十里。
现代文：京相潘说：博昌县南面临近绳水，有个地方叫贝丘，在齐城西北四十里。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: the south of Bochang County faces the near-rope water, there is a place called Beichu, forty miles northwest of Qicheng.

古文：《春秋》庄公八年，齐侯田于贝丘，见公子彭生，豕立而位。齐侯坠车伤足于是处也。
现代文：《春秋》：庄公八年前，齐侯在贝丘打猎，看见公子彭生像猪一样直立起来啼哭，齐侯吓得从车上掉下来，跌伤了脚，就在这地方。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Eight years ago, Zhuang Gong, Qi Hou was hunting in Beichu. He saw his son Peng Sheng standing upright like a pig and crying. Qi Hou was so scared that he fell from the car and hurt his foot. It was in this place.

古文：渑水又西北人时水。
现代文：绳水又往西北流，注入时水。
English: The rope water also flows to the northwest, injecting fresh water.

古文：《从征记》又曰：水出临淄县北，径乐安博昌南界，西入时水者也，自下通谓之为渑也。
现代文：《从征记》又说：绳水发源于临淄县，往北流经乐安、博昌南面边界，往西注入时水从这里至下游也通称为混水。
English: "From the record" also said: the rope water originated in Linyi County, flowing northward through the southern border of Le'an and Bochang, and when injected to the west, the water from here to the downstream is also commonly known as mixed water.

古文：昔晋侯与齐侯宴，齐侯曰有酒如渑，指喻此水也。
现代文：从前晋侯和齐侯会宴，齐侯说：有酒如混水。比喻中指的就是这条水。
English: Once upon a time, there was a banquet between Prince Jin and Prince Qi. Prince Qi said, "Wine is like mixed water." The water in the parable is the horse mackerel.

古文：时水又屈而东北，径博昌城北。时水又东北，径齐利县故城北，又东北径巨淀县故城北，又东北径广饶县故城北，东北入淄水。
现代文：时水又折向东北，流经博昌城北面；又往东北流经齐利县旧城北面，又往东北流经巨淀县旧城北面，又往东北流经广饶县旧城北面，往东北注入淄水。
English: When the water turned to the northeast, it flowed through the north side of Bochang City; it also flowed to the northeast through the north side of the old city of Qili County, it also flowed to the northeast through the north side of the old city of Jiuyang County, and it also flowed to the northeast through the north side of the old city of Guangrao County, injecting Surabaya water to the northeast.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：淄入濡。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：淄水注入濡水。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: salty water is infused with wet water.

古文：《淮南子》曰：白公问微言曰：若以水投水，如何？
现代文：《淮南子》说：白公问孔子对含义至深的隐微之言的看法，说：如果把水倒入水中，又会怎么样份。
English: "Huainanzi" said: Bai Gongtuo asked Confucius's opinion on the deepest meaning of the subtle words and said: If you pour water into water, what will happen?

古文：孔子曰：淄、渑之水合，易牙尝而知之。
现代文：孔子说：淄水、混水混合，易牙只要尝一尝就会知道。
English: Confucius said, "If you taste the mixture of brackish water and mixed water, you will know how to change your teeth."

古文：谓斯水矣。又东北入于海。
现代文：说的就是这条水。又往东北流，注入大海。
English: It is this water that he is talking about. It flows to the northeast and flows into the sea.

古文：淄水入马车渎，乱流东北，径琅槐故城南，又东北径马井城北，与时渑之水，互受通称，故邑流其号。
现代文：淄水注入马车读，往东北乱流，经琅槐旧城南面，又往东北流经马井城北，与时水、泥水互相通称，所以城以水为名传下来了。
English: Surabaya water was injected into the carriage, and the turbulent flow to the northeast passed through the south of Surabaya old city, and then flowed to the northeast through the north of Ma'in city. It is commonly known as water and muddy water, so the city has been passed down as water.

古文：又东北至皮丘坑入于海，故晏谟、伏琛并言淄渑之水，合于皮丘坑西。
现代文：淄水又往东北流，到皮丘坑注入大海。因此晏漠、伏深都说：淄水、绳水在皮丘坑西面汇合。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast and pours into the sea at Pichu pit. Therefore, both Zouba and Fushin said: Surabaya water and rope water converge at the west side of Pichu pit.

古文：《地理志》曰：马车渎至琅槐入于海。盖举县言也。
现代文：《地理志》说：马车读流到琅槐注入大海，这是指县而言。
English: "Geography" said: the carriage read the flow to the raft into the sea, which refers to the county.

古文：汶水出朱虚县泰山，山上有长城，西接岱山，东连琅邪巨海，千有余里，盖田氏之所造也。
现代文：汶水发源于朱虚县的泰山，泰山上有长城，西面连接岱山，东面延伸到琅邪大海，全长千余里，是田氏所筑。
English: Wenshui originated from Mount Tai in Zhuxu County. There is a Great Wall on Mount Tai, which is connected to Mount Lushan on the west and extends to the Sea of Evil on the east. It is more than a thousand miles long and was built by the Tian family.

古文：《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王二十年，齐筑防以为长城。
现代文：《竹书纪年》载，梁惠成王二十年前,齐国修筑防御工事，造了长城。
English: According to the "Chronicle of Bamboo," twenty years before King Liang Huicheng, Qi built fortifications and built the Great Wall.

古文：《竹书》又云：晋烈公十二年，王命韩景子、赵烈子、翟员伐齐，入长城。
现代文：《竹书》又说：晋烈公十二年前，派韩景子，赵烈子、翟员讨伐齐国，侵入长城。
English: "The Bamboo Scroll" also says: Twelve years ago, Prince Jin Rong sent Han Jiezi, Zhao Rongzi, and his retainers to fight against Qi and invade the Great Wall.

古文：《史记》所谓齐威王越赵侵我伐长城者也。
现代文：《史记》所谓齐威王经过赵国侵犯我国，攻打长城，就指此事。
English: The so-called story of King Qiwei invading China through Zhao and attacking the Great Wall in "Histories" refers to this event.

古文：伏琛、晏谟并言水出县东南峿山，山在小泰山东者也。
现代文：伏深、晏漠都说：汶水发源于朱虚县东南面的晤山，峪山在小泰山的东边。
English: Both Fushin and Zoumo said that the source of Wenshui is from Mount Heme in the southeast of Zhuxu County, and Mount Lushan is in the east of Xiaotai Mountain.

古文：北过其县东，汶水自县东北，径郚城北。
现代文：往北流过县东，汶水从朱虚县东北流经部城北面。
English: It flows northward through the east of the county, and the Wen Shui flows from the northeast of Zhuxu County to the north of Jingbu City.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：朱虚县东四十里，有郚城亭，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：朱虚县东面四十里有个邵城亭，是旧县城。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: There is a Shaocheng Pavilion forty miles east of Zhuxu County, which is the old county seat.

古文：又东北径管宁冢东。
现代文：又往东北流经管宁墓东面，所以晏漠说，柴阜西南有魏管宁墓。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the east of Guan Ning's tomb, so Zou Mo said that there is a Wei Guan Ning's tomb in the southwest of Chai Fu.

古文：故晏谟言：柴阜西南，有魏独行君子管宁墓，墓前有碑。
现代文：管宁是一位品德高尚不随俗浮沉的人。他的墓前有一座石碑。
English: There is a stone monument in front of his grave.

古文：又东北径柴阜山北。山之东有征士邴原冢，碑志存焉。
现代文：汶水又往东北流经柴阜山北面，山的东面有邮原墓，丙卜原是个有才德而不受征聘的人，他墓前的碑记还在。
English: The Wen Shui also flows to the northeast through the north face of Mount Chaifu. On the east side of the mountain is the tomb of Postmaster Po, who was a talented man who was not recruited. The monument in front of his tomb is still there.

古文：汶水又东北，径汉青州刺史孙嵩墓西，有碑碣。
现代文：汶水又往东北流经汉朝青州刺史孙篙墓西边，有墓碑。
English: The Wen Shui also flows to the northeast through the west side of the tomb of the Han Dynasty's Qing Zhou Jishi Sun Yat-sen, with a tombstone.

古文：汶水又东径安丘县故城北。汉高帝八年，封将军张说为侯国。《地理志》曰：王莽之诛郅也。
现代文：汶水又往东流经安丘县旧城北面，汉高帝八年前,把这里封给将军张说，立为侯国石《地理志》说：这就是王莽时的诛邪。
English: Wen Shui also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Anqiu County. Eight years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to the general Zhang He, and it was set up as a provincial capital. "Geography" said: This is the wickedness of Wang Mangshi.

古文：孟康曰：今渠丘亭是也。
现代文：孟康说：就是今天的渠丘亭。
English: Meng Kang said, "That is today's Quqiu Pavilion."

古文：伏琛、晏谟《齐记》并言莒渠丘亭在安丘城东北十里，非矣。
现代文：伏深、晏漠的《齐记》都说，营县的渠丘亭在安丘城东北十里。
English: The "Qiji" of Fushin and Zoumo both say that the Quqiu Pavilion in Ying County is ten miles northeast of Anqiu City.

古文：城对牟山，山之西南有孙宾硕兄弟墓，碑志并在也。
现代文：都弄错了。城面对牟山，山的西南面有孙宾硕兄弟墓。碑文都还在。
English: They got it all wrong. The city faces Mt. Mu, and there is the tomb of Sun Bingsuo's brothers on the southwest side of the mountain. The inscriptions are still there.

古文：又北过淳于县西，又东北入于潍。
现代文：又往北流过淳于县西面，又往东北注人潍水。
English: It also flows north through the western part of Junyu County, and in the northeast it discharges into the Ningyuan River.

古文：故夏后氏之斟灌国也。
现代文：淳于县是从前夏后氏的斟灌国。
English: Junyu County was the watering place of the former Xiaguo clan.

古文：周武王以封淳于公，号曰淳于国。
现代文：周武王把它封给淳于公，称为淳于国。
English: King Zhou Wu gave it to Jun Yu Gong and called it Jun Yu Guo.

古文：《春秋》桓公六年：冬，州公如曹。
现代文：《春秋》，桓公六年冬天，州公到曹。
English: "Spring and Autumn," in the winter of the sixth year of King Kan's reign, Zhou Gong to Cao.

古文：《传》曰：淳于公如曹，度其国危，遂不复也。
现代文：《左传》说：淳于公到了曹，估计国内形势危险，就没有回去。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: When Chun Yu Gong arrived in Cao, he estimated that the domestic situation was dangerous and did not go back.

古文：其城东北，则两川交会也。
现代文：城的东北面，是汉水与潍水的汇流处。
English: The northeast side of the city is the confluence of the Han River and the Surabaya River.

古文：潍水出琅邪箕县潍山，琅邪，山名也，越王句践之故国也。
现代文：潍水发源于琅邪郡箕县的潍山，琅邪是山名，原属越王句践的国土。
English: Surabaya originated from Mount Surabaya in Surabaya County, Surabaya County. Surabaya is the name of the mountain, originally belonging to the land of Yue Wangcun.

古文：句践并吴，欲霸中国，徙都琅邪。
现代文：句践吞并吴国后，想称霸中国，就迁都到琅邪。
English: After the annexation of Wu, he wanted to dominate China, so he moved the capital to Suiyi.

古文：秦始皇二十六年，灭齐，以为郡。
现代文：秦始皇二十六年前，灭了齐国，就把琅邪设立为郡。
English: Twenty-six years ago, Emperor Qin Shi Huang, having destroyed the State of Qi, established the County of Zheyao.

古文：城即秦皇之所筑也。
现代文：城是秦始皇所筑。
English: The city was built by Qin Shi Huang.

古文：遂登琅邪大乐之山，作层台于其上，谓之琅邪台。
现代文：秦始皇登上琅邪的大乐之山，在上修筑了层台，称为琅邪台。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang ascended the Mount of Great Music, and built a tiered platform on it, which is known as the Tower of Evil.

古文：台在城东南十里，孤立，特显出于众山，上下周二十里余，傍滨巨海。
现代文：台在城东南十里，孤零零地耸立着，在众山之中显得格外突出。山周围二十里有余，靠近海滨。
English: Tai is ten miles southeast of the city, stands alone, and stands out among the mountains. There are more than twenty around the mountain, close to the seashore.

古文：秦王乐之，因留三月。乃徙黔首三万户于琅邪山下，复十二年。
现代文：秦始一王很高兴，因此在这里逗留了三个月，他把三万户平民迁移到琅邪山下，豁免赋税十二年。
English: King Qin Shihuang was so pleased that he stayed here for three months. He moved thirty thousand civilians to the foot of Mount Ziyang and exempted them from paying taxes for twelve years.

古文：所作台基三层，层高三丈，上级平敞，方二百余步，广五里，刊石立碑，纪秦功德。
现代文：他修筑的高台，台基有三层，每层高一丈，七层平坦宽敞，二百余步见方，宽广五里。又刻石立碑，溉载秦始皇的功德。
English: The high platform he built has a three-storey base, each storey is one storey high, seven storeys are flat and spacious, more than two hundred paces square, and five miles wide. It is also engraved with a stone monument, bearing the merits of Qin Shihuang.

古文：台上有神渊，渊至灵焉。人污之则竭，斋洁则通。
现代文：台上有个神渊，非常灵验，如有人将水弄脏之后就会枯竭；如诚心诚意，保持洁净，水就畅通。
English: There is a fountain on the table, which is very effective. If someone makes the water dirty, it will dry up. If you are sincere and keep it clean, the water will flow smoothly.

古文：神庙在齐八祠中。汉武帝亦尝登之。
现代文：这里的神庙是齐地八祠之一，汉武帝也曾登临此台。
English: The temple here is one of the eight ancestral shrines in Qiji, and Emperor Hanwu once visited the site.

古文：汉高帝吕后七年，以为王国。文帝三年，更名为郡，王莽改曰填夷矣。
现代文：汉高帝吕后七年前，把这里立为王闲，文帝三年前，改名为郡，王莽时又改称填夷。
English: Seven years ago, the Emperor of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Lyu Hou, named it Wang Xian. Three years ago, the Emperor Wen changed the name to Gu County. Wang Mangshi also changed the name to Jieyi.

古文：潍水导源潍山。
现代文：潍水发源于潍山。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Mount Surabaya.

古文：许慎、吕忱云：潍水出箕屋山。
现代文：许慎、吕忱都说：潍水发源于；箕屋山。
English: Both Xu Sheng and Lucheng said: "The source of this water is the Qiya Mountain.

古文：《淮南子》曰：潍水出覆舟山。
现代文：《淮南子》说：潍水发源于覆舟山。
English: "Huai Nanzi" said: "The spring water originates from the Zhoushan Mountains.

古文：盖广异名也。
现代文：这些都是此山的异名。
English: These are the different names of the mountain.

古文：东北径箕县故城西，又西，析泉水注之。
现代文：潍水往东北流经箕县旧城西，又往西流，析泉水注入。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Surabaya, and then flows to the west, where it is infused with spring water.

古文：水出析泉县北松山东，南流径析泉县东，又东南径仲固山东，北流入于潍。
现代文：析泉水发源于析泉县北面的松山，往东南流经析泉县东，又往东南流经仲固山，往东北注入潍水。
English: The dissected spring water originates from Matsuyama in the north of dissected spring county, flows to the southeast through the east of dissected spring county, flows to the southeast through Zhonggu Mountain, and injects the water into the northeast.

古文：《地理志》曰：至箕县北入潍者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：析泉水流到箕县往北注入潍水。
English: "Geography" said: the spring water flow to the north of the county is injected into the water.

古文：潍水又东北径诸县故城西。
现代文：潍水又往东北流经诸县旧城西。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the counties west of the old city.

古文：《春秋》文公十二年，季孙行父城诸及郓。
现代文：《春秋》文公于二年前，季孙行父修筑了诸城和郭城。
English: "Spring and Autumn" was published two years ago, and Ji Sun Xingfa built Zhu Cheng and Gu Cheng.

古文：《传》曰：城其下邑也。
现代文：《左传》说：修筑了卜邑城。
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: Buyi City was built.

古文：王莽更名诸并矣。
现代文：王莽改名为诸城。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Zhu Cheng.

古文：潍水又东北，涓水注之。
现代文：滩水又往东北流，涓水注入。
English: The beach water flows to the northeast, and the brackish water is injected.

古文：水出马耳山，山高百丈，上有二石并举，望齐马耳，故世取名焉。
现代文：涓水发源于马耳山，山高百丈，山顶有两块岩石相对并峙，望去像马耳一样，因此世人取名为马耳山。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Mount Malta. The mountain is hundreds of meters high, and the top of the mountain has two rocks standing side by side, looking like Malta. That's why people call it Mount Malta.

古文：东去常山三十里，涓水发于其阴，北径娄乡城东。
现代文：此山东距常山三十里，涓水发源于山的北面，往北流经娄乡城东面。
English: This Shandong is 30 miles away from Changshan. The Surabaya water originates from the north side of the mountain and flows northward through the east side of the city of Surabaya.

古文：《春秋》昭公五年，《经》书夏莒牟夷，以牟娄防兹来奔者也。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公五年前，《经》载，夏天，营牟夷带了牟、娄、防、兹前来投奔。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Five years ago, Zhaogong, according to the "Ching," in the summer, Ying Mui brought Mu, Yao, Bo, and Zi to join him.

古文：又分诸县之东，为海曲县，故俗人谓此城为东诸城。涓水又北注于潍水。
现代文：又把诸县的东部划分出来立为海曲县，所以民间称此城为东诸城，涓水又往北注入潍水。
English: In addition, the eastern part of the counties was divided and established as Haiqu County, so the people called this city the East Cities. Surabaya water was injected into Surabaya to the north.

古文：东北过东武县西，县因冈为城，城周三十里。
现代文：往东北流过东武县西边。东武县利用山冈地势筑城，周围三十里。
English: To the northeast, it flows through the west side of Dongwu County. Dongwu County has built a city using the mountains and hills, with a circumference of thirty miles.

古文：汉高帝六年，封郭蒙为侯国，王莽更名之曰祥善矣。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这里封给郭蒙，立为侯国，王莽改名为祥善。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Guo Meng as a fiefdom, and Wang Mang changed his name to Xiang Zhen.

古文：又北，左合扶淇之水，水出西南常山，东北流注潍。
现代文：潍水又北流，左面与扶淇水汇合，扶淇水发源于西南面的常山，往东北流，注入潍水。
English: Surabaya's water also flows north, and on the left it merges with Fuqi's water. Fuqi's water originates from Changshan in the southwest and flows to the northeast, infusing Surabaya's water.

古文：晏、伏并以潍水为扶淇之水，以扶淇之水为潍水，非也。
现代文：晏漠、伏深都以为潍水就是扶淇水，把扶淇水当作潍水，都弄错了。
English: Both Zou Miao and Fushin thought that Fuxi water was Fuxi water, and mistook Fuxi water as Fuxi water.

古文：按经脉志，潍自箕县北，径东武县西，北流合扶淇之水。
现代文：根据，《水经》的水脉记载，潍水从箕县往北流经东武县，往西北流，与扶淇水汇合。
English: According to the record of the water vein in the "Water Sutra," the Surabaya water flows northward from Min County through Dongwu County, flows northwestward, and merges with the Fuxi water.

古文：晏谟、伏琛云：东武城西北二里潍水者，即扶淇之水也。
现代文：晏说、伏深说：东武城西北二里的潍水，就是扶淇水。
English: Yu said, Fushin said: Surabaya, two miles northwest of Tobu City, is Fushimizu.

古文：潍水又北，右合卢水，即久台水也。
现代文：潍水又往北流，在右边与卢水汇合，卢水就久台水。
English: The Surabaya River flows northward, merging with the Luzhou River on the right, and the Luzhou River merges with the Jiutai River.

古文：《地理志》曰：水出琅邪横县故山，王莽之令丘也。
现代文：《地理志》说：卢水发源于琅邪横县故山，横县就是王莽时的令丘。
English: "Geography" said: Lu Shui originated from the ancient mountains of Shiyan County, Hengxian County, Hengxian County is Wang Mangshi's Lingqiu.

古文：山在东武县故城东南，世谓之卢山也。
现代文：山在东武县旧城东南，世人称为卢山。
English: The mountain is in the southeast of the old town of Dongwu County, and is known to the world as Lushan.

古文：西北流，径昌县故城西，东北流。
现代文：卢水往西北流经昌县泊城西面，转而往东北流。
English: The Lu River flows northwest through the west side of Po Cheng, Chang County, and turns to the northeast.

古文：《齐地记》曰：东武城东南有卢水，水侧有胜火木，方俗音曰柽子，其木经野火烧死，炭不灭。故东方朔云：不灰之木者也。
现代文：《齐地记》说：东武城东南有卢水，水旁有胜火木，当地方言称怪广、这些树木经野火烧死，变成了炭都不消灭，因此东方朔称为不介成灰的树木。
English: "Zidi Ji" said: Southeast of Dongwu City, there is Lu Shui, and there are Sheng Hui trees next to the water. The local saying is that it is strange that these trees are burned to death by wildfires and turned into charcoal, but they are not destroyed. Therefore, Dongwu Shuo is called trees that do not turn into ashes.

古文：其水又东北流，径东武县故城东，而西北入潍。
现代文：卢水又往东北流经东武县旧城东面，往西北流，注入潍水。
English: The Lu River flows to the northeast through the eastern part of the old city of Dongwu County, flows to the northwest, and injects the Surabaya River.

古文：《地理志》曰：久台水东南至东武入潍者也。
现代文：《地理志》说：久台水往东南流，到东武注入潍水。
English: "Geography" said: Jiutai water flows to the southeast, and it injects Surabaya water into Tobu.

古文：《尚书》所谓潍、淄其道矣。
现代文：这就是《尚书》所说的潍水、淄水都已疏通
English: This is what "Shangshu" said about Surabaya, Surabaya has been dredged.

古文：又北过平昌县东，潍水又北径石泉县故城西，王莽之养信也。
现代文：又往北流过平昌县东边，潍水又往北流经石泉县旧城西边，就是王莽时的养信。
English: It also flows northward through the east of Pyeongchang County, and the Surabaya River flows northward through the west of the old city of Shiquan County, which is Wang Mangtu's Yangxin.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：平昌县东南四十里，有石泉亭，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗说》说：平昌县东南四十里有石泉亭，是旧县。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: There is a stone spring pavilion in the southeast forty of Pyeongchang County, which is an old county.

古文：潍水又北径平昌县故城东，荆水注之。
现代文：潍水又往北流经平昌县旧城东边，荆水注入。
English: Surabaya water also flows northward through the eastern side of the old city of Pyeongchang County, and is infused with ginger water.

古文：水出县南荆山阜，东北流径平昌县故城东。汉文帝封齐悼惠王肥子印为侯国。
现代文：荆水发源于县南的荆山阜，往东北流经平昌县旧城东边 汉文帝把这里封给齐悼惠王肥的儿子印，立为侯国。
English: The Jing Water originates from the Jing Mountain Foothills in the south of the county and flows to the northeast through the east of the old city of Pyeongchang County. Han Emperor Wen sealed this place to Qi Miao, the son of Hui Wangfei, and established it as a princely state.

古文：城之东南角有台，台下有井，与荆水通。
现代文：城的东南角有一座台，台下有井，与荆水相通，有什么掉到井里，可在荆水取回。
English: In the southeast corner of the city, there is a platform. Beneath the platform, there is a well connected to the Jingshui River. If anything falls into the well, it can be retrieved through the Jingshui River.

古文：物坠于井，则取之荆水，昔常有龙出入于其中，故世亦谓之龙台城也。荆水又东北流，注于潍。
现代文：过夫常有龙出入其中，所以民间又称为龙台城。荆水又往东北流，注入潍水。潍水文往北流，语水注入。
English: In the past, there were often dragons in and out of it, so it was also called Longtai City by the people. The Jing water flowed to the northeast and injected into the Surabaya water. The Surabaya water flowed to the north and injected into the language water.

古文：潍水又北，浯水注之，水出浯山，世谓之巨平山也。《地理志》曰：灵门县有高山、壶山，浯水所出，东北入潍，今是山西接浯山。
现代文：语水发源于语山，世人称为巨平山。《地理志》说：灵门县有高深山、壶山，悟水发源于此，亨靛东北流，注入潍水。今天此山西面和语山连接。
English: "Geography" said: Lingmen County has Gaoshen Mountain and Jujube Mountain, Gohsu originated from here, Hengye Northeast Stream, and injected into Surabaya. Today, the west side of this mountain is connected to Yuanshan.

古文：许慎《说文》言水出灵门山，世谓之浯汶矣。
现代文：许慎《说文》说：语水发源于灵门山，世人称为语汶水。
English: Xu Shen's "Saying Texts" says: The language of water originates from Lingmen Mountain, and the world is known as the language of water.

古文：其水东北径姑幕县故城东。县有五色土，王者封建诸侯，随方受之。
现代文：语水往东北流经姑幕县时城东边，该县有五色土，帝王分封诸侯时，包起不同颜色的泥卜，按方位授给诸侯。
English: The Yangtze River flows to the northeast through the eastern part of Jicheng, Gubu County. The county has five-colored soil. When the emperor divided the provinces, he wrapped mud of different colors and awarded them to the provinces according to the direction.

古文：故薄姑氏之国也。
现代文：这里是从前薄姑氏之国。
English: This is the land of the former Bo Gu clan.

古文：阚駰曰：周成王时，薄姑与四国作乱，周公灭之，以封太公。
现代文：阐胭说：周成王时，薄姑和四国叛乱，周公灭了它，封给太公。
English: Elucidation said: When Zhou Cheng Wang, Bo Gu and Shikoku rebelled, Zhou Gong put an end to it and gave it to Taigong.

古文：是以《地理志》曰：或言薄姑也。王莽曰季睦矣。
现代文：因此《地理志》说：姑幕县也称薄姑，王莽时称季睦。
English: Therefore, "Geography" said: Guwu County is also called Bo Gu, and Wang Mang is called Qimutu.

古文：应劭曰：《左传》曰薄姑氏国，太公封焉。
现代文：应勘说：《左传》记载，薄姑氏国琏太公的封地。
English: Yingkang said: "According to Zuo Zhuan, it was the fief of the grand duke of the Bo Gu clan.

古文：薛瓒《汉书注》云：博昌有薄姑城。
现代文：薛攒《汉书注》说：博昌有薄姑城。
English: Xue Nan "Hanshu Note" said: Bochang has a Bo Gu city.

古文：未知孰是。
现代文：不知谁的说法正确。
English: I don't know who's right.

古文：浯水又东北径平昌县故城北，古堨此水，以溢溉田，南注荆水。
现代文：涪水又往东北流经平昌县旧城北面，古时在此筑堰截流，用来灌溉农田，南流注入荆水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the northeast through the northern part of the old city of Pyeongchang County. In ancient times, a weir was built here to cut off the flow, which was used to irrigate farmland, and the southern stream was injected with ginger water.

古文：浯水又东北流，而注于潍水也。
现代文：语水又往东北流，注入潍水。
English: The Yangtze River also flows to the northeast, injecting water from the Bohai River.

古文：又北过高密县西，应劭曰：县有密水，故有高密之名也。
现代文：又往北流过高密县西边，应劫说：县里有密水，因此有高密之名。
English: It also flowed northward past the west side of Gaomi County, and the robber said: There is dense water in the county, so it has the name of Gaomi.

古文：然今世所谓百尺水者，盖密水也。
现代文：现在所说的百尺水就是密水。密水有两个源头。
English: The so-called "hundred-feet of water" is actually "tight water." Tight water has two sources.

古文：水有二源，西源出奕山，亦曰鄣日山。山势高峻，隔绝阳曦。晏谟曰：山状鄣日，是有此名。
现代文：西源出自奕山，也称郭日山，山势高峻，挡住了阳光。晏模说：山形蔽障了日光，因有此名。
English: Xiyuan comes from Yishan, also known as Guo Rishan. The mountain is so high and steep that it blocks the sunlight. Zou Miao said: The mountain shape blocks the sunlight, hence the name.

古文：伏琛曰：山上鄣日，故名鄣日山也。
现代文：伏深说：山峰蔽障了太阳，所以称郭日山。
English: Fushin said: The mountain peaks block the sun, so it is called Guo Rishan.

古文：其水东北流，东源出五弩山，西北流，同泻一壑，俗谓之百尺水，古人堨以溉田数十顷。
现代文：此水往东北流。东源水出自五弩山，往西北流，与源水一同流泻入一条山谷，俗称百尺水，古人在此拦河筑堰，灌溉田地数十顷。
English: This water flows to the northeast. The east source water comes from Mount Wuling and flows to the northwest. Together with the source water, it flows into a valley, commonly known as Hundred Foot Water. The ancients stopped the river here to build a weir and irrigate dozens of hectares of fields.

古文：又北径昌妥县故城东。
现代文：百尺水往北流经高密县西，注入潍水，自此以下，两条水互兼通称。
English: A hundred feet of water flowed northward through the west of Gaomi County, injecting salty water. Since then, the two waters have been known as each other.

古文：汉明帝永平中，封邓袭为侯国也。
现代文：潍水乱流往县西碑产山西，又往东北流，水上有旧堰，从前凿石竖柱阻断潍水，堰宽六十多步，掘开东岸，引水通长渠。
English: The turbulent flow of Surabaya water flows to the west of the county, producing Shanxi, and then flows to the northeast. There is an old weir on the water. Formerly, a stone pillar was cut to block the Surabaya water. The weir is more than sixty steps wide. The east bank was excavated and the water was diverted into a long canal.

古文：《郡国志》曰：双安帝延光元年复也。
现代文：潍水又往东北流经高密县旧城南。明帝永平年间恢复为县。
English: Surabaya's water flowed to the northeast through the old southern part of Gaomi County, which was reinstated as a county during the reign of Emperor Yongping.

古文：又北过淳于县东，潍水又北，左会汶水，北径平城亭西，又东北径密乡亭西。
现代文：又往北流过淳于县东面，潍水又往北流，左边与泣水汇合，往北流经平城亭西面，又转向东北流经密乡亭西面。
English: It also flows north through Junyu County to the east, Surabaya to the north, and merges with Weeping Water on the left. It flows north through the west of Pingcheng Pavilion, and turns to the northeast through the west of Muxiang Pavilion.

古文：《郡国志》曰：淳于县有密乡。
现代文：东郡国志》说：淳于县有密乡。
English: Dong County National History" said: There is a close-knit community in Junyu County.

古文：《地理志》，皆北海之属县也。
现代文：《地理志》说，都是北海的属县。
English: "Geography" says that they are all counties in the North Sea.

古文：应劭曰：淳于县东北六十里，有平城亭，又四十里，有密乡亭，故县也。
现代文：应肋说：淳于县东北六十里有平城亭，又四十里有密乡亭，从前是县。
English: Ying Li said: In the northeast of Chunyu County, there are sixty Pingcheng pavilions, and forty Mi Xiang pavilions, which used to be counties.

古文：潍水又东北径下密县故城西。城东有密阜。
现代文：潍水又往东北流经下密县旧城西，城东有密阜。
English: Surabaya also flows to the northeast through the old west of Shimomi County, and there is Mifu in the east of the city.

古文：《地理志》曰：有三户山祠。
现代文：《地理志》说：有三户山祠。
English: "Geography" said: there are three mountain shrines.

古文：余按应劭曰：密者水名，是有下密之称。俗以之名阜，非也。
现代文：按应肋说：密是水名，确有下密之称，但民间用这名字来称呼小山岗，这就不对了。
English: According to Yingli, "Chi" is the name of the water, and it is indeed known as "Shimo-Chi," but people use this name to call the hill, which is not correct.

古文：又东北过都昌县东，潍水东北径逢萌墓。
现代文：又往东北流过都昌县东面，潍水往东北流经逢萌墓。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the eastern part of Duchang County, and flows to the northeast through Fengmeng Tomb.

古文：萌，县人也，少有大节，耻给事县亭，遂浮海至辽东，复还，在不其山隐学。
现代文：逢萌，都昌县人，少年时就很有骨气，以在县亭供职为耻，就渡海到辽东，回来后在不其山隐居读书。
English: Feng Meng, a native of Duchang County, had a strong backbone when he was a boy. He was ashamed to work in the county pavilion, so he went across the sea to Liaodong, and after returning, he lived in seclusion in Fuxishan to study.

古文：明帝安车征萌，以佯狂免。
现代文：明帝备车征聘，逢萌假装癫狂，没有应聘。
English: Ming Di prepares a car for recruitment, Feng Meng pretends to be mad and does not apply.

古文：又北径都昌县故城东。汉高帝六年，封朱轸为侯国。
现代文：潍水又往北流经都昌县旧城东面，汉高帝六年前，把这里封给朱较，立为侯国。
English: Surabaya also flows northward through the east of the old city of Duchang County. Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Zhu Jie and established it as a vassal state.

古文：北海相孔融，为黄巾贼管亥所围于都昌也，太史慈为融求救，刘备持的突围其处也。
现代文：北海宰相孔融曾被黄巾贼管亥围困在都昌。太史慈替孔融去向刘备求救，手持挡箭牌突围，就是这地方。
English: The prime minister of the North Sea, Kong Rong, was once besieged by the yellow-robed bandit, Guan Hai, in Duchang. Taishi Citi went to Liu Bei to ask for help for Kong Rong, and broke out of the siege with a shield. This is the place.

古文：又东北入于海。
现代文：又往东北流注人大海。
English: It also flows to the northeast and pours into the sea.

古文：胶水出黔陬县胶山北，过其县西，《齐记》曰：胶水出五弩山，盖胶山之殊名也。
现代文：胶水发源于黔阪县胶山北面，流过县西，《齐记》说：胶水发源于五弩山，就是胶山的别名。
English: Glue originated in the north of Jiaoshan, Yishan County, and flowed through the west of the county. "Qiji" said: Glue originated in Wushan, which is another name for Jiaoshan.

古文：北径祝兹县故城东。汉武帝元鼎中，封胶东康王子延为侯国。
现代文：胶水往北流经祝兹县旧城东面，汉武帝元鼎年间前～前，把这里封给胶东康王的儿子延，立为侯国。
English: Glue flowed northward through the eastern part of the old city of Zhuzi County. During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Yan, the son of King Jiaodongkang, was assigned this area and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又径扶县故城西，《地理志》，琅邪之属县也。
现代文：又流经征扶县旧城西面。据《地理志》，这是琅邪的属县。
English: It also flows through the west side of the old city of Zifu County. According to the "Geography," this is the county of the evil.

古文：汉文帝元年，封吕平为侯国。
现代文：汉文帝元年前，把这地方封给吕平，立为侯国。
English: Before the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wen gave this place to Lüping and established it as a principality.

古文：胶水又北径黔陬故城西。袁山松《郡国志》曰：县有介亭。
现代文：胶水又往北流经黔随县旧城西南，袁山松《郡国志》说：黔厥县有介亭。
English: The glue also flowed northward through the southwest of the old city of Qizhu County. Yuan Shansong, "County History," said: There is a pavilion in Qijue County.

古文：《地理志》曰：故介国也。
现代文：《地理志》说：这里是从前的介国。
English: "Geography" said: This is the former imperial country.

古文：《春秋》僖公九年，介葛卢来朝，闻牛鸣曰：是生三牺，皆用之。问之，果然。
现代文：《春秋》：僖公九年前，介国葛卢来朝见，听到牛鸣声，说：这头牛生了三头纯色的牛犊，都已用来祭祀了，经查问果然如此。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Nine years ago, nine years ago, Ge Lu from the neighboring country came to see the emperor. He heard the cow's mooing and said, "This cow has given birth to three pure-colored calves, all of which have been used for sacrifice. After investigation, this is indeed the case.

古文：晏谟、伏琛并云县有东西二城，相去四十里有胶水，非也。
现代文：晏漠、伏深都说：黔随县有东西两座城，相距四十里，有胶水。
English: Both Diao Miao and Fuxhen said: There are two cities in Diao Sui County, forty miles apart, and there is glue.

古文：斯乃拒艾水也。
现代文：这话不对，那是拒艾水。
English: That's not right, that's a denial.

古文：水出县西南拒艾山，即《齐记》所谓黔艾山也。
现代文：拒艾水发源于黔随县西南面的拒艾山，就是《齐记》所说的黔艾山。
English: Qiaoyi Water originates from Qiaoyi Mountain in the southwest of Guizhou County, which is the Qiaoyi Mountain mentioned in "Qiji."

古文：东北流，径柜县故城西，王莽之祓同也，世谓之王城。又谓是水为洋水矣。
现代文：往东北流经柜县旧城西面，这就是王莽时的拔同，人们称为王城，又称这条水为洋水。
English: It flows to the northeast through the west side of the old city of Jian County, which is the same as that of Wang Mang. People call it Wangcheng, and also call this water Yangshui.

古文：又东北流，晏，伏所谓黔陬城西四十里有胶水者也。
现代文：拒艾水又往东流，晏漠、伏深说黔随城西四十里有胶水，就指此水。
English: Although Ai water also flows to the east, it is said that there is glue along the west side of the city, referring to this water.

古文：又东入海。
现代文：拒艾水又余流入海。
English: Despite this, more and more water is flowing into the sea.

古文：《地理志》：琅邪有柜县，根艾水出焉。
现代文：《地理志》：琅邪郡有柜县，根艾水发源于此，东流入海。
English: "Geography": There is a cabinet county in Yuya County. The roots of Ai Shui originated here and flowed into the sea to the east.

古文：东入海，即斯水也。
现代文：指的就是此水。
English: It refers to this water.

古文：今胶水北流径西黔陬城东，晏、伏所谓高密郡侧有黔陬县。
现代文：现在胶水向北流经西黔随城东面，晏漠、伏深说搞密郡城旁有黔贩县城，就指此城。
English: Now, the glue is flowing northward through the West Bank, following the east side of the city. Zou Miao and Fuxin said that there is a county seat next to the county seat, which refers to this city.

古文：《地理志》曰：胶水出邞县，王莽更之纯德矣，疑即是县，所未详也。
现代文：《地理志》说：胶水发源川下县，王莽改名为纯德，可能就是黔随县，但不清楚。
English: "Geography" said: Glue originated in Kawashita County, Wang Mang changed his name to Chunde, it may be Sui County, but it is not clear.

古文：潭周四十里，亦潍水枝津之所注也。胶水又东北，径下密县故城东，又东北，径胶东县故城西。汉高帝九年，别为国。景帝封子寄为王国，王莽更之郁袟也，今长广郡治。
现代文：又往北流过夷安县东面，夷安县就是过去王莽改名为原亭的地方。应肋说：夷安县是从前莱国的夷维邑。太史公说：晏平仲是莱国夷维人。汉明帝永平年间，把它另立为国，景帝把它封给儿子刘寄，立为王国；王莽改名为郁铁；今天是长广郡的治所。
English: It also flowed north to the east of Yi'an County. Yi'an County is where Wang Mang changed his name to Yuan Ting in the past. Ying Li said: Yi'an County was once the Yiwei village of the former Lai State. Tai Shigong said: Yu Pingzhong was a Lai State Yiwei person. During the Yongping era of Emperor Hanming, it was established as a separate country, and Emperor Jing gave it to his son Liu Ying and established it as a kingdom; Wang Mang changed his name to Yutie; today it is the administrative center of Changguang County.

古文：伏琛、晏谟言胶水东北回，达于胶东城北百里，流注于海。
现代文：伏深、晏漠说，胶水向东北迂回流到胶东城北面一百里，注入大海。
English: Fushin and Zou said that the glue flowed in a roundabout way to the northeast to a hundred miles north of Jiaodong City and was injected into the sea.

古文：又北过当利县西北，入于海。
现代文：又往北流过当利县西北，注人大海。
English: It also flowed northward through the northwest of Dangli County and poured into the sea.

古文：县，故王莽更名之为东莱亭也。
现代文：当利县是从前王莽改名为东莱亭的旧地。
English: Dangli County is the former place of Donglaiting, which was renamed from the former Wang Mang.

古文：又北径平度县。
现代文：胶水又往北流经平度县。
English: The glue flowed northward through Pingdu County.

古文：汉武帝元朔二年，封菑川懿王子刘衍为侯国，王莽更名之曰利卢也。
现代文：汉武帝元朔二年前，把这里封给苗川鼓王的儿子刘衍，立为侯国，王莽改名为利卢。
English: Two years ago, Emperor Hanwu Yuan Shuo assigned this place to Liu Yan, the son of the Drum King of Miaochuan, and made it a vassal state. Wang Mang changed his name to Lilu.

古文：县有土山，胶水北历土山，注于海。
现代文：县里有土山，胶水往北流经土山，注入大海。
English: There are mud hills in the county, and the glue flows northward through the mud hills and into the sea.

古文：海南，土山以北，悉盐坑相承，修煮不辍，北眺巨海，杏冥无极，天际两分，白黑方别，所谓溟海者也。
现代文：大海以南、土山以北，都是盐场，盐民们在此世世代代煮盆，从未中断。在这里向北眺望，大海渺远苍茫，杳无边际，水天相接，界线分明，这就是所谓溟海。
English: To the south of the sea and to the north of the mountains are salt pans, where salt miners have been working for generations without interruption. Here, looking north, the sea is vast and boundless, the water and sky are connected, and the boundary is clear. This is the so-called Bohai Sea.

古文：故《地理志》曰：胶水北至平度入海也。
现代文：因此《地理志》说：胶水北流到平度注入大海。
English: Therefore, the "Geography" said: the north flow of glue is injected into the sea to the flatness.

