古文：一曰：行不可不孰。
现代文：慎行行动不可不深思熟虑。
English: Prudent action must be well thought out.

古文：不孰，如赴深谿，虽悔无及。
现代文：不搡思熟虑，就会像奔向深谷，即使后悔也来不及。
English: If you don't think about it, it will be like running into a deep valley, and you won't even have time to regret it.

古文：君子计行虑义，小人计行其利，乃不利。
现代文：君子谋划行动时考虑道义，小人谋划行动时期求利益，结果反而不利。
English: A gentleman considers morality when planning an action, a villain seeks profit when planning an action, but the result is unfavorable.

古文：有知不利之利者，则可与言理矣。
现代文：假如有人懂得不谋求利益实际上就包含着利益，那么就可以跟他谈论道义了。
English: If someone understands that acting without seeking profit actually involves profit, then you can talk to him about morality.

古文：荆平王有臣曰费无忌，害太子建，欲去之。
现代文：楚平王有个臣子叫费无忌，嫉恨太子建，想除掉他。
English: There was a vassal of King Chuping who was jealous of Prince Jian and wanted to get rid of him.

古文：王为建取妻于秦而美，无忌劝王夺。
现代文：平王为太子建从秦国娶了个妻子，长得很美，费无忌就鼓动平王强占为己有。
English: King Hei married a wife from Qin for Prince Jian. She was very beautiful, and he had no choice but to encourage King Hei to take her as his own.

古文：王已夺之，而疏太子。
现代文：平王强占这个女子以后，就疏远了太子。
English: King Heian alienated the crown prince after he forcibly took this woman.

古文：无忌说王曰： 晋之霸也，近于诸夏；而荆僻也，故不能与争。
现代文：费无忌又劝平王说： 晋国称霸，是因为靠近华夏各国，而楚国地域偏远，所以不能同晋国争霸。
English: At great expense, he also advised Ping Wang to say: Jin dominates because it is close to the countries of Huaxia, while Chu is remote, so it cannot compete with Jin.

古文：不若大城城父而置太子焉，以求北方，王收南方，是得天下也。 
现代文：不如大建城父，把太子安置在那里，以谋求北方各国的尊奉，您自己收取南方各国这样就能得到天下了。 
English: It is not as good as building a great city and placing the crown prince there, in order to seek the respect of the countries in the north, and receiving the countries in the south yourself, so that you can gain the world.

古文：王说，使太子居于城父。
现代文：平王很高兴，使太子居住在城父。
English: King Heian was delighted to have the crown prince living in his hometown.

古文：居一年，乃恶之曰: 建与连尹将以方城外反。 
现代文：过了一年，费无忌又诋毁太子建说： 太子建和连尹伍奢将凭借方城以外作乱。 
English: A year later, Fei also slandered Prince Jian, saying: Prince Jian and Lian Yinwu will use Fangcheng to make trouble.

古文：王曰： 已为我子矣，又尚奚求？ 
现代文：平王说。 他已经做了我的太子了，还谋求什么? 
English: Heiwang said, "He has already become my crown prince, what else is he seeking for?

古文：对曰： 以妻事怨，且自以为犹宋也。
现代文：费无忌回答说。 他固为娶妻的事怨恨您，而且自以为就像宋国这样的独立小国一样。
English: He hates you for marrying his wife and thinks he's like a small, independent country like Song.

古文：齐晋又辅之。
现代文：齐国和晋国又帮助他。
English: Qi and Jin also helped him.

古文：将以害荆，其事已集矣。 
现代文：他将要以此危害楚国，事情肯定要成功了。 
English: He is going to endanger the state of Chu in this way, and things are bound to succeed.

古文：王信之，使执连尹，太子建出奔。
现代文：平王相信了费无忌的话，派人逮捕了连尹伍奢。太子建出逃到国外。
English: King Heian believed his words and sent someone to arrest Lian Yin Wuxia. Prince Jian fled abroad.

古文：左尹郄宛，国人说之。
现代文：左尹郄宛很得国人爱戴，费无忌又想杀掉郄宛。
English: Zuo Yin Yowan was loved by the Chinese people, and they wanted to kill him.

古文：无忌又欲杀之，谓令尹子常曰: 郄宛欲饮令尹酒。 
现代文：他对令尹子常说： 郄宛想请令尹您喝酒。 又对郄宛说： 令尹想到你家来喝酒。 
English: He often said to Ling Yin Zi, "I want to invite you to have a drink," and to Ling Wan, "I want you to have a drink."

古文：又谓郄宛曰： 令尹欲饮酒于子之家。 
现代文：郄宛说： 我是个卑贱的人，不值得令尹光临。
English: Xuanwan said, "I am a lowly person, and I am not worthy to be visited by Yin."

古文：郄宛曰： 我贱人也，不足以辱令尹。
现代文：假如令尹一定屈尊光临，我该拿什么酬报他、招待他呢? 
English: What should I reward him with and invite him to if he deigns to come?

古文：令尹必来辱，我且何以给待之？ 无忌曰： 令尹好甲兵，子出而寘之门，令尹至，必观之已，因以为酬。 
现代文：费无忌说。 令尹喜欢铠甲兵器，你把这些东西搬出来放在门口，令尹来了一定会观赏它们，你就乘势把这些东西作为礼物进献给他。 
English: Li Yin likes armored weapons, you take these things out and put them at the door, Li Yin will surely come to watch them, you take the opportunity to give these things to him as a gift.

古文：及飨日，惟门左右而寘甲兵焉。
现代文：等到宴享这天，郄宛把门口两旁用帷幕遮起来，把铠甲兵器放在里边。
English: When it was time to enjoy the feast, Shouwan covered both sides of the entrance with a curtain and placed the armor inside.

古文：无忌因谓令尹曰： 吾几祸令尹。
现代文：费无忌于是对令尹说。 我差一点害了您。
English: I had to take the trouble to say to Ling Yin, I almost hurt you.

古文：郄宛将杀令尹，甲在门矣。 
现代文：郄宛想杀您，已经把铠甲兵器藏在门口了。 
English: XuanWan wants to kill you and has hidden armor-piercing weapons at the door.

古文：令尹使人视之，信。
现代文：令尹派人去察看，真是这样。
English: So Yin sent someone to investigate, and sure enough.

古文：遂攻郄宛，杀之。
现代文：于是派兵进攻郄宛，杀死了他。
English: So they sent troops to attack Shawan and killed him.

古文：国人大怨，进胙者莫不非令尹。
现代文：国人非常痛恨令尹，卿大夫没有一个人不指责他。
English: The Chinese people hated Ling Yin very much, and there was not a single doctor who did not criticize him.

古文：沈尹戍谓令尹曰: 夫无忌，荆之谗人也。亡夫太子建，杀连尹奢，屏王之耳目。
现代文：沈尹戍对令尹说； 费无忌是楚国的谗谀小人，使太子建出亡，连尹伍奢被杀，掩蔽国君的耳目。
English: Shen Yunyun said to Ling Yunyun: Fei is undoubtedly the villain of Chu, who caused the death of Prince Jian and the killing of Lian Yunyun, covering the eyes and ears of the sovereign.

古文：今令尹又用之杀众不辜，以兴大谤，患几及令尹。 令尹子常曰： 是吾罪也，敢不良图？ 
现代文：现在您又听信他的话杀害无辜的人们，从而招致了各种严厉的指责，祸害很快就会来到您身上。 令尹子常说； 这是我的罪过，怎么敢不好好地想法对付呢? 
English: Now you are listening to his words and killing innocent people, which has led to all kinds of severe accusations, and the evil will soon come to you. Let Yin Zi often say; This is my sin, how dare I not think about it?

古文：乃杀费无忌，尽灭其族，以说其国。
现代文：于是就杀死了费无忌，并把他的宗族全部诛灭，取此取悦于国人。
English: So he killed Fei Wuhong and annihilated his entire clan, to the delight of the Chinese people.

古文：动而不论其义，知害人而不知人害己也，以灭其族，费无忌之谓乎！
现代文：做事情不讲道义，只知道害别人却不知道别人也会害自己致使宗族被诛灭，指的就是费无忌吧！
English: Doing things without moral principles, only knowing how to harm others, but not knowing that others will also harm themselves, resulting in the annihilation of the clan, refers to no holds barred!

古文：崔杼与庆封谋杀齐庄公。
现代文：崔杼和庆封合谋杀死了齐庄公。
English: Cui Gan and Qingfeng jointly murdered and killed Qi Zhuanggong.

古文：庄公死，更立景公，崔杼相之。
现代文：庄公死后，二人另立景公为君，由崔杼给他做相。
English: After the death of Zhuang Gong, the two men set up another king for Jing Gong, and Cui Yao made him a portrait.

古文：庆封又欲杀崔杼而代之相。
现代文：庆封又想杀掉崔杼，自己代他为相。
English: Qingfeng also wanted to kill Cui Yao and take his place as the leader.

古文：于是崔杼之子，令之争后。
现代文：于是就挑拨崔杼的儿子们，让他们争夺做后嗣的资格。
English: So he instigated Cui Yao's sons to compete for the right to be his heir.

古文：崔杼之子相与私闀。
现代文：崔杼的儿子们私自争斗起来。
English: Cui Yao's sons began to fight among themselves.

古文：崔杼往见庆封而告之。
现代文：崔杼去见庆封，告诉他这件事。
English: Cui Gan went to see Qingfeng and told him about it.

古文：庆封谓崔杼曰： 且留，吾将兴甲以杀之。 
现代文：庆封对崔杼说： 你姑且留在这里，我将派兵去把他们杀掉。 
English: Qingfeng said to Cui Yao: You can stay here, I will send soldiers to kill them.

古文：因令卢满嫳兴甲以诛之。
现代文：于是派了卢满嫳起兵去诛杀他们。
English: Lu Manchu then sent troops to fight and kill them.

古文：尽杀崔杼之妻子及枝属，烧其室屋，报崔杼曰： 吾已诛之矣。 
现代文：卢满嫳把崔杼的妻儿老小以及宗族亲属全部杀光，烧了他的房屋住宅，回报崔杼说： 我已经把他们杀死了。 
English: Lu Manju killed all of Cui Yao's wife, children, and clan relatives, burned his house and residence, and said to Cui Yao, "I have already killed them."

古文：崔杼归，无归，因而自绞也。
现代文：崔杼回去，已经无家可归，因而自缢而死。
English: When Cui Yao returned, he was homeless and hanged himself to death.

古文：庆封相景公，景公苦之。
现代文：庆封做了齐景公的相，景公深以为苦。
English: Qingfeng did Qi Jinggong's face, and Jinggong was deeply distressed.

古文：庆封出猎，景公与陈无宇、公孙灶、公孙虿诛封。
现代文：庆封外出打猎，景公乘机与陈无宇、公孙灶、公孙虿起兵讨伐庆封。
English: Qingfeng went out hunting, and Jing Gong took the opportunity to fight with Chen Wuyu, Gongsun Zhao, and Gongsun Yao to defeat Qingfeng.

古文：庆封以其属斗，不胜，走如鲁。
现代文：庆封率领自己的家丁同景公交战，未能取胜，就逃到鲁国。
English: Qingfeng led his family to a public transportation battle in the same area. When he failed to win, he fled to Lu Province.

古文：齐人以为让，又去鲁而如吴，王予之朱方。
现代文：齐国就这件事责备鲁国。庆封又离开鲁国去吴国，吴王把朱方邑封给了他。
English: Qi blamed Lu for the incident. Qingfeng left Lu for Wu, and the king of Wu gave him Zhufangyurong.

古文：荆灵王闻之，率诸侯以攻吴，围朱方，拔之。
现代文：楚灵王听说了，就率领诸侯进攻吴国，包围朱方，攻占了它。
English: When King Chuling heard of this, he led the princes to attack Wu, encircle Zhufang, and conquer it.

古文：得庆封，负之斧质，以徇于诸侯军，因令其呼之曰： 毋或如齐庆封，弑其君而弱其孤，以亡其大夫。 
现代文：灵王俘获了庆封，让他背着斧质在诸侯军中遛行示众，并让他喊道： 不要像齐国庆封那样，杀害他的君主，欺凌丧父的新君，强迫大夫盟誓！ 
English: Lingwang captured Qingfeng, made him carry an axe on his back and parade among the armies of the princes, and made him shout: Don't kill his monarch, bully the fatherless new prince, and force the doctor to take an oath, as Qi Guo Qingfeng did!

古文：乃杀之。
现代文：然后才杀死了他。
English: Then he killed him.

古文：黄帝之贵而死，尧舜之贤而死，孟贲之勇而死，人固皆死，若庆封者，可谓重死矣。
现代文：黄帝那样尊贵，最后也要死亡，尧舜那样贤圣，最后也要死亡，孟贲那样勇武，最后也要死亡，人本来都要死亡，但像庆封这样的人，受尽凌辱而死，可以说是死而又死了。
English: The Yellow Emperor was so honorable that he had to die in the end, Qu was so virtuous and holy that he had to die in the end, and Mencius was so brave that he had to die in the end. Everyone is supposed to die, but people like Qingfeng, who suffered humiliation and died, can be said to have died and died again.

古文：身为僇，支属不可以完，行忮之故也。
现代文：自己被杀，宗族亲属也不能保全，这是嫉妒别人的缘故。
English: If you are killed, your relatives cannot be spared, because of the jealousy of others.

古文：凡乱人之动也，其始相助，后必相恶。
现代文：太凡邪恶的小人做事，开始的时候互相帮忙，而到后来一定互相憎恶。
English: Very evil villains do things, at first they help each other, but later they must hate each other.

古文：为义者则不然，始而相与，久而相信，卒而相亲，后世以为法程。
现代文：坚守道义的人却不是这样。他们开始时互相帮助，时间越长越互相信任，最后更是互相亲近。后代把这种做法当作准则。
English: This is not the case with moral men; they begin by helping each other, and the longer they go on, the more they trust each other, and the closer they come to each other in the end.

古文：二曰：先王之于论也极之矣。
现代文：无义先王对于事理论述得非常透彻了。
English: King Wuyi has described the theory of things very thoroughly.

古文：故义者，百事之始也，万利之本也，中智之所不及也。
现代文：义是各种事情的开端，是一切利益的本源，这是才智平庸的人认识不到的。
English: Righteousness is the beginning of all things, and the source of all benefits, which is not recognized by people of mediocre intelligence.

古文：不及则不知，不知则趋利。
现代文：认识不到就不明事理，不明事理就会追求私利。
English: If you don't recognize it, you don't know the reason, and if you don't know the reason, you will pursue self-interest.

古文：趋利固不可必也。
现代文：追求私利的做法肯定是靠不住的。
English: The pursuit of self-interest is certainly not reliable.

古文：公孙鞅、郑平、续经、公孙竭是已。
现代文：公孙鞅、郑平，续经、公孙竭等人的情形就是这样。
English: This is the case with Gongsun Qi, Zheng Ping, Zeng Jing, Gongsun Zhe and others.

古文：以义动则无旷事矣，人臣与人臣谋为奸，犹或与之，又况乎人主与其臣谋为义，其孰不与者？
现代文：根据道义去行动就不会有做不成的事情了。臣子与臣子谋划做坏事，尚且有人赞同，又何况国君和他的臣子谋划施行道义，还会有谁不赞同呢?
English: If you act according to morality, there will be nothing you can't accomplish. If a vassal and a vassal plan to do bad things and someone approves of it, let alone the sovereign and his vassal plan to implement morality, who would not approve of it?

古文：非独其臣也，天下皆且与之。
现代文：不只是臣子们赞同，天下的人都将赞同他。
English: Not only the courtiers agree with him, but everyone in the world will agree with him.

古文：公孙鞅之于秦，非父兄也，非有故也，以能用也。
现代文：公孙鞅对于秦王来说，并不是宗亲，并没有旧谊，只是凭着才能被任用的。
English: As far as King Qin was concerned, Gongsun Yao was not a blood relative, nor did he have any old friends. He was only appointed on the basis of his talent.

古文：欲堙之责，非攻无以。
现代文：他要对秦国尽职，除了进攻别的国家没有其他办法。
English: He wanted to do his duty to Qin, and there was no other way but to attack other countries.

古文：于是为秦将而攻魏。
现代文：于是公孙鞅就为泰国统兵进攻魏国。
English: As a result, Gongsun Yi led the Thai army to attack Wei.

古文：魏使公子卬将而当之。
现代文：魏国派公子卬率兵抵御他。
English: Wei dispatched nobles and soldiers to resist him.

古文：公孙鞅之居魏也，固善公子卬。
现代文：公孙鞅在魏国时，原本和公子卬很要好。
English: When Gongsun Yao was in Wei, he was originally very friendly with Gongzi Yao.

古文：使人谓公子卬曰： 凡所为游而欲贵者，以公子之故也。
现代文：他派人对公子卬说： 我所以出游并希望显贵，都是为了公子您的缘故。
English: He sent a message to his son-in-law, saying, "The reason I'm traveling and hoping to become famous is because of you, my son.

古文：今秦令鞅将，魏令公子当之，岂且忍相与战哉？
现代文：现在秦国让我统兵，魏国让公子同我相拒，我们怎么忍心互相交战呢?
English: Now that Qin has asked me to lead the army, and Wei has asked the nobles to oppose me, how can we bear to fight each other?

古文：公子言之公子之主，鞅请亦言之主，而皆罢军。 
现代文：请公子向公子的君主报告，我也向我的君主报告，让双方都罢兵。 
English: Let my lord report to his lord, and I to my lord, and let both of us retire.

古文：于是将归矣，使人谓公子曰： 归未有时相见，愿与公子坐而相去别也。 
现代文：双方都准备回师的时候，公孙鞅又派人对公子卬说； 回去以后再也无日相见希望同公子聚一聚再离别。 公于说： 好吧。 
English: When both sides were preparing to return, Gongsun Yao sent another person to say to Gongzi Yao, "After you return, you will never see each other again. I hope you and Gongzi will get together and then part." Gongyu said, "Okay."

古文：公子曰： 诺。 
现代文：魏国的军校们谏诤说： 不能这样做。 公子卬不听。
English: The military academies in Wei said, "You can't do that," but the princes wouldn't listen.

古文：魏吏争之曰： 不可。 公子不听，遂相与坐。公孙鞅因伏卒与车骑以取公子卬。秦孝公薨，惠王立，以此疑公孙鞅之行，欲加罪焉。
现代文：于是两人相聚叙旧，公孙鞅乘机埋伏下步卒车骑俘虏了公子卬。秦孝公死后，惠王即位，因为这件事而怀疑公孙鞅的品行，想加罪于公孙鞅。
English: As a result, the two got together to talk about the past, and Gongsun Yao took the opportunity to ambush and capture Gongzi Yao. After the death of Qin Xiaogong, Hui Wang ascended to the throne, because of this incident, he doubted Gongsun Yao's character and wanted to add guilt to Gongsun Yao.

古文：公孙鞅以其私属与母归魏，襄疵不受，曰： 以君之反公子卬也，吾无道知君。 
现代文：公孙鞅带着自己的家众与母亲回魏国去，魏国大臣襄疵不接纳，说： 因为您对公子卬背倍弃义，我无法了解您。 
English: Gongsun Yao took his family and mother back to Wei. The Wei Minister did not accept the criticism and said, "Because you have betrayed your son, I cannot understand you."

古文：故士自行不可不审也。
现代文：所以，士人对自己的行为不可不审慎。
English: Therefore, a scholar must be prudent in his behavior.

古文：郑平于秦王，臣也；其于应侯，交也。
现代文：郑平对秦王来说是臣子，对应侯来说是朋友。
English: Zheng Ping was a vassal to King Qin, and a friend to his vassals.

古文：欺交反主，为利故也。
现代文：他欺骗朋友，背叛君主，是因为追求私利的缘故。
English: He deceived his friends and betrayed his sovereign in the pursuit of personal gain.

古文：方其为秦将也，天下所贵之无不以者，重也。
现代文：当他做秦将的时候，天下认为尊贵显耀的事情没有一件不能做，这是因为他位尊权重。
English: When he was the Qin general, the world believed that there was not a single thing he could not do, because he was the most important.

古文：重以得之，轻必失之。
现代文：靠位尊权重得到的东西，权去身轻时一定要丧失。
English: What is gained by deference must be lost by disdain.

古文：去秦将，入赵、魏，天下所贱之无不以也，所可羞无不以也。行方可贱可羞，而无秦将之重，不穷奚待？
现代文：邯平离开秦将的地位，进入赵国和魏国以后，天下认为轻贱的事情没有一件不做，天下认为羞耻的事情没有一件不做，行为降至可贱可耻一流，又没有做秦将的重极高位，不潦倒还等什么?
English: After Xingping left the position of Qin general and entered Zhao and Wei, there was not a single thing he did not do that the world considered to be frivolous, and there was not a single thing he did not do that the world considered to be shameful. His behavior was reduced to a shameful first-class, and he did not do the most important high position of Qin general. What is he waiting for?

古文：赵急求李欬。李言、续经与之俱如卫，抵公孙与。
现代文：赵国紧急搜捕李教，李言、续经跟他一起去卫国投奔公孙与。
English: Zhao Guo urgently searched for and arrested Li Jiao, Li Yan, and Zeng Jing, and they went with him to join Gongsun He in the defense of the country.

古文：公孙与见而与入。
现代文：公孙与会见并同意接纳他们。
English: His grandson was present at the meeting and agreed to take them in.

古文：续经因告卫吏使捕之。
现代文：续经乘机向卫国官员告发了这件事，让他们逮捕了李数。
English: Ms. Zeng took the opportunity to report the incident to the defense officials, who arrested Mr. Li.

古文：续经以仕赵五大夫。
现代文：续经靠这个在赵国做了五大夫。
English: Zeng Jing relied on this to make five husbands in Zhao.

古文：人莫与同朝，子孙不可以交友。
现代文：人们没有谁愿意跟他同朝为官，就连他的子孙也交不到朋友。
English: No one wants to serve in the same government as him, and even his children and grandchildren can't make friends.

古文：公孙竭与阴君之事，而反告之樗里相国，以仕秦五大夫。
现代文：公孙竭参与阴君之事，却又反过来向相国樗里疾告发，靠这个在秦做了五大夫。
English: Gongsun did his best to participate in Yinjun's affairs, but in turn, he reported to his brother-in-law in the neighboring country, relying on this to make five husbands in Qin.

古文：功非不大也，然而不得入三都，又况乎无此其功而有行乎！
现代文：他的功劳并不是不大，但却为人们所鄙夷不能进人赵、卫、魏三国国都。公孙竭告密立功尚且如此，又何况没有这种功劳却有他那样行为的人昵！
English: His achievement is not insignificant, but it is despised by people who cannot enter the capitals of the three countries of Zhao, Wei, and Wei. It is still the case that his great-grandson did his best to keep secrets, and what is more, there are people who do not have this kind of achievement but behave like him!

古文：三曰：使人大迷惑者，必物之相似也。
现代文：疑似让人深感迷惑的，一定是相似的事物。
English: What seems deeply puzzling must be something similar.

古文：玉人之所患，患石之似玉者；相剑者之所患，患剑之似吴干者；贤主之所患，患人之博闻辩言而似通者。
现代文：玉工所忧虑的，是像玉一样的石头，相剑的人所忧虑的，是像吴干一样的剑，贤明的君主所忧虑的，是见闻广博、能言善辩像是通达事理的人。
English: A jade craftsman worries about a stone like jade, a swordsman worries about a sword like Wu Gan, and a wise ruler worries about a person who is well-informed, eloquent and seems to be knowledgeable.

古文：亡国之主似智，亡国之臣似忠。
现代文：亡国的君主好像很聪明，亡国的臣子好像很忠诚。
English: The exiled monarch seems to be very clever, and the exiled vassal seems to be very loyal.

古文：相似之物，此愚者之所大惑，而圣人之所加虑也，故墨子见歧道而哭之。
现代文：相似的事物，是愚昧的人深感迷惑、圣人也要用心思索的，所以墨子才看见歧路为之哭泣。
English: Similar things are deeply perplexing to the foolish, and require careful contemplation by the wise, which is why Mozi saw the stray path and wept over it.

古文：周宅酆、镐，近戎人。
现代文：周建都于丰、镐，靠近戎人。
English: Zhou Jiandu is located in Feng and Handan, close to Rongren.

古文：与诸侯约：为高葆于王路，置鼓其上，远近相闻；即戎寇至，传鼓相告，诸侯之兵皆至，救天子。
现代文：和诸侯约定。在大路上修筑高大的土堡，上面设置大鼓，使远近都能听到鼓声。如果戎兵入侵，就由近及远击鼓传告，诸侯的军队就都来援救天子。
English: He made an agreement with the lords to build a tall earthen fort on the main road and set up a large drum on it, so that the sound of the drum could be heard from far and near. If the soldiers invaded, they would beat the drum from near and far, and the armies of the lords would come to rescue the emperor.

古文：戎寇当至，幽王击鼓，诸侯之兵皆至，褒姒大说，喜之。幽王欲褒姒之笑也，因数击鼓，诸侯之兵数至而无寇。
现代文：戎兵曾经入侵，周幽王击鼓，诸侯军队都如约而至，褒嫩看了非常高兴，很喜欢幽王这种做法，幽王希望看到褒姒的笺靥，于是屡屡击鼓，诸侯的军队多次到来，却没有敌兵。
English: The soldiers once invaded, Zhou Yu Wang played the drums, and the armies of the princes all arrived as scheduled. Bo Neng was very happy to see this, and liked Yu Wang's approach very much. Yu Wang hoped to see Bo Xuan's gongs, so he repeatedly played the drums. The armies of the princes came many times, but there were no enemy soldiers.

古文：至于后戎寇真至，幽王击鼓，诸侯兵不至，幽王之身乃死于丽山之下，为天下笑。
现代文：到后来戎兵真的来了，幽王击鼓，但诸接的军队不再到来，幽王于是被杀死在骊山之下，为天下人耻笑。
English: Later, the soldiers really came, and Yu Wang played the drums, but the troops did not come any more, and Yu Wang was killed at the foot of Lushan Mountain, becoming the laughing stock of the world.

古文：此夫以无寇失真寇者也。
现代文：这是因为没有敌寇乱击鼓而误了真的敌寇啊!
English: This is because there is no enemy bandit drumming and missing the real enemy bandit!

古文：贤者有小恶以致大恶，褒姒之败，乃令幽王好小说以致大灭。
现代文：贤明的人有小的过失尚且会招致大的灾祸，叉何况不肖的人呢?褒姒败坏国事，是让幽王喜好无足轻重的欢乐而导致杀身亡国。
English: A wise man may commit a small error and incur a great calamity, but how much more a wretched man? To corrupt the affairs of a kingdom is to make the king delight in trifling pleasures and cause the country to perish.

古文：故形骸相离，三公九卿出走。
现代文：所以幽王身首分离，三公九卿出逃。
English: Therefore, Yu Wang's head was severed, and the three princes and nine nobles fled.

古文：此褒姒之所用死，而平王所以东徙也，秦襄、晋文之所以劳王而赐地也。
现代文：这也是褒姒所以身死，平王所以东迁的原因，是秦襄公、晋文侯所以起兵勤王、被赐以土地的原因。
English: This is also the reason why Bo Xun died, the reason why Ping Wang moved east, the reason why Qin Xiang Gong and Jin Wen Hou raised armies to serve the king, and the reason why they were given land.

古文：梁北有黎丘部，有奇鬼焉，善效人之子姓昆弟之状。
现代文：梁国北部有个黎丘乡，那里有个奇鬼，善于模仿人的子孙兄弟的样子。
English: In Liqiu Township in northern Liang Province, there is a strange ghost that is good at imitating the appearance of people's children and grandchildren.

古文：邑丈人有之市而醉归者，黎丘之鬼效其子之状，扶而道苦之。
现代文：乡中有个老者到市上去，喝醉了酒往家走，黎丘奇鬼模仿他儿子的样子，搀扶他回家，在路上苦苦折磨他。
English: There was an old man in the village who went to the market, got drunk and walked home. The Lichuch ghost imitated the appearance of his son, helped him get home, and tortured him on the way.

古文：丈人归，酒醒，而诮其子曰: 吾为汝父也，岂谓不慈哉？
现代文：老者回到家里，酒醒以后责问他的儿子说： 我作为你的父亲，难道能说不慈爱吗?
English: The old man returned home, sobered up, and scolded his son, saying, "As your father, can I say that I am not kind?

古文：我醉，汝道苦我，何故？ 
现代文：我喝醉了，你在路上苦苦折磨我，这是为什么? 
English: I'm drunk and you're torturing me on the road. Why is that?

古文：其子泣而触地曰： 孽矣！
现代文：他的儿子哭着以头碰地说： 您遇到鬼怪了！
English: His son, crying and shaking his head, said: "You've met a ghost!"

古文：无此事也。
现代文：没有这回事呀!
English: There is no such thing!

古文：昔也往责于东邑，人可问也。 
现代文：昨天我去东多讨债，这是可以问别人的。 
English: Yesterday, I went to Dongdo to collect debts. You can ask someone else about this.

古文：其父信之，曰： 嘻！是必夫奇鬼也！
现代文：父亲相信了儿子的话，说。 噢，这一定是那个奇鬼作怪了！
English: The father believed his son and said, "Oh, it must be the bogeyman!

古文：我固尝闻之矣。 
现代文：我本来就听人说起过它。 
English: I had heard about it.

古文：明日端复饮于市，欲遇而刺杀之。
现代文：第二天老者特意又到市上饮酒，希望再次遇见奇鬼，把它杀死。
English: The next day, the old man deliberately went to the market to drink again, hoping to meet the strange ghost again and kill it.

古文：明旦之市而醉，其真子恐其父之不能反也，遂逝迎之。
现代文：天刚亮就到市上去，又喝醉了，他的儿子怕父亲回不了家，就去接他。
English: He went to the city just after dawn, got drunk again, and his son, afraid that his father would not be able to return home, went to pick him up.

古文：丈人望其真子，拔剑而刺之。
现代文：老者望见儿子，拔剑就刺。
English: The old man looked at his son, drew his sword and stabbed him.

古文：丈人智惑于似其子者，而杀于真子。
现代文：老者的思想被像他儿子的奇鬼所迷惑，而杀死了自己的真儿子。
English: The old man's mind was bewitched by a ghost like his son, and he killed his real son.

古文：夫惑于似士者而失于真士，此黎丘丈人之智也。
现代文：那些被像是贤士的人所迷惑的人，错过了真正的贤士，这种思想正像黎丘老者一样啊！
English: Those who are bewitched by those who appear to be sages miss the true sages, just like Lycus the Elder!

古文：疑似之迹，不可不察，察之必于其人也。
现代文：对于令人疑惑的相似的现像，不能不审察清楚。审察这种现像，一定要找适当的人。
English: For suspiciously similar phenomena, it is necessary to investigate clearly. To investigate such phenomena, it is necessary to find the right people.

古文：舜为御，尧为左，禹为右，入于泽而问牧童，入于水而问渔师，奚故也？
现代文：即使舜做车夫，尧做主人，禹做车右，进入草泽也要问牧童，到了水边也要阅渔夫。什么缘故呢?
English: Even if the mule is the driver, the donkey is the master, and the yakitori is on the right, if you go into the meadow, you have to ask the herd boy, and if you go to the water's edge, you have to ask the fisherman. Why?

古文：其知之审也。
现代文：固为他们对情况了解得清楚。
English: It's because they know the situation so well.

古文：夫孪子之相似者，其母常识之，知之审也。
现代文：孪生子长得很相像，但他们的母亲总是能够辨认，这是因为母亲对他们了解得清楚。
English: Twins look alike, but their mothers can always tell them apart because she knows them so well.

古文：四曰：先王所恶，无恶于不可知。
现代文：壹行先王所厌恶的，莫过于言行不可察知。
English: There is nothing that the first emperor detested more than words and deeds that cannot be detected.

古文：不可知，则君臣父子兄弟朋友夫妻之际败矣。
现代文：不可察知，君臣父子兄弟朋友夫妻各自的界限就要被破坏。
English: It is imperceptible that the boundaries of princes, ministers, fathers, sons, brothers, friends, and husbands and wives are about to be destroyed.

古文：十际皆败，乱莫大焉。
现代文：十者的界限都遭到破坏，祸乱没有比这再大的。
English: There is no greater calamity than the destruction of the boundaries of the ten.

古文：凡人伦，以十际为安者也，释十际则与麋鹿虎狼无以异，多勇者则为制耳矣。
现代文：大凡人与人之闻的伦理关系，是靠十者的界限保持安定的。舍弃这些界限，人和麋鹿虎狼就没什么区别了，勇悍多力的人就会辖制别人了。
English: The ethical relationship between mortals and humans is kept stable by the boundaries of the ten. If these boundaries are abandoned, there will be no difference between people and elk, tigers and wolves, and the brave and powerful people will dominate others.

古文：不可知，则无安君无乐亲矣，无荣兄无亲友无尊夫矣。
现代文：不可察知，就没有人安定国君了，没有人取悦父母了，没有人敬重兄长了，没有人亲近朋友了，没有人尊敬丈夫了。
English: Invisibly, there is no one to stabilize the sovereign, no one to please the parents, no one to respect the elder brother, no one to be close to the friends, no one to respect the husband.

古文：强大未必王也，而王必强大。
现代文：国家强大不一定能够统一天下，但统一天下一定要强大才行。
English: A strong country may not be able to unify the country, but it must be strong to unify the country.

古文：王者之所藉以成也何？
现代文：统一天下的人赖以成功的是什么呢?
English: What is the success of the unifier?

古文：藉其威与其利。
现代文：是凭借他的威势和给人的利益。
English: It is by virtue of his authority and benefit to others.

古文：非强大则其威不威，其利不利。其威不威则不足以禁也，其利不利则不足以劝也，故贤主必使其威利无敌。
现代文：国家不强大，他的威势就不能使人敬畏，他的利益就不能给人好处，威势不能使人敬畏，就不足禁止人们为恶，利益不能给人好处就不足 鼓励人们行善。所以贤明的君主一定要使自己的威势和给人的利益都无可匹敌。
English: If the state is not strong, its power cannot inspire awe, and its interests cannot bring benefit. If its power cannot inspire awe, it is not enough to forbid people to do evil, and if its interests cannot bring benefit, it is not enough to encourage people to do good. Therefore, a wise ruler must make his power and benefits incomparable.

古文：故以禁则必止，以劝则必为。
现代文：因此，用以禁止，人们就一定住手；用以鼓动，人们就一定去做。
English: Therefore, to prohibit, people must stop; to encourage, people must do.

古文：威利敌，而忧苦民、行可知者王；威利无敌，而以行不知者亡。
现代文：威势和利益彼此相当，那么为百姓忧虑辛劳、言行诚信可知的人就会统一天下；威势和利益无可匹敌，但言行不可察知，这样的人就会灭亡。
English: If prestige and interests are equal, then those who are concerned about the people, work hard, and speak and act with integrity will be unified; if prestige and interests are incomparable, but words and actions are not discernible, then such people will perish.

古文：小弱而不可知，则强大疑之矣。
现代文：国家弱小而又不可察知，强大的国家就会猜疑它了。
English: A weak and unobservable state is suspected by a strong one.

古文：人之情不能爱其所疑，小弱而大不爱，则无以存。
现代文：人之常情，不能爱自己猜疑的人，国家弱小而又不被大国喜爱，就没有办法生存。
English: There is no way for those who cannot love their own suspicions, who are weak and not loved by the great powers, to survive.

古文：故不可知之道，王者行之，废；强大行之，危；小弱行之，灭。
现代文：所以，言行让人不可察知的做法，统治天下的人实行它就会衰落，强大的国家实行它就会危险，弱小的国家实行它就会灭亡。
English: Therefore, words and deeds are imperceptible to people. If the rulers of the world practice it, they will decline. If the powerful countries practice it, they will be in danger. If the weak countries practice it, they will perish.

古文：今行者见大树，必解衣县冠倚剑而寝其下。
现代文：行路的人看见大树，就一定会来到树下，脱下衣服，挂上帽子，把宝剑靠在树边，躺在树下休息。
English: When a traveler sees a big tree, he will surely come to the tree, take off his clothes, hang his hat, put his sword against the tree, and lie down under the tree to rest.

古文：大树非人之情亲知交也，而安之若此者，信也。
现代文：大树并不是人们的亲朋好友，但人们却对它如此放心，是因为大树可以信赖。
English: Big trees are not people's relatives and friends, but people are so at ease with it because big trees can be trusted.

古文：陵上巨木，人以为期，易知故也。
现代文：高山上的大树，人们常用来做为约会之处，是因为它容易看到的缘故。
English: The tree high in the mountains is often used as a meeting place because it is easy to see.

古文：又况于士乎？
现代文：树木尚且如此，又何况士人呢！
English: The trees are still like that, and what's more, so are the priests!

古文：士义可知，则期为必矣。
现代文：士人的道义如果诚信可知，那么他为人所瞩目就是必然的了。
English: If the integrity of a scholar is known, then it is inevitable that he will attract people's attention.

古文：又况强大之国？
现代文：士人尚且如此，又何况强大的国家呢！
English: This is still the case, let alone a powerful country!

古文：强大之国诚可知，则其王不难矣。
现代文：强大的国家如果确实诚信可知，那么它统一天下就不难了。
English: If a powerful country is indeed honest, then it is not difficult to unify it.

古文：人之所乘船者，为其能浮而不能沈也。世之所以贤君子者，为其能行义而不能行邪辟也。
现代文：人们所以乘船，是周为它能浮在水上而不会沉下去；世间所以敬重君子，是因为他能实行信义而不会做邪恶的事。
English: The reason why people go on a boat is that it can float on the water without sinking; the reason why the world respects a gentleman is because he can practice faith and not do evil.

古文：孔子卜，得贲。
现代文：孔子占卜，得剜贲卦。
English: Confucius said that divination is a kind of gossip.

古文：孔子曰： 不吉。 
现代文：孔子说： 不吉利。 
English: Confucius said: Unlucky.

古文：子贡曰： 夫贲亦好矣，何谓不吉乎？ 
现代文：子贡说： 贲卦也很好了，为什么说不吉利呢? 
English: Zigong said, "Guan Gua is also very good. Why do you say it is unlucky?

古文：孔子曰： 夫白而白，黑而黑，夫贲又何好乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 白就应该是白，黑就应该是黑，贲卦赶驳不纯，又好在哪里呢? 
English: Confucius said, "White should be white, black should be black, and if it is not pure, what good is it?

古文：故贤者所恶于物，无恶于无处。
现代文：所以贤者对于事物，所厌恶的莫过于它不可辨察审度。
English: Therefore, what the wise dislike most about things is that they cannot be judged.

古文：夫天下之所以恶，莫恶于不可知也。
现代文：天下所厌恶的，莫过于不可察知。
English: There is nothing the world hates so much as the unknowable.

古文：夫不可知，盗不与期，贼不与谋。
现代文：一个人如果不可察知，就连窃贼也不约他结伙，就连强盗也不与他谋议。
English: If a person is not detectable, even a thief will not make an appointment with him, and even a robber will not consult with him.

古文：盗贼大奸也，而犹得所匹偶，又况于欲成大功乎？
现代文：窃贼强盗是非常邪恶的人，尚且要找合适的伙伴，又何况打算成就大功的人呢!
English: Thieves and robbers are very evil people, and they have to find a suitable partner, let alone someone who intends to achieve great success!

古文：夫欲成大功，令天下皆轻劝而助之，必之士可知。
现代文：打算成就大功，让天下人都竞相努力来帮助自己的，一定要依赖于世士的诚信可知。
English: If you want to achieve great things and make the whole world compete to help you, you must rely on the integrity of the world.

古文：五曰：身定、国安、天下治，必贤人。
现代文：求人要使自身安定，国家安宁、天下太平，必须依靠贤人。
English: If people want to make themselves stable, the country peaceful and the world at peace, they must rely on sages.

古文：古之有天下也者七十一圣，观于《春秋》，自鲁隐公以至哀公十有二世，其所以得之，所以失之，其术一也：得贤人，国无不安，名无不荣；失贤人，国无不危，名无不辱。
现代文：古代治理天下的共有七十一位圣王，从《春秋》看，自鲁隐公到鲁哀公共十二代，在这期间，诸侯获得君位和失去君位，其道理是一样的：得到贤人，国家没有不安定的，名声没有不显荣的，失去贤人，国家没有不危险的，名声没有不耻辱的。
English: In ancient times, there were a total of seventy-one holy kings who governed the world. According to "Spring and Autumn," there were twelve generations from Lu Yinggu to Ru Yinggu. During this period, princes gained and lost their royal titles for the same reason: they gained wise men, the country was not unstable, their reputation was not dishonorable, and they lost wise men, the country was not dangerous, and their reputation was not dishonorable.

古文：先王之索贤人，无不以也。极卑极贱，极远极劳。
现代文：先王为了寻求贤人，是无所不做的：他们可以对贤人极其谦卑，可以举用极为卑贱的人，可以到极远的地方去，可阻付出极大的辛劳。
English: The ancients did everything in their power to find wise men: they could be extremely humble to wise men, they could use extremely lowly people, they could go to extremely far away places, and they could put in a lot of hard work.

古文：虞用宫之奇、吴用伍子胥之言，此二国者，虽至于今存可也。
现代文：假如虞国采用宫之奇的意见，吴国采用伍子胥的意见，这两个国家存在到今天也是可能的。
English: If the State of Yu had adopted the opinion of Gong Zhiqi, and the State of Wu had adopted the opinion of Wu Zixuan, it would be possible for these two countries to exist to this day.

古文：则是国可寿也。
现代文：由此看来，国运是可以使之长久的。
English: From this point of view, the national movement can make it long-term.

古文：有能益人之寿者，则人莫不愿之；今寿国有道，而君人者而不求，过矣。
现代文：如果有人能延长人的寿命，那么人们没有人不愿意；现在有办法使国运长久，而做君主的却不去努力寻求，这就错了。
English: If one can prolong one's life, no one is unwilling to do so; it is a mistake for a monarch not to strive to find a way to prolong the life of the nation.

古文：尧传天下于舜，礼之诸侯，妻以二女，臣以十子，身请北面朝之：至卑也。
现代文：尧把天下传给舜，在诸侯面前礼敬他，把两个女儿嫁给他，让自己的十个儿子给他做臣属，自己要求以臣子身分朝拜他；这是把自己降到最低下的地位了。
English: To hand over the kingdom to him, to pay homage to him in the presence of princes, to give him his two daughters in marriage, to make his ten sons his vassals, and to demand that they bow down to him as his vassals, is to lower oneself to the lowest level.

古文：伊尹，庖厨之臣也；傅说，殷之胥靡也，皆上相天子：至贱也。
现代文：伊尹是在厨房中服役的奴隶，傅说是殷商的刑徒，两个人都做了天子之相：这是举用最卑贱的人了。
English: Yi Yin is a slave serving in the kitchen, Fu is said to be a convict of a merchant, and both of them have made the image of the Son of Heaven: this is the humblest person.

古文：禹东至榑木之地，日出九津，青羌之野，攒树之所，㨉天之山，鸟谷、青丘之乡，黑齿之国；南至交阯、孙朴续之国，丹粟漆树沸水漂漂九阳之山，羽人、裸民之处，不死之乡；西至三危之国，巫山之下，饮露吸气之民，积金之山，其肱、一臂、三面之乡；北至人正之国，夏海之穷，衡山之上，犬戎之国，夸父之野，禺强之所，积水、积石之山。
现代文：禹东行到达樽木之地，太阳升起的九津之山，青羌之野，林术茂密之处，耸人云天之山，鸟谷青丘之国，黑齿之国，南行到达交耻，孙朴续椭之国，盛产丹砂、生长漆树、泉水喷涌的九阳之山，羽人、裸民之国，不死之国，西行到达三危之国，巫山之下，故露暖气之民所居之处，积金之山，奇肱、一臂、三面之国：北行到达人正之国，人海之滨，断山之上，犬戎之国，夸父逐日之野，禺强居住之所，积水、积石之山。
English: Yu traveled eastward and arrived at the land of cask wood, the sun-rising mountain of Jiuzin, the field of green alder, the place of dense forestry, the mountain of the dazzling clouds, the country of birds, the country of green hills, the country of black teeth, traveled southward and arrived at the country of shame, the country of Sun Po, the country of continuous ellipses, the mountain of Jiuyang, which is rich in the production of red sand, the growth of lacquer trees, and the gushing of spring water, the country of feathered people, naked people, the country of immortality, traveled westward and arrived at the country of three

古文：不有懈堕，忧其黔首，颜色黎黑，窍藏不通，步不相过，以求贤人，欲尽地利：至劳也。
现代文：他四处奔走，毫不懈怠，为百姓忧虑，面色黧黑，周身不适，步履艰难，去寻求贤人，想要充分发挥土地的效益：这是辛劳到极点了。
English: He runs around, tirelessly, worried about the people, dark-skinned, uncomfortable all over, walking with difficulty, to seek sages, to make full use of the benefits of the land: this is hard work to the extreme.

古文：得陶、化益、真窥、横革、之交五人佐禹，故功绩铭乎金石，著于盘盂。
现代文：结果得到皋陶，怕益、直成、横革、之交五人为佐，所以功绩刻于金石，书予盘盂，流传后世。
English: As a result, the pottery was made, and five people, including Xian Yi, Zicheng, Heng Ge, and Zhifang, contributed to it. Therefore, the achievement was engraved on the precious stone, and the book was preserved and passed down to future generations.

古文：昔者尧朝许由于沛泽之中，曰： 十日出而焦火不息，不亦劳乎？
现代文：从前尧到大泽之中拜见许由，说。 十个太阳都出来了，火把却还不熄灭，不是徒劳吗?
English: Once upon a time, I went to the middle of Osawa to pay my respects to Hojo, saying, "Ten suns have come out, but the torches have not been extinguished. Isn't it all in vain?"

古文：夫子为天子，而天下已治矣，请属天下于夫子。 
现代文：您来做天子，天下一定能够大治，我愿把天下交给您治理。 
English: If you come to be the son of heaven, the world will surely be able to be governed. I am willing to hand over the world to your governance.

古文：许由辞曰： 为天下之不治与？
现代文：许由推辞说： 这是为什和呢?
English: "What is this for?" he said, dismissively.

古文：而既已治矣。自为与？啁噍巢于林，不过一枝；偃鼠饮于河，不过满腹。
现代文：要说是因为天下还不太平吧，可如今天下已经太平了；说是为了自己吧，须知鹤鹩在树林中筑巢，树木再多，自己也只不过占据一棵树枝；鼹鼠到河里喝水，河水再多，自己也只不过喝饱肚皮。
English: If you want to say that it is because the world is not yet peaceful, but it is peaceful today; if you want to say that it is for yourself, you should know that the stork builds a nest in the forest, and no matter how many trees there are, he only occupies one branch; the mole drinks water in the river, and no matter how much water there is in the river, he only drinks his fill.

古文：归已，君乎！恶用天下？ 
现代文：您回去吧!我哪里用得着天下? 
English: Go back! What do I need the whole world for?

古文：遂之箕山之下，颍水之阳，耕而食，终身无经天下之色。
现代文：说罢，就去箕山脚下、颖水北岸种田为生，终生也没有过问天下的表示。
English: Having said that, he went to farmland at the foot of Lushan Mountain and on the north shore of Yingshui to make a living, and he never questioned what the world said.

古文：故贤主之于贤者也，物莫之妨，戚爱习故不以害之，故贤者聚焉。
现代文：所以贤明的君主任用贤者，不因外界事物使它受到妨害，不因亲人、爱幸、近习，故旧使之受到破坏，因而贤者聚集到他这里来。
English: Therefore, the wise ruler uses the wise, and does not let it be disturbed by external things, and does not let it be destroyed by relatives, loved ones, and relatives, so that the wise are gathered to him.

古文：贤者所聚，天地不坏，鬼神不害，人事不谋，此五常之本事也。
现代文：贤者所聚之处，天地不会降灾，鬼神不会作祟，人们不去谋算。这是五教的根本。
English: Where sages gather, heaven and earth will not bring disaster, ghosts and gods will not do harm, and people will not make plans. This is the foundation of the Five Teachings.

古文：皋子，众疑取国，召南宫虔、孔伯产而众口止。
现代文：人们怀疑皋子窃国，皋子把贤者南官虔、孔伯产召来，人们就停止了议论。
English: People suspected Zou Zi of stealing the country. Zou Zi summoned the sages Nan Guan Qian and Kong Bo Xing, and people stopped talking about it.

古文：晋人欲攻郑，令叔向聘焉，视其有人与无人。
现代文：晋君想进攻郑国，派叔向到郑国聘问，借以察看郑国有没有贤人。
English: Jin Jun wanted to attack Zheng Guo, so he sent his uncle to Zheng Guo to inquire whether there were any wise men in Zheng Guo.

古文：子产为之诗曰: 子惠思我，褰裳涉洧；子不我思，岂无他士？ 
现代文：子产对叔向诵诗说： 如果你心里思念我，就请提起衣服涉过洧河，如果你不再把我思念，难道我没有其他伴侣可选? 
English: "If you miss me, please take off your clothes and wade across the Li River. If you don't miss me anymore, don't I have another partner to choose from?

古文：叔向归曰： 郑有人，子产在焉，不可攻也。
现代文：叔向回到晋国，说： 郑国有贤人，那里有子产在，进攻不得。
English: When Uncle Xiang returned to Jin, he said, "Zheng has sages, there are children there, we must not attack.

古文：秦、荆近，其诗有异心，不可攻也。 
现代文：郑国跟秦国楚国临近，子产赋的诗又流露出二心，郑国攻不得。 
English: Zheng Guo is close to Qin Guo and Chu Guo, and the poem of Zifu reveals the two hearts. Zheng Guo cannot be attacked.

古文：晋人乃辍攻郑。
现代文：晋国于是停止攻郑。
English: Jin then stopped attacking Zheng.

古文：孔子曰： 《诗》云： 无竞惟人。 子产一称而郑国免。 
现代文：孔子说： 《诗经》上说： 国家强大完全在于有贤人 ，子产只是诵诗一首，郑国就免遭灾难！ 
English: Confucius said: "The Book of Songs" says: "A country's strength lies entirely in its wise men. If the progeny only recite one poem, Zheng Guo will be spared from disaster!"

古文：六曰：夫得言不可以不察。
现代文：察传听到传闻不可不审察清楚。
English: When you hear rumors, you must investigate them thoroughly.

古文：数传而白为黑，黑为白。
现代文：多次辗转相传，白的就成了黑的，黑的就成了白的。
English: Repeatedly passed down from generation to generation, white became black, and black became white.

古文：故狗似玃，玃似母猴，母猴似人，人之与狗则远矣。
现代文：狗像玃，玃像母猴，母猴像人，但是人和狗就差远了。
English: A dog is like a baboon, a baboon is like a female monkey, a female monkey is like a human, but humans and dogs are very different.

古文：此愚者之所以大过也。
现代文：这是愚蠢的人造成大误的原因。
English: That's why stupid people make big mistakes.

古文：闻而审，则为福矣；闻而不审，不若无闻矣。
现代文：听到什么如果加以审察，就有好处；听到什么如果不加审察，不如不听。
English: Hearing anything examined is good; hearing anything unexamined is not.

古文：齐桓公闻管子于鲍叔，楚庄闻孙叔敖于沈尹筮，审之也，故国霸诸侯也。
现代文：齐桓公从鲍叔牙那里得知管仲，楚庄王从沈尹筮那里得知孙叔敖，审察他们，因此国家称霸于诸侯。
English: Prince Qi Huan learned about Guanzhong from Bao Shuji, and King Chu Zhuang learned about Sun Shujun from Shen Yunyun, and examined them, so the state dominated the princes.

古文：吴王闻越王句践于太宰嚭，智伯闻赵襄子于张武，不审也，故国亡身死也。
现代文：吴王从太宰嚭那里听信了越王勾践的话，智伯从张武那里听信了赵襄子的事，没有经过审察便相信了，因此国家灭亡自己送了命。
English: King Wu listened to the words of King Yue from Dazai Yan, and Zhi Bo listened to the story of Zhao Xiangzi from Zhang Wu. They believed it without examination, so they lost their lives when the country was destroyed.

古文：凡闻言必熟论，其于人必验之以理。
现代文：凡是听到传闻，都必须深透审察，对于人都必须用理进行检验。
English: All hearsay must be thoroughly investigated, and all people must be tested by reason.

古文：鲁哀公问于孔子曰： 乐正夔一足，信乎？ 
现代文：鲁哀公问孔子说： 乐正夔只有一只脚，真的吗？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked Confucius, "Is it true that Le Zhengkun only has one foot?

古文：孔子曰： 昔者舜欲以乐传教于天下，乃令重黎举夔于草莽之中而进之，舜以为乐正。
现代文：孔子说： 从前舜想用音乐向天下老百姓传播教化，就让重黎从民间举荐了夔而且起用了他，舜任命他做乐正。
English: Confucius said: Once upon a time, if you wanted to use music to spread enlightenment to the people of the world, you would have Chou Li recommend you from the people and employ you, appointing you to be the music director.

古文：夔于是正六律，和五声，以通八风，而天下大服。
现代文：夔于是校正六律，谐和五声，用来调和阴阳之气。因而天下归顺。
English: then corrected the six laws, harmony and five tones, used to reconcile the yin and yang. Thus, the world surrendered.

古文：重黎又欲益求人，舜曰： 夫乐，天地之精也，得失之节也，故唯圣人为能和。和，乐之本也。
现代文：重黎还想多找些像夔这样的人，舜说： 音乐是天地间的精华，国家治乱的关键。只有圣人才能做到和谐，而和谐是音乐的根本。
English: Chongli also wants to find more people like Gong. Gong said, "Music is the essence of heaven and earth, the key to governing the country. Only saints can achieve harmony, and harmony is the foundation of music."

古文：夔能和之以平天下，若夔者一而足矣。 
现代文：夔能调和音律，从而使天下安定，像夔这样的人一个就够了。 
English: It is enough for a man like Gong to be able to harmonize the melody and thus make the world stable.

古文：故曰 夔一足 ，非 一足 也。 
现代文：所以说 一个夔就足够了 ，不是 夔只有一只足 。 
English: So one toad is enough, not a toad with only one leg.

古文：宋之丁氏，家无井而出溉汲，常一人居外。
现代文：宋国有个姓丁的人，家里没有水井，需要出门去打水，经常派一人在外专管打水。
English: There was a man surnamed Ding in Song, who had no well at home and needed to go out to fetch water. He often sent one person to fetch water.

古文：及其家穿井，告人曰： 吾穿井得一人。 
现代文：等到他家打了水井，他告诉别人说： 我家打水井得到一个人。 
English: When his family drilled a well, he told others: My family drilled a well and got a man.

古文：有闻而传之者曰： 丁氏穿井得一人。 
现代文：有人听了就去传播： 丁家挖井挖到了一个人。 
English: Some people heard about it and spread the news: The Ding family dug a well and found a person.

古文：国人道之，闻之于宋君。
现代文：都城的人人纷纷传说这件事，被宋君听到了。
English: People in the capital have been talking about it, and Song Jun heard about it.

古文：宋君令人问之于丁氏。丁氏对曰： 得一人之使，非得一人于井中也。 
现代文：宋君派人向姓丁的问明情况，姓丁的答道， 得到一个人使用，并非在井内挖到了一个活人。 
English: Songjun sent someone to ask Ding about the situation, and Ding replied that it was not a living person who was dug up in the well, but a person who was used.

古文：求闻之若此，不若无闻也。子夏之晋，过卫，有读史记者曰: 晋师三豕涉河。 
现代文：像这样听信传闻，不如不听。子夏到晋国去，经过卫国，有个读史书的人说： 晋军三豕过黄河。 
English: It is better not to listen to hearsay like this. Zixia went to Jin Province and passed through the defense of the country. A person reading a history book said: The Jin Army crossed the Yellow River three times.

古文：子夏曰： 非也，是己亥也。
现代文：子夏说： 不对，是己亥日过黄河。
English: Zixia said, "No, it was I who crossed the Yellow River.

古文：夫 己 与 三 相近， 豕 与 亥 相似。 
现代文：古文 己 字与 三 字字形相近， 豕 字和 亥 字相似。 
English: The ancient characters "己" and "三" are similar, and "" and "亥" are similar.

古文：至于晋而问之，则曰 晋师己亥涉河 也。
现代文：到了晋国探问此事，果然是说，晋国军队在己亥那天渡过黄河。
English: When he went to Jin Province to inquire about the matter, he was told that the Jin Army had crossed the Yellow River on Ji Hai Day.

古文：辞多类非而是，多类是而非。
现代文：言辞有很多似是而非，似非而是的。
English: There's a lot of double-speak, double-speak.

古文：是非之经，不可不分。此圣人之所慎也。
现代文：是非的界线，不可不分辩清楚，这是圣人需要特别慎重对待的问题。
English: The line between right and wrong cannot be clearly drawn without debate, and this is an issue that sages need to treat with special care.

古文：然则何以慎？
现代文：虽然这样，那末靠什么方法才能做到慎重呢？
English: Even so, by what means can one be prudent?

古文：缘物之情及人之情以为所闻，则得之矣。
现代文：遵循着事物的规律和人的情理，用这种方法来审察所听到的传闻，就可以得到真实的情况了。
English: Following the laws of things and human reason, using this method to examine the rumors heard, you can get the real situation.

