古文：黄帝问曰：诊法何如？
现代文：黄帝问道：诊脉的方法是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the method of diagnosing the pulse?

古文：岐伯对曰：诊法常以平旦，阴气未动，阳气未散，饮食未进，经脉未盛，络脉调匀，气血未乱，故乃可诊有过之脉。
现代文：岐伯回答说：诊脉通常是以早晨太阳将要升起之前的时间为最好，此时人还没有劳于事，阴气未被扰动，阳气尚未耗散，饮食也未曾进过，经脉之气尚未充盛，络脉之气也很匀静，气血未受到扰乱，因而可以诊察出有病的脉象。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The best time to diagnose the pulse is usually before the sun is about to rise in the morning. At this time, the person has not worked, the yin has not been disturbed, the yang has not been dissipated, the diet has not been eaten, the qi of the meridians has not been enriched, the qi of the vas deferens is also very even, and the qi and blood have not been disturbed, so the diseased pulse can be diagnosed.

古文：切脉动静而视精明，察五色，观五脏有余不足，六腑强弱，形之盛衰，以此参伍，决死生之分。
现代文：上部在头的脉盛，为邪壅于上，可见呼吸急促，喘满之症；下部在足的脉盛，是邪滞于下，可见胀满之病。
English: The upper part of the pulse in the head is the evil eye on the top, showing shortness of breath and wheezing; the lower part of the pulse in the foot is the evil eye on the bottom, showing bloating.

古文：夫脉者，血之府也。长则气治，短则气病，数则烦心，大则病进。上盛则气高，下盛则气胀，代则气衰，细则气少，涩则心痛，浑浑革至如涌泉，病进而色弊，绵绵其去如弦绝，死。
现代文：代脉为脉动有规则的间歇脉象，表示五脏之气衰弱病势较重；细脉为指下感觉脉管细小的脉象，表示气虚、血虚、阴虚以致不能充盈脉管；涩脉为脉动艰涩的脉象，表示血流不畅以致血少、气滞，主心痛之症。脉来粗大急速如泉水上涌，这种脉象表示病势亢进，气血非常紊乱，必定面色晦暗无光而有生命危险；脉来隐约不现、微细无力，脉去如琴弦猝然断绝而去，为气血已绝，生机已断，故主死。
English: The generative vein is a regular pulsating intermittent pulse, indicating that the five viscera are weak and the disease is severe; the fine vein is a small pulse of the sensory vasculature under the finger, indicating qi deficiency, blood deficiency, and shade deficiency, so that the vasculature cannot be filled; the astringent vein is a pulsating difficult pulse, indicating poor blood flow, resulting in less blood, qi stagnation, and the disease of the main heart. The pulse is coarse and rapid, such as the upwelling of spring water. This pulse indicates that the disease is advanced, the qi and blood are very disordered, and the face must be dark

古文：夫精明五色者，气之华也。
现代文：眼睛的神彩，面部的五色，都是内脏的精气表现出来的光华。
English: The brilliance of the eyes, the five colors of the face, are all the brilliance of the essence of the internal organs.

古文：赤欲如白裹朱，不欲如赭；白欲如鹅羽，不欲如盐，青欲如苍璧之泽，不欲如蓝；黄欲如罗裹雄黄，不欲如黄土；黑欲如重漆色，不欲如地苍。
现代文：赤色应该像白帛裹朱砂一样，红润而有光泽，不应该像赭石那样，色赤带紫，没有光泽；白色应该像鹅的羽毛一样，白而有光泽，不应该像盐那样白而带灰暗色；青色应该青而明润如璧玉，不应像蓼蓝那样青而带沉暗色；黄色应该像白罗纱包着雄黄一样，黄而明润，不应该像黄土那样，枯暗无华；黑色应该像重漆之色，光彩而润，不应该像地上的黑土那样枯暗没有生气。
English: Red should be like chalk in cinnabar, ruddy and shiny, not like flint, reddish-purple and dull; white should be like goose feathers, white and shiny, not white and dull like salt; blue should be blue and clear like jade, not blue and dark like indigo; yellow should be like rosemary wrapped in marigold, yellow and clear, not dull like ocher; black should be like the color of heavy paint, bright and moist, not dull and lifeless like the black soil of the earth.

古文：五色精微象见矣，其寿不久也。
现代文：假如五脏真色暴露于外，这是真气外脱的危象，人的寿命也就不长了。
English: If the true color of the viscera is exposed to the outside world, this is the danger of losing one's true nature, and one's life span will not be long.

古文：夫精明者，所以视万物，别白黑，审短长，以长为短，以白为黑，如是则精衰矣。
现代文：眼睛的瞳神是观察万物、分别黑白、审察长短的，若长短不明、黑白不清，这是精气衰竭的现象。
English: The pupil of the eye is to observe all things, distinguish between black and white, and examine the long and short. If the length is unknown and the black and white are unclear, this is a phenomenon of exhaustion.

古文：五脏者，中之守也。
现代文：五脏，是藏精气而守于内。
English: The five viscera contain the essence of the body and keep it inside.

古文：中盛藏满，气胜伤恐者，声如从室中言，是中气之湿也。
现代文：如果邪盛于腹中，脏气壅满，气盛而喘，善伤于恐，讲话声音重浊不清，如在密室中说话一样，这是中焦有湿邪所致。
English: If the evil spirit is in the belly, the air is full of filth, the breath of the evil spirit is panting, the good spirit is hurt by fear, and the voice of the speech is heavy and unclear, as if speaking in a secret room, this is caused by the evil spirit being wet in the middle of the focus.

古文：言而微，终日乃复言者，此夺气也。
现代文：语音低微而气不接续，一天到晚的唠叨不断，这是精气被劫夺所致。
English: The voice is low and breathless, and the day-to-night chatter is incessant. This is the result of the spirit being robbed.

古文：衣被不敛，言语善恶，不避亲疏者，此神明之乱也。
现代文：衣被不知敛盖，言语不知善恶，不辨亲疏远近的，这是神明错乱的现象。
English: This is a phenomenon of divine disorder, in which one's robe is covered by an unknown garment, one's speech is ignorant of good and evil, and one does not distinguish between those who are close and those who are distant.

古文：仓廪不藏者，是门户不要也。
现代文：脾胃不能藏纳水谷精气而泄利不禁的，是中气失守，肛门不能约束的缘故。
English: The reason why the spleen and stomach can't contain the essence of the valley and can't help but give it out is that the middle qi is lost and the anus can't be restrained.

古文：水泉不止者，是膀胱不藏也。
现代文：小便失禁的，是膀胱不能闭藏的缘故。
English: Urinary incontinence is caused by the inability of the bladder to close.

古文：得守者生，失守者死。
现代文：若五脏功能正常，得其职守者则生；若五脏精气不能固藏，失其职守则死。
English: If the function of the five viscera is normal, the one who keeps his duty is born; if the five viscera's essence cannot be stored, the one who loses his duty is dead.

古文：夫五脏者，身之强也。
现代文：五脏精气充足，为身体强健之本。
English: The five internal organs are full of energy, which is the foundation of a strong body.

古文：头者，精明之府，头倾视深，精神将夺矣。
现代文：头为精明之府，若见到头部低垂，目陷无光的，是精神将要衰败。
English: The head is the abode of sagacity. If one sees the head bowed and the eyes sunken, it is the spirit that is about to decay.

古文：背者，胸中之府，背曲肩随，府将坏矣。
现代文：后背是五脏汇聚之地，为胸中之府，若见到背弯曲而肩下垂的，是胸中脏器将要败坏。
English: The back is the place where the five internal organs come together. It is the center of the chest. If you see the back bent and the shoulders sagging, it is the internal organs in the chest that will deteriorate.

古文：腰者，肾之府，转摇不能，肾将惫矣。
现代文：肾位居于腰，故腰为肾之府，若见到不能转侧摇动，是肾气将要衰惫。
English: The kidney is located at the waist, so the waist is the home of the kidney. If you can't turn and shake, it is the kidney gas that will be exhausted.

古文：膝者，筋之府，屈伸不能，行则偻附，筋将惫矣。
现代文：膝是筋汇聚的地方，所以膝为筋之府，若曲伸不能，行路要弓身附物，这是筋的功能将要衰惫。
English: The knee is the place where the sinews come together, so the knee is the home of the sinews. If you can't bend and stretch, you should walk with the bow attached. This is the function of the sinews that will be exhausted.

古文：骨者，髓之府，不能久立，行则振掉，骨将惫矣。
现代文：骨为髓之府，不能久立，行则震颤摇摆，这是髓虚，骨的功能将要衰惫。
English: Bone is the home of marrow. It cannot stand for a long time. When it moves, it trembles and sways. This is marrow deficiency, and the function of bone will decline.

古文：得强则生，失强则死。岐伯曰：反四时者，有余为精，不足为消。
现代文：若脏气能够恢复强健，则虽病可以复生；若脏气不能复强，则病情不能挽回，人也就死了。岐伯说：脉气与四时阴阳之气相反的，如相反的形象为有余，皆为邪气盛于正气，相反的形象为不足，为血气先己消损。
English: If the impure qi can restore strength, then the illness can be revived; if the impure qi cannot be restored, then the illness cannot be recovered, and the person will die. Qibo said: the pulse qi is the opposite of the qi of yin and yang at four o'clock, if the opposite image is surplus, it is the evil qi that is contained in the righteous qi, and the opposite image is insufficient, it is the blood qi that has been lost first.

古文：应太过，不足为精；应不足，有余为消。
现代文：根据时令变化，脏气当旺，脉气应有余，却反见不足的，这是邪气盛于正气；脉气应不足，却反见有余的，这是正不胜邪，邪气盛，而血气消损。
English: According to the seasonal changes, the dirty gas is strong, the pulse gas should be more than enough, but it is not enough, this is the evil gas in the righteous gas; the pulse gas should be insufficient, but it is not enough, this is the positive evil, the evil gas is strong, and the blood gas is lost.

古文：阴阳不相应，病名曰关格。
现代文：这种阴阳不相顺从，气血不相营运，邪正不相适应而发生的疾病名叫 关格 。
English: This kind of disease that occurs when yin and yang do not obey each other, qi and blood do not operate together, and evil and righteousness do not fit together is called Guan Ge.

古文：帝曰：脉其四时动奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：脉象是怎样应四时的变化而变动的呢？
English: Huangdi asked: How does the pulse pattern change in response to the four o'clock change?

古文：知病之所在奈何？
现代文：怎样从脉诊上知道病变的所在呢？
English: How can the location of the lesion be known from the pulse diagnosis?

古文：知病之所变奈何？
现代文：怎样从脉诊上知道疾病的变化呢？
English: How do you know the change of the disease from the pulse diagnosis?

古文：知病乍在内奈何？
现代文：怎样从脉诊上知道病发生在内部呢？
English: How do you know from the pulse diagnosis that the disease occurs internally?

古文：知病乍在外奈何？
现代文：怎样从脉诊上知道病发生在外部呢？
English: How do you know from the pulse diagnosis that the disease occurs externally?

古文：请问此五者可得闻乎？
现代文：请问这五个问题，可以讲给我听吗？
English: Can you tell me about these five questions?

古文：岐伯曰：请言其与天运转大也。
现代文：岐伯说：让我讲一讲人体的阴阳升降与天运之环转相适应的情况。
English: Qi Bo said: Let me talk about the situation of the human body's yin and yang rising and falling in accordance with the cycle of heaven's fortune.

古文：万物之外，六合之内，天地之变，阴阳之应，彼春之暖，为夏之暑，彼秋之忿，为冬之怒。
现代文：万物之外，六合之内，天地间的变化，阴阳四时与之相应。如春天的气候温暖，发展为夏天的气候暑热，秋天得劲急之气，发展为冬天的寒杀之气，这种四时气候的变化，人体的脉象也随着变化而升降浮沉。
English: In addition to all things, within the six conjunctions, the changes between heaven and earth, yin and yang at four o'clock correspond to it. For example, if the climate is warm in spring, it will develop into a hot summer climate, the autumn will have a rush of energy, and it will develop into a cold winter, this four-hour climate change, the pulse of the human body will also rise and fall with the change.

古文：四变之动，脉与之上下，以春应中规，夏应中矩，秋应中衡，冬应中权。是故冬至四十五日，阳气微上，阴气微下；夏至四十五日，阴气微上，阳气微下，阴阳有时，与脉为期，期而相失，知脉所分，分之有期，故知死时。
现代文：春脉如圆规之象，夏脉如矩尺之象，秋脉如称杆之象，冬脉如秤砣之象。四时阴阳的情况也是这样，冬至到立春的四十五天，阳气逐渐上升，阴气逐渐下降；夏至到立秋的四十五天，阴气逐渐上升，阳气逐渐下降。四时阴阳的升降是有一定的时间规律的，人体脉象的变化也要与之相应，脉象变化与四时阴阳不相适应即是病态，如果知道脉象的正常与异常的分别，对比阴阳消长的时间规律，就可以判断出病人的死亡时间。
English: The spring pulse is like a compass, the summer pulse is like a ruler, the autumn pulse is like a balance, and the winter pulse is like a scale. The situation of yin and yang at 4 o'clock is also the same. During the forty-five days from the winter solstice to the beginning of spring, the yang gradually rises and the yin gradually falls; during the forty-five days from the summer solstice to the beginning of autumn, the yin gradually rises and the yang gradually falls. The rise and fall of yin and yang at 4 o'clock has a certain time pattern, and the changes in the human pulse image should also correspond to it. Pulse image changes that do

古文：微妙在脉，不可不察，察之有纪，从阴阳始，始之有经，从五行生，生之有度，四时为宜。
现代文：人体与四时阴阳变化的微妙变化都体现在脉象上，所以不能不详细诊察，诊察脉象是有纲纪的，就是要从辨别阴阳之气开始，辨别阴阳之气是有规律的，就是从结合五行开始，结合五行是有法度的，就是要与四时阴阳的变化相适宜。
English: The subtle changes of the human body and the changes of yin and yang at 4 o'clock are reflected in the pulse image, so it is necessary to make a detailed diagnosis. The diagnosis of the pulse image is systematic, it is necessary to start from the distinction of the yin and yang qi, the distinction of the yin and yang qi is regular, it is necessary to start from the combination of the five elements, the combination of the five elements is legitimate, it is necessary to be suitable for the changes of the yin and yang at 4 o'clock.

古文：补泻勿失，与天地如一，得一之情，以知死生。
现代文：运用补法和泻法时，不能与上述的法则相违背，要使人体与天地自然之气保持统一，知道了天人合一的道理，就可以预决死生。
English: When using the method of supplementation and the method of laxation, one must not violate the above-mentioned rules. The human body must be unified with the natural atmosphere of heaven and earth. If you know the principle of the unity of heaven and man, you can predict life and death.

古文：是故声合五音，色合五行，脉合阴阳。是知阴盛则梦涉大水恐惧，阳盛则梦大火燔灼，阴阳惧盛，则梦相杀毁伤。
现代文：阴气盛则梦见渡大水而恐惧；阳气盛则梦见大火烧灼；阴阳俱盛则梦见相互残杀毁伤。上气太盛则梦飞腾；下气太盛则梦下堕。
English: Yin qisheng dreams of crossing the great water and fears; yang qisheng dreams of fire and burning; yin and yang qisheng dreams of killing and injuring each other. Upper qisheng dreams of flying; lower qisheng dreams of falling down.

古文：上盛则梦飞，下盛则梦堕；甚饱则梦予，甚饥则梦取；肝气盛则梦怒，肺气盛则梦哭；短虫多则梦聚众，长虫多则梦相击毁伤。
现代文：过饱的时候，就会梦见送食物给人；饥饿的时候，就会梦见去取食物。肝气盛，则做梦好发怒气；肺气盛，则做梦悲哀啼哭。腹内蛲虫多，则梦众人集聚；腹内蛔虫多，则梦打架损伤。
English: When you are full, you will dream of giving food to people; when you are hungry, you will dream of getting food. If you have a strong liver, you will dream of getting angry; if you have a strong lung, you will dream of crying sadly. If you have a lot of worms in your stomach, you will dream of people gathering; if you have a lot of worms in your stomach, you will dream of getting into a fight.

古文：是故，持脉有道，虚静为保。
现代文：所以，诊脉有一定方法和要求，虚心静气才能保证诊断的正确。
English: Therefore, there are certain methods and requirements for diagnosing the pulse, and only with an open mind and a calm spirit can the diagnosis be guaranteed to be correct.

古文：春日浮，如鱼之游在波；夏日在肤，泛泛乎万物有余；秋日下肤，蛰虫将去；冬日在骨，蛰虫周密，君子居室。
现代文：春天的脉象应该浮而在外，好像鱼浮游于水波之中；夏天的脉象在肤，洪大而浮，泛泛然充满于指下，就像夏天万物生长的茂盛状态；秋天的脉象处于皮肤之下，就像蛰虫将要伏藏；冬天的脉象沉在骨，就像冬眠之虫闭藏不出，人们也都深居简出一样。
English: The pulse of spring should be floating outside, like a fish swimming in the waves of water; the pulse of summer should be on the skin, large and buoyant, and suddenly full under the fingertips, like the lush state of all things growing in summer; the pulse of autumn should be under the skin, like a tapeworm about to hide; the pulse of winter should be sunk in the bones, like a hibernating insect that can't be closed and hidden, and people are also deep and simple.

古文：故曰： 知内者按而纪之，知外者终而始之。 
现代文：因此说：要知道内脏的脉象情况，可以通过把脉而得知；要知道外部的色象情况，可以通过面诊而断决。
English: Therefore, it is said: to know the pulse condition of the internal organs, it can be known by taking the pulse; to know the external color condition, it can be determined by face-to-face consultation.

古文：此六者，持脉之大法。
现代文：春、夏、秋、冬、内、外这六个方面，乃是诊脉的大法。
English: The six aspects of spring, summer, autumn, winter, inside and outside are the great law of diagnosing the pulse.

古文：心脉搏坚而长，当病舌卷不能言；其软而散者，当消环自己。
现代文：心脉坚而长，搏击指下，为心经邪盛，火盛气浮，当病 舌卷 而不能言语；其脉软而散的，当病 消渴 ，待其胃气来复，病自痊愈。
English: The pulse of the heart is strong and long, it beats under the finger, for the heart is full of evil, full of fire and buoyant, when the tongue is sick, it cannot speak; its pulse is soft and loose, when it is sick, it quenches thirst, waits for its stomach to come back, and the disease is cured.

古文：肺脉搏坚而长，当病唾血；其软而散者，当病灌汗，至令不复散发也。
现代文：肺脉坚而长，搏击指下，为火邪犯肺，当病 唾血 ；其脉软而散的，为肺脉不足，当病 灌汗 ，在这种情况下，不可再用发散的方法治疗。
English: The pulmonary vein is hard and long, under the finger, it is the fire evil lung, when the disease is spit blood; its vein is soft and scattered, it is the pulmonary vein deficiency, when the disease is sweating, in this case, it is no longer possible to use the divergent method of treatment.

古文：肝脉搏坚而长，色不青，当病坠若搏，因血在胁下，令人喘逆；其软而散色泽者，当病溢饮。
现代文：肝脉坚而长，搏击指下，其面色当青，现在反而不见青色，知其病非由内生，当为跌坠或搏击所伤，因淤血积于胁下，阻碍肺气升降，所以使人喘逆；如其脉软而散，加之面目颜色鲜泽的，当发 溢饮病 。
English: The veins of the liver are strong and long. When struck with a finger, the liver's complexion appears blue. Now, however, it does not appear blue. It is known that the disease is not endogenous, but is caused by a fall or a blow. Because blood clots under stress, it hinders the rise and fall of the lungs, so it makes people wheeze. If the veins are soft and loose, and the face is brightly colored, it is a case of overdrinking disease.

古文：溢饮者，渴暴多饮，而易入肌皮肠胃之外也。
现代文：溢饮病口渴暴饮，因水不化气，而水气容易流入肌肉皮肤之间、肠胃之外所引起。
English: Overdrinking disease is caused by overdrinking due to thirst, because water does not turn into gas, and water vapor easily flows into the muscles, between the skin, and outside the intestines and stomach.

古文：胃脉搏坚而长，其色赤，当病折髀；其软而散者，当病食痹。
现代文：胃脉坚而长，搏击指下，面色赤，当病 髀痛 如折；如其脉软而散的，则胃气不足，当病 食痹 。
English: If the stomach vein is long and hard, it beats under the finger, the face is red, and it is painful when sick; if the vein is soft and loose, the stomach is short of gas, and it is paralysed when sick.

古文：脾脉搏坚而长，其色黄，当病少气；其软而散色不泽者，当病足胻肿，若水状也。
现代文：脾脉坚而长，搏击指下，面部色黄，乃脾气不运，当病 少气 ；如其脉软而散，面色不泽，为脾虚，不能运化水湿，当病 足胻肿 如水状。
English: The spleen vein is strong and long, the fight is under the finger, the face is yellow, but the spleen is unlucky, when the disease is short of breath; if the vein is soft and loose, the complexion is dull, the spleen is weak, it can not move and is wet, when the disease is abscessed, the foot is watery.

古文：肾脉搏坚而长，其色黄而赤者，当病折腰；其软而散者，当病少血，至令不复也。
现代文：肾脉坚长，搏击指下，面部黄而带赤，是心脾之邪盛侵犯于肾，肾受邪伤，当病腰痛如折；如其脉软而散者，当病精血虚少，使身体不能恢复健康。
English: If the kidney vein is long and hard, and the pulse is under the finger, and the face is yellow and red, it is the evil of the heart and spleen that invades the kidney. If the kidney is injured by evil, the patient will have back pain; if the vein is soft and scattered, the patient will have insufficient blood, so that the body cannot recover health.

古文：帝曰：诊得心脉而急，此为何病？
现代文：黄帝说：诊脉时，其心脉劲急，这是什么病？
English: Huang Di said: When diagnosing the pulse, the pulse is very fast. What kind of disease is this?

古文：病形何如？
现代文：病的症状是怎样的呢？
English: What are the symptoms of the disease?

古文：岐伯曰：病名心疝，少腹当有形也。
现代文：岐伯说：这种病名叫 心疝 ，少腹部位一定有形征出现。
English: Qi Bo said: This disease is called palpitation, and there must be symptoms in the abdomen.

古文：帝曰：何以言之？
现代文：黄帝说：这是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Why do you say that?

古文：岐伯曰：心为牡脏，小肠为之使，故曰少腹当有形也。
现代文：岐伯说：心为阳脏，心与小肠为表里，今与病传于腑，小肠受之，为疝而痛，小肠居于少腹，所以少腹当有病形。
English: Qi Bo said: the heart is the yang, the heart and the small intestine are the inside of the surface, now the disease is transmitted to the diaphragm, the small intestine suffers from it, it is painful for the diaphragm, the small intestine lives in the small abdomen, so the small abdomen should have a pathological shape.

古文：帝曰：诊得胃脉病形何如？
现代文：黄帝说：诊察到胃脉有病，会出现什么病变呢？
English: Huang Di said: What kind of lesions will appear after diagnosing that the gastric artery is diseased?

古文：岐伯曰：胃脉实则胀，虚则泄。
现代文：岐伯说：胃脉实则邪气有余，将出现腹胀满病；胃脉虚则胃气不足，将出现泄泻病。
English: Qi Bo said: if the gastric vein is deficient, gastric ballooning will occur; if the gastric vein is deficient, gastric leakage will occur.

古文：帝曰：病成而变何谓？
现代文：黄帝说：疾病的形成及其发展变化又是怎样的呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the reason for the formation and development of the disease?

古文：岐伯曰：风成为寒热，瘅成为消中，厥成为巅疾，久风为飧泄，脉风成为疠。病之变化，不可胜数。
现代文：岐伯说：因于风邪，可变为寒热病；瘅热既久，可成为 消中 病；气逆上而不己，可成为癫痫病；风气通于肝，风邪经久不愈，木邪侮土，可成为飧泻病；风邪客于脉，留而不去则成为疠风病；疾病的发展变化是不能够数清的。
English: Qi Bo said: Due to the cold, it can become a cold and fever disease; if the fever lasts for a long time, it can become a wasting disease; if the qi is upside down, it can become an epilepsy disease; if the wind passes through the liver, the cold will not be cured for a long time, and if the tree is cursed, it can become a diarrhea disease; if the wind is in the vein, if it is left and not removed, it will become a leprosy disease; the development and change of the disease can not be counted.

古文：帝曰：诸痈肿筋挛骨痛，此皆安生？
现代文：黄帝说：各种痈肿、筋挛、骨痛的病变，是怎样产生的呢？
English: Huang Di said: How did the various abscesses, muscle spasms, and bone pain lesions come about?

古文：岐伯曰：此寒气之肿，八风之变也。
现代文：岐伯说：这都是因为寒气聚集和八风邪气侵犯人体后而发生的变化。
English: Qi Bo said: This is all due to the changes that occur after the cold air gathers and the eight evil winds invade the human body.

古文：帝曰：治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：怎样进行治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：此四时之病，以其胜治之愈也。
现代文：岐伯说：由于四时偏胜之邪气所引起的病变，根据五行相胜的规律确定治则去治疗就会痊愈。
English: Qi Bo said: Due to the lesions caused by the evil spirit of the four-time victory, according to the law of the five elements victory, the treatment will be cured.

古文：帝曰：有故病五脏发动，因伤脉色，各何以知其久暴至之病乎？
现代文：黄帝说：有旧病从五脏发动，都会影响到脉色而发生变化，怎样区别它是久病还是新病呢？
English: Huang Di said: If an old disease starts from the five internal organs, it will affect the pulse color and change. How to distinguish whether it is a long-term illness or a new disease?

古文：岐伯曰：悉乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯说：你问的很详细啊！
English: Qibo said: Your question is very comprehensive!

古文：征其脉小，色不夺者，新病也；征其脉不夺，其色夺者，此久病也。征其脉与五色俱夺者，此久病也；征其脉与五色俱不夺者，新病也。
现代文：只要验看它脉色就可以区别开来：如脉虽小而气色不失于正常的，是为新病；如脉不失于正常而色失于正常的，乃是久病；如脉象与气色均失于正常状态的，也是久病；如脉象与面色都不失于正常的，乃是新病。
English: If the pulse is small but the complexion is normal, it is a new disease; if the pulse is normal but the complexion is abnormal, it is a chronic disease; if both the pulse and the complexion are abnormal, it is a chronic disease; if both the pulse and the complexion are abnormal, it is a new disease.

古文：肝与肾脉并至，其色苍赤，当病毁伤不见血，已见血，湿若中水也。
现代文：脉见沉弦，是肝脉与肾脉并致，而外部没有血，或外部已见血，其经脉必滞，血气必凝，血凝经滞，形体必肿，有似乎因湿邪或水气中伤的现象，成为一种淤血肿胀。
English: If the pulse is dull, it is caused by the liver vein and the kidney vein together, and there is no blood outside, or blood has been seen outside, the meridians will be stagnant, the blood gas will be coagulated, the blood coagulation will be stagnant, the body will be swollen, and there will be a phenomenon that seems to be due to wetness or water vapor injury, becoming a kind of congestion and swelling.

古文：尺内两旁，则季胁也，尺外以候肾，尺里以候腹。
现代文：尺肤两旁是季胁相应的部位，尺肤的外侧用来诊察肾，尺肤的里侧用来诊察腹。
English: Both sides of the ulna are the corresponding parts of the estrus, the outer side of the ulna is used to diagnose the kidney, and the inner side of the ulna is used to diagnose the abdomen.

古文：中附上，左外以候肝，内以候鬲。右外以候胃，内以候脾。
现代文：尺肤的中部逐渐向上，左臂外侧用来诊察肝，左臂内侧用来诊察膈；右臂外侧用来诊察胃，右臂内侧用来诊察脾。
English: The middle of the ulnar skin gradually rises, the outer side of the left arm is used to diagnose the liver, the inner side of the left arm is used to diagnose the spleen; the outer side of the right arm is used to diagnose the stomach, and the inner side of the right arm is used to diagnose the spleen.

古文：上附上，右外以候肺，内以候胸中，左外以候心，内以候膻中。
现代文：尺肤的上部逐渐向上，右臂外侧用来诊察肺，右臂内侧用来诊察胸中；左臂外侧用来诊察心，左臂内侧用来诊察膻中。
English: The upper part of the ulna is gradually raised. The outer side of the right arm is used to diagnose the lungs, the inner side of the right arm is used to diagnose the middle of the chest; the outer side of the left arm is used to diagnose the heart, and the inner side of the left arm is used to diagnose the middle of the shin.

古文：前以候前，后以候后。
现代文：前部用来诊察身之前半部，后部用来诊察身之后半部。
English: The front part is used to examine the anterior half of the body, and the rear part is used to examine the posterior half of the body.

古文：上竟上者，胸喉中事也。
现代文：上界以上的部位，可诊察胸喉中的情况。
English: Above the upper limit, the condition in the chest and throat can be diagnosed.

古文：下竟下者，少腹腰股膝胫足中事也。
现代文：下界以下的部位，可诊察少腹、腰、股、膝、胫、足中的情况。
English: The areas below the lower limit can be examined for dyspepsia, hips, thighs, knees, ankles, and feet.

古文：粗大者阴不足，阳有余，为热中也。
现代文：寸口脉，脉象洪大的，是由于阴精不足而阳有余，故发为热中之病。
English: Cunkou pulse, pulse like Hongda, is due to the insufficiency of yin essence and the excess of yang, so it is a disease of heat.

古文：来疾去徐，上实下虚，为厥巅疾。
现代文：脉象来时急疾而去时徐缓，这是由于上部实而下部虚，气逆于上，多好发为 癫仆 一类的疾病。
English: This is because the upper part is solid and the lower part is hollow, and the qi is contrary to the upper part. It is more likely to be a disease such as epilepsy.

古文：来徐去疾，上虚下实，为恶风也。
现代文：脉象来时徐缓而去时急疾，这是由于上部虚而下部实，多好发为 疠风 之病。
English: When the pulse comes, it is slow, but when it goes, it is sudden. This is because the upper part is false and the lower part is true. It is more likely to be the disease of leprosy.

古文：故中恶风者，阳气受也。
现代文：患这种病的原因，是因为阳气虚而失去捍卫的功能，所以才感受邪气而发病。
English: The reason for suffering from this disease is that the yang qi is deficient and the function of defending it is lost, so it is only when the evil qi is felt that the disease occurs.

古文：有脉俱沉细数者，少阴厥也；沉细数散者，寒热也；浮而散者为眴仆。
现代文：有两手脉均见沉细数的，沉细为肾之脉体，数为热，故发为少阴之阳厥；如见脉沉细数散，为阴血亏损，多发为阴虚阳亢之虚劳寒热病。脉浮而散，好发为眩晕仆倒之病。
English: If the veins of both hands are thick and thin, the thick and thin are the vascular body of the kidney, and the number is hot, so the disease is a minor yin yang jue; if the veins are thin and thin and thin, it is a yin and blood loss, and the disease is a minor yin and blood loss, and the disease is a minor yin and blood loss, and the disease is a minor yin and blood loss, and the disease is a minor yin and blood loss, and the disease is a minor yin and blood loss, and the disease is a minor yin and blood loss.

古文：诸浮不躁者，皆在阳，则为热；其有躁者在手，诸细而沉者，皆在阴，则为骨痛；其有静者在足。
现代文：凡见浮脉而不躁急，其病在阳分，则出现发热的症状，病在足三阳经；如浮而躁急的，则病在手三阳经。凡见细脉而沉，其病在阴分，发为骨节疼痛，病在手三阴经；如果脉细沉而静，其病在足三阴经。
English: Anyone who sees the floating vein without being impatient, and whose illness is in the yang point, will have the symptoms of fever, and the illness is in the three yang points of the foot; if it is floating and impatient, the illness is in the three yang points of the hand. Anyone who sees the thin vein and sinks, the illness is in the yin point, and the onset is pain in the bone joint, and the illness is in the three yang points of the hand; if the vein is thin and quiet, the illness is in the three yang points of the foot.

古文：数动一代者，病在阳之脉也，泄及便脓血。
现代文：发现数动，而见一次歇止的脉象，是病在阳分，为阳热郁滞的脉象，可出现泄利或大便带脓血的疾病。
English: The pulse that is found to be pulsating several times, but seen to stop only once, is the pulse of the disease in the yang point, and is the pulse of the stagnation of the yang heat. The disease of bleeding or stool with blood in the stool may occur.

古文：诸过者切之，涩者阳气有余也，滑者阴气有余也。
现代文：诊察到各种有病的脉象而切按时，如见涩脉是阳气有余，滑脉为阴气有余。
English: After diagnosing all kinds of diseased veins and cutting them on time, you can see that the astringent veins are more yang and the synovial veins are more yin.

古文：阳气有余为身热无汗，阴气有余为多汗身寒，阴阳有余则无汗而寒。
现代文：阳热有余则身热而无汗；阴寒有余则多汗而身寒；阴气阳气均有余，则无汗而身寒。
English: If there is an excess of solar heat, the body will be hot without sweat; if there is an excess of cold, the body will be cold with excessive sweat; if there is an excess of both yin and yang, the body will be cold without sweat.

古文：推而外之，内而不外，有心腹积也。
现代文：按脉浮取不见，沉取则脉沉迟不浮，是病在内而非在外，故知其心腹有积聚病。
English: According to the pulse, there is no buoyancy, and if it is absorbed, the pulse is sluggish and not buoyant. It is a disease inside and not outside, so it is known that there is an accumulation disease in his heart.

古文：推而内之，外而不内，身有热也。
现代文：按脉沉取不显，浮取则脉浮数不沉，是病在外而不在内，当有身发热之症。
English: According to the pulse, the sedimentation is not obvious, and the floating number of the pulse is not heavy. The disease is outside but not inside, and there should be a fever.

古文：推而上之，上而不下，腰足清也。
现代文：凡诊脉推求于上部，只见于上部，下部脉弱的，这是上实下虚，故出现腰足清冷之症。
English: Where the diagnostic pulse is inferred in the upper part, it is only found in the upper part, and the lower part of the pulse is weak. This is the upper real and lower false, so the disease of coldness of the waist and feet appears.

古文：推而下之，下而不上，头项痛也。
现代文：凡诊脉推求于下部，只见于下部，而上部脉弱的，这是上虚下实，故出现头项疼痛之症。
English: Where the diagnostic pulse is inferred in the lower part, it is only seen in the lower part, and the upper part of the pulse is weak, which is the upper and lower real, so the headache pain occurs.

古文：按之至骨，脉气少者，腰脊痛而身有痹也。
现代文：若重按至骨，而脉气少的，是生阳之气不足，故可以出现腰脊疼痛及身体痹证。
English: If you press hard to the bone, and the pulse qi is low, it is the lack of qi of the yang, so there may be pain in the lumbar spine and body paralysis.

