古文：凡天地之间有鬼，非人死精神为之也，皆人思念存想之所致也。
现代文：凡是天地之间有鬼，不是人死后精神变成的，都是人思念过于专心引来的。
English: All ghosts between heaven and earth, which are not spirits after death, are caused by people's thoughts being too concentrated.

古文：致之何由？由於疾病。
现代文：怎么会引来鬼呢？由于人有疾病。
English: How can ghosts be attracted? Because people have diseases.

古文：人病则忧惧，忧惧见鬼出。
现代文：人病了就忧惧，忧惧鬼就出现。
English: When people are ill, they are worried, and when they are worried, ghosts appear.

古文：凡人不病则不畏惧。
现代文：大凡人不病就不会畏惧。
English: If you are not sick, you will not be afraid.

古文：故得病寝衽，畏惧鬼至；畏惧则存想，存想则目虚见。
现代文：所以得病躺在席子上，畏惧鬼会来，畏惧就呆呆的去想，呆想就会虚幻地看见鬼。
English: Therefore, lying sick on the mat, fearing the ghost will come, fearing to think stupidly, thinking stupidly will see the ghost unrealistically.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：传曰： 伯乐学相马，顾玩所见，无非马者。
现代文：传上说： 伯乐学习鉴别马，察看琢磨他所见到的东西，没有一样不是马。
English: According to legend, Haku-le learned to identify horses, observing and pondering what he saw, and nothing was not a horse.

古文：宋之庖丁学解牛，三年不见生牛，所见皆死牛也。 
现代文：宋国的厨师学习解剖牛，三年不见一头活牛，所见到的全是死牛。 
English: Song Dynasty chefs learned to dissect cattle. For three years, they didn't see a single live cow. All they saw were dead cattle.

古文：二者用精至矣。思念存想，自见异物也。
现代文：伯乐和厨师精神过于集中，思念过于专心，所以虚幻地看到了这些东西。
English: Bo Le and the chef's spirit were too concentrated, and their thoughts were too concentrated, so they saw these things unrealistically.

古文：人病见鬼，犹伯乐之见马，庖丁之见牛也。
现代文：人病了看见鬼，如同伯乐看见马，厨师看见牛一样。
English: When a man is ill, he sees a ghost, just as a farmer sees a horse or a cook sees a cow.

古文：伯乐、庖丁所见非马与牛，则亦知夫病者所见非鬼也。
现代文：伯乐、厨师所看见的不是马和牛，那么也就知道病人所看见的不是鬼了。
English: If the groom and the cook do not see a horse or a cow, then we know that the sick person does not see a ghost.

古文：病者困剧身体痛，则谓鬼持棰杖殴击之，若见鬼把椎锁绳纆立守其旁，病痛恐惧，妄见之也。
现代文：病人病得厉害身体疼痛，就认为是鬼拿鞭子棍棒殴打他，或者是见鬼拿槌子锁链绳索站立守候在他的身旁，病痛中恐惧，虚妄地看见了鬼。
English: If the patient is very ill and has pain in his body, he will think that the devil is beating him with a whip and a club, or that the devil is standing by him with a hammer, a chain and a rope, and he will be afraid in his illness and falsely see the ghost.

古文：初疾畏惊，见鬼之来；疾困恐死，见鬼之怒；身自疾痛，见鬼之击，皆存想虚致，未必有其实也。
现代文：刚病时畏惧惊慌，看见鬼来了，病得厉害时恐怕死去，看见鬼发怒；病人身体自己疼痛，看见鬼在殴打，都是忧虑过度遭致的虚幻，不一定有真实的鬼。
English: Fear and panic at the onset of illness, seeing a ghost, fear of dying when seriously ill, seeing a ghost angry; the patient's own body pain, seeing a ghost beating, are all illusions caused by excessive worries, and there is not necessarily a real ghost.

古文：夫精念存想，或泄於目，或泄於口，或泄於耳。
现代文：精心思虑，或发泄于目，或发泄于口，或发泄于耳。
English: Careful consideration, or vent in the eyes, or vent in the mouth, or vent in the ear.

古文：泄於目，目见其形；泄於耳，耳闻其声；泄於口，口言其事。
现代文：发泄于目，眼睛就看见鬼的形状；发泄于耳，耳朵就听见鬼的声音；发泄于口，嘴里就说鬼的事。
English: Give vent to the eyes, and the eyes will see the shape of the ghost; give vent to the ears, and the ears will hear the voice of the ghost; give vent to the mouth, and the mouth will speak of the ghost.

古文：昼日则鬼见，暮卧则梦闻。
现代文：白天就见鬼出现，晚上睡觉就梦见鬼。
English: During the day, ghosts appear, and when you sleep at night, you dream of ghosts.

古文：独卧空室之中，若有所畏惧，则梦见夫人据案其身哭矣。
现代文：一个人睡在空空的卧室之中，如果心里有所畏惧，就会梦见有妖压在自己的身上。
English: A person sleeps in an empty bedroom, and if there is fear in his heart, he will dream of a demon pressing down on him.

古文：觉见卧闻，俱用精神；畏惧存想，同一实也。
现代文：醒时见鬼、睡着梦鬼，都是由于精神在起作用；心里畏惧和专心思虑，实际上同是一回事。
English: To see a ghost when awake, and to dream of a ghost when asleep, are both due to the spirit at work; fear in the heart and concentrated thought are actually the same thing.

古文：一曰：人之见鬼，目光与卧乱也。
现代文：有一种说法：人之所以看见鬼，是由于目光因为睡觉的缘故而昏乱了。
English: There is a saying: the reason why people see ghosts is because their eyes are confused due to sleep.

古文：人之昼也，气倦精尽，夜则欲卧，卧而目光反，反而精神见人物之象矣。
现代文：人在白天，搞得精疲力尽，晚上就想睡觉，睡觉以后目光就反照，目光反照而精神就看见人和物的虚像。
English: During the day, people are exhausted, and at night they want to sleep. After sleeping, their eyes reflect, and the eyes reflect and the spirit sees the virtual image of people and things.

古文：人病亦气倦精尽，目虽不卧，光已乱於卧也，故亦见人物象。
现代文：人病了也会弄得精疲力尽，眼睛虽然没有像睡觉那样闭上，但目光已经比正常人睡觉时还要昏乱，所以也会看见人和物的虚像。
English: People also get exhausted when they are ill. Although their eyes are not closed as they are when they sleep, they are already more confused than when a normal person sleeps, so they also see the virtual images of people and things.

古文：病者之见也，若卧若否，与梦相似。
现代文：病人看见虚象时，似睡非睡，和做梦相似。
English: When the patient sees the phantom, he seems to be asleep, similar to dreaming.

古文：当其见也，其人能自知觉与梦，故其见物不能知其鬼与人，精尽气倦之效也。
现代文：当病人看见人和物的虚像时，他不知道自己是醒着还是在作梦，所以他看见东西就不能够知道那是鬼还是人，这是他精疲力尽的证明。
English: When the patient sees the virtual images of people and things, he does not know whether he is awake or dreaming, so he can not see things to know whether it is a ghost or a person, which is proof of his exhaustion.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：根据什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：以狂者见鬼也。
现代文：根据精神病患者看见鬼的情况就可以证明。
English: This can be proven by the fact that psychopaths see ghosts.

古文：狂痴独语，不与善人相得者，病困精乱也。
现代文：精神病人和傻子自言自语，和健康的人不相同，是由于病得厉害精神昏乱的缘故。
English: Psychopaths and idiots talk to themselves differently from healthy people because they are mentally deranged.

古文：夫病且死之时，亦与狂等。
现代文：人病到将近死亡的时候，也就和精神病人一样。
English: When a person is sick to the point of near death, it is the same as a mental patient.

古文：卧、病及狂，三者皆精衰倦，目光反照，故皆独见人物之象焉。
现代文：睡觉的人、生病的人以及精神病人，三种人都是精衰气倦，目光反照，所以唯独他们都能看见人和物的虚像。
English: Sleepers, sick people and mental patients, all three are exhausted and tired, their eyes reflect, so only they can see the virtual images of people and things.

古文：一曰：鬼者，人所见得病之气也。
现代文：有一种说法：鬼是人们见到的使人得病的一种气。
English: There is a saying that ghosts are a kind of qi that people see and make them sick.

古文：气不和者中人，中人为鬼，其气象人形而见。
现代文：气不协调会伤害人，伤害人的气被叫做鬼。这种不协调的气构成像人的形状而出现。
English: An uncoordinated qi can harm a person, and the qi that harms a person is called a ghost. This uncoordinated qi forms the shape of a person and appears.

古文：故病笃者气盛，气盛则象人而至，至则病者见其象矣。
现代文：所以病情严重的人不和之气多，不和之气多就会构成像人形状的鬼到来，鬼到来病人就会看见它的形象。
English: Therefore, people who are seriously ill have a lot of discordant energy, and a lot of discordant energy will constitute the arrival of a ghost in the shape of a person. When the ghost arrives, the patient will see its image.

古文：假令得病山林之中，其见鬼则见山林之精。
现代文：假如人在山林之中得病，他看见鬼就是看见山林中的精怪。
English: If a person falls ill in the mountains and forests, if he sees a ghost, it means that he has seen a strange creature in the mountains and forests.

古文：人或病越地者，见越人坐其侧。
现代文：有人在越地得病，他看见鬼就会看见越人坐在他的身旁。
English: If someone is sick in Yueji, when he sees a ghost, he will see Yue people sitting next to him.

古文：由此言之，灌夫、窦婴之徒，或时气之形象也。
现代文：据此说来，灌夫、窦婴这类人死后出现，可能是使人得病的气所形成的虚像。
English: According to this, the appearance of people such as Ganfu and Dou Ying after death may be a virtual image formed by the qi that makes people sick.

古文：凡天地之间气皆於天，天文垂象於上，其气降而生物。
现代文：大凡天地之间，气都统属于天，日月星辰从天空向地上显示各种形象，天上的气降下来而生成万物。
English: Between heaven and earth, the air all belongs to the sky. The sun, moon and stars show various images to the earth from the sky. The air in the sky descends to form all things.

古文：气和者养生，不和者伤害。
现代文：阴阳之气和谐有益于活着的东西，不和谐就伤害活着的东西。
English: The harmony of yin and yang is beneficial to living things, and disharmony harms living things.

古文：本有象於天，则其降下，有形於地矣。
现代文：这些气本来有各自的星象在天上，那么它们降下来，就在地上产生出各种形象。
English: These gasses originally had their own constellations in the sky, then they descended and produced various images on the earth.

古文：故鬼之见也，象气为之也。
现代文：所以鬼的出现，是星象的气造成的。
English: Therefore, the appearance of ghosts is caused by the gas of the stars.

古文：众之体，为人与鸟兽，故其病人，则见人与鸟兽之形。
现代文：由于各种星体是人和鸟兽的样子，所以当鬼使人得病时，就以人和鸟兽的形象出现。
English: Since all kinds of stars are in the shape of people and birds and beasts, when ghosts make people sick, they appear in the image of people and birds and beasts.

古文：一曰：鬼者，老物精也。
现代文：有一种说法：鬼，就是老物精。
English: There is a saying: a ghost is an old soul.

古文：夫物之老者，其精为人；亦有未老，性能变化，象人形。
现代文：老物，它的精气可以离开形体虚构成人形，然而也有未老的东西，它们天生就能离开形体而变化，变成像人一样的形体。
English: An old thing, its spirit can leave the body and form a doll, but there are also immature things, they can inherently leave the body and change into a human-like body.

古文：人之受气，有与物同精者，则其物与之交；及病，精气衰劣也，则来犯陵之矣。
现代文：人从天承受了气，如果有和某种物的精气相同的，那么，那种物就能与他交接。等到他生了病，精气衰弱的时候，那种物的精气就会来侵犯他了。
English: A person receives the breath from heaven, and if there is something that is the same as the breath of a certain thing, then that thing can communicate with him. When he is sick and his breath is weak, the breath of that thing will invade him.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：成事：俗间与物交者，见鬼之来也。
现代文：以往的事例：民间凡是生病和物交接的人，都能看见有鬼到来。
English: Past cases: Folks who are ill and have a seizure can see a ghost coming.

古文：夫病者所见之鬼，与彼病物何以异？
现代文：病人见到的鬼，与那些趁人生病时来交接的物有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between a ghost seen by a patient and those that take advantage of a person's illness to take over?

古文：人病见鬼来，象其墓中死人来迎呼之者，宅中之六畜也。
现代文：人生病见到鬼来，如果这个鬼像是自家墓中的死人来迎接呼唤自己的，那么，它就是自己家中的六畜的精气变成的。
English: People are sick of seeing ghosts, if this ghost is like a dead person in their own grave to meet their calling, then it is the spirit of the six animals in their own home.

古文：及见他鬼，非是所素知者，他家若草野之中物为之也。
现代文：如果见到的是其他的鬼而不是平时所熟悉的人，那么，它就是别人家里或草野之中的物的精气变成的。
English: If you see other ghosts instead of familiar people, then it is the spirit of things in other people's homes or fields.

古文：一曰：鬼者，本生於人，时不成人，变化而去。
现代文：有一种说法：鬼，本来是由人生出来的，有时生下来后没有成为人，而是变化成别的东西走掉了。
English: There is a saying: Ghosts, originally born from human beings, sometimes do not become human beings after being born, but change into something else and go away.

古文：天地之性，本有此化，非道术之家所能论辩。
现代文：天地之间有生命的东西，本来就存在着这样的变化，不是 道术之家 所能谈论清楚的。
English: This kind of change is inherent in all living things between heaven and earth, and it is not something that can be clearly discussed by the House of Dao.

古文：与人相触犯者病，病人命当死，死者不离人。
现代文：鬼能触犯人是由于人自身有病，得病的人命中注定应当死，死的原因离不开这个人自身而不是鬼造成的。
English: Ghosts can attack people because they are sick. People who get sick are fated to die, and the cause of death cannot be separated from the person themselves, not the ghost.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：《礼》曰： 颛顼氏有三子，生而亡去为疫鬼：一居江水，是为虐鬼；一居若水，是为魍魉鬼；一居人宫室区隅沤库，善惊人小兒。 
现代文：《礼纬》上说： 颛顼氏有三个儿子，生下来时变化而去成为疫鬼。一个住在长江，这是虐鬼；一个住在若水，这是魍魉鬼；一个住在人的宫室小屋角落潮湿库房中，专门惊吓人家的小孩子。 
English: "Li Wei" said, "The Zou family has three sons, all of whom change into evil spirits when they are born. One lives in the Yangtze River, which is an evil spirit; one lives in the Wakamizu River, which is an evil spirit; and one lives in a damp warehouse in the corner of a man's palace, a small child who is dedicated to scaring people.

古文：前颛顼之世，生子必多，若颛顼之鬼神以百数也。
现代文：颛顼以前的时代，出生的孩子一定很多，像颛顼的儿子那样生下来变成鬼神的应该有成百个。
English: In ancient times, there must have been many children who were born, and there must have been hundreds of people who were born and turned into ghosts and gods like the son of the dragonfly.

古文：诸鬼神有形体法，能立树与人相见者，皆生於善人，得善人之气，故能似类善人之形，能与善人相害。
现代文：所有的鬼神中，那些具有变化形体的手段，能站着和活人相见的鬼，都是正常人所生下来的，它们得到正常人的气，所以能模仿正常人的形体，来伤害正常的人。
English: Of all the ghosts and gods, those that have the means to change their shape and can stand and face living people are all born from normal people. They receive the breath of normal people, so they can imitate the shape of normal people and harm normal people.

古文：阴阳浮游之类，若云烟之气，不能为也。
现代文：一般的阴阳之气和类似蜉蝣一类的东西。就像是云烟之气，是不能变成这种有形体的鬼的。
English: Ordinary yin and yang qi and things like gongs, which are like clouds of smoke, cannot be transformed into this kind of tangible ghost.

古文：一曰：鬼者，甲乙之神也。
现代文：有一种说法：鬼就是甲乙之神。
English: There is a saying: Ghosts are the gods of A and B.

古文：甲乙者，天之别气也，其形象人。
现代文：甲乙之神，是天的别气构成的，它的形状像人。
English: The gods of A and B are composed of the different energies of heaven, and they are shaped like humans.

古文：人病且死，甲乙之神至矣。
现代文：人病到快要死的时候，就会看见甲乙之神到来。
English: When a person is sick to the point of death, he will see the arrival of the gods of A and B.

古文：假令甲乙之日病，则死见庚辛之神矣。
现代文：如果恰逢天干是甲、乙的日子生病，那么死的时候就会见到庚辛之神。为什么呢？
English: If you fall ill on days A and B, you will see the god of death when you die. Why is that?

古文：何则？甲乙鬼，庚辛报甲乙，故病人且死，杀鬼之至者，庚辛之神也。
现代文：甲乙之日看见鬼，庚辛之神克甲乙之神，所以病人临死，到来的恶鬼，是庚辛之神。
English: On the second day of the second month, he saw a ghost, and the god of Genghis Khan was the god of the second month, so the patient was about to die, and the evil spirit that came was the god of Genghis Khan.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：以甲乙日病者，其死生之期，常在庚辛之日。
现代文：用甲乙日生病的人，他的死期经常在庚辛之日来证明。
English: People who fall ill on days A and B are often given the date of their death as the day of Genghis Khan.

古文：此非论者所以为实也。
现代文：我并不认为这些看法是符合事实的。
English: I do not think that these views are consistent with the facts.

古文：天道难知，鬼神暗昧，故具载列，令世察之也。
现代文：因为天道很难弄清楚，鬼神的事也很难弄明白，所以我原原本本地记载罗列出来，让世人去判断它。
English: Because the way of heaven is difficult to figure out, and the things of ghosts and gods are also difficult to figure out, so I have listed the original local records and let the world judge it.

古文：一曰：鬼者，物也，与人无异。
现代文：有一种说法：鬼是物，和人没有什么不同。
English: There is a saying: Ghosts are things, no different from people.

古文：天地之间，有鬼之物，常在四边之外，时往来中国，与人杂，凶恶之类也，故人病且死者乃见之。
现代文：天地之间，有鬼这种东西，常在边远地区，有时往来于中原地区，与人混杂在一起，是一种凶恶的东西，所以人生病临死时才看见它。
English: Between heaven and earth, there are such things as ghosts, often in remote areas, sometimes traveling to and from the Central Plains, mixed with people. It is a vicious thing, so people only see it when they are sick and about to die.

古文：天地生物也，有人如鸟兽。及其生凶物，亦有似人象鸟兽者。
现代文：天地生育万物，有人以及鸟兽，至于天地生出凶恶之物，也有既像人又像鸟兽的。
English: The heavens and the earth gave birth to all things, both man and beast and fowl; and the heavens and the earth gave birth to evil things, both man-like and beast-like.

古文：故凶祸之家，或见蜚尸，或见走凶，或见人形，三者皆鬼也。
现代文：所以凶祸之家，有时看见能飞行的尸体，有时看见会奔跑的凶物，有时看见像人形的东西，这三种都是鬼。
English: Therefore, in the house of evil, sometimes you can see flying corpses, sometimes you can see running monsters, and sometimes you can see things that look like human figures. All three of these are ghosts.

古文：或谓之鬼，或谓之凶，或谓之魅，或谓之魑，皆生存实有，非虚无象类之也。
现代文：有人称它是凶物，有人称它是物精，有人称它是山怪，它们都是活着的实际存在的东西，而不是虚无的类似怪物的虚像。
English: Some call it a beast, some call it a spirit, some call it a monster, but they are all living, real things, not imaginary monsters.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：成事：俗间家人且凶，见流光集其室，或见其形若鸟之状，时流入堂室，察其不谓若鸟兽矣。
现代文：以往的事例：民间百姓将要发生不吉利的事，就会看见一种流动的光聚集在他的屋子里，或者是看见它的形体像鸟的形状，不时流进堂室，观察它的形状认为像鸟兽一样。
English: In the past, when an unlucky event was about to happen, the common people would see a kind of flowing light gather in their homes, or they would see its shape like a bird, and it would flow into their courtyards from time to time, and they would observe its shape and think it was like a bird or animal.

古文：夫物有形则能食，能食则便利。
现代文：物有形体就能吃东西，能吃东西就要大小便。
English: The corporeal body can eat, and if it can eat, it must urinate.

古文：便利有验，则形体有实矣。
现代文：大小便可以验证，那么形体就是实际存在的了。
English: If the pee can be verified, then the shape is real.

古文：《左氏春秋》曰： 投之四裔，以御魑魅。 
现代文：《左氏春秋》上说： 流放他们到四方边远地区，以承受魑魅的灾害。 
English: "Zao's Spring and Autumn" said: Exile them to remote areas in the four directions to withstand the disasters of disenchantment.

古文：《山海经》曰： 北方有鬼国。 
现代文：《山海经》上说： 北方有个鬼国。 
English: "Sankaikyo" says: There is a ghost country in the north.

古文：说螭者谓之龙物也，而魅与龙相连，魅则龙之类矣。
现代文：谈论螭的人称它为龙一类的动物，而魅与龙经常连用，魅就是龙一类的动物。
English: People who talk about the dragonfly call it a dragon-like animal, and the charm is often used in conjunction with the dragon, and the charm is a dragon-like animal.

古文：又言：国，人物之党也。
现代文：既然说 鬼国 ，里边的鬼就该和通常的人和物是一类的东西。
English: Since it is said to be a ghost country, the ghosts inside should be the same kind of things as ordinary people and things.

古文：《山海经》又曰：沧海之中，有度朔之山。上有大桃木，其屈蟠三千里，其枝间东北曰鬼门，万鬼所出入也。
现代文：《山海经》上又说： 沧海之中，有一座度朔山，山上有棵大桃树，它的枝干盘绕达三千里，它的树枝间的东北方叫鬼门，是所有的鬼出入的地方。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" also says, "Among the vicissitudes of the sea, there is a mountain called Du Shuo Mountain. On the mountain, there is a large peach tree. Its branches are coiled up to three thousand li. The northeastern part between its branches is called Ghost Gate. It is the place where all ghosts come and go.

古文：上有二神人，一曰神荼，一曰郁垒，主阅领万鬼。
现代文：山上有两个神人，一个叫神荼，一个叫郁垒，负责检查和统领所有鬼怪。
English: There are two godmen on the mountain, one called Shennong and one called Yu Rong, who are responsible for inspecting and controlling all the ghosts.

古文：恶害之鬼，执以苇索，而以食虎。
现代文：有作恶祸害的鬼，他们就用苇索捆起来，把它喂老虎。
English: When they found a malevolent ghost, they tied it up with ropes and fed it to the tiger.

古文：於是黄帝乃作礼以时驱之，立大桃人，门户画神荼、郁垒与虎，悬苇索以御凶魅。
现代文：于是黄帝就制订礼仪按一定的时间驱鬼，立一个大桃木人，门户上画神荼、郁垒与虎的形象，悬挂苇索以防御鬼怪。 
English: As a result, the Yellow Emperor set up a ritual to drive away the ghosts according to a certain time, set up a large peach tree, painted the images of the gods, Yuji and the tiger on the portal, and hung the noose to defend against the ghosts.

古文：有形，故执以食虎。
现代文：凶恶的魅有形体，所以捆它去喂老虎。
English: The evil charmer has a body, so tie him up and feed him to the tigers.

古文：案可食之物，无空虚者。
现代文：考察可以食用的东西，没有一样是虚而不实的。
English: When it comes to edible food, there is no such thing as fake.

古文：其物也性与人殊，时见时匿，与龙不常见，无以异也。
现代文：魑魅这一类东西，本性与人不同，有时出现有时隐藏，和龙的不经常出现，没有什么不同。
English: The nature of such a thing as disenchantment is different from that of human beings. It sometimes appears and sometimes hides. It is no different from the infrequent appearance of dragons.

古文：一曰：人且吉凶，妖祥先见。
现代文：有一种说法：人将要发生吉凶之事，征兆首先出现。
English: There is a saying that when something auspicious or inauspicious is about to happen to a person, the signs will appear first.

古文：人之且死，见百怪，鬼在百怪之中。
现代文：人将要死的时候会看见各种怪异现象，鬼是各种怪异现象之中的一种。
English: When people are about to die, they will see all kinds of strange phenomena. Ghosts are one of the kinds of strange phenomena.

古文：故妖怪之动，象人之形，或象人之声为应，故其妖动不离人形。
现代文：所以妖怪的行动，或类似人的形象，或模仿人的声音作为应和，因此那些妖怪行动不会离开人的形象。
English: Therefore, the actions of monsters, or similar to the human image, or imitate the human voice as a response, so those monster actions will not leave the human image.

古文：天地之间，妖怪非一，言有妖，声有妖，文有妖，或妖气象人之形，或人含气为妖。
现代文：天地之间，妖怪不只一种，有表现为言语的怪现象，有表现为声音的怪现象，有表现为文字的怪现象。有的妖气模仿成人的形状，有的则是人含着妖气表现出一种怪异现象。
English: Between heaven and earth, there is more than one kind of monster. There are strange phenomena that manifest themselves as speech, strange phenomena that manifest themselves as sound, and strange phenomena that manifest themselves as words. Some monsters imitate the shape of an adult, and some are people who manifest a strange phenomenon while holding a monster.

古文：象人之形，诸所见鬼是也。人含气为妖，巫之类是也。
现代文：妖气模仿人的形状的，就是大家所见到的鬼；人含着妖气表现出怪异现象的，就是巫师一类的人。
English: A demon that imitates the shape of a person is a ghost that everyone has seen; a person with a demon that exhibits strange phenomena is a sorcerer.

古文：是以实巫之辞，无所因据，其吉凶自从口出，若童之摇矣。
现代文：因此核实巫师的言辞，并不是有什么根据而说出来的，那些预示吉凶的话，是通过巫师的口自己迸发出来的，就像儿童唱的歌谣一样。
English: So verifying a sorcerer's words is not based on any evidence, the words that foretell good or bad are uttered by the sorcerer himself, just like a children's song.

古文：童谣口自言，巫辞意自出。口自言，意自出，则其为人，与声气自立，音声自发，同一实也。
现代文：童谣是儿童的嘴里自动唱出来的，巫师话语中的意思也是自动流露出来的，嘴里自动唱出来，意思自动流露出来，那么鬼之成为人形，也就和声音是妖气自动形成的，声音是自动发出来的，同属于一回事情。
English: A nursery rhyme is automatically sung from the mouth of a child, the meaning of a wizard's words is also automatically revealed, the mouth is automatically sung, the meaning is automatically revealed, then the ghost becomes a doll, and the sound is automatically formed by the evil spirit, the sound is automatically emitted, and belongs to the same thing.

古文：世称纣之时，夜郊鬼哭；及仓颉作书，鬼夜哭。
现代文：世人说纣的时候，夜晚郊外有鬼在哭，到仓颉创造文字时，有鬼在晚上哭泣。
English: When the world is chattering, there are ghosts crying in the suburbs at night, and when they are creating words in Cangzhou, there are ghosts crying at night.

古文：气能象人声而哭，则亦能象人形而见，则人以为鬼矣。
现代文：妖气既然能模仿人的声音而哭泣，那么也能模仿人形而出现，人们就认为是鬼了。
English: Since evil spirits can imitate human voices and cry, they can also imitate dolls and appear, and people think they are ghosts.

古文：鬼之见也，人之妖也。
现代文：鬼的出现，是一种像人形的妖气。
English: The appearance of a ghost is a kind of demonic spirit resembling a human form.

古文：天地之间，祸福之至，皆有兆象，有渐不卒然，有象不猥来。
现代文：天地之间，祸福的到来，都有征兆，是有苗头的不会突然到来，先有迹象不会猝然到来。
English: Between heaven and earth, the arrival of calamity and blessing, there are signs. If there are signs, it will not come suddenly. If there are signs, it will not come suddenly.

古文：天地之道，入将亡，凶亦出；国将亡，妖亦见。
现代文：天地间的道理，人将要死亡，凶兆也就出现了；国家将要灭亡，妖象也就出现了。
English: According to the principle between heaven and earth, people will die, and ominous signs will appear; countries will perish, and monsters will appear.

古文：犹人且吉，吉祥至；国且昌，昌瑞至矣。
现代文：如同人将有吉事，吉祥的征兆就出现；国家将要昌盛，昌盛的征兆就出现一样。
English: Just as people will have auspicious events, auspicious signs will appear; the country will prosper, and the signs of prosperity will appear.

古文：故夫瑞应妖祥，其实一也。
现代文：所以那些瑞应和妖祥，作为一种征兆实质上是一样的。
English: So those auspicious and inauspicious signs are essentially the same.

古文：而世独谓鬼者不在妖祥之中，谓鬼犹神而能害人，不通妖祥之道，不睹物气之变也。
现代文：然而世人唯独说鬼不在妖祥之中，说鬼就像神一样能够害人，这是不懂得吉凶征兆出现的道理，看不到物气发生的变化。
English: However, the world only says that ghosts are not among the evil spirits, and that ghosts can harm people just like gods. This is because they do not understand the reason for the appearance of auspicious and inauspicious signs, and do not see the changes in the material atmosphere.

古文：国将亡，妖见，其亡非妖也。
现代文：国家将要灭亡，妖象就会出现；然而国家的灭亡，并不是由于妖象造成的。
English: When the country is about to perish, the demon elephant will appear; however, the destruction of the country is not caused by the demon elephant.

古文：人将死，鬼来，其死非鬼也。
现代文：人将要死了，鬼就会到来，然而人死不是由于鬼造成的。
English: When a person is about to die, the ghost will come, but the death of a person is not caused by the ghost.

古文：亡国者，兵也；杀人者，病也。
现代文：使国家灭亡的是战争；杀人致死的是疾病。
English: It is war that destroys nations; it is disease that kills.

古文：何以明之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: How do you prove it?

古文：齐襄公将为贼所杀，游於姑棼，遂田於贝丘，见大豕。
现代文：齐襄公将要被贼人杀死，他巡游于姑棼，接着又在贝丘打猎，在路上看见一头大猪。
English: Prince Qixiang was about to be killed by thieves. He was cruising in Guzheng, and then hunting in Beichu, when he saw a big pig on the road.

古文：从者曰： 公子彭生也。 
现代文：随从的人说： 猪是公子彭生变的。 
English: The attendants said: This is Prince Peng Sheng.

古文：公怒曰： 彭生敢见！ 
现代文：齐襄公发怒说： 彭生敢出现！ 
English: Qi Xiangong said angrily, "How dare Peng Sheng come to see me!

古文：引弓射之，豕人立而啼。
现代文：拉弓射大猪，大猪像人一样站立起来呼号。
English: He drew his bow and shot the boar. The boar stood up like a man and called out.

古文：公惧，坠於车，伤足丧履，而为贼杀之。
现代文：齐襄公很害怕，坠落下车脚伤鞋丢，被贼人杀了他。
English: Mr. Qi Xiang was very scared. He fell off the cart, hurt his foot and lost his shoe. The thief killed him.

古文：夫杀襄公者，贼也。
现代文：杀死襄公的是贼人。
English: It was a thief who killed Prince Xiang.

古文：先见大豕於路，则襄公且死之妖也。
现代文：先看见大猪在路上，就是襄公将要死而出现的妖象。
English: The first to see the big pig on the road is the demon elephant that appears when Prince Xiang is about to die.

古文：人谓之彭生者，有似彭生之状也。
现代文：随从的人说猪是彭生变的，是因为猪有点像彭生的形状的缘故。
English: Followers say that the pig is Peng Sheng, because the pig is a bit like the shape of Peng Sheng.

古文：世人皆知杀襄公者非豕，而独谓鬼能杀人，一惑也。
现代文：世人都知道杀死襄公的不是大猪，而唯独要说鬼能杀人，实在是糊涂啊。
English: The world knows that it wasn't a pig that killed Prince Xiang, but to say that only a ghost can kill people is really stupid.

古文：天地之气为妖者，太阳之气也。
现代文：天地间的气能变成妖的，是极盛的阳气。
English: The energy between heaven and earth that turns into a demon is the yang energy at its peak.

古文：妖与毒同，气中伤人者谓之毒，气变化者谓之妖。
现代文：妖与毒相同，阳气能够中伤人的称之为毒，阳气能够变化的称之为妖。
English: A demon is the same as a poison, a yang that can slander people is called a poison, and a yang that can change is called a demon.

古文：世谓童谣，荧惑使之，彼言有所见也。
现代文：世上的人说童谣是荧惑星的精气诱导儿童唱的，这话是有一定见解的。
English: People around the world say that nursery rhymes are sung by children induced by the energy of a fluorescent planet, and they have a certain point of view.

古文：荧惑火星，火有毒荧。故当荧惑守宿，国有祸败。
现代文：荧惑是火星，火有毒光，所以倘若荧惑星侵犯心宿，国家就会有祸败。
English: Fluorescence is Mars, fire is poisonous light, so if the fluorescent planet encroaches on the heart, the country will be doomed.

古文：火气恍惚，故妖象存亡。
现代文：由于荧惑星的火气是恍恍惚惚的，所以它产生的妖象时有时无。
English: Because the fire of the fluorescent planet is trance-like, the phantoms it produces are intermittent.

古文：龙，阳物也，故时变化。鬼，阳气也，时藏时见。
现代文：龙，是随阳气而出没的动物，所以时常变化；鬼，是阳气构成的，所以有时隐藏有时出现。
English: Dragons are animals that appear and disappear with the yang, so they often change; ghosts are made up of yang, so they sometimes hide and sometimes appear.

古文：阳气赤，故世人尽见鬼，其色纯硃。
现代文：阳气是红的，所以世人尽都看得见鬼，鬼的颜色都是纯红的。
English: Yang qi is red, so people all over the world can see the devil, and the color of the devil is pure red.

古文：蜚凶，阳也。阳，火也。
现代文：能飞的怪物，是阳气构成的，阳，也就是火，所以 蜚凶 之类表现为火光。
English: Flying monsters are made up of yang, which is fire, so things like evil spirits appear as firelight.

古文：故蜚凶之类为火光，火热焦物，故止集树木，枝叶枯死。
现代文：火灼热能烤焦东西，所以 蜚凶 停聚在树上，树的枝叶会枯死。
English: The heat of the fire can scorch things, so the fireflies stay in the trees, and the branches and leaves of the trees die.

古文：《鸿范》五行二曰火，五事二曰言。
现代文：《洪范》记载，五行中第二位是火，五事中第二位是言。
English: "Hong Fan" records that the second place among the five elements is fire, and the second place among the five things is speech.

古文：言、火同气，故童谣、诗歌为妖言。
现代文：言与火都同属于阳气，所以童谣、诗歌都是妖气诱导的言语。
English: Words and fire both belong to the yang, so nursery rhymes and poems are all words induced by evil spirits.

古文：言出文成，故世有文书之怪。
现代文：话说出来文字写出来，所以世间上有以文书表现的怪异现象。
English: Words come out and words are written, so there is a strange phenomenon in the world that is expressed in writing.

古文：世谓童子为阳，故妖言出於小童。
现代文：世人认为童子属阳，所以妖言出于儿童的口里。
English: The world believes that the boy is yang, so the demonic words come out of the mouth of the child.

古文：童、巫含阳，故大雩之祭，舞童暴巫。
现代文：儿童、巫师含有阳气，所以举行大雩祭祀时，让儿童不停地跳舞把巫师晒在太阳下。
English: Children and wizards contain yang, so when holding the great dragonfly sacrifice, let the children keep dancing and expose the wizards to the sun.

古文：雩祭之礼，倍阴合阳，故犹日食阴胜，攻社之阴也。
现代文：雩祭这种典礼，是为了助长阴气以调和阳气。所以如同日食时阴气过于旺盛，就讨伐社神的阴气一样。
English: The ceremony of the burnt offering is to promote the yin to balance the yang, so just as the yin is too strong during a solar eclipse, so is the yin of the gods.

古文：日食阴胜，故攻阴之类。天旱阳胜，故愁阳之党。
现代文：日食时阴气胜过阳气，所以要攻伐属于阴类的东西；天旱时阳气胜过阴气，所以要折磨属于阳类的东西。
English: When there is a solar eclipse, the yin prevails over the yang, so it is necessary to attack things that belong to the yin class; when there is a drought, the yang prevails over the yin, so it is necessary to torture things that belong to the yang class.

古文：巫为阳党，故鲁僖遭旱，议欲焚巫。
现代文：巫师属于阳类，所以鲁僖公时遭受旱灾，就和大臣们商议要烧死巫师以损阳气。
English: Wizards belong to the masculine category, so when Lu Xun suffered a drought, he discussed with his ministers to burn wizards to destroy the masculine.

古文：巫含阳气，以故阳地之民多为巫。
现代文：巫师含阳气，所以南方的老百姓许多人都作巫师。
English: Sorcerers contain yang, so many people in the south become sorcerers.

古文：巫党於鬼，故巫者为鬼巫。
现代文：巫师属于鬼这一类，所以称巫师为鬼巫。
English: Sorcerers belong to the category of ghosts, so they are called ghosts and witches.

古文：鬼巫比於童谣，故巫之审者，能处吉凶。
现代文：鬼巫等同于童谣，因此巫师中的高明者，能够判断吉凶之事。
English: Ghosts and witches are equivalent to nursery rhymes, so wizards who are highly skilled can judge good and bad things.

古文：吉凶能处，吉凶之徒也，故申生之妖见於巫。
现代文：吉凶能够判断，巫师也就和预示吉凶的妖象同属于一类了。
English: Being able to judge between good and evil, sorcerers also belong to the same category as the demon elephants that foretell good and evil.

古文：巫含阳，能见为妖也。申生为妖，则知杜伯、庄子义厉鬼之徒皆妖也。
现代文：所以申生的妖象通过巫师显形来预言吉凶，巫师含有阳气，所以能把申生的妖象表现出来。申生死后变成妖象出现，那么可知杜伯、庄子义、厉鬼这类鬼的出现都是妖象了。
English: Therefore, the demon of Shen Sheng can predict the fate of good and evil through the appearance of the sorcerer. The sorcerer contains yang, so he can show the demon of Shen Sheng. When Shen Sheng died, he appeared as a demon, so it can be known that the appearance of ghosts such as Du Bo, Zhuo Ziyi, and Li Gang are all demon.

古文：杜伯之厉为妖，则其弓、矢、投、措皆妖毒也。
现代文：杜伯这类鬼是妖象，那么他们的弓、矢、杖、楫都是妖毒了。
English: Du Bo's kind of ghosts are demon elephants, so their bows, arrows, staffs, and halberds are all demon poison.

古文：妖象人之形，其毒象人之兵。
现代文：妖气化成的鬼像人的形体，它的毒像人的兵器。
English: The demon transformed into a ghost-like human form, its poison like a human weapon.

古文：鬼、毒同色，故杜伯弓矢皆硃彤也。
现代文：鬼和鬼毒是同一种颜色，所以杜伯的弓矢都是红色的。
English: Ghost and ghost poison are the same color, so Dober's bows and arrows are red.

古文：毒象人之兵，则其中人，人辄死也。
现代文：鬼毒像人的兵器，那么鬼毒伤人，人往往会死。
English: Ghost poison is like a human weapon. If ghost poison injures a person, the person will often die.

古文：中人微者即为腓，病者不即时死。
现代文：鬼毒轻微地伤人人就得腓病，病人不会立即死去。
English: If anyone is slightly injured by ghost poison, he or she will fall ill, and the patient will not die immediately.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：腓者，毒气所加也。
现代文：腓病，是毒气所造成的。
English: Ringworm is caused by poison gas.

古文：妖或施其毒，不见其体；或见其形，不施其毒；或出其声，不成其言；或明其言，不知其音。
现代文：妖或者施放它的毒，不显现它的形体；或显现它的形体，不施放它的毒；或者发出它的声音，不讲出它的话；或讲出它的话，又听不见它的声音。
English: Either the demon administers its poison and does not reveal its form; or it manifests its form but does not administer its poison; or it utters its voice but does not speak its words; or it speaks its words but its voice is not heard.

古文：若夫申生，见其体、成其言者也；杜伯之属，见其体、施其毒者也；诗妖、童谣、石言之属，明其言者也；濮水琴声、纣郊鬼哭，出其声者也。
现代文：如像申生，就是显现形体、讲出它的话的；如杜伯这一类，就是显现形体、施放他们的毒的；如诗妖、童谣、石头说话这一类，就是讲明它们的话的；在濮水听见琴声、纣时郊外有鬼哭，就是发出了声音的。
English: For example, people like Shen Sheng are those who appear in the form and speak their words; people like Du Bo are those who appear in the form and cast their poisons; people like poetic demons, nursery rhymes, and speaking stones are those who explain their words; people who hear the sound of the harp at dusk and the ghost crying in the countryside at dusk are those who make a sound.

古文：妖之见出也，或且凶而豫见，或凶至而因出。
现代文：妖象的出现，或是人将遇到凶祸而预先出现，或凶祸到来而随同出现。
English: The appearance of a demon elephant, or a person will encounter evil and appear in advance, or evil will come and appear with it.

古文：因出，则妖与毒俱行。豫见，妖出不能毒。
现代文：随同出现，那么妖象与妖毒一起发生；预先出现，就只出现妖象而不能毒害人。
English: If it appears simultaneously, then the demon elephant and the demon poison occur together; if it appears beforehand, only the demon elephant appears and cannot poison people.

古文：申生之见，豫见之妖也。杜伯、庄子义、厉鬼至，因出之妖也。
现代文：申生妖象的出现，是预先出现的妖象；杜伯、庄子义、厉鬼的到来，是随同出现的妖象。
English: The appearance of Shen Sheng's demon elephant is a pre-emergent demon elephant; the arrival of Du Bo, Zhuo Ziyi, and Liguo is a concomitant demon elephant.

古文：周宣王、燕简公、宋夜姑时当死，故妖见毒因击。
现代文：周宣王、燕简公、宋夜姑时运注定他们应当死，所以妖象出现妖毒也随着打中他们了。
English: Zhou Xuan Wang, Yan Jian Gong, and Song Yegu were destined to die, so the appearance of the demon elephant also hit them.

古文：晋惠公身当获，命未死，故妖直见毒不射。
现代文：晋惠公自己注定应当被秦国俘虏，命中注定不应当死，所以妖象只是出现而没有放毒。
English: Jin Huigong himself was fated to be captured by Qin, and his fate was fated not to die, so the demon elephant only appeared and did not poison him.

古文：然则杜伯、庄子义、厉鬼之见，周宣王、燕简、夜姑且死之妖也。
现代文：这样说来，那么杜伯、庄子义、厉鬼的出现，是周宣王、燕简公、夜姑将要死时出现的妖象。
English: In this way, the appearance of Du Bo, Zhuo Ziyi, and Lijing is the appearance of demonic elephants when Zhou Xuan Wang, Yan Jian Gong, and the nightingale are about to die.

古文：申生之而出，晋惠公且见获之妖也。
现代文：申生的出现，是晋惠公将要被俘时出现的妖象。
English: The appearance of Shen Sheng is the demon elephant that appears when Jin Huigong is about to be captured.

古文：伯有之梦，驷带、公孙段且卒之妖也。
现代文：伯有的托梦，是驷带、公孙段将要死时出现的妖象。
English: Bo's recurring dream is about the umbilical cord and the demon elephant that appear when Bo's grandson is about to die.

古文：老父结草，魏颗且胜之祥，亦或时杜回见获之妖也。
现代文：老人编结草绳，是魏颗将要获胜的吉兆，也或许是杜回要被俘时出现的妖象。
English: The old man is weaving a grass rope, which is a good omen for Wei Wei to win, and may also be the demon elephant that appears when Du Wei is about to be captured.

古文：苍犬噬吕后，吕后且死，妖象犬形也。
现代文：灰白色的狗咬吕后，是吕后将要死了，妖气显出像狗的形状。
English: When the grey-white dog bites Lv Hou, it means that Lv Hou is about to die, and the evil spirit appears in the shape of a dog.

古文：武安且卒，妖象窦婴、灌夫之面也。
现代文：武安侯将要死了，妖气显出像窦婴、灌夫面貌的妖象。
English: Wu'an Hou is about to die, and the evil spirit appears as a demonic elephant with the appearance of a baby and a baby's face.

古文：故凡世间所谓妖祥、所谓鬼神者，皆太阳之气为之也。
现代文：所以大凡世间所说的妖象瑞祥，所说的鬼魂神怪之类的现象，都是由极盛的阳气构成的。
English: Therefore, the phenomena such as the so-called demon, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost, such as the so-called ghost,

古文：太阳之气，天气也。
现代文：极盛的阳气，是天施放的气。
English: The yang energy that is at its peak is the energy that is released by the heavens.

古文：天能生人之体，故能象人之容。
现代文：天能生育人的形体，所以极盛的阳气就能模仿人的容貌。
English: Nature is able to reproduce the human form, so the yang in full bloom can imitate the human appearance.

古文：夫人所以生者，阴、阳气也。
现代文：人之所以产生，是由于承受了天施放的阴阳之气。
English: Man came into being as a result of receiving the yin and yang energy that was released by the heavens.

古文：阴气主为骨肉，阳气主为精神。
现代文：阴气主管形成骨肉，阳气主管形成精神。
English: Yin governs the formation of bones and flesh, yang governs the formation of spirit.

古文：人之生也，阴、阳气具，故骨肉坚，精气盛。
现代文：人出生以后，阴阳之气齐备，所以骨肉坚强，精气旺盛。
English: After a person is born, the qi of yin and yang is ready, so the bones and flesh are strong, and the essence is vigorous.

古文：精气为知，骨肉为强，故精神言谈，形体固守。
现代文：精气产生知觉，骨肉产生筋力，所以有精神说话，有形体维持生存。
English: The spirit produces consciousness, and the flesh produces strength, so that the spirit can speak and the body can survive.

古文：骨肉精神，合错相持，故能常见而不灭亡也。
现代文：骨肉与精神，交错结合相互依持，所以人体能经常存在而不消失。
English: Flesh and blood and spirit are intertwined and mutually dependent, so the human body can always exist without disappearing.

古文：太阳之气，盛而无阴，故徒能为象，不能为形。
现代文：极盛的阳气，虽极盛而没有阴气配合，所以只能形成虚象，不能构成形体。
English: The yang that is in full bloom, although it is in full bloom, has no yin to match, so it can only form an illusion and cannot form a shape.

古文：无骨肉有精气，故一见恍惚，辄复灭亡也。
现代文：由于虚象没有骨肉，只有精气，所以恍恍惚惚地出现一下，马上又消失了。
English: Since the imaginary elephant has no bones or flesh, only spirit, it appears for a moment in a trance and then disappears again.

