古文：李娃传
现代文：李娃传
English: Li Wa Chuan

古文：汧国夫人李娃，长安之倡女也。节行瑰奇，有足称者。
现代文：汧国夫人李娃是长安的歌舞艺人，节操高洁，个性孤傲，受到人们的称赞。
English: Mrs. Liwa of Shan State is a song and dance artist in Chang'an. She has a high integrity, a proud personality, and has been praised by people.

古文：故监察御史白行简为传述。
现代文：所以监察御史白行简为她作了传记。
English: So the inspector, Bai Xingjian, wrote a biography for her.

古文：天宝中，有常州刺史荥阳公者，略其名氏，不书，时望甚崇，家徒甚殷。知命之年，有一子，始弱冠矣，隽朗有词藻，迥然不群，深为时辈推伏。
现代文：唐代天宝年间，有位常州刺史荥阳公，当时的名望很高，家中的奴仆很多，五十岁时才有一个儿子，儿子长到二十岁时，俊秀聪明，文章也写得很好，跟一般人大不一样，当时的人都很称道佩服。
English: During the Tang Dynasty's Tenpo era, there was a prince of Changzhou, Shishi Shenyang. At that time, his reputation was very high, and there were many servants in his family. At the age of fifty, he only had one son. When his son was twenty years old, he was handsome and clever, and his articles were well written. He was different from the average person. People at that time were very impressed and admired.

古文：其父爱而器之，曰： 此吾家千里驹也。 
现代文：他的父亲很喜欢他器重他，说： 这是我们家的千里驹啊！ 
English: His father was very fond of him, held him in high esteem, and said, "This is the pinnacle of our family!"

古文：应乡赋秀才举，将行，乃盛其服玩车马之饰，计其京师薪储之费。
现代文：这位公子由州县选拔到京师应试，出发前家中让他穿上很考究的衣服，并带着很多车马。
English: This young man was selected by the prefectural government to go to Beijing to take the exam. Before he left, his family asked him to wear very elegant clothes and take a lot of horses and carriages with him.

古文：谓之曰： 吾观尔之才，当一战而霸。今备二载之用，且丰尔之给，将为其志也。 
现代文：还算好了他在京城的日常生活用钱，父亲对他说： 我看你的才能，会一举考中，现在给你准备了两年的费用，并且一定充分地供给你，是为了使你实现志向。 
English: His father said to him, "I see your talent, you will pass the exam with flying colors. Now I have prepared two years of expenses for you, and I will certainly provide you with enough in order to make you realize your ambition."

古文：生亦自负视上第如指掌。
现代文：这位公子也很自信，把考取功名看得像弹弹手指那样容易。
English: This gentleman is also very confident, and he sees the performance test as being as easy as snapping his fingers.

古文：自毗陵发，月余抵长安，居于布政里。
现代文：公子从毗陵出发，一个多月就到了长安，住在布政里。
English: Starting from Viling, it took him more than a month to arrive in Chang'an, where he lived in Buzheng.

古文：尝游东市还，自平康东门入，将访友于西南。
现代文：他曾去游览东市，回来时从平康东门进入，打算到京城西南去拜访朋友。
English: He once went to visit Dongshi, and when he came back, he entered from the Pingkang East Gate, intending to visit friends in the southwest of Beijing.

古文：至鸣珂曲，见一宅，门庭不甚广，而室宇严邃，阖一扉。
现代文：到了鸣珂曲，看见有一座住宅，门和院子不太大，而房屋严密幽深。
English: When I arrived at Mingkequ, I saw a house. The door and yard were not too big, but the house was tight and deep.

古文：有娃方凭一双鬟青衣立，妖姿要妙，绝代未有。
现代文：只关着一扇门，有一位少女，正把手放在一个梳着两个环形发髻的侍女的肩上站在那里，姿态容貌非常漂亮，在当时简直找不出第二个。
English: There was only one door closed, and a young girl was standing there with her hand on the shoulder of a servant girl with two ringlets in her hair, and she looked so beautiful that it was hard to find a second one at the time.

古文：生忽见之，不觉停骖久之，徘徊不能去。
现代文：公子看见少女后，不自觉地让马停住，徘徊了老半天也没走。
English: After the young man saw the girl, he involuntarily stopped the horse and wandered around for a long time.

古文：乃诈坠鞭于地，候其从者，敕取之，累眄于娃，娃回眸凝睇，情甚相慕，竟不敢措辞而去。
现代文：于是假装马鞭子掉到了地上，等待跟随的人来了，好让他拾起来。多次斜着眼看那位少女，那少女也回过头来凝视着公子，像对他也很爱慕。最后公子也没敢说什么话就离去了。
English: So he pretended that the whip had fallen to the ground, and waited for his follower to come and pick it up. He looked at the girl cross-eyed several times, and the girl also looked back at him, as if she admired him. Finally, the boy did not dare to say anything and left.

古文：生自尔意若有失，乃密征其友游长安之熟者以讯之。友曰： 此狭邪女李氏宅也。 曰： 娃可求乎？ 
现代文：从此公子精神上好像失掉了什么，于是便偷偷地召来熟悉长安的朋友打听，朋友说： 那是妓女李氏的住宅。 公子又问： 这个少女，我可以追求她吗？ 
English: From then on, he seemed to have lost something mentally, so he secretly called a friend who was familiar with Chang'an to inquire. The friend said, "That is the house of the prostitute, Ms. Li." He also asked, "This girl, can I pursue her?"

古文：对曰： 李氏颇赡，前与通之者，多贵戚豪族，所得甚广，非累百万，不能动其志也。 
现代文：回答说，这个姓李的比较富裕，前去跟她交往的，大多是贵戚和富豪。她的交际很广，如果不能达百万的钱，是不能使她动心的。
English: She replied that this woman, surnamed Li, was relatively wealthy, and most of the people who came to socialize with her were rich relatives and millionaires. She had a wide range of friendships, and if she didn't have a million dollars, she wouldn't be able to move her.

古文：生曰： 苟患其不谐，虽百万，何惜！ 
现代文：公子说： 我只担心事情不能成功，即使百万，又有什么舍不得？ 
English: He said, "I'm just worried that things won't work out. Even if it's a million dollars, what's there not to like?"

古文：他日，乃洁其衣服，盛宾从而往。
现代文：有一天，公子便穿上干净的衣服，带着一大群侍从去了。
English: One day, he put on clean clothes and set out with a large group of attendants.

古文：扣其门，俄有侍儿启扃。
现代文：派人前去敲门，不一会儿，有一个侍女出来开门。
English: They sent someone to knock on the door, and a moment later, a maid came out to open the door.

古文：生曰： 此谁之第耶？ 
现代文：公子说： 这是谁家的府第呀？ 
English: The prince said, "Whose palace is this?"

古文：侍儿不答，驰走大呼曰： 前时遗策郎也。 
现代文：侍女不回答，一边往回跑一边喊： 是前些日子马鞭子落到地上的那位公子来了！ 
English: The maid did not answer, but ran back shouting: "The gentleman whose horse whip fell to the ground the other day has arrived!"

古文：娃大悦曰： 尔姑止之，吾当整妆易服而出。 
现代文：李娃又惊又喜，说： 你暂且留住他，我得打扮一下，换换衣服再出去。 
English: Surprised and delighted, Li Wa said, "You can keep him for the time being. I have to dress up and change my clothes before I go out."

古文：生闻之，私喜。
现代文：公子听到这话，暗暗高兴。
English: When he heard this, he was secretly pleased.

古文：乃引至萧墙间，见一姥垂白上偻，即娃母也。
现代文：侍女于是把公子带到影壁墙前，就看见一位白头发驼背的老妇，这就是李娃的母亲。
English: The maid then took the boy to the shadow wall, where she saw an old woman with white hair and a hunched back. This was Li Wa's mother.

古文：生跪拜前致词曰： 闻兹地有隙院，愿税以居，信乎？ 
现代文：书生走上前跪下拜见说： 听说这儿有空闲的房子，我愿租来居住，不知是不是真的？ 
English: The student came forward, kneeled down, bowed and said: I heard that there is a vacant house here, I would like to rent it to live in, I wonder if it's true?

古文：姥曰： 惧其浅陋湫隘，不足以辱长者所处，安敢言直耶？ 
现代文：老妇说： 那房子只怕简陋低洼窄小，不足以委屈贵客居住，哪里敢提租赁的事。 
English: The old woman said, "That house is too humble, too low-lying, too narrow and too small to be lived in by a distinguished guest. How dare you mention the matter of leasing?

古文：延生于迟宾之馆，馆宇甚丽。
现代文：便把公子引入客厅，客厅的房屋很华丽。
English: He then led the young man into the drawing room, which was a magnificent building.

古文：与生偶坐，因曰： 某有女娇小，技艺薄劣，欣见宾客，愿将见之。 
现代文：老妇与书生一同坐下，说道： 我有个娇小的女儿，技艺水平不高，看到客来很高兴，愿让她出来见一见你。 
English: The old woman sat down with the students and said, "I have a petite daughter, whose skill level is not high. I am very happy to see you, and I would like her to come out and meet you."

古文：乃命娃出，明眸皓腕，举步艳冶。生遂惊起，莫敢仰视。
现代文：说罢就让李娃出来了。只见李娃眼睛明亮，手腕白皙，行步娇美，公子吃惊地立刻站了起来，不敢抬眼看。
English: As soon as he said it, he let Liwa out. Seeing Liwa's bright eyes, white wrists, and graceful walk, the prince stood up immediately in surprise, not daring to look up.

古文：与之拜毕，叙寒燠，触类妍媚，目所未睹。
现代文：拜见之后，谈了些天气冷暖的话，李娃的一举一动公子都觉得妩媚动人，是自己从来没见过的。
English: After the meeting, they talked about the weather and Liwa's every move, and the young man found Liwa's every move charming, which he had never seen before.

古文：复坐，烹茶斟酒，器用甚洁。
现代文：公子又重新坐下后，李娃就煮茶斟酒，所用的器具都很干净。
English: After the boy sat down again, Li Hua made tea and poured wine. The utensils used were all clean.

古文：久之日暮，鼓声四动。
现代文：过了很久，天渐渐黑了，更鼓声四起。
English: After a long time, it was getting dark, and more drums were beating.

古文：姥访其居远近。生绐之曰： 在延平门外数里。 
现代文：老妇询问书生住处的远近，公子骗她说： 我住在延平门外好几里的地方。 
English: The old woman asked the scholar about the distance to his residence, and the scholar lied to her: I live several miles outside Yanping Gate.

古文：冀其远而见留也。
现代文：公子是故意说路远，希望能被李娃留宿。
English: The boy said he was going far away on purpose, hoping to be put up by Liwa.

古文：姥曰： 鼓已发矣，当速归，无犯禁。 
现代文：老妇人说： 更鼓已敲过了，公子该赶快回去了，不要触犯了禁夜法令。 
English: The old woman said, "The drum has already been beaten. The young man should hurry back and not violate the curfew."

古文：生曰： 幸接欢笑，不知日之云夕。
现代文：公子说： 今天能侥幸相见很高兴，竟不知道天已经很晚了。
English: He said, "I'm so happy to have the chance to meet you today, I didn't know it was so late.

古文：道里辽阔，城内又无亲戚，将若之何？ 
现代文：但我的路途太远，城内又没有亲戚，该怎么办呢？ 
English: But I live too far away and have no relatives in the city. What should I do?

古文：娃曰： 不见责僻陋，方将居之，宿何害焉。 
现代文：李娃说： 如不嫌弃屋子狭小简陋，正想让你在这里住，住一宿又有什么关系呢？ 
English: Liwa said, "If you don't mind abandoning the cramped and humble house, and you really want to live here, what does it matter if you only stay one night?

古文：生数目姥，姥曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：书生几次用眼睛看老妇人，老妇人说： 好，好吧。 
English: The student looked at the old woman with his eyes several times, and the old woman said, "Okay, okay.

古文：生乃召其家僮，持双缣，请以备一宵之馔。
现代文：书生就召来他年青的仆人，拿着两匹绢，请求以此来充当一顿晚饭的费用。
English: The scholar summoned his young servant with two mules and asked him to pay for dinner.

古文：娃笑而止之曰： 宾主之仪，且不然也。
现代文：李娃笑着阻止说： 这样是不合宾主之礼的，怎么能让你破费呢。
English: Li Wa laughed and said, "This is not appropriate for a guest, how can you waste your time?"

古文：今夕之费，愿以贫窭之家，随其粗粝以进之。其余以俟他辰。 
现代文：今晚费用由我出，愿凭贫穷之家的情况，供给你一顿粗糙的饭菜，其余的等以后再说吧。 
English: I will defray the expense of this evening, and, according to the circumstances of the poor house, I will provide you with a coarse meal, and the rest will be discussed later.

古文：固辞，终不许。
现代文：李娃坚决推辞，最后也没把公子的绢收下。
English: Li Hua resolutely refused, and in the end did not accept her husband's proposal.

古文：俄徙坐西堂，帷幕帘榻，焕然夺目；妆奁衾枕。
现代文：不一会儿，请公子到西屋坐下，只见帷幕帘子床帐，都十分光彩艳丽，梳妆台、枕头、被子，也都十分豪华漂亮。
English: After a while, he invited the young man to sit down in the west room. The curtains and bedspread were all very bright and beautiful, and the dresser, pillows, and comforter were also very luxurious and beautiful.

古文：亦皆侈丽。乃张烛进馔，品味甚盛。
现代文：于是点上蜡烛端来了饭菜，菜肴的品种和味道都是上等的。
English: A candle was lit and the meal was served. The variety and taste of the dishes were excellent.

古文：彻馔，姥起。生娃谈话方切，诙谐调笑，无所不至。
现代文：吃完饭后，老妇人站起来走开了，公子与李娃的谈话才亲切起来，幽默风趣，互相逗笑，没有什么不涉及的。
English: After the meal, the old woman stood up and walked away. The conversation between the young man and Li Wa became intimate, humorous and funny, teasing each other, nothing was left out.

古文：生曰： 前偶过卿门，遇卿适在屏间。厥后心常勤念，虽寝与食，未尝或舍。 
现代文：公子说： 前些时，偶尔经过您的门口，看到您正在门前影壁旁，从那以后我心中常常想念，即使睡觉和吃饭的时候，也不曾有片刻忘记。 
English: He said: Some time ago, I occasionally passed by your door and saw you standing in front of the door by the shadow wall. Since then, I have often thought about you in my heart. Even when sleeping and eating, I have never forgotten you for a moment.

古文：娃答曰： 我心亦如之。 
现代文：李娃回答说： 我的心也是这样。 
English: Li Hua replied: My heart is also like this.

古文：生曰： 今之来，非直求居而已，愿偿平生之志。
现代文：公子说： 这次我来，并非只求住几天，而是想实现我平生的愿望。
English: He said, "This time, I came here not just to stay for a few days, but to fulfill my lifelong wish.

古文：但未知命也若何。 
现代文：只不知我的命运如何？ 
English: I just don't know what my fate will be.

古文：言未终，姥至，询其故，具以告。
现代文：话还没说完，老妇人来了，问公子说那话的意思。
English: Before he had finished speaking, the old woman came and asked the young man what he meant by that.

古文：姥笑曰： 男女之际，大欲存焉。
现代文：公子就把自己的心事全告诉了老妇人。
English: The young man told the old woman everything that was on his mind.

古文：情苟相得，虽父母之命，不能制也。
现代文：老妇人笑着说： 男女之间，愿意相亲相爱的心愿是自然而然的，感情如果合得来，即使是父母的命令，也阻止不了。
English: The old woman smiled and said, "Between a man and a woman, the desire to love each other is natural. If the feelings are compatible, even the orders of the parents cannot stop it.

古文：女子固陋，曷足以荐君子之枕席！ 
现代文：我这女孩本来丑陋，怎么配给公子做媳妇呢？ 
English: This girl of mine is naturally ugly, how can she be given to a man to be his daughter-in-law?

古文：生遂下阶，拜而谢之曰： 愿以己为厮养。 
现代文：公子于是走下台阶，深深拜着感谢她说： 如蒙答应，即使让我作您家的仆役也可以。 
English: The young man then went down the steps, bowed deeply and thanked her, saying, "If you agree, you can even let me be a servant in your house."

古文：姥遂目之为郎，饮酣而散。
现代文：老妇人于是就把公子看作女婿，酒喝得很尽兴后才结束。
English: The old woman then regarded the young man as her son-in-law, and only finished after drinking to her heart's content.

古文：及旦，尽徙其囊橐，因家于李之第。
现代文：等到第二天早晨，公子把自己的行李物品全搬了来，就住进了李娃的宅子。
English: By the next morning, he had brought all of his belongings with him and moved into Li Wa's house.

古文：自是生屏迹戢身，不复与亲知相闻，日会倡优侪类，狎戏游宴。
现代文：从此公子敛迹藏身，不再跟亲属朋友来往，每天跟唱歌的演戏的聚在一起，亲近，戏耍，游览饮宴，不久就把口袋里的钱化光了，于是只好卖了车马和自己的年青仆人。
English: From then on, the young man retreated into hiding, no longer visiting his relatives and friends. Every day, he would gather with the singers and actors, get close to them, play with them, and visit banquets. Soon, he ran out of money in his pocket, so he had to sell his horse and carriage and his young servant.

古文：囊中尽空，乃鬻骏乘及其家僮。
现代文：只一年多，钱财仆人和马匹全都没有了。
English: Just over a year later, all the money, servants and horses were gone.

古文：岁余，资财仆马荡然。迩来姥意渐怠，娃情弥笃。
现代文：于是老妇的态度渐渐就有些怠慢，而李娃的情意却更加深厚。
English: As a result, the old woman's attitude gradually became somewhat neglectful, while Li Wa's feelings became more profound.

古文：他日，娃谓生曰： 与郎相知一年，尚无孕嗣。
现代文：有一天，李娃对公子说： 与你相交一年了，还没有怀孕，常听说竹林神有求必应，很是灵验。
English: One day, Li Wa said to her son-in-law, "I have been dating you for a year, but I am not pregnant yet. I have often heard that the Bamboo Forest God is very responsive.

古文：常闻竹林神者，报应如响，将致荐酹求之，可乎？ 
现代文：我要送上酒食祭祀，向神祈求，可以吗？ 公子不知是圈套，因而非常高兴。
English: I want to make a food and wine offering and pray to God, is that okay? The young man didn't know it was a trap, so he was very happy.

古文：生不知其计，大喜。
现代文：于是他拿衣服到当铺当了，去准备牛猪羊三牲和甜酒等祭品。
English: So he pawned his clothes at a pawnshop and went to prepare three sacrificial animals of cattle, pigs and sheep, as well as sweet wine and other offerings.

古文：乃质衣于肆，以备牢醴，与娃同谒祠宇而祷祝焉，信宿而返。
现代文：备好祭品后就跟李娃一起到供奉神的庙里向神祈祷，住了一宿才往回走，公子骑着驴走在后边。
English: After preparing the sacrificial offering, she went with Li Wa to the temple dedicated to the gods to pray to the gods. She stayed there for one night before going back, with her husband riding behind on a donkey.

古文：策驴而后，至里北门，娃谓生曰： 此东转小曲中，某之姨宅也，将憩而觐之，可乎？ 
现代文：到了里弄的北门，李娃对公子说： 从这儿向东拐，有个小胡同，是我姨家的住宅，打算到那里稍稍休息一会儿，去拜见我姨娘，可以吗？ 
English: Arriving at the north gate of the alley, Li Wa said to her son-in-law, "From here, turn east. There is a small alley, which is my aunt's house. I plan to go there to take a short break and visit my aunt. Is that okay?"

古文：生如其言，前行不逾百步，果见一车门。
现代文：公子同意了。往前走了不到一百步，果然看见一个院门。
English: He agreed. He walked forward less than a hundred paces and saw a courtyard gate.

古文：窥其际，甚弘敞。
现代文：向里面张望了一下，很宽敞。那丫环从车后说： 到了。 
English: I took a look inside, and it was very spacious. The maid said from the back of the car, "We've arrived."

古文：生下，适有一人出访曰： 谁？ 
现代文：公子下了驴，恰好有一人出来问道： 谁？ 
English: The prince dismounted his donkey, and a man happened to come out and ask: Who?

古文：曰： 李娃也。 
现代文：回答说： 李娃。 
English: She replied: "Liwa."

古文：乃入告。
现代文：于是进去禀报。
English: The man went through the door to report it.

古文：俄有一妪至，年可四十余，与生相迎曰： 吾甥来否？ 
现代文：不一会儿一个女人出来了，年龄约四十多岁，跟公子相迎，说： 我外甥女来了吗？ 
English: Soon after, a woman in her forties came out to greet him, saying: "Is my niece here?

古文：娃下车，妪逆访之曰： 何久绝？ 
现代文：李娃下车，那女人迎着问： 怎么这么长时间不来了呢？ 
English: Li Wa got off the bus, and the woman greeted her by asking: Why did you take so long to come?

古文：相视而笑。
现代文：互相看着笑。
English: Looking at each other and laughing.

古文：娃引生拜之，既见，遂偕入西戟门偏院。
现代文：李娃引导公子拜见那女人。见过后，就一块进入西边的门内偏院里。
English: Li Wa guided the young man to meet the woman. After seeing her, they entered the inner courtyard on the west side of the gate.

古文：中有山亭，竹树葱茜，池榭幽绝。
现代文：院中有山有亭，竹子，树木长得很茂盛，池塘水边房子都很幽静。
English: There are mountains and pavilions in the yard, bamboo, trees grow very luxuriantly, and the houses by the pond are very quiet.

古文：生谓娃曰： 此姨之私第耶？ 
现代文：公子对李娃说： 这是你姨母的私人住宅吗？ 
English: "Is this your aunt's private residence?

古文：笑而不答，以他语对。
现代文：李娃只笑不回答，用别的语搪塞过去。
English: Li Wa just laughed and didn't answer. She prevaricated in another language.

古文：俄献茶果，甚珍奇。
现代文：不一会儿，献上茶与水果，很珍贵奇特。
English: Soon, tea and fruit were offered, very precious and unique.

古文：食顷，有一人控大宛，汗流驰至曰： 姥遇暴疾颇甚，殆不识人，宜速归。 
现代文：有一顿饭的工夫，忽然有一个人骑着一匹大宛名马，汗流满面地跑来了，说： 老太太突然患了重病很厉害，几乎连人都不认识了，请姑娘赶快回去。 
English: When it was time for a meal, a man suddenly rode up on a large, well-known horse, sweating profusely, and said: "The old lady has suddenly fallen seriously ill. She is so ill that she hardly knows anyone. Please hurry back, young lady."

古文：娃谓姨曰： 方寸乱矣，某骑而前去，当令返乘，便与郎偕来。 
现代文：李娃对她姨说： 我的心都乱了，我骑马先回去，然后让马再返回来，你就跟他一块来吧。 
English: Li Wa said to her aunt, "My heart is in turmoil. I will ride back first, and then let the horse come back. You should come with him."

古文：生拟随之，其姨与侍儿偶语，以手挥之，令生止于户外，曰： 姥且殁矣，当与某议丧事，以济其急，奈何遽相随而去？ 
现代文：公子打算跟李娃一起走，李娃的姨与侍女两人私语了一阵儿，挥手示意，让公子停在门外，说： 老太太就要死了，你应该和我一起商量一下丧事，好处理这个紧急情况，为什么要立刻跟着去？ 
English: The young man was planning to go with Liwa. Liwa's aunt and the maid whispered to each other for a while, waved and motioned for the young man to stop outside the door, saying, "The old lady is about to die. You should discuss the funeral with me so that we can deal with this emergency. Why do you want to go with her right away?"

古文：乃止，共计其凶仪斋祭之用。
现代文：公子便留下了，与姨一起计算举行丧礼祭奠的费用。
English: The young man stayed behind, and together with his aunt, they calculated the cost of holding a funeral service.

古文：日晚，乘不至。
现代文：天已黄昏，骑马的仆人并没来。
English: It was dusk, and the servant on horseback had not come.

古文：姨言曰： 无复命何也？
现代文：那位姨说： 到现在还没有回信儿，怎么回事？
English: The aunt said: So far there has been no reply to my letter, what's going on?

古文：郎骤往觇之，某当继至。 
现代文：你赶快去看看她！我会随后赶到。 
English: You'd better go and see her! I'll be along later.

古文：生遂往，至旧宅，门扁钥甚密，以泥缄之。生大骇，诘其邻人。
现代文：公子于是就走了。他赶到李娃原来的住宅，一看，门锁得很严实，还用泥印封上了，心里很震惊，询问那里的邻人。
English: He rushed to Li Hua's former residence, and when he saw that the door was tightly locked and sealed with a mud seal, he was shocked and asked the neighbors there.

古文：邻人曰： 李本税此而居，约已周矣。
现代文：邻居说： 李娃本来是租住在这里，租约已经到期，房主收回了房子。
English: Neighbors said: Li Hua originally rented to live here, the lease has expired, and the homeowner has taken back the house.

古文：第主自收，姥徙居而且再宿矣。 征徙何处，曰： 不详其所。 
现代文：老妇迁居了，已走了两宿了。 询问搬到了何处，说： 不清楚她的新住处。 
English: The old lady has moved, she has been gone for two nights.Asked where she had moved to, she said: I don't know where her new place is.

古文：生将驰赴宣阳，以诘其姨，日已晚矣，计程不能达。
现代文：公子想要赶快跑到宣阳去问问李娃的姨，到底怎么回事。但天已经晚了，计算了一下路程到不了，就脱下衣服作抵押，弄了点饭吃，又租了张床睡觉。
English: The husband wanted to hurry to Xuanyang to ask Li Hua's aunt what was going on. But it was already late, he calculated the distance and couldn't get there, so he took off his clothes as collateral, made some food, and rented a bed to sleep in.

古文：乃弛其装服，质馔而食，赁榻而寝，生恚怒方甚，自昏达旦，目不交睫。
现代文：公子非常气愤，从晚上到早晨，一宿没合眼，等到天刚亮就骑着跛脚的驴赶往宣阳。到后，连连地敲门，敲了一顿饭工夫也没有人应。
English: He was very angry. From the evening to the morning, he did not close his eyes for one night. When it was just dawn, he rode a lame donkey to Xuanyang. After arriving, he knocked on the door again and again. He knocked for a meal, but no one answered.

古文：质明，乃策蹇而去。
现代文：公子高声大喊了半天，有一个官员慢慢走出来。
English: After shouting at the top of his voice for half a day, an official slowly came out.

古文：既至，连扣其扉，食顷无人应。
现代文：公子急忙上前问他： 李娃的姨住在这里吗？ 回答说： 没有。 
English: The boy hurried forward and asked him, "Does Li Wa's aunt live here?" He replied, "No."

古文：生大呼数四，有宦者徐出。
现代文：公子说： 昨天黄昏时还在这里，为什么藏起来了呢？ 
English: He said, "It was still here at dusk yesterday. Why did it hide?

古文：生遽访之： 姨氏在乎？ 
现代文：又问这房子是谁家的住宅，回答说： 这是崔尚书的住宅。
English: He also asked who's house this was and replied: "This is Cui Shangshu's house."

古文：曰： 无之。 生曰： 昨暮在此，何故匿之？ 访其谁氏之第，曰： 此崔高书宅。
现代文：昨天有一个人租了这所房子，说用来等待远来的中表亲戚，但还没到黄昏就走了。 
English: Yesterday, a man who had rented the house, saying he was waiting for distant relatives, left before dusk.

古文：昨者有一人税此院，云迟中表之远至者，未暮去矣。 
现代文：公子惊慌困惑得快要疯了，不知道怎么办才好，于是又返回布政里原来住的地方。
English: Panicked and confused, the boy nearly went mad and did not know what to do, so he returned to the place where he used to live in Busan.

古文：生惶惑发狂，罔知所措，因返访布政旧邸。邸主哀而进膳。
现代文：主人因为同情他而给他饭吃。公子由于怨恨愤懑，三天未进饭食，因而得了很重的病，十多天以后病情更厉害了，房主人害怕他一病不起，就把他搬到了殡仪铺中。
English: The master gave him food because he felt sorry for him. Due to his resentment and anger, the young man did not eat for three days, and as a result, he became very ill. After more than ten days, his illness became more severe. The landlord was afraid that he would not be able to afford to take care of him if he became ill, so he moved him to a funeral parlor.

古文：生怨懑，绝食三日，遘疾甚笃，旬余愈甚。邸主惧其不起，徙之于凶肆之中。
现代文：然而公子的病情一直不见好转，全铺的人都为他伤心、叹息，轮流着喂他。
English: However, the boy's condition never improved, and everyone in the shop was sad for him, sighing, and taking turns to feed him.

古文：绵缀移时，合肆之人，共伤叹而互饲之。
现代文：后来稍微好了些，拄着棍子能起来了。从此殡仪铺每天都雇用他，让他牵引灵帐，得点报酬以便养活自己。
English: After that, he felt a little better and was able to walk with a cane. From then on, the funeral parlour hired him every day to collect the coffins and earn a little money to support himself.

古文：后稍愈，杖而能起。由是凶肆日假之，令执繐帷，获其直以自给。
现代文：经过了几个月，公子渐渐健壮起来，每听到殡仪铺里那哀悼亡人的歌，就自己叹息，觉得还不如那些死去的人。
English: After a few months, the boy gradually became stronger, and whenever he heard the song of mourning for the dead in the funeral parlor, he sighed and felt inferior to those who died.

古文：累月，渐复壮，每听其哀歌，自叹不及逝者，辄呜咽流涕，不能自止。归则效之。
现代文：于是便低声哭泣流泪，自己也控制不住自己。每次送灵回来后，就模仿那哀歌。
English: So he began to weep in a low voice and shed tears, and he could not control himself. Every time he sent a spirit back, he would imitate that lament.

古文：生聪敏者也，无何，曲尽其妙，虽长安无有伦比。
现代文：公子本是聪明伶俐的人，所以不长时间，就掌握了唱哀歌的全部技巧，即使整个长安也没有人比得过他。
English: He was a clever man, so it didn't take long for him to master all the skills of singing laments. Even in the whole of Chang'an, no one could match him.

古文：初，二肆之佣凶器者，互争胜负。
现代文：当初，两个殡仪铺中出租丧葬所用的器物，二位店主互争胜负。
English: In the beginning, two funeral parlours leased funeral paraphernalia, and the two shop owners competed with each other.

古文：其东肆车舆皆奇丽，殆不敌。唯哀挽劣焉。
现代文：那东铺的纸扎车马都十分新奇华丽，几乎无人能跟他们相比，只有出殡时歌手的挽歌唱得很低劣。
English: The papier-mâché chariots and horses in the East Shop are so new and gorgeous that almost no one can compare to them. Only the funeral singer's dirge is inferior.

古文：其东肆长知生妙绝，乃醵钱二万索顾焉。其党耆旧，共较其所能者，阴教生新声，而相赞和。累旬，人莫知之。
现代文：那东铺的店主知道公子唱挽歌极好，就凑了两万钱要雇他，公子同伙中唱挽歌的老手，偷偷地教给他新曲，而且辅导配合练了十几天，没有谁知道这事。
English: The owner of the oriental shop knew that the boy was an excellent elegiac singer, so he pooled together twenty thousand yuan to hire him. A veteran elegiac singer among the boy's friends secretly taught him a new song, and the coaching and cooperation went on for ten days. No one knew about it.

古文：其二肆长相谓曰： 我欲各阅所佣之器于天门街，以较优劣。
现代文：那两个殡仪铺的店主都向对方说： 我想我们各把自己出租的器物陈列在天门街，以便比一下谁优谁劣。
English: The owners of the two funeral parlors both said to each other, "I think we should each display the equipment we rent out on Tianmen Street, so that we can compare who is better and who is worse."

古文：不胜者，罚直五万，以备酒馔之用，可乎？ 
现代文：不能取胜的，罚钱五万，以便用它作酒饭的费用。可以吗？ 
English: If you can't win, you will be fined 50,000 won, so that you can use it to pay for your meals and drinks. Is that okay?

古文：二肆许诺，乃邀立符契，署以保证，然后阅之。
现代文：两个店主都同意了。于是邀来人立下了契约，写上了保人，然后就把器物都陈列出来。
English: Both shop owners agreed. So the invitees signed a contract, wrote a guarantor, and then put all the items on display.

古文：士女大和会，聚至数万。
现代文：城里的男男女女闻讯后都来看热闹，聚集了好几万人。
English: After hearing the news, both men and women in the city came to see the lively scene, gathering tens of thousands of people.

古文：于是里胥告于贼曹，贼曹闻于京尹。
现代文：看到这种情况，管街道的里胥报告了管治安的贼曹，贼曹报告了京都的执政官京兆尹。
English: Seeing this situation, Lihong, who was in charge of the streets, reported to Kisao, who was in charge of public security, and Kisao reported to Kyochoin, the regent of Kyoto.

古文：四方之士，尽赴趋焉，巷无居人。
现代文：这天一大早，四面八方的人全都赶来了，小巷里的居民也全都出来了。
English: In the early morning of that day, people from all over came, and all the residents of the alley came out.

古文：自旦阅之，及亭午，历举辇舆威仪之具，西肆皆不胜，师有惭色。
现代文：两个铺子从早晨开始陈列治丧等祭器一直到正午，依次摆出了纸辇、车舆、纸制仪仗等东西，西铺都比不过，他们的店主脸上很不光彩。
English: The two shops displayed funeral and other sacrificial objects from the morning until noon, and successively displayed things such as paper money, chariots, and paper ceremonial weapons. The western shops were no better, and their shopkeepers' faces were very disgraced.

古文：乃置层榻于南隅，有长髯者，拥铎而进，翊卫数人，于是奋髯扬眉，扼腕顿颡而登，乃歌《白马》之词。
现代文：接着西铺在东南墙角安放了一个高榻，有位留胡子的人拿着铃上场，有好几个人簇拥着他。他扬起胡须，抬起眉毛，握着腕子点了点头登上高榻，唱了一支名叫《白马》的挽歌。
English: Next, the west wing placed a high stool in the southeast corner of the wall. A bearded man came onto the stage with a bell, and several people gathered around him. He raised his beard, raised his eyebrows, held his arms, nodded, climbed onto the high stool, and sang an elegy called "White Horse."

古文：恃其夙胜，顾眄左右，旁若无人。
现代文：他依仗平素的名望，边唱边左顾右盼旁若无人。
English: Relying on his modest reputation, he sang and looked around as if no one was there.

古文：齐声赞扬之，自以为独步一时，不可得而屈也。
现代文：唱完后，看客齐声赞扬。他自己也认为唱得技艺高超，谁也比不了。
English: After he finished singing, the audience praised him in unison. He also thought that his singing skills were superb, and no one could beat him.

古文：有顷，东肆长于北隅上设连榻，有乌巾少年，左右五六人，秉翣而至，即生也。
现代文：这时只见东铺店主也在北墙角安放了几个相连的高榻，一位戴黑孝巾的少年手拿着棺材上的饰物在五六个人簇拥下上了场，他就是那公子。
English: At this time, the owner of the east shop also placed several connected high beds in the north corner of the wall. A young boy wearing a black handkerchief and holding the ornaments on the coffin took the stage surrounded by five or six people. He was that boy.

古文：整衣服，俯仰甚徐，申喉发调，容若不胜。
现代文：只见他坦然地整了整衣服，从容地扬了扬头，先是辗转歌喉唱了起来，看表情好像由于悲痛而唱不成声似地。
English: I only saw him calmly straighten his clothes, calmly raise his head, and first sing a song, looking at the expression as if he could not sing due to grief.

古文：乃歌《薤露》之章，举声清越，响振林木。曲度未终，闻者歔欷掩泣。
现代文：公子唱的挽歌名叫《薤露》，越唱越高昂，歌声震动了树林，一曲还没唱完，看客们就都被感动得深深叹息，有的还捂住脸哭起来。
English: The dirge sung by the young man was called "The Dew," and the more it was sung, the higher it rose. The singing voice shook the forest. Before the song was over, the spectators were moved to deep sighs, and some of them covered their faces and began to cry.

古文：西肆长为众所诮，益惭耻，密置所输之直于前，乃潜遁焉。
现代文：大家都讥讽西铺唱得拙劣，西铺店主更感到难堪了。暗地把所输的钱放在前面，偷偷的逃走了。
English: Everyone mocked the poor singing of the barber shop, and the barber shop owner felt even more embarrassed. He secretly put the lost money in front of him and secretly ran away.

古文：四座愕眙，莫之测也。
现代文：四周座位上的人都惊诧发愣，谁也没料到会有这个结果。
English: The people on the seats all around were surprised and stunned, no one expected this result.

古文：先是天子方下诏，俾外方之牧，岁一至阙下，谓之入计。
现代文：在此以前皇帝下过的诏书，让京城以外各州郡的长官每年来京城一次，称之为 入计 。
English: The imperial decree issued by the emperor before this time allowed the governors of the states and counties outside the capital to come to the capital once a year, which was called "admission."

古文：时也，适遇生之父在京师，与同列者易服章，窃往观焉。
现代文：当时，恰好遇上公子的父亲在京城，与同僚换上便服，也偷偷地到那里去看。
English: At that time, he happened to meet the boy's father in the capital, and he and his colleagues put on casual clothes and secretly went there to see.

古文：有老竖，即生乳母婿也，见生之举措辞气，将认之而未敢，乃泫然流涕。
现代文：有个老仆人，就是公子的奶妈的丈夫，看见那唱挽歌的人，举止语气很像失去的公子，想去认他又不敢，便禁不住掉下泪来。
English: An old servant, the husband of the boy's wet nurse, saw the mourner, who behaved very much like the lost boy, and did not dare to recognize him, and could not help shedding tears.

古文：生父惊而诘之，因告曰： 歌者之貌，酷似郎之亡子。 
现代文：公子的父亲吃惊地问他，他说， 唱歌的那个人，相貌举止都非常像您死去的儿子。 
English: Surprised, the boy's father asked him, "The man who is singing looks and acts very much like your dead son," he said.

古文：父曰： 吾子以多财为盗所害，奚至是耶？ 
现代文：公子的父亲说： 我的儿子因为财物多而被强盗杀害，怎么会到这里来呢？ 
English: The boy's father said, "My son was killed by robbers because he had a lot of money. How did he end up here?"

古文：言讫，亦泣。
现代文：说完，也哭了起来。
English: When she finished, she also began to cry.

古文：及归，竖间驰往，访于同党曰： 向歌者谁，若斯之妙欤？ 
现代文：等到回去后，老仆人找了个机会赶快跑到殡仪铺，向唱歌的一伙询问说： 前些时候唱歌的那人是谁，他唱得真太好了！ 
English: When he got back, the old servant took the opportunity to run quickly to the funeral parlour and asked the singing group: "Who was that man who sang earlier, he sang so well!"

古文：皆曰： 某氏之子。 
现代文：都说是某姓人的儿子。
English: They all said he was the son of someone.

古文：征其名，且易之矣，竖凛然大惊。
现代文：又问他的名，说已经改了。老仆人非常吃惊，慢慢走过去，靠近了细看。
English: He asked his name again and was told that it had been changed. The old servant was very surprised and slowly walked over to take a closer look.

古文：徐往，迫而察之。生见竖，色动回翔，将匿于众中。
现代文：这时公子看见了老仆人，脸色突变，立即转身，想藏入人群中。
English: At this time, the young man saw the old servant, his face changed, he immediately turned around and tried to hide in the crowd.

古文：竖遂持其袂曰： 岂非某乎？ 
现代文：老仆人于是扯住他的袖子说： 难道你不是公子吗？ 
English: The old servant then tugged at his sleeve and said: Aren't you a gentleman?

古文：相持而泣，遂载以归。
现代文：拉着手就哭了起来，便用车把他载着回来了。
English: She held his hand and burst into tears, then drove him back home.

古文：至其室，父责曰： 志行若此，污辱吾门，何施面目，复相见也？ 
现代文：到了房间里，他父亲责备他说： 你的志向和行为堕落到了这个地步，玷污了我们的家族，有什么面目再相见呢！ 
English: When he got to his room, his father scolded him: "Your ambition and behavior have degenerated to such an extent that you have tarnished our family. How can we ever see each other again?"

古文：乃徒行出，至曲江西杏园东，去其衣服。以马鞭鞭之数百。
现代文：于是让公子步行走出去，到了曲江西杏园的东面，剥掉了公子的衣服，用马鞭抽打了几百鞭。
English: So he let the boy go out on foot to the east side of the West Qujiang River Apricot Orchard, stripped the boy of his clothes, and whipped him with a horse whip for several hundred lashes.

古文：生不胜其苦而毙，父弃之而去。
现代文：公子承受不了那种痛苦，昏死过去。他的父亲丢下他就走了。
English: Unable to bear the pain, he fainted and passed away. His father left him and went away.

古文：其师命相狎昵者，阴随之，归告同党，共加伤叹。令二人赍苇席瘗焉。
现代文：公子的师傅一开始就派人暗中跟着他们，事后回去告诉了同伙的人，于是都伤心叹息，然后让两个人带着苇席去准备把他埋了。
English: At first, the boy's master sent someone to follow them secretly, but later he went back and told his companions, and they all sighed sadly, and then let the two men go with a feast to prepare to bury him.

古文：至则心下微温，举之良久，气稍通。
现代文：到了那里，一摸书生的心口还稍有点温暖，便把他抬了起来，好久，才渐渐有了点气息，于是大家一起把他抬了回去。
English: When they got there, as soon as they felt that the heart of the student was still a little warm, they lifted him up. It took a long time for him to breathe, so they all carried him back together.

古文：因共荷而归，以苇筒灌勺饮，经宿乃活。
现代文：大伙用芦苇管儿给他灌水，用勺喂水，经过一夜才活过来。
English: They gave him water from a reed pipe and fed him with a spoon, and he only came back to life after one night.

古文：月余，手足不能自举，其楚挞之处皆溃烂，秽甚。
现代文：一个多月后，公子的手脚仍不能动，那被鞭打过的地方都感染化脓，脏得厉害。
English: More than a month later, he is still unable to move his hands and feet. The area where he was whipped is infected with scabies and is extremely dirty.

古文：同辈患之，一夕弃于道周。
现代文：同在一起的那些人都很厌恶他，就在一天晚上把他扔到了道边上。
English: Those who were with him loathed him, and one night they threw him on the roadside.

古文：行路咸伤之，往往投其余食，得以充肠。
现代文：过路的人看到了这情形都感到悲哀，常常扔给他一点剩余的食物，这才使他能填饱肚子。
English: Passers-by are saddened by the sight and often throw him a bit of leftover food to fill his stomach.

古文：十旬，方杖策而起。
现代文：过了十天公子才能拄着棍子站起来。
English: It took ten days before the boy could hold a stick and stand up.

古文：被布裘，裘有百结，褴褛如悬鹑。
现代文：他穿着布衣服，像僧人的百衲衣一样都是补丁，破烂不堪，像秃尾巴的鹌鹑一样没有风采。
English: He was dressed in cloth, patched like a monk's cassock, ragged and shabby, as graceless as a bald-tailed toad.

古文：持一破瓯巡于闾里，以乞食为事。自秋徂冬，夜入于粪壤窟室，昼则周游廛肆。
现代文：他拿着一个小破盆在居民家挨户乞讨，从秋天到冬天，夜晚就宿在脏土洞穴里，白天就周游于闹市中。
English: From autumn to winter, he would sleep in a dirt cave at night and roam around the city during the day.

古文：一旦大雪，生为冻馁所驱。
现代文：有一天早晨下大雪，公子被冻饿逼迫，只得顶着雪出去讨饭。
English: One morning there was a heavy snowfall, and the young man was forced by hunger and cold to go out into the snow to beg for food.

古文：冒雪而出，乞食之声甚苦，闻见者莫不凄恻。
现代文：那乞讨的声音很凄苦，听到看到的人都感到很伤心。
English: The sound of the begging was very sad, and everyone who heard and saw it felt very sad.

古文：时雪方甚，人家外户多不发。
现代文：当时雪下得正大，住户的门大多不开。
English: At that time, it was snowing heavily, and most of the doors of the households did not open.

古文：至安邑东门，循里垣，北转第七八，有一门独启左扉，即娃之第也。
现代文：公子到了安邑东门，顺着里弄的墙根走，向北转过了七八家，有一家只开着左扇门，这就是李娃的住宅。
English: When he arrived at the East Gate of Anyi, he walked along the base of the wall and turned north, passing seven or eight houses. One house only had its left door open, which was Li Wa's house.

古文：生不知之，遂连声疾呼： 饥冻之甚。 音响凄切，所不忍听。
现代文：但是公子不知道，就连连大声呼减，由于冻饿交加，叫声凄凉悲哀，令人不忍心听。
English: But the young man did not know, he even called out loudly for a reduction. Due to the cold and hunger, the cries were bleak and sad, which was unbearable to listen to.

古文：娃自阁中闻之，谓侍儿曰： 此必生也，我辨其音矣。 
现代文：李娃从阁楼里听到了，对侍女说： 这一定是那个公子，我听出他的声音了。 
English: Li Wa heard it from the attic and said to the maid: This must be the gentleman, I recognize his voice.

古文：连步而出。见生枯瘠疥疠，殆非人状。
现代文：她快步走了出来，只见书生干枯瘦弱，满身疥疮，几乎不像人样。
English: She walked out briskly, only to find Shousen withered, emaciated, covered in acne, barely human.

古文：娃意感焉，乃谓曰： 岂非某郎也？ 
现代文：李娃心里很受触动，于是对他说： 这不是郎君吗？ 
English: Li Wa was very touched, so she said to him, "Isn't this my husband?"

古文：生愤懑绝倒，口不能言，颔颐而已。
现代文：公子一听，悲愤交加，昏倒在地，说不出话来，只微微点头而已。
English: Upon hearing this, the young man was overcome with grief and anger. He fainted and fell to the ground, unable to speak, only nodding slightly.

古文：娃前抱其颈，以绣襦拥而归于西厢。失声长恸曰： 令子一朝及此，我之罪也。 
现代文：李娃走过去，抱着他的脖子，用绣花袄裹着他弄到西厢房，不禁大声痛哭，说： 使你落到这个地步，是我的罪过啊！ 
English: Li Wa walked over, hugged his neck, wrapped him in an embroidered shawl and brought him to the west wing room. She couldn't help but cry loudly and said, "It was my fault that you ended up in this situation!

古文：绝而复苏。
现代文：哭得昏过去半天才苏醒过来。
English: I was crying myself to sleep and only woke up half an hour later.

古文：姥大骇奔至，曰： 何也？ 娃曰： 某郎。 
现代文：老妇人异常吃惊，急忙跑了过来，说： 怎么回事？ 李娃说： 是某郎君。 
English: The old woman was extremely surprised and hurried over, saying, "What's the matter?" Li Wa said, "It's my husband."

古文：姥遽曰： 当逐之，奈何令至此。 
现代文：老妇人马上说： 应当赶走他，为什么叫他来这里？ 
English: The old woman immediately said, "He should be expelled, why did he come here?"

古文：娃敛容却睇曰： 不然，此良家子也，当昔驱高车，持金装，至某之室，不逾期而荡尽。且互设诡计，舍而逐之，殆非人行。
现代文：李娃脸色一沉，回过头来斜看着老妇人说： 不能这样。他本来是清白人家的子弟，当初驾着高高的马车，带着贵重的行装，到了我们家，没超过一年就全部用光，并且又合谋施展诡计，抛弃赶走了他，这不是人应该做的。
English: Li Wa looked downcast, looked back at the old woman and said, "It can't be like this. He was originally a son of a white family. At the beginning, he drove a tall carriage and brought valuable clothing with him. When he came to our house, it took him less than a year to use it all up, and then he conspired to carry out a trick, abandoned and drove him away. This is not what people should do.

古文：令其失志，不得齿于人伦。
现代文：使他失去志向，被人们所不齿。
English: To make him lose his ambition and be despised by the people.

古文：父子之道，天性也。使其情绝，杀而弃之，又困踬若此。
现代文：父子之间的感情，本是人性天伦，却使他们断绝了骨肉情义，他父亲甚至杀死并丢弃了他。
English: The affection between father and son, which is a natural human relationship, has been severed from flesh and blood, and his father even killed and abandoned him.

古文：天下之人，尽知为某也。
现代文：如今公子困顿倒霉到这种状况，天下的人都知道是因为我造成的。
English: Now that my son is in this situation, everyone in the world knows that I caused it.

古文：生亲戚满朝，一旦当权者熟察其本末，祸将及矣。
现代文：公子的亲戚在朝廷中做官的很多，一旦掌权的亲戚仔细查明了这件事的来龙去脉，灾祸就要临头了。
English: There are many relatives of princes who hold official positions in the imperial court. Once the relatives in power have carefully ascertained the circumstances of this matter, disaster is imminent.

古文：况欺天负人，鬼神不祐，无自贻其殃也。
现代文：况且欺骗上天辜负人心，鬼神也不会保佑的，还是不要给自己找祸吧。
English: Moreover, deceiving the heavens and betraying the hearts of the people will not be blessed by ghosts and gods, so don't make trouble for yourself.

古文：某为姥子，迨今有二十岁矣。计其赀，不啻直千金。
现代文：我作为您的孩子，到现在已有二十年了，花费的钱财，不止千金。
English: I've been your child for twenty years now, and I've spent more than a thousand dollars.

古文：今姥年六十余，愿计二十年衣食之用以赎身，当与此子别卜所诣。
现代文：现今您老已六十多了，我愿意计算一下二十年来我在衣食方面所用的钱，把它还给您为自己赎身。
English: Now that you are over sixty, I would like to calculate the money I have spent on food and clothing over the past twenty years and return it to you to redeem myself.

古文：所诣非遥，晨昏得以温清，某愿足矣。 
现代文：我打算与这个人另找住处，所去的地方不远，早晨晚上还可以来尽孝道，这样我的愿望也就满足了。 
English: I plan to find another place to live with this person. The place I'm going to is not far away, and I can come in the morning and evening to fulfill my filial duty, so my wish is also satisfied.

古文：姥度其志不可夺，因许之。
现代文：老妇人估计她的志向是不能改变了，便答应了她。
English: The old woman, assuming that her wishes could not be changed, agreed.

古文：给姥之余，有百金。
现代文：李娃把钱给老妇人后，还剩有百金。
English: After Li Wa gave the money to the old woman, she still had a hundred gold left.

古文：北隅四五家，税一隙院。
现代文：向北经过四五家，在那儿租了一所空房。
English: He passed four or five houses on his way north and rented a vacant house there.

古文：乃与生沐浴，易其衣服，为汤粥通其肠，次以酥乳润其脏。
现代文：于是给公子洗了澡，换下脏衣服，做热粥给公子喝，以便使他肠胃通畅，然后又让他吃乳酪，以便滋润他的内脏，经过十多天，才让他吃些美味佳肴。
English: So they gave him a bath, changed his dirty clothes, made hot porridge for him to drink in order to make his stomach smooth, and then let him eat cheese in order to moisturize his internal organs. After more than ten days, they let him eat some delicious food.

古文：旬余，方荐水陆之馔。头巾履袜，皆取珍异者衣之。
现代文：公子穿戴的头巾鞋袜，也都选用珍贵时新的式样。
English: The turban shoes and socks worn by the young man are also made of precious new styles.

古文：未数月，肌肤稍腴。卒岁，平愈如初。
现代文：不到几个月，公子的肌肉皮肤渐渐丰满，到年底，就完全痊愈复原，又像当初那样了。
English: Within a few months, the boy's muscles and skin gradually plumped up, and by the end of the year, he was completely healed and restored, as he was at the beginning.

古文：异时，娃谓生曰： 体已康矣，志已壮矣。渊思寂虑，默想曩昔之艺业，可温习乎？ 
现代文：有一天，李娃对公子说： 身体已经康复了，志向也该恢复了，你好好想一想，默默地回忆一下从前的功课学业，还可以拣起来吗？ 
English: One day, Li Hua said to her son-in-law: Your body has already recovered, and your ambition should also have recovered. Think about it, silently recall your previous homework and studies, can you still pick it up?

古文：生思之曰： 十得二三耳。 
现代文：公子想了一会儿，说： 十分只剩二三分了。 
English: The young man thought for a moment and said, "I only have two or three minutes left.

古文：娃命车出游，生骑而从。
现代文：李娃叫人套车出去游逛。公子骑着马跟着。
English: Li Wa asked the rickshaw to go out for a ride. The boy followed on horseback.

古文：至旗亭南偏门鬻坟典之肆，令生拣而市之，计费百金，尽载以归。
现代文：到了旗亭南边的边门那里卖四书五经的书铺里，让公子从中选购了一些，计算用费共需一百金。买好后，把书全装到车上运了回来。
English: He went to the bookstore that sold the Four Books and Five Classics at the side gate on the south side of the pavilion, and asked the young man to choose and buy some of them. The total cost was one hundred gold. After buying, he loaded all the books onto the car and brought them back.

古文：因令生斥弃百虑以志学，俾夜作昼，孜孜矻矻。娃常偶坐，宵分乃寐。
现代文：于是叫公子排除各种杂念，专心致志地学习，让他把夜晚当作白天，勤奋刻苦地读书，李娃经常陪坐着，半夜才睡觉。
English: So he asked the boy to eliminate all kinds of distractions and concentrate on his studies. He asked him to treat the night as the day and study diligently. Liwa often sat with him and only went to bed at midnight.

古文：伺其疲倦，即谕之缀诗赋。
现代文：等到他疲倦时，就叫他吟诗作赋。
English: When he was tired, he was asked to chant a poem.

古文：二岁而业大就，海内文籍，莫不该览。
现代文：只二年，公子学业上有了很大的成就。国内的文章书籍，全部都看完了。
English: In just two years, he has made great achievements in his studies. He has read all the domestic articles and books.

古文：生谓娃曰： 可策名试艺矣。 
现代文：公子对李娃说： 现在我可以报名应试了。 
English: He said to Liwa, "Now I can sign up for the entrance exam."

古文：娃曰： 未也，且令精熟，以俟百战。 
现代文：李娃说： 不到时候，学问必须又精又熟，才能百战百胜。 
English: Liwa said: Before the time is right, knowledge must be refined and well-versed in order to win every battle.

古文：更一年，曰： 可行矣。 
现代文：又过了一年，李娃说： 现在可以去了。 
English: After another year, Liwa said: Now I can go.

古文：于是遂一上登甲科，声振礼闱。
现代文：于是公子一上考场，就考中了甲科，连礼部的考官们都十分震动。
English: As a result, as soon as he went to the examination hall, he passed the examination in Grade A. Even the examiners in the etiquette department were very shocked.

古文：虽前辈见其文，罔不敛衽敬羡，愿友之而不可得。
现代文：即使是前辈看了他的文章，也无不肃然表示敬仰羡慕，愿意跟他交朋友可却找不到机会。
English: Even his predecessors read his articles, and all of them respectfully expressed their admiration and envy. They were willing to make friends with him, but they couldn't find the opportunity.

古文：娃曰： 未也。今秀士苟获擢一科第，则自谓可以取中朝之显职，擅天下之美名。
现代文：李娃说： 你现在还不行，当今才德突出的人，一旦考中以后，就自认为可以取得朝中显耀的职务，占有天下的美名。
English: Li Wa said, "You are not good enough yet. Today's outstanding talents, once they pass the middle school entrance examination, think that they can obtain the illustrious position in the court and occupy the world's reputation.

古文：子行秽迹鄙，不侔于他士。当砻淬利器，以求再捷，方可以连衡多士，争霸群英。 
现代文：而你过去的行为有污点，品德也不超群，比不上别的读书人，应当继续磨砺锋利的武器，以便取得第二次的胜利。那时你才可以结交很多文人，在群英中取得第一名。 
English: And you, whose past conduct is tainted and whose character is not superior to that of other readers, should continue to sharpen your sharp weapons in order to win a second victory. Only then can you make friends with many literati and win the first place among the British.

古文：生由是益自勤苦，声价弥甚。
现代文：公子从此更加勤奋刻苦，声望也越来越高。
English: Since then, he has been more diligent and hardworking, and his reputation is getting higher and higher.

古文：其年遇大比，诏征四方之隽。
现代文：那一年正碰上三年一次的全国大考，皇帝下诏招收四方的杰出人才，公子选试了 直言极谏科 。
English: That year, the triennial national university entrance examination was taking place. The emperor issued an edict to recruit outstanding talents from the four regions, and the prince chose to try out the Straight Talk Science.

古文：生应直言极谏策科，名第一，授成都府参军。
现代文：考试 对策 名列第一，被授予成都府参军的职务。
English: Examination Countermeasures Ranked first, was awarded the post of Chengdu prefecture to join the army.

古文：三事以降，皆其友也。
现代文：三公以下的官，都成了他的朋友。
English: All officials below the rank of three dukes became his friends.

古文：将之官，娃谓生曰： 今之复子本躯，某不相负也。
现代文：将去上任时，李娃对公子说： 现在你已经恢复了自己原来的身份，我没有对不起你的地方了。
English: When she was about to take office, Li Wa said to her son-in-law: Now that you have restored your original identity, I have no reason to be sorry for you.

古文：愿以残年，归养老姥。
现代文：我愿用我剩下的岁月，回去奉养老母亲。
English: I would like to use my remaining years to go back and help my elderly mother.

古文：君当结媛鼎族，以奉蒸尝。
现代文：你应当跟一个名门贵族的女子结婚，以便主持冬秋的祭祀。
English: You should marry a woman of noble birth in order to preside over the winter and autumn festivals.

古文：中外婚媾，无自黩也。
现代文：像你这样在朝中做官的人，和我结婚是会玷污你的身份的。
English: For someone like you, who is an official in the Korean government, marrying me would tarnish your status.

古文：勉思自爱，某从此去矣。 
现代文：望你自珍自爱，我从现在起就要离开你了。 
English: Take care of yourself. I'm leaving you from now on.

古文：生泣曰： 子若弃我，当自刭以就死。 
现代文：公子哭着说： 你如果丢下我，我就自刎而死。 
English: He cried and said, "If you leave me, I will commit suicide."

古文：娃固辞不从，生勤请弥恳。
现代文：李娃坚决推辞，不答应公子的要求。
English: Li Hua resolutely refused and did not agree to the prince's request.

古文：娃曰： 送子涉江，至于剑门，当令我回。 
现代文：公子再三请求，态度愈加诚恳。李娃说： 现在我送你过长江，到了四川剑门以后，就得让我回来。 
English: Li Wa said, "Now that I've sent you across the Yangtze River, I'll have to ask you to come back after you get to Sichuan Jianmen."

古文：生许诺。
现代文：公子答应了。
English: The student agreed.

古文：月余，至剑门。
现代文：去了一个多月，到达了剑门。
English: It took more than a month to get there, and we finally arrived at the Sword Gate.

古文：未及发而除书至，生父由常州诏入，拜成都尹，兼剑南采访使。
现代文：还没等出发，调动官职的文书就送到了。公子的父亲也由常州奉皇命入川，被授予成都府尹，兼任剑南采访使。
English: Before they had even set off, the paperwork for the transfer of official posts arrived. His father also came to Sichuan from Changzhou on the emperor's orders, and was awarded the title of Chengdu Fu Yin, and also served as the Jianan envoy.

古文：浃辰，父到。
现代文：十二天后，公子父亲也到达剑门。
English: Twelve days later, the boy's father also arrived at the Gate of Swords.

古文：生因投刺，谒于邮亭。
现代文：公子于是送上名片，到驿站见府尹。
English: So he sent his business card and went to the station to see Fu Yin.

古文：父不敢认，见其祖父官讳，方大惊，命登阶，抚背恸哭移时。曰： 吾与尔父子如初。 
现代文：父亲不敢认，看到名片上公子祖父和父亲的官名和名字，才大吃一惊，叫公子走上台阶，抚摸着他的背痛哭多时，说： 我和你的父子关系还像过去一样。 
English: His father didn't dare to admit it, but when he saw the official names and names of his grandfather and father on the business card, he was taken aback. He asked his son to walk up the steps, stroked his back and cried for a long time, saying: My relationship with your father and son is still the same as before.

古文：因诘其由，具陈其本末。
现代文：于是询问儿子的经历，公子就把自己的遭遇全部叙述了一遍。
English: So he asked about his son's experience, and the boy recounted everything that had happened to him.

古文：大奇之，诘娃安在。
现代文：公子的父亲觉得非常奇怪，就问李娃在什么地方。
English: The boy's father thought it was very strange and asked Li Hua where she was.

古文：曰： 送某至此，当令复还。 父曰： 不可。 
现代文：公子说： 她送我到此地，已经让她回去了。 父亲说： 绝不可以。 
English: The young man said, "She sent me here, and she has sent me back," and the father said, "No way."

古文：翌日，命驾与生先之成都，留娃于剑门，筑别馆以处之。
现代文：第二天，命令准备车辆，父子一起先到了成都，把李娃留在剑门，单修了一座房子叫李娃住在里面。
English: The next day, the order was given to prepare the vehicle. The father and son first arrived in Chengdu together, leaving Liwa at Jianmen, and built a house for Liwa to live in.

古文：明日，命媒氏通二姓之好，备六礼以迎之，遂如秦晋之偶。
现代文：第二天，让媒人去说亲，按照结婚的全部礼仪去剑门迎娶，从此正式结为夫妻。
English: The next day, let the matchmaker go to say goodbye, according to the whole etiquette of marriage, go to Jianmen to get married, and then officially become husband and wife.

古文：娃既备礼，岁时伏腊，妇道甚修，治家严整，极为亲所眷尚。
现代文：李娃婚后，逢年过节，那些做妻子和儿媳应做的事，都做得非常周到。管理家务严格有条理，非常受公婆的宠爱夸奖。
English: After Li Wa got married, during the New Year holidays, she did all the things that a wife and daughter-in-law should do very carefully. She managed the housework in a strict and orderly manner, and was greatly loved and praised by her in-laws.

古文：后数岁，生父母偕殁，持孝甚至。
现代文：过了几年以后，公子的父母都去世了，两人极尽孝道。
English: A few years later, the boy's parents both passed away, and the two of them devoted themselves to filial piety.

古文：有灵芝产于倚庐，一穗三秀，本道上闻。
现代文：不久，在守孝的草屋那地方长出了灵芝，一个穗上开出三朵花，于是剑南道的长官把这事上报了皇亲。
English: Soon, reishi mushrooms sprouted in the area of Shouko's grass hut, and three flowers bloomed on one spike, so the magistrate of South Jian Province reported the matter to the emperor's relatives.

古文：又有白燕数十，巢其层甍。天子异之，宠锡加等。
现代文：又有白燕数十只在他们住的楼房的屋脊上做窝。
English: There are also dozens of white swallows nesting on the roofs of the buildings they live in.

古文：终制，累迁清显之任。
现代文：天子对此感到惊奇，格外地给予赏赐嘉奖。
English: The Son of Heaven was surprised by this and gave him a special reward.

古文：十年间，至数郡。
现代文：服孝期满，公子屡次升任显赫高贵的官职。
English: At the end of his period of filial piety, he was repeatedly promoted to prominent and noble official positions.

古文：娃封汧国夫人，有四子，皆为大官，其卑者犹为太原尹。
现代文：十年当中，到几个郡做过官，李娃被封为汧国夫人。他们有四个儿子，都做了大官，官职最低的也做到了太原府府尹。
English: During the ten years, she served as an official in several counties, and Li Wa was named the wife of the country. They have four sons, all of whom have served as high officials, and the lowest official has also achieved Taiyuan Fufu Yin.

古文：弟兄姻媾皆甲门，内外隆盛，莫之与京。
现代文：弟兄们的姻亲都是名门大族，自家和亲属都兴盛发达，没有哪一家能比得上。唉！
English: The brothers' in-laws are all from prestigious families, and their own families and relatives are prosperous and developed. No other family can match them. Alas!

古文：嗟乎，倡荡之姬，节行如是，虽古先烈女，不能逾也。焉得不为之叹息哉！
现代文：一个行为放荡的妓女，节操行为竟能达到这种程度，即使是古代的烈女，也不能超过，怎么能不为她感慨呢？
English: How can one not feel sorry for a prostitute who behaves in such a debauched manner, and whose self-restraint reaches a level that even ancient martyrs could not surpass?

古文：予伯祖尝牧晋州，转户部，为水陆运使，三任皆与生为代，故谙详其事。
现代文：我的伯祖曾任晋州牧，后转户部，做水陆运使，三任都与那位公子做过职务上的交接，所以熟悉这些事。
English: My great-uncle once served as a Jinzhou herdsman, and later transferred to the household department, and worked as a land and water transport envoy. All three of them have done the handover of duties with that gentleman, so they are familiar with these things.

古文：贞元中，予与陇西公佐，话妇人操烈之品格，因遂述汧国之事。
现代文：贞元年间，我与陇西的李公佐，谈论妇女的操守品德，于是便叙述了汧国夫人的事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, I talked with Li Gongzuo of Shaanxi about women's moral character, and then described the story of Lady Zhenguo.

古文：公佐拊掌竦听，命予为传。
现代文：李公佐听完后，不住地拍手赞叹，让我为李娃作传。
English: After listening to Li Gongzao, he kept clapping his hands in admiration and asked me to write a biography of Li Wa.

古文：乃握管濡翰，疏而存之。
现代文：我于是拿起笔来蘸上墨汁，详细地写出来以便保存下来。
English: So I took up a pen and dipped it in ink and wrote it out in detail so that it could be preserved.

古文：时乙亥岁秋八月，太原白行简云。
现代文：时间是乙亥岁秋天八月份。
English: The time is from autumn to August in the Year of the Boar.

