古文：杜佑，字君卿，京兆万年人。
现代文：杜佑字君卿，京兆万年县人。
English: DuYuZiQunQing, a resident of JingZhao County for thousands of years.

古文：父希望，重然诺，所交游皆一时俊杰。
现代文：父亲杜希望，讲信用，一诺千金，他交往的人都是当世英才豪杰。
English: Father Du hoped, talked about trust, promised thousands of dollars, and the people he interacted with were contemporary heroes.

古文：为安陵令，都督宋庆礼表其异政。
现代文：任安陵县令，都督宋庆礼上表章向皇帝报告他的优异政绩。
English: As the governor of Anling County, the governor Song Qingli went to the emperor to report his outstanding achievements.

古文：坐小累去官。
现代文：犯了小错丢了官。
English: He made a small mistake and lost his position.

古文：开元中，交河公主嫁突骑施，诏希望为和亲判官。
现代文：开元年间，交河公主嫁给突骑施，朝廷任命希望为和亲使者。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, Princess Jiaohe was married to Zhu Jishi, and the imperial court appointed Hope to be the emissary of peace.

古文：信安郡王漪表署灵州别驾、关内道度支判官。
现代文：信安郡王漪上表章向朝廷举荐，安排他任灵州别驾、关内道支度判官。
English: Wang Qian of Xin'an County recommended Zhang Shang to the imperial court and arranged for him to be appointed as the judge of Lingshou Beiliao and Guanai Road Preparation.

古文：自代州都督召还京师，对边事，玄宗才之。
现代文：从代州都督任上召回京都，应答皇帝对边防事务的咨询，玄宗皇帝认为他有才能。
English: He was called back to Kyoto from his position as acting governor of the prefecture to answer the emperor's consultation on border defense affairs. Emperor Xuanzong thought he had talent.

古文：属吐蕃攻勃律，勃律乞归，右相李林甫方领陇西节度，故拜希望鄯州都督，知留后。
现代文：与吐蕃一道进攻勃律，勃律乞求归降。李林甫右丞相刚兼陇西节度使，所以任命希望为鄯州都督，执掌留后。
English: Together with Tubo, they attacked Bodu, and Bodu begged for surrender. Li Linfu, the right-hand man of the prime minister and the governor of Shaanxi Province, appointed Hope as the governor of Zhangzhou, and he remained in charge.

古文：驰传度陇，破乌莽众，斩千余级，进拔新城，振旅而还。
现代文：驿使传令，希望越过陇州，打败了乌莽的军队，斩了一千多颗首级，进兵攻占新城，整顿军队班师回来。
English: Zhai sent a command, hoping to cross Zhangzhou, defeated the reckless army, cut off more than a thousand heads, marched into the new city, and rectified the army.

古文：擢鸿胪卿。
现代文：提拔为鸿胪卿。
English: He was promoted to Hongyuqing.

古文：于是置镇西军，希望引师部分塞下，吐蕃惧，遗书求和。
现代文：这时设置镇西军，希望带领军队部署在边塞下，吐蕃害怕，送来求和书信。
English: At this time, the Western Zhen army was set up, hoping to lead the army to be deployed under the border dam, and the Tibetans were afraid and sent a letter asking for peace.

古文：希望报曰： 受和非臣下所得专。 
现代文：希望答复说 ：接受求和不是我当臣子能专断的。 
English: Hope replied, "As a courtier, I cannot arbitrarily accept a sum of money.

古文：虏悉众争坛泉，希望大小战数十，俘其大酋，至莫门，焚积蓄，卒城而还。
现代文：吐蕃全军争夺檀泉，希望军打了大小几十仗，俘虏了他们的大首领，进军至莫门，烧毁敌军屯积的粮草，摧毁城堡后回军。
English: The whole army of Tubo fought for the sand spring, the Hope Army fought dozens of battles, captured their great leader, marched to Momen, burned the grain and grass accumulated by the enemy army, destroyed the castle and returned to the army.

古文：授二子官。
现代文：朝廷给他的两儿子封了官。
English: The court appointed his two sons as officials.

古文：时军屡兴，府库虚寡，希望居数岁，刍粟金帛丰余。
现代文：当时战争经常发生，府库钱粮空虚，希望在那里经营几年，钱粮草料细丝织布富足有余。
English: At that time, wars were frequent, the treasury was empty of money and grain, and it was hoped to operate there for a few years, and there was more than enough money, grain and grass, and fine silk and woven cloth.

古文：宦者牛仙童行边，或劝希望结其驩，答曰： 以货籓身，吾不忍。 
现代文：宦官牛仙童巡视边塞，有人劝希望巴结他，讨他欢心。希望回答说： 用行贿保官位，我不忍做。 
English: The eunuch Niu Xiantong was inspecting the border fortress. Someone advised Hope to flatter him and make him happy. Hope replied, "I can't bear to bribe to secure my position."

古文：仙童还奏希望不职，下迁恒州刺史，徙西河。
现代文：仙童回朝报告皇帝说希望不称职，降职为恒州刺史，调到西河郡。
English: Xiantong reported back to the emperor that Hope was incompetent and was demoted to the post of Hengzhou historian and transferred to Xihe County.

古文：而仙童受诸将金事泄，抵死，畀金者皆得罪。
现代文：后来仙童收诸将领金银贿赂事泄露，判了死罪，给仙童金银行贿的人都判了罪。
English: Later, when it was leaked that Fairchild had bribed generals with gold and silver, he was sentenced to death, and the people who bribed Fairchild Gold Bank were also convicted.

古文：希望爱重文学，门下所引如崔颢等皆名重当时。
现代文：希望爱好重视文学，如崔颢等在当时很著名的一些诗人文学家都汇集在他的门下。
English: He placed great importance on literature, and poets and humanists who were well-known at the time, such as Cui Wei, gathered under his leadership.

古文：佑以廕补济南参军事、剡县丞。
现代文：杜佑因是功臣之子任命为济南参军事、剡县县丞。
English: Du You, the son of a meritorious subject, was appointed as a military officer of Jinan and the county magistrate of Jixian County.

古文：尝过润州刺史韦元甫，元甫以故人子待之，不加礼。
现代文：曾经拜访润州刺史韦元甫，元甫把他看作是老朋友的儿子来接待他，没有用常礼厚待他。
English: He once visited the Rongzhou Grand Prince Wei Yuanfu, who received him as the son of an old friend and did not treat him with courtesy.

古文：它日，元甫有疑狱不能决，试讯佑，佑为辨处，契要无不尽。
现代文：有一天，元甫有一疑难案件不能决断，就考一考杜佑，杜佑替他辨别真伪抓住关键，判断得没有不全面的。
English: One day, when Genpo couldn't decide on a difficult case, he put Du You to the test. Du You grasped the key to distinguishing truth from falsehood for him, and the judgment was not incomplete.

古文：元甫奇之，署司法参军，府徙浙西、淮南，表置幕府。
现代文：元甫认为他是奇才，安排他任司法参军。元甫后调任浙西、淮南节度使，都上表章举荐杜佑，安排在他的幕府任职。
English: Yuan Fu thought he was a genius and arranged for him to be appointed to the judiciary and join the army. After Yuan Fu was transferred to the West Zhejiang and Huainan Sect Envoys, they all recommended Du You and arranged for him to serve in his shogunate.

古文：入为工部郎中，充江淮青苗使，再迁容管经略使。
现代文：杜佑入朝任工部郎中，充任江淮青苗使，两次升为容管经略使。
English: Du You entered the imperial court as a junior member of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, and served as an envoy of Jianghuai young seedlings, and was twice promoted to a junior envoy of Rongguan.

古文：杨炎辅政，历金部郎中，为水陆转运使，改度支兼和籴使。
现代文：杨炎任宰相时，先后任金部郎中、水陆转运使，改任度支兼和籴使。
English: When Yang Yan was appointed prime minister, he successively held the posts of vice-minister of finance, vice-minister of land and water transportation, and vice-minister of military affairs.

古文：于是军兴馈漕，佑得剸决。
现代文：当时军队的粮饷靠漕运，杜佑能全权决断。
English: At that time, the army's grain supply relied on rowing transport, and Du Youneng had full authority to make decisions.

古文：以户部侍郎判度支。
现代文：以户部侍郎的官衔兼度支。
English: He rose to the rank of a chamberlain of the household department and also a tutelary official.

古文：建中初，河朔兵挐战，民困，赋无所出。
现代文：建中初年，河朔的军队长期作战，百姓穷困，赋税无法征收。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, the army of Hexuo fought for a long time, the people were poor, and taxes could not be levied.

古文：佑以为救敝莫若省用，省用则省官，乃上议曰：
现代文：杜佑认为挽救疲敝穷困的方法没有比得上节约财政支出的，节约财政支出就要裁减官员。
English: Du You believes that the method of saving the exhausted and impoverished is not comparable to the method of saving financial expenditure, and the method of saving financial expenditure is to reduce officials.

古文：汉光武建武中废县四百，吏率十署一；魏太和时分遣使者省吏员，正始时并郡县；晋太元省官七百；隋开皇废郡五百；贞观初省内官六百员。
现代文：于是上奏章给皇帝说： 汉光武帝建武年间，撤除了四百个县，官吏一概十人中选一人；三国时魏国太和年间分别派出使者减少官员，正始年间合并郡县；东晋孝武帝太元年间裁减了七百名官员；隋朝文帝开皇年间废除了五百个郡；本朝贞观初年裁减宫女、妃嫔、太监六百人。
English: Therefore, the Song of Songs to the emperor said: During the reign of Emperor Jianwu of the Han Dynasty, 400 counties were abolished, and one official was selected from every ten officials; during the reign of Emperor Wei of the Three Kingdoms, emissaries were sent to reduce officials, and counties were merged during the reign of Emperor Taizu; during the reign of Emperor Xiaowu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, 700 officials were reduced; during the reign of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, 500 counties were abolished; in the first year of Emperor Zhenguan of this dynasty, 600 concubines, eunuchs, and eunuchs were reduced.

古文：设官之本，以治众庶，故古者计人置吏，不肯虚设。
现代文：设立官员的根本目的，是治理百姓，所以古代都按人口设置官吏，不肯虚设。
English: The fundamental purpose of setting up officials is to govern the people, so in ancient times, officials were set up according to the population, and they refused to be set up in vain.

古文：自汉至唐，因征战艰难以省吏员，诚救弊之切也。
现代文：自汉朝到唐朝，因为战争国家财政困难原因而裁减官员，的确是挽救疲敝穷困的最合适的办法。
English: From the Han Dynasty to the Tang Dynasty, the reduction of officials due to the financial difficulties of the warring states was indeed the most appropriate way to save the exhausted and impoverished.

古文：昔咎繇作士，今刑部尚书、大理卿，则二咎繇也。垂作共工，今工部尚书、将作监，则二垂也。契作司徒，今司徒、户部尚书，则二契也。伯夷为秩宗，今礼部尚书、礼仪使，则二伯夷也。伯益为虞，今虞部郎中、都水使司，则二伯益也。
现代文：古代帝舜时，只有皋陶一人做狱官，现在刑部尚书、大理寺卿是两个皋陶；只有垂一人做工官，现在工部尚书、将作监相当于两个垂；只有契一人任司徒，现在有司徒、户部尚书相当于两个契；只有伯夷一人任礼官，现在礼部尚书、礼仪使相当于两个伯夷；只有伯益一人任治理山川河流的官，现在虞部郎中、都水使者，相当于两个伯益。
English: In the time of the ancient emperors, only Juntao was a prison officer, but now the Minister of Justice, Shang Shu, and the Lord of Dali Temple are two Juntao; only Zhuge was a work officer, but now the Minister of Industry, Shang Shu, and the Inspector General are equivalent to two Zhuge; only Ji was a scholar, but now there are scholars, and the Minister of Household, Shang Shu, is equivalent to two Ji; only Bo Yi was a etiquette official, but now the Minister of Etiquette, Shang Shu, and the Etiquette Enforcer are equivalent to two Bo Yi; only Bo Yi was an official who governed the mountains and rivers,

古文：伯冏为太仆，今太仆卿、驾部郎中、尚辇奉御、闲厩使，则四伯冏也。
现代文：周穆王时只伯礒一人任太仆，现在太仆卿、驾部郎中、尚辇奉御、闲厩使，相当于四个伯礒。
English: At the time of King Zhou Mu, only one hokkien was appointed as the eunuch. Now, there are four hokkien equivalent to the eunuch, the driver, the driver's son-in-law, the eunuch's son-in-law and the eunuch's son-in-law.

古文：古天子有六军，汉前后左右将军四人，今十二卫、神策八军，凡将军六十员。旧名不废，新资日加。且汉置别驾，随刺史巡察，犹今观察使之有副也。
现代文：古代天子有六军，汉朝设置前后左右四员将军，现在十二卫、神策八军、共设置了六十员将军，原有的官职没有废除，新的官职一天天增多，况且汉朝设置别驾的官职，是跟随刺史巡察的，像现在观察使有副职一样。
English: In ancient times, Tianzi had six armies, and the Han Dynasty set up four generals before and after, and now the 12 Guards and the Eight Armies of the Divine Policy have set up a total of sixty generals. The original official positions have not been abolished, and new official positions are increasing day by day. Moreover, the Han Dynasty set up a different official position, which is to follow the history of the inspection, just as the current observation has a secondary position.

古文：参军者，参其府军事，犹今节度判官也。
现代文：参军是在府衙参谋军事的，像今天节度使府的判官一样。
English: Joining the army is a military staff officer of the prefectural government, just like today's judge of the prefectural government.

古文：官名职务，直迁易不同尔，讵有事实哉？
现代文：官名职务只是名称变化而不同罢了，哪是实际有那么多官职呢？
English: Official titles and positions are just different names, so why are there so many official titles and positions?

古文：诚宜斟酌繁省。
现代文：的确应当斟酌繁省。
English: Indeed, it should be considered carefully.

古文：欲致治者先正名。
现代文：想达到天下太平者必须首先正名。
English: If you want to achieve world peace, you must first clear your name.

古文：神龙中，官纪荡然，有司大集选者，既无阙员，则置员外官二千人，自是以为常。
现代文：神龙年间，设置官职的法规被败坏了，有关衙门大规模召集人才做候补官，既没有缺员，又设置一千名员外官，从这以后成为常例。
English: During the reign of the Dragon King, the regulations for the establishment of government posts were corrupted. The relevant government summoned talents on a large scale to serve as alternate officials. There was no shortage of personnel, and a thousand foreign officials were set up. Since then, it has become a regular practice.

古文：当开元、天宝中，四方无虞，编户九百余万，帑藏丰溢，虽有浮费，不足为忧。
现代文：在开元、天宝年间，天下没有祸乱，在编户口九百多万，国家贮藏钱财的仓库都装满了，即使有浪费，也不会出大毛病。
English: During the Kaiyuan and Tianbao years, there was no calamity in the world. There were more than nine million registered accounts, and the warehouses where the state stored money and wealth were full. Even if there was waste, there would be no major problems.

古文：今黎苗凋瘵，天下户百三十万，陛下诏使者按比，才得三百万，比天宝三分之一，就中浮寄又五之二，出赋者已耗，而食之者如旧，安可不革？
现代文：现在百姓穷困贫弱，天下户口只一百三十万，陛下命令使者复查，只得三百万户，只天宝年间的三分之一，其中还有五分之二是浮寄户。出赋税的户数减少了，但领取俸禄的官员人数仍旧那么多，怎么能不改革呢？
English: At present, the people are poor and weak, with only 1.3 million household accounts in the world. His Majesty ordered the envoy to review the situation, and only three million households were found, only one-third of the number in the Tenpo era, of which two-fifths were floating households. The number of households paying taxes has decreased, but the number of officials receiving salaries is still so large. How can there not be reform?

古文：议者以天下尚有跋扈不廷，一省官吏，被罢者皆往托焉。
现代文： 议事官员认为天下还有跋扈不服从朝廷的，一裁撤官吏，被罢免的官吏都去投靠他。
English: The council officials believed that there were still many people in the world who disobeyed the imperial court. Once an official was dismissed, the dismissed officials all went to support him.

古文：此常情之说，类非至论。
现代文：这是按常情说的，像不是最高明的建议。
English: As is often the case, this may not be the best advice.

古文：且才者荐用，不才者何患其亡，又况顾姻戚家产哉！
现代文：况且有才艺的人荐用，没有才德的人哪担心他逃离呢？更何况顾及亲戚家产！
English: Moreover, if a talented person recommends you, why would a person without talent be worried about him fleeing? Not to mention taking into account the wealth of relatives!

古文：建武时公孙述、隗嚣未灭，太和、正始、太元时吴、蜀鼎立，开皇时陈尚割据，皆罗取俊乂，犹不虑失人以资敌。
现代文：建武年间公孙述、隗嚣没有消灭，太和、正始、太元时期吴国、蜀国鼎立，开皇年间陈国还割据江南，都招揽有才智的人才，还担心人才流失去资助了敌方。
English: During the Jianwu period, the insistence of Gongsun and Shu did not disappear. During the Tahe period, the Zheng He period, and the Taiyuan period, the states of Wu and Shu were established, and during the reign of Emperor Chen, the south of the Yangtze River was divided. All of them invited talented people, but they were also worried that the flow of talent would be lost to the enemy.

古文：今田悦辈繁刑暴赋，惟军是恤，遇士人如奴，固无范睢业秦、贾季强狄之患。
现代文：现在田悦一类人刑罚繁多、横征暴敛，只抚恤军人，待读书人像奴隶，本来没有像范睢帮助秦国建立功业、贾季帮助狄国强盛之类的忧虑。
English: Nowadays, people like Tian Yue are subject to a wide range of punishments, extortion is rampant, only military personnel are given pensions, and people who have to study are like slaves. Originally, there were no worries like Fan Yu helping Qin to build a career, or Jia Ji helping Di to become powerful.

古文：若以习久不可以遽改，且应权省别驾、参军、司马，州县额内官，约户置尉。
现代文：如果因为陋习沿袭已久不能立即改革，但应该暂且减裁别驾、参军、司马等官职，州县编制定额内的官吏，粗略计户设置尉。
English: If it is not possible to immediately reform because the bad habits have been inherited for a long time, it is necessary to temporarily reduce the official positions such as driving, joining the army, Sima, the officials within the state and county cadres, and the rough calculation of households.

古文：当罢者，有行义，在所以闻；不如状，举者当坐；不为人举者，任参常调。
现代文：应当在裁减之列的，如果有才德，由当地长官报告朝廷，如果所报不实，推荐的人应当惩罚裁撤。不被人推荐的，随便安置，也有什么害处呢？
English: If there is talent that should be reduced, the local magistrate should report it to the imperial court. If the report is false, the person who recommended it should be punished and removed. If it is not recommended, what is the harm of arbitrarily placing it?

古文：亦何患哉？如魏置柱国，当时宿德盛业者居之，贵宠第一；周、隋间授受已多，国家以为勋级，才得地三十顷耳。
现代文：像魏设置柱国的勋官，当时封给老年德高望重有大功的人，显贵宠爱第一，周、隋时期已给封了很多，国家作为功勋的等级，只封给三十顷田地。
English: For example, when the Wei Dynasty set up the pillar country, it was the nobles who were favored the most. The Zhou Dynasty and the Sui Dynasty had already given a lot of honors, but the state only gave thirty hectares of fields as a level of merit.

古文：又开府仪同三司、光禄大夫，亦官名，以其太多，回作阶级。随时立制，遇弊则变，何必因循惮改作耶？
现代文：又开府仪同三司、光禄大夫，也是官名，因为它太多，转作阶官等级，随时势订立条规，遇有毛病就改变，为什么要因循守旧怕改革呢？ 
English: In addition, the Kaifu Rite is the same as the Three Departments and the Guanglu Doctor, which are also official names. Because there are too many of them, they are converted into the ranks of officials, and rules and regulations are made at any time. If there is a problem, they are changed. Why are they afraid of reform because they are old-fashioned?

古文：议入，不省。
现代文：奏章送入，没有察看。
English: The score was sent in without being examined.

古文：卢杞当国，恶之，出为苏州刺史。
现代文：卢杞执掌国政，讨厌他，调出京都到苏州任刺史。
English: Lu Wei was in charge of national politics, hated him, and transferred him from Kyoto to Suzhou.

古文：前刺史母丧解，佑母在，辞不行，改饶州。
现代文：前一任的刺史因母亲死了服丧离任，杜佑的母亲健在，辞官不赴任，改任饶州刺史。
English: The previous Sashishi resigned due to the death of his mother. Duyou's mother was still alive, so he resigned from his post and became the Sashishi of Raozhou.

古文：俄迁岭南节度使。
现代文：不久升任岭南节度使。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Lingnan Festival Commissioner.

古文：佑为开大衢，疏析廛闬，以息火灾。
现代文：杜佑为他们修四通八达的大路，疏散街市住宅区的房屋，用来平息火灾。
English: Du You repaired all-access roads for them, evacuated houses in residential areas of the city, and used them to quell fires.

古文：硃厓黎民三世保险不宾，佑讨平之。
现代文：朱涯、黎州的百姓三个朝代守住险要不归附朝廷，杜佑征讨平定了这两个地方。
English: The people of Zhuya and Lizhou in the three dynasties had to defend themselves or be annexed by the imperial court, and the Duyou Conquest settled these two places.

古文：召拜尚书右丞。
现代文：召回朝封为尚书右丞。
English: He was recalled to the Imperial Court as Shoshu Ujo.

古文：俄出为淮南节度使，以母丧解，诏不许。
现代文：不久，出京任淮南节度使，因为母亲死服丧要求离任，皇帝下诏书不批准。
English: Soon after, Huainan's ceremonial envoy, who was sent to Beijing, requested to leave the post because his mother was dying, but the emperor did not approve the imperial decree.

古文：徐州节度使张建封卒，军乱，立其子愔，请于朝，帝不许，乃诏佑检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事，节度徐泗讨定之。
现代文：徐州节度使张建封病故，军队发生骚乱，要立他的儿子张忄音做节度使，向朝廷请示，皇帝没有批准，因此命令杜佑任检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事、徐泗节度使征讨平定骚乱。
English: When Zhang Jianfeng died of illness and the Xuzhou Festival caused a riot in the army, he wanted to appoint his son Zhang Yuyin as the festival's envoy. He asked the imperial court for permission, but the emperor did not approve. Therefore, he ordered Du Youren to inspect the school, Shang Shu Zuopu to shoot, Tong Zhong Shumen to lower the banner, and Xu Yu Festival to subdue the riot.

古文：佑具舠舰，遣属将孟准度淮击徐，不克，引还。
现代文：杜佑准备战船，派部下将领孟准渡过淮河攻击徐州，没有打胜，领兵退回。
English: Du You prepared a warship and sent his subordinate general, Meng Jun, to cross the Huai River to attack Xuzhou. He did not win, and led his troops back.

古文：佑于出师应变非所长，因固境不敢进，乃招授愔徐州节度使，析濠、泗二州隶淮南。
现代文：杜佑对于领兵打仗应付战场的变化没有长处，因此固守边界不敢进攻。因此朝廷任命张忄音为徐州节度使，分濠、泗两州隶属于淮南节度使。
English: Du You did not have the strength to lead the troops to fight and cope with the changes in the battlefield, so he stuck to the border and did not dare to attack. Therefore, the imperial court appointed Zhang Xuan as the Xuzhou Festival envoy, and the two states of Fengtu and Fengtu were subordinate to the Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：初，佑决雷陂以广灌溉，斥海濒弃地为田，积米至五十万斛，列营三十区，士马整饬，四邻畏之；然宽假僚佐，故南宫僔、李亚、郑元均至争权乱政，帝为佑斥去之。
现代文：当初，杜佑开挖雷陂用来扩大灌溉面积，开垦海边荒弃的土地为良田，积藏的米达到五十万斛，排列三十座兵营，兵马整齐，四邻都怕他。但姑息放纵部下官吏，所以南宫亻尊、李亚、郑元均到了争夺权力扰乱政局的地步，皇帝替杜佑罢免了他们的官职。
English: At first, Du You began to dig up the abandoned land by the sea to expand the irrigation area, and the abandoned land by the sea was turned into good fields. The accumulated rice reached five hundred thousand mu, thirty barracks were lined up, the soldiers and horses were neat, and the neighbors were afraid of him. However, the subordinate officials indulged in indulgence, so Nan Gongjunjun, Li Ya, and Zheng Yuan all reached the point of competing for power and disturbing the political situation. The emperor dismissed them from their official positions for Du You.

古文：十九年，拜检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：贞元十九年，杜佑被任为检校司空同中书门下平章事。
English: In the 19th year of the Zhengyuan era, Du You was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：德宗崩，诏摄冢宰。
现代文：德宗皇帝病故，朝廷命令他代理冢宰。
English: Emperor Dezong died of illness, and the imperial court ordered him to act as regent.

古文：进检校司徒，兼度支盐铁使。
现代文：升任检校司徒，兼度支盐铁使。
English: He was promoted to the post of school inspector, and at the same time supported the salt and iron workers.

古文：于是王叔文为副，佑既以宰相不亲事，叔文遂专权。
现代文：当时王叔文任副度支盐铁使，杜佑又因为王叔文是宰相，自己就不亲自处理本职事务，王叔文就专擅了度支盐铁使的权力。
English: At that time, Wang Shouwen was the deputy provincial salt and iron envoy, and Du You, because Wang Shouwen was the prime minister, did not personally deal with his duties, and Wang Shouwen was exclusively good at the power of the provincial salt and iron envoy.

古文：后叔文以母丧还第，佑有所按决，郎中陈谏请须叔文，佑曰： 使不可专耶？ 
现代文：后来王叔文因母亲病亡守丧回家，杜佑才有所察觉，郎中陈谏说须请示王叔文，杜佑说： 正使不能决断处理吗？ 
English: Later, when Wang Shouwen went home to mourn his mother's death due to illness, Du You only became aware of it. His brother-in-law Chen Yao said that Wang Shouwen should be consulted. Du You said: Is it because you can't deal with it decisively?

古文：乃出谏为河中少尹。
现代文：于是把陈谏调出任河中郡少尹。
English: As a result, Chen Hao was transferred to the post of Shao Yin of Hechong County.

古文：叔文欲摇东宫，冀佑为助，佑不应，乃谋逐之，未决而败。
现代文：王叔文想废除太子，希望杜佑帮忙，杜佑没有答应，因此阴谋赶走他，还没有决定王叔文就失败了。
English: Wang Shouwen wanted to abolish the crown prince and hoped that Duyou would help. Duyou did not agree, so the plot to drive him away failed before Wang Shouwen was decided.

古文：佑更荐李巽以自副。
现代文：杜佑又荐李巽作为自己的副职。
English: Du You also recommended Li Wei as his deputy.

古文：宪宗在谅暗，复摄冢宰，尽让度支盐铁于巽。
现代文：宪宗守丧，杜佑又代理冢宰，把度支盐铁使全部让给李巽。
English: Kenzong kept the funeral, Du You also acted as the steward, and all the salt and iron resources were transferred to Li Xuan.

古文：始，度支啬，用度多，署吏权摄百司，繁而不纲；佑以营缮还将作，木炭归司农，湅染还少府，职务简修。
现代文：当初，度支府节约费用，安排许多官吏临时代替各衙门的工作，繁杂没有条理，杜佑把营造修缮的事务交还匠作监，木炭事务归还司农卿，煮丝染色归还少府，职务简明。
English: At the beginning, the Du Prefecture saved costs and arranged for many officials to work temporarily in place of each gate. The work was complicated and disorganized. Du You returned the construction and repair work to the craftsmen as supervisors, the charcoal affairs to the Secretary of Agriculture, and the silk dyeing to the Minor Prefecture. The duties were concise.

古文：明年，拜司徒，封岐国公。
现代文：第二年，任为司徒、封为岐国公。
English: In the following year, he was appointed to the post of governor and given the title of governor of Gifu Province.

古文：党项阴导吐蕃为乱，诸将邀功，请讨之。佑以为无良边臣，有为而叛，即上疏曰：昔周宣中兴，猃狁为害，追之太原，及境而止，不欲弊中国，怒远夷也。
现代文：党项暗中联络吐蕃发动战乱，诸将领求取战功，请求征讨他们，杜佑认为没有优秀的守边防的臣子，他们有借口叛乱，就上奏疏说：古代周宣王中兴，猃狁发动战争，周宣王追击到太原，到边境就停止了，不想因为战争使国家疲敝，触怒疏远夷族。
English: Du You believed that there was no superior vassal guarding the border, and they had an excuse to rebel, so he sent a message to Shou saying: In ancient times, Zhou Xuan Wang Zhongxing,  started a war, Zhou Xuan Wang chased the war to Taiyuan, and stopped at the border. He did not want to exhaust the country because of the war and alienate the Yi people.

古文：秦恃兵力，北拒匈奴，西逐诸羌，结怨阶乱，实生谪戍。
现代文：秦朝仗恃兵力强大，向北抗击匈奴，向西赶走羌族各部落，结下仇怨的根本原因，实在是用流放的罪人守边。
English: The Qin Dynasty had a strong military force. They fought against the Xiongnu in the north and drove away the Yi tribes in the west. The root cause of the enmity was the use of exiled criminals to defend the border.

古文：盖圣王之治天下，惟欲绥静生人，西至于流沙，东渐于海，在北与南，止存声教，岂疲内而事外耶？
现代文：圣王治理天下，只想安定百姓，西部到沙漠，东部近大海，在北方与南方，只存声威和教化，哪能使国内疲弱和屈服外族呢？
English: The holy king governs the world and only wants to stabilize the people. The west is a desert, the east is near the sea, and in the north and south, there is only prestige and indoctrination. Who can make the country weak and give in to foreigners?

古文：昔冯奉世矫诏斩莎车王，传首京师，威震西域，宣帝议加爵土，萧望之独谓矫制违命，虽有功不可为法，恐后奉使者为国家生事夷狄。
现代文：古代冯奉世假传皇帝命令杀了莎车王，把首级送到京城，宣帝讨论，准备给他赐爵位，封土地，只有肖望之一人说假传皇帝命令违犯法规，虽然有功不能效法，怕后来出使的人替国家在夷族狄族挑起事端。
English: In ancient times, Feng Fengshi, the false emperor, ordered to kill the king of Yarkand, and sent his head to Beijing to discuss the proclamation of the emperor, and prepared to give him a knighthood and land. Only one of Xiao Wang said that the false emperor's order violated the laws and regulations, although it was meritorious, it could not be imitated, for fear that the person sent later would stir up trouble for the country in the Di ethnic group.

古文：比突厥默啜寇害中国，开元初，郝灵佺捕斩之，自谓功莫与二，宋璟虑边臣由此邀功，但授郎将而已，繇是讫开元之盛，不复议边，中国遂安。
现代文：等突厥默啜侵犯内地，开元初年，郝灵亻全捉住他杀了，自认为功劳第一，宋瞡担心守边塞的臣子因此求取功劳，只封给郝灵亻全郎将罢了，由于这时到开元盛世，不再讨论边境事务，大唐就安宁了。
English: When the Turks silently invaded the inland, in the first year of the first millennium, Hailing Quan captured and killed him. He considered merit to be the first. Song Hui was worried that the vassals guarding the border fortress would seek credit for this, so he only gave Hailing Quan to Hailing Quan. Since border affairs would no longer be discussed in the golden age of the first millennium, the Great Tang Dynasty would be peaceful.

古文：此成败鉴戒之不远也。
现代文：这成功和失败的鉴戒离现在并不远。
English: That distinction between success and failure is not far away.

古文：党项小蕃，与中国杂处，间者边将侵刻，利其善马子女，敛求繇役，遂致叛亡，与北狄西戎相诱盗边。
现代文：党项是小藩国，与大唐的居民混杂居住，有时边塞的将领以掠夺他们的良马妻子儿女为利，征收苛捐杂税，强征徭役，就导致他们叛逃，与北方的狄族和西部的吐蕃相互勾结侵犯边塞。
English: Sometimes the border fortress generals took advantage of the plunder of their good horses, wives and children, levied heavy taxes and levied forced labor, which led to their defection, and colluded with the Di people in the north and the Tubo people in the west to invade the border fortress.

古文：《传》曰： 远人不服，则修文德以来之。 
现代文：传说 ：远方的人不服，就推广文德让他来归附。 
English: Legend: People from far away were not satisfied, so they promoted Wenda to make him return.

古文：管仲有言： 国家无使勇猛者为边境。 
现代文：管仲说 ：国家不要派勇猛的人守边境。 
English: Guanzhong said: The country should not send brave people to guard the border.

古文：此诚圣哲识微知著之略也。
现代文：这的确是圣哲见到细微的事物而知道事物的实质和发展趋势的谋略呀。
English: This is indeed the strategy of sages to see the subtleties of things and know the essence and development trend of things.

古文：今戎丑方强，边备未实，诚宜慎择良将，使之完辑，禁绝诛求，示以信诚，来则惩御，去则谨备。
现代文：现在戎族正强大，边防不充实，的确应该谨慎地选择优秀将领，使边塞坚固安定。禁绝诛杀求功，向对方显示诚心和信用，来侵犯就惩罚，离去就谨慎地防卫。
English: Now that the armed forces are strong and the border defense is not sufficient, it is indeed necessary to carefully select excellent generals to make the border fortress strong and stable. Forbid fighting and seeking merits, show sincerity and trust to the other side, punish when encroaching, and defend cautiously when leaving.

古文：彼当怀柔，革其奸谋。
现代文：对他们应当用友好的态度笼络，去掉他们的奸谋。
English: They should be wooed with a friendly attitude and their evil schemes should be eliminated.

古文：何必亟兴师役，坐取劳费哉？
现代文：何必屡次发动军队作战，坐取劳累和浪费钱粮呢？
English: Why do we have to repeatedly send troops into battle, toil and waste money and grain?

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝赞赏并采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：岁余，乞致仕，不听，诏三五日一入中书，平章政事。
现代文：过了一年多，请求退休，皇帝不批准，命令他只需三五天到中书省去一次，主持平章政事。
English: After more than a year, he asked to retire, but the emperor did not approve, and ordered him to only go to the capital once every three to five days to preside over the government affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：佑每进见，天子尊礼之，官而不名。
现代文：杜佑每次进见皇帝，皇帝都很尊敬他，以礼相待，称他的官职而不叫他的名字。
English: Every time Du You went to see the emperor, the emperor respected him, treated him with courtesy, and referred to his official position without calling him by name.

古文：后数年，固乞骸骨，帝不得已，许之。
现代文：后来几年，坚决请求退休回乡，皇帝不得已，同意了，仍封为光禄大夫，在太子太保的官职上退休。
English: A few years later, he firmly requested to retire and return to his hometown. The emperor reluctantly agreed. He was still appointed as the Guanglu doctor and retired from the post of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：仍拜光禄大夫、守太保致仕，俾朝朔望，遣中人锡予备厚。元和七年卒，年七十八，册赠太傅，谥曰安简。
现代文：让他在每月十五日、三十日会朝，派宦官赐给厚礼。元和七年，病故，享年七十八岁，赠册追封为太傅，谥号 安简 。
English: Let him hold court on the 15th and 30th of each month, and send eunuchs to give gifts. Yuan and seven years old, died of illness at the age of 78, posthumously awarded the title of Taifu, posthumously named Anjian.

古文：佑资嗜学，虽贵犹夜分读书。
现代文：杜佑天性酷爱读书，即使显贵了也读书到深夜。
English: Du You had a natural affinity for reading, and even when he was a high-ranking official, he would read late into the night.

古文：先是，刘秩摭百家，侔周六官法，为《政典》三十五篇，房琯称才过刘向。
现代文：这以前，刘秩摘取百家，求取周朝六官法，写《政典》五十三篇，房称赞他才学超过了刘向。
English: Prior to this, Liu Zicheng had selected hundreds of schools, sought the best of the Zhou Dynasty's six official codes, and written fifty-three "Political Codes." Fang praised him for learning more than Liu Xiang.

古文：佑以为未尽，因广其阙，参益新礼，为二百篇，自号《通典》，奏之，优诏嘉美，儒者服其书约而详。
现代文：杜佑认为他不全面，因而补充他的缺漏，增加新的礼制，写了二百篇，自己给这著作命名为《通典》，上奏皇帝，皇帝下诏书大加赞美，儒家学者佩服这书语言简洁，内容丰富。
English: Du You thought it was incomplete, so he filled in the gaps, added a new etiquette, and wrote two hundred articles. He named the work "Tongguan" (通典). The emperor was the first to read it, and the emperor's edict was highly praised. Confucian scholars admired the book for its concise language and rich content.

古文：为人平易逊顺，与物不违忤，人皆爱重之，方汉胡广，然练达文采不及也。
现代文：杜佑为人平易近人谦逊和顺，与事物不相违背，人们都尊敬爱戴他，比汉朝的胡广，但精练通畅文采比不上。
English: Du You is an approachable, humble and easy-going person, and does not contradict things. People respect and love him. He is better than Hu Guang of the Han Dynasty, but he is not as refined and fluent.

古文：硃坡樊川，颇治亭观林苾，凿山股泉，与宾客置酒为乐。
现代文：在朱坡樊川，修治了很多亭台楼阁和草木，凿山引了一股泉水，与宾客在此饮酒奏乐。
English: In Zhupo Luchuan, many pavilions and trees were repaired, and a spring water was drawn from the mountain, and guests drank and played music here.

古文：子弟皆奉朝请，贵盛为一时冠。
现代文：后辈都每天早晨向他请安，显贵昌盛是当时第一。
English: The younger generation greeted him every morning, and the eminent Chang Sheng was the first at that time.

古文：卒，赠礼部尚书。从郁，元和初为左补阙，崔群等以宰相子为嫌，再徙秘书丞。
现代文：天性在吏职方面精通，治理政事不明察，多次主管赋税，视对百姓有利还是有害增加或减少赋税数目。
English: It is natural to be proficient in official duties, but it is not prudent to manage political affairs. Many times, the person in charge of taxation will increase or decrease the number of taxes according to whether it is beneficial or harmful to the people.

古文：终驾部员外郎。子牧。悰，字永裕，以门廕三迁太子司议郎。
现代文：杜式方的儿名叫悰，字永裕，因为是功臣之后经三次提拔任太子司议郎。
English: Du Shikifang's son's name was Zou, and his alias was Yongyu, because he was a meritorious subject who was promoted three times to the position of Prince Regent.

古文：权德舆为相，其婿翰林学士独孤郁以嫌自白。
现代文：权德舆任宰相，他的女婿、翰林学士独孤郁因为嫌名犯忌自己主动禀报皇帝。
English: His son-in-law, the scholar Hanlin, was the only one who did not report to the emperor because he was suspected of committing a crime.

古文：宪宗见郁文雅，叹曰： 德舆有婿乃尔！ 
现代文：宪宗看见独孤郁文雅，感叹地说： 德舆竟有这样好女婿！ 
English: When Kenzong saw that Duolou was so refined and elegant, he said with a sigh, "Deyu actually has such a good son-in-law!"

古文：时岐阳公主，帝爱女。
现代文：当时岐阳公主是皇帝最疼爱的女儿。
English: At that time, Princess Qiyang was the emperor's favorite daughter.

古文：旧制，选多戚里将家，帝始诏宰相李吉甫择大臣子，皆辞疾，唯悰以选召见麟德殿。
现代文：按照老法规，大多选择亲戚将相家的男子做女婿。皇帝命令宰相李吉甫挑选大臣的儿子，都推辞有毛病，不能入选，只有杜悰入选了，在麟德殿召见。
English: According to the old regulations, most relatives choose a man from the same family to be their son-in-law. The emperor ordered the prime minister Li Jifu to select the minister's son, but they all refused to be selected because they had defects. Only Du Xuan was selected and was summoned to Lin De Dian.

古文：礼成，授殿中少监、驸马都尉。
现代文：婚礼后，任杜悰为殿中少监、驸马都尉。
English: After the wedding, Du Rong was appointed junior superintendent of the palace and captain of the imperial horse.

古文：太和初，由澧州刺史召为京兆尹，迁凤翔忠武节度使。
现代文：太和初年，由沣州刺史召回京城任京兆尹，升为凤翔忠武节度使。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, he was called back to Beijing from Zhangzhou to serve as Jing Zhaoyun, and was promoted to Feng Xiang Zhongwu Jiedu Envoy.

古文：入为工部尚书，判度支。
现代文：回朝任工部尚书，兼任度支。
English: He returned to the imperial court as the secretary of the Ministry of Works, and also served as the provincial secretary.

古文：会公主薨，悰久不谢，文宗怪之。
现代文：碰到公主逝世，杜悰长时间不上朝谢恩。文宗皇帝责怪他。
English: When the princess died, Du Juan did not thank the emperor for a long time. Emperor Wenzong blamed him.

古文：户部侍郎李珏曰： 比驸马都尉皆为公主服斩衰三年，故悰不得谢。 
现代文：户部侍郎李珏说 ：按规定驸马都尉要替公主穿斩衰的丧服三年，所以杜悰不能上朝谢恩。 
English: Household servant Li Yan said, "According to regulations, the Captain of the Horse has to wear the mourning clothes for the princess for three years, so Du Yu can't go to the palace to thank her."

古文：帝矍然，始诏杖而期，著于令。
现代文：皇帝一下子明白过来，才命令杜悰持杖守一年丧，写在法令里。
English: The emperor suddenly understood, and ordered Du Xuan to hold a one-year mourning, which was written in the decree.

古文：会昌初，为淮南节度使。
现代文：会昌初年，杜悰任淮南节度使，武宗皇帝命令扬州监军选取十七名教坊的歌舞女伎进献宫中。
English: In the first year of Huichang, Du Xuan was appointed as the envoy of Huainan Festival, and Emperor Wuzong ordered the Yangzhou Supervision Army to select seventeen female dancers from the school to be presented to the palace.

古文：武宗诏扬州监军取倡家女十七人进禁中，监军请悰同选，又欲阅良家有姿相者，悰曰： 吾不奉诏而辄与，罪也。 监军怒，表于帝。
现代文：监军请杜悰一起选取，又想察看挑选清白人家的美女，杜悰说 ：我没有奉皇帝命令就参与这件事，是犯罪。 监军发怒，上表章向皇帝打小报告。
English: The overseer of the army asked Du Qian to select them together, and also wanted to inspect the beautiful women who had selected the white people. Du Qian said: I did not participate in this matter by order of the emperor, it is a crime. The overseer of the army was angry and made a small report to the emperor.

古文：帝以悰有大臣体，乃诏罢所进伎，有意倚悰为相矣。
现代文：皇帝认为杜悰有大臣的风度，就下令停止进献歌舞女伎，并有依靠杜悰当宰相的打算。
English: The emperor thought that Du Qian had the demeanor of a minister, so he ordered to stop the promotion of Kabuki, and had the intention to rely on Du Qian as the prime minister.

古文：逾年，召拜检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事，仍判度支。
现代文：过了一年，召回朝任检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事，仍兼任度支。
English: A year later, he was recalled to the imperial court to serve as the inspector of the school, and he still served as the governor.

古文：刘稹平，进左仆射、兼门下侍郎。
现代文：刘稹叛乱平定后，升为左仆射，兼门下侍郎。
English: After Liu Bei's rebellion was quelled, he was promoted to the position of Zuoying, and also served as a subordinate attendant.

古文：未几，以本官罢，出为剑南东川节度使，徙西川，复镇淮南。
现代文：不久罢去本官，调出京城任剑南东川节度使，调西川节度使，又任淮南节度使。
English: He was soon dismissed and transferred out of Beijing to serve as the Jiannan Dongchuan Festival Envoy, the Xichuan Festival Envoy, and the Huainan Festival Envoy.

古文：时方旱，道路流亡藉藉，民至漉漕渠遗米自给，呼为 圣米 ，取陂泽茭蒲实皆尽，悰更表以为祥。
现代文：当时正发旱灾，道路上满是逃荒的人，百姓到了滤取河渠里漕运散落的米充饥的地步，百姓还把它叫作 圣米 。池塘沼泽里的菱角香蒲草被百姓吃完了，杜悰却上表朝廷说年成好，很吉利。
English: At that time, there was a drought, the roads were full of people fleeing the famine, and the people had reached the point of filtering the rice that had been rowed and scattered in the canals to satisfy their hunger. The people also called it holy rice. The people had finished eating the cattail in the pond marsh, but the cuckoo told the court that the year was good and very lucky.

古文：狱囚积数百千人，而荒湎宴适不能事。罢，兼太子太傅，分司东都。
现代文：监狱里囚犯累计几百上千人，杜悰却荒淫沉湎饮酒享乐不处理政事，被罢免了淮南节度使职务，兼任太子太傅，在东都设立分衙门。
English: There were hundreds of thousands of prisoners in the prison, but Du Juan did not deal with political affairs, he was dismissed from the post of Huainan Festival Commissioner, concurrently served as the Crown Prince, and set up a dividing gate in Dongdu.

古文：逾岁，起为留守，复节度剑南西川。
现代文：过了一年，起用为东都留守，又任剑南西川节度使。
English: A year later, he was appointed as the representative of Dongdu, and also as the representative of Jian'nan and Xichuan.

古文：召为右仆射，判度支，进兼门下侍郎同平章事。
现代文：召回朝任右仆射，兼任度支，升兼门下侍郎同平章事。
English: He was recalled to the court as the right-hand retainer of the Emperor, concurrently serving as the second-in-command, and was promoted to the position of a subordinate attendant of the Emperor.

古文：始，宣宗世，夔王以下五王处大明宫内院，而郓王居十六宅。
现代文：当初，在宣宗朝，夔王以下五个王住在大明宫内院，但郓王住十六间屋。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, five emperors lived in the inner courtyard of the Daming Palace, but Emperor Xuan lived in sixteen rooms.

古文：帝大渐，枢密使王归长、马公儒等以遗诏立夔王，而左军中尉王宗实等入殿中，以为归长等矫诏，乃迎郓王立之，是为懿宗。
现代文：皇帝病危，枢密使王归长、马公儒等人根据皇帝遗诏立夔王当皇帝，但左军中尉王宗实等人进宫殿里，认为归长等人是假传皇帝遗诏，于是迎接郓王立为皇帝，这就是懿宗。
English: The emperor was gravely ill, and Wang Guichang, Ma Gongru and others, who had been sent by the emperor's privy council, proclaimed him emperor in accordance with the emperor's will. However, Wang Zongshi, a lieutenant of the Left Army, and others entered the palace and thought that Guichang and others were falsifying the emperor's will, so they greeted Wang Guichang as emperor, which was Emperor Xizong.

古文：久之，遣枢密使杨庆诣中书，独揖悰，它宰相毕諴、杜审权、蒋伸不敢进，乃授悰中人请帝监国奏，因谕悰劾大臣名不在者抵罪。悰遽封授使者复命，谓庆曰： 上践祚未久，君等秉权，以爱憎杀大臣，公属祸无日矣。 
现代文：过了好久，派枢密使杨庆到中书省，只对杜悰拱手行礼，其他宰相毕诚、杜审权、蒋伸不敢进见，于是把宦官写的请太子代掌国政奏章交给杜悰，并且命令杜悰弹劾没有在奏章上签名的大臣治罪，杜悰立即封牢奏章交给使者回复命令，对杨庆说： 皇帝即位不久，您们掌权，以自己的爱憎杀大臣，您们的灾祸不用多少日子就会来到了。 
English: After a long time, he sent a confidential envoy to Yang Qing to Zhongshuo, and only bowed to Du Kun. The other prime ministers Bi Cheng, Du Xuanquan, and Jiang Sheng did not dare to see him. So he gave Du Kun the eunuch's eulogy to invite the prince to take charge of the country, and ordered Du Kun to impeach the minister who did not sign the eulogy. Du Kun immediately sealed the eulogy and gave it to the envoy to reply to the order. He said to Yang Qing: The emperor will soon ascend to the throne, you will take power, kill the minister with your own love and hate, and your

古文：庆色沮去，帝怒亦释，大臣遂安。
现代文：杨庆沮丧的离去，皇帝的怒气也消了，大臣于是都安下心来。
English: Yang Qing left dejected, the emperor's anger also disappeared, and the minister then calmed down.

古文：未几，册拜司空，封邠国公，以检校司徒为凤翔、荆南节度使，加兼太傅。
现代文：不久，册封为司徒，封为国公，以检校司徒任凤翔、荆南节度使，加兼太傅。
English: Not long after, he was canonized as a scholar and made a prince of the country, and was appointed as the inspector of the school, Fengxiang, Jingnan, and Zhuang, as well as Taifu.

古文：会黔南观察使秦匡谋讨蛮，兵败，奔于悰，悰囚之，劾不能伏节，有诏斩之。
现代文：碰到黔南观察使秦匡谋征讨蛮族打了败仗，奔逃到杜悰处，杜悰把他关押起来，弹劾他不能殉节而死，朝廷命令处死他。
English: When he came across the southern part of Hunan, the observation caused Qin Kuang, who was trying to recruit barbarians, to lose the battle and run away to Du Juan. Du Juan detained him, impeached him for not being able to die a martyr's death, and the court ordered him to be executed.

古文：悰不意其死，骇愕得疾卒，年八十，赠太师。
现代文：杜悰没有想到他会获死罪，因惊愕得病死去，享年八十岁，追封为太师。
English: Du Xuan did not expect that he would be sentenced to death. He died of shock and illness at the age of 80 and was posthumously named Grand Master.

古文：葬日，诏宰相百官临奠。
现代文：下葬的那天，皇帝命宰相百官去奠祭。
English: On the day of the burial, the emperor ordered the prime minister and hundreds of officials to go to the sacrificial offering.

古文：悰于大议论往往有所合，然才不周用。
现代文：杜悰对大道理常常有一致看法，但才能不全用。
English: Cuckoos often have a unified view of the great truth, but they can't use it all.

古文：虽出入将相，而厚自奉养，未尝荐进幽隐，佑之素风衰焉，故时号 秃角犀 。
现代文：虽然在朝任宰相、出朝当将帅，但自己会享乐，不曾向朝廷推荐选拔隐居的贤才，败坏了杜佑纯朴洁白的遗风，所以当时号称 秃角犀 。
English: Although he served as prime minister in the imperial court and as a general in the imperial court, he would enjoy himself. He did not recommend to the imperial court the selection of hermit sages, which corrupted Du You's pure and simple style. Therefore, he was known as the "bald horned rhinoceros" at that time.

古文：子裔休，懿宗时历翰林学士、给事中，坐事贬端州司马。
现代文：他的儿子叫裔休，懿宗时历任翰林学士、给事中。犯罪降职任端州司马。
English: His son is called Zi Xiu. He was a scholar of Hanlin and a middle-ranking official at the time of Zong Zong. He was demoted to the position of a provincial magistrate for a crime.

古文：弟孺休，字休之。
现代文：裔休的弟弟叫孺休，字休之。
English: The younger brother of the descendant of Shu is called Shu Shu, and his name is Shu.

古文：累擢给事中。
现代文：经多次提拔官至给事中。
English: After several promotions, he is now in the middle of his career.

古文：大顺初，钱镠遣弟銶率兵击徐约于苏州，破之，以海昌都将沈粲行刺史事，而昭宗更命孺休为之，以粲为制置指挥使。
现代文：大顺初年，钱派弟弟钱钅求统帅士兵到苏州进攻徐约，打败他，派海昌都将沈粲代理刺史，但昭宗又命孺休任刺史，任沈粲为制置指挥使。
English: In the first year of Dashun, Qian sent his younger brother Qian Yu to Suzhou to ask the commander-in-chief of the soldiers to attack Xu You and defeat him. He sent Haichang to appoint Shen Yu as the deputy commander, but Zhaozong ordered him to resign from the post of commander and appointed Shen Yu as the commander.

古文：镠不悦，密遣粲害焉。
现代文：钱不高兴，秘密地派沈粲杀害孺休。
English: Qian was not happy, and secretly sent Shen Tong to kill Yan Xiu.

古文：始，孺休见攻也，曰： 勿杀我，当与尔金。 
现代文：当初孺休被攻击，说： 不要杀我，我会给你金子。 
English: When he was attacked, he said, "Don't kill me, I'll give you gold."

古文：粲曰： 杀尔，金焉往？ 
现代文：沈粲说： 杀了你，金子还会跑了？ 
English: Shen Yao said, "If I kill you, will the gold run away?"

古文：与兄述休同死。
现代文：与哥哥述休同时被杀死。
English: He was killed at the same time as his brother, Sushu.

古文：悰弟慆。
现代文：杜悰的弟弟叫杜慆。
English: Cuckoo's younger brother is called Cuckoo.

古文：慆，咸通中为泗州刺史。
现代文：杜慆，咸通年间任泗州刺史。
English: Du Qian, during the reign of Hamdang, served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：会庞勋反，围城，处士辛谠自广陵来见慆，劝出家属，独以身守。
现代文：恰逢庞勋反叛，围攻泗州城。一位不在朝做官的士人辛谠自广陵来见杜慆，劝他送家属出城，只自己留下守城。
English: It coincided with Pang Xun's rebellion and the siege of Zhangzhou City. A non-government official, Xin Xuan, came from Guangling to see Du Xuan and persuaded him to send his family members out of the city, leaving only himself to defend the city.

古文：慆曰： 吾出百口求生，众心摇矣，不如与将士生死共之。 
现代文：杜慆说： 我送家里一百口人出城求生，军心就动摇了，不如同将士同生共死。 
English: Du Juan said, "I sent a hundred members of my family out of the city to survive, and the morale of the army was shaken. It is better to live and die together as soldiers."

古文：众闻皆泣下。
现代文：将士们听了都感动得哭了。
English: When the generals heard this, they were moved to tears.

古文：慆之闻难，完濬城隍，阅器械无不具。
现代文：杜慆听到危难将到来，加高加固城墙，挖深护城河，察看作战器械，无微不至。
English: When the cuckoo heard that danger was coming, he raised and strengthened the city walls, dug a deep moat, and inspected the war equipment.

古文：贼将李圆易慆，驰勇士百人欲入封府库，慆为好言厚礼迎劳，贼不虞忄舀之谋也。
现代文：叛军将领李圆轻视杜慆，命令百名勇士骑马冲入城里欲封府库，杜慆用美言厚礼迎接慰劳他们。叛军不担心杜慆谋算他们。
English: The rebel general Li Yuan despised Du Juan and ordered a hundred warriors to ride into the city on horseback to seize the government treasury. Du Juan greeted and consoled them with kind words and gifts. The rebels were not worried about Du Juan plotting against them.

古文：明日，伏甲士三百，宴球场，贼皆歼焉。
现代文：第二天，埋伏三百名穿铠甲的士兵，在场设宴招待叛军，伏兵全部消灭了他们。
English: The next day, three hundred armored soldiers ambushed the rebels with a banquet. The ambushers killed them all.

古文：圆怒，傅城战，慆杀数百人，圆退壁城西。
现代文：李圆发怒，逼近城墙作战。杜慆杀死叛军几百人。李圆退守城西的营垒。
English: Li Yuan got angry and approached the city wall to fight. Du Juan killed several hundred rebels. Li Yuan retreated to defend the camp in the west of the city.

古文：勋闻，益其兵，而以书射城中促降。
现代文：庞勋听到战况，增加李圆的兵力，并且把书射进城中逼迫杜慆投降。
English: Pang Hun heard about the war, increased Li Yuan's forces, and forced Du Zuo to surrender by shooting books into the city.

古文：会夜，慆击鼓乘城大呼，圆气夺，奔还徐州。
现代文：正巧天黑，杜慆击鼓登城大呼，李圆锐气丧失，跑回徐州。
English: It just so happened that it was dark, the cuckoos were beating their drums and shouting in the city. Li Yuan lost his spirit and ran back to Xuzhou.

古文：未几，贼焚淮口，昼夜战不息，谠乃请救于戍将郭厚本，贼解去。
现代文：不久，叛军焚毁淮口，昼夜攻打不停，辛谠于是向这一带的守将郭厚本请求救援，叛军解围退去。
English: Soon after, the rebels set fire to Huaikou and attacked it day and night, so Xinlu asked Guo Houben, the military commander of this area, for help, and the rebels withdrew from the siege.

古文：浙西节度使杜审权遣将以兵千人来援，反为圆军所包，一军尽没。
现代文：浙西节度使杜审权派遣将领带一千士兵支援，反而被李圆包围，全军都战死了。
English: At the Western Zhejiang Festival, Du Xianquan sent a general with a thousand soldiers to support him, but he was surrounded by Li Yuan, and the entire army died in the battle.

古文：慆使人间道走京师，诏戴可师以沙陀、吐浑兵二万招讨。
现代文：杜慆派人秘密走小路跑向京城求救，皇帝命令戴可师率领沙陀、吐浑兵二万人征讨庞勋。
English: Du Qian sent a person to secretly take a back road and run to the capital to ask for help. The emperor ordered the Dai Ke Division, led by Shado, to recruit 20,000 soldiers from the Tu Hun to fight against Pang Xun.

古文：淮南节度使令狐綯遣牙将李湘屯淮口，与郭厚本合，为圆所败，湘等并没，于是援绝。
现代文：淮南节度使令狐派牙将李湘驻扎淮口，与郭厚本会合，被李圆打败了，李湘等人战死，因此救兵断绝。
English: Huainan Festival made Ling Fu send Fang Tong to station Li Xiang in Huai Kou and meet with Guo Houben. Li Yuan defeated Li Xiang and others, and Li Xiang and others were killed in battle, so the rescue was cut off.

古文：贼乃以铁锁绝淮流，梯冲乘城。
现代文：叛军用铁锁链拦断淮河，搭梯向城上冲锋登城。
English: The rebels cut off the Huaihe River with iron chains and ladders and stormed the city.

古文：粮尽，为薄饘以给。
现代文：城中粮食完了，煮稀粥充饥。
English: The grain in the city is finished, so they cook thin gruel to satisfy their hunger.

古文：懿宗遣使加慆检校右散骑常侍，勉以坚守。
现代文：懿宗派使者加封杜慆为检校右散骑常侍，勉励他坚守城池。
English: The emissary of the Jie sect sealed Du Xi as the right-hand rider of the inspection, and encouraged him to stick to the city.

古文：勋遣圆入城见慆约降，慆怒杀之。
现代文：庞勋派李圆进城见杜慆，约他投降，杜慆愤怒地杀死了李圆。
English: Pang Hun sent Li Yuan into the city to see Du Juan and asked him to surrender. Du Juan killed Li Yuan in anger.

古文：勋复遗之书，答书言安禄山、硃泚等终底覆灭者，以阴携其党。
现代文：庞勋又送信招降，杜慆回信说安禄山、朱氵此等人最终彻底灭亡了，用这暗计来使他的党羽胆寒丧失信心。
English: Pang Xun also sent a letter inviting him to surrender, and Du Xi replied that An Lushan, Zhu Xi and others had finally and completely perished, and used this trick to make his followers lose confidence.

古文：勋累攻不得志，会招讨使马举率兵至，遂解去。
现代文：庞勋屡次攻城不能得手，招讨使马举率领援兵到了，庞勋解围退走。
English: Pang Xun's repeated attacks on the city were unsuccessful, so he summoned Ma He to lead reinforcements, and Pang Xun broke the siege and retreated.

古文：围凡十月，慆拊循士，皆殊死奋，而辛谠冒围出入，纠辑援师，卒完一州，时称为难。
现代文：叛军围城共十个月，杜慆抚慰士兵，士兵都殊死奋战，又加上辛谠冲出冲进重围，联络集合援军，终于保全了整个州城，当时都赞扬他们难能可贵。
English: The rebels besieged the city for a total of ten months. Du Qun comforted the soldiers, and the soldiers fought to the death. Together with Xin Qun, they rushed out, stormed into the heavy siege, contacted and gathered reinforcements, and finally preserved the entire state capital. At that time, they were praised as invaluable.

古文：贼平，慆迁义成军节度使，检校兵部尚书，卒。
现代文：叛贼平定了，杜慆升任义成军节度使、检校兵部尚书，病故。
English: The traitors were subdued, and Du Xuan was promoted to the position of the Yicheng Army's commander of the festival and the inspection of the school. He died of illness.

古文：牧，字牧之，善属文。
现代文：杜牧字牧之，很会写文章。
English: Du Mu Zhi Mu Zhi is very good at writing articles.

古文：第进士，复举贤良方正。
现代文：考中进士，又选中贤良方正能言极谏科。
English: He passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was selected for the virtuous Fang Zheng can speak extremely well.

古文：沈传师表为江西团练府巡官，又为牛僧孺淮南节度府掌书记。
现代文：沈传师上表举荐他任江西团练府巡官，又任牛僧孺淮南节度府掌书记。
English: Shen Chuanshi recommended him to be appointed as the inspector of Jiangxi Reunification Training Center and the secretary of the head of Huainan Reunification Training Center.

古文：擢监察御史，移疾分司东都，以弟顗病弃官。
现代文：提拔为监察御史，写信称病在东都设立分衙门。因弟弟杜耾病重辞官职。
English: He was promoted to inspector of imperial history, and wrote a letter saying that he was sick to set up a branch gate in Dongdu. Due to his brother Du Xi's illness, he resigned from his post.

古文：复为宣州团练判官，拜殿中侍御史内供奉。
现代文：又任宣州团练判官，封为殿中侍御史内供奉。
English: He was also appointed as the judge of the Xuanzhou Rehearsal, and was given the title of the palace attendant.

古文：是时，刘从谏守泽潞，何进滔据魏博，颇骄蹇不循法度。
现代文：当时，刘从谏守卫泽潞，何进滔占据魏博，很是骄横，不遵守国家法律。
English: At that time, Liu was arrogant and did not abide by national laws.

古文：牧追咎长庆以来朝廷措置亡术，复失山东，钜封剧镇，所以系天下轻重，不得承袭轻授，皆国家大事，嫌不当位而言，实有罪，故作《罪言》。
现代文：杜牧追溯长庆年间以来的历史，认为责任在于朝廷处置没有谋略，又失去崤山以东地区。封疆大吏和强大藩镇，关系到国家的安危，不能私自世袭，朝廷不能轻率任命。这都是国家大计，遗憾的是杜牧不当权，没有资格谈国家大计，实在有罪，所以写《罪言》，内容是：百姓被战祸害苦了。
English: Du Mu traced the history since the Changqing era, and believed that the responsibility lay in the fact that the imperial court had no strategy for dealing with the situation, and lost the area east of Shaoshan. The officials of the fiefdoms and the powerful towns were related to the safety of the country, and they could not be inherited privately, and the imperial court could not appoint them rashly. These were all national plans. Unfortunately, Du Mu did not have the right, he was not qualified to talk about the national plan, and he was really guilty, so he wrote "Sins," the content of which was: The people suffered from the scourge of war.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：战乱起源于崤山以东，泛滥到全国。
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：生人常病兵，兵祖于山东，羡于天下。不得山东，兵不可去。山东之地，禹画九土曰冀州；舜以其分太大，离为幽州，为并州。
现代文：不取得崤山以东，武器不能放下。崤山以东地区，大禹划分天下为九个州时叫冀州，舜因为禹划得太大，又从冀州分出幽州和并州。
English: If you don't get to the east of Lushan, you can't lay down your weapons. The area east of Lushan was called Jizhou when the Great Yu divided the world into nine states, but because the division was too large, Yuzhou and the merged state were separated from Jizhou.

古文：程其水土，与河南等，常重十三，故其人沈鸷多材力，重许可，能辛苦。
现代文：估量它的自然条件和资源，让它与河南相等，一般还要强十分之一二。所以它的人民沉雄勇猛，多才体壮，重许诺守信用，能吃苦耐劳。
English: Assess its natural conditions and resources, make it equal to Henan Province, and generally one-tenth to two-tenths stronger. Therefore, its people are brave and courageous, versatile and strong, promise and keep promises, and can endure hardships.

古文：魏晋以下，工机纤杂，意态百出，俗益卑弊，人益脆弱，唯山东敦五种，本兵矢，他不能荡而自若也。
现代文：魏、晋以降，工匠织机精巧多杂，五花八门层出不穷，习俗越变越坏，人的素质越来越差。只有崤山以东地区督促种植五谷。以尚武为本，他方不能动摇而保持自己的本色。
English: From the Wei and Jin dynasties onwards, the weaving machines of the craftsmen became more and more elaborate and intricate, with an endless variety of patterns emerging. The customs became worse and worse, and the quality of the people became worse and worse. Only the area east of Lushan urged the planting of grain crops. Based on martial arts, the other side could not be shaken and maintained its true colors.

古文：产健马，下者日驰二百里，所以兵常当天下。
现代文：出产健壮的马匹，即使是下等的马也能一天跑二百里路，所以这里的士兵可以抵挡天下士兵的进攻。
English: Producing sturdy horses, even inferior horses can run two hundred miles a day, so the soldiers here can resist the attack of soldiers around the world.

古文：冀州，以其恃强不循理，冀其必破弱；虽已破，冀其复强大也。并州，力足以并吞也。
现代文：冀州凭借这些有利条件依仗强大遵守朝廷法律，希冀它一定衰败，但破败了又希冀它强大。并州，是说力量足以吞并。
English: Taking advantage of these favorable conditions, Jizhou adhered to the imperial law by relying on the strong, hoping that it would certainly decay, but if it was ruined, it hoped that it would be strong. Annexing the state means that the strength is sufficient for annexation.

古文：幽州，幽阴惨杀也。
现代文：幽州，是说它幽深阴森惨烈，弥漫杀气。
English: Yuzhou, is to say that it is gloomy gloomy gloomy, pervasive murderous.

古文：圣人因以为名。
现代文：圣人因此给它们命名。
English: The saint thus gave them their name.

古文：黄帝时，蚩尤为兵阶，自后帝王多居其地。
现代文：黄帝时代蚩尤凭借它发动战争，自此以后，帝王大多占据这个地区。
English: In the era of the Yellow Emperor, Qiu You used it to wage war, and since then, emperors have mostly occupied this area.

古文：周劣齐霸，不一世，晋大，常佣役诸侯。
现代文：周朝衰落，齐国称霸，不可一世，晋国强大，经常奴役诸侯。
English: The Zhou Dynasty was in decline, the State of Qi was dominant and could not be defeated, the State of Jin was powerful and often enslaved the princes.

古文：至秦萃锐三晋，经六世乃能得韩，遂折天下脊；复得赵，因拾取诸国。
现代文：到秦国集中精锐军队对付三晋，经过六代人的征战才占领韩国，因此折断了天下的脊梁；又攻占赵国，趁势扫平其他诸侯国。
English: When Qin concentrated its elite troops to deal with the Three Kingdoms, it took six generations of war to occupy Korea, thus breaking the backbone of the world; it also conquered Zhao and took advantage of the situation to wipe out other vassal states.

古文：韩信联齐有之，故蒯通知汉、楚轻重在信。
现代文：韩信连结齐国占有它，所以蒯通明了，汉、楚之争谁胜谁败关键是韩信站在谁一边。
English: Han Xin allied with Qi to occupy it, so it was clear to Zou that the key to who would win and who would lose in the Han-Chu conflict was on whose side Han Xin stood.

古文：光武始于上谷，成于鄗。
现代文：东汉光武帝刘秀在上谷起义兵，在高阝成就帝业。
English: Liu Xiu, the Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty, was a rebel in Shangtang and became emperor in Gaozhou.

古文：魏武举官渡，三分天下有其二。晋乱胡作，至宋武号英雄，得蜀，得关中，尽有河南地，十分天下之八，然不能使一人度河以窥胡。
现代文：魏武帝曹操官渡之战获胜，三分天下占有二分，晋朝发生内乱，胡人侵占河北，以南朝宋武帝刘裕号称英雄，进兵四川，夺得关中，攻占河南全部土地，占有天下十分之八的土地，但没有一兵一卒渡过黄河图谋消灭河北的胡人政权。
English: Emperor Cao Cao of the Wei Dynasty won the Battle of Guandu, gaining two-thirds of the world in three minutes, civil unrest occurred in the Jin Dynasty, and the Hu people invaded and occupied Hebei. Emperor Liu Yu of the Southern Song Dynasty was hailed as a hero, marched into Sichuan, captured Guanzhong, conquered all the land of Henan, and occupied eight-tenths of the world's land, but not a single soldier crossed the Yellow River in an attempt to destroy the Hu people's regime in Hebei.

古文：至高齐荒荡，宇文取之，隋文因以灭陈，五百年间，天下乃一家。
现代文：到高齐荒淫放荡，宇文氏取代他，隋文帝依仗它消灭了江南陈朝，五百年间，天下才统一为一家。
English: When Gao Qi became wild and debauched, the Uwen clan replaced him, and the Sui Emperor relied on it to destroy the Chen Dynasty in the south of the Yangtze River. It took five hundred years for the whole world to become one family.

古文：隋文非宋武敌也，是宋不得山东，隋得山东，故隋为王，宋为霸。
现代文：隋文帝不能匹敌宋武帝，是刘宋没有攻占崤山以东，隋朝占有崤山以东，所以隋朝成就了帝业，刘宋只能建霸业。
English: Sui Emperor Wen could not match Song Emperor Wu. Liu Song did not conquer the east of Mount Lushan, while Sui Dynasty occupied the east of Mount Lushan. Therefore, Sui Dynasty achieved empire, while Liu Song could only establish hegemony.

古文：由此言之，山东，王者不得不为王，霸者不得不为霸，猾贼得之，足以致天下不安。
现代文：从这来说，崤山以东，帝王不占有它就不能成就帝业，霸主不占有它就不能成为霸主，奸诈的野心家占有它，足以招致天下不得安宁。
English: From this point of view, to the east of Mount Lushan, the emperor can not achieve empire without possessing it, the overlord can not become the overlord without possessing it, and the treacherous aspirants possess it, which is enough to cause the world to have no peace.

古文：天宝末，燕盗起，出入成皋、函、潼间，若涉无人地。
现代文：天宝末年，河北安禄山叛乱，出入成皋、函谷关、潼关之间，如入无人之境。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, there was a rebellion in Anlu Mountain, Hebei Province, and it was like entering a no-man's-land between Chengguan, Hanyu Pass, and Shaoguan.

古文：郭、李辈兵五十万，不能过鄴。
现代文：郭子仪、李光弼等人率军五十万，不能越过邺城。
English: Guo Zi Yi, Li Guangyao and others led an army of half a million, but they could not get past Lucheng.

古文：自尔百余城，天下力尽，不得尺寸，人望之若回鹘、吐蕃，义无敢窥者。
现代文：从那以后，一百多座城，朝廷用尽天下的力量，也没有攻占到尺寸土地。人们视它们是像回鹘、吐蕃一样的藩国，按理不能图谋攻占。
English: Since then, more than a hundred cities, the imperial court has exhausted the power of the world, and has not captured the size of the land. People regard them as a domain country like Huizhou and Tubo, and cannot reasonably attempt to capture them.

古文：国家因之畦河修障戍，塞其街蹊。
现代文：国家因而挖河、修固屏障防守，阻断交通要冲。
English: As a result, the state dug up the river, repaired the defensive barrier, and blocked the traffic.

古文：齐、鲁、梁、蔡被其风流，因以为寇。
现代文：齐、鲁等地、梁、蔡等州也中其流毒，因而也作乱成为叛贼。
English: Qi, Lu and other places, Liang, Cai and other states were also poisoned, so they also became rebels.

古文：以里拓表，以表撑里，混澒回转，颠倒横邪，未常五年间不战。
现代文：以河北为后盾向河南扩展，河南又巩固了河北，互相勾结，互相呼应，横行无忌，没有五年间不打仗的。
English: With the backing of Hebei, it expanded to Henan, and Henan consolidated Hebei. They colluded with each other, echoed each other, and ran rampant. No one did not fight for five years.

古文：生人日顿委，四夷日日炽，天子因之幸陕，幸汉中，焦焦然七十余年。运遭孝武，澣衣一肉，不畋不乐，自卑冗中拔取将相，凡十三年，乃能尽得河南、山西地，洗削更革，罔不能适。
现代文：百姓日益困乏，四方夷族一天天猖獗，天子因此逃亡陕州、逃亡汉中，惊惶焦虑七十多年，气运遭逢孝武，穿旧衣服，每天吃一次肉，不游猎不奏乐，从地位低微的人中选拔将相，共十三年，才能攻取河南、山西的全部土地，实行改革，欺诈之徒不能敌。
English: The people were increasingly impoverished, and the barbarians in the four directions were becoming more and more rampant day by day. As a result, Tianzi fled from Shaanxi and fled from Hanzhong. He was terrified and anxious for more than 70 years. He was met with filial piety, wore old clothes, ate meat once a day, did not hunt or play music, and selected generals from low-ranking people. It took a total of 13 years to capture all the land in Henan and Shanxi and implement reforms. The fraudsters could not be defeated.

古文：唯山东不服，亦再攻之，皆不利。
现代文：只有崤山以东不归服朝廷，也曾两次进攻，都没有取得胜利。
English: Only east of Lushan did not submit to the imperial court, and there were also two attacks, neither of which were successful.

古文：岂天使生人未至于怗泰邪？
现代文：难道是上天不让百姓过安泰日子吗？
English: Is it possible that God does not allow the people to live a safe life?

古文：岂人谋未至邪？
现代文：难道是人主观上奋斗不够吗？
English: Is it that people are not struggling enough subjectively?

古文：何其艰哉！
现代文：为什么这样的艰难啊？
English: Why is it so difficult?

古文：今日天子圣明，超出古昔，志于平治。
现代文：现在天子圣明，超过了古代，立志使国家达到太平安定。
English: Now, the Son of Heaven, surpassing the ancient times, is determined to make the country achieve peace and stability.

古文：若欲悉使生人无事，其要先去兵。
现代文：如果想全国百姓无难无灾，那关键是解除战祸。
English: If we want the people of the whole country to be free from hardship and disaster, the key is to remove the scourge of war.

古文：不得山东，兵不可去。
现代文：但不收复崤山以东地区，战祸就不能解除。
English: However, without recovering the areas east of Lushan, the scourge of war cannot be lifted.

古文：今者，上策莫如自治。
现代文：现在上策没有比得上使自己一方太平强盛的。
English: Now there is no better strategy than to make one's own side strong and prosperous.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：当贞元时，山东有燕、赵、魏叛，河南有齐、蔡叛，梁、徐、陈、汝、白马津、盟津、襄、邓、安、黄、寿春皆戍厚兵十余所，才足自护治所，实不辍一人以他使，遂使我力解势弛，熟视不轨者无可奈何。
现代文：在贞元年间，崤山以东有燕、赵、魏三地叛乱，河南有齐、蔡二地叛乱，梁、徐、陈、汝、白马津、盟津、襄、邓、安、黄、寿春都派重兵防守，十多处的兵力才足以保护自己的治所，实在是不能留下一人派其他用场，就使我方势力减弱了，经常看着那些叛乱的家伙而奈何他们不得。
English: During the Zhengyuan era, there were three rebellions in Yan, Zhao and Wei in the east of Lushan, and two rebellions in Qi and Cai in Henan. Liang, Xu, Chen, Ru, Baima Jin, Mengjin, Xiang, Deng, An, Huang and Shuchun all sent heavy troops to defend. The strength of more than ten places was enough to protect their own jails. It was really impossible to leave one person to send to other places, so our strength weakened. I often looked at those rebels and wondered what they had to do.

古文：阶此，蜀亦叛，吴亦叛，其他未叛者，迎时上下，不可保信。
现代文：借这个时机，蜀也反叛，吴也反叛，其他没有反叛的，有时服从朝廷，有时归附叛贼，不能保住信义。
English: Taking advantage of this opportunity, Shu also rebelled, Wu also rebelled, and others who did not rebel, sometimes obeyed the imperial court, sometimes joined the traitors, and could not maintain their loyalty.

古文：自元和初至今二十九年间，得蜀，得吴，得蔡，得齐，收郡县二百余城，所未能得，唯山东百城耳。
现代文：从元和初年到现在二十九年间，平定了蜀，收复了吴，收复了蔡，收复了齐，收复了郡县二百多座城，没有收复的，只崤山以东一百多座城了。
English: In the 29 years from the Yuan and the first year of the year to the present, Shu has been pacified, Wu has been recovered, Cai has been recovered, Qi has been recovered, and more than 200 cities in counties have been recovered. Only more than 100 cities east of Lushan have not been recovered.

古文：土地人户，财物甲兵，较之往年，岂不绰绰乎？
现代文：土地人口，钱粮物资，铠甲武器，比较往年难道不是绰绰有余吗？
English: Compared to previous years, isn't the land, population, money, grain, and armored weapons more than enough?

古文：亦足自以为治也。
现代文：这又足以使自己认为自己太平强盛起来了。
English: This was enough to make him think that he was too strong.

古文：法令制度，品式条章，果自治乎？
现代文：但是，法令制度等级规章，果真能使自安自强吗？
English: However, can the legal system, hierarchy, and regulations really make us self-reliant?

古文：贤才奸恶，搜选置舍，果自治乎？
现代文：搜选提拔贤才，贬斥奸恶的小人，果真能合乎自安自强的要求吗？
English: Is it really possible to meet the requirements of self-reliance and self-improvement by selecting and promoting talents and disparaging villains?

古文：障戍镇守，干戈车马，果自治乎？
现代文：防卫边塞、守卫重镇、武器车辆马匹，果真达到了自安自强的需求吗？
English: Did the defense of border fortresses, the guarding of important towns, weapons, vehicles and horses really meet the needs of self-reliance and self-improvement?

古文：井闾阡陌，仓廪财赋，果自治乎？
现代文：百姓土地、粮草布帛、财物赋税，果真达到了自安自强的条件了吗？
English: Have the people's land, grain, grass, cloth, and property taxation really reached the conditions of self-reliance and self-strengthening?

古文：如不果自治，是助虏为虏。
现代文：如果不能实现自己方面的安定和强大，这实际上是助长叛贼作乱。
English: If it fails to achieve stability and strength on its own, it will actually encourage the rebels to make trouble.

古文：环土三千里，植根七十年，复有天下阴为之助，则安可以取？
现代文：河北土地方圆三千里，叛乱已扎根七十年，天下又有暗中支持它的人，那怎么能马上就收复呢？
English: The territory of Hebei province is three thousand miles in circumference, the rebellion has been rooted for seventy years, and there are people all over the world who secretly support it. So how can it be recovered immediately?

古文：故曰：上策莫如自治。中策莫如取魏。
现代文：所以说上策不如朝廷自安自强，中策没有比攻取魏州好。
English: Therefore, the best strategy is not as good as the imperial court's self-reliance, and the middle strategy is no better than the capture of Weizhou.

古文：魏于山东最重，于河南亦最重。
现代文：魏州对于崤山以东地区最为重要，对河南也最为重要。
English: Weizhou is the most important region to the east of Lushan and the most important to Henan.

古文：魏在山东，以其能遮赵也。
现代文：魏州在崤山以东，因为它是赵州的屏障。
English: Weizhou is east of Lushan, because it is the barrier of Zhaozhou.

古文：既不可越魏以取赵，固不可越赵以取燕。
现代文：朝廷既不能超过魏州去攻取赵州，更不能超过赵州去攻取燕地。
English: The imperial court could not go beyond Wei Province to conquer Zhao Province, nor could it go beyond Zhao Province to conquer Yan Province.

古文：是燕、赵常取重于魏，魏常操燕、赵之命。
现代文：这就是燕赵常常依重魏州的原因，魏州常掌握着燕赵的命运。
English: This is the reason why Yan Zhao often relies on Weizhou, which often holds the fate of Yan Zhao.

古文：故魏在山东最重。
现代文：所以魏州在崤山以东的战略地位最为重要。
English: Therefore, the strategic position of Weizhou in the east of Lushan is the most important.

古文：黎阳距白马津三十里，新乡距盟津一百五十里，陴垒相望，朝驾暮战，是二津，虏能溃一，则驰入成皋，不数日间。
现代文：黎阳距离白马津三十里，新乡距盟津一百五十里，城垒相望，早晨出发晚上交战，白马津、盟津只要叛军攻破一个，就能在几天内，冲进成皋。
English: Liyang is 30 miles away from Baimajin, Xinxiang is 150 miles away from Mengjin, the fortresses are facing each other, the morning departure and the evening battle, as long as the rebels break through one of Baimajin and Mengjin, they can rush into Chengdu within a few days.

古文：故魏于河南亦最重。
现代文：所以魏州对河南来说也是战略要地。
English: Therefore, Weizhou is also a strategic place for Henan.

古文：元和中，举天下兵诛蔡，诛齐，顿之五年，无山东忧者，以能得魏也。
现代文：元和年间，发动天下的士兵，扫平齐蔡一带叛乱，一下子五年没有崤山以东的骚扰，是因为收复了魏州。
English: During the Yuan and He years, soldiers from all over the world were mobilized to quell the rebellion in the Qi Cai area, and suddenly there was no harassment east of Lushan for five years because of the recovery of Weizhou.

古文：昨日诛沧，顿之三年，无山东忧，亦以能得魏也。
现代文：昔日平定沧州，一下子三年没有崤山以东的威胁，也是因为能攻占了魏州。
English: Once upon a time, Cangzhou was pacified. Suddenly, there was no threat east of Lushan for three years, also because of the capture of Weizhou.

古文：长庆初诛赵，一日五诸侯兵四出溃解，以失魏也。昨日诛赵，罢如长庆时，亦以失魏也。
现代文：长庆初年，朝廷平定赵州，一天之内，五路诸侯大军溃败四散，因为失去了魏州；昔日平定赵州，像长庆初年一样失败了，也是因为失去了魏州。
English: In the first year of Changqing, the imperial court conquered Zhaozhou. Within one day, the armies of the five princes were defeated and scattered, because they lost Weizhou. In the past, the conquest of Zhaozhou failed, just like the first year of Changqing, also because they lost Weizhou.

古文：故河南、山东之轻重在魏。非魏强大，地形使然也。
现代文：所以魏州是崤山以东、河南的关键所在，不是因为魏州强大，而是地理位置使它这样重要呀。
English: Therefore, Weizhou is the key to the east of Lushan and Henan, not because Weizhou is powerful, but because its geographical location makes it so important.

古文：故曰：取魏为中策。
现代文：所以说攻取魏州是中策。
English: Therefore, the capture of Weizhou is a medium-term strategy.

古文：最下策为浪战，不计地势，不审攻守是也。
现代文：最下策是轻率作战。不考虑地理环境，不分析攻守态势就是轻率作战。
English: The bottom line is to fight rashly. Without considering the geographical environment, without analyzing the offensive and defensive situation, it is to fight rashly.

古文：兵多粟多，驱人使战者，便于守；兵少粟少，人不驱自战者，便于战。
现代文：兵多粮足，迫使百姓打仗，防守就有利；兵少粮缺，百姓不用强迫自愿作战，进攻就有利。
English: If the soldiers have plenty of food, and force the people to fight, the defense will be advantageous; if the soldiers are short of food, and the people do not have to be forced to fight voluntarily, the attack will be advantageous.

古文：故我常失于战，虏常困于守。
现代文：所以我方常因进攻而失败，敌方常被防守困扰。
English: That's why we often fail because of our offense, and the enemy is often plagued by their defense.

古文：山东叛且三五世，后生所见言语举止，无非叛也，以为事理正当如此，沉酣入骨髓，无以为非者，至有围急食尽，啖尸以战。
现代文：崤山以东的叛乱延续将近五个朝代了，后世的百姓所见的行动，所听到的语言，没有不是叛军一方的，认为事情理当如此，沉迷已入骨髓了。没有人认为这是错的。以至于有被围攻形势危急粮食吃尽而吃死人肉还坚持作战的。
English: The rebellion east of Lushan lasted for nearly five dynasties. In later generations, the people saw the actions and heard the words, and no one who was not from the rebel side thought that things should be like this. The addiction was in the marrow of the bones. No one thought it was wrong. So much so that there were people who were besieged and had run out of food, but ate dead human flesh and insisted on fighting.

古文：以此为俗，岂可与决一胜一负哉？
现代文：这已经成为习俗了，哪能与他们打一两仗就可决定胜负呢？
English: This has become a custom. How can one or two battles with them decide the outcome?

古文：自十余年凡三收赵，食尽且下。
现代文：十多年来，曾三次发动收复赵州的战役，都是在赵州粮尽快要攻下时前功尽弃。
English: Over the past ten years, Zhaozhou Grain has launched three campaigns to recapture Zhaozhou, and all of them have been abandoned before the time when Zhaozhou Grain should be captured as soon as possible.

古文：郗士美败，赵复振；杜叔良败，赵复振；李听败，赵复振。
现代文：郗士良战败，赵州又振作起来；杜叔良战败，赵州又振作起来；李听战败，赵州又振作起来。
English: Fuxiliang defeated, Zhao Zhou cheered up again; Du Shuliang defeated, Zhao Zhou cheered up again; Li He defeated, Zhao Zhou cheered up again.

古文：故曰：不计地势，不审攻守，为浪战，最下策也。
现代文：所以不考虑地理环境，不分析攻守态势，轻率作战，是最下策。
English: Therefore, it is the worst policy not to consider the geographical environment, not to analyze the offensive and defensive situation, and to fight rashly.

古文：累迁左补阙、史馆修撰，改膳部员外郎。
现代文：连续提拔为左补阙、史馆修撰，改任膳部员外郎。
English: He was successively promoted to Zuo Zhuo (左补) and Shiguang Shuxian (史馆修撰), and was reappointed as a member of the kitchen staff.

古文：宰相李德裕素奇其才。
现代文：宰相李德裕，认为他是奇才。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu thinks he is a genius.

古文：会昌中，黠戛斯破回鹘，回鹘种落溃入漠南，牧说德裕不如遂取之，以为： 两汉伐虏，常以秋冬，当匈奴劲弓折胶，重马免乳，与之相校，故败多胜少。
现代文：会昌年间，黠戛斯打败回鹘军，回鹘族部落溃退进大沙漠南部。杜牧劝说李德裕不如趁机攻取，认为： 两汉进攻匈奴，常在秋冬两季，当时匈奴军强弓胶牢可用，母马没怀胎哺乳，与它交战，所以败多胜少。
English: During the Huichang period, the Hakka defeated the Hui army, and the Hui tribe retreated into the southern desert. Dumu persuaded Li Deyu that it was better to seize the opportunity to attack, saying: The Han Dynasty attacked the Xiongnu, often in the autumn and winter, when the Xiongnu army could use a strong bow and glue, and the mare was not pregnant and lactating, and fought with it, so it was more or less defeated.

古文：今若以仲夏发幽、并突骑及酒泉兵，出其意外，一举无类矣。 
现代文：现在如果在盛夏征调幽州并州的精锐骑兵和酒泉的士兵，出其不意，可一举全歼！ 
English: Now, if the elite cavalrymen of Yuzhou and Jiuquan and the soldiers of Jiuquan are transferred in midsummer, they will be taken by surprise and can be completely wiped out at one stroke!

古文：德裕善之。
现代文：李德裕认为这策略很好。
English: Li Deyu thinks this is a good strategy.

古文：会刘稹拒命，诏诸镇兵讨之，牧复移书于德裕，以 河阳西北去天井关强百里，用万人为垒，窒其口，深壁勿与战。
现代文：碰到刘稹拒不执行朝廷进军的命令，皇帝命令各节度使率兵征讨他，杜牧又送信给李德裕，认为 河阳西北离天井关一百多里，用一万兵修筑堡垒、截断路口，坚守壁垒不与他们交战。
English: When Liu Bei refused to carry out the order of the imperial court to march, the emperor ordered the various states to send soldiers to recruit him. Du Mu also sent a message to Li Deyu, saying that the northwest of Heyang was more than a hundred miles away from the ceiling, and that he would use ten thousand soldiers to build fortresses and cut off intersections, and adhere to the barrier and not fight with them.

古文：成德军世与昭义为敌，王元达思一雪以自奋，然不能长驱径捣上党，其必取者在西面。
现代文：成德军与昭义军是仇敌，王元逵想报仇雪恨自然会奋勇作战，但不能长驱直入攻上党，他攻击的对象一定会在西面。
English: The Chengde Army and the Zhaoyi Army were enemies. Wang Yuanxuan would naturally fight bravely if he wanted to take revenge, but he could not drive straight into the attacking party for a long time. The target of his attack would definitely be in the west.

古文：今若以忠武、武宁两军益青州精甲五千、宣润弩手二千，道绛而入，不数月必覆贼巢。
现代文：现在如果用忠武军、武宁军加上青州五千精兵，宣州、润州二千弓弩手，顺绛州进兵，不要几个月，一定会捣毁叛贼刘稹的巢穴。
English: Now, if we use the Zhongwu Army and the Wu Ning Army, together with the five thousand elite soldiers from Qingzhou, the two thousand archers from Xuanzhou and Runzhou, and the marching soldiers from Shunnanzhou, in a few months, we will surely destroy the den of the traitor Liu Bei.

古文：昭义之食，尽仰山东，常日节度使率留食邢州，山西兵单少，可乘虚袭取。故兵闻拙速，未睹巧之久也 。
现代文：昭义军的粮草，全部仰仗崤函以东供给，节度使平常时日率军留在邢州就食，山西的兵力少，可以乘虚攻取，所以兵贵神速，没有看到使用巧谋秘计能长久不被知道的 。
English: The grain and grass of the Shouyi Army all depended on the supply from the east of Shuhan, and the festival usually made the army stay in Shanzhou to eat. Shanxi's military strength was small and could be taken advantage of. Therefore, the soldiers were very fast and did not see that the use of cunning secret strategies could not be known for a long time.

古文：俄而泽潞平，略如牧策。
现代文：不久昭义镇的泽州、潞州平定，大致是按杜牧的策略用兵的。
English: Soon after, Zhezhou and Zhangzhou in Shaoyi Town were pacified, and troops were used roughly in accordance with Dumu's strategy.

古文：历黄、池、睦三州刺史，入为司勋员外郎，常兼史职。
现代文：历任黄州、池州、睦州刺史，回朝任司勋员外郎，常兼史馆的职务。
English: He successively served as the chief historian of Huangzhou, Chizhou, and Mengzhou, and returned to the imperial court to serve as the second-in-command of the Imperial Household Agency, and often held the post of chief historian.

古文：改吏部，复乞为湖州刺史。
现代文：改任吏部员外郎，又请求任湖州刺史。
English: He was reassigned to the position of clerk, and he also requested to be appointed as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：逾年，以考功郎中知制诰，迁中书舍人。
现代文：过了一年，回朝任考功员外郎、知制诰，升任中书舍人。
English: A year later, he returned to the imperial court and was appointed as Gairo and Chisaku, and was promoted to the position of junior high school teacher.

古文：牧刚直有奇节，不为龊龊小谨，敢论列大事，指陈病利尤切至。
现代文：杜牧性格刚直，有奇特的气节，不拘小节，敢议论国家大计方针，剖析利害关系特别切中要害。
English: Dumoulin's character is upright, he has a peculiar temperament, he is not fussy, he dares to discuss the national plan and policy, and he is particularly incisive in analyzing the relationship of interests.

古文：少与李甘、李中敏、宋邧善，其通古今，善处成败，甘等不及也。
现代文：年轻时与李甘、李中敏、宋交情好。他博古通今，善于分析历史上兴衰的经验教训，李甘等人比不上他。
English: When he was young, he was good friends with Li Gan, Li Zhongmin, and Song. He is knowledgeable about the past and the present, and is good at analyzing the lessons learned from the rise and fall of history. Li Gan and others are not comparable to him.

古文：牧亦以疏直，时无右援者。
现代文：杜牧也很粗直，当时没有谁帮助他。
English: Dumoulin was also very rude, there was no one to help him.

古文：从兄悰更历将相，而牧困踬不自振，颇怏怏不平。卒，年五十。
现代文：堂兄杜出将入相，但杜牧一直官运不亨通，仕途不顺利，不能振作自己，心里很郁郁不平，逝世时年仅五十岁。
English: His cousin, Du Du, was about to be crowned, but Du Mu was always unsuccessful in his official career, his career was not smooth, he could not cheer himself up, his heart was very depressed, and he was only fifty years old when he died.

古文：初，牧梦人告曰： 尔应名毕。 
现代文：当初杜牧梦中有人告诉他说 ：你名字应该叫华。 
English: At first, someone in Du Mu's dream told him, "Your name should be Hua."

古文：复梦书 皎皎白驹 字，或曰 过隙也 。
现代文：又梦中写道 皎皎白驹 四字，又写道： 过隙也。 
English: He also wrote in his dream the four characters "白" and "過隙也."

古文：俄而炊甑裂，牧曰： 不祥也。 
现代文：不久，蒸饭时饭甑破裂，杜牧说： 不吉祥。 
English: Not long after, the rice cooker broke during the steamed rice, and Dumu said, "This is not auspicious.

古文：乃自为墓志，悉取所为文章焚之。
现代文：因此自己写了墓志，把自己写的文章全部烧了。
English: So he wrote his own epitaph and burned all the articles he had written.

古文：牧于诗，情致豪迈，人号为 小杜 ，以别杜甫云。
现代文：杜牧在诗歌方面的特点是情致豪迈，当时人们号称为 小杜 ，以与杜甫区别。
English: In terms of poetry, Du Mu was characterized by his heroic sentiments. At that time, people called him Xiao Du to distinguish him from Du Fu.

古文：顗，字胜之，幼病目，母禁其为学。
现代文：杜耾字胜之，年幼眼睛生病，母亲禁止他读书。
English: His mother forbade him to read because his eyes were diseased when he was young.

古文：举进士，礼部侍郎贾餗语人曰： 得杜顗足敌数百人。 
现代文：选中进士。礼部侍郎贾饣束对人说 ：得到杜耾足以抵得上几百人。 
English: Jia Yanzhong, a waiter in the ceremonial department, said to the man, "Getting a cuckoo is enough to win over hundreds of people."

古文：授秘书省正字。
现代文：任命为秘书省正字。
English: He was appointed secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：李德裕奏为浙西府宾佐。
现代文：李德裕报告皇帝任命为浙西节度府的幕僚。
English: Li Deyu reported that the emperor appointed him as a staff member of the Western Zhejiang Provincial Government.

古文：德裕贵盛，宾客无敢忤，惟顗数谏正之。
现代文：李德裕显贵势盛，宾客没有人敢违背他，只有杜耾多次劝说他，纠正他的错误。
English: Li Deyu was a prominent and powerful figure. None of the guests dared to disobey him. Only Du Juan repeatedly persuaded him to correct his mistakes.

古文：及谪袁州，叹曰： 门下爱我皆如顗，吾无今日。 
现代文：李德裕流放袁州时，叹息说： 门下爱护我的人都像杜耾，我没有今日之败。 
English: When Li Deyu was exiled to Yuanzhou, he sighed and said, "The people who love and care for me under my tutelage are like cuckoos. I am not defeated today.

古文：太和末，召为咸阳尉，直史馆。
现代文：大和末年，召回朝任咸阳尉，在史馆值班。
English: At the end of the Yamato era, he was recalled to the Imperial Court to serve as Xianyang lieutenant and was on duty at the history museum.

古文：常语人曰： 李训、郑注必败。 
现代文：常对人说： 李训、郑注必然失败。 
English: I often told people: Li Xun and Zheng Zhu will inevitably fail.

古文：行未及都，闻难作，疏辞疾归。
现代文：还没有回到京城，听到叛乱兴起，立即托病辞官回家。
English: He had not yet returned to the capital, but when he heard that a rebellion was on the rise, he immediately went home on sick leave.

古文：顗亦善属文，与牧相上下。
现代文：杜耾也擅长写文章，与杜牧不相上下。
English: Du Wei is also good at writing articles, which is on a par with Du Mu.

古文：竟以丧明卒。
现代文：竟然因眼睛失明病故。
English: He actually died of blindness in his eyes.

