古文：彭汝砺，字器资，饶州鄱阳人。
现代文：彭汝砺字器资，饶州鄱阳人。
English: Peng Ryu is a skilled writer, and a native of Raozhou.

古文：治平二年，举进士第一。
现代文：治平二年举进士第一名。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was the first to be promoted.

古文：历保信军推官、武安军掌书记、潭州军事推官。
现代文：历任保信军推官、武安军掌书记、潭州军事推官。
English: Successive Baoxin Military Commissar, Wu'an Military Chief Secretary, and Tanzhou Military Commissar.

古文：王安石见其《诗义》，补国子直讲，改大理寺丞，擢太子中允，既而恶之。
现代文：王安石看到他的《诗义》，补国子直讲，改任大理寺丞，提升为太子中允，不久厌恶他。
English: Wang Anshi saw his "Poetry," complemented the direct speech of Guo Zi, was appointed as the president of Dali Temple, and was promoted to the prince's middle son, and soon detested him.

古文：御史中丞邓绾将举为御史，召之不往；既上章，复以失举自列。
现代文：御史中丞邓绾将要提升为御史，召之不去；又上奏，再以失举自列。
English: The Vice-Minister of History, Deng Qi, was to be promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of History, but he was not called; he was promoted again, and then he was demoted again.

古文：神宗怒，逐绾，用汝砺为监察御史里行。
现代文：神宗生气，贬逐邓绾，任用汝砺为监察御史里行。
English: Shenzong was angry, denounced Deng Wei, and appointed Ru Wei as the inspector of the Imperial Historical Commission.

古文：首陈十事：一正己，二任人，三守令，四理财，五养民，六振救，七兴事，八变法，九青苗，十盐事。
现代文：汝砺首先陈述十事：一是正己，二是任人，三是守令，四是理财，五是养民，六是赈救，七是兴事，八是变法，九是青苗，十是盐事。
English: First of all, you should state ten things: the first is to be righteous, the second is to appoint people, the third is to keep orders, the fourth is to manage money, the fifth is to feed the people, the sixth is to rescue, the seventh is to cause trouble, the eighth is to change the law, the ninth is to be a young seedling, and the tenth is to be salt.

古文：指擿利害，多人所难言者。
现代文：指出揭发利弊，多是人所难说的。
English: pointed out that the advantages and disadvantages of whistleblowing are mostly difficult to say.

古文：又论吕嘉问市易聚敛非法，当罢；俞充谄中人王中正，至使妻拜之，不当检正中书五房事。
现代文：又论吕嘉问市易聚敛非法，应罢免；俞充谄媚宦官王中正，以至指使妻儿拜见王中正，不应检正中书五房事。
English: It was also said that Lujia Rongcheng should be removed from office for illegally gathering and amassing wealth, and that it was not proper to investigate the affairs of the five households of Wang Zhongzheng, a high-ranking official, and even to order his wife and children to visit Wang Zhongzheng.

古文：神宗为罢充，诘其语所从，汝砺曰： 如此，非所以广聪明也。 卒不奉诏。
现代文：神宗为此而罢免俞充，并查究汝砺的话的根据，汝砺说： 这样，不是用来广视听的做法。 终于不奉诏命。
English: For this reason, Shenzong dismissed Xuan Quan and investigated the basis of Yu Yu's words. Yu Yu said, "This is not a practice for broadcasting and listening. Finally, it is not in accordance with the imperial edict."

古文：及中正与李宪主西师，汝砺言不当以兵付中人，因及汉、唐祸乱之事。
现代文：等到王中正与李宪主管西部军队，汝砺说不应把军队付与宦官，因而言及汉、唐祸乱之事。
English: When Wang Zhongzheng and Li Xian were put in charge of the western army, Ru Yi said that the army should not be entrusted to eunuchs, thus referring to the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty.

古文：神宗不怿，语折之。
现代文：神宗不高兴，说话打断了汝砺。
English: Shenzong was not happy, and interrupted Ru Ru.

古文：汝砺拱立不动，伺间复言，神宗为改容，在廷者皆叹服。
现代文：汝砺拱手站立不动，等待机会再说，神宗为之改容，在廷的人都叹息佩服。
English: You stood motionless with folded hands, waiting for an opportunity to speak again. Shenzong changed his appearance for it, and everyone in the court sighed in admiration.

古文：宗室以女卖婚民间，有司奏罢之。
现代文：皇族宗室把女卖婚民间，官员奏请解除婚姻。
English: The royal family sold their daughter to a commoner, and officials petitioned to dissolve the marriage.

古文：汝砺言： 此虽疏属，皆天家子孙，不可使闾阎之贱得以货取，愿更著婚法。 
现代文：汝砺说： 这虽然是疏远的亲戚，都是天家子孙，不能使民间的低贱人得以货取，希望改变著婚法。 
English: Ru Wei said: Although these are distant relatives, they are all descendants of the heavenly family, and they cannot make the low-born people of the people take the goods, hoping to change the marriage law.

古文：元丰初，以馆阁校勘为江西转运判官，陛辞，复言： 今不患无将顺之臣，患无谏诤之臣；不患无敢为之臣，患无敢言之臣。 神宗嘉其忠荩。
现代文：元丰初年，汝砺以馆阁校勘的身份为江西转运判官，辞谢皇帝，又说 ：现在不担心没有将顺之臣，担心没有谏诤之臣；不担心没有敢为之臣，担心没有敢于说话之臣。 神宗称赞他的忠诚。
English: In the first year of the Yuan-Feng Dynasty, Rugao was appointed as the judge of Jiangxi transshipment in the capacity of the inspector of the pavilion and pavilion, resigned from the emperor, and said: Now I am not worried about not having a subordinate, worried about not having a subordinate; not worried about not daring to be a subordinate, worried about not daring to speak. Shenzong praised his loyalty.

古文：代还，提点京西刑狱。
现代文：更替回朝，任京西提点刑狱。
English: He was transferred back to the imperial court and sentenced to a prison term.

古文：元祐二年，召为起居舍人。
现代文：元二年，召用为起居舍人。
English: In 1902, he was called to be a householder.

古文：时相问新旧之政，对曰： 政无彼此，一于是而已。
现代文：当时皇帝想问新旧政治，回答说： 政治没有彼比，统一于是而已。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to ask about the new and old politics, and replied: Politics has no comparison, unification is just like that.

古文：今所更大者，取士及差役法，行之而士民皆病，未见其可。 逾年，迁中书舍人，赐金紫。
现代文：现在所变化大的，是取士与差役法，实行这些制度但士人百姓都不满，不见其可行。 过了一年，升任中书舍人，赐金紫。
English: The biggest change now is the law on the appointment and dismissal of officials, the implementation of these systems, but the people are dissatisfied with the officials and do not find them feasible.After a year, he was promoted to the position of middle school teacher and awarded gold and purple.

古文：词命雅正，有古人风。其论诗体四韵事尤力，大臣有持平者，颇相左右，一时进取者疾之，欲排去其类，未有以发。
现代文：汝砺词命雅正，大臣中有持平论的，与他的意见颇为相左，一时希图进取之士都指责他，想要排斥去掉他们这类人，但没有借口发作。
English: You are right in what you say. There are even-handed ministers who are quite opposed to his views. People who want to be progressive at the moment accuse him of wanting to exclude and get rid of people like them, but there is no excuse.

古文：会知汉阳军吴处厚得蔡确安州诗上之，傅会解释，以为怨谤。
现代文：恰逢知汉阳军吴处厚得到蔡确安州诗上呈。附会解释，认为怨恨诽谤。
English: It just so happened that Wu Shudao, a member of the Han Yang Army, received a poem from Cai Jiaxuan. The association added an explanation, saying that the hatred was slanderous.

古文：谏官交章请治之，又造为危言，以激怒宣仁后，欲置之法。
现代文：谏官交互上章请治罪，又制造危言，来激怒宣仁太后，打算置之法办。
English: The eunuchs alternately pleaded for punishment and made threatening remarks to infuriate Empress Dowager Xuanren, who planned to have them prosecuted.

古文：汝砺谓此罗织之渐也，数以白执政，不能救，遂上疏论列，不听。
现代文：汝砺说： 这是罗织罪名的开始。 多次报告执政大臣，不能挽救，于是上疏论列，没有得到同意。
English: Ru Wei said: This is the beginning of Luo Wei's crime. Repeatedly reported to the ruling minister, can not be saved, so on the slack line, did not get consent.

古文：方居家待罪，得确谪命除目草词，曰： 我不出，谁任其责者。 即入省，封还除目，辨论愈切。
现代文：正居家待罪，得到蔡确谪命除目草词，说： 我不出来，谁来担负这一责任。 立即进入禁宫中，封还除目，议论更加恳切。
English: He was at home awaiting trial when he received Cai Jizhen's death sentence, saying, "I won't come out, who will take on this responsibility?" He immediately entered the Forbidden City, was sealed and had his eyes removed, and the discussion became more earnest.

古文：谏官指汝砺为朋党，宣仁后曰： 汝砺岂党确者，亦为朝廷论事尔。 及确贬新州，又须汝砺草词，遂落职知徐州。
现代文：谏官指责汝砺为朋党，宣仁太后说 ：汝砺岂是依附蔡确的人，也是替朝廷论事而已。 等到蔡确贬官新州，又需要汝砺草词，于是落职知徐州。
English: The eunuch accused her of being a party crony, and Empress Dowager Xuanren said, "Isn't it true that you are a follower of Cai Zhengyi, and that you are just arguing on behalf of the imperial court? When Cai Zhengyi was demoted to the new state, it was necessary for you to draft a speech, so you resigned from your post and left Xuzhou.

古文：初，汝砺在台时，论吕嘉问事，与确异趣，徙外十年，确为有力。
现代文：开始，汝砺在御史台时，议论吕嘉问之事，与蔡确意见不同，移外任十年，蔡确起了很大作用。
English: At the beginning, when Ru Hao was on the History Channel, he discussed the matter of Lü Jiahu, and his opinion differed from that of Cai Jie. After ten years of moving abroad, Cai Jie played a great role.

古文：后治嘉问它狱，以不阿执政，坐夺二官。
现代文：后来治罪吕嘉问其他狱案，因不阿附执政大臣，因被削夺二官。
English: Later, Lyu Jia asked other prison cases, because he did not attach the ruling minister, because he was deprived of two officials.

古文：至是，又为确得罪，人以此益贤之。
现代文：到这时，又替蔡确获罪，人们因此更加尊敬他。
English: By this time, he had been found guilty on behalf of Cai Jizhen, which made people respect him even more.

古文：加集贤殿修撰，入权兵、刑二部侍郎。
现代文：加官集贤殿修撰，入权兵、刑二部侍郎。
English: He was promoted to the rank of officer, and became a courtier of the Second Division of the Imperial Court.

古文：有狱当贷，执政以特旨杀之，汝砺持不下。
现代文：有狱案应宽大，执政大臣以特旨杀之，汝砺坚持不杀。
English: If there is a prison case, it should be lenient, the ruling minister should kill it with a special order, and you should insist on not killing.

古文：执政怒，罚其属。
现代文：执政大臣发怒，惩罚汝砺的部下。
English: Enraged, the ruling minister punished Rong's subordinates.

古文：汝砺言： 制书有不便，许奏论。
现代文：汝砺说 ：皇帝的制书有不便的地方，允许奏论，这是制度。
English: Ru Wei said: The emperor's book production has inconvenient places, allowing the theory of play, this is the system.

古文：汝砺属又何罪？ 遂自劾请去，章四上。
现代文：部下又有什么罪？ 于是自己弹劾请求去职，奏章四次上呈。
English: What is the crime of his subordinates? So he impeached himself, requested to leave the post, and submitted the report four times.

古文：诏免属罚，徙汝砺礼部，真拜吏部侍郎。
现代文：诏令免去部下的惩罚，移汝砺任职礼部，实授吏部侍郎。
English: The imperial edict exempted his subordinates from punishment, and he was transferred to the ceremonial department, and he was given the title of attendant of the official department.

古文：哲宗躬听断，修熙宁、元丰政事，人皆争献所闻，汝砺独无建白。
现代文：哲宗亲自处理政事，修撰熙宁、元丰政事，人们都争相献出所闻，汝砺惟独没有建议。
English: Zhezong personally dealt with political affairs, and the political affairs of Xining and Yuanfeng were revised. People were eager to present what they had heard, but Ruzhen did not have any suggestions.

古文：或问之，答曰： 在前日则无敢言，于今则人人能言之矣。 进权吏部尚书。
现代文：有人问他，回答说： 在以前就无人敢说，在今天就人人能说话了。 进升代理吏部尚书。
English: When someone asked him about it, he replied, "In the past, no one dared to speak out, but today everyone can.

古文：言者谓尝附会刘挚，以宝文阁直学士知成都府。
现代文：言官认为他曾经依附刘挚，以宝文阁直学士的身份为成都知府。
English: The magistrate believed that he had once attached himself to Liu Zhengyi and assumed the post of Chengdu prefect in his capacity as a direct graduate of the Bowen Palace.

古文：未行，章数上，又降待制、知江州。
现代文：没有去赴任，多次上奏章，又降为待制、知江州。
English: He did not go to the post, repeatedly played the chapter, and was reduced to the standby system, Chijiangzhou.

古文：将行，哲宗问所欲言，对曰： 陛下今所复者，其政不能无是非，其人不能无贤否。
现代文：将要发出，哲宗询问他所想说的话，汝砺应对说： 陛下现在所恢复的，其政事不能没有是非，其人不能没有贤能不肖。
English: When Tetsuzo asked him what he wanted to say, he replied, "What Your Majesty has restored cannot be without rights and wrongs, nor can it be without virtues and virtues.

古文：政惟其是，则无不善；人惟其贤，则无不得矣。 
现代文：政事惟其对，那么没有什么不好；人惟其贤能，那么没有什么得不到的了。 
English: If the government does the right thing, then there is nothing bad; if the people do the right thing, then there is nothing to be gained.

古文：至郡数月而病去。
现代文：到达江州几个月后汝砺因病去世。
English: A few months after arriving in Jiangzhou, Rong died of illness.

古文：其遗表略云： 土地已有余，愿抚以仁；财用非不饶，愿节以礼。
现代文：他的遗表大略说： 土地已有余，希望抚以仁政；财用不是不富饶，希望节以礼仪。
English: His last will and testament roughly says: There is more than enough land, and it is hoped that benevolent government will be promoted; the use of money is not ungenerous, and it is hoped that the festival will be marked by etiquette.

古文：佞人初若可悦，而其患在后；忠言初若可恶，而其利甚博。 至于恤河北流移，察江南水旱，凡数百言。
现代文：奸佞之人开始好像令人喜欢，但其祸患在将来；忠言开始好像令人讨厌，但其利益很广博。 至于抚恤河北流散移民，视察江南水灾旱灾，共几百言。
English: The traitor seems to be pleasant at first, but his misfortune is in the future; the loyal adviser seems to be unpleasant at first, but his benefits are very extensive.As for the support of the Hebei diaspora immigrants and the inspection of the floods and droughts in the south of the Yangtze River, there are hundreds of words.

古文：朝廷方以枢密都承旨命之而已卒，乃以告赐其家。
现代文：朝廷正任命他为枢密都承旨却已去世，就以之告赐其家。
English: The imperial court was appointing him as privy councillor, but he had already passed away, so his family was told.

古文：年五十四。
现代文：终年五十四岁。
English: He was fifty-four years old.

古文：汝砺读书为文，志于大者，言动取舍，必合于义，与人交，必尽诚敬。
现代文：汝砺读书写文章，志向远大，言行取舍，必定符合义理，与人交往，必尽诚敬。
English: If you read books and write articles, you must be ambitious, and your words and deeds must be consistent with the principles. If you interact with people, you must be sincere.

古文：兄无子，为立后，官之。
现代文：兄长无子，替兄立后，以之为官。
English: His elder brother had no children, so he took his brother's place and became an official.

古文：少时师事桐庐倪天隐，既死，并其母妻葬之，且衣食其女。
现代文：年青时师事桐庐倪天隐，不久天隐死去，并其母亲妻子埋葬，而且供给其女儿的衣食。
English: When he was young, his teacher was Tonglu Ni Tianyin. Soon after, Tianyin died, and his mother and wife buried him, and provided food and clothing for their daughter.

古文：夬为御史，大壮劝使早去，夬以为畏友。
现代文：与他一起考中进士的宋涣死，帮助宋涣的后代，无异于像自己的儿子。所著《易义》、《诗义》、《诗文》五十卷。
English: Together with him, Song Xuan, who passed the junior high school entrance examination, died. Helping Song Xuan's descendants is tantamount to helping one's own son. He wrote "Iyi," "Poetry" and "Poetry" in fifty volumes.

古文：不幸早卒。
现代文：弟弟汝霖、汝方。
English: Brother Rulin, your side is up.

古文：孙谔，字元忠，睢阳人。
现代文：孙谔字元忠，睢阳人。
English: Sun Yat-sen's character, Yuan Zhong, was from Shenyang.

古文：父文用，以信厚称乡里，死谥慈静居士。
现代文：父亲孙文用，以信用厚道著称于乡里，死后谥慈静居士。
English: His father, Sun Wenyi, was well-known in the village for his trustworthiness, and after his death, he became a layman.

古文：谔少挺特不群，为张方平所器。
现代文：孙谔年轻时特立出众，被张方平所器重。
English: When he was young, Sun Yat-sen stood out from the crowd and was held in high regard by Zhang Fangping.

古文：登进士第，调哲信主簿，选为国子直讲。
现代文：登进士第，调任哲信县主簿，选为国子直讲。
English: He was promoted to the position of a scholar, transferred to the position of the chief accountant of Tetsushin County, and was elected as a direct disciple of Kuniko.

古文：陷虞蕃狱，免。
现代文：陷于虞蕃狱案，被免职。
English: Caught up in the Guozhen prison case, he was removed from his post.

古文：元祐初，起为太常博士，迁丞。
现代文：元初年，起用为太学博士，升任太常寺丞。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as Taigaku hakase and promoted to Taejoji no jo.

古文：哲宗卜后，太史惑阴阳拘忌之说，谔上疏太皇太后言： 家人委巷之语，不足以定大计，愿断自圣虑。 出为利、梓路转运判官，召拜礼部员外郎、左正言。
现代文：哲宗选择后嗣，太史被阴阳拘忌之说迷惑，孙谔上疏太皇太后说： 家人僻陋的话，不足以定大计，希望由圣明的考虑决断。 出任利、梓路转运判官，召授礼部员外郎、左正言。
English: Tetsuzong chose the heir, Taishi was puzzled by the yin and yang taboos, and Sun Yat-sen's wife, the Empress Dowager, said: If the family is remote, it is not enough to make a general plan, I hope that it will be decided by the consideration of the Holy Light.

古文：绍圣治元祐党，谔言： 汉、唐朋党之祸，其监不远。 蹇序辰编类章疏，谔又言： 朝廷当示信，以静安天下，请如前诏书，一切勿问。 尝侍对，论星文变咎，愿修省消复，罢幸西池及寝内降除授。
现代文：绍圣年间整治元党人，孙谔说： 汉、唐朋党的祸害，其教训并不久远。 蹇序辰编次奏章奏疏，孙谔又说： 朝廷应示以信用，以静安定天下，请如以前诏书，一切不问。 曾侍对皇帝，论星宿天文变咎，希望修身省心消除，废除临幸西池及在寝宫内降旨授官。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shoshen, Sun Yat-sen, the founder of the Chinese Communist Party, said, "The lessons of the evils of the Han and Tang Dynasties are not far away. " Sun Yat-sen also said, "The imperial court should show trust and tranquility to stabilize the world. As in the past, please do not ask for anything. " Sun Yat-sen, who once served the emperor, said that the stars and constellations were to blame for the changes in the heavens. He hoped to rectify himself and eliminate them. He abolished the imperial court in the West Lake and the imperial court in the sleeping palace.

古文：帝每患台谏乏人，谔曰： 士岂乏于世，顾陛下不知尔。 立疏可用者二十二人。
现代文：皇帝每每担心御史台谏院缺乏人才，孙谔说： 世间岂会缺乏士人，只是陛下不知道而已。 立即开列可以任用的二十二人。
English: The emperor was worried about the lack of talent in the Imperial History Research Institute. Sun Yat-sen said, "There may be a shortage of scholars in the world, but your majesty does not know about it. Immediately list the 22 people who can be appointed.

古文：章惇恶其拂己，出知广德军，徙唐州，提点湖南刑狱。
现代文：章厌恶孙谔违背自己，让他出任知广德军，移知唐州，提点湖南刑狱。
English: Zhang detested Sun Yat-sen's betrayal of him, and had him appointed to the Zhiguang German Army, transferred him to Tangzhou, and sent him to Hunan Prison.

古文：徽宗立，复为右司谏，首论大臣邪正、政事可废置因革者，帝称其鲠直。
现代文：徽宗即位，恢复为右司谏，首先论大臣邪佞正直、政事可以废置因革者，皇帝称赞他的鲠直。
English: Huizong ascended to the throne and was restored to the right priesthood. First of all, he said that the minister was honest, and the government affairs could be abolished because of the reformer. The emperor praised his honesty.

古文：议者欲以群臣封事付外详定，谔言： 君不密则失臣，是将速忠臣之祸矣，不宜宣泄。 乃止。
现代文：议论的人打算以群臣封事付外详细论定，孙谔说： 君主不秘密就会失去臣子，这样将加速忠臣的祸患，不应宣示泄露。 于是停止。
English: The debaters intended to use the seal of the group of vassals to make a detailed argument. Sun Yat-sen said, "If the monarch does not keep secrets, he will lose his vassals. This will accelerate the misfortune of his loyal vassals. It should not be announced and leaked." Then they stopped.

古文：迁左司谏，俄以疾卒。
现代文：升任左司谏，不久因病去世。
English: He was promoted to Zuo Jian, but died of illness soon after.

古文：谔与彭汝砺以气节相尚，汝砺亡，谔语所知曰： 吾居言责，不愧器资于地下矣。 及再入谏省，不能旬月，时论惜之。
现代文：孙谔与彭汝砺以气节相尚，汝砺死亡，孙谔告诉所认识的人说： 我处于谏言的职责，将无愧器资于地下。 等到他再次进入谏院，任职历时不到一个月，时论惜之。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Peng Rui-yen had the same temperament, but after Rui-yen's death, Sun Yat-sen told people he knew, "I am in the position to speak out, and I will do my best to go underground." When he re-entered the Summer Palace, he had been in office for less than a month, and he regretted it at the time.

