古文：杨一清，字应宁，其先云南安宁人。
现代文：杨一清，字应宇，他的祖先是云南安宁人。
English: Yang Yixing, also known as Ying Yu, is a native of Anning, Yunnan.

古文：父景，以化州同知致仕，携之居巴陵。
现代文：父亲杨景，从化州同知任上退休，带着他住在巴陵。
English: His father, Yang Jing, retired from his post as a tutor in Huazhou and took him to live in Baling.

古文：少能文，以奇童荐为翰林秀才。
现代文：他很小的时候就能写文章，被作为奇童推荐做了翰林秀才。
English: He was able to write articles when he was very young, and was recommended as a child prodigy.

古文：宪宗命内阁择师教之。
现代文：宪宗让内阁选择教师教育他。
English: Kenzong asked the cabinet to choose a teacher to educate him.

古文：年十四举乡试，登成化八年进士。
现代文：十四岁中乡试后，又登成化八年进士。
English: After passing the junior high school entrance examination at the age of fourteen, he was promoted to senior high school student eight years later.

古文：父丧，葬丹徒，遂家焉。
现代文：他父亲死后埋葬在丹徒，于是他就把家安置在那里了。
English: When his father died and was buried in Dantu, he made his home there.

古文：服除，授中书舍人。
现代文：除下丧服后，做了中书舍人。
English: After removing the mourning clothes, he did the Chinese calligraphy.

古文：久之，迁山西按察佥事，以副使督学陕西。
现代文：过了很久，升为山西按察佥事，又以副使身份到陕西任督学。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to Shanxi, and went to Shaanxi as an inspector with the status of deputy envoy.

古文：一清貌寝而性警敏，好谈经济大略。
现代文：一清相貌丑陋而天性机敏，喜欢谈论经世济民的大事方针。
English: Ugly-looking and quick-witted by nature, Issing likes to talk about the important policy of helping the people through the world.

古文：在陕八年，以其暇究边事甚悉。
现代文：在陕西八年中间，利用空闲时间把边疆的情况研究得很详备。
English: In the middle of eight years in Shaanxi, I used my free time to study the situation in the frontier in detail.

古文：入为太常寺少卿，进南京太常寺卿。
现代文：调入朝廷做太常寺少卿，又升为南京太常寺卿。
English: He was transferred to the imperial court as a junior chief priest of the Taizhoji Temple, and was promoted to the chief priest of the Nanjing Taizhoji Temple.

古文：弘治十五年用刘大夏荐，擢都察院左副都御史，督理陕西马政。
现代文：弘治十五年孝宗采纳刘大夏的举荐，提升他为都察院左副都御史，去陕西督理马政。
English: In the 15th year of the Hongzhi era, Xiaozong accepted Liu Daxia's recommendation and promoted him to the left vice-governor of the Duka Academy, and he went to Shaanxi to supervise horse politics.

古文：西番故饶马，而仰给中国茶饮以去疾。太祖著令，以蜀茶易番马，资军中用。
现代文：西边的番国本来有很多马，因为他们凭仗中国的茶叶去防治疾病，所以太祖曾制定法令，用四川的茶叶换取番人的马供军队使用。
English: In the west, there were many horses in the guarding country, because they relied on Chinese tea to prevent and control diseases. Therefore, Emperor Taizu issued a decree to exchange Sichuan tea for the guards' horses for use by the army.

古文：久而浸弛，奸人多挟私茶阑出为利，番马不时至。
现代文：时间长了，禁令松弛了，不法奸商经常贩运私茶出关去赢利，番人的马不再按时送过来了。
English: The time was long, the ban was relaxed, illegal profiteers often trafficked smuggled tea out of the customs to make a profit, and the keeper's horse was no longer delivered on time.

古文：一清严为禁，尽笼茶利于官，以服致诸番，番马大集。
现代文：一清对此严加禁止，把茶叶贸易的好处全部收归官府，以此制服各番，番人的马匹又源源而来了。
English: The I Ching strictly prohibited this, and brought all the benefits of the tea trade back to the government, thus subduing everyone, and the guards' horses came from everywhere.

古文：会寇大入花马池，帝命一清巡抚陕西，仍督马政。
现代文：当贼寇大举侵入花马池的时候，孝宗皇帝让一清巡抚陕西，同时仍旧督理马政。
English: When the bandits invaded the Flower and Horse Pond on a large scale, Emperor Xiaozong made I Ching the governor of Shaanxi Province, while still supervising horse politics.

古文：甫受事，寇已退。
现代文：一清才接受任命，贼寇已经撤退。
English: It took I Ching to accept the appointment, and the bandits had already retreated.

古文：乃选卒练兵，创平虏、红古二城以援固原；筑垣濒河以捍靖虏；劾罢贪庸总兵武安侯郑宏；裁镇守中官冗费，军纪肃然。
现代文：于是一清着手选将练兵，修筑平虏、红古两座城池，用以增援固原；又沿着黄河修建矮墙用以防范靖虏；检举揭发并罢免了贪婪、无能的总兵官、武安侯郑宏；裁减了镇守宦官多余的开支。这下，军队的纪律为之肃然。
English: Therefore, he began to select and train soldiers, built two castles, Pingru and Honggu, to reinforce Gouyuan; built a low wall along the Yellow River to prevent Jingru; exposed and dismissed the greedy and incompetent commander-in-chief, Wu'an Hou Zhenghong; and reduced the unnecessary expenses of the town guard eunuchs. Now, the discipline of the army was terrible.

古文：武宗初立，寇数万骑抵固原，总兵曹雄军隔绝不相闻。
现代文：武宗刚刚即位，贼寇几万人骑马进犯固原，总兵曹雄的军队被隔绝，音讯全无。
English: Emperor Wuzong had just ascended to the throne. Tens of thousands of thieves and robbers rode on horseback to invade Gouyuan. General Cao Xiong's army was cut off and there was no news.

古文：一清帅轻骑自平凉昼夜行，抵雄军，为之节度，多张疑兵胁寇，寇移犯隆德。
现代文：一清率领轻骑兵从平凉出发昼夜兼程，到达曹雄的军中，为他筹划、指挥，设了很多疑兵威胁敌人，敌军于是改犯隆德。
English: Iqing led the light cavalry from Pingliang and traveled day and night to reach Cao Xiong's army, planned and commanded for him, set up a lot of suspicious soldiers to threaten the enemy, and the enemy army changed the offense to Longde.

古文：一清夜发火炮，响应山谷间。
现代文：一清于夜间点发大炮，声音回荡在山谷中间。
English: Isshin fires cannons at night, and the sound reverberates across the valley.

古文：寇疑大兵至，遁出塞。
现代文：贼寇怀疑有大部队过来，就逃到边塞外去了。
English: Suspecting that a large force was approaching, the bandits fled outside the border fortress.

古文：一清以延绥、宁夏、甘肃有警不相援，患无所统摄，请遣大臣兼领之。
现代文：一清因为延绥、宁夏、甘肃有战争警报而不相互增援，原因在于无人统一指挥，请求朝廷派大臣来兼领各部。
English: I Ching did not reinforce each other because of war alerts in Yancheng, Ningxia, and Gansu. The reason was that there was no unified command, and he asked the imperial court to send a minister to take charge of all ministries.

古文：大夏请即命一清总制三镇军务。
现代文：大夏请求就此任命一清总制三镇的军事。
English: Daxia requested that the military leaders of the three towns of the I Ching General System be appointed.

古文：寻进右都御史。一清遂建议修边，其略曰：
现代文：不久一清升为右都御史，就建议修整边防，他的奏章大概说：
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of the Right Metropolitan, and he proposed to improve the border defense. His report said:

古文：陕西各边，延绥据险，宁夏、甘肃扼河山，惟花马池至灵州地宽延，城堡复疏。
现代文： 陕西的各处边境，延绥居于险要地带，宁夏、甘肃有河山可以扼守，只有花马池到灵州一带平地宽广，城堡又久不维修了。
English: All the borders of Shaanxi, Yan Xun lives in the critical zone, Ningxia and Gansu have rivers and mountains that can be protected, only the flat land from Hua Ma Chi to Lingzhou is wide, and the castle has not been maintained for a long time.

古文：寇毁墙入，则固原、庆阳、平凉、巩昌皆受患。
现代文：贼寇破墙而入，那么固原、庆阳、平凉、巩昌都要受害。
English: If thieves break through the wall and enter, then Gouyuan, Qingyang, Pingliang, and Gongchang will all suffer.

古文：成化初，宁夏巡抚徐廷璋筑边墙绵亘二百余里。
现代文：成化初年，宁夏巡抚徐廷璋修建战防墙长达二百余里。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the governor of Ningxia, Xu Tingyao, built a defensive wall of more than two hundred miles.

古文：在延绥者，余子俊修之甚固。
现代文：在延绥的边防墙，余子俊把它修得很牢固。
English: At the border wall in Yancheng, Yu Zijun built it very firmly.

古文：由是，寇不入套二十余年。
现代文：由此，贼寇有二十多年不曾到过河套地区。
English: As a result, the bandits have not been to the Hetao area for more than 20 years.

古文：后边备疏，墙堑日夷。
现代文：后来边防战备失修，护城墙和战壕一天天变为平地。
English: Later, the border defences fell into disrepair and the ramparts and trenches became flattened day by day.

古文：弘治末至今，寇连岁侵略。
现代文：弘治末年到现在，贼寇年年前来侵略。
English: From the end of the Heian period to the present, thieves and robbers have been invading Japan for years.

古文：都御史史琳请于花马池、韦州设营卫，总制尚书秦纮仅修四五小堡及靖虏至环庆治堑七百里，谓可无患。
现代文：都御史史琳请在花马池、韦州设立军营，总制、尚书秦仅仅修建四五个小土堡，又在靖虏到环庆间开挖七百里战壕，以为这样就不必忧虑了。
English: The general secretary, Shangshu Qin, only built four or five small earthen fortifications, and dug seven hundred miles of trenches between Jingru and Huanqing, thinking that there was no need to worry.

古文：不一二年，寇复深入。是纮所修不足捍敌。
现代文：不到一二年，贼寇又打了进来，这说明秦所修建的土堡和开挖的战壕不能挡住敌人。
English: In less than a year or two, the bandits invaded again, which shows that the earthen fort built by Qin and the trenches dug could not stop the enemy.

古文：臣久官陕西，颇谙形势。
现代文：我在陕西做了多年的官，对敌我情形很知道一些。
English: I have been an official in Shaanxi for many years, so I know a lot about the enemy and our situation.

古文：寇动称数万，往来倏忽。
现代文：贼寇前来动辄声称有数万人马，往来飘忽，速度很快。
English: Thieves and bandits come at any time and claim that there are tens of thousands of horses, and the traffic is erratic and fast.

古文：未至，征兵多扰费；既至，召援辄后时。
现代文：我方呢？敌人没到就征调部队，多有扰民破费的地方，敌人来后征调援兵又耽误军机。
English: What about our side? The enemy mobilizes troops before arriving, and there are many places where they disturb the people and waste money. The enemy mobilizes reinforcements after arriving and delays military aircraft.

古文：欲战，则彼不来；持久，则我师坐老。
现代文：我想打仗时敌人不来，持久驻防就会使我们的军队坐至疲惫。
English: I think that if the enemy does not come when we are at war, our army will be exhausted if we stay there for a long time.

古文：臣以为防边之策，大要有四：修浚墙堑，以固边防；增设卫所，以壮边兵；经理灵、夏，以安内附；整饬韦州，以遏外侵。
现代文：我以为守护边疆的策略，要点有四条：修筑墙堡，开挖战壕，加强防备；增设卫所，壮大边防力量；治理好灵州、宁夏，安定内附的番人；修整韦州城，用以遏制敌人前来侵略。
English: I think there are four main points in the strategy of guarding the frontier: building wall forts, digging trenches, and strengthening defenses; adding guard stations and strengthening border defense forces; managing Lingzhou and Ningxia well, and stabilizing the attached guards; and improving Weizhou City to deter the enemy from coming to invade.

古文：今河套即周朔方，汉定襄，赫连勃勃统万城也。
现代文： 现在的河套也就是周朝所说的朔方，汉代所说的定襄，赫连勃勃所辖的统万城。
English: The current Hetao is also the Shuo Fang mentioned in the Zhou Dynasty, the Ding Xiang mentioned in the Han Dynasty, and the Tong Wancheng governed by Herengong.

古文：唐张仁愿筑三受降城，置烽堠千八百所，突厥不敢逾山牧马。
现代文：唐朝张仁愿在这里修建了三座受降城，设置了一千八百所烽火台和望台，突厥人不敢过山来放牧牛马。
English: Zhang Ren of the Tang Dynasty was willing to build three capitals here, and set up 1,800 bonfires and watchtowers. The Turks did not dare to cross the mountains to graze cattle and horses.

古文：古之举大事者，未尝不劳于先，逸于后。
现代文：古代那些干成大事业的人无不是劳苦在先，然后才得到安逸。
English: In ancient times, those who achieved great things did so through hard work first, and only then did they find comfort.

古文：夫受降据三面险，当千里之蔽。
现代文：那受降城依仗三面险要形势，充当千里河山的屏障。
English: The besieged city is in a precarious situation on three sides, acting as a barrier to thousands of rivers and mountains.

古文：国初舍受降而卫东胜，已失一面之险。
现代文：开国初我们放弃受降城而保卫东胜，已失去了一面天险之地。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, we gave up defending Dongsheng against the fall of the city, and have lost a place of natural danger.

古文：其后又辍东胜以就延绥，则以一面而遮千余里之冲，遂使河套沃壤为寇巢穴。
现代文：后来又放弃东胜，驻兵延绥，以一面形势防阻一千多余里的要害地带，由此使得河套一带沃土变成了贼寇的巢穴。
English: Later, it abandoned Dongsheng and stationed troops in Yancheng, taking advantage of the situation to block more than a thousand miles of critical areas. As a result, the fertile land around Hetao became a den of thieves and robbers.

古文：深山大河，势乃在彼，而宁夏外险反南备河。
现代文：深山大河，有利地势掌握在敌人手中，而宁夏对外防御的天险反过来倒做向南防御黄河的屏障。
English: Shenshan River, the advantageous situation is in the hands of the enemy, while the natural danger of Ningxia's external defense, in turn, serves as a barrier to the south to defend the Yellow River.

古文：此边患所以相寻而不可解也。
现代文：这就是边防战患相连无法消除的原因。
English: This is why the problems of border wars are inextricably linked.

古文：诚宜复守东胜，因河为固，东接大同，西属宁夏，使河套方千里之地，归我耕牧，屯田数百万亩，省内地转输，策之上也。
现代文：为今之计，实在应当再驻守东胜，依仗黄河固守，往东连着大同，向西接应宁夏，使河套一带方圆千里的土地归我们耕种、放牧，屯田几百万亩，减少从内地运送的需求，这是上策。
English: For the present plan, we should really stay in Dongsheng again, rely on the Yellow River to hold fast, connect Datong to the east, and connect Ningxia to the west, so that the land of a thousand miles around the river should belong to us for farming and grazing, millions of mu of farmland, and reduce the demand for transportation from the mainland. This is the best policy.

古文：如或不能，及今增筑防边，敌来有以待之，犹愈无策。
现代文：假如不可能这样，趁现在增建边防战备，敌人来了有办法抵御，也比束手无策好些。 
English: If this is not possible, it is better to take advantage of the current increase in border defense and combat readiness, and have a way to resist the enemy, rather than having nothing to do.

古文：因条具便宜：延绥安边营石涝池至横城三百里，宜设墩台九百座，暖谯九百间，守军四千五百人；石涝池至定边营百六十三里，平衍宜墙者百三十一里，险崖峻阜可铲削者三十二里，宜为墩台，连接宁夏东路；花马池无险，敌至仰客兵，宜置卫；兴武营守御所兵不足，宜召募；自环庆以西至宁州，宜增兵备一人；横城以北，黄河南岸有墩三十六，宜修复。
现代文：进而他逐条陈述了方便的措施：延绥安边营石涝池到横城三百里，应设土墩、石台九百座，取暖的望台九百间，驻军四千五百人；在涝池到安边营之间一百六十三里，土地平坦、宽广，便于修建防护墙的有一百三十一里，山势险峻但可以铲平、修整的有三十二里，应设土堡、望敌台，连接宁夏东路的防线；花马池没有天险，敌人来时依仗临时武装，应该设置卫站，兴武营守御所兵力不足，应召募新兵入伍；自环庆往西到宁州，中间应增派兵备一人；横城以北，黄河南岸现有三十六座土堡，应予修复。
English: He then went on to state the convenient measures one by one: in the three hundred miles from Yancheng's Anbian Camp to Hengcheng, there should be a mound, nine hundred stone platforms, nine hundred observation platforms for heating, and four thousand and five hundred troops stationed; in the one hundred and sixty-three miles between Yancheng's Anbian Camp and Yancheng's Anbian Camp, the land is flat and wide, and it is convenient to build a protective wall for one hundred and thirty-one miles; the mountains are steep but can be leveled and repaired for thirty-two miles; a earthen fort, a lookout tower, and a defense line connecting Ningxia East

古文：帝可其议。大发帑金数十万，使一清筑墙。
现代文：武宗同意了他的建议，拨出几十万两国库银，让一清修建防护墙。
English: Wu Zong agreed to his suggestion and allocated hundreds of thousands of the two countries' treasury silver to let Iqing build a protective wall.

古文：而刘瑾憾一清不附己，一清遂引疾归。
现代文：而刘瑾恨一清不归附自己，一清无奈就托病还乡去了。
English: But Liu Yu hated that Iqing did not return to his side, and Iqing reluctantly went back to his hometown on the pretext of illness.

古文：其成者，在要害间仅四十里。
现代文：修筑成的防护墙只有位于要害地带的四十里而已。
English: The fortified wall is only forty miles from the critical zone.

古文：瑾诬一清冒破边费，逮下锦衣狱。
现代文：刘瑾又诬告一清冒领、浪费边防费用，把他逮进了锦衣卫的监狱里。
English: Liu Yao also falsely accused Iqing of swindling the collar and wasting border defense expenses, and arrested him and put him in the prison of Jin Rongwei.

古文：大学士李东阳、王鏊力救得解。仍致仕归，先后罚米六百石。
现代文：大学士李东阳、王鏊竭力营救，才被释放出来，仍旧命令他罢官回家，为此，他前前后后被扣发的禄米有六百石之多。
English: College students Li Dongyang and Wang Qi tried their best to rescue him, but he was only released after they ordered him to return home. As a result, he was deprived of more than 600 kilos of rice.

古文：安化王寘鐇反。诏起一清总制军务，与总兵官神英西讨，中官张永监其军。
现代文：安化王蜫钅番起来造反，朝廷诏令一清出来总制军事，与总兵官神英一道西讨，宦官张永监督他的军队。
English: Anhua Wang Xiban rebelled, and the imperial court issued a decree to clear out the general system of military affairs. Together with the general officer Shen Ying, he fought in the west, and the eunuch Zhang Yong supervised his army.

古文：未至，一清故部将仇钺已捕执之。
现代文：军队还没到，一清原来的部将仇钺已活捉了蜫钅番。
English: Before the army arrived, the I Ching's original commander, Qiu Yao, had already captured Zhang Fan alive.

古文：一清驰至镇，宣布德意。
现代文：一清飞马到达仇钺的兵镇，宣布了朝廷对劳苦将士的慰问。
English: Once Qing Feima arrived at the military town of Qianlong, he announced the condolences of the imperial court to the hard-working soldiers.

古文：张永旋亦至，一清与结纳，相得甚欢。
现代文：张永不久也到了，一清和他结交，在一块共事得都很快乐。
English: Zhang Yong also arrived soon after, Iqing made friends with him, and they were very happy to work together.

古文：知永与瑾有隙，乘间扼腕言曰： 赖公力定反侧。然此易除也，如国家内患何。 
现代文：他知道张永和刘瑾有矛盾，就借机愤恨地说 ：仗着您的力量平定了反贼，但蜫钅番容易除掉，拿国家内部的祸害又怎么样呢？ 
English: He knew that Zhang Yong and Liu Ye had a conflict, so he took the opportunity to say angrily: With your strength, you have pacified the anti-thieves, but it is easy to get rid of them, what about the scourge within the country?

古文：永曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：张永问 ：你指的是什么？ 
English: Zhang Yongqian: What are you referring to?

古文：一清遂促席画掌作 瑾 字。
现代文：一清就凑上去在手掌中画了一个 瑾 字。
English: As soon as he was clear, he drew a swastika in the palm of his hand.

古文：永难之曰： 是家晨夕上前，枝附根据，耳目广矣。 
现代文：张永为难地说 ：这个家伙一天到晚在皇上身边，依附他的人盘根错节，抱成一团，他的耳目太多了。 
English: Zhang Yong was puzzled and said, "This guy is at the emperor's side all day long. The people who cling to him are entangled in knots, holding them together. He has too many eyes and ears."

古文：一清慷慨曰： 公亦上信臣，讨贼不付他人而付公，意可知。
现代文：一清激动地说 ：您也是皇上信任的大臣，讨伐反贼，不交给别人办而交给您，皇上的用意可以想见。
English: Ichikiyo said excitedly, "You are also the emperor's trusted minister, you fight against thieves, you don't leave it to others, you are in charge, you can imagine the emperor's intention."

古文：今功成奏捷，请间论军事，因发瑾奸，极陈海内愁怨，惧变起心腹。
现代文：现在大功告成，您可以奏上捷报，请得机会向皇上讲论军事，借此机会揭发刘瑾干的坏事，极力陈述天下人的怨恨和对心腹之患、宫廷政变的担心。
English: Now that the great work has been accomplished, you can report the success. Please take the opportunity to talk to the emperor about the military, take this opportunity to expose the bad things Liu Xuan did, and vigorously state the resentment of the people of the world and the fear of a confidant and a palace coup.

古文：上英武，必听公诛瑾。
现代文：皇上聪明、勇武，一定会听取您的意见，杀掉刘瑾。
English: The emperor is clever and brave. He will surely listen to your opinion and kill Liu Xuan.

古文：瑾诛，公益柄用，悉矫前弊，收天下心。
现代文：刘瑾除掉后，您越发得到重用，就可以发愤努力，革除以前的弊端，得到天下人的拥戴。
English: After the removal of Liu Wei, the more you get reused, you can work hard to eliminate the previous drawbacks and get the world's support.

古文：吕强、张承业暨公，千载三人耳。 
现代文：吕强、张承业和您，将是千年来三大豪杰呢。 
English: Lv Qiang, Zhang Chengye and you will be the three great heroes of the millennium.

古文：永曰： 脱不济，奈何？ 
现代文：张永问道： 假若不成功，怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhang Yong asked: What if it doesn't work out?

古文：一清曰： 言出于公必济。
现代文：一清说： 话从您口中说出，一定会成功。
English: Ichikiyo said, "If the words come out of your mouth, you are sure to succeed."

古文：万一不信，公顿首据地泣，请死上前，剖心以明不妄，上必为公动。
现代文：万一皇上不相信，您就爬在地下叩头哭述，在皇上面前请求自杀，挖开心肝以显示所说并非假话，皇上一定会因为您而感动的。
English: In the unlikely event that the Emperor did not believe you, you would crawl underground, prostrate yourself and weep, beg to commit suicide in front of the Emperor, and tear your heart out to show that what you said was not a lie. The Emperor would certainly be moved because of you.

古文：苟得请，即行事，毋须臾缓。 
现代文：如果您得到皇上批准，就立即行动，不要有片刻迟缓。 
English: If you receive the Emperor's approval, you must act immediately, without delay.

古文：于是永勃然起曰： 嗟乎，老奴何惜余年不以报主哉！ 
现代文：于是张永发愤站起来说： 嗨，老奴怎么能爱惜余生而不以生命报效皇上呢？ 
English: So Zhang Yong angrily stood up and said: Hey, how can the old man spare the rest of his life and not repay the emperor with his life?

古文：竟如一清策诛瑾。
现代文：最后按照一清的计策诛杀了刘瑾。
English: Finally, according to I Ching's plan, he killed Liu Xuan.

古文：永以是德一清，左右之，得召还，拜户部尚书。
现代文：张永从此感激一清，在朝中为他张罗，一清被召回朝中，当了户部尚书。
English: Zhang Yong has been grateful to Iqing ever since. He was called for him in the court of the emperor. Iqing was recalled to the court of the emperor and became the head of the household.

古文：论功，加太子少保，赐金币。
现代文：评定功绩，加封为太子少保，得到一笔赏银。
English: He was awarded a silver medal for his meritorious service and was given the additional title of Prince's Junior Bodyguard.

古文：寻改吏部。
现代文：不久改任吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the position of secretary of the Ministry of Public Security.

古文：一清于时政最通练，而性阔大。爱乐贤士大夫，与共功名。
现代文：一清对当时政治最为通达、干练，而且心胸宽广，热爱贤士大夫，与他们一道成就功名。
English: At that time, I Ching was the most politically astute, capable, and broad-minded person. He loved the sages and doctors, and worked with them to achieve fame.

古文：凡为瑾所构陷者，率见甄录。
现代文：凡是被刘瑾所诬陷的人才，大都被他酌加录用了。
English: All the talented people who were framed by Liu Wei were mostly recruited by him.

古文：朝有所知，夕即登荐，门生遍天下。
现代文：早上知道一个人才，当天就予推荐，因此他的门生遍布天下。
English: If you know a talent in the morning, it will be recommended the same day, so his protégés are all over the world.

古文：尝再帅关中，起偏裨至大将封侯者，累累然不绝。
现代文：他曾经两次在关中带兵，所提拔的偏裨小将做到大将乃至封侯的人，接连不断。
English: He had twice led soldiers in Guanzhong, and the promoted minor generals became generals and even feudal lords, one after another.

古文：馈谢有所入，缘手即散之。
现代文：有人送礼进来，顺手就散发给别人了。
English: Someone came in with a gift, and it was promptly distributed to others.

古文：大盗躏中原，一清疏请命将调兵。前后凡数上，皆报可。
现代文：造反的大盗在中原作乱，一清上书请求调兵遣将，前后共几次上书，武宗都批准了。
English: The rebellious bandits caused turmoil in Central Plains, and I Ching submitted a petition requesting the transfer of troops and dispatching generals. There were several petitions before and after, and Emperor Wu approved all of them.

古文：盗平，加少保、太子太保，荫锦衣百户。
现代文：盗贼被镇压后，一清被加封为少保、太子太保，荫子锦衣百户。
English: After the suppression of the thieves, I Ching was awarded the titles of Shao Bao, Taibo, and Jin Zi Jin Yi.

古文：再推内阁，不用。用尚书靳贵，而进一清少傅、太子太傅。
现代文：又被推荐入内阁为阁员，但武宗没有用他，而是用了尚书靳贵，把一清升为少傅、太子太傅。
English: He was also recommended to join the cabinet as a member of the cabinet, but Emperor Wu did not use him, but used Shangshu Xigui to promote Iqing to Shao Fu and Taifu.

古文：给事中王昂论选法币，指一清植私党，帝为谪昂。
现代文：给事中王昂上书议论选用官吏的弊端，指责一清扶植私党，武宗为此把王昂贬了官。
English: In the middle of the matter, Wang Ang wrote a letter discussing the drawbacks of the selection of officials, accusing I Ching of supporting a private party, and Wu Zong demoted Wang Ang for this reason.

古文：一清更申救，优旨报闻。
现代文：一清又上书解救他，武宗温和地回答说 知道了 。
English: Once again, he wrote to rescue him, and Bu Zong replied mildly, "I understand."

古文：乾清宫灾，诏求直言。
现代文：乾清宫发生火灾，武宗下诏求取正直的谏议。
English: A fire broke out in the palace of Emperor Qianqing, and Emperor Wu issued an edict demanding an honest discussion.

古文：一清上书言视朝太迟，享祀太慢，西内创梵宇，禁中宿边兵，畿内皇店之害，江南织造之扰。
现代文：一清上书讲到皇上上朝太迟，祭祀礼数不周，宫廷西部修建僧房，紫禁城中驻扎着边防部队，城郊设立的皇店有害无益，江南织造的设立骚扰一方。
English: The I Ching document mentioned that the emperor was too late to ascend the throne, the number of rituals was inadequate, the western part of the palace was built with monks' quarters, the border troops were stationed in the Forbidden City, the imperial stores set up on the outskirts of the city were harmful and useless, and the establishment of Jiangnan Weaving was a nuisance.

古文：因引疾乞归，帝慰留之。
现代文：为此他自称生病，请求回乡，武宗慰问并挽留了他。
English: For this reason, he claimed to be ill and asked to return to his hometown. Buzong consoled him and kept him.

古文：大学士杨廷和忧去，命一清兼武英殿大学士入参机务。
现代文：大学士杨廷和回家守丧后，武宗让一清兼任武英殿大学士，入内阁参与机密大事。
English: After Yang Tinghe, a university scholar, went home to attend the funeral, Wu Zong asked Iqing to concurrently serve as a university scholar of the Wu Ying palace and enter the cabinet to participate in confidential events.

古文：张永寻得罪罢，而义子钱宁用事。
现代文：张永不久因罪罢官，而他的干儿子钱宁却掌了权。
English: Zhang Yong was soon removed from office for his crimes, but his eldest son, Channing, took power.

古文：宁故善一清，有构之者因蓄怨。
现代文：钱宁过去曾喜欢过一清，有人从中间挑拨所以心中对一清怀了恨。
English: Channing had liked I Ching in the past, but someone instigated it from the middle, so she harbored hatred for I Ching in her heart.

古文：会灾异，一清自劾，极陈时政，中有 狂言惑圣听，匹夫摇国是，禁廷杂介胄之夫，京师无藩篱之托 语，讥切近幸，帝弗省。
现代文：恰好碰上灾变，一清上书自我批评，极力陈述当时政治，中间有几句话说 有人用大话迷惑皇上，破坏国家大事，内廷中夹杂了武夫，京城都没有可以依靠的屏障 ，用来批评武宗身边宠信的小人，武宗看后并不理解。
English: Just when disaster struck, Ichikiyo wrote a letter of self-criticism, vigorously stating the politics of the time, with a few words in the middle: Some people use big words to confuse the emperor and sabotage national affairs, the inner court is mixed with warriors, and the capital has no barrier that can be relied on. It was used to criticize the trusted villains around Emperor Wuzong, but Emperor Wuzong did not understand it.

古文：宁与江彬辈闻之，大怒。使优人于帝前为蜚语，刺讥一清。
现代文：钱宁与江彬等人听说后大为恼怒，就让戏子们在武宗面前制造流言蜚语，影射一清。
English: When Channing and Jiang Bin heard about this, they were very angry, so they asked the actors to create rumors and insinuations in front of Bu Zong.

古文：时有考察罢官者，嗾武学生朱大周讦一清阴事，而以宁为内主。给事御史周金、陈轼等交章劾大周妄言，请究主使，帝不听。
现代文：当时有一个在考察中被罢官的人，教唆武学生朱大周攻击一清的隐私，钱宁在宫中充当内应，给事御史周金、陈轼等接连上书指斥大周一派胡言，请追究幕后主使人，武宗不听。
English: At that time, there was a person who had been dismissed during the inspection, instigating Zhu Dazhou, a martial arts student, to attack Iqing's privacy. Channing acted as a secret agent in the palace, and successively sent a letter to Zhou Jin, Chen Qi, and others to denounce the nonsense of the Dazhou faction. Please investigate the masterminds behind the scenes. Bu Zong did not listen.

古文：一清乃力请骸骨归，赐敕褒谕，给夫廪如制。
现代文：一清于是尽力请求退休还乡，武宗传下令表扬了他一番，让他退休，按规定供给仆役、禄米。
English: As a result, Iqing tried his best to request retirement and return to his hometown, and Bu Zongxuan ordered to praise him the most, let him retire, and provide servants and rice according to regulations.

古文：帝南征，幸一清第，乐饮两昼夜，赋诗赓和以十数。
现代文：武宗后来南征时，还来过一清的府第，君臣高兴地喝了两天两夜酒，赋诗唱和达十次左右。
English: Later, when Emperor Wuzong was on the Southern Expedition, he also visited Iqing Prefecture. The monarchs and ministers happily drank wine for two days and two nights, and sang and played poetry up to ten times.

古文：一清从容讽止，帝遂不为江浙行。
现代文：一清平静地劝止武宗，武宗于是取消了江、浙之行。
English: Iqing calmly advised Busong to stop, and Busong then cancelled his trip to Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：世宗为世子时，献王尝言楚有三杰：刘大夏、李东阳及一清也，心识之。
现代文：世宗还是世子的时候，献王曾说楚地有三杰，就是刘大夏、李东阳和杨一清，世宗心里记下了。
English: When Sejong was still a child, King Xian said that there were three outstanding people in Chu, namely Liu Daxia, Li Dongyang and Yang Yiching, which Sejong took to heart.

古文：及即位，廷臣交荐一清，乃遣官赐金币存问，谕以宣召期，趣使有言。
现代文：等即位后，大臣们接连推荐一清，世宗就派官下去赠送银币给他表示慰问，告诉他召他回朝的时间，催他上书对政治发表意见。
English: After the enthronement, the ministers successively recommended Iqing, and Shizong sent officials down to give him silver coins to express his condolences, tell him the time to call him back to the dynasty, and urge him to submit a letter to express his opinion on politics.

古文：一清陈谢，特予一子官中书舍人。
现代文：一清上书谢恩，世宗特别给他一子做中书舍人的奖赏。
English: I Ching wrote to express his gratitude, and Shizong gave him a special reward for his son being the one to donate the book.

古文：嘉靖三年十二月戊午诏一清以少傅、太子太傅改兵部尚书、左都御史，总制陕西三边军务。
现代文：嘉靖三年十二月二十八日，诏令一清以少傅、太子太傅的品位改任兵部尚书、左都御史，总制陕西三边军事。
English: On December 28th, the third year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Emperor issued an edict to Iqing, who was promoted to the rank of Shao Fu and Taifu, and was assigned to the military department of Shangshu, Zuo Miyoshi, and the general system of Shaanxi trilateral military.

古文：故相行边，自一清始。
现代文：前任首辅充当边地将帅，这是从一清开始才有的事。
English: The previous chief aide acted as a field marshal, which is something that has only been done since the Qing Dynasty.

古文：温诏褒美，比之郭子仪。
现代文：诏书以温和的语气赞扬他，把他比作郭子仪。
English: The edict praised him in a mild tone, comparing him to Guo Ziyi.

古文：一清至是三为总制，部曲皆踊跃喜。
现代文：一清到现在已是第三次出任总制，士卒对此欢喜雀跃。
English: It is now the third time that I Ching has served as the general secretary, and the cadres are very happy about this.

古文：亦不剌窜西海，为西宁洮河害，金献民言抚便，独一清请剿。
现代文：亦不剌逃窜到西海，成为西宁、洮河一带的祸害，金献民认为召安有利，一清却主张剿灭他。
English: He also fled to the West Sea and became a scourge in Xining and the Lu River area. The people of Jinxian believed that it was beneficial to invite An, but the people of Yiching advocated exterminating him.

古文：土鲁番求贡，陈九畴欲绝之，一清则请抚。
现代文：土鲁番请求上贡，陈九畴想回绝他，一清却请对土鲁番加以安抚。
English: Turuban asked for tribute, Chen Jiuzang wanted to refuse him, but Iqing asked Turuban to be appeased.

古文：时帅诸将肄习行阵，尝曰： 无事时当如有事堤防，有事时当如无事镇静。 
现代文：他经常带领军官们演习阵法，曾说： 没有战事的时候应当像有战事一样提防着，有战事的时候应当像没事一样镇静。 
English: He often led his officers in the practice of battle formations, and once said: "When there is no war, one should be as vigilant as if there were a war, and when there is a war, one should be as calm as if there were no war."

古文：会张璁等力排费宏，御史吉棠因请还一清内阁。
现代文：正当张璁等极力排挤费宏时，御史吉棠借机请把一清再调入内阁。
English: Just when Zhang Ye and others were trying their best to oust Fei Hong, Mishi Jitang took the opportunity to re-assign I Ching to the cabinet.

古文：给事中章侨、御史侯秩等争之。帝谪秩官，召一清为吏部尚书、武英殿大学士。
现代文：给事中章侨、御史侯秩等上书争辩，世宗把侯秩贬了官，就此召一清回朝当了吏部尚书、武英殿大学士。
English: In the middle of the matter, there was a dispute over the title of prince, prince's rank, and so on, and Shizong demoted the prince's rank, and then summoned Iqing back to the court to become the secretary of the personnel department and the scholar of the Imperial Palace.

古文：既入见，加少师，仍兼太子太傅，非故事也。
现代文：入朝觐见后，加少师衔，仍兼太子太傅，这也是过去没有过的事。
English: After entering the imperial court, he was given a lesser rank and was still crown prince, which was something that had never happened before.

古文：亡何，《献皇帝实录》成，加太子太师、谨身殿大学士。
现代文：过了不久，《献皇帝实录》成书，升一清为太子太师、谨身殿大学士。
English: Not long after, the "Offering to the Emperor Record" was published, and Sheng Iqing became the crown prince and grand master, as well as a scholar of the Imperial Household.

古文：一清以不预纂修辞，不许。
现代文：一清以自己没有参加编写为理由推辞，世宗不允许。
English: Ip Ching declined on the grounds that he did not participate in the compilation, but Sejong did not allow it.

古文：王宪奏捷，推功一清，加特进左柱国、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：王宪奏上捷报，又归功于一清，加封他特进左柱国、华盖殿大学士。
English: Wang Xian played a successful report, and also credited to I Ching, plus he was specially promoted to the left pillar country, Huagai Dian University.

古文：费宏已去，一清遂为首辅。
现代文：费宏这时已经去职，一清于是做了首辅。
English: Fei Hong had already left the post at this time, and I Ching then became the first assistant.

古文：帝赐银章二，曰 耆德忠正 ，曰 绳愆纠违 ，令密封言事。
现代文：世宗赐给他两枚银章，一个刻着 耆德忠正 ，一个刻着 绳愆纠违 ，让他密封奏本，上书议事。
English: The Sejong gave him two silver seals, one engraved with "德忠正" (德忠正) and one with "绳纠违" (绳纠违), and asked him to seal the record and submit it for deliberation.

古文：与张璁论张永前功，起为提督团营。
现代文：他跟张璁说起张永以前的功劳，张永又得以出任提督团营。
English: He told Zhang Zhe about Zhang Yong's previous achievements, and Zhang Yong was able to serve as the admiral of the battalion.

古文：给事中陆粲请增筑边墙，推明一清曩时议，一清因力从臾之。
现代文：给事中陆粲请求增建边防上的防护墙，奏章中援引了一清过去的主张，一清于是极力肯定他的主意。
English: In response to Lu Yao's request to build an additional protective wall on the border, Issing cited Issing's past assertions in the petition, and Issing then vigorously affirmed his idea.

古文：帝为发帑金，命侍郎王廷相往，然久之亦竟止。
现代文：世宗为此拨发国库银，让侍郎王廷相过去经办，但是时间长了也终于停顿下来。
English: For this purpose, King Sejong allocated silver from the national treasury and asked his attendant, King Tingjong, to take care of it, but it took a long time and finally came to a halt.

古文：《明伦大典》成，加正一品俸。
现代文：《明伦大典》成书以后，一清提了正一品的官俸。
English: After the book "Ming Lun Da Dian" was completed, Iqing raised the official salary of one official.

古文：初， 大礼 议起，一清方家居，见张璁疏，寓书门人乔宇曰： 张生此议，圣人复起，不能易也。 
现代文：当初 ，大礼 的争论开始后，一清正在家赋闲，见到张璁的上书，他写信给门人乔守说： 张生的这种主张，即使圣人再生，也不能修改了。 
English: At first, after the dispute over the gift began, Iqing was idle at home, and when he saw Zhang Ye's petition, he wrote to the doorkeeper Qiao Shou and said: Zhang Sheng's proposition cannot be amended even if the sage is reborn.

古文：又劝席书早赴召，以定大议。
现代文：他又劝席书及早应召，以便把 大礼 的议论确定下来。
English: He also urged the chairpersons to be summoned early in order to finalize the discussion of the grand ceremony.

古文：璁等既骤显，颇引一清。
现代文：张璁等人突然间显贵起来，很想拉一清来作为自己的帮助。
English: Zhang Qian and others suddenly became prominent, and they were very eager to help as their own.

古文：帝亦以一清老臣，恩礼加渥。免常朝日讲侍班，朔望朝参，令晨初始入阁视事。
现代文：世宗也因为一清是年老的大臣，对他的恩礼很是厚重，免了他正常的朝见、日讲、值班，每月初一、十五日才参加早朝，并且让他迟到清晨再进内阁办公事。
English: Because he was an old minister, Sejong was also very generous to him, exempting him from the normal morning meeting, daily lecture, and duty, only participating in the early morning on the first and fifteenth days of each month, and letting him enter the cabinet office late in the morning.

古文：御书、和章及金币、牢醴之赐甚渥。
现代文：世宗给了他很多御书、和诗、金币及酒肉等赏赐。
English: The Sejong gave him many books, poems, gold coins, meat and wine, and other rewards.

古文：所言边事、国计，大小无不倾听。
现代文：他所建议的边疆守御、国务事宜，无论大小，世宗无不倾听。
English: No matter how big or small, Sejong always listens to his advice on border protection and state affairs.

古文：璁与桂萼既攻去费宏，意一清必援己。一清顾请召谢迁，心怨之。
现代文：张璁与桂萼把费宏排挤走以后，心想一清一定帮自己的忙，一清却请召谢迁还朝，他们心里就恨起一清来。
English: After Zhang Qian and Gui Cale pushed Feihong away, they thought that Iqing would definitely help them. However, Iqing invited Xie Qian to return, and they hated Iqing in their hearts.

古文：迁未至，璁已入内阁，多所更建。
现代文：谢迁人还没到，张璁已经进入内阁，把很多事都改了样。
English: Before Xie Qianren arrived, Zhang Ye had already entered the cabinet and changed many things.

古文：一清引故事稍裁抑，其党积不平。
现代文：一清援引惯例对他稍加压抑，他们那伙人就愤愤不平。
English: As soon as Qing cited the practice of slightly suppressing him, their group was indignant.

古文：锦衣聂能迁讦璁，璁欲置之死，一清不可。
现代文：锦衣聂能迁攻击了张璁，张璁想把他置于死地，一清不同意。
English: The brocade pigeon attacked Zhang Xuan. Zhang Xuan wanted to put him to death, but Iqing disagreed.

古文：璁怒，上疏阴诋一清，又嗾黄绾排之甚力。
现代文：张璁恼了，上书暗中诋毁一清，又唆使黄绾起劲地排挤一清。
English: Annoyed, Zhang Yao secretly slandered Iqing in the petition and instigated Huang Qi to vigorously oust Iqing.

古文：一清疏辨，言璁以能迁故排己，且傍及璁他语。
现代文：一清上书辩解，说张璁因为能迁一事所以排斥自己，并且又涉及到张璁说过的别的话，就此请求退休。
English: Iqing wrote a letter of apology, saying that Zhang Ye had excluded himself because of the relocation, and also related to other words that Zhang Ye had said, and requested retirement.

古文：因乞骸骨。
现代文：世宗为他们双方做了劝解。
English: Sejong advised both of them.

古文：帝为两解之。一清又因灾变请戒饬百官和衷，复乞宥议礼诸臣罪，璁益憾。
现代文：一清又因为灾变上书，请世宗告诫百官注意同心同德，又请宽恕过去议礼大臣的罪过。张璁这下更加恨他了。
English: Because of the calamity, Iqing also wrote a letter, asking Shizong to admonish the hundred officials to pay attention to the same mind and the same virtue, and also to forgive the sins of the former Minister of Ceremonies. Zhang Ye now hated him even more.

古文：柱萼入内阁，亦不相能。
现代文：桂萼进入内阁后，也和他互不服气。
English: After Katsura Calypso entered the cabinet, she was also not satisfied with him.

古文：一清屡求去，且言： 今持论者尚纷更，臣独主安静；尚刻核，臣独主宽平。
现代文：一清一再请求解职，并且说： 现在有权说话的人们喜欢改这改那，我却主张安宁、平静；他们崇尚尖刻的考查，我却主张宽松、和平。
English: Iqing repeatedly asked to be relieved of his duties, and said: People who have the right to speak now like to change this and that, but I stand for peace and tranquility; they advocate harsh examination, but I stand for relaxation and peace.

古文：用是多龃龉，愿避贤者路。 
现代文：因此相互之间意见有很多不同，我愿意为能人避开道路。 
English: So there are a lot of differences of opinion between each other, and I'm willing to get out of the way for someone who can.

古文：帝复温旨褒之。
现代文：世宗又用温和的诏书表扬他一番。
English: Sejong also praised him the most with a mild edict.

古文：而给事中王准、陆粲发璁、萼招权纳贿状，帝立罢璁、萼，且暴其罪。
现代文：这时给事中王准、陆粲揭发了张璁、桂萼揽权、纳贿的罪状，世宗立即罢免了张璁、桂萼，并且公开了他们的罪行。
English: At this time, Wang Quan and Lu Yao exposed Zhang Ye and Gui Cale for power-grabbing and bribe-taking, and Shizong immediately dismissed Zhang Ye and Gui Cale and exposed their crimes.

古文：其党霍韬攘臂曰： 张、桂行，势且及我。 
现代文：他们的党羽霍韬奋臂喊叫说 ：张、桂二人走了，再往下就轮到我了。 
English: Their henchman, Huo Gan, shouted excitedly, "Zhang and Gui have left, and it's my turn to go down."

古文：遂上疏力攻一清，言其受张永、萧敬贿。
现代文：于是上书竭力攻击一清，说他受了张永、萧敬的贿赂。
English: As a result, the petition strenuously attacked Iqing, saying that he had been bribed by Zhang Yong and Xiao Jing.

古文：一清再疏辨，乞罢。
现代文：一清又一次上书辩白，请求解职。
English: Iqing again and again wrote to plead his case, asking to be dismissed.

古文：帝虽慰留之，而璁复召还，韬攻益急，且言法司承一清风指，构成萼罪。
现代文：世宗虽然安慰并挽留他，而张璁又被召了回来，霍韬对他的攻击更加厉害，并且说法司是受了一清的煽动、指使，蓄意给桂萼定的罪。
English: Although Shizong consoled and retained him, Zhang Xuan was called back again, and Huo Xuan's attack on him was even more severe, and it was said that the magistrate was deliberately incited and instructed to punish Gui Xuan.

古文：帝果怒，令法司会廷臣杂议。
现代文：世宗果然给激怒了，命令法司会同朝中大臣一起讨论此事。
English: Sejong was really infuriated and ordered the Legal Affairs Commission to discuss the matter with the Minister of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：出刑部尚书周伦于南京，以侍郎许赞代。
现代文：把刑部尚书周伦下放到南京，让侍郎许赞取代了他。
English: He sent the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Zhoulun, to Nanjing, and replaced him with a servant, Xu Zan.

古文：赞乃实韬言，请削一清籍。帝令一清自陈。
现代文：许赞于是证实了霍韬的话，请剥夺一清的官籍，世宗让一清自己作说明。
English: Xu Zan then confirmed the words of Huo Yao, please deprive Iqing of his official registration, and let Iqing explain himself.

古文：璁乃三上密疏，引一清赞礼功，乞赐宽假，实以坚帝意俾之去。
现代文：张璁这时三次密封上书，提出一清参加确议 大礼 的功劳，请给他休一次长假，实际上是要世宗下定决心打发一清离开。
English: At this time, Zhang Qian sealed the letter three times and proposed that Iqing should take a long vacation for his participation in the grand ceremony. In fact, he wanted Shizong to make up his mind to send Iqing away.

古文：帝果允致仕，驰驿归，仍赐金币。
现代文：世宗果然同意一清退休，由驿站派车送回，仍旧赏赐他一些金币。
English: Sejong agreed to retire Ikki and sent him back by car from the station, but still rewarded him with some gold coins.

古文：明年，璁等构朱继宗狱，坐一清受张永弟容金钱，为永志墓，又与容世锦衣指挥，遂落职闲住。
现代文：第二年，张璁等人制造了朱继宗一案，把一清定罪为因为受张永弟弟张容的金钱为张永撰写墓志铭，又给了张容世袭锦衣指挥的封赏，于是剥夺了他的官职，由他在家闲住。
English: The following year, Zhang Ye and others fabricated the case of Zhu Jizong, and convicted Iqing Yu for receiving money from Zhang Yong's brother Zhang Rong to write Zhang Yong's epitaph, and also gave Zhang Rong the reward of hereditary brocade conductor, thus depriving him of his official post and letting him stay idle at home.

古文：一清大恨曰： 老矣，乃为孺子所卖！ 
现代文：一清极为痛恨地说： 我老了，竟然给这毛孩子卖掉了！ 
English: Ichikiyo said bitterly, "I'm old, and I sold my cow to this hairy child!"

古文：疽发背死。
现代文：为此气得背上长了毒疮，死掉了。
English: Enraged by this, he developed poisonous sores on his back and died.

古文：遗疏言身被污蔑，死且不瞑，帝令释赃罪不问。
现代文：死前上书中说到自己被人诬蔑，死了也闭不了眼睛。世宗命令免了他的贪赃罪，不予追究。
English: Before his death, he wrote in his will that he had been slandered and that he could not close his eyes even in death. The Sejong order absolved him of the crime of embezzlement and he will not be investigated.

古文：后数年复故官。
现代文：过了几年又恢复了他原先的官位。
English: A few years later he was reinstated in his former post.

古文：久之，赠太保，谥文襄。
现代文：很久以后，才追赠他为太保，谥文襄。
English: It was not until much later that he was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo, 文襄.

古文：一清生而隐宫，貌寺人，无子。
现代文：一清生来生殖器不全，长得像个宦官，没有生过孩子。
English: Iqing was born with a genital defect, looks like a eunuch, and has never had a child.

古文：博学善权变，尤晓畅边事。
现代文：他学识渊博，善于权变，尤其通晓边防事务。
English: He is well-read and adept at maneuvering, especially in border affairs.

古文：羽书旁午，一夕占十疏，悉中机宜。
现代文：当军事文书繁杂时他一个晚上写成十篇奏章，篇篇都说中要害。
English: When military documents were complicated, he wrote ten pieces of music in one night, all of which said the key points.

古文：人或訾己，反荐扬之。
现代文：有人批评他，他反要推荐、赞扬那个人。
English: Someone criticizes him, but he wants to recommend and praise that person.

古文：惟晚与璁、萼异，为所轧，不获以恩礼终。
现代文：只是晚年与张璁、桂萼不合，被他们倾轧，没能够得着皇上的恩典、礼遇，忧郁而死。
English: However, in his later years, he did not get along with Zhang Ye and Gui Caly, and was pushed around by them. He was unable to obtain the emperor's grace and courtesy, and died of melancholy.

古文：然其才一时无两，或比之姚崇云。王琼，字德华，太原人。
现代文：但是他的才干当时无有匹敌，所以有人把他比作姚崇。王琼，字德华，太原人。
English: But his talent was unmatched at the time, so some people compared him to Yao Chong, Wang Qiong, Zhi Dehua, and Taiyuan people.

古文：成化二十年进士。
现代文：成化二十年进士。
English: He was promoted to sergeant after 20 years of service.

古文：授工部主事，进郎中。
现代文：最初担任工部主事，后升为郎中。
English: At first he was the head of the engineering department, later he was promoted to junior assistant.

古文：出治漕河三年，胪其事为志。
现代文：外调治理漕河三年，把所经历过的事罗列出来，撰写了一篇记叙文。
English: He was transferred out to manage Caohe for three years, listed the things he experienced, and wrote a narrative.

古文：继者按稽之，不爽毫发，由是以敏练称。
现代文：后来接任的人查考那些事，竟然是毫厘不差，由此王琼就以勤勉、干练出了名。
English: Later, the person who took over the post investigated those things, and it turned out to be nothing less than perfect. As a result, Wang Qiong became famous for his diligence and ability.

古文：改户部，历河南右布政使。
现代文：不久改任户部郎中，又转官河南右布政使。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of a junior member of the household department, and was also transferred to the post of Henan Ubu political envoy.

古文：正德元年，擢右副都御史督漕运。
现代文：正德元年他被提升为右副都御史，负责督办漕运。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, responsible for supervising transportation.

古文：明年入为户部右侍郎。
现代文：第二年入朝，担任户部左侍郎。
English: In the second year after entering the imperial court, he served as the left attendant of the household.

古文：衡府有赐地，芜不可耕，勒民出租以为常，王反诬民赵贤等侵据。
现代文：衡王府当时有朝廷赏赐的土地，荒芜得无法耕种，衡王还是勒令百姓按照正常情况交租，又反过来诬告赵贤等小百姓侵占了他的土地。
English: At that time, Heng Wangfu's land, which had been awarded by the imperial court, was so desolate that it could not be cultivated. Heng Wang still ordered the people to pay rent according to the normal situation, and in turn falsely accused Zhao Xian and other small people of occupying his land.

古文：琼往按，夺旁近民地予之，贤等戍边，民多怨者。
现代文：王琼前去检察，把旁边百姓家的土地夺过来给了衡王，把赵贤等发配到边境充军，当地百姓有很多人都怨恨王琼。
English: Wang Qiong went to inspect, took over the land of the nearby people's home and gave it to Heng Wang, and sent Zhao Xian and others to the border to join the army. Many local people resented Wang Qiong.

古文：三年春，廷推吏部侍郎，前后六人，皆不允。
现代文：三年春天，朝廷推举吏部侍郎，前后推上六个人，武宗都不同意。
English: In the spring of the third year, the imperial court nominated six people to be the attendants of the cadres, but Takemune did not agree.

古文：最后以琼上，许之。
现代文：最后把王琼推选出来，武宗同意了。
English: In the end, Wang Qiong was selected, and Wu Zong agreed.

古文：坐任户部时边臣借太仓银未偿，所司奏迟，尚书顾佐夺俸，而琼改南京。
现代文：因为他在户部时边疆大臣用太仓的银子没有归还，有关负责人员上报晚了，户部尚书顾佐被扣发了俸禄，王琼被调往南京。
English: Because the Minister of the Frontier did not return the silver from Taicang when he was in the household, the relevant responsible personnel reported late, the household's Shangshu Gu was deprived of his salary, and Wang Qiong was transferred to Nanjing.

古文：已，复改户部。
现代文：过后，又改任户部右侍郎。
English: Later, he was reappointed as the right-hand man of the household.

古文：八年进尚书。
现代文：八年升为户部尚书。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to the position of household secretary.

古文：琼为人有心计，善钩校。
现代文：王琼为人很有心计，善于查对。
English: Wang Qiong is very resourceful and good at checking.

古文：为郎时悉录故牍条例，尽得其敛散盈缩状。
现代文：他在为郎时就把过去的文牍、规则抄了下来，全面掌握了户部钱财收支、亏盈的情况。
English: When he was the son-in-law, he copied down the past documents and rules, and comprehensively grasped the situation of the household's income, expenditure and deficit.

古文：及为尚书，益明习国计。
现代文：等做了尚书，更加熟悉了国家的财政计算。
English: After finishing the book, he became more familiar with the country's financial calculations.

古文：边帅请刍糗，则屈指计某仓、某场庤粮草几何；诸郡岁输、边卒岁采秋青几何，曰： 足矣。
现代文：边境有将领来请拨发粮草，他屈指计算一下某仓库、某草场有多少粮草，各郡每年运送多少，边防士卒每年秋收粮草多少，就说： 这些已经够了。
English: There is a general at the border who comes to ask for the allocation of grain and grass. He counts with his little finger how much grain and grass there is in a certain warehouse and a certain pasture, how much grain and grass is transported by counties every year, and how much grain and grass is collected by border guards every autumn, and says: These are already enough.

古文：重索妄也。 
现代文：再伸手要就是弄虚作假。 
English: To reach out again would be to fake it.

古文：人益以琼为才。
现代文：由此大家更认为王琼有才干了。
English: As a result, everyone thinks Wang Qiong is talented.

古文：十年代陆完为兵部尚书。
现代文：十年他接替陆完做了兵部尚书。
English: Ten years later, he succeeded Lu Guanzhong as the secretary of the Military Department.

古文：时四方盗起，将士以首功进秩。
现代文：当时各地盗贼四起，官兵的将士都以斩杀敌人的头颅数论功升官。
English: At that time, there were four robberies around the country, and all officers and soldiers were promoted to higher ranks by chopping off the heads of their enemies.

古文：琼言： 此嬴秦弊政。
现代文：王琼上书 ：这是嬴秦似的败国政策。
English: Wang Qiong wrote: This is a defeatist policy similar to that of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：行之边方犹可，未有内地而论首功者。
现代文：在边境上实行还可以，没有内地作战而以头颅数论功的。
English: It can also be implemented on the border, without fighting in the interior and using the number of heads as a measure of success.

古文：今江西、四川妄杀平民千万，纵贼贻祸，皆此议所致。
现代文：现在江西、四川的官兵乱杀平民百姓成千上万人，纵容了盗贼，留下了祸患，都是这条规定造成的。
English: Now the soldiers and officers in Jiangxi and Sichuan have killed tens of thousands of civilians indiscriminately, connived with thieves, and left behind disasters, all of which are caused by this regulation.

古文：自今内地征讨，惟以荡平为功，不计首级。 
现代文：从现在起官兵在内地讨伐盗贼，只以扫荡、平息论功，不再计算斩获头颅数目。 
English: From now on, officers and soldiers will fight against thieves in the inland, only to sweep and quell, and no longer count the number of heads.

古文：从之。
现代文：武宗同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：帝时远游塞外，经岁不还，近畿盗窃发。
现代文：武宗皇帝当时到边塞以外远游，长年不回，京郊的盗贼正悄悄兴起。
English: At that time, Emperor Wuzong traveled far away from the border fortress and did not return for many years. Thieves in the suburbs of Beijing are quietly emerging.

古文：琼请于河间设总兵一人，大名、武定各设兵备副使一人，责以平贼，而檄顺天、保定两巡抚，严要害为外防，集辽东、延绥士马于行在，以护军驾。
现代文：王琼请在河间设置一名总兵，在大名、武定各设一名兵备副使，责令他们平息当地盗贼，又传令顺天、保定的两个巡抚，严守要害地段防止外敌侵入，征集辽东、延绥兵马到武宗行宫附近地区，用以保护皇上。
English: Wang Qiong requested that a commander-in-chief be set up in Hema, and a deputy commander-in-chief be set up in Daimyo and Wuding respectively, ordering them to quell the local thieves. He also ordered the two governors of Shuntian and Baoding to strictly guard the key areas to prevent the invasion of foreign enemies, and to recruit Liaodong and Yancheng soldiers and horses to the area near the Wuzong Palace to protect the emperor.

古文：中外恃以无恐。
现代文：朝廷内外仗着这些才不担惊受怕。
English: People inside and outside the court are not afraid of these things.

古文：孝丰贼汤麻九反，有司请发兵剿。
现代文：孝丰的盗贼汤麻九起来造反，有关部门请派军队过去收捕。
English: Xiaofeng's thief, Tang Ma Jiu, rebelled, and the relevant departments requested that the army be sent to arrest him.

古文：琼请密敕勘粮都御史许廷光，出不意擒之，无一脱者。
现代文：王琼请密令勘粮都御史许廷光出其不意地擒拿他们，结果成功了，盗贼没一个漏网。
English: Wang Qiong asked the secret order of the grain surveyor Xu Tingguang to catch them by surprise. The result was successful, and none of the thieves slipped through the net.

古文：四方捷奏上，多推功琼，数受荫赉，累加至少师兼太子太师，子锦衣世千户。
现代文：各地奏上捷报后，大多归功于王琼的谋划，他因此几次受到赏赐、封荫，逐渐做到了少师兼太子太师，儿子也被封为世袭锦衣千户。
English: After the news of the victory spread all over the country, most of it was attributed to Wang Qiong's planning. As a result, he received several awards and shadings, and gradually became a young master and a prince. His son was also named a hereditary brocade thousand households.

古文：及营建乾清宫，又荫锦衣千户者二，宠遇冠诸尚书。
现代文：等到修建乾清宫完毕，又荫封他两个儿子为锦衣千户，他受到的宠爱在几个尚书中首屈一指。
English: By the time the construction of the Qianqing Palace was completed, and his two sons were crowned as the best-dressed of thousands of households, he was favored second to none in several Shang books.

古文：十四年，宁王宸濠反。
现代文：十四年，宁王宸濠造反作乱。
English: In the 14th year, Ning Wang instigated a rebellion.

古文：琼请敕南和伯方寿祥督操江兵防南都，南赣巡抚王守仁、湖广巡抚秦金各率所部趋南昌，应天巡抚李充嗣镇京口，淮扬巡抚丛兰扼仪真。
现代文：王琼请武宗命令南和伯方寿祥率领操江部队防守南京，南赣巡抚王守仁、湖广巡抚秦金各自率领自己的部队开往南昌，应天巡抚李充嗣镇守京口，淮扬巡抚丛兰扼守仪真。
English: Wang Qiong asked Wu Zong to order Nanhe and Bofang Shuxiang to lead the river troops to defend Nanjing, Nanying's governor Wang Shuren and Hougang's governor Qin Jin to lead their own troops to Nanchang, Yingtian's governor Li Shongshi to guard Jingkou, and Huaiyang's governor Conglan to guard Jizhen.

古文：奏上，帝意欲亲征，持三日不下。
现代文：他的奏章递上后，武宗心里想要亲征，君臣争议了三天还决定不了。
English: After his report was submitted, Emperor Wuzong wanted to personally lead the expedition, but after three days of discussion, he could not decide.

古文：大学士杨廷和趣之，竟下亲征诏，命琼与廷和等居守。
现代文：大学士杨廷和催促皇上早作决定，武宗最后还是下诏亲征，让王琼与廷和等人在北京坐镇。
English: Yang Tinghe, a university scholar, urged the emperor to make an early decision. In the end, Emperor Wuzong issued an edict to personally conscript Wang Qiong, Tinghe and others to live in Beijing.

古文：先是，琼用王守仁抚南、赣，假便宜提督军务。
现代文：在此之前，王琼任用王守仁巡抚南、赣，放权让他见机行事，提督军务。
English: Prior to this, Wang Qiong appointed Wang Shouren as the governor of Nan and Handan, and gave him the power to act as he saw fit. He became the admiral of military affairs.

古文：比宸濠反，书闻，举朝惴惴。
现代文：等宸濠造起反来，地方上报朝廷知道后，满朝大臣心里惴惴不安。
English: After the rebellion broke out and the local newspapers reported it to the imperial court, the minister of the Manchu court was uneasy.

古文：琼曰： 诸君勿忧，吾用王伯安赣州，正为今日，贼旦夕擒耳。 
现代文：王琼说 ：大家不用担心，我任用王伯安到赣州去，正是为了现在这件事，反贼马上就会拿下的。 
English: Wang Qiong said, "Don't worry everyone, I have appointed Wang Bo'an to go to Ganzhou. It is precisely for this reason that the anti-thieves will take it immediately."

古文：未几，果如其言。
现代文：没过多少天，事情果然像他所说的那样。
English: A few days later, things did indeed turn out as he said.

古文：琼才高，善结纳。
现代文：王琼很有才能，并善于结交权贵。
English: Wang Qiong is very talented and good at making friends with the powerful.

古文：厚事钱宁、江彬等，因得自展，所奏请辄行。其能为功于兵部者，亦彬等力也。
现代文：他恭敬地侍奉钱宁、江彬等人，由此得到施展才干的机会，他递上去给皇上的建议、请求一经提出就能得到批准，他能在兵部多次立功，也是借了江彬等人的力量。
English: He respectfully served Channing, Jiang Bin and others, and thus got the opportunity to display his talents. The suggestions and requests he submitted to the emperor could be approved as soon as they were made. He was able to perform meritorious service in the military many times, and also borrowed the strength of Jiang Bin and others.

古文：陆完败，代为吏部尚书。
现代文：陆完倒台后，他取代陆完做了吏部尚书。
English: After the fall of Lu Gan, he replaced Lu Gan as the head of the cadre department.

古文：琼忌彭泽平流贼，声望出己上，构于钱宁，中泽危法。
现代文：王琼忌妒彭泽平定流贼，名望超过了自己，就勾结钱宁，用重罪中伤彭泽。
English: Wang Qiong was jealous of Pengze Pingding Liao, whose reputation exceeded his own, so he colluded with Channing to slander Pengze with a felony.

古文：又陷云南巡抚范镛、甘肃巡抚李昆、副使陈九畴于狱，中外多畏琼。
现代文：又把云南巡抚范镛、甘肃巡抚李昆、副使陈九畴诬陷下狱，一时间朝廷内外官员大多害怕王琼。
English: Wang Qiong was also falsely accused of imprisoning Yunnan governor Fan Hui, Gansu governor Li Kun and vice-envoy Chen Jujia. For a time, most officials inside and outside the imperial court were afraid of Wang Qiong.

古文：而大学士廷和亦以琼所诛赏，多取中旨，不关内阁，弗能堪。
现代文：而大学士廷和也因为王琼所行赏罚大多得到武宗发自内宫的批复诏书，不经过内阁，所以无能为力。
English: However, because most of the rewards and punishments meted out by Wang Qiong were approved by the Imperial Rescript issued by Emperor Wuzong from the Inner Palace, they did not go through the cabinet, so there was nothing that could be done.

古文：明年，世宗入继，言官交劾琼，系都察院狱。
现代文：第二年，世宗继了位，谏官前后不停地揭发王琼，他被关进了都察院的监狱。
English: The following year, when Shizong succeeded to the throne, eunuchs kept exposing Wang Qiong, and he was locked up in the prison of Duza Academy.

古文：琼力讦廷和，帝愈不直琼，下廷臣杂议。坐交结近侍律论死，命戍庄浪。
现代文：王琼于是竭力攻击廷和，世宗这下更认为他不正直，就交由大臣们议论，结果以触犯结交皇上左右侍卫的律令应判处死刑，改为让他充军庄浪。
English: Wang Qiong then tried his best to attack Ting Wo, and Shizong now thought he was dishonest, so he left it to the ministers to discuss. As a result, he was sentenced to death for violating the rule that the guards around the emperor should be sentenced to death. Instead, he was allowed to serve as a soldier.

古文：琼复诉年老，改戍绥德。
现代文：王琼又上诉说自己年纪大了，因而被改派到绥德充军。
English: Wang Qiong also appealed that he was too old, so he was reassigned to the Chongqing Military Region.

古文：张璁、桂萼、霍韬用事，以琼与廷和仇，首荐之，不纳。
现代文：张璁、桂萼、霍韬掌权后，因为王琼与廷和有仇，就推荐了他，世宗没有听从他们。
English: After Zhang Qian, Gui Qian, and Huo Qian took power, because Wang Qiong had a grudge against the imperial court, they recommended him, but Shizong did not listen to them.

古文：至嘉靖六年有边警，萼力请用琼，不果。
现代文：到嘉靖六年边境上有战事，桂萼等人坚决请求任用王琼，没有得逞。
English: In the sixth year of Jiajing, there was a war on the border, and Gui Caly and others resolutely requested the appointment of Wang Qiong, but did not succeed.

古文：帝亦悯琼老病，令还籍为民。
现代文：但世宗也可怜王琼年老有病，就让他返回老家做个平民。
English: However, Shizong also felt sorry for Wang Qiong's old age and illness, so he let him return to his hometown as a commoner.

古文：御史胡松因劾萼谪外任，其同官周在请宥松，并下诏狱。
现代文：御史胡松因为弹劾桂萼被贬官外放，他的同事周在请求饶恕胡松，也被关进了诏狱。
English: Because of Gui Cai's impeachment, his colleague Zhou Shih-hu Song was demoted and banished, and his colleague Zhou Zai, who had begged for Hu Song's forgiveness, was also thrown into the imperial prison.

古文：萼复言琼前攻廷和，故廷臣群起排之。
现代文：桂萼又一次说到王琼以前批评过廷和，所以满朝大臣一齐起来排斥他。
English: Gui Caly said again that Wang Qiong had criticized the imperial court and the emperor before, so all the ministers of the imperial court got together to expel him.

古文：帝乃命复琼尚书待用。
现代文：世宗于是命令让王琼官复尚书，等候任用。
English: King Sejong then ordered the official Wang Qiong to resubmit his application and wait for his appointment.

古文：明年遂以兵部尚书兼右都御史代王宪督陕西三边军务。
现代文：第二年就让他以兵部尚书兼右都御史的名义接替王宪提督陕西三边军务。
English: In the following year, he was appointed to succeed Admiral Wang Xian in charge of the military affairs of the three sides in Shaanxi Province in the name of Shang Shu of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Right Metropolitan Historian.

古文：土鲁番据哈密，廷议闭关绝其贡，四年矣。
现代文：吐鲁番占领了哈密，朝廷决定关闭关门，拒绝它的进贡，已经有四年了。
English: It has been four years since Turpan occupied Hami and the imperial court decided to close its doors and refuse its tribute.

古文：至是，其将牙木兰为酋速檀满速儿所疑，率从二千求内属。
现代文：到这时，它的将领牙木兰因为受到速檀满速儿的猜疑，率领二千人来请求内附。
English: At this time, its general, Toa Mulan, led two thousand people to request annexation, because he was suspected by Haytham Mansoor.

古文：沙州番人帖木哥、土巴等，素为土鲁番役属者，苦其征求，亦率五千余人入附。
现代文：沙州番人帖木哥、土巴等，一向受土鲁番奴役，以他们的征收为痛苦，也率领五千多人入关来内附。
English: The watchmen of Shazhou, such as Timuqo and Tubas, had always been enslaved by the Turuban, and took their expropriation as a pain. They also led more than five thousand people into the customs.

古文：番人来寇，连为参将云昌等所败。
现代文：土鲁番人来侵犯，接连被参将云昌等打败。
English: The Turuban came to invade, and was successively defeated by the general Yunchang and others.

古文：其引瓦剌寇肃州者，游击彭濬击退之。
现代文：他们勾引瓦剌人侵犯肃州，游击彭打退了他们。
English: They lured the Varangians to invade Suzhou, and the guerrilla Peng Zuo repulsed them.

古文：贼既失援，又数失利，乃献还哈密。求通贡，乞归羁留使臣，而语多谩。
现代文：敌人既失去了援助，又在几次战争中失利，于是归还哈密，请求上贡，请归还被扣押在中国的使臣，只是话说得很不礼貌。
English: The enemy, having lost aid and been defeated in several wars, returned Hami, asked for tribute, and asked for the return of the envoys detained in China, but the words were very impolite.

古文：琼奏乞抚纳，帝从兵部尚书王时中议，如琼请。
现代文：王琼上书请求对他们予以安抚、结交，世宗采纳兵部尚书王时中的意见，像王琼奏请的那样做了处置。
English: Wang Qiong wrote to request that they be appeased and befriended, and Shizong adopted the opinion of the commander of the military department, Shang Shouwang, and dealt with them as Wang Qiong had requested.

古文：霍韬难之，琼再疏请诏还番使，通贡如故。
现代文：霍韬对此提出责难，王琼又上书请求遣还土鲁番的使臣，像以前那样允许他们来上贡。
English: Huo Xi criticized this, and Wang Qiong also sent a letter to request the return of the envoys from Turpan, allowing them to come to pay tribute as before.

古文：自是西域复定，而北寇常为边患。
现代文：从此西域又平定下来，只是北方的贼寇常常来骚扰边疆。
English: Since then, the western region has settled down, but the northern bandits often come to harass the frontier.

古文：初入犯庄浪，琼部诸将遮击之，斩数十级。
现代文：首次进来侵犯庄浪，王琼部下的将领阻击他们，斩获几十个首级。
English: The generals under Wang Qiong attacked Zhuanglang for the first time. They were repulsed and dozens of heads were chopped off.

古文：俄由红城子入，杀部饷主簿张文明。
现代文：不久由红城子进来，杀害了部饷主簿张文明。
English: Soon after, Hongchengzi came in and killed Zhang Wenming, the head of the Ministry of Public Security.

古文：明年以数万骑寇宁夏。已又犯灵州，琼督游击梁震等邀斩七十余人。
现代文：第二年又用数万骑兵来犯宁夏，过后又侵犯灵州，王琼派济南梁震等拦截，斩敌七十多人。
English: The next year, he used tens of thousands of cavalry to invade Ningxia, and later invaded Lingzhou. Wang Qiong sent Liang Zhen and others from Jinan to intercept, and killed more than 70 enemies.

古文：其秋，集诸道精卒三万，按行塞下。
现代文：那年秋天，征召各路精兵三万人，在塞下巡行。
English: In the autumn of that year, 30,000 elite soldiers from all walks of life were conscripted to march under the bridge.

古文：寇闻，徙帐远遁。
现代文：敌人听说了，卷起帐篷远逃而去。
English: When the enemy heard of this, they rolled up their tents and fled.

古文：诸军分道出，纵野烧，耀兵而还。
现代文：明朝官兵于是分路进攻，放火在原野上焚烧，显示了军威，然后收兵而回。
English: Therefore, the officers and soldiers of the Ming Dynasty attacked separately, set fire to the field and burned it, showing their military power, and then withdrew.

古文：先是，南京给事中邱九仞劾琼，帝慰留之。
现代文：在这之前，南京给事中丘九仞弹劾王琼，世宗却加以安慰、挽留。
English: Prior to this, Nanjing had sent Zhongqiu Jiuye to impeach Wang Qiong, but Shizong consoled and retained him.

古文：及璁、萼罢政，诸劾璁、萼党者咸首琼，乃令致仕。
现代文：等张璁、桂萼被罢免后，那些弹劾张璁、桂萼等人的大臣都出面攻击王琼，世宗于是命令他退休。
English: After Zhang Ye and Gui Calyp were removed from office, those ministers who had impeached Zhang Ye and Gui Calyp came forward to attack Wang Qiong, and Shizong ordered him to retire.

古文：俄寝前诏，遣慰谕。
现代文：不久又把先前的诏书搁下来，派人对王琼表示慰问。
English: Soon after, the previous edict was shelved and people were sent to Wang Qiong to express their condolences.

古文：会番大掠临洮，琼集兵讨若笼、板尔诸族，焚其巢，斩首三百六十，抚降七十余族。
现代文：正好番人前来临洮大肆掳掠，王琼征调兵力讨伐若笼、板尔各部，焚烧了他们的巢穴，斩杀了三百六十人，收附了七十多个部族。
English: Just as the guards were approaching, Wang Qiong gathered and mobilized troops to invade all parts of Ruokeng and Pan, burned their nests, killed 360 people, and annexed more than 70 tribes.

古文：录功，加太子太保。
现代文：评定战功，被加升为太子太保。
English: He was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo for his distinguished war service.

古文：琼在边，戎备甚饬。
现代文：王琼在边疆上，战备都整顿得很好。
English: On the frontier, Wang Qiong was well prepared for battle.

古文：寇尝入山西得利，逾岁复猎境上，阳欲东，琼令备其西。
现代文：贼寇曾经打到山西，占了便宜，过了一年又来边境上抢劫，假装着要向东打，王琼命令在西边做好战斗准备。
English: Thieves and robbers once fought to Shanxi and took advantage of it. A year later, they came to the border to rob, pretending to fight to the east. Wang Qiong ordered to prepare for battle in the west.

古文：寇果入，大败之。
现代文：贼寇果然钻了进来，官兵沉重地打击了它。
English: The bandit did indeed get in, and the officers and soldiers dealt it a heavy blow.

古文：诸番荡平，西陲益靖。
现代文：各处番人被扫荡、平息后，西部边陲更加太平了。
English: After the guards in various places were swept away and calmed down, the western border areas became more peaceful.

古文：甘肃军民素苦土鲁番侵暴，恐琼去，相率乞守臣奏留。
现代文：甘肃军民一向受吐鲁番人侵犯、欺凌，现在惟恐王琼离开，就一块请求当地守臣向朝廷上书，留下王琼别走。
English: The military and people of Gansu have always been encroached upon and bullied by the Turfan people. Now, fearing that Wang Qiong would leave, they jointly requested the local retainers to submit a letter to the imperial court, asking Wang Qiong not to leave.

古文：于是巡抚唐泽、巡按胡明善具陈其功，乞如军民请。
现代文：于是巡抚唐泽、巡按胡明善都上书叙述他的功劳，请听从甘肃军民的请求。
English: As a result, Tangze, the governor of Gansu, and Hu Mingshan, the inspector-general, both wrote to him describing his services. Please listen to the request of the soldiers and people of Gansu.

古文：优诏奖之。
现代文：世宗为此颁发诏书，奖励了王琼一番。
English: Emperor Mingzong rewarded him with a letter of commendation.

古文：初，帝恶杨廷和，疑廷臣悉其党，故连用桂萼、方献夫为吏部。
现代文：当初，世宗厌恶杨廷和，怀疑朝中大臣都是他的同党，所以接连任用桂萼、方献夫主管吏部。
English: At first, Shizong disliked Yang Tinghe and suspected that the ministers of both the North and the Middle Kingdom were his co-partisans. Therefore, he successively appointed Gui Cai and Fang Xianfu to be in charge of the personnel department.

古文：及献夫去，帝不欲授他人，久不补。
现代文：等献夫离任后，世宗不想任用另外的人，所以久久不增补这个缺额。
English: After the departure of such a dedicated person, Shizong did not want to appoint another person, so he did not add this vacancy for a long time.

古文：至十年冬，遣行人赍敕召琼为吏部尚书。
现代文：到十年冬季，才派行人拿着敕书前往召王琼回朝。
English: It was not until the winter of the 10th year that a passerby was sent with a letter to summon Wang Qiong back to the imperial court.

古文：南京御史马〈敭〉等十人力诋琼先朝遗奸。帝大怒，尽逮〈敭〉等下诏狱，慰谕琼。
现代文：当吏部尚书、南京御史马易攵等十个人上书痛骂王琼是先帝一朝遗留的大奸臣时，世宗大为恼怒，把马易攵等人全都关进了诏狱中，并且对王琼表示安慰。
English: When ten people, including Shang Shu of the cadre department and Ma Yixuan, the governor of Nanjing, wrote a scathing letter to Wang Qiong, accusing him of being a treacherous vassal left behind by the former emperor, Shizong was very angry and put Ma Yixuan and the others all in the imperial prison, and expressed his consolation to Wang Qiong.

古文：未凡，〈敭〉等亦还职。
现代文：不过不久，马易攵等也都官复原职了。
English: However, soon, Ma Yixuan and others were also reinstated.

古文：花马池有警，兵部尚书王宪请发兵。
现代文：花马池传来战报，兵部尚书王宪请派出部队。
English: A battle report came from Hanama-chi, and the military commander, Shangshu Wangxian, requested that troops be sent.

古文：琼言花马池备严，寇不能入，大军至，且先退，徒耗中国。
现代文：王琼说花马池战备严整，敌人打不进去，大部队去了，敌人先撤了兵，只能空自耗费中国的人力、财力而已。
English: Wang Qiong said that Huama'chi was well-prepared for the war, the enemy could not get in, the main force had left, and the enemy had withdrawn first, so it could only consume China's manpower and financial resources.

古文：宪竟发六千人，比至彰德，寇果遁。
现代文：王宪最终还是派出六千人，走到彰德，敌人果然逃走了。
English: In the end, Wang Xian sent six thousand men to Zhangde, and the enemy fled.

古文：明年秋卒官。
现代文：第二年秋天，王琼死在任上。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Wang Qiong died in office.

古文：赠太师，谥恭襄。
现代文：被追赠为太师，谥恭襄。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：是年，彭泽已先卒矣。
现代文：同一年，彭泽已在王琼之前死掉了。
English: In the same year, Pengze died before Wang Qiong.

古文：当正、嘉间，泽、琼并有才略，相中伤不已，亦迭为进退。
现代文：在正德、嘉靖年间，彭泽、王琼都有才干，有胆略，他们不停地相互中伤，仕途中你进我退，几番更迭。
English: During the Zhengde and Jiajing years, Peng Ze and Wang Qiong were both talented and daring, and they constantly slandered each other. On the way to work, they were replaced several times.

古文：而琼险忮，公论尤不予。
现代文：其中王琼阴险、忌妒，舆论尤其不赞成他。
English: Among them, Wang Qiong is insidious and envious, and the public opinion especially disapproves of him.

古文：然在本兵时功多。而其督三边也，人以比杨一清云。
现代文：但是他在兵部时立了很多功，外放提督陕西三边军务时，人们也曾把他比作杨一清呢。
English: However, he did a lot of work when he was in the military department. When he was appointed admiral of the trilateral military affairs of Shaanxi Province, people also compared him to Yang Iqing.

古文：彭泽，字济物，兰州人。
现代文：彭泽，字济物，兰州人。
English: Pengze, Zhizhi, Lanzhou.

古文：幼学于外祖段坚，有志节。
现代文：从小跟着外祖父段坚读书学习，为人很有志向和操守。
English: He grew up reading and studying with his grandfather, Duan Jian, and is very ambitious and conscientious.

古文：会试二场毕，闻母病，径归，母病亦已。
现代文：参加会试两场考完，听说母亲生了病，就立即回家去了，他母亲的病也就好了。
English: After taking part in two examinations, he heard that his mother was ill, so he immediately went home, and his mother's illness was cured.

古文：登弘治三年进士，授工部主事，历刑部郎中。
现代文：他后来考中弘治三年进士，初任工部主事，后转任刑部郎中。
English: He later became a member of the junior high school entrance examination for three years, first as the head of the engineering department, and later as the assistant of the criminal justice department.

古文：势豪杀人，泽置之辟。中贵为祈免，执不听。
现代文：有豪强杀了人，彭泽判他死刑，宫廷中有势力的宦官出面替这个人请求减免，彭泽坚持原判，不听请托。
English: A powerful man killed someone, Penza sentenced him to death. A powerful eunuch in the court came forward to request a remission for this person. Penza insisted on the original sentence and did not listen to the request.

古文：出为徽州知府。
现代文：后来外出做徽州知府。
English: Later, he went out to become the governor of Huizhou Province.

古文：泽将遣女，治漆器数十，使吏送其家。
现代文：他将要嫁女儿，置办了几十件漆器，让手下人送到家里。
English: He is about to marry off his daughter and has ordered dozens of pieces of lacquerware to be delivered to his home by his staff.

古文：泽父大怒，趣焚之，徒步诣徽。
现代文：他的父亲大为恼火，马上给他烧掉了，然后步行到徽州。
English: His father was so angry that he immediately burned it for him, and then walked to Huizhou.

古文：泽惊出迓，自吏负其装。
现代文：彭泽惊奇地出外迎接，示意手下人背上他父亲的行李。
English: Peng Ze went out to greet him in surprise, gesturing to his men to carry his father's luggage.

古文：父怒曰： 吾负此数千里，汝不能负数步耶？ 
现代文：他的父亲怒气冲冲地说 ：我自己背了它几千里，你难道不能背几步路吗？ 
English: His father said angrily, "I carried him thousands of miles by myself, can't you carry him a few steps?"

古文：入，杖泽堂下。
现代文：进到府里，就在堂下把彭泽杖打了一顿。
English: Entering the mansion, he beat Peng Ze Cane under the hall.

古文：杖已，持装径去。
现代文：打完后，拿起自己的行李径自走了。
English: After finishing, he picked up his luggage and walked away.

古文：泽益痛砥砺。
现代文：经过这件事以后，彭泽痛下决心砥砺品行。
English: After this incident, Peng Ze painfully resolved to improve his behavior.

古文：政最，人以方前守孙遇。
现代文：政评中得了最好成绩，人们把他比作前任知府孙遇。
English: He got the best score in the political evaluation, and people compared him to the former governor Sun Yutong.

古文：遇见《循吏传》中。
现代文：孙遇的事迹见于《循吏传》中。
English: The story of Sun Yu can be found in "Biographies of Officials."

古文：父丧归。
现代文：后来因守父丧还乡去了。
English: He returned to his hometown after his father's death.

古文：正德初，起知真定。
现代文：正德初年，被重新任命为真定知府。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he was reappointed as the governor of Jinding.

古文：阉人数挠禁，泽治一棺于厅事，以死怵之，其人不敢逞。
现代文：有宦官几次三番触犯禁令，彭泽在厅堂上为他准备了一个棺材，用死来吓唬他，那个宦官从此不敢再逞强了。
English: There was a eunuch who repeatedly violated the ban. Penza prepared a coffin for him in the hall and threatened him with death. From then on, the eunuch no longer dared to be brave.

古文：迁浙江副使，历河南按察使，所至以威猛称。
现代文：后来他升任浙江副使，又做过河南按察使，所到之处都以有魄力著名。
English: Later, he was promoted to deputy envoy of Zhejiang Province, and he also served as deputy inspector of Henan Province. He was known for his courage everywhere he went.

古文：擢右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：后来升为右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of the Right Deputy Governor of the Capital, the Governor of Liaodong.

古文：进右副都御史，改保定。
现代文：升右副都御史后，改任保定巡抚。
English: After being promoted to vice-governor of the capital, he was appointed governor of Baoding.

古文：未赴，而刘惠、赵鐩等乱河南，命泽与咸宁伯仇钺提督军务讨之。
现代文：还没有赴任，刘惠、赵钅遂等在河南作乱，朝廷命令彭泽与咸宁伯仇钺提督军务，前往讨伐。
English: Before taking office, Liu Hui, Zhao Wei and others started a riot in Henan, and the imperial court ordered Peng Ze and Xianning to take up the military affairs of Admiral Qian Qi and go to the crusade.

古文：陈便宜十一事，厚赏峻罚，以激劝将吏。
现代文：他上书陈述了十一条意见，要求便宜行事，以便利用厚赏和重罚，激励官兵。
English: He put forward eleven opinions in a letter, asking to act cheaply in order to use heavy rewards and heavy punishments to motivate officers and soldiers.

古文：泽体干修伟，腰带十二围，大音声，与人语若叱咤。
现代文：彭泽体格高大，腰带有十二围长，声音响亮，和人说话就像在喊叫。
English: Peng Ze is tall, with a girdle twelve times as long, and his voice is loud. When he talks to people, it's like he's shouting.

古文：始至，大陈军容，引见诸将校，责以畏缩当死。
现代文：才一上任，就大整军容，把各队将校召来，责告他们临阵畏缩，一律处死。
English: As soon as he took office, he began a major reorganization of the army, summoned the officers of each team, accused them of flinching in the face of battle, and had them all executed.

古文：诸将校股栗伏罪，良久乃释。遂下令鼓行薄贼，大小数十战，连破之。
现代文：各队将校吓得大腿直发颤，赶快低头认罪，过了好久，彭泽方肯罢休，于是传达军令，要求鼓声一响就靠近寇贼。这样经过大大小小几十次战斗，连连打败敌人。
English: The officers of each team were so scared that their thighs trembled, and they quickly bowed their heads and confessed. After a long time, Peng Zefang was willing to give up, so he conveyed a military order to approach the bandits as soon as the drums sounded. In this way, after dozens of battles, large and small, they defeated the enemy one after another.

古文：甫四月，贼尽平，语详《钺传》。
现代文：才四个月时间，河南的盗贼全被平定了。
English: It only took four months for all the thieves in Henan to be subdued.

古文：录功，进右都御史、太子少保，荫子锦衣世百户。
现代文：彭泽当时说过的话，详见于《仇钺传》中，登录战功，彭泽晋升为右都御史、太子少保，荫封儿子为世袭锦衣百户。
English: The words Penza said at that time are detailed in "The Tale of the Enemy," listing the war achievements, Penza was promoted to the governor of the right capital, the prince minor protector, and his son was the hereditary brocade of a hundred households.

古文：寻代洪钟总督川、陕诸军，讨四川贼。
现代文：不久他接替洪钟总督川、陕各路军队，前往讨伐四川的盗贼。
English: Soon he succeeded Hong Zhong, the governor of Sichuan and Shaanxi, and went to fight the thieves in Sichuan.

古文：时鄢本恕、蓝廷瑞、廖惠、曹甫已平，惟廖麻子、喻思俸猖獗如故。
现代文：当时鄢本恕、蓝廷瑞、廖惠、曹惠已经被平定，只有廖麻子、喻思俸依然猖獗。
English: At that time, Nie Meng Meng, Lan Ting Rui, Liao Hui and Cao Hui had already been subdued, and only Liao Aszi and Yu Shifeng were still rampant.

古文：泽偕总兵官时源数败贼，部将阎勋追擒麻子于剑州。
现代文：彭泽和总兵官时源一起几次对敌作战，部将阎勋在剑州追拿了麻子。
English: Peng Ze and Commander-in-Chief Shi Yuan fought against the enemy several times together, and General Yan Xun chased and captured Asa Zi in Jianzhou.

古文：思俸窜通、巴间，势复振。
现代文：思俸逃窜到通、巴之间，势头又抬了起来。
English: The momentum picked up again, with Shifeng escaping to Tong and Ba.

古文：泽督诸军围之，卒就擒。
现代文：彭泽指挥各路官兵包围，他终于被活捉了。
English: Peng Ze commanded all officers and soldiers to surround him, and he was finally captured alive.

古文：泽遂移汉中，请班师。
现代文：彭泽于是移驻汉中，请求班兵回朝。
English: Penza then moved to Hanzhong and asked his soldiers to return to the imperial court.

古文：未报，而内江、荣昌贼复炽，泽又移师讨平之。
现代文：尚未得到朝廷批复，而内江、荣昌的盗贼又急切活动起来。
English: The thieves in Neijiang and Rongchang have not yet received approval from the imperial court, but they are eager to start their activities.

古文：且平成都乱卒之执知州、指挥者。
现代文：彭泽又移师讨伐，征服了它，并且镇压了成都那些捉拿了知州、指挥的造反士兵。
English: Pengze also moved his division to fight, conquered it, and suppressed the rebel soldiers from Chengdu who captured and commanded Zhizhou.

古文：请班师益力，诏暂留保宁镇抚。进左都御史、太子太保，荫子如初。
现代文：此后他更坚决请求班师回朝，朝廷诏令他暂时留驻保宁，维护治安，把他提升为左都御史、太子太保，还和当初一样荫封他的子孙。
English: After that, he even more resolutely requested his class teacher to return to the imperial court, and the imperial court ordered him to temporarily stay in Boryeong to maintain public safety, promoted him to Sadogoto goshi, Prince Taibo, and shadowed his children and grandchildren as in the beginning.

古文：泽复请还者再，乃召还。
现代文：他后来又两次请求回朝，才得到征召。
English: He later made two more requests to return to the North before he was called up.

古文：未行，会土鲁番据哈密，执忠顺王速檀拜牙郎，以其印去，投谩书甘肃，要索金币。
现代文：尚未动身，碰上吐鲁番占领哈密，捉拿了忠顺王速檀拜牙郎，拿了他的大印回去，并送了一份气势凌人的书信到甘肃，勒索金币。
English: Before leaving, he encountered the Turfan occupying Hami, captured the Loyal Shun Wang He Dan Bai Fang Lang, took his great seal back, and sent a domineering letter to Gansu to extort gold coins.

古文：总制邓璋、甘肃巡抚赵鉴以闻，请遣大臣经略。
现代文：总制邓璋、甘肃巡抚赵鉴把这事报告朝廷，请派遣大臣下来总办此事。
English: General Secretary Deng Wei and Gansu Inspector Zhao Jian reported the matter to the imperial court and requested that a minister be sent to deal with the matter.

古文：大学士杨廷和等共荐泽。
现代文：大学士杨廷和等人一起推荐彭泽。
English: Yang Tinghe, a university graduate, recommended Penza together with others.

古文：泽久在兵间，厌之。以乡土为辞，且引疾，推璋及咸宁侯钺可任。
现代文：彭泽长久生活在部队里，厌烦了，就以甘肃是自己家乡为名加以推辞，并且自称生了病，所以推荐说邓璋和咸宁侯仇钺有能力担任。
English: Peng Ze had lived in the army for a long time. When he got tired of it, he dismissed it by saying that Gansu was his hometown. He also claimed to be ill, so he recommended that Deng Qian and Xianning Hou Qian were capable of serving.

古文：帝优诏慰勉，乃行。
现代文：武宗皇帝颁下诏书对他加以慰问和鼓励，他才勉强上任。
English: Emperor Wuzong consoled and encouraged him by issuing an edict, and he reluctantly took office.

古文：泽材武知兵，然性疏阔负气。
现代文：彭泽有武才，懂军事，但他生性好简易，爱赌气。
English: Peng Ze has military talent and understands military affairs, but he has a simple nature and likes to gamble.

古文：经略哈密事颇不当，钱宁、王琼等交齮龁之，遂因此得罪。
现代文：他这次总办哈密一事就做得很不恰当，钱宁、王琼等人又合力倾轧他，他就因为此事被判了罪。
English: Channing, Wang Qiong, and the others all ganged up on him, and he was convicted of the crime.

古文：泽至甘州，土鲁番方寇赤斤、苦峪诸卫，遣使索金币，请还哈密。
现代文：彭泽到达甘州时，吐鲁番正在侵犯赤斤、苦峪等卫，派遣使臣来勒索金币，并表示愿归还哈密。
English: When Pengze arrived in Ganzhou, Turpan was encroaching on the red crane, bittern and other guards, sending envoys to extort gold coins, and expressed his willingness to return Hami.

古文：泽以番人可利啖也，与鉴谋，遣哈密都督写亦虎仙以币二千、银酒枪一赂之，令还哈密城印。
现代文：彭泽以为番人可以利诱，就与赵鉴商议，派哈密都督写亦虎仙拿二千枚金币，一只银酒枪前往贿赂他们，要他们归还哈密城忠顺王的大印。
English: Peng Ze thought that the guards could be enticed, so he discussed with Zhao Jian and sent the governor of Hami to take two thousand gold coins and a silver wine gun to bribe them to return the seal of King Zhongshun of Hami.

古文：未得报，辄奏事平，乞骸骨。
现代文：还没等消息返回来，他就上书说哈密一事已经平息了，请求回家养老。
English: Before the news came back, he wrote to say that the Hami affair had calmed down and asked to go home to retire.

古文：召还理院事。
现代文：朝廷于是召他回朝主管都察院的事务。
English: The imperial court then called him back to the court to be in charge of the affairs of the Duka-in.

古文：巡按御史冯时雍言城未归，泽不宜遽召。
现代文：巡抚御史冯时雍上书说哈密城并未收复，彭泽不应该太早召回。
English: In a letter to the governor, Feng Shiyong said that since Hami City had not been recaptured, Pengze should not be recalled too early.

古文：不纳。
现代文：武宗没听取他的意见。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：初，兵部缺尚书，廷臣共推泽，而王琼得之，且阴阻泽。
现代文：当初兵部没有尚书，朝中大臣一起推荐彭泽，而王琼得到了这个位置，又暗中阻止对彭泽的召还。
English: At first, the Ministry of Military Affairs did not have Shang Shu, and the ministers of the two Koreas recommended Peng Ze together, but Wang Qiong got this position and secretly prevented the recall of Peng Ze.

古文：言官多劾琼者，由是有隙。
现代文：谏官有很多人弹劾王琼，由此两人有了矛盾。
English: There were many eunuchs who wanted to impeach Wang Qiong, which led to a conflict between the two.

古文：泽又使酒常凌琼，琼愈欲倾之。
现代文：彭泽又时常借着酒兴欺负王琼，王琼更加想要扳倒他。
English: Peng Ze often bullied Wang Qiong through drinking, and Wang Qiong even wanted to take him down.

古文：泽时时骂钱宁，琼以语宁，宁未信。
现代文：彭泽常常骂钱宁，王琼告诉钱宁，钱宁不信。
English: Peng Ze often scolded Channing. Wang Qiong told Channing that Channing did not believe him.

古文：琼乃邀泽饮，匿宁所亲屏间，挑泽醉骂使闻之，宁果大怒。
现代文：王琼于是邀请彭泽来家里喝酒，把钱宁藏在屋里边的屏风后边，引逗彭泽喝醉后大骂，让钱宁自己听见，这下钱宁非常恼怒。
English: Wang Qiong then invited Pengze to come to the house for a drink, hid Channing behind a screen inside the house, and got Pengze to get drunk and swear loudly so that Channing could hear it herself, which made Channing very angry.

古文：会寇大入宣府，廷议以许泰将兵，泽总制东西两边军务。
现代文：碰上贼寇大肆进入宣府，朝廷决定由许泰带兵，由彭泽总制东西两边军务。
English: When thieves and robbers entered Xuanwu in large numbers, the imperial court decided that Xu Tai would lead the troops and Peng Ze would be in charge of the military affairs on both sides.

古文：及诏下，罢泰不遣，又不命泽总制，独令提督两游击兵六千人以行，意以困泽。
现代文：等诏书传下来，让许泰留下来，又不任命彭泽为总制，只是让他统率两个游击手下的六千名士兵出发，实际用意是要为难彭泽。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, Xu Tai was allowed to stay, but Peng Ze was not appointed as commander-in-chief. Instead, he was ordered to lead 6,000 soldiers under the command of two guerrillas. The actual intention was to embarrass Peng Ze.

古文：泽言： 臣文臣，摧锋陷阵非臣所能独任。 
现代文：彭泽上书说 ：我是一个文臣，冲锋陷阵并不是我独自一人能够做到的。 
English: In his petition, Penza said, "I am a scholar, and it is not possible for me to lead the charge alone.

古文：琼乃奏遣成国公朱辅。
现代文：王琼于是上书请派成国公朱辅和他同去。
English: Wang Qiong then sent a letter requesting that Chengguo Zhu Fu be sent with him.

古文：会寇遁，泽还理院事。
现代文：正好贼寇逃跑了，彭泽才又回来办理都察院的事务。
English: Just as the bandits fled, Penza returned to deal with the affairs of the Duka.

古文：写亦虎仙者，素桀黠。
现代文：写亦虎仙这个人一向贪狠、狡猾。
English: He has always been greedy and cunning.

古文：虽居肃州，阴通土鲁番酋速檀满速儿，为之耳目，据城夺印皆其谋。
现代文：他虽然住在甘州，却暗中勾结吐鲁番酋长速檀满速儿，为他做耳目，占领哈密城，夺取忠顺王大印都是他主谋的。
English: Although he lived in Ganzhou, he secretly colluded with the Turpan chieftain Houdan Manshir, acting as his eyes and ears. He was the mastermind behind the occupation of Hami City and the capture of King Da Ying of Zhongshun.

古文：泽初不知而遣之。
现代文：彭泽当初不知道就派了他去。
English: Peng Ze did not know at first and sent him away.

古文：满速儿以城印来归，留速檀拜牙郎如故。
现代文：满速儿拿忠顺王大印过来归还，却依旧扣留着速檀拜牙郎。
English: He hurriedly took the seal of King Zhongshun to return it, but he still detained the fast-bowing Fang Lang.

古文：虎仙复啖使入寇，曰： 肃州可得也。 
现代文：虎仙又进谄言，让他前来侵犯，说 ：肃州是可以拿下来的。 
English: The tiger-demon spoke again, asking him to come and invade, saying: Suzhou can be taken down.

古文：满速儿悦，使其婿马黑木随入贡，以觇虚实，且征贿。
现代文：满速儿高兴了，就让他的女婿马黑木随贡使前来窥探虚实，并且索取贿赂。
English: Filled with joy, he let his son-in-law, Ma Hegi, come with a tribute envoy to spy out the truth and demand a bribe.

古文：泽已还，鉴亦迁去，李昆代巡抚，虑他变，质其使于甘州，而驱虎仙出关。
现代文：彭泽当时已经还朝，赵鉴也调走，李昆接替他当了巡抚，因为怕生意外，就把吐鲁番的使臣扣作人质，押在甘州，同时把虎仙驱逐出关。
English: At that time, Peng Ze was still in power, Zhao Jian was also transferred away, and Li Kun took over from him as the governor. Because he was afraid of an accident, he held the envoys from Turpan hostage and kept them in Ganzhou, and at the same time expelled the Tiger Immortal from the customs.

古文：虎仙惧弗去。
现代文：虎仙害怕得不敢到吐鲁番去了。
English: Tiger Immortal was too scared to go to Turpan.

古文：满速儿闻之怒，复取哈密，分兵据沙州，自率万骑寇嘉峪关。
现代文：满速儿听说这些以后恼火了，又占领了哈密，分出部分兵力侵占沙州，自己亲自率领一万骑兵来攻打嘉峪关。
English: After hearing these things, Man Suo became angry, occupied Hami again, allocated part of the troops to invade Shazhou, and personally led ten thousand cavalry to attack Jiayuguan.

古文：游击芮宁与参将蒋存礼御之。
现代文：游击芮宁与参将蒋存礼进行抵御。
English: The guerrilla Huning and the general Jiang Cunli resisted.

古文：宁以七百人先遇寇沙子坝。寇围宁，而分兵缀存礼军。
现代文：芮宁带七百人在沙子霸首先遇上敌人，敌人包围了芮宁，又分出兵力牵制着存礼的兵力。
English: The seven hundred people from Huning first encountered the enemy in the battle of Shaziha. The enemy surrounded Huning and dispatched troops to restrain the remaining troops.

古文：宁军尽没，遂堕城堡，纵杀掠。
现代文：芮宁全军覆没，敌人就破坏城堡，纵兵杀人、抢劫。
English: The whole army of Suining was wiped out, the enemy destroyed the castle, the soldiers killed and robbed.

古文：诏泽提督三边军务往御。
现代文：朝廷诏令彭泽提督三边军务，前往抵御敌人。
English: The imperial court ordered Admiral Penza to leave the trilateral military affairs and go to resist the enemy.

古文：会副使陈九畴系其使失拜烟答及虎仙等，内应绝，乃复求和。
现代文：正好副使陈九畴逮捕了敌国大使失拜烟答和内奸虎仙等人，满速儿没有了内应，于是又一次求和。
English: It just so happened that Vice Minister Chen Juzhen arrested the ambassador of the enemy country, and the traitor, Tiger Immortal, and so on. There was no response immediately, so he once again sued for peace.

古文：泽兵遂罢。
现代文：彭泽的出兵也就停下了。
English: Penza's dispatch of troops also stopped.

古文：寻乞骸骨归，驰驿给夫廪如制。
现代文：不久他获准退休还乡，官府按规定提供了车马，发放禄米给他。
English: Soon after, he was allowed to retire and return to his hometown. The government provided him with a car and a horse, and gave him a sum of money.

古文：泽既去，琼追论嘉峪之败，请穷诘增币者主名。
现代文：彭泽离开后，王琼上书追究嘉峪战败一事，请严厉追查给吐鲁番赠送金币的主使人。
English: After the departure of Pengze, Wang Qiong wrote a letter to investigate the defeat of Jiayu, and requested that the person who gave gold coins to Turpan be severely investigated.

古文：钱宁从中下其事，大学士梁储等持之，乃已。
现代文：钱宁从宫中下达了这个任务，大学士梁储等人把它压下，才算完。
English: Channing ordered the task from the palace, and it was only after the university scholar Liang Chu and others suppressed it that it was all over.

古文：会失拜烟答子讼父冤，下法司议，释写亦虎仙等。
现代文：正好失拜烟答的儿子为父诉冤，事情交法司讨论后，决定释放写亦虎仙等人。
English: It just so happened that the son of the disgraced tobacco trader sued for his father's wrongdoings. After discussing the matter with the legal department, it was decided to release the people such as the writer and the tiger.

古文：琼因请遣给事御史勘失事状，还报无所引。
现代文：王琼于是请派给事御史前去考察失事的原由和情况，给事御史返回后说没有什么引起战争的因素。
English: Wang Qiong then asked to send an official historian to investigate the cause and circumstances of the accident. When the official historian returned, he said that there were no factors that caused the war.

古文：琼遂劾泽妄增金币，遗书议和，失信启衅，辱国丧师；昆、九畴俱宜罪。
现代文：王琼于是上书弹劾彭泽随意增加给敌国的金币，自作主张，和敌人通信议和，失信于人后引发战乱，辱国丧师；并认为李昆、九畴也都应问罪。
English: Wang Qiong then wrote a letter to impeach Peng Zhe for arbitrarily increasing the amount of gold coins given to the enemy country, making his own proposal, negotiating peace with the enemy by correspondence, causing a war after betraying others, and humiliating the country; and believed that Li Kun and Jiuzhang should also be charged.

古文：诏斥泽为民，昆、九畴逮讯。
现代文：于是武宗下诏命令：彭泽夺官为民，李昆、九畴逮捕，加以审讯。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wuzong issued an imperial edict: Peng Ze seized officials and became a citizen, Li Kun and Jiuzang were arrested and put on trial.

古文：昆谪官，九畴除名。
现代文：结果李昆贬了官，九畴被除名。
English: As a result, Li Kun was demoted and Jiuzang was expelled.

古文：世宗入继，钱宁败，琼亦得罪。
现代文：世宗即位后，钱宁败亡，王琼也被判了罪。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Channing was defeated, and Wang Qiong was also found guilty.

古文：御史杨秉中请召泽，遂即家起兵部尚书、太子太保。
现代文：御史杨秉中请召彭泽还朝，于是他从家中重新被任命为兵部尚书、太子太保。
English: Gu Shi Yang Bingzhong invited Peng Ze to return to the court, so he was reappointed from his family as the military secretary and the prince's bodyguard.

古文：昆、九畴亦复官。
现代文：李昆、九畴也又出来做了官。
English: Li Kun and Jiuzang also became officials.

古文：部事积坏久，泽核功罪，杜干请，兵政一新。
现代文：彭泽考核功罪，杜绝私请，兵政为之焕然一新。
English: Peng Ze examined the merits and demerits, put an end to personal invitations, and the military government was completely renewed.

古文：初，正德时，廷臣建白戎务奉俞旨者，多废格。
现代文：当初，正德年间，朝中大臣提出的不少军事问题已得到诏书指示，但很多诏书被搁置下来，未予推行。
English: At the beginning, during the Zhengde era, many military issues raised by the ministers of the DPRK and China had been instructed by imperial decrees, but many imperial decrees were shelved and not implemented.

古文：泽请胪列成书，次第修举。
现代文：彭泽请把那些诏书归类编为一书，按次序逐步予以实施。
English: Peng Ze, please classify those edicts and compile them into one book, and gradually implement them in order.

古文：又请敕九边守臣，策防御方略，毋画境自保。
现代文：又请指示九边守臣，策划防御敌人的总体办法，不要各自为政，画境自保。
English: Please also instruct the guards on the nine sides to plan a general approach to the defense of the enemy, not to be independent, and to protect themselves.

古文：镇、巡居中调度，毋相牵制。
现代文：镇守、巡抚在中间协同安排，不要相互掣肘。
English: The town warden and the governor should make a cooperative arrangement in the middle, and should not restrict each other.

古文：诸边各以农隙筑墙浚濠，修墩台，饬屯堡，为经久计。
现代文：各边镇都要利用农闲时间修筑防护墙，开挖战壕，修建望台，修整所驻城堡，做好长远打算。
English: All border towns should use their leisure time to build protective walls, dig trenches, build watchtowers, repair the castle, and make long-term plans.

古文：内地盗甫息，敕守臣练卒伍，立保甲，惩匿盗不举者。
现代文：内地的盗贼刚刚平定，应指示守臣操练兵马，建立保甲制度，惩治那些匿藏盗贼而不举报的人。
English: The thieves in the hinterland have just been subdued. They should instruct the guards to train soldiers and horses, establish an armor protection system, and punish those who hide thieves and do not report them.

古文：且抚西南诸苗蛮，申海禁，汰京军老弱。
现代文：此外又建议安抚西南各处苗蛮，重申海禁，裁汰京军中的老、弱士兵。
English: In addition, he also proposed to appease the barbarians in southwestern China, reaffirm the naval blockade, and eliminate the old and weak soldiers in the Beijing army.

古文：帝咸嘉纳。
现代文：以上建议，世宗都表示同意。
English: Sejong agreed to all of the above suggestions.

古文：诏遣中官杨金、郑斌、安川更代镇守，复令张弼、刘瑶守凉州、居庸。
现代文：世宗已诏令宦官杨金、郑斌、安川外出替任镇守，又任用张弼、刘瑶去驻守凉州、居庸。
English: King Sejong had ordered the eunuchs Yang Jin, Zheng Bin, and An Chuan to go out to take the place of the town guards, and also appointed Zhang Ye and Liu Ye to garrison Liangzhou and Juyong.

古文：泽持不可，罢弗遣。
现代文：彭泽坚决认为不行，世宗就作罢了，不再派用。
English: Penza firmly believed that it was not possible, so Shizong gave up and did not send any more.

古文：四川巡抚胡世宁劾分守中官赵钦，泽因请尽罢诸镇守。
现代文：四川巡抚胡世宁弹劾分守宦官赵钦的罪行，彭泽借此机会请把各地镇守宦官都免除。
English: The governor of Sichuan, Hu Shining, impeached the eunuch Zhao Qin, and Peng Ze took this opportunity to ask that all the eunuchs in the townships be pardoned.

古文：时虽不从，其后镇守竟罢。
现代文：当时世宗虽然没听从，以后镇守宦官最终还是被废止了。
English: Although Sejong did not obey at that time, the town guard eunuchs were eventually abolished.

古文：嘉靖元年，泽言天下军官，部皆有帖黄籍，用以黜陟，锦衣独无，于是置籍如诸卫。锦衣千户刘瓒等，诏书黜汰，复求还官，司礼中官萧敬请补监局工匠千五百人，泽皆持不可，帝并从之。
现代文：嘉靖元年，彭泽说全国军官在兵部都备有升降档案，用来作为提升、降职的参考，只锦衣千户刘瓒等，过去诏令把他们免了官，现在又请求做官，司礼中官萧敬请给监局增补一千五百名工匠，彭泽都坚决不同意，世宗都听从了他。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing era, Peng Ze said that the military officers in the whole country had promotion and demotion files in the military department, which were used as a reference for promotion and demotion. Only thousands of officials in brocade and silk, who had been dismissed by the imperial edict in the past, now requested to become officials. Vice Admiral Xiao Jing asked the Supervision Bureau to add 1,500 craftsmen. Peng Ze firmly disagreed, and all the sects obeyed him.

古文：帝将授外戚蒋泰等五人为锦衣，泽争，不纳。
现代文：世宗又想任用外戚蒋泰等五个人为锦衣官，彭泽反对，世宗这次没听他。
English: Shizong also wanted to appoint five people, including his relative Jiang Tai, as brocade officers. Peng Ze objected, and Shizong did not listen to him this time.

古文：在部多所执持。
现代文：他前后在兵部时敢于坚持己见，同皇上论争。
English: When he was in the military, he dared to stick to his own opinion and argue with the emperor.

古文：会御史史道以讦杨廷和下狱，泽复劾道。帝因谕言官，惟大奸及机密事专疏奏，余只具公疏，毋挟私中伤善类。
现代文：后来碰上御史史道因攻击杨廷和被逮捕下狱，彭泽又上书弹劾史道，世宗指示谏官们说，只有对大奸或机密事情用专门奏章，其他只交公文上来就行了，不要夹杂私人感情上书来中伤好人。
English: Later, when he encountered Mishi Shido, who was arrested and sent to prison for attacking Yang Ting, Penza also wrote a letter to impeach Shido. Shizong instructed the eunuchs to say that they should only use special music for high treason or confidential matters, and only submit official documents for other matters. Do not mix personal feelings with the letter to defame good people.

古文：诏下，给事御史交章劾泽阻言路，坏祖宗法。
现代文：诏书颁布后，给事御史纷纷上书批评彭泽阻塞别人进言的门路，破坏了祖宗制定下来的法度。
English: After the imperial edict was promulgated, eminent historians sent letters to criticize Pengze for blocking the way for others to make suggestions and undermining the laws established by the ancestors.

古文：帝乃从吏部言，停前谕。
现代文：世宗于是听取吏部的意见，停用以前的那个指示。
English: Sejong then listened to the opinions of the officials and stopped using the previous instruction.

古文：泽不自安，累疏乞休。
现代文：但是彭泽自己心中还是感到不安，几次上书请求辞职。
English: But Penza still felt uneasy in his heart and wrote several times to request his resignation.

古文：言者复交劾之，乃加少保，赐敕乘传归。
现代文：谏官们这一次又纷纷上书弹劾他，于是他被提升为少保，传令乘官方车马回家去了。
English: This time, the eunuchs again wrote to impeach him, so he was promoted to the rank of junior guard and ordered to take an official carriage home.

古文：锦衣百户王邦奇憾泽尝抑己，上书言哈密失国，由泽赂番求和所致，语侵杨廷和、陈九畴等。
现代文：锦衣百户王邦奇恨彭泽以前压过自己，就上书说哈密国丢掉，是由彭泽贿赂吐鲁番大使向他们求和而造成的，书中并且连及到杨廷和、陈九畴等人。
English: The king of the hundred brocade houses, Bangqi, who hated Pengze for having previously oppressed him, wrote a letter saying that the loss of Hami was caused by Pengze's bribing the ambassador of Turpan to make peace with them. The letter also mentioned Yang Tinghe, Chen Jiuzhang and others.

古文：张璁、桂萼方疾廷和，遂逮九畴廷讯，戍边。
现代文：张璁、桂萼当时正恨着廷和，就逮来九畴加以审问，并把他充军边境。
English: At that time, Zhang Ye and Gui Caly were hating Ting He, so they arrested Jiuzang and interrogated him, and sent him to the military border.

古文：泽复夺官为民，家居郁郁以卒。
现代文：彭泽又因此被削职为民，在家中闲住着，郁郁不乐地死掉了。
English: As a result, Peng Ze was dismissed from his job and became a commoner. He lived idly at home and died a sad man.

古文：总制尚书唐龙言： 泽孝友廉直，先后讨平群盗，功在盟府。
现代文：总制尚书唐龙上书说 ：彭泽对父兄孝友，做官廉洁、正直，前前后后平定各处盗贼，功绩记录在官府的书册上。
English: Tang Long, the general secretary of Shangshu, said in a letter: Peng Ze is a filial son to his father and brother, he is a clean and honest official, he has subdued thieves everywhere, and his achievements are recorded in the book of the government.

古文：陛下起之田间，俾掌邦政。
现代文：陛下把他从乡间提拔上来，让他参与国家大事。
English: His Majesty promoted him from the countryside to take part in national affairs.

古文：泽孜孜奉国，复为谗言构罢。
现代文：彭泽孜孜不倦，忠心报国，又被谗言诬蔑，终于免了官。
English: Peng Ze Ze diligently worked tirelessly, loyally served the country, and was also slandered, and was finally relieved of his duties.

古文：今殁已五年，所遗二妾，衣食不给。
现代文：现在他死去已经五年，留下来的两个妾连衣食都供应不上。
English: Now, five years after his death, the two remaining concubines cannot even be fed and clothed.

古文：请核泽往劳，复官加恤，以作忠臣之气。 
现代文：请朝廷核定彭泽以往的功劳，给他恢复一官，对他的家里加以抚恤，用来振作忠臣报国的正气。 
English: Please ask the Imperial Court to approve Peng Ze's past achievements, restore him to an official position, and give a pension to his family, which will be used to boost the righteous spirit of a loyal subject serving the country.

古文：不从。
现代文：世宗不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：隆庆初，复官，谥襄毅。
现代文：隆庆初，恢复了他的官位，谥襄毅。
English: At the beginning of the Longqing era, he was restored to his official position.

古文：毛伯温，字汝厉，吉水人。
现代文：毛伯温，字汝厉，江西吉水人。
English: Mao Bowen, the character Ru Li, Jiangxi Jishui people.

古文：祖超，广西知府。
现代文：祖父毛超，做过广西知府。
English: His grandfather, Mao Chao, was governor of Guangxi.

古文：伯温登正德三年进士，授绍兴府推官。擢御史，巡按福建、河南。
现代文：伯温考中正德三年进士，初任绍兴府推官，后升任御史，先后巡按福建、河南。
English: After three years of studying at the Beijing Conservatory, Zhong Zhengde was promoted to a scholar. He was first appointed as the governor of Shaoxing Prefecture, and later he was promoted to the position of imperial historian. He successively traveled to Fujian and Henan.

古文：世宗即位，中官张锐、张忠等论死，其党萧敬、韦霦阴缓之。
现代文：世宗即位后，宦官张锐、张忠等被判死刑，他们的同伙萧敬、韦靈暗中想拖延行刑。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, eunuchs Zhang Rui and Zhang Zhong were sentenced to death, while their accomplices Xiao Jing and Wei Ling secretly tried to delay the execution.

古文：伯温请并诛敬、霦，中官为屏气。
现代文：伯温上书请一并杀了萧敬、韦靈，宦官们因此才闭上了嘴巴。
English: Berwin wrote to the eunuchs, asking them to kill Xiao Jing and Weiling together. This is why the eunuchs kept their mouths shut.

古文：嘉靖初，迁大理寺丞。
现代文：嘉靖初年，伯温升为大理寺丞。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, Bo Wen was promoted to Dali Temple.

古文：擢右佥都御史，巡抚宁夏。
现代文：后来又升为右佥都御史，巡抚宁夏。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of the Right Deputy Governor of the Capital, the Governor of Ningxia.

古文：李福达狱起，坐为大理时失入，褫职归。
现代文：李福达一案被重新提起，伯温因为在大理寺时误判重罪，被罢官归乡。
English: The Li Fuda case was reopened, and Bo Wen was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown because he was wrongly convicted of a felony at Dali Temple.

古文：用荐起故官，抚山西，移顺天，皆未赴。
现代文：后来因为他人推荐恢复旧职，让他巡抚山西，又改为巡抚顺天，他都没有上任。
English: Later, because he was recommended by others to resume his old position, he was made the governor of Shanxi, and then he was changed to the governor of Shuntian, but he did not take office.

古文：改理院事，进左副都御史。
现代文：朝廷于是让他改为办理都察院的事务，提升他为左副都御史。
English: As a result, the Imperial Court asked him to handle the affairs of the Duka-in and promoted him to the position of Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian.

古文：为赵府宗人祐椋所讦，解官候勘。
现代文：在这个职务上，他又受到赵王府的族人朱椋的攻击，被解除官职听候考察。
English: In this position, he was also attacked by Zhu Xi, a member of the Zhao Wangfu clan, and was relieved of his official duties pending an investigation.

古文：已，复褫职。
现代文：过后又被开除了职务。
English: He was later dismissed from his post.

古文：十五年冬，皇嗣生，将颁诏外国。
现代文：十五年冬天，皇子出生，打算向外国颁布诏书。
English: In the winter of 1515, when the prince was born, he intended to issue an imperial edict to foreign countries.

古文：礼部尚书夏言以安南久失朝贡，不当遣使，请讨之。
现代文：礼部尚书夏言认为安南多年不来朝贡，不应当派遣使节，并进而请讨伐它。
English: Shangshu Xiayan of the Ministry of Ceremonies thought that Annan had not paid tribute for many years and should not send an envoy, and then asked him to fight against it.

古文：遂起伯温右都御史，与咸宁侯仇鸾治兵待命。
现代文：世宗于是起用伯温为右都御史，让他和咸宁侯仇鸾整兵待命。
English: Therefore, King Sejong appointed Bowen as the right-hand governor of the capital, and put him on standby with Xianning, the feudal lord.

古文：以父丧辞，不许。
现代文：伯温以父丧在身推辞，世宗不答应。
English: Berwin used his father's death as an excuse, but Shizong did not agree.

古文：明年五月至京，上方略六事。
现代文：第二年五月伯温到达京城，递上六条方略。
English: In May of the following year, Bowen arrived in Beijing and submitted six strategies.

古文：会安南世孙黎宁遣陪臣郑惟僚等诉莫登庸弑逆，请兴师复仇。
现代文：恰好这时安南国王孙黎宁派遣陪臣郑惟僚等人来诉说莫登庸弑君篡权，请中国兴兵替他们复仇。
English: It was at this time that Sun Lining, King of Annam, sent his vassal Zheng Weili and others to complain that Moden Yongzheng had usurped power, and asked the Chinese Xingren to take revenge for them.

古文：帝疑其不实，命暂缓师，敕两广、云南守臣勘报，而命伯温协理院事。
现代文：世宗怀疑情况不真实，命令伯温暂缓出兵，传令两广、云南守臣调查以后报上来，同时让伯温协助办理都察院的事务。
English: Shizong suspected that the situation was not true and ordered Bo Wen to suspend the dispatch of troops, to order the two Guang and Yunnan Shoucheng to investigate and report back, and to let Bo Wen assist in handling the affairs of the Duka Academy.

古文：御史何维柏请听伯温终制，不许。
现代文：御史何维柏奏请让伯温守完丧，世宗不答应。
English: Sejong did not agree to the request of the governor He Weibao to allow Bo Wen to hold a memorial service.

古文：伯温引疾不出，至禫除始起视事。
现代文：伯温只好称病不出，一直到除丧服的祭祀过后才出来理事。
English: Berwin had no choice but to say that he was too ill to attend, and he did not come out as a director until after the funeral service.

古文：其冬迁工部尚书。
现代文：这年冬天，伯温升任工部尚书。
English: In the winter of that year, Bo Wen was promoted to Shang Shu of the Engineering Department.

古文：十七年春，黔国公沐朝辅等以登庸降表至，请宥罪许贡。
现代文：十七年春天，黔国公沐朝辅等拿登庸的降表献给朝廷，请宽恕他的罪，允许安南来朝贡。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, the prince of the country, the imperial aide, and others presented the abdication certificate of Deng Yong to the imperial court. Please forgive his sin and allow Annan to come to pay tribute.

古文：先是，云南巡抚汪文盛奏登庸闻发兵进讨，遣使潜觇。
现代文：在此之前，云南巡抚汪文盛奏称，登庸听说朝廷将发兵前往讨伐他，派人偷偷来侦察我们。
English: Prior to this, the governor of Yunnan, Wang Wen, made a grand show of saying that Deng Yong had heard that the imperial court would send troops to fight him and secretly sent people to spy on us.

古文：帝已敕遵前诏进兵，文盛又纳安南降人武文渊策，具言登庸可破状，复传檄安南令奉表献地。
现代文：世宗已传令要大臣按照以前的诏书出兵，文盛又采纳安南投降过来的武文渊的计策，上书说登庸可以拿下来的情况，一面又传檄要登庸向朝廷上表献地。
English: King Sejong had issued an order for the minister to send troops in accordance with the previous edict, and Moon Seong also adopted the strategy of Bu Moon Yuan, who had surrendered to Annan, and issued a letter saying that Deng Yong could be taken down. On the other hand, it was rumored that Deng Yong would offer land to the imperial court.

古文：及是，下朝辅奏付廷议，佥言不可许。
现代文：到这个时候，世宗把朝辅的奏章交给大臣们讨论，大家都说不能答应他。
English: At this time, Sejong handed over the imperial rescript to the ministers for discussion, and they all said that they could not agree to it.

古文：乃改伯温兵部尚书兼右都御史，克期启行。
现代文：世宗于是改命伯温担任兵部尚书兼右都御史，限期上任。
English: Sejong then changed his name to Bowen to serve as Hyobu Shosho and Utsunomiya Imperial Historian, and took office for a limited period of time.

古文：帝以用兵事重，无必讨意，特欲威服之。
现代文：世宗认为用兵的事关系重大，并没有非讨伐安南不可的意思，只是想威吓制服它而已。
English: Sejong thought that the matter of using soldiers was of great importance, and did not mean that it was necessary to fight Annan, but just wanted to intimidate and subdue it.

古文：而兵部尚书张瓒无所画，视帝意为可否。
现代文：可是兵部尚书张瓒没有什么主见，完全视世宗的意思为可否。
English: However, Shangshu Zhang of the military department had no opinion on the matter, and completely regarded the meaning of Shizong as whether it was possible or not.

古文：朝论多主不当兴师，顾不敢显谏。
现代文：朝中大臣们多认为不该兴兵讨伐，只是不敢明白地谏阻。
English: Most of the ministers of the two Koreas thought that it was not right to raise an army for a crusade, but they did not dare to oppose it explicitly.

古文：制下数月，两广总督侍郎张经以用兵方略上，且言须兵三十万，饷百六十万石。
现代文：世宗的指示传下去几个月后，两广总督、侍郎张经递上一份用兵方略，并且说需要三十万士兵，一百六十万石粮饷。
English: A few months after Sejong's instructions were passed down, the governor of the two provinces, Zhang Jing, submitted a military strategy, and said that 300,000 soldiers and 1.6 million koku of grain were needed.

古文：钦州知州林希元则极言登庸易取，请即日出师。
现代文：钦州知州林希元则极力说登庸不难拿下来，请立即出兵。
English: Lin Xiyuan from Qinzhou and Zhizhou insisted that it would not be difficult to take down Deng Yong, so please send troops immediately.

古文：瓒不敢决，复请廷议。
现代文：张瓒不敢做决定，又奏请让大臣们公议。
English: Zhang Ye did not dare to make a decision, and asked the ministers to hold a public discussion.

古文：议上无成策，帝不怿，让瓒，师复止。
现代文：讨论过后递上去的决议又没有什么像样的计策，世宗感到不高兴，责怪了张瓒一番，军队又停止出征了。
English: The resolution submitted after the discussion had no decent strategy. Shizong felt unhappy, blamed Zhang Xuan, and the army stopped going to war.

古文：命伯温仍协理院事。
现代文：伯温受命再次协助办理按察院的事务。
English: Berwin was again ordered to assist in handling the affairs of the court of cassation.

古文：明年二月，帝幸承天。诏伯温总督宣、大、山西军务。
现代文：第二年二月，世宗住在承天，诏令伯温去总督宣府、大同、山西的军务。
English: In February of the following year, when Sejong was living in Jotian, he issued an edict ordering Bowen to go to the governor of Xuanfu, Datong, and Shanxi for military affairs.

古文：俄选宫僚，加兼太子宾客。
现代文：不久选用东宫官员，又给他加官，兼任太子宾客。
English: Soon, officials of the East Palace were selected, and he was given an additional post, concurrently serving as the prince's guest.

古文：大同所辖镇边、镇川、弘赐、镇河、镇虏五堡，相距二百余里，极边近贼帐。
现代文：大同所管辖的镇边、镇川、弘赐、镇河、镇虏五座城堡，距城二百多里远，是接近敌人营帐的最边远地带。
English: The five castles of Zhenbian, Zhenchuan, Hongzhi, Zhenhe and Zhenru under Datong's jurisdiction are more than 200 miles away from the city, and are the most remote areas close to the enemy's camp.

古文：自巡抚张文锦以筑堡致乱，后无敢议修者。
现代文：自从巡抚张文锦因为修筑这些城堡导致兵变后，没有人敢再主张维修它们了。
English: Since the governor Zhang Wenjin caused a mutiny by building these castles, no one dares to maintain them.

古文：伯温曰： 变所由生，以任用匪人，非建议谬也。 
现代文：伯温说： 兵变所以发生，是因为文锦用人不当，并不是他的建议有什么不对。 
English: Berwin said: The mutiny happened because Wenjin was employing people improperly, not because there was anything wrong with his suggestion.

古文：卒营之。募军三千防守，给以闲田，永除其赋。
现代文：终于还是修复了这些城堡，招募三千士兵在这里防守，分给他们空闲的田地，永久地免除他们的田赋。
English: He finally repaired the castles, recruited three thousand soldiers to defend them, gave them free fields, and permanently exempted them from the land tax.

古文：边防赖焉。
现代文：边防依仗这一点很有威力。
English: The fact that border defense depends on war is very powerful.

古文：录功，加太子少保。
现代文：论功，伯温被晋升为太子少保。
English: For his meritorious service, Bowen was promoted to Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：是时登庸惧讨，数上表乞降。
现代文：这时，登庸害怕中国讨伐他，几次上书请求投降。
English: At this time, Deng Yong was afraid that China would attack him, and he wrote several times to request surrender.

古文：帝亦欲因抚之，遣侍郎黄绾招谕。
现代文：世宗也想借此机会安抚他，就派侍郎黄绾去招安。
English: Sejong also wanted to take this opportunity to appease him, so he sent his steward, Huang Qi, to bring peace.

古文：绾多所要求，帝怒，罢绾。
现代文：黄绾过多地提出各种要求，世宗恼了，罢了黄绾的官。
English: Huang Qi excessively put forward various demands. Shizong was annoyed and dismissed Huang Qi's officials.

古文：再下廷议，咸言当讨，帝从之。
现代文：然后又下交群臣议论，大家都说应当讨伐他。
English: Then he submitted it to the courtiers for discussion, and they all said that he should be fought.

古文：闰七月命伯温、鸾南征。文武三品以下不用命者，许军令从事。
现代文：世宗同意了，就在闰七月里命令伯温、仇鸾南征，文武三品以下官员不听命令的，允许他们按军法处治。
English: Shizong agreed, and in the intercalary month of July, he ordered the Southern Expedition of Bo Wen and Qiu Xuan. If the officials below the third grade of literature and military science did not obey the order, they were allowed to be dealt with according to military law.

古文：伯温等至广西，会总督张经，总兵官安远侯柳珣，参政翁万达、张岳等议，征两广、福建、湖广狼土官兵凡十二万五千余人，分三哨，自凭祥、龙峒、思陵州入，而以奇兵二为声援。
现代文：伯温等到达广西后，召集总督张经，总兵官、安远侯柳王旬，参政翁万达、张岳等商定，征调两广、福建、湖广狼土官兵共十二万五千多人，分置三处哨所，从凭祥、龙峒、思陵州挺进安南，再用两支奇军作为声援部队。
English: After arriving in Guangxi, Berwin and others convened the governor Zhang Jing, the chief military officer, Anyuan Hou Liu Wang Shun, and the politicians Weng Wanda and Zhang Yue, and agreed to conscript a total of more than 125,000 officers and soldiers from Guangxi, Fujian, and Hunan, set up three separate posts, and advanced from Pingxiang, Longyan, and Silingzhou to Annan, and then used two special forces as a solidarity force.

古文：檄云南巡抚汪文盛帅兵驻莲花滩，亦分三道进。
现代文：又传令云南巡抚汪文盛率兵驻在莲花滩，也分兵三路进军安南。
English: It was also rumored that the Yunnan governor Wang Wensheng stationed his troops at the Lotus Beach, and also marched into Annan in three directions.

古文：部署已定，会鸾有罪召还，即以珣代。
现代文：部署已定，碰上仇鸾因罪被召回，就让柳王旬取代了他。
English: The deployment had already been decided, and when he was recalled for a crime, he was replaced by Liu Wangjun.

古文：十九年秋，伯温等进驻南宁。檄安南臣民，谕以天朝兴灭继绝之义，罪止登庸父子，举郡县降者以其地授之。
现代文：嘉靖十九年秋天，伯温等人进驻南宁，传檄安南臣民，告诉他们大明王朝要复兴被登庸无理毁灭的国家，选择黎氏子孙继承祖宗的家国，只治登庸父子的罪，有带领郡县投降的，就拿这个郡县封赏他。
English: In the autumn of the 19th year of Jiajing, Bowen and others were stationed in Nanning to preach to the subjects of Annan, telling them that the Daming Dynasty wanted to revive the country that was destroyed by Deng Yong, select the descendants of the Li clan to inherit the ancestral homeland, and only punish Deng Yong's father and son. If there was a leader who surrendered the county, they would reward him with this county.

古文：悬重购购登庸父子，而宣谕登庸籍土地、人民纳款，即如诏书宥罪。
现代文：又悬重赏缉拿登庸父子，同时传令登庸只要交上土地、人民的簿册并依此纳款，就照诏书中讲过的那些饶恕他的罪过。
English: He also placed a heavy bounty on the arrest of Deng Yong and his son, and at the same time ordered Deng Yong to forgive his sins as mentioned in the edict, as long as he submitted the land and people's book and received payment according to it.

古文：登庸大惧，遣使诣万达乞降，词甚哀。
现代文：登庸非常害怕，派了使臣到万达那里求降，措辞很是可怜。
English: Deng Yong was very scared and sent an envoy to Wanda to ask for surrender. The wording was very poor.

古文：万达送之伯温所。
现代文：万达把他们送到伯温那里。
English: Wanda sent them to Bowen.

古文：伯温承制许之，宣天子恩威，纳其图籍，并所还钦州四峒地。权令还国听命。
现代文：伯温奉命答应了，向他们传达了天子的恩德和威严，收取了安南国的地图、户籍，还有他们所归还的钦州四峒地区，暂且命令登庸的使臣回国听令。
English: Upon receiving the order, Berwin agreed, and conveyed to them the benevolence and majesty of the heavenly son. He received the map of Annam, the household registration, and the four counties of Chin State that they had returned. For the time being, he ordered Deng Yong's envoys to return to China to obey the order.

古文：驰疏以闻，帝大悦。诏改安南国为安南都统使司，以登庸为都统使，世袭，置十三宣抚司，令自署置。
现代文：伯温把这些情况飞章上奏，世宗极为高兴，发布诏书把安南国改名安南都统使司，让登庸当都统使，世代相承，在境内分设十三个宣抚司，由他自己安排。
English: Berwin made a big fuss about these circumstances, and Shizong was extremely pleased. He issued an edict to rename Annam as Annam-du-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung

古文：伯温受命岁余，不发一矢，而安南定，由帝本不欲用兵故也。
现代文：伯温接受讨伐安南的任务一年多时间里，没射过一支箭，安南就被平定，这是因为世宗本来就不打算动兵的缘故。
English: Berwin accepted the task of fighting Annan for more than a year, and Annan was pacified without firing a single arrow. This was because Sejong had never intended to mobilize troops.

古文：论功，加太子太保。
现代文：事后论功，伯温被加官为太子太保。
English: After the event, Bowen was promoted to the post of Crown Prince.

古文：二十一年正月还朝，复理院事。
现代文：二十一年正月伯温回朝，仍旧办理都察院的职事。
English: In the first month of the twenty-first year, Bowen returned to the North and still handled the duties of the Duka-in.

古文：边关数有警，伯温请筑京师外城。
现代文：边关上几次传来警报，伯温请修建京师外城。
English: When the alarm came several times at the border, Bo Wen asked for the construction of the Beijing Division Outer City.

古文：帝已报可，给事中刘养直言，庙工方兴，物力难继，乃命暂止。
现代文：世宗已批示说可以，给事中刘养直说修庙的工程正在进展中，物力跟不上，世宗就传令暂停修筑外城。
English: The Sejong had already issued an order saying that it was possible, but in the middle of the matter, Liu Yangzhi said that the project to repair the temple was in progress, and the material resources could not keep up, and the Sejong ordered the construction of the outer city to be suspended.

古文：其年十月，张瓒卒，伯温代为兵部。
现代文：当年十月，张瓒死了，伯温就代理兵部的事务。
English: In October of that year, Zhang Xuan died, and Berwin took over the affairs of the military department.

古文：瓒贪黩，在部八年，戎备尽堕。
现代文：张瓒为人迷恋权柄，不能尽职，在兵部当了八年尚书，军事设施全给荒废了。
English: Zhang Ye was infatuated with power and power, unable to perform his duties. He served in the military for eight years, and the military facilities were completely abandoned.

古文：伯温会廷臣议上防边二十四事，军令一新。
现代文：伯温召集朝臣们商议后奏上二十四条防边建议，军令为之一新。
English: After summoning his courtiers for deliberation, Berwin presented twenty-four proposals for the defense of the frontier, one of which was a new military order.

古文：言官建议，请核实新军、京军及内府力士、匠役，以裕国储。
现代文：有言官建议核实新军、京军及内府力士、工匠名额，以便节约开支，充实国库储备。
English: A spokesman suggested verifying the number of New Army, Beijing Army, and inner-prefectural wrestlers and craftsmen in order to save expenses and replenish treasury reserves.

古文：伯温因上冗滥当革者二十余条，凡锦衣、腾骧诸卫，御马、内官、尚膳诸监，素为中贵盘踞者，尽在革中。
现代文：伯温于是递上关于应当裁减的冗滥人员的二十多条意见，举凡锦衣、腾骧等卫，御马、内官、尚膳等监，这些一向被宦官们占据的部门，都在裁减之列。
English: Berwin then submitted more than twenty opinions on the redundancy of redundant personnel that should be reduced, including guards such as brocade and eaves, overseers such as overseers, eunuchs, and eunuchs. These departments, which have always been occupied by eunuchs, are among the reductions.

古文：帝称善，立命清汰。
现代文：世宗称赞这个建议，命令立即照此清理。
English: The Sejong praised the suggestion and ordered the clean-up to be carried out immediately.

古文：宿弊颇厘，而左右近习多不悦。
现代文：朝廷中多年来存在的这些弊端得到了很大改善，可是世宗身边的太监们这下却很不高兴。
English: These drawbacks that have existed in the Imperial Court for many years have been greatly improved, but the eunuchs around Sejong are now very unhappy.

古文：二十三年秋，顺天巡抚朱方以防秋毕请撤客兵。
现代文：二十三年秋天，顺天巡抚朱方因为防秋结束请撤回临时派驻的客兵。
English: In the autumn of the 23rd year, Governor Shuntian Zhu Fang requested the withdrawal of the temporarily stationed guest soldiers because of the end of the autumn prevention.

古文：未几，寇大入，直逼畿辅。
现代文：不多久，北寇大举入侵，直逼京师近郊。
English: Not long after, the North Koreans launched a large-scale invasion, pushing right up to the outskirts of Beijing.

古文：帝震怒，并械总督翟鹏遣戍，毙方杖下。
现代文：世宗大为震怒，一并逮捕了总督翟鹏，让他充了军，把朱方打死在大棍之下。
English: Sejong was so enraged that he arrested the governor, Hao Peng, and had him fill the army and beat Zhu Fang to death with a big stick.

古文：御史舒汀言，方止议撤蓟兵，而并撤宣、大，则伯温与职方郎韩最也。
现代文：御史舒汀说，朱方只是建议撤回蓟镇的客兵，主张把宣府、大同的客兵一起撤回的是伯温和职方郎韩最。
English: Mishi Shuting said that Zhu Fang only suggested withdrawing the guest soldiers from Shanzhen, and it was Bo Wen and the official party member Lang Han who advocated withdrawing the guest soldiers from Xuanfu and Datong together.

古文：帝遂削伯温籍，杖最八十，戍极边。
现代文：世宗于是把伯温削除官籍，把韩最打了八十大棍，发配到最边远的地方充军去了。
English: Sejong then removed Bowen from the official register, beat Han with eighty clubs, and sent him to join the army in the most remote place.

古文：伯温归，疽发背卒。
现代文：伯温回乡以后，背上长出疽疮死掉了。
English: After returning to his hometown, Bo Wen developed gangrene on his back and died.

古文：穆宗立，复官，赐恤。
现代文：穆宗即位后，给他恢复了官职，并赐予恤典。
English: After Mu Zong ascended the throne, he was restored to his official position and given a pension.

古文：天启初，追谥襄懋。
现代文：天启初年，追谥他为 襄懋 。
English: In the first year of the apocalypse, he was chased by Xiang Yu.

古文：伯温气宇沉毅，饮啖兼十人。
现代文：伯温为人气宇深沉、坚强，吃饭、饮酒有十个人的容量。
English: Berwin has a deep and strong personality. He can eat and drink as much as ten people.

古文：临事决机，不动声色。
现代文：遇事决策，不动声色。
English: When it comes to decision-making, he is unflappable.

古文：召拜兵部左侍郎。
现代文：在对安南的战争中，万达、张岳提出了很多计策。
English: In the war against Annan, Wanda and Zhang Yue proposed many strategies.

古文：年老引去。隆庆初卒。
现代文：伯温极力向朝廷推荐他们，他们两个于是得到了任用。
English: Bowen strongly recommended them to the court, and the two were appointed.

古文：翁万达，字仁夫，揭阳人。
现代文：翁万达，字仁夫，广东揭阳人。
English: Weng Wanda, also known as Renfu, is a famous actor in Guangdong.

古文：嘉靖五年进士。
现代文：嘉靖五年进士出身。
English: In the fifth year of Jiajing, he was promoted to a scholar.

古文：授户部主事。再迁郎中，出为梧州知府。
现代文：最初担任户部主事，又升为郎中，然后到梧州当了知府。
English: At first, he served as the head of the household department, then he was promoted to a junior vassal, and then he became the prefect of Wuzhou.

古文：咸宁侯仇鸾镇两广，纵部卒为虐。万达缚其尤横者，杖之。阅四年，声绩大著。
现代文：咸宁侯仇鸾镇守两广，放任部下士兵为害，万达把他们中间最残暴的人捆了，打了一顿大棍。
English: Xianning Hou Qianlong Zhengu guarded the two provinces, and allowed his subordinates to harm the soldiers. Wanda tied up the most brutal among them and beat them with a big stick.

古文：会朝议将讨安南，擢万达广西副使，专办安南事。
现代文：在这里当了四年知府，声望、成就都很显著。恰好朝廷决定讨伐安南，就提拔万达做了广西副使，专职处理安南事务。
English: He served as the governor of Guangxi for four years, and his reputation and achievements were remarkable. Just as the imperial court decided to crack down on Annan, he promoted Wanda to be the deputy envoy of Guangxi to deal with Annan affairs on a full-time basis.

古文：万达请于总督张经曰： 莫登庸大言 中国不能正土官弑逆罪，安能问我 。
现代文：万达向总督张经申请说： 莫登庸狂妄叫嚣 中国朝廷不能把土官杀害上级的办罪，怎么有本事来惩办我 ？
English: Wanda applied to the governor Zhang Jing, saying: Moden yong arrogant clamor China's imperial court can't punish a local official for killing a superior, how can it punish me?

古文：今凭祥州土舍李寰弑其土官珍，思恩府土目卢回煽九司乱，龙州土舍赵楷杀从子燧、爰，又结田州人韦应杀燧弟宝，断藤峡瑶侯公丁负固。
现代文：现在冯祥州土著居民李寰杀了他们的土官李珍，思恩府的土著小吏卢回煽动九司叛乱，龙州土著居民赵楷杀了自己的侄子赵燧、赵火爰，又勾结田州人韦应杀了赵燧的弟弟赵宝，断藤峡瑶族侯爵公丁负隅顽抗，不服管教。
English: Now, the indigenous residents of Fengxiangzhou, Li Qian, killed their local official, Li Zhen; the indigenous minor officials of Si'enfu, Lu Hui, incited the rebellion of Jiuxi; the indigenous residents of Longzhou, Zhao Kai, killed their nephews, Zhao Qi and Zhao Huo; the collusion of the people of Tianzhou, Wei Ying, killed Zhao Qi's brother, Zhao Bao; and the stubborn resistance of the Marquis Gong Ding, a member of the Dongxia Yi people, who refused to accept discipline.

古文：此曹同恶共济，一旦约为内应，我且不自保。
现代文：这些家伙们同恶共济，一旦被安南约为内应，我们会自顾不暇。
English: These guys are partners in crime, and once Annan is gone, we'll be on our own.

古文：先擒此数人问罪，安南易下耳。 
现代文：先把这些人抓了治罪，安南就容易征服了。 
English: If these people are first arrested and punished, it will be easy for Annan to conquer them.

古文：经曰： 然，惟君之所为。 
现代文：张经回答说： 对，随你处置吧。 
English: Zhang Jing replied: Yes, do as you please.

古文：于是诛寰、应，擒回，招还九司，诱杀楷，佯系讼公丁者绐公丁，执诸坐。以两军破平其巢。
现代文：于是万达杀掉了李寰、李应，活捉了卢回，把九司予以招安，诱杀了赵楷，又假装把控告公丁的人关起来，骗来公丁，就在他的坐椅上活捉了他，然后派两队人马打下了他的巢穴。
English: So Wanda killed Li Qian and Li Ying, captured Lu Hui alive, lured Jiu Si to safety, lured Zhao Kai to death, and pretended to lock up the person who accused Gong Ding, tricked Gong Ding, captured him alive in his chair, and then sent two teams of men and horses to knock down his lair.

古文：又议割四峒属南宁，降峒豪黄贤相。
现代文：又决定割四峒，划归南宁，降服了峒族土豪黄贤相。
English: He also decided to cut the four ridges and return to Nanning, and subdued the local hero Huang Xianxiang.

古文：登庸始惧。
现代文：这下登庸才害怕了。
English: Now Deng Yong was afraid.

古文：迁浙江右参政。经以征安南非万达不可，奏留之，乃命以参政莅广西。
现代文：朝廷这时打算让万达升任浙江右参政，张经因为讨伐安南事离开万达不行，就上书请求留用他，于是朝廷委派他到广西当了参政。
English: At that time, the imperial court planned to promote Wanda to the post of Zhejiang right-wing political participant. Zhang Jing, who could not leave Wanda because of the struggle against Annan, sent a letter requesting that he be retained, so the imperial court appointed him to Guangxi to participate in politics.

古文：已而毛伯温集兵进剿，万达上书伯温，言： 揖让而告成功，上策也。
现代文：不久毛伯温聚集部队打算前往讨伐，万达给他写信说： 以揖让的礼仪不用兵而告成功，是上策。
English: Not long after, Mao Bowen gathered troops and planned to go on a crusade. Wanda wrote to him saying, "The etiquette of appeasement is the best way to achieve success without using troops."

古文：慑之以不敢不从，中策也。
现代文：用兵力恫吓使他不敢不服从，是中策。
English: Using military force to intimidate him so that he does not dare to disobey is a central strategy.

古文：芟夷绝灭，终为下策。 
现代文：斩尽杀绝，到底还是下策。 
English: Kill them all, that's the next best thing.

古文：伯温然之。
现代文：伯温同意他的看法。
English: Berwyn agrees with him.

古文：会获安南谍者丁南杰，万达解其缚，厚遇，遣之去，怵以天朝兵威。
现代文：恰好这时抓获了一名安南的间谍丁南杰，万达为他解下绳索，好好款待他一番，就放他回去，让他知道并惧怕中国朝廷的兵力之强大。
English: Just at this time, an Annan spy, Ding Nanjie, was captured. Wanda untied the ropes for him, treated him well, and let him go back to let him know and fear the strength of the Chinese imperial court.

古文：登庸大惧，乃诣伯温乞降。
现代文：登庸这下大为害怕，就到万达这里来请求投降。
English: Deng Yong was very scared, so he came to Wanda to ask for surrender.

古文：是役也，万达功最，赏不逾常格。然帝知其能，迁四川按察使。
现代文：这次安南战争，万达的功绩最大，虽然给的奖赏没有什么破格的，但是世宗了解他的才干，升用他做了四川按察使。
English: This time, in the Annan War, Wanda's achievement was the greatest. Although the reward he was given was nothing out of the ordinary, the Sejong understood his talent and promoted him to the post of inspector of Sichuan.

古文：历陕西左、右布政使。
现代文：以后万达历任陕西左、右布政使。
English: Later, Wanda successively served as the political envoy of Shaanxi Province.

古文：二十三年，擢右副都御史，巡抚陕西。寻进兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，代翟鹏总督宣、大、山西、保定军务。
现代文：二十三年升任右副都御史，巡抚陕西，不久升为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，接替翟鹏总督宣、大、山西、保定军务。
English: In 233, he was promoted to the position of the right vice-governor of the capital and the governor of Shaanxi Province. Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the military department and the right hand man of the governor of the capital, and took over the military affairs of Xuanpeng, Da'an, Shanxi and Baoding.

古文：劾罢宣府总兵官郤永、副总兵姜奭，荐何卿、赵卿、沈希仪。赵卿遂代永。
现代文：他上书弹劾、罢免了宣府总兵官谷阝永和副总兵姜，推荐何卿、赵卿和沈希仪，于是赵卿接替了谷阝永。
English: He sent a letter to impeach and dismiss the chief military officer of Xuanwu, Gu Yingyong, and the deputy chief military officer Jiang, and recommended He Xing, Zhao Xing and Shen Xiyi, so Zhao Xing succeeded Gu Yingyong.

古文：万达谨侦候，明赏罚。
现代文：万达很注意侦察敌情，而且赏罚严明。
English: Wanda pays great attention to reconnaissance of the enemy situation, and the rewards and punishments are strict.

古文：每当防秋，发卒乘障，阴遣卒倾朱于油，察离次者朱其处。卒归辄缚，毋敢复离次者。
现代文：每当防秋季节，派兵埋伏在隐蔽处，又暗中派巡逻士兵携带着浇了油的朱砂，看到有人离开驻点就在那里涂上朱砂，等这些士兵返回就把他们捆起来，从此再没人敢擅自离开驻点。
English: Whenever it was the autumn prevention season, they would send soldiers to lie in wait in hidden places, and secretly send patrol soldiers to carry oiled cinnabar. When they saw someone leave the garrison, they would apply cinnabar there, and when these soldiers returned, they would tie them up. From then on, no one would dare to leave the garrison without permission.

古文：严杀降禁，违辄抵死。
现代文：他严格禁止杀害投降的官兵，违抗命令就得抵命。
English: He strictly forbade the killing of surrendering officers and soldiers, and those who disobeyed orders were to be executed.

古文：得降人，抚之如所亲，以是益知敌情。
现代文：每次有投降过来的人，他安抚他们像对待自己亲近的人一样，由此他更加了解敌情。
English: Each time someone surrenders, he soothes them as if they were someone close to him, giving him a better understanding of the enemy.

古文：寇数万骑犯大同中路，入铁裹门，故总兵官张达力战却之。
现代文：贼寇几万骑兵侵犯大同中路，进入铁裹门，原总兵官张达拼死力打退了他们。
English: Thieves and robbers with tens of thousands of cavalry invaded Datong Middle Road and entered the Iron Wrapped Gate. The former chief military officer Zhang Da desperately fought them off.

古文：又犯鹁鸽谷，参将张凤、诸生王邦直等战死。
现代文：敌人又侵犯鹁鸽谷，参将张凤、监生王邦直等战死。
English: The enemy also invaded Yan Dove Valley, leading to the death of Zhang Feng, Wang Bangzhi and others.

古文：万达与总兵官周尚文备阳和，而遣骑四出邀击，颇有斩获。
现代文：万达与总兵官周尚文在阳和守备，派出骑兵四处阻击，杀死、俘虏了不少敌人。
English: Wanda and the commander-in-chief, Zhou Shangwen, were on high alert and sent cavalry to block the enemy's advance, killing and capturing many of the enemy.

古文：寇登山，见官兵大集，乃引去。
现代文：贼寇登上山，看到官兵聚结了大批人马，于是撤退了。
English: Thieves climbed the mountain, saw a large number of officers and soldiers gathered, and then retreated.

古文：事闻，赐敕奖赉。
现代文：战况汇报给朝廷知道后，世宗传令奖赏了万达。
English: After the report on the state of the war was made known to the imperial court, Shizong ordered to reward Wanda.

古文：屡疏请修筑边墙，议自大同东路阳和口至宣府西阳河，须帑银二十九万。
现代文：万达屡次上书请修建防护墙，认为从大同东路阳和口到宣府西阳河，修墙需要花费国库银二十九万两。
English: Wanda has repeatedly written to request the construction of a protective wall, arguing that from Datong East Road Yanghekou to Xuanfu Xiyanghe, it will cost the national treasury 290,000 taels of silver to repair the wall.

古文：帝已许之，兵部挠其议，以大同旧有二边，不当复于边内筑墙。帝不听。
现代文：世宗已同意了，兵部却阻挠这个决定，认为大同过去已经有两重边防战备了，不应当在边防线之内另外修建防护墙，世宗没有听兵部的意见。
English: Sejong had already agreed, but the Ministry of Military Affairs blocked the decision, arguing that Datong had already prepared for two border wars in the past, and should not build another protective wall within the border line. Sejong did not listen to the opinion of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：乃自大同东路天城、阳和、开山口诸处为墙百二十八里，堡七，墩台百五十四；宣府西路西阳河、洗马林、张家口诸处为墙六十四里，敌台十。
现代文：于是万达在大同东路天城、阳和、开山口等处修建了一百二十八里防护墙，七座城堡，一百五十四个望敌台；在宣府西路西阳河、洗马林、张家口等处修建了六十四里防护墙，十座望敌台。
English: As a result, Wanda built a 128-mile protective wall, seven castles, and 154 watchtowers at Tiancheng, Yanghe, and Kaishangkou on Datong East Road; and a 64-mile protective wall and ten watchtowers at Xiyanghe, Shima Lin, and Zhangjiakou on Xuanfu West Road.

古文：斩崖削坡五十里。工五十余日成。
现代文：工程一共开山平坡五十里，仅五十多天就完成了。
English: The project covered a total of 50 miles of mountains and plains, and was completed in just over 50 days.

古文：山西偏关以西百五十里，恃河为险；偏关以东百有四里，略与大同西路等。内边，紫荆、宁武、雁门为要，次则居庸、倒马、龙泉、平刑。迩年寇犯山西，必自大同；犯紫荆，必自宣府。
现代文：万达因此被提升为右都御史。后来他揭发代王府的皇族子弟朱充灼等人的叛乱密谋，又升为左都御史。后来，万达联合宣、大、山西的镇守、巡抚等官一起上书讨论边防战守事宜，大要说： 近年来贼寇入侵山西，一定从大同进兵；侵犯紫荆，一定从宣府进兵。
English: As a result, Wanda was promoted to the Right Capital Historian. Later, he exposed the rebellion plotting of the royal family's younger brother Zhu Shengyao and others on behalf of the royal palace, and was promoted to the Left Capital Historian. Later, Wanda jointly submitted a letter to Xuan Xuan, Dai, Shanxi's town guards, governors and other officials to discuss border defense and defense matters, saying: In recent years, if thieves and bandits invade Shanxi, they must enter the army from Datong; if they invade Bauhinia, they must enter the army from Xuan Xuan.

古文：先年山西防秋，止守外边偏、老一带，岁发班军六千人备御，大同仍置兵，宁、雁为声援。
现代文：前些年山西防秋，只驻守偏关、老营堡一带，每年派遣六千名换防部队来防守，大同也还驻扎着军队，宁武、雁门部队作为声援。
English: In previous years, Shanxi's autumn defense was only stationed in the areas of Yeguan and Laoying Fort, and six thousand troops were dispatched every year to defend the defense. Datong also stationed troops, and Ningwu and Ganmen troops acted as solidarity.

古文：比弃极冲，守次边，非守要之意。
现代文：这样放弃最边远的要害不守，来防守次边，不是驻守要害所适当的。
English: In this way, it is not appropriate to abandon the most remote key without defending it, and to defend the next side.

古文：宣府亦专备西、中二路，而北路空虚。
现代文：宣府也是专门把守西、中两路，而北路空虚。
English: Xuanfu also specially guarded the west and middle roads, while the north road was empty.

古文：且连年三镇防秋，征调辽、陕兵马，糜粮赏不訾，恐难持久。
现代文：并且连年三镇防秋，都需要调用辽东、陕西兵马，耗费的粮草、赏银不说，也怕很难长期这样坚持。
English: Moreover, it is necessary to call up Liaodong and Shaanxi soldiers and horses to prevent autumn in three towns for years in a row. Not to mention the cost of grain, grass and silver, it may be difficult to persist in this way for a long time.

古文：并守之议，实为善经。
现代文：各路边防部队联合守护边疆的主张，实在是最好的战略。
English: The idea of all border defense forces jointly guarding the border is really the best strategy.

古文：外边四时皆防，城堡兵各有分地，冬春徂夏，不必参错征发。
现代文：最远的边防线上一年四季都驻兵防守，各处城堡各派部队划地分守，这样一年四季，都不必来回调兵遣将了。
English: On the farthest border line, soldiers are stationed for defense all year round, and each castle is guarded by different troops, so there is no need to send soldiers back and forth all year round.

古文：若泥往事临时调遣，近者数十里，远者百余里，首尾不相应。
现代文：如果拘于惯例，老这样子临时调兵遣将，近的有几十里路，远的有一百多里路要赶，作战部队首尾不能呼应。
English: If we stick to the usual practice and make a temporary troop deployment in the old way, there are dozens of miles to the near and more than a hundred miles to the far, and the combat troops cannot respond at all.

古文：万一如往年溃墙而入，越关而南，京师震骇，方始征调，何益事机？
现代文：万一像早年那样被敌人破墙而入，过关向南，京师震惊，再来调遣部队，对事情能有多大的帮助呢？
English: In the unlikely event that, as in the early years, the enemy breaks through the wall, passes through the pass to the south, the Beijing division is shocked, and then dispatches troops, how much help can it be to things?

古文：摆边之兵，未可遽罢。
现代文：所以布置在边远的兵力，不能马上收回来。
English: Therefore, the troops deployed in remote areas cannot be brought back immediately.

古文：百人之堡，非千人不能攻，以有垣堑可凭也。修边之役，必当再举。
现代文： 《周易》说 王公贵族设置险阻来防卫自己的国家 。所谓设置险阻，就是凭借人力修筑城墙或利用天险的意思，山川的险要形势，是敌人和我们一样可以利用的。
English: "Zhou Yi" said that the princes and nobles set up obstacles to defend their country. The so-called setting up obstacles means building walls with manpower or taking advantage of natural hazards. The critical situation of mountains and rivers can be used by the enemy as well as us.

古文：夫定规画，度工费，二者修边之事；慎防秋，并兵力，重责成，量征调，实边堡，明出塞，计供亿，节财用，八者守边之事。
现代文：城墙、战壕这样的险阻，却是我们自己独占的。我们一百个人驻扎的城堡，敌人没一千人就攻不下来，因为我们有墙壁、战壕可用来隐蔽自己。所以修筑边防的工程，务必继续发动起来。 
English: The castle where a hundred of us are stationed cannot be stormed by an enemy force of less than a thousand, because we have walls and trenches to hide behind. Therefore, the construction of border defenses must continue.

古文：因条十事上之，帝悉报许。
现代文：就此谈了十条意见递交上去，世宗全部作了同意的批示。
English: On this, ten opinions were discussed and submitted, and Sejong agreed to all of them.

古文：乃请帑银六十万两，修大同西路、宣府东路边墙，凡八百里。
现代文：于是万达申请了国库银六十万两，修建大同西路、宣府东路的边防墙，共八百里。
English: As a result, Wanda applied for 600,000 taels of treasury silver to build a border wall along Datong West Road and Xuanfu East Road, a total of 800 miles.

古文：工成，予一子官。
现代文：工程完毕后，世宗奖他一个儿子做了官。
English: After the project was completed, one of his sons became a government official.

古文：万达精心计，善钩校，墙堞近远，濠堑深广，曲尽其宜。
现代文：万达工于心计，并擅长计量城墙远近、壕沟的深浅，经他测量，都能做得恰到好处。
English: Wanda is a meticulous worker, and is good at measuring the distance of the city wall and the depth of the trench. According to his measurement, he can do it just right.

古文：寇乃不敢轻犯。
现代文：贼寇从此不敢轻易过来侵略了。
English: Thieves and robbers no longer dare to come and invade easily.

古文：墙内戍者得以暇耕牧，边费亦日省。
现代文：边防墙里驻守的士兵也可以利用闲暇耕田牧马了，边防开支也逐步减少了。
English: The soldiers stationed in the border wall can also use their leisure time to cultivate fields and herd horses, and the border defense expenditure has gradually decreased.

古文：初，客兵防秋，岁帑金一百五十余万，添发且数十万，其后减省几半。
现代文：当初，外边调来的部队到此防秋，每年耗资一百五十余万两国库银，还要超支近几十万两，这样下来后节省了一半。
English: At the beginning, the troops transferred from abroad to this fall prevention, cost more than one and a half million of the two countries' treasury and silver every year, and also overspent by nearly hundreds of thousands of taels, thus saving half after coming down.

古文：又议掣山西兵并力守大同，巡抚孙继鲁沮之。帝为逮继鲁，悉纳万达言。
现代文：万达后来又主张撤了山西的驻守部队并入大同，共同防守大同，巡抚孙继鲁从中阻挠，世宗为此逮捕了继鲁，完全采纳了万达的意见。
English: Later, Wanda also advocated the withdrawal of the garrison troops from Shanxi and their merger into Datong, and the joint defense of Datong. The governor Sun Jilu obstructed this, and Shizong arrested Jilu for this, and fully adopted Wanda's opinion.

古文：万达更事久，帝深倚之，所请无不从，独言俺答贡事与帝意左。
现代文：万达长期经历战场，世宗很信赖他，对他的请求无不答应，只有万达对俺答通贡一事的主张与世宗的心意不一致。
English: Wanda had been on the battlefield for a long time, and Shizong trusted him very much and complied with his request. Only Wanda's opinion on the matter of my payment of tribute was inconsistent with Shizong's intentions.

古文：先是，二十一年，俺答阿不孩使石天爵等款镇远堡求贡。言小王子等九部牧青山，艳中国缣帛，入掠止人畜，所得寡，且不能无亡失，故令天爵输诚。
现代文：在此之前，嘉靖二十一年，俺答阿不孩派石天爵等人来镇远堡请求通贡，说小王子等九个部落在青山一带游牧，他们喜欢中国的绸缎，进来抢掠只能得到人口和牲畜，收获也少，并且路上也不能没有损失，所以让天爵来表示对中国的诚心。
English: Prior to this, in the twenty-first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, I sent Shi Tianjiao and others to Zhenyuan Fort to request tribute, saying that the Little Prince and other nine tribes were nomadic in the Qingshan area. They liked China's silk and silk, and they could only get people and livestock by robbing and pillaging. The harvest was also small, and there could not be no loss on the way, so let Tianjiao express his sincerity to China.

古文：朝议不纳。
现代文：朝廷讨论后决定不予接受。
English: After discussion, the Imperial Court decided not to accept it.

古文：天爵等复至，巡抚龙大有执之。
现代文：天爵等人二次来时，巡抚龙大有把他们抓了起来。
English: When Tianjue and the others came back a second time, the inspector, Long Dayu, arrested them all.

古文：大有进一官，将吏悉迁擢，磔天爵于市。
现代文：大有因此官升一级，他手下的官吏都得到提拔，接着他们在街市上把天爵给绞死了。
English: As a result, he was promoted to the first rank, and all the officials under him were promoted, and then they hanged him in the market.

古文：寇怒，大入，屠村堡，信使绝五年。
现代文：贼寇恼了，入关来大肆屠杀乡村、城堡中的军民，双方的信使中断了五年之久。
English: Annoyed, the bandits came into the pass and massacred the soldiers and civilians in the village and the castle. The messengers of both sides were interrupted for five years.

古文：会玉林卫百户杨威为所掠，威诡能定贡市，遂释还。
现代文：后来碰上玉林卫百户杨威被他们俘虏，杨威诈说自己有办法帮他们打开贡市，就被放了回来。
English: Later, they captured Yang Wei of Yulin Weihai Hundred Households. Yang Wei fraudulently said that he had a way to help them open the tribute market, and was released.

古文：俺答阿不孩复遣使款大同左卫塞，边帅家丁董宝等狃天爵前事，复杀之，以首功报。
现代文：俺答阿不孩又派使节来到大同左卫城下，守将的家人董宝等有鉴于以前天爵的事，又杀了他们的使节，向朝廷报上自己斩获敌人的功劳。
English: I replied that Ah Bu's children had also sent envoys to the castle of Datong Zuoqi, and the family members of the guard, such as Dong Bao, had killed their envoys in view of the previous incident, and reported to the imperial court that they had won the enemy's credit.

古文：万达言： 北敌，弘治前岁入贡，疆场稍宁。
现代文：万达上书说： 北方之敌，弘治之前每年过来进贡，战场上比较宁静些。
English: Wanda wrote: The enemy from the north comes to pay tribute every year before Hongzhi, and the battlefield is relatively quiet.

古文：自虞台岭之战覆我师，渐轻中国，侵犯四十余年。
现代文：自从虞台岭那一仗打败我们的军队后，逐渐轻视中国，连续不断侵犯我国四十多年。
English: After defeating our army in the Battle of Yutai-ling, it has gradually despised China and continuously invaded our country for more than 40 years.

古文：石天爵之事，臣尝痛边臣失计。
现代文：石天爵的事，我曾经遗憾守边的大臣失策。
English: I once regretted a blunder by the Minister of the Border Guard in the matter of Shi Tianzhe.

古文：今复通款，即不许，当善相谕遣。
现代文：现在他们又来访问，即使我们不同意，也应当好意打发他们返回去。
English: Now that they are visiting again, even if we don't agree, we should be kind enough to send them back.

古文：诱而杀之，此何理也？
现代文：引诱他们过来，把他们都给杀了，这算什么道理？
English: What's the point of luring them here and killing them all?

古文：请亟诛宝等，榜塞上，明告以朝廷德意，解其蓄怨构兵之谋。 
现代文：请立即杀了董宝等人，在边塞上张榜布告，说明朝廷对他们的爱惜之心，融化他们积怨兴兵的阴谋。 
English: Please kill Dong Bao and the others immediately, and post a notice on the border fort, explaining the court's love for them, and melting away their resentment and plot to raise an army.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：世宗不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：未几，俺答阿不孩复奉印信番文，欲诣边陈款。
现代文：不久，俺答阿不孩又派人拿着盖了印信的番文公函前来，想来中国边境上通好。
English: Not long after, I sent someone with a stamped stamped letter to come to the Chinese border.

古文：万达为奏曰： 今届秋，彼可一逞。
现代文：万达替他们上书说 ：现在临近秋季，他们本来可以用兵。
English: Wanda wrote a letter on their behalf, saying: Now that autumn is approaching, they could have used soldiers.

古文：乃屡被杀戮，犹请贡不已者，缘入犯则利在部落，获贡则利归其长。
现代文：竟然在一再被斩杀来使的情况下还不断地请求通贡，这是因为进兵来犯，所获得的利益属部落所有，得到回贡，利益归他们头领所得。
English: In spite of the fact that they were repeatedly killed, they continued to ask for tribute. This is because the soldiers came to commit crimes, and the profits they gained belonged to the tribe. They received tribute back, and the profits belonged to the income of their leaders.

古文：处之克当，边患可弭。
现代文：假如处理得当，边疆的战患可以消除。
English: If handled properly, the war danger on the border can be eliminated.

古文：若臣等封疆臣，贡亦备，不贡亦备，不缘此懈也。 
现代文：当然像我们这些守边的大臣，通贡也要防备，不通贡也要防备，我们不会因此放松自己的。 
English: Of course, like those of us who are border-guarding ministers, we must also be prepared to pay tribute, and we must also be prepared not to pay tribute. We will not relax ourselves because of this.

古文：兵部尚书陈经等言敌难信，请敕边臣诘实，责万达十日内回奏。
现代文：兵部尚书陈经等认为敌国难以信任，请传令边臣问知实在情况，于是朝廷限令万达在十天内做出回答。
English: Shangshu Chenjing and others in the military department thought that it was difficult to trust the enemy country, so they sent a telegram to the frontier minister to inquire about the real situation. Therefore, the imperial court ordered Wanda to respond within ten days.

古文：万达还其使，与约。至期，使者不至。
现代文：万达送回他们的使节，和他们预约了大使来访的时间。
English: Wanda sent back their envoy and made an appointment for the ambassador to visit.

古文：万达虑帝督过，以使者去无可究为辞。
现代文：到时候，他们的大使没到，万达担心世宗问罪，就说使者已经离开，想追究他们也无可追究了。
English: At that time, their ambassador did not arrive, and Wanda, fearing that Shizong would incriminate them, said that the envoy had left, and if they wanted to pursue them, they could not be pursued.

古文：已而使狎至，牢拒之，好言慰答而已。
现代文：过后他们的信使热火火地来了，万达坚决拒绝他们的请求，只是用和气的话对他们加以慰问而已。
English: After that, their messenger arrived in hot haste, and Wanda resolutely refused their request, but only consoled them with kind words.

古文：俺答以通好，散处其众，不设备，亦不杀哨卒。
现代文：俺答因为想和中国通好，疏散了他们边境上的部队，不设防，也不杀中国的哨兵。
English: I replied that because I wanted to get along with China, I had evacuated the troops on their border, leaving the Chinese sentries undefended and unkilled.

古文：顷之，复至，词益恭。
现代文：不久他们的信使又来了，话说得很恭敬。
English: Soon their messenger came again, speaking very respectfully.

古文：万达又为奏曰： 敌恳恳求贡，去而复来。
现代文：万达又为此事上书说 ：敌国信使言词恳切，请求通贡，去而复来。
English: Wanda also wrote on this matter: The enemy's messenger spoke earnestly, asked for tribute, went away and came back.

古文：今宣、大兴版筑，正当羁縻，使无扰。
现代文：现在宣府、大同正在修筑战墙，正好可以拖延时间，让他们不来骚扰。
English: Now the Xuanfu and Datong are building a wall of war, just to delay the time, so that they do not come to harass.

古文：请限以地、以人、以时。悉听，即许之贡；不听，则曲在彼，即拒绝之。 
现代文：请给他们限定地点、人数、时间，他们都照办时，就让他们来入贡，如果他们不照办，那就是他们理亏，我们就拒绝他们好了。 
English: Please give them a limited place, number of people, and time. If they all comply, let them pay tribute. If they do not comply, then they are at a disadvantage, so let's refuse them.

古文：帝责其渎奏，卒不许。
现代文：世宗批评他胡言乱语，最终还是不允许他们的请求。
English: The Sejong criticized him for talking nonsense, but ultimately did not allow their request.

古文：盖是时曾铣有复套之议，夏言主之，故力绌贡议，且以复套事行诸边臣议之。
现代文：大概当时曾铣已经有了收复河套地区的奏议，夏言从中赞助，所以世宗极力压制通贡的主张。后来世宗就把收复河套的事情交给各处边关的守臣商议了。
English: At that time, probably, Zeng Yao already had a petition to recover the Hetao region, which was sponsored by Xia Yan, so Shizong tried his best to suppress Tonggong's proposal. Later, Shizong handed over the matter of recovering Hetao to the border guards to discuss.

古文：万达议曰：
现代文：万达递上奏议说：
English: Wanda said in a statement:

古文：河套本中国故壤。
现代文： 河套本来是中国领土。
English: Hetao was originally Chinese territory.

古文：成祖三犁王庭，残其部落，舍黄河，卫东胜。
现代文：过去成祖三次派军队攻占北寇的老巢，破坏他们的部落，然后退离黄河，守卫东胜。
English: In the past, Cheng Zu sent troops three times to capture the old nest of the Northern Cormorants, destroy their tribe, and then retreat from the Yellow River to guard Dongsheng.

古文：后又撤东胜以就延绥，套地遂沦失。
现代文：后来又从东胜撤防，驻守延绥，河套地区就这样丢掉了。
English: Later, it withdrew from Dongsheng and garrisoned Yancheng, thus abandoning the Hetao region.

古文：然正统、弘治间，我未守，彼亦未取。
现代文：不过正统、弘治年间，我们对这片地区不加守护，他们也没有占为己有。
English: However, during the orthodox and Hongzhi years, we did not protect this area, and they did not occupy it for themselves.

古文：乃因循画地守，捐天险，失沃野之利。弘治前，我犹岁搜套，后乃任彼出入，盘据其中，畜牧生养。
现代文：弘治前，我们每年还出兵搜查一遍，后来竟然听任他们出入，盘踞其中，放牧牛羊，繁衍子孙。
English: Before Hongzhi, we also sent soldiers to search the cranes once a year. Later, we even allowed them to come and go, settle among them, graze cattle and sheep, and breed offspring.

古文：譬之为家，成业久矣，欲一举复之，毋乃不易乎！
现代文：现在这个地区对他们说来，就如同一个人持家一样，家业成就了很长时间，自然很巩固了，想一下子收复河套，不是太不容易了吗？
English: Now, for them, this region is just like a person running a household. The family business has been achieved for a long time, and it is naturally very consolidated. Isn't it too difficult to recover Hetao all at once?

古文：提军深入，山川之险易，途径之迂直，水草之有无，皆未熟知。
现代文：我们提军深入时，对山川的险易，道路的曲直，水草的有无，都不怎么熟悉。
English: When we go deep into the war, we are not very familiar with the dangers of mountains and rivers, the curvature of roads, and the presence or absence of aquatic plants.

古文：我马出塞三日已疲，彼骑一呼可集。
现代文：我们的马匹出塞三天就劳累不堪了，他们的马匹一个口哨就大批涌来。
English: Our horses were exhausted after three days out of the stables, and their horses came in large numbers at the whistle.

古文：我军数万众，缓行持重则备益固，疾行趋利则辎重在后。
现代文：我军几万人出征，带着辎重慢慢行军，敌人的防备就会更加牢固，追求便利飞速行军呢，辎重又在后面，供应不上。
English: Tens of thousands of our troops go to war, marching slowly with heavy loads, and the enemy's defenses will be more solid. The pursuit of convenience is to march quickly, and the heavy loads are in the back, and there is no supply.

古文：即得小利，归师尚艰。倘失向导，全军殆矣。
现代文：而且出征即使占到小便宜，回师还很困难，假如失掉向导，全军可就算完了。
English: Moreover, even if the expedition takes advantage of a small advantage, it is still very difficult to return to the division. If the guide is lost, the whole army can be considered finished.

古文：彼迁徙远近靡常。
现代文：另外敌人远近迁徙，没有固定住址。
English: In addition, the enemy has migrated far and wide and has no fixed address.

古文：一战之后，彼或保聚，或佯遁，笳角时动，壁垒相持，已离复合，终不渡河。
现代文：一仗打完，他们或许会聚集在一处防守，或许会佯装败逃，这样贼寇会经常胡号相闻，或散或聚，凭借堡垒与我们对峙不下，始终不渡过黄河那边去。
English: When a battle is over, they may gather in one place to defend themselves, or they may pretend to be defeated and flee. In this way, the thieves and robbers will often get to know each other, either separately or together, and they will not be able to confront us with the help of the fortress, and they will never cross the Yellow River.

古文：我军于此，战耶，退耶，两相守耶？
现代文：我军在这个时候，是战呢，还是退呢，还是与他们继续对峙呢？
English: At this time, will our army fight, retreat, or continue to confront them?

古文：议者见近时捣巢，恒获首功，昔年城大同五堡，寇不深竞，以为套易复。
现代文：还有，数万军队出塞以后，也必须有几万人援助他们才成，还必须用猛将开通粮道，这些都是极为困难，我方承受不了的。 有这种主张的看到近来攻打敌营总能有斩敌之功，往年我们在大同修建五个城堡，贼寇也没怎么争战，就认为河套地区容易收复。
English: Furthermore, after tens of thousands of troops leave Datong, there must also be tens of thousands of people to help them, and it is also necessary to use fierce generals to open the grain route. These are extremely difficult, and we can't bear it. Seeing that attacking the enemy camp recently can always have the effect of defeating the enemy, in previous years we built five castles in Datong, and the thieves and robbers didn't fight much, we think that the Hetao area is easy to recover.

古文：然捣巢，因其近塞，乘不备，胜则倏归，举足南向即家门。
现代文：但是捣敌人的巢穴是利用它接近我方边塞的特点，乘敌人不加戒备的机会进兵，得胜后马上回师，抬起腿没几步就向南到了家门口。
English: But storming the enemy's lair is taking advantage of the fact that it is close to our border fortress, taking advantage of the enemy's unguarded opportunity to march into the army, immediately returning to the division after victory, lifting his legs and reaching the south doorstep in just a few steps.

古文：复套，则深入其地，后援不继，事势异也。
现代文：收复河套就要深入敌占区，后援不能跟上来，跟捣毁几个巢穴的形势可不同。
English: To recover Hetao, it is necessary to go deep into the enemy-occupied area, the backup cannot keep up, and the situation may be different from the destruction of several nests.

古文：往城诸边，近我土，彼原不以为利。
现代文：往年在边境上修建城墙，是在临近我们的疆土上，敌国本不认为那是他们的地利。
English: In previous years, when we built walls on the border, it was on territory close to ours, which the enemy countries did not consider to be their territory.

古文：套，自其四时驻牧地，肯晏然已乎？
现代文：河套地区是他们一年四季住家、放牧的地区，他们肯善罢甘休吗？
English: The Hetao area is where they live and graze all year round. Are they willing to give it a rest?

古文：事体异也。曰伺彼出套，据河守，先亟筑渡口垣墙，以次移置边堡。
现代文：收复河套的事情跟修建城堡的事也是有差别的。有人说看到他们走出河套，就依靠黄河死守，首先紧急修建渡口、战墙，逐步向前修建城堡，就可以把敌人驱逐出去了。
English: There is also a difference between recovering the estuary and building a castle. Some people say that when they see that they are out of the estuary, they rely on the Yellow River to defend themselves. First, they urgently build a ferry and a wall, and gradually build a castle. Then they can expel the enemy.

古文：彼控弦十余万，岂有空套出。
现代文：他们有十几万张弓箭，怎么肯整个从河套走出来？
English: They have more than a hundred thousand bows and arrows, how can they come out of the river completely?

古文：筑垣二千余里，岂不日可成？
现代文：我们修建二千多里的战墙，哪是短时间可以完成的？
English: We are building a wall of more than two thousand miles, what can be accomplished in a short time?

古文：堡非百数十不相联络，堡兵非千人不可居，而游徼瞭望者不与，当三十万众不止也。
现代文：在河套地区，城堡没有一百几十个就无法相互联络，每个城堡没一千人就无法驻守，不算上游击人员、望人员，也应当不止三十万人才行。
English: In the Hetao region, it is impossible to communicate with each other without more than a hundred castles, and each castle cannot be garrisoned without a thousand people. Not counting the guerrillas and guards, it should be more than three hundred thousand people.

古文：况循边距河，动辄千里，一岁食糜亿万。
现代文：况且沿着边镇走向驻守黄河，动不动就是上千里远，一年的伙食、开支就是亿万之多。
English: Moreover, moving along the border town towards the garrison of the Yellow River is thousands of miles away, and the food and expenses for one year are hundreds of millions.

古文：自内输边，自边输河，飞挽之艰不可不深虑。
现代文：从内地运到边关上，再从边关运到黄河上，粮草运送的艰难不能不认真考虑啊。
English: From the inland to the border gate, and then from the border gate to the Yellow River, the difficulty of transporting grain and grass cannot but be seriously considered.

古文：若令彼有其隙，我乘其敝，从而图之，未尝不可。
现代文：当然，假使敌人内部有矛盾，我们利用他们的内耗，乘机收复河套地区，那未尝不可。
English: Of course, if there are contradictions within the enemy, we can take advantage of their internal consumption and take the opportunity to recover the Hetao area.

古文：今塞下喘息未定，边卒疮痍未起，横挑强寇以事非常，愚所不解也。议上，不省。
现代文：现在我们在塞下喘不过气来，边防士兵受到的创伤还没医治好，就横竖要挑拨强敌，置自己于非常事变中，这对我来说是不可思议的事情。 
English: It is inconceivable to me that now, when we are gasping for breath under the blockade, and the wounds of the border soldiers have not yet healed, we should provoke a strong enemy and put ourselves in the middle of an extraordinary incident.

古文：其后，俺答与小王子隙。
现代文：他的奏议呈上去，世宗未予理睬。此后，俺答与小王子之间发生矛盾。
English: His petition was submitted, but Sejong ignored it. After that, there was a conflict between me and the little prince.

古文：小王子欲寇辽东，俺答以其谋告，请与中国夹攻以立信。
现代文：小王子想侵犯辽东，俺答把他的阴谋告诉了万达，请求和中国一道夹攻小王子，用以建立自己的信誉。
English: The Little Prince wanted to invade Liaodong. I told Wanda about his plot and asked to attack the Little Prince together with China in order to establish my credibility.

古文：万达不敢闻。
现代文：万达不敢往上报告。
English: Wanda does not dare to report to the top.

古文：使者再至，为言于朝，帝不许。
现代文：俺答的使节又来了一次，万达才报告给朝廷。但是世宗不同意。
English: The envoy I replied to came again, and it was only then that Wanda reported to the imperial court. However, Sejong did not agree.

古文：二十七年三月，万达又言诸部求贡不遂，惭且愤，声言大举犯边，乞令边臣得便宜从事。
现代文：二十七年三月，万达又上书说俺答各部请求通贡不成，羞惭而且恼火，扬言要大举南下，犯我边界，请传令让边臣有见机行事的权力。
English: In March of the 27th year, Wanda sent another letter saying that I was ashamed and annoyed that I could not answer the requests for tribute from various ministries. I threatened to go south in a big way and violate our borders. I asked for an order to give the border minister the power to act as he saw fit.

古文：帝怒，切责之，通贡议乃绝。
现代文：世宗恼了，严厉训斥了他。
English: Sejong got angry and scolded him severely.

古文：其年八月，俺答犯大同不克，退攻五堡，官军战弥陀山却之。
现代文：当年八月，俺答攻打大同不成，退而攻打五堡，官军在弥陀山大战一场，击退了敌人。
English: In August of that year, I replied that it was impossible to attack Datong, so I retreated and attacked Wufeng. The government army fought a battle on Midasanshan Mountain and repulsed the enemy.

古文：趋山西，复败还。
现代文：他们又进犯山西，又大败而回。
English: They invaded Shanxi again, but were again defeated.

古文：逾月，犯宣府，大掠永宁、隆庆、怀来，军民死者数万。
现代文：过了一个月，俺答侵略宣府，在永宁、隆庆、怀来一带大肆屠掠，被杀的军民有几万人之多。
English: A month later, we responded by invading Xuanfu, and carried out large-scale looting and pillaging in the areas of Yongning, Longqing, and Huailai. Tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians were killed.

古文：万达坐停俸二级。俄录弥陀山功，还其俸。
现代文：万达因此被扣发二级俸禄，不久论弥陀山战功，又退还了他。
English: As a result, Wanda's second-class salary was withheld, and he was later reimbursed for his contribution to the Battle of Midasan.

古文：俺答将复寇宣府，总兵官赵卿怯，万达奏以周尚文代。
现代文：俺答后来又要攻打宣府，总兵官赵卿胆怯惧敌，万达奏请让周尚文替换他。
English: I replied that I would attack Xuanfu later, and the general officer Zhao Qing was afraid of the enemy. Wanda asked Zhou Shangwen to replace him.

古文：未至，寇犯滴水崖，指挥董抃、江瀚、唐臣、张淮等战死，遂南下驻隆庆石河营，分游骑东掠。游击王钥、大同游击袁正却之，寇移而南。
现代文：周尚文尚未到任，贼寇攻打滴水崖，指挥董、江翰、唐臣、张淮等战死，敌人于是南下驻扎在隆庆的石河营，分派小股骑兵队伍向东掳掠，游击王钅仑、大同游击袁正打败了他们，敌人于是移兵南下。
English: Zhou Shangwen had not yet arrived at his post. Thieves and robbers attacked the dripping cliff, and commanders Dong, Jiang Han, Tang Chen, Zhang Huai and others died in battle. The enemy then moved south and stationed in Longqing's Shihe Camp. Small cavalry units were dispatched to the east to plunder and pillage. Guerrilla Wang Yulun and Datong guerrilla Yuan Zheng defeated them, and the enemy then moved south.

古文：会尚文万骑至，参将田琦骑千余与合，连战曹家庄、斩四首，搴其旗，寇据险不退。
现代文：恰好周尚文带领一万骑兵到来，参将田琦的一千多骑兵与他会合一处，在曹家庄连战数场，斩敌四人，拔了敌人的军旗，但敌人还是负隅顽抗，不肯退兵。
English: It just so happened that Zhou Shangwen arrived with ten thousand cavalry, and more than one thousand cavalrymen from Tianyi joined him. They fought several battles in Caojiazhuang, killed four enemies, and pulled out the enemy's banner, but the enemy still stubbornly resisted and refused to withdraw.

古文：万达督参将姜应熊等驰赴，顺风鼓噪，扬沙蔽天。
现代文：万达带参将姜应熊等飞马赶来参战，顺风击鼓喊杀，马蹄扬起的尘沙遮天蔽日。
English: Wanda brought with him the flying horses such as Jiang Ying Xiong to participate in the battle, the wind beat the drums and shouted, and the dust raised by the horses' hooves covered the sky.

古文：寇惊曰： 翁太师至矣！ 
现代文：敌人惊恐地喊道 ：翁太师来了！ 
English: The enemy cried out in fright, "Master Weng is coming!"

古文：是夜东去。
现代文：这天夜里就向东逃去。
English: That night, they fled east.

古文：诸将追击，连败之。
现代文：各位将领率兵追击，连连败敌。
English: All generals and commanders led the troops in pursuit and defeated the enemy one after another.

古文：帝侦万达督战状，大喜，立进兵部尚书兼右副都御史。
现代文：世宗暗中察访到万达督战的情形，非常高兴，立刻提拔他做兵部尚书兼右副都御史。
English: Sejong surreptitiously inspected the situation of the Battle of Wanda, was very pleased, and immediately promoted him to be the military secretary and the right deputy capital historian.

古文：寻召理部事。
现代文：不久又召他回朝主管兵部的事务。
English: He was soon called back to the imperial court to be in charge of the affairs of the military department.

古文：以父忧归。
现代文：因为父亲去世，他守丧回家去了。
English: He went home to mourn the death of his father.

古文：明年秋，大同失事，督抚郭宗皋、陈耀被逮，诏起万达代宗皋。
现代文：第二年秋天，大同出了事，督抚郭宗皋、陈耀被逮捕，朝廷诏令万达出来接任宗皋的职务。
English: In the autumn of the following year, an incident occurred in Datong, the superintendent Guo Zongyao and Chen Yao were arrested, and the court ordered Wanda to take over Zongyao's duties.

古文：万达方病疽，庐墓间，疏请终制。
现代文：万达正害着疽疮，结庐在父亲坟边居住，上书请让自己守完三年之丧。
English: Wanda is suffering from gangrene and living with scabs at her father's graveside. Please allow yourself to complete the three-year mourning period.

古文：未达，而俺答犯都城。兵部尚书丁汝夔得罪，遂即以万达代之。
现代文：奏本没到京，俺答率兵来犯京城了，兵部尚书丁汝夔被问了罪，世宗就让万达接替他。
English: The report didn't make it to Kyoto, so I replied that I had come to the capital with an army. The military commander, Shangshu Dingrui, was questioned about the crime, and Shizong asked Wanda to replace him.

古文：万达家岭南，距京师八千里，倍道行四十日抵近京。
现代文：万达家在岭南，距离京城八千里远，他昼夜兼程走了四十天才临近京城。
English: Wanda's home is in Lingnan, eight thousand miles away from Beijing. He walked for forty days and nights to get close to Beijing.

古文：时寇氛炽，帝日夕徯万达至。迟之，以问严嵩。
现代文：当时敌人正气势嚣张，世宗一天到晚等着万达来，嫌他来迟，就问严嵩是怎么回事。
English: At that time, the enemy was in full swing, and Shizong waited all day for Wanda to come. He didn't want him to be late, so he asked Yan Song what was going on.

古文：嵩故不悦万达，言寇患在肘腋，诸臣观望，非君召不俟驾之义。
现代文：严嵩本来就不喜欢万达，现在就说敌人在眼皮底下，大臣们都坐地观望，不是过去那种君主传唤不等车驾好就立即赶来的道理了。
English: Yan Song didn't like Wanda in the first place, but now he says that the enemy is right under his nose, and the ministers are all sitting on the ground watching. This is not the kind of reason that used to be used in the past, when a monarch would summon a car and wait until it was ready to drive.

古文：帝遂用王邦瑞于兵部。
现代文：世宗于是让王邦瑞当了兵部尚书。
English: Therefore, King Sejong made Wang Bangrui the military commander.

古文：不数日，万达至，具疏自明。帝责其欺慢，念守制，姑夺职，听别用。
现代文：不几天万达到了，上书说明来得迟缓的原因，世宗批评他哄骗主上，考虑他正在守丧，就暂且免职，等候别的任命。
English: Within a few days, he had reached ten thousand. He sent a letter explaining the reasons for the delay. The Sejong criticized him for deceiving the Lord. Considering that he was in mourning, he was temporarily relieved of his duties and awaited another appointment.

古文：仇鸾时为大将军，宠方盛，衔宿怨，谗言构于帝。万达遂失眷，降兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，经略紫荆诸关。
现代文：仇鸾当时做着大将军，正受世宗的宠信，他记恨万达的旧仇，就向世宗进谗言，万达于是失去了世宗的喜爱，被降为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，派往经略紫荆等处边关。
English: He remembered Wanda's old enmity and spoke ill of her to Shizong. As a result, Wanda lost Shizong's favor and was demoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department and the right-hand man of the capital's historian, and was sent to the border of Jingli and Bijie.

古文：三十年二月，京察，自陈乞终制。
现代文：三十年二月，京官进行考评，万达自己上奏时请求回家把丧守完。
English: In February of the thirtieth year, the Beijing officials conducted an evaluation, and Wanda himself requested to go home to finish the mourning.

古文：帝疑其避事，免归。
现代文：世宗怀疑他避事自保，就免了他当时的职务让他还乡。
English: Sejong suspected that he was avoiding things to protect himself, so he relieved him of his duties at the time and let him return to his hometown.

古文：濒行疏谢，复摘讹字为不敬，斥为民。
现代文：临近告别，他上书谢恩，又被摘取了奏章中的白字，批评他大不敬，罢官为民。
English: Nearing his farewell, he wrote a letter of thanks, and the white letters in the score were taken out, criticizing him for being disrespectful and dismissing him.

古文：明年十月，兵部尚书赵锦以附仇鸾戍边，复起万达代之。
现代文：第二年十月，兵部尚书赵锦因为投靠仇鸾被发配充军，世宗又启用万达来接替他。
English: In October of the following year, the military secretary Zhao Jin was sent to the army for siding with the enemy, and Shizong appointed Wanda to succeed him.

古文：未闻命卒，年五十五。
现代文：万达还没有接到任命就死了，终年五十五岁。
English: Wanda died before receiving the appointment, at the age of fifty-five.

古文：万达事亲孝。父殁，负土成坟。
现代文：万达对父母很孝顺，父亲死后，他亲自背土堆成坟。
English: Wanda was very dutiful to his parents. After his father's death, he dug the grave himself.

古文：好谈性命之学，与欧阳德、罗洪先、唐顺之、王畿、魏良政善。
现代文：生平喜欢讲求性命理学，与欧阳德、罗洪先、唐顺之、王畿、魏良政很友好。
English: In his life, he liked to emphasize sex numerology, and was very friendly with Ouyang De, Luo Hongxian, Tang Shunzhi, Wang Gui, and Wei Liang Zheng.

古文：通古今，操笔顷刻万言。
现代文：学通古今，下笔立成万言。
English: Learning from the past and the present, the next stroke becomes a million words.

古文：为人刚介坦直，勇于任事，履艰危，意气弥厉。
现代文：为人刚正、坦直，勇于承担责任，面对艰难困苦，意气越是豪迈。
English: They are upright, straightforward, and have the courage to take responsibility. In the face of hardships, their spirit is more heroic.

古文：临阵尝身先士卒，尤善御将士，得其死力。
现代文：他在战场上曾经身先士卒，治军尤其擅长驾御部下的将士，能让他们以死相报。
English: He used to lead the troops on the battlefield. He is particularly good at leading his subordinates, and can make them pay with their lives.

古文：嘉靖中，边臣行事适机宜、建言中肯窾者，万达称首。
现代文：嘉靖年间，边臣中办事恰当，主张切合实际的，万达可以称为第一。
English: During the Jiajing period, Wanda could be said to be the first among the vassals to do things properly and advocate what was practical.

古文：隆庆中，追谥襄毅。
现代文：隆庆中，朝廷才追谥他为 襄毅 。
English: At the height of the Qing Dynasty, the imperial court only pursued him as Xiang Yi.

