古文：冯异与赤眉战，使壮士变服与赤眉同，伏于道侧。
现代文：原文汉朝时冯异征讨赤眉军的时候，命令士兵换上赤眉军的兵服，埋伏在路边。
English: During the Han Dynasty, when Feng Xizheng was fighting against the Red Eyebrows, he ordered the soldiers to change into the military uniforms of the Red Eyebrows and lie in wait on the roadside.

古文：旦日，赤眉使万人攻异前部。贼见势弱，遂悉众攻异。
现代文：第二天，赤眉发动一万人攻打冯异的先头部队，贼兵看冯异兵力薄弱，就全军出击，发动猛攻。
English: The next day, Red Eyebrows launched ten thousand people to attack Feng Yixing's leading troops. Seeing that Feng Yixing's troops were weak, the thief soldiers attacked the whole army and launched an onslaught.

古文：异乃纵兵大战，日昃，贼气衰，伏兵卒起，服色相乱，赤眉不复识别，众遂惊溃。
现代文：冯异指挥士兵奋勇应战，一直坚持到傍晚，贼兵气势已经弱下来，埋伏在路边的士兵突然出击，由于这些伏兵的服装和赤眉兵相同，一时间赤眉兵没有办法辨识敌我，于是惊慌失措地逃逸。
English: Feng Yiyi commanded the soldiers to fight bravely, and persisted until the evening. The strength of the bandits had weakened, and the soldiers who were lying in wait on the roadside suddenly attacked. Since the clothes of these ambush soldiers were the same as those of the red-browed soldiers, the red-browed soldiers were unable to identify the enemy for a while, so they fled in panic.

古文：异追击，大破之。
现代文：冯异下令追击，赤眉军大败。
English: Feng Ying ordered a pursuit, and the Red Eyebrows were soundly defeated.

古文：吐蕃寇临洮，次大来谷。
现代文：唐朝时期吐蕃入侵临洮，抵达大来谷。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Tubo invaded Linyi and arrived at Dali Valley.

古文：安北大都护王晙率所部二千，与临洮兵合，料奇兵七百，易胡服，夜袭敌营，去贼五里，令曰： 前遇寇大呼，鼓角应之。 
现代文：安北大都护王晙率领两千士兵，和临洮军队联合抵御吐蕃。王晙事先挑选了七百名勇士，换上了吐蕃的军服，趁着夜色袭击敌营。在离敌营五里的地方，他对士兵们说： 遇到敌兵，就大声喊叫，同时击鼓吹号相应。 
English: Wang Zhe, the protector of Anbei, led two thousand soldiers and joined forces with the Linyi army to resist the Tubo. Wang Zhe selected seven hundred warriors in advance, put on Tubo's military uniforms, and took advantage of the night to attack the enemy camp. At a distance of five miles from the enemy camp, he said to the soldiers: When encountering enemy soldiers, shout loudly, and at the same time beat drums and blow horns accordingly.

古文：贼惊，疑伏兵在旁，自相斗，死者万计。
现代文：敌兵果然认为四周有兵埋伏，非常惊慌，开始自相残杀，死了数万人。
English: The enemy soldiers really thought that there were soldiers lying in wait all around, panicked, and began to kill each other, killing tens of thousands of people.

