古文：陈循，字德遵，泰和人。
现代文：陈循，字德遵，泰和人。
English: Chen Cui, Zi De Zun, Tai He Ren.

古文：永乐十三年进士第一。
现代文：永乐十三年，考中进士第一名。
English: In the thirteenth year of Yongle, he won the first place in the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：授翰林修撰。
现代文：授官翰林修撰。
English: It was written by Hanlin Shuxuan.

古文：习朝廷典故。
现代文：他很熟悉朝廷的典章旧例。
English: He is very familiar with the rules and precedents of the imperial court.

古文：帝幸北京，命取秘阁书诣行在，遂留侍焉。
现代文：皇帝驾临北京，命令他拿出国家书库的书籍到皇帝临时驻地，于是留用焉侍臣。
English: When the emperor arrived in Beijing, he ordered him to take out the books of the national library to the emperor's temporary residence, so he kept Yan as a courtier.

古文：洪熙元年，进侍讲。
现代文：洪熙元年，晋升为侍讲。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he was promoted to the post of assistant lecturer.

古文：宣德初，受命直南宫，日承顾问。
现代文：宣德初年，接受命令值班南宫，白天担任顾问。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he was ordered to be on duty at the South Palace, and served as a consultant during the day.

古文：赐第玉河桥西，巡幸未尝不从。
现代文：皇帝赐给他住宅舱玉河桥西，巡游的时候没有不跟从的。
English: The emperor gave him a residential cabin west of the Jade River Bridge, and there was no one who did not follow him when he was on a cruise.

古文：进侍讲学士。
现代文：晋升为侍讲学士。
English: Promoted to Lecturer.

古文：正统元年兼经筵官。
现代文：正统元年，兼任御前讲席。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he also served as a lecturer in front of the emperor.

古文：久之，进翰林院学士。
现代文：遇了很久，晋升为翰林院学士。
English: After a long wait, he was promoted to a bachelor of Hanlin Academy.

古文：九年入文渊阁，典机务。
现代文：正统九年，进入文渊阁，主管机要事务。
English: After nine years as an official, he entered Wenyu Pavilion and was in charge of important matters.

古文：初，廷议天下吏民建言章奏，皆三杨主之。
现代文：当初，朝廷商议天下官吏百姓进言上奏章，都是三杨主持。
English: At first, the imperial court deliberated on the world's officials and people to make suggestions on the composition, all of which were presided over by Sanyang.

古文：至是荣、士奇已卒，循及曹鼐、马愉在内阁，礼部援故事请。
现代文：到这时杨荣、杨士奇已死，陈循和曹鼐、马愉在内阁，礼部援引旧例请示。
English: By this time, Yang Rong and Yang Shiqui had died, Chen Cui and Cao Qi and Ma Yu were in the cabinet, and the Ministry of Ceremonies invoked the old case to ask for instructions.

古文：帝以杨溥老，宜优闲，令循等预议。
现代文：皇帝认为杨溥年老，应该优闲地生活，命令陈循等人参加商议。
English: The emperor thought that Yang Xuan was old and should live a leisurely life, and ordered Chen Xun and others to take part in the discussion.

古文：明年进户部右侍郎，兼学士。
现代文：第二年，晋升为户部右侍郎，兼任学士。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the household, and also served as a bachelor.

古文：土木之变，人心汹惧。
现代文：土木事变，人人心里都震荡恐惧。
English: Civil engineering accident, everyone's heart is shaking with fear.

古文：循居中，所言多采纳。
现代文：陈循居处其中，所进言的事大多被采纳。
English: Among them, most of the suggestions made by Chen Xunju were adopted.

古文：进户部尚书，兼职如故。
现代文：提升为户部尚书，仍像以前那样兼职。
English: He was promoted to head of the household, but continued to work part-time as before.

古文：也先犯京师，请敕各边精骑入卫，驰檄回番以疑敌。
现代文：也先侵犯京城，请求救命各边关的精良骑兵进京护卫，用快马传递檄文给回人以迷惑敌人。
English: He also invaded the capital city first, asked for help from the elite cavalrymen on each side of the pass to escort him into the capital, and used fast horses to pass messages to the returnees in order to confuse the enemy.

古文：帝皆从其计。
现代文：皇帝全都听从了他的计策。
English: All the emperors followed his advice.

古文：景泰二年，以葬妻与乡人争墓地，为前后巡按御史所不直，循辄讦奏。
现代文：景泰二年，因为埋葬妻子和乡里人争夺墓地，前后任巡按御史认为他无理，陈循就告诉上奏他人的过错。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, because of the burial of his wife and the villagers competing for the cemetery, the former and later inspectors thought that he was unreasonable, and Chen Xu told the fault of others.

古文：给事中林聪等极论循罪。
现代文：给事中林聪等人竭力弹劾陈循的罪遇。
English: In this matter, Lin Cong and others tried their best to impeach Chen Cui for his crimes.

古文：帝是聪言，而置循不问。
现代文：皇帝认为林聪的话正确，却把陈循放在一边不追究。
English: The emperor thought that Lin Cong's words were correct, but he put Chen Xun aside and did not investigate.

古文：循本以才望显，及是素誉隳焉。
现代文：陈循本来靠才学名望显耀，到适时清白的名誉毁坏了。
English: Chen Cun originally relied on his academic reputation to shine, but his reputation of timely innocence was destroyed.

古文：二年十二月进少保兼文渊阁大学士。
现代文：景泰二年十二月，晋升为少保兼文渊阁大学士。
English: In December of the second year of Jing Tai, he was promoted to Junior Security Officer and Bachelor of Wenyu Academy.

古文：帝欲易太子，内畏诸阁臣，先期赐循及高谷白金百两，江渊、王一宁、萧鎡半之。
现代文：皇帝想改立太子，心里畏惧各位内阁大臣，事先赐予陈循和高壳白银一百雨，江渊、圣二宁、萧铁五十两。
English: The emperor wanted to change the position of the crown prince, and was afraid of the cabinet ministers. In advance, he gave Chen Cui and Gao Huling one hundred rain, and Jiang Yuan, Sheng Ni Ning and Xiao Tie fifty-two rain.

古文：比下诏议，循等遂不敢诤，加兼太子太傅。
现代文：等到皇帝下诏书讨论的时候，陈循等人于是不敢劝谏，加官兼任太子太傅。
English: When the Emperor's edict was discussed, Chen Cui and others did not dare to dissuade him, and he was appointed to the post of crown prince.

古文：寻以太子令旨赐百官银帛。
现代文：不久以太子令旨赐给百官银两和绢帛。
English: Soon after, the Emperor issued a decree to bestow the title of "hundred officials, silver, and gold" on him.

古文：逾月，帝复赐循等六人黄金五十两，进华盖殿大学士，兼文渊阁如故。
现代文：过了一个月，皇帝又赐给陈循等六个人黄金五十两，提拔为华盖殿大学士，仍像以前那样在文渊合兼职。
English: A month later, the emperor again gave fifty taels of gold to six people, including Chen Xuan, and promoted them to Huagai Palace Scholars. They still worked part-time at Wenyu Academy as before.

古文：循子英及王文子伦应顺天乡试被黜，相与构考官刘俨、黄谏，为给事中张宁等所劾。
现代文：陈循的儿子陈英和王文的儿子王伦参加顺天的乡试被除名，一齐拉拢考官刘俨、黄谏，被给事中张宁等人所弹劾。
English: Chen Xun's son Chen Ying and Wang Wen's son Wang Lun took part in Xun Tian's township examination and were expelled. The examiners Liu Wei and Huang Qi were brought together, and were impeached by Zhang Ning and others.

古文：帝亦不罪。
现代文：皇帝也不追究他们的罪过。
English: The emperor did not prosecute them for their crimes.

古文：英宗复位，于谦、王文死，杖循百，戍铁岭卫。
现代文：英宗第二次登上皇位，于谦、王文被处死，处陈循杖刑一百，戍守铁嵌卫。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne for the second time, Yu Qian and Wang Wen were executed. They were sentenced to 100 strokes of the cane and forced to guard the Iron Guard.

古文：循在宣德时，御史张楷献诗忤旨。
现代文：陈循在宣德时期，御史张楷献诗触怒了皇上。
English: During the Xuande era, Chen Xun's poem to the imperial historian Zhang Kai angered the emperor.

古文：循曰 彼亦忠爱也 ，遂得释。
现代文：陈循说： 他也是忠心爱国。 于是张楷得到释放。
English: Chen Xun said: He is also loyal and patriotic, so Zhang Kai was released.

古文：御史陈祚上疏，触帝怒，循婉为解，得不死。
现代文：御史陈祚上疏，触怒了皇帝，陈循婉言为他解脱，使他没有被处死。
English: The emperor was angered by the omission of the imperial historian Chen Xuan Shangsu, but Chen Xuanwen relieved him so that he was not executed.

古文：景帝朝，尝集古帝王行事，名《勤政要典》，上之。
现代文：景帝时期，他曾经编辑古代帝王的事迹，命名为《勤政要典》，进献上去。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, he once edited the deeds of ancient emperors, named it "The Guiding Principles of Good Governance," and presented it to the emperor.

古文：河南江北大雪，麦苗死，请发帑市麦种给贫民。
现代文：黄河南岸和长江北岸下大雪，麦苗被冻死，他请求用国库的钱买麦种供给贫民。
English: The southern bank of the Yellow River and the northern bank of the Yangtze River were under heavy snow, and the wheat seedlings were frozen to death. He requested that the money from the state treasury be used to buy wheat seeds to supply the poor.

古文：因事进言，多足采者。
现代文：他根据具体事情进言，有很多足以采用。
English: He makes suggestions based on specific issues, and there are plenty to choose from.

古文：然久居政地，刻躁为士论所薄。
现代文：但是长久地处在政府部门，刻薄浮躁的作风被士论所轻视。
English: But having been in government for a long time, his caustic and impetuous style has been despised by critics.

古文：其严谴则石亨辈为之，非帝意也。
现代文：他受到的严厉谴责却是石亨那一伙人干的，并不是呈帝的意思。
English: The severe reprimand he received, however, was the work of Shi Heng's group, and was not meant to show him as an emperor.

古文：亨等既败，循自贬所上书自讼，言： 天位，陛下所固有。
现代文：查亨等人失败后，陈循从贬谪的地方上书申辩，说： 天位，是陛下本来就有的。
English: After the defeat of Chaheng and others, Chen Xun wrote a letter of apology from the place of disparagement, saying: Your Majesty already has the heavenly throne.

古文：当天与人归之时，群臣备法驾大乐，恭诣南内，奏请临朝。
现代文：在天和人归向的时候，群臣准备法驾和盛大的礼乐，恭敬地到南内宫，上奏章请求陛下亲临朝政。
English: When heaven and earth are reconciled, the courtiers prepare the dharma chariot and grand music, respectfully go to the Nanae Palace, and request His Majesty to come to the Imperial Court in person.

古文：非特宫禁不惊，抑亦可示天下万世。
现代文：不但皇宫禁地不惊慌，也可以宣示于天下万世。
English: Not only will the Imperial Palace not panic, but it can also be proclaimed throughout the world.

古文：而亨等儌倖一时，计不出此，卒皆自取祸败。
现代文：但是石亨等人侥幸于一时，想不到这些，最后都自取灾祸失败。
English: However, Shi Heng and others were lucky for a moment, did not expect this, and finally failed at their own peril.

古文：臣服事累叶，曾著微劳，实为所挤，惟陛下怜察。 
现代文：臣担任官职几朝，曾有微薄的功劳，实在是被人排挤，恳请陛下怜悯明察。 
English: For several dynasties, a vassal has served in an official position, and has had meager merit, and has actually been ousted by others. I implore Your Majesty to have mercy and take a close look.

古文：诏释为民，一年卒。
现代文：皇帝诏命释放作平民，一年后死去。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered his release as a commoner, and he died a year later.

古文：成化中，于谦事雪，循子引例请恤，乃复官赐祭。
现代文：成化年间，于谦的事昭雪，陈循的儿子援引旧例请求恤典，纔恢复官爵赐予祭祀。
English: During Chenghua's reign, the matter of Yu Qian came to light, and Chen Xun's son, citing the old custom, asked for a deed of indemnity and the reinstatement of the title of nobility to be bestowed on the sacrificial rites.

古文：同邑萧鎡。字孟勤。
现代文：同乡萧鍅，字孟勤。
English: Fellow villager Xiao Yao, surnamed Meng Qin.

古文：宣德二年进士，需次于家。
现代文：宣德二年考中进士，授予官职后在家按等候资历补缺。
English: Xuan De passed the two-year middle school entrance examination, and after being awarded the post, he filled the vacancy at home according to the waiting qualifications.

古文：八年，帝命杨溥合选三科进士，拔二十八人为庶吉士，鎡为首。
现代文：宣德八年，皇帝命令杨溥全面选拔三科进士，提升二十八人为庶吉士，萧铁为第一个。
English: In the eighth year of Xuande, the emperor ordered Yang Jie to comprehensively select the three disciplines to promote students, and promoted 28 people to be the best-sellers, Xiao Tie being the first.

古文：英宗即位，授编修。
现代文：英宗登上皇位，授官编修。
English: Yingzong ascended to the throne and was awarded the post of editor.

古文：正统三年进侍读。
现代文：正统三年，晋升为侍读。
English: After three years as an orthodox student, he was promoted to an attendant.

古文：久之，代李时勉为国子监祭酒。
现代文：过了很久，代替李时勉任国子监祭酒。
English: After a long time, he replaced Li Shizhen as the overseer of the festival wine.

古文：景泰元年以老疾辞。
现代文：景泰元年，因年老多病辞官。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, he resigned from his post due to old age and illness.

古文：既得允，监丞鲍相率六馆生连章乞留。
现代文：已经得到许可，监丞鲍相带领六馆的学生接连呈上奏章请求让他留任。
English: Having received permission, superintendent Bao Xiang led the students of the sixth hall to submit a petition to ask him to remain in office.

古文：帝可其奏。
现代文：皇帝答应了他们的奏请。
English: The patriarch approved his suggestion.

古文：明年以本官兼翰林学士，与侍郎王一宁并入直文渊阁。
现代文：第二年，以原来的官职兼任翰林学士，和侍郎王一宁一起进入文渊阁值班。
English: In the second year, he concurrently served as the Hanlin Scholar with his original official position, and went on duty at the Wenyu Pavilion together with the chamberlain Wang Yining.

古文：又明年进户部右侍郎，兼官如故。
现代文：第三年，晋升户部右侍郎，仍像以前那样兼职。
English: In the third year, he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the household, but continued to work part-time as before.

古文：易储议起，鎡曰： 无易树子，霸者所禁，矧天朝乎。 
现代文：改变储君的讨论发生时，萧鍅说： 不要改变树立的太子，这是霸王们所禁止的，何况天朝呢？ 
English: When the discussion of changing the crown prince took place, Xiao Wei said: Do not change the established prince, this is forbidden by the overlords, let alone the imperial court.

古文：不听。
现代文：皇上不听从。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：加太子少师。
现代文：加官太子少师。
English: It is time to add the crown prince to the junior division.

古文：《寰宇通志》成，进户部尚书。
现代文：《寰宇通志》写成，晋升户部尚书。
English: "The History of the World" was written, and he was promoted to head of the Household Division.

古文：帝不豫，诸臣议复宪宗东宫。
现代文：皇帝有病，众位大臣讨论恢复宪宗为太子。
English: The emperor is ill, and the ministers discuss the reinstatement of Emperor Kenzong as crown prince.

古文：李贤私问鎡，鎡曰： 既退，不可再也。 
现代文：李贤私下询问萧鍅，萧铁说： 已经退位，不能第二次登位了。 
English: Li Xian privately asked Xiao Wei, Xiao Tie said: He has abdicated, he cannot ascend the throne for the second time.

古文：英宗复位，遂削籍。
现代文：英宗第二次登上皇位，于是削去官籍。
English: When Emperor Yeongjong ascended the throne for the second time, he was stripped of his official status.

古文：天顺八年卒。
现代文：天顺八年死去。
English: He died eight years later.

古文：成化中，复官赐祭。
现代文：成化年问，恢复官爵赐予祭祀。
English: Chenghua year, the restoration of the peerage bestowed on the rite.

古文：鎡学问该博，文章尔雅。
现代文：萧锚学问渊博精深，文章雅正。
English: Xiao An's knowledge is profound and profound, and his articles are elegant.

古文：然性猜忌，遇事多退避云。
现代文：但是本性猜忌，遇到事情大多退避。
English: However, they are suspicious by nature, and most of them shy away when things come up.

古文：王文，字千之，初名强，束鹿人。
现代文：王文，字干之，本名叫王强，束鹿人。
English: Wang Wen, also known as Gan Zhi, was originally named Wang Qiang, and was a Deer Herder.

古文：永乐十九年进士。
现代文：永乐十九年考中进士。
English: Yongle nineteen years of middle school entrance examination.

古文：授监察御史。
现代文：授官监察御史。
English: Li Lan was promoted to Supervisor of History.

古文：持廉奉法，为都御史顾佐所称。
现代文：品行廉洁奉守法律，被都御史题焦所称赞。
English: Honest and law-abiding, he was praised by the Metropolitan Historian Jiao.

古文：宣德末，奉命治彰德妖贼张普祥狱。
现代文：宣德末年，奉命审理彰德妖贼张普祥的案件。
English: At the end of the Xuande era, he was ordered to try the case of Zhang Puxiang, the thief of Zhangde.

古文：还奏称旨，赐今名。
现代文：回朝奏报符合皇上的意思，赐给他现在的名字。
English: The return of the report to the emperor was in line with the emperor's wishes, and he was given his current name.

古文：英宗即位，迁陕西按察使。
现代文：英宗登上皇位，升任陕西按察使。
English: Yingzong ascended the imperial throne and was promoted to the post of inspector of Shaanxi Province.

古文：遭父忧，命奔丧，起视事。
现代文：遭逢父亲去世服丧，起用处理政事。
English: After the death of his father, he went into mourning and was appointed to deal with political affairs.

古文：正统三年正月擢右副都御史，巡抚宁夏，五年召为大理寺卿。
现代文：正统三年正月，提升为右副都御史，巡抚宁夏。正统五年，召回朝廷任大理寺卿。
English: In the first month of the third year of orthodoxy, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of Ningxia. In the fifth year of orthodoxy, he was recalled to the imperial court and appointed the head of the Dali Temple.

古文：明年与刑部侍郎何文渊录在京刑狱，寻迁右都御史。
现代文：第二年，和刑部侍郎何文渊审察京城的案件，不久升任右都御史。
English: In the following year, he and He Wenyuan, a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department, investigated a case in Kyoto, and he was soon promoted to Utsunomiya Imperial Historian.

古文：九年出视延绥、宁夏边务。劾治定边营失律都督佥事王祯、都督同知黄真等罪，边徼为肃。
现代文：正统九年，出京巡视延绥、宁夏的边关防务，弹劾审理定边营触犯法律的都督愈事王祯、都督同知黄真等人的罪行，边关为此而严整。
English: In the ninth year of his reign, he went to Beijing to inspect the defense of the border gates in Yancheng and Ningxia, and the impeachment trial determined the crimes committed by the governor of Yancheng, the governor of Yancheng, and the governor of Yancheng, Huang Zhen, who violated the law. The border gates were tightened for this reason.

古文：明年代陈镒镇守陕西，平凉、临洮、巩昌饥，奏免其租。
现代文：第=年，代替陈镒镇守陕西。平凉、临洮、巩昌发生饥荒，上奏章免除那些地方的租税。
English: In the same year, he replaced Chen Yuzhen as governor of Shaanxi Province. Due to the famine in Pingliang, Linyi and Gongchang, the tax of those regions was exempted.

古文：寻进左都御史。
现代文：不久提升为左都御史。
English: He was soon promoted to Sadogoto no mikoto.

古文：在陕五年，镇静不扰。
现代文：在陕西任职五年，镇守安静不扰乱平民。
English: During his five years of service in Shaanxi, the town guard kept quiet and did not disturb the civilians.

古文：景泰改元，召掌院事。
现代文：景泰元年，召回朝廷掌管都察院的事务。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, he recalled the imperial court to take charge of the affairs of the Imperial Palace.

古文：文为人深刻有城府，面目严冷，与陈镒同官，一揖外未尝接谈。
现代文：王文为人严峻苛刻有心机，面容严肃冷峻，他和陈镒官阶相同，见面作一个长揖之外从没有遇交接攀谈。
English: Wang Wen is a stern and harsh person with a strong will, his face is serious and cold. He and Chen Yao are of the same rank, and they have never met for a conversation outside of a long chat.

古文：初，按大理少卿薛瑄狱，希王振指，欲坐瑄死。
现代文：众御史像神人一样畏惧他，朝廷大臣不敢以私情干谒，然而内心实际柔媚。当初，审理大死罪。
English: Historians feared him as if he were a god, and the ministers of the imperial court did not dare to act out of selfishness, but his heart was actually tender. At first, he was tried for capital murder.

古文：至是治中官金英纵家奴不法事，但抵奴罪。
现代文：到这时审理宦官金英放纵家奴不遵守法律的案件，只是判了家奴的罪。
English: At this time, the trial of eunuch Jin Ying's case of indulging the family slave in not abiding by the law only convicted the family slave.

古文：给事中林聪等劾文、镒畏势长奸，下诏狱。
现代文：给事中林聪等人弹劾王文、陈镒畏惧权势助长奸恶，把他们关进钦犯监狱。
English: Wang Wen and Chen Yao were impeached by Lin Cong and others, who feared that power would encourage treachery, and they were put in the Qin prison.

古文：二人俱伏，乃宥之。
现代文：两个人都承认罪行，皇上于是宽容了他们。
English: Both men confessed to the crime, and the emperor pardoned them.

古文：二年六月，学士江渊上言法司断狱多枉。
现代文：景泰二年六月，学士江渊上书说法律机关判决案件大多枉曲。
English: In June of the second year of Jing Tai, the scholar Jiang Yuan wrote that most of the cases decided by the legal authorities were unjustified.

古文：文及刑部尚书俞士悦求罢。且言渊尝私以事，不听，故见诬。
现代文：王文和刑部尚书俞士悦请求罢免，并且说江渊曾经有事贿赂他们，他们没有听从，所以被诬告。
English: Wang Wen and the head of the criminal investigation department, Shang Shuxuan Shiyue, requested to be dismissed, and said that Jiang Yuan had once bribed them, but they did not obey, so they were falsely accused.

古文：帝两置之。
现代文：皇帝对两边都置之不理。
English: The emperor ignored both sides.

古文：三年春，加太子太保。
现代文：景泰三年春，加官为太子太保。
English: In the spring of the third year of King Tae's reign, he was promoted to the position of Crown Prince Taepo.

古文：时陈镒镇陕西，将还，文当代。
现代文：当时陈镒镇守陕西，将要回朝，王文应当代替他。
English: At that time, Chen Bingzhen was in charge of Shaanxi Province and was about to return to the imperial court. Wang Wen should replace him.

古文：诸御史交章留之，乃改命侍郎耿九畴。
现代文：各个御史纷纷上奏章挽留他，于是改换任命侍郎耿九畴。
English: Various emperors tried to persuade him to stay, so he was replaced by Geng Jiuzhou, who was appointed as his attendant.

古文：南京地震，江、淮北大水，命巡视。
现代文：南京发生地震，长江、淮河北岸涨洪水，命令他去巡枧。
English: An earthquake occurred in Nanjing, the Yangtze River and the north bank of the Huai River flooded, and he was ordered to go on patrol.

古文：偕南九卿议上军民便宜九事。
现代文：他同南九卿商议呈上有利于军民的九件事。
English: He discussed with the Southern Nine Lords and presented nine matters that were beneficial to the military and the people.

古文：又言徐、淮间饥甚，而南京储蓄有余，请尽发徐、淮仓粟振贷，而以应输南京者输徐、淮，补其缺。
现代文：又进言徐、淮之间饥荒严重，而南京的储蓄有剩余，请求全部发放徐、淮仓库的粟米来赈救，而把应该输送到南京的粮食输送给徐、淮，填补那里的空缺。
English: He also suggested that the famine between Xu and Huai was serious, while Nanjing had surplus savings, and requested that all the corn in Xu and Huai's warehouse be distributed to save the situation, and that the grain that should be transported to Nanjing be sent to Xu and Huai to fill the vacancies there.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：都答复许可。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：是时，陈循最任，好刚自用。
现代文：适时候，陈循最得到信任，刚愎自用。
English: At the right time, Chen Xun was the most trusted, and he used his power for his own purposes.

古文：高谷与循不相能，以文强悍，思引与共政以敌之，乃疏请增阁员。
现代文：高谷和陈循不相友好，因为王文强悍，想拉他一齐共同处理朝政来对抗陈循，于是上疏请求增加内阁的人数。
English: Takaya and Chen Cui are not friendly with each other, because Wang Wenjun is tough and wants to pull him together to deal with the government to fight Chen Cui, so Shang Shu requested to increase the number of cabinet members.

古文：循举其乡人萧维祯，谷遂举文。
现代文：陈循举荐他的同乡萧维桢，高谷于是举荐王文。
English: Chen Cun recommended his countryman Xiao Weijun, and Takaya recommended Wang Wen.

古文：而文得中官王诚助，于是诏用文。
现代文：而王文得到宦官王诚的帮助，于是诏命任用王文。
English: However, Wang Wen received help from the eunuch Wang Cheng, so the imperial edict ordered the appointment of Wang Wen.

古文：寻自江、淮还朝，改吏部尚书，兼翰林院学士，直文渊阁。
现代文：不久他从长江、淮河囤到朝廷，改任吏部尚书，兼任翰林院学士，值班文渊阁。
English: Soon he went to the imperial court from the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River, and was assigned to the personnel department of Shangshu, concurrently served as a bachelor of Hanlin Academy, and was on duty at Wenyuan Pavilion.

古文：二品大臣入阁自文始。
现代文：二品大臣进入内阁从王文开始。
English: Second-rank ministers entering the cabinet began with Wang Wen.

古文：寻遭母丧，夺哀如前。
现代文：不久遭逢母亲去世服丧，像前次那样减少服丧期任官。
English: Soon after, she suffered the loss of her mother and, as in the previous case, had to reduce the period of mourning.

古文：文虽为谷所引，而谷迟重，循性明决，文反与循合而不附谷。
现代文：王文虽然是高谷所引荐，但是高谷迟缓稳重，陈循性格鲜明决断，王文反而与陈循相合而不依附高谷。
English: Although Wang Wen was recommended by Gao Gu, Gao Gu was slow and steady, while Chen Cui was decisive. Wang Wen, on the other hand, got along with Chen Cui and did not cling to Gao Gu.

古文：其后以子伦故，欲倾考官，又用谷言而罢。
现代文：后来因为儿子王伦的原因，想倾轧考官，又因为高谷进言而作罢。
English: Later, because of his son Wang Lun, he wanted to dump the examiner, and because of Takaya's advice, he gave up.

古文：由是两人卒不相得。
现代文：因此两个人最终不相友好。
English: As a result, the two men ended up on bad terms.

古文：五年三月，江、淮大水，复命巡视。
现代文：景泰五年三月，长江、淮河涨洪水，又命令他巡视。
English: In March of the fifth year of Jing Tai, the Yangtze River and the Huai River flooded, and he was ordered to inspect.

古文：先是苏、松、常、镇四府粮四石折白银一两，民以为便。
现代文：在此之前，苏、松、常、镇四府的粮食，四石折合白银一两，百姓认为便宜。
English: Prior to this, the grain in the four prefectures of Su, Song, Chang and Zhen was equivalent to four stones and one or two silver, which was considered cheap by the common people.

古文：后户部复征米，令输徐、淮，凡一百十余万石。
现代文：后来户部又征收大米，命令输送给徐、淮，共一百一十多万石。
English: Later, the household department also levied rice and ordered it to be delivered to Xu and Huai, a total of more than 1.1 million koku.

古文：率三石而致一石，有破家者。
现代文：大致用三石纔运送到一石，有的人家产破败。
English: Roughly, one stone was transported using three-stone rafts, and some people's homes were ruined.

古文：文用便宜停之。又发廪振饥民三百六十余万。
现代文：王文以便宜行事停止输送大米，又打开粮仓赈济饥民三百六十余万。
English: Wang Wen acted as appropriate to stop the delivery of rice, and opened the granary to feed more than 3.6 million hungry people.

古文：时年饥多盗，文捕长洲盗许道师等二百人。
现代文：当时因为饥荒而多盗贼，王文逮捕长洲盗贼许道师等二百人。
English: At that time, because of the famine, there were many thieves. Wang Wen arrested the Changzhou thief Xu Daoshi and 200 others.

古文：欲张其功，坐以谋逆。
现代文：想扩大自己的功劳，判许道师焉谋反叛逆罪。
English: Wanting to expand his own merits, he sentenced the Daoist to the crime of plotting rebellion.

古文：大理卿薛瑄辨其诬。
现代文：大理卿薛管辨别出他的诬陷。
English: Daliqing Xue Guan discerned his frame-up.

古文：给事中王镇乞会廷臣勘实，得为盗者十六人置之法，而余得释。
现代文：给事中王镇请求召集朝廷大臣勘察落实，查出当盗贼的十六人依法处置，而其余的得到释放。
English: At the request of Wang Zhen, the Minister of the Imperial Court was summoned to investigate and implement the matter. Sixteen people who were found to be thieves were dealt with according to law, while the rest were released.

古文：还进少保，兼东阁大学士。
现代文：回朝后晋升为少保，兼任束合大学士。
English: After returning to the Imperial Court, he was promoted to Junior Security Officer and concurrently served as Sokai University Scholar.

古文：再进谨身殿大学士，仍兼东阁。
现代文：再次升任谨身殿大学士，仍然在柬合兼职。
English: He was once again promoted to the position of honorary university professor, and is still working part-time in Cambodia.

古文：初，英宗之还也，廷臣议奉迎礼。
现代文：当初，英宗回朝的时候，朝廷大臣讨论迎接的礼节。
English: At first, when Emperor Yeongjong returned to Korea, the ministers of the Imperial Court discussed the etiquette of greeting him.

古文：文时为都御史，厉声曰： 公等谓上皇果还耶？
现代文：王文当时是都御史，厉声说： 你们认为上皇果真能回来吗？
English: Wang Wen, who was the Metropolitan Historian at the time, said sharply: Do you think the Emperor can really come back?

古文：也先不索土地、金帛而遽送驾来耶？ 
现代文：也先不索取土地、金帛而立即送上皇回来吗？ 
English: Did they also immediately send it back to the emperor without first asking for land and gold ingots?

古文：众素畏文，皆愕然不决而罢。
现代文：众人一直畏惧王文，都愕然没有决议而结束讨论。
English: People have always been afraid of Wang Wen, and they all ended the discussion without a resolution.

古文：及易储议起，文率先承命。
现代文：到改换储君的讨论兴起时，王文率先受命。
English: Wang Wen was the first to receive the order when the discussion of changing the depositary arose.

古文：景帝不豫，群臣欲乞还沂王东宫。
现代文：景帝病重，群臣打算请求让沂王回束宫。
English: Emperor Jing was gravely ill, and his courtiers were planning to request that the King of Wei be allowed to return to the Imperial Palace.

古文：文曰： 安知上意谁属？ 
现代文：王文说： 怎么知道皇上的遗意属于谁？ 
English: Wang Wen said: How do you know who the emperor's will belongs to?

古文：乃疏请早选元良。
现代文：于是上疏请求早日选定太子。
English: As a result, Joso requested that a crown prince be chosen as soon as possible.

古文：以是中外喧传文与中官王诚等谋召取襄世子。
现代文：因此宫里官外闸嚷嚷地盛传王文和宦官王诚等人谋划召取襄世子为储君。
English: Therefore, it was rumored that Wang Wen and eunuch Wang Cheng were plotting to make Xiang's heir the crown prince.

古文：英宗复位，即日与于谦执于班内。
现代文：英宗重新登上皇位，当天他和于谦就在班列内被拘捕。
English: On the day of Yingzong's ascension to the throne, he and Yu Qian were arrested in the procession.

古文：言官劾文与谦等谋立外藩，命鞫于廷。
现代文：谏官弹劾王文和于谦等人阴谋树立外地藩王，命令在朝廷上审问。
English: The eunuchs impeached Wang Wen and Yu Qian for plotting to establish a foreign king and ordered them to be tried in the imperial court.

古文：文力辩曰： 召亲王须用金牌信符，遣人必有马牌，内府兵部可验也。 
现代文：王文极力争辩说： 召回亲王必须用金牌信符，遣发官员必定有马牌，内府兵部可以骏证我做了没有。 
English: Wang Wen strenuously argued: to recall the prince, it is necessary to use a gold-plated letter, the dispatching official must have a horse plate, and the Neifu Military Department can verify whether I have done it.

古文：辞气激壮。
现代文：言辞语气激烈雄壮。
English: The tone of the speech is fierce and majestic.

古文：逮车驾主事沈敬按问，无迹。
现代文：逮捕车驾主事沈敬来查究审问，没有事实。
English: There is no truth to the allegation that the arrest of the driver was due to Shen Jing's investigation and interrogation.

古文：廷臣遂坐谦、文召敬谋未定，与谦同斩于市，诸子悉戍边。
现代文：朝廷大臣于是以于谦、王文召集沈敬阴谋未定而判罪，和于谦一起在集市被斩首，所有的儿子全都戍守边关。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court was then found guilty of conspiring with Yu Qian and Wang Wen to summon Shen Jing. He and Yu Qian were beheaded together in the market, and all of their sons guarded the border.

古文：敬亦坐知谋反故纵，减死，戍铁岭。
现代文：沈敬也因知道谋反却故意放纵获罪，减去死刑，戍守铁岭。
English: Shen Jing was also found guilty of knowing that he was plotting a rebellion, but deliberately indulged in it. He received a reduced death sentence and was allowed to stay in Tieling.

古文：文之死，人皆知其诬。
现代文：王文的死，人人都知道他受了诬陷。
English: Wang Wen's death, everyone knows he was framed.

古文：以素刻忮，且迎驾、复储之议不惬舆论，故冤死而民不思。
现代文：因为平时刻簿强悍，并且在迎驾、复储的讨论时不与舆论相合，所以冤死而百姓不思念他。
English: Because the book is strong at ordinary times, and it does not coincide with public opinion in the discussion of welcoming and re-stocking, so he died unjustly and the people did not miss him.

古文：成化初，赦其子还，寻复官，赠太保，谥毅愍。
现代文：成化初年，赦免他的儿子回来，不久恢复官职，追赠为太保，谧号毅愍。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he pardoned his son to come back, and soon resumed his official duties, posthumously becoming the grand marshal, with the posthumous name Yi Jun.

古文：伦，改名宗彝。
现代文：玉伦，改名焉宗彝。
English: Gyokuren, changed his name to Enso.

古文：成化初进士。
现代文：成化初年进士。
English: First-year trainee at Chenghua.

古文：历户部郎中，出理辽东饷。
现代文：历任户部郎中，出京管理辽东的军饷。
English: Successive chief retainers of the household department went to Beijing to manage the military pay of Liaodong.

古文：中官汪直东征，言宗彝督饷劳，擢太仆少卿。
现代文：宦官汪直束征，说王宗彝督办军饷有功劳，提升任太仆少卿。
English: The eunuch, Wang Zhizhu Zheng, said that Wang Zongyi, the military commander, had made great contributions, and promoted him to the position of Taigu Shaoqing.

古文：弘治中，累官南京礼部尚书。
现代文：弘治年问，多次升迁至南京礼部尚书。
English: He was promoted several times to the Nanjing etiquette department.

古文：卒，谥安简。
现代文：死后，谧号安简。
English: After her death, her nickname was Anjan.

古文：江渊，字世用，江津人。
现代文：江渊，字世用，江津人。
English: Jiangyuan (江渊) is the name commonly used to refer to people from Jiangjin.

古文：宣德五年庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：宣德五年选庶吉士，授官编修。
English: In the fifth year of the Xuande Five-yearly Election, he was awarded the post of deputy editor-in-chief.

古文：正统十二年诏与杜宁、裴纶、刘俨、商辂、陈文、杨鼎、吕原、刘俊、王玉共十人，肄业东阁，曹鼐等为之师。
现代文：正统十二年，诏命他和杜宁、裴纶、刘俨、商辖、陈文、杨鼎、吕原、刘俊、王玉一共十个人，在柬阁学习，曹鼐等人当他们的老师。
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, Emperor Zhao ordered him and ten others, including Du Ning, Pei Yu, Liu Yu, Shang Ji, Chen Wen, Yang Ding, Lyu Yuan, Liu Jun, and Wang Yu, to study in Cambodia, with Cao Pi and others as their teachers.

古文：郕王监国，徐有贞倡议南迁，太监金英叱出之，踉跄过左掖门。
现代文：邸王代理国政，徐有贞倡议南迁，太监金英呵叱他出去，他踉踉跆跆经过左掖门。
English: The king of the palace was in charge of state affairs, Xu Youzhen proposed to move south, the eunuch Jin Yinghong scolded him to go out, and they passed through the Zuoying Gate.

古文：渊适入，迎问之。
现代文：江渊正好进来，迎上去问他。
English: Jiang Yuan just came in and greeted him.

古文：有贞曰： 以吾议南迁不合也。 
现代文：徐有贞说： 因为我建议南迁不合众意。 
English: Xu Youzhen said: Because I suggested moving to the south, there was no consensus.

古文：于是渊入，极陈固守之策。
现代文：于是江渊进去，极力陈说稳固防守的策略。
English: So Jiang Yuan went in and tried his best to present a solid defense strategy.

古文：遂见知于王，由侍讲超擢刑部右侍郎。
现代文：于是被邸王知遇，由侍讲越级提拔为刑部右侍郎。
English: As a result, he was met by the head of the Imperial Household Agency, and was promoted to the position of Right Attendant of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：也先薄京师，命渊参都督孙镗军事。
现代文：也先进犯京城，皇上命令江渊参与都督孙镗的军队事务。
English: He also advanced to the capital city, and the emperor ordered Jiang Yuan to participate in the military affairs of the governor Sun Yat-sen.

古文：景泰元年出视紫荆、倒马、白羊诸关隘，与都指挥同知翁信督修雁门关。
现代文：景泰元年，出京巡枧紫剂、倒马、白羊各关隘，和都指挥同知翁信监督修建雁门关。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, he went to Beijing to patrol every pass of the Purple Agent, the Falling Horse, and the White Goat, and commanded Tongzhi Wengxin to supervise the construction of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：其秋遂以本官兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：这年秋天就以原来的官职兼任翰林学士，进入内阁参预机要事务。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he took up his former official position and concurrently served as Hanlin Scholar, entering the cabinet to participate in important matters.

古文：寻改户部侍郎，兼职如故。
现代文：不久改任户部侍郎，像以前那样兼职。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of head waiter, working part-time as before.

古文：明年六月以天变条上三事：一，厚结朵颜、赤斤诸卫，为东西藩篱；一，免京军余丁，以资生业；一，禁讦告王振余党，以免枉滥。
现代文：第二年六月，因为天象变异分条上书建议三件事：一，深厚结交朵颜、赤斤各卫，作为东西方的防线；二，陈去京城军队多余的兵丁，用来资助生产；三，禁止揭发上告王振的余党，以免枉错淫滥使无辜受害。
English: In June of the following year, because of the celestial phenomenon variation, three things were proposed in the article: First, the deep friendship of Doyan and Chakkin, as the defense line of the East and West; Second, the excess soldiers of the Beijing army were used to finance production; Third, it was forbidden to expose the remaining party that sued Wang Zhen, so as not to cause innocent victims.

古文：诏悉从之。
现代文：诏令全部听从他的建议。
English: Zhaozong's edict all followed Han Jian's request.

古文：又明年二月改吏部，仍兼学士。
现代文：又在第二年二月改任吏部，仍然兼任学士。
English: In February of the following year, he was reassigned to the personnel department, still concurrently serving as a bachelor.

古文：是春，京师久雨雪。
现代文：逭年春天，京城下了很久的雪。
English: In the spring of the year of the rooster, it snowed for a long time in Kyoto.

古文：渊上言： 汉刘向曰，凡雨阴也，雪又雨之阴也。
现代文：江渊上言说： 汉代的刘向说，凡是雨都属于阴，雪又比雨更阴。
English: Jiangyuan Shangyin said: Liu Xiang of the Han Dynasty said that all rain belongs to yin, and snow is more yin than rain.

古文：仲春少阳用事，而寒气胁之，占法谓人君刑法暴滥之象。
现代文：仲春时节少阳主宰天下，而寒气却挟持它，占卜说这是人间的君王刑法严厉过滥的兆象。
English: In the middle of the Spring Festival, Shao Yang dominates the world, but the cold is holding it back, soothsayers say that this is a sign that the king of the world's criminal law is too harsh.

古文：陛下恩威溥洽，未尝不赦过宥罪，窃恐有司奉行无状，冤抑或有未伸。
现代文：陛下恩德威严广博，不是没有赦免罪过，私下担心有关官员奉命行使权力却行为不检，冤屈可能有没能伸张的。
English: His Majesty's authority is broad and strict, and he has not pardoned any crimes. Privately, he is worried that the officials concerned have been ordered to exercise power but have acted inappropriately, and that their grievances may not have been upheld.

古文：且向者下明诏，免景泰二年田租之三。今复移檄追征，则是朝廷自失大信于民。怨气郁结，良由此也。 
现代文：况且以前下达明确的诏令，免去景泰二年田租的三分之一，现在又传递公文追收，却是朝廷自己对人民丧失了极大的信用，怨气郁结，确实是因为这个原因。 
English: Moreover, it was precisely for this reason that the imperial court itself had lost a great deal of trust in the people, and the resentment was deepened by the fact that it had previously issued a clear edict exempting Jing Tai from one-third of the two-year land rent, and was now passing on the collection of official documents.

古文：帝乃令法司申冤滥，诘户部违诏，下尚书金濂于狱，卒免税加诏。东宫既易，加太子少师。
现代文：皇帝于是命令司法机关昭雪受冤屈和判处过重的人，责备户部违反诏令，把尚书金濂关进监狱，最后按诏令免税。东宫改换后，加官太子少师。
English: The emperor then ordered the judicial organs to punish those who had been wronged and sentenced too severely, and accused the household department of violating the imperial edict, putting Shang Shujin in prison, and finally tax exemption according to the imperial edict.

古文：四川巡抚佥都御史李匡不职，以渊言罢之。
现代文：四川巡抚愈都御史李匡不称职，因为江渊的进言罢免了他。
English: Li Kuang, the governor of Sichuan, was incompetent, because Jiang Yuan's suggestion led to his dismissal.

古文：母忧起复。
现代文：服母丧期中起用恢复官职。
English: Midway through the period of mourning for his mother, he was reinstated to his post.

古文：初侍讲学士倪谦遭丧，渊荐谦为讲官，谦遂夺哀。
现代文：当初侍讲学士倪谦遭逢丧事，江渊举荐他任讲官，倪谦于是减少服丧期起用任职。
English: At the beginning, Ni Qian, the assistant lecturer, suffered a death, Jiang Yuan recommended him to be a lecturer, so Ni Qian reduced the period of mourning and took up the post.

古文：至是御史周文言渊引谦，正自为今日地。
现代文：现在御史周文说江渊引荐倪谦，正是他自己为今天打算。
English: Now, historian Zhou Wen said that Jiang Yuan's introduction of Ni Qian was exactly what he had planned for today.

古文：帝以事既处分，不问，而令自今群臣遭丧无滥保。
现代文：皇帝认为事情已经处理了，不再过问，却命令从现在起群臣遭逢丧事不得没有准则地保举。
English: The emperor thought that the matter had already been dealt with and would no longer be questioned, but ordered that from now on, the ministers had to be promoted without any rules.

古文：五年春，山东、河南、江北饥，命同平江侯陈预往抚。
现代文：景泰五年春，山东、河南、长江北岸发生饥荒，命令他和平江侯陈豫一起前去抚慰。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Jing Tai, famine occurred in Shandong, Henan, and the north bank of the Yangtze River, and he was ordered to go with the prince of the Peace River, Chen Yu, to relieve the famine.

古文：渊前后条上军民便宜十数事。
现代文：江渊前后分条上书对军民有利的十多件事。
English: There are more than ten things that are beneficial to the military and the people.

古文：并请筑淮安月城以护常盈仓，广徐州东城以护广运仓。
现代文：并且请求修筑淮安月城来保护常盈仓，扩大徐州束城来保护广运仓。
English: He also requested the construction of Huai'an Yuecheng to protect the Changying warehouse, and the expansion of Xuzhou Sokcheng to protect the Guangyun warehouse.

古文：悉议行。
现代文：全部都经廷议实行。
English: All of them have been implemented after court deliberation.

古文：时江北洊饥，淮安粮运在涂者，渊悉追还备振，漕卒乘机侵耗。
现代文：当时长江北岸屡次发生饥荒，淮安运送在途中的粮食，江渊全部追回来预备救灾，管理漕运的士兵乘机侵占偷盗。
English: At that time, there were repeated famines on the north bank of the Yangtze River. Huai'an transported grain on the way, Jiangyuan recovered all of it to prepare for disaster relief, and the soldiers who managed the transportation took the opportunity to occupy and steal.

古文：事闻，遣御史按实。
现代文：事情被朝廷知道，派遣御史考察落实。
English: The Imperial Court was made aware of the matter and dispatched an Imperial Historical Survey to investigate the matter.

古文：渊被劾。当削籍。
现代文：江渊被弹劾，应当削去官籍。
English: Jiang Yuan was impeached and should be stripped of his official status.

古文：廷臣以渊守便宜，不当罪。
现代文：朝廷大臣认为江渊是为了方便救灾，不应当定罪。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court believed that Jiang Yuan was to facilitate disaster relief and should not be convicted.

古文：帝宥之。
现代文：皇帝宽恕了他。
English: The emperor pardoned him.

古文：阁臣既不相协，而陈循、王文尤刻私。
现代文：内阁大臣已经不融洽，而陈循、王文尤其刻意营私。
English: Cabinet ministers are already at odds with each other, and Chen Xun and Wang Wen especially deliberately play favorites.

古文：渊好议论，每为同官所抑，意忽忽不乐。
现代文：江渊喜欢议论，常常被同级官员所压制，内心感到失意不高兴。
English: Jiang Yuan liked to talk, and was often suppressed by officials at the same level. He felt frustrated and unhappy inside.

古文：会兵部尚书于谦以病在告，诏推一人协理部事。渊心欲得之。
现代文：恰逢兵部尚书于谦因病告假，诏命推选一人去协同办理兵部的事务，江渊心里很想得到这个职位。
English: At the same time, Shangshu Yu Qian took a leave of absence from the military due to illness. He was ordered to select a person to coordinate the affairs of the military department. Jiang Yuan really wanted to get this position.

古文：循等佯推渊，而密令商辂草奏，示以 石兵江工 四字，渊在旁不知也。
现代文：陈循等人假装推选江渊却悄悄地叫商辖起草奏章，把 石兵江工 四个字给他看，江渊在一边不明白。
English: Chen Cui and others pretended to select Jiang Yuan, but quietly asked Shang Jiu to draft a report, and showed him the four characters of Shi Bingjiang Gong. Jiang Yuan did not understand.

古文：比诏下，调工部尚书石璞于兵部，而以渊代璞。渊大失望。
现代文：等到诏书下达，调工部尚书石璞去兵部，而用江渊代替石璞，江渊大为失望。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, Jiang Yuan was greatly disappointed that Shang Shuxu Shijie of the Adjustment and Construction Department went to the Military Department, and Jiang Yuan was used instead of Shijie.

古文：英宗复位，与陈循等俱谪戍辽东，未几卒。
现代文：英宗重新登上皇位，他和陈循等人都贬谪去戍守辽东，没过多久就死了。
English: Yingzong ascended the throne again, he and Chen Cui and others all went to defend Liaodong, and died not long after.

古文：初，黄矰之奏易储也，或疑渊主之。
现代文：当初，黄珐奏请改换储君，有人怀疑江渊主张这件事。
English: At first, Huang Yuxo asked to change the crown prince, and some people suspected Jiang Yuan of advocating this.

古文：丘浚曰： 此易辨也，广西纸与京师纸异。 
现代文：丘浚说： 这容易分辨，广西的纸和京城的纸不同。 
English: "It's easy to tell, the paper in Guangxi is different from the paper in Beijing," said Youjun.

古文：索奏视之，果广西纸，其诬乃白。
现代文：取来奏书一看，果然是魔西的纸，他受的诬陷纔洗清。
English: When he took a look at the transcript, it was indeed Morsi's paper, and he was cleared of the frame-up.

古文：成化初，复官。
现代文：成化初年，恢复官职。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he resumed his official position.

古文：许彬，字道中，宁阳人。永乐十三年进士。
现代文：许彬，字道中，宁阳人，永乐十三年考中进士。
English: Xu Bin, a middle school student from Ningyang, won a prize in the 13th Yongle Middle School Entrance Examination.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：改为庶吉士，授官检讨。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the review of the awarding of the position is now over.

古文：正统末，累迁太常少卿，兼翰林待诏，提督四夷馆。
现代文：正统末年，多次升迁至太常少卿，兼任翰林待诏，总管四夷馆。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, he was promoted several times to the position of Taijo Shokei, concurrently serving as Hanlin Shidai, the head of Shii Museum.

古文：上皇将还，遣彬至宣府奉迎。上皇命书罪己诏及谕群臣敕，遣祭土木阵亡官军。以此受知上皇。还擢本寺卿。
现代文：上皇将返回，派遣许彬到宣府迎接，上皇命令他写罪己诏和训谕群臣的敕书，派遣他祭祀土木阵亡的官军，因此被上皇知遇，回朝后提升为本寺卿。
English: The Retired Emperor was about to return and sent Xu Bin to meet him at Xuanfu. The Retired Emperor ordered him to write an imperial edict condemning himself and ordering his vassals, and sent him to offer sacrifices to the civil and military dead. As a result, he was met by the Retired Emperor and promoted to the head priest of this temple after his return to the imperial court.

古文：石亨等谋复上皇，以其谋告彬，彬进徐有贞，语具有贞传。
现代文：石亨等人谋划恢复上皇的皇位，把他们的打算告诉许彬，许彬推荐徐有贞，详情记载在《有贞传》。
English: Shi Heng and others plotted to restore the emperor's throne, and told Xu Bin about their plans. Xu Bin recommended Xu Youzhen, and the details are recorded in "A Biography of Youzhen."

古文：英宗复位，进礼部左侍郎，兼翰林院学士。入直文渊阁。
现代文：英宗重新登上皇位，他晋升为礼部左侍郎，兼任翰林院学士，进入文渊阁值班。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne again. He was promoted to the left attendant of the ceremonial department, concurrently served as a bachelor of the Hanlin Academy, and entered the duty of Wen Yuange.

古文：未几，为石亨所忌，出为南京礼部右侍郎，甫行，贬陕西参政。
现代文：没过多久，被石亨所猜忌，出京任南京礼部右侍郎，刚刚出发，又贬为陕西参政。
English: It didn't take long before he was suspected by Shi Heng and sent to Beijing to serve as the right hand man of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department. He had just left the country when he was relegated to politics in Shaanxi.

古文：至则乞休去。
现代文：到达后就请求退休离任。
English: Upon arrival, he asked to retire.

古文：宪宗立，命以侍郎致仕，寻卒。
现代文：宪宗登上皇位，命令他以侍郎的官职退休，不久就死了。
English: When Emperor Kenzong ascended the throne, he ordered him to retire as a chamberlain, and he died soon after.

古文：彬性坦率，好交游，不能择人，一时浮荡士多出其门。
现代文：许彬性格坦率，喜欢交结朋友，不善于选择人，当时轻浮放荡之士大多出于他的门下。
English: Xu Bin's character is frank, likes to make friends, and is not good at choosing people. At that time, most of the frivolous and debauched people were his disciples.

古文：晚参大政，方欲杜门谢客，而客恶其变态，竞相腾谤，竟不安其位。
现代文：晚年参预重大的政事，正想闭门谢客，但是客人不喜欢他改变以前的态度，竞相肆意诽谤他，终于不能安稳自己的官位。
English: At the end of his life, he was about to take part in a major political event and was about to thank his guests behind closed doors. However, his guests did not like his change of attitude and began to slander him, and he was finally unable to secure his official position.

古文：陈文，字安简，庐陵人。
现代文：陈文，字安简，庐陵人。
English: Chen Wen, also known as An Jian, is from Fuling.

古文：乡试第一，正统元年进士及第，授编修。
现代文：参加乡试获得第一，垂统元年，考中进士，授官编修。
English: He won the first place in the township test, and in the first year of the Communist Party of China, he was promoted to a scholar in the middle school examination, and was awarded the title of editor.

古文：十二年命进学东阁。
现代文：正统十二年，命令进为柬阁大学士。
English: In the twelfth year of orthodoxy, he was ordered to enter the Cambodian University.

古文：秩满，迁侍讲。
现代文：任期满，晋升为侍讲。
English: Upon completion of his term of office, he was promoted to the position of assistant speaker.

古文：景泰二年，阁臣高谷荐文才，遂擢云南右布政使，贵州比岁用兵，资饷云南，民困转输。
现代文：景泰二年，内阁大臣高壳举荐陈文的才能，于是提升他任云南右布政使。贵州连续几年有战争，物资军饷来自于云南，百姓被运输所困扰。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, the cabinet minister Gao Hul recommended Chen Wen's talent, and then promoted him to be the political envoy of Yunnan Province. Guizhou has been at war for several years in a row, materials and military supplies come from Yunnan, and the people are plagued by transportation.

古文：文令商贾代输，而民倍偿其费，皆称便。
现代文：陈文命令商人代替百姓输送，而百姓加倍补偿商人的运费，大家都称道说方便。
English: Chen Wen ordered the merchants to transport the goods on behalf of the people, and the people doubled the compensation for the merchants' shipping costs. Everyone praised the convenience.

古文：税课额钞七十余万，吏俸所取给，典者侵蚀，吏或累岁不得俸。
现代文：税收款额为钱钞七十多万，官吏的俸禄取以供给，主管的入侵吞，官吏有时连续几年不能得到俸禄。
English: The amount of taxes is more than 700,000 yuan, the salaries of officials are taken as supplies, the incursions of supervisors are swallowed, and officials sometimes cannot get salaries for several consecutive years.

古文：文悉按治，课日羡溢。
现代文：陈文全都审察整顿，税收渐渐充足富余。
English: Chen Wen all inspected and rectified, and the tax revenue gradually became sufficient and surplus.

古文：云南产银，民间用银贸易，视内地三倍。
现代文：云南出产白银，民间用白银贸易，是内地的三倍。
English: Yunnan produces three times as much silver as the mainland, and the private silver trade is booming.

古文：隶在官者免役，纳银亦三之，纳者不为病。
现代文：属于官家的人免除徭役，缴纳的白银也是百姓的三分之一，缴纳的人不认为是不好。
English: Those who belonged to the official family were exempted from corvée, and the silver paid was also one-third of the people's. Those who paid did not think it was bad.

古文：文曰： 虽如是，得无伤廉乎？ 
现代文：陈文说： 虽然如此，该不会有害于廉政吧？ 
English: Chen Wen said: Even so, wouldn't it be harmful to the integrity of politics?

古文：损之，复令减隶额三之一。
现代文：减少这种份额，又命令灭除属于官家的租税份额的三分之一。
English: It also ordered the elimination of one-third of the official share of taxes.

古文：名誉日起，迁广东左布政使，母忧未赴。
现代文：名声赞誉渐渐上升，升任广东左布政使，因为母丧没有赴任。
English: His reputation and praise gradually increased, and he was promoted to the post of Guangdong Zuobu Political Envoy, because he did not go to the post because of his mother's death.

古文：英宗即复位，一日谓左右曰： 向侍朕编修，皙而长者安在？ 
现代文：英宗再次登上皇位之后，有一天对左右的人说： 以前侍奉朕的编修，白皙而且高大的人在哪里？ 
English: After Yingzong ascended the throne again, one day he said to the people around him: "Where are the tall, white-haired men who used to serve me as editors?

古文：左右以文对，即召为詹事。
现代文：左右的人回答是陈文，皇上马上召他任詹事。
English: The people around answered that it was Chen Wen, and the emperor immediately called him to serve as secretary.

古文：乞终制。不允。
现代文：他请求守完二年的丧期。不被允许。
English: He asked to complete the two-year mourning period. He was not allowed to.

古文：入侍东宫讲读。
现代文：入朝陪侍束宫任讲读。
English: He entered the imperial court accompanied by an attendant from the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：学士吕原卒，帝问李贤谁可代者，曰： 柯潜可。 
现代文：学士吕原死，皇帝问李贤谁能够代替，李贤说： 柯潜可以。 
English: When the scholar Lü Yuan died, the emperor asked Li Xian who could replace him. Li Xian said: Ke Xuan can.

古文：出告王翱，翱曰： 陈文以次当及，奈何抑之？ 
现代文：出来以后告诉王翱，王翱说： 陈文按顺序应当轮到他，为什么要压制他？ 
English: After he came out, he told Wang Yao. Wang Yao said: Chen Wen should take his turn in order, why suppress him?

古文：明日，贤入见，如翱言。
现代文：第二天，李贤入朝晋见皇上，像王翱说的那样进言。
English: The next day, Li Xian entered the imperial court to see the emperor and made a speech as Wang Yao said.

古文：七年二月进礼部右侍郎兼学士，入内阁。
现代文：量泰七年二月，晋升为礼部右侍郎兼任学士，进入内阁。
English: In February of the seventh year of Jotai's reign, he was promoted to the post of Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department and also served as a bachelor, and entered the cabinet.

古文：文既入，数挠贤以自异，曰： 吾非若所荐也。 
现代文：陈文入内阁后，多次阻挠李贤而提出异议，说： 我不是你所推荐的。 
English: After Chen Wen entered the cabinet, he repeatedly obstructed Li Xian and raised objections, saying: I am not what you recommended.

古文：侍读学士钱溥与文比舍居，交甚欢。
现代文：侍读学士钱溥和陈文相邻居住，交往很好。
English: Qian Qian and Chen Wen live next to each other, and they get along very well.

古文：溥尝授内侍书。其徒多贵幸，来谒，必邀文共饮。
现代文：钱溥曾经授官内侍书，他弟子大多显贵宠幸，前来拜谒，必定邀请陈文一同喝酒。
English: Qian Qian had once been awarded the title of the official's personal attendant. Most of his disciples were favored by nobles. If they came to pay homage to Qian Qian, they would certainly invite Chen Wen to drink together.

古文：英宗大渐，东宫内侍王纶私诣溥计事，不召文。
现代文：英宗病危，东宫内侍王纶悄悄到钱溥家商量事情，不召陈文。
English: Emperor Yingzong was critically ill, and the attendant of the East Palace, Wang Qian, quietly went to Qian Qian's home to discuss the matter, but did not call Chen Wen.

古文：文密觇之。
现代文：陈文暗中偷看他们。
English: Chen Wen secretly peeked at them.

古文：纶言： 帝不豫，东宫纳妃，如何？ 
现代文：王纶说： 皇帝病危，束宫要纳妃子，怎么办？ 
English: Wang Yao said, "The Emperor is critically ill, and the Empress wants to marry a concubine. What should we do?

古文：溥谓： 当奉遗诏行事。 
现代文：钱溥说： 应当遵奉遗诏行事。 
English: Qian Ye said: We should act in accordance with the will.

古文：已而英宗崩，贤当草诏。
现代文：不久英宗死了，李贤应该起草诏书。
English: Soon after Yingzong died, Li Xian was supposed to draft the imperial edict.

古文：文起夺其笔曰： 无庸，已有草者。 
现代文：陈文起身夺下他的笔说： 没有用了，已经有起草的人。 
English: Chen Wen stood up, grabbed his pen and said, "It's no use, someone has already drafted it."

古文：因言纶、溥定计，欲逐贤以溥代之，而以兵部侍郎韩雍代尚书马昂。
现代文：于是说王纶、钱溥已经定下计划，想逐出李贤用钱溥代替，还要用兵部侍郎韩雍代替尚书马昂。
English: Therefore, it was said that Wang Qian and Qian Qian had already set a plan to expel Li Xian and replace him with Qian Qian, and also to replace Shang Shumaang with Han Yong, the attendant of the military department.

古文：贤怒，发其事。
现代文：李贤大怒，揭发他们的事情。
English: Li Xian flew into a rage and exposed their affair.

古文：是时宪宗初立，纶自谓当得司礼，气张甚。
现代文：当时宪宗刚登上皇位，王纶自以为应当得到司礼的职位，气焰很嚣张。
English: At that time, Emperor Xianzong had just ascended the throne, and Wang Yao thought that he should be given the position of priest, and he was very arrogant.

古文：英宗大殓，纶衰服袭貂，帝见而恶之。
现代文：举行英宗的入棺礼，王纶的丧服叠套着貂皮衣，皇帝看见了很讨厌他。
English: The coffin-laying ceremony for Emperor Yingzong was held, and Wang Yao's funeral attire was layered with a mink coat. The emperor was disgusted when he saw him.

古文：太监牛玉恐其轧己，因数纶罪，逐之去。
现代文：太监牛玉担心他倾轧自己，于是历数王纶的罪遇，驱逐他离开朝廷。
English: The eunuch Niu Yu was worried that he would ruin himself, so he enumerated Wang Yao's crimes and expelled him from the imperial court.

古文：溥谪知顺德县，雍浙江参政。
现代文：钱溥贬谪为顺德县知县，韩雍为浙江参政。
English: Qian Qian became the top politician in Shunde County, and Han Yong became the top politician in Zhejiang.

古文：词所连，顺天府尹王福，通政参议赵昂，南宁伯毛荣，都督马良、冯宗、刘聚，锦衣都指挥佥事门达等皆坐谪。
现代文：狱词所牵连的人，有顺天府尹王福，通政参议赵昂，南窒侦毛荣，都督马良、冯宗、刘聚，锦衣都指挥食事门达等人都连坐被贬谪。
English: The people implicated by the prison terms, including Shuntianfu Yin Wangfu, Tongzheng Zhao Ang, Nanyu Yan Mao Rong, Governor Ma Liang, Feng Zong, Liu Ju, and Jin Yidu commander Mei Menda, were all demoted.

古文：雍亦文素所不悦者也。
现代文：韩雍也是陈文一直所不喜欢的人。
English: Han Yong is also a person Chen Wen has always disliked.

古文：改吏部左侍郎，同知经筵事。
现代文：陈文改任吏部左侍郎，同知御前讲席事务。
English: Chen Wen was reassigned to the Left Attendant of the Cadre Department, and he also served as a lecturer in front of the Emperor.

古文：成化元年进礼部尚书。
现代文：成化元年，晋升为礼部尚书。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：罗伦论贤夺情。
现代文：罗伦控告李贤守丧不满期而任职。
English: Loren accused Li Xian of holding the post for an unsatisfactory period of time.

古文：文内愧，阴助贤逐伦，益为时论所鄙。
现代文：陈文心中愧疚，暗地襄帮助李贤逐出罗伦，更加被当时的舆论所鄙薄。
English: Chen Wen felt guilty in his heart and secretly helped Li Xian to expel Loren, which was even more despised by the public opinion at that time.

古文：三年春，帝命户部尚书马昂、副都御史林聪及给事中潘礼、陈越清理京营。
现代文：成化三年春季，皇帝命令户部尚书马昂、副都御史林聪和给事中潘礼、陈越清理京城的罩营。
English: In the spring of the third year of Chenghua, the emperor ordered the head of the household, Shang Shumaang, and the vice-governor of the capital, Shilin Conghe, to give Panli and Chen Yue the opportunity to clean up the hooded camp in the capital.

古文：文奏必得内臣共事，始可刬除宿弊，因荐太监怀恩。
现代文：陈文上奏说一定要有内臣一齐处理这件事，纔能够铲除长期以来的弊病，因此推荐太监怀恩。
English: Chen Wenzhong said that there must be a vassal to deal with this matter together, and he can eradicate the long-standing ills, so he recommended the eunuch Wai En.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：《英宗实录》成，加太子少保，兼文渊阁大学士。
现代文：《英宗实录》写成，加官为太子少保，兼任文渊阁大学士。
English: "The True Record of the Yingzong" was written, and he was promoted to the position of the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and concurrently served as a scholar at Bunyukaku University.

古文：四年卒。
现代文：成化四年死去。
English: He died four years later.

古文：赠少傅，谥庄靖。
现代文：追赠为少傅，谧号庄靖。
English: He was posthumously promoted to Shao Fu and given the posthumous name Zhuang Jing.

古文：文素以才自许，在外颇著绩效，士大夫多冀其进用。
现代文：陈文一直以才华自许，在京城外做官颇有功绩实效，士大夫大多希望他进入朝廷得到任用。
English: Chen Wen has always prided himself on his talent. He has served as an official outside the capital with considerable merit and effectiveness. Most of the magistrates hope that he will be appointed to the imperial court.

古文：及居宫端，行事鄙猥。
现代文：到他任太子詹事，做事鄙陋。
English: After he was appointed crown prince, he did despicable things.

古文：既参大政，无所建明。
现代文：参预重大政务后，没有什么建树。
English: After participating in important government affairs, there is nothing to build on.

古文：朝退则引宾客故人置酒为曲宴，专务请属。
现代文：退朝后就邀请宾客老友进行歌舞宴乐，专心于打通关节。
English: After retiring, he invited guests and old friends to sing and dance, concentrating on opening joints.

古文：性卞急，遇睚眦怨必报。
现代文：性格急躁，遇到极小的仇怨也一定要报复。
English: He is quick-tempered, and if he encounters a minor grudge, he is sure to take revenge.

古文：及贤卒，文益恣意行，名节大丧。
现代文：到李贤死后，陈文更加任意行事，名节大大地丧失。
English: After Li Xian's death, Chen Wen acted more arbitrarily, and his reputation was greatly tarnished.

古文：殁后，礼部主事陆渊之、御史谢文祥皆疏论文不当得美谥。
现代文：死了以后，礼部主事陆渊之、御史谢文祥都上疏弹劾陈文不应当得到好的谧号。
English: After his death, the head of the ceremonial department, Lu Yuanzhi, and the chief historian, Xie Wenshang, went to the capital to impeach Chen Wen. Chen Wen should not get a good nickname.

古文：帝以事已施行，不许。
现代文：皇帝认为事情已经施行了，不同意。
English: The emperor thought that the matter had already been settled and did not agree.

古文：万安，安循吉，眉州人。
现代文：万安，字循吉，眉州人。
English: Wan'an, Zhixunji, Meizhou people.

古文：长身魁颜，眉目如刻画，外宽而深中。
现代文：身材高大相貌魁梧，眉毛和眼睛像刻画上去的，外面宽阔而里面深凹。
English: He is tall and heavy-looking, with eyebrows and eyes like a caricature, broad on the outside and deep inside.

古文：正统十三年进士。
现代文：正统十三年考中进士。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher in the 13th year of the orthodox examination.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：改庶吉士，授官编修。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：成化初，屡迁礼部左侍郎。
现代文：成化初年，多次迁升后任礼部左侍郎。
English: In the first year of Seika, he was promoted several times and then became the left attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：五年命兼翰林学士，入内阁参机务。
现代文：成化五年，命令他兼任翰林学士，进入内阁参预机要事务。
English: In the fifth year of Chenghua, he was ordered to concurrently serve as a scholar of Hanlin and enter the cabinet to participate in important matters.

古文：同年生詹事李泰，中官永昌养子也，齿少于安。
现代文：和他同一年考中的生员任詹事的李泰，是宦官李永昌的养子，比菌安年纪小。
English: Li Tai, who was a student in the same year as him, is the adopted son of eunuch Li Yongchang, and is younger than Ye An.

古文：安兄事之，得其欢。
现代文：墓塞像对待兄长一样对待他，得到他的欢心。
English: The grave-digger treated him like a brother and won his heart.

古文：自为同官，每当迁，必推安出己上。
现代文：自从成为同级官僚以后，每当迁升，李泰必定推荐万安排在自己的前边。
English: Since becoming a bureaucrat at the same level, Li Tai has always recommended Wan Arrangements to his predecessors whenever he was promoted.

古文：至是议简阁臣，泰复推安曰： 子先之，我不患不至。 
现代文：到这时商议选拔内阁大臣，李泰又推荐万安说： 你先去，我不怕不能到达。 
English: At this time, they were discussing the selection of a cabinet minister, and Li Tai recommended Wan'an, saying: You go first, I'm not afraid of not being able to get there.

古文：故安得入阁，而泰忽暴病死。
现代文：因此万安得到进入内阁的机会，而李泰忽然得急病死了。
English: As a result, Wan An was given the opportunity to enter the cabinet, while Li Tai suddenly fell ill and died.

古文：安无学术，既柄用，惟日事请托，结诸阉为内援。
现代文：万安没有什么学问，被重用而掌握大权以后，只是天天专注于请客送礼，结交各个宦官作为内援。
English: Wan'an did not have much knowledge. After he was reused and seized power, he only focused on inviting guests and giving gifts every day, and made friends with various eunuchs as domestic help.

古文：时万贵妃宠冠后宫，安因内侍致殷勤，自称子侄行。
现代文：当时万贵妃在后宫最受宠，万安依靠内侍献殷勤，自称子侄辈。
English: At that time, Princess Wan Guifei was the most favored in the harem. Wan An relied on the courtiers for their attentions and claimed to be her son and nephew.

古文：妃尝自愧无门阀，闻则大喜，妃弟锦衣指挥通，遂以族属数过安家。
现代文：万贵妃曾经为役有门板望族而羞愧，听说之后十分高兴。万贵妃的弟弟锦衣指挥万通，于是以家族亲属的身份多次到万安家裹拜访。
English: Princess Mangui was once ashamed of being a member of a prestigious family with a door, but was very happy when she heard about it. Princess Mangui's younger brother, Jin Yi, was in charge of Bantong, so he visited the Wan'an family several times as a family relative.

古文：其妻王氏有母至自博兴。
现代文：他的妻子王氏的母亲从博兴来。
English: His wife Wang's mother came from Bo Xing.

古文：王谓母曰： 向家贫时，以妹为人娣，今安在？ 
现代文：王氏对母亲说： 以前家裹贫穷的时候，把妹妹给别人作小妾，现在在哪里？ 
English: Mr. Wang said to his mother: In the past, when our family was poor, my sister was used as a concubine for others. Where is she now?

古文：母曰： 第忆为四川万编修者。 
现代文：母亲说： 只记得是四川万编修。 
English: My mother said: I only remember Sichuan Wanquan.

古文：通心疑是安，访之则安小妇，由是两家妇日往来。
现代文：万通心里怀疑是万安，问他纔知道是万安的小妾，从此两家的女人天天来往。
English: Manto suspected that it was Wan'an in his heart, and asked him if he knew that she was Wan'an's concubine. From then on, the two women went back and forth every day.

古文：通妻著籍禁内，恣出入，安得备知宫中动静，益自固。
现代文：万遁的妻子在宫城中有门籍，任意出入，万安能够完全知道宫中的动静，更加稳固了自己的地位。
English: Wan'an's wife had a family register in Miyagi and could come and go as she pleased. Wan'an was able to know everything that was going on in the palace, which further solidified her position.

古文：侍郎刑让、祭酒陈鉴与安同年不相能。
现代文：侍郎邢让、祭酒陈鉴和万安同年中进士，不相友好。
English: The chamberlains, Junjan, the sacrificial wine, Chen Jian, and Ban'an, were all promoted in the same year, and were not on friendly terms with each other.

古文：安构狱，除两人名。
现代文：万安诬陷二人入狱，除去二人的名籍。
English: Wan'an framed two people and sent them to prison, and removed their names from the register.

古文：七年冬，彗见天田，犯太微。
现代文：成化七年冬天，彗星出现在天田，冲犯太微星。
English: In the winter of the seventh year, a comet appeared in Amata, colliding with a faint star.

古文：廷臣多言君臣否隔，宜时召大臣议政。
现代文：朝廷大臣多说是君王和臣子之间阻隔不通，应该按时召见大臣商议朝政。
English: The ministers of the Imperial Court mostly said that there was no communication between the monarch and his subjects, and that the ministers should be summoned on time to discuss the policy of the imperial court.

古文：大学士彭时、商辂力请。
现代文：大学士彭时、商辖极力请求。
English: Peng Shi, a university scholar, was strongly requested by the commercial jurisdiction.

古文：司礼中官乃约以御殿日召对，且曰： 初见，情未洽，勿多言，姑俟他日。 
现代文：司礼宦官于是约定在御殿日召对，并且说： 初次拜见皇上，感情还没有融洽，不要多说话，有什么要说的姑且等待其它时候。 
English: The ceremonial eunuch then agreed to summon the pair on the day of the Imperial Palace, and said: "This is the first time I have met the Emperor, and our feelings are not yet compatible. Don't talk too much. If you have anything to say, wait until another time."

古文：将入，复约如初。
现代文：正要进去，又像原来那样约定。
English: Just as I was about to go in, we agreed again, as we had before.

古文：比见，时言天变可畏，帝曰： 已知，卿等宜尽心。 
现代文：等到晋见皇上的时候，彭时说天象的变化是可怕的，皇帝说： 已经知道了，卿等应该尽心。 
English: When Jin came to see the emperor, Peng Shi said that the changes in the celestial body were terrible. The emperor said, "I already know. You should do your best."

古文：时又言： 昨御史有疏，请减京官俸薪，武臣不免觖望，乞如旧便。 
现代文：彭时又说： 昨天御史有疏奏，请求减少京城官员的俸禄薪水，武臣不免因失望而怨恨，请求按旧例行事为好。 
English: Peng Shi also said, "Yesterday, there was a delay in the request to reduce the salary of the officials of the capital, and the vassals were disappointed and resentful, and requested that it would be better to proceed as usual.

古文：帝可之。
现代文：皇帝答应了他。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：安遂顿首呼万岁。
现代文：万安于是磕头呼万岁，想出去。
English: Then Shantou called out, "Long live Wan'an!" and wanted to go out.

古文：欲出，时、辂不得已，皆叩头退。
现代文：彭时、商辖没有办法，都磕头退出。
English: Peng Shih and Shang Jie had no choice but to quit.

古文：中官戏朝士曰： 若辈尝言不召见。
现代文：宦官嘲笑朝廷的官员说： 你们这些人经常说皇上不召见你们。
English: The eunuch mocked the officials of the imperial court, saying, "You people often say that the emperor does not summon you.

古文：及见，止知呼万岁耳。 
现代文：等到召见的时候，祇知道呼万岁罢了。 
English: When you are summoned, all you have to do is shout "Hurrah!"

古文：一时传笑，谓之 万岁阁老 。
现代文：一时传为笑话，称他们是 万岁阁老 。
English: It was a joke for a while, saying that they were the long-lived cabinet ministers.

古文：帝自是不复召见大臣矣。
现代文：皇帝从此不再召见大臣了。
English: From then on, the emperor no longer summoned ministers.

古文：其后尹直入阁，欲请见帝计事。
现代文：这以后尹直进入内阁，想请求晋见皇帝商议事情。
English: After this, Yin Zhi entered the cabinet and wanted to ask Jin to meet with the emperor to discuss the matter.

古文：安止之曰： 往彭公请召对，一语不合，辄叩头呼万岁，以此贻笑。
现代文：万安制止他说： 以前彭公请求召对，一句话不对，就磕头呼万岁，因此留下笑柄。
English: Wan'an stopped him and said, "Before, Peng Gong would ask for the right call, and if the word was not right, he would shout "long live Shantou," thus leaving a laughing stock.

古文：今吾辈每事尽言，太监择而闻之，上无不允者，胜面对多矣。 
现代文：现在我们每件事情都详尽地报告，太监选择上报，皇上没有不应允的，大大地胜过去当面对答了。 
English: Now we report everything in detail, the eunuch chooses to report, the emperor does not disapprove, and it is much better to answer in person.

古文：其容悦不识大体，且善归过于人如此。
现代文：他曲意逢迎取悦上意不识大体，并且善于把过错归结给别人到这个地步。
English: He's a know-it-all and a blame-the-other-guy kind of guy.

古文：九年进礼部尚书。
现代文：成化九年，晋升为礼部尚书。
English: In the ninth year of Chenghua, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：久之，改户部。
现代文：很久以后，改任户部。
English: After a long time, he was reassigned to the household department.

古文：十三年加太子少保，俄改文渊阁大学士。
现代文：成化十三年，加官太子少保，不久改任文渊合大学士。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Chenghua Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of crown prince minor protector, and was soon appointed as a scholar of Wenyuanhe University.

古文：孝宗出閤，进吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士，寻加太子太保。
现代文：孝宗出阁，晋升为吏部尚书、谨身殿大学士，不久加官太子太保。
English: Xiaozong entered the cabinet, and was promoted to the post of secretary of the General Office of the Ministry of Education, and the post of academician of the Imperial Household Ministry, and was soon promoted to the post of crown prince and grand tutor.

古文：时彭时已殁，商辂以忤汪直去，在内阁者刘珝、刘吉。
现代文：当时彭时已经死了，商辖因为触怒汪直而辞官，在内阁的有刘翊、刘吉。
English: At that time, Peng Shih was already dead, Shang Zhi resigned because he had angered Wang Zhi, and Liu Hui and Liu Ji were in the cabinet.

古文：而安为首辅，与南人相党附；珝与尚书尹旻、王越又以北人为党，互相倾轧。
现代文：万安作首辅，和南方的人结成党派，刘翊和尚书尹曼、王越又以北方的人作为朋党，互相倾轧。
English: Wan An, as the first assistant, formed a party with the people in the south, and Liu Ye, the monk Shu Yinman, and Wang Yue also took the people in the north as their friends and fought with each other.

古文：然珝疏浅而安深鸷，故珝卒不能胜安。十八年，汪直宠衰，言官请罢西厂。
现代文：但是刘翊粗疏浅薄而万安却深沉凶狠，所以刘硼始终不能胜过万安成化十八年，汪直的宠幸衰微，谏官请求罢除西厂。
English: However, Liu Bei is coarse and shallow, while Wan'an is deep and ferocious. Therefore, Liu Bei has never been able to surpass Wan'an in eighteen years. Wang Zhi's favorite is fading, and the eunuch requests the removal of the West Factory.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：皇帝不答应。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：安具疏再言之，报可，中外颇以是称安。
现代文：万安呈上奏疏再次说这件事，答复许可，朝廷内外大多因此称赞莴安。
English: Wan'an submitted the matter to the imperial court for reconsideration, and was allowed to reply. Most people inside and outside the court praised Xuan'an for this.

古文：《文华大训》成，进太子太傅、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：《文华大训》写成，晋升为太子太傅、华盖殿大学士。
English: "Wenhua Da Xun" was written, and he was promoted to Prince Taifu and Huagai Dian University Scholar.

古文：复进少傅、太子太师，再进少师。
现代文：又升任少傅、太子太师，又升任为少师。
English: He was also promoted to Junior Master, Crown Prince Grand Master, and Junior Master.

古文：当是时，朝多秕政，四方灾伤日告。
现代文：正当这个时候，朝廷有很多不恰当的措施，四面八方的灾害每天都有报告。
English: Just at this time, the imperial court has many inappropriate measures, and disasters in all directions are reported every day.

古文：帝崇信道教，封金阙、玉阙真君为上帝，遣安祭于灵济宫。
现代文：皇帝崇信道教，封金阙、玉阙真君为上帝，派遣万安在灵济宫祭祀。
English: Emperor Chongxin believed in Taoism, named Jinyu and Yujing Zhenjun as gods, and sent Wan'an to offer sacrifices at Lingji Palace.

古文：而李孜省、邓常恩方进用，安因彭华潜与结，藉以排异己。
现代文：而李孜省、邓常恩纔进用，万安因为彭华暗中和他结交，藉他来排除异己。
English: However, Li Ze Province and Deng Chang Enchong used Wan An because Peng Hua had secretly made friends with him, and used him to eliminate dissidents.

古文：于是珝及王恕、马文升、秦纮、耿裕诸大臣相继被逐，而华遂由詹事迁吏部侍郎，入内阁。
现代文：于是刘翊和王恕、马文升、秦弦、耿裕等大臣相继被逐出朝廷，而彭华于是从詹事升任吏部侍郎，进入内阁。
English: As a result, Liu Bei and Wang Shou, Ma Wensheng, Qin Zhen, Geng Yu and other ministers were successively expelled from the imperial court, and Peng Hua was then promoted from Zhanji to the position of secretary of the cadre department and entered the cabinet.

古文：朝臣无敢与安牴牾者。
现代文：朝廷大臣没有敢和万安对抗的。
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court did not dare to confront Wan'an.

古文：华，安福人，大学士时之族弟，举景泰五年会试第一。
现代文：彭华，安福人，大学士彭时的族弟，考中景泰五年会试第一名。
English: Peng Hua, a person of Anfu, the younger brother of the university scholar Peng Shi, won the first place in Jing Tai's five-year examination.

古文：深刻多计数，善阴伺人短，与安、孜省比。
现代文：为人严峻苛刻又多算计人，善于窥伺别人的短处，和万安、李孜省相勾结。
English: He is a stern, harsh and calculating person, good at spying on the shortcomings of others, and colluding with Wan'an and Lize provinces.

古文：尝嗾萧彦庄攻李秉，又逐尹旻、罗璟，人皆恶而畏之。
现代文：曾经唆使萧彦庄攻击李秉，又驱逐尹曼、罗璟，人们都厌恶并且畏惧他。
English: He once instigated Xiao Yanzhuang to attack Li Bing, and expelled Yinman and Luo Yao. People loathe and fear him.

古文：逾年，得风疾去。
现代文：过了一年，得中风病而离任。
English: A year later, he suffered a stroke and left office.

古文：孝宗嗣位，安草登极诏书，禁言官假风闻挟私，中外哗然。
现代文：孝宗继承皇位，万安起草即位诏书，禁止谏官假藉风闻的事挟私报复，朝廷内外议论纷纷。
English: Takamune succeeded to the throne, Banan drafted the imperial edict of enthronement, prohibiting eunuchs from taking advantage of rumors to take revenge, and there were many discussions inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：御史汤鼐诣阁。
现代文：御史汤鼐到内阁问这件事。
English: Goshitangyo went to the cabinet to inquire about the matter.

古文：安从容言曰： 此里面意也。 
现代文：万安委婉地说： 这是里面的意思。 
English: Wan'an said euphemistically, "This is what it means."

古文：鼐即以其语奏闻，谓安抑塞言路，归过于君，无人臣礼。
现代文：汤鼐马上将他的话奏报皇上，说万安压制阻塞进言的道路，把遇错归结给君王，没有人臣的礼节。
English: Tang Xuan immediately reported his words to the emperor, saying that Wan An suppressed the way of blocking the speech, attributed the mistake to the monarch, and did not have the etiquette of a subject.

古文：于是庶吉士邹智，御史文贵、姜洪等交章列其罪状。
现代文：于是庶吉士邹智，御史文贵、姜洪等人纷纷上奏章列敷他的罪状。
English: As a result, Zou Zhi, Gishi Wengui, Jiang Hong, and others, all of whom were born in Guizhou, began to list his crimes.

古文：先是，歙人倪进贤者，粗知书，无行，谄事安，日与讲房中术。
现代文：在此之前，歙人有个叫倪进贤的，粗略地读过一些害，没有品行，谄媚侍奉万安，天天和他研讨房中术。
English: Prior to this, there was a man named Ni Jinxian, who had roughly read some harm, had no character, charmed and served Wan'an, and studied martial arts with him every day.

古文：安昵之，因令就试，得进士。
现代文：万安昵爱他，于是叫他去参加考试，获得进士。
English: Wan An loved him dearly, so she told him to take the exam and get a promotion.

古文：授为庶吉士，除御史。
现代文：授官庶吉士，任命为御史。
English: He was awarded the rank of second-ranked Kichiji and was appointed as Goshi.

古文：帝一日于宫中得疏一小箧，则皆论房中术者，末署曰 臣安进 。
现代文：皇帝有一天在宫中得到一小筐奏疏，却全部都是讨论房中术的，末尾署名为 臣安进 。
English: One day, the emperor received a small basket of musical scores in the palace, but all of them were about the arts of the court. At the end, they were signed "Minister Anjin."

古文：帝命太监怀恩持至阁曰： 此大臣所为耶？ 
现代文：皇帝命令太监怀恩拿到内阁说： 这是大臣所做的吗？ 
English: The emperor ordered the eunuch Wain to go to the cabinet and say: Is this what the minister has done?

古文：安愧汗伏地，不能出声。
现代文：万安羞愧流汗爬在地上，不能说话。
English: Wan'an crawled on the ground in shame and sweat, unable to speak.

古文：及诸臣弹章入，复令恩就安读之。
现代文：等到各位大臣弹劾的奏章送进宫，又命令怀恩到万安面前宣读。
English: Wait until the impeachment report is sent to the palace by the ministers, and order Wine to read it out in front of Wan'an.

古文：安数跪起求哀，无去意。
现代文：万安多次下跪请求哀怜，没有辞官的想法。
English: Wan'an repeatedly knelt down to beg for mercy, with no thought of resigning.

古文：恩直前摘其牙牌曰： 可出矣。 
现代文：怀恩直接前去摘下他的牙牌说： 可以出去了。 
English: "I'm out of here," Wynn said, striding over to remove his name tag.

古文：始惶遽索马归第，乞休去。
现代文：他纔惊惶地急忙找马回家，请求退休离任。
English: In a panic, he hurried to find a horse to go home and asked to retire.

古文：时年已七十余。尚于道上望三台星，冀复用。
现代文：当时年纪己经七十多岁了，还在路上望三台星，希望又被任用。
English: At that time, he was already over seventy years old, and he was still on the road looking for three stars, hoping to be appointed again.

古文：居一年卒，赠太师，谥文康。初，孝穆皇太后之薨，内庭籍籍指万贵妃。
现代文：遇了一年就死了，追赠为太师，谧号文康当初，孝穆皇太后的死，内官喧哗指责万贵妃。
English: He died a year later, posthumously became the Grand Master, and was given the posthumous name of Wenkang. At the time of the death of Empress Dowager Xiaomu, the palace officials loudly blamed Empress Wan Guifei.

古文：孝宗立，鱼台县丞徐项上书发其事。
现代文：孝宗登上皇位，鱼台县县丞徐项上书揭发这件事。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, Yuetai County magistrate Xu Xiang wrote a letter to expose the affair.

古文：廷臣议逮鞫万氏戚属曾出入宫掖者。
现代文：朝廷大臣商议逮捕审问万氏亲属中曾经出入宫门的人。
English: The ministers of the Imperial Court discussed the arrest and interrogation of the relatives of Mr. Wan who had entered and left the palace.

古文：安惊惧不知所为，曰： 我久不与万氏往来矣。 
现代文：万安吃惊害怕不知道自己该怎么办，说： 我已经很久不和万氏来往了。 
English: Surprised and afraid, Wan An didn't know what to do and said, "I haven't been in contact with Wan Shi for a long time.

古文：而刘吉先与万氏姻，亦自危。
现代文：而刘吉原先和万氏有姻亲关系，也感到危险。
English: Liu Ji, who was originally related by marriage to Wan, also felt in danger.

古文：其党尹直尚在阁，共拟旨寝之。
现代文：他的党羽尹直还在内阁，一齐拟写圣旨阻止这件事。
English: His henchman, Yin Zhi, is still in the cabinet, and they are all drafting a decree to stop this.

古文：孝宗仁厚，亦置不问，安、吉得无事。
现代文：孝宗仁厚，也放在一边不过问，万安、刘吉纔没有什么事。
English: Xiaozong Renhu, also put aside, but ask, Wan'an, Liu Jizhe has nothing to do.

古文：安在政府二十年，每遇试，必令其门生为考官，子孙甥婿多登第者。
现代文：万安在政府任职二十年，每当遇上考试，必定命令他的门生当考官，儿子孙子外甥女婿有很多考中的。
English: Wan'an has served in the government for 20 years. Whenever there is an exam, he will definitely order his protégé to be the examiner. His son, grandson, nephew, and son-in-law all got a lot of A's.

古文：子翼，南京礼部侍郎。
现代文：儿子万翼，南京礼部侍郎。
English: His son, Wan Ying, became a chamberlain of the Nanjing Reibu.

古文：孙弘璧，翰林编修。
现代文：孙子万弘璧，翰林编修。
English: The grandson of Wan Hongbi, Hanlin edits.

古文：安死无几，翼、弘璧相继死，安竟无后。
现代文：万安死后没多久，万翼、万弘璧相继死去，万安竟然没有后代在世。
English: Not long after Wan'an's death, Wan Ying and Wan Hong Bi died one after another, leaving Wan An with no living descendants.

古文：刘珝，字叔温，寿光人。
现代文：刘翊，字叔温，寿光人。
English: Liu Wei, Zhu Wen, Shouguang Ren.

古文：正统十三年进士。
现代文：正统十三年考中进士。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher in the 13th year of the orthodox examination.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：改为庶吉士，授官编修。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：天顺中，历右中允，侍讲东宫。
现代文：天顺年间，多次任右中允，侍讲束宫。
English: During the Tenshun era, he was appointed to the post of Uchujo-yon (Middle Counselor of the Right) several times, and served as an attendant to Sokoku.

古文：宪宗即位，以旧宫僚屡迁太常卿，兼侍读学士，直经筵日讲。
现代文：宪宗登上皇位，他因为是以前宫中的属僚多次迁升至太常卿，兼任侍读学士，值班御前讲席，任日讲官。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, because he was a former palace aide-de-camp, he was moved several times to the position of Grand Councilor, concurrently serving as an attendant bachelor, on duty in front of the throne, and as a Japanese lecturer.

古文：成化十年进吏部左侍郎，充讲官如故。
现代文：成化十年，晋升为吏部左侍郎，像以前那样担当讲官。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to the left-hand man of the cadre department, and was in charge of the lecturer as before.

古文：珝每进讲，反覆开导，词气侃侃，闻者为悚。
现代文：刘翊每次入朝讲学，反复开导，言词语气不慌不忙，听的人为之悚惧。
English: Every time Liu Wei gives a lecture in the DPRK, he repeatedly enlightens the audience. The tone of his speech is unhurried and unhurried, which makes the listeners shudder.

古文：学士刘定之称为讲官第一，宪宗亦爱重之。
现代文：学士刘定之称他为讲官第一名，宪宗也喜爱并推重他。
English: Liu Dingzhi, a bachelor, said that he was the first lecturer, and Xianzong also loved and promoted him.

古文：明年诏以本官兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：第二年，诏命以原来的官职兼任翰林学士，进入内阁参预机要事务。
English: In the second year, he was ordered by the emperor to take up his former official position as a scholar of Hanlin and enter the cabinet to participate in important affairs.

古文：帝每呼 东刘先生 ，赐印章一，文曰 嘉猷赞翊 。
现代文：皇帝每次都叫他 柬刘先生 ，赐给他一枚印章，印文是 嘉猷赞翊 。
English: The emperor always called him "Mr. Cam Liu" and gave him a seal with the words "Jiayuanzhang" (嘉赞).

古文：寻进吏部尚书，再加太子少保、文渊阁大学士。
现代文：不久晋升为吏部尚书，再次加官太子少保、文渊阁大学士。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and was again promoted to the post of crown prince, junior vice-premier, and scholar of Bunyukaku University.

古文：《文华大训》成。加太子太保，进谨身殿大学士。
现代文：《文华大训》写成，加官太子太保，升任谨身殿大学士。
English: "Wenhua Da Xun" was written, and he was promoted to the post of the Crown Prince's eunuch, and was promoted to the post of the university scholar.

古文：珝性疏直。
现代文：刘翊性格开朗直爽。
English: Liu Ye has a cheerful and straightforward personality.

古文：自以宫僚旧臣，遇事无所回护。
现代文：自以为是官僚旧臣，遇到事情不回避。
English: He thinks of himself as an old bureaucrat and doesn't shy away when things come up.

古文：员外郎林俊以劾梁芳、继晓下狱，珝于帝前解之。
现代文：员外郎林俊因为弹劾梁芳、继晓被关进监狱，刘瑚在皇帝面前解脱了他。
English: Liu Hui released Lin Jun, who was imprisoned for impeaching Liang Fang and Ji Xiao, in front of the emperor.

古文：李孜省辈左道乱政，欲动摇东宫。
现代文：李孜省等人用邪门左道扰乱政事，想改换束宫。
English: Li Ze and others used the evil door and the left way to disrupt political affairs and wanted to change the palace.

古文：珝密疏谏，谋少阻。
现代文：刘翊秘密地上疏劝谏，那个阴谋被稍微阻止。
English: Liu Ye secretly tried to dissuade him, but the plot was thwarted.

古文：素薄万安，尝斥安负国无耻。
现代文：他一直轻视万安，曾经斥责万安辜负国家没有羞耻。
English: He has always despised Wan'an. He once scolded Wan'an for failing the country without shame.

古文：安积忿，日夜思中珝。
现代文：万安忿恨郁积于心，日夜想法中伤刘翊。
English: Wan'an's resentment accumulated in his heart, and day and night he would think of ways to slander Liu Ye.

古文：初，商辂之劾汪直也，珝与万安、刘吉助之争，得罢西厂。
现代文：当初，商辖弹劾汪直，刘翊和万安、刘吉帮助他抗争，结果罢除西厂。
English: At first, the business jurisdiction impeached Wang Zhi, and Liu Wei, Wan An and Liu Ji helped him to fight. As a result, the West Factory was dismissed.

古文：他日，珝又折王越于朝，越惭而退。
现代文：另一夭，刘瑚又在朝堂责备王越，王越羞愧地退了下去。
English: Another day, Liu Hui reproached Wang Yue in the court, and Wang Yue retreated in shame.

古文：已而西厂复设，珝不能有所诤。
现代文：不久西厂重新设立，刘翊不能够有所劝谏。
English: Soon after, the West Plant was re-established, and Liu Yao was unable to persuade him.

古文：至十八年，安见直宠衰，揣知西厂当罢，邀珝同奏。
现代文：到了成化十八年，万安见汪直的宠幸衰微了，揣想西厂应当罢除，邀请刘翊一齐上奏。
English: In the 18th year of Chenghua, Wan'an saw that Wang Zhi's favor had waned, and thought that the West Factory should be removed, and invited Liu Zhi to play together.

古文：珝辞不与，安遂独奏。
现代文：刘玥推辞不参与，万安于是独自上奏。
English: Liu Xuan declined to participate, so Wan'an played on his own.

古文：疏上，帝颇讶无珝名。
现代文：奏疏呈上去，皇帝很惊讶没有刘瑚的名字。
English: The Emperor was surprised that there was no name of Liu Hui.

古文：安阴使人讦珝与直有连。
现代文：万安暗中叫人揭发刘翊和汪直有牵连。
English: Wan'an secretly asked someone to expose the involvement of Liu Wei and Wang Zhi.

古文：会珝子鎡邀妓狎饮，里人赵宾戏为《刘公子曲》，或增饰秽语，杂教坊院本奏之。
现代文：恰逢刘翊的儿子刘镒邀约妓女放荡地喝酒，同乡趟童开玩笑写了《刘公子曲》，有人增加添饰淫秽的话语，混杂在教坊院本中上奏。
English: Coinciding with Liu Bei's son, Liu Bei, inviting prostitutes to drink in a debauched manner, a fellow villager, Tong Tong, jokingly wrote the "Liu Gongzi Song," some people added decorative obscene words, mixed in the textbook of the school.

古文：帝大怒，决意去珝。
现代文：皇帝十分气愤，下决心弃去刘瑚。
English: The emperor was very angry and decided to abandon Liu Hui.

古文：遣中官覃昌召安、吉赴西角门，出帝手封书一函示之。
现代文：派遣宦官覃昌召集万安、刘吉到西角门，拿出皇帝亲手写的一封信函给他们看。
English: He sent eunuch Juchang to summon Wan'an and Liu Ji to the West Corner Gate, and took out a letter written by the emperor himself to show them.

古文：安等佯惊救。
现代文：万安等人假装急忙救助刘瑚。
English: Wan'an and others pretended to rush to Liu Hui's rescue.

古文：次日，珝具疏乞休。
现代文：第二天，刘翊上疏请求退休。
English: The next day, Liu Yishangzo asked to retire.

古文：令驰驿，赐月廪、岁隶、白金、楮币甚厚。
现代文：命令乘驿马返家，赐给很丰厚的月麇、岁隶、白银、纸币。
English: He was ordered to return home on a donkey, and was given a very generous allowance of moon cakes, rice cakes, silver, and paper money.

古文：其实排珝使去者，安、吉两人谋也。
现代文：实际上排挤刘瑚使他离开的，是万安、刘吉两个人的阴谋。
English: In fact, it was a plot by Wan'an and Liu Ji to oust Liu Hui and make him leave.

古文：时内阁三人，安贪狡，吉阴刻。
现代文：当时内阁有三个人。万安贪婪狡猾，刘吉阴险刻薄。
English: At that time, there were three people in the cabinet. Wan'an was greedy and cunning, and Liu Jixin was sinister and mean.

古文：珝稍优，顾喜谭论，人目为狂躁。
现代文：刘硼稍微好一些，但是因为喜欢谈论，人们认为他浮躁轻狂。
English: Liu Wei is a little better, but because he likes to talk, people think he is impetuous and frivolous.

古文：珝既仓卒引退，而彭华、尹直相继入内阁，安、吉之党乃益固。
现代文：刘翊已经仓促引退，而彭华、尹直相继进入内阁，万安、刘吉的党派于是更加稳固。
English: Liu Hui has hastily retired, while Peng Hua and Yin Zhi have successively entered the cabinet, and the parties of Wan'an and Liu Ji have become more stable.

古文：珝初遭母忧，庐墓三年。
现代文：刘翊当初遭逢母亲丧事，在墓旁庐舍里守了三年孝。
English: At the time of his mother's death, Liu Yao was buried for three years in a mausoleum next to her grave.

古文：比归，侍父尽孝。
现代文：等他回朝做官，侍候父亲尽孝。
English: When he returns to the imperial court, he will work as an official and serve his father as a dutiful son.

古文：父殁，复庐于墓。
现代文：父亲死了，又在墓旁搭庐舍守孝。
English: After his father's death, he visited his father's grave again.

古文：弘治三年卒，谥文和。
现代文：弘治三年死，谧号文和。
English: When Koji died three years later, his posthumous name was changed to Monwa.

古文：嘉靖初，以言官请，赐祠额曰 昭贤 ，仍遣官祭之。
现代文：嘉靖初年，因为谏官的请求，赐祠庙匾额为 昭贤 ，仍然派遣官员祭祀他。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, because of the request of the eunuch, the temple was given the status of the temple, and officials were still sent to worship him.

古文：子鈗，字汝中。
现代文：儿子刘锐，宇汝中。
English: His son, Liu Rui, is a junior at Ur.

古文：八岁时，宪宗召见，爱其聪敏，且拜起如礼，即命为中书舍人。
现代文：八岁的时候，宪宗召见他，喜爱他聪明敏捷，并且跪拜起身符合礼节，当即任命焉中书舍人。
English: When he was eight years old, Emperor Xuanzong summoned him, loved his cleverness and agility, and bowed down and rose in accordance with the etiquette, and immediately appointed Yanzhong as a scholar.

古文：宫殿门阈高，同官杨一清常提之出入。
现代文：宫殿的门坎很高，同级官员杨一清经常提着他进出。
English: The threshold of the palace is very high, and Yang Iqing, an official of the same level, often carries him in and out.

古文：帝虑牙牌易损，命易以银。
现代文：皇帝考虑到牙牌容易损坏，命令用银牌改换。
English: The emperor considered the dental plaque to be easily damaged and ordered it to be replaced with a silver plaque.

古文：历官五十余年，嘉靖中至太常卿，兼五经博士，仍供事内阁诰敕房。
现代文：先后任官五十多年，嘉靖年间官至太常卿，兼任《五经》博士，仍然在内阁的诰敕房办公。
English: He served as an official for more than 50 years, and during the Jiajing era, he was promoted to the position of Grand Secretary of the State Council and concurrently served as a doctor of the Five Classics. He still works in the Cabinet's antechamber.

古文：博学有行谊，与长洲刘棨并淹贯故实，时称 二刘 。
现代文：他博学又有品行，和长洲刘荣都渊博贯通过去的史实，当时被称为 二刘 。
English: He was erudite and virtuous, and he and Changzhou Liu Rong were both well-versed in historical facts. At that time, they were called the two Liu.

古文：刘吉，字祐之，博野人。
现代文：刘吉，字佑之，博野人。
English: Liu Ji, Aza You Zhi, Bo Wildman.

古文：正统十三年进士。
现代文：正统十三年考中进士。
English: He was promoted to junior high school teacher in the 13th year of the orthodox examination.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修，充经筵官。
现代文：改庶吉士，授官编修，充任御前讲席。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Kichishi, given the title of editor-in-chief, and appointed to the Imperial Lecture Table.

古文：《寰宇通志》成，进修撰。
现代文：《寰宇通志》写成，晋升修撰。
English: "The History of the World" was written, and he was promoted to copywriter.

古文：天顺四年侍讲读于东宫，以忧归。
现代文：天顺四年，在束宫陪侍太子讲读，因服丧归家。
English: In the fourth year of Tenshun, she accompanied the crown prince to lecture at Sok Palace, but returned home due to mourning.

古文：宪宗即位。召纂《英宗实录》。
现代文：宪宗即位，征召纂写《英宗实录》。
English: Kenzong ascended to the throne, and was summoned to compile the "Eingzong Record."

古文：至京，上疏乞终制。
现代文：到达京城，上疏请求服满丧制。
English: Arriving in the capital, Shang Su requested to serve the full mourning period.

古文：不允，进侍读。
现代文：不允许，晋升侍读。
English: Not allowed. Promoted to reading room attendant.

古文：《实录》成，迁侍读学士，直经筵。
现代文：《英宗实录》写成，升任侍读学士，值班御前讲席。
English: "The True Record of the Yingzong" was written, and he was promoted to attendant bachelor, on duty in front of the throne.

古文：累迁礼部左侍郎。
现代文：多次迁升至礼部左侍郎。
English: He moved several times and rose to the position of Reibu Sasajiro.

古文：成化十一年与刘珝同受命，兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。寻进礼部尚书。
现代文：成化十一年，和刘瑚一齐接受命令兼任翰林学士，进入内阁参预机要事务，不久晋升为礼部尚书。
English: In the eleventh year of Chenghua, he and Liu Hui both received orders to concurrently serve as scholars of Hanlin, entered the cabinet to participate in important affairs, and were soon promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：孝宗出閤，加太子少保兼文渊阁大学士。
现代文：孝宗出阁，加官太子少保兼任文渊阁大学士。
English: Takamune was appointed to the cabinet, and Kakan Taishi Shobo was appointed to the post of Bunyukaku Daigaku Shoshi.

古文：十八年遭父丧，诏起复。
现代文：成化十八年，遭逢父亲丧事，诏命起用恢复官职。
English: In the eighteenth year of Chenghua, after the death of his father, he was ordered by the emperor to resume his official duties.

古文：吉三疏恳辞，而阴属贵戚万喜为之地，得不允。
现代文：刘吉三次上疏诚恳地辞官，却暗地里嘱托贵戚万喜给他一席之地，结果不允许辞官。
English: On three occasions, Liu Ji earnestly resigned from his post, but secretly asked his close relative Wanxi to give him a place. As a result, he was not allowed to resign.

古文：《文华大训》成，加太子太保，进武英殿大学士。
现代文：《文华大训》写成，加官太子太保，晋升为武英殿大学士。
English: "Wenhua Da Xun" was written, and he was promoted to the post of the Crown Prince's eunuch, and promoted to the post of a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：久之，进户部尚书、谨身殿大学士，寻加少保兼太子太傅。
现代文：很久以后，升任户部尚书、谨曼殿大学士，不久加官少保兼任太子太傅。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the post of household secretary, and soon he was promoted to the post of Junior Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household and concurrently served as the Crown Prince's Daifu.

古文：孝宗即位，庶吉士邹智、御史姜洪力诋万安、尹直及吉皆小人，当斥。
现代文：孝宗登上皇位，庶吉士邹智、御史姜洪竭力谴责万安、尹直和刘吉都是小人，应当罢斥。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, his second-in-command, Gui Zhi (智) and his chief adviser, Jiang Hongzhu (御史), tried their best to denounce Wan'an, Yin Zhi (尹直) and Liu Ji (刘吉) as villains who should be ousted.

古文：吉深衔之。
现代文：刘吉很怨恨他们。
English: Liu Ji resented them very much.

古文：安、直皆去，吉独留，委寄愈专。
现代文：万安、尹直都离职而去，刘吉一个人留了下来，委任托付更加专任他一人。
English: Wan'an and Yin Zhiang both resigned and left, leaving Liu Ji as the only one, and he was entrusted with a more full-time position.

古文：虑言者攻不已，乃建议超迁科道官，处以不次之位。
现代文：考虑到进言的人不停地攻击，于是建议越级提拔科道官，把他们放置在不按次序升迁的位置。
English: Considering that the person who made the suggestion kept attacking, it was suggested that the Taoist scholars should be promoted beyond their ranks, and they should be placed in a position where they are not promoted in order.

古文：诏起废滞，给事中贺钦、御史强珍辈十人已次第拟擢，吉复上疏荐之。部曹预荐者惟林俊一人，冀以此笼络言路，而言者犹未息。
现代文：诏命起用废弃不用或者长期滞留不升迁的官员，给事中贺钦、御史强珍等十人已经按次序提拔，刘吉又上疏举荐他们，部曹预先推荐的只有林俊一个人，希望以此笼络谏官，但是进言的人还是没有停息。
English: According to the imperial edict, the officials who were not needed or had not been promoted for a long time were appointed. Ten of them, including He Qin and Gu Shi Qiang Zhen, have been promoted in order. Liu Ji also recommended them. Only Lin Jun was recommended in advance by the minister, hoping to entice the eunuchs with this, but the people who made suggestions still did not stop.

古文：庶子张升，御史曹璘、欧阳旦，南京给事中方向，御史陈嵩等相继劾吉。
现代文：庶子张升，御史曹璘、欧阳旦，南京给事中方向，御史陈嵩等人相继弹劾刘吉。
English: Liu Ji was successively impeached by his son-in-law Zhang Sheng, his ministers Cao Wei, Ouyang Dan, Nanjing's vice-director, and his minister Chen Song.

古文：吉愤甚，中升逐之。
现代文：刘吉气愤极了，中伤张升并把他逐出朝廷。
English: Liu Jie was so angry that he slandered Zhang Sheng and expelled him from the court.

古文：数兴大狱，智、向囚系远贬，洪亦谪官。
现代文：多次发起大案，邹智、方向被囚禁起来贬到远方，差苏也被贬官。
English: He initiated major cases many times. Zou Zhi and Xiang Du were imprisoned and banished to a faraway place, and Zha Su was also demoted.

古文：复与中官蒋琮比，逐南御史姜绾等，台署为空。
现代文：又和宦官蒋琮勾结，驱逐南御史姜绾等人，御史台官署因此而空虚。
English: He also colluded with the eunuch Chiang Kai-shek to expel the Southern Governor Jiang Xi and others. As a result, the Governor's Office was left empty.

古文：中外侧目，言者亦少衰。
现代文：朝廷内外的人侧目而枧，进言的人也稍稍衰减。
English: People inside and outside the Imperial Court looked sideways and frowned, and those who made suggestions also waned slightly.

古文：初，吉与万安、刘珝在成化时，帝失德，无所规正，时有 纸糊三阁老，泥塑六尚书 之谣。
现代文：当初，刘吉和万安、刘硼在成化时期，皇帝失去圣德，没有什么规劝矫正，当时有 纸糊三合老，泥塑六尚书 的谣谚。
English: At the beginning, Liu Ji, Wan'an and Liu Bei were in the period of maturation, the emperor lost his virtue, and there was no persuasion to correct it. At that time, there was a rumor of "paper paste three years old, clay sculpture six years old."

古文：至是见孝宗仁明，同列徐溥、刘健皆正人，而吉于阁臣居首，两人有论建，吉亦暑名，复时时为正论，窃美名以自盖。
现代文：到这个时候看见孝宗仁爱明智，同级官员徐溥、刘健都是正直的人，但是刘吉在内阁大臣中处在第一位，两人一有什么商讨建议，刘吉也署上名字，又不时发表正面的议论，窃取美好的名声束掩盖自己。
English: At this time, he saw that Xiaozong Ren'ai was wise, and that the officials of the same level, Xu Xi and Liu Jian, were all honest people, but Liu Ji was the first among the cabinet ministers. Whenever the two had any suggestions for discussion, Liu Ji also signed his name, and from time to time made positive comments, stealing the good reputation and covering himself.

古文：弘治二年二月旱，帝令儒臣撰文祷雨。
现代文：弘治二年二月，发生干旱，皇帝命令儒臣撰写文章祈祷降雨。
English: In February of the second year of Konji, a drought occurred, and the emperor ordered Juzen to write an article and pray for rain.

古文：吉等言： 迩者奸徒袭李孜省、邓常恩故术，见月宿在毕，天将阴雨，遂奏请祈祷，觊一验以希进用。
现代文：刘吉等人进言说： 近来奸邪的人攻击李孜省、邓常恩的旧方法，看见月宿在毕，天将转阴下雨，于是上奏请求祈祷，希望有一次灵验而以此希图进用。
English: Liu Ji and others said: Recently, the evil-doers have attacked the old methods of Li Ze Province and Deng Chang'en. Seeing that the Moon Festival is over and that the sky will turn dark and rain, they asked for prayers at the beginning of the performance, hoping that it would be effective for once, and hoped to use it.

古文：倖门一开，争言祈祷，要宠召祸，实基于此。祝文不敢奉诏。 
现代文：侥幸进身的门路一打开，争着建议祈祷，谋求宠信招致灾祸，实在都是来源于这些事，我们不敢遵奉命令撰写祝祀文章。 
English: As soon as the door is opened, we scramble for suggestions and prayers, seek favors and invite disaster. All of these things are the source of these things. We do not dare to follow orders to write congratulatory articles.

古文：帝意悟，遂已之。
现代文：皇帝的思想省悟过来，于是停止了逭件事。
English: The emperor came to his senses and put a stop to it.

古文：五月以灾异请帝修德防微，慎终如始。
现代文：五月，因为有灾异请求皇帝修养品德防止细微的引诱，像开始那样一直慎重地做到终止。
English: In May, because of a calamity, the emperor requested the cultivation of moral character and the prevention of subtle seduction, and ended as carefully as he had begun.

古文：八月又以灾异陈七事。
现代文：八月，又因为灾异陈述七件事。
English: In August, seven incidents were reported due to natural disasters.

古文：代王献海青，吉等言登极诏书已却四方贡献，乞勿受。
现代文：代王进献海青，刘吉等人说即位诏书已经制止四方的贡献，请求不要接受海青。
English: Liu Jie and others said that the imperial edict of enthronement had stopped the contribution of the four parties, and asked not to accept Hai Qing.

古文：明年三月偕同列上言： 陛下圣质清羸，与先帝不同。
现代文：第二年三月，和同列官员一起上书进言： 陛下神圣的身体清瘦薄弱，和先帝不同。
English: In March of the following year, together with the same officials, he wrote a letter saying, "His Majesty's sacred body is thin and weak, unlike that of the former emperor.

古文：凡宴乐游观，一切嗜好之事，宜悉减省。
现代文：凡是宴乐游观，一切喜好的事情，应该全部减少省去。
English: All kinds of entertainment and sightseeing, all kinds of favorite things, should all be reduced and eliminated.

古文：左右近臣有请如先帝故事者，当以太祖、太宗典故斥退之。
现代文：左右近臣有请求像先帝旧例的，应当用太祖、太宗的典制和成例斥退他们。
English: If any close vassals on the right or the left have any request to follow the old practice of the previous emperor, they should be rebuffed with the formalities and precedents of the great ancestor and the great patriarch.

古文：祖宗令节宴游皆有时，陛下法祖宗可也。 
现代文：祖宗在时令节候宴游，都有一定的时候，陛下效法祖宗就行了。 
English: There is a certain time for the ancestors to go on a banquet tour during the seasonal festival. His Majesty should follow the example of his ancestors.

古文：土鲁番使者贡狮子还，帝令内阁草敕，遣中官送之。
现代文：土鲁番使者进贡狮子后返回，皇帝命令内阁起草敕书，派遣宦官护送他们。
English: When the envoys from Turfan returned after paying tribute to the lions, the emperor ordered the cabinet to draft an imperial edict and dispatch eunuchs to escort them.

古文：吉等言不宜优宠太过，使番戎轻中国。
现代文：刘吉等人说不该太过分地优待宠爱，使番戎轻视中原之国。
English: Liu Ji and others said that favoritism should not be too excessive, causing Ban Rong to despise the Central Plains country.

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：事情于是终止。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：既又言： 狮子诸兽，日饲二羊，岁当用七百二十，又守视校尉日五十人，皆繁费。
现代文：不久又进言： 狮子这些野兽，每天喂养两只羊，一年应当用七百二十只，再加上护守看管的校尉每天有五十个人，都是繁重的费用。
English: He soon added: "To feed these wild beasts, the lions, with two sheep a day, seven hundred and twenty a year, and the captain of fifty a day to guard and keep them, is a heavy expense.

古文：宜绝诸兽食，听自毙。 
现代文：应该断绝那些野兽的粮食，听任它们自己死亡。 
English: Those beasts should be denied food and left to die on their own.

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：皇帝不能采用。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：十二月，星变，又言： 迩者妖星出天津，历杵臼，迫营室，其占为兵，为饥，为水旱。
现代文：十二月，星象有变化，又进言： 近来妖星出现在天津，经过杵臼，迫近营室星，它的占象是有兵乱，有饥荒，有水灾旱灾。
English: In December, there was a change in the astrological signs, and he said: Recently, a monster star appeared in Tianjin, passing through the millstone and approaching the camp star. Its horoscope is war, famine, flood and drought.

古文：今两畿、河南、山西、陕西旱蝗；四川、湖广岁不登。
现代文：现在两畿、河南、山西、陕西发生干旱蝗灾，四川、湖广收成不好。
English: At present, drought and locust plagues have occurred in the two Kis, Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi provinces, and the harvest in Sichuan and Hunan is not good.

古文：倘明年复然，恐盗贼窃发，祸乱将作。
现代文：倘若明年又这样，恐怕盗贼要暗中暴发，祸乱将会发生。
English: If this happens again next year, I'm afraid the thieves will secretly break out, and the disaster will happen.

古文：愿陛下节用度，罢宴游，屏谗言，斥异教，留怀经史，讲求治道。
现代文：希望陛下节省用度，停止宴乐游玩，屏弃谗言，排斥异教，心中常想着经书史册，讲求治国的方法。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will conserve your time, stop going to parties, discard gossip, reject paganism, often think about the history of the scriptures, and talk about how to govern the country.

古文：沙河修桥，江西造瓷器，南海子缮垣墙，俱非急务，宜悉停止。 
现代文：沙河修桥，江西造瓷器，南海子维修城墙，都不是紧急事务，应该全部停止。 
English: Rebuilding the bridge in Shahe, making porcelain in Jiangxi, and repairing the city wall in Nanhaizi are not urgent matters, and should all be stopped.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝嘉赏并采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：帝惑近习言，颇崇祈祷事，发经牌令阁臣作赞，又令拟神将封号。
现代文：皇帝迷惑于近臣的话，很崇信祈祷的事情，发经牌命令内阁大臣写赞语，又命令拟定神将的封号。
English: The emperor was puzzled by the words of his courtiers, and he highly believed in prayer. He issued a prayer card and ordered the cabinet minister to write a praise, and also ordered the seal number of the god to be drawn up.

古文：吉等极言邪说当斥。
现代文：刘吉等人极力劝谏邪说应当排斥。
English: Liu Ji and others strongly advised that the heresy should be rejected.

古文：吉自帝初即位进少傅，兼太子太师，吏部尚书。
现代文：刘吉从皇帝纔即位就提升为少傅，兼任太子太师，吏部尚书。
English: Liu Ji was promoted to Shao Fu from the time of Emperor Xizong's ascension to the throne, and also served as the Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：及《宪宗实录》成。又进少师、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：到《宪宗寅录渗写成，又升任少师、华盖殿大学士。
English: He was promoted to be a junior teacher and a scholar of the Hwaketian University.

古文：吉柄政久，权势烜赫。
现代文：刘吉把持政权的时间很长，权势显赫。
English: Liu Jie has held power for a long time, and his power is outstanding.

古文：帝初倾心听信，后眷颇衰。而吉终无去志。
现代文：皇帝开始的时候倾心听信他，后来对他的眷顾渐少，但是刘吉始终没有离任的想法。
English: At the beginning, the emperor was inclined to listen to him, and later his patronage gradually decreased, but Liu Ji never had the idea of leaving office.

古文：五年，帝欲封后弟伯爵，命吉撰诰券。
现代文：弘治五年，皇帝想分封皇后的弟弟为伯爵，命令刘吉撰写诰券。
English: In the fifth year of Hongzhi, the emperor wanted to make the younger brother of the empress an earl, and ordered Liu Ji to write a certificate.

古文：吉言必尽封二太后家子弟方可。
现代文：刘吉说一定要全部分封两个太后家里的子弟纔行。
English: Liu Ji said that the two children of the empress dowager's family must all be banned.

古文：帝不悦，遣中官至其家，讽令致仕，始上章引退。
现代文：皇帝不高兴，派遣宦官到他的家里，婉言命令他退休，这纔上奏章引退。
English: The emperor was displeased, and sent an eunuch to his house to order him to retire.

古文：良赐敕，驰驿如故事。
现代文：诏命赐予敕书，按先例驾乘驿马回家。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to write a letter and take a horse to go home.

古文：吉多智数，善附会，自缘饰，锐于营私，时为言路所攻。
现代文：刘吉多智谋心计，善于附会，自我装饰，专一于营谋私利，不时被谏官攻击。
English: Liu Jido was a clever schemer, good at holding side meetings, self-adornment, dedicated to seeking personal gain, and was attacked by eunuchs from time to time.

古文：居内阁十八年，人目之为 刘绵花 ，以其耐弹也。
现代文：在内阁十八年，人们称他为 刘绵花 ，因为他耐弹。
English: During his 18 years in the cabinet, people called him Liu Mianhua, because he was bulletproof.

古文：吉疑其言出下第举子，因请举人三试不第者，不得复会试。
现代文：刘吉怀疑这话出自于役考上的举子，于是向皇帝请求举人参加三次考试不及第的，不准再参加会试。
English: Liu Jie suspected that this remark came from the examination on the service examination, so he asked the emperor to nominate a person to participate in the third examination and not allowed to participate in the examination.

古文：时适当会试期，举子已群集都下，礼部为请。
现代文：当时正好是会试的时候，举子已经全部聚集在京城里，礼部为此向皇上请示。
English: At that time, it happened to be the time of the audition, and all the students had gathered in the capital, so the Ministry of Ceremonies asked the emperor for permission.

古文：诏姑许入试，后如令。
现代文：诏命姑且准许进去考试，后来像刘吉所言执行。
English: The imperial edict allowed him to go in for the examination, which was later carried out as Liu Ji said.

古文：已而吉罢，令亦不行。
现代文：不久刘吉罢免，命今也不执行了。
English: Liu Ji was soon ousted, and the order has not been carried out since.

古文：吉归，逾年卒。
现代文：刘吉回到家里，过了一年就死了。
English: Liu Ji returned home and died a year later.

古文：赠太师，谥文穆。
现代文：追赠为太师，谧号文穆。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Taishi and given the posthumous name of Wenmu.

古文：尹直，字正言，泰和人。
现代文：尹直，字正言，泰和人。
English: Yin Zhi, Zi Zhenggen, Tai He Ren.

古文：景泰五年进士。
现代文：景泰五年考中进士。
English: Jing Tai was promoted to sergeant five years later.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：改庶吉士，授官编修。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：成化初，充经筵讲官，与修《英宗实录》。
现代文：成化初年，担任御前讲席讲官，参加修撰《英宗实录》。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he served as a lecturer in front of the throne and participated in the compilation of the "Eingzong Record."

古文：总裁欲革去景泰帝号，引汉昌邑、更始为比。
现代文：总裁打算革去景泰的帝号，援引漠代昌邑、更始为比照。
English: The president intends to take away Jing Tai's imperial title, citing the example of Changyi in the desert and the beginning of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：直辨曰： 《实录》中有初为大臣，后为军民者。
现代文：尹直争辩说： 《实录》中有当初是大臣，后来是军民的人。
English: Yin Zhi argued: "The True Record" contains people who were originally ministers, and later military and civilians.

古文：方居官时，则称某官某，既罢去而后改称。
现代文：在他当官的时候，就称某官某，已经罢去而后改变称呼。
English: When he was in office, he was referred to as so-and-so, but has since changed his title.

古文：如汉府以谋逆降庶人，其未反时，书王书叔如故也。
现代文：比如汉府因为谋反降为庶人，他没有造反的时候，像原来那样写为王写为叔。
English: For example, Hanfu was reduced to a commoner for plotting rebellion. When he did not rebel, he was written as a king and uncle as before.

古文：岂有逆计其反，而即降从庶人之号者哉！
现代文：难道有预料到他造反，就降为庶人的称呼的道理吗！
English: Is there any reason to call him a commoner in anticipation of his rebellion?

古文：且昌邑旋立旋废，景泰帝则为宗庙社稷主七年。
现代文：况且昌邑随即登位随即废除，景泰皇帝却成为宗庙社稷的主宰达七年。
English: Moreover, Chang'e was abolished immediately after the enthronement, but Emperor Jingtai became the head of the family temple for seven years.

古文：更始无所受命，景泰帝则策命于母后。
现代文：更始没有接受命令，而景泰皇帝却从母后受策命。
English: He did not accept the order at first, but Emperor Jing Tai received the order from his mother.

古文：当时定倾危难之中，微帝则京师非国家有。
现代文：当时是稳定倾倒的国家于危难之中，没有皇帝京城就不会是国家所有。
English: At that time, it was a stable country in danger, and without the emperor, the capital would not be owned by the state.

古文：虽易储失德，然能不惑于卢忠、徐振之言，卒全两宫，以至今日。
现代文：虽然他改换储君失去圣德，但是能够不迷惑于卢忠、徐振的话，最后保全两宫，以至于今天。
English: Although he changed the crown prince and lost his holiness, he was able not to bother Lu Zhong and Xu Zhen, and finally preserved the two palaces to this day.

古文：其功过足相准，不宜去帝号。 
现代文：他的功劳遇错足以相当，不应该革去帝号。 
English: His merits and mistakes are sufficient, and he should not be stripped of his imperial title.

古文：时不能难。
现代文：当时没有人能够难倒他。
English: At that time, no one could stump him.

古文：既成，进侍读，历侍读学士。
现代文：《实录》修成后，晋升为侍读，历任侍读学士。
English: After the completion of "Real Record," he was promoted to attendant, and successively attended bachelor.

古文：六年上疏乞纂修《大明通典》，并续成《宋元纲目》，章下所司。
现代文：成化六年，上疏请求纂修《大明通典》，并且续写完成《宋元纲目》。奏章下发到有关部门。
English: Six years later, Shang So requested the compilation and revision of the "Daming Classic" and the completion of the "Song and Yuan Outline." The report was sent to the relevant departments.

古文：十一年迁礼部右侍郎，辞，不许。
现代文：成化十一年，提升为礼部右侍郎，他推辞，不被允许。
English: When he was eleven years old, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department. He refused and was not allowed to continue.

古文：丁父忧，服除，起南京吏部右侍郎，就改礼部左侍郎。
现代文：服父丧，丧期满，起用为南京吏部右侍郎，就地改任礼部左侍郎。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Cadastral Department, and then he was appointed as the Left Attendant of the Ceremonial Department.

古文：二十二年春，召佐兵部。
现代文：成化二十二年春李，召回朝廷辅佐兵部。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year of Chenghua, he was recalled to the Imperial Court Auxiliary Military Department.

古文：占城王古来为安南所逼，弃国来求援。
现代文：占城王古来被安南逼迫，离开国家来请求援助。
English: Forced by Annan to leave the country to appeal for aid, the king of the city of Zham has been in exile ever since.

古文：议者欲送之还，直曰： 彼穷来归，我若驱使还国，是杀之也。
现代文：讨论的人打算送他回去，尹直说： 他走投无路来归顺，我们如果驱逐使他回国，就等于是杀了他。
English: The discussant intends to send him back, and Yin Zhi said: He has no choice but to surrender. If we expel him back to China, it would be tantamount to killing him.

古文：宜遣大臣即询，量宜处置。 
现代文：应该派遣大臣马上询问他，再权衡合适的方法处置。 
English: A minister should be dispatched to question him immediately and then weigh up the appropriate course of action.

古文：诏从之，命都御史屠滽往。
现代文：诏命听从他的建议，命令都御史屠澝前去。
English: The imperial edict obeyed his suggestion and ordered the imperial envoy Tu Youyou to go.

古文：贵州镇巡官奏苗反，请发兵，廷议将从之。
现代文：贵州镇巡官奏报苗族造反，请求发兵，朝廷议论打算依从他。
English: The Guizhou town inspector reported the rebellion of the Miao people and requested to send troops. The imperial court discussed whether to obey him.

古文：直言起衅邀功，不可信。
现代文：尹直说这是挑起事端邀功请赏，不能听信。
English: Yin Zhi said that this was an attempt to stir up trouble and ask for a reward, which was unacceptable.

古文：命官往勘，果无警。
现代文：命令官员前去考察，果然没有敌警。
English: Officers were ordered to investigate, but no riot police showed up.

古文：是年九月改户部兼翰林学士，入内阁。
现代文：这一年九月，改任户部兼翰林学士，进入内阁。
English: In September of the same year, he was appointed as the head of the Household Department and the Hanlin Scholar, and entered the cabinet.

古文：逾月，进兵部尚书，加太子太保。
现代文：过了一个月，晋升为兵部尚书，加官太子太保。
English: A month later, he was promoted to Hyobusho (Minister of Military) and given the additional post of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：直明敏博学，练习朝章，而躁于进取。
现代文：尹直明察敏悟博学，熟习朝廷的章程，但是急于进取。
English: Yin Zhiming was keen on learning and familiar with the regulations of the imperial court, but he was eager to forge ahead.

古文：性矜忌，不自检饬，与吏部尚书尹旻相恶。
现代文：性格矜傲猜忌，不自我检束整饬，和吏部尚书尹曼关系不好。
English: His character is arrogant and suspicious, he doesn't self-examine and rectify, and he doesn't have a good relationship with the personnel department.

古文：直初觊礼部侍郎，而旻荐他人。直以中旨得之。
现代文：尹直当初想任礼部侍郎，而尹曼推荐了别人，尹直靠内宫皇帝直接下旨得到这个职位。
English: At first, Yin Zhi wanted to be appointed as an attendant of the Ceremonial Department, but Yin Man recommended someone else. Yin Zhi got this position by direct order of the Emperor of the Inner Court.

古文：次日遇旻于朝，举笏谢。
现代文：第二天在朝堂上遇到尹曼，他举起笏板称谢。
English: The next day, when he met Yinman in the morning hall, he held up the cutting board to express his thanks.

古文：旻曰： 公所谓简在帝心者。 
现代文：尹曼说： 你是所说的从皇帝心里选出来的人。 
English: Yinman said: You are the one who was chosen from the heart of the emperor.

古文：自是怨益深。
现代文：从此怨恨渐渐加深。
English: Since then, the resentment has gradually deepened.

古文：后在南部八年，郁郁不得志，属其党万安、彭华谋内召，旻辄持不可。
现代文：后来他在南京呆了八年，郁郁不得志，嘱托他的同党万安、彭华设法召回朝内，尹曼就把持住不许可。
English: Later, he stayed in Nanjing for eight years, depressed and discouraged, and asked his fellow party members Wan'an and Penghua to try to recall him to the imperial court, but Yinman did not allow them to do so.

古文：诸朝臣亦皆畏直，幸其在南。
现代文：众位朝廷大臣也都畏惧尹直，庆幸他在南京。
English: Many ministers of the imperial court were also afraid of Yin Zhi and were glad that he was in Nanjing.

古文：及推兵部左、右侍郎，吏部列何琮等八人。
现代文：到推荐兵部左、右侍郎的时候，吏部列出何琮等八个人。
English: When it came to recommending the left and right attendants of the military department, the personnel department listed eight people such as He Yao.

古文：诏用琮，而直以安、华及李孜省力，中旨召还。
现代文：诏命任用何琮，而尹直靠万安、彭华和李孜省出力，皇帝直接下旨召他回朝。
English: The imperial edict ordered the appointment of He Qian, while Yin directly relied on Wan'an, Penghua and Lize provinces for his efforts, and the emperor directly ordered him to return to the imperial court.

古文：至是修怨，与孜省等比。陷旻父子得罪，又构罢江西巡抚闵珪，物论喧然不平。
现代文：从此报复以前的仇恨，和李孜省等人勾结，诬陷尹曼父子获罪，又诬陷罢免江西巡抚闵珪，舆论喧然不平。
English: Since then, they have retaliated against the previous hatred, colluded with Li Ze Province and others, framed Yin Man and his son to be convicted, and framed and dismissed Jiangxi Governor Yan, and the public opinion is noisy and unequal.

古文：刑部郎袁清者，安私人，又幸于内侍郭闰。
现代文：刑部郎袁清，是万安的亲信，又被内侍郭闰宠幸。
English: Yuan Qing, the head of the Department of Justice, was a close confidant of Wan'an, and was also favored by the chambermaid Guo Yue.

古文：勘事浙江，輘轹诸大吏，吏部尚书李裕恶之。
现代文：他在浙江调查事情，欺压各位大官吏，吏部尚书李裕讨厌他。
English: He investigated matters in Zhejiang and bullied various high-ranking officials. The head of the personnel department, Shangshu Li Yu, hated him.

古文：比还，即除绍兴知府。
现代文：等他回朝，马上授官为绍兴知府。
English: When he returned to China, he was immediately appointed as the governor of Shaoxing.

古文：清惧，累章求改，裕极论其罪，下诏狱。
现代文：袁清害怕，多次上奏章请求改任。李裕用最重的刑法判处他的罪遇，被关进钦犯监狱。
English: Yuan Qing was afraid and repeatedly petitioned for a change of post. Li Yu sentenced him to the heaviest criminal law and put him in Qinhuang Prison.

古文：安、闰以属直，为言于孜省，取中旨赦之，改知郧阳。孝宗立，进士李文祥，御史汤鼐、姜洪、缪樗，庶吉士邹智等连章劾直。
现代文：万安、郭闰把这件事托付给尹直，尹直为他在李孜省面前说好话，取得内宫皇帝的圣旨赦免了他，改任鄙阳知府孝宗登上皇位，进士李文祥，御史汤鼐、姜洪、缪樗，庶吉士邹智等人接连呈上奏章弹劾尹直。
English: Wan'an and Guo Liang entrusted this matter to Yin Zhi. Yin Zhi spoke well of him in front of Li Ze Province, obtained the imperial edict of the Inner Court to pardon him, and was appointed as the governor of Danyang Prefecture. Xiaozong ascended to the throne, and the scholars Li Wenxiang, the historian Tang Jun, Jiang Hong, Miao Jun, and the illegitimate scholar Zou Zhi successively submitted a petition to impeach Yin Zhi.

古文：给事中宋琮及御史许斌言直自初为侍郎以至入阁，夤缘攀附，皆取中旨。
现代文：给事中宋琮和御史许斌说尹直从当初当侍郎到进入内阁，拉拢关系攀附权贵，都是取自内宫皇帝的圣旨。
English: In the case, Song Tao and his secretary Xu Bin said that from the time when Yin Zhi was a waiter to entering the cabinet, the relationship of attracting and clinging to the powerful was all taken from the emperor's will of the inner palace.

古文：帝于是薄其为人，令致仕。
现代文：皇帝于是鄙薄他的为人，命令他退休。
English: The emperor despised him and ordered him to retire.

古文：弘治九年表贺万寿，并以太子年当出閤，上《承华箴》，引先朝少保黄淮事，冀召对。
现代文：弘治九年，他上表祝贺皇帝生日，并且借口太子年纪应当出阁，上《承华箴》，援引前朝少保黄淮的旧例，希望召对。
English: In the ninth year of Hongzhi, he congratulated the emperor's birthday on the table, and on the pretext that the prince's age should be out of the cabinet, he quoted the old example of Shao Bao Huanghuai in the previous dynasty, hoping to summon the opposite.

古文：帝却之。
现代文：皇帝拒绝了他。
English: The emperor turned him down.

古文：正德中卒，谥文和。
现代文：正德年间死去，谧号文和。
English: Zhengde died in the same year, and his posthumous name was Wenhe.

古文：赞曰：《易》称内君子外小人，为泰；外君子内小人，为否。
现代文：赞曰：《易经》说接纳君子排斥小人，是好的；排斥君子接纳小人，是坏的。
English: Zang said: "The I Ching says that it is good to accept a gentleman and reject a villain; it is bad to reject a gentleman and accept a villain.

古文：况端揆之寄，百僚具瞻者乎！
现代文：何况宰相是国家的依赖，百官都瞻仰的人呢！
English: What's more, the prime minister is a person who is dependent on the state and admired by all government officials!

古文：陈循以下诸人，虽不为大奸慝，而居心刻忮，务逞己私。
现代文：陈循以下那些人，虽然不是大奸大恶，但是居心刻薄阴险，追求满足自己的私心。
English: Chen Cui and the following people, although they are not great traitors or great evils, are malicious and insidious in their pursuit of satisfying their selfish desires.

古文：同己者比，异己者忌；比则相援，忌则相轧。
现代文：赞同自己的就勾结，不赞同自己的就忌恨。党同的就相互援助，忌恨的就倾轧。
English: Those who agree with themselves collude, those who disagree with themselves hate. Those who are in the same party help each other, and those who hate each other fight.

古文：至万安、刘吉要结近幸，蒙耻固位。犹幸同列多贤，相与弥缝匡救，而秽迹昭彰，小人之归，何可掩哉！
现代文：到万安、刘吉讨好巴结皇上近身的内幸，不顾羞耻巩固官位，还幸亏一同为官的有很多贤人，相互弥补缝合匡正挽救，但是他们污秽的行径显而易见，小人的行为，怎么能够掩盖呢！
English: In Wan'an, Liu Ji courted Emperor Bao Jie's close inner happiness, and consolidated his official position regardless of shame. Fortunately, there were many wise men who served as officials together, and they made up for each other and saved the righteous, but their dirty deeds were obvious. How could the villain's behavior be covered up?

