古文：七年春，王正月，鼷鼠食郊牛角，改卜牛。
现代文：七年春季，周历正月，鼷鼠咬坏了准备祭祀天地用的牛的角。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, a mole bit off the horn of a cow that was being prepared for the sacrifice of heaven and earth.

古文：鼷鼠又食其角，乃免牛。
现代文：于是又另外占十一头牛。
English: So another eleven cows were accounted for.

古文：吴伐郯。夏五月，曹伯来朝。
现代文：鼷鼠又将这头牛的角咬坏了，鲁国祭祀天地时就不用牛了。吴国攻打郯国。夏季五月，曹伯来鲁国朝见。
English: The weasel bit off the horn of the cow, and the cow was no longer needed for the sacrifice of heaven and earth in Lu. The State of Wu attacked the State of Ya. In the summer of May, Cao Bo came to see the Imperial Court of Lu.

古文：不郊，犹三望。
现代文：这年，鲁国不祭祀天地，但仍然祭祀泰山、黄河、东海。
English: In this year, Lu did not worship heaven and earth, but still worshiped Mount Tai, the Yellow River, and the East Sea.

古文：秋，楚公子婴齐帅师伐郑。
现代文：秋季，楚国公子婴齐率领军队攻打郑国。
English: In the autumn, the prince of Chu, the infant Qi, led the army to attack Zheng.

古文：公会晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、杞伯救郑。
现代文：成公与晋侯、齐侯、宋公、卫侯、曹伯、莒子、邾子、杞伯一起援救郑国。
English: Cheng Gong and Jin Hou, Qi Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Cao Bo, Zou Zi, Zou Zi and Zou Bo worked together to rescue Zheng Guo.

古文：八月戊辰，同盟于马陵。
现代文：八月戊辰日，在马陵一起结盟。
English: In August, on the day of Pentecost, they made an alliance together in Maling.

古文：公至自会。
现代文：成公从马陵回到鲁国。
English: Wen Gong returns from Xincheng.

古文：吴入州来。
现代文：吴国军队攻进楚国的州来。
English: The army of the State of Wu invaded the states of the State of Chu.

古文：冬，大雩。
现代文：冬季，鲁国举行求雨的大祭。
English: In winter, the State of Lu holds a grand festival to pray for rain.

古文：卫孙林父出奔晋。
现代文：卫国大夫孙林父逃到晋国。
English: Sun Lin's father, the doctor of national defense, fled to Jin.

古文：七年春，吴伐郯，郯成。
现代文：七年春季，吴国进攻郯国，郯国和吴国讲和。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the State of Wu attacked the State of Yao, and the State of Yao and the State of Wu made peace.

古文：季文子曰： 中国不振旅，蛮夷入伐，而莫之或恤，无吊者也夫！
现代文：季文子说： 中原诸国不能镇慑蛮夷，蛮夷却来进攻，而没有人对此担忧，这是因为没有好国君的缘故啊！
English: Ji Wenzi said: The Central Plains countries could not suppress the barbarians, but the barbarians attacked, and no one worried about it, because there was no good sovereign!

古文：《诗》曰： 不吊昊天，乱靡有定。 
现代文：《诗》说： 上天不善，动乱没有个安定的时候。 
English: "Poetry" said: The weather is not good, and there is no stable time for turmoil.

古文：其此之谓乎！
现代文：说的就是这种情况吧！
English: This is exactly the situation.

古文：有上不吊，其谁不受乱？
现代文：有了上面的人但是不善，还有谁不受到动乱？
English: With those above but not good, who is not disturbed?

古文：吾亡无日矣！ 
现代文：我们很快就会灭亡了。 
English: We'll all be dead soon.

古文：君子曰： 知惧如是，斯不亡矣。 
现代文：君子说： 像这样知道戒惧，这就不会灭亡了。 
English: The gentleman said, "Knowing fear like this, it will not perish."

古文：郑子良相成公以如晋，见且拜师。
现代文：郑国的子良作为郑成公的相礼到了晋国，进见晋景公，同时拜谢出兵救郑。
English: Zheng's son Liang came to Jin as Zheng Chenggong's consort, visited Jin Jinggong, and thanked him for sending troops to rescue Zheng.

古文：夏，曹宣公来朝。
现代文：夏季，曹宣公前来朝见。
English: In summer, Cao Xuan Gong would come to see him in the morning.

古文：秋，楚子重伐郑，师于氾。
现代文：秋季，楚国的子重进攻郑国，军队驻扎在汜地。
English: In the autumn, the Zizhong of Chu attacked Zheng, and the army was stationed in Handan.

古文：诸侯救郑。
现代文：诸侯援救郑国。
English: The princes came to the rescue of Zheng.

古文：郑共仲、侯羽军楚师，囚郧公钟仪，献诸晋。
现代文：郑国的共仲、侯羽包围楚军，囚禁郧公钟仪，把他献给晋国。
English: Zheng's General Zhong and Hou Yu encircled the Chu army, imprisoned Gong Zhongyi, and dedicated him to Jin.

古文：八月，同盟于马陵，寻虫牢之盟，且莒服故也。
现代文：八月，鲁成公和晋景公、齐顷公、宋共公、卫定公、曹宣公、莒子、邾子、杞桓公在马陵结盟，这是由于重温虫牢的盟约，同时又因莒国顺服的缘故。
English: In August, Lu Chenggong and Jin Jinggong, Qi Hegong, Song Quangong, Wei Dinggong, Cao Xuangong, Zizi, Zizi, and Zi Huangong allied in Maling. This was due to revisiting the covenant of the Wormhole, and at the same time due to the obedience of the country.

古文：晋人以钟仪归，囚诸军府。
现代文：晋国人带着钟仪回去，把他囚禁在军用储藏室里。
English: The Jin people took the clock back and imprisoned it in a military storeroom.

古文：楚围宋之役，师还。子重请取于申、吕以为赏田，王许之。
现代文：楚国包围宋国那一次战役，楚军回国，子重请求取得申邑、吕邑土地作为赏田。楚共王答应了。
English: In the first battle of the encirclement of the Song Dynasty by the State of Chu, when the Chu army returned to the country, Zizhong requested to obtain the land of Shenyi and Lyuyi as a reward field. The King of Chu and the Communists agreed.

古文：申公巫臣曰： 不可。
现代文：申公巫臣说： 不行。
English: Shen Gong said, "No."

古文：此申、吕所以邑也，是以为赋，以御北方。
现代文：申、吕两地之所赖以成为城邑的，是因为从这里征发兵赋，以抵御北方。
English: The reason why Shen and Lv became towns is that they were used to raise troops to defend against the north.

古文：若取之，是无申、吕也。
现代文：如果私人占有它，这就不能成为申邑和吕邑了。
English: If it is privately owned, it can't be Shenyue or Lyuyue.

古文：晋、郑必至于汉。 
现代文：晋国和郑国一定可以到达汉水。 
English: Jin and Zheng can definitely reach Hanshui.

古文：王乃止。
现代文：楚庄王就不给了。
English: Wang Hun therefore did not respond.

古文：子重是以怨巫臣。
现代文：子重因此怨恨巫臣。
English: As a result, Soneshige resented the wizard.

古文：子反欲取夏姬，巫臣止之，遂取以行。子反亦怨之。
现代文：子反想娶夏姬。巫臣阻止他，自己反而娶了夏姬逃到晋国，子反因此也很怨恨巫臣。
English: His son wanted to marry Hagi, but the shaman stopped him. Instead, he married Hagi and fled to Jin. As a result, his son also resented the shaman.

古文：及共王即位，子重、子反杀巫臣之族子阎、子荡及清尹弗忌及襄老之子黑要，而分其室。
现代文：等到楚共王即位，子重，子反杀了巫臣的族人子阎、子荡和清尹弗忌以及襄老的儿子黑要，并且瓜分他们的家产。
English: When the Communist King of Chu came to the throne, Zicheng and his sons killed the wizards Ziyan, Zihang, and Qing Yin Fu Boi, as well as Xiang Lao's son Hei Yao, and divided their family property.

古文：子重取子阎之室，使沈尹与王子罢分子荡之室，子反取黑要与清尹之室。
现代文：子重取得了子阎的家产，让沈尹和王子罢瓜分子荡的家产，子反取得黑要和清尹弗忌的家产。
English: Zi Chong obtained the family property of Zi Yan, the family property of Shen Yin and Prince Baigua, and Zi Fang obtained the family property of He You and Qing Yin Furui.

古文：巫臣自晋遗二子书曰： 尔以谗慝贪惏事君，而多杀不辜。余必使尔罢于奔命以死。 
现代文：巫臣从晋国写信给子反、子重两个人，说： 你们用邪恶贪婪事奉国君，杀了很多无罪的人，我一定要让你们疲于奔命而死。 
English: The shaman wrote a letter from Jin Province to two people, Sonhan and Sonju, saying, "You have served the sovereign with evil and greed, and killed many innocent people. I will surely let you die exhausted from running for your lives.

古文：巫臣请使于吴，晋侯许之。
现代文：巫臣请求出使到吴国去，晋景公允许了。
English: The Wushu requested to be sent to the State of Wu, and Jinjing gave his permission.

古文：吴子寿梦说之。
现代文：吴子寿梦喜欢他。
English: Wu Zishoumeng likes him.

古文：乃通吴于晋。以两之一卒適吴，舍偏两之一焉。
现代文：于是巫臣就使吴国和晋国通好，带领了楚国的三十辆兵车到吴国做教练，留下十五辆给吴国。
English: As a result, the shaman made Wu and Jin friendly, and led thirty chariots from Chu to Wu as coaches, leaving fifteen for Wu.

古文：与其射御，教吴乘车，教之战陈，教之叛楚。
现代文：送给吴国射手和御者，教吴国人使用兵车，教他们安排战阵，教他们背叛楚国。
English: To the archers and drivers of the State of Wu, to teach the people of the State of Wu how to use chariots, to teach them how to arrange battle lines, to teach them how to betray the State of Chu.

古文：寘其子狐庸焉，使为行人于吴。
现代文：巫臣又把自己的儿子狐庸留在那里，让他在吴国做外交官。
English: The sorcerer also left his son Foong Yong there to work as a diplomat in the State of Wu.

古文：吴始伐楚，伐巢，伐徐。子重奔命。
现代文：吴国开始进攻楚国、进攻巢国、进攻徐国，子重奉命奔驰。
English: The State of Wu began to attack the State of Chu, the State of Chaozhou, and the State of Xu. Zi Chong was ordered to run.

古文：马陵之会，吴入州来。子重自郑奔命。
现代文：在马陵会见的时候，吴军进入州来，子重从郑国奉命赶去救援。
English: At the time of the meeting in Maling, the Wu army entered the state, and Zizhong was ordered to rush to the rescue from Zheng.

古文：子重、子反于是乎一岁七奔命。
现代文：子重、子反在这种情况下，一年之中七次奉命奔驰以抵御吴军。
English: In this situation, Zi Chong and Zi Han were ordered to gallop seven times a year to fend off the Wu army.

古文：蛮夷属于楚者，吴尽取之。是以始大，通吴于上国。
现代文：蛮夷属于楚国的，吴国全部加以占取，因此吴国开始强大，吴国才得以和中原诸国往来。
English: The barbarians belonged to the state of Chu, and the state of Wu occupied all of them. As a result, the state of Wu became powerful, and it was only then that the state of Wu was able to interact with the Central Plains countries.

古文：卫定公恶孙林父。
现代文：卫定公讨厌孙林父。
English: Wei Dingong hated Sun Lin's father.

古文：冬，孙林父出奔晋。
现代文：冬季，孙林父逃亡到晋国。
English: In winter, Sun Lin's father fled to Jin Province.

古文：卫侯如晋，晋反戚焉。
现代文：卫定公去到晋国，晋国把孙林父的封邑戚地归还给了卫国。
English: Wei Ding Gong went to Jin Province, and Jin Province returned Sun Lin's father's fief and relatives' land to Wei Province.

