古文：天福十二年夏五月乙酉朔，契丹所署大丞相、政事令、东京留守、燕王赵延寿为永康乌裕所絷，既而乌裕召蕃汉臣僚于镇州牙署，矫其主遣诏，命乌裕嗣位，于是发哀成服。
现代文：天福十二年夏五月一日，契丹所任命的大丞相、政事令、东京留守、燕王赵延寿被永康王兀欲囚禁，接着兀欲召集蕃汉两族大臣官僚们到镇州官署，伪造契丹国主的遗诏，以兀欲接任契丹国主位，于是发布讣告，举行丧礼，穿上丧服。
English: On the first day of May in the summer of the 12th year of Tianfu, Yongkang Wang Xi wanted to imprison Zhao Yanshou, the grand chancellor, the chief of government, and the king of Yan, who was staying in Tokyo and had been appointed by Khitan, and then he wanted to convene the ministers and bureaucrats of the Han and Han people to the township government office, forge the last will and testament of the ruler of Khitan, and take over the position of the ruler of Khitan, so he issued an obituary, held a funeral, and put on the funeral clothes.

古文：辛卯，诏取五月十三日车驾南幸。
现代文：五月七日，诏令在五月十二日国主驾幸南方。
English: On May 7th, the imperial edict announced that on May 12th, the emperor would leave for the south.

古文：万超驰至城下，谕之曰： 今契丹北遁，天下无主，并州刘公，仗大义，定中土，所向风靡，后服者族，盍早图之。 
现代文：十日，以太原府府尹刘崇出任北京留守，命令皇太子刘承训、武德使李晖为大内巡校。十二日，高祖从河东出发，越过阴地关而路过东京。
English: On the 10th, Yin Liu Chong of the Taiyuan prefectural government stayed in Beijing and ordered the crown prince Liu Chengxun and the martial arts envoy Li Xi to be the university inspector. On the 12th, Gaozu set off from Hedong and passed through Tokyo.

古文：令奇乃开门迎纳，宏肇即留万超权州事。
现代文：当时星卜官说，太岁星在鹑火的位置，不利于向南方走，所以经过阴地关。十三日，史弘肇上奏说，泽州刺史翟令奇率领全郡投降。
English: At that time, the astrologer said that the position of the great star in the campfire was not conducive to going south, so it passed through the yinji pass. On the 13th, Shihong Zhao reported that Zhezhou stabbed Shihong Lingqi and led the whole county to surrender.

古文：是日，契丹所署汴州节度使萧翰迎郇国公李从益至东京，请从益知南朝军国事。
现代文：同日，契丹所任命的汴州节度使萧翰迎接郇国公李从益到汴京，请李从益掌管南方的军国事务。
English: On the same day, the Bozhou Festival appointed by Khitan made Xiao Han welcome the Bozhou official Li Congyi to Beijing, and asked Li Congyi to take charge of the military affairs of the south.

古文：己亥，萧翰发离东京北去。
现代文：十五日，萧翰离开汴京到北方去。
English: On the 15th, Xiao Han left Beijing to go to the north.

古文：乙巳，契丹永康王乌裕自镇州还蕃，行次定州，以定州节度副使耶律忠为定州节度使，孙方简为云州节度使。
现代文：二十一日，契丹永康王兀欲从镇州返回蕃地，路过定州，以定州节度副使耶律忠担任定州节度使，孙方简担任云州节度使。
English: On the 21st day of the month, King Yongkang of the Khitan Empire wanted to return from Zhenzhou to Handan, passing through Dingzhou. Yerutzhong, Deputy Envoy to Dingzhou Festival, served as Envoy to Dingzhou Festival, and Sun Fangyan served as Envoy to Yunnan Festival.

古文：方简不受命，遂归狼山。
现代文：孙方简不接受任命，就去了狼山。
English: Sun Fangjian did not accept the appointment and went to Wolf Mountain.

古文：戊申，车驾至绛州，本州刺史李从朗以郡降。
现代文：二十四日，高祖车驾来到绛州，绛州刺史李从朗率领全郡投降。
English: On the 24th, Gao Zu drove to Zhangzhou. Li Conglang, the governor of Zhangzhou, led the entire county to surrender.

古文：初，契丹遣偏校成霸卿、曹可璠等守其郡，帝建义之始，不时归命，及车驾至，帝耀兵于城下，不令攻击，从朗等遂降。
现代文：当初，契丹派遣偏校成霸卿、曹可等据守他们的州郡，高祖登帝位的初期，都陆续归顺，到车驾来临时，高祖在城下炫耀兵力，不用攻击，李从朗等就投降了。
English: At the beginning, the Khitan Empire dispatched the warlords Cheng Baqing, Cao Ke and others to defend their states and counties. In the early days of Gaozu's accession to the throne, they all surrendered one after another. When the chariot came, Gaozu showed off his troops under the city. Without attacking, Li Conglang and others surrendered.

古文：六月乙卯，契丹河中节度使赵赞起复河中节度使。
现代文：天福十二年六月二日，原契丹河中节度使赵赞在服丧期满后担任河中节度使。
English: On June 2nd, the 12th year of Tianfu, Zhao Zhan, the former Khitan River Festival Delegate, was appointed as the River Festival Delegate after his period of mourning had expired.

古文：是日，契丹右仆射兼中书侍郎、平章事张砺卒于镇州。
现代文：同一天，契丹右仆射、兼中书侍郎、平章事张砺死于镇州。
English: On the same day, Qidan's right-hand man, Zha, concurrently the chancellor's secretary, Ping Zhang, died in Zhenzhou.

古文：丙辰，车驾至洛，两京文武百僚自新安相次奉迎。
现代文：三日，高祖车驾幸临洛阳，西京洛阳和东京汴都的文武百官从新安接连恭敬迎候。
English: On the third day, Gao Zu's car drove to Luoyang, and hundreds of civil and military officials from Luoyang, West Beijing, and the capital, Tokyo, came one after another from Xin'an to pay their respects.

古文：郇国公李从益、唐明宗淑妃王氏皆赐死于东京。
现代文：郇国公李从益、唐明宗淑妃王氏都被赐死在东京。
English: Li Congyi, the Duke of Shandong, and Tang Mingzong, the Prince of Sui, were both sentenced to death in Tokyo.

古文：甲子，车驾至东京。丙寅，以汉州就粮归捷指挥使张建雄为濮州刺史，以金州守御指挥使康彦环为金州防御使。
现代文：十三日，以汉州就粮归捷指挥使张建雄担任濮州刺史，以金州守御指挥使康彦环担任金州防御。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Jianxiong was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou by the command of Hanzhou on the return of grain to victory, and Yasuhiko Ring was appointed as the defense of Jinzhou by the command of Jinzhou.

古文：建雄、彦环皆因乱害本州刺史，自知州事，故有是命。
现代文：张建雄、康彦环都乘动乱之机杀死了本州刺史，自己掌管州里的军政大事，所以得到了上述任命。
English: Zhang Jianxiong and Kang Yanhuan both took the opportunity of the turmoil to kill the local history, and they were in charge of the military and political events in the state, so they got the above-mentioned appointment.

古文：以北京知进奏王从璋为内客省使。
现代文：以北京掌管进奏的王从璋担任内客省使。
English: Wang Congtao, who was in charge of import and export in Beijing, served as the provincial envoy.

古文：戊辰，制： 大赦天下。
现代文：十五日，发布诏令： 大赦天下。
English: On the 15th, a decree was issued: amnesty for the whole country.

古文：应天福十二年六月十五日昧爽已前，天下见禁罪人，已结正未结正，已发觉未发觉，除十恶五逆外，罪无轻重，咸赦除之。
现代文：在天福十二年六月十五日黎明以前，天下所有被关押的罪犯，已经判决或尚未判决，已经发觉或尚未发觉，除了十恶五逆之外，无论罪重罪轻，全部赦免释放他们。
English: Before the dawn of the 15th day of the 6th month of the 12th year of the Heavenly Fortune, all the criminals in the world who have been sentenced or have not yet been sentenced, have been discovered or have not yet been discovered, except for the ten evils and five vices, regardless of the severity of the crime, will be pardoned and released.

古文：诸州去年残税并放。
现代文：各州往年遗留的税收全部免除。
English: All state taxes left over from previous years will be waived.

古文：东、西京一百里内，放今年夏税；一百里外及京城，今年屋税并放一半。
现代文：东、西两京一百里以外的地方，免征今年夏季的税收；一百里以内包括京城在内，今年房租屋税减免一半。
English: This year's summer tax will be exempted for places up to 100 miles away from the eastern and western capital cities; within 100 miles, including the capital city, half of the house rent tax will be exempted this year.

古文：契丹所授职任，不议改更。
现代文：契丹所任命的官职，不再变更。
English: The positions of officials appointed by Khitan will not be changed.

古文：诸贬降官，未量移者与量移；已量移者与叙录。
现代文：各位贬降流放了的官吏，没有迁回安置的给予迁回安置，已经迁回安置的给予登记录用。
English: All officials who have been demoted and exiled, those who have not been resettled should be resettled, and those who have been resettled should be registered.

古文：徒流人并放还。
现代文：一般流放的人都回原籍。
English: Generally, exiles return to their place of origin.

古文：唐故河中节度使、西平王硃友谦追封魏王，故枢密使冯赟赠中书令，故河阳节度使、判六军康义诚赠中书令。故西京留守、京兆尹王思同、故邠州节度使药彦稠、故襄州节度使安重进、故镇州节度使安重荣，并赠侍中。
现代文：欠别人的钱财的，用家产抵当还不能还清的部分全部免除，改称国号叫大汉，年号仍旧叫天福 等等。十六日，诏令青州、襄州、安州恢复为节镇，曹州、陈州仍恢复旧制为郡。二十四日，因湖南节度使马希范去世而停止朝见臣下三天。这一月中，契丹所命的相州节度使高唐英被屯驻指挥使王继弘、楚晖杀死。
English: On the 16th, Qingzhou, Xiangzhou and Anzhou were reinstated as towns, and Caozhou and Chenzhou were reinstated as counties. On the 24th, three days of court visits were suspended due to the death of Ma Xifan in the Hunan festival. In the middle of this month, Gao Tangying was killed by the garrison commander Wang Jihong and Chu Xi in the Xiangzhou festival ordered by the Khitan.

古文：庚辰，追尊六庙，以太祖高皇帝、世祖光武皇帝为不祧之庙，高曾已下四朝，追尊谥号，已载于前矣。
现代文：二十八日，建祖庙追尊六位先祖，以西汉太祖高皇帝刘邦、东汉世祖光武皇帝刘秀居祖庙中永久不废的地位，高、曾祖以下四个先祖庙号又追尊谥号，已见载于前面了。
English: On the 28th, the ancestor temple was built to honor six ancestors, with the Western Han Dynasty Great Ancestor Gao Emperor Liu Bang and the Eastern Han Dynasty Great Ancestor Guangwu Emperor Liu Xiu living in the ancestor temple in a permanent position, and the four ancestor temple names including Gao and Zengzu were also honored.

古文：是日，权太常卿张昭上六庙乐章舞名：太祖高皇帝室酌献，请依旧奏《武德之舞》；世祖光武皇帝室酌献，请依旧奏《大武之舞》；文祖明元皇帝室酌献，请奏《灵长之舞》；德祖恭僖皇帝室酌献，请奏《积善之舞》；翼祖昭献皇帝室酌献，请奏《显仁之舞》；显祖章圣皇帝室酌献，请奏《章庆之舞》。
现代文：这一天，临时太常卿张昭进上庆典六庙的乐章歌舞名称：供奉太祖高皇帝神位时，请依旧例演奏《武德之舞》；供奉世祖光武皇帝神位时，请依旧例演奏《大武之舞》；供奉文祖明元皇帝神位时，请演奏《灵长之舞》；供奉德祖恭僖皇帝神位时，请演奏《积善之舞》；供奉翼祖昭献皇帝神位时，请演奏《显仁之舞》；供奉显祖章圣皇帝神位时，请演奏《章庆之舞》。
English: On this day, Zhang Zhao, the Provisional Grand Duke, entered the six temples of the festival. The names of the music and dance of the six temples are as follows: When honoring the throne of Emperor Gao, please still play the "Dance of Martial Arts"; When honoring the throne of Emperor Guangwu, please still play the "Dance of Great Martial Arts"; When honoring the throne of Emperor Wenzhongming, please play the "Dance of the Elder"; When honoring the throne of Emperor Jun, please play the "Dance of the Good"; When honoring the throne of Emperor Ying, please play the "Dance of the Benevolent"; When hon

古文：其六庙歌词，文多不录。
现代文：那在六庙歌唱的歌词，因文辞太多不在这里记录。
English: The lyrics sung at the Six Temples are too wordy to be recorded here.

古文：八月壬午朔，镇州驻屯护圣左厢都指挥使白再荣等，逐契丹所命节度满达勒，复其城。满达勒与河职责节度崔廷勋、洛京留守刘晞，并奔定州。
现代文：八月一日，镇州驻屯护圣左厢都指挥使白再荣等人赶走契丹所任命的节度使麻答，收复镇州城；麻答与河阳节度使崔廷勋、洛京留守刘，一起逃奔定州。
English: On August 1st, Zhenzhou garrison commander Bai Zairong and others drove away the Khitan-appointed military governor Ma Dua and recaptured Zhenzhou City; Ma Dua and the Kheyang military governor Cui Tingxun and Luo Jing left Liu behind and fled to Dingzhou together.

古文：驰驿以闻。
现代文：派驿使飞马上报。
English: Send a messenger to report to the horse.

古文：庚寅，以洺州团练使薛怀让为邢州节度使。
现代文：九日，以氵名州团练使薛怀让担任邢州节度使。
English: On the 9th, Xue Huaijian was appointed as the chief envoy of the Bozhou Festival with the help of the Bozhou delegation.

古文：辛卯，诏恆州复为镇州，顺国军复为成德军。
现代文：十日，诏令恒州恢复为镇州，顺国军恢复为成德军。
English: On the 10th, the imperial edict restored Hengzhou to Zhenzhou, and Shunkuo Army to Chengde Army.

古文：己酉，以刑部尚书窦贞固为吏部尚书。
现代文：十九日，诏令天下凡干了抢劫偷盗的事，不论获得多少赃物，调查如没有虚假，全部处以死刑。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict decreed that anyone in the world who committed robbery and theft, no matter how much stolen goods they obtained, would be sentenced to death if the investigation was not false.

古文：是日，薛怀让奏，收复邢州，杀伪命节度副使、知州事刘铎。
现代文：因两浙节度使、守太师、兼中书令、吴越国王钱弘佐去世而停止上朝三天。二十八日，薛怀让报告，收复了邢州，杀死了契丹任命的伪节度副使、管理邢州事务的刘铎。
English: On the 28th, Xue Huaiyang reported that he had recovered Zhangzhou and killed Liu Bei, the pseudo deputy envoy of Zhangzhou appointed by the Khitan, who was in charge of the affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，怀让为洺州防御使，满达勒亟发健步督洺州粮运，怀让杀之以闻。
现代文：当初，薛怀让担任氵名州防御使，契丹所任命的节度使麻答派遣很会走路的人督促氵名州的粮食运输，薛怀让杀了他们回报高祖。
English: At first, Xue Huaijan served as the defense envoy of Sheming prefecture. The governor appointed by the Khitan made the Mahdists send people who could walk well to supervise the grain transportation of Sheming prefecture. Xue Huaijan killed them to repay Gaozu.

古文：帝遣郭从义与怀让攻取邢州，蕃将杨衮来援铎，怀让拒之，不胜，退保洺州，敌骑掠其部，民大被其苦。
现代文：高祖派遣郭从义与薛怀让进攻夺取邢州，蕃族将领杨兖来援救刘铎，薛怀让抵拒杨兖，没有取胜，退回氵名州据守，敌军骑兵抢劫他辖区的人民，大受敌军的祸害。
English: Gaozu dispatched Guo Zongyi and Xue Huaiyan to attack and seize Zhangzhou. The general Yang Hui came to the rescue of Liu Hui. Xue Huaiyan resisted Yang Hui, failed to win, and returned to defend Zhangming. The enemy cavalry robbed the people in his jurisdiction, and suffered great harm from the enemy army.

古文：会镇州逐满达勒，杨衮收兵退，铎乃上表请命。
现代文：碰上镇州赶走麻答，杨兖收兵撤退，刘铎才上表高祖请求归顺。
English: When Zhenzhou chased away Ma Tuo, Yang Hui withdrew his troops, and Liu Hui went to petition Gao Zu to surrender.

古文：怀让乘其无备，遣人绐铎云： 奉诏袭契丹，请置顿于郡。 
现代文：薛怀让趁刘铎没有准备，派人骗刘铎说： 我奉高祖命令攻袭契丹，请允许我在你州城驻军。 
English: Taking advantage of Liu Yao's lack of preparation, Xue Huaijan sent someone to deceive Liu Yao, saying, "I am following Gao Zu's order to attack Khitan, please allow me to station troops in your provincial capital.

古文：铎开门迎之，即为怀让所害，时人冤之。
现代文：刘铎开门迎接他，就被薛怀让杀害，当时人都知道刘铎死得冤枉。
English: When Liu Ye opened the door to greet him, he was killed by Xue Huaijan. At the time, everyone knew that Liu Ye had died unjustly.

古文：铎初受契丹命为邢州都指挥使，及永康王以高奉明为节度使，满达勒署铎为邢州副使兼都指挥使。
现代文：刘铎原先接受契丹任命担任邢州都指挥使，到契丹永康王任命高奉明为节度使时，麻答暂命刘铎担任邢州副使兼都指挥使。
English: Liu Wei was originally appointed by Khitan to serve as the commanding envoy of the Bozhou capital. When Khitan King Yongkang appointed Gao Fengming as the chief envoy, Ma Du temporarily appointed Liu Wei to serve as the deputy envoy of Bozhou and the commanding envoy of the capital.

古文：帝至东京，奉明归镇州，令铎知邢州事，至是遇害。
现代文：高祖到东京，高奉明率领镇州归降，命令刘铎掌管邢州事务，一直到这时被杀害。
English: Gaozu went to Tokyo, Gao Fengming led Zhenzhou to surrender, ordered Liu Bei to take charge of the affairs of Zhangzhou, and was killed until this time.

古文：庚戌，文武百僚上表，请以二月四日降诞日为圣寿节，从之。
现代文：二十九日，文武百官上表，请求将二月四日高祖的诞生日作为圣寿节，高祖同意了。
English: On the 29th, hundreds of civil and military officials came to the table, requesting that Gaozu's birthday on February 4 be made a saint's day. Gaozu agreed.

古文：前晋昌军节度副使李肃加左骁卫上将军致仕。
现代文：天福十二年九月二十七日，下诏书说因为杜重威背叛朝廷，定于本月二十九日御驾暂时前往澶州、魏州。二十九日，高祖御驾离开京师。
English: On September 27th, the 12th year of Tianfu, the next imperial edict stated that because Du Chongwei had betrayed the imperial court, it was decided that on the 29th of this month he would temporarily go to Ganzhou and Weizhou. On the 29th, Gao Zu left Beijing.

古文：甲申，车驾次韦城。诏： 河北诸州见禁罪人，自十月五日昧爽以前，常赦所不原者，咸赦除之。 
现代文：冬十月三日，高祖御驾暂停在韦城，发布诏令说 ：黄河以北各州被关押的罪人，从十月五日黎明以前，按一般赦免仍不能原谅的，全部赦免他们。 
English: On October 3, winter, Gao Zu's carriage stopped in Weicheng and issued a royal edict, saying: From before dawn on October 5, all the criminals imprisoned in the states north of the Yellow River who cannot be pardoned according to the general pardon should be pardoned.

古文：癸丑，日南至，从官称贺于行宫。
现代文：十一日，太阳上出现像鸡蛋大的黑点。
English: On the 11th, a black spot the size of an egg appeared on the sun.

古文：己未，湖南奏，荆南节度使高从诲叛。辛酉，雨木冰。
现代文：十五日，御驾到达邺都城下。二十五日，诏令都部署高行周督师攻击邺都，高祖登上高高的土山观战，当时大家都说还不宜攻城，副部署慕容彦超坚决要求进攻邺都城。
English: On the fifteenth day, they arrived at the foot of the city. On the twenty-fifth day, the emperor ordered Gao Xing Zhou to attack the city. Gao Zu climbed a high hill to watch the battle. At that time, everyone said that it was not appropriate to attack the city, and the deputy commander Murong Yanchao firmly demanded to attack the city.

古文：壬申，杜重威上表请命。
现代文：这一天，汉朝军队战伤了一万多人，没能攻下邺都而撤退。
English: On this day, the Han Dynasty army wounded more than 10,000 people, failed to capture Shantou and retreated.

古文：癸酉，雨木冰。
现代文：十一月二十七日。
English: November 27th.

古文：丁丑，杜重威素服出降，待罪于宫门，诏释其罪。
现代文：杜重威穿着白衣出城投降，在宫门等待处罚，高祖颁发诏令免除他的罪过。
English: Du Chongwei dressed in white went out of the city to surrender and waited for punishment at the palace gate. Gaozu issued a decree to absolve him of his sins.

古文：鄴都留守、天雄军节度使高行周加守太尉，封临清王。
现代文：邺都留守、天雄军节度使高行周加封为守太尉，封为临清王。
English: Shidu stayed behind, and the festival of the Tianxiong Army caused Gao Xing Zhou to be awarded the title of Guards Lieutenant and the title of Linqing King.

古文：以杜重威为检校太师、守太傅、兼中书令、楚国公。
现代文：以杜重威担任检校太师、主太傅、兼中书令、楚国公。
English: Du Chongwei served as the school inspector, the head teacher, the middle school secretary, and the Duke of Chu.

古文：庚子，司徒李鏻薨。
现代文：十二月六日，御驾离开邺都返回京城，十三日，从邺都到达京城。
English: On December 6, they left Shidu and returned to Beijing. On the 13th, they arrived in Beijing from Shidu.

古文：辛丑，以前鄜州节度使郭谨为滑州节度使，加检校太尉。
现代文：十四日，因为皇太子、开封府尹刘承训去世停止上朝三天，追封为魏王。十七日，高祖在太平宫举行哀悼。二十日，司徒李钅去世。
English: On the 14th, because of the death of the crown prince, the Kaifeng prefect, Yin Liu Chengxun, the Shang Dynasty was suspended for three days, and he was posthumously crowned as the Wei King. On the 17th, Gaozu held a mourning ceremony at the Taiping Palace. On the 20th, Stulli died.

古文：戊申，宿州奏，部民饿死者八百六十有七人。
现代文：二十八日，宿州报告，宿州被饿死的有八百六十七人。
English: On the 28th, Chofu reported that 867 people died of starvation in Chofu.

古文：乾祐元年正月辛亥朔，帝不受朝贺。
现代文：乾祐元年正月一日，高祖没接受朝拜祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Qianyu, Gaozu did not accept the morning worship congratulations.

古文：甲子，帝不豫。庚午，以前宗正卿石光赞为太子宾客，以太仆卿赵上交为秘书监。
现代文：五日，颁布诏令说： 太赦天下，改天福十三年为乾元年，在正月五日黎明以前，犯了罪的除了十恶五逆外，无论罪行的轻重，全部赦免释放。 
English: On the 5th, the imperial edict was issued, saying: "The world is too forgiving, and the 13th year of Tian Fu will be changed to the 1st year of Qian. Before the dawn of the 5th day of the first month, those who committed crimes, regardless of the severity of the crime, were all pardoned and released, except for the ten evils and five rebellions.

古文：是日殂。逢吉等秘不发丧，下诏称： 重威父子，因朕小疾，谤议摇众，皆斩之。 
现代文：九日，高祖将御名改为詗。十一日，以前邓州节度使、燕国公冯道担任主太师，进封为齐国公。十四日，高祖生病。
English: On the 9th, Gao Zu changed his name to Gao. On the 11th, Feng Dao, the former Dengzhou festival envoy and Yan Guo Gong, served as the master teacher, and was enthroned as Qi Guo Gong. On the 14th, Gao Zu fell ill.

古文：磔死于市，市人争啖其肉。
现代文：二十日，高祖在万岁殿驾崩，这时年龄五十四岁，封闭消息不发布讣告。
English: On the 20th, Gao Zu passed away in the Hall of Long Life, at the age of fifty-four. No obituary was published.

古文：二月辛巳朔，内降遗制，皇子周王承祐可于柩前即皇帝位。
现代文：三十日，太傅杜重威被诛杀。二月一日，朝廷下达高祖遗令，皇子、周王刘承可在高祖灵柩前登皇帝位。
English: On February 1, the imperial court issued Gaozu's posthumous order, allowing his son, Prince Zhou Liucheng, to ascend to the throne before Gaozu's funeral.

古文：是日发哀。
现代文：同日发布讣告。
English: An obituary was published the same day.

古文：其年二月，太常卿张昭上谥曰睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：同年三月，太常卿张昭进上高祖谥号叫睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝，庙号叫高祖。
English: In March of the same year, Grand Duke Zhang Zhaojin ascended to Gaozu, whose posthumous name was Ruiwen Shengwu Zhaozhong Emperor, and whose temple name was Gaozu.

古文：十一月壬申，葬于睿陵，宰臣苏禹珪撰谥册、哀册文云。
现代文：十一月二十七日，葬在睿陵，宰臣禹王圭在迁葬时撰写了赞扬高祖功德的韵文。
English: On November 27th, when he was buried in Ruiling, his vassal Yu Wanggui wrote a poem praising Gao Zu's merits.

