古文：乡射之礼。
现代文：乡射的礼仪：主人前往告请宾。
English: The etiquette of town shooting: the host goes to invite the guests.

古文：主人戒宾，宾出迎，再拜。
现代文：宾出门迎接，对主人两拜。
English: Greet guests when they come out, and be courteous to the host.

古文：主人答再拜，乃请。
现代文：主人答两拜，随后致辞邀请宾。
English: The host said two bows, and then invited the guests with a speech.

古文：宾礼辞，许。
现代文：宾推辞一番，接受邀请。
English: The host bowed to the guests, and then gave a speech inviting them to attend.

古文：主人再拜，宾答再拜。
现代文：主人对宾两拜，宾答两拜。
English: The host bows twice to the guest, and the guest bows twice to the host.

古文：主人退；宾送，再拜。
现代文：主人告退，宾两拜送主人。
English: The host withdrew, and the guests came to see the host off.

古文：无介。乃席宾，南面，东上。
现代文：于是为宾布席，面朝南，以东为上首。
English: So it was a ping-pong table, facing south, with the east at the top.

古文：众宾之席，继而西。
现代文：众宾之席，在宾席的西边依次相续布设。
English: The seats for the guests are arranged in sequence on the west side of the table.

古文：席主人于阼阶上，西面。
现代文：在阼阶的上方为主人设席，面朝西。
English: There is a seat for the host at the top of the stairs, facing west.

古文：尊于宾席之东，两壶，斯禁，左玄酒，皆加勺。
现代文：在宾席的东边设两只酒壶，壶下以斯禁相承，玄酒在西边。
English: Two wine jugs are set up on the east side of the guest table, with the forbidden wine under the jug and the forbidden wine on the west side.

古文：篚在其南，东肆。
现代文：两只壶上各放置一只酒勺。篚在壶的南边，东向陈放。
English: A wine spoon is placed on each of the two jugs. The gourd is placed on the south side of the jug, and the wine is aged to the east.

古文：设洗于阼阶东南，南北以堂深，东西当东荣。
现代文：在阼阶的东南方设洗，洗南北的长度与堂深相等，东西与屋的东翼相对。
English: In the southeast of the east steps, there is a wash, the length of the wash from north to south is equal to the depth of the hall, and the east and west are opposite to the east wing of the house.

古文：水在洗东，篚在洗西，南肆。
现代文：水设在洗的东边，篚在洗的西边，南向陈放。
English: The water is set up on the east side of the wash, the straw on the west side of the wash, and it is released to the south.

古文：县于洗东北，西面。
现代文：磬悬置于洗的东北边，面朝西。
English: Suspended on the northeast side of the wash, facing west.

古文：乃张侯，下纲不及地武。
现代文：然后设置箭靶。箭靶下边系靶的纲绳不及于地。
English: Then set up the arrow target. The lower edge of the arrow target is not higher than the ground.

古文：不系左下纲，中掩束之。
现代文：箭靶左下方的纲绳先不要结上，把它与靶的左下幅一起向东卷束掩盖起侯中。
English: Do not knot the lower left sash of the arrow target first. Wrap it together with the lower left width of the target to the east to cover the middle of the warp.

古文：乏参侯道，居侯党之一，西五步。
现代文：乏设在射道总长靠箭靶一旁三分之一、距靶西五步的位置上。
English: The total length of the firing path is set at one-third of the side of the arrow target and five steps west of the target.

古文：羹定。
现代文：肉已煮熟。
English: The meat is cooked.

古文：主人朝服，乃速宾；宾朝服出迎，再拜；主人答再拜，退；宾送，再拜。
现代文：主人答两拜，告退。宾两拜送主人。
English: The host bowed twice and left. The guests bowed twice to see the host off.

古文：宾及众宾遂从之。
现代文：宾和众宾随后而至。
English: Guests and dignitaries followed.

古文：及门，主人一相出迎于门外，再拜；宾答再拜。
现代文：到了州学的大门口，主人与一位相礼者出门外迎接，对宾两拜，宾答两拜。
English: When they arrived at the entrance to the university, the host and a courtesan went out to greet them, bowing twice to the guests and twice to the guests.

古文：揖众宾。
现代文：又对众宾揖。
English: He also waved to the guests.

古文：主人以宾揖，先入。
现代文：主人与宾相揖，主人先进门内。
English: The host and the guest mingle, the host leading the way through the door.

古文：宾厌众宾，众宾皆入门左，东面北上。
现代文：宾长揖请众宾，众宾皆从门西侧入内，面向东，以北为上。
English: Guests are invited to the guest room. All guests enter from the west side of the door, facing east, with north facing up.

古文：宾少进，主人以宾三揖，皆行。
现代文：宾稍稍向前走一点，主人与宾相对三揖，同时前行。
English: The guests walk a little bit forward, the host and the guests stand opposite each other and walk forward at the same time.

古文：及阶，三让，主人升一等，宾升。
现代文：到达堂下阶前，主人与宾相互谦让三番，主人升一级台阶后，宾登阶升堂。
English: Before reaching the lower steps of the hall, the host and the guest should make three mutual concessions. After the host ascends one step, the guest ascends the stairs to the hall.

古文：主人阼阶上当楣北面再拜，宾西阶上当楣北面答再拜。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方对着屋前梁的地方面朝北两拜。宾则在西阶上方对着屋前梁的地方面朝北答两拜。
English: The host should bow twice to the north at the top of the stairs facing the front beam of the house. The guests should bow twice to the north at the top of the west steps facing the front beam of the house.

古文：主人坐取爵于上篚，以降。
现代文：主人坐下，由上篚取爵在手，执爵下堂。
English: The host sits down, takes the knighthood from the upper bowl in his hand, and carries the knighthood down the hall.

古文：宾降。
现代文：宾亦下堂。
English: The guests also left the hall.

古文：主人阼阶前西面坐奠爵，兴辞降。宾对。
现代文：主人在阼阶前面朝西坐下，把爵放置于地上，站起来辞谢宾下堂，宾亦致辞作答。
English: The host sat down facing west in front of the stairs, placed the earring on the ground, stood up to thank the guest, and the guest also gave a speech to answer.

古文：主人坐取爵，兴，适洗，南面坐奠爵于篚下，盥洗。
现代文：主人坐下，取爵在手，起立，到洗前，面朝南坐下，把爵放置于篚下，盥手洗爵。
English: The host sits down, takes the sash in his hand, stands up, and before washing, sits down facing south, places the sash under his armpit, and washes the sash.

古文：宾进，东北面辞洗。
现代文：宾向东前行，面朝东北辞谢主人洗爵。
English: The guest marched eastward and faced the northeast to thank the host for the baptism.

古文：主人坐奠爵于篚，兴对，宾反位。
现代文：主人坐下，把爵放置在篚中，起立对宾致答辞。
English: The host sits down, places the knight in the urn, and stands up to address his guest.

古文：主人卒洗，壹揖，壹让，以宾升。
现代文：宾复归原位。主人洗爵完毕，与宾相对一揖，谦让一番，同时上堂。
English: The guests returned to their original seats. After the christening of the host, he bowed to the guests, humbly, and went into the hall.

古文：宾西阶上北面拜洗。
现代文：宾在西阶的上方面朝北拜射主人洗爵。
English: On the upper side of the west steps, the guests bowed their heads to the north to pray for the baptism of the host.

古文：主人阼阶上北面奠爵，遂答拜，乃降。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方面朝北放爵在地上，随之对宾答拜，然后下堂。
English: The host, facing north on the rung of the stairs, let the knight fall to the ground, then bowed to the guests, and then left the hall.

古文：宾降，主人辞降，宾对。
现代文：宾亦下堂，主人辞谢宾下堂，宾亦致辞作答。
English: The guest also went down the hall, the host thanked the guest for coming down the hall, and the guest also gave a speech.

古文：主人卒盥，壹揖壹让升；宾升，西阶上疑立。
现代文：主人洗手毕，与宾相对一揖，谦让一番，然后上堂。宾上堂，在西阶上方凝神端正站立。
English: The host washed his hands, bowed to the guests, and then went to the hall. The guests went to the hall and stood stiffly at the top of the west steps.

古文：主人坐取爵，实之宾席之前，西北面献宾。
现代文：主人坐下取爵在手，斟满酒，到宾的席前面朝西北献宾。
English: The host sits down with a goblet in his hand, fills it with wine, and waves to the guests from the northwest in front of their table.

古文：宾西阶上北面拜，主人少退。
现代文：宾在西阶上方拜谢主人，主人稍避后退。
English: The guest bowed to the host at the top of the west staircase, and the host stepped back.

古文：宾进受爵于席前，复位。
现代文：宾前行接过酒爵退回原位。
English: The guests marched forward to receive the wine and returned to their original seats.

古文：主人阼阶上拜送爵，宾少退。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方拜送爵，宾稍稍退避。
English: The host bade farewell at the top of the stairs, and the guest stepped back slightly.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：有司把脯醢进置席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：宾升席，自西方。乃设折俎。
现代文：宾从西边就席。有司设折俎于席前。
English: The guests are seated immediately from the west. A steward is kneeling in front of the seats.

古文：主人阼阶东疑立。
现代文：把爵放置在脯醢西边，站起取肺，坐下，断取肺尖以祭肺。
English: The owner is standing upright on the east side of the stairs.

古文：宾坐，左执爵，右祭脯醢，奠爵于荐西，兴取肺，坐，绝祭，尚左手，哜之，兴，加于俎，坐梲手，执爵，遂祭酒，兴，席末坐啐酒，降席，坐尊爵，拜，告旨，执爵兴。
现代文：然后左手上举，尝肺，随之站起，把肺放置俎上。复又坐下，把手擦拭干净，继而手执爵祭酒，起立，在席未端坐下尝酒。下席，坐下放爵在地，一拜，口称： 美酒 ，手持爵起立。
English: Then raise the left hand, taste the lungs, then stand up and place the lungs on the gong. Then sit down again, wipe the hand clean, then hold the sacrificial wine with your hand, stand up, sit down and taste the wine before the end of the meal. Sit down, sit down and put the wine on the ground, bow for a while, saying: Fine wine, stand up holding the wine.

古文：主人阼阶上答拜。
现代文：主人在阼阶的上方对宾答拜。
English: The host then stands up, holding the sash in his hand, and bows to the guests at the top of the stairs.

古文：宾西阶上北面坐卒爵，兴，坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵兴。
现代文：宾在西阶上方面朝北坐下干杯，起立。复又坐下将爵放置地上，随即一拜，然后执爵起立。
English: The guest sits facing north on the west side of the steps, makes a toast, and then stands up. He then sits down again, places the lord on the ground, immediately bows, and then stands up.

古文：主人阼阶上答拜。
现代文：主人在阼阶的上方对宾答拜。
English: The host then stands up, holding the sash in his hand, and bows to the guests at the top of the stairs.

古文：宾以虚爵降。
现代文：宾手持空爵下堂。
English: The guest leaves the hall with the empty sword in his hand.

古文：主人降。
现代文：主人亦下堂。
English: The master is coming down the hall to greet the followers.

古文：宾西阶前东面坐奠爵，兴，辞降；主人对。
现代文：宾在西阶前面朝东坐下，把爵放在地上，站起辞谢主人下堂，主人对宾作答。
English: The guest sat down facing east in front of the west steps, put the knight on the ground, stood up and thanked the host for coming down the hall. The host answered the guest.

古文：宾坐取爵，适洗，北面坐奠爵于篚下，兴，盥洗。
现代文：宾坐下取爵在手，到洗之前，面朝北坐下，放爵在篚下，起立盥手洗爵。
English: The guest sits down and takes the sash in his hand, before washing, sits down facing north, puts the sash under his arm, and stands up and washes the sash with his hand.

古文：主人阼阶之东，南面辞洗。
现代文：主人在阼阶的东边面朝南致辞，谢宾洗爵。
English: The master gave a speech facing south on the east side of the stairs. Xie Bin was given a knighthood.

古文：宾坐奠爵于篚，兴对。
现代文：宾坐下，把爵放在篚中，站起，致辞作答。
English: The guest sits down, puts the earl in the urn, stands up, makes a speech and answers.

古文：主人反位。
现代文：主人复回其位。
English: The master returns to his seat.

古文：宾卒洗，揖让如初，升。
现代文：宾洗爵完毕，像主人献宾时一样，与主人相互揖让，上堂。
English: After the christening of the guests, just as when the host is presenting the guests, the guests and the host make mutual concessions and go into the hall.

古文：主人拜洗，宾答拜，兴，降盥，如主人之礼。
现代文：主人拜谢宾洗爵，宾对主人答拜，起立，下堂洗手，其礼节与主人献宾时相同。
English: The host thanks the guest for being baptized, the guest answers the host, stands up, and washes his hands when leaving the hall. The etiquette is the same as when the host is presenting the guest.

古文：宾升，实爵主人之席前，东南面酢主人。
现代文：宾上堂，斟满酒，到主人席前面朝东南酢主人。
English: The guests enter the hall, fill their glasses with wine, and walk to the front of the host's table.

古文：主人阼阶上拜，宾少退。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方拜宾，宾稍退后避让。
English: The host bowed to the guest at the top of the stairs, and the guest stepped back slightly.

古文：主人进受爵，复位，宾西阶上拜送爵。
现代文：主人进前接爵在手，回到自己的位子上。宾在西阶上方拜送爵。
English: The host stepped forward to receive the baron and returned to his seat. The guest waited for the baron at the top of the west steps.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：有司把脯醢进置主人席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：主人升席自北方。
现代文：主人从北面即席。
English: The host is seated immediately to the north.

古文：乃设折俎。
现代文：接着有司将折俎进放主人席前。
English: Next, a steward places the folding screen in front of the owner's seat.

古文：祭如宾礼，不告旨，自席前适阼阶上，北面坐卒爵，兴，坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵兴。
现代文：祭酒、祭脯醢的礼节与宾相同，不称赞酒美。主人从席前至阼阶上方，面朝北坐下干杯，起立。复又坐下放爵于地，随即一拜，然后手持爵站起。
English: The etiquette for offering wine and sake is the same as for guests, and does not commend the beauty of the wine. The host sits down from the front of the table to the top of the rung, faces north, makes a toast, and then stands up. He then sits down again, lays his sword on the ground, immediately bows, and then stands up with the sword in his hand.

古文：宾西阶上北面答拜。
现代文：宾在西阶上方面朝北答拜主人。
English: The guests bowed to their host on the west steps, facing north.

古文：主人坐奠爵于序端，阼阶上再拜崇酒，宾西阶上答再拜。
现代文：主人坐下，把爵放置在东序端地上，在阼阶上方两拜，把酒壶添满，宾在西阶上方对主人答两拜。
English: The host sits down, places the chalice on the floor at the east end of the row, bows twice above the rung, fills the wine jug, and the guest bows twice to the host above the west rung.

古文：主人坐取觯于篚，以降。
现代文：主人坐下在篚中取觯，持觯下堂。
English: The owner sits down, takes the bowl from the urn, and walks down the hall holding the urn.

古文：宾降，主人奠觯辞降，宾对，东面立。
现代文：宾下堂，主人放觯在地辞谢宾下堂。宾亦致辞作答，面朝东站立。
English: In the guest hall, the host put the gong in the floor to thank the guest. The guest also gave a speech and stood facing east.

古文：主人坐取觯，洗，宾不辞洗。
现代文：主人坐下，取觯在手，洗觯。宾不辞谢主人洗觯。
English: The host sits down, picks up the bowl and washes it. The guest thanks the host profusely for washing the bowl.

古文：卒洗，揖让升。
现代文：主人洗觯完毕，与宾相互揖让上堂。
English: After the host has washed the dishes, he and his guests let each other into the hall.

古文：宾西阶上疑立。
现代文：宾在西阶的上方端正站立。
English: The guest stands at the top of the west steps.

古文：主人实觯，酬之，阼阶上北面坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴。
现代文：主人斟酒，酬宾，在阼阶上方面朝北坐下，放觯在地，随即一拜，然后持觯起立。
English: The host pours the wine, and the guests are invited to sit facing north on the rung of the rung, place the gong on the ground, bow once, and then stand up holding the gong.

古文：宾西阶上北面答拜。
现代文：宾在西阶上方面朝北答拜主人。
English: The guests bowed to their host on the west steps, facing north.

古文：主人坐祭，遂饮，卒觯，兴，坐奠觯，遂拜，执觯兴。
现代文：主人坐下，祭酒，随即饮酒，干杯后起立。复又坐下，放觯在地，随即一拜，持觯起立。
English: The host sits down, offers wine, then drinks, stands up after the toast, sits down again, puts the urn on the ground, immediately bows, and stands up holding the urn.

古文：宾西阶上北面答拜。
现代文：宾在西阶上方面朝北答拜主人。
English: The guests bowed to their host on the west steps, facing north.

古文：主人降洗。
现代文：主人下堂洗觯。
English: The host went downstairs to wash the dishes.

古文：宾降辞，如献礼，升，不拜洗。
现代文：宾随之下堂并辞谢主人。上堂，不拜谢主人洗觯。
English: The guest then goes down the hall and thanks the host. On the way up, he washes the dishes without thanking the host.

古文：宾西阶上立。
现代文：宾在西阶上方站立。
English: The guest stands at the top of the west steps.

古文：主人实觯宾之席前，北面。
现代文：主人斟满酒，到宾席前面朝北站立。
English: The host pours the wine and stands facing north in front of the guests.

古文：宾西阶上拜。
现代文：宾在西阶的上方拜主人。
English: The guests bow to their host at the top of the west staircase.

古文：主人坐奠觯于荐西。
现代文：主人坐下，将觯放在脯醢西边的地上。
English: The owner sits down and places the plough on the ground to the west of the reeds.

古文：宾辞，坐取觯以兴，反位。
现代文：宾致辞谢主人，坐下，取觯站起，回到自己的位子上。
English: The guest thanks the host, sits down, takes the gong, stands up, and returns to his seat.

古文：主人阼阶上拜送。
现代文：主人在阼阶的上方拜送觯。
English: The master bows at the top of the stairs.

古文：宾北面坐奠觯于荐东，反位。
现代文：宾面朝北坐下，把觯放在脯醢东边地上，然后返回自己的位子。
English: The guest sits facing north, places the gong on the ground to the east of the gong, and then returns to his seat.

古文：主人揖降。
现代文：主人揖宾，下堂。
English: The host and his guests leave the hall.

古文：宾降，东面立于西阶西，当西序。
现代文：宾下堂，面朝东站立在西阶西侧正对西序的地方。
English: The guest hall, facing east, stands on the west side of the west steps, directly opposite the west aisle.

古文：主人西南面三拜众宾，众宾皆答一拜。
现代文：主人面朝西南拜众宾三次，众宾皆答主人一拜。
English: The host faced southwest and bowed to the guests three times, and the guests all bowed to the host once.

古文：主人揖升，坐取爵于序端，降洗；升实爵，西阶上献从宾。
现代文：主人揖，上堂，在序端坐下，取爵在手，下堂洗爵，然后上堂斟酒，在西阶的上方献众宾。
English: The host goes into the hall, sits down at the front of the hall, takes the knighthood in his hand, goes down the hall to be knighted, and then goes into the hall to pour the wine and present it to the guests at the top of the west steps.

古文：众宾之长升拜受者三人，主人拜送。
现代文：众宾中年长者三人上堂拜受爵，主人拜送爵。
English: Among the guests, three elderly people came to the hall to be knighted, and the host was knighted.

古文：坐祭，立饮，不拜；既爵，授主人爵；降复位。
现代文：这三人坐着祭祀，站着饮酒，干杯后不拜，将爵还授与主人，下堂回到原位。
English: The three of them sat and offered sacrifices, drank alcohol while standing, did not bow after the toast, bestowed a peerage on the host, and returned to their original seats.

古文：众宾皆不拜，受爵，坐祭，立饮。
现代文：众宾接受爵时都不拜，坐着祭祀，站着饮酒。
English: The guests do not bow when receiving a knighthood, they offer sacrifices while sitting and drink alcohol while standing.

古文：每一人献，则荐诸其席。
现代文：主人对众宾年长者三人中每一人献酒，有司都要把脯醢进置其席前。
English: The host offered a drink to each of the three elderly guests, and all of them had to place their goblets in front of their seats.

古文：众宾辩有脯醢。
现代文：其他众宾也都要把脯醢进置其位。
English: Other guests should also recommend it.

古文：主人以虚爵降，奠于篚。
现代文：主人持空爵下堂，把爵放置篚中。
English: The host went down the hall with the empty sword and placed it in the urn.

古文：揖让升。
现代文：主人与宾相互揖让上堂。
English: The host and the guest let each other into the hall.

古文：宾厌众宾升，众宾皆升，就席。
现代文：宾长揖请众宾上堂，众宾皆上堂，即席。
English: The head waiter invited all the guests to the hall. All the guests came to the hall and sat down.

古文：一人洗，举觯于宾；升实觯，西阶上坐奠觯；拜，执觯兴。
现代文：主人之吏一人洗觯，举觯授宾。举觯者上堂斟酒，在西阶上方坐下，放觯在地，随即一拜，持觯起立。
English: One of the host's clerks washes the gong and raises it to confer with the guests. The person who raises the gong goes to the hall, pours the wine, sits down at the top of the west steps, puts the gong on the ground, then bows and stands up holding the gong.

古文：宾席末答拜。
现代文：宾在席的末端答拜。
English: The guest bowed at the end of the table.

古文：举觯者坐祭，遂饮，卒觯，兴；坐奠觯，拜，执觯兴；宾答拜。
现代文：举觯坐下祭酒，随即饮酒，干杯后起立。复又坐下放觯在地上，随即一拜，执觯起立。宾答拜。
English: Raise the gong, sit down and drink the sacrificial wine, then drink, stand up after the toast. Then sit down again and put the gong on the ground, then bow, hold the gong and stand up.

古文：降洗，升实之，西阶上北面。宾拜。
现代文：举觯者下堂洗觯，上堂斟酒，面朝北站立于西阶上方。宾拜谢。
English: The person who raises the gong washes the gong in the lower hall, pours the wine in the upper hall, and stands at the top of the west steps, facing north.

古文：举觯者进，坐奠觯于荐西。
现代文：举觯者前行把觯放在脯醢的西边。
English: The hoist advances and places the anchor on the west side of the mast.

古文：宾辞，坐取以兴，举觯者西阶上拜送。
现代文：宾辞谢，坐下取觯在手，起立。举觯者在西阶上方拜送觯。
English: The guests bow their thanks, sit down and take the urns in their hands, then stand up. The bearer of the urns bows at the top of the west steps.

古文：宾反奠于其所。
现代文：宾复将觯放置于原位。
English: The guest of honour left the urn in its original place.

古文：举觯者降。
现代文：举觯者下堂。
English: The curtain is raised and everyone leaves the hall.

古文：大夫若有遵者，则入门左。
现代文：若有大夫为遵者，则从门西侧入内。
English: If there is a doctor as a follower, then enter from the west side of the door.

古文：主人降。
现代文：主人下堂迎遵者。
English: The master is coming down the hall to greet the followers.

古文：宾及众宾皆降，复初位。
现代文：宾与众宾亦皆下堂，站立在初入门时的位置。
English: The guests and all the guests also went down the hall and stood in the position they were in when they first entered.

古文：主人揖让，以大夫升，拜至，大夫答拜。
现代文：主人与大夫相揖让上堂。主人拜谢大夫的光临，大夫答拜主人。
English: The master and the doctor bowed to each other and let him into the hall. The master thanked the doctor for coming, and the doctor bowed to the master.

古文：主人以爵降，大夫降。
现代文：主人持爵下堂，大夫亦下堂。
English: The host came down the hall with a knighthood, and the doctor also came down.

古文：主人辞降。
现代文：主人辞谢大夫下堂。
English: The host left the hall to thank the doctor.

古文：大夫辞洗，如宾礼，席于尊东。
现代文：大夫辞谢主人为之洗爵，其礼节与宾相同。
English: The doctor thanked his host for the honour of being knighted, with the same courtesy as his guest.

古文：升，不拜洗。
现代文：在酒壶的东边为遵者设席。
English: There are seats for followers on the east side of the wine jug.

古文：主人实爵，席前献于大夫。
现代文：升堂，遵者不拜谢主人洗爵。主人斟满酒，至席前献大夫。
English: When ascending the hall, those who do not bow to the master are baptized. The master pours wine and presents the doctor to the front of the table.

古文：大夫西阶上拜，进受爵，反位。
现代文：大夫在西阶上方拜谢，前行接爵，回返其位。
English: The doctor bowed his thanks at the top of the west staircase, marched forward to receive the knighthood, and returned to his seat.

古文：主人大夫之右拜送。
现代文：主人在大夫的右边拜送爵。
English: His master was on the doctor's right, bowing to him.

古文：大夫辞加席。
现代文：大夫要辞去上一重席。
English: The doctor is resigning from his post.

古文：主人对，不去加席。
现代文：主人致辞作答，不撤其上一重席。
English: The host gave a speech in reply, and did not withdraw from his seat.

古文：乃荐脯醢。大夫升席。
现代文：有司随之把脯醢进置大夫席前。
English: Thereupon, Yushi placed the shovel in front of the doctor's chair.

古文：设折俎。
现代文：大夫即席。
English: A steward places the folding basket in front of the host's seat.

古文：祭如宾礼，不哜肺，不啐酒，不告旨，西阶上卒爵，拜。
现代文：有司把折俎进置席前。遵者祭肺祭酒，其仪式与宾相同，不尝肺，不尝酒，不称赞酒美，在西阶上方干杯，拜。
English: There is a steward who places the folding screen in front of the seats. The ceremony of the lung-sacrifice and wine-sacrifice for the followers is the same as that for the guests. They do not taste the lung, do not taste the wine, do not praise the beauty of the wine. They drink a toast and pray at the top of the west staircase.

古文：主人答拜。
现代文：主人答拜遵者。
English: The host returns the compliment.

古文：大夫降洗，主人复阼阶，降辞如初。卒洗。主人盥，揖让升。
现代文：大夫下堂洗爵，主人回到阼阶，下堂辞谢之仪与前相同，洗爵毕，主人洗手，与遵者相互揖让上堂。
English: The doctor goes down to the hall to be knighted, the master returns to the dais, the ceremony of resignation and thanksgiving is the same as before, the knight is baptized, the master washes his hands, and the followers mutually concede to the hall.

古文：大夫授主人爵于两楹间，复位。
现代文：大夫在堂上两柱之间把爵授与主人后，回到原位。
English: After conferring the title of knight on his master between the two pillars in the hall, the doctor returned to his original position.

古文：主人实爵，以酢于西阶上，坐奠爵，拜，大夫答拜。
现代文：主人斟酒，用它在西阶上行酢酒之仪。主人坐下，放爵于地上，随之一拜。大夫答拜主人。
English: The host pours the wine and uses it to perform the ritual of pouring vinegar on the west steps. The host sits down, lays the crown on the ground, and then bows. The doctor then bows to the host.

古文：坐祭，卒爵，拜，大夫答拜。
现代文：主人坐而祭酒，干杯后一拜。大夫答拜。
English: The host sits and offers wine, then bows after the toast. The doctor bows back.

古文：主人坐奠爵于西楹南，再拜崇酒，大夫答拜。
现代文：主人在西楹南边坐下，放爵于地上，两拜添酒。大夫答拜。
English: The owner sat down on the south side of the Xidi, put the knight on the ground, and poured two cups of wine. The doctor replied.

古文：主人复阼阶，揖降。
现代文：主人回到阼阶上，作揖下堂。
English: The master returned to the stairs and went downstairs.

古文：大夫降，立于宾南。
现代文：大夫下堂，站立在宾的南边。
English: The doctor went down the hall and stood on the south side of the guests.

古文：主人揖让，以宾升，大夫及众宾皆升，就席。
现代文：主人与宾相互揖让上堂。大夫和众宾都上堂，各就其席。
English: The host and the guests let each other into the hall. The doctor and all the guests came into the hall, each to his seat.

古文：席工于西阶上，少东。
现代文：在西阶上方稍东的位置为乐工布席。
English: On the west steps, slightly to the east, there is a musician's seat.

古文：乐正先升，北面立于其西。
现代文：乐正先上堂，面朝北站立在席的西边。
English: Le Zheng entered the hall first, facing north and standing on the west side of the seat.

古文：工四人，二瑟，瑟先，相者皆左何瑟，面鼓，执越，内弦。
现代文：乐工四人，其中二人鼓瑟，鼓瑟者在前。相者皆左手荷瑟，瑟首在前，手在瑟下孔处执瑟，瑟弦朝内，以右手扶乐工。
English: There are four musicians, two of whom are the percussionists, with the percussionist at the front. All of them are holding the harpsichord in their left hand, the bow in front, the hands at the bottom of the harpsichord, the strings in front, and the right hand holding the harpsichord.

古文：右手相，入，升自西阶，北面东上。
现代文：乐工入内，从西阶上堂，面朝北，以东为上。
English: Musicians enter from the west, face north, and exit from the east.

古文：工坐。相者坐授瑟，乃降。
现代文：乐工坐下，相者坐下把瑟授与鼓瑟的乐工，然后下堂。
English: The musicians sit down, the audience sits down and applauds the musicians, who then leave the hall.

古文：笙入，立于县中，西面。
现代文：吹笙者入内，站立在磬的东边，面朝西。
English: The trumpeter enters and stands on the east side of the cymbal, facing west.

古文：乃合乐：《周南·关雎》、《葛覃》、《卷耳》，《召南·鹊巢》、《采蘩》、《采苹》。
现代文：接着，堂上歌、瑟，堂下笙、磬一齐演奏《周南·关雎》、《葛覃》、《卷耳》，《召南·鹊巢》、《采繁》、《采蘋》诸诗篇。
English: Then, songs and serenades at the beginning and end of the performance, as well as gongs and cymbals at the end of the performance, performed together the poems "Zhou Nan Guanzhang," "Ge Zheng," "Rolling Ear" and "Zhanan Guanzhong," "Zhe Sheng" and "Zhe Ping."

古文：工不兴，告于乐正，曰： 正歌备。 
现代文：乐工不起立，报告乐正说： 正歌已演奏完毕。 
English: The musician did not stand up, and the announcer said, "The main song has finished playing.

古文：乐正告于宾，乃降。
现代文：乐正以此告宾，然后下堂。
English: Le Zheng announced the guests with this, and then left the hall.

古文：主人取爵于上篚，献工。
现代文：主人由堂上筐中取爵献乐工。
English: The owner takes a piece from the basket in the hall and offers it to the musicians.

古文：大师则为之洗。
现代文：如有大师，则主人为他洗爵。
English: If there is a master among them, he will be given a knighthood.

古文：宾降，主人辞降。
现代文：宾下堂，主人辞谢宾。
English: The guest follows the host down the hall, and the host thanks the guest.

古文：工不辞洗。
现代文：乐工不辞谢主人洗爵。
English: Musicians do their best to get their masters knighted.

古文：卒洗，升实爵。
现代文：主人洗爵毕，上堂斟酒。
English: The host has been christened and is pouring wine in the hall.

古文：工不兴，左瑟，一人拜受爵。
现代文：乐工不起立，把瑟放在左边，乐工中为首者一人拜而受爵。
English: The musicians did not stand up, but placed their sashes to the left. The first musician bowed and received a knighthood.

古文：主人阼阶上拜送爵。
现代文：主人在阼阶的上方拜送爵。
English: The master is receiving a knighthood at the top of the stairs.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：有司把脯醢进置其席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：使人相祭。
现代文：使相者赞助他祭酒、祭脯醢。
English: Make the celebrant sponsor the sacrificial wine and gong.

古文：工饮，不拜既爵，授主人爵。
现代文：乐工饮酒，干杯后不拜，把爵还授与主人。
English: Musicians drink alcohol, do not bow after a toast, and award a knighthood to the host.

古文：众工不拜，受爵，祭饮，辩有脯醢。
现代文：其余众乐工则不拜而受爵，祭酒后饮之。
English: The rest of the musicians were knighted without bowing, and drank it after the sacrificial wine.

古文：不祭，不洗。
现代文：献酒时每人都有脯醢，但不祭脯醢。
English: When offering wine, everyone has a gong, but they do not sacrifice the gong.

古文：遂献笙于西阶上。
现代文：接着，主人在西阶上献吹笙人。
English: Next, the owner presented a blow-up doll on the west steps.

古文：笙一人拜于下，尽阶，不升堂。
现代文：吹笙人中长者一人在西阶下拜谢主人，上到最后一级台阶，不上堂，接受酒爵。
English: One of the elders among the braggarts bowed to his master at the foot of the west steps, climbed up to the last step, left the hall, and accepted the award.

古文：受爵，主人拜送爵。
现代文：主人拜送爵。
English: My master is to be knighted.

古文：阶前坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵，升，授主人爵。众笙不拜，受爵，坐祭，立饮，辩有脯醢，不祭。
现代文：在阶前坐下祭酒、祭脯醢，站起饮酒，干杯后不拜，然后上台阶把爵还授与主人，其余吹笙人不拜而接爵，坐着祭酒，起立饮酒。向其余众吹笙人献酒时都要进置脯醢于其位，但不祭脯醢。
English: In front of the steps, sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, the sacrificial bowl, stand up to drink, after the toast, do not bow, and then go up the steps to give the title back to the master, the rest of the trumpeters do not bow and take the title, sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, stand up to drink. When offering wine to the rest of the trumpeters, they must put the bowl in its place, but do not sacrifice the bowl.

古文：主人以爵降，尊于篚，反升，就席。
现代文：主人持空爵下堂，把爵放置篚中，然后上堂即席。
English: The host went down the hall with the empty sword, placed the sword in the urn, and then went to the hall without a seat.

古文：主人降席自南方，侧降，作相为司正。
现代文：主人从南侧下席，独自一人下堂，命相礼人行司正之事。
English: The master sat down from the south side and went down the hall alone. It was a matter of life and death.

古文：司正礼辞，许诺。
现代文：司正推辞一番，答应了。
English: Sisho declined, but agreed.

古文：主人再拜，司正答拜。
现代文：主人两拜，司正答拜主人。
English: The host bowed twice, and the secretary bowed to the host.

古文：主人升就席。
现代文：主人上堂，回至席上。
English: The host enters the hall and returns to his seat.

古文：司正洗觯，升自西阶，由楹内适阼阶上，北面受命于主人；西阶上北面请安于宾。宾礼辞，许。
现代文：司正洗觯，从西阶上堂，由楹北前行至阼阶上方，面朝北接受主人之命。又至西阶上方请宾安止，宾推辞一番，许诺。
English: The secretary, Zheng Rong, went up the hall from the west steps, and walked from the north of the hall to the top of the steps, facing north to accept the master's order. And when he reached the top of the west steps, he asked the guests to stop, and the guests declined and promised.

古文：司正告于主人，遂立于楹间以相拜。
现代文：司正告知主人，然后站立在堂上两楹之间相拜。
English: The master was informed by the steward, and then they stood between the two pillars in the hall and bowed to each other.

古文：主人阼阶上再拜，宾西阶上答再拜，皆揖就席。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方两拜谢宾，宾则在西阶上方对主人答两拜，然后相揖各就席。
English: The host bows twice to the guest at the top of the rung, and the guest bows twice to the host at the top of the west rung, and then they both take their seats.

古文：司正实觯，降自西阶，中庭北面坐奠觯，兴，退，少立；进，坐取觯，兴；反坐，不祭，遂卒觯，兴；坐奠觯，拜，执觯兴；洗，北面坐奠于其所，兴；少退，北面立于觯南。
现代文：司正斟酒，从西阶下堂，在庭当中的位置上面朝北坐下，放觯在地。起立，退后站立片刻。
English: The steward is pouring the wine. He comes down from the west steps, sits down in the middle of the courtyard, facing north, and places the gourd on the ground. He stands up, steps back and stands for a moment.

古文：未旅。
现代文：未即行旅酬之仪。
English: Soon after, the travel reward ceremony took place.

古文：三耦俟于堂西，南面东上。
现代文：三耦面朝南在堂下西边等候，以东为上。
English: The three-coupled south-facing faces wait on the west side of the hall, with the east facing up.

古文：司射适堂西，袒决遂，取弓于阶西，兼挟乘矢，升自西阶。
现代文：司射至堂下西边，袒露左臂，在大拇指上套上钩弦的扳指，左臂着上皮制的臂衣，至阶西取弓在手，以左手执弓，右大指勾弦，二三指间并持四矢，由西阶上堂。
English: The priest shoots to the west side of the hall, exposes his left arm, puts a hooked string wrench on his thumb, puts an epithelial armband on his left arm, takes the bow in his hand to the west, holds the bow with his left hand, hooks the string with his right thumb, and holds four arrows between two or three fingers, and walks up the hall from the west steps.

古文：阶上北面告于宾，曰： 弓矢既具，有司请射。 
现代文：在西阶上方面朝北向宾报告说： 弓箭都已齐备，执事者请求射事开始。 
English: On the west steps, the north side reported to the guest: The bows and arrows are all ready, and the deacon requests that the shooting begin.

古文：宾对曰： 某不能。
现代文：宾回答说： 在下德艺不高，但由于诸位先生的缘故，不能不许。 
English: The guest replied, "I am not very good at it, but for the sake of you gentlemen, I cannot help it.

古文：为二三子。 许诺。
现代文：宾许诺。
English: I promise.

古文：司射适阼阶上，东北面告于主人，曰： 请射于宾，宾许。 
现代文：司射至阼阶上方，面朝东北报告主人说： 向宾请射，宾已准许。 
English: The archer shot up to the top of the stairs, facing northeast, and reported to the host: "Please shoot the guest. The guest has given permission to shoot."

古文：司射降自西阶；阶前西面，命弟子纳射器。
现代文：司射由西阶下堂，在阶前面朝西命弟子搬射箭的器具入内。
English: The archer went down the hall from the west steps, and the disciple carrying the archery equipment went into the hall from the front of the steps.

古文：乃纳射器，皆在堂西。
现代文：弟子搬射箭器具入内，陈放在堂下西边。
English: The disciple brought the archery equipment inside and placed it on the west side of the hall.

古文：宾与大夫之弓倚于西序，矢在弓下，北括。
现代文：宾和大夫之弓靠于西夹西边堂廉上，矢横放在弓下，箭括朝北。
English: Bin and Dafu's bows rest on the west side of the west side of the hall, the arrows are placed horizontally under the bow, and the arrows are facing north.

古文：众弓倚于堂西，矢在其上。
现代文：其余众弓靠于堂下西边，矢则横放在弓的上方堂廉上。
English: The rest of the bows are leaning against the west side of the lower hall, and the arrows are placed horizontally on the upper square of the bow.

古文：主人之弓矢，在东序东。
现代文：主人的弓矢陈放在东夹东边堂廉上。
English: The master's bow and arrow were placed on the east side of the hall.

古文：司射不释弓矢，遂以比三耦于堂西。
现代文：司射仍然两手持弓矢，在堂下西边挑选组成三耦。
English: The archer still holds a bow and arrow in both hands, and selects three couples to form a circle on the west side of the hall.

古文：三耦之南，北面，命上射曰： 某御于子。 
现代文：在三耦的南边面朝北命上射说： 某人侍射于先生。 
English: On the south side of the three-couple, facing north, he said: "Someone shot at my husband.

古文：命下射曰： 子与某子射。 
现代文：命下射说： 先生与某某先生射。 
English: Ordered to shoot, he said: "Teacher, shoot that so-and-so teacher."

古文：司正为司马，司马命张侯，弟子说束，遂系左下纲。
现代文：司正暂行司马之职。司马命张设箭靶，弟子解束，随之将箭靶左下方的纲绳栓在立柱上。
English: Sima Minoru set up an arrow target, the disciple untied the bundle, and then fastened the lower left side of the arrow target to the pillar.

古文：司马又命获者： 倚旌于侯中。 
现代文：司马又命获者把旌旗倚置在箭靶的中央。
English: Sima was also ordered to place the banner in the center of the target.

古文：获者由西方，坐取旌，倚于侯中，乃退。
现代文：获者在靶的西边坐下，取旌旗在手，倚置于箭靶中央，然后退下。
English: The winner sits down on the west side of the target, takes the banner in his hand, leans in the center of the target, and then retreats.

古文：乐正适西方，命弟子赞工，迁乐于下。弟子相工，如初入；降自西降，阼阶下之东南，堂前三笴，西面北上坐。
现代文：乐正至堂下西边，命弟子相助乐工，将瑟迁至堂下，弟子像乐工入内时一样，相助乐工，从西阶下堂，至阼阶下东南方向，距堂前三箭杆远的地方面朝西坐下，以北为上首。
English: The music was moved to the west side of the lower hall, and the disciples were ordered to help the musicians move to the lower hall. The disciples helped the musicians move from the west side of the lower hall to the southeast side of the lower hall, away from the three arrows in front of the hall, and sat down facing west, with the north as the top.

古文：乐正北面立于其南。
现代文：乐正面朝北站立在他们的南边。
English: Le, facing north, stood to their south.

古文：司射犹挟乘矢，以命三耦： 各与其耦让取弓矢，拾！ 
现代文：司射仍双手执弓，并持四矢，命令三耦说： 每位射手各自与自己的射耦相互揖让，轮流取弓矢。 
English: The archer, still holding the bow with both hands and holding the four arrows, ordered the three couples to say: "Each archer must give way to his or her partner and take turns taking the bow and arrows."

古文：三耦皆袒决遂。有司左执弣，右执弦，而授弓，遂授矢。
现代文：三耦皆袒开左臂，在大拇指上套上钩弦的扳指，左臂着上皮制的臂衣。有司左手执弓把，右手执弓弦，把弓授与三耦，然后授矢。
English: The three couples all pried open their left arms, looped a hook-stringed wrench around their thumbs, and put an epithelial armband on their left arms. Yoshi held the bow handle in his left hand and the bow string in his right hand, awarded the bow to the three couples, and then gave them the arrows.

古文：三耦皆执弓，搢三而挟一个。
现代文：三耦皆左手执弓，插三矢于身右腰带之间，右手二三指间挟矢一技。
English: All three couples hold the bow with their left hand, insert three arrows between their right and left belts, and hold the arrow between two or three fingers of their right hand.

古文：司射先立于所设中之西南，东面。
现代文：司射先行站立在将要设中的位置的西南边，面朝东。
English: The archer stands at the southwest edge of the position to be set in the middle, facing east.

古文：三耦皆进，由司射之西，立于其西南，东面北上而俟。
现代文：三耦由司射的西边一起前行，至司射的西南边面朝东站立等候，以北为上首。
English: The three couples marched together from the west side of the spire to the southwest side of the spire and stood waiting facing east, with the north at the top.

古文：司射东面立于三耦之北，搢三而挟一个，揖进；当阶，北面揖；及阶，揖；升常，揖；豫则钩楹内，堂则由楹外。
现代文：司射面朝东站立在三耦的北边，将三枝箭插在身右腰带间，右手二、三指间挟矢一枝，揖而前行。行至与阶相直时，面朝北作揖，到了阶前，一揖，上堂，又一揖。
English: The archer stands facing east on the north side of the three-coupled circle, inserts three arrows between the waistband on the right side of the body, and holds one arrow between two or three fingers on the right hand, and hobbles forward. When the line is straight with the steps, he hobbles facing north, and when he reaches the front of the steps, he hobbles one step, goes up the stairs, and hobbles another step.

古文：当左物，北面揖；及物，揖。
现代文：射礼如在州学中举行，要绕楹的东边向北行；如射礼在乡学中举行，则要由楹南东行。
English: If the shooting ceremony is held in the county school, it should go north around the east side of the moat; if the shooting ceremony is held in the township school, it should go east from the south of the moat.

古文：左足履物，不方足，还；视侯中，俯正足。
现代文：行至与东边的射位相垂直的位置，面朝北一揖，到射位前，又一揖。左脚踏在射位的十字标志上，两脚不并拢，即由面朝北转向面朝南。
English: Walk to the position perpendicular to the shooting position on the east side, face north, take one step, before the shooting position, take another step. Left foot on the cross mark of the shooting position, the two feet are not close together, that is, from facing north to facing south.

古文：不去旌。诱射，将乘矢。
现代文：目视箭靶正中，然后俯视其足，端正站立的姿势。不撤去倚置在靶中央的旌旗。
English: Look at the target in the center of the arrow, then look down at its foot and stand up straight. Do not remove the shield that is placed in the center of the target.

古文：执弓不挟，右执弦。
现代文：司射射箭四枝以作示范。然后左手执弓，右手执弦，不挟矢。
English: The archer shoots four arrows as a demonstration. Then the left hand holds the bow, the right hand holds the string, and the arrow is not caught.

古文：南面揖，揖如升射；降，出于其位南；适堂西，改取一个，挟之。
现代文：面朝南揖，其仪节如上堂射箭时相同。司射下堂，由其位子的南边前至堂下西边，另取矢一枝，挟于右手二、三指间。
English: He shoots from the south front of his seat to the west side of the lower hall, taking another arrow and holding it between two or three fingers of his right hand.

古文：遂适阶西，取扑，搢之，以反位。
现代文：然后至西阶的西边，取扑插于带间，返回其原位。
English: Then go to the west side of the west steps, take the flaps, insert them between the bands, and return to their original position.

古文：司马命获者执旌以负侯，获者适侯，执旌负侯而俟。
现代文：司马命获者手执旌旗，面朝北背箭靶站立。获者至靶前，手执旌旗背向箭靶站立等候。
English: The winner of the Sima Life held a banner in his hand and stood facing north with his back to the target. The winner stood in front of the target holding a banner with his back to the target and waited.

古文：司射还，当上耦西面，作上耦射。
现代文：司射向左转，面向西与上耦相对，使上耦上堂射。
English: The shooter turned to the left, facing west and opposite the upper coupler, causing the upper coupler to shoot up.

古文：司射反位。
现代文：司射返归原位。
English: The sprayer returns to its place.

古文：上耦揖进，上射在左，并行；当阶，北面揖；及阶，揖。
现代文：上耦揖而前行，上射在左边，二人并行。行至与阶相直的地方，面朝北一揖，至西阶前，一揖。
English: The upper couple walk forward, the upper shot is on the left, and the two walk in parallel. They walk to the place that is straight with the steps, facing north for one step, and to the west before the steps, for one step.

古文：上射先升三等，下射从之，中等。
现代文：上射先上三级台阶，下射随后登阶，与上射中间隔一级台阶。
English: The upper shot first goes up three steps, the lower shot then climbs the steps, and the upper shot is separated by one step.

古文：上射升堂，少左；下射升，上射揖，并行。
现代文：上射上堂后，稍靠西边站立。下射上堂，上射作揖，二人并排前行。
English: After shooting up to the hall, stand a little to the west. Shoot down to the hall, shoot up to the rafters, and walk two abreast.

古文：皆当其物，北面揖；及物，揖。
现代文：二人皆直对自己的射位面朝北作揖，至射位，又一揖。
English: Both of them made a right angle to the north of their shooting position, and another right angle to the shooting position.

古文：皆左足履物，还视侯中，合足而俟。
现代文：二人都以左脚踏在自己的射位的十字标志上，由面朝北转为面朝南，目视箭靶正中，两足合拢站立等候。
English: Both of them put their left foot on the cross mark of their shooting position, turned from facing north to facing south, sighted the arrow target in the middle, closed their feet and stood waiting.

古文：司马适堂西，不决遂，袒执弓，出于司射之南，升自西阶；钩楹，由上射之后，西南面立于物间；右执箫，南扬弓，命去侯。
现代文：司马至堂下西边，不套扳指，不着臂衣，只袒露左臂，手执弓，转从司射南边出来，由西阶上堂，绕西楹西向北行，再向东转，从上射的后边转而面朝西南，站立在上、下射位之间。以左手持弓的梢端，向南举起，命获者离开箭靶。
English: Sima went to the west side of the hall, without a wrench, without a coat, only exposing his left arm, holding a bow, turning from the south side of Sima, going up the hall from the west side, going north around the west gate, then turning east, turning from the back of the upper shot to the southwest, standing between the upper and lower shooting positions. Holding the tip of the bow with his left hand, he raised it to the south, and those who were ordered to leave the target.

古文：获者执旌许诺，声不绝，以至于乏；坐，东面偃旌，兴而俟。
现代文：获者执旌答应，从靶至乏，应诺之声不断。获者坐下，面朝东把旌旗放倒，然后起立等候。
English: The winner promised to hold the scepter, and from the target to the lack, the voice of the promise continued. The winner sat down, faced east, put down the scepter, and then stood up to wait.

古文：司马出于下射之南，还其后，降自西阶；反由司射之南，适堂西，释弓，袭，反位，立于司射之南。
现代文：司马转由下射南边出来，再转向下射之后，行至西阶下堂。复转由司射南边至堂下西边，放下弓，复穿好衣服，然后返归原位，站立在司射的南边。
English: Sima came out from the south side of the lower arch, then turned to the north side of the lower arch, and went to the west side of the lower hall. Return from the south side of the lower arch to the west side of the lower hall, put down the bow, put on the clothes, and then returned to the original position, standing on the south side of the lower arch.

古文：司射进，与司马交于阶前，相左；由堂下西阶之东，北面视上射，命曰： 无射获，无猎获！ 
现代文：司射向北前行，在西阶前与司马相交，各在对方的左手。司射在堂下西阶的东边，面朝北目视上射，命令说： 不要射伤获者，不要射到乏旁惊扰获者。 
English: Sisera marched northward and crossed paths with Sima in front of the west steps, each on the other's left hand. Sisera was on the east side of the west steps of the lower hall, facing north and looking up. He gave the order: "Don't shoot the wounded, don't shoot the tired, and don't disturb the wounded."

古文：上射揖。司射退，反位。
现代文：上射对司射一揖，司射退下，返归其位。
English: The upper archer throws a stone at the second archer, the second archer retreats and returns to his place.

古文：乃射，上射既发，挟弓矢；而后下射射，拾发，以将乘矢。
现代文：于是射箭开始。上射已发一矢，复挟第二矢于弓，此时下射发矢。上、下射如此交替发射，以至各射完四矢。
English: So the archery began. One arrow had been shot up, the second arrow was caught in the bow, at this time the arrow was shot down. The upper and lower arrows were fired alternately, so that four arrows were shot each.

古文：获者坐而获，举旌以宫，偃旌以商；获而未释获。
现代文：获者坐地以唱获，举旌时，唱获声与宫音相谐，偃旌时唱获声则与商音相应。
English: The winner sits on the floor to sing the winner, and when the gong is raised, the singing winner's voice is in harmony with the palace sound, and when the gong is raised, the singing winner's voice is in tune with the merchant sound.

古文：卒射，皆执弓不挟，南面揖，揖如升射。
现代文：此番射中时只由获者高声报获，而不释算计数射中的次数。射毕，二人都执弓而不挟矢，面朝南作揖，其仪节与上堂射时相同。
English: After the shooting, both of them hold the bow without holding the arrows, face south and make a bow, and the ceremony is the same as when shooting in the hall.

古文：上射降三等，下射少右，从之，中等；并行，上射于左。
现代文：上射下三级台阶，下射稍靠西边走，跟随上射下堂，与上射间隔一级台阶。
English: There are three steps between the upper and lower shoots, and the lower shoots are slightly to the west, following the upper shoots to the lower hall, with one step between the upper and lower shoots.

古文：与升射者相左，交于阶前，相揖。
现代文：下堂后并排前行，上射在东边。与上堂射箭的人相互在对方左手于阶前相交，相互一揖。
English: After going down the hall, go forward side by side, and shoot up on the east side. The person who shoots arrows with the person who goes up the hall intersects each other on the other side's left hand in front of the steps and shoots each other.

古文：由司马之南，适堂西，释弓，说决拾，袭而俟于堂西，南面，东上。
现代文：上耦转从司马的南边至堂下西边，放下弓，脱去扳指和臂衣，复穿好衣服面朝南在堂下西边等候，以东为上首。
English: The upper couple turn from the south side of Sima to the west side of the lower hall, put down the bow, take off the wrenches and armor, put on the clothes and wait facing south on the west side of the lower hall, with the east as the top.

古文：三耦卒射，亦如之。
现代文：三耦射毕，其仪节亦与此相同。
English: Three-couple shooting is complete, and the ceremony is the same.

古文：司射去扑，倚于西阶之西，升堂，北面告于宾，曰： 三耦座射。 
现代文：司射把扑从腰带上拿下来，靠在西阶的西边，上堂，面朝北向宾报告说： 三耦已射毕。 
English: The archer took the pike from his belt, leaned on the west side of the west steps, went up the hall, facing north, and reported to the guest: "Three couples have been shot."

古文：宾揖。
现代文：宾对司射一揖。
English: The guest shoots a crossbow at the host.

古文：司射降，搢扑，反位。
现代文：司射下堂，把扑插在带间，返归原位。
English: The officer shoots down the hall, inserts the flail between the straps, and returns to its original position.

古文：司马适堂西，袒执弓，由其位南，进；与司射交于阶前，相左；升自西阶，钩楹，自右物之后，立于物间；西南面，揖弓，命取矢。
现代文：司马至堂下西边，袒露左臂，执弓在手，转由其位的南边向北前行，与司射相交于阶前时，各在对方的左手，由西阶上堂。绕西楹西边向北行，再向东转，从右射位的北边转为面朝西南，站立在左右两个射位的十字标志之间。弓向外推，命弟子取矢。
English: Sima went to the west side of the hall, bared his left arm, holding a bow in his hand, turned from the south side of his seat to the north, and when he and the archer intersected in front of the steps, each went to the west side of the hall with the other's left hand. He went around the west side of the west gate to the north, then turned to the east, turned from the north side of the right shooting position to the southwest, and stood between the cross marks of the left and right shooting positions. The bow was pushed out, and the disciple was ordered to take the arrow.

古文：获者执旌许诺，声不绝，以旌负侯而俟。
现代文：获者执旌答应，由乏至靶，应诺声不断，执旌背向箭靶立待。
English: The winner promised to hold the crossbow, and from lack to target, he kept promising, and held the crossbow facing the arrow target.

古文：司马出于左物之南，还其后，降自西阶；遂适堂前，北面立于所设楅之南，命弟子设楅，乃设楅于中庭，南当洗，东肆。
现代文：司马转从左射位的南边出来，再由左射位的北边至西阶下堂。随后至堂前，面朝北站在将设楅的位置的南边，命弟子设楅。于是弟子在庭当中设楅，楅的位置南北与洗相直，朝东陈放。
English: Sima turned from the south side of the left projectile, then from the north side of the left projectile to the west side of the lower hall. Then to the front of the hall, face north, stand on the south side of the location where the crossbow will be set up, and order the disciple to set up the crossbow. So the disciple set up the crossbow in the middle of the yard, the position of the crossbow is north-south and straight with the washing, and the east is set free.

古文：司马由司射之南，退，释弓于堂西，袭，反位。
现代文：司马从司射的南边退下，在堂下西边放下弓，穿好衣服，返归其位。
English: Sima retreated from the south side of Sima Lu, put down his bow on the west side of the hall, put on his clothes, and returned to his place.

古文：弟子取矢，北面坐委于楅；北括，乃退。
现代文：弟子取矢，面朝北坐下，把矢横放在楅上，矢括朝北，然后退下。
English: The disciple took the arrows, sat down facing north, placed the arrows horizontally on the yoke, gathered the arrows facing north, and then retreated.

古文：司马袭进，当楅南，北面坐，左右抚矢而乘之。
现代文：司马不袒臂，前行至楅南边，面朝北坐下，左右两手抚矢点数四、四分之。
English: Sima did not fold his arms, but walked to the south side of the moat, sat down facing north, and stroked the dots with his left and right hands for four and a quarter minutes.

古文：若矢不备，则司马又袒执弓如初，升命曰： 取矢不索！ 
现代文：如矢数不足，则司马又像起初那样，袒露左臂，执弓在手，上堂命令弟子说： 取矢必有所余，不可索尽。 
English: If the number of arrows is insufficient, then Sima will again, as he did at the beginning, bare his left arm, hold the bow in his hand, and go to the hall to order his disciple to say: "There must be more arrows than can be drawn.

古文：弟子自西方应曰： 诺！ 
现代文：弟子从西方答应说： 诺。 
English: The disciple from the West promised and said, "Yes."

古文：乃复求矢，加于楅。
现代文：于是再次取矢放置楅上。
English: So he took the arrow again and placed it on the crossbow.

古文：司射倚扑于阶西，升，请射于宾，如初。
现代文：司射把扑倚置于西阶西边，上堂向宾请射，仪节与开始时相同。宾应允。
English: The archer places the lance on the west side of the west steps, and goes up to the hall to ask the guest to shoot. The ceremony is the same as at the beginning. The guest agrees.

古文：宾许诺。宾、主人、大夫若皆与射，则遂告于宾，适阼阶上告于主人，主人与宾为耦；遂告于大夫，大夫虽众，皆与士为耦。
现代文：宾、主人、大夫如果皆参与射事，则随即以此报告宾，并至阼阶上方报告主人。主人与宾组成射耦。接着报告大夫，大夫虽多，皆与士组合为耦。
English: If the guest, the host, and the doctor all participate in the shooting, then the guest is immediately reported as such, and the host is reported to the top of the ladder. The host and the guest form a shooting couple. Then the doctor is reported, and although there are many doctors, they are all coupled with the judge.

古文：以耦告于大夫，曰： 某御于子。 
现代文：以其耦报告大夫说： 某人侍射于先生。 
English: "Someone is shooting at my husband," the doctor said.

古文：西阶上，北面作众宾射。
现代文：司射在西阶上方面朝北使众宾射。
English: On the west steps, the North Korean side made the guests shoot arrows.

古文：司射降，搢扑，由司马之南适堂西，立，比众耦。
现代文：司射下堂，将扑插于带间，转由司马的南边至堂下西边立定，挑选组成众耦。
English: The Sima lower hall will be inserted between the bands, moving from the south side of the Sima to the west side of the lower hall, and selected to form a multi-couple.

古文：众宾将与射者皆降，由司马之南适堂西，继三耦而立，东上。
现代文：众宾待参加射箭的人都下堂，转由司马南边前至堂下西边，继三耦之西依序站立，以东为上。
English: The guests waiting to take part in the archery all go down the hall, turning from the south side of the Sima to the west side of the hall, standing in order from west to east.

古文：大夫之耦为上，若有东面者，则北上。
现代文：大夫之耦位在上，如有面朝东站立的，则以北为上。
English: Doctor's couple is on top, if there is a face facing east, then north is on top.

古文：宾、主人与大夫皆未降，司射乃比众耦辩。
现代文：宾、主人和大夫皆未下堂，司射于是挑选组合众耦完毕。
English: The guests, the host and the doctor have not yet left the hall, so Sisera has finished selecting the couples.

古文：遂命三耦拾取矢，司射反位。
现代文：接着，司射命三耦轮流取矢，然后司射返回原位。
English: Next, the archer shoots three arrows in turn, and then the archer returns to his original position.

古文：三耦拾取矢，皆袒决遂，执弓，进立于司马之西南。
现代文：三耦轮流取矢，皆袒露左臂，在拇指上套上扳指，把皮制的臂衣着于左臂，执弓在手，前行站立在司马的西南边。
English: The three couples took turns taking the arrows, all exposing their left arms, looping the trigger on their thumbs, putting the leather arm on their left arms, holding the bow in their hands, and walking forward to stand on the southwest side of Sima.

古文：司射作上耦取矢，司射反位。
现代文：司射使上耦取矢，司射返回其位。
English: The projectile circles the up-coupling arrow, the projectile returns to its position.

古文：上耦揖进；当楅北面揖，及楅揖。上射东面，下射西面。
现代文：上耦作揖前行，行至与楅相直时，面朝北一揖，至楅前，又一揖，上射面朝东，下射面朝西。
English: The upper-coupled anchor moves forward, and when it is in line with the anchor, it faces one anchor to the north, and when it is in front of the anchor, it faces another anchor. The upper-shooting surface faces east, and the lower-shooting surface faces west.

古文：上射揖进，坐，横弓；却手自弓下取一个，兼诸弣，顺羽，且兴；执弦而左还，退反位，东面揖。
现代文：上射作揖，近楅前坐下，左手在上横向执弓，仰右手从弓下取矢一枝，并矢置于左手弓把间而以右手顺理其羽，同时起立。右手执弓弦，向左转，退返楅西的位置，面朝东作揖。
English: Sit down in front of the hammock, hold the bow horizontally with the left hand on the top rim, raise the right hand to take an arrow from under the bow, and place the arrow between the left-hand bow handle and straighten its wings with the right hand, and stand up at the same time. Hold the bow string with the right hand, turn left, return to the west position, and face east.

古文：下射进，坐，横弓；覆手自弓上取一个，兴；其他如上射。
现代文：下射近楅前坐下，左手横向执弓，右手心向下从弓上取矢一技，起立，其他动作与上射相同。
English: Sit down in front of the crossbow, hold the bow horizontally with the left hand, take the arrow from the bow with the right hand, stand up, the other movements are the same as the upward shot.

古文：既拾取乘矢，揖，皆左还；南面揖，皆少进；当楅南，皆左还，北面，搢三挟一个；揖，皆左还，上射于右；与进者相左，相揖；退反位。
现代文：上、下射交替各取四矢毕，一揖，皆向左转，面朝南一揖，稍稍前行，在楅南边与楅相直的位置上又皆向左转为面朝北，在身右带间插矢三枝，挟一矢在二、三指间，一揖，皆向左转，上射在右边。与以下前往楅前取矢的人相交，都在对方的左手位置，与之相互一揖，退归原位。
English: The up and down shooters take four arrows alternately, and with one swing, they all turn to the left, face south, and with one swing, advance slightly. At the position where the south side of the bow is straight with the bow, they all turn to the left to face north, insert three arrows between the right side of the body, pinch one arrow between two or three fingers, and with one swing, they all turn to the left and shoot up on the right. Intersect with the following people who go to take arrows in front of the bow, all in the left hand position of the other, and with each other, and return to their original position.

古文：三耦拾取矢，亦如之。
现代文：三耦交替取矢，其仪节皆与此相同。
English: Three couples take the arrows alternately, and the rituals are the same.

古文：后者遂取诱射之矢，兼乘矢而取之，以授有司于西方，而后反位。
现代文：最后一个取矢的人取已矢毕，继而一次并取司射作示范的四枝矢，至庭的西侧授与有司，然后返归原位。
English: The last person to take the arrows has finished taking the arrows, and then the four arrows are taken once and taken to the west side of the yard for demonstration, and then returned to their original position.

古文：众宾未拾取矢，皆袒决遂，执弓，搢三挟一个；由堂西进，继三耦之南而立，东面，北上。
现代文：众宾不更替取矢，皆袒露左臂，在拇指上套上扳指，左臂着皮制臂衣，执弓在手，插三矢在腰带间，右手二、三指间挟矢一枝。由堂下西边南行，依序面朝东站立在三耦的南边，以北为上。
English: All the guests take the arrows in turn. They all bare their left arm, put a wrench on their thumb, put a leather armband on their left arm, hold a bow in their hand, insert three arrows between their belts, and hold an arrow between two or three fingers on their right hand. They walk south from the west side of the hall, and stand in order facing east on the south side of the triple coupling, with north at the top.

古文：大夫之耦为上。
现代文：大夫之耦在上位。
English: The doctor's wife is on top.

古文：司射作射如初，一耦揖升如初。
现代文：司射使上耦上堂射，仪式如前。
English: The ceremony continues as before, with the archer making the couple shoot.

古文：司马命去侯，获者许诺。
现代文：一耦揖而上堂，仪节亦与始射时相同。司马命获者离开箭靶，获者答应。
English: The ceremony is the same as at the start of the shooting. The winner of the Sima life leaves the target, and the winner agrees.

古文：司马降，释弓反位。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓返回原位。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down his bow, and returned to his seat.

古文：司射犹挟一个，去扑，与司马交于阶前，升，请释获于宾；宾许。
现代文：司射仍挟矢一枝，把扑倚置西阶，与司马在阶前相交，上堂，请宾准许释算以计数胜负，宾允许。
English: The archer still holds one arrow in his right hand, places the pike on the west step, intersects with the horse in front of the step, and goes up to the hall. The guest is asked to allow the interpretation to count the victory and defeat. The guest is allowed.

古文：降，搢扑，西面立于所设中之东；北面命释获者设中，遂视之。
现代文：司射下堂，插扑于带间，面朝西站立在将要设中的位置的东边，然后面朝北命释获者设置中，接着视察并教以释算的方法。
English: The official shoots down the hall, inserts between the bands, faces west and stands on the east side of the position to be set in the middle, and then faces north to set the released person in the middle, and then inspects and teaches the method of interpretation.

古文：释获者执鹿中，一人执算以从之。
现代文：释获人手执鹿中，另有一人手拿算筹跟随其后。
English: Among those released, there was a person holding a stick, and another person holding an abacus followed behind.

古文：释获者坐设中，南当楅，西当西序，东面；兴受算，坐实八算于中，横委其馀于中西，南末；兴，共而俟。
现代文：释获人坐下设中，中的位置在南正对楅，西与西序相直的地方，东向陈放。释获人站起，接过算筹，坐下，在中里盛八枝算筹，把其余的算筹横向放置在 中 的西边，算筹的末端朝南。
English: The released person sits down in the middle, and the middle position is in the place where the south is directly opposite the north, and the west is straight with the west order, and the east is exposed. The released person stands up, takes over the abacus, sits down, holds eight branches of the abacus in the middle, and places the rest of the abacus horizontally on the west side of the middle, and the end of the abacus faces south.

古文：司射遂进，由堂下，北面命曰： 不贯不释！ 
现代文：然后起来，拱手等候。接着，司射前行，在堂下面朝北命令说： 不射中且贯穿箭靶则不释算。 
English: Then he stood up and waited with folded hands. Next, the archer marched forward and ordered the hall to face north, saying, "If you don't hit and pierce the target, you won't be released."

古文：上射揖。
现代文：上射对司射一揖。
English: The upper shot to the lower shot is one stroke.

古文：司射退反位。
现代文：司射退返其位。
English: The shooters retreated back to their positions.

古文：释获者坐取中之八算，改实八算于中，兴，执而俟。
现代文：释获人坐下，取中所盛八枝算筹在手，另盛八算于 中 ，起立，执算筹等候。
English: The released person sits down, takes the middle eight-branch calculation in his hand, the other eight-branch calculation in the middle, stands up, and waits for the calculation.

古文：乃射，若中，则释获者坐而释获，每一个释一算。
现代文：于是开始射箭。如射中，则释获人坐下释算，每射中一矢即放一枝算筹在地以计数。
English: Then the archery began. If the archery was successful, the archer was released to sit down and calculate. For each arrow shot, one archer was placed on the ground to count.

古文：上射于右，下射于左，若有馀算，则反委之。
现代文：上射的算筹放在右边；下射的算筹放在左边；如果有剩余的算筹，则放在 中 的西边。
English: The up arrows are placed on the right; the down arrows are placed on the left; and if there are any arrows left over, they are placed in the center-west.

古文：又取中之八算，改实八算于中，兴，执而俟。
现代文：然后，又取 中 所盛八枝算筹在手，另在 中 里盛八枝算筹。
English: Then, he took the eight-branched abacus in the middle and the eight-branched abacus in the middle.

古文：三耦卒射。
现代文：站起，手持算筹等候。三耦射事结束。
English: Stand up, hold the abacus in your hand and wait. The triple shooting is over.

古文：宾、主人、大夫揖，皆由其阶降揖。
现代文：宾、主人、大夫皆作揖，各由其阶下堂，又一揖。
English: The guests, the host, and the doctor all make a bowl, and each of them goes to the next hall and makes another bowl.

古文：主人堂东袒决遂，执弓，搢三挟一个。
现代文：主人至堂下东边，袒露左臂，在拇指套上扳指，左臂着皮制臂衣，然后执弓在手，插三矢于身右带间，右手二、三指间挟矢一枝。
English: The owner went to the east side of the lower hall, uncovered his left arm, wiggled his thumb on the thumb sleeve, put a leather armband on his left arm, then held the bow in his hand, inserted three arrows between his right belt, and held an arrow between the second and third fingers of his right hand.

古文：宾于堂西亦如之。
现代文：宾至堂下西边，行事仪节与主人相同。
English: The guest goes to the west side of the hall, and the ceremony is the same as the host.

古文：皆由其阶，阶下揖，升堂揖。
现代文：各至其阶下，一揖，上堂，又一揖。
English: Each to his step, one shovel, into the hall, and out again.

古文：主人为下射，皆当其物，北面揖，及物揖，乃射；卒，南面揖；皆由其阶，阶上揖，降阶揖。
现代文：主人为下射，与宾各对其射位，面朝北作揖，至射位之前，又一揖。
English: The host shoots downwards, and the guests each make a fist at their shooting position, facing north, and before the shooting position, another fist.

古文：宾序西，主人序东，皆释弓，说决拾，袭，反位；升，及阶揖，升堂揖，皆就席。
现代文：接着开始射箭。射毕，面朝南作揖。各至其阶，在阶上方一揖，下台阶，又一揖。宾在序西边，主人在序东边，都放下弓，脱去扳指和臂衣，穿好衣服，各返归其位。上堂时，至阶前一揖，上堂又一揖，皆各就其席。
English: Then the archery begins. After the shooting, the arrows are made facing south. Everyone goes to their step, one step above the step, the next step down, and another step. The guests on the west side of the row, and the host on the east side of the row, all put down their bows, take off their wrenches and coats of arms, put on their clothes, and return to their seats. When entering the hall, one step before the steps, and one step after entering the hall, everyone takes their seats.

古文：大夫袒决遂，执弓，搢三挟一个，由堂西出于司射之西，就其耦。
现代文：大夫袒其左臂，拇指套上扳指，左臂着皮制臂衣，执弓在手，插三矢在身右带间，右手二、三指间挟矢一枝，由堂西司射的西边转出，至其射耦的南边就位。
English: The doctor pierced his left arm, put a thumbscrew on his thumb, put a leather armband on his left arm, held a bow in his hand, inserted three arrows between the right and left straps of his body, and held an arrow between two or three fingers of his right hand. He turned from the west side of Don Xi's archery to the south side of his archery.

古文：大夫为下射，揖进；耦少退。
现代文：大夫为下射，二人揖而前行，大夫之耦稍靠后一些。
English: The doctor shoots downwards, the two stagger forward, the doctor's partner a little behind.

古文：揖如三耦。
现代文：作揖的仪节与三耦上堂射箭时相同。
English: The ceremonial act of making the kite is the same as when the three couples go into the hall for archery.

古文：及阶，耦先升。
现代文：至台阶前，大夫之耦先登阶。
English: When it came to the steps, the doctor's couple went up first.

古文：卒射，揖如升射，耦先降。
现代文：射毕，作揖之仪与上堂射时相同，大夫的射耦先下台阶。
English: After the shooting, the ceremony is the same as when shooting in the hall. The doctor's shooting partner goes down the steps first.

古文：降阶，耦少退。
现代文：下台阶后，大夫之耦稍退后一些。
English: After descending the steps, the doctor's couple retreated a little.

古文：皆释弓于堂西，袭。
现代文：二人皆在堂下西边放下弓，穿好衣服。
English: Both of them put down their bows on the west side of the hall and got dressed.

古文：耦遂止于堂西，大夫升就席。
现代文：大夫之耦即停留在堂下西边，大夫则上堂即其席。
English: The doctor's couple stayed in the west side of the hall, while the doctor went up to his seat.

古文：众家继射，释获皆如初。
现代文：随后，众宾上堂射箭，与先前一样释算。
English: Afterwards, all the guests came to the hall to shoot arrows, as before.

古文：司射所作，唯上耦。
现代文：司射只命上耦上堂射。
English: The archer only shoots from above.

古文：卒射，释获者遂以所执余获，升自西阶，尽阶，不升堂。告于宾曰： 左右卒射。 
现代文：射毕，释获人即手执最后一耦所剩余的算筹，上到西阶最高一级台阶，不上堂，报告宾说： 左右已射箭完毕。 
English: When the shooting was over, the person holding the last pair of arrows and the remaining archery arrows was released. He went up to the highest step of the west staircase and did not go to the hall. The guest of honor said, "I have finished shooting arrows left and right."

古文：降，反位，坐委余获于中西；兴，共而俟。
现代文：释获人下堂，返归其位，坐下，把剩余算筹放置在 中 的西边。然后起立，拱手等候。
English: The released person goes down the hall, returns to his seat, sits down, places the remaining abacus on the west side of the middle, then stands up and waits.

古文：司马袒决执弓，升命取矢，如初。
现代文：司马袒露左臂，拇指着扳指，执弓在手，上堂命弟子取矢，其仪节与前相同。
English: Sima Yu exposed his left arm, with his thumb pointing to the wrench, holding the bow in his hand, and went to the hall to order his disciple to take the arrow. The ceremony was the same as before.

古文：获者许诺，以旌负侯，如初。
现代文：获者答应，执族背向箭靶站立，仪节如前。
English: The recipient consented, and the clansmen stood with their backs to the target, and the ceremony continued as before.

古文：司马降，释弓，反位。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓，返归其位。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down his bow, and returned to his seat.

古文：弟子委矢，如初。
现代文：弟子把矢放在楅上，仪节如前。
English: The disciple put the arrow on the crossbow, and the ceremony continued as before.

古文：大夫之矢，则兼束之以茅，上握焉。
现代文：大夫的四枝矢，则用茅捆束在一起，束在手握处的上方。
English: The doctor's four arrows were tied together with a thatch bundle and tied above the grip of his hand.

古文：司马乘矢如初。
现代文：司马四、四分数矢，仪节如前。
English: Sima four, four fractions of an arrow, ceremony as before.

古文：司射遂适西阶西，释弓，去扑，袭；进由中东，立于中南，北面视算。
现代文：接着，司射至西阶西边，放下弓和扑，穿好衣服。由 中 的东边南行，至 中 南边站立，面朝北检视算筹。
English: Next, Sisai went to the west side of the west steps, put down the bow and arrow, put on his clothes, walked south from the east side of the middle to the south side of the middle, and stood facing north to inspect and calculate.

古文：释获者东面于中西坐，先数右获。
现代文：释获人面朝东坐在 中 的西边，先数上射之算筹。
English: Those who were released sat on the west side of the middle, facing east. The first to shoot was the winner.

古文：二算为纯，一纯以取，实于左手；十纯则缩而委之，每委异之；有馀纯，则横于下。
现代文：两枝算筹为一对，数一对，即取而放在左手中，数够十对，则纵向放置地上，每十对放在一起，分开放置。
English: Two arithmetic piles are a pair. If you count one pair, they are taken and placed in the left hand. If you count ten pairs, they are placed vertically on the ground. Every ten pairs are placed together and placed separately.

古文：一算为奇，奇则又缩诸纯下。
现代文：余剩不够十对的，则靠西边横向放置。
English: If there are less than ten pairs left, place them horizontally on the west side.

古文：兴，自前适左，东面；坐，兼敛算，实于左手；一纯以委，十则异之，其馀如右获。
现代文：单枝算筹为奇数，奇数的算筹又纵向放在剩余成对算筹的南边。然后起立，从 中 的东边行至下射之算处。坐下数算筹，以左手取算筹，数一对，则直接放置地上，够十对，则分开另放一堆，其余和数上射之算法相同。
English: The odd-numbered counting piles are placed vertically on the south side of the remaining paired counting piles. Then stand up and walk from the east side of the middle to the counting place of the downward shot. Sit down to count the counting piles, take the counting piles with the left hand, count one pair, then place them directly on the ground, enough for ten pairs, then separate and put another pile, the rest is the same as the number of upper shots.

古文：司射复位。
现代文：司射返归其位。
English: The archer returns to his position.

古文：释获者遂进取贤获，执以升，自西阶，尽阶不升堂，告于宾。若右胜，则曰： 右贤于左。 
现代文：释获者于是近前取胜者一方所赢的算筹，持之从西阶登上台阶，上到最上一级，不升堂，向宾报告。如右胜，则说： 右贤于左。 
English: The freedman then approaches the winning side's winning chess piece, carries it up the steps from the west side, up to the highest level, does not ascend the hall, and reports to the guests. If the right wins, it is said: Right is better than left.

古文：若左胜，则曰： 左贤于右。 
现代文：如左胜，则说： 左贤于右。 
English: If the left side wins, it is said that the left side is superior to the right side.

古文：以纯数告；若有奇者，亦曰奇。
现代文：报告所胜算筹的对数，如有奇数，亦报告其奇数。
English: Report the logarithm of the winning number, if there is an odd number, also report its odd number.

古文：若左右钧，则左右皆执一算以告，曰： 左右钧。 
现代文：如果左右射成平局，则执左右各一枝算筹报告说： 左右均。 
English: If the left and right arrows result in a tie, then the left and right arrows report: both left and right.

古文：降复位，坐，兼敛算，实八算于中，委其馀于中西；兴，共而俟。
现代文：然后下堂返回其位，坐下，兼取八枝算筹盛置于 中 ，把其余的算筹放在 中 西边。起立，拱手等候。
English: Then go back to your seat, sit down, take the eight-branched abacus and place it in the middle, and put the rest of the abacus in the middle and west. Stand up and wait.

古文：司射适堂西，命弟子设丰。
现代文：司射至堂下西边，命弟子设丰。
English: Sisho went to the west side of the hall and ordered his disciple, Shiehong, to leave.

古文：弟子奉丰升，设于西楹之西，乃降。
现代文：弟子手捧丰上堂，设置在堂上西楹的西边，随即下堂。
English: The disciple went up to the hall with an abundance in his hand, set it up on the west side of the west gallery, and then left the hall.

古文：胜者之弟子洗觯，升酌，南面坐奠于丰上；降，袒执弓，反位。
现代文：胜者一方的年轻人洗觯，上堂斟酒，面朝南坐下把觯放置在丰上。下堂，袒露左臂，执弓在手，返归其位。
English: The young man of the winning side washes the gourd, goes up to the hall, pours the wine, sits down facing south and places the gourd on the bowl. He goes down to the hall, baring his left arm, holding the bow in his hand, and returns to his place.

古文：司射遂袒执弓，挟一个，搢扑，北面于三耦之南，命三耦及众宾： 胜者皆袒决遂，执张弓。
现代文：接着，司射袒露左臂，执弓在手，二、三指间挟矢一枝，插扑于带间，面朝北在三耦南边命三耦和众宾说： 胜者一方皆袒左臂，套扳指，着臂衣，手持上弦之弓。
English: Next, the archer exposed his left arm, holding the bow in his hand, holding an arrow between his two or three fingers, inserting it between the straps, facing north on the south side of the tricoule, and the guests said: The winners all hold their left arm, cover the wrench, wear the armband, and hold the bow.

古文：不胜者皆袭，说决拾，却左手，右加弛弓于其上，遂以执弣。 
现代文：不胜一方都要穿好衣服，脱去扳指和臂衣，右手把解弦之弓仰放于左手上，左手向上横弓握把，然后右手亦握弓把。 
English: The winning side must get dressed, take off the wrenches and armor, the right hand raises the bow of the string on the left hand, the left hand up the crossbow grip, and then the right hand also holds the bow handle.

古文：司射先反位。
现代文：司射先返归其位。
English: The shooting guard returns to his original position.

古文：三耦及众射者皆与其耦进立于射位，北上。
现代文：三耦和众射者皆与其射耦南行，站立于原来堂下俟射序立之位，以北为上首。
English: The three couples and all the shooters went south with their couples, standing in the original position of the lower row of shooters, with the north at the top.

古文：司射作升饮者，如作射。
现代文：司射命饮酒者上堂饮酒，与使射者上堂射之仪节相同。
English: It is the same ritual for the person who shoots the drinker to go to the hall to drink.

古文：一耦进，揖如升射，及阶，胜者先升，升堂，少右。
现代文：一耦前行，作揖，和上堂射时仪节相同。至阶前，胜者先上堂，稍靠右边一些。
English: A pair of couples walk forward, making a ruckus, which is the same as the ceremonial ruckus when shooting into the hall. At the front of the steps, the winner walks into the hall first, a little to the right.

古文：不胜者进，北面坐取丰上之觯；兴，少退，立卒斛；进，坐奠于丰下；兴，揖。
现代文：不胜者前行至丰前，面朝北坐下，取丰上之觯在手，站起，稍稍退后，站着干杯。然后近前坐下，将觯放置在丰下边。起立，作揖。
English: The loser goes to the front of the bowl, sits down facing north, takes the top ladle of the bowl in his hand, stands up, steps back a little, stands and makes a toast. Then he sits down closer and places the ladle on the bottom of the bowl. Stands up and makes a toast.

古文：不胜者先降，与升饮者相左，交于阶前，相揖；出于司马之南，遂适堂西；释弓，袭而俟。
现代文：不胜者先下堂，与上堂饮酒的人在阶前相交，相互在对方左手位置，互相一揖。从司马的南边转弯至堂下西边。放下弓，整衣等候。
English: The loser goes down the hall first, and the person who drinks in the hall intersects in front of the steps, each in the left hand position of the other party, and bows to each other. Turn from the south side of Sima to the west side of the hall. Put down the bow, wait for the dress.

古文：有执爵者。
现代文：专门使赞者执爵。
English: A special envoy will preside over the ceremony.

古文：执爵者坐取觯，实之，反奠于丰上。
现代文：执爵人坐下，取觯在手，斟酒，复把觯放在丰上。
English: The steward sits down, takes the goblet in his hand, pours the wine, and places the goblet on the hearth.

古文：升饮者如初。
现代文：接下来升堂饮酒的人仪节与前相同。
English: The next rite of passage for drinking alcohol is the same as before.

古文：三耦卒饮。
现代文：三耦饮酒完毕。
English: The three couples have finished drinking.

古文：宾、主人、大夫不胜，则不执弓，执爵者取觯，降洗，升实之，以授于席前，受觯，以适西阶上，北面立饮；卒觯，授执爵者，反就席。
现代文：宾、主人、大夫如在不胜者一方，则不执弓。执爵人取觯下堂为之洗觯，上堂斟满酒，然后到席前授与他。接觯后，持觯至西阶上方面朝北饮酒。干杯后，将觯授与执爵人，然后返归其席。
English: The guest, host and doctor do not hold the bow if they are on the winning side. The steward takes the bowl downstairs to wash it, fills it with wine, and then presents it to him before the meal. After receiving the bowl, he holds the bowl to the west and drinks it. After the toast, he presents the bowl to the steward and then returns to his seat.

古文：大夫饮，则耦不升。
现代文：大夫饮酒时，则大夫的射耦不上堂。
English: When the doctor drinks alcohol, the doctor's ejaculation does not come out.

古文：若大夫之耦不胜，则亦执弛弓，特升饮。
现代文：如果大夫的射耦在不胜一方，则亦手持解弦之弓，独自上堂饮酒。
English: If the doctor's projectile is on the losing side, he will also hold the bow to solve the string and go to the hall to drink alone.

古文：众宾继饮，射爵者辩，乃彻丰与觯。
现代文：众宾接着上堂饮酒完毕，于是把丰和觯撤下。
English: The guests then went to the hall and finished drinking, so they took Feng and Zou down.

古文：司马洗爵，升实之以降，献获者于侯。
现代文：司马在堂下洗爵，上堂斟酒，持爵下堂，至靶前向获者献酒。
English: Sima was knighted in the hall, poured wine in the hall, came down the hall with his knighthood, and offered wine to the winner before the target.

古文：荐脯醢，设折俎，俎与荐皆三祭。
现代文：有司为获者荐脯醢，设折俎。祭俎与脯醢所用的祭肺和半条脯各备三份。
English: There is a steward who is recommended by the recipient, and a folding screen is set up. Three portions each of the sacrificial lung and half of the screen used for the sacrificial screen and screen are prepared.

古文：获者负侯，北面拜受爵，司马西面拜送爵。
现代文：获者背向箭靶而立，面朝北拜而接爵，司马面朝西拜送爵。
English: The winner stood with his back to the target, bowed to the north and received the title, while Sima bowed to the west and received the title.

古文：获者执爵，使人执其荐与俎从之；适右个，设荐俎。
现代文：获者以手持爵，使赞者持其脯醢和俎跟随其后。至箭靶东侧立杆处，即将脯醢和俎设置其前。
English: The awardee holds the dagger in his hand, and the awardee holds his crossbow and arrow and follows him. They reach the pole on the east side of the arrow target, where the crossbow and arrow are set up in front of it.

古文：获者南面坐，左执爵，祭脯醢；执爵兴，取肺，坐祭，遂祭酒；兴，适左个；中亦如之。
现代文：获者面朝南坐下，左手执爵，祭脯醢，执爵起立。又从俎上取肺在手，坐下祭俎，继而祭酒。起立，至箭靶的西侧和中央，其仪节都与上相同。
English: The awardee sits down facing south, holds the dagger in his left hand, and raises the ceremonial pestle and the ceremonial pestle. He also takes the lungs from the pestle in his hand, sits down, holds the ceremonial pestle, and then raises the ceremonial wine. When he stands up, both the west side and the center of the target are the same as above.

古文：左个之西北三步，东面设荐俎，获者荐右东面立饮，不拜既爵，司马受爵，奠于篚，复位。
现代文：赞者在箭靶西侧之西北三步远的位置上面朝东设置脯醢和俎。获者在脯醢的右边面朝东站着饮酒，干杯后不拜。司马接过空爵，放置在篚中，返回其位。
English: The winner stood on the right side of the target and drank alcohol facing east. After the toast, he did not bow. Sima took over the empty knight, placed it in the middle of the target and returned to his place.

古文：获者执其荐，使人执俎从之，辟设于乏南。
现代文：获者自持笾豆，使赞者持俎随后，避其正位，设置在乏的南边。
English: The winner holds a pea, the winner holds a bean, and then avoids its positive position and places it on the south side of the bean.

古文：获者负侯而俟。
现代文：获者背向箭靶站立等候。
English: The winner stands with his back to the target and waits.

古文：司射适阶西，释弓矢，去扑，说决拾，袭；适洗，洗爵；升实之，以降，献释获者于其位，少南。
现代文：司射至西阶西边，放下弓矢和扑，脱去扳指和臂衣，穿好衣服。
English: The archer shoots to the west side of the west steps, puts down the bow and arrow and the pike, takes off the trigger finger and the armor, and puts on his clothes.

古文：荐脯醢，折俎，有祭。释获者荐右东面拜受爵，司射北面拜送爵。
现代文：至洗前洗爵。上堂斟满酒，持爵下堂，在释获者之位稍南一点的地方向释获者献酒。
English: Prior to the christening, there is a christening. The hall is filled with wine, and after the christening, there is a toast to the freedman at a place slightly south of the freedman's place.

古文：释获者就其荐坐，左执爵，祭脯醢；兴，取肺，坐祭，遂祭酒；兴，司射之西，北面立饮，不拜既爵。
现代文：起立，从俎上取肺在手，坐下祭俎，接着祭酒。起立，在司射西边面朝北站着饮酒，干杯后不拜。
English: Stand up, take the lungs from the yakitori in your hand, sit down and make the yakitori, followed by the sacrificial wine. Stand up, drink alcohol facing north on the west side of the shooters, and do not bow after the toast.

古文：司射受爵，奠于篚。释获者少西辟荐，反位。
现代文：司射接爵放在篚中，释获人稍靠西边避正位设其笾豆和俎，然后返归其位。
English: The archer was placed in the middle of the cocoon, and the freedman was placed slightly to the west of the cocoon, with his pea and gourd, and then returned to his place.

古文：司射适堂西，袒决遂，取弓于阶西，挟一个，搢扑，以反位。
现代文：司射至堂下西边，袒露左臂，在拇指上套上勾弦的扳指，左臂着皮制的臂衣，至西阶西边取弓在手，右手二、三指间挟矢一技，插扑于腰带间，返归其位。
English: The priest shoots to the west side of the lower hall, exposing his left arm, putting a hooked finger on his thumb, wearing a leather armband on his left arm, taking a bow in his hand to the west side, holding an arrow between two or three fingers on his right hand, inserting it between the belts, and returning to his place.

古文：司射去扑，倚于阶西，升请射于宾，如初。宾许。
现代文：司射把扑抽出倚置在西阶西边，上堂向宾请射，仪节与前相同。宾允许。
English: The archer places the lance on the west side of the west steps, and goes up to the hall to ask the guests to shoot. The ceremony is the same as before. Guests are allowed.

古文：司射降，搢扑，由司马之南适堂西，命三耦及众宾： 皆袒决遂，执弓就位！ 
现代文：司射下堂，插扑于带间，转由司马南边至堂下西边，命三耦及众宾皆袒左臂，着扳指，穿臂衣，执弓各就其位。
English: Sima shot down the hall, interspersed between the bands, turning from the south side of Sima to the west side of the hall, the three couples and the guests all held the left arm, with the trigger finger, wearing the armband, holding the bow, each in its place.

古文：司射先反位。
现代文：司射先返归原位。
English: The shooting guard returns to his original position.

古文：三耦及众宾皆袒决遂，执弓，各以其耦进，反于射位。
现代文：三耦及众宾皆袒露左臂，套上扳指，左臂着臂衣，执弓在手，各与其射耦南行，返归于俟射序立之位。
English: The three couples and all the guests all exposed their left arms, put on their wrenches, put on their arm warmers, and held their bows in their hands. They each went south with their couples and returned to the position of standing in the firing line.

古文：司射作拾取矢。
现代文：司射命交替取矢。
English: The shooters take turns taking the arrows.

古文：三耦拾取矢如初，反位。
现代文：三耦如前一样交替取矢，返归其位。
English: As before, the three couples take arrows alternately and return to their positions.

古文：宾、主人、大夫降揖如初。
现代文：宾、主人、大夫下堂、作揖，仪节与前相同。
English: The guests, the host, and the doctor go down the hall and make a gong, and the ceremony is the same as before.

古文：主人堂东，宾堂西，皆袒决遂，执弓；皆进阶前揖，及楅揖，拾取矢如三耦。
现代文：主人至堂下东边，宾至堂下西边，皆袒左臂，套扳指，着臂衣，执弓在手，皆各前行，至阶前，作揖，至楅前，又一揖，像三耦一样交替轮流取矢。
English: The host to the east side of the hall, and the guest to the west side of the hall, all with their left arm in a sling, with a set of wrenches, wearing armor, and holding a bow in their hands. They all go forward, to the front of the steps, to make a crossbow, to the front of the crossbow, and another crossbow, and take turns taking arrows like a triad.

古文：卒，北面搢三挟一个，揖退。
现代文：取矢毕，面朝北插三矢于身右带间，在二、三指间挟矢一枝，作揖退下。
English: After taking the arrows, face north, insert three arrows between the right strap of the body, pinch one arrow between two or three fingers, make a hook and retreat.

古文：宾堂西，主人堂东，皆释弓矢，袭；及阶揖，升堂揖，就席。
现代文：宾至堂下西边，主人至堂下东边，皆放下弓矢，穿好衣服。至阶前，一揖，上堂，又一揖，各即其席。
English: The guests go to the west side of the hall, and the host goes to the east side of the hall, and they all put down their bows and arrows and put on their clothes. When they reach the front of the steps, there is a bow, when they go up to the hall, there is another bow, and they all take their seats.

古文：大夫袒决遂，执弓，就其耦；揖皆进，如三耦。
现代文：大夫袒左臂，拇指上套扳指，左臂着皮制臂衣，执弓到其射耦之南就位。皆如三耦一样作揖、前行。
English: The doctor holds the left arm, the thumb covers the trigger finger, the left arm is covered with a leather armband, and the bow is held in place to the south of its projectile coupling. They all hold the bow and move forward like a triple coupling.

古文：耦东面，大夫西面。
现代文：大夫之耦面朝东，大夫面朝西。
English: The couple of the doctor faces east, the doctor faces west.

古文：大夫进坐，说矢束，兴反位。
现代文：大夫近福而坐，解下束矢的茅草，起立返回其位。
English: The doctor sat down close to Fuku, untied the thatch from the bundle of arrows, stood up and returned to his seat.

古文：而后耦揖进坐，兼取乘矢，顺羽而兴，反位，揖。
现代文：随后大夫之耦作揖，近楅坐下，一次并取四枝矢，以手顺理箭羽而起立，返回其位，又一揖。
English: Then the doctor's coupled crossbow, close to the crossbow, sits down, takes four arrows at once, stands up with his hand, returns to his position, and shoots another crossbow.

古文：大夫进坐，亦兼取乘矢，如其耦，北面，搢三挟一个，揖退。
现代文：大夫近楅坐下，与其耦一样，亦一次并取四枝矢。转而面朝北，在身右带间插矢三枝，右手二、三指间挟矢一枝，揖而退下。
English: The doctor sat down near the crossbow and, like his partner, took four arrows at once. He turned his face to the north, inserted three arrows between his right belt, and one arrow between two or three fingers of his right hand, and retreated.

古文：耦反位。
现代文：耦返归俟射序立之位。
English: The coupling returns to the position of the laser sequence.

古文：大夫遂适序西，释弓矢，袭；升即席。
现代文：大夫继而至序西，放下弓矢，穿好衣服，上堂就其席。
English: The doctor then went to the west of the row, put down his bow and arrow, put on his clothes, and took his seat in the hall.

古文：众宾继拾取矢，皆如三耦，以反位。
现代文：众宾随后像三耦一样，各交替轮流取矢，挟矢返回升射前序立之位。
English: The guests then, like a three-way coupling, take turns taking arrows, and the arrows return to the position where they were standing before the launch.

古文：司射犹挟一个以进，作上射如初。
现代文：司射仍挟矢一枝而前行至上耦前，命上射上堂射，其仪节与开始时相同。
English: The archer still shoots with one arrow and goes forward to the top coupler, shoots on the life and shoots on the hall, the ritual is the same as at the beginning.

古文：一耦揖升如初。
现代文：一耦作揖、上堂，其仪节与开始时相同。
English: A couple performs the rite of entering the hall, with the same ritual as at the beginning.

古文：司马升，命去侯，获者许诺。
现代文：司马上堂，命获者离开靶位，获者应诺。
English: Sima Mado, the one who was given the order left the target position, and the one who was given the order agreed.

古文：司马降，释弓反位。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓，返归其位。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down his bow, and returned to his seat.

古文：司射与司马交于阶前，去扑，袭；升，请以乐乐于宾。
现代文：司射与司马在阶前相交，把扑倚置阶西，穿好衣服。
English: Sirai and Sima intersected in front of the steps, put their backs to the west of the steps, and got dressed.

古文：宾许诺。
现代文：上堂，向宾请求演奏音乐，宾许诺。
English: Go to the hall, ask the guests to play music, and make a promise.

古文：司射降，搢扑，东面命乐正，曰： 请以乐乐于宾，宾许。 
现代文：司射下堂，插扑于带间，面朝东命乐正说： 向宾请求以音乐来娱乐，宾已准许。 
English: "Ask the guests to entertain themselves with music. The guests have given their permission," said Sisho, who had come down from the hall and was flung between the bands, facing east.

古文：司射遂适阶间，堂下北面命曰： 不鼓不释！ 
现代文：于是司射至两阶之间，在堂下面朝北命令说： 射箭凡不与鼓节相应者则不释算。 
English: So the archer went between the two ranks and ordered the north side of the hall to say, "Any archery that does not correspond to the drum section will not be counted."

古文：上射揖。司射退反位。
现代文：上射一揖，司射退返其位。
English: The first shot went up and the second shot came back down.

古文：乐正东面命大师，曰： 奏《驺虞》，间若一。 
现代文：乐正面朝东命令大师说： 演奏《驺虞》，五节之间的节奏长短疏密都要相同。 
English: The maestro ordered the front of the music to the east and said: "When playing "Shuyu," the rhythm between the five sections should be the same.

古文：大师不兴，许诺。
现代文：大师不起立而应诺。
English: The master didn't get up and make a promise.

古文：乐正退反位。
现代文：乐正退返其位。
English: Le Zheng retreated to his seat.

古文：及奏《驺虞》以射。
现代文：于是演奏《驺虞》以节制射箭的动作。
English: Therefore, the performance of "Shuyu" was accompanied by the movements of controlled archery.

古文：三耦卒射，宾、主人、大夫、众宾继射，释获如初。
现代文：三耦射毕，宾、主人、大夫、众宾依序相继射箭，射中释算与前相同。
English: After the three-couple archery, the guest, the host, the doctor, and the guests shot arrows in sequence, and the shooting interpretation was the same as before.

古文：卒射，降。
现代文：射毕，下堂。
English: After the shooting, down the hall.

古文：释获者执余获，升告左右卒射，如初。
现代文：释获人手执剩余的算筹，上堂报告左右射箭完毕，仪节同前。
English: The remaining archery equipment was released, the report on the hall was completed, and the ceremony began.

古文：司马升，命取矢，获者许诺。
现代文：司马上堂，命取矢，获者应诺。
English: Sima Dao, take an arrow for your life, and the one who gets it will promise.

古文：司马降，释弓反位。
现代文：司马下堂，放下弓，返归其位。
English: Sima walked down the hall, put down his bow, and returned to his seat.

古文：弟子委矢，司马乘之，皆如初。
现代文：弟子将矢放置楅上，司马四、四分之，都与前相同。
English: The disciple placed the arrow on the yoke, Sima four, four points, are the same as before.

古文：司射释弓视算，如初；释获者以贤获与钧告，如初。
现代文：司射放下弓，检视算筹，其仪如前。释获人报告胜者一方所胜算筹数或射成平局的情况，仪节与前相同。
English: The archer puts down the bow and examines the arithmetic chips, and the ceremony is the same as before. The released person reports the situation of the winner's side winning the arithmetic chips or shooting into a tie, and the ceremony is the same as before.

古文：降复位。
现代文：下堂返归其位。
English: The lower court returned to its seats.

古文：司射命设丰，设丰、实觯如初；遂命胜者执张弓，不胜者执弛弓，升饮如初。
现代文：司射命弟子设丰，弟子遵命设丰及斟酒诸仪节，都与前相同。继而命令胜者一方执上弦之弓，不胜的一方执解弦之弓及上堂饮酒之仪，皆与前相同。
English: The disciple who shoots the arrow sets the bounty, the disciple who obeys the order sets the bounty and pours the wine, and all the ceremonies are the same as before. Next, the victor is ordered to hold the bow with the strings, and the invincible is ordered to hold the bow with the strings and the ceremony of drinking in the hall are the same as before.

古文：司射犹袒决遂，左执弓，右执一个，兼诸弦，面镞；适堂西，以命拾取矢，如初。
现代文：司射仍袒左臂，拇指上套扳指，左臂着臂衣，左手执弓，右手将一枝矢顺并于弦上而持之，箭头朝上。至堂下西边，命交替轮流取矢，其仪节如前。
English: The archer still grips the left arm, the thumb over the trigger finger, the left arm with the armband, the left hand holding the bow, the right hand holding an arrow straight and on the string, the arrowhead facing up. To the west of the hall, the lives take turns taking arrows, the ritual is the same as before.

古文：司射反位。
现代文：司射返回其位。
English: The sprayer returns to its place.

古文：三耦及宾、主人、大夫、众宾皆袒决遂，拾取矢，如初；矢不挟，兼诸弦弣以退，不反位，遂授有司于堂西。
现代文：三耦和宾、主人、大夫及众宾皆袒左臂，套扳指，着臂衣，交替轮流取矢，仪节如前。不挟矢，而将矢顺并于弦和弓把而持之，退下，不即返归原位，下堂至堂西将弓矢授与执事人。
English: The three couples and the guests, the host, the doctor and all the guests all hold the left arm, put the wrenches on, put on the armcoat, take turns taking arrows, and the ceremony is as before. Instead of holding the arrows, they hold them in a straight line with the strings and the handle of the bow, step back, or immediately return to their original position, and award the bow and arrow to the deacon from the hall to the west.

古文：辩拾取矢，揖，皆升就席。
现代文：交替轮流取矢完毕，皆作揖，上堂各就其席。
English: After taking turns to take the arrows, everyone makes a bow, and everyone takes their seats in the hall.

古文：司射乃适堂西，释弓，去扑，说决拾，袭，反位。
现代文：司射至堂下西边，放下弓和扑，脱去扳指与臂衣，穿好衣服，返归其位。
English: Sisera went to the west side of the hall, put down his bow and arrows, took off his wrenches and armor, put on his clothes and returned to his place.

古文：司马命弟子说侯之左下纲而释之，命获者以旌退，命弟子退楅。
现代文：司马命弟子解开拴在箭靶西边立柱上的纲绳，与左下幅一起向东卷束起来，命获者手执旌旗退下，命弟子把楅撤下。
English: The disciple of Sima Myou disentangled the line of the anchor on the pillar on the west side of the arrow target, and wound it up to the east together with the left lower width. The one who received the order held the flag and retreated, and the disciple of Myou removed the anchor.

古文：司射命释获者退中与算，而俟。
现代文：司射命释获人彻下 中 和算筹等候。
English: The magistrate was released pending a reconciliation.

古文：司马反为司正，退，复觯南而立。
现代文：司马复又行司正之职，退返觯南边的位置站立。
English: Sima Fu resumed his duties as secretary and returned to his position on the south side of the Yangtze River.

古文：乐正命弟子赞工即位。
现代文：乐正命弟子相助乐工即其位。
English: The disciples of Le Zhengmei assisted the musicians to take their places.

古文：弟子相工，如其降也，升自西阶，反坐。
现代文：弟子像其下堂时一样相助乐工从西阶上堂，返归其位坐下。
English: The disciple assisted the musician to go up the west staircase as he did when he went down, and then returned to his seat and sat down.

古文：宾北面坐，取俎西之觯，兴，阼阶上北面酬主人。
现代文：宾面朝北坐下，拿起放在俎西边的觯，起立，至阼阶上方面朝北向主人酬酒。
English: The guest sits down facing north, picks up the gong placed on the west side of the gong, stands up, and raises the gong facing north to the host.

古文：主人降席，立于宾东。
现代文：主人下席，站在宾的东边。
English: The host takes a seat and stands to the east of the guests.

古文：宾坐奠觯，拜；执觯兴；主人答拜。
现代文：宾坐下，放觯在地，一拜，持觯起立。主人答拜。
English: The guest sits down, puts the yoke on the ground, bows, and stands up holding the yoke. The host responds with a bow.

古文：宾不祭，卒觯，不拜，不洗，实之，进东南面。
现代文：宾不祭酒，干杯，不拜，不下堂洗觯。然后斟满酒，前行，转而面朝东南。
English: The guests do not offer wine, make a toast, do not bow, do not wash the dishes. Then they fill up with wine, walk forward, and turn to face southeast.

古文：主人阼阶上北面拜，宾少退。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方面朝北拜，宾稍退后。
English: The host bowed to the north at the top of the stairs, and the guest stepped back a little.

古文：主人进受觯，宾主人之西北面拜送。
现代文：主人近前接觯，宾在主人西边面朝北拜送。
English: The host approaches and greets the guests, who are escorted by the host to the west, facing north.

古文：宾揖，就席。
现代文：宾作揖而即其席。
English: The guests made their way to their seats.

古文：主人以觯适西阶上酬大夫；大夫降席，立于主人之西，如宾酬主人之礼。
现代文：主人持觯至西阶上方酬大夫。大夫下席，站立在主人西边。其仪节与宾酬主人时相同。
English: The host holds the gong to the top of the west staircase to reward the host. The host then steps down and stands to the west of the host. The ceremony is the same as when the host is rewarded.

古文：主人揖，就席。
现代文：主人作揖而即席。
English: The host improvised a song.

古文：若无大夫，则长受酬，亦如之。
现代文：如果没有大夫在场，则堂上众宾之长者受酬，仪节亦与上相同。
English: If there is no doctor present, the elders of the guests in the hall will be paid, and the ceremony will be the same as above.

古文：司正升自西阶，相旅，作受酬者曰： 某酬某子。 
现代文：司正从西阶上堂主持旅酬仪式，命受酬者说： 某人向某先生酬酒。 
English: The secretary is presiding over the travel reward ceremony from the west steps of the hall. The person who received the reward said: Someone rewarded a certain teacher with wine.

古文：受酬者降席。
现代文：受酬的人下席。
English: The honorees take their seats.

古文：司正退立于西序端，东面。
现代文：司正退下站立在西序端，面朝东。
English: Shizeng retreated and stood at the western end of the row, facing east.

古文：众受酬者拜、兴、饮，皆如宾酬主人之礼。
现代文：众受酬者拜、起立及饮酒之仪，都与宾酬主人时相同。
English: The ritual of prostration, standing up and drinking alcohol is the same for the recipients as it is for the host.

古文：辩，遂酬在下者；皆升，受酬于西阶上。
现代文：堂上旅酬已遍及众宾，接着依序酬堂下众宾。众宾皆上堂，在西阶上方受酬。
English: The guests in the upper hall have all been paid for their journey, followed by the guests in the lower hall. The guests all go up the hall and are paid at the top of the west staircase.

古文：卒受者以觯降，奠于篚。
现代文：最后一位受酬的人执觯下堂，把觯放在篚中。
English: The last person to be paid goes down the hall holding the gong and places it in the urn.

古文：司正降复位，使二人举觯于宾与大夫。
现代文：司正下堂复归其位，命主人之吏二人举觯授与宾和大夫。
English: Sijongxitang returned to his position, and the two officials of the host raised their shields to award the guest and the doctor.

古文：举觯者皆洗觯，升实之；西阶上北面，皆坐奠觯，拜，执觯兴。
现代文：举觯者都要在堂下洗觯，上堂斟满酒，在西阶上方面朝北坐下放觯在地，一拜，执觯起立。
English: Those who raise the cymbals should wash the cymbals under the hall, fill the cymbals with wine, sit down facing north on the upper side of the west steps, put the cymbals on the ground, bow, hold the cymbals and stand up.

古文：宾与大夫皆席末答拜。
现代文：宾和大夫皆在席末端答拜。
English: The guests and the doctor all bowed at the end of the table.

古文：兴觯者皆坐祭，遂饮，卒觯，兴；坐奠觯，拜，执觯兴。
现代文：举觯者皆坐下祭酒，继而饮酒，干杯后起立。复又坐下，放觯在地上，随即一拜，执觯起立。
English: Those who raise the cymbals all sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, and then drink, and then stand up after the toast. Then they sit down again, put the cymbals on the ground, and then bow for a while, and then stand up holding the cymbals.

古文：宾与大夫皆答拜。
现代文：宾和大夫皆答拜。
English: The guests and the doctor all bowed.

古文：举觯者逆降，洗，升实觯，皆立于西阶上，北面，东上。
现代文：举觯者下堂，其次序正与上堂时相反。洗觯毕，上堂斟满酒，皆在西阶上面朝北站立，以东为上。
English: The order of those leaving the hall is the reverse of that of those entering. After washing, the hall is filled with wine, and everyone stands on the west steps facing north, with the east facing up.

古文：宾与大夫拜。
现代文：宾与大夫拜。
English: The guests bowed to the doctor.

古文：举觯者皆进，坐奠于荐右。
现代文：举觯者皆进前把觯放置于笾豆右边。
English: Everyone who has picked up a pea goes forward and places the pea on the right side of the pea.

古文：宾与大夫辞，坐受觯以兴。
现代文：宾和大夫辞谢，坐接觯，起立。
English: Bin and the doctor bowed, sat down, and stood up.

古文：举觯者退反位，皆拜送，乃降。
现代文：举觯者退返其位，皆拜送觯，然后下堂。
English: Those who had raised the gong returned to their seats, everyone bowed before the gong and left the hall.

古文：宾与大夫坐，反奠于其所，兴。
现代文：宾和大夫坐下，把觯各放置于其脯醢的右边。
English: Bin and Dafu sat down and placed their gongs on the right side of their gongs.

古文：若无大夫，则唯宾。
现代文：如无大夫在场，则使一人举觯授宾。
English: If there is no doctor present, then one person is to present the award to the guest.

古文：司正升自西阶，阼阶上受命于主人，适西阶上，北面请坐于宾，宾辞以俎。
现代文：司正从西阶上堂，至阼阶上方主人前受命，然后至西阶上方请宾安坐，宾以俎尚未撤为由推辞。
English: The steward was ordered to enter the hall from the west staircase and stand in front of the host at the top of the staircase. He then went to the top of the west staircase to invite the guests to sit down. The guests declined on the grounds that the curtain had not yet been pulled back.

古文：反命于主人，主人曰： 请彻俎。 
现代文：司正向主人复命，主人说： 请求撤俎。 
English: The steward was replying to his master, and the master said, "Ask him to withdraw the anchor."

古文：宾许。
现代文：宾允许。
English: Guests allowed.

古文：司正降自西阶，阶前命弟子俟彻俎。
现代文：司正从西阶下堂，在阶前命弟子准备伺候撤俎。
English: The master is descending the hall from the west staircase. In front of the staircase, the disciple is preparing to serve the retreat.

古文：司正升立于序端。
现代文：司正上堂站立在序端。
English: Shi Zheng walked into the hall and stood at the front.

古文：宾降席，北面。
现代文：宾下席，面朝北方。
English: Seated guests, facing north.

古文：主人降席自南方，阼阶上北面。
现代文：主人从席南侧下席，面朝北站于阼阶上方。
English: The host takes the lower seat from the south side of the table, facing north and standing above the steps.

古文：大夫降席，席东南面。
现代文：大夫下席，面朝南站在席东边。
English: The doctor sits down, faces south and stands on the east side of the seat.

古文：宾取俎，还授司正。
现代文：宾取俎，转身授与司正。
English: He took the gong and turned to present it to the president.

古文：司正以降自西阶，宾从之降，遂立于阶西，东面。
现代文：司正持俎从西阶下堂，宾随后下堂，继而面朝东站立在西阶西边。
English: The officiant holds the gong and descends from the west steps, the guest then descends, and then stands facing east on the west side of the west steps.

古文：司正以俎出，授从者。
现代文：司正持俎出门，授与其随从。
English: Sizheng took the scepter out of the door and gave it to his attendant.

古文：主人取俎，还授弟子。
现代文：主人取俎，转身授与弟子。
English: The master took the gong and turned to award the disciple.

古文：弟子受俎，降自西阶以东。
现代文：弟子接俎，从西阶下堂，持俎至东壁收藏。
English: Disciples pick up the yakitori, walk down the hall from the west steps, and carry the yakitori to the east wall for collection.

古文：主人降自阼阶，西面立。
现代文：主人从东阶下堂，面朝西站立。
English: The master descends the hall from the east steps and stands facing west.

古文：大夫取俎，还授弟子；弟子以降自西阶，遂出授从者；大夫从之降，立于宾南。
现代文：大夫取俎，转身授与弟子，弟子持俎从西阶下堂，继而出门授之与随从人役。大夫随其后下堂，站立在宾的南边。
English: The doctor takes the gong, turns around to give it to the disciple, the disciple holds the gong and goes down the hall from the west steps, then goes out the door to give it to the attendant. The doctor then goes down the hall and stands on the south side of the guest.

古文：众宾皆降，立于大夫之南，少退，北上。
现代文：众宾都下堂，依序站立在大夫南边，稍稍退后，以北为上首。
English: All the guests left the hall and stood in order on the south side of the doctor, a little bit behind, with the north at the top.

古文：主人以宾揖让，说屦，乃升。
现代文：主人与宾相揖让，脱去鞋子，上堂。
English: The host and his guest make allowances, take off their shoes, and go into the hall.

古文：大夫及众宾皆说屦，升，坐。
现代文：大夫及众宾皆脱掉鞋子，上堂坐下。
English: The doctor and all the guests took off their shoes and sat down in the hall.

古文：乃羞。无算爵。
现代文：执事人摆上菜肴，宾主欢饮，爵行无数。
English: The stewards set out the dishes, the guests enjoy the drinks, and there are countless parties.

古文：使二人举觯。
现代文：使二人举觯酬宾和大夫。
English: The two men were made honorary guests and doctors.

古文：宾与大夫不兴，取奠觯饮，卒觯，不拜。
现代文：宾和大夫不起立，拿起放在地上的觯饮酒，干杯，不拜。
English: The guest and the doctor do not stand up, but pick up the gong placed on the ground and drink alcohol, make a toast, do not bow.

古文：执觯者受觯，遂实之。
现代文：执觯人接觯，随即斟酒。
English: The server clasps the goblet, then pours the wine.

古文：宾觯以之主人，大夫之觯长受，而错，皆不拜。
现代文：主人受宾之觯，众宾中长者受大夫之觯，相互交错，都不拜。
English: The host receives the cheers of the guests, and the elders among the guests receive the cheers of the doctor, interlacing with each other, neither bowing.

古文：辩，卒受者兴，以旅在下者于西阶上。
现代文：酬酒已遍及堂上众宾，最后一位受酬者起立，在西阶上方依次向堂下众宾及主人之赞者酬酒。
English: The wine has been distributed to all the guests in the hall. The last recipient of the award stands up and, at the top of the west steps, awards the wine to the guests in the hall and the owner's admirers.

古文：长受酬，酬者不拜，乃饮，卒觯，以实之。
现代文：堂下众宾和赞者中年长者受酬，酬者不拜而饮酒，干杯，又斟满酒。
English: The middle-aged and elderly guests and admirers were rewarded, and those who were rewarded drank, toasted, and poured wine without bowing.

古文：受酬者不拜受。
现代文：受酬的人不拜而受觯。
English: Those who are paid are not bowed down, but are beaten.

古文：辩旅，皆不拜。
现代文：依序酬酒，酬酒遍及堂下众宾与赞者，都不拜。
English: The guests and admirers in the hall all received their drinks in order, and did not bow.

古文：执觯者皆与旅。
现代文：执觯的人也都参加。
English: The people who hold the reins of power also take part.

古文：卒受者以虚觯降奠于篚；执觯者洗，升实觯，反奠于宾与大夫。
现代文：最后一位受酬者持空觯下堂，把它放在篚中。执觯人洗觯，上堂斟满酒，将觯放置在宾与大夫席前。
English: The last recipient of the award came down the hall with an empty gong and placed it in the gong. The host washed the gong, filled the gong with wine, and placed the gong in front of the guest and doctor's seats.

古文：无算乐。
现代文：歌乐不限，尽欢而止。
English: Then they sing and play an unlimited number of songs.

古文：宾兴，乐正命奏《陔》。
现代文：宾站起，乐正命奏《陔夏》。
English: The guests stand up, and the music begins to play "Midsummer."

古文：宾降及阶，《陔》作。
现代文：宾下堂，至台阶时，《陔夏》的乐声起。
English: In the guest hall, the music of "Summer" begins as you reach the steps.

古文：宾出，众宾皆出，主人送于门外，再拜。
现代文：宾退出，众宾皆退出。主人送至大门外，两拜。
English: The guests leave, all the guests leave. The host leads them outside the gate, and they bow twice.

古文：明日，宾朝服以拜赐于门外，主人不见。
现代文：第二天，宾身穿朝服至主人门外拜谢主人的礼遇，主人推辞，不请入见。
English: The next day, the guest, dressed in court attire, went to the master's door to thank him for his courtesy. The master declined and did not invite him in.

古文：如宾服，遂从之，拜辱于门外，乃退。
现代文：主人身着与宾相同的礼服，从至门外，拜谢宾屈尊驾临，宾于是告退。
English: The host, wearing the same dress as the guest, came to the door to thank the guest for coming. The guest then left.

古文：主人释服，乃息司正。
现代文：主人卸去朝服而服玄端，于是犒劳司正。
English: The master took off his imperial robe and put on a simple one, and then the labor secretary came out.

古文：无介。不杀。
现代文：不用介，不杀牲。
English: Don't meddle, don't kill.

古文：使人速。
现代文：要人召请司正。
English: Important people call for the chief secretary.

古文：迎于门外，不拜；入，升。不拜至，不拜洗。
现代文：主人至门外迎接，不拜。入门上堂，不拜，谢其光临，不拜谢洗爵。
English: The host greets him outside the door, but does not bow. He enters the hall, but does not bow. He thanks him for his presence, but does not thank him for his baptism.

古文：荐脯醢，无俎。
现代文：执事人进置脯醢，但不设俎。
English: The deacon inserts the urn, but does not set it up.

古文：宾酢主人，主人不崇酒，不拜众宾；既献众宾，一人举觯，遂无算爵。
现代文：宾以酒回敬主人，主人不添酒，不拜众宾。向众宾献酒后，使一人举觯授宾，随即爵行无数。
English: The guests pay homage to the host with wine, but the host does not add wine and does not bow to the guests. After offering wine to the guests, one person raises the gong to award the guests, and then there are countless peerages.

古文：无司正。
现代文：不用司正监酒。
English: You don't have to be a sommelier to make wine.

古文：宾不与。
现代文：宾不参加。
English: He will not be attending.

古文：征唯所欲，以告于乡先生、君子可也。羞唯所有。
现代文：邀请客人，因其所愿。对乡中致仕的卿大夫及盛德君子，邀请与否亦随其所愿。
English: Guests are invited according to their wishes. For the village's honorary doctor and grand gentleman, the invitation or not also depends on their wishes.

古文：乡乐唯欲。
现代文：所上的菜肴不限，视其所有；演唱《国风》的诗篇，也无限定，因其所欲。
English: Various parts of "Kokufu" can also be sung as desired.

古文：记。大夫与，则公士为宾。
现代文：如果有大夫参加，则使居官之士为宾。
English: If a doctor is present, a local official is invited as a guest.

古文：使能，不宿戒。
现代文：因为宾为贤能之士，所以不必预先戒告。
English: Because the guest is a man of virtue, there is no need to warn him in advance.

古文：其牲，狗也。亨于堂东北。
现代文：其牲用狗，在堂外东北边烹煮。
English: Cattle dogs are cooked outside the hall on the northeast side.

古文：尊，綌幂。宾至，彻之。
现代文：酒尊上盖粗葛布盖巾，宾到时撤去。
English: Cover the sake with a coarse burlap cloth, and remove it when the guest arrives.

古文：蒲筵，缁布纯。
现代文：设筵用以黑布镶边的蒲席。
English: There is a cushion with a rim made of black cloth.

古文：西序之席，北上。
现代文：设在西序面朝东的席，以北为上首。
English: Seats located in the west row, facing east, with the north at the top.

古文：献用爵，其他用觯。
现代文：献酒用爵，其他用觯。
English: Dedicate the wine with a girdle, the rest with a pestle.

古文：以爵拜者，不徒作。
现代文：干杯后下拜者不空起立，起立即要酢主人。
English: After the toast, the genuflectors are not free to stand up, but must immediately ask the host for vinegar.

古文：荐，脯用笾，五胑，祭半胑，横于上。
现代文：进脯醢：脯盛于笾，脯五条，另有半条横置其上以供祭祀。
English: Into the yakitori: the yakitori is placed in the yakitori, five yakitori are placed on the yakitori, and the other half is placed horizontally on top of the yakitori for the ritual.

古文：醢以豆，出自东房。
现代文：醢盛在豆中，预先陈放在东房里。
English: Ayu is in the middle of the beans, pre-cooked and placed in the east room.

古文：胑长尺二寸。
现代文：脯条长一尺二寸。
English: The bamboo shoots are 1 foot 2 inches long.

古文：俎由东壁，自西阶升。
现代文：俎，用时从东壁移至西阶，从西阶上堂陈置席前。
English: The table was placed in the east room in advance. It was then moved from the east wall to the west steps, and from the west steps up to the hall, it was placed in front of the seats.

古文：宾俎，脊、胁、肩、肺。
现代文：宾之俎所载的肉食有：脊、胁、肩、肺。
English: The meat contained in Bin's yakitori includes: loin, pork belly, shoulder, and lung.

古文：主人俎：脊、胁、臂、肺。
现代文：主人之俎所载的肉食有：脊、胁、臂、肺。
English: The meat contained in the owner's yakitori includes: loin, breast, arm, and lung.

古文：肺皆离。
现代文：肺都要割离开来。
English: The lungs have to be cut away.

古文：皆右体也。
现代文：牲都要用右体，肉皮向上。
English: The animal should be slaughtered with the right side of the body, with the skin facing upwards.

古文：进腠。凡举爵，三作而不徒爵。凡奠者于左，将兴者于右。
现代文：凡是举爵献宾、献大夫、献乐工，都要进脯醢。大凡酒杯不用时，放置在左边；将要举以献酬，则放置在右边。
English: All guests, doctors, and musicians who are to be presented with a peerage should be presented with a gong. When not in use, the large goblet should be placed on the left; when a gift is to be presented, it should be placed on the right.

古文：众宾之长，一人辞洗，如宾礼。
现代文：众宾长者三人之中，只有一位尊者辞洗，其仪节与宾礼相同。
English: Of the three elderly guests, only His Holiness resigned from baptism, with the same ceremony as the guests.

古文：若有诸公，则如宾礼，大夫如介礼。
现代文：如果有诸公在场，待以宾礼，对大夫则待以介礼。
English: If there are nobles present, they should be treated as guests, and the doctor should be treated with courtesy.

古文：无诸公，则大夫和宾礼。
现代文：无诸公在场，则对大夫待以宾礼。
English: In the absence of Zhu Gong, the doctor was treated as a guest.

古文：乐作，大夫不入。
现代文：已开始奏乐，大夫便不可再入内。
English: Once the music starts, the doctor cannot re-enter.

古文：乐正，与立者齿。
现代文：乐正与堂下众宾一起依序受酬。
English: Le Zheng received the award in the same order as the other guests.

古文：三笙一和而成声。
现代文：三人吹笙，一人吹和而成乐曲。
English: Three people play the koto, one person plays the koto, and it becomes a piece of music.

古文：献工与笙，取爵于上篚。既献，奠于下篚。
现代文：给乐工和吹笙人献酒，要从堂上篚中取爵，献酒毕，要把空爵放在堂下篚中。
English: When offering wine to the musicians and trumpeters, take a knight from the upper bowl of the hall. When the wine has been offered, place the empty knight in the lower bowl of the hall.

古文：其笙，则献诸西阶上。
现代文：主人献吹笙人，在西阶上拜送。
English: The host gave him a blow job and sent him off on the west steps.

古文：立者，东面北上。
现代文：堂下众宾面朝东，以北为上。
English: The guests in the hall face east, with north at the top.

古文：司正既举觯，而荐诸其位。
现代文：司正在举觯旅酬以后，要把脯醢进置其位。
English: After the division is raising the shovel, it is necessary to move the shovel into place.

古文：三耦者，使弟子。司射前戒之。
现代文：三耦，选众宾中的年青人组成，司射进前教诫之。
English: Three couples, made up of young people chosen from among the guests, go into the ring.

古文：司射之弓矢与扑，倚于西阶之西。
现代文：司射的弓矢和扑，靠在西阶西边。
English: The archer's bow and arrow, and the archer's javelin rest on the west side of the west steps.

古文：司射既袒决遂而升，司马阶前命张侯，遂命倚旌。
现代文：在司射袒左臂、套上扳指，臂着臂衣上堂后，司马即在阶前命张设箭靶，接着命获者把旌倚靠在靶子中央。
English: After the archer shoots with his left arm, puts on the trigger finger, and walks into the hall arm-in-arm, Sima orders the archer to set up an arrow target in front of the steps, and then the person who wins the order leans the crossbow against the center of the target.

古文：凡侯：天子熊侯，白质；诸侯麋侯，赤质；大夫布侯，画以虎豹；士布侯，画以鹿豕。
现代文：所用的靶子：天子用画熊头的箭靶，底色为白色；诸侯用画麋鹿头的箭靶，底色为红色；大夫的箭靶以布制成，靶心处画虎豹头；士的箭靶亦以布制成，靶心处画鹿和豕的头像。
English: The targets used: the emperor used an arrow target with a bear's head, the background color was white; the lords used an arrow target with an elk's head, the background color was red; the doctor's arrow target was made of cloth, with a tiger's head at the bull's-eye; the scholar's arrow target was also made of cloth, with the heads of a deer and a baboon at the bull's-eye.

古文：凡画者，丹质。
现代文：凡在侧边彩画云气为饰的靶子，其画云气处以朱红色为底色。
English: Where the target is decorated with clouds painted on the side, the clouds are painted with vermilion as the base color.

古文：射自楹间，物长如笴。
现代文：射箭的位置在堂上两楹之间。
English: The place for archery is between the two piers on the hall.

古文：其间容弓，距随长武。序则物当栋，堂则物当楣，命负侯者，由其位。
现代文：射手所立处的十字标记，其纵画长一箭杆，上射与下射的位置相距一弓长，十字标记的横画长约一足。射于州学，射手立处的十字标记在屋的中脊下，射于乡学，其十字标记的位置则在屋前楣下。
English: The cross mark where the archer stands is one arrow-rod long in the vertical position, one bow-length long between the up-shoot and down-shoot positions, and about one foot long in the horizontal position of the cross mark. In the state school, the cross mark where the archer stands is under the middle ridge of the house, and in the township school, the cross mark is under the front of the house.

古文：凡适堂西，皆出入于司马之南。
现代文：司马在其原位遥命获者背向箭靶而立。凡是去堂下西边，都要从司马之位的南边出入。
English: Sima stands in his original position with his back to the target if he is given a long shot. If you want to go to the west side of the hall, you must enter and exit from the south side of Sima's seat.

古文：唯宾与大夫降阶，遂西取弓矢。
现代文：只有宾和大夫下台阶后，直接至堂西取弓矢。
English: Only Bin and the doctor went down the steps and went directly to the west of the hall to fetch a bow and arrow.

古文：旌，各以其物。
现代文：获者所执旌旗，各用射者平时所用的旗帜。
English: The winners will hold the flags, and the shooters will use the flags they normally use.

古文：无物，则以白羽与朱羽糅。杠长三仞，以鸿脰韬上，二寻。
现代文：不命之士，则用白羽和朱羽杂缀为旌旗，其旗竿长两丈一尺，在其一丈六尺以上处，套上鸿雁的颈项。
English: For the dead, white feathers and vermilion feathers are used to decorate the flagpole. The flagpole is two feet high and one foot long, and at a height of six feet or more, it is covered with the neck of a wild goose.

古文：凡挟矢，于二指之间横之。
现代文：凡挟矢，都是横向夹在食指与中指之间。
English: All pinching arrows are held horizontally between the index finger and the middle finger.

古文：司射在司马之北。司马无事不执弓。
现代文：司射的位置在司马的北边，司马无射事时不执弓。
English: The position of the archer is on the north side of Sima, and Sima does not hold the bow when there is no shooting.

古文：始射，获而未释获；复，释获；复，用乐行之。
现代文：第一番射箭，射中时，只有获者大声唱获而不释算筹记数；第二番射箭，则释算筹以记数；第三番射箭，则用音乐节射。
English: In the first round of archery, when the archer hits, only the winner sings loudly and does not calculate the number of points; in the second round of archery, the archer interprets and calculates the number of points; in the third round of archery, the archer shoots with music.

古文：上射于右。
现代文：上射的位置在右边。
English: The upper shot is on the right.

古文：楅长如笴，博三寸，厚寸有半，龙首，其中蛇交，韦当。
现代文：楅的形制，长一箭杆，宽三寸，厚一寸半，两端作龙首，中间为蛇身相交状，以形似背心的皮当设于其上以承矢。
English: In the shape of a crossbow, one long shaft, three inches wide and one and a half inches thick, with a dragon's head at each end and a snake's body intersecting in the middle. A waistcoat-like skin should be placed over it to support the arrow.

古文：楅，髹，横而拳之，南面坐而奠之，南北当洗。
现代文：楅，漆成赤黑色，设楅者以手横捧之，面朝南坐下，放置于中庭，其位置南北与洗相对。
English: , painted red and black, the person who placed the  held it sideways with his hand, sat down facing south, and placed it in the atrium, its position north-south opposite the 洗.

古文：射者有过，则挞之。
现代文：射箭的人如有过错，则以扑抽打作为惩罚。
English: If the archer is at fault, he is punished with a whipping.

古文：众宾不与射者，不降。
现代文：众宾中不参与射事的人不下堂。
English: Guests who do not participate in the shooting will not be allowed to leave the hall.

古文：取诱射之矢者，既拾取矢，而后兼诱射之乘矢而取之。
现代文：取司射作示范之矢的人，既已与其耦轮流取矢完毕，然后一次并取司射作示范的四枝矢。
English: The person who takes the second arrow as the demonstration arrow has already finished taking the arrow with its coupling rotation, and then takes the second arrow as the demonstration four-branched arrow.

古文：宾、主人射，则司射摈升降，卒射即席，而反位卒事。
现代文：宾和主人射时，则司射赞相其上堂和下堂，宾和主人射毕就席后司射才无事，返归其位。
English: When the guests and the host are seated, the hostess praises the guests as they walk up and down the hall. After the guests and the host are seated, the hostess returns to her seat.

古文：鹿中，髹，前足跪，凿背容八算。释获者奉之，先首。
现代文：鹿中的形制，漆成赤黑色，刻木为鹿形，前腿跪伏，背上凿孔可盛八枝算筹；释获人以手捧之，头向前方。
English: In the shape of a deer, painted red and black, carved in the shape of a deer, the front legs are kneeling, and a hole can be drilled in the back to hold eight branches. When released, it is held in the hand, with the head facing forward.

古文：大夫降，立于堂西以俟射。
现代文：大夫下堂，站在堂下西边等候上堂射箭。
English: The doctor went down the hall and stood on the west side of the hall waiting to go up to the hall to shoot arrows.

古文：大夫与士射，袒薰襦。
现代文：大夫与士为射耦，则袒露其绛色短衣。
English: The doctor and the gentleman are a couple, but their navy-coloured jackets are exposed.

古文：耦少退于物。
现代文：其射耦在射箭的位置上稍退后一些。
English: His archery partner is a little further back in the archery circle.

古文：司射释弓矢视算，与献释获者释弓矢。
现代文：司射检视算筹时，要放下弓矢。向释获人献酒时，也要先放下弓矢。
English: Bow and arrows should be put down when inspecting archery and watching arithmetic. Bow and arrows should also be put down when offering wine to released prisoners.

古文：礼射不主皮。
现代文：演习礼乐之射以容体合礼乐为主而不以射中为主。
English: The shooting of the drill ritual music is mainly composed of the body and the ritual music, rather than the shooting.

古文：主皮之射者，胜者又射，不胜者降。
现代文：主于射中之射，则胜者继续参与射事，不胜者下堂，下一番便不能继续升堂再射。
English: If the shot is a hit, the winner continues to participate in the shooting, the loser goes down, and the next one can not continue to go up and shoot again.

古文：主人亦饮于西阶上。
现代文：主人如在不胜者一方，亦在西阶上方饮射爵。
English: If the host is on the side of the loser, he will also drink shooters above the west steps.

古文：获者之俎，折脊、胁、肺、臑。
现代文：获者之俎所载肉食有：折脊、胁、肺及牲体前肢。
English: The meat contained in the winner's yakitori included ribs, beef, lungs and animal forelimbs.

古文：东方谓之右个。
现代文：靶的东侧称作右个。
English: The east side of the target is called the right circle.

古文：释获者之俎，折脊、胁、肺，皆有祭。
现代文：释获人之俎所载肉食有：折脊、胁、肺。
English: The meat contained in the human torso that was released included: ribs, intestines, and lungs.

古文：大夫说矢束，坐说之。
现代文：获者与释获者俎上都有祭肺。大夫解去束矢的茅草时，要坐下来解。
English: Both the recipient and the released person have a sacrificial lung on their beak. When the doctor removes the thatch from the bundle of arrows, sit down and solve it.

古文：歌《驺虞》，若《采苹》，皆五终。
现代文：演奏《驺虞》，与《采蘋》一样，都要演奏五成。
English: In the performance of "Shuyu," as in the case of "The Apple Picking," 50% of the music must be played by the ensemble.

古文：射无算。
现代文：射耦则无定数。
English: In the case of a projectile-couple, there is no constant.

古文：古者于旅也语。
现代文：古来饮酒至旅酬时，才可以谈话。
English: Since ancient times, you can only have a conversation when you've had enough to drink.

古文：凡旅，不洗。
现代文：旅酬，不洗觯。
English: When traveling, do not wash your socks.

古文：不洗者，不祭。
现代文：不洗觯则不祭酒。
English: If you don't wash the yakitori, you don't get the sake.

古文：既旅，士不入。
现代文：已开始旅酬，士便不可再入内了。
English: If they have already begun their journey, they are not allowed to re-enter.

古文：大夫后出。主人送于门外，再拜。
现代文：大夫最后告退，主人送至大门外，两拜。
English: The doctor finally retreated, and the owner sent him outside the gate for two days.

古文：乡侯，上个五寻，中十尺。
现代文：乡射的靶子，最上幅长四丈，中十尺见方。
English: The target for township shooting is four meters long at the top and ten meters square in the middle.

古文：侯道五十弓，弓二寸以为侯中。
现代文：侯道长五十弓，每弓取二寸为中的宽和高之数。
English: There are fifty bows on the road, with two inches taken from each bow for the middle width and height.

古文：倍中以为躬，倍躬以为左右舌。
现代文：躬的长度是中的二倍，上舌的长度又是躬的二倍。下舌长出躬的部分的长度是上舌长出躬的部分的一半。
English: The middle groove is twice as long, the upper tongue is twice as long, and the grooved part of the lower tongue is half the length of the grooved part of the upper tongue.

古文：下舌半上舌。箭筹八十。
现代文：竹子做成的算筹八十根。
English: It is made of bamboo and has 80 stems.

古文：长尺有握，握素。
现代文：算筹长一尺零一握，用刀削白的一端是手握之处。
English: Calculate the length of one foot and one hand, and use a knife to whittle the end where the hand is held.

古文：楚扑长如笴。刊本尺。
现代文：楚扑与箭杆一样长，用刀削其一端一尺长的部分以便手握。
English: Chu po is as long as an arrow shaft, and a knife is used to cut off a foot-long section at one end so that it can be held in the hand.

古文：君射，则为下射。
现代文：国君参与射事，则做下射。
English: If the sovereign participates in the shooting, he shoots from below.

古文：上射退于物一笴，既发，则答君而俟。
现代文：上射要在射箭的位置上退后一箭杆远，射完一矢，则面向君恭候君射。
English: The upper shot retreated to a place three feet behind the archery place, the upper shot had finished, and he waited facing the sovereign.

古文：君，乐作而后就物。
现代文：国君要在奏乐以后才到射箭的位置上。
English: The sovereign has to come to the archery position after the music.

古文：君，袒朱襦以射。
现代文：国君射时袒露朱红色的短衣。
English: The Emperor is wearing a scarlet-coloured short-sleeved shirt.

古文：小臣以巾执矢以授。
现代文：小臣用巾垫手执矢授与君。
English: The junior minister awarded you with an arrow held in his hand with a napkin cushion.

古文：若饮君，如燕，则夹爵。君，国中射，则皮树中，以翿旌获，白羽与朱羽糅；于郊，则闾中，以旌获；于竟，则虎中，龙旃。
现代文：如果君在不胜一方，则依照燕礼宾媵觯于公之仪使君饮射爵，侍君射者先斟酒自饮，君饮毕，复又酌酒自饮。国君在城中射，则用皮树中盛算筹，获者执翿旌唱获；射于郊，则用闾中盛算筹，获者执旌唱获；射于国境，则用虎中盛算筹，获者执赤色的龙旗唱获。
English: If you are on the losing side, then, according to the etiquette of the eagle, the guests in the public ceremony will make you drink and shoot the knight, and the attendant shooters will first pour the wine and drink, and then drink, and then drink again. If the king shoots in the city, he will use the leather tree to count the money, and the winner will hold the gong and sing; if the king shoots in the suburbs, he will use the gong and hold the gong and sing; if the king shoots at the border, he will use the tiger and hold the red dragon flag and sing.

古文：大夫，兕中，各以其物获。
现代文：大夫，用兕中盛算筹，获者各执其平时所建旗帜唱获。
English: Doctor, let's use the money from the lottery to raise money. The winners will each get to keep the flag they built in their spare time.

古文：士，鹿中，翿旌以获。
现代文：士，用鹿中盛算筹，获者执翿旌唱获。
English: The winner of the lottery will be awarded the prize money.

古文：唯君有射于国中，其馀否。
现代文：只有国君有城中之射，其余则无。
English: Only the sovereign has the best shot in town, the rest have none.

古文：君在，大夫射，则肉袒。
现代文：如君在场，大夫射时则袒露其左臂。
English: In the presence of the sovereign, the doctor would have to show his left arm to shoot an arrow.

