古文：李石完颜福寿独吉义乌延蒲离黑乌延蒲辖奴乌延查剌李师雄尼庞古钞兀孛术鲁定方夹谷胡剌蒲察斡论夹谷查剌李石，字子坚，辽阳人，贞懿皇后弟也。
现代文：李石，字子坚，辽阳人，是贞懿皇后的弟弟。
English: Li Shi, also known as Zi Jian, a native of Liaoyang, was the younger brother of Empress Zhenya.

古文：先世仕辽，为宰相。
现代文：他的先世在辽国做官，官高至宰相。
English: In his previous life, he was an official in Liaoning Province, rising to the position of prime minister.

古文：高祖仙寿，尝脱辽主之舅于难，辽帝赐仙寿辽阳及汤池地千顷，他物称是，常以李舅目之。
现代文：高祖仙寿，曾经帮助辽国君主的舅舅脱险，因此辽国皇帝赐给仙寿辽阳以及汤池土地上千顷，还赏赐了相称的其他物品，常把他当李舅看待。
English: The great ancestor Xian Shou once helped the uncle of the monarch of Liao to escape danger. Therefore, the emperor of Liao gave Xian Shou Liaoyang and thousands of hectares of land in Tangchi, and also awarded other items commensurate with it. He was often regarded as Uncle Li.

古文：父雏讹只，桂州观察使，高永昌据东京，率众攻之，不胜而死。
现代文：李石的父亲雏讹之，曾任桂州观察使，高永昌据守东京的时候，雏讹之率领众人去攻打，战败而死。
English: Li Shi's father, Gao Yongchang, was a Guizhou observation envoy. When Gao Yongchang was defending Tokyo, Gao led the people to attack and was defeated and died.

古文：石敦厚寡言，而器识过人。
现代文：李石敦睦忠厚，寡言少语，然而他的器度胆识却超过常人。
English: Li Shidun is good-natured and loyal. He is a man of few words, but he has more courage than the average person.

古文：天会二年，授世袭谋克，为行军猛安。
现代文：天会二年，李石被授予世袭谋克，当了行军猛安。
English: In the second year of the Heavenly Meeting, Li Shih was awarded the Hereditary Medal of Merit, and was awarded the Marching Medal of Merit.

古文：睿宗为右副元帅，引置军中，属之宗弼。
现代文：睿宗当时是右副元帅，把李石安置在军中，归属宗弼麾下。
English: Ruizong was the right vice marshal at that time, and placed Li Shi in the army, under the command of Zong.

古文：八年，除礼宾副使，转洛苑副使。
现代文：八年，拜官礼宾副使，又改任洛苑副使。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to vice-envoy of protocol and vice-envoy of Luoyuan.

古文：天眷元年，置行台省于汴，石为汴京都巡检使，历大名少尹、汴京马军副都指挥使，累官景州刺史。
现代文：天眷元年，在汴京设置行台省，李石为汴京都巡检使，历任大名少尹、汴京马军副都指挥使，直做到景州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Heian era, the province of Xingtai was set up in Xingtai, and Li Shih became the inspector of Xingtai, and successive daimyo Shao Yin and vice-commander of the Xingtai Horse Army became the inspector of Xingtai, until he became the history of Jingzhou.

古文：海陵营建燕京宫室，石护役皇城端门。
现代文：海陵营建燕京宫室，李石守护皇城端门。
English: Hailing the construction of Yanjing Palace, Li Shi guarded the gate of the imperial city.

古文：海陵迁都燕京，石随例入见。
现代文：海陵迁都燕京，李石按惯例入朝谒见。
English: Hai Ling moved the capital to Yanjing, and Li Shi went to the imperial court as usual.

古文：海陵指石曰： 此非葛王之舅乎？ 
现代文：海陵指着李石说 ：这不是葛王的舅舅吗？ 
English: Pointing at Li Shi, Hailing said, "Isn't this Ge Wang's uncle?"

古文：葛王，谓世宗也。
现代文：葛王，说的是世宗。
English: Ge Wang is talking about Shizong.

古文：未几，除兴中少尹。
现代文：没过多久，李石被授予兴中少尹之职。
English: Soon after, Li Shih was awarded the post of Xingzhong Shao Yin.

古文：石知海陵忌宗室，颇歉前日之言，秩满，托疾还乡里。
现代文：李石知道海陵忌讳宗室，对前日海陵的话很感心中不安，任期届满，以有病为托辞归还乡里。
English: Li Shih knew that Hailing was a taboo-breaker, and was deeply disturbed by Hailing's words the day before. When his term of office expired, he returned to the village with the excuse that he was ill.

古文：世宗留守东京，御契丹括里，石留东京巡察城中。
现代文：世宗留守东京，抵御契丹括里的进犯，李石留东京在城中巡察。
English: Sejong stayed in Tokyo to fend off the attacks of Khitan forces, while Lee Seok stayed in Tokyo to inspect the castle.

古文：海陵使副留守高存福伺察世宗动静，知军李蒲速越知存福谋，以告世宗，石因劝世宗先除存福，然后举事，世宗从之。
现代文：海陵派副留守高存福暗中监视世宗动静，知军李蒲速越知道存福的阴谋，把这些情况告诉了世宗，李石就劝世宗先除掉高存福，然后举行起义，世宗听从了他的意见。
English: Gao Cunfu, the deputy of the Hailing faction, stayed behind to secretly monitor the movements of Shizong. The more the Shogun Li Puxu knew about Cunfu's plot, the more he told Shizong about these circumstances. Li Shih advised Shizong to first eliminate Gao Cunfu and then stage an uprising. Shizong listened to his advice.

古文：大定元年，以定策功为户部尚书。
现代文：大定元年，李石因协助世宗决策有功而拜户部尚书。
English: In the first year of Dading, Li Shishi was awarded the honorary title of "household minister" for his contribution to the decision-making of Shizong.

古文：无何，拜参知政事。
现代文：没有多长时间，又拜参知政事。
English: It didn't take long for him to get involved in politics again.

古文：阿琐杀同知中都留守蒲察沙离只，遣使奉表东京，而群臣多劝世宗幸上京者。
现代文：阿琐杀了同知中都留守蒲察沙离只，然后派使者进东京上表，群臣中多数劝世宗驾临京都。
English: Azo killed his confidant, leaving only Puchasa, and then sent an envoy to Tokyo to persuade Sejong to come to Kyoto.

古文：石奏曰： 正隆远在江、淮，寇盗蜂起，万姓引领东向，宜因此时直赴中都，据腹心以号令天下，万世之业也。
现代文：李石上奏说 ：正隆远在江、淮一带，寇盗蜂起，百姓万民盼望东方，应该趁现在这个机会直接奔赴中都，占据腹心要地来向天下发号施令，这是千秋万代的大业。
English: Li Shishangsoo said, "Right now, far away in the areas of the Yangtze River and Huai River, the bandits are rising up, and the people are looking forward to the East. We should take advantage of this opportunity to go directly to the capital and occupy the important place to give orders to the world. This is a great cause for thousands of generations.

古文：惟陛下无牵于众惑。 
现代文：只请陛下不要让众人牵着走。 
English: Just please, Your Majesty, don't let everyone drag you away.

古文：上意遂决，即日启行。
现代文：皇上于是拿定了主意，当日就启行。
English: The emperor then made up his mind and set off on the same day.

古文：世宗纳石女后宫，生郑王永蹈、卫绍王永济，是为元妃李氏。
现代文：世宗将李石的女儿纳娶到后宫，她为皇上生下两个儿子：郑王永蹈和卫绍王永济，她就是元妃李氏。
English: King Sejong married Li Shi's daughter Na to the harem, and she gave birth to two sons for the emperor: Zheng Wang Yongbai and Wei Shao Wang Yongji. She was the original princess of the Li clan.

古文：三年，户部尚书梁钅求上言： 大定以前，官吏士卒俸粟支帖真伪相杂，请一切停罢。 
现代文：大定三年，户部尚书梁钅求上奏说 ：大定以前，官吏士卒俸粟支帖真伪相杂，请一切停止发放。 
English: In the third year of the Taisho era, the head of the Household Ministry, Shosho Ryangun, appealed to the emperor, saying, "Before the Taisho era, the salaries of government officials were mixed, so please stop issuing them.

古文：石买革去旧贴，下仓支粟，仓司不敢违，以新粟与之。
现代文：李石买革失去旧帖，下仓库去支取粮食，仓司不敢违抗他，拿新粮支给了他。
English: When Li Shihai lost his old post, he went down to the warehouse to withdraw grain. The warehouse clerk did not dare to defy him and gave him the new grain.

古文：上闻其事，以问梁钅求。
现代文：皇上听说了这件事，拿来问梁钅求。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he asked Liang Yingqiu about it.

古文：梁钅求对不以实。
现代文：梁钅求答对没讲实话。
English: Liang Wei didn't tell the truth when he asked for an answer.

古文：上命尚书左丞翟永固鞫之。梁钅求削官四阶，降知火山军，石罢为御史大夫。
现代文：皇上命令尚书左丞翟永固审理这件事，梁钅求被削官四级，降知火山军，李石被贬为御史大夫。
English: The emperor ordered Shang Shuzhong Yonggu to investigate the matter. Liang Shuzhong asked to be demoted to the fourth grade, and Li Shi was demoted to goshi taifu.

古文：久之，封道国公。
现代文：过了很久，才又被封为道国公。
English: It was a long time before he was made a provincial governor again.

古文：六年，上幸西京，石与少詹事乌古论三合守卫中都宫阙。
现代文：大定六年，皇上驾临西京，李石和少詹事乌古论三合守卫中都的宫阙。
English: In the sixth year of Dading, the emperor arrived in West Beijing, and Li Shih and Shao Zhan talked about the ancient times and the palace guard of the capital.

古文：诏曰： 京师巡御，不可不严。
现代文：皇上下诏说 ：京师的巡逻和防御不可不严。
English: The imperial edict said: the patrol and defense of the Beijing Division must not be lax.

古文：近都猛安内选士二千人巡警，仍给口豢刍粟。 
现代文：都城附近要从猛安中选二千名兵士巡回警戒，照常发给家畜及粮食。 
English: In the vicinity of the capital, 2,000 soldiers should be selected from Meng'an to patrol and guard, and livestock and grain should be distributed as usual.

古文：既退，宰相或问石奏事何久，石正色曰： 正为天下奸污未尽诛耳。 
现代文：并对宰相大臣说 ：国库中的钱币不是白白集攒的，但如果军士贫弱，百姓困乏，所需费用虽多，难道就可以停止发放吗？ 
English: And he said to the Prime Minister: the money in the treasury is not collected in vain, but if the soldiers are poor, the people are poor, and the costs are high, can the distribution be stopped?

古文：闻者悚然。一日，上谓石曰： 御史分别庶官邪、正。
现代文：按照旧日的典章制度，凡是皇上巡行启驾，留守中都的官吏每十天上表问候起居。
English: According to the old ceremonial system, whenever the emperor was on a tour, officials from the capital who were away from the capital would greet him every ten days.

古文：卿等惟劾有罪，而未尝举善也，宜令监察分路刺举善恶以闻。 
现代文：皇上因为使者来往传达频繁，命令改成二十天进一次表。皇上对李石说 ：御史要识别普通官吏是邪是正。卿等只弹劾有罪的，而不曾有推举表现好的，应该命令监察分路打探举出善的和恶的让我知道。 
English: Because of the frequent communication between the emissaries, the emperor's order was changed to once every twenty days. The emperor said to Li Shi, "Your Majesty should recognize whether the ordinary officials are evil or righteous. Sirs and others only impeach the guilty, but have never elected the good ones. You should order the supervisory branch to investigate and bring out the good and evil ones to let me know."

古文：石司宪既久，年浸高。
现代文：李石掌管法令已经很长时间了，年龄渐渐高了。
English: Li Shishi has been in charge of the law for a long time, and his age is getting higher and higher.

古文：御史台奏，事有在制前断定，乞依新条改断者。
现代文：御史台上奏，典章制度是前朝定下的，请求确定依照新的条令修改制定典章的人。
English: On the historical stage, the award system was established by the previous government, and the request was made to determine the person who would amend and establish the award in accordance with the new regulations.

古文：上曰： 若在制前行者，岂可改也。 
现代文：皇上说 ：如果典章制度都是前人执行的，怎么可以改呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "If the award system was implemented by the predecessors, how can it be changed?"

古文：上御香阁，召中丞移剌道谓之曰： 李石耄矣，汝等宜尽心。
现代文：皇上在御香阁，召见中丞移剌道并对他说： 李石老了，汝等应该尽心。
English: At the Imperial Palace, the Emperor summoned Chujo to the hallway and said to him: Li Shi is old, you should do your best.

古文：向所奏事甚不当，岂涉于私乎？ 
现代文：前面所奏的事情很不恰当，难道关系到什么私情吗？ 
English: The foregoing is very improper. Is there any personal interest involved?

古文：他日，又谓石曰： 卿近累奏皆常事，臣下善恶邪正，无语及之。
现代文：另有一天，皇上又对李石说： 爱卿近来屡次上奏的都是平常事。臣下是善是恶是邪是正，没有语言提到这些。
English: On another day, the emperor also said to Li Shih, "What Aicheng has been reciting many times recently are ordinary matters. Whether a vassal is good, evil, wicked, or righteous, there is no language to mention these things.

古文：卿年老矣，不能久居此，若能举一二善事，亦不负此职也。 
现代文：爱卿年纪老了，不能长久居留在这里，如果能举荐一、二件善事，也不辜负你现任的职务啊！ 
English: Aiqing is too old to stay here for long. If you can recommend one or two good deeds, you will be worthy of your current position!

古文：十年，进拜太尉、尚书令。
现代文：大定十年，李石进拜太尉、尚书令。
English: In the 10th year of Dading, Li Shizhong was promoted to the rank of Taiyi and Shang Shuling.

古文：诏曰： 太后兄弟惟卿一人，故命领尚书事。
现代文：皇帝诏书上说： 太后的兄弟只有爱卿一人，所以命令你统领尚书省的事。
English: In the imperial edict, the emperor said: There is only one brother of the empress dowager, Aicheng, so I order you to take charge of the affairs of Shangshu Province.

古文：军国大事，涉于利害，识其可否，细事不烦卿也。 
现代文：有关国家军队的大事，涉及到利害关系，议定其可行不可行，至于琐细的事情，就不烦请爱卿了。 
English: As for the important matters related to the national army, involving interests, it was agreed that it was feasible and not feasible. As for the trivial matters, it would not be troublesome to ask Aiqing.

古文：进封平原郡王。
现代文：又进封李石为平原郡王。
English: Li Shih was also crowned the king of Pingyuan County.

古文：平章政事完颜守道奏事，石神色不怿。
现代文：平章政事完颜守道上言奏事，李石神色不高兴。
English: After the political affairs of Pingzhang and Yan Shou Road, Li Shixin was not happy.

古文：世宗察之，谓石曰： 守道所奏，既非私事，卿当共议可否。
现代文：世宗察觉到了，对李石说： 守道所奏的，既然不是私事，爱卿应当与朕共同商议可否。
English: Sejong noticed this and said to Li Shijun, "Since what you have done is not a private matter, you should discuss it with me.

古文：在上位者所见有不可，顺而从之，在下位者所见虽当，则遽不从乎？
现代文：在你职位之上的所持见解有不可行的，你依顺他服从他，在你职位之下的所持见解虽然得当，你却惶恐而拒绝听从吗？
English: Is there any opinion held above your station which is impracticable, and you yield to it and obey it, or is there any opinion held below your station which, though right, you fear and refuse to obey?

古文：岂可以与己相违而蓄怒哉。
现代文：怎么可以因为与自己的见解相违背就动怒呢？
English: How can you get angry because someone disagrees with you?

古文：如此则下位者谁敢复言？ 石对曰： 不敢。 
现代文：像你这样，那么在你职位之下的谁敢再发表意见呢？ 李石回答说 ：臣不敢。 
English: Like you, who under your position would dare to express an opinion? Li Shi replied, "A minister wouldn't dare."

古文：上曰： 朕欲于京府节镇运司长佐三员内任文臣一员，尚未得人。 
现代文：皇上说 ：朕打算在京府节镇运司长佐三员官吏中任用文臣一员，尚没选出这个人。 
English: The emperor said, "I intend to appoint a civil servant from among the three officials of the Beijing Festival Town Transportation Director, but I haven't chosen this person yet."

古文：石奏曰： 资考未至，不敢拟。 
现代文：李石上奏说 ：他们的资历考核文书还未到，不敢拟定。 
English: Li Shisheng said: Their qualification assessment documents have not yet arrived, and they dare not draft them.

古文：上曰： 近观节度转运副使中才能者有之。
现代文：皇上说 ：最近观察节度转运副使中有这种才能的人。
English: The emperor said, "Recently, I have observed a person with such talent among the vice-ambassadors of dispatch and transportation.

古文：海陵时，省令史不用进士，故少尹节度转运副使中乏人。
现代文：海陵在位时，省令史不用进士，所以少尹节度转运副使中缺乏人才。
English: When Hailing was in power, provincial commanders did not need to be promoted, so there was a lack of talent among the vice-envoys of Shao Yin Jiedu.

古文：大定以来，用进士，亦颇有人矣，节度转运副使中有廉能者具以名闻，朕将用之。
现代文：大定以来，用了进士，也很有一些人才，节度转运副使中廉洁能干的人都是闻名的，朕将起用他们。
English: Since the establishment of Datong, we have employed a number of talented people, and the vice-ministers of transportation and logistics are well-known for their integrity and ability. I will employ them.

古文：朝官不历外任，无以见其才，外官不历随朝，无以进其才，中外更试，庶可得人。 
现代文：朝中官员没有在外地任职经历，没有机会显示他们的才能，外官没有随朝任职的经历，没有奉献他们才能的机遇，如果朝中和外地官员更换试用，一般来说可以选出人才。 
English: Officials of the DPRK and China do not have the experience of serving in the field and do not have the opportunity to show their talents. Foreign officials do not have the experience of serving with the DPRK and do not have the opportunity to dedicate their talents. If officials of the DPRK and China and foreign officials change probation, in general, talents can be selected.

古文：他日，上复问曰： 外任五品职事多阙，何也？ 
现代文：有一天，皇上问道： 在朝外任五品职的官员缺的多，这是为什么？ 
English: One day, the Emperor asked: Why is there a shortage of officials of the five ranks who are stationed outside the country?

古文：石对曰： 资考少有及者。 
现代文：李石回答说 ：资格考试很少有及格的。 
English: Li Shih replied: It is rare to pass the qualification examination.

古文：上曰： 苟有贤能，当不次用之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：如果有贤能的人，应当不分等级地使用他们。 
English: The emperor said: If there are capable people, they should be appointed regardless of rank.

古文：对不称旨，上表乞骸骨，以太保致仕，进封广平郡王。
现代文：李石答对与皇上旨意不相称，他上表请保尸骨。李石以太保的身份进入仕途，进封为广平郡王。
English: Li Shih replied that it was not commensurate with the emperor's will, and he asked the table to keep the bones. Li Shih's identity of ether protection entered the career, and he was crowned the king of Guangping County.

古文：十六年，薨。
现代文：大定十六年，李石逝世。
English: In the 16th year of Dading, Li Shi passed away.

古文：上辍朝临吊，哭之恸，赙钱万贯，官给葬事。
现代文：皇上退朝亲临凭吊，哭得非常哀痛，办丧事用钱万贯，安葬事宜都是官办。
English: When the emperor abdicated, his relatives came to pay their respects, weeping with great sorrow. A great deal of money was spent on the funeral, and all the funeral arrangements were made by the government.

古文：少府监张仅言监护，亲王、宰相以下郊送，谥襄简。
现代文：少府监张仅言监护，亲王、宰相以下官员送到郊外。
English: Zhang, the minor prefectural supervisor, was only a verbal guardian, and the prince, the prime minister and other officials were sent to the suburbs.

古文：石以勋戚，久处腹心之寄，内廷献替，外罕得闻。
现代文：李石的谥号是襄简。李石以有功勋的皇亲的身份，长期处在腹心要害部门，宫廷内部献计献策，对宫廷以外之事很少知道。
English: Li Shih's nickname is "Xiang Jane." Li Shih, as a meritorious imperial relative, has long been in the key department of the confidant, contributing ideas and suggestions within the palace, and knows little about things outside the palace.

古文：观其劾奏徒单子温退答宰臣之问，气岸宜有不能堪者。
现代文：观察他弹劾上奏徒单子温时退避回答宰相大臣的发问，气岸确实有不能承受的地方。
English: Observing his evasion of answering the Prime Minister's question when he was asked about the impeachment, there is indeed an unbearable place.

古文：时论得失半之，亦岂以是耶？
现代文：当时人们对他评论得失参半，也不是没有道理的。
English: At the time, people's comments about him were mixed, and not without reason.

古文：旧史载其少贫，贞懿后周之，不受，曰： 国家方急用人，正宜自勉，何患乎贫。 
现代文：旧史记载李石年少时家境贫困，贞懿皇后周济他，他不接受，说 ：国家正急用人，正应该自勉，怎么能在乎贫困呢？ 
English: Ancient history records that when Li Shishi was young, his family was poor, and the Empress Zhenya Zhou gave him money, but he did not accept it, saying: The country is in urgent need of people, it should be self-sufficient, how can it care about poverty?

古文：后感泣曰： 汝苟能此，吾复何忧。 
现代文：皇后感动地哭着说： 你能做到这样，我还有什么可担忧的。 
English: The empress was moved to tears and said, "If you can do that, I have nothing to worry about."

古文：及中年，以冒粟见斥，众讥贪鄙，如出二人。
现代文：李石到了中年，因为冒领粮食受到贬斥，众人讥笑他贪心卑鄙，前后判若两人。
English: When Li Shih reached middle age, he was scorned for taking grain. People ridiculed him for being greedy and despicable.

古文：史又称其未贵，人有慢之者，及为相，其人以事见石，惶恐。
现代文：旧史中又称他不自以为贵，人们有侮慢他的，等到他做了宰相，当年侮慢他的人有事去见他，很是惶恐。
English: In the old history, it was also said that he did not think highly of himself, and people scorned him. When he became prime minister, the people who had scorned him that year were very frightened to see him.

古文：石曰： 吾岂念旧恶者。 
现代文：李石说 ：我难道是不忘旧仇的人吗？ 
English: Li Shi said, "Am I a person who never forgets old enemies?"

古文：待之弥厚。
现代文：对待那人很厚道。
English: Treat that person with kindness.

古文：能为长者言如是，又与他日气岸迥殊。
现代文：能当长者说这样的话，又和他一向气岸迥然不同。
English: To be able to say such a thing as an elder is quite different from what he has always been like.

古文：山东、河南军民交恶，争田不绝。
现代文：山东、河南的军民关系很坏，争田的事屡次发生，没有停止过。
English: The military-civilian relationship in Shandong and Henan is very bad. Conflicts over land have occurred repeatedly and have not stopped.

古文：有司谓兵为国根本，姑宜假借。
现代文：有司认为军队是国家的根本，暂且应该借用土地。
English: Yushi believes that the military is the foundation of the country and should temporarily borrow land.

古文：石持不可，曰： 兵民一也，孰轻孰重？
现代文：李石持不同意见，他说： 兵、民是一样的，哪个轻哪个重？
English: Li Shishi held a different opinion. He said, "The soldiers and the people are the same. Which is lighter and which is heavier?"

古文：国家所恃以立者，纪纲耳，纪纲不明，故下敢轻冒。
现代文：立国所凭仗的是纪纲，纪纲不明，所以下面敢于轻视和冒犯。
English: The foundation of the country was based on a code of discipline. The code of discipline is unknown, so I dare to belittle and offend below.

古文：惟当明其疆理，示以法禁，使之无争，是为长久之术。 
现代文：只有让他们明确划分疆界的道理，宣示有关法律禁令，让他们不再争执，才是长久之计。 
English: It is only a long-term solution to let them clearly understand the principle of dividing the boundaries, declare the relevant legal prohibitions, and let them no longer dispute.

古文：趣有司按问，自是军民之争遂息。
现代文：有司按他说的去办理，从此军民之争就平息了。
English: A division commander did as he was told, and the conflict between the military and the people calmed down.

古文：北京民曹贵谋反，大理议廷中，谓贵等阴谋久不能发，在法 词理不能动众，威力不足率人 ，罪止论斩。
现代文：北京百姓曹贵阴谋造反，朝中大理廷议时，说曹贵等人有阴谋，但很长时间没有行动，按法律规定 ，词理不能动众，威力不足率人 ，定罪最重是论斩。
English: Cao Gui, a citizen of Beijing, plotted to rebel. When the Supreme People's Court of the DPRK and the People's Republic of China deliberated, it said that Cao Gui and others had a plot, but there was no action for a long time. According to the law, the words cannot move the public, the power is insufficient, and the heaviest conviction is beheading.

古文：石是之。
现代文：李石同意这个意见。
English: Li Shih agreed with this opinion.

古文：又议从坐，久不能决。
现代文：又议协同犯罪的，久议不能定夺。
English: In the case of a joint crime, the case cannot be decided for a long time.

古文：石曰： 罪疑惟轻。 
现代文：李石说： 罪行有疑点不能肯定，只有从轻处理。 
English: Li Shi said: If there is any doubt about the crime, it cannot be certain, and it can only be handled lightly.

古文：入，详奏其状，上从之，缘坐皆免死。
现代文：他进朝，向皇上详细汇报了情况，皇上听从了他的意见，因此与本案有牵连的都免于死罪。
English: He went to the emperor and reported the situation to him in detail. The emperor listened to his advice, so everyone involved in the case was exempted from the death penalty.

古文：北鄙岁警，朝廷欲发民穿深堑以御之。
现代文：北部边疆一带年年报警，北人要进犯，朝廷想发动百姓挖深沟用来抵御北人。
English: Every year, the police are alerted along the northern border, the northerners want to attack, and the court wants to mobilize the people to dig a deep ditch to fend off the northerners.

古文：石与丞相纥石烈良弼皆曰： 不可。
现代文：李石与丞相纥石烈良弼都说 ：不行。
English: Both Li Shih and the Minister of War, Shi Lerong Liang, said, "No."

古文：古筑长城备北，徒耗民力，无益于事。
现代文：古代修筑长城防备北人入侵，白白耗费了民力，于事无益。
English: In ancient times, the construction of the Great Wall to prevent the invasion of the northerners wasted the people's efforts and was useless.

古文：北俗无定居，出没不常，惟当以德柔之。
现代文：北人不定居，出没无常规，只有以德政对他们采取怀柔政策。
English: The northerners do not settle down, they come and go without routine, and only the German government can adopt a soft policy towards them.

古文：世宗喜曰： 太后家有子孙举进士，甚盛事也。 
现代文：如果挖了深深的战壕，必须得设置军队把守，而塞北多风沙，要不了几年，战壕就填平了。不能把中国有用的力量搞得很疲劳，如果这样做一点好处也没有。 
English: If you dig a deep trench, you have to set up an army to guard it, and there is a lot of wind and sand in the north, and it will take a few years to fill the trench. You can't make China's useful forces very tired, and there is no benefit in doing so.

古文：累官户部员外郎，坐事降清水令，召为大兴少尹，迁户部侍郎，累迁山东提刑使。
现代文：原来修深壕的建议于是搁置起来了，当时朝中官员都称赞李石有见解。世宗在位近三十年，尚书令共有四个人：张浩以老臣身份受信任，完颜守道以功劳卓著受重用，徒单克宁因辅助保护皇上性命受尊重，李石则以辅助参与朝廷决策得到宠信，其他人没有能赶上他们的。
English: The original proposal to dig a deep trench was then shelved. At that time, officials from both North Korea and China praised Li Shih for having an opinion. Shizong reigned for nearly thirty years, and there were four people in Shang Shuling: Zhang Hao was trusted as a senior minister, Guan Yan Shou Dao was highly valued for his services, Tu Chan Kening was respected for helping to protect the emperor's life, and Li Shih was trusted for helping to participate in the decision-making of the imperial court. Others could not catch up with them.

古文：卒。卫绍王即位，以元舅赠特进，追封道国公。子道安，擢符宝郎。完颜福寿，曷速馆人也。
现代文：明昌五年，皇诏李石配享世宗庙廷。李石的儿子是献可和逵可。完颜福寿，是曷速馆人。
English: In the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Zhao Li Shi was awarded the right to enjoy the world-renowned temple court. Li Shi's son was Xian Ke and Zheng Ke. He was born in Fuzhou and was a member of the Zheng He Museum.

古文：父合住，国初来归，授猛安。
现代文：其父完颜合住，建国之初前来归顺，被授予猛安。
English: His father lived happily ever after, and came to submit at the beginning of the founding of the country, and was granted Meng'an.

古文：天眷二年，福寿袭父合住职，授定远大将军，累加金吾卫上将军。
现代文：天眷二年，完颜福寿继承父亲完颜合住的职位，被授予定远大将军，直至升到金吾卫上将军。
English: Two years later, Gan Yan Fu Shou inherited his father's position and was given the title of General Yuan, until he was promoted to General Jin Wu Wei.

古文：海陵省并猛安谋克，遂停封。
现代文：海陵王减少合并猛安谋克，于是停止了他的加封。
English: King Hailing reduced the merger to Meng'an, and then stopped his sealing.

古文：正隆末，海陵伐宋，福寿领娄室、台答蔼二猛安由山东道进至泰安。
现代文：正隆末年，海陵王攻打宋朝，完颜福寿率领娄室、台答蔼二猛安由山东道进军到泰安。
English: At the end of the Zhenglong era, King Hailing led an attack on the Song Dynasty, and Yan Fushou led his troops from Shandong Province to Tai'an Province.

古文：既受甲，福寿乃诱将校北还，而高忠建、卢万家奴等亦各率众万余俱归东京，欲共立世宗。
现代文：接受了命令，完颜福寿于是劝将校们北撤，而高忠建、卢万家奴等也各自率领军队一万多人来归顺东京，想共同拥立世宗做皇帝。
English: After accepting the order, Yan Fu Shou then persuaded the officers to withdraw to the north, while Gao Zhong Jian and Lu Wan Jia Nong each led an army of more than ten thousand people to surrender to Tokyo, wanting to jointly support the establishment of Sejong as emperor.

古文：至辽口，世宗遣徒单思忠、府吏张谋鲁瓦等来迎，察其去就。
现代文：完颜福寿到达辽口，金世宗派徒单思忠、府吏张谋鲁瓦等前来迎候，以了解他的去向。
English: After Yan Fu Shou arrived in Liaokou, the followers of the Jin Sect, Shan Sizhong and the government official Zhang Morua came to greet him and find out where he was going.

古文：思忠等以数骑驰入军中，见福寿等问曰： 将军何为至此？ 
现代文：徒单思忠等几个人骑马到完颜福寿军中，拜见他们并问道 ：将军您为什么到这里？ 
English: Tsuchidan Shizhong and a few others rode on horseback to the Yan Fushou army, met them and asked: General, why are you here?

古文：福寿等向南指海陵而言曰： 此人失道，不能保天下。
现代文：完颜福寿等向南指向皇帝海陵王说 ：这个人失去道义，不能保持天下。
English: Yan Fu Shou and others pointed south to Emperor Hailing and said, "This man has lost his morality and cannot remain in the world."

古文：国公乃太祖皇帝亲孙，我辈欲推戴为主，以此来耳。 
现代文：国公是太祖皇帝的亲孙子，我们想推立他做皇帝，所以来到这里。 
English: The sovereign is the grandchild of the great-grandfather emperor, and we want to make him emperor, so we came here.

古文：诸军皆东向拜，呼万岁。
现代文：诸军都向东朝拜，高呼万岁。
English: All the troops bowed to the east and shouted "Long live the Red Army!"

古文：为书以授思忠。
现代文：完颜福寿写信交给徒单思忠。
English: Yan Fu Shou wrote a letter to Tsuchidan Shizhong.

古文：于是督诸军渡辽水，径至东京城下，即谕军士擐甲入卫宫城，杀高存福等。
现代文：完颜福寿敦促各军渡辽水，直到东京城下，然后告谕军士武装进入卫宫城，杀了高存福等人。
English: After Yan Fu Shou urged the troops to cross the Liao Shui River to the outskirts of Tokyo, he then ordered the soldiers to enter the Imperial Palace and kill Gao Cunfu and others.

古文：明日，与诸将及东京吏民从婆速路兵马都总管完颜谋衍劝进。
现代文：第二天，完颜福寿同诸将及东京官民随婆速路兵马都统总管完颜谋衍劝说皇帝登基。
English: The next day, Kanen Fukuju, along with other generals and Tokyo officials and people, followed the general manager of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses to persuade the emperor to ascend to the throne.

古文：世宗即位，以福寿为元帅右监军，赐以银币御马。
现代文：金世宗即皇帝位，任完颜福寿为元帅右监军，赏赐给他银子、钱币及御马。
English: Kim Sejong became emperor, and Yan Fuxu was appointed marshal of the Right Supervision Army, and was awarded silver, coins, and a horse.

古文：初，谋衍之至也，大会诸军，以福寿之军居左，高忠建军居右。
现代文：始初，完颜谋衍到，诸军会合，把完颜福寿的军队排列在左边，高忠建的军队排在右边。
English: At the beginning of the year, Gan Yan Fu Yuan arrived, and all the armies gathered to line up Gan Yan Fu Shou's army on the left and Gao Zhong Jian's army on the right.

古文：忠建曰： 何以我军为右军？ 
现代文：高忠建说 ：为什么把我的军队排在右边？ 
English: Gao Zhongjian said: Why put my army on the right?

古文：谋衍曰： 树置在我，尔曷敢言！ 
现代文：完颜谋衍说 ：我让这样排的，你怎敢说这话！ 
English: "How dare you say such a thing, when I ordered you to line up like that!" she said.

古文：福寿曰： 始建大事，左右军高下何足争也。 
现代文：完颜福寿说： 刚开始建立大事业，左右军的高低不值得争。 
English: Yan Fu Shou said, "It's just the beginning of building a great cause. It's not worth fighting about the level of the left and right armies.

古文：遂让忠建为左军。
现代文：于是让高忠建的军队当作左军。
English: As a result, Gao Zhongjian's army was used as the left army.

古文：世宗闻而贤之。
现代文：金世宗听说此事，认为完颜福寿很贤德。
English: When Kim Sejong heard about this, he thought that Kangyan Fushou was very virtuous.

古文：未几，从完颜谋衍讨白彦敬、纥石烈志宁于北京。
现代文：不久，完颜福寿随从完颜谋衍在北京讨伐白彦敬、纥石烈志宁。
English: Soon after, Guan Yan Fu Shou followed Guan Yan Mu Yan in Beijing to fight against Bai Yan Kei and Zou Shi Lai Zhining.

古文：是冬，上闻临潢尹兼元帅左都监吾紥忽等与窝斡战不利，命福寿将兵进讨。
现代文：这年冬天，皇帝听说临潢尹兼元帅左都监完颜吾扎忽等同移剌窝斡作战不利，命令完颜福寿率兵进行讨伐。
English: In the winter of that year, the emperor heard that it was unfavorable for the emperor to have Yan Wuzha as the commander-in-chief of Linyi, and ordered Yan Fushou to lead the troops in a crusade.

古文：已败贼，俘获生口万计。
现代文：打败了敌军，俘虏一万多人。
English: They defeated the enemy and took more than ten thousand prisoners.

古文：世宗以纥石烈志宁代之，召还，授兴平军节度使，复其世袭猛安，寻领济州路诸军事。
现代文：金世宗用纥石烈志宁代替完颜福寿的职务，把他召回京城，授予兴平军节度使，恢复他的世袭猛安，不久做领济州路诸军事。
English: Jin Shizong replaced Yan Fushu's post with Zhi Shi Retshinin, recalled him back to Beijing, awarded him to the Xingping Army as the festival envoy, restored his hereditary vigorous peace, and soon led the Jeju Road to the military.

古文：大定三年，卒。
现代文：大定三年，完颜福寿死去。
English: After three years, Yan Fu Shou passed away.

