古文：十有七年春，小邾子来朝。
现代文：十七年春季，小邾穆公来鲁国朝见。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, Xiao Yanmu Gong came to see the Imperial Court of Lu.

古文：夏六月甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季六月甲戌初一这天，发生了日食。
English: In summer, on the first day of June, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋，郯子来朝。
现代文：秋季，郯子来鲁国朝见。
English: In autumn, the pheasants come to Lu to see the emperor.

古文：八月，晋荀吴帅师灭陆浑之戎。
现代文：八月，晋国的荀吴率领军队灭掉陆浑的戎人。
English: In August, Zou Wu of Jin led an army to exterminate the Yong people of Luhun.

古文：冬，有星孛于大辰。
现代文：冬季，彗星的光芒扫过大火星。
English: In winter, the comet's glow sweeps across the great planet Mars.

古文：楚人及吴战于长岸。
现代文：楚国人和吴国人在长岸交战。
English: The Chu people and the Wu people fought on the Changan River.

古文：十七年春，小邾穆公来朝，公与之燕。
现代文：十七年春季，小邾穆公来鲁国朝见，昭公和他一起饮宴。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year, Xiao Yan Mu Gong came to the Imperial Court of the State of Lu for a meeting, and Shao Gong had a banquet with him.

古文：季平子赋《采叔》，穆公赋《菁菁者莪》。
现代文：季平子赋了《采叔》，穆公赋了《菁菁者莪》。
English: Ji Ping Zi endowed the "Cherry Uncle," Mu Gong endowed the "Jing Jing."

古文：昭子曰： 不有以国，其能久乎？ 
现代文：昭子说： 假若没有治理国家的人才，国家能长久吗？ 
English: Akiko said, "If there are no talented people to govern the country, can the country last long?"

古文：夏六月甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，六月初一日，发生日食。
English: In summer, on the first day of June, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：祝史请所用币。昭子曰： 日有食之，天子不举，伐鼓于社；诸侯用币于社，伐鼓于朝。礼也。 
现代文：掌管祭祀的官员请示所应该使用的祭品，昭子说： 发生日食，天子不进丰盛的菜肴，在土地神庙里击鼓。诸侯用祭品在土地神庙里祭祀，在朝廷上击鼓。这是礼制。 
English: The official in charge of the ritual asked for instructions on which offerings should be used, and Akiko said, "In the event of a solar eclipse, the heavenly son does not partake of the sumptuous dishes, but plays the drum in the land temple. Princes use the offerings to perform the ritual in the land temple, and play the drum in the imperial court. This is the ritual system."

古文：平子御之，曰： 止也。
现代文：平子禁止这样做，说： 不能那样做。
English: Hirako forbade it, saying, "You can't do that."

古文：唯正月朔，慝未作，日有食之，于是乎有伐鼓用币，礼也。
现代文：只有周正六月初一，阴气没有发作，发生日食，才击鼓用祭品，这是礼制。
English: Only on the first day of the first month of the sixth month of the lunar calendar, when the sun is eclipsed and the weather is not too gloomy, is there a ritual of beating drums to make offerings.

古文：其馀则否。 
现代文：其他的时候就不这样。 
English: Other times, not so much.

古文：大史曰： 在此月也。
现代文：太史说： 就是在这个月。
English: Taishi said, "This is the month.

古文：日过分而未至，三辰有灾。于是乎百官降物，君不举，辟移时，乐奏鼓，祝用币，史用辞。
现代文：太阳过了春分而没有到夏至，日、月、星有了灾殃，在这时候百官穿上素服，国君不进丰盛的菜肴，离开正寝躲过日食的时辰，乐工击鼓，祝使用祭品，史官使用辞令来祈祷消灾去祸。
English: The sun passed the vernal equinox and did not reach the summer solstice. The sun, moon, and stars were plagued. At this time, the officials put on plainclothes, the sovereign did not eat rich dishes, left the time of sleeping to avoid the solar eclipse, the musicians played drums, and wished to use sacrifices, and the historians used words to pray to eliminate the disaster.

古文：故《夏书》曰： 辰不集于房，瞽奏鼓，啬夫驰，庶人走。 此月朔之谓也。
现代文：所以《夏书》说： 日月交会不在正常的地位上，瞽师击鼓，啬夫驾车，百姓奔跑 ，说的就是这个月初一的情况。
English: Therefore, "Summer Book" said: The sun-moon rendezvous is not in a normal position, the eunuch is beating the drum, the miser is driving, and the people are running, referring to the situation on the first day of this month.

古文：当夏四月，是谓孟夏。 
现代文：正当夏正的四月，所以叫做孟夏。 
English: April, when it is summer, is the first month of summer.

古文：平子弗从。
现代文：平子不听从。
English: Hirako doesn't listen.

古文：昭子退曰： 夫子将有异志，不君君矣。 
现代文：昭子退出，说： 这个人将要有别的念头，他不把国君当成国君了。 
English: Akiko withdrew, saying, "This man will have other ideas, he no longer regards the sovereign as sovereign."

古文：秋，郯子来朝，公与之宴。
现代文：秋季，郯子来鲁国朝见，昭公和他一起饮宴。
English: In autumn, Shoshi came to see the Emperor of Lu, and Shoko had a banquet with him.

古文：昭子问焉，曰： 少皞氏鸟名官，何故也？ 
现代文：昭子询问他，说： 少皞氏用鸟名作为官名，这是什么缘故？ 
English: Akiko questioned him, saying, "The Shoni clan uses the name of a bird as its official name. Why is that?

古文：郯子曰： 吾祖也，我知之。
现代文：郯子说： 他是我的祖先，我知道。
English: The cripple said, "He is my ancestor, I know.

古文：昔者黄帝氏以云纪，故为云师而云名。
现代文：从前黄帝氏用云记事，所以设置各部门长官都用云字命名。
English: In the past, the Yellow Emperor used the cloud to record things, so the heads of all departments were named with the cloud character.

古文：炎帝氏以火纪，故为火师而火名。
现代文：炎帝氏用火记事，所以设置各部门长官都用火字命名。
English: Emperor Yan used fire to record events, so the heads of all departments were named with the word "fire."

古文：共工氏以水纪，故为水师而水名。
现代文：共工氏用水记事，所以设置各部门长官都用水字命名。
English: The names of co-workers are recorded in Chinese characters, so the heads of all departments are named in Chinese characters.

古文：大皞氏以龙纪，故为龙师而龙名。
现代文：太皞氏用龙记事，所以设置各部门长官都用龙来命名。
English: The Taiyu clan used dragons to record events, so the heads of all departments were named after dragons.

古文：我高祖少皞挚之立也，凤鸟適至，故纪于鸟，为鸟师而鸟名。
现代文：我的高祖少皞挚即位的时候，凤鸟正好来到，所以就从鸟开始记事，设置各部门长官都用鸟来命名。
English: When my great-great-great-great-grandfather Shosho sincerely ascended to the throne, the phoenix bird just happened to come, so I began to remember things from the bird, setting up the heads of all departments to be named after the bird.

古文：凤鸟氏，历正也。
现代文：凤鸟氏，就是掌管天文历法的官。
English: Fengjiao is the official in charge of the astronomical calendar.

古文：玄鸟氏，司分者也。
现代文：玄鸟氏，就是掌管春分、秋分的官。
English: The Gencho clan is the official in charge of the vernal and autumnal equinoxes.

古文：伯赵氏，司至者也。
现代文：伯赵氏，是掌管夏至、冬至的官。
English: Bo Zhao is the official in charge of the summer solstice and winter solstice.

古文：青鸟氏，司启者也。
现代文：青鸟氏，是掌管立春、立夏的官。
English: The Aobori clan is the official who presides over the start of spring and summer.

古文：丹鸟氏，司闭者也。
现代文：丹鸟氏，是掌管立秋、立冬的官。
English: Mr. Dancho is the official in charge of the start of autumn and winter.

古文：祝鸠氏，司徒也。鴡鸠氏，司马也。鸤鸠氏，司空也。爽鸠氏，司寇也。鹘鸠氏，司事也。
现代文：祝鸠氏，就是司徒；鴡鸠氏，就是司马；鸤鸠氏，就是司空；爽鸠氏，就是司寇；鹘鸠氏，就是司事。
English: Zhu Xi, that is, Sitoru; Xi, that is, Sima; Xi, that is, Siku; Shuang, that is, Siko; Zou, that is, Siji.

古文：五鸠，鸠民者也。
现代文：这五鸠，是鸠聚百姓的。
English: These five pillars are the pillars of the people.

古文：五雉，为五工正，利器用，正度量，夷民者也。
现代文：五雉是五种管理手工业的官，是改善器物用具、统一尺度容量、让百姓得到平均的。
English: Wujing is the official in charge of the management of the five handicrafts. It is to improve the equipment and tools, unify the scale capacity, and let the people get the average.

古文：九扈，为九农正，扈民无淫者也。
现代文：九扈是九种管理农业的官，是制止百姓不让他们放纵的。
English: Jiuzhaigou is the name of nine kinds of officials in charge of agriculture. They are responsible for stopping the people from indulging in agriculture.

古文：自颛顼以来，不能纪远，乃纪于近。为民师而命以民事，则不能故也。 
现代文：自从颛顼以来，不能记述远古的事情，就从近古开始记述，做百姓的长官而用百姓的事情来命名，那已经是不能照过去办理了。 
English: Since it is not possible to record the ancient things since ancient times, it is necessary to record the recent things from ancient times. It is no longer possible to be a people's officer and use the people's things to name things.

古文：仲尼闻之，见于郯子而学之。
现代文：孔子听到了这件事，进见郯子并向他学习古代官制。
English: When Confucius heard about this, he went to see Xunzi and learned from him about the ancient official system.

古文：既而告人曰： 吾闻之，天子失官，学在四夷，犹信。 
现代文：不久以后告诉别人说： 我听说， 在天子那里失去了古代官制，官制的学问还保存在远方的小国 ，这话还是可以相信的。 
English: Later, he told others, "I have heard that the official learning of the Son of Heaven has been lost, and that we can learn from the small countries around us. This is a true and trustworthy saying.

古文：晋侯使屠蒯如周，请有事于雒与三涂。
现代文：晋顷公派屠蒯去到周朝，请求祭祀洛水和三涂山。
English: Jinhaakong sent Tu Youyou to the Zhou Dynasty to request the worship of Luo Shui and San Tu Mountain.

古文：苌弘谓刘子曰： 客容猛，非祭也。其伐戎乎？
现代文：苌弘对刘子说： 客人的脸色凶猛，不是为了祭祀，恐怕是为了进攻戎人吗！
English: Zou Hong said to Liu Zi: The guests' fierce countenance is not for the purpose of sacrifice, I'm afraid it's for attacking the soldiers!

古文：陆浑氏甚睦于楚，必是故也。
现代文：陆浑氏和楚国很友好，一定是这个缘故。
English: The Lukhun clan and the state of Chu are very friendly. This must be the reason.

古文：君其备之！ 
现代文：您还是防备一下。 
English: You'd better be prepared.

古文：乃警戎备。
现代文：于是就对戎人加强警备。
English: As a result, the troops were put on high alert.

古文：九月丁卯，晋荀吴帅师涉自棘津，使祭史先用牲于雒。
现代文：九月二十四日，晋国的荀吴领兵从棘津徒步涉水，让祭史先用牲口祭祀洛水。
English: On September 24th, Zhang Wu, the leader of Jin, waded into the water on foot from Acanthus, making the first animal sacrifice in history to worship Luoshui.

古文：陆浑人弗知，师从之。
现代文：陆浑人不知道，部队就跟着打过去。
English: Unbeknownst to the people of Luhun, the troops followed and attacked.

古文：庚午，遂灭陆浑，数之以其贰于楚也。
现代文：二十七日，就灭亡了陆浑，责备他们和楚国勾结。
English: On the 27th day, Lu Hun was defeated, accusing them of colluding with Chu.

古文：陆浑子奔楚，其众奔甘鹿。
现代文：陆浑子逃亡到楚国，他的部下逃亡到甘鹿。
English: Lu Hunzi fled to Chu, and his men fled to Ganlu.

古文：周大获。
现代文：周朝俘虏了大批陆浑人。
English: The Zhou Dynasty captured a large number of Luhun people.

古文：宣子梦文公携荀吴而授之陆浑，故使穆子帅师，献俘于文宫。
现代文：韩宣子梦见晋文公拉着荀吴而把陆浑交付给他，所以让他领兵，在晋文公庙里奉献俘虏。
English: Han Xuan Zi had a dream that Jin Wengong was pulling Zou Wu and handing Lu Hun over to him, so he asked him to lead the troops and dedicate the captives in Jin Wengong's temple.

古文：冬，有星孛于大辰，西及汉。
现代文：冬季，彗星在大火星旁边出现，光芒西达银河。
English: In winter, the comet appears next to the great Mars, and the light follows the Milky Way.

古文：申须曰： 彗所以除旧布新也。天事恒象，今除于火，火出必布焉。诸侯其有火灾乎？ 
现代文：申须说： 彗星是用来除旧布新的，天上发生的事常常像征凶吉，现在对大火星清扫，大火星再度出现必然散布灾殃，诸侯各国恐怕会有火灾吧！ 
English: Shen Su said, "Comets are used to remove old cloth and make new ones. What happens in the sky is often like a sign of bad luck. Now the Great Mars is being cleaned up. If the Great Mars reappears, it will inevitably spread disaster. I'm afraid there will be a fire in all the princes' countries!"

古文：梓慎曰： 往年吾见之，是其征也，火出而见。
现代文：梓慎说： 去年我见到它，这就是它的征兆了。大火星出现而见到它。
English: Zi Shen said: I saw it last year, this is the sign of it. I saw it when the great Mars appeared.

古文：今兹火出而章，必火入而伏。
现代文：现在它在大火星出现时更加明亮，必然在大火星消失时潜伏。
English: Now it shines more brightly when the great Mars appears, and it must lurk when the great Mars disappears.

古文：其居火也久矣，其与不然乎？
现代文：它和大火星在一起已经很久了，难道不是这样吗？
English: It's been with the Great Mars for a long time, hasn't it?

古文：火出，于夏为三月，于商为四月，于周为五月。
现代文：大火星出现，在夏正是三月，在商正是四月，在周正是五月。
English: Mars is rising, in summer it is March, in business it is April, and in the week it is May.

古文：夏数得天，若火作，其四国当之，在宋、卫、陈、郑乎？
现代文：夏代的历数和天像适应，如果发生火灾，恐怕有四个国家承当，在宋国、卫国、陈国、郑国吧！
English: The number of months in summer is determined by the heavens. If fire breaks out, Shikoku will be affected by fire, including Song, Wei, Chen, and Zheng.

古文：宋，大辰之虚也；陈，大皞之虚也；郑，祝融之虚也；皆火房也。
现代文：宋国，是大火星的分野；陈国，是太皞的分野；郑国，是祝融的分野，都是大火星所居住的地方。
English: Song is the realm of the Great Mars, Chen is the realm of the Great Dragon, and Zheng is the realm of Zhu Rong, all of which are inhabited by the Great Mars.

古文：星孛及汉，汉，水祥也。
现代文：彗星到达银河，银河，就是水。
English: The comet reaches the Milky Way, the Milky Way is water.

古文：卫，颛顼之虚也，故为帝丘。
现代文：卫国，是颛顼的分野，所以是帝丘，和它相配的星是大水。
English: The defense of the country is the field of the dragonfly, so it is the imperial hill, and the star that matches it is the great water.

古文：其星为大水，水，火之牡也。其以丙子若壬午作乎？
现代文：水，是火的阳姓配偶。恐怕会在丙子日或者壬午日发生火灾吧！
English: Water is fire's yang consort. I'm afraid there will be a fire on Cixi Day or Jingu Day!

古文：水火所以合也。
现代文：水火会在那个时候配合的。
English: Water and fire go together.

古文：若火入而伏，必以壬午，不过其见之月。 
现代文：如果大火星消失而彗星随着潜伏，一定在壬午日发生火灾，不会超过它发现的那个月。 
English: If the great Mars disappears and the comet follows its lurking path, it will certainly set fire to the meridian, but not beyond the month in which it was discovered.

古文：郑裨竈言于子产曰： 宋、卫、陈、郑将同日火，若我用瓘斝玉瓒，郑必不火。 
现代文：郑国的神灶对子产说： 宋、卫、陈、郑四国将要在同一天发生火灾。如果我们用瓘斝玉瓒祭神，郑国一定不发生火灾。 
English: Zheng Guo's god stove said to his son: Song, Wei, Chen and Zheng will have a fire on the same day. If we worship the god with the Jade Urn, there will be no fire in Zheng Guo.

古文：子产弗与。
现代文：子产不肯给。
English: The woman refused to give birth.

古文：吴伐楚。阳匄为令尹，卜战，不吉。
现代文：吴国攻打楚国，楚国的阳匄做令尹，占卜战争的结果，不吉利。
English: The state of Wu attacked the state of Chu, and the impotence of Chu ordered Yin to do so. The result of the divination war was unlucky.

古文：司马子鱼曰： 我得上流，何故不吉？
现代文：司马子鱼说： 我们地处上游，为什么不吉利？
English: But Sima Zifang said: We are in the upper reaches, how can we not be lucky?

古文：且楚故，司马令龟，我请改卜。 
现代文：而且楚国的惯例，由司马在占卜前报告占卜的事情，我请求重新占卜。 
English: Moreover, it is the practice of the state of Chu for Sima to report the matter of divination before divination. I request that the divination be repeated.

古文：令曰： 鲂也以其属死之，楚师继之，尚大克之。 吉。
现代文：报告说： 鲂带领部属战死，楚军跟上去，希望大获全胜。吉利。 
English: The report said: "He led his subordinates to their deaths, and the Chu army followed, hoping to win a complete victory. Good luck."

古文：战于长岸。子鱼先死，楚师继之，大败吴师，获其乘舟馀皇。使随人与后至者守之，环而堑之，及泉，盈其隧炭，陈以待命。
现代文：两国军队在长岸作战，子鱼先战死，楚军跟着上去，把吴军打得大败，得到一条名叫馀皇的船，派随国人和后来到达的人看守，环绕这条船挖深沟，一直见到泉水，用炭填满，摆开阵势听候命令。
English: The armies of the two countries fought on the Chang'an coast. Zi Yu was the first to die in the battle, followed by the Chu army, which defeated the Wu army, obtained a ship named Yuhuang, sent guards to follow the compatriots and those who arrived later, dug a deep ditch around the ship, saw the spring water all the time, filled it with charcoal, and set up a position to listen for orders.

古文：吴公子光请于其众曰： 丧先王之乘舟，岂唯光之罪，众亦有焉。
现代文：吴国的公子光向大家请求说： 丢掉先王坐的船，难道只是光一人的罪过，大家也是有罪的。
English: Guang, the prince of the State of Wu, appealed to everyone, saying, "Is it just the fault of Guang alone that he threw away the ship on which the former king was riding? Everyone is also guilty.

古文：请藉取之，以救死。 
现代文：请求借大家的力量夺取回来以救一死。 
English: Please lend us your strength to recapture it in order to save one life.

古文：众许之。
现代文：大家答应了。
English: Everyone said yes.

古文：使长鬣者三人，潜伏于舟侧，曰： 我呼馀皇，则对。 
现代文：派遣身高力壮的三个人偷偷地埋伏在船旁边，说： 我喊馀皇，你们就回答。 
English: And he sent three men of great stature, and they lay in wait secretly by the side of the ship, saying, I will call to the king of the Amorites, and you shall answer me.

古文：师夜从之。
现代文：军队在夜里跟上去。
English: The army followed in the night.

古文：三呼，皆迭对。
现代文：喊了三次，埋伏的人都交替回答。
English: He called out three times, and the ambushers answered in turn.

古文：楚人从而杀之，楚师乱。
现代文：楚国人上去把他们杀了。
English: The people of Chu went up and killed them.

古文：吴人大败之，取馀皇以归。
现代文：楚军混乱，吴军大败楚军，把馀皇号船夺回去了。
English: The Chu army was in disarray, and the Wu army defeated the Chu army and took back the Yuhuang ship.

