古文：十有一年春，滕侯、薛侯来朝。
现代文：十一年春，滕侯和薛侯前来朝见鲁君。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Teng Hou and Xue Hou came to see Lu Jun.

古文：夏，公会郑伯于时来。
现代文：夏季，隐公在郲与郑庄公会面。
English: In the summer, Ying Gong met with Zheng Zhuang Gong in Handan.

古文：秋七月壬午，公及齐侯、郑伯入许。
现代文：秋季七月壬午日，隐公会合齐僖公、郑庄公进攻许国。
English: In the autumn of July, on the morning of the 7th day of the 7th month, Prince Qi and Prince Zheng attacked Xu Province.

古文：冬十有一月壬辰，公薨。
现代文：冬季十一月壬辰，隐公逝世。
English: In the winter of November, Imjin passed away.

古文：十一年春，滕侯、薛侯来朝，争长。
现代文：十一年春季，滕侯和薛侯前来朝见鲁君，两人争执行礼的先后。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Teng Hou and Xue Hou came to see Lu Jun, and the two fought over the order of the ceremony.

古文：薛侯曰： 我先封。 
现代文：薛侯说： 我先受封。 
English: Xue Hou said, "I will be crowned first."

古文：滕侯曰： 我，周之卜正也。薛，庶姓也，我不可以后之。 
现代文：腾侯说： 我是成周的卜正官，薛国是外姓，我不能落后于他。 
English: Teng Hou said: I am Cheng Zhou's Bu Zheng Guan, Xue Guo is a foreign surname, I can't lag behind him.

古文：公使羽父请于薛侯曰： 君与滕君辱在寡人。周谚有之曰： 山有木，工则度之；宾有礼，主则择之。 
现代文：鲁隐公派羽父向薛侯商量说： 承君王和滕侯问候寡君，成周的俗话说： 山上有树木，工匠就加以量测；宾客有礼貌，主人就加以选择。 
English: Luyin sent Feathered Father to consult with Xue Hou and said: King Chengjun and Teng Hou send their greetings to Youjun, Cheng Zhou's proverb says: If there are trees on the mountain, the craftsman will measure them; if the guests are polite, the host will choose them.

古文：周之宗盟，异姓为后。
现代文：成周的会盟，异姓在后面。
English: When Zhou Tianzi allied with the princes, he took a different surname.

古文：寡人若朝于薛，不敢与诸任齿。君若辱贶寡人，则愿以滕君为请。 
现代文：寡人如果到薛国朝见，就不敢和任姓诸国并列，如果承君王加惠于我，那就希望君王同意滕侯的请求。 
English: If only a few people visit Xue's court, they wouldn't dare to be on the same level as all the other countries. If the king favors me, then I hope the king will agree to Teng Hou's request.

古文：薛侯许之，乃长滕侯。
现代文：薛侯同意，就让滕侯先行朝礼。
English: Xue Hou agreed, so let Teng Hou lead the morning ceremony.

古文：夏，公会郑伯于郲，谋伐许也。
现代文：夏季，隐公和郑庄公在郲地会见，策划进攻许国。
English: In the summer, Ying Gong and Zheng Zhuang Gong met in Handan and planned to attack Xu Province.

古文：郑伯将伐许，五月甲辰，授兵于大宫。
现代文：郑庄公准备进攻许国时，五月十四日，在太祖庙内颁发武器。
English: When Zheng Zhuang Gong was preparing to attack Xu Province, on May 14th, he issued weapons in Taizu Temple.

古文：公孙阏与颍考叔争车，颖考叔挟輈以走，子都拔棘以逐之，及大逵，弗及，子都怒。
现代文：公孙阏和颍考叔争夺兵车，颍考叔挟起车辕奔跑，子都拔出戟追上去。追到大路上，没有追上，子都很愤怒。
English: Gongsun Yao and Jiukao Uncle fought for the chariot, Jiukao Uncle picked up the chariot and ran, and the children all pulled out their ploughs to catch up. When they caught up on the highway, they did not catch up, and the children were very angry.

古文：秋七月，公会齐侯、郑伯伐许。
现代文：秋季，七月，隐公会合齐僖公、郑庄公进攻许国。
English: In the autumn, in July, Prince Qi and Prince Zheng attacked Xu Province.

古文：庚辰，傅于许。
现代文：初一日，军队汇合攻打许城。
English: On the first day, the armies converged to attack Xu City.

古文：颍考叔取郑伯之旗蝥弧以先登。子都自下射之，颠。
现代文：颍考叔拿着郑庄公的旗帜 蝥弧 争先登上城墙，子都从下面用箭射他，颍考叔摔下来死了。
English: Zheng Zhuangguo's banner was carried by Uncle Zengkao, who scrambled to the top of the city wall. His sons shot arrows at him from below, and Uncle Zengkao fell to his death.

古文：瑕叔盈又以蝥弧登，周麾而呼曰： 君登矣！ 
现代文：瑕叔盈又举着 蝥弧 冲上城，向四周挥动旗帜，大喊说： 国君登城了！ 
English: Koetsu Ying again rushed to the city holding a bow and arrow, waved the flag around, and shouted, "The Emperor has arrived!"

古文：郑师毕登。
现代文：于是郑国的军队全部登上了城墙。
English: As a result, all of Zheng's troops scaled the city wall.

古文：壬午，遂入许。
现代文：初三日，便占领了许国。
English: On the third day of the first month, they occupied Xu Province.

古文：许庄公奔卫。
现代文：许庄公逃亡到卫国。
English: Prince Xu Zhuang fled to the defense of the country.

古文：齐侯以许让公。
现代文：齐僖公把许国让给隐公。
English: Lord Qi Rong ceded Xu Province to Lord Yin.

古文：公曰： 君谓许不共，故从君讨之。
现代文：隐公说： 国君说许国不交纳贡品，所以寡人才跟随君王讨伐它。
English: Yin Gong said: The sovereign said that Xu Province would not pay tribute, so few people followed the sovereign to fight against it.

古文：许既伏其罪矣，虽君有命，寡人弗敢与闻。 
现代文：许国既然已经认罪了，虽然君王有这样的好意，我也不敢参与这件事。 
English: Since Xu Guo Rong has already confessed his guilt, I dare not get involved in this matter, even though the king has such a good intention.

古文：乃与郑人。
现代文：于是就把许国领土送给了郑庄公。
English: So he gave the territory of Xu Province to Zheng Zhuang.

古文：郑伯使许大夫百里奉许叔以居许东偏，曰： 天祸许国，鬼神实不逞于许君，而假手于我寡人。
现代文：郑庄公让许国大夫百里事奉许叔住在许都的东部边邑，说： 上天降祸于许国，鬼神确实对许君不满意，而借我的手惩罚他。
English: Zheng Zhuang allowed Dr. Bai Li of Xu Province to serve Uncle Xu and live in the eastern border town of Xu. He said, "Heaven has brought disaster to Xu Province. The ghosts and gods are indeed dissatisfied with Xu Jun, and they have used my hand to punish him."

古文：寡人唯是一二父兄不能共亿，其敢以许自为功乎？
现代文：我这儿连一两个父老兄弟都不能和睦共处，难道敢把讨伐许国作为自己的功劳？
English: I can't even get along with one or two of my brothers and sisters here. How dare I take credit for conquering a foreign country?

古文：寡人有弟，不能和协，而使餬其口于四方，其况能久有许乎？
现代文：我有个兄弟，不能和和气气共同过日子，而使他四方求食，我难道还能长久占有许国？
English: I have a brother who is not able to live with me, and I make him go in search of food. Will I be able to hold the kingdom for long?

古文：吾子其奉许叔以抚柔此民也，吾将使获也佐吾子。
现代文：您应当事奉许叔来安抚这里的百姓，我准备让公孙获来帮助您。
English: You should serve Uncle Xu to pacify the people here, I am ready to let my grandson help you.

古文：若寡人得没于地，天其以礼悔祸于许，无宁兹许公复奉其社稷。
现代文：假如我得以善终，上天可能又依礼而撤回加于许国的祸害，让许公再来治理他的同家。
English: If I die a good death, Heaven may, out of courtesy, withdraw the evil it has inflicted on Xu Guo, and allow Xu Gong to return to rule his family.

古文：唯我郑国之有请谒焉，如旧昏媾，其能降以相从也。
现代文：那时候只要我郑国对许国有所请求，可能还是会像对待老亲戚一样，降格而同意的。
English: At that time, as long as I, Zheng Guo, had a request for Xu Guo, I might still be treated like an old relative, demoted and agreed.

古文：无滋他族，实偪处此，以与我郑国争此土也。
现代文：不要让别国逼近我们住的这里，来同我郑国争夺这块土地。
English: Don't let other countries come close to where we live and compete with my country, Zheng, for this land.

古文：吾子孙其覆亡之不暇，而况能禋祀许乎？
现代文：我的子孙挽救危亡还来不及，难道还能替许国敬祭祖先吗？
English: It is too late to save the lives of my children and grandchildren. Can I still pay homage to my ancestors for the sake of my country?

古文：寡人之使吾子处此，不唯许国之为，亦聊以固吾圉也。 
现代文：我让您留在这里，不仅为了许国，也是姑且巩固我的边疆。 
English: I let you stay here, not only for the sake of the country, but also to strengthen my borders.

古文：乃使公孙获处许西偏，曰： 凡而器用财贿，无寘于许。
现代文：于是就让公孙获住在许城的西部边境，对他说： 凡是你的器用财货，不要放在许国。
English: So he let Gongsun live on the western border of Hucheng and said to him, "Don't put any of your tools, money or goods in Hucheng.

古文：我死，乃亟去之。
现代文：我死后就赶紧离开这里。
English: When I die, get the hell out of here.

古文：吾先君新邑于此，王室而既卑矣，周之子孙日失其序。
现代文：我祖先在这里新建城邑，眼看到周王室已经逐渐衰微，我们这些周朝的子孙一天天丢掉自己的事业。
English: My ancestors built a new city here. I see that the Zhou royal family has gradually declined, and we, the descendants of the Zhou dynasty, are losing our business day by day.

古文：夫许，大岳之胤也，天而既厌周德矣，吾其能与许争乎？ 
现代文：而许国，是四岳的后代，上天既然已经厌弃了成周，我哪里还能和许国竞争呢？ 
English: But Xu Guo is the descendant of the four mountains. Since God has abandoned Cheng Zhou, where can I still compete with Xu Guo?

古文：君子谓： 郑庄公于是乎有礼。
现代文：君子说： 郑庄公在这件事情上合乎礼。
English: The gentleman said, "Zheng Zhuang is behaving properly in this matter.

古文：礼，经国家，定社稷，序民人，利后嗣者也。
现代文：礼，是治理国家、安定社稷、使百姓有秩序、使后代有利的大法。
English: Etiquette is a great law for governing the country, stabilizing society, keeping the people in order, and benefiting future generations.

古文：许，无刑而伐之，服而舍之，度德而处之，量力而行之，相时而动，无累后人，可谓知礼矣。 
现代文：许国违背法度而庄公讨伐他们，服罪了就宽恕他们，揣度自己德行而决定事情，衡量自己的力量而办理事务，看准了时机而行动，不要让忧虑连累后人，可以说是懂得礼了。 
English: Some countries have broken the law and fought them bravely, forgiven them when they have confessed their sins, decided things by considering their own virtue, handled affairs by measuring their own strength, and acted when the time was right. Don't let worries drag down future generations. You can say that you know the etiquette.

古文：郑伯使卒出豭，行出犬、鸡，以诅射颍考叔者。
现代文：郑庄公让一百名士兵拿出一头公猪，二十五人拿出一条狗和一只鸡，来诅咒射死颍考叔的凶手。
English: Zheng Zhuanggong asked a hundred soldiers to take out a boar, and twenty-five people to take out a dog and a chicken, to curse the murderer who shot Uncle Zengkao.

古文：君子谓： 郑庄公失政刑矣。
现代文：君子说： 郑庄公失掉了政和刑。
English: The gentleman said, "Zheng Zhuanggong has lost political power and power of punishment.

古文：政以治民，刑以正邪，既无德政，又无威刑，是以及邪。
现代文：政用来治理百姓，刑用来纠正邪恶。既缺乏清明的政治，又没有威严的刑法，所以才发生邪恶。
English: Politics is used to govern the people, and punishment is used to correct evil. It is because of the lack of a clear politics and the absence of a dignified criminal law that evil occurs.

古文：邪而诅之，将何益矣！ 
现代文：已经发生邪恶而加以诅咒，有什么好处！ 
English: What good is it to curse an evil that has already occurred?

古文：王取邬、刘、蒍、邘之田于郑，而与郑人苏忿生之田：温、原、絺、樊、隰郕、攒茅、向、盟、州、陉、隤、怀。
现代文：周天子在郑国取得邬、刘、蒍、邘的土田，却给了郑国人原来属于苏忿生的土田：温、原、絺、樊、隰郕、攒茅、向、盟、州、陉、隤、怀。
English: Zhou Tianzi in Zheng got the earthen fields of Yan, Liu, Yao, and Yao, but he gave the earthen fields that originally belonged to Su Guanzheng to the people of Zheng: Wen, Yuan, Yao, Yao, Yao, Yao Mao, Xiang, Meng, Zhou, Yao, Yao, and Huai.

古文：君子是以知桓王之失郑也。恕而行之，德之则也，礼之经也。
现代文：君子因此而知道桓王会失去郑国了，认为 按照恕道办事，是德的准则，礼的常规。
English: As a result, the nobles knew that King Huan would lose Zheng. They believed that to act in accordance with the Way of Tolerance was the standard of virtue and the routine of etiquette.

古文：己弗能有而以与人，人之不至，不亦宜乎。
现代文：自己不能保有，就拿来送给别人。别人不再来朝见，不也应该吗？ 
English: If you can't keep it for yourself, give it to someone else. If others don't come to see you, shouldn't you?

古文：郑、息有违言，息侯伐郑。郑伯与战于竟，息师大败而还。
现代文：郑伯与息侯因言语不和，息侯就带兵讨伐郑国，郑伯在郑国的边境迎战，息师被打得狼狈而回。
English: Zheng Bo and his father-in-law had a verbal disagreement, so his father-in-law led an army to fight against Zheng Guo, Zheng Bo fought on the border of Zheng Guo, and his father-in-law was beaten and returned in disarray.

古文：君子是以知息之将亡也。
现代文：君子们因此知道息国将要灭亡了。
English: The nobles therefore knew that their country was about to perish.

古文：不度德，不量力，不亲亲，不征辞，不察有罪，犯五不韪而以伐人，其丧师也，不亦宜乎！
现代文：不考虑郑伯的德望，不衡量自己的力量，不亲近同姓的郑国，不对证言语不和的实际原因，不调查有罪之事，犯了 五大不对 却要攻伐他人，这种人丧失军队，难道不应该吗！
English: Without considering Zheng Bo's moral expectations, without measuring his own strength, without being close to his namesake Zheng Guo, without verifying the actual reasons for the discord, without investigating the guilty, having committed the five major offenses, but wanting to attack others, such a person should lose the army, shouldn't he?

古文：冬十月，郑伯以虢师伐宋。
现代文：冬季十月，郑庄公带着虢国的军队攻打宋国。
English: In the winter of October, Zheng Zhuanggong attacked Song with the troops of Min.

古文：壬戌，大败宋师，以报其入郑也。
现代文：十四日，把宋国的军队打得大败，以报复宋国攻入郑国的那次战役。
English: On the 14th, he defeated Song's army and took revenge for Song's invasion of Zheng.

古文：宋不告命，故不书。
现代文：宋国没有前来报告这件事，所以《春秋》没有记载。
English: Song did not come forward to report the incident, so "Spring and Autumn" did not record it.

古文：凡诸侯有命，告则书，不然则否。
现代文：凡是诸侯发生大事，前来报告就记载，不然就不记载。
English: Whenever a major event occurs in the lordships, the report will be recorded, otherwise it will not be recorded.

古文：师出臧否，亦如之。
现代文：出兵顺利或者不顺利，也是一样。
English: Whether the troop deployment is successful or not is the same thing.

古文：虽及灭国，灭不告败，胜不告克，不书于策。
现代文：即使国家被灭亡，被灭的不报告战败，胜利的不报告战胜，也不记载在简册上。
English: Even if the country is annihilated, the annihilated do not report defeat, the victorious do not report victory, it is not recorded in the booklet.

古文：羽父请杀桓公，将以求大宰。
现代文：鲁国大夫羽父请求杀掉桓公，想借此求得宰相的官职。
English: Lu Guotongfei requested to kill Huan, hoping to obtain the post of prime minister.

古文：公曰： 为其少故也，吾将授之矣。
现代文：隐公说： 从前由于他年轻的缘故，所以我代为摄政，现在我打算把国君的位子交还给他。
English: "In the past, I acted as regent because of his young age, but now I plan to return the position of the sovereign to him," he said.

古文：使营菟裘，吾将老焉。 
现代文：已经派人在菟裘建筑房屋，我已经打算退休养老了。 
English: They have already sent people to build houses in Muju, and I am already planning to retire.

古文：羽父惧，反谮公于桓公而请弑之。
现代文：羽父害怕了，反而在鲁桓公那里诬陷鲁隐公而请求桓公杀死隐公。
English: The feathered father was afraid, but instead framed Lu Yingguo at Lu Huan's place and asked Huan to kill Yingguo.

古文：公之为公子也，与郑人战于狐壤，止焉。
现代文：隐公还是公子的时候，曾率兵同郑国人在狐壤打仗，被俘获。
English: When Hinkong was still a young man, he once led an army to fight against the Zheng people in the Fox's Lair and was captured.

古文：郑人囚诸尹氏，赂尹氏而祷于其主钟巫，遂与尹氏归而立其主。
现代文：郑国人把他囚禁在尹氏那里。隐公贿赂尹氏，并在尹氏所祭神主钟巫之前祷告，于是就和尹氏一起回国而在鲁国立了钟巫的神主。
English: The people of Zheng imprisoned him with the Yin family. Hinkong bribed the Yin family and prayed before the god master Zhong Wu that the Yin family worshiped, so he returned to China with the Yin family and became the god master of Zhong Wu in Lu.

古文：十一月，公祭钟巫，齐于社圃，馆于寪氏。
现代文：十一月，隐公将要祭祀钟巫，在社圃斋戒，住在寪氏那里。
English: In November, the hermit will sacrifice to the bell witch, fast in the community garden, and live with Mr. Zou.

古文：壬辰，羽父使贼弑公于氏，立桓公而讨氏，有死者。
现代文：十五日，羽父让坏人在寪家刺杀隐公，立桓公为国君，并且讨伐寪氏，寪氏有人被杀害。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the feathered father ordered the villain to assassinate the hidden lord in the Shun family, to establish the Huan lord as the sovereign, and to fight against the Shun clan. Some members of the Shun clan were killed.

古文：不书葬，不成丧也。
现代文：《春秋》不记载安葬隐公，是由于没有按国君的规格正式为隐公举行丧礼。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record the burial of Hinkong, due to the fact that the funeral was not officially held for Hinkong according to the specifications of the sovereign.

