古文：谬误益州长吏萧颖士郗昂张长史萧俛崔清何儒亮于頔苑抽李文彬
现代文：郗昂张长史萧俛崔清何儒亮于頔苑抽李文彬
English: Zhang Changshi, Xiao Wei, Cui Qinghe, He Ru Liang, Li Wenbin

古文：苏拯窦少卿
现代文：苏拯窦少卿
English: Su Zhenguo

古文：遗忘张利涉阎玄一郭务静张守信李睍张藏用
现代文：遗忘张利涉阎玄一郭务静张守信李睍张藏用
English: Forgetting Zhang Li, Involving Yan Xuan, Joining a Guo, Maintaining Tranquility, Upholding the Faith, Caring for Li, and Using Zhang as a Treasure

古文：谬误
现代文：谬误
English: Fallacy

古文：益州长吏
现代文：益州长吏
English: Governor Makoto Saito

古文：唐益州每岁进甘子，皆以纸裹之。
现代文：唐朝时，益州每年都向京都宫中进献甘子，每只甘子都用纸包裹好。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, every year, the Empress of Yizhou presented sweet potatoes to the Kyoto Imperial Palace. Each sweet potato was wrapped in paper.

古文：他时长吏嫌其不敬，代之以细布。
现代文：后来，长吏怕用纸包裹不恭敬，改用细布包裹。
English: Later, officials were afraid to use paper wrapping, so they used cloth wrapping instead.

古文：既而恒恐有甘子为布所损，每岁多怀忧惧。
现代文：之后，又怕甘子被布包裹坏了。每年甘子进献京都后，都忧虑恐惧。
English: After that, I was afraid that the amago would be wrapped in cloth and ruined. Every year, after the amago was presented to Kyoto, I was worried and afraid.

古文：俄有御史甘子布至，长吏以为推布裹甘子事，因大惧曰：果为所推。
现代文：这一年，甘子进献京都后，忽然有个叫甘子布的御史来到益州。长吏误以为这位御史来益州是推究用布裹甘子的事，因此异常惊恐地说：果然被朝廷追究这件事情。
English: In that year, after the presentation of amago to Kyoto, an envoy named Amago-bu suddenly came to Ikshu. The officials mistakenly thought that this envoy came to Ikshu to investigate the matter of wrapping amago in cloth, so they were extremely alarmed and said, "The Imperial Court has indeed investigated this matter."

古文：及子布到驿，长吏但叙以布裹甘子为敬。
现代文：待到御史甘子布来到驿馆中，这位长吏拜见后，只是说用布裹甘子是如何如何的对皇上恭敬。
English: When the official, Gan Zi Bu, came to the Imperial Palace, after paying his respects, the official only said that wrapping Gan Zi Bu in cloth was a way of showing respect to the emperor.

古文：子布初不知之，久而方悟。
现代文：甘子布初时对他这样说，一点也不明白。
English: When Gan Zibu first said this to him, he didn't understand at all.

古文：闻者莫不大笑。
现代文：过了一段时间后，才领悟到是怎么一回事。
English: It took me a while to realise what was going on.

古文：子布好学，有文才，知名当代。
现代文：讲给他人听，听的人没有不开怀大笑的。御史甘子布好学，有文才，在当时很有名望。
English: When he spoke to others, there was no one who did not burst out laughing. He was a scholar and a man of letters, and he was very famous at the time.

古文：萧颖士
现代文：萧颖士
English: Xiao Yingshi

古文：唐天宝初，萧颖士因游灵昌。远至胙县南二十里。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝初年，萧颖士因为去灵昌游玩，来到胙县以南二十里的地方。
English: In the first year of Tang Xuan Zong Tianbao, Xiao Yingshi came to a place 20 miles south of Handan County because he wanted to visit Lingchang.

古文：有胡店，店上有人多姓胡。
现代文：这里有一家胡店，店里的人多数都姓胡。
English: There is a Hu store here, and most of the people in the store are surnamed Hu.

古文：颖士发县日晚，县寮饮饯移时，薄暮方行。
现代文：萧颖士从县城出发时天已经很晚了。县里的官员们为他设宴饯行用去了一段时间，到了傍晚才启程。
English: It was very late when Xiao Yingshi set off from the county seat. The county officials spent some time preparing a banquet for him, and he did not leave until the evening.

古文：至县南三五里，便即昏黑。有一妇人年二十四五，着红衫绿裙，骑驴，驴上有衣服。
现代文：出了县城向南走了三四里路，天色就昏黑了，遇到一位妇女约二十四五岁，身着红衫绿裙，骑着一条毛驴，驴身上驼有衣服。
English: I walked three or four miles south from the county seat, and it was getting dark when I met a woman about twenty-four or twenty-five years old, wearing a red shirt and a green skirt, riding a donkey. The donkey had clothes on its body.

古文：向颖士言：儿家直南二十里。
现代文：这位妇女对萧颖士说：我家住在顺道往南走二十里的地方。
English: The woman said to Xiao Yingshi, "My family lives 20 miles south of here.

古文：今归遇夜，独行怕惧，愿随郎君鞍马同行。
现代文：现在天色已晚，我一个人走路很害怕，愿意随你一块儿走搭个伴好吗？
English: It's getting late, and I'm scared to walk alone. Would you like a companion to walk with you?

古文：颖士问女何姓，曰：姓胡。
现代文：萧颖士看看女子问：你姓什么？
English: Xiao Yingshi looked at the woman and asked: What is your surname?

古文：颖士常见世间说有野狐，或作男子，或作女人，于黄昏之际媚人。
现代文：女子回答说：我姓胡。萧颖士常常听人们说有野狐狸精，或者变成男人，或者变成女人，在天傍黑时迷惑人。
English: The woman replied: "My surname is Hu. Xiao Yingshi often hears people say that there are wild fox spirits, or become a man, or become a woman, to confuse people in the dark.

古文：颖士疑此女郎是野狐，遂唾叱之曰：死野狐，敢媚萧颖士。
现代文：萧颖士疑心眼前的这位妙龄少妇就是野狐狸精变的，于是唾骂申叱说：该死的野狐，你竟敢媚惑我萧颖士？
English: Xiao Yingshi suspected that the young woman in front of her was a wild fox, so she scolded and scolded: "Damn wild fox, how dare you seduce me, Xiao Yingshi?

古文：遂鞭马南驰，奔至主人店，歇息解衣。
现代文：立即打马向南疾驰而去。萧颖士骑马来到胡家店，投宿店中，脱衣歇息。
English: Xiao Yingshi rode a horse to the Hu Jia store, the lodging store, stripped off and rested.

古文：良久，听见妇人，从门牵驴入来。
现代文：过了许久，他从窗户看到路上遇见的那位少妇牵驴从大门进到院子里。
English: After a long time, he saw from the window that the young woman he had met on the road was leading a donkey through the gate into the courtyard.

古文：其店叟曰：何为冲夜？
现代文：店里的老主人出屋问道：为什么违禁夜行？
English: The old owner of the shop went out and asked: Why is it forbidden to go out at night?

古文：曰：冲夜犹可，适被一害风措大，呼儿作野狐，合被唾杀。
现代文：少妇回答说：犯夜还算罢了。适才在路上被一个害了疯犬病的人，唤儿是野狐，好悬没被他唾杀我。
English: The young woman replied: "It's just a one-night stand. I was just on the road when I was attacked by a man who had rabies and called me a wild fox, so I didn't expect him to spit at me and kill me.

古文：其妇人乃店叟之女也。颖士渐恧而已。
现代文：直到这时，萧颖士才知道自己误将店主的女儿当成了野狐精，不由得羞愧满面，很不好意思。
English: It was only then that Xiao Yingshi realized that she had mistaken the shopkeeper's daughter for a wild fox spirit. She couldn't help but feel ashamed and embarrassed.

古文：郗昂
现代文：郗昂
English: Hoang An

古文：唐郗昂与韦陟交善。
现代文：唐玄宗时，郗昂与韦陟关系很好。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Yao and Wei had a good relationship.

古文：因话国朝宰相，谁最无德。昂误对曰：韦安石也。
现代文：一次，二人在一起谈论起朝中的诸位宰相中谁最无德，郗昂口误地说：韦安石啊！
English: On one occasion, the two of them were talking about which of the prime ministers of the dynasty was the most depraved, and Zangang mistakenly said: "Wei Anshi!

古文：已而惊走而去，逢吉温于街中。温问何故苍惶如此，答曰：适与韦尚书话国朝宰相最无德者，本欲言吉顼，误言韦安石。
现代文：吉温问他因什么这么惊惶？郗昂回答说：适才跟韦尚书谈论朝中宰相谁最无德，本来是想说吉温，却口下误说成韦安石了。
English: Jiwen asked him why he was so alarmed. Gongang replied, "I just wanted to talk to Wei Shangshu about who is the most worthless prime minister of the DPRK. I originally wanted to say Jiwen, but I mistakenly said Wei Anshi."

古文：既言，又鞭马而走，抵房相之第。
现代文：说完又觉不对，立即打马离去。郗昂经过房宰相府第门前。
English: After saying this, he felt it was not right and immediately left on horseback. He passed in front of the door of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：琯执手慰问之，复以房融为对。
现代文：宰相房琯拉着他的手，安慰他不要这么慌恐失措，并问他为了什么事？
English: The prime minister, Fong Yu, took his hand, consoled him not to be so panicked, and asked him what was the matter?

古文：昂有时称，忽一日犯三人。
现代文：郗昂又张口说出房琯最无德来。事后，郗昂经常对人说自己忽然一天之间，得罪了三位宰相。
English: Later, Yao often told people that he had suddenly offended three prime ministers in one day.

古文：举朝嗟叹，唯韦陟遂与之绝。
现代文：满朝文武官员都为他感慨不已，三位宰相中，只有韦陟从这以后跟郗昂断绝了往来。
English: All the officials of the Manchu Dynasty were deeply moved by him. Among the three prime ministers, only Wei Wei broke off contact with Yao Ang after this.

古文：张长史
现代文：张长史
English: Zhang Changshi

古文：唐监济令李回，妻张氏。
现代文：唐朝临济县令李回，娶妻张氏。
English: Li Hui, the ruler of Linji County in the Tang Dynasty, married into the Zhang family.

古文：其父为庐州长史，告老归。
现代文：张氏的父亲曾经任过庐州长史，现告老还乡。
English: Mr. Zhang's father once served as the governor of Shandong Province, and now he has returned to his hometown.

古文：以回之薄其女也，故往临济辱之，误至全节县。
现代文：张长史因为李回薄待他的女儿，前往临济县去辱骂李回，不料误入全节县。
English: Zhang Changshi went to Linji County to abuse Li Hui because Li Hui treated his daughter poorly, but ended up in Quanzhou County by mistake.

古文：而问门人曰：明府在乎？
现代文：进门就问看门人：县令在吗？
English: When you enter the door, ask the doorman: Is the county magistrate there?

古文：门者曰在。
现代文：看门人回答说：在。
English: The doorman replied, "Yes."

古文：张遂入至厅前，大骂辱。
现代文：张长史于是直奔厅前，大声辱骂。
English: Zhang Changshi then ran straight to the front of the hall and shouted insults.

古文：全节令赵子余不知其故，私自门窥之，见一老父诟骂不已。
现代文：全节县令赵子余不知什么缘故有人大骂自己，暗中从门缝里向外看，只见一位老汉大骂不已。
English: The whole section of the county ordered Zhao Ziyu not to know why someone was swearing at himself, secretly looking out from the door, only to see an old man swearing.

古文：而县下常有狐为魅，以张为狐焉。
现代文：当时县内常传有狐狸成精作怪。
English: At that time, it was often rumored in the prefecture that foxes had become monsters.

古文：乃密召吏人执而鞭之，张亦未寤，骂仍恣肆。
现代文：赵子余以为张长史是狐精变的来县衙作怪，迷惑人众，于是暗中召呼差役用鞭子抽打了张长史。张长史依然不醒悟，仍然辱骂不已。
English: Zhao Ziyu thought that Zhang Changshi was a fox spirit who had come to the county to play tricks and confuse the people, so he secretly called the police to beat Zhang Changshi with a whip. Zhang Changshi still did not wake up, still abused.

古文：击之困极，方问何人，辄此诟骂。
现代文：差役们鞭打累了，才想起来问：你是什么？到此随便辱骂我们县令？
English: When the officers were tired of whipping, they remembered to ask: "What are you, coming here to abuse our county magistrate?

古文：乃自言吾李回妻父也，回贱吾女，来怒回耳。
现代文：张长史才说：我是你们县令李回妻子的父亲。李回虐待我女儿，所以我来骂他。
English: Zhang Changshicai said, "I am the father of your county magistrate Li Hui's wife. Li Hui abused my daughter, so I came to scold him."

古文：全节令方知其误，置之馆，给医药焉。
现代文：全节县令赵子余才知道都误会了。将张长史安置在驿馆中住下，请来大夫为他诊伤上药。
English: The whole section was misunderstood by the county magistrate Zhao Ziyu. Zhang Changshi was placed in a temporary residence and a doctor was brought in to diagnose and treat his injuries.

古文：张之僮夜亡至临济，告回。
现代文：跟随张长史一块儿来的家童连夜赶到临济县，将张长史在全节县挨打的事情报告给李回。
English: The family child who came with Zhang Changshi rushed to Linji County overnight and reported to Li Wei that Zhang Changshi had been beaten in Quanjie County.

古文：回大怒，遣人吏数百，将袭全节而击令。
现代文：李回听了后大怒，立即派遣差役几百人，声言要袭击全节县殴打县令。
English: After hearing Li's reply, he flew into a rage and immediately dispatched several hundred police officers, claiming that he wanted to attack the whole county and beat up the county magistrate.

古文：令惧，闭门守之。
现代文：全节县令赵子余听说后非常恐惧。关闭好县衙大门守候在县衙里。
English: After hearing this, the county magistrate Zhao Ziyu was very afraid. He closed the gate of the county hall and waited in the county hall.

古文：回遂至郡诉之，太守召令责之，恕其误也。
现代文：李回叫门不开，便来到郡府上告赵子余。太守听了李回的上告后，将全节县令召到府衙中斥责一顿，原谅他是搞误会了。
English: Li Hui did not open the door, so he came to the county government to sue Zhao Ziyu. After the governor heard Li Hui's appeal, he summoned the entire county government to the prefectural government to reprimand him, and forgive him for misunderstanding.

古文：使出钱二十万遗张长史以和之。
现代文：只命令他出钱二十万赔偿张长史所受到的伤害。
English: He was only ordered to pay 200,000 yuan in compensation for Zhang Changshi's injuries.

古文：回乃迎至县，张喜回之报复。
现代文：李回将岳父张长史迎接到临济县自己家中。张长史对李回及时赶到全节县报复赵子余，感到特别高兴。
English: Li Hui welcomed his father-in-law Zhang Changshi to his home in Linji County. Zhang Changshi was particularly pleased that Li Hui arrived in time to retaliate against Zhao Ziyu in Quanzhi County.

古文：卒不言其薄女，遂归。
现代文：就不再责问他虐待女儿的事情，高高兴兴地回到自己家中。
English: She stopped accusing him of abusing her daughter and happily returned to her home.

古文：萧俛
现代文：萧俛
English: Xiao Yao

古文：唐贞元中，萧俛新及第。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，萧俛刚考中进士。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, Xiao Yuang passed the entrance examination for junior high school.

古文：时国医王彦伯住太平里，与给事郑云逵比舍住。
现代文：当时，太医王彦伯住在京城长安太平里，与给事郑云逵的宅院相邻。
English: At that time, the Imperial Physician Wang Yanbo lived in Chang'an Taiping, Beijing, adjacent to Zheng Yunyao's residence.

古文：忽患寒热，早诣彦伯求诊候，误入云逵第。
现代文：萧俛忽然患寒热症，早晨起来后，到太医王彦伯家中看病，误入给事郑云逵家。
English: Xiao Yao suddenly fell ill with chills and fever. After getting up in the morning, he went to the home of Wang Yanbo, the chief physician, to see a doctor, but mistakenly went to Zheng Yunyao's home.

古文：会门人他适，云达立于中门。
现代文：正赶上看门人到别处去了，没遇阻拦就进入院中。
English: Just in time, the doorman went elsewhere and entered the hospital without being stopped.

古文：俛前趋曰：某前及第，有期集之役，忽患。
现代文：给事郑云逵站在中门那儿，萧俛上前施礼后，说：我是前天新考中的进士，同科学友们在一块儿聚会宴游，不甚患上了胃肠感冒。
English: For the occasion, Zheng Yunyao stood at the middle gate, and after Xiao Yao bowed before him, he said: I was a freshman in the new examination the day before yesterday, and my classmates had a party together. I did not suffer from a gastrointestinal cold.

古文：具说其状。
现代文：口吐腹泻，浑身发冷，腹胃疼痛难忍。
English: Vomiting diarrhea, chills all over the body, unbearable pain in the abdomen.

古文：逵命仆人延坐，为诊其臂曰：据脉候，是心家热风。
现代文：请太医为我诊候一下。给事郑云逵听了后，让家中仆人拿来一只椅子请萧俛坐在那儿，为他在手腕部诊脉，说：根据你的脉象，是心火上升引起的伤风。
English: After listening to Zheng Yunyao, he asked the family servant to bring a chair and asked Xiao Yao to sit there. Xiao Yao took his pulse at the wrist and said, "According to your pulse, it is typhoid fever caused by the rise of the heart."

古文：云逵姓郑，若觅国医王彦伯，东邻是也。
现代文：我叫郑云逵，你要找太医王彦伯，他是我东邻，请到隔院去找。
English: My name is Zheng Yunyao. If you want to find Dr. Wang Yanbo, he is my neighbor to the east. Please go to the next yard.

古文：俛赧然而去。
现代文：萧俛听了后，羞臊得满脸潮红地离开了郑家。
English: After listening, Xiao Yao left the Zheng family with a flushed face.

古文：崔清
现代文：崔清
English: Cui Qing

古文：唐崔清除濠州刺史，替李逊。清辞户部侍郎李巽，留坐与语。
现代文：唐朝人崔清官拜豪州刺史，接替他的前任李逊，崔清上任前，到户部侍郎李巽那里拜谢告别，李巽家人留他坐下跟主人闲话。
English: Before taking office, the Tang Dynasty official Cui Qing went to the household servant Li Yao to say goodbye. Li Yao's family left him to sit down and gossip with his master.

古文：清指谓所替李逊曰：清都者不知李逊浑不解官。
现代文：崔请坐下后，指着户部侍郎李巽说李逊：我都不知道李逊这个人愚昧到不想辞官离任。
English: After sitting down, Cui pointed to the head waiter, Li Yao, and said to Li Xun: "I didn't even know that Li Xun was so stupid that he didn't want to resign.

古文：再三言之。
现代文：再三重复地说这一句话。
English: Repeat this phrase over and over again.

古文：巽曰：李巽即可在，只是独不称公意。
现代文：户部侍郎实在忍耐不住了，接上说：李巽在这呢。只是我单单不让您先生满意。
English: The head waiter couldn't stand it any longer and went on to say, "Li Ye is here, but I just can't satisfy your husband."

古文：清稍悟之，惭顾而去。
现代文：崔清这才明白自己认错人了，羞愧地起身告辞走了。
English: It was only then that Cui Qing realized that he had mistakenly identified the wrong person. Embarrassed, he got up and left.

古文：何儒亮
现代文：何儒亮
English: He Ru Liang

古文：唐进士何儒亮自外州至京，访其从叔。误造郎中赵需宅，自云同房侄。
现代文：唐朝时，进士何儒亮自外州来到京城长安，看完他的堂叔，误入郎中赵需家，自我介绍说是族内同一分支的侄子。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the scholar He Ru Liang came to the capital Chang'an from outside the state. After seeing his cousin, he mistakenly entered the house of his cousin Zhao Kuo Jia. He introduced himself as a nephew of the same branch of the tribe.

古文：会冬至，需欲家宴，挥霍云：既是同房。
现代文：当时正值冬至，赵需正欲设家宴过节，招手请何儒亮入席，说：即是同房，就请一块儿吃点便饭吧。
English: At that time, it was the winter solstice. Zhao Biao wanted to hold a family banquet to celebrate the festival. He beckoned to He Ru Liang to sit down and said, "Even if you are in the same room, please have a casual meal together."

古文：便令入宴。姑姊妹妻子尽在焉。儒亮馔毕，徐出。
现代文：赵需家中的姑姑、姐姐、妹妹及他的妻子都在一张桌上，跟何儒亮一起吃饭。
English: Zhao Meng's aunt, sister, younger sister and his wife were all at the same table, eating with He Ru Liang.

古文：及细察之，乃何氏之子也，需大笑。
现代文：何儒亮吃完饭便起身告辞，慢慢走出赵家。赵需仔细察看，才发现他是何家人，不是赵家堂侄，不由得大笑起来。
English: After finishing his meal, He Ruliang got up to say goodbye and slowly walked out of Zhao's house. Zhao had to take a closer look to find out that he was He's family member, not Zhao's cousin. He couldn't help but burst out laughing.

古文：儒亮岁余不敢出。
现代文：何儒亮也知道自己误入赵家，有一年多不好意思在外走动。
English: He Ru Liang also knew that he had mistakenly entered Zhao's house, and he was embarrassed to walk around outside for more than a year.

古文：京城时人，因以为何需郎中。
现代文：当时，满京城的人，都称赵儒为何需郎中。
English: At that time, people all over Beijing called Zhao Ru a good son-in-law.

古文：于頔
现代文：于頔
English: Yu Zhen

古文：唐司空于頔以乐曲有《想夫怜》，其名不雅，将改之。
现代文：唐朝时，司空于頔认为乐曲《想夫怜》的曲名不够文雅，想改换个曲名。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Siku Yuxuan thought that the title of the music piece "Wish for a Husband" was not elegant enough, and wanted to change the title.

古文：客有笑曰：南朝相府，曾有瑞莲，故歌为《相府莲》。
现代文：有位客人笑着说：南朝相府中，曾有瑞莲。所以有首歌名《相府莲》。
English: One guest said with a smile, "In the Southern Dynasty, there was a lotus flower called the Suiren. That's why there's a song called "The Suiren."

古文：自是后人语讹。
现代文：想夫怜 是后人的讹传。
English: "I want to please my husband" is a story passed down from generation to generation.

古文：乃不改。
现代文：于是就不改了。
English: So they didn't change it.

古文：又旧说，董仲舒墓，门人至，皆下马。
现代文：又旧时还有人说，汉朝宰相董仲舒的陵墓，他的僚下、弟子去拜谒，都必须下马方得进入。
English: In ancient times, it was also said that the mausoleum of Dong Zhongshu, the prime minister of the Han Dynasty, his colleagues and disciples had to dismount to enter the mausoleum.

古文：谓之下马陵，语讹为虾蟆陵。
现代文：因此称为下马陵，后人讹传为虾蟆陵。
English: Therefore, it was called the Lower Horse Mausoleum, and later it was passed down as the Shrimp Mausoleum.

古文：今荆襄之人，呼堤为提；留绛之人，呼釜为付。
现代文：现在荆襄一带的人，管堤叫提；留绛一带的人，管釜叫付。
English: Now, people in the area around Jingxiang are calling for the dike to be raised, and people in the area around Lubao are calling for the pipe to be removed.

古文：皆讹谬所习也。
现代文：这些，都是讹误而成了习惯。
English: These are all mistakes that have become habits.

古文：苑抽
现代文：苑抽
English: 苑抽

古文：唐尚书裴胄镇江陵，常与苑论有旧。
现代文：唐朝时，尚书裴胄镇守江陵，曾经与苑论交往很厚。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Shangshu Peiwen Zhen guarded Jiangling, and had a close relationship with Yuanren.

古文：论及第后，更不相见，但书札通问而已。
现代文：苑论考中进士后，不再跟裴胄见面了，只是通信问候一下而已。
English: After he was admitted as a scholar in the middle school examination, he no longer met with Pei Yao, but only exchanged greetings.

古文：论弟抽方应举，过江陵，行谒地主之礼。
现代文：苑论的弟弟苑抽，刚刚参加选拔举人的考试，途径江陵，到府衙通报，欲行参拜地方长官的礼仪。
English: Yuan Yuan, the younger brother of Yuan Rong, had just taken part in the examination for selecting and nominating people. He went to Jiangling to inform the prefectural government that he wanted to visit the local governor's etiquette.

古文：客因见抽名曰：秀才之名，虽字不同，且难于尚书前为礼，如何？
现代文：负责接待工作的书吏，看到苑抽通报的名氏说：你这位秀才的名字，虽然只是字不同，但是很难向尚书行拜见的礼仪，怎么办？
English: The librarian in charge of the reception work, seeing the famous names announced by the garden lottery, said: Your name of this genius, although it is just a different word, but it is difficult to perform the etiquette of greeting Shang Shuxu, how to do?

古文：会抽怀中有论旧名纸，便谓客将曰：某自别有名。
现代文：正巧，苑抽的怀中还带有哥哥苑论的旧名片，便取出来对接待人说：我还有另外一个名字。
English: Coincidentally, the elder brother Yuan Rong's old business card was still in Yuan Rong's arms, so he took it out and said to the receptionist, "I have another name.

古文：客将见日晚，仓遑遽将名入。
现代文：负责接待客人的书吏见天色已经晚了，仓促地接着苑抽递给他的后一张名片，进入里面通报。
English: The librarian in charge of receiving guests saw that it was already late, hastily followed the last business card handed to him by Yuan, and went inside to report.

古文：胄喜曰：苑大来矣，屈入！
现代文：裴胄看到苑论的名片，非常高兴，说：是苑大来了啊！快请进来！
English: Pei Hao saw Yuan's business card and was very happy, saying, "It's Yuan Da who's here! Please come in!

古文：抽至中庭，胄见貌异。
现代文：苑抽来到厅堂，裴胄见面貌不是苑论。
English: When the court came to the hall, Pei Yao's appearance was not the court's opinion.

古文：及坐，揖曰：足下第几？
现代文：待到请苑抽入坐后，举手揖拜问：请问你是苑家的老几啊？
English: After waiting for Zhenyuan to take his seat, he raised his hand and asked: "Excuse me, who is the oldest member of the Yuan family?"

古文：抽对曰：第四。
现代文：苑抽回答说：我是苑家的老四。
English: Yuanqu replied, "I am the fourth son of the Yuan family.

古文：胄曰：与苑大远近？
现代文：裴胃问：苑大是你什么人？
English: Pei Gangtu asked: What kind of person are you, Yuan Da?

古文：抽曰：家兄。
现代文：苑抽回答说：是我的亲哥哥。
English: Yuanqu replied, "He is my own brother."

古文：又问曰：足下正名何？
现代文：裴胄又问：你的真正的名字叫什么呀？
English: Pei Yao also asked: What is your real name?

古文：对曰：名论。
现代文：苑抽回答说：苑论。
English: Yuanqu replied: "It is up to Yuanqu.

古文：又曰：贤兄改名乎？
现代文：裴胄又问：你哥哥苑论改名了吗？
English: Pei Yao also asked: Did your brother Yuan Rong change his name?

古文：抽曰：家兄也名论。
现代文：苑抽回答说：我哥哥也叫苑论。
English: Yuan Zu replied, "My brother is also named Yuan Ren."

古文：公庭将吏，于是皆笑。
现代文：在场的府衙中的文武官员吏役听了后，都大笑不止。
English: After listening to the speech, the civil and military officials of the prefectural government who were present burst out laughing.

古文：及引坐，乃陈本名名抽。
现代文：等到引导苑抽到正室入坐后，他才向裴胄说自己的本名叫苑抽。
English: It wasn't until the guide, Yuan Zhuo, arrived at the main room and sat down that he told Pei Yao that his real name was Yuan Zhuo.

古文：既逡巡于便院，俄而远近悉知。
现代文：这件事情不一会儿便传遍了整个府衙。又过了一会儿，远近都知道了。
English: The story soon spread throughout the entire prefecture, and after a while, it was known far and wide.

古文：李文彬
现代文：李文彬
English: Li Wenbin

古文：唐举人李文彬受知于舍人纥干泉。
现代文：唐朝时，举人李文彬是被中书舍人纥干泉发现举荐起来的。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Li Wenbin, the person who recommended him, was recommended by the famous Chinese scholar Zou Ganquan.

古文：时有京兆府同箓贺兰洎卒。
现代文：因此纥干泉对他有知遇之恩。当时，京兆府同箓贺兰洎病故。
English: At that time, his classmate from Beijing's Chaozhou Prefecture, Helan Zang, died of illness.

古文：文彬因谒紫微。
现代文：李文彬正在这时去拜见中书舍人纥干泉。
English: At this time, Li Wenbin went to visit the Chinese scholar Yan Ganquan.

古文：紫微问曰：今日有何新事？
现代文：纥干泉问：今天京城中有什么新鲜事？
English: Gao Ganquan asked: What's new in Beijing today?

古文：文彬曰：适过府门，闻纥干洎卒。
现代文：李文彬回答说：刚才经过府门，听说纥干洎死了。
English: Li Wenbin replied, "I just passed by the front gate and heard that Gao Ganjun died.

古文：泉曰：莫错否？
现代文：纥干泉问：没有听错吗？
English: Gao Ganquan asked, "Didn't you mishear?

古文：文彬曰：不错。
现代文：李文彬回答说：没有听错。
English: Li Wenbin replied: I did not mishear.

古文：泉曰：君大似共鬼语也。
现代文：纥干泉满脸怒气地说：你大概是在跟鬼说话呢吧。
English: Yu Ganquan said angrily, "You must be talking to a ghost."

古文：拂衣而去。
现代文：乞哼哼地甩一下衣服进入内室。
English: With a groan, he threw off his clothes and entered the inner room.

古文：文彬乃悟，盖俱重姓，又同名，而误对也。
现代文：李文彬这才醒悟到，原来是这两个人虽然不是一个姓但同音，又同名，刚才自己回答错了。
English: It was only then that Li Wenbin realized that although these two people did not have the same surname, they had the same pronunciation and the same name. He had just answered incorrectly.

古文：苏拯
现代文：苏拯
English: Su Zheng

古文：唐光化中，苏拯与乡人陈涤同处。
现代文：唐昭宗光化年间，有个叫苏拯的人，与同乡陈涤住在一起。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang, there was a man named Su Zheng who lived with a fellow villager, Chen Yaorong.

古文：拯与考功郎中苏璞，初叙宗党。
现代文：信写好后，请陈涤代为封好寄出。
English: After the letter is written, please send it to Chen Polyester for sealing.

古文：璞故奉常涤之子也。
现代文：陈涤随手写上自己的名字，将信寄出去。
English: Chen Polyester wrote his name by hand and mailed the letter.

古文：拯既执贽，寻以启事温卷。
现代文：考功郎中苏璞收到信后一看，立即大怒。
English: After receiving the letter, Su Shi, the winner of the examination, was immediately furious.

古文：因令陈涤缄封，涤遂误书己名。
现代文：苏拯得知这一消息后诚惶诚恐，马上又写了一封信表示歉意。吴子华听说这件事后说：这完全是一场误会啊！
English: After Su Zheng learned of this news, he was very frightened and immediately wrote another letter to apologize. After hearing about this, Wu Zihua said: This is all a misunderstanding!

古文：璞得之，大怒。拯闻之仓皇，复至书谢过。吴子华闻之曰：此书应误也。
现代文：陈涤随手写上自己的名字，是一误；苏璞收到信后，将 陈涤 错看成了 常涤 ，是二误也。
English: It was a mistake for Chen Polyester to write his own name by hand; after Su Yao received the letter, he mistook Chen Polyester for Chang Polyester, which was also a second mistake.

古文：窦少卿
现代文：窦少卿
English: Dou Shaoqing

古文：有窦少卿者家于故都。
现代文：有个叫窦少卿的人，家住在故都。
English: There was a man named Dou Shaoqing who lived in the old capital.

古文：素于渭北诸州，至村店中。
现代文：窦少卿离家到渭北各个州去考察巡游，来到一个乡村小店，随他同来的一个仆人得病不能同行。
English: Dou Shaoqing left home to go on an inspection tour to various provinces in northern Shandong. He came to a small village store, and one of the servants who came with him fell ill and could not accompany him.

古文：有从者抱疾，寄于主人而前去。历鄜、延、灵夏，经年未归。
现代文：窦少卿将这个仆人寄放在店主这儿，自己继续去巡游考察，先后到过鄜州、延州、灵夏等地，有一年多没有回家。
English: Dou Shaoqing left the servant with the shopkeeper and went on a tour of inspection. He visited Zhangzhou, Yanzhou, Lingxia and other places, and did not return home for more than a year.

古文：其从者寻卒于店中。此人临卒，店主问曰：何姓名？
现代文：这期间，在窦少卿离开那家乡村小店后不久，他寄放在店主家的那个仆人病势突然转重，死在店主家。临死前，店主问他：你叫什么名字？
English: During this period, shortly after Dou Shaoqing left the small village store, the servant he had left at the store owner's house suddenly became seriously ill and died at the store owner's house. Before dying, the store owner asked him: What is your name?

古文：此仆只言得窦少卿三字，便奄然无语。
现代文：这个仆人只说出：窦少卿三个字，就再也不出声了。
English: The servant only uttered three words: Dou Shaoqing, and then never spoke again.

古文：店主遂坎路侧以埋之，卓一牌向道曰：窦少卿墓。
现代文：于是，店主在路边掘个墓穴，将这个仆人埋在里面，并在墓前竖立一块墓碑，上面刻着窦少卿之墓几个字。
English: As a result, the shop owner dug a grave on the roadside, buried the servant inside, and erected a tombstone in front of the grave with the words "Tomb of Dou Shaoqing" engraved on it.

古文：与窦相识者过之。大惊讶，问店主，店主曰：牌上有名，固不谬矣。
现代文：有个跟窦少卿认识的人路过这里，看到墓碑上的名字非常吃惊，问店主是怎么回事？店主回答说：碑上有名有姓，一点也不假。
English: A person who knew Dou Shaoqing passed by here and was very surprised to see the name on the tombstone. He asked the shop owner what was going on. The shop owner replied, "The name on the tombstone is not fake at all.

古文：于是更有识窦者经过，甚痛惜。
现代文：后来，有个跟窦少卿非常熟悉的人路过这里，看到墓碑上的名字，很是痛惜。
English: Later, a person who was very familiar with Dou Shaoqing passed by here and was very sorry to see the name on the tombstone.

古文：有至亲者报其家，及令骨肉省其牌，果不谬。
现代文：有个跟窦家非常知近的亲戚将这事告诉了窦家。窦家派出窦少卿的儿子前往这家村店去察看墓碑，果然如此。
English: A relative who was very close to the Dou family told the Dou family about this. The Dou family sent the son of Dou Shaoqing to the village store to inspect the tombstone, and it was true.

古文：其家于是举哀成服，造斋相次，迎其旅榇殡葬。
现代文：于是窦家全家穿上哀服为窦少卿发丧，相继设斋为窦少卿奠祭。并且，将墓里的灵柩迎运回家中安葬。
English: As a result, the entire Dou family donned mourning clothes for the funeral of Dou Shaoqing, and successively set up a sacrificial altar for Dou Shaoqing. In addition, the coffin in the tomb was transported home for burial.

古文：远近亲戚，咸来吊慰。
现代文：不论是远道的，还是近处的亲朋好友都来吊唁慰问。
English: Whether from far away or close by, relatives and friends came to offer their condolences.

古文：葬后月余，有人附到窦家书，归程已近郡，报上下平善。
现代文：下葬后一个多月，忽然有一天，一个人捎来一封窦少卿的书信给窦家。信上说他就快要回到本郡来了，并向全家老少报告他平安，安康，一切都好。
English: More than a month after the funeral, suddenly one day, a person brought a letter from Dou Shaoqing to the Dou family. The letter said that he was about to return to the county, and reported to the whole family that he was safe, healthy, and everything was fine.

古文：其家大惊，不信，谓人诈修此书。
现代文：窦家见信后无限惊讶，全家人都不相信这是真的。
English: When the Dou family saw the letter, they were stunned. The whole family didn't believe it was true.

古文：又有人报云：道路间睹其形貌，甚是安健。
现代文：说一定是故意写封书信搞诈骗。过了几天，又有人来报告说：我在路上见到了窦少卿，非常健壮。
English: He said that he must have deliberately written a letter to commit fraud. A few days later, someone else came to report: I saw Dou Shaoqing on the road, very robust.

古文：其家愈惑之。
现代文：窦家人愈加疑惑，于是派人偷偷去迎视窦少卿。
English: Dou's family became more and more suspicious, so they sent someone to secretly meet Dou Shaoqing.

古文：遂使人潜逆之，窃窥其路左，疑其鬼物。
现代文：去迎视的这个人见窦少卿远远走过来，便躲藏在路边偷偷窥视，怀疑走来的是窦少卿的鬼魂。
English: The person who went to greet Dou Shaoqing saw him coming from far away and hid on the side of the road to spy on him, suspecting that it was Dou Shaoqing's ghost that was coming.

古文：至其家，妻男皆谓其魂魄归来。
现代文：待到窦少卿进入家门，妻儿老小都大喊大叫道：鬼来啦！
English: When Dou Shaoqing entered the house, his wife, son and daughter all shouted, "The ghost has come!"

古文：窦细语其由，方知埋者是从人，乃店主卓牌之错误也。
现代文：鬼来啦！窦少卿仔细讲述了这件事情的经过后，家里才知道下葬的是随从仆人，如此大错是那家村店主人立碑刻字造成的啊！
English: The devil came! After Dou Shaoqing carefully recounted the course of this matter, the family only learned that it was the servant who was buried. Such a big mistake was caused by the owner of the village shop erecting a monument and engraving!

古文：遗忘
现代文：遗忘
English: Oblivion

古文：张利涉
现代文：张利涉
English: Zhang Lizang

古文：唐张利涉性多忘。
现代文：唐朝人张利涉记性不好，好忘事。
English: Zhang Li of the Tang Dynasty had a poor memory and was forgetful.

古文：解褐怀州参军，每聚会被召，必于笏上记之。
现代文：张利涉任怀州参军期间，每次开会被召见，都在手中的板笏上记下这件事。
English: During Zhang Li's military service in Waizhou, every time he was summoned to a meeting, he wrote it down on the tablet in his hand.

古文：时河内令耿仁惠邀之，怪其不至。
现代文：当时，有一次河内县令耿仁惠邀请他，奇怪他没有按期去。
English: At that time, Geng Renhui, the governor of Hanoi, once invited him, and it was surprising that he did not go as scheduled.

古文：亲就门致请，涉看笏曰：公何见顾？笏上无名。
现代文：于是，亲自登门来请他。张利涉看看手中的笏板说：笏板上并没有记上你的名字啊？
English: Therefore, he personally came to the door to invite him. Zhang Lizhan looked at the cutting board in his hand and said: Your name is not written on the cutting board?

古文：又一时昼寝惊，索马入州。
现代文：还有一次，张利涉白天睡觉忽然惊醒，急忙让手下为他备马，说是有急事要到州里去。
English: On another occasion, Zhang Li, who had been sleeping during the day, suddenly woke up and hurriedly asked his men to prepare a horse for him, saying that there was an urgent need to go to the countryside.

古文：扣刺使邓恽门，拜谢曰：闻公欲赐责，死罪？
现代文：张利涉骑马来到州里，直奔刺史邓恽府门，敲门而入，见到邓恽拜谢说：听说刺史要给予我死刑的处罚？
English: Zhang Li rode a horse to Zhuli and went straight to the gate of Dengye's residence, knocking on the door. When he saw Dengye Baixie, he said, "I heard that Dengye was going to give me the death penalty?

古文：邓恽曰：无此事。
现代文：刺史邓恽惊异地说：没有这样的事呀？
English: Surprised, Tang Shi Deng Yao said, "There is no such thing?"

古文：涉曰司功某甲言之。
现代文：张利涉说：司功甲某说的啊！
English: Zhang Lizhu said, "What Gong Jia said!

古文：恽大怒，乃呼州官棰，以甲间构。
现代文：邓恽大怒，于是喊来掌管笞刑的州官，让他将甲某以离间中伤的罪名，处以杖刑。
English: Deng Yao was furious, so he called the state official in charge of the caning, and asked him to punish A with a caning for the crime of slandering.

古文：将杖之，甲苦诉初无此语。
现代文：甲某听到这件事情后，苦苦哀求说他确实没有说过刺史要处张利涉死罪的话。
English: After A heard about this, he pleaded that he did not say that Zhang Li should be punished for the crime of murder.

古文：涉前请曰：望公舍之，涉恐是梦中见说耳。
现代文：这时，张利涉上前请求刺史邓恽说：望刺史大人恕甲某无罪。我恐怕是在睡梦中听到他说这样的话呀。
English: At this time, Zhang Li stepped forward to plead with Deng Yao, the stabber, saying, "Master Wang stabber, forgive A for his innocence. I'm afraid I heard him say this in my sleep."

古文：时人由是咸知其性理惛惑矣。
现代文：从此，人们都知道张利涉昏愦糊涂。
English: From then on, people knew that Zhang Li was delusional.

古文：阎玄一
现代文：阎玄一
English: Yan Xuan I

古文：唐三原县令阎玄一为人多忘。
现代文：唐朝时，三原县令阎玄一非常健忘。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Mihara County Governor Yan Xuan Yi was very forgetful.

古文：曾至州，于主人舍坐。
现代文：一次，阎玄一来到州里，坐在主人家中。
English: Once, Yan Xuan Yi came to the state and sat in the master's home.

古文：州佐史前过，以为县典也，呼欲杖之。
现代文：州里的佐史从这里走过，阎玄一错误地将州里佐史记认成县里的佐史，招呼过来想要鞭打他。
English: Sashi from the prefecture passed by here, and Yan Xuan Yi mistakenly identified Sashi from the prefecture as Sashi from the county, and called him over to whip him.

古文：典曰：某是州佐也。
现代文：走过来的这位县佐说：我是州佐啊。
English: The prefectural governor who came by said, "I'm a prefectural governor.

古文：一惭谢而止。
现代文：阎玄一羞愧地道歉，才算了结。
English: Yan Xuan made a shamefaced apology, and that was the end of it.

古文：须臾县典至，一疑其州佐也，执手引坐。
现代文：过了一会儿，县佐来了。阎玄一又疑心他是州佐，拉着来人的手让他坐下。
English: After a while, the prefectural deputy arrived. Yan Xuan Yi suspected that he was a prefectural deputy, and took the man's hand and asked him to sit down.

古文：典曰：某是县佐也。
现代文：来人说：我是县佐啊！
English: People say: I'm a prefectural governor!

古文：又愧而上。
现代文：阎玄一又羞愧万分。
English: Yan Xuan was once again filled with shame.

古文：曾有人传其兄书者，止于阶下。
现代文：还有一次，一个人稍给阎玄一一封他哥哥寄给他的信，站在台阶下面。
English: Another time, a man handed Yan Xuan a letter sent to him by his brother, standing at the bottom of the steps.

古文：俄而里胥自录人到，一索杖。遂鞭送书人数下。
现代文：过了一会儿，乡吏白录人来了，阎玄一向乡吏要来棍杖，就鞭打给他送信的这个人。
English: After a while, the village official, Bai Luo, arrived. Yan Xuan had been waiting for the village official to come with a cane, so he whipped the man who had sent him the letter.

古文：其人不知所以，讯之。
现代文：这位送书人一点也不知道因为什么原因挨了打，问阎玄一。
English: The deliverer did not know at all why he was beaten, so he asked Yan Xuan.

古文：一曰：吾大错。
现代文：阎玄一说：我打错了。
English: Yan Xuan said, "I made a mistake.

古文：顾直典，向宅取杯酒愞疮。
现代文：这时遇到值班的县佐从这里路过。阎玄一让县佐到他家里取来一杯酒为被打的人，暖暖疮伤。
English: At this time, Yan Xuan met the county aide on duty who was passing by. Yan Xuan asked the county aide to go to his house to get a glass of wine for the person who was beaten, to warm the wound.

古文：良久，典持酒至，一既忘其取酒，复忘其被杖者。
现代文：过了许久，县佐拿来了酒，阎玄一完全忘记了让县佐取酒这件事情，也忘了被他鞭打的送信人。
English: After a long time, Xian Satoru brought wine. Yan Xuan Yi completely forgot the matter of letting Xian Satoru take the wine, and also forgot the sender who was whipped by him.

古文：因便赐直典饮之。
现代文：于是就将酒赏赐给了县佐喝。
English: As a result, the award was given to the prefectural sake brewer.

古文：郭务静
现代文：郭务静
English: Guo Wujing

古文：唐沧州南皮县丞郭务静，初上，典王庆通判案。
现代文：唐朝时，沧州南皮县丞郭务静，刚上任时，正值县佐王庆通审理一件案子。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Guo Wujing, the county magistrate of Nanpi County, Cangzhou, was just taking office when a case was being heard by the county magistrate of Sao Qing Tong.

古文：静曰：尔何姓？
现代文：郭务静问王庆道：你姓什么？
English: Guo Wujing asked Wang Qingdao: What is your surname?

古文：庆曰：姓王。
现代文：王庆通回答说：我姓王。
English: Wang Qingtong replied: My surname is Wang.

古文：须臾，庆又来，又问何姓。
现代文：过了一会儿，王庆通又来到县丞郭务静这儿。郭务静又问：你姓什么？
English: After a while, Wang Qingtong came to the county magistrate Guo Mujing again. Guo Mujing also asked: What is your surname?

古文：庆又曰：姓王。
现代文：王庆通回答说：我姓王。
English: Wang Qingtong replied: My surname is Wang.

古文：静怪愕良久，仰看庆曰：南皮佐史惣姓王？
现代文：郭务静惊异愣住了好一会儿，仰头看着王庆通，问：南皮县佐史总共有几个姓王的？
English: Guo Wujing froze in surprise for a while, looking up at Wang Qingtong. Q: How many surnames does Wang have in Sashi, Nanpi County?

古文：张守信
现代文：张守信
English: Zhang Shoushin

古文：唐张守信为余杭太守，善富阳尉张瑶，假借之，瑶不知其故。
现代文：唐朝时，余杭太宗张守信，非常友善富阳县尉张瑶，对待张瑶特别宽容。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Shuxin, the Yuhang Taizong, was very friendly with Zhang Ye, the Fuyang County lieutenant, and treated Zhang Ye with special tolerance.

古文：则使录事参军张遇，达意于瑶，将妻之以女。
现代文：张瑶不知道太守为什么对自己这样好。张守信就让录事参军张遇转告张瑶，说他想将自己的女儿嫁给张瑶作妻子。
English: Zhang Shuxin did not know why the Emperor was so kind to him. Zhang Shuxin asked Zhang Yu, who had enlisted in the army, to tell Zhang Xuan that he wanted to marry his daughter to Zhang Xuan as his wife.

古文：瑶喜，吉期有日矣。
现代文：张瑶听了后非常高兴，认为自己这回娶妻的日期有指望了。
English: Zhang Ye was very happy after hearing this, and thought that there was hope for the date of his marriage this time.

古文：然私相闻也，郡县未知之。
现代文：然而这些都是在暗中悄悄进行的，从郡府到两县的县衙，都不知道这件事情。
English: However, all of this was done quietly and secretly, and no one from the prefectural government to the county governments of the two counties knew about it.

古文：守信为女具衣装，女之保姆问曰：欲以女适何人？
现代文：张守信积极为女儿准备陪嫁的服装。女儿的保姆问：准备将女儿嫁给谁呀？
English: Zhang Shuxin is actively preparing her daughter's wedding attire. Her daughter's nanny asked: Who are you going to marry off your daughter to?

古文：守信以告。
现代文：张守信告诉保姆女婿是谁。
English: Zhang Shouxin told the nanny who the son-in-law was.

古文：保姆曰：女婿姓张，不知主君之女何姓？
现代文：保姆说：女婿姓张，不知太守的女儿姓什么啊？
English: The nanny said, "My son-in-law's surname is Zhang. I don't know what the surname of the daughter of the Empress Dowager is."

古文：吾窃惑焉。
现代文：我私下感到疑惑？
English: Do I privately wonder?

古文：守信乃悟，亟止之。
现代文：张守信这才醒悟，立即停止这门婚事。
English: It was only then that Zhang Shoushin came to his senses and immediately stopped the marriage.

古文：李眖
现代文：李眖
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐殿中侍御史李逢年自左迁后，稍进汉州雒县令。
现代文：唐朝时，殿中侍郎李逢年被贬职后，过了一段时间又授以汉州雒县县令。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the court chamberlain Li Feng was demoted, and after a period of time, he was awarded the title of Han Prefecture.

古文：逢年有吏才，蜀之采访使常委以推按焉。
现代文：李逢年很有治理政务的才干。蜀道掌管刑狱与监察州县官吏的官员，经常委派他代为审理狱案。
English: Li Fengnian is very talented in governing government affairs. Shu Dao, the official in charge of prisons and supervising state and county officials, often appoints him to hear prison cases on his behalf.

古文：逢年妻，中丞郑昉之女也，情志不合，去之。
现代文：李逢年的妻子，是御史中丞郑昉的女儿，因为感情性格不合，而被他休弃婚。
English: Li Fengnian's wife, the daughter of the imperial historian Zheng Yao, was divorced by him because of emotional incompatibility.

古文：及在蜀城，谓益府户曹李眖曰：逢年家无内主，昉落难堪。
现代文：一次，李逢年来到蜀城成都后，对益州府户曹李眖说：我现在家里没有一个主事的婆娘，空落孤单日子很难过。
English: Once, after Li Feng came to Chengdu from Shucheng, he said to Cao Lijuan, a resident of Yizhou Prefecture: I don't have a bossy mother-in-law at home now, and it's sad to be left alone.

古文：儿女长成，理须婚娶。
现代文：况且，儿女们都长大自立了，理应再婚娶个婆娘。
English: Besides, my children have grown up and become independent, so I should remarry and marry a mother-in-law.

古文：弟既相狎，幸为逢年求一妻焉。
现代文：老弟既然跟我不错，非常希望你能为我介绍一个婆良啊！
English: Since my brother is good with me, I really hope you can introduce me to a grandmother!

古文：此都官僚女之与妹，纵再醮者，亦可论之，幸留意焉。
现代文：署中同僚的女儿或者妹子，纵然是离婚再嫁的，也可以考虑，希望老弟为我留心访查访查。
English: The daughter or younger sister of a colleague in the department, even if she is divorced and remarried, can also be considered. I hope my brother will pay attention to my visit and investigation.

古文：眖曰：诺。复又访之于眖。
现代文：李眖回答说：行啊，我一定好好物色一位嫂子。
English: Li Yao replied: All right, I will definitely find a sister-in-law.

古文：眖率略人也，乃造逢年曰：兵曹李札，甚名家也。
现代文：后来，李逢年又一次拜访李眖谈起这件事。李眖是个性情粗疏马虎的人。过了一段时间到李逢年这儿说：兵曹李札，是蜀中的名门望族。
English: Later, Li Fengnian once again visited Li Gan to discuss the matter. Li Gan was a rough and sloppy person. After a while, he came to Li Fengnian and said: "Commander Li Zha, is a famous and respected family in Shu.

古文：札妹甚美，闻于蜀城。
现代文：李扎有一位妹妹，长得非常美貌。
English: Liza has a younger sister who is very beautiful.

古文：曾适元氏，其夫寻卒。
现代文：听说在成都曾嫁给元氏为妻，丈夫刚刚死去。
English: I heard that she had been married to Mr. Yuan in Chengdu, but her husband had just died.

古文：资装亦厚，从婢且二十人。
现代文：她的嫁妆也非常丰厚，单是陪嫁的丫环就有二十人。
English: Her dowry was also very rich, with twenty maids of honour alone.

古文：兄能娶之乎？
现代文：老哥愿意娶此女为妻吗？
English: Is my brother willing to marry this woman?

古文：逢年许之，令眖报李札。
现代文：李逢年高兴地答应了，并让李眖将自己的意思转告给李扎。
English: Li Fengnian happily agreed, and asked Li Yao to convey his intention to Li Zha.

古文：札自造逢年谢。
现代文：李扎得到这一消息后，亲自前来拜谢李逢年。
English: After Li Zha received this news, he personally came to thank Li Fengnian.

古文：明日，请至宅。其夜，逢年喜，寝未曙而兴。
现代文：第二天，李扎请李逢年到他家去小住几日。
English: The next day, Li Zha asked Li Feng to come to his house to stay for a few days.

古文：严饰毕，顾步阶除而独言曰：李札之妹，门地若斯。
现代文：当天晚上，李逢年非常高兴，天还没亮就醒来了。
English: That evening, Li Fengnian was very happy and woke up before dawn.

古文：虽曾适人，年幼且美。家又富贵，何幸如之。言再三，忽惊难曰：李眖过矣，又误于人。
现代文：他穿好衣服，一个人走出屋门，在庭院中边踱步边自言自语地说：李扎的妹妹，门第又是这样相当。年轻而又美貌动人，家里又富贵丰裕李逢年反复叼念着，忽然惊醒过来，难受地说：李眖犯了个大错误啊，真是误人不浅。
English: He got dressed, walked out of the door by himself, and paced around the courtyard, saying to himself: Liza's younger sister, she's from the same family. She's young and beautiful, and her family is rich and affluent. Li Fan repeatedly thought about this, and suddenly woke up and said, "Li Yao has made a big mistake. He's really misled people."

古文：今所论亲，为复何姓，怪哉！
现代文：他给我提的这门亲事，我们男女双方为什么都姓李啊！
English: He brought up the subject of marriage to me. Why are both of us surnamed Li?

古文：因策马到府庭。
现代文：真是奇怪。于是，李逢年立即骑马回到公堂上。
English: So Li Fengnian immediately rode back to the courtroom.

古文：李眖进曰：兄今日过札妹乎。
现代文：过了一会儿，进入公堂，问：老哥今天就娶李扎的妹妹吗？
English: After a while, he entered the courtroom and asked, "Is my brother going to marry Liza's sister today?"

古文：逢年不应，眖曰：事变矣。
现代文：李逢年低头不语。李眖问：怎么，出了什么差错了吗？
English: Li Fengnian bowed his head and did not speak. Li Yao asked: Why, did something go wrong?

古文：逄年曰：君思札妹乎，为复何姓。
现代文：李逢年抬起头来说：我在想，李扎的妹妹为什么跟我一个姓呢？
English: Li Fengnian looked up and said, "I'm thinking, why does Liza's sister have the same last name as me?"

古文：眖惊而退。
现代文：李眖听了后方惊悟，离开公堂，遇见李扎。
English: After listening to the surprise from the rear, Li Yao left the courtroom and met Li Zha.

古文：遇李札，札曰：侍御今日见过乎，已为地矣。
现代文：李扎问：李侍御你今天见过他了吗？你已经替我说通了吧。
English: Liza asked: Did you see him today, Master Li? You've made my point for me.

古文：眖曰：吾大误耳，但知求好壻，都不思其姓氏。
现代文：李眖说：我犯了一个大错误。只是想为令妹找个好女婿，都没有想到李侍御跟令妹同姓啊！
English: Li Yao said, "I made a big mistake. I just wanted to find a good son-in-law for my sister. I didn't think that Li Zhi Gu had the same surname as my sister!"

古文：札大惊，惋恨之。
现代文：李扎听了后也大为吃惊，连连表示惋惜遗憾。
English: After listening to Li Zha, he was also very surprised and repeatedly expressed regret.

古文：张藏用
现代文：张藏用
English: For hanging and storing

古文：唐青州临朐丞张藏用，性既鲁钝，又弱于神。
现代文：唐朝时，青州临朐县丞张藏用，性情愚鲁迟钝，又有些神经质。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Zang, the governor of Linyi County in Qingzhou, was dull and stupid, and somewhat neurotic.

古文：尝召一木匠，十召不至。
现代文：一次，张藏用让人请一位木匠，召呼了十次也没有来。
English: On one occasion, Zhang Zangyu had a carpenter invited, but he did not come after calling him ten times.

古文：藏用大怒，使擒之。
现代文：张藏用异常恼怒，派人将这个木匠捉来。
English: Zhang Zang was extremely angry and sent someone to catch the carpenter.

古文：匠既到，适会邻县令，使人送书，遗藏用。
现代文：这个木匠刚到县衙，正赶上邻县县令派人送书给张藏用。
English: The carpenter had just arrived at the county government and was just in time for the neighboring county to send someone to send books to Zhang Zanglu.

古文：藏用方怒解，木匠又走。
现代文：张藏用边生气边折开书信看。
English: Zhang Zangyong frowned as he opened and read the letter.

古文：读书毕，便令剥送书者。
现代文：这时候，被捉来的木匠悄悄离开县衙溜走了。
English: At this time, the carpenter who was caught quietly left the county and slipped away.

古文：笞之至十，送书人谢杖。
现代文：张藏用读完书信后，便命令差役剥去送书人的衣服，打十板子。
English: After Zhang Zangyong finished reading the letter, he ordered the policeman to strip the sender of his clothes and beat him severely.

古文：请曰：某为明府送书，纵书人之意忤明府，使者何罪？
现代文：送书人谢过杖刑后，问：我是给县丞您送书的邻县衙役，纵然是写信人独犯了县丞您，我这个送信的使者有什么罪呢？
English: After the sender thanked him for the cane punishment, he asked: I am a neighboring county magistrate who sent a letter to you, even if the letter writer only committed you, what is the crime of me, the messenger who sent the letter?

古文：藏用乃知其误，谢曰：适怒匠人，不意误笞君耳。
现代文：张藏用才知道自己错打了人，向送书人表示歉意，说：刚才我是跟那个木匠生气，无意间误打了使君啊！
English: Only then did Zhang Zangyong realize that he had hit someone by mistake, and he apologized to the person who had sent him the books, saying, "Just now I was angry with that carpenter, and I accidentally hit the messenger!

古文：命里正取饮一器，以饮送书人，而别更视事。
现代文：让里正赶快拿来一坛酒，送给被打的送书人饮用。之后，又去处理别的公务去了。
English: He was rushing to fetch a jug of wine to give to the beaten deliveryman, and then went to attend to other business.

古文：忽见里正，指酒问曰：此中何物？
现代文：过了一会儿，张藏用看见里正手捧一坛酒走过来，指着坛子问：这里盛的是什么？
English: After a while, Zhang Zang walked over with a bowl of wine in his right hand, pointing to the bowl and asking: What's in here?

古文：里正曰：酒。
现代文：里正回答说：酒啊！
English: Li Zheng replied: "Wine!

古文：藏用曰：何妨饮之。
现代文：张藏用说：你就将它喝了吧。
English: Zhang Zangyong said, "Just drink it."

古文：里正拜而饮之。
现代文：里正拜谢后，打开坛子喝酒。
English: After bowing, Li Zheng opened the jar to drink.

古文：藏用遂入户，送书者竟不得酒，扶杖而归。
现代文：张藏用回到县衙后，被打的送信人左等右等也不见有人送酒给他喝，只好拄着拐杖一瘸一拐地走了。
English: After Zhang Zangyong returned to the county magistrate's office, the beaten messenger did not see anyone give him wine to drink, so he had to limp away on crutches.

