古文：昭王既息民缮兵，复欲伐赵。武安君曰： 不可。 
现代文：秦昭王在百姓得到休养生息、兵器车辆得到修整之后，又想攻打赵国。武安君说： 不可以攻打赵国。 
English: After the people had rested and recuperated, and the weapons and vehicles had been repaired, Qin Zhao Wang wanted to attack Zhao again. Wu Anjun said: You cannot attack Zhao.

古文：王曰： 前年国虚民饥，君不量百姓之力，求益军粮以灭赵。
现代文：秦王说： 前年国库空虚百姓受饥，您不考虑百姓的负担能力，要求增调军粮消灭赵国。
English: King Qin said: The previous year, the treasury was empty and the people were starving. You did not consider the people's ability to pay and demanded an increase in military rations to destroy Zhao.

古文：今寡人息民以养士，蓄积粮食，三军之俸有倍于前，而曰 不可 ，其说何也？ 
现代文：如今寡人休养百姓来供养士兵，蓄积粮食，三军将士的俸禄超过从前一倍，而您却说 不可以进攻赵国 ，这种说法有什么原因吗？ 
English: Nowadays, there are too few people to support the people to support the soldiers and accumulate grain. The salaries of the soldiers of the three armies have more than doubled, but you say that it is not possible to attack Zhao, is there any reason for this statement?

古文：武安君曰： 长平之事，秦军大尅，赵军大破；秦人欢喜，赵人畏惧。
现代文：武安君说： 长平之战，秦军大胜，赵军大败。秦国人欢喜，赵国人害怕。
English: Wu Anjun said: In the Changping War, the Qin Army won a great victory, and the Zhao Army lost a great defeat. The people of Qin were happy, and the people of Zhao were afraid.

古文：秦民之死者厚葬，伤者厚养，劳者相飨，饮食铺餽，以靡其财；赵人之死者不得收，伤者不得疗，涕泣相哀，勠力同忧，耕田疾作，以生其财。
现代文：秦国百姓战死的得到厚葬，受伤的得刭了特殊的照顾，劳苦的饮酒解乏，吃饱喝足并得到馈饷，消费掉国家的资财。赵国战死的人得不到收殓，受伤的得不到治疗，哭泣哀嚎，尽力共同分担忧患，加紧耕田劳作多生资财。
English: The people of Qin who died in the war were given a rich burial, the injured were given special care, the hard-working drank to relieve fatigue, ate and drank enough and were fed, and consumed the country's assets. The people of Zhao who died in the war were not received, the injured were not treated, wept and mourned, and tried their best to share the worries and sufferings, and intensified their farm work to increase their assets.

古文：今王发军，虽倍其前，臣料赵国守备，亦以十倍矣。
现代文：如今大王能够派出的军队虽然超过从前的一倍，臣下料想赵国守备国家的军队也会超出原来的十倍。
English: Although the king can now send more than twice as many troops as before, the vassals expect that the army of Zhao to defend the country will also exceed the original ten times.

古文：赵自长平已来，君臣忧惧，早朝晏退，卑辞重币，四面出嫁，结亲燕、魏，连好齐、楚，积虑并心，备秦为务。
现代文：赵国自长平之战以来，君臣忧虑恐惧，早上很早上朝，晚上很晚退朝，用低下的言辞和厚重的礼物，四面派出使者向诸侯求和，同燕、魏两国结为同盟，同齐、楚两国连成伙伴，处心积虑，把防范秦国当作最要紧的事。
English: Since the Battle of Changping, Zhao's princes and ministers have been worried and fearful. They withdrew from the court very early in the morning and very late in the evening. With low-key words and heavy gifts, they sent envoys to the princes on all sides to sue for peace. They formed an alliance with Yan and Wei, and a partnership with Qi and Chu. They were careful and considered the prevention of Qin as the most important thing.

古文：其国内实，其交外成。
现代文：赵国国内殷实，外交成功。
English: Zhao's domestic affluence and diplomatic success.

古文：当今之时，赵未可伐也。 
现代文：这个时候，是不可以攻打赵国的。 
English: At this time, it is not allowed to attack Zhao.

古文：王曰： 寡人既以兴师矣。 
现代文：秦王说； 寡人已经准备好发兵了。 
English: King Qin said, "Many people are ready to send troops."

古文：乃使五校大夫王陵将而伐赵。
现代文：于是派五大夫王陵为将进攻赵国。
English: Therefore, he sent the Five Great Kings to attack Zhao.

古文：陵战失利，亡五校。
现代文：王陵作战失利，连军营都丢了。
English: The battle of Wangling was a failure, and even the military camp was lost.

古文：王欲使武安君，武安君称疾不行。
现代文：秦王想派武安君出战，武安君称病不出。
English: King Qin wanted to send Wu Anjun to fight, but Wu Anjun said he was too sick to go.

古文：王乃使应侯往见武安君，责之曰： 楚，地方五千里，持戟百万。君前率数万之众入楚，拔鄢、郢，焚其庙，东至竟陵，楚人震恐，东徙而不敢西向。
现代文：秦王就派应侯去探望武安君，责备他说： 楚国土地方圆五千里，持戟的士卒上百万，您从前率几万人的军队攻入楚国，攻克鄢、郢两地，焚毁楚王的宗庙，东面攻到竞陵，楚国人感到震惊恐慌，向东迁徒，不敢向西进犯。
English: King Qin sent an envoy to visit Wu Anjun and scolded him, saying, "The territory of Chu is five thousand miles in circumference, and there are millions of soldiers who hold the scepter. You once led an army of tens of thousands of people to invade Chu, conquer the two places of Qi and Qi, burn down the ancestral temple of King Chu, and attack the competing mausoleum in the east. The people of Chu were shocked and panicked, migrated to the east, and dared not attack the west.

古文：韩、魏相率，兴兵甚众，君所将之不能半之，而与战之于伊阙，大破二国之军，流血漂卤，斩首二十四万。韩、魏以故至今称东藩。
现代文：韩、魏两国相继发兵，动用的军队很多，您所率领的军队，不到韩、魏两国军队的一半，而您却同它们在伊阙大战，大败了这两个国家的军队，死亡者的血能漂起作战的大盾，斩下敌人二十四万首级，韩、魏两国因为这个缘故至今自称是秦国东面的藩国。
English: Han and Wei sent troops one after another, and used a lot of troops. The army you led was less than half of the armies of Han and Wei, but you fought with them in the Yili War and defeated the armies of these two countries. The blood of the dead could float the great shield of war and cut off 240,000 heads of the enemy. For this reason, Han and Wei still claim to be the easternmost provinces of Qin.

古文：此君之功，天下莫不闻。
现代文：这是您的功劳，天下没有谁没听说的。
English: This is to your credit. There is no one in the world who has not heard of it.

古文：今赵卒之死于长平者已十七、八，其国虚弱，是以寡人大发军，人数倍于赵国之众，愿使君将，必欲灭之矣。
现代文：如今赵国土卒在长平之战中死去的，已有十之七、八，他们的国家很虚弱，因此寡人大举发兵，人数超过赵国军队的一倍，希望您能为将，一定能够灭掉赵国。
English: Today, seven out of ten Zhao soldiers have died in the Battle of Changping. Their country is very weak, so many people have sent troops, more than double the number of Zhao troops. I hope you will be able to destroy Zhao.

古文：君尝以寡击众，取胜如神，况以强击弱，以众击寡乎？ 
现代文：您曾以少击众，仿若神兵降世取得了胜利，何况现在是以强击弱，以众攻少呢？ 
English: You have achieved victory by striking the masses with a few, as if a divine soldier had descended into the world. How much more so now that you are striking the weak with force and attacking the few with the many?

古文：武安君曰： 是时楚王恃其国大，不恤其政，而群臣相妬以功，谄谀用事，良臣斥疏，百姓心离，城池不修，既无畏臣，又无守备。故起所以得引兵深入，多倍城邑，发梁焚舟以专民，以掠于郊野，以足军食。
现代文：武安君说： 当时楚王依仗国家强大，不体察朝政，群臣因为争功互相嫉妒，阿谀奉迎者受到重用，好的大臣被排斥疏远，百姓离心离德，城墙和护城河不加修整，由于楚国已经没有好的大臣执掌朝政，又没有常备不懈的守军，所以我能够领兵深入楚国，占领很多城邑，我又下令折断桥梁，焚毁木船使士卒专心作战，并在城邑的郊外掠得粮食补足军粮。
English: Wu Anjun said: At that time, King Chu relied on the strength of the country and did not pay attention to the court politics. The ministers were jealous of each other because of the competition for merits. The flatterers were used heavily. The good ministers were excluded and alienated. The people were alienated from Germany. The city walls and moats were not repaired. Since there was no good minister in charge of the court politics in Chu and there was no permanent and unremitting defense force, I was able to lead the troops deep into Chu and occupy many cities and towns. I also ordered the bridges to be broken, the wooden ships to be burned, the soldiers to concentrate on fighting, and the grain to supplement the

古文：当此之时，秦中士卒，以军中为家，将帅为父母，不约而亲，不谋而信，一心同功，死不旋踵。
现代文：正在这个时候，秦军中的士卒以军队为家，把将帅当作父母，不用约束彼此就相互亲近，不用商量彼此就相互信任，一心想着同获战功，奋勇向前死不后退。
English: At this time, the soldiers in the Qin Army took the army as their home and regarded the generals as their parents. They did not need to restrain each other, they were close to each other, they did not need to discuss with each other, they trusted each other, and they were all thinking about winning military exploits together.

古文：楚人自战其地，咸顾其家，各有散心，莫有斗志。是以能有功也。
现代文：楚国人在自己的土地上作战，都顾念自己的家室，各自都有不同的想法，毫无斗志，因此我能取得战功。
English: The people of Chu fought on their own land. They all cared about their families. Each of them had different ideas and no fighting spirit. Therefore, I was able to win the war.

古文：伊阙之战，韩孤顾魏，不欲先用其众。
现代文：伊阙之战，韩国力单势孤，只考虑利用魏国，不想先使用自己的军队。
English: In the Battle of Yili, South Korea was all alone, and only considered using Wei, not wanting to use its own troops first.

古文：魏恃韩之锐，欲推以为锋。
现代文：魏国依赖韩军训练有素，想把韩国军队推到前面做先锋。
English: Relying on the well-trained Korean army, Wei wanted to push the Korean army to the front as the vanguard.

古文：二军争便之力不同，是以臣得设疑兵，以待韩阵，专军并锐，触魏之不意。
现代文：两国军队争夺方便力量不均衡，因此臣下才能设下疑兵与韩军对阵，另派精锐军队，冲击魏军出其不意。
English: The forces of the two countries were not evenly matched, so the vassals were only able to set up doubtful soldiers to oppose the Korean army, and sent elite troops to attack the Wei army by surprise.

古文：魏军既败，韩军自溃，乘胜逐北，以是之故能立功。
现代文：魏军已经失败，韩军自然也就溃退了，乘胜追击败北的军队，臣下因为这个缘故才能立下战功。
English: The Wei army had already failed, and the Korean army naturally retreated, taking advantage of the victory to chase and defeat the northern army. Because of this, the vassals were able to win the war.

古文：皆计利形势，自然之理，何神之有哉！
现代文：这都是因为考虑了地形是否有利、军队的形势如何，顺理成章，哪有什么神兵啊！
English: This is all due to the consideration of whether the terrain is favorable and how the situation of the army is, so it is logical to conclude that there are no god soldiers!

古文：今秦破赵军于长平，不遂以时乘其振惧而灭之，畏而释之，使得耕稼以益蓄积，养孤长幼，以益其众，缮治兵甲以益其强，增城浚池以益其固。主折节以下其臣，臣推礼以下死士。
现代文：如今秦军在长平击败赵军，不赶快抓紧时机趁着赵国恐惧万分的时候灭亡赵国，看到赵国畏惧屈服就放弃灭赵，使赵国能够抓紧耕种增加储备，抚养遗孤，让幼儿长大以扩充军队，加高城墙，疏浚护城河使城邑更加坚固，国君委屈自己亲近大臣，大臣不惜生命亲近效死力的士兵。
English: Now the Qin army has defeated the Zhao army in Changping. They did not hurry to seize the opportunity to take advantage of the fear of Zhao to perish Zhao. When they saw that Zhao was afraid to give in, they gave up exterminating Zhao, so that Zhao could pay close attention to farming to increase reserves, raise orphans, let children grow up to expand the army, raise city walls, dredge moats to make cities and towns more solid. The king wronged himself to be close to the minister, and the minister did not hesitate to be close to the soldiers.

古文：至于平原君之属，皆令妻妾补缝于行伍之间。
现代文：至于平原君那样的人，都让自己的妻妾到军队中为将士们缝缝补补。
English: As for people like Hirahara-kun, they all send their wives and concubines to the army to patch things up for the soldiers.

古文：臣人一心，上下同力，犹勾践困于会稽之时也。
现代文：臣民一心，上下共同努力，如同勾践被困在会稽出上的时候，趁现在去攻打赵国，赵国一定会固守城邑。
English: The subjects are united and work together, as if they were trapped in a meeting, taking advantage of the time to attack Zhao. Zhao will definitely hold on to the city.

古文：以合伐之，赵必固守，挑其军战，必不肯出。
现代文：向赵军挑战，赵军一定不肯出城。围困国都，一定不能攻克。
English: Challenging the Zhao army, the Zhao army will certainly refuse to leave the city. The besieged capital must not be conquered.

古文：围其国都，必不可克。
现代文：攻打其它城邑，也一定不能攻下。
English: If you attack other towns, you will not be able to capture them.

古文：攻其列城，必未可拔。
现代文：在城邑的郊外抢掠，一定会一无所获。
English: Looting on the outskirts of a town is a sure way to get nothing.

古文：掠其郊野，必无所得。兵出无功，诸侯生心，外救必至。
现代文：出兵不能获得战动，诸侯们产生异心，赵国的救兵必然会赶来。
English: The dispatch of troops could not gain momentum, the lords were alienated, and Zhao's rescuers would inevitably arrive.

古文：臣见其害，未睹其利。
现代文：臣下只见到攻赵的害处，没看到好处。
English: The vassals only saw the harm of attacking Zhao, but not the benefits.

古文：又病，未能行。 
现代文：臣下现在又有病，不能去。 
English: My vassal is ill again and can't go.

古文：应侯惭而退，以言于王。
现代文：应侯惭愧退了出去，把武安君的话告诉了秦王。
English: Ashamed, Ying Hou retreated and told King Qin about Wu Anjun's words.

古文：王曰： 微白起，吾不能灭赵乎？ 
现代文：秦王说： 没有白起，我就不能灭掉赵国了吗？ 
English: The King of Qin said, "Without starting from scratch, can I not eliminate Zhao Province?"

古文：复益发军，更使王齕代王陵伐赵。围邯郸八、九月，死伤者众，而弗下。
现代文：又增派军队，另派王龅代替王陵进攻赵国，秦军围困邯郸八、九个月，死伤众多，仍没有攻下邯郸。
English: He also dispatched additional troops, and sent Wang Qian to attack Zhao Province in place of the royal tomb. The Qin Army besieged Qian for eight or nine months, causing many deaths and injuries, but still failed to capture Qian.

古文：赵王出轻锐以寇其后，秦数不利。
现代文：赵王派出轻锐的小股军队骚扰秦军后方，秦军出战多次不利。
English: Zhao Wang sent a small group of light troops to harass the rear of the Qin Army, and the Qin Army was unfavorable many times.

古文：武安君曰： 不听臣计，今果如何？ 
现代文：武安君说： 不听我的计策，现在结果怎样？ 
English: Wu Anjun said, "You didn't listen to my strategy, so what's the result now?"

古文：王闻之怒，因见武安君，强起之，曰： 君虽病，强为寡人卧而将之。
现代文：秦王听说后大怒，于是去见武安君，逼着武安君起床，说： 您虽然有病，也得勉强自己卧着为寡人带兵。
English: Hearing of this, King Qin flew into a rage, so he went to see Wu Anjun, forced Wu Anjun to get up, and said: Although you are ill, you have to force yourself to lie down and lead the soldiers.

古文：有功，寡人之愿，将加重于君。
现代文：有了战功，这是寡人希望的，会重赏您。
English: If you succeed in the war, which few people hope for, you will be rewarded.

古文：如君不行，寡人恨君。 
现代文：如果您不去，寡人就会怨恨您。 
English: If you don't go, people will resent you.

古文：武安君顿首曰： 臣知行虽无功，得免于罪。
现代文：武安君叩头曰： 臣下知道去了即使没有战功，也可以免除罪过。
English: Wu'an Jun's flunky said: The vassals know that even if they do not have any war achievements, they can be absolved of their sins.

古文：虽不行无罪，不免于诛。
现代文：如果不去，即便没有罪过，也免不了被杀。
English: If you don't go, even if you're not guilty, you'll be killed.

古文：然惟愿大王贤臣愚计，释赵养民，以诸侯之变。
现代文：然而臣下只是希望大王能够看一看臣下不高明的计策，放弃赵国，让百姓得到休养生息，以应付诸侯之间出现的变故。
English: However, the vassals only hoped that the great king would take a look at the unskillful strategies of the vassals, abandon the state of Zhao, and allow the people to rest and recuperate in order to cope with the changes that occurred between the princes.

古文：抚其恐惧，伐其骄慢，诛灭无道，以令诸侯，天下可定，何必以赵为先乎？
现代文：安抚恐惧的，攻打傲慢的，诛灭无道的，以此来号令诸侯，天下就可以平定，为什么一定要把赵国作为首先进攻的对象呢？
English: To pacify the fearful, to attack the arrogant, to annihilate the senseless, this is the way to order the princes, the world can be pacified, why must Zhao Guo be the first target of attack?

古文：此所谓为一臣屈而胜天下也。
现代文：这就是所说的被一个大臣屈服却战胜天下人。
English: This is what is meant by being bowed down by a minister but defeating the world.

古文：大王若不察臣愚计，必欲快心于赵，以致臣罪，此亦所谓胜一臣而为天下屈者也。
现代文：大王如果不详察臣下的愚计，一定要在赵国得到心理上的满足，以致于降罪臣下，这也是所说的战胜一个大臣，却被天下人屈服。
English: If the great king does not scrutinize the follies of his vassals, he must get psychological satisfaction in Zhao, so that he surrenders to his vassals, which is also called defeating a minister, but being bowed down by the world.

古文：夫胜一臣之严焉，孰若胜天下之威大耶？
现代文：战胜一个大臣的威严，同战胜天下人的威严相比，哪个更大呢？
English: Which is greater, to overcome the majesty of a minister, or to overcome the majesty of men?

古文：臣闻明主爱其国，忠臣爱其名。
现代文：臣下听说贤明的君王爱惜国家，忠诚的大臣爱惜名誉。
English: Subjects have heard that a wise king cherishes his country, and a loyal minister cherishes his honor.

古文：破国不可复完，死卒不可复生。
现代文：破碎的国家不可能重获完整，死去的人不可能死而复生。
English: A broken country cannot be made whole again, and the dead cannot be brought back to life.

古文：臣宁伏受重诛而死，不忍为辱军之将。
现代文：臣下宁愿受重罚而死，不忍做蒙受耻辱的军队的将领。
English: A vassal would rather be punished severely and die than be the general of a humiliated army.

古文：愿大王察之。 
现代文：希望大王详察。 
English: Let's hope the emperor is watching closely.

古文：王不答而去。
现代文：秦王没有答话就走了。
English: Qin Wang left without answering.

