古文：起昭阳作噩十二月，尽强圉赤奋若六月，凡三年有奇。
现代文：起昭阳作噩十二月，尽强圉赤奋若六月，凡三年有奇。
English: If the sun rises in December and sets in June, every three years is a special year.

古文：均王上乾化三年
现代文：后梁均王乾化三年
English: Liang Junwang dried up three years later

古文：十二月，吴镇海节度使徐温、平卢节度使硃瑾帅诸将拒之，遇于赵步。
现代文：十二月，吴国镇海节度使徐温、平卢节度使朱瑾率领诸将抵御后梁王景仁，两军在赵步相遇。
English: In December, Xu Wen led the Zhenhai Festival of Wugu Province and Zhu Xi led the Pinglu Festival of Pinglu Province to resist King Liang Jingren, and the two armies met in Zhaobou.

古文：吴征兵未集，温以四千馀人与景仁战，不胜而却。
现代文：当时，吴国征集的士卒还未到齐，徐温率领着四千余士卒与王景仁交战。终因寡不敌众而战败退却。
English: At that time, the soldiers recruited by the State of Wu had not yet arrived, and Xu Wen led more than four thousand soldiers to fight against Wang Jingren. He was finally defeated and retreated because he was outnumbered.

古文：景仁引兵乘之，将及于隘，吴吏士皆失色，左骁卫大将军宛丘陈绍援枪大呼曰： 诱敌太深，可以进矣！ 
现代文：王景仁乘胜率兵追击，快追到险要的地方，吴国的官兵都吓得惊恐失色。这时，吴国的左骁卫大将军宛丘人陈绍举起枪来高声疾呼，说： 诱敌太深了，可以进攻了。 
English: Wang Jingren took advantage of the victory to lead his soldiers in pursuit. They soon reached the critical point, and the officers and soldiers of the State of Wu were terrified. At this time, Chen Shao, a man from the hills, raised his gun to the General of the Left Division of the National Guard of the State of Wu and shouted loudly, saying, "The enemy is too deep to be lured, so we can attack."

古文：跃马还斗，众随之，梁兵乃退。
现代文：于是他跃上战马，回头还击后梁军，吴国的士卒也跟着他一起与后梁军作战，后梁军才撤退。
English: So he leapt onto his war horse and turned around to fight back Houliang's army. The soldiers of Wuxi also followed him to fight Houliang's army. Houliang's army then retreated.

古文：温拊其背曰： 非子之智勇，吾几困矣！ 
现代文：事后徐温拍着陈绍的背说： 若不是你聪明勇敢，我们几乎就要陷入困境了。 
English: Afterwards, Xu Wen patted Chen Shaos back and said: If it wasn't for your cleverness and bravery, we would almost be in trouble.

古文：赐之金帛，绍悉以分麾下。
现代文：于是赏赐给陈绍很多金帛，陈绍全部赏赐分给部下。
English: As a result, Chen Shao was rewarded with many gold ingots, and Chen Shao distributed all the rewards to his subordinates.

古文：吴兵既集，复战于霍丘，梁兵大败。王景仁以数骑殿，吴人不敢逼。
现代文：吴国的军队征集起来以后，又与后梁军战于霍丘，结果后梁军大败，王景仁和几个骑兵走在队伍的后面，吴国的士卒不敢逼近。
English: After the army of the State of Wu was assembled, it fought with Hou Liang's army in Huoqiu. As a result, Hou Liang's army was defeated. Wang Jingren and several cavalrymen walked behind the team, and the soldiers of the State of Wu did not dare to approach.

古文：梁之渡淮而南也，表其可涉之津。霍丘守将硃景浮表于木，徙置深渊。
现代文：后梁军在渡过淮水向南撤退时，在水浅的渡津作了标志；吴军霍丘守将朱景将这些标志浮在木头上移到水深的地方。
English: After Liang's army crossed Huai Shui and retreated to the south, they made signs in the shallow water of Wuding; the Wu army's Huoqiu commander Zhu Jing floated these signs on wood to a place deep in the water.

古文：及梁兵败还，望表而涉，溺死者太半，吴人聚梁尸为京观于霍丘。
现代文：等到后梁军战败回逃的时候，都按照过河时设置的标志涉水渡河，结果被溺死的士卒有一半以上，吴国人把被溺死的后梁军尸体集中起来在霍丘封筑成高士家，以此来炫耀自己军队所取得的胜利。
English: When the Houliang army was defeated and fled back, they all waded across the river in accordance with the signs set up when crossing the river. As a result, more than half of the drowned soldiers were drowned. The people of Wu gathered the drowned corpses of the Houliang army and built them into a noble family in Huoqiu Feng, in order to show off the victory achieved by their army.

古文：庚午，晋王以周德威为卢龙节度使，兼侍中，以李嗣本为振武节度使。
现代文：庚午，晋王李存勖任命周德威为卢龙节度使兼侍中，任命李嗣本为振武节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the king of Jin, Li Cunxu, appointed Zhou Dewei as the Lulong Festival envoy and attendant, and appointed Li Shuxuben as the Zhenwu Festival envoy.

古文：燕主守光将奔沧州就刘守奇，涉寒，足肿，且迷失道。至燕乐之境，昼匿坑谷，数日不食，令妻祝氏乞食于田父张师造家。
现代文：燕主刘守光被周德威击败后，将要向南投奔沧州刘守奇，由于步行过河，水寒冷，脚肿了，而且迷失了道路，行至燕乐县境内时，白天藏匿在谷之中，好几天都没有吃上饭，就让他的妻子祝氏到老农张师造家讨饭。
English: After Yan's master Liu Shouguang was defeated by Zhou Dewei, he was going to go to Nantou to conquer Cangzhou. Liu Shouqi, because of crossing the river on foot, the water was cold, his feet were swollen, and he lost the road. When he went to the territory of Yanle County, he hid in the valley during the day and did not have dinner for several days. He asked his wife Zhu to go to the old farmer Zhang Shifu's house to beg for food.

古文：师造怪妇人异状，诘知守光处，并其三子擒之。癸酉，晋王方宴，将吏擒守光适至，王语之曰： 主人何避客之深邪！ 
现代文：老农张师造觉得刘守光的妻子祝氏形状很怪异，盘问得知刘守光的住处，于是连刘守光的三个儿子一并捉拿起来，癸酉，晋王正要举行宴会时，将吏把刘守光押送刚刚到达，晋王对他们说： 主人为什么要这样畏避客人呢？ 
English: Zhang Shizuo, an old farmer, thought that the shape of Liu Shuguang's wife Zhu was very strange. The interrogation learned Liu Shuguang's place of residence, so Liu Shuguang's three sons were arrested together. Well, when Jin Wang was about to hold a banquet, the officials escorted Liu Shuguang just arrived. Jin Wang said to them: Why does the master avoid guests like this?

古文：并仁恭置之馆舍，以器服膳饮赐之。
现代文：于是将刘仁恭和刘守光一并安置到客舍，并赐给他们衣食用具。
English: As a result, Liu Renkong and Liu Shouguang were placed together in a guest house, and they were given clothes and utensils.

古文：王命掌书记王缄草露布，缄不知故事，书之于布，遣人曳之。
现代文：随后晋王又命令掌管书牍记录的官员王缄起草露布，晓示天下。王缄不知露布的旧例，便把情况书写在布匹上，派人拉着。
English: Subsequently, the king of Jin also ordered the official in charge of the records of the records, Wang Xuan, to draw up a bluff to show the world. Wang Xuan did not know the old example of the bluff, so he wrote the situation on the cloth and sent someone to pull it.

古文：晋王欲自云、代归，越王镕及王处直请由中山、真定趣井陉，王从之。
现代文：晋王打算经过云州、代州回晋阳，赵王王熔和王处直请求经由中山、真定，并取道井陉返回晋阳，晋王听从了他们的意见。
English: Jin Wang planned to return to Jinyang via Yunnan and Daizhou. Zhao Wang Wang Rong and Wang Shicun directly requested to return to Jinyang via Zhongshan and Zhending, and to take the road of Jingyao. Jin Wang listened to their advice.

古文：庚辰，晋王发幽州，刘仁恭父子皆荷校于露布之下。
现代文：庚辰，晋王从幽州出发，刘仁恭父子都戴着枷锁在露布之下。
English: Geng Chen and Jin Wang set out from Yuzhou, and Liu Rengyong and his son were both wearing shackles under their robes.

古文：守光父母唾其面而骂之曰： 逆贼，破我家至此！ 
现代文：刘守光的母亲和父亲将唾沫唾在他的脸上并骂他说： 逆贼，把我的家败坏到这种地步！ 
English: Liu Shuguang's mother and father spit in his face and scolded him: "Traitor, you have ruined my home to such an extent!

古文：守光俯首而已。
现代文：刘守光只是低着头而已。
English: Liu Shuguang just kept his head down.

古文：甲申，至定州，舍于关城。
现代文：甲申，行至定州，住在关口的城楼里面。
English: From Jiaxing, go to Dingzhou, and live in the city tower at the pass.

古文：丙戌，晋王与王处直谒北岳庙。
现代文：丙戌，晋王和王处直拜谒北岳庙。
English: The Jin kings and emperors paid homage to the Beiyue Temple.

古文：是日，至行唐，赵王镕迎谒于路。
现代文：这一天，行至行唐，赵王王熔在路上迎接谒见了晋王。
English: On this day, on the way to Tang Dynasty, Zhao Wangwangluo met Jin Wang on the road to welcome him.

古文：均王上乾化四年
现代文：乾化四年
English: Drying for four years

古文：春，正月，戊戌朔，赵王镕诣晋王行帐上寿置酒。
现代文：春季正月，戊戍朔，赵王王熔到晋王的军帐中为晋王上寿敬酒。
English: In the first month of spring, in the new moon, Zhao Wang Wang melted into Jin Wang's military account to toast Jin Wang's longevity.

古文：镕愿识刘太师面，晋王命吏脱刘仁恭及守光械，引就席同宴。
现代文：王熔希望能见刘太师一面，晋王命令看守刘仁恭、刘守光的官吏卸掉刘仁恭、刘守光所戴的枷械，并把他们领到帐中同宴，王熔回拜了他们，又赠送给他们衣服、鞍马、酒馔。
English: Wang Rong hoped to see Liu Taishi. Jin Wang ordered the officials of Liu Rongong and Liu Shuguang to remove the shackles from Liu Rongong and Liu Shuguang, and led them to the banquet. Wang Rong bowed to them and gave them clothes, saddle horses and wine goblets.

古文：镕答其拜，又以衣服、鞍马、酒馔赠之，己亥，晋王与镕畋于行唐之西，镕送至境上而别。丙子，蜀主命太子判六军，开崇勋府，置僚属，后更谓之天策府。
现代文：已亥，晋王和王熔在行唐的西面打猎，随后王熔把晋王送到边境上才分别。丙午，前蜀主王建命令太子元膺判管六军，始建崇勋府，设置僚属，后来改称为天策府。
English: Already in the winter, Jin Wang and Wang Rong went hunting on the west side of the Tang Dynasty, and then Wang Rong sent Jin Wang to the border before they separated. In the afternoon of the third day, the former Shu lord Wang Jian ordered the prince Yuan Xuan to control the six armies, start building the Chongxun Palace, set up subordinates, and later renamed it the Heavenly Palace.

古文：壬子，晋王以练纟斥刘仁恭父子，凯歌入于晋阳。
现代文：壬子，晋王用白绢捆绑着刘仁恭父子，高奏凯歌进入了晋阳城。
English: According to the legend, the king of Jin bound Liu Rengong and his son with egrets, and they entered the city of Jinyang after performing a grand song.

古文：丙辰，献于太庙。自临斩刘守光。
现代文：丙辰，晋王将俘虏刘仁父子献于太庙，并亲临刑场斩杀刘守光。
English: At the same time, the king of Jin dedicated the captive Liu Ren and his son to the Great Temple, and personally killed Liu Shuguang at the execution site.

古文：守光呼曰： 守光死不恨，然教守光不降者，李小喜也！ 
现代文：临刑前刘守光高声呼喊说： 我刘守光死而无恨，然而教我刘守光不降服的人是李小喜。 
English: Before his execution, Liu Shuguang shouted in a loud voice: I, Liu Shuguang, died without hatred, but the person who taught me that Liu Shuguang would not surrender was Li Xiaoxi.

古文：王召小喜证之，小喜瞋目叱守光曰： 汝内乱禽兽行，亦我教邪！ 
现代文：晋王把李小喜召来证明刘守光的话是否事实，李小喜怒目斥骂刘守光说： 你伦的禽兽行为也是我教的吗？ 
English: Jin Wang summoned Li Xiaoxi to prove whether Liu Shouguang's words were true. Li Xiaoxi angrily scolded Liu Shouguang and said: Did I teach you the behavior of animals?

古文：王怒其无礼，先斩之。
现代文：晋王对他出言无礼的行为十分生气，于是先斩杀了李小喜。
English: Jin Wang was very angry at his rude behavior, so he first killed Li Xiaoxi.

古文：守光曰： 守光善骑射，王欲成霸业，何不留之使自效！ 
现代文：刘守光说： 我刘守光善于骑马射箭，大王要成功霸业，为什么不留下我，让我为您效劳呢？ 
English: Liu Shouguang said: I, Liu Shouguang, am good at riding horses and archery. The great king wants to succeed in dominating the industry. Why not leave me and let me serve you?

古文：其二妻李氏、祝氏让之曰： 皇帝，事已如此，生亦何益！
现代文：刘守光的两个妻子李氏和祝氏在一旁责备地说： 皇上，事已如此，活着又有什么好处呢？ 
English: Liu Shuguang's two wives, Li and Zhu, said reproachfully on the sidelines: "Emperor, things have come to this, what good is it to be alive?

古文：即伸颈就戮。
现代文：随即伸出脖子接受砍戮。
English: He then stuck his neck out to be slaughtered.

古文：守光至死号泣哀祈不已。
现代文：刘守光至死都不停地号泣求饶。
English: Liu Shuguang cried and begged for mercy until his death.

古文：王命节度副使卢汝弼等械仁恭至代州，刺其心血以祭先王墓，然后斩之。
现代文：晋王命令节度副使卢汝弼等给刘仁恭戴上枷锁。押送到代州，刺取了他的心血祭祀了先王李克用陵墓，然后将他斩杀。
English: The Jin king ordered Lu Ruxuan, the vice-envoy of the festival, to put shackles on Liu Renkong. He was escorted to Daizhou, where he was stabbed and sacrificed to the mausoleum of the former king Li Ke, and then beheaded.

古文：或说赵王镕曰： 大王所称尚书令，乃梁官也，大王既与梁为仇，不当称其官。且自太宗践祚已来，无敢当其名者。
现代文：有人劝赵王王熔说： 大王所称尚书令是梁国的官名，大王既然与梁国为仇敌，就不应当再用梁国的官名，况且自从唐太宗登位以来，没有敢称这种官名的。
English: Some people advised Zhao Wang Wang Rong to say, "The official name of Liang Guo that the great king called Shang Shuling is Liang Guo. Since the great king is an enemy of Liang Guo, he should no longer use the official name of Liang Guo. Moreover, since Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he has not dared to call this official name.

古文：今晋王为盟主，勋高位卑，不若以尚书令让之。 
现代文：现在晋王为盟主，功高位低，不如用尚书令这个官位来推崇他。 
English: Now that Jin Wang is the commander-in-chief and his achievements are few and far between, it is better to use the official title of Shang Shuling to praise him.

古文：镕曰： 善！ 
现代文：王熔说： 很对。 
English: Wang Rong said: That's right.

古文：乃与王处直各遣使推晋王为尚书令，晋王三让，然后受之，始开府置行台如太宗故事。
现代文：于是与王处直各自派一些人去推举晋王为尚书令，晋王再三辞让，最后才接受了，并和过去的唐太宗一样，开建府署，设置行台。
English: Therefore, he and Wang Shizhi each sent some people to nominate Jin Wang as Shang Shuling. Jin Wang repeatedly made concessions, but finally accepted, and, like Tang Taizong in the past, began to build a government office and set up a platform.

古文：高季昌以蜀夔、万、忠、涪四州旧隶荆南，兴兵取之，先以水军攻夔州。
现代文：高季昌因为前蜀的夔州、万州、忠州、涪州四州过去隶属荆南，打算用武力来夺取这些地方。一开始用水军攻打夔州。
English: Gao Jichang, because the four pre-Shu states of Ganzhou, Wanzhou, Zhongzhou and Ganzhou had belonged to Jingnan in the past, intended to seize these places by force. At first, he used naval forces to attack Ganzhou.

古文：时镇江节度使兼侍中嘉王宗寿镇忠州，夔州刺史王成先请甲，宗寿但以白布袍给之。
现代文：当时前蜀镇江节度使兼侍中嘉王王宗寿镇守忠州，夔州刺史王成先请求率领甲士作战，王宗寿只把穿白布袍的士卒配备给他。
English: At that time, Wang Zongshou, the former Shu Zhenjiang Festival envoy and attendant of King Jia, was in charge of the defense of Zhongzhou, and Wang Chengxian, the governor of Zhangzhou, asked him to lead the cavalrymen in battle. Wang Zongshou only equipped him with soldiers wearing white robes.

古文：成先帅之逆战，季昌纵火船焚蜀浮桥，招讨副使张武举铁纟亘拒之，船不得进。
现代文：王成先率领这些白袍士卒迎战高季昌，高季昌放出火船焚烧了前蜀的浮桥，前蜀招讨副使张武架起铁索桥来阻拦高季昌的火船，结果火船无法通过。
English: Wang Chengxian led these white-robed soldiers to meet Gao Jichang. Gao Jichang launched a fire boat and burned the pontoon bridge of the former Shu. The former Shu's deputy Zhang Wu built a cable bridge to block Gao Jichang's fire boat. As a result, the fire boat could not pass.

古文：会风反，荆南兵焚溺死者甚众。
现代文：这时正好遇上风向调转，荆南高季昌的部队被火烧死和淹死的士卒很多。
English: At this time, just as the wind changed direction, Jingnan Gao Jichang's troops were burned to death and many soldiers drowned.

古文：季昌乘战舰，蒙以牛革，飞石中之，折其尾，季昌易小舟以遁。
现代文：高季昌改乘战船逃跑，并给船蒙上牛皮，但被飞石击中，船尾被砸断，高季昌又改乘小船逃跑。
English: Gao Jichang fled in a warship and covered it with cowhide, but it was hit by flying rocks and the stern was broken, and Gao Jichang fled in a small boat.

古文：荆南兵大败，俘斩五千级。
现代文：在这次战役中，荆南兵大败，被俘虏和斩杀的共有五千人左右。
English: In this battle, the Jingnan soldiers were soundly defeated, and a total of about five thousand people were captured and killed.

古文：成先密遣人奏宗寿不给甲之状，宗寿获之，召成先，斩之。
现代文：夔州刺史王成先秘密派人向前蜀主奏告王宗寿不配备给戴甲士卒的情况，结果被王宗寿获知，于是召见王成先，并斩杀了他。
English: Wang Chengxian, the governor of Zhangzhou, secretly sent a person to inform Wang Zongshou of the situation that Wang Zongshou was not equipped to deal with Daijia. As a result, Wang Zongshu was informed, so he summoned Wang Chengxian and killed him.

古文：帝以岐人数为寇，二月，甲戌，徙感化节度使康怀英为永平节度使，镇长安。
现代文：后梁帝因为岐人曾多次来侵犯，二月，甲戌，调感化节度使康怀英为永平节度使，镇守长安。
English: Later, Emperor Liang of the Liang Dynasty, because the Qin people had repeatedly invaded the area, in February, he changed the name of Jiaxing to Yongping, and made Kang Huaiying the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：怀英即怀贞也，避帝名改焉。
现代文：康怀英即康怀贞，因为避讳后梁帝均王朱友贞的名字而改为康怀英。
English: Kang Huaiying means Kang Huai Zhen, but it was changed to Kang Huai Ying because Emperor Liang avoided the name of King Zhu Youzhen.

古文：夏，四月，丙子，蜀主徙镇江军治夔州。
现代文：夏季，四月丙子，前蜀主王建调镇江军去治理夔州。
English: In the summer, in April, the former Shu ruler Wang Jian transferred the Zhenjiang Army to govern Zhangzhou.

古文：丁丑，司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事于兢坐挟私迁补军校，罢为工部侍郎，再贬莱州司马。
现代文：丁丑，司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事于兢因为犯了徇私迁补军校的罪，降为工部侍郎，后来又贬任莱州司马。
English: Ding Gou, Siku and his subordinate Jiro, and Tongping Zhang Ji Yu Jing were reduced to Jiro of the Ministry of Industry for committing the crime of relocating a military school. Later, they were demoted to Sima of Laizhou.

古文：吴袁州刺史刘崇景叛，附于楚。
现代文：吴国的袁州刺史刘景崇叛背吴国，归附于楚。
English: Liu Jingsong, the Yuan Zhou assassin of the State of Wu, defected from the State of Wu and joined the State of Chu.

古文：崇景，威之子也。
现代文：刘景崇是刘威的儿子。
English: Liu Jing Chong is Liu Wei's son.

古文：楚将许贞将万人援之，吴都指挥使柴再用、米志诚帅诸将讨之。
现代文：楚将许贞率领一万人马来援救他，吴国的都指挥使柴再用、米志诚率领许多将领来讨伐他。
English: Chu general Xu Zhen led ten thousand horses to rescue him, the governor of the State of Wu ordered that firewood be reused, and Yizhicheng led many generals to fight him.

古文：楚岳州刺史许德勋将水军巡边。夜分，南风暴起，都指挥使王环乘风趣黄州，以绳梯登城，径趣州署，执吴刺史马鄴，大掠而还。德勋曰： 鄂州将邀我，宜备之。 
现代文：楚国的岳州刺史许德勋率领水军在楚吴边境上巡逻，到了半夜的时候，突然刮起了南风，楚国的都指挥使王环乘风直捣吴国的黄州，用绳梯登上了城墙，然后直奔州署，俘获了吴国刺史马邺，大肆抢劫之后返回，许德勋说： 鄂州的军队很可能阻截我们，应该防备他们的进攻。 
English: Xu Dezhun, the Yezhou chief of the State of Chu, led the navy to patrol on the border of Chu and Wu. At midnight, a south wind suddenly blew. The commander of the State of Chu ordered Wang Huan to ride the wind straight to Huangzhou of the State of Wu, climbed the city wall with a rope ladder, and then went straight to the State Administration, captured the Wuzhou chief of the State of Wu, and returned after a large-scale robbery. Xu Dezhun said: The army of Ezhou is likely to intercept us, and we should be prepared for their attack.

古文：环曰： 我军入黄州，鄂人不知，奄过其城，彼自救不暇，安敢邀我！ 
现代文：王环说： 我军进入黄州时，鄂人根本不知道，这次路过是突然通过州城，此时他们自救不暇，哪里还敢阻截我们。 
English: Wang Huan said: When our army entered Huangzhou, the H people did not know at all. This time, they passed through the provincial capital. At this time, they were too busy to save themselves. How could they dare to intercept us?

古文：乃展旗鸣鼓而行，鄂人不敢逼。
现代文：于是举起旗敲起鼓列队而行，鄂人根本没敢逼近他们。
English: So they raised the flag, beat the drums and marched in formation. The H people did not dare to approach them at all.

古文：五月，朔方节度使兼中书令颍川王韩逊卒，军中推其子洙为留后。
现代文：五月，朔方节度使兼中书令颍川王韩逊去世，军中推选他的儿子韩洙为留后。
English: In May, King Han Song of Sui died, and his son Han Xuan was chosen by the army to succeed him.

古文：癸丑，诏以洙为节度使。
现代文：癸丑，后梁帝正式颂诏任用韩洙为朔方节度使。
English: However, after Emperor Liang made an official proclamation, Han Zheng was appointed as the envoy of the Shuo side.

古文：吴柴再用等与刘崇景、许贞战于万胜冈，大破之，崇景、贞弃袁州遁去。
现代文：吴国都指挥使柴再用与刘崇景、许贞在万胜冈打仗，结果柴再用大败敌军，刘崇景和许贞放弃了袁州而逃跑。
English: Wu Guodu commanded Chai Zai to fight with Liu Chongqing and Xu Zhen in Wanshenggang. As a result, Chai Zai defeated the enemy army, Liu Chongqing and Xu Zhen abandoned Yuanzhou and fled.

古文：晋王既克幽州，乃谋入寇。
现代文：晋王攻克幽州以后，打算入侵别的地方。
English: After conquering Yuzhou, Jin Wang planned to invade other places.

古文：秋，七月，会赵王镕及周德威于赵州，南寇邢州，李嗣昭引昭义兵会之。
现代文：秋季，七月，晋王在赵州会见赵王王熔和周德威，并向南入侵邢州，李嗣昭率领昭义军和他们会师。
English: In the autumn, in July, Jin Wang met with Zhao Wang Wang Rong and Zhou Dewei in Zhaozhou, and invaded Zhangzhou to the south. Li Shizhao led the Zhaoying Army and their division.

古文：杨师厚引兵救邢州，军于漳水之东。
现代文：杨师厚从魏州率领军队去援救邢州，在漳水东面安营扎寨。
English: Yang Shihou led an army from Weizhou to rescue Zhangzhou and set up camp in the east of Zhangshui.

古文：晋军至张公桥，裨将曹进金来奔。
现代文：晋王军队行至张公桥时，裨将曹进金率军投奔来降。
English: When Jin Wang's army marched to Zhang Gong Bridge, Cao Jin Jin led the army to rush down.

古文：晋军退，诸镇兵皆引归。
现代文：后来，晋军撤退，燕、赵、诸镇的军队也都率兵回营。
English: Later, the Jin army retreated, and the armies of Yan, Zhao and Zhuzhen also led their soldiers back to the camp.

古文：八月，晋王还晋阳。
现代文：八月，晋王回到晋阳。
English: In August, Jin Wang returned to Jinyang.

古文：蜀武泰节度使王宗训镇黔州，贪暴不法，擅还成都。
现代文：前蜀武泰节度使王宗训镇守黔州，贪暴不法，擅自回到成都。
English: Prior to the Shu-Wutai Festival, Wang Zongxun, who was in charge of the defense of Bozhou, became corrupt and returned to Chengdu without authorization.

古文：庚辰，见蜀主，多所邀求，言辞狂悖。
现代文：庚辰，他见到前蜀主王建以后，提出很多要求，而且说话时语言十分狂悖。
English: Geng Chen, after he saw the former Shu master Wang Jian, made a lot of demands, and the language was very wild when he spoke.

古文：蜀主怒，命卫士殴杀之。
现代文：王建十分生气，便命令他的卫士把王宗训活活打死。
English: Wang Jian was very angry and ordered his guards to beat Wang Zongxun to death.

古文：戊子，以内枢密使潘峭为武泰节度使、同平章事，翰林学士承旨毛文锡为礼部尚书，判枢密院。
现代文：戊子，任命内枢密使潘峭为武泰节度使、同平章事，翰林学士承旨毛文锡为礼部尚书，判枢密院。
English: Wu Zi, appointed the Inner Privy Councilor Pan Qiao as the Wu Tai Festival Delegate, and the Hanlin Scholar Mao Wensi as the Ceremonial Secretary, and the Privy Council was decided.

古文：峡上有堰，或劝蜀主乘夏秋江涨，决之以灌江陵。
现代文：川江三峡上有一座挡水的低坝，有人劝说王建趁夏秋川江水涨时，打开低坝，直灌江陵。
English: On the Three Gorges of the Sichuan River, there is a low dam that blocks water. Some people persuaded Wang Jian to take advantage of the summer when the water of the Sichuan River rises, to open the low dam and directly irrigate the Gangneung.

古文：毛文锡谏曰： 高季昌不服，其民何罪！
现代文：毛文锡进谏说： 高季昌虽然不顺服，但他的百姓们有什么罪呢？
English: Mao Wenxizhong said: Although Gao Jichang disobeyed, what is the sin of his people?

古文：陛下方以德怀天下，忍以邻国之民为鱼鳖食乎！ 
现代文：陛下将要用崇高的品德来怀柔天下，怎么能忍心把邻国的百姓当成鱼鳌的食物呢？ 
English: Your Majesty is going to use your lofty moral character to win the hearts and minds of the world. How can you bear to treat the people of a neighboring country as bait?

古文：蜀主乃止。
现代文：王建于是停止了水灌江陵的计划。
English: Wang Jian then stopped the plan to flood Jiangling.

古文：帝以福王友璋为武宁节度使。
现代文：后梁帝任命福王朱友璋为武宁节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Liang appointed Fu Wang Zhu Youjun as the ambassador of the Wu Ning Festival.

古文：前节度使王殷，友珪所置也，惧，不受代，叛附于吴。
现代文：以前的武宁节度使王殷是朱友所立的，他因为害怕，不敢接受替代的制命，便背叛后梁而归附了吴国。
English: The previous Wu Ning Festival made Wang Yin the first to be established by Zhu You. Because he was afraid and did not dare to accept a substitute command, he betrayed Hou Liang and joined the State of Wu.

古文：九月，命淮南西北面招讨应接使牛存节及开封尹刘鄩将兵讨之。
现代文：九月，后梁命淮南西北面招讨应接使牛存节和开封尹刘率兵讨伐王殷。
English: In September, after Liang ordered the southwestern part of Huainan Province to invite and receive the Cattle Preservation Festival and Kaifeng, Yin Liu led an army to fight Wang Yin.

古文：冬，十月，存节等军于宿州。
现代文：冬季，十月，牛存节等驻扎在宿州。
English: In the winter, October, the Cattle Preservation Festival, etc. are stationed in Suzhou.

古文：吴平卢节度使硃瑾等将兵救徐州，存节等逆击，破之，吴兵引归。
现代文：这时吴国派遣平卢节度使朱瑾等率兵援救徐州，牛存节等率兵迎战，结果朱瑾的部队被击败，吴国的军队才撤回。
English: At this time, the State of Wu sent Pinglu Jiedu to make Zhu Xi and other soldiers rescue Xuzhou, and Niu Cunjie and other soldiers to fight. As a result, Zhu Xi's troops were defeated, and the army of the State of Wu withdrew.

古文：十一月，乙巳，南诏寇黎州，蜀主以夔王宗范、兼中书令宗播、嘉王宗寿为三招讨以击之。
现代文：十一月，乙巳，南诏国侵犯黎州，前蜀主派遣夔王王宗范、兼中书令王宗播、嘉王王宗寿为三招讨，阻击南诏的侵略军。
English: In November, when Nanzhao invaded Lizhou, the former Shu ruler sent Wang Zongfan, also known as King Zongfan, and King Zongshou, also known as King Zongban, as a three-pronged attack to block Nanzhao's invading army.

古文：丙辰，败之于潘仓嶂，斩其酋长赵嵯政等。
现代文：丙辰，在潘仓嶂打败了南诏侵略军，斩杀南诏酋长赵嵯政等。
English: He defeated the Nanzhao invading army at Pancangyu and killed the Nanzhao chieftain Zhao Yanzheng.

古文：壬戌，又败之于山口城。
现代文：壬戌，又在山口城击败了南诏军队。
English: and defeated the Nanzhao army in Yamaguchi-jo.

古文：十二月，乙亥，破其武侯岭十三寨。
现代文：十二月，乙亥，攻下南诏武侯岭等十三个村寨。
English: In December, in the Year of the Boar, thirteen villages, including Nanzhao and Wuholing, were captured.

古文：辛巳，又败之于大度河，浮斩数万级，蛮争走度水，桥绝，溺死者数万人。
现代文：辛巳，又在大渡河击败了南诏军队，俘获和斩杀数万南诏士卒，南诏人争先恐后地抢着过河逃跑，桥被压断，又有数万人被水淹死。
English: Soon after, he defeated the Nanzhao army at the Dadu River, capturing and slaughtering tens of thousands of Nanzhao soldiers. The Nanzhao people scrambled to escape across the river, the bridge was broken, and tens of thousands of people were drowned.

古文：宗范等将作浮梁济大渡河攻之，蜀主召之令还。
现代文：王宗范等将要制成浮桥渡过大渡河继续攻打南诏军队，前蜀主通知王宗范等，命令他们撤回。
English: Wang Zongfan and others were going to make a floating bridge to cross the Dadu River and continue to attack the Nanzhao army. The former Shu lord informed Wang Zongfan and others and ordered them to withdraw.

古文：癸未，蜀兴州刺史兼北路制置指挥使王宗鐸攻岐阶州及固镇，破细砂等十一寨，斩首四千级。
现代文：癸未，前蜀光州刺史兼北路制置指挥使王崇铎向岐国的阶州和固镇发起进攻，攻下细砂等十一个村寨，斩杀四千人。
English: At the same time, Wang Chongyi, the former governor of Shuguang Prefecture and commander of the Northern Route Construction Command, ordered Wang Chongyi to launch an attack on Zhazhou and Guzhen in Qigong Province, capturing eleven villages and hamlets such as Fine Sand, and killing four thousand people.

古文：甲申，指挥使王宗俨破岐长城关等四寨，斩首二千级。
现代文：甲申，指挥使王崇俨又攻下岐国长城关等四个村寨，斩杀二千人。
English: In Jiaxing, the commander sent Wang Chongyao to attack four villages including the Great Wall Pass of Qi Province, killing two thousand people.

古文：岐静难节度使李继徽为其子彦鲁所毒而死，彦鲁自为留后。
现代文：岐国静难节度使李继徽被他的儿子李彦鲁毒死，李彦鲁自己当了留后官。
English: Due to the difficult situation in Qin, Li Jihui was poisoned to death by his son, Li Yanlu, who himself became the successor.

古文：均王上贞明元年
现代文：贞明元年
English: In the first year of the Zhenming Dynasty

古文：春，正月，己亥，蜀主御得贤门受蛮俘，大赦。
现代文：春季正月，己亥，前蜀主驾临得贤门接受蛮夷的俘虏，并大赦了他们。
English: In the first month of spring, Ji Hai, the former Lord of Shu came to the Gate of the Wise to accept the captives of the barbarians, and pardoned them.

古文：初，黎、雅蛮酋刘昌嗣、郝玄鉴、杨师泰，虽内属于唐，受爵赏，号金堡三王，而潜通南诏，为之诇导。
现代文：起初，黎、雅蛮夷酋长刘昌嗣、郝玄鉴、杨师泰三人虽然向内归属于唐，也曾受过后唐的封爵和赏赐，号称金堡三王，实际上却偷偷地私通南诏，并为南诏充当侦察和向导。
English: At first, the three men, Li, Liu Changzhi, Yu Xuanjian, Yang Shitai, the chiefs of the Yamanyi, although they belonged to the Tang Dynasty, had also been knighted and rewarded by the Later Tang Dynasty, and were known as the Three Kings of Jinbao, in fact, they secretly communicated with Nanzhao, and acted as reconnaissance and guide for Nanzhao.

古文：镇蜀者多文臣，虽知其情，不敢诘。
现代文：镇守蜀地的人多数是文官，虽然知道他们的情况，但不敢去问个究竟。
English: Most of the people guarding Shu are civil servants. Although they know about their situation, they don't dare to ask.

古文：于是，蜀主数以漏泄军谋，斩于成都市，毁金堡。
现代文：此时，前蜀主责备他们泄漏军机，在成都把他们斩了，并且捣毁了金堡。
English: At this time, the former Shu master accused them of leaking military aircraft, beheaded them in Chengdu, and destroyed the golden castle.

古文：自是南诏不复敢犯边。
现代文：从此以后，南诏不敢再侵犯前蜀的边境。
English: From then on, Nanzhao did not dare to encroach on the borders of the former Shu.

古文：二月，牛存节等拔彭城，王殷举族自焚。
现代文：二月，牛存节等攻下了彭城，王殷全族都自焚。
English: In February, Niu Cunjie and others captured Pengcheng, and Wang Yin's entire family self-immolated.

古文：三月，丁卯，以右仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事赵光逢为太子太保，致仕。
现代文：三月，丁卯，封右仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事赵光逢以太子太保，退休归居。
English: In March, Dingwu, the right-hand servant of Fu Xie and the servant of his disciple, Tongping Zhangji, Zhao Guangfeng, the ethereal son of Taibo, retired and returned home.

古文：天雄节度使兼中书令鄴王杨师厚卒。
现代文：天雄节度使兼中书令邺王杨师厚去世。
English: Yang Shihou, Tianxiong's envoy to the festival and the king of the Chinese calligraphy, passed away.

古文：师厚晚年矜功恃众，擅割财赋，选军中骁勇，置银枪效节都数千人，给赐优厚，欲以复故时牙兵之盛。
现代文：杨师厚在晚年时常居功自，擅自夺取财赋，并挑选军中勇敢善战的士卒设置私人军队数千人，号称银枪效节都，供给赏赐十分优厚，打算恢复过去牙兵的盛况。
English: In his later years, Yang Shihou often took credit for his achievements, seized wealth without authorization, and selected brave and good soldiers from the army to set up a private army of thousands of people, known as the Silver Gun Effect Festival, with very generous rewards, intending to restore the grandeur of the tooth soldiers in the past.

古文：帝虽外加尊礼，内实忌之，及卒，私于宫中受贺。
现代文：后梁帝虽然表面上对他尊礼有加，内心却很忌恨他，到他死后，在宫中暗自庆贺。
English: Although Emperor Hou Liang treated him with respect on the surface, he hated him in his heart. After his death, he secretly celebrated in the palace.

古文：租庸使赵岩、判官邵赞言于帝曰： 魏博为唐腹心之蠹，二百馀年不能除去者，以其地广兵强之故也。
现代文：租庸使赵岩、判官邵赞对后梁帝说： 魏博一带是唐朝心腹中的蠹虫，之所以二百余年来不能铲除它的割据形势，主要原因是地广兵强。
English: Zhao Yan, the judge Shao Zan, said to Emperor Houliang: "Weibo area is a maggot in the heart of the Tang Dynasty. The reason why it has not been able to eradicate its separatist situation for more than two hundred years is mainly due to its vast territory and strong military.

古文：罗绍威、杨师厚据之，朝廷皆不能制。
现代文：罗绍威、杨师厚占据这块地方以后，朝廷都不能够控制它。
English: After Roshowei and Yang Shihou occupied this area, the imperial court was unable to control it.

古文：陛下不乘此时为之计，所谓 弹疽不严，必将复聚， 安知来者不为师厚乎！
现代文：陛下如果不乘此时重新考虑，就像所说的 弹除脓血不净，必将重新瘀结 ，怎么能够知道未来的天雄节度使不像杨师厚呢？
English: Your Majesty, if you do not take this opportunity to reconsider, as the saying goes, "If you remove the bad blood, you will surely re-knot," how can you know that the future Tianxiong Festival will not be like Yang Shihou?

古文：宜分六州为两镇以弱其权。 
现代文：应当将魏博六州分为两镇，削弱它的权力。 
English: Weibo Six Prefecture should be divided into two towns to weaken its power.

古文：帝以为然，以平卢节度使贺德伦为天雄节度使；置昭德军于相州，割澶、卫二州隶焉，以宣徽使张筠为昭德节度使，仍分魏州将士府库之半于相州。
现代文：后梁帝认为言之有理，于是任命原平卢节度使贺德伦为天雄节度使。在相州增置了昭德军，割出澶、卫二州隶属相州，任命原宣徽使张筠为昭德节度使，又将魏州的将士、府库财产的一半分给相州。
English: Later, Emperor Liang thought that his words were reasonable, so he appointed the former Pinglu Festival Envoy to make Hedren the Tianxiong Festival Envoy. The Zhaotie Army was added to Xiangzhou, and Xuanwu and Weizhou were subordinated to Xiangzhou. The former Xuanhu Envoy to Zhangye was appointed the Xuanwu Festival Envoy to Xiangzhou, and the soldiers and half of the treasury property of Weizhou were given to Xiangzhou.

古文：筠，海州人也。
现代文：张筠是海州人。
English: Zhang Ye is a native of Haizhou.

古文：二人既赴镇，朝廷恐魏人不服，遣开封尹刘鄩将兵六万自白马济河，以讨镇、定为名，实张形势以胁之。
现代文：贺德伦、张筠已经赴任，但朝廷又害怕魏州人不服，于是又派遣开封尹刘率兵六万，从白马渡过黄河，以讨伐镇州、定州为名，其实是虚张声势用威力来强迫魏人服从。
English: Hedren and Zhang Ye had already taken office, but the imperial court was afraid that the Wei people would not be satisfied, so it sent Kaifeng Yin Liu to lead 60,000 soldiers across the Yellow River from Baima, in the name of fighting Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. In fact, it was a bluff to use power to force the Wei people to obey.

古文：魏兵皆父子相承数百年，族姻磐结，不愿分徙。
现代文：魏州士卒数百年来都是父子相承，族与族之间婚姻盘结，不愿意分离。
English: For hundreds of years, the officials of Weizhou have been inherited from father to son. Marriages between tribes are intertwined, and they do not want to be separated.

古文：德伦屡趣之，应行者皆嗟怨，连营聚哭。
现代文：天雄节度使贺德伦多次催促他们分离，但答应离开的人都哀叹怨恨，甚至连营聚集在一起号啕大哭。
English: The Tianxiong Festival made Hedren urge them to separate several times, but those who agreed to leave lamented their resentment, and even the campmates gathered together to howl and cry.

古文：己丑，刘鄩屯南乐，先遣澶州刺史王彦章将龙骧五百骑入魏州，屯金波亭。
现代文：己丑，开封尹刘的军队驻扎在南乐，先派澶州刺史王彦章率领龙骧骑兵五百人进入魏州，驻扎在金波亭。
English: At the same time, the troops of Yin Liu in Kaifeng were stationed in Nanle. Wang Yanzhang, the governor of Zhangzhou, led 500 Longyu cavalrymen into Weizhou and stationed them in Jinbo Pavilion.

古文：魏兵相与谋曰： 朝廷忌吾军府强盛，欲设策使之残破耳。
现代文：魏州的士卒们互相谋划说： 朝廷非常忌恨我们的军府强盛，打算用计策让我们军府自行残破。
English: The officers of the state of Weizhou plotted with each other, saying: "The imperial court abhors the strength of our military establishment, and intends to use stratagems to make our military establishment self-destruct."

古文：吾六州历代籓镇，兵未尝远出河门，一旦骨肉流离，生不如死。 
现代文：我们六个州历代都是一个藩镇，士卒从来没有远出过河门，一旦骨肉流离，生不如死。 
English: Our six prefectures have been one township throughout the ages, and our officers and men have never been far from the river gate. Once the flesh and bones are displaced, life is better than death.

古文：是夕，军乱，纵火大掠，围金波亭，王彦章斩关而走。
现代文：当天晚上，魏军大乱，放火掠夺，包围了金波亭，澶州刺史王彦章斩杀了守门士卒才得以逃出。
English: On the evening of the same day, the Wei army rioted, set fire to and plundered, and surrounded Jinbo Pavilion. It was only after Wang Yanzhang, the governor of Zhangzhou, killed the gatekeeper that he was able to escape.

古文：诘旦，乱兵入牙城，杀贺德伦之亲兵五百人，劫德伦置楼上。
现代文：第二天早晨，魏州乱兵进入了后梁军主将居住的牙城，杀了贺德伦的亲兵五百余人，并劫持了贺德伦，把他放到了牙城的城楼上。
English: In the morning of the next day, the Wei soldiers entered the city of Fang, where the commander of the Liang army lived. They killed more than five hundred of Hedren's own soldiers, and kidnapped Hedren and put him on the castle tower of Fang.

古文：有效节军校张彦者，自帅其党，拔白刃，止剽掠。
现代文：有个郊节军军校叫张彦的人，率领自己的同伙，拔出刀枪，制止抢劫活动。
English: A man from the Suburban Festival Military Academy named Zhang Yan, led by his accomplice, pulled out a knife and gun to stop the robbery.

古文：夏，四月，帝遣供奉官扈异抚谕魏军，许张彦以刺史。
现代文：夏季，四月，后梁帝派遣供奉官扈异前往抚慰魏军，并答应让张彦做刺史。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Houliang sent a very different offering officer to comfort the Wei army, and promised to let Zhang Yan do the stabbing.

古文：彦请复相、澶、卫三州如旧制。
现代文：张彦请求恢复相、澶、卫三州隶属天雄的旧制。
English: Zhang Yan requested the restoration of the old system in which the three prefectures of Sang, Ye and Wei were subordinate to Tianxiong.

古文：异还，言张彦易与，但遣刘鄩加兵，立当传首。
现代文：扈异回到朝廷以后说，张彦容易对付，只需命令刘派兵增援，马上就可以拿回张彦的首级来。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Yan Yan said that Zhang Yan was easy to deal with. He only needed to order Liu to send reinforcements, and he could immediately get back Zhang Yan's head.

古文：帝由是不许，但以优诏答之。
现代文：后梁帝因此没有同意任命张彦做刺吏，仅仅以褒扬的诏书回答他。
English: Emperor Hou Liang therefore did not agree to the appointment of Zhang Yan as assassin, and only replied to him with a letter of commendation.

古文：使者再返，彦裂诏书抵于地，戟手南向诟朝廷，谓德伦曰： 天子愚暗，听人穿鼻。
现代文：使者返回魏军时，张彦将诏书撕碎扔在地上，用手指着南面怒骂朝廷，并对贺德伦说： 天子遇昧昏庸，听凭别人牵着鼻子走。
English: When the envoy returned to the Wei army, Zhang Yan tore up the imperial edict and threw it on the ground. He pointed to the south with his finger and cursed the imperial court. He said to Hedren, "When the Son of Heaven is confused, he lets others lead him by the nose."

古文：今我兵甲虽强，苟无处援，不能独立，宜投款于晋。 
现代文：现在我的军队虽然还很强盛，但是如果没有外援，仍然不能自立，应当向晋王表示亲善。 
English: Now, although my army is still very strong, if there is no foreign aid, it still cannot stand on its own. I should show my goodwill to King Jin.

古文：遂逼德伦以书求援于晋。
现代文：于是逼着贺德伦写信向后晋王求援。
English: So he forced Hedren to write a letter to King Jin for help.

古文：李继徽假子保衡杀李彦鲁，自称静难留后，举邠、宁二州来附。
现代文：李继徽的养子李保衡杀死了李彦鲁，自称静难留后，并带着、宁二州归附后梁。
English: Li Jihui's adopted son Li Baoheng killed Li Yanlu, claiming that it was difficult to remain quiet, and took Ning Erzhou back to Houliang.

古文：诏以保衡为感化节度使，以河阳留后霍彦威为静难节度使。
现代文：后梁帝下诏，任命李保衡为感化节度使，任命河阳留后霍彦威为静难节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Liang issued an edict, appointing Li Baoheng as the envoy of influence, and appointing Huo Yanwei as the envoy of tranquility after his stay in Heyang.

古文：吴徐温以其子牙内都指挥使知训为淮南行军副使、内外马步诸军副使。
现代文：吴国的镇海节度使徐温让他的儿子牙内都指挥使徐知训出任淮南行军副使和内外马步诸军副使。
English: The Zhenhai Festival in Wuxu led Xu Wen to have his son Gan Neitu command Xu Zhixun to serve as deputy envoy to the south of Huai and deputy envoy to the troops in and out of Ma Bu.

古文：晋王得贺德伦书，命马步副总管李存审自赵州引兵进据临清。
现代文：晋王接到贺德伦的信以后，便命令马步副总管李存审从赵州出发去占据临清。
English: After Jin Wang received Hedren's letter, he ordered the deputy head of Ma Bu, Li Cunxin, to leave Zhao Zhou to occupy Linqing.

古文：五月，存审至临清，刘鄩屯洹水。
现代文：五月，李存审到达临清，后梁开封尹刘的军队驻扎在洹水。
English: In May, Li Cunxin arrived in Linqing, after Liang Kaifeng, Yin Liu's army was stationed in Surabaya.

古文：贺德伦复遣使告急于晋，晋王引大军自黄泽岭东下，与存审会于临清，犹疑魏人之诈，按兵不进。
现代文：贺德伦又派出使者向晋王告急，晋王亲率大军从黄泽岭东下，在临清与李存审会师，这时他们仍然怀疑魏人有诈，所以按兵不进。
English: He Delun also sent an envoy to Jin Wang to express his urgency. Jin Wang's father-in-law led a large army from Huangze Ridge to the east, and met with Li Cunxuan in Linqing. At this time, they still suspected that the Wei people were deceptive, so they did not advance.

古文：德伦遣判官司空颋犒军，密言于晋王曰： 除乱当除根。 
现代文：贺德伦派判官司空前去慰劳晋王军队，秘密地对晋王说： 除乱当除根。 
English: Hedren sent the judge to comfort the army of the king of Jin and secretly said to the king of Jin: To remove disorder, you must remove the root.

古文：因言张彦凶狡之状，劝晋王先除之，则无虞矣。
现代文：进而把张彦凶残狡诈的情况告诉了晋王，劝说晋王首先把张彦除掉，就没有什么忧患了。
English: He then told Jin Wang about Zhang Yan's cruel and cunning situation, and persuaded Jin Wang to get rid of Zhang Yan first, so that there would be no sorrow.

古文：王默然。
现代文：晋王听了之后没有表态。
English: Huainan Wang was speechless after listening.

古文：颋，贝州人也。
现代文：司空是贝州人。
English: Siku is from Bechu.

古文：晋王进屯永济，张彦选银枪效节五百人，皆执兵自卫，诣永济谒见，王登驿楼语之曰： 汝陵胁主帅，残虐百姓，数日中迎马诉冤者百馀辈。
现代文：晋王率领军队向前推进，驻扎在永济。张彦挑选银枪效节五百人，都全副武装，加强自卫，到永济拜见晋王，晋王登上驿站的城楼对他说： 你欺凌逼迫主帅，残害百姓，连日来迎马诉冤的就有百余批。
English: Jin Wang led the army forward and stationed it in Yongji. Zhang Yan selected 500 people for the Silver Gun Effect Festival, all of whom were fully armed and strengthened their self-defense. They went to Yongji to meet Jin Wang. Jin Wang boarded the tower of the station and said to him: You bully and persecute the commander and brutalize the people. There are more than a hundred batches of people who have come to meet the horse and complain.

古文：我今举兵而来，以安百姓，非贪人土地。
现代文：我今天率兵而来，目的是安定百姓，并非来贪图别人的土地。
English: I have come here today with my soldiers with the aim of stabilizing the people, not to covet other people's land.

古文：汝虽有功于我，不得不诛以谢魏人。 
现代文：你虽然对我有功，但为了向魏州人民谢罪，不得不将你杀掉。 
English: Although you have contributed to me, in order to apologize to the people of Weizhou, I had to kill you.

古文：遂斩彦及其党七人，馀众股栗。
现代文：于是晋王斩了张彦及其同伙共七人，其余的乱兵吓得腿都发抖，十分恐惧。
English: As a result, Jin Wang beheaded Zhang Yan and his accomplices, a total of seven people. The rest of the ruffians were so scared that their legs were trembling and they were very afraid.

古文：王召谕之曰： 罪止八人，馀无所问。
现代文：晋王把其余乱兵召集来对他们说： 有罪的只有八人、其余的一概不追究。
English: Jin Wang called the rest of the ruffians together and said to them: There are only eight guilty people, and the rest will not be prosecuted.

古文：自今当竭力为吾爪牙。 
现代文：从今以后你们应当竭力成为我的亲信。 
English: From now on, you should do your best to become my close friends.

古文：众皆拜伏，呼万岁。
现代文：大家听后都跪伏在地感谢，高呼万岁。
English: After hearing this, everyone fell to their knees in gratitude and shouted, "Long live!"

古文：明日，王缓带轻裘而进，令张彦之卒擐甲执兵，翼马而从，仍以为帐前银枪都。
现代文：第二天，晋王宽带轻衣，十分从容地继续前进，命令张彦的士卒披甲执枪，全副武装，跟随在晋王的两侧，把他们仍然作为帐前银枪都。
English: The next day, Jin Wang, dressed in a wide-brimmed light coat, continued to advance very calmly, ordering Zhang Yan's soldiers to wear armor and carry guns, fully armed, to follow on both sides of Jin Wang, and still regard them as the front-line silver guns.

古文：众心由是大服。
现代文：乱军士兵从此顺服了晋王。
English: The rebel soldiers obeyed the Jin king from then on.

古文：刘鄩闻晋军至，选兵万馀人，自洹水趣魏县。
现代文：刘听到晋军将要到来，选出一万多士卒从洹水直达魏县。
English: When Liu heard that the Jin army was about to arrive, he selected more than ten thousand soldiers to march from Surabaya to Wei County.

古文：晋王留李存审屯临清，遣史建瑭屯魏县以拒之，王自引亲军至魏县，与鄩夹河为营。
现代文：晋王留下李存审的军队驻扎在临清，同时派遣史建瑭屯兵魏县来抵御刘，晋王亲自率领随身护卫的士兵到了魏县，与刘在漳河的两岸安营扎寨。
English: Jin Wang left Li Cunxin's army stationed in Linqing, and at the same time dispatched Shi Jiankun's troops to Wei County to resist Liu. Jin Wang personally led the soldiers who accompanied him to Wei County, and camped with Liu on both sides of the Wei River.

古文：帝闻魏博叛，大悔惧，遣天平节度使牛存节将兵屯杨刘，为鄩声援。
现代文：后梁帝听说魏博这个重要军镇投降了晋王，感到十分悔恨和恐惧，于是派遣天平节度使牛存节率兵驻扎在杨刘，声援刘。
English: When Emperor Houliang heard that Wei Bo, an important military town, had surrendered to the King of Jin, he felt very remorseful and fearful, so he sent Tianping Jiedu to have Niu Cunjie and his soldiers stationed in Yang Liu to support Liu.

古文：会存节病卒，以匡国节度使王檀代之。
现代文：不久，牛存节病死，又用匡国节度使王檀代替了他。
English: Soon after, Niu Cun Jie died of illness, and Wang Dan replaced him with Kuang Guo Jie.

古文：岐王遣彰义节度使刘知俊围邠州，霍彦威固守拒之。
现代文：岐王李茂贞派遣彰义节度使刘知俊包围了州，后梁将霍彦威坚守州抵御。
English: The king of Qi, Li Maozhen, sent the Zhangyi army to encircle the state, and Liu Zhijun surrounded the state. Houyanwei was firmly defended by Li Liang.

古文：六月，庚寅朔，贺德伦帅将吏请晋王入府城慰劳。
现代文：六月，庚寅朔，贺德伦率领将吏请求晋王入府慰劳士卒。
English: In June, Geng Yinshuo and He Delun led the generals to request Jin Wang to enter the palace to comfort the laborers.

古文：既入，德伦上印节，请王兼领天雄军，王固辞，曰： 比闻汴寇侵逼贵道，故亲董师徒，远来相救。又闻城中新罹涂炭，故暂入存抚。
现代文：晋王入府以后，贺德伦送上天雄军府印和天雄旌节，请求晋王兼管天雄军，晋王一再辞让说： 近来听说汴梁强寇侵逼您的军镇，所以亲自督率士卒，远道来相救；又听说城中百姓最近遭到严重残害和灾难，所以亲自暂时进城安抚一下。
English: After Jin Wang entered the capital, He Delun sent Tianxiong the seal of the capital and Tianxiong the seal of the military, and asked Jin Wang to be in charge of Tianxiong's army. Jin Wang repeatedly declined, saying, "Recently, I heard that the Qiliang strong robbers invaded your military town, so I personally led the officers and men to come a long way to rescue them; I also heard that the people in the city had recently suffered serious damage and disaster, so I personally temporarily entered the city to appease them.

古文：明公不垂鉴信，乃以印节见推，诚非素怀。 
现代文：您却不能理解、信任，竟用印节来表示推让，这不合我的心愿。 
English: But you can't understand, trust, and even use the seal to express concession, which is not what I want.

古文：德伦再拜曰： 今寇敌密迩，军城新有大变，人心未安。德伦腹心纪纲为张彦所杀殆尽，形孤势弱，安能统众！
现代文：贺德伦又一再拜谢说： 现在寇敌逼近，军营中最近又有大的变化，人心未安，我的亲信臣仆都被张彦杀死，形势十分孤弱，怎么能统率大家呢？
English: Hodelun also repeatedly said, "Now the enemy is approaching, there have recently been major changes in the military camp, people are not at ease, my trusted servants have all been killed by Zhang Yan, the situation is very weak, how can I lead everyone?"

古文：一旦生事，恐负大恩。 
现代文：一旦发生事情，唯恐辜负晋王的大恩。 
English: If something happens, I'm afraid I won't be able to live up to Jin Wang's great favor.

古文：王乃受之。
现代文：晋王于是接受了他的印节。
English: The Jin king then accepted his seal.

古文：德伦帅将吏拜贺，王承制以德伦为大同节度使，遣之官。
现代文：贺德伦带领将吏拜贺，晋王按照规制任命贺德伦为大同节度使，并派他立即赴任。
English: The Jin king, in accordance with the regulations, appointed He Delun as the delegate of the Grand Tongue Festival, and sent him to the post immediately.

古文：德伦至晋阳，张承业留之。
现代文：贺德伦到了晋阳，被张承业留了下来。
English: When Hedren arrived in Jinyang, he was left behind by Zhang Chengye.

古文：时银枪效节都在魏城犹骄横，晋王下令： 自今有朋党流言及暴掠百姓者，杀无赦！ 
现代文：这个时候，银枪效节都在魏州城仍然很骄横，于是晋王下令： 从今以后如有结为朋党、传播流言和以暴力掠夺百姓的人，坚决杀掉，决不宽容。 
English: At this time, the silver gun effect festival was still very arrogant in Weizhou City, so the Jin king ordered: From now on, if there are people who are friends of the party, spread rumors and plunder the people with violence, resolutely kill and never tolerate.

古文：以沁州刺史李存进为天雄都巡按使。
现代文：任命沁州刺史李存进为天雄都巡按使。
English: Li Cunjin, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the envoy of Tianxiongdu.

古文：有讹言摇众及强取人一钱已上者，存进皆枭首磔尸于市。
现代文：凡有传播流言蜚语来动摇民众及用武力强夺别人一钱以上的人，李存进都砍头裂尸示众。
English: Li Cunxin cut off the heads and dismembered the bodies of all those who spread rumors to shake the public and used force to extort more than a dollar from others.

古文：旬日，城中肃然，无敢喧哗者。
现代文：过了十来天，城中非常安静，没有敢吵吵嚷嚷的人。
English: After about ten days, the city was very quiet, and no one dared to make a noise.

古文：存进本姓孙，名重进，振武人也。
现代文：李存进本姓孙，名字叫重进，振武人。
English: Li Cunjin's real surname is Sun, his given name is Chongjin, and his given name is Zhenwu.

古文：晋王多出征讨，天雄军府事皆委判官司空颋决之。
现代文：晋王经常出征打仗，天雄军府的事情都委托判官司空处理。
English: Jin Wang often went out to fight wars, and entrusted the affairs of the Tianxiong Military Government to the magistrate Siku to deal with.

古文：颋恃才挟势，睚眦必报，纳贿骄侈。
现代文：司空依仗他的才干和势力，小怨小忿都要报复，经常受贿，又很骄横奢侈。
English: Siku relies on his talent and strength, takes revenge for small grudges, often takes bribes, and is arrogant and extravagant.

古文：颋有从子在河南，颋密使人召之。都虞候张裕执其使者以白王，王责颋曰： 自吾得魏博，庶事悉以委公，公何得见欺如是！
现代文：他有个侄儿在黄河以南，司空秘密派人把他召来，都虞候张裕抓住司空的使者，报告了晋王，晋王遣责司空说： 自从我得到魏博以后，日常事务都委托你来处理，你为什么如此欺骗我？
English: He had a nephew south of the Yellow River. Siku secretly sent someone to summon him. Zhang Yu seized Siku's messenger and reported to the Jin king. The Jin king scolded Siku and said, "Since I got Weibo, I have entrusted you to handle my daily affairs. Why did you deceive me like this?"

古文：独不可先相示邪？ 
现代文：难道不可以事先向我报告吗？ 
English: Isn't it possible to inform me in advance?

古文：揖令归第。
现代文：很客气地让他回家。
English: He was graciously allowed to go home.

古文：是日，族诛于军门，以判官王正言代之。
现代文：就在这一天，在军门将司空的家族都杀掉。随即让判官王正言代替了他的职务。
English: On this very day, the family of the military gatekeeper, Sikuo, was killed, and the judge, Wang Zhengyan, immediately took his place.

古文：正言，郓州人也。
现代文：王正言是郓州人。
English: Wang Zhengyan is from Zhangzhou.

古文：魏州孔目吏孔谦，勤敏多计数，善治簿书，晋王以为支度务使。
现代文：魏州孔目吏孔谦，勤劳敏捷，多计谋，善于管理簿记帐册，晋王任命他为支度务使。
English: Kong Qian, an official of the Wei State Confucius Institute, was diligent, quick-witted, resourceful, and good at managing books and account books. Jin Wang appointed him as a preparatory envoy.

古文：谦能曲事权要，由是宠任弥固。
现代文：孔谦能够婉转变通，讨好有权势的要人，因此对他的宠信和任用越来越稳固。
English: Kong Qian is able to gently change his mind and please the powerful dignitaries, so his favor and appointment are becoming more and more stable.

古文：魏州新乱之后，府库空竭，民间疲弊，而聚三镇之兵，战于河上，殆将十年，供亿军须，未尝有阙，谦之力也。
现代文：魏州新遭动乱以后，府库财物空竭，民间也很疲惫。集中并、魏、镇三镇的士卒，在黄河边作战将近十年，军队的供给从未有过短缺，这些全靠孔谦之力。
English: After the recent turmoil in Weizhou, the government treasury was depleted and the people were exhausted. The soldiers from the central government, Weizhou and the three towns fought along the Yellow River for nearly ten years, and there was never a shortage of supplies for the army. All of this was thanks to Kong Qian.

古文：然急征重敛，使六州愁苦，归怨于王，亦其所为也。
现代文：然而紧急征集重敛财物，使魏博六州的百姓愁苦不堪，以致百姓归怨于晋王，也是孔谦所为。
English: However, the urgent collection and accumulation of wealth caused the people in the six states of Weibo to be distressed, so that the people resented Jin Wang, which was also done by Kong Qian.

古文：张彦之以魏博归晋也，贝州刺史张源德不从，北结沧德，南连刘鄩以拒晋，数断镇、定粮道。
现代文：张彦献魏博叛归晋国时，贝州刺史张源德不听从他，北面联合沧州、德州，南面连接刘来抵御晋军，曾多次断绝镇州、定州的粮路。
English: When Zhang Yan offered Wei Bo to rebel and return to Jin, Zhang Yuande, the governor of Bei Zhou, did not listen to him. He united Cangzhou and Dezhou in the north and connected Liu in the south to resist the Jin army. He cut off the grain routes of Zhenzhou and Dingzhou many times.

古文：或说晋王： 请先发兵万人取源德，然后东兼沧景，则海隅之地皆为我有。 
现代文：有人劝晋王说： 请先派兵万人夺取张源德占据的贝州，然后再向东夺取沧州、景州，这样沿海一带的地方都可以归我们晋国所有。 
English: Someone advised the Jin king: "Please first send ten thousand soldiers to seize Beizhou, which is occupied by Zhang Yuande, and then to the east to seize Cangzhou and Jingzhou, so that the coastal areas can be owned by our Jin country."

古文：晋王曰： 不然。
现代文：晋王说： 不像你们说的那样。
English: Jinwang said, "It's not like you said.

古文：贝州城坚兵多，未易猝攻。德州录于沧州而无备，若得而戍之，则沧、贝不得往来，二垒既孤，然后可取。 
现代文：贝州城防坚固，兵士很多，不易突然袭击，德州隶属沧州，且没有防备，如能夺取并派兵防守，这样沧州、贝州就不能往来，两个州孤立之后，就可以夺取。 
English: Beizhou is well-fortified, has many soldiers, and is not easy to be attacked suddenly. Texas belongs to Cangzhou, and has no defenses. If it can be captured and sent to defense, then Cangzhou and Beizhou cannot travel. After the two states are isolated, they can be captured.

古文：乃遣骑兵五百，昼夜兼行，袭德州。
现代文：于是晋王派遣五百骑兵，昼夜兼行，前往袭击德州。
English: So the Jin king dispatched five hundred horsemen, traveling both day and night, to attack Texas.

古文：刺史不意晋兵至，逾城走，遂克之，以辽州守捉将马通为刺史。
现代文：德州刺史没想到晋军会到来，翻越城墙逃走，德州被晋军攻下，晋王任命辽州守捉将马通为德州刺史。
English: The prince of Texas did not expect the Jin army to come, he climbed over the city wall to escape, Texas was captured by the Jin army, and the Jin king appointed Liaozhou to guard and capture Matong as the prince of Texas.

古文：秋，七月，晋人夜袭澶州，陷之。
现代文：秋季七月，晋军在一个晚上偷袭澶州，并攻破。
English: In the autumn of July, the Jin army made a surprise attack on Zhangzhou in one night and broke through.

古文：刺史王彦章在刘鄩营，晋人获其妻子，待之甚厚，遣间使诱彦章，彦章斩其使，晋人尽灭其家。
现代文：此时澶州刺史王彦章正在刘的军营中，晋人在城内俘获了王彦章的妻子，晋人待他们十分优厚。晋人派出秘密使者前去引诱王彦章，王彦章杀了晋使，晋人把他的全家都杀死。
English: At this time, Wang Yanzhang, the governor of Zhangzhou, was in Liu's military camp. The Jin captured Wang Yanzhang's wife in the city, and the Jin treated them very well. The Jin sent a secret envoy to lure Wang Yanzhang, Wang Yanzhang killed the envoy, and the Jin killed his entire family.

古文：晋王以魏州将李岩为澶州刺史。
现代文：晋王任命魏州将领李岩为澶州刺史。
English: Jin Wang appointed Li Yan, the general of Weizhou, as the crown prince of Zhangzhou.

古文：晋王劳军于魏县，因帅百馀骑循河而上，觇刘鄩营。
现代文：晋王在魏县慰劳军队，趁机率领百余骑兵沿河而上，偷偷地侦察刘的军营。
English: Jin Wang took the opportunity to lead more than a hundred cavalry along the river and secretly scouted Liu's military camp.

古文：会天阴晦，鄩伏兵五千于河曲丛林间，鼓噪而出，围王数重。
现代文：此时正好遇上天气阴暗，刘在河流拐弯处的丛林中埋伏下五千多士兵，一边呼叫一边击鼓冲了出来，把晋王包围了好几层。
English: At this time, the weather just happened to be gloomy. Liu ambushed more than five thousand soldiers in the jungle at the bend of the river. While shouting and drumming, he rushed out and surrounded Jin Wang for several layers.

古文：王跃马大呼，帅骑驰突，所向披靡。
现代文：晋王策马腾跃，大声疾呼，率领骑兵突围，所向披靡。
English: Jin Wang pranced his horse, shouted loudly, and led the cavalry to break out of the encirclement.

古文：裨将夏鲁奇等操短兵力战，自午至申乃得出，亡其七骑，鲁奇手杀百馀人，伤夷遍体，会李存审救兵至，乃得免。
现代文：副将夏鲁奇等手持刀剑与刘的围兵奋力战斗，从午时一直打到申时才逃出去，有七名骑兵在战斗中死亡，夏鲁奇亲手杀死百余人，他自己遍体伤痕，正好这时李存审的援兵赶到，这才得免于难。
English: Vice-commander Xialuqi and others fought hard with Liu's encircling troops with swords in hand. They fought from noon until dusk before escaping. Seven cavalrymen died in the battle. Xialuqi killed more than a hundred people with his own hands. He was covered with scars. It was just at this time that Li Cunxiu's reinforcements arrived, which saved him from trouble.

古文：王顾谓从骑曰： 几为虏嗤。 
现代文：晋王回过头来对随从骑兵说： 差点儿成为俘虏被人讥笑。 
English: Jin Wang turned to his cavalry and said, "I almost became a prisoner and was ridiculed.

古文：皆曰： 适足使敌人见大王之英武耳。 
现代文：骑兵们说： 这次正足以让敌人见见大王的英俊威武。 
English: The cavalrymen said: This time is just enough for the enemy to see the king's handsome and powerful horse.

古文：鲁奇，青州人也，王以是益爱之，赐姓名曰李绍奇。
现代文：夏鲁奇是青州人。晋王因此更加喜爱他，并赐姓名叫李绍奇。
English: Sharuch is a native of Qingzhou. Therefore, the king of Jin loved him even more and gave him the name Li Shaochi.

古文：刘鄩以晋兵尽在魏州，晋阳必虚，欲以奇计袭取之，乃潜引兵自黄泽西去。
现代文：刘鄩认为晋军都在魏州作战，晋阳城一定空虚，打算用奇计袭取晋阳，于是偷偷地率兵从黄泽出发向西开进。
English: Liu Bei thought that the Jin forces were all fighting in Weizhou, and that the city of Jinyang must be empty. He planned to use a cunning plan to attack Jinyang, so he secretly led his troops from Huangze to the west.

古文：晋人怪鄩军数日不出，寂无声迹，遣骑觇之，城中无烟火，但时见旗帜循堞往来。
现代文：晋军感到刘军队好多天没有出来，寂静无声，也没有什么活动迹象，于是派出骑兵去侦察刘的军营，结果城中没有烟火，只是有时看到旗帜顺着城堞来回走动。
English: The Jin army felt that Liu's army had not come out for many days, silent and silent, and there was no sign of activity, so they sent cavalry to scout Liu's military camp. As a result, there were no fireworks in the city, but sometimes they saw flags walking back and forth along the battlements.

古文：晋王曰： 吾闻刘鄩用兵，一步百计，此必诈也。
现代文：晋王说： 我听说刘用兵，一步百计，这里面一定有诈。 
English: Jin Wang said, "I have heard that Liu uses soldiers, and every step is calculated. There must be some deception in this.

古文：更使觇之，乃缚刍为人，执旗乘驴在城上耳。
现代文：于是又派出一些人去侦察，发现顺着城堞来回走动的旗帜是用草捆绑的草人打着旗帜骑着驴在城上来回走动。
English: So they sent out some men to investigate, and they found that the flags that were moving back and forth along the battlements were grass-bound straw men carrying flags and riding donkeys back and forth over the city.

古文：得城中老弱者诘之，云军去已二日矣。
现代文：后来抓到城里年老体弱的人查问，都说刘军队已经离开两天了。
English: Later, when the old and infirm in the city were caught and questioned, they all said that Liu's army had left two days ago.

古文：晋王曰： 刘鄩长于袭人，短于决战，计彼行才及山下。 
现代文：晋王说： 刘擅长于偷袭别人，但在决战上有所欠缺，估计刘的军队刚刚走到山下。 
English: Jin Wang said, "Liu is good at sneak attacks on others, but he lacks in decisive battles. It is estimated that Liu's army has just reached the foot of the mountain.

古文：亟发骑兵追之。
现代文：于是晋王迅速派出骑兵去追赶刘。
English: Therefore, Jin Wang quickly sent cavalry to chase Liu.

古文：会阴雨积旬，黄泽道险，堇泥深尺馀，士卒援藤葛而进，皆腹疾足肿，或坠崖谷死者什二三。
现代文：这时正好遇上十几天来阴雨连绵，黄泽的道路更加艰险，烂泥有一尺多深，士卒们都是拉着藤葛等树木向前推进，好多人都腹泄脚肿，有十分之二三的士卒因此而死亡。
English: At this time, it just so happened that it had been raining for a dozen days in a row, and the road to Huangze was more difficult. The mud was more than a foot deep, and the soldiers were all pulling trees such as rattan. Many people had swollen feet, and two-thirds of the soldiers died as a result.

古文：晋将李嗣恩倍道先入晋阳，城中知之，勒兵为备。
现代文：晋将李嗣恩领兵日夜兼行，抢先进入晋阳城，晋阳城内的人得知他回来，便整顿军队，防备刘的进攻。
English: Jin general Li Shion led the troops day and night, and entered Jinyang City ahead of time. When the people in Jinyang City learned that he had returned, they reorganized the army and prepared for Liu's attack.

古文：鄩至乐平，糗粮且尽。又闻晋有备，追兵在后，众惧，将溃。鄩谕之曰： 今去家千里，深入敌境，腹背有兵，山谷高深，如坠井中，去将何之！
现代文：刘行到乐平时，干粮将要吃完，又听说晋阳已有防备，追兵又在后面，士卒们都感到害怕，行将溃散，刘告谕他的将士们说： 现在我们离开家乡已有一千多里，深入了敌境，前面和背后都有敌兵，这里山高谷深，就像掉在井里一样，下一步将怎么办呢？
English: When Liu Xing arrived at Leping, he was about to run out of dry rations. He also heard that Jinyang was already prepared, and the pursuit was behind. The soldiers were afraid and were about to scatter. Liu told his soldiers: "Now we have left our hometown for more than a thousand miles, we have gone deep into the enemy territory, there are enemy soldiers in front and behind, the mountains and valleys are deep here, just like falling into a well. What will we do next?

古文：惟力战庶几可免，不则以死报君亲耳。 
现代文：只有奋力战斗，也许可以免于不幸，否则就只能以死来回报君王、父老了。 
English: If you fight hard, you may be able to avoid misfortune. Otherwise, you can only repay the king and your father with death.

古文：众泣而止。
现代文：将士们停止了哭泣。
English: The soldiers stopped crying.

古文：周德威闻鄩西上，自幽州引千骑救晋阳，至土门，鄩已整众下山，自邢州陈宋口逾漳水而东，屯于宗城。
现代文：晋将周德威听说刘率军自黄泽西上，于是率领一千多骑兵从幽州出发前往援救晋阳，行至土门时，刘已经整顿部队下了山，从邢州陈宋口渡过漳河水向东而去，驻扎在宗城。
English: Jin commander Zhou Dewei heard that Liu led an army from the Yellow Jersey to the Jinyang River, so he led more than a thousand cavalrymen from Yuzhou to rescue Jinyang. When he went to Dumen, Liu had reorganized the troops down the mountain, crossed the Jinyang River from Chen Songkou in Zhangzhou to the east, and stationed in Munchen.

古文：鄩军往还，马死殆半。
现代文：刘在进军、撤军往来中，战马死掉将近一半。
English: During Liu's advance and withdrawal, nearly half of the horses died.

古文：时晋军乏食，鄩知临清有蓄积，欲据之以绝晋粮道。
现代文：这时，晋军缺乏军粮，刘得知临清有晋军的积蓄，打算占据临清来断绝晋军的粮道。
English: At this time, the Jin army was short of food. Liu learned that Linqing had the savings of the Jin army and planned to occupy Linqing to cut off the Jin army's food supply.

古文：德威急追鄩，再宿，至南宫，遣骑擒其斥候者数十人，断腕而纵之，使言曰： 周侍中已据临清矣！ 
现代文：周德威紧急追赶刘的军队，两天两夜赶到南宫，然后派出骑兵抓了刘的十多个哨兵，把他们的手腕打断以后放了他们，让他们回去告诉刘说： 周德威已经占据了临清。 
English: Zhou Dewei urgently chased Liu's army, and arrived at the Southern Palace in two days and two nights. He then sent cavalry to arrest more than ten of Liu's sentinels, broke their wrists and released them, and let them go back to tell Liu: Zhou Dewei has occupied Linqing.

古文：鄩军大骇。
现代文：刘的士卒十分惊骇。
English: Liu's fellow officers were horrified.

古文：诘朝，德威略鄩营而过，入临清，鄩引军趋贝州。
现代文：第二早晨，周德威率军劫掠刘的军营而过，进入临清，刘率领部队迅速到了贝州。
English: The next morning, Zhou Dewei led the army to plunder Liu's military camp and entered Linqing. Liu led the troops to quickly march to Bechu.

古文：时晋王出师屯博州，刘鄩军堂邑，周德威攻之，不克。
现代文：这时，晋王率军驻扎在博州，刘驻扎在堂邑，周德威率军攻打刘，没有攻下。
English: At this time, Jin Wang led the army stationed in Bozhou, Liu stationed in Dongyi, Zhou Dewi led the army to attack Liu, but failed to capture.

古文：翌日，鄩军于莘县，晋军踵之，鄩治莘城，堑而守之，自莘及河筑甬道以通馈饷。
现代文：第二天，刘驻扎在莘县，晋军接踵而来，刘整治莘城，挖了壕沟坚守着，并从莘城到黄河筑起了甬道，用来运送粮饷。
English: The next day, Liu was stationed in Handan County. The Jin army came one after another. Liu repaired Handan City, dug a trench to hold on, and built a causeway from Handan City to the Yellow River to transport grain.

古文：晋王营于莘西三十里，烟火相望，一日数战。
现代文：晋王则在莘城以西三十里安下军营，两军烟火相望，每天都要打好几次仗。
English: Jin Wang, on the other hand, set up a military camp 30 miles west of Lucheng. The two armies looked at each other with fireworks and fought several times a day.

古文：晋王爱元行钦骁健，从代州刺史李嗣源求之，嗣源不得已献之，以为散员都部署，赐姓名曰李绍荣。
现代文：晋王特别喜爱元行钦的勇猛刚强，便向代州刺史李嗣源索求，李嗣源不得已，把元行钦献给晋王，晋王任命他为散员都部署。并赐给他姓名叫李绍荣。
English: Jin Wang was particularly fond of Yuan Xingqin's bravery and strength, so he asked the Daizhou-based historian Li Siyuan for his opinion. Li Siyuan had no choice but to dedicate Yuan Xingqin to Jin Wang, who appointed him as a scout and gave him the name Li Shaorong.

古文：绍荣尝力战深入，剑中其面，未解，高行周救之得免。
现代文：李绍荣曾深入敌军奋力作战，不幸面部被剑刺中，但他没有放松战斗，幸好高行周率军救了他，才免于一死。
English: Li Shaorong once went deep into the enemy army to fight hard. Unfortunately, his face was pierced by a sword, but he did not relax in the battle. Fortunately, Gao Xingzhou and his army saved him from death.

古文：王复欲求行周，重于发言，密使人以官禄啖之。
现代文：晋王又打算索求高行周，但难以启齿，便秘密派人去用官禄来引诱他。
English: Jin Wang also planned to solicit Gao Xing Zhou, but it was difficult to speak out, so he secretly sent someone to use the official salary to lure him.

古文：行周辞曰： 代州养壮士，亦为大王耳，行周事代州，亦犹事大王也。
现代文：高行周推辞说： 代州培养的壮士也是为了大王，我侍奉代州也就同侍奉大王一样。
English: Gao Xingzhou said, "The strong men trained in Daizhou are also for the great king, and I serve Daizhou just as I serve the great king."

古文：代州脱行周兄弟于死，行周不忍负之。 
现代文：代州人从死亡中解救了行周兄弟，我不忍心辜负了代州人。 
English: Daizhou people rescued the Xing Zhou brothers from death. I couldn't bear to fail the Daizhou people.

古文：乃止。
现代文：晋王才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：绛州刺史尹皓攻晋之隰州，八月，又攻慈州，皆不克。
现代文：绛州刺史尹皓攻打晋王的隰州，八月，又攻打慈州，都没有攻克。
English: In August, he attacked Cizhou, but failed to conquer it.

古文：王檀与昭义留后贺瑰攻澶州，拔之，执李岩，送东都。
现代文：王檀与昭义节度使留后贺一起攻打澶州，把澶州攻克，并抓获了晋王任命的澶州刺史李岩，将他押送到东都。
English: Wang Dan and Zhao Yi sent Ruo He to attack Bozhou together with Zhao Yi and conquered Bozhou, and captured Li Yan, the governor of Bozhou appointed by Jin Wang, and sent him to Dongdu.

古文：帝以杨师厚故将杨延直为澶州刺史，使将兵万人助刘鄩，且招诱魏人。
现代文：后梁帝任命杨师厚旧部杨延直为澶州刺史，让他率一万士卒去援助刘，并招诱魏州人前去。
English: Later, Emperor Liang appointed Yang Shihou's former subordinate Yang Yanzhong as the governor of Zhangzhou, and asked him to lead ten thousand soldiers to aid Liu, and invite the people of Wei to go.

古文：晋王遣李存审将兵五千击贝州。
现代文：晋王派遣马步副总管李存审率领五千士卒去攻打贝州。
English: Jin Wang dispatched Ma Bu's deputy general manager Li Cunxin to lead five thousand soldiers to attack Beizhou.

古文：张源德有卒三千，每夕分出剽掠，州民苦之，请堑其城以安耕耘。
现代文：贝州刺史张源德有三千士卒，每天夜晚出去抢劫，贝州人民甚为痛苦，请求李存审挖沟阻止他们出城骚扰，以使人民能安居耕耘。
English: There are three thousand soldiers of Zhangyuande, the chief of Baizhou, who go out to rob every night. The people of Baizhou are very distressed and ask Li Cunxun to dig a ditch to prevent them from leaving the city and harassing them, so that the people can live and work in peace.

古文：存审乃发八县丁夫堑而围之。
现代文：李存审便发动贝州八县的丁夫，挖堑壕把城围起来。
English: Li Cunxin then mobilized the Dingfu of eight counties in Bozhou to dig trenches and encircle the city.

古文：刘鄩在莘久，馈运不给，晋人数抵其寨下挑战，鄩不出。
现代文：刘鄩在莘城驻守了很长时间，军粮不能运输供给，晋军曾多次到他的营寨下挑衅，刘的部队不出来。
English: Liu Bei had been stationed in Lucheng for a long time. Military food could not be transported and supplied. Jin troops had repeatedly come to his camp to provoke him. Liu's troops could not come out.

古文：晋人乃攻绝其甬道，以千馀斧斩寨木，梁人惊忧而出，因俘获而还。
现代文：于是晋军断绝了他的甬道，一千多人手持斧刀砍伐刘的寨木，后梁的士卒惊恐地逃出营寨，被晋人俘获回去。
English: As a result, the Jin army cut off his escape route. More than a thousand men armed with axes and knives cut down Liu's stockade. Houliang's soldiers fled the camp in fear and were captured by the Jin.

古文：帝以诏书让鄩老师费粮，失亡多，不速战。鄩奏称： 臣比欲以奇兵捣其腹心，还取镇、定，期以旬时再清河朔。
现代文：后梁帝下诏书谴责刘劳师费粮，造成伤亡大，又不速战，刘回奏说： 我们本来计划用骑兵攻打他的心腹晋阳，回师时夺取镇、定二州，以十天为期，清除河朔一带的敌人。
English: After Emperor Liang issued an edict condemning Liu Law for wasting food, causing heavy casualties, and not fighting promptly, Liu Hui said: We had originally planned to use cavalry to attack his henchman Jinyang, seize the town and Ding Erzhou when returning to the division, and clear the enemy in and around Hexuo for a period of ten days.

古文：无何天未厌乱，淫雨积旬，粮竭士病。
现代文：但天时不利，十多天阴雨连绵，军粮匮乏，士卒疲病。
English: However, the weather was unfavourable, with more than ten days of continuous rain and gloom, a shortage of army rations, and soldiers suffering from exhaustion.

古文：又欲据临清断其馈饷，而周杨五奄至，驰突如神。
现代文：此后，又打算占据临清断绝晋军的粮饷，然而周德威突然来到，奔驰如神。
English: After that, he also intended to occupy the grain reserve of the Jin army in Linqing, but Zhou Dewei suddenly arrived, galloping like a god.

古文：臣今退保莘县，享士训兵以俟进取。
现代文：我现在退保莘县，让士卒们一边休息一边训练，以待下一步继续作战。
English: I am now withdrawing from Baoxian County, allowing the soldiers to rest and train while waiting for the next step to continue the battle.

古文：观其兵数甚多，便习骑射，诚为勍敌，未易轻也。
现代文：我看到晋军的士卒很多，又善于骑射，确实是一支强敌，从来没有敢轻视。
English: I saw a lot of officers and men of the Jin army, and they were good at riding and shooting. It was indeed a strong enemy, and I never dared to despise it.

古文：苟有隙可乘，臣岂敢偷安养寇！ 
现代文：如果有空隙可乘，我哪敢偷安养寇！ 
English: If there is a gap to take advantage of, how can I dare to steal and raise a pigeon!

古文：帝复问鄩决胜之策，鄩曰： 臣今无策，惟愿人给十斛粮，贼可破矣。 
现代文：后梁帝又向刘询问取决胜利的策略，刘回答说： 我今天还没有什么好的策略，只希望能得到每人十斛粮食，这样敌人就可以打败。 
English: Afterward, Emperor Liang asked Liu about the winning strategy. Liu replied, "I don't have any good strategy today. I just hope to get ten bags of grain per person, so that the enemy can be defeated."

古文：帝怒，责鄩曰： 将军蓄米，欲破贼邪，欲疗饥邪？ 
现代文：后梁帝十分生气，谴责刘说： 将军你储备粮食，是准备打败敌人呢，还是打算防止饥饿呢？ 
English: Emperor Hou Liang was very angry and reprimanded Liu, saying: General, when you stockpile grain, are you preparing to defeat the enemy, or are you planning to prevent starvation?

古文：乃遣中使往督战。
现代文：于是派遣中使前往督战。
English: As a result, the dispatched envoy went to supervise the battle.

古文：鄩集诸将问曰： 主上深居禁中，不知军旅，徒与少年新进辈谋之。
现代文：刘召集诸军将领说： 主上深居宫中，不了解军队作战，仅仅和一些新提升的年轻人商量对策。
English: Liu called together the generals and said, "The Lord lives deep in the palace and does not know how the army fights. He is merely discussing countermeasures with some newly promoted young people.

古文：夫兵在临机制变，不可预度。
现代文：作战在于随机应变，不能预先估计。
English: Combat is a random contingency that cannot be predicted in advance.

古文：今敌尚强，与战必不利，奈何？ 
现代文：现在敌军还很强大，和他们作战一定不利于我们，怎么办呢？ 
English: Now the enemy is still very strong, and fighting with them is bound to be to our disadvantage. What should we do?

古文：诸将皆曰：胜负须一决，旷日何待！ 
现代文：诸位将领都说： 不管胜负应当决于一战，这样一直拖下去又能等到什么呢？ 
English: All the generals said: No matter whether victory or defeat should be decided by one battle, what can we wait for by dragging it out like this?

古文：鄩默然，不悦。退谓所亲曰： 主暗臣谀，将骄卒惰，吾未知死所矣！ 
现代文：刘没有说话，不高兴，退下来对他亲近的人说： 主上昏暗愚昧，臣下阿谀奉承，将帅骄傲，士兵懈惰；我不知将要死在什么地方！ 
English: Liu did not speak, he was not happy, he retreated and said to those close to him: "The lord is dim and stupid, the vassals are flattering, the commander is proud, the soldiers are lazy; I do not know where I am going to die!

古文：他日，复集诸将于军门，人置河水一器于前，令饮之，众莫之测。
现代文：一天，刘在军营门口又召集诸军将领，每人面前放了一杯河水，让他们喝掉，众将领不解其中的意思。
English: One day, Liu again gathered the generals at the gate of the camp and placed a glass of river water in front of each of them for them to drink. The generals were puzzled.

古文：鄩谕之曰： 一器犹难，滔滔之河，可胜尽乎！ 
现代文：刘给们解释说： 一杯水都难以喝掉，滔滔不绝的河水难道能够穷尽吗？ 
English: Liu explained to them: It is difficult to drink a glass of water. Can the endless river water be exhausted?

古文：众失色。
现代文：诸将都吓得变了脸色。
English: The generals turned pale with fright.

古文：后数日，鄩将万馀人薄镇、定营，镇、定人惊扰。
现代文：几天以后，刘率领一万多士卒逼近镇、定的军营，镇、定二州的人都感到害怕。
English: A few days later, Liu led more than 10,000 soldiers to approach the military camp in Dingding Township. People in Dingding Township and the two prefectures were scared.

古文：晋李存审以骑兵二千横击之，李建及以银枪千人助之，鄩大败，奔还。
现代文：晋将李存审率领二千骑兵拦腰击刘，李建及率领一千多银枪军前来援助，结果刘被打得大败，奔逃回去。
English: Jin ordered Li Cunxin to lead two thousand cavalrymen to block Liu's attack, and Li Jian and led more than one thousand silver soldiers to come to his aid. As a result, Liu was defeated and fled back.

古文：晋人逐之，及寨下，俘斩千计。
现代文：晋军奋力追赶，一直追到刘营寨之下，俘虏和斩杀了一千多人。
English: The Jin army fought hard to catch up, all the way to Liu Yingzhai, capturing and slaughtering more than a thousand people.

古文：刘岩逆妇于楚，楚王殷遣永顺节度使存送之。
现代文：刘岩到楚国迎接他的妻子，楚王马殷派永顺节度使马存护送他们。
English: Liu Yan went to Chu to meet his wife, and King Ma Yin of Chu sent Yongshun Jiedu to escort them.

古文：乙未，蜀主以兼中书令王宗绾为北路行营都制置使，兼中书令王宗播为招讨使，攻秦州；兼中书令王宗瑶为东北面招讨使，同平章事王宗翰为副使，攻凤州。
现代文：乙未，前蜀主王建任命兼中书令王宗绾为北路行营都制置使，兼中书令王宗播为招讨使，一起攻打秦州。任命兼中书令王宗瑶为东北面招讨使，同平章事王宗翰为副使，一起攻打凤州。
English: Two years later, the former Shu ruler, Wang Jian, appointed Wang Zongxuan as the envoy of the Northern Route Campaign, Wang Zonghan as the envoy of the Invitation Campaign, and Wang Zongxuan as the envoy of the Northeast Invitation Campaign, and Wang Zonghan as the deputy envoy of the Peace Treaty, and together they attacked Fengzhou.

古文：庚戌，吴以镇海节度使徐温为管内水陆马步诸军都指挥使、两浙都招讨使、守侍中、齐国公，镇润州，以升、润、常、宣、歙、池六州为巡属，军国庶务参决如故；留徐知训居广陵秉政。
现代文：庚戌，吴国任命镇海节度使徐温为管内水陆马步诸军都指挥使、两浙都招讨使、守侍中、齐国公，镇守润州，并把升、润、常、宣、歙、池六州都作为他的巡察范围，国家的各种军政事务他都参与决策，和过去一样。
English: Geng Hui and Wu Guo appointed Zhenhai Jiedu to make Xu Wen the commanding envoy of all the armies within the jurisdiction of the water and land horse and foot, the envoys of the two Zhejiang provinces, the attendants of the central government, the governor of Qi, and the town guards of Renzhou, and the six states of Sheng, Renzhou, Chang, Xuan, Handan and Chi as his inspection scope. He participated in the decision-making of various military and political affairs of the country, as in the past.

古文：初，帝为均王，娶河阳节度使张归霸女为妃，即位，欲立为后。
现代文：把徐知训留在广陵掌管那里的政权。当初，后梁帝做均王时，娶了河阳节度使张归霸的女儿作为妃子，即位以后，打算把她立为皇后。
English: He left Xu Zhixun in Guangling in charge of the political power there. At first, when Emperor Houliang was the king of the Jurchen Kingdom, he married the daughter of Heyang Jiedu to Zhang Guiba as his concubine, and after he ascended the throne, he planned to make her the empress.

古文：后以帝未南郊，固辞。
现代文：皇后认为皇帝没有去祭祀天帝，所以一直辞让。
English: The empress thought that the emperor did not go to worship the heavenly emperor, so she kept giving in.

古文：九月，壬午，妃疾甚，册为德妃，是夕，卒。
现代文：九月，壬午，张妃病重，于是册封她为德妃，当天晚上她就病死了。
English: In September, at noon, Zhangfei was seriously ill, so she was named the Empress of Germany, and she died of illness that evening.

古文：康王友敬，目重瞳子，自谓当为天子，遂谋作乱。
现代文：康王朱友敬，眼睛里有两个瞳子，自己说他可以当天子，于是就阴谋发动叛乱。
English: Kang Wang Zhu Youjing, with two pupils in his eyes, said that he could be a sun god, so he plotted to start a rebellion.

古文：冬，十月，辛亥夜，德妃将出葬，友敬使腹心数人匿于寝殿。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛亥夜晚，德妃将要出葬，朱友敬派了几个心腹偷偷藏在寝殿。
English: In the winter, October, Xinhai night, the German empress will be buried, Zhu Youqing sent several confidants to secretly hide in the bedchamber.

古文：帝觉之，跣足逾垣而出，召宿卫兵索殿中，得而手刃之。
现代文：后梁帝发现这后，光着脚翻墙逃了出去。召集宿卫兵在寝殿里搜查，只要抓住叛乱的人就马上杀死。
English: When Emperor Hou Liang discovered this, he fled barefoot over the wall. He summoned the guards to search his bedchamber, and as soon as they caught the rebels, they killed them immediately.

古文：壬子，捕友敬，诛之。
现代文：壬子，抓获了朱友敬，并把他杀死。
English: Jinzi, captured Zhu Youqing, and killed him.

古文：帝由是疏忌宗室，专任赵岩及德妃兄弟汉鼎、汉杰、从兄弟汉伦、汉融，咸居近职，参预谋议，每出兵必使之监护。
现代文：后梁帝因此猜忌、疏远了宗室人员，只信用赵岩及德妃的兄弟张汉鼎、张汉杰，从兄弟张汉伦、张汉融，让他们担任了亲近皇帝的官职，让他们参与朝廷谋议，每次出兵一定派他们监护。
English: As a result, Emperor Houliang was suspicious of and alienated the members of the imperial family. He only trusted Zhao Yan and Defei's brothers Zhang Han Ding and Zhang Han Jie, and his brothers Zhang Han Lun and Zhang Han Rong, allowing them to hold official positions close to the emperor, allowing them to participate in the imperial court's deliberation, and sending them as guardians whenever troops were dispatched.

古文：岩等依势弄权，卖官鬻狱，离间旧将相，敬翔、李振虽为执政，所言多不用。
现代文：赵岩等依权弄势，贪脏枉法，在旧有将相中挑拔离间。敬翔、李振虽然主持政务，但他们所说的话很多都不被采用。
English: Zhao Yan and others have used their power to manipulate the situation, become greedy and corrupt, and sow discord among the old generals. Although Qixiang and Li Zhen presided over government affairs, many of their words were not adopted.

古文：振每称疾不预事，以避赵、张之族，政事日紊，以至于亡。
现代文：李振经常装病不去参与政事，以此来回避赵岩、张归霸家族。后来政事越来越乱，以至于后梁朝灭亡。
English: Li Zhen often feigned illness to avoid participating in political affairs in order to avoid Zhao Yan and Zhang Guiba's family. Later, political affairs became more and more chaotic, leading to the downfall of the Later Liang Dynasty.

古文：刘鄩遣卒诈降于晋，谋赂膳夫以毒晋王。事泄，晋王杀之，并其党五人。
现代文：刘派遣士卒去晋王那里诈降，企图贿赂为晋王做饭的厨师来毒死晋王，后来事情败露，晋王杀死了这些士卒及其同党五人。
English: Liu sent soldiers to Jin Wang to betray him, and tried to bribe the chef who cooked for Jin Wang to poison Jin Wang. Later, it was revealed that Jin Wang killed these soldiers and five of his party members.

古文：十一月，己未夜，蜀宫火。
现代文：十一月，己未夜晚，前蜀的宫中失火。
English: In November, before the night was over, a fire broke out in the former Shu's palace.

古文：自得成都以来，宝货贮于百尺楼，悉为煨烬。
现代文：自从前蜀得到成都以来，一些宝物奇货都储藏在百尺楼里，这次大火，全部化为灰烬。
English: Since the former Shu obtained Chengdu, some treasures and curiosities have been stored in the hundred-foot building. This fire, all turned into ashes.

古文：诸军都指挥使兼中书令宗侃等帅卫兵欲入救火，蜀主闭门不内。
现代文：诸军都指挥使兼中书令王宗侃率领卫打算进入宫中救火，但蜀主关起门来不让他们进去。
English: Wang Zongkan, the commander of all the armies and the commander of the Chinese army, led the guards to enter the palace to put out the fire, but Shu closed the door and did not let them enter.

古文：庚申旦，火犹未熄，蜀主出义兴门见群臣，命有司聚太庙神主，分巡都城，言毕，复入宫闭门。将相皆献帷幕饮食。
现代文：庚申的早晨，大火还没有熄灭，蜀主走出义兴门外会见了群臣，并命令有司把太庙神都召集起来，又让他们去视察都城，说完以后，又回到宫中，把宫门关闭起来，将相们都向蜀主进献帷幕和食物。
English: On the morning of Goshun, when the fire had not yet been extinguished, Shu walked out of the Yixing Gate to meet with the courtiers. He also ordered the secretary to gather all the gods of the ancient temple and let them go to inspect the capital city. After he finished speaking, he returned to the palace, closed the palace gate, and brought all the attendants to present the curtain and food to Shu.

古文：壬戌，蜀大赦。
现代文：壬戌，前蜀实行大赦。
English: For example, a general amnesty was implemented in Jinshan and former Shu.

古文：乙丑，改元
现代文：乙丑，后梁帝改换了年号。
English: Second ugly, after Emperor Liang changed the year.

古文：己巳，蜀王宗翰引兵出青泥岭，克固镇，与秦州将郭守谦战于泥阳川。
现代文：己巳，前蜀王宗翰率兵出青泥岭，攻克固镇，与秦州将领郭守谦在泥阳川交战。
English: At that time, the former Shu King Zonghan led his troops out of Qingdeiling, conquered Guzhen, and fought with the Qin State General Guo Shouqian in Deyang River.

古文：蜀兵败，退保鹿台山。
现代文：前蜀兵败退，撤到鹿台山坚守。
English: The former Shu soldiers were defeated and retreated to Ludaishan to hold out.

古文：辛未，王宗绾等败秦州兵于金沙谷，擒其将李彦巢等，乘胜趣秦州。
现代文：辛未，王宗绾率军在金沙谷击败秦州士兵，抓获了他们的将领李彦巢等，乘胜开赴秦州。
English: In Xinwei, Wang Zonglu led the army to defeat the Qin soldiers in Jinsha Valley, captured their general Li Yanxu and others, and took advantage of the victory to go to Qin.

古文：兴州刺史王宗鐸克阶州，降其刺史李彦安。
现代文：兴州刺史王宗铎攻克阶州，阶州刺史李彦安投降。
English: Wang Zongqi, the prince of Xingzhou, conquered Shaoshou, and Li Yan'an, the prince of Shaoshou, surrendered.

古文：甲戌，王宗绾克成州，擒其刺史李彦德。
现代文：甲戌，王宗绾攻下成州，阶州刺史李彦安投降。
English: Jiuquan, Wang Zonglu conquered Chengzhou, and Li Yan'an, the governor of Chaozhou, surrendered.

古文：蜀军至上染坊，秦州节度使李继崇遣其子彦秀奉牌印迎降。
现代文：甲戌，王宗绾攻下成州，俘获刺史李彦德。前蜀军行至上染坊，秦州节度使李继宗派他的儿子李彦秀拿着牌印迎降于前蜀军。
English: The former Shu army marched to Shangye Dyeing Factory, and the Qin State Festival made Li Jizong send his son, Li Yanxiu, to meet the former Shu army with a seal.

古文：宗绛入秦州，表排陈使王宗俦为留后。
现代文：王宗绛进入秦州，上表荐排阵使王宗俦为秦州留后。
English: Wang Zonglu entered Qinzhou, and the above-mentioned recommended formation made Wang Zonglu stay behind in Qinzhou.

古文：刘知俊攻霍彦威于邠州，半岁不克，闻秦州降蜀，知俊妻子皆迁成都。
现代文：后梁将领刘知俊在州进攻霍彦威，半年也没有攻克，后来听说秦州已经投降前蜀军，刘知俊的妻、子都迁往成都。
English: Liu Zhijun, the general of Houliang, attacked Huoyangwei in Zhou, but did not conquer it for half a year. Later, he heard that Qinzhou had surrendered to the former Shu army, and Liu Zhijun's wife and son moved to Chengdu.

古文：知俊解围还凤翔，终惧及祸，夜帅亲兵七十人，斩关而出，庚辰，奔于蜀军。
现代文：刘知俊撤军回到凤翔，很害怕祸及已身，于是在夜晚率领七十个亲信，过关斩将逃出军营，庚辰，投奔前蜀军。
English: Liu Zhijun retreated back to Fengxiang, very afraid that the disaster would be fatal, so he led seventy cronies in the night to escape from the military camp, Gengchen, and join the former Shu army.

古文：王宗绾自河池、两当进兵，会王宗瑶攻凤州，癸未，克之。
现代文：王宗绾从河池、两当率兵前进，适逢王宗瑶攻打凤州，癸未，攻克凤州。
English: Wang Zongyao led his troops from Hechi and Futang to advance. Wang Zongyao attacked Fengzhou at the right time and conquered Fengzhou at the wrong time.

古文：岐义胜节度使、同平章事李彦韬知岐王衰弱，十二月，举耀、鼎二州来降。
现代文：岐国义胜节度使、同平章事李彦韬知道岐王很衰弱，十二月，率领耀、鼎州来投降。
English: Li Yanqi, the envoy of the Yi Sheng Festival of the State of Qin, knew that the King of Qin was very weak. In December, he led Yao and Dingzhou to surrender.

古文：彦韬即温韬也。
现代文：李彦韬就是温韬。
English: Li Yanjun is a warm-hearted person.

古文：乙未，诏改耀州为崇州，鼎州为裕州，义胜军为静胜军，复彦韬姓温氏，名昭图，官任如故。
现代文：乙未，后梁帝下诏改耀州为崇州，改鼎州为裕州，改义胜军为静胜军，恢复李彦韬姓温，名叫昭图，他所任的一切官职和原来一样。
English: After Emperor Liang issued the edict to change Yaozhou to Chongzhou, Dingzhou to Yuzhou, and the Yixing Victory Army to the Jing Victory Army, Li Yanjun's surname Wen and his name Zhaotu were restored, and all the official positions he held were the same as before.

古文：丁未，蜀大赦；改明年元曰通正。
现代文：丁未，前蜀对犯罪的人实行大赦；改明年的年号为通正。
English: Ding Wei, the former Shu implemented an amnesty for people who committed crimes; changed the year of the next year to Tongzheng.

古文：置武兴军于凤州，割文、兴二州隶之，以前利州团练使王宗鲁为节度使。
现代文：凤州设置了武兴军，割出文州、兴州隶属于凤州，任命前利州团练使王宗鲁为凤州节度使。
English: The Wuxing Army was set up in Fengzhou, and it was decided that Wenzhou and Xingzhou would be subordinate to Fengzhou, and Wang Zonglu, the former group training envoy of Lizhou, was appointed as the festival envoy of Fengzhou.

古文：是岁，清海、建武节度使兼中书令刘岩，以吴越王镠为国王而己独为南平王，表求封南越王及加都统，帝不许。
现代文：这一年，清海、建武节度使兼中书令刘岩任命吴越王钱为吴越国王，而自己则为南平王，并上表请求封自己为南越王并加都统，后梁帝没有答应。
English: In the same year, Liu Yan, the envoy of Qinghai and Jianwu Festival and the Chinese envoy, appointed Wu Yue King Qian as the king of Wu Yue, while he himself was the king of Nanping, and requested the table above to seal himself as the king of South Vietnam and Kaddu. Emperor Hou Liang did not agree.

古文：岩谓僚属曰： 今中国纷纷，孰为天子！
现代文：刘岩对他的僚属们说： 现在中国杂乱纷纷，谁为天子！
English: Liu Yan said to his colleagues: Now that China is in chaos, who is the son of heaven!

古文：安能梯航万里，远事伪庭乎！ 
现代文：怎能长途跋涉，经历险阻来侍奉伪庭呢？ 
English: How can one trek long distances and go through dangerous obstacles to serve a fake court?

古文：自是贡使遂绝。均王上贞明二年
现代文：从此和朝廷断绝了贡献和使臣。贞明二年
English: From then on, contributions and envoys were cut off from the imperial court.

古文：春，正月，宣武节度使、守中书令、广德靖王全昱卒。
现代文：春季正月，后梁朝宣武节度使、守中书令、广德靖王朱全昱去世。
English: In the first month of spring, Zhu Quanzhang, the envoy to the Xuanwu Festival of the Later Liang Dynasty, the Guozhong Shuling, and the Guangde Jing Wang passed away.

古文：帝闻前河南府参军李愚学行，召为左拾遗，充崇政院直学士。
现代文：后梁帝听说原来的河南府参军李愚学问与操行都很好，于是召他来担任左拾遗官，并充当崇政院直学士。
English: Later, Emperor Liang heard that Li Gu, a former member of the Henan Provincial Army, was well educated and well-behaved, so he called him to serve as the official to collect the remains of the deceased, and to serve as a direct scholar of the Chongzhen Academy.

古文：衡王友谅贵重，李振等见，皆拜之愚独长揖，帝闻而让之，曰： 衡王于朕，兄也，朕犹拜之，卿长揖，可乎？ 
现代文：衡王朱友谅位尊身贵，李振等人见都要向他跪拜，李愚见了只行拱手礼，后梁帝听说以后责备他，说： 衡王朱友谅是我的兄长，我见了他都要跪拜，而你却行拱手礼，这样可以吗？ 
English: Heng Wang Zhu Youjun is a dignitary, and Li Zhen and others must kneel to him when they see him. When Li Gu saw him, he only bowed his head. Later, Emperor Liang heard about it and later rebuked him, saying: Heng Wang Zhu Youjun is my elder brother. When I saw him, I had to kneel, but you bowed your head. Is that okay?

古文：对曰： 陛下以家人礼见衡王，拜之宜也。
现代文：李愚回答说： 陛下是以本家人的礼来见衡王的，向他跪拜是应该的。
English: Li Yu replied, "Your Majesty came to see Heng Wang with the courtesy of his own family, and it is proper to kneel before him."

古文：振等陛下家臣。
现代文：李振等是陛下的家臣。
English: Li Zhen et al. are His Majesty's vassals.

古文：臣于王无素，不敢妄有所屈。 
现代文：我和衡王素无来往，不也妄有所屈。 
English: Heng Wang and I have never had any dealings with each other.

古文：久之，竟以抗直罢为邓州观察判官。
现代文：李愚见了衡王一直是这样，后梁帝竟以他固执抗命而罢他为邓州观察判官。
English: Li Qiu saw that Heng Wang had always been like this, and Emperor Hou Liang actually dismissed him as a Dengzhou observation judge because of his stubborn disobedience.

古文：蜀主以李继崇为武泰节度使、兼中书令、陇西王。
现代文：前蜀主任命李继崇为武泰节度使、兼中书令、陇西王。
English: The former Lord of Shu appointed Li Jitong as the ambassador of the Wu-tai Festival, as well as the scribe of the Middle Kingdom, and the king of Shaanxi.

古文：二月，辛丑夜，吴宿卫将马谦、李球劫吴王登楼，发库兵讨徐知训。
现代文：二月，辛丑夜，吴国的宿卫将马谦、李球劫持着吴王杨隆演登上城楼，并派守库士兵去讨伐徐知训。
English: In February, on the night of Xin Qiu, the guards of the State of Wuxi kidnapped Ma Qian and Li Qiu and took the king of Wuxi, Yang Longyan, to the city tower, and sent soldiers to fight Xu Zhixun.

古文：知训将出走，严可求曰： 军城有变，公先弃众自去，众将何依！ 
现代文：徐知训将要逃出城外，严可求劝他说： 军城有变，你首先丢弃了众将士而自己逃跑，众将士又将依靠谁呢？ 
English: Xu Zhixun was about to escape from the city. Yan could be persuaded to say to him, "The military city has changed. You first abandoned the soldiers and ran away yourself. Who will the soldiers rely on?

古文：知训乃止。
现代文：徐知训因此才没有出走。
English: This is why Xu Zhixun did not run away.

古文：众犹疑惧，可求阖户而寝，鼾息闻于外，府中稍安。
现代文：此时众将士仍然犹豫害怕，但严可求却关起门来去睡觉，在门外边都可以听见他的鼾声，这样府中才稍微安定了一些。
English: At this time, all the soldiers were still hesitant and afraid, but Yan can be asked to sleep with the door closed, and his snoring can be heard outside the door, so that the house is a little more stable.

古文：壬寅，谦等陈于天兴门外，诸道副都统硃瑾自润州至，视之，曰： 不足畏也。 
现代文：壬寅，马谦等在天兴门外摆开阵势，此时诸道副都统朱瑾从润州来到，看了看马谦摆出的阵势，说： 不必害怕。 
English: Ren Yin, Ma Qian, etc. began to set up their positions outside Tianxing Gate. At this time, Zhu Xi, the vice-governor of all provinces, came from Runzhou, looked at the position set up by Ma Qian, and said: Don't be afraid.

古文：返顾外众，举手大呼，乱兵皆溃，擒谦、球，斩之。
现代文：回过头来对着外面的人众举手高呼，乱兵纷纷溃散。于是抓获了马谦和李球，将他们斩杀。
English: He turned his head to the crowd outside, raised his hands and shouted, and the rioters scattered. So he captured Ma Qian and Li Qiu and killed them.

古文：帝屡趣刘鄩战，鄩闭壁不出。
现代文：后梁帝曾多次催促刘作战，但刘却闭门不出。
English: Emperor Hou Liang had urged Liu to fight many times, but Liu refused to do so.

古文：晋王乃留副总管李存审守营，自劳军于贝州，声言归晋阳。
现代文：于是晋王留副总管李存审坚守军营，他亲自去贝州慰劳包围张源德的军队，并扬言回归晋阳。
English: As a result, Li Cunxin, the vice-governor of Jin Wangliu, held fast to the military camp. He personally went to Beizhou to encircle Zhang Yuande's army, and threatened to return to Jinyang.

古文：鄩闻之，奏请袭魏州。帝报曰： 今扫境内以属将军，社稷存亡，系兹一举，将军勉之！ 
现代文：刘听到之后，上奏请求袭击魏州，后梁帝告诉他说： 现在全国都交给你，社稷存亡，在此一举，希望你努力去作战。 
English: After Liu heard it, he made a request to attack Weizhou, and Emperor Houliang told him: "Now the whole country has been handed over to you. Society is doomed. In one fell swoop, I hope you will work hard to fight.

古文：鄩令澶州刺史杨延直引兵万人会于魏州，延直夜半至城南，城中选壮士五百潜出击之，延直不为备，溃乱而走。
现代文：于是刘命令澶州刺史杨延直率领一万人开赴魏州，杨延直半夜时到达魏州城南，城中晋军选拔了五百壮士偷偷出城袭击杨延直的军队，杨延直没有防备，溃散逃跑。
English: As a result, Liu ordered the Zhangzhou assassin Yang Yanzhi to lead ten thousand people to go to Weizhou. Yang Yanzhi arrived in the south of Weizhou in the middle of the night. The Jin army in the city selected five hundred strong men to sneak out of the city to attack Yang Yanzhi's army. Yang Yanzhi was unprepared and fled.

古文：诘旦，鄩自莘县悉众至城东，与延直馀众合，李存审引营中兵踵其后，李嗣源以城中兵出战，晋王亦自贝州至，与嗣源当其前。
现代文：第二早晨，刘的全部军队从莘县来到魏州城东，和杨延直剩下的军队会合。李存审率领营中的军队紧跟在他们的后面，李嗣源率领城中的部队出城迎战后梁军。这时晋王也从贝州到达，与李嗣源的军队正好在刘军队的前面。
English: The next morning, Liu's entire army came to the east of Weizhou City from Min County to meet Yang Yanzhi's remaining army. Li Cunxin led the army in the camp followed closely behind them, and Li Siyuan led the troops in the city out of the city to meet Liang's army after the battle. At this time, Jin Wang also arrived from Beizhou, and Li Siyuan's army was just in front of Liu's army.

古文：鄩见之，惊曰： 晋王邪！ 
现代文：刘看到，惊讶地说： 是晋王啊！ 
English: Liu saw it and said in surprise: It's Jin Wang!

古文：引兵稍却，晋王蹑之，至故元城西，与李存审遇。
现代文：于是刘引兵稍作退却，晋王率军紧随其后，一直到了旧元城的西面，与李存审的部队相遇。
English: As a result, Liu's army retreated slightly, and Jin Wang and his army followed closely behind, all the way to the west of the old Yuancheng, where they met Li Cunxu's army.

古文：晋王为方陈于西北，存审为方陈于东南，鄩为圆陈于其中间，四面受敌。合战良久，梁兵大败，鄩引数十骑突围走。
现代文：晋王的军队在西北面摆出方阵，李存审在东南面摆出方阵，刘的军队则在他们的中间摆开圆阵，刘军队四面受敌，双方交战很久，后梁军大败，刘率数十骑兵冲出了包围逃跑。
English: Jin Wang's army set up a square formation in the northwest, Li Cunxun's army set up a square formation in the southeast, and Liu's army set up a round formation in the middle. Liu's army was surrounded by enemies on all sides, and the two sides fought for a long time. After Liang's army was defeated, Liu and dozens of cavalry rushed out of the encirclement and fled.

古文：梁步卒凡七万，晋兵环而击之，败卒登木，木枝为之折，追至河上，杀溺殆尽。
现代文：后梁军有七万多步卒，被晋军包围住攻打，后梁军败兵爬上了树，以致树被压断。晋军一直追到黄河边上，后梁军几乎全部被杀死或淹死。
English: Houliang's army had more than seventy thousand foot soldiers, and was surrounded and attacked by the Jin army. The defeated soldiers of Houliang's army climbed up the tree, so that the tree was crushed. The Jin army chased them all the way to the edge of the Yellow River, and almost all of Houliang's army was killed or drowned.

古文：鄩收散卒自黎阳渡河，保滑州。
现代文：刘收集起被击散的军队从黎阳渡过黄河，退守滑州。
English: Liu gathered up his scattered troops, crossed the Yellow River from Liyang, and retreated to Luzhou.

古文：匡国节度使王檀密疏请发关西兵袭晋阳，帝从之，发河中、陕、同华诸镇兵合三万，出阴地关，奄至晋阳城下，昼夜急攻。
现代文：匡国节度使王檀秘密上疏建议派关西军队袭击晋阳，后梁帝听从了他的意见，派河中、陕、同华诸镇军队共计三万余人，开出阴地关，很快到达晋阳城下，昼夜急攻。
English: During the Kuangguo Festival, Wang Dan secretly suggested that the Kansai troops be sent to attack Jinyang. Later, Emperor Liang listened to his advice and sent a total of more than 30,000 troops from Hezhong, Shaanxi, and Tonghua towns to drive out of Yinji Pass and quickly reach the city of Jinyang, and make a surprise attack day and night.

古文：城中无备，发诸司丁匠及驱市人乘城拒守，城几陷者数四，张承业大惧。
现代文：由于城中没有准备，于是征发各司的工匠以及市民们登城拒守，城墙有好几处几乎被踩陷。监军张承业感到非常害怕。
English: As there was no preparation in the city, craftsmen from various departments and citizens were conscripted and sent to the city to defend it, but they refused, and several parts of the city wall were almost trampled down. Zhang Chengye, the supervisor of the army, was very afraid.

古文：代北故将安金全退居太原，往见承业曰： 晋阳根本之地，若失之，则大事去矣。
现代文：这时原来代北的将领安金全退居在太原，前去拜见张承业，并对他说： 太原是晋王的根本之地，如果失守，国家大事就全部完了。
English: At this time, the general An Jinquan, who originally represented the north, retreated to Taiyuan, went to see Zhang Chengye, and said to him: Taiyuan is the fundamental place of the Jin king, if it is lost, all national events will be over.

古文：仆虽老病，忧兼家国，请以库甲见授，为公击之。 
现代文：我虽看老有病，但仍为国担忧，请求把库存兵甲交给我，我为你去攻打后梁军。 
English: Although I have been ill for a long time, I am still worried about the country. I ask you to give me your stockpile of armor, and I will go and attack Houliang's army for you.

古文：承业即与之。
现代文：张承业将库存兵甲交给了安金全。
English: Zhang Chengye handed over the inventory to Anjin Quan.

古文：金全帅其子弟及退将之家得数百人，夜出北门，击梁兵于羊马城内。梁兵大惊，引却。
现代文：安金全率领着他的子弟以及退下来将领的家人共有几百人，乘夜间出晋阳北门，在羊马城内向后梁军发起了进攻。
English: A total of several hundred people, led by An Jinquan, his son and younger brother, as well as the families of the retired generals, took the night out of the north gate of Jinyang and launched an attack on the Houliang army in the city of Yangma.

古文：昭义节度使李嗣昭闻晋阳有寇，遣牙将石君立将五百骑救之。
现代文：后梁军将士感到非常惊恐，引兵退却。晋昭义节度使李嗣昭听说晋阳被敌人侵袭，派牙将石君立率领五百骑兵前往援救。
English: The soldiers of Houliang's army were very frightened and retreated. After the Jin Zhaoyi Festival, Li Shizhao heard that Jinyang was attacked by the enemy and sent the commander Shi Junli and five hundred cavalry to rescue.

古文：君立朝发上党，夕至晋阳。
现代文：石君立早上从上党出发，晚上就赶到了晋阳。
English: Shi Junli set out from Shangdang in the morning and arrived in Jinyang in the evening.

古文：梁兵扼汾河桥，君立击破之，径至城下大呼曰： 昭义侍中大军至矣。 
现代文：后梁军扼守汾河桥，石君立击败了他们，直奔晋阳城下，他高声大呼说： 昭义侍中大军已经到来。 
English: After Liang's army held the Luohe Bridge, Shi Junli defeated them and went straight to the city of Jinyang. He shouted loudly: "The army of Zhao Yi's attendants has arrived."

古文：遂入城。
现代文：于是率军开进晋阳城。
English: So he led his army into Jinyang City.

古文：夜，与安金全等分出诸门击梁兵，梁兵死伤什二三。
现代文：当天夜晚，石君立与安金全等率兵分别从晋阳城各门出击后梁军，后梁军被打死打伤的有十分之二三。
English: On the evening of the same day, Shijunli and Anjin Quan led their soldiers to attack Houliang's army from each gate of Jinyang City, and two-thirds of Houliang's army were killed or wounded.

古文：诘朝，王檀引兵大掠而还。
现代文：次日晨，王檀领兵在晋阳城外大肆抢劫一番后撤回。
English: In the morning of the next day, Wang Danzhong led the soldiers to withdraw after a large-scale robbery outside the city of Jinyang.

古文：晋王性矜伐，以策非己出，故金全等赏皆不行。
现代文：晋王的性情喜欢居功自夸，因为这次晋阳解围的谋略不是他想出来的，所以对安金全等也就都没有奖赏。
English: Jin Wang's temperament liked to take credit and boast, because he did not come up with the strategy for breaking the siege of Jinyang, so there was no reward for Anjin Quanzhang.

古文：梁兵之在晋阳城下也，大同节度使贺德伦部兵多逃入梁军，张承业恐其为变，收德伦，斩之。
现代文：当后梁兵重重包围在晋阳城下时，大同节度使贺德伦军队的士兵有很多人逃奔后梁军，张承业害怕贺德伦策划兵变，就将他抓了起来，并斩杀了他。
English: When Hou Liang's soldiers were surrounded at the foot of Jinyang City, many soldiers of Hedren's army fled to Hou Liang's army because of the Great Tong Festival. Zhang Chengye was afraid that Hou Delun was planning a mutiny, so he arrested him and killed him.

古文：帝闻刘鄩败，又闻王檀无功，叹曰： 吾事去矣！ 
现代文：后梁帝听说刘战败，又听说王檀也没有成功，叹息地说： 我的事业就要完了。 
English: After Emperor Liang heard of Liu's defeat and Wang Dan's failure, he said with a sigh, "My career is coming to an end."

古文：三月，乙卯朔，晋王攻卫州，壬戌，刺史米昭降之。
现代文：三月，乙卯朔，晋王进攻卫州，壬戌，卫州刺史米昭投降了晋王。
English: In March, Yi Ushuo, the King of Jin attacked Weizhou, Renwen, and Weizhou's ruler Shimi Zhao surrendered to the King of Jin.

古文：又攻惠州，刺史靳绍走，擒斩之，复以惠州为磁州。
现代文：晋王又攻惠州，惠州刺史靳绍逃走，晋王抓住他斩了，把惠州改为磁州。
English: Jin Wang attacked Huizhou again, Huizhou stabbed Shi Xinshao and fled, Jin Wang caught him and beheaded him, changing Huizhou into a magnetic state.

古文：晋王还魏州。
现代文：晋王回到魏州。
English: Jin Wang returned to Weizhou.

古文：上屡召刘鄩不至，己巳，即以鄩为宣义节度使，使将兵屯黎阳。
现代文：后梁帝曾多次要召见刘，刘始终没有到，己巳，后梁帝任命刘为宣义节度使，并让他率兵驻扎在黎阳。
English: Emperor Houliang summoned Liu several times, but Liu never arrived. Therefore, Emperor Houliang appointed Liu as the envoy of the Xuan Yi Festival, and stationed him and his soldiers in Liyang.

古文：夏，四月，晋人拔洺州，以魏州都巡检使袁建丰为洺州刺史。
现代文：夏季四月，晋人攻下州，并任命魏州都巡检使袁建丰为州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, the Jin people conquered the state and appointed the Wei capital inspector Yuan Jianfeng as the state historian.

古文：刘鄩既败，河南大恐，鄩复不应召，由是将卒皆摇心。
现代文：刘被打败后，河南地区的人们都十分害怕，刘又多次没有接受后梁帝的召见，因此将帅部卒都有些动摇。
English: After Liu was defeated, the people in Henan were very afraid. Liu repeatedly did not accept the summons of the late Emperor Liang, so the generals were somewhat shaken.

古文：帝遣捉生都指挥使李霸帅所部千人戍杨刘，癸卯，出宋门，其夕，复自水门入，大噪。纵火剽掠，攻建国门，帝登楼拒战。
现代文：后梁帝派遣捉生都指挥使李霸率领他的所属部队一千多人驻扎在杨刘，癸卯，他率领部队开出宋门，当天晚上，又率部队从水门入城，大声喧闹，放火剽掠，反叛了后梁帝，攻打梁宫的建国门，后梁帝登上建国门楼抵抗。
English: After Emperor Liang dispatched the commander of the capital to Li Ba, who led more than a thousand of his troops to be stationed in Yang Liu, Shao Wu. He led the troops to open the Song Gate, and on the same evening, he led the troops from the Water Gate into the city, loud and noisy, setting fire and looting, rebelled against Emperor Liang, attacked the National Foundation Gate of the Liang Palace, and Emperor Liang ascended the National Foundation Gate to resist.

古文：龙骧四军都指挥使杜晏球以五百骑屯球场，贼以油沃幕，长木揭之，欲焚楼，势甚危。
现代文：龙骧四军都指挥使杜晏球率领五百骑兵驻扎在球场，李霸的叛军把帐篷上浇上油，用长竿子架起来，准备点燃后烧毁城楼，形势十分危急。
English: The commander of the four armies of the Dragon and Dragon Dynasties ordered Cuckoo Ball to lead five hundred cavalry stationed in the stadium. Li Ba's rebels poured oil on the tents, set them up with long poles, and prepared to ignite and burn the city tower. The situation was very critical.

古文：晏球于门隙窥之，见贼无甲胄，乃出骑击之，决力死战，俄而贼溃走。
现代文：杜晏球从门缝里看到李霸的军队没有穿戴铠甲、头盔，于是率领骑兵向李霸发起进攻，士卒们奋力作战，一会儿李霸的叛军就被打败逃走了。
English: Cuckoo Ball saw through a crack in the door that Li Ba's army was not wearing armor or helmets, so he led the cavalry to attack Li Ba. The soldiers fought hard, and Li Ba's rebels were defeated and fled.

古文：帝见骑兵击贼，呼曰： 非吾龙骧之士乎，谁为乱首？ 
现代文：后梁帝看到有骑兵去抗击反叛的军队，便高声地说： 这不是我的龙骧将士吗！谁是叛军的首领？ 
English: After Emperor Liang saw some cavalrymen go to fight the rebel army, he said loudly: "Isn't this my dragoon soldier! Who is the leader of the rebel army?

古文：晏球曰： 乱者惟李霸一都，馀军不动。
现代文：杜晏球回答说： 叛乱者只有李霸一部，其他的军队都没有动。
English: Du Rongqiu replied, "The rebels are only a part of Li Bao's army, the rest of the army has not moved.

古文：陛下但帅控鹤守宫城，迟明，臣必破之。 
现代文：陛下只管率领控鹤禁军守住宫城，等到天明，我一定能够击败叛军。 
English: As long as His Majesty leads the Controlled Crane Forbidden Army to defend Miyagi, I will surely be able to defeat the rebels by dawn.

古文：既而晏球讨乱者，阖营皆族之，以功除单州刺史。
现代文：接着，杜晏球就率军讨伐李霸的反叛军队，并将叛军全营将士以及他们的家属全部诛灭。杜晏球也因此功而被提拔为单州刺史。
English: Next, Du Xuanqiu led the army to fight against Li Ba's rebel army, and annihilated the entire rebel army and their families. Du Xuanqiu was also promoted to single-state history for this achievement.

古文：五月，吴越王镠遣浙西安抚判官皮光业自建、汀、虔、郴、潭、岳、荆南道入贡。
现代文：五月，吴越王钱派遣浙西安抚判官皮光业从建州、汀州、虔州、郴州、潭州、岳州、荆南一路后梁朝廷入贡。
English: In May, Wu Yue Wang Qian sent the Zhejiang-Xi pacification judge Pi Guangye from Jianzhou, Tingzhou, Qianzhou, Bozhou, Tanzhou, Yuezhou and Jingnan to pay tribute to the Hailiang court.

古文：光业，日休之子也。
现代文：皮兴业是皮日休的儿子。
English: Pi Xingye is the son of Pi Rikyu.

古文：六月，晋人攻邢州，保义节度使阎宝拒守。
现代文：六月，晋王对邢州发起进攻，保义节度使阎宝在邢州抗拒坚守。
English: In June, Jin Wang launched an attack on Bozhou, and Yan Bao resisted and held out in Bozhou.

古文：帝遣捉生都指挥使张温将兵五百救之，温以其众降晋。
现代文：后梁帝派捉生都指挥使张温率领五百士卒前往救援，张温却率领军队投降了晋王。
English: Later, Emperor Liang sent Zhang Wen with 500 soldiers to rescue him, but Zhang Wen led the army to surrender to Jin Wang.

古文：秋，七月，甲寅朔，晋王至魏州。
现代文：秋季七月，甲寅朔，晋王到达魏州。
English: In the autumn of July, Jia Yin Shuo and Jin Wang arrived in Weizhou.

古文：上嘉吴越王镠贡献之勤，壬戌，加镠诸道兵马元帅。
现代文：后梁帝嘉许吴越王钱贡献勤快。壬戌，加封钱为诸道兵马元帅。
English: Emperor Qian of Wuyue was praised by Emperor Liang for his diligent contribution of money.

古文：朝议多言镠之入贡，利于市易，不宜过以名器假之。
现代文：朝廷里很多人认为钱入贡，是贪图市场贸易，不应当过份地用名爵来封。
English: Many people in the imperial court believed that the money came from tribute, that it was greed for market trade, and that it was not proper to use the title of nobility excessively.

古文：翰林学士窦梦征执麻以泣，坐贬蓬莱尉。
现代文：翰林学士窦梦征拿着丧服麻布哭泣，后梁帝认为他犯了罪，贬他为蓬莱尉。
English: Hanlin Scholar Dou Mengsheng wept with his mourning clothes and sackcloth. Emperor Liang thought he had committed a crime and demoted him to Lieutenant Penglai.

古文：梦征，棣州人也。
现代文：窦梦征是棣州人。
English: Dou Mengsheng is from Zhangzhou.

古文：甲子，吴润州牙将周郊作乱，入府，杀大将秦师权等，大将陈祐等讨斩之。
现代文：甲子，吴国牙将周郊发动叛乱，进入府署，杀了大将秦师权等人，大将陈等出兵讨伐周郊，并把他斩杀。
English: Gao Zi and Wu Guoga launched a rebellion in the suburbs, entered the government office, killed General Qin Shiguang and others, General Chen and others sent troops to fight in the suburbs, and killed him.

古文：八月，丁酉，以太子太保致仕赵光逢为司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：八月，丁酉，起用以太子少保退休的赵光逢为司空，兼任门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In August, Ding Xi appointed Zhao Guangfeng, who had retired as the prince's junior bodyguard, as the secretary, concurrently serving as the servant of the disciple and the peer of the peer.

古文：丙午，蜀主以王宗绾为东北面都招讨，集王宗翰、嘉王宗寿为第一、第二招讨，将兵十万出凤州；以王宗播为西北面都招讨，武信军节度使刘知俊、天雄节度使王宗俦、匡国军使唐文裔为第一、第二、第三招讨，将兵十二万出秦州，以伐岐。
现代文：丙午，前蜀主任命王宗绾为东北面都招讨，集王王宗翰、嘉王王宗寿为第一、第二招讨，率领十万大军从凤州出发。任命王宗播为西北面招讨，武信军节度使刘知俊、天雄节度使王宗俦、匡国军使唐文裔为第一、第二、第三招讨，率领十二万大军从秦州出发，前往讨伐岐王。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, the former Shu Emperor appointed Wang Zongxuan to lead the north-eastern campaign, Wang Zonghan and Jia Wang Zongshu to lead the first and second campaigns, and led the 100,000-strong army from Fengzhou; appointed Wang Zonghan to lead the north-western campaign, Liu Zhijun to lead the Wuxin Army, Tianxiong to lead the Wang Zongxuan, and the Kuangguo Army to lead the Tang literati to lead the first, second and third campaigns, and led the 120,000-strong army from Qinzhou to fight against the king of Qi.

古文：晋王自将攻邢州，昭德节度使张筠弃相州走。晋人复以相州隶天雄军，以李嗣源为刺史。
现代文：晋王亲自率领军队进攻邢州，昭德节度使张筠丢弃相州逃跑，晋王又将相州隶属于天雄军，任命李嗣源为相州刺史。
English: Jin Wang personally led the army to attack Zhangzhou. Zhao De and Jing Du forced Zhang Ye to abandon Xiangzhou and flee. Jin Wang also subordinated Xiangzhou to Tianxiong's army and appointed Li Siyuan as Xiangzhou's magistrate.

古文：晋王遣人告阎宝以相州已拔，又遣张温帅援兵至城下谕之，宝举城降。
现代文：晋王派人告诉后梁保义军节度使阎宝说相州已被攻下，又派降将张温率领援兵到邢州城下向他指明利害，阎宝便献城投降了晋王。
English: The Jin king sent someone to tell the Liang Bao loyalist army commander to make Yan Bao say that Xiangzhou had been conquered, and also sent Zhang Wen to lead reinforcements to the city of Zhangzhou to show him the stakes. Yan Bao then surrendered to the Jin king.

古文：晋王以宝为东南面招讨使，领天平节度使、同平章事；以李存审为安国节度使，镇邢州。
现代文：晋王任命阎宝为东南面招讨使、领天平节度使、同平章事，任命李存审为安国节度使，镇守邢州。
English: Jin Wang appointed Yan Bao as the southeastern envoy, the leader of the Tianping Festival, and the leader of the Tongping Festival, and appointed Li Cunxin as the leader of the An Guo Festival, and the town guard of Bozhou.

古文：契丹王阿保机帅诸部兵三十万，号百万，自麟、胜攻晋蔚州，陷之，虏振武节度使李嗣本。
现代文：契丹王阿保机率领三十万大军，号称百万大军，从麟州、胜州出发向晋王的蔚州发动进攻，并攻下了蔚州，俘虏了振武节度使李嗣本。
English: The Khitan king Abokot led a 300,000-strong army, reputed to be a million-strong army, from Linzhou and Shengzhou to launch an attack on Jin's Ulshu, and captured Ulshu, capturing Zhenwu Jiedu and Li Siben.

古文：遣使以木书求货于大同防御使李存璋，存璋斩其使。
现代文：阿保机又派出使者向大同防御使李存璋送去了木刻的书信向他索求货财，李存璋斩杀了使者。
English: A Baoji also sent an envoy to Datong Defense to make Li Cunxu send a woodcut letter to him to request goods and money, Li Cunxu killed the envoy.

古文：契丹进攻云州，存璋悉力拒之。
现代文：契丹又向云州发起了进攻，李存璋倾全力抗拒。
English: The Khitan launched another attack on Yunnan, and Li Cunxu resisted with all his might.

古文：九月，晋王还晋阳。
现代文：九月，晋王回到晋阳。
English: In September, Jin Wang returned to Jinyang.

古文：王性仁孝，故虽经营河北，而数还晋阳省曹夫人，岁再三焉。
现代文：晋王的性情仁厚孝敬，所以他虽然经营着河北，但还经常回到晋阳去看望曹夫人，每年有两三次。
English: Jin Wang's disposition is benevolent and filial, so although he runs Hebei, he often returns to Jinyang to visit Mrs. Cao, two or three times a year.

古文：晋人以兵逼沧州，顺化节度使戴思远弃城奔东都。
现代文：晋人派兵威胁沧州，顺化节度使戴思远放弃沧州城而跑到东都，沧州将领毛璋带领全城投降晋王。
English: Jin sent troops to threaten Cangzhou, and the Hue Festival made Dai Siyuan abandon Cangzhou and run to Dongdu. Cangzhou's general, Mao Kun, led the whole city to surrender to Jin.

古文：沧州将毛璋据城降晋，晋王命李嗣源将兵镇抚之，嗣源遣璋诣晋阳。晋王徙李存审为横海节度使，镇沧州，以嗣源为安国节度使。
现代文：晋王命令李嗣率兵前去镇守安抚沧州，李嗣源派毛璋回到晋阳。晋王调李存审为横海节度使，镇守沧州。任命李嗣源为安国节度使。
English: The king of Jin ordered Li Cunxuan and his soldiers to go to the town guard to pacify Cangzhou, and Li Siyuan sent Mao Jun to return to Jinyang. The king of Jin transferred Li Cunxuan to be the envoy of the Henghai Festival and the town guard of Cangzhou, and appointed Li Siyuan as the envoy of the An Guo Festival.

古文：嗣源以安重诲为中门使，委以心腹，重诲亦为嗣源尽力。
现代文：李嗣源又任用安重诲为中门使，把他当做自己的心腹，安重诲也尽力为李嗣源效力。
English: Li Siyuan also appointed An Chongyao as the middle gate envoy, and regarded him as his confidant. An Chongyao also tried his best to work for Li Siyuan.

古文：重诲，应州胡人也。
现代文：安重诲是应州的胡人。
English: An Chongchuan is a Hu man from Yingzhou.

古文：晋王自将兵救云州，行至代州，契丹闻之，引去，王亦还。
现代文：晋王亲自率兵去援救云州，走到代州时，契丹人听说晋王来救，就领兵离去，晋王也就还师。
English: Jin Wang personally led the troops to rescue Yunnan. When they reached Daizhou, the Khitan people heard that Jin Wang had come to rescue them, so they led the troops away. Jin Wang also returned the division.

古文：以李存璋为大同节度使。
现代文：之后晋王又任命李存璋为大同节度使。
English: Later, the Jin king also appointed Li Cunxu as the Datong Festival envoy.

古文：晋人围贝州逾年，张源德闻河北诸州皆为晋有，欲降，谋于其众。众以穷而后降，恐不免死，不从。
现代文：于是他就和大家商量，大家认为弹尽粮绝的时候投降，恐怕仍不能免于一死，所以没有只从张源德的意见。
English: So he consulted with everyone, and everyone thought that if he surrendered when he ran out of food, he would still not be able to avoid death, so there was no opinion only from Zhang Yuande.

古文：共杀源德，婴城固守。
现代文：大家一起杀死了张源德，全城士卒绕城坚守。
English: Everyone killed Zhang Yuande together, and the whole city stood firm around the city.

古文：城中食尽，啖人为粮，乃谓晋将曰： 出降惧死，请擐甲执兵而降，事定而释之。 
现代文：后来城中的粮食吃完了，以至食人为粮。这时才对晋国将领说： 我们出去投降，又害怕被你们杀死，请求让我们穿着甲胄，拿着兵器出去投降，等到事情安定然后就把我们放了。 
English: Only then did they say to the Jin generals: "We are going out to surrender, but we are afraid of being killed by you. Please let us go out to surrender wearing armor and carrying weapons. Wait until things are stable and then let us go."

古文：晋将许之，其众三千出降，既释甲，围而杀之，尽殪。
现代文：晋国将领答应了他们的请求，贝州士卒三千余人出城投降了晋军，他们把兵甲放下以后，晋军包围了他们，并全部杀死。
English: The Jin generals agreed to their request. More than three thousand Beizhou soldiers and officers left the city and surrendered to the Jin army. After they put down their armor, the Jin army surrounded them and killed them all.

古文：晋王以毛璋为贝州刺使。
现代文：然后晋王任命毛璋为贝州刺史。
English: The Jin king then appointed Mao Jun as the leader of Bozhou.

古文：于是河北皆入于晋，惟黎阳为梁守。
现代文：从此以后河北地区都归晋国所有，只有黎阳还被后梁占据着。
English: Since then, all of Hebei Province has been owned by Jin Province, with only Liyang still occupied by Houliang.

古文：晋王如魏州。
现代文：晋王到达魏州。
English: Jin Wang arrived in Weizhou.

古文：吴光州将王言杀刺史载肇，吴王遣楚州团练使李厚讨之。
现代文：吴国光州将领王言杀死了光州刺史载肇，吴王派遣楚州团练使李厚前往讨伐王言。
English: Wang Yan, the general of Gwangju of the State of Wu, killed Wang Yan, the assassin of Gwangju, which was recorded in history. The King of Wu dispatched the Chuzhou Regiment to train Li Hou to go and fight Wang Yan.

古文：庐州观察使张崇不俟命，引兵趣光州，言弃城走。
现代文：庐州观察使张崇没等接到命令就率兵赶往光州，王言弃城逃跑。
English: Zhang Chong did not wait for the order to rush to Gwangju with his soldiers, Wang Yan abandoned the city and fled.

古文：以李厚权知光州。
现代文：吴王让李厚暂时管理光州。
English: King Wu asked Li Hou to temporarily manage Gwangju.

古文：崇，慎县人也。
现代文：张崇是慎县人。
English: Zhang Chong is from Sheng County.

古文：庚申，蜀新宫成，在旧宫之北。
现代文：庚申，前蜀的新营落成，它的位置在旧宫的北面。
English: In Goshun, the new camp of former Shu was completed. It is located in the north of the old palace.

古文：天平节度使兼中书令琅邪忠毅王王檀，多募群盗，置帐下为亲兵。己卯，盗乘檀无备，突入府杀檀。
现代文：天平节度使兼中书令琅邪忠毅王王檀招募了很多资贼，安置在他的帐下充当亲兵，己卯，盗贼乘王檀没有防备，突然进入王檀军府将王檀杀死。
English: During the Tianping Festival, Wang Dang, who was also the Chinese envoy, recruited many thieves and placed them under his charge to serve as his personal soldiers. However, the thieves took advantage of Wang Dang's unpreparedness and suddenly entered Wang Dang's military headquarters to kill him.

古文：节度副使裴彦帅府兵讨诛之，军府由是获安。
现代文：天平节度副使裴彦率领军府的部队讨伐盗贼，并把他们都诛杀了，因此，军府才获得了安定。
English: The vice-commander of the Tianping Festival, Pei Yan, led the troops of the military government to fight against the thieves and killed them all, so the military government gained stability.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，蜀王宗绾等出大散关，大破岐兵，俘斩万计，遂取宝鸡。
现代文：冬季十月，甲申，前蜀王宗绾等率领军队开出大散关，大败岐兵，俘虏和斩杀了一万余人，夺取了宝鸡。
English: In the winter of October, Jiashen, the former Shu King Zonglu and other troops led the army to open a large Sankuan, defeated the soldiers, captured and killed more than 10,000 people, and captured the Baoji.

古文：己丑，王宗播等出故关，至陇州。
现代文：己丑，王宗播等率兵开出旧关，到达陇州。
English: Ji Jiu, Wang Zonghan and other soldiers led the troops out of the old pass and arrived in Zhangzhou.

古文：丙寅，保胜节度使兼侍中李继岌畏岐王猜忌，帅其众二万，弃陇州奔于蜀军。
现代文：丙寅，岐国保胜节度使兼侍中李继岌害怕岐王对他有所猜忌，于是率领二万多士卒放弃陇州，投奔前蜀军。
English: Xiong Yin, the envoy and chamberlain of the Guizhou Victory Day, was afraid that the king of Guizhou was suspicious of him, so he led more than twenty thousand soldiers to abandon Zhangzhou and join the former Shu army.

古文：蜀兵进攻陇州，以继岌为西北面行营第四招讨。
现代文：前蜀兵对陇州发起进攻，并任命李继岌为西北面行营第四招讨。
English: Former Shu soldiers launched an attack on Bozhou, and appointed Li Jizhe as the fourth leader to march to the northwest.

古文：刘知俊会王宗绾等围凤翔，岐兵不出。
现代文：前蜀将刘知俊会合王宗绾等围攻凤翔，岐兵不敢出城作战。
English: Former Shu general Liu Zhijun meeting Wang Zonglu and others besieged Fengxiang, and the soldiers of Qi did not dare to leave the city to fight.

古文：会大雪，蜀主召军还。
现代文：这时正遇上下大雪，于是前蜀主下诏撤回军队。
English: At this time, heavy snow was falling, so the former shogun issued an edict to withdraw the army.

古文：复李继岌姓名曰桑弘志。
现代文：前蜀主恢复了李继岌的姓名，叫桑弘志。
English: The former Shu master restored the name of Li Jizhe, called Kuang Hongzhi.

古文：弘志，黎阳人也。
现代文：桑弘志是黎阳人。
English: Kuang Hongzhi is from Liyang.

古文：丁酉，以礼部侍郎郑珏为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丁酉，后梁帝任命礼部侍郎郑珏为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: After the death of Ding Xi, Emperor Liang appointed Zheng Xi, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, as the attendant of the Central Secretariat and the same rank.

古文：珏，綮之侄孙也。
现代文：郑珏是郑綮的侄孙子。
English: Zheng Rong is Zheng Rong's grandnephew.

古文：己亥，蜀大赦。
现代文：己亥，前蜀实行大赦。
English: Ji Hai, the former Shu implemented an amnesty.

古文：晋王遣使如吴，会兵以击梁。
现代文：晋王派遣使者出使吴国，商量两国共同攻打后梁。
English: The Jin king sent an envoy to Wu to discuss the two countries jointly attacking Houliang.

古文：十一月，吴以行军副使徐知训为淮北行营都招讨使，及硃瑾等将兵趣宋、亳与晋相应。
现代文：十一月，吴国任命行军副使徐知训为淮北行营都招讨使，以及朱瑾等率兵开赴宋、亳和晋军配合。
English: In November, the State of Wu appointed the deputy envoy Xu Zhixun as the envoy for the Huaibei campaign, and Zhu Xi and other soldiers went to Song, Shan and Jin to cooperate.

古文：即渡淮，移檄州县，进围颍州。
现代文：过了淮河以后，将讨伐后梁的檄文张贴到各州县，进兵包围了颍州。
English: After crossing the Huaihe River, they posted the letter of protest to all prefectures and counties, and the marching troops surrounded Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，戊申，蜀大赦，改明年元曰天汉，国号大汉。
现代文：十二月，戊申，前蜀实行大赦，改明年的年号为天汉，国号为大汉。
English: In December, Boushen, the former Shu implemented an amnesty, and changed the year of the next year to Tianhan, and the country name to Dahan.

古文：楚王殷闻晋王平河北，遣使通好。晋王亦遣使报之。
现代文：楚王马殷听说晋王攻下河北一带，便派出使者要求互通友好，晋王也派使者回报楚王。
English: When King Ma Yin of Chu heard that King Jin had conquered the area around Hebei, he sent an envoy to request mutual friendship. King Jin also sent an envoy to return the favor to King Chu.

古文：是岁，庆州叛附于岐，岐将李继陟据之。
现代文：这一年，庆州又背叛后梁归属于岐，岐将李继陟率兵占据了这个地方。
English: This year, after Gyeongju's betrayal, Liang fell to Gi, who led Li Jizhe's troops to occupy the place.

古文：诏以左龙虎统军贺瑰为西面行营马步都指挥使，将兵讨之，破岐兵，下宁、衍二州。
现代文：后梁帝下诏任命左龙虎统军贺为西面行营马步都指挥使，让他率兵讨伐庆州，打败岐兵，并攻下宁、衍二州。
English: Later, Emperor Liang issued an edict appointing He as the commander of the Western Camp of the Left Dragon and Tiger United Army. He led the army to fight against Qingzhou, defeat the Qi soldiers, and conquer Ning and Yan two states.

古文：河东监军张承业既贵用事，其侄瓘等五人自同州往依之，晋王以承业故，皆擢用之。
现代文：河东监军张承业既显贵又当权，他的侄儿张等五人从同州来这里投靠他，晋王因为张承业的缘故，都予以提拔任用。
English: Zhang Chengye, the military inspector of Hedong, was both prominent and in power. His nephew Zhang and five others came from the same state to support him. Jin Wang promoted and appointed them all because of Zhang Chengye.

古文：承业治家甚严，有侄为盗，杀贩牛者，承业立斩之，王亟使救之，已不及。
现代文：张承业治家非常严格，他有个侄儿成为强盗，杀死贩牛人，张承业立刻将他处死，晋王派人去解救，但已经来不及了。
English: Zhang Chengye was a very strict family man. He had a nephew who became a bandit and killed a cattle trader. Zhang Chengye immediately put him to death. Jin Wang sent someone to rescue him, but it was too late.

古文：王以瓘为麟州刺史，承业谓瓘曰： 汝本车度一民，与刘开道为贼，惯为不法，今若不悛，死无日矣！ 
现代文：晋王任命张为麟州刺史，张承业对张说： 你本来是车度的一个普通百姓，曾与刘开道一起为贼，一贯不守法，现在如果你还不改悔，不知哪天你就会被杀死。 
English: Jin Wang appointed Zhang to write the history of Linzhou. Zhang Chengye said to Zhang: You were originally an ordinary citizen of Chedu, once a thief together with Liu Kaidou, always disobeyed the law, now if you still do not repent, I do not know which day you will be killed.

古文：由此瓘所至不敢贪暴。
现代文：从此以后，张无论到了哪，都不敢贪暴。
English: From then on, no matter where Zhang went, he did not dare to be corrupt.

古文：吴越牙内先锋都指挥使钱传珦逆妇于闽，自是闽与吴越通好。
现代文：吴越牙内先锋都指挥使钱传在闽国娶了妻，从此以后闽与吴越互通友好往来。
English: Wu Yue's vanguard commander Qian Chuan married his wife in Yan's country. Since then, Yan and Wu Yue have maintained friendly exchanges.

古文：闽铸铅钱，与铜钱并行。
现代文：闽国开始铸造铅钱，与过去使用的铜钱并行。
English: The country began to mint lead money, in parallel with the copper money used in the past.

古文：初，燕人苦刘守光残虐，军士多归于契丹。及守光被围于幽州，其北边士民多为契丹所掠，契丹日益强大。
现代文：起初，燕人苦于刘守光对他们的残酷虐待，军士中有很多人归属契丹，刘守光被围困在幽州时，幽州北面的士民们有很多被契丹人抢夺过去，契丹由是日益强大起来。
English: At first, the Yan people suffered from Liu Shouguang's cruel mistreatment of them. Many of the sergeants belonged to the Khitan. When Liu Shouguang was besieged in Yuzhou, many of the citizens north of Yuzhou were robbed by the Khitan, and the Khitan became increasingly powerful.

古文：契丹王阿保机自称皇帝，国人谓之天皇王，以妻述律氏为皇后，置百官。
现代文：契丹王阿保机自称皇帝，契丹国人称他为天皇王，以他的妻子述律氏为皇后，设置了百官。
English: The Khitan king, Aboki, proclaimed himself emperor, the people of Khitan called him the Emperor King, with his wife, the Suri clan, as empress, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：至是，改元神册。
现代文：至此，契丹王改年号为神册。
English: At this point, King Khidam changed the name of the year to God's book.

古文：述律后勇决多权变，阿保机行兵御众，述律后常预其谋。
现代文：述律后勇敢果断，又多权变，阿保机每兴师动众，述律后经常参与谋划。
English: After the proclamation of the law, he was brave and decisive, and there were many changes of power. Ah Bao Ji was always a motivator, and often participated in planning after the proclamation of the law.

古文：阿保机尝度碛击党项，留述律后守其帐，黄头、臭泊二室韦乘虚合兵掠之。
现代文：阿保机曾经穿过沙漠攻打党项，留下述律后守卫帐幕，黄头、臭泊二室韦打算乘阿保机不在而合伙率兵抢掠帐幕。
English: Ah Bao Ji had once crossed the desert to attack the party, leaving behind the precepts to guard the tent. Huang Tou, Odor Po and Nishimuro Wei planned to take advantage of Ah Bao Ji's absence and jointly led the soldiers to loot the tent.

古文：述律后知之，勒兵以待其至，奋击，大破之，由是名震诸夷。
现代文：述律后知道了这件事后，整治兵众等待他们到来，率兵奋力反击，大破二室韦的士兵，由此，述律后名震诸夷。
English: After the proclamation learned of this matter, the rectification soldiers waited for their arrival, led the soldiers to fight back, and broke the soldiers of Nishimurowei. As a result, the proclamation shocked everyone.

古文：述律后有母有姑，皆踞榻受其拜，曰： 吾惟拜天，不拜人也。 
现代文：述律后有母亲、婆婆，述律后都坐在床上接受她们的礼拜，述律后说： 我只拜天，是不拜人的。 
English: After the recitation, there was a mother and a mother-in-law. After the recitation, they all sat on the bed to receive their worship. After the recitation, they said, "I only worship God, I don't worship people."

古文：晋王方经营河北，欲结契丹为援，常以叔父事阿保机，以叔母事述律后。
现代文：晋王李顾勖刚刚治理河北时，打算结交契丹作为后援，所以经常把阿保机当作叔父来侍奉，把述律后当作叔母来侍奉。
English: When the Jin king Li Guzhen was just ruling Hebei, he planned to make friends with Khitan as a back-up, so he often served Ah Bao Ji as an uncle and Suryu Hou as an aunt.

古文：刘守光末年衰困，遣参军韩延徽求援于契丹。契丹主怒其不拜，留之，使牧马于野。
现代文：刘守光的晚年非常衰困，曾派遣参军韩延徽到契丹国去求援，契丹主对于他不行拜见礼十分生气，于是就把韩延徽发配到野外牧马。
English: Liu Shuguang was very depressed in his later years. He once sent Han Yanhui, a member of the military, to the Khitan country to ask for help. The Khitan lord was very angry that he could not pay his respects, so he sent Han Yanhui out to pasture horses.

古文：延徽，幽州人，有智略，颇知属文。
现代文：韩延徽是幽州人，很有智谋，也很懂写文章。
English: Han Yanhui is from Yuzhou. He is very resourceful and knows how to write articles.

古文：述律后言于契丹主曰： 延徽能守节不屈，此今之贤者，奈何辱以牧圉！
现代文：述律后对契丹主说： 韩延徽能够操守气节而不屈服，是当今的贤者，怎么能侮辱他而让他去放马呢？
English: After the recitation of the rites, he said to the Khitan master: Han Yanhui is able to keep his temper and not give in, and is today's sage. How can you insult him and make him release the horse?

古文：宜礼而用之。 
现代文：应当以礼相待而起用他。 
English: He should be treated with courtesy.

古文：契丹主召延徽与语，悦之，遂以为谋主，举动访焉。
现代文：于是契丹主召见韩延徽，并和他谈话，非常喜欢他，于是把他当作主要的参谋人物，只要一有举动，就要去和他商量。
English: So the Khitan chief summoned Han Yanhui for a meeting and had a conversation with him. He liked him very much, so he treated him as the main staff person, and whenever there was a move, he would go and discuss it with him.

古文：延徽始教契丹建牙开府，筑城郭，立市里，以处汉人，使各有配偶，垦艺荒田。
现代文：韩延徽初到契丹时就教契丹建牙开府，修筑城郭，设立市场里巷，用来安置汉民，使每个人都有配偶，开垦种植荒田。
English: When Han Yanhui first arrived in Qidan, he taught Qidan how to build a capital, construct a castle, set up a market alley, used to settle Han people, so that everyone has a spouse, and reclaim and plant wasteland.

古文：由是汉人各安生业，逃亡者益少。
现代文：从此以后，汉族人都各自安居乐业，逃亡的人越来越少。
English: Since then, the Han people have been living and working independently, and fewer and fewer people have fled.

古文：契丹威服诸国，延徽有助焉。
现代文：契丹能够威服各国，韩延徽给予了很大帮助。
English: Khitan was able to intimidate countries, and Han Yanhui was of great help.

古文：顷之，延徽逃奔晋阳。
现代文：没多久，韩延徽逃奔到晋阳。
English: Not long after, Han Yanhui fled to Jinyang.

古文：晋王欲置之幕府，掌书记王缄疾之。
现代文：晋王打算把他安置在自己的幕府里，掌书记王缄很嫉妒他。
English: The Jin king planned to place him in his own shogunate, and the secretary of the shogunate, Wang Qi, was very jealous of him.

古文：延徽不自安，求东归省母，过真定，止于乡人王德明家，德明问所之，延徽曰： 今河北皆为晋有，当复诣契丹耳。 
现代文：韩延徽感到不能自安，所以请求回幽州看望母亲，路过真定时，在同乡人王德明家住下。王德明问他下一步到哪里去，韩延徽说： 现在河北地区都归晋国所有，应当重新回到契丹国去。 
English: Han Yanhui did not feel at ease, so he asked to go back to Yuzhou to visit his mother. When he passed by, he stayed at the home of fellow villager Wang Deming. When Wang Deming asked him where to go next, Han Yanhui said, "Now all of Hebei Province belongs to Jin Province, so I should go back to Qidan Province."

古文：德明曰： 叛而复往，得无取死乎？ 
现代文：王德明说： 你叛背了契丹国，而今又要返回去，这不是去找死吗？ 
English: Wang Deming said, "You betrayed the Khitan Empire, and now you want to go back. Isn't that seeking death?"

古文：延徽曰： 彼自吾来，如丧手目；今往诣之，彼手目复完，安肯害我！ 
现代文：韩延徽说： 契丹国自从我出走后，国王如丧手目，今天我再返回契丹国，契丹国王的手目不是又完备了吗？他怎么能够杀害我呢？ 
English: Han Yanhui said, "Since I left the country of Khitan, the king has been helpless. Today, I will return to the country of Khitan. Is not the hand of the king of Khitan complete? How could he kill me?

古文：既省母，遂复入契丹。
现代文：等他看望了母亲以后，就又重新回到了契丹国。
English: After visiting his mother, he returned to Khitan.

古文：契丹主闻其至，大喜，如自天而下，拊其背曰： 曏者何往？ 
现代文：契丹国主听说韩延徽回来非常高兴，就好像韩延徽从天而降，国王抚着韩延徽的背说： 前一段你走到哪里去了？ 
English: The Khitan ruler was very happy to hear that Han Yanhui had returned. It was as if Han Yanhui had fallen from the sky. The king stroked Han Yanhui's back and said, "Where did you go in the previous paragraph?"

古文：延徽曰： 思母，欲告归，恐不听，故私归耳。 
现代文：韩延徽说： 我很思念母亲，本想请假回去看看，但又害怕国王不答应我，所以我就私自回去了。 
English: Han Yanhui said, "I miss my mother very much. I wanted to ask for leave to go back and see her, but I was afraid that the king would not approve of me, so I went back on my own."

古文：契丹主待之益厚。
现代文：从此以后，契丹国主待他更加丰厚。
English: From then on, the Khitan ruler treated him more generously.

古文：及称帝，以延徽为相，累迁至中书令。
现代文：契丹国主称皇帝时，就任命韩延徽为宰相，一直提拔到中书令。
English: When the Khitan ruler was proclaimed emperor, he appointed Han Yanhui as prime minister and promoted him all the way to the position of chancellor.

古文：晋王遣使至契丹，延徽寓书于晋王，叙所以北去之意，且曰： 非不恋英主，非不思故乡，所以不留，正惧王缄之谗耳。 
现代文：晋王派出使者到契丹国，韩延徽借机给晋王写信，追叙了当初所以北去契丹的原因。并且说： 不是我不留恋英明的君主，也不是我不思念故乡，我之所以不能留在晋国，正是害怕王缄嫉妒我而说我的坏话。 
English: The king of Jin sent an envoy to Khitan, and Han Yanhui took the opportunity to write to the king of Jin, tracing the reasons why he went north to Khitan in the first place. And he said: It's not that I don't miss the wise monarch, nor that I don't miss my hometown. The reason why I can't stay in Jin is that I'm afraid Wang Yao will be jealous of me and say bad things about me.

古文：因以老母为托，且曰： 延徽在此，契丹必不南牧。 
现代文：因此又以老母相托，信中又说： 有我韩延徽在此，契丹国一定不会向南侵扰。 
English: Therefore, he relied on his mother and said in the letter: "With my Han Yanhui here, the Khitan state will not invade the south."

古文：故终同光之世，契丹不深入为寇，延徽之力也。
现代文：所以在李存勖成为后唐庄宗的时期，契丹不向南面深入侵扰，靠的是韩延徽之力。
English: Therefore, in the period when Li Cunxu became a post-Tangzhuang Zong, Khitan did not invade the south, but relied on the strength of Han Yanhui.

古文：均王上贞明三年
现代文：贞明三年
English: Zhenming three years old

古文：春，正月，诏宣武节度使袁象先救颍州，既至，吴军引还。
现代文：春季正月，后梁帝下诏命令宣武节度使袁象先前往援救颖州，到达颖州时，吴军已自撤退。
English: In the first month of spring, Emperor Liang issued an edict calling for martial law and Yuan Xiang was sent to rescue Yingzhou. By the time he reached Yingzhou, the Wu army had already retreated.

古文：二月，甲申，晋王攻黎阳，刘鄩拒之，数日，不克而去。
现代文：二月，甲申，晋王率兵进攻黎阳，刘率兵抗拒，双方交战几天，晋军因攻不下而退去。
English: In February, Jiashen, Jin Wang led an army to attack Liyang, Liu led an army to resist, the two sides fought for a few days, Jin's army retreated because it could not be attacked.

古文：晋王之弟威塞军防御使存矩在新州，骄惰不治，侍婢预政。
现代文：晋王的弟弟威塞军防御使李存矩驻守新州，他骄横懒惰，不能治理，他的侍从奴婢们经常干预政事。
English: The defense of the Wessai army, the younger brother of the Jin king, made Li Cunxu stay in Xinzhou. He was arrogant and lazy, unable to govern, and his servants often interfered in political affairs.

古文：晋王使募山北部落骁勇者及刘守光亡卒以益南讨之军。
现代文：晋王命他到山北面的部落地区去招募一些勇敢善战的人以及刘守光的逃兵，来扩充向南讨伐的军队。
English: Jin Wang ordered him to go to the tribal areas north of the mountain to recruit some brave warriors and Liu Shuguang's deserters to expand the army to the south.

古文：又率其民出马，民或鬻十牛易一战马，期会迫促，边人嗟怨。
现代文：他又强迫百姓出马，百姓们有的用十头牛去换一匹战马，加上期限非常紧迫，以至边境的百姓悲叹愤怒。
English: He also forced the people to mount horses, and some of the people exchanged ten oxen for one war horse. The deadline was very tight, and the people at the border lamented with anger.

古文：存矩得五百骑，自部送之，以寿州刺史卢文进为裨将。
现代文：李存矩征得五百匹战马，自己带领送往前方，派寿州刺史卢文进为裨将。
English: Li Cunmong conscripted five hundred horses and led them to the front. He also sent Shoushou cutter Lu Wenjin to help.

古文：行者皆惮远役，存矩复不存恤。
现代文：前去送马的人们都害怕长途差役，李存矩对他们不加体恤。
English: People who go to send horses are afraid of long-distance transport, and Li Cunmeng does not add a T-shirt to them.

古文：甲午，至祁沟关，小校宫彦璋与士卒谋曰： 闻晋王与梁人确斗，骑兵死伤不少。
现代文：甲午，行到祁沟关，小校宫彦璋和士卒们谋划说： 我听说晋王的军队和梁国的军队旗鼓相当，晋王的骑兵又死伤不少。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the year, when they went to Shigou Pass, the schoolboy Miyahikoma and the soldiers planned to say: I heard that the army of the king of Jin and the army of Liang were equal, and the cavalry of the king of Jin had a lot of deaths and injuries.

古文：吾侪捐父母妻子，为人客战，千里送死，而使长复不矜恤，奈何？ 
现代文：大家都说： 杀死使长，拥护卢将军回到新州，据城自守，他们能把我们怎么样呢？ 
English: Everyone said: Kill the envoy, support General Lu to return to Xinzhou, let the city defend itself, what can they do to us?

古文：众曰： 杀使长，拥卢将军还新州，据城自守，其如我何！ 
现代文：于是拿起武器，大声疾呼，直奔传舍。次日晨，李存矩还没有起床，就被这些人给杀死了。
English: So he picked up a weapon, shouted loudly, and went straight to the missionary house. The next morning, Li Cunmeng had not yet gotten up when he was killed by these people.

古文：因执兵大噪，趣传舍，诘朝，存矩寝未起，就杀之，文进不能制，抚膺哭其尸曰： 奴辈既害郎君，使我何面复见晋王！ 
现代文：卢文进未能制止，自己捶着胸哭李存矩说： 奴辈害了郎君，让我以什么脸面去见晋王呢？ 于是被大家拥簇回到新州，新州守将杨全章拒绝接纳。
English: Lu Wenjin couldn't stop it, he cried with his arms around his chest, Li Cunmeng said, "What kind of face should I wear when I go to see the Jin king, since my vassals have harmed my brother-in-law?" As a result, he was swarmed by everyone and returned to Xinzhou. Yang Quanzhang, the governor of Xinzhou, refused to accept him.

古文：因为众所拥，还新州，守将杨全章拒之。又攻武州，雁门以北都知防御兵马使李嗣肱击败之。
现代文：他们又攻打武州，结果又被雁门以北都知防御兵马使李嗣肱打败。
English: They also attacked Wuzhou. As a result, they were defeated by Li Shizhen, the commander of the Terracotta Army north of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：周德威亦遣兵追讨，文进帅其众奔契丹。
现代文：晋将周德威也派兵追讨，卢文进率众投奔契丹。
English: Jin general Zhou Dewei also sent troops to pursue them, and Lu Wenjin led the crowd to rush to Khitan.

古文：晋王闻存矩不道以致乱，杀侍婢及幕僚数人。
现代文：晋王听说李存矩因为治理不得法而导致叛乱，于是杀了李存矩的侍从奴婢及幕僚数人。
English: The Jin king heard that Li Cunxu led a rebellion because he could not govern according to the law, so he killed several of Li Cunxu's servants and staff.

古文：初，幽州北七百里有渝关，下有渝水通海。
现代文：当初，在幽州以北七百里的地方有一个渝关，关下有一条渝水直通于海。
English: In the beginning, there was a Yuguan seven hundred miles north of Yuzhou, and under the Yuguan there was a river of Yuguan water that led straight to the sea.

古文：自关东北循海有道，道狭处才数尺，旁皆乱山，高峻不可越。
现代文：从关东北顺着海有一条路，这条路的狭窄处只有几尺宽，旁边都是高低起伏的山峰，山高不可攀越。
English: There is a road from the northeast of Guan along the sea, the narrow part of this road is only a few feet wide, next to it are high and low undulating peaks, mountains can not be climbed.

古文：比至进牛口，旧置八防御军，募土兵守之。
现代文：北至进牛口，过去在这里设置有八防御军，招募乡土兵士把守。
English: As far north as the entrance to Niukou, eight defensive armies were set up here in the past, and local soldiers were recruited to guard it.

古文：田租皆供军食，不入于蓟，幽州岁致缯纩以供战士衣。
现代文：这里的田租都供给军用，不需送到蓟县，幽州每年往这里运送布帛和绵絮，做成衣服供士兵穿戴。
English: The field rent here is all supplied to the military, so there is no need to send it to Handan County. Every year, Yuzhou ships cloth and lint here to make clothes for soldiers to wear.

古文：每岁早获，清野坚壁以待契丹，契丹至，辄闭壁不战，俟其去，选骁勇据隘邀之，契丹常失利走。
现代文：这里每年都收获很早，坚壁清野后等待契丹的入侵，契丹军来了，他们就关起壁垒不出去作战，等到契丹军离开，就选拔一些勇敢善战的士卒占据隘口阻截他们，契丹军经常失利而退走。
English: Here, the harvest is early every year. After clearing the fields, they wait for the Khitan invasion. When the Khitan army comes, they close the barriers and do not go out to fight. When the Khitan army leaves, they select some brave and good soldiers to occupy the gap and intercept them. The Khitan army often loses and retreats.

古文：土兵皆自为田园，力战有功则赐勋加赏，由是契丹不敢轻入寇。
现代文：这里的土兵们都自己耕种田园，奋力作战而立功者，会加赏封官。因此，契丹人也不敢轻易进来侵略。
English: The local soldiers here all cultivate their own fields, and those who have distinguished themselves in battle will be rewarded with a post. Therefore, the Khitans do not dare to come in and invade easily.

古文：及周德威为卢龙节度使，恃勇不修边备，遂失渝关之险，契丹每刍牧于营、平之间。
现代文：周德威任卢龙节度使时，他依仗自己勇敢而从不修整边防设备，于是慢慢失掉了渝关的险要，契丹人也经常来营州、平州之间放牧和割草。
English: When Zhou Dewei was appointed as Lulong's festival envoy, he relied on his own bravery and never repaired the border defense equipment, so he slowly lost the key to Yuguan. The Khitan also often came to graze and mow grass between Yingzhou and Pingzhou.

古文：德威又忌幽州旧将有名者，往往杀之。
现代文：周德威还嫉妒幽州旧将领中有名望的人，往往把他们杀掉。
English: Zhou Dewei also envied the famous people among the old generals in Yuzhou and often killed them.

古文：吴王遣使遗契丹主以猛火油，曰： 攻城，以此油然火焚楼橹，敌以水沃之，火愈炽。 
现代文：吴王派遣使者送给契丹主 猛火油 ，说： 攻城时，用这种油点燃焚烧城楼，敌人用水来浇它，火势更旺。 
English: The king of Wu sent an envoy to give the Khitan lord the oil of fierce fire, saying: When attacking the city, use this oil to ignite and burn the city tower, the enemy will pour water on it, and the fire will be more vigorous.

古文：契丹主大喜，即选骑三万欲攻幽州，述律后哂之曰： 岂有试油而攻一国乎！ 
现代文：契丹主特别高兴，便选拔三万骑兵准备攻打幽州，述律后讥笑他说： 哪里有为了试验油而发起对一国的攻打？ 
English: The Khitan lord was particularly pleased, so he selected thirty thousand cavalrymen to prepare to attack Yuzhou. After reciting the rules, he scoffed and said: Where is there an attack on a country for the purpose of testing oil?

古文：因指帐前树谓契丹主曰： 此树无皮，可以生乎？ 
现代文：因此指着军帐前面的树对契丹主说： 这棵树没有树皮，它还可以生长吗？ 
English: So he pointed to the tree in front of the military account and said to the Khitan lord: This tree has no bark, can it still grow?

古文：契丹主曰： 不可。 
现代文：契丹主回答说： 不可以 。
English: The emir replied: "No."

古文：述律后曰： 幽州城亦犹是矣。
现代文：述律后说： 幽州城也和这棵树一样。
English: After reciting the precepts, he said, "Yuzhou City is the same as this tree.

古文：吾但以三千骑伏其旁，掠其四野，使城中无食，不过数年，城自困矣，何必如此躁动轻举！
现代文：我们只用三千骑兵埋伏在幽州城的旁边，抢掠了它的四周，使城中没有粮食可吃，不用几年，幽州城自然会处于困境，何必如此轻举妄动！
English: We only used three thousand cavalrymen to lie in ambush next to Yuzhou City, plundered its surroundings, so that there was no food to eat in the city. In a few years, Yuzhou City would naturally be in a predicament, why move so lightly!

古文：万一不胜，为中国笑，吾部落亦解体矣。 
现代文：万一打不胜，被中原各国所讥笑，我们的部落也就会解体。 
English: In the unlikely event that we are defeated and ridiculed by the countries of the Central Plains, our tribe will also disintegrate.

古文：契丹主乃止。
现代文：契丹主于是停止了对幽州的进攻。
English: The Khitan lord then stopped his attack on Yuzhou.

古文：三月，卢文进引契丹兵急攻新州，刺史安金全不能守，弃城走。
现代文：三月，卢文进引契丹兵迅速向新州发起进攻，新州刺史安金全不能坚守，弃城逃跑。
English: In March, Lu Wenjin led the Khitan soldiers to launch a swift attack on Xinzhou. Xinzhou's governor, Shi Anjin, was unable to hold out and fled the city.

古文：文进以其部将刘殷为刺史，使守之。
现代文：卢文进因此任命他的部将刘殷为新州刺史，让他坚守新州。
English: Lu Wenjin therefore appointed his subordinate Liu Yin as the new state chief historian, and let him stick to the new state.

古文：晋王使周德威合河东、镇、定之兵攻之，旬日不克。
现代文：晋王派周德威会合河东、镇州、定州的部队向新州发起进攻，十几天都未能攻克。
English: Jin Wang sent Zhou Dewei to gather the troops of Hedong, Zhenzhou and Dingzhou to launch an attack on Xinzhou, but failed to conquer it for ten days.

古文：契丹主帅众三十万救之，德威众寡不敌，大为契丹所败，奔归。
现代文：契丹主率领三十万大军前往援救，周德威由于寡不敌众，被契丹打得大败，赶快逃奔回去。
English: The Khitan leader led 300,000 troops to the rescue, but Zhou Dewei, outnumbered and defeated by the Khitan, quickly fled back.

古文：楚王殷遣其弟存攻吴上高，俘获而还。
现代文：楚王马殷派遣他的弟弟马存攻打吴国的上高，俘获了很多人口、财物而回。
English: King Ma Yin of Chu dispatched his younger brother Ma Cun to attack Shanggao in the State of Wu, capturing many people and property before returning.

古文：契丹乘胜进围幽州，声言有众百万，氈车毳幕弥温山泽。
现代文：契丹乘胜前进包围了幽州，声言有百万大军，挂毡毯的大车和毡帐布满了山上山下。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, the Khitans advanced and encircled Yuzhou, claiming to have a million-strong army, and covered the mountains with tapestry-covered carts and tents.

古文：卢文进教之攻城，为地道，昼夜四面俱进，城中穴地然膏以邀之。
现代文：卢文进教他们攻城的方法，挖地道，白天黑夜四面一起进攻，城里挖地穴点燃膏油来阻截他们。
English: Lu Wen taught them how to attack the city, digging tunnels, attacking from all sides day and night, digging holes in the city and lighting oil to stop them.

古文：又为土山以临城，城中熔铜以洒之，日杀千计，而攻之不止。
现代文：又在城边垒起土山以居高临城，城中熔铜来投洒敌人，每天杀死的人近一千，就这样还进攻不止。
English: He also erected earthen mounds on the outskirts of the city to stand tall against the city, and melted copper in the city to throw at the enemy, killing nearly a thousand people every day. In this way, he continued to attack.

古文：周德威遣间使诣晋王告急，王方与梁相持河上，欲分兵则兵少，欲勿救恐失之，忧形于色，谋于诸将，独李嗣源、李存审、阎宝劝王救之。
现代文：周德威秘密派出使者到晋王那里告急，此时晋王刚和后梁军相持在河上，想分兵救援，又觉得兵力太少，打算不去救援，又怕失去幽州。于是和诸将商量，只有李嗣源、李存审、阎宝劝晋王去解救幽州。
English: Zhou Dewei secretly sent an envoy to Jin Wang to express his urgency. At this time, Jin Wang Gang and Hou Liang's army were holding each other on the river. They wanted to split the army and rescue, but felt that the army was too small. They planned not to rescue, but were afraid of losing Yuzhou. So they discussed with the generals, and only Li Siyuan, Li Cunxin, and Yan Bao advised Jin Wang to rescue Yuzhou.

古文：王喜曰： 昔太宗得一李靖犹擒颉利，今吾有猛将三人，复何忧哉！ 
现代文：晋王高兴地说： 从前唐太宗得到一个李靖还能抓获颉利，今天我有猛将三人，又有什么可忧虑的呢？ 
English: Jin Wang said happily, "Once upon a time, Tang Taizong could get one Li Jing and still capture Gong Li, today I have three fierce generals, what is there to worry about?

古文：存审、宝以为虏无辎重，势不能久，俟其野无所掠，食尽自还，然后踵而击之。
现代文：李存审、阎宝认为敌人没有带多少军用物资，这种形势就会维持太久，等到他们在野外掠夺不到什么，粮食吃完的时候，就会自己撤回去。然后紧追其后而攻打。
English: Li Cunxuan and Yan Bao believed that the enemy did not bring much military supplies, and this situation would last too long. When they could not plunder anything in the field and finished eating the grain, they would withdraw by themselves. Then they would pursue and attack.

古文：李嗣源曰： 周德威社稷之臣，今幽州朝夕不保，恐变生于中，何暇待虏之衰！
现代文：李嗣源说： 周德威是国命所系的大臣，现在幽州朝夕难保，恐怕这段时间里就会发生变化，哪有时间等待敌人的衰弱！
English: Li Siyuan said: Zhou Dewei is the minister of the department of national destiny, and now Yuzhou is in a precarious situation. I am afraid that things will change during this time. There is no time to wait for the enemy to weaken!

古文：臣请身为前锋以赴之。 
现代文：我请求身为前锋赶赴前线战。 
English: I asked to go to the front as a striker.

古文：王曰： 公言是也。 
现代文：晋王说： 你说的很对。 
English: Jin Wang said, "You are quite right.

古文：即日，命治兵。
现代文：当天就让他整理军队。
English: On the same day, he ordered him to reorganize the army.

古文：夏，四月，晋王命嗣源将兵先进，军于涞水，阎宝以镇、定之兵继之。
现代文：夏季，四月，晋王命令李嗣源领兵率先前进，在涞水驻扎下来，阎宝率领镇州、定州的军队跟在后面。
English: In the summer, in April, the king of Jin ordered Li Shiyuan to lead the troops forward and stationed them in Surabaya. Yan Bao led the troops from Zhenzhou and Dingzhou and followed behind.

古文：吴升州刺史徐知诰治城市府舍甚盛。
现代文：吴国升州刺史徐知诰整治城市府舍非常兴盛。
English: Wuzhong Shengzhou Zhishi Xu Zhisheng rectification city government buildings are very prosperous.

古文：五月，徐温行部至升州，爱其繁富。
现代文：五月，徐温巡行到升州，非常喜欢这里的繁华富裕。
English: In May, Xu Wen went on a parade to Shengzhou. He was very fond of the prosperity here.

古文：润州司马陈彦谦劝温徙镇海军治所于升州，温从之，徙知诰为润州团练使。
现代文：润州司马陈彦谦劝徐温把镇海军的治所迁到升州，徐温听从了他的意见，把徐知诰调任为润州团练使。
English: Rongzhou Sima Chen Yanqian advised Xu Wen to relocate the administrative office of the town navy to Rongzhou. Xu Wen listened to his advice and appointed Xu Zhisheng as the Rongzhou regimental training envoy.

古文：知诰求宣州，温不许，知诰不乐。
现代文：徐知诰请求调到宣州，徐温没有答应，徐知诰很不高兴。
English: Xu Zhisheng requested to be transferred to Xuanzhou, but Xu Wen did not agree, and Xu Zhisheng was very unhappy.

古文：宋齐丘密言于知诰曰： 三郎骄纵，败在朝夕。
现代文：宋齐丘偷偷对徐知诰说： 三郎骄傲放纵，迟早要失败。
English: Song Qiqiu secretly said to Xu Zhisheng: "Saburo is proud and self-indulgent. Sooner or later, he will fail."

古文：润州去广陵隔一水耳，此天授也。 
现代文：润州离广陵只是一水之隔，这是上天授与你的。 
English: Renzhou is only a stone's throw away from Guangling, which is a blessing from heaven.

古文：知诰悦，即之官。
现代文：徐知诰听后也觉得高兴，于是马上去上任。
English: Xu Zhisheng also felt happy after listening, so he immediately went to work.

古文：三郎，谓温长子知训也。
现代文：三郎，指的是徐温的长子徐知训。
English: Saburo refers to the eldest son of Xu Wen, Xu Zhixun.

古文：温以陈彦谦为镇海节度判官。
现代文：于是徐温任命陈彦谦为镇海节度判官。
English: So Xu Wen appointed Chen Yanqian as the judge of Zhenhai Festival.

古文：温但举大纲，细务悉委彦谦，江、淮称治。
现代文：徐温只抓大事，具体事情全部委托陈彦谦来办理，从此江、淮南区也可称得上是管理得不错的地方。
English: Xu Wen only paid attention to important matters, and entrusted all specific matters to Chen Yanqian to handle. From then on, Jiangjiang and Huainan District can also be said to be a well-managed place.

古文：彦谦，常州人也。
现代文：陈彦谦是常州人。
English: Chen Yanqian is from Changzhou.

古文：高季昌与孔勍修好，复通贡献。
现代文：高季昌和孔重新和好，又恢复了过去的进奉。
English: Gao Jichang and Kong reconciled again, and resumed the past promotion.

