古文：高祖睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝，姓刘氏，初名知远，其先沙陀部人也，其后世居于太原。
现代文：高祖睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝刘知远，祖先是沙陀族人，后来迁居太原。
English: Emperor Liu Zhiyuan, whose ancestors were Shado people, later moved to Taiyuan.

古文：知远弱不好弄，严重寡言，面紫色，目多白睛，凛如也。
现代文：知远体弱不好动，沉默寡言，面呈紫色，目多白睛，为人严肃。
English: Distant, frail, unable to move, taciturn, purple-faced, white-eyed, serious.

古文：与晋高祖俱事明宗，为偏将。明宗及梁人战德胜，晋高祖马甲断，梁兵几及，知远以所乘马授之，复取高祖马殿而还，高祖德之。高祖留守北京，以知远为押衙。
现代文：和晋高祖一起当明宗的偏将，明宗与梁在德胜交战，晋高祖马甲断了，梁兵快追到，知远把自己所骑的马送给晋高祖，又取高祖的马跟在后面回来，高祖非常感谢他，高祖留守北京，知远为押衙。
English: Together with Jin Gaozu, he was Mingzong's second-in-command. Mingzong fought with Liang in the Battle of Desheng. Jin Gaozu's horse armor broke, Liang soldiers soon caught up. Zhiyuan gave the horse he was riding to Jin Gaozu, and took Gaozu's horse to follow him back. Gaozu thanked him very much. Gaozu stayed in Beijing, and Zhiyuan was his escort.

古文：潞王从珂反，愍帝出奔，高祖自镇州朝京师，遇愍帝于卫州，止传舍，知远遣勇士石敢袖铁槌侍高祖，以虞变。
现代文：潞王从珂反叛，愍帝出奔，高祖从镇州往京城在卫州遇见愍帝到驿舍，知远派勇士石敢拿铁锤侍卫高祖以防危险。
English: Gao Wang rebelled from Ka, Gao Di fled, Gao Zu went from Zhenzhou to Beijing, met Gao Di in Weizhou and went to the imperial villa, and sent the warrior Shi Gan to guard Gao Zu with a hammer to prevent danger.

古文：高祖与愍帝议事未决，左右欲兵之，知远拥高祖入室，敢与左右格斗而死，知远即率兵尽杀愍帝左右，留帝传舍而去。
现代文：高祖与愍帝议事尚未决断，愍帝左右想动武，知远保护高祖到室内，石敢与左右格斗而死，知远立即率兵杀尽愍帝左右，只留下愍帝在驿舍而去。
English: Gaozu's discussion with Emperor Xizong had not yet been decided. Emperor Xizong wanted to take military action. Zhiyuan protected Gaozu and went indoors. Shi dared to fight against the Emperor Xizong and died. Zhiyuan immediately led his soldiers to kill Emperor Xizong and his entourage, leaving Emperor Xizong alone in the hermitage.

古文：废帝入立，高祖复镇河东，已而有隙，高祖将举兵，知远与桑维翰密为高祖谋画，赞成之。
现代文：废帝入京即位，高祖又镇河东，不久发生矛盾，高祖想起兵，知远与桑维翰参加密谋策划，赞成起兵。
English: The deposed emperor ascended to the throne in Beijing, Gao Zu also moved to Hedong, and soon a conflict occurred. Gao Zu remembered the soldiers, Zhiyuan and San Weihan participated in the conspiracy planning, and agreed to raise an army.

古文：高祖即位于太原，以知远为侍卫亲军都虞候，领保义军节度使。
现代文：高祖在太原即帝位，任命知远为侍卫亲军都虞候，领保义军节度使。
English: Gao Zu was enthroned as emperor in Taiyuan, and appointed Zhiyuan as the guardian of the pro-army capital, and the guardian of the pro-army festival.

古文：契丹耶律德光送高祖至潞州，临决，指知远曰： 此都军甚操剌，无大故勿弃之。 
现代文：契丹耶律德光送高祖到潞州，临别，指着知远说： 此都军很勇猛，无大故不要放弃他。 
English: Qidan Yerudoglu sent Gao Zu to Zhangzhou, and at the end of the farewell, he pointed to Zhiyuan and said: This capital's army is very brave, don't give up on him for no reason.

古文：天福二年，迁侍卫马步军都指挥使，领忠武军节度使。
现代文：天福二年，升侍卫马步军都指挥使，领忠武军节度使。
English: In the second year of Tianfu, all the officers and men who were promoted to the rank of guards and horse marching troops commanded the envoys, and led the loyal military troops to the festival.

古文：已而以杜重威代知远领忠武，徙知远领归德，知远耻与重威同制，杜门不出。
现代文：不久用杜重威代知远领忠武军，徙知远领归德军节度使，知远因与重威同级感到羞耻，闭门不出。
English: Du Chongwei soon replaced Zhiyuan as the leader of the loyal armed forces, and Zhiyuan was transferred to the position of the German military commander. Zhiyuan was ashamed of being at the same level as Zhiyuan and did not come out.

古文：高祖怒，欲罢其兵职，宰相赵莹以为不可，高祖乃遣端明殿学士和凝就第宣谕，知远乃受命。
现代文：高祖大怒，想罢免他的官职，宰相赵莹认为不好，高祖才派端明殿学士和凝到他家宣谕，知远才接受任命。
English: Gao Zu was furious and wanted to remove him from his official post. The prime minister, Zhao Ying, did not think it was good. Gao Zu only sent Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate and condensed the proclamation to his home. Zhiyuan only accepted the appointment.

古文：五年，徙鄴都留守。
现代文：天福五年，徙邺都留守。
English: In the five years since Tianfu, all the migratory pigeons have left.

古文：九月，朝京师，高祖幸其第。
现代文：九月，到京城朝见，高祖到他家里。
English: In September, they met in the morning in Beijing, and Gaozu went to his home.

古文：六年，拜河东节度使、北京留守。
现代文：天福六年，任河东节度使、北京留守。
English: In Tianfu's sixth year, he stayed in Beijing as an envoy of the Hedong Festival.

古文：七年，高祖崩。
现代文：天福七年，高祖死。
English: In the seventh year of Tianfu, Gao Zu died.

古文：知远从高祖起太原，有佐命功，自出帝立，与契丹绝盟，用兵北方，常疑知远勋位已高，幸晋多故而有异志，每优尊之。
现代文：知远跟随高祖起兵太原，有佐命之功，自从出帝即位，与契丹断绝盟好，用兵北方，常常怀疑知远勋位已高，对晋多事之秋幸灾乐祸而有二心，每次都优待尊崇他。
English: Zhiyuan followed Gao Zu to take up arms in Taiyuan, and was instrumental in saving lives. Since he ascended to the throne, he broke off the alliance with Khitan and used soldiers in the north. He often suspected that Zhiyuan's rank was high, and he had two minds about the fall of Jin, and he always treated him with preferential treatment and respect.

古文：拜中书令，封太原王、幽州道行营招讨使，又拜北面行营都统。
现代文：升中书令，封太原王、幽州道行营招讨使，又升北面行营都统。
English: He was promoted to the position of middle-ranking official, and was appointed as the envoy of King Taiyuan and the envoy of Yuzhou Road Campaign. He was also promoted to the position of the north-facing campaigner of Du Du.

古文：开运二年四月，封北平王，三年五月，加守太尉，然王未尝出兵。
现代文：开运二年四月，封北平王，开运三年五月，加守太尉，然而王以前从未出兵。
English: In April of the second year, he was given the title of Beiping Wang, and in May of the third year, he was made an additional captain of the guard. However, Wang had never sent troops before.

古文：契丹寇澶州，别遣伟王攻雁门，败之于秀容。
现代文：契丹进犯澶州，派伟王攻雁门，知远在秀容打败契丹军。
English: Khitan invaded Bozhou, sent Wei Wang to attack Yanmen, and Zhiyuan defeated the Khitan army in Xiurong.

古文：八月，杀吐浑白承福等族，取其赀钜万，良马数千。
现代文：八月，杀吐浑白承福等族，取其资产巨万，良马数千匹。
English: In August, they killed the Hunpai, Chengfu and other ethnic groups, taking their huge assets and thousands of good horses.

古文：四年，契丹犯京师，出帝北迁，王遣牙将王峻奉表契丹，耶律德光呼之为兒，赐以木拐一，木拐，虏法贵之如中国几杖，非优大臣不可得。
现代文：开运四年，契丹进犯京城，出帝被俘北迁，王派牙将王峻上表契丹，耶律德光称他为儿子，赐给木拐，这是少数民族的习俗，贵重如中原的几杖，不是亲信的大臣不给。
English: Four years after the start of the campaign, the Khitans invaded the capital, the emperor was deposed and taken prisoner and moved to the north. The king sent Fang to bring Wang Shun to the throne of the Khitans. Yerudoglu called him his son and gave him a wooden staff. This is a custom of ethnic minorities. It is as precious as a few canes from the Central Plains, and is not given to ministers who are not close friends.

古文：峻持拐归，虏人望之皆避道。
现代文：王峻拿着木拐回来，契丹兵望见都让路。
English: Wang Jun came back with a wooden stick, and the Khitan soldiers gave way at sight.

古文：峻还，为王言契丹必不能有中国，乃议建国。
现代文：王峻回来说 ：契丹必不可能长久占据中原，建议建立国家。 
English: Wang Junhui said: It is impossible for the Khitan to occupy the Central Plains for a long time, and suggested the establishment of a state.

古文：二月戊辰，河东行军司马张彦威等上笺劝进。
现代文：二月十二日，河东行军司马张彦威等人上表劝进。
English: On February 12th, Zhang Yanwei, the Sima of the Hedong Marching Army, and others went to the table to persuade them to advance.

古文：辛未，皇帝即位，称天福十二年。
现代文：十五日，知远即帝位，称天福十二年。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhiyuan was enthroned as emperor, and it was called the twelfth year of Tianfu.

古文：磁州贼首梁晖取相州来归。
现代文：磁州贼首梁晖取相州来归附。
English: The head of the magnetic state thief Liang Liang took the same state to annex it.

古文：武节都指挥使史弘肇取代州，杀其刺史王晖。
现代文：武节都指挥使史弘肇取代州，杀其刺史王晖。
English: The commander of the Wu Festival ordered Shi Hongzhao to replace the state and kill his assassin, Shi Wangjun.

古文：晋州将药可俦杀守将骆从朗及括钱使、谏议大夫赵熙来归。
现代文：晋州将药可俦杀其守将骆从朗及括钱使、谏议大夫赵熙来归降。
English: Jinzhou will be able to fight and kill the medicine, and its guard will be Luo Conglang and the envoy of the money, and the doctor Zhao Xilai will return.

古文：辛巳，陕州留后赵晖、潞州留后王守恩来归。
现代文：二十五日，陕州留后赵晖、潞州留后王守恩来归。
English: On the 25th, after staying in Shaanxi Province, Zhao Wei and after staying in Ganzhou Province, Wang Shouen returned.

古文：三月丙戌朔，蠲河东杂税。
现代文：三月一日，免去河东杂税。
English: On March 1, the Hedong miscellaneous tax will be exempted.

古文：辛卯，延州军乱，逐其节度使周密。
现代文：六日，延州军内乱，驱逐节度使周密。
English: On the 6th, there was a civil disturbance in the Yanzhou army, and the expulsion was carried out in a meticulous manner.

古文：壬辰，丹州指挥使高彦询以其州来归。
现代文：七日，丹州指挥使高彦询以其州来归附。
English: On the seventh day, the commander of Danzhou sent Gao Yancheng to his province to annex it.

古文：壬寅，契丹遁，以其将萧翰为宣武军节度使守汴州。
现代文：十七日，契丹军退走，派其大将萧翰为宣武节度使守汴州。
English: On the 17th, the Khitan army retreated and sent its general Xiao Han to defend Zhangzhou for the Xuanwu Festival.

古文：夏四月己未，右都押衙杨邠为枢密使，蕃汉兵马都孔目官郭威权枢密副使。
现代文：四月四日，任右都押衙杨为枢密使，蕃汉兵马都孔目官郭威权枢密副使。
English: On April 4th, the right-wing Du Fu Yang was appointed as the Privy Envoy, and Guo Wenzhong, the commander of the Han soldiers and horses, was appointed as the Deputy Privy Envoy.

古文：契丹陷相州，杀梁晖。
现代文：契丹攻占相州，杀梁晖。
English: The Khitans captured Sangju and killed Liang Yao.

古文：癸亥，立魏国夫人李氏为皇后。
现代文：八日，立魏国夫人李氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th, the Lady of Wei and the Lady of Li were proclaimed empresses.

古文：甲子，河东节度判官苏逢吉、观察推官苏禹珪为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九日，任河东节度判官苏逢吉、观察推官苏禹皀为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 9th, Su Fengji, who was appointed as the judge of the Hedong Festival, and Su Yuqi, who was the observer of the judge, were the attendants of the Chinese calligraphy and the subordinates of the Chinese calligraphy.

古文：乙丑，侍卫亲军步军都指挥使史弘肇取潞州。
现代文：十日，侍卫亲军步军都指挥使史弘肇攻取潞州。
English: On the 10th day, the guards and foot soldiers of the pro-army all commanded Shi Hongzhao to invade Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，奉国指挥使武行德以河阳来归。
现代文：十三日，奉国指挥使武行德以河阳来归。
English: On the 13th, the commanding officer sent Wu Xingde to Heyang to return.

古文：史弘肇取泽州。
现代文：史弘肇攻取泽州。
English: Shi Hongzhao captured Zezhou.

古文：丙子，契丹耶律德光卒于栾城，契丹入于镇州。
现代文：二十一日，契丹耶律德光死于栾城县，契丹入镇州。
English: On the twenty-first day, Khitan Yerudoglu died in Lucheng County, and Khitan entered Zhenzhou.

古文：五月甲午，太原尹刘崇为北京留守。
现代文：五月十日，任太原尹刘崇为北京留守。
English: On May 10, Ren Taiyuan Yin Liu Chong left for Beijing.

古文：丙申，如东京。
现代文：十二日，前往东京。
English: On the 12th, he left for Tokyo.

古文：萧翰遁归于契丹，以郇国公李从益知南朝军国事。
现代文：萧翰退归契丹，用郇国公李从益管南朝军国事。
English: Xiao Han returned to Khitan, and used Gong Li of Shandong to manage the affairs of state of the Southern Dynasties.

古文：戊申，次绛州，刺史李从朗来归。
现代文：二十四日，到绛州，刺史李从朗来归附。
English: On the 24th, he went to Zhangzhou, and received the title of Zhi Shi Li from Lang.

古文：六月丙辰，次河阳，杀李从益及其母于京师。
现代文：六月三日，到河阳，杀李从益及其母于京城。
English: On June 3, he went to Hayao and killed Li Congyi and his mother in Beijing.

古文：甲子，至自太原。戊辰，改国号汉，赦罪人、蠲民税。
现代文：十一日，从太原到达洛阳，十五日，改国号汉，大赦，免当年农民赋税。
English: On the 11th day, from Taiyuan to Luoyang, and on the 15th day, the country name was changed to Han, amnesty, and farmers were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：于阗遣使者来。
现代文：于田使者来。
English: Yuda's emissaries have arrived.

古文：是夏，刘昫薨。
现代文：同年夏天，刘日旬死。
English: In the summer of the same year, Liu died.

古文：秋闰七月乙丑，禁造契丹服器。
现代文：闰七月十三，禁止制造契丹衣服、器具。
English: On July 13, the manufacture of Khitan clothing and utensils was banned.

古文：天雄军节度使杜重威反，天平军节度使高行周为鄴都行营都部署以讨之。
现代文：天雄军节度使杜重威反叛，派天平军节度使高行周为邺都行营都部署去讨伐。
English: The Tianxiong Army sent troops to rebel against Du Chongwei, and the Tianping Army sent troops to fight against Gao Xingzhou.

古文：庚辰，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：高祖湍谥曰明元，庙号文祖，祖妣李氏谥曰明贞；曾祖昂谥曰恭僖，庙号德祖，祖妣杨氏谥曰恭惠；祖僎谥曰昭宪，庙号翼祖，祖妣李氏谥曰昭穆；考琠谥曰章圣，庙号显祖，妣安氏谥曰章懿。
现代文：二十八日，追尊祖考为皇帝，妣为皇后：高祖湍谥曰明元，庙号文祖，祖妣李氏谥明贞；曾祖昂谥恭僖，庙号德祖，祖妣杨氏谥曰恭惠；祖谥曰昭宪，庙号翼祖，祖妣李氏谥曰昭穆；考谥曰章圣，庙号显祖，妣安氏谥曰章懿。
English: On the 28th, the emperor and empress were named after the revered ancestors: Gao Zu (高祖) was named Mingyuan (明元), temple name Wenzu (文祖), ancestor Li (李氏) was named Mingzhen (明貞); Zengzu (曾祖) Angzong (昂恭), temple name Dezu (徳祖), ancestor Yang (楊氏) was named Gonghui; Zu (祖) was named Zhaoxian (昭憲), temple name Yingzu (翼祖), ancestor Li (李氏) was named Zhaomu; Guo (考) was named Zhang Sheng (章聖), temple name X

古文：以汉高皇帝为高祖，光武皇帝为世祖，皆不祧。
现代文：以汉高皇帝为高祖，光武皇帝为世祖，都不祭祀。
English: With Emperor Henkel as the high ancestor and Emperor Guangwu as the ancestor, they are not worshiped.

古文：八月，护圣指挥使白再荣逐契丹，以镇州来归。
现代文：八月，护圣指挥使白再荣驱逐契丹，以镇州来归附。
English: In August, the commander of the Protection of Holy Relics ordered Baizhe Rong to expel the Khitan and annex it to Zhenzhou.

古文：丙申，安国军节度使薛怀让杀契丹之将刘鐸，入于邢州。
现代文：十五日，安国军节度使薛怀让杀契丹将军刘铎，入邢州。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the An Guo Army sent Xue Huai to assassinate the Khitan general Liu Bei and enter Zhangzhou.

古文：九月甲戌，吏部尚书窦贞固守司空兼门下侍郎，翰林学士、中书舍人李涛为中书侍郎：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：九月二十三日，任吏部尚书窦贞固守司空兼门下侍郎，翰林学士、中书舍人李涛为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On September 23rd, Shang Shu Dou Zhen Gu Gu Gu Zi Ku and his attendant were appointed as officials of the Ministry of Personnel, and Li Tao, Hanlin Baccalaureate and the person in charge of the Chinese school, was appointed as the Chinese school attendant and the person in charge of the Chinese school.

古文：庚辰，北征。
现代文：二十九日，北征。
English: On the 29th, the Northern Expedition began.

古文：冬十月甲申，次韦城，赦河北。
现代文：十月三日，到韦城，赦免河北。
English: On October 3, he went to Weicheng and pardoned Hebei Province.

古文：十一月壬申，杜重威降。
现代文：十一月二十二日，杜重威投降。
English: On November 22, Du Chongwei surrendered.

古文：十二月癸巳，至自鄴都。
现代文：十二月十三日，从邺都回到洛阳。
English: On December 13, he returned to Luoyang from Shidu.

古文：乾祐元年春正月乙卯，大赦，改元。己未，更名暠。
现代文：乾祐元年正月五日，大赦，改元。九日，更名暠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：丁丑，皇帝崩于万岁殿。
现代文：二十七日，皇帝在万岁殿去世。
English: On the 27th, the emperor died in the Hall of Long Life.

