古文：王蕃字永元，庐江人也。
现代文：王蕃传，王蕃，字永元，庐江人。
English: Wang Xizhong, Wang Xizhong, the character Yongyuan, the Lijiang River people.

古文：博览多闻，兼通术艺。
现代文：他博览多闻，兼通历法、六艺。
English: He is well-versed in many subjects, including the calendar and the six arts.

古文：始为尚书郎，去官。
现代文：起始为尚书郎，后辞官而去。
English: It started with Sho Shuro and ended with his resignation.

古文：孙休即位，与贺邵、薛莹、虞汜俱为散骑中常侍，皆加驸马都尉。
现代文：孙休即位后，他与贺邵、薛莹、虞汜一道为散骑中常侍，都被加授驸马都尉。
English: After Sun Xiu's accession to the throne, he, along with He Shao, Xue Ying, and Yu Yao, was an attendant in the cavalry, and were all awarded the title of lieutenant of the cavalry.

古文：时论清之。
现代文：当时社会评论认为他很清雅。
English: At the time, social commentators thought he was dapper.

古文：遣使至蜀，蜀人称焉，还为夏口监军。
现代文：朝廷派遣他出使蜀国，蜀人称赏他，回朝任夏口监军。
English: The imperial court sent him as an envoy to the State of Shu. The people of Shu praised him, and he returned to the imperial court to serve as the inspector of the Xiakou army.

古文：孙皓初。复入为常侍，与万彧同官。
现代文：孙皓在位初年，王蕃又入朝为常侍，与万彧官职一样。
English: In the first year of Sun Yat-sen's reign, Wang Yao again entered the court as a regular attendant, the same as Wan Yao's official post.

古文：彧与皓有旧，俗士挟侵，谓蕃自轻。
现代文：万彧与孙皓有旧交，其人鄙俗之人，仗势侵辱王蕃，说王蕃自我轻贱。
English: Wan Xuan had an old friendship with Sun Yat-sen, who was a despicable person. He insulted Wang Yat-sen and said that Wang Yat-sen was inferior to him.

古文：又中书丞陈声，皓之嬖臣，数谮毁蕃。
现代文：又中书丞陈声，是孙皓的嬖臣，多次在孙皓面前谮毁王蕃。
English: In addition, Chen Sheng, the chancellor, was a vassal of Sun Yat-sen, and he repeatedly slandered Wang Xi in front of Sun Yat-sen.

古文：蕃体气高亮，不能承颜顺指；时或迕意，积以见责。
现代文：王蕃气质高风亮节，不能低声下气看人脸色行事，有时违忤孙皓的意旨，时间长了即受责备。
English: Wang Yao's temperament is high-spirited and bright, and he cannot act in a low voice and look at people's faces. Sometimes he violates Sun Yao's intention, and if it takes a long time, he will be blamed.

古文：甘露二年，丁忠使晋还，皓大会群臣，蕃沉醉顿伏。皓疑而不悦，举蕃出外。
现代文：甘露二年，丁忠出使晋国回国，孙皓大摆宴席会集群臣，王蕃饮酒大醉，当即倒地，孙皓怀疑王蕃不敬而不高兴，让人把他抬到外面去。
English: In the second year of Ganlu, Ding Zhong sent an envoy to Jin to return to the country, Sun Yat-sen held a grand banquet to gather ministers, Wang Yat-sen drank heavily and immediately fell to the ground, Sun Yat-sen suspected that Wang Yat-sen was disrespectful and unhappy, and had him carried outside.

古文：顷之请还，酒亦不解。
现代文：很快王蕃请求回来，酒还未全醒。
English: Wang Yao soon asked him to come back, he was still drunk.

古文：蕃性有威严，行止自若，皓大怒，呵左右于殿下斩之。
现代文：王蕃的性情一向有威严气势，此时举止自若，孙皓大怒，喝令手下人将王蕃斩杀在大殿下。
English: Wang Yao's disposition had always been dignified, but at this time he behaved arrogantly. Sun Yao was furious and ordered his men to behead Wang Yao in front of the Great Hall.

古文：卫将军滕牧、征西将军留平请，不能得。
现代文：卫将军滕牧、征西将军留平为他求情，孙皓不允。
English: General Teng Mu of the Wei Dynasty and General Remping of the Western Expedition pleaded for him, but Sun Yat-sen did not agree.

古文：丞相陆凯上疏曰： 常侍王蕃黄中通理，知天知物，处朝忠蹇，斯社稷之重镇，大吴之龙逢也。
现代文：丞相陆凯上奏说： 常侍王蕃内修美德外明事理，知晓天道了解万物，处事朝中正直忠心，是社稷的重臣，大吴的龙逢啊！
English: The prime minister, Lu Kai, said in his speech, "The constant attendant of Wang Xuanai cultivates virtue, understands external things, knows the heavenly way, understands all things, is honest and loyal in his dealings with the central government, and is the chief minister of the Sheshan, the Dragon of the Great Wu!

古文：昔事景皇，纳言左右，景皇钦嘉，叹为异伦。
现代文：从前他奉事景皇帝，进谏献策于左右，景皇帝钦佩赞赏他，赞叹他卓越超群。
English: In the past, he worked for the Emperor Jing and advised him on various matters. The Emperor Jing admired and appreciated him and praised his excellence.

古文：而陛下忿其苦辞，恶其直对，枭之殿堂，尸骸暴弃，邦内伤心，有识悲悼。 
现代文：而陛下恼恨他说话刺耳，厌恶他直言对答，将他斩首于殿堂，抛尸于野外，国内人民为他伤心，有识之士为他悲悼。 
English: His Majesty, however, was annoyed by his harsh words and disgusted by his frank answers. He had him beheaded in the palace and his body was thrown into the open. The people of the country grieved for him, and those with insight mourned for him.

古文：其痛蕃如此。
现代文：他痛惜王蕃即是这样。
English: He deplored that Wang Yao had behaved in this way.

古文：蕃死时年三十九，皓徙蕃家属广州。
现代文：王蕃死时仅三十九岁，孙皓将他的家属流放到广州。
English: Wang Hui was only thirty-nine years old when he died, and Sun Yat-sen exiled his family to Guangzhou.

古文：二弟着、延皆作佳器，郭马起事，不为马用，见害。
现代文：他的两个弟弟王著、王延，都是杰出才器之士，郭马起兵叛乱时，他们不肯为郭马所任用，故被杀害。
English: His two younger brothers, Wang Zhu and Wang Yan, were both men of outstanding talent. When Guo Ma started a rebellion, they refused to be appointed by Guo Ma, so they were killed.

古文：楼玄字承先，沛郡蕲人也。
现代文：楼玄传，楼玄，字承先，沛郡蕲县人。
English: Lou Xuan Chuan, Lou Xuan, the word inherits the first, Pei County, Minxian County.

古文：孙休时为监农御史。
现代文：孙休时期他为监农御史。
English: During the Sun Yat-sen era, he was the overseer of farmers.

古文：孙皓即位，与王蕃、郭逴、万彧俱为散骑中常侍，出为会稽太守，入为大司农。
现代文：孙皓即位为帝，楼玄与王蕃、郭逴、万彧一道为散骑中常侍，出朝外任会稽太守，入朝任大司农。
English: Sun Yat-sen ascended to the throne as emperor, and Lou Xuan, along with Wang Xi, Guo Xi, and Wan Xuan, served as a regular attendant in the cavalry. He was appointed as an inspector general of the Imperial Household Agency when he left the imperial court, and as the chief agronomist when he entered the imperial court.

古文：旧禁中主者自用亲近人作之，彧陈亲密近职宜用好人，皓因敕有司，求忠清之士，以应其选，遂用玄为宫下镇禁中候，主殿中事，玄从九卿持刀侍卫，正身率众，奉法而行，应对切直，数迕皓意，渐见责怒。
现代文：以前宫中主事人本是使用亲近的人来担任，万彧奏说在亲密熟知的人中，应使用品行正派之人，孙皓便下令有关官员，寻找忠正清廉之士，以接受宫中任职的选拔，于是任用楼玄为宫下镇禁中候，主持殿中事务。楼玄为副九卿故持刀侍卫宫禁，严正自身表率众人，按照法令行事，答对恳切忠直，数次违忤孙皓的意旨，渐渐受到责怪恼恨。
English: In the past, the person in charge of the palace was supposed to be someone who was close to him. If the report said that among close acquaintances, a person of good character should be used, Sun Yat-sen ordered the relevant officials to find a loyal and honest person to accept the selection of the palace, and then appointed Lou Xuan to be the deputy of the palace and preside over the affairs of the palace. Lou Xuan was the deputy of the nine nobles, so he held a sword to guard the palace. He strictly led the people by example, acted in accordance with the law, answered sincerely and honestly, violated the intention of Sun Yat-sen several times, and was gradually blamed and res

古文：后人诬白玄与贺邵相逢，驻共耳语大笑，谤讪政事，遂被诏诘责，送付广州。
现代文：后来有人诬陷诽谤楼玄与贺邵相遇时，停车窃窃私议放声大笑，毁谤朝政。于是受到孙皓下诏诘责，被押送广州。
English: Later, when someone framed and slandered Lou Xuan and He Shao when they met, they laughed loudly and slandered the imperial government. Therefore, they were reprimanded by Sun Yat-sen and sent to Guangzhou.

古文：东观令华核上疏曰： 臣窃以治国之体，其犹治家。
现代文：东观令华核上奏说： 为臣私下认为治理国家的根本，犹如治家。
English: Dongguan Linghua Nuclear Power Plant said: Privately, the minister believes that the foundation of governing the country is like managing a family.

古文：主田野者，皆宜良信。
现代文：主管田间事务的人，都宜为贤良诚信。
English: Those who are in charge of field affairs should be virtuous and honest.

古文：又宜得一人总其条目，为作维纲，众事乃理。
现代文：又应用一人总理出家务的规章条目，为它制定一条总纲，这样家中各项事情得到治理。
English: In addition, the article of the regulation on the departure of a prime minister from home affairs was applied to formulate a general outline for it, so that various things in the home would be governed.

古文：《论语》曰： 无为而治者其舜也与！
现代文：《论语》有言： 无所作为能使天下得到治理的人是舜。
English: There is a saying in the Analects: The person who can make the world governed by doing nothing is a baboon.

古文：恭己正南面而己。 言所任得其人，放优游而自逸也。
现代文：他只是让自己面向正南端正地坐着而已。 是说任用的人得当称职，故此自己悠闲而安逸。
English: He just lets himself sit upright, facing due south, which means that the person he appoints must be competent, so he feels relaxed and at ease.

古文：今海内未定，天下多事，事无大小，皆当关闻，动经御坐，劳损圣虑。
现代文：如今天下未定，国家多事，事无大小，都应当禀报以求上闻，故一切经由陛下，使您圣明的思虑有所劳损。
English: If it is not decided today, the country's many affairs, no matter how big or small, should be reported in order to be heard, so everything through His Majesty, so that your sacred thoughts are strained.

古文：陛下既垂意博古，综极艺文，加勤心好道，随节致气，宜得闲静以展神思，呼翕清淳，与天同极。
现代文：陛下既已着意于博通古事，总览穷极经典文籍，加之用心勤奋喜好道术，随着节令炼养精气，应当得到空闲安静以放松精神，呼吸清淳空气，与自然共致无极。
English: Since His Majesty has been interested in learning about ancient history and has an exhaustive overview of classic literature, in addition to being diligent and fond of Taoism, and with the spirit of the season, he should get leisure and quiet to relax his spirit, breathe clean air, and live in harmony with nature.

古文：臣夙夜思惟，诸吏之中，任干之事，足委丈者，无胜于楼玄。
现代文：为臣日夜思量，百官之中，能任职担当此事，足以信赖委托之人，没有比楼玄再合适不过。
English: As a vassal thinks day and night, among the hundreds of officials, there is no one more suitable than Lou Xuan who can be in charge of this matter and who is trustworthy enough to entrust.

古文：玄清忠奉公，冠冕当世，众服其操，无与争先。
现代文：楼玄清廉忠正奉公守法，卓立超越于当今之世，众人都敬佩他的操守，无人能与他争先。
English: Mr. Lou Xuan, a man of integrity, is a law-abiding and outstanding person who transcends today's world. Everyone admires his integrity, and no one can compete with him.

古文：失清者则心平而意直，忠者惟正道而履之，如玄之性，终始可保，乞陛下赦玄前愆，使得自新，擢之宰司，责其后效。使为官择人，随才授任，则舜之恭己，近亦可得。 
现代文：而清者则心平而意直，忠者只有正道才乐意举足，像楼玄这种性情，可以始终保持一致，乞请陛下赦免楼玄以前的罪过，使他得以悔过自新，提拔他主持有关部门事务，责成他取得良好的成效，陛下能让自己安抚官职选拔人才，根据人的才干委以职任，则舜那种端坐面南无为而治的情景，很快也能实现。 
English: On the other hand, those who are pure are calm and straightforward, and those who are loyal are willing to lift their feet only if they are on the right path. A disposition like Lou Xuan's can always be consistent, begging His Majesty to pardon Lou Xuan's previous sins, so that he can repent and reform, promote him to preside over relevant departmental affairs, and instruct him to achieve good results. His Majesty can pacify himself to select talents for official positions, and appoint positions according to people's talent committees, then the situation of sitting on the sidelines and doing nothing will soon be realized.

古文：皓话玄名声，复徙玄及子据，付交址将张奕，使以战自效，阴别敕奕令杀之。
现代文：孙皓忌恨楼玄的声名，再流放楼玄及儿子楼据，将他们交付给交阯的将领张奕，让他们在战争中效力，暗中却命令张奕杀掉他们。
English: Sun Yuxi hated Lou Xuan's reputation, and then exiled Lou Xuan and his son Lou Jian, and handed them over to the warlord Zhang Yi, so that they could serve in the war, but secretly ordered Zhang Yi to kill them.

古文：据到交址，病死。
现代文：楼据到交阯后病死。
English: He died of illness after the marriage.

古文：玄一身随亦讨贼，持刀步涉，见亦辄拜，亦未忍杀。
现代文：楼玄单身一人跟随张奕征讨贼寇，持刀徒步长途跋涉，见了张奕就叩拜，张奕不忍心杀死他。
English: Lou Xuan, a single man, followed Zhang Yizheng to fight against thieves and robbers, and trekked a long distance with a knife. When he saw Zhang Yizheng, he bowed to him. Zhang Yizheng did not have the heart to kill him.

古文：会亦暴卒，玄殡敛亦，于器中见敕书，还便自杀。
现代文：正好张奕突然去世，楼玄殡殓张奕时，从张奕的器物中发现孙皓的敕书，他回去后就自杀身亡。
English: Just as Zhang Yi suddenly passed away, when Lou Xuan was burying Zhang Yi, he found Sun Ye's forged book among Zhang Yi's belongings. After he returned, he committed suicide.

古文：贺邵字兴伯，会稽山阴人也，孙休即位，从中郎为期骑中常侍，出为吴郡太守。
现代文：贺邵传，贺邵，字兴伯，会稽郡山阴县人。孙休登基，贺邵从中郎出任散骑中常侍，出朝外任吴郡太守。
English: He Shao Chuan, He Shao, the character Xing Bo, was from Shanyin County, Hefei County. Sun Xiu ascended to the throne, He Shao served as a middle-ranking equerry to Zhong Lang, and served as the governor of Wuxi County.

古文：孙皓时，入为左典军，迁中书令，领太子太傅。
现代文：孙皓时期，他入朝为左典军，升为中书令，兼任太子太傅。
English: During the Sun Yat-sen period, he entered the imperial court as a member of the Southern Expeditionary Force, was promoted to the rank of Chushirei, and concurrently served as Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：皓凶暴骄矜，政事日弊。
现代文：孙皓凶狠残暴，骄横自负，国家政事日益衰敝。
English: Sun Yat-sen was ferocious and cruel, arrogant and conceited, and the country's political affairs became increasingly decadent.

古文：邵上疏谏曰： 古之圣王，所以潜处重闱之内而知万里之情，垂拱衽席之上，明照八极之际者，任贤之功也。
现代文：贺邵上奏进谏说： 古代圣明的君主，之所以能深居宫闱而知晓天下之事，垂衣拱手端坐席上却能光耀八方极远之地，这归功于他能任用贤才！
English: He Shao Shangsoo Jinjun said: The reason why the ancient sage monarch could live deep in the palace and know the things of the world, but could shine far and wide while sitting at the table, was due to his ability to appoint wise men!

古文：陛下以至德淑姿，统承皇业，宜率身履道，恭奉神器，旌贤表善，以康庶政。
现代文：陛下以杰出的德行和美好的资质，统绪帝业，应以身率先履行道义，恭敬奉守社稷大业，褒扬贤能表彰善良，以安定各种国家政事。
English: His Majesty, with his outstanding moral conduct and fine qualifications, leads the unification of the imperial cause. He should take the lead in fulfilling morality with his own body, respectfully observe the great cause of the society, praise the virtuous and commend the good, and stabilize various national political affairs.

古文：自顷年以来，朝列纷错，真伪相贸，上下空任，文武旷位，外无山岳之镇，内无拾遗之臣。佞谀之徒拊冀天飞，干弄朝威，盗窃荣利，而忠良排坠，信臣被害。
现代文：自近年以来，朝廷官列错乱纷杂，真伪相混，上下空职，文武官员不尽职守，朝廷外面没有如山岳般的镇守将领，宫廷内面没有拾遗补阙的贤良大臣，奸佞阿谀之徒鼓翅飞翔，干弄朝廷威柄，盗窃荣利，而忠诚贤良者却被排挤贬抑，诚实正直大臣遭受诽谤陷害。
English: Since recent years, the ranks of imperial officials have been chaotic, mixed with truth and falsehood, vacant posts, civil and military officials do not perform their duties, there are no mountain-like town guard generals outside the imperial court, there are no virtuous ministers in the imperial court to pick up the remains and replenish the coffers, and the traitorous imams are flying in the wings, tampering with the prestige of the imperial court and stealing the honor and profits, while the loyal and virtuous are being ousted and degraded, and the honest ministers are being slandered and framed.

古文：是以正士摧方，而庸臣苟媚，先意承旨，各希时趣。人执反理之评，士吐诡道之论，遂使清流变浊，忠臣结舌。
现代文：故此正直之士改易方正的操守，而昏庸的小臣却苟且献媚，他们揣摩陛下心思奉承恭维，各自希望达到自己的浅近目的，人们执着违反常理的评说，个个口吐歪曲事实的理论，于是使清流变浊，忠臣噤声。
English: For this reason, those who are honest have changed their behavior to be upright, while those who are foolish have been obsequious and flattering. They have thought about how to flatter and flatter His Majesty, and each of them hopes to achieve their own shallow goals. People are obsessed with comments that violate common sense, and they are all spouting theories that distort the facts. As a result, the clear stream has become muddy, and loyalists have been silenced.

古文：陛下处九天之上，隐百重之室，言出风靡，令行景从，亲洽宠媚之臣，日闻顺意之辞，将谓此辈实贤，而天下已平也。
现代文：陛下身处九天高位，居于百重深宫，一言既出，风靡天下，一令颁行如影随从，亲洽献媚取宠的臣子，每天爱听顺合心意的言辞，恐怕会认为这类人真的贤明，而天下已经太平。
English: His Majesty is in the highest position for nine days, living in the hundred-step deep palace, a word is issued and swept the world, an order is issued and followed like a shadow, a courtier who is familiar with flattery and favors, loves to listen to words that suit his heart every day, I am afraid that I will think that this kind of person is really wise, and the world has been peaceful.

古文：臣心所不安，敢不以闻。臣闻兴国之君乐闻其过，荒乱之主乐闻其誉。闻其过者过日消而福臻，闻其誉者誉日损而祸至。
现代文：为臣心感不安，怎敢不上报给陛下听闻。 为臣听说兴国之君乐意听到人家指出他的过错，荒乱之君喜欢听到别人对他的美言赞誉；乐意听到指责过错的君主，他的过错会日益清除而福运臻于宏大；乐意听到他人赞誉的君主，他的声誉会日益减损而祸患必然来临。
English: When a subject hears that the prince of a prosperous country is pleased to hear his faults pointed out, and the prince of a desolate country is pleased to hear his praises praised; when a subject hears that the prince of a desolate country is pleased to hear his faults criticized, his faults will be increasingly purged and his good fortune will be magnified; when a subject hears that the prince of a prosperous country is pleased to hear his faults pointed out, and the prince of a desolate country will be pleased to hear his praises praised; when a subject hears that the prince of a desolate country is pleased to hear his faults criticized, his faults will be increasingly purged and his good fortune will be magnified

古文：是以古之人君，捐让以进贤，虚己以求过，譬天位于乘犇，以虎尾为警戒。
现代文：所以古代的君王，作揖礼请以进用贤人，虚怀以寻求己过，譬喻帝位犹如乘危奔命，装饰虎尾以警戒自身。
English: Therefore, the ancient kings, to make the imperial salute, please use the sages, and vainly seek their own faults. For example, the imperial throne is like running for your life, decorating the tiger's tail to guard yourself.

古文：至于陛下，严刑法以禁直辞，黜善士以逆谏臣，眩耀毁誉之实，沉沦近习之言。
现代文：至于陛下，严厉刑罚以禁绝直率言辞，罢黜善良人物以拒绝忠谏贤臣，不明毁谤与赞誉的实质，沉迷于宠臣的阿谀虚假之言。
English: As for his majesty, he punishes harshly by forbidding frank speech, by ousting good people, by refusing loyal and wise ministers, by not knowing the essence of slander and praise, and by indulging in the false words of his favorite ministers.

古文：昔高宗思佐，梦寐得贤，而陛下求之如忘，忽之如遗。
现代文：从前殷高宗思念良佐，梦寐以求得到贤士，而陛下求贤似乎丢在脑后，忽视贤才如同遗弃无用之物。
English: Once upon a time, Yin Gaozong pined for a good assistant and dreamed of obtaining a wise man, but His Majesty seems to have forgotten about seeking a wise man. Ignoring a wise man is like abandoning a useless thing.

古文：故常侍王蕃忠恪在公，才任辅弼，以醉酒之间加之大戮。
现代文：原常侍王蕃忠诚恭谨于公事，才干胜任辅弼，却在他酒醉时施以极刑。
English: He had always served the king loyally and respectfully in public affairs, and was able to serve as a competent assistant, but when he was drunk, he imposed capital punishment.

古文：近鸿胪葛奚，先帝旧臣，偶有逆迕，昏醉之言耳，三爵之后，礼所不讳，陛下猥发雷霆，谓之轻慢，饮之醇酒，中毒陨命。
现代文：近来鸿胪卿葛奚，是先帝的旧臣，偶尔有些违忤，不过是昏醉时说的话而已，酒过三巡后，不再忌讳礼节，陛下却猝发雷霆，说他轻侮傲慢，让他饮下酒精，以致中毒身亡。
English: Recently, Hongyuqing Gejun, an old vassal of the former emperor, occasionally violated some rules, but only said things when he was drunk. After three rounds of drinking, he no longer shunned etiquette, but his majesty suddenly became furious, saying that he despised arrogance and let him drink alcohol, resulting in poisoning and death.

古文：自是之后，海内悼心，朝臣失图，仕者以退为幸，居者以出为福，诚非所以保光洪绪，臣隆道化也。 又何定本趋走小人，仆隶之下，身无锱铢之行，能无鹰犬之用，而陛下爱其佞媚，假其威柄，使定恃宠放恣，自擅威福，口正国议，手弄天机，上亏日月之明，下塞君子之路。
现代文：自此以后，国内人士伤心，朝廷大臣失望，做官者以退职为幸运，居朝者以外任为福气，这确实不是用以保持光大宏伟功业、兴隆道德教化的情势！ 此外，何定本是供驱使的小人，地位在奴仆之下，自身没有半文钱的德行，才能没有鹰、犬般的作用，而陛下喜爱他奸佞献媚，转交他威权，使何定依恃宠幸肆无忌惮，擅作威福，口里决定国家大计，手中玩弄国家大权，上损陛下日月般的光明，下塞正人君子的上进道路。
English: Since then, the people of the country have been saddened, the ministers of the imperial court have been disappointed, the officials have been lucky to retire, and those who live in the imperial court have been lucky to be appointed to other positions. This is indeed not a situation to maintain the glory of magnificent achievements and the flourishing of moral education! In addition, He Ding was originally a villain to be driven, his position was under the slaves, he did not have half a penny of virtue, and he could not have the eagle and dog-like role, but His Majesty loved him, flattered him, and transferred his authority to him. He made He Ding cling to his favors unscrupulously,

古文：夫小人求人，必进奸利，定间妄兴事役，发江边戍兵以驱麋鹿，结置山陵，芟夷林莽，殚其九野之兽，聚于重围之内，上无益时之分，下有损耗之费。
现代文：凡小人要求进取，必定进献奸邪的利益，何定无事妄自发动劳役，征调长江沿岸的守卫部队去驱赶麋鹿，在山上布置网罗，砍伐森林，尽将各处野外的兽物，驱集在重围之中，这对上没有补益时政的名分，对下则有损耗财产的浪费。
English: All villains who want to be aggressive will inevitably promote the interests of evil and treachery. No matter what, they will arbitrarily initiate labor service, conscript the guard troops along the Yangtze River to drive the elk, set up traps on the mountains, cut down forests, and drive all the wild animals everywhere into the heavy siege. This has no benefit to the current government, but it is a waste of loss of property.

古文：而兵士疲于运送，人力竭于驱逐，老弱饥冻，大小怨叹。
现代文：而兵士们疲惫来往运送，人力在驱赶野兽时用尽，老弱饥寒交迫，长幼怨声载道。
English: But the soldiers are tired of being transported back and forth, their manpower is exhausted when driving away the beasts, the old and weak are hungry and cold, and the children are complaining.

古文：臣窃观天变，自比年以来阴阳错谬，四时逆节，日食地震；中夏陨霜，参之典籍，皆阴气陵阳，小人弄势之所致也。
现代文：为臣私下观察天象，自近年以来阴阳错乱，四时易节，日食地震，仲夏降霜，参阅典籍，这些都是阴气强凌阳气，是小人玩弄权势所招致。
English: For the vassal to observe the celestial phenomenon in private, since recent years, the yin and yang disorder, the four seasons, the solar eclipse, the earthquake, the midsummer frost, refer to the classics, these are all yin and yang, and are caused by the villain playing with power.

古文：臣尝览书传，验诸行事，灾祥之应，所为寒栗。
现代文：为臣曾披览书传，验证诸般发生的现象，灾祸祥瑞都得到应验，故为之心惊寒战。
English: For the minister, he had read the book to verify the various phenomena that occurred, and the calamity Xiang Rui had been fulfilled, so his heart was shocked.

古文：昔高宗修己以消鼎雉之异，宋景崇德以退荧惑之变。愿陛下上惧皇天谴告之诮，下追二君攘灾之道，远览前代任贤之功，近寤今日谬授之失，清澄朝位，旌叙俊乂，放退佞邪，抑夺奸势。如是之辈，一匆复用，广延淹滞，容受直辞，祗承乾指，敬奉先业，则大化光敷，天人望塞也。《传》曰： 国之兴也，视民如赤子。其亡也，以民为草芥。 
现代文：从前殷高宗修养自己品德以消弭野鸡投鼎的异象，宋景公崇尚德行以消退火星不祥的变化，希望陛下能上怕皇天告示的谴责，下追高宗、景公禳灾的修行，远鉴前代任用贤能的功德，近省当今荒谬授人权柄的过失，整顿澄清朝中的官位，表彰论赏俊杰的功用，放逐驱退奸佞的小臣，抑制剥夺邪恶者权势，前述小人，一律不再任用，广泛延请滞留埋没在下不得升进的人才，容纳接受直率劝谏的言辞，谨慎地承受上天的旨意，恭敬地奉守先人的基业，如是则弘大教化如阳光普照，上天和下民的怨望就会止息。 《易传》有言： 国家将兴旺，视百姓如赤子；国家将衰亡，待百姓如草芥。 
English: In the past, Yin Gaozong cultivated his moral character to dispel the vision of pheasants flying into the sky, Song Jinggong advocated moral conduct to dispel the ominous changes of Mars, and hoped that His Majesty would be able to fear the condemnation of the emperor's heavenly announcement, pursue the practice of Gaozong and Jinggong's disaster relief, learn from the merits of the previous generation's appointment of the virtuous, the mistakes of the current absurd granting of authority to the neighboring provinces, rectify and clarify the official position of the DPRK, commend and reward the merits of Junjie, expel the vile ministers, restrain and deprive the evil

古文：陛下昔韬神光，潜德东夏，以圣哲茂姿，龙飞应天，四海延颈，八方拭目，以成康之化必隆于旦夕也。
现代文：陛下从前深藏神圣光芒，潜修德行于东方之地，以圣明的睿智和卓茂的风采，潜龙腾飞顺应天命，四海人民延颈盼望，八方百姓拭目瞻观，认为成、康之世的教化定会在短期内兴隆。
English: Once upon a time, His Majesty hid the divine light in the depths of his heart, and traveled to the East to cultivate virtue. With the wisdom of the holy light and the splendid style, the hidden dragon soared in accordance with the destiny of heaven. The people of the four seas extended their necks in hope, and the people of the eight directions looked at each other and thought that the enlightenment of the world of success and well-being would surely flourish in the short term.

古文：自登位以来，法禁转苛，赋调益繁。中宫内竖，分布州郡，横兴事役，竞造奸利。
现代文：自陛下登基以来，法令条禁变得苛刻，赋税征调日益繁杂；宫廷内的奸邪小人，分布各处州郡，肆意兴动劳役，竞相贪求暴利。
English: Since His Majesty's accession to the throne, laws and regulations have become stricter, taxes and levies have become more and more complicated; the villains in the court, distributed throughout the states and counties, wantonly engage in labor service and compete for profiteering.

古文：百姓罹杼轴之困，黎民罢无已之求，老幼饥寒，家户莱色，而所在长吏，迫畏罪负，严法峻刑，苦民求办。
现代文：百姓遭受穿梭般的困扰，民众疲惫无止境的索求，老小饥寒交迫，家家面现菜色，而地方官吏，迫于畏惧担负罪责，便施以严法酷刑，折磨百姓求得供应。
English: The people suffer from the problems of being shuttled, the people are tired of endless demands, the old and the young are hungry and cold, and every family has a dish, and local officials, forced by fear to bear criminal responsibility, use severe torture to torture the people to obtain supplies.

古文：是以人力不堪，家户离散，呼嗟之声，感伤和气。
现代文：故此民力不堪承受，家户妻离子散，痛哭哀号之声，动伤国家祥和之气。
English: Therefore, the people's strength is unbearable, households are scattered, and the sound of weeping and wailing disturbs the country's peaceful spirit.

古文：又江边戍兵，远当以拓土广境，近当以守界备难，宜特优育，以待有事，而征发赋调，烟至云集，衣不全裋褐，食不瞻朝夕，出当锋镝之难，入抱无聊之戚。
现代文：又长江沿岸的守卫军队，从远处考虑应该拓土开疆，从近处考虑应当守疆防敌，故此应对他们特别优待供养，以待战事发生时使用，而现在对他们征收赋税，如烟漫云涌，使他们衣不能遮蔽全身，食不能供应早夕，出战时要他们冒枪林箭雨之难，回营后使他们承受无以为生的愁戚。
English: In addition, the guarding troops along the Yangtze River, considering from a distance that they should expand their territory, and considering from a close distance that they should defend their territory against the enemy, should therefore be given special preferential treatment and support to be used in the event of war, and now they are taxed, such as smoke clouds, so that their clothes cannot cover their whole body, food cannot be supplied in the morning and evening, and they are required to face the difficulties of guns and arrows when going to war, and after returning to camp, they are made to bear the sorrow of having nothing to live for.

古文：是以父子相弃，叛者成行。
现代文：因此他们父子相互抛弃，叛逃者结队成群。
English: So father and son abandoned each other, and defectors came in droves.

古文：愿陛下宽赋除烦，振恤穷乏，省诸不急，荡禁约法，则海内乐业，大化普洽。
现代文：希望陛下宽缓赋税除去烦苛，赈济抚恤穷困贫乏之人，减省那些不急需的劳役，简约消除法律禁令，如此则全国人民能乐业安居，弘大教化能推广普及。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will relax taxation to remove burdensome taxes, provide relief and support for the poor and needy, reduce those labor services that are not urgently needed, and simply eliminate legal prohibitions. In this way, the people of the whole country will be able to enjoy their work and live safely, and Hongda Education can be promoted and popularized.

古文：夫民者国之本，食者民之命也，今国无一年之储。家无经月之畜，而后宫之中坐食者万有余人。
现代文：人民是国家的根本，而食物是人民的命脉，如今国家无一年可用的储备，百姓家中无经月可食的积蓄，而后宫之中坐食终日者一万多人。
English: The people are the foundation of the country, and food is the lifeblood of the people. Today, the country has no reserves that can be used for a year, the people have no monthly savings, and there are more than ten thousand people sitting in the harem all day.

古文：内有离旷之怨，外有损耗之费。使库廪空于无用，士民饥于糟糠。又北敌注目，伺国盛衰，陛下不恃己之威德；而怙敌之不来，忽四海之困穷，而轻虏之不为难，诚非长策庙胜之要也。
现代文：宫中有离家空守的怨恨，朝外有无端损耗的花费，使得国库被无益的事情用尽，百姓因糠菜的不足饥饿终日。 此外，北方强敌虎目注视，窥伺我国的盛衰，陛下不依靠自己的威严德行，而期望敌人的不来侵犯，忽视四海的困顿穷苦，而轻视强敌的不来发难，这确实不是谋求长久居宫稳操胜券的措施。
English: In addition, the powerful enemy in the north is watching closely, spying on the rise and fall of our country, His Majesty does not rely on his own majesty and virtue, but expects the enemy not to invade, ignores the hardships and poverty of the four seas, and despises the strong enemy not to attack, which is really not a measure to seek a long-term stay in the palace and a stable victory.

古文：昔大皇帝勤身苦体，创基南夏，割据江山，拓士万里，虽承天赞，实由人力也。
现代文：从前大皇帝勤劳辛苦自身，在南方创下基业，割据半壁江山，开拓万里疆土，虽然蒙受上天的相助，实际主要靠人的努力。
English: In the past, the great emperors worked hard and painstakingly to create a foundation in the south, separated half of the country, and explored thousands of miles of territory. Although they received help from heaven, they actually relied mainly on human efforts.

古文：余庆遗祚，至于陛下，陛下宜勉崇德器，以光前烈。爱民养士，保全先轨，何可忽显祖之功勤，轻难得之大业。忘天下之不振，替兴衰之巨变哉？
现代文：传留的福祚和皇位，直到陛下，陛下应勉力崇尚德行操守，以光大先辈勋业，爱民养士，保全先人制定的治国大纲，怎么可以忽略显扬祖上的功勋，轻视难以取得的大业，忘却天下的不振、王朝更替兴衰的巨变呢？
English: His Majesty should strive to uphold the virtues and ethics, honor the great ancestors, love the people and nurture the scholars, and preserve the national governance outline formulated by his predecessors. How can he neglect to show the merits of his ancestors, despise the great cause that is difficult to achieve, and forget the sluggishness of the world and the great changes of the rise and fall of dynasties?

古文：臣闻否泰无常，吉凶由人，长江限不可久恃，苟我不守，一苇可航也。
现代文：为臣听说吉凶变易无常，祸福由人争得，长江的险阻不可长久依恃，如果我们不加强防守，则一苇可航。
English: The vassal heard that good and evil are fickle, misfortune and good fortune are won by people, the Yangtze River's obstacles cannot be clung to for a long time, and if we do not strengthen our defense, we will be able to sail.

古文：昔秦建皇帝之号，据殽函之阻，德化不修，法政苛酷，毒流生民，忠臣杜口，是以一夫大呼，社稷倾覆。
现代文：从前秦国创建皇帝的称号，据守崤山、函谷关的险要，但不修德行教化，法律苛刻政治残酷，毒害殃及百姓，忠臣闭口无言，故此陈胜振臂一呼，社稷即刻倾覆。
English: The title of the emperor who founded the former Qin state was based on the principle of protecting Lushan and Hantan Pass, but he did not cultivate virtue and carry out enlightenment, the law was harsh and the politics was cruel, the poison affected the people, and the loyal vassals were silent. Therefore, Chen Sheng shook his arm and the society was immediately overturned.

古文：近刘氏据三关之险，守重山之固，可谓金城石室，万世之业，任授失贤，一朝丧没，君臣系颈，共为羁仆。
现代文：近者刘氏占据三关险隘，坚守重山固防，可说是金城石室，万世之业，只因授任不依贤能，一下子便丧国灭亡，君臣被绳索系颈，一起成为俘虏之人。
English: The recent Liu clan occupied the three passes and narrow passes, adhered to the heavy mountains and fortified defenses, can be said to be the golden city, the stone room, the eternal cause, only because the appointment did not depend on merit, the country was destroyed at once, the monarchs and ministers were tied by ropes and became captives together.

古文：此当世之明鉴，目前之炯戒也。
现代文：这是当代的明鉴，眼前的炯戒啊！
English: This is a clear contemporary example, a warning for the present!

古文：愿陛下远考前事，近览世变，丰基强本，割情从道，则成康之治兴，而圣祖之祚隆矣。
现代文：希望陛下远考前代之事，近鉴当代之变，扩大基业，强固根本，割弃私情，遵循道义，如是则成康之世的政治局面就会形成，而圣明祖辈传下的福运就会隆盛。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will look far and wide at the things of the previous generation, take a closer look at the changes of the present, expand the foundation, strengthen the foundation, abandon personal feelings, and follow morality. If so, the political situation in the prosperous world will be formed, and the good fortune passed down by the ancestors of Shengming will flourish.

古文：书奏，皓深恨之。
现代文：章表呈上后，孙皓深深地含恨在心。
English: After the chapter list was presented, Sun Yat-sen deeply regretted it.

古文：邵奉公贞正，亲近所惮。
现代文：贺邵奉公忠正，孙皓的亲近小臣都很畏惧他。
English: Gao Shao was loyal to the public, and all of Sun Yat-sen's close ministers were afraid of him.

古文：乃共谮邵与楼玄谤毁国事，俱被诘责。
现代文：于是一起谮毁贺邵与楼玄谤毁国事，贺、楼二人都被孙皓诘难指斥。
English: As a result, both He Shao and Lou Xuan were denounced for slandering state affairs, and both He and Lou were rebuked by Sun Yat-sen.

古文：玄见送南州，邵原复职。
现代文：楼玄被押送南方的广州，贺邵受到原谅官复旧职。
English: Lou Xuan was escorted to Guangzhou in the south, and He Shao was pardoned and restored to his former position.

古文：后邵中恶风，口不能言，去职数月，皓疑其托疾，收付酒藏，掠考千所，邵卒无一语，竟见杀害，家属徙临海。
现代文：后来贺邵中风，口不能言，离职数月，孙皓怀疑他是假装有病，将他收捕关在酒窖里，拷打千余下，贺邵始终没说一句话，最终被杀死，家属流放到临海。
English: Later, He Shao suffered a stroke, was unable to speak, and left office for several months. Sun Yat-sen suspected that he was pretending to be ill, arrested him, locked him in a wine cellar, and tortured him for more than a thousand years. He Shao never said a word, and was eventually killed, and his family members were exiled to Linhai.

古文：并下诏诛玄子孙，是岁天册元年也，邵年四十九。
现代文：孙皓同时下诏诛杀楼玄的子孙，这一年为天册元年，贺邵时年四十九岁。
English: At the same time, Sun Yat-sen issued an edict to kill the descendants of Lou Xuan. This year was the first year of the Heavenly Scrolls, and He Shao was 49 years old.

古文：韦曜字弘嗣，吴郡云阳人也。
现代文：韦曜传，韦曜，字弘嗣，吴郡云阳人。
English: Wei Yuxuan, Wei Yuxuan, surnamed Hongzhi, a native of Yunyang, Wuxi County.

古文：少好学，能属文，从丞相掾除西安令，还为尚书郎，迁太子中庶子。
现代文：他年少时好学，能写文章，任丞相的掾史，外授任西安县县令，回朝任尚书郎，升任为太子中庶子。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn and able to write articles. He was appointed as the secretary of the imperial court, and was also appointed as the county magistrate of Xi'an County. When he returned to the imperial court, he was appointed as Shang Shuro, and was promoted to the middle child of the prince.

古文：时蔡颖亦在东宫，性好博奕。太子和以为无益，命曜论之。
现代文：当时蔡颖也在东宫，他一向喜受下棋，太子孙和认为下棋没有益处，故让韦曜来论说此事。
English: At that time, Cai Ying was also in the East Palace. He had always enjoyed playing chess. The prince and his descendants thought that playing chess was not beneficial, so he asked Wei You to discuss the matter.

古文：其辞曰： 盖闻君子耻当年而功不立，疾设世而名不称，故曰 学如不及，犹恐失之 。
现代文：韦曜作文为： 听说君子耻于正当年华而功名未建，痛恨终尽人世而声誉不扬，故此说学习如不及时，犹恐失去良机。
English: Wei Yue's composition is: I heard that a gentleman is ashamed of being at the right age and his reputation is not built, and he hates to end his life with a bad reputation. Therefore, he said that if he does not study in time, he will lose a good opportunity.

古文：是以古之志士，悼年齿之流迈而惧名称之不立也，故逸精厉操，晨兴夜寐，不遑宁息，经之以岁月，累之以日力，若宁越之勤，董生之笃，渐渍德义之渊，栖迟道艺之域。
现代文：因而古代有志之士，伤悼年岁的流逝而担心功名未及建立，故此勉励振奋砥砺操守，早起晚睡，顾不上休息，经年累月苦下功夫，像宁越那样勤奋，董仲舒那样笃学，濡浸在道德仁义的深潭，居游于学问技艺的王国。
English: Therefore, the ancient aspirants, grieving the passing of the years and worried that their fame had not yet been established, encouraged themselves to be diligent and disciplined, to get up early and go to bed late, to take care of rest, to work hard over the years, to be diligent like Ning Yue, to be conscientious like Dong Zhongshu, to be immersed in the deep pool of morality, benevolence and righteousness, and to live in the kingdom of learning and skills.

古文：且以西伯之圣，姬公之才，犹有日昃待旦之劳，故能隆兴周道，垂名亿载，况在臣庶，而可以已乎？
现代文：况且以西周文王的圣明、周公的才智，犹要夜以继日的辛勤，故而才能兴隆周朝道统，流传美名万世。至于一般的臣民，怎么可以止步不前呢？
English: Moreover, with the holy light of the Western Zhouwen King and the wisdom of Zhou Gong, it is necessary to work hard day and night, so that the Zhou Dynasty and the Doutong can flourish and spread the reputation forever. As for the general subjects, how can they stop moving forward?

古文：历观古今功名之士，皆有累积殊异之迹，劳身苦体，契阔勤思，平居不堕其业，穷困不易其素，是以卜式立志于耕牧，而黄霸受道于囹圄，终有荣显之福，以成不朽之名。
现代文：历观古今建立功名事业的人，都有不同一般的积累业迹，亲身劳苦，尽心思虑，平居不荒废学业，穷困不改更志向，因而卜式耕田放牧亦立下大志，黄霸身陷囹圄还接受道义，他们终于获得荣耀显赫的幸福，也因此成就不朽的功名。
English: From ancient times to the present, people who have established meritorious careers have different general accumulation records. They worked hard in person, thought hard, did not waste their studies, did not change their poverty and became more ambitious. As a result, they also set a great ambition for farming and grazing in the Bo style. Huangba also accepted morality while in prison. They finally gained glory and happiness, and thus achieved immortal fame.

古文：故山甫勤于夙夜，而吴汉不离公门，岂有游惰哉？ 今世之人多不务经术，好玩博奕，废事弃业，忘寝与食，穷日尽明，继以脂烛。
现代文：故此仲山甫昼夜勤劳，而吴汉不离官府，他们哪会有游嬉的惰性？ 如今世人大多不致力于经术，喜玩下棋，废弃事业，废寝忘食，耗尽日光，继以燃烛。
English: Therefore, Zhongshan Fu works diligently day and night, while Wu Han does not leave the government, where will they have the inertia of play? Nowadays, most people in the world do not devote themselves to learning, enjoy playing chess, abandon careers, waste sleep and forget to eat, exhaust sunlight, and then burn candles.

古文：当其临局交争，雌雄未决，专精锐意，心劳体倦，人事旷而不修，宾旅阙而不接，虽有太牢之馔，《韶》、《夏》之乐，不暇存也。
现代文：当他们面临棋局交锋争战，胜负未分时，便聚精会神，专心致志，心劳体倦，人事荒废而不整修，宾客前访无人接待，虽有太牢供品般的美味佳肴，《韶夏》舞曲之类的动听音乐，也无暇品评欣赏。
English: When they are faced with a game of chess and the outcome is still undecided, they concentrate their minds, concentrate their minds, work hard and get tired, the staff is wasted and not renovated, the guests are not received, although there are delicious dishes that are too hard to offer, and beautiful music such as "Summer" dance music, there is no time to appreciate and appreciate.

古文：至或赌及衣物，徙棋易行，廉耻之意弛，而忿戾之色发，然其所志不出一枰之上，所务不过方罫之间，胜敌无封爵之赏，获地无兼土之实，技非六艺，用非经国。
现代文：以致有人赌注衣物，变移下棋的目的，使廉耻的思想观念松弛，而忿戾的神色产生，然而他们的志向没有超出一个棋盘的范围，所追求的没有越过方格之间的距离，战胜对手没有封赐爵位之赏，获得地盘没有兼并土地之实。
English: So that some people bet on clothes, change the purpose of playing chess, relax the concept of shamelessness, and angry looks arise, but their aspirations do not exceed the scope of a chessboard, the pursuit does not cross the distance between the squares, the victory over the opponent does not award a knighthood, the acquisition of territory does not annex the land.

古文：立身者不阶其术，征选者不由其道。
现代文：这种技巧不属于经典六艺，这种才能不能用于治理国家，立身处世者不能借用下棋的技能，征选人才者不能通过下棋的途径。
English: This skill does not belong to the classic six arts, this talent can not be used to govern the country, those who are well-established in life can not borrow chess skills, and those who recruit talent can not play chess.

古文：求之于战陈，则非孙、吴之伦也。
现代文：从中寻求战术阵法，则非孙武、吴起他们的那一套；从中考究道义学问，则非孔子学派的东西。
English: To seek the tactics from it is not the same as Sun Wu and Wu Qi; to study the morality from it is not the Confucius school.

古文：考之于道艺，则非孔氏之门也；以变诈为务，则非忠信之士也；以劫杀为名，则非仁者之意也；而空妨日废业，终无补益。
现代文：以巧变诈欺为手段，则非忠信的事情；把拦劫杀掠作名分，则非仁者的思想，而且白白损耗时光荒废事业，终究毫无补益。
English: Using cunning and deception as a means is not a matter of loyalty; robbing and killing for fame is not the thought of a benevolent person, and it is a waste of time and a waste of business, and there is no benefit in the end.

古文：是何异设木而击之，置石而投之哉！
现代文：这与设立木杆而击打它、安放石块而投掷它有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between this and setting up a wooden pole and hitting it, or placing a stone and throwing it?

古文：且君子之居室也勤身以致养，其在朝也竭命以纳忠，临事且犹旰食，而何博奕之足耽？
现代文：况且君子在家中要不辞劳苦侍养父母，在朝廷要竭尽生命效忠君王，面临繁忙事情要推迟进餐，哪会沉湎耽延于棋盘之中呢？
English: Moreover, a gentleman has to work hard at home to support his parents, in the court he has to devote his life to the king, and in the face of busy affairs he has to postpone meals.

古文：夫然，故孝友之行立，贞纯之名彰也。 方今大吴受命，海内未平，圣朝乾乾，务在得人，勇略之士则受熊虎之任，儒雅之徒则处龙凤之署，百行兼苞，文武并骛，博选良才，旌简髦俊。
现代文：认准这种道理，则孝顺友善的品行得以树立，坚贞纯正的声名就会显扬。 当今大吴承受天命，海内尚未平定，圣明的朝廷自强不息，努力获得人才，勇而有谋之人就授以雄威虎将的重任，学问渊博气度雍雅之士就进入卧龙栖凤的官署，各种技能兼容并立，文臣武将并驾齐驱，广泛选拔优秀人才，表彰择用英雄俊士，设立考核科目，颁行官爵赏赐，这实在是千载难逢的嘉会，百年难遇的良机。
English: If this principle is recognized, then filial piety and friendly conduct can be established, and the reputation of being steadfast and pure will be prominent. Today, the Great Wu has received the Mandate of Heaven, the sea has not yet been pacified, the Holy Imperial Court has been self-improving and striving to obtain talents. The brave and resourceful have been given the important task of the powerful tiger generals, and the learned and elegant people have entered the government office of Wolong Jifeng. All kinds of skills are compatible and stand side by side, and the scholars and generals are in line. Excellent talents have been widely selected, heroes and good men have been commended, assessment subjects have been

古文：设程式之科，垂金爵之赏，诚千载之嘉会，百世之良遇也，当世之士，宜勉思至道，爱功惜力，以佐明时，使名书史籍，勋在盟府，乃君子之上务，当今之先急也。 夫一木之枰孰与方国之封？
现代文：当今士人，应勉励思求最完美的道义，爱惜自己的功业和精力，以辅佐政治清明的时政，使自己的名字载入史册，授勋的策书存于盟府，此乃君子最高目的，当今最急事务。 一块木头棋盘怎比一方土地的封邑？
English: Today's scholars should strive to think about the most perfect morality, cherish their own work and energy, and make their names go down in history by supporting a political and clear-cut contemporary politics, and the plans for awarding honors are stored in the League of Nations. This is the highest purpose of a gentleman and the most urgent business of today. How does a wooden chessboard compare to a feudal land?

古文：枯棋三百孰与万人之将？
现代文：三百颗干枯棋子怎比率兵上万的将领？
English: What is the ratio of three hundred dry pieces to ten thousand generals?

古文：兖龙之服，金石之乐，足以兼棋局而贸博弈矣。
现代文：绣着飞龙的服装，金石奏协的音乐，足以兼容棋局的乐趣而换替下棋的游戏。
English: The costumes embroidered with flying dragons and the music of the Gems and Stones Orchestra are enough to replace the game of chess with the fun of a board game.

古文：假令世士移博奕之力而用之于诗书，是有颜、闵之志也。用之于智计，是有良、平之思也。用之于资货，是有猗顿之富也；用之于射御，是有将帅之备也。
现代文：如果让世人转移下棋的精力到用功诗书上去，就会有颜回、闵损的志向；转移到用功智谋上去，就会有张良、陈平的思维；转移到用功殖货上去，就会有猗顿的财富；转移到用功射御上去，就会有将帅的才能。
English: If we allow the world to transfer the energy of playing chess to the use of gong, poetry and books, there will be a desire to return the favor and reduce losses; transferred to the use of gong and wisdom, there will be the thinking of Zhang Liang and Chen Ping; transferred to the use of gong and goods, there will be the wealth of Shandong; transferred to the use of gong and shooting, there will be the talent of the general.

古文：如此则功名立而鄙贱远矣。
现代文：做到这一步则功名即可建立，而卑贱就会远弃。 
English: If this step is achieved, merit can be established, and meanness will be abandoned.

古文：和废后，为黄门侍郎。
现代文：孙和被废黜后，韦曜任黄门侍郎。
English: After Sun He was deposed, Wei You served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：孙亮即位，诸葛恪辅政，表曜为太史令，撰《吴书》，华核、薛莹等皆与参同，孙休践阼，为中书郎、博士祭酒。
现代文：孙亮即位，诸葛恪辅佐朝政，上表奏任韦曜为太史令，撰著《吴书》，华核、薛莹等都参与此项工作。孙休登基后，韦曜被任命为中书郎、博士祭酒。
English: When Sun Liang ascended the throne, Zhuge Ke assisted in the government of the dynasty, and Wei You, who was appointed as the Tai Shi Ling, wrote "Wu Shu." Hua Jiu, Xue Ying and others all participated in this work. After Sun Xiu ascended the throne, Wei You was appointed as the middle scribe and the doctor of sacrificial wine.

古文：命曜依刘向故事，校定众书。
现代文：孙休命令韦曜依照刘向所创体例，校核审定各类书籍，又打算请韦曜担任侍讲。
English: Sun Xiu ordered Wei You, in accordance with the example created by Liu Xiang, to check and approve all kinds of books, and also intended to ask Wei You to serve as an assistant lecturer.

古文：又欲延曜侍讲，而左将军张布近习宠幸，事行多玷，惮曜侍讲儒士，又性精确，惧以古今警戒休意，固争不可。
现代文：而左将军张布是孙休亲近的宠臣，做事颇有过错，害怕韦曜任侍讲儒士后，因为韦曜性情处事精明确切，怕他用古今事情作譬警戒孙休的认识，就坚决争辩说韦曜不能担任此职。
English: On the other hand, Zhang Bu, the Left General, was a close favorite of Sun Xiu, and he made a lot of mistakes in his work. He was afraid that Wei You, after serving as a lecturer of Confucianism, would not be able to hold this position because of Wei You's clear and precise disposition. He was afraid that he would use the example of ancient and modern events to warn Sun Xiu's understanding.

古文：休深恨布，语在《休传》。
现代文：孙休极为恼恨张布，其事记在《孙休传》。
English: Sun Xiu was extremely angry with Zhang Bu, which is recorded in the "Biography of Sun Xiu."

古文：然曜竟止不入。
现代文：然而韦曜最终还是被阻止，未能入宫。
English: However, Wei You was eventually prevented from entering the palace.

古文：孙皓即位，封高陵亭候，迁中书仆射，职省，为侍中，常领左国史。
现代文：孙皓即位，封韦曜为高陵亭侯，升任中书仆射，后降职为侍中，长期兼任左国史。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's accession to the throne, Wei You was given the title of Prince of Goryeongjeong, promoted to the position of the middle secretary, and later demoted to the position of the middle attendant. He also held the position of the left national historian for a long time.

古文：时所在承指数言瑞应。
现代文：其时孙皓周围的人迎合孙皓旨意，多次说出现祥瑞感应现象。
English: At that time, the people around Sun Yat-sen catered to Sun Yat-sen's will and repeatedly said that there was a phenomenon of Xiang Rui induction.

古文：皓以问曜，曜答曰： 此人家筐箧中物耳。 
现代文：孙皓以此询问韦曜，韦曜回答说： 这只是人家箱匣中的东西而已。 
English: Sun Yat-sen asked Wei Youyou about this, and Wei Youyou replied: This is just something in someone's box.

古文：又皓欲为父和作纪，曜执以和不登帝位，宜名为传。
现代文：又孙皓想为自己父亲孙和作 纪 ，而韦曜坚持以孙和未登帝位为据，只宜将其历史记载文字定作 传 。
English: In addition, Sun Yat-sen wanted to write a history of his father, Sun Wa, and Wei You insisted that Sun Wa had not ascended to the throne, and that only his historical records should be passed down.

古文：如是者非一，渐见责怒。
现代文：类似事情并非一次，渐渐地韦曜受到孙皓的责怪恼怒。
English: This kind of thing happened more than once, and gradually Wei You was blamed and angered by Sun Yat-sen.

古文：曜益忧惧，自陈衰老，求去侍、史二官，乞欲成所造书，以从业别有所付，皓终不听。
现代文：韦曜更加忧惧，自己提出年老体衰，请求辞去侍中、左国史两个官职，恳求让他完成自己要写的书，把他所承担的任务转交他人，孙皓始终不答允。
English: Wei Youyang was even more worried. He proposed that he was old and weak, asked to resign from the two official positions of attendant and left national history, and implored him to complete the book he wanted to write and transfer the tasks he undertook to others. Sun Yat-sen never agreed.

古文：时有疾病，医药监护，持之愈急。
现代文：当时韦曜有病，服药护理，更加迫切地要求辞职。
English: At that time, Wei Youyou was ill, taking medicine and nursing, and more urgently demanded to resign.

古文：皓每飨宴，无不竟日，坐席无能否率以七升为限，虽不悉入口，皆浇灌取尽。
现代文：孙皓每次设宴，没有不是一整天的，坐席中人不管能否饮酒都以七升为必饮限量，即使自己不能全部喝完，也要被强迫灌完够数。
English: Every time Sun Yat-sen held a banquet, there was always one for the whole day. Regardless of whether or not they could drink alcohol, people at the banquet had to drink seven liters. Even if they couldn't drink it all, they were forced to drink enough.

古文：曜素饮酒不过二升，初见礼异时，常为裁减，或密赐茶荈以当酒，至于宠衰，更见逼强，辄以为罪。
现代文：韦曜一向饮酒不过二升之量，起初他受到特殊礼遇时，孙皓常减少他的酒数，或者暗中赐给他茶水代替酒，及至宠幸衰退，反而更被强迫喝酒，往往因所饮不足量而受惩罚。
English: Wei Yang always drank no more than two liters of alcohol. At first, when he received special treatment, Sun Yat-sen often reduced his number of drinks, or secretly gave him tea instead of wine, and his favorite luck faded. On the contrary, he was forced to drink, and was often punished for not drinking enough.

古文：又于酒后使侍臣难折公卿，以嘲弄侵克发摘私短以为欢。
现代文：另外孙皓在酒后让侍臣侮辱诘责大臣们，以嘲弄相侵，互相揭短作为乐趣。
English: In addition, after drinking, Sun Yat-sen had his courtiers insult and reprimand the ministers, using mockery as a form of aggression and making fun of each other's shortcomings.

古文：时有衍过，或误犯皓讳，辄见收缚，至于诛戮。
现代文：这时谁要有所过失，或者误犯孙皓之讳，就要遭到拘捕，甚至被斩杀诛死。
English: At this time, anyone who makes a mistake, or accidentally breaks Sun Yat-sen's vow of silence, will be arrested and even be beheaded.

古文：曜以为外相毁伤，内长尤恨，使不济济，非佳事也，故但示难问经义言论而已。
现代文：韦曜认为朝臣在公共场合相互谤毁伤害，内心就会相互滋生怨恨，使大家不能和睦共济，这并非好事，故此他只是出示难题提问经典的辞义理论而已。
English: Wei You believes that it is not a good thing for courtiers to slander and injure each other in public, and that resentment will breed in their hearts, so that everyone can not help each other. Therefore, he only presents a difficult problem and questions the classic theory of rhetoric.

古文：皓以为不承用诏命，意不忠尽，遂积前后嫌忿，收曜付狱，是岁凤皇二年也。
现代文：孙皓认为韦曜不接受皇帝诏命，有意不尽忠主上，于是将他对韦曜前后不满的嫌隙忿恨积累一起，收捕韦曜投进监狱。这年是凤凰二年。
English: Sun Yat-sen thought that Wei You did not accept the Emperor's edict and was intentionally not loyal to the Lord, so he gathered together his resentment against Wei You and arrested Wei You and put him in prison. This year is the second year of the Phoenix.

古文：曜因狱吏上辞曰： 囚荷恩见哀，无与为比，曾无芒氂有以上报，孤辱恩宠，自陷极罪。
现代文：韦曜通过狱吏向孙皓上书说： 囚犯我身负皇恩蒙承爱怜，无人比得上，而自己却没有丝毫贡献来报答主上，辜负污辱了陛下的恩爱宠幸，自己陷入死罪。
English: Wei You wrote a letter to Sun Yat-sen through the prison guard, saying: "I, a prisoner, have been blessed with the grace of the emperor, have been loved and pitied, and no one can compare to me. However, I have not made the slightest contribution to repay the Lord. I have betrayed and insulted the grace and favor of His Majesty, and I have fallen into the crime of death.

古文：念当灰灭。长弃黄泉，愚情，窃有所怀，贪令上闻。
现代文：想到自己将化成灰烬，永弃黄泉之下，心情凄凉苦哀，私下心中有所记挂，故冒犯禁令而呈报陛下。
English: Thinking that he would be reduced to ashes and cast into the underworld for all eternity, he felt desolate and sad, and he secretly had something in mind, so he violated the ban and reported it to His Majesty.

古文：囚昔见世间有古历注，其所记载既多虚无，在书籍者亦复错谬。
现代文：囚犯我过去发现世间有古代历法的注释，上面的记载有许多虚假而无根据的东西，与经典书籍的记载也有错谬之处。
English: Prisoner I used to find that there are annotations of ancient calendars in the world, and there are many false and unfounded things in the above records, and there are also fallacies in the records of classic books.

古文：囚寻按传记，考合异同，采摭耳目所及。以作《洞纪》，纪自庖牺，至于秦、汉，凡为三卷，当起黄武以来，别作一卷，事尚未成。
现代文：囚犯我寻查考究经传所记，考核异同，采摭查询得来的材料，来撰成《洞纪》一书，起自伏羲，直到秦汉，共为三卷，另将自黄武以来，再另写一卷，此事尚未完成。
English: As a prisoner, I searched for and studied the records of history, assessed the similarities and differences, and collected the materials obtained from the inquiries to compile a book of "Dongji," from Fuxi to Qin and Han Dynasties, a total of three volumes, and another volume will be written since Huangwu. This matter has not yet been completed.

古文：又见刘熙所作《释名》，信多佳者，然物类众多，难得详究。故时有得失，而爵位之事，又有非是。
现代文：又看见刘熙所作的《释名》，确实有很多绝妙的地方。然而物类繁多，难得详细考究，故此不时出现错误，而关于爵位一事，又有解释不对之处。
English: He also saw Liu Xi's "Interpretation of Names," which indeed has many excellent points. However, there are many kinds of things, and it is rare to study them in detail, so there are mistakes from time to time, and there are also incorrect explanations about the peerage.

古文：愚以官爵，今之所急，不宜乘误。
现代文：愚见以为官爵一事，乃目前急宜弄清楚的事情，不应当乖谬失误。
English: It is foolish to think that the matter of the peerage is an urgent matter to be clarified at present, and we should not make mistakes.

古文：囚自忘至微，又作《官职训》及《辩释名》各一卷，欲表上之。
现代文：囚犯我忘记了自己极为卑下的身份，又作《官职训》与《辨释名》各一卷，想呈献陛下。
English: As a prisoner, I have forgotten my extremely lowly status, and I have also written one volume of "Official Training" and one volume of "Explanation of Names," which I would like to present to His Majesty.

古文：新写始毕，会以无状，幽囚特命，泯没之日，恨不上闻。谨以先死列状，乞上言秘府，于外料取，呈内以闻。
现代文：新作刚完成，正逢我因无礼行径受到囚禁狱中的处分，泯没之日，遗憾不能将它呈献陛下，谨于临死之前将这些著述开列出来，恳求陛下告知秘府，让他们至我家选取，呈献陛下批阅。
English: The new work has just been completed, just as I was punished in prison for my impolite behavior, on the day of my death, I regret that I cannot present it to Your Majesty. I would like to list these books before I die, and implore Your Majesty to inform the Privy Council so that they can come to my house to select them and present them to Your Majesty for approval.

古文：迫惧浅蔽，不合天听，抱怖雀息，乞垂哀省。 
现代文：回顾所写著述担心因浅陋壅敝，不合陛下旨意，心怀恐惧屏气止息，恳求陛下降予怜惜加以审明。 
English: Looking back on what I had written, I was afraid that it was shallow and not in accordance with His Majesty's will, so I held my breath in fear and implored His Majesty to have mercy and clarify it.

古文：曜冀以此求免，而皓更怪其书之垢故，又以诘曜。
现代文：韦曜企望以此免除死罪，而孙皓反怪他的奏章有墨污，故此又以此诘问韦曜。
English: Wei You hoped to be exempted from the death penalty, but Sun Yat-sen accused him of having ink stains on his score, so he questioned Wei You in this way.

古文：曜对曰： 囚撰此书，实欲表上，惧有误谬，数数省读，不觉点污。
现代文：韦曜回书说： 囚犯我撰述此表，确实想上呈陛下，害怕有所错误，反复检查阅读，不知不觉弄脏了它。
English: Prisoner: I have written this list, I really want to present it to Your Majesty, I am afraid of making a mistake, I have repeatedly checked the reading, and I have unknowingly soiled it.

古文：被问寒战，形气呐吃，谨追辞叩头五百下，两手自搏。 
现代文：遭到诘问心惊胆颤，呼吸急促，结结巴巴说不出话。谨此补加谢罪叩头五百下，两手自我抽打。 
English: When he was interrogated, his heart quivered with fear, his breathing was rapid, and he stammered and was unable to speak. To make amends, he bowed his head 500 times and beat himself with both hands.

古文：而华核连上疏救曜曰： 曜运值千载，特蒙哀识，以其儒学，得与史官，貂蝉内侍，承答天问，圣朝仁笃，慎终追远，迎神之际，垂涕敕曜。
现代文：而华核接连上奏营救韦曜说： 韦曜幸遇千载难逢之机，特别蒙受陛下哀怜赏识，凭着他的儒学功底，得以担职史官，身着宫内侍从官员服饰，承旨应答陛下的询问，圣明朝廷仁爱宽厚，哀悼死者追思远人，在迎神之际，垂泪敕封韦曜。
English: And Hua Jiao successively played the role of rescuing Wei You, saying: Wei You was fortunate to have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, and especially received His Majesty's pity and appreciation. With his Confucianism foundation, he was able to serve as a historian, dressed in the official attire of the palace attendant, to answer Your Majesty's inquiry, the Ming Dynasty was benevolent and generous, mourned the dead and thought about the distant people, and shed tears to seal Wei You on the occasion of welcoming God.

古文：曜愚惑不达。不能敷宣陛下大舜之美，而拘击史官，使圣趣不叙，至行不彰，实曜愚蔽当死之罪，然臣
现代文：韦曜愚昧不明，不能敷陈宣扬陛下大舜那样的美德，而是拘泥于史官的先例，使陛下旨意得不到表述，崇高的德行不能彰显，实在是韦曜愚昧浅陋，犯下该死的罪行。
English: Wei You's stupidity is unclear, he can't lay out and promote virtues like His Majesty's epaulettes, but he sticks to the precedents of historians, so that His Majesty's will can't be expressed, and lofty virtues can't be displayed. It's really Wei You's stupidity and shallowness, and he has committed a damnable crime.

古文：见曜自少勤学，虽老不倦，探综坟典，温故知新，及意所经识古今行事，外吏之中少过曜者。
现代文：然而为臣勤勉陈说自己愚见，发现韦曜自小就勤奋向学，至老不倦，探究融通坟典，温故知新，以至于心中熟知古今所发生的重大事件，朝外官员很少有人能超过他。
English: However, the minister diligently said that he was stupid, and found that Wei Youran had been diligently studying since childhood, and had never tired of it. He explored and integrated the cemetery code, and knew the old and new so well that he was familiar with the major events that had occurred in the past and present. Few foreign officials could surpass him.

古文：昔李陵为汉将，军败不还而降匈奴，司马迁不加疾恶，为陵游说，汉武帝以迁有良史之才，欲使毕成所撰，忍不加诛，书卒成立，垂之无穷。
现代文：从前李陵为汉朝大将，军队被打败没有返回而投降匈奴，司马迁不加痛恨，为李陵到处说情，汉武帝考虑到司马迁具有良史的才能，想让他完成所撰写的《史记》，故抑制自己的愤怒没有对他施用极刑，书最终撰成，流传千古。
English: Formerly, Li Ling was the general of the Han Dynasty. The army was defeated and did not return, but surrendered to the Xiongnu. Sima Qian did not add hatred, but interceded everywhere for Li Ling. Emperor Wu of Han took into account that Sima Qian had the talent of good history, and wanted him to complete the "History" he wrote. Therefore, he restrained his anger and did not impose capital punishment on him. The book was finally compiled and passed down for thousands of years.

古文：今曜在吴，亦汉之史迁也。
现代文：如今韦曜在吴，也即是汉的史官司马迁啊！
English: Now Wei You is in Wu, that is, the Han's historical official Sima Qian!

古文：伏见前后符瑞彰着。神指天应，继出累见，一统之期，庶不复久。
现代文：先后看到祥瑞征兆的显露，神灵的旨意与上天的感应，连续出现，统一天下的时期，大概不会长久。
English: Seeing the signs of auspiciousness appear one after another, the will of the gods and the inspiration of the heavens appear in succession, and the period of unification will probably not last long.

古文：事乎之后，当观时设制，三王不相因礼，五帝不相沿乐，质文殊涂，损益异体，宜得辈依准古义，有所改立。
现代文：一统大业完成后，当根据时代要求来建立典章制度，三王互不因循旧制礼仪，五帝互不沿袭前朝乐制，内容与形式的选取途经各有不同，增减具体条文体例有别，应当取得韦曜这类人才依据古代原则，对前朝制度有所修改新创。
English: After the great cause of unification is completed, it is necessary to establish a ceremony system according to the requirements of the times. The three kings do not follow the old system of etiquette, and the five emperors do not follow the former imperial music system. The selection of content and form is different, and the addition and subtraction of specific articles and styles are different. Talents such as Wei You should be obtained to modify and create the former imperial system according to ancient principles.

古文：汉氏承秦，则有叔孙通定一代之仪，曜之才学亦汉通之次也。
现代文：汉代承续秦代，则有叔孙通制定新的一朝礼仪，韦曜的才能学识也达到汉代叔孙通的程度。
English: In the Han Dynasty, which succeeded the Qin Dynasty, there were uncles and grandsons who developed a new imperial etiquette, and the ability and knowledge of Wei and Yang also reached the level of uncles and grandsons in the Han Dynasty.

古文：又《吴书》虽已有头角，叙赞未述。
现代文：又《吴书》虽然已有了头绪，但叙言、赞论尚未撰就。
English: In addition, although "Wu Shu" already has a clue, the narration and approbation have not yet been compiled.

古文：昔班固作《汉书》，文辞典雅，后刘珍，刘毅等作《汉记》，远不及固，叙传尤劣。
现代文：从前班固作《汉书》，文辞典雅，后来刘珍、刘毅等作《汉记》，远远不及班固，尤其叙传部分拙劣。
English: Previously, Ban Gu wrote "Hanshu" with elegant vocabulary. Later, Liu Zhen, Liu Yi and others wrote "Hanshi," which was far inferior to Ban Gu, especially the narration part was poor.

古文：今年《吴书》当垂千载，编次诸吏，后之才士论次善恶，非得良才如曜者，实不可使阙不朽之书。
现代文：如今《吴书》应当流传千载，按序列入各史之间，后代学者论次评判优劣，非得有韦曜那样的优秀人才，实在不能补缺这部不朽之书。
English: Nowadays, "Wu Shu" should be passed down for a thousand years, and it should be included in each history in order. Future generations of scholars should discuss and judge the merits and demerits. It is impossible to fill the gap of this immortal book without excellent talents like Wei You.

古文：如臣顽蔽，诚非其人。
现代文：像为臣这样愚顽浅陋之人，实在不是能胜任这种撰述之人。
English: Such a stupid and shallow person as Wei Zeng is not really a person who is qualified to write this kind of article.

古文：曜年已七十，余数无几，乞赦其一等之罪，为终身徒，使成书业，水足传未，垂之百世。
现代文：韦曜年纪已届七十，剩下的人生不多了，恳切希望陛下赦免他的头等大罪，改判他终身为囚徒，使他完成著书的事业，让《吴书》永昭后人，流传百世。
English: At the age of seventy, Wei You has not much time left to live. He sincerely hopes that His Majesty will pardon his first-class crime and commute his sentence to life imprisonment, so that he can complete his book-writing career and let "Wu Shu" be passed down to posterity.

古文：谨通进表，叩头百下。 皓不许，遂诛曜，徙百家零陵。
现代文：谨此奉表，叩头百下。 孙皓不准许华核的请求，于是杀死韦曜，将他家属流放至零陵。
English: Sun Yat-sen did not approve of Hua Kuan's request, so he killed Wei You and exiled his family members to Luling.

古文：子隆，亦有文学也。
现代文：韦曜之子韦隆，亦有文采学问。
English: Wei You's son, Weilong, is also a scholar.

古文：华核字永先，吴郡武进人也。
现代文：华核传，华核，字永先，吴郡武进县人。
English: Hua Jiu Chuan, Hua Jiu, Zi Yong Xian, Wu County, Wujin County.

古文：始为上虞尉、曲农都尉，以文学入为秘府郎，迁中书丞。
现代文：他起始为上虞县县尉、典农都尉，因为文学入朝为秘府郎，升任中书丞。
English: He started out as the Shangyu County Lieutenant and the Dunong County Lieutenant, but because literature was brought into the imperial court, he became the Privy Councillor and was promoted to the position of Junior Secretary.

古文：蜀为魏所并，核诣宫门发表曰： 间闻贼众蚁聚向西境，西境艰险，谓当无虞。
现代文：蜀国被魏国所吞并后，华核前往宫门前呈表上奏说： 我不久前听说敌人如蚂蚁一样聚向西蜀境地，西蜀地势艰险，按理说应当不会出问题。
English: After Shu was annexed by Wei, Hua Jiao went to the palace gate to submit a report, saying: I recently heard that the enemy had gathered like ants to the west of Shu. The west of Shu is in a difficult situation, so it should not be a problem.

古文：定闻陆抗表至，成都不守，臣主播越，社稷倾覆。
现代文：我又确实得知陆抗的奏章已到，说成都并未守住，君臣远散，社稷倾覆。
English: I also learned for certain that the report of the land resistance had arrived, saying that Chengdu had not been held, that the princes and ministers had dispersed far away, and that the social order had been overthrown.

古文：昔卫为翟所灭而桓公存之，今道里长远，不可救振，失委附之土，弃贡献之国，臣以草芥，窃怀不宁。陛下圣仁，恩泽远抚，卒闻如此，必垂哀悼。
现代文：从前卫国被北狄所灭而齐桓公使卫国再度存在，如今路程遥远，不可救援振兴蜀国，失去了归附我国的土地，舍弃了进贡我们的国家，为臣乃草芥之人，私下尚且心怀不宁，陛下圣仁之主，恩泽抚施远方，猝然听到这一消息，必定产生伤悼心情。
English: From the time when the former Protectorate was destroyed by the Northern Di and the Minister Qi Huan restored the existence of the Protectorate, it is now a long way away, it is impossible to rescue and revitalize the Shu Kingdom, it has lost the land attached to our country, it has abandoned the tribute to our country, it is a man of straw and mustard, he is still restless in private, His Majesty the Lord of Mercy, grace and mercy far away, when he suddenly hears this news, he will certainly have a sad mood.

古文：臣不胜忡怅之情，谨拜表以闻。 
现代文：我无法抑制怅惘忧伤的情感，谨此呈上奏章让陛下听到我的心声。 
English: Unable to suppress my feelings of deep sorrow, I would like to present the score so that Your Majesty can hear my heart.

古文：孙皓即位，封除陵亭候。
现代文：孙皓继承皇位后，封华核为徐陵亭侯。
English: After Sun Yat-sen's succession to the throne, Huakou was given the title of Xulingting.

古文：实鼎二年，皓更营新宫，制度弘广，饰以珠玉，所费甚多。
现代文：宝鼎二年，孙皓再营造新宫，规模宏大，用珠玉装饰，花费极大。
English: In the second year of Baoding, Sun Yat-sen re-built a new palace, on a grand scale, decorated with jewels, at great expense.

古文：是时盛夏兴工，农守并废，核上疏谏曰： 臣闻汉文之世，九州晏然，秦民喜去惨毒之苛政，归刘氏之宽仁，省役约法，与之更始，分王子弟以藩汉室，当此之时，皆以为泰山之安，无穷之基之也。
现代文：其时正是盛夏开始动工，农耕与边守一起被荒废，华核上奏劝谏说： 为臣听说汉文帝时期，九州安宁，过去为秦朝之民的百姓庆幸消除了惨酷的苛政，归顺了宽仁的刘汉王朝，减省劳役精简法令，人民生活与新的王朝一道重开纪元，分封王室子弟为王侯，作为护卫汉中央朝廷的屏障，在当时形势下，大家都认为社会同泰山一样稳固，新王朝定下了无穷的基业。
English: It was at that time that construction began in midsummer. Farming and border guards were laid waste together. Hua Jiu appealed to the emperor, saying: "Your majesty, I have heard that during the reign of Emperor Hanwen, Kyushu was peaceful. The people, who used to be the people of the Qin Dynasty, thankfully eliminated the cruel and harsh government, submitted to the benevolent Liu Han Dynasty, reduced labor and simplified laws, and the people's life reopened the era together with the new dynasty. The royal children were appointed as princes, as a barrier to protect the central court of Han. Under the circumstances at that time, everyone believed that society was as stable as Mount Tai

古文：至于贾谊，独以为可痛哭及流涕者三，可为长叹息者六，乃曰当今之势何异抱火积薪之下而寝其上，火末及然而谓之安。
现代文：而至贾谊，偏偏认为可为之痛苦流涕的事情有三大件，可为之长声叹气的事情有六大件，于是说当今的形势与抱着火在堆积的柴草之下而人睡在上面没什么两样，大火尚未燃烧起来而认为是平安。
English: On the other hand, Jia Yi thinks that there are three major things that can cause pain and suffering, and six major things that can cause long sighs, so he said that the current situation is no different from holding a fire under a pile of firewood and sleeping on it. The fire has not yet burned and it is considered to be safe.

古文：其后变乱，皆如其言。
现代文：以后发生的变乱，都如他所预言的那样。
English: The upheavals that followed were just as he had predicted.

古文：臣虽下愚，不识大伦，窃以囊时之事，揆今之势。谊曰复数年间，诸王方刚，汉之傅相称疾罢归，欲以此为治，虽尧、舜不能安。
现代文：为臣虽说下贱愚昧，不识大体，私下以往日之事，来揣度今日的局势。 贾谊预言后过了几年，诸王正值势力强盛之时，汉朝廷派往的傅、相称说有病被免职回朝，想凭这样的局面来使国家得到治理，即使是尧、舜也不能使其安定。
English: Although the vassal is said to be lowly and ignorant, he does not know the general situation, and privately takes the things of the past to figure out today's situation. A few years after Jia Yi's prophecy, when the kings were at the height of their power, Fu, who was sent to the Han Dynasty, was said to be ill and was dismissed to return to the North. If you want to use such a situation to get the country under control, even the thunder and lightning can't make it stable.

古文：今大敌据九州之地，有大半之众，习攻战之余术，乘戎刀之旧势，欲与中国争相吞之计，其犹楚汉势不两立，非徒汉之诸王淮南，济北而已。
现代文：如今大敌占有九州地域，控制全国大多数的民众，熟悉攻战的各种方法，利用军事胜利的既有形势，故此想定立与中原竞争吞并对方的大计，这好比楚、汉两方势不两立，对方可不仅仅是汉朝的各王侯，如淮南王、济北王那样的势力而已。
English: Today, the great enemy occupies the Kyushu region, controls the majority of the people across the country, is familiar with various methods of attacking the war, and takes advantage of the existing situation of military victory. Therefore, it is planned to compete with the Central Plains to annex the other side's plan. This is like the Chu and Han sides are not mutually exclusive. The other side is not just the power of the princes of the Han Dynasty, such as King Huainan and King Jibei.

古文：谊之所欲痛哭，比今为缓，抱火卧薪之喻，于今而急。
现代文：贾谊之所以想痛哭的局势，比起今日要和缓多了，抱火卧薪的比喻，对今天来说更是急迫。
English: The situation that made Jia Yi want to cry was much milder than it is today. The metaphor of sleeping with one's hair on fire is even more urgent today.

古文：大皇帝览前代之如彼，察今势之如此，故广开农桑之业，积不訾之储，恤民重役，务养战士，是以大小感恩，各思竭命。
现代文：大皇帝看到前代的情形是那个样子，考察今天的形势是这个样子，故此广开农耕蚕桑之业，积蓄无法计量的储备，抚恤沉重劳役的百姓，积极致力于供养作战的兵卒，故此人人感恩，个个都想竭力效命。
English: The great emperor saw the situation of the previous generation as it was, and examined the situation today as it is. Therefore, he expanded the farming of sericulture and mulberry, accumulated immeasurable reserves, supported the people who worked hard, and actively worked to support the soldiers who fought. Therefore, everyone is grateful, and everyone wants to work hard.

古文：斯运未至，早弃万国，自是之后，强臣专政，上诡天时，下违从议，忘安存之本，邀一时之利，数兴军旅，倾竭府藏，兵劳民困，无时获安。
现代文：这种福运尚未降临，大皇帝就溘然离开人世。自此之后，权臣专政，上背天时，下违众议，失却安定生存的根本，追求眼前一时半刻的利益，多次出动军队，倾尽府库储存，兵士劳顿民众困苦，没有一刻得到安宁。
English: Since then, the dictatorship of the powerful ministers has gone against the will of the people at every turn, lost the fundamentals of stable existence, pursued short-term interests, repeatedly dispatched troops, exhausted government treasury reserves, soldiers have worked hard and the people have suffered hardships, and there has not been a moment of peace.

古文：今之存者乃创夷之遗众，哀苦之余及耳。
现代文：如今存世之人只是身负创伤的孑遗兵卒，困苦哀号的残余百姓而已。
English: Those who are alive today are only the traumatized soldiers who have been left behind, and the remaining people who are suffering and wailing.

古文：遂使军盗空匮，仓廪不实，布帛之赐，寒暑不周，重以失业，家户不赡。
现代文：于是使得军用物资乏匮，仓廪府库空虚，布帛的赏赐，不能兼顾寒、暑，再加百姓失业，家家衣食不济。
English: As a result, there was a shortage of military supplies, the warehouses and government warehouses were empty, the reward of cloth coats could not take care of both cold and heat, and the people lost their jobs, and their families could not afford food and clothing.

古文：而北积谷养民，专心向东，无复他警。
现代文：而北方敌人积粮养民，专心谋取东土，不再有其他需要警备之事。
English: Meanwhile, the enemy in the north is stockpiling grain to feed the people and concentrating on conquering the eastern land. There is no longer anything else that needs to be guarded against.

古文：蜀为西藩，土地险固，加承先主统御之术，谓其守御足以长久，不图一朝奄至倾覆！
现代文：蜀国作为西边藩国，地势险要牢固，加之继承先主刘备的统治之方，按说它的防御守备能够长久，想不到一下子就倾覆社稷。
English: As a western Han state, Shu's geographical position is extremely solid. In addition, it is the successor to the ruling party of Liu Bei, and it is said that its defense and defense can last for a long time, and it will be overthrown unexpectedly.

古文：唇亡齿寒，古人所惧。
现代文：唇亡齿寒。这是古人所担忧的情景。
English: Cold lips and teeth. This is a situation that worried the ancients.

古文：交州诸郡，国之南土，交址、九真二郡已没，日南孤危，存亡难保，合浦以北，民皆摇动。因连避役，多有离叛，而备戍减少，威镇转轻，常恐呼吸复有变故。
现代文：交州各郡，是我国的南部土地，交阯、九真两郡已经沦陷，日南郡孤立危急，存亡难保，合浦以北地区，百姓都在动摇，借机一再躲避劳役，很多人叛变作乱，而防备戍守的人员减少，威镇势力变轻，常常担心呼吸间就又发生变故。
English: The counties of Jiaozhou are the southern land of our country. The two counties of Jiaozhou and Jiuzhen have already fallen. Nichinan County is isolated and in danger, and its survival is difficult to ensure. In the areas north of Hepu, the people are wavering, taking the opportunity to repeatedly avoid labor service. Many people have mutinied and made trouble, while the number of personnel guarding and guarding has decreased. The power of Weizhen has become light, and people often worry that things will change again between breaths.

古文：昔海虏窥窬东县，多得离民，地习海行，狃于往年，钞盗无日，今胸背有嫌，首尾多难，乃国朝之厄会也。
现代文：从前海盗窥伺东部郡县，多次获得离叛的百姓，熟悉地势熟练航海，贪得无厌甚于往年，抢掠盗窃一日不息，我们如今腹背受敌，首尾多难，已处于国家朝廷的厄运时期！
English: Once upon a time, pirates spied on the eastern counties and counties, repeatedly gained rebellious people, familiar with the terrain, skilled in navigation, more insatiable than in previous years, robbing and stealing day in and day out, we are now suffering from the enemy, with many difficulties, and we are already in the bad luck period of the national court!

古文：诚宜住建立之役，先备豫之计，勉垦殖之业，为饥乏之救。
现代文：确实应该停止修建新宫的劳役，先得制定防备敌人大计，劝勉发展垦荒种植事业，作为解救饥寒困乏的措施。
English: It is indeed necessary to stop the forced labor in the construction of the new palace, first formulate a plan to prevent the enemy, and encourage the development of desert planting as a measure to relieve hunger and cold.

古文：惟恐农时将过，东作向晚，有事之日，整严未办。
现代文：惟恐农时将要过去，春耕生产为时过晚，战争发起之日，军队装备与粮草未办。
English: However, it is feared that the agricultural season will be over, spring ploughing production will be too late, and military equipment and grain and grass will not be ready on the day the war is launched.

古文：若舍此急，尽力功作，卒有风尘不虞之变。当委版筑之役，应烽燧之急，驱怨苦之众，赴自刃之难，此乃大敌所因为资也。
现代文：如果舍弃这些急务，却尽力修建宫室，突然发生意想不到的战事变故，这才放弃修室筑墙的劳役，去应付烽火告警的急需，驱使怨忿困苦的部众，赶赴白刃相向的战场，这就是强大敌人可反用来作为资助的局势了。
English: If you abandon these urgent tasks, but do your best to build the palace, and suddenly unexpected war events occur, then you give up the labor of repairing the room and building the wall, to cope with the urgent need for bonfire alarms, and drive the resentful and suffering subordinates to rush to the battlefield, this is a situation that a powerful enemy can use as a subsidy.

古文：如但固守，旷日持久，则军粮必乏，不待接刃，而战士已困矣。昔太戊之时，桑谷生庭，惧而修德，怪消殷兴。
现代文：如果只是固守，旷日持久，则军粮必定缺乏，不等战场交刃，而参战之人已经困顿不堪。 从前商代太戊王时期，桑树、稻谷生长庭堂之内，心中恐惧故此修养德行，于是怪异现象消除而殷商王朝隆兴。
English: If you just hold fast and hold out for a long time, then there will definitely be a shortage of military food, and the battlefields will not intersect, and those who participate in the war will already be in dire straits.In the former Shang Dynasty, during the reign of King Taewu, mulberry trees and rice grew in the courtyard, and the fear in the heart was cultivated, so the strange phenomenon was eliminated and the Yin Shang Dynasty flourished.

古文：荧惑守心，宋以为灾，景公下从瞽史之言，而荧惑退舍，景公延年。
现代文：火星轨道掠过心宿之域，宋国认为灾难将到，宋景公恭谨听从瞽史的意见，使火星退回原先的位置，宋景公也因此而延年。
English: The orbit of Mars passed through the region of the heart's abode, and Song thought that disaster would come. Song Jinggong respectfully listened to Zou Shi's opinion and made Mars return to its original position. As a result, Song Jinggong's life was prolonged.

古文：夫修德于身而感异类，言发于口通神明。
现代文：自身修养德行就能感化异类，言从口出就能通达神明。
English: Self-cultivation and virtue can influence the heterogeneous, and words can reach the gods from the mouth.

古文：臣以愚蔽，误忝近署，不能冀宣仁泽以感灵祗，仰惭俯愧，无所投处。
现代文：为臣以愚笨闭塞的资质，而错误地安置在宫中官署，不能辅翼陛下昭示仁义恩泽以感化神灵，对上对下均感惭愧，无处可以投身。
English: As a vassal with the qualification of being stupid and obtuse, and wrongly placed in the Imperial Household Agency, I cannot support His Majesty in showing benevolence and kindness to influence the gods. I feel ashamed both up and down, and I have nowhere to devote myself.

古文：退伏思惟，荣惑桑谷之异，天示二主，至如他余锱介之妖；近是门庭小神所为，验之天地，无有他变，而征样符瑞前后屡臻，明珠既觌，白雀继见，万亿之祚，实灵所挺。以九域为宅，天下为家，不与编户之民转徙同也。
现代文：退下低头思量，火星、桑谷的怪异现象，是上天在警告两位君主，至于其他种种细小的怪异，不过是身边门庭内小神所为，验证于天地，没有其他变化，而祥瑞的征兆却先后屡屡出现，明珠既已显露，白雀继之现世，万民的福祚，实际是神灵使其显露，以九州为宅，以天下为家，并不与编户之民一同转移。
English: Stand back, bow your heads, and contemplate. The strange phenomena of Mars and Mulberry Valley were Heaven's warning to the two monarchs. As for all the other minor oddities, they were merely the work of small gods in the gates around them. They were verified in heaven and earth, and there were no other changes. However, the signs of auspiciousness have repeatedly appeared. The pearl has already been revealed, followed by the white bird in this world, and the blessing of all people. In fact, it is the gods who reveal it. Kyushu is the home, the world is the home, and it does not move with the people who make up the household.

古文：又今之宫室，先帝所营。卜土立基，非为不祥。
现代文：又今日的宫室，是先帝所造，选择日期开土立基，并非不吉祥。
English: Also, today's palace chamber was built by the former emperor, and it is not unlucky to choose the date to break ground.

古文：又杨市土地与宫连接，若大功毕竟，舆驾迁住，门行之神，皆当转移，犹恐长，久未必胜旧。
现代文：又杨市土地与皇宫相连接，如果浩大工程完毕，陛下车驾迁住，在门前巡行的神灵，都当跟着转移，恐怕长久下去未必强于旧宫。
English: In addition, the land of Yangshi is connected to the Imperial Palace. If the huge project is completed and His Majesty moves to live there, the deities that parade in front of the gate should also be transferred. I am afraid that it may not be better than the old palace for a long time.

古文：屡迁不少，留则有嫌，此乃愚臣所以夙夜为忧灼也。
现代文：屡屡迁移又不可，留在旧宫又有忌讳，这正是为臣日益担忧焦虑的原因。
English: It is not possible to move repeatedly, and it is taboo to stay in the old palace, which is precisely the reason for the increasingly worried and anxious vassal.

古文：臣省《月令》，季夏之月，不可以兴土功，不可以会诸侯，不可以起兵动众，举大事必有大殃。
现代文：为臣考察《礼记·月令》，季夏月份，不可兴动土木，不可会盟诸侯，不可兴师动众，举行大事必有大灾。
English: For the vassal to examine the "Rituals and Monthly Rites," the spring and summer months, it is not possible to start civil engineering, it is not possible to unite the lords, it is not possible to motivate the masses, and there must be a major disaster to hold a major event.

古文：今虽诸侯不会，诸侯之军与会无异。
现代文：如今虽说诸侯没有会聚，但集合诸侯军队与会集诸侯没有区别。
English: Today, although there is no gathering of lords, there is no difference between the gathering of armies of lords and the gathering of lords.

古文：六月戊己，土行正王，既不可犯，加又农月，时不可失。
现代文：六月戊巳日，土星运行正俯照人间，既不可动土触犯，又加之农忙之月，农时不可错失。
English: On the last day of June, Saturn's movement is shining down on the human world, and it is not possible to touch the soil, and in addition to the busy agricultural month, it is not possible to miss the agricultural time.

古文：昔鲁隐公夏城中丘，《春秋》书之，垂为后戒。
现代文：从前鲁隐公夏季修筑中丘城，《春秋》记载了这件事，留给后人做鉴戒。
English: In the past, Lu Yin Gong used to build Zhongqiu City in the summer. "Spring and Autumn" recorded this event and left it as a warning to future generations.

古文：今筑宫为长世之洪基，而犯天地之大禁，袭《春秋》之所书，废敬授之上务，臣以愚管，窃所未安。又恐所召离民，或有不至，讨之则废役兴事，不讨则日月滋慢。
现代文：今日修筑宫室是为了万世的宏大基业，而冒犯天地间的大禁忌，沿袭《春秋》中所说的错误行为，废弃恭敬上天授予的最大要务，为臣以愚拙的管见，私下心中不安。 此外，为臣担心所要征召的流民，有的将不来，讨伐他们要废弃工程兴起战事，不讨伐他们则他们日益滋生祸患。
English: Today, the construction of the palace is for the great cause of all ages, but it offends the great taboo between heaven and earth, follows the wrong actions mentioned in the "Spring and Autumn," abandons the respect for the most important task bestowed by heaven, and leads the vassal to stupid management, and is privately uneasy. In addition, the vassal is worried that some of the displaced people to be conscripted will not come, and if they fight, the project will be abandoned and war will break out, and if they do not fight, they will increasingly breed disasters.

古文：若悉并到，大众聚会，希无疾病。
现代文：如果他们全数到来，很难保证这么多人聚在一起不发生疾病。
English: If they all arrive, it will be difficult to ensure that such a large number of people will not get sick.

古文：且人心安则念善，苦则怨叛。
现代文：况且人心都是安定则向往良善、困苦则怨恨叛乱。
English: Moreover, people's hearts are stable and yearn for goodness, while hardship and resentment lead to rebellion.

古文：江南精兵，北土所难，欲以十卒当东一人。
现代文：江南精锐兵卒，北方敌军一向难于对付，想以十个士兵对付我兵一人。
English: Jiangnan elite soldiers, the northern enemy has always been difficult to deal with, want to deal with ten soldiers against one of my soldiers.

古文：天下未定，深可忧惜之。
现代文：天下尚未平定，应深为顾惜他们。
English: The world has not yet been pacified, and they should be deeply pitied.

古文：如此宫成，死叛五千，则北军之众更增五万，着到万人，则倍益十万，病者有死亡之损，叛者传不善之语，此乃大敌所以欢喜也。
现代文：现在这种状况等到宫室筑成，则死亡叛逃五千人，那么北方军队等于增加了五万；如果死亡叛逃者达到一万，则敌人等于增添了十万。病的人有会死亡的损失，逃的人又会传出不利我方的话，这正是强大敌人所高兴的事情。
English: In the present situation, when the palace is built, if 5,000 people die and defect, then the northern army will increase by 50,000; if 10,000 people die and defect, then the enemy will increase by 100,000. Sick people will die, and those who escape will spread words that are unfavorable to our side. This is exactly what the powerful enemy is happy about.

古文：今当角力中原，以定强弱，正于际会。彼益我损，加以劳困，此乃雄夫智士所以深忧。臣闻先王治国无三年之储，曰国非其国，安宁之世戒备如此。况敌强大而忽农忘畜。
现代文：如今正值敌我双方决斗中原，争定强弱，正在这个时期，敌方人数增多而我方兵力减少，加之劳苦困顿，这是英雄智士深深忧患的事情。 为臣听说古代圣明君主治理国家，若无三年的物资储备，则说 国已不国 ，安定平宁的时代尚且如此戒备，何况敌人强大而我们却轻视农业忘却储蓄。
English: Now is the time of the duel of the Central Plains between the two sides of the enemy and us, vying for strength and weakness. In this period, the number of the enemy has increased and our troop strength has decreased, coupled with the hardships, this is a matter of deep concern for the heroes and sages. The vassals heard that the ancient holy monarchs governed the country, if they did not have three years of material reserves, they said that the country was no longer a country, the era of stability and leveling was still so alert, not to mention that the enemy was strong and we despised agriculture and forgot to save.

古文：今虽颇种殖，间者大水沉没，其余存者当须耘获。而长吏怖期，上方诸郡，身涉山林，尽力伐材，废农弃务；士民妻孥羸小，垦殖又薄；若有水旱则永无所获。
现代文：如今虽然有所种植，但间或被大水淹没，其余部分留存的田地还应当去耕耘收获，而地方官员害怕延误宫室修建工期，地势上高的郡县，驱民深入山林，尽力砍木伐树，废弃农耕时务，士人民众妻儿老残幼小，垦种土地薄少，若遇水旱灾害则永远一无所获。
English: Nowadays, although there is some planting, it is sometimes flooded by heavy water, and the remaining part of the remaining fields should still be cultivated and harvested. And local officials are afraid of delaying the construction period of the palace, the counties with high land, driving people deep into the mountains, trying their best to cut down trees, abandoning farming time, and the people's wives and children are old and small, and there is little land for planting, and if there is a flood and drought disaster, they will never get anything.

古文：州郡见米，当待有事，冗食之众，仰官供济。
现代文：州郡现存的粮食，应当留待有紧急情况发生时动用，而吃闲饭不干事之人，却还依赖官府供济。
English: The grain existing in the state and county should be reserved for use in the event of an emergency, and those who do not work while eating are still dependent on the government for subsistence.

古文：若上下空乏，运漕不供，而北敌犯疆，使周、召更生，良、平复出，不能为陛下计明矣。
现代文：如果上空下乏，漕运供应不及，而北方敌人侵犯边界，即使让周公、召公重生，张良、陈平复出，也不能替陛下出谋划策以救危急，这一点是很清楚的！
English: It is clear that even if Zhou Gong, Zhao Gong are reborn, and Zhang Liang and Chen Ping are revived, they will not be able to make suggestions for His Majesty to save the critical situation if the airspace is scarce, the supply of rowing transport is insufficient, and the northern enemy violates the border!

古文：臣闻君明者臣忠，主圣者臣直，是以，昧犯天威，乞垂哀省。
现代文：为臣听说君主英明则朝臣们忠心，君主聪睿则朝臣们正直，故此我以忄娄忄娄恳切之心，冒昧触犯天威，乞请陛下垂怜，省阅我的表章。 
English: As a vassal, I have heard that if the monarch is wise, the courtiers will be loyal, and if the monarch is wise, the courtiers will be honest. Therefore, with a sincere heart, I have dared to violate the will of heaven and beg Your Majesty to have mercy on me and spare my seal.

古文：书奏，皓不纳。
现代文：奏表呈上后，孙皓不采纳。
English: After the report form was submitted, Sun Yat-sen did not accept it.

古文：后迁东观令，领右国吏，核上疏辞让。皓答曰： 得表，以东观儒林之府，当讲校文艺，处定疑难，汉时皆名学硕儒乃任其职，乞更选英贤。
现代文：后来升任华核为东观令，兼任右国史，华核上疏推辞，孙皓答复说： 收到您的奏章，您考虑到东观是儒士集中的官署，职当讲论考订文章经籍，处理解决疑难问题，汉代都是著名学者饱学儒士才担任其中职任，请求改选英明贤能之人担当。
English: Later, Hua Kuan was promoted to Dong Guanling and concurrently held the post of U Guo Shi. Hua Kuanling resigned from the post, and Sun Yat-sen replied, "Receiving your petition, you took into account that Dong Guan is a government office with a concentration of Confucians. The post of the post is to lecture on the study of scriptures and solve difficult problems. In the Han Dynasty, only well-known scholars and well-educated Confucians could hold this post. I would like to request that you re-elect a wise and capable person to take this post."

古文：闻之，以卿研精坟典，博览多闻，可谓悦礼乐敦诗书者也。
现代文：我知道了，考虑到您精研古代典籍，博览多闻，可说是喜好礼乐笃敬诗书之人。
English: I know, considering that you have studied ancient classics and are well-informed, you can be said to be a person who likes liturgical music and respects poetry.

古文：当飞翰骋藻，光赞时事，以越扬、班、张、蔡之畴，怪乃谦光，厚自菲薄，宜勉备所职，以迈先贤，勿复纷纷。 
现代文：应当让您在文翰辞藻上发挥才干，光大赞颂当世政事，以超越扬雄、班固、张衡、蔡邕之辈，使奇异的人才谦退收敛，厚重的人才菲薄自己，您应当勉力尽职，超越前代贤人，不要再说什么了。 
English: You should be allowed to give full play to your talents in literary and philosophical terms, glorify contemporary politics, surpass the likes of Yang Xiong, Banggu, Zhang Heng and Cai Qi, make strange talents humble and converge, and thick talents thin themselves. You should try your best to do your duty, surpass the previous generation of sages, and do not say anything more.

古文：时仓廪无储，世俗滋侈，核上疏曰： 今冠虏充斥，征伐未已，居无积年之储，出无敌之畜，此乃有国者所宣深忧也。
现代文：当时府库没有储蓄，世俗风气越发奢侈，华核上奏说： 如今敌寇充斥边境，征伐尚未停息，平居无积年的储存，出战无应敌的积蓄，这正是治理国家的人所应该深为忧虑的事。
English: At that time, the government treasury had no savings, and the secular culture became more and more extravagant. Hua Jiu said in his report: Nowadays, the enemy bandits are flooding the border, the conquest has not yet stopped, there is no accumulation of years of storage, and there is no match for the war. This is exactly what the people who govern the country should be deeply worried about.

古文：夫财谷所生，皆出于民，趋时务农，国之上急。
现代文：财物粮食的产出，都出于百姓之手，紧随时令抓紧农作，是国家第一等急迫大事。
English: The output of wealth, goods and grain are all produced by the hands of the people. It is urgent for the people to pay close attention to agricultural work, which is the first urgent matter for the country.

古文：而都下诸官，所掌别异，各自下调，不计民力，辄与近期。
现代文：而朝廷众官，所掌管的部门各自不同，都向下面征调劳役，不考虑民众的承受能力，动辄规定近前迫切的期限。
English: However, all the officials of the imperial court, each in charge of a different department, recruited and transferred laborers from below, without considering the people's ability to bear, and often set a deadline that was imminent.

古文：长吏畏罪，昼夜催民，委舍佃事，遑赴会日，定送到都，或蕴积不用，而徒使百姓消力失时。
现代文：地方官员害怕获罪，昼夜催逼百姓，使百姓放弃农事耕作，匆忙按限期赶赴集合地，定期定数送到京都，有时征调来的人众积压不用，而白白耗费百姓们的精力，耽误他们农耕时光。
English: Local officials, afraid of being found guilty, urged the people day and night, forcing them to give up farming. They hurriedly rushed to the meeting place according to the deadline, and sent them to Kyoto on a regular basis. Sometimes the people who were recruited and transferred were not needed, and they wasted the energy of the people and delayed their farming time.

古文：到秋收月，督其限入，夺其播殖之时，而责定送其今年之税，如有逋悬，则籍没财物，故家户贫困，衣食不足。
现代文：到了秋收月份，又督责他们限期缴粮纳税。
English: In the autumn harvest month, they were also ordered to pay grain tax by the deadline.

古文：宜暂息众役，专心农桑。
现代文：既剥夺了他们播种的农时，又督责他们当年的赋税。
English: They were not only deprived of the time to sow their crops, but were also reprimanded for the taxes they paid that year.

古文：古人称一夫不耕，或受其饥。
现代文：如有拖欠，还没收他们家中的财物，所以家家户户贫穷困苦，衣食不足。
English: If there are arrears, their family's belongings are also confiscated, so every family is poor and destitute, lacking food and clothing.

古文：一女不织，或受其寒。是以先王治国，惟农是务。
现代文：应当暂时停止各种劳役，专心致力于农桑之事，古人说过，一夫不耕就有人因此受饥，一女不织就有人因此受寒，故此古代君王治国，惟以农业生产为急务。
English: The ancients said that if a man does not plow, some people will suffer from hunger, and if a woman does not weave, some people will suffer from cold. Therefore, ancient kings ruled the country, but agricultural production was an urgent matter.

古文：军兴以来，已向百栽，农人废南亩之务，女工停机杼之业。
现代文：战争爆发以来，已近百年时光，农人荒废了农田的事务，织女停止了机杼的职业。
English: Since the outbreak of the war, it has been nearly a hundred years, farmers have abandoned farmland affairs, and weavers have stopped their cunning occupation.

古文：推此揆之，则蔬食而长饥，薄衣而履冰者，固不少矣。
现代文：按此推测揣度，则吃着糠菜还得长期饥饿，穿着单衣还得践冰踏霜，这样的人肯定还有很多。
English: According to this speculation, there must be a lot of people who have to go hungry for a long time while eating stew, and have to trample on the ice while wearing a singlet.

古文：臣闻主之所求于民者二，民之所望于主者三。
现代文：为臣听说君主向百姓求取的有两件事，而百姓企望于君主的有三件事。
English: A courtier heard that the monarch asked the people for two things, and the people asked the monarch for three things.

古文：二谓求其为己劳也，求其为己死也。
现代文：这两件事是：要求民众为自己劳累，要求民众为自己献身。
English: These two things are: requiring the people to work hard for themselves and requiring the people to devote themselves to themselves.

古文：三谓讥者能食之，劳者能息之，有功者能赏之。
现代文：这三件事是：能使饥饿者有饭吃，能让劳累者得休息，能给有功者以赏赐。
English: These three things are: to feed the hungry, to give rest to the weary, and to reward those who labor.

古文：民以致其二事而主失其三望者，则怨心生而功不建，今帑藏不实，民劳役猥，主之二求已备，民之三望未报。
现代文：如果百姓实现了君主的两个要求而君主却让百姓三个愿望落空，则怨恨之心必然产生，国家功业必不能建起。如今国库所藏空虚，百姓劳役繁多，君主对百姓的两个要求已经具备，而百姓对君主的三个愿望却未得到回报。
English: If the people have fulfilled the two requirements of the monarch, but the monarch has let the people's three wishes go unfulfilled, resentment will inevitably arise, and the national cause will not be built. Today, the treasury is empty, the people's labor is numerous, the monarch's two requirements for the people have been met, but the people's three wishes for the monarch have not been rewarded.

古文：且饥者不待美馔而后饱，寒者不俟狐貉而后温，为味者口之奇，文绣者身之饰也。
现代文：况且饥饿者并不企求有美味佳肴才吃得饱，寒冷者并不期待狐皮貉裘才穿得暖。美味只是口味的猎奇，文绣只是身体的修饰。
English: Moreover, those who are hungry do not look for delicious delicacies to eat until they are full, and those who are cold do not look for fox fur coats to wear until they are warm. Delicacy is just a curiosity of taste, and embroidery is just a body modification.

古文：今事多而役繁，民贫而俗奢，百工作无用之器，妇人为绮靡之饰，不勤麻枲，并乡黼黻，转相仿效，耻独无有。
现代文：如今事务甚多而徭役繁杂，民众贫苦而世风奢侈，百工制作那些毫无实用价值的器具，妇女绣制华丽绮艳的衣饰。不勤于纺织麻布者，却都穿着绣有斑斓花纹的礼服，转相仿效，耻无独有。
English: Nowadays, the affairs are numerous and the duties are complicated, the people are poor and the world style is extravagant, the craftsmen make those utensils that have no practical value, the women embroider gorgeous and glamorous clothing. Those who are not diligent in weaving linen, but are wearing dresses embroidered with variegated patterns, follow one another, and there is no shame in being unique.

古文：兵民之家，犹复遂俗，内无儋石之储，而出有绫绮之服，至于富贾商贩之家，重以金银，奢恣尤甚。
现代文：兵士与百姓之家，犹在跟逐世俗，家内无一担粮食的储存，而外出却有绫罗绮丽的服饰，至于商贩富贾之家，再加以金银首饰，奢侈更为严重。
English: The homes of soldiers and commoners still follow the world. They do not have a single grain storage in their homes, but they go out with beautiful clothes. As for the homes of merchants and rich people, with the addition of gold and silver jewelry, luxury is even more serious.

古文：天下未平，百姓不赡，宜一生民之原，丰谷帛之业。
现代文：天下尚未平定，百姓不得赡养，应当齐一养民生民的本原，兴旺农耕纺织的事业。
English: The country has not yet been pacified, the people must not be supported, the people's livelihood should be supported, and the cause of agriculture and textiles should flourish.

古文：而弃功于浮华之巧，妨日于侈靡之事，上无尊卑等级之差，下有耗财物力之损。
现代文：现在却耗损功夫在浮华技巧之上，荒废时日于奢侈事物之中，上无尊卑等级的差别，下有损耗财力的伤害。
English: Now, however, effort is wasted on flashy tricks, time is wasted on luxuries, there is no difference between the upper and lower levels, and there is a loss of financial resources.

古文：今吏士之家，少无子女，多者三四，少者一二，通令户有一女，十万家则十万人，人织绩一岁一束，则十万束矣。
现代文：如今官员士人的家庭中，很少没有子女的，多者三四个，少者一两个，通共平均一户人家只有一个女子，则十万户人家就有女子十万人，每人一年织布一匹，则一年就有十万匹布。
English: Nowadays, in the families of bureaucrats, there are very few without children, most are three or four, and a few are one or two. In total, on average, a household has only one woman, while a hundred thousand households have a hundred thousand women, and each person weaves one cloth a year, so there are a hundred thousand cloths a year.

古文：使四疆之内同心戮力，数年之间，布帛必积。
现代文：若使全国同心努力，数年之间，布帛必然堆如山积。
English: If the whole country makes a concerted effort, within a few years, cloth cocoons will inevitably pile up.

古文：恣民五色，惟所服用，但禁绮绣无益之饰。
现代文：到时听任百姓采用五色，只做他们穿用的衣服，但禁止绮丽无用的修饰。
English: At that time, the people were allowed to use the five colors, only to make the clothes they wear, but it was forbidden to make useless modifications.

古文：且美貌者不待华采以祟好，艳姿者不待文绮以致爱，五采之饰，足以丽矣。
现代文：况且相貌漂亮的人不需要华丽色彩以增加好看，身姿艳丽的人不需要绮丽花纹来招人喜爱，五彩之饰，足够美丽了。
English: Moreover, a beautiful-looking person does not need gorgeous colors to increase good looks, a beautiful-looking person does not need gorgeous patterns to attract people's love, and colorful ornaments are beautiful enough.

古文：若极粉黛，穷盛服，未必无丑妇。废华采，去文绣，未必无美人也。
现代文：如果用尽粉黛，穿尽盛服，也未必没有丑妇；废除华彩，去掉文绣，也未必没有美女。
English: If you use up all the powder and wear all the clothes, you may not have an ugly woman; if you abolish the glamor and remove the embroidery, you may not have a beautiful woman.

古文：若实如论，有之无益废之无损者，何爱而不斩禁以充府藏之急乎？
现代文：如果确实如我所言，有之无益去之无损的话，为何舍不得暂时禁止以充实库府的急需呢？
English: If it is true, as I have said, that there is nothing to be gained and nothing to be lost, then why are they so reluctant to temporarily ban the use of cash to meet the urgent needs of the treasury?

古文：此救乏之上务，富国之本业也，使管、晏复生，无以易此。
现代文：这是拯救匮乏的最高急务，富强国家的根本事业，即使让管仲、晏婴再生，无法改变这种治国措施。
English: This is the most urgent task of saving the poor, the fundamental cause of a rich and strong country. Even if you let Guanzhong and Xing infancy regenerate, you can't change this measure of governing the country.

古文：汉之文、景，承平继统，天下已定，四方无虞，犹以雕文之妨农事，锦绣之害女红，开富国之利，杜饥寒之本。
现代文：汉代的文、景两帝，在太平环境中继承皇统，当时天下平定，四方无事，尚且认为雕饰文绣伤害农事，锦衣绣服损害女红。故此广开富强国家的获利之源，杜绝寒冷饥饿的根本之因。
English: The two emperors of the Han Dynasty, Wen and Jing, succeeded to the imperial throne in a peaceful environment. At that time, the world was peaceful and there was no trouble in the four directions. They also believed that the carving and embroidery harmed agriculture, and the brocade and embroidered clothing harmed women. Therefore, the source of profit of the rich and powerful countries was widely opened, and the root cause of cold and hunger was eliminated.

古文：况今六台分乖；豺狼充路；兵不离疆；甲不解带。而可以不广生财之原，充府藏之积哉？ 
现代文：何况今日六合分离，豺狼满道，兵卒不离边疆，铠甲不解系带，这种形势下可以不广开生财之源、充实府库之积吗？ 
English: What's more, in today's situation of the separation of the six directions, the wolves are everywhere, the soldiers do not leave the border, and the armor does not loosen the belt, can we not expand the source of income and enrich the government treasury?

古文：皓以核年老，敕令草表，核不敢。
现代文：孙皓以为华核年老，就敕令他草拟章表，华核不敢应承。
English: Sun Yat-sen thought that Hua Jiao was old, so he ordered him to draft a chapter list, but Hua Jiao did not dare to do so.

古文：又敕作草文，停立待之。
现代文：孙皓又敕令他撰作文章，站在一旁等他写完。
English: Sun Yat-sen also ordered him to write an article and stood by waiting for him to finish.

古文：核为文曰： 咨核小臣，草芥凡庸。
现代文：华核撰文为： 叹我这小臣，草芥且凡庸。
English: Hua Jiu wrote: I lament that I, a minor minister, am nothing but a mediocrity.

古文：遭眷值圣，受恩特隆。
现代文：见重于圣主，受恩特盛隆。
English: He is more important than the Lord, and he prospers by grace.

古文：越从朽壤，蝉蜕朝中。
现代文：超身污沼地，脱胎圣朝中。
English: He was born in a filthy swamp and grew up in a holy temple.

古文：熙光紫闼；青璅是凭。
现代文：祥光临紫闼，普照青琐宫。
English: The auspicious visit to Shijiazhuang, the general view of the Qingzo Palace.

古文：毖挹清露，沐浴凯风。
现代文：挹掬清甘露，沐浴和煦风。
English: Rinse with clear nectar, bathe, and rinse.

古文：效无丝氂，负阙山祟。
现代文：功绩无丝毫，亏负如山崇。
English: No merit at all, but a mountain of losses.

古文：滋润含垢，恩贷累重。
现代文：泽润又容垢，圣恩累重重。
English: The soil is moist and soft, but heavy with the blessings of God.

古文：秽质被荣，局命得融。
现代文：劣质获殊荣，亻局身得和融。
English: Inferior quality won the award, but the final result was harmonious.

古文：欲报罔极，委之皇穹。
现代文：欲报无极恩，委身于苍穹。
English: I want to repay the great favor and commit myself to the sky.

古文：圣恩雨注，哀弃其尤。
现代文：圣恩如雨注，哀舍我罪尤。
English: Holy grace is pouring down like rain. Have mercy on me, a sinner.

古文：猥命草对，润被下愚。
现代文：辱命答君问，润泽遍下愚。
English: It's a shame to have to answer your question, but it's all downhill from here.

古文：不敢达敕，惧速罪诛。
现代文：不敢违敕令，唯恐获罪诛。
English: They dare not disobey orders for fear of being punished.

古文：冒承诏命，魂逝形留。 核前后陈便宜，及贡荐良能，解释罪过，书百余上，皆有补益，文多不悉载。
现代文：冒昧承诏命，魂逝形体留。 华核前后陈述于国便宜之事，以及推荐贤能之士，辩解他人罪过，上书一百余次，都对朝政有所补益，因文字太多故不全部录载。
English: He dared to accept the imperial edict, and his spirit remained in his body after his death. Huakong repeatedly stated things that were advantageous to the country, and recommended virtuous people, defended the sins of others, and wrote more than a hundred times, all of which were beneficial to the government of the dynasty. Because there were too many words, not all of them were recorded.

古文：天册元年以微谴免，数岁卒。
现代文：天册元年，他因细小过失而被免职，几年后去世。
English: In the first year of the Book of Heaven, he was dismissed for a minor fault, and died a few years later.

古文：曜、核所论事章疏，咸传于世也。
现代文：韦日翟、华核他们所论评政事的奏章疏表，都流传于世。
English: Wei Risheng and Hua Jiu, both of whom commented on political affairs, have been passed down to the world.

