古文：昭宗昭宗圣穆景文孝皇帝讳晔，懿宗第七子，母曰惠安太后王氏。
现代文：昭宗，谥号圣穆景文孝皇帝，名李晔，是懿宗皇帝第七子，母亲惠安太后，姓王。
English: Zhaozong, also known as Emperor Shengmujingwenxiao, was the seventh son of Emperor Zhaozong and the mother of Empress Dowager Hui An, surnamed Wang.

古文：以咸通八年二月二十二日生于东内。十三年四月，封寿王，名杰。
现代文：咸通八年二月二十二日生于东内，咸通十三年四月封为寿王，名李杰。
English: Hamdong was born in Dongnai on February 22nd, 8th year of Hamdong's reign. In April 13th of Hamdong's reign, he was given the title of Shouwang, and his name was Li Jie.

古文：乾符四年，授开府仪同三司、幽州大都督、幽州卢龙等军节度、押奚契丹、管内观察处置等使。
现代文：乾符四年被授为开府仪同三司、幽州大都督、幽州卢龙等军镇节度使、押奚、契丹藩落使、辖区内观察处置使等。
English: In four years, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Yuzhou Daduo, Yuzhou Lulong and other military town festival envoys, overseers, Khitan clan overseers, observation and disposition envoys in the jurisdiction, etc.

古文：帝于僖宗，母弟也，尤相亲睦。
现代文：寿王和僖宗是同母所生的兄弟，相互间特别亲近和睦。
English: Shouwang and Yeongjong are brothers born of the same mother, and they are particularly close to each other.

古文：自艰难播越，尝随侍左右，握兵中要，皆奇而爱之。
现代文：自从国事艰难以来，僖宗流亡外方，寿王曾经随侍在僖宗左右，掌握兵权和中枢政要，僖宗极为器重和爱惜他。
English: Since the difficult state of affairs, Emperor Taizong has been in exile abroad. Shouwang once followed Emperor Taizong around, mastered the military power and the central political dignitary. Emperor Taizong was extremely precious and cherished him.

古文：文德元年二月，僖宗暴不豫。
现代文：文德元年二月，僖宗患暴病。
English: In February of 1869, Shizong fell violently ill.

古文：时初复宫闱，人心倾瞩，遽闻被疾，军民骇愕。
现代文：当时皇帝刚刚回到皇宫不久，人心极其关注皇帝，突然听说皇帝患暴病，军民都震骇惊愕。
English: At that time, the emperor had just returned to the imperial palace, and the people were extremely concerned about the emperor. Suddenly, they heard that the emperor was suffering from a violent illness. The military and the people were shocked and stunned.

古文：及大渐之夕，而未知所立。
现代文：直到皇帝病情危重的那天傍晚，大家还不知道由谁继位。
English: Until the evening of the day when the emperor fell critically ill, it was not known who would succeed him.

古文：群臣以吉王最贤，又在寿王之上，将立之，唯军容杨复恭请以寿王监国。
现代文：群臣认为吉王最贤德，排行又在寿王前面，将会立吉王为继位者，只有左右神策观军容使杨复恭请求任命寿王监国。
English: The group of courtiers believed that Ji Wang was the most virtuous, ranking ahead of Shou Wang, and would establish Ji Wang as the successor. Only the right and left divine policy view forces Yang Fuqong to request the appointment of Shou Wang as the overseer of the country.

古文：三月六日，宣遗诏立为皇太弟。
现代文：三月六日，宣布僖宗遗诏，立寿王为皇太弟。
English: On March 6, it was announced in the last will and testament of Emperor Taizong that Prince Li Shou would become the younger brother of the crown prince.

古文：八日，柩前即位，时年二十二。
现代文：八日，寿王在僖宗的灵柩前即皇帝位，时年二十二岁。
English: On the eighth day, Shouwang ascended to the throne in front of Shanzong's coffin, at the age of twenty-two.

古文：以司空韦昭度摄冢宰。
现代文：任命司空韦昭度暂时代理宰相。
English: Appointed Siku Wei Zhaodu as temporary acting prime minister.

古文：己丑，见群臣，始听政。
现代文：三月十二日，接见群臣，开始处理政务。
English: On March 12, he received a group of ministers and began to deal with government affairs.

古文：帝攻书好文，尤重儒术，神气雄俊，有会昌之遗风。
现代文：皇上喜欢读有关典章文物制度方面的书，特别重视儒家学术，精神气质雄杰英武，有武宗皇帝的遗风。
English: The emperor likes to read books related to the award and cultural relics system, attaches great importance to Confucian scholarship, and has the spirit of a hero and warrior, a legacy of Emperor Wuzong.

古文：以先朝威武不振，国命浸微而尊礼大臣，详延道术，意在恢张旧业，号令天下。
现代文：因为先朝的声威，武功不能振作，国家的命脉逐渐衰微，因而皇上尊重和礼遇大臣，审慎地推行治国的方法，目的在于恢复和扩展先朝的旧业，以统一全国的号令。
English: Because the prestige of the previous dynasty, martial arts cannot be invigorated, and the lifeblood of the country is gradually declining, the emperor respects and treats ministers with courtesy, and prudently implements the methods of governing the country. The purpose is to restore and expand the old business of the previous dynasty to unify the nation's call.

古文：即位之始，中外称之。
现代文：皇上即位之初，朝内外都很称赞他。
English: At the beginning of the Emperor's accession to the throne, he was highly praised both inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：四月戊辰朔。
现代文：四月初一为戊辰日。
English: The first day of April is the first day of spring.

古文：庚午，追谥圣母惠安太后曰恭献。
现代文：四月初三，追加皇上已故的母亲惠安太后谥号为恭献。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, the late Empress Dowager Hui An, the late mother of the Emperor, was added as a tribute.

古文：乙亥，河南尹彦张全义以兵袭李罕之于河阳，罕之出据泽州。
现代文：四月初八，河南尹张全义在河阳率军袭击李罕之，李罕之退出河阳，占据泽州。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth lunar month, Yin Zhang Quanyi of Henan Province led an army to attack Li Hanzhi in Heyang. Li Hanzhi withdrew from Heyang and occupied Zhezhou.

古文：魏博衙军杀其帅乐祯于龙兴寺，又击乐从训，败之。
现代文：魏博镇的衙军在龙兴寺杀害其主帅乐彦祯，又进攻乐从训，击败了他。
English: In Longxing Temple, Wei Bo's Han army killed its commander, Le Yanqi, and attacked Le Congxun, defeating him.

古文：从训以残众保洹水，为罗宗弁陷其城而杀之。
现代文：乐从训率领残部退守洹水，被罗宗弁攻破城池，将其杀害。
English: Le Zongxun led the remnants to retreat to Surabaya and was defeated and killed by Luo Zongwen.

古文：壬午，蔡贼孙儒陷扬州，杨行密溃围而出，据宣州。
现代文：四月十五日，蔡州贼将孙儒攻破扬州，杨行密突围逃出扬州，占据宣州。
English: On April 15th, Cai Zhou's bandits defeated Sun Ru in Yangzhou, and Yang Xing escaped from the encirclement and occupied Xuanzhou.

古文：孙儒自称淮南节度，仍率其众攻宣州。
现代文：孙儒自称为淮南节度使，并率领他的部下进攻宣州。
English: Sun Ru called himself the envoy of Huainan Festival, and led his subordinates to attack Xuanzhou.

古文：五月丁酉朔，制以宣武军节度使、检校侍中、沛郡王硃全忠为蔡州四面行营兵马都统。
现代文：五月初一，决定任命宣武军节度使、检校侍中、沛郡王朱全忠为蔡州四面行营兵马都统。
English: On the first day of May, it was decided to appoint Wang Zhu Quanzhong of Pei County as the military commander of the four sides of Caizhou.

古文：自秦贤、石璠败后，蔡贼渐弱，时溥方为全忠所攻，故移溥都统之命授全忠。
现代文：自从秦贤、石兵败之后，蔡州贼军的势力逐渐衰弱，当时时溥正被朱全忠进攻，因此把时溥四面行营兵马都统的职衔转授给了朱全忠。
English: Since the defeat of Qin Xian and the Stone Army, the power of the Caizhou Thieves' Army gradually weakened. At that time, Shijiazhuang was being attacked by Zhu Quanzhong. Therefore, he transferred the title of the general of soldiers and horses who marched around Shijiazhuang to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：壬寅，蔡贼将伪署荆襄节度使赵德諲遣使归朝，愿讨贼自效，乃以德諲为蔡州四面行营副都统，德諲遂以荆襄之兵属全忠。
现代文：五月初六，被伪授为荆襄节度使的蔡州贼将赵德醔派使者来表示归顺朝廷，愿意征讨贼军以效命立功，朝廷便任命赵德醔为蔡州四面行营副都统，赵德醔即率领荆襄的兵马归属于朱全忠。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, the Caizhou bandits, who had been falsely awarded as Jingxiang's festival envoys, sent an envoy to Zhao Dejun to express their submission to the imperial court and their willingness to solicit the bandit army to perform meritorious service. The imperial court then appointed Zhao Dejun as the deputy commander of the four sides of Caizhou. Zhao Dejun then led Jingxiang's soldiers and horses to belong to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：六月丁卯朔，以川贼王建大乱，剑南陈敬瑄告难，制以开府仪同三司、守司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、上柱国、扶阳郡开国公，食邑二千户韦昭度检校司徒、门下侍郎、平章事，兼成都尹，充剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事，兼两川招抚制置等使。
现代文：六月初一，因为川中贼将王建策动大叛乱，剑南的陈敬王宣向朝廷告急，决定任命开府仪同三司、暂署司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、上柱国、扶阳郡开国公、食邑二千户韦昭度为检校司徒、门下侍郎、平章政事，兼成都尹，充任剑南西川节度副大使、掌管节度使事务，兼西川招抚制置使等。
English: On the first day of June, Chen Jing Wang Xuan of Jian'nan made an urgent appeal to the imperial court, because Wang Jian was plotting a major rebellion, and it was decided to appoint the third secretary of Kaifu Yi, the temporary deputy of Jian Kuo, the subordinate of Jian Kuo, the subordinate of Jian Kuo, the deputy of Jian Kuo, the palace envoy of Tai Qing, the scholar of Hongwen Museum, the envoy of the treasury, the provincial governor of Shangzhu Guo, the provincial governor of Fuyang County, and Wei Zhaodu of the 2,000 households of Jian Kuo as the school inspector,

古文：蔡州行营奏大破贼于龙陂，进军以逼贼城。
现代文：蔡州行营奏报，在龙陂大破贼军，并进军逼近贼军占据的城池。
English: Caizhou campaign report, in Longyan great crackdown on the thief army, and march into the city occupied by the thief army.

古文：七月丙申朔，泽州刺史李罕之引太原之师攻河阳，为汴将丁会所败，退还高平。
现代文：七月初一，泽州刺史李罕之引导太原的军队进攻河阳，被汴州将领丁会击败，退兵返回高平。
English: On the first day of July, Li Hanzhi, the governor of Zhejiang Province, led the army of Taiyuan to attack Heyang. He was defeated by Ding Hui, the general of Zhangzhou Province, and returned to Gaoping.

古文：九月乙未，汴将硃珍败时溥之师于埇桥，遂陷宿州，自是溥婴城不敢复出。
现代文：九月初一，汴州将领朱珍在維桥击败时溥的军队，于是攻陷宿州，从此时溥据守城池不敢再出城。
English: On the first day of September, Zhu Zhen, the general of Zhangzhou, defeated the army of Shijiazhuang in Weiqiao, and then invaded Suzhou. From this time on, the besieged castle did not dare to leave the city.

古文：汴将胡元琮急攻蔡州。
现代文：汴州将领胡元琮急速攻打蔡州。
English: Zhangzhou general Hu Yuanjun quickly attacked Caizhou.

古文：十二月甲子朔，蔡州牙将申丛执秦宗权，挝折其足，乞降。诏中使宣谕，便以丛权知留后。
现代文：十二月初一，蔡州的偏将申丛逮捕秦宗权，打断了他的腿，任命申丛暂时代理蔡州留后。
English: On the first day of December, Qin Zongquan was arrested by Caizhou's warlord Shen Cong, who broke his leg and appointed Shen Cong as his temporary deputy to stay behind in Caizhou.

古文：比中使至，别将郭璠杀申丛，篡宗权，絷送汴州。
现代文：等中使到达蔡州，另一名偏将郭杀死申丛，把秦宗权抢到手，捆起来送到汴州。
English: After the envoys arrived in Caizhou, the other one killed Guo Shengzong, grabbed Qin Zongquan, tied him up and sent him to Cangzhou.

古文：蔡、申、光等州平。
现代文：蔡州、申州、光州等地获得平定。
English: Caizhou, Shenzhou, Gwangju and other places were pacified.

古文：诏赐蔡州行营兵士钱二十五万贯，令度支逐近支给。
现代文：皇上下诏赐给蔡州行营的士兵二十五万贯钱，命令度支使逐步支付给他们。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to give 250,000 yuan to the soldiers in the Caizhou encampment, and ordered the tribune to pay them gradually.

古文：是月，葬僖宗于靖陵。
现代文：当月，把僖宗安葬在靖陵。
English: That month, Emperor Taizong was buried in Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：龙纪元年春正月癸巳朔，上御武德殿受朝贺，宣制大赦，改元。
现代文：龙纪元年春，正月初一，皇上驾临武德殿接受朝贺。宣布敕命，实行大赦，改用新年号。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Dragon era, on the first day of the first month, the emperor arrived at the Wude Hall to receive morning greetings. He announced his death, implemented an amnesty, and changed to the New Year's number.

古文：中外文武臣僚进秩颁爵有差。
现代文：对朝内外文武大臣晋封官职，颁赐的爵位各不相同。
English: The titles of nobility bestowed on the ministers of literature and armed forces in and out of the imperial court who were promoted to high-ranking official posts vary.

古文：以剑南西川节度、两川招抚制置使韦昭度检校司空，为东都留守；以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰刘崇望本官同平章事；以刑部侍郎孙揆为京兆尹。
现代文：任命剑南西川节度使、两川招抚制置使韦昭度为检校司空，担任东都留守；任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰刘崇望以本职任同平章事；任命刑部侍郎孙揆为京兆尹。
English: He appointed Wei Zhaodu, the envoy to the Jian'nan West River Festival, and Wei Zhaodu, the envoy to the Two Rivers Recruitment and Placement Program, as the inspector of the school, and he stayed in Dongdu; he appointed Hanlin Scholar Zongyi, the attendant of the military department, and Liu Chongwang, the attendant of the intellectual department, as the official of the same level with their respective positions; he appointed the attendant of the criminal department, Sun Ying, as the Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：二月癸亥朔。
现代文：二月初一为癸亥日。
English: The first day of February is the day of the boar.

古文：己丑，汴州行军司马李璠监送逆贼秦宗权并妻赵氏以献，上御延喜门受俘，百僚称贺，以之徇市，告庙社，斩于独柳。赵氏笞死。
现代文：二月二十七日，汴州行军司马李监押解送逆贼秦宗权和他的妻子赵氏前往京师献俘，皇上驾临延喜门接受献俘，百官向皇上表示祝贺。把逆贼夫妇游街示众，祭告宗庙社稷以后，在独柳将秦宗权斩首，赵氏以笞刑处死。
English: On February 27th, Zhangzhou Marching Division Ma Lijun escorted and deported the rebel Qin Zongquan and his wife Zhao to Beijing to offer him as a prisoner of war. The emperor came to Yanxi Gate to accept the offer, and hundreds of officials congratulated the emperor. After the rebel couple were paraded through the streets and the Zong Temple was condemned, Qin Zongquan was beheaded in Duoliu, and Zhao was executed by beheading.

古文：初，自诸侯收长安，黄巢东出关，与宗权合。
现代文：当初，从诸将收复长安时起，黄巢向东出关，和秦宗权合流。
English: At first, from the time that Zhu Shou recovered Chang'an, Huang Chao went out of the pass to the east and joined Qin Zongquan.

古文：巢贼虽平，而宗权之凶徒大集，西至金、商、陕、虢，南极荆、襄，东过淮甸，北侵徐、兗、汴、郑，幅员数十州。
现代文：黄巢的贼军虽然被平定，秦宗权手下的凶徒却聚集得更多了，西至金州、商州、陕州、虢州，南达荆州、襄州，东过淮甸，北犯徐州、兖州、汴州、郑州，范围达到几十个州。
English: Although the bandits of Huang Chao were subdued, the thugs under the command of Qin Zongquan gathered more, reaching dozens of states from the west to Jinzhou, Shangzhou, Shaanxi, and Ganzhou, from the south to Jingzhou and Xiangzhou, from the east to Huai Dian, and from the north to Xuzhou, Ganzhou, Ganzhou, and Zhengzhou.

古文：五六年间，民无耕织，千室之邑，不存一二，岁既凶荒，皆脍人而食，丧乱之酷，未之前闻。
现代文：五六年之内，百姓失去耕种纺织的生计，一千户人家的集镇，留下来的人不到一两户。年成既然凶险饥荒，百姓便烹煮人肉而食，战乱的残酷，是过去从来没有听说过的。
English: Within five or six years, the people lost their livelihood of farming and weaving. A market town of a thousand households disappeared, and less than one or two families remained. In the year of the terrible famine, the people cooked human flesh and ate it. The cruelty of the war was unheard of in the past.

古文：宗权既平，而硃全忠连兵十万，吞噬河南，兗、郓、青、徐之间，血战不解，唐祚以至于亡。
现代文：秦宗权被平定以后，朱全忠却又聚集十万军队，吞并河南、兖州、郓州、青州、徐州之间地区，血战不能平息，唐朝的国运便走向灭亡。
English: After the subjugation of the Qin Dynasty, Zhu Quanzhong gathered another hundred thousand troops and annexed the regions between Henan, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Qingzhou and Xuzhou. The bloody war could not be quelled, and the national movement of the Tang Dynasty went to ruin.

古文：中书奏请以二月二十二日为嘉会节，从之。
现代文：中书省上奏，请求以二月二十二日为嘉会节，皇上允从。
English: The Ministry of Culture and Literature appealed to the emperor, requesting that February 22nd be designated as the Festival of Rejoicing, and the emperor agreed.

古文：三月壬辰朔，以右仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事孔纬守司空、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、领诸道盐铁转运等使，以右仆射、门下侍郎、集贤殿大学士杜让能为左仆射、监修国史、判度支，以中书侍郎、户部尚书、同平章事张浚为集贤殿大学士、判户部事。
现代文：三月初一，任命右仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事孔纬暂署司空、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，并担任诸道盐铁转运使，任命右仆射、门下侍郎、集贤殿大学士杜让能为左仆射、监修国史、暂署度支使，任命中书侍郎、户部尚书、同平章事张浚为集贤殿大学士，执掌户部事务。
English: On the first day of March, he appointed his right-hand man Asa, his manservant, and Tongping Zhangji Kongwei to be the temporary deputy governor, the envoy to the Taiqing Palace, the scholar of the Hongwu Museum, and the envoy of the Enrichment Fund, and to serve as the envoy of salt and iron transportation to all provinces; he appointed his right-hand man Asa, his manservant, and the scholar of the Jixian Palace, Du Jianren, to be his left-hand man Asa, to supervise the study of national history, and to serve as the temporary deputy envoy; and he appointed Chusho's

古文：四月壬戌朔，以宣武淮南等节度副大使、知节度事、管内营田观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅、兼侍中、扬州大都督府长史、汴州刺史、充蔡州四面行营都统、上柱国、沛郡王、食邑四千户硃全忠为检校太尉、中书令，进封东平王，仍赐赏军钱十万贯。
现代文：四月初一，任命宣武、淮南等军节度副大使、掌管节度使事务、管区内营田使、观察处置使、开府仪同三司、检校太傅，兼任侍中、扬州大都督府长史、汴州刺史、充任蔡州四面行营都统、上柱国、沛郡王、食邑四千户朱全忠为检校太尉、中书令，晋封为东平王，并赏赐军费十万贯钱。
English: On the first day of April, Zhu Quanzhong was appointed Vice-Ambassador of the Xuanwu and Huainan Armies for the Festival, in charge of the affairs of the Festival Envoy, Yingtian Envoy in the region, Observation and Disposition Envoy, Kaifu Yi and Three Departments, Inspection of Schools Taifu, concurrently served as Junior Chamberlain, Yangzhou Grand Governor, Yangzhou Governor, and served as Caizhou Four-sided Campaign Capital, Shangzhuo Province, Pei County King, and 4,000 households in the food village. Zhu Quanzhong was promoted to the rank of Inspector of Schools, promoted to the rank of Dong

古文：五月壬辰朔，汉州刺史王建陷成都府，迁陈敬瑄于雅州，建自称西川兵马留后。
现代文：五月初一，汉州刺史王建攻陷成都府，将陈敬王宣迁徙到雅州，王建自称为西川兵马留后。
English: On the first day of May, Wang Jian, a Han Chinese general, invaded Chengdu and moved Chen Jing Wang Xuan to Yazhou. Wang Jian claimed to be the heir of the West River soldiers and horses.

古文：复用田令孜为监军。
现代文：朝廷再次任用田令孜为监军。
English: The imperial court once again appointed Tian Lingzi as the supervisor.

古文：六月辛酉朔，邢洺节度使孟方立卒，三军推其弟洺州刺史迁为留后，太原李克用出军攻之。
现代文：六月初一，邢氵名节度使孟方立去世，全军将士推举他的弟弟氵名州刺史孟迁为邢氵名节度留后，太原李克用出兵攻打孟迁。
English: On the first day of June, after the death of Meng Fangli at the Festival of the Annunciation, and the whole army elected his brother, Meng Qian, as the Festival of the Annunciation, Taiyuan Li Ke used troops to attack Meng Qian.

古文：杭州刺史钱镠攻宣州，下之，擒刘浩，剖心以祭周宝。
现代文：杭州刺史钱霮进攻宣州，攻占了城池，擒获刘浩，将他的心挖出来祭奠周宝。
English: Hangzhou stabbing history Qian Ye attacked Xuanzhou, captured the city, captured Liu Hao, and dug out his heart to pay tribute to Zhou Bao.

古文：七月，诏于杭州置武胜军，以镠为本军防御观察等使。
现代文：七月，皇上下诏在杭州设置武胜军，任命钱霮为本军防御使、观察使。
English: In July, the emperor issued an imperial edict to set up a victorious army in Hangzhou and appointed Qian Ye as the army's defense envoy and observation envoy.

古文：十月己未朔，青州节度使王敬武卒。
现代文：十月初一，青州节度使王敬武去世。
English: On the first day of October, the Qingzhou Festival caused Wang Jingwu's death.

古文：制以特进、太子少师、博陵郡开国侯、食邑一千户崔安潜检校太傅、兼侍中、青州刺史、平卢军节度观察、押新罗渤海两蕃等使。
现代文：决定任命特进、太子少师、博陵郡开国侯、食邑一千户崔安潜任检校太傅，兼任侍中、青州刺史、平卢节度使、观察使、监管新罗渤海两蕃使。
English: It was decided to appoint the special envoy, the prince's young teacher, the founding lord of Boling County, and the 1,000 households of the food village of Cui'an as the school inspector, and also serve as the attendant, the Qingzhou scribe, the Pinglu festival envoy, the observation envoy, and the supervision of the new Luo and Bohai two envoys.

古文：青州三军以敬武子师范权知兵马事。
现代文：青州三军将士推举王敬武的儿子王师范暂时执掌兵马的事务。
English: Wang Jingwu's son, Wang Shifan, was elected by the generals of the three armies in Qingzhou to temporarily take charge of the affairs of the soldiers and horses.

古文：十一月己丑朔，将有事于圆丘。改御名曰晔。
现代文：十一月初一，皇上将要举行祭天大典，改名为李晔。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the emperor will hold a grand ceremony to celebrate the Day of Heaven and change his name to Li Xi.

古文：辛亥，上宿斋于武德殿，宰相百僚朝服于位。
现代文：十一月二十三日，皇上在武德殿住宿、奉斋，宰相率领百官身穿朝服各就位次。
English: On November 23rd, the emperor stayed at the Wude Hall and held a banquet. The prime minister led hundreds of officials in imperial robes to take their places.

古文：时两军中尉杨复恭及两枢密皆朝服侍上，太常博士钱珝、李绰等奏论之曰： 皇帝赴斋宫，内臣皆服朝服。
现代文：当时左军中尉杨复恭，以及两个枢密都穿着朝服在皇上身边伺候，太常博士钱王羽、李绰等上奏章议论这件事说 ：皇帝前往斋宫奉斋，皇宫的内臣都穿上了朝服。
English: At that time, Yang Fuqong, a lieutenant of the Left Army, and the two privy councillors were wearing imperial robes to serve the emperor. Dr. Qian Wangyu, Li Qiao, and others discussed the matter in a report, saying: The emperor went to the palace to have a meal, and the palace courtiers were dressed in imperial robes.

古文：臣检国朝故事及近代礼令，并无内官朝服助祭之文。
现代文：臣查阅本朝的旧例，以及近代的礼仪法令，并没有内官穿着朝服作为助祭的明文规定。
English: The vassal checked the old cases of this dynasty, as well as the modern etiquette laws and regulations, and there was no explicit provision for the clerk to wear a royal robe as a deacon.

古文：伏惟皇帝陛下承天御历，圣祚中兴，祗见宗祧，克陈大礼。
现代文：皇帝陛下承受了上天所赋予的统御天下的运数，国家福祚得以中兴，恭敬地拜见列祖列宗的神主，举行盛大的典礼。
English: His Majesty the Emperor received the number of years of good fortune bestowed by Heaven to rule over the world, and the national blessing was able to be extended, and he respectfully paid homage to the God of his ancestors and held a grand ceremony.

古文：皆禀高祖、太宗之成制，必循虞、夏、商、周之旧经，置冕服章，式遵彝宪。
现代文：这都是秉承了高祖、太宗既成的制度，必然遵循着虞、夏、商、周古老的典则，车饰冠冕、服装图案，其规格都要遵守仪礼律令。
English: These are all adhering to the established system of Gao Zu and Taizong, inevitably following the ancient rules of Yu, Xia, Shang and Zhou, car decoration crowns, clothing patterns, and their specifications must comply with the rules and regulations of ceremonies.

古文：礼院先准大礼使牒称得内侍省牒，要知内臣朝服品秩，礼院已准礼令报讫。
现代文：礼院先按照大礼使的公文所说，从内侍省的册籍中了解内臣的朝服、品阶的全部情况，礼院已按照礼法律令上报完毕。
English: According to the official document of the grand envoy, the etiquette institute first learned all the information about the court dress and rank of the vassal from the records of the Ministry of the Imperial Household, and the etiquette institute has completed the report in accordance with the etiquette decree.

古文：今参详近朝事例，若内官及诸卫将军必须制冠服，即各依所兼正官，随资品依令式服本官之服。
现代文：现在仔细考察近代的事例，如果宫廷的内官及各卫所的将军必须制作祭祀的冠冕服饰，就各自根据自己所兼任的正官，依照资格、品级，按律令的规定穿本官的朝服。
English: Now let's carefully examine modern cases. If the palace eunuchs and the generals of the imperial guards had to make ceremonial crowns, they would each wear the imperial robes of their respective offices according to their qualifications and ranks, and in accordance with the provisions of the ritsuryo.

古文：事存传听，且可俯从，然亦不分明著在礼令。
现代文：事实虽然只存在于传说、听闻之中，还是可以照着办理的，虽然并没有明确地记载在礼法律令上面。
English: Although the facts only exist in legends and hearsay, they can still be followed, although they are not clearly recorded in the Code of Etiquette.

古文：乞圣慈允臣所奏。 
现代文：请皇上允准我们的所奏。 
English: I ask the Emperor's permission to play our piece.

古文：状入，至晚不报。
现代文：奏折递上去之后，直到晚上还不见答复。
English: After the report was submitted, there was still no reply until the evening.

古文：钱珝又进状曰： 臣今日巳时进状，论内官冠服制度，未奉圣旨。
现代文：钱王羽又呈上奏章说： 臣今天于巳时进上了奏章，论述百官的冠服制度，没有接到圣旨的裁决。
English: Qian Wangyu also submitted a report, saying: "The minister submitted a report today at noon, discussing the crown and robe system for officials, but did not receive the verdict of the imperial edict.

古文：伏以陛下虔事郊禋，式遵彝范，凡关典礼，必守宪章。
现代文：因为陛下要虔诚地进行郊庙祭天大典，应当遵循典则规范，凡有关祀典礼仪的一切，必须遵守律令典章。
English: Because His Majesty wants to faithfully conduct the Suburban Temple Festival, he should follow the rules and regulations. Everything related to the worship ceremony must comply with the laws and regulations.

古文：今陛下行先王之大礼，而内臣遂服先王之法服。
现代文：现在陛下举行先王的盛大典礼，内官就应当穿用先王时代的礼服。
English: Now that His Majesty is holding the grand ceremony of the former king, the officials should wear the ceremonial dress of the former king's era.

古文：来日朝献大圣祖，臣赞导皇帝行事，若侍臣服章有违制度，是为非礼，上渎祖宗，臣期不奉敕。臣谬当圣代，叨备礼官，获正朝仪，死且不朽，脂膏泥滓，是所甘心。 
现代文：祭祀的日子奏献《大圣祖》庙乐，臣协助导引皇上进行祭祀，如果侍臣所穿的服饰违背了礼仪制度，就叫作 非礼 ，上有辱于列祖列宗，臣到时候是不能奉圣命行事的，臣谬当圣明的时代，勉强充任礼官，获得了匡正朝仪的殊荣，就是死了也是不朽的，把臣的脂膏涂地，也是甘心情愿的。 
English: On the day of the sacrifice, the temple music of the "Great Patriarch" was played, and the vassal assisted in guiding the emperor to perform the sacrifice. If the attire worn by the vassal violated the etiquette system, it was called indecent, it was humiliating to the ancestors and the ancestors, and the vassal could not act according to the holy life at that time. In the era of Shenming, the vassal was barely appointed as a etiquette officer, and won the honor of the upright court ceremony. Even if he died, he would be immortal, and he would be willing to smear his vassal with grease.

古文：状入，降硃书御札曰： 卿等所论至当，事可从权。勿以小瑕，遂妨大礼。 
现代文：奏章送入宫内以后，皇上用朱笔批下评语说 ：你们所分析的很恰当，但事情可以暂时照现在这样办，不要因为小小的缺点，就妨碍了盛大的祭典。 
English: After the score was sent to the Imperial Palace, the Emperor wrote a comment with a red pen, saying, "Your analysis is very appropriate, but things can be done as they are now for the time being. Don't let small shortcomings interfere with the grand festival."

古文：于是内四臣遂以法服侍祠。
现代文：于是由四个内官穿着礼服侍奉皇上奉行祭典。
English: As a result, the ceremony was performed by four eunuchs dressed in ceremonial robes and serving the emperor.

古文：甲寅，圆丘礼毕，御承天门，大赦。
现代文：十一月二十六日，祭天大典完毕，皇上驾临承天门，下诏大赦天下。
English: On November 26th, after the grand ceremony of the Festival of the Heavens, the emperor arrived at the Gate of Heaven and proclaimed a general amnesty to the world.

古文：十二月戊午，宰臣杜让能兼司空。
现代文：十二月初一，宰相杜让能兼任司空。
English: On the first day of December, Prime Minister Dujan Neng also assumed the post of Sikyong.

古文：大顺元年春正月戊子朔，御武德殿受朝贺。
现代文：大顺元年春，正月初一，皇上驾临武德殿接受百官朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, in the spring of the first year of the Great Shun, the emperor arrived at the Wude Hall to receive morning greetings from hundreds of officials.

古文：宰臣百僚上徽号曰圣文睿德光武弘孝皇帝，礼毕，大赦，改元大顺。
现代文：宰相率领百官向皇上敬献徽号为：圣文睿德光武弘孝皇帝。礼仪结束，皇上下诏大赦天下，改年号为大顺。
English: The prime minister led hundreds of officials to present the emblem to the emperor as follows: Emperor Shengwenrui Deguangwu Hongxiao. At the end of the ceremony, the emperor issued a general amnesty to the world, and the year name was changed to Dashun.

古文：二月丁巳，宰臣兼国子祭酒孔纬以孔子庙经兵火，有司释奠无所，请内外文臣自观察使、制使下及令佐，于本官料钱上缗抽十文，助修国学，从之。
现代文：二月初一，宰相兼国子祭酒孔纬因为孔子庙经过战火的破坏，官府没有在地方举行祭奠先师的典礼，请求朝廷内外的文臣，自观察使、制使以下，以及各县的食吏佐官，在本职的津贴钱中，每一千文抽取十文用于帮助修葺国子学，皇上允准。
English: On the first day of February, the Prime Minister and Guozhi's sacrificial wine, Kong Wei, because the Confucius Temple had been destroyed by the war, the government did not hold a ceremony to commemorate the forerunner in the local area. He asked the courtiers inside and outside the imperial court, from the observation envoy, the commanding envoy and below, as well as the food service officers in each county, to extract ten coins from every thousand coins of their allowance money to help repair Guozhi's study, with the approval of the emperor.

古文：宣武节度使硃全忠进位守中书令，加食邑千户，余如故。
现代文：宣武节度使朱全忠晋升品阶，署理中书令，加授食邑一千户，其余的职衔照旧。
English: At the Xuanwu Festival, Zhu Quanzhong was promoted to a higher grade, acting as a middle-ranking official, and was awarded 1,000 households of food villages. The rest of the titles remained the same.

古文：太原都将安金俊攻围邢州历年，城中食尽，邢洺观察使孟迁以城降，乃以孟迁之族归太原。
现代文：太原府都将安金俊进攻、包围邢州历时一年，城内粮食断绝，邢氵名观察使孟迁率城投降，便把孟迁全族迁归太原府。
English: Both Taiyuan and Anjinjun attacked and besieged Luzhou, which lasted for a year. The food supply in the city was cut off, and the observation of the eunuchs caused Meng Qian to lead the city to surrender, and then Meng Qian's whole family was moved back to Taiyuan.

古文：克用以大将安建为邢洺留后。
现代文：李克用派大将安建担任邢氵名留后。
English: Li Keqiang appointed General An Jian as his successor.

古文：三月丁亥朔，硃全忠上表： 关东籓镇，请除用朝廷名德为节度观察使。
现代文：三月初二，朱全忠奉上表章说： 关东的各藩镇，请任用朝廷有名望、有德行的大臣担任节度使、观察使。
English: On the second day of the third month, Zhu Quanzhong said: "All the provinces and towns in Guandong, please appoint famous and virtuous ministers from the imperial court to serve as festival envoys and observation envoys.

古文：如籓臣固位不受代，臣请以兵诛之。
现代文：如果有藩臣坚守本位而不接受他人取代的，臣请求派兵去诛灭他。
English: If there is a vassal who sticks to his position and does not accept others to replace him, the vassal requests that soldiers be sent to exterminate him.

古文：如王徽、裴璩、孔晦、崔安潜等皆缙绅名族，践历素高，宜用为徐郓青兗等道节度使。 
现代文：如王徽、裴璩、孔晦、崔安潜等，都是缙绅名族，资历一向很高，应该任作为徐州、郓州、青州、兖州等府道的节度使。 
English: For example, Wang Hui, Pei Xuan, Kong Yue, Cui Anqian, etc. are all Xizhen famous families, and their qualifications have always been very high. They should be appointed as festival envoys of Xuzhou, Zhangzhou, Qingzhou, Zhangzhou and other prefectures.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：昭义节度使李克修卒，太原帅克用之弟也，三军推克修弟克恭知留后事。
现代文：昭义军节度使李克修去世，他是太原府主帅李克用的弟弟，三军拥戴李克修的弟弟李克恭掌管昭义军节度留后事务。
English: He was the younger brother of Li Kegui, the commander of Taiyuan Prefecture, and the younger brother of Li Kegui, who was supported by the three armies. Li Kegong was in charge of the affairs of the Shouyi Army after the festival.

古文：四月丙辰朔，李克用遣大将安金俊率师攻云州。
现代文：四月初一，李克用派遣大将安金俊率军进攻云州。
English: On the first day of April, Li Ke used the opportunity to dispatch General An Jinjun and his army to attack Yunnan.

古文：赫连铎求援于幽州，李匡威出兵援之，战于蔚州，太原军大败，燕军执安金俊，献之于朝。
现代文：赫连铎向幽州求援，李匡威出兵救援云州，双方在蔚州交战，安金俊的太原军被打得大败，燕州的军队擒获了安金俊，将他献给朝廷。
English: Helianthus asked for help from Yuzhou, Li Kuangwei sent troops to rescue Yunnan, the two sides fought in Ulshu, An Jinjun's Taiyuan army was defeated, and the Yanzhou army captured An Jinjun and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：李匡威、赫连铎、硃全忠等上表： 请因沙陀败亡，臣与河北三镇及臣所镇汴滑河阳之兵平定太原，愿朝廷命重臣一人都总戎事。 
现代文：李匡威、赫连铎、朱全忠等奉上表章说： 请利用沙陀军战败逃跑的机会，臣等与河北三镇，以及臣等所管辖汴州、滑州、河阳的军队去平定太原，希望朝廷任命一名重臣统领这次军事行动。 
English: Li Kuangwei, Helianthus, Zhu Quanzhong and others presented the watch to the emperor and said: "Please take advantage of the opportunity of the defeat and escape of the Shatou Army. The ministers and the three towns of Hebei, as well as the troops of Zhangzhou, Nanzhou and Hebei under the jurisdiction of the ministers, should go to pacify Taiyuan. I hope that the imperial court will appoint a senior minister to lead this military operation."

古文：昭宗以太原于艰难时立兴复大功，心疑其事，下两省、御史台、尚书省四品已上官议。
现代文：昭宗因为太原军在朝廷遭逢艰难时立下了振兴朝廷恢复帝业的大功，心里对这件事有所疑虑，把事情下达到中书、门下两省、御史台、尚书省四品以上的官员中讨论。
English: Because the Taiyuan Army had made great contributions to the revitalization of the imperial court and the restoration of imperial business when the imperial court was in a difficult situation, Akimune had some doubts about this matter, and discussed the matter with more than four officials from Zhongshu, his two subordinate provinces, Gushidai, and Shangshu.

古文：唯党全忠者言其可伐，不可者十之七，宰臣杜让能、刘崇望深以为不可。
现代文：只有与朱全忠结成一党的人说太原军可以讨伐，认为不可以讨伐者占了十分之七，宰臣杜让能、刘崇望认为极不可以。
English: Only those who formed a party with Zhu Quanzhong said that the Taiyuan Army could fight, and those who thought it was impossible to fight accounted for seven out of ten. Vice-minister Du Zhanneng and Liu Chongwang thought it was extremely impossible.

古文：惟张浚议曰： 先朝再幸兴元，实沙陀之罪。比虑河北诸侯与之胶固，无以涤除。
现代文：只有张浚发表意见说： 先帝两次驾临兴元，实际上正是沙陀人的罪过，近来正忧虑河北地区的封疆大吏和沙陀军牢牢地勾结在一起，没有办法把他们分开。
English: Zhang Jun was the only one to express his opinion: The previous emperor's two visits to Xingyuan were actually the fault of the Shatou people. Recently, it is worrying that the great officials of the Hebei region and the Shatou army are firmly colluding, and there is no way to separate them.

古文：今两河大籓皆愿诛讨，不因其离贰而除之，是当断失断也。 孔纬曰： 浚言是也。 
现代文：现在两河地区的重要藩镇都愿意讨伐他，不趁他们分裂的这个机会除掉他，正是应当决断而不决断。 孔纬说 ：张浚的话是对的。 
English: Now all the important towns and villages in the Liuhe area are willing to fight against him, and it is exactly the right decision not to use the opportunity of their division to get rid of him.Kong Wei said: Zhang Jun's words are right.

古文：军容杨复恭曰： 先朝蒙犯霜露，播越草莽，七八年间，寝不安席，虽贼臣摇荡于外，亦由失制于中。
现代文：观军容使杨复恭说 ：先帝蒙受顶霜雪、冒风露之苦，流亡在外地的乡野，七八年当中，不能安眠于枕席，虽然是由于贼臣在外面鼓动、破坏，也由于朝中失去了控制。
English: Yang Fukyong, a military observer, said: The former emperor suffered from the worst frost, snow, wind and dew, and was exiled to the countryside in the outlying areas. During the seven or eight years, he could not sleep peacefully on the pillow, although it was due to the instigation and destruction of the vassals outside, and also due to the loss of control by the central government.

古文：陛下缵承，人心忻戴，不宜轻举干戈，为国生事。
现代文：陛下继承了大统，人心欣喜拥戴，不应当轻易发动战争，为国家滋生事端。
English: His Majesty has succeeded to the throne, and the people's hearts are rejoicing and supporting him. He should not easily start a war and cause trouble for the country.

古文：望优诏报全忠，且以柔服为辞。 
现代文：希望颁发优诏回复朱全忠，而且要用柔婉而能使他心悦诚服的辞令。 
English: It is hoped that Zhu Quanzhong will reply with a fine edict, and it is necessary to use words that are gentle and can make his heart happy.

古文：上然之。
现代文：皇上同意他的意见。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：全忠密遣浚之亲党赂浚，浚恃全忠之援，论奏不已，天子黾勉从之。
现代文：朱全忠暗中派遣张浚的亲信贿赂张浚，张浚依仗着朱全忠的后援，不停地上奏章申述。皇上勉强依从了他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong secretly sent Zhang Jun's cronies to bribe Zhang Quanzhong, and Zhang Quanzhong, relying on Zhu Quanzhong's support, kept filing appeals. The emperor reluctantly obeyed him.

古文：五月，制特进、中书侍郎、兵部尚书、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、上柱国、河间郡开国伯、食邑七百户张浚为太原四面行营兵马都统，京兆尹孙揆副之。以华州节度使韩建为北面行营招讨都虞候、供军等使；以宣武节度使硃全忠为太原东南面招讨使；成德军节度使王镕为太原东面招讨使；幽州节度使李匡威为太原北面招讨使，云州防御使赫连铎副之。
现代文：五月，决定由特进、中书侍郎、兵部尚书、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、上柱国、河间郡开国伯、食邑七百户张浚为太原四面行营兵马都统，以京兆尹孙揆任副都统；任命华州节度使韩建为北面行营招讨都虞候、供军使等；任命宣武军节度使朱全忠为太原东南面招讨使；任命成德军节度使王为太原东面招讨使；任命幽州节度使李匡威为太原北面招讨使，云州防御使赫连铎任副使。
English: In May, it was decided that Zhang Jun, who was a special envoy, the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the general secretary of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, Tongping Zhangji, the academician of Jixianden University, Shangzhu Guo, the founding governor of Kawama County, and the seven hundred households of the food village, would be appointed as the commander of the Taiyuan four-faced cavalry and infantry, with Jing Zhao and Yin Sunye as deputy commanders; Huazhou Festival was appointed to make Han Jian the commander of the north-facing cavalry and infantry, and the military envoy; Xuan

古文：丙午，潞州军乱，杀其帅李克恭。
现代文：五月二十一日，潞州军人发生动乱，杀死其主帅李克恭。
English: On May 21, soldiers in Zhangzhou rioted and killed their commander, Li Keqiang.

古文：监军使薛缋本函克恭首献之于朝，浚方起兵，朝廷称贺。
现代文：监军使薛缋本把李克恭的头颅装在木匣里献给朝廷，这时张浚刚刚起兵，朝廷向他祝贺。
English: The commander-in-chief, Xue Yibun, presented the head of Li Keqiang to the imperial court in a wooden box. At this time, Zhang Jun had just raised an army, and the imperial court congratulated him.

古文：壬子，都招讨使张浚、孙揆率诸策神军三千赴行营，昭宗御安喜门临送，诫誓之。
现代文：五月二十七日，都招讨使张浚、孙揆率领神策军各营的三千名士兵前往前线军营，昭宗驾临安喜门送行，向他们发布训诫和誓师的命令。
English: On May 27th, the three thousand soldiers of each battalion of the Shensha Army led by Zhang Jun and Sun Yat-sen were summoned to the front-line military camp, and Zhaozong drove to the Anxi Gate to see them off, and issued the order of exhortation and oath to them.

古文：六月乙卯，李克用大将权知邢洺兵马留后安建上表，请以三州归顺，遣中使往劳之。
现代文：六月初一，李克用的大将，暂署邢浚兵马留后安建奉上表章，请求以三个州归降朝廷，皇上派遣中使前去抚慰他。
English: On the first day of June, Li Ke used the general, temporarily signed the "Dredge Troops and Horses" to stay, and An Jian submitted to the imperial seal, requesting three states to surrender to the imperial court, and the emperor sent an envoy to comfort him.

古文：制以德州刺史、权知沧州兵马留后卢彦威检校尚书右仆射，兼沧州刺史、御史大夫，充义昌军节度、沧德观察处置等使。
现代文：决定任命德州刺史、暂署沧州兵马留后卢彦威任检校尚书右仆射，兼任沧州刺史、御史大夫，充任义昌军节度使、沧德观察处置使等。
English: It was decided to appoint Lu Yanwei as the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school.

古文：彦威，光启初逐其帅杨全玫，求旄节，朝廷以扈跸都将曹诚为沧德节度使，诚虽不至任，而彦威之请不行。
现代文：卢彦威在光启初年驱逐他的主帅杨全玫，请求朝廷赐予节旄，朝廷任命扈跸都将领曹诚担任沧德节度使，曹诚虽然没有到任，而卢彦威的请求也没有得到满足。
English: In the first year of Guangqi, Lu Yanwei expelled his coach Yang Quanmei and asked the court to grant him a ceremonial scepter. The court appointed the scepter bearer Cao Cheng to serve as the ceremonial scepter bearer. Although Cao Cheng did not take up the post, Lu Yanwei's request was not met.

古文：至是，王镕、罗弘信因张浚用兵，为彦威论请，故有斯授。
现代文：到这时，王、罗弘信借张浚起兵讨伐李克用的机会，替卢彦威陈奏他的请求，因而才有了这项任命。
English: At this time, Wang and Luo Hongxin took the opportunity of Zhang Jun raising an army to fight against Li Ke to play his request for Lu Yanwei, which led to this appointment.

古文：以京兆尹、行营兵马副招讨孙揆检校兵部尚书，兼潞州大都督府长史，充昭义节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：任命京兆尹、行营兵马副招讨孙揆任检校兵部尚书，兼任潞州大都督府长史，充任昭义军节度副大使，执掌节度使事务。
English: He appointed Jing Zhaoyun, deputy commander of the army and cavalry, to recruit Sun Yat-sen as the inspector of the school inspection of the military department, concurrently served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and served as the deputy ambassador of the Shouyijun Festival, in charge of the festival affairs.

古文：硃全忠遣大将葛从周率千骑入潞州，从周权充兵马留后。
现代文：张浚和各路军队在晋州会合，朱全忠挑选了三千名士兵作为张浚的亲军。秋，七月初一，朝廷的军队屯驻在阴地，太原军大将康君立率军队抵抗。
English: Zhang Jun and the various armies met in Jinzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong selected three thousand soldiers as Zhang Jun's pro-army. In the autumn, on the first day of July, the imperial army was stationed in Yinchi, and the Taiyuan army general Kang Junli led the army to resist.

古文：硃全忠奏已差兵士守潞州，请节度使孙揆赴镇。
现代文：朱全忠派遣大将葛从周率领一千名骑兵进入潞州，请节度使孙揆前往节制、镇守。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched General Ge Cong Zhou to lead a thousand cavalry into Ganzhou, and asked the governor to send Sun Yat-sen to control and defend the town.

古文：时中使韩归范押揆旌节、官告送至行营。
现代文：当时中使韩归范监送孙揆的旌旗、节旄、委任状到行营。
English: At that time, Han Guifan was sent by the Central Committee to supervise the delivery of Sun Yat-sen's banner, festival banner and commission letter to the camp.

古文：丙申，揆建节，率兵二千，自晋州赴镇昭义。
现代文：七月十二日，孙揆树立节度使的旌旗、节旄，率领两千名兵卒，从晋州前去镇守昭义军。
English: On July 12th, Sun Yat-sen set up the festival flag and festival banner, and led two thousand soldiers from Jinzhou to guard the Shao Yi Army.

古文：戊申，至长子县山谷中。太原骑将李存孝伏兵执揆与韩归范牙兵五百，俘送太原，余兵悉为存孝所杀。
现代文：七月二十四日，走到长子县的山谷中，太原军的骑将李存孝埋伏的军队擒获了孙揆、韩归范和五百名亲兵，押送到太原，其余的士兵全部遭到李存孝的杀害。
English: On July 24th, when they reached the valley in the county of the eldest son, the ambushed troops of Li Cunxiao, the cavalry commander of the Taiyuan Army, captured Sun Yat-sen, Han Kui-fan and five hundred of their own soldiers and escorted them to Taiyuan. The remaining soldiers were all killed by Li Cunxiao.

古文：太原将康君立率兵二万攻潞州。
现代文：太原军将领康君立率领两万名士兵攻打潞州。
English: The general of the Taiyuan Army, Kang Junli, led 20,000 soldiers to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：九月甲申，幽州、云州蕃、汉兵三万攻雁门，太原将李存信、薛阿檀击败之。
现代文：九月初一，幽州、云州的外族和汉族士兵共三万人进攻雁门关，太原军将领李存信、薛阿檀将他们击败。
English: On the first day of September, a total of 30,000 foreign and Han soldiers from Yuzhou and Yunnan attacked Yanmen Pass. Li Cunxin and Xue Adan, generals of the Taiyuan Army, defeated them.

古文：汴将葛从周弃上党，康君立入据之，克用以君立为泽潞兵马留后。
现代文：汴州将领葛从周放弃上党，康君立进据上党，李克用命康君立担任泽潞州兵马留后。
English: Zhangzhou general led Ge Zhou to give up the party, and Kangjunli to join the party. Li Ke used his order to appoint Kangjunli as the commander of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses of Zhejiang.

古文：十一月癸丑朔，太原将邢州刺史李存孝自恃擒孙揆功，合为昭义帅，怨克用授康君立。
现代文：十一月初一，太原军将领邢州刺史李存孝仗恃擒获孙揆的功劳，认为自己应当担任昭义军主帅，怨恨李克用把这个职位授予了康君立。
English: On the first day of November, Li Cunxiao, the general of the Taiyuan Army, who received the credit from Sun Yat-sen, thought that he should serve as the head of the Shouyi Army, and he resented Li Kegui for awarding this position to Kang Junli.

古文：存孝自晋州率行营兵归邢州，据城上表归朝，仍致书与张浚、王镕求援。
现代文：李存孝从晋州率领自己行营的士兵回到邢州，占据城池，奉上表章归顺朝廷，并写信给张浚、王，请求援助。
English: From Jinzhou, Li Cunxiao led his camped soldiers back to Zhangzhou, occupied the city, submitted to the imperial court, and wrote to Zhang Jun and Wang to request assistance.

古文：克用遣大将李存信、薛阿檀拒王师于阴地，三战三捷，由是河西鄜、夏、邠、岐之军渡河西归。
现代文：李克用派遣大将李存信、薛阿檀在阴地抗击朝廷的军队，三战三捷，因此江西节镇的州、夏州、州、岐州的军队渡过黄河返回西边。
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of generals Li Cunxin and Xue Atan to fight against the imperial army in the hinterland, and won three wars and three victories. Therefore, the armies of Jiangxi Jie Zhen, Xia Zhou, Zhou and Qizhou crossed the Yellow River and returned to the west.

古文：韩建以诸军保平阳，存信追之，建军又败，建退保绛州。
现代文：韩建率领各军守卫平阳，李存信追击他，韩建的军队又被击败，退守绛州。
English: Han Jian led the army to defend Pingyang, Li Cunxin chased him, and Han Jian's army was defeated and retreated to Zhangzhou.

古文：张浚以汴卒、禁军万人在晋州，存信攻之三日，相与谋曰： 张浚宰相，俘之无益，天子禁兵，不宜加害。
现代文：张浚率领汴州士卒、一万名禁军驻守晋州，李存信攻了晋州三天，和部下一起商量说： 张浚是个宰相，把他俘获了没有好处；天子的禁军，也不应该加害于他们。
English: Li Cunxin attacked Jinzhou for three days, and discussed with his subordinates: Zhang Jun is a prime minister, it is no good to capture him; Tianzi's forbidden army should not harm them.

古文：如得平阳，于我无利。 
现代文：如果占领了平阳，对我们也没有好处。 
English: If we occupy Pingyang, it will not be good for us.

古文：遂退舍五十里而军。
现代文：于是便退兵五十里驻扎下来。
English: As a result, he withdrew his troops fifty miles away and settled down.

古文：十二月壬午朔，张浚、韩建拔晋、绛遁去，李存信收晋、绛，大掠河中四郡。
现代文：十二月初一，张浚、韩建率军从晋州、绛州开拔逃走，李存信收复晋州、绛州，大肆抢劫河中四郡。
English: On the first day of December, Zhang Jun and Han Jian led the army to escape from Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, and Li Cunxin recovered Jinzhou and Zhangzhou, and looted four counties in Central Hebei.

古文：丙寅，制特进、中书侍郎、平章事、太原四面行营都统张浚可检校兵部尚书，兼鄂州刺史、御史大夫，充鄂岳观察使。
现代文：十二月初九，决定由特进、中书侍郎、平章政事、太原四面行营都统张浚署理检校兵部尚书，兼任鄂州刺史、御史大夫，充任鄂岳观察使。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month of the year, it was decided that the special envoy, the attendant of the Chinese book, the political affairs of Pingzhang, and the inspection and inspection department of the military department of Shangshu of Taiyuan would all be sent to the four sides of Taiyuan, and they would also serve as the Ezhou historian and the chief historian, and serve as the observer of Mount Etu.

古文：以开府仪同三司、守司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、鲁国公、食邑三千户、充诸道盐铁转运等使孔纬检校司徒，兼江陵尹、荆南节度观察处置使。
现代文：任命开府仪同三司、署理司徒、门下侍郎、同平章事、上柱国、鲁国公、食邑三千户、充任诸道盐铁转运使孔纬为检校司徒，兼任江陵尹、荆南节度使、观察处置使。
English: He appointed Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, acting Sito, subordinate Jiro, Tongping Zhangji, Shangzhuang Guo, Lu Guo Guo, three thousand households in food villages, and appointed Kong Wei as the school inspection Sito, and concurrently as the Gangneung Yin, Jingnan Festival Envoy, and Observation and Disposition Envoy.

古文：庚午，新除鄂岳观察使张浚责授连州刺史，新除荆南节度使孔纬责授均州刺史，并驰驿赴任。
现代文：十二月十九日，新被授予鄂岳观察使的张浚贬职为连州刺史，新被授予荆南节度使的孔纬贬职为均州刺史，同时由驿路驰赴任所任职。
English: On December 19th, Zhang Jun, who was newly awarded the observation post of Egyu, was demoted to the post of Lianzhou historian, and Kong Wei, who was newly awarded the post of Jingnan Festival envoy, was demoted to the post of Junzhou historian. At the same time, he was transferred to the post office from Qianluqi.

古文：太原军屯晋州，李克用遣中使韩归范还朝，因上表诉冤，言： 被贼臣张浚依倚硃全忠离间功臣，致削夺臣官爵。 
现代文：太原军队屯驻在晋州，李克用派中使韩归范返回朝廷，借此奉上表章申诉冤屈，说： 贼臣张浚依靠朱全忠离间功臣和朝廷的关系，以致削除了臣的官职、爵位。 
English: The Taiyuan army was stationed in Jinzhou, and Li Ke sent Han Guifan to return to the imperial court. He used this opportunity to submit a complaint to the emperor, saying: The rogue minister Zhang Jun relied on Zhu Quanzhong to sever the relationship between the meritorious minister and the imperial court, resulting in the removal of the minister's official post and peerage.

古文：朝廷欲令释憾，下群臣议其可否。左仆射韦昭度等议曰：
现代文：朝廷想让他消除怨恨，把他的奏章下达到群臣中议论，是肯定还是否定，左仆射韦昭度等议论说：
English: The imperial court wanted him to dispel the resentment and make his music reach the level of discussion among the courtiers, whether it was affirmative or negative. Zuo Wei Zhaodu said:

古文：赏功罚否，前圣之令猷；含垢匿瑕，百王之垂训。
现代文： 赏赐有功的，惩罚有罪的，是前代圣贤正确的谋略；容忍自己的屈辱，掩盖别人的缺点，是百世留下的教导。
English: Rewarding the meritorious and punishing the guilty is the correct strategy of the sages of the previous generation; tolerating one's own humiliation and covering up the shortcomings of others is the teaching left by the ages.

古文：是以雷解而羲文象德，网开而汤化归仁，用彼怀柔，式存彝范。
现代文：因此，雷霆化解，就产生了象征德行的伏羲八卦之文，网罟张开，商汤就归化于仁义，用德行和仁义来实行怀柔，留下了最高的典范。
English: Therefore, the resolution of the thunderbolt gave rise to the text of Fu Xi Ba Gua, a symbol of virtue, and when the net was opened, the broth was naturalized into benevolence and righteousness, and the virtue and benevolence were used to practice Huairou, leaving the highest example.

古文：上自轩农之代，下臻文武之朝，罔不允洽宽弘，以流霈泽。
现代文：上起轩辕、神农的时代，下至周文、周武的王朝，没有哪一个不是公允和洽、宽洪大量，以广施恩泽。
English: From the era of Xuan Zang and Shennong, down to the Zhouwen and Zhouwu dynasties, there is no one who is not fair and amicable, generous in quantity, and generous in grace.

古文：况国家德祖守成之日，宪宗致理之时，车轨一同，桑麻万里。
现代文：何况国家在德宗保存祖宗大业的日子，宪宗致力于治理天下的时候，车轨道路统一，桑麻一望无际。
English: Moreover, in the days when the country preserved the great cause of the ancestors under the Dezong, and when the Jianzong was committed to governing the world, the tracks and roads were unified, and there was no end to the mulberry trees.

古文：烛龙外野，悉在梯航；火鼠穷郊，咸归正朔。
现代文：神兽烛龙照耀着田野，登山航海都受到保护；鼠辈消灭于四境，一切重归于从头。
English: The divine beasts, the candlesticks and dragons shine on the fields, the mountaineering and sailing are all protected; the mice are eliminated in the four regions, and everything returns to the beginning.

古文：然犹王承宗拥兵镇、冀，诏范希朝讨之，仍岁无功，卒行赦宥。
现代文：然而还有王承宗在镇州、冀州拥兵自重，皇上下诏，令范希朝讨伐他，因连年都没有建树功勋，最后还是实行了赦免。
English: However, there was also Wang Chengzong in Zhenzhou and Jizhou, who supported the soldiers with self-respect, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Fan Xichang to fight him, because he had not done any meritorious deeds for years, and finally he was pardoned.

古文：而又硃滔以幽州之众，结田悦、李纳、王武俊之强，遣马燧等征之不克，旋又宽之。
现代文：继而又有朱滔率领着幽州的部众，和田悦、李纳、王武俊等强将勾结在一起，朝廷派遣马燧等人去征伐他们也没有成功，随后又宽赦了他们。
English: Subsequently, Zhu Tao led Yuzhou's subordinates, and strong generals such as Wada Yue, Li Na, and Wang Wujun colluded with each other. The court sent Ma Jun and others to conquer them, but they were not successful, and then pardoned them.

古文：以累圣之典谋睿哲，大朝之纪律文明，非不欲厉彼风驱，快其电扫。
现代文：曾在多部圣贤的经典中去求取智慧明哲，本朝纲纪律令的条文也记载得很清楚，并不是不想凌厉迅速地将他们驱除扫灭。
English: He had sought wisdom and sages in the classics of many sages, and the provisions of the disciplinary order of this dynasty were also clearly recorded. It was not that he did not want to expel them quickly and violently.

古文：然且考《春秋》之义，稽楚、郑之文，或退而许平，或服而更舍，存于旧史，载彼新书。
现代文：然而考查《春秋》的义旨，察核楚国、郑国的有关记载，他们也有时退让而允许议和，有时臣服又改变主意。这些事实都保存在旧史中，记载在新书内。
English: However, examining the meaning of "Spring and Autumn" and examining the relevant records of Chu and Zheng, they sometimes conceded and allowed peace talks, and sometimes surrendered and changed their minds. These facts are preserved in old history and recorded in the new book.

古文：李克用代漠强宗，阴山贵胤，呼吸而风云作气，指麾而草树成形。
现代文： 李克用是代漠的强族，阴山贵族的后裔，他的呼吸能够化为风云之气，他的指挥可以使草木成形。
English: Li Kegui is a descendant of a powerful clan in the desert, a descendant of the nobles of the gloomy mountains. His breath can turn into the wind and clouds, and his command can shape the grass and trees.

古文：仰天指心，誓献失訾之首；伏弢欧血，屡亲都护之营。
现代文：他仰天表明心迹，发誓要使自己对朝廷的奉献居于百官之首；身怀武器，费尽心血，屡次担任都护的官职。
English: Looking up to the heavens, he declared his intentions, vowing to place his dedication to the imperial court at the top of the list of officials; armed with weapons, he worked hard and repeatedly held the official post of the protector of the capital.

古文：所谓勇多上人，自匪穷来归我。
现代文：可以说，勇猛超过了上乘之人，本来就不是穷途末路才来归附我朝。
English: It can be said that it is not the end of the road to join the Ming Dynasty if one is braver than the best.

古文：及陛下圣考懿宗皇帝之朝，彭门失守，亲驱锐卒，首建殊功。
现代文：待到陛下的皇父懿宗皇帝时，彭门失守，他亲自督率精锐的士卒，首建特殊的功勋。
English: When his majesty's imperial father, Emperor Jianzong, lost control of Pengmen, he personally supervised the elite soldiers and was the first to build a special merit.

古文：而先帝即位之初，渚宫大扰，复提义旅，克静妖氛。
现代文：而且当先帝僖宗即位初年的时候，江陵的渚宫受到严重侵扰，他又带着义军扑灭了妖氛。
English: Moreover, when the former Emperor Shoson ascended the throne in the first year, the Nagisa Palace in Gangneung was seriously disturbed, and he took the rebel army to extinguish the demonic atmosphere.

古文：其后封豕长蛇，荐食上国，继以子朝之乱，皆因重耳之盟，保大朝之宗祧，垂中兴于简册。
现代文：后来如野猪、长蛇一般的贼军连续吞占国家的土地，接着又发生了王朝的内乱，都是借重于重耳的同盟，才保住了本朝的宗庙祭祀，在史册上记下了王室重又振兴的一笔。
English: Later, the bandits like wild boars and long snakes continuously occupied the country's land, and then the civil war of the dynasty occurred. It was all thanks to the alliance that was more important than the ear, that the ancestral temple of this dynasty was preserved, and the revival of the royal family was recorded in history.

古文：盖圣王之御天下也，有勋可书，有绩可载，宥过不忘于十代，念功岂止于一时。
现代文：大凡圣明的君王统治天下，总是有功勋可以书写，有业绩可以记载，十代之内的人都不会忘记要原谅他的过错，怀念有功的人难道仅仅只是一时么！
English: A great and holy king rules the world. He always has merits to be written about and achievements to be recorded. People within ten generations will not forget to forgive his mistakes. Is it only for a short time that we remember those who have meritorious deeds?

古文：天高听卑，请事斯语。
现代文：皇天虽高却要听取下情，希望能按照这句话去做。
English: Although the emperor is high, he has to listen to the situation, hoping to do according to this sentence.

古文：且四海之内，创磐犹殷，九贡之邦，纲条未理。
现代文：再说四海之内，创伤仍然很严重，接受万方贡品的邦国，纲纪条令还没有得到清理。
English: Furthermore, in the four seas, the trauma is still very serious, and the countries that accept tributes from all directions have not yet been cleared up.

古文：昨者遽起邠、岐之众，寻已退还；又征燕、蓟之师，倏闻内变。
现代文：不久前急速派出的州、岐州队伍，后来已经退了回来；又征调燕州、蓟州的军队，突然听说内部发生了变乱。
English: The troops from Shizhou and Qizhou, which were quickly dispatched not long ago, have since retreated; the troops from Yanzhou and Ganzhou have also been conscripted, and suddenly it was heard that there had been internal turmoil.

古文：出于饟馈失职，资扉绝供，致此投戈，是乖借箸。
现代文：这都是因为管理粮饷的官员失职，断绝了物资鞋履的供应，以致这次放下武器休战，这是有悖于为皇上筹划的谋略的。
English: This was all due to the negligence of the officials in charge of grain and grain, who cut off the supply of materials and shoes, resulting in the laying down of arms and truce, which was contrary to the strategy planned for the emperor.

古文：盖下计之未熟，非圣谋之不臧。
现代文：大概是因为臣下的谋划未能深思熟虑，并不是皇上的谋略不善。
English: Probably because the plans of his subjects were not well thought out, not because the emperor's plans were not good.

古文：傥宸断重离，天机间出，录兹成款，散彼师徒，虚其念旧之怀，待以如初之礼。
现代文：如果能够重新由皇上决断，天赋的灵性时有出现；录下它们，拟成条款，散发给李克用的那些将士们，勾起他们怀念旧恩的胸怀，像当初一样的对他们待之以礼。
English: If it were possible for the emperor to decide again, gifted spirits would appear from time to time; record them, draw up clauses, and distribute them to the soldiers used by Li Ke, arouse their nostalgia for the old grace, and treat them with respect as they did in the beginning.

古文：臣等所议，实以在斯。
现代文：臣等所议论的，实质就在这里。
English: This is the essence of what the ministers are talking about.

古文：抑又闻往者汉将赵充国欲因边境衰弱，出兵击之，于是魏相上书，画陈利害，且曰： 恃国家之大，矜人物之众，欲见威于敌者，谓之骄兵。
现代文： 又听说从前汉朝的将领赵充国，因为边境上敌人的力量很薄弱，想要出兵攻击敌人。这时候魏相向皇帝上书，分析、陈述利害关系，而且说 ：依仗着国家地域广大，凭借着人口物资众多，想要向敌人显示威风，这叫作骄兵。
English: It was also heard that Zhao Chongguo, a former general of the Han Dynasty, wanted to send troops to attack the enemy because the strength of the enemy on the border was very weak. At this time, Wei Xiang wrote a letter to the emperor, analyzing and stating the interests, and said: Relying on the vast territory of the country, relying on a large number of people and materials, he wanted to show his power to the enemy. This is called a proud soldier.

古文：兵骄者灭，非但人事，乃天道也。 
现代文：兵骄就会灭亡，这不仅仅是人事，也是自然的规律。 
English: Military arrogance will perish. This is not only a personnel matter, but also a law of nature.

古文：又曰： 臣不知此兵何名者也。 
现代文：他又说 ：我不知道这样的出兵有什么正当的名义。
English: He added: "I don't know how such a deployment can be justified.

古文：兵出无名，事乃不成，汉宣纳之，竟罢其伐。
现代文：出兵而没有正当的名义，事情是一定不能成功的。 汉宣帝采纳了他的意见，终于停止了这场征战。
English: Sending troops without a legitimate name, the matter is bound to fail. Emperor Han Xuan adopted his opinion and finally stopped the campaign.

古文：伏惟皇帝陛下鉴往古用师之难，采列圣迁善之美，恩加区宇，信及豚鱼，则臣等不胜恳愿。
现代文：希望皇帝陛下借鉴往古用兵的艰难，吸收先皇们改过迁善的美德，把恩德施加给全国，连鱼豕这样的贱类都能得到信义，这就是臣等极其恳切的愿望。
English: I hope that His Majesty the Emperor will learn from the hardships of using soldiers in the past, absorb the virtues of the emperors who reformed and reformed, and impose benevolence on the whole country, so that even such a lowly species as fish bait can be trusted. This is the earnest wish of the ministers.

古文：况今汴、魏犹艰，幽、定方困，纵遣之调发，岂能集事！
现代文： 何况现在汴州、魏州还很艰难，幽州、定州也正处于困顿之中，即使向他们征调、派遣，又怎么能使事情成功呢！
English: What's more, Zhangzhou and Weizhou are still in a very difficult situation, and Yuzhou and Dingzhou are also in a difficult situation. Even if they are transferred and dispatched, how can they make things successful?

古文：虚行号令，徒召寇雠，将以剿人，非唯辱国。
现代文：只是发出一些不能实行的号令，不过白白地招致仇敌、怨恨，如果用这些去劳累百姓，就不仅仅是辱国了。
English: It's just issuing some orders that can't be implemented, but causing enemies and resentment in vain. If you use these to wear down the people, it's not just a national humiliation.

古文：且黠斯举勤王之众，推效命之诚，未能虏骑独攻，所望汉兵同力。
现代文：再说黠戛斯族虽派遣救援朝廷的军队，表示为皇上效力用命的诚心，但不可能由胡人的骑兵单独进军一一一他们还指望汉族军队协同作战。
English: Moreover, although the Qajars dispatched troops to rescue the imperial court, expressing their sincerity to serve the emperor with their lives, it was impossible for the cavalry of the Hu people to march alone - they still expected the Han troops to fight together.

古文：令兹数镇，奔命不遑，难致济师，恐又生事。
现代文：让这几个镇的士卒疲于奔命都来不及，不仅难以达到援助师旅的目的，恐怕还会滋生事端。
English: It is not only difficult to achieve the purpose of the trip to help teachers, but it is also likely to cause trouble.

古文：谕其渐当暑热，非利戎旃，悉力颁沾，遣还蕃部。
现代文：应当告诉他们：现在天气渐当暑热，不利于北部严寒地区来的人，朝廷将以全力向他们施行恩泽，让他们的部队返回原地。
English: They should be told that the weather is getting hotter and hotter, which is not good for those who come from the cold regions in the north, and that the imperial court will do its best to reward them and let their troops return to their original places.

古文：重盈陈五郡之卒，益谨关防；王珙振两河之雄，更严旗鼓。
现代文：王重盈布列着五个郡的兵卒，使关塞更加谨慎；王珙振作两河的雄风，使军容更加严整。
English: Wang Chung Ying deployed soldiers from five counties to make the checkpoints more cautious; Wang Hui invigorated the vigor of the two rivers to make the military look more rigorous.

古文：然后奖其上表，哀以自陈，录彼前劳，责之后效。
现代文：然后勉励李克用上表，自陈乞求哀怜之情，记载他原先的功劳，责成他继续效命。
English: Then he encouraged Li Ke to use the above table to beg for pity from Chen, record his original merit, and order him to continue to serve.

古文：征神爵之往典，还日逐之故封。
现代文：征引汉宣帝神爵年间的旧典，赐还原来封给他的胡夷官职。
English: He conscripted old documents from the time of Emperor Xuan of Han and gave back the official post of Hui that had originally been given to him.

古文：谕其已斥王恭，不使更疑晋帝，凡百臣子，实切乃诚。
现代文：告诉他，已经斥退了张浚、孔纬这类人，使他对皇上不再有所疑忌，所有的臣子，应当切切实实地做到忠诚。
English: Tell him that you have already rejected people like Zhang Jun and Kong Wei, so that he will no longer have any doubts about the emperor. All courtiers should earnestly be loyal.

古文：其克用在身官爵，并请却还，仍依前编入属籍。
现代文：李克用在身的官职，希望全部赐还给他，仍然和原来一样，编入官吏的名籍。 
English: Li Ke used his official position and hopes that all of it will be given back to him, still the same as before, incorporated into the official register.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依从所奏。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎崔昭纬本官同平章事，御史中丞徐彦若为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎崔昭纬以本职任同平章事，御史中丞徐彦若任户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi and Hyobusu Chamberlain Choi Zhaowei were appointed to the same rank, and Goshi Junior Middle Officer Xu Yan was appointed to the same rank as Household Chamberlain and Chamberlain.

古文：尚书右仆射王徽卒，赠司空，谥曰贞。
现代文：尚书右仆射王徽去世，追赠为司空，追加谥号为贞。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Wanghui, died and was posthumously given the title of Siku, with the additional title of Zhen.

古文：二年春正月壬子朔，李克用急攻邢州。
现代文：大顺三年春，正月初一，李克用急攻邢州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Spring of Dashun, Li Ke used a sudden attack on Bozhou.

古文：李存考求援于王镕，镕出军援之，屯于尧山。
现代文：李存孝向王求援，王派兵去救援他，把军队驻扎在尧山。
English: Li Cunxiao appealed to the king for help. The king sent soldiers to rescue him and stationed the army in Shaoshan.

古文：克用自太原至，击败之，进围邢州。
现代文：李克用率军从太原来到，击败了王，进而围困邢州。
English: Li Ke arrived from Taiyuan with his army, defeated Wang, and then besieged Zhangzhou.

古文：司徒、门下侍郎、平章事杜让能进位太尉、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使领诸道盐铁转运等使。
现代文：司徒、门下侍郎、平章政事杜让能晋升为太尉、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，兼领诸道盐铁转运使。
English: Sito, his attendant, and Taira no Shoji Seiji Dujaneng were promoted to the rank of Taijo, Taiqing Palace Envoy, Kobunkwan University Scholar, Enzakuko Envoy, as well as leading the Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy.

古文：以中书侍郎、吏部尚书、平章事刘望为门下侍郎、监修国史、判度支事，工部侍郎、平章事崔昭纬判户部事。
现代文：任命中书侍郎、吏部尚书、平章政事刘崇望为门下侍郎、监修国史、署理度支使，由兵部侍郎、平章政事崔昭纬掌管户部事务。
English: He appointed Liu Chongwang, Chushushushijiro, Rikibu Shoshu, and Pingzhang Zengji, to be his subordinate jijiro, supervisor of national history, and acting deputy chief of staff, and Cui Zhaowei, Hyobusujiro and Pingzhang Zengji, to be in charge of household affairs.

古文：二月辛巳，李克用复检校太师、中书令、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度观察处置等使。
现代文：二月初一，李克用恢复检校太师、中书令、太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使、观察处置使的官职。
English: On the first day of February, Li Keqiang restored the official posts of the chief inspector of schools, the chief editor of the People's Daily, the chief editor of the People's Daily, the chief editor of the People's Daily, the chief editor of the People's Daily, the chief editor of the People's Daily, the chief editor of the People's Daily, the chief editor of the People's Daily, the chief editor of the People's Daily.

古文：时张浚、韩建兵败后，为太原将李存信等所追，至是方自含山逾王偓，出河清，达于河阳。
现代文：当时张浚、韩建兵败之后，被太原军的将领李存信等追击，这时候才经含山越过王屋山，出河清县到达河阳。
English: At that time, after Zhang Jun and Han Jian were defeated, they were chased by Li Cunxin, the general of the Taiyuan Army, and so on. It was only at this time that they crossed Wangya Mountain via Han Mountain and reached Heyang in Deheqing County.

古文：属河溢，无舟楫，建坏人卢舍，为木罂数百，方获渡，人多覆溺，休其徒于司徒庙。
现代文：时值黄河泛滥，没有船只，韩建便拆毁民房，做了几百个木桶，才得以渡河，但大多数人都翻下河淹死了，韩建让他的部下在司徒庙休息。
English: At a time when the Yellow River was flooded and there were no boats, Han Jian destroyed the houses and made hundreds of wooden barrels to cross the river. However, most people fell into the river and drowned. Han Jian let his men rest in the St. Peter's Temple.

古文：是役也，朝廷倚硃全忠及三镇兵。
现代文：这次战役，朝廷依靠着朱全忠和三个节镇的军队。
English: In this battle, the imperial court relied on Zhu Quanzhong and the troops of the three towns.

古文：全忠方连兵徐郓，乃求兵粮于镇、魏，全忠终不至行营。
现代文：朱全忠正和徐州、郓州合兵在一起，便向镇州、魏州要军粮，但朱全忠终究没有到军营中去。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was with soldiers from Xuzhou and Bozhou, and asked for military rations from Zhenzhou and Weizhou, but Zhu Quanzhong did not go to the military camp.

古文：镇、魏倚太原为扞蔽，如破太原郡，恐危镇、魏，王镕、罗弘信亦不出师。
现代文：镇州、魏州依靠太原李克用作为自己的屏藩。如果太原郡被攻破，恐怕会危及到镇州、魏州，所以王、罗弘信也不出兵。
English: Zhenzhou and Weizhou depended on Taiyuan, which Li Ke used as his own Ping County. If Taiyuan County was breached, it would probably endanger Zhenzhou and Weizhou, so Wang and Luo Hongxin did not send troops.

古文：唯邠、岐、华、鄜、夏乌合之众会晋州。
现代文：只有州、岐州、华州、鹿阝州、夏州的乌合之众会集在晋州。
English: Only the ragtag hordes of Zhou, Qizhou, Huazhou, Luhansk, and Xia would gather in Jinzhou.

古文：兵未交而孙揆擒，燕卒败，所以河西、岐下之师望风溃散，而浚、建至败。
现代文：双方的军队还没有交战，孙揆就被捉住了，燕州军失败，所以河西、岐下的军队也就望风溃败、逃散，而张浚、韩建也就归于失败。
English: The armies of the two sides had not yet engaged in battle, and Sun Yat-sen was captured, and the Yanzhou Army was defeated, so the armies of Hexi and Qizhi were defeated by the wind and fled, and Zhang Jun and Han Jian were defeated.

古文：全忠以镇、魏不助兵粮观望，遣庞师古将兵讨魏，陷十县，罗弘信乞盟，乃退。
现代文：朱全忠因为镇州、魏州不援助军粮而居中观望，派遣庞师古率军讨伐魏州，攻占了十个县。罗弘信请求议和，庞师古才退兵。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sat in the middle and watched because Zhenzhou and Weizhou did not provide military food aid. He sent Pang Shigu to lead the army to fight against Weizhou and captured ten counties. Luo Hongxin requested peace talks, and Pang Shigu finally withdrew.

古文：三月辛亥朔，以青州权知兵马留后王师节度观察、押新罗渤海两蕃等使。
现代文：棣州刺史张蟾被青州将领王师范击败。新授职为平卢节度使的崔安潜从棣州回到朝廷，再授为太子少师之职。三月初一，任命暂署青州兵马留后王师范为检校兵部尚书，兼任青州刺史、御史大夫，充任平卢军节度使、观察使、监押新罗渤海两蕃使等。
English: On the first day of March, he appointed the deputy commander of the Qingzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses, the late Wang Shifan, as the inspector of the military inspection department, concurrently serving as the Qingzhou inspector and the chief historian, and acting as the Pinglu military inspector, the observation envoy, and the warden of the two imperial envoys to Silla and the Bohai Sea.

古文：淮南节度孙儒为宣州观察使杨行密所杀。
现代文：淮南节度使孙儒被宣州观察使杨行密杀害。
English: The Huainan Festival caused Sun Ru to be killed by Yang Xingmi of Xuanzhou Observation.

古文：初，行密扬州失守，据宣州，孙儒以兵攻围三年。
现代文：当初，杨行密扬州失守，占据了宣州，孙儒率军对他攻打、围困了三年。
English: At first, Yang Xing lost control of Myan Prefecture and occupied Xuan Prefecture. Sun Ru led the army to attack and besiege him for three years.

古文：是春，淮南大饥，军中疫疠死者十三四。
现代文：这年春天，淮南发生大饥荒，军中的士卒患传染病而死的占十之三四。
English: In the spring of that year, a great famine occurred in Huainan. Thirty-four out of ten soldiers died of infectious diseases.

古文：是月，孙儒亦病，为帐下所执，降行密。
现代文：当月，孙儒也患病，被部下抓了起来，投降了杨行密。
English: That month, Sun Ru also fell ill, was caught by his subordinates, and surrendered to Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密乃并孙儒之众，复据广陵。
现代文：杨行密便合并了孙儒的部下，重新占据了扬州。
English: Yang Xingmi then merged with Sun Ru's subordinates and reoccupied Yangzhou.

古文：六月，王镕出军援李存孝，克用大举讨镇州。
现代文：六月，王出兵增援李存孝，李克用派兵大举讨伐镇州。
English: In June, Wang sent troops to reinforce Li Cunxiao, and Li Ke sent troops to fight against Zhenzhou on a large scale.

古文：七月，太原军出井陉，屯于常山镇，大掠镇、赵、深诸郡。
现代文：七月，太原军由井陉出兵，屯驻在常山镇，大肆劫掠镇州、赵州、深州各郡。
English: In July, the Taiyuan Army dispatched troops from Jingye, stationed in Changshan Town, and plundered the counties of Zhenzhou, Zhaozhou, and Shenzhou.

古文：幽州节度使李匡威自率步骑三万援王镕。
现代文：幽州节度使李匡威亲自率领三万名步骑兵增援王。
English: At the Yuzhou Festival, Li Kuangwei personally led 30,000 infantry and cavalry to reinforce Wang.

古文：八月，克用班师。
现代文：八月，李克用班师。
English: In August, Li Ke became a teacher.

古文：九月丁未朔。
现代文：九月，初一为丁未日。
English: September 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：乙卯，天子赐左军中尉杨复恭几杖，以大将军致仕。
现代文：九月初九，天子赐给左军中尉杨复恭几杖，令其以大将军职衔告老退休。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9

古文：复恭怒，称病不受诏。
现代文：杨复恭发怒，称说有病而不接受诏书。
English: Yang Fuxiong became angry and said that he was ill and would not accept the edict.

古文：十月丁丑朔。
现代文：十月，初一为丁丑日。
English: In October, the first day of the new year is Dingxia Day.

古文：甲申，天威军使李顺节率禁兵讨杨复恭，复恭假子玉山军使杨守信以兵拒之，列阵于昌化里。
现代文：十月初八，天威军使李顺节率领禁军讨伐杨复恭，杨复恭的养子玉山军使杨守信率军进行抵抗，在昌化里列成战阵。
English: On the eighth day of October, the Tianwei Army sent Li Shunjie to lead the forbidden army to fight against Yang Fukong. Yang Fukong's adopted son, the Yushan Army, sent Yang Shouxin to lead the army to resist and formed a battle line in Changhua.

古文：昭宗登延喜楼，陈兵自卫以俟变。
现代文：昭宗登上延喜楼，布置士兵自卫以等待局势的变化。
English: Shozong boarded the Yanxi Tower and arranged soldiers to defend themselves while waiting for the situation to change.

古文：相持至晚，不战而退。
现代文：双方相持到晚上，不战而退。
English: Both sides held out into the evening and withdrew without a fight.

古文：是夜，守信乃拥其众卫复恭出京师，且战且行，出通化门，由七盘路之商州，又令义兒张绾为后殿。
现代文：这天夜里，杨守信便带着他的部下护卫着杨复恭离开京师，边打边走，出了通化门，经由七盘这条路去商州。杨守信又命令义子张绾作为殿后。
English: That night, Yang Shouxin took his men and escorted Yang Fuqiong away from Beijing Division. They went out of Tonghua Gate and went to Shangzhou via Qipan Road. Yang Shouxin also ordered his son Zhang Xuan to be the queen.

古文：永安都头安权追及绾，擒之而还。
现代文：永安都的头领安权追上了张绾，把他捉住而返回。
English: Anquan, the leader of Yong'an, caught up with Zhang Jun, caught him and returned.

古文：十一月，硃全忠上表，请移时溥节镇。
现代文：十一月，朱全忠奉上表章，请求调换时溥的节镇职务。
English: In November, Zhu Quanzhong was presented with a badge and asked to be transferred to the position of the festival town.

古文：是月，汴军陷宿州，乃授溥太子太师。
现代文：当月，汴州军攻陷宿州，于是授予时溥太子太师之职。
English: In the same month, the Zhangzhou Army captured Suzhou, and then conferred the position of Daishi to the Prince of Zhangzhou.

古文：溥将刘知俊降汴军。
现代文：时溥的部将刘知俊投降了汴州军。
English: Liu Zhijun, the commander of Jishu, surrendered to the Zhangzhou Army.

古文：镇州王镕、幽州李匡威复谋攻定州以分其地，王处存求援于太原。
现代文：镇州王、幽州李匡威再次谋划进攻定州以瓜分其土地，王处存向太原李克用求援。
English: The king of Zhenzhou and Yuzhou, Li Kuangwei, once again planned to attack Dingzhou in order to divide up its land. The king's office was located in Taiyuan to ask Li Kegui for help.

古文：十二月丙子朔，以光禄大夫、门下侍郎、右仆射、平章事、监修国史、判度支、上柱国、彭城县开国男刘崇望检校司空、同平章事，兼徐州刺史，充武宁军节度、徐宿观察制置使。
现代文：十二月初一，任命光禄大夫、门下侍郎、右仆射、平章政事、监修国史、署理度支使、上柱国、彭城县开国男刘崇望为检校司空、同平章事，兼任徐州刺史，充任宁武军节度使、徐宿观察处置使。
English: On the first day of December, he appointed Dr. Guanglu, his subordinate attendant, his right-hand man, Pingzhang Zhengji, the supervisor of the national history, and the deputy governor, and Liu Chongwang, the founder of Shangzhuang Province and Pengcheng County, as the inspector of the school, Tongping Zhengji, concurrently serving as the governor of Xuzhou Province, and serving as the Ningwu Military Festival and the observation and disposition of Xuzhuang.

古文：时李顺节恃恩恣横，出入以兵仗自随，两军中尉刘景宣、西门君遂惧其窥图非望。
现代文：当时李顺节仗恃着皇上的恩宠恣意横行，出入都以兵卒甲仗跟随自己，两军中尉刘景宜、西门君遂害怕他有非分窥伺的图谋。
English: At that time, Li Shunjie took advantage of the emperor's favor to run amok, and went in and out with soldiers following him. The two army lieutenants, Liu Jingyi and Ximen Jun, were afraid that he was spying on them.

古文：丁亥，两中尉传诏召顺节，顺节以甲士三百自随，至银台门，门司传诏止从者。
现代文：十二月十一日，两军中尉传下诏令召见李顺节，李顺节带着三百名甲士跟随在自己后面。走到银台门时，掌门官传下诏令不许跟随的人入内。
English: On December 11th, the lieutenants of the two armies issued an edict summoning Li Shunjie. Li Shunjie followed behind with three hundred knights. When he reached the Silver Gate, the head of the gate issued an edict forbidding anyone who followed him to enter.

古文：两中尉在仗舍邀顺节，坐次，令部将嗣光审斫顺节，头随剑落。
现代文：两军中尉在陈放甲仗的屋子迎候李顺节，落座以后，令部将嗣光审斩李顺节，头颅随剑而落。
English: The lieutenants of the two armies waited for Li Shunjie in the house where Chen Hanzhong fought. After he was seated, the commander of the order, He Guangxian, beheaded Li Shunjie, and his head fell with the sword.

古文：其部下知顺节死，大噪出延喜门。
现代文：李顺节的部下知道他死了，大声鼓噪着出了延喜门。
English: Li Shunjie's subordinates knew that he was dead and stormed out of the Yanxi Gate.

古文：是日，天威、捧日、登封三都乱，剽永宁里，至晚方定。
现代文：这天，天威都、捧日都、登封都三支部队发生动乱，抢掠永宁里，到晚上才安定下来。
English: On this day, three troops from Tianweidu, Hupehdu and Dengfengdu rioted, looting Yongningli, and only settled down in the evening.

古文：户部尚书郑延昌为中书侍郎、平章事、判度支。
现代文：以户部尚书郑延昌担任中书侍郎、平章政事，执掌度支事。
English: Zheng Yanchang, who held the title of Shangshu of the Household Department, served as the attendant of the middle secretary, Pingzhang of the government, and was in charge of the supporting affairs.

古文：景福元年春正月丙午朔，上御武德殿受朝贺，大赦，改元景福。
现代文：景福元年春，正月初一，皇上驾临武德殿接受朝贺，大赦天下，改年号为景福。
English: In the spring of the first year of Gingfu, on the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor came to the Wude Hall to receive morning greetings, granted amnesty to the world, and changed the year name to Gingfu.

古文：凤翔李茂贞、邠州王行瑜、华州韩建、同州王行约、秦州李茂庄等上表疏兴元杨守亮纳叛臣杨复恭，请同出本军讨伐，兼自备供军粮料，不取给于度支，只请加茂贞山南招讨使名。
现代文：凤翔的李茂贞、州的王行瑜、华州的韩建、同州的王行约、秦州的李茂庄等上表指出：兴元杨守亮接纳叛臣杨复恭，请求共同派遣本部军马讨伐，并自行准备供给军用的粮草，不向度支司支取，只要求加授李茂贞山南招讨使的名义。
English: Fengxiang's Li Maozhen, State's Wang Xingyu, Huazhou's Han Jian, State's Wang Xingyao, Qin State's Li Maozhuang, etc. The above table pointed out: Xingyuan's Yang Shouliang received the traitor Yang Fuqiong, requested to jointly send the headquarters' army and horses to fight, and prepared to supply the grain and grass for military use on his own. He did not withdraw it from the provincial branch secretary, but only requested to award Li Maozhen the name of Shannan Recruiting Envoy.

古文：内臣皆不可其奏，昭宗亦以茂贞得山南之后有问鼎之志，诏久之不下。
现代文：内臣宦官都不同意他们的奏章，昭宗也认为李茂贞取得山南之后会有窥伺朝廷的野心，很久不颁发诏书。
English: The vassals and eunuchs did not agree with their imperial rescript, and Shōzong also thought that Li Maozhen would have ambitions to spy on the imperial court after acquiring Shannan, and would not issue an imperial rescript for a long time.

古文：茂贞怒，与王行瑜不俟进止，发兵攻兴元。
现代文：李茂贞发怒，和王行瑜一起，不等诏令下还是不下，就发兵进攻兴元。
English: Li Maozhen was enraged and, together with Wang Xingyu, sent troops to attack Xingyuan without waiting for the imperial decree to be issued.

古文：累请招讨之命，兼与宰相杜让能、中尉西门君遂书，词语诟詈，凌蔑王室，昭宗心不能容。
现代文：李茂贞多次请求发布授予招讨使的命令，又给宰相杜让能、中尉西门君遂写信，语句中有指责谩骂的话，凌辱轻蔑王室，昭宗心里不能容忍。
English: Li Maozhen repeatedly requested the issuance of an order to grant a summoning envoy, and then wrote to the Prime Minister Du Zhenneng and Lieutenant Ximen Jun. There were words of accusation and abuse in the statement, insults and contempt for the royal family, and Zhaozong could not tolerate it in his heart.

古文：二月丙子朔。
现代文：二月初一为丙子日。
English: The first day of February is Cixi Day.

古文：庚寅，太原、易定之兵合势攻镇州，王镕复告难于幽州，李匡威率步骑三万赴之。
现代文：二月十五日，太原、易定的军队合力攻打镇州，王再次向幽州告急，李匡威率领三万名步骑兵前往。
English: On February 15, the armies of Taiyuan and Yiding joined forces to attack Zhenzhou. Wang once again rushed to Yuzhou, and Li Kuangwei led 30,000 infantry cavalry to the scene.

古文：时太原之众军于常山镇，易定之众军坚固镇，燕、赵之卒分拒之。
现代文：当时太原的军队驻扎在常山镇，易定的队伍驻扎在坚固镇，燕州、赵州的士卒分兵抵抗他们。
English: At that time, Taiyuan's army was stationed in Changshan Town, Yi Ding's team was stationed in Jenggu Town, and soldiers from Yanzhou and Zhaozhou resisted them.

古文：三月，克用、处存敛军而退。
现代文：三月，李克用、王处存收兵而退。
English: In March, Li Ke and Wang Shicun withdrew from the battlefield.

古文：四月乙亥，左军中尉西门君遂杀天威军使贾德晟，时德晟与李顺节俱掌天威军，顺节死，中尉恶德晟，诬奏杀之。
现代文：四月初二，左军中尉西门君遂杀死天威军使贾德晟，当时贾德晟和李顺节都执掌天威军。李顺节死后，西门君遂憎恶贾德晟，以诬陷之辞上奏，杀了他。
English: On the second day of the first month of April, the lieutenant of the Left Army, Ximen Jun, killed the envoy of the Tianwei Army, Jia Dejun. At that time, both Jia Dejun and Li Shunjie were in charge of the Tianwei Army. After the death of Li Shunjie, Ximen Jun hated Jia Dejun and killed him with the words of frame-up.

古文：是日，德晟部下千余骑出奔凤翔，自是岐军益盛。
现代文：这天，贾德晟部下的一千多名骑兵出奔到凤翔，从此以后岐州军队更加强大。
English: On this day, more than a thousand cavalrymen under the command of Jia Dejun fled to Fengxiang. Since then, the Qizhou army has become more powerful.

古文：五月甲辰，制以河南尹张全义检校司徒、同平章事，兼孟州刺史，充河阳三城节度、孟怀泽观察等使。
现代文：五月初一，决定任命河南尹张全义为检校司徒、同平章事，兼任孟州刺史，充任河阳三城节度使、孟州怀州泽州观察使。
English: On the first day of May, it was decided to appoint Yin Zhang Quanyi of Henan Province as a school inspector, Tongping official, concurrently serving as a historian of Mengzhou, acting as the festival envoy of the three cities of Heyang, and the observation envoy of Mengzhou, Waizhou and Zezhou.

古文：七月，燕、赵之卒合势援邢州，太原大将李存信率军拒于尧山，王镕大败而还。
现代文：七月，燕州、赵州的士卒合力增援邢州，太原军大将李存信率军在尧山抵抗，王被打得大败而回。
English: In July, soldiers from Yanzhou and Zhaozhou joined forces to reinforce Zhangzhou. General Li Cunxin of the Taiyuan Army led the army to resist in Shaoshan. Wang was defeated and returned.

古文：十一月辛丑，凤翔、邠宁之众攻兴元府，陷之。
现代文：十一月初一，凤翔、宁的军队进攻兴元府，攻陷该城。
English: On the first day of November, Fengxiang and Ning's army attacked Xingyuanfu and captured the city.

古文：山南西道节度使杨守亮与前左军中尉杨复恭、判官李巨川突围而遁，将奔太原。
现代文：山南西道节度使杨守亮和前左军中尉杨复恭、判官李巨川突围逃跑，将去投奔太原。
English: Yang Shouliang, former lieutenant of the Leftist Army Yang Fookong, and judge Li Juchuan broke out of the encirclement and fled to Taiyuan.

古文：李茂贞表其子继密权知兴元府事。
现代文：李茂贞表示由他的儿子李继密暂时掌管兴元府事务。
English: Li Maozhen said that his son, Li Jimi, would temporarily take charge of the affairs of the Xingyuan government.

古文：十二月辛未朔，华州节度使韩建奏于乾元县遇兴元溃散兵士，击败之。
现代文：十二月初一，华州节度使韩建奏报说，在乾元县遇到兴元府溃散的士兵，击败了他们。
English: On the first day of December, the Huazhou Festival made Han Jiansuo report that he met the soldiers of the disintegrated Xingyuan Prefecture in Qianyuan County and defeated them.

古文：其杨守亮、杨复恭并已处斩讫，皆传首京师。
现代文：其中杨守亮、杨复恭都已被斩首，行刑完毕，均将头颅传送到京师。
English: Among them, Yang Shouliang and Yang Fuqiong have been beheaded, and after the execution, their heads will be sent to Beijing.

古文：二年春正月辛丑朔，制以权知剑南东川兵马留后顾彦晖检校尚书右仆射，兼梓州刺史、御史大夫，充剑南东川节度观察等使。
现代文：景福二年春，正月初一，决定任命暂署剑南东川兵马留后的顾彦晖为检校尚书右仆射，兼任梓州刺史、御史大夫，充任剑南东川节度使、观察使。
English: In the spring of the second year of Gingfu, on the first day of the first month of the year, it was decided to appoint Gu Yanqi, who had temporarily signed for the soldiers and horses of the East River of Jiannan, as the inspector of the school, and also served as the secretary of the history of Zizhou and the secretary of the history, and served as the secretary of the festival of the East River of Jiannan and the observer.

古文：时王建连年攻彦晖，李茂贞欲与建争东川，故表请彦晖正授旄钺，示修好也。
现代文：当时王建连年进攻顾彦晖，李茂贞想要和王建争夺东川，因此上表请求正式授予顾彦晖节旄斧钺，表示和他修好。
English: At that time, Wang Jianlian attacked Gu Yanyuan, and Li Maozhen wanted to compete with Wang Jian for the East River. Therefore, the above request was officially granted to Gu Yanyuan, indicating that he was friendly with him.

古文：二月庚午朔，太原李克用以兵攻镇州，师出井陉，王镕惧，再求救于幽州。
现代文：二月初一，太原李克用率军进攻镇州，军队到达井陉，王害怕，再次向幽州求救。
English: On the first day of February, Taiyuan Li Ke led the army to attack Zhenzhou. The army reached Jingyao. Wang was afraid and once again asked Yuzhou for help.

古文：甲申，李匡威复来赴援，太原之军还邢州。
现代文：二月十五日，李匡威再次前来增援王，太原的军队回到邢州。
English: On February 15, Li Kuangwei once again came to reinforce Wang, and Taiyuan's army returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：三月庚子，制以捧日都头陈珮为广州刺史、岭南东道节度使，扈跸都头曹诚为黔州刺史、黔中节度使，耀德都头李鋋为润州刺史、镇海军节度使，宣威都头孙惟晟为江陵尹、荆南节度使，并加特进、同平章事。
现代文：三月初一，决定任命捧日都头陈为广州刺史、岭南东道节度使；任命扈跸都头曹诚为黔州刺史、黔中节度使；任命耀德都头李钅延为润州刺史、镇海军节度使；任命宣威都头孙惟晟为江陵尹、荆南节度使，均加授特进、同平章事的职衔。
English: On the first day of March, it was decided to appoint Chen, the head of Hupeh, as the chief historian of Guangzhou and the chief historian of the host city of Lingnan; Cao Cheng, the head of Hupeh, as the chief historian of Luzhou and the chief historian of Luzhong; Li Qianyan, the head of Yaode, as the chief historian of Renzhou and the chief historian of the town navy; and Sun Weizhen, the head of Xuanwei, as the chief historian of Jiangling and the chief historian of Jingnan, all of which were given the titles of special promotion and equal rank.

古文：各令赴镇，并落军权。
现代文：命他们各自前往节镇任职，全部削除军权。
English: They were each ordered to go to the festival town to serve, and all military power was removed.

古文：时朝议以茂贞傲侮王命，武臣难制，欲用杜让能及亲王典禁兵，故罢五将之权，兼以平章事悦其心。
现代文：当时朝臣们的看法，认为李茂贞傲视、轻侮皇上的命令，统兵的武将难以驾驭。想要任用杜让能和亲王统率禁军，所以革去了五名禁军将领的兵权，让他们兼任平章政事，使他们心里高兴。
English: At that time, the courtiers thought that Li Maozhen was arrogant and disdainful of the emperor's orders, and that the generals of the imperial guard were difficult to control. In order to appoint Du Jiangneng and the prince to lead the imperial guard, he dismissed the military power of five imperial guard generals, and let them concurrently serve in the political affairs of Pingzhang, which made them happy.

古文：太尉杜让能册拜，加食邑至六千户。
现代文：太尉杜让能册封授职，将食邑增加到六千户。
English: Captain Du Jiangneng was appointed to the post, and increased the number of food villages to six thousand.

古文：是月，幽州节度使李匡威弟匡筹据幽州，自称留后，以符追行营兵，兵皆还幽州。
现代文：当月，幽州节度使李匡威的弟弟李匡筹占据幽州，自称留后，用兵符追回出征各营的士兵，士兵们都返回了幽州。
English: That month, the Yuzhou Festival made Li Kuangwei's younger brother Li Kuangchong occupy Yuzhou, claiming to stay behind, and using military insignia to chase back the soldiers of each battalion. The soldiers all returned to Yuzhou.

古文：匡威既无归路，遣判官李贞抱入奏，请朝觐。
现代文：李匡威既然没有了退路，就派判官李贞抱到京师去上奏朝廷，请求朝见皇上。
English: Since there was no way out for Li Kuangwei, he sent the judge Li Zhenbao to Beijing to appeal to the imperial court and request an audience with the emperor.

古文：王镕感匡威援助之惠，乃筑第于恆州，迎匡威处之。
现代文：王感谢李匡威曾经援救、帮助自己之恩，便在恒州建造了一座府第迎来李匡威住在那里。
English: Wang thanked Li Kuangwei for rescuing and helping him, and built a mansion in Hengzhou to welcome Li Kuangwei to live there.

古文：四月己巳，汴将王重师、牛存节陷徐州，节度使时溥举家自燔而死。
现代文：四月初一，汴州将领李重师、牛存节攻陷徐州，节度使时溥全家自焚而死。
English: On the first day of April, the Zhangzhou generals Li Chongshi and Niu Cunjie invaded and occupied Xuzhou, and the siege led to the self-immolation of the whole family.

古文：硃全忠遣将庞师古守徐州。
现代文：朱全忠派部将庞师古镇守徐州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched the Pang Division to guard the ancient town of Xuzhou.

古文：六月丁酉朔。
现代文：六月初一为丁酉日。
English: The first day of June is Ding Xi Day.

古文：乙卯，幽州节度使李匡威谋害王镕而夺其帅，恆州三军攻匡威，杀之。
现代文：六月十九日，幽州节度使李匡威阴谋杀害王而夺取他主帅的地位，恒州三军进攻李匡威，把他杀掉了。
English: On June 19th, the Yuzhou Festival caused Li Kuangwei to conspire to kill the king and seize his position as commander-in-chief. The three armies of Hengzhou attacked Li Kuangwei and killed him.

古文：戊午，制太尉、门下侍郎、平章事、晋国公杜让能加食邑至九千户。
现代文：六月二十二日，决定把太尉、门下侍郎、平章政事、晋国公杜让能的食邑增加到九千户。
English: On June 22nd, it was decided to increase the number of households receiving food from Taijun, his attendants, Taira no Sho Seiji, and Jin no Kuni no Dujan to 9,000.

古文：门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平间事崔昭纬进阶光禄大夫，中书侍郎、平章事郑延昌兼刑部尚书，并加食邑至千户。
现代文：门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章政事崔昭纬晋升阶官光禄大夫，中书侍郎、平章政事郑延昌兼任刑部尚书，并将食邑增加到一千户。
English: His disciple Choi Zhaowei was promoted to the rank of doctor of Guanglu, while Choi Yanchang, his disciple's attendant, official of the Ministry of Justice, and political officer of the Ministry of Justice, was promoted to the rank of doctor of Guanglu, and concurrently served as the official of the Ministry of Justice, and increased the number of restaurants to one thousand.

古文：以祠部郎中、知制诰陆扆为中书舍人，仍前翰林学士。
现代文：任命祠部郎中、知制诰陆为中书舍人，仍担任翰林学士。
English: Appointed the middle son of the ancestral hall, Zhizhe Xinglu, as the person in charge of Chinese literature, and still served as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：幽州节度使李匡筹遣使檄王镕，讯杀匡威之罪。
现代文：幽州节度使李匡筹派使者传令给王，质问他杀害李匡威的罪责。
English: At the Yuzhou Festival, Li Kuang sent an envoy to Wang to question him about his guilt in the murder of Li Kuangwei.

古文：二籓结怨，硃全忠遣判官韦震使幽州和解之。
现代文：两员藩将之间结下了仇怨，朱全忠派遣判官韦震前往幽州，令李匡筹与他和解。
English: A grudge was forged between the two feudal lords, and Zhu Quanzhong sent the judge Wei Zhen to Yuzhou to make Li Kuangqiao reconcile with him.

古文：七月，李克用兴兵攻镇州，败王镕军于平山。
现代文：七月，李克用起兵进攻镇州，在平山击败了王的军队。
English: In July, Li Ke used his troops to attack Zhenzhou and defeated Wang's army in Pingshan.

古文：镕惧，乞盟，请以兵粮助攻邢州，许之，克用遂旋军襄国。
现代文：王害怕，乞求缔结盟好，请求用兵卒和粮草帮助他进攻邢州，李克用允许了他，便令军队凯旋，返回襄阳。
English: Wang was afraid, begged for an alliance, and asked for soldiers and grain to help him attack Zhangzhou. Li Kegui allowed him, and the army made a triumphant return to Xiangyang.

古文：癸未，制以凤翔陇州节度使、检校太尉、中书令、凤翔尹、上柱国、岐王、食邑四千五百户李茂贞为兴元尹、山南西道节度等使。
现代文：七月十七日，决定任命凤翔陇州节度使、检校太尉、中书令、凤翔尹、上柱国、岐王、食邑四千五百户李茂贞为兴元尹、山南西道节度使等。
English: On July 17th, it was decided to appoint Feng Xiang, Bozhou Festival Delegate, Inspector of Schools, Chinese Calligraphy, Feng Xiangyin, Shangzhuang, Qi Wang, and 4500 households in Shiyou as Xingyuanyin, Shannan West Road Festival Delegate, etc.

古文：以中书侍郎、同平章事徐彦若检校尚书左仆射、同平章事，兼凤翔尹，充凤翔陇州节度使。
现代文：任命中书侍郎、同平章事徐彦若为检校尚书左仆射、同平章事，兼凤翔尹，充任凤翔陇州节度使。
English: Appointed the middle school secretary, Tongping Zhangji Xu Yan, if he is the school inspector Shangshu Zuofu, Tongping Zhangji, and Fengxiang Yin, he will serve as the Fengxiang Bozhou Festival envoy.

古文：时茂贞恃兵求兼领山南节度，昭宗久之不行，茂贞表章不逊，深诋时政，上不能容，将加兵问罪，故以彦若代之。
现代文：当时李茂贞仗恃兵力，要求兼任山南节度使，昭宗很久都不颁发任命的诏书，李茂贞上奏的表章很不恭敬，大肆诋毁时政，皇上不能容忍，准备起兵向他问罪，因此以徐彦若取代他。
English: At that time, Li Maozhen fought against the troops and demanded to serve concurrently as the Shannan Festival envoy. Zhaozong did not issue the appointment decree for a long time. Li Maozhen's appearance was very disrespectful and defamed the current government. The emperor could not tolerate it and prepared to raise an army to question him. Therefore, he replaced him with Xu Yanruo.

古文：八月丙申朔，以嗣覃王为京西招讨使，神策大将军李钅岁副之。
现代文：八月初一，任命嗣覃王为京西招讨使、神策大将军李钅岁任招讨副使。
English: On the first day of August, he appointed King Tsugue as the Beijing and Western China recruiting envoy, and General Li Yunyi as the deputy recruiting envoy.

古文：九月丙寅朔，以武胜军防御使钱镠为镇海军节度、浙江西道观察处置等使，仍移镇海军额于杭州。
现代文：九月初一，任命武胜军防御使钱霮为镇海军节度使、浙江西道观察处置使等，并把镇海军节镇的治所迁移到杭州。
English: On the first day of September, Qian Ye was appointed as the naval festival envoy for the defense of the Wu Sheng Army and the western Zhejiang observation and disposal envoy, and the administrative center of the naval festival town was moved to Hangzhou.

古文：乙亥，覃王率扈驾五十四军进攻岐阳，屯于兴平。
现代文：九月初十，覃王率领扈从皇帝车驾的五十四军进攻岐阳，屯驻在兴平。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, Shao Wang led the 54th Army, which was driven by the emperor, to attack Qiyang and stationed in Xingping.

古文：李茂贞以兵逆战，屯于盭厔。
现代文：李茂贞率军迎战，屯驻在銩稨。
English: Li Maozhen led the army to meet the battle and stationed in Tong.

古文：壬午，岐军进迫兴平，王师自溃。
现代文：九月十七日，岐阳的李茂贞军进逼兴平，朝廷的军队不战而自溃。
English: On September 17th, Li Maozhen's army from Qiyang marched into Xingping, forcing the imperial army to retreat without a fight.

古文：茂贞乘胜逼京师，进屯三桥。
现代文：李茂贞乘胜逼近京师，进驻于三桥。
English: Li Maozhen took advantage of the victory to approach the capital division and stationed in Sanqiao.

古文：甲申，昭宗御安福门，斩观军容使西门君遂、内枢密使李周潼，遣中使赐茂贞诏，令收兵归镇。
现代文：九月十九日，昭宗驾临安福门，将观军容使西门君遂、内枢密使李周潼斩首，派中使向李茂贞颁赐诏书，令他收兵回归本镇。
English: On September 19th, Zhaozong arrived at the Anfu Gate, dispatched troops to observe the situation, and then dispatched the envoy Xiamen Jun, the envoy Li Zhouqi beheaded, and sent the envoy to Li Maozhen to issue an imperial edict, ordering him to withdraw his troops and return to the town.

古文：茂贞陈兵临皋驿，数宰臣杜让能之罪，请诛之。
现代文：李茂贞把军队布列在临皋驿，一条条地列举宰臣杜让能的罪行，请求将他处死。
English: Li Maozhen deployed the army in Linyi, enumerated the crimes of the aide-de-camp Du Jiangneng, and requested that he be put to death.

古文：制贬太尉、平章事、晋国公杜让能为雷州司户。
现代文：决定将太尉、平章政事、晋国公杜让能贬职为雷州司户。
English: It was decided to demote Taijun, Pingzhang Zhengji and Jin Guo Gong Dujaneng to the position of Leizhou steward.

古文：十月乙未，赐杜让能自尽，其弟户部侍郎弘徽坐让能赐死。
现代文：十月初一，赐杜让能自尽，他的弟弟、户部侍郎杜弘徽因受杜让能株连也被赐死。
English: On the first day of October, Du Jiangneng committed suicide, and his younger brother, Du Honghui, a chamberlain of the household, was also sentenced to death because of Du Jiangneng.

古文：十一月，制以凤翔节度使李茂贞守中书令，进封秦王，兼兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
现代文：十一月，决定任命凤翔陇州节度使李茂贞代理中书令，晋封为秦王，兼兴元尹、山南西道节度使。
English: In November, it was decided to appoint Feng Xiang as the representative of Li Maozhen of the Bozhou Festival, and he was promoted to the Qin King, as well as the representative of Xingyuan Yin and the West Shannan Festival.

古文：邠州节度使王行瑜赐号 尚父 ，赐铁券。
现代文：州节度使王行瑜赐以 尚父 之号，赐给铁券。
English: The state festival made Wang Xingyu bestow the title of "Grandfather" and give him iron coupons.

古文：以门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章事、监修国史崔昭纬兼尚书左仆射，充诸道盐铁转运等使；以特进、行右仆射韦昭度为司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、弘文馆大学士、太清宫使、延资库使。
现代文：任命门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章政事、监修国史崔昭纬兼任尚书左仆射，充任诸道盐铁转运使；任命特进、署理右仆射韦昭度为司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、弘文馆大学士、太清宫使、延资库使。
English: He appointed his servant-servant, cadre Shangshu, Taira Zhang Zhengji, and overseer Guo Shi Cui Zhaowei, who also served as Shangshu's left-hand servant, Sha, and served as the salt and iron transportation envoy to all provinces; he appointed his special envoy and acting right-hand servant, Sha Wei Zhaodou, as his secretary, servant-servant, Tongping Zhengji, scholar of the Hongwen Library, envoy to the Taiqing Palace, and envoy to the Yangtze Reservoir.

古文：中书侍郎、刑部尚书、平章事、判度支郑延昌罢知政事，守尚书左仆射，以病求罢故也。
现代文：命中书侍郎、刑部尚书、平章政事、署理度支使郑延昌停止执掌政务，署理尚书左仆射，这是他因病而自己请求罢免的。
English: Zheng Yanchang, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Zheng Yanchang, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Zheng Yanchang, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Zheng Yanchang, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Zheng Yanchang, Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Zheng Yanchang, Zheng Yanchang, Zheng Yanchang, Zheng Yanchang

古文：以新除凤翔节度使徐彦若复知政事。
现代文：任命新被授予凤翔节度使的徐彦若重新执掌政务。
English: The appointment of Xu Yanru, who was newly awarded the title of Fengxiang, to take charge of government affairs.

古文：户部侍郎、判户部事王搏本官同平章事。
现代文：户部侍郎、暂掌户部事务的王抟以本职任同平章事。
English: Wang Xuan, the steward of the household department and the temporary head of the household department affairs, was appointed to the post on an equal footing.

古文：乾宁元年春正月乙丑朔，上御武德殿受朝，宣制大赦，改元乾宁。
现代文：乾宁元年，正月初一，皇上驾临武德殿接受朝贺，宣布大赦令，改年号为乾宁。
English: In the first year of Qianning, on the first day of the first month, the emperor came to the Wude Hall to receive morning greetings, announced an amnesty order, and changed the year name to Qianning.

古文：凤翔李茂贞来朝，大陈兵卫，献妓女三十人，宴之内殿，数日还籓。
现代文：凤翔李茂贞来朝见皇上，大肆陈列兵卫，献上歌舞伎三十人，皇上在内殿宴请他，几天以后才回到藩镇。
English: Fengxiang Li Maozhen came to the imperial court to see the emperor. He made a large display of soldiers and presented 30 kabuki actors. The emperor invited him to a banquet in the inner hall, and he only returned to the town a few days later.

古文：时茂贞有山南梁、洋、兴、凤、岐、陇、秦、泾、原等十五余郡，甲兵雄盛，凌弱王室，颇有问鼎之志。
现代文：当时李茂贞据有山南道的梁州、洋州、兴州、凤州、岐州、陇州、秦州、泾州、原州等十五个以上州郡，甲兵勇猛强大，欺凌、压迫王室，颇有窃取皇权的意图。
English: At that time, Li Maozhen had more than 15 counties and prefectures, including Liangzhou, Yangzhou, Xingzhou, Fengzhou, Qizhou, Quzhou, Qinzhou, Quzhou, and Wonzhou in Shannan Province. He was a brave and powerful warrior, bullied and oppressed the royal family, and had the intention to steal the imperial power.

古文：二月，汴人大败兗、郓之军于东阿，瑄、瑾势蹙，求援于太原，李克用出师援之。
现代文：二月，汴州的军队在东阿把兖州、郓州的军队打得大败，王宣州、瑾州的形势危急，向太原求救，李克用派兵去救援。
English: In February, the troops of Ganzhou defeated the troops of Ganzhou and Ganzhou in Dong'a. Wang Xuanzhou and Ganzhou were in a critical situation, and appealed to Taiyuan for help. Li Keji sent troops to rescue them.

古文：三月甲子朔，太原军攻邢州，陷之，执其逆将李存孝，槛送太原，裂之。
现代文：三月初一，太原军进攻邢州，攻占该城，擒获太原军叛将李存孝，用囚车押送到太原，用车裂的刑罚处死了他。
English: On the first day of March, the Taiyuan army attacked Zhangzhou, captured the city, captured the Taiyuan army traitor Li Cunxiao, escorted him to Taiyuan in a prisoner car, and executed him with the punishment of cracking the car.

古文：克用以大将马师素权知邢洺团练事。
现代文：李克用派大将马师素暂时执掌邢氵名团练使的事务。
English: Li Ke used the dispatch of General Ma Shizuo to temporarily take charge of the affairs of the Shennai Rehearsal Group.

古文：五月，蔡贼孙儒部将刘建锋攻陷潭州，自称湖南节度使。
现代文：五月，蔡州贼将孙儒部下的将领刘建锋攻破潭州，自称为湖南节度使。
English: In May, Liu Jianfeng, a general under Sun's Confucianism department, was defeated by Caizhou bandits in Tanzhou, and he called himself the envoy of the Hunan Festival.

古文：以翰林学士、中书舍人陆扆为户部侍郎、知制诰，充职。
现代文：任命翰林学士、中书舍人陆为户部侍郎、知制诰，暂时充任的官职。
English: He appointed Hanlin Bachelors and Zhongshushe Renlu as household attendants and intellectuals to temporarily fill the official positions.

古文：六月壬辰，李克用攻陷云州，执大同防御使赫连铎，以其牙将薛志勤守云中。
现代文：六月初一，李克用攻陷云州，俘获大同防御使赫连铎，派他的偏将薛志勤镇守云中。
English: On the first day of June, Li Ke used the opportunity to invade Yunnan and capture Datong's defense envoy Hereng Yao. He sent his general Xue Zhiqin to guard Yunnan.

古文：十月庚寅，以中书侍郎、平章事王搏为湖南节度使。
现代文：十月初一，任命中书侍郎、平章政事王抟为湖南节度使。
English: On the first day of October, Wang Xi, the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the political secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the Hunan Festival envoy.

古文：以翰林学士承旨、礼部尚书、知制诰李磎为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命翰林学士承旨、礼部侍郎、知制诰李石奚为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: He appointed Hanlin Scholar Zong Ji, Reibu Attendant, and Chisei Shogun Li Shijie as Household Attendant and Tongping Clerk.

古文：宣制之日，水部郎中、知制诰刘崇鲁出班而泣，言磎奸邪，党附内官，不可居辅弼之地，由是制命不行。
现代文：宣布决定的那一天，知制诰刘崇鲁走出班列哭着说李石奚是一个奸邪之人，他勾结、依附宦官，不可居于宰相的地位。因而这道制命没有执行。
English: On the day that the decision was announced, Liu Chonglu, the chief eunuch, walked out of the procession crying that Li Shijun was a traitor, that he had colluded with and depended on eunuchs, and that he should not occupy the position of prime minister. As a result, the order was not carried out.

古文：戊申，制御史中丞崔胤为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：十月十九日，决定由御史中丞崔胤担任兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: On October 19th, it was decided that Choi In, the Vice-Minister of History, would serve as the Hyobushirou and Tongpei Shoji.

古文：是月，李克用以太原之众进攻幽州。
现代文：当月，李克用派太原军进攻幽州。
English: That month, Li Ke sent the Taiyuan Army to attack Yuzhou.

古文：十二月，幽州节度使李匡筹溃围而遁。
现代文：十二月，幽州节度使李匡筹突围逃跑。
English: In December, the Yuzhou Festival made Li Kuangqiao break through the encirclement and escape.

古文：克用陷幽州，以李匡威故将刘仁恭为幽州兵为留后。
现代文：李克用攻陷幽州，任命李匡威原来的部将刘仁恭担任幽州兵马留后。
English: Li Ke used the fall of Yuzhou to appoint Liu Rengong, Li Kuangwei's former subordinate, as the commander of the Yuzhou troops.

古文：是月，李匡筹南奔赴关，至景城，为沧州节度使卢彦威所杀。
现代文：当月，李匡筹向南逃跑，前往关塞，到景城时，被沧州节度使卢彦威杀害。
English: That month, Li Kuang-che fled south to Guan Sai, and when he arrived at Jingcheng, he was killed by Lu Yanwei, the governor of Cangzhou.

古文：二年春正月己未朔，河中节度使、检校太师、中书令、河中尹、上柱国、琅邪郡王王重盈卒，三军立重荣子行军司马珂知留后事。
现代文：乾宁二年春，正月初一，河中节度使、检校太师、中书令、河中尹、上柱国、琅笽郡王王重盈去世，三军拥立王重荣的儿子、行军司马王珂执掌节度留后事务。
English: In the spring of the second year of Qianning, on the first day of the first month of the year, Wang Chouying, the envoy to the Mid-Autumn Festival, the chief inspector of schools, the editor of the mid-autumn festival, Yin of the Mid-Autumn Festival, the governor of Shangzhu Province, and Wang Chouying of Qianning County passed away. Wang Chouying, the son of Wang Chou Rong, the commander of the three armies, and Wang Ke, the marshal, took charge of the post-festival affairs.

古文：二月己丑朔，王重盈子陕州节度使珙、绛州刺史瑶举兵讨王珂，兼上章诉珂冒姓，非重荣子。
现代文：二月初一，王重盈的儿子，陕西节度使王珙、绛州刺史王瑶起兵讨伐王珂，并上表控告王珂假冒姓王，并不是王重荣的儿子。
English: On the first day of February, Wang Chung-ying's son, the Shaanxi Jiedu, sent Wang Yao and Wang Yao, the governor of Zhangzhou, to fight Wang Ke. Wang Yao accused Wang Ke of using a false surname, Wang, and was not Wang Chung-ying's son.

古文：珂、珙争为蒲帅，上遣中使慰劳。
现代文：王珂、王珙争着要当蒲州主帅，皇上派中使去劝慰他们。
English: Wang Ke and Wang Yao vied with each other to become the general of Bushu, and the emperor sent an envoy to console them.

古文：三月，制以中书侍郎、同平章事崔胤检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、河中尹，充河中节度、晋绛慈隰观察处置等使。
现代文：三月，决定任命中书侍郎、同平章事崔胤为检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、河中尹，充任河中节度使、晋绛慈隰等州观察处置使。
English: In March, it was decided to appoint Choi Yan, the chancellor of the middle school, and Tongping Zhangji, the secretary of the middle school, as the inspector of the middle school, Shang Shul, the secretary of the middle school, and Tongping Zhangji, the secretary of the middle school, as the inspector of the middle school, and Tongping Zhangji, the secretary of the middle school, as the inspector of the middle school, and Tongping Zhangji, the secretary of the middle school, as the inspector of the middle school, and Tongping Zhangji, the secretary of the middle school, as the inspector of the middle school.

古文：浙东节度使董昌僭号称罗平国，年称大圣，用婺州刺史蒋瑰为宰相，仍伪署官员。
现代文：浙东节度使董昌冒用国号，称为罗平国，年号称为大圣，任命婺州刺史蒋腢为宰相，并非法地任命其他官职。
English: The East Zhejiang Festival made Dong Chang falsely use the country name, called Luoping Country, and the year name called Dasheng, appointed Zhangzhou Zishi Jiang Wei as prime minister, and illegally appointed other official positions.

古文：镇海军节度使钱镠请以本军进讨，从之。
现代文：镇海军节度使钱霮请求率领本部军队进行讨伐，皇上允从。
English: The town's naval festival made Qian Ye request to lead the headquarters army to carry out the crusade, and the emperor agreed.

古文：以翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰赵光逢为尚书左丞，依前充职。
现代文：任命翰林学士承旨、兵部侍郎、知制诰赵光逢为尚书左丞，仍为暂时充任的职务。
English: The appointment of Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, Hyobu Attendant, and Zhizhi Deacon Zhao Guangfeng as Shang Shuzhanzhong, is still a temporary position.

古文：太原李克用上章言王重荣有功于国，其子珂宜承袭，请赐节钺。
现代文：太原李克用奉上表章，说王重荣对国家有功，他的儿子王珂应当承袭父职，请求赐给他节仗斧钺。
English: Taiyuan Li Ke used the above seal to say that Wang Chung Rong was of great service to the country, and that his son Wang Ke should inherit his father's position, and requested that he be given a ceremonial axe.

古文：邠州王行瑜、凤翔李茂贞、华州韩建各上章，言珂螟蛉，不宜缵袭，请以王珂为陕州，王珙为河中。
现代文：州王行瑜、凤翔李茂贞、华州韩建各自奉上表章，说王珂是螟蛉义子，不应该继承父职，要求任命王珂为陕州刺史，王珙为河中节度使。
English: State Wang Xingyu, Fengxiang Li Maozhen, and Huazhou Han Jianrong each presented a watch badge, saying that Wang Ke was the legitimate son of Xing, and should not inherit his father's position, and demanded that Wang Ke be appointed as the historian of Shaanxi, and that Wang Xing be appointed as the festival envoy of Central China.

古文：天子以先允克用之奏，久之不下。
现代文：天子因为先允准了李克用的所奏，很久不颁发圣旨下来。
English: The Son of Heaven did not issue the imperial edict for a long time because he had previously approved the music played by Li Ke.

古文：五月丁巳朔。
现代文：五月初一为丁巳日。
English: The first day of May is Ting Si Day.

古文：甲子，李茂贞、王行瑜、韩建等各率精甲数千人入觐，京师大恐，人皆亡窜，吏不能止。
现代文：五月初八，李茂贞、王行瑜、韩建等各自率领精兵几千人入宫朝见皇上，京师的人非常恐惧，人们都逃亡奔窜，官吏们无法制止。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, Li Maozhen, Wang Xingyu, Han Jian and others each led several thousand elite soldiers into the palace to see the emperor. The people of Beijing were very afraid, people were fleeing, and officials could not stop them.

古文：昭宗御安福门以俟之，三帅既至，拜舞楼下，昭宗临轩自谕之曰： 卿等籓侯，宜存臣节，称兵入朝，不由奏请，意在何也？ 
现代文：昭宗驾临安福门等待他们，三名主帅来了之后，在城楼下面行舞蹈拜见之礼。昭宗来到楼前的高台上亲自对他们说 ：你们都是藩镇的大将，应当保持人臣的气节，带着军队入朝而不事先上奏请示，你们是什么意图？ 
English: Shōzō came to the Anpu Gate to wait for them. After the three commanders arrived, they danced a farewell dance beneath the castle tower. Shōzō came to the platform in front of the tower and said to them in person, "You are all generals of the domain, you should maintain the dignity of a vassal, and enter the imperial court with your troops without asking permission in advance. What is your intention?"

古文：茂贞、行瑜汗流洽背，不能对，唯韩建陈叙入觐之由。
现代文：李茂贞、王行瑜汗流浃背，无法回答，只有韩建陈述了入朝觐见皇上的理由。
English: Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu were so drenched in sweat that they were unable to answer. Only Han Jian explained his reasons for entering the imperial court to meet the emperor.

古文：上并召升楼，赐之卮酒，宴之于同文殿。
现代文：皇上把他们一起召到城楼上，各赐给他们一杯酒，然后在同文殿宴请他们。
English: The emperor called them together to the castle tower, gave them each a glass of wine, and then invited them to a banquet in the Tongwen Hall.

古文：茂贞、行瑜极言南北司相倾，深蠹时政，请诛其太甚者。
现代文：李茂贞、王行瑜极力诉说朝臣和宦官之间互相倾轧，深为时政之害，请求诛杀那些为害特别严重的朝臣和宦官。
English: Li Maozhen and Wang Xingyu tried their best to say that the mutual infighting between courtiers and eunuchs was deeply harmful to the current government, and requested that those courtiers and eunuchs who were particularly harmful be killed.

古文：乃贬宰相韦昭度、李磎，寻杀之于都亭驿，杀内官数人而去。
现代文：于是贬斥宰相韦昭度、李石奚，不久就在都亭驿杀害了他们。
English: Therefore, he disparaged the prime ministers Wei Zhaodu and Li Shijun, and soon killed them in Du Tingting.

古文：王行瑜留弟行约，茂贞留假子阎圭，各以兵二千人宿卫。
现代文：又杀了几名宦官，三人才离开京师。王行瑜留下他的弟弟王行约，李茂贞留下他的养子李阎圭，各率领两千名士兵为宫中宿卫。
English: Wang Xingyu left his brother Wang Xingyao, and Li Maozhen left his adopted son Li Yangui. Each of them led two thousand soldiers as palace guards.

古文：时三帅同谋废昭宗立吉王，闻太原起军乃止，留兵宿卫而还。
现代文：当时这三个主帅共同策划废掉昭宗而拥立吉王为帝，听说太原方面起兵才罢休，留下士卒宿卫皇宫而离去。
English: At that time, these three commanders jointly plotted to abolish Akimune and install Yoshihito as emperor. When they heard that the Taiyuan side had raised an army, they stopped fighting and left their soldiers to guard the imperial palace.

古文：壬申，以责授均州司户孔纬、绣州司户张浚并为太子宾客。
现代文：五月十六日，把均州司户孔纬、绣州司户张浚都贬职为太子宾客。
English: On May 16th, Kong Wei, the governor of Gyeongju Province, and Zhang Jun, the governor of Bushu Province, were both demoted to the position of guests of the crown prince.

古文：以翰林学士、户部侍郎、知制诰陆扆为兵部侍郎，充职。
现代文：任命翰林学士、户部侍郎、知制诰陆为兵部侍郎，是暂时充任之职。
English: The appointment of Hanlin Bao, Hubei Zirong, and Zhizhe Xinglu as Hyube Zirong is a temporary position.

古文：六月丁亥朔，以京兆尹、嗣薛王知柔兼户部尚书、判度支，兼诸道盐铁转运等使。
现代文：六月初一，任命京兆尹、嗣薛王李知柔兼任户部尚书、署理度支使，兼任诸道盐铁转运使等。
English: On the first day of June, he appointed Jing Zhaoyun and Xue Wang's heir, Li Zhirou, to concurrently serve as household secretary, acting deputy chief of staff, and concurrently as envoy for the transfer of salt and iron to various provinces.

古文：壬辰，以太子宾客孔纬为吏部尚书，寻复开府仪同三司、守司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、弘文馆大学士、太清宫延资库使、上柱国、鲁郡开国公，食邑四千户、食实封二百户，仍号 持危启运保乂功臣。 
现代文：六月初六，任命太子宾客孔纬为吏部尚书，不久又恢复其开府仪同三司、署理司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、弘文馆大学士、太清宫延资库使、上柱国、鲁郡开国公之职，食邑四千户，实封食邑二百户，并授予 持危启运保功臣 的尊号。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the year, he appointed the prince's guest, Kong Wei, as the head of the personnel department of Shangshu, and soon restored his Kaifu ceremony with the three departments, the acting secretary Ku, the servant of his disciple, Tongping Zhangji, the scholar of the Hongwen Museum, the official of the Taiqing Palace Enrichment Fund, Shangzhu Province, Lu County, the opening of the country, 4,000 households of the food village, 200 households of the real food village, and awarded the honorary title of the hero of the dangerous start of transportation.

古文：时纬在华州，寻属太原军至而止。
现代文：当时孔纬在华州，随即因太原军来到而停止赴京。
English: At that time, Kong Wei was in Huazhou, and immediately stopped going to Beijing because of the arrival of the Taiyuan Army.

古文：以太子宾客张浚复光禄大夫、行兵部尚书、上柱国、河间郡开国侯、食邑二千户。
现代文：命太子宾客张浚再任光禄大夫、署理兵部尚书、上柱国、河间郡开国侯，食邑二千户。
English: The guests of His Imperial Highness the Crown Prince, Zhang Jun, were re-appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the acting secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Shangzhu Province, and the governor of Kawama County, with 2,000 households.

古文：浚在长水，亦不至京师。
现代文：张浚在长水，也不前去京师。
English: Zhang Jun is in Changshui, but he will not go to Beijing.

古文：复以王搏为中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：再次任命王抟为中书侍郎、平章政事。
English: He reappointed Wang Qi as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and Ping Zhang as the minister of state.

古文：七月丙辰朔，李克用举军渡河，以讨王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建等称兵诣阙之罪。
现代文：七月初一，李克用率领全军渡过黄河，以讨伐王行瑜、李茂贞、韩建等举兵入宫的罪行。
English: On the first day of July, Li Keqiang led the whole army across the Yellow River to fight against the crimes of Wang Xingyu, Li Maozhen, Han Jian and others who raised an army to enter the palace.

古文：庚申，同州节度使王行实弃郡入京师，谓两军中尉骆全瓘、刘景宣曰： 沙陀十万至矣！请奉车驾幸邠州，且有城守。 
现代文：七月初五，同州节度使王行实放弃州郡进入京师，对两军中尉骆全权、刘景宣说： 十万沙陀军到了，请让我迎奉皇上的车驾临幸州，有城垣可以据守。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month of July, the festival of the same state made Wang Xingshi give up the state and county to enter the Beijing division, and said to the two army lieutenants Luo Quanquan and Liu Jingxuan: The hundred thousand Satou army has arrived, please let me welcome the emperor's car and drive to Linchengzhou, there are castle walls to defend.

古文：时景宣附凤翔，癸亥夜，阎圭与刘景宣子继晟、同州王行实纵火剽东市，请上出幸。
现代文：当时刘景宣依附凤翔李茂贞。七月初八夜间，李阎圭和刘景宣的儿子刘继晟、同州节度使王行实一起放火，抢劫东市，请求皇上出走。
English: At that time, Liu Jingxuan adhered to Fengxiang and Li Maozhen. On the night of the eighth day of the seventh month, Li Yangui, Liu Jixuan, Liu Jingxuan's son, and Tongzhou Jiedu sent Wang Xingshi to set fire together, robbed Dongshi, and asked the emperor to leave.

古文：上闻乱，登承天门，遣诸王率禁兵御之。
现代文：皇上听说发生动乱，登上承天门，派遣诸侯王率领禁军抵抗他们。
English: When the emperor heard that there was unrest, he went up to the Gate of Heaven and dispatched the princes and princes to lead the imperial army to resist them.

古文：捧日都头李筠率本军侍卫楼上。
现代文：捧日都头李筠率领本军的士卒侍卫城楼上的皇上。
English: On the first day of the new year, the head of the capital Li Xi led his army of officers and men to guard the emperor on the castle tower.

古文：阎圭以凤翔之卒攻李筠，矢及御座之楼扉。
现代文：李阎圭派遣凤翔的兵卒进攻李筠，弓矢射到了皇上御座所在楼房的门扉上。
English: Li Yan Gui sent Feng Xiang's soldiers to attack Li Yao, and the bow and arrow hit the door of the building where the emperor's throne was located.

古文：上惧，下楼与亲王、公主、内人数百幸永兴坊李筠营。
现代文：皇上害怕，下楼和亲王、公主、宫人共几百人临幸永兴坊李筠的军营中。
English: The emperor was afraid, and went downstairs with the prince, princess, and courtiers, a total of several hundred people, to the military camp of Li Xi in Yongxingfang.

古文：扈跸都头李君实以兵继至，乃与筠两都兵士侍卫出启夏门，憩于华严寺，以候内人继至。
现代文：扈跸都头李君实率领人马接踵而来，就和李筠一起，两都的士兵侍卫着皇上出启夏门，憩息于华严寺，以等待随后来到的宫人。
English: Li Junshi, the head of the two capitals, led the procession, and together with Li Xi, the soldiers of the two capitals guarded the summer gate of the emperor, and rested in Huayan Temple to wait for the courtiers who came later.

古文：其日晚，幸莎城镇。
现代文：当天晚上抵达莎城镇。
English: In the evening of the same day, they arrived in Shaoshen.

古文：京师士庶从幸者数十万，比至南山谷口，暍死者三之一。
现代文：京师的官员、百姓跟随皇上出走的有几十万人，等走到南山的谷口时，受暴热中暑而死的有三分之一。
English: Hundreds of thousands of officials and commoners from the capital fled with the emperor. By the time they reached Taniguchi in the southern mountains, a third of them had died from heatstroke brought on by the intense heat.

古文：至暮，为盗寇掠，恸哭之声，殷动山谷。
现代文：天快黑的时候又被强盗抢劫，恸哭的声音震动山谷。
English: When it was nearly dark, they were robbed by bandits, and the sound of their wailing shook the valley.

古文：权令京兆尹知柔中书事及随驾置顿使。
现代文：暂时授命京兆尹李知柔掌管中书省事务，并担任随驾置顿使。
English: Beijing Zhaoyun Li Zhirou was temporarily appointed to be in charge of the affairs of China's Book Ministry, and served as a temporary envoy.

古文：信宿，宰相徐彦若、王抟、崔胤三人至，乃移石门镇之佛宫。
现代文：宿了两夜，宰相徐彦若、王抟、崔胤三人来到，皇上便移住到石门镇的佛寺中。
English: After staying for two nights, the three prime ministers, Xu Yanruo, Wang Xi, and Cui Yan, arrived, and the emperor moved to a Buddhist temple in Shimen Town.

古文：仍令知枢密刘光裕、薛王知柔归京师制置，合禁军以备宫禁。
现代文：于是命令署理枢密使刘光裕、薛王李知柔回京师去安排一切，集合禁军以准备宫中防卫。
English: Therefore, he ordered the acting privy councilor to send Liu Guangyu and Xue Wang Lijiao back to the Beijing division to arrange everything and assemble the imperial army to prepare for the defense of the palace.

古文：丙寅，李克用遣牙将阎谔奉表奔问，奏屯军河中，候进止发赴邠州。
现代文：七月十一日，李克用派遣偏将阎谔奉上表章前来慰问，奏报说军队停驻在河中，等候皇上进退的动静再派兵前往州。
English: On July 11th, Li Ke used the dispatch of the partial commander Yan Qi to come to offer condolences. The report said that the army was stationed in the middle of the river, waiting for the movement of the emperor's advance and retreat before sending soldiers to the state.

古文：丁卯，上遣内官张承业传诏克用军，便令监太原行营兵马，发赴新平。
现代文：七月十二日，皇上派遣内官张承业到李克用军中发布诏令，即命他监督太原行营的兵马，出发前往新平。
English: On July 12th, the emperor sent Zhang Chengye, an internal affairs officer, to Li Ke to issue a decree, ordering him to supervise the soldiers and horses in the Taiyuan encampment and set out for Xinping.

古文：又令内官郄廷立传诏泾州，令张鐇起泾原之师会克用军。
现代文：又命内官郄廷立到泾州传达诏命，命令张钅番派遣泾原的军队和李克用的军队会合。
English: He also ordered the internal affairs officer, Yu Tingli, to go to Zhangzhou to deliver the imperial command, and ordered Zhang Yifan to send the troops from Yuyuan to meet Li Keji's troops.

古文：上在南山半月余，克用仍在河中，未至渭北。
现代文：皇上在南山半个多月，李克用仍然在河中府，没有到达渭北。
English: The emperor stayed in Nanshan for more than half a month, but Li Keyong still stayed in Hechu Prefecture and did not reach the north of Shandong.

古文：上惧凤翔兵士劫迁，乃令延王将御服、鞍马、玉器等至河中，宣谕曰： 朕以景宣、全瓘、行实、继鹏为表里之奸谋，纵干戈于双阙，烟尘倏忽，劫杀纵横。
现代文：皇上害怕凤翔李茂贞的兵卒劫持他转移到别的地方去，便命令延王把御服、鞍马、玉器等带到河中府去，对李克用宣布圣命说： 朕因为遭到刘景宣、骆全馞、王行实、刘继鹏内外勾结的奸谋，他们在两宫放纵士卒作乱，转眼间燃起烟尘，到处抢劫杀戮。
English: The emperor was afraid that Fengxiang Li Maozhen's soldiers would kidnap him and transfer him to another place, so he ordered Yan Wang to take his imperial robes, pommel horse, jade and so on to Henan Province, and said to Li Ke with the proclamation of his sacred life: "Because I have been plotted against by Liu Jingxuan, Luo Quanzhang, Wang Xingshi, and Liu Jipeng inside and outside the country, they have indulged their soldiers to make trouble in the two palaces, igniting smoke and dust in the blink of an eye, robbing and killing everywhere.

古文：朕偶脱锋铓，遂移辇辂，所为巡幸，止在近郊。
现代文：我偶然摆脱了兵刃的锋芒，便乘上车辇出走，所临幸的地方，只在京师的近郊。
English: I got rid of the edge of the blade by chance, so I got on the bus and ran away. The lucky place I came to was only in the suburbs of Beijing Division.

古文：盖知卿统领雄师，驻临蒲坂，累飞书诏，继遣使人。
现代文：因为知道你统率着强大的军队驻扎在蒲坂地方，因而多次飞马传下诏书，接着又派遣使臣前往。
English: Because he knew that you were stationed in the Busaka region at the head of a powerful army, he repeatedly issued edicts on horseback and then sent envoys.

古文：期卿以社稷为忧，君亲在念，必思响应，速议龚行。
现代文：希望你以社稷为忧，以君亲为念，必定会考虑、响应朕的征召，急速商讨恭奉君命的行动。
English: I hope that you will consider and respond to my call and quickly discuss the action of honoring your mission with the society and your relatives in mind.

古文：岂谓将涉两旬，未有来表，忧虞是切，寝食不遑。
现代文：谁知道时间快到两旬，你的表章还没有来到，使朕感到十分忧急，睡觉、进食都不安。
English: Who knows, the time is approaching the second half of the year, and your seal has not yet come, which makes me feel very anxious, and I am uneasy about sleeping and eating.

古文：岂忠义不切疚怀，而道途或有阻滞？
现代文：莫非是因为忠义之心和你负疚的心情不能相切合，或者是路途上有什么阻滞？
English: Could it be because loyalty and guilt are incompatible, or is there something standing in the way?

古文：今则专令亲信，恳托勋贤，故遣延王戒丕、丹王允与供奉官王鲁纡等宣示。
现代文：如今专门派一名亲信，以便恳切地托付勋将贤臣，故而派延王李戒丕、丹王李允和供奉官王鲁行等宣示朕的旨意。
English: Now, I have specially dispatched a trusted confidant to earnestly entrust my will to the honored generals and wise men. Therefore, I have sent Yan Wang, Li Jiaxuan, Dan Wang, Li Yun, and Wang Lu Xing, the offering official, to proclaim my will.

古文：卿宜便董貔貅，径临邠凤，荡平妖穴，以拯阽危，是所望也。 
现代文：你应当立即督率雄兵，直接前往州、凤翔，扫平妖孽的巢穴，以拯救国家的危局，这是朕所希望于你的。 
English: You should immediately supervise and lead the soldiers, go directly to the state, Fengxiang, sweep away the witch's lair, to save the country's crisis, this is what I hope for you.

古文：八月乙酉朔，延王至河中，克用已发前锋至渭北，又令史俨率五百骑赴行在侍卫。
现代文：八月初一，延王到达河中府，李克用已经派遣前锋抵达渭北，又命令史俨率领五百名骑兵前往皇上驻跸处侍卫圣驾。
English: On the first day of August, Yan Wang arrived in Hezhongfu. Li Kegui had already dispatched a vanguard to arrive in the north of Anhui, and ordered Shi Yan to lead five hundred cavalrymen to escort the holy driver of the imperial garrison.

古文：己丑，克用自至渭桥砦。
现代文：八月初五，李克用亲自到达渭桥寨。
English: On the fifth day of August, Li Keqiang personally arrived at Zou Bridge Village.

古文：癸巳，行梨园杀邠军数千，获其大将王令陶以献。
现代文：八月初九，在梨园杀死州军的几千名士卒，俘获其大将王令陶献给朝廷。
English: On the 9th day of August, he killed several thousand soldiers of the state army in Liyuan and captured its general Wang Lingtao to present to the imperial court.

古文：又诏鄜州节度使李思孝本军进讨。
现代文：皇上又下诏，令州节度使李思孝率领本军讨伐贼军。
English: The emperor issued another edict, ordering the prefectural governor to send Li Sihiao to lead the army to fight the bandits.

古文：丁酉，制以河东节度使、开府仪同三司、守太师、中书令，兼太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、陇西郡王李克用为邠宁四面行营都招讨使。
现代文：八月十三日，决定任命河东节度使、开府仪同三司、暂署太师、中书令、兼太原尹、北都留守、上柱国、陇西郡王李克用为宁西面行营都招讨使。
English: On August 13th, it was decided to appoint the Hedong Festival Envoy, the Kaifu Ceremonies and Three Departments, the temporary Taishi, the Chinese Calligraphy Order, and the Taiyuan Yin, the Northern Capital Left Behind, Shangzhuang Province, and the King of Shaanxi County, Li Ke, to recruit envoys for the west side of Ning.

古文：夏州节度使李思谏充邠宁东北面招讨使，泾原节度使张鐇充邠宁西面招讨使，河中节度使王珂充行营供军粮料使。
现代文：以夏州节度使李思谏充任宁东北面招讨使，以泾原节度使张钅番充任宁四面招讨使，以河中节度使王珂充任行营供军粮料使。
English: Xiazhou Festival was used to appoint Li Sijun as the recruiting envoy for the northeastern Ning Dynasty, Yuyuan Festival was used to appoint Zhang Yiban as the recruiting envoy for the four regions of Ning Dynasty, and Huazhong Festival was used to appoint Wang Kezhen as the envoy for the supply of grain to the army.

古文：李茂贞闻之惧，斩阎圭、武秃子，传首行在，上章请罪。
现代文：李茂贞听到之后很恐惧，杀死李阎圭、武秃子，将他们的头颅传送到皇上驻跸处，奉上表章请罪。
English: After hearing this, Li Maozhen was very frightened. She killed Li Yan Gui and Wu Zhao Zi, and sent their heads to the emperor's residence to ask for forgiveness.

古文：辛丑，制削夺王行瑜在身官爵。
现代文：八月十七日，决定削夺王行瑜现任的官职爵位。
English: On August 17th, it was decided to strip Wang Xingyu of his current official title.

古文：改授李克用邠宁四面行营都统。
现代文：改授李克用为宁四面行营都统。
English: Li Ke used the award to go camping in all directions for Ning Du.

古文：其大将盖寓李存信阎锷、判官王让李袭吉等，并降诏锡赉。
现代文：他的大将盖寓、李存信、阎谔，判官王让、李袭吉等，都颁发诏令给予赏赐。
English: His generals Gai Yue, Li Cunxin, Yan Qi, and judges Wang Zhan and Li Hao Ji all issued edicts to reward him.

古文：又以河中都监袁季贞充邠宁四面行营兵马都监押。
现代文：又任命河中府都监袁季贞充任宁四面行营兵马都监押。
English: He also appointed Yuan Jizhenchong, the prefectural governor of Hebei Province, to be in charge of overseeing the troops and horses marching in all directions.

古文：壬寅，李克用遣子存贞奉表行在，请车驾还宫。
现代文：八月十八日，李克用派儿子李存贞奉表章到皇上驻跸处，请求皇上的车驾返回皇宫。
English: On August 18, Li Ke used the occasion to send his son Li Cunzhen to the emperor's residence to request the emperor's car to return to the palace.

古文：答诏曰： 昨延王回，言卿忧时体国，执礼输忠，接遇之间，周旋尽节。
现代文：皇上下诏回答说 ：昨日延王返回，说你忧虑时局，体察国情，坚守礼仪，表达忠诚之心。在接待中，应对举止都尽到了为臣的节操。
English: The imperial edict replied: "Yan Wang returned yesterday, saying that you are worried about the current situation, understand the national conditions, adhere to etiquette, and express loyalty. In the reception, the corresponding manners have all reached the discipline of being a subject.

古文：备知肺腑，识我恩荣，静惟尊主之心，果契知臣之分。
现代文：你完全理解了我的肺腑之言，体察了我所给予的恩遇荣宠，冷静地思索你尊奉人主的心意，果然合乎知遇之臣的本分。
English: You have fully understood my heartfelt words, experienced the grace, honor and favor I have bestowed upon you, and calmly contemplated your heart's desire to honor and serve the Lord. This is indeed the duty of a knowledgeable minister.

古文：朕欲取今月十二四日却复都城，冀宁兆庶，倚我勋德，有若长城，速伸翦荡之谋，以慰黔黎之望。 
现代文：我想选取本月二十四日再返回都城，希望亿万百姓能得到安宁，依靠着我有如长城一般的勋劳德行，迅速实现剪灭、扫荡贼臣的谋略，以宽慰黎民百姓的愿望。 
English: I want to choose the 24th day of this month to return to the capital, hoping that hundreds of millions of people can get peace and rely on me to work like the Great Wall to quickly realize the strategy of cutting off and sweeping away the traitors, so as to appease the wishes of the Lebanese people.

古文：癸卯，又令延王传诏，令克用发骑军三千赴三桥屯驻，以备回銮。
现代文：八月十九日，又令延王传布诏令，命令李克用派三千名骑兵前往三桥屯驻，以准备皇上返回皇宫。
English: On August 19, Yan Wang was also ordered to issue a royal edict, ordering Li Ke to send three thousand cavalrymen to Sanqiao to prepare for the emperor's return to the palace.

古文：辛亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：八月二十七日，皇上的车驾回到皇宫。
English: On August 27th, the Emperor's carriage drove back to the Imperial Palace.

古文：壬子，司空、门下侍郎、平章事、临修国史、诸道盐铁转运使崔昭纬罢知政事，为太子宾客。
现代文：八月二十八日，司空、门下侍郎、平章政事、监修国史、诸道盐铁转运使崔昭纬停止执掌政务，任太子宾客。
English: On August 28th, Cui Zhaowei was appointed as a guest of the crown prince, after Cui Kuo, his subordinate attendant, Ping Zhang, who was in charge of government affairs, supervised the study of national history, and the transportation of salt and iron from various provinces, had ceased to be in charge of government affairs.

古文：以河中兵马留后王珂检校司空，兼河中尹、御史大夫，充护国军节度、河中晋绛慈隰观察等使；以幽州兵马留后刘仁恭检校司空，兼幽州大都督府长史，充幽州卢龙军节度、押奚契丹等使；以故左军中尉杨复恭开府、魏国公：并从克用奏请也。
现代文：任命河中兵马留后王珂为检校司空，兼任河中尹、御史大夫，充任护国军节度使、河中晋绛慈隰等州观察使；任命幽州兵马留后刘仁恭为检校司空，兼任幽州大都督府长史，充任幽州卢龙军节度使、监押奚契丹两蕃使等；已故左军中尉杨复恭被追授为开府仪同三司、魏国公。
English: Wang Ke was appointed as the inspecting officer after the soldiers and horses of Yuzhou were left behind, and concurrently served as the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer of Yuzhou, the inspecting officer

古文：九月甲寅朔。
现代文：这都是服从李克用所奏请而决定任命的。
English: The first day of September is "Kotora Day."

古文：丙辰，制光禄大夫、守尚书左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、东莞郡公徐彦若为司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫修奉太庙等使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，充诸道盐铁转运等使。
现代文：九月初一为甲寅日。九月初三，决定由光禄大夫、署理尚书左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、上柱国、东莞郡公徐彦若任司空、门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫修奉太庙等使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，充任诸道盐铁转运使等。
English: On the third day of the first month of September, it was decided that Dr. Guanglu, the acting secretary, Shangshu Zuoxia, the under-secretary, Tongping Zhangji, the supervisor of national history, Shangzhu Guo, Dongguan County, Xu Yanru, the secretary, the under-secretary, Tongping Zhangji, the envoy of the Taiching Palace to the Great Temple, the scholar of the Hongwen Museum, the envoy of the Enrichment Fund, and the envoy of the salt and iron transportation.

古文：正议大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事王抟为金紫光禄大夫、户部尚书门下侍郎、监修国史、判度支；正议大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事崔胤为金紫光禄大夫、户部兼礼部尚书、集贤殿大学士、判户部事。
现代文：决定由正议大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事王抟任金紫光禄大夫，兼礼部尚书、集贤殿大学士，执掌户部事务。
English: It was decided that he would be appointed as the chief adviser, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, the secretary of the middle school, and the secretary of the middle school.

古文：并赐号 扶危匡国致理功臣。 
现代文：均赐予 扶危匡国致理功臣 的尊号。
English: All of them were given the honorary title of 扶危匡国致理功臣.

古文：癸亥，司空、门下侍郎、平章事、太清宫修奉太庙等使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、上柱国、鲁郡开国公孔纬卒，赠太尉。
现代文：九月初十，司空、门下侍郎、平章政事、太清宫修奉太庙等使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、上柱国、鲁郡开国公孔纬去世，追赠太尉职衔。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month of the year, Siku, his valet, Taira no Shosho, Taira no Misegi, the envoy to the Imperial Palace to worship the Imperial Shrine, Kobunkan Daigakuin Daigakuin, the envoy to the Yonsei treasury, and the founder of Shangzhu Province and Lu County, Kongwei passed away, and was posthumously awarded the rank of taifu.

古文：十月甲申朔，王师破贼梨园砦，俘斩万计，行瑜由是婴城自固。
现代文：十月初一，朝廷的军队在梨园寨击败贼军，俘获、斩杀的敌军数以万计，因此王行瑜只得据城固守。
English: On the first day of October, the imperial army defeated the bandits in Liyuanzhai, capturing and killing tens of thousands of enemy troops, so Wang Xingyu had to hold on to the city.

古文：丁亥，制赦系囚，其节文曰： 其有任崇柱石，位重台衡，或委以军权，或参诸宥密。
现代文：十月初四，决定赦免在押的囚犯，敕令节录的文字说： 有的人担当的责任像柱石一样崇高，地位像宰辅一样重要，或者把军权托付给他，或者让他参与机密。
English: On the 4th of October, it was decided to pardon the prisoners in custody, and the text of the imperial edict said: Some people have responsibilities as lofty as pillars and positions as important as vice-premiers, or entrust him with military power, or let him participate in secrets.

古文：竟因连谤，终至祸名，郁我好生，嗟乎强死。
现代文：然而竟因为遭到多次诽谤，终至于落下祸国的罪名，想到我那众多的善良百姓，叹息他们死于非命。
English: However, because I have been slandered many times, finally, as for the crime of falling into a calamitous country, I think of my many good people and lament that they died a violent death.

古文：应大顺已来，有非罪而加削夺者，并复官资。
现代文：凡属大顺年以来没有罪过而被强行削除官职的，都应当恢复官职、资历。
English: All those who have been forcibly removed from their posts without any fault since the New Year's Eve should have their posts and seniority restored.

古文：其杜让能、西门君遂、李周潼已下，并与昭雪，还其爵秩。
现代文：其中杜让能、西门君遂、李周潼以下的官员，都给予昭雪平反，赐还他们原来的爵位待遇。
English: Among them, officials such as Du Zhaneng, Ximen Jun Sui, and Li Zhouqi all rehabilitated Zhao Xue and restored their original peerage treatment.

古文：韦昭度顷处台司，每伸相业，王行瑜求尚书令，独能抑之，致于沉冤，谅由此事。
现代文：韦昭良不久以前居于宰相之位，屡次拓展宰相的事业，王行瑜强求尚书令的官职，只有他能压抑这种无理的要求，以致蒙受沉冤，估计就是由这件事引起的。
English: Wei Zhaoliang was recently in the position of prime minister, repeatedly expanding the cause of the prime minister, Wang Xingyu insisted on the official post of Shang Shuling, only he could suppress this unreasonable demand, resulting in suffering grievances, which is estimated to be caused by this matter.

古文：李磎文章宏赡，迥出辈流，竟以朋党之间，挤于死地，凡在有识，孰不咨嗟。
现代文：李石奚的文章宏阔富赡，远远超出其同辈人，竟然因为朋党的嫌隙，被排挤到死地，凡是有识之士，谁能不叹息呢！
English: Li Shijun's article is magnificent and rich, far beyond his peers, and he was even ousted to death because of his friends' grudge. Anyone with insight can't help but sigh!

古文：宜并与昭洗，仍复官爵。 
现代文：应该同时为他们昭雪洗刷，仍旧恢复原来的官职爵位。 
English: At the same time, they should be purged, and the original official titles should be restored.

古文：又敕： 太子宾客崔昭纬责授梧州司马，水部郎中、知制诰刘崇鲁贬崖州司户。
现代文：又敕令：太子宾客崔昭纬贬职为梧州司马；水部郎中、知制诰刘崇鲁贬职为崖州司户。
English: Also decreed: the prince's guest, Cui Zhaowei, was demoted to the position of Wuzhou's steward; Liu Chonglu, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Water Resources, was demoted to the position of Yazhou's steward.

古文：又诏邠州行营都统曰： 邠州节度副使崔鋋，破贼之时，勿令漏网。
现代文：又下诏给州行营都统说： 州节度副使崔钅延，在攻破贼军时不要让他漏网脱逃。
English: He also issued an edict to the prefectural governors, saying, "Deputy prefectural governor Cui Qianyan, do not let him slip away when defeating the bandits.

古文：鋋与昭纬去年朋党，交结行瑜，构合祸胎，原由此贼。
现代文：崔钅延和崔昭纬去年结成朋党，和王行瑜来往勾结。构成祸胎，本来就是由于这个奸贼。
English: Last year, Cui Yuanyan and Cui Zhaowei formed a crony party and colluded with Wang Xingyu. It was this traitor who was the root cause of the trouble.

古文：付四面行营知委。 
现代文：交付给四面行营知其原委。 
English: It was handed over to the Shimen Gangyeong Chihchihuan Committee.

古文：是月，四面行营大集邠州。
现代文：当月四个方面的军营在州大会师。
English: The four-pronged barrage began in the state's largest division that month.

古文：十一月癸未朔。
现代文：十一月初一为癸丑日。
English: The first day of the month of November is a leap day.

古文：壬寅，王行瑜与其妻子部曲五百余人溃围出奔，至庆州，行瑜为部下所杀，并其家二百口，并诣行营乞降，李克用遣牙将阎锷献于京师。
现代文：十一月十日，王行瑜和他的妻子，以及部下五百多人突围出逃，到达庆州，王行瑜被其部下杀死。连他的家属在内共二百人，一起到军营去请求投降，李克用派偏将阎锷把他们献给京师。
English: On November 10, Wang Xingyu, his wife, and more than five hundred of his subordinates broke out of the encirclement and fled to Gyeongju. Wang Xingyu was killed by his subordinates. A total of two hundred people, including his family members, went to the military camp to request surrender. Li Ke used the faction to sacrifice them to the Beijing division.

古文：十二月甲申朔，昭宗御延喜门受俘馘，百僚楼前称贺。
现代文：十二月初一，昭宗驾临延喜门接受战俘，百官在楼前表示祝贺。
English: On the first day of December, Zhaozong arrived at the Yanxi Gate to receive prisoners of war. Hundreds of officials came to congratulate him in front of the building.

古文：制以李克用守太师、中书令，进封晋王，食邑九千户，改赐 忠贞平难功臣。 
现代文：决定任命李克用暂署太师、中书令，晋封为晋王，食邑九千户，改赐 忠贞平难功臣 的尊号。
English: It was decided to appoint Li Kegui as the temporarily appointed Grand Master and the Order of the Chinese Epistle, to promote him to the rank of the King of Jin, to feed nine thousand households, and to give him the honorary title of the Loyal and Peaceful Hero.

古文：是月，克用班师太原。
现代文：当月李克用班师返回太原。
English: That month, Li Ke returned to Taiyuan with a team.

古文：制：皇第三子祤封棣王，第五子禊封虔王，第六子禋封沂王，第七子祎封遂王。
现代文：决定：皇上第三子李臿封为棣王，第五子李禊封为虔王，第六子李封为沂王，第七子李礻韦封为遂王。
English: Decision: The emperor's third son, Li Shufeng, was crowned King of Qi, the fifth son, Li Shufeng, was crowned King of Qi, the sixth son, Li Shufeng, was crowned King of Qi, and the seventh son, Li Shufeng Wei, was crowned King of Sui.

古文：三年春正月癸丑朔，制以特进、户部尚书、兼京兆尹、嗣薛王知柔检校司徒，兼广州刺史、御史大夫，充清海军节度、岭南东道观察处置等使。
现代文：乾宁三年春，正月初一，决定任命特进、户部尚书、兼京兆尹、嗣薛王李知柔为检校司徒，兼任广州刺史、御史大夫，充任清海军节度使、岭南东道观察处置使。
English: In the spring of the third year of Qianning, on the first day of the first month of the year, it was decided to appoint Tejin, Hubei Shangshu, and also Beijing Zhaoyun, and the heir of Xue Wang, Li Zhirou, as school inspectors, concurrently serving as the Guangzhou chief historian and chief historian, serving as the Qing Navy Festival Envoy and the Lingnan Host Observation and Disposition Envoy.

古文：以尚书右丞崔泽为凤州刺史。
现代文：任命尚书右丞崔泽为凤州刺史。
English: He appointed Shangshu Rongcheng Choi Ze as the chief historian of Fengzhou.

古文：魏博罗弘信击败太原军于莘县。
现代文：魏博节度使罗弘信在莘县击败太原军。
English: The Wei Bo Festival enabled Luo Hongxin to defeat the Taiyuan Army in Handan County.

古文：初，兗郓示援于太原，克用令蕃将史完府、何怀宝等千骑赴之。
现代文：此前，兖州、郓州向太原的李克用求救，李克用命令藩将史完府、何怀宝等率一千名骑兵前往。
English: Previously, Bozhou and Ganzhou appealed to Li Kegui of Taiyuan for help, and Li Kegui ordered domain generals Shi Wanfu and He Huaibao to lead a thousand cavalry to the scene.

古文：至是又令大将李存信屯于莘县，魏人常假其道，存信戢军不谨，或侵挠魏民。
现代文：太原军在莘县战败后，李克用又命令大将李存信屯驻在莘县，魏州人经常借走这条路，而李存信约束军队不严格，有时候侵扰魏州的百姓。
English: After the defeat of the Taiyuan army in Yixian, Li Ke used to order the general Li Cunxin to stay in Yixian. The people of Weizhou often borrowed this road, and Li Cunxin did not strictly restrain the army, sometimes disturbing the people of Weizhou.

古文：弘信怒，伏兵击之，其军宵溃。
现代文：罗弘信发怒，设伏兵袭击李存信，李存信的军队夜间中伏崩溃。
English: Luo Hongxin became angry and set an ambush to attack Li Cunxin. Li Cunxin's army collapsed during the night.

古文：自是弘信南结于梁，与太原绝，兗郓已至俱陷。
现代文：从此罗弘信和南面的梁州结好，而与太原绝交，至此兖州、郓州都陷入罗弘信手中。
English: From then on, Luo Hongxin and Liangzhou in the south made a good relationship, but cut off diplomatic relations with Taiyuan. At this time, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou both fell into the hands of Luo Hongxin.

古文：二月壬子朔，制以通王滋为开府仪同三司，判侍卫诸道军事。
现代文：二月初一，决定任命通王李滋为开府仪同三司，掌管侍卫及各道的军事。
English: On the first day of February, it was decided to appoint Tong Wang Lizi as the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, in charge of the guards and the military of each province.

古文：以银青光禄大夫、户部尚书、嘉兴县子、食邑五百户陆扆为兵部尚书。
现代文：任命银青光禄大夫、户部尚书、嘉兴县子、食邑五百户陆为兵部尚书。
English: He appointed Dr. Yin Qingguanglu, Hubei Shangshu, Jiaxing Xiangzi, and 500 households in Shiyou as Hubei Shangshu.

古文：三月壬子朔，以考功员外郎、集贤殿学士杜德祥为工部郎中、知制诰。
现代文：三月初一，任命考功员外郎、集贤殿学士杜德祥为工部郎中、知制诰。
English: On the first day of March, Gao Gongjun (examiner) Wairo and Jixianden (scholar) Du Dexiang were appointed as vice-ministers of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：四月壬午朔，湖南军乱，杀其帅刘建锋，三军立其部将权知邵州刺史马殷为兵马留后。
现代文：四月初一，湖南军队发生动乱，杀死他们的主帅刘建锋，三军拥立他的部将暂署邵州刺史马殷为兵马留后。
English: On the first day of April, the Hunan army was in turmoil, killing their commander, Liu Jianfeng, after the three armies had temporarily appointed his subordinate, Shao Zhou Shima Yin, as the commander of the troops.

古文：镇海军节度使钱镠攻越州，下之，斩董昌，平浙东。
现代文：镇海军节度使钱霮进攻越州，攻陷该城，将董昌处斩，平定了浙东。
English: The naval festival of the town made Qian Ye attack Yuezhou, captured the city, executed Dong Chang, and pacified East Zhejiang.

古文：制加钱镠检校太尉、中书令。
现代文：决定加授钱霮为检校太尉、中书令。
English: It was decided to award Qian Qian as a school inspector and a middle school teacher.

古文：五月辛巳，责授梧州司马崔昭纬赐自尽。
现代文：五月，贬职为梧州司马的崔昭纬被赐予自尽。
English: In May, Cui Zhaowei, who had been demoted to the position of Wuzhou's Sima, was given permission to commit suicide.

古文：制金紫光禄大夫、户部尚书、门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史、上柱国、太原郡开国公王抟为检校尚书左仆射、同平章事，兼越州刺史，充镇东军节度、浙江东道观察处置等使。
现代文：决定金紫光禄大夫、户部尚书、门下侍郎、平章政事、监修国史、上柱国、太原郡开国公王抟担任检校尚书左仆射、同平章事，兼任越州刺史，充任镇东军节度使、浙江东道观察处置使。
English: It was decided that Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Hube Shangshu, his attendant, Ping Zhang Zongji, the supervisor of national history, Shangzhu Guo, the founding prince of Taiyuan County, should serve as the school inspector, Shangshu Zuopuzha, Tongping Zongji, concurrently serve as the governor of Yuezhou, serve as the festival envoy of the Zhendong Army, and serve as the host observation and disposition envoy of Zhejiang.

古文：六月庚戌，李克用率沙陀、并、汾之众五万攻魏州，及其郛，大掠于其六郡，陷成安、洹水、临漳十余邑，报莘之怨也。
现代文：六月初一，李克用率领沙陀、并州、汾州的部众五万人进攻魏州，抵达魏州的外城，大肆劫掠其属下的六个郡，攻陷成安、洹水、临漳等十几座城池，这是为了报莘县兵败之仇。
English: On the first day of June, Li Ke attacked Wei Prefecture with 50,000 troops led by Shato, Bozhou and Zhangzhou, and arrived at the outer city of Wei Prefecture. He plundered six counties under his jurisdiction, and captured more than a dozen cities including Cheng'an, Lishui and Linyi. This was to avenge the defeat of Linyi County.

古文：凤翔李茂贞怨国家有硃玫之讨，绝朝贡，谋将犯阙，天子命覃王治兵以俟变。
现代文：凤翔节度使李茂贞怨恨朝廷讨伐朱玫，停止向朝廷进贡，策划着要进犯宫阙；皇上命令覃王整治军队以等待变乱。
English: The Fengxiang Festival made Li Maozhen resent the imperial court's crusade against Zhu Mei, stop paying tribute to the imperial court, and plan to invade the imperial palace; the emperor ordered the king to rectify the army to wait for chaos.

古文：是月，茂贞上章，请以兵师入觐。
现代文：当月，李茂贞奉上表章，请求率军入朝觐见皇上。
English: That month, Li Maozhen was presented with a medal and asked to lead the army to the imperial court to meet the emperor.

古文：上令通王、覃王、延王分统安圣、捧宸、保宁、宣化等四军，以卫近畿。
现代文：皇上命令通王、覃王、延王分别统领安圣、振宸、保宁、宣化等四军，以保卫京师附近地区。
English: The emperor ordered King Tong, King Hao, and King Yan to lead the four armies of An Sheng, Zhenhu, Boryeong, and Xuanhua, respectively, to defend the area near the Beijing Division.

古文：丙寅，凤翔军犯京畿，覃王拒之于娄馆，接战不利。
现代文：六月十七日，李茂贞的凤翔军进犯京师附近地区，覃王在娄馆抵抗敌军，接战失利。
English: On June 17th, Li Maozhen's Fengxiang Army invaded the area near the Beijing Division, and the Warlord resisted the enemy army at the Summer Palace, losing the battle.

古文：秋七月庚辰朔。
现代文：秋，七月初一为庚辰日。
English: In autumn, the first day of July is Geng Chen Day.

古文：壬辰，岐军逼京师，诸王率禁兵奉车驾将幸太原。
现代文：七月十三日，岐州的军队逼近京师，诸侯王率领禁军护卫皇上的车驾准备前往太原。
English: On July 13th, the Qizhou army approached the Beijing division, and the prince led the imperial guard to escort the emperor's car to Taiyuan.

古文：癸巳，次渭北，华州韩建遣子充奉表起居，请驻跸华州，乃授建京畿都指挥、安抚制置、催促诸道纲运等使。
现代文：七月十四日，皇上停驻在渭北。华州的韩建派他的儿子韩充奉上表章问候皇上的日常生活起居情况，请求皇上到华州驻跸，于是授予韩建京畿都指挥使、安抚制置使、催促诸道纲运使等职。
English: On July 14th, the emperor was stationed in northern Gansu. Han Jian of Huazhou sent his son, Han Zheng, to send greetings to the emperor's daily life and living conditions, and requested the emperor to stay in Huazhou. Therefore, Han Jian was awarded the posts of Gyeonggi Capital Commanding Envoy, Pacifying and Placing Envoy, and Urging the Implementation of Various Programs.

古文：诏谓建曰： 启途之行，已在河东，今且幸鄜畤。 
现代文：皇上下达给韩建的诏令说 ：一开始出发上路就已经在河东，如今暂时到去。 
English: The imperial edict sent by the emperor to Han Jian said, "From the beginning of our journey, we have been in Hedong, and now we are going there temporarily."

古文：甲午，次富平。
现代文：七月十五日，皇上驻跸于富平。
English: On July 15, the emperor arrived in Fuping.

古文：韩建来朝，泣奏曰： 籓臣倔强，非止茂贞。
现代文：韩建前来朝见皇上，流着泪奏道： 藩臣倔强不服从朝廷，不止李茂贞一人。
English: Han Jian came to see the emperor in the morning and sang with tears: The vassal stubbornly disobeyed the imperial court, more than Li Maozhen alone.

古文：虽太原勤王，无宜巡幸。
现代文：虽然太原李克用的军队来救援皇上，还是不宜于到太原去。
English: Although Taiyuan Li Ke used the army to rescue the emperor, it is still not appropriate to go to Taiyuan.

古文：臣之镇守，控扼关畿，兵力虽微，足以自固。
现代文：我所镇守的藩镇，控制、扼守着关内畿辅地区，兵力虽然微少，足以巩固自身。
English: The domain and town I am guarding control and hold the Kansai-Kiev region, and although the troop strength is small, it is enough to consolidate itself.

古文：陛下若轻舍近畿，远巡极塞，去园陵宗庙，宁不痛心，失魏阙金汤，又非良算。
现代文：陛下如果轻易放弃京师附近的地方，到极远的边塞地区去，离开了先帝的陵墓和宗庙，难道不痛心吗？丧失了朝廷的金城汤池，也不是好的办法。
English: If Your Majesty easily abandons the places near the capital, and goes to the remote border areas, leaving behind the former emperor's mausoleum and ancestral temple, won't it be painful? Losing the imperial palace of Jincheng, is not a good way.

古文：若舆驾渡河，必难再复，谋苟不臧，悔之宁及。
现代文：如果圣驾渡过黄河，必定难以恢复。决策如果不正确，后悔就来不及了。
English: If the saint drives across the Yellow River, it will be difficult to recover. If the decision is not correct, it will be too late to regret.

古文：愿陛下且驻三峰，以图恢复。 
现代文：希望陛下暂时留驻在三峰，以图恢复。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will stay in Sanfeng for the time being in an attempt to recover.

古文：上亦泣下曰： 朕难奈茂贞，忿不思难。卿言是也。 
现代文：皇上也流着眼泪说 ：我拿李茂贞没有办法，在气愤中想不到事情的困难，你的话是对的。 
English: The emperor also shed tears and said, "I have no way to deal with Li Maozhen. In my anger, I cannot think of the difficulties of the situation. Your words are right."

古文：乙未，次下邽丙申，驻跸华州，以衙城为行宫。
现代文：七月十六日，皇帝在下圭阝停留。七月十七日，皇上驻跸在华州，以署衙作为行宫。
English: On July 16th, the emperor stopped in Shimo-Kyuehwa, and on July 17th, the emperor stayed in Huazhou, using Denzhong as his residence.

古文：时岐军犯京师，宫室廛闾，鞠为灰烬，自中和已来葺构之功，扫地尽矣。
现代文：当时岐州的军队进犯京师，宫室和市场被糟蹋得只剩一片灰烬，自中和年以来修理建造的成就，全都一扫而光了。
English: At that time, the army of Qizhou invaded the Beijing Division, the palace room and the market were destroyed until there was only a piece of ash left, and the achievements of repair and construction since the Middle Ages were all swept away.

古文：乙巳，制以金紫光禄大夫、中书侍郎，兼礼部尚书、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、判户部事、上柱国、博陵县开国伯崔胤检校尚书左仆射，兼广州刺史、御史大夫，充清海军节度、岭南东道观察处置等使。
现代文：七月二十六日，决定任命金紫光禄大夫、中书侍郎、兼礼部尚书、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、掌户部事、上柱国、博陵县开国伯崔胤为检校尚书左仆射，兼任广州刺史、御史大夫，充任清海军节度使、岭南东道观察处置使。
English: On July 26th, it was decided to appoint Jin Zi Guanglu as a doctor of Chinese classics, a chancellor of Chinese classics, a chancellor of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Tongping Zhangji, a scholar of Jixianden University, a chancellor of the Ministry of Households, Shangzhuang Guo, and the founder of Boling County, Bao Cuiyan, as a vice-chancellor of the inspection of the school, and concurrently as a chancellor of Guangzhou and a vice-chancellor of history, and as an envoy of the Qing Navy and an envoy of the Lingnan Host Observation and Disposition.

古文：丙午，制以翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞、知制诰、嘉兴县开国子、食邑五百户陆扆为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：七月二十七日，决定任命翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞、知制诰、嘉兴县开国子、食邑五百户陆为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: On July 27th, it was decided to appoint Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, Shang Shuzhu Zuo Zheng, Zhizhe Yao, Jiaxing County Kaikun Zi, and 500 households in Shuei as household attendants and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：八月己酉朔。
现代文：八月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of August is a national holiday.

古文：甲寅，新除镇东军节度使钱镠权领浙江东道军州事。
现代文：八月初六，新授命的镇东军节度使钱霮暂掌浙江东道军州事务。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the newly-ordered Zhendong Military Festival made Qian Ye temporarily take charge of the affairs of the host military region of Zhejiang.

古文：戊午，制以户部侍郎、平章事陆扆为中书侍郎，兼判户部事。
现代文：八月初十，决定任命户部侍郎、平章政事陆为中书侍郎，兼掌户部的事务。
English: At the beginning of August 10th, it was decided to appoint the Household Attendant, Taira no Akira Seijiro, as the Chusho Attendant, and also in charge of the affairs of the Household Department.

古文：九月己卯朔，汴州硃全忠、河南尹张全义与关东诸侯俱上表，言秦中有灾，请车驾迁都洛阳。
现代文：九月初一，汴州朱全忠、河南尹张全义和关东的藩镇都奉上表章，说秦中有灾殃，请求圣驾迁都到洛阳。
English: On the first day of September, Zhu Quanzhong of Bozhou, Yin Zhang Quanzhong of Henan Province, and the towns of Guandong Province all presented banners saying that there was a calamity in Qin, and requested the holy driver to move the capital to Luoyang.

古文：全忠、全义言臣已表率诸籓，缮治洛阳宫室。
现代文：朱全忠、张全义说他们为各藩镇做出了表率，修理整治洛阳的宫室。
English: Zhu Quanzhong and Zhang Quanyi said that they had set an example for all the towns and villages in their domains by repairing and renovating the imperial palace in Luoyang.

古文：优诏答之。
现代文：皇上特颁优诏答复了他们。
English: The Emperor specially granted the Imperial Rescript.

古文：乙未，制新除清海军节度使崔胤复知政事。
现代文：九月十七日，决定新授命为清海军节度使的崔胤重新执掌政务。
English: On September 17th, it was decided that Cui Yan, who had been newly appointed as the Qing Navy's envoy to the Qing Dynasty, would take charge of government affairs again.

古文：胤之出镇，硃全忠再表请论奏，言胤不宜去相位，故有是命。
现代文：崔胤出京任节度使，朱全忠两度奉上表章请求允准所奏，说崔胤不应当离开相位，所以才有这道圣命。
English: When Cui Yin went to Beijing to serve as the festival envoy, Zhu Quanzhong twice requested permission from the emperor, saying that Cui Yin should not leave the position, which is why he had this sacred mission.

古文：丁酉，制中书侍郎、集贤殿大学士、判户部事陆扆责授硖州刺史，崔胤怒扆代己，诬奏扆党庇茂贞故也。
现代文：九月十九日，决定中书侍郎、集贤殿大学士、掌户部事务陆贬职为硖州刺史，这是因为崔胤对于陆代替了自己感到愤怒，在皇上面前诬告陆结党庇护李茂贞的缘故。
English: On September 19th, it was decided to demote Lu, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters and Calligraphy, a scholar of Jixianden University, and the head of the Household Affairs Department, to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou. This was because Cui Yin was angry that Lu had replaced him and falsely accused Lu of protecting Li Maozhen in front of the emperor.

古文：丙午，制以镇国军节度使韩建检校太尉，兼中书令，充修复宫阙、京畿制置、催促诸道纲运等使。
现代文：九月二十八日，决定任命镇国军节度使韩建为检校太尉，兼任中书令，充任修复宫阙使、京畿制置使、催促诸道纲运使等。
English: On September 28, it was decided to appoint Han Jian, the commander of the town and country military festival, as the inspector of the school, concurrently serving as the secretary of the middle school, acting as the restoration of the imperial palace, the Gyeonggi system, and the promotion of various programs.

古文：以京兆尹孙偓为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命京兆尹孙亻屋为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: Appointed Jingzhao Yin Sun Qianya as the secretary of the military department, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：十月戊申朔，以中书舍人、权知礼部贡举薛昭纬为礼部侍郎。
现代文：十月初一，任命中书舍人、暂掌礼部贡举事务的薛昭纬为礼部侍郎。
English: On the first day of October, Xue Zhaowei, the person in charge of the book collection and temporarily in charge of the tribute collection of the Ministry of Ceremonies, was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：壬子，制以兵部侍郎、平章事孙偓为中书侍郎，充凤翔行营招讨使。
现代文：十月初五，决定任命兵部侍郎、同平章事孙亻屋为中书侍郎，充任凤翔行营招讨使。
English: On the 5th day of October, it was decided to appoint the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Tongping Zhangji Sun Yingya, as the attendant of the Ministry of Central Affairs, and he served as the envoy of Fengxiang Campaign.

古文：甲寅，偓于驿舍会诸将，以议进军。
现代文：十月初七，孙亻屋在驿舍与诸将相见，以商议进军的事。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of October, Sun Yat-sen met with the generals at the imperial villa to discuss the march.

古文：戊午，李茂贞上表章请罪，愿改事君之礼，继修职贡，仍献钱十五万，助修京阙。
现代文：十月十一日，李茂贞奉上表章请罪，愿意改进侍奉君王的礼仪，继续承担按时上贡的义务，并献上十五万钱，以帮助修整京师的宫阙。
English: On October 11th, Li Maozhen was presented with a badge to plead guilty, willing to improve the etiquette of serving the monarch, continue to bear the obligation to pay tribute on time, and donate 150,000 yuan to help repair the imperial seal of Beijing.

古文：韩建左右之，师遂不行。
现代文：韩建操纵了这件事，军队便没有出发去讨伐李茂贞。
English: Han Jian manipulated the matter, and the army did not set out to fight against Li Maozhen.

古文：十一月丁丑朔，以韩建兼领京兆尹、京城把截使。
现代文：十一月初一，任命韩建兼任京兆尹和京城把截使。
English: On the first day of November, Han Jian was appointed to concurrently serve as the Beijing Zhaoyun and the Beijing City Interceptor.

古文：十二月丁未，李克用纵兵俘剽魏博诸郡邑。
现代文：十二月初一，李克用放纵士卒在魏博各城邑掳掠人口，抢劫财物。
English: On the first day of December, Li Ke used indulgent soldiers to abduct people and rob property in various cities and towns in Weibo.

古文：以前翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞、知制诰赵光远为御史中丞。
现代文：任命前翰林学士承旨、尚书左丞、知制诰赵光远为御史中丞。
English: Former Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi, Shang Shuzhu Zuo Zheng, and Zhao Guangyuan of Zhizhi Zheng were appointed as Mi Shi Zhong Zheng.

古文：太常礼院奏权立行庙，以备告飨，从之。
现代文：太常寺礼院奏请临时建立皇上在外祭祀的宗庙，以备举行祭享的大典。
English: The Rehearsal Hall of Taejō-ji Temple requested the temporary establishment of the Imperial Family's ancestral temple for external worship, in preparation for the grand ceremony.

古文：四年春正月丁丑朔，车驾在华州行宫，受群臣朝贺。
现代文：皇上允从。乾宁四年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸在华州的行宫，皇上接受群臣的朝贺。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Emperor Qianning, on the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor's chauffeur was stationed at the imperial palace in Huazhou, and the emperor received morning greetings from his ministers.

古文：癸未，汴将庞师古陷郓州，节度使硃瑄与妻荣氏溃围，瑄至中都，为野人所杀，荣氏俘于汴军。
现代文：正月初七，汴州将领庞师古攻陷郓州，郓州节度使朱王宣和妻子荣氏突围，朱暄逃到中都，被当地人杀死，荣氏被汴州军队所俘获。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Zhangzhou general Pang Shigu invaded and occupied Zhangzhou. The Zhangzhou Festival enabled Zhu Wangxuan and his wife Rongji to break out of the siege. Zhu Rong escaped to the capital and was killed by the locals. Rongji was captured by the Zhangzhou army.

古文：硃全忠署庞师古为郓州兵马留后。
现代文：朱全忠任命庞师古为郓州兵马留后。
English: Zhu Quanzhong appointed Pang Shigu as the commander of the Bozhou Terracotta Army.

古文：宰相孙偓罢知政事，守兵部尚书。
现代文：宰相孙亻屋被停止执掌政务，暂时代理兵部尚书。
English: The Prime Minister, Sun Yat-sen, was suspended from holding the reins of government, temporarily replaced by the Acting Minister of the Ministry of War, Shang Shu.

古文：二月丙午朔。
现代文：二月初一为丙午日。
English: The first day of February is C-noon.

古文：戊申，汴将葛从周攻兗州，陷之，节度使硃瑾奔杨行密，其将康怀贞降从周，硃全忠署从周为兗州兵马留后。
现代文：二月初三，汴州将领葛从周进攻兖州，攻破了城池，节度使朱瑾逃到杨行密那儿，他的部将康怀贞投降葛从周，朱全忠任命葛从周担任兖州兵马留后。
English: On the 3rd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：自是郓、齐、曹、棣、兗、沂、密、徐、宿、陈、许、郑、滑、濮等州皆没于全忠，唯王师范守青州，亦纳款于汴。
现代文：从此，郓州、齐州、曹州、棣州、兖州、沂州、密州、徐州、宿州、陈州、许州、郑州、滑州、濮州等州郡都落到了朱全忠手中，惟有王师范镇守青州，但也向朱全忠表示忠心。
English: From then on, Zhangzhou, Qizhou, Caozhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Mizhou, Xuzhou, Suzhou, Chenzhou, Huzhou, Zhengzhou, Luzhou, Zhangzhou and other prefectures and counties all fell into the hands of Zhu Quanzhong. Only Wang Shifan was able to defend Qingzhou, but he also expressed his loyalty to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：己未，制朝议大夫、守右散骑常侍、上柱国、荥阳县男郑綮为礼部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：二月十四日，决定朝议大夫、暂署右散骑常侍、上柱国、荥阳县男郑綮担任礼部侍郎、同平章事。
English: On February 14th, it was decided that Zheng Qi, a male from Shangzhu Province and Shenyang County, would serve as a ceremonial attendant and Tongping chapter member.

古文：癸丑，责授硖州刺史陆扆为工部尚书。
现代文：二月初八，将硖州刺史陆贬职为工部尚书。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, he demoted Zhangzhou Zhi Shilu to the position of engineering department.

古文：甲寅，华州防城将花重武告睦王已下八王欲谋杀韩建，移车驾幸河中。
现代文：二月初九，华州守城将领花重武报告，睦王以下的八个诸侯王想要谋杀韩建，把圣驾转移到河中府去。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, Huazhou's garrison commander reported that eight princes wanted to murder Han Jian and transfer him to Hezhongfu.

古文：帝闻之骇然，召韩建谕之，建辞疾不敢行。
现代文：皇上听说了这个情况之后感到很惊骇，召令韩建来京当面向他发出谕旨，韩建以有病为托辞，不敢前来。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he was horrified and summoned Han Jian to come to Beijing to issue an edict in his presence. Han Jian used his illness as an excuse and did not dare to come.

古文：帝即令通王已下诣建治所自陈。
现代文：皇上便命令通王以下诸侯王前去韩建府衙所在地自陈其情。
English: The emperor then ordered Tong Wang and the other princes to go to the location of Han Jianfu and express their feelings.

古文：建奏曰： 今日未时，睦王、济王、韶王、通王、彭王、韩王、仪王、陈王等八人到臣治所，不测事由。
现代文：韩建后来上奏说： 今日未时，睦王、济王、韶王、通王、彭王、韩王、仪王、陈王等八人来到我的府衙，不知道究竟为了什么事。
English: Han Jian later reported: "Today, eight people, including King Mutsu, King Ji, King Gong, King Tong, King Peng, King Han, King Yi, and King Chen, came to my palace. I don't know why.

古文：臣酌量事体，不合与诸王相见，兼恐久在臣所，于事非宜。
现代文：我酌量情况，不应当与各位王爷当面提及，加上王爷们在我府中待得太久，恐怕不太合适。
English: At my discretion, I should not mention it to the princes in person, and since the princes have been staying in my palace for too long, I'm afraid it's not appropriate.

古文：况睦王等与臣中外事殊，尊卑礼隔，至于事柄，未有相侵，忽然及门，意不可测。 
现代文：何况睦王等人和我之间，朝内朝外事情不同，尊卑的礼节也相悬隔，至于具体的事端，彼此没有侵犯过，忽然来到我府中，他们的用意实在难以猜测。 
English: What's more, things are different between Prince Mutsu and myself, inside and outside the court, and the etiquette of superiority and inferiority are also different. As for the specific incident, they have not violated each other, and suddenly came to our palace. Their intention is really difficult to guess.

古文：又引晋室八王挠乱天下事， 请依旧制，令诸王在十六宅，不合典兵。
现代文：又引用晋朝王室八王扰乱天下的事实说： 请依照原来的制度，令各位王爷住在十六宅，不应当执掌兵权。
English: He also cited the fact that the eight kings of the royal family of the Jin Dynasty disturbed the world and said: Please, in accordance with the original system, let the princes live in sixteen houses, and should not hold military power.

古文：其殿后捧日、扈跸等军人，皆坊市无赖之徒，不堪侍卫，伏乞放散，以宁众心。 
现代文：为皇上殿后的那些捧日都、扈跸都之流的军人，都是街市中的无赖之徒，不能够侍卫圣驾，请把他们解散，以使大家安心。 
English: For those soldiers of the sun-holding, sun-worshipping, sun-worshipping and sun-worshipping families who are after the emperor's palace are ruffians in the streets and cannot guard the saint, please disband them to make everyone feel at ease.

古文：昭宗不得已，皆从之。
现代文：昭宗不得已，都按照韩建说的办。
English: As a last resort, Akimune did everything according to Han Jian's instructions.

古文：是日，囚八王于别第，殿后侍卫四军二万余人皆放散，杀捧日都头李筠于大云桥下，自是天子之卫士尽矣。
现代文：当天，就把八王囚禁在另外的府第，为皇上殿后的四个侍卫军二万多人都被解散，并在大云桥下将捧日都头李筠处死，从此天子的卫士全部都没有了。
English: On the same day, the eight kings were imprisoned in another palace, and more than twenty thousand of the four bodyguards for the emperors and empresses were disbanded, and Li Xi, the head of the Hatchi capital, was executed under the Da Yun Bridge. From then on, all the guards of the emperor were gone.

古文：丙辰，韩建上表，请封拜皇太子、亲王，以为维城之计。
现代文：二月十一日，韩建奉上表章，请求封授皇太子、亲王，以作为维护城池的措施。
English: On February 11th, Han Jian was presented with a medal and asked to be granted the title of crown prince and prince as a measure to maintain the city.

古文：己未，制德王裕宜册为皇太子。
现代文：二月十四日，决定册封德王李裕为皇太子。
English: On February 14th, it was decided to enthrone the German king, Li Yu, as crown prince.

古文：辛酉，制第八男秘可封景王，第九男祚可封辉王，第十男祺可封祁王，第十一男禛可封雅王，第十二男祥可封琼王。
现代文：决定封皇上第八子李礻必为景王，封第九子李祚为辉王，封第十子李祺为祁王，封第十一子李礻真为雅王，封第十二子李祥为琼王。
English: It was decided that the eighth son of the emperor should be crowned King of Jing, the ninth son of the emperor should be crowned King of Hui, the tenth son of the emperor should be crowned King of Zhai, the eleventh son of the emperor should be crowned King of Ya, and the twelfth son of the emperor should be crowned King of Qiong.

古文：三月丙子朔。
现代文：三月初一为丙子日。
English: The first day of March is Cixi Day.

古文：戊寅，制韩建进封昌黎郡王，改赐 资忠靖国功臣 。
现代文：三月初三，决定晋封韩建为昌黎郡王，改赐封号为 资忠靖国功臣 。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, it was decided that Han Jian would be promoted to the county king of Changli County, and his title would be changed to Cizhong (資忠) and Jingguo (靖国) Hero.

古文：以光禄大夫、兵部尚书、上柱国、河间郡开国侯、食邑二千户张浚为尚书左仆射，依前充租庸使。
现代文：任命光禄大夫、兵部尚书、上柱国、河间郡开国侯、食邑二千户张浚为尚书左仆射，仍和原来一样充任租庸使。
English: He appointed Dr. Guanglu, Hyobusho, Shangzhuo, Kawama County, Kaigoku, and 2,000 households in Shokui as Shoshuzuke, and still served as the same as before.

古文：四月丙午朔，就加福建节度使王潮检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：四月初一，就地加授福建节度使王潮为检校尚书右仆射。
English: On the first day of April, the Fujian Festival was awarded to Wang Chao on the spot, so that Wang Chao became the school inspector.

古文：韩建献封事十条，其三，太子、诸王请置师傅教导。
现代文：韩建献上有关封授的建议十条，其中第三条是：太子和诸侯王都请安排师傅进行教导。
English: Han Jian presented ten suggestions about the conferment, the third of which was: the prince and princes should arrange a master to teach.

古文：乃以太子宾客王牍为诸王侍读。
现代文：于是任命太子宾客为诸侯王侍读。
English: The prince's guests were then appointed to wait on the princes.

古文：宰相郑綮以病乞骸，乃罢知政事。
现代文：宰相郑綮因病请求辞官退休，即命他停止执掌政务。
English: Prime Minister Zheng Rong requested to retire due to illness, and he was immediately ordered to stop handling government affairs.

古文：五月乙亥朔，以国子博士硃朴为右谏议大夫、同平章事。
现代文：五月初一，任命国子博士朱朴为右谏议大夫、同平章事。
English: On the first day of May, Dr. Kuniko appointed Dr. Zhu Pu as the doctor of the Right Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：七月甲戌，帝与学士、亲王登齐云楼，西望长安，令乐工唱御制《菩萨蛮》词，奏毕，皆泣下沾襟，覃王已下并有属和。
现代文：七月初一，皇帝和学士、亲王们一起登上齐云楼，西望长安，让乐工们演唱御制的《菩萨蛮》词，演奏完毕，都流下眼泪，泪水沾湿了衣襟，覃王以下还附和着一起唱。
English: On the first day of July, the emperor, the scholars, and the princes ascended the Qiyun Building together and looked westward to Chang'an. They asked the musicians to sing the words of the imperial "Bodhisattva." After the performance, they all shed tears, the tears wet their clothes, and the emperors and empresses sang together.

古文：八月甲辰朔，以工部尚书陆扆为兵部尚书。
现代文：八月初一，任命工部尚书陆为兵部尚书。
English: On the first day of August, Shang Shuling of the Engineering Department was appointed as Shang Shuling of the Military Department.

古文：韩建与邠、岐三镇素有无君之迹，及李克用诛行瑜，心常切齿。
现代文：韩建和州三个镇将，一向就有无视君王的行为，等到李克用杀了王行瑜，心中常切齿痛恨。
English: Han Jian and the three town commanders of Hanzhou have always ignored the king. When Li Ke used to kill Wang Xingyu, his heart was often filled with hatred.

古文：去岁车驾将幸河东，乃令延王戒丕使太原，见克用，陈省方之意。
现代文：去年圣驾将临幸河东府，便派延王李戒丕出使太原，见了李克用，陈述皇上有视察地方的意思。
English: Last year, when the Holy Prince arrived at the eastern capital of Linxinghe, he sent Li Jiechi, the king of Yan, as an envoy to Taiyuan to meet Li Keyong and explain the emperor's intention to inspect the region.

古文：是月，延王自太原还。
现代文：当月，延王从太原返回。
English: That month, Yan Wang returned from Taiyuan.

古文：韩建奏曰： 自陛下即位已来，与近辅交恶，皆因诸王典兵，凶徒乐祸，遂致舆驾不安。
现代文：韩建奏道： 自从陛下即位以来，和左近的辅臣关系恶劣，都是因为各王侯执掌兵权，凶徒们幸灾乐祸，以致圣驾不得安宁。
English: Han Jianso said, "Since His Majesty ascended the throne, the relationship with his closest vassals has been bad. This is because the princes hold the military power, and the criminals enjoy the misfortune. As a result, there is no peace for His Holiness.

古文：比者臣奏罢兵权，实虑有不测之变。
现代文：不久前我上奏罢除诸侯王的兵权，实在也是担心发生意外的变故。
English: Not long ago, I announced the abolition of the military power of the princes, and I was really worried about unexpected changes.

古文：今闻延王、覃王尚苞阴计，愿陛下宸断不疑，制于未乱，即社稷之福也。 
现代文：现在听说延王、覃王心中仍然包藏着阴谋，希望陛下圣断不要犹疑不决，在动乱没有发生的时候先发制人，就是社稷之福了。 
English: Now I have heard that Yan Wang and Zou Wang still have a conspiracy in their hearts. I hope that His Majesty will not hesitate to make a decision, and will pre-empt the unrest when it does not occur, which is a blessing for society.

古文：上曰： 岂至是耶！ 
现代文：皇上看了说： 难道到这个地步了吗！ 
English: The Emperor looked on and said: Has it really come to this?

古文：居数日，以上无报，乃与知枢密刘季述矫制发兵，围十六宅。
现代文：过了几天，因为皇上没有答复，韩建就和执掌枢密使事务的刘季述假传圣命发兵，包围了十六宅。
English: After a few days, because the emperor did not reply, Han Jiancang and Liu Ji, who was in charge of the envoy affairs, sent troops to surround the 16 houses.

古文：诸王惧，披发沿垣而呼曰： 官家救兒命！
现代文：诸侯王们十分恐惧，披散了头发沿着围墙喊道 ：皇上救儿子们一命呀！ 
English: The princes and kings were so terrified that they tore their hair and ran along the wall shouting: "Emperor, save the lives of your sons!"

古文：或登屋沿树。
现代文：有的登上屋顶，有的爬上树。
English: Some climbed onto rooftops, others climbed into trees.

古文：是日，通王、覃王已下十一王并其侍者，皆为建兵所拥，至石堤谷，无长少皆杀之，而建以谋逆闻。
现代文：当天，通王、覃王以下十一个王以及侍奉他们的人，都被韩建的士兵簇拥着，到了石堤谷，无论年长年幼都杀了，而韩建也得了阴谋叛乱的名声。
English: On the same day, eleven kings, including King Tong and King Gong, as well as their attendants, were surrounded by Han Jian's soldiers. When they arrived at Shidi Valley, they killed everyone, young and old, and Han Jian gained a reputation for conspiracy and rebellion.

古文：寻杀太子詹事马道殷、将作监许岩士，贬平章事硃朴，皆上所宠昵者。
现代文：接着又杀了太子詹事马道殷、将作监许岩士，将平章政事朱朴贬官，这都是皇上所宠幸亲昵的人。
English: Next, he killed Prince Zhan Shima Daoying, the future procurator Iwatsuru, and the future politician Zhu Pu, all of whom were favored and loved by the emperor.

古文：九月癸酉朔，以御史中丞狄归昌为尚书右丞。
现代文：九月初一，任命御史中丞狄归昌为尚书右丞。
English: On the first day of September, Di Guichang, the vice-commander of the Imperial Historian's Office, was appointed the vice-commander of the Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：以刑部侍郎杨涉为吏部侍郎。
现代文：任命刑部侍郎杨涉为吏部侍郎。
English: He appointed Yang Wu, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, as the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：制以镇海军节度使钱镠为镇海军节度、渐江东西道观察处置等使、杭州越州刺史、上柱国、吴王。
现代文：决定任命镇海军节度使钱霮为镇海军节度使、浙江东西道观察处置使、杭州越州刺史、上柱国、吴王。
English: It was decided to appoint Qian Ye as the town naval festival envoy, Zhejiang East-West Road Observation and Disposal Envoy, Hangzhou Yuezhou Jishi, Shangzhuo Guo, and Wu Wang as the town naval festival envoy.

古文：冬十月癸卯朔，以华州节度使韩建兼同州刺史、匡国军节度使。
现代文：冬，十月初一，任命华州节度使韩建兼任同州刺史、匡国军节度使。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, Han Jian was appointed as the official of the Huazhou Festival, and also served as the official of the festival of the Kuangguo Army.

古文：硃全忠遣其将权徐州兵马留后庞师古、兗州留后葛从周率兗、郓、曹、濮、徐、宿、滑等兵士七万渡淮讨杨行密。
现代文：朱全忠派遣他的部将，暂署徐州兵马留后庞师古、兖州留后葛从周率领兖州、郓州、曹州、濮州、徐州、宿州、滑州等地的士卒七万人渡过淮河讨伐杨行密。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched his commanders, temporarily dispatched Xuzhou soldiers and horses to stay behind Pang Shigu and Zhangzhou soldiers and horses to stay behind Ge Zhou, and led 70,000 soldiers from Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, Caozhou, Zhangzhou, Xuzhou, Suizhou, and Slanting to cross the Huai River to fight against Yang Xingmi.

古文：制以太中大夫、前御史中丞裴贽为礼部尚书、知贡举。
现代文：决定任命太中大夫、前御史中丞裴贽为礼部尚书，掌管贡举事务。
English: It was decided to appoint Tai Zhong Dafu and former Goshi Zhongzheng Pei Jun to be the ceremonial secretary, in charge of tribute affairs.

古文：幽州节度使刘仁恭大败沙陀于安塞，李克用单骑仅免。
现代文：幽州节度使刘仁恭在安塞把沙陀军打得大败，李克用仅仅单骑得以幸免。
English: The Yuzhou Festival caused Liu Rengong to defeat the Shado Army in Ansei, and Li Ke was spared with only a single ride.

古文：十一月壬申朔。
现代文：十一月初一为壬申日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Jinshin Day.

古文：癸酉，淮南大将硃瑾潜出舟师袭汴军于清口，庞师古举军皆没，师古被执。
现代文：十一月初二，淮南大将朱瑾暗中派出水军在清口袭击汴州军，庞师古全军覆没，庞师古被俘获。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Zhu Rongzhong, the general of Huainan, secretly sent a naval force to attack the Zhangzhou Army at Qingkou. Pang Shigu's entire army was destroyed, and Pang Shigu was captured.

古文：进葛从周自霍丘渡淮，至濠州，闻师古败，乃退军，信宿至渒河，方渡而硃瑾至。
现代文：当时葛从周正从霍丘渡过淮河，军队抵达濠州时，听说庞师古被击败，便退军了，经过两夜而到达氵卑河，正要渡河而朱瑾的军队来了。
English: At that time, Ge Cong Zhou was crossing the Huai River from Huoqiu. When the army arrived in Zhangzhou, he heard that Pang Shigu was defeated and withdrew. After two nights, he reached the Zoubei River. He was about to cross the river when Zhu Xi's army came.

古文：是日杀伤溺死殆尽，还者不满千人，唯牛存节一军先渡获免。
现代文：当天，葛存周的士卒几乎全被杀死淹死，逃回来的不满一千人，只有牛存节一军因为先渡河而免于被歼。
English: On the same day, almost all of Ge Cun Zhou's soldiers were killed and drowned, and less than a thousand escaped back. Only the army of Niu Cun Jie was spared from annihilation because they crossed the river first.

古文：比至颍州，大雪寒冻，死者十五六。自古丧师之甚，无如此也。
现代文：等抵达颍州，天降大雪，气候严寒，又死了十之五六，自古以来战败丧师没有像这样严重的。
English: When they arrived in Zhangzhou, there was heavy snowfall, the weather was cold, and five out of ten died. Since ancient times, there has never been such a serious defeat and death of a division.

古文：由是行密据有江、淮之间。
现代文：从此以后，杨行密据有长江、淮河之间的地区。
English: Since then, Yang Xingming has controlled the area between the Yangtze River and the Huai River.

古文：以检校司空、权知兗州兵马事葛从周为兗州刺史，充泰宁军节度使；以颍州刺史王敬荛检校尚书左仆射、兼徐州刺史，充武宁军节度使：从全忠奏也。
现代文：任命检校司空、暂时掌管兖州兵马事务的葛从周为兖州刺史，充任泰宁军节度使；任命颍州刺史王敬荛为检校尚书左仆射，兼任徐州刺史，充任武宁军节度使，这是按朱全忠的奏书任命的。
English: Ge Cong Zhou, the inspector of the school and temporarily in charge of the military and equestrian affairs of Bozhou, was appointed as the inspector of the school of Bozhou and served as the inspector of the Taining Army; Wang Jingyao, the inspector of the school of Bozhou, was appointed as the inspector of the school of Shangshu and also served as the inspector of the school of Xuzhou and served as the inspector of the Buzhou Army, which was appointed according to the report of Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：光化元年春正月辛未朔，车驾在华州。
现代文：光化元年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸在华州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Guanghua, the emperor's chauffeur arrived in Huazhou.

古文：以兵部侍郎崔远为户部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：任命兵部侍郎崔远为户部侍郎、同平章事。
English: He appointed the Hyobu chamberlain Cui Yuan as the household chamberlain, Tongpei Shoji.

古文：诸道贡修宫阙钱，命京兆尹韩建入京城计度。
现代文：各道府进奉修整宫阙的钱，派遣京兆尹韩建入京师计划度量。
English: All prefectures donated money for the renovation of the Imperial Palace, and the dispatch of Emperor Jingzhao, Emperor Yin, and Emperor Han to Beijing was planned and measured.

古文：硃全忠遣判官韦震奏事，求兼领郓州。
现代文：朱全忠派遣判官韦震前来奏事，请求兼管郓州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent the judge Wei Zhen to report the matter and request that he also take charge of Zhangzhou.

古文：时全忠军败之后，欲自大其权，以扼邻籓之变。
现代文：当时朱全忠在兵败之后，想要扩大自己的权限，以便扼死相邻藩镇的变乱。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong, after the military defeat, wanted to expand his authority in order to stifle the turmoil in the neighboring towns.

古文：幽州节度使刘仁恭恃安塞之捷，欲吞噬河朔，是月遣其子守文将兵袭沧州，节度使卢彦威弃城而循，守文遂据之，自称留后。
现代文：幽州节度使刘仁恭仗恃着安塞的胜利，想要吞并河朔地区，当月派遣他的儿子刘守文率兵袭击沧州，沧州节度使卢彦威放弃城池而逃跑，刘守文便占领了沧州，自称沧州节度留后。
English: The Yuzhou Festival made Liu Rengong take advantage of the victory of Ansei and wanted to annex the Heshuo region. That month, he sent his son Liu Shouwen to attack Cangzhou. The Cangzhou Festival made Lu Yanwei abandon the city and flee. Liu Shouwen then occupied Cangzhou, claiming to stay behind the Cangzhou Festival.

古文：四月庚子，制淑妃何氏宜册为皇后。
现代文：四月初一，决定册封淑妃何氏为皇后。
English: On the first day of April, it was decided to enthrone Sukey Ho as empress.

古文：上幸陟屺寺，宴从官于韩建所献御庄。
现代文：皇上驾临陟屺寺，在韩建所献的御庄上宴请随从的官员。
English: The emperor drove to Linfen Temple, where he held a banquet for the officials accompanying him at the Imperial Villa dedicated by Han Jian.

古文：五月己巳朔，以立后大赦。
现代文：五月初一，因为册立皇后而大赦天下。
English: On the first day of May, there was a general amnesty because a new empress had been crowned.

古文：汴将葛从周率众攻李克用邢、洺、磁等州，陷之。
现代文：汴州军将领葛从周率领部众进攻李克用辖治的邢州、氵名州、磁州等州，攻陷了这些地方。
English: The general of the Zhangzhou Army, Ge, led by Zhou, attacked the Zhangzhou, Zhangmeizhou, Magnetizedzhou and other provinces under the jurisdiction of Li Ke, and captured these places.

古文：全忠署从周为三州兵马留后。
现代文：朱全忠派葛从周担任三州兵马留后。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent Ge from Zhou to serve as the commander of the Tri-State Army.

古文：六月己亥，帝幸西溪观竞渡。
现代文：六月初一，皇帝来到西溪观看渡河竞赛。
English: On the first day of June, the emperor came to Xixi to watch the river crossing competition.

古文：天下籓牧、文武百僚上表，请车驾还京。
现代文：全国的藩镇守臣、文武百官奉上表章，请求皇上的车驾返回京师。
English: All over the country, hundreds of lords, vassals, and civil and military officials requested the emperor's car to return to the capital.

古文：七月，汴将氏叔琮陷赵匡凝之随、唐、邓等州。
现代文：七月，汴州将领氏叔琮攻陷赵匡凝辖治的隋州、唐州、邓州等地。
English: In July, the Bozhou general Uji no Tsubaki invaded Suizhou, Tangzhou, and Dengzhou, which were under the jurisdiction of Zhao Kuangning.

古文：敕升华州为兴德府，剌史为尹，左右司马为少尹，郑县为次赤，官员资望一同五府。
现代文：皇上敕命，把华州升格为兴德府，原主官刺史改为尹，左右司马改为少尹，郑县为次于赤县的畿县，官员的资望全部同于五府。
English: At the Emperor's behest, Huazhou was upgraded to Xingde Prefecture, the former chief official Zhishi was changed to Yin, the left and right Sima was changed to Shao Yin, Zheng County was changed to Kixian, which was next to Aka County, and the officials' titles were all the same in the five prefectures.

古文：封华岳庙为佑顺侯。
现代文：册封华岳庙为佑顺侯。
English: Huayue Temple was awarded the title of "Yu Shun Hou."

古文：八月戊戌朔。
现代文：八月初一为戊戌日。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day.

古文：己未，车驾自华还京师。
现代文：八月二十二日，皇上的车驾从华州返回京师。
English: On August 22nd, the emperor's chauffeur drove back from Huazhou to Beijing.

古文：甲子，御端门，大赦，改元光化。
现代文：八月二十七日，皇上驾临端门，下诏大赦天下，改年号为光化。
English: On August 27th, the emperor arrived at the front gate, issued a decree to pardon the world, and changed the year to Gwanghwamun.

古文：九月戊辰朔，以御史中丞狄归昌为尚书左丞。
现代文：九月初一，任命御史中丞狄归昌为尚书左丞。
English: On the first day of September, Di Guichang, the Vice-Minister of History, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Left.

古文：制以镇国、匡国等军节度使韩建守太傅、中书令、兴德尹，封颍川郡王，赐铁券，并御写 忠贞 以遗之。
现代文：决定任命镇国军、匡国军等军镇节度使韩建署理太傅、中书令、兴德尹，晋封为颍川郡王，赐给铁券，并由皇上御笔书写 忠贞 二字赠给他。
English: It was decided to appoint Han Jian, Deputy Taifu, Chushirei, and Xing Deyin as the military commanders of the Zhenguo Army, Kuangguo Army, and other military commanders of the Zhenguo Army, to be promoted to the king of Shichuan County, to be given iron coupons, and to be given the word "loyalty" written by the emperor.

古文：建累上表辞王爵，乃改封许国公。
现代文：韩建多次上表推辞王爵，于是改封为许国公。
English: Han Jian repeatedly submitted his resignation as prince, so he changed his title to Prince Xu.

古文：魏博节度使罗弘信进封临清郡王。
现代文：魏博节度使罗弘信晋封为临清郡王。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Luo Hongxin crowned as the King of Linqing County.

古文：是月，弘信卒，赠太师，谥曰庄肃。
现代文：当月，罗弘信去世，追赠太师职衔，追谥为庄肃。
English: That month, Luo Hongxin passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master.

古文：衙军立其子副大使绍威知兵马事，寻赐之节钺。
现代文：亲兵拥立罗弘信的儿子、节度副使罗绍威执掌兵马事务，朝廷不久赐给他节仗旄钺。
English: Luo Hongxin's son, the deputy envoy of the festival, Luo Shaowei, who personally supported the soldiers, took charge of the military affairs, and the court soon gave him the festival badge.

古文：十月丁酉朔，河南尹张全义就加侍中。
现代文：十月初一，河南尹张全义就地加授侍中。
English: On the first day of October, Yin Zhang Quanyi from Henan Province was promoted to Junior Chamberlain on the spot.

古文：汴将硃友恭自江西行营还，过安州，杀刺史武渝，遣部将守之。
现代文：汴州将领朱友恭从江西行营返回，经过安州时杀死安州刺史武渝，派部将镇守安州。
English: Zhu Yougong, the general of Zhangzhou, was returning from a campaign in Jiangxi Province. When he passed through Anzhou, he killed Anzhou's assassin, Shih Wuyong, and assigned him to guard Anzhou.

古文：汴将张存敬以兵袭蔡州，刺史崔洪纳款，请以弟贤质于汴，许之。
现代文：汴州将领张存敬率军袭击蔡州，蔡州刺史崔洪向他表示忠诚，请求让他的弟弟崔贤在汴州做人质，张存敬答应了他。
English: Zhang Cunjing, the general of Zhangzhou, led an army to attack Caizhou. Cui Hong, the governor of Caizhou, expressed his loyalty to him and requested that his brother Cui Xian be held hostage in Zhangzhou. Zhang Cunjing agreed.

古文：十二月丙寅，李克用将潞州节度使薛志勤死，泽州刺史李罕之乘其无帅，袭潞取之，遣其子颢乞降于汴，全忠表罕之为节度使。
现代文：十二月初一，李克用的部将潞州节度使薛志勤死去，泽州刺史李罕之乘潞州没有了主帅，偷袭潞州而占领了它，派他的儿子李颢向汴州请降，朱全忠上表请授予李罕之节度使之职。
English: On the first day of December, Li Ke's subordinate, the governor of Zhangzhou, Xue Zhiqin, died. The governor of Zhezhou, Li Hanzhi, took advantage of the fact that Zhangzhou was without a commander. He attacked Zhangzhou and occupied it. He sent his son, Li Jun, to Zhangzhou to ask for surrender. Zhu Quanzhong sent a request to the emperor to grant Li Hanzhi the post of governor.

古文：二年春正月乙未朔。
现代文：光化二年春，正月初一为己未日。
English: In the spring of the second year of Gwanghwamun, the first day of the first month was the last day.

古文：丁未，以兵部尚书陆扆为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：正月十三日，任命兵部尚书陆为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, he appointed Hyobu Sho Riku as Hyobu Jiro and Tonghei Shoji.

古文：二月，蔡州刺史崔洪为衙兵所迫，同窜淮南。
现代文：二月，蔡州刺史崔洪被亲兵所逼迫，和他们一起逃窜到淮南。
English: In February, Cai Zhou's assassin, Cui Hong, was forced by his own soldiers to flee with them to Huainan.

古文：时洪以弟贤质于汴，汴人遣贤还蔡，征兵三千出征。
现代文：当时崔洪让弟弟崔贤到汴州去做人质，汴州人遣送崔贤回到蔡州，征调三千名士兵出征。
English: At that time, Cui Hong asked his brother Cui Xian to go to Ganzhou to be a hostage. The Ganzhou people sent Cui Xian back to Caizhou and conscripted three thousand soldiers to go to war.

古文：蔡兵乱，杀贤，遂拥洪度淮。
现代文：蔡州的士兵发生动乱，杀死了崔贤，便拥戴着崔洪渡过淮河。
English: Soldiers in Caizhou rioted, killed Cui Xian, and then carried Cui Hong across the Huai River.

古文：硃全忠令其子友裕守蔡州。
现代文：朱全忠命令他的儿子朱友裕镇守蔡州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered his son Zhu Youyu to defend Caizhou.

古文：幽州节度使刘仁恭驱燕军十万，将兼赵、魏。
现代文：幽州节度使刘仁恭驱策十万名燕州士卒，将要兼并赵州、魏州。
English: The Yuzhou Festival made Liu Rengong drive 100,000 Yanzhou soldiers to annex Zhaozhou and Weizhou.

古文：是月陷贝州，人无少长皆屠之，投尸清水，为之不流。
现代文：当月攻陷了贝州，无论年少、年长的全都杀掉，把尸体投入清水，河水被尸体堵住而不能流动。
English: In the same month, Baizhou was invaded, and all the people, young and old, were killed and their bodies thrown into the clear water. The river was blocked by the bodies and could not flow.

古文：遂进攻魏州。
现代文：刘仁恭于是进攻魏州。
English: Liu Rengong then attacked Weizhou.

古文：罗绍威求救于汴。
现代文：罗绍威向汴州求救。
English: Rossoway called for help from Luzhou.

古文：三月，硃全忠遣大将张存敬率师援之，屯于内黄。
现代文：三月，朱全忠派大将张存敬率军救援魏州，部队屯驻在内黄。
English: In March, Zhu Quanzhong sent General Zhang Cun Rong to lead the army to rescue Weizhou, and the troops were stationed in Neihuang.

古文：葛从周自邢、洺率劲骑八百入魏州。
现代文：葛从周从邢州、氵名州率领强劲的骑兵八百人进入魏州辖境。
English: Ge Zong Zhou led a strong cavalry of eight hundred men from Bozhou and Anming into the jurisdiction of Weizhou.

古文：燕将刘守文、单可及闻汴军在内黄，引军往击之。
现代文：燕州将领刘守文、单可及听说汴州军屯驻在内黄，带兵前去进攻他们。
English: Liu Shouwen, the general of Yanzhou, heard that the Zhangzhou army was stationed in Neihang and led his troops to attack them.

古文：存敬设伏内黄东，大败燕军，俘斩三万，生擒单可及。
现代文：张存敬在内黄东面设置伏兵，把燕州军打得大败，俘虏杀死三万人，生擒单可及。
English: Zhang Cunjing set up an ambush on the east side of Inner Hwang, defeated the Yanzhou Army, killed thirty thousand prisoners, and could only be reached by the survivors.

古文：刘守文以余众还魏州，为存敬、从周所乘，燕军复败，仁恭父子仅免。
现代文：刘守文带着残余的部众返回魏州，被张存敬、葛从周乘机袭击，燕州军再次失败，仅仅刘仁恭父子脱逃。
English: Liu Shouwen returned to Weizhou with his remaining followers, and was attacked by Zhang Cunjing and Ge Zhou. The Yanzhou army failed again, and only Liu Rengong and his son escaped.

古文：汴、魏合兵蹑之，赵人复邀之东境，自魏至沧五百里间，僵尸相枕。
现代文：汴州、魏州的军队合兵一起在后面追击，赵州军队又在其东面边境拦击，从魏州到沧州的五百里距离之间，尸体互相枕藉。
English: The troops of Bozhou and Weizhou pursued together in the rear, and the troops of Zhaozhou intercepted them on their eastern border. Between the five hundred mile distance from Weizhou to Cangzhou, the corpses passed each other.

古文：是春，有白气竟天如练，自西南彻东北，而旋有燕卒之败。
现代文：这年春天，有一道白气穿过天空，像一条白练一样，从西南方一直贯通到东北方，不久就发生了燕州军战败的事。
English: In the spring of this year, a white wind passed through the sky, like a white streak, from the southwest to the northeast, and soon the defeat of the Yanzhou Army occurred.

古文：四月，汴将氏叔琮由上党进军攻太原，出石会，为沙陀擒其前锋将陈章，叔琮乃退去。
现代文：四月，汴州将领氏叔琮从上党进军攻打太原，军出石会时，被沙陀军擒获他的前锋将领陈章，氏叔琮就退回去了。
English: In April, the Zhangzhou general Uji Shuxuan marched from Shangdang to attack Taiyuan. When the army came out of the stone meeting, his forward general Chen Zhang was captured by the Shatou army, and Uji Shuxuan retreated.

古文：六月，制以昭义节度使、检校太尉、兼太师、侍中、潞州大都督府长史、陇西郡开国公、食邑三千户李罕之为孟州刺史，充河阳三城节度、孟怀观察等使；以检校司徒、孟州刺史、河阳节度使丁会为泽、潞等节度使：从全忠奏也。
现代文：六月，决定任命昭义军节度使、检校太尉兼太师、侍中、潞州大都督府长史、陇西郡开国公、食邑三千户李罕之为孟州刺史，充任河阳三城节度使、孟怀观察使等；任命检校司徒、孟州刺史、河阳节度使丁会为泽州、潞州节度使，这都是按照朱全忠的上奏而任命的。
English: In June, it was decided to appoint Zhao Yijun as Mengzhou's delegate to the festival, Zhao Yijun as the inspecting officer, Zhao Yijun as the inspecting officer, Zhao Yijun as the governor, Zhao Yijun as the founding father of Shaanxi County, Li Han as the founder of 3,000 households in food villages, Zhao Yijun as the delegate to the festival, and Meng Huai as the observer. Zhao Yijun as the inspecting officer, Zhao Yijun as the inspecting officer, Meng Zijun as the inspecting officer, and Ding Heyang as the delegate to the festival, were

古文：丁丑，李罕之至怀州，卒于传舍。
现代文：六月十五日，李罕之到怀州，死在驿舍里。
English: On June 15th, Li Han Zhi went to Huai Zhou and died in a hermitage.

古文：陕州军乱，杀其帅王珙，立都将军李璠为留后。
现代文：陕州军队发生动乱，杀死他们的主帅王珙，拥立都将军李为陕州留后。
English: The army of Shaanxi Province was in turmoil, their commander Wang Qi was killed, and the general Li was left in charge of Shaanxi Province.

古文：丁亥，制以前太常卿刘崇望为吏部尚书，兵部侍郎裴枢为吏部侍郎，户部侍郎薛昭纬为兵部侍郎。
现代文：六月二十五日，决定任命前太常卿刘崇望为吏部尚书，任命兵部侍郎裴枢为吏部侍郎，任命户部侍郎薛昭纬为兵部侍郎。
English: On June 25th, it was decided to appoint Liu Chongwang, the former First Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, as the Secretary of the General Staff, Baizhu, the Secretary of the General Staff, as the Secretary of the General Staff, and Xue Zhaowei, the Secretary of the General Staff, as the Secretary of the General Staff.

古文：七月，青州守海州将牛从毅拥郡人投淮南，行密遂有海州。
现代文：七月，青州署理海州事务的将领牛从毅带领着全郡人投向淮南，杨行密便据有了海州。
English: In July, Niu Congyi, the general in charge of Haizhou affairs in Qingzhou, led the whole county to invest in Huainan, and Yang Xingmi won Haizhou.

古文：十一月，陕州衙将硃简杀李璠，自称留后，降汴，全忠表简为帅守。
现代文：十一月，陕州的衙将朱简杀死李，自称为陕州留后，投降汴州。朱全忠上表任命朱简为陕州主帅。
English: In November, Zhu Quanzhong of Shaanxi Province ordered Zhu Jian to kill Li. Zhu Quanzhong claimed to have stayed in Shaanxi Province and then surrendered to Quanzhong Province. Zhu Quanzhong then appointed Zhu Jian as the head coach of Shaanxi Province.

古文：三年春正月庚子朔，以礼部尚书裴贽为刑部尚书。
现代文：光化三年春，正月初一，任命礼部尚书裴贽为刑部尚书。
English: On the first day of the first month of the new year, in the spring of the third year of the Guanghua era, Pei Yao, the secretary of the Ministry of Rites, was appointed the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：癸卯，硃全忠奏： 本贯宋州砀山县，蒙恩升为辉州，其地卑湿，难葺庐舍，请移辉州治所于单父县。 
现代文：正月十四日，朱全忠上奏说： 我的本籍宋州砀山县，承蒙皇上的恩典升格为辉州，这地方低洼潮湿，难以修建房舍，请把辉州的治所迁移到单父县。 
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong said: My native Songzhou Lushan County, thanks to the grace of the emperor, has been upgraded to Huizhou. This place is low-lying and humid, and it is difficult to build houses. Please relocate the administrative center of Huizhou to Shanfa County.

古文：从之，仍赐号为崇德军。
现代文：皇上允准，并将辉州赐号为崇德军。
English: The emperor agreed, and gave Huizhou the title of Chongdejun.

古文：四月戊午，汴、魏合军攻沧州，以报入郛之役，葛从周连陷沧德郡邑，王镕遣使和解于全忠，令刘仁恭修好，汴、魏班师。
现代文：四月初一，汴州、魏州合军进攻沧州，以报复侵入外城的那一战，葛从周连续攻陷沧州、德州的郡县，王派遣使者和朱全忠和解，又令刘仁恭和朱全忠修好，汴州和魏州的军队班师返回。
English: On the first day of April, the combined armies of Bozhou and Weizhou attacked Cangzhou in retaliation for the invasion of the outer city. Ge Zhou successively invaded the counties and counties of Cangzhou and Dezhou. Wang sent an envoy to reconcile with Zhu Quanzhong, and ordered Liu Rengong and Zhu Quanzhong to make peace. The army divisions from Bozhou and Weizhou returned.

古文：辛未，皇后、太子谒九庙。
现代文：五月十四日，皇后、太子参谒九庙。
English: On May 14, the Empress and the Crown Prince visited nine temples.

古文：六月丁巳，硃全忠表陕州兵马留后硃简乡里同宗，改名友谦，乞真授节钺。
现代文：六月初一，朱全忠上表奏称陕州兵马留后朱简为乡里同宗，改名为朱友谦，请求朝廷实授节旄斧钺。
English: On the first day of June, Zhu Quanzhong issued a proclamation saying that after the Shaanxi soldiers and horses left, Zhu Jian was a member of the same family in the village, changed his name to Zhu Youqian, and requested the court to carry out the award ceremony.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：戊辰，特进、司空、门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史王抟贬崖州司户，寻赐死于蓝田驿，枢密使宋道弼、景务修并死。
现代文：六月十二日，将特进、司空、门下侍郎、平章政事，监修国史王抟贬职为崖州司户，不久即在蓝田驿将其赐死，枢密使宋道弼、景务修也一起赐死。
English: On June 12th, he demoted Tetsujin, Siku, his attendant, Taira no Shoji, and the overseer of national history, Wang Xi, to the position of Yashu steward. Soon after, he was put to death in Lantian County, and the imperial envoy Song Daojun and Jing Mu Xiu were also put to death.

古文：为崔胤所诬，言三人中外相结也。
现代文：他们受到崔胤的诬陷，说他们三人在朝内外互相勾结。
English: They were framed by Choi Yin, saying that the three of them were colluding with each other inside and outside the government.

古文：七月丁亥朔，兵部尚书刘崇望卒，赠司空。
现代文：七月初二，兵部尚书刘崇望去世，追赠为司空。
English: On the second day of July, Liu Chongwang, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Siku.

古文：甲午，兵部郎中薛正表为右谏议大夫。
现代文：七月初九，兵部郎中薛正表担任右谏议大夫。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, Xue Zhengbo, a middle-ranking official of the Ministry of Military Affairs, assumed the post of doctor of the Right Division.

古文：以许州刺史硃友恭检校司徒，为颍州刺史；以左武卫将军赵霖检左仆射，为许州刺史；宣武押衙刘知俊检校右仆射，为郑州刺史：从全忠奏也。
现代文：任命许州刺史朱友恭为检校司徒、颍州刺史；任命左武卫将军赵霖为检校左仆射、许州刺史；任命宣武军押衙刘知俊为检校右仆射、郑州刺史，这都是依朱全忠的上奏而任命的。
English: The appointment of Zhu Youqiong, the marshal of Xuzhou, as the marshal of Xuzhou; the appointment of Zhao Lin, the general of Zuowei, as the marshal of Xuzhou; the appointment of Liu Zhijun, the marshal of Xuanwu, as the marshal of Zhengzhou; these were all appointed according to Zhu Quanzhong's prelude.

古文：戊申，制以武贞军节度、澧朗叙等州观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、检校司徒、同平章事、朗州刺史、上柱国、冯翊郡开国侯、食邑一千五百户雷满检校太保，封冯翊郡王，余如故。
现代文：七月二十三日，决定任命武贞军节度使、澧州朗州叙州等州观察处置使、开府仪同三司、检校司徒、同平章事、朗州刺史、上柱国、冯翊郡开国侯、食邑一千五百户雷满为检校太保，封授冯翊郡王，其余官职照旧。
English: On July 23rd, it was decided to appoint Wu Zhen Jun's envoy to the military festival, Zhangzhou Langzhou Xuzhou and other states' observation and disposition envoys, Kaifu Yi and three departments, school inspection officers, Tongping Zhangji, Langzhou Zhishi, Shangzhu Guo, Fengye County's founding governor, and food villages' fifteen hundred households of Lei Man as school inspection guards, and confer the title of Fengye County's king, and the remaining official positions will remain unchanged.

古文：以武泰军节度、黔中观察处置等使、光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、黔州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国赵崇封天水县开国子，食邑五百户。
现代文：封授武泰军节度使、黔中观察处置使、光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、黔州刺史、御史大夫、上柱国赵崇为天水县开国子、食邑五百户。
English: Emissary of the Thai-Myanmar Military Festival, Emissary of the Observation and Disposition of the Middle School in Handan, Doctor Guanglu, School Inspector Shangshu Zuopu, Historian of Handan, Doctor of History, Shangzhuang Province Zhao Chong is the founder of Tianshui County and 500 households in food villages.

古文：庚戌，制昭义节度留后、光禄大夫、检校司空、上柱国孟迁为检校司徒，兼潞州大都府长史，充昭义节度副大使、知节度事、潞磁邢洺等州观察处置使，仍封平昌县男，食邑三百户，从李克用奏也。
现代文：七月二十五日，决定昭义军节度留后、光禄大夫、检校司空、上柱国孟迁担任检校司徒，兼任潞州大都督府长史、充任昭义军节度副大使，执掌节度使事务、潞州磁州邢州氵名州等州观察处置使，并封为平昌县男、食邑三百户，这是依从李克用的上奏而决定的。
English: On July 25th, it was decided that after the Shouyijun Festival, Dr. Guanglu, the school inspector, and the upper pillar, Guo Mengqian, would serve as the school inspector, concurrently serve as the governor of Zhangzhou, serve as the deputy ambassador of the Shouyijun Festival, take charge of the festival affairs, and serve as the state observation and disposal envoy of Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou, and Renmeizhou and other states, and be appointed as the man of Pyeongchang County and the food of three hundred households. This was decided according to Li Keyi's report.

古文：以金紫光禄大夫、守兵部尚书、上柱国、乐安郡开国公、食邑一千五百户孙储守兵部尚书，兼京兆尹。
现代文：任命金紫光禄大夫、暂署兵部尚书、上柱国、乐安郡开国公、食邑一千五百户孙储暂署兵部尚书，兼任京兆尹。
English: He appointed Jin Zi Guanglu as a doctor, temporarily signed the military department's official document, Shangzhu Guo, Le'an County as the founding father of the country, and 1500 households in Shuei County as Sun Zu, temporarily signed the military department's official document, and concurrently served as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：乙卯，制忠烈卫圣镇国功臣、剑南西川节度副大使、知节度事、管内营田观察处置统押近界诸蛮兼西山八国云南安抚制置等使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、中书令、成都尹、上柱国、琅邪郡王、食邑三千户、实封一百户王建可兼剑南东川、武信军两道都指挥制置等使，加食邑一千户，余如故。
现代文：七月三十日，决定 忠烈卫圣镇国功臣 、剑南西川节度副大使、执掌节度使事务、辖区内营田使、观察处置使、统押近界诸蛮使、兼任西山八国云南安抚制置使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、中书令、成都尹、上柱国、琅笽郡王、食邑三千户、实封一百户王建兼任剑南东川、武信军两道都指挥制置使，加授食邑一千户，其余官职照旧。
English: On July 30th, it was decided that Zhong Liao Wei Sheng Zhen Guo Gong Zhen, Vice-Ambassador of the Jianan West River Festival, in charge of the festival affairs, in the jurisdiction of the Ying Tian Zhen, observation and disposition of the envoy, in charge of the barbarian envoys in the near abroad, concurrently serving as the West Mountain eight countries Yunnan pacification envoy, Kaifu Yi Tong three division, school inspection captain, Chinese book order, Chengdu Yin, Shangzhu Guo, Shixian Wang, three thousand households of the food village, one hundred households of the real estate Wang Jian concurrently served as the

古文：时建攻下梓州顾彦晖，兼有东川洋、果、阆等州故也。又以忠义军节度、山南东道管内观察处置三司水陆发运等使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、中书令、兼襄州刺史、上柱国、南平王、食邑三千户赵匡凝可检校太师、兼中书令，加实封一百户。
现代文：这是因为当时王建攻破了顾彦晖的梓州，兼并了东川的洋州、果州、阆州等州的缘故，又任命忠义军节度使、山南东道辖区内观察处置使、三司水陆发运使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、中书令、兼职襄州刺史、上柱国、南平王、食邑三千户赵匡凝署理检校太师，兼任中书令，加授实封食邑一百户。
English: This was due to the fact that at that time Wang Jian broke through Gu Yanqi's Zizhou and annexed Dongchuan's Yangzhou, Guozhou, Zhangzhou and other states. He also appointed the loyalist army's festival envoy, the observation and disposal envoy in the Shannan host jurisdiction area, the three departments of water and land transport envoy, the three departments of Kaifu instrument and the three departments, the inspector of the school, the Chinese calligrapher, the part-time Yangzhou stabbing history, Shangzhu Guo, Nanping Wang, and the 3,000 households of the food village of Zhao Kuangge. He also served as the Chinese

古文：八月丙辰朔，硃全忠奏： 先割汝州隶许州，请却还东都。
现代文：八月初一，朱全忠上奏章说： 原先把汝州割属于许州，希望退还给东都管辖。
English: On the first day of August, Zhu Quanzhong wrote: Originally, Ruzhou was assigned to Xuzhou, and I hope it will be returned to the jurisdiction of Dongdu.

古文：河阳先管泽州，今缘蕃戎占据，得失不常，请权割河南府王屋、清河、巩三县隶河阳。 
现代文：河阳府原先管辖泽州，现在由于被蕃戎外族占据，回归和失控没有一定，希望暂时把河南府的王屋、清河、巩县三个县划属河阳府。 
English: Heyang Prefecture was originally under the jurisdiction of Zezhou, but now, due to being occupied by foreign ethnic groups, the return and loss of control are not certain. It is hoped that the three counties of Wangya, Qinghe and Gongxian in Henan Prefecture will be temporarily assigned to Heyang Prefecture.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：癸亥，制忠贞平难功臣、河东节度、管内观察处置等使、开府仪同三司、守太师、兼中书令、北都留守、太原尹、上柱国、晋王、食邑九千户、食实封七百户李克用加实封一百户。
现代文：八月初八，决定 忠贞平难功臣 、河东节度使、辖区内观察处置使、开府仪同三司、暂署太师、兼中书令、北都留守、太原尹、上柱国、晋王、食邑九千户、实封食邑七百户李克用加授实封一百户。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, it was decided that the Loyal and Faithful Hero, the Hedong Festival Envoy, the Observation and Disposition Envoy in the Jurisdiction Area, the Kaifu Ceremony and the Three Departments, the Temporary Taishi, and the Chinese Calligraphy, the Beidou Left-Behind, the Taiyuan Yin, the Shangzhu Country, the Jin Wang, the Food Village of Nine Thousand Households, and the Sealed Food Village of Seven Hundred Households would be used to increase the number of Sealed Food Villages.

古文：丁卯，以朝请大夫、虞部郎中、知制诰、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋颜荛为中书舍人。
现代文：八月十二日，任命朝请大夫、虞部郎中、知制诰、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋颜荛为中书舍人。
English: On August 12th, he appointed Asaba no daibu, Yubetsu no roju, Chisei no shaku, Kamitsubashira no kuni, and Taisei no tsubaki no yakitori as chusho-sojin.

古文：己巳，制前归义军节度副使、权知兵马留后、银青光禄大夫、检校国子祭酒、监察御史、上柱国张承奉为检校左散骑常侍，兼沙州刺史、御史大夫，充归义节度、瓜沙伊西等州观察处置押蕃落等使。
现代文：八月十四日，决定前归义军节度副使、暂署兵马留后、银青光禄大夫、检校国子祭酒、监察御史、上柱国张承奉为检校左散骑常侍，兼任汝州刺史、御史大夫、充任归义军节度使、瓜州沙州伊州西州等州观察处置使、押蕃落使等。
English: On August 14th, it was decided that the former deputy envoy of the festival of the returned rebels, the temporary signing of the soldiers and horses, the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu, the school inspection of the national son's sacrificial wine, the inspector of the history, and the upper pillar of the country Zhang Chengbo would be the school inspection of the left sanshan riding attendant, concurrently serving as the secretary of the history of Ruzhou, the secretary of the history, acting as the envoy of the festival of the returned rebels, the observer of Guazhou, Shazhou, Izhou, Xizhou and other states, and the ambassador of the fall of the

古文：庚辰，太原大将李嗣昭攻洺州、下之，执汴将硃绍宗。
现代文：八月二十五日，太原军大将李嗣昭进攻氵名州，攻了下来，擒获汴州将领朱绍宗。
English: On August 25th, Li Shizhao, the general of the Taiyuan Army, attacked Zhangmengzhou, and captured Zhu Shaosong, the general of Zhangzhou.

古文：汴将葛从周率师赴之，嗣昭弃城而去。
现代文：汴州将领葛从周率军前往增援，李嗣昭放弃氵名州而离去。
English: Zhangzhou's general led Ge from Zhou's army to reinforce, and Li Shizhao abandoned Zhangming and left.

古文：从周邀之于青山口，晋军大败，从周乘胜攻镇州。
现代文：葛从周在青山口拦击李嗣昭，太原军大败，葛从周乘胜进攻镇州。
English: Ge from Zhou stopped Li Shizhao at the Qingshan Pass, the Taiyuan Army was defeated, and Ge from Zhou won the attack on Zhenzhou.

古文：壬午，制荆南节度、忠万归夔涪峡等州观察处置水陆催运等使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、兼中书令、江陵尹、上柱国、上谷郡王、食邑三千户成汭可检校太师、中书令，余如故。
现代文：八月二十七日，决定荆南节度使、忠州万州归州夔州涪州峡州等州观察处置使、水陆催运使、开府仪同三司、检校太尉、兼职中书令、江陵尹、上柱国、上谷郡王、食邑三千户成担任检校太师、中书令，其余官职仍和原来一样。
English: On August 27th, it was decided that Jingnan Festival Envoy, Chungju Banzhou Returned to Chuzhou, Chuzhou Gorge State Observation and Disposal Envoy, Water and Land Transport Envoy, Kaifu Yi Tong Third Division, School Inspection Officer, Part-time Chinese Calligraphy Instructor, Jiangling Yin, Shangzhu Province, Shanggu County King, and 3,000 households in Shiyou County will serve as School Inspection Officer and Chinese Calligraphy Instructor, and other official positions will remain the same as before.

古文：甲申，制扶危匡国致理功臣、特进、行尚书左仆射、兼门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、判度支、上柱国、清河郡开国公、食邑二千户崔胤可开府仪同三司，进封魏国公，加食邑一千户，余如故。
现代文：八月二十九日，决定 扶危匡国政理功臣 、特进、署理尚书左仆射、兼职门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、暂掌度支事务、上柱国、清河郡开国公、食邑二千户崔胤担任开府仪同三司，晋封为魏国公，并加授食邑一千户，其余官职仍和原来一样。
English: On August 29th, it was decided that Fu Jing Kuangguo, a meritorious politician and statesman, and Tejin, the deputy of Shang Shuzo, and the part-time attendant of his disciple, Tong Ping Zhangji, the supervisor of the national history, would be temporarily in charge of the branch affairs, Shang Zhuo, the founding of Qinghe County, and the 2,000 households of Cuisine Cui Yan would serve as the founding ceremony and the third division, and would be promoted to Wei Guo Guo Guo, and 1,000 households of Cuisine Cui would be added, and the remaining official positions would remain the same as before.

古文：九月丙戌朔，硃全忠引三镇之师攻镇州，王镕惧，遣判官周式、副大使王昭祚、主事梁公儒子弟为质于汴，出犒师绢十五万匹求盟，许之。
现代文：九月初一，朱全忠率领三镇的军队进攻镇州，王心中恐惧，派遣判官周式、副大使王昭祚、主事梁公儒的子弟到汴州去做人质，并献出犒赏军队用的十五万匹绢，请求订盟和解，朱全忠允许了他。
English: On the first day of September, Zhu Quanzhong led the troops of the three towns to attack Zhenzhou. Wang was afraid and sent the judge Zhou Shi, the deputy ambassador Wang Zhaojun, and the son of the leader Liang Gongru to Zhangzhou to be a hostage. He also offered 150,000 yakitori to reward the troops and asked for an alliance and reconciliation. Zhu Quanzhong allowed him.

古文：张存敬遂自深、冀进军，攻瀛、莫，下郡邑二十，阻雨泥泞，不及幽州。
现代文：张存敬便从深州、冀州进军，进攻瀛州、莫州，攻破了二十个郡县，因大雨道路泥泞而受阻，不能到幽州。
English: Zhang Cunjing then marched from Shenzhou and Jizhou to attack Zhangzhou and Mozhou, breaking through twenty counties. Due to the heavy rain, the roads were muddy and could not reach Yuzhou.

古文：遂西行陷祁州，大败中山将王处直军于沙河北，进屯怀德驿。
现代文：便向西前进，攻陷了祁州，在沙河北面把中山州将领王处直的军队打得大败，进驻于怀德驿。
English: He then advanced to the west, conquered Zhangzhou, defeated the army of Zhongshan State General Wang Shanzhi in the north of the Shahe River, and stationed in Huai De.

古文：遂攻定州，节度使王郜奔太原，衙将王处直斩孔目官梁汶，出缣二十万乞盟，许之。
现代文：于是又进攻定州，节度使王郜逃奔太原，亲军衙将王处直杀死孔目官梁汶，献出二十万匹绢请求订立和约，得到朱全忠允许。
English: So they attacked Dingzhou again, and the festival made Wang Zhi flee to Taiyuan. The pro-army Zhi killed Wang Shizhi directly and killed the Confucian official Liang Wen, and offered 200,000 horses to request a peace treaty, which was allowed by Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠遂署王处直为义武军留后。
现代文：朱全忠便任命王处直担任义武军节度留后。
English: Zhu Quanzhong then appointed Wang Shanzhong to be in charge of the festival of the Volunteer Army.

古文：乙巳，制扶危匡国致理功臣、开府仪同三司、守太保、兼门下侍郎、平章事，充太清宫使、修奉太庙使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运等使、上柱国、齐国公、食邑五千户、食实封一百户徐彦若可检校太尉、同平章事，充清海军节度、岭南东道管内观察处置供军粮料等使。
现代文：九月二十日，决定 扶危匡国致理功臣 、开府仪同三司、署理太保、兼门下侍郎、平章政事、充任太清宫使、修奉太庙使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使、上柱国、齐国公、食邑五千户、实封食邑一百户徐彦若担任检校太尉、同平章事、充任清海军节度使、岭南东道辖区内观察处置使、供军粮料使等。
English: On September 20th, it was decided that Xu Yan, who served as a school inspector, Tongping Zhangji, full-time Qing navy festival envoy, observation and disposal envoy in the Lingnan host jurisdiction area, and grain supply envoy, would be appointed as a meritorious subject, Kaifu Yi Tong 3rd Division, acting eunuch, concurrently a subordinate attendant, Taira Zhang political affairs, full-time Taiqing palace envoy, worshipping eunuch envoy, Hongwu Pavilion university scholar, envoy of the Enrichment Fund, salt and iron transportation envoy, Shangzhuang Province, Qi Province, 5,000 households in food villages, and 100

古文：丙午，制光禄大夫、中书侍郎、兼吏部尚书、同平章事、充集贤殿大学士、判户部事、博陵郡开国公、食邑二千户崔远罢知政事，守本官。
现代文：九月二十一日，决定光禄大夫、中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事、充任集贤殿大学士、执掌户部事务、博陵郡开国公、食邑二千户崔远停止执掌政务，暂署本职。
English: On September 21st, it was decided that Dr. Guanglu, the chief secretary of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office

古文：戊申，制左仆射、门下侍郎、平章事、监修国史、判度支崔胤充太清宫使、修奉太庙使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，依前判度支，兼充诸道盐铁运等使。
现代文：九月二十三日，决定左仆射、门下侍郎、平章政事、监修国史、执掌度支使事务崔胤充任太清宫使、修奉太庙使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，仍旧掌管度支使事务，兼充诸道盐铁转运使。
English: On September 23rd, it was decided that Zuoxia, his attendant, Pingzhang, who was in charge of political affairs, supervised the study of national history, and was in charge of the affairs of the imperial envoy, Cui Yan would be appointed as the imperial envoy to the Qing dynasty, the imperial envoy to the imperial court, the imperial envoy to the imperial court, the imperial envoy to the imperial court, the imperial envoy to the imperial palace, the imperial envoy to the imperial palace, the imperial envoy to the imperial palace, the imperial envoy to the imperial palace, the imperial envoy to the imperial palace, the imperial envoy to the imperial palace, the imperial

古文：光禄大夫、中书侍郎，兼户部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、吴郡开国公、食邑一千五百户陆扆为门下侍郎、户部尚书、监修国史。
现代文：由光禄大夫、中书侍郎、兼职户部尚书、同平章事、上柱国、吴郡开国公、食邑一千五百户陆担任门下侍郎、户部尚书、监修国史。
English: From Dr. Guanglu, Chusho Jiro, part-time Hube Shosho, Tongping Zhangji, Shangzhuo Province, Wuzhong County Kaigong, and Shueyi 1,500 households served as subordinate Jiro, Hube Shosho, and supervision of national history.

古文：以正议大夫、守刑部尚书、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋裴贽为中书侍郎，兼刑部尚书、同平章事，充集贤殿大学士。
现代文：任命正议大夫、署理刑部尚书、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑三百户、赐紫金鱼袋裴贽为中书侍郎，兼任刑部尚书、同平章事，充任集贤殿大学士。
English: He appointed Zheng Rong Daofu, Acting Director of the Criminal Investigation Department Shang Shu, Shang Zhuo Guo, the founder of Hedong County, and 300 households of food villages, and awarded the Purple Gold Fish Bag to Pei Yao as the secretary of the Central Investigation Department, concurrently serving as the Director of the Criminal Investigation Department Shang Shu, Tong Ping Zhangji, and serving as a member of the Jixian Palace University.

古文：以银青光禄大夫、行尚书吏部侍郎、上柱国裴枢为中书侍郎、同平章事，判户部事。
现代文：任命银青光禄大夫、暂署尚书吏部侍郎、上柱国裴枢为中枢侍郎、同平章事，执掌户部事务。
English: He appointed Yin Qingguanglu as doctor, Shang Shuling as secretary, Shangzhu Guo Peizhu as central secretary, and Tongping Zhangji as secretary in charge of the household affairs.

古文：辛亥，以光禄大夫、尚书右仆射、租庸使张浚罢租庸使，守本官。
现代文：九月二十六日，革去光禄大夫、尚书右仆射、租庸使张浚的租庸使之职，暂时署理本官。
English: On September 26th, Dr. Guanglu, Shang Shuji, and Zhang Jian were removed from their posts, and Zhang Jian was temporarily appointed as acting director.

古文：十月丙辰朔。
现代文：十月初一为乙卯日。
English: The first day of October is the first day of the second month.

古文：辛酉，以前清海军节度副使、朝散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、御史大夫、上柱国王溥守左散骑常侍，充盐铁副使。
现代文：十月初七，任命前清海军节度副使、朝散大夫、检校左散骑常侍、御史大夫、上柱国王溥署理左散骑常侍，充任盐铁副使。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of October, he appointed the former Qing Navy Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former Vice-Minister of Ceremonies, the former

古文：癸未，制以保义军节度留后、银青光禄大夫、检校户部尚书、兼御史大夫、上柱国硃友谦为金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射，兼陕州大都督府长史、御史大夫，充保义军节度、陕虢观察处置等使。
现代文：十月二十九日，决定任命保义军节度留后、银青光禄大夫、检校户部尚书、兼御史大夫、上柱国朱友谦为金紫光禄大夫、检校尚书右仆射，兼任陕州大都督府长史、御史大夫，充任保义军节度使、陕虢观察处置使。
English: On October 29th, it was decided to appoint Yin Qingguanglu as doctor, Shang Shuxu as inspector, and Shang Youqian as superintendent of history, and Zhu Youqian as secretary of Jin Ziguanglu, Shang Shuxu as superintendent of history, and Shang Shuxu as superintendent of history, to serve as inspector of history and superintendent of history, and to serve as inspector of festivals and inspector of Shaanxi and Fujian Provinces.

古文：十一月乙酉朔。
现代文：十一月初一为乙酉日。
English: The first day of November is Acetylene Day.

古文：庚寅，左右军中尉刘季述、王仲先废昭宗，幽于东内问安宫，请皇太子裕监国。
现代文：十一月初六，左右军中尉刘季述、王仲先废掉昭宗，把他囚禁在东内的问安宫，请求皇太子李裕监国。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the year, Liu Ji, a lieutenant of the Left and Right Armies, reported that Wang Zhongxian had abolished Zhaozong, imprisoned him in the east of the An Palace, and asked the crown prince Li Yu to supervise the country.

古文：时昭宗委崔胤以执政，胤恃全忠之助，稍抑宦官。
现代文：当时昭宗把执政的权柄委托给崔胤，崔胤依仗着朱全忠的帮助，逐步压抑宦官。
English: At that time, Shozong entrusted the power of governing to Cui Yan, who, with the help of Zhu Quanzhong, gradually suppressed the eunuchs.

古文：而帝自华还宫后，颇以禽酒肆志，喜怒不常，自宋道弼等得罪，黄门尤惧。
现代文：而皇帝从华州回到皇宫以后，颇在游猎和饮酒方面放纵自己，喜怒无常，自从宋道弼等得罪被处死后，宦官们特别害怕。
English: However, after the emperor returned to the imperial palace from Huazhou, he indulged himself in hunting and drinking, and he was moody. Since Song Daojun was executed, the eunuchs were particularly afraid.

古文：至是，上猎苑中，醉甚，是夜，手杀黄门、侍女数人。
现代文：这一天，皇上在苑中行猎，酒醉得厉害，当天夜间，亲手杀死几名宦官和宫女。
English: On this day, the emperor was hunting in the garden, he was very drunk, and that night, he killed several eunuchs and court ladies with his own hands.

古文：庚寅，日及辰巳，内门不开。
现代文：初六这天，已经到辰时和巳时，寝宫的门还没有打开。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, it was already late in the afternoon and early in the morning, and the door of the sleeping palace had not yet opened.

古文：刘季述诣中书谓宰相崔胤曰： 宫中必有不测之事，人臣安得坐观？
现代文：刘季述到中书省去对宰相崔胤说 ：宫中一定发生了什么意外的事，做臣子的怎么能坐视不管呢？
English: Liu Ji said to the prime minister Cui Yan: "There must have been an accident in the palace. How can a courtier sit idly by?"

古文：我等内臣也，可以便宜从事。 
现代文：我们是内臣，可以根据具体情况自行处置。 
English: We are vassals, and we can make our own decisions according to the specific situation.

古文：即以禁兵千人破关而入，问讯中人，具知其故。
现代文：便带了一千名禁军把门打破进去了，问内宫的人，探悉了昨晚发生的事情。
English: So he took a thousand forbidden soldiers, broke down the door and went in, asked the people in the inner palace, and found out what had happened last night.

古文：即出与宰臣谋曰： 主上所为如此，非社稷之主也。废昏立明，具有故事，国家大计，非逆乱也。 
现代文：刘季述等就出来和宰相商量说： 皇上的行为像这样，不是一个能保全社稷的君王，废除昏君，拥戴明皇，是有先例可循的，这是有关国家存亡的大计，不是谋逆作乱。 
English: Liu Jishu and others came out to discuss with the prime minister and said: The emperor's behavior is like this, it is not a king who can preserve the social order. There is a precedent to follow in abolishing the dim prince and supporting the bright emperor. This is a grand plan for the survival of the country concerned, not a rebellion.

古文：即召百官署状，崔胤等不获已署之。
现代文：即把百官召来，出具文状签名，崔胤等不得已被迫签了名。
English: That is to say, the centurion was summoned and issued a written signature, and Cui Yan and others were forced to sign their names.

古文：季述、仲先与汴州进奏官程岩等十三人请对，对讫，季述上殿待罪次。左右军将士齐唱万岁声，遂突入宣化门，行至思政殿，便行杀戮，径至乞巧楼下。帝遽见兵士，惊堕床下，起而将去，季述、仲先掖而令坐。
现代文：刘季述、王仲先和汴州的进奏官程岩等十三人请求陈述事由，陈述完毕，刘季述上殿以罪臣身份听候处理，左右军的将士齐声高呼万岁，于是突入宣化门，走到思政殿便开始杀人，一直进到乞巧楼下，皇上忽然看见士兵来到，惊得从床上跌了下来，爬起来想走，刘季述、王仲先把他扶起来让他坐着。
English: Thirteen people, including Liu Jishu, Wang Zhongxian, and Cheng Yan, the marching officer of Zhangzhou, requested a statement of the cause of the incident. After the statement was completed, Liu Jishu went to the palace as a criminal to await treatment. The soldiers of the left and right armies shouted in unison, "Long live!" He then rushed into the Xuanhua Gate, walked to the Shizheng Palace and began to kill people. He went all the way down to the Beggar's House. The emperor suddenly saw the soldiers coming, fell down from the bed in shock, got up and wanted to leave. Liu Jishu and Wang Zhongxian helped him up

古文：何皇后遽出拜曰： 军容长官护官家，勿至惊恐，有事取军容商量。 
现代文：何皇后立即出来拜见他们说 ：将军们护着官家，不要让他吓着了，有什么事听取将军们的商量。 
English: The empress immediately came out to meet them and said, "The generals are protecting the officials, don't let him be scared, listen to the generals' advice on anything."

古文：季述即出百官合同状，曰： 陛下倦临宝位，中外群情，愿太子监国，请陛下颐养于东宫。 
现代文：刘季述便拿出百官们一起签名的文书，说： 皇上倦于治理国事，朝廷内外官员们的情绪都希望由太子监国处理国政，请陛下在东宫颐养天年。 
English: Liu Ji then took out a document signed by hundreds of officials and said: "The emperor is tired of governing state affairs. Officials both inside and outside the imperial court are hoping that the crown prince will oversee state affairs. I would like to ask His Majesty to live a long life in the East Palace."

古文：帝曰： 吾昨与卿等欢饮，不觉太过，何至此耶！ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：我昨天还和你们在一起高兴地喝着酒，不知不觉喝多了，哪至于到这个地步呢！ 
English: The emperor said, "Yesterday, I was still happily drinking wine with you, and I unknowingly drank too much. How did it get to this point?

古文：皇后曰： 圣人依他军容语。 
现代文：皇后说： 圣上就按他们这几位将军说的话办吧。 
English: The empress said, "Sacredly, let's do as these generals have said."

古文：即于御前取国宝付季述，即时帝与皇后共一辇，并常所侍从十余内人赴东宫。
现代文：于是就当着皇帝的面取出玉玺交给刘季述，当时皇帝和皇后就共乘一辆车，和平时侍从左右的十几个宫人前往东宫去了。
English: So, in front of the Emperor, he took out the Jade Scepter and handed it to Liu Jiura. At that time, the Emperor and Empress shared a car, and during peacetime, more than a dozen courtiers went to the East Palace.

古文：入后，季述手自扃锁院门，日于窗中通食器。
现代文：进宫之后，刘季述亲手把宫院的门锁上，每天只从窗户中把装着食品的食器送进去。
English: After entering the palace, Liu Jishu locked the door of the palace courtyard with his own hands, and every day he only sent dishes containing food through the window.

古文：是日，迎皇太子监国，矫宣昭宗命称上皇。
现代文：当天，把太子迎来监国，假传昭宗的圣旨称昭宗为太上皇。
English: On the same day, the crown prince was ushered into the position of regent, and the pseudo-legend of Shoson's holy will proclaimed Shoson to be the emperor.

古文：甲午，宣上皇制，太子登皇帝位，宰臣、百僚、方镇加爵进秩，又赐百僚银一千五百两、绢千匹、绵万两充救接，皆季述求媚于朝也。
现代文：十一月初十，宣布太上皇的决定，由太子登基即皇帝位，宰臣、百官、各方镇都晋封爵位，增加俸禄，又赠给百官白银一千五百两、绢一千匹、绵一万两，以作为接济，这都是刘季述为了讨好朝臣们而做的。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the decision of the retired emperor was announced. The crown prince was enthroned as the emperor, the vice-ministers, the officials and the towns were promoted to the ranks, the salary was increased, and the officials were given 1,500 taels of silver, 1,000 taels of gold and 10,000 taels of fine linen as gifts. All of this was done by Liu Jishu to please the courtiers.

古文：时硃全忠在定州行营，崔胤与前左仆射张浚告难于全忠，请以兵问罪，全忠自行营还大梁。
现代文：当时朱全忠在定州军营中，崔胤和前左仆射张浚一起向朱全忠报告变乱，请求他率兵前来问罪，朱全忠即从军营返回大梁。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong was in the Dingzhou military camp. Cui Yin and his former left-hand man, Zhang Jun, reported the disturbance to Zhu Quanzhong and asked him to come with his soldiers to ask for punishment. Zhu Quanzhong immediately returned to Daliang from the military camp.

古文：十二月乙卯朔。
现代文：十二月初一为乙卯日。
English: The first day of December is the first day of the second month.

古文：癸未夜。护驾盐州都将孙德昭、周承诲、董彦弼以兵攻刘季述、王仲先，杀仲先，携其首诣东宫门，呼曰： 逆贼王仲先已斩首讫，请陛下出宫慰谕兵士。 
现代文：十二月二十九日夜间，前来护驾的盐州都将孙德昭、周承诲、董彦弼率军进攻刘季述、王仲先，杀死了王仲先，提着他的脑袋来到东宫门口，大叫道： 反贼王仲先已经被斩首了，请陛下出宫来慰问、告谕士兵。 
English: On the night of December 29th, Sun Dezhao, Zhou Chengyu, and Dong Yanqi, who came to escort the carriage, led their troops to attack Liu Jishu and Wang Zhongxian. They killed Wang Zhongxian and brought his head to the gate of the East Palace, shouting: Anti-thief Wang Zhongxian has been beheaded, please Your Majesty come out of the palace to console and tell the soldiers.

古文：宫人破钥，帝与皇后方得出。
现代文：宫人打坏了锁钥，皇上和皇后才得出来。
English: The palace staff broke the key, and the Emperor and Empress were able to get out.

古文：天复元年春正月甲申朔，昭宗反正，登长乐门楼，受朝贺。
现代文：天复元年春，正月初一，昭宗重新恢复帝位，登上长乐门城楼，接受百官朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, in the spring of the year of the Restoration of Heaven, Akimune restored the imperial throne, ascended the castle tower of Changle Gate, and received the morning greetings of hundreds of officials.

古文：班未退，孙德昭执刘季述至楼前，上方诘责，已为乱棒击死，乃尸之于市。
现代文：朝班还没有退，孙德昭擒获刘季述来到楼前，皇上正要质问斥责他，刘季述已经被乱棒打死，便把他的尸体陈放在大街上。
English: The morning shift had not yet retired, when Sun De Zhaohui received Liu Jishu and came to the front of the building. The emperor was about to question and reprimand him. Liu Jishu had already been beaten to death, and his body was put on the street.

古文：乙酉，制以孙德昭检校司空，充静海军节度使。
现代文：正月初二，决定任命孙德昭为检校司空，充任静海军节度使。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, it was decided to appoint Sun Dezhao as the inspector of the school, and he served as the delegate of the Jing Navy Festival.

古文：丙戌，宰相崔胤进位司空。
现代文：正月初三，宰相崔胤晋封勋位为司空。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Prime Minister Choi Tan was promoted to the rank of Siku.

古文：己丑，硃全忠械程岩，折足槛送京师，戮之于市。
现代文：正月初六，朱全忠对程岩加械具，折断双足，用囚笼押送到京师，在街市上处死。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong rigged up a machine against Chengyan, broke both his legs, and sent him to Beijing Division in a cage, where he was executed in the market.

古文：制皇太子裕降为德王，改名祐。
现代文：决定把皇太子李裕降为德王，改名为李。
English: It was decided to downgrade the crown prince Li Yu to the German king and change his name to Li.

古文：庚寅，制以孙德昭为安南节度、检校太保。以周承诲为邕州刺史、邕管节度经略使，以董彦弼为容州刺史、容管节度等使，并检校太保、同平章事。
现代文：正月初七，决定任命孙德昭为安南节度，检校太保周承诲为邕州刺史、邕管节度使、经略使，任命董彦弼为容州刺史、容管节度使等，并任检校太保、同平章事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, it was decided to appoint Sun Dezhao as Annan's delegate, and Zhou Chengyao, the inspector of schools, as the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, the inspector of counties, and the inspector of counties.

古文：杀神策军使李师虔、徐彦回。
现代文：将神策军使李师虔、徐彦回处死。
English: Li Shikian and Xu Yan, the commanders of the Divine Providence Army, were executed.

古文：敕曰： 朕临御已来，十有四载，常慕好生之德，固无乐杀之心。
现代文：皇上敕命说： 我即皇帝位以来，已经有十四年了，总是仰慕皇天爱护生灵的德行，从来没有以杀戮为快乐的心肠。
English: The Emperor said desperately, "It has been fourteen years since I, the Emperor, ascended the throne, and I have always admired the Emperor's virtue of loving and protecting sentient beings. I have never had the pleasure of killing.

古文：昨季述等幽辱朕躬，迫胁太子。
现代文：不久前刘季述等幽禁羞辱我，逼我威胁太子。
English: Not long ago, Liu Qishu humiliated me by confining me and forced me to threaten the crown prince.

古文：李师虔是逆贼亲厚，选来东内主持，动息之间，俾其侦伺。
现代文：李师虔是逆贼亲厚的心腹之人，被他们选到东宫来主持卫戍，我的举止呼吸，都要让他侦察窥伺。
English: Li Shikian is a close confidant of the traitors. He was chosen by them to preside over the East Palace, and I have to let him spy on my every move.

古文：每有须索，皆不供承。
现代文：每当我有什么需求索取，都不供给、奉承。
English: Whenever I ask for something, they don't supply, they flatter me.

古文：要纸笔则恐作诏书，索锥刀则虑为利器，凌辱万状，出入搜罗。
现代文：需要纸笔就害怕我做诏书，索取锥刀就担心我用作武器，对我进行各种各样的凌辱。连出入宫禁的人都要进行搜查。
English: If I needed a pen and paper, they were afraid that I would make an imperial edict, if I asked for a awl, they were worried that I would be used as a weapon, and they abused me in all kinds of ways. Even people who were not allowed to enter or leave the palace were searched.

古文：朕所御之衣，昼服夜濯，凝冽之际，寒苦难胜。
现代文：我所穿的衣服，白天穿着，晚间脱下来洗，天寒地冻的日子，寒冷的痛苦难以忍受。
English: The clothes I wear, I wear them during the day, take them off at night to wash them, and when it's freezing cold, the pain of the cold is unbearable.

古文：嫔嫱公主，衾裯皆阙。
现代文：妃嫔和公主们，连被褥都很缺乏。
English: The concubines and princesses, even the bedding is in short supply.

古文：缗钱则贯百不入，缯帛则尺寸难求。
现代文：一点赋钱都不送进来，一尺一寸的衣料都难求。
English: They don't send in any money at all, and it's hard to find even an inch of clothing.

古文：六辈同其主张，五人权其威势。
现代文：六个人都是同一主张，五个人都施逞着自己的威势。
English: All six of them have the same idea, and all five of them are asserting their authority.

古文：若言状罪，翰墨难穷，若许生全，是为贷法，宜并处斩。 
现代文：如果要列举他们的罪状，那是笔墨所难以穷尽的，如果允许他们的生命保全，那就是枉法，应当全部处斩。 
English: If we were to enumerate their crimes, it would be too long to write, and if we were to allow their lives to be spared, it would be in vain and they should all be executed.

古文：时硃全忠既服河朔三镇，欲窥图王室篡代之谋，以李克用在太原，惧其角逐。
现代文：当时朱全忠既已使河朔等三个军镇降服，便想要图谋王室，实行篡位取而代之的阴谋，但因为李克用在太原，害怕他和自己相争。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong, who had already subjugated three military towns such as Hexuo, wanted to plot against the royal family and carry out a plot to usurp the throne, but because Li Ke was in Taiyuan, he was afraid of competing with himself.

古文：是月，全忠令大将张存敬率兵三万，由含山袭河中王珂。
现代文：当月，朱全忠命令大将张存敬率领三万名士卒，从含山出发袭击河中节度使王珂。
English: In the same month, Zhu Quanzhong ordered General Zhang Cunqian to lead 30,000 soldiers to attack Wang Ke, the commander of the Mid-Hebei Military Region, from Hanshan.

古文：晋州刺史张汉瑜、绛州刺史、陶建不意贼至，城守无备，皆以郡降。
现代文：晋州刺史张汉瑜、绛州刺史陶建没有料到贼军会来到，城池的防守没有准备，都带着全郡投降了。
English: Zhang Hanyu, the governor of Jinzhou, and Tao Jian, the governor of Zhangzhou, did not expect the bandits to come. The defense of the city was not prepared, and they surrendered with the whole county.

古文：存敬移兵围河中，王珂求救于太原，克用不能救，乃婴城谓存敬曰： 吾与汴王有旧，俟王至即降。 
现代文：张存敬便转移军队去包围河中，王珂向太原李克用求救，李克用无法救援，王珂就据城对张存敬说： 我和汴王有旧交情，等汴王到了我就投降。 
English: Zhang Cunjing then moved his army to encircle the middle of the river. Wang Ke went to Taiyuan to ask Li Ke for help, but Li Ke was unable to rescue him. Wang Ke then said to Zhang Cunjing: "I have an old friendship with King Gong. When King Gong arrives, I will surrender."

古文：二月甲寅朔。
现代文：二月初一为甲寅日。
English: The first day of February is "Kato-in" day.

古文：戊辰，硃全忠至河中，遂移王珂及兄璘、弟瓚举室徙于汴，以张存敬守河中。
现代文：二月十五日，朱全忠抵达河中，便把王珂和他的哥哥王王、弟弟王瓒全家都迁到汴州去，命令张存敬镇守河中。
English: On February 15, Zhu Quanzhong arrived in the middle of the river and moved Wang Ke, his brother Wang Wang, and his brother Wang Yao's entire family to Zhangzhou and ordered Zhang Cunjing to guard the middle of the river.

古文：是月，制以全忠检校太师、守中书令，进封梁王。
现代文：当月，决定任命朱全忠为检校太师、署理中书令，并晋封为梁王。
English: In the same month, it was decided to appoint Zhu Quanzhong as the proctor of the school, the acting vice-president of the school, and he was promoted to the position of Liang Wang.

古文：三月癸未朔，全忠引军归汴，奏： 河中节度使岁贡课盐三千车，臣今代领池场，请加二千车，岁贡五千车。
现代文：三月初一，朱全忠带着军队回到汴州，上奏朝廷说： 河中节度使每年上交税盐三千车，现在由我代管盐池二处，请允许我加二千车，每年上交五千车税盐。
English: On the first day of March, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Zhangzhou with his army and reported to the imperial court: "The River Festival has made it possible to hand over three thousand cars of tax salt every year. Now I am in charge of two salt ponds. Please allow me to add two thousand cars and hand over five thousand cars of tax salt every year."

古文：候五池完葺，则依平时供订额。 
现代文：等五处盐池修理完毕，再按照平时上交的税额进贡。 
English: After the five salt ponds are repaired, the tribute will be paid according to the amount of tax normally paid.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四月癸丑朔，汴军大举攻太原，氏叔琮以兵三万由天井关进攻泽潞，节度使孟迁以上党降。
现代文：四月初一，汴州军队大举进攻太原，氏叔琮率领三万名士卒从天井关进攻泽潞，泽潞节度使孟迁率上党投降。
English: On the first day of April, the Bozhou army launched a large-scale attack on Taiyuan. Mr. Zhu Rong led 30,000 soldiers to attack Zeguang from the ceiling, and the Zeguang festival made Meng Qian lead the party to surrender.

古文：叔琮长驱出围柏，营于洞涡驿。
现代文：氏叔琮从围柏长驱而出，在洞涡驿扎营。
English: Uji no Tsukuda set out from Waihaku Changpu and camped at Dongwurong.

古文：葛从周率赵、魏、中山之兵由土门入，陷承天军，与叔琮会。
现代文：葛从周率领赵州、魏州、中山的军队从土门进入，攻陷承天军，和氏叔琮会师。
English: Ge Zhou led the troops of Zhao, Wei and Zhongshan to enter from the earth gate, attack and trap the Heavenly Army, and join forces with his uncle.

古文：时属大雨，刍粮不给，汴将保众而还。
现代文：当时正值大雨天气，粮草供应不上，汴州将领为保住部众而退回。
English: At that time, it was raining heavily, and the supply of grain and grass was not available. The general of Zhangzhou withdrew in order to save his subordinates.

古文：甲戌，天子有事于宗庙。
现代文：四月二十二日，皇上在宗庙举行祭祀大典。
English: On April 22nd, the Emperor held a grand ritual at the ancestral temple.

古文：是日，御长乐门，大赦天下，改元天复。
现代文：当天，皇上驾临长乐门，下诏大赦天下，改年号为天复。
English: On the same day, the emperor arrived at the Changle Gate, issued a decree to pardon the world, and changed the year to Tianfu.

古文：李茂贞自镇来朝，赐宴于寿春殿，进钱数万缗。
现代文：李茂贞从节镇前来朝见皇上，皇上在寿春殿赐宴，李茂贞进奉钱款几万缗。
English: Li Maozhen came from Jiezhen to see the emperor, the emperor gave a banquet at Shuchun Hall, and Li Maozhen donated tens of thousands of baht.

古文：时中尉韩全诲及北司与茂贞相善，宰相崔胤与硃全忠相善，四人各为表里。
现代文：当时中尉韩全诲以及北司的内官和李茂贞相友善，而宰相崔胤则和朱全忠相友善，四个人各自互为表里通声气。
English: At that time, Lieutenant Han Quanzhang and the North Division's Inner Officer were friendly with Li Maozhen, while Prime Minister Cui Yan was friendly with Zhu Quanzhong, and the four of them were on good terms with each other.

古文：全忠欲迁都洛阳，茂贞欲迎驾凤翔，各有挟天子令诸侯之意。
现代文：朱全忠想要皇帝迁都至洛阳，李茂贞想要迎接圣驾到凤翔，各人都有挟天子以号令诸侯的意图。
English: Zhu Quanzhong wanted the emperor to move the capital to Luoyang, Li Maozhen wanted to welcome the Holy Prince to Fengxiang, and each of them had the intention of blackmailing the emperor to order the princes.

古文：五月壬午朔。
现代文：五月初一为壬午日。
English: The first day of May is Renpo Day.

古文：庚子，制门下侍郎、户部尚书、平章事陆扆加兵部尚书，进阶特进。
现代文：五月十九日，决定门下侍郎、户部尚书、平章政事陆加授兵部尚书，并晋封特进的阶官。
English: On May 19th, it was decided to promote his subordinate attendants, Hube Shoshu, and Pingzhang Zhengji Lu, to Heibe Shoshu, and to promote them to specially promoted officers.

古文：壬寅，制以硃全忠兼河中尹、河中节度、晋绛慈隰观察处置、安邑解县两池榷盐制置等使。
现代文：五月二十一日，决定以朱全忠兼任河中尹、河中节度使、晋绛慈隰等州观察处置使、安邑解县两地榷盐制置使。
English: On May 21, it was decided that Zhu Quanzhong would concurrently serve as the envoy of Yin Hezhong, the envoy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, the envoy of the observation and disposition of the state, and the envoy of the salt production in two places in Anyuril County.

古文：闰六月辛巳朔，制以河阳节度丁会依前检校司徒，兼潞州大都督府长史、昭义节度等使，代孟迁；以迁检校司徒，为河阳节度。
现代文：闰六月初一，决定任命河阳节度使丁会仍和以前一样担任检校司徒，兼任潞州大都督府长史、昭义军节度使，以代替孟迁；任命孟迁为检校司徒，并任河阳节度使。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, it was decided to appoint the Ding Association of Heyang Festival Envoys to continue to serve as school inspectors as before, and also serve as the chief historian of the governor of Zhangzhou and the festival envoy of the Shao Yi Army to replace Meng Qian; Meng Qian was appointed as a school inspector and also served as a festival envoy of Heyang.

古文：全忠奏也。
现代文：这是朱全忠奏请的。
English: It was requested by Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：仍请于昭义节度官阶内落下邢、洺、磁三州，却以泽州为属郡，其河阳节度只以怀州为属郡，从之。
现代文：并请求在昭义军节度使的官阶内除去邢州、氵名州、磁州三州。再以泽州作为其属郡，河阳节度使则只以怀州为属郡，皇上允从。
English: He also requested that the three prefectures of Yeongju, Yeongmyeonju and Gyeongju be removed from the official ranks of the Shogun's envoys, and that Zeju be used as the county to which the envoys belonged, while the Heyang envoys only belonged to the county of Huaiju, which was accepted by the emperor.

古文：全忠又奏请以齐州隶郓州，从之。
现代文：朱全忠又奏请把齐州隶属于郓州，皇上允从。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also asked the emperor to subordinate Qizhou to Zhangzhou. The emperor agreed.

古文：十月己卯朔。
现代文：十月初一为己卯日。
English: The first day of October is a holiday.

古文：戊戌，全忠引四镇之师七万赴河中，京师闻之大恐，豪民皆亡窜山谷。
现代文：十月二十日，朱全忠带领着四方镇的军队七万人前往河中，京师的人听到这个消息非常恐惧，有钱人都逃跑奔窜到山谷中。
English: On October 20, Zhu Quanzhong led 70,000 troops from Shifang Town to the middle of the river. The people of Beijing Division were very afraid when they heard this news. The rich people all ran away and rushed to the valley.

古文：十一月己酉朔。
现代文：十一月初一为己酉日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is a national holiday.

古文：壬子，中尉韩全诲与凤翔护驾都将李继诲奉车驾出幸凤翔。
现代文：十一月初四，中尉韩全诲和凤翔护驾都将李继诲奉迎车驾出京临幸凤翔。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Lieutenant Han Zhengyu and Fengxiang escorted Li Zhiyuan out of Beijing to welcome Fengxiang.

古文：是日，汴军陷同州，执州将司马鄴，华州节度使韩建遣判官李巨川送款。
现代文：当天，汴州军队攻陷同州，俘获同州守将司马邺，华州节度使韩建派遣判官李巨川去表示忠诚。
English: On the same day, the Zhangzhou army invaded and captured the same state, captured the same state's guard general Sima Qian, and the Huazhou festival made Han Jian send the judge Li Juchuan to show his loyalty.

古文：甲寅，汴军驻灵口。
现代文：十一月初六，汴州军屯驻在灵口。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of November, the Zhangzhou Army was stationed in Lingkou.

古文：乙卯，全忠知帝出幸，乃回兵攻华州。
现代文：十一月初七，朱全忠知道皇帝离开京师出走，便回军去进攻华州。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, Zhu Quanzhong knew that the emperor had left Beijing and fled, so he returned to the army to attack Huazhou.

古文：大军驻赤水，全忠以亲兵驻西溪。
现代文：大部队屯驻在赤水，朱全忠率领亲军驻扎在西溪。
English: A large force was stationed in Chishui, and Zhu Quanzhong led his relatives' army to be stationed in Xixi.

古文：韩建出降，乃署为忠武军节度使，以陈州为理所。
现代文：韩建出城投降，朱全忠便暂任他为忠武军节度使，以陈州作为治所。
English: Han Jian left the city to surrender, and Zhu Quanzhong temporarily appointed him as the commander of the loyal troops, with Chenzhou as the capital.

古文：丁巳，宰相崔胤令户部侍郎王溥至赤水砦，促全忠以兵迎驾。
现代文：十一月初九，宰相崔胤命户部侍郎王溥到赤水寨去催促朱全忠率军迎接圣驾。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of November, Prime Minister Choi Tan ordered Wang Ye, the head of the Household Division, to go to Chashuizhai to urge Zhu Quanzhong to lead the army to welcome the saint.

古文：戊午，全忠自赤水趋长安，崔胤率文武百僚太子太师卢知猷已下迎全忠于坡头。
现代文：十一月初十，朱全忠从赤水前往长安，崔胤率领自太子太师卢知猷以下的文武百官在坡头迎接朱全忠。
English: At the beginning of November 10, Zhu Quanzhong traveled from Chishui to Chang'an. Cui Yan led hundreds of civil and military officials from the Prince's Grand Master Lu Zhisheng down to meet Zhu Quanzhong at the slope.

古文：庚申，汴军趋凤翔。
现代文：十一月十二日，汴州军前往凤翔。
English: On November 12, the Zhangzhou Army marched to Fengxiang.

古文：戊辰，至岐下。
现代文：十一月二十日，汴州军到岐下。
English: On November 20th, the Bozhou army arrived in Qishan.

古文：全忠令判官李择、裴铸入城奏事，言： 臣在河中，得崔胤书，言奉密诏令臣以兵士迎驾，臣不敢擅自迎銮。 
现代文：朱全忠派判官李择、裴铸进城向皇帝奏事，说： 我在河中接到崔胤的信，说奉皇上的密诏，令我率领士卒迎接圣驾，我不敢擅自进城迎接圣驾。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent the judges Li Zhe and Pei Jiu into the city to report to the emperor, saying: I received a letter from Cui Yin in the river, saying that according to the emperor's secret decree, I was ordered to lead the soldiers to greet the holy driver. I did not dare to enter the city without permission to greet the holy driver.

古文：昭宗怒胤矫命，连诏全忠以兵士还镇。
现代文：昭宗对于崔胤矫传诏命很气愤，连续下诏令朱全忠率领士卒返回本镇。
English: Zhaozong was very angry with Cui Yin's dictation, and ordered Zhu Quanzhong and his soldiers to return to the town.

古文：辛未，全忠引军离凤翔，退攻邠州。
现代文：十一月二十三日，朱全忠带着军队离开凤翔，退而转攻州。
English: On November 23rd, Zhu Quanzhong left Fengxiang with his army and retreated to attack Shu.

古文：甲戌，制扶危致理功臣、开府仪同三司、守司空、门下侍郎、平章事、充太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运等使、判度支、上柱国、魏国公、食邑五千户、食实封二百户崔胤可责授朝散大夫、守工部尚书。
现代文：十一月二十六日，决定 扶危致理功臣 、开府仪同三司、署理司空、门下侍郎、平章政事、充任太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使、暂掌度支事务、上柱国、魏国公、食邑五千户、实封食邑二百户崔胤贬职为朝散大夫、暂署工部尚书。
English: On November 26th, it was decided to appoint the following persons to assist in the relief of the perilous situation: Li Liongongcheng, Kaifu Yi Tong San Sisi, Acting Siku, his attendant, Ping Zhang Zhengji, appointed as the envoy of the Taiqing Palace, the scholar of the Hongwu Museum, the envoy of the Enrichment Fund, the envoy of the salt and iron transportation of all roads, temporarily in charge of the relief and supply affairs, Shangzhuo Province, Wei Guogong, the 5,000 households of the food villages, and the 200 households of the real food villages. Cui Yan was demoted to the position of the

古文：乙亥，邠州节度使李继徽以城降，全忠乃舍其孥于河中，以继徽从军。
现代文：十一月二十七日，州节度使李继徽以州城投降汴州军，朱全忠便把他的子女留在河中，而让李继徽随军前进。
English: On November 27th, the state festival made Li Jihui surrender to the Shan State Army in the state capital. Zhu Quanzhong left his children in the river and let Li Jihui advance with the army.

古文：以汴军营于三原。
现代文：朱全忠把汴州军扎营在三原。
English: Zhu Quanzhong encamped the Zhangzhou Army in Mihara.

古文：十二月己卯，崔胤自长安至三原砦，与全忠谋攻凤翔。
现代文：十二月初一，崔胤从长安来到三原寨，和朱全忠一起谋划进攻凤翔的事。
English: On the first day of December, Cui Yin came from Chang'an to Mihara Village, and together with Zhu Quanzhong, they planned to attack Fengxiang.

古文：二年春正月戊申朔，车驾在凤翔。
现代文：天复二年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸在凤翔。
English: In the spring of the second year of Tianfu, on the first day of the first month, the emperor's chariot arrived in Fengxiang.

古文：全忠在三原，李克用遣大将周德威攻慈、隰、晋等州。
现代文：朱全忠在三原，李克用派大将周德威进攻慈州、隰州、晋州等州。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was in Mihara, and Li Ke used General Zhou Dewei to attack Cizhou, Zhangzhou, Jinzhou and other provinces.

古文：全忠归河中，令其将硃友宁率众五万屯绛州，大败太原军于蒲县西北，友宁乘胜追奔，陷汾州，进围太原。
现代文：朱全忠回到河中，命令他的部将朱友宁率领五万人屯驻在绛州，在蒲县西北把太原军打得大败，然后朱友宁乘胜追击逃敌，攻陷汾州，进而包围太原。
English: Zhu Quanzhong returned to the river and ordered his general Zhu Youning to lead fifty thousand people to settle in Zhangzhou. He defeated the Taiyuan army in the northwest of Pu County, and then Zhu Youning took advantage of the victory to pursue the fleeing enemy, capture Zhangzhou, and then surround Taiyuan.

古文：天子遣谏议大夫张顗至晋州谕全忠，令与太原通和。
现代文：皇帝派谏议大夫张岂页到晋州去告谕朱全忠，令他和太原李克用议和。
English: The emperor sent Zhang Xizhe, a doctor of negotiation, to Jinzhou to tell Zhu Quanzhong that he and Taiyuan Li Ke should negotiate for peace.

古文：属友宁再战不利，乃还关西。
现代文：恰值朱友宁两次作战失利，汴州军便返回了关西。
English: Just as Zhu Youning lost two battles, the Zhangzhou Army returned to Kansai.

古文：四月丁丑，硃友宁总大军屯于兴平。
现代文：四月初一，朱友宁统领大军屯驻在兴平。
English: On the first day of April, Zhu Youning led a large army stationed in Xingping.

古文：五月，岐军出战，大败于武功南之汉谷。
现代文：五月，岐州军出战，在武功县南面的汉谷被打得大败。
English: In May, the Qizhou army went to war and was soundly defeated at Hankow in the south of Wukong County.

古文：全忠闻捷，自引汴军五万西征。
现代文：朱全忠听到捷报，亲自率领五万汴州军西征。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong heard the good news, he personally led the western expedition of fifty thousand Zhangzhou troops.

古文：六月，进营虢县。
现代文：六月，汴州军进驻于虢县。
English: In June, the Zhangzhou Army entered Zhang County.

古文：丁亥，进围凤翔，遣判官入城迎驾。
现代文：六月十三日，进而包围凤翔，朱全忠派判官入城迎接圣驾。
English: On June 13, they encircled Fengxiang, and Zhu Quanzhong sent officials to the city to welcome the saint.

古文：九月，岐军出战，又败。
现代文：九月，岐州军出战，又遭失败。
English: In September, the Qizhou army went to war and was defeated again.

古文：十一月，鄜州节度使李周彝率众救凤翔。
现代文：十一月，州节度使李周彝率领部众救援凤翔。
English: In November, the state festival made Li Zhoujun lead the rescue of Fengxiang.

古文：十二月癸酉，汴将孔勍乘虚袭下鄜州，获周彝妻子，周彝即以兵士来降。
现代文：十二月初一，汴州将领孔京力乘虚攻下州，俘获了李周彝的妻子儿女，李周彝立即率领士卒前来投降。
English: On the first day of December, the Zhangzhou general Kong Jingli took advantage of the situation and captured Li Zhouyi's wife and children. Li Zhouyi immediately led his soldiers to surrender.

古文：于是邠、宁、鄜、坊等州皆陷于汴军。
现代文：于是州、宁州、州、坊州等州郡全部陷于汴州军之手。
English: As a result, the prefectures of Zhou, Ningzhou, Zhou and Fangzhou all fell into the hands of the Zhangzhou Army.

古文：茂贞惧，谋诛内官以解。
现代文：李茂贞心中恐惧，策划杀宦官以解除危机。
English: Fearing for her life, Li Maozhen planned to kill the eunuch to resolve the crisis.

古文：三年春正月癸卯朔，车驾在凤翔。
现代文：天复三年春，正月初一，皇上的车驾驻跸于凤翔。
English: In the spring of the third year of Tianfu, on the first day of the first month, the emperor's chariot was stationed in Fengxiang.

古文：甲辰，天子遣中使到全忠军，茂贞亦令军将郭启奇来达上欲还京之旨。
现代文：正月初二，皇上派太监到朱全忠军中，李茂贞也派军将郭启奇来传达皇上想要返回京师的意图。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor sent eunuchs to Zhu Quanzhong's army, and Li Maozhen also sent troops to Guo Qiji to convey the emperor's intention to return to Beijing.

古文：丙午，青州牙将刘鄩陷全忠之兗州，又令牙将张厚入奏，是日，亦窃发于华州，杀州将娄敬思。
现代文：正月初四，青州军的偏将刘寻阝攻陷了朱全忠的兖州，又派偏将入城奏闻皇上，当天，又暗中在华州发难，杀死华州守将娄敬思。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Liu Xingyao, the commander of the Qingzhou Army, captured the Zhangzhou of Zhu Quanzhong, and sent the commander to enter the city to report to the emperor. On the same day, he secretly attacked Huazhou and killed the Huazhou guard general Zou Jingsi.

古文：上又令户部侍郎韩偓、赵国夫人宠颜宣谕于全忠军。
现代文：皇上又命令户部侍郎韩亻屋、赵国夫人宠颜向朱全忠表示慰问。
English: The emperor also ordered the head waiter of the household, Han Yuya, the favorite of Lady Zhao Guo, to express his condolences to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：辛亥，全忠令判官李振入奏，上令翰林学士姚洎传宣，令全忠唤崔胤令率文武百僚来迎驾。
现代文：正月初九，朱全忠派判官李振入城上奏皇上，皇上命翰林学士姚洎传达敕命，命令朱全忠传唤崔胤，令他率领文武百官前来迎接圣驾。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong sent the judge, Li Zhen, into the city to report to the emperor. The emperor ordered the scholar of Hanlin, Yao Wei, to convey his command, and ordered Zhu Quanzhong to summon Cui Yin, ordering him to lead hundreds of officers and men to come to greet the saint.

古文：癸丑，上令礼部尚书苏循传诏，赐全忠玉带，仍令全忠处分蒋玄晖侍帝左右。
现代文：正月十一日，皇上令礼部尚书苏循传达诏令。赐给朱全忠玉带，并令朱全忠安排蒋玄晖随侍在皇帝身边。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to convey the imperial edict to Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong was given a jade belt, and Zhu Quanzhong was ordered to arrange for Jiang Xuanzhang to accompany the emperor.

古文：丁巳，蒋玄晖与中使同押送中尉韩全诲、张弘彦已下二十人首级，告谕四镇兵士回銮之期。
现代文：正月十五日，蒋玄晖和中使共同押送中尉韩全诲、张弘彦以下二十个人的首级，并告知四镇士兵皇上返回京城的日期。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the year, Jiang Xuanzhang and the Chinese envoy jointly escorted the heads of twenty people, including Lieutenant Han Quanlin and Zhang Hongyan, and informed the soldiers of the four towns of the date of the emperor's return to Beijing.

古文：戊午，遣中使走马华州，追崔胤，胤托疾不至。
现代文：正月十六日，皇上派中使驰马前去华州追请崔胤来凤翔，崔胤以患病为托辞不来。
English: On the 16th day of the first month, the emperor sent an envoy on horseback to Huazhou to ask Cui Yan to come to Fengxiang. Cui Yan used illness as an excuse not to come.

古文：甲子巳时，车驾出凤翔，幸全忠军。
现代文：正月二十二日巳时，皇上的车驾离开凤翔，到朱全忠的军营中。
English: At the eleventh hour of the twenty-second day of the first month, the emperor's chariot left Fengxiang and went to Zhu Quanzhong's camp.

古文：全忠素服待罪，泣下不自胜，上亲解玉带赐之。
现代文：朱全忠穿着素服等待发落。眼泪流下来，不能控制自己，皇上亲手从身上解下玉带赐给他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong wore plain clothes and waited for the ceremony to end. Tears flowed, he could not control himself, and the emperor personally untied the jade belt from his body and gave it to him.

古文：乙丑，次扶风，令硃友伦总兵侍卫。
现代文：正月二十三日，皇上的车驾停驻在扶风，令朱友伦总管兵卒侍卫皇上。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, the emperor's chariot stopped at Fufeng, and Zhu Yulun, the commander-in-chief, was appointed to guard the emperor.

古文：丙寅，次武功。
现代文：正月二十四日，停驻在武功。
English: On the 24th day of the first month, he was stationed in Wugong.

古文：丁卯，次兴平，宰臣崔胤率百官迎谒。
现代文：正月二十五日，停驻在兴平，宰相崔胤率领百官迎候谒见。
English: On the 25th day of the first month, it stopped in Xingping, and Prime Minister Cui Yan led hundreds of officials to welcome and see it.

古文：即日降制，以崔胤守司空、门下侍郎、平章事，复太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使、判度支，魏国公封邑如故。
现代文：当天即下达敕令，任命崔胤暂署司空、门下侍郎、平章政事，恢复太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使的官职，掌管度支事务，魏国公所封的食邑仍和原来一样。
English: On the same day, the imperial edict was issued, appointing Cui Yan as the provisional secretary of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager.

古文：戊辰，次咸阳。
现代文：正月二十六日，圣驾停驻在咸阳。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the year, the caravan stopped in Xianyang.

古文：己巳，入京师。
现代文：正月二十七日，圣驾入京师。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, the saint arrived in Beijing.

古文：天子素服哭于太庙，改服冕旒，谒九庙。
现代文：天子穿着素服在太庙哭泣，然后改穿皇帝的冠冕朝服，进谒九庙。
English: Tianzi wept in plain clothes in the Great Temple, then changed into the emperor's crowned imperial robe and entered the Nine Temples.

古文：礼毕，御长乐楼，大赦，百僚称贺。
现代文：仪式结束后，皇上驾临长乐楼，下诏大赦天下，百官表示祝贺。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor arrived at the Changle Building, issued a general amnesty, and hundreds of officials expressed their congratulations.

古文：全忠处左军。
现代文：朱全忠处在左军。
English: Zhu Quanzhong is in the left army.

古文：辛未，宴全忠于内殿，内第子奏乐。
现代文：正月二十九日，皇上在内殿宴请朱全忠，由宫内乐工奏乐。
English: On the 29th day of the first month, the emperor invited Zhu Quanzhong to a banquet in the inner hall, and the music was played by the palace musicians.

古文：是日，制内官第五可范已下七百人并赐死于内侍省，其诸道监军及小使，仰本道节度使处斩讫奏，从全忠、崔胤所奏也。
现代文：当天，决定在内侍省将内官第五可范以下共七百人全部赐死，各道的监军以及小使，全部由本道的节度使处斩后奏报皇上，这是按照朱全忠、崔胤所奏而决定的。
English: On the same day, it was decided that in Naishi Province, a total of seven hundred people below the fifth-ranking officer of the Ministry of the Interior would be put to death, and the supervisors of the troops and envoys of each province would all be sent to the emperor by the governor of the province. This was decided in accordance with Zhu Quanzhong and Cui Yin.

古文：帝悲惜之，自为奠文祭之。
现代文：皇帝为他们悲痛叹惜，亲自做悼文祭奠他们。
English: The emperor grieved and lamented for them, and personally wrote a eulogy for them.

古文：二月壬申朔。
现代文：二月初一为壬申日。
English: The first day of February is Jinshin Day.

古文：甲戌，制赐全忠 回天再造竭忠守正功臣 名。
现代文：二月初三，决定赐予朱全忠 回天再造竭忠守正功臣 的称号。
English: On the third day of February, it was decided to bestow the title of Zhu Quanzhong, the re-created loyal subject.

古文：己卯，制以辉王祚充诸道兵马元帅。
现代文：二月初八，决定任命辉王李祚充任诸道兵马元帅。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, it was decided to appoint Hui Wang Lijun as the commander of the troops and horses.

古文：又制以回天再造竭忠守正功臣、宣武宣义天平护国等军节度使、汴宋亳辉河中晋绛慈隰郑滑颍郓齐曹等州观察处置等使、太清宫修葺宫阙制置度支解县池场等使、开府仪同三司、检校太师、守中书令、河中尹、汴滑郓等州刺史、上柱国、梁王、食邑九千户、食实封六百户硃全忠守司徒，兼侍中、判六军十二卫。
现代文：又决定任命 回天再造竭忠守正功臣 ，宣武军、宣义军、天平军、护国军等军镇节度使，汴州、宋州、亳州、辉州、河中、晋州、绛州、慈州、隰州、郑州、滑州、颍州、郓州、齐州、曹州等州观察处置使，太清宫修葺宫阙制置使，度支解县池场使，开府仪同三司，检校太师，暂署中书令，河中尹，汴州、滑州、郓州等州刺史，上柱国，梁王，食邑九千户，实封食邑六百户朱全忠兼署太尉、中书令，充任诸道兵马副元帅，加封食邑三千户。
English: In addition, it was decided to appoint the following officials to carry out the task of returning to heaven and re-creating the loyal and honorable heroes and heroines of the Xuanwu Army, Xuanwu Volunteer Army, Tianping Army, and National Defense Army; the observation and disposition of the states of Bozhou, Songzhou, Bozhou, Huizhou, Hechu, Jinzhou, Bozhou, Cizhou, Bozhou, Zhengzhou, Luzhou, Luzhou, Luzhou, Qizhou, Caozhou; the repair and installation of the imperial seal system of the Taiqing Palace; the support and solution of the county of Chiba; the

古文：以吏部尚书、平章事裴枢检校右仆射，同平章事，兼广州刺史、可守太尉、中书令，充诸道兵马副元帅，进邑三千户。
现代文：任命宰臣崔胤暂署司徒，兼任侍中，掌管六军十二卫。任命吏部尚书、平章政事裴枢为检校右仆射、同平章事，兼任广州刺史、清海军节度使、岭南东道观察使等。
English: He appointed Cui Yan, the Vice-Minister of the North, as the temporary assistant of the Secretary, and concurrently served as the Vice-Minister of the Navy, in charge of the 12 Guards of the Sixth Army. He appointed Shang Shu, the Secretary of the General Staff, Ping Zhang, the Secretary of State, Pei Zu, as the right-hand man of the school inspection, and Tong Ping, the Secretary of the Secretary of the General Staff, and concurrently served as the Guangzhou Historian, the Qing Navy Festival Envoy, and the Lingnan Host Observation Envoy.

古文：以宰臣崔胤清海军节度、岭南东道观察等使。甲戌，制以门下侍郎、兵部尚书、同平章事、监修国史陆扆责授沂王傅分司。
现代文：二月十三日，决定将门下侍郎、兵部尚书、同平章事、监修国史陆降职为沂王傅。
English: On February 13th, it was decided to demote his subordinate attendant, Hyobu Shosho, Tongpei Shoji, and supervisor of national history, Lu, to the position of Shao Wangfu.

古文：己丑，上宴全忠于寿春殿。又令全忠与茂贞书，取平原公主。
现代文：二月十八日，皇上在寿春殿宴请朱全忠，又令朱全忠写信给李茂贞，令其娶平原公主。
English: On February 18, the emperor invited Zhu Quanzhong to a banquet at Shuchun Palace, and ordered Zhu Quanzhong to write to Li Maozhen to marry Princess Pingyuan.

古文：同州节度使赵翊、陕州节度使硃友谦来朝。
现代文：同州节度使赵翊、陕州节度使朱友谦前来朝见皇上。
English: The festival in the same state brought Zhao Wei, and the festival in Shaanxi brought Zhu Youqian to see the emperor.

古文：制以硃友裕为华州刺史，充感化军节度使。
现代文：决定任命朱友裕为华州刺史，充任感化军节度使。
English: It was decided to appoint Zhu Youyu as the historian of Huazhou and as the envoy of the Kuomintang.

古文：乙未，会鞠于保宁殿，全忠得头筹，令内弟子送酒，仍面赐副元帅官告。
现代文：二月二十四日，在保宁殿击鞠为戏，朱全忠得了第一名，皇上令内宫的乐工送酒致贺，并当面赐予副元帅的官诰文书。
English: On February 24th, Zhu Quanzhong won the first place in the game of bowls at the Baoning Palace. The emperor ordered the musicians of the inner palace to send wine to congratulate him, and gave the vice-marshal's official document in person.

古文：以新除广州节度使裴枢为门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章事、监修国史；以户部侍郎王溥同平章事。
现代文：任命新授给广州节度使的裴枢为门下侍郎、吏部尚书、平章政事、监修国史；任命户部侍郎王溥为同平章事。
English: Baizhu, who was newly awarded to the Guangzhou Festival Delegate, was appointed as a subordinate attendant, a clerk, a government official, and a supervisor of national history; the household attendant Wang Xi was appointed as a peer.

古文：戊戌，全忠归大梁，上宴之内殿，置酒于延喜门。
现代文：二月二十七日，朱全忠返回大梁，行前皇上在内殿宴请他，酒宴摆在延喜门。
English: On February 27th, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Daliang. The former emperor invited him to a banquet in the inner hall, and the banquet was held at the Yanxi Gate.

古文：是日，全忠与四镇判官皆预席，上临轩泣别，又令中使走送御制《杨柳枝》词五首赐之。
现代文：当天，朱全忠和四个镇的判官都参加了宴饮，皇上来到殿前台地与朱全忠流泪相别，朱全忠离去后，皇上又派中使追赶着送去御制的五首《杨柳枝》词赐给他。
English: On the same day, Zhu Quanzhong and the judges of the four towns all attended the banquet. The emperor came to the front of the hall to tearfully say goodbye to Zhu Quanzhong. After Zhu Quanzhong left, the emperor sent a middle envoy to chase him and give him the five "Willow Branch" poems.

古文：辛丑，平原公主至京师。
现代文：二月三十日，平原公主抵达京师。
English: On February 30, Princess Hirahara arrived in Kyoto.

古文：三月壬寅朔，全忠引四镇之兵征王师范。
现代文：三月初一，朱全忠带领四个军镇的军兵征讨王师范。
English: On the first day of March, Zhu Quanzhong led soldiers from four military towns to recruit Wang Shimen.

古文：先是，大将硃友宁、杨师厚前军临淄、青，师范求援于淮南，杨行密遣将王景仁帅众万人赴之。
现代文：在此之前，朱全忠的大将朱友宁、杨师厚的前军兵临淄州、青州，王师范向淮南方面求救，杨行密派手下的将领王景仁率领一万名士卒前去救援。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Quanzhong's general Zhu Youning, Yang Shihou's former soldiers from Linyi and Qingzhou, and Wang Shifan appealed to Huainan for help, and Yang Xingmi's general Wang Jingren led ten thousand soldiers to the rescue.

古文：四月辛未朔，西川王建以兵攻秦、陇，乘茂贞之弱也，仍遣判官韦庄入贡，修好于全忠。
现代文：四月初一，西川王建率军攻打秦州、陇州，这是乘李茂贞兵势弱小的机会，并派遣判官韦庄入朝进贡，以结好于朱全忠。
English: On the first day of April, Wang Jian of the West River led an army to attack Qinzhou and Zhangzhou. This was an opportunity to take advantage of the weak military strength of Li Maozhen, and sent the judge Wei Zhuang to the court to pay tribute to make a good match with Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：五月，制凤翔陇右四镇北庭行军、彰义军节度、泾原渭武观察处置押蕃落等使、开府仪同三司、守尚书令、兼侍中、凤翔尹、上柱国、秦王李茂贞可检校太师、守中书令。
现代文：五月，决定凤翔、陇右、四镇、北庭行军使，彰义军节度使，泾州、原州、渭州、武州观察处置使，押蕃落使，开府仪同三司，暂署尚书令，兼任侍中、凤翔尹、上柱国、秦王李茂贞任检校太师，署理中书令。
English: In May, it was decided that Feng Xiang, Zou Yu, Shizhen and Beiting would be the envoys for the march, Zhangyi Army would be the envoys for the festival, Bozhou, Wonju, Bozhou and Wuzhou would be the envoys for the observation and disposition, and Kaifu Yi Tong and the three departments would be the envoys for the execution of the imperial edict, and concurrently the attendants, Feng Xiang Yin, Shangzhu Guo and Qin Wang Li Maozhen would be the inspectors, and the attendants would be the envoys.

古文：初，茂贞凌弱王室，朝廷姑息，加尚书令，及是全忠方守太尉，茂贞惧，乞罢尚书令故也。
现代文：原先，李茂贞欺凌王室，朝廷姑息迁就，加授他为尚书令，到这时因为朱全忠正署理着太尉的职务，李茂贞害怕，才因而请求罢免尚书令。
English: Originally, Li Maozhen bullied the royal family, and the imperial court appeased him and granted him the title of Shang Shuling. At this time, because Zhu Quanzhong was acting as a captain, Li Maozhen was afraid, and therefore requested the removal of Shang Shuling.

古文：崔胤奏： 六军十二卫名额空存，实无兵士。
现代文：崔胤上奏说 ：六军十二卫只有空名，实际上并没有士兵。
English: Cui Yin said in his report: The Six Armies and Twelve Guards only have empty names, in fact, there are no soldiers.

古文：京师侍卫，亦藉亲军。
现代文：京师的侍卫，也是靠着亲军。
English: The guards of the imperial division also relied on their own troops.

古文：请每军量召募一千一百人，共置六千六百人。 
现代文：请求每军酌量招募一千一百人，六军共安置六千六百人。 
English: Each army is requested to recruit 1,100 people at its discretion, and a total of 6,600 people are placed in the six armies.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乃令六军诸卫副使、京兆尹郑元规立格招收于市。
现代文：便命令六军诸卫副使、京兆尹郑元规订下标准，在民间招收。
English: He then ordered the Vice-Envoy of the Six Armies of the Wei Dynasty, Jing Zha Yin Zheng Yuan, to set standards and recruit from the civilian population.

古文：制以颍州刺史硃友恭检校司空，兼徐州刺史，充武宁军节度使，从全忠奏也。
现代文：决定任命颍州刺史朱友恭为检校司空，兼任徐州刺史，充任武宁军节度使，这是依朱全忠上奏而任命的。
English: It was decided to appoint Zhu Youqiong, the inspector of Bozhou, as the inspector of the school, and Zhu Youqiong, the inspector of Xuzhou, as the inspector of the festival of the Wu Ning Army. This was appointed in accordance with Zhu Quanzhong's report.

古文：六月，青州、淮南军与汴人战于临淄，汴军大败，硃友宁战死，传首淮南。
现代文：六月，青州、淮南军和汴州军在临淄交战，汴州军大败，朱友宁战死，他的首级在淮南传送示众。
English: In June, Qingzhou, Huainan Army and Zhangzhou Army fought in Linyi, Zhangzhou Army was defeated, Zhu Youning died in battle, and his head was sent to the public in Huainan.

古文：九月，汴将杨师厚大败青州军于临朐。
现代文：九月，汴州将领杨师厚在临朐将青州军打得大败。
English: In September, the Zhangzhou general Yang Shihou defeated the Qingzhou army in Linyi.

古文：荆南节度使成汭以舟师赴援鄂州，澧朗雷彦恭承虚袭陷江陵。
现代文：荆南节度使成率领水师前去救援鄂州，澧州朗州的雷彦恭乘江陵空虚前去袭击，攻陷了江陵。
English: Jing Nan Jie Du sent Cheng Liao, the leading naval officer, to rescue Ezhou, and Lei Yan Gong from Lanzhou, Luzhou, took advantage of the emptiness of Gangneung to attack and capture Gangneung.

古文：汭军士闻之溃归，汭愤怒投水而死。
现代文：成部下的士兵听到这个消息溃散奔回，成愤怒，投水而死。
English: When soldiers under the command of Genbu heard the news, they scattered, ran back, became enraged, and drowned.

古文：赵匡凝遂以兵袭荆州，据之。
现代文：赵匡凝便率军袭击荆州，占据了城池。
English: Zhao Kuangge led the army to attack Jingzhou and occupied the city.

古文：辛巳，汴州护驾都将硃友伦击鞠坠马卒，全忠怒，杀同鞠将校数人。
现代文：十月十五日，汴州护驾都将领朱友伦击鞠从马上摔下而死，朱全忠发怒，杀死一起击鞠的几名军官。
English: On October 15th, Zhu Quanzhong, the commander of the Zhangzhou escort, fell from his horse and died. Zhu Quanzhong became enraged and killed several officers who were playing bowls together.

古文：十一月丁酉朔，王师范以青州降杨师厚，全忠复令师范知青州事。
现代文：十一月初一，王师范率同青州投降杨师厚，朱全忠还是令王师范执掌青州的事务。
English: On the first day of November, Wang Shifan led Yang Shihou to surrender with Qingzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong still put Wang Shifan in charge of Qingzhou affairs.

古文：邠州、凤翔兵士逼京畿。
现代文：州、凤翔的士兵逼近京畿地区。
English: Fengxiang's soldiers are approaching the Gyeonggi region.

古文：汴军屯河中。
现代文：汴州军屯驻在河中。
English: The Zhangzhou Army was stationed in the middle of the river.

古文：青州牙将刘鄩以兗州降葛从周，禀师范命也。
现代文：青州偏将刘寻阝以兖州投降葛从周，这是秉承王师范的命令而行事的。
English: Liu Xingyao of Qingzhou surrendered to Ge Zhou of Zhangzhou, which was in accordance with Wang Shifan's order.

古文：全忠嘉之，署为元帅府都押衙，权知鄜州留后事。
现代文：朱全忠嘉奖了他，任命他为元师府都押衙，暂时掌管州留后的事务。
English: Zhu Quanzhong commended him and appointed him as the former teacher's superintendent, temporarily in charge of the affairs of the state.

古文：十二月丁卯朔。
现代文：十二月初一为丁卯日。
English: The first day of December is Dingwu.

古文：辛巳，制以礼部尚书独孤损为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：十二月十五日，决定任命礼部尚书独孤损为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: On December 15th, it was decided to appoint Shang Shuxu from the Ministry of Ceremonies as the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Tong Ping Zhangji.

古文：丙申，制守司徒、侍中、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、判六军十二卫事、诸道盐铁转运使、判度支、上柱国、魏国公、食邑四千五百户崔胤责授太子宾客，守刑部尚书、兼京兆尹、六军诸卫副使郑元规责授循州司户。
现代文：十二月三十日，决定署理司徒、侍中、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、执掌六军十二卫事务、诸道盐铁转运使、执掌度支事务、上柱国、魏国公、食邑四千五百户崔胤贬职为太子宾客。将署理刑部尚书、兼京兆尹、六军诸卫副使郑元规贬职为循州司户。
English: On December 30th, it was decided to demote Cui Yan, the deputy of the six armed forces, who was in charge of the twelve military departments, the salt and iron transportation, the transportation and supply, the four thousand and five hundred households in Shangzhuang, Wei, and Shiyou, to the position of the prince's guest. The deputy of the criminal department, Shangshu, concurrently with Jing Zhaoyun, and the deputy of the six armed forces, Zheng Yuan Gui, were demoted to the position of the deputy of the six military departments.

古文：是日，汴州扈驾指挥使硃友谅杀胤及元规、皇城使王建勋、飞龙使陈班、阁门使王建袭、客省使王建乂、前左仆射上柱国河间郡公张浚。
现代文：当天，汴州扈驾都指挥使朱友谅杀死崔胤和郑元规，皇城使王建勋，飞龙使陈班，阁门使王建袭，客省使王建、前左仆射、上柱国、河间郡公张浚。
English: On the same day, the commanding officer of Zhangzhou, Zhu Youyong, killed Cui Yin and Zheng Yuanbi, the imperial city sent Wang Jianxun, the flying dragon sent Chen Ban, the pavilion gate sent Wang Jianqi, the guest province sent Wang Jian, the former left footman shot, the upper pillar country, and the inter-county public Zhang Jun.

古文：全忠将逼车驾幸洛阳，惧胤、浚立异也。
现代文：这是因为朱全忠将逼迫皇上到洛阳去，怕崔胤、张浚反对而采取的措施。
English: This was because Zhu Quanzhong would force the emperor to go to Luoyang, fearing the opposition of Cui Yin and Zhang Jun.

古文：天祐元年春正月丁酉朔，以翰林学士、左拾遗柳璨为右谏议大夫、同平章事，赐紫金鱼袋。
现代文：天元年春，正月初一为丁酉日。任命翰林学士、左拾遗柳璨为右谏议大夫、同平章事，赐紫金鱼袋。
English: In the spring of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month

古文：己亥，制以兵部尚书崔远为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：正月初三，决定任命兵部尚书崔远为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, it was decided to appoint Hyobu Shangshu Cui Yuan as Chushushijiro, Tongping Zhangji, and Shixianden University Scholar.

古文：己酉，全忠率师屯河中，遣牙将寇彦卿奉表请车驾迁都洛阳。
现代文：正月十三日，朱全忠率军屯驻在河中，派遣偏将寇彦卿奉上表章，请求圣驾迁都到洛阳。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong and his army stationed themselves in the middle of the river, and dispatched the commander-in-chief, Qiao Yanqing, to petition the emperor to move the capital to Luoyang.

古文：全忠令长安居人按籍迁居，彻屋木，自渭浮河而下，连甍号哭，月余不息。
现代文：朱全忠命令长安的居民按户口册籍迁居到洛阳，拆下房屋的木料，从渭水顺流而下漂浮到黄河，长安居民一家家的连声痛哭，一个多月都没有停止下来。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered the residents of Chang'an to move to Luoyang according to their household registration books. They tore down the wood of the houses and floated down from the Surabaya River to the Yellow River. The continuous crying of a family of Chang'an residents did not stop for more than a month.

古文：秦人大骂于路曰： 国贼崔胤，召硃温倾覆社稷，俾我及此，天乎！天乎！ 
现代文：秦中人在路上大骂说 ：国贼崔胤把朱温召来颠覆国家，使我们落到这个地步，天哪！天哪！ 
English: People in the middle of the Qin Dynasty were cursing loudly on the road, saying, "The traitor Cui Yin has summoned Zhu Wen to subvert the country, and we have come to this, my God! My God!

古文：丁巳，车驾发京师。
现代文：正月二十一日，皇上的车驾从京师出发。
English: On the 21st day of the first month, the emperor's carriage set off from the capital.

古文：癸亥，次陕州，全忠迎谒于路。
现代文：正月二十七日，车驾停驻在陕州，朱全忠在路途上迎候，谒见。
English: On the 27th day of the first month, the car was parked in Shaanxi, and Zhu Quanzhong greeted him on the way to see him.

古文：二月丙寅朔。
现代文：二月初一为丙寅日。
English: The first day of February is Cui Yin.

古文：乙亥，全忠辞赴洛阳，亲督工作。
现代文：二月初十，朱全忠辞别皇上前往洛阳，亲自监督施工。
English: At the beginning of February 10th, Zhu Quanzhong said goodbye to the emperor and went to Luoyang to personally supervise the construction.

古文：四月丙寅朔。
现代文：四月初一为丙寅日。
English: The first day of April is Hsin-Tin Day.

古文：癸巳，帝遣晋国夫人可证传诏谕全忠，言中宫诞蓐未安，取十月入洛阳宫。
现代文：四月二十八日，皇帝派遣晋国夫人可证传诏告知朱全忠，说皇后分娩后身体尚未恢复，决定十月再去洛阳宫。
English: On April 28, the emperor sent the wife of Jin to inform Zhu Quanzhong that the queen had not yet recovered after giving birth, and decided to go to Luoyang Palace in October.

古文：全忠意上迟留俟变，怒甚，谓牙将寇彦卿曰： 亟往陕州，到日便促官家发来！ 
现代文：朱全忠认为皇上有意拖延推迟以待变化，非常生气，对偏将寇彦卿说 ：你赶快去陕州，一到，催促皇帝当天就出发前来！ 
English: Zhu Quanzhong thought that the emperor was deliberately delaying the departure to wait for changes, and he was very angry. He said to General Qiao Yanqing: You should go to Shaanxi as soon as you arrive, and urge the emperor to leave on the same day!

古文：闰四月乙未朔。
现代文：闰四月初一为乙未日。
English: The first day of the leap month of April is the eve of the second day of the month.

古文：丁酉，车驾发陕州。
现代文：闰四月初三，皇上的车驾从陕州出发。
English: On the third day of the fourth lunar month, the emperor's carriage set off from Shaanxi Province.

古文：壬寅，次谷水行宫。
现代文：闰四月初八，皇上驻跸在谷水的行宫。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the leap year, the emperor arrived at his residence in Gusui.

古文：时崔胤所募六军兵士，胤死后亡散并尽，从上东迁者，唯诸王、小黄门十数，打球代奉内园小兒共二百余人。
现代文：当时崔胤所召募的六军士兵在他死了之后全都跑光了，跟随皇上东迁去洛阳的，只有各位王子、小黄门侍者十几人，连在内苑供奉击鞠的小孩一共才二百多人。
English: At that time, the soldiers of the Six Armies recruited by Cui Yin all ran away after his death. Only the princes, a dozen or so servants of the Little Yellow Gate, and a total of more than two hundred children who were in the inner courtyard to offer bowing and archery followed the emperor to Luoyang.

古文：全忠在陕，仍虑此辈为变，欲尽去之，以汴卒为侍卫。
现代文：朱全忠在陕州时就担心这些人会发生变故，想要把他们全部除掉，用汴州的士兵作为皇上的侍卫。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong was in Shaanxi, he was worried that something would happen to these people and wanted to get rid of them all, using soldiers from Zhangzhou as the emperor's bodyguards.

古文：至谷水顿，全忠令医官许昭远告内园等谋变，因会设幄，酒食次并坑之，乃以谋逆闻。
现代文：到谷水顿的时候，朱全忠指使医官许昭远告发内苑的人阴谋叛变，借机设下幄幕把他们和皇上分开，在饮酒进食的时候把他们全部活埋了，便以他们要谋反为由奏闻皇上。
English: At the time of the Gu Shui Tong, Zhu Quanzhong instructed the medical officer Xu Zhaoyuan to inform the people of the Inner Court of the conspiracy to rebel, took the opportunity to set up a curtain to separate them from the emperor, and buried them all alive while drinking and eating, and then reported to the emperor on the grounds that they wanted to rebel.

古文：由是帝左右前后侍卫职掌，皆汴人也。
现代文：从此以后，在皇帝前后左右侍卫的人，都是汴州的士卒了。
English: From then on, all the attendants and guards around the emperor were soldiers from Zhangzhou.

古文：甲辰，车驾由徽安门入，硃全忠、张全义、宰相裴枢独孤损前导。
现代文：闰四月初十，皇上的车驾由徽安门进入洛阳，朱全忠、张全义、宰相裴枢、独孤损做先导。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month, the emperor's car drove from Hui'anmen to Luoyang, with Zhu Quanzhong, Zhang Quanzhi, Prime Minister Pei Zu, and Duyuko leading the way.

古文：是日大风雨土，跬步不辨物色，日暝稍止。
现代文：当天刮大风，天上落下尘土，一两步之内就看不清东西，天快黑时才逐渐停止。
English: On that day, a strong wind blew, dust fell from the sky, and I couldn't see anything clearly within one or two steps. It gradually stopped when it was getting dark.

古文：上谒太庙，礼毕还宫，御正殿宣劳从官卫士，受驾。
现代文：皇上拜谒太庙，礼仪结束之后回到宫室，驾临正殿慰问从行的官员和卫士，接受朝贺。
English: The emperor paid a visit to the Grand Imperial Temple, returned to the palace room after the end of the ceremony, and came to the main hall to offer condolences to the accompanying officials and guards, and to receive morning greetings.

古文：乙巳，上御光政门，大赦，制曰：
现代文：闰四月十一日，皇上驾临光政门，下诏大赦天下。
English: On leap April 11th, the emperor arrived at the gate of Guangzheng, and issued an edict of amnesty to the world.

古文：乃睠中州，便侯伯会朝之路；运逢百六，顺古今禳避之宜。
现代文：敕令说：顾念中州，有着便于侯伯方镇会盟朝见的路途；国运遭逢着不幸到极点，就应当顺应古今消灾避祸的良策。
English: The imperial edict said: in consideration of Zhongzhou, there is a road that is convenient for Hou Bofang Town to meet the League and the government; the national fortune has suffered misfortune to the extreme, it should follow the good policy of eliminating disasters and avoiding disasters from ancient to modern times.

古文：况建鼎旧京，我家二宅，轘辕通其左，郏、鄏引其前。
现代文：何况洛阳本是建都的旧京，又是我皇家的第二处住宅，轩辕皇帝的陵园通向它的左边，周的王城郏辱阝延伸到它的前面。
English: What's more, Luoyang was originally the old capital of Beijing, and also the second residence of the imperial family. The tomb garden of Emperor Xuanzang leads to its left, and the imperial city of Zhou extends to its front.

古文：周平王之东迁，更延姬姓；汉光武之定业，克茂刘宗。
现代文：周平王东迁洛阳，延续了姬姓的王朝；汉光武定业在东都，发展了刘氏的宗绪。
English: Zhou Ping Wang Dong moved to Luoyang, continuing the dynasty with the surname of Ji; Han Guangwu Dingye in Dongdu, developed the Liu dynasty.

古文：肇葺新都，祈天永命，皆因否运，复启昌期。
现代文：他们重新建造新都，是为了祈求皇天赐予长远的运数，这都是因为恶劣的机运，才想要开启昌盛的时期。
English: They rebuilt the new capital in order to pray to the emperor for long-term good luck. It was all due to bad luck that they wanted to open a period of prosperity.

古文：或西避于戎狄，或载歼于妖孽。
现代文：有的是为了逃避西方戎狄的侵犯，有的是为了歼灭作乱的妖孽。
English: Some did it to escape the encroachment of the Western armies, and some did it to annihilate the witches who caused the turmoil.

古文：朕遭家不造，布德不明，十载已来，三罹播越。
现代文：我遭遇家门的不幸，陈布德行不英明，十年以来，三次遭受流亡之苦。
English: I suffered the misfortune of my family, Chen Bud's conduct was unwise, and since ten years ago, I have suffered the pain of exile three times.

古文：亦属灾缠秦、雍，叛起邠、岐。
现代文：这也是因为灾星纠缠着秦州、雍州，叛逆兴起于州、岐州。
English: This is also because the evil star entangled Qinzhou and Yongzhou, and the rebellion arose in Zhuzhou and Qizhou.

古文：始幸石门，以避卫兵之乱；载行华岳，仍惊畿邑之侵。
现代文：开始是临幸石门，以躲避卫兵的动乱；接着是两次转移到华州，因为畿辅被侵犯而受到惊吓。
English: First, it was the Linsen Gate, to avoid the disturbance of the guards; then, it was twice transferred to the Huashu, because Kievan Kievan was alarmed by the encroachment.

古文：忧危则矢及车舆，凌胁则火延宫庙。
现代文：弓矢射中了我的车驾，为危殆而忧急；大火延烧到皇宫和宗庙，倍受欺凌和威胁。
English: My car was hit by a bow and arrow, and I was worried about the danger; the fire spread to the royal palace and ancestral temple, and I was bullied and threatened.

古文：迨至逆连宫竖，构结奸凶，致刘季述幽朕于下宫，韩全诲劫予于右辅。
现代文：叛臣和宫中的小人竟至于通同一气，奸佞凶恶的人互相勾结，致使刘季述把我幽禁在偏室，韩全诲把我劫持到右辅凤翔。
English: As for the traitor and the villain in the palace, they are actually the same, and the traitor and the villain colluded with each other, causing Liu Jishu to imprison me in a side room, and Han Quanzhong to kidnap me to Zuo Fengxiang.

古文：莫匪兵围内殿，焰亘九重，皆思假武以容身，唯效指鹿而威众。
现代文：没有哪一个不是以军队包围内殿，嚣张的气焰直达九重宫阙，都想凭借武力以容留自身，只思仿效赵高指鹿为马以威胁众人。
English: Not a single one of them did not encircle the inner hall with an army, and their arrogance reached as high as the ninth floor of the palace. They all wanted to use force to contain themselves, and only wanted to follow the example of Zhao Gaozhixiang as a horse to threaten everyone.

古文：矫宣天宪，欺蔑外籓，行书诏以任情，欲忠良而获罪。
现代文：假传天子的号令，欺凌蔑视外藩守臣，任意发布文告诏令，想让忠臣良将获罪。
English: Falsely transmitted the order of the son of heaven, bullied and despised the foreign retainers, arbitrarily issued the edict of the edict, and wanted to make the loyal vassal guilty.

古文：虽群方岳牧，协力匡扶，拘戎律于阻修，报朝恩而隔越。
现代文：即使有各地的节镇郡守齐心协力地匡扶朝廷，却因受军律的限制而被阻隔在远方，想要报效朝廷的恩宠也因为地域遥远而不能。
English: Even if there are festival towns and county governors from all over the country who make concerted efforts to support the imperial court, they are isolated in the distance due to the restrictions of the military code. If you want to repay the grace of the imperial court, you can't because the region is far away.

古文：副元帅、梁王全忠以兼镇近辅，总兵四籓，远赴岐阳，躬迎大驾。
现代文：副元帅、梁王朱全忠因为兼任畿辅附近的节度使，总领四镇的军队，从远地前来岐阳，亲自迎接圣驾。
English: Vice-Marshal, Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong, because he also served as the festival envoy near Kiyev, the commander-in-chief of the four-town army, came to Qiyang from afar to personally welcome the saint.

古文：辛勤百战，尽剿凶渠，营野三年，竟回銮辂。
现代文：经过多次劳苦的战斗，把凶横的祸首尽数剿灭，军营宿在野外达三年之久，终于使銮驾返回京城。
English: After many arduous battles, the ferocious villain was completely annihilated, and the army camped in the field for three years, finally returning to the capital.

古文：咸、镐载新其宫阙，让、珪绝类于阉徒，方崇再造之功，以正中兴之运。
现代文：咸阳、镐京每年都要更新其宫阙，杜让能、崔王圭完全类似于宦官，朕应当推重再造社稷的功勋，以端正中兴朝廷的运数。
English: Xianyang and Beijing have to renew their imperial edicts every year, and Du Jiangneng and Cui Wanggui are completely similar to eunuchs. We should emphasize the merits of re-establishing the imperial edicts in order to rectify the performance of the imperial court.

古文：又邠岐结衅，巴蜀连兵，上负国恩，下隳邻好。
现代文：州、岐州又造事端，巴州、蜀州连年兴兵，上负朝廷的恩遇，下毁邻州的和睦。
English: Guizhou and Qizhou also caused trouble, and Baizhou and Shuzhou continued to raise troops for years on end, losing the favor of the imperial court and destroying the harmony of neighboring states.

古文：焚宫烈火，更延热于亲邻；却驾凶锋，复延侵于禁苑。
现代文：焚烧宫殿的烈火，更延及近邻地区；逼迫圣驾退避的凶锋，再次侵犯了禁苑。
English: The fierce fire that burned the palace extended to the nearby areas; the fierce front that forced the saint to retreat once again invaded the Forbidden Garden.

古文：抑又太一游处，并集六宫，罚星荧惑，久缠东井，玄象荐灾于秦分，地形无过于洛阳。
现代文：有时太一星官总是逗留在皇后的寝宫之上，荧惑灾星长久地环绕着井宿天区。秦州的分野出现了连年灾祸的征兆，从地形上看没有比洛阳更好的地方。
English: Sometimes, the great star always lingers over the empress's bedchamber, and the dazzling star of disaster has long surrounded the well-sleeping area. In the field of Qinzhou, there have been signs of disaster for years. From the topography, there is no better place than Luoyang.

古文：爰有一二荩臣，洎四方同志，竭心王室，共誓嘉谋。
现代文：有一两个忠臣，以及四方志同道合之士，发誓要用好的谋略来为王室竭尽民力。
English: There are one or two loyalists, as well as a quartet of like-minded individuals, who have vowed to use their wits to do their best for the royal family.

古文：魏镇定燕，航大河而毕至；陈徐潞蔡，辇巨轴以偕来。
现代文：魏州、镇州、定州、燕州的士卒乘着黄河的航船全部到达；陈州、徐州、潞州、蔡州的军将和我一起坐着巨大的车辇到来。
English: The soldiers from Weizhou, Zhenzhou, Dingzhou and Yanzhou have all arrived by boat on the Yellow River; the soldiers from Chenzhou, Xuzhou, Ganzhou and Caizhou will come with me in a huge carriage.

古文：披荆棘而立朝廷，划灰烬而化轮奂。
现代文：砍倒荆棘，重新建立了朝廷；扫除灰烬，变换了众多的宫室。
English: He cut down the thorns and re-established the imperial court; swept away the ashes and transformed numerous palace rooms.

古文：左郊祧而右社稷，肃尔崇严；前广殿而后重廊，蔼然华邃。
现代文：左边是宗庙，右边是社稷：肃穆、崇高、威严；前面是宽大的殿堂，后面是重重的回廊：和谐、华丽，深邃。
English: On the left is the ancestral temple, on the right is the shrine: solemn, lofty, majestic; in front is a spacious hall, behind is a heavy corridor: harmonious, gorgeous, profound.

古文：公卿佥议，龟筮协从。
现代文：公卿们共同议定，又以占卜作为参考。
English: The nobles agreed together and used divination as a reference.

古文：甲子令年，孟夏初吉，备法驾而离陕分，列百官而入洛郊，观此殷繁，良多嘉慰。
现代文：就在甲子这美好的一年，孟夏的第一个吉祥之日，备办皇帝的车驾离开陕州地方，排列百官成行抵达洛阳的郊外，看到这富盛繁华，得到了很大的安慰。
English: In the beautiful year of Jiazi, the first auspicious day of Mengxia, the emperor's car left the Shaanxi region, and hundreds of officials arrived at the outskirts of Luoyang. Seeing this prosperity, I was greatly comforted.

古文：谢罪太庙，忧惕惊怀；登御端门，轸恻兴感。
现代文：到太庙谢罪，忧惧惊扰着胸怀；登临端门，心中凄恻，百感丛生。
English: When you go to the Great Temple to atone for your sins, your heart will be troubled with fear; when you go to the front gate, your heart will be filled with awe and emotion.

古文：盖以一人寡祐，至万姓靡宁，工役艰疲，忠良尽瘁，克建再迁之业，冀延八百之基。
现代文：这是因为一个人得不到皇天庇，致使人间百姓不得安宁，工役艰苦疲惫，忠臣良将尽都心力交瘁，能够建树迁都的大业，期望延续八百年的基业。
English: This is because one person cannot obtain the imperial canopy, resulting in the people of the world not having peace, laborers are exhausted, and loyal subjects will do their best to build the great cause of moving the capital, hoping to continue the eight-hundred-year-old foundation.

古文：宜覃涣汗之恩，俟此雍熙之庆，涤瑕荡垢，咸与惟新。
现代文：应当广布浩大的皇恩，等待这和乐的庆典，荡涤瑕疵污垢，完全更新自己。
English: You should spread the vast grace of the emperor, wait for this celebration of harmony, remove the blemishes and dirt, and completely renew yourself.

古文：可大赦天下，改天复四年为天祐元年，于戏！
现代文：决定大赦天下，改天复四年为天元年。
English: It was decided to grant a general amnesty to the whole country and change the leap year from four years to one year.

古文：肆眚阊阖，即安宫闱。
现代文：唉，朝廷赦免了罪人的过失，也就安定了宫室。
English: Alas, the imperial court pardoned the transgressions of the guilty, thereby stabilizing the imperial household.

古文：虽九庙几筵，已閟于新室；而诸陵松柏，遥隔于旧都。
现代文：即使是宗庙的祭筵，也已经关闭在新室；而各先皇陵寝上的松柏，也遥遥地隔绝于旧都。
English: Even the sacrificial altar of the ancestral temple has been closed in the new room; and the pine trees on the tombs of the emperors are also far away from the old capital.

古文：将务乂宁，难申绻慕。
现代文：将要致力于国家的安宁，难以表达心中的缱绻思慕。
English: He will have to devote himself to the tranquility of the country, and it is difficult to express the yearning in his heart.

古文：文武百辟，执事具僚，从我千里而来，端尔一心莅政。
现代文：朝中的文武百官，以及所配备的办事僚属，千里迢迢地追随我来到，应当端整自己，专心处理政务。
English: The hundreds of civil and military officials of the DPRK, as well as their subordinate staffs, who have followed me from far and wide, should rectify themselves and concentrate on handling government affairs.

古文：恩覃既往，效责从新，方当开国之初，必举慢官之罚。
现代文：既已广布恩德，就应当重新效命尽责，正当开国的初期，一定要惩罚那些怠慢职守的官员。 
English: Now that the country has been greatly improved, we should once again fulfill our duties. Just as in the early days of the founding of the country, we must punish those officials who neglect their duties.

古文：戊申，敕今后除留宣徽两院、小马坊、丰德庙、御厨、客省、阁门、飞龙、庄宅九使外，其余并停。
现代文：闰四月十四日，敕令：今后除留用宣徽两院使、小马坊使、丰德库使、御厨使、客省使、阁门使、飞龙使、庄宅使等九种使职外，其他使职全部罢除。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the leap year, the royal decree: in the future, in addition to retaining nine kinds of duties such as the envoys of the two houses of the imperial seal, the envoys of Xiaoma Fang, the envoys of the Funde Library, the envoys of the kitchen, the envoys of the guest provinces, the envoys of the pavilions, the envoys of the flying dragons, and the envoys of the manor houses, all other duties will be eliminated.

古文：内园冰井公事委河南尹，仍不差内夫人传宣。
现代文：内苑中冰水方面的公务委派河南尹承担，并不用内廷的夫人传令宣旨。
English: Henan Yin was appointed to undertake the official duties of the ice and water in the inner court, and did not use the wife of the inner court to issue orders.

古文：杀医官阎祐之、国子博士欧阳特，言星谶也。
现代文：将医官阎之、国子博士欧阳特处死，因为他们擅自谈论星象的征兆。
English: The medical officer Yan Zhi and Dr. Kuniko Ouyang were put to death because they talked about the signs of the stars without permission.

古文：宰相裴枢兼右仆射、诸道盐铁转运等使、监修国史，户部尚书、门下侍郎、平章事独孤损判度支，中书侍郎、平章事柳璨判户部事。
现代文：宰相裴枢兼任右仆射、诸道盐铁转运使、监修国史。户部尚书、门下侍郎、平章政事独孤损掌管度支事。中书侍郎、平章政事柳璨掌管户部事。
English: Prime Minister Baizhu concurrently served as the right-hand man, the salt and iron transportation envoy, and the supervisor of national history. The household secretary, the under secretary, and the secretary of state, Heizhang, were in charge of the administration and support. The secretary of the middle secretary, and the secretary of state, Heizhang, were in charge of the household affairs.

古文：五月乙丑朔。
现代文：五月初一为乙丑日。
English: The first day of May is the second day of the Ox.

古文：丙寅，制河阳节度使张汉瑜同平章事。
现代文：五月初二，决定河阳节度使张汉瑜为同平章事。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, it was decided that Zhang Hanyu would be awarded the title of "Dongping" in the Heyang Festival.

古文：宴百僚于崇勋殿，上赞述全忠之功业，因言御楼前一日所司亡失赦书，赖元帅府收得副本施行，几失事矣，中书不得无过。
现代文：皇上在崇勋殿宴请百官，皇上赞述朱全忠的功勋业绩，因而说到驾临光政门楼上的前一天府衙官员丢失了大赦天下的诏书，幸亏元帅府中收得赦书副本才得以宣布施行，几乎误事，中书省不能说没有过错。
English: The emperor invited hundreds of officials to a banquet at the Palace of the Imperial Decorations, and the emperor praised Zhu Quanzhong's meritorious achievements. Therefore, he said that the day before he arrived at the Guangzheng Gate, the prefectural government officials lost the amnesty decree. Fortunately, the Marshal's Office received a copy of the amnesty decree before it could be announced and implemented. It was almost a mistake, and the Chinese Book Ministry could not say that there was no fault.

古文：裴枢等起待罪。
现代文：宰相裴枢等站起来请罪。
English: Prime Minister Pei Zu stood up and pleaded guilty.

古文：中饮，帝更衣，召全忠曲宴阁中，全忠恳辞。
现代文：宴饮到中途，皇帝起来更衣，把朱全忠召到小阁中私宴，朱全忠恳切地推辞。
English: Halfway through the banquet, the emperor got up to change clothes and called Zhu Quanzhong to a private banquet in a small pavilion. Zhu Quanzhong earnestly declined.

古文：帝曰： 朕以全忠功业崇高，欲斋中款曲，以表庇赖耳。
现代文：皇帝说： 我认为全忠功绩崇高，想到斋中去说一说心里话，以表示托庇仰赖的意思。
English: The emperor said, "I think the merit of being a full-fledged loyalist is lofty. I want to say a few words in the middle of the meal, to show that I trust and rely on you."

古文：全忠既不欲来，即令敬翔来，朕与之言。 
现代文：全忠既然不想来，就叫敬翔来罢，我和他说一说。 
English: Since Quanzhong doesn't want to come, let Qianxiang come. I'll have a word with him.

古文：全忠令敬翔私退，奏曰： 敬翔亦醉而出矣。 
现代文：朱全忠令敬翔悄悄地退席，然后上奏皇帝说 ：敬翔也喝醉酒出殿去了。 
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered Qianxiang to quietly withdraw, and then the emperor said: Qianxiang also went out of the palace drunk.

古文：己巳，全忠辞赴大梁，宴于崇勋殿，是日雨甚。
现代文：五月初五，朱全忠向皇上告辞返回大梁，皇上在崇勋殿宴请朱全忠，这一天下着大雨。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, Zhu Quanzhong bade farewell to the emperor and returned to Daliang. The emperor invited Zhu Quanzhong to a banquet at the Hall of Supreme Honor. It was raining heavily that day.

古文：乙酉，翰林学士、左谏议大夫、知制诰沈栖远守本官，以病陈乞故也。
现代文：五月二十一日，命翰林学士、左谏议大夫、知制诰沈栖远暂署本职，这是他因病陈请的缘故。
English: On May 21st, it was announced that Hanlin B.A., Zuo Jie R.D. and Zhisheng J.C. had been temporarily assigned to this post. This was due to his illness.

古文：丁亥，敕河南府畿县先减尉一员，可准京兆府例，复置县尉一员。
现代文：五月二十三日，敕令河南省的畿县，原先减少的一名县尉，现在可以按照京兆府的先例，重新设置一名。
English: On May 23rd, the number of county lieutenants in Kixian County, Henan Province, was reduced by one. Now, in accordance with the precedent of Jingzhao Prefecture, one new county lieutenant can be appointed.

古文：癸巳，中书奏：准今年四月十一日赦文，陕州都督府改为兴唐府，其都督府长史宜改为尹，左右司马为少尹，录事为司录，陕县为次赤，余为次畿。
现代文：五月二十九日，中书省上奏说：按照今年四月十一日的大赦令，陕州都督府改为兴唐府，原来的都督府长史改为尹，左右司马改为少尹，录事改为司录，陕县定为次赤县，其余的县定为畿县。
English: On May 29, the report of the General Office of the People's Republic of China said: "According to the amnesty decree of April 11 this year, the governor's office of Shaanxi Province was changed to Xingtang Prefecture, the former governor's chief historian was changed to Yin, the left and right secretary was changed to Shao Yin, and the record was changed to the record, Shaanxi County was designated as Ziqi County, and the remaining counties were designated as Kixian County.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：六月甲午朔，邠州杨崇本侵掠关内，全忠遣硃友裕屯军于百仁村。
现代文：六月初一，州杨崇本侵犯、劫掠关内，朱全忠派遣朱友裕把军队屯驻在百仁村。
English: On the first day of June, Zhou Yang Chongbon invaded and plundered Guanzhong, and Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhu Youyu to garrison the army in Baeren Village.

古文：丙申，通议大夫、中书舍人、赐紫金鱼袋杨注可充翰林学士。
现代文：六月初三，通议大夫、中书舍人、赐紫金鱼袋杨注充任翰林学士。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Yang Zhucheng, a doctor of general discussion, a scholar of Chinese literature, and a recipient of the Purple Gold Fish Bag, was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：庚子，三佛齐国入朝使薄诃粟可宁远将军。
现代文：六月初七，封三佛齐国入朝使蒲诃粟为宁远将军。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, the Three Buddhas of Qi were enthroned in the imperial court, and Pu Poppy became the general of Ningyuan.

古文：丁未，制金紫光禄大夫、太子少傅卢绍可太子太保致仕。
现代文：六月十四日，决定金紫光禄大夫、太子少傅卢绍署理太子少保辞官退休。
English: On June 14th, it was decided that Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu and Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting Acting.

古文：银青光禄大夫、太子少师、天水男、食邑三百户赵崇可检校右仆射。
现代文：银青光禄大夫、太子少师、天水男、食邑三百户赵崇署理检校右仆射。
English: Dr. Yin Qingguanglu, young teacher Taizi, young man Tianshui, and 300 households in the food village Zhao Chong Department of Inspection and Inspection of Schools.

古文：甲寅，以京兆少尹郑韬光为太常少卿，前侍御史韦说为右司员外郎，前进士姚顗为校书郎，前进士赵颀、刘明济、窦专并可秘书省校书郎正字，从柳璨奏也。
现代文：六月二十一日，任命京兆府少尹郑韬光为太常寺少卿，任命前侍御史韦说为右司员外郎，任命前进士姚岂页为校书郎，前进士赵颀、刘明济、窦专均担任秘书省校书郎正字，这是按柳璨的上奏任命的。
English: On June 21st, Yin Zheng Rongguang, the Junior Secretary of Beijing Zhaofu, was appointed as the Junior Secretary of Taizhong Temple, the former attendant Shi Wei said was appointed as the right secretary of the secretary, Yao Zhaozhe was appointed as the secretary of the school, and the progressives Zhao Wei, Liu Mingji, and Dou Zhan all served as the secretary of the provincial school secretary, which was appointed according to the report of Liu Wei.

古文：荆南襄州忠义军节度、开府仪同三司、检校太师、中书令、江陵尹、襄州刺史、上柱国、楚王、食邑六千户赵匡凝宜备礼册命。
现代文：荆南襄州忠义军节度使、开府仪同三司、检校太师、中书令、江陵尹、襄州刺史、上柱国、楚王、食邑六千户赵匡凝应立即准备册封的礼仪。
English: Jingnan Xiangzhou Loyally-Armed Forces Festival Delegate, Kaifu Ceremonial and Three Departments, Inspector of Schools, Chinese Calligraphy, Jiangling Yin, Xiangzhou Calligraphy, Shangzhu Guo, King of Chu, and 6,000 households in the food village of Zhao Kuangge should immediately prepare the ceremony of canonization.

古文：七月癸亥朔，全忠率师讨邠、凤。
现代文：七月初一，朱全忠率军讨伐州、凤翔。
English: On the first day of July, Zhu Quanzhong and his army marched to Liaozhou and Fengxiang.

古文：甲子，自汴至洛阳，宴于文思球场。
现代文：七月初二，朱全忠从汴州到达洛阳，皇上在文思场宴请朱全忠。
English: On the second day of the first month of July, Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Luoyang from Bozhou. The emperor invited Zhu Quanzhong to a banquet at the Palace of Literature.

古文：全忠入，百官或坐于廊下，全忠怒，笞通引官何凝。
现代文：朱全忠进来的时候，有的官员坐在廊下，朱全忠发怒，用鞭子抽打通引官何凝。
English: When Zhu Quanzhong came in, some officials were sitting in the corridor. Zhu Quanzhong was angry and lashed out with a whip.

古文：丙寅，制金紫光禄大夫、行御史中丞、上柱国韩仪责授棣州司马，侍御史归蔼责授登州司户，坐百官傲全忠也。
现代文：七月初四，决定金紫光禄大夫、署理御史中丞、上柱国韩仪贬职为棣州司马，侍御史归蔼贬职为登州司户，这是因百官对待朱全忠不恭敬而受到的处罚。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month, it was decided to demote Jin Zi Guanglu, the doctor, the deputy of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary

古文：甲戌，制以中大夫、中书舍人、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋杜彦林为太中大夫、守御史中丞。
现代文：七月十二日，决定任命中大夫、中书舍人、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋杜彦林为太中大夫，署理御史中丞。
English: On July 12, it was decided to appoint Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr. Chung, Dr.

古文：丁丑，制以兵部郎中萧颀为吏部郎中，户部郎中徐绾为兵部郎中，司勋员外郎张茂枢为礼部郎中，监察御史郄殷象为右补阙。
现代文：七月十五日，决定任命兵部郎中萧颀为吏部郎中，任命户部郎中徐绾为兵部郎中，任命司勋员外郎张茂枢为礼部郎中，任命监察御史郗殷象为右补阙。
English: On July 15th, it was decided to appoint Xiao Jie, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Xu Jie, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Household Affairs, as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Zhang Maozhu, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Jian Yinxiang, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：己卯，制武昌军节度、鄂岳蕲黄等州观察处置兼三司水陆发运淮南西面行营招讨等使、开府仪同三司、检校太师、中书令、西平王、食邑三千户杜洪加食邑一千户，实封二百户。
现代文：七月十七日，决定武昌军节度使、鄂州岳州蕲州黄州等州观察处置使兼三司水陆发运使、淮南西面行营招讨使、开府仪同三司、检校太师、中书令、西平王、食邑三千户杜洪加授食邑一千户，实封食邑二百户。
English: On July 17th, it was decided that the Wuchang Military Festival Envoy, the Ezhou, Yuezhou, Zhangzhou, Huangzhou and other states' observation and disposal envoys and three departments of water and land transport envoys, the Huainan West Side Campaign Invitation Envoy, the Kaifu Yi and three departments, the school inspector, the Chinese calligrapher, the Xiping Wang, the three thousand households of the food village, the one thousand households of the Duhong plus the food village, and the two hundred households of the real food village.

古文：庚寅，中书奏： 西京旧有凌烟阁，图画功臣，今迁都洛阳，合议修建。
现代文：七月二十八日，中书省上奏说： 西京原来有一座凌烟阁，画着功臣的像，现在迁都到洛阳，应当决定也修建一座。
English: On July 28th, China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy issued a communique saying: Originally, there was a Lingyak Pavilion in Xijing, with a portrait of a hero. Now that the capital has been moved to Luoyang, it should be decided to build one as well.

古文：副元帅梁王勋庸冠世，请凌烟阁之侧别创一阁，以表殊勋。 
现代文：天下兵马副元帅、梁王朱全忠的勋劳业绩为当世第一，请允许在凌烟阁旁边另建一阁，以表彰梁王的特殊功勋。 
English: Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong, the vice-marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, is currently the world's number one for his distinguished service. Please allow us to build another pavilion next to the Lingyak Pavilion in recognition of Liang Wang's special merits.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：八月壬辰朔。
现代文：八月初一为壬辰日。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day.

古文：壬寅夜，硃全忠令左龙武统军硃友恭、右龙武统军氏叔琮、枢密使蒋玄晖弑昭宗于椒殿。
现代文：八月十一日夜间，朱全忠命令左龙武统军朱友恭、右龙武统军氏叔琮、枢密使蒋玄晖在椒殿杀死昭宗。
English: On the night of August 11th, Zhu Quanzhong ordered Zhu Youqiong of the Left Dragon United Front Army, Uji Shuxuan of the Right Dragon United Front Army, and the confidential envoy Jiang Xuanqian to kill Zhaozong in the Hall of Peppers.

古文：自帝迁洛，李克用、李茂贞、西川王建、襄阳赵匡凝知全忠篡夺之谋，连盟举义，以兴复为辞。
现代文：自从皇帝迁都到洛阳，李克用、李茂贞、西川的王建、襄阳的赵匡凝察觉了朱全忠篡夺皇位的阴谋，便结成同盟举行反朱全忠的起义，而以振兴、恢复唐室为说辞。
English: Since the emperor moved the capital to Luoyang, Li Kegui, Li Maozhen, Wang Jian of Xichuan, and Zhao Kuangjing of Xiangyang became aware of Zhu Quanzhong's plot to usurp the throne, and they formed an alliance to hold an uprising against Zhu Quanzhong, using the revitalization and restoration of the Tang Dynasty as a pretext.

古文：而帝英杰不群，全忠方事西讨，虑变起于中，故害帝以绝人望。
现代文：皇帝是个英明雄杰而不随和的人，朱全忠正进行讨伐西面敌人的事，担心宫中发生变故，因而加害皇帝以断绝他人的指望。
English: The emperor was a brave and heroic man who did not go along with others. Zhu Quanzhong was carrying out a crusade against the enemy in the west, and he was worried that there would be a change in the palace. Therefore, he harmed the emperor to cut off the hopes of others.

古文：帝自离长安、日忧不测，与皇后、内人唯沉饮自宽。
现代文：皇帝自从离开长安以后，每天都担心发生不测之事，和皇后、宫人只是陷溺在饮酒中以宽慰自己。
English: Since he left Chang'an, the emperor had been worried about something happening every day. He, the empress, and the courtiers were just drowning themselves in alcohol to comfort themselves.

古文：是月壬寅，全忠令判官李振自河中至洛阳，与友恭等图之。
现代文：当月十一日这天，朱全忠指令判官李振从河中来到洛阳，和朱友恭等人一起商量这件事。
English: On the 11th day of that month, Zhu Quanzhong ordered the judge Li Zhen to come to Luoyang from the middle of the river to discuss the matter with Zhu Yougong and others.

古文：是夜二鼓，蒋玄晖选龙武衙官史太等百人叩内门，言军前有急奏面见上。
现代文：当夜二更，蒋玄晖挑选龙武军军官史太等一百名士兵敲内宫的门，说军队有紧急情况要当面奏明皇上。
English: On the evening of the second day, Jiang Xuancheng selected a hundred soldiers including Longwu army officer Shi Tai to knock on the door of the inner palace, saying that the army had an emergency to report to the emperor in person.

古文：内门开，玄晖每门留卒十人，至椒殿院，贞一夫人启关，谓玄晖曰： 急奏不应以卒来。 
现代文：宫门打开之后，蒋玄晖每道门留下十名兵卒。来到椒殿院，贞一夫人打开门键，对蒋玄晖说 ：有紧急奏报不应当带兵来。 
English: After the palace gate was opened, Jiang Xuanzhang left ten soldiers at each gate. When he arrived at the Palace of the Peppers, Lady Zhen Yi opened the door key and said to Jiang Xuanzhang: "If there is an emergency report, you should not bring soldiers."

古文：史太执贞一杀之，急趋殿下。
现代文：史太抓住贞一夫人就杀了，急忙来到殿下。
English: Shi Tai grabbed Lady Zhen Yi and killed her, then hurried to His Royal Highness.

古文：玄晖曰： 至尊何在？ 
现代文：蒋玄晖问 ：皇上在哪里？ 
English: Jiang Xuanqian asked: Where is the emperor?

古文：昭仪李渐荣临轩谓玄晖曰： 院使莫伤官家，宁杀我辈。 
现代文：昭仪李渐荣来到轩前对蒋玄晖说： 院使不要伤害皇上，宁可杀了我们这些人。 
English: Zhao Yi Li Qian Rong came to Xuan and said to Jiang Xuanqi: Emperor, don't hurt the emperor, rather kill us.

古文：帝方醉，闻之遽起。
现代文：皇帝正喝醉了，一听到这话立即起来。
English: The emperor, who was drunk at the time, stood up as soon as he heard this.

古文：史太持剑入椒殿，帝单衣旋柱而走，太追而弑之。
现代文：史太持剑进入椒殿，皇帝只穿着单衣绕着屋柱逃跑，史太追上去杀死了他。
English: Shi Tai entered the Hall of Peppers holding a sword. The emperor fled around the pillar wearing only a singlet. Shi Tai chased after him and killed him.

古文：渐荣以身护帝，亦为太所杀。
现代文：李渐荣用身体护着皇帝，也被史太杀死了。
English: Li Yan Rong protected the emperor with his body and was killed by Shi Tai.

古文：复执何皇后，将害之。
现代文：又抓住何皇后，要杀害她。
English: He also grabbed Queen He, intending to kill her.

古文：后求哀于玄晖，玄晖以全忠止令害帝，释后而去。
现代文：何皇后向蒋玄晖哀求，蒋玄晖因为朱全忠只命令杀死皇帝，便放了何皇后而离去了。
English: Empress He pleaded with Jiang Xuanzhang. Since Zhu Quanzhong only ordered to kill the emperor, Jiang Xuanzhang released Empress He and left.

古文：帝殂，年三十八，群臣上谥曰圣穆景文孝皇帝，庙号昭宗。
现代文：皇帝死时三十八岁，群臣敬奉谥号为圣穆景文孝皇帝，庙号昭宗。
English: The emperor was thirty-eight years old at the time of his death, and his courtiers revered his posthumous name as Emperor Shengmu Jingwen Xiao, and his temple name as Emperor Zhaozong.

古文：二年二月二十日，葬于和陵。
现代文：天二年二月二十日安葬于和陵。
English: He was buried in the Imperial mausoleum on February 20 of the following year.

古文：哀帝哀皇帝讳柷，昭宗第九子，母曰积善太后何氏。
现代文：哀帝，名叫李柷，是昭宗的第九个儿子，母亲积善太后，姓何。
English: Aidi, named Li Xi, was the ninth son of Zhaozong, and his mother, Empress Dowager Ji Sheng, was surnamed He.

古文：景福元年九月三日，生于大内。
现代文：昭宗景福元年九月三日，哀帝生于皇宫之内。
English: On September 3rd, the first year of the reign of Emperor Akizong, Emperor Jingfu was born in the Imperial Palace.

古文：乾宁四年二月，封辉王，名祚。
现代文：乾宁四年二月，被封为辉王，名叫李祚。
English: In February of the 4th year of Qianning, he was named King Hui, and his name was Li Xi.

古文：天复三年二月，拜开府仪同三司，充诸道兵马元帅。
现代文：天复三年二月，拜为开府仪同三司，充任诸道兵马元帅。
English: In February of the third year of Tianfu, he was appointed as the commander of the ceremony and the three departments, and was appointed as the marshal of the soldiers and horses of all provinces.

古文：天祐元年八月十二日，昭宗遇弑。翌日，蒋玄晖矫宣遗诏，曰： 我国家化隋为唐，奄有天下，三百年之睹兵戈之屡起，赖勋贤协力，宗社再安。
现代文：我从继承大业到现在，已将近二十年，虽然恭谨勤奋，没有怠惰，而命运气数中的艰难却很多，以致广大的国土不得安宁，目睹兵乱屡次发生，幸好勋臣贤才同心协力，宗庙社稷才又得安宁。
English: It has been nearly twenty years since I inherited the great cause, and although I am respectful and diligent, I am not lazy, and the hardships in my destiny are many, so that the vast land is not tranquil, and I have witnessed the repeated occurrence of military conflicts. Fortunately, the noblemen and wise men have made concerted efforts, and the ancestral temple and community have achieved tranquility.

古文：岂意宫闱之间，祸乱忽作，昭仪李渐荣、河东夫人裴贞一潜怀逆节，辄肆狂谋，伤疻既深，已及危革。
现代文：哪里料想到后宫忽然发生了祸乱。昭仪李渐荣、河东夫人裴贞一暗中怀着异心，肆行狂妄的阴谋，国家的伤痛很深，已达到了危险变乱的程度。
English: No one could have expected that a calamity suddenly occurred in the harem. Zhao Yi Li Qian Rong and Hedong's wife Peizhen secretly harbored alien intentions and carried out a reckless conspiracy. The country's pain was very deep and had reached the level of dangerous disorder.

古文：万机不可以久旷，四海不可以乏君，神鼎所归，须有缵继。
现代文：各种事务不能长久无人过问，四海之内也不可以没有君王，国家政权要有所归属，必须有继承的人。
English: Various affairs cannot be left unattended for a long time, and there can be no king in the four seas. If the state power is to belong, there must be someone to inherit it.

古文：辉王祚幼彰岐嶷，长实端良，裒然不群，予所钟爱，必能克奉丕训，以安兆人。
现代文：辉王李祚幼年即已表现出聪慧，长大之后又确实正派善良，与众不同，这正是我所钟爱的。他一定能约束自己，奉守祖训，以安定百姓。
English: King Hui Li Yao showed his wisdom at an early age, and when he grew up, he was indeed decent, kind and different, which is exactly what I loved. He must be able to discipline himself and abide by the ancestral teachings in order to stabilize the people.

古文：宜立为皇太子，仍改名柷，监军国事。
现代文：应该立为皇太子，改名为李木兄，监督军国大事。
English: He should be made crown prince, change his name to Li Mu'er, and supervise military affairs.

古文：于戏！孝爱可以承九庙，恭俭可以安万邦，无乐逸游，志康寰宇。
现代文：唉，孝爱可以继承宗庙，恭俭可以安定家邦，不要享乐游玩，要有志于振兴国家。
English: Alas, filial piety can inherit the ancestral temple, and frugality can stabilize the family state. Don't have fun and games, but aspire to revitalize the country.

古文：百辟卿士，佑兹冲人，载扬我高祖、太宗之休烈。 
现代文：百官公卿士大夫们护佑这年幼的人吧，发扬我高祖、太宗盛大的业绩！ 
English: Let the hundreds of officials, nobles, and officials bless this young man, and carry forward the great achievements of my great-grandfather, Taizong!

古文：是日迁神柩于西宫，文武百僚班慰于延和门外。
现代文：当天把灵柩迁往西宫，文武百官列班吊慰于延和门外。
English: On the same day, the coffin was moved to the West Palace, and hundreds of civil and military officials lined up to offer condolences outside the Yanhe Gate.

古文：其日午时，又矫宣皇太后令曰： 予遭家不造，急变爰臻，祸生女职之徒，事起宫奚之辈。
现代文：当天午时，又假传皇太后敕令说 ：我家中遭遇不幸，以至于发生了急变，祸殃产生在女官身上，事端由宫中的奴婢引起。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, the Empress Dowager's edict was also falsely transmitted, saying, "A misfortune has befallen my family, so much so that there has been a sudden change. The misfortune has befallen the court ladies, and the incident has been caused by the slaves in the palace."

古文：皇帝自罹锋刃，已至弥留，不及顾遗，号恸徒切。
现代文：皇帝从遭受刺杀开始，直到临终，来不及安排后事。我只能悲号痛哭，做无益的哀切。
English: From the time the emperor was assassinated until the end of his life, there was no time to arrange the aftermath. I could only weep bitterly and mourn in vain.

古文：定大计者安社稷，纂丕图者择贤明，议属未亡人，须示建长策。
现代文：确定根本大计才能安定社稷，规划宏图必须选择贤明的继承人。大家认为应由先皇的未亡人，我，提出必须显示有所建树的良策。
English: In order to stabilize society, it is necessary to determine a fundamental plan, and a wise successor must be chosen for the grand plan. It is believed that I, the widow of the former emperor, should propose a good plan that must show some achievements.

古文：承高祖之宝运，医元勋之忠规，伏示股肱，以匡冲昧。
现代文：继承高祖的宝运，必须依靠元老勋臣忠诚的箴规，表现出辅佐的作用，以辅助幼小的皇帝。
English: In order to inherit the fortune of the great ancestors, it is necessary to rely on the principle of loyalty of the veterans and show the role of assistant to assist the young emperor.

古文：皇太子柷宜于柩前即皇帝位，其哀制并依祖宗故事，中书门下准前处分。
现代文：皇太子李木兄应该在灵柩前即皇帝位，丧礼的规格全依照祖宗的先例，中书、门下二省按照原来的规矩处置。唉！
English: The crown prince, Li Muyan, should be enthroned as emperor before the coffin. The funeral specifications should be entirely in accordance with the precedent of the ancestors. The Central Government and the two subordinate provinces should be disposed of according to the original rules. Alas!

古文：于戏！送往事居，古人令范，行今报旧，前哲格言。抆泪敷宣，言不能喻。 
现代文：送走了死者，侍奉活着的人，是古人的美德；着手于当今以报答旧恩，是光哲的格言，揩拭着眼泪陈述、宣布，言辞是无法表达的。 
English: Sending away the dead and serving the living is the virtue of the ancients; starting today to repay the old favor is the motto of Guang Zhe, wiping away tears, stating and announcing that words cannot express.

古文：帝时年十三，乞且监国，柩前即位，宜差太常卿王溥充礼仪使，又令太子家令李能告哀于十六宅。
现代文：皇上当时十三岁，即将承担监国的责任，在先皇的灵柩前即了皇帝位，派遣太常卿王溥充任礼仪使，又派太子家令李能到十六宅报丧。
English: At that time, the emperor was thirteen years old and was about to assume the responsibility of supervising the country. Before the coffin of the former emperor, he was crowned emperor, dispatched the Grand Duke Wang Qian as the ceremonial envoy, and sent the prince's family order Li Neng to the 16th house to report the funeral.

古文：丙午，大行皇帝大殓，皇太子柩前即皇帝位。
现代文：八月十五日，为初丧的皇帝实行大殓，皇太子在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: On August 15, a grand funeral was held for the newly-deceased emperor, and the crown prince ascended the throne in front of the coffin.

古文：己酉，矫制曰： 昭仪李渐荣、河东夫人裴贞一，今月十一日夜持刃谋逆，惧罪投井而死，宜追削为悖逆庶人。 
现代文：又假传圣命说 ：昭仪李渐荣、河东夫人裴贞一本月十一日夜间持刀作乱，畏罪投井自杀，应当追削为悖逆庶人。 
English: They also falsely preached the holy life, saying: Zhao Yi Li Qian Rong and Hedong's wife Peizhen, who held a knife in the night of the 11th day of the same month and committed a riot and committed suicide by throwing themselves into a well out of fear of crime, should be hunted down as disobedient commoners.

古文：蒋玄晖夜既弑逆，诘旦宣言于外曰： 夜来帝与昭仪博戏，帝醉，为昭仪所害。 
现代文：蒋玄晖夜间谋害皇上之后，早晨对外面扬言说 ：夜间皇上和昭仪赌钱为戏，皇上喝醉了，被昭仪害死。 
English: After plotting to kill the emperor at night, Jiang Xuanzang threatened the outside world in the morning, saying, "The emperor and Zhaoyi were gambling at night. The emperor got drunk and was killed by Zhaoyi."

古文：归罪宫人，以掩弑逆之迹。
现代文：归罪于宫人，以遮掩他谋杀皇帝的罪行。
English: Blame it on the palace guard to cover up his crime of murdering the emperor.

古文：然龙武军官健备传二夫人之言于市人。
现代文：但是龙武军的军健却把两位夫人的话全都传到市井中去了。
English: However, the military cadres of the Long March Army spread the words of the two ladies all over the city.

古文：寻用史太为棣州刺史，以酬弑逆之功。
现代文：立即任命史太为棣州刺史，以奖励他谋杀昭宗皇帝的功劳。
English: He immediately appointed Shi Tai as the governor of Zhangzhou to reward him for the murder of Emperor Zhaozong.

古文：庚戌，群臣上表请听政。
现代文：八月十九日，群臣上表请皇上处理政务。
English: On August 19th, a group of high-ranking courtiers petitioned the emperor to handle government affairs.

古文：甲寅，中书奏： 皇帝九月三日降诞，请以其日为乾和节。 
现代文：八月二十三日，中书省上奏说： 九月三日是皇帝的诞辰，请把这一天作为乾和节。 
English: On August 23rd, the Chinese Book Ministry issued a proclamation saying: September 3rd is the birthday of the emperor, please make this day the Qianhe Festival.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙丑，百僚赴西宫，殓讫，释服。
现代文：八月二十四日，百官去西宫，先皇遗体入棺毕，解除丧服。
English: On August 24th, hundreds of officials went to the West Palace, the body of the former emperor was put into the coffin, and the mourning clothes were removed.

古文：皇帝见群臣于崇勋殿西廊下。
现代文：新皇帝在崇勋殿西廊下接见群臣。
English: The new emperor met with his ministers under the west corridor of the Imperial Palace.

古文：中书帖：今月二十四日释服后，三日一度进名起居。
现代文：中书省呈上名帖：本月二十四日除下丧服后，每三天呈上一次名帖请安。
English: China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy presents a commemorative postcard: after removing the mourning clothes on the 24th of this month, a commemorative postcard will be presented every three days.

古文：丙辰，敕： 朕奉太后慈旨，以两司纲运未来，百官事力多阙，旦夕霜冷，深轸所怀。
现代文：八月二十五日，皇上敕令： 我奉皇太后的慈旨：因为两司送的物资还没有到，百官在辛劳中大多缺少所需的物品，早晚天气寒冷，令我深切关怀。
English: On August 25th, the Emperor issued the following imperial edict: I have carried out the benevolent will of the Empress Dowager: Because the supplies sent by the two departments have not yet arrived, most of the officials lack the necessary items in their hard work, and the weather is cold in the morning and evening, I am deeply concerned.

古文：令于内库方圆银二千一百七十二两，充见任文武常参官救接，委御史台依品秩分俵。 
现代文：着令以内库的方圆银二千一百七十二两接济现任的文武常参官，委派御史台按照品级官俸分发。 
English: He ordered that the 2,172 taels of round silver in the treasury be given to the incumbent civil and military councillors, and appointed the Imperial Historian's Office to distribute it according to the official salary of the grade.

古文：是日，皇帝听政。
现代文：当天，皇上处理政务。
English: On the same day, the Emperor dealt with government affairs.

古文：丁巳，敕：乾和节方在哀疚，其内道场宜停。
现代文：八月二十六日，皇上敕令：乾和节正处于哀痛期间，宫内讲经应当停止。
English: On August 26th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: the Qianhe Festival is in the mourning period, and the palace sermon should be stopped.

古文：戊午，遣刑部尚书张祎告哀于河中，全忠号哭尽哀。
现代文：八月二十七日，派刑部尚书张前往河中报哀，朱全忠放声大哭，极尽哀痛。
English: On August 27th, the Criminal Investigation Department sent Shang Shuzhang to Hechong to pay his respects. Zhu Quanzhong cried loudly and was extremely sad.

古文：庚申，敕： 乾和节文武百僚诸军诸使诸道进奏官准故事于寺观设斋，不得宰杀，只许酒果脯醢。 
现代文：八月二十九日，皇上敕令： 乾和节文武百官及各军、各使、各道的进奏官按照旧例在佛寺道观内设斋醮，不得宰杀牲口，只许用酒和果脯果酱。 
English: On August 29th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: On the occasion of the Chinese New Year, the 100 military and civilian officials, as well as the military, envoys, and envoys of the various sects, should set up a camp in the Buddhist temple Daokun in accordance with the old custom. No animals should be slaughtered, and only wine and fruit jam should be used.

古文：辛酉，敕： 三月二十三日嘉会节。伏以大行皇帝仙驾上升，灵山将卜，神既游于天际，节宜辍于人间。准故事，嘉会节宜停。 
现代文：八月三十日，皇上敕令： 三月二十三日为嘉会节，因已故皇帝仙驾升天，将要卜选灵柩安葬之地，魂魄既然已经在天际遨游，人间的节日就应当停止，按照旧例，嘉会节应当停止。 
English: On August 30th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: March 23rd is the Jia Hui Festival. Since the deceased emperor ascended to heaven and will choose the burial place of the coffin, since the soul has already traveled to the sky, the festivals of the human world should be stopped. According to the old practice, the Jia Hui Festival should be stopped.

古文：九月壬戌朔，百官素服赴西内临，进名奉慰。
现代文：九月初一，百官身着孝服往西内哭吊。
English: On the first day of September, hundreds of officials dressed in filial piety went crying to the West.

古文：戊辰，大行皇帝大祥，百官素服赴西内临。己巳，敕右仆射、门下侍郎、礼部尚书、平章事裴枢宜充大行皇帝山陵礼仪使，门下侍郎、平章事独孤损宜充大行皇帝山陵使，兵部侍郎李燕充卤簿使，权知河南尹韦震充桥道使，宗正卿李克勤充按行使。庚午，皇帝释服从吉。
现代文：九月初八，敕命右仆射、门下侍郎、礼部尚书、平章政事裴枢充任已故皇帝山陵礼仪使，门下侍郎、平章政事独孤损充任已故皇帝山陵使，兵部侍部李燕充任卤簿使，暂署河南尹的韦震充任桥道使，宗正卿李克勤充任按行使。九月初九，皇帝解除丧服，暂用吉服。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, the following were appointed to the position of the deceased emperor's burial rite envoy: the right-hand man of the deceased emperor, the attendant of the deceased emperor, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony, the attendant of the ceremony

古文：中书门下奏： 伏以陛下光继宝图，纂承丕绪，教道克申于先训，保任实自于慈颜。
现代文：中书门下省奏 ：因陛下荣继宝玺图籍，承接大统，在教化和德行方面能发扬祖训，保持帝位确实因为母后。
English: According to the textbook, it is said that because His Majesty succeeded to the throne of Baojun and inherited the supreme leadership, he was able to carry forward the ancestral teachings in terms of enlightenment and virtue, and maintained the imperial throne because of his mother.

古文：今则正位宸居，未崇徽号。
现代文：现在已经正大位，居紫宸殿，还没有崇奉美称。
English: Now he has become a high-ranking official, he lives in Shishinden, but he has not yet been given the title of a Buddhist saint.

古文：伏以大行皇帝皇后母临四海，德冠六宫，推尊宜正于鸿名，敬上式光于睿孝，望上尊号曰皇太后。 
现代文：先皇帝的皇后慈光照临四海，懿德冠于后宫，要推崇尊仰就要确定美名，而尊敬长上的榜样应当表现在大孝上，望奉上 皇太后 的尊号。 
English: The empress of the former emperor, Ciguang, shines on the four seas, and virtue is crowned in the harem. To promote respect and admiration, it is necessary to determine a good name, and the example of respect for elders should be manifested in great filial piety, and it is hoped to be given the honorary title of empress dowager.

古文：奉敕宜依。
现代文：皇上敕令说：应当依从。
English: The Emperor's edict said: it should be obeyed.

古文：又敕辉王府官属宜停。
现代文：又敕令原辉王府的官属应当停止履行职务。
English: He also ordered that the officials and subordinates of the former Huiwangfu should stop performing their duties.

古文：辛巳，山陵桥道使改差权河南尹张廷范，其顿递陵下应接等使，并令廷范兼之。
现代文：九月二十日，改派暂署河南尹的张廷范任山陵桥道使，那些屯驻、运送以及在陵下接待的差使，均命张廷范兼管。
English: On September 20, Zhang Tingfan, who had been temporarily assigned to Yin of Henan Province, was reassigned as the envoy of the Mountain and Necropolis Bridge. All the envoys stationed, transported and received at the necropolis were assigned to Zhang Tingfan.

古文：庚寅，中书奏：太常寺止鼓两字 敔 上字犯御名，请改曰 肇 。
现代文：九月二十九日，中书省奏：太常寺止鼓两字 吾攴 上字冒犯了皇帝的御名，请求改为 肇 。
English: On September 29th, the Ministry of Chinese Literature issued a request that the two characters "吾" in "太常寺止鼓" should be changed to "肇."

古文：从之。
现代文：诏命依从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十月辛卯朔，日有蚀之，在心初度。
现代文：十月初一，发生日蚀，在日心初度。
English: A solar eclipse occurred on the first day of October, at the beginning of the heliocentric period.

古文：壬辰，全忠自河中来朝，赴西内临祭讫，对于崇勋殿。
现代文：十月初二，朱全忠从河中来朝见，赴西内哭祭完毕之后在崇勋殿与皇上谈话。
English: At the beginning of October 2, Zhu Quanzhong came from Hechu to see the emperor, and after going to Xi'an to attend the wailing ceremony, he had a conversation with the emperor at the Chongxun Hall.

古文：甲午，敕检校太保、左龙武统军硃友恭可复本姓名李彦威，贬崖州司户同正。
现代文：十月初四，敕令检校太保、左龙武统军朱友恭可以恢复原来的姓名李彦威，贬官为崖州司户同正。
English: At the beginning of October 4th, the imperial command ordered Zhu Youqiong, the inspector of schools, and Zhu Youqiong, the leader of the Left Dragon Military Unification Army, to restore his original name, Li Yanwei. He was demoted to the position of Jiaozhou Sido Tongzheng.

古文：检校司徒、右龙武统军氏叔琮可贬贝州司户同正。
现代文：检校司徒、右龙武统军氏叔琮也贬为贝州司户同正。
English: The inspector of the school and the uncle of the Right Dragon Wu Tong Jun were also demoted to the position of Bei Zhou Sido Tong Zheng.

古文：又敕： 彦威等主典禁兵，妄为扇动，既有彰于物论，兼亦系于军情。
现代文：又敕令： 李彦威等主管禁军，妄自进行煽动，既遭到人们的议论，又关系到军情。
English: Another imperial edict: Li Yanwei and other leaders banned the military and arbitrarily carried out incitement, which was not only discussed by people, but also related to the military situation.

古文：谪掾遐方，安能塞责？
现代文：仅仅贬谪到远方去做小吏怎么能抵充罪责？
English: How can merely being sent to a faraway place to work as a petty official be enough to cover up one's guilt?

古文：宜配充本州长流百姓，仍令所在赐自尽。 
现代文：应当发配充军为本州的长流百姓，并命令他们在当地自杀。 
English: The army should be dispatched to round up the long stream of civilians in the state and order them to commit suicide on the spot.

古文：河南尹张廷范收彦威等杀之。
现代文：河南尹张廷范拘捕李彦威等处死。
English: Yin Zhang Tingfan of Henan Province was arrested and Li Yanwei and others were executed.

古文：临刑，大呼曰： 卖我性命，欲塞天下之谤，其如神理何！
现代文：临刑时，李彦威大声呼喊说 ：出卖我的性命，想要堵塞天下人的议论，能面对天理吗？
English: At the time of his execution, Li Yanwei shouted out loud: "Selling my life, trying to block the world's discussion, can I face the heavenly law?

古文：操心若此，欲望子孙长世，可乎？ 
现代文：像这样处心积虑，要想子孙代代相传，办得到吗？ 
English: Is it possible to carry out such a well-thought-out process and pass it down from generation to generation?

古文：呼廷范，谓曰： 公行当及此，勉自图之。 
现代文：把张廷范喊来对他说： 你这样做，也会落到我这个地步，希望你自己盘算一下。 
English: Call Zhang Tingfan and say to him: If you do this, you will end up like me. I hope you will think about it.

古文：是日，全忠归大梁。
现代文：这天，朱全忠回到大梁。
English: On this day, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Daliang.

古文：丙申，制天平军节度使、检校太师、中书令，兼郓州刺史、上柱国、东平王、食邑七千户张全义本官兼河南尹、许州刺史、忠武军节度观察等使、判六军诸卫事。
现代文：十月初六，决定天平军节度使、检校太师、中书令，兼任郓州刺史、上柱国、东平王、食邑七千户张全义以本官兼任河南尹、许州刺史、忠武军节度使、观察使等，掌管六军各卫所的事务。
English: At the beginning of October 6th, it was decided that Zhang Quanyi, the Tianping Army's festival envoy, school inspector, and Chinese calligrapher, would also serve as the governor of Zhangzhou, Shangzhuang, Dongping, and 7,000 households in food villages, and that he would also serve as the governor of Henan, the governor of Huzhou, the loyal army's festival envoy, and the observation envoy. He was in charge of the affairs of the six armies' sanitariums.

古文：皇帝即位行事官、左丞杨涉进封开国伯，加食邑四百户。
现代文：皇帝即位时的行事官、左丞杨涉晋封为开国伯、加授食邑四百户。
English: At the time of the emperor's accession to the throne, the officiating officer of the left, Yang Zhan Jinfeng, became the founding prefect and added 400 households to the county.

古文：吏部侍郎赵光逢进开国公，加食邑三百户。
现代文：吏部侍郎赵光逢晋封为开国公、加授食邑三百户。
English: Zhao Guangfeng, a servant of the cadres, was appointed as the founding father of the country, and 300 households were added.

古文：右散骑常侍窦回、给事中孙续、户部郎中知制诰封舜卿等加勋阶。
现代文：右散骑常侍窦回、给事中孙续、户部郎中知制诰封舜卿等加授勋阶。
English: On the right, Zangjia Zongzhi Dou Hui, Sun Zong, the head of the Household Division, was awarded an additional order of merit.

古文：礼仪使、太常卿王溥与一子八品正员官。
现代文：礼仪使、太常卿王溥的一个儿子授予正八品官。
English: The etiquette envoy conferred the title of Senior Eighth Rank Officer on one of the sons of the Grand Duke Wang Xi.

古文：书宝册官吏部尚书陆扆、刑部尚书张祎，扆与一子八品正员官，祎加阶。太子太保卢绍卒。
现代文：书宝册官吏部尚书陆、刑部尚书张，的一个儿子授予正八品官，张祚加官阶，太子太保卢绍去世。
English: One of the sons of Shang Shul, the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official of the official

古文：魏博罗绍威进救接百官绢千匹、绵三千两。
现代文：魏博的罗绍威进献接济百官的绢帛一千匹、绵三千两。
English: Wei Bo's Rossoway donated 1,000 yakitori fish and 3,000 yakitori yakitori noodles.

古文：十一月辛酉朔。癸酉午时，日有黄白晕，旁有青赤纫。
现代文：十一月辛酉为初一，十一月十三日，午时，太阳出现了黄白色的晕圈，旁边有青赤色的条纹。
English: It was the first day of November. At noon on November 13th, the sun appeared as a yellow-white halo with a blue-red stripe next to it.

古文：杨行密攻光州，又急攻鄂州，杜洪遣使求援，全忠率师五万自颍州渡淮，至霍丘大掠以纾之，行密分兵来拒。
现代文：杨行密进攻光州，又急攻鄂州，杜洪派使者向朝廷求援，朱全忠率领五万军队从颍州渡过淮河，到霍丘大肆劫掠以缓解局势，杨行密分遣军队前来抵敌。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked Gwangju and raided Ezhou. Du Hong sent an envoy to the imperial court to ask for help. Zhu Quanzhong led fifty thousand troops from Zhangzhou across the Huai River to Huoqiu to loot and pillage to ease the situation. Yang Xingmi dispatched troops to fight the enemy.

古文：乙酉，敕： 据太常礼院奏，于十二月内择日册太后者。朕近奉慈旨，以山陵未毕，哀感方缠。
现代文：十一月二十五日，皇上敕令： 据太常礼院奏闻，将在十二月内选定时间册封皇太后，我近日接到太后的慈旨，因先皇的陵墓尚未完成，心中哀感缠绵。
English: November 25th, the Emperor's edict: According to the report of the Imperial Household Agency, the time for the enthronement of the Empress Dowager will be selected in December. I recently received the Empress Dowager's benevolent will, because the mausoleum of the former emperor has not yet been completed, my heart is full of sadness.

古文：凡百有司，且虔充奉，吉凶之礼，难以并施。
现代文：所有的府衙职司都应该虔诚地尽心尽职，吉凶两种不同的礼仪难以同时举行，册封太后的典礼应当等到陵墓完工以后。
English: All prefectural officials should religiously perform their duties. It is difficult to hold two different ceremonies at the same time. The ceremony of enthroning the empress dowager should wait until after the mausoleum is completed.

古文：太后册礼，宜俟山陵毕日，庶得桥山攀慕，彰尽节于群臣；兰殿承荣，展盛仪于朕志。
现代文：那时才能到桥山向先皇表示敬慕，在群臣面前显扬尽节之心；后宫承受荣耀，我才能施行盛大的礼仪。
English: Only then will I be able to go to Hashiyama to pay my respects to the former emperor and show my heartfelt feelings in front of the courtiers; only then will I be able to perform the grand ceremonial for the glory of the harem.

古文：情既获遂，礼实宜之。
现代文：衷情既得以表达，册封的典礼便可以施行了。
English: Once the heartfelt feelings have been expressed, the canonization ceremony can be carried out.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交给有关府衙安排。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：己丑，岭南东道辨州宜改为勋州。
现代文：十一月二十九日，岭南东道的辨州改为勋州。
English: On November 29, Binzhou of Lingnan East Road was changed to Xiongzhou.

古文：十二月辛卯朔。
现代文：十二月辛卯为初一。
English: December is the first day of the new year.

古文：癸卯，权知河南府尹、和王傅张廷范宜复本官。
现代文：十二月十三日，暂代河南府尹、和王太傅张廷范恢复本职。
English: On December 13th, Yin and Wang Taifu Zhang Tingfan, the acting governor of Henan Province, resumed their duties.

古文：光禄大夫、检校司徒河东县开国子、食邑五百户、充山陵副使、权知河南尹、天平军节度副使韦震权知郓州军州事。
现代文：光禄大夫、检校司徒、河东县开国子，食邑五百户、充任山陵副使、暂署河南尹、天平军节度命韦震暂时掌管郓州军州事务。
English: Guanglu doctor, school inspector, son of the founder of Hedong County, 500 households of food villages, acting as deputy envoy of the mountains and tombs, temporarily sent to Henan Yin, Tianping Army Festival, Wei Zhen temporarily in charge of the military affairs of Zhangzhou.

古文：二年春正月庚申朔，杨行密陷鄂州，执节度使杜洪，斩于扬州市。
现代文：哀帝天二年正月初一，杨行密攻陷鄂州，掳获节度使杜洪在扬州斩首。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Emperor's reign, Yang Xingmi invaded Ezhou, captured the festival and beheaded Du Hong in Yangzhou.

古文：鄂、岳、蕲、黄等州入行密。
现代文：鄂州、岳州、蕲州、黄州等州都被杨行密占领。
English: Ezhou, Yuezhou, Zhangzhou, Huangzhou and other provinces were all occupied by Yang Xingmi.

古文：全忠自霍丘还大梁。
现代文：朱全忠从霍丘回到大梁。
English: Zhu Quanzhong returned from Huoqiu to Daliang.

古文：甲子，太常卿王溥上大行皇帝谥号、庙号，乃敕右仆射、平章事裴枢撰谥册，中书侍郎柳璨撰哀册。
现代文：正月初五，太常卿王溥呈上已故皇帝的谥号、庙号，皇上便令右仆射、平章政事裴枢撰写谥册，中书侍郎柳璨撰写哀册。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Grand Councilor Wang Xi presented the posthumous name and temple name of the deceased emperor. The emperor then ordered the Right Servant Sha and the Second Servant Ping Zhang to write a memorial book, and the Second Servant Liu Xi to write a memorial book.

古文：辛未，敕： 朕祗荷丕图，仰惟元训，方迫遗弓之痛，俯临同轨之期。
现代文：正月十二日，皇上敕令： 我敬承大统，仰怀先皇遗训，正迫于先皇遗下世业而去的悲痛，面向着统一全国的期望。
English: On the 12th day of the first month of the year, the Emperor issued the following edict: I hold the Great Reign in high esteem, cherish the Emperor's last teachings, and, driven by the grief of the Emperor's passing, look forward to the unification of the whole country.

古文：将展孝思，亲扶护卫。
现代文：我将要展现孝心，亲自扶持和护卫先皇的灵柩。
English: I will show my filial piety by personally supporting and guarding the casket of the late emperor.

古文：皇太后义深鸣凤，痛切攀龙，亦欲专奉灵舆，躬及园寝，兼尽追摧之道，用终克敬之仪。
现代文：皇太后的节义比鸣凤还要深沉，痛切地依附着先皇，也打算专门扶送灵车。亲自前往陵园，兼尽追怀的悲痛心情，以完成表达虔敬的礼仪。
English: The empress dowager's devotion to the festival was even deeper than that of Mingfeng. She was deeply attached to the former emperor and also planned to escort the hearse. She went to the cemetery in person to complete the ritual of expressing reverence while pursuing her feelings of grief.

古文：其大行皇帝山陵发引日，朕随太后亲至陵所，付中书门下，宜体至怀。 
现代文：先皇灵柩出发的那一天，我将跟随太后，亲自去陵墓的所在地。这诏令交付给中书省门下省，应当体察我一片至情。 
English: On the day of the departure of the casket of the late Emperor, I will follow the Empress Dowager and personally go to the location of the mausoleum.

古文：群臣三表论谏，乃止。
现代文：群臣再三上表劝谏，才劝止。
English: The group of ministers repeatedly went to the table to dissuade him, only to be dissuaded.

古文：二月庚寅朔。
现代文：二月庚寅为初一。
English: The first day of February is Go-in Day.

古文：壬辰，制以前知鄜州军州事、检校尚书左仆射刘鄩为右金吾卫大将军，充右街使。
现代文：二月初三，决定任命原主持州军州事务、检校尚书左仆射刘寻阝担任右金吾卫大将军，充任右街使。
English: On the third day of February, it was decided to appoint Liu Xingyao, who formerly presided over the state military affairs of the state and was the left-hand man of Shang Shu, the inspector of the school, as the right-hand general of Kinguwei, acting as the right-hand street envoy.

古文：检校左仆射硃汉宾为右羽林统军。
现代文：任命检校左仆射朱汉宾为右羽林统军。
English: Zhu Hanbin, the left-hand man of the inspection of the school, was appointed as the leader of the right-wing united army.

古文：丙申，群臣告谥于西宫。
现代文：二月初七，群臣向西宫太后奏告先皇谥号。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd month, a group of courtiers reported to the Empress Dowager Cixi that the Emperor had abdicated.

古文：己亥，敕： 今月十一日，大行皇帝启攒宫。
现代文：二月初十，皇上敕令： 本月十一日，先皇的灵柩将启动。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month, the Emperor's command: On the 11th day of this month, the coffin of the late Emperor will be started.

古文：准故事，坊市禁音乐，至二十日掩玄宫毕，如旧。 
现代文：按旧制，坊市中禁止演奏音乐，到二十日灵柩掩埋完毕再还原如常。 
English: According to the old system, the performance of music was prohibited in the market. On the 20th, the coffin was buried and then returned to normal.

古文：庚子，启攒宫，文武百僚夕临于西宫。
现代文：二月十一日，灵柩启动，文武百官全都哭祭于西宫。
English: On February 11th, the funeral procession was started, and all the civil and military officials attended the memorial service in the West Palace.

古文：丁未，灵驾发引，濮王已下从，皇帝、太后长乐门外祭毕归大内。
现代文：二月十八日，灵车出发，自濮王以下的官员公卿都随从前往，皇帝、太后在长乐门外祭奠完毕返回皇宫。
English: On February 18th, the hearse set off, and the officials and nobles from the king to the emperor followed. The emperor and the empress dowager returned to the imperial palace after paying their respects outside the Changle Gate.

古文：己酉，葬昭宗皇帝于和陵。
现代文：二月二十日，将昭宗皇帝安葬在和陵。
English: On February 20, Emperor Zhaozong was buried in the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：庚戌，制以太常卿王溥为工部尚书。
现代文：二月二十一日，敕命以太常卿王溥担任工部尚书。
English: On February 21st, Wang Xi, the ethereal Lord of the Ether, was appointed as the Minister of the Ministry of Works.

古文：壬子，制以汝州刺史裴迪为刑部尚书。
现代文：二月二十二日，敕命以汝州刺史裴迪担任刑部尚书。
English: On February 22nd, it was announced that Ruzhou assassin Shi Peidi would be appointed as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：泰宁军节度、检校司空、兗州刺史、御史大夫葛从周检校司徒、兼右金吾上将军致仕，从周病风，不任朝谒故也。
现代文：泰宁军节度使、检校司空、兖州刺史、御史大夫葛从周检校司徒、兼右金吾上将军离职去任，因葛从周身患中风之症，不能上朝拜谒皇帝的缘故。
English: Tainin's military festival envoy, school inspection officer Ku, Zhangzhou's chief historian, and chief historian Ge resigned from Zhou's school inspection officer, and also from the right-hand king's general, due to the fact that Ge suffered from a stroke and could not go to the court to worship Emperor Zhou.

古文：以左金吾上将军卢彦威为左威卫上将军。
现代文：任命左金吾上将军卢彦威为左威卫上将军。
English: He appointed Lu Yanwei, General Zuo Jingo, as General Zuo Wei.

古文：是月社日，枢密使蒋玄晖宴德王裕已下九王于九曲池，既醉，皆绞杀之，竟不知其瘗所。
现代文：当月的社日，枢密使蒋玄晖在九曲池宴请德王李裕以下的九个王，醉了之后，把他们全部绞死了。竟不知道埋在什么地方。
English: On the social day of the same month, the confidential envoy Jiang Xuanqi invited the nine kings below the German king Li Yu to a banquet at the Jiuquan Pond. After getting drunk, he hanged them all. He did not know where they were buried.

古文：丙辰，左仆射裴贽等议迁庙，合迁顺宗一室，从之。
现代文：二月二十六日，左仆射裴贽等商议把昭宗的神位迁入宗庙，将昭宗与顺宗合迁于一室，皇上允许。
English: On February 26th, Saho Shohei and others discussed the relocation of Shoson's shrine to the ancestral temple, moving Shoson and Shunson together in one room, which was permitted by the emperor.

古文：己未，昭宗皇帝神主祔太庙，礼院奏昭宗庙乐，曰《咸宁之舞》。
现代文：二月二十九日，昭宗皇帝的神位附祭于太庙，礼院演奏昭宗的庙乐，名叫《咸宁之舞》。
English: On February 29th, Emperor Shoson's enthronement was enshrined in the Great Temple, and the ceremonial hall performed Shoson's temple music, called "The Dance of Hamnin."

古文：三月庚申朔。
现代文：三月庚申为初一。
English: March Koshin is the first day of the new year.

古文：壬戌，制以前平卢军节度使、检校太傅、同平章事、兼青州刺史、上柱国、琅邪郡公、食邑二千五百户王师范为孟州刺史、河阳三城怀孟节度观察等使，从全忠奏也。
现代文：三月初三，谕令前平卢军节度使，检校太傅、同平章事，兼青州刺史、上柱国、琅笽郡公、食邑二千五百户王师范为孟州刺史、河阳三城怀孟节度使、观察使等，这是按照朱全忠的奏书任命的。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, the former Pinglu Military Festival Envoy, Inspection Taifu, Tongping Zhengji, and Qingzhou Historian, Shangzhuang Guo, Qixian Guo, and Cuisine Village 2,500 Wang Shifan were appointed as Mengzhou Historian, Heyang Three Cities Huai Meng Festival Envoy, Observation Envoy, etc. This was appointed according to Zhu Quanzhong's report.

古文：甲子，制以特进、尚书右仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使、判度支、上柱国、河东郡开国公、食邑二千户裴枢可守尚书左仆射。
现代文：三月初五，谕令以特进、尚书右仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使、兼任度支使、上柱国、河东郡开国公、食邑二千户裴枢任尚书左仆射。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month of the year, an order was issued to appoint the special envoy, Shangshu Zuoxia, the under-waiter, Tongping Zhangji, the envoy of the Taiqing Palace, the scholar of the Hongwen Museum, the envoy of the capital treasury, the envoy of the salt and iron transportation in all directions, the concurrent deputy envoy, Shangzhu Guo, the governor of the opening of the country in Hedong County, and the 2,000 households of Baizhu in the food village as Shangshu Zuoxia.

古文：光禄大夫、门下侍郎、户部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、河南县开国子、食邑五百户独孤损可检校尚书左仆射、同平章事，兼安南都护，充静海军节度、安南管内观察处置等使。
现代文：光禄大夫、门下侍郎、户部尚书、同平章事、监修国史、河南县开国子、食邑五百户独孤损任检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、兼安南都护，充任静海军节度使、安南管内观察使、处置使等。
English: Dr. Guanglu, his attendants, the household secretary, Tongping Zhangji, the supervisor of the national history, the founder of Henan County, the 500 households of the food village, the school inspector Shangshu Zuopuzha, Tongping Zhangji, and the guardian of Annan, served as the naval festival envoy of Jing, the observation envoy of Annan, the disposition envoy, and so on.

古文：以光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、上柱国、博陵郡开国公、食邑一千五百户崔远可守尚书右仆射。
现代文：任命光禄大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、上柱国、博陵郡开国公、食邑一千五百户崔远任尚书右仆射。
English: Appointed Guanglu Doctor, Chushushijiro, Tongping Zhangji, Jixianden University Scholar, Shangzhuo Province, Boling County Kaigong, and 1500 households in food villages.

古文：以正议大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事，判户部事、上柱国、河东县男、食邑三百户柳璨为门下侍郎、兼户部尚书、同平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运等使。
现代文：任命正议大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事、判户部事、上柱国、河东县男、食邑三百户柳璨为门下侍郎、兼任户部尚书、同平章事、太清宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使等。
English: He was appointed as the chief councilor, the chief secretary of the Central Committee, the chief secretary of Tongping, the chief secretary of the Han households, the chief secretary of Shangzhuang, the chief secretary of Hedong County, and the chief secretary of the 300 households of Yuxuan, the concurrent chief secretary of the households, the chief secretary of Tongping, the palace envoy of the Taiqing Dynasty, the university scholar of the Hongwen Library, the envoy of the Yangtze Reservoir, and the envoy of the salt and iron transportation in all directions.

古文：以正议大夫、尚书吏部侍郎、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋张文蔚为中书侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、判度支。
现代文：任命正议大夫、尚书吏部侍郎、上柱国、赐紫金鱼袋张文蔚为中书侍郎、同平章事、监修国史、兼任度支使。
English: He appointed Zhang Wenwei as the chief secretary, the chief secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary, the secretary of the office of the secretary of the office of the secretary

古文：以银青光禄大夫、行尚书左丞、上柱国、弘农县伯、食邑七百户杨涉为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士、判户部事。
现代文：任命银青光禄大夫、兼职尚书左丞、上柱国、弘农县伯、食邑七百户杨涉为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿大学士，兼掌户部事。
English: Appointed Yin Qingguanglu doctor, part-time Shang Shuzojo, Shangzhu Guo, Hongnong County Bo, food village seven hundred households Yang Wai as Chushushijiro, Tongping Zhangji, Jixian Palace University Scholar, and the head of the household department.

古文：庚午，敕： 朕以宰臣学士，文武百僚，常拘官局，空逐游从。
现代文：三月十一日，皇上敕令： 我考虑宰臣学士和文武百官长年被拘束在官署中，只能空想游览的踪迹。
English: On March 11th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict: I consider that the Vice-Minister of Education and the Centenary of Civil and Military Affairs have been detained in the government office for many years, and can only imagine the traces of the tour.

古文：今膏泽不愆，丰年有望，当兹韶景，宜示优恩。
现代文：如今恩泽不为过分，丰年有了希望，面对这美景，应当表示优宠的恩遇。
English: Now the grace is not excessive, the year of plenty has hope, in the face of this beauty, it should express the grace of grace.

古文：自今月十二日后至十六日，各令取便选胜追游。
现代文：从本月十二日以后到十六日，可让各官在方便的时候选择胜景，追欢游玩。
English: From the 12th day of this month to the 16th day, officials can choose the scenic spots at their own convenience and go on an outing.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交付府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：壬申，以检校司徒、和王傅张廷范为太常卿。
现代文：三月二十日，任命检校司徒、和王太傅张廷范任太常卿。
English: On March 20, Wang Taifu Zhang Tingfan was appointed as the permanent secretary of the Communist Party of China.

古文：丁亥，敕： 翰林学士、户部侍郎杨注是宰臣杨涉亲弟，兄既秉于枢衡，弟故难居宥密，可守本官，罢内职。 
现代文：三月二十八日，皇上敕令： 翰林学士、户部侍郎杨注是宰相杨涉的亲弟弟，兄长既掌管机枢要职，弟弟便难以居官于机要职务。可保留本官职务而免去内府官职。 
English: On March 28th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Hanlin Scholar and Household Attendant Yang Jie is the younger brother of Prime Minister Yang Wuchang. Since the elder brother is in charge of the key position, it is difficult for the younger brother to stay in the key position. He can retain his position and be exempted from the inner-prefectural official position.

古文：四月己丑朔。
现代文：四月己丑为初一。
English: April is the first month of the year.

古文：壬辰，敕河南府缑氏县令宜兼充和陵台令，仍升为赤县。
现代文：四月初四，敕令河南府缑氏县县令兼任和陵台令，仍旧升格为赤县。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：癸巳，敕曰： 文武二柄，国家大纲，东西两班，官职同体。
现代文：四月初五，敕令： 文武两大权柄，是国家的总纲，东西两班大臣，职务的作用相同。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the year, the imperial edict: The two great powers of literature and military affairs are the general outline of the country, and the two groups of ministers from east and west have the same functions.

古文：咸匡圣运，共列明廷，品秩相对于高卑，禄俸皆均于厚薄。
现代文：都是为了匡扶神圣的大运，共同列位于朝廷。品级和地位的高低相称，俸禄的多少都是公平合理的。
English: All of them are in order to support the sacred Great Prosperity and are jointly listed in the imperial court. Rank and status are commensurate, and the amount of salary is fair and reasonable.

古文：不论前代，祗考本朝。
现代文：不必说前代了，只需考察一下本朝就足可证明。
English: It is not necessary to mention the previous generation, it is enough to examine this generation to prove it.

古文：太宗皇帝以中外臣僚，文武参用，或自军卫而居台省，亦由衣冠而秉节旄，足明于武列文班，不令分清浊优劣。
现代文：太宗皇帝把朝内朝外的官员，文臣和武将参和任用，有的出身于军卫而后来任职于台省，也有本来是文人而后来执掌兵权的，足以证明武将和文臣之间，不必把他们按照文武来区分清浊优劣。
English: Emperor Taizong appointed officials, civil servants and military commanders from inside and outside the imperial court to participate in the war. Some of them were born in the military guard and later served in Taiwan Province, while others were originally literati and later held military power. This is enough to prove that there is no need to distinguish between military commanders and civil servants according to their merits and demerits.

古文：近代浮薄相尚，凌蔑旧章，假偃武以修文，竞弃本而逐末。
现代文：近来崇尚浮华浅薄的风气，轻视旧的章程，假称停息兵戈以修养文德，竞相扬弃根本而追逐末节。
English: Recently, it has been advocating a flashy and shallow culture, despising the old regulations, pretending to stop interest rate hikes to cultivate morality, and competing to abandon the fundamentals and pursue the ends.

古文：虽蓝衫鱼简，当一见而便许升堂；纵拖紫腰金，若非类而无令接席。
现代文：即使是职位不高的官员，只要相合就让他升堂入室；纵然是拖着紫绶、腰悬金印的大官，如果不能引为同类就不让他和自己连席。
English: Even if it is a low-ranking official, as long as it is a match, he will be promoted to enter the room; even if it is a high-ranking official with a purple ribbon and a gold seal on his waist, if he cannot be brought into the same category, he will not be allowed to sit with him.

古文：以是显扬荣辱，分别重轻，遽失人心，尽隳朝体。
现代文：用这来显示自己的荣辱，区分对人的轻重，骤然丧失人心，朝廷的体统全被破坏。
English: Using this to show their honor and shame, distinguishing the importance of people, they suddenly lost the hearts of the people, and the integrity of the court was completely destroyed.

古文：致其今日，实此之由，须议改更，渐期通济。
现代文：导致如今这样，实在是由此而造成的。
English: And that's really what's led to this.

古文：文武百官，自一品以下，逐月所给料钱并须均匀，数目多少，一般支给。兼差使诸道，亦依轮次，既就公平，必期开泰。
现代文：必须商量改弦更张，逐渐产生挽救的希望，文武百官，自一品以下，按月发下的津贴必须均匀，数目多少都同样地支付，兼任各道的差使，也应按照轮流的顺序，做到公平合理。这样，必能期望和平安泰。
English: It is necessary to discuss a change of policy, and hope for salvation will gradually arise. The monthly allowance must be uniform and the same amount must be paid to all civil and military officials, from the first to the last, and they should also serve as envoys of various departments, and they should also follow the order of rotation, so as to be fair and reasonable. In this way, peace and security can be expected.

古文：凡百臣庶，宜体朕怀。 
现代文：所有的臣民都应当体察我的一片情怀。 
English: All my subjects should feel a part of me.

古文：和王傅张廷范者，全忠将吏也，以善音律，求为太常卿，全忠荐用之。
现代文：和王的太傅张廷范是朱全忠手下的将吏，因为通晓音律，请求担任太常卿，这是朱全忠推荐任用他的。
English: Zhang Tingfan, the King's Taifu, was one of Zhu Quanzhong's generals. Because he was familiar with musical notation, he asked to serve as Taizhongqing, which was recommended by Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：宰相裴枢以廷范非乐卿之才，全忠怒，罢枢相位。
现代文：宰相裴枢认为张廷范不是乐官的人才，朱全忠发怒，罢免了裴枢的宰相之职。
English: Prime Minister Pei Zu believed that Zhang Ting Fan was not a talented musician, and Zhu Quanzhong became angry and dismissed Pei Zu from the post of prime minister.

古文：柳璨希旨，又降此诏斥枢辈，故有白马之祸。
现代文：柳璨迎合皇上的意旨，皇上又降下这道诏书斥责裴枢一类人，故而才有了裴枢等白马驿被杀的祸事。
English: Liu Xuan catered to the emperor's wishes, and the emperor issued this edict to reprimand Pei Zu and other people, which led to the calamity of Pei Zu and other white horses being killed.

古文：丙午，前棣州刺史刘仁遇检校司空，兼兗州刺史、御史大夫，充泰宁军节度使。
现代文：四月初六，前棣州刺史刘仁遇任检校司空，并兼任兖州刺史、御史大夫，充任泰宁军节度使。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the year, Liu Ren, the former chief historian of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the inspector of the school, and also served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou and the chief historian, and served as the chief envoy of the Taining Army.

古文：乙未，制左仆射裴枢、新除清海军节度使独孤损、河南尹张全义、工部尚书王溥、司空致仕裴贽、刑部尚书张祎，并赐一子八品正员官，以奉山陵之劳也。
现代文：四月初七，决定左仆射裴枢、新任清海军节度使独孤损、河南尹张全义、工部尚书王溥、离任卸职的司空裴贽、刑部尚书张都赐给一个儿子正八品官职，以作为替先皇陵墓效劳的酬劳。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month, it was decided that the left-hand servant Sha Pei Zu, the newly appointed Qing Navy Commander, Henan Yin Zhang Quan Yi, the Minister of Works, Wang Qi, the departing and retiring Secretary Ku Pei Qi, and the Minister of Justice, Shang Zhang, would all give one son the official position of the eighth grade, as a reward for serving the tomb of the former emperor.

古文：敕曰： 朕以宿麦未登，时阳久亢，虑阙粢盛之备，轸予宵旰之怀。
现代文：皇上敕令说 ：因为隔年成熟的麦子还没有收获，天气又久晴不雨，我忧虑不能备办祭祀用的谷物。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "Since the next year's mature wheat has not yet been harvested, and the weather has not been fine for a long time, I am worried that I cannot prepare the grain for the ritual.

古文：所宜避正位于宸居，减珍羞于常膳，谅惟眇质，深合罪躬。
现代文：在繁忙的政务中，我的心情感到沉重。应当回避皇宫中的正殿，减少日常饮食中的美味，谅我资性渺小，只有这样才与我有罪之身相符。
English: In the midst of busy government affairs, my heart feels heavy. I should avoid the main hall in the palace, reduce the delicacy in my daily diet, and forgive myself for my small talent. This is the only way to reconcile with my guilty conscience.

古文：自今月八日已后，不御正殿，减常膳。
现代文：从本月八日以后，我不再到正殿，并减少日常饮食费用。
English: After the 8th of this month, I will no longer go to the main hall and reduce my daily food expenses.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交主管府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：辛丑，侍御史李光庭郗殷象、殿中丞张升崔昭矩、起居舍人卢仁烱卢鼎苏楷、吏部员外郎崔协、左补阙崔咸休、右补阙杜承昭罗兗、右拾遗韦彖路德延，并宜赐绯鱼袋；兵部郎中韦乾美、比部郎中杨焕，皆赐紫金鱼袋：并以奉山陵之劳也。
现代文：四月十三日，侍御史李光庭、郗殷象、殿中丞张升、崔昭矩，起居舍人卢仁炯、卢鼎、苏楷，吏部员外郎崔协，左补阙崔咸休，右补阙杜承昭、罗兖，右拾遗韦彖、路德延，都赐予绯鱼符袋；兵部郎中韦乾美、比部郎中杨焕，都赐予紫金鱼符袋，以此作为对先皇陵墓效劳的酬劳。
English: On April 13th, the attendants Shi Li Guangting, Zou Yingxiang, the palace junior secretaries Zhang Sheng and Cui Zhaojun, the housekeepers Lu Renqi, Lu Ding and Su Kai, the clerk Wai Lang Cui Xie, the left-hand mender Zou Cui Han Xiu, the right-hand mender Zou Du Cheng Zhao, Luo Yao, the right-hand mender Zhou Wei and Lu De Yan, were all given eel charm bags; the war minister Lang Zhong Wei Qian Mei and the war minister Lang Zhong Yang Huan were all given purple goldfish charm bags as a reward for their service to

古文：壬寅，敕： 朕获荷丕图，仰遵慈训，爰崇徽号，已定礼仪，冀申为子之心，以展奉亲之敬。
现代文：四月十四日，皇上敕命： 我自从继承大统，上遵母后的训示，拟尊奉美号，已定下礼仪，希望借此表达为人子的一片孝心，以显示侍奉母亲的虔诚。
English: On April 14th, the Emperor died: Since I succeeded to the throne, I have been following my mother's instructions, and I have established a ritual of honoring the name Mei. I hope that by doing so, I can express my filial piety as a human being, and show my devotion to serving my mother.

古文：昨所司定今月二十五日行皇太后册礼。
现代文：昨日府署确定本月二十五日举行册封皇太后的典礼。
English: Yesterday, the prefectural government office confirmed that the ceremony for the investiture of the Empress Dowager will be held on the 25th of this month.

古文：再奉慈旨，以宫殿未停工作，蒸暑不欲劳人，宜改吉辰，固难违命。
现代文：又奉母后慈旨，因为宫殿还没停止施工，暑热蒸人，不可使人劳累，应该另改一个吉利的日子，实在难以违命。
English: He also followed his mother's wishes, because the construction of the palace had not yet stopped, the heat was oppressive, and people should not be overworked. It was necessary to change the auspicious day. It was really difficult to disobey the order.

古文：册礼俟修大内毕功日，所司以闻。 
现代文：册封之礼等修葺皇宫完工的日子再举行，府衙知悉。 
English: The enthronement ceremony will be held on the day the renovation of the Imperial Palace is completed, and the prefectural government is aware of this.

古文：癸卯，太清宫使柳璨奏修上清宫毕，请改为太清宫，从之。
现代文：四月十五日，太清宫使柳璨奏报，上清宫修建完毕，请求改名为太清宫，皇上允准。
English: On April 15th, the Taiqing Palace asked Liu Xuan to report that the Upper Qing Palace had been completed and requested to be renamed the Taiqing Palace, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：甲辰夜，彗起北河，贯文昌，其长三丈，在西北方。
现代文：四月十六日夜，彗星起于北河贯通文昌星域，有三丈长，在西北方向。
English: On the evening of April 16th, the comet rose from the Beihe River and passed through the Wenchang star region. It was three feet long and in the northwest direction.

古文：丁未，敕： 设官分职，各有司存，铨衡既任于吏曹，除授宁烦于宰职。
现代文：四月十九日，皇上敕命 ：设置官吏以分掌职权，各有管辖范围，斟酌、权衡具体事务则由吏员担任，授予官职就只能由宰相操心了。
English: On April 19th, the emperor decreed that officials should be set up to divide responsibilities and powers, each with its own jurisdiction. The officials would be responsible for considering and weighing specific matters, and only the prime minister would be responsible for awarding official positions.

古文：但所司注拟申到，中书过验酌量，苟或差舛，难可尽定。
现代文：但主管部门拟具申报的名单，虽经中书省检查斟酌，如果发生了差错，仍然难以全部核定。
English: However, it is still difficult to fully approve the list prepared by the competent department, even though it has been inspected by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：近年除授，其徒实繁，占选部之阙员，择公当之优便，遂致三铨注拟之时，皆旷职务。
现代文：近年来所任命的官员实在太多，他们占据了吏部补阙的全部名额，而且选择优厚多利的职位，这就导致经三次考选后拟具名单时，因许多人考试不获通过，职位都空缺出来。
English: In recent years, there have been so many officials appointed that they have occupied all the places in the cadre replenishment plan, and they have chosen positions that are more advantageous. This has led to the fact that when the list was drawn up after three examinations, many people did not pass the examinations, and the positions were all vacant.

古文：且以宰相之任，提举百司，唯务公平无私，方致渐臻有道。
现代文：况且以宰相的责任，既然在于提拔荐举百官，惟有力求公平无私，才能逐渐达到走上正轨。
English: Moreover, since the responsibility of the prime minister is to promote, recommend and select the best officials, only by vigorously pursuing fairness and selflessness can we gradually get on the right track.

古文：应天下州府令录，并委吏部三铨注拟。
现代文：应当把全国州府的职官，全部交由吏部三次考选后再拟具体名单。
English: It is necessary to submit all the officials of the state capitals across the country to the Personnel Department for the third time for examination and selection, and then draw up a specific list.

古文：自天祐二年四月十一日已后，中书并不除授，或诸荐奏量留，即度可否施行。
现代文：从天二年四月十一日以后，中书省不再授予官职，有时由各方荐举奏报，量才留用，再裁度可否任命。
English: After April 11, 2002, the Ministry of Education and Culture will no longer award official positions. Sometimes, candidates will be recommended by various parties. Only the best candidates will be retained, and then it will be decided whether they can be appointed.

古文：庶各司其局，免致紊隳，宰相提纲，永存事体。
现代文：希望各自管理自己的机构，避免造成混乱破坏，由宰相总领，使朝廷的体制能够永存。交付主管府衙执行。 
English: It was hoped that they would each manage their own institutions to avoid chaos and damage, and that the system of the imperial court would be perpetuated by the chancellor-in-chief.

古文：付所司。 辛亥，以彗孛谪见，德音放京畿军镇诸司禁囚，常赦不原外，罪无轻重，递减一等，限三日内疏理闻奏。
现代文：四月二十三日，因为彗星谪降出现，皇上颁恩诏，释放京畿地区军镇各府衙囚禁的犯人，除按照常例赦免不予追究的之外，无论罪轻罪重，均依次减刑一等，限三天之内清查奏报上来。
English: On April 23rd, due to the appearance of the comet declination, the emperor issued an imperial edict to release the prisoners imprisoned in the military towns of the Gyeonggi region. Except for those who were pardoned and not prosecuted in accordance with the usual practice, regardless of the severity of the crime, the sentences were reduced one by one, and the investigation report was submitted within three days.

古文：壬子，敕： 朕以冲幼，克嗣丕基，业业兢兢，勤恭夕惕。彗星谪见，罪在朕躬。
现代文：四月二十四日，皇上敕令说： 我处在幼龄而能继承大业，兢兢业业，终日勤勉警觉，彗星谪降下方，罪在于我。
English: On April 24th, the Emperor's edict said: I am young and able to inherit a great cause, I am dedicated, diligent and alert all day long, the comet is descending, the fault lies with me.

古文：虽已降赦文，特行恩宥，起今月二十四日后，避正殿，减常膳，以明思过。
现代文：虽然已经下达赦免罪囚的诏书，以特地实行恩赦，我还是要从本月二十四日起，以后回避在正殿接受群臣朝拜，减免日常饮食费用，以表明我反省过错。
English: Although an imperial edict has been issued to pardon criminals and prisoners, and a special amnesty has been implemented, I will, from the 24th of this month, refrain from receiving the worship of courtiers in the main hall, and reduce or waive the daily meal expenses, in order to show my remorse.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交付主管府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：丙辰，敕： 准向来事例，每贯抽除外，以八百五十文为贯，每陌八十五文。如闻坊市之中，多以八十为陌，更有除折，顿爽旧规。
现代文：四月二十八日，皇上又敕令： 按照向来的惯例，每贯钱抽取除陌钱税之外，以八百五十文为一贯，每百钱则余八十五文，听说坊市中大多以八十文抵当一百文，这样抽取除陌钱的折扣，把原来的规矩一下子改变了。
English: On April 28th, the emperor issued another edict: According to the usual practice, in addition to the tax on foreign money, 850 mon was deducted from every 100 mon, and the remaining 85 mon was deducted from every 100 mon. I heard that most people in the market would deduct 100 mon from 80 mon. By deducting the discount on foreign money in this way, the original rule was suddenly changed.

古文：付河南府，市肆交易，并以八十五文为陌，不得更有改移。 
现代文：交待河南府：市场上交易，都应以八十五文抵当一百文，不许另行改变。 
English: Handing over to Henan Province: All transactions on the market should be eighty-five to one hundred, and no other changes are allowed.

古文：戊午，敕： 东上阁门，西上阁门，比常出入，以东上为先。大忌进名，即西上阁门为便。
现代文：四月三十日，皇上再下敕令： 东上阁门、西上阁门，平常出入时，都以东上阁门为先，而大忌的日子进见，则以西上阁门较为便利。
English: On April 30th, the emperor issued another imperial edict: East Shanggak Gate and West Shanggak Gate, when entering and exiting normally, East Shanggak Gate is the first, but on the day of great taboo, West Shanggak Gate is more convenient.

古文：比因阉官擅权，乃以阴阳取位，不思南面，但启西门。
现代文：近来因为宦官专权，竟按照阴阳来确定进出的地方，不考虑皇上，只开西门。
English: Recently, because of the exclusive right of eunuchs, the place of entry and exit has been determined according to yin and yang, and only the west gate has been opened without considering the emperor.

古文：迩来相承，未议更改，详其称谓，似爽旧规。
现代文：一直相沿相承，不商量改变，仔细加以衡量，似乎与旧规不合。
English: It seems to be inconsistent with the old rules to continue along the same line, change without discussion, and carefully measure.

古文：自今年五月一日后，常朝出入，取东上阁门，或遇奉慰，即开西上阁门，永为定制。
现代文：从今年五月一日以后，通常上朝出入，从东上阁门，有时遇有奉旨抚慰的事，则开西上阁门，成为一项确定不移的制度。
English: Since May 1 of this year, it has become an unshakable system that people usually enter and leave the DPRK through the East Gate and enter the DPRK through the West Gate. In some cases, if there is a need for consolation, the West Gate will be opened.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交付主管府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：又敕： 朕以上天谪见，避殿责躬，不宜朔会朝正殿。其五月一日朝会，宜权停。 
现代文：又敕令 ：因上天谪降彗星，我回避在正殿接受百官朝拜以自责，每月初一的朝会不宜在正殿。其中五月一日的朝会应当暂时停止。 
English: Also, Imperial edict: Due to the comet that fell from the sky, I avoid receiving the morning worship of all officials in the main hall as a self-reproach. The morning meeting on the first day of each month should not be held in the main hall. Among them, the morning meeting on May 1 should be temporarily suspended.

古文：五月己未朔，以星变不视朝。
现代文：五月初一，因为星象变化而停止早朝。
English: On the first day of May, because of the change of the stars, the sunrise stopped early in the morning.

古文：敕曰： 天文变见，合事祈禳，宜于太清宫置黄箓道场，三司支给斋料。 
现代文：敕命说： 天象发生变化，应当举行祈祷以消灾，应当在太清宫设置黄篆道场，由三司支取供给斋醮之物。 
English: He said, "When the weather changes, prayers should be held to relieve the disaster. A Huangpi dojo should be set up in the Taiqing Palace, and the three departments should provide the food for the feast."

古文：壬戌，敕： 法驾迁都之日，洛京再建之初，虑怀土有类于新丰，权更名以变于旧制。
现代文：五月初四，皇上又敕命： 天子车驾迁都的日子，正是洛京再建皇都的初期，考虑到怀念故土会有类似汉高祖仿新丰筑城的旧事，权且更改地名以改变旧制。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, the emperor died again: the day of the relocation of the capital was the beginning of the reconstruction of the imperial capital in Luojing. Taking into account the nostalgia for the old country, there would be something similar to the Hango ancestor's imitation of the new Fengchuk city, and the right to change the place name to change the old system.

古文：妖星既出于雍分，高闳难效于秦余，宜改旧门之名，以壮卜年之永。
现代文：但妖星既出现在雍州的分野，建筑的高大宏伟便难以仿效秦亡以后的汉高祖。只宜于改变旧门的名称以增大长年的吉利。
English: However, since the Yogexing appeared in the field of Yongzhou, the height and grandeur of the building are difficult to imitate the Han Gaozu after the death of Qin. It is only appropriate to change the name of the old gate to increase the long-term good luck.

古文：延喜门改为宣仁门，重明门改为兴教门，长乐门改为光政门，光范门曰应天门，乾化门曰乾元门，宣政门曰敷政门，宣政殿曰贞观殿，日华门曰左延福门，月华门曰右延福门，万寿门曰万春门，积庆门曰兴善门，含章门曰膺福门，含清门曰延义门，金銮门曰千秋门，延和门曰章善门，保宁殿曰文思殿。
现代文：延喜门改为宣仁门，重明门改为兴教门，长乐门改为光政门，光范门改称应天门，乾化门改称乾元门，宣政门改称敷政门，宣政殿改称贞观殿，日华门改称左延福门，月华门称为右延福门，万寿门称为万春门，积庆门称为兴善门，含章门称为膺福门，含清门称为延义门，金銮门称为千秋门，延和门称为章善门，保宁殿称为文思殿。
English: The Yanxi Gate was renamed the Xuanren Gate, the Chongming Gate was renamed the Xingjiao Gate, the Changle Gate was renamed the Guangzheng Gate, the Guangfan Gate was renamed the Yingtian Gate, the Qianhua Gate was renamed the Qianyuan Gate, the Xuanzheng Gate was renamed the Dikizheng Gate, the Xuanzheng Palace was renamed the Zhenguan Palace, the Nichihua Gate was renamed the Zuoyan Fu Gate, the Yuehua Gate was renamed the Yuanyan Fu Gate, the Wanzhou Gate was renamed the Banchun Gate, the Jieqing Gate was renamed the Xingzhen Gate, the

古文：其见在门名，有与西京门同名者，并宜复洛京旧门名。付所司。 
现代文：那些现在和西京的门名相同的，都应该恢复洛京的旧门名，交付主管府衙执行。 
English: Those that now have the same names as those in West Beijing should restore the old names of the gates in Loking and submit them to the competent authorities for implementation.

古文：乙酉夜，西北彗星长六七十丈，自轩辕大角及天市西垣，光辉猛怒，其长竟天。
现代文：五月二十七日夜间，西北方向的彗星长六七十丈，从轩辕星座的大角星直达天空的西面，光芒强烈，照耀满天。
English: On the night of May 27th, the northwest-facing comet grew to a length of sixty or seventy meters, reaching from the star Arcturus in the constellation of Regulus to the west of the sky. Its light was intense and shone all over the sky.

古文：丙寅，有司修皇太后宫毕。
现代文：五月初八，内府修缮皇太后寝宫完毕。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month of the year, the renovation of the inner palace of the Empress Dowager was completed.

古文：中书奏： 皇太后慈惠临人，宽仁驭物，早叶伣天之兆，克彰诞圣之符。
现代文：中书省奏说 ：皇太后的慈恩照临人间，处理事情宽厚仁爱，早就表现出如天一般的征兆，能够显示诞生圣人的符命。
English: China's Ministry of Literature said: "The Empress Dowager's benevolence shines on the human world, handling things with generosity and benevolence, and has long shown signs like heaven, which can show the birth of a saint's fate.

古文：今轮奂新宫，规摹旧典，崇训既征于信史，积善宜显于昌期。
现代文：如今迁居于新的宫室，应把摹拟旧日典则作为规章，既在信史中找到了崇高的训示，积善的美德就应该显现在昌明的时代。
English: Now that we have moved to a new palace, we should emulate the old diary as a rule. Since we have found a noble instruction in the history of faith, the virtue of accumulating good deeds should be manifested in the era of prosperity.

古文：太后宫请以积善为名。 
现代文：太后的宫室请命名为积善宫。 
English: Please name the Empress Dowager's palace as Jiezen Palace.

古文：从之。又以将卜郊禋，预调雅乐，宜以太常卿张廷范充修乐悬使。
现代文：皇上允准，又因为将选定在郊外祭天的时间，要预先调集雅乐，任命太常卿张廷范充任修乐悬使。
English: The emperor agreed, and because the time of the festival will be chosen in the suburbs, it is necessary to mobilize elegant music in advance and appoint Zhang Tingfan, the permanent secretary, as the music envoy.

古文：丁卯，荆襄节度使赵匡凝奏为故使成汭立祠宇，从之。
现代文：五月初九，荆襄节度使赵匡凝奏请为故节度使成建立祠庙，皇上允准。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, the Jingxiang Festival invited Zhao Kuangge to build an ancestral temple for the late festival, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：己巳，太清宫使柳璨奏： 近敕改易宫殿门名，窃以玄元皇帝庙，西京曰太清宫，东京曰太微宫，其太清宫请复为太微宫，臣便给入官阶。 
现代文：五月十一日，太清宫使柳璨上奏说 ：最近皇上敕命改换宫殿殿门的名字，臣认为玄元皇帝庙，西京长安叫作太清宫，东京洛阳叫作太微宫，请把太清宫名字恢复为太微宫，臣便于接受官阶。 
English: On May 11th, the Taiqing Palace asked Liu Qian to make a report, saying: The emperor recently changed the name of the palace gate, and the vassal thought that the Xuan Yuan Emperor Temple, the West Beijing Chang'an was called the Taiqing Palace, and the Tokyo Luoyang was called the Taiwei Palace. Please restore the name of the Taiqing Palace to the Taiwei Palace. It will be easier for the vassal to accept the official rank.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依奏。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚午，敕： 所司定今年十月九日有事郊丘，其修制礼衣祭服宜令宰臣柳璨判，祭器宜令张文蔚、杨涉分判，仪仗车辂宜令太常卿张廷范判。 
现代文：五月十二日，皇上敕命： 府衙定于今年十月九日在郊外的山陵举行祭天大典，所缝制的礼衣祭服着令宰臣柳璨掌管，祭器着令张文蔚、杨涉二人分管，仪仗车辆则令太常卿张廷范掌管。 
English: On May 12, the emperor decreed: The prefectural government will hold the grand ceremony of the Festival of Heaven on October 9 this year at the mountain mausoleum in the suburbs. The ceremonial dress and ceremonial clothes sewn will be under the control of Vice-Minister Liu Wei, the ceremonial instruments will be under the control of Zhang Wenwei and Yang Tang, and the ceremonial vehicles will be under the control of Zhang Tingfan.

古文：壬申，制新除静海军节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、兼安南都护、河南郡开国侯、食邑一千户独孤损可责授朝散大夫、棣州刺史，仍令御史台发遣出京讫闻奏。
现代文：五月十四日，决定新任静海军节度使、银青光禄大夫、检校尚书左仆射、同平章事、兼安南都护、河南郡开国侯、食邑一千户独孤损贬谪为朝散大夫、棣州刺史，仍旧令御史台发送出京，完毕后向皇上奏闻。
English: On May 14th, it was decided that the newly appointed Jing naval festival envoy, Yin Qing Guanglu doctor, school inspection Shang Shu Zuo Fu Sha, Tong Ping Zhangji, concurrently Annan tutelary, Henan county founding prince, food village one thousand households alone loss and demotion to Choshan doctor, Zhangzhou stabbing history, still ordered the historical platform to be sent out of Beijing, and reported to the emperor after completion.

古文：敕曰： 朕谬将眇质，叨荷丕图，常怀驭朽之心，每轸泣辜之念。谅于黜责，岂易施行。
现代文：敕令说 ：我以渺小的资性谬承大统，常常怀着驾驭朽车一般的小心，屡屡抱着哀怜罪人的念头，想原谅遭到罢黜贬谪的人，这难道是容易做到的么？
English: The imperial edict said, "I have come to the throne with little talent, often with the same caution as driving a dilapidated car, often with the idea of pitying sinners, and wanting to forgive those who have been ousted and demeaned. Is this easy to do?

古文：左仆射裴枢、右仆射崔远，虽罢机衡，尚居揆路，既处优崇之任，未伤进退之规。
现代文：左仆射裴枢、右仆射崔远，虽然罢免了相位，仍然官居要职，既然还处于优越崇高的地位，就没有损及他们进退升降的前程。
English: The left-hand servant, Sha Pei Zu, and the right-hand servant, Sha Cui Yuan, although dismissed from their positions, still hold important posts. Since they are still in a superior and lofty position, it has not harmed their advancement and promotion.

古文：不能秉志安家，但恣流言谤国，颇兴物论，难抑朝章。
现代文：然而他们不能把握自己的意志，安定家族，只是任意以流言诽谤国家，这颇引起人们的议论，难以匡正朝廷的规章。
English: However, they are unable to control their own will, stabilize their families, and just arbitrarily slander the country with rumors. This has caused a lot of discussion, and it is difficult to rectify the rules of the imperial court.

古文：须离八座之荣，尚付六条之政，勉思咎己，无至尤人。
现代文：他们本来必须离开八大显职的荣宠，然而还是授予他们查处六种罪行的官职，以期让他们努力反省自己的过失，不至于埋怨他人。
English: They should have been stripped of their eight prestigious titles, but they were given the post of investigating and handling six types of crimes, so that they could try to reflect on their own mistakes and not blame others.

古文：枢可责授朝散大夫、登州刺史，远可责授朝散大夫、莱州刺史，便发遣出京。 
现代文：裴枢可谪授为朝散大夫、登州刺史，崔远可谪授为朝散大夫、莱州刺史，立即发送出京。 
English: Peizhu can be appointed as the doctor of the morning sun, the history of ascending to the state, and Cui Yuan can be appointed as the doctor of the morning sun, the history of ascending to the state, and immediately sent to Beijing.

古文：兵部郎中韦乾美贬沂州司户。
现代文：兵部尚书韦乾美降职为沂州司户。
English: Hyobusho Shoshu Wei Qianmei was demoted to the position of Chenzhou Sido.

古文：甲戌，敕中书舍人封渭贬齐州司户，右补阙郑辇密州莒县尉，兵部员外卢协祁州司户，并员外置。
现代文：五月十六日，敕命中书舍人封渭降职为齐州司户，右补阙郑辇降职为密州府莒县县尉，兵部员外郎卢协降职为祁州司户，上述官员均置于定员编额以外。
English: On May 16th, Zheng He, a member of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, was demoted to the post of Secretary of the State Council of Quizhou, Zheng He, a member of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, was demoted to the post of County Lieutenant of Quizhou County, and Wai Lang Lu Xie, a member of the Ministry of National Defense, was demoted to the post of Secretary of the State Council of Quizhou. The above-mentioned officials were all placed outside the quota.

古文：乙亥，敕吏部尚书陆扆贬濮州司户，工部尚书王溥淄州司户。
现代文：五月十七日，敕令吏部尚书陆降职为濮州司户，工部尚书王溥降职为淄州司户。
English: On May 17th, the imperial edict was issued to demote Shang Shul, the head of the personnel department, to the position of Xizhou governor, and to demote Shang Shouwang, the head of the engineering department, to the position of Xizhou governor.

古文：司天奏： 旬朔已前，星文变见，仰观垂象，特轸圣慈。
现代文：司天监奏报说 ：十天以前，星图出现变化，仰观天象，特惶恐地报告皇上。
English: "Ten days ago, there was a change in the star map. I looked up at the sky and reported it to the emperor with great trepidation," the Siten monitor said.

古文：自今月八日夜已后，连遇阴雨，测候不得。
现代文：从本月八日夜以后连遇阴雨，无法观测天象。
English: Since the night of the 8th of this month, it has been raining continuously, making it impossible to observe the celestial objects.

古文：至十三日夜一更三点，天色暂晴，景纬分明，妖星不见于碧虚，灾沴潜消于天汉者。 
现代文：到十三日夜间一更三点，天气暂时放晴，星斗分明，妖星在天上隐去，灾祸悄悄地在空中消失。 
English: By 1:30 a.m. on the night of the 13th, the weather was temporarily clear, the stars were bright, the evil star disappeared in the sky, and the disaster quietly disappeared in the air.

古文：敕曰： 上天谪见，下土震惊，致夙夜之沈忧，恐生灵之多难。
现代文：皇上敕命说 ：上天降罪的征兆出现了，下土的人们震惊，以致昼夜都陷入忧愁之中，惟恐百姓们多灾多难。
English: The emperor said desperately, "The signs of God's condemnation have appeared, and the people of the lower earth are shocked, so that they are plunged into sorrow day and night, fearing that the people will suffer many disasters and hardships."

古文：不居正殿，尽辍常羞，益务斋虔，以申禳祷。
现代文：我不赴正殿，日常的美食全部免除，更加虔诚地进行斋醮，以表示祈求免灾。
English: I do not go to the main hall, all the daily delicacies are exempted, and I fast more devoutly to express my prayers for disaster relief.

古文：果致玄穹覆祐，孛彗消除，岂罪己之感通，免贻人于灾沴。
现代文：如今果然取得苍天庇佑，妖星从天上消失了，莫非是由于反省自己而得到感悟通达，免除了人们的灾祸么！
English: Now that he has been blessed by Heaven, and the evil star has disappeared from the sky, he must have gained enlightenment through self-reflection, and thus saved people from disaster!

古文：式观陈奏，深慰诚怀。 
现代文：观看了陈奏的情况，我心里深感宽慰。 
English: I felt a deep sense of relief when I watched Chen's performance.

古文：丙子，敕户部郎中李仁俭贬和王府咨议，起居舍人卢仁烱安州司户，寿安尉、直弘文馆卢晏沧州东光尉。
现代文：五月十八日，敕令户部郎中李仁俭降职为和王府咨议，起居舍人卢仁炯降职为安州司户，寿安县尉、当值弘文馆卢晏降职为沧州府东光县尉。
English: On May 18th, he demoted Li Renzhen, the vice-chairman of the Household Department, to the position of He Wangfu consultation, Lu Renzhen, the chief of the living quarters, to the position of Anzhou family secretary, Shou'an County lieutenant, and Lu Renzhen, the incumbent of the Hongwen Museum, to the position of Dongguang County lieutenant of Cangzhou.

古文：丁丑，陈许节度使张全义奏： 得许州留后状申，自多事以来，许州权为列郡，今特创鼓角楼讫，请复为军额。 
现代文：五月十九日，陈许节度使张全义上奏说 ：得到许州留后的具状申述，自从国家多难以来，许州暂时被列为一般郡县，现在特地建成了司军令的鼓角楼，请重新恢复军府的匾额。 
English: On May 19th, Chen Xu Xidi asked Zhang Quanyi to make a report, saying: After receiving the specific complaint from Xu Zhou, since the country has been in difficulties, Xu Zhou has been temporarily listed as a general county, and now it has been specially built as the Drum Tower of the Secretary of the Army, please restore the military post.

古文：敕旨依旧置忠武军牌额。
现代文：皇上敕令照旧安放忠武军的匾额。
English: As before, the Emperor's edict placed the medals of the loyal armed forces.

古文：戊寅，宴群臣于崇勋殿，全忠与王镕、罗绍威置宴也。
现代文：五月二十日，皇上在崇勋殿宴请群臣，召朱全忠和王、罗绍威赴宴，令他们献金。
English: On May 20, the emperor held a banquet for his courtiers at the Palace of the Imperial Decorations, and summoned Zhu Quanzhong, Wang, and Roshowei to the banquet and ordered them to donate money.

古文：庚辰，敕特进、检校司徒、守太保致仕赵崇可曹州司户，银青光禄大夫、兵部侍郎王赞可濮州司户。
现代文：五月二十二日，敕令特进、检校司徒、兼任太保而离任的赵崇担任曹州司户，银青光禄大夫、兵部侍郎王赞担任濮州司户。
English: On the 22nd of May, Zhao Chong, who was a special envoy for the imperial edict, a school inspector, and a concurrent eunuch, served as the secretary of Caozhou, and Wang Zan, who was a doctor of silver, a doctor of light, and a waiter of the military department, served as the secretary of Caozhou.

古文：辛巳，敕责授登州刺史裴枢可陇州司户，责授棣州刺史独孤损可琼州司户，责授莱州刺史崔远可白州司户。
现代文：五月二十三日，敕令将登州刺史裴枢降职为陇州司户，将棣州刺史独孤损降职为琼州司户，将莱州刺史崔远降职为白州司户。
English: On May 23rd, the imperial edict demoted Baizhu, the governor of Danzhou, to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou, Duxiu, the governor of Zhangzhou, to the position of the governor of Qiongzhou, and Cui Yuan, the governor of Laizhou, to the position of the governor of Baizhou.

古文：壬午，敕司勋员外韦甄责授和王友，洛阳县令李光序责授左春坊典设郎。
现代文：五月二十四日，敕令司勋员外韦甄降职为和王宾客，洛阳县令李光序降职为左春坊典设郎。
English: On May 24th, Wei Zhen, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, was demoted to be a guest of He Wang, and Li Guangxu, the governor of Luoyang County, was demoted to be a disciple of Zuo Chunbo.

古文：甲申，秘书监崔仁鲁可密州司户，国子祭酒崔澄陈州司户，太府少卿裴钅咸徐州司户，卫尉少卿裴纾曹州南华尉，左补阙崔咸休宁陵尉，司封员外薛氵高辉州司户，前盐铁推官独孤宪临沂尉，秘书少监裴鉥郓州司户，长安尉、直史馆裴格符离尉，兵部郎中李象郑州司户，刑部员外卢荐范县尉。
现代文：五月二十六日，秘书监崔仁鲁任密州司户，国子祭酒崔澄任陈州司户，太府少卿裴钅咸任徐州司户，卫尉少卿裴纾任曹州府南华县尉，左补阙崔咸休任宁陵县尉，司封员外薛氵高任辉州司户，前盐铁推官独孤宪任临沂县尉，秘书少监裴钅术任郓州司户，长安县尉、当值史馆裴洛任符离县尉，兵部郎中李象任郑州司户，刑部员外卢荐任范县县尉。
English: On May 26th, Secretary Supervisor Cui Renlu was appointed to Mishu County Manager, National Children's Festival Liquor Supervisor Cui Cheng was appointed to Chen County Manager, Taifu Junior Secretary Pei Yuxian was appointed to Xuzhou County Manager, Guard Junior Secretary Pei Luo was appointed to Nanhua County Manager in Caozhou, Left Assistant Supervisor Cui Yuxian was appointed to Ningling County Manager, Secretary Supervisor Xue Yigao was appointed to Huizhou County Manager, Former Salt and Iron Promotion Officer Du Guoxian was appointed to Linyi County Manager, Secretary Junior Supervisor Pei Yijie was appointed to Zhangzhou County Manager, Chang

古文：丙戌，颍州汝阴县人彭文妻产三男。
现代文：五月二十八日，颍州府汝阴县人彭文的妻子一胎生下三个儿子。
English: On May 28, the wife of Peng Wen, a resident of Ruyin County, Zhangzhou, gave birth to three sons.

古文：丁亥，敕以翰林学士、尚书职方郎中张策兼充史馆修撰，修国史。
现代文：五月二十九日，敕命以翰林学士、尚书职方郎中张策兼任史馆修撰，编修国史。
English: On May 29th, Zhang Ce, a scholar of Hanlin and a disciple of Shang Shuxing, also served as a writer at the History Museum, compiling national history.

古文：六月戊子朔，敕： 责授陇州司户裴枢、琼州司户独孤损、白州司户崔远、濮州司户陆扆、淄州司户王溥、曹州司户赵崇，濮州司户王赞等，皆受国恩，咸当重任。
现代文：六月初一，敕命： 被降职的陇州司户裴枢、琼州司户独孤损、白州司户崔远、濮州司户陆、淄州司户王溥、曹州司户赵崇、濮州司户王赞等人，都享受过国家的恩惠，全都担当着要职。
English: On the first day of June, their lives were in danger: the downgraded Jingzhou Sidu Baizhu, Qiongzhou Sidu Duyu, Baizhou Sidu Cui Yuan, Jingzhou Sidu Lu, Jingzhou Sidu Wang Yao, Caozhou Sidu Zhao Chong, Jingzhou Sidu Wang Zan and others have all enjoyed the grace of the state and are all in charge of important positions.

古文：罔思罄谒，唯贮奸邪，虽已谪于遐方，尚难宽于国典。委御史台差人所在州县各赐自尽。 
现代文：他们不想竭尽忠诚，只存着奸邪之心，虽然已经被贬谪到远方，还是难以为国法所宽容，委任御史台派人到他们所在的州县命他们自杀。 
English: They do not want to be loyal, they only want to be treacherous. Although they have been banished to a faraway place, it is still difficult to be tolerated by the law of the country. They have appointed the Imperial Historian to send people to their home counties to order them to commit suicide.

古文：时枢等七人已至滑州，皆并命于白马驿，全忠令投尸于河。
现代文：当时裴枢等七人已到达滑州，都在白马驿被杀死。朱全忠命令把尸体都投入黄河。
English: At that time, Baizhu and seven others had already arrived in Slanting, and they were all killed in Baimao. Zhu Quanzhong ordered the bodies to be thrown into the Yellow River.

古文：己丑，敕： 君臣之间，进退以礼，矧于求旧，欲保初终，苟自掇于悔尤，亦须行于黜责。
现代文：六月初二，皇上敕命说： 君臣之间，一进一退都须符合礼仪，也要求耆旧老臣保持有始有终的臣节，如果自己做了后悔怨恨的事，也必须进行贬谪处罚。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the emperor said, "Between princes and ministers, every entry and exit must be in accordance with etiquette. He also required his old ministers to maintain the vassal festival from beginning to end, and if they did something they regretted and resented, they must also be punished.

古文：特进、守司空致仕、上柱国、河东县开国公、食邑二千户裴贽早以公望，常践台司，靡闻竭力以匡时，每务养恬而避事。
现代文：特进、守司空致仕、上柱国、河东县开国公、食邑二千户裴贽早就凭着公爵的名望，常居于台阁宰辅之职，但没有听说他能尽力匡扶时局，只求静养而回避事端。
English: Pei Jian, the special envoy, the governor-general, the governor-general of Shangzhu, the founder of Hedong County, and the ruler of 2,000 households in Shiyou County, had long lived on the reputation of the duke, often serving as the vice-premier of the cabinet, but it was not heard that he could do his best to help the current situation, only to recuperate and avoid the incident.

古文：洎从请老，不谓无恩，合慎枢机，动循规矩。
现代文：自从请求退休养老以后，不能说没有享受朝廷的恩典，他应当谨慎地对待枢纽机要的事务，一举一动都合于规矩。
English: Since he asked to retire and receive a pension, it cannot be said that he has not enjoyed the grace of the imperial court. He should carefully handle the most important affairs, and his every move should be in accordance with the rules.

古文：虽云勇退，乃有后言，自为簿从之酋，颇失人臣之礼。
现代文：虽说是急流勇退，却留下了让后人议论的话柄。自从做了仪仗队伍的首领，很失作为人臣应有的礼节。
English: Although it was a swift retreat, he left a legacy for posterity to discuss. Since he became the leader of the honor guard, he has lost the etiquette expected of a courtier.

古文：谪居郡掾，用正朝纲，可责授青州司户。
现代文：必须降职为郡县的掾吏，以端正朝廷的纲常，可降级为青州司户。
English: He must be demoted to the position of county magistrate, but he can be demoted to the position of the governor of Qingzhou in accordance with the rules of the imperial court.

古文：刑部郎中李煦可莱州司户。 
现代文：刑部郎中李煦可任莱州司户。 
English: The Minister of Justice's son-in-law, Li Yan, can be appointed as the Governor of Laizhou.

古文：辛卯，太微宫使柳璨奏： 前使裴枢充宫使日，权奏请玄元观为太清宫，又别奏在京弘道观为太清宫，至今未有制置。
现代文：六月初四，太微宫使柳璨奏说： 前任宫使裴枢充任宫使的时候，经权衡将玄元观改为太清宫，然而至今没有做出决定处置。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the imperial envoy to the Taiwei Palace, Liu Xuan, said: When the previous imperial envoy, Pei Zu, was appointed as the imperial envoy, he weighed the pros and cons of changing the Xuan Yuan concept to the Taiqing Palace. However, no decision has been made so far.

古文：伏以今年十月九日陛下亲事南禋，先谒圣祖庙，弘道观既未修葺，玄元观又在北山，若车驾出城，礼非便稳。今欲只留北邙山上老君庙一所，其玄元观请拆入都城，于清化坊内建置太微宫，以备车驾行事。 
现代文：因今年十月九日陛下要亲自参加南郊的祭祀，先要参谒圣祖庙，弘道观既然没有修缮，玄元观又在北山，如果皇上的车驾出城，祭礼不够方便、稳妥，如今想只保留北邙山的一所老君庙，玄元观则请拆迁入都城，在清化坊内建造太微宫，以备皇上的车驾出行。 
English: Because on October 9 of this year, His Majesty wanted to personally attend the sacrificial rites in the southern suburbs, he first had to visit the Holy Ancestor Temple. Since the Hongdao View has not been repaired, the Xuan Yuan View is also in Beishan. If the emperor's car drives out of the city, the ritual is not convenient and safe enough. Now he only wants to keep one Laojun Temple in Beishan. For the Xuan Yuan View, please demolish it and move it to the capital city, and build the Taibo Palace in Chinghua Square to prepare for the emperor's car trip.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上准奏。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：壬辰，敕： 诸道节度、观察、防御、刺史等，部内有新除朝官、前资朝官，敕到后三日内发遣赴阙，仍差人监送。
现代文：六月初六，敕令： 各道的节度使、观察使、防御使、刺史等，辖区内有新任命的朝官和原来任用的朝官，接到敕令后三日内出发来朝，仍旧派人监督遣送。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：所在州县不得停住，苟或稽违，必议贬黜。
现代文：所经过的州县不得停留、居住，如有迁延违抗者，必定做出贬谪罢免的处置。
English: They are not allowed to stay or live in the state or county they pass through. If they defy the relocation order, they will be dismissed.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交会主管府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：癸巳，敕： 卫尉少卿敬沼是裴贽之甥。常累于舅，或以明经挠文柄，或以私事窃化权。
现代文：六月初八，敕令： 卫尉少卿敬沼是裴贽的外甥，常常被他的舅父所牵累，有时凭着明经科第的出身阻挠文治的实施，有时为谋私事而窃据权柄。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the imperial edict was issued: Lieutenant-Commander Kei Numa was the nephew of Pei Tong. He was often influenced by his uncle, and sometimes hindered the implementation of civil government by virtue of his background as a scholar of Chinese classics, and sometimes stole power for personal reasons.

古文：贽已左迁，尔又何追！
现代文：现在裴贽已经贬官，你又怎么逃得掉呢？
English: Now that Pei Jun has been demoted, how can you escape?

古文：可贬徐州萧县尉。 
现代文：可降职为徐州府萧县县尉。 
English: He may be demoted to Xiaoshan County Lieutenant of Xuzhou.

古文：丙申，敕： 福建每年进橄榄子，比因阉竖出自闽中，牵于嗜好之间，遂成贡奉之典。
现代文：六月初九，敕命： 福建每年进贡橄榄，近来因为宦官来自于闽中，这和他们自己的嗜好之物有关，便成了进贡的定制。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month of the lunar month, the eunuch died: Fujian pays tribute to the olive tree every year. Recently, because the eunuch comes from the middle of the eunuch, which is related to their own hobbies, it has become the custom of paying tribute.

古文：虽嘉忠荩，伏恐烦劳。今后只供进蜡面茶，其进橄榄子宜停。 
现代文：虽然忠诚可嘉，但恐怕过于烦劳百姓，今后只进贡蜡面茶即可，进贡橄榄应当停止。 
English: Although loyalty is commendable, I am afraid that it is too troublesome for the people. In the future, only the tribute of wax tea can be paid, and the tribute of olive should be stopped.

古文：戊戌，敕： 密县令裴练贬登州牟平尉，长水令崔仁略淄州高苑尉，福昌主簿陆珣沂州新泰尉，泥水令独孤韬范县尉，并员外置，皆裴枢、崔远、陆扆宗党也。
现代文：六月十一日，敕令：密县县令裴练降职为登州府牟平县尉，长水县令崔仁略降职为淄州府高苑县尉，福昌主簿陆王旬任沂州府新泰县尉，泥水县令独孤韬任范县县尉，全部置于正员职额之外，因为他们都是裴枢、崔远、陆的同党。
English: On June 11th, the imperial edict: the governor of My County, Pei Rong, was demoted to the position of the governor of Muping County, Dangzhou Prefecture; the governor of Changshui County, Cui Ren, was slightly demoted to the position of the governor of Gaoyuan County, Dangzhou Prefecture; the governor of Fuchang, Lu Wang Shun, was appointed the governor of Xintai County, Dangzhou Prefecture; and the governor of Muddy Water County, Du Guoyuan, was appointed the governor of Fan County. All of them were placed outside the official positions, because they were all the same party as Pei Zu, Cui Yuan

古文：壬寅，湖南马殷奏，岳州洞庭、青草之侧，有古祠四所，先以荒圮，臣复修庙了毕，乞赐名额者。
现代文：六月十五日，湖南的马殷上奏： 岳州府洞庭湖、青草湖的旁边，有四座古祠，因为原来已经荒废倒塌，臣重新修复完毕，请求皇上赐题名额。 
English: On the 15th of June, Ma Yin from Hunan played the following tune: There are four ancient shrines next to Dongting Lake and Qingcao Lake in Yuezhou Prefecture. Because they had been abandoned and collapsed, the minister has restored them and asked the emperor to grant them a place.

古文：敕旨黄陵二妃祠曰懿节，洞庭君祠曰利涉侯，青草祠曰安流侯；三闾大夫祠，先以澧朗观察使雷满奏，已封昭灵侯，宜依天祐元年九月二十九日敕处分。
现代文：皇上颁发诏令，黄陵二妃祠赐封懿节，洞庭君祠赐封利涉侯，青草祠赐封安流侯，三闾大夫祠，在先按照澧朗观察使雷满的奏报，已封为昭灵侯，应该依据天元年九月二十九日的敕令处理。
English: The emperor issued a royal decree, the Huangling Erfei Shrine was awarded the title of Shouling Festival, the Dongting Jun Shrine was awarded the title of Lishuanghou, the Qingcao Shrine was awarded the title of Anliuhou, and the Sanqi Dafu Shrine was awarded the title of Shoulinghou, according to the report of the thunderstorm observed in the first place. It should be dealt with according to the royal decree of September 29, 1901.

古文：丙午，全忠奏： 得宰相柳璨记事，欲拆北邙山下玄元观移入都内，于清化坊取旧昭明寺基，建置太微宫，准备十月九日南郊行事。
现代文：六月十九日，朱全忠奏 ：得到宰相柳璨记事的文案，想要把北邙山下玄元观拆迁到皇都之内，在清化坊选取昭明寺旧基修建太微宫，准备于十月九日在南郊举行祭祀。
English: On June 19th, Zhu Quanzhong: obtained the text of the Prime Minister Liu Jie's memo, wanted to demolish the Beibei Mountain's Xuan Yuan Temple and relocate it to the imperial capital, and selected the old foundation of Shoming Temple in Qinghua Village to build Taibing Palace, and prepared to hold a ritual in the southern suburb on October 9th.

古文：缘延资库盐铁并无物力，令臣商量者。
现代文：但因为延资库并无盐铁实物，令我商讨此事。
English: However, since there is no physical salted iron in the extension fund, I had to discuss the matter.

古文：臣已牒判六军诸卫张全义指挥工作讫。 
现代文：我已行文令六军诸卫张全义指挥施工完毕。 
English: I have issued a written order to Zhang Quanyi, commander of the Sixth Army of the Guards, to complete the construction.

古文：优诏嘉之。
现代文：皇上颁诏从优嘉许。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict of commendation.

古文：丁未，敕： 太子宾客柳逊尝为张浚租庸判官，又王溥监修日奏充判官，授工部侍郎，又与赵崇、裴贽为刎颈之交。
现代文：六月二十日，敕令 ：太子宾客柳逊曾担任张浚租庸判官，在王溥监修日奏时也充任判官，授予工部侍郎，又和赵崇、裴贽结成生死之交。
English: On June 20th, the imperial edict: the prince's guest, Liu Xun, had served as the judge of Zhang Jun Rongyong, and also served as the judge when Wang Qian supervised the performance of the Nissho, and was awarded the attendant of the work department, and also made a life-and-death friendship with Zhao Chong and Pei Yu.

古文：昨裴枢等得罪之时，合当连坐，尚矜暮齿，且俾悬车，可本官致仕。 
现代文：日前裴枢等获罪的时候，应当连坐并罪，还以年老自骄，暂且令其辞官家居，可在本官任内离职。 
English: Recently, when Baizhu and others were found guilty, they should be held jointly and severally guilty, and with the arrogance of old age, they should be temporarily dismissed from their posts, and they can leave their posts during their term of office.

古文：戊申，敕前司勋员外郎、赐绯鱼袋李延古责授卫尉寺主簿。
现代文：六月二十一日，敕令前司勋员外郎、赐绯鱼袋李延古降职，授予卫尉寺主簿。
English: On June 21st, the Emperor ordered the former secretary of the Honored Servant of the Emperor, Wairo, to give the fish bag to Li Yanku to demote him, and awarded him the master book of the Wei Rong Temple.

古文：七月戊午朔。
现代文：七月戊午为初一。
English: In July, the first day of the school year begins at noon.

古文：辛酉，赐全忠《迎銮记功碑文》，立于都内。
现代文：七月初四，赐予朱全忠《迎銮记功碑文》，建立在皇都之内。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month, Zhu Quanzhong was given the "Welcome to the Capital Inscription," which was set up in the capital.

古文：全忠进助郊礼钱三万贯。
现代文：朱全忠进献资助郊祀的祭礼钱三万贯。
English: Zhu Quanzhong donated 30,000 yuan to subsidize the festival of the suburban worship.

古文：癸亥，再贬柳逊曹州司马。辛巳，敕全忠请铸河中、晋、绛诸县印，县名内有 城 字并落下，如密郑、绛、蒲例，单名为文。
现代文：七月二十四日，敕令朱全忠铸造河中、晋、绛等各县印信，县名内凡带有 城 字都去掉，如密、郑、绛、蒲等例子。都用单字铸文。
English: On July 24th, Emperor Gao ordered Zhu Quanzhong to cast the seals of counties such as Hechong, Jin, and Handan. Any county names with the character "城" were removed, such as "密," "郑," "," and "蒲." All of them were cast with a single character.

古文：壬午，宰臣柳璨、礼部尚书苏循充皇太后册礼使。
现代文：七月二十五日，宰臣柳璨、礼部尚书苏循充任皇太后册礼使。
English: On July 25th, Vice-Minister Yanagisawa and Vice-Minister of Ceremonies Shosho Sukune were appointed as courtiers to the Empress Dowager.

古文：是日，于积善宫行礼毕，帝乘辇赴太后宫称贺。
现代文：这天在积善宫举行典礼完毕，皇上乘车到皇太后的宫殿贺喜。
English: On this day, after the ceremony held at Jiezen Palace, the Emperor rode to the palace of the Empress Dowager to congratulate her.

古文：丙戌，太常礼院奏： 每月朔望，皇帝赴积善宫起居，文武百官于宫门进名起居。 
现代文：七月二十九日，太常礼院上奏说 ：每月初一、十五，皇帝到积善宫向皇太后请安，文武百官在宫门外进奉名帖请安。 
English: On July 29th, the Taichang Academy of Ceremonies reported: "On the first day of the month and the fifteenth day of the month, the emperor goes to the Jie Son Palace to offer greetings to the empress dowager, and hundreds of civil and military officials enter outside the palace gate to offer their greetings.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依允。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：八月丁亥朔。
现代文：八月丁亥为初一。
English: August Dinghai is the first day of the year.

古文：戊子，制中书舍人姚洎可尚书户部侍郎，充元帅府判官，从全忠奏也。
现代文：八月初二，决定中书舍人姚洎任尚书户部侍郎，并充任元帅府判官，这是按照朱全忠的奏折处置的。
English: On the second day of August, it was decided to appoint Yao Jun, a bookseller, as a waiter of Shang Shuhou's household department and as a judge of the marshal's office. This was done in accordance with Zhu Quanzhong's report.

古文：洛苑使奏谷水屯地内嘉禾合颖。
现代文：洛苑使奏报，谷水屯地里的嘉禾内颖相合。
English: Luo Yuan sent a report, and Jia He Nei Ying in Gushui Township agreed.

古文：乙未，敕： 伪称官阶人泉州晋江县应乡贡明经陈文巨招伏罪款，付河南府决杀。
现代文：八月初九，敕令：冒称官阶的人，泉州府晋江县应乡贡试的明经陈文巨承认罪行，交付河南府处决。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the imperial edict was issued: Chen Wenyu, a person who pretended to be a government official, admitted to the crime and was handed over to Henan Province for execution.

古文：庚子，敕： 汉代元勋，邓禹冠诸侯之上；晋朝重位，王导居百辟之先。
现代文：八月十四日，敕令： 汉代的元勋，以邓禹居于诸侯的首位；晋朝的要职，王导处在百官的前列。
English: August 14th, the imperial edict: the Han Dynasty's founding father, Deng Yu, is the first among the princes; the important position of the Jin Dynasty, Wang Dua is in the forefront of the hundred officials.

古文：皆道著匡扶，功宣寰宇，其于崇宠，迥异等伦。
现代文：他们的治道，都体现在匡扶社稷中，功绩昭彰于天下。他们所受的尊崇和恩宠，远远地超过了同辈人。
English: Their way of governance is reflected in the Kuang Fu Society, and their achievements are renowned throughout the world. The respect and grace they receive far exceeds that of their contemporaries.

古文：朕获以眇躬，重兴丕运，凡关制度，必法旧章，实仗勋贤，永安宗社。
现代文：我以渺小之身，重新振兴皇朝大运，凡是关系到朝廷制度的事，必定取法于旧典，依靠着勋旧贤臣，使宗庙社稷永得安宁。
English: With my small stature, I can revitalize the great movement of the imperial dynasty. In all matters related to the imperial court system, I must learn from the old scriptures, rely on the honor of the old wise men, and make the ancestral temple and shrine enjoy eternal tranquility.

古文：副元帅梁王正守太尉、中书令，忠武军节度使、河南尹张全义亦正守中书令，俱深倚注，咸正台衡。
现代文：副元帅梁王正式担任太尉、中书令、忠武军节度使，河南尹张全义也正式担任中书令，都深受重视，能够端正台阁。
English: Vice-Marshal Liang Wang officially served as the captain, the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and the commander of the loyal troops, and Henan Yin Zhang Quanyi also officially served as the secretary of the Central Military Commission. They are all highly valued and can set the table correctly.

古文：其朝廷册礼、告祀天地宗庙，其司空则差官摄行，太尉、侍中、中书令即宰臣摄行。
现代文：朝廷的册封之礼，祭祀天地宗庙的仪式，其赞礼官则派其他官员代行，由太尉、侍中、中书令即宰臣代行。
English: The enthronement ceremony of the imperial court, the ritual of worshiping the heaven and earth, and the ancestral temple are performed, and other officials are sent to act as the praising officers, and they are performed by the captain, the chamberlain, and the chushiroi, that is, the vice-minister.

古文：今太尉副元帅任冠籓垣，每遇行礼之时，或不在京国，即事须差摄太尉行事。
现代文：如今太尉副元帅担任着藩镇的主官，遇到举行典礼的时候，有时不在京师，便须差遣官员代理太尉执行。
English: Nowadays, the lieutenant vice-marshal serves as the chief officer of the town, and when the ceremony is held, sometimes he is not in Beijing, and the officer must be sent to the acting lieutenant for execution.

古文：全义见居阙下，任正中枢，不可更差别官又摄中书令事。
现代文：张全义现在正在京师担任着中枢正官，不可以另外再委派别的官员再去代理中书令的职务。
English: Zhang Quanyi is now acting as the central official in Beijing. It is not possible to appoint other officials to act as the representative of the central government.

古文：其太尉官，如梁王朝觐在京，便委行事，如却赴镇，即依前摄行。
现代文：那太尉的职司，如果梁王在京朝见皇上，便可派他处理事务；如果要去藩镇，就依前例由人代行。
English: As for the function of the captain, if Liang Wang is in Beijing to see the emperor, he can send him to deal with affairs; if he wants to go to the town, he will be represented by someone according to precedent.

古文：所合差中书令，便委全义以本官行礼。
现代文：应当派中书令办的事，便可委派张全义以本职的资格举行礼仪。
English: Zhang Quanyi can be assigned to hold the etiquette in his own capacity if he is to be sent to handle the matter.

古文：其侍中、司空、司徒即临时差官。
现代文：侍中、司空、司徒则临时派官充任。
English: Samurai, Tsukasa, and Sito were temporarily assigned to fill the positions.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交付主管府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：壬寅，敕： 前太中大夫、尚书兵部侍郎、赐紫金鱼袋司空图俊造登科，硃紫升籍，既养高以傲代，类移山而钓名。
现代文：八月十六日，敕令： 前太中大夫、尚书兵部侍郎、赐紫金鱼袋司空图，因才能出众而考中进士，晋升为高官。涵养既高，就轻慢同辈，类似于移居山林而作伪求名。
English: August 16th, the imperial edict: the former doctor of the middle palace, the attendant of the military department of Shangshu, and the purple gold fish bag Siku Tu, were promoted to high-ranking officials because of their outstanding ability. As long as they are well-educated, they are contemptuous of their peers, similar to moving to the mountains and pretending to seek fame.

古文：志乐漱流，心轻食禄。
现代文：志趣在于以隐居为乐，内心则轻视朝廷的俸禄。
English: His ambition is to enjoy his seclusion, but in his heart he despises the salary of the imperial court.

古文：匪夷匪惠，难居公正之朝；载省载思，当徇幽栖之志。宜放还中条山。 
现代文：既不平易也不仁厚，难以呆在公允正直的朝廷；为了让他一边反省一边思索，理应满足他归隐林泉的志向，以放他回中条山为宜。 
English: It is neither easy nor benevolent, and it is difficult to stay in a fair and honest court; in order to let him reflect and think, it is reasonable to satisfy his desire to return to the forest, and it is appropriate to let him return to Zhongjiaoshan.

古文：癸卯，敕太常卿张廷范宜充南郊礼仪使。
现代文：八月十七日，敕命太常卿张廷范充任南郊祭祀的礼仪使。
English: On August 17th, Zhang Tingfan, the newly appointed First Secretary of the Central Military Commission, was appointed as the etiquette envoy for the Southern Suburbs.

古文：丁未，制削夺荆襄节度使赵匡凝在身官爵。
现代文：八月二十一日，决定废除荆襄节度使赵匡凝现任的官职和爵位。
English: On August 21st, it was decided to abolish the official post and title of Jingxiang Festival, which made Zhao Kuanggen the incumbent.

古文：是月乙未，全忠遣大将杨师厚讨匡凝，收唐、邓、复、郢、随等州，全忠自率亲军赴之。
现代文：当月乙未，朱全忠派大将杨师厚讨伐赵匡凝，收复唐州、邓州、复州、郢州、隋州等州，朱全忠亲自带领亲军赴前线。
English: In the same month, Zhu Quanzhong sent General Yang Shihou to fight against Zhao Kuangning and recover Tangzhou, Dengzhou, Fuzhou, Zhangzhou, Suizhou and other provinces. Zhu Quanzhong personally led his troops to the front.

古文：荆襄之军，阵于汉水之阴。
现代文：赵匡凝的军队在汉水南面列阵。
English: Zhao Kuangge's army was arrayed on the south side of the Han River.

古文：九月丁巳朔。
现代文：九月丁巳为初一。
English: September is the first day of the new year.

古文：辛酉，杨师厚于襄州西六十里阴谷江口伐竹木为浮梁。
现代文：九月初五，杨师厚在襄州西面六十里的阴谷江岸砍伐竹木造浮桥。
English: On the fifth day of September, Yang Shihou was cutting down a bamboo-wood floating bridge on the bank of the Yin Valley River, sixty miles west of Xiangzhou.

古文：癸亥，梁成，引军渡江。
现代文：九月初七，浮桥造成，杨师厚领军渡江。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the floating bridge was created, and Yang Shihou led the army across the river.

古文：甲子，赵匡凝率劲兵二万，阵于江之湄。
现代文：九月初八，赵匡凝率领两万强兵在江边列阵。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, Zhao Kuangge led 20,000 strong soldiers to line up on the river.

古文：师厚一战败之，遂乘胜蹑之，阵于城下。
现代文：杨师厚军一仗就击败了赵匡凝，于是乘胜追击，在城下布阵。
English: Yang Shih Hou's army defeated Zhao Kuangning in a single battle, so he took advantage of the victory to pursue and set up a line of battle under the city.

古文：是夜，匡凝挈其孥溃围遁去。
现代文：当夜，赵匡凝挈带他的儿子突围逃走。
English: That night, Zhao Kuangning took his son to break out and escape.

古文：乙丑，师厚入襄阳。
现代文：九月初九，杨师厚进入襄阳。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Yang Shihou entered Yangyang.

古文：丙寅，全忠继至。
现代文：九月初十，朱全忠接着来到。
English: At the beginning of September, Zhu Quanzhong came next.

古文：壬申，匡凝牙将王建武遣押牙常质以荆南降。言权知荆南军府事赵匡明今月十一日弃城上峡，奔蜀川。
现代文：九月十六日，赵匡凝的偏将王建武派亲兵常质以荆南投降，说暂代处理荆南军府事宜的赵匡明本月十一日弃城去峡口，投奔蜀州。
English: On September 16th, Zhao Kuangning's general Wang Jianwu sent his soldiers to Jingnan to surrender, saying that Zhao Kuangming, who temporarily handled the Jingnan Military Government, abandoned the city on the 11th of this month to go to the mouth of the gorge and go to Shuzhou.

古文：敕曰： 梁王躬临貔武，收复荆、襄，拔岘首若转丸，平荆门如沃雪，连收两镇，并走二凶。
现代文：敕令说： 梁王亲自率领勇敢的士兵收复了荆州、襄阳，攻下岘首山要塞就像滚动圆丸一般容易，平定荆门犹如浇水溶雪一般迅速，接连收复两镇，同时赶走两个凶顽。
English: The imperial edict said: Liang Wang personally led the brave soldiers to recover Jingzhou and Xiangyang. It was as easy as rolling a round ball to capture the fortress of Jianshou Mountain, and it was as quick as pouring water to melt snow to pacify Jingmen. He successively recovered two towns and drove away two villains at the same time.

古文：乃睠勋庸，载深嘉注，宜赐诏奖饰。 
现代文：顾念他的功劳。我充满了深深的赞许之情。应当颁诏予以奖励表彰。 
English: I am filled with deep admiration for his efforts. He should be awarded and commended.

古文：内出宣旨： 妳婆杨氏可赐号昭仪，妳婆王氏可封郡夫人，第二妳婆王氏先帝已封郡夫人，准杨氏例改封。 
现代文：内侍出宫宣布圣旨说 ：奶妈杨氏可以赐给 昭仪 的名号，奶妈王氏可以封为郡夫人，第二奶妈王氏先帝已经封为郡夫人，按照杨氏的先例改封。 
English: The palace attendant came out to announce the sacred edict, saying: Yang's wet nurse can give Zhao Yi the title of "Crow," Wang's wet nurse can be named "County Lady," and Wang's second wet nurse has already been named "County Lady" by the former emperor, and the seals will be changed in accordance with Yang's precedent.

古文：中书奏议言： 乳母古无封夫人赐内职之例，近代因循，殊乖典故。
现代文：中书省上奏说 ：古代没有奶妈封夫人赐给宫内职衔的先例，近代因袭封赐之例，极不符合旧章。
English: According to the report of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology: In ancient times, there was no precedent for the title of nanny given to the palace by the wife of the emperor. In modern times, the example of hereditary title is very inconsistent with the old chapter.

古文：昔汉顺帝以乳母宋氏为山阳君，安帝乳母王氏曰野王君，当时朝议非之。
现代文：从前汉顺帝封奶妈宋氏为山阳君，汉安帝的奶妈王氏封为野王君，当时朝廷的议论不以为然。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Shun of the Han Dynasty appointed the wet nurse of the Song Dynasty as Sanyangjun, and the wet nurse of Emperor An of the Han Dynasty was appointed by the Wang Dynasty as Yaowangjun. At the time, the court was not impressed.

古文：今国祚中兴，礼宜求旧。
现代文：现在国运振兴，礼制应当按照旧章。
English: Now that the National Games have been revitalized, the etiquette should follow the old chapter.

古文：臣等商量，杨氏望赐号安圣君，王氏曰福圣君，第二王氏曰康圣君。 
现代文：臣等商量的意见是：望对杨氏赐名号为安圣君、王氏为福圣君，第二王氏为康圣君。 
English: The opinions discussed by the ministers were as follows: It is hoped that the Yang clan will be given the name of An Shengkun, the Wang clan will be given the name of Fu Shengkun, and the second Wang clan will be given the name of Kang Shengkun.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依允。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己巳，敕武成王庙宜改为武明王。
现代文：九月十三日，敕命将武成王庙改名为武明王庙。
English: On September 13th, it was ordered to rename the Wucheng Wang Temple to the Wuming Wang Temple.

古文：乙酉，敕先择十月九日有事郊丘，备物之间，有所未办，宜改用十一月十九日。
现代文：九月二十九日，敕命：原先择定十月九日在郊外的山陵举行祭祀之礼，因备用的物品尚未办好，应将日期改为十一月十九日。
English: September 29th, last day of the year: Originally, October 9th was chosen as the day to hold the sacrificial ceremony at the mountain mausoleum in the suburbs. However, since the necessary items had not yet been prepared, the date was changed to November 19th.

古文：十月丙戌朔，制梁王全忠可充诸道兵马元帅，别开府幕，加食邑通前一万五千户，实封一千五百户。
现代文：十月初一，决定梁王朱全忠充任诸道兵马元帅，另外成立府署，加封食邑，连原封共一万五千户，实封一千五百户。
English: On the first day of October, it was decided that Liang Wang Zhu Quanzhong would be appointed as the marshal of the armies and horses of all provinces. In addition, a prefectural government office would be established, and food villages would be added, with a total of 15,000 households originally sealed and 1,500 households actually sealed.

古文：金州冯行袭奏当道昭信军额内一字，与元帅全忠讳字同，乃赐号戎昭军。
现代文：金州冯行袭上奏说，本道昭信军匾额内有一个字和元帅朱全忠名讳相同，便赐名为戎昭军。
English: Jinzhou Feng Xingyi said in his report that there was a word in the military insignia of this road that was the same as the name of Marshal Zhu Quanzhong, and he was given the name Rong Zhaojun.

古文：制削夺荆南留后赵匡凝官爵。
现代文：决定削除荆南留后赵匡凝的官爵。
English: It was decided to remove the official title of Zhao Kuangning after Jingnan's stay.

古文：丁亥，敕： 洛城坊曲内，旧有朝臣诸司宅舍，经乱荒榛。
现代文：十月初二，敕命： 洛阳坊市中，原有各司署朝臣的住宅房舍，经过动乱已经荒废。
English: On the second day of October, death: In Luoyangfang City, the residential buildings of the courtiers of the original departments have been abandoned after the turmoil.

古文：张全义葺理已来，皆已耕垦，既供军赋，即系公田。
现代文：经过张全义整治以后都已经变成了耕种垦植的田地，既然用来供给军队的赋税，也就成为公田。
English: After the rectification of Zhang Zhengyi, they have all been turned into fields for cultivation and planting, and since they are used to supply the army with taxes, they have become public land.

古文：或恐每有披论，认为世业，须烦按验，遂启幸门。
现代文：但恐怕总会有人持异议，把公田认作自家世传的业田，必然会不厌其烦地去查验，便为奸佞之徒开启方便之门。
English: But I'm afraid there will always be someone who disagrees, who considers public land to be their family's hereditary land, who will inevitably go to the trouble of checking it, and who will open the door of convenience for the traitors.

古文：其都内坊曲及畿内已耕植田土，诸色人并不得论认。
现代文：那些京城坊市中及畿辅之地及已经耕种的田地，各类人都不许认作私田。
English: All kinds of people are not allowed to consider the fields in the middle of Gyeongseongbokgung and Gyeongbokgung and the fields that have already been cultivated as private fields.

古文：如要业田，一任买置。
现代文：如果想要传世的业田，可以任人随意买置。
English: If you want to pass down your yakitori, you can let anyone buy it.

古文：凡论认者，不在给还之限。
现代文：凡是私自认作私田的，不在归还原主的范围之内。
English: Any land that I consider to be my own is not within the scope of restitution to the original owner.

古文：如有本主元自差人勾当，不在此限。
现代文：但如果田地的原主本来就派人管理着，则不在此限。
English: However, this does not apply if the original owner of the field has already sent someone to manage it.

古文：如荒田无主，即许识认。
现代文：如果是无主的荒田，即可以认领。
English: If it is ownerless wasteland, it can be claimed.

古文：付河南府。 
现代文：交付河南府施行。 
English: Delivered to Henan Province for implementation.

古文：甲午，起居郎苏楷驳昭宗谥号曰： 帝王御宇，由理乱以审污隆；宗祀配天，资谥号以定升降。
现代文：十月初九，起居郎苏楷驳斥昭宗的谥号说 ：帝王统治天下，由治乱而察知盛衰以祭祀来配享皇天，借助谥号以定褒贬。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month, Su Kai, a retainer, refuted Akimune's posthumous title, saying, "Emperors rule the world, and the rise and fall of emperors can be detected by ruling the chaos, and sacrifices are made to share the glory of the emperor, and the posthumous title is used to determine praise and blame."

古文：故臣下君上皆不得而私也。
现代文：因此臣下和君王都不能够从私心出发。
English: Therefore, neither a subject nor a monarch can start from selfishness.

古文：伏以陛下顺考古道，昭彰至公，既当不讳之朝，宁阻上言之路。
现代文：由陛下逐一考查往古之道，彰明着极大的公正，既然处在可以直言不讳的朝廷，难道会阻止上言之路？
English: His Majesty's step-by-step examination of the ancient ways demonstrates great fairness. Since he is in a court that can be outspoken, will it prevent the road to the last word?

古文：伏以昭宗皇帝睿哲居尊，恭俭垂化，其于善美，孰敢蔽亏。
现代文：因昭宗皇帝以明哲居于至尊之位，恭俭流布于天地造化，对于他的善良美德，谁敢蒙蔽损伤？
English: Because Emperor Zhaozong lived in the supreme position with wisdom and philosophy, and his frugality spread throughout heaven and earth, who would dare to cover up his good virtues?

古文：然而否运莫兴，至理犹郁，遂致四方多事，万乘频迁。
现代文：然而没有运祚就不能兴盛，即使有至理也会郁塞，以至于导致四方变乱纷繁，皇上多次蒙受变迁。
English: However, without luck, there can be no prosperity, and even if there is reason, there will be depression, which will lead to chaotic changes in the four directions, and the emperor will suffer changes many times.

古文：始则阉竖猖狂，受幽辱于东内；终则嫔嫱悖乱，罹夭阏于中闱。
现代文：最初是太监猖狂，皇上在东内遭受凌辱；最后则宫嫔作乱，皇上在寝宫受到摧折。
English: At first, the eunuchs were rampant, and the emperor suffered humiliation in the east; finally, the palace courtiers rioted, and the emperor was devastated in his bed.

古文：其于易名，宜循考行。
现代文：对于改易名号，应当按照考察行状的结果而定。
English: For the change of name, it should be based on the results of the inspection report.

古文：有司先定尊谥曰圣穆景文孝皇帝，庙号昭宗，敢言溢美，似异直书。按后汉和、安、顺帝，缘非功德，遂改宗称，以允臣下之请。
现代文：朝廷官署先定谥号为圣穆景文孝皇帝，庙号昭宗，敢于用溢美之辞，似乎有别于直率之语，据查，后汉的和帝、顺帝，因为并没有功业德行，便更改了宗庙的称号，以此满足臣下的请求。
English: The Imperial Household Agency first set the nickname as Emperor Saint Muqing Wenxiao, and the temple name as Emperor Zhaozong. They dared to use words of praise, which seemed to be different from straightforward words. According to the investigation, Emperor He and Emperor Shun of the Later Han Dynasty, because they did not have merits and virtues, changed the title of the ancestral temple to meet the requests of their subjects.

古文：今郊禋有日，祫祭惟时。
现代文：现在郊祀的日子快到了，合祭正当其时。
English: Now the day of the suburban worship is approaching, and it is the right time for the closing ceremony.

古文：将期允惬列圣之心，更下详议新庙之称。
现代文：应本着期盼列圣和谐畅快的心意，再由臣下详细讨论新庙的称号。
English: The title of the new temple should be discussed in detail by the vassals in the hope that the canonization will be harmonious and smooth.

古文：庶使叶先朝罪己之德，表圣主无私之明。 
现代文：这大概才能使之符合先祖们严于律己的美德，表现圣主无私的英明。 
English: This is probably the only way to make it consistent with the virtues of our ancestors, who were strict with themselves, and to show the selfless wisdom of the Lord.

古文：楷，礼部尚书循之子，凡劣无艺。
现代文：苏楷是礼部尚书苏循的儿子，庸劣无能，他于乾宁二年应进士试登第后，人们议论。
English: Su Kai is the son of the etiquette scholar Su Su, mediocre and incompetent. After he was promoted to the second year of probation in Qianning, people talked about it.

古文：乾宁二年应进士登第后，物论以为滥，昭宗命翰林学士陆扆、秘书监冯渥覆试黜落，永不许入举场，楷负愧衔怨。
现代文：认为他没有才学，昭宗命翰林学士陆、秘书监冯渥复试苏楷，将他罢黜落选，永远不许进入科举的考场，苏楷背负惭愧，心怀怨望。
English: Thinking that he did not have the ability to learn, Zhaozong ordered Hanlin Baozhonglu and Secretary Supervisor Feng Aw to retake the examination of Su Kai, to remove him from the election, and never allow him to enter the examination room of the imperial examination. Su Kai was ashamed and harbored resentment.

古文：至是，全忠弑逆君上，柳璨陷害朝臣，乃与起居郎罗衮、起居舍人卢鼎连署驳议。
现代文：至此，朱全忠弑君犯上，柳璨陷害朝臣，就由起居郎罗衮、起居舍人卢鼎联名起草驳议。
English: At this point, when Zhu Quanzhong and his son committed a crime, and Liu Yao and others framed a courtier, Luo Yao, the son-in-law, and Lu Ding, the son-in-law, jointly drafted a rebuttal.

古文：楷目不知书，手仅能执笔，其文罗衮作也。
现代文：苏楷根本不识字，仅仅会用手握笔，那文章是罗衮所做。
English: Su Kai can't read at all, he can only hold a pen in his hand. The article was written by Luo Yao.

古文：时政出贼臣，哀帝不能制。
现代文：当时政令由贼臣发出，哀帝无法控制。
English: At that time, the decree was issued by a vassal, and Emperor Ai could not control it.

古文：太常卿张廷范改谥曰恭灵庄闵孝皇帝，庙号曰襄宗。
现代文：太常卿张廷范改谥号为恭灵庄闵孝皇帝，庙号为襄宗。
English: Zhang Tingfan, Taizongqing, changed his name to Emperor Gonglingzhuang and his temple name to Xiangzong.

古文：全忠雄猜物鉴，自楷驳谥后，深鄙之，既传代之后，循、楷父子皆斥逐，不令在朝。
现代文：朱全忠猜忌刻毒，敏于观察，自从苏楷驳斥谥号后，朱全忠对他极为鄙视，帝位传至哀帝以后，苏循、苏楷父子都被斥逐，不让他们呆在朝中，十月二十二日，署司改题昭宗的神位，停止上朝一天。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was keen on observation and was not afraid to guess. Since Su Xuan refuted the imperial title, Zhu Quanzhong despised him very much. After the imperial throne was passed to Emperor Yan, both Su Xuan and Su Qian were banished, and they were not allowed to stay in the imperial court. On October 22, Zhu Quanzhong changed the title of Emperor Zhaozong's divine throne, and stopped going to the imperial court for one day.

古文：丁未，所司改题昭宗神主，辍朝一日，癸丑，敕成德军宜改为武顺，管内藁城县曰藁平，信都曰尧都，栾城曰栾氏，阜城曰汉阜，临城为房子，避全忠祖、父名也。
现代文：十月二十八日敕命成德军改名为武顺军，其辖区之内的高木城县改为高木平，信都改为尧都，栾城改为栾氏，阜城改为汉阜，临城改为房子，都是因为要避朱全忠祖父、父亲名讳。
English: On October 28, he ordered the Chengde Army to change its name to the Wushun Army, and the Takagi Castle County under his jurisdiction was changed to Takagidaira, Shintou was changed to Shintou, Shicheng was changed to Shishi, Fucheng was changed to Hanfu, and Lincheng was changed to House, all because he wanted to avoid the name of Zhu Quanzhong's grandfather and father.

古文：十一月乙卯朔，敕潞州潞城县改为潞子，黎城曰黎亭。
现代文：十一月初一，敕命把潞州府潞城县改名为潞子，黎城改为黎亭。
English: On the first day of November, it was decided to change the name of Zhangcheng County, Zhangzhou Prefecture, to Zhangzi, and that of Licheng to Liting.

古文：全忠平荆襄后，遂引军将攻淮南。
现代文：朱全忠平定荆襄以后，便带着军将攻打淮南。
English: After Zhu Quanzhong had subdued Jingxiang, he led his generals to attack Huainan.

古文：行次枣阳，阻雨，比至光州，道险涂潦，人马饥乏。
现代文：行军到枣阳驻扎，被雨阻止，等到达光州，道路险阻，途中遍地渍水，人马饥饿疲劳。
English: They marched to Zaoyang and camped there, but were stopped by rain. When they reached Gwangju, the road was dangerous, there was water everywhere on the way, and they were tired and hungry.

古文：休止十余日，乃趋固始。
现代文：休息了十多天，才前往固始。
English: After more than ten days of rest, I went to Gosei.

古文：进军距寿州三十里，寿人闭壁不出，左右言师老不可用。
现代文：进军到距寿州三十里时，寿州人关闭壁垒不出，朱全忠左右的人都说军队疲塌了无法作战。
English: When the march reached thirty miles from Shoushu, the people of Shoushu did not close the barriers, and people around Zhu Quanzhong said that the army was exhausted and unable to fight.

古文：是月丙辰，全忠自正阳渡淮而北，至汝阴。
现代文：当月十一月初二，朱全忠从正阳渡过淮河而北上，到达汝阴。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Zhu Quanzhong crossed the Huai River from Zhengyang and went north to Ruyin.

古文：全忠深悔此行无益。
现代文：这次行动徒劳无益，朱全忠极为后悔。
English: This action was in vain, and Zhu Quanzhong deeply regretted it.

古文：丁卯，至大梁。
现代文：十一月十三日，到达大梁。
English: On November 13th, we arrived in Dalian.

古文：时哀帝以此月十九日亲祠圆丘，中外百司礼仪法物已备。
现代文：当时哀帝因为这个月十九日要亲自祭天，朝内外各府衙已把礼仪所用的祭器准备齐全。
English: At that time, Emperor Ai wanted to personally offer sacrifices to Heaven on the 19th day of this month, and all the prefectures and governments both inside and outside the country had already prepared the sacrificial vessels used in the ritual.

古文：戊辰，宰相已下于南郊坛习仪，而裴迪自大梁回，言全忠怒蒋玄晖、张廷范、柳璨等谋延唐祚，而欲郊天改元。
现代文：十一月十四日，自宰相以下的官员在南郊祭坛演习礼仪，而裴迪从大梁返回，说朱全忠对蒋玄晖、张廷范、柳璨等谋划延续唐朝的国运很气愤，想要祭天改朝换代。
English: On November 14th, officials from the Prime Minister on down rehearsed etiquette at the southern suburb altar, while Paddy returned from Dalian, saying that Zhu Quanzhong was very angry with Jiang Xuanqian, Zhang Tingfan, Liu Bei and others for plotting to continue the national movement of the Tang Dynasty, and wanted to sacrifice Heaven to change the dynasty.

古文：玄晖、柳璨大惧。
现代文：蒋玄晖，柳璨非常害怕。
English: Jiang Xuanqin, Liu Xuanqin are very scared.

古文：庚午，敕曰： 先定此月十九日亲礼南郊，虽定吉辰，改卜亦有故事。宜改取来年正月上辛。付所司。 
现代文：十一月十六日，敕命说： 先定下的本月十九日亲自去南郊举行祭天大典，虽然选定的是吉日，而改选他日也有先例，应当改为明年正月的第一个辛日，交付府衙执行。 
English: On November 16th, the emperor said, "I have decided to personally go to the southern suburbs to hold the grand ceremony of the Festival of Heaven on the 19th day of this month. Although the chosen day is auspicious, there is a precedent for choosing another day. It should be changed to the first bad day of the first month of next year and submitted to the government for implementation."

古文：辛巳，制： 回天再造竭忠守正功臣、诸道兵马元帅、宣武宣义天平护国等军节度观察处置、修宫阙制置、度支解县池场、亳州太清宫等使、开府仪同三司、守太尉、中书令、河中尹、汴滑郓等州刺史、上柱国、梁王、食邑一万五千户、实封一千五百户硃全忠可授相国，总百揆，其以宣武、宣义、天平、护国、天雄、武顺、忠武、佑国、河阳、义武、昭义、保义、戎昭、武定、泰宁、平卢、匡国、镇国、武宁、忠义、荆南二十一道为魏国，仍进封魏王，依前充诸道兵马元帅、太尉、中书令、宣武宣义天平护国等军节度观察处置等使，加食邑五千户，实封八千五百户，入朝不趋，剑履上殿，赞拜不名，兼备九锡之命，仍择日备礼册命。
现代文：十一月十七日，决定：回天再造竭忠守正功臣、诸道兵马元帅、宣武、宣义、天平、护国等军节度使、观察使、处置使、修宫阙制置、度支解县池场、亳州太清宫等使、开府仪同三司、权署太尉、中书令、河中尹、汴滑郓等州刺史、上柱国、梁王、食邑一万五千户、实封一千五百户朱全忠授予宰相之职，总管百官，把宣武宣义天平护国、天雄、武顺、忠武、佑国、河阳、义武、昭义、保义、戎昭、武定、泰宁、平卢、匡国、镇国、武宁、忠义、荆南等二十一道划属魏国，仍然晋封魏王，依旧充任诸道兵马元帅、太尉、中书令、宣武、宣义、天平、护国等军的节度使、观察使、处置使等、加封食邑五千户、实封八千五百户，入朝毋须快步，可带剑着履上殿面见皇上，赞礼下拜时不须报名，并赋予九锡之命，并选择吉日备办礼仪进行册封任命。
English: On November 17th, it was decided that Zhu Quanzhong would be appointed as the prime minister, the chief administrator of 100 officials, and would be in charge of proclaiming martial law, proclaiming righteousness, and protecting the country. Zhu Quanzhong would also be appointed as the prime minister, the chief administrator of 100 officials, and would be in charge of proclaiming martial law, proclaiming righteousness, and protecting the country.

古文：又制以杨师厚为襄州兵马留后，左龙武统军张慎思为武宁军兵马留后。
现代文：又决定以杨师厚为襄州兵马留后，以左龙武统军张慎思为武宁军兵马留后。
English: It was also decided that Yang Shihou would remain as the Yangzhou soldiers and horses, and Zhang Shansi of the Zuolongwu United Army would remain as the soldiers and horses of the Wu Ning Army.

古文：壬午，中书门下奏： 相国魏王总百揆，百司合呈纳本司印。
现代文：十一月十八日中书省、门下省上奏： 相国魏王既然总管百官，各府衙即应该呈献本府的印信。
English: On November 18th, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China and its subordinate ministries made the following announcement: Since King Wei of the same country was the head of a hundred officials, each prefecture should present the seal letter of this prefecture.

古文：其中书门下印，堂候王仁珪呈纳，中书公事，权追中书省印行遣。 
现代文：中书省，门下省的印信，由堂侯王仁王圭呈献，中书省的公文，暂时追加中书省的印信发出。 
English: The provincial seal of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and its subordinate provinces was presented by Prince Wang Renzhong, and the official document of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and the additional seal of the People's Republic of China (PRC) were issued.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲申，敕河南告成县改为阳邑，蔡州襄城改为苞孚，同州韩城改为韩原，绛州翼城改为浍川，郓州郓城改为万安，慈州文城改为屈邑，泽州晋城改高都，阳城改为濩泽，安州应城改为应阳，洪州丰城改为吴高。
现代文：十一月二十日敕命河南的告成县改为阳邑，蔡州的襄城改为苞孚，同州的韩城改为韩原，绛州的翼城改为浍川，郓州的郓城改为万安，慈州的文城改为屈邑，泽州的晋城改为高都，阳城改为泽，安州的应城改为应阳，洪州的丰城改为吴高。
English: On November 20, Guicheng County in Henan Province was changed to Yang'e, Xiangcheng in Caizhou Province was changed to Shifu, Hancheng in the same province was changed to Hanwon, Yingcheng in Zhangzhou Province was changed to Xichuan, Shicheng in Zhangzhou Province was changed to Wan'an, Wencheng in Cizhou Province was changed to Qu'e, Jincheng in Zhejiang Province was changed to Gaodu, Yangcheng in Zhejiang Province was changed to Zhe, Yingcheng in Anzhou Province was changed to Yingyang, and Fengcheng in Hongzhou Province was changed to Wu Gao.

古文：全忠令判官司马鄴让相国总百揆之命。
现代文：朱全忠命令判官司马邺推辞相国总管百官的任命。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered the judge, Sima Qian, to reject the appointment of the chief administrator of the country.

古文：十二月乙酉朔。
现代文：十二月乙酉为初一。
English: December is the New Year's Day.

古文：戊子，诏蒋玄晖赍手诏赴魏国，不许陈让锡命。
现代文：十二月初四，皇上诏令蒋玄晖带着手谕前往魏国，不许朱全忠陈述辞让九锡大臣的任命。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the emperor ordered Jiang Xuanqi to go to Wei with a handwritten order not to allow Zhu Quanzhong to resign from the appointment of Jiuxi Minister.

古文：辛卯，制：正议大夫、门下侍郎，兼户部尚书、同平章事、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，充诸道盐铁转运等使、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑三百户柳璨可光禄大夫、守司空，兼门下侍郎、同平章事、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，充诸道盐铁转运等使，进封河东县开国伯，通前食邑七百户，充魏国册礼使。
现代文：十二月初七，决定：正议大夫、门下侍郎、兼任户部尚书、同平章事、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，充任诸道盐铁使、转运使、上柱国、河东县开国男、食邑三百户柳璨任光禄大夫、暂署司空，兼任门下侍郎、同平章事、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使，充任诸道盐铁使、转运使，晋封为河东县开国伯，连原先的食邑，共七百户，充任魏国册礼使。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month, it was decided that: Zheng Rong, the doctor of deliberation, his attendant, concurrently served as the head of the household, Shangshu, Tongping Zhangji, Taimiao Palace Envoy, Kobunkwan University Scholar, Yan Zhiguo Envoy, served as the salt and iron envoy to all provinces, the transit envoy, Shangzhuang Province, the founding father of Hedong County, and the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the 300 households of the

古文：制： 相国魏王曾祖赠太傅茂琳追封魏王，谥宣宪；祖赠太师信追封魏王，谥武元；父赠尚书令诚追封魏王，谥文明。
现代文：决定：相国魏王朱全忠的曾祖父朱茂琳赠太傅衔，追封为魏王，加谥号宣宪；祖父朱信赠太师衔，追封为魏王，加谥号武元；父朱诚赠尚书令之职，追封为魏王，加谥号文明。
English: Decision: Zhu Maolin, the great-grandfather of Zhu Quanzhong, the King of Wei, presented the title of Taifu, posthumously awarded the title of King of Wei, and added the title of Xuancheng; his grandfather, Zhu Xin, presented the title of Taishi, posthumously awarded the title of King of Wei, and added the title of Wuyuan; his father, Zhu Cheng, presented the post of Shang Shuling, posthumously awarded the title of King of Wei, and added the title of Wenming.

古文：敕右常侍王钜、太常卿张廷范、给事中崔沂、工部尚书李克助、祠部郎中知制诰张茂枢、膳部员外知制诰杜晓、吏部郎中李光嗣、驾部郎中赵光胤、户部郎中崔协、比部郎中杨焕、左常侍孔拯、右谏议萧颀、左拾遗裴彖、右拾遗高济、职方郎中牛希逸、主客郎中萧蘧等，随册礼使柳璨魏国行事。
现代文：敕命右常侍王钜，太常卿张廷范、给事中崔沂、工部尚书李克助、祠部郎中知制诰张茂枢、膳部员外知制诰杜晓、吏部郎中李光嗣、驾部郎中赵光胤、户部郎中崔协、比部郎中杨焕、左常侍孔拯、右谏议萧颀、左拾遗裴王彖、右拾遗高济、职方郎中牛希逸、主客郎中萧蘧等，随册礼使柳璨到魏国办事。
English: He sent the following officials to Wei: the right-hand attendant Wang Qian, the grand secretary Zhang Tingfan, the middle attendant Cui Qian, the engineer Shangshu Li Ketsu, the priest Zhang Maozhu, the kitchen attendant Du Xiao, the secretary Li Guangzhi, the driver Zhao Guangyan, the housemaster Cui Xie, the priest Yang Huan, the left-hand attendant Kong Zheng, the right-hand attendant Xiao Qian, the left-hand attendant Pei Wang Qian, the right-hand attendant Gaoji, the clerk Niu Xiyi, and the hostess Xiao Qian

古文：先是，北院宣徽使王殷使寿州行营，构蒋玄晖于全忠，全忠怒，急归大梁。
现代文：在此之前，北院宣徽使王殷出使寿州行营，在朱全忠面前挑拨蒋玄晖，朱全忠大怒，急忙回归大梁。
English: Prior to this, the Northern Court's proclamation of the emblem made Wang Yin go on a campaign to Shoushou, provoking Jiang Xuanzang in front of Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong was furious and hurriedly returned to Daliang.

古文：上令刑部尚书裴迪赍诏慰劳全忠，全忠忿恨，语极不逊，故行相国百揆之命以悦其心。
现代文：皇上命刑部尚书裴迪带着诏书慰劳朱全忠。朱全忠愤恨，说话极不恭敬，因此才颁行相国管百官的命令，让他心里高兴。
English: Shangshu Peidi of the imperial punishment department came with a decree to console Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong was indignant and spoke very disrespectfully, so he issued the order of the hundred officials of the State Administration, which made him happy.

古文：蒋玄晖自至大梁陈诉，全忠怒犹不解。
现代文：蒋玄晖自己到大梁去陈告辩解，朱全忠的怒气还是不能消，皇上为此很担忧。
English: Jiang Xuanqian himself went to Daliang to make a complaint and defend himself, but Zhu Quanzhong's anger could not be dispelled. The emperor was very worried about this.

古文：帝忧之。甲午，上召三宰相议其事，柳璨曰： 人望归元帅，陛下揖让释负，今其时也。 
现代文：十二月初十，皇上召见三个宰相商议这件事。柳璨说： 元帅是人望所归，陛下谦让些，解除重负，这正是时候了。 
English: On the tenth day of the twelfth month, the emperor summoned the three prime ministers to discuss the matter. Liu Yao said: "A marshal is a man of renown. Your majesty should be more humble and relieve the burden. This is the right time."

古文：帝曰： 运祚去唐久矣，幸为元帅所延。
现代文：皇上说 ：运数福祚离开大唐已经很久了。幸而被元帅延续了下来。
English: The emperor said, "It's been a long time since Yunki Fukuda left Datang. Fortunately, he was succeeded by the marshal.

古文：今日天下，非予之天下，神器大宝，归于有德，又何疑焉。
现代文：今日的天下，已经不是我的天下，镇国的神器宝鼎应当归有德之人所有，这又有什么疑问呢！
English: Today's world is no longer my world. The treasures of the town should belong to the virtuous people. There is no doubt about that!

古文：他人传予意不尽，卿自往大梁，备言此怀。 
现代文：别人传达我的意思不能说明白，你亲自到大梁去，仔细告诉他我的想法。 
English: Others convey my meaning can not be clear, you personally go to the girder, carefully tell him what I think.

古文：乃赐璨茶、药，便令进发。
现代文：就赐予柳璨茶、药，立即命他出发。
English: He gave him tea and medicine and ordered him to leave immediately.

古文：乙未，敕：枢密使蒋玄晖宜削在身官爵，送河南府处斩。
现代文：十二月十一日，敕命：枢密使蒋玄晖应当削除在身的官职、爵位，送往河南府处斩。
English: On December 11, it was decreed that the Privy Counsellor Jiang Xuanzang should be stripped of his official posts and titles and sent to Henan Province for execution.

古文：丰德库使应顼、尚食使硃建武送河南府决杀。
现代文：处斩丰德库使应顼，尚食使朱建武被送往河南府处死。
English: Feng Deku was executed and Zhu Jianwu was sent to Henan to be executed.

古文：庚子，敕：枢密使及宣徽南院北院并停。其枢密公事，令王殷权知。
现代文：十二月十六日，敕命：枢密使及宣徽南院、北院都停止职司，枢密院的公务令王殷暂时处理。
English: On December 16th, the following order was issued: the Privy Counsellor and the Southern and Northern Courts of the State Council of Hunan and Hubei were suspended from their duties, and Wang Yin was ordered to temporarily dispose of the duties of the Privy Council.

古文：其两院人吏，并勒归中书。
现代文：两院的人员官吏，命令他们全部并到中书省。
English: The personnel and officials of the two houses were ordered to all go to the Central Book Ministry.

古文：其诸司诸道人，并不得到宣徽院。凡有公事，并于中书论请。
现代文：各司各道的人员都不得到宣徽院，所有的公事都向中书省报告请示。
English: The personnel of all departments and provinces do not have access to Xuanhuiyuan, and all official matters are reported to the Ministry of Education and Culture for guidance.

古文：其延义、千秋两门，只差小黄门三人勾当，其官健勒归本军。
现代文：延义门、千秋门两座门，只派三个小太监管着，那些军官健卒命他们都回本军。
English: At the two gates of Yan'yi Gate and Qianqiu Gate, only three minor officers were sent to supervise, and those officers all returned to their own army.

古文：敕： 魏王坚辞宠命，过示捴谦。
现代文：敕命 ：魏王坚决推辞优宠之命，表现得过分谦逊。
English: Death: Wei Wang resolutely refused the favored life and showed excessive modesty.

古文：朕以国史所书元帅之任，并以天下为名，爰自近年，改为诸道，既非旧制，须在正名。
现代文：我看国史上所记载的元帅职位，都是以 天下 为名，从近年以来却改为 诸道 。既然不是旧制，就必须正名。
English: In my opinion, the positions of marshal recorded in the history of the country are all named after the world, but in recent years they have been changed to "various ways." Since it is not the old system, it is necessary to legitimize the name.

古文：宜追制改为天下兵马元帅，余准诏旨处分。 
现代文：应当上追旧制改为 天下兵马元帅 ，其余的职位按原来的诏命处理。 
English: It should be changed from the old system to the world's military marshal, and the rest of the positions should be handled according to the original edict.

古文：辛丑，敕： 汉宣帝中兴，五日一听朝，历代通规，永为常式。
现代文：十二月十七日，敕命： 汉宣帝振兴汉朝，每五天上一次朝，这是历代的通则，成为永久性的常规制度。
English: On December 17th, he died: Emperor Han Xuan started to revitalize the Han Dynasty. Every five days there is a new dynasty, which has been the general rule throughout the ages and has become a permanent regular system.

古文：近代不循旧仪，辄隳制度，既奸邪之得计，致临视之失常，须守旧规，以循定制。
现代文：近代不遵循旧礼仪，总是破坏制度，既使奸邪之人能够得计，就使临朝视政失去了常规，因此必须遵守旧规，以循着确定不移的制度。
English: In modern times, people do not follow the old etiquette and always destroy the system. Even if the traitors are able to get away with it, it will make the imperial court lose its normal view of politics. Therefore, it is necessary to abide by the old rules and follow the established system.

古文：宜每月只许一、五、九日开延英，计九度。
现代文：应当每个月只许逢一、五、九日开启延英阁发布一次诏令，全月一共九次。
English: Yan Yingge should only be allowed to open and issue an edict once every month on the 1st, 5th and 9th, a total of nine times in the whole month.

古文：其入阁日，仍于延英日一度指挥；如有大段公事，中书门下具榜子奏请开延英，不计日数。
现代文：入阁的那一天，仍然在延英阁发布一次诏令；如果有了大宗的公事，由中书省和门下省出具榜文请求开启延英阁，不算原定的日数。
English: On the day of entering the cabinet, Yan Yingge still issued a decree; if there is a large amount of business, the Ministry of Literature and the subordinate provinces will issue a request to open Yan Yingge, not counting the original number of days.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交付府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：又敕： 宫嫔女职，本备内任，近年已来，稍失仪制。
现代文：又敕命： 宫嫔女官，本来只用作内宫任职，近年以来，逐渐丧失仪礼制度。
English: Another sad death: The Imperial Household Agency, originally used only to serve the inner palace, has gradually lost its ceremonial system in recent years.

古文：宫人出内宣命，寀御参随视朝，乃失旧规，须为永制。
现代文：宫人走出内宫宣布诏令，采女随同上朝，这就丧失了旧的规章，必须制定永久性的制度。
English: The palace people went out of the inner palace to announce the edict, and the adoption of women followed the previous government. This meant that the old rules were lost, and a permanent system had to be established.

古文：今后每遇延英坐朝日，只令小黄门祗候引从，宫人不得擅出内门，庶循典仪，免至纷杂。 
现代文：今后每次遇到皇上在延英阁坐朝的日子，只派小太监小心侍候带路，宫人不得随便走出内门，必须遵守典礼仪节，以免造成杂乱。 
English: From now on, whenever the Emperor is in residence at Yan Ying Court, only minor eunuchs will be sent to carefully wait and lead the way. The courtiers are not allowed to go out of the inner gate at will, and must comply with the ceremonies and rites, so as not to cause disorder.

古文：壬寅，戎昭军奏收复金州，兵火之后，井邑残破，请移理所于均州，从之。
现代文：十二月十八日，戎昭军奏报收复金州，经过战火之后，城池市井残破，请求迁移治所到均州，依从。
English: On December 18th, the Eunso Army reported the recapture of Jinzhou. After the war, Shichii was defeated and requested the relocation of the government office to Junzhou, which was complied with.

古文：仍改为武定军。
现代文：仍旧改为武定军。
English: It was still changed to the Wu Ding Army.

古文：乙巳，汴州别驾蒋仲伸决杀，玄晖季父也。
现代文：十二月二十一日，蒋玄晖的叔父、汴州别驾蒋仲伸被处死。
English: On December 21st, Jiang Xuancheng's uncle, the governor of Zhangzhou, Jiang Zhongxin, was executed.

古文：又敕： 蒋玄晖身居密近，擅弄威权，鬻爵卖官，聚财营第，而苞藏悖逆，稔浸奸邪。虽都市已处于极刑，而屈法尚慊于众怒，更示焚弃之典，以惩显负之踪。
现代文：又敕令： 蒋玄晖身居显要，擅自玩弄权术，卖官鬻爵，聚敛钱财用以营造宅第，而且包藏着悖逆之心，逐渐成为奸邪之臣，虽然已经在京师的市上处以死刑，但他的枉法行径仍被众人所恨怒，应该再处以火烧的刑典，以惩办他公然负恩的行径。
English: The edict also said: "Chiang Xuanzang is a prominent person. He plays power games without authorization, sells officials to the highest bidder, collects money to build a mansion, and harbors a rebellious heart. He has gradually become a vassal of treachery. Although he has been sentenced to death in the market of Beijing, his evil deeds are still hated by the people. He should be punished with a fiery criminal code to punish his blatant act of betrayal."

古文：宜追削为凶逆百姓，仍委河南府揭尸于都门外，聚众焚烧。 
现代文：应当追削原官而授以凶逆百姓之号，仍然委托河南府在都门处掀棺起尸，当众焚烧。 
English: The original officials should be hunted down and given the title of "vicious and rebellious people," but the Henan government was still commissioned to lift the coffin from the corpse at the capital gate and burn it in public.

古文：玄晖死后，王殷、赵殷衡等又谮于全忠云： 内人相传，玄晖私侍积善宫，与柳璨、张廷范为盟誓之交，求兴唐祚。 
现代文：蒋玄晖死后，王殷、赵殷衡等又向朱全忠进谗言说 ：宫中人相传，蒋玄晖在积善宫私侍皇太后，和柳璨、张廷范结为生死之交，想要振兴唐朝国运。 
English: After the death of Jiang Xuanqian, Wang Yin, Zhao Yin Heng and others also said to Zhu Quanzhong: It is said in the palace that Jiang Xuanqian served the empress dowager at the Jiezheng Palace, and he was a life-and-death friend of Liu Xuan and Zhang Tingfan, and he wanted to revitalize the Tang Dynasty.

古文：戊申，全忠令知枢密王殷害皇太后何氏于积善宫，又杀宫人阿秋、阿虔，言通导蒋玄晖。
现代文：十二月二十四日，朱全忠命令代理枢密使王殷在积善宫将皇太后何氏杀害，又杀死宫人阿秋、阿虔，说她们为蒋玄晖通风导引。
English: On December 24th, Zhu Quanzhong ordered the acting privy councilor Wang Yin to kill the empress dowager He in the Zhishan Palace, and also to kill the courtiers Aqiu and Aqian, saying that they were Jiang Xuanqian's guides.

古文：己酉，敕以太后丧，废朝三日。
现代文：十二月二十五日，敕命，因皇太后的丧事而停止上朝三日。
English: On December 25th, the procession died, and the procession stopped on the 3rd due to the funeral of the Empress Dowager.

古文：百官奉慰讫。又敕曰： 皇太后位承坤德，有愧母仪。
现代文：百官慰问完毕之后，皇上敕令说： 皇太后的地位承受地德，而她的行为却有愧于为人母的原则。
English: After the condolences of hundreds of officials, the Emperor's edict said: The position of the Empress Dowager inherits the virtue of the land, but her behavior is unworthy of the principle of being a mother.

古文：近者凶逆诛夷，宫闱词连丑状，寻自崩变，以谢万方。
现代文：近来凶逆百姓蒋玄晖被诛杀，后宫中传出丑闻，接着就发生了巨变，以向天下谢罪。
English: Recently, the villain Jiang Xuanqin was killed, a scandal was reported in the harem, and then a great change took place, in order to thank the world.

古文：朕以幼冲，君临区宇，虽情深号慕，而法难徇私，勉循秦、汉之规，须示追降之典。
现代文：我以幼小的年龄驾驭着江山，对母亲虽然情怀深厚，号哭依恋，但法律难徇私情，只能努力遵循秦、汉的法规，必须显示追夺、降格的刑典。
English: At a young age, I was navigating the country. Although I had deep feelings for my mother, I was crying and clinging to her. However, the law could not satisfy my personal feelings. I could only strive to follow the laws of Qin and Han dynasties. I had to show the criminal code of chasing and demotion.

古文：其遣黄门收所上皇太后宝册，追废为庶人，宜差官告郊庙。 
现代文：立即派宦官收回敬献给皇太后的晋封宝册，追废为平民，并应当派官员告之宗庙。 
English: Immediately send eunuchs to recover the treasure book dedicated to the empress dowager, revoke it as a civilian, and send officials to inform the family temple.

古文：庚戌，敕： 朕以谬荷丕图，礼合亲谒郊庙，先定来年正月上辛用事。
现代文：十二月二十六日，敕命： 我谬承大统，按礼制应当亲自拜谒宗庙，原先定下明年正月前一个辛日举行祀典。
English: On December 26th, I made my last will and testament. According to the ritual system, I should personally visit the ancestral temple. Originally, I had decided to hold the ceremony on a hard day before the first month of the next year.

古文：今以宫围内乱，播于丑声，难以惭恧之容，入于祖宗之庙。
现代文：现在因为后宫发生变乱，传出了丑闻，难以带着羞惭的面容进入祖宗的太庙。
English: Now, because of the turmoil in the harem and the scandal, it is difficult to enter the ancestral temple with a shameful face.

古文：其明年上辛亲谒郊庙宜停。 
现代文：明年前一个辛日亲自拜谒宗庙的活动应当停止。 
English: Next year, the activities of personally visiting the Jinsong Temple on a bad day should be stopped.

古文：壬子，敕积善宫安福殿宜废。
现代文：十二月二十八日，敕命：积善宫安福殿应该废除。
English: On December 28th, it was decreed that the Anfu Hall of Jie Zhen Gong should be abolished.

古文：癸丑，敕光禄大夫、守司空、门下侍郎、平章事、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使柳璨责授朝议郎，守登州刺史。
现代文：十二月二十九日，敕命光禄大夫、署理司空、门下侍郎、平章事、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、延资库使、诸道盐铁转运使柳璨降职为朝议郎、署理登州刺史。
English: On December 29th, Dr. Guanglu, Acting Secretary Ku, Servant of the Emperor, Taira no Shoji, Imperial Palace Envoy, Kobunkwan University Scholar, Enrichment Fund Envoy, Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy, and Yanagisawa were demoted to the position of Chozeiro and Acting Dengshu Shishi.

古文：又敕： 太常卿张廷范、太常少卿裴磵温銮、祠部郎中知制诰张茂枢等，蒋玄晖在枢密之时，与柳璨、张廷范共为朋扇，日相往来，假其游宴之名，别贮倾危之计。
现代文：又敕命： 太常卿张廷范、太常少卿裴石间、温銮、祠部郎中知制诰张茂枢等，蒋玄晖任枢密使时，和柳璨、张廷范共同结党煽动，每天互相往来，借游乐宴享的名义，另行包藏倾覆社稷的诡计。
English: Also killed were: Zhang Tingfan, the first secretary of the CPC Central Committee; Pei Shima, the second secretary of the CPC Central Committee; Wen Qi, the second secretary of the CPC Central Committee; Zhang Maozhu, the third secretary of the CPC Central Committee; and others. When Jiang Xuanqi was a confidential envoy, he, Liu Bei, and Zhang Tingfan worked together to form a party and instigate. They interacted with each other every day and, in the name of pleasure and enjoyment, carried out another conspiracy to overthrow the government.

古文：苟安重位，酷陷朝臣，既此阴谋，难宽大辟。
现代文：苟安于要职，残害朝臣，既行这样的阴谋，难以宽赦死刑。
English: It is difficult to pardon the death penalty for a person who is content with a high-ranking position and murders courtiers, since such a conspiracy has been carried out.

古文：柳璨已从别敕处分，廷范可责授莱州司户。
现代文：柳璨已根据别的敕命处置，张廷范可降职为莱州司户。
English: Liu Yao has made another drastic decision. Zhang Tingfan may be demoted to the position of Laizhou governor.

古文：裴磵等常同聚会，固共苞藏，磵可青州北海尉，銮临淄尉，茂枢博昌尉，并员外置。 
现代文：裴石间等常和他们一起聚会，自然共同包藏祸心。裴石间可降为青州府北海县尉，温銮为临淄县尉，张茂枢为博昌县尉，都在定员之外设置。 
English: Pei Shima and others often gathered with them, naturally harboring evil thoughts together. Pei Shima can be reduced to the Qingzhou Beihai County Lieutenant, Wen Wei to the Linyi County Lieutenant, Zhang Maozhu to the Bochang County Lieutenant, all of which are set outside the quota.

古文：甲寅，敕： 责授登州刺史柳璨，素矜憸巧，每务回邪。
现代文：十二月三十日，敕命： 降职为登州刺史的柳璨，一向以奸佞机巧自矜，总是勉力于邪辟的事。
English: On December 30th, Liu Yao, who was demoted to the position of the chief historian of the state, committed suicide. He had always been good at treachery and always tried to do evil things.

古文：幸以庸才，骤居重位，曾无显效，孤负明恩。
现代文：侥幸以庸劣之才而骤居要位，但没有显著政绩，辜负了圣恩。
English: It was a fluke that a mediocre talent suddenly rose to an important position, but without any significant political achievements, he failed to live up to the grace of God.

古文：诡谲多端，苞藏莫测，但结连于凶险，独陷害于贤良。
现代文：他为人诡诈多端，祸心包藏莫测，只是和凶恶阴险之徒相结纳，一味陷害贤德善良的人。
English: He is a cunning and devious man, with an insidious evil heart. He only consorts with evil and sinister people, and is bent on framing virtuous and kind people.

古文：罪既贯盈，理须窜殛。
现代文：罪恶既已达于极点，按理也应当徙流处死。
English: Since the crime has reached the extreme, it is reasonable that the death penalty should be carried out.

古文：可贬密州司户，再贬长流崖州百姓，委御史台赐自尽。 
现代文：可降职为密州司户，再贬谪为长流崖州的平民，委托御史台令其自尽。 
English: He could be demoted to the position of the steward of Mishu, and then relegated to the position of a commoner of Nagareya, and ordered to commit suicide by the Imperial Historian.

古文：是日斩于上东门外。
现代文：当天在上东门外将其斩首。
English: On the same day, he was beheaded outside the Upper East Gate.

古文：又敕： 张廷范性唯庸妄，志在回邪，不能保慎宠荣，而乃苞藏凶险。
现代文：又敕命 ：张廷范生性庸劣狂妄，一心只在奸邪，不能谨慎地保持朝廷的荣宠，却包藏凶险之心。
English: He also tried to take his own life: Zhang Tingfan was a mediocre and arrogant person, bent on evil, unable to maintain the honor of the imperial court prudently, but harboring a dangerous heart.

古文：密交柳璨，深结玄晖，昼议宵行，欺天负地。神祇共怒，罪状难原。
现代文：和柳璨密切来往，和蒋玄晖深相结纳，白天策划，晚上施行，欺天背地，神人共怒，其罪状难以宽容。
English: He had a close relationship with Liu Bei and a deep connection with Jiang Xuancheng. He plotted during the day and carried it out at night, deceiving the heavens and the earth. God and man were angry with him, and his crimes were intolerable.

古文：宜除名，委河南府于都市集众，以五车分裂。
现代文：应当除名撤职，委托河南府在都市集合百姓们，以车裂之刑处死。
English: He should be removed from his post, and the Henan government should be instructed to gather the people in the city, and he should be sentenced to death by chariot breaking.

古文：温銮、裴磵、张茂枢并除名，委于御史台所在赐自尽。
现代文：温銮、裴石间、张茂枢一并除名撤职，委托御史台在其使署令他们自尽。
English: Wen Wei, Pei Shima, and Zhang Maozhu were all removed from their posts, and the State Administration of History was entrusted with ordering them to commit suicide.

古文：柳璨弟瑀、瑊，送河南府决杀。 
现代文：柳璨的弟弟柳王禹、柳王咸送往河南府处死。 
English: Liu Yao's younger brothers, Liu Wang Yu and Liu Wang Xian, were sent to Henan to be executed.

古文：三年春正月乙卯朔，全忠以四镇之师七万，会河北诸军，屯于深州乐城。
现代文：天三年春，正月初一，朱全忠率领四个藩镇的军队七万人，与河北各军会合，屯驻在深州府的乐城。
English: In the spring of the third year of heaven, on the first day of the first month, Zhu Quanzhong led 70,000 troops from four provinces and towns to meet with the armies of Hebei and stationed in Lecheng, Shenzhou.

古文：戊午，敕右拾遗柳瑗贬洺州鸡泽尉，璨疏属也。
现代文：正月初四，敕命将右拾遗柳瑗贬为氵名州府鸡泽县尉，柳瑗是柳璨的远房亲属。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he decreed that Yu Yu, a distant relative of Liu Yu, would be demoted to the rank of lieutenant of Jizhe County, Fujian Province.

古文：乙丑，全忠自汴河赴魏州。
现代文：正月十一日，朱全忠从汴河前往魏州。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong traveled from Luohe to Weizhou.

古文：丙寅，制： 定乱安国功臣、镇海镇东军节度、浙江东西道观察处置等使、淮南东面行营招讨营田安抚两浙盐铁制置发运等使、开府仪同三司、守侍中、兼中书令、杭越两州刺史、上柱国、吴王、食邑九千户、实封五百户钱镠，总临两镇，制抚三吴。
现代文：正月十二日，决定： 讨平叛乱安定国家的功臣、镇海镇东军节度使、浙江东道浙江西道观察使、处置使、淮南东西行营招讨营田安抚两浙盐铁制置使、发运使、开府仪同三司、代署侍中、兼任中书令、杭越两州刺史、上柱国、吴王、食邑九千户、实封五百户钱霮，总辖两镇，控制三吴。
English: On the 12th day of the first month, it was decided: Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhenhai, Zhen

古文：道途阻艰，未行册命，宜令所司择日备礼。 
现代文：因道路艰难险阻，还没有颁行册封的命令，令有关府衙择定日期准备礼仪。 
English: Due to the difficulties of the road, there has not yet been an order to issue a seal, ordering the relevant government to select a date to prepare for the ceremony.

古文：己巳夜，魏博节度使罗绍威杀其衙内亲军八千人。
现代文：正月十五日夜间，魏博节度使罗绍威杀死其衙内亲军八千人。
English: On the night of the fifteenth day of the first month, the Wei Bo festival made Rossoway kill eight thousand of his troops.

古文：戊午，全忠自内黄入魏州。
现代文：正月十六日，朱全忠从内黄进入魏州。
English: On the 16th day of the first month, Zhu Quanzhong entered Weizhou from Inner Huang.

古文：是月，魏博衙外兵五万自历亭还，分据绍威贝、博等州，汴军攻围之。
现代文：当月，魏博衙外兵五万人从历亭返回，分别占据罗绍威辖区内的贝州、博州等州，汴州军向他们进攻，围困了他们。
English: In the same month, 50,000 Wei Bozhou foreign soldiers returned from Liting and occupied Bozhou, Bozhou and other provinces in the jurisdiction of Roshowe. The Zhangzhou Army attacked them and besieged them.

古文：壬申，敕： 相国总百揆魏王顷辞册命，宜令所司再行册礼。 
现代文：正月十八日，敕命： 相国总百官，魏王近来推辞册封之礼，应指示衙署再行册封之礼。 
English: On the 18th day of the first month of the year, he decreed that the Wei Wang, the chief official of the whole country, who had recently rescinded the ceremony of conferring the title, should instruct the Imperial Household Agency to repeat the ceremony of conferring the title.

古文：辛巳，国子监奉： 奉去年十一月五日敕文，应国学每年与诸道等一例解送两人，今监生郭应图等六十人连状论诉。 
现代文：正月二十七日，国子监上奏 ：奉去年十一月五日的敕命，国子监每年应和各道府同样报送两人，现在监生郭应图等六十人连名具状上诉。 
English: On the 27th day of the first month of the year, the provincial overseer reported: According to the order of November 5 last year, the provincial overseer should submit two people every year, the same as the provinces. Now, sixty people, including the supervisor Guo Yingtu, have jointly filed an appeal.

古文：敕旨： 取士之科，明经极重，每年人数，已有旧规，去夏条疏，盖防渝滥。
现代文：皇上敕旨说： 选士的科目， 明经 一科极为重要，每年的人数，已经有了旧规，去年夏天分条列款陈述，主要是为了防止混乱。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "The subjects for selecting candidates, starting with the Ming and Qing Dynasties, one subject is extremely important, and the number of candidates each year has already reached the old standard. Last summer, the items were listed in separate sections, mainly in order to prevent confusion.

古文：今国子监、河南府俱有论奏，所试明经，宜令准常年例解送礼部，放人多少，酌量施行。
现代文：现在国子监、河南府都有上奏，所试 明经 一科，应当令其依照往年的通例报送礼部，至于放榜录取多少，则酌量施行。
English: At present, the Guozihuan and Henan Prefecture both have the upper grades, and the one subject of the Ming Dynasty, the Ming Dynasty, should be ordered to send gifts according to the usual practice in previous years. As for the number of admissions from the list, it will be implemented in a discretionary manner.

古文：但不徇嘱求，无致侥幸。
现代文：但不能曲从私人的嘱求，不要使他们存侥幸心理。
English: But you can't make music from private requests, don't let them have a sense of luck.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交付府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：二月甲申朔，魏博节度使罗绍威宜许于本镇置三代私庙。
现代文：二月初一，同意魏博节度使罗绍威在本藩镇建置三代私家祖庙。
English: On the first day of February, it was agreed that Weibo Festival would allow Rossowei to build a three-generation private ancestral temple in this town.

古文：癸卯。敕今年礼部所放进士，据依去年人数外，更放两人。
现代文：二月二十日，敕令礼部今年所录取的进士，按照去年的人数另外再增加两人。
English: On February 20th, the number of new recruits admitted to the Imperial Ceremonial Department this year was increased by another two, in accordance with last year's number.

古文：三月甲寅朔。
现代文：三月甲寅为初一。
English: March Kato-in is the first day of school.

古文：甲戌，敕： 河中、昭义管内，俱有慈州，地里相去不远，称谓时闻错误，其昭义管内慈州宜改为惠州。 
现代文：三月二十一日，敕命 ：河中、昭义两府管区内都有慈州，两地相距不远，称说中不时听到发生错误，昭义府管辖内的慈州应当改为惠州。 
English: On March 21st, he died: Cizhou is located in the two prefectural administrative regions of Hechu and Shouyi, and the two places are not far apart. He said that he heard from time to time that there was a mistake, and Cizhou under the jurisdiction of Shouyi should be changed to Huizhou.

古文：壬戌，全忠奏河中判官刘崇子匡图，今年进士登第，遽列高科，恐涉群议，请礼部落下。
现代文：三月二十一，朱全忠上奏，河中判官刘崇的儿子刘匡图，今年登进士第，突然列名于高科，恐怕会引起人们的非议，请求礼部将其除名。
English: On March 21, Zhu Quanzhong's son, Liu Kuangtu, the son of Liu Chong, the judge of the Middle Court of the River, was suddenly listed as a scholar this year. I am afraid that it will cause people's criticism and request the Ministry of Ceremonies to remove it from the list.

古文：戊寅，制元帅梁王可兼领诸道盐铁转运等使，判度支户部事，充三司都制置使。
现代文：三月二十五日，决定元帅梁王兼任诸道盐铁转运使，代行度支户部事宜，并充任三司都制置使。
English: On March 25th, it was decided that Marshal Liang Wang would also serve as the envoy of salt and iron transportation in various provinces, acting as the representative of the General Office of the People's Republic of China, and acting as the envoy of the three departments.

古文：辛巳，敕贬西都留守判官、左谏议大夫郑賨崖州司户，寻赐死。
现代文：三月二十八日，敕命西都留守判官、左谏议大夫郑寅降职为崖州司户，随即令其自尽。
English: On March 28th, Zheng Yin, the judge who stayed in Xidu for the last time and the doctor of the Left Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, was demoted to the position of the governor of Yazhou, and then he was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：四月甲申朔，日有蚀之，在胃十二度。
现代文：四月初二，发生日蚀，在胃宿天区十二度。
English: On the second day of the fourth month, a solar eclipse occurred, and it was 12 degrees in the stomach and abdomen.

古文：戊申，魏博罗绍威奏： 臣当管博州聊城县、武阳莘县武水博平高堂等五县，皆于黄河东岸，其乡村百姓渡河输税不便，与天平军管界接连，请割属郓。 
现代文：四月二十六日，魏博罗绍威奏说： 臣管辖的博州府聊城县，以及武阳、莘县、武水，博平、高堂等五县，都在黄河东岸，该地区的乡村百姓渡河纳税不便，和天平军辖区边界相连，请割属于郓州。 
English: On April 26, Wei Bo Luo Shao Wei said: Liaocheng County, Bozhou Prefecture, which is under the jurisdiction of the minister, and five counties including Wuyang, Shixian, Wushui, Boping, and Gaotang, are all on the east bank of the Yellow River. It is inconvenient for the villagers in this area to cross the river to pay taxes, and it is connected to the border of the Tianping Military Jurisdiction. Please cut it off and belong to Bozhou.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五月癸酉朔，追赠故荆南节度使成汭、鄂岳节度使杜洪官爵，仍于本州立祠庙，从全忠奏也。
现代文：五月二十一日，追赠已故荆南节度使成、鄂岳节度使杜洪官爵，仍在本州建立祠庙一一一这是按朱全忠的奏书处置的。
English: On May 21st, the late Jing Nan Jidong Jicheng and the late E Yue Jidong Jidong Du Hong Guanzhong were posthumously awarded, and the ancestral temple was still established in Honshu. This was handled according to Zhu Quanzhong's report.

古文：丙申，敕： 天祐二年九月二十日于金州置戎昭军，割均、房二州为属郡。
现代文：丙申，敕令： 天二年九月二十日在金州建置戎昭军府，割均州、房州为其属郡。
English: Bishen, the imperial edict: On September 20th, the second year of heaven, the Eunso military headquarters was built in Jinzhou, and Junzhou and Fangzhou were divided into counties.

古文：比因冯行袭叶赞元勋，克宣丕绩，用奖济师之效，遂行割地之权。
现代文：近因冯行袭协助元勋，能够显现伟绩，为了奖励救助军队的功劳，便让他在割出的地区施行权力。
English: Recently, due to Feng Xinggang's assistance to Yuan Xun, he was able to show great achievements. In order to reward the service of rescuing the army, he was allowed to exercise power in the allocated area.

古文：今命帅得人，畴庸有秩，其戎昭军额宜停，其均、房二州却还山南东道收管。 
现代文：现在任人得当，征收田赋也有了规矩，其戎昭军职额的建置应当停止，其中均州、房州退还山南东道收管。 
English: Now the appointment of people is appropriate, the collection of rice fields has rules, and the establishment of military posts should be stopped, among which Junzhou and Fangzhou should be returned to Shannan host management.

古文：六月癸未朔，甲申，敕： 襄州近因赵匡凝作帅，请别立忠义军额，既非往制，固是从权。
现代文：六月癸未为初一。六月初二，敕命： 襄州近来因为赵匡凝任主帅，请求另立忠义军职额，这既不是过去的体制，自然只能是暂时建制。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the death knell sounded: Recently, because Zhao Kuangcheng was appointed as the head coach, Xiangzhou requested to establish a separate position for the loyalist army. This is not the system of the past, of course, it can only be a temporary system.

古文：忠义军额宜停废，依旧为山南东道节度使。 
现代文：忠义军职额应当废止，依旧为山南东道节度使。 
English: The position of the loyalist army should be abolished, and Shannan should continue to be the host of the festival.

古文：己亥，权右唐州事卫审符奏，州郭凋残，又不居要路，请移理所于泌阳县，从之。
现代文：六月十七日，暂代唐州事务卫审符上奏说，州城残破，又不处在要道上，请求把治所搬迁到泌阳县，皇上允准。
English: On June 17th, the provisional Tangzhou Affairs Guard made a report saying that the provincial capital was in ruins and not on the important road, and requested that the government office be relocated to Seoyang County. The emperor agreed.

古文：制以京兆尹、佑国军节度使韩建为青州节度使，代王重师；以重师代建为京兆尹。
现代文：决定任命京兆尹、佑国军节度使韩建代替王重师为青州节度使，而以王重师代替韩建为京兆尹。
English: It was decided to appoint Jing Zhaoyun and Han Jian to replace Wang Shongshi as Qingzhou Festival Delegate, and Wang Shongshi to replace Han Jian as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：壬寅，敕： 文武百僚每月一度入阁于贞观殿。
现代文：六月二十日，敕命： 文武百官每月在贞观殿朝拜皇上一次。
English: On the 20th day of the 6th month, hundreds of civil and military officials came to pay homage to the emperor for the last time each month at Zhenguan Hall.

古文：贞观大殿，朝廷正衙，遇正至之辰，受群臣朝贺。
现代文：贞观大殿是朝廷的正衙，遇到正月和夏至、冬至的日子，皇上在这里接受群臣朝贺。
English: Zhenguan Great Hall is the main hall of the imperial court. On the first day of the month, the summer solstice, and the winter solstice, the emperor receives morning greetings from his retainers here.

古文：比来视朔，未正规仪，今后于崇勋殿入阁。
现代文：近来每月初一的视朝，没有端正规矩礼仪，今后在崇勋殿接受群臣朝拜。
English: Recently, on the first day of every month, there has been no formal ceremony, and henceforth, he will receive the worship of courtiers in the Hall of Supreme Honor.

古文：付所司。 
现代文：交付府衙执行。 
English: Delivered to the prefectural government for implementation.

古文：左拾遗、充史馆修撰裴彖以堂叔母危疾在济源，无兄弟侍疾，乞假宁省，从之。
现代文：左拾遗、充任史馆修撰裴王彖因堂叔母在济原病危，没有兄弟侍候疾病，请假归省。皇上依允。
English: On the left, the collection of relics and the work of the history museum. On the right, the aunt of Pei Wang Xiantang, who was critically ill in Jihara and had no brothers to attend to her illness, took a leave of absence and returned to the province. The emperor agreed.

古文：七月壬子朔。
现代文：七月壬子为初一。
English: July is the first day of the new school year.

古文：己未，全忠始自魏州归大梁，魏博六州平定。
现代文：七月初八，朱全忠才从魏州返回大梁，魏博的六个州被平定。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month, Zhu Quanzhong returned to Daliang from Weizhou, and the six provinces of Weibo were finally pacified.

古文：检校工部尚书、守宗正卿、嗣邠王震停见任，落下袭封，以请告于外也。
现代文：检校工部尚书、署理宗正寺卿、嗣王李震停止现任职务，撤销袭封名号，对外则伪称请假的名义。
English: Shang Shu of the school inspection department, the acting head of Sosei-ji Temple, and the heir Wang Li Zhen suspended their current duties, revoked their names, and falsely claimed to be on leave.

古文：辛未，皇妹永明公主薨，罢朝三日。
现代文：七月二十日，皇妹永明公主去世，停止上朝三日。
English: On July 20th, Princess Yongming, the younger sister of the emperor, passed away and stopped attending the Imperial Court on the 3rd.

古文：八月甲辰，全忠复自汴州北渡河，攻沧州。
现代文：八月二十三日，朱全忠再度从汴州北渡黄河，进攻沧州。
English: On August 23, Zhu Quanzhong once again crossed the Yellow River from Bozhou to attack Cangzhou.

古文：乙未，魏博奏割贝州永济、广宗，相州临河、内黄、洹水、斥丘等六县隶魏州，从之。
现代文：八月二十四日，魏博节度使罗绍威奏请分割贝州的永济、广宗，相州的临河、内黄、洹水、斥丘等六县隶属于魏州，皇上依从。
English: On August 24th, the Wei Bo Festival made the Emperor of Wei request the division of six counties, including Yongji and Guangzong in Bei Zhou, and Linhe, Neihuang, Lishui and Yanqiu in Xiang Zhou, which belonged to Wei Zhou, and the Emperor complied.

古文：九月辛亥朔。丁卯，全忠在军至沧州，军于长芦。
现代文：九月辛亥为初一，九月十七日，朱全忠的大军到达沧州，驻扎在长芦。
English: On September 17, the first day of Xinhai, Zhu Quanzhong's army arrived in Cangzhou and was stationed in Changlu.

古文：是月积阴霖雨不止，差官宗禜都门。
现代文：当月天气连续阴雨不止，派遣官员在都门祭礼，禳除灾祸。
English: That month, the weather continued to be cloudy and rainy, and officials were dispatched to hold a festival in the capital to eliminate the disaster.

古文：十月乙未，两浙钱镠请于本镇立三代私庙，从之。
现代文：十月十四日，两浙钱霮请求在本镇建立三代祖庙，皇上依从。
English: On October 14, the two Zhejiang Qianqian requested the establishment of a three-generation ancestral temple in the town, and the emperor complied.

古文：十一月庚戌朔。
现代文：十一月庚戌为初一。
English: The first day of the first month of November is the Day of the Rooster.

古文：丙子，废牛羊司。
现代文：十一月二十七日，废除牛羊司。
English: On November 27th, the Department of Cattle and Goats was abolished.

古文：御厨肉河南府供进，所有进到牛羊，便付河南府收管。
现代文：御厨的肉由河南府供给，所有各地进献的牛羊，立即交付河南府收管。
English: The meat for the soup kitchen will be supplied by Henan Province, and all the cattle and sheep donated from all over the country will be immediately delivered to Henan Province for collection.

古文：十二月己卯朔，淮南伪署宣歙观察使、检校司徒王茂章可金紫光禄大夫、检校太保，从钱镠奏也。
现代文：十二月初一，淮南暂署宣歙观察使、检校司徒王茂章任金紫光禄大夫、检校太保，这是按钱霮的奏书而任命的。
English: On the first day of December, Wang Maozhang, pro tempore inspector of Xuancheng and inspector of schools in Huainan, was appointed as the doctor of Jin Ziguanglu and the inspector of schools. This was appointed according to Qian Ye's report.

古文：茂章背杨渥，以宣州降钱镠故也。
现代文：这是因为王茂章背弃杨渥，以宣州投降了钱霮的缘故。
English: This is because Wang Maozhang turned his back on Yang Wou and surrendered Qian Ye to Xuan Zhou.

古文：己丑，全忠奏文武两班一、五、九朝日，元帅府排比廊飧。
现代文：十二月十一日，朱全忠奏请，在文武两班官员逢一、五、九朝见皇上的日子，由他在元帅府廊下排列宴席招待群臣。
English: On December 11th, Zhu Quanzhong requested that on the days when officials from the two classes of civil and military met the emperor on the 1st, 5th and 9th, he would arrange banquets under the corridor of the Marshal's Palace to invite the ministers.

古文：敕曰： 百官入朝，两廊赐食，迁都之后，有司官阙供。
现代文：皇上敕命说： 百官入宫朝见皇上，在两廊赐宴，迁都以后，本由有关的官署供给。
English: The emperor said, "A hundred officials entered the palace to see the emperor, and a banquet was given in the two corridors. After the capital was moved, this was provided by the relevant government office.

古文：元帅梁王欲整大纲，复行故事，俾其班列，益认优隆，宜赐诏奖饰。 
现代文：元帅梁王想要整顿朝纲，重新实行旧例，以便在班列中更能识别优秀宝贵的人才，应当颁诏奖励播扬。 
English: If Marshal Liang Wang wants to rectify the morning program and re-implement the old practice, so that he can better identify outstanding and valuable talents in the squadron, he should issue an edict to reward promotion.

古文：甲辰，河阳节度副使孙乘贬崖州司户，寻赐自尽。
现代文：十二月二十六日，河阳节度副使孙乘降职为崖州司户，随后，令其自杀。
English: On December 26th, Sun Rong, the deputy of the Heyang Festival, was demoted to the position of the governor of Yazhou, and then he was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：闰十二月己酉朔，福建百姓僧道诣阙，请为节度使王审知立德政碑，从之。
现代文：闰十二月初一，福建的百姓、僧侣、道士来到皇宫，请求为节度使王审知建立德政碑，皇上依从。
English: On the first day of the second month of December, the people, monks and Taoists of Fujian came to the imperial palace to request that Wang Xizhi build a monument to virtue and politics for the festival, and the emperor complied.

古文：乙丑，华州镇国节度观察处置等使额及兴德府名，并宜停废，复为华州刺史，充本州防御使，仍隶同州为支郡，所管华、商两州诸县，先升次赤，次畿并罢，宜依旧名。
现代文：闰十二月十七日，华州镇国节度使、观察使、处置使的职额及兴德府的名称都应该废除，恢复为华州刺史，并充任本州防御使，仍旧隶属于同州，为其支郡，所管辖的华州、商州各县，原来升格为赤县、畿县的全部取消，都依旧名。
English: On the 17th day of leap December, the posts of Huazhou town and country festival envoy, observation envoy, disposition envoy and the name of Xingde Prefecture should all be abolished, restored to Huazhou history, and served as the state's defense envoy, still subordinated to the same state, as its branch county, the counties of Huazhou and Shangzhou under its jurisdiction, the original upgrade to Chixian and Jixian were all canceled, but they are still named.

古文：西都佑国军作镇已来，未有属郡，其金州、商州宜隶为属郡。
现代文：西都佑国军成为藩镇以后没有下属的郡，金州、商州应该成为其属郡。
English: After Xidu Youguojun became a township, it did not have a subordinate county. Jinzhou and Shangzhou should become its subordinate counties.

古文：京兆府奉先县本属冯翊，栎阳连接下邽，奉先县宜却隶同州，栎阳宜隶华州。
现代文：京兆府的奉先县本属于冯翊府，栎阳县与下圭阝相连，奉先县应重属于同州，栎阳县应当隶属于华州。
English: Fengxian County of Jingzhao Prefecture originally belonged to Fengyuan Prefecture, Poyang County is connected to Shimo Guizhou, Fengxian County should belong to the same state, and Poyang County should be subordinate to Huazhou.

古文：丙寅，夺西川节度使王建在身官爵。
现代文：闰十二月十八日，削除西川节度使王建的在职官爵。
English: On the 18th day of the 12th lunar month, Wang Jian's official title was removed.

古文：戊辰，李克用与幽州之众同攻潞州，全忠守将丁会以泽、潞降太原，克用以其子嗣昭为留后。
现代文：闰十二月二十日，李克用和幽州的部众一起进攻潞州，朱全忠的守将丁会以泽州、潞州投降李克用的太原军，李克用派他的儿子李嗣昭为留后。
English: On the 20th day of the 12th lunar month, Li Kezhen and his subordinates from Yuzhou attacked Zhangzhou. Zhu Quanzhong's commander Ding surrendered to Li Kezhen's Taiyuan army in Zhezhou and Zhangzhou. Li Kezhen sent his son Li Shizhao to stay behind.

古文：甲戌，全忠烧长芦营旋军，闻潞州陷故也。
现代文：闰十二月二十六日，朱全忠烧毁长芦军营后回军一一一因为听说潞州已经失陷了。
English: On December 26, Zhu Quanzhong returned to the army after burning the Changlu military camp because he heard that Zhangzhou had fallen.

古文：乙亥，贬兴唐府少尹孙秘长流爱州，寻赐死，孙乘弟也。
现代文：闰十二月二十七日，贬谪兴唐府少尹孙泌长流爱州，随即令其自尽。孙泌是孙乘的弟弟。
English: On the 27th day of the intercalary month of December, the Tang government's minor Yin Sun Jie, who was the younger brother of Sun Rong, was exiled to Aizhou. He was then ordered to commit suicide.

古文：四年春正月戊寅朔。
现代文：天四年春，正月戊寅初一。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the fourth year of Jianzhong is New Year's Day.

古文：壬寅，全忠自长芦至大梁，天子遣御史大夫薛贻矩赍诏慰劳。
现代文：正月二十六日，朱全忠从长芦返回大梁，皇上派御史大夫薛贻矩带着诏书去慰劳朱全忠。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the year, Zhu Quanzhong returned from Changlu to Daliang. The emperor sent the Grand Historian Xue Yanzhong to comfort Zhu Quanzhong with an edict.

古文：全忠自弑昭宗之后，岐、蜀、太原，连兵牵制，关西日削。
现代文：自从杀死昭宗之后，岐州、蜀州、太原联军对他进行牵制，关西土地日益削减。
English: Since the killing of Zhaozong, the allied forces of Qizhou, Shuzhou and Taiyuan have restrained him, and the land in Kansai has been increasingly reduced.

古文：幸罗绍威杀牙军，全获魏博六州。
现代文：幸亏罗绍威杀死衙内亲军，全部控制了魏博六州。
English: Fortunately, Roshowei killed Yanai's pro-army and took control of all six states of Weibo.

古文：将行篡代，欲威临河朔，乃再兴师临幽、沧，冀仁恭父子乞盟，则与之相结，以固王镕、绍威之心。
现代文：朱全忠即将篡位而取代唐朝，想要威逼河朔，便再次起兵逼近幽州、沧州，指望刘仁恭父子先向他乞求联盟，再和他们结盟，以稳住王、罗绍威之心。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was about to usurp the throne and replace the Tang Dynasty. He wanted to intimidate Heshaku, so he once again raised an army to approach Yuzhou and Cangzhou. He hoped that Liu Rengong and his son would first beg him for an alliance, and then make an alliance with them to stabilize the hearts of Wang and Roshowi.

古文：而自秋迄冬，攻沧州无功，及闻丁会失守，烧营遽还。
现代文：然而从秋天到冬天，攻打沧州都没有取得成功，及至听到丁会所守的城池失守，便烧毁军营返回。
English: However, from autumn to winter, the attack on Cangzhou was not successful, and when they heard that the castle defended by the Ding Association was lost, they burned down the military camp and returned.

古文：路由魏州，罗绍威知失势，恐兵袭己，深赞篡夺之谋，他日如王受禅，必罄六州军赋以助大礼，全忠深感之。
现代文：路经魏州时，罗绍威知道他失势了，担心他派兵袭击自己，便极力赞成他篡国夺位之谋，并表示以后如果梁王接受了帝位，他一定竭尽魏博六州的全部赋税以帮助登基大典。
English: When passing through Weizhou, Rossoway knew that he had lost power, and feared that he would send troops to attack him, so he strongly approved of his usurpation of the throne, and said that if King Liang accepted the throne in the future, he would certainly exhaust all the taxes of the six states of Weibo to help the enthronement ceremony.

古文：至大梁，会薛贻矩来，乃以臣礼见全忠。
现代文：朱全忠对他深表感谢，回到大梁，适逢薛贻矩来到，竟以臣下的礼节朝见朱全忠。
English: Zhu Quanzhong expressed his deep gratitude to him. When he returned to Daliang, Xue Yanzhong arrived, and he greeted Zhu Quanzhong with the courtesy of a vassal.

古文：贻矩承间密陈禅代之谋，全忠心德之。
现代文：薛贻矩乘机秘密陈告取代唐朝的谋略，朱全忠心中很感激他。
English: Xue Bin took the opportunity to secretly announce the strategy to replace the Tang Dynasty, and Zhu Quanzhong was very grateful to him.

古文：贻矩还奏曰： 元帅有受代意，陛下深体时事，去兹重负。 
现代文：薛贻矩回去之后对皇上说 ：元帅有接受建议取代唐朝的意思，陛下应当深刻体察当前局势，卸掉这个沉重的包袱。 
English: Upon his return, Xue Yucheng said to the emperor: "The marshal has the intention of accepting the proposal to replace the Tang Dynasty. Your Majesty should deeply understand the current situation and get rid of this heavy burden."

古文：帝曰： 此吾素怀也。 
现代文：皇上说： 这是我向来的想法。 
English: The emperor said, "This is what I have always thought.

古文：乃降诏元帅以二月行传禅之礼，全忠伪辞。
现代文：于是下诏给元帅，定于二月举行传位禅让的仪式，朱全忠假意推辞。
English: As a result, an edict was issued to the marshal, and a ceremony of abdication was scheduled to be held in February, at which time Zhu Quanzhong pretended to resign.

古文：二月壬子，诏文武百官以今月七日齐赴元帅府。
现代文：二月初五，皇上诏令文武百官在本月七日一起赴元帅府。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, the emperor issued an imperial edict, and on the 7th day of the month, hundreds of military and civilian officials went to the marshal's office.

古文：癸丑，宰相百官辞，全忠以未断表为词。
现代文：二月初六，宰相百官拒绝，朱全忠以皇上没有拒受臣下的表章为借口，推辞受命。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1

古文：三月戊寅朔，全忠令大将李思安率兵三万，合魏博之众，攻掠幽州。
现代文：三月初一，朱全忠命大将李思安领兵三万，再加上魏博罗绍威的部下，攻打幽州。
English: On the first day of March, Zhu Quanzhong's loyal general Li Sian led 30,000 soldiers, together with Wei Bolo Shaowei's subordinates, to attack Yuzhou.

古文：思安顿兵临其郛，会仁恭子守光率兵赴援，思安乃还。
现代文：李思安兵临幽州外城而宿营，恰逢刘仁恭的儿子刘守光率军前来救援，李思安即返回。
English: Li Sian's soldiers were encamped outside the city of Linyuzhou when Liu Shuguang, the son of Liu Rengong, came to the rescue with his army. Li Sian immediately returned.

古文：庚寅，诏薛贻矩再使大梁，达传位之旨。
现代文：三月十三日，皇上诏令薛贻矩再次奉命到大梁，表示传位梁王的意图。
English: On the 13th of March, the emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering Xue Xuan to go to Daliang again to express his intention to pass the throne to Liang Wang.

古文：甲辰，诏曰：敕宰臣文武百辟，籓岳庶尹，明听朕言。夫大宝之尊，神器之重，傥非德充宇宙，功济黔黎，著重华纳麓之功，彰文命导川之绩，允熙帝载，克代天工，则何以统御万邦，照临八极。
现代文：三月二十七日，诏令说： 敕命宰相及文武百官、藩将吏员，明白地听取我的谕示，那大统的尊严，神器的沉重，如果不是德行充盈于宇宙，功劳拯救了黎民，有虞舜那种摄行天子政令的显著功业，有夏禹那样疏导河川的明显成绩，有和洽帝王事业的才能，可代替皇天的功力，又怎么去统治天下，照耀八方呢！
English: On March 27th, the imperial edict said: "I hereby order the prime minister and the hundreds of civil and military officials, the officials of the clan, to listen to my instructions clearly. If the dignity of the general, the weight of the artifact, if it is not filled with virtue in the universe, the merit saved the people of Lai, there is the remarkable achievement of Gu Yao in carrying out the decree of the son of heaven, there is the obvious achievement of channeling rivers like Xia Yu, there is the talent of reconciling the emperor's cause, which can replace the power of the emperor, how can you rule the world and shine in all directions!

古文：元帅梁王，龙颜瑞质，玉理奇文，以英谋睿武定寰瀛，以厚泽深仁抚华夏。
现代文：元帅梁王，有皇帝的面相，祥瑞的资质，具备非凡的才能，以英明的谋略和圣哲的武功平定了寰宇，以宽厚的恩泽和深沉的仁义安抚了华夏。
English: Marshal Liang Wang, with the face of the emperor, the qualifications of Xiang Rui, and possessing extraordinary talents, leveled the world with his wise strategy and the martial arts of the sage, and pacified China with his generous grace and deep benevolence.

古文：神功至德，绝后光前，缇油罕纪其鸿勋，讴诵显归于至化。
现代文：神圣的功勋和极高的品德光前绝后，史官的朱笔也罕能记载这伟大的勋业，讴歌颂扬显然已经达到了极致。
English: Sacred merits and extremely high moral standards are ever-present, and the red pen of historians is rarely able to record this great meritorious deed. The eulogy praise has obviously reached its peak.

古文：二十年之功业，亿兆众之推崇，迩无异言，远无异望。
现代文：二十年建功立业，受到亿万百姓的推崇，近处没有不同的意见，远地也不再对别人抱有希望。
English: He has made great achievements in the past 20 years and has been respected by hundreds of millions of people. There are no different opinions in the vicinity, and there is no longer any hope for others in the distance.

古文：朕惟王圣德，光被八纮，宜顺玄穹，膺兹宝命。
现代文：我想那梁王的圣德，其光辉已照耀到天地的极限，应当顺应苍天，承受这命运。
English: I think that the holiness of King Liang, whose brilliance has shone to the limits of heaven and earth, should conform to heaven and bear this fate.

古文：况天文符瑞，杂沓宣明，虞夏昌期，显于图箓。
现代文：何况天象和符瑞显示得又多又明白，正如虞舜、夏禹时代的昌盛显示在图篆上一样。
English: What's more, the celestial phenomena and auspicious signs are shown abundantly and clearly, just as the prosperity of the Yu and Xia Yu eras is shown on the map.

古文：万机不可以久旷，天命不可以久违，神祇叶心，归于有德。
现代文：帝政不可以久空，天命不可以久违，神人同心归向有德者。
English: The imperial government cannot be empty for a long time, the heavenly destiny cannot be lost for a long time, and the gods and mortals are united in their devotion to the virtuous.

古文：朕敬以天下，传禅圣君，退居旧籓，以备三恪。
现代文：我虔诚地把天下禅让给圣君，退居于旧日的藩镇，以表示无限的尊敬。
English: I piously yielded the world of Zen to the saint and retired to the old town to show my infinite respect.

古文：今敕宰臣张文蔚、杨涉等率文武百僚，备法驾奉迎梁朝，勉厉肃恭，尊戴明主。
现代文：现在命宰臣张文蔚、杨涉等率领文武百官准备天子的法驾奉迎梁朝皇帝，勉力肃穆恭敬地尊奉、拥戴明主。
English: Now, he ordered his vassals Zhang Wenwei, Yang Zhan, and other leading officials to prepare for the heavenly son's dharma drive to serve the emperor of the Liang Dynasty, and to earnestly and respectfully honor and support the Ming Lord.

古文：冲人释兹重负，永为虞宾，获奉新朝，庆泰兼极。
现代文：年幼的我放下这沉重的负担之后，永做客卿。能够侍奉新朝，既感到庆幸，又感到安然。
English: After I put down this heavy burden when I was young, I have been a guest forever. I feel both happy and relieved to be able to serve the new dynasty.

古文：中外列辟，宜体朕怀。
现代文：朝内外的列侯，都应该体察我的心意。 
English: Princes, both at home and abroad, should feel my heart.

古文：乙酉，乃以中书侍郎、平章事张文蔚充册使，礼部尚书苏循为副。中书侍郎、平章事杨涉押传国宝使，翰林学士、中书舍人张策为副。御史大夫薛贻矩为押金宝使，左丞赵光逢为副。
现代文：五月初九，以中书侍郎、平章政事张文蔚充当册封使，礼部侍郎苏循充任副使；中书侍郎、平章政事杨涉任押传国宝使，翰林学士、中书舍人张策任副使；御史大夫薛贻矩任押金宝使，左丞赵光逢任副使。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, Zhang Wenwei, the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and Su Xun, the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, served as the chief envoy, Su Xun, the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, served as the vice-envoy, Yang Tang, the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, served as the vice-envoy of the National Treasures, Zhang Ce, the bachelor of Hanlin, the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, served as the vice-envoy of the National Treasures, Xue Ying, the

古文：甲午，文蔚押文武百僚赴大梁。
现代文：五月十八日，张文蔚押送文武百官前往大梁。
English: On May 18, Zhang Wenwei escorted 100 military and civilian officials to Dalian.

古文：甲子，行事。
现代文：六月十九日，举行册封典礼。
English: On June 19, the enthronement ceremony was held.

古文：册曰：皇帝若曰：咨尔天下兵马元帅、相国总百揆梁王，朕每观上古之书，以尧舜为始者，盖以禅让之典垂于无穷。
现代文：册命说 ：皇帝这样说：兹有天下兵马元帅、相国并总管百官梁王，我每阅读上古的书籍，从尧舜开始，都以禅让的典礼传之无穷。
English: The scribe said, "The emperor said this: Here is the world's marshal of soldiers and horses, the fatherland and the head of the hundred officials, Liang Wang. Every time I read the ancient books, from the beginning to the present, I have passed on the endless Zen ceremony.

古文：故封泰山，禅梁父，略可道者七十二君，则知天下至公，非一姓独有。
现代文：因而在泰山祭天，在梁父祭地，约数得出的就有七十二个君王，于是知道天下应是属于大公而不是一姓所独有。
English: Therefore, in the Taishan Festival of Heaven and the Liangpu Festival of Heaven, there are seventy-two kings, so we know that the world should belong to the grand duke and not be exclusive to one family.

古文：自古明王圣帝，焦思劳神，惴若纳隍，坐以待旦，莫不居之则兢畏，去之则逸安。
现代文：自古以来的明君圣帝，苦思劳神，心中不安就像敌人已经进入了护城河，坐等天亮。
English: Since ancient times, Ming Jun Sheng Di, the god of hard work, is uneasy in his heart, as if the enemy has entered the moat, sitting and waiting for the dawn.

古文：且轩辕非不明，放勋非不圣，尚欲游于姑射，休彼大庭。
现代文：呆在皇位上没有哪一天不战战兢兢地害怕，离开了才能舒畅安心。
English: There is not a single day when I am on the throne that I do not tremble with fear. When I am away, I feel comfortable and at ease.

古文：矧乎历数寻终，期运久谢，属于孤藐，统御万方者哉！
现代文：再说轩辕帝也并不是不明智，唐尧也不是不圣贤，尚且想到姑射山去游玩，到那大庭去休憩，何况命数已到尽头，期运已将终止，像我这样幼稚孤单的人，又怎能统御天下呢？
English: Besides, Emperor Xuanzong was not unwise, and Emperor Tang was not unholy. Even if he wanted to go to the mountain to play and take a break in the courtyard, his life was already over and his term of office was about to expire. How could a childish and lonely person like me rule the world?

古文：况自懿祖之后，嬖幸乱朝，祸起有阶，政渐无象。
现代文：况且从懿宗以后，爱宠幸的小人败乱朝政，灾祸起自于内廷，政事逐渐失去了规矩。
English: Moreover, after Emperor Taizong, petty villains who loved their favorites ruined the imperial government. The calamity started from the Inner Court, and the government gradually lost its discipline.

古文：奋扬神武，戡定区夏，大功二十，光著册书。
现代文：犹如天网大片破裂，又如海水横流，到现今达到了丧乱的地步，谁又能最后平定。
English: Like the rupture of a large piece of skynet, and like the cross-flow of seawater, it has now reached the point of chaos, and who can finally pacify it.

古文：北越阴山，南逾瘴海，东至碣石，西暨流沙，怀生之伦，罔不悦附。
现代文：到了我，以幼小的年龄继承这衰败的根绪，难道如此幼稚昏昧，能守住这宏大的基业么？北边越过阴山，南边到达瘴海，东面到临碣石，西面及于流沙，满怀生之希望的人们，无不高兴地归附梁王。
English: When it comes to me, inheriting the roots of this decline at a young age, is it so childish and dim-witted to be able to hold on to this grand foundation? In the north, over the gloomy mountains, in the south to the Bohai Sea, in the east to Linyi Shi, and in the west to the quicksand, people full of hope for life, are not unhappy to belong to Liang Wang.

古文：矧予寡昧，危而获存。
现代文：更何况我这孤独昏昧，经过危难而获得生存的人呢？
English: How much less I, who am alone and unenlightened, and who have survived through adversity?

古文：今则上察天文，下观人愿，是土德终极之际，乃金行兆应之辰。
现代文：如今上观天象，下视人情，已经是唐朝的土德到完结的时候，也是梁朝的金德应兆的时辰。
English: Nowadays, looking up at the celestial bodies and looking down at people's feelings is already the time when the Tang Dynasty's patriotism comes to an end, and it is also the time when the Liang Dynasty's benevolence responds to the signs.

古文：况十载之间，彗星三见，布新除旧，厥有明征，讴歌所归，属在睿德。
现代文：更何况十年当中彗星三次出现，展布新朝，更换旧朝，确实已经有了明显的征兆。人们讴歌赞颂所归向的，当属那英明高尚之人。
English: Moreover, the comet has appeared three times in ten years, spreading a new dynasty and replacing the old dynasty. Indeed, there have been clear signs. People's eulogies should be directed to the wise and noble people.

古文：今遣持节、银青光禄大夫、守中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事张文蔚等，奉皇帝宝绶，敬逊于位。
现代文：现在派持节银青光禄大夫、署理中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事张文蔚等，捧着皇帝的印绶，恭敬地把皇帝之位禅让给梁王。
English: Now, Dr. Qing Guanglu, Acting Secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Zhang Wenwei, who holds the Emperor's seal, hold the Emperor's seal and respectfully cede the Emperor's throne to King Liang.

古文：于戏！天之历数在尔躬，允执其中，天禄永终。
现代文：唉，皇天的运数已经到了你的身上，公允融洽地掌握着它，天禄会永远延续下去的。
English: Alas, the Emperor's good fortune has come to you, hold it fairly and harmoniously, and the heavenly reward will continue forever.

古文：王其祗显大礼，享兹万国，以肃膺天命。
现代文：希望梁王举行盛大的典礼享有这天下，以恭敬地承受天命。 
English: It is hoped that King Liang will hold a grand ceremony to enjoy this world and respectfully accept the destiny.

古文：全忠建国，奉帝为济阴王，迁于曹州，处前刺史氏叔琮之第。时太原、幽州、凤翔、西川犹称天祐正朔。
现代文：朱全忠建国以后，尊奉皇上为济阴王，迁居于曹州，住在前刺史氏叔琮的府第中，当时太原、幽州、凤翔、西川还用天年号。
English: After the founding of the country, Zhu Quanzhong revered the emperor as the king of Jiyin, moved to Caozhou, and lived in the middle of the capital of the former Zhang Shi's uncle. At that time, Taiyuan, Yuzhou, Fengxiang, and West River still used the name Tiannian.

古文：天祐五年二月二十一日，帝为全忠所害，时年十七，仍谥曰哀皇帝，以王礼葬于济阴县之定陶乡。
现代文：天五年二月二十一日，皇上被朱全忠杀害，时年十七岁，仍加谥号为哀皇帝，以王侯的礼仪安葬于济阴县的定陶乡。
English: On February 21st, the emperor was killed by Zhu Quanzhong. At the age of seventeen, he was still referred to as the "poor emperor" and was buried with the etiquette of a prince in Dingtao Township, Jilin County.

古文：中兴之初，方备礼改卜，遇国丧而止。
现代文：后唐中兴的初年，已准备按礼制另选陵址，因遇到国丧而停止。
English: In the first year of the post-Tang rejuvenation, it was prepared to select another mausoleum site according to the etiquette system, but it was stopped due to the national mourning.

古文：明宗时就故陵置园邑，有司请谥曰昭宣光烈孝皇帝，庙号 景宗 。
现代文：后唐明宗时在原墓址修建陵园。府署请求加谥号为昭宣光烈孝皇帝，庙号景宗。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, when the Ming Dynasty built a cemetery at the original cemetery site, the prefectural government requested that the posthumous name be changed to Emperor Zhaoxuan, and the temple name to Emperor Jingsong.

古文：中书覆奏少帝行事，不合称宗，存谥而已。
现代文：中书省回复说，年幼的皇帝去世以后，不应当称宗，只保留谥号就可以了。
English: China's Ministry of Literature replied that after the young emperor's death, he should not be referred to as Zong, and that it was fine to retain only his posthumous name.

古文：知礼者亦以宣、景之谥非宜，今只取本谥，载之于纪。
现代文：懂得礼制的人也认为宣、景的谥号不恰当，现在只取他原来的谥号，记载于本纪中。
English: People who understand the etiquette also think that the nickname of Xuan and Jing is inappropriate. Now, only his original nickname is recorded in this record.

