古文：吴王还自伐齐，乃讯申胥曰： 昔吾先王体德明圣，达于上帝，譬如农夫作耦，以刈杀四方之蓬蒿，以立名于荆，此则大夫之力也。
现代文：吴王夫差伐齐获胜归来后，便责问伍子胥说： 过去我的先王德高圣明，通达上天的意旨，就像农夫并排耕作一样，与你一起割除我国四方的蒿草，打败了楚国并在那里立下了威名，这是你出的力。
English: After the victorious return of Wu Wangfu, he scolded Wu Zixuan and said: In the past, my ancestor Wang De Gao Shengming, who was able to reach the will of heaven, was like a farmer working side by side. Together with you, he cut the weeds in all four corners of our country, defeated the state of Chu and established a reputation there. This is your strength.

古文：今大夫老，而又不自安恬逸，而处以念恶，出则罪吾众，挠乱百度，以妖孽吴国。
现代文：如今你老了，却又不肯自安于闲适的生活，在家尽动些坏脑筋，出外使我的部众遭受苦难，扰乱法度，来加害于吴国。
English: Now that you are old, you still refuse to give up your comfortable life. At home, you try to do some bad things, and when you go out, you make my subordinates suffer, disrupt the law, and harm the State of Wu.

古文：今天降衷于吴，齐师受服。
现代文：现在上天降福吴国，使齐国归顺了。
English: Now, Heaven has bestowed blessings on the State of Wu and made the State of Qi submit.

古文：孤岂敢自多，先王之钟鼓，实式灵之。
现代文：我岂敢自夸，这是因为先王的军队，得到神灵佑助的缘故。
English: Dare I boast that it was because the former king's army was aided by the gods?

古文：敢告于大夫。 
现代文：我冒昧告诉你这个消息。 
English: I take the liberty of telling you this news.

古文：申胥释剑而对曰： 昔吾先王世有辅弼之臣，以能遂疑计恶，以不陷于大难。
现代文：伍子胥解下佩剑回答说： 过去我们先王一直有辅佐的贤臣，用来帮助决断疑难，权衡得失，所以没有陷入大难。
English: Wu Zi Er undid his sword and replied, "In the past, our forefathers always had wise advisors to help them decide what to do and what not to do, so they didn't get into a big trouble.

古文：今王播弃黎老，而孩童焉比谋，曰： 余令而不违。 
现代文：如今你抛弃老臣，去和幼稚的年轻人共商国策，说： 我的命令不得违背。 
English: Now you are abandoning your veteran ministers and going to discuss national policy with naive young people, saying: My orders must not be violated.

古文：夫不违，乃违也。
现代文：这样的不违背，恰恰是对天意的违背。
English: Such non-violation is precisely a violation of God's will.

古文：夫不违，亡之阶也。
现代文：这样的不违背，正是导致败亡的阶梯啊。
English: Such non-violation is the very ladder that leads to defeat.

古文：夫天之所弃，必骤近其小喜，而远其大忧。
现代文：那上天所要抛弃的，必定在眼前先给它小小的欢喜，而把大的忧患留在后面。
English: The one whom heaven is about to discard must first give him small joys before his eyes, and leave behind him great sorrows.

古文：王若不得志于齐，而以觉寤王心，而吴国犹世。
现代文：您如果伐齐不顺利，反而会内心有所觉悟，这样吴国还可以世代延续。
English: If you do not succeed, you will have some inner awareness, so that Wu can continue for generations.

古文：吾先君得之也，必有以取之；其亡之也，亦有以弃之。
现代文：我们先王凡是取得成就，必定有成功的条件；凡是遭到失败，也自有失败的原因。
English: Whenever our forefathers achieved something, there must have been conditions for success; whenever they failed, there must have been reasons for failure.

古文：用能援持盈以没，而骤救倾以时。
现代文：凭借有才能的人辅佐可以保住成业，而且及时挽回危局。
English: With the help of talented assistants, you can maintain your career and recover from a crisis in time.

古文：今王无以取之，而天禄亟至，是吴命之短也。
现代文：现在你没有取得成功的条件，而上天赐给你的福禄却屡屡降临，说明吴国的国运已经很短了。
English: Now you do not have the conditions for success, but the blessings given to you by Heaven have come again and again, indicating that the national movement of Wu has been very short.

古文：员不忍称疾辟易，以见王之亲为越之擒也。员请先死。 
现代文：我不忍心称病退避一边，看到你被越国人所生擒，我只有请求先死！ 
English: I can't bear to call in sick and step aside. Seeing that you were taken alive by the Yue people, I can only ask to die first!

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是就自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：将死，曰： 以悬吾目于东门，以见越之入，吴国之亡也。 
现代文：临死前，说： 把我的眼睛悬挂在国都的东门上，让我看到越国入侵，吴国的灭亡。 
English: Before his death, he said: "Hang my eyes on the east gate of the capital, let me see the invasion of Yue and the destruction of Wu."

古文：王愠曰： 孤不使大夫得有见也。 
现代文：吴王恼怒地说： 我不让他有看到什么的机会。 
English: Wu Wang said angrily, "I didn't give him a chance to see anything."

古文：乃使取申胥之尸，盛以鸱鴺，而投之于江。
现代文：便派人拿伍子胥的尸体，装到皮口袋中，投入长江。
English: They then sent someone to take Wu Zixuan's body, put it in a leather bag and throw it into the Yangtze River.

