古文：武灵王平昼闲居，肥义侍坐，曰： 王虑世事之变，权甲兵之用，念简、襄之迹，计胡、狄之利乎? 
现代文：赵武灵王平日里闲着的时候，独自居住，肥义在旁边侍奉陪坐，说： 大王您是不是在考虑目前时事的变化，权衡兵力的合理使用，思念筒子、襄子的光辉业绩，考虑如何从胡、狄那里获得利益呢？ 
English: When Zhao Wuling Wang was idle on weekdays, he lived alone, with Feiyi serving as an attendant next to him, saying: Great King, are you considering the current changes in current affairs, weighing the rational use of military forces, thinking about the brilliant performance of Zhongzi and Xiangzi, and considering how to benefit from Hu and Di?

古文：王曰： 嗣立不忘先德，君之道也；错质务明主之长，臣之论也。
现代文：赵武灵王回答说： 继承君位不忘祖先的功德，这是做君王的原则；委身于国君，致力于光大君主的长处和功绩，这是臣子的本分。
English: King Zhao Wuling replied, "It is the principle of being a monarch to inherit the throne without forgetting the merits of one's ancestors; it is the duty of a courtier to devote himself to the sovereign and to the strengths and merits of the great monarch.

古文：是以贤君静而有道民便事之教，动有明古先世之功。
现代文：所以贤明的君主国家平静时要教化国民礼教之事，动荡之时让国民知道古人的功劳与还要明白当下要取得的功绩。
English: Therefore, a wise monarchy should educate the people about national etiquette when the country is calm, and let the people know the merits of the ancients and the merits to be achieved at the moment when the country is in turmoil.

古文：为人臣者，穷有弟长辞让之节，通有补民益主之业。
现代文：做臣子的，在不得志时要保持尊敬长辈谦虚退让的品行，地位显达以后要做出有益于百姓和君王的事业。
English: As a courtier, when you are discouraged, you should maintain the behavior of respecting your elders and being humble and yielding. After your status is revealed, you should do things that are beneficial to the people and the king.

古文：此两者，君臣之分也。
现代文：这两个方面，是做君王和臣下的应尽职责。
English: These two aspects are the due duties of being a monarch and a subject.

古文：今吾欲继襄主之业，启胡、翟之乡，而卒世不见也。
现代文：现在我想继承襄主的事业，开发胡、翟居住的地区，但是我担心一辈子也没有人理解我的用心。
English: Now I want to carry on my master's work and develop the area where Hu and Yan live, but I'm worried that no one will ever understand my intentions.

古文：敌弱者，用力少而功多，可以无尽百姓之劳，而享往古之勋。
现代文：敌人的力量薄弱，我们付出的力量不大，就会取得非常大的成果，不使百姓疲惫，就会得到简子、襄子那样的功勋。
English: The enemy's strength is weak. If we expend a small amount of strength, we will achieve great results. If we don't make the people tired, we will receive the same merits as Jianzi and Xiangzi.

古文：夫有高世之功者，必负遗俗之累；有独知之虑者，必被庶人之恐。
现代文：建立了盖世功勋的人，必然要遭受一些世俗小人的责难；而有独到见解的人，也必然会招惹众人的怨恨。
English: Those who have established world-class achievements will inevitably suffer the criticism of some worldly villains; and those who have unique opinions will also inevitably attract the resentment of many people.

古文：今吾将胡服骑射以教百姓，而世必议寡人矣。 
现代文：现在我准备教导民众穿着胡服练习骑马射箭，这样一来，国内一定会有人非议指责我。 
English: Now I'm going to teach people to practice horse riding and archery while wearing a kimono, so I'm sure someone in my country will criticize me.

古文：肥义曰： 臣闻之，疑事无功，疑行无名。
现代文：肥义说： 我听说，做事情犹豫不决就无法成功，该行动的时候却顾虑重重，就不会功成名就。
English: Huiyi said: I have heard that if you hesitate to do something, you will not succeed, but if you do it with a lot of concern, you will not succeed.

古文：今王即定负遗俗之虑，殆毋顾天下之议矣。
现代文：现在大王既然下定决心背弃世俗偏见，那就一定不要顾虑天下人的非议了。
English: Now that the great king has made up his mind to turn his back on worldly prejudices, he must not worry about the criticism of the world.

古文：夫论至德者不和于俗，成大功者不谋于众。
现代文：凡是追求最高道德的人都不去附和俗人的意见；成就伟大功业的人都不会去与众人商议。
English: Those who pursue the highest morality will not conform to the world, and those who achieve great achievements will not seek to negotiate with ordinary people.

古文：昔舜舞有苗，而禹袒入裸国，非以养欲而乐志也，欲以论德而要功也。
现代文：从前舜跳有苗的舞蹈，禹光着身子进入不知穿衣服的部落，他们并不是想放纵情欲，怡乐心志，而是想借此宣扬道德，建立功业，求取功名。
English: Once upon a time, they danced a dance with seedlings, and Yu Guang danced with his body into a tribe that did not know how to wear clothes. They did not want to indulge their passions and enjoy their hearts, but wanted to use this to promote morality, establish a career, and seek fame.

古文：愚者暗于成事，智者见于未萌，王其遂行之。 
现代文：愚蠢的人在事情发生以后还看不明白，而聪明的人却能在事情未发生之前就有所察觉，大王您还是马上按您的想法去付诸实施吧。 
English: Stupid people don't understand things after they happen, but smart people can notice things before they happen. You should implement your ideas right away.

古文：王曰： 寡人非疑胡服也，吾恐天下笑之。
现代文：赵武灵王说： 我不是对 胡服骑射 这件事有什么顾虑，而是担心天下人笑话我。
English: Zhao Wuling Wang said, "I'm not worried about Hu Rong riding a horse, but I'm worried about the world laughing at me.

古文：狂夫之乐，知者哀焉；愚者之笑，贤者戚焉。
现代文：狂狷的人觉得高兴的事，有理智的人会为此感到悲哀；愚蠢的人高兴的事，贤明者却对此担忧。
English: What delirious people are happy about, sensible people are sad about; what stupid people are happy about, sensible people are worried about.

古文：世有顺我者，则胡服之功未可知也。
现代文：如果国人都支持我的话，那么改穿胡服的功效就不可估量。
English: If the people of my country support me, then the effect of changing to the traditional dress will be immeasurable.

古文：虽敺世以笑我，胡地中山吾必有之。 
现代文：即使举世的百姓都讥笑我，北方胡人和中山国的地方我也一定会得到手。 
English: Even if people all over the world laugh at me, I am sure to get a hand from the northern Hu people and the mid-mountain country.

古文：王遂胡服。
现代文：于是赵武灵王改穿胡人的服装。
English: As a result, King Zhao Wuling changed his costume to that of the Hu people.

古文：使王孙緤告公子成曰： 寡人胡服，且将以朝，亦欲叔之服之也。
现代文：他派王孙緤将自己的意思转告公子成，说： 我已经改穿胡服了，而且将要穿着胡服上朝，我希望王叔也改穿胡服。
English: He sent Wang Sunye to convey his intention to his son-in-law, saying: "I have changed to wearing the Hu uniform, and I will wear the Hu uniform to the imperial court. I hope Uncle Wang will also change to wearing the Hu uniform."

古文：家听于亲，国听于君，古今之公行也。
现代文：在家里要听命于父母，在朝廷要听命于君王，这是从古到今一直通行的惯例。
English: It has been customary from ancient times to obey one's parents at home and the king at court.

古文：子不反亲，臣不逆主，先王之通谊也。
现代文：子女不能违背父母的命令，臣子不能违背国君的命令，这是先王所立下的原则。
English: Children cannot disobey the orders of their parents, and courtiers cannot disobey the orders of the sovereign. This was the principle established by the former king.

古文：今寡人作教易服，而叔不服，吾恐天下议之也。
现代文：现在我改革改换服装，如果王叔您都不穿它，我担心天下的人对此会大加非议。
English: Now that I have reformed and changed my clothes, if Uncle Wang and you do not wear it, I am afraid that people around the world will criticize this.

古文：夫制国有常，而利民为本；从政有经，而令行为上。
现代文：治理国家要有一定法则，但要以有利于民众为根本；处理政事有一定的规则，但要以政令能够顺利施行为上。
English: There should be certain rules for governing the country, but they should be based on what is beneficial to the people; there should be certain rules for handling political affairs, but they should be able to be smoothly implemented through government decrees.

古文：故明德在于论贱，行政在于信贵。
现代文：所以要想修明德政，就必须考虑百姓的利益，要想执掌国家的政权，首先要取得贵族的信任。
English: Therefore, if you want to establish a moral government, you must consider the interests of the people. If you want to hold the power of the state, you must first gain the trust of the aristocracy.

古文：今胡服之意，非以养欲而乐志也。
现代文：现在我改穿胡服的目的，并不是想要纵欲而娱乐心志。
English: Nowadays, the purpose of wearing Hu clothing is not to satisfy desires and pleasurable aspirations; things have to achieve a certain purpose before the work can be completed.

古文：事有所出，功有所止。事成功立，然后德且见也。
现代文：事情只要开始做了，就要奠定成功的基础，这样才能显示出政绩来。
English: As soon as things begin to be done, it is necessary to lay the foundation for success, so that political achievements can be shown.

古文：今寡人恐叔逆从政之经，以辅公叔之议。
现代文：现在我恐怕王叔违背了从政的规则，从而助长了王公贵族对这件事情的非议。
English: Now I am afraid that Uncle Wang has violated the rules of politics, thus encouraging the princes and nobles to criticize this matter.

古文：且寡人闻之，事利国者行无邪，因贵戚者名不累。
现代文：何况我曾经听说，只要你做的事情有利于国家，那么就不要顾忌别人的非议，按照王公贵族的意见来办事，就不会遭到人们的非议。
English: Moreover, I once heard that as long as what you do is beneficial to the country, then you should not fear the criticism of others. If you act in accordance with the opinions of princes and aristocrats, you will not be criticized by people.

古文：故寡人愿募公叔之义，以成胡服之功。
现代文：所以我想要依靠王叔的威望，来达成改穿胡服这件事。
English: That's why I want to rely on Uncle Wang's prestige to achieve the change of clothes.

古文：使緤谒之叔，请服焉。 
现代文：我特地派王孙緤来禀告您，请求您也穿上胡服。 
English: I've sent Wang Yao to see your uncle. Please put on your Hu clothing.

古文：公子成再拜曰： 臣固闻王之胡服也，不佞寝疾，不能趋走，是以不先进。
现代文：公子成又拜了拜，说： 我本来就已经听说大王改穿胡服这件事了，但我卧病在床，无法行走，因此没有先去拜见大王，对您陈述我的看法。
English: Prince Zicheng bowed again and said, "I had already heard that the Great King had changed his clothes, but I was sick in bed and couldn't walk, so I didn't go to see the Great King first to present my opinion to you.

古文：王今命之，臣固敢竭其愚忠。
现代文：今天大王派人来通知我，我就来尽我的愚忠。
English: Today the great king sent someone to inform me of his departure, and I have come to fulfill my foolish loyalty.

古文：臣闻之：中国者，聪明叡知之所居也，万物财用之所聚也，贤圣之所教也。仁义之所施也，诗书礼乐之所用也，异敏技艺之所试也，远方之所观赴也，蛮夷之所义行也。
现代文：我听说，中原地区是聪明而有远见的人士所生活的地方，是各种物资和财富聚集的地方，是圣贤推行教化的地方，是仁德所普遍施行的地方，是《诗》《书》《礼》《乐》所实行的地方，是各种奇巧技艺所施展的地方，是各国诸侯不远千里前来考察学习的地方，是四方落后的少数民族效法的地方。
English: I have heard that the Central Plains region is a place where clever and far-sighted people live, a place where all kinds of materials and wealth are gathered, a place where sages promote enlightenment, a place where benevolence is widely practiced, a place where "poetry," "books," "rituals" and "music" are practiced, a place where all kinds of amazing skills are exhibited, a place where princes from all over the world come thousands of miles to inspect and learn, and a place where backward ethnic minorities from all over the country imitate.

古文：今王释此，而袭远方之服，变古之教，易古之道，逆人之心，畔学者，离中国，臣愿大王图之。 
现代文：但是大王却丢弃了这些优秀的文化，而改穿落后少数民族的服装，这是改变先人的教化，变易先人的制度，背离人们的心理，背叛了先王的成法，丢弃了中原的先进制度。我请大王慎重地做这件事。 
English: However, the great king has discarded these excellent cultures and changed to the clothing of backward ethnic minorities. This is to change the enlightenment of the ancestors, to change the system of the ancestors, to deviate from the psychology of the people, to betray the established law of the first king, and to discard the advanced system of the Central Plains. I ask the great king to do this carefully.

古文：使者报王。
现代文：使者把公子成的话报告给赵武灵王。
English: The messenger reported his words to King Zhao Wuling.

古文：王曰： 吾固闻叔之病也。 
现代文：武灵王说： 我就知道王叔反对这件事。 
English: King Wuling said, "I knew Uncle Wang was against it.

古文：即之公叔成家，自请之曰： 夫服者，所以便用也；礼者，所以便事也。
现代文：于是马上就去公子成家里，亲自向他阐述自己的观点： 大凡衣服是为了便于穿用，礼制是为了便于办事。
English: So she immediately went to his home and personally explained her point of view to him: ordinary clothes are for ease of use, and etiquette is for ease of doing business.

古文：是以圣人观其乡而顺宜，因其事而制礼，所以利其民而厚其国也。
现代文：因此圣贤之人观察当地的习俗然后制定与之相适应的措施，根据具体的情况来制定礼法，这样做既有利于民众，也有益于国家。
English: Therefore, sages observe local customs and then formulate measures to suit them, and formulate etiquette according to the specific situation, which is beneficial to both the people and the country.

古文：被发文身，错臂左衽，瓯越之民也。
现代文：剪掉头发，在身上刺花纹，两臂交错站立，衣襟向左掩，这是瓯越人民的风俗。
English: It is the custom of the people of Zouyue to cut their hair, wear embroidered patterns on their bodies, stand with their arms interlaced, and wear their collars turned to the left.

古文：黑齿雕题，鯷冠秫缝，大吴之国也。
现代文：染黑牙齿，在额头雕画，头戴鱼皮帽子，身穿缝纫粗拙的衣服，这是吴国的风俗。
English: Blackened teeth, carved foreheads, fish-skin hats, and poorly sewn clothes are the customs of the State of Wu.

古文：礼服不同，其便一也。
现代文：礼制和服饰虽然不同，但求其利国便民却是一致的。
English: Although the ceremonial system and clothing are different, they are consistent in seeking to benefit the country and benefit the people.

古文：是以乡异而用变，事异而礼易。
现代文：因此，地方不同，所采用的器物就不一样，情况不同，使用的礼制也有所改变。
English: Therefore, in different places, the utensils used are different, the situation is different, and the etiquette used has also changed.

古文：是故圣人苟可以利其民，不一其用；果可以便其事，不同其礼。
现代文：因此，圣贤的君主只制定有利于百姓的政策，但并不统一他们的器物用度；如果可以方便行事，礼制完全可以不相同。
English: Therefore, the wise monarchs only make policies that are beneficial to the people, but do not unify their utensil usage; if it is convenient to act, the etiquette can be completely different.

古文：儒者一师而礼异，中国同俗而教离，又况山谷之便乎?
现代文：儒生虽都师从同一老师，可是传下来的礼法却各不相同；中原地区风俗相同，但各国的政教不同，更何况地处偏僻山区，难道不更应该考虑便宜行事吗?
English: Although all Confucianism students learn from the same teacher, the handed down etiquette is different; the Central Plains region has the same customs, but the politics and religion of each country are different, not to mention that it is located in a remote mountainous area. Shouldn't we consider acting cheaply?

古文：故去就之变，知者不能一；远近之服，贤圣不能同。
现代文：所以说对于风俗礼制的取舍变化多端，即使聪明人也无法统一；不同地区的服式，即使圣贤君主也难以使其一致。
English: Therefore, the choice of customs and ceremonies varies widely, and even clever people cannot unify them; the dress of different regions is difficult for even sages and kings to make it consistent.

古文：穷乡多异，曲学多辨。不知而不疑，异于己而不非者，公于求善也。
现代文：偏僻的地方人们少见而多怪，孤陋寡闻的人喜欢争辩，不熟悉的事情不要轻易怀疑，对和自己不同的意见不非议，这才是无私地追求真理的态度。
English: In remote places, people are rare and strange. People who are uneducated like to argue. Don't easily doubt unfamiliar things. Don't criticize opinions that differ from your own. This is the attitude of selfless pursuit of truth.

古文：今卿之所言者，俗也。吾之所言者，所以制俗也。
现代文：现在王叔您所说的是有关适应风俗的意见；我所说的则是如何改变旧的传统。
English: Now Uncle Wang, what you are saying is your opinion on adapting to customs; what I am saying is how to change the old tradition.

古文：今吾国东有河、薄洛之水，与齐、中山同之，而无舟楫之用。
现代文：现在，我国东面有黄河、漳水，是和齐国、中山共同拥有的边境，但却没有战船守御它。
English: At present, there are the Yellow River and Surabaya in the east of our country, which is the common border with Qi and Zhongshan, but there are no warships to guard it.

古文：自常山以至代、上党，东有燕、东胡之境，西有楼烦、秦、韩之边。
现代文：从常山到代郡、上党郡，东面与燕国和东胡接壤，西面与楼烦、秦国、韩国紧紧相邻，但我们没有骑兵部队防守。
English: From Changshan to Dayu County and Shangdang County, the east is bordered by Yan and Donghu, and the west is closely adjacent to Loudui, Qin and South Korea, but we do not have cavalry troops for defense.

古文：故寡人且聚舟楫之用，求水居之民，而无骑射之备。以守河、薄洛之水；变服骑射，以备其参胡、楼烦、秦、韩之边。
现代文：所以我准备制造战船，招募习于水战的居民，让他们来防守黄河、漳水；改穿胡服，练习骑马射箭，防备与燕国、东胡、楼烦、秦国、韩国的边境。
English: Therefore, I am preparing to build warships and recruit residents who are familiar with water warfare to guard the Yellow River and Surabaya; change into Hu clothing, practice horseback archery, and guard the borders with Yan, Donghu, Loudui, Qin, and South Korea.

古文：且昔者简主不塞晋阳，以及上党，而襄王兼戎取代，以攘诸，此愚知之所明也。
现代文：从前简子不把自己限于晋阳和上党两个地方，襄子兼并了戎族和代郡，以抵御胡人。这些道理不论是愚笨之人还是聪明之人都明白。
English: Once upon a time, Jianzi did not confine himself to the two places of Jinyang and Shangdang. He also annexed Wuzhong and Dai County to resist the Hu people. Both stupid people and smart people understand these principles.

古文：先时中山负齐之强兵，侵掠吾地，系累吾民，引水围鄗，非社稷之神灵，即鄗几不守。
现代文：过去，中山国依仗齐国强大的军队的支持，侵犯掠夺我国的土地，掳掠囚禁我国的人民，引水围灌鄙城，假若不是祖宗神灵的保佑，鄙城几乎被攻破。
English: In the past, Zhongshan relied on the support of the powerful army of Qi to invade and plunder our land, kidnap and imprison our people, and bring water to encircle our city. If it were not for the blessing of the ancestral gods, our city would have been almost broken.

古文：先王忿之，其怨未能报也。
现代文：先王对这事非常气愤，直到今天，他们的仇怨还没有报。
English: The former king was very angry about this, and to this day, their grudge has not been reported.

古文：今骑射之服，近可以备上党之形，远可以报中山之怨。
现代文：现在我们推行 胡服骑射 的政策，从近处说，可以扼守上党这样形势险要的地方；从远处说，可以报中山侵略先王的仇恨。
English: Now that we are implementing the policy of "Hufu riding and shooting," from a close distance, we can hold on to places where the situation is critical, such as Shangdang; from a distance, we can report the hatred of Zhongshan's invasion to the former king.

古文：而叔也顺中国之俗以逆简、襄之意，恶变服之名而忘国事之耻，非寡人所望于子！ 
现代文：可王叔您却偏偏要因袭中原的旧俗，违背简子和襄子的遗愿，憎恶改变服式的做法，却忘记了国家曾遭受的耻辱，这决不是我期望您做的啊! 
English: But Uncle Wang, you have attacked the old customs of the Central Plains, violated the last wishes of Jian Zi and Xiang Zi, abhorred the practice of changing uniforms, but have forgotten the shame that the country once suffered. This is not what I expect you to do!

古文：公子成再拜稽首曰： 臣愚不达于王之议，敢道世俗之间。
现代文：公子成听了，对武灵王大礼参拜谢罪，他说： 我太愚蠢了，竟没有体会到大王的良苦用心，所以才冒昧地说了一些世俗的言论。
English: After listening, he said to King Wuling: "I am so stupid that I did not realize the great king's good intentions, so I ventured to say some worldly words.

古文：今欲继简、襄之意，以顺先王之志，臣敢不听令。 
现代文：现在大王想要继承简子、襄子的意愿，实现先王和遗志，我怎么敢不服从命令呢! 
English: Now that the great king wants to inherit the will of Jianzi and Xiangzi, and realize the will of the former king, how dare I disobey the order!

古文：再拜，乃赐胡服。
现代文：公子成又拜了两拜。于是赵武灵王就赐给他胡服。
English: Kinzicheng bowed two more times. Then King Zhao Wuling gave him a robe.

古文：赵文进谏曰： 农夫劳而君子养焉，政之经也。愚者陈意而知者论焉，教之道也。臣无隐忠，君无蔽言，国之禄也。
现代文：赵文劝谏武灵王说： 农夫辛勤耕作以供养君子，这是治理国家的根本；愚笨的人表达意见，明智的人加以决策，这是处理问题的方法；做臣子的不隐瞒自己的意见，做君王的不阻塞言路，这是国家的福分。
English: Zhao Wen advised King Gong Wuling, saying: "Farmers work hard to support gentlemen, which is the foundation of governing the country; stupid people express their opinions, and wise people make decisions, which is the way to deal with problems; being a courtier does not hide his opinions, and being a monarch does not block the way of speech, which is the blessing of the country.

古文：臣虽愚，愿竭其忠。 
现代文：我虽然愚笨，但还是希望竭尽自己的忠心。 
English: Foolish as I am, I hope to do my best to be faithful.

古文：王曰： 虑无恶扰，忠无过罪，子其言乎。 
现代文：武灵王说： 替别人着想的人不应该过分苛求，竭尽忠心的人不能指责他的错误，您就直言吧。 
English: Wuling Wang said, "A person who thinks about others should not be too demanding, and a person who is extremely loyal should not be criticized for his mistakes. Please speak frankly."

古文：赵文曰： 当世辅俗，古之道也。衣服有常，礼之制也。修法无愆，民之职也。三者，先圣之所以教。
现代文：赵文说： 适应时势顺从当地民俗，这是自古以来的法则；衣服有一定的款式这是礼法的规定；遵守法纪，不犯错误，这是老百姓的职责，这三个方面，都是古代圣贤的教导。
English: Zhao Wen said: Adapting to the times and obeying local folk customs, this has been the law since ancient times; clothes have a certain style, this is the requirement of etiquette; obeying the law and not making mistakes, this is the responsibility of the common people, these three aspects are the teachings of ancient sages.

古文：今君释此，而袭远方之服，变教之古，易古之道，故臣愿王之图之。 
现代文：现在大王您对这些都弃之不顾，去改穿远方胡人的衣服，改变古代的教化，改变古代的章程，所以我希望大王认真地考虑考虑。 
English: Now, Your Majesty, you have disregarded all of these, and you are going to change the clothes of the Hu people from far away, change the ancient education, and change the ancient regulations, so I hope that Your Majesty will seriously consider it.

古文：王曰： 子言世俗之间。
现代文：武灵王说： 你所说的只是世俗的见解。
English: King Wuling said, "What you said is just a worldly opinion.

古文：常民溺于习俗，学者沉于所闻。此两者，所以成官而顺政也，非所以观远而论始也。
现代文：普通民众只是一味地沉溺于习惯世俗之中，而书呆子又总是拘泥于书本上的东西，这两种人，他们只能谨守职责，遵守法令而已，不能和他们一道谋长远的事业，建立开创之功。
English: Ordinary people are just indulging in the habitual worldliness, while the nerds are always sticking to books. These two kinds of people can only abide by their duties and abide by the laws, and cannot work with them to seek a long-term career and establish pioneering achievements.

古文：且夫三代不同服而王，五伯不同教而政。
现代文：而且夏、商、周三个朝代虽然服装不同但却能统一天下；春秋五霸政教各异却能治理好国家。
English: Moreover, the three dynasties of Xia, Shang and Zhou were able to unify the country despite their different clothing; the Five Dynasties of Spring and Autumn were able to govern the country despite their different political and religious systems.

古文：知者作教，而愚者制焉。贤者议俗，不肖者拘焉。
现代文：聪明人制订法令，愚蠢的人被法令制约；贤达的人改革习俗，而愚笨的人却拘泥于旧风陋俗。
English: Wise men make laws, fools obey them. Wise men reform customs, fools cling to them.

古文：夫制于服之民。不足与论心；拘于俗之众，不足与致意。
现代文：因此那些受世俗礼法制约的人，没有必要和他们交流思想；那些拘泥于旧风陋俗的人，没有必要向他们说明你的意图。
English: Therefore, for those who are bound by worldly etiquette, there is no need to exchange ideas with them; for those who are stuck in old customs, there is no need to explain your intentions to them.

古文：故势与俗化，而礼与变俱，圣人之道也。
现代文：所以习俗随时势而变，而礼法和这一变化了的习俗相统一，这才是圣人治国的根本原则啊!
English: That is why customs are subject to change at any time, and the unification of etiquette and this changed custom is the fundamental principle of the sage's governance!

古文：承教而动，循法无私，民之职也。
现代文：接到国家的政令就马上行动，遵守法制而抛弃个人私念，这才是老百姓的天职。
English: It is the bounden duty of the common people to act immediately upon receiving government orders, to abide by the rule of law, and to abandon personal selfishness.

古文：知学之人，能与闻迁，达于礼之变，能与时化。
现代文：真正有学问的人能听从意见而改变观点，真正通晓礼法的人能跟着时代的变化而变化。
English: A truly learned person can listen to opinions and change his point of view, and a person who truly understands etiquette can change with the changes of the times.

古文：故为己者不待人，制今者不法古，子其释之。 
现代文：因此为自己着想的人不会兼顾他人，要改变时势就不能完全效法古代，您就放心吧! 
English: Therefore, people who think for themselves will not take into account others. To change the situation, we cannot completely follow the ancient times. Don't worry!

古文：赵造谏曰： 隐忠不竭，奸之属也。以私诬国，贼之类也。
现代文：赵造也去劝谏赵武灵王，他说： 不竭尽忠心，知而不言，这是奸臣一样的行为；为了私利去欺骗君主，这是有损于国家的做法。
English: Zhao Zou also went to advise King Zhao Wuling. He said: "Not being loyal to the best of one's ability, knowing but not saying, is the same as being a traitor. Deceiving the sovereign for one's own benefit is detrimental to the country."

古文：犯奸者身死，贱国者族宗。
现代文：犯了奸佞罪的人处以死刑，危害国家的人诛灭宗族。
English: A person who commits treason shall be sentenced to death, and a person who endangers the state shall be sentenced to extermination.

古文：反此两者，先圣之明刑，臣下之大罪也。臣虽愚，愿尽其忠，无遁其死。 
现代文：这两点是上古圣王制定的刑法，也是作臣子的人所犯的最重的罪。我虽然愚笨，但愿尽自己的忠心，绝不逃避死亡。 
English: These two points are the criminal law established by the ancient holy king, and they are also the most serious sins committed by a courtier. Although I am stupid, I would like to do my best to be loyal and never escape death.

古文：王日： 竭意不讳，忠也。上无蔽言，明也。
现代文：武灵王说： 毫不保留地说出自己的想法而不加任何隐讳，这就是忠臣；不阻塞言路，虚心接受意见，这就叫明主。
English: King Wuling said, "A loyal subject is one who speaks his mind without reservation and without concealing anything. One who does not obstruct the path of speech and accepts opinions with an open mind is called a clear master."

古文：忠不辟危，明不距人。子其言乎。 
现代文：忠臣不畏惧危险，明主不拒绝臣子发表意见，您就坦然地说吧! 
English: If a loyal subject is not afraid of danger, and if the master does not refuse to allow the subject to express his opinion, then you can say it freely!

古文：赵造曰： 臣闻之，圣人不易民而教，知者不变俗而动。
现代文：赵造说： 我听说过，圣贤之人不去变更民众的习俗而去教化他们，聪明的人不改变习俗而治理国家。
English: Zhao Zou said: I have heard that saints and sages do not change the customs of the people but educate them, and clever people do not change the customs but govern the country.

古文：因民而教者，不劳而成功；据俗而动者，虑径而易见也。
现代文：根据民意进行教化，不费多大力气就能收到成效；根据不同的习俗治理国家，考虑问题简捷方便，做起来容易见到效果。
English: Indoctrination according to public opinion can be effective without much effort; governing the country according to different customs is simple and convenient, and it is easy to see the results.

古文：今王易初不循俗，胡服不顾世，非所以教民而成礼也。
现代文：现在大王您改变原来的服饰而不遵循习俗，改穿胡服而不顾世人的议论，这不是按照礼仪法则教化民众的方式。
English: Now, Your Majesty, changing the original dress without following the custom, and changing into the Hu clothing without paying attention to the opinions of the world, this is not the way to educate the people according to the rules of etiquette.

古文：且服奇者志淫，俗辟者乱民。
现代文：而且穿着奇装异服，会使人心思不正，习俗怪僻会扰乱民心。
English: Moreover, wearing strange clothes will make people think wrongly, and eccentric customs will disturb people's hearts.

古文：是以莅国者不袭奇辟之服，中国不近蛮夷之行，非所以教民而成礼者也。
现代文：所以做国君的人不应去接受奇异怪僻的衣服，中原地区的人民不应效法蛮夷的生活方式，这不是按礼法要求来教化百姓的途径。
English: Therefore, the sovereign should not accept strange and outlandish clothes, and the people of the Central Plains should not follow the barbaric way of life. This is not the way to educate the people according to the requirements of etiquette.

古文：且循法无过，修礼无邪，臣愿王之图之。 
现代文：况且遵循以往的法令不会出差错，按照旧有的礼节行事就不会生出邪念。我希望大王慎重考虑这件事情。 
English: Moreover, there is nothing wrong with following the laws of the past, and acting according to the old etiquette will not give rise to evil thoughts. I hope the king will carefully consider this matter.

古文：王曰： 古今不同俗，何古之法?
现代文：武灵王说： 自古至今，习俗都不同，我们要效法哪一个时候的呢?
English: Wuling Wang said: From ancient times to the present, customs are different. When should we follow them?

古文：帝王不相袭，何礼之循?
现代文：帝王的礼法也不是世代相承的，我们要遵循谁的礼法呢?
English: The emperor's etiquette is not handed down from generation to generation. Whose etiquette should we follow?

古文：宓戏、神农教而不诛，黄帝、尧、舜诛而不怒。
现代文：伏羲和神农，对民众只是进行教化，而不诛杀；黄帝、尧、舜，虽然有了死刑，但并不诛连妻子儿女。
English: Fuxi and Shennong only educated the people, but did not kill them; Huangdi, Xing and Yao, although they had the death penalty, did not imprison their wives and children.

古文：及至三王，观时而制法，因事而制礼，法度制令，各顺其宜；衣服器械，各便其用。
现代文：到了夏、商、周三代圣王时，就观察当时的形势来建立法制，根据具体情况来制定礼俗。法度、政令都因时制宜，衣服器用都方便使用。
English: When Xia, Shang and the third generation of holy kings came, they observed the situation at that time to establish a legal system, and formulated the etiquette according to the specific situation. Laws and decrees are all time-appropriate, and clothing and utensils are convenient to use.

古文：故礼世不必一其道，便国不必法古。
现代文：所以治理国家不一定要走同一条路，只要对国家有利，不一定要效法古代。
English: Therefore, the governance of the country does not necessarily have to follow the same path. As long as it is beneficial to the country, it is not necessary to follow the ancient times.

古文：圣人之兴也，不相袭而王。夏、殷之衰也，不易礼而灭。
现代文：圣人的出现，不是因为互相承袭才统治天下的；夏朝和殷朝的衰亡，不会因为改变礼法而不灭亡。
English: The emergence of saints is not because of mutual inheritance to rule the world; the decline of the Xia Dynasty and the Yin Dynasty will not perish without changing the etiquette.

古文：然则反古未可非，而循礼未足多也。
现代文：这样说来，不沿袭古法，不一定就要斥责，谨守旧礼陋俗也未必值得称赞。
English: So, it is not unreasonable to go against the old system, and it is commendable to follow the old rituals.

古文：且服奇而志淫，是邹、鲁无奇行也；俗辟而民易，是吴、越无俊民也。
现代文：再说，如果服饰奇异就会使人心思不正的话，那么最遵守礼法的邹国和鲁国就不会有行为怪僻的人了；如果习俗怪僻就会使民众变坏的话，那么吴、越地区就不会出现出类拔萃的人才了。
English: Moreover, if wearing strange clothes would make people think of something wrong, then there would be no eccentric people in the most etiquette-observant provinces of Shan and Lu; if eccentric customs would make people bad, then there would be no outstanding talents in the Wu and Yue regions.

古文：是以圣人利身之谓服，便事之谓教，进退之谓节，衣服之制，所以齐常民，非所以论贤者也。故圣与俗流，贤与变俱。
现代文：所以说圣人把便于穿着的叫衣服，把方便行事的就叫教化。行为举止上的一些礼节，服饰上的规定，只是用来让普通百姓取得一致，而不是用来衡量贤明与否的。
English: That is why the sages called clothing what is easy to wear, and called education what is easy to do. Some etiquette in behavior and dress code are only used to get the common people to agree, not to measure wisdom.

古文：谚曰： 以书为御者，不尽于马之情。
现代文：因此，圣明的人能适应任何习俗，有才能的人能紧随时势的变化。
English: Therefore, a saintly person can adapt to any custom, and a talented person can keep abreast of changes in the situation.

古文：以古制今者，不达于事之变。 故循法之功，不足以高世；法古之学，不足以制今。
现代文：有句谚语说： 按照书本来驾车的人，就不能充分发挥马的实际能力；采用古代的礼法来治理当今的国家，就不能符合当今社会的实际。 所以，遵循现成的制度建立的功业不可能超过当世，效法古人的作法，就不能够管理好现在的国家。
English: There is a proverb that says: "Those who drive according to the book cannot give full play to the actual ability of the horse; the use of ancient etiquette to govern today's country cannot conform to the reality of today's society. Therefore, the work of following the existing system cannot exceed the current world, and the practice of the ancients cannot manage the current country well.

古文：子其勿反也。 
现代文：您还是不要反对吧。 
English: Don't argue with me.

