古文：脉濡而弱，弱反在关，濡反在巅，微反在上，涩反在下。
现代文：关脉濡而弱，寸脉反见微，尺脉反见涩。微主阳气不足，涩主阴血亏虚。
English: The junction vein is wet and weak, the inch vein is weak, and the yard vein is astringent. The micro main yang is insufficient, and the astringent main yin blood is deficient.

古文：微则阳气不足，涩则无血。
现代文：阳气不足，就容易出现中风多汗，烦躁；阴血不足，就会出现形寒怕冷、四肢厥冷。
English: If the yang is deficient, it is easy to have a stroke, sweat a lot, and be irritable; if the yin is deficient, it will be cold, and the limbs will be cold.

古文：阳气反微，中风、汗出而反躁烦；涩则无血，厥而且寒。
现代文：阳虚不能用攻下法，误用攻下，就会导致心下痞结胀硬的变证。
English: Yang deficiency can not use the method of attack, misuse of attack, it will lead to the variation of the heart's lower jaw swelling.

古文：阳微不可下，下之则心下痞硬。
现代文：脐右有气筑筑然跳动，是肝气虚，不能用攻下法。
English: The right has the energy to build and jump, but the heart is weak and cannot be attacked.

古文：动气在右，不可下，下之则津液内竭，咽燥、鼻干、头眩、心悸也。
现代文：如果误用攻下，就会导致津液内竭，出现咽喉与鼻中干燥、头目昏眩、心慌等证。
English: If misused, it will lead to internal fluid depletion, dryness in the throat and nose, dizziness, palpitations and other symptoms.

古文：动气在左，不可下。
现代文：脐左有气筑筑然跳动，是肝气虚，不能攻下。
English: The dragonfly on the left is full of energy and is beating vigorously. It is weak in spirit and cannot be captured.

古文：下之则腹内拘急，食不下，动气更剧。虽有身热，卧则欲蜷。
现代文：误用攻下，就会形成腹中拘挛疼痛，饮食不进，气筑筑然跳动更加厉害，虽然身上发热，却要蜷曲而卧。
English: Misuse of the attack, it will form a pain in the abdomen, the diet does not advance, the gas builds up and the beating is more severe, although the body is hot, it should curl up and lie down.

古文：动气在上，不可下。
现代文：脐上有气筑筑然跳动，是心气虚，不能攻下。
English: The dragonfly is full of energy and keeps beating. It is weak and cannot be captured.

古文：下之则掌握热烦，身上浮冷，热汗自泄，欲得水自灌。
现代文：误用攻下，致阴虚内热，就会出现掌心发热、身上体表觉冷，却又发热汗出，想用冷水浇洗。
English: Misuse of the grip, resulting in yin deficiency internal heat, will cause the palm to heat up, the body surface to feel cold, but it will sweat hotly and want to be washed with cold water.

古文：动气在下，不可下。
现代文：脐下有气筑筑然跳动，是肾气虚，不能用攻下法。
English: The underarm is full of energy and beats vigorously. It is a deficiency of kidney energy and cannot be conquered by the method of attacking.

古文：下之则腹胀满，卒起头眩，食则下清谷，心下痞也。
现代文：误用攻下就会导致肾阳更虚，阴寒更甚，出现腰部胀满、骤然站起即感头晕、饮食不消化、泻下尽是不消化的食物、心下痞塞等证。
English: Misuse under attack will lead to kidney yang is more deficient, the cold is more severe, the waist is swollen, suddenly stand up and feel dizzy, the diet is not digested, the food is not digested under laxity, the heart is blocked and so on.

古文：咽中闭寒，不可下。
现代文：咽喉闭塞的病症，不能用攻下法。
English: Throat obstruction is a disease that cannot be cured.

古文：下之则上轻下重，水浆不下，卧则欲蜷，身急痛，下利日数十行。
现代文：如果误用攻下，就会导致汤水喝不进，蜷曲而卧，身体拘急疼痛，腹泻一天数十次。
English: If misused, it will lead to not being able to drink the soup, curling up and lying down, acute pain in the body, and diarrhea dozens of times a day.

古文：诸外实者，不可下。
现代文：凡是表有实邪的，不能攻下。
English: If there is real evil on the surface, it cannot be captured.

古文：下之则发微热，亡脉厥者，当脐握热。
现代文：如果误用攻下就会引起身发微热、脉搏摸不到、四肢厥冷、齐腹中部发热等变证。
English: If misused under attack, it will cause body heat, pulse can not be felt, cold limbs, fever in the middle of the abdomen, etc.

古文：诸虚者，不可下。
现代文：凡是虚证，不能用攻下法。
English: If the evidence is false, the method of capture cannot be used.

古文：下之则大渴，求水者易愈，恶水者剧。脉濡而弱，弱反在关，濡反在巅，弦反在上，微反在下。弦为阳运，微为阴寒。上实下虚，意欲得温。
现代文：如果误用攻下，就会导致口渴很甚。如果渴而想喝水的，为阳气未竭，其预后较好，容易治愈；如果渴又不愿喝水的，为阳气已竭，其病情严重。关部脉濡而弱，寸部脉反弦，尺部脉反微。弦是阳气扰动在上，微是阴寒盛于下，上虽实而下焦虚寒，所以病人喜欢温暖。
English: If misused, it will cause extreme thirst. If you are thirsty and want to drink water, because the yang qi is not exhausted, the prognosis is better and easy to cure; if you are thirsty and do not want to drink water, because the yang qi is exhausted, the condition is serious. The junction pulse is wet and weak, the inch pulse is against the string, and the yard pulse is against the micro. The string is the yang qi disturbance on the top, the micro is the cold on the bottom, although the top is solid and the bottom is anxious and cold, so the patient likes to be warm.

古文：微弦为虚，虚者不可下也。
现代文：由于正气本虚，所以不能攻下。
English: Due to the fact that the righteous spirit is inherently deceptive, it cannot be captured.

古文：微则为咳，咳则吐涎，下之则咳止，而利因不休，利不休，则胸中如虫啮，粥入则出，小便不利，两胁拘急，喘息为难，颈背相引，臂则不仁，极寒反汗出，身冷若冰，眼睛不慧，语言不休，而谷气多入，此为除中，口虽欲言，舌不得前。
现代文：脉微而咳嗽、吐痰，是阳气虚弱、水寒犯肺所致，不能攻下。如果误用攻下，咳嗽虽止，却引起腹泻不止，胸中疼痛而烦扰不安，有如虫咬，食粥就立即吐出，小便不通畅，两胁拘急疼痛，气喘呼吸困难，颈部及背部拘急牵引不舒，臂部麻木，失去知觉。如果虚寒甚极，则反见汗出，身冷如冰，眼睛看不清物体，言语喋喋不休，食欲旺盛，进食很多，这就是除中，此时病人虽然想说话，却舌体缩短、强硬，不能运转。
English: Coughing and spitting with a weak pulse are caused by weak yang qi and water-cold lungs, and cannot be controlled. If it is misused, although the cough has stopped, it will cause diarrhea, pain in the chest is annoying and uneasy, like an insect bite, porridge is immediately vomited, urination is not smooth, two coats are in acute pain, asthma is difficult to breathe, neck and back are in acute traction and uncomfortable, arm numbness, loss of consciousness. If it is extremely cold, it is sweating, body is cold as ice, eyes cannot see objects clearly, speech is chattering, appetite is strong, eating a lot, this is

古文：浮为阳虚，数为无血，浮为虚，数为热。
现代文：关脉濡弱，寸脉浮，尺脉数。浮为阳虚，数是阴血少。
English: Guan vein is weak, Cun vein is floating, and the number of ulnar veins is floating. Floating is Yang deficiency, and the number is Yin deficiency.

古文：浮为虚，自汗出而恶寒；数为痛，振寒而栗。
现代文：阳气虚弱不能固外，所以自汗出而怕冷；阴血少，不能濡润温养，所以身体疼痛、振战寒栗。
English: Yang qi is weak and cannot be fixed externally, so it is afraid of cold from sweating; yin blood is less, it cannot be moistened and warmed, so the body is painful and shivering.

古文：微弱在关，胸下为急，喘汗而不得呼吸，呼吸之中，痛在于胁，振寒相搏，形如疟状，医反下之，故令脉数、发热、狂走见鬼，心下为痞，小便淋沥，小腹甚硬，小便尿血也。
现代文：如果关脉微弱，为中气虚衰，所以胸中憋闷难受，喘息，出汗，呼吸困难，呼吸牵引胸胁疼痛，时发寒战，好象疟疾一样。如果误用攻下，就会导致脉数、发热、发狂奔走、如见鬼状、胃脘部痞塞、小便淋漓不畅、小腹部坚硬、尿血等变证。
English: If the junction is weak, the middle air is weak, so the chest is stuffy and uncomfortable, wheezing, sweating, shortness of breath, breathing traction chest pain, sometimes chills, like malaria. If misused, it will lead to changes in pulse rate, fever, frantic running, ghost-like, gastric and temporal obstruction, poor urination, hard small abdomen, and bloody urine.

古文：脉濡而紧，濡则卫气微，紧则荣中寒。
现代文：脉象濡而紧，濡是卫气虚弱，紧是营中受寒。
English: The pulse is wet and tight, wet is weak, and tight is cold in the camp.

古文：阳微卫中风，发热而恶寒；荣紧胃气冷，微呕心内烦。
现代文：阳气不足，卫中风邪，所以发热、怕冷；营受寒邪，胃中虚冷，所以微微呕吐、心烦不安。
English: Yang is deficient, Wei has a stroke, so he has fever and is afraid of cold; Ying is affected by cold, and his stomach is cold, so he vomits slightly and is upset.

古文：医为有大热，解肌而发汗，亡阳虚烦躁，心下苦痞坚。表里俱虚竭，卒起而头眩。客热在皮肤，怅怏不得眠。
现代文：证属阳虚兼表，治当扶阳解表。医生却认为肌表热甚，单用解肌发表药治疗，致汗出亡阳，所以烦躁不安，胃脘部痞胀硬结；表里俱虚，所以骤然站起即感头晕，自觉肌表发热，苦闷不能安眠。
English: The doctor, however, thought that the skin surface was very hot, and treated it with a single muscle relaxant, causing perspiration and death of the sun, so he was irritable and uneasy, and the stomach and palate were swollen and hard; the inside of the face was hollow, so he suddenly felt dizzy when he stood up, and the skin surface was feverish, and he could not sleep peacefully.

古文：不知胃气冷，紧寒在关元。技巧无所施，汲水灌其身。客热应时罢，栗栗而振寒。
现代文：医生仍不知道胃中虚寒、下焦寒甚，不循辨证论治规律，反而用冷水浇灌病人身上，体表之热虽然立即消退，却引起寒栗振战，须盖几床棉被。
English: Doctors still do not know that the stomach is cold, and the lower part is even chilly. Instead of following the law of differentiation and treatment, they pour cold water on the patient's body. Although the heat on the surface of the body immediately subsides, it causes chills and shivers, and several beds must be covered with quilts.

古文：重被而复之，汗出而冒巅。
现代文：结果又导致汗出、头目昏晕、全身筋肉跳动、身体振颤。
English: As a result, it also caused sweating, dizziness of the head, beating of the whole body muscles, and body tremors.

古文：体惕而又振，小便为微难。寒气因水发，清谷不容间。呕变反肠出，颠倒不得安。手足为微逆，身冷而内烦。
现代文：里寒因用冷水浇灌治疗而更甚，所以出现腹泻不止，腹泻完谷不化，脱肛，呕吐，起卧不安，手足微有厥冷，身上发冷而心中烦躁。
English: The cold in the abdomen is aggravated by the cold water treatment, so the diarrhea continues, the diarrhea does not go away, the anus is removed, vomiting, restlessness, the hands and feet are slightly cold, the body is cold and the heart is irritable.

古文：迟欲从后救，安可复追还。脉浮而大，浮为气实，大为血虚。
现代文：如果治疗稍迟，就无法挽救。脉象浮而大，浮是气实，大为血虚。
English: If the treatment is a little late, it can not be saved. The pulse is floating and large, the float is solid, and the blood is very weak.

古文：血虚为无阴，孤阳独下阴部者，小便当赤而难，胞中当虚，今反小便利，而大汗出，法应卫家当微，今反更实，津液四射，荣竭血尽，干烦而不得眠，血薄肉消，而成暴液。
现代文：血虚则阴亏，阴虚则阳亢。如果膀胱空虚，阳热乘虚下乘，小便应当黄赤短涩，现反见小便通畅而大汗出，照理阳气应虚衰，现阳气反而盛实，致使津液大量外泄，营血受到煎熬而虚竭，出现口干、心烦不能安睡、肉消形瘦等证。
English: If the bladder is empty, and the yang is hot, the urine should be yellow-red and short and astringent. On the contrary, the urine should be smooth and sweat profusely. According to the theory, the yang should be weak, but now the yang is strong, causing a large amount of fluid to leak out, the blood is exhausted by suffering, and dry mouth, trouble sleeping, and thinning of the flesh appear.

古文：医复以毒药攻其胃，此为重虚，客阳去有期，必下如污泥而死。
现代文：医生如再用峻猛药攻下，必使阴液更伤，阴竭而阳脱，势必出现大便泻下如污泥的变证，预后不良。
English: If the doctor uses harsh medicine again, it will make the phallus more injured, the phallus will be exhausted and the male organ will be detached, and there will be a change in the stool, such as sludge, and the prognosis is poor.

古文：脉数者，久数不止，止则邪结，正气不能复，正气却结于藏，故邪气浮之，与皮毛相得。脉数者，不可下，下之则必烦，利不止。
现代文：脉象数的，一般主热，表现为长时间跳的快而不歇止。如果数脉中而见歇止，是邪气结滞、正气郁结。脉数的，不能用攻下法治疗，如果误用攻下，就会引起心烦、下利不止的变证。
English: The main heat of the pulse count is generally fast for a long time and does not stop. If there is a pause in the pulse count, it is evil stagnation and positive stagnation. The pulse count cannot be treated with the capture method, and if the capture method is misused, it will cause irritation and deviation.

古文：脉浮大，应发汗，医反下之，此为大逆。
现代文：脉象浮大，为表实邪盛，当用发汗法治疗。
English: If the pulse is swollen, it is a sign of malignancy and should be treated with sweating.

古文：呕多，虽有阳明证，不可攻之。
现代文：阳虚阴盛的大便硬结，不能攻下。
English: The yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yin, yang, yang, yang, yang, yin, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yin, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang, yang,

古文：太阳病，外证未解，不可下，下之为逆。夫病阳多者热，下之则硬。
现代文：如果误用攻下，就会引起腹泻完谷不化、腹部胀满的变证。患伤寒病，头痛发热，微微出汗，证属阳明里热。
English: If misused, it will cause diarrhea, bloating, and abdominal distension. If you suffer from typhoid fever, headache, fever, and slight sweating, it is Yangmingli fever.

古文：无阳阴强，大便硬者，下之则必清谷腹满。伤寒发热，头痛，微汗。发汗，则不识人；熏之则喘，不得小便，心腹满；下之则短气，小便难，头痛，背强；加温针则衄。
现代文：如果误用发汗，则里热更甚，产生神昏不识人的变证；误用火熏法治疗，则火邪内迫，出现喘气、小便不通、胃脘及腹部胀闷等变证；误用攻下，则耗伤津液，出现短气、小便解出困难、头痛、项背强急不舒等变证；误用温针，则致热盛动血，出现鼻衄等变证。
English: If sweating is misused, then the heat in the abdomen will be even worse, resulting in dizziness and other symptoms; if the fire-smoking method is misused, then the fire will be forced, and symptoms such as shortness of breath, incontinence, stomach cramps and abdominal distension will occur; if the attack is misused, then fluid will be drained, and symptoms such as shortness of breath, difficulty in urinating, headache, and stiff neck will occur; if the warm needle is misused, then symptoms such as heat stroke and nosebleed will occur.

古文：伤寒，脉阴阳俱紧，恶寒发热，则脉欲厥。
现代文：患伤寒病，寸关尺三部脉俱紧，发热怕冷的，属太阳表实，如果少阴阳气内虚的，则将出现厥脉。
English: Suffering from typhoid fever, the three parts of the pulse are tight. If the fever is afraid of cold, it is the sun that shows the truth. If there is less yin and yang in the air, it will appear.

古文：厥者，脉初来大，渐渐小，更来渐渐大，是其候也。
现代文：所谓厥脉，是指脉象初来时大，渐渐变小，再来又渐渐变大。
English: The so-called jue vein refers to the fact that the vein of an elephant is large when it first arrives, gradually becomes smaller, and then gradually becomes larger again.

古文：如此者恶寒，甚者，翕翕汗出，喉中痛；热多者，目赤脉多，睛不慧，医复发之，咽中则伤；若复下之，则两目闭，寒多者便清谷，热多者便脓血；若熏之，则身发黄；若熨之，则咽燥。
现代文：出现这种症候的病人，如果怕冷严重的，就会见身体翕翕然汗出，咽喉中疼痛；如果发热重的，就会有目睛发红、脉络多、视物不清。此时，如果医生再用发汗法治疗，就会使咽中损伤、破溃；如果再行攻下，就会出现两目难睁，寒多的，就腹泻完谷不化，热多的，就泻下脓血便；如果误用火熏法治疗，就会出现肌肤发黄；如果用火熨法治疗，就会出现咽喉干燥。
English: Patients with this symptom, if the cold is severe, will see the body sweating profusely and pain in the throat; if the fever is severe, the eyes will be red, with many veins and blurred vision. At this time, if the doctor uses the sweating method again, the pharynx will be damaged and ruptured; if it is attacked again, it will be difficult to open the eyes, if it is cold, the diarrhea will not go away, if it is hot, the diarrhea will be bloody; if the fire fumigation method is misused, the skin will be yellow; if the fire ironing method is used, the throat will be dry.

古文：若小便利者，可救之；小便难者，为危殆。
现代文：这种种变证，如果小便通利的，尚可治疗；如果小便难出的，则属危候。
English: This kind of variation, if the urine is beneficial, can still be treated; if the urine is difficult to come out, it is a critical illness.

古文：伤寒发热，口中勃勃气出，头痛，目黄，衄不可制，贪水者必呕，恶水者厥。
现代文：外感病，发热，口中热气勃勃而出，头痛，眼睛发黄，衄血不止，如果想要喝水的，喝水后就一定呕吐，不愿喝水的，就会产生手足厥冷。
English: Exogenous disease, fever, hot breath coming out of the mouth, headache, yellow eyes, bloodshot, if you want to drink water, you must vomit after drinking water, if you don't want to drink water, you will have cold hands and feet.

古文：若下之，咽中生疮，假令手足温者，必下重便脓血。
现代文：假如误用攻下，就会引起咽中溃烂生疮，其手足温暖的，还会出现泻下脓血、里急后重的症状。
English: If misused, it will cause ulceration and sores in the pharynx. If the hands and feet are warm, there will also be symptoms of bloody diarrhea and sudden weight gain.

古文：头痛目黄者，若下之，则两目闭。
现代文：病人头痛目黄的，如果误用攻下，就会导致双目紧闭懒睁。
English: The patient has a headache with yellow eyes. If misused, it will cause the eyes to close tightly.

古文：贪水者，脉必厥，其声嘤，咽喉塞；若发汗，则战栗，阴阳俱虚。
现代文：病人想喝水的，如果误用攻下，就会引起脉厥、声音不清晰、咽喉闭塞疼痛；误用发汗，就会导致阴阳俱虚，出现畏寒战栗。
English: If the patient wants to drink water, if misused, it will cause palpitations, unclear voice, sore throat; if misused for sweating, it will lead to deficiency of yin and yang, and shivering.

古文：恶水者，若下之，则里冷不嗜食，大便完谷出；若发汗，则口中伤，舌上白胎，烦躁，脉数实，不大便，六七日后，必便血；若发汗，则小便自利也。
现代文：病人不愿喝水的，如果误用攻下，致阴寒内感，就会出现不思饮食、大便完谷不化；误用发汗，就会引起口中生疮、烦躁不安、舌生白苔等变证。如果脉象数实，不解大便六七天，是热瘀于内，以后可能出现便血；倘若再用发汗法治疗，则会引起小便自遗的变证。
English: The patient is reluctant to drink water, if misused, resulting in a feeling of coldness, there will be no thought of eating and drinking, and the stool will not dissolve; misuse of sweating will cause sores in the mouth, irritability, white tongue and other changes. If the pulse is true, the stool will not dissolve for six or seven days, it is hot inside, and later there may be blood in the stool; if it is treated with sweating, it will cause changes in the urine.

古文：下利，脉大者，虚也，以其强下之故也。
现代文：腹泻而脉象大的，属正气虚弱，这是强行攻下所造成的。
English: Diarrhoea with a large pulse is a sign of weakness, which is caused by being forcibly captured.

古文：设脉浮革，固尔肠鸣者，属当归四逆汤主之。
现代文：假如脉象浮革，并见肠鸣的，为血虚里寒，可用当归四逆汤治疗。
English: If the pulse is sluggish and the intestines are ringing, it is cold in the blood, and can be treated with Angelica root soup.

