古文：公在秦三月，闻秦将成，乃使郤乞告吕甥。
现代文：晋惠公被秦国关了三个月，听说秦国将要跟晋国讲和，就派郤乞回国告诉吕甥这个消息。
English: Jin Huigong was imprisoned by Qin for three months. When he heard that Qin was going to make peace with Jin, he sent a beggar to go back and tell his nephew the news.

古文：吕甥教之言，令国人于朝曰： 君使乞告二三子曰： 秦将归寡人，寡人不足以辱社稷，二三子其改置以代圉也。  
现代文：吕甥教郤乞一番话，让他对聚集在宫门前的国人说： 国君派我来告诉大家： 秦国将要放我回来，我辱没了国家不配当国君，你们改立一个国君用子圉来代替吧。  
English: Lu's nephew taught Zou a word of supplication, asking him to say to the countrymen gathered in front of the palace gate: The sovereign sent me to tell everyone: Qin is about to release me, I have disgraced the country and do not deserve to be the sovereign, you should replace a sovereign with Zou.

古文：且赏以悦众，众皆哭，焉作辕田。
现代文：又代表惠公赏赐土地让大家高兴，大家都感动得哭了，于是晋国就开阡佰把土地分配给国人。
English: On behalf of Huigong, he also rewarded and granted land, which made everyone happy. Everyone was moved to tears, so the State of Jin reclaimed the land and allocated it to its citizens.

古文：吕甥致众而告之曰： 吾君惭焉其亡之不恤，而群臣是忧，不亦惠乎？
现代文：吕甥召集群臣并告诉他们说： 我们国君因败亡在外而愧疚，他并不为自己忧愁，而是为群臣担忧，不也很慈惠吗？
English: Lu Nephew called his ministers together and told them: "Our sovereign is ashamed of his defeat abroad. He is not sad for himself, but worried about his ministers. Isn't that very kind?"

古文：君犹在外，若何？ 
现代文：国君还被关在国外，如何是好？ 
English: How is it good that the head of state is still locked up abroad?

古文：众曰： 何为而可？ 
现代文：大家说： 我们做些什么才可以让国君回来呢？ 
English: Everyone said, "What can we do to get the sovereign back?"

古文：吕甥曰： 以韩之病，兵甲尽矣。
现代文：吕甥说： 韩原会战失败，晋国的武器装备都完了。
English: Lu Nephew said, "The battle of Hanwon was a failure, and Jin's weapons and equipment were all gone.

古文：若征缮以辅孺子，以为君援，虽四邻之闻之也，丧君有君，群臣辑睦，兵甲益多，好我者劝，恶我者惧，庶有益乎？ 
现代文：如果我们增收赋税，修治武器，用来辅佐太子，并作为国君的后援，让四方邻国听到后，知道我们失去国君又有了新的国君，群臣和睦，武器更多，友好的国家就会勉励我们，敌对的国家就会害怕我们，是否会对国君回来有好处呢？ 
English: If we increase taxes, repair weapons, use them to support the crown prince, and act as a back-up for the sovereign, so that the neighbors in the four directions hear about it and know that we have lost the sovereign and have a new sovereign, that the ministers are in harmony, and that there are more weapons, the friendly countries will encourage us, and the hostile countries will be afraid of us, will it be good for the sovereign to return?

古文：众皆说，焉作州兵。
现代文：大家都很高兴，于是晋国就改革兵制建置州兵来扩充军力。
English: Everyone was happy, so Jin Province reformed the military system and established the National Guard to expand the military.

古文：吕甥逆君于秦，穆公讯之曰： 晋国和平？ 
现代文：吕甥去秦国迎接惠公，秦穆公问他说： 晋国的人和睦吗？ 
English: Lu's nephew went to Qin to meet Hui Gong. Qin Mu Gong asked him: Are the people of Jin harmonious?

古文：对曰： 不和。 
现代文：回答说： 不和睦。 
English: Lv Guo replied, "No reconciliation."

古文：公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：穆公问： 是什么原因？ 
English: Kan said, "Why is that?

古文：对曰： 其小人不念其君之罪，而悼其父兄子弟之死丧者，不惮征缮以立孺子，曰： 必报仇，吾宁事齐、楚，齐、楚又交辅之。 
现代文：回答说： 那些小人不考虑国君的罪过，只悼念在韩原之战中死去的父兄子弟，他们不怕征税修武来拥立子圉为新君，说： 一定要报秦之仇，我们宁可事奉齐国和楚国，让齐国和楚国共同援助我们。 
English: He replied, "Those villains do not consider the sins of the sovereign, but only mourn the fathers, brothers and children who died in the Battle of Han Yuan. They are not afraid to levy taxes and build up their armed forces to support the enthronement of Zixuan as the new sovereign. They say, "We must avenge the Qin Dynasty. We would rather serve Qi and Chu, and let Qi and Chu help us together."

古文：其君子思其君，且知其罪，曰： 必事秦，有死无他。 
现代文：那些有见识的君子虽思念自己的国君，但也知道他的罪过，说： 一定要事奉秦国，就是死也不能存二心。 
English: Although those discerning gentlemen missed their sovereign, they also knew his sins and said, "You must serve the Qin Kingdom. Even if you die, you can't have second thoughts."

古文：故不和。
现代文：所以彼此不和睦。
English: That's why they don't get along.

古文：比其和之而来，故久。 
现代文：等到大家统一认识后才来迎接国君，所以拖了很久。 
English: We waited until everyone had a unified understanding before welcoming the sovereign, so it took a long time.

古文：公曰： 而无来，吾固将归君，国谓君何？ 
现代文：穆公说： 你不来，我本来就要送回晋君。
English: Mu Gong said: If you don't come, I was going to send you back to Jin Jun.

古文：对曰： 小人曰不免，君子则否。 公曰： 何故？ 
现代文：晋国的人怎样看待晋君的前途？ 回答说： 小人认为国君不能免难，君子则不这么认为。 穆公问： 为什么？ 
English: How do the people of Jin look at Jinjun's future? Wu replied: The villain thinks that the king is inevitable, but the gentleman does not think so. Mu Gong asked: Why?

古文：对曰： 小人忌而不思，愿从其君而与报秦，是故云。
现代文：回答说： 小人只是怨恨秦国，不考虑自己国君的罪过，想跟从子圉一起报复秦国，所以这么认为。
English: He replied: The villain only resented the Qin State, did not consider the sins of his own sovereign, and wanted to take revenge on the Qin State together with his son, so he thought so.

古文：其君子则否，曰： 吾君之入也，君之惠也。能纳之，能执之，则能释之。
现代文：君子不是这样，他们说：我们国君当初能回国继承君位，是你的恩惠。你能接纳他，能俘虏他，也就能放了他。
English: This was not the case with the nobles. They said, "It was your grace that our sovereign was able to return to our country to inherit the throne in the first place. If you can accept him, if you can capture him, you can also release him."

古文：德莫厚焉，惠莫大焉。
现代文：没有比这再宽厚的仁德了，没有比这再大的恩惠了。
English: There is no greater benevolence, no greater grace.

古文：纳而不遂，废而不起，以德为怨，君其不然？  秦君曰： 然。 
现代文：让他回国而不成全他，或者废黜而不起用他，使原来的仁德变为仇恨，你大概不会这样做吧？ 秦穆公说： 是的。 
English: You probably wouldn't let him return to the country without fulfilling him, or depose him without using him, and turn the original benevolence into hatred, would you? Qin Mukong said: Yes.

古文：乃改馆晋君，馈七牢焉。
现代文：于是改变对晋君的待遇，安排他住在馆舍，又按诸侯之礼，用七牢来款待。
English: Therefore, they changed the treatment of Jinjun, arranging for him to live in a mansion, and according to the courtesy of the princes, using seven dungeons to entertain him.

