古文：孔靖，字季恭，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：孔靖字季恭，会稽郡山阴人。
English: Kong Jing (Kong Jing) (Kong Jing) (Kong Jing) (Kong Jing) (Kong Jing) (Kong Jing)

古文：名与高祖祖讳同，故称字。
现代文：名字和高祖的祖父名字相同，所以用字自称。
English: His name is the same as that of Gaozu's grandfather, so he calls himself by his first name.

古文：祖愉，晋车骑将军。父，散骑常侍。
现代文：他的祖父孔愉是晋朝的车骑将军，父亲孔躢官至散骑常侍。
English: His grandfather, Kong Yu, was a cavalry general in the Jin Dynasty, and his father, Kong Yiguan, was a cavalryman.

古文：季恭始察郡孝廉，功曹史，著作佐郎，太子舍人，镇军司马，司徒左西掾。
现代文：孔靖最初被选为本郡的孝廉、功曹史、著作佐郎、太子舍人、镇军司马、司徒左西掾。
English: Kong Jing was initially selected as the county's filial piety, meritorious service, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution, great contribution.

古文：未拜，遭母忧。
现代文：还未赴任，便遇上母亲去世。
English: His mother died before he took office.

古文：隆安五年，于丧中被起建威将军、山阴令，不就。
现代文：隆安五年。孔靖在守孝期间便被起用为建威将军、山阴令。
English: In the 5th year of the Longan era, Kong Jing was appointed as General Jian Wei and Mountain Yin during the period of filial piety.

古文：高祖东征孙恩，屡至会稽，季恭曲意礼接，赡给甚厚。
现代文：他婉言拒绝上任。高祖东征孙恩，几次到会稽，孔靖热情接待，给高祖很多礼物。
English: He politely refused to take up the post. Gao Zu went to the East to visit Sun En, went to the auditorium several times, was warmly received by Kong Jing, and gave Gao Zu many gifts.

古文：高祖后讨孙恩，时桓玄篡形已著，欲于山阴建义讨之。季恭以为山阴去京邑路远，且玄未居极位，不如待其篡逆事彰，衅成恶稔，徐于京口图之，不忧不克。
现代文：高祖后来讨伐孙恩，当时桓玄篡夺帝位的意图渐渐显露，高祖想在山阴起义讨伐，孔靖认为山阴离都城太远，而且桓玄还未称帝，不如等待他篡夺形势明显，罪恶昭彰的时候慢慢在京口图谋他，那样不怕不成功。
English: Gaozhu later fought against Sun En. At that time, Kuan Xuan's intention to usurp the imperial throne was gradually revealed. Gaozhu wanted to fight in the Shanyin Uprising. Kong Jing believed that Shanyin was too far from the capital, and Kuan Xuan had not yet proclaimed himself emperor. It would be better to wait for him to usurp the situation was obvious, and slowly plot against him in Beijing when the evil was obvious. That way, there was no fear of failure.

古文：高祖亦谓为然。
现代文：高祖也认为这计策很好。
English: Gaozu also thought this was a good idea.

古文：虞啸父为征东将军、会稽内史，季恭初求为府司马，不得。
现代文：虞啸父当东征将军、会稽内史，孔靖起初求请当他的府中司马，但未实现。
English: His father was a general of the Eastern Expedition and the auditor of the internal history of the association. At first, Kong Jing asked him to be the secretary of his office, but it did not happen.

古文：及帝定桓玄，以季恭为内史，使赍封板拜授，正与季恭相值，季恭便回舟夜还。
现代文：到高祖平定桓玄，用孔靖当会稽内史，叫人拿着封板任命孔靖，在路上和孔靖相遇，孔靖便转过船来回到郡上。
English: On the way to Gaozhu to subdue Huan Xuan, he used Kong Jing to check the internal history of the association, and asked someone to hold the seal to appoint Kong Jing. He met Kong Jing on the road, and Kong Jing turned the ship around and returned to the county.

古文：至即叩扉告啸父，并令扫拂别斋，即便入郡。
现代文：回来后便敲虞啸父的门告诉他此事，并叫虞啸父扫其他的房子，孔靖便上任了。
English: After returning, he knocked on Father Yu's door to tell him about the matter, and asked Father Yu to sweep the other houses. Kong Jing then took office.

古文：啸父本为桓玄所授，闻玄败，震惧，开门请罪。
现代文：虞啸父本来是桓玄任命的，听说桓玄失败，又惊异又恐惧，便登门向孔靖请罪。
English: Gu Xiao's father was originally appointed by Huan Xuan. When he heard that Huan Xuan had failed, he was both surprised and afraid, so he went to Kong Jing's door to plead guilty.

古文：季恭慰勉，使且安所住，明旦乃移。
现代文：孔靖对他反复安慰，叫他安心过日子，第二天才到会稽府中正式上任。
English: Kong Jing repeatedly consoled him and told him to live his life with peace of mind. It was only the next day that he officially took office at the Central Auditing Office.

古文：季恭到任，务存治实，敕止浮华，翦罚游惰，由是寇盗衰止，境内肃清。
现代文：孔靖上任后，崇尚实际，禁止浮华，惩罚游荡懒惰行为，于是盗贼消失，境内安宁。
English: After Kong Jing took office, he advocated practicality, banned vanity, and punished loitering and laziness. As a result, the thieves disappeared, and there was peace in the territory.

古文：征为右卫将军，加给事中，不拜。
现代文：不久孔靖被征用为右卫将军，加官给事中，他没有拜任。
English: Soon after, Kong Jing was requisitioned as the general of the Right Division, but he did not take up the post when he was promoted.

古文：寻除侍中，领本国中正，徙琅邪王大司马司马。
现代文：不久又任他为侍中，兼领本郡的中正职务，再转任琅王牙王的大司马府司马。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a chamberlain, concurrently holding the county's vice-premier position, and then transferred to the post of grand steward of the King of the Horse, King of the Horse.

古文：寻出为吴兴太守，加冠军。
现代文：不久出外当吴兴太守，加冠军将军名号。
English: Soon he went abroad as Wu Xing Taishu, adding the title of champion general.

古文：先是，吴兴频丧太守，云项羽神为卞山王，居郡听事，二千石至，常避之；季恭居听事，竟无害也。
现代文：先前吴兴连死几位太守，传说项羽神灵当了卞山王，在郡治中管事，二千石太守上任，常常避开神灵，孔靖在府中处理事务，结果也没有发生什么。
English: Previously, Wu Xinglian killed several daimyos, and legend has it that Xiang Yu's spirit became the king of Shaoshan and was in charge of the county government. The 2,000-koku daimyos took office and often avoided the spirit. Kong Jing handled affairs in the government, and nothing happened as a result.

古文：迁尚书右仆射，固让。
现代文：再迁任尚书右仆射，他坚决辞让。
English: He was then transferred to the position of Shang Shu's right-hand man, and he resolutely resigned.

古文：义熙八年，复督五郡诸军、征虏、会稽内史。
现代文：义熙八年，孔靖再当督五郡诸军事、征虏将军、会稽内史。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Kong Jing became the governor of the five counties of the military, conscripted generals, and examined the internal history of the association.

古文：修饰学校，督课诵习。
现代文：这次他修治学校，督促学生的学习。
English: This time he visited a school and urged the students to study.

古文：十年，复为尚书右仆射，加散骑常侍，又让不拜。
现代文：十年，他再当尚书右仆射，加官散骑常侍，孔靖又一次辞让不拜任。
English: Ten years later, he was once again Shang Shu's right-hand man, an official horseback riding attendant, and Kong Jing once again resigned from his post.

古文：顷之，除领军将军，加散骑常侍，本州大中正。
现代文：不久，他被任命为领军将军，加官散骑常侍，本州大中正。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a leading general, an officer of the cavalry, and a junior high school principal in Honshu University.

古文：十二年，致仕，拜金紫光禄大夫，常侍如故。
现代文：十二年，孔靖退休，拜为金紫光禄大夫，常侍照旧。
English: In the twelfth year, Kong Jing retired, and became the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the regular attendant as before.

古文：是岁，高祖北伐，季恭求从，以为太尉军咨祭酒、后将军。
现代文：这年，高祖北伐，孔靖请求一同前往。高祖用他为太尉军谘祭酒、后将军。
English: In this year, Gaozu went to the Northern Expedition, and Kong Jing asked him to go with him. Gaozu used him as the Taifeng Army's sacrificial wine and the general's wife.

古文：从平关、洛。
现代文：又随同平定关中、洛阳。
English: Followed by Pingding Guanzhong, Luoyang.

古文：高祖为相国，又随府迁。
现代文：高祖当相国，孔靖又随本府迁官。
English: Gao Zu served as consort of the emperor, and Kong Jing also moved with the government.

古文：宋台初建，令书以为尚书令，加散骑常侍，又让不受，乃拜侍中、特进、左光禄大夫。
现代文：宋国府台刚建立，任命他为尚书令，加官散骑常侍，孔靖又辞让不接受，于是拜任为侍中、特进、左光禄大夫。
English: Song Guofu just established Taiwan, appointed him as Shang Shuling (尚書令), and promoted him to the position of Sanzhiyan (散騎常侍), but Kong Jing refused to accept his resignation, so he was appointed to the position of Jizhong (侍中), Tejin (特进) and Sakoroku Dafu (左光禄大夫).

古文：辞事东归，高祖饯之戏马台，百僚咸赋诗以述其美。
现代文：孔靖辞官回到东方。高祖在戏马台为他饯行，朝中百官都为他赋诗记叙这一盛事。
English: Kong Jingji returned to the East. Gao Zu walked for him at the circus, and all the officials of the dynasty wrote poems for him to recount this great event.

古文：及受命，加开府仪同三司，辞让累年，终以不受。
现代文：到高祖称帝时，又加给他开府仪同三司，他辞让一年多最终没有接受。
English: When Gaozhu was proclaimed emperor, he was also given the title of Kaifu and the three offices. He did not accept his resignation for more than a year.

古文：沈昙庆，吴兴武康人，侍中怀文从父兄也。
现代文：永初三年孔靖逝世，享年七十六岁。被追赠为侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。沈昙庆，吴兴武康人，是侍中沈怀文的堂兄。
English: Kong Jing died at the age of 76, in the third year of the Yongchu era. He was posthumously awarded the titles of Junior Chamberlain, Doctor of the Left Hand, and Third Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency. Shen Yuqing, Wu Xingwu Kangren, was the cousin of Junior Chamberlain Shen Huaiwen.

古文：父发，员外散骑侍郎，早卒；吴兴太守王韶之为之诔焉。
现代文：父亲沈发，官至员外散骑侍郎，早死，吴兴太守王韶之为他撰写祭文。
English: His father, Shen Fa, was an official who rode horseback from time to time, and he died young. Wu Xing, the de facto ruler of the state, wrote the ritual for him.

古文：昙庆初辟主簿，州从事，西曹主簿，长沙王义欣后军镇军主簿。
现代文：沈昙庆最初被征用为主簿、本州从事、西曹主簿、长沙王刘义欣后军镇军主簿。
English: Shen Yuqing was initially requisitioned as the main book, engaged in Honshu, West Cao main book, Changsha King Liu Yixin's rear army town army main book.

古文：遭母忧，哀毁致称，本县令诸葛阐之公解言上。
现代文：遇到母亲去世，他悲痛万分，被人们所称述。县令诸葛阐之劝他节哀。
English: When his mother died, he was so grief-stricken that he was said to have been advised by Zhuge, the county magistrate, to go on a mourning period.

古文：服释，复为主簿。
现代文：沈昙庆守孝期满，再当主簿。
English: At the end of his term of office, Shen Yuqing became the head of the family again.

古文：义欣又请为镇军记室参军。
现代文：刘义欣又请他当镇军记室参军。
English: Liu Yixin also invited him to join the army at the town's military records office.

古文：出为余杭令，迁司徒主簿，江夏王义恭太尉录事参军，尚书右丞。
现代文：又出外当余杭县令，迁任司徒主簿、江夏王刘义恭的太尉录事参军、尚书右丞。
English: He also went abroad to serve as the governor of Yuhang County, and was transferred to the position of the chief bookkeeper of the Sittu, the captain of the King of Jiangxia Liu Yigong to join the army, and the right-hand man of the Shang Shu.

古文：时岁有水旱，昙庆议立常平仓以救民急，太祖纳其言，而事不行。
现代文：当时每年都发生水灾和旱灾。昙庆打算设立常平仓库解救人民的疾苦，太祖采纳他的建议，但这事最终没有施行。
English: At that time, floods and droughts occurred every year. Yingqing planned to set up a warehouse in Changping to relieve the suffering of the people. The great-grandfather accepted his suggestion, but it was ultimately not implemented.

古文：领本邑中正，少府，扬州治中从事史，始兴王浚卫军长史。元凶弑立，世祖入讨，劭遣昙庆还东募人，安东将军随王诞收付永兴县狱，久之，被原。
现代文：他又兼领本郡中正职务、少府、扬州治中从事史、始兴王刘浚卫军长史，元凶刘邵杀文帝自立，世祖讨伐刘邵，刘邵派沈昙庆到东方招募兵士，安东将军随王刘诞把他逮捕到永兴县监狱，不久便被原谅释放。
English: He also concurrently held the county's vice-governor position, the vice-governor of the county, the vice-governor of Yangzhou, the vice-governor of Yangzhou, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-governor of Shixing, the vice-

古文：世祖践阼，除东海王祎抚军长史，入为尚书吏部郎，江夏王义恭大司马长史，南东海太守，左卫将军。
现代文：世祖即位，任命沈昙庆为东海王刘礻韦的抚军长史，又进京当尚书吏部郎、江夏王刘义恭的大司马府长史、南东海太守、左卫将军。
English: When the founder of the dynasty ascended the throne, he appointed Shen Yuqing as the commander-in-chief of the East Sea King Liu Bei, and he also entered Beijing as the secretary-general of the Shang Dynasty, the governor-in-chief of the Ma Prefecture of the Jiangxia King Liu Yigong, the governor-general of the South East Sea, and the general of the Left Division.

古文：大明元年，督徐兗二州及梁郡诸军事、辅国将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：大明元年，沈昙庆当督徐、兖二州和梁郡诸军事、辅国将军、徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, Shen Rongqing, the governor of Xu, Shan Erzhou and Liang County, led the military, the general of the auxiliary state, and the history of Xuzhou.

古文：时殿中员外将军裴景仁助戍彭城，本伧人，多悉戎荒事。
现代文：当时殿中员外将军裴景仁帮助镇守彭城，本来是北方来的流民，很熟悉北方事务。
English: At that time, General Pei Jingren, a member of the palace staff, helped guard Pengcheng. He was originally an exile from the north and was very familiar with northern affairs.

古文：昙庆使撰《秦记》十卷，叙苻氏僭伪本末，其书传于世。
现代文：沈昙庆叫他撰述《秦记》十卷，叙述苻氏兴亡本末故事。这书在社会上流传。
English: Shen Yuqing asked him to write ten volumes of "Qin Ji" and narrate the ultimate story of the rise and fall of the Qin clan. This book has been passed down in society.

古文：明年，复征为左卫将军，加给事中，领本州大中正。
现代文：第二年沈昙庆再被征调为左卫将军，加官给事中，兼领本州大中正。
English: In the second year, Shen Yuqing was again conscripted and transferred to the General of the Left Division, and was promoted to the middle-ranking officer, concurrently leading the middle-ranking officer of Honshu University.

古文：三年，迁祠部尚书。
现代文：三年他迁任祠部尚书。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the ancestral hall of Shangshu.

古文：其年，卒，时年五十七。
现代文：当年去世，时年五十七岁。
English: He died that year, aged fifty-seven.

古文：追赠本官。
现代文：被追赠本来官职。
English: He was posthumously awarded his official position.

古文：昙庆谨实清正，所莅有称绩。
现代文：沈昙庆谨慎、踏实、清正廉洁，在任上都有好声名。
English: Shen Yuqing is prudent, down-to-earth, honest and incorruptible, and has a good reputation in his post.

古文：常谓子弟曰： 吾处世无才能，政图作大老子耳。 
现代文：他常对儿子弟弟们说： 我处世也没什么才能，只管做大老儿子罢了。 
English: He often said to his sons and brothers: I have no talent in life, I just want to be the eldest son.

古文：世以长者称之。
现代文：世人认为他是一个胸怀宽厚的人。
English: Soon after, he was arrested together with Liu Yigong, the Dazaifu of Jiangxia, and all six of his sons were killed.

