古文：一曰：季夏之月，日在柳，昏心中，旦奎中。
现代文：季夏季夏六月，太阳的位置在柳宿。黄昏时刻，心宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，奎宿出现在南方中天。
English: In the season of summer, summer and June, the position of the sun is in the willow. At dusk, the heart appears in the southern sky, and at dawn, the Kui appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日丙丁，其帝炎帝，其神祝融，其虫羽，其音徵，律中林钟。
现代文：季夏于天干属丙丁，它的主宰之帝是炎帝，佐帝之神是祝融，应时的动物是凤鸟之类的羽族，相配的声音是徵音，音律与林钟相应。
English: Qixia in Tiangan belongs to Pan Ding, its ruling emperor is Yan Di, the god of Zi Di is Zhu Rong, the corresponding animal is a feathered animal such as a phoenix, the corresponding sound is a call, and the rhythm corresponds to the forest bell.

古文：其数七，其味苦，其臭焦，其祀灶，祭先肺。
现代文：这个月的数字是七，味道是苦昧，气昧是焦气，要举行的条祀是灶祭，祭祀时祭品以肺脏为尊。
English: The number of this month is seven, the taste is bitterness, bitterness is anxiety, the ritual to be held is the stove festival, and the sacrificial offering is the lung.

古文：凉风始至，蟋蟀居宇，鹰乃学习，腐草化为幵。
现代文：这个月，凉风开始来到，蟋蟀住在屋檐下，鹰于是学习飞翔搏击，腐草化作萤火虫。
English: This month, the cool breeze began to arrive, the crickets lived under the eaves, the eagle learned to fly and fight, and the weeds turned into fireflies.

古文：天子居明堂右个，乘朱辂，驾赤骝，载赤旗，衣朱衣，服赤玉，食菽与鸡，其器高以觕。
现代文：天子住在南向明堂的右侧室，乘坐朱红色的车子，车前驾着赤红色的马，车上插着赤色的绘有龙纹的旗帜；天子穿着赤色的衣服，佩戴着赤色的饰玉，吃的食物是豆类和鸡，用的器物高而且大。
English: Tianzi lived in the right side room of Nanxiangming Hall. He rode in a vermilion-colored carriage with a crimson-colored horse in the front, and a red dragon-patterned flag was attached to the carriage. Tianzi wore red clothes and red ornaments, and ate beans and chicken. The utensils he used were tall and large.

古文：是月也，令渔师伐蛟取鼍，升龟取鼋。
现代文：这个月，命令管渔业的官吏，斩蛟取鼍，献龟取鼋。
English: This month, officials in charge of fisheries were ordered to chop off cormorants to get cormorants, and to sacrifice turtles to get turtles.

古文：乃命虞人入材苇。
现代文：命令掌管池泽的官吏收纳用来制作器物的芦苇。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of the pond to collect the reeds used to make the utensils.

古文：是月也，令四监大夫合百县之秩刍，以养牺牲。
现代文：这个月，命争监管四郡的县大夫聚集各县按常规交纳的刍草，以此来饲养供祭祀用的牲畜。
English: This month, the prefectural doctors of four prefectures, who are fighting for their lives, gathered the ephedra that each prefecture normally pays to raise livestock for sacrificial purposes.

古文：令民无不咸出其力，以供皇天上帝、名山大川、四方之神，以祀宗庙社稷之灵，为民祈福。
现代文：命令百姓都尽力收割聚集，以供给祭祀皇天上帝，名山大川、四方神祗，宗庙社稷之用，为百姓祈求幸福。
English: He ordered the people to harvest and gather as much as possible to provide offerings for the worship of the Emperor God, famous mountains and rivers, the gods of the four directions, ancestral temples and shrines, and to pray for the happiness of the people.

古文：是月也，命妇官染采，黼黻文章，必以法故，无或差忒，黄黑苍赤，莫不质良，勿敢伪诈，以给郊庙祭祀之服，以为旗章，以别贵贱等级之度。
现代文：这个月，命令掌管布帛的女官负责印染彩色，各种图案的颜色搭配，一定要按照法规和习惯，不要有一点差错。黑黄苍赤各种颜色择样都鲜艳良好，不许有一点欺诈。用这些布帛供制作祭天祭祖时所穿的礼服之用，并用它们制作旌旗标志，以此来区分贵贱等级。
English: This month, the female official in charge of cloth patterns was ordered to be responsible for printing and dyeing colors, and the color matching of various patterns must be in accordance with laws and customs, and there must not be any error. Black, yellow, and red colors are all bright and good, and there must not be any fraud. Use these cloth patterns to make dresses worn during the Festival of the Ancestors, and use them to make flags to distinguish the nobility.

古文：是月也，树木方盛，乃命虞人入山行木，无或斩伐；不可以兴土功，不可以合诸侯，不可以起兵动众，无举大事，以摇荡於气。
现代文：这个月，树木生长正茂盛，于是命令掌管山林的官吏到山里去巡视树木，不许人们砍伐。这个月，不可以兴工建筑，不可以会合诸侯，不可以兴师动众，不要有大的举动来摇动土气。
English: This month, the trees are growing luxuriantly, so the officials in charge of the mountains and forests are ordered to go to the mountains to inspect the trees and not allow people to cut them down. This month, it is not possible to start construction, it is not possible to meet the princes, it is not possible to motivate the masses, and there should be no big moves to shake the local spirit.

古文：无发令而干时，以妨神农之事。
现代文：不要发布侵扰农时的命令而损害农耕之事。
English: Don't damage farming by issuing orders that interfere with farming hours.

古文：水潦盛昌，命神农将巡功，举大事则有天殃。
现代文：达个月雨水正多，命令农官巡视田亩修治的情况。
English: There has been a lot of rain in the past month, and the agricultural officials have been ordered to inspect the situation of field management.

古文：是月也，土润溽暑，大雨时行，烧薙行水，利以杀草，如以热汤，可以粪田畴，可以美土疆。
现代文：有违背农时的大的举动，就会遭到天灾。这个月，土地湿润，天气潮热，大雨常常降落，烧掉割下晒干的野草，灌上雨水，太阳一晒，就像用开水煮一样，这样有利于杀死野草。而且可以用它们肥田，改良土壤。
English: This month, the land is moist, the weather is hot, heavy rain often falls, burning the cut and sun-dried weeds, pouring rainwater, and once the sun is exposed, it is like boiling with boiling water, which is conducive to killing weeds. And they can be used to fertilize fields and improve the soil.

古文：行之是令，是月甘雨三至，三旬二日。
现代文：实行这些政令，这个月就会下及时雨，除去晦朔，三月中可以有两天降雨。
English: If these decrees are implemented, there will be timely rain this month, and there may be two days of rain in mid-March.

古文：季夏行春令，则谷实解落，国多风咳，人乃迁徙；行秋令，则丘隰水潦，禾稼不熟，乃多女灾，行冬令，则寒气不时，鹰隼早鸷，四鄙入保。
现代文：夏季实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，谷物的籽实就会散落，百姓就会伤风咳嗽，迁移搬家。如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，高地洼地都会出现太水，庄稼就不能成熟，妇女也多有不能生育之灾。如果实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，寒冷之气就会不合时地来到，鹰隼等猛禽就会过早地去击杀飞鸟，四方边邑的百姓就会为躲避敌寇而逃入城堡。
English: If the decree to be implemented in spring is implemented in summer, the grain seeds will be scattered, the people will have colds and coughs, and they will move. If the decree to be implemented in autumn is implemented, the highlands and lowlands will be flooded, the crops will not be able to mature, and many women will not be able to bear children. If the decree to be implemented in winter is implemented, the cold air will come at an inopportune time, birds of prey such as eagles will prematurely kill birds, and the people of the four corners will flee into the castle to avoid the enemy.

古文：中央土，其日戊己，其帝黄帝，其神后土，其虫倮，其音宫，律中黄钟之宫，其数五，其味甘，其臭香，其祀中霤，祭先心，天子居太庙太室，乘大辂，驾黄骝，载黄旗，衣黄衣，服黄玉，食稷与牛，其器圜以揜。
现代文：中央于五行属土，于天干属戊己，它的主宰之帝是黄帝，佐帝之神是后土，应时的动物是麒麟之类的裸族，相配的声音是宫音，音律与黄钟之宫相应。它的数字是五，味道是甜味，气味是香气，要举行的祭祀是中霤之祀，祭祀时祭品以心脏为尊。天子住在中央明堂的正室，乘坐木质大车，车前驾着黄色的马，车上插着黄色的绘有龙纹的旗帜，天子穿着黄色的衣服，佩戴着黄色的佩玉，吃的食物是稷和牛，用的器物中间宽大而口敛缩。
English: In the center, the five elements belong to the earth, and the heavenly stem belongs to Wuji. Its ruling emperor is Huangdi, and the god of Zedi is Houchi. The animal of the time is a naked tribe such as Kirin. The matching sound is the palace sound, and the rhythm corresponds to the palace of the yellow bell. Its number is five, the taste is sweetness, the smell is aroma, and the sacrifice to be held is the sacrifice of Zhongyi, and the sacrificial offering is the heart. Tianzi lives in the main room of the Central Ming Hall, riding a wooden cart, driving a yellow horse in front of the car, with a yellow flag with a dragon pattern on it

古文：二曰：黄钟生林钟，林钟生太蔟，太蔟生南吕，南吕生姑洗，姑洗生应钟，应钟生蕤宾，蕤宾生大吕，大吕生夷则，夷则生夹钟，夹钟生无射，无射生仲吕。
现代文：音律由黄钟律生出林钟律，由林钟律生出太蔟律，由太蔟律生出南吕律，由南吕律生出姑洗律，由姑洗律生出应钟律，由应钟律生出蕤宾律，由蕤宾律生出大吕律，由大吕律生出夷则律，由夷则律生出夹钟律，由夹钟律生出无射律，由无射律生出仲吕律。
English: From the Yellow Bell Rhythms, the Lin Bell Rhythms were born, from the Lin Bell Rhythms were born the Taisho Rhythms, from the Taisho Rhythms were born the Nanlu Rhythms, from the Nanlu Rhythms were born the Guchu Rhythms, from the Guchu Rhythms were born the Ying Bell Rhythms, from the Ying Bell Rhythms were born the Xing Bin Rhythms, from the Xing Bin Rhythms were born the DaLu Rhythms, from the DaLu Rhythms were born the Yi Zi Rhythms, from the Yi Zi Rhythms were born

古文：三分所生，益之一分以上生。
现代文：把作为基准的音律度数分为三等分，再增加其中的一分，由此上生出新律。
English: The basic cadence is divided into three equal parts, and then one of the parts is added to create a new rhythm.

古文：三分所生，去其一分以下生。
现代文：把作为基准的音律度数分为三等分，再减去其中的一分，由此下生出新律。
English: The basic cadence is divided into three equal parts, and one of them is subtracted, from which a new cadence is created.

古文：黄钟、大吕、太蔟、夹钟、姑洗、仲吕、蕤宾为上，林钟、夷则、南吕、无射、应钟为下。
现代文：黄钟、大吕、太蔟、夹钟、蛄洗、仲吕，蕤宾等乐律是由上生而得，林钟，夷则，南吕、无射，应钟等乐律是由下生而得。
English: The musical rhythms of the Yellow Bell, the Great Lu, the Great Gong, the Clamped Bell, the Purification Bell, the Middle Lu, and the Upright and Reclining Bell are derived from the previous life, while the musical rhythms of the Lin Bell, the Yizi Bell, the South Lu, the No Shot Bell, and the Ying Bell are derived from the next life.

古文：大圣至理之世，天地之气，合而生风。
现代文：最圣明最完美的时代，天气与地气会合而产生了风。
English: In the holiest and most perfect of times, the weather and the atmosphere came together to create the wind.

古文：日至则月钟其风，以生十二律。
现代文：太阳每运行到一定度次，月亮就聚集该月之风，由此产生了十二乐律。
English: Every time the sun moves to a certain degree, the moon gathers the wind of that month, resulting in twelve melodies.

古文：仲冬日短至，则生黄钟。
现代文：仲冬，白天最短的冬至那天，产生出黄钟。
English: In the middle of winter, on the day of the winter solstice, the shortest day, a yellow bell is produced.

古文：季冬生大吕。
现代文：季冬产生出七吕。
English: In the winter season, seven brooms are produced.

古文：孟春生太蔟。
现代文：孟春产生出太蔟。
English: Mengchun produces too much cadmium.

古文：仲春生夹钟。
现代文：仲春产生出夹钟。
English: Zhongchun produces a clamped bell.

古文：季春生姑洗。
现代文：季春产生出姑洗。
English: Kiharu gives rise to gushu.

古文：孟夏生仲吕。
现代文：孟夏产生出仲弓。
English: Meng Xia produced the middle bow.

古文：仲夏日长至，则生蕤宾。
现代文：仲夏，白天最长的夏至那天，产生出蕤宾。
English: Midsummer, the day of the summer solstice with the longest daylight, brings out guests.

古文：季夏生林钟。孟秋生夷则。
现代文：季夏产生出林钟，孟秋产生出夷则。
English: Qixia produces Shulin Bell, and Mengqiu produces Shiyi Zheng.

古文：仲秋生南吕。
现代文：仲秋产生如南吕。
English: Mid-autumn brings forth the Southern Lynx.

古文：季秋生无射。
现代文：季秋产生出无射。
English: There are no shoots in the spring and autumn.

古文：孟冬生应钟。
现代文：孟冬产生出应钟。
English: Meng Dong produced a response bell.

古文：天地之风气正，则十二律定矣。
现代文：天气、地气会合产生的风纯正，十二律就确定了。
English: The wind generated by the combination of the weather and the geomagnetic field is pure, and the twelve laws are established.

古文：黄钟之月，土事无作，慎无发盖，以固天闭地，阳气且泄。
现代文：律应黄钟的月份，动土建筑的事不要进行，千万不可揭开盖藏之物，以便使天地封闭，否则，阳气将要泄露出去。
English: In the month of the yellow bell, do not carry out earth-moving construction, and do not uncover hidden things in order to close heaven and earth. Otherwise, yang qi will leak out.

古文：大吕之月，数将几终，岁且更起，专而农民，无有所使。
现代文：律应大吕的月份，一年之数将近终结，新的一年即将重新开始，要让你们的农民心志专一，不可有其它劳役。
English: It is the month of the Great Lyu, the end of the year is approaching, and the new year is about to begin again. Your farmers should be single-minded, and there should be no other labor service.

古文：太蔟之月，阳气始生，草木繁动，令农发土，无或失时。
现代文：律应太蔟的月份，阳气开始生发，草木萌动，命令农民破土耕种，不要错过农时。
English: In the month of the lunar calendar, the yang begins to grow, the plants sprout, and the farmers are ordered to break the soil and cultivate. Don't miss the farming time.

古文：夹钟之月，宽裕和平，行德去刑，无或作事，以害群生。
现代文：律应夹钟的月份，要宽容和顺，施仁德，除刑罚，不可兴师动众，伤害众生。
English: In the month when the clock is ticking, it is necessary to be tolerant and obedient, to practice benevolence, and in addition to punishment, not to incite the masses and harm sentient beings.

古文：姑洗之月，达道通路，沟渎修利，申之此令，嘉气趣至。
现代文：律应姑洗的月份，要使道路通畅，疏浚沟渠，申明此令，美善之气就会迅速到来。
English: In the month of Lixing, it is necessary to make the roads smooth, dredge the ditches, and affirm this order, and the virtuous spirit will come quickly.

古文：仲吕之月，无聚大众，巡劝农事，草木方长，无携民心。
现代文：律应仲吕的月份，不要征集广大民众，要巡视农事，劝勉农民，草术正在生长，不可使人民对农事三心二意。
English: In the month of Zhu Yingzhonglu, do not recruit the broad masses of the people, we must inspect agricultural affairs and encourage farmers. Grass is growing, we must not make the people hesitant about agricultural affairs.

古文：蕤宾之月，阳气在上，安壮养佼，本朝不静，草木早槁。
现代文：律应蕤宾的月份，阳气在上，要畜养丁壮，朝政如果不安，草木就会早枯。
English: According to the lunar calendar, the yang is in the ascendant, and it is necessary to raise strong animals. If the government is uneasy, the plants will wither early.

古文：林钟之月，草木盛满，阴将始刑，无发大事，以将阳气。
现代文：律应林钟的月份，草木丰盛，阴气将要开始刑杀万物，不可举行大事，以便将养阳气。
English: According to the lunar calendar, plants and trees will be in full bloom, and the yin will begin to torture and kill all things. No major events should be held, so that the yang will be raised.

古文：夷则之月，修法饬刑，选士厉兵，诘诛不义，以怀远方。
现代文：律应夷则的月份，要修明法度，整协刑罚，简选武士，磨砺兵器，声讨、诛杀不义之人，以安抚远方。
English: In the month of Ritsu Ying Yi Zi, it is necessary to amend the laws, rectify the punishments, select the warriors, sharpen the weapons, condemn and kill the unjust people to appease the far away.

古文：南吕之月，蛰虫入穴，趣农收聚，无敢懈怠，以多为务。
现代文：律应南吕的月份，蛰虫钻进洞穴，要催促农民收割聚藏，不可懈怠，务求多收多藏。
English: According to the lunar calendar, when the aphids enter the cave, farmers should be urged to harvest and accumulate. They should not slack off, and strive to collect more and store more.

古文：无射之月，疾断有罪，当法勿赦，无留狱讼，以亟以故。
现代文：律应无射的月份，要迅速判决有罪的人，应当法办的不要赦免，不要滞留诉讼案件，处理要从速，要合乎旧典。
English: In the month when there is no shooting, it is necessary to quickly judge the guilty, do not pardon those who should be prosecuted, do not delay the litigation cases, and deal with them promptly and in accordance with the old code.

古文：应钟之月，阴阳不通，闭而为冬，修别丧纪，审民所终。
现代文：德应应钟的月份，阴阳不通，天地闭塞而进八冬季，要饬正丧事的规格，按贵贱等级加以区别，要慎重处理人民用以送终的一切事宜。
English: Virtue should respond to the month of the clock, yin and yang are not clear, heaven and earth are blocked and enter the eight winter, it is necessary to set the specifications of the funeral, distinguish according to the level of nobility, and carefully handle all matters used by the people to send off.

古文：夏后氏孔甲田于东阳萯山。
现代文：音初夏君孔甲在东阳萯山打猎。
English: At the beginning of the year, Xia Jun Kong Jia went hunting in Shaoshan, Dongyang.

古文：天大风，晦盲，孔甲迷惑，入于民室。
现代文：夭刮起大风，天色昏暗，孔甲迷失了方向，走进一家老百姓的屋子。
English: A gale blew up, the sky was dark, and Kong Jia lost his way and walked into an ordinary people's house.

古文：主人方乳，或曰： 后来，是良日也，之子是必大吉。 
现代文：这家人家正在生孩子。有人说： 君主到来，这是好日子啊，这个该子一定大吉大利。 
English: The family is having a baby, and someone says: "It's a good day, the monarch is coming, this child must be very lucky."

古文：或曰： 不胜也，之子是必有殃。 
现代文：有人说。 怕享受不了这个福分啊，这个孩子一定会遭受灾难。 
English: Some people say, "I'm afraid I won't be able to enjoy this blessing, this child will surely suffer a disaster."

古文：后乃取其子以归，曰： 以为余子，谁敢殃之？ 
现代文：夏君就把这个孩子带了回去，说： 让他作我的儿子，谁敢害他? 
English: Xia Jun took this child back and said: Let him be my son, who would dare to harm him?

古文：子长成人，幕动坼橑，斧斩其足，遂为守门者。
现代文：孩子长大成人了，一次帐幕掀动，屋椽裂开，斧子掉下来砍断了他的脚，于是只好作守门之官。
English: When the child became an adult, he had to serve as a gatekeeper after the tent curtain was once lifted, the eaves cracked, and an axe fell and cut off his foot.

古文：孔甲曰： 呜呼！
现代文：孔甲叹息道： 哎！
English: Kong Jia sighed, "Oh!

古文：有疾，命矣夫！ 
现代文：发生了这种灾难，是命里注定吧！ 
English: Was it fate that brought about this catastrophe?

古文：乃作为 破斧 之歌，实始为东音。
现代文：于是创作出 破舞 之瞅。这是最早的东方音乐。
English: As a result, he created the music of the broken dance, which is the earliest oriental music.

古文：禹行功，见涂山之女。
现代文：禹巡视治水之事，途中娶涂山氏之女。
English: On his way to inspect the flood control work, Yu married a daughter of the Tu Shan clan.

古文：禹未之遇而巡省南土。
现代文：禹没有来得及与她举行结婚典礼，就到南方巡视去了。
English: Yu did not have time to hold a wedding ceremony with her, so he went on a tour of the south.

古文：涂山氏之女乃令其妾候禹于涂山之阳。女乃作歌，歌曰： 候人兮猗 ，实始作为南音。
现代文：涂山氏之女就叫她的侍女在涂山南面迎候禹，她自己于是作了一首歌，歌牢唱遭： 候望人啊 ，这是最早的南方音乐。
English: The daughter of the Tu Shan clan asked her maidservant to wait for Yu on the south side of Tu Shan, and she herself composed a song, which was sung in the song cell: "Waiting for someone," this is the earliest southern music.

古文：周公及召公取风焉，以为 周南 、 召南 。
现代文：周公和召公时曾在那里采风，后人就把它叫作 周南 、 召南 。
English: Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong were once popular there, and later generations called it Zhou Nan or Zhao Nan.

古文：周昭王亲将征荆。
现代文：周昭王亲自率领军队征伐荆国。
English: Zhou Zhao Wang personally led the army to conquer Jing Province.

古文：辛余靡长且多力，为王右。还反涉汉，梁败，王及蔡公抎于汉中。
现代文：辛馀靡身高力大，作昭王的车右军队返回，渡汉水，这时桥坏了，昭王和蔡公坠落在水中。
English: With great effort and strength, the right-hand army of King Zhaowang's chariot returned and crossed the Han River. At this time, the bridge broke, and King Zhaowang and Cai Gong fell into the water.

古文：辛余靡振王北济，又反振蔡公。
现代文：辛馀靡把昭王救到北岸，又返回救了蔡公。
English: With great difficulty, Zhao Wang was rescued to the north shore, and returned to rescue Cai Gong.

古文：周公乃侯之于西翟，实为长公。
现代文：周公于是封他在西方为诸侯，作一方诸侯之长。
English: Zhou Gong then appointed him as a vassal in the west, as a vassal of the vassal.

古文：殷整甲徙宅西河，犹思故处，实始作为西音。
现代文：当初，殷整甲迁徙到西河居住，但还思念故土，于是最早创作了西方音乐。
English: At first, Yin Jianjia migrated to the West River to live, but he still missed his homeland, so he was the first to create Western music.

古文：长公继是音以处西山。
现代文：辛余靡封侯后住在西翟之山，继承了这一音乐。
English: Xin Yu lived in Xishuanzhishan after her accession to the throne and inherited this music.

古文：秦缪公取风焉，实始作为秦音。
现代文：秦穆公时曾在那里采风，开始把它作为秦国的音乐。
English: It was there that Qin Mu Gong took up the style and began to use it as the music of Qin.

古文：有娀氏有二佚女，为之九成之台，饮食必以鼓。
现代文：有娀氏有两位荚貌的女子，给她们造起了九层高台，饮食一定用鼓乐陪伴。
English: Mr. Yu has two beautiful women, for whom he has built a nine-storey high-rise, and their meals are always accompanied by drum music.

古文：帝令燕往视之，鸣若谥隘。
现代文：天帝让燕子去看看她们。燕子去了，叫声谧隘。
English: The heavenly emperor asked the swallow to go and look at them. The swallow went and called out, "I am narrow."

古文：二女爱而争搏之，覆以玉筐。
现代文：那两位女子报喜爱燕子，争着扑住它，用玉璧罩住。
English: The two women loved the swallow and fought to catch it and cover it with jade.

古文：少选，发而视之，燕遗二卵，北飞，遂不反。
现代文：过了一会儿，揭开筐看它，燕子留下两个蛋，向北飞去，不再回来。
English: After a while, opening the basket to look at it, the swallow left two eggs and flew north, never to return.

古文：二女作歌，一终曰： 燕燕往飞 ，实始作为北音。
现代文：那两位女子作了一首敬，歌中唱道： 燕于燕子展翅飞 ，这是最早的北方音乐。
English: The two women made a tribute song, in which they sang: 燕于燕子展翼飞, which is the earliest northern music.

古文：凡音者，产乎人心者也。
现代文：大凡音乐，是从人的内心产生出来的。
English: Great music comes from the human heart.

古文：感于心则荡乎音，音成于外而化乎内。
现代文：心中有所感受，就会在音乐中表现出来，音乐表现于外而化育于内。
English: If there is a feeling in the heart, it will be expressed in music. Music is expressed externally and nurtured internally.

古文：是故闻其声而知其风，察其风而知其志，观其志而知其德。
现代文：因此，听到某一地区的音乐就可以了解它的风俗，考察它的风俗就可以知道它的志趣，观察它的志趣就可以知道它的德行。
English: Therefore, listening to the music of a certain region can understand its customs, examining its customs can know its interests, observing its interests can know its virtues.

古文：盛衰、贤不肖、君子小人皆形于乐，不可隐匿。
现代文：兴盛与衰亡、贤明与不肖、君子与小人都会在音乐中襄现出来，不可隐藏。
English: Prosperity and decline, the wise and the foolish, the gentleman and the ruffian, all appear in music, and cannot be hidden.

古文：故曰：乐之为观也，深矣。
现代文：所以说音乐作为一种观察的对像，它所反映的是相当深刻的了。
English: So music, as an object of observation, reflects something quite profound.

古文：土弊则草木不长，水烦则鱼鳖不大，世浊则礼烦而乐淫。
现代文：土质恶劣，草木就不能生长；水流浑浊，鱼鳖就不能长大，社会黑暗，礼仪就会烦乱，音乐就会淫邪。
English: If the soil is bad, the plants cannot grow; if the water is muddy, the fish cannot grow; if the society is dark, the etiquette will be disturbed, and the music will be immoral.

古文：郑卫之声、桑间之音，此乱国之所好，衰德之所说。
现代文：郑卫之声、桑间之音，这是淫乱的国家所喜好的，是道德袁敢的君主所高兴的。
English: The voice of Zheng Wei, the voice of the mulberry tree, this is what the adulterous country likes, and what the moral monarch is pleased with.

古文：流辟、越、慆滥之音出，则滔荡之气、邪慢之心感矣；感则百奸众辟从此产矣。
现代文：只要淫邪、轻佻、放纵的音乐产生出来，放荡无羁的风气、邪恶轻慢的思想盛情就要熏染人了。人们受到这种熏染，各式各样的邪恶就由此产生了。
English: As long as lewd, frivolous, and licentious music is produced, people will be infected with the unrestrained culture of debauchery and the evil and frivolous thoughts. People are infected with this, and all kinds of evils arise from it.

古文：故君子反道以修德，正德以出乐，和乐以成顺。
现代文：所以，君子以道为根本，进行品德修养，端正品德链而创作音乐，音乐和谐而后通达理义。
English: Therefore, a gentleman takes the Tao as the foundation, cultivates his moral character, and creates music by correcting the moral chain. The music is harmonious and then leads to reason.

古文：乐和而民乡方矣。
现代文：音乐和谐了，人民就向往道义了。
English: When the music is harmonious, the people yearn for morality.

古文：四曰：欲观至乐，必於至治。
现代文：制乐想要欣赏最和谐完美的音乐，必定要有最完美的政治。
English: If you want to enjoy the most harmonious and perfect music, you must have the most perfect politics.

古文：其治厚者其乐治厚，其治薄者其乐治薄，乱世则慢以乐矣。
现代文：国家治理美善的，它的音乐就美善，国家治理粗疏的，它的音乐就粗疏，至于乱世，音乐已经流于轻慢了。
English: If a country is well governed, its music will be good. If a country is poorly governed, its music will be poor. If a country is in turmoil, its music will be frivolous.

古文：今窒闭户牖，动天地，一室也。
现代文：虽关闭门窗，在一室之中却可感动天地。
English: Although the doors and windows are closed, it is possible to move heaven and earth in one room.

古文：故成汤之时，有谷生於庭，昏而生，比旦而大拱。
现代文：成汤在位的时候，庭中生出一棵奇异的谷子，黄昏时萌芽，等到天亮已经有两手合围那么粗了。
English: When Cheng Tang was in power, a strange millet seed sprouted in the garden. It sprouted at dusk, and by dawn it was already as thick as a pair of hands.

古文：其吏请卜其故。
现代文：汤的臣下请求占卜异谷出现的原因。
English: Tang's vassals requested divination as to the reason for the appearance of the valley.

古文：汤退卜者曰： 吾闻祥者福之先者也，见祥而为不善，则福不至。
现代文：汤辞退占卜的臣子说： 我听说，吉祥的事物是福的先兆，但是如果遇到吉兆，却做不善的事，福就不会降临。
English: I heard that auspicious things are the forerunners of blessings, but if you encounter auspicious things but do bad things, blessings will not come.

古文：妖者祸之先者也，见妖而为善，则祸不至。 
现代文：怪异的事物是灾祸前先兆，但是如果遇到怪异而做善事，灾祸就不会降临。 
English: Strange things are the forerunners of disaster, but if you do good in the face of strange things, disaster will not come.

古文：於是早朝晏退，问疾吊丧，务镇抚百姓。
现代文：于是他早上朝，晚退朝，勤于政事，探问病人，吊唁死者，务求安抚百姓。
English: So he was up early in the morning and late in the evening, diligent in politics, inquired about the sick, and mourned the dead, in order to appease the people.

古文：三日而谷亡。
现代文：三日之后，庭中的异谷竟消失了。
English: Three days later, the heron disappeared from the garden.

古文：故祸兮福之所倚，福兮祸之所伏。
现代文：所以说。祸是福所倚存的东西，福是祸所隐藏的处所。
English: Wherefore, woe is that in which happiness dwells, and happiness is the place where woe is concealed.

古文：圣人所独见，众人焉知其极？
现代文：这个道理只有圣人才能认识到，一般人哪里会知道事物变化的终极?
English: Only a sage can recognize this truth, but how can an ordinary person know the ultimate change of things?

古文：周文王立国八年，岁六月，文王寝疾五日而地动，东西南北不出国郊。
现代文：周成王即位八年了，这年六月，文王卧病在床五天而地震，震动范围东西南北不出国都四郊。
English: It's been eight years since King Zhou Cheng ascended the throne. In June of this year, King Wen was sick in bed for five days and an earthquake occurred. The shaking ranged from east to west and from north to south, and did not leave the capital's four suburbs.

古文：百吏皆请曰： 臣闻地之动，为人主也。
现代文：百官都请求说， 我们听说，地之所以震动是为君主的缘故。
English: And the magistrates petitioned, saying, We have heard that the earth is moved for the king.

古文：今王寝疾五日而地动，四面不出周郊，群臣皆恐，曰 请移之 。 
现代文：如今大王您卧病五天而地震，震动范围四面不超出国都四郊，群臣都十身恐惧，说 请王把灾祸移走 。 
English: Now, Your Majesty, you have been ill for five days, and there is an earthquake. The range of the tremors does not exceed the capital and its suburbs on all sides. The courtiers are full of fear, saying, "Ask the king to remove the disaster."

古文：文王曰： 若何其移之也？ 
现代文：文王说， 怎么移走它呢? 
English: King Wen said, "How can it be removed?"

古文：对曰： 兴事动众，以增国城，其可以移之乎！ 
现代文：臣子回答说： 征发徭役，发动民众，来增筑国都的城墙，大概就可以把灾祸移走吧。 
English: The courtiers replied, "If we conscript soldiers and mobilize the people to increase the walls of the capital, we can probably remove the disaster."

古文：文王曰： 不可。
现代文：文王说： 不行。
English: The King of Literature said: No.

古文：夫天之见妖也，以罚有罪也。
现代文：上天显现怪异是借以惩罚有罪的人。
English: The supernatural is used to punish the guilty.

古文：我必有罪，故天以此罚我也。
现代文：我必定有罪，所以天借此惩罚我。
English: I must be guilty, so Heaven is punishing me.

古文：今故兴事动众以增国城，是重吾罪也。
现代文：如今特为此征发徭役，发动民众，亲来增筑国都城墙，这是加重我的罪过。
English: Now, especially for this reason, I have to solicit laborers, mobilize the people, and personally build the capital city wall, which is an aggravation of my sin.

古文：不可。 
现代文：这么办不行。
English: This battle cannot be fought alone.

古文：文王曰： 昌也请改行重善以移之，其可以免乎！ 
现代文：我愿意改变过去的行为，增加美善的品德，来移走灾祸，或许可以免除灾祸吧。 
English: I am willing to change my past behavior and increase my good character to remove the disaster. Maybe I can get rid of the disaster.

古文：於是谨其礼秩、皮革，以交诸侯；饬其辞令、币帛、以礼豪士；颁其爵列、等级、田畴，以赏群臣。
现代文：于是文王慎重对待礼法、聘问，用以结交诸侯，整饬辞夸、礼品，用以礼贤下士；颁布爵位、等级，田地，用以赏赐群臣。
English: As a result, King Wen carefully treated the etiquette and invitations, which were used to make friends with the princes, and the speeches and gifts, which were used to reward the nobles; he also issued the titles, ranks, and fields, which were used to reward the courtiers.

古文：无几何，疾乃止。
现代文：没过多久，文壬的病就好了。
English: It didn't take long for Wenren's illness to clear up.

古文：文王即位八年而地动，已动之後四十三年，凡文王立国五十一年而终。
现代文：文王即位八年而地震，地震之后又在位四十三年，文王共莅临王位五十一年而死。
English: King Moon was on the throne for eight years when the earthquake struck, and he reigned for 43 years after the earthquake. King Moon died after 51 years on the throne.

古文：此文王之所以止殃翦妖也。
现代文：这全在于文王用以止息祸殃、灭除怪异的方式得当啊。
English: This is all due to the proper way that King Wen used to stop the calamity and eliminate the weirdness.

古文：宋景公之时，荧惑在心，公惧，召子韦而问焉，曰： 荧惑在心，何也？ 
现代文：宋景公在位的时候，火星出现在心宿的位置。景公害怕了，召见子韦，向他询问道： 火星出现在心宿，这是什幺征兆呢? 
English: During the reign of Song Jinggong, Mars appeared in the position of the Heart Lodge. Jinggong was afraid, summoned Zi Wei and asked him: Mars appeared in the Heart Lodge, what is the sign?

古文：子韦曰： 荧惑者，天罚也；心者，宋之分野也。祸当於君。
现代文：子韦说： 火星代表上天的惩罚，心宿是宋国的分野，灾祸当降临在国君您的身上。
English: Zi Wei said: Mars represents the punishment of heaven, the heart is the domain of the Song Dynasty, and the calamity should befall the sovereign.

古文：虽然，可移於宰相。 
现代文：虽然如此，灾祸可以转移给宰相。 
English: Nevertheless, the disaster can be transferred to the Prime Minister.

古文：公曰： 宰相，所与治国家也，而移死焉，不祥。 
现代文：景公说； 宰相是跟我一起治理国家的人，却要把死亡转嫁给他，这不吉利。 
English: Jing Gong said, "The prime minister is the person who governs the country with me, but he wants to pass the death on to him, which is not auspicious."

古文：子韦曰： 可移於民。 
现代文：子韦说： 灾锅可以转移给百姓。 
English: Zi Wei said: The disaster pot can be transferred to the people.

古文：公曰： 民死，寡人将谁为君乎？
现代文：景公说； 百姓死了，我将绐谁当国君呢?
English: Jing Gong said, "The people are dead. Who will I choose to be the ruler of the country?"

古文：宁独死！ 
现代文：我宁肯独自去死！ 
English: I'd rather die alone!

古文：子韦曰： 可移於岁。 
现代文：子韦说； 还可以把灾祸转移给农业收成。 
English: Zi Wei said; it is also possible to transfer the disaster to agricultural harvest.

古文：公曰： 岁害则民饥，民饥必死。
现代文：景公说： 农业收成受到损害，百姓就会遭受饥荒，百姓遭受饥荒必死。
English: Jing Gong said: If the agricultural harvest is damaged, the people will suffer from famine, and the people will die from famine.

古文：为人君而杀其民以自活也，其谁以我为君乎？
现代文：给百姓当国君，却杀害自己的百蛀，以求使自己活下去，那谁还会把我当作国君昵?
English: Who will treat me as a sovereign when I am the sovereign of the people but kill hundreds of my own people in order to keep myself alive?

古文：是寡人之命固尽已，子无复言矣。 
现代文：这是我的命数本来已经到头了，你不要再说了！ 
English: This is the end of my life, stop talking about it!

古文：子韦还走，北面载拜曰： 臣敢贺君。
现代文：子韦立刻离开所立之处，面向北拜两拜说； 我祝贺您！
English: Zi Wei immediately left the place where he was standing, facing north, bowed twice and said: I congratulate you!

古文：天之处高而听卑。君有至德之言三，天必三赏君。今夕荧惑其徙三舍，君延年二十一岁。 
现代文：天居于高处却可以听到地上的一切，您有符合最高尚道德的三句话，天一定奖赏您三次，今夜火星一定后退三舍，您可以延寿二十一年。 
English: Heaven dwells on high, but you can hear everything on earth. You have three sentences that are in line with the highest morality. Heaven will reward you three times. Mars will retreat tonight. You can extend your life by 21 years.

古文：公曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：景公说： 你根据什么知道舍这样呢? 
English: Jing Gong said, "On what basis do you know this?

古文：对曰： 有三善言，必有三赏，荧惑必三徙舍。
现代文：子韦回答说： 您有三旬美善之吉，所以必得三次奖赏，因此火星一定后退三舍。
English: Zi Wei replied, "You have the good fortune of being born on the 30th day of the 3rd month, so you will get three rewards. Therefore, Mars will definitely retreat.

古文：舍行七星，星一徙当一年，三七二十一，臣故曰 君延年二十一岁 矣。
现代文：迁移一舍要经过七颗星，一颗星代表一年，三七二十一年，所以我说 您可延寿二十一年 。
English: It takes seven stars to move a house, and one star represents one year, 3721, so I say you can extend your life by 21 years.

古文：臣请伏於陛下以伺候之。荧惑不徙，臣请死。 公曰： 可。 
现代文：我请求守候在宫殿台阶之下现察火星，火星如不后退，我甘愿一死。 景公说； 可以。 
English: I ask you to wait at the foot of the palace steps to observe Mars. If Mars does not retreat, I am willing to die.

古文：是夕荧惑果徙三舍。
现代文：这夜火星果然后退了三舍。
English: This night, Mars fruit then withdrew from the three houses.

古文：五曰：五帝三王之於乐尽之矣。
现代文：明理五帝三王在音乐方面已经达到尽善尽美了。
English: Ming Li, the Five Emperors and the Three Kings have achieved perfection in music.

古文：乱国之主未尝知乐者，是常主也。
现代文：政治混乱的国家的君主从来不曾懂得音乐，这是由于他们是凡庸的君主的缘救。
English: Monarchs of countries in political turmoil have never been able to understand music, which is because they are mediocre monarchs.

古文：夫有天赏得为主，而未尝得主之实，此之谓大悲。
现代文：获得上天的赏赐，得以成为君主，然而徒有君主之名，却无君主之实，这是最可悲的。
English: It is the saddest thing to receive a heavenly reward and become a monarch, yet to have the name of a monarch, but not the reality of a monarch.

古文：是正坐於夕室也，其所谓正乃不正矣。
现代文：这就如同在方位不正的屋子里摆正座位一样，其所谓正，恰恰是不正。
English: This is like putting the right seat in a room with the wrong orientation. The so-called right is exactly wrong.

古文：凡生，非一气之化也；长，非一物之任也；成，非一形之功也。
现代文：万物的诞生，不是阴、阳二气之中一种气能够他育的，万物的生长，不是哪一种物能够承担的，万物的形成，不是哪一种东西的功劳。
English: The birth of all things is not something that can be nurtured by one of the yin and yang qi, the growth of all things is not something that can be borne, and the formation of all things is not the merit of any one thing.

古文：故众正之所积，其福无不及也；众邪之所积，其祸无不逮也。
现代文：所以，大量正气积聚的地方，福没有不降临的，大量邪气积聚的地方，祸没有不发生的。
English: Therefore, where a large amount of positive energy is accumulated, there is no blessing that does not come, and where a large amount of evil energy is accumulated, there is no misfortune that does not occur.

古文：其风雨则不适，其甘雨则不降，其霜雪则不时，寒暑则不当，阴阳失次，四时易节，人民淫烁不固，禽兽胎消不殖，草木庳小不滋，五谷萎败不成。
现代文：邪恶积聚之处，那里的风雨不适时，及时雨不降，霜雷不合时令，寒暑失当，阴阳失去常规，四季次序颠倒，人民淫乱不能生育，禽兽胚胎消释不能繁殖，草木矮小不能生长，五谷枯萎不能结实。
English: Evil accumulates in places where the wind and rain do not blow at the right time, the rain does not fall at the right time, the frost and thunder are not in season, the cold and heat are not appropriate, the yin and yang are out of the ordinary, the order of the four seasons is reversed, the people are immoral and cannot give birth, the embryos of animals and beasts cannot reproduce, the grass cannot grow, and the withered grain cannot be solid.

古文：其以为乐也，若之何哉？
现代文：以此为素材制作音乐，会怎么样呢?
English: What would it be like to make music out of this material?

古文：故至乱之化：君臣相贼，长少相杀，父子相忍，弟兄相诬，知交相倒，夫妻相冒，日以相危，失人之纪，心若禽兽，长邪苟利，不知义理。
现代文：所以，极端混乱的社会，它的风气是，君臣互相残害，长少互相杀毂，父子残忍相待，弟兄互相欺骗，挚友互相背叛，夫互相冒犯。人们天天相互残害，丧失人伦，心像禽兽一样，长于邪恶，苟且求利，不懂理义。
English: Therefore, in an extremely chaotic society, its culture is one in which princes and ministers kill each other, elders and children kill each other, fathers and sons treat each other cruelly, brothers deceive each other, close friends betray each other, and husbands offend each other. People kill each other every day, lose human relations, and their hearts are like beasts, they are better than evil, they seek profit, and they do not understand reason.

古文：其云状有若犬、若马、若白鹄、若众车；有其状若人，苍衣赤首，不动，其名曰天衡；有其状若悬旍而赤，其名曰云旍；有其状若众马以斗，其名曰滑马；有其状若众植华以长，黄上白下，其名蚩尤之旗。
现代文：它的云气形状有的像狗、像马、像白天鹅，像各种各样的车辆。有的像人青色的衣服，红色的头，一动不动，它的名字叫 天衡 ；有的像悬空的旌旗，颜色是红的，它的名字叫 云旍 有的像许多匹马在争斗，它的名字叫 滑马 ；有的像许多植华而稍长，颜色上黄下白，它的名字叫 蚩尤之旗 。
English: Some of its clouds are shaped like dogs, like horses, like white swans, like all kinds of vehicles; some are like human-blue clothes, red heads, motionless, its name is Tianheng; some are like a hanging banner, the color is red, its name is Yunqi; some are like many horses fighting, its name is Gliding Horse; some are like many plants and are slightly longer, the color is yellow and white, its name is Flag of Zhouyu.

古文：其日有斗蚀，有倍僪，有晕珥，有不光，有不及景，有众日并出，有昼盲，有霄见。
现代文：它的太阳有时技生日蚀，有时有倍僪懦、晕珥之类的光气，有时不发光，有时有光却不产生阴影，有时许多个太阳一齐在空中出现，有时白天昏暗，有时太阳在夜里出现。
English: Sometimes its sun is eclipsed, sometimes there is a halo of light, sometimes it does not shine, sometimes there is light but no shadow, sometimes many suns appear together in the sky, sometimes the day is dark, sometimes the sun appears at night.

古文：其月有薄蚀，有晖珥，有偏盲，有四月并出，有二月并见，有小月承大月，有大月承小月，有月蚀星，有出而无光。
现代文：它的月亮有时发生月蚀，有时有晖珥之类的光气，有时一侧昏暗，有时四个月亮一起出现，有时两个月亮一起出现，有时一起出现一大一小两个月亮，一上一下，或者小月托着大月，或者大月捧着小月，有时月亮遮住星星，有时月出而无光。
English: Its moon is sometimes eclipsed, sometimes has a halo of light, sometimes dark on one side, sometimes four moons appear together, sometimes two moons appear together, sometimes one large and one small moon appear together, one above the other, or a small moon supports a large moon, or a large moon holds a small moon, sometimes the moon covers the stars, sometimes the moon rises without light.

古文：其星有荧惑，有彗星，有天棓，有天搀，有天竹，有天英，有天干，有贼星，有斗星，有宾星。
现代文：它的妖星有荧惑，有慧星，有天掊，有天搀，有天竹，有天英，有天干，有贼星，有斗星，有宾星。
English: Its magical stars include Fluorescence, Comet, Cucumber, Dragonfly, Heavenly Bamboo, Heavenly Ying, Heavenly Stem, Thief Star, Fighting Star, and Bin Star.

古文：其气有上不属天，下不属地，有丰上杀下，有若水之波，有若山之楫；春则黄，夏则黑，秋则苍，冬则赤。
现代文：它的雾气有的上不连天，下不连地，有的上大下小，有的像水的波浪，有的像山的林木。春天是黄色的，夏天是黑色，秋天是苍色，冬天是红色。
English: Some of its mists are as high as the sky, some are as low as the ground, some are as big as they are small, some are like water waves, some are like mountain trees. Spring is yellow, summer is black, autumn is pale, and winter is red.

古文：其妖孽有生如带，有鬼投其陴，有菟生雉，雉亦生鴳，有螟集其国，其音匈匈，国有游蛇西东，马牛乃言，犬彘乃连，有狼入於国，有人自天降，市有舞鸱，国有行飞，马有生角，雄鸡五足，有豕生而弥，鸡卵多毈，有社迁处，有豕生狗。
现代文：它的妖孽有生得像带子的，有鬼跳进城上的女墙，有兔子生出野鸡，野鸡又生出鹘雀，有螟虫聚集在国都，发出匈匈的声音使人惊惧，国都内有游蛇忽西忽东四处乱窜，马牛竟然开口说话，狗猪竟然互相交配，有狼闯入国都，有妖人从天而降，市场上有飞舞的鸱鹗，国都内有横行的怪兽，有马生角，雄鸡五只脚，有猪生下来蹄不生甲，鸡卵多孵化不出，有祭祀土神的场所自己移了地方，有猪生狗。
English: Its witches are born like ribbons, ghosts jump into the female wall of the city, rabbits give birth to pheasants, pheasants give birth to chaffinches, ladybirds gather in the capital, making the sound of Hungary and Hungary alarming, snakes wander around the capital, horses and cows talk, dogs and pigs mate with each other, wolves break into the capital, goblins fall from the sky, flying centipedes appear in the market, monsters run rampant in the capital, horses have horns, roosters have five legs, pigs are born without hooves, and chicken eggs do not hatch, and there are places to worship earth gods.

古文：国有此物，其主不知惊惶亟革，上帝降祸，凶灾必亟。
现代文：国家中有了以上这些怪异之物，君主不知惊惶，不知迅速改革，那么上帝降下灾祸，凶灾必定到极点。
English: With the above-mentioned strange things in the country, the monarch does not know how to be alarmed, does not know how to reform quickly, then God will bring down disaster, and the disaster will surely come to the extreme.

古文：其残亡死丧，殄绝无类，流散循饥无日矣。
现代文：其国家灭亡，君主死丧，无一幸免，人民流离失散，大遭饥荒的日子没几天了。
English: Their country is destroyed, their monarch is dead, no one is spared, their people are displaced and scattered, and the days of great famine are only a few days away.

古文：此皆乱国之所生也，不能胜数，尽荆、越之竹，犹不能书。
现代文：这些都是混乱的国家发生的怪异现像，多得数也数不清，即使用尽楚、越生长的竹子也仍然写不完。
English: These are all strange phenomena occurring in a chaotic country. There are too many to count, and even if you use all the bamboo that grows, you still can't finish writing.

古文：故子华子曰： 夫乱世之民，长短颉吾午百疾，民多疾疠，道多褓襁，盲秃伛尪，万怪皆生。 
现代文：所以，子华子说： 乱世的百姓，没有节度，是非错乱，百病俱生。百姓多疾病，道路上多弃婴，瞎眼、秃头，驼背、鸡胸，各种各样的怪异都产生了。 
English: Therefore, Zihua Zi said: The people of the chaotic world have no restraint, the rights and wrongs are disordered, and all kinds of diseases are born. The people have many diseases, many babies are abandoned on the road, blind eyes, bald heads, hunchbacks, chicken breasts, and all kinds of weird things have arisen.

古文：故乱世之主，乌闻至乐？
现代文：因此，乱世的君主怎么能听到最和谐、完美的音乐?
English: How, then, can the prince of chaos hear the most harmonious and perfect music?

古文：不闻至乐，其乐不乐。
现代文：听不到最和谐、完美的音乐，它的音乐不会快乐。
English: The most harmonious and perfect music cannot be heard, and its music will not be happy.

