古文：来护儿，字崇善，本南阳新野人，汉中郎将歙十八世孙也。
现代文：来护儿字崇善，祖先河南新野人，是汉中郎将来歙的十八代孙。
English: The 18th generation descendant of Hanzhong Lang's future son-in-law, the 18th generation descendant of his ancestor, the Henan Xinyou people.

古文：曾祖成，魏新野县侯，后归梁，徙居广陵，因家焉。
现代文：曾祖父来成，魏时封爵新野县侯，后来归顺梁朝，移居广陵，因此就在广陵安下了家。
English: His great-grandfather, Lai Cheng, was the feudal lord of Xinye County during the Wei Dynasty. Later, he became a vassal of the Shun Liang Dynasty and moved to Guangling. As a result, he settled down in Guangling.

古文：位终六合令。
现代文：官终于六合县令。
English: The official finally issued the order of Liuhe County.

古文：祖嶷，步兵校尉、秦郡太守、长宁县侯。
现代文：祖父来嶷，历任步兵校尉、秦郡太守，爵长宁县侯。
English: His grandfather came from Laiwu, successively served as an infantry captain, the governor of Qin County, and the lord of Ning County.

古文：父法敏，仕陈终于海陵令。
现代文：父来法敏，出仕陈朝，官终于海陵县令。
English: His father, Law Min, served in the Chen Dynasty, and eventually became the governor of Hailing County.

古文：护儿未识而孤，养于世母吴氏。
现代文：来护儿还未记事的时候就成了孤儿，由伯母吴氏抚养。
English: When the foster child did not remember anything, he became an orphan and was raised by his aunt Wu.

古文：吴氏提携鞠养，甚有慈训，幼而卓荦，初读《诗》，至 击鼓其镗，踊跃用兵 ， 羔裘豹饰，孔武有力 。
现代文：吴氏照顾抚养，非常慈爱和顺。来护儿自幼卓荦不俗，刚开始读《诗》，读到 击鼓其镗，踊跃用兵 和 羔裘豹饰，孔武有力。 
English: Mr. Wu takes care of the upbringing, is very loving and obedient. He has been taking care of his children since they were very young. At the beginning of reading "Poetry," he read "Drumming its gongs," "Using soldiers with exuberance" and "Lambs with leopard ornaments," and he has a strong knowledge of martial arts.

古文：因舍书叹曰： 大丈夫在世当如是，会为国灭贼以取功名，安能区区专事笔砚也！ 
现代文：于是丢下书感叹道 ：大丈夫生活在世应该像这样，应该为国家消灭贼兵，以取得功名，怎么能够专门从事小小的笔墨纸砚呢！ 
English: So he threw the book down and lamented, "It's okay, life in the world should be like this, we should eliminate the bandits for the country in order to gain fame, how can we specialize in small pen, ink and paper tricks!"

古文：群辈惊其言而壮其志。
现代文：众人为他的话感到惊奇，认为其志向豪壮。
English: Many people were surprised by his words and thought that his ambition was great.

古文：及长，雄略秀出，志气英进。
现代文：等到长大成人，雄才大略超乎常人，志气英伟高远。
English: By the time they become adults, their talents are a little beyond the ordinary, and their aspirations are far-reaching.

古文：涉猎书史，不为章句学。
现代文：学习书史，不寻章摘句。
English: When studying the history of books, do not look for chapters and excerpts.

古文：始，侯景之乱，护儿世父为乡人陶武子所害，吴氏每流涕为护儿言之。
现代文：侯景之乱开始的时候，来护儿的伯父被同乡人陶武子杀害，吴氏常常痛哭流涕向来护儿讲述这件事。
English: At the beginning of the Houjing Rebellion, the uncle who came to take care of the children was killed by a fellow villager, Tao Wuzi. Mr. Wu often cried and sobbed as he told the story to the children.

古文：武子宗族数百家，厚自封植。
现代文：陶武子的宗族有几百家，多植党羽。
English: There are several hundred families in Tao Wuzi's clan, and many of them are party members.

古文：护儿每思复怨，因其有婚礼，乃结客数人，直入其家，引武子斩之，宾客皆慑不敢动。
现代文：来护儿经常想着报仇，乘陶武子家举行婚礼之机，就联络几个人，直接进入陶武子家，把陶武子领出来杀了，众宾客都恐惧不敢动。
English: The babysitter often thought of revenge, and took the opportunity of the wedding held at Tao Wuzi's house to contact several people, directly entered Tao Wuzi's house, brought Tao Wuzi out and killed him. All the guests were afraid to move.

古文：乃以其头祭伯父墓，因潜伏岁余。
现代文：来护儿就用陶武子的人头祭奠伯父的坟墓，于是就潜藏起来一年多。
English: The guardian used the human head of Tao Wuzi to pay tribute to his uncle's grave, after which he went into hiding for more than a year.

古文：会周师定淮南，乃归乡里。
现代文：遇上周朝的军队平定淮南，来护儿就回了乡里。
English: When the army of last week's morning pacified Huainan, the babysitter went back to the countryside.

古文：所住白土村，地居疆埸，数见军旅，护儿常慨然有立功名之志。
现代文：来护儿所住的白土村，正处于两国交兵的战场，经常见到军队，来护儿常常慨然有建立功名的志向。
English: The village of Baidu, where the nanny lives, is on the battlefield between the two countries. The army is often seen, and the nanny often has the ambition to build a reputation.

古文：及开皇初，宇文忻、宇若弼等镇广陵，并深相礼重。除大都督，领本乡兵。
现代文：到了隋文帝开皇初年，宇文忻、贺若弼等人镇守广陵，都很尊敬看重来护儿，任命他为大都督，统领本乡之兵。
English: In the first year of the Sui Emperor's reign, the town guards of Guangling, such as Uwen Yao and He Ruo Yao, all respected and valued the tutor, appointed him as the grand governor, and commanded the soldiers of the hometown.

古文：破陈将曾永，以功授仪同三司，平陈之役，护儿有功焉，进位上开府，赏物一千段。
现代文：打败陈国将领曾永，因功授仪同三司。平定陈国之战，来护儿立有战功，晋官位上开府，赏赐财物一千段。
English: Defeated Zeng Yong, the general of Chen Province, and received the award ceremony with the three officers. The war of Chen Province was settled, the children who came to protect the war were distinguished, the government was established, and the property was rewarded with one thousand dan.

古文：十一年，高智慧据江南反，以子总管统兵隋杨素讨之。
现代文：开皇十一年，高智慧占据江南造反，文帝任命杨素之子总管统兵随杨素征讨。
English: In the eleventh year of the emperor's reign, high wisdom occupied the south of the Yangtze River and rebelled. Emperor Wen appointed Yang Su's son as the commander-in-chief.

古文：贼据浙江岸为营，周亘百余里，船舰被江，鼓噪而进。
现代文：贼兵依据浙江岸结营，长达一百余里，船舰覆盖了江面，鼓声喧天而进。
English: The robber soldiers camped along the Zhejiang coast for more than a hundred miles, the ships covered the river, and the drums roared into the sky.

古文：护儿言于素曰： 吴人累锐，利在舟楫。
现代文：来护儿对杨素说： 吴人轻捷锋锐，便利在于舟楫。
English: The nanny said to Yang Su: "Wu people are light, quick and sharp. The convenience lies in the boat.

古文：必死之贼，难与争锋。
现代文：抱定必死之心的贼兵，难以和他们争斗。
English: It is difficult to fight against determined and desperate bandits.

古文：公且严阵以待之，勿与接刃，请假奇兵数千，潜度江，掩破其壁，使退无所归，进不得战，此韩信破赵之策也。 
现代文：公姑且严阵以待，不要和他们交战，请求给我数千奇兵，偷偷地渡过江去，乘敌不备攻破敌兵营盘，让敌人退兵无处可归，进兵不能作战，这就是韩信击败赵军的策略。 
English: Han Xin's strategy to defeat Zhao's army was to wait for the enemy, not to fight with them, to ask for thousands of soldiers, to cross the river secretly, to take advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness to break through the enemy's camp, to let the enemy retreat with nowhere to return, and not to fight.

古文：素以为然。
现代文：杨素认为这种计谋很好。
English: Yang Su thinks this strategy is a good one.

古文：护儿乃以轻舸数百，直登江岸，袭破其营，因纵火，烟焰张天。
现代文：来护儿就用几百只轻舟，径直登上江岸，袭击攻破敌营，于是就放起火来，烈焰漫天。
English: Using hundreds of small boats, the guards went straight to the riverbank, attacked and broke through the enemy camp, and then set fire to it. The flames filled the sky.

古文：贼顾火而惧，素因是动，一鼓破之。
现代文：贼兵看到火光就恐惧起来，杨素于是发动进攻，一举而大败贼兵。
English: When the bandits saw the fire, they panicked. Yang Su launched an attack and defeated the bandits in one fell swoop.

古文：智慧将逃于海，护儿追至闽中，余党皆平。
现代文：智慧将要逃到海中，来护儿率兵追到闽地，消灭了高智慧的余党。
English: Wisdom will flee to the sea, come to the nursery, lead the soldiers to chase the dragon, and eliminate the high-wisdom remnants.

古文：进位大将军。除泉州刺史，封襄阳县公，食邑一千户，赐物二千段、奴婢百人。
现代文：来护儿因军功晋位大将军，授泉州刺史之职，封襄阳县公，食邑一千户，赏赐物品二千段，奴婢一百人。
English: Because of his military exploits, Liguo'er was promoted to the rank of general, given the post of Quanzhou's chief historian, appointed as the governor of Xiangyang County, given 1,000 households of food villages, 2,000 pieces of rewards, and 100 slaves.

古文：护儿招怀初附，威惠兼举。
现代文：来护儿刚刚归附，威势恩惠并举。
English: The foster child has just been returned to the family, and his kindness and benevolence go hand in hand.

古文：玺书劳问，前后相属。
现代文：文书慰问，前后相接，绵延不绝。
English: Letters of condolence, one after another, continued.

古文：时智慧余党盛道延阻兵为乱，护儿又讨平之。
现代文：当时，高智慧的余党盛道延兴兵作乱，来护儿又去征讨平定。
English: At that time, the high-wisdom Yu Party Shengdao Yanxing soldiers made a riot, came to protect the children and went to conquer and pacify.

古文：迁建州总管。
现代文：升任建州总管。
English: Promoted to the post of Jianzhou general manager.

古文：又与蒲山公李宽讨平黟、歙逆党汪文进，进位柱国，封永宁郡公。
现代文：又和蒲山公李宽一起征讨平定黟、歙二地的叛贼汪文进，晋位柱国，封爵永宁郡公。
English: He also worked with Li Guang, the governor of Busan, to subdue the traitor Wang Wenzhin, who had conquered the two provinces of Yunnan and Shandong. Wang Wenzin was promoted to the rank of pillar state and was knighted as the governor of Yongning County.

古文：文帝嘉其功，使画工图其像以进。
现代文：文帝嘉奖他的功劳，让画工画来护儿的画像进献。
English: Emperor Wen commended him for his service and asked the artist to contribute a painting of a nanny.

古文：十八年，诏追入朝，赐以宫女、宝刀、骏马、锦彩等物，仍留长子楷为千牛备身，使护儿还职。
现代文：开皇十八年，诏令来护儿入朝，赏赐给他宫女、宝刀、骏马、锦纟采等，依旧留其长子来楷在京任千牛备身，让来护儿仍回建州任职。
English: In the 18th year of the emperor's reign, the emperor issued a decree to escort his son into the imperial court, and rewarded him with a concubine, a sword, a horse, a broom, etc. He still kept his eldest son, Lai Kai, in Beijing to serve as a thousand cows, and let Lai Niu still return to Jianzhou to serve.

古文：仁寿初，迁瀛州刺史，以善政闻，频见劳勉。
现代文：仁寿初年，来护儿改任瀛州刺史，因善于治政而闻名，频频受到慰劳和勉励。
English: In the first year of his life, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou Province. He was known for his good governance, and was frequently consoled and encouraged.

古文：炀帝嗣位，被追入朝，百姓攀恋，累日不能出境，诣阙上书致请者，前后数百人。
现代文：炀帝继位，来护儿被召入朝，百姓留恋怀念他。许多日仍不能出境，到朝中上书请求将来护儿留下来的人，前后有几百人。
English: When Emperor Shun succeeded to the throne, Lai Fuerer was summoned to the court, and the people remembered him with nostalgia. He was still unable to leave the country for many days, and there were hundreds of people who wrote to the court to request that Lai Fuerer stay in the future.

古文：帝谓曰： 昔国步未康，卿为名将，今天下无事，又为良二千石，可谓兼美矣。 
现代文：炀帝对他说 ：当初国家没安定的时候，卿是有名的将领。如今天下安定了，卿又成为很好的刺史，可以说是双美兼而有之了。 
English: Emperor Xuan said to him, "In the beginning, when the country was not stable, Xie was a famous general. Today, when the country is stable, Xie has become a very good general, and it can be said that he is both good and great.

古文：仍除右骁卫大将军。寻迁左。
现代文：就任命来护儿为右骁卫大将军，不久又升为左骁卫大将军。
English: He appointed Guo Er as the right guard general, and soon he was promoted to the left guard general.

古文：又改上柱国为光禄大夫，徙右翊卫大将军，进封荣国公，恩礼隆密，朝臣无比。
现代文：又改任上柱国、光禄大夫，徙位右翊卫大将军，晋爵荣国公，恩宠礼遇更为丰隆，朝中大臣没有人能跟他相比。
English: He was also appointed as Shangzhu Guo and Guanglu Daifu, promoted to the rank of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and promoted to the rank of Duke of Rongguo. His grace and courtesy were more plentiful, and there was no other minister in the middle of the dynasty who could compare to him.

古文：大业六年，车驾幸江都，谓护儿曰： 衣锦昼游，古人所重，卿今是也。 
现代文：大业六年，炀帝车驾巡幸江都，对来护儿说： 穿着华丽的衣服白天巡游，是古人看重的。卿如今就是这样。 
English: In the sixth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Qian drove a car around the capital of the Xianjiang River and said to the nanny: "Wearing gorgeous clothes and parading during the day was valued by the ancients. Sir, this is how it is now."

古文：乃赐物二千段，并牛酒，令谒先人墓，宴乡里父老。
现代文：就赏赐给来护儿财物二千段和牛、酒，令他去拜谒先人之墓，宴请乡里的父老乡亲。
English: He rewarded the son-in-law with 2,000-dan yakitori and wine, and told him to visit his ancestor's grave and host a banquet for his parents in the village.

古文：仍令三品已上并集其宅，酣饮尽日，朝野荣之。
现代文：令三品以上的官员都聚集到他的宅院中，畅饮一日，朝野人士都为来护儿感到荣耀。
English: Officials above the third rank gathered in his residence for a day of drinking, and people from both the government and the private sector felt honored to come and take care of him.

古文：辽东之役，以护儿为平壤道行军总管，兼检校东莱郡太守，率楼船指沧海。
现代文：辽东之战，炀帝任命来护儿为平壤道行军总管，兼任检校东莱郡太守，率领楼船直指沧海。
English: In the Battle of Liaodong, Emperor Qian appointed Luo Er as the general manager of the march of Pyongyang Road, and also served as the governor of Donglai County, and led the ship straight to the sea of vicissitudes.

古文：入自浿水，去平壤六十里，高丽主高元扫境内兵以拒之，列阵数十里。
现代文：自氵贝水而入，距平壤六十里。高丽主高元尽集境内之兵迎战，列阵长达几十里。
English: It is sixty miles from Pyongyang, entering from Mushroom Creek. Gao Yuan, the ruler of Goryeo, gathered all the soldiers in the country to face the battle, and the lines stretched for dozens of miles.

古文：诸将咸惧，护儿笑谓副将周法尚及军吏曰： 吾本谓其坚城清野以待王师，今来送死，当殄之而朝食。 
现代文：诸位将领都很恐惧，来护儿笑着对副将周法尚和军官们说： 我原来以为他们会坚壁清野等待王师，如今来送死，定当一日之内歼灭他们。 
English: All of the generals were terrified, and they smiled and said to Vice Admiral Zhou Fashang and the officers: "I originally thought they would stand firm and wait for Wang Shi, but now I am going to send them to their deaths, and I am determined to annihilate them within a day."

古文：高元弟建骁勇绝伦，率敢死数百人来致师。
现代文：高元之弟高建非常骁勇，率领几百人的敢死队来挑战。
English: Gao Yuan's younger brother Gao Jian was very brave and led a death squad of several hundred people to challenge.

古文：护儿命武贲郎将费青奴及第六子左千牛整驰斩其首，乃从兵追奔，直至城下，俘斩不可胜计，因破其郛，营于城外，以待诸军。
现代文：来护儿命令武贲郎将费青奴和他的第六个儿子左千牛来整驰往阵前，斩高建首级，纵兵追击，直至城下，俘虏和斩首的无法计算，乘机攻破外城，在城外安营扎寨，等待其他各路兵马。
English: The guardian ordered Wu Yulang to send Fei Xiongnu and his sixth son Zu Qian Niu to the front, cut high and build the first level, pursue the column, until under the city, the captives and beheadings are incalculable, take the opportunity to break through the outer city, camp outside the city, and wait for other soldiers.

古文：高丽昼闭城门，不敢出。
现代文：高丽兵白天关闭城门，不敢出战。
English: The Goryeo soldiers closed the city gates during the day and did not dare to go out to fight.

古文：会宇文述等众军皆败，乃旋军。
现代文：适逢宇文述等众军被战败，就撤军了。
English: When the armies of Uwenshu and others were defeated, they withdrew.

古文：以功赐物五千段，以第五子弘为杜城府鹰扬郎将，以先封襄阳公赐其子整。
现代文：因军功赏赐财物五千段，任命来护儿的第五个儿子来弘为杜城府鹰扬郎将，将先前的封爵襄阳公赐给第六子来整。
English: Due to his military service, he was awarded 5,000 dan in property. He appointed his fifth son, Lai Hong, to be the Duke of Ducheng, and gave the previous title of Duke of Xiangyang to his sixth son, Lai Jie.

古文：明年，又出沧海道，师次东莱，会杨玄感反，进攻洛阳，护儿闻之，召裨将周法尚等议旋军讨逆。
现代文：第二年，又一次出兵沧海道，军队到了东莱，适逢杨玄感造反，进攻洛阳。来护儿听说后，召见偏将周法尚等议论回师讨伐叛贼。
English: The next year, another expedition was sent to the Canghai Highway, and the army arrived in Donglai, coinciding with Yang Xuanxuan's rebellion and attack on Luoyang. After hearing the news, he summoned the partial commander Zhou Fashang and others to discuss returning to the division to fight the traitors.

古文：法尚等咸以无敕，不宜擅还，再三固执不从。
现代文：周法尚等人都认为没有敕令，不应擅自回师，再三固执己见，不听从来护儿的主张。
English: Zhou Fashang and others all believed that there was no imperial edict, and that they should not return to the teacher without permission, repeatedly stick to their own opinions, and not listen to the advocate of the tutor.

古文：护儿厉声曰： 洛阳被围，心腹之疾。
现代文：来护儿严厉地说 ：洛阳被围攻，是心腹大患。
English: The caretaker said sternly: Luoyang is under siege, it is a big headache.

古文：高丽逆命，犹疥癣耳。
现代文：高丽违命，只是像癣疥一样。
English: Goryeo disobeyed orders, just like a baboon.

古文：公家之事，知无不为，专擅在吾，当不关诸人也。
现代文：国家的事情，知道了就不能不去做，专擅之罪在我，不会与你们这些人有什么干系。
English: In matters of state, once you know, you can't help but do it. The crime of being an expert is mine, and it will have nothing to do with you people.

古文：有沮议者，军法从事。 
现代文：有人再阻止命令，按军法办理。 
English: Someone blocked the order again, and it was handled according to military law.

古文：即日回军。令子弘及整驰驿奏闻。
现代文：当日就回师，令儿子来弘、来整驰驿入京，奏知炀帝。
English: On the same day, he went back to his master and ordered his son to come to Beijing to report to the emperor.

古文：帝见弘等甚悦，曰： 汝父擅赴国难，乃诚臣也。 
现代文：炀帝见到来弘等人，非常高兴，说 ：你的父亲擅自赶赴国难，真是忠臣。 
English: Emperor Yao was very pleased to see Chihiro and the others, and said, "Your father rushed to the country without permission. He is truly a loyal subject."

古文：授弘通议大夫，整公路府鹰扬即将，乃降玺书于护儿曰： 公旋师之时，是朕敕公之日，君臣授弘意合，远同符契。
现代文：任命来弘为通议大夫，来整为公路府鹰扬郎将，颁布诏书给来护儿说 ：公回师之时，就是朕敕命公之日，君臣的心意相合，虽远而像符节一样契合。
English: Appointed Lai Hong as the general discussion doctor, Lai Ting as the general of the highway department Ying Yang Lang, and issued an edict to Lai Guo, saying: When I return, it is the day of my death. The hearts of the monarchs and ministers coincide, although far away, they coincide like a rune festival.

古文：枭此元恶，期在不遥，勒名太常，非公而谁也！ 
现代文：斩除杨玄感这个罪魁祸首，日期不会遥远的，刻名于宗庙社稷，除了公还会是谁呢？ 
English: If Yang Xuanxuan, the culprit, were to be eliminated, the date would not be far off, and his name would be engraved on the family temple seal. Who else would it be but a court official?

古文：于是护儿与宇文述破玄感于阌乡，斩平之。
现代文：于是，来护儿和宇文述在阌乡大败杨玄感，斩其首而平定叛乱。
English: As a result, Lai Guo'er and Uwen recounted the great defeat of Yang Xuan in Xiangxiang, beheaded him and quelled the rebellion.

古文：还，加开府仪同三司，赐物五千段、黄金千两、奴婢百人，赠父法敏东阳郡太守、永宁县公。
现代文：回朝后，加授开府仪同三司，赏赐财物五千段、黄金一千两、奴婢一百人，追赠其父来法敏为东阳郡太守、永宁县公。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was awarded the title of Kaifu and the three offices, and was rewarded with five thousand pieces of property, one thousand taels of gold, and one hundred maidservants. His father, Lai Fomin, was posthumously made the governor of Dongyang County and the governor of Yongning County.

古文：十一年，又率师渡海，破高丽奢卑等二城。
现代文：大业十一年，又率军渡海作战，攻下高丽奢卑等二座城池。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of King Taejo, he led his army to fight across the sea and captured two cities, including Goryeo and Baekje.

古文：高丽举国来战，护儿大破之。
现代文：高丽集结全国的兵马来迎战，来护儿大败高丽军。
English: Goryeo rallied soldiers and horses from all over the country to meet the war, and defeated the Goryeo army.

古文：将趣平壤，高元震惧，使执叛臣斛斯政诣辽东城下请降。
现代文：准备率军直取平壤，高元震惊恐惧，派人执缚叛臣斛斯政到辽东城下，请求投降。
English: Prepared to lead the army to take Pyongyang directly, Gao Yuan was shocked and afraid, and sent someone to detain the traitor Gong Sizheng to the city of Liaodong and ask him to surrender.

古文：帝许之，诏护儿旋军。
现代文：炀帝答应了请求，诏令来护儿回师。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed to the request and ordered the tutor to come and take care of the child.

古文：护儿集众军谓曰： 三度出兵，未能平贼。
现代文：来护儿聚集众军说： 三次出兵，都没能平定贼兵。
English: He came to rally the troops and said, "Three times we have sent troops, but we have not been able to defeat the bandits.

古文：此还也，不可重来。
现代文：这次回师，就不能再来了。
English: This time, I can't come back.

古文：今高丽困弊，野无青草，以我众战，不日克之。
现代文：高丽如今困窘破败，野地里连青草都没有，以我们这些大军与敌交战，用不了多少日子就能取胜。
English: Koryo is now in a desperate situation. There is not even grass in the fields. With our large army, we can fight the enemy and win in a few days.

古文：吾欲进兵，径围平壤，取其伪主，献捷而归也。 
现代文：我想进兵，直接围攻平壤，抓获伪主，进献捷报而回。 
English: I want to enter the army, directly besiege Pyongyang, capture the false master, and return with a victory.

古文：于是拜表请行，不肯奉诏。
现代文：于是上表请求进兵，不愿奉诏回师。
English: As a result, the upper table requested to enter the army and did not want to be sent back to the division.

古文：长史崔君肃固争之，以为不可。
现代文：长史崔君肃坚决争辩，认为不可这样做。
English: Choi Jun-soo, the eldest, argued firmly that this should not be done.

古文：护儿曰： 贼势破矣。
现代文：来护儿说 ：贼兵之势可以打败。
English: The caretaker said, "The bandits can be defeated."

古文：吾在阃外，事合专决，宁征得高元，还而获谴，舍此成功，所不能矣。 
现代文：我在朝廷之外，事情理应一人决断，宁肯进兵活捉高元，回去后遭到贬斥，若要丢掉这个成功的机会，那是不行的。 
English: I am outside the imperial court, and things should be decided by one person. I would rather go into the army to capture Gao Yuan alive, and be scorned when I return. If I want to lose this chance of success, that is not possible.

古文：君肃告众曰： 若从元帅，违拒诏书，必当奏闻。 
现代文：崔君肃告诉众人说 ：若要听从元帅的，违抗皇帝诏令，一定要奏知皇帝。 
English: Cui Junsu told the crowd, "If you want to obey the marshal and defy the emperor's edict, you must inform the emperor."

古文：诸将惧，乃同劝还师，方始奉诏。
现代文：诸将畏惧，就一同劝请回师，来护儿才听从诏令。
English: The generals were afraid, and together they urged him to call back his advisers and come to their aid before he obeyed the edict.

古文：及帝于雁门为突厥所围，将选精骑溃围而出，护儿及樊子盖并固谏，乃止。
现代文：炀帝在雁门关被突厥兵围困，准备挑选精锐的骑兵保驾突出重围，来护儿和樊子盖一同坚决劝阻，炀帝才作罢。
English: Emperor Yao was besieged by the Turks at the Gate of the Wild Goose. He was preparing to select elite cavalry to defend the outpost against the encirclement. He resolutely dissuaded his son-in-law and son-in-law from coming, and only then did Emperor Yao give up.

古文：十二年，驾幸江都，护儿谏曰： 自皇家受命，将四十年，薄赋轻徭，户口滋殖。
现代文：大业十二年，炀帝巡幸江都，来护儿劝谏说 ：自从皇家受天命，将近四十年，薄赋税，轻徭役，人口增加。
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of King Taejo, Emperor Ye went on a tour of the capital of the Southern Han Dynasty, and came to his son-in-law to persuade him, saying, "Since the royal family received the Mandate of Heaven, it has been nearly forty years of low taxes, light duties, and an increase in population.

古文：陛下以高丽逆命，稍兴军旅，百姓无知，易为咨怨，在外群盗，往往聚结，车驾游幸，深恐非宜。
现代文：陛下因为高丽违抗命令，稍稍兴兵，百姓没有见识，轻易生出咨嗟怨怒，在外结群为盗，常常聚集在一起，皇上车驾巡游，恐怕很不合适。
English: His Majesty, because of Goryeo's disobedience to the order, raised the troops a little, the people did not see it, easily gave rise to resentment, gathered in groups outside, often gathered together, and the imperial car drove the parade, I am afraid it is very inappropriate.

古文：伏愿驻驾洛阳，与时休息，出师命将，扫清群丑，上禀圣算，指日克除。
现代文：希望陛下驻圣驾于洛阳，根据时节休养生息，出动军队，任命将领，扫荡清除众多丑类，上秉承圣命，指日克敌取胜。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will stay in Luoyang, rest and recuperate according to the season, dispatch troops, appoint generals, sweep and remove many ugly creatures, uphold the sacred life, defeat the enemy and win.

古文：陛下今幸江都，是臣衣锦之地，臣荷恩深重，不敢专为身谋。 
现代文：陛下如今巡幸江都，那里是臣衣锦还乡之地，臣深受恩宠，不敢只为自己打算。 
English: His Majesty is now touring the capital of the Yangtze River, which is the place of the returnee's homecoming. The returnee is deeply favored and does not dare to think only of himself.

古文：帝闻之，厉色而起，数日不得见。
现代文：炀帝听后，神色严厉地站了起来，好多日子不得相见。
English: After listening to Emperor Xuan, he stood up with a stern expression. They would not see each other for many days.

古文：后怒解，方被引入，谓曰： 公意乃尔，朕复何望！ 
现代文：后来，炀帝怒气消解，才令人领来护儿入见，说： 公竟然有这样的意思，朕还有什么指望？ 
English: Later, after Emperor Xuan's anger had dissipated, he was finally persuaded to see reason, saying: "How could the emperor have such an intention? What hope do I have?

古文：护儿因不敢言。
现代文：来护儿于是不敢再说话。
English: The nanny then did not dare to speak again.

古文：寻代宇文述为左翊卫大将军。
现代文：不久，代替宇文述为左翊卫大将军。
English: Soon, he replaced Uwen Shu as Zuo Jianwei General.

古文：及宇文化及构逆，深忌之。
现代文：宇文化及发动叛乱，十分忌恨来护儿。
English: culture and start a rebellion, they are very reluctant to come to take care of their children.

古文：是日旦将朝，见执。
现代文：这一天早晨将要朝见时，被抓了起来。
English: One morning, just before dawn, he was arrested.

古文：护儿曰： 陛下今何在？ 
现代文：来护儿问道 ：陛下如今在哪里？ 
English: The nanny asked: Where is His Majesty now?

古文：左右曰： 今被执矣。 
现代文：身边的人回答说 ：今天被抓了起来。 
English: People around him replied: "He was arrested today."

古文：护儿叹曰： 吾备位大臣，荷国重任，不能肃清凶逆，遂令王室至此，抱恨泉壤，知复何言！ 
现代文：来护儿叹息说： 我身为大臣，担负着国家的重任，不能够肃清凶恶的叛逆，以至于让王室到了这种地步，只能抱恨于黄泉，还能再说什么呢！ 
English: The nanny sighed and said, "As a minister, shouldering the heavy responsibility of the country, I am unable to eliminate the vicious rebellion that has brought the royal family to this point. I can only hate it to the depths of hell. What else can I say!"

古文：乃遇害。
现代文：于是就被杀害了。
English: So he was killed.

古文：护儿重然诺，敦交契，廉于财利，不事产业。
现代文：来护儿重视许诺，交往诚厚，对财物名利很清廉，不修治产业。
English: Those who come to take care of children attach importance to promises, deal with each other sincerely, are very clean in terms of property, fame and fortune, and do not cultivate and manage industries.

古文：至于行军用兵，特多谋算，每览兵法，曰： 此亦岂异人意也！ 
现代文：至于行军用兵，谋略特别多，每次观览兵法，就说： 这难道也和人们的意思有什么不同吗？ 
English: As for marching soldiers, there are a lot of strategies. Every time I watch the art of war, I say: Is this also different from what people mean?

古文：善抚士卒，部分严明，故咸得其死力。
现代文：善于安抚士兵，赏罚处置严明，所以都能够为他效死尽力。
English: Good at pacifying soldiers, strict reward and punishment, so they are able to do their best for him.

古文：子十二人，楷通议大夫，弘金紫光禄大夫，整左光禄大夫。
现代文：来护儿有十二个儿子，来楷任通议大夫，来弘任金紫光禄大夫，来整任左光禄大夫。
English: Lai Guo'er had twelve sons, Lai Kai was appointed as the doctor of general discussion, Lai Hong was appointed as the doctor of golden and purple light, and Lai Jie was appointed as the doctor of left light.

古文：整尤骁勇，善抚御，讨击群盗，所向皆捷。
现代文：来整特别骁健英勇，善于抚慰治理部卒，讨伐打击群盗，所向皆能奏捷。
English: He is particularly strong and brave in rectification, good at soothing subordinates, fighting against bandits, and can achieve success in all directions.

古文：诸贼歌曰： 长白山头百战场，十十五五把长枪。
现代文：诸贼歌唱说： 长白山头百战场，十十五五把长枪。
English: The bandits sang: There are a hundred battlefields on the Changbai Mountain, and fifteen hundred and five long guns.

古文：不畏官军千万众，只怕荣公第六郎。 
现代文：不畏官军千万众，只怕荣公第六郎。 
English: Do not fear the tens of thousands of government troops, only fear Rongong the Sixth.

古文：至是，并遇祸，子侄死者十人，唯少子恆、济二人免。
现代文：到了宇文化及叛乱，都一起遇害。来护儿的子侄死于难的有十人，只有小儿子来恒、来济二人幸免。
English: When they arrived at Yu Culture and Rebellion, they were all killed together. The nephew who came to look after the children was one of ten people who died in the disaster. Only the two youngest sons, Lai Heng and Lai Ji, were spared.

古文：樊子盖，字华宗，庐江人也。
现代文：樊子盖字华宗，庐江人。
English: The name Huazong, a native of the Minjiang River, is written in red ink.

古文：祖道则，梁越州刺史。
现代文：祖父樊道则，梁朝时任越州刺史。
English: His grandfather, Xing Dao Zi, served as the governor of Yue Prefecture during the Liang Dynasty.

古文：父儒，侯景之乱奔齐，位仁州刺史。
现代文：父樊儒，侯景之乱中逃奔齐国，官至仁州刺史。
English: His father, Xizhu, fled to Qi Province during the Houjing Rebellion, and became an official in Renzhou.

古文：子盖仕齐，位东海北陈二郡太守、员外散骑常侍，封富阳侯。
现代文：樊子盖出仕齐国，历任东海、北陈二郡太守，员外散骑常侍，封爵富阳侯。
English: Zong Zi Gui served the State of Qi, successively served as the governor of the East China Sea and the North Chen Er County, and was a knight of the Prince of Fuyang.

古文：周武帝平齐，授仪同三司、郢州刺史。
现代文：周武帝平定齐国，授樊子盖仪同三司、郢州刺史。
English: Emperor Zhou of Wu conquered Qi, and conferred the title of Zizigai to Tong San Shi, and the title of Zizigai to Zhang Zhou.

古文：隋文帝受禅，以仪同领乡兵，后除枞阳太守。
现代文：隋文帝受禅，樊子盖以仪同之职兼领乡兵，后又任枞阳太守。
English: Sui Emperor Wen accepted Zen, and Zang Zi Gai served as the ceremonial leader and the leader of the local soldiers. Later, he also served as the governor of Shenyang.

古文：平陈之役，以功加上开府，改封上蔡县伯，历辰、嵩、齐三州刺史，转循州总管，许以便宜从事。
现代文：平定陈国之战，樊子盖以功加授上开府，改封上蔡县伯，历任辰、嵩、齐三州刺史，转任循州总管，文帝允许他遇事不待上奏，自行裁断处置。
English: After settling the Battle of Chen Guo, Zang Zi Gai was awarded the title of Shang Kaifu with merit, changed his title to Shang Cai Xian Bo, and successively appointed as Chen, Song, and Qi, and appointed as the governor of Xuzhou. Emperor Wen allowed him not to wait for the report in case of emergency, and to decide on his own disposal.

古文：十八年，入朝，奏岭南地图，赐以良马杂物，加统四州，令还任所，遣光禄少卿柳謇之饯于灞上。
现代文：开皇十八年，入朝奉献岭南地图，文帝赏赐给他良马和杂物，增加统领四州，令回归任职之处，派遣光禄少卿柳謇之在灞上为樊子盖饯行。
English: In the 18th year of the Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen presented a map of Lingnan to the emperor, and Emperor Wen rewarded him with fine horses and miscellaneous goods, increased the command of the four states, ordered him to return to his post, and dispatched Guanglu Shaoqing Liu Xizhi to serve as a mule cover on the mule.

古文：炀帝即位，转凉州刺史，改授银青光禄大夫、武威太守，以善政闻。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，樊子盖转任凉州刺史，改授银青光禄大夫、武威太守，以善于理政闻名。
English: When the Sui and Qian Dynasties ascended to the throne, Zang Zi Gai was transferred to the post of Liangzhou Historian, and was awarded the titles of Silver Qing Guanglu Doctor and Wu Wei Governor. He was known for his good management skills.

古文：大业三年，入朝，加金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：大业三年，樊子盖入朝，加授金紫光禄大夫。
English: After three years of hard work, he entered the imperial court and was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：五年，车驾西巡，将入吐谷浑。
现代文：大业五年，炀帝车驾西巡，将要进入吐谷浑。
English: After five years of hard work, Emperor Qian is driving westward and will enter Tugu Hun.

古文：子盖以彼多瘴气，献青木香，以御雾露。
现代文：樊子盖因为那里多有瘴气，奉献青木香，用以防御雾气和露水。
English: Because there is a lot of radon in the hazelnut cover, Aoki incense is offered to protect against fog and dew.

古文：及帝还，谓曰： 人道公清，定如此不？ 子盖谢曰： 臣安敢清，止是小心不敢纳贿耳。 
现代文：炀帝回来后，对樊子盖说： 人们都说公清廉，肯定像这样吗？ 樊子盖说 ：臣怎么敢称清廉，只是小心谨慎不敢受贿而已。 
English: After Emperor Zou returned, he said to Zou Zige, "People say that the government is clean and honest, is it really like that?" Zou Zige said, "How dare the minister say that he is clean and honest, he is just being careful not to take bribes."

古文：于是赐之口味百余斛，加右光禄大夫。
现代文：炀帝于是赏赐给他食物一百多斛，加授右光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Qian then rewarded him with more than one hundred mu of food and the additional title of Uguanglu Doctor.

古文：子盖曰： 愿奉丹陛。 
现代文：樊子盖说： 希望能够侍奉陛下。 
English: Hanzi Gai said, "I hope to be able to serve Your Majesty."

古文：帝曰： 公侍朕则一人而已，委以西方，则万人之敌，宜识此心。 
现代文：炀帝说： 公侍奉朕只是侍奉一人罢了，把西方委托给你，则是一人可敌万人，你应该明白朕这种心意。 
English: Emperor Xuan said, "I am only one person serving the public, but if I entrust the West to you, then one person can be worth ten thousand people. You should understand my heart.

古文：六年，帝避暑陇川宫，又云欲幸河西。
现代文：大业六年，炀帝在陇川宫避暑，又说想要巡幸河西。
English: In the sixth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Xizong spent the summer at the Xichuan Palace, and also said that he wanted to go on a pleasure tour to the west of Hexi.

古文：子盖倾望銮舆，愿巡郡境。
现代文：樊子盖渴望炀帝的车驾，希望炀帝巡幸武威郡。
English: Zong Zi Gai longs for Emperor Zou's chauffeur and hopes that Emperor Zou will tour Wuwei County.

古文：帝知之，下诏慰勉之。
现代文：炀帝知道后，下诏书慰问劝勉樊子盖。
English: After Emperor Xizong learned of this, he issued an imperial edict of condolence and exhortation to Zeng Zi Gui.

古文：是岁，朝于江都宫，帝谓曰： 富贵不还故乡，真衣绣夜行耳。 
现代文：这一年，樊子盖在江都行宫朝见炀帝，炀帝说 ：富贵之后不回乡，真正是穿着华丽的衣服夜间行走，谁人知晓？ 
English: In the same year, Miao Ziguai went to see Emperor Gao in the morning at the Imperial Palace in Jiangdu. Emperor Gao said, "If you don't go back to your hometown after you become rich, you are really walking at night wearing gorgeous clothes. Who knows?"

古文：因敕庐江郡设三千人会，赐米麦六千石，使谒坟墓，宴故老，当时荣之。
现代文：于是敕令庐江郡设置三千人大会，赏赐米和麦子六千石，让樊子盖拜谒祖坟，宴请家乡父老，当时的人都为樊子盖感到光荣。
English: Therefore, Zou ordered Lijiang County to set up a three-thousand-person assembly, rewarded rice and wheat with six-thousand-cubic-meters, and let Zou cover the graves of Zou's ancestors, and invited the elders of his hometown to a banquet. At that time, people felt proud of Zou covering.

古文：还除户部尚书。
现代文：回京后任户部尚书。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed to the post of household secretary.

古文：时处罗可汗及高昌王款塞，复以子盖检校武威太守，应接二蕃。
现代文：这时，处罗可汗和高昌王来通好，炀帝又任樊子盖检校武威太守，接应二藩王。
English: At this time, Luo Khan and the King of Gaochang came to an amicable agreement, and Emperor Gao also served as the governor of Wuwei, and received the two kings.

古文：辽东之役，摄左武卫将军，出长岑道。
现代文：辽东之战，樊子盖兼领左武卫将军，出兵长岑道。
English: In the Battle of Liaodong, Zhang Ziguai also led General Zuo Wuwei, and sent troops to the Long March Road.

古文：后以宿卫不行。
现代文：后来因在宫中担任警戒没有成行。
English: Later, he did not go because he was on guard duty at the palace.

古文：加左光禄大夫。
现代文：加授左光禄大夫。
English: He was awarded the additional title of Doctor Sakoroku.

古文：其年，帝还东都，使子盖涿郡留守。
现代文：这一年，炀帝回到东都洛阳，命樊子盖为涿郡留守。
English: In the same year, Emperor Gong returned to Luoyang, the eastern capital, leaving Gui County for the last time.

古文：九年，驾复幸辽东，命子盖东都留守。
现代文：大业九年，炀帝又临幸辽东，命樊子盖留守东都洛阳。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of King Taejo, Emperor Gong also came to Liaodong, but Emperor Ye left Luoyang, the eastern capital, for good.

古文：属杨玄感作逆，逼城，子盖遣河南赞务裴弘策逆击之，反为所败，遂斩弘策以徇。
现代文：适逢杨玄感叛乱，兵临城下，樊子盖派遣河南赞务裴弘策迎击，反而被杨玄感打败，遂将裴弘策斩首示众。
English: At the time of Yang Xuanxuan's rebellion, when the soldiers were under the city, Zizi Gai sent Henan Zanwu Pei Hongse to counterattack, but he was defeated by Yang Xuanxuan, and then he beheaded Pei Hongse.

古文：国子祭酒杨汪小不恭，子盖又将斩之。
现代文：国子祭酒杨汪略有不恭，子盖又要杀他。
English: Guo Zi's sacrificial wine Yang Wang is a bit disrespectful, Zi Gai wants to kill him again.

古文：汪拜谢，顿首流血，久乃释免。
现代文：杨汪拜求，磕头流血，很久才释免他。
English: Yang Wang begged, Shantou bled, it took a long time to release him.

古文：于是三军莫不战栗，将吏无敢仰视。
现代文：于是三军无不惊恐，将吏没有人敢仰视。
English: As a result, the three armies were all terrified, and none of the generals dared to look up.

古文：玄感每尽锐攻城，子盖徐设备御，至辄摧破。
现代文：杨玄感每次都是选择精锐部队攻城，樊子盖缓缓地设置防备抵御，攻城部队一到就被打败。
English: Yang Xuanxuan always chose the elite troops to attack the city, and slowly set up the defense, and the attacking troops were defeated as soon as they arrived.

古文：会来护等救至，玄感乃解去。
现代文：碰巧来护儿等救兵来到，杨玄感才解围而去。
English: As it happened, the rescuers such as the nanny came, and Yang Xuanxuan was relieved and left.

古文：子盖凡所诛杀万人。
现代文：樊子盖诛杀的人总计达万人。
English: The total number of people killed by lice is up to ten thousand.

古文：又检校河南内史。
现代文：又任检校河南内史。
English: He was also appointed inspector of Henan's internal history.

古文：车驾至高阳，追诣行在所，帝劳之，以比萧何、寇恂，加光禄大夫，封建安侯，赐女乐五十人。
现代文：炀帝车驾到高阳，樊子盖追到炀帝的行所，炀帝慰劳他，拿他和萧何、寇恂相比，加授光禄大夫，封爵建安侯，赏赐给他歌女五十人。
English: Emperor Gao drove his carriage to Gaoyang, and Zizi Gai chased him to Emperor Gao's place of residence. Emperor Gao consoled him, compared him to Xiao He and Guo Gan, awarded him the title of Guanglu Doctor, the title of Jian'an Marquis, and gave him fifty female singers.

古文：谓曰： 朕遣越王留守东都，示以皇枝盘石，社稷大事，终以委公。
现代文：炀帝对他说 ：朕派遣越王留守东都，是用来显示皇家枝干坚如磐石，国家大事，最终是委托给公。
English: Emperor Xuan said to him, "I sent King Yue to stay in Dongdu to show that the royal branch is as solid as a rock, and that national affairs are ultimately entrusted to the public.

古文：特宜持重，戈甲五百人而后出，此勇夫重闭之义。
现代文：特别应该持重，有五百兵士卫护而后才出，这就是用勇士重重阻隔的意思。
English: In particular, it should be heavy, with five hundred soldiers guarding and then coming out, which is the meaning of using warriors to block.

古文：无赖不轨者，便诛锄之，凡可施行，无劳形迹。
现代文：若有无赖之人欲谋不轨，就可诛杀之，凡是可以施行的，就不要劳动形迹了。
English: If there is a scoundrel who wants to plot evil, you can fight and kill him, and whatever can be done, don't work.

古文：今为公别造玉麟符，以代铜兽。 
现代文：如今为公另造玉麒麟符节，用来代替铜制兽状符节。 
English: Nowadays, the jade unicorn symbol is used to replace the bronze beast-shaped symbol.

古文：又指越、代二王曰： 今以二孙委公与卫文升耳。
现代文：又指着越王和代王说 ：如今我就把这两个孙子委托给你和卫文升了。
English: He also pointed to King Yue and King Daewong and said, "Now I have entrusted these two grandsons to you and Wei Wensheng."

古文：宜选贞良宿德有方幅者教习之。 
现代文：应该选择忠贞善良德行高洁品格端正的人教导他们。 
English: They should be taught by those who are loyal, good, virtuous, and of high moral character.

古文：于是赐以良田、甲第。
现代文：于是赏赐给樊子盖良田和宅第。
English: As a result, reward was given to Shishigai Ryota and Yakudai.

古文：十年，驾还东都，帝谓子盖曰： 玄感之反，神明故以彰公赤心耳。
现代文：大业十年，炀帝车驾回东都洛阳，对樊子盖说： 杨玄感造反，是神明故意用来显示公的赤胆忠心。
English: Ten years after the great undertaking, Emperor Gong drove back to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and said to Zizi Gai: Yang Xuan's sense of rebellion was deliberately used by the gods to show the public's loyalty.

古文：析珪进爵，宜有令谟。 
现代文：分颁王圭玉，晋封爵位，应该有良策。 
English: There should be a good plan for awarding Wang Guiyu and promoting him to a knighthood.

古文：是日进爵为济公，言其功济天下，特为立名，无此郡国也。
现代文：当日晋封樊子盖爵位为济公。说的是樊子盖功劳济于天下，只是给他设立名号，而不是有这样一个郡国。
English: On the day of the enthronement, Shanzi Gai was given the title of Jigong. It was said that Shanzi Gai had made great contributions to the world, but he was only given a title, not a county.

古文：后与苏威、宇文述陪宴积翠池，帝亲以金杯属子盖酒，曰： 良算嘉谋，俟公后动，即以此杯赐公，用为永年之瑞。 
现代文：后来，和苏威、宇文述一起在积翠池陪炀帝宴饮，炀帝亲自用一只金杯给樊子盖斟酒，说： 良算嘉谋，等待公然后才会出现，就把这个金杯赏赐给公，用来作为长久的瑞兆。 
English: Later, together with Su Wei and Yu Wenshu, he had a banquet with Emperor Gong at the Jiecui Pool. Emperor Gong himself used a gold cup to pour wine over the mule's head, saying: "It is a good plan to wait for the emperor to appear, and then give this gold cup to the emperor as a long-term auspicious omen."

古文：十一年，从驾至雁门，为突厥所围。
现代文：大业十一年，跟从炀帝车驾到雁门，被突厥兵围困。
English: In the eleventh year of Daye's reign, he followed Emperor Qian's carriage to the Wild Goose Gate and was besieged by Turkish soldiers.

古文：帝欲选精骑溃围出，子盖及来护谏，因垂泣： 愿暂停辽东之役，以慰众望。
现代文：炀帝想挑精锐骑兵突出重围，樊子盖和来护儿劝谏，流着泪说： 希望陛下暂停辽东之战，以抚慰众人之心。
English: Emperor Qian wanted to make the elite cavalrymen stand out and encircle the enemy. Zizi Gai and his son came to persuade him, saying with tears: I hope that His Majesty will suspend the battle of Liaodong to soothe the hearts of the people.

古文：圣躬亲出慰抚，厚为勋格，人心自奋，不足为忧。 
现代文：皇上亲自出去安抚，厚加勋位，人人自然奋勇，突厥兵之围不足以为忧虑。 
English: The emperor himself went out to appease them, he increased their ranks, everyone naturally fought bravely, and the siege of the Turkish soldiers was not enough to worry about.

古文：帝从之，后援兵至，虏乃去。
现代文：炀帝听从樊子盖的建议。后来援兵赶到，突厥兵才离去。
English: Emperor Yao followed the advice of Zizi Gai. Later, reinforcements arrived, and the Turkish soldiers left.

古文：纳言苏威追论勋格太重，宜在斟酌。
现代文：纳言苏砘追论勋位太重，应该加以斟酌。
English: Nagan Su Hao said that the award is too heavy and should be considered.

古文：子盖执奏不宜失信。
现代文：樊子盖执意奏请不应失信。
English: Don't break your promise to play the dulcimer.

古文：帝曰： 公欲收物情邪？ 
现代文：炀帝说 ：公想收买人情吗？ 
English: Emperor Zou said, "Does the public want to buy off human feelings?

古文：子盖默然不敢对。
现代文：樊子盖默默不语，不敢对答。
English: Zong Zi Gui was silent, not daring to answer.

古文：从驾还东都。
现代文：樊子盖跟从炀帝车驾回东都洛阳。
English: Zong Zi Gui drove back to Luoyang, the eastern capital, in the Zong Di car.

古文：时绛郡贼敬槃陀、柴保昌等阻兵数万，汾、晋苦之，诏子盖进讨。
现代文：这时，绛郡盗贼敬陀、柴保昌等人拥兵数万，汾、晋二地之民深受其苦，诏令樊子盖进兵征讨。
English: At this time, Jingda, Chai Baochang and other bandits in Handan County gathered tens of thousands of soldiers, and the people in Handan and Jinji suffered from it, so they ordered Shanzigae to enter the army for conscription.

古文：时人物殷阜，子盖善恶无所分别，汾水北村坞尽焚之。
现代文：当时人力物产富实，樊子盖不分善恶好坏，将他们集中在汾水北村坞全部焚烧。
English: At that time, the manpower and material resources were abundant, and they were all burned in the north village dock of Surabaya, regardless of whether they were good or bad.

古文：百姓大骇，相率为盗。
现代文：百姓十分惊恐，相继成为盗贼。
English: The people were so frightened that they became thieves.

古文：其归首者，无少长悉坑之。
现代文：对那些自首的人，不论年龄大小，一概活埋。
English: For those who turn themselves in, regardless of age, they are buried alive.

古文：拥数万众，经年不能破贼，诏徵还，又将兵击宜阳贼，以疾停，卒于东京。
现代文：樊子盖拥有数万兵马，一年多仍然不能破贼，诏令征回京师。樊子盖又领兵打击宜阳之地的盗贼，因疾病而停止，死于东京。
English: Zou Ziguai had tens of thousands of soldiers and horses, but after more than a year, he was still unable to defeat the bandits and was ordered to return to the capital. Zou Ziguai also led an army to fight the bandits in Yiyang, but stopped due to illness and died in Tokyo.

古文：上悲伤者久之，顾黄门侍郎裴矩曰： 子盖临终何语？ 
现代文：炀帝悲伤很久，对黄门侍郎裴矩说 ：樊子盖临终时有什么话？ 
English: Emperor Yao was sad for a long time, and said to the Yellow Gate's steward, Pei Neng: What did Yao Ziguai say on his deathbed?

古文：矩曰： 子盖病笃，深恨雁门之耻。 
现代文：裴矩答道 ：樊子盖病得厉害的时候，深恨雁门被围之耻。 
English: Pei replied, "When Zong Zi Gai was very ill, I deeply hated the shame of being surrounded at the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：帝闻之叹息，令百官就吊，赠开府仪同三司，谥曰景。
现代文：炀帝听说后甚为感慨，命令百官前去吊唁，追赠开府仪同三司，谥号曰景。
English: After hearing the news, Emperor Xizong was very moved and ordered hundreds of officials to go to offer condolences. He also gave away the imperial regalia and three offices, and his posthumous name was Jiajing.

古文：会葬万余人。
现代文：安葬时，送葬的有一万多人。
English: At the time of her burial, more than 10,000 people attended her funeral.

古文：明年，复临沧海，在军遇疾卒。
现代文：武威郡的百姓官员听说樊子盖的死讯，没有不叹息悲痛的，立碑颂扬其德行。
English: When the people's officials of Wuwei County heard the news of the death of Zizi Gai, there was no one who did not sigh and grieve, and set up a monument to praise his virtues.

古文：赠武卫大将军，谥曰僖。有子六人，绍范最知名。
现代文：樊子盖没有别的权术和谋略，统领军队很谨慎稳重，不曾有过失败，莅临官位明于审察，属下没有敢欺瞒他的。严厉残酷。
English: Zong Zi Gai had no other tactics or stratagems. He was very cautious and steady in commanding the army. He had never been defeated. His position as an official was clear from the examination, and his subordinates did not dare to deceive him. He was strict and cruel.

古文：卫玄，字文升，河南洛阳人也。
现代文：缺少恩惠，杀戮武断，临死的时候，见到断头鬼纷纷前来索命，成为厉鬼云云。卫玄字文升，河南洛阳人。
English: Lacking grace, killing arbitrarily, when about to die, seeing the decapitated ghosts come to ask for their lives, they become fierce ghosts. Wei Xuan Zi Wensheng, Luoyang, Henan.

古文：祖悦，魏司农卿。
现代文：祖父卫悦，魏时任司农卿。
English: His grandfather, Wei Yue, was the Minister of Agriculture in the Wei Dynasty.

古文：父，侍中、左武卫大将军。
现代文：父卫，官侍中，左武卫大将军。
English: Father Wei, middle-ranking officer and attendant, and General Zuo Wei.

古文：玄少有器识，周武帝在籓，引为记室。
现代文：卫玄幼时有器量见识，周武帝为藩王时，引荐卫玄为记室。
English: When Wei Xuan was a child, he had the ability to see, and when Emperor Zhou Wu was the king of the domain, he recommended Wei Xuan as a recorder.

古文：迁给事上士，袭爵兴势公。
现代文：升任给事上士，袭爵为兴势公。
English: He was promoted to the rank of staff sergeant and received a knighthood.

古文：武帝亲总万机，拜益州总管长史，赐以万钉宝带。
现代文：周武帝即位，任命卫玄为益州总管长史，赐给他万钉宝带。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu ascended to the throne, appointed Wei Xuan as the governor-general of Yizhou, and bestowed upon him the Ten Thousand Nails Treasure Belt.

古文：稍迁开府仪同三司、太府中大夫，摄内史事，仍领京兆尹，称为强济。
现代文：不久，升任开府仪同三司、太府中大夫，摄领内史事，兼任京兆尹，时人称其强力贯通天下。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Taifu Zhong Dafu, Director of Internal History, and concurrently served as Jing Zhaoyun, who was said at the time to have the power to penetrate the world.

古文：隋文帝作相，检校熊州事。
现代文：隋文帝作丞相，卫玄任检校熊州事。
English: Sui Emperor Wen served as chancellor, and Wei Xuan was in charge of inspecting schools in Xiongzhou.

古文：及受禅，迁淮州总管，进封同轨郡公，坐事免。
现代文：隋文帝受禅继位，卫玄升任淮州总管，晋封同轨郡公，因受牵连免官。
English: Emperor Sui Wen was succeeded by Emperor Zhen, and Emperor Wei Xuan was promoted to the post of general manager of Huai Zhou, promoted to the post of county magistrate, and removed from office due to implication.

古文：未几，拜岚州刺史。
现代文：不久，任岚州刺史。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：会起长城之役，诏玄监督之。
现代文：适逢又起修筑长城之役，诏令卫玄监督修筑长城。
English: At the same time, the construction of the Great Wall began, and Emperor Wu ordered Emperor Wei to supervise the construction of the Great Wall.

古文：后为卫尉少卿。
现代文：后来改任卫尉少卿。
English: He was later promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：仁寿初，山獠作逆，以玄为资州刺史，以镇抚之。
现代文：仁寿初年，山獠叛乱，任命卫玄为资州刺史前往镇压安抚。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's reign, there was a rebellion in Shanzhai, and Wei Xuan was appointed as the governor of Zhouzhou to suppress and pacify it.

古文：玄既到官，时獠攻围大牢镇，玄单骑造其营，谓群獠曰： 我是刺史，衔天子诏安养汝等，汝等勿惊 诸贼莫敢动。
现代文：卫玄到任之后，山獠正围攻大牢镇，卫玄单人独骑到山獠营地，对众獠人说： 我是资州刺史，奉天子诏令安抚养育你们，你们不要惊怕。 众獠人没有人敢动。
English: After Wei Xuan took office, the hawks were besieging Dajiao Town. Wei Xuan rode alone to the hawks' camp and said to the hawks, "I am the governor of Zhouzhou, and I have been ordered by Heaven to pacify and nurture you. Don't be afraid. No one dares to move."

古文：于是说以利害，渠帅感悦，解兵归附者十余万口。
现代文：于是，卫玄向他们陈述利害，獠人主帅受到感动，十多万人缴械投降。
English: As a result, Wei Xuan told them what was at stake, the coach was moved, and more than one hundred thousand people surrendered.

古文：文帝大悦，赐缣二千匹，除遂州总管，仍令剑南安抚。
现代文：文帝非常高兴，赐给卫玄细绢二千匹，升任遂州总管，仍令为剑南安抚使。
English: Emperor Wen was so pleased that he gave Wei Xuan two thousand fine horses, promoted him to the post of Suizhou governor, and made him the peace envoy to Jianan.

古文：炀帝即位，复徵为卫尉卿，夷獠攀恋，数百里不绝。
现代文：隋炀帝即位，又征召入京为卫尉卿。夷獠之人怀恋卫玄，相送之人几百里内不断。
English: Emperor Sui and Qian ascended to the throne, and he was also conscripted to enter Beijing as the Lord of the Guards. The people of the barbarians fell in love with Wei Xuan, and the people who sent him away continued for hundreds of miles.

古文：及与之决，并挥涕而去。
现代文：分别的时候，都是挥泪而去。
English: When they parted, they both left in tears.

古文：迁工部尚书。
现代文：升任工部尚书。
English: He was promoted to the Ministry of Works.

古文：后拜魏郡太守，尚书如故。
现代文：后来任魏郡太守，仍兼任工部尚书。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Wei County, and still concurrently served as the head of the engineering department.

古文：未几，拜右卫大将军，检校左候卫事。
现代文：不久，任右侯卫大将军，检校左侯卫事。
English: Soon, he was appointed to the position of the Right Hōwei General and the Left Hōwei Inspector of Schools.

古文：转刑部尚书。
现代文：改任刑部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：辽东之役，检校右御卫大将军，帅师出增地道。
现代文：辽东之战时，卫玄任检校右御卫大将军，率兵由增地道而出。
English: During the Battle of Liaodong, Wei Xuan served as the general of the right guard of the inspection school, and led the soldiers out of Zengdi Road.

古文：时诸军多不利，玄独全众而还。
现代文：当时各路兵马多有不利，只有卫玄全师而还。
English: At that time, most of the soldiers and horses were unfavorable, and only Wei Xuan's entire division survived.

古文：拜金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：授任金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：九年，驾幸辽东，使玄与代王侑留守京师，拜为京兆内史，尚书如故，许以便宜从事，敕代王待以师傅礼。
现代文：大业九年，炀帝驾幸辽东，令卫玄和代王杨侑留守京师，任命卫玄为京兆内史，仍兼任刑部尚书，允许他遇事不便上奏，自行裁处决断，敕令代王以对待师傅的礼节对待卫玄。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiei era, Emperor Wu was in Liaodong, and he ordered Wei Xuan and the acting king, Yang Xuan, to stay in Beijing as teachers. He appointed Wei Xuan to be the internal historian of Beijing, and he also served as the official secretary of the criminal justice department. He was allowed to make a report in case of inconvenience, to make his own decisions, and to order the acting king to treat Wei Xuan with the etiquette of a teacher.

古文：会杨玄感围东都，玄率步骑七万援之。
现代文：适逢杨玄感围困东都洛阳，卫玄率领步兵骑兵七万人增援。
English: When Yang Xuanxuan besieged the eastern capital Luoyang, Wei Xuan led 70,000 infantry and cavalry reinforcements.

古文：至华阴，掘杨素冢，焚其骸骨，夷其茔域，示士卒以必死。
现代文：到了华阴，发掘杨素墓冢，焚烧其尸骸遗骨，将其祖茔铲平，向士卒显示必死的决心。
English: When he arrived in Huayin, he unearthed Yang Su's tomb, burned his remains, and shoveled his ancestor to the ground, showing his determination to die.

古文：既出潼关，议者恐崤函有伏兵，请於陕县沿流东下，直趋河阳，以攻其背。
现代文：兵出潼关之后，有人担心崤山和函谷关之处有伏兵，请求从陕县顺流而下，直奔河阳，攻击杨玄感的后方。
English: After the soldiers left Shaoguan, some people feared that there would be an ambush in Shaoshan and Hanyu Pass, and requested that they go down the river from Shaanxi County and go straight to Heyang to attack the rear of Yang Xuanxuan.

古文：玄曰： 此计非竖子所及也。 
现代文：卫玄说： 这种计谋不是小子所能想到的。 
English: Wei Xuan said, "This kind of stratagem is not something a child could come up with.

古文：乃鼓行而进。
现代文：于是就击鼓前进。
English: So they beat the drums and marched on.

古文：既度函谷，卒如所量。
现代文：过了函谷关之后，终于像他猜测的那样。
English: After passing through the Hakodate pass, it was finally as he had guessed.

古文：乃遣武贲郎将张峻为疑军於南道，玄以大兵直趋城北。
现代文：卫玄就派遣武贲郎将张峻从南路进发作为疑兵，自己则亲率大军直奔城北。
English: Wei Xuan sent Wu Yulang to send Zhang Jun from the south road as a suspected soldier, while he himself led a large army straight to the north of the city.

古文：玄感逆拒之，且战且行，屯军金谷。
现代文：杨玄感率兵迎战。卫玄一边战一边行，大军在金谷驻扎下来。
English: Yang Xuan led his troops into battle. Wei Xuan fought side by side, and the large army was stationed in Jingu.

古文：于军中扫地而祭文帝曰： 若社稷灵长，宜令丑徒冰碎；如或大运去矣，幸使老臣先死。 
现代文：卫玄在军中清扫一片场地，祭祀文帝说： 如果社稷长久，应该让杨玄感这些丑类像冰块一样破碎；如果隋朝大势已去，就请让老臣先死吧！ 
English: Wei Xuan was sweeping a field in the army, and said to Emperor Wen: "If the social strife lasts long, Yang Xuan should be made to feel that these ugly creatures are broken like ice; if the Sui Dynasty's great power has gone, please let the old minister die first!"

古文：词气激扬，三军莫不涕咽。
现代文：词气激昂，三军将士莫不流涕呜咽。
English: The words were so passionate that the three generals could not help sobbing.

古文：时众寡不敌，民贼频战不利，死伤太半。
现代文：当时，卫玄寡不敌众，与贼兵频频作战都不利，士卒死伤大半。
English: At that time, Wei Xuan was outnumbered and outgunned, and frequent battles with bandits were unfavorable. Most of the soldiers were killed or injured.

古文：玄苦战，贼稍却，进屯北芒。
现代文：卫玄率兵苦战，贼兵才稍稍退却，大军进屯于北芒。
English: Wei Xuan and his soldiers fought hard, the bandits only retreated a little, and the army moved into Beimang.

古文：会宇文述、来护等援兵至，玄感西遁。
现代文：适逢宇文述、来护儿等援兵赶到，杨玄感向西逃遁。
English: When reinforcements arrived, such as Yu Wenshu and a nurse, Yang Xuanxuan fled to the west.

古文：玄遣通议大夫斛斯万善、监门直阁庞玉前锋追之，及于阌乡，与宇文述等合击破之。
现代文：卫玄派遣通议大夫斛斯万善、监门直阁庞玉为先锋追击，赶到阌乡，与宇文述等合兵击败叛军。
English: Wei Xuan dispatched the interlocutory doctor Gong Si Wanzhen and the jailer Zhaogu Pangyu as the vanguard to pursue the attack, rushed to Xiangxiang, and defeated the rebels with the help of soldiers such as Wu Wenshu.

古文：车驾至高阳，征诣行在所。
现代文：炀帝车驾到高阳，征召卫玄到其所在的地方。
English: Emperor Gaozong drove to Gaoyang and summoned Wei Xuan to the place where he was.

古文：帝劳之曰： 社稷臣也。
现代文：炀帝慰劳卫玄说： 公真是社稷之臣啊！
English: Emperor Qian comforted Laowei Xuan and said, "Fairness is truly a social vassal!

古文：使朕无西顾之忧。 
现代文：使朕得以没有西顾之忧。 
English: So that I can go to the West without any worries.

古文：进右光禄大夫，赐以良田、甲第，资物钜万，还镇京师，帝谓曰： 关右之任，一委于公。
现代文：晋升卫玄为右光禄大夫，赐给他良田、宅第，财物数万。卫玄回去镇守京师，炀帝对他说： 函谷关以西全部委托给公了。
English: Emperor Gao promoted Wei Xuan to Uguanglu doctor, and gave him a good field, a mansion, and tens of thousands of property. Wei Xuan went back to guard the capital, and Emperor Gao said to him, "Everything west of the Huan Valley Pass has been entrusted to the public.

古文：公安，社稷乃安；公危，社稷亦危。
现代文：公安然无恙，国家就安然无恙；公有危险，国家也就危险了。
English: When the public is safe and sound, the country is safe and sound; when the public is in danger, the country is in danger.

古文：出入须有兵卫，坐卧恆宜自牢也。
现代文：公出入必须有兵士保卫，坐卧应该经常自我安稳。
English: There must be soldiers to guard public access, and sitting and lying down should always be self-stable.

古文：今特给千兵，以充侍从。 
现代文：如今特意给公一千名士兵，充当侍卫随从。 
English: Now, a thousand soldiers have been specially given to the prince to act as bodyguards.

古文：与樊子盖俱赐以玉麟符，以代铜兽。
现代文：和樊子盖一起，都赐给玉麒麟符节，因用以代替铜兽符节。
English: Together with the mule cover, both were given to the Jade and Unicorn Festival, because they were used to replace the Bronze Beast Festival.

古文：十一年，诏玄抚关中。
现代文：大业十一年，诏令卫玄安抚关中。
English: In the eleventh year of the great undertaking, Emperor Dairei ordered Wei Xuan to pacify Guanzhong.

古文：时盗贼蜂起，百姓饥馑，玄竟不能救恤。
现代文：当时，关中盗贼蜂起，百姓饥饿至死，卫玄竟然不能赈济抚恤。
English: At that time, the thieves in Guanzhong revolted, the people were starving to death, and Wei Xuan couldn't even afford the pension.

古文：而官方坏乱，货贿公行。
现代文：而官方败坏纷乱，贿赂公行。
English: But official corruption is rampant, and bribery is rampant.

古文：自以年老，上表乞骸骨，帝遣内史舍人封德彝驰喻之曰： 京师国本，宗庙园陵所在，籍公卧以镇之。 
现代文：卫玄认为自己年纪已高，上表乞求告老还乡。炀帝派遣内史舍人封德彝驰往京师，告诉他说： 京师是国家的根本，是宗庙园陵的所在地，借助公卧居以镇守之。 
English: Emperor Gao sent Feng De, a historian, to Beijing to tell him: "Beijing is the foundation of the country. It is the location of the ancestral temples and gardens. With the help of the imperial bed, it is protected by the town."

古文：玄乃止。
现代文：卫玄才作罢。
English: Wei Xuan can't do it.

古文：义师入关，自知不能守，尤惧称疾，不知政事。
现代文：义师进入关中，卫玄自知不能守御，忧愁恐惧，自称有病，不理政事。
English: When Yishi entered Guanzhong, Wei Xuan knew that he could not defend himself, was worried and afraid, claimed to be ill, and did not care about politics.

古文：城陷，归于家。义宁中，卒。
现代文：京城陷落，卫玄归居家中，隋恭帝义宁中卒。
English: The capital fell, Wei Xuan returned home, and Sui Gongdi Yining became a junior high school student.

