古文：萧奉先，天祚元妃之兄弟也。
现代文：萧奉先，天祚元妃之兄长。
English: Xiao Bongxian, the elder brother of Princess Tianyao.

古文：外宽内忌。
现代文：外表宽厚内心忌刻。
English: Generous on the outside, ungrateful on the inside.

古文：因元妃为上眷倚，累官枢密使，封兰陵郡王。
现代文：因元妃为皇上所宠爱和倚重，奉先累任枢密使，封兰陵郡王。
English: Because Empress Yuanfei was favored and trusted by the emperor, he appointed her as a privy envoy and named her Lanling County King.

古文：天庆二年，上幸混同江钓鱼。
现代文：天庆二年，皇上临幸混同江钓鱼。
English: In the second year of Tianqing, Emperor Linxing mixed fishing with river fishing.

古文：故事，生女直酋长在千里内者皆朝行在。
现代文：按旧例，生女真酋长在千里以内者都要前往行宫朝见。
English: According to the old practice, anyone who is within a thousand miles of the real chief's daughter should go to the palace for a morning meeting.

古文：适头鱼宴，上使诸酋次第歌舞为乐，至阿骨打，但端立直视，辞以不能。
现代文：适逢头鱼宴上，皇上让各位酋长依次唱歌跳舞作乐，轮到阿骨打，其人只是端坐正视，推辞说不会。
English: On the occasion of the head fish banquet, the emperor asked the chiefs to sing and dance in turn to make music. When it was time for the bone beating, they just sat and looked straight ahead, but declined to do so.

古文：再三旨谕，不从。
现代文：皇上再三劝谕，阿骨打不从。
English: The emperor repeatedly exhorted, but Akechi did not comply.

古文：上密谓奉先曰： 阿骨打跋扈若此，可托以边事诛之。 
现代文：皇上私下对奉先说： 没想到阿骨打如此跋扈！可借口边事诛杀他。 
English: Privately, the emperor said to Bongxian: "I didn't expect to be beaten so severely! You can kill him on the pretext of a trivial matter."

古文：奉先曰： 彼粗人，不知礼义，且无大过，杀之伤向化心。
现代文：奉先说 ：他是个粗人，不知礼义，况且没有大的过错，杀掉他将会伤害各部向慕归化之心。
English: "He's a boor, he doesn't know the meaning of propriety, and he hasn't made any big mistakes. Killing him will hurt the hearts of those who yearn for a return to normality," said Fengxian.

古文：设有异志，蕞尔小国，亦何能为！ 
现代文：假如真有异心，弹丸之地的小国，又能有什么作为呢！ 
English: If there really is dissent, what can a small country in the land of bullets do?

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上便罢了。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：四年，阿骨打起兵犯宁江州，东北路统军使萧挞不也战失利。
现代文：四年，阿骨打起兵进犯宁江州，东北路统军使萧挞不也交战失利。
English: In four years, Akotsu led an army to invade Ningjiang Province, and the Northeastern United Army defeated Xiao Shifu in battle.

古文：上命奉先弟嗣先为都统，将番、汉兵往讨，屯出河店。
现代文：皇上命奉先之弟嗣先担任都统，统率番、汉军队前往攻讨，屯驻于出河店。
English: On the emperor's orders, the younger brother of the former first served as the successor of the former, and led the Han army to attack and settle in Dehe shop.

古文：女直乃潜渡混同江，乘我师未备来袭。
现代文：女真便暗渡混同江，乘我军不备前来袭击。
English: Nyanzhen secretly crossed the Yangtze River and took advantage of our army's unpreparedness to attack.

古文：嗣先败绩，军将往往遁去。
现代文：嗣先败绩，将士大多逃走。
English: After the initial defeat, most of the soldiers fled.

古文：奉先惧弟被诛，乃奏 东征溃军逃罪，所至劫掠，若不肆赦，将啸聚为患 。
现代文：奉先害怕其弟被诛杀，便奏称 东征溃败之军带罪逃亡，所到之处便四处抢劫，如果不赦免他们，恐怕会结伙为盗，成为祸患 。
English: Fearing that his younger brother would be killed, he made a report that the defeated army of the Eastern Expedition had fled with crimes, and robbed everywhere they went. If they were not pardoned, they would probably band together to steal and become a scourge.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上从之。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：嗣先诣阙待罪，止免官而已。
现代文：嗣先到宫中等候处罚判罪，只不过免去官职而已。
English: He first went to the Imperial Palace to await punishment and sentencing, but he was only relieved of his official duties.

古文：由是士无斗志，遇敌辄溃，郡县所失日多。
现代文：从此士卒再无斗志，遇到敌人便溃逃，郡县失陷者一天多似一天。
English: From then on, the soldiers no longer had the will to fight. When they encountered the enemy, they fled. Those who were lost in the county were more like one day.

古文：初，奉先诬耶律余睹结驸马萧昱谋立其甥晋王，事觉，杀昱。
现代文：当初，奉先诬陷耶律余睹勾结驸马萧昱阴谋扶立其外甥晋王而事情败露，诛杀萧昱。
English: At first, Bongxian framed Ye Lu for colluding with Xiao Yao and conspiring to help his nephew Jin Wang rise to power, but the plot was uncovered and he killed Xiao Yao.

古文：余睹在军中闻之，惧，奔女直。
现代文：余睹在军中听说后恐惧，便逃奔女真。
English: After witnessing the horror of what she heard in the army, she ran away.

古文：保大二年，余睹为女直监军，引兵奄至，上忧甚。
现代文：保大二年，余睹为女真监军，率兵突然前来，皇上十分忧心。
English: In the second year of Bao Dai, the emperor was very worried when he saw a female inspector suddenly arrive with an army.

古文：奉先曰： 余睹乃王子班之苗裔，此来实无亡辽心，欲立晋王耳。
现代文：奉先说 ：余睹乃是王子班的后裔，这次前来确实不会有灭辽之心，是想扶立晋王罢了。
English: Feng Xian said: Yu Xian is a descendant of the prince class, this time he will not really have the heart to destroy Liao, he just wants to help establish Jin Wang.

古文：若以社稷计，不惜一子，诛之，可不战而退。 
现代文：如果为社稷着想，不吝惜一个儿子，诛杀了他，可以不必交战而敌人自退。 
English: If, for the sake of society, you do not begrudge a son and kill him, you can withdraw the enemy without fighting.

古文：遂赐晋王死。
现代文：于是赐死晋王。
English: As a result, Jin Wang was sentenced to death.

古文：中外莫不流涕，人心益解体。
现代文：内外官员无不伤心流泪，人心更加离散。
English: Officials at home and abroad shed tears of sorrow, and people's hearts became more and more divided.

古文：当女直之兵未至也，奉先逢迎天祚，言： 女直虽能攻我上京，终不能远离巢穴。 
现代文：当女真军队还未前来时，奉先逢迎宽慰天祚，说： 女真尽管能进攻我国上京，到底不能远离自己的巢穴。 
English: When the Jurchen army had not yet arrived, Feng Yingxuan consoled Tianyao, saying: Although Jurchen can attack our country and go to Beijing, she can't stay away from her lair.

古文：而一旦越三千里直捣云中，计无所出，惟请播迁夹山。
现代文：然而忽然一日金兵进军三千里直捣云中，奉先无计可施，只好请皇上流离迁住于夹山。
English: However, all of a sudden, the gold soldiers marched three thousand miles straight into the clouds. There was nothing he could do, so he had to ask the emperor to relocate to Jiashan.

古文：天祚方悟，顾谓奉先曰： 汝父子误我至此，杀之何益！
现代文：天祚这才醒悟，回头对奉先说： 你父子二人误我到了这一步，杀掉你又有何益！
English: It was only then that Tianyao woke up and turned to Fengxian and said, "Your father and son have brought me to this point by mistake. There is no benefit in killing you!"

古文：汝去，毋从我行。
现代文：你走吧，不要跟着我去。
English: You go. Don't follow me.

古文：恐军心忿怒，祸必及我。 
现代文：恐怕军心忿恨恼怒，造出乱子必然连累于我。 
English: I'm afraid that the military's resentment and anger will inevitably drag me down with them.

古文：奉先父子恸哭而去，为左右执送女直兵。
现代文：奉先父子痛哭着离去，为左右抓获送给女真兵。
English: Bongxian father and son cried bitterly and left, but were captured and sent to the Jurchen soldiers.

古文：女直兵斩其长子昂，送奉先及次子昱于其国主。
现代文：女真兵杀死其长子萧昂，送奉先及次子萧昱到其国主处。
English: The female soldier killed her eldest son, Xiao Ang, and sent her first and second sons, Xiao Yao, to their lord.

古文：道遇我兵，夺归，天祚并赐死。
现代文：途中遇到我国士兵，夺回，天祚将他们一并赐死。
English: On the way, they met our soldiers, recaptured them, and God gave them death together.

古文：李处温，析津人。
现代文：李处温，析津人。
English: Li Duanwen, a graduate of the University of Tsinghua.

古文：伯父俨，大康初为将作少监，累官参知政事，封漆水郡王，雅与北枢密使萧奉先友旧。
现代文：伯父李俨，大康初任将作少监，累官参知政事，封漆水郡王，与北枢密使萧奉先颇有交情。
English: Daikang's uncle Li Lan, Daikang's first-appointed junior inspector, was appointed to the post of vice-governor, and served as a member of the Council of State, and the king of Suishui County. He had a good relationship with the Northern Privy Councilor Xiao Bongsian.

古文：执政十余年，善逢迎取媚，天祚又宠任之。
现代文：执政十余年，善于逢迎献媚。天祚又宠信重用他。
English: He has been in power for more than ten years and is good at flattery. He is also a favorite of Heaven.

古文：俨卒，奉先荐处温为相。处温因奉先有援已力，倾心阿附，以固权位，而贪污尤甚，凡所接引，类多小人。
现代文：耶律俨去世，奉先荐举李处温任宰相，处温因奉先有提拔自己之力，倾心阿谀附从，以巩固权势地位，而贪利忘义比伯父更甚，凡所荐举之人，大多是小人。
English: After the death of Yeludong, Li Shuanwen was promoted to the post of prime minister on the recommendation of others. As Li Shuanwen had the power to promote himself, he followed his uncle to consolidate his position of power. He was more greedy than his uncle, and most of the people he recommended were villains.

古文：保大初，金人陷中京，诸将莫能支。
现代文：保大初，金人攻陷中京，诸将无人能够抵挡。
English: At the beginning of Bao's first year of college, the Jin people invaded and occupied central Beijing, and no one was able to resist them.

古文：天祚惧，奔夹山，兵势日迫。
现代文：天祚害怕，逃奔夹山，兵势日见窘迫。
English: The emperor was afraid and fled to the mountains. The army was in increasing distress.

古文：处温与族弟处能、子奭，外假怨军声援，结都统萧干谋立魏国王淳，召番、汉官属诣魏王府劝进。
现代文：处温与族弟处能、子李，在外借助怨军为声援，结连都统萧干谋划扶立魏国王耶律淳，召集蕃、汉属吏前往魏王府劝进。
English: Duan Wen and his younger brothers, Duan Neng and Zi Li, enlisted the help of hostile forces abroad for support, joined forces with Du Tong Xiao Gan to plan the installation of the Wei king, Ye Lu Jun, and gathered officials from the Han dynasty to go to the Wei royal palace for persuasion.

古文：魏国王将出，奭乃持赭袍衣之，令百官拜舞称贺。
现代文：魏国王准备出逃，李便手持赭袍给他穿上，下令百官拜舞祝贺。
English: When the king of Wei was about to flee, Li dressed him in the imperial robe and ordered the officials to dance to congratulate him.

古文：魏王固辞不得，遂称天锡皇帝。
现代文：魏王坚决推辞，不得已，便自称天锡皇帝。
English: The Wei king resolutely refused, and as a last resort, he called himself the Emperor of Tianxi.

古文：以处温守太尉，处能直枢密院，奭为少府少监，左企弓以下及亲旧与其事者，赐官有差。
现代文：任命处温为守太尉，处能直枢密院，李为少府少监，左企弓以下以及亲朋旧友参与其事者，赐予官职各有等差。
English: Wen was appointed to the position of captain of the guard, Neng Jizhi to the Privy Council, Li was appointed to the position of the minor superintendent of the minor prefectures, and those who participated in the matter, including relatives, friends and old friends, were given official positions with different ranks.

古文：会魏国王病，自知不起，密授处温番汉马步军都元帅，意将属以后事。
现代文：适逢魏国王生病，自知将一病不起，秘密授处温为蕃汉马步军都元帅，想将后事托付于他。
English: When the king of Wei fell ill, knowing that he would not be able to bear the illness, he secretly appointed Wen to be the marshal of the Han horse marching army, and wanted to entrust the future to him.

古文：及病亟，萧干等矫诏南面宰执入议，独处温称疾不对，阴聚勇士为备，绐云奉密旨防他变。
现代文：及至病危，萧干等人矫诏令南面宰执入宫议事，只有处温称病不肯前来，暗中集聚勇士做好防备，诳称奉密旨防止发生变故。
English: When he was critically ill, Xiao Gan and others issued an edict ordering Nanmen to take charge of the palace's affairs, but Duan Wen said that he was ill and refused to come. He secretly gathered warriors to prepare, pretending to have a secret order to prevent the occurrence of misfortune.

古文：魏国王卒，萧干拥契丹兵，宣言当立王妃萧氏为太后，权主军国事，众无敢异者。
现代文：魏国王去世，萧干掌握契丹兵马，声称应立王妃萧氏为太后，临时主持军国大事，众人无人敢发异议。
English: After the death of the Wei king, Xiao Gan took control of the Khitan soldiers and horses, claimed that Princess Xiao should be appointed as the empress dowager, and temporarily presided over the military affairs. No one dared to raise objections.

古文：干以后命，召处温至，时方多难，未欲即诛，但追毁元帅劄子。
现代文：萧干借太后之命，召处温前来，当时正值国家多难，不想立即杀他，只是追回并销毁授予元帅一职的札子。
English: Xiao Gan borrowed the empress dowager's order to summon Duan Wen to come. At that time, the country was in a difficult situation. He did not want to kill him immediately, but only to recover and destroy the postcard that awarded him the post of marshal.

古文：处温曰： 今日之事，天人所与，岂可易也！ 
现代文：处能害怕遭祸，削发为僧。不久有永清人傅遵说随郭药师进入燕京，被擒，详细陈说处温曾经送给易州富民赵履仁书信转达童贯，想挟持萧后纳土称臣归附于宋。
English: Soon, a Yongqing person Fu Zun said that he had entered Yanjing with Guo Healer and was arrested. He said in detail that Duan Wen had sent a letter to Yizhou rich man Zhao Liren and conveyed it to Tong Gan, and wanted to hold Xiao Hounai as a hostage to annex Song.

古文：琳虽有难色，亦勉从之。淳既称帝，诸将咸居权要，琳独守太师，十日一朝，平章军国大事。阳以元老尊之，实则不使与政。
现代文：后来拘执处温讯问此事，处温说： 我们父子对于宣宗天锡皇上有扶立之功，应该世代蒙受宽恕优容，怎么能因为谗言而获罪？ 太后说： 先前假如能让魏国王像周公那样不篡，那么终将享受亲戚与贤臣之美名并流传后世。
English: Later, the Detention Division interrogated Wen on this matter, and Wen said: Our father and son have the merit of supporting Emperor Xizong of Xuanzong, and should be forgiven and tolerated for generations. How can they be guilty of slander? The Empress Dowager said: Previously, if the King of Wei could be allowed not to usurp like Zhou Gong, then he would eventually enjoy the reputation of relatives and wise men and be passed down to future generations.

古文：琳由是郁悒而卒。
现代文：连累魏王的全因你们父子，你们有什么功劳可言？ 
English: Your father and son were responsible for bringing down the king of Wei. What do you have to show for it?

古文：耶律余睹，一名余都姑，国族之近者也。
现代文：一并数落其先前所犯之罪恶。处温无言以对，于是赐死，李也被诛杀。耶律余睹，又名余都姑，在皇族中血缘较近。
English: The sins he had previously committed were counted together. Duan Wen was speechless, so he was sentenced to death, and Li was also killed. Yelu Yu Jian, also known as Yu Dugu, was closer in blood to the royal family.

古文：慷慨尚气义。
现代文：为人慷慨，崇尚气节和道义。
English: He is a generous person, advocating virtue and morality.

古文：保大初，历官副都统。
现代文：保大初，历任副都统。
English: At the beginning of Baodai, successive vice-governors.

古文：其妻天祚文妃之妹，文妃生晋王，最贤，国人皆属望。
现代文：其妻为天祚文妃之妹，文妃生晋王，最为贤明，国人都归心于他。
English: His wife was the younger sister of Princess Tenjyo, and Princess Tenjyo gave birth to King Jin, who was the wisest of all, and the people of the country were devoted to him.

古文：时萧奉先之妹亦为天祚元妃，生秦王。
现代文：当时萧奉先之妹为天祚元妃，生秦王。
English: At that time, Xiao Bongxian's younger sister was Princess Tianyu Yuan, the daughter of King Qin.

古文：奉先恐秦王不得立，深忌余睹，将潜图之。
现代文：奉先担心秦王不得即位，十分忌恨余睹，准备暗中害他。
English: Bongxian was worried that King Qin would not be allowed to ascend the throne, and he was very reluctant to be seen, and prepared to secretly harm him.

古文：适耶律挞葛里之妻会余睹之妻于军中，奉先讽人诬余睹结驸马萧昱、挞葛里，谋立晋王，尊天祚为太上皇。
现代文：适逢耶律挞葛里之妻在军中与余睹之妻在军中相会，奉先唆使他人诬陷余睹结连驸马萧昱、挞葛里，图谋扶立晋王，尊天祚为太上皇。
English: When the wife of Yerutong Geli met the wife of Yuanshan in the army, Bong first instigated others to frame Yuanshan to link Xiao Yao Ma and Yuanshan Geli, in an attempt to help establish the King of Jin, and make Son Tianyao the Grand Empress.

古文：事觉，杀昱及挞葛里妻，赐文妃死。
现代文：事情泄露，皇上诛杀萧昱及挞葛里妻，赐死文妃。
English: When the affair leaked out, the emperor ordered the killing of Xiao Yu and his wife, and ordered the death of Princess Wen.

古文：余睹在军中闻之，惧不能自明被诛，即引兵千余，并骨肉军帐叛归女直。
现代文：余睹在军中听说后，害怕无法为自己辩白而被杀，便率领千余人，连同骨肉军帐反叛归附女真。
English: After hearing about the incident in the army, he was afraid that he would not be able to defend himself and would be killed, so he led more than a thousand people, along with the bones of the army, to rebel against Nyoshin.

古文：会大霖雨，道途留阻。
现代文：适逢大雨连绵，路途阻断逗留不前。
English: It coincided with continuous heavy rain, blocking the road and delaying travel.

古文：天祚遣知奚王府萧遐买、北宰相萧德恭、大常衮耶律谛里姑、归州观察使萧和尚奴、四军太师萧干追捕甚急。
现代文：天祚派遣知奚王府萧遐买、北宰相萧德恭、大常衮耶律谛里姑、归州观察使萧和尚奴、四军太师萧干追捕十分急切。
English: Tianzhu dispatched Xiao Jibai, the king of Zhishan, Xiao Deqong, the prime minister of the north, and Dazhongjie, the governor of Lijiang, to observe the return to the state, so that Xiao Monk Niu and Xiao Gan, the grandmaster of the four armies, were very eager to pursue.

古文：至闾山，及之。
现代文：到闾山，追上了余睹。
English: When I got to Shaoshan, I caught up with everyone else.

古文：诸将议曰： 萧奉先恃宠，蔑害官兵。
现代文：众将商议说： 萧奉先倚恃宠幸，蔑视残害官兵。
English: The generals deliberated and said: Xiao Bongxian favored the favored and despised the mutilated officers and soldiers.

古文：余睹乃宗室雄才，素不肯为其下。
现代文：余睹乃宗室之中雄才大略之人，向来不肯屈从于他。
English: Yu Han, who is the most talented person in his family, has always refused to give in to him.

古文：若擒之，则他日吾辈皆余睹矣。不如纵之。 
现代文：如果擒获余睹，那么将来我们都会沦为下一个余睹了。不如放他走。 
English: If he is left unpunished, then in the future we will all become the next unpunished. It is better to let him go.

古文：还，绐云追袭不及。
现代文：回来，诳称追击不及。
English: He came back and pretended he couldn't catch up.

古文：余睹既入女直，为其国前锋，引娄室孛堇兵攻陷州郡，不测而至。
现代文：余睹进入女真之后，为金国担任前锋，引领娄室孛堇军队攻陷州郡，出乎意料地前来。
English: After witnessing the entry of Jianzhen, he served as a forward for Jin Guo and led the Yishu troops to invade Shuzhou County, unexpectedly coming to the fore.

古文：天祚闻之大惊，知不能敌，率卫兵入夹山。
现代文：天祚听说后大惊，自知不能抵敌，率领卫兵进入夹山。
English: After hearing the news, Tianyao was shocked. Knowing that he could not resist the enemy, he led the guards into the mountains.

古文：余睹在女直为监军，久不调，意不自安，乃假游猎，遁西夏。
现代文：余睹在女真担任监军，长期不调动，心中不自安，便假借游猎，逃奔西夏。
English: After witnessing Jianzhen as a supervisor of the army, he did not move for a long time and was not at ease in his heart, so he borrowed a hunting trip and fled to the west.

古文：夏人问： 汝来有兵几何？ 
现代文：夏人问 ：你此来有兵力多少？ 
English: Xia Rong asked: How many troops do you have here?

古文：余睹以二三百对，夏人不纳，卒。
现代文：余睹回答说有二三百人，夏人不肯接纳他，余睹便去世了。
English: Yu Jian replied that there were two or three hundred people. Xia people refused to accept him, and Yu Jian passed away.

