古文：楚王问于范环曰： 寡人欲置相于秦，孰可? 
现代文：楚怀王问范环说： 寡人想在秦国安排一个相国，你看谁可以胜任？ 
English: King Chu Huai asked Fan Huan: "Many people want to arrange a sister country in Qin. Who do you think is capable of doing this?

古文：对曰： 臣不足以知之。 王曰： 吾相甘茂可乎? 
现代文：范环说： 臣不知道。 楚怀王说： 我安排甘茂去做相国可以吗？ 
English: Fan Huan said, "The minister doesn't know." Chu Hui Wang said, "Can I arrange for Ganmao to become a consort?"

古文：范环对曰： 不可。 
现代文：范环回答说： 不可以。 
English: Fan Huan replied: "No."

古文：王曰： 何也? 
现代文：楚怀王间： 为什么？ 
English: Chu Huai Wangzi: Why?

古文：曰： 夫史举，上蔡之监门也。
现代文：范环说： 史举原来是上蔡的看门人。
English: Fan Huan said: Shih Jiu was originally the gatekeeper of Shang Cai.

古文：大不如事君，小不如处室，以苛廉闻于世，甘茂事之顺焉。
现代文：往大说他不知道如何事奉君王，往小说他不知道怎样处理好家务事，以过于廉洁闻名于世，甘茂事奉他却十分顺从。
English: According to legend, he did not know how to serve the king. According to the novel, he did not know how to handle household chores, and was known for being too honest. However, Ganmao served him very obediently.

古文：故惠王之明，武王之察，张仪之好谮，甘茂事之，取十官而无罪，茂诚贤者也，然而不可相秦。
现代文：所以，像惠王那样的贤明，武王那样明察，张仪那样喜欢说别人坏话，让甘茂去事奉他们，就算获得十个官职也不是罪过，甘茂的确是有能力，但是却不可以让他去做秦国的相国。
English: Therefore, as wise as Hui Wang, as clear-sighted as Wu Wang, and as fond of bad-mouthing others as Zhang Yi, it is not a sin to let Ganmao serve them, even if he obtains ten official posts. Ganmao is indeed capable, but he cannot be allowed to become the fatherland of Qin.

古文：秦之有贤相也，非楚国之利也。
现代文：秦国有贤能的相国，对楚国没有好处。
English: Qin has a virtuous relative, which is not good for Chu.

古文：且王尝用滑于越而纳句章，昧之难，越乱，故楚南察濑胡而野江东。
现代文：再说大王曾经派召滑到越国为相，接收了句章，引出了唐昧之难，但因越国内乱，所以楚国扔能向南收管濑湖而以江东为郡。
English: Moreover, the great king once sent the governor to Yue as a pharaoh, received a sentence, and led to the difficulties of the Tang Dynasty. However, due to the domestic turmoil in Yue, Chu was able to take control of Wuhu to the south and take Jiangdong as a county.

古文：计王之功所以能如此者，越乱而楚治也。
现代文：大王的功业之所以能达到如此程度，是因为越国内乱而楚国得到了治理。
English: The reason why the great king's work has been able to reach such a level is because of the civil war in Vietnam and the governance of Chu.

古文：今王以用之于越矣，而忘之于秦，臣以为王钜速忘矣。
现代文：如今大王对越国已经用过这种策略，还想对秦国使用，臣下认为大王太健忘了。
English: Now the great king has already used this strategy against Yue, and he wants to use it against Qin. His vassals think the great king is too forgetful.

古文：王若欲置相于秦乎?
现代文：大王果真想在秦国安排相国吗？
English: Did the great king really want to arrange a sister country in Qin?

古文：若公孙郝者可。
现代文：像公孙郝那样的人就可以。
English: People like Gongsun Zou can do it.

古文：夫公孙郝之于秦王，亲也。
现代文：公孙郝和秦王的关系很亲密。
English: The relationship between Gongsun Rong and King Qin was very close.

古文：少与之同衣，长与之同车，被王衣以听事，真大王之相已。
现代文：年少时他与秦王同穿一件衣服，长大以后与秦王同坐一辆车，披着秦王的衣服处理公事，他可真是大王应该派去做相国的人选了。
English: When he was young, he wore the same clothes as King Qin. When he grew up, he rode in the same car as King Qin. He wore King Qin's clothes to do business. He really should be sent by the great king to be the candidate of his country.

古文：王相之，楚国之大利也。 
现代文：如果他去做相国，对楚国来说非常有利。 
English: If he were to become a son-in-law, it would be very beneficial for Chu.

