古文：吕望仲尼文翁董仲舒何比干五鹿充宗王溥应枢袁安陈仲举张承张氏司马休之杜慈武士彟张文成上官昭容崔行功李正己李揆贾隐林张子良郑絪
现代文：吕望仲尼文翁董仲舒何比干五鹿充宗王溥应枢袁安陈仲举张承张氏司马休之杜慈武士彟张文成上官昭容崔行功李正己李揆贾隐林张子良郑絪
English: Lu Wang, Zhong Ni, Wen Weng, Dong Zhong Shu, He Bi Gan, Wu Lu, Chong Zong, Wang Wei, Chu Yuan, An Chen, Zhong Zhou, Zhang Zeng, Zhang Zi, Ma Xiu, Du Ci, Samurai, Zhang Wensheng, Zhao Rong Cui, Gong Li, Zheng Ji, Li Wei, Jia Yinglin, Zhang Ziliang, Zheng He

古文：吕望
现代文：吕望
English: Lü Wang

古文：吕望钓于渭滨，获鲤鱼。
现代文：吕望在渭水边上钓鱼，钓上了一条鲤鱼。
English: Lu Wang was fishing on the edge of Surabaya waters and caught a catfish.

古文：剖腹得书曰：吕望封于齐。
现代文：剖开鱼的肚子，发现有一个纸条，上面写着：吕望将在齐国受封。
English: They cut open the fish's belly and found a note that read: Lü Wang will be crowned emperor of Qi.

古文：仲尼
现代文：仲尼
English: Zhongni District

古文：周灵王二十一年，孔子生鲁襄之代。
现代文：周灵王二十一年的时候，孔子生在鲁国襄公的时代。
English: When King Zhou Ling was 21 years old, Confucius was born in the era of Lu Xianggong.

古文：夜有二神女，擎香露，沐浴征在。天帝下奏钧天乐，空中有言曰： 天感生圣子，故降以和乐。 
现代文：夜晚有二位女神，拿着香露给孔子的母亲征在洗澡，天帝下界演奏钧天乐曲，空中还有话说： 上天感谢你生了圣人，所以才奏起和乐。 
English: In the evening, there were two goddesses who were bathing Confucius's mother, Zeng Rui, with fragrant dew. The lower world of the heavenly emperor was playing heavenly music. There were also words in the air: "Thank God you gave birth to a saint, that's why you're playing music."

古文：有五老，列征在之庭中。
现代文：另外还有五星精在征在的庭院里排列着。
English: In addition, there are five star elves lined up in the courtyard.

古文：夫子未生之前，麟吐玉书于阙里人家，文云： 水精子，继衰周为素王。 
现代文：孔子没出生之前，有麒麟从嘴里吐出一张纸条给都城里的一户人家，纸条上面写着：水精的儿子，将继衰弱的周朝之后做 素王 。
English: Before Confucius was born, a unicorn spat out a note to a family in the capital. The note read: "The son of a water sprite will succeed the weak Zhou Dynasty as the king of vegetables."

古文：征在以繍绂系麟之角，相者云： 夫子殷汤之后，水德而为素王。 
现代文：征在就把拴印章用的绣丝绳绑在了麒麟的角上。有个会相术的先生说： 孔子是在殷纣王和汤武王之后应了水德将成为 素王  。
English: There was a teacher of physiognomy who said: Confucius, after Yin Xi Wang and Tang Wu Wang, followed Shu De and became Su Wang.

古文：至定公二十四年，鉏商畋于大泽，得麟，示夫子，系绂尚存。
现代文：到了定公二十四年，鉏商在大泽打猎，得到了一只麒麟，拿来给孔子看，母亲征在给麒麟绑的那条丝绳还在它的角上。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Ding Gong's reign, a hawker went hunting in Osawa and obtained a giraffe, which he brought to show to Confucius. The silk cord that his mother had tied to the giraffe was still on its horns.

古文：夫子见之，抱而解绂，涕下沾襟。
现代文：孔子抱着麒麟把丝绳解了下来，流下了眼泪，泪水沾湿了衣襟。
English: Holding Kirin in his arms, Confucius untied the silk cord and shed tears, which wet his shirt collar.

古文：文翁
现代文：文翁
English: Wen Weng

古文：汉文翁当起田，斫柴为陂。
现代文：汉朝有个叫文翁的人，要开一个水田，就想用刀把柴草都砍掉建个小池。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Wen Weng, who wanted to open a paddy field, so he wanted to use a knife to cut down the firewood and grass and build a small pond.

古文：夜有百十野猪，鼻载土著柴中，比晓塘成。
现代文：夜晚有一百多头野猪就用鼻子运土往柴草里倒，等天亮池塘建成了。
English: In the evening, more than a hundred wild boars used their noses to transport soil and pour it into the brushwood. By dawn, the pond was complete.

古文：稻常收。
现代文：水稻年年丰收。
English: The rice harvest is bountiful year after year.

古文：尝欲断一大树，欲断处，去地一丈八尺，翁先咒曰： 吾得二千石，斧当著此处。 
现代文：一次他曾经想砍倒一棵大树，想要砍的地方，离地面有一丈八尺高，砍树前，文翁就祈祷说： 我要能做个二千石谷的官，斧子就应当砍在这个地方。 
English: Once he wanted to cut down a big tree, and the place he wanted to cut was eight feet high from the ground. Before cutting the tree, Wen Weng prayed and said, "If I want to be an official of a two-thousand-koku valley, the axe should be cut in this place."

古文：因掷之，正砍所欲，后果为蜀郡守。
现代文：说完就把斧子扔了出去。正巧斧子就砍在了所要砍的地方。他后来果然就作了蜀郡守。
English: After he finished speaking, he threw the axe out. It just so happened that the axe fell where it was supposed to fall. He later became the governor of Shu County.

古文：董仲舒
现代文：董仲舒
English: Dong Zhongshu

古文：汉董仲舒常梦蛟龙入怀中，乃作《春秋繁露》。
现代文：汉朝有个叫董仲舒的，经常梦见蛟龙投入怀里，于是他就写了《春秋繁露》这部书。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Dong Zhongshu, who often dreamed of a dragon falling into his arms, so he wrote the book "Spring and Autumn Blossoms."

古文：何比干
现代文：何比干
English: What a contrast

古文：汉何比干梦有贵客，车骑满门，觉以语妻子。
现代文：汉朝有个叫何比干的人，梦见贵客来临，车马盈门。醒后就把这个梦告诉了他的妻子和孩子。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a man named He Bijuan who dreamt that a distinguished guest was coming, and horses and chariots were crowding the gate. After waking up, he told this dream to his wife and children.

古文：未已，门首有老姥，年可八十余，求避雨，雨甚盛而衣不沾濡。
现代文：还没等说完，门口就有个老太太，年岁有八十多了，要求避雨。这时外面雨下得很大，可是老太太的衣服却没有被淋湿。
English: Before he had finished speaking, there was an old lady at the door, more than eighty years old, asking for shelter from the rain. At this time, it was raining heavily outside, but the old lady's clothes were not wet.

古文：比干延入，礼待之。
现代文：比干就把她让到了屋里，并且以礼相待。
English: He let her into the house and treated her with courtesy.

古文：乃曰： 君先出自后稷，佐尧至晋有阴功，今天赐君策。 
现代文：老太太就说： 你的祖先是后稷的后人，他们辅佐尧帝直到晋帝，有阴功。现在上天赐给你一册书。 
English: The old lady said, "Your ancestors are the descendants of Emperor Houyi. They assisted Emperor Shun until Emperor Jin, and they have the Yin Gong. Now, God has given you a book.

古文：如简，长九寸，凡九百九十枚，以授之曰： 子孙能佩者富贵。 
现代文：这书好像竹简、长九寸，共有九百九十枚。老太太授书给比干并说： 子孙谁能佩带它，谁就能富贵。 
English: The old lady gave the book to Bi Gan and said, "Whoever's offspring can wear this book will be rich."

古文：言讫出门，不复见。
现代文：说完就走出了门，从此再也没有看见她。
English: He then walked out of the door and she was never seen again.

古文：五鹿充宗
现代文：五鹿充宗
English: Goka Mitsumune

古文：汉五鹿充宗受学于弘成子。
现代文：汉朝五鹿有个叫充宗的人，他跟着弘成子学习。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a man in Wolu named Chengzong, who studied under Hong Chengzi.

古文：成子少时，尝有人过己，授以文石，大如燕卵。
现代文：成子小时候，曾经有路过他家的人，把一块带有花纹的石头给了他。
English: When he was a child, a passer-by once gave him a stone with a pattern.

古文：成子吞之，遂大明悟，为天下通儒。
现代文：石头像小燕子的蛋那样大小，成子就把它吞了下去。
English: The stone was the size of a small swallow's egg, and the adult swallowed it.

古文：成子后病，吐出此石，以授充宗，又为名学也。
现代文：于是就特别的聪明醒悟。成为了天下无所不通的学者。成子后来得了病，就把这块石头吐了出来，给了充宗，所以充宗也成为了有名的学者了。
English: As a result, he became particularly clever and enlightened. He became an all-knowing scholar in the world. When his son later became ill, he spat out this stone and gave it to Choson, so Choson also became a famous scholar.

古文：王溥
现代文：王溥
English: Wang Yao

古文：后汉永初三年，国用不足，令民吏入钱者得为官。
现代文：后汉时永初三年，国家资财不充足，于是就下令百姓官吏如有给国家钱的人就可以做官。
English: In the first three years of the Later Han Dynasty, the state's resources were not sufficient, so the people ordered that officials who had money to give to the state could become officials.

古文：琅琊王溥，其先吉，为昌邑中尉。
现代文：琅琊王溥，他的祖先王吉，曾做昌邑中尉。
English: His ancestor, Wang Ji, was a lieutenant of Changyi.

古文：溥奕世衰凌，及安帝时，家贫无赀，不得仕。
现代文：到王溥时一代接一代的家境就衰败了，等到了安帝时，家里就穷的没有钱维持生活了。
English: By the time of Wang Xi, the family fortune of generation after generation had decayed, and by the time of An Di, the family was poor and had no money to sustain life.

古文：乃挟竹简，摇笔洛阳市佣书。
现代文：又不做官，只好挟着纸笔，在洛阳市里靠写书信挣点钱花。
English: He didn't want to be an official, so he had to earn some money by writing letters in Luoyang with a pen and paper.

古文：为人美形貌，又多文词，僦其书者，丈夫赐其衣冠，妇人遗其金玉。
现代文：王溥这个人，长得好看，而且很有才华，所以去找他写东西，男的就赏给他些衣帽，妇女们就给他些金玉。
English: Wang Yao was good-looking and very talented, so if you went to him to write something, the men would give him some clothes and hats, and the women would give him some gold.

古文：一日之中，衣宝盈车而归。
现代文：在一天里，他就收了满满一车的衣物和珍宝而回家了。
English: In one day, he collected a carload of clothes and treasures and went home.

古文：积粟十廪，九族宗亲。莫不仰其衣食。
现代文：他积累了十仓粮食，因此九族的亲戚，没有不敬慕他的吃穿的。
English: He has accumulated ten storehouses of grain, so his relatives from nine ethnic groups have nothing to eat or wear without admiring him.

古文：洛阳称为善而富也。
现代文：洛阳的人都称赞他是靠行善事才富起来。
English: People in Luoyang praised him for getting rich by doing good deeds.

古文：溥先时家贫，穿井得铁印，铭曰： 佣力得富至亿瘐，一土三田军门主。 
现代文：王溥先前家穷时，挖井得到了一个铁印，上面刻着： 佣力得富至亿瘐，一土三田军门主。 
English: When Wang Yao's family was poor, he received an iron stamp for digging a well, which was engraved with: "I got rich with my help up to one hundred million baht, I am the gatekeeper of the Mita army."

古文：溥以亿钱输官，得中垒校尉。三田一土垒字，校尉掌北军垒门，故曰军门主也。
现代文：王溥就用十万钱去买了个官，结果做了中垒校尉。 垒 字是三个 田 字加一个 土 字，校尉是掌管北军垒门的官，所以说是 军门主 了。
English: Wang Yao used 100,000 yuan to buy an officer, and as a result, he became the captain of the middle gate. The gate word is three "Tian" characters and one "So" character. The captain is the officer in charge of the gate of the Northern Army, so he is said to be the master of the gate.

古文：应枢
现代文：应枢
English: Response hub

古文：后汉汝南应枢生四子，见神光照社。
现代文：后汉汝南有个叫应枢的人，他生了四个儿子。
English: In the Southern Han Dynasty, there was a man named Ying Zu, who had four sons.

古文：枢见光，以问卜人。
现代文：一天土地庙被神光所照射，而应枢看见了神光，就去问会卜算的人。
English: One day, the land temple was illuminated by the divine light, and when Ying Zhuo saw the divine light, he went to ask the people of the divination society.

古文：卜人曰： 此天符也，子孙其兴乎。 
现代文：卜者说： 这是天降瑞符啊，你的后代会兴旺。 
English: The fortuneteller said, "This is a good omen from heaven. Your descendants will prosper."

古文：乃探得黄金。
现代文：应枢于是就探测得到了黄金。
English: The receiver then detects the gold.

古文：自是诸子官学，并有才名。
现代文：从这以后他的几个孩子都在官学学习，并且都和才气很有名声。
English: Since then, several of his children have gone on to study at government-run schools and have gained reputations for their talent.

古文：至玚，七世通显。
现代文：到应玚时，应枢家七代都很显赫通达。
English: By the time of Ying Zang, the seven generations of the Ying Zang family were all outstanding and accomplished.

古文：袁安
现代文：袁安
English: Yuan An

古文：汉袁安父亡，母使安以鸡酒诣卜工，问葬地。
现代文：汉朝有个叫袁安的人，他的父亲死了，母亲就让他准备好鸡酒去请会占卜阴阳的人，问一问把父亲埋葬在什么地方好。
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was a man named Yuan An. His father had died, and his mother asked him to prepare chicken wine to invite a diviner to ask where his father should be buried.

古文：道逢三书生，问安何之，具以告。
现代文：半道上他遇到了五个书生，问袁安去做什么，袁安就把实情都告诉了他们。
English: On the way, he met five students and asked Yuan An what he was going to do. Yuan An told them the whole truth.

古文：书生曰： 吾知好葬地。 
现代文：书生们说： 我们知道一块好的葬地。 
English: The students said: "We know a good burial ground.

古文：安以鸡酒礼之，毕，告安地处，云： 当此世为贵公。 
现代文：袁安就把他们请到家中用鸡酒款待了他们。吃喝完了，书生们就告诉了袁安埋葬的地点，并且说： 应当在你这代做贵公。 
English: Yuan An invited them to his home and entertained them with chicken wine. After eating and drinking, the students told Yuan An where to bury him and said, "You should be a nobleman in your generation."

古文：便与别，数步顾视，皆不见。
现代文：说完就告别而去。走了几步，再四处环视，书生都不见了。
English: After saying goodbye, he left. After walking a few steps and looking around, all the students were gone.

古文：安疑是神人，因葬其地。
现代文：袁安怀疑他们是神人，就把父亲埋葬在书生指点的地方。
English: Yuan An suspected that they were gods, so he buried his father in the place indicated by the scholar.

古文：遂登司徒，子孙昌盛，四世五公焉
现代文：不久袁安就做了司徒，他的子孙后代也都十分兴旺显达。四代共有五个做贵公的。
English: Soon, Yuan An became a disciple, and his children and grandchildren were also very prosperous. There were a total of five noblemen in four generations.

古文：陈仲举
现代文：陈仲举
English: Chen Zhongju

古文：陈仲举微时，尝行宿主人黄申家。
现代文：陈仲举未显贵时候，曾经出外住宿在主人黄申的家里。
English: When Chen Zhongzhi was still a minor, he used to stay at the home of his host, Huang Shen.

古文：申家夜产，仲举不知。
现代文：正赶上黄申的老婆晚上要临产，仲举却不知道。
English: Huang Shen's wife, who was catching up with him, was about to give birth in the evening, but Zhonghe did not know.

古文：夜三更，有扣门者，久许，闻应云： 门里有贵人，不可前，宜从后门往。 
现代文：到了夜里三更天的时候，听见有叩门的声音。过了好久，就听见有人应道： 屋里有贵人，不可以上前，应当从后门进去。 
English: When it was three in the morning, there was a knock at the door. After a long time, someone answered: "There's a dignitary in the house, you can't go in front, you have to go in through the back door."

古文：俄闻往者还，门内者问之： 见何儿？名何？当几岁？ 
现代文：一会又听见去的那个人返回来，屋里的人就问他： 你看见了是个什么样的孩子，叫什么名字，能活多大岁数。 
English: After a while, the man who had heard it returned, and the people in the house asked him, "What kind of child did you see, what is his name, and how long can he live?"

古文：还者云： 是男儿，名阿奴，当十五岁。 
现代文：回来的那个人说： 是个男孩，名叫阿奴，能活十五岁。 
English: The one who came back said: It's a boy named Anu, he can live for fifteen years.

古文：又问曰： 后当若为死？ 
现代文：屋里的人又问他说： 以后他应当怎么死？ 
English: The people in the room asked him again: How should he die next?

古文：答曰： 为人作屋，落地死。 
现代文：回答说： 给人家盖房子，从房子上掉下来摔死。 
English: He replied: To build a house for someone and fall off it and die.

古文：仲举闻此，默志之。
现代文：仲举听到这里，就默默的记在了心里。
English: When I heard about this, I silently kept it in my heart.

古文：后十五年，为豫章太守，遣吏往问，昔儿阿奴所在，家云： 助东家作屋，堕栋而死矣。 
现代文：十五年后，仲举做了豫章太守。他就派了一个官吏前去打听，从前叫阿奴的那个小孩在那里，他家中的人说： 帮助东家盖房子，从房子上掉下来摔死了。 
English: Fifteen years later, he sent an official to inquire where the child, formerly named Anu, was. The people in his family said, "He was helping his master build a house when he fell from the house and died."

古文：仲举后果大贵。
现代文：仲举后来也果然大贵了。
English: The matchmaking turned out to be very expensive.

古文：张承
现代文：张承
English: Zhang Cheng

古文：氏怀张承时，乘轻舠于江浦，忽见白蛇长三丈，腾入舟中。
现代文：孙氏身怀张承的时候，乘坐着一艘轻快的小船在江边上，忽然看见一条白蛇，有三丈长，窜进了小船中。
English: When Sun was pregnant with Zhang Rong, he was riding a light boat on the edge of the river, when he suddenly saw a white snake, three feet long, slither into the boat.

古文：咒曰： 若为吉祥，勿毒噬我。 
现代文：她就默默地祷告说： 如果是吉祥的征兆，那么就不要咬我。 
English: She prayed silently, "If it's a good omen, then don't bite me."

古文：萦而将还，置于房中，一宿不复见，母嗟惜之。
现代文：孙氏随后把它带回家，把蛇放在房中，一宿没有再看见那条蛇。孙氏十分叹惜。
English: Mr. Sun then took it home, put the snake in his room, and did not see the snake again for one night. Mr. Sun was very sorry.

古文：邻中相谓曰： 昨者张家有白鹄，耸翮入云，以告承母。
现代文：邻居们都互相告诉说： 昨天张家有只白天鹅展开翅膀飞上了云天。 
English: Neighbors told each other: Yesterday, a white swan flew into the sky from Zhangjiajie.

古文：母使筮之。筮者曰： 吉祥。
现代文：占卜的人说： 这是吉祥的征兆。
English: The soothsayer said, "This is an auspicious sign."

古文：鹄是延年之物，从室入云，自卑升高之象。
现代文：天鹅是长寿之物，从屋里飞到了云中，这是从低往高升的象征。
English: The swan is a symbol of longevity, flying from the house to the clouds, a symbol of rising from the low to the high.

古文：昔吴阖闾葬其妹，殉以美人宝剑珍物，穷江南之富。
现代文：从前吴王阖闾埋葬他的妹妹，用美人、宝剑，以及珍贵的物品做为殉葬品，把江南的好东西几乎都拿尽了。
English: Once upon a time, when King Wu buried his sister, he used a beautiful woman, a sword, and precious objects as funerary objects, taking almost all the good things from the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：未及千年，雕云覆其溪谷，美女游于塚上，白鹄翔乎林中，白虎啸于山侧，皆昔时之精灵。
现代文：没过一千年，就有美丽的彩云覆盖了溪谷，美貌的女子在古墓上游玩，白色的天鹅在森林中飞翔，白色的猛虎在山间吼叫。
English: In less than a thousand years, there will be beautiful colored clouds covering the valley, beautiful women playing on ancient tombs, white swans flying in the forest, and white tigers roaring in the mountains.

古文：今出于世，当使子孙位极人臣，擅名江表。
现代文：这些都是从前的精灵，现在又出世了，这将预兆你的子孙后代能做高官，名扬江表。
English: These are all former elves, and now they are born again, which will foreshadow that your children and grandchildren can become high-ranking officials, and become famous.

古文：若生子，可以名为白鹄。 
现代文：因此你如果是生个男孩，可以给他起名叫白鹄。
English: So if you have a boy, you can name him Egret.

古文：后承生昭，位辅吴将军，年九十，虵鹄之祥也。
现代文：后来张承生下张昭，官位是辅吴将军，活了九十岁。这是蛇鹄带来的吉祥。
English: Later, Zhang Zheng gave birth to Zhang Zhao, whose official rank was Fu Wu General, and he lived to be ninety years old. This is the auspiciousness brought by the snake charm.

古文：张氏
现代文：张氏
English: Mr. Zhang

古文：晋长安有张氏者，昼独处室，有鸠自外入。止于床。
现代文：晋朝长安有个张氏，白天自己在室内，有一只鸠鸟从外面飞进来，停在她的床上。
English: Zhang, a resident of Chang'an in the Jin Dynasty, was indoors during the day when an ostrich flew in from outside and landed on her bed.

古文：张氏恶之，披怀而咒曰： 鸠，尔来为我祸耶，飞上承尘，为我福耶，飞入我怀。 
现代文：张氏很厌恶它，就敝开怀祷告说： 鸠鸟，你来如是我的祸事，就飞上天花板，如是我的福事，就飞到我的怀里。 
English: Mr. Zhang detested it very much, so he opened his arms and prayed: "Stork, if you come as my misfortune, fly up to the ceiling, if you come as my blessing, fly into my arms.

古文：鸠飞入怀，乃化为一铜钩。
现代文：结果鸠鸟真的飞进了他的怀里，而且变成了一块铜钩。
English: As it turned out, the ostrich really did fly into his arms and turned into a piece of copper.

古文：从尔资产巨万。
现代文：从这以后，张氏家资产上万，发了大财。
English: Since then, the Zhang family has accumulated tens of thousands of yuan in assets and made a fortune.

古文：司马休之
现代文：司马休之
English: Sima Huizhi

古文：晋司马休之，安帝族子，遇难出奔。所乘骓，常于床前养之，忽连鸣不食，注目视鞍。
现代文：晋朝司马休之，是安帝同族的后代，因遇难而外逃，他骑的马常在床前喂养，忽然那马连声嘶叫不吃东西，它在注视着马鞍马不动。
English: Jin Dynasty's Sima Xiu Zhi, a descendant of An Di's compatriots, fled abroad due to the disaster. The horse he rode was often fed in front of the bed. Suddenly, the horse even screamed and refused to eat. It was watching the saddle horse and did not move.

古文：休之即试鞴之，则不动。休之还坐，马又惊。因骑马，即骤出，行十里余，慕容超收使已至，奔驰，仅得归晋。
现代文：休之就试着鞴上马鞍，马不动，休之就又坐了下来，可是那马又惊叫起来，休之于是就骑上了马背，马就突然奔驰了出去，跑了十多里路，这时慕容超收使已到，休之就骑着马奔驰，才得到回晋。
English: Huizhi tried to saddle up, but the horse did not move, so Huizhi got up and sat down again, but the horse screamed again, so Huizhi rode on the horse's back, and the horse suddenly galloped out and ran more than ten miles. At this time, Murong Chao's messenger had arrived, and Huizhi rode the horse and galloped to get back to Jin.

古文：杜慈
现代文：杜慈
English: Duci

古文：秦符生、寿光年，每宴集，后入者皆斩之。
现代文：前秦的符生和寿光年间，每次聚众宴会，凡是后来的都要斩首。
English: During the Fu Sheng and Shuguang years of the former Qin Dynasty, every banquet that gathered a large number of people had to be beheaded.

古文：尚书郎杜慈奔驰疲倦，假寝省中，梦一人乘黑驴曰： 宁留而同死，将去而独生。 
现代文：尚书郎杜慈因奔驰劳累，就迷迷糊糊地在官衙里睡着了，他梦见了一人骑着一头黑色的毛驴说： 你若留在这里，就要一同死，如离开就可以活下来。 
English: Shang Shulang Du Ci, exhausted by the journey, fell asleep in a daze in the official residence. He dreamed of a man riding a black donkey and saying: "If you stay here, you will die together, but if you leave, you will survive."

古文：慈闻惊觉，取马遁走，乃免。
现代文：杜慈听了这话就惊恐地醒了，骑着马逃跑了。结果免了这场灾祸。
English: Tootsie awoke with a start and fled on horseback, escaping the ordeal.

古文：余皆斩。
现代文：而剩下的没有走的人都被杀了。
English: Those who did not leave were killed.

古文：武士彟
现代文：武士彟
English: Samurai sword

古文：唐武士彟，太原文水县人。
现代文：唐朝有个叫武士彟的人，是太原文水县人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Bushiro, who was from Suixian, Taiyuan.

古文：微时，与邑人许文宝，以鬻材为事。
现代文：小时候，与县里人许文宝靠着卖木材为生。
English: When he was a child, he made a living by selling lumber with county resident Xu Wenbao.

古文：常聚材木数万茎，一旦化为丛林森茂，因致大富。
现代文：他们曾栽植了数万棵小树，有一天小树要长成了茂盛的森林，他们就可成为大富翁。
English: They had planted tens of thousands of small trees, and one day the small trees would grow into a lush forest, and they could become millionaires.

古文：士彟与文宝读书林下，自称为厚材，文宝自称枯木，私言必当大贵。
现代文：一天，士彟与文宝在树林下面读书，士彟自称是个厚材，文宝自称是枯木。私下里说一定能富贵。
English: One day, Shizhao and Wenbao were reading under the trees. Shizhao claimed to be a thick wood, and Wenbao claimed to be dead wood. They said in private that they would definitely be rich.

古文：及高祖起义兵，以铠胄从入关，故乡人云： 士彟以鬻材之故，果逢构夏之秋。 
现代文：等到高祖发起义兵的时候，士彟也就穿着铠甲跟着入关。乡里的人们都说： 士彟靠卖木材的原故，果然遇到好结局。 
English: By the time Gao Zu raised a volunteer army, Shi Yan had also followed him into the customs in his armor. The people in the village all said, "Because Shi Yan relied on selling wood, he actually met with a good ending."

古文：及士彟贵达，文宝依之，位终刺史。
现代文：等士彟富贵显达了，文宝依附他，官位做到了刺史。
English: The likes of Shao Fugui became prominent, Wenbao clung to him, and his official position made history.

古文：张文成
现代文：张文成
English: Zhang Wensheng

古文：唐率更令张文成，枭晨鸣于庭树。其妻以为不祥，连唾之。
现代文：唐朝率更令张文成，一天早晨听见一只猫头鹰在庭院的树上叫，他的妻子认为是不吉祥的征兆，就连声唾骂它。
English: One morning, Zhang Wencheng heard an owl hooting in a tree in the courtyard. His wife thought it was an unlucky omen and even swore at it.

古文：文成云： 急洒扫，吾当改官。 
现代文：张文成说： 赶快洒扫干净，我要改官了。 
English: Zhang Wencheng said: Hurry up and clean up, I'm going to change my position.

古文：言未毕，贺客已在门矣。
现代文：话还没说完，祝贺的人就已在门外等着了。
English: Before the speech was over, the well-wishers were already waiting outside the door.

古文：又一说，文成景云二年，为鸿胪寺丞，帽带及绿袍，并被鼠啮。
现代文：还有一个传说，文成在景云二年时，做鸿胪寺丞，帽子、腰带以及绿袍都被老鼠咬了。
English: There is also a legend that when Wencheng was two years old in Jingyun, he was a monk, and his hat, belt and green robe were all bitten by mice.

古文：有蜘蛛大如栗，当寝门悬丝上。
现代文：有一个象栗子大小的蜘蛛，悬挂在卧室丝网上。
English: There was a spider the size of a chestnut hanging from the bedroom's silk screen.

古文：经数日，大赦，加阶，授五品。
现代文：过了几天，遇大赦，他被提升授五品官。
English: A few days later, after an amnesty, he was promoted to the Fifth Rank.

古文：男不宰，鼠亦啮腰带欲断，寻选授博野尉。
现代文：他的儿子不宰，也被老鼠咬了腰带，几乎要咬断了，不久被选授博野尉。
English: His son was not killed, but a mouse bit his belt, almost tearing it, and he was soon promoted to Hono lieutenant.

古文：上官昭容
现代文：上官昭容
English: Superintendent Shoyoung

古文：唐上官昭容者，侍郎仪之孙也。
现代文：唐朝的上官昭容，是侍郎仪的孙子。
English: The superior officer of the Tang Dynasty, Zhaorong, was the grandson of a chamberlain.

古文：仪子有罪，妇郑氏填宫，遗腹生昭容。
现代文：仪的儿子有罪，他的儿媳妇已怀了孕，被弄到宫里后，生下了留在肚子里的孩子昭容。
English: Yi's son is guilty, his daughter-in-law is pregnant, and after being taken to the palace, she gives birth to the child left in her stomach, Zhaoyong.

古文：其母将诞之夕，梦人与秤曰： 持此秤量天下文士。 
现代文：昭容的母亲将要生他的那天晚上，梦见有个人给他一杆秤说： 拿着这杆秤去衡量天下的女人。 
English: On the night that Zhaorong's mother was about to give birth to him, he dreamed that a man gave him a pair of scales and said, "Take this pair of scales and measure all the women in the world."

古文：郑氏冀其男也，及生昭容，母视之曰： 秤量天下，岂是妆耶？ 
现代文：郑氏希望他是男孩。等生下了昭容，母亲看着他说： 称量天下，难道是你吗？ 
English: Zheng hoped it would be a boy. When Zhaorong was born, his mother looked at him and said, "Weighing the world, is it really you?"

古文：口中呕呕，如应曰 是 。
现代文：幼小的昭容就发出一呕呕的声音，好象答应说： 是 。
English: The young Zhao Rong let out a gagging sound, as if promising to say, "Yes."

古文：崔行功
现代文：崔行功
English: Cui Xingong

古文：唐秘书少监崔行功，未得五品前，忽有鸲鹆，衔一物入其室，置案上去，乃鱼袋钩铁。
现代文：唐朝秘书少监崔行功，在没做五品官以前，忽然有一只八哥，口里含着一个东西飞进了他的住室，把东西放到案上就飞走了。原来是一个鱼袋钩铁。
English: Cui Xinggong, a secretary of the Tang Dynasty, before he became the fifth grade official, suddenly a starling flew into his living room with something in its mouth, put it on the case and flew away. It turned out to be a fish bag with a hook.

古文：不数日，加大夫也。
现代文：没过几天，崔行功就被加封为大夫之职。
English: Within a few days, Cui Xingong was promoted to the post of doctor.

古文：李正己
现代文：李正己
English: Li Zhengji

古文：唐李正己本名怀玉，侯希逸之内弟也。
现代文：唐朝李正己本名叫李怀玉，是侯希逸的内弟。
English: Li Zhengji of the Tang Dynasty was originally named Li Huaiyu, the younger brother of Hou Xiyu.

古文：侯镇淄青，署怀玉为兵马使。
现代文：侯希逸镇守淄青的时候委任怀玉做兵马使。
English: Hou Xiyat appointed Huaiyu to be an envoy when he was in control of Jiaqing.

古文：寻构飞语，侯怒囚之，将置于法。
现代文：不久流传流言蜚语，侯希逸知道非常恼怒，就把李怀玉囚禁起来，将要以法严惩。
English: Rumors soon spread that Hou Xiyi, knowing that she was very angry, had imprisoned Li Huaiyu and was going to punish her severely.

古文：怀玉抱冤无诉，于狱中叠石像佛，默祈冥助。
现代文：怀玉怀着满腹冤屈没有地方申诉，就在狱中用石头堆起了一个佛像，并默默的祈祷请求神灵帮助。
English: With a belly full of grievances and no place to appeal, Huayu built a stone Buddha statue in prison and silently prayed to the gods for help.

古文：时近腊月，心慕同侪，叹咤而睡。
现代文：这时将近腊月，他非常羡慕同辈的人，就叹息怒骂着睡了。
English: At this time, near the end of his life, he was very envious of his peers, so he sighed and cursed and fell asleep.

古文：觉有人在头上语曰： 李怀玉，汝富贵时至。 
现代文：这时就感觉有人在头上告诉他说： 李怀玉，你富贵的日子到了。 
English: At this time, he felt someone in his head telling him: Li Huaiyu, your day of wealth has come.

古文：即惊觉，顾不见人，天尚黑，意甚怪之。
现代文：于是他吃惊地醒了，环视四周，却不见有人。天还没亮，他感到非常奇怪，就又睡了。
English: And he awoke with a start, and looked about him, and, behold, there was no man; and before it was light, he wondered exceedingly, and slept again.

古文：复睡，又听人谓曰： 汝看墙上有青鸟子噪，即是富贵时至。 
现代文：这时就又听到有人对他说： 你看见墙上有青色的鸟鸣叫，就是富贵的时候到了。 
English: Just then he heard someone say to him, "If you see a bluebird singing on the wall, it is time to be rich."

古文：即惊觉，复不见人。
现代文：他又惊讶地醒来，仍然没看见有人。
English: To his surprise, he woke up again and still saw no one.

古文：有顷天曙，忽有青鸟数十，大如雀，时集墙上。
现代文：过了一会，天已放亮，忽然有十多只青色的鸟，象麻雀那样大小，这时落在墙上。
English: After a while, the sky was bright, and suddenly more than ten blue birds, as big as sparrows, landed on the wall.

古文：俄闻三军叫呼，逐出希逸，坏锁。取怀玉，权知留后。
现代文：不一会就听见三军呼叫的声音，撵走了侯希逸，打碎了牢锁，救出了怀玉，叫他暂时做留后的地方官。
English: Not long after, he heard the sound of the three armies' shouts, snatched Hou Xiyu away, broke the prison lock, rescued Huaiyu, and asked him to temporarily serve as a local official.

古文：李揆
现代文：李揆
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐代宗将临轩送上计郡守，百僚外办，御辇俯及殿之横门。
现代文：唐代宗坐着华丽的车子去送别上计郡守，文武百官在外大量购置送行用的物品。
English: Tang Daizong took a magnificent car to see off the county governor of Shangji, and hundreds of civil and military officials purchased a large number of items for the delivery.

古文：帝忽驻辇，召北省官谓曰： 我常记先朝每饯计吏，皆有德音，以申诫励，今独无有，可乎？ 
现代文：皇帝乘坐着车来到了大殿的横门下，忽然停住了车，召集北省官员们对他们说： 我曾记得，先主在朝时，每当给计吏送行时都要有 恩诏 下达民间，用来告诫勉励。
English: The emperor rode in a carriage to the side gate of the Great Hall. He suddenly stopped the carriage and called together the officials of the Northern Province and said to them, "I once remembered that in the morning, whenever the emperor was seeing off the tax collectors, he had to issue an edict to the common people to admonish and encourage them.

古文：宰相匆遽不暇奏对，帝曰： 且罢朝撰词，以俟异日。 
现代文：而现在为什么没有呢？这样可以吗？ 宰相匆遽一时没有回答。皇帝说： 干脆停止上朝回去撰写送行的文章，等待写好了再饯行吧。 
English: And why not now? Is that okay? The prime minister did not answer in a hurry. The emperor said: Just stop going up to the emperor and go back to write a farewell article, wait until it is written and then go.

古文：中书舍人李揆越班伏奏曰： 陛下送计吏，敕下已久，远近咸知，今忽临朝改移，或恐四方乍闻，妄生疑惑。
现代文：这时中书舍人李揆赶紧上前跪伏在地上，上奏说： 皇帝送计吏，诏书已经下达很长时间了，远近的人都知道，现在突然改变送行的日期，恐怕四方官民得知，要胡乱的猜疑。
English: At this time, the librarian, Li Qian, hurried forward, knelt on the ground, and began to recite: The emperor is sending the accountants, the imperial decree has been issued for a long time, people from near and far know that now the date of departure has suddenly changed, I am afraid that officials and people in the four directions have learned that they should be suspicious.

古文：今止须制词，臣请立操翰，伏乞陛下稍驻銮辂。 
现代文：现在停止送行，须要找个理由，请让我立刻动笔起草一个通知，乞请皇上稍稍停一下车。 
English: If I have to find a reason for stopping the procession now, please let me immediately write a notice, begging the emperor to stop the car for a moment.

古文：帝俞之，遂命纸笔，即令御前起草。
现代文：皇帝答应了他的要求，就叫人拿来纸笔，让李揆在皇帝面前起草。
English: The emperor agreed to his request, so he asked someone to bring a pen and paper and let Li Yao draft it in front of the emperor.

古文：随遣书工写录，顷刻而毕。
现代文：随即派书工抄写。不一会就写完了。
English: A scribe was immediately dispatched to copy it. It was finished in no time.

古文：及宣诏，每遇要处，帝必目揆于班。
现代文：接着就以诏书的形式宣读了。从此以后，每遇重大的事情，皇帝都要亲眼看见李揆在不在场。
English: Then it was read out in the form of an imperial edict. From then on, whenever something important happened, the emperor had to see with his own eyes that Li Xi was not present.

古文：中外日俟揆之新命，时方盛暑，揆夜寝于堂之前轩，而空其中堂，为昼日避暑之所。
现代文：朝廷内外每天等着李揆被提升，当时正是盛夏，李揆晚上就睡在了殿堂前檐下的平台上，中堂是空的，是白天避暑的地方。
English: People in and out of the imperial court waited for Li Qiye to be promoted every day. At that time, it was the height of summer, and Li Qiye slept on the platform under the eaves in front of the Great Hall of the People at night. The Great Hall was empty, and it was a place to escape the heat during the day.

古文：于一夜，忽有巨狐鸣噪于庭，仍人立跳跃，目光迸射，久之，逾垣而去。
现代文：一天晚上，忽然有只大狐狸在庭院里鸣叫。还象人站立起来那样的跳跃，两只眼睛放出光焰，过了很长时间，跳墙走了。
English: One night, suddenly, there was a big fox chirping in the courtyard. It also jumped like a man standing up, its two eyes emitting light. After a long time, it jumped over the wall and ran away.

古文：揆甚恶之，是夜未艾，忽闻中堂动荡喧豗，若有异物，即令执烛开门以视。人辈惊骇返走，皆曰： 有物甚异。 
现代文：李揆非常厌恶，这一夜都没有睡着。忽然又听见中堂里有动荡喧闹的声音，好象有奇怪的动物，就叫人拿着蜡烛打开门看，人们都惊恐害怕的往回跑，都说： 有个东西长得特别奇怪。 
English: Li Yao was so disgusted that he didn't sleep at all that night. Suddenly, he heard noisy and turbulent noises in the middle hall, as if there was a strange animal, so he asked someone to open the door with a candle. People were running back and forth in fear, saying, "There's something very strange."

古文：揆即就窥，乃有暇蟆，大如三斗釜，两目朱殷，蹲踞嚼沫。
现代文：李揆就靠近前去看，却是个蛤蟆。大小就象三斗的大锅。
English: Li Qian came closer to see, but it was a dragonfly. It was as big as a three-drum cauldron.

古文：揆不令损害，阶前素有渍瓜果大铜盆，可受一斛，遂令家人覆其盆而合之。
现代文：两眼通红，蹲在地上，嘴里还吐着沫子，李揆不让人损害它，就用放在台阶前一个可装十斗的平常浸渍瓜果的大铜盆，把蛤蟆扣起来，并把门也插上，再没听到什么动静。
English: His eyes were red, he was crouching on the ground, and he was still spitting foam in his mouth. To prevent anyone from damaging it, Li Yao used a large copper basin that can hold ten buckets of commonly impregnated melon and fruit, which was placed in front of the steps. He buttoned up the shackles and also plugged in the door, and he did not hear any further movement.

古文：因扃其门，亦无他变。将晓，揆入朝，其日拜相。
现代文：天刚要亮时，李揆入朝，这天他就被提升为相。
English: Just as the sun was about to rise, Li Rong entered the morning, and on this day he was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：及归，亲族列贺，因话诸怪，即遣启户，揭盆视之，已失其物矣。
现代文：等回来时，亲戚族人都排着队来祝贺。于是就谈起夜晚的怪事来，就派人打开房门，揭开铜盆来看，盆下面扣着的那个大蛤蟆已经没有了。
English: When he came back, his relatives were all lined up to congratulate him, so he told them about the strange events of the night, and sent someone to open the door of the house, uncover the copper basin, and see that the cocoon under the basin was no longer there.

古文：贾隐林
现代文：贾隐林
English: Jia Yinglin

古文：唐德宗欲西幸，有知星者奏云： 逢林即住。 
现代文：唐德宗想要去西边巡视，有个善于观察星相的人启奏说： 遇见有林的地方就停下。 
English: When Tang Dezong wanted to go on a tour of the west, a person who was good at observing the constellations suggested, "If you come across a forest, stop."

古文：帝曰： 岂敢令朕止于林木间？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 怎么敢叫我停止在林木中。 
English: The emperor said, "How dare you ask me to stop in the middle of the forest?

古文：姜公辅曰： 不然，但地亦应。 
现代文：姜公辅说： 不这样，就是地也应远林木的。 
English: Jiang Gongyu said: Otherwise, even the earth should be far away from the trees.

古文：乃奉天尉贾隐林谒帝于行在，帝观隐林气色雄杰，兼是忠烈之家，而名叶星者所奏之语。
现代文：有个奉天尉贾隐林到行宫拜见皇帝，皇帝看贾隐林气度长相非凡，又是出身在忠臣英烈的家里，符合了知星者所说的话。
English: There was a servant of heaven, Jia Yinglin, who went to the palace to visit the emperor. The emperor saw that Jia Yinglin's temperament was extraordinary, and that he was born in the family of a loyal subject, which was in line with what the star-gazers said.

古文：隐林即天宝末贾修之犹子，帝因召于卧内，以探筹略之深浅。
现代文：隐林是天宝末年贾修的侄子，皇帝把他叫到了卧室里，来试探他的智谋筹略的深浅程度。
English: Hinbayashi was the nephew of the late Jiaxiu Tianbao. The emperor summoned him to his bedroom to test the depth of his wisdom and strategy.

古文：隐林于御榻前，以手板画地，陈攻守之策，帝甚异之。
现代文：隐林在皇帝的床前，用竹板在地上画，并陈述攻守的策略。皇帝感到很不一般。
English: In front of the emperor's bed, Hekilin drew on the floor with a bamboo board and explained the strategy of attack and defense. The emperor felt very unusual.

古文：隐林奏曰： 臣昨梦日堕于地，臣以头戴日上天。 
现代文：隐林对皇帝说： 昨天晚上梦见太阳从天上掉下来，我用脑袋又把太阳顶上了天。 
English: Hinbayashi said to the emperor, "Last night I dreamed that the sun fell from the sky, and I used my head to lift the sun back up to the sky.

古文：帝曰： 朕此来也，乃已前定。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我这次来，乃是以前已经定数的。 
English: The emperor said, "I have come this time because I have been appointed before.

古文：遂拜隐林为侍御史，纠劾行在，寻迁左常侍。
现代文：于是就封隐林为侍御史，在皇帝身边负责纠正错误，揭发罪行的工作，不久又改任了左常侍。
English: As a result, Emperor Jinglin was made an Imperial Historian, responsible for correcting mistakes and exposing crimes in the emperor's entourage. Soon after, he was reassigned to the position of Zuo Changzhu.

古文：张子良
现代文：张子良
English: Zhang Ziliang

古文：唐永贞二年，春三月，彩虹入润州大将张子良宅。
现代文：唐朝永贞二年的阳春三月，彩虹照进了润州大将张子良的住宅。
English: In the Yangchun March of the second year of Yongzhen of the Tang Dynasty, a rainbow shone into the residence of Rongzhou General Zhang Ziliang.

古文：初入浆瓮，水尽，入井饮之。
现代文：先进到盛水的缸里，水没有了，又到井里去喝。
English: He went first into the pitcher of water, and when there was no more water, he went to the well to drink.

古文：是月九日，节度使李锜，诏召不赴阙，欲乱。
现代文：这个月的第九天，节度使李锜，因诏书召他进宫，他却没有来，想要做乱。
English: On the ninth day of this month, the festival made Li Yan, who was summoned to the palace because of the edict, but he did not come, want to make a mess.

古文：令子良领兵收宣歙，子良翻然反兵围城，李锜就擒，子良拜金吾将军，寻拜方镇。
现代文：于是皇帝就命令张子良领兵收复宣歙，子良很快地调头反兵围城，李锜被捉，子良被提升为金吾将军。不久又升为方镇。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Zhang Ziliang to lead an army to recover Xuanwu, and Ziliang quickly turned his head against the siege of the city, Li Xi was captured, and Ziliang was promoted to Kingu General. Soon he was promoted to Fangzhen.

古文：郑絪
现代文：郑絪
English: Zheng Wei

古文：唐丞相郑絪宅，在昭国坊南门，忽有物来投瓦砾，五六夜不绝。
现代文：唐朝丞相郑絪的住宅，在昭国坊南门。一天忽然住宅里投来了碎石瓦块，连续五六夜没断。
English: The residence of Zheng Qi, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, is located at the south gate of Zhaoguo Fang. One day, gravel tiles were suddenly thrown into the house, and they did not break for five or six consecutive nights.

古文：及移于安仁西门宅避之，瓦砾又随而至。
现代文：郑絪就搬到了安仁西门的住宅躲避，结果碎石瓦块也跟着来了。
English: Zheng Rong moved to a house on the west side of Anren to hide. As a result, the rubble and tiles followed.

古文：久之，复迁昭国。
现代文：过了很长时间，他又搬回了昭国坊。
English: After a long time, he moved back to Zhaoguangfang.

古文：郑公归心释门，宴处常在禅室，及归昭国，入方丈，絪子满室悬丝，去地一二尺，不知其数。
现代文：郑絪开始信奉佛教，吃住常常在禅堂里。等搬回昭国，他进到佛堂，喜蛛满屋，结网而挂，离地面有一二尺高，数不清有多少。
English: Zheng Qi began to believe in Buddhism, and often ate and lived in a Zen hall. When he moved back to Zhaoguo, he entered the Buddhist hall, and the house was full of cicadas, hanging from nets, one or two feet high from the ground, and he couldn't count how many there were.

古文：其夕瓦砾亦绝，翌日拜相。
现代文：就在那天晚上，碎石瓦块也没有了。第二天郑絪就被封了宰相。
English: That very night, the rubble and tiles were gone. The next day, Zheng Rong was named prime minister.

