古文：宣律师
现代文：宣律师
English: Lawyer Xuan Zhou

古文：大唐乾封二年春二月，西明寺道律师逐静在京师城南故净业寺修道。
现代文：唐高宗乾封二年春季二月，西明寺律师逐静在京都城南原净业寺修习佛道。
English: In the spring of February of the second year of Tang Gaozong Qianfeng, the lawyer of Ximing Temple gradually studied Buddhism in the Southern Yuan Pure Land Temple in Kyoto.

古文：律师积德高远，抱素日久。
现代文：逐静律师积德高远，久持道心。
English: All lawyers are highly moral and have a long-held moral compass.

古文：忽有一人来至律师所，致敬申礼。
现代文：一天，忽有一人来到律师的住处。
English: One day, a man suddenly came to the lawyer's home.

古文：具叙暄凉，律师问曰： 檀越何处？
现代文：施礼致敬，相互道过寒暄之后，律师问道： 施主家住何处？
English: After paying homage and exchanging greetings, the lawyer asked: Where does the donor's family live?

古文：姓字谁耶？ 
现代文：尊姓贵名是什么？ 
English: What is your family name?

古文：答曰： 弟子姓王名璠，是大吴之兰台臣也。
现代文：此人答道： 弟子姓王名璠，是大吴国时兰台的臣民。
English: This person replied: The disciple surnamed Wang Mingsheng was a subject of Lantai during the Great Wu Kingdom.

古文：会师初至建业，孙主即未许之，令感希有之瑞，为立非常之庙。
现代文：康僧会法师当初来到建业，国主孙权没有立即允许他传教，令其感召希世之珍宝，为他建立非常之寺庙。
English: When the Master of the Hong Son Association first came to Jianye, the sovereign Sun Quan did not immediately allow him to proselytize, so he inspired the rare treasure to build a very special temple for him.

古文：于时天地神祗，咸加灵被，于三七曰，遂感舍利。
现代文：当时天地诸神都以威灵相助，康僧会法师在三七那一天，便感召得到了佛祖遗骨舍利。
English: At that time, all the gods in heaven and on earth helped with the power of will. On the day of March 7th, the master of the Kang Son Association was inspired to obtain the Buddha's remains.

古文：吴王手执铜瓶，倾铜盘内，舍利所冲，盘即破裂。
现代文：吴王手拿铜瓶倾倒在盘内，盘子被舍利所冲击，当即破碎。
English: Wu Wang took a copper bottle in his hand and dumped it into the dish. The dish was hit by the shears and immediately shattered.

古文：乃至火烧锤试，俱不能损。
现代文：又用火烧锤击，都不能使舍利受损。
English: They also used a fire hammer to hit it, but they could not damage the shears.

古文：阚泽、张昱之徒，亦是天人护助，入其身中，令其神爽通敏，答对谐允。
现代文：阚泽、张昱等人，也因得到天人保佑与帮助，天人进入他们的身体，才使其神思敏捷清爽，能够对答流畅允妥。
English: Heze, Zhang Ye and others were also blessed and helped by heavenly beings, who entered their bodies to make their minds quick and clear, and able to answer questions smoothly.

古文：今业在天，弘护佛法为事。
现代文：如今我们已升天，以弘扬保护佛法为职事。
English: Now that we have ascended to heaven, our duty is to promote and protect Buddhism.

古文：弟子是南方天王韦将军下之使者。
现代文：弟子是南天王韦将军属下的使者。
English: His disciple was the emissary of General Nan Tian Wang Wei.

古文：将军事物极多，拥护三洲之佛法，有斗争凌危之事，无不躬往，和喻令解。
现代文：将军的事务极多，他要拥护三洲的佛法，凡是各处出现争斗、危机的事情，将军无不亲自前往，进行晓喻调解。
English: The general has a lot of things to do. He wants to uphold the Buddhism of the three continents. Whenever there is a conflict or crisis anywhere, the general will go there in person to mediate.

古文：今附和南，天欲即至，前事拥闹，不久当至，具令弟子等共师言。 
现代文：如今南洲刚刚平复和解，天王就想立即到此，只因事情繁杂有所耽误，不久就会到来的，天王让弟子等人先与律师谈谈。 
English: Now that Nanzhou has just been pacified and reconciled, Heavenly King wanted to come here immediately. However, he was delayed due to complicated matters. He will come soon. Heavenly King asked the disciples and others to talk to the lawyer first.

古文：不久复有人来，云姓罗氏，是蜀人也。
现代文：不久又有一人到来，自称姓罗，是蜀地人。
English: Soon, another person arrived, claiming to be from Shu, with the surname Luo.

古文：言作蜀音，广说律相。
现代文：说话全是蜀地口音，大谈佛教的律相之法。
English: He speaks with a Shu accent and talks a lot about the Buddhist law of cause and effect.

古文：初相见时，如俗礼仪，叙述缘由，多有次第，遂用忽忘。
现代文：初见面时，礼仪如同俗众，讲述起佛法之缘由来则极有见地，于是让人忘了他原先的俗态。
English: When they first meet, the etiquette is like that of the common people, and the explanation of the origin of Buddhism is very insightful, so people forget their original vulgarity.

古文：次又一人，云姓费氏，礼敬如前。
现代文：接着又来了一个人，说是姓费，礼仪方方也如罗氏一样。
English: Then another person came, saying that his surname was Fee, and his etiquette was the same as Luo's.

古文：云： 弟子迦叶佛时，生在初天，在韦将军下。
现代文：他说： 弟子在迦叶佛时生于第一层天，在韦将军属下供职。
English: He said, "My disciple was born on the first layer of heaven at the time of Buddha in Kaya, and served under General Wei.

古文：诸天贪欲所醉，弟子以宿愿力，不交天欲，清静梵行，偏敬毗尼。
现代文：天下诸人多为贪欲迷醉，弟子凭借自己的宿愿，不惑于贪欲，以清静为本，奉行佛法，尤敬重佛藏中的戒律。
English: Most people in the world are intoxicated by greed. Disciples, relying on their long-cherished wishes, do not get confused by greed, adhere to the Dharma based on tranquility, and especially respect the precepts in the Buddha's collection.

古文：韦将军童真梵行，不受天欲。
现代文：韦将军以童真之心奉事佛法，不受贪欲之烦扰。
English: General Wei served the Dharma with a childlike heart and was not bothered by greed.

古文：一王之下，有八将军、四王、三十二将。周四天下，往还护助诸出家人。
现代文：天王之下有八将军、四王、三十二将，共同管理四方天下，往返保护，扶助所有的出家人。
English: Under the Heavenly King, there are eight generals, four kings, and thirty-two generals, who jointly manage the four quarters of the world, protect and support all monastics.

古文：四天下中，北天一洲，少有佛法。余三天下，佛法大弘。然出家之人，多犯禁戒，少有如法。
现代文：四方天下之中，北方天下佛法流布不广，影响较小；其余三方天下佛法弘扬广大，影响比较普遍，然而出家之人多数违犯禁戒，严格恪守戒律的人为数较少。
English: Among the four directions of the world, Buddhism is not widely spread in the northern world, and its influence is small; in the remaining three directions of the world, Buddhism is widely promoted, and its influence is relatively common. However, most of the ordained people violate the precepts, and the number of people who strictly abide by the precepts is small.

古文：东西天下，人少黠慧，烦恼难化。
现代文：东方天下与西方天下，人们不那么精明聪慧，自身的烦恼也就难于迁化。
English: In the East and the West, people are not so smart and clever, and their own troubles are difficult to resolve.

古文：南方一洲，虽多犯罪，化令从善，心易调伏。
现代文：南方天下的人，虽然多有犯罪行为，但是只要认真感化令其从善，他们那精明灵活的心性比较容易驯服。
English: People in the south of the world, although there are many criminal acts, but as long as they are seriously influenced to do good, their shrewd and flexible mentality is relatively easy to tame.

古文：佛临涅槃，亲受付嘱，并令守护，不使魔娆。
现代文：释迦佛祖在临近涅槃升天之际，谆谆嘱咐弟子门徒，并令其谨慎守护佛法，不让妖魔鬼怪侵扰。
English: When Shaka Buddha was on the verge of attaining nirvana and ascending to heaven, he instructed his disciples to guard the Dharma carefully and not to allow demons and monsters to intrude.

古文：若不守护，如是破戒，谁有行我之法教者。
现代文：如不严加守护，如此违戒犯规，哪里还有人奉行我佛之法教的。
English: If it were not for the strict protection, and such violations of the precepts and regulations, there would be no one to follow the teachings of my Buddha.

古文：故佛垂诫，不敢不行。
现代文：所以，佛祖的谆谆教诲与至诚告诫，我辈不敢不奉行。
English: Therefore, we dare not fail to follow the Buddha's teachings and earnest admonitions.

古文：虽见毁禁，愍而护之。
现代文：戒律虽然受到一些破坏，我们仍要以慈悲为怀，尽力去保护出家之人。
English: Although the precepts have suffered some damage, we should still try our best to protect monastics with compassion.

古文：见行一善，万过不咎，事等忘瑕，不存往失。
现代文：只要他们修行善事，过去的各种过错都可以不咎，善事多了就会忘记过去的污点，不必记取以往的过失。
English: As long as they practice good deeds, all kinds of mistakes in the past can be forgiven. If they do more good deeds, they will forget the stains of the past and do not have to remember the mistakes of the past.

古文：且人中臭气，上薰空界四十万里，诸天清净，无不厌之。
现代文：况且人世中的臭气，上薰空界四十万里，诸位天人心境清净，对此臭气无不厌恶。
English: Moreover, the stench in the world of man reaches four hundred thousand miles into the sky, and all of you heavenly beings have a pure heart, and you are all disgusted by this stench.

古文：但以受佛付嘱，令护佛法。尚与人同止，诸天不敢不来。
现代文：但因受到佛祖的嘱咐，令其尽心守护佛法，何况天人尚与世人共同栖止于同一个天下，所以诸位天人不敢不来到天下。
English: However, since he was instructed by the Buddha to guard the Dharma with all his heart, and since the celestial beings still reside in the same world as the people of the world, you celestial beings dare not fail to come to the world.

古文：韦将军三十二将之中，最存弘护。
现代文：韦将军是三十二名天将之中，最有弘扬守护佛法之诚意的。
English: Among the thirty-two generals, General Wei is the most sincere in promoting the protection of Buddhism.

古文：多有魔子魔女，轻弄比丘，道力微者，并为惑乱。
现代文：世间有许多魔男魔女，轻侮戏弄出家人，出家人中的道力微弱者，都受到他们的迷惑拢乱。
English: There are many sorcerers and witches in the world. They mock and tease the monastics, and the weak ones among the monastics are all bewitched and confused by them.

古文：将军栖遑奔至，应机除剪。
现代文：一有这类事情发现，韦将军便急忙奔波而到，应该适时地将他们剪除掉。
English: As soon as such things are discovered, General Wei will rush to the scene, and they should be eliminated in a timely manner.

古文：故有事至，须往四王所时，王见皆起。
现代文：所以只要韦将军有事要办，需要到四位天王住处时，天王见了都起来迎接。
English: Therefore, whenever General Wei had something to do and needed to go to the residence of the four heavenly kings, the heavenly kings would rise to meet him.

古文：为韦将军修童真行护正法故。
现代文：这都是因为韦将军能以童真之心修行，又能精诚守护佛法的缘故。
English: This is all because General Wei is able to practice with a childlike heart and is able to diligently guard Buddhism.

古文：弟子性乐戒律，如来一代所制毗尼，并在座中听受戒法。 
现代文：弟子禀性喜爱戒律，如来佛祖一代所创制的律藏经典，我都在讲堂上聆听接受过。 
English: Disciples have a strong affinity for precepts, and I have listened to and accepted the classic collection of precepts created by the Buddha's generation.

古文：因问律中诸隐文义，无不决滞。
现代文：律师便向他询问律典中诸多文字隐晦处的含义，费天人无不给以决滞释疑。
English: The lawyer then asked him about the meaning of many obscure passages in the law code, and the man of the world gave him a decisive answer.

古文：然此东华三宝，素有山海水石，往往多现，但谓其灵而敬之。
现代文：然而东方华土对待佛法的态度，往往就像一向对待肉眼能够看得见的山海水石一样，只是认为佛法灵验、实用所以才去敬奉它。
English: However, the attitude of Eastern China towards Buddhism is often the same as it has always been towards the mountains and seawater that can be seen with the naked eye. They just think that Buddhism is effective and practical, so they worship it.

古文：顾访失由，莫知投诣。
现代文：这样来看待和探求佛法佛理就失去了它的根由，不能领悟它的深层底蕴。
English: If we look at and explore Buddhism and the Dharma in this way, we will lose its roots and will not be able to understand its deep roots.

古文：遂因此缘，随而咨请。
现代文：又因这样的缘故，伴随而来的现象就是多为实用目的而去谘询祈请佛教。
English: And because of this, the accompanying phenomenon is to consult and pray for Buddhism, mostly for practical purposes.

古文：且沈冥之相，以理括之，未曾持观，不可以语也。
现代文：而佛法本身是对三界万物之中深邃玄幽之相，通过法理予以概括，这是肉眼凡胎无法看得见的，也是不能用语言具体明确的加以宣示与指述的。
English: However, the Dharma itself is a profound and subtle aspect of all things in the three realms, which is summarized through the principles of the Dharma. This is something that cannot be seen with the naked eye, nor can it be declared and pointed out in concrete and clear language.

古文：宣师又以感通记问天人云： 益州成都多宝石佛者，何代时像，从地涌出。 
现代文：宣律师又将《感通记》中记载的内容来询向费天人道： 益州成都的多宝石像，是什么时代的佛像？ 
English: Mr. Xuan also asked Fei Tianyong about the content recorded in "Chengtong Ji": The multi-jewel statue in Chengdu, Yizhou, is a Buddha statue from which era?

古文：答曰： 蜀都元基青城山上，今之成都，大海之地。
现代文：费天人答道： 蜀都的原址在青城山上，现在的成都当时还是一片汪洋大海。
English: Fei Tianren replied: The original site of Shudu was on Qingcheng Mountain. At that time, the current Chengdu was still a vast ocean.

古文：昔迦叶佛时，有人于西洱河造之，拟多宝佛全身相也，在西洱河鹫山寺。有成都人往彼兴易，请像将还，至今多宝寺处，为海神蹋船所没。
现代文：远在迦叶佛时代，有人在西洱河摹拟多宝佛全身形相制造了多宝佛石像，放在西洱河鹫头山寺庙里，后来有个成都人到西洱河去兴易，带着这座石佛像往回走，走到现在的多宝寺那个地方，被海神踩翻了船而沉没了。
English: As far back as the time of the Buddha of Kaya, someone made a stone statue of the Buddha of Kaya in the form of the whole body of the Buddha of Kaya in the Xidi River and placed it in the temple of Shantou Mountain in the Xidi River. Later, a Chengdu man went to Xingyi in the Xidi River, walked back with this stone Buddha statue, and went to the place of the current Kaya Temple. He was trampled by the sea god, overturned the boat and sank.

古文：初取像人见海神于岸上游，谓是山鬼，遂即杀之。因尔神瞋覆没，人像俱溺，同在一船。
现代文：因为当初那个取像的成都人，看见海神在岸上游逛，以为是山鬼，便把海神杀了，所以惹怒了海神，如今海神便把他的船掀翻了，结果是在同一条船上的人与佛像都沉到了水底。
English: Because the person from Chengdu, who took the picture, saw the sea god wandering on the shore and thought it was a mountain ghost, he killed the sea god, so he angered the sea god. Now the sea god has overturned his boat, and as a result, the people in the same boat with the Buddha statue have sunk to the bottom of the water.

古文：其多宝旧在鹫头山寺，古基尚在，仍有一塔，常有光明。
现代文：那尊多宝佛石像原先所在的鹫头山寺庙，旧庙遗址仍然存在，仍有一座寺塔，寺塔经常放射出亮光。
English: The temple on Shantou Mountain where the multi-treasure Buddha statue was originally located, the old temple site still exists, there is still a temple tower, and the temple tower often emits light.

古文：令向彼土，道由郎州过，大小不算，三千余里，方达西洱河。
现代文：假如要到那个地方去，就需路过郎州，大道与小路都放在内，须走三千多里路才能到达西洱河。
English: If you want to go to that place, you need to pass through Lanzhou, including the avenue and the small road, and you need to walk more than three thousand miles to reach the Xidi River.

古文：河大阔，或百里，或五百里。
现代文：西洱河特别宽，有的地方宽一百里，有的地方则宽达五百里。
English: The Xidi River is particularly wide, in some places it is a hundred miles wide, in others it is up to five hundred miles wide.

古文：中有山洲，亦有古寺，经像尚存，而无僧住。
现代文：河的中间有山岛，岛上有古庙，寺庙里仍有经书与佛像存在，但没有僧人居住。
English: There is a mountainous island in the middle of the river. There is an ancient temple on the island. There are still scriptures and Buddha statues in the temple, but there are no monks living there.

古文：经同此文，时闻钟声。百姓殷实，每年二时，供养古塔。
现代文：经书的文学与我们看到的一样，寺庙内还时常听到有钟声响，当地的百姓都比较富足，每年四、八两月，他们都按时去古塔供奉祭奠。
English: The literature of the sutras is the same as what we see. Bells are often heard in the temple. The local people are relatively affluent. Every April and August, they all go to the ancient pagoda on time to offer sacrifices.

古文：塔如戒坛，三重石砌，上有覆釜。
现代文：寺塔好像受戒时的坛台，由三层石块砌成，塔顶覆盖着铅盆。
English: The temple tower looks like an altar at the time of ordination. It is made of three layers of stone, and the top of the tower is covered with a lead basin.

古文：其数极多，彼土诸人，但言神冢。
现代文：这种寺塔，那个地方极多，当地人称为神冢。
English: There are so many temples and pagodas of this kind in that area that the locals call them "shrines."

古文：每发光明，人以蔬食祭之，求其福祚也。
现代文：每当寺塔发射亮光时，人们使用素食菜果等祭祀，祈求神灵赐福、保佑。
English: Whenever a temple tower emits a bright light, people use vegetarian vegetables and fruits to pray for blessings and protection from the gods.

古文：其地西北去西州二千余里。
现代文：这个地方往西北走距离西州两千余里。
English: This place is more than two thousand miles away from Xizhou to the northwest.

古文：问去天竺非远，往往有至彼者。
现代文：距天竺国不太远。过去常常有人到过那个地方。
English: It's not far from Tianyao. People used to go there quite often.

古文：自下云云至晋时，有僧于此地。见土坟随出随除，怪不可平。后见拆开，深怪其尔。
现代文：再往后说就说到晋代了，晋时有个僧人在这个地方，看见地上有一座土坟，他平掉之后紧接着还冒出来，随平随冒，他奇怪土坟平不掉，后来便被他挖开了。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, there was a monk who was in this place and saw a dirt grave on the ground. After he flattened it, it immediately popped up. He was surprised that the dirt grave could not be flattened, and later he dug it up.

古文：乃深掘丈余，获像及人骨在船。
现代文：挖开之后又奇怪怎么那样深，于是继续往下挖。掘到一丈多深时，掘出了佛像、人骨与船。
English: After digging, he was surprised at how deep it was, so he continued digging. When he reached a depth of more than a meter, he dug out a Buddha statue, human bones and a boat.

古文：其髅骨肘胫，悉皆粗大数倍，过于今人。即迦叶佛时，阎浮人寿二万岁时人也。今时劫减，命促人小，固其常然，不可怪也。
现代文：骨头架子上的肘骨与胫骨特别粗大，相当于现在人的几倍，这是迦叶佛时代，寿命长达两万岁的闫浮人，如今时劫减少，人的寿命短促了形体也短小了，这是正常现象，不足为怪。
English: Elbow bones and tibia bones on the bone shelf are particularly large, equivalent to several times that of modern humans. This is the age of Gaya Buddha, who lived up to twenty thousand years old, and now the time is reduced. Human life is short and the body is short. This is a normal phenomenon, and it is not surprising.

古文：初出之时，牵曳难得。弟子化为老人，指撝方便，须臾至周，灭法暂隐。到隋重兴，更复出之。
现代文：那位僧人挖得石像之后，因为拖不动；便化成一位老人，指挥调遣起来就比较方便了，不大一会儿就安排妥当了，把石像暂时埋藏了起来，到了隋朝又重新发掘了出来，石像于是又出现在世上。
English: After the monk had dug up the stone statue, because he couldn't move, he turned into an old man. It was more convenient for the commander to dispatch, and it was arranged in a short time. The stone statue was temporarily buried, and it was re-excavated in the Sui Dynasty. The stone statue then reappeared in the world.

古文：蜀人但知其灵从地而出，亦不测其根源。
现代文：蜀地人只知道这座神像是从地下发掘出来的，但并不了解它的根源是怎么回事。
English: The people of Shu only know that the statue of the god was excavated from the ground, but they do not know what its origin is.

古文：见其花趺有多宝字，因遂名焉，又名多宝寺。 
现代文：他们见石像脚背上刻有 多宝 二字，于是就称它为多宝石像，又称安置石像的庙为多宝寺。 
English: They saw the word "Tobao" engraved on the statue's instep, so they called it the "Tobao Jewel Statue," and also called the temple where the statue was placed the "Tobao Temple."

古文：又问： 多宝字是其隶书，出于亡秦之代。
现代文：宣律师又问到， 石像上刻的 多宝 二字属于隶书，隶书出于秦代。
English: Mr. Xuan also asked, "The word "Tobao" engraved on the stone statue belongs to the book of ranks, and the book of ranks dates back to the Qin Dynasty.

古文：如何迦叶佛时，已有神州书耶？ 
现代文：怎么在迦叶佛时代就已有了神州的隶书呢？ 
English: How is it that in the time of Gautama Buddha, there were already inscriptions of the divine state?

古文：答曰： 亡秦李斯隶书，此乃近代远承。隶书之兴，兴于古佛之世。
现代文：费天人答道： 秦代李斯的隶书，原是近代对远古时代的继承，隶书的兴起出现于古佛时代。
English: Fei Tianren replied: The Li script of the Qin Dynasty was originally a modern inheritance of the ancient era, and the rise of the Li script appeared in the era of the ancient Buddha.

古文：见今南洲四面千有余洲，庄严阎浮，一方百有余国，文字言音，同今唐国。但以海路辽远，动数十万里，重译莫传，故使此方封守株柱，不足怪也。
现代文：现今南土四周有一千多个海岛，庄严阎浮，那里有一百多个国家，他们的文字语言都与大唐国相同，只因海路遥远，动辄几十万里，得不到转译传播，致使你们这个地方封闭自守，这也是不足为怪的。
English: Nowadays, there are more than a thousand islands around the southern land, solemnly floating. There are more than a hundred countries there, and their written language is the same as that of the Great Tang. However, because the sea route is far away, often hundreds of thousands of miles, it cannot be translated and disseminated, resulting in your place being closed and self-protecting, which is not surprising.

古文：师不闻乎？
现代文：律师没有听说过吗？
English: Haven't you heard of lawyers?

古文：梁顾野王，太学之大博也，周访字源，出没不定，故玉篇序云： 有开春申君墓得其铭文，皆是隶字。 
现代文：梁朝的顾野王是太学之中学识最为渊博的人，他四处考察文字的起源，也没找到确切的答案，所以在《玉篇》序中说： 有人打开春申君的坟墓得到他的铭文，铭文全是隶书体文字。 
English: King Guye of the Liang Dynasty was the most knowledgeable person among the scholars. He investigated the origin of the characters everywhere, but did not find a definite answer, so he said in the preface to the "Gyoku Hen": Someone opened the tomb of Chunshenjun to get his inscription. The inscription is all in the script.

古文：检春申是周武六国同时，隶文则非吞并之日也。
现代文：查春申君是东周列国时代的人，可见隶书非秦国吞并六国之后才出现的。
English: Chachunshenjun was a person in the era of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, and it can be seen that Li Shu did not appear until after the annexation of the six countries by the Qin Dynasty.

古文：此国篆隶诸书，尚有茫昧，宁知迦叶佛时之事。
现代文：六国时代到底是篆书还是隶书，尚且不可测度，怎么能知道迦叶佛时代的事呢。
English: Whether the Six Kingdoms period was a period of syllabic or cursive writing is still immeasurable, so how can we know about the time of Gaya Buddha?

古文：决非其耳目之所闻见也。 
现代文：所以，隶书到底起源于何时，绝不是单凭耳闻目睹的现象就能断定的。 
English: Therefore, it is by no means a phenomenon that can be determined by hearing and seeing alone.

古文：又问： 今西京城西高四土台，俗谚云：是苍颉造书台。
现代文：宣律师又问道： 现在长安城西的高四土台，俗称苍颉造字台。
English: Lawyer Xuan also asked, "Currently, the foundation of the West High School of Chang'an City, commonly known as the Heron Building, is under construction.

古文：如何云隶书字古时已有？ 
现代文：怎么说是隶书字在远古时代就已经有了呢？ 
English: How can it be said that the characters of the script already existed in ancient times?

古文：答曰： 苍颉于此台上，增土造台，观鸟迹者，非无其事。
现代文：费天人答道： 苍颉在这里堆土为台以观察鸟的足迹，这件事不是没有。
English: Fei Tianren replied, "It is not without reason that herons pile up dirt here to observe the bird's footprints.

古文：且苍颉之传，此土罕知其源。或云黄帝之臣，或云古帝王也。
现代文：但关于苍颉其人，人们很少知道他的来源，有人说他是黄帝的臣民，有人说他是古代帝王。
English: However, little is known about the origins of the Heron people. Some say they are subjects of the Yellow Emperor, while others say they are ancient emperors.

古文：鸟迹之书时变，一途今所绝有。
现代文：鸟迹之书时时都在衍变，一成不变的事现在绝对没有。
English: The book of bird tracks is constantly evolving, and there is absolutely nothing that is set in stone now.

古文：无益之言，不劳述也。 
现代文：这是无须分辩的，用不着多费否舌。 
English: This is indisputable, there is no need to spend a lot of time denying it.

古文：又有天人，姓陆名玄畅，来谒律师云： 弟子是周穆王时，生在初天，本是迦叶佛时天，为通化故，周时暂现。
现代文：又有个天人，姓陆名玄畅，前来拜见律师道： 弟子是周穆王时生在初天的，本是迦叶佛时代的天人，为了开导教化世人的缘故，周穆王时暂时现身。
English: Another celestial being, surnamed Lu Mei Xuanchang, came to see the lawyer and said: The disciple was born on the first day of King Zhou Mu's reign. He was originally a celestial being in the time of Gaya Buddha. For the sake of enlightening and enlightening the world, King Zhou Mu temporarily appeared.

古文：所问高四土台者，其本迦叶佛于此第三会，说法度人。至穆王时，文殊、目连来化，穆王从之，即列子所谓化人者是也。
现代文：你所问的高四台，它本是迦叶佛在这里举行第三次法会，讲说佛法度脱人的地方，到了周穆王时，文殊与目连前来教化，穆王听从他们教化，他们就是列子所说的 化人 。
English: Gao Si Tai, which you asked about, was originally the place where Gaya Buddha held the third puja here, and spoke about how to liberate people through Buddhism. When he came to King Zhou Mu, Manju and Muren came to enlighten him, and King Mu listened to their enlightenment. They are what Reishi called "transmuted people."

古文：化人示穆王云： 高四台是迦叶佛说法处。 
现代文：化人告诉周穆王说： 高四台是迦叶佛讲说佛法的地方。 
English: The avatar told Zhou Mu Wang that: Gaosidai is the place where Kaya Buddha taught Buddhism.

古文：因造三会道场。
现代文：穆王便在那里修造了三会道场。
English: King Mu then built the Three Cultures Dojo there.

古文：至秦穆公时，扶风获一石佛，穆公不识，弃马坊中，秽污此像。
现代文：到了秦穆公时，扶风得到了一尊石雕佛像，穆公不认识，便扔到了马棚里，佛像身上弄得非常脏。
English: When he arrived at Qin Mu Gong, Fu Feng obtained a stone Buddha statue. Mu Gong did not recognize it, so he threw it into the stable. The Buddha statue was very dirty.

古文：护像神瞋，令公染疾。公又梦游上帝，极被责疏。
现代文：佛神生气了，便让穆公得了病，穆公又梦游见到天帝，受到严厉的责罚。
English: The Buddha got angry and made Mu Gong sick. Mu Gong then sleepwalked to see the Heavenly Emperor and was severely punished.

古文：觉问侍臣由余，便答云： 臣闻周穆王时，有化人来此土，云是佛神。
现代文：梦醒后询问侍臣由余，由余便答道： 臣闻周穆王时，有两个化人来到这片国土，说是佛神。 
English: After waking up from a dream, he asked his vassal, Yu Yu, and Yu Yu replied, "When I was a vassal of King Zhou Mu, two avatars came to this land and said they were Buddha gods.

古文：穆王信之，于终南山造中天台，高千余尺，基址见在。又于苍颉台造神庙，名三会道场。
现代文：周穆王非常信奉他们，在终南山上修造了中天台，高一千多尺，中天台的遗址现在仍然保留着，又在苍颉台上建造了神庙，叫作三会道场。
English: King Zhou Mu believed in them so much that he built the Middle Rooftop on the South Mountain, which is more than a thousand feet high. The site of the Middle Rooftop is still preserved, and he built a temple on the Heron Hill, which is called the Three Cultures Dojo.

古文：公今所患，殆非佛为之耶？ 
现代文：您现在的灾祸，全是因为不尊敬佛神而招致的。 
English: Your current misfortune is all caused by disrespecting the Buddha and God.

古文：公闻大怖，语由余曰： 吾近获一石人，衣冠非今所制，弃之马坊。
现代文：素穆公听了大为恐惧，对由余说： 我最近得到一尊石雕人像，石像的穿戴不是现在人服饰的款式，我把它扔到马棚里了。
English: Sumukong listened with great fear and said to Yu Yu: I recently got a stone statue, the stone statue is not wearing the current style of human clothing, I threw it in the stable.

古文：得非此是佛神耶？ 
现代文：莫非这就是佛神吗？ 
English: Could this be the Buddha?

古文：由余闻，往视之，对曰： 此真佛神也。 
现代文：由余听了，前往马棚里一看，对穆公说： 这尊石像真的是佛神。 
English: After hearing this, Yu Yu went to the stable to have a look and said to Mu Gong: This stone statue is really a Buddha deity.

古文：公取像澡浴，安清净处，像遂放光。
现代文：穆公把石像拿回来清洗干净，安放在十分清净的地方，佛像便放射出光芒，穆公又恐惧了。
English: Mu Gong took the stone statue back, cleaned it, and placed it in a very clean place. The Buddha statue radiated light, and Mu Gong was afraid again.

古文：公又怖，谓神瞋也，宰三牲以祭之。
现代文：以为佛神放光是在生气，便宰猪杀羊摆供祭祀。
English: He thought that the Buddha was angry when he released the light, so he slaughtered a pig and killed a sheep to offer as a sacrifice.

古文：诸善神等，擎弃远处。
现代文：不料善神们把这些牛羊等肉统统拿到远处扔了。
English: Unexpectedly, the good gods took all these cattle, sheep and other meat and threw them far away.

古文：公又大怖，以问由余。
现代文：穆公更加恐惧了，便问由余这是怎么回事。
English: Mu Gong was even more afraid, so he asked Yu Yu what was going on.

古文：答曰： 臣闻佛清净，不进酒肉，爱重物命。
现代文：由余答道： 我听说佛家素净，不吃酒肉，为的是爱惜生物的性命。
English: Yu Yu replied, "I heard that Buddhist families are vegetarian and do not eat meat or drink alcohol, in order to respect the lives of living beings.

古文：如护一子，所有供养，烧香而已，所可祭祀，饼果之属。 
现代文：如果得到一个佛像，供奉的时候只要烧香就行，用来祭祀的供品也都是素食果蔬之类。 
English: If you get a Buddha statue, just burn incense when offering it, and the offerings used for worship are all vegetarian fruits and vegetables.

古文：公大悦。
现代文：穆公听了大为高兴。
English: Mu Gong was very happy to hear this.

古文：欲造佛像，绝于工人。又问由余，答曰： 昔穆王造寺之侧，应有工匠。 
现代文：他要制作佛像，苦于没有工匠，又询问由余怎么办，由余答道： 在从前周穆王修造寺庙的附近，应当有工匠。 
English: He wanted to make a Buddha statue, but was frustrated by the lack of craftsmen. He asked Yu Yu what he should do. Yu Yu replied: There should be craftsmen in the vicinity of the temple built by King Zhou Mu.

古文：遂于高四台南村内，得一老人，娃王名安，年百八十。自云曾于三会道场见人造之，臣今年老，无力能作。所住村北，有兄弟四人，曾于道场内为诸匠执作，请追共造。
现代文：于是，便在高四台南面的村庄里找到一位老人，此人姓王名安，已经一百八十岁了，王安说他曾在三会道场看见过别人制造佛像，但现在自己已经老了，无力制作；在自己村庄的北边有兄弟四人，当年曾在道场内当工匠亲手制作过佛像，可以找他们四人一起制造。
English: As a result, he found an old man in the village south of Gaositai. His name was Wang Nian'an, and he was already 180 years old. Wang An said that he had seen others making Buddha statues at the Sanhui dojo, but now he was old and unable to make them. In the north of his village, there were four brothers who had made Buddha statues by hand when they were craftsmen in the dojo. He could find four of them to make them together.

古文：依言作之，成一铜像。相好圆备，公悦，大赏赉之。
现代文：秦穆公便照着王安的话办了，找到这兄弟四人，制成一尊铜佛像，铜像的形相端庄丰满，穆公十分满意，大加赏赐四位工匠。
English: Qin Mu Gong did as Wang An said, found the four brothers, and made a bronze Buddha statue. The bronze statue was dignified and plump. Mu Gong was very satisfied, and rewarded the four craftsmen greatly.

古文：彼人得财，并造功德，于土台上造重阁，高三百尺。时人号之高四台，或曰高四楼。
现代文：工匠们得到赏赐的钱财后，都用来修造了功德，在苍颉土台上修建了几层楼阁，楼阁高达三百尺，当时人们称它为高四台，有的叫它高四楼。
English: After the craftsmen were rewarded with money and wealth, they all used it to build merits. They built several floors of towers on the heron platform. The towers were as high as three hundred feet. At that time, people called it the high four, and some called it the high fourth floor.

古文：其人姓高，大者名四；或曰，兄弟四人同立故也。或取大兄名以目之，故有高四之名，至今称也。 
现代文：这兄弟四人姓高，老大叫高四，所以楼阁起名高四台或高曰楼；也有人说，用 高四 给楼台命名，是因为楼台本为高氏四人共同建造的。
English: The four brothers were surnamed Gao, and the boss was called Gao Si, so the pavilion was named Gao Si Tai or Gao Sai Lou; some people said that the platform was named Gao Si because the platform was built jointly by the four Gao brothers.

古文：又问： 目连舍利弗，佛在已终，如何重见？ 
现代文：总之。高四台的名字与建造人有关，现在人们仍然叫它这个名字。 
English: In short, the name of Gaositai is related to the builder, and people still call it by this name.

古文：答曰： 同名六人，此目连非大目连也。
现代文：宣律师又问陆玄畅天人；释迦牟尼十大弟子中的目连与舍利弗；这两位佛子早已不在人世，为什么后来又出现了呢？
English: Lawyer Xuan also asked Lu Xuanchang about celestial beings; among the ten disciples of Sakyamuni, what is the relationship between Meren and Sariputra; these two Buddhas have long been dead, why did they reappear later?

古文：到宇文周时，文殊师利化为梵僧，来游此土，云欲礼拜迦叶佛说法处，并往文殊所住之处，名清凉山。
现代文：天人答道： 跟他们同名的有六个人，这个目连不是原先那个大目连。到了北朝宇文周时，文殊师利佛化为佛僧，来到北地游化，说要到迦叶佛讲说佛法的地方去礼拜，还要到文殊住过的地方去。这个地方就是清凉山。
English: The man of heaven replied, "There are six people with the same name as them, and this group is not the original large group. During the Northern Dynasty's Yuwen Zhou, Monju's master Li Buddha became a Buddhist monk, and he came to Hokkien Yuhua, saying that he wanted to go to worship at the place where Gaya Buddha taught Buddhism, and he also wanted to go to the place where Monju lived. This place is Qingliang Mountain.

古文：遍问道俗，无有知者。
现代文：他遍访僧人与俗众，没有人知道这些事情。
English: He visited monks and lay people, and no one knew about these things.

古文：时有智猛法师，年始十八，反问梵僧： 何因知有二圣余迹？ 
现代文：当时有个智猛法师，年仅十八岁，他反问这位佛僧： 你根据什么知道有两位先圣的余迹？ 
English: At that time, there was a wise and fierce mage, only eighteen years old, who asked the Buddhist monk: How do you know that there are two remnants of the first saint?

古文：答曰： 在秦都城南二十里，有苍颉造书台，即其地也。 
现代文：佛僧答道： 在秦国都城南面二十里处有座苍颉造字台，那就是当年迦叶先圣讲说佛法的地方。 
English: The Buddhist monk replied, "Twenty miles south of the capital city of Qin, there is a heron-made writing desk. That was the place where Saint Cai Ye Xian preached Buddhism.

古文：又云： 在沙河南五十里，青山北四十里，即其处也。 
现代文：他又说： 在沙河以南五十里，青山以北四十里，就是那个地方。 
English: He said, "That place is fifty miles south of the Sand River and forty miles north of Aoyama."

古文：又问 沙河 、 青山 是何语，答曰： 渭水终南山也。 
现代文：智猛法师又问他 沙河 、 青山 指的是什么地方，佛僧答道： 指的是渭水与终南山。 
English: Master Zhimeng also asked him what places the Sand River and Aoyama referred to, and the Buddhist monk replied, "They refer to Surabaya and the South Mountain."

古文：此僧便从渭水直南而步，遂得高四台，便云此是古佛说法处也。
现代文：这位佛僧便从渭水出发一直往南走去，于是找到了高四台，便说这就是当年迦叶佛讲说佛法的地方。
English: The Buddhist monk started from Surabaya and walked all the way to the south, whereupon he found Gaosidai and said that this was the place where the Buddha Kaya preached the Dharma.

古文：于时智猛法师，随往礼拜。
现代文：当时智猛法师也跟着他到那里去礼拜先圣余迹。
English: At that time, Master Zhimeng also followed him there to pay homage to the holy relic.

古文：不久失梵僧所在。
现代文：不久，这位佛僧便不见了。
English: Soon after, the monk disappeared.

古文：智猛长大，具为太常韦卿说之，请其台处，依本置寺，遂奏周主，名三会寺。
现代文：智猛长大后，把这件事跟太常韦卿说了，请他在高四台这个地方，依照原样建立了寺庙，寺庙建成后便奏报了北周皇帝，命名为三会寺。
English: After Zhimeng grew up, he told this matter to Taizhang Weiqing, and asked him to build a temple in this place in Gaoshuidai as it was. After the temple was built, it was reported to the Northern Zhou Emperor and named Sanhui Temple.

古文：至隋大业，废入大寺。
现代文：到了隋炀帝大业年间，废除了三会寺。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taiye of the Sui Dynasty, the Three Congregational Temples were abolished.

古文：因被废毁，配入菩提。
现代文：因为寺庙被废弃，里面的佛像便配置在菩提寺内。
English: Because the temple was abandoned, the Buddha statues inside were placed in the family temple.

古文：今京城东市西平康坊南门东菩提寺西堂佛首，即是三会寺佛。
现代文：如今京城东市区西平康街南门东边菩提寺西殿的佛首，就是当年三会寺内的佛像。
English: Today, the Buddha's head in the west hall of the family temple on the east side of the south gate of Xipingkang Street, Dongshi District, Beijing, is the Buddha statue in the Sankai Temple that year.

古文：释迦如来得度大迦叶后，十二年中，来至此台，其下见有迦叶佛舍利。
现代文：释迦如来佛祖得度大迦叶之后，第十二年，大迦叶来到这座高四台，台下现有迦叶佛的遗骨舍利。
English: In the twelfth year after Shaka Nyorai Buddha attained the Great Buddha, the Great Buddha came to this four-storied pagoda. Under the pagoda is the remains of the Great Buddha.

古文：周穆王游大夏，佛告彼土见有古塔，可返礼事。
现代文：周穆王游于大夏时，佛告诉他你们那个地方现有古塔，可以回去到那里礼拜供奉。
English: When King Zhou Mu was traveling in the summer, the Buddha told him that there was an ancient pagoda in that place and that he could go back there to worship.

古文：王问何方，佛答在鄗京之东南也。
现代文：周穆王问古塔在什么地方，佛说在都城鄗京的东南方。
English: Zhou Mu Wang asked where the ancient pagoda was, and the Buddha said it was in the southeast of the capital Beijing.

古文：西天竺国具有别传，云岁长年，是师子国僧，年九十九夏，是三果阿那含人，闻斯胜迹，躬至礼拜。
现代文：据西天竺国的图书资料记载，说这年有个师子国僧人叫长年，现年九十九岁，是三果阿那含人，听说鄗京东南有古塔，他便亲自到那里礼拜。
English: According to the records of the books and materials of the Western Heavenly Kingdom, it is said that this year there was a ninety-nine-year-old monk named Changnian, who was from Anaghan in Sango. He heard that there was an ancient pagoda in the southeast of Beijing, and he personally went there to worship.

古文：又奏请欲往北岱清凉山文殊师利菩萨坐处。
现代文：他又奏请皇帝。要到北岱清凉山文殊师利佛安放的地方去。
English: He also wrote to the emperor to invite him to go to the place where the Buddha's relic was placed in the Qingliang Mountain in Beilun.

古文：皇帝闻喜，敕给驿马内使及弟子官佐二十余人，在处供给。
现代文：皇帝听了非常高兴，赐给他宫内用的驿马以及弟子官佐二十余人，供他使用。
English: The emperor was very pleased to hear this, and gave him a mule for use in the palace, as well as more than twenty disciples and officials for him to use.

古文：诸官人弟子等，并乘官马。唯长年一人，少小已来，精诚苦行，不乘杂畜。
现代文：出发之后，各位官人弟子都骑着官马，唯独长年一人徒步走路，因他从小到今，一直坚持修练苦行，从来不骑牲畜。
English: After the departure, all the officials and disciples rode official horses, except for one who walked on foot for a long time, because he has been practicing asceticism since childhood and never rides livestock.

古文：即到岱州清凉山，即便肘行膝步而上，至中台佛堂，即是文殊庙堂。
现代文：到了岱州清凉山后，长年使用双肘双膝着地，肘行膝步而上，直至中台佛堂，也就是文殊师利菩萨庙堂。
English: After arriving at the Qingliang Mountain in Zhangzhou, he used his elbows and knees to land on the ground for many years, and then walked up to the Zhongtai Buddhist Temple, that is, the Manjusri Bodhisattva Temple.

古文：从下至上，可行三十余里，山石劲利，入肉到骨，无血乳出。
现代文：从下面到佛堂这样跪行了三十多里，沿途山石锋利，刺破了肌肉直到骨头，竟没有血浆流出来。
English: From the bottom to the Buddhist hall, I knelt for more than thirty miles. The rocks along the way were sharp and pierced my muscles down to the bone, but no blood flowed out.

古文：至于七日，五体投地，布面在土，不起不食。
现代文：到了第七天，累得趴倒在地上，面颊贴着泥土，爬不起来，也不进饮食。
English: On the seventh day, he fell to the ground exhausted, his cheeks caked with mud, unable to get up and unable to eat.

古文：七日满已，忽起，踊跃指挥，四方上下空界，具见文殊师利菩萨圣僧罗汉。
现代文：这样整整七天期满之后，忽然从地上站了起来，欢蹦跳跃，神扬气爽，只觉得四面八方上下空间，处处都能看见文殊师利菩萨与圣僧罗汉。
English: Thus, after the full seven-day period, he suddenly stood up from the ground, hopping and jumping, exhilarated, only to feel that there was space above and below in all directions, and everywhere he could see Manjushri Bodhisattva and the holy monk Luo Han.

古文：从者道俗数十人，有见不见。
现代文：跟从他的几十名僧人俗众，有的也能看见，有的则什么也看不到。
English: Some of the dozens of monks and lay people who followed him could see, while others could not see anything.

古文：复有一蟒蛇，身长数里，从北而来，直上长年，长年见喜。
现代文：又有一条身长几里的巨蛇从北面爬来，直接扑向长年，长年见了非常喜欢。
English: There was also a giant snake several miles long that crawled from the north and swooped directly at Changnian. I liked seeing it for a long time.

古文：衔师脚过，变为僧形。
现代文：巨蛇用嘴含过法师的脚之后，立即变成僧人的形状。
English: After the giant snake licked the mage's foot with its mouth, it immediately turned into the shape of a monk.

古文：诸人惧怕，皆悉四散，唯长年一人，心不惊动。
现代文：众人见了十分惧怕，纷纷四散奔逃，唯独长年一人，心不惊动神情坦然。
English: Everyone was terrified and ran away in all directions, except for one elderly man, who remained calm and composed.

古文：种种灵应，不可具述。 
现代文：种种灵验报应的事情，还有很多，不能一一细述。 
English: There are a lot of things that have to do with various kinds of retribution, and I can't detail them all.

古文：律师又问天人曰： 自昔相传，文殊在清凉山，领五百仙人说法。
现代文：宣律师又问天人道： 自古以来代代相传，文殊曾在清凉山上统领五百名仙人讲说佛法。
English: Lawyer Xuan also asked the man of heaven: Since ancient times, it has been passed down from generation to generation. Monju once led five hundred hermits on the cool mountain to teach Buddhism.

古文：经中明文殊是久住娑婆世界菩萨。
现代文：经书里明文记载着文殊是长久住在娑婆世界的菩萨。
English: It is clearly recorded in the scriptures that Manjushri is a bodhisattva who has lived in the Saha world for a long time.

古文：娑婆则大千总号，如何偏在此方？ 
现代文：娑婆世界则是大千世界的总称，为什么他偏偏只在清凉山这个地方呢？
English: Saha world is the general name of the world, why is he only in this place in Qingliangshan?

古文：答曰： 文殊是诸佛之元帅，随缘利见，应变不同。
现代文：天人答道： 文殊师利佛是诸佛的元帅，随处都能见到，因缘变化不同。
English: The celestial being replied, "Manjusri-Shi-Lifo is the marshal of all the Buddhas. He can be seen everywhere, and changes according to different causes.

古文：大士大功，非人境界，不劳评泊，但知仰信。
现代文：此乃大士大功，并非常人之境界，不必在此评断，只管信仰就是了。
English: This is a great achievement, and a very human realm. There is no need to judge here, just have faith.

古文：多在清凉山五台之中，今属北岱州西，见有五台县清凉府。
现代文：虽然如此，文殊多数情况下还是住在清凉山的五台之中，此地现属北岱州西部，设有五台县清凉府。
English: Despite this, in most cases, Monju still lived in Wutai in Qingliang Mountain, which is now located in the western part of North Luzhou and is home to Wutai County's Qingliang Prefecture.

古文：皇唐已来，有僧名解脱，在岩窟亡来三十余年，身肉不坏，似如入灭尽定。
现代文：唐朝以来，有位僧人名叫解脱，他在岩窟死亡三十多年了，遗体一直没有腐败，就象园寂入定的一样。
English: Since the Tang Dynasty, there was a monk named Jiefang. He died in a rock cave more than thirty years ago, and his body has never been corrupted, just like a garden.

古文：复有一尼，亦入定不动。
现代文：又有一位僧尼，也是入定不动。
English: There was another monk and nun who also did not move.

古文：各经多年。
现代文：他们的遗体都经过了许多年没有败坏。
English: Their bodies had all been preserved for many years.

古文：圣迹迦蓝。菩萨圣僧，仙人仙花，屡屡人见。
现代文：圣迹与寺院，菩萨与圣僧，仙人与仙花，屡次出现在人的面前。
English: Sacred sites and temples, bodhisattvas and holy monks, sages and fairy flowers, have repeatedly appeared in front of people.

古文：具在别篇，岂得不信。 
现代文：所有过些，都在别处有所记载，怎能叫人不相信呢。 
English: All of this has been documented elsewhere, so how can anyone not believe it?

古文：又问： 今五台山中台之东南三十里，见有大孚灵鹫寺，两堂隔涧犹存。南有花园，可二顷许，四时发彩，色类不同，四周树围。
现代文：律师又问天人道： 现在五台山中台的东南三十里处，有一座大孚灵鹫寺，两座殿堂隔河相望，至今犹在；寺院南面有花园，占地面积两顷左右，一年四季都开花，只是颜色种类不同，花园四周有绿树环绕。
English: The lawyer also asked Tian Rong: At present, there is a Dafu Lingyao Temple 30 miles southeast of Wutai Mountain in the middle of Taiwan. The two temples are across the river from each other and still exist. There is a garden to the south of the temple, covering an area of about two hectares. Flowers bloom all year round, but the color types are different. The garden is surrounded by green trees.

古文：人移花栽别处种植，皆悉不生。
现代文：人们将里面的花草移到别处栽种时，都不能成活，只有在这个花园里生长，才能永久繁荣。
English: When people move the flowers and plants inside to plant elsewhere, they cannot survive. Only if they grow in this garden can they flourish forever.

古文：唯在园内，方得久荣，人究年月，莫知来由，或云汉明所立，或云魏孝文帝栽植。
现代文：人们追究这座寺庙建于何年何月时，都没有考证出准确年代，有人说寺庙是汉明帝时建立的，有人说花草是魏孝文帝时栽植的。
English: People have investigated the year and month when this temple was built, but have not verified the exact age. Some people say that the temple was built during the reign of Emperor Han Ming, while others say that the flowers and plants were planted during the reign of Emperor Wei Xiaowen.

古文：古老相传，互说不同，如何为实？ 
现代文：自古以来代代相传，各种说法互不相同，到底哪种说法是真实的呢？ 
English: Since ancient times, it has been passed down from generation to generation, and all kinds of stories are different from each other. Which story is true?

古文：答曰： 但是二帝所作。
现代文：天人答道： 确实是两位帝王建造的。
English: The man of heaven replied: It was indeed built by two emperors.

古文：昔周穆之时，已有佛法，此山灵异，文殊所居。周穆于中造寺供养。
现代文：从前，在周穆王时，就已有了佛教，这座山特别灵明神异，是文殊居住的地方，周穆王在这座山里修造了寺庙，供奉佛法。
English: Once upon a time, in the time of King Zhou Mu, there was already Buddhism. This mountain is particularly magical and is the place where Manjusri lived. King Zhou Mu built a temple in this mountain to worship Buddhism.

古文：及阿育王，亦依置塔。
现代文：到阿育王时，也依旧例设置了寺塔。
English: By the time of Emperor Ashoka, temple towers were still being built.

古文：汉明之初，摩腾法师是阿罗汉天眼，亦见有塔，请帝立寺。
现代文：汉明帝初年，摩腾法师是阿罗汉天眼，也看见这里有寺塔，便请明帝在这里建立寺庙。
English: In the first year of Emperor Han Ming, Morten Magus, who was the Eye of Heaven, also saw a pagoda here, and asked Emperor Ming to build a temple here.

古文：其山形像似灵鹫山，名曰大孚，孚者信也。
现代文：这座山的形状象灵鹫山，名字叫大孚， 孚 就是 信 的意思。
English: The shape of this mountain is like Lingya Mountain, and its name is Dafu, which means "Faith."

古文：帝深信佛法，立寺劝人。
现代文：明帝深信佛法，便在这里建立寺庙劝导世人。
English: Emperor Ming believed in Buddhism so much that he built a temple here to teach it to the world.

古文：元魏孝文，北台不远，常来礼谒，见人马行迹，石上分明，其事可验。
现代文：元魏孝文帝的都城在离五台山北台不远的地方，所以常常来这里礼拜供奉，现在石头上清晰地看到有人马走过的痕迹，就是这件事情的证明。
English: The capital of Emperor Xiaowen of the Wei Dynasty was not far from Wutai Mountain and Beidaira, so he often came here to worship. Now, the traces of people and horses walking on the stone are clearly visible, which is proof of this matter.

古文：岂唯五台独验，今终南、太白、太华、五岳名山。皆有圣人为住持佛法，令法久住。
现代文：岂止五台山有灵验，如今终南、太白、太华等五岳名山，都有圣僧名僧住在那里主持讲说佛法，以图佛法久存。
English: It is not enough that Mount Wutai is well-established. Nowadays, there are holy monks and eminent monks who live there and preside over the preaching of Buddhism in the famous mountains of the Five Mountains, such as Nan, Taibai, and Taihua, in order to perpetuate Buddhism.

古文：有人设供，感讣徵应。
现代文：这些地方也都有人前去设供祭祀，都能感应灵验。
English: These places also have people who come to offer sacrifices, and they can all be effective.

古文：事在别篇，不烦此术也。 
现代文：所有这些事情，别处都有记载，此不赘述。 
English: All of these things have been documented elsewhere, so I won't go into them here.

古文：又问： 今凉州西番和县山裂像，出何代造耶？ 答云。迦叶佛时，有利宾菩萨，见此山人，不信业报，以杀害为事，于时住处有数万家，无重佛法者。
现代文：律师又问天人现在凉州西番和县断裂的佛像，是什么年代制造出来的，天人答道： 迦叶佛时代，有个利宾菩萨，看到这座山里的人不相信因果报应，以杀害生灵为能事，当时住在这里的有几万户人家，没有一个敬重佛教的。
English: The lawyer also asked the man of heaven what year the broken Buddha statues in Xifanhe County, Liangzhou, were made, and the man of heaven replied: In the time of Gaya Buddha, there was a Libing Bodhisattva, who saw that the people in this mountain did not believe in karma and were capable of killing living beings. At that time, there were tens of thousands of families living here, and none of them respected Buddhism.

古文：菩萨救之，为立迦蓝，大梵天王手造像身，初成以后，菩萨神力能令如真佛不异。
现代文：菩萨为了救拔他们，便为他们在这里建立了寺院，大梵天王亲手制造了利宾佛像，佛像制成后，菩萨的神力能使它与真佛设有不同。
English: In order to save them, the bodhisattva built a temple for them here. The great Brahma himself made the Libin Buddha statue. After the Buddha statue was made, the power of the bodhisattva could make it different from the real Buddha.

古文：游步说法，教化诸人。
现代文：菩萨到处游化，讲说佛法，教化每个人。
English: Bodhisattvas travel everywhere, teaching the Dharma and enlightening everyone.

古文：虽蒙此道，犹故不信。
现代文：人们虽然蒙受佛教的教化，却仍然不信奉佛法。
English: Although people have been enlightened by Buddhism, they still do not believe in Buddhism.

古文：于时菩萨示行怖畏，手擎大石，可于聚落，欲下压之。
现代文：这时，菩萨便施行了恐怖方法，让佛像手举着大石头，石头可以骤然落下来，要压住下边的人。
English: At this time, the Bodhisattva implemented a method of terror, having the Buddha statue hold a large stone in its hand. The stone could suddenly fall down, crushing the people below.

古文：菩萨扬威劝化，诸人便欻回心，敬信于佛。
现代文：由于菩萨显扬神威以示劝化，人们便忽然回心转念，开始敬信佛法。
English: As the Bodhisattvas displayed their divine powers to persuade people, people suddenly had a change of heart and began to revere Buddhism.

古文：所有杀具，变成莲花，随处街巷，华如种植。
现代文：所有杀害生灵的器具，于是变成了莲花，莲花开满了各处的大街小巷，就象种植的一样。
English: All the instruments of killing turned into lotus flowers, and the lotus flowers bloomed everywhere in the streets and alleys, just as if they had been planted.

古文：瑞像方摄神力，菩萨又劝诸清信士，令造七寺。
现代文：佛像刚刚收敛了神力，菩萨又劝说那些清真的信徒，让他们修造七座寺庙。
English: The Buddha had just regained his strength, and the Bodhisattva persuaded the sincere believers to build seven temples.

古文：南北一百四十里，东西八十里，弥山亘谷，处处僧坊佛殿。
现代文：要在南北一百四十里、东西八十里的范围之内，漫山遍谷，处处都有僧舍佛殿。
English: Within a radius of one hundred and forty miles from north to south and eighty miles from east to west, there should be mountains and valleys, and there should be Buddhist monasteries everywhere.

古文：营造经十三年，方得成就。
现代文：营造过程长达十三年之久，才得以全部建成。
English: The construction process lasted for thirteen years before it was fully completed.

古文：同时出家者，有二万人，在七寺住。
现代文：同时出家修道的，多达两万人，他们都住在这七座寺院里。
English: At the same time, there are as many as twenty thousand monastics, all of whom live in these seven monasteries.

古文：经三百年，彼诸人等，现业力大，昔所造恶，当世轻受，不入地狱。
现代文：经过三百年的长期修练，这些人的道业法力都大了，从前所做的恶行，当世减轻了罪过，不再被打入地狱。
English: After three hundred years of long-term training, these people's virtue and virtue are all great. The evil deeds they did in the past have mitigated their sins in the present life, and they will no longer be driven into hell.

古文：前所害者，在恶趣中，又发恶愿，彼害我者，及未成圣，我当害之；若不加害，恶业便尽，我无以报。
现代文：从前被他们杀害的，在恶趣之中又发下恶愿：那些杀害我们的人，乘其未能成佛的时候，我们应当把他们害了；如不加害于他们，他们的罪蘖便会消除，我们就没有理由和办法予以报复了。
English: Those who were killed by them in the past, sent forth evil wishes in the midst of their evil desires: those who killed us, taking advantage of their failure to become Buddhas, we should harm them; if we do not harm them, their sins will be eliminated, and we will have no reason or way to retaliate.

古文：共吐大火，焚烧寺舍，及彼聚落，一时焚荡。纵盗得活，又以大水漂溺杀之，无一得存。
现代文：于是，他们便一起口吐大火，焚烧了寺院僧舍，直到那些人聚居的地方被大火洗动一空为止，纵使有人苟活于火灾、又以大水淹没溺死，结果是没有一人能够幸存。
English: So, together, they breathed fire and set ablaze the monastery and the monks' quarters, until the place where those people lived was completely washed away by the fire. Although some people survived the fire and drowned in the flood, none of them could survive.

古文：时彼山神，寺未破前，收取此像，远在空中；寺破已后，下内石室，安置供养。
现代文：当时那个地方的山神，在寺庙尚未倒塌之前，收取了利宾菩萨的神像，运到很远的空中；寺庙破毁之后，山神又把菩萨的佛像安置在地下石室中供奉。
English: At that time, the mountain god of that place, before the temple had collapsed, collected the god statue of Libin Bodhisattva and transported it to a far away sky; after the temple was destroyed, the mountain god placed the Buddha statue of the bodhisattva in the underground stone room for worship.

古文：年月既久，石生室灭，至刘萨诃师礼山，逆示像出。
现代文：后来年头太多了，石像仍然存在而石室却已不见了。等到刘萨诃法师前去拜山时，石像便从地下冒了出来。
English: Years later, the stone statues were still there, but the stone room was gone. When Master Liu Sadun went to worship the mountain, the stone statues emerged from the ground.

古文：其萨诃者，前身元是利宾菩萨。
现代文：那个萨诃法师的前身，原是利宾菩萨，利宾菩萨的石像已经身首异处。
English: The predecessor of that Satsang master was originally Libin Bodhisattva, whose stone statue has been moved to a different place.

古文：身首别处，更在别篇也。 
现代文：这都记载在别处了。 
English: It's all documented elsewhere.

古文：又问： 江表龙光瑞像，人传罗什将来，有言扶南所得，如何为定？ 
现代文：律师又问他江南龙光寺的珍贵佛像，人们传说是西域僧人罗什带来的，也有人说是从扶南国得来的，哪种说法是正确的？
English: The lawyer also asked him about the precious Buddha statues of the Longguang Temple in the south of the Yangtze River. People say that they were brought by the monk Rosh from the western region, while others say that they came from Funan Province. Which statement is correct?

古文：答曰： 此非罗什所得，斯乃宋孝武帝征扶南获之。
现代文：天人答道： 这尊佛像不是罗什带来的，而是南朝宋孝武帝征扶南时获得的。
English: Tianren replied: This Buddha statue was not brought by Roche, but was obtained by the Southern Dynasty Emperor Song Xiaowu during the Southern Expedition.

古文：昔佛灭后三百年中，北天竺大阿罗汉优婆质那，以神力加工匠，后三百年中，凿大石山，安置佛窟，从上至下，凡有五重，高三百余尺。
现代文：昔日佛祖去世三百年时，北天竺的大阿罗汉优婆质那，将神灵之力施加给工匠，工匠在以后的三百年间，开凿大石山，安置佛窟，从上到下共有五层，高三百余尺。
English: When the Buddha died three hundred years ago, the Great Arohan, the Great Mother of the North, exerted the power of the gods on the craftsmen. Over the next three hundred years, the craftsmen excavated a large stone mountain and placed a Buddhist cave, with a total of five floors from top to bottom, more than three hundred feet high.

古文：请弥勒菩萨指挥，作檀室处之。玄奘师传云，百余尺；圣迹记云，高八丈。足趺八尺，六斋日常放光明。
现代文：请来弥勒菩萨指挥安排，制作檀室放在那里，玄奘法师的《传》说，檀室高一百余尺，《圣迹记》则说，高八丈，脚背为八尺，在六斋日经常放射光芒。
English: Please come to Maitreya Bodhisattva's command and arrange to make a sandalwood room and place it there. The "Biography" of Master Xuanzang said that the sandalwood room is more than one hundred feet high, and the "Holy Relic" said that it is eight feet high, eight feet in the instep, and often radiates light on the sixth day of Lent.

古文：其初作时，罗汉将工人上天，三往方成。
现代文：当初制作的时候，罗汉将工人送到天空，如此送上三次才制作成功。
English: At the time of the original production, Rohan sent the workers to the sky, and it took three times before the production was successful.

古文：第二头牛头旃檀，第三金，第四玉，第五铜像。
现代文：佛窟的第二层安放的是牛头旃檀，第三层安放的是金像，第四层是玉像，第五层是铜像。
English: On the second floor of the Buddha's Grotto is a bull's head, on the third floor is a gold statue, on the fourth floor is a jade statue, and on the fifth floor is a bronze statue.

古文：凡夫今见，止在下重，上四重闭。
现代文：普通人现在看见的，只是最下边的第五层，上面四层都关闭着。
English: What ordinary people see now is only the bottom fifth floor, and the top four floors are all closed.

古文：石窟映彻，见人脏腑。
现代文：整个石窟光闪闪的，能够照彻人的肺腑。
English: The entire grotto is shiny and can be seen from the bottom of one's heart.

古文：第六百年，有佛柰遮阿罗汉，生已母亡。
现代文：石窟建成后的第六百年，有位佛奈遮阿罗汉，他刚生下来母亲就死了。
English: In the sixth century after the construction of the grotto, there was a Buddha named Arahant, who was just born when his mother died.

古文：后生扶南国，念母重恩，从上重中，取小檀像，令母供养。
现代文：他又出生在扶南国，因为念及母亲生育自己的重恩，便从石窟最上面的一层拿了一个小檀像，让母亲供奉。
English: He was born in Funan Province, and because he remembered his mother's kindness in giving birth to him, he took a small sandalwood statue from the top floor of the cave for his mother to worship.

古文：母终，生扬州，出家，住新兴寺，获得三果。
现代文：母亲死后转生到扬州，长大后出了家，住在新兴寺，证得三果。
English: After his mother's death, he was reincarnated in Yangzhou. When he grew up, he left home and lived in a new temple. He obtained the Three Fruits Certificate.

古文：宋孝武征扶南，获此像来都，亦是罗汉神力。
现代文：宋孝武帝征扶南时，得到了这尊小檀像带回了京都。
English: When Emperor Song Xiaowu conquered Funan, he obtained this small sandalwood statue and brought it back to Kyoto.

古文：母今见在，时往罗浮天台西方诸处。昔法盛昙无谒者，再往西方。
现代文：也是借了奈遮阿罗汉的神力、母亲如今仍然健在，时常到罗浮天台等西方各个地方去，从前那里的法盛昙没有人去拜谒，母亲去的地方还要往西。
English: It was also thanks to the power of Neha Arohan that my mother is still alive today. She often goes to various places in the west, such as the Luo Fu Tiantai. In the past, no one went to worship Fa Sheng Yao there, and the places my mother went to were further west.

古文：有传五卷。略述此缘。何忽云罗什法师背负而来耶？ 
现代文：这件事情的前因后果，有《传》五卷略加论述，怎么忽然说什么这尊檀像是罗什背到这里来的呢？
English: The antecedents and consequences of this event are described in detail in the five volumes of the "Biography," so how can it suddenly be said that this deity was brought here by Roche?

古文：宣律师因问： 什师一代所翻之经，人多偏乐，受持转盛，何耶？ 
现代文：宣律师于是问道： 罗什法师一代人翻译的佛经，人们大都偏爱，所以从那之后，修习佛法的情况开始兴盛起来。
English: Lawyer Xuan then asked: The sutras translated by Master Luo Shih a generation ago were favored by most people, so from then on, the practice of Buddhism began to flourish.

古文：答曰： 其人聪明，善解大乘，已下诸人同时翻译者并隽。
现代文：这是什么原因呢？ 天人答道： 鸠摩罗什这个人聪明智慧，善于理解大乘教义，在他主持下一起参与翻译的人也都是佛教界的俊才。
English: What is the reason for this? The man of heaven replied: This man, Kumarosh, is intelligent and wise, and is good at understanding the Mahayana teachings. The people who participated in the translation under his leadership are also great talents in the Buddhist world.

古文：又一代之宝也，绝后光前，仰之所不及。
现代文：罗什是那个时代的珍宝，是空前绝后的人，使人望尘莫及。
English: Roche was a treasure of that era, a man without precedent or equal.

古文：故其所译，以悟达为先，得佛遗寄之意也。 
现代文：所以他所翻译的佛经，以领悟和传达佛法的教义为主，是最接近佛祖遗著之真义的。 
English: Therefore, his translation of the Buddhist scriptures, focusing on understanding and conveying the teachings of Buddhism, is the closest to the true meaning of the Buddha's writings.

古文：又问： 俗中常论被秦姚与抑破重戒，云何得佛意耶？ 
现代文：律师又问道： 通常都说罗什法师被秦人姚兴逼迫，破除了佛教严格的戒律；怎么说他是最得佛祖遗教之真义的呢？
English: The lawyer also asked, "It is often said that Master Lo Shih was persecuted by the Qin people Yao Xing and broke the strict precepts of Buddhism; how can he be said to be the one who has gained the true meaning of the Buddha's teachings?

古文：答曰： 此非悠悠凡所筹度，何须评论。
现代文：天人答道： 这个问题不是芸芸凡众所能理解的，无须多加评论。
English: Tianren replied, "This question is not something that everyone can understand. There is no need to comment on it.

古文：什师德行在三贤，所在通化，那繁补阙，随机而作。
现代文：罗什法师的德行在于佛事三贤，宗旨之所在是感通教化众生，哪能纠缠和拘泥于小节的缺失，应当随因机缘而行事。
English: Master Rosh's virtue lies in the Buddhist Three Sages, the purpose of which is to inspire and enlighten sentient beings. How can you entangle and stick to the lack of subsection, you should act according to the opportunity.

古文：故大论一部，十分略九。自余经论，例此可知。
现代文：所以经他译释的《大智度论》这部经书，十分省略为九分，其余的经论如何，道过这个例子就可以推知。
English: Therefore, the sutra "On Great Wisdom," which he translated, is completely omitted for nine points. How the rest of the sutra is, can be inferred from this example.

古文：冥祥感应，历代弥新，深会圣旨，罕逢难遇，又蒙文殊指受，令其删定，特异恒伦。岂以别室见讥，顿亡玄致者也。 
现代文：对于佛法教义的沉思感悟，理解越来越新，象他那样能够深刻领会先圣的旨意，实在很少见到。他又蒙受文殊的指点传授，让他删定译释的经论，所以大大超过普通人的翻译。
English: It is very rare to see someone with such a deep understanding of the Buddha's teachings. He was also instructed by Manjusri, who asked him to delete the sutras he was translating, so his translation is much better than that of an ordinary person.

古文：又问： 邡州显际寺山出石像者，何代所立？ 答曰： 像是秦穆公所造。像元出处，是周穆王造寺处也。
现代文：对他这样的人。怎能因为他被逼收纳妻室而加以讥笑，从而一笔勾销他深刻的造诣和卓著的建树呢。 律师又问在邡州显际寺山上出现的石像是什么时代建造的，天人答道： 石像秦穆公时制造的，石像原先出现的地点是周穆王建造寺庙的地方。
English: For someone like him, how can he be ridiculed because he was forced to take in a wife, thereby writing off his profound accomplishments and outstanding achievements. The lawyer also asked what era the stone statues that appeared on the mountain of the Genji Temple in Zhangzhou were built, and the man of heaven replied: The stone statues were made in the time of Qin Mu, and the place where the stone statues originally appeared was the place where King Zhou Mu built the temple.

古文：佛去世后，育王第四女，又造像塔，于此供养。于时此寺有一二三果人住中，秦相由余常所奉敬。
现代文：佛祖去世之后，阿育王的第四个女儿又建造了佛像和寺塔，在这里供奉，这时在这座寺庙里住着一至三个得到证果的僧人。秦穆公的宰相由余常常到这里供奉。
English: After the death of Buddha, the fourth daughter of King Ashoka built a Buddha statue and a pagoda to worship here. At that time, there were one to three monks who had obtained the certification. The prime minister of Qin Mu Gong, Yu Yu, often came here to worship.

古文：往者迦叶佛时，亦于此立寺，是彼沙弥显际造也。
现代文：在从前迦叶佛时代，也在这里建立过寺庙，是那个沙弥显际所建造的。
English: In the time of the Buddha, a temple was also built here. It was built by the priest Shanki.

古文：仍将本名，以显寺额。 
现代文：后来这座寺庙仍采用本来的名字，匾额上题的是 显际寺 。
English: Later, the temple still used its original name, with the inscription "Henjiji Temple."

古文：又问： 金玉华宫南檀台山上，有砖塔，面别四十步，下层极壮，四面石龛，傍有碎砖，又有三十余窑砖，古老莫知何代，然每闻钟声？ 
现代文：律师又问金玉华宫南面檀台山上有座砖砌的古塔，塔的四面各为四十步宽，底层极为雄壮，四面都有石龛，石龛旁边有小块的砖，又有三十余块窑砖。塔的形状十分古老，不知是什么时代建造的，然而塔内常常听列有钟声。
English: The lawyer also asked about an ancient brick tower on the sand dunes to the south of the Golden Jade Palace. The four sides of the tower are each forty paces wide, and the bottom floor is extremely majestic. There are stone pillars on all four sides, small bricks next to the stone pillars, and more than thirty kiln bricks. The shape of the tower is very old, I don't know what era it was built in, but bells are often heard inside the tower.

古文：答曰： 此穆王寺也，名曰灵山。
现代文：天人答道： 这是周穆王时的寺庙，名字叫灵山。
English: Tianren replied, "This is a temple from the time of King Zhou Mu. Its name is Lingshan.

古文：至育王时，敕山神于此造塔。
现代文：到阿育王时，敕令山神在这里建造了一座塔。
English: At the time of King Ashikaga, the mountain god Kirei built a tower here.

古文：西晋末乱，五胡控权。
现代文：西晋末年出现动乱局面，五胡乱华控制政权，刘曜建都于长安。
English: At the end of the Western Jin Dynasty, there was a turbulent situation. Wu Hulanhua controlled the regime, and Liu Youjian was based in Chang'an.

古文：刘曜京都长安，数梦此山佛见，在砖塔中坐。语曜曰： 汝少饮酒，莫耽色欲，黜去邪佞，进用忠良。 
现代文：他几次梦到在这座山上看见有佛坐在塔里，佛对刘曜说： 你要少喝酒，不要沉醉于色欲，要罢黜奸邪运用忠良。
English: He dreamed several times that he saw a Buddha sitting in a pagoda on this mountain. The Buddha said to Liu You, "You should drink less alcohol, not indulge in sexual desire, renounce treachery and evil, and practice righteousness."

古文：曜不能从，后于洛阳，酒醉落马，为石勒所擒。
现代文：刘曜不听佛的劝告，后来在洛阳酒醉落马，被石勒擒获了。
English: Liu You did not listen to the Buddha's advice, and later fell down drunk in Luoyang and was caught by Shi Le.

古文：初曜因梦所悟，令人寻山访之，遂见此像，坐小砖塔，与梦符同。
现代文：当初，刘曜被梦境所提示，派人寻访这座山，果然见到这里有个佛像坐在小砖塔里，与他梦中见到的完全一致。
English: At first, Liu Yue was prompted by a dream and sent someone to search the mountain, and indeed saw a Buddha statue sitting in a small brick tower, which was exactly the same as what he saw in his dream.

古文：便毁小塔，更造大者，高一十九级，并造寺宇。极存壮丽，寺名法灯，度三百僧住之。
现代文：他便令人毁掉小塔，重新建造了大砖塔，塔高一十九级，同时还建造了寺庙，寺庙极为壮丽，寺庙的名字是法灯寺，引度了三百名僧人住在寺内。
English: He then had the small tower destroyed and the large brick tower rebuilt. The tower is nineteen levels high. At the same time, he also built a temple. The temple is extremely magnificent. The name of the temple is Hokke-ji Temple. Three hundred monks live in the temple.

古文：曜没赵后，寺有四十三人，修得三果。山神于今塔后又造一寺，供三果僧。
现代文：刘曜灭亡于石赵之后，法灯寺内有四十三位僧人修练证得三果，山神在现今的大塔后面又建造了一座寺庙，用以供养这些证得三果的高僧。
English: After Liu You's death in Shizhao, there were forty-three monks practicing the Three Fruits of Enlightenment in the Law Lantern Temple, and the mountain god built another temple behind the current pagoda to support these high monks who had obtained the Three Fruits of Enlightenment.

古文：神往太白，采取芝草，供养圣僧，皆获延龄。
现代文：山神到太白山上采取灵芝卓，供养这些圣僧，这些圣僧便得到了长寿。
English: The deity of the mountain went to Mount Taibai to take Lingzidro to feed these holy monks, and these holy monks gained longevity.

古文：寺今现在，凡人不见。
现代文：这座寺庙现今仍在，但是凡人看不见。
English: The temple is still there today, but is invisible to the naked eye.

古文：所闻钟声，即是寺钟也。
现代文：现在常常听到的钟声，就是这座寺庙里的钟声。
English: The bells you often hear nowadays are the bells from this temple.

古文：其塔本基，虽因刘曜，仍是穆王立寺之处也，又是迦叶如来之古寺也。
现代文：砖塔本来的基础，虽然经过刘曜的翻新改建，但仍是周穆王时建寺庙的地方，又是迦叶如来时代古寺的旧址。
English: The original foundation of the brick pagoda, although it has been renovated and rebuilt by Liu You, is still the place where the temple was built by King Zhou Mu, and it is also the old site of the ancient temple in the time of Jia Ye.

古文：至贞观年，于玉华北慈乌川山上，常见群鹿来集其所，逐去还来。有人异之，于鹿集处，掘深一丈，获一石像，长一丈许，见今供养。 
现代文：到了唐太宗贞观年间，在玉华宫北面慈乌川山上，经常见到一群鹿集在一个地方，把它们赶跑后还返回来，有人感到奇怪，便在这个地方往地下挖，掘到一丈深时得到了一尊石像，身高一丈左右。这尊石雕佛像现今还供养在寺庙里。 
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, a herd of deer was often seen gathering at a place on Ciuchuan Mountain, north of the Jade Emperor's Palace. Some people were surprised to see a herd of deer running away and then returning. They dug underground at this place, and when they reached a depth of one meter, they found a stone statue, about one meter in height. This stone Buddha statue is still kept in the temple.

古文：又问： 荆州前大明寺旃檀像者，云是优填王所造，依传从彼摸来，将至梁朝。今京师复有，何者是本？ 答曰： 大明是本像。
现代文：律师又问荆州前大明寺内的旃檀佛像，据说是优填王所制造的，被依传从那里来带到了梁朝；如今京城长安又有一个这样的檀木佛像；这两个之中哪个是本像？
English: The lawyer also asked Jingzhou former Daming Temple's sandalwood Buddha statue, which is said to have been made by King You Ji, and was brought from there to the Liang Dynasty according to legend; now there is another such sandalwood Buddha statue in Beijing Chang'an; which of the two is the original image?

古文：梁高既崩，像来荆渚。
现代文：天人答道： 大明寺里的那个是本像，梁高灭亡后，佛像来到了荆州。
English: Tianren replied: The one in Daming Temple is the original statue. After the death of Liang Gao, the Buddha statue came to Jingzhou.

古文：至元帝承圣三年，周平梁后，收薄国宝，皆入北周。其檀像者，有僧珍师藏隐房内，多以财物赠遗使人，像遂得停。
现代文：梁元帝承圣三年于北周平掉南梁朝后，把国宝都收集到北周，当时那尊檀像被一住僧珍法师隐藏在房内，赠给前来收集国宝的使者许多财物，檀像便保留了下来。
English: In the third year of Emperor Liang Yuan's reign, after he had overthrown the Southern Liang Dynasty in Northern Zhou, he gathered all the national treasures to Northern Zhou. At that time, the sandal statue was hidden in the room by a resident monk Zhen Mage, who presented many treasures to the emissaries who came to collect the national treasure. The sandal statue was preserved.

古文：至隋开皇九年，文帝遗使人柳顾言往迎，寺僧又求像，令镇荆楚。顾是乡人，从之。
现代文：到了隋文帝开皇九年，文帝派遣使者柳顾前往荆州迎请檀像，寺僧又恳求留下檀像让其守护荆楚之地，柳顾是这个地方的人，所以听从了寺僧的请求。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Wen sent an envoy, Liu Gu, to Jingzhou to welcome the sandalwood statue. The monk also begged to leave the sandalwood statue to guard the land of Jingchu. Liu Gu was from this place, so he obeyed the request of the monk.

古文：令别刻檀，将往恭旨。
现代文：他令人另外刻制一尊檀像，拿去向皇帝复命。
English: He had another sandalwood statue carved and took it to the emperor.

古文：当时访匠，得一婆罗门僧，名真达，为造。
现代文：当时访求匠人时找到一位婆罗门僧人，名字叫真达，是真达为他刻造了檀像。
English: When he visited the craftsman at that time, he found a Brahman monk named Zinda, who carved the statue for him.

古文：即今西京大兴善寺像是也，亦甚灵异。
现代文：这尊檀像就是如今长安大兴善寺中的那尊檀像，也很灵异。
English: This statue is the same as the one now in Chang'an Great Xingzen Temple, and it is also very magical.

古文：本像在荆州，僧以漆布幔之。
现代文：本像在荆州，由僧人用漆布幔帐遮盖着。
English: The original image is in Jingzhou, covered by a monk with a lacquer cloth.

古文：相好不及真者。
现代文：佛像的仿制品，制作的形相无论怎么好，也不如本像。
English: An imitation of a Buddha statue, no matter how good the image is, is not as good as the original.

古文：大明本是古佛住处，灵像不肯北迁故也。
现代文：大明寺本是古佛的住处，所以有灵气的檀像不愿迁移到北方。
English: Daimyō-ji was originally the residence of the ancient Buddha, so the reiki-inspired statue was reluctant to move to the north.

古文：近有长沙义法师，天人冥赞，遂悟开发，别除漆布，真容重显，大动信心。
现代文：近来有一位长沙寺的义法师，在天人的点化之下开发觉悟了，于是除去了遮在檀像上的漆布幔帐，使檀像的真面目重新显示了出来，大大感动了信徒的心怀。
English: Recently, a guru at Changsha Temple developed an awareness after being enlightened by a heavenly being, so he removed the lacquer cloth covering the sandal, revealing the sandal's true face. This greatly moved the hearts of believers.

古文：披觌灵仪，令檀所作，本无补接，光趺殊异，象牙雕刻，卒非人工所成。
现代文：揭去帐幔后重新看到了佛像风采，发现檀像的制作本无沾补衔接之处，光着的脚背尤其为特异，就像象牙雕刻的一样，绝对不象人工制作的。
English: After removing the curtain, I saw the style of the Buddha statue again, and found that the production of the sandalwood statue did not touch the joints, and the bare soles of the feet were particularly unusual, just like ivory carving, absolutely not like artificial production.

古文：兴善像身，一一乖本。 
现代文：而兴善寺的檀像躯体，处处都与本像不同。 
English: On the other hand, the body of the sandalwood statue at Heungseon-ji Temple is different from the original statue in every way.

古文：又问： 涪州相思寺侧，多有古迹，篆铭勒之，不识其缘。
现代文：律师又问他涪州相思寺旁边，有很多古迹，上面有用篆字刻写的铭文，认不出是什么意思。
English: The lawyer also asked him that there are many monuments next to the Bozhou Confucius Temple with inscriptions engraved with Chinese characters on them, and he could not recognize what it meant.

古文：此事云何？
现代文：这件事怎么解释呢？
English: How can this be explained?

古文：答曰： 此迦叶佛时，有山神姓罗，名子明，蜀人也。
现代文：天人答道： 这是迦叶佛时代的事。当时有个山神姓罗，名叫子明，蜀地人。
English: The man of heaven replied, "This happened in the time of Buddha Kaya. At that time, there was a mountain god named Luo, whose name was Zi Ming. He was from Shu.

古文：旧是持戒比丘，生憎破戒者，发诸恶愿：令我死后，作大恶鬼，啖破戒人。
现代文：这位山神过去是个受戒的僧人，平生憎恨破坏戒规的人，发下恶愿说：我死之后一定要化为大恶鬼，吃掉这些破除戒规的人。
English: The mountain god, who used to be an ordained monk, had always hated those who broke the precepts, and made a bad wish: "After I die, I must turn into a great evil spirit and eat these people who broke the precepts."

古文：因愿受身，作此山神。
现代文：这一恶愿便兑现在他身上，他死后成了这里的山神。
English: This evil wish was fulfilled in him, and after his death he became a mountain god here.

古文：多有眷属，所主土地，东西五千余里，南北二千余里。
现代文：山神下面有许多部属，他所管辖的地方，东西长达五千余里，南北也有两千多里。
English: There are many subordinates under the mountain god, and the area under his jurisdiction is more than five thousand miles long from east to west, and more than two thousand miles from north to south.

古文：年啖万人已上。
现代文：他与部属每年吃掉万人以上。
English: He and his subordinates eat more than ten thousand people every year.

古文：此神本僧为迦叶佛兄，后为弟子，彼佛怜愍，故来教化，种种神变，然使调伏，与受五戒，随识宿命，因不啖人。
现代文：这位山神转世之前的那位僧人本是迦叶佛的兄长，后来迦叶佛怜悯这位本是自己大哥的弟子，便来教化他，运用了种种神变之法终于使他服从，给他受了五戒，接着他便认识了宿命，于是不再吃人了。
English: The monk before this mountain god was reincarnated was originally the elder brother of Gaya Buddha. Later, Gaya Buddha took pity on this disciple, who was his elder brother, and came to enlighten him. He used various methods of metamorphosis to finally make him obey. He gave him the five precepts, and then he realized his destiny, so he stopped eating people.

古文：恐后心变，故佛留迹。
现代文：恐怕他以后变心，迦叶佛便留下了这些佛迹。
English: I'm afraid that he later changed his mind, and Kaya Buddha left these Buddhist monuments behind.

古文：育王于上起塔，在山顶。
现代文：阿育王在这些佛迹上建起了寺塔，寺塔坐落在山顶上。
English: Ashoka built a pagoda on these Buddhist relics, and the pagoda is located on the top of the mountain.

古文：神便藏于石中。
现代文：山神便藏在山顶上的石头里。
English: The mountain god then hid in the stone on the top of the mountain.

古文：塔是白玉所作。
现代文：塔是白玉石彻成的。
English: The tower is made entirely of white jade.

古文：其神现在，其郭下寺塔，育王所立。
现代文：这位山神现在仍在，他住的地方下面的那座石塔，是阿育王建立的。
English: The mountain god is still alive, and the stone tower below where he lived was built by King Ashoka.

古文：见付嘱仪中。 
现代文：在嘱咐的文章中可以见到。 
English: You can see it in the article I ordered.

古文：又问： 南海循州北山兴宁县界灵龛寺，多有灵迹，何也？ 
现代文：宣律师又问他南海循州北山兴宁县边界处的灵龛寺，有很多佛灵的神迹，这是怎回事？
English: Lawyer Xuan also asked him about the Linglong Temple on the border of Xingning County, Shuzhou and Beishan in the South China Sea. There are many miracles of Buddha's spirit. What's going on?

古文：答曰： 此乃文殊圣者弟子，为此山神，多造恶业。文殊愍之，便来教化。遂识宿命，请为留迹，我常礼事，得离诸恶。
现代文：天人答道： 这些神迹都是文殊所留下的。文殊先圣有个弟子在这里做山神，作了很多恶业，文殊怜悯他便来对他施行教化，他便认识了宿命，请文殊先圣为他留下神迹，自己好常常礼拜，从而脱离恶业。
English: The man of heaven replied: These miracles were all left by Manjushri. There was a disciple of Manjushri who became a mountain god here and did many evil deeds. Manjushri took pity on him and came to enlighten him. He came to know his destiny. He asked Manjushri to leave a miracle for him, and he prayed often so that he could get rid of his evil deeds.

古文：文殊为现，今者是也。
现代文：文殊就为他显现了神迹，如今见到的神迹就是这样来的。
English: Manjusri then performed a miracle for him, and this is how the miracle we see now came about.

古文：于贞观三年，山神命终，生兜率天。
现代文：在唐太宗贞观三年山神命终，托生于兜率天。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Taizong Zhenguan, the three-year-old mountain god, died and was reborn in the sky.

古文：别有一鬼，来居此地，即旧神亲家也。
现代文：另有一个山鬼来到此地居住，这个山鬼就是原来那山神的亲家。
English: Another mountain spirit came to live here. This mountain spirit was originally a relative of the mountain god.

古文：大造诸恶，生天旧神怜之，下请文殊，为现小迹。以化后神，又从正法。
现代文：他又大作恶业。生在兜率天的那位原山神怜惜他，便下来请文殊为他显现小的神迹，用以教化后来的山神，文殊又照过去那样为他显现了小的神迹。
English: The original mountain god, who was born in the sky, took pity on him and came down to ask Manjusri to appear as a small miracle for him, in order to enlighten the later mountain gods. As in the past, Manjusri also appeared as a small miracle for him.

古文：故今此山，大小迹现，莫匪有由焉。
现代文：所以如今在这座山上显现的神迹，没有不是有来由的。
English: So there is a reason for the miracles that now appear on this mountain.

古文：见付嘱仪。 
现代文：在嘱咐的文字中可见。 
English: You can see it in the text of the order.

古文：又问： 沁州北山石窟佛，常有光明。此像出来久近耶？ 
现代文：律师又问沁州北山石窟里的佛像常常放出光芒，这里的佛像是什么时代制造出来的？
English: The lawyer also asked that the Buddha statues in the Beishan Grottoes in Luzhou often emit light. What era were the Buddha statues here made in?

古文：答曰： 此窟迦叶佛释迦佛二时备有，往昔周穆王弟子造迦叶佛像也。 
现代文：天人答道： 这座石窟在迦叶佛与释迦牟尼佛两个时代都有，你说的佛像是从前穆王弟子所制造的迦叶佛的佛像。 
English: The celestial being replied, "This grotto has existed in both the times of Gaya Buddha and Sakyamuni Buddha. The Buddha statue you are talking about is the Buddha statue of Gaya Buddha, which was made by a former disciple of King Mu.

古文：又问： 渭南终南二山，有佛面山、七佛涧者。 答曰： 此事同于前。南山库谷天藏，是迦叶佛自手所造之藏也。
现代文：律师又问他渭南山与终南山上的佛面山、七佛涧是什么时代出现的，天人答道： 这件事与前面那件事相同，南山上的库谷天藏是迦叶佛亲手所造的库藏。
English: The lawyer also asked him about the time when the seven stupas and the Buddha's face mountain appeared on the South Mountain and the final South Mountain. The celestial being replied: This matter is the same as the previous one. The Kugu Heavenly Treasure on the South Mountain is a treasure created by the hands of the Buddha Kaya.

古文：今现有十三缘觉，在谷内住。 
现代文：现有十三位缘觉住在谷内。 
English: Thirteen people currently live in the valley.

古文：又问此土常传有佛，是殷时、周昭、庄王等造，互说不同，如何取定？ 
现代文：律师又问他此地有许多佛像，传说是殷周时代昭王、庄王等制造的，说法不一，如何确定？
English: The lawyer also asked him that there are many Buddha statues here, and the legend is that they were made by King Zhao and King Zhuang in the Yin Zhou era. There are different stories, so how can you be sure?

古文：答曰： 皆有所以。
现代文：天人答道： 这些说法都有依据。
English: Tianren replied, "There is evidence to support these claims.

古文：弟子夏桀时生天，具见佛之垂化。
现代文：弟子夏桀时有了天，都受到佛的教化。
English: When disciple Xia Yao was born, he was enlightened by the Buddha.

古文：且佛有三身，法报二身，则非凡见，并化登地以上。唯有化身，被该三千，百亿释迦，随人所感。前后不定，或在殷末，或在鲁庄，俱在大千之中。
现代文：况且佛有三身，其中法，报二身，平常人看不见，但这二身也都化登在地上；独有化身，替身该有三千，有百亿个释迦牟尼佛，随着人的感悟时时都可以见到，或先或后时间不确定，或者在殷末见到，或者在鲁庄公时见到。
English: Moreover, the Buddha has three bodies, of which the Dharma body and the Bodhisattva body are invisible to ordinary people, but these two bodies are also incarnated on the earth; there should be three thousand unique incarnations and alter egos, and there are ten billion Shakyamuni Buddhas, which can be seen at any time according to one's perception, or at an uncertain time before or after, or at the end of Yin, or at the time of Lu Zhuang.

古文：前后咸传一化，感见随机，前后何定。若据法报，常自湛然，不足叹也。 
现代文：这百亿个释迦佛的化身都在大千世界之中，时间先后成为一统，人们随着不同的机缘随时都可能感悟而见到，到底是先还是后怎么能够确定呢！假若依据法、报二身，这个问题就更为清楚了。这是不足惊叹的。 
English: These tens of billions of incarnations of Buddha Shakyamuni are all in the vast world. Time has successively become one. People can perceive and see with different opportunities at any time. How can it be determined whether it is first or last? If it is based on the law and the report of the two bodies, the problem will be more clear. This is not surprising.

古文：又问： 汉地所见诸瑞像，多传育王第四女所造，其争幽冥，难得其实，此事云何？ 
现代文：律师又问天人道： 汉地所见到的许多佛像，常常传说是阿育王的第四个女儿所制造的，这些说法的依据都不明确，很难得出可靠的结论，这件事情怎么解释呢？ 
English: The lawyer also asked Tian Rong: Many of the Buddha statues seen in Han China are often said to have been made by the fourth daughter of King Ashoka. The basis of these claims is not clear, and it is difficult to draw reliable conclusions. How can this matter be explained?

古文：答曰： 此实不疑，为育王第四女。
现代文：天人答道： 这是事实，不用怀疑。因为阿育王的第四个女儿相貌不扬，很长时间嫁不出去。
English: The man of heaven replied, "This is a fact, and there is no need to doubt it, because the fourth daughter of King Ashoka is not good-looking and will not be able to marry for a long time.

古文：厥貌非妍，久而未出，常恨其丑，乃图佛形相，还如自身，成已发愿。佛之相好，挺异于人如何同我之形仪也。
现代文：她常常报怨自己太丑，便画佛的形相，希望自身也能有佛的相貌。佛像画成后又发愿道： 佛的相貌这么好，超出于常人，怎么能同我的相貌相比呢！ 
English: She often complained that she was too ugly, so she painted the Buddha's image, hoping that she could also have the Buddha's appearance. After the Buddha image was painted, she made a wish: "The Buddha's appearance is so good, beyond ordinary people, how can it be compared to my appearance!"

古文：以此苦邀，弥经年月，后感佛现，忽异本形。
现代文：从此之后她苦苦祈求，经过许多年月后，终于感应到佛形出现，她自己的形貌骤然改变了。
English: From then on, she prayed hard, and after many years, she finally sensed the appearance of the Buddha image, and her own appearance suddenly changed.

古文：父具问之，述其所愿。
现代文：父亲问她是怎么回事，她便告诉了发愿祈求的经过。
English: When her father asked her what had happened, she told him the story of how she had made the wish.

古文：今北山玉华、荆州长沙、杨都高悝、及京城崇敬寺像，并是育王第四女造。
现代文：如今北山玉华寺，荆州长沙寺，杨都高悝寺以及京城长安崇敬寺内的佛像，都是阿育王第四个女儿所造的。
English: Today, the Buddha statues in the Beishan Yuhua Temple, the Jingchuangsha Temple, the Yangdu Gaojun Temple and the Beijing Chang'an Chongqing Temple were all made by the fourth daughter of King Ashoka.

古文：或有书其光趺，依梵本书。
现代文：有一幅画像画着她光着脚背，靠着一本梵文书。
English: One image shows her barefoot and leaning on a Sanskrit book.

古文：汉人读者，罕识其文。
现代文：汉人读者，很少有认识梵文的。
English: Chinese readers rarely know Sanskrit.

古文：育王因将此像，令诸鬼神，随缘所感，流传开悟。
现代文：阿育王便把这幅画像，让鬼神们随缘感悟，到处流传以开悟他们。
English: King Ashoka then spread this image far and wide to enlighten the ghosts and gods.

古文：今睹像面，莫非女形。
现代文：如今看到的佛像面部，没有不是女性的脸型的。
English: The faces of the Buddha statues we see today do not have a female face.

古文：其崇敬寺地，本是战场。西晋将末，有五胡大起，兵戈相杀，此地特多地下人骨，今掘犹得。
现代文：崇敬寺那个地方本来是战场，西晋末年有五胡乱华，互相以刀兵格杀，这个地方地下有许多人的骨头，现在还能挖到。
English: The area of Chongye Temple was originally a battlefield. At the end of the Western Jin Dynasty, there were five chaotic wars in which soldiers killed each other with swords. There are many human bones underground in this area, which can still be excavated.

古文：所杀无辜，残害酷滥，故诸神鬼，携以镇之。令诸冤魂，得生善念。
现代文：所杀的都是无幸，生灵遭涂炭，所以鬼神们带来佛像镇压冤魂，让冤魂们能够产生善良的心愿。
English: All those killed were unlucky, and the living were charred, so the ghosts and gods brought Buddha statues to suppress the evil spirits, so that the evil spirits could have good wishes.

古文：周朝灭法，神亦徙之。隋祖载隆，佛还重起。 
现代文：北周朝灭绝佛法时，神灵也迁移了，隋祖杨坚时佛教中兴，佛像又返回来了。 
English: When the Northern Zhou Dynasty exterminated Buddhism, the gods also migrated. When the Sui Dynasty founder Yang Jian revived Buddhism, the Buddha statues returned.

古文：又问： 幽冥所感，俗中常有。神去形朽，如何重来，或经七日多日，如生不异？ 
现代文：律师又问人死之后仍有感应的事在平常人中也常发生，神魂走了形体烂了，为什么还能活转来，有的过了七天甚至许多天，还与活着时一个样，这是什么原因？
English: The lawyer also asked about the fact that there are still sensations after death, which often happens to ordinary people. The soul has departed and the body has rotted. Why can it still be revived? Some people have passed seven days or even many days and are still the same as when they were alive. What is the reason for this?

古文：答曰： 人禀七识，各有神。心识为主，主虽前去，余神守护，不足怪也。
现代文：天人答道： 人有七识，每一识都有神守护，其中以心识为主，主虽然走了，其余各神仍在守护着，这是不足怪的。
English: The man of heaven replied, "It is not strange that man has seven senses, and each sense is guarded by a god, of which the mind is the most important. Although the Lord has departed, the other gods are still guarding it.

古文：如五戒中，一戒五神，五戒便有二十五神，戒破五神去，余者仍在。
现代文：比如五戒之中，每戒有五神，五戒便有二十五神，一戒破了五神便走了，其余二十神仍然存在。
English: For example, among the five precepts, each precept has five gods, the five precepts have twenty-five gods, once the five gods are broken, they leave, and the remaining twenty gods still exist.

古文：如大僧受戒，戒有二百五十神，亦戒戒之中，感得二百五十，防卫比丘。
现代文：又如大僧受戒，一戒有二百五十神，也在每戒之中都感到有二百五十神在防卫着僧人。
English: Similarly, when a great monk receives the precepts, there are two hundred and fifty gods in each precept, and in each precept he feels that there are two hundred and fifty gods protecting the monk.

古文：若毁一重戒，但二百五十神去，余者恒随。 
现代文：如果破了一重戒，那就只有二百五十神失去，其余诸神仍然跟随着僧人。 
English: If one precept is broken, then only two hundred and fifty gods are lost, the rest of the gods still follow the monks.

古文：律师又问天人曰： 其蜀地简州三学山寺，空灯常照，因何而有？ 
现代文：宣律又问天人道： 在蜀地简州三学山寺内，有空灯常照，这空灯因何而有？ 
English: Xuan Rui also asked Tian Rong: In Shu Di Jian Zhou San Xue Shan Temple, there is an empty lamp that is often lit. What is the reason for this empty lamp?

古文：答曰： 山有菩萨寺，迦叶佛正法时初立，有欢喜王菩萨造之。
现代文：天人答道： 三学山上有一座菩萨庙，这是迦叶佛正法时刚建立的，由欢喜王菩萨建造。
English: The man of heaven replied, "There is a Bodhisattva temple on Sangakusan Mountain. It was built by King of Joy Bodhisattva at the time when Buddha Kaya was preparing for the Fa.

古文：寺名法灯。
现代文：寺庙的名字叫法灯。
English: The name of the temple is called the Law Lamp.

古文：自彼至今，常明室表。
现代文：从那时到现在，一直有灯光照到室外。
English: From then until now, there have always been lights shining outside.

古文：有小菩萨三百人，断粒遐龄，常住此山。
现代文：有小菩萨三百人，绝食长寿，常住于此山。
English: There are three hundred minor bodhisattvas, who live a long life on a starvation diet, and they often live on this mountain.

古文：此灯又是山神李特，续后供养，故至正月，处处燃灯，以供佛寺云尔。 
现代文：此灯又是后来山神李特继续供奉的，所以每年到了正月，处处燃起灯烛，说这是供奉佛寺的。
English: This lamp was later continued to be worshipped by the mountain god Rite, so every year in the first month, candles are lit everywhere, saying that it is dedicated to the Buddhist temple.

