古文：孔子曰： 道之以政，齐之以刑，民免而无耻。道之以德，齐之以礼，有耻且格。 
现代文：孔子说； 用政治法令来引导百姓，用刑罚来约束百姓，百姓可以免于犯罪，但却没有羞耻之心。
English: Confucius said: Use political decrees to guide the people, use punishments to restrain the people, the people can be free from crime, but they have no sense of shame.

古文：老氏称： 上德不德，是以有德；下德不失德，是以无德。
现代文：如果用道德来引导百姓，用礼仪来约束百姓，那么百姓就会有羞耻之心，并且改过自新。 
English: If morality is used to guide the people, and etiquette is used to restrain the people, then the people will have a sense of shame and reform themselves.

古文：法令滋章，盗贼多有。 太史公曰：信哉是言也！
现代文：老子说： 具有高尚道德的人，不表现在形式上的德，因此才有德；道德低下的人，执守着形式上的德，因此没有实际的德。  法令越是严酷，盗贼反而更多。 
English: Lao Tzu said: People with high morals do not show formal virtue, so they have virtue; people with low morals adhere to formal virtue, so they have no actual virtue. The more severe the decree, the more thieves there are.

古文：法令者治之具，而非制治清浊之源也。
现代文：太史公说：这些话可信啊！汉令是政治的工具，而不是管理政治清浊的根源。
English: Taishigong said: These words are credible! Hanling is a political tool, not the root cause of managing political purity.

古文：昔天下之网尝密矣，然奸伪萌起，其极也，上下相遁，至於不振。
现代文：从前天下的法网是很密的，但是邪诈伪的事情却产生出来，这情况发展到最严重的时候，官吏和百姓竟然相互欺骗，达到国家一蹶不振的地步。
English: The legal net has been very tight from day to day, but evil and fraudulent things have arisen. This situation has developed to the most serious time, and officials and people have actually deceived each other, reaching the point where the country is stagnant.

古文：当是之时，吏治若救火扬沸，非武健严酷，恶能胜其任而愉快乎！
现代文：在这个时候，官吏管理政事就象抱薪救火，扬汤止沸一样，如果不用强健有力的人和严酷的法令，怎么能胜其任而愉快呢？
English: At this time, officials manage government affairs as if they were trying to put out a fire with a stick or stop a raging fire. How can they be competent and happy if they do not need strong and powerful people and strict laws?

古文：言道德者，溺其职矣。
现代文：如果让倡言道德的人来干这些事，一定会失职的。
English: It would be a dereliction of duty for an ethical advocate to do these things.

古文：故曰 听讼，吾犹人也，必也使无讼乎 。 下士闻道大笑之 。
现代文：所以孔子说： 审理诉讼，我同别人一样；一定要有不同，那就让人们不要再发生诉讼的事。 老子说： 愚蠢浅漏的人听到道德之言，就会大笑起来。 
English: That is why Confucius said, "When I hear lawsuits, I am just like everyone else; there must be a difference, so that people will no longer have to go through lawsuits."Lao Tzu said, "Foolish and shallow people will laugh out loud when they hear the word morality.

古文：非虚言也。
现代文：这些话并不是虚妄之言。
English: These are not idle words.

古文：汉兴，破觚而为圜，斫雕而为朴，网漏於吞舟之鱼，而吏治烝烝，不至於奸，黎民艾安。
现代文：汉朝建立后，破坏了方形的，换成圆形的，对秦朝法律作了较大变动，如同砍掉外部的雕饰，露出质朴自然的本质一样，法律由繁苛而至宽简，就像可以漏掉吞舟之鱼的鱼网，然而官吏的治绩纯厚美盛，不至于做出邪之事，百姓也都平安无事。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the square-shaped cranes were destroyed and replaced with round ones, and major changes were made to the laws of the Qin Dynasty. Just as the external carvings were cut off to reveal the simple and natural essence, the laws changed from complex to simple, like a fish net that can miss the fish that swallows the boat. However, the performance of government officials was pure and beautiful, and they did not do evil things, and the people were safe and sound.

古文：由是观之，在彼不在此。
现代文：由此可见，国家政治的美好，在于君王的宽厚，而不在法律的严酷。
English: Thus, the beauty of national politics lies in the magnanimity of the monarch, not in the severity of the law.

古文：高后时，酷吏独有侯封，刻轹宗室，侵辱功臣。
现代文：高后时代，酷吏只有侯封，苛刻欺压皇族，侵犯侮辱有功之臣。
English: In the post-high school era, the only cruel officials were the feudal lords, who harshly bullied the imperial family and insulted meritorious vassals.

古文：吕氏已败，遂夷侯封之家。
现代文：诸吕彻底失败后，朝廷就杀了侯封的全家。
English: After the complete defeat of Zhu Lü, the imperial court killed the entire family of Houfeng.

古文：孝景时，晁错以刻深颇用术辅其资，而七国之乱，发怒於错，错卒以被戮。
现代文：孝景帝时代，晁错用心苛刻严酷，多用法术来施展他的才能，因而吴、楚等七国叛乱，把愤怒发泄到晁错身上，晁错因此被杀。
English: In the era of Emperor Xiao Jing, Zou Er was harsh-hearted and harsh, and used magic to display his talents. As a result, Wu, Chu and other seven countries rebelled, venting their anger on Zou Er, and Zou Er was killed as a result.

古文：其後有郅都、宁成之属。
现代文：这以后有郅都和宁成之辈。
English: Since then, there have been descendants of Shidu and Ningcheng.

古文：郅都者，杨人也。以郎事孝文帝。
现代文：郅都是杨县人，以郎官的身份服事孝文帝。
English: They were all from Yang County and served Emperor Xiaowen as vassals.

古文：孝景时，都为中郎将，敢直谏，面折大臣於朝。
现代文：景帝时代，郅都当了中郎将，敢于向朝廷直言进谏，在朝廷上当面使人折服。
English: In the era of Emperor Jing, Shidu became a middle-ranking general. He dared to speak directly to the imperial court, and made people bow to him in front of the imperial court.

古文：尝从入上林，贾姬如厕，野彘卒入厕。
现代文：他曾经跟随天子到上林苑，贾姬到厕所去，野猪突然闯进厕所。
English: He once followed Tianzi to Shanglinyuan, Jackie to the toilet, and the wild boar suddenly broke into the toilet.

古文：上目都，都不行。
现代文：皇上用眼示意郅都，郅都不肯行动。
English: The Emperor winked at them, but they refused to move.

古文：上欲自持兵救贾姬，都伏上前曰： 亡一姬复一姬进，天下所少宁贾姬等乎？
现代文：皇上想亲自拿着武器去救贾姬，郅都跪在皇上面前说： 失掉一个姬妾，还会有个姬妾进宫，天下难道会缺少贾姬这样的人吗？
English: The emperor wanted to personally take up arms to save Jaki, and they all knelt in front of the emperor and said: "If you lose a concubine, there will still be a concubine entering the palace. Will the world lack someone like Jaki?

古文：陛下纵自轻，柰宗庙太后何！ 
现代文：陛下纵然看轻自已，而祖庙和太后怎么办呢？ 
English: Even if His Majesty thinks lightly of himself, what about the ancestral temple and the empress dowager?

古文：上还，彘亦去。
现代文：皇上回转身来，野猪也离开了。
English: The emperor turned around and the wild boar also left.

古文：太后闻之，赐都金百斤，由此重郅都。
现代文：太后听说了这件事，赏赐郅都黄金百斤，从此重视郅都。
English: When the empress dowager heard about this, she rewarded Xindu with a hundred catties of gold. From then on, she attached great importance to Xindu.

古文：济南瞷氏宗人三百馀家，豪猾，二千石莫能制，於是景帝乃拜都为济南太守。
现代文：济南姓的宗族共有三百多家，强横滑，济南太守不能治服他们，于是汉景帝就任命郅都当济南太守。
English: There were more than three hundred clans with the surname of Jinan in total, but they were too strong to be subdued by the governor of Jinan, so Emperor Han Jing appointed Xindu as governor of Jinan.

古文：至则族灭瞷氏首恶，馀皆股栗。
现代文：郅都来到济南郡所，就把氏家族首恶分子的全家都杀了，其余姓坏人都吓得大腿发抖。
English: They all came to Jinan County, and killed the entire family of the head villain of the clan, and the rest of the villains were so scared that their thighs trembled.

古文：居岁馀，郡中不拾遗。
现代文：过了一年多，济南郡路不拾遗。
English: More than a year later, the road in Jinan County remains unpaved.

古文：旁十馀郡守畏都如大府。
现代文：周围十多个郡的郡守畏惧郅都就象畏惧上级官府一样。
English: County governors in more than a dozen surrounding counties are just as afraid of Yu as they are of higher-level government offices.

古文：都为人勇，有气力，公廉，不发私书，问遗无所受，请寄无所听。
现代文：郅都为人勇敢，有气力，公正廉洁，不翻开私人求情的信，送礼，他不接受，私人的请托他不听。
English: They are all brave, powerful, fair and honest. They do not open private letters of appeal, they do not accept gifts, and they do not listen to private requests.

古文：常自称曰： 已倍亲而仕，身固当奉职死节官下，终不顾妻子矣。 
现代文：他常常自己说： 已经背离父母而来当官，我就应当在官位上奉公尽职，保持节操而死，终究不能顾念妻子儿女。 
English: He often said to himself, "Having left my parents and come to be an official, I should fulfill my duties in my official position, maintain self-discipline and die. After all, I can't neglect my wife and children."

古文：郅都迁为中尉。丞相条侯至贵倨也，而都揖丞相。
现代文：郅都调升中尉之官，丞相周亚夫官最高而又傲慢，而郅都见到他只是作揖，并不跪拜。
English: Both of them were promoted to the rank of lieutenant, and the prime minister, Zhou Yafu, was the highest-ranking and most arrogant official. However, both of them saw that he was only acting, not bowing down.

古文：是时民朴，畏罪自重，而都独先严酷，致行法不避贵戚，列侯宗室见都侧目而视，号曰 苍鹰 。
现代文：这时，百姓质朴，怕犯罪，都守法自重，郅都却自首先施行严酷的刑法，以致执法不畏避权贵和皇亲，连列侯和皇族之人见到他，都要侧目而视，称呼他为 苍鹰 。
English: At this time, the people were simple, afraid of crime, and respected the law, but the magistrates were the first to enforce the harsh criminal law, so that the law enforcement was not afraid to avoid the powerful and the royal family. Even the feudal lords and the royal family saw him and looked sideways and called him the Goshawk.

古文：临江王徵诣中尉府对簿，临江王欲得刀笔为书谢上，而都禁吏不予。
现代文：临江王被召到中尉府受审问，临江王想得到书写工具，给皇上写信，表示谢罪，郅都却告诉官吏不给他书写工具。
English: Linjiang Wang was summoned to the lieutenant's residence for interrogation. Linjiang Wang wanted to get a writing instrument and write a letter to the emperor to express his gratitude, but Shidu told the officials not to give him a writing instrument.

古文：魏其侯使人以间与临江王。
现代文：魏其侯派人暗中给临江王送去书写工具。
English: Wei Qihou sent a person to secretly send a writing instrument to Linjiang Wang.

古文：临江王既为书谢上，因自杀。
现代文：临江王给皇上写了谢罪的信，于是就自杀了。
English: King Linjiang wrote a letter of apology to the emperor and then committed suicide.

古文：窦太后闻之，怒，以危法中都，都免归家。
现代文：窦太后听到这个消息，发怒了，用严法中伤郅都，郅都被免官归家。
English: Upon hearing this news, Empress Dowager Dou became enraged and used harsh punishments to slander both of them. Both of them were dismissed from their posts and returned home.

古文：孝景帝乃使使持节拜都为雁门太守，而便道之官，得以便宜从事。
现代文：汉景帝就派使者拿着符节任命郅都为雁门太守，并让他乘便取道上路，直接去雁门上任，根据实际情况独立处理政事。
English: Emperor Han Jing sent an envoy with a rune to appoint Xindu as the governor of the Wild Goose Gate, and asked him to take the road and go directly to the Wild Goose Gate to take office and independently deal with political affairs according to the actual situation.

古文：匈奴素闻郅都节，居边，为引兵去，竟郅都死不近雁门。
现代文：匈奴人一向听说郅都有操节，现在由他守卫边境，所以匈奴人便领兵离开汉朝边境，直到郅都死去时，一直没敢近雁门。
English: The Huns had always heard that the dragonfly had a temper, and now it was he who guarded the border, so the Huns led the soldiers away from the Han Dynasty border, and until the dragonfly died, it never dared to approach the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：匈奴至为偶人象郅都，令骑驰射莫能中，见惮如此。
现代文：匈奴甚至做了像郅都模样的木偶人，让骑兵们奔跑射击，没有人能射中，害怕郅都到了如此的程度。
English: The Xiongnu even made a puppet man in the likeness of the skull, so that the cavalry could run and shoot, but no one could hit the target. The fear of the skull had reached such a level.

古文：匈奴患之。
现代文：匈奴人以郅都为祸患。
English: The Xiongnu regarded the capital as a scourge.

古文：窦太后乃竟中都以汉法。景帝曰： 都忠臣。 
现代文：窦太后最后竟以汉朝法律中伤郅都，景帝说： 郅都是忠臣。 
English: In the end, Dowager Dou actually used Han Dynasty law to slander Shidu. Emperor Jing said, "All Shidu are loyal subjects."

古文：欲释之。
现代文：想释放他。
English: They want to release him.

古文：窦太后曰： 临江王独非忠臣邪？ 
现代文：窦太后说： 临江王难道就不是忠臣吗？ 
English: Empress Dowager Dou said, "Isn't the King of Linjiang a loyal subject?

古文：於是遂斩郅都。
现代文：于是就把郅都杀了。
English: So he killed them all.

古文：宁成者，穰人也。以郎谒者事景帝。
现代文：宁成是穰县人，做侍卫随从之官服事汉景帝。
English: Ning Cheng was from Jixian County and served Emperor Han Jing as an attendant.

古文：好气，为人小吏，必陵其长吏；为人上，操下如束湿薪。
现代文：他为人好胜，做人家的小官时，一定要欺陵他的长官；做了人家的长官，控制下就象捆绑湿柴一样随便。
English: He is a competitive person. When he is a petty official, he must deceive his superiors. When he is a superiors, he is as easy to control as a bundle of wet firewood.

古文：滑贼任威。稍迁至济南都尉，而郅都为守。
现代文：他狡猾凶残，任性使威，逐渐升官，当了济南都尉，这时郅都是济南太守。
English: He was cunning and ferocious, capricious and domineering. He was gradually promoted and became the captain of Jinan. At that time, he was the governor of Jinan.

古文：始前数都尉皆步入府，因吏谒守如县令，其畏郅都如此。
现代文：在此之前的几个都尉都是步行走入太守府，通过下级官吏传达，然后进见太守，就象县令进见太守一样，他们畏惧郅都就是这个样子。
English: Prior to this, several captains walked into the governor's office on foot, communicated through lower-level officials, and then went to see the governor, just as the county magistrate went to see the governor. This is how they feared the shamans.

古文：及成往，直陵都出其上。
现代文：等到宁成前来，却一直越过郅都，走到他的上位。
English: However, when Ningcheng arrived, he went all the way across the capital and went to his superior.

古文：都素闻其声，於是善遇，与结驩。
现代文：郅都一向听说过他的名声，于是很好地对待他，同他结成友好关系。
English: They had always heard of his reputation, so they treated him well and formed a friendly relationship with him.

古文：久之，郅都死，後长安左右宗室多暴犯法，於是上召宁成为中尉。其治效郅都，其廉弗如，然宗室豪桀皆人人惴恐。
现代文：过了好久，郅都死去，后来长安附近皇族中的好多人凶暴犯法，于是皇上召来宁成当了中尉，他的治理办法仿效郅都，他的廉洁不如郅都，但是皇族豪强人人都恐惧不宁。
English: After a long time, Shudu died. Later, many members of the imperial family in the vicinity of Chang'an committed violent crimes. Therefore, the emperor summoned Ningcheng to become a lieutenant. His governance method was modeled after Shudu, and his integrity was not as good as Shudu, but everyone was afraid of the imperial family strongman.

古文：武帝即位，徙为内史。
现代文：汉武帝即位，宁成改任为内史。
English: Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, and Ning Cheng was appointed to the post of Inner Historian.

古文：外戚多毁成之短，抵罪髡钳。是时九卿罪死即死，少被刑，而成极刑，自以为不复收，於是解脱，诈刻传出关归家。
现代文：外戚们多诽谤宁成的缺点，他被依法叛处剃发和以铁缚脖子的刑罚，这时九卿犯罪该处死的就处死，很少遭受一般刑罚，而宁成却遭受极重的刑罚，他自己认为朝廷不会再用他当官，于是就解脱刑具，私刻假的有关文件，出了函谷关回到家中。
English: Relatives often slandered the shortcomings of Ningcheng. He was sentenced to shave his hair and tie his neck with iron according to the law. At that time, if the Nine Lords committed a crime that should be punished with death, they would be executed. They rarely suffered general punishment, but Ningcheng suffered extremely severe punishment. He thought that the court would no longer use him as an official, so he got rid of the torture device, forged the relevant documents, and went out of Hantian Pass to return home.

古文：称曰： 仕不至二千石，贾不至千万，安可比人乎！ 
现代文：他杨言说； 当官做不到二千石一级的高官，经商挣不到一千万贯钱，怎能同别人相比呢？ 
English: He Yangyan said; officials can't be a high-ranking official of 2,000 koku level, business can't earn 10 million yuan, how can they compare with others?

古文：乃贳贷买陂田千馀顷，假贫民，役使数千家。
现代文：于是他借钱买了一千多顷可灌溉的土地，出租给贫苦的百姓，给他种地受奴役的有几千家。
English: So he borrowed money to buy more than a thousand hectares of irrigable land, leased it to poor people, and thousands of families were enslaved to farm the land for him.

古文：数年，会赦。
现代文：几年以后，遇上大赦。
English: A few years later, there was an amnesty.

古文：致产数千金，为任侠，持吏长短，出从数十骑。
现代文：他已有了几千斤黄金的家产，专好抱打不平，掌握官吏们的短处，出门时有几十个骑马的人跟随其后。
English: He already had a family fortune of several thousand kilos of gold. He was good at holding grudges and grasping the shortcomings of officials. When he went out, he was followed by dozens of people on horseback.

古文：其使民威重於郡守。
现代文：他驱使百姓的权威比郡守还大。
English: The authority with which he drives the people is greater than that of a county governor.

古文：周阳由者，其父赵兼以淮南王舅父侯周阳，故因姓周阳氏。
现代文：周阳由，他父亲赵兼以淮南王刘长舅父的身份被封为周阳侯，所以姓周阳。
English: Zhou Yang was named Zhou Yang because his father, Zhao Jian, was named Zhou Yang as the uncle of Liu Chang, the king of Huainan.

古文：由以宗家任为郎，事孝文及景帝。
现代文：周阳由因为是外戚被任命为郎官，服事孝文帝和孝景帝。
English: Because he was a maternal relative, Zhou Yangyu was appointed as a vassal to serve Emperor Xiaowen and Emperor Xiaoqing.

古文：景帝时，由为郡守。
现代文：景帝时，周阳由当了郎官。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jing, Zhou Yang Rong became his vassal.

古文：武帝即位，吏治尚循谨甚，然由居二千石中，最为暴酷骄恣。
现代文：汉武帝即位后，官员处理政事，崇尚遵循法度，谨慎行事，然而周阳由在二千石一级的官员中，是最暴虐残酷、骄傲放纵的人。
English: After Emperor Hanwu ascended the throne, officials dealt with political affairs, advocated compliance with the law, and acted cautiously. However, Zhou Yangyu was the most tyrannical and cruel, proud and indulgent person among officials at the level of 2,000 koku.

古文：所爱者，挠法活之；所憎者，曲法诛灭之。
现代文：他所喜爱的，如果犯了死罪，就曲解法律使那人活下来；他所憎恶的，他就歪曲法令把他杀死。
English: Whom he loved, if he committed a capital crime, he twisted the law to keep him alive; whom he hated, he twisted the law to put him to death.

古文：所居郡，必夷其豪。
现代文：他在哪个郡当官，就一定要消灭那个郡的豪门。
English: Whichever county he is in charge of, he must wipe out that county's powerful families.

古文：为守，视都尉如令。
现代文：他当郡太守，就把都尉视同县令一般。
English: When he was the county governor, he regarded the captain as the same as the county magistrate.

古文：为都尉，必陵太守，夺之治。
现代文：他当都尉，必定欺凌太守，侵夺他的权力。
English: When he was a captain, he must have bullied the governor and usurped his power.

古文：与汲黯俱为忮，司马安之文恶，俱在二千石列，同车未尝敢均茵伏。
现代文：他和汲黯都属于强狠之人，还有司马安善用法令条文害人，都身居二千石官员的行列，可是汲黯与司马安若与周阳由同车都不敢和周阳由均分坐垫与同伏车栏。
English: He and Qiu Qian are both strong-willed people, as well as Sima An, who is good at using laws and regulations to harm people, are both in the ranks of two thousand stone officials, but Qian Qian and Sima An, if they are in the same car with Zhou Yangyu, do not dare to share the cushion and the same car seat with Zhou Yangyu.

古文：由後为河东都尉，时与其守胜屠公争权，相告言罪。胜屠公当抵罪，义不受刑，自杀，而由弃市。
现代文：周阳由后来当了河东郡的都尉，经常同郡太守申屠公争权，互相告状，结果申公被判决有罪，但他坚持道义，不肯接受刑罚而自杀，周阳由被处以弃市之刑。
English: Zhou Yangyu later became the captain of Hedong County. He often fought with the county magistrate Shen Tuo Gong for the right to sue each other. As a result, Shen Gong was found guilty, but he insisted on morality, refused to accept the punishment and committed suicide. Zhou Yangyu was sentenced to leave the city.

古文：自宁成、周阳由之後，事益多，民巧法，大抵吏之治类多成、由等矣。
现代文：从宁成、周阳由之后，政事更加繁杂，百姓用巧诈的手段对付法律，多数官吏治理政事都象宁成和周阳由一样。
English: After Ningcheng and Zhouyangyu, political affairs became more complicated. The people used cunning means to deal with the law, and most officials handled political affairs in the same way as Ningcheng and Zhouyangyu.

古文：赵禹者，斄人。以佐史补中都官，用廉为令史，事太尉亚夫。
现代文：赵禹是斄县人，以佐史的身份补任京城官府的官员，因为廉洁升为令史，服事周亚夫。
English: Zhao Yu is a native of Handan County. He was appointed as an assistant historian to fill the position of an official of the Beijing government, and because he was incorruptible, he was promoted to senior historian and served Zhou Yafu.

古文：亚夫为丞相，禹为丞相史，府中皆称其廉平。
现代文：周亚夫当丞相，赵禹当丞相史，丞相府中的人都称赞他廉洁公平。
English: Zhou Yafu as prime minister, Zhao Yu as prime minister of history, and people in the prime minister's office all praised him for his honesty and fairness.

古文：然亚夫弗任，曰： 极知禹无害，然文深，不可以居大府。 
现代文：但周亚夫不重用他，说： 我很知道赵禹有杰出无比的才干，但他执法森严酷苛，不能在上层官府当官。 
English: But Zhou Yafu did not make much use of him, saying: I know very well that Zhao Yu has outstanding and incomparable talent, but he is very strict in enforcing the law and cannot be an official in a high-level government office.

古文：今上时，禹以刀笔吏积劳，稍迁为御史。
现代文：武帝时代，赵禹因为从事文书工作而积累功劳，逐渐升为御史。
English: In the era of Emperor Wu, Zhao Yu accumulated merit by engaging in clerical work, and gradually rose to the position of imperial historian.

古文：上以为能，至太中大夫。
现代文：皇上认为他有才能，又升到太史大夫。
English: The Emperor thought he had talent and promoted him to the position of Grand Historian.

古文：与张汤论定诸律令，作见知，吏传得相监司。
现代文：他和张汤共同制定各种法令，制作 见知法 ，让官吏互相监视，相互检举。
English: He and Zhang Tang worked together to formulate various laws and regulations, produced the "Knowledge Law," and allowed officials to monitor each other and report on each other.

古文：用法益刻，盖自此始。
现代文：汉朝法律越发严厉，大概就从这时候开始的。
English: It was probably at this time that the laws of the Han Dynasty became more and more severe.

古文：张汤者，杜人也。
现代文：张汤是杜县人。
English: Zhang Tang is from Du County.

古文：其父为长安丞，出，汤为兒守舍。
现代文：他父亲当长安县丞，有一次出门去，张汤当时是小孩，父亲就让他在家看门。
English: When his father was the county magistrate of Chang'an County, he once went out. Zhang Tang was a child at the time, and his father asked him to watch the door at home.

古文：还而鼠盗肉，其父怒，笞汤。
现代文：父亲回家后，看到老鼠偷了肉，就对张汤发怒，用鞭子打了他。
English: When his father came home and saw that the mouse had stolen the meat, he became angry with Zhang Tang and beat him with a whip.

古文：汤掘窟得盗鼠及馀肉，劾鼠掠治，传爰书，讯鞫论报，并取鼠与肉，具狱磔堂下。
现代文：张汤掘开鼠洞，找到偷肉的老鼠和没吃完的肉，就举告老鼠的罪行，加以拷打审问，记录审问过程，反复审问，把判决的罪状报告上级，并且把老鼠和剩肉取来，当堂最后定案，把老鼠分尸处死。
English: Zhang Tang dug a rat hole, found a rat that had stolen meat and uneaten meat, reported the rat's crime, tortured and interrogated it, recorded the interrogation process, repeatedly interrogated it, reported the crime to his superiors, and retrieved the rat and leftover meat. When the court finally decided the case, the rat was dismembered and executed.

古文：其父见之，视其文辞如老狱吏，大惊，遂使书狱。
现代文：他父亲看到这情景，又看到那判决辞像老练的法官所写，特别惊讶，于是就让他学习邢狱文书。
English: His father was so astonished by the scene, and by the fact that the sentence seemed to have been written by an experienced judge, that he had him study the prison manual.

古文：父死後，汤为长安吏，久之。
现代文：父亲死后，张汤就当了长安的官员，做了很长一段时间。
English: After his father's death, Zhang Tang became an official in Chang'an and worked there for a long time.

古文：周阳侯始为诸卿时，尝系长安，汤倾身为之。
现代文：周阳侯田胜开始做九卿之官时，曾经被拘禁在长安，张汤竭尽全力加以解救。
English: When Zhouyang Hou Tian Sheng began to work as an official of the Nine Lords, he was once detained in Chang'an, and Zhang Tang tried his best to rescue him.

古文：及出为侯，大与汤交，遍见汤贵人。
现代文：待田胜出狱封了侯，与张汤密切交往，并把当朝权贵一一介绍给张汤，让张汤同他们相识。
English: After Tian Sheng was released from prison, he kept in close contact with Zhang Tang, and introduced the dignitaries of that time to Zhang Tang one by one, so that Zhang Tang could get to know them.

古文：汤给事内史，为宁成掾，以汤为无害，言大府，调为茂陵尉，治方中。
现代文：张汤在内史任职，担任宁成的属官，因为张汤才能无人可比，宁成就向上级官府推荐，张汤被调升为茂陵尉，主持陵墓土建工程。
English: Zhang Tang worked in internal history and served as a subordinate official of Ning Cheng. Because Zhang Tang's talent was incomparable, Ning Cheng was recommended to higher-level government offices. Zhang Tang was promoted to Murying Lieutenant and presided over the civil construction project of the mausoleum.

古文：武安侯为丞相，徵汤为史，时荐言之天子，补御史，使案事。
现代文：武安侯田蚡当了丞相，征召张汤做内史，经常向天子推荐他，被任命为御史，让他查验办理狱事。
English: Wu'an Hou Tianjun became chancellor, recruited Zhang Tang to do internal history, often recommended him to Tianzi, was appointed imperial historian, and let him inspect and handle prison affairs.

古文：治陈皇后蛊狱，深竟党与。
现代文：他主持处理陈皇后巫蛊案件时，深入追究同党。
English: When he presided over the handling of the case of Empress Chen Wusong, he deeply investigated the same party.

古文：於是上以为能，稍迁至太中大夫。
现代文：于是汉武帝认为他有办事能力，逐步提拔他当了太中大夫。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu thought that he had the ability to do things, and gradually promoted him to become the Grand Physician.

古文：与赵禹共定诸律令，务在深文，拘守职之吏。
现代文：他与赵禹一起制定各种法律条文，务求苛刻严峻，约束在职的官吏。
English: Together with Zhao Yu, he formulated a variety of laws and regulations, in order to be harsh and severe, and to restrict the officials in office.

古文：已而赵禹迁为中尉，徙为少府，而张汤为廷尉，两人交驩，而兄事禹。
现代文：不久，赵禹提升为中尉又改任少府，而张汤当了廷尉，两人友好交往，张汤以对待兄长的礼节对待赵禹。
English: Soon, Zhao Yu was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and transferred to the position of a minor prefect, while Zhang Tang became a court lieutenant. The two had a friendly relationship, and Zhang Tang treated Zhao Yu with the etiquette of an elder brother.

古文：禹为人廉倨。为吏以来，舍毋食客。
现代文：赵禹为人廉洁傲慢，当官以来，家中没有食客。
English: Zhao Yu is a man of incorruptibility and arrogance. Since he became an official, there have been no diners in his home.

古文：公卿相造请禹，禹终不报谢，务在绝知友宾客之请，孤立行一意而已。
现代文：三公九卿前来拜访他，赵禹却始终不回访答谢，务求断绝与知心朋友和宾客的来往，独自一心一意地处理自己的公务。
English: Three princes and nine nobles came to visit him, but Zhao Yu never returned their visits to thank them, in order to cut off contacts with close friends and guests, and to deal with his official duties single-mindedly.

古文：见文法辄取，亦不覆案，求官属阴罪。
现代文：他看到法令条文就取来，也不去复查，以求追究从属官员的隐秘的罪过。
English: When he sees the provisions of the law, he takes them and does not review them, in order to pursue the hidden crimes of subordinate officials.

古文：汤为人多诈，舞智以御人。
现代文：张汤为人狡诈，善施智谋控制别人。
English: Zhang Tang is a cunning person and is good at manipulating others.

古文：始为小吏，乾没，与长安富贾田甲、鱼翁叔之属交私。
现代文：他开始当小官时，就喜欢以权谋私，曾与长安富商田甲、鱼翁叔之流勾结。
English: When he began to work as a minor official, he liked to use power for personal gain, and had colluded with Chang'an rich merchants such as Tian Jia and Yu Wengshu.

古文：及列九卿，收接天下名士大夫，己心内虽不合，然阳浮慕之。
现代文：等到他位列九卿时，便结交天下名士大夫，自己内心虽然同他们不合，但表面却装出仰慕他们的样子。
English: When he became one of the nine nobles, he befriended famous doctors around the world. Although he did not agree with them in his heart, he pretended to admire them on the surface.

古文：是时上方乡文学，汤决大狱，欲傅古义，乃请博士弟子治尚书、春秋补廷尉史，亭疑法。
现代文：这时，汉武帝正心向儒家学说，张汤判决大案，就想附会儒家观点，因此就请博士弟子们研究《尚书》《春秋》，他担任廷尉史，就请他们评判法律的可疑之处。
English: At this time, Emperor Hanwu was devoting himself to the Confucian doctrine, and he wanted to add the Confucian point of view to the Zhang Tang judgment. Therefore, he asked his doctoral students to study "Shang Shu" and "Chunqiu." He served as a court official and asked them to judge the doubtful points of the law.

古文：奏谳疑事，必豫先为上分别其原，上所是，受而著谳决法廷尉，絜令扬主之明。
现代文：每次上报判决的疑难案件，都预先给皇上分析事情的原委，皇上认为对的，就接受并记录下来，作为判案的法规，以廷尉的名义加以公布，颂扬皇上的圣明。
English: Each time a difficult case is reported for judgment, the emperor is given the original commission to analyze the matter in advance. If the emperor thinks it is right, he will accept it and record it. As a judgment rule, it will be published in the name of the courtier to praise the emperor's holiness.

古文：奏事即谴，汤应谢，乡上意所便，必引正、监、掾史贤者，曰： 固为臣议，如上责臣，臣弗用，愚抵於此。 
现代文：如果奏事遭到谴责，张汤就认错谢罪，顺着皇上的心意，一定要举出正、左右监和贤能的属吏，说： 他们本来向我提议过，就像皇上责备我的那样，我没采纳，愚蠢到这种地步。 
English: If the report was condemned, Zhang Tang would confess his mistake and apologize, and in accordance with the emperor's wishes, he would be sure to point out the chief, left and right supervisors and competent subordinate officials, saying: They had originally proposed to me, just as the emperor reproached me, but I did not accept it, stupid to such an extent.

古文：罪常释。
现代文：因此，他的罪常被皇上宽恕不究。
English: As a result, his crimes were often forgiven by the emperor.

古文：即奏事，上善之，曰： 臣非知为此奏，乃正、监、掾史某为之。 
现代文：他有时向皇上呈上奏章，皇上认为好，他就说： 臣不知道这奏章，是正、左右监和属官们写的。 
English: Sometimes he would present the Emperor with a musical composition, and if the Emperor thought it was good, he would say, "The minister does not know that this musical composition was written by the chief, the left and right overseers, and the subordinate officials.

古文：其欲荐吏，扬人之善蔽人之过如此。
现代文：他想推荐官吏，表扬人家的好处，掩蔽别人的过错，常常这样做。
English: He wants to recommend officials, praise the benefits of others, cover up the mistakes of others, and often do so.

古文：所治即上意所欲罪，予监史深祸者；即上意所欲释，与监史轻平者。
现代文：他所处理的案件，如果是皇上想要加罪的，他就交给执法严酷的监史去办理；要是皇上想宽恕的，他就交给执法轻而公平的监史去办理。
English: The cases he dealt with, if the emperor wanted to add to the crime, he would hand them over to the law enforcement harsh history of supervision to handle; if the emperor wanted to forgive, he would hand them over to the law enforcement light and fair history of supervision to handle.

古文：所治即豪，必舞文巧诋；即下户羸弱，时口言，虽文致法，上财察。
现代文：他所处理的如果是豪强，则一定要玩弄法律条文，巧妙地进行诬陷。如果是平民百姓和瘦弱的人，则常常用口向皇上陈述，虽然按法律条文应当判刑，但请皇上明察裁定。
English: If he was dealing with the brave and the strong, he had to play with the provisions of the law and cleverly frame them. If it was a commoner or a weak person, he would often use his mouth to make a statement to the emperor. Although he should be sentenced according to the provisions of the law, he should ask the emperor to make a clear judgment.

古文：於是往往释汤所言。
现代文：于是，皇上往往就宽释了张汤所说的人。
English: As a result, the emperor often pardoned the people mentioned by Zhang Tang.

古文：汤至於大吏，内行脩也。通宾客饮食。於故人子弟为吏及贫昆弟，调护之尤厚。
现代文：张汤虽做了大官，自身修养很好，与宾客交往，同他们喝酒吃饭，对于老朋友当官的子弟以及贫穷的兄弟们，照顾得尤其宽厚。
English: Although Zhang Tang was a high-ranking official, he cultivated himself very well. He mingled with guests, drank and ate with them, and was especially generous to the sons of his old friends and poor brothers.

古文：其造请诸公，不避寒暑。
现代文：他拜问三公，不避寒暑。
English: He prayed to the Three Kings and did not avoid the cold and heat.

古文：是以汤虽文深意忌不专平，然得此声誉。
现代文：所以张汤虽然执法严酷，内心嫉妒，处事不纯正公平，却得到了好名声。
English: Therefore, although Zhang Tang's law enforcement is harsh, his heart is jealous, and his work is not pure and fair, he has gained a good reputation.

古文：而刻深吏多为爪牙用者，依於文学之士。
现代文：那些执法酷烈刻毒的官吏都被他用为属吏，又都依从于儒学之士。
English: All those officials who enforced the law fiercely and viciously were used by him as subordinate officials, and they all obeyed the Confucian scholars.

古文：丞相弘数称其美。
现代文：丞相公孙弘屡次称赞他的美德。
English: The prime minister, Sun Hong, has repeatedly praised his virtues.

古文：及治淮南、衡山、江都反狱，皆穷根本。
现代文：待到他处理淮南王、衡山王、江都王谋反的案件，都能穷追到底。
English: Until he deals with the cases of Huainan Wang, Hengshan Wang and Jiangdu Wang plotting rebellion, he will be able to pursue them to the end.

古文：严助及伍被，上欲释之。汤争曰： 伍被本画反谋，而助亲幸出入禁闼爪牙臣，乃交私诸侯如此，弗诛，後不可治。 
现代文：严助和伍被，皇上本想宽恕他们，张汤争辩说： 伍被本来是策划谋反的人，严助是皇上亲近宠幸的人，是出入宫廷禁门的护卫之臣，竟然这样私交诸侯，如不杀他，以后就不好管理臣下了。 
English: Zhang Tang argued that the emperor originally wanted to pardon Yan Su and Wu Quan, saying: Wu Quan was originally a person who plotted rebellion, Yan Su was a person who was close to and favored by the emperor, and he was a guarding vassal who was not allowed to enter and leave the palace. If he did not kill him, it would be difficult to manage his vassals in the future.

古文：於是上可论之。
现代文：于是，皇上同意对他们的判决。
English: As a result, the emperor consented to the verdict against them.

古文：其治狱所排大臣自为功，多此类。
现代文：他处理案子打击大臣，自己邀功的情况，多半如此。
English: This is likely to be the case when he deals with a case against a minister and claims credit for it.

古文：於是汤益尊任，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：于是，张汤更加受到尊宠和信任，升为御史大夫。
English: As a result, Zhang Tang was more respected and trusted, and was promoted to the position of chief historian.

古文：会浑邪等降，汉大兴兵伐匈奴，山东水旱，贫民流徙，皆仰给县官，县官空虚。
现代文：正巧赶上匈奴浑邪王等投降汉朝，汉朝出动大军讨伐匈奴，山东遇到水涝和干旱的灾害，贫苦百姓流离失所，都依靠国家供应衣食，国家因此仓库空虚。
English: Just in time for the Huns to surrender to the Han Dynasty, the Han Dynasty dispatched a large army to fight the Huns, Shandong encountered floods and droughts, and the poor people were displaced. They all depended on the state to supply food and clothing, so the state warehouses were empty.

古文：於是丞上指，请造白金及五铢钱，笼天下盐铁，排富商大贾，出告缗令，鉏豪彊并兼之家，舞文巧诋以辅法。
现代文：于是张汤按皇上旨意，请铸造银钱和五铢钱，垄断天下的盐铁经营权，打击富商大贾，发布告缗令，剷除豪强兼并之家的势力，玩弄法律条文巧言诬陷，来辅助法律的推行。
English: Therefore, Zhang Tang, according to the emperor's will, requested the minting of silver money and five-baht money, monopolized the world's salt and iron management rights, cracked down on rich businessmen, issued a proclamation, eliminated the power of the powerful merger house, and played with the legal provisions and cleverly framed to assist the implementation of the law.

古文：汤每朝奏事，语国家用，日晏，天子忘食。
现代文：张汤每次上朝奏事，谈论国家的财用情况，一直谈到傍晚，天子也忘记了吃饭时间。
English: Every time Zhang Tang made a report in the morning, talking about the country's financial situation, he kept talking about the evening, and Tianzi also forgot the meal time.

古文：丞相取充位，天下事皆决於汤。
现代文：丞相无事可做，空占相位，天下的事情都取决于张汤。
English: The prime minister has nothing to do, the sky is the limit, and everything in the world depends on Zhang Tang.

古文：百姓不安其生，骚动，县官所兴，未获其利，奸吏并侵渔，於是痛绳以罪。
现代文：致使百姓不能安心生活，骚动不宁，国家兴办的事，得不到利益，而贪官污吏却一起侵夺盗窃，于是就彻底以法惩办。
English: As a result, the people cannot live with peace of mind, there is turmoil and unrest, the state-run affairs do not receive benefits, while corrupt officials steal and plunder together, so they are thoroughly punished by law.

古文：则自公卿以下，至於庶人，咸指汤。
现代文：从三公九卿以下，直到平民百姓，都指责张汤。
English: From the three princes and nine nobles down to the common people, they all blamed Zhang Tang.

古文：汤尝病，天子至自视病，其隆贵如此。
现代文：张汤曾经生病，天子亲自前去看望他，他的高贵达到这种地步。
English: Zhang Tang was once ill, and Tianzi himself came to visit him. His nobility reached such a level.

古文：匈奴来请和亲，群臣议上前。
现代文：匈奴来请求和亲，大臣们在皇上面前讨论。
English: The Xiongnu came to ask for peace, and the ministers discussed it in front of the emperor.

古文：博士狄山曰： 和亲便。 
现代文：博士狄山说： 和亲有利。 
English: Dr Dizan said: "It's good to be close.

古文：上问其便，山曰： 兵者凶器，未易数动。
现代文：皇上问他有利的道理，狄山说： 兵器是凶器，不要轻易屡次动用。
English: When the emperor asked him the reason for this, Dizan said, "Weapons are deadly weapons, and should not be used repeatedly.

古文：高帝欲伐匈奴，大困平城，乃遂结和亲。
现代文：高帝要攻打匈奴，被围困在平城，于是就缔结和亲。
English: Emperor Gao wanted to attack the Huns and was besieged in Pingcheng, so he made peace.

古文：孝惠、高后时，天下安乐。
现代文：孝惠帝、高后时期，天下安定和乐。
English: Xiao Huidi, the post-high school period, the world is stable and happy.

古文：及孝文帝欲事匈奴，北边萧然苦兵矣。
现代文：到孝文帝想要对付匈奴，北方边境骚扰不宁，人民苦于战争了。
English: By the time Emperor Xiaowen wanted to deal with the Xiongnu, the northern border was disturbed, and the people suffered from the war.

古文：孝景时，吴楚七国反，景帝往来两宫间，寒心者数月。
现代文：孝景帝时，吴、楚等七国反叛，景帝在两宫之间往来商讨，几个月忧心忡忡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, seven countries including Wu and Chu rebelled, and Emperor Jing spent several anxious months in discussions between the two courts.

古文：吴楚已破，竟景帝不言兵，天下富实。
现代文：吴、楚已被打败，景帝到死都不再谈论战争，天下富裕充实。
English: Wu and Chu had been defeated, and Emperor Jing stopped talking about the war until his death. The country was rich and prosperous.

古文：今自陛下举兵击匈奴，中国以空虚，边民大困贫。
现代文：如今从陛下派兵攻打匈奴以来，国内因此空虚，边境百姓十分窘困贫苦。
English: Now, since His Majesty sent troops to fight the Huns, the country is empty and the people on the border are very poor.

古文：由此观之，不如和亲。 
现代文：由此看来，不如和亲。 
English: From this point of view, it is better to reconcile.

古文：上问汤，汤曰： 此愚儒，无知。 
现代文：皇上问张汤，张汤说： 这是愚蠢的儒生，无知。 
English: The emperor asked Zhang Tang, Zhang Tang said: This is stupid Confucianism, ignorance.

古文：狄山曰： 臣固愚忠，若御史大夫汤乃诈忠。
现代文：狄生说： 我确实是愚忠，像御史大夫张汤却是伪忠。
English: Di Sheng said: I am indeed a stupid loyalist, but like the historian Zhang Tang, I am a false loyalist.

古文：若汤之治淮南、江都，以深文痛诋诸侯，别疏骨肉，使蕃臣不自安。
现代文：像张汤处理淮南王、江都王的案件，用严酷的法律来放肆地诋毁诸侯王，离间疏远皇上的至亲，因而使各封国国王自感不安。
English: Like Zhang Tang handled the cases of Huainan King and Jiangdu King, he used harsh laws to boldly slander the princes and alienate the emperor's close relatives, thus making the kings of various fiefdoms feel uneasy.

古文：臣固知汤之为诈忠。 
现代文：我本来就知道张汤是伪忠。 
English: I already knew that Zhang Tang was a fake loyalist.

古文：於是上作色曰： 吾使生居一郡，能无使虏入盗乎？ 曰： 不能。 
现代文：于是皇上变了脸色说： 我派你驻守一个郡，能够不让胡虏进来掠夺吗？ 狄山说： 不能。 
English: Then the emperor turned pale and said, "I have sent you to garrison a county, can you prevent the Huns from coming in to plunder?" Dizan said, "No."

古文：曰： 居一县？ 
现代文：皇上说： 驻守一个县呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "How about garrisoning a county?

古文：对曰： 不能。 
现代文：回答说： 不能。 
English: And he said, I cannot.

古文：复曰： 居一障间？ 
现代文：皇上又说： 驻守一个要塞城堡呢？ 
English: The emperor also said, "How about garrisoning a fortress castle?

古文：山自度辩穷且下吏，曰： 能。 
现代文：狄山自己估计辩词穷尽将要交给司法官治罪，就说： 能够。 
English: Dizan himself estimated that the exhaustion of the argument would be handed over to the judicial officer to punish, and said: Can.

古文：於是上遣山乘鄣。
现代文：于是皇上派狄山登上边塞的一个城堡。
English: So the emperor sent Mount Dizan to climb a castle in the border fortress.

古文：至月馀，匈奴斩山头而去。
现代文：过了一个多月，匈奴人砍下狄山的头而离去。
English: After more than a month, the Huns cut off Dizan's head and left.

古文：自是以後，群臣震慴。
现代文：从这以后，大臣们震惊恐惧。
English: Since then, ministers have reacted with shock and horror.

古文：汤之客田甲，虽贾人，有贤操。
现代文：张汤的宾客田甲，虽然是商人，但有贤良的节操。
English: Zhang Tang's guest Tian Jia, although a merchant, has a virtuous temper.

古文：始汤为小吏时，与钱通，及汤为大吏，甲所以责汤行义过失，亦有烈士风。
现代文：当初张汤做小官时，和他以钱财相交，等到张汤当大官，田甲责备张汤品行道义方面的过错，也有忠义慷慨之士的风度。
English: At first, when Zhang Tang was a minor official, he used money and wealth to make friends with him. When Zhang Tang became a high-ranking official, Tian Jia reproached Zhang Tang for his moral and ethical faults, and also had the demeanor of a loyal and generous person.

古文：汤为御史大夫七岁，败。
现代文：张汤当了七年御史大夫，失败了。
English: Zhang Tang served as chief historian for seven years and failed.

古文：河东人李文尝与汤有卻，已而为御史中丞，恚，数从中文书事有可以伤汤者，不能为地。
现代文：河东人李文曾经同张汤有嫌隙，以后他当了御史中丞，心中怨恨张汤，屡次从宫中文书里寻找可以用来伤害张汤的材料，不留余地。
English: Li Wen, a man from the east of the river, once had a grudge against Zhang Tang. Later, when he became an imperial historian, he resented Zhang Tang in his heart, and repeatedly searched for materials that could be used to harm Zhang Tang from the imperial Chinese books, leaving no room for error.

古文：汤有所爱史鲁谒居，知汤不平，使人上蜚变告文奸事，事下汤，汤治论杀文，而汤心知谒居为之。
现代文：张汤有个喜爱的下属叫鲁谒居，知道张汤对此心中不平，就让人以流言向皇上密告李文的坏事，而这事正好交给张汤处理，张汤就判决李文死罪，把他杀了，他也知道这事是鲁谒居干的。
English: Zhang Tang had a favorite subordinate named Lu Xunju. Knowing that Zhang Tang was not happy about this, he had someone inform the emperor of Li Wen's bad deeds with rumors. This matter was just handed over to Zhang Tang to deal with. Zhang Tang sentenced Li Wen to death and killed him. He also knew that this matter was done by Lu Xunju.

古文：上问曰： 言变事纵迹安起？ 
现代文：皇上问道： 匿名上告李文的事是怎样发生的？ 
English: The emperor asked: How did the anonymous complaint against Li Wenrong happen?

古文：汤详惊曰： 此殆文故人怨之。 
现代文：张汤假装惊讶地说： 这大概是李文的老朋友怨恨他。 
English: Zhang Tang pretended to be surprised and said, "It's probably Li Wen's old friend who resents him."

古文：谒居病卧闾里主人，汤自往视疾，为谒居摩足。
现代文：后来鲁谒居病倒在同乡主人家里，张汤亲自去看望他的病情，替鲁谒居按摩腿脚。
English: Later, Lu Xunju fell ill at the home of a fellow villager. Zhang Tang personally visited him to see how he was doing and massaged his legs and feet.

古文：赵国以冶铸为业，王数讼铁官事，汤常排赵王。
现代文：赵国人以冶炼铸造为职业，赵王刘彭祖屡次同朝廷派来主管铸铁的官员打官司，张汤常常打击赵王。
English: The people of Zhao were smelting and casting as a profession. The king of Zhao, Liu Pengzu, repeatedly sued the officials in charge of cast iron sent by the imperial court. Zhang Tang often attacked the king of Zhao.

古文：赵王求汤阴事。
现代文：赵王寻找张汤的阴私事。
English: Zhao Wang is looking for Zhang Tang's dirty secret.

古文：谒居尝案赵王，赵王怨之，并上书告： 汤，大臣也，史谒居有病，汤至为摩足，疑与为大奸。 
现代文：鲁谒居曾经检举过赵王，赵王怨恨他，于是一并上书告发，说： 张汤是大臣，其属官鲁谒居有病，张汤竟然给他按摩脚，我怀疑两人必定一同做了大的坏事。 
English: Lu Xunju had once reported Zhao Wang. Zhao Wang resented him, so they jointly filed a complaint, saying: Zhang Tang is a minister, and his subordinate Lu Xunju is ill. Zhang Tang even massaged his feet. I suspect that the two of them must have done something very bad together.

古文：事下廷尉。谒居病死，事连其弟，弟系导官。
现代文：这事交给廷尉处理，鲁谒居病死了，事情牵连到他的弟弟，就把他弟弟拘禁在导官署。
English: The matter was handed over to the imperial lieutenant to deal with. Lu Xunju died of illness. The matter implicated his younger brother, who was detained at the guidance bureau.

古文：汤亦治他囚导官，见谒居弟，欲阴为之，而详不省。
现代文：张汤也到导官署审理别的囚犯，看到鲁谒居的弟弟，想暗中帮助他，所以假装不察看他。
English: Zhang Tang also went to the magistrate's office to examine other prisoners. When he saw Lu Xunju's younger brother, he wanted to secretly help him, so he pretended not to look at him.

古文：谒居弟弗知，怨汤，使人上书告汤与谒居谋，共变告李文。
现代文：鲁谒居的弟弟不知道这个情况，怨恨张汤，因此就让人上告张汤和鲁谒居搞阴谋，共同匿名告发了李文。
English: Lu Yujiu's younger brother did not know about the situation and resented Zhang Tang, so he had someone sue Zhang Tang and Lu Yujiu for conspiracy, and together they anonymously denounced Li Wen.

古文：事下减宣。
现代文：这事交给减宣处理。
English: The matter was referred to the Censor Board.

古文：宣尝与汤有卻，及得此事，穷竟其事，未奏也。
现代文：减宣曾同张汤有嫌隙，待他接受了这案子，把案情查得水落石出，没有上报。
English: Yan Xuan once had a grudge with Zhang Tang, but he accepted the case, investigated the case thoroughly, and did not report it.

古文：会人有盗发孝文园瘗钱，丞相青翟朝，与汤约俱谢，至前，汤念独丞相以四时行园，当谢，汤无与也，不谢。
现代文：正巧有人偷挖了孝文帝陵园里的殉葬钱，丞相庄青翟上朝，同张汤约定一同去谢罪，到了皇上面前，张汤想只有丞相必须按四季巡视陵园，丞相应当谢罪，与我张汤没关系，不肯谢罪。
English: It just so happened that someone had secretly dug up the funeral money in the mausoleum of Emperor Xiaowen. The prime minister Zhuang Qingyao went to the emperor and agreed with Zhang Tang to go together to thank the emperor. When Zhang Tang came before the emperor, he thought that only the prime minister must inspect the mausoleum according to the four seasons. The prime minister should thank the emperor. Zhang Tang had nothing to do with me and refused to thank the emperor.

古文：丞相谢，上使御史案其事。
现代文：丞相谢罪后，皇上派御史查办此事。
English: After chancellor Xie's crime, the emperor sent the imperial historian to investigate the matter.

古文：汤欲致其文丞相见知，丞相患之。
现代文：张汤想按法律条文判丞相明知故纵的罪过，丞相忧虑此事。
English: Zhang Tong wanted to convict the prime minister of the crime of knowingly and willfully in accordance with the provisions of the law. The prime minister was worried about this.

古文：三长史皆害汤，欲陷之。
现代文：丞相手下的三个长史都忌恨张汤，想陷害他。
English: The three long-term subordinates of Zheng hated Zhang Tang and wanted to frame him.

古文：始长史硃买臣，会稽人也。读春秋。
现代文：最初，长史朱买臣是会稽人，攻读《春秋》。
English: In the beginning, Changshi Zhu was an auditor, studying "Spring and Autumn."

古文：庄助使人言买臣，买臣以楚辞与助俱幸，侍中，为太中大夫，用事；而汤乃为小吏，跪伏使买臣等前。
现代文：庄助让人向皇帝推荐朱买臣，朱买臣因为熟悉《楚辞》的缘故，同庄助都得到皇上的宠幸，从侍中升为太中大夫，当权。这时张汤只是个小官，在朱买臣等面前下跪听候差遣。
English: Zhu Bai Sheng was recommended to the emperor by Zhu Bai Sheng. Because Zhu Bai Sheng was familiar with the "Chu Ci," he and Zhu Bai Sheng were both favored by the emperor and were promoted from the ranks of the attendants to the Tai Zhong Daifu, and they were in power. At this time, Zhang Tang was just a minor official, and he knelt down in front of Zhu Bai Sheng and others to listen to the dispatch.

古文：已而汤为廷尉，治淮南狱，排挤庄助，买臣固心望。
现代文：不久，张汤当了廷尉，办理淮南王案件，排挤庄助，朱买臣心里本来怨恨张汤。
English: Soon, Zhang Tang became a courtier, handled the case of King Huainan, and pushed out Zhuang Su, and Zhu Baixian originally resented Zhang Tang in his heart.

古文：及汤为御史大夫，买臣以会稽守为主爵都尉，列於九卿。
现代文：待张汤当了御史大夫，朱买臣从会稽太守的职位上调任主爵都尉，位列九卿之中。
English: After Zhang Tang became the goshi taifu, Zhu bai sen was transferred from the post of auditor general to the post of lord lieutenant, ranking among the nine lords.

古文：数年，坐法废，守长史，见汤，汤坐床上，丞史遇买臣弗为礼。
现代文：几年后，因犯法罢官，代理长史，去拜见张汤，张汤坐在日常所坐的椅子上接见朱买臣，他的丞史一类的属官也不以礼对待朱买臣。
English: A few years later, after he was dismissed for violating the law, the acting Chang Shi, went to visit Zhang Tang. Zhang Tang sat on the chair he usually sat on to meet Zhu Bai Sheng. His subordinate officers such as Zheng Shi also did not treat Zhu Bai Sheng with courtesy.

古文：买臣楚士，深怨，常欲死之。
现代文：朱买臣是楚地士人，深深怨恨张汤，常想把他整死。
English: Zhu Baixian was a native of Chu, who deeply resented Zhang Tang and often wanted to kill him.

古文：王朝，齐人也。以术至右内史。
现代文：王朝是齐地人，凭着儒家学说当了右内史。
English: The royal dynasty was from the Qi Dynasty, and based on the Confucian doctrine, it became the right internal history.

古文：边通，学长短，刚暴彊人也，官再至济南相。
现代文：边通，学习纵横家的思想学说，是个性格刚强爆裂的强悍之人。当官，两次做济南王的丞相。
English: Bian Tong, who studied the thoughts and doctrines of the Longitudinalists and Horizontalists, was a tough man with a strong personality. He was a government official and twice served as the prime minister of the King of Jinan.

古文：故皆居汤右，已而失官，守长史，诎体於汤。
现代文：从前，他们都比张汤的官大，不久丢了官，代理长史，对张汤行屈体跪拜之礼。
English: Once upon a time, they were all higher-ranking officials than Zhang Tang, and soon lost their positions. Acting for Chang Shi, they bowed down to Zhang Tang.

古文：汤数行丞相事，知此三长史素贵，常凌折之。
现代文：张汤屡次兼任丞相的职务，知道这三个长史原来地位很高，就常常欺负压制他们。
English: Zhang Tang concurrently held the post of chancellor many times. Knowing that these three chancellors originally had a high status, he often bullied and suppressed them.

古文：以故三长史合谋曰： 始汤约与君谢，已而卖君；今欲劾君以宗庙事，此欲代君耳。
现代文：因此，三位长史合谋并对庄青翟说： 开始张汤同你约定一起向皇上谢罪，紧接着就出卖了你；现在又用宗庙之事控告你，这是想代替你的职位。
English: Therefore, the three long-term historians conspired and said to Zhuang Qingyao: At first, Zhang Tang agreed with you to apologize to the emperor, and then he betrayed you; now he is accusing you of the matter of the ancestral temple, which is to replace your position.

古文：吾知汤阴事。 
现代文：我们知道张汤的不法隐私。 
English: We know the illegal privacy of Zhang Tang.

古文：使吏捕案汤左田信等，曰汤且欲奏请，信辄先知之，居物致富，与汤分之，及他奸事。
现代文：于是就派属吏逮捕并审理张汤的同案犯田信等人，说张汤将要向皇上奏请政事，田信则预先就知道，然后囤积物资，发财致富，同张汤分脏，还有其他坏事。
English: Therefore, officials were sent to arrest and try Zhang Tang's accomplices, Tian Xin and others, saying that Zhang Tang was going to appeal to the emperor for political affairs, while Tian Xin knew in advance, and then hoarded materials, made a fortune, shared dirty laundry with Zhang Tang, and other bad things.

古文：事辞颇闻。上问汤曰： 吾所为，贾人辄先知之，益居其物，是类有以吾谋告之者。 
现代文：有关此事的供辞被皇上听到了，皇上向张汤说： 我所要做的事，商人则预先知道此事，越发囤积那些货物，这好象有人把我的想法告诉了他们一样。 
English: The emperor's confession about this matter was heard by the emperor, who said to Zhang Tang: The merchants knew in advance what I was going to do, and they hoarded those goods more and more. It was as if someone had told them my thoughts.

古文：汤不谢。汤又详惊曰： 固宜有。 
现代文：张汤不谢罪，却又假装惊讶地说： 应该说一定有人这样做了。 
English: Zhang Tang did not apologize, but pretended to be surprised and said: It should be said that someone must have done this.

古文：减宣亦奏谒居等事。
现代文：这时减宣也上奏书报告张汤和鲁谒居的犯法之事。
English: At this time, Yan Xuan also sent a report to report the illegal activities of Zhang Tang and Lu Xunju.

古文：天子果以汤怀诈面欺，使使八辈簿责汤。
现代文：天子果然以为张汤心怀巧诈，当面欺骗君王，派八批使者按记录在案的罪证审问张汤。
English: Heaven's Son really thought that Zhang Tang was cunning and deceitful, deceived the king in person, and sent eight groups of emissaries to interrogate Zhang Tang according to the criminal evidence recorded in the case.

古文：汤具自道无此，不服。
现代文：张汤自己说没有这些罪过，不服。
English: Zhang Tang himself said that he did not commit any of these sins, but he was not convinced.

古文：於是上使赵禹责汤。
现代文：于是皇上派赵禹审问张汤。
English: So the emperor sent Zhao Yu to interrogate Zhang Tang.

古文：禹至，让汤曰： 君何不知分也。
现代文：赵禹来了以后，责备张汤说： 皇上怎能不知道情况呢？
English: After Zhao Yu arrived, he reproached Zhang Tang, saying: How could the emperor not know the situation?

古文：君所治夷灭者几何人矣？
现代文：你办理案件时，被夷灭家族的有多少人呢？
English: When you handle a case, how many people from the destroyed family are involved?

古文：今人言君皆有状，天子重致君狱，欲令君自为计，何多以对簿为？ 
现代文：如今人家告你的罪状都有证据，天子难以处理你的案子，想让你自己想法自杀，何必多对证答辩呢？ 
English: Now that there is evidence of the charges against you, it is difficult for God to handle your case, and He wants you to commit suicide. Why do you need to defend yourself against the evidence?

古文：汤乃为书谢曰： 汤无尺寸功，起刀笔吏，陛下幸致为三公，无以塞责。然谋陷汤罪者，三长史也。 
现代文：张汤就写信谢罪说： 张汤没有尺寸之功，起初只当文书小吏，陛下宠幸我，让我位列三公之位，无法推御罪责，然而阴谋陷害张汤的罪人是三位长史。 
English: Zhang Tang wrote a letter to Xie Sin, saying, "Zhang Tang has no dimensional merit. At the beginning, he was only a clerk. Your Majesty favored me and put me in the position of the three princes. I can't shirk my guilt. However, the three criminals who plotted to frame Zhang Tang have a long history.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：张汤于是就自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：汤死，家产直不过五百金，皆所得奉赐，无他业。
现代文：张汤死时，家产总值不超过五百金，都是所得的俸禄和皇上的赏赐，没有其他的产业。
English: At the time of Zhang Tang's death, the total value of the family's income did not exceed five hundred gold coins. It was all earned income and the emperor's reward, and there was no other property.

古文：昆弟诸子欲厚葬汤，汤母曰： 汤为天子大臣，被汙恶言而死，何厚葬乎！ 
现代文：张汤兄弟和儿子们仍想厚葬张汤，他母亲说： 张汤是天子的大臣，遭受恶言诬告而死，何必厚葬呢？ 
English: Zhang Tang's brothers and sons still want to give Zhang Tang a dignified burial. His mother said, "Zhang Tang was a minister of the Son of Heaven. He was falsely accused and died. Why should he be given a dignified burial?

古文：载以牛车，有棺无椁。
现代文：于是就用牛车拉着棺材，没有外椁。
English: So they used an ox cart to pull the coffin, without an outer coffin.

古文：天子闻之，曰： 非此母不能生此子。 
现代文：天子听到这情况后，说： 没有这样的母亲，生不出这样的儿子。 
English: Upon hearing this, Heavenly Son said, "Without such a mother, such a son cannot be born.

古文：乃尽案诛三长史。
现代文：就穷究此案，把三个长史全都杀了。
English: After exhaustively investigating the case, he killed all three of the Longshis.

古文：丞相青翟自杀。
现代文：丞相庄青翟也自杀。
English: The chancellor, Zhuang Qingyao, also committed suicide.

古文：出田信。
现代文：田信被释放出去。
English: Tianxin was released.

古文：上惜汤。稍迁其子安世。
现代文：皇上怜惜张汤，逐渐提拔他的儿子张安世。
English: The emperor took pity on Zhang Tang and gradually promoted his son Zhang Anshi.

古文：赵禹中废，已而为廷尉。
现代文：赵禹中途被罢官，不久当了廷尉。
English: Zhao Yu was dismissed halfway through his term and soon became a court lieutenant.

古文：始条侯以为禹贼深，弗任。
现代文：最初，条侯周亚夫认为赵禹残酷阴谋，不肯重用。
English: At first, the feudal lord Zhou Yafu thought that Zhao Yu was a cruel plotter and refused to reuse it.

古文：及禹为少府，比九卿。
现代文：待赵禹当了少府，与九卿并列。
English: Zhao Yu became a minor prefect, ranking alongside the nine nobles.

古文：禹酷急，至晚节，事益多，吏务为严峻，而禹治加缓，而名为平。
现代文：赵禹做事严酷急躁，到晚年时，国家事情越来越多，官吏致力于施行严刑峻法，而赵禹却执法清援，被称为平和。
English: Zhao Yu was harsh and impatient in his work. In his later years, there were more and more affairs of state, and officials were committed to enforcing severe punishments, while Zhao Yu was enforcing the law and was called peaceful.

古文：王温舒等後起，治酷於禹。
现代文：无温舒等人是后起之官，执法比赵禹严酷。
English: Mutenshu and others are late-comers to the government, and their enforcement of the law is harsher than Zhao Yu's.

古文：禹以老，徙为燕相。
现代文：因为赵禹年老，改任燕国丞相。
English: Because of Zhao Yu's old age, he was reassigned to the post of Vice-Minister of State.

古文：数岁，乱悖有罪，免归。後汤十馀年，以寿卒于家。
现代文：几年后，犯有昏乱背逆之罪，被免官，在张汤死后十余年，老死在家中。
English: A few years later, he was found guilty of derangement and treason and was removed from office. More than ten years after Zhang Tang's death, he died at home.

古文：义纵者，河东人也。
现代文：义纵是河东人。
English: Yizheng is from the eastern part of the river.

古文：为少年时，尝与张次公俱攻剽为群盗。
现代文：少年时代，曾与张次公一块抢劫，结为强盗团伙。
English: In his boyhood, he robbed with Zhang Zikong and formed a gang of robbers.

古文：纵有姊姁，以医幸王太后。
现代文：义纵有个姐姐叫姁，凭医术受到太后的宠幸。
English: Yihong had an older sister named Yao, who was favored by the empress dowager because of her medical skills.

古文：王太后问： 有子兄弟为官者乎？ 
现代文：王太后问姁说： 你有儿子和兄弟当官吗？ 
English: The Empress Dowager asked Gong, "Do you have a son or brother who is an official?"

古文：姊曰： 有弟无行，不可。 
现代文：义纵的姐姐说： 有个弟弟，品行不好，不能当官。 
English: Yoshitsune's sister said, "I have a younger brother who has a bad character and cannot be an official.

古文：太后乃告上，拜义姁弟纵为中郎，补上党郡中令。
现代文：太后就告诉皇上，任义姁的弟弟义纵为中郎，改任上党郡中某县的县令。
English: The empress dowager told the emperor that she had appointed Yixuan's younger brother, Yizhong, as the middle brother, and that he had been appointed as the county magistrate of a certain county in Shangdang County.

古文：治敢行，少蕴藉，县无逋事，举为第一。
现代文：义纵执法严酷，很少有宽和包容的情形，因此县里没有逃亡的事，被推荐为第一。
English: Law enforcement in Yizhong is harsh, and there are few cases of tolerance and tolerance, so there is no escape in the county, and it is recommended as the first.

古文：迁为长陵及长安令，直法行治，不避贵戚。
现代文：后来改任长陵和长安的县令，依法办理政事，不回避贵族和皇亲。
English: Later, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Changling and Chang'an. He handled political affairs according to the law, and did not avoid aristocrats and imperial relatives.

古文：以捕案太后外孙脩成君子仲，上以为能，迁为河内都尉。
现代文：因为逮捕审讯太后的外孙脩成君的儿子仲，皇上认为他有能力，任为河内都尉。
English: Because of the arrest and interrogation of the son of the grandchild of the Empress Dowager, the Emperor believed that he was capable and appointed him as the captain of Hanoi.

古文：至则族灭其豪穰氏之属，河内道不拾遗。
现代文：到任后，他就把当地豪强穰氏之流灭了族，使河内出现道不拾遗的局面。
English: After taking office, he annihilated the local powerful Min clan, creating a chaotic situation in Hanoi.

古文：而张次公亦为郎，以勇悍从军，敢深入，有功，为岸头侯。
现代文：张次公也当了郎官，凭着他的勇敢骠悍当了兵，因为作战敢于深入敌军，获得军功，封为岸头侯。
English: Zhang Zikong also became a vassal, and with his bravery and courage he became a soldier, because he dared to fight deep into the enemy army, won military merit, and was named the head of the shore.

古文：宁成家居，上欲以为郡守。
现代文：宁成在家闲居时，皇帝想让他当太守。
English: When Ning Cheng was idling at home, the emperor wanted to make him the governor-general.

古文：御史大夫弘曰： 臣居山东为小吏时，宁成为济南都尉，其治如狼牧羊。
现代文：御史大夫公孙弘说： 我在山东当小官时，宁成做济南都尉，他处理政事就象狼牧羊一样凶。
English: Chief historian Gongsun Hong said: When I was a minor official in Shandong Province, Ningcheng was the governor of Jinan Province. He was as fierce as a wolf herding sheep in dealing with political affairs.

古文：成不可使治民。 
现代文：宁成不可以用来治理百姓。 
English: Ningcheng cannot be used to govern the people.

古文：上乃拜成为关都尉。
现代文：皇上就任命宁成当关都尉。
English: The emperor then appointed Ning Cheng as the captain of Guan.

古文：岁馀，关东吏隶郡国出入关者，号曰 宁见乳虎，无值宁成之怒 。
现代文：一年以后，关东郡国的官吏察看郡国中出入关口的人，都扬言说： 宁肯看到幼崽哺乳的母虎，也不要遇到宁成发怒。 
English: A year later, the officials of the Kanto prefectural government inspected the people entering and leaving the gates of the prefectural government, and they all threatened to say: I would rather see a mother tiger nursing cubs than encounter Ning Chengfa.

古文：义纵自河内迁为南阳太守，闻宁成家居南阳，及纵至关，宁成侧行送迎，然纵气盛，弗为礼。
现代文：义纵从河内调任南阳太守，听说宁成在南阳家中闲居，等到义纵到达南阳关口，宁成跟随身后，往来迎送，但是义纵盛气凌人，不以礼相待。
English: Yizhong was transferred from Hanoi to be the governor of Nanyang, and it was heard that Ningcheng was idling at his home in Nanyang. When Yizhong arrived at the Nanyang Pass, Ningcheng followed behind and greeted him. However, Yizhong had a domineering attitude and did not treat people with courtesy.

古文：至郡，遂案宁氏，尽破碎其家。
现代文：到了郡府，义纵就审理宁氏家的罪行，完全粉碎了有罪的宁氏家族。
English: When he arrived at the county seat, he tried the Ning family for their crimes and completely crushed the guilty Ning family.

古文：成坐有罪，及孔、暴之属皆饹亡，南阳吏民重足一迹。
现代文：宁成也被株连有罪，至于孔姓和暴姓之流的豪门都逃亡而去，南阳的官吏百姓都怕得谨慎行动，不敢有错。
English: Ning Cheng was also found guilty by the joint-stock company. As for the rich families with surnames such as Kong and Wu, they all fled. The officials and people in Nanyang were too afraid to act cautiously and dare not make mistakes.

古文：而平氏硃彊、杜衍、杜周为纵牙爪之吏，任用，迁为廷史。
现代文：平氏县的朱强、杜衍县的杜周都是义纵的得力属官，受到重用，升为廷史。
English: Zhu Qiang of Pingxi County and Du Zhou of Duyan County were both able subordinate officials of Yizhong, and they were reused and promoted to the highest ranks in court history.

古文：军数出定襄，定襄吏民乱败，於是徙纵为定襄太守。
现代文：这时汉朝军队屡次从定襄出兵打匈奴，定襄的官吏和百姓人心散乱、世风败坏，朝廷于是改派义纵做定襄太守。
English: At this time, the Han Dynasty army repeatedly sent troops from Dingxiang to fight the Xiongnu, the officials and people of Dingxiang were scattered and the world was corrupt, so the imperial court reassigned Yigong to be Dingxiang's governor.

古文：纵至，掩定襄狱中重罪轻系二百馀人，及宾客昆弟私入相视亦二百馀人。
现代文：义纵到任后，捕取定襄狱中没有戴刑具的重罪犯人二百人，以及他们的宾客兄弟私自探监的也有二百余人。
English: After Yigong took office, 200 felons who did not wear torture devices were arrested and sentenced to prison, as well as more than 200 of their guest brothers who visited the prison without permission.

古文：纵一捕鞠，曰 为死罪解脱 。
现代文：义纵把他们全部逮捕起来加以审讯，罪名是 为死罪解脱 。
English: Yicheng arrested all of them and put them on trial, charging them with "committing capital crimes."

古文：是日皆报杀四百馀人。
现代文：这天都上报杀人数目，共四百余人。
English: On this day, the number of people killed was reported, a total of more than four hundred.

古文：其後郡中不寒而栗，猾民佐吏为治。
现代文：这之后，郡中人都不寒而栗，连刁猾之民也辅佐官吏治理政事。
English: After this, everyone in the county shuddered, and even the most cunning people began to assist officials in the administration of political affairs.

古文：是时赵禹、张汤以深刻为九卿矣，然其治尚宽，辅法而行，而纵以鹰击毛挚为治。
现代文：这时，赵禹、张汤都因执法严酷而当了九卿之官，但是他们的治理办法还算宽松，都以法律辅助行事，而义纵却以酷烈凶狠治理政事。
English: At this time, Zhao Yu and Zhang Tang both became officials of the Nine Lords due to their strict enforcement of the law, but their governance methods were still rather loose. They all acted with the assistance of the law, while Yi governed political affairs with fierce ferocity.

古文：後会五铢钱白金起，民为奸，京师尤甚，乃以纵为右内史，王温舒为中尉。
现代文：后来正赶上五铢钱和白金起用，豪民乘机施展诈手段，京城尤其严重，朝廷就用义纵做右内史，王温舒当中尉。
English: Later, when the five yuan and platinum coins came into use, the wealthy people took advantage of the opportunity to carry out fraudulent means. The capital city was particularly serious. The imperial court used the Yizheng to do the right internal history. Wang Wenshu was a lieutenant.

古文：温舒至恶，其所为不先言纵，纵必以气凌之，败坏其功。
现代文：王温舒极凶恶，他所做的事若不预先告知义纵，义纵必定施展个人义气欺凌他，破坏他干的事。
English: Wang Wenshu is extremely vicious. If he does not inform Yixiang of what he has done in advance, Yixiang will certainly use his personal righteousness to bully him and destroy what he has done.

古文：其治，所诛杀甚多，然取为小治，奸益不胜，直指始出矣。
现代文：他治理政事，杀的人很多，但是急促治理，非但成效不大，反而邪之事越来越多，因而直指之官开始出现了。
English: He administered political affairs and killed a lot of people, but the hasty administration was not only ineffective, but more and more evil things were happening, so officials who pointed fingers began to appear.

古文：吏之治以斩杀缚束为务，阎奉以恶用矣。
现代文：官吏治理政事以斩杀和捆缚为主要任务，阎奉以凶恶被任用。
English: The main tasks of the officials in governing the government were to kill and bind, and Yan Fong was appointed as the most vicious.

古文：纵廉，其治放郅都。
现代文：义纵廉洁，他治理政事仿效郅都。
English: He is honest and upright, and he governs the affairs of state following the example of Xindu.

古文：上幸鼎湖，病久，已而卒起幸甘泉，道多不治。上怒曰： 纵以我为不复行此道乎？ 
现代文：皇上驾幸鼎湖，病了好长一段时间，病好了突然驾幸甘泉宫，所行之路多半没有修整，皇上发怒说： 义纵以为我不再走这条路了吧？ 
English: The emperor drove happily to Dinghu Lake. He had been ill for a long time. When he got better, he suddenly drove happily to Ganquan Palace. The road he took was mostly unpaved. The emperor became angry and said, "You thought I would never walk this road again, didn't you?

古文：嗛之。
现代文：心中怀恨义纵。
English: Hatred and vindictiveness in the heart.

古文：至冬，杨可方受告缗，纵以为此乱民，部吏捕其为可使者。
现代文：到了冬天，杨可正受命主持处理 告缗 案件，义纵以为这将扰乱百姓，部署官吏逮捕那些替杨可出去干事的人。
English: By the winter, Yang Ke was being assigned to preside over the handling of the 告 case. Even though he thought that this would disturb the people, he deployed officials to arrest those who went out to work for Yang Ke.

古文：天子闻，使杜式治，以为废格沮事，弃纵市。
现代文：天子听说了这件事，派杜式去处理，认为义纵的做法，是废弃了敬君之礼，破坏了君王要办的事，将义纵弃市。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he sent Du Xi to deal with it, believing that the practice of Yixing abandoned the honor of the king, destroyed the things that the king wanted to do, and abandoned Yixing.

古文：後一岁，张汤亦死。
现代文：过了一年，张汤也死了。
English: A year later, Zhang Tang also died.

古文：王温舒者，阳陵人也。
现代文：王温舒是阳陵人。
English: Wang Wenshu is from Yangling.

古文：少时椎埋为奸。
现代文：年轻时做盗墓等坏事。
English: He did grave robbing and other bad things when he was young.

古文：已而试补县亭长，数废。
现代文：不久，当了县里的亭长，屡次被免职。
English: Soon after, he became the county's pavilion chief, but was repeatedly dismissed.

古文：为吏，以治狱至廷史。
现代文：后来当了小官，因善于处理案件升为廷史。
English: Later, he became a minor official and was promoted to court historian because he was good at handling cases.

古文：事张汤，迁为御史。
现代文：服事张汤，升为御史。
English: He served Zhang Tang and was promoted to goshi.

古文：督盗贼，杀伤甚多，稍迁至广平都尉。
现代文：他督捕盗贼，杀伤的人很多，逐渐升为广平都尉。
English: He was in charge of catching thieves, killing and wounding many people, and gradually rose to the rank of Captain Guangping.

古文：择郡中豪敢任吏十馀人，以为爪牙，皆把其阴重罪，而纵使督盗贼，快其意所欲得。
现代文：他选择郡中豪放勇敢的十余人当属官，让他们做得力帮手，掌握他们每个人的隐秘的重大罪行，从而放手让他们去督捕盗贼。
English: He chose more than ten brave and courageous people in the county to be subordinate officers, let them do their best to help, grasp the hidden major crimes of each of them, and thus let them go to catch thieves.

古文：此人虽有百罪，弗法；即有避，因其事夷之，亦灭宗。
现代文：如果谁捕获盗贼使王温舒很满意，此人虽然有百种罪恶也不加惩治；若是有所回避，就依据他过去所犯的罪行杀死他，甚至灭其家族。
English: If anyone catches a thief to Wang Wenshu's satisfaction, this person will not be punished, although he has a hundred kinds of sins; if he evades, kill him according to the crimes he committed in the past, and even destroy his family.

古文：以其故齐赵之郊盗贼不敢近广平，广平声为道不拾遗。
现代文：因为这个原因，齐地和赵地乡间的盗贼不敢接近广平郡，广平郡有了道不拾遗的好名声。
English: For this reason, thieves in rural areas of Qi and Zhaodi do not dare to approach Guangping County, which has a good reputation.

古文：上闻，迁为河内太守。
现代文：皇上听说后，升任王温舒为河内太守。
English: After the emperor heard about it, Wang Wenshu was promoted to the position of the governor of Hanoi.

古文：素居广平时，皆知河内豪奸之家，及往，九月而至。
现代文：王温舒以前居住在广平时，完全熟悉河内的豪强猾的人家，待他前往广平，九月份就上任了。
English: When Wang Wenshu used to live in Quang Binh, he was fully familiar with the powerful and cunning people in Hanoi. After he went to Quang Binh, he took office in September.

古文：令郡具私马五十匹，为驿自河内至长安，部吏如居广平时方略，捕郡中豪猾，郡中豪猾相连坐千馀家。
现代文：他下令郡府准备私马五十匹，从河内到长安设置了驿站，部署手下的官吏就象在广平时所用的办法一样，逮捕郡中豪强猾之人，郡中豪强猾相连坐犯罪的有一千余家。
English: He ordered the county government to prepare 50 private horses, set up a post from Hanoi to Chang'an, and deployed his officials to arrest the powerful and cunning people in the county, just like the methods used in ordinary times. There are more than a thousand families of powerful and cunning criminals in the county.

古文：上书请，大者至族，小者乃死，家尽没入偿臧。
现代文：上书请示皇上，罪大者灭族，罪小者处死，家中财产完全没收，偿还从前所得到的赃物。
English: In the petition, he asked the emperor to declare that those guilty of major crimes should be exterminated, those guilty of minor crimes should be executed, the family's property should be completely confiscated, and the stolen goods obtained in the past should be repaid.

古文：奏行不过二三日，得可事。
现代文：奏书送走不过两三日，就得到皇上的可以执行的答复。
English: Only two or three days after the dispatch of the report, the Emperor's reply, which could be carried out, was received.

古文：论报，至流血十馀里。
现代文：案子判决上报，竟至于流血十余里。
English: The case was reported after the verdict, but the bloodshed was more than ten miles away.

古文：河内皆怪其奏，以为神速。
现代文：河内人都奇怪王温舒的奏书，以为神速。
English: People in Hanoi were surprised by Wang Wenshu's performance and thought it was very fast.

古文：尽十二月，郡中毋声，毋敢夜行，野无犬吠之盗。
现代文：十二月结束了，郡里没有人敢说话，也无人敢夜晚行走，郊野没有因盗贼引起狗叫的现象。
English: December is over, no one dares to speak in the county, no one dares to walk at night, there is no phenomenon of dogs barking because of thieves in the countryside.

古文：其颇不得，失之旁郡国，黎来，会春，温舒顿足叹曰： 嗟乎，令冬月益展一月，足吾事矣！ 
现代文：那少数没抓到的罪犯，逃到附近的郡国去了，待到把他们追捕抓回来，正赶上春天了，王温舒跺脚叹道： 唉！如果冬季再延长一个月，我的事情就办完了。 
English: The few criminals who were not caught fled to a nearby county and waited until they were chased and caught, just in time for spring. Wang Wenshu stomped his feet and sighed: Alas! If the winter is extended for another month, my work will be finished.

古文：其好杀伐行威不爱人如此。
现代文：他喜欢杀伐、施展威武及不爱民就是这个样子。
English: That's how he likes to kill, use force and doesn't like the people.

古文：天子闻之，以为能，迁为中尉。
现代文：天子听了，以为他有才能，升为中尉。
English: When he heard this, he thought he had talent and was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：其治复放河内，徙诸名祸猾吏与从事，河内则杨皆、麻戊，关中杨赣、成信等。
现代文：他治理政事还是效仿河内的办法，调来那些著名祸害和猾官吏同他一起共事，河内的有杨皆与、麻戊，关中的有杨赣和成信等。
English: He still followed the example of Hanoi in his governance of political affairs, bringing in those famous evil and cunning officials to work with him, such as Yang Guanhe and Ma Wu in Hanoi, and Yang Hui and Chengxin in Guanzhong.

古文：义纵为内史，惮未敢恣治。
现代文：因为义纵当内史，王温舒怕他，因此还未敢恣意地实行严酷之政。
English: Because Wang Wenshu was afraid of Yigong, he did not dare to arbitrarily implement a harsh policy.

古文：及纵死，张汤败後，徙为廷尉，而尹齐为中尉。
现代文：等到义纵死去，张汤失败之后，王温舒改任廷尉，尹齐当了中尉。
English: After the death of Yi Zhong and the failure of Zhang Tang, Wang Wenshu was appointed as a court lieutenant, and Yin Qi became a lieutenant.

古文：尹齐者，东郡茌平人。以刀笔稍迁至御史。
现代文：尹齐是东郡茌平人，从文书小吏升为御史。
English: Yin Qi was from Dong County, Suiping. He was promoted from a clerk to a historian.

古文：事张汤，张汤数称以为廉武，使督盗贼，所斩伐不避贵戚。
现代文：服事张汤，张汤屡次称赞他廉洁勇敢，派他督捕盗贼，所要斩杀的人不回避权贵皇亲。
English: Serving Zhang Tang, Zhang Tang repeatedly praised him for his integrity and bravery, sent him to catch thieves, and those who wanted to be killed did not avoid the powerful emperor.

古文：迁为关内都尉，声甚於宁成。
现代文：他升为关内都尉，好名声超过宁成。
English: He rose to the rank of captain in Guanai, and his reputation surpassed that of Ning Cheng.

古文：上以为能，迁为中尉，吏民益凋敝。
现代文：皇上认为他有才能，升他为中尉，而官吏和平民生活更加困苦不堪。
English: The emperor thought he was talented and promoted him to lieutenant, but the life of officials and civilians was even more difficult.

古文：尹齐木彊少文，豪恶吏伏匿而善吏不能为治，以故事多废，抵罪。
现代文：尹齐处事死板，不讲求礼仪，强悍凶恶的官吏隐藏起来，而善良的官员又不能独自有效地去处理政事，因此政事多半都废弛了，被判了罪。
English: Yin Qi dealt with things rigidly, did not ask for etiquette, strong and vicious officials were hidden, and good officials could not effectively deal with political affairs alone, so most of the political affairs were wasted and convicted.

古文：上复徙温舒为中尉，而杨仆以严酷为主爵都尉。
现代文：皇上又改任王温舒为中尉，而杨仆凭借他的严峻酷烈当了主爵都尉。
English: The emperor also appointed Wang Wenshu as a lieutenant, while Yang Pu, with his stern and fierce character, became a lord lieutenant.

古文：杨仆者，宜阳人也。以千夫为吏。
现代文：杨仆是宜阳人，以千夫的身份当了小官。
English: Yang Bu is a native of Yiyang. He became a minor official with the status of a thousand men.

古文：河南守案举以为能，迁为御史，使督盗贼关东。
现代文：河南太守考核并推荐他有才能而升为御史，派到关东去督捕盗贼。
English: The governor of Henan Province evaluated and recommended his talent and promoted him to the position of imperial historian. He was sent to Guandong to catch thieves.

古文：治放尹齐，以为敢挚行。
现代文：他治理政事仿效尹齐，被认为做事凶猛而有胆量。
English: He follows the example of Yin Qi in his governance and is considered to be fierce and courageous.

古文：稍迁至主爵都尉，列九卿。
现代文：逐渐升为主爵都尉，位列九卿之中。
English: He gradually rose to the rank of lord lieutenant and was ranked among the nine nobles.

古文：天子以为能。南越反，拜为楼船将军，有功，封将梁侯。
现代文：皇上认为他有才能，在南越反叛时，他被任命为楼船将军，因有军功，被封为将粱侯。
English: The emperor thought he had talent. When there was a rebellion in South Vietnam, he was appointed the general of the loung ship. Because of his military achievements, he was named the general of the loung.

古文：为荀彘所缚。
现代文：后被荀彘所捆缚。
English: He was then tied up with chains.

古文：居久之，病死。
现代文：过了很久，他得病而死。
English: After a long time, he fell ill and died.

古文：而温舒复为中尉。为人少文，居廷惛惛不辩，至於中尉则心开。
现代文：王温舒又当了中尉，他为人缺少斯文，在朝廷办事，思想糊涂，不辨是非，到他当中尉以后，则心情开朗。
English: Wang Wenshu became a lieutenant again. He lacked courtesy, worked at the imperial court, was muddled in his thinking, and could not distinguish between right and wrong. After he became a lieutenant, he was in a cheerful mood.

古文：督盗贼，素习关中俗，知豪恶吏，豪恶吏尽复为用，为方略。
现代文：他督捕盗贼，原来熟悉关中习俗，了解当地豪强和凶恶的官吏，所以豪强和凶恶官吏都愿意为他出力，为他出谋划策。
English: As a thief-catcher, he was familiar with customs in Guanzhong and knew the local powerful and evil officials. Therefore, the powerful and evil officials were willing to work for him and make suggestions for him.

古文：吏苛察，盗贼恶少年投缿购告言奸，置伯格长以牧司奸盗贼。
现代文：官吏严苛侦察，盗贼和凶恶少年就用投书和检举箱的办法，收买告发罪恶的情报，设置伯格长以督察邪之人和盗贼。
English: The officials carried out strict reconnaissance, and the thieves and vicious juveniles used the method of throwing books and a whistle-blowing box to bribe the information to report the crime, and set up the mayor of Berg to inspect the evil people and thieves.

古文：温舒为人，善事有埶者；即无埶者，视之如奴。
现代文：王温舒为人谄媚，善于巴结有权势的人，若是没有权势的人，他对待他们就象对待奴仆一样。
English: Wang Wenshu was a charming person, good at courting powerful people. If there were no powerful people, he would treat them like slaves.

古文：有埶家，虽有奸如山，弗犯；无埶者，贵戚必侵辱。
现代文：有权势的人家，虽然邪之事堆积如山，他也不去触犯。无权势的，就是高贵的皇亲，他也一定要欺侮。
English: He will not offend a powerful family, even though the evil deeds are piled up like a mountain. If he is not powerful, even if he is a noble imperial relative, he must bully.

古文：舞文巧诋下户之猾，以焄大豪。
现代文：他玩弄法令条文巧言诋毁猾的平民，而威迫大的豪强。
English: He plays fast and loose with the letter of the law to denigrate cunning civilians and intimidate the powerful.

古文：其治中尉如此。奸猾穷治，大抵尽靡烂狱中，行论无出者。
现代文：他当中尉时就这样处理政事，对于猾之民，必定穷究其罪，大多都被打得皮开肉绽，烂死狱中，判决有罪的，没有一个人走出狱中。
English: When he was a lieutenant, he dealt with political affairs in this way. For cunning people, they must be thoroughly investigated for their crimes. Most of them were beaten to a pulp and died in prison. If they were found guilty, none of them left prison.

古文：其爪牙吏虎而冠。
现代文：他的得力部下都象戴着帽子的猛虎一样。
English: His best men are like tigers in hats.

古文：於是中尉部中中猾以下皆伏，有势者为游声誉，称治。
现代文：于是在中尉管辖范围的中等以下的猾之人，都隐伏不敢出来，有权势的都替他宣扬名声，称赞他的治绩。
English: As a result, the less-than-moderate cunning people in the lieutenant's jurisdiction all hid and did not dare to come out, and the powerful ones promoted his reputation and praised his performance.

古文：治数岁，其吏多以权富。
现代文：他治理了几年，他的属官多因此而富有。
English: He ruled for several years, and many of his subordinates became rich as a result.

古文：温舒击东越还，议有不中意者，坐小法抵罪免。
现代文：王温舒攻打东越回来后，议事不合天子的旨意，犯了小法被判罪免官。
English: After Wang Wenshu came back from attacking Dongyue, he violated minor laws and was convicted and removed from office.

古文：是时天子方欲作通天台而未有人，温舒请覆中尉脱卒，得数万人作。
现代文：这时，天子正想修建通天台，还没人主持这事，王温舒请求考核中尉部下逃避兵役的人，查出几万人可去参加劳动。
English: At this time, Tianzi was trying to build a penthouse, and there was no one to preside over the matter. Wang Wenshu requested that the lieutenant's subordinates who evaded military service be examined, and found that tens of thousands of people could go to work.

古文：上说，拜为少府。徙为右内史，治如其故，奸邪少禁。
现代文：皇上很高兴，任命他为少府，又改任右内吏，处理政事同从前一样，邪之事稍被禁止。
English: The emperor was very pleased and appointed him Shōfu (lesser prefect), and he was also reassigned to the post of Uchiuchi no kami (officer of the Right Division of the Inner Palace Guards). He dealt with political affairs as before, and he was prohibited from doing anything evil.

古文：坐法失官。复为右辅，行中尉事。
现代文：后来犯法丢掉官职，不久又被任命为右辅，代理中尉的职务，处理政事同原来的做法一样。
English: Later, he violated the law and lost his official position. Soon after, he was appointed to the post of right assistant, acting lieutenant, and dealt with political affairs in the same way as before.

古文：如故操。岁馀，会宛军发，诏徵豪吏，温舒匿其吏华成，及人有变告温舒受员骑钱，他奸利事，罪至族，自杀。
现代文：一年多以后，正赶上征讨大宛的军队出发，朝廷下令征召豪强官吏，王温舒把他的属官华成隐藏起来。待到有人告发王温舒接受在额骑兵的赃款和其他的坏事，罪行之重应当灭族，他就自杀了。
English: More than a year later, just in time for the departure of the army to conquer Dawan, the imperial court ordered the recruitment of powerful officials, and Wang Wenshu hid his subordinate officer Huacheng. Until someone accused Wang Wenshu of accepting bribes from the cavalry and other bad things, the weight of the crime should be extermination, he committed suicide.

古文：其时两弟及两婚家亦各自坐他罪而族。
现代文：这时，他的两个弟弟以及两个姻亲之家，各自都犯了其他的罪行而被灭族。
English: At this time, his two younger brothers, as well as two in-laws, each committed other crimes and were exterminated.

古文：光禄徐自为曰： 悲夫，夫古有三族，而王温舒罪至同时而五族乎！ 
现代文：光禄徐自为说： 可悲啊，古代有灭三族的事，而王温舒犯罪竟至于同时夷灭五族！ 
English: Guanglu Xu thought to himself, "How sad. In ancient times, three ethnic groups were exterminated, but Wang Wenshu's crime was to exterminate five ethnic groups at the same time!"

古文：温舒死，家直累千金。
现代文：王温舒死后，他的家产价值累积有一千金。
English: After Wang Wenshu's death, the value of his family property accumulated to one thousand gold.

古文：後数岁，尹齐亦以淮阳都尉病死，家直不满五十金。
现代文：以后好多年，尹齐也在淮阳都尉的任上病死，他的家产价值不足五十金。
English: Many years later, Yin Qi also died of illness while serving as the governor of Huaiyang. His family property was worth less than fifty gold coins.

古文：所诛灭淮阳甚多，及死，仇家欲烧其尸，尸亡去归葬。
现代文：他所杀的淮阳人很多，待到他死了，怨仇之家想烧他的尸体，家属偷偷地把他的尸体运回来安葬。
English: He killed a lot of people in Huaiyang. When he died, his family wanted to burn his body, and his relatives secretly brought his body back for burial.

古文：自温舒等以恶为治，而郡守、都尉、诸侯二千石欲为治者，其治大抵尽放温舒，而吏民益轻犯法，盗贼滋起。
现代文：自从王温舒用严酷凶恶手段处理政事，其后郡守、都尉、诸侯和二千石的官员想要治理政事，他们的治理办法，大都效法王温舒，然而官吏和百姓越发轻易犯法，盗贼越来越多起来。
English: Since Wang Wenshu used harsh and vicious means to deal with political affairs, then county governors, captains, princes and officials of two thousand koku wanted to govern political affairs. Most of their governance methods followed the example of Wang Wenshu. However, officials and people were more and more prone to breaking the law, and thieves were on the rise.

古文：南阳有梅免、白政，楚有殷中、杜少，齐有徐勃，燕赵之间有坚卢、范生之属。
现代文：南阳有梅免、白政，楚地有殷中、杜少，齐地有徐勃，燕赵之间有坚卢、范生之流。
English: Nanyang has Mei Min and Bai Zheng, Chu has Yin Zhong and Du Shao, Qi has Xu Bo, and Yan Zhao has Jian Lu and Fan Sheng.

古文：大群至数千人，擅自号，攻城邑，取库兵，释死罪，缚辱郡太守、都尉，杀二千石，为檄告县趣具食；小群以百数，掠卤乡里者，不可胜数也。
现代文：大的团伙多达数千人，擅自称王称号，攻打城邑，夺取武器库中的兵器，释放判死罪的犯人，捆缚侮辱郡太守、都尉，杀二千石的官员，发布檄文，催促各县为他们所准备粮食。小的团伙有几百人，抢劫乡村的数也数不过来。
English: Large gangs of up to several thousand people, arrogantly claiming the title of king, attacked towns, seized weapons in arsenals, released prisoners sentenced to death, tied up officials who insulted county governors and captains, killed officials of two thousand koku, issued letters of reprimand, and urged counties to prepare food for them. Small gangs have several hundred people, and the number of robberies in villages is countless.

古文：於是天子始使御史中丞、丞相长史督之。
现代文：于是天子开始派御史中丞、丞相长史督办剿灭之事。
English: As a result, the Son of Heaven began to dispatch His Excellency, the Vice-Minister of History, the Vice-Minister of History, and the Superintendent of History to exterminate them.

古文：犹弗能禁也，乃使光禄大夫范昆、诸辅都尉及故九卿张德等衣绣衣，持节，虎符发兵以兴击，斩首大部或至万馀级，及以法诛通饮食，坐连诸郡，甚者数千人。
现代文：但还是不能禁止，就派光禄大夫范昆、诸位辅都尉及原九卿张德等人，穿着绣衣，拿着符节和虎符，发兵攻击，对于大的团伙杀头的竟多至一万多人，以及按法律杀死那些给作乱者送去饮食的人。诛连数郡、被杀的多达数千人。
English: But they still couldn't ban it, so they sent Guanglu's doctor Fan Kun, all the assistant captains and the former nine generals Zhang De and others, wearing embroidered clothes, holding symbols and tiger symbols, to attack, killing up to ten thousand people for large groups, and killing those who sent food to the rioters in accordance with the law. In several counties, up to several thousand people were killed.

古文：数岁，乃颇得其渠率。
现代文：几年后，才捕到他们的大首领。
English: It took several years before their main leader was caught.

古文：散卒失亡，复聚党阻山川者，往往而群居，无可柰何。
现代文：但是走散的士卒逃跑了，又聚集成党，占据险要的山川作乱，往往群居一处，对他们无可奈何。
English: However, the scattered soldiers ran away, and gathered again to form a party, occupied dangerous mountains and rivers to make trouble, and often lived in groups. There was nothing they could do about it.

古文：於是作 沈命法 ，曰群盗起不发觉，发觉而捕弗满品者，二千石以下至小吏主者皆死。
现代文：于是朝廷颁行 沈命法 ，说群盗产生而官吏没有发觉，或发觉却没有捕捉到规定的数额、有关的二千石以下至小的官员，凡主持此事的都要处死。
English: As a result, the Imperial Court issued the "Death Penalty Law," saying that if a group of thieves occurred and officials did not discover, or did not discover but did not capture the specified amount, the relevant officials with less than two thousand koku, and those who presided over the matter, would be put to death.

古文：其後小吏畏诛，虽有盗不敢发，恐不能得，坐课累府，府亦使其不言。
现代文：这以后，小官员怕被诛杀，纵然有盗贼也不敢上报，害怕捕不到，犯法被判刑又连累上级官府，上级官府也让他们不要上报。
English: After this, minor officials are afraid of being beaten to death, even if there is a thief, they dare not report it, they are afraid of not being caught, they are sentenced for breaking the law, and they also involve higher-level government agencies, and the higher-level government agencies also let them not report.

古文：故盗贼浸多，上下相为匿，以文辞避法焉。
现代文：所以盗贼更加多起来，上下互相隐瞒，玩弄文辞，逃避法律制裁。
English: As a result, the number of thieves is on the rise. They conceal their activities from each other, play with words, and evade legal sanctions.

古文：减宣者，杨人也。以佐史无害给事河东守府。
现代文：减宣是杨县人，因为当佐史无比能干，被调到河东太守府任职。
English: Yan Xuan was from Yang County and was transferred to the Governor's Office of Hedong Province because Dang Sa Shi was very capable.

古文：卫将军青使买马河东，见宣无害，言上，徵为大厩丞。
现代文：将军卫青派人到河东买马，看到减宣能干无比，就向皇上推荐，被征召到京城当了大厩丞。
English: General Wei Qing sent someone to buy a horse in Hedong, and when he saw that Yan Xuan was very capable, he recommended him to the emperor, and he was conscripted to be the grand stable master in Beijing.

古文：官事辨，稍迁至御史及中丞。
现代文：当官做事很公平，逐渐升任御史和中丞。
English: The officials were very fair in their dealings, and he was gradually promoted to the posts of goshi and chujo.

古文：使治主父偃及治淮南反狱，所以微文深诋，杀者甚众，称为敢决疑。
现代文：皇上派他处理主父偃和淮南王造反的案件，他用隐微的法律条文深究诋毁，所以被杀的人很多，被称赞为敢于判决疑难案件。
English: The emperor sent him to deal with the case of the rebellion of the main father Yu and Huainan Wang. He used subtle legal provisions to investigate and discredit, so many people were killed. He was praised for daring to judge difficult cases.

古文：数废数起，为御史及中丞者几二十岁。
现代文：他屡次被免官又屡次被起用，当御史及中丞之官差不多有二十年。
English: He was repeatedly removed from office and repeatedly appointed, and served as imperial historian and chujo for almost twenty years.

古文：王温舒免中尉，而宣为左内史。
现代文：王温舒免去中尉之官，而减宣当左内史。
English: Wang Wenshu was removed from the rank of lieutenant, while Xuan Xuan was demoted to the rank of Inner Historian.

古文：其治米盐，事大小皆关其手，自部署县名曹实物，官吏令丞不得擅摇，痛以重法绳之。
现代文：他管理米和盐的事，无论事大或事小都要亲自经手，自己安排县中各具体部门的财产器物，官吏中县令和县丞也不得擅自改动，甚至用重法来管制他们。
English: He manages the affairs of rice and salt. No matter how big or small, he must personally handle them. He arranges the property items of each specific department in the county by himself. Officials such as the county magistrate and the county magistrate are not allowed to change without authorization, and even use heavy laws to control them.

古文：居官数年，一切郡中为小治辨，然独宣以小致大，能因力行之，难以为经。
现代文：当官几年，其他各郡都办好了一些小事而已，但是唯独减宣却能从小事办到大事，能凭借他的力量加以推行，当然他的办法也难以当做常法。
English: As an official for several years, other counties have only done some small things well, but only the reduction of publicity can do big things from small things, and can be implemented by virtue of his strength. Of course, his method is also difficult to be regarded as common law.

古文：中废。为右扶风，坐怨成信，信亡藏上林中，宣使郿令格杀信，吏卒格信时，射中上林苑门，宣下吏诋罪，以为大逆，当族，自杀。
现代文：他中途被罢官，后来又当了右扶风，因为怨恨他的属官成信，成信逃走藏到上林苑中，减宣派郿县县令击杀成信。官吏和士卒射杀成信时，射中了上林苑的门，减宣被交付法官判罪，法官认为他犯大逆不道的罪，判定为灭族，减宣就自杀了。
English: He was removed from office in the middle of his term, and later he became a right wind, because he resented his subordinate officer Chengxin. Chengxin fled and hid in Shanglinyuan, and Yan Xuan sent a county order to kill Chengxin. When the officials and soldiers shot Chengxin, they hit the door of Shanglinyuan. Yan Xuan was convicted by the judge. The judge considered him to be guilty of high treason and was sentenced to extermination. Yan Xuan committed suicide.

古文：而杜周任用。
现代文：杜周得到任用。
English: Du Zhou was appointed.

古文：杜周者，南阳杜衍人。
现代文：杜周是南阳杜衍人。
English: Du Zhou is a Nanyang Duyan.

古文：义纵为南阳守，以为爪牙，举为廷尉史。
现代文：义纵当南阳太守，把杜周当做得力助手，荐举他当廷尉史。
English: Yi Zong served as the governor of Nanyang, and Du Zhou served as his assistant, recommending him as a court official.

古文：事张汤，汤数言其无害，至御史。
现代文：他服事张汤，张汤屡次说他才能无比，官职升到御史。
English: He served Zhang Tang, Zhang Tang repeatedly said that his talent was incomparable, and his official position was elevated to the imperial historian.

古文：使案边失亡，所论杀甚众。
现代文：派他审理边境士卒逃亡的事，被判死刑的很多。
English: Sent him to try the escape of a border guard, and many were sentenced to death.

古文：奏事中上意，任用，与减宣相编，更为中丞十馀岁。
现代文：他上奏的事情合乎皇上的心意，被任用，同减宣相接替，改任中丞十多年。
English: The matter he reported was in line with the emperor's wishes, and he was appointed to succeed Shigenobu, and served as chujo for more than ten years.

古文：其治与宣相放，然重迟，外宽，内深次骨。
现代文：杜周治理政事与减宣相仿佛，但是处事慎重，决断迟缓，外表宽松，内心深刻切骨。
English: Du Zhou's governance of political affairs seems to be similar to the reduction of propaganda, but he is cautious in handling affairs, slow in making decisions, loose on the outside, and deep in his heart.

古文：宣为左内史，周为廷尉，其治大放张汤而善候伺。
现代文：减宣当左内史，杜周当廷尉，他治理政事仿效张汤，而善于窥测皇上的意图。
English: Xuan Xuan was the left internal historian, Du Zhou was the imperial lieutenant. He governed affairs of state in imitation of Zhang Tang, and was good at spying on the emperor's intentions.

古文：上所欲挤者，因而陷之；上所欲释者，久系待问而微见其冤状。
现代文：皇上想要排挤的，就趁机加以陷害；皇上想要宽释的，就长期囚禁待审，暗中显露他的冤情。
English: If the emperor wanted to expel someone, he would take the opportunity to frame him; if the emperor wanted to pardon someone, he would imprison him for a long time pending trial, secretly revealing his grievances.

古文：客有让周曰： 君为天子决平，不循三尺法，专以人主意指为狱。
现代文：门客有人责备杜周说： 为皇上公平断案，不遵循五尺法律，却专以皇上的意旨来断案。
English: One of Du Zhou's clients reproached him, saying, "He adjudicates cases fairly for the emperor. He does not follow the five-feet law, but adjudicates cases exclusively according to the emperor's will."

古文：狱者固如是乎？ 
现代文：法官本来应当这样吗？ 
English: Is that how judges are supposed to be?

古文：周曰： 三尺安出哉？
现代文：杜周说： 三尺法律是怎样产生的？
English: Du Zhou said: How did the three-feet law come about?

古文：前主所是著为律，後主所是疏为令，当时为是，何古之法乎！ 
现代文：从前的国君认为对的就写成法律，后来的国君认为对的就记载为法令。适合当时的情况就是正确的、何必要遵循古代法律呢？ 
English: What the former sovereign thought was right was written into law, and what the later sovereign thought was right was recorded as a decree. What suited the situation at the time was correct, so why was it necessary to follow the ancient law?

古文：至周为廷尉，诏狱亦益多矣。
现代文：待到杜周当了廷尉，皇上命令办的案子也越发多了。
English: By the time Du Zhou became a courtier, there were more and more cases ordered by the emperor.

古文：二千石系者新故相因，不减百馀人。
现代文：二千石一级的官员被拘捕的新旧相连，不少于一百人。
English: No less than one hundred officials of the first class of 2,000 koku were arrested, both old and new.

古文：郡吏大府举之廷尉，一岁至千馀章。
现代文：郡国官员和上级官府送交尉办的案件，一年中多达一千多个。
English: County and state officials and higher-level government offices send more than a thousand cases a year to the lieutenant's office.

古文：章大者连逮证案数百，小者数十人；远者数千，近者数百里。
现代文：每个奏章所举报的案子，大的要逮捕有关证人数百人，小的也要逮捕数十人；这些人，远的几千里，近的数百里。
English: For each case reported in each report, the large ones need to arrest hundreds of relevant witnesses, and the small ones need to arrest dozens of people; these people are thousands of miles away and hundreds of miles away.

古文：会狱，吏因责如章告劾，不服，以笞掠定之。
现代文：案犯被押到京师会审时，官吏就要求犯人象奏章上说的那样来招供，如不服，就用刑具拷打定案。
English: When the criminal was taken to the Beijing Teachers' Association for trial, the officials demanded that the prisoner confess as mentioned in the play, and if he did not accept, he was tortured with torture instruments to finalize the case.

古文：於是闻有逮皆亡匿。
现代文：于是人们听到逮捕人的消息，都逃跑和藏匿起来。
English: So when people heard about the arrests, they all ran away and hid.

古文：狱久者至更数赦十有馀岁而相告言，大抵尽诋以不道以上。
现代文：案件拖得久的，甚至经过几次赦免，十多年后还会被告发，大多数都以大逆不道以上的罪名加以诬陷。
English: Cases are drawn out for a long time, and even after several amnesties, they are still prosecuted more than ten years later. Most of them are framed with the charge of high treason.

古文：廷尉及中都官诏狱逮至六七万人，吏所增加十万馀人。
现代文：廷尉及中都官奉诏办案所逮捕的人多达六、七万，属官所捕又要增加十多万。
English: As many as sixty to seventy thousand people were arrested by the imperial lieutenant and the central government official who handled the case according to the imperial edict, and the number of arrests by subordinate officials would increase by more than one hundred thousand.

古文：周中废，後为执金吾，逐盗，捕治桑弘羊、卫皇后昆弟子刻深，天子以为尽力无私，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：杜周中途被罢官，后来当了执金吾，追捕盗贼，逮捕查办桑弘羊和卫皇后兄弟的儿子，严苛酷烈，天子认为他尽职而无私，升任御史大夫。
English: Du Zhou was removed from office in the middle of his term. Later, he became the chief of police, pursuing thieves, arresting and investigating the sons of the brothers of the Queen of Song and Wei. He was harsh and severe. Tianzi thought he was conscientious and selfless, and he was promoted to the position of chief historian.

古文：家两子，夹河为守。
现代文：他的两个儿子，分别当了河内和河南太守。
English: His two sons became the governors of Hanoi and Henan respectively.

古文：其治暴酷皆甚於王温舒等矣。
现代文：他治理政事残暴酷烈比王温舒等更厉害。
English: He ruled the country more brutally and fiercely than Wang Wenshu and others.

古文：杜周初徵为廷史，有一马，且不全；及身久任事，至三公列，子孙尊官，家訾累数巨万矣。
现代文：杜周开始当廷史时，只有一匹马，而且配备也不全；等到他长久当官，位列三公，子孙都当了高官，家中钱财积累数目多达好多万。
English: At the beginning of Du Zhou's court history, there was only one horse, and the equipment was not complete; when he had been in office for a long time, he was ranked as the third prince, his children and grandchildren were all high-ranking officials, and the amount of money and wealth accumulated in the family was as much as many millions.

古文：太史公曰：自郅都、杜周十人者，此皆以酷烈为声。
现代文：太史公说：从郅都到杜周十个人，都以严酷暴烈而闻名。
English: Taishigong said, "From Xindu to Du Zhou, ten people are famous for being harsh and violent.

古文：然郅都伉直，引是非，争天下大体。
现代文：但郅都刚烈正直，辩说是非，争与国家有益的重大原则。
English: But all of them are steadfastly honest, argue the rights and wrongs, and fight for the important principles that are beneficial to the country.

古文：张汤以知阴阳，人主与俱上下，时数辩当否，国家赖其便。
现代文：张汤因为懂得观察君王的喜怒哀乐而投其所好，皇上与他上下配合，当时屡次辩论国家大事的得失，国家他而得到益处。
English: Zhang Tang liked him because he knew how to observe the king's emotions, and the emperor cooperated with him. At that time, the gains and losses of national events were repeatedly debated, and the country benefited from him.

古文：赵禹时据法守正。
现代文：赵禹时常依据法律坚持正道。
English: Zhao Yu always adheres to the right path according to the law.

古文：杜周从谀，以少言为重。
现代文：杜周则顺从上司的意旨、阿谀奉承，以少说话为重要原则。
English: Du Zhou, on the other hand, obeyed the boss's will, flattered him, and took the principle of saying little as an important principle.

古文：自张汤死後，网密，多诋严，官事浸以秏废。
现代文：从张汤死后，法网严密，办案多诋毁严酷，政事逐渐败坏荒废。
English: Since Zhang Tang's death, the legal network has been strict, the handling of cases has been harsh, and political affairs have gradually deteriorated.

古文：九卿碌碌奉其官，救过不赡，何暇论绳墨之外乎！
现代文：九卿之官碌碌无为，只求保护官职，他们防止发生过错尚且来不及，哪有时间研究法律以外的事情呢？
English: The officials of the nine nobles are idle, seeking only to protect their posts. It is too late for them to prevent mistakes from happening. How can they have time to study things other than the law?

古文：然此十人中，其廉者足以为仪表，其污者足以为戒，方略教导，禁奸止邪，一切亦皆彬彬质有其文武焉。
现代文：但是这十个人中，那廉洁的完全可以成为人们的表率，那污浊的足以做人们的鉴戒，他们谋划策略，教导人们，禁止邪，一切作为，斯文有礼，恩威并施。
English: But among these ten people, the one who is incorruptible can completely become the leader of people, and the one who is dirty is enough to be a warning to people. They plan strategies, teach people, prohibit evil, and do everything with courtesy and grace.

古文：虽惨酷，斯称其位矣。
现代文：执法虽然严酷，但这与他的职务是相称的。
English: Enforcement of the law, while harsh, is commensurate with his duties.

古文：至若蜀守冯当暴挫，广汉李贞擅磔人，东郡弥仆锯项，天水骆璧推咸，河东褚广妄杀，京兆无忌、冯翊殷周蝮鸷，水衡阎奉朴击卖请，何足数哉！
现代文：至于像蜀郡太守冯当凶暴地摧残人，广汉郡李贞擅自肢解百姓，东郡弥仆锯断人的脖子。天水郡骆璧椎击犯人逼供定案，河东郡褚广妄杀百姓，京兆的无忌、冯诩殷周的凶狠，水衡都尉阎奉拷打逼迫犯人出钱买得宽恕，哪里值得陈说！
English: As for the likes of Shu County Governor Feng Dang viciously destroying people, Guanghan County Li Zhen dismembering people without authorization, Dong County Yabo sawing off people's necks, Tianshui County Luo Bi Shi hit prisoners to force confessions, Hedong County Yan Guang killing people, Jing Zhao's no-holds-barred, Feng Yu Yin Zhou's ferocious, water balance captain Yan Fong torturing and forcing prisoners to pay money to buy forgiveness, what is worth mentioning!

古文：何足数哉！
现代文：哪里值得陈说！
English: Where is there anything worth saying!

