古文：诸葛宏在西朝，少有清誉，为王夷甫所重，时论亦以拟王。
现代文：诸葛厷在西晋时，年纪轻轻就有很好的名声，受到王夷甫的器重，当时的舆论也拿他和王夷甫相比。
English: When Zhuge Liang was in West Jin, he had a good reputation at a young age. He was respected by Wang Yifu, and the public opinion at that time also compared him to Wang Yifu.

古文：后为继母族党所谗，诬之为狂逆。
现代文：后来被他继母的亲族造谣中伤，诬蔑他是狂放叛逆。
English: Later, he was slandered by his stepmother's relatives, who accused him of being wild and rebellious.

古文：将远徙，友人王夷甫之徒，诣槛车与别。宏问： 朝廷何以徙我？ 
现代文：将要把他流放到边远地区时，他的朋友王夷甫等人来到囚车前和他告别，诸葛友问： 朝廷为什么流放我？ 
English: When he was about to be exiled to a remote area, his friend Wang Yifu and others came to the cart to bid him farewell. Zhuge You asked: Why did the imperial court exile me?

古文：王曰： 言卿狂逆。 
现代文：王夷甫说： 他们说你狂放悖逆。 
English: Wang Yifu said: They say you are wild and rebellious.

古文：宏曰： 逆则应杀，狂何所徙？ 
现代文：诸葛厷说： 叛逆就应当斩首，狂放有什么可流放的呢！ 
English: Zhuge Liang said: "A traitor should be beheaded, what can be exiled by wild beasts?"

古文：桓公入蜀，至三峡中，部伍中有得猿子者。其母缘岸哀号，行百余里不去，遂跳上船，至便即绝。
现代文：桓温进军蜀地，到达三峡时，部队里有个人捉到一只小猿，母猿沿着江岸一路悲啼，直跟着船走了百多里也不肯离开，终于跳上了船，一上船就死去了。
English: When Huan Wen marched into Shudi and reached the Three Gorges, there was a person in the army who caught a small monkey. The mother monkey grieved all the way along the riverbank, followed the boat for more than a hundred miles and refused to leave. Finally, she jumped on the boat and died as soon as she got on the boat.

古文：破视其腹中，肠皆寸寸断。
现代文：剖开母猿的肚子看，肠子都一寸一寸地断开了。
English: When the stomach of the mother ape was opened, the intestines were cut off inch by inch.

古文：公闻之，怒，命黜其人。
现代文：桓温听说这事大怒，下令革除了捉小猿的那个人。
English: Hearing of this, Kan-Wen flew into a rage and ordered that the person who had caught the little monkey be fired.

古文：殷中军被废，在信安，终日书空作字。
现代文：殷浩被贬为庶人以后，住在信安县，一天到晚总是在半空中虚写字形。
English: After Yin Hao was relegated to a commoner, he lived in Xin'an County, and he always wrote glyphs in mid-air all day long.

古文：扬州吏民寻义逐之，窃视，唯作 咄咄怪事 四字而已。
现代文：扬州人民怀念他的恩德，追随而来，偷偷地看他，原来只是写 咄咄怪事 这四个字。
English: The people of Yangzhou missed his kindness, followed him, and secretly watched him. Originally, they just wrote the four words "strange things."

古文：桓公坐有参军椅烝薤不时解，共食者又不助，而椅终不放，举坐皆笑。
现代文：桓温座上有个参军用筷子夹烝薤，一下子没能夹起来，同桌的人又不帮忙，而他还一直夹个不停，满座的人都笑起来。
English: On the Kanon seat, there was a staff member with a chopstick holder. He couldn't hold it all at once, and the people at the same table didn't help, but he kept holding it, and the whole seat burst into laughter.

古文：桓公曰： 同盘尚不相助，况复危难乎？ 
现代文：桓温说： 一起吃饭，尚且不能互相帮助，更何况遇到危急患难呢！ 
English: Kanwen said, "We can eat together, but we can't help each other, let alone in an emergency!

古文：敕令免官。
现代文：便下令罢了他们的官。
English: They ordered their officers to stand down.

古文：殷中军废后，恨简文曰： 上人箸百尺楼上，儋梯将去。 
现代文：中军将军殷浩罢官以后，埋怨简文帝说，说： 把人送到百尺高楼上，却把梯子搬走了。 
English: After the dismissal of the Chinese general Yin Hao, he complained about Emperor Jianwen, saying: He sent people to a hundred-foot-high building, but he took away the ladder.

古文：邓竟陵免官后赴山陵，过见大司马桓公。公问之曰： 卿何以更瘦？ 
现代文：竟陵太守邓遐罢官后去参加皇帝的葬礼时，拜见了大司马桓温，桓温问道： 你为什么更加消瘦了？ 
English: In fact, when the governor of the imperial mausoleum, Deng Jun, went to attend the emperor's funeral after his resignation, he met with the chief steward, Ma Huanwen. Huanwen asked: Why are you more emaciated?

古文：邓曰： 有愧于叔达，不能不恨于破甑！ 
现代文：邓遐说： 我在叔达面前有愧，不能不因打破饭甑而遗憾。 
English: Deng Wei said: I feel guilty in front of my uncle, I can't help but regret breaking the rice bowl.

古文：桓宣武既废太宰父子，仍上表曰： 应割近情，以存远计。
现代文：桓温罢免了司马晞、司马综父子后，仍然上奏章说： 陛下应该割断私情，考虑长远之计。
English: After Kuan Wen dismissed Sima Wei and Sima Zonglu, father and son, he still made a report saying: His Majesty should cut off personal feelings and consider long-term plans.

古文：若除太宰父子，可无后忧。 
现代文：如果清除太宰父子，就可永除后患。 
English: If you remove Dazai and his son, you can permanently remove the after-effects.

古文：简文手答表曰： 所不忍言，况过于言？ 
现代文：简文帝在奏章上亲手批示说： 我都不忍心这样说，何况所做的超过了所说的。 
English: Emperor Jianwen wrote his own instructions on the score and said, "I can't bear to say this, and what's more, I've done more than I've said."

古文：宣武又重表，辞转苦切。
现代文：桓温又重新上奏章，言辞越发迫切。
English: Kuan-Wen resumed his recital, and his words became more and more urgent.

古文：简文更答曰： 若晋室灵长，明公便宜奉行此诏。如大运去矣，请避贤路！ 
现代文：简文帝再批示说： 如果老天保佑我晋朝国运久长，就请阁下照我的话办；如果晋朝气数已尽，不如让位给你。 
English: Emperor Jianwen gave another order, saying, "If God blesses me with long-term success in the Jin Dynasty, please do as I say; if the Jin Dynasty is exhausted, it is better to give way to you."

古文：桓公读诏，手战流汗，于此乃止。
现代文：桓温读着诏书，害怕得手发抖、直流汗，这才停止上奏。
English: While reading the edict, Kuan Wen was afraid that his hands would tremble and sweat profusely, so he stopped playing.

古文：太宰父子，远徙新安。
现代文：太宰父子被流放到遥远的新安郡。
English: Dazai and his son were exiled to the distant county of Xin'an.

古文：桓玄败后，殷仲文还为大司马咨议，意似二三，非复往日。
现代文：桓玄兵败以后，殷仲文回到都城，在大司马司马德文手下任咨议参军。
English: After the defeat of Huan Xuan's army, Yin Zhongwen returned to the capital, and was appointed as a consultant to join the army under the supervision of Grand Master Ma Sima Dewen.

古文：大司马府听前，有一老槐，甚扶疏。
现代文：他常常心神不定，再也不是往日的样子。大司马府的厅堂前有一棵老槐树，枝叶很萧条。
English: He is often restless and is no longer what he used to be. There is an old eucalyptus tree in front of the hall of Daishimafu, and its branches and leaves are very depressed.

古文：殷因月朔，与众在听，视槐良久，叹曰： 槐树婆娑，无复生意！ 
现代文：一次，殷仲文因为逢着月初，与众人在厅堂中集会。他久久地看着老槐树，叹息说： 槐树如此萧疏，再也没有生机了！ 
English: Once, because it was the beginning of the month, Yin Zhongwen gathered with many people in the hall. He looked at the old eucalyptus tree for a long time and sighed: The eucalyptus tree is so sparse, there is no vitality anymore!

古文：殷仲文既素有名望，自谓必当阿衡朝政。
现代文：殷仲文既一向很有名望，自认为一走会主持国政。
English: Since Yin Zhongwen has always been very famous, he thought that he would preside over state affairs as soon as he left.

古文：忽作东阳太守，意甚不平。
现代文：忽然调任东阳太守，心里非常不平。
English: He was suddenly reassigned as the governor of Dongyang and was very upset.

古文：及之郡，至富阳，慨然叹曰： 看此山川形势，当复出一孙伯符！ 
现代文：当到郡上任，经过富阳时，感慨地叹息说： 看这里的山河地理形势，应当再出一个孙伯符。 
English: When he took office in the county and passed through Fuyang, he sighed with emotion and said, "Looking at the geographical situation of the mountains and rivers here, we should have another Sun Bofu.

