古文：赵收天下，且以伐齐。
现代文：赵国联合天下诸侯，准备依靠他们的力量进攻齐国。
English: Zhao united all the princes of the world and prepared to rely on their strength to attack Qi.

古文：苏秦为齐上括说赵王曰： 臣闻古之贤君，德行非施于海内也，教顺慈爱，非布于万民也，祭祀时享，非当于鬼神也，甘露降，风雨时至，农夫登，年谷丰盈，众人喜之，而贤主恶之。
现代文：苏秦为齐国上书游说赵惠文王说： 臣下听说古代贤明的君主，他的道德品待不一定在天下施行，教育训化慈祥仁爱不一定施予万民，祭祀天地宗庙不一定面对鬼神。天上降下的甜美的露水，风雨按时来到，农夫丰收，当年的谷物非常充足，人们对此都很高兴，然而贤明的君主却因为没有给予百姓什么心神不安。
English: Zhao Huiwen Wang said: Subjects have heard that the ancient wise monarch, his moral treatment may not be implemented in the world, education and training, kindness and benevolence may not be given to all people, and the sacrifice of heaven and earth and ancestral temple may not face ghosts and gods. The sweet dew falling from the sky, the wind and rain come on time, the farmer's harvest, and the grain of that year are very sufficient. People are very happy about this, but the wise monarch is uneasy because he has not given the people anything.

古文：今足下功力，非数痛加于秦国，而怨毒积恶，非曾深凌于韩也。
现代文：如今凭足下的功力，并没有多次与泰国交战或攻伐，而且与秦国之间的怨恨、积久而成的愤怒一向不比齐国深。
English: Today, thanks to the power of its feet, it has not fought or attacked Thailand many times, and the resentment and long-accumulated anger between it and Qin has always been as deep as the country itself.

古文：臣窃外闻大臣及下吏之议。皆言主前专据，以秦为爱赵而憎韩。
现代文：臣下在外面暗中听到大臣和下级官吏的议论，都说君王以前独自专断地认为秦国爱护赵国而憎恨齐国。
English: His vassals overheard the discussions of ministers and lower-level officials outside, and they all said that the monarch had previously arbitrarily decided that Qin loved Zhao and hated Qi.

古文：臣窃以事观之，秦岂得爱赵而憎韩哉？
现代文：臣下根据事实私下观察，秦国哪里能爱护赵国而憎恨齐国呀！
English: According to the facts, the vassals privately observed that how could Qin love Zhao but hate Qi!

古文：欲亡韩吞两周之地，故以韩为饵，先出声于天下，欲邻国闻而观之也。
现代文：这是秦国想要灭亡韩国吞并两周的土地，所以把齐国作为钓饵，先在天下声言憎恨齐囤，想使邻国听到并看到此事。
English: This is the land that Qin wanted to annihilate and annex for two weeks, so it used Qi as a bait and first proclaimed its hatred of Qi to the world, hoping that its neighbors would hear and see it.

古文：恐其事不成，故出兵以佯示赵、魏。
现代文：秦国担心此事不能成功，所以假装出兵韩国给赵国、魏国看。
English: Qin was worried that this would not succeed, so he pretended to send troops to Korea to fool Zhao and Wei.

古文：恐天下之警觉，故微韩以贰之。
现代文：秦国担心天下诸侯醒悟，所以稍微进攻一下韩国来消除诸侯的怀疑。
English: Qin feared that the princes of the world would wake up, so he attacked Korea a little to dispel the suspicions of the princes.

古文：恐天下疑己，故出质以为信。
现代文：秦国担心天下诸侯对自己怀有疑心，所以放出各国在秦国的人质表示信用。
English: Qin feared that the princes of the world were suspicious of them, so they released the hostages of various countries in Qin to show their trust.

古文：声德于与国，而实伐空韩。
现代文：泰国声言对盟国友好，而实际却进攻郑国韩国。
English: Thailand claimed to be friendly to the allies, but actually attacked South Korea.

古文：臣窃观其图之也。议秦以谋计，必出于是。
现代文：臣下暗中观察秦国的谋趔，料想秦国的计谋一定从这里表现出来。 
English: The vassals secretly observed Qin's stratagems and thought that Qin's stratagems must have been manifested from here.

古文：且夫说士之计，皆曰韩亡三川，魏灭晋国，恃韩未穷，而祸及于赵。
现代文：再说游说之士的计谋都说： 韩国灭亡了三川之地，魏国灭亡了晋国的绛邑之地，早市没有停止赵国已经遭受灾祸。
English: Moreover, the schemes of the lobbyists all say: Korea has perished in the land of the Three Rivers, Wei has perished in the land of Jin in the land of the Nine Villages, the morning market has not stopped, and Zhao has suffered a disaster.

古文：且物固有势异而患同者，又有势同而患异者。
现代文：再说事情本来有形势不同而祸患相同的，又有形势相同而祸患不同的。
English: Besides, there are things in which the situations are different but the disasters are the same, and there are things in which the situations are the same but the disasters are different.

古文：昔者楚人久伐而中山亡。
现代文：从前楚国人连年被诸国进攻，而赵国乘机灭亡了中山。
English: In the past, the people of Chu were attacked by other countries for years on end, while the state of Zhao took the opportunity to destroy Zhongshan.

古文：今燕尽韩之河南，距沙丘，而至钜鹿之界三百里；距于捍关，至于榆中千五百里。
现代文：如今燕国全部占领了齐国北部的土地，从沙丘到鉅鹿的边界三百里，从北部边境到扦关，直到榆中一千五百里。
English: At present, Yan's state has occupied all the land in the north of Qi, from the dunes to the border of Menglu three hundred miles, from the northern border to Shaoguan, up to the middle of Shizhong fifteen hundred miles.

古文：秦尽韩、魏之上党，则地与国都邦属而壤挈者七百里。
现代文：秦国全部占镊了韩国、魏国的上党，那么秦国的土地就和赵国的都城及所管辖的地方有七百里边境接壤。
English: Qin occupied the whole of Korea and the upper part of Wei, so the land of Qin had a 700-mile border with the capital of Zhao and the areas under its jurisdiction.

古文：秦以三军强弩坐羊唐之上，即地去邯郸二十里。
现代文：秦国用三军中的驽箭手据守在羊肠险要的地方，那么此地距离邯郸只有一百二十里。
English: Qin used the crossbow archers of the three armies to defend the place where the sheep gut was in danger, so this place is only one hundred and twenty miles away from the crossbow.

古文：且秦以三军攻王之上党而危其北，则句注之西，非王之有也。
现代文：况且秦国率领三军进攻君王的上党地区并危害它的北部，那么句注以西的土地就不是君王的了。
English: Moreover, Qin led three armies to attack the king's Shangdang region and endanger its north, so the land to the west of the sentence is not the king's.

古文：今鲁句注禁常山而守，三百里通于燕之唐、曲吾，此代马胡驹不东，而昆山之玉不出也。此三宝者，又非王之有也。
现代文：如令越过句注、关闭常山禁止通行，此地到达燕国的唐地、曲逆有三百里，这样代地、胡地的马匹就不能向东来，昆山的宝玉也不能运出，这三样宝物，也不是君王所有的了。
English: If the order goes beyond the sentence, closing Changshan and prohibiting traffic, it is three hundred miles to reach the Tang and Qigong regions of Yan. In this way, the horses of the Hudi and Hudi regions cannot come to the east, and the precious stones of Kunshan cannot be transported out. These three treasures are not owned by the king.

古文：今从于强秦国之伐齐，臣恐其祸出于是矣。
现代文：如今顺从强大的秦国长时间的进攻齐国，臣下害怕祸患就从这里产生。
English: Now, they obey the powerful Qin State's long-term attack on Qi State, and the vassals are afraid that the evil will come from here.

古文：昔者五国之王尝合横而谋伐赵，叁分赵国壤地，著之盘盂，属之仇柞。
现代文：从前，五国的君主曾经采用连横之策谋划进攻赵国，把赵国的土地分成三份，盟约刻在盘盂一类的青铜器上，互相联合起来就在主客敬酒之间。
English: Once upon a time, the monarchs of the Five Kingdoms had planned to attack the State of Zhao using the strategy of liaison. The land of Zhao was divided into three parts, and the covenants were engraved on bronze vessels such as jars, and they united with each other between the host and guest toasts.

古文：五国之兵有日矣，韩乃西师以禁秦国，使秦发令素服而听，反温、枳、高平于魏，反三公、什清于赵，此王之明知也。
现代文：正当五国即将出兵的日子里，齐国却向西出兵制止秦国，使秦国废除称帝之令，穷上白色的凶服谢罪听令，把温地、枳地、高平归还给魏国，把三公、什清归还给赵国，这是君王清楚知道的。
English: At a time when the Five Kingdoms were about to send troops, the State of Qi sent troops to the west to stop the State of Qin, to make the State of Qin abrogate the order to proclaim the emperor, to make the emperors wear white robes and thank the emperor for obeying the order, to return the Warm Land, the Bad Land and Gaoping to the State of Wei, and to return the Three Kingdoms and Shiching to the State of Zhao. This was well known to the monarch.

古文：夫韩事赵宜正为上交；今乃以抵罪取伐，臣恐其后事王者之不敢自必也。
现代文：齐国事奉赵国，应该说是向上交往，如今却把这种交往抵偿罪责对它进攻，臣下害怕这以后事奉君王的人一定不敢与您交往了。
English: Since Qi served Zhao, it should be said that they had upward contacts, but now they have used this contact to offset the guilt of attacking it. The vassals are afraid that after this, those who serve the king will not dare to interact with you.

古文：今王收天下，必以王为得。
现代文：如今君王联合齐国，天下诸侯一定认为君王仁义。
English: Now that the monarchs have united and unified the country, the world's princes must think that the monarch is benevolent and righteous.

古文：韩危社稷以事王，天下必重王。
现代文：齐国就会拿整个国家来事奉君王，天下诸侯一定尊重君王。
English: The state of Qi will take the whole country to serve the king, and the princes of the world must respect the king.

古文：然则韩义王以天下就之，下至韩慕王以天下收之，是一世之命，制于王已。
现代文：这样、一来，那么齐国就会认为赵国仁义，君王凭借天下诸侯的拥护屈就齐国，处在下位的齐国一旦凶暴，君王就率领天下诸侯制止它，这就是一个时代的命运控制在君王手里了。
English: In this way, as a result, Qi would think that Zhao was benevolent and righteous, that the king would bend to Qi by virtue of the support of the princes of the world, and that once Qi, which was in the lower ranks, was violent, the king would lead the princes of the world to stop it. This is the fate of an era controlled by the king.

古文：臣愿大王深与左右群臣卒计而重谋，先事成虑而熟图之也。 
现代文：距下希望大玉和左右群臣一起深入详细地按我说的话谋划一下，在事情成功之前深繇熟虑一下是否有道理。 
English: From a distance, I hope that the big shot and the left and right ministers will work together to plan in depth and in detail according to what I said, and consider whether it makes sense before the matter is successful.

