古文：周朗，字义利，汝南安城人也。
现代文：周朗字，义利，汝南安成人。
English: Zhou Langzi, Yi Li, and Ru Nan'an are now adults.

古文：祖文，黄门侍郎。
现代文：祖父周文，官至黄门侍郎。
English: His grandfather, Zhou Wen, was a Yellow Gate Chamberlain.

古文：父淳，宋初贵达，官至侍中，太常。兄峤，尚高祖第四女宣城德公主。
现代文：父亲周淳。宋国建立后做了大官，曾任侍中兼太常，他的哥哥周峤，娶高祖武帝第四个女儿宣城公主。
English: His father, Zhou Jun, became a high-ranking official after the establishment of the Song Dynasty, and once served as an aide-de-camp to the emperor. His brother, Zhou Qi, married Emperor Gao Zuwu's fourth daughter, Princess Xuancheng.

古文：二女适建平王宏、庐江王祎。
现代文：周峤的两个女儿分别嫁给建平王刘宏和庐江王刘，周峤因为是皇室亲戚而做重要官职。
English: Zhou Yi's two daughters were married to King Liu Hong of Jianping and King Liu of Qianjiang, respectively. Zhou Yi held important official positions because he was a relative of the royal family.

古文：以贵戚显官，元嘉末，为吴兴太守。贼劭弑立，随王诞举义于会稽，劭加峤冠军将军，诞檄又至。
现代文：元嘉末年，周峤当了吴兴太守，元凶刘邵杀文帝自称皇帝时，隋王刘诞在会稽起义，刘邵任周峤为冠军将军。刘诞的檄文接着又到了。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhou Enlai became the de facto ruler of Wu Xing and the culprit Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen and claimed to be the emperor. The Sui King Liu Xing rebelled at the meeting, and Liu Shao appointed Zhou Enlai as the champion general. Liu Xing's obituary followed.

古文：峤素惧怯，回惑不知所从，为府司马丘珍孙所杀。
现代文：周峤一向胆小，迷惑犹豫，手足无措，被他府中的司马丘珍孙杀了。
English: Zhou Qi has always been timid, confused, hesitant, and helpless. He was killed by Sima Qiu's grandson in his government.

古文：朝庭明其本心，国婚如故。
现代文：朝廷体谅他的本意，继续和他家保持婚姻关系。
English: The imperial court understood his intention and continued to maintain a marital relationship with his family.

古文：朗少而爱奇，雅有风气，与峤志趋不同，峤甚疾之。初为南平王铄冠军行参军，太子舍人，司徒主簿，坐请急不待对，除名。又为江夏王义恭太尉参军。元嘉二十七年春，朝议当遣义恭出镇彭城，为北讨大统。
现代文：周朗在少年时便非常浪漫，风度潇洒，气度不凡，和他哥哥周峤志向不同，周峤非常嫉妒他，周朗最先当南平王刘铄冠军行参军，太子舍人，兼任主簿，因为休假不请示，被免官除名，接着他又当江夏王刘义恭太尉参军，元嘉二十七年春天，朝廷商议派刘义恭出外镇守彭城，作北伐统帅。
English: When he was a boy, Zhou Lang was very romantic, with a dashing demeanor and extraordinary temperament. His ambition was different from that of his brother Zhou Ye. Zhou Ye was very jealous of him. Zhou Lang first joined the army as the champion of the Nanping King Liu Ye. He was the prince's concubine and also served as the chief clerk. Because he did not ask for leave, he was removed from office and expelled. Then he joined the army as the second lieutenant of the Jiangxia King Liu Yigong. In the spring of the 27th year of the Yuan Jia, the imperial court negotiated and sent Liu Yigong out to guard Pengcheng

古文：朗闻之解职。
现代文：周朗听了这个消息，主动辞职。
English: After hearing this, Zhou Lang was relieved of his duties.

古文：及义恭出镇，府主簿羊希从行，与朗书戏之，劝令献奇进策。朗报书曰：
现代文：刘义恭出镇彭城，义恭府中主簿羊希跟着义恭一同赴任。羊希给周朗写了一封书信并嘲笑他，叫他为义恭出谋划策，周朗回信说：
English: Liu Yigong left the town of Pengcheng, and the chief bookkeeper of the Yigong Prefecture, Yang Xi, followed him to the post. Yang Xi wrote a letter to Zhou Lang and mocked him, asking him to come up with a plan for Yigong. Zhou Lang replied:

古文：羊生足下：岂当适使人进哉，何卿才之更茂也。
现代文：羊先生阁下：正遇着你叫我进取，想不到你才能有如此卓著。
English: His Excellency Mr. Yang: Just when I met you, I told you to be aggressive. I had no idea you could be so outstanding.

古文：宅生结意，可复佳耳，属华比彩，何更工邪！
现代文：你的好心好意，确实非常令人感动，丰富的词藻，华丽的句式，用得又何其轻巧。
English: Your kind heart and good intentions are indeed very touching. Your rich vocabulary and gorgeous sentences are so easy to use.

古文：视己反覆，慰亦无已。观诸纸上，方审卿复逢知己。动以何术，而能每降恩明，岂不为足下欣邪，然更忧不知卿死所处耳。
现代文：我已看了你的信几遍了，心中非常快慰，看你写的信的内容，才知道又遇到你这个知己，我有什么功德，而使你每每这么垂爱于我，我确实为你的好意而高兴得很，然而却担心你将来会在哪儿死掉呢？
English: I have read your letter several times, and it gives me great pleasure to read the content of your letter and to know that I have met you again, my friend. What merit do I have that makes you love me so much? I am indeed very happy for your kindness, but I am worried about where you will die in the future.

古文：夫匈奴之不诛有日，皇居之亡辱旧矣。
现代文：匈奴人有很长时间存在，汉人生活不安定也很久了。
English: The Xiongnu people have existed for a long time, and the Han people's life has been unstable for a long time.

古文：天下孰不愤心悲肠，以忿胡人之患，靡衣偷食，以望国家之师。
现代文：中国人谁不满心愤怒，憎恨胡人对中国的威胁，省衣节食希望汉族军队打过去。
English: Chinese people who are dissatisfied, angry, hate the Hu people's threat to China, and hope that the Han army will fight.

古文：自智士钳口，雄人蓄气，不得议图边之事者，良淹岁纪。
现代文：但是从有谋略的人保持沉默，军人压住复仇之心，不许人们论论外国之事的时候以来，已有很多年了。
English: But it has been many years since the time when wily men kept silent, and soldiers repressed the spirit of revenge, and did not allow people to talk about foreign affairs.

古文：今天子以炎、轩之德，冢辅以姬、吕之贤，故赫然发怒，将以匈奴衅旗，恻然动仁，欲使余氓被惠。
现代文：当今皇帝具有黄帝尧帝般的才德，宰相们有周公姜尚的贤明，所以勃然大怒，将杀匈奴人祭我们的军旗，同情心大发，想使北方人民免除异族的压迫。
English: Today's emperor has the talent of the Yellow Emperor, and the chancellors have the wisdom of Zhou Gong and Jiang Shang, so they are furious, will kill the Huns and sacrifice our military flag, and have great compassion, and want to free the northern people from the oppression of foreigners.

古文：及取士之令朝发，宰士暮登英豪；调兵之诏夕行，主公旦升雄俊。延贤人者，固非一日，况复加此焉。
现代文：征集人才的命令早晨发出，宰相们晚上便选用英雄豪杰，调动武艺高强之人。本朝历来选用贤人，况且现在这样的非常时期。
English: The order to recruit talents is issued in the morning, and the prime ministers select heroes and heroes in the evening, and mobilize people with strong martial arts. This dynasty has always selected wise men, and now is such an extraordinary time.

古文：夫天下之士，砥行磨名，欲不辱其志气；选奇蓄异，将进善于所天。
现代文：天下人士，不断地磨炼意志，努力练习艺业，想不负平生的志愿，官员们选拔奇才，把他们贡献给皇上。
English: People from all over the world are constantly honing their wills, working hard to practice their art, and trying to live up to their lifelong wishes. Officials select prodigies and offer them to the emperor.

古文：非但有建国之谋不及，安民之论不与，至反以孝洁生议于乡曲，忠烈起谤于君寀。身不絓王臣之箓，名不厕通人之班。颠倒国门，湮销丘里者，自数十年以往，岂一人哉！
现代文：但是这些人士却忘了国家的建设，农民安定的大问题；也有的人士因为自己的才德被乡绅所讥讽，或因自己的忠正而使自己受到皇上身边的奸佞的诽谤。以致永不能成为朝中大臣，不能成为当地名士，远离国门，埋没于田野之中，几十年以来，难道只一个吗？
English: But these people have forgotten the great problems of national construction and the stability of the peasantry; there are also people who have been ridiculed by the squire because of their talent, or have been slandered by the traitors around the emperor because of their loyalty. So that they can never become a minister of the Middle Kingdom, can not become a local celebrity, far from the gate of the country, buried in the fields, for decades, is there only one?

古文：若吾身无他伎，而出值明君，变官望主，岁增恩价，竟不能柔心饰带，取重左右。
现代文：至于我本身没有什么技能，但出来便遇着明君，不断希望主上为自己升官，年年得到非常好的宠待，却不能调养自己的性格，掩饰自己的好恶，让身边的人喜欢。
English: As for myself, I don't have any skills, but when I came out, I met Mingjun. I constantly hoped that the Lord would promote me, and I received very good favors year after year. However, I couldn't cultivate my character, hide my likes and dislikes, and make people around me like me.

古文：校于向士，则荣已多；料于今职，则笑亦广。
现代文：和那些不幸的人士相比，可谓荣华得多，但是和今天的通达之士相比，倒会被他们耻笑。
English: Compared to those unfortunates, they were far more glorious, but compared to today's intellectuals, they would be laughed at.

古文：而足下方复广吾以驰志之时，求予以安边之术，何足下不知言也。
现代文：但足下却希望我努力进取，叫我献出安边退敌的方略，阁下也太不知我的心理了。
English: But at the same time, they expect me to work hard and advance, and ask me to present a strategy for retreating from the enemy. You don't know my psychology.

古文：若以贤未登，则今之登贤如此；以才应进，则吾之非才若是。
现代文：如果说贤人还未选进，而今天又选进了这么多的贤人，认为人才应该有用武之地，而我又没有什么才能。
English: If the wise men have not yet been elected, and today so many wise men have been elected, it is believed that talent should be useful, and I have no talent.

古文：岂可欲以殒海之鬐，望鼓鳃于竖鳞之肆；坠风之羽，觊振翮于轩毳之间。其不能俱陪渌水，并负青天，可无待于明见。
现代文：怎么能叫落入大海的马鬃，在卖鱼虾的市场上去鼓动。随风飘动的羽毛，在华美的轩窗饰帘上优美地摇摆，它们不能背负渌水，飞越苍天，那是显而易见的。
English: How can they call for the horse mules that have fallen into the sea, and rouse them in the fish and shrimp market; the feathers that flutter in the wind, and sway gracefully on the ornate curtains of the pavilion; they cannot carry the rushing water and fly across the sky, that is obvious.

古文：若乃阙奇谋深智之术，无悦主狎俗之能，亦不可复稍为卿说。
现代文：如果既没有奇谋异术，又没有让皇上高兴，让臣民喜悦的能力，那就更不值得你的欣赏。
English: If you don't have the ability to conjure up a miracle, make the emperor happy, and make your subjects happy, then it's even less worthy of your appreciation.

古文：但观以上国再毁之臣，望府一逐之吏，当复是天下才否，此皆足下所亲知。
现代文：只因我这曾经被惩罚的小官，州府驱使的干部，再去成为国家需要的人才，这很清楚是不可能的。
English: Just because I am a petty official who has been punished, a cadre driven by the state government, to become a talent needed by the country, this is clearly impossible.

古文：吾虽疲冗，亦尝听君子之余论，岂敢忘之。
现代文：我虽然疲惫无能，也曾经听说过贤人们的评论，那就更不敢忘记了。
English: Although I am tired and incompetent, I have also heard the comments of wise people, so I dare not forget.

古文：凡士之置身有三耳：一则云户岫寝，栾危桂荣，秣芝浮霜，翦松沈雪，怜肌蓄髓，宝气爱魂，非但土石侯卿，腐鸩梁锦，实乃伫意天后，睨目羽人。
现代文：大凡士人处世有五种类型：第一种以白云作门窗，以山洞作寝室，修理香树，嗅赏桂花，吞食灵芝草，在霜上游走，采摘松果，在雪地中吟赏，仔细地保养肌肤，培精蓄气，注意呼吸，养怡精神，把王侯将相当做土石一般，把膏梁锦玉的生活当成有害的毒药，确实是与天地万物同呼吸，把神仙也当成平庸不足道的东西；第二种的则是竭心尽智，为国家而献计，在云台宫里议论，在未央宫中向皇上献策，指出皇上的不完善的地方，为千万大众作呼声。
English: There are five types of ordinary people in the world: the first one uses white clouds as doors and windows, caves as bedrooms, repairs incense trees, smells and appreciates osmanthus flowers, swallows reishi grass, swims in the frost, picks pine cones, appreciates in the snow, carefully maintains the skin, cultivates vitality, pays attention to breathing, and nurtures a pleasant spirit. The prince will be quite like earth and stone, regards the life of the prince as a harmful poison, and indeed breathes with all things in heaven and earth, and regards the immortal as a mediocre thing. The second one is to devote oneself to the country, discuss in the Yuntai Palace

古文：次则刳心扫智，剖命驱生，横议于云台之下，切辞于宣室之上，衍王德而批民患，进贞白而鸩奸猾，委玉入而齐声礼，揭金出而烹勍寇，使车轨一风，甸道共德，令功日济而己无迹，道日富而君难名，致诸侯敛手，天子改观。
现代文：推举坚贞正直的人，黜退奸邪狡猾之徒，到朝廷之上便使礼乐风行，到疆场上便杀敌擒王，使天下统一，四海同心。功勋卓著而自己不留名声，国家日益太平而皇上垂拱无为，使诸侯皆俯首称臣，皇上仁恩布于四海。
English: He promoted those who were steadfast and upright, repelled those who were treacherous, evil and cunning, promoted ceremonial music in the imperial court, killed the enemy warlord on the battlefield, unified the world, and united the four seas. He did not leave a reputation for his outstanding achievements. The country became more and more peaceful, but the emperor remained inactive. All the princes bowed their heads in homage to him, and the emperor bestowed his benevolence on the four seas.

古文：其末则餍台而出，望旃而入，结冤两宫之下，鼓袖六王之间，俯眉胁肩，言天下之道德，瞋目扼腕，陈从横于四海，理有泰则止而进，调觉迕则反而还，闲居违官，交造顿罢，捐慕遗忧，夷毁销誉，呼吸以补其气，缮嚼以辅其生。
现代文：第三种则每日饱食之后便上朝朝拜，看到宫门开了便进去，在两宫中间来来往往尽职守礼，口称尧舜汤文武的教训，俯首惶恐，胁肩进策，谈论仁义礼智的大道，慷慨陈词如何治理国家。被皇上采纳便不断进取，被否决便全身而退，在家闲居，远离官场，与人断绝往来，忘掉一切忧愁，不管别人赞扬与批评，每口吐故纳新练养气功，讲究饮食而希望长生不老。
English: The third type, after a full meal every day, goes to the imperial court to worship, sees the palace gate open and enters, and often comes and goes between the two palaces to perform his duties and observe the etiquette, saying that he learned the lessons of war, bowed his head in fear, shouldered the strategy, talked about the road of benevolence, righteousness, courtesy and wisdom, and made a generous speech on how to govern the country. If he was adopted by the emperor, he would continue to make progress, and if he was rejected, he would withdraw completely, stay at home, stay away from the officialdom, break off contacts with people, forget all sorrows, regardless of others'

古文：凡此三者，皆志士仁人之所行，非吾之所能也。
现代文：这三大类型，正是志士仁人所表现的几种，但不是我能做到的。
English: These three types are just a few of the ways that people with high moral values behave, but it's not something I can do.

古文：若吾幸病不及死，役不至身，蓬藜既满，方杜长者之辙；谷稼是谘，自绝世豪之顾。尘生床帷，苔积阶月，又檐中山木，时华月深，池上海草，岁荣日蔓。
现代文：至于我嘛，侥幸有病痛但不至死，劳役不降到我头上，以蓬蒿为门，杜绝与名人的交情，只顾种田耕地，和官吏不相往来，让床上堆满尘埃，让门前土阶长满青苔，任屋檐上的草木越长越高，池塘上的海草，越来越滋润茂壮。
English: As for me, I was lucky enough to have sickness but not death, labor service did not come down on my head, I used a canopy as a door, cut off friendships with celebrities, only cultivated fields, and did not interact with officials, let the bed be full of dust, let the steps in front of the door be covered with moss, let the plants on the eaves grow higher and higher, and the seagrasses on the pond become more and more moist and lush.

古文：且室间轩左，幸有陈书十箧，席隅奥右，颇得宿酒数壶。按弦拭徽，雠方校石，时复陈局露初，奠爵星晚，欢然不觉是羲、轩后也。
现代文：在厢房之中，幸好有旧书十箱，厨房角落，储藏陈年老酒几壶；不时弹弹琴，鼓鼓筝，研究药方异术，在傍晚下一盘棋，在月夜看看天星，怡然自得，几乎不落在羲皇帝时人的后面。
English: In the living room, fortunately, there are ten boxes of old books, in the kitchen corner, there are several jars of old wine stored; from time to time, play the piano, drum and kite, study herbal medicine, play a game of chess in the evening, look at the stars in the moonlit night, feel good, and almost do not fall behind the people in the time of Emperor Qian.

古文：近春田三顷，秋园五畦，若此无灾，山装可具。
现代文：在春天种几亩田，在秋天耕几块菜园，如果没有天灾，便算衣食丰足。
English: Plant a few mu of fields in spring, cultivate a few vegetable gardens in autumn, and if there is no natural disaster, you will have enough food and clothing.

古文：候振饮之罢，俟封勒之毕，当敬观邠、酆，萧寻伊、鄗，傍眺燕、陇，邪履辽、卫，覛我周之轸迹，吊他贤之忧天。
现代文：等待酒喝厌了，国家太平了，便想游一游关中，追迹洛阳和长安故址。再游到河北辽东，看看我中原的故疆旧土，凭吊古代先贤们的遗迹，体会他们的当年心态。
English: Tired of waiting for the wine to drink and the country to be peaceful, I want to take a tour of Guanzhong, trace the ancient sites of Luoyang and Chang'an, and then travel to Liaodong, Hebei Province, to see my old homeland in the Central Plains, admire the relics of the ancient sages, and experience their mentality of that year.

古文：当其少涉，未休此欲，但理实诡固，物好交加，或征势而笑其言，或观谋而害其意。
现代文：在我青年时代时，便有这些打算，但我的想法也许很奇异鄙陋；而人情喜欢攻击异端，或者因为他人的地位低下而讥笑他的所做所为，或者看到他好的谋划而嫉恨他。
English: In my youth I had these plans, but my thoughts may have been strange and mean; and human nature likes to attack the heretic, or to laugh at what he does because of his lowly position, or to hate him because of his good plans.

古文：夫杨硃以此，犹见嗤于梁人，况才减杨子之器，物甚魏君之意者哉！
现代文：杨朱在这样的时候，尚且被魏国人嘲讽，况且我辈不具备杨生那样的器识，而世人比魏国国民更加恶毒呢。
English: At such a time, Yang Zhu was still ridiculed by the Wei people, moreover, our generation does not have the same knowledge as Yang Sheng, and the world is more vicious than the Wei people.

古文：若如汉宗之言李广，此固许天下之有才，又知天下之时非也。岂若党巷闾里之间，忌见贞士之遭遇，便谓是臧获庸人之徒耳。士固愿呈心于其主，露奇于所归。卿相，末事也。若广者，何用侯为。至乃复有致谒于为乱之日，被讪于害正之徒，心奇而无由露，事直而变为枉，岂不痛哉！
现代文：至如说汉武帝谈到李广时，认为他是天下奇才，但知道他的才能不适合那个时代，况且乡党街巷中的人们，厌恶贞洁的正人君子的行为，说正人的举动是奴隶庸人的妄动，大丈夫本来都愿意向皇上表示忠诚，为国家出谋献计，卿相职务是一种没有价值的东西，像李广那样有才的人也不需要封侯，甚至还有被灾难袭击，被奸邪的人诽谤，有奇谋妙计而无法为人所知，为人正直而被冤枉，这些岂有不令人痛心！
English: For example, when Emperor Hanwu talked about Li Guang, he thought that he was the world's greatest genius, but he knew that his talent was not suitable for that era. Moreover, the people in the streets and lanes of the township party detested the behavior of the chaste upright gentleman, saying that the actions of the upright man were the actions of a slave, and they were all willing to show loyalty to the emperor and make efforts for the country. The position of the noble minister was a worthless thing. A talented person like Li Guang did not need to be imprisoned. He was even attacked by disasters and slandered by evil people. He had a wonderful plan that could not be known to others

古文：岂不痛哉！
现代文：怎么能不痛心！
English: How can I not be heartbroken!

古文：若足下可谓冠负日月，籍践渊海，心支身首，无不通照。
现代文：至于阁下，可以说是头顶日月脚踏苍海，心则自如地控制头和身体，无所不顺无所不到。
English: As for you, it can be said that the sun, the moon and the sea are at your feet above your head, while your heart controls your head and body freely, and everything goes smoothly.

古文：今复出入燕、河，交关姬、卫，整笏振豪，已议于帷筵之上，提鞭鸣剑，复呵于军场之间，身超每深恩之所集，心动必明主之所亮。
现代文：现在再到燕山的黄河那一带去，和周公召公类的人物相处，手握节杖，身穿高官的衣服，在帷幄宴会上高谈阔论，扬起指挥鞭，舞动军令剑，在部队中大声喊叫，每一举动都得到朝廷的奖励，每一计谋必然受到皇上的赞赏。
English: Now, let's go to the Yellow River area of Yanshan, and get along with Zhou Gongzhao's public figures, holding the scepter, wearing the clothes of high-ranking officials, talking loudly at the curtain banquet, raising the whip, dancing the military sword, and shouting loudly in the army. Every move is rewarded by the court, and every strategy is bound to be appreciated by the emperor.

古文：可不直议正身，辅人君之过误。明目张胆，谋军家之得失，操志勇之将，荐俊正之士，此乃足下之所以报也。
现代文：怎能不修正自己的行为贡献高明的计策，补充君主的不足，理直气壮，想出战争的处理办法，选择勇敢有为的将领，推荐超群正直的士人，这是阁下应该回报国家的。
English: How can you not correct your own behavior, contribute clever strategies, supplement the shortcomings of the monarch, be forthright, come up with ways to deal with war, select brave and effective generals, and recommend outstandingly honest statesmen. This is what you should return to the country.

古文：不尔，便擐甲修戈，徘徊左右，卫君王之身，当马首之镝，关必固之垒，交死进之战，使身分而主豫，寇灭而兵全，此亦报之次也。
现代文：如果做不到这点，便应该披坚执锐，紧紧追随国王左右，保护皇帝的安全，作军队盾牌，加固军营防守，在战斗中奋勇冲杀，使自己牺牲而主上安逸，敌人消灭而我军保全，这也是第二等的报效。
English: If you can't do this, you should put on a tough and persistent attitude, closely follow the king around, protect the safety of the emperor, serve as a shield for the army, strengthen the defense of the military camp, fight bravely in the battle, sacrifice yourself and be at ease, destroy the enemy and preserve our army, which is also a second-class reward.

古文：如是，则系匈奴于北阙无日矣。
现代文：如果做到这样，那么捉拿匈奴胡人不久便可以实现了。
English: If this is done, then the capture of the Huns and Huns will soon be achieved.

古文：亡但默默，窥宠而坐。
现代文：而不应默不作声，获取宠遇而无所事事。
English: Instead, they should not be silent, get favors and do nothing.

古文：谓子有心，敢书薄意。
现代文：你是有心人，这里我谈出这些心中想法。
English: You are a man of the heart, and here I speak these thoughts from the heart.

古文：朗之辞意倜傥，类皆如此。
现代文：周朗的文辞意趣非常潇洒不羁，大抵都是这样的。
English: Zhou Lang's literary taste is very cool and uninhibited, mostly like this.

古文：复起为通直郎。
现代文：他再被任命作通直郎。
English: He was reappointed as Tsunenairo.

古文：世祖即位，除建平王宏中军录事参军。
现代文：世祖当上皇帝，被调为建平王刘宏中军录事参军。
English: When Shizu became emperor, he was transferred to join the army of Liu Hong, the king of Jianping.

古文：时普责百官谠言，朗上书曰：
现代文：当时孝武帝要求朝中每个臣子抒发自己的意见。周朗又上书说：
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu asked every vassal in the court to express their opinions. Zhou Lang also wrote:

古文：昔仲尼有言： 治天下若寘诸掌。 
现代文：当年孔子曾经说过： 治理天下好比把它放在手掌心上。 
English: Back then, Confucius once said: "Governing the world is like holding it in the palm of your hand."

古文：岂徒言哉！
现代文：这岂只是大话呢！
English: Is this just a tall tale?

古文：方策之政，息举在人，盖当世之君不为之耳。
现代文：正确的政策，在于人们的运用与否，只是当时的国王们不愿做罢了。
English: The correct policy lies in whether people use it or not, but the kings of the time were unwilling to do so.

古文：况乃运钟浇暮，世膺乱余，重以宫庙遭不更之酷，江服被未有之痛，千里连死，万井共泣。
现代文：况且当今世风日下，混乱不堪，再加上国家遭到叛军的困扰，江东碰上空前的浩劫，千里之间，死人如山，万村哭诉。
English: Moreover, today's world is in a downward spiral, chaos is unbearable, coupled with the country being plagued by rebels, the East River has encountered unprecedented havoc, thousands of miles, dead people are like mountains, villages are crying.

古文：而秦、汉余敝，尚行于今，魏、晋遗谬，犹布于民，是而望国安于今，化崇于古，却行及前之言，积薪待然之譬，臣不知所以方。
现代文：而秦汉以来的各种弊端，还在社会上流行，魏晋留下的荒唐现象还在人民中充斥，这样而希望国家安宁，教化超过古代，好比向后走而想到前方，堆积干柴于烈火之上，我不知道是不是有比这更恰当的比喻。
English: But all kinds of evils since the Qin and Han dynasties are still prevalent in society, and the absurd phenomena left behind by the Wei and Jin dynasties are still rife among the people. To hope for national tranquility and enlightenment beyond the ancient times in this way is like walking backwards while thinking ahead, and piling up dry wood on a blazing fire. I don't know if there is a more appropriate metaphor than this.

古文：然陛下既基之以孝，又申之以仁，民所疾苦，敢不略荐。
现代文：但皇上天生有孝心，又加上无比善良，对于人民的疾苦，我怎么敢不粗略地陈述。
English: But the Emperor was born with filial piety, coupled with incomparable kindness, and how dare I not make a cursory statement about the suffering of the people.

古文：凡治者何哉？
现代文：凡是治国用什么办法呢？
English: What are the usual methods of governing a country?

古文：为教而已。
现代文：用教育而已。
English: It's all about education.

古文：今教衰已久，民不知则，又随以刑逐之，岂为政之道欤！
现代文：现在教育事业已削弱了很长时间，人民不知道向谁学习，犯了错误只用刑罚来对付，这难道是治民的方法吗？
English: Now that the educational cause has been weakened for a long time, the people do not know from whom to learn, and when mistakes are made, they are only dealt with by punishment. Is this a method of governing the people?

古文：欲为教者，宜二十五家选一长，百家置一师，男子十三至十七，皆令学经；十八至二十，尽使修武。
现代文：想恢复教育工作，应该二十五家选出一个负责的人，一百家中设立一个教师。男孩子十三岁到十七岁都叫他们去学习经书；十八岁到二十五岁都叫他们去训练武艺。
English: If they want to resume the work of education, 25 families should elect a person in charge, and 100 families should appoint a teacher. Boys between the ages of 13 and 17 should be asked to study the scriptures, and those between the ages of 18 and 25 should be asked to train in martial arts.

古文：训以书记图律，忠孝仁义之礼，廉让勤恭之则；授以兵经战略，军部舟骑之容，挽强击刺之法。
现代文：用写字、作文、天文、律令、忠诚、孝顺、仁善、道义等教育他们，教育他们廉洁、谦让、勤劳、恭谨。教育他们兵法和谋略，部队的行止、步兵骑兵的训练方法，以及射箭格斗的技巧。
English: Educate them in writing, composition, astronomy, law, loyalty, filial piety, benevolence, morality, etc. Educate them to be honest, humble, diligent, and respectful. Educate them in military tactics and strategies, troop behavior, infantry and cavalry training methods, and archery fighting skills.

古文：官长皆月至学所，以课其能。
现代文：各地长官每月到学堂，检查他们的进展情况。
English: District superintendents visit the schools monthly to check on their progress.

古文：习经者五年有立，则言之司徒；用武者三年善艺，亦升之司马。
现代文：学习经书五年之后有效果的应推荐给司徒府，习武三年后有效的，送他们到 军事部门 ，如经过七年而不熟悉经书，经过五年而武艺不足，便再考。
English: Those who are effective after five years of studying scriptures should be recommended to the Stutthof, and those who are effective after three years of martial arts should be sent to the military department. If they are not familiar with scriptures after seven years, and martial arts are insufficient after five years, they should retake the examination.

古文：若七年而经不明，五年而勇不达，则更求其言政置谋，迹其心术行履，复不足取者，虽公卿子孙，长归农亩，终身不得为吏。其国学则宜详考占数，部定子史，令书不烦行，习无糜力。
现代文：看他的言论和谋略，看他的心术，行为表现，没有用处的，即使是三公九卿的子弟，也得放归农田，一辈子不许做官。至于太学则应搜集各种书籍，编排诸子和历史书籍，使各种书井然有序、一目了然，学习起来不浪费精力。
English: It is of no use to look at his words and stratagems, his mind tricks, and his behavior. Even if he is the son of three princes and nine queens, he must be released to farmland and not allowed to be an official for the rest of his life. As for learning, he should collect all kinds of books, arrange his children and history books, so that all kinds of books are well-ordered and clear at a glance, and do not waste energy when learning.

古文：凡学，虽凶荒不宜废也。
现代文：教育，即使是凶年荒年也不应荒废的。
English: Education, even in the worst of times, should not be wasted.

古文：农桑者，实民之命，为国之本，有一不足，则礼节不兴。
现代文：农业，是人民赖以生存的根本，是国家存在的基础。这个地方没搞好，那么礼乐便不能运行。
English: Agriculture is the basis of the people's survival and the foundation of the country's existence. If this area is not well managed, then the ritual music cannot function.

古文：若重之，宜罢金钱，以谷帛为赏罚。
现代文：如果重视它，应该不用黄金银钱，用谷子和布帛作为赏罚的手段。
English: If you value it, you should not use gold and silver, but use grain and cloth as a means of reward and punishment.

古文：然愚民不达其权，议者好增其异。
现代文：但是愚昧的百姓不知道它的功用、献策的人喜欢提出不同的意见。
English: But the ignorant people do not know its function, and those who offer suggestions like to put forward different opinions.

古文：凡自淮以北，万匹为市；从江以南，千斛为货，亦不患其难也。
现代文：在淮河以北地区，有一万匹布便可以成为集市，在长江以南，一千斛谷子则可以成为货物，也不用担心有什么不方便的。
English: In areas north of the Huai River, ten thousand pieces of cloth can become a bazaar, and south of the Yangtze River, a thousand stalks of millet can become goods, and there is no need to worry about anything inconvenient.

古文：今且听市至千钱以还者用钱，余皆用绢布及米，其不中度者坐之。
现代文：现在应该允许集市到一千钱以下的可以用钱，其余的都用丝绢布匹和大米作交易，其中米布不合格的予以惩罚。
English: Now, it should be allowed that those who have less than a thousand money in the bazaar can use money, and the rest should use silk cloth and rice to trade, and those whose rice cloth is not qualified should be punished.

古文：如此，则垦田自广，民资必繁，盗铸者罢，人死必息。
现代文：如果做到这样，那么农田的开垦便会自行发动，人民的物资必然丰富，暗中造钱的人必定减少，人民遇到死亡的事不再发生。
English: If this is done, then the reclamation of farmland will start on its own, the people's materials will inevitably be rich, the people who secretly make money will certainly decrease, and the people will no longer encounter death.

古文：又田非疁水，皆播麦菽，地堪滋养，悉艺珝麻，廕巷缘籓，必树桑柘，列庭接宇，唯植竹栗。
现代文：凡田不属于多水的地方，都种上麦粟。
English: All fields, except those with abundant water, are planted with poppy.

古文：若此令既行，而善其事者，庶民则叙之以爵，有司亦从而加赏。
现代文：土地上凡有肥料营养的地方，都栽上麻苗。街头巷尾、屋檐路边必须栽上桑树，庭院园地只种竹子板栗。如果这个政策得以实行，凡是做得很好的百姓，则用官爵进行奖励，有关部门也加以赏赐。
English: Wherever there is fertilizer and nutrients on the land, hemp seedlings are planted. Mulberry trees must be planted at the end of streets and at the edges of roofs, and only bamboo and chestnuts are planted in courtyards. If this policy is implemented, all the people who have done well will be rewarded with official titles, and the relevant departments will also reward them.

古文：若田在草间，木物不植，则挞之而伐其余树，在所以次坐之。
现代文：如果田中长满野草，不种树木，便鞭打此人而砍掉其余的树，各地灵活实行不同的罚惩政策。
English: If the field is overgrown with weeds and no trees are planted, the person will be whipped and the rest of the trees will be cut down, and different punishment policies will be flexibly implemented in different regions.

古文：又取税之法，宜计人为输，不应以赀。
现代文：收税的方法，应按人口征收，而不应该按财产。
English: The method of collecting taxes should be based on population, not on property.

古文：云何使富者不尽，贫者不蠲。
现代文：说什么使富人不增加财富，穷人不减少损失。
English: What prevents the rich from increasing their wealth and the poor from decreasing their losses?

古文：乃令桑长一尺，围以为价，田进一亩，度以为钱，屋不得瓦，皆责赀实。
现代文：以至让桑树增长一尺，便计算其中的价值，田地增进一亩，便算出值多少钱，房屋不能增添砖瓦，否则便算成财产。
English: For example, if a mulberry tree grows by one foot, its value will be calculated. If a field grows by one mu, its value will be calculated. If a house cannot add bricks and tiles, it will be counted as property.

古文：民以此，树不敢种，土畏妄垦，栋焚榱露，不敢加泥。
现代文：百姓因为这，不敢种树，人们怕开垦新的土地，屋梁被烧，屋脊裸露，也不敢加以修饰。
English: Because of this, people do not dare to plant trees, people are afraid to reclaim new land, roof beams are burned, roof ridges are exposed, and they dare not decorate them.

古文：岂有剥善害民，禁衣恶食，若此苦者。
现代文：怎么能这样禁锢好东西损害人民，禁止人民增加衣服，提倡人们艰苦的生活，以至到达今天这样痛苦的地步。
English: How is it possible to harm the people by restricting the good things, prohibiting the people from increasing their clothing, and advocating the hard life of the people, so as to reach such a painful point today?

古文：方今若重斯农，则宜务削兹法。
现代文：当今如果重新重视农业，便必须去除去这些税法。
English: Today, if there is to be a renewed focus on agriculture, these tax laws must be removed.

古文：凡为国，不患威之不立，患恩之不下；不患土之不广，患民之不育。
现代文：凡是治国，不怕威严不能建立，只怕恩惠不能施予。不怕土地不广阔，只怕人民不增加。
English: When governing a country, there is no fear of not being able to establish majesty, only fear of not being able to grant favors. There is no fear of the land not being vast, only fear of the people not increasing.

古文：自华、夷争杀，戎、夏竞威，破国则积尸竟邑，屠将则覆军满野，海内遗生，盖不余半。
现代文：自从汉人胡人相互厮杀，中国外国相互斗争以来，消灭一个国家则尸体堆积满城，屠杀一个敌方的将军则尸横遍野，天下留下的人民，大概还不到一半。
English: Since the Han and Hu people fought each other and the Chinese and foreign countries fought each other, the bodies piled up in the city when a country was destroyed, and the bodies of a general who killed an enemy were scattered all over the countryside, the people left in the world are probably less than half.

古文：重以急政严刑，天灾岁疫，贫者但供吏，死者弗望霾，鳏居有不愿娶，生子每不敢举。
现代文：加上刻薄的政策，残酷的刑罚，年年有天灾，岁岁有瘟疫，穷人仅能勉强维持生命，死的人不能埋葬，鳏夫有不愿娶妻子的，生了儿子每每不愿保留。
English: In addition, there are harsh policies, cruel punishments, natural disasters every year, plagues every year, the poor can only barely sustain their lives, the dead cannot be buried, the widower does not want to marry his wife, and when he has a son, he does not want to keep him.

古文：又戍淹徭久，妻老嗣绝，及淫奔所孕，皆复不收。是杀人之日有数途，生人之岁无一理，不知复百年间，将尽以草木为世邪？
现代文：另外到边疆戍守时间长久，妻子已老，后嗣不存，私奔生的儿子，却不再收养，这是杀人的道路，每日有几条，增加人口每年没什么计划，如果再经过百来年，难道会全部让草木当这世界的主人吗？
English: In addition, to the frontier to stay for a long time, the wife is old, the heirs do not exist, the son who ran away, but no longer adopt, this is a murderous road, there are several every day, there is no plan to increase the population every year, if it takes another hundred years, will they all let the plants be the masters of this world?

古文：此最是惊心悲魂恸哭太息者。
现代文：这是最令人震惊、悲痛、哭泣的地方。
English: It's the most shocking, heartbreaking, tear-jerking place.

古文：法虽有禁杀子之科，设蚤娶之令，然触刑罪，忍悼痛而为之，岂不有酷甚处邪！
现代文：法令当然有禁止杀儿子的条目，和早娶的规定，然而人们触犯法律、忍心而这样做的，难道不是生活中有更甚于被惩罚的悲惨境况吗？
English: Of course, there are articles in the law prohibiting the killing of sons, and provisions for early marriage, but people break the law and do so with forbearance. Isn't there more to life than the misery of being punished?

古文：今宜家宽其役，户减其税。女子十五不嫁，家人坐之。
现代文：当今应该每家减轻劳役、每家减免税收、女子到十五不出嫁，家长应受惩处。
English: Today, labor service should be reduced for every family, taxes should be reduced or exempted for every family, women should not marry before the age of 15, and parents should be punished.

古文：特雉可以娉妻妾，大布可以事舅姑，若待足而行，则有司加纠。
现代文：大野鸡羽毛可以作为聘用妻妾的礼物，大块布匹可以作为出嫁的妆奁，如果等到礼物充足才聘娶，有关部门应该加以纠正。
English: A large pheasant feather can be used as a gift for hiring a wife and concubine, and a large piece of cloth can be used as a wedding makeup. If you wait until the gift is sufficient to hire and marry, the relevant departments should be corrected.

古文：凡宫中女隶，必择不复字者。庶家内役，皆令各有所配。要使天下不得有终独之生，无子之老。
现代文：凡是宫中服务的宫女，必须挑出那些不再出嫁的人，百姓家的奴仆，也应让他们每人都有家室，总之是使天下人不再有一辈子独身的和没有儿子的老人。
English: All maids of honor who serve in the palace must select those who will no longer marry, and the servants of the common people should also let them each have a family, in short, so that the world will no longer have a lifetime of single and sonless old men.

古文：所谓十年存育，十年教训，如此，则二十年间，长户胜兵，必数倍矣。
现代文：真是俗称的十年养育，这样二十年过去，每户不断的生长新的人口，能出任兵役的人，必然比过去多好几倍。
English: It is really the so-called ten years of upbringing, so that in the past twenty years, with the continuous growth of the new population in each household, the number of people who can serve in the military service must be several times more than in the past.

古文：又亡者乱郊，馑人盈甸，皆是不为其存计，而任之迁流，故饥寒一至，慈母不能保其子，欲其不为寇盗，岂可得邪？
现代文：另外，逃亡的人骚扰京郊，饥饿的人充满京城，却不为他们作考虑，而任他们迁移无常，所以饥饿和寒冷到来，慈母不能保管儿子，希望这些人不当强盗不当亡命徒，怎么做得到呢？
English: In addition, fugitives harass the suburbs of Beijing, starving people fill the capital, but do not consider them, and let them migrate impermanently, so hunger and cold come, a loving mother can not keep her son, hoping that these people are not robbers and not fugitives, how to get it?

古文：既御之使然，复止之以杀，彼于有司，何酷至是！
现代文：既然先这样对待他们，再用屠杀对付他们，有关法律部门，对他们又何其狠毒。
English: If this is how they are treated before they are killed, how cruel the relevant legal departments are to them.

古文：且草树既死，皮叶皆枯，是其梁肉尽矣。
现代文：况且草树已死，树皮树叶都已枯蒿，这时他们的吃的东西可能都完了。
English: What's more, by the time the grass and trees are dead and the bark and leaves have withered, they may have run out of things to eat.

古文：冰霜已厚，苫盖难资，是其衣裘败矣。比至阳春，生其余几。
现代文：冰霜降得很厚，干草房屋瓦缝不易找到，这是他们缺少衣服的时候，到了阳春三月，还有几个人能活？
English: The frost fell thickly, and it was not easy to find the hay house tile seams. This was when they lacked clothes. In the spring and spring in March, how many people could live?

古文：今自江以南，在所皆穰，有食之处，须官兴役，宜募远近能食五十口一年者，赏爵一级。
现代文：现在从长江以南到处闹饥荒，有饭吃的地方，政府必须督促管理，应该赏赐那些每年能养活五十个流民的人，增加他一级爵位。
English: Now, from the south of the Yangtze River, famine is raging everywhere. Where there is food to eat, the government must supervise and manage. Those who can feed fifty displaced people each year should be rewarded and given a first-class knighthood.

古文：不过千家，故近食十万口矣。
现代文：这样的人达到一千家，便可以救活十万人。
English: If there are a thousand such people, they can save the lives of a hundred thousand people.

古文：使其受食者，悉令就佃淮南，多其长帅，给其粮种。凡公私游手，岁发佐农，令堤湖尽修，原陆并起。
现代文：叫其中接受他人救济的人，成为救护者的部属，使救护者供应他们粮食和谷种，以后叫他们全部到淮南去当佃农，凡是公家私家那些游手好闲的人，每年征调他们帮助农民，让崩坏的湖堤全部得到修理，平原陆地都派上用场。
English: Let the recipients of other people's relief become the subordinates of the rescuers, let the rescuers supply them with grain and cereals, and then let them all go to Huainan to be tenant farmers. All the idlers, both public and private, should be conscripted every year to help farmers, so that all the broken lake dikes can be repaired, and the plains and land can be put to good use.

古文：仍量家立社，计地设闾，检其出入，督其游惰。
现代文：还根据户口数目建立村社，计算田地多少，设置基层单位，检查人员的进出，监督那些游荡而懒惰的人。
English: They also set up village societies according to the number of household accounts, calculate the number of fields, set up grassroots units, check the entry and exit of personnel, and supervise those who wander and are lazy.

古文：须待大熟，可移之复旧。
现代文：等待丰收之年，让他们迁移到故乡去。
English: Waiting for the year of the harvest, let them migrate to their hometowns.

古文：淮以北悉使南过江，东旅客尽令西归。
现代文：淮河以北让他们全部渡江南归，东方流民全部叫他们回到西边。
English: North of the Huaihe River, let them all cross the river to the south and return, and all the eastern refugees told them to return to the west.

古文：故毒之在体，必割其缓处，函、渭灵区，阒为荒窟，伊、洛神基，蔚成茂草，岂可不怀欤？
现代文：所以毒患在身体上，必须先割去缓和的地方，函谷关和渭河那般灵秀地方，已暗然成为荒凉的濯濯童山。伊水洛阳一带神圣土地，已长成丰茂的草原。这些地方难道不值得思念？
English: Therefore, the poison in the body must first be removed from the areas that need to be alleviated. Such beautiful places as Hanzhouguan and Luohe have secretly become desolate mountains. The sacred land around Yishui Luoyang has grown into lush grasslands. Aren't these places worth thinking about?

古文：历下、泗间，何足独恋。
现代文：何必只关心这样小的一些地方。
English: Why care about such small places?

古文：议者必以为胡衰不足避，而不知我之病甚于胡矣！
现代文：历下泗水流域，献计的人认为胡人已衰落不需退避，但不知我们的困难更甚于胡人。
English: After experiencing the lower Ershui basin, the contributors believe that the Hu people have declined and do not need to retreat, but they do not know that our difficulties are even greater than the Hu people.

古文：若谓民之既徙，狄必就之，若其来从，我之愿也。
现代文：如果认为人民迁移以后，胡人必然迁进去，如果他们靠近我们，正是我们希望的。
English: If it is believed that after the migration of the people, the Hu people will inevitably move in, if they are close to us, that is what we hope.

古文：胡若能来，必非其种，不过山东杂汉，则是国家由来所欲覆育。
现代文：胡人如果能南迁，必定不是真正的胡人。不过是中原的各种汉族人民，他们正是我国一向希望保护的。
English: If the Hu people can move south, they must not be true Hu people, but various Han people in the Central Plains, who are exactly what our country has always wanted to protect.

古文：既华得坐实，戎空自远，其为来，利固善也。
现代文：既然汉人前去居住其间，北方地区必然空虚无人居住。
English: Since the Han Chinese went to live there, the northern region must be empty and uninhabited.

古文：今空守孤城，徒费财役，亦行见淮北必非境服有矣，不亦重辱丧哉！
现代文：他们南迁，徒然耗费财力物力，不久便可以看到淮北地区仍然从我们手中失落，这难道不是再一次受辱吗？
English: Isn't it another humiliation for them to move to the south, waste money and material resources, and soon see that the Huaibei region is still lost to us?

古文：使虏但发轻骑三千，更互出入，春来犯麦，秋至侵禾，水陆漕输，居然复绝。于贼不劳，而边已困，不至二年，卒散民尽，可蹻足而待也。
现代文：叫敌人只调轻快骑兵三千人交替出入，春天来践踏麦苗，秋天来侵踏谷禾，那么我们的水陆运输，必然会重新断绝，对于敌人是不疲劳的，但我们的边防已很困难，不出二年，兵败退归人民逃散。这是可以跷足等待的。
English: Let the enemy only dispatch three thousand light cavalry to enter and leave alternately, trample the wheat seedlings in spring and invade the grain in autumn, then our land and water transportation will inevitably be cut off again. It is not tiring for the enemy, but our border defense is already very difficult. In less than two years, the defeated soldiers will return to the people to flee and disperse. This can be waited for.

古文：设使胡灭，则中州必有兴者，决不能有奉土地、率民人以归国家矣。
现代文：即使胡人消灭，而中原地区必然有继续居住的人群。这时不会有奉献土地、率领人民来投奔我国的。
English: Even if the Hu people were to disappear, there would still be people living in the Central Plains. At that time, there would be no need to dedicate land and lead people to our country.

古文：诚如此，则徐、齐终逼，亦不可守。
现代文：如果这样的话，那么徐州山东一带终会被夺去，这也是不可不防的。
English: If this is the case, then the Xuzhou-Shandong area will eventually be taken away, which is inevitable.

古文：且夫战守之法，当恃人之不敢攻。
现代文：况且进攻和防守的方法，唯一可以依靠的是敌人对我们不能攻击。
English: Moreover, the only thing we can rely on in our offensive and defensive methods is that the enemy cannot attack us.

古文：顷年兵之所以败，皆反此也。
现代文：近年来我国出师之所以失败，则是背离这一方法的。
English: In recent years, the reason for the failure of our country to send instructors is the departure from this method.

古文：今人知不以羊追狼，蟹捕鼠，而令重车弱卒，与肥马悍胡相逐，其不能济，固宜矣。
现代文：有常识的人都知道不用羊来追狼、螃蟹捉老鼠，而我们却让笨重的车、疲弱的士兵和骠壮的骏马、勇悍的胡人相驰逐，不能取得胜利，那是理所当然的。
English: People of common sense know that we do not need sheep to chase wolves, crabs to catch mice, but we let heavy vehicles, weak soldiers and strong horses, and brave men chase each other, and cannot win, that is a matter of course.

古文：汉之中年能事胡者，以马多也；胡之后服汉者，亦以马少也。
现代文：西汉中期之所以能进攻匈奴，是因为马匹特别的多，匈奴之所以顺从汉人，也是因为马少的原因。
English: The reason why the Western Han Dynasty was able to attack the Xiongnu in the mid-period was because there were so many horses. The reason why the Xiongnu obeyed the Han people was also because there were few horses.

古文：既兵不可去，车骑应蓄。
现代文：既然未来战争不能回避，兵车马匹应该准备。
English: Since future wars cannot be avoided, chariots and horses should be prepared.

古文：今宜募天下使养马一匹者，蠲一人役。三匹者，除一人为吏。
现代文：现在应该鼓励国人积极养马，养一匹的，免除一人的劳役，三匹的，任用一人做官。
English: Now it is time to encourage the Chinese people to actively raise horses. If you raise one horse, you can exempt one person from labor service, and if you raise three horses, you can appoint one person as an official.

古文：自此以进，阶赏有差，边亭徼驿，一无发动。
现代文：从此以往，赏赐有规定，边界驿站房屋中的马也不许调动。
English: Since then, there has been a stipulation that horses in border station houses are not allowed to be moved.

古文：又将者，将求其死也。
现代文：对将帅，人们希望他们不怕死。
English: For the generals, one hopes that they are not afraid to die.

古文：自能执干戈，幸而不亡，筋力尽于戎役，其于望上者，固已深矣。
现代文：对于能手持长矛大戟侥幸不死，在军务中消耗自己精力的将帅们，他们想得到上司的赏赐，一向希望极大。
English: For generals who can hold a spear in their hands and are lucky enough not to die, and who expend their energy in military affairs, they have always had great hopes of being rewarded by their superiors.

古文：重有澄风扫雾之勤，驱波涤尘之力，此所自矜，尤复为甚。
现代文：如果更立有扫荡敌人、打败敌人的功勋，这使他们的骄傲更有资本。
English: If they have the merit of sweeping the enemy and defeating the enemy, this will make their pride more capital.

古文：近所功赏，人知其浓，然似颇谬虚实，怨怒实众。
现代文：近来的赏赐，人们知道比较优厚，然而听说相当不合标准有怨气的很多。
English: Recent awards are known to be generous, but many are said to be quite substandard and have been the subject of complaints.

古文：垂臂而反脣者，往往为部，耦语而呼望者，处处成群。
现代文：垂手而立口中怨言的，往往成群，在一起相互议论而不满足的，往往成队。
English: Those who complain with outstretched hands are often in groups, and those who are dissatisfied with talking to each other are often in groups.

古文：凡武人意气，特易崩沮，设一旦有变，则向之怨者皆为敌也。
现代文：凡是军队的心性，极容易沮丧崩溃，如果一旦有变，那么先前心怀怨恨的人便反而成为敌人了。
English: The mentality of any army is very prone to frustration and collapse, and if there is a change, then those who previously harbored resentment will become enemies instead.

古文：今宜国财与之共竭，府粟与之同罄，去者应遣，浓加宠爵，发所在禄之，将秩未充，余费宜阙，他事负辇，长不应与，唯可教以搜狩之礼，习以钲鼓之节。
现代文：现今应该和他们共享国家财物，府中积蓄也让他们分到一份，离开部队的人应该用钱财遣送他们，对他们厚加宠待，叫他们住居地方的长官对他们给予录用，将领的俸禄还未满数，国家其余的费用应该少用一些，其他的用度不足，也不应予以满足。然后用狩猎的礼节教诲他们，用征战击鼓的方法训练他们。
English: Now, they should share the national wealth with them, and they should also get a share of the central government's savings. Those who leave the army should send them with money and wealth, treat them generously, and ask the local officials where they live to recruit them. The generals' salaries are not yet full, and the rest of the country's expenses should be used less. Other expenses are insufficient and should not be met. Then, teach them the etiquette of hunting, and train them with the method of recruiting drums.

古文：若假勇以进，务黜其身。老至而罢，赏延于嗣。
现代文：如果恃勇而冒进的，应该予以黜退，到老了便让他们退休，赏赐的恩惠，遍及他们的后嗣。
English: If any are bold and enter, let them be turned back, and when they are old let them retire, and let their heirs inherit the bounty.

古文：又缘淮城垒，皆宜兴复，使烽鼓相达，兵食相连。若边民请师，皆宜莫许。远夷贡至，止于报答，语以国家之未暇，示以何事而非君。
现代文：另外沿淮河的堡垒，都应该修复，使烽火台相望，鼓声相互能听到，军队之间相互联系，如果边民请求出兵，应该一律不允许，远方的少数民族前来贡献，只简略地报答一下，告诉他们我国还有很多事，哪里没有国君侍候？
English: In addition, the fortresses along the Huai River should be repaired, so that the campfires can be seen from each other, the drums can be heard from each other, and the armies can communicate with each other. If the border people request to send troops, they should not be allowed at all. Ethnic minorities from far away should come to contribute, only briefly reciprocate, and tell them that there are still many things in our country. Where is there no sovereign to wait for?

古文：须内教既立，徐料寇形，办骑卒四十万，而国中不扰，取谷支二十岁，而远邑不惊，然后越淮穷河，跨陇出漠，亦何适而不可。
现代文：必须等待内部政治稳定军力充足之后，再慢慢地观察敌情，准备好步兵骑兵四十万，使国内不受到困难的侵扰，储藏好二十年的粮食，而远方响应我们的地区也不受到侵扰，然后越过淮河，前指黄河，跨据陇右，出击大漠，那时要到哪里都不是随意呢！
English: We must wait for internal political stability and sufficient military strength, then slowly observe the enemy situation, prepare 400,000 infantry and cavalry, so that the country will not be disturbed by difficulties, store grain for 20 years, and the distant regions will not be disturbed, and then cross the Huaihe River, point to the Yellow River, cross the right bank of the Yangtze River, and attack the desert. At that time, it is not arbitrary to go anywhere!

古文：又教之不敦，一至于是。
现代文：教化很不敦厚纯朴已到了很差的地步。
English: Indoctrination is very poor, and simplicity has reached a very low level.

古文：今士大夫以下，父母在而兄弟异计，十家而七矣。
现代文：当今士大夫以下，父母尚在而兄弟分家，十户中有七户。
English: Today, seven out of ten households have parents who are still alive and brothers who have split up.

古文：庶人父子殊产，亦八家而五矣。
现代文：老百姓父子分居，也八家中有五家的。
English: Among the common people, father and son live separately, and five out of eight families are divorced.

古文：凡甚者，乃危亡不相知，饥寒不相恤，又嫉谤谗害，其间不可称数。
现代文：尤其严重的是，对方陷于危险困苦之中却不知道，简直不可胜数。
English: What is especially serious is that the other party is in danger and distress but does not know it. There are simply too many.

古文：宜明其禁，以革其风，先有善于家者，即务其赏；自今不改，则没其财。
现代文：应该明确地禁止这些，以改革当今风气，先有在家人中做好事的，便必须奖赏。从今以后不改正的，便没收他的一切财产。
English: These should be expressly forbidden, in order to reform the present-day customs, first of all, to do good in the family must be rewarded, and from now on, if he does not correct himself, all his property will be confiscated.

古文：又三年之丧，天下之达丧，以其哀并衷出，故制同外兴；日久均痛，故愈迟齐典。
现代文：三年为父母守孝，是古今通用的制度。因为悲哀是真诚发生的，所以制定外在的规矩，时间一久便成习惯，所以规定很长时间而习惯礼制。
English: Three years of filial piety for parents is a universal system from ancient times to the present. Because the sorrow is sincere, the external rules are formulated, and the time will become a habit, so the rules are set for a long time and the etiquette is customary.

古文：汉氏节其臣则可矣，薄其子则乱也。
现代文：汉文帝缩短臣民守孝是对的，至于今人的缩短到几天则是荒谬的。
English: Emperor Hanwen was right to shorten filial piety to a few days, but it is absurd to shorten it to a few days.

古文：云何使衰苴之容尽，鸣号之音息。
现代文：怎么能叫丧礼衣服一脱下，哀哭之声便结束了。
English: How is it that when the shroud is removed, the wailing ceases?

古文：夫佩玉启旒，深情弗忍，冕珠视朝，不亦甚乎！
现代文：朝中佩带玉物，亮开旌旗，是狠心的人做不出的。
English: It is impossible for a hard-hearted person to wear jewels in the morning and evening and display the national flag.

古文：凡法有变于古而刻于情，则莫能顺焉。
现代文：戴着华贵的帽子上朝，不是更成问题了吗？凡是法规有和古代不相同而不合人情的，都不能顺利行事。
English: Isn't it more of a problem that he came to power wearing an expensive hat? Any laws and regulations that are different from ancient times and are not humane cannot be carried out smoothly.

古文：至乎败于礼而安于身，必遽而奉之，何乃厚于恶，薄于善欤！今陛下以大孝始基，宜反斯谬。
现代文：至于败乱礼法而安心过活者往往受到尊宠，为什么对坏的东西这么好而对善的东西如此没兴趣，现今皇上用大孝心作为基础，应该改正这种坏风气。
English: As for why those who live a safe life by breaking the rules of etiquette are often favored, and why the bad things are so good and the good things are so uninteresting, the emperor is now using great filial piety as the foundation, and this bad culture should be corrected.

古文：且朝享临御，当近自身始，妃主典制，宜渐加矫正。
现代文：朝廷宴会和朝见大臣，应当从自己严肃开始，皇妃干政制度应该逐步加以修正。
English: The imperial banquets and the visits of ministers to the imperial court should begin with their own seriousness, and the system of the empress's participation in politics should be gradually amended.

古文：凡举天下以奉一君，何患不给。
现代文：让天下人来侍候一个国君，没有什么担心不能供应的。
English: Let the whole world wait upon a sovereign, and there is nothing to fear that cannot be supplied.

古文：或帝有集皁之陋，后有帛布之鄙，亦无取焉。
现代文：当然皇帝有穿黑衣服的朴素，皇后有穿棉布的简略，也不值得效法。
English: Of course, the emperor has the simplicity of wearing black clothes, and the queen has the simplicity of wearing cotton. It is not worth emulating.

古文：且一体炫金，不及百两，一岁美衣，不过数袭，而必收宝连椟，集服累笥，目岂常视，身未时亲，是为椟带宝，笥著衣，空散国家之财，徒奔天下之货。
现代文：况且一件衣服缀满黄金，也不会超过一百两，一年穿的衣服也不过几套，而必须集宝玉几箱子，备好衣服几柜子，难道是每一件都去观赏、每一件都穿的，这其实是为箱子带着宝贝、为柜子穿衣服，徒劳耗费国家的财物，白白地消磨天下资产。
English: Moreover, a piece of clothing adorned with gold will not exceed one hundred and two, and there are only a few sets of clothes worn in a year, but it is necessary to collect several boxes of jewels and prepare several cabinets of clothes. Is it possible to go to see each piece and wear each piece? In fact, this is to take the treasure for the box and wear the clothes for the cabinet, waste the country's wealth in vain, and waste the world's assets in vain.

古文：而主以此惰礼，妃以此傲家，是何糜蠹之剧，惑鄙之甚！
现代文：而皇帝因而日益懈怠政治、妃嫔也因则傲视国人，这是何等无聊的浪费和损害，何等的粗鄙庸俗！
English: And the emperor, as a result, increasingly slackens his politics, and the concubines, as a result, look down on the countrymen. What a waste and damage, what a vulgarity!

古文：逮至婢竖，皆无定科，一婢之身，重婢以使，一竖之家，列竖以役。
现代文：以至到了奴婢那样的人，也没有定制，一个婢女要更低级的两个婢女使唤，一个奴仆的家庭，要一大群更低级的奴仆去侍候。
English: There was also no provision for people like slaves and maidservants. A servant girl needed two servants of a lower rank, a family of servants, and a large group of servants of a lower rank to wait on them.

古文：瓦金皮绣，浆酒藿肉者，故不可称纪。
现代文：用黄金雕饰房屋，用锦绣饰帐帘，喝着成瓶的美酒，烧着成串的肉食，不可胜数。
English: Houses are decorated with gold, curtains with brocade, bottles of fine wine are drunk, strings of meat are roasted, and the list goes on.

古文：至有列軿以游遨，饰兵以驱叱，不亦重甚哉！
现代文：甚至有驾着群马遨游，手握兵器以驱赶市人，那就更严重了。
English: It's even worse when they drive around on horses with weapons in their hands to drive out the townspeople.

古文：若禁行赐薄，不容致此。
现代文：如果法令被执行，赏赐数量小的话，是不会到这地步的。
English: If the law had been enforced and the rewards had been small, it would not have come to this.

古文：且细作始并，以为俭节，而市造华怪，即传于民。
现代文：开始宫庭制造的用物，宫中是比较朴素的，但市上制造的却是奇异华丽，这种样式便马上传到民间。
English: At the beginning, the utensils made in the palace were relatively simple, but those made in the market were extraordinarily ornate, and this style soon spread to the people.

古文：如此，则迁也，非罢也。
现代文：这样则是鼓励人民模仿奢侈，而不是提倡节俭。
English: This encourages people to imitate luxury rather than promote thrift.

古文：凡天下得治者以实，而治天下者常虚，民之耳目，既不可诳，治之盈耗，立亦随之。
现代文：凡是天下治理往往用的是物质，但汉朝治天下的常用的是精神。人民的视听是不能欺骗的。政治的成功与失败，立刻便有反应。
English: When governing the world, materials are often used, but when ruling the world under the Han Dynasty, spirit is commonly used. The people's audio-visual cannot be deceived. Political success and failure are immediately reflected.

古文：故凡厥庶民，制度日侈，商贩之室，饰等王侯，佣卖之身，制均妃后。
现代文：所以这些平民之家，制度越来越奢侈。商贩家庭，和王族家庭一样打扮，一样华丽。
English: So these commoner families, the system is getting more and more extravagant, merchant families, and royal families, they dress up, they're just as flashy.

古文：凡一袖之大，足断为两，一裾之长，可分为二；见车马不辨贵贱，视冠服不知尊卑。
现代文：一个裤脚的长度，可以裁成两个裤脚。看见人们的坐车坐骑辨不清是贵人是贱人，看人们的衣服不知是大是小。
English: The length of one trouser leg can be cut into two trouser legs. When you see people riding in a car, you can't tell whether they are a gentleman or a slut. When you look at people's clothes, you don't know whether they are big or small.

古文：尚方今造一物，小民明已睥睨。宫中朝制一衣，庶家晚已裁学。
现代文：今天制造一个衣服，小百姓明天已经学会，宫中早晨裁一件衣服，平民家庭晚上已了然于心。
English: Today to make a dress, the common people have learned tomorrow, the palace in the morning to cut a dress, the civilian family in the evening has been clear in mind.

古文：侈丽之原，实先宫阃。又妃主所赐，不限高卑，自今以去，宜为节目。
现代文：侈奢虚华的根源，宫中确实是关键，对于王公妃嫔公主的赏赐，从今以后，应该加以节制。
English: The palace is indeed the key to the origin of extravagance, and the rewards of princes and princesses should be restrained from now on.

古文：金魄翟玉，锦绣縠罗，奇色异章，小民既不得服，在上亦不得赐。若工人复造奇伎淫器，则皆焚之，而重其罪。
现代文：金制的玉器、彩色的玉具、锦绣绸缎、奇装异服，百姓不许穿戴，在上面的人不能赏赐，如果那些巧匠再造奇怪的玩具、器物，都要烧掉，且予以重罚。
English: People are not allowed to wear gold jade objects, colored jade objects, embroidered silk brocades, or strange clothes, and those who wear them cannot be rewarded. If those craftsmen recreate strange toys and objects, they must be burned and severely punished.

古文：又置官者，将以燮天平气，赞地成功，防奸御难，治烦理剧，使官称事立，人称官置，无空树散位，繁进冗人。今高卑贸实，大小反称，名之不定，是谓官邪。
现代文：国家设立官职，为的是协和天地平定风气、顺理阴阳、成就功业。防备邪恶的发生，抵御灾难的降临，预防麻烦的事，处理复杂的政务，使官员称职，公事办成，每人都不辜负他的职务，而不是空设闲置，多多进用闲职人员，当今大小官职与实际不符，大小官员称呼不等，名称不确定，这是官职的灾难。
English: The state established official positions in order to harmonize the heavens and the earth, to stabilize the culture, to follow the logic of yin and yang, and to achieve merits. To prevent the occurrence of evil, to resist the advent of disasters, to prevent troubles, to deal with complex government affairs, to make officials competent, to accomplish public affairs, and to make everyone live up to his duties, instead of being vacant and idle, to use more and more idle personnel. Today's official positions do not match the reality, officials of different sizes are called differently, and their names are uncertain. This is the disaster of official positions.

古文：而世废姬公之制，俗传秦人之法，恶明君之典，好暗主之事，其憎圣爱愚，何其甚矣。
现代文：但世人早已废除了周朝制定的制度，朝廷还用秦朝设的法律，讨厌明君贤相的规矩。喜欢昏君们的把戏，他们恨圣人喜爱愚昧之人、何其厉害。
English: However, the world has long since abolished the system established by the Zhou Dynasty, and the imperial court still uses the laws established by the Qin Dynasty, and hates the rules of the wise rulers.

古文：今则宜先省事，从而并官，置位以周典为式，变名以适时为用，秦、汉末制，何足取也。
现代文：当今应首先省去杂事，除去一些官职。设官以周朝为典范，改变名称以时代为标准，秦汉以来的拙劣官制，是不足取用的。
English: Today, we should first of all eliminate unnecessary things and remove some official positions. The establishment of officials should be based on the Zhou Dynasty as a model, and the change of name should be based on the era. The clumsy official system since the Qin and Han Dynasties is not enough to use.

古文：当使德厚者位尊，位尊者禄重；能薄者官贱，官贱者秩轻。
现代文：应当使品德高尚的当大官，当大官的俸禄多，能力差的当小官，当小官的俸禄少。
English: Those with high moral character should be promoted to higher-ranking officials and receive more salary, while those with poor ability should be promoted to lower-ranking officials and receive less salary.

古文：缨冕绂佩，称官以服；车骑容卫，当职以施。
现代文：对于人们的衣帽服饰，按等级裁制，出车行走规矩，按职务高低选择施行。
English: For people's clothes, hats and apparel, according to the level of tailoring, departure walking rules, according to the position of high and low selection.

古文：又寄土州郡，宜通废罢，旧地民户，应更置立。
现代文：寄寓南方的州郡，应该全部废除，各地方的人民百姓应该重新划分。
English: All the states and counties in the south should be abolished, and the people in each place should be redistributed.

古文：岂吴邦而有徐邑，扬境而宅兗民，上淆辰纪，下乱畿甸。
现代文：怎么能在吴国一带而有徐州的郡县。扬州境内而有兖州的名称。这是混淆天道、搞乱州郡的行为。
English: How can there be counties and counties of Xuzhou in the area of Wuzhou, and the name of Zhangzhou in the territory of Yangzhou? This is an act of confusing heaven and earth and messing up counties and counties.

古文：又王侯识未堪务，不应强仕，须合冠而启封，能政而议爵。
现代文：其中如朱方等地不设置州名，如江都一带，应该重新建立郡县。王侯见识不能处理世事的，不应勉强做官，应等他成年而封爵位，只有能从事政治生活的才封他官职。
English: Among them, the names of prefectures should not be set up in places such as Zhu Fang, and counties should be re-established in areas such as Jiangdu. If a prince sees that he cannot handle worldly affairs, he should not reluctantly become an official, he should wait until he is an adult and be given a knighthood, and only if he can engage in political life should he be given an official post.

古文：且帝子未官，人谁谓贱。但宜详置宾友，选择正人，亦何必列长史、参军、别驾、从事，然后为贵哉！
现代文：况且皇帝的儿子即使没有当官，又有谁说他低贱的，只需仔细地为他挑选有才德的老师做宾客朋友，何必设立长史参军别驾，然后才算高贵呢？
English: Moreover, even if the emperor's son is not an official, who says he is lowly? It is only necessary to carefully select a talented teacher as a guest friend for him. Why is it necessary to set up a long history of joining the army and then be considered noble?

古文：又世有先后，业有难易，明帝能令其兒不匹光武之子，马贵人能使其家不比阴后之族。
现代文：又辈分有先后，事情有难有易的，汉明帝能让他儿子不能和光武帝的儿子待遇相比。马皇后不让他们家超过阴皇后家的待遇。
English: In addition, generations are assigned successively, and things are difficult and easy. Emperor Hanming could not let his son be compared with the treatment of Emperor Guangwu's son. Empress Ma did not let their family exceed the treatment of the Queen Yin's family.

古文：盛矣哉，此于后世不可忘也。
现代文：这是一种了不起的行为。对这些后人也不应该忘记啊！
English: This is a remarkable act. These descendants should not be forgotten!

古文：至当舆抑碎首之忿，陛殿延辟戟之威，此亦复不可忘也。
现代文：至于像当着皇帝车子进谏抑制巨大的愤怒汉文帝，朝见臣民收敛威风的古事，这也是不能忘记掉的。
English: As for the ancient events, such as Emperor Hanwen suppressing his tremendous anger at the sight of the emperor's chariot entering the imperial palace, and the subjects of the imperial court restraining their arrogance, this is also something that cannot be forgotten.

古文：内外之政，实不可杂。若妃主为人请官者，其人宜终身不得为官；若请罪者，亦终身不得赦罪。
现代文：朝廷内外政事，确实不能混杂，如果妃嫔公主为别人求官的，应该终身禁止那个人做官，如果请求恕罪的，也应终身不得赦免他的罪过。
English: Internal and external affairs of the court should not be mixed. If a concubine princess seeks a position for someone else, that person should be banned from being an official for life. If he asks for forgiveness, his sins should not be pardoned for life.

古文：凡天下所须者才，而才诚难知也。
现代文：凡治天下需要的是人才，而人才确实难以了解。
English: What the world needs is talent, and talent is indeed difficult to understand.

古文：有深居而言寡，则蕴学而无由知；有卑处而事隔，则怀奇而无由进。
现代文：有死在家中而沉默寡言的，则他满腹学问而无人知道，有官职低贱而被人所嫉妒的。
English: There are those who die at home and are silent, those who are full of knowledge and nobody knows about it, and those who have lowly official positions and are envied by others.

古文：或复见忌于亲故，或亦遭谗于贵党，其欲致车右而动御席，语天下而辩治乱，焉可得哉！漫言举贤，则斯人固未得矣。
现代文：有的遭到贵族的诽谤。他们想到皇帝面前惊动皇上，谈论天下陈述治乱兴衰，怎么可能呢，一般地说即使被看成贤人，还是不能被推荐。
English: Some were slandered by aristocrats. How could they think of alarming the emperor in front of the emperor, talking about the rise and fall of the world's statement to control the turmoil? Generally speaking, even if they are regarded as sages, they still cannot be recommended.

古文：宜使世之所称通经达史、辨词精数、吏能将谋、偏术小道者，使猎缨危膝，博求其用。
现代文：应该选择被世人称说，博览通晓经书史书、辨析词律、精擅术数、有行政才能、有将帅谋略、有偏才小异术的人。使他们立身朝廷中，广泛地信用他们。
English: It is necessary to choose those who are said by the world to be well-versed in the history of the scriptures, to be able to analyze the rules of poetry, to be good at counting, to have administrative ability, to be a good strategist, and to be gifted in minor arts. Let them stand in the imperial court and widely trust them.

古文：制内外官与官之远近及仕之类，令各以所能而造其室，降情以诱之，卑身以安之。然后察其擢脣吻，树颊胲，动精神，发意气，语之所至，意之所执，不过数四间，不亦尽可知哉！
现代文：制定内外的官员和官员的远近进退的法式，叫他们各人适当访问贤人增长见识，尊敬贤人平等对待，叫别人说出自己的想法，让他们平心静气，然后观察他们的口才、他们的方略、他们的计划、他们的志向。根据他的议论、表现，不过几次对话，便可以比较熟悉这些人才。
English: Formulate the French style of internal and external officials and officials from near and far, let each of them properly visit sages to gain insight, respect sages and treat them equally, let others speak their minds, let them calm down, and then observe their eloquence, their strategies, their plans, their aspirations. According to his speech, performance, but a few dialogues, you can be more familiar with these talents.

古文：若忠孝廉清之比，强正惇柔之伦，难以检格立，不可须臾定。宜使乡部求其行，守宰察其能，竟皆见之于选贵，呈之于相主，然后处其职宜，定其位用。
现代文：如果有忠诚孝顺廉洁清正的人，刚强正直淳朴柔顺的人，很难按一般的规矩予以进用，不能迅速地判断他们的才能，应该叫乡党官员考察他们的言行，太守县令注意他们的表现，最后推荐给吏部，介绍给宰相皇上。然后再给他安排职务、确定级别。
English: If there are people who are loyal, filial, honest, clean and upright, and people who are tough, honest, simple and pliable, it is difficult to use them according to the general rules, and it is not possible to quickly judge their talents. It is necessary to ask the township party officials to examine their words and deeds, the county magistrate to pay attention to their performance, and finally recommend them to the personnel department and introduce them to the prime minister. Then assign him a position and determine the level.

古文：如此，故应愚鄙尽捐，贤明悉举矣。
现代文：做到这样，便能使愚昧无知的人都被裁减，贤明正直的都被选用。
English: In this way, the foolish and the ignorant will be eliminated, and the wise and the upright will be promoted.

古文：又俗好以毁沈人，不知察其所以致毁；以誉进人，不知测其所以致誉。毁徒皆鄙，则宜擢其毁者；誉党悉庸，则宜退其誉者。
现代文：另外世俗喜欢用诽谤来损害一个人，而不思索他之所以招致被毁谤的原因；用称誉的方式进用人才而不知他之所以招致好名声的原因，如果毁谤者都是品德不好的，那么应该辞退那个被称誉的人。
English: In addition, the world likes to use slander to damage a person without thinking about the reason why he was slandered; to use talent by way of praise without knowing the reason why he attracted a good reputation; if the slanderers are all bad characters, then the praised person should be dismissed.

古文：如此，则毁誉不妄，善恶分矣。
现代文：这些行为使毁谤和称誉混乱倒置。
English: These actions invert the roles of defamation and praise.

古文：又既谓之才，则不宜以阶级限，不应以年齿齐。
现代文：另外既然一个人有才能，那便不应该用等级来限制他，也不应该因年龄而加以挑剔。
English: In addition, since a person has talent, he should not be limited by grades, nor should he be picky because of his age.

古文：凡贵者好疑人少，不知其少于人矣。
现代文：凡是大官喜欢怀疑别人太年轻，不知他比另外一些人要年轻。
English: It is common for senior officials to suspect others of being too young, not knowing that they are younger than others.

古文：老者亦轻人少，不知其不及少矣。
现代文：老年人轻视年青人，不知他还赶不上年轻人。
English: The old despise the young, but they do not know that they cannot keep up with the young.

古文：自释氏流教，其来有源，渊检精测，固非深矣。
现代文：从佛教流传以来，有很长的历史，然而仔细体察又觉得没有什么深刻的意义。
English: It has a long history since the spread of Buddhism, but on closer inspection it does not seem to have any deep significance.

古文：舒引容润，既亦广矣。
现代文：其中内容宠杂、纷繁多变，然而学佛修德的人品德越来越坏。
English: Among them, the contents are mixed and varied, but the moral character of those who practice Buddhism is getting worse and worse.

古文：然习慧者日替其修，束诫者月繁其过，遂至糜散锦帛，侈饰车从。
现代文：接受戒律的人过错一月多过一月，以至于浪费锦绣布帛，过分地修饰车马和随从的礼节。
English: The fault of those who accept the precepts is more than one month, so that they waste the embroidered cloth, excessively decorate the chariot and the attendant's etiquette.

古文：复假精医术，托杂卜数，延妹满室，置酒浃堂，寄夫托妻者不无，杀子乞兒者继有。而犹倚灵假像，背亲傲君，欺费疾老，震损宫邑，是乃外刑之所不容戮，内教之所不悔罪，而横天地之间，莫不纠察。人不得然，岂其鬼欤！
现代文：再便是借称通晓医术、附托卜卦数术，接纳美人满屋，堂内摆满了酒席，其中有寄存丈夫或妻子到庙中的，杀儿子求儿子的，而他们不过借助神仙佛像，背离父母傲视国君，骗人钱财和憎恶老人，惊害宫庭都邑，这是刑罚必须惩处的对象，也是佛教教规所坚决拥护的。而这些竟然横行于国家之内，无人纠正，人们不能改变，难道是鬼作怪吗？
English: Then there are those who are said to be familiar with medicine and divination, and who have a house full of beautiful women to entertain, and a hall full of banquets. Among them are those who keep their husband or wife in a temple, those who kill their son to woo their son, but they only do so with the help of a sacred Buddha statue, those who abandon their parents and look down on the sovereign, those who cheat people out of money and hate the elderly, and those who terrorize the capital of the imperial court. These are the objects that must be punished, and they are also firmly supported by the Buddhist canon. And these are rampant in the country, and no one corrects them, and

古文：今宜申严佛律，裨重国令，其疵恶显著者，悉皆罢遣，余则随其艺行，各为之条，使禅义经诵，人能其一，食不过蔬，衣不出布。若应更度者，则令先习义行，本其神心，必能草腐人天，竦精以往者，虽侯王家子，亦不宜拘。
现代文：现在应该申明佛家戒律，加强国法的威严，在佛门中罪过显明的都加以淘汰，余下来的都进行考察，加以整齐和教导，让他们能歌颂佛书，朗诵经文，必须每人具备一方面的本领，他们吃的东西必须是素食，衣服全都是素色，如果再要度人出家，必须首先让他修行戒律，清静他们的心神，这样必然能清理佛门，洗涤世俗，即使王侯子弟也不应例外。
English: Now it is time to affirm the Buddhist precepts, strengthen the authority of the national law, and eliminate the obvious sins in the Buddhist gate. The remaining ones will be examined, tidied up and taught so that they can praise Buddhist books and recite scriptures. Each person must have one aspect of ability. What they eat must be vegetarian, and their clothes are all plain. If they want to be ordained again, they must first let him practice the precepts and quiet their minds. This will certainly clean up the Buddhist gate and wash the world. Even the prince's children should not be an exception.

古文：凡鬼道惑众，妖巫破俗，触木而言怪者不可数，寓采而称神者非可算。
现代文：凡是鬼怪必然迷惑众人，妖邪巫术必然败坏风俗，碰到树木便称为怪异的人不可胜数，碰到好事而称为神灵的很多。
English: All ghosts are bound to confuse people. Demons and witchcraft are bound to corrupt customs. When it comes to trees, there are countless people who are called strange. When it comes to good things, there are many people who are called gods.

古文：其原本是乱男女，合饮食，因之而以祈祝，从之而以报请，是乱不诛，为害未息。
现代文：这些本来是男女混乱，交合饮食，从中产生邪怪的东西，信奉它们而希望得到好报。这种罪过如果不遏止，那么危害就不会停止。
English: These are originally the confusion of men and women, the mixing of food and drink, from which evil things come, and they believe in them and hope for a good reward. If this sin is not stopped, then the harm will not stop.

古文：凡一苑始立，一神初兴，淫风辄以之而甚。今修堤以北，置园百里，峻山以右，居灵十房，糜财败俗，其可称限。
现代文：凡是一寺院刚建成，神灵刚诞生，淫荡的风气总是因此更加厉害，当今长堤以北，设置寺庙几乎达一百多里，钟山右边，其中十间房子放着神像佛图，耗费财物，败乱风俗，怎么得了！
English: Whenever a temple has just been built, a deity has just been born, the lewd atmosphere is always more powerful. Today, north of the long embankment, there are almost more than a hundred miles of temples, and on the right side of the bell mountain, ten of the houses have statues of gods and Buddhas, consuming property and destroying customs. How come!

古文：又针药之术，世寡复修，诊脉之伎，人鲜能达。民因是益征于鬼，遂弃于医，重令耗惑不反，死夭复半。今太医宜男女习教，在所应遣吏受业。
现代文：另外针炙医疗的办法，世人很少能掌握，纳脉的技巧，人们很少能熟悉，百姓因此越来越求助于鬼神，于是抛弃医术，严重的甚至害人性命，死的人几乎占一半，当今皇家医院应各分男女进行学习，各地方应派官员管理这些。
English: In addition, acupuncture and moxibustion are medical methods that are rarely mastered by the world, and the technique of finding veins is rarely familiar to people. As a result, people are increasingly resorting to ghosts and gods, so they abandon medicine, which is serious and even harmful to human life, and almost half of the people die. Today's royal hospital should be divided into men and women to study, and officials should be sent to manage these in various places.

古文：如此，故当愈于媚神之愚，征正腠理之敝矣。
现代文：这样必然比求神拜佛好一些。可以减去不明医学的弊端。
English: This is certainly better than praying to God and worshipping Buddha. It can reduce the drawbacks of unknown medicine.

古文：凡无世不有言事，未时不有令下，然而升平不至，昏危是继，何哉？
现代文：每朝每代都有上书献策的，每个时期都有诏书下达，然而太平时代不来临，昏乱的时代一个接一个，是为什么呢？
English: Every dynasty and every generation has people who submit proposals, and every period has decrees issued. However, the era of peace does not come, and the era of confusion follows one after another. Why is that?

古文：盖设令之本非实也。又病言不出于谋臣，事不便于贵党，轻者抵訾呵骇，重者死压穷摈，故西京有方调之诛，东郡有党锢之戮。
现代文：大概发布的政策是不正确的，或者觉得谋略不是出自权臣之口，计划对贵族不方便，其中问题小的被训斥，严重的被杀掉或摈弃远方，所以西汉时有进直言被杀的，东汉有党锢之祸。
English: Probably, the policies issued were incorrect, or they felt that the strategy was not from the mouth of the power minister, the plan was inconvenient for the aristocracy, and the small problems were reprimanded, and the serious ones were killed or abandoned far away. Therefore, in the Western Han Dynasty, there were those who were killed for speaking out, and in the Eastern Han Dynasty, there was the scourge of the party.

古文：陛下若欲申常令，循末典，则群臣在焉；若欲改旧章，兴王道，则微臣存矣。敢昧死以陈，唯陛下察之。
现代文：皇上如果想执行一般的法令、遵从平庸的习俗，则大臣们已具备；若想改革老规矩、招致太平之道，则小臣我在这里敢冒死陈说只希望皇上明察它们。
English: If the Emperor wishes to execute general decrees and conform to ordinary customs, his ministers are at hand; if he wishes to reform old customs and bring about peace, his ministers are at hand. Here, I venture to say that I only hope that the Emperor will take a good look at them.

古文：书奏，忤旨，自解去职。
现代文：他的文章奏上不合皇帝的意思，自己便主动辞官离职。
English: When it became clear that his article was not in line with the emperor's wishes, he took the initiative to resign from his post.

古文：又除太子中舍人，出为庐陵内史。
现代文：不久又被调为太子中舍人，再出外当庐陵内史。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the Prince's household, and then went abroad to work as a historian at the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：郡后荒芜，频有野兽，母薛氏欲见猎，朗乃合围纵火，令母观之。
现代文：郡府的后面荒芜得很，没有田地，常有野兽出没其中，他的母亲想看打猎的场面，周朗于是找人把那块荒地全圈起来，点起火来叫他的母亲观看，不幸大火烧出圈外，延到郡中马圈。
English: The back of the county seat was very desolate, there were no fields, and wild animals often haunted it. His mother wanted to see the hunting scene, so Zhou Lang asked someone to circle the wasteland and light a fire for his mother to watch. Unfortunately, the fire burned outside the circle and extended to the county's horse ring.

古文：火逸烧郡廨，朗悉以秩米起屋，偿所烧之限，称疾去官，遂为州司所纠。
现代文：周朗用他的俸禄建起屋子，偿还被烧的损失。称说有病而辞职，于是被本州法官弹劾。
English: Zhou Lang used his salary to build a house and pay for the damage caused by the fire. He resigned, saying he was ill, and was impeached by a local judge.

古文：还都谢世祖曰： 州司举臣愆失，多有不允。臣在郡，虎三食人，虫鼠犯稼，以此二事上负陛下。 
现代文：他回到京城对世祖谢罪道： 本州法官列举我的过失，很多是不公平的，我在郡中，老虎曾三次吃人，虫和老鼠侵害农作物，只在这两件事上我对不起皇上。 
English: He returned to the capital to thank his ancestor, saying, "The state judge enumerated my faults, many of which were unfair. In my county, tigers have eaten people three times, and insects and mice have attacked crops. I am sorry for these two things only, Your Majesty.

古文：上变色曰： 州司不允，或可有之。虫虎之灾，宁关卿小物。 
现代文：孝武听后变了颜色，说： 你州的法官不公平，或许有可能，虫害和老虎的灾难，难道与你有关吗？ 
English: After listening, Xiaowu changed his color and said: The judge in your state is unfair, perhaps it is possible, the disaster of insect pests and tigers, is it related to you?

古文：朗寻丁母艰，有孝性，每哭必恸，其余颇不依居丧常节。
现代文：周朗不久因母亲去世而守孝，他非常有孝心，每次哭得都非常伤心，然而其他地方相当不遵循平常礼节。
English: Zhou Lang, who became a filial son shortly after his mother's death, is very filial, and every time he cries, he is very sad. However, other places do not follow the usual etiquette.

古文：大明四年，上使有司奏其居丧无礼，请加收治。
现代文：大明四年，孝武帝叫有关人员上奏说周朗在守孝期间不守礼法，请求予以逮捕。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu called the relevant personnel to report that Zhou Lang did not observe the etiquette during the period of filial piety, and requested that he be arrested.

古文：诏曰： 朗悖礼利口，宜令翦戮，微物不足乱典刑，特锁付边郡。 
现代文：孝武帝又下了一道诏书说： 周朗违背礼义，巧言令色，应该诛杀，但不宜因小人污染法令，特地锁送到边郡。 
English: Emperor Xiaowu also issued an edict saying: Zhou Lang violated the etiquette, and his clever words and deeds should be punished, but it is not appropriate to send him to Bian County with a special lock because of the villain pollution law.

古文：于是传送宁州，于道杀之，时年三十六。
现代文：于是周朗被解送到宁州，在路上杀了他，当时三十六岁。
English: As a result, Zhou Lang was deported to Ningzhou, where he was killed on the road, at the age of 36.

古文：子仁昭，顺帝升明末，为南海太守。
现代文：他的儿子周昭仁，顺帝升明末年当过南海太守。
English: His son Zhou Zhaoren, Shunde Shoming, was the governor of the South China Sea at the end of the Ming Dynasty.

