古文：杜阚王李苑罗王
现代文：杜伏威，齐州章丘县人。
English: Du Fuwei, a native of Zhangqiu County, Qizhou.

古文：杜伏威，齐州章丘人。
现代文：少时豪爽放荡，不治产业，和同乡辅公祏约为生死之交。
English: At a young age, he was a proud and debauched person. He did not care about the industry, and he and his fellow townspeople were friends for life and death.

古文：公礻石数盗姑家牧羊以馈伏威，县迹捕急，乃相与亡命为盗，时年十六。
现代文：辅公祏多次偷窃姑家牧羊，以馈赠杜伏威，因州县捕捉急切，以故一起逃亡江湖为盗，时年仅十六岁。
English: Fu Gongyao repeatedly stole from his aunt's sheep herding, using the gift of Du Fu Wei, and was eager to be caught by the prefectural government, so he fled the country together to commit theft. He was only 16 years old at the time.

古文：伏威狡谲多算，每剽劫，众用其策皆效。
现代文：杜伏威狡猾而多谋略，每次抢劫，群盗采用其策总是见效。
English: Defoe is cunning and resourceful, and in each robbery, the gang's tactics always pay off.

古文：尝营护诸盗，出为导，入为殿，故其党爱服，共推为主。
现代文：常常营护众盗，出为向导，入为殿后，因而得到其党羽的爱戴信服，共同推举他为首领。
English: He often protected the thieves, acted as a guide, and entered the palace as a retainer. As a result, he was loved and trusted by his party members, who jointly elected him as their leader.

古文：隋大业九年，入长白山，依贼左君行，不得意，舍去，转剽淮南，称将军。
现代文：隋大业九年，进入长白山，投靠贼帅左君行，不得其志，因而舍弃而走，转而劫掠淮南地区，自称为将军。
English: In the ninth year of the Sui Dynasty, he entered the Changbai Mountains and went to the aid of Zuojunxing, the thief-commander-in-chief. Unable to achieve his goal, he gave up and left, and instead plundered the Huainan region, calling himself a general.

古文：下邳贼苗海潮拥众钞暴，伏威遣公祏胁谕曰： 天下共苦隋，豪桀相与兴义，然力弱势分不相统，若合以为强，则无事隋矣。
现代文：下邳贼寇苗海潮聚众打家劫舍，杜伏威派辅公祏威胁说： 天下之人共苦隋朝政令，英雄豪杰各举大义，然而力弱势分不相统属，不如合兵以加强力量，那就不怕隋军威胁了。
English: Under the influence of the pirates of the Miao Sea, they gathered in large numbers to raid homes, and the Duvoirites sent auxiliary officials to threaten: The people of the world are all suffering from the Sui Dynasty's decrees, and the heroes and heroines are all great, but the weak and the strong are not subordinate to each other, it is better to join forces to strengthen strength, then there is no fear of the threat of the Sui Army.

古文：公能为主，吾且从，不然，一战以决。 
现代文：如你能为头领，我们必定服从，不然的话，就以一战来决雄雌。 
English: If you are the leader, we will obey. Otherwise, we will fight to the death.

古文：海潮惧，即以众下之。
现代文：苗海潮感到害怕，随即率其众归服于杜伏威。
English: Miao Haichao felt scared and immediately led his people to surrender to Du Fu Wei.

古文：江都留守遣校尉宋颢将兵捕击，伏威与战，伪北，诱颢堕葭榛泽中，顺风纵火迫之，步骑烧死几尽。
现代文：江都留守派遣校尉宋颢率兵讨捕，杜伏威与他交战，假装败退，引诱宋颢陷入芦苇泽中，从上风放火逼迫，其步兵骑兵烧死殆尽。
English: Jiangdu stayed behind and dispatched the captain Song Jun to lead the troops to arrest him. Du Fuwei fought with him, pretended to retreat, lured Song Jun into the reeds, set fire to him from the upper wind, and his infantry and cavalry were burned to death.

古文：海陵贼赵破阵闻伏威兵少，轻之，召使并力。
现代文：海陵贼帅赵破阵听说杜伏威兵少，轻视他，派人招他合并。
English: The commander of the tomb robbers, Zhao Bajian, heard that Du Fuwei had few soldiers, despised him, and sent someone to recruit him for the merger.

古文：伏威引亲将十人操牛酒谒，勒公祏严兵待变。
现代文：杜伏威率亲将十人携带牛酒拜见，命辅公祏严整兵马以待事变。
English: Du Fu Wei personally led ten people to carry cattle and wine to pay a visit, assisted by the public, and strictly organized soldiers and horses to wait for things to change.

古文：破阵引伏威入幕，置酒，悉召酋首高会。
现代文：赵破阵引杜伏威进入帐幕，布置酒席，尽招其头目会面。
English: Zhao broke the line and led Du Fuwei into the tent, set up a banquet, and invited his leader to meet.

古文：伏威突斩破阵，众眙骇不及救，复杀数十人，下皆畏服，公祏兵亦至，遂并其众，至数万。
现代文：杜伏威突然斩杀赵破阵，众人惊骇而救助不及，接着又杀了数十人，其部下全都畏服，辅公祏兵马也赶到，于是吞并其众，达到数万之多。
English: Du Fuwei suddenly killed Zhao and broke the line of battle. The people were shocked and could not be saved. Then he killed dozens of people. His subordinates were all awestruck. Auxiliary officers and soldiers also arrived, and then absorbed his people, reaching tens of thousands.

古文：攻安宜，屠之。
现代文：进攻安宜，大开杀戒。
English: It's safe to attack, so let's go for the kill.

古文：隋遣虎牙郎将来整战于黄花轮，伏威大败，身重创，与公祏财有众数百，亡去，行收卒得八千，与虎牙郎将公孙上哲战盐城，覆其军。
现代文：隋派虎牙郎将来整战于黄花轮，杜伏威大败，身受重伤，与辅公祏仅剩部下数百人，逃离而走，后收编散兵满八千人，与隋军虎牙郎将公孙上哲战于盐城，歼灭其军。
English: In the future, the Sui sent Tigress to rectify the war in Huanghualin, Du Fuwei was defeated and seriously injured, and only hundreds of subordinates were left with the Auxiliary Public Security Bureau. They fled and went away. After that, they collected eight thousand scattered soldiers, and fought with the Sui army Tigress and Gongsun Shangzhe in Yancheng, annihilating their army.

古文：炀帝遣右御卫将军陈棱以精兵讨之，棱不敢战，伏威遗以妇人服，书称陈姥，怒其军。
现代文：隋炀帝派遣右御卫将军陈眣统率精兵前往讨伐，陈眣不敢交战，杜伏威送以妇人之服，并在信中称陈姥，以激怒其军。
English: Emperor Sui sent the right-guard general Chen Yu to lead the elite soldiers to the crusade. Chen Yu did not dare to fight. Du Fuwei sent a woman's dress and called Chen Yu in the letter to provoke his army.

古文：棱果悉兵至，伏威迎出挑战，棱军射中其额，伏威怒曰： 不杀汝，矢不拔！ 
现代文：陈眣果然全军到来，杜伏威自出挑战，陈眣部将射中其额头，杜伏威发怒说 ：不杀你，我就不拔出箭来！ 
English: Chen Yao's whole army arrived, and Du Fuwei challenged him. Chen Yao shot him in the forehead. Du Fuwei said angrily, "If I don't kill you, I won't pull out the arrow!"

古文：遂驰入棱阵，大呼冲击，众披靡，获所射将，使拔箭已，斩之，携其首入棱军示之，又杀数十人，遂大溃，棱走而免。
现代文：于是冲进陈眣阵中，大呼冲击，所向披靡，擒获射箭之人，让他拔出箭来，然后斩杀，携带其首级冲入陈眣军中夸示，又杀掉数十人，隋军于是大败而逃，陈眣逃脱而免难。
English: So they stormed into Chen Xuan's army, shouted loudly for an onslaught, were overpowered, captured the archer, let him pull out the arrow, then beheaded him, rushed into Chen Xuan's army with his head to boast, and killed dozens of people. The Sui army was then defeated and fled, and Chen Xuan escaped.

古文：进破高邮，引兵度淮，攻历阳，据之，称总管。
现代文：接着攻破高邮县，率兵渡过淮河，进攻历阳，占据之后自称总管。
English: Next, he broke through Gaoyou County, crossed the Huai River with his soldiers, attacked Liyang, occupied it, and then claimed to be the general manager.

古文：分兵徇属县，皆下，江淮群盗争附。
现代文：分兵巡略属县，所至皆下，江淮地区群盗纷纷归附。
English: The division patrols belonged to the county, and all of them went down, and the gangs of thieves in the Jianghuai region were attached one after another.

古文：伏威选敢死士五千，号 上募 ，宠厚之，与均甘苦，每攻取，必先登，战罢，阅创在背者杀之。
现代文：杜伏威选拔敢死勇士五千人，号为 上募 ，待遇优厚，和他们同甘共苦，每逢攻战，必定先登。既战之后，检视伤在背后者杀死。
English: Du Fu Wei selected five thousand brave men who were willing to die, and called them "recruits," and treated them well. They worked together with them through thick and thin, and whenever there was a battle, they would always go first. After the war, the wounded in the back were examined and killed.

古文：所虏获必分与麾下，士有战死，以其妻殉，故人自奋战，无完敌。
现代文：有所缴获，必定分赏部下，战士阵亡，将其妻妾殉葬，所以人自奋战，所向无敌。
English: If something is captured, it must be rewarded to his subordinates. If a soldier is killed in battle, his wife and concubine must be buried. Therefore, if a man fights hard, he will be invincible.

古文：宇文化及以为历阳太守，不受。
现代文：宇文化及任命他为历阳太守，他不接受。
English: He does not accept the Yu culture and the appointment of him as the Liyang governor.

古文：徙丹阳，自称大行台。
现代文：后来移治丹阳郡，自称大行台。
English: Later, he moved to Danyang County and called himself Dagangdai.

古文：始进用士人，缮利兵械，薄赋敛，除殉葬法，民奸若盗及吏受赇，虽轻，皆杀无赦。
现代文：开始进用士人，修造兵械，减轻赋税，废除殉葬之法，民犯奸盗之罪及官员贪赃枉法者，不分情节轻重，一律处决。
English: Civil servants began to be employed, military equipment was repaired, taxes were reduced, the law of martyrdom and burial was abolished, and all those who committed the crimes of theft and embezzlement and official corruption were executed, regardless of the seriousness of the circumstances.

古文：上表越王侗，侗以为东南道大总管，封楚王。
现代文：上表于越王杨侗，杨侗任命他为东南道大总管，封为楚王。
English: The above table is in Yue Wang Yang Hui, Yang Hui appointed him as the general manager of the Southeast University, and named him King of Chu.

古文：是时，秦王方讨王世充，遣使招怀，伏威乃献款。高祖授以东南道行台尚书令、江淮安抚大使、上柱国、吴王，赐姓，豫属籍，以其子德俊为山阳公，赐帛五千段，马三百匹。
现代文：那时，秦王正在讨伐王世充，派遣使者招谕杜伏威，伏威献款归降，高祖任命他为东南道行台尚书令、江淮安抚大使、上柱国，封为吴王，赐姓李氏，录入宗正属籍，封其子杜德俊为山阳公，赐予帛五千段，马三百匹。
English: At that time, King Qin was fighting against King Shichong. He sent an envoy to invite Du Fuwei to surrender. Du Fuwei made a donation and surrendered. Gao Zu appointed him as Shang Shuling of Southeast Dao, Ambassador of Jianghuai to pacify China, and Shang Zhuo Guo. He was given the title of King of Wu, the surname Li, and was registered as a member of the Zong Zheng family. His son Du Dejun was given the title of Sanyang Guo, and he was given 5,000 baht and 300 horses.

古文：伏威遣其将陈正通、徐绍宗以兵会，取世充之梁郡。
现代文：杜伏威派遣其将陈正通、徐绍宗率兵相会，攻取王世充所占据的梁郡。
English: Du Fuwei dispatched Chen Zhengtong and Xu Shaosong to meet and capture Liang County, which was occupied by Wang Shichong.

古文：又遣将王雄诞讨李子通于杭州，禽以献。
现代文：还派遣部将王雄诞讨伐李子通于杭州，擒获以献。
English: The dispatching department also sent Wang Xiongzhi to Hangzhou to collect plums, which was received as a gift.

古文：破汪华于歙州。
现代文：攻破汪华于歙州。
English: Wang Hua was defeated in Zhangzhou.

古文：尽有江东、淮南地，南属岭，东至于海。
现代文：尽据江东、淮南地区，南接五岭，东至于海。
English: It extends as far as the east of the Yangtze River and the south of Huainan, and is connected to the Wuling Mountains in the south and the sea in the east.

古文：秦王已平刘黑闼，师次曹、兗，伏威惧，乃入朝。
现代文：秦王平定刘黑闼后，驻军于曹州、兖州一带地方，杜伏威因害怕而入朝。
English: After the Qin King subdued Liu Heyao, he stationed troops in the areas of Caozhou and Zhangzhou. Du Fuwei was afraid and entered the imperial court.

古文：诏拜太子太保兼行台尚书令，留京师，位在齐王元吉上，以宠之。
现代文：下诏授职太子太保兼行台尚书令，留居京师，位在齐王元吉之上，以示宠异。
English: The following edict conferred the post of Crown Prince Taibo concurrently with the Tai Shang Shuling, and he stayed in Beijing and was placed above Qi Wang Yuanji to show his favoritism.

古文：伏威好神仙长年术，饵云母被毒，武德七年二月，暴卒。
现代文：杜伏威喜好神仙长年之术，服食云母中毒，武德七年二月，突然去世。
English: Du Fu Wei liked the magic of immortals for a long time, took mica poisoning, and died suddenly in February of the seventh year of Wu De.

古文：初，公祏反，矫伏威令以绐众，赵郡王孝恭既平公祏，得反书以闻。
现代文：起初，辅公祏造反，假托杜伏威号令以欺骗属下，赵郡王孝恭平定辅公祏之后，得其反书奏闻朝廷。
English: At first, the auxiliary magistrate rebelled and deceived his subordinates by pretending to issue an order from Du Fu Wei. After Zhao County Wang Xiaogong defeated the auxiliary magistrate, he received a counter-report from the imperial court.

古文：公祏被禽，乃诬与己谋；又伏威、王雄诞及棱赀产在丹阳者当原，而赵郡王孝恭悉籍入之，棱自诉，忤孝恭。
现代文：高祖追夺其官爵，削去宗正属籍、籍没其家产。贞观元年，太宗知其冤枉，下诏恢复官爵，以国公礼节重新安葬，照旧例归还其子封爵。
English: Gao Zu chased after his official title, stripped him of his official title and his family property. In the first year of Zhenguan, knowing that he had wronged him, Taizong restored his official title, reburied him with national propriety, and returned his son's title as usual.

古文：遂以谋反诛。王雄诞，曹州济阴人。
现代文：王雄诞是曹州济阴县人。
English: Wang Yuxi is from Jiyin County, Caozhou.

古文：少强果，膂力绝人。
现代文：少时强健果敢，膂力过人。
English: Strong and courageous at a young age, he is a man of great strength.

古文：伏威之起，用其计，战多克，署骠骑将军。
现代文：杜伏威起兵后，采用其计，出战多胜，署其官职为骠骑将军。
English: After Du Fu Wei raised an army, he adopted Du Fu Wei's strategy, fought many battles and won many victories. He was appointed to the post of general of cavalry.

古文：初，伏威度淮与李子通合，后子通惮其才，袭之，伏威被创堕马，雄诞负逃葭泽中，裒啸散亡，又为隋将来整所窘，众复溃。
现代文：起初，伏威渡过淮河与李子通合兵，后来子通畏忌其才，派出骑兵袭击，伏威身受重伤坠落马下，雄诞背着他逃匿于芦苇泽中，收集散亡士卒，又被隋将来整所败，其众再次溃散。
English: At first, Fu Wei crossed the Huai River with Li Zitong and joined the army, later, Zitong was afraid of his talent and sent cavalry to attack, Fu Wei was seriously injured and fell under the horse, the hero hid behind him in the reed lake, collected the scattered dead soldiers, and was defeated by the Sui Dynasty in the future, and his people were dispersed again.

古文：别将西门君仪妻王勇决而力，负伏威走，雄诞总麾下壮士十余人从之。
现代文：伏威部将西门君仪之妻王氏勇武多力，背着伏威逃走，雄诞率领其部下壮士十余人随从护卫。
English: Fu Wei's subordinate, Wang Shih, the wife of Ximen Junyi, fought bravely and energetically and fled with Fu Wei on his back. He led more than ten of his strong men to escort him.

古文：追兵至，雄诞还拒，数被创，气弥厉，伏威遂脱。
现代文：追兵赶到，雄诞返身拒战，身上多处受伤，然而勇气百倍，竟使伏威逃免此难。
English: When the pursuing soldiers arrived, Fu Wei bravely returned to his body and resisted the battle. He was injured in many places on his body. However, he was a hundred times more courageous, and he was able to escape from this difficult situation.

古文：阚棱年长于雄诞，故军中号棱 大将军 ，雄诞 小将军 。
现代文：因阚棱年长于雄诞，以故军中称阚棱为大将军，称雄诞为小将军。
English: Because Yu Ren was older than Yu Xizhixing, Yu Ren was called the great general and Yu Xizhixing was called the small general in the old army.

古文：后伏威令辅公祏击子通，以雄诞、棱为副，战溧水，子通败，公祏乘胜追之，反为所挤，士皆走壁。
现代文：后来伏威命令辅公祏攻击李子通，派雄诞与阚棱为副手，交战于溧水，子通大败。公祏乘胜追击，却反为子通所败，军士全都坚守壁垒而不敢出战。
English: Later, Fu Wei ordered Auxiliary Public Marshal to attack Li Zi Tong, sent Yu Xing and Yu Ren as deputies, fought in Surabaya, Zi Tong was defeated. Public Marshal took advantage of the victory to pursue, but was defeated by Zi Tong, and the sergeants all stood firm against the barriers and dared not go to war.

古文：雄诞曰： 子通狃于胜，无营垒，今急击之，必克。 
现代文：雄诞说 ：子通因胜而骄，其军又无营垒，如急击其众，必能战胜。 
English: Yuanzhi said, "Zitong is proud of his victory, and his army has no strongholds. If he attacks his people in haste, he will surely win."

古文：公祏不从。
现代文：公祏不接受他的提议。
English: The public did not accept his proposal.

古文：雄诞独提私卒数百，衔枚夜往，乘风火之，子通大败走，度太湖。
现代文：雄诞便自率私属数百人衔枚夜往，顺风放火，子通大败而逃，渡过太湖而去。
English: On the night of the anniversary, he led hundreds of his followers in a night march, set fire to the wind, defeated and fled across the Taihu Lake.

古文：武德四年，与子通战苏州，却之。
现代文：武德四年，雄诞与子通战于苏州，将其击退。
English: In the fourth year of the Wude era, the Xiong Zi and his sons fought in Suzhou and repulsed them.

古文：子通以精兵保独松岭，雄诞遣将陈当率千兵出不意，乘高蔽崦，张疑帜，夜缚炬于树，遍山泽。
现代文：子通率精兵防守独松岭，雄诞派其部将陈当率兵千人出其不意，乘高据险，多张旗帜，夜里缚扎炬火于树上，遍布山泽之间。
English: Zixu led the elite soldiers to defend the unique pine ridge, and the hero dispatched his subordinate Chen Dang to lead thousands of soldiers to surprise, taking high risks, multiple flags, and tying torches to trees at night, all over the mountains and lakes.

古文：子通惧，烧营遁，保余杭，雄诞追禽之。
现代文：子通恐惧，烧营而逃，退保余杭，雄诞将他追擒。
English: Zongtong is afraid, burns the camp and runs away, retreats to Yuhang, and the hero pursues him.

古文：歙守汪华在郡称王且十年，雄诞还师攻之，华以劲甲出新安洞拒战，雄诞伏兵山谷，以弱卒数千斗，辄走壁，华来攻，壁中奋殊死，不可下。
现代文：歙州贼寇汪华占据该郡称王将近十年，雄诞还军攻讨。汪华率劲甲出新安洞口拒战，雄诞伏兵于山谷之间，而率弱卒数千人与之交锋，交战不久就退守本营。
English: Wang Hua, the thief of Zhangzhou, occupied the county for nearly ten years, and the hero returned to the army to attack. Wang Hua led the strong armor out of the Xian cave to resist the war, and the hero ambushed the soldiers between the valleys, and the weak soldiers led thousands of people to fight with them, and soon after the battle they retreated to the home camp.

古文：会暮还，雄诞伏兵已据洞口，不得归，遽面缚降。
现代文：汪华前来攻打，壁中士卒拼死奋战，久攻不下。天晚还军时，雄诞伏兵已占据洞口，不能返归，窘急无奈，只好自缚请降。
English: When Wang Hua came to attack, the wall sergeants fought to the death and could not attack for a long time. When the army returned late in the day, the heroic ambush had occupied the cave mouth, unable to return, desperate and helpless, they had no choice but to surrender.

古文：苏贼闻人遂安据昆山，无所属，伏威使讨之，雄诞以邑险而完，攻之引日，遂单骑造垒门，陈国威灵，因开晓祸福，遂安即降。
现代文：苏州贼寇闻人遂安占据昆山县，而无所归属，伏威派遣雄诞往讨。雄诞认为昆山地险而防守完备，攻打必费时日，便单骑前往城下，陈说国家威灵，开导晓谕祸福，遂安随即出降。
English: The Suzhou bandit Soan occupied Kunshan County, but he had nothing to belong to, so Fuwei sent Yuanzhao to discuss. Yuanzhao thought that Kunshan was dangerous and the defense was complete, and it would take time to attack, so he rode alone to the city, said that the country was good, and explained the evil and good, so An immediately surrendered.

古文：以前后功授歙州总管，封宜春郡公。
现代文：雄诞因前后战功授职歙州总管，封为宜春郡公。
English: He was awarded the post of the general manager of Bozhou due to his outstanding war achievements, and was named the governor of Yichun County.

古文：伏威入朝，以兵属雄诞。
现代文：伏威入朝时，将兵权交付雄诞。
English: At the time of Fu Wei's accession to the imperial court, military power was handed over to the emperor.

古文：辅公祏将反，患其异己，纵反间，阳言得伏威教，责雄诞贰。
现代文：辅公祏将要反叛朝廷，顾虑雄诞异己，便纵其反间，扬言得到伏威的指示，责备雄诞怀有二心。
English: Fu Gongxuan was going to rebel against the imperial court, and he was worried that the young man was a heretic. Despite this, he threatened to get Fu Wei's instructions and scolded the young man for having two hearts.

古文：雄诞素质直，信之，乃归卧疾。
现代文：雄诞素来率直，信其谎言，便称病卧床休养。
English: The young man, who had always been outspoken, believed his lies and said he was sick in bed.

古文：公祏夺其兵，遣西门君仪谕计，雄诞始悔寤，曰： 天下方靖，王在京师，当谨守籓，奈何为族夷事？
现代文：公祏趁机夺其兵权，派遣西门君仪谕以反叛朝廷之计，雄诞这才后悔，明白是怎么一回事，便说道 ：方今天下太平，大王留在京师，应当谨守藩服，为何要干这种灭族之事呢？
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity to seize his military power, the court official dispatched Simon the Great to rebel against the imperial court. It was only when he became emperor that he regretted it. When he understood what had happened, he said, "The country is at peace today, the great king is staying in Beijing, he should respect the dress code of the domain. Why do you want to do such a thing to exterminate the people?

古文：雄诞虽死，谊不从！ 
现代文：雄诞虽死，不敢从命！ 
English: Though the hero dies, he dares not die!

古文：公祏遂缢之。
现代文：公祏便缢杀了他。
English: He was publicly flogged and killed.

古文：雄诞爱人，善抚士，能致下死力，每破城邑，整众山立，无丝毫犯。
现代文：雄诞为人仁爱，善抚士卒，能得部下死力，每逢攻破城堡，都能约束部下，秋毫无犯。
English: The hero is benevolent and kind to his subordinates. He is able to gain the death of his subordinates. Whenever the castle is breached, he is able to restrain his subordinates, and there is no fall.

古文：死之日，江南士庶为流涕。
现代文：因此被害之日，江南士民无不为之流涕。
English: Therefore, on the day of the disaster, the people of Jiangnan all shed tears.

古文：刘武周以兵入寇，君璋曰： 唐以一州兵掇取三辅，所向风靡，此殆天命，非人谋，不可争也。
现代文：高祖嘉奖其忠节，命其子世果承袭宜春郡公的封爵。太宗即位后，下诏赠予左骁卫大将军、越州都督，谥为忠。世果在垂拱初年，任官至广州都督、安西大都护。苑君璋是马邑郡豪杰，以矫捷勇武自励，刘武周率兵入寇，君璋说 ：唐主率一州之兵，收取三辅之地，所向披靡，此是天命，不是人谋所致，不可与他争锋。
English: Emperor Gao praised his loyalty and ordered his son Shiguo to inherit the title of Duke of Yichun County. After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, the imperial edict was presented to General Zuo Jianwei, the governor of Yue Prefecture, for his loyalty. In the first year of his reign, Shiguo was appointed to the governor of Guangzhou and the governor of Anxi Province. Yuan Junya was a hero of Mayi County, who encouraged himself with agility and bravery. Liu Wuzhou led the troops into the invasion. Junya said: "The lord of Tang led the troops of one province, received three subsidiary places, and was victorious. This is fate,

古文：太原而南多岩阻，今束甲深入，无踵军，有失不可偿，不如连突厥与唐合从，南面称孤，上策也。 
现代文：太原以南地多险阻，如今裹甲而入，恐无接应，万一有失后果难堪，不如连结突厥而与唐和好，南面称王，方为上策。 
English: The land south of Taiyuan is full of dangers and obstacles, and now they are rushing into it, fearing no response. In the unlikely event of an embarrassing loss, it would be better to link up with Turkey and make peace with Tang. The south is king, and that is the best strategy.

古文：武周不听，使君璋守朔州，引众内侵，未几败，泣曰： 废君言，乃至此！ 
现代文：武周不听，派君璋留守朔州，率众内侵，不久战败，哭着说： 不听您的话，以致落到这个地步！ 
English: Wu Zhou did not listen, sent Junya to stay in Shuozhou, led the crowd to invade, soon defeated, crying: I did not listen to your words, so I fell to this point!

古文：即与共趋突厥。
现代文：随即共同逃往突厥。
English: They then fled together to Turkey.

古文：武周死，突厥以君璋为大行台，统武周部曲，使郁射设监兵，与旧将高满政夜袭代州，不克。
现代文：武周死后，突厥命君璋为大行台。统率武周的部下，派郁射设监其兵，与旧将高满政一道夜袭代州，未能攻下。
English: After the death of Wu Zhou, the Turk's life was taken as a hostage. Under the leadership of Wu Zhou's subordinates, Yu Sha was sent to supervise his soldiers, and together with the old general Gaoman Zheng, they attacked Daizhou at night, but failed to capture it.

古文：高祖遣使招之，赐铁券，约不死。
现代文：高祖派遣使者招抚他，赐予铁券，保证不杀。
English: Gaozhu sent an emissary to entice him, gave him an iron certificate, and promised not to kill him.

古文：君璋拒命，进寇代州，刺史王孝德拒却之。
现代文：君璋不接受朝命，进犯代州，刺史王孝德将其击退。
English: Junyao did not accept the order of the emperor and attacked Daizhou. Wang Xiaode stabbed him and drove him back.

古文：满政劝君璋曰： 夷狄无礼，岂可北面臣之？
现代文：满政劝君璋说 ：夷狄无礼，怎能北面称臣？
English: Mansei persuaded Junyao to say: "You are impolite, how can you praise a subject from the north?"

古文：请尽杀其众以归唐。 
现代文：请尽杀其众以归附唐朝。 
English: Please kill as many of them as possible to join the Tang Dynasty.

古文：君璋不从。
现代文：君璋不同意。
English: Junya disagrees.

古文：而马邑困于兵，人厌乱，满政因众不忍，夜胁君璋，君璋奔突厥。
现代文：而马邑困于兵祸，人心厌乱，满政因众人不满，夜逼君璋，君璋逃奔突厥。
English: However, Ma'eup was beset by military disaster, the people were fed up with the turmoil, the Manchurian government was dissatisfied with the people, forced Junyao to flee at night, and Junyao fled to Turkey.

古文：满政以城归，诏拜朔州总管，封荣国公。
现代文：满政以城归朝，下诏拜为朔州总管，封为荣国公。
English: After the return of the city to the imperial court in Manchukuo, he was appointed governor of Shuozhou and crowned as Rongguogong.

古文：君璋引突厥攻陷马邑，杀满政，夷其党，乃去，退保恒安。
现代文：君璋带领突厥兵成攻陷马邑，杀害满政，尽灭其党羽而去，退保于恒安。
English: Kim Byung-soo led the Turkish army to attack and capture Ma'eup, killed Manseong, wiped out his party and fled to Heng'an.

古文：其部皆中国人，多叛去，君璋穷，乃降，自请鄣虏赎罪。
现代文：君璋部下尽是中原人士，往往叛离，君璋势穷请降，自请抵御北虏以赎罪。
English: His subordinates were all from the Central Plains, and they often defected. The powerful ruler begged for their surrender and offered to atone for their sins by resisting the northern invaders.

古文：高祖遣雁门人元普赐金券，会颉利亦召之，意犹豫。
现代文：高祖派遣雁门人元普赐予铁券，恰遇颉利也遣使来招，心怀犹豫。
English: Gao Zu dispatched Yanmen Genpu to bestow iron coupons, and when it happened that He Li also sent an envoy to recruit, he hesitated.

古文：子孝政谏曰： 大人许唐降，又贰颉利，自取亡也。
现代文：其子孝政谏劝说： 大人既答应降于唐朝，又要贰于颉利，这是自取灭亡。
English: His son, Xiao Zhengqi, persuaded him: "It is self-defeating for an adult not only to agree to surrender to the Tang Dynasty, but also to surrender to Goryeo.

古文：今粮尽众携，不即决，恐衿肘变生，孝政不忍见祸之酷也！ 
现代文：如今粮食殆尽人心又离，不及时决断，恐怕发生意外变故，孝政不忍见此惨祸！ 
English: Now the grain is exhausted and the people are separated. If we do not make a decision in time, I am afraid there will be an accident. Xiaozheng cannot bear to see this disaster!

古文：即单骑南奔，君璋喻返之，召众与议。
现代文：随即单骑南奔，君璋叫他返回，然后召集众人商议。
English: He then rode south alone. Junyao told him to return, and then called everyone together for discussion.

古文：恒安人郭子威曰： 恒安故王者都，山川足以自固，突厥方强，我援之，可观天下变，何遽降？ 
现代文：恒安人郭子威说： 恒安从前是王者之都，山川形势足以自固，突厥正强，可为我援，据此可观天下之变，何必急着投降？ 
English: Guo Ziwei, a resident of Heng'an, said: "Heng'an used to be the capital of kings, the mountain and river situation is self-sufficient, the Turks are strong and can help me. According to this, we can see the changes in the world. Why should we rush to surrender?

古文：君璋然之，执元普送突厥，颉利德之，遣以锦裘羊马。
现代文：君璋赞同其议，执送元普于突厥，颉利感其诚义，送以锦裘羊马。
English: Junyao agreed with his proposal, and sent Yuan Pu to Turkey. Jinli felt his sincerity and sent Jin Qiu a sheep and a horse.

古文：其下怨，投书于门曰： 不早附唐，父子诛。 
现代文：其部下埋怨，投包信于门说： 不早日降唐，父子诛灭。 
English: His subordinates complained, and sent letters to the emperor saying, "If the Tang Dynasty is not brought down at an early date, the father and son will perish."

古文：孝政惧，欲自归，为君璋所拘。
现代文：孝政害怕，想自归朝廷，被君璋拘禁。
English: Takamasa was afraid and wanted to return to the imperial court, but he was detained by Junko.

古文：与突厥寇马邑，犯太原，边人苦之。
现代文：其后与突厥入寇马邑，进犯太原，使边民吃尽苦头。
English: Afterwards, they entered Kouma-eup with the Turks and invaded Taiyuan, making the border people suffer greatly.

古文：见颉利政乱，知将亡，遂率所部降，颉利追，击走其兵。
现代文：后来见颉利政局混乱，知其将亡，便率所部归降，颉利追击，君璋击退其兵。
English: Later, seeing the political turmoil in Goryeo and knowing that he was about to die, he led his troops to surrender, Goryeo pursued him, and Junlun repulsed his troops.

古文：入朝，拜安州都督，封芮国公，食五百户，赐帛四千匹。
现代文：入朝后，任职安州都督，封为芮国公，享受实封五百户，赐予丝帛四千匹。
English: After he entered the imperial court, he served as the governor of Anzhou and was named the prince of Shandong Province. He enjoyed the title of 500 households and was given 4,000 silkworms.

古文：君璋不晓书，然天资习事，历职有惠称。
现代文：君璋不晓文字，但天资习于政事，任职期间有惠称。
English: Although he did not know the written language, he was a natural at politics and was given a title of honor during his time in office.

古文：贞观中，卒。
现代文：贞观年间去世。
English: He died in the same year as Zhenguan.

古文：罗艺，字子廷，襄州襄阳人，家京兆之云阳。
现代文：罗艺字子廷，襄州襄阳县人，家居京兆府云阳县。
English: Luo Yi Zi Zi Ting, a resident of Yangyang County, Yangzhou, lives in Yunyang County, Beijing.

古文：父荣，隋监门将军。
现代文：父亲罗荣，任隋监门将军。
English: His father, Luo Rong, was a general in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：艺刚愎不仁，勇攻战，善用槊。
现代文：罗艺刚愎而不仁，勇于攻战，善于用槊。
English: Luo Yiyi is tough and tough-minded, brave in battle, and good at using the crossbow.

古文：大业中，以战力补虎贲郎将。
现代文：大业年间，因战功补任虎贲郎将。
English: During the Taiei era, he was promoted to the post of Kogakuro shogun due to his war exploits.

古文：辽东之役，李景以武卫大将军督饟北平，诏艺以兵属，分部严一。
现代文：伐辽战役时，李景以武卫大将军身份督运粮草于北平，下诏罗艺之兵归李景节制。
English: During the Battle of Liao, Li Jing, as General Wu Wei, supervised the transportation of grain and grass in Beiping, and the soldiers of Luo Yi were subordinated to Li Jing.

古文：然任气，尝慢侮景，频为景辱。
现代文：罗艺部署严整划一，但任凭气性，曾凌侮李景，被李景所折辱。
English: Luo Yi's deployment was strict and uniform, but he was allowed to rely on his temperament. He once insulted Li Jing and was humiliated by Li Jing.

古文：天下盗起，涿郡号富饶，伐辽兵仗多在，而仓盈羡，又临朔宫多珍宝，屯师且数万，苦盗贼侵掠，留守将赵什住、贺兰谊、晋文衍等不能支。
现代文：天下盗贼蜂起，涿郡号为富饶，伐辽兵器多在，仓库物质充盈，而且临朔宫中多藏珍宝，驻军也有几万人，但苦于盗贼劫掠，留守将领赵什住、贺兰谊、晋文衍等人不能抵御。
English: Thieves rose up all over the world, the county name of Zhai County was Rich, there were many weapons of the Liao Dynasty, the warehouses were full of materials, and there were many treasures in the Linshuo Palace. There were also tens of thousands of garrison troops, but they suffered from the robberies, and the remaining generals Zhao Shizhu, Helan Yi, Jin Wenyan and others could not resist.

古文：艺捍寇，数破却之，勇常冠军，为诸将忌畏。
现代文：罗艺与贼寇交战，多次获胜，勇力为诸军之冠，为诸将所忌畏。
English: Luo Yiyi fought with the bandits and won many times. His bravery was the crown of all armies and was feared by all generals.

古文：艺阴自计，因出师，诡说众曰： 吾军讨贼数有功，而食乏。
现代文：罗艺暗自谋画，因出兵作战之机，煽动众人说 ：我军讨伐贼寇屡建功勋，而食用缺乏。
English: Luo Yiyi secretly plotted, and because of the opportunity to send troops to fight, he incited everyone to say: Our army has repeatedly made great achievements in fighting against the bandits, but there is a lack of food.

古文：官粟若山，而留守不赈恤，岂安人强众意邪？ 
现代文：官府粮食堆积如山，而留守官员不肯赈恤我们，这难道是安人强众的意思吗？ 
English: The government's grain is piling up like a mountain, and the officials left behind are not willing to take pity on us. Is this the meaning of strengthening the people?

古文：士皆怨。
现代文：军士都不满意。
English: The sergeants aren't happy.

古文：既还，郡丞出郊谒，艺执之，陈兵入，什住等惧，争听命。
现代文：不久军队返回，郡丞出城迎接，罗艺逮住他们，陈兵而入，赵什住等人害怕，争着听命于他。
English: Soon the army returned, the county magistrate went out of the city to meet them, Luo Yi caught them, Chen soldiers rushed in, Zhao Shizhu and others were afraid and fought to obey him.

古文：艺即发库赀赐战士，仓粟给穷人，境内大悦。
现代文：罗艺随即拿出库物分赐战士，开仓分粮给穷人，境内军民大喜。
English: Luo Yi immediately took out the storehouse to distribute goods to the soldiers, opened the storehouse to distribute grain to the poor, and the soldiers and people in the territory were very happy.

古文：杀异己者渤海太守唐祎等，威动北边，柳城、怀远并归附。
现代文：杀渤海太守唐等异己分子，声威震动北方边地，柳城、怀远等处全都归附。
English: The killing of foreign elements such as the Emperor of the Bohai Sea and the ruler of the Tang Dynasty shook the northern borderlands, and Liucheng, Huaiyuan and other places were all annexed.

古文：黜柳城太守杨林甫，改郡曰营州，以襄平太守邓皓为总管，艺自称幽州总管。
现代文：废黜柳城太守杨林甫，将该郡改名为营州，任命襄平太守邓嵩为总管，罗艺自称为幽州总管。
English: Yang Linfu, the governor of Liucheng, was deposed, the county was renamed Yingzhou, and Deng Song, the governor of Yangping, was appointed as the general manager. Luo Yi called himself the general manager of Yingzhou.

古文：宇文化及至山东，遣使招艺，艺曰： 我隋旧臣，今大行颠覆，义不辱于贼。 
现代文：宇文化及到达山东地面，派遣使者招降罗艺，罗艺说： 我是隋朝的旧臣，现在皇上遇害，义不辱没于贼。 
English: When he reached the ground in Shandong, he sent an envoy to recruit Luo Yi. Luo Yi said: I am an old vassal of the Sui Dynasty, now the emperor has been killed, I will not be humiliated by the thief.

古文：斩使者，为炀帝发丧三日。
现代文：斩其使者，为隋炀帝发丧致哀三天。
English: His envoy was beheaded, and three days of mourning were declared for the Sui and Qian emperors.

古文：时窦建德、高开道亦遣使于艺，艺谓官属曰： 建德等皆剧贼，不足共功名，唐公起兵据关中，民望所系，王业必成，吾决归之。
现代文：当时窦建德、高开道也派遣使者招罗艺，罗艺对其部属说 ：窦建德等人都是剧贼大盗，不足与共功名。唐公起兵占据关中，人心所向，必成帝业，我决定归附于他。
English: At that time, Dou Jiande and Gao Kaido also sent envoys to recruit Luo Yi, and Luo Yi said to his subordinates: Dou Jiande and others are thieves and thieves, and they all have their merits and demerits. Tang Gong raised an army to occupy Guanzhong, and I decided to attach myself to him.

古文：敢异议者戮！ 
现代文：敢有不同意见者斩！ 
English: Kill anyone who dares to have a different opinion!

古文：会张道源抚辑山东，亦谕艺降，武德二年，乃奉表以地归。
现代文：时逢张道源招抚山东，也派使者劝他归降。武德二年，便奉表以其地归降。
English: Whenever Zhang Daoyuan made overtures to Shandong, he also sent an envoy to persuade him to surrender. Two years later, he was forced to surrender.

古文：诏封燕王，赐姓，豫属籍。
现代文：下诏封为燕王，赐姓李氏，录入宗正属籍。
English: He was given the posthumous title of Yan Wang, given the surname Li, and registered as a member of the Zongzheng clan.

古文：数与建德战，多所禽馘。
现代文：后来多次与窦建德交战，擒获颇多。
English: Later, he fought with Dou Jiande many times and won a lot of victories.

古文：秦王击刘黑闼，高祖诏艺弟监门将军寿以兵从，艺自率众数万破刘什善、张君立于徐河。
现代文：秦王进击刘黑闼，高祖下诏罗艺之弟临门将军罗寿率兵相从，罗艺亲自率众数万击破刘什善、张君立于徐河。
English: The Qin king marched into Liu Heyao, and the Linmen general Luo Shou, the younger brother of Gao Zu's subordinate Zhao Luo Yi, led the troops to follow, and Luo Yi personally led tens of thousands of people to defeat Liu Shishan and Zhang Junli in Xuhe.

古文：黑闼引突厥入寇，艺复以兵与皇太子建成会洺州，遂请入朝。
现代文：刘黑闼带领突厥入关进犯，罗艺又率兵与皇太子建成会师于氵名州，于是请求入朝。
English: Liu Heixuan led the Turks to invade Guanzhong, and Luo Yi led the troops to join the crown prince in Shennai, and then requested to enter the imperial court.

古文：帝厚礼之，拜左翊卫大将军。
现代文：高祖以厚礼款待，并授职左翊卫大将军。
English: Gaozu treated them with great hospitality and awarded them the post of General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：艺负其功，且贵重不少屈，秦王左右尝至其营，艺辱之。
现代文：罗艺自夸其功，自视甚高而无所屈从，秦王左右曾至其营，罗艺无故折辱他们。
English: Luo Yi boasted of his exploits, he regarded himself as very high and had nothing to submit to. Qin kings and others came to his camp, and Luo Yi insulted them for no reason.

古文：高祖怒，以属吏，久乃释。
现代文：高祖发怒，将他交吏下狱，过了好久才放他出来。
English: Gaozhu was angry and sent him to prison. It was a long time before he was released.

古文：时突厥放横，藉艺威名欲惮虏，诏以本官领天节军将，镇泾州。
现代文：当时突厥放肆横行，朝廷想借罗艺威名镇住北夷，便下诏他以本官兼领天节军将，镇守泾州。
English: At that time, the Turks were rampant, and the imperial court wanted to borrow Luo Yiwu's famous town to live in Beiyi, and then ordered him to be his own officer and commander of the Tianjie army, and to guard Zhangzhou.

古文：太宗即位，进开府仪同三司。
现代文：太宗即位后，晋爵开府仪同三司。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Jinjue Kaifu Yi and the three officials left.

古文：艺内惧，乃图反，诡言阅武。
现代文：罗艺内心害怕报复，便谋图反叛，假言检阅军队。
English: Luo Yiyi was afraid of retaliation in his heart, so he plotted a rebellion and pretended to review the army.

古文：兵既集，称被密诏入朝，军至豳，治中赵慈皓出谒，遂据州。
现代文：兵马既集，假称接受密诏入朝，行军到豳州时，治中赵慈皓出城拜见，于是趁势占据州城。
English: As soon as the soldiers and horses were assembled, they assumed that they had accepted the secret imperial edict to enter the imperial court, and when they marched to Zhangzhou, Zhao Cixi went out of the city to meet them, and took advantage of the situation to occupy the state capital.

古文：帝命长孙无忌、尉迟敬德击之，未至，慈皓与统军杨岌谋诛艺，艺觉，执慈皓。
现代文：太宗命令长孙无忌与尉迟敬德率兵进击，大军还没抵达，赵慈皓便与统军杨岌谋议诛除罗艺，被罗艺发觉，抓住赵慈皓。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the eldest grandson Wu Boi and the lieutenant Qi Jingde to lead the troops to attack. Before the large army arrived, Zhao Cixi and the United Army Yang precariously discussed the removal of Luo Yi. Luo Yi discovered and caught Zhao Cixi.

古文：岌居外，即攻之，艺败，弃妻子，从数百骑奔突厥。
现代文：杨岌当时还在城外，随即攻城，罗艺战败，抛弃妻子儿女，带领数百名骑兵逃奔突厥。
English: At that time, Yang Du was still outside the city. He immediately attacked the city, defeated Luo Yi, abandoned his wife and children, and led hundreds of cavalry to flee to Turkey.

古文：抵宁州，骑稍亡，左右斩之，传首，枭于都市。
现代文：到宁州时，从骑逐渐逃散，其左右斩杀罗艺，传首京师，挂于市中示众。
English: When they arrived in Ningzhou, they gradually dispersed from the cavalry. They killed Luo Yi on both sides, and the head of the Beijing Division was hung in the city for the public to see.

古文：寿时为利州都督，亦及诛。
现代文：罗寿当时任利州都督，也被诛杀。
English: Luo Shou, who was the governor of Lishu at the time, was also killed.

古文：先是，济阴女子李，自言通鬼道，能愈疾，四方惑之，诏取致京师。
现代文：从前，济阴有位李氏妇女，自称能通鬼道，能治疗疾病，四方之人受其迷惑，下诏接她进京。
English: Once upon a time, there was a Li woman in Jiyin who claimed to be able to communicate with ghosts and cure diseases. People from all over the country were bewitched by her and came to Beijing to meet her.

古文：尝往来艺家，谓艺妻孟曰： 妃相贵，当母天下。 
现代文：曾来往罗艺家里，对罗艺的妻子孟氏说： 您有贵相，必定成为天下之母。 
English: He once went to Luo Yi's home and said to Luo Yi's wife Meng: You have a noble face, you will surely become the mother of the world.

古文：孟令视艺，又曰： 妃之贵由于王，贵色且发。 
现代文：孟氏叫她为罗艺看相，又说： 您的富贵是因燕王而来，燕王的贵色将要发挥。 
English: Mr. Meng asked her to look after Luo Yiyi. He also said, "Your wealth is due to King Yan. The preciousness of King Yan will be brought into play."

古文：艺妻信之，亦赞以反，既败，与李皆斩。
现代文：罗艺之妻相信她的话，也赞同谋反，失败之后，和李氏一道被斩。
English: Luo Yi's wife believed her words and also agreed to conspire to rebel. After the failure, she was beheaded together with Li.

古文：王君廓，并州石艾人。
现代文：王君廓是并州石艾县人。
English: Wang Junku is from Shiai County, Wenzhou.

古文：少孤贫，为驵侩，无行，善盗。
现代文：少时孤贫，曾为市场经纪人，品行不好，惯于盗窃。
English: He was poor for a while, worked as a market broker, had a bad character, and was used to stealing.

古文：尝负竹笱如鱼具，内置逆刺，见鬻缯者，以笱囊其头，不可脱，乃夺缯去，而主不辨也，乡里患之。
现代文：曾背负形同渔具的竹篓，内设倒刺，路遇卖丝绸者，用篓扣住脑袋，使其无法摆脱，随即夺走丝绸，而原主不知被谁劫夺，成为乡里一大祸害。
English: Once upon a time, there was a bamboo pole with the same shape as a fishing tackle, with a barbed spike inside. A man selling silk on the road hit his head with the spike, making it impossible to get rid of, and then took away the silk. The original owner was robbed by someone, and became a great scourge in the village.

古文：大业末，欲聚兵为盗，请与叔俱，不从，乃诬邻人通叔母者，与叔共杀之，遂皆亡命。
现代文：大业末年，想集聚兵马为盗，请与叔父同行，未能说服，便诬陷邻居与叔母私通，与叔父一同杀人，随后逃走。
English: At the end of his life, he wanted to gather soldiers and horses to steal, so he asked his uncle to accompany him. Unable to convince him, he framed his neighbor for having an affair with his aunt, killed her together with his uncle, and then ran away.

古文：众稍集，掠夏、长平。
现代文：其众渐多，劫掠夏县、长平。
English: Their numbers gradually increased, and they plundered Xia County and Changping.

古文：河东丞丁荣拒之，且遣使慰召。
现代文：河东郡臣丁荣率兵抵御，并派使者招抚。
English: Minister Ding Rong of Hedong County led the troops to resist, and sent an envoy to appease.

古文：君廓见使，谬为欲归首者。
现代文：君廓见到使者，装出愿意归降的姿态。
English: When the nobles saw the messenger, they pretended to be willing to surrender.

古文：荣轻之，因陈兵登山，君廓悉伏甲山谷中。
现代文：丁荣轻视他，便陈兵登山，君廓尽伏甲兵于山谷之中。
English: Ding Rong despised him, so Chen Bing climbed the mountain, and Junku did his best to subdue the armored soldiers in the valley.

古文：荣军还，掩击，破之。
现代文：丁荣率军返还，君廓掩袭，大败其众。
English: Ding Rong led the army to return, Jun Guo attacked and defeated them.

古文：又与贼韦宝、邓豹等掠虞乡，宋老生与战，君廓不利，保方山，老生列营迫之。
现代文：还与贼寇韦宝、邓豹等股劫掠虞乡，宋老生出战，君廓不胜，退保于方山，老生列营进逼。
English: They also plundered Yu Township with the bandits Wei Bao, Deng Bao and other groups, Song Laosheng went to war, Junku was invincible, retired to Fangshan, and Laosheng marched into the camp.

古文：君郭粮尽，诈请降，与老生隔涧语，祈请哀到。老生为感动，稍缓之，君廓一昔遁去。
现代文：君廓粮尽力屈，假称愿降，与老生隔溪说话，祈求哀告，老生被他感动，放松了警惕，君廓趁机在夜里逃脱。
English: He tried his best to give in, pretending to be willing to give in, talking with the old man across the stream, praying and lamenting. The old man was moved by him, relaxed his vigilance, and the monk took the opportunity to escape in the night.

古文：高祖兵起，召之，不从。
现代文：高祖起兵，招谕君廓，君廓不愿归附。
English: Gao Zu raised an army and invited the Junko, but the Junko did not want to join.

古文：归李密，密不甚礼，乃归国。
现代文：后投靠李密，李密不很重视他，便又归降朝廷。
English: After that, he relied on Li Mi, but Li Mi did not attach much importance to him, so he returned to the imperial court.

古文：授上柱国、假河内太守、常山郡公，迁辽州刺史，徙封上谷，从战东都有功，为右武卫将军。
现代文：授职上柱国、代理河内太守，封为常山郡公，迁任辽州刺史，徙封上谷郡公。随同作战于东都，立下功勋，任职右武卫将军。
English: He was awarded the post of Shangzhu Guo, acting as the governor of Hanoi, appointed as the governor of Changshan County, transferred to the post of Liaozhou chief historian, and transferred to the post of Shanggu County governor. He accompanied the war in Dongdu, made meritorious service, and served as the right guard general.

古文：诏劳之曰： 尔以十三人破贼万，自古以少制众，无有也！ 
现代文：下诏慰劳他说 ：你率十三人击破贼军万人，自古以少胜众，不曾有过！ 
English: He sent a message of consolation, saying: "You and your thirteen men defeated an army of ten thousand thieves. Since ancient times, the few have prevailed over the many. Never before!"

古文：赐杂彩百段。
现代文：赐予各种绸缎一百匹。
English: and bestowed a hundred silks of all kinds.

古文：别下轩辕、罗川二县，破世充将魏隐，击粮道缑氏，沈米艘三十柁。
现代文：另外还攻下頧辕、罗川二县，击破世充部将魏隐，袭击粮道于缑氏，凿沉米船三十艘。
English: In addition, they also captured two counties of Yunnan and Luochuan, defeated General Wei Yin of Shicheng, attacked the grain route of the Yunnan clan, and sank thirty rice ships.

古文：进爵彭国公，镇幽州。
现代文：晋爵为彭国公，镇守幽州。
English: He was promoted to the peerage of Peng Guogong and became the town guard of Yuzhou.

古文：击突厥，俘斩二千，获马五千匹。
现代文：后袭击突厥，俘斩二千人，缴获战马五千匹。
English: Later they attacked the Turks, killed two thousand captives, and captured five thousand horses.

古文：入朝，帝赐所乘马，令自廷中乘以出，谓侍臣曰： 昔蔺相如叱秦王，目眦皆烈。
现代文：入朝进见时，高祖将所乘御马赐予他，命他从廷中骑乘而出，并对侍臣说： 从前蔺相如喝叱秦王，眼眶尽裂。
English: When he entered the court, Emperor Gaozong gave him the horse he was riding and ordered him to ride out of the court. He said to his courtiers, "In the past, if you were to scold King Qin, your eyelids would crack.

古文：君廓往击建德，李勣遏之，至发愤大呼，鼻耳皆流血，其勇何特古人哉！
现代文：君廓前往袭击建德，李责力加以阻止，君廓发愤大呼，鼻耳全都出血，其勇不减于古人！
English: Junkuro went to attack Jiande, Li Li Li stopped him, Junkuro shouted in anger, his nose and ears were all bleeding, his courage was no less than that of the ancients!

古文：朕当不以例赏。 
现代文：我应不照常例予以奖赏。 
English: I should reward him in an unusual way.

古文：乃赐锦袍金带，还幽州。
现代文：便赐予锦袍金带，派他还镇幽州。
English: He gave him a gold brocade belt and sent him to Yuzhou.

古文：会大都督庐江王瑗反，欲夺君廓兵以委王诜。
现代文：时逢大都督庐江王李瑗谋反，想夺君廓兵权以委任王诜。
English: At the right time, the great governor of the Li River, King Li Xi, plotted a rebellion and wanted to seize the military power of the royal family to appoint Wang Xi.

古文：君廓本绐瑗使乱为己功，乃从数骑候诜，留骑于外，曰： 闻呼声则入。 
现代文：君廓本来就骗哄李瑗作乱好让自己立功，便带领数骑去见王诜，而留从骑于门外，吩咐说 ：听见呼声就冲进来。 
English: The courtier had already tricked Li Yao into creating a disturbance so that he could take credit for the victory, so he led several horsemen to see Wang Yao, but left the horsemen outside the gate and ordered them to rush in when they heard the shouts.

古文：乃独款诜，诈曰： 有急变，当白！ 
现代文：便只身拜见王诜，骗他说 ：有急变，当告白！ 
English: He went to see Wang Yao alone and lied to him, saying, "There has been a sudden change, I must confess!"

古文：诜方沐，握发出，即斩之，因执瑗。
现代文：王诜正在洗头，握发而出，君廓随即斩杀，接着擒获李瑗。
English: Wang Yao was washing his hair, shook his head and came out. Jun Kuo immediately killed him, and then captured Li Yao.

古文：以功授幽州都督，瑗家口悉赐之，进左光禄大夫，赐帛千段。
现代文：因功授职幽州都督，将李瑗家人全都赐给他，并加衔为左光禄大夫，赐予丝帛一千匹。
English: He was awarded the post of Yuzhou governor for his merits, and all of Li Qian's family members were given to him. He was also given the title of Zuo Guanglu Doctor and a thousand silk reeds.

古文：居职不守法度，长史李玄道数以法绳督，猜惑不自安。
现代文：君廓居官不守法度，长史李道玄多次用朝廷法度加以约束，因而心怀疑惧内不自安。
English: The court officials did not abide by the law, and the chief historian, Li Daoxuan, was repeatedly restrained by the court's law, so he was suspicious and worried.

古文：会被召，至渭南，杀驿史，亡奔突厥，野人斩之。
现代文：后征召入朝，行至渭南时，杀害驿站官吏，逃往突厥，被乡村居民所杀。
English: Afterward, he was conscripted into the imperial court, and when he traveled to southern Anhui Province, he killed officials of the station, fled to Turkestan, and was killed by villagers.

古文：太宗顾前功，为收葬，待其家如初。
现代文：太宗因念前功，为他收葬，对待他的家属一如往常。
English: Taizong paid his respects, buried him, and treated his family members as usual.

古文：御史大夫温彦博奏： 君廓叛臣，不宜食封邑，有司失所宜言。 
现代文：御史大夫温彦博上奏说 ：君廓是叛臣，不应享受封邑，有关官员所言不当。 
English: Goshi no daifu (chief historian) Atsuhiko Hiroshige said, "The prince is a traitor and should not enjoy a fiefdom, and what the relevant officials said was inappropriate."

古文：乃贬为庶人。
现代文：这才贬为庶人。
English: That's when you're reduced to a commoner.

