古文：人主之术：处无为之事，而循行不言之教，清静而不动，一度而不摇，因循而任下，责成而不劳。
现代文：君主治理天下，应实施无为而治，推行无须说教就能使人明白的原则。君主自身应清静而不浮躁，坚持自然法度而不动摇；以顺循事物固有特性的态度任用下属，充分发挥群臣百官的作用，使他们各尽其责而自己不必亲自操劳和费心。
English: To govern the world, the monarch should implement the principle of doing nothing but ruling, and promote the principle of making people understand without preaching. The monarch himself should be calm and not impetuous, adhere to the natural law without wavering; appoint subordinates with an attitude of following the inherent characteristics of things, and give full play to the role of hundreds of officials, so that they each perform their duties without having to personally work and bother.

古文：是故心知规而师傅谕导，口能言而行人称辞，足能行而相者先导，耳能听而执正进谏。
现代文：所以根据上述的原则，君主心里明白，藏有韬略却让国师来晓喻开导，能说会道却让行人去陈说，脚腿灵便却让相者引导宾客，耳朵聪敏却由执政官员来转达百官意见或计谋。
English: Therefore, according to the above-mentioned principle, the monarch understands in his heart that there is a trick but let the state teacher understand and enlighten, can speak but let the pedestrians speak, the feet and legs are spirit but let the guests guide the guests, and the ears are smart but let the ruling officials convey the opinions or strategies of the officials.

古文：是故虑无失策，谋无过事；言为文章，行为仪表于天下；进退应时，动静循理；不为丑美好憎，不为赏罚喜怒；名各自名，类各自类，事犹自然，莫出于己。
现代文：因而，君主考虑问题便不会失策，行动计划便不会过错；言论合理，行为可作天下之表率；进退适合时宜，动静遵循原理；也不会因事物的美丑而产生好恶之情，更不会因赏罚而喜怒；事物叫什么名称就随它叫什么名称，事物属什么类别就让它属什么类别；事物是什么样子都是自然而然的，并不是由个人意志所决定的。
English: Therefore, the monarch will not make mistakes when considering problems, and his action plan will not be wrong; his speech will be reasonable, and his behavior will set an example for the world; his advance and retreat will be suitable for the times, and his movement will follow the principle; he will not have likes and dislikes because of the beauty and ugliness of things, and he will not be pleased or angry because of rewards and punishments; whatever the name of a thing is, it will be called by whatever name, and whatever category a thing belongs to, it will belong to whatever category; and whatever the appearance of a thing is, it is natural and not determined by personal will.

古文：故古之王者，冕而前旒，所以蔽明也；黈纩塞耳，所以掩聪；天子外屏，所以自障。
现代文：所以，古代帝王君主，带的冠冕前面装饰一串珠玉，这是用来遮挡视线的；冠冕两侧垂悬的绵丸球，这是用来堵塞耳朵的；皇帝宫外设立的屏风，这是用来阻隔自己、远离小人的。
English: Therefore, the ancient emperors and monarchs wore a string of beads in front of the crown, which was used to block the line of sight; the round balls hanging on both sides of the crown, which was used to block the ears; the screen set up outside the emperor's palace, which was used to block themselves and stay away from villains.

古文：故所理者远则所在者迩，所治者大则所守者小。
现代文：因此君主管辖的范围越远，所审察的范围却越近；治理的事情越大，所操持的事情却越小。
English: Therefore, the farther the scope of the ruler's jurisdiction, the closer the scope of the examination; the greater the governance, the smaller the operation.

古文：夫目妄视则淫，耳妄听则惑，口妄言则乱。
现代文：眼睛乱看则易淫邪，耳朵乱听则易迷惑，嘴巴乱说则易搅乱。
English: If the eyes are not in order, it is easy to commit adultery; if the ears are not in order, it is easy to be deceived; if the mouth is not in order, it is easy to be confused.

古文：夫三关者，不可不慎守也。
现代文：这三道关口，平时不可不谨慎把持。
English: In normal times, these three gates must be carefully controlled.

古文：若欲规之，乃是离之；若欲饰之，乃是贼之。
现代文：如果要去规范它，则是离散了它；如果要去修饰它，则是伤害了它。
English: If you want to standardize it, it is discrete; if you want to modify it, it is damaged.

古文：天气为魂，地气为魄；反之玄房，各处其宅，守而勿失，上通太一。
现代文：接受天之阳气的叫魂，接受地之阴气的叫魄；魂魄返聚心体玄房，各自所处自己位置，持守而不失散，人的精神就能上通太一元气。
English: Accept the yang of heaven to call the soul, accept the yang of earth to call the spirit; the soul returns to the heart and body, each in its own position, holding and not losing, and the human spirit can be connected to the one-element spirit.

古文：太一之精，通于天道。
现代文：这太一元气是与天道融会相通。
English: This great unity is related to the unification of heaven and earth.

古文：天道玄默，无容无则，大不可极，深不可测，尚与人化，知不能得。
现代文：天道沉静玄妙、没有形貌也没有常态规则，其大不可极，其深不可测；它常与人一起化育，而人的智慧却无法把握它。
English: The heavenly way is calm and subtle, without shape or normal rules. It is immeasurable and unfathomable. It is often bred with people, but human wisdom cannot grasp it.

古文：昔者神农之治天下也，神不驰于胸中，智不出于四域，怀其仁诚之心，甘雨时降，五谷蕃植，春生夏长，秋收冬藏，月省时考，岁终献功，以时尝谷，祀于明堂。
现代文：过去神农氏治理天下，精神沉静而不躁动驰骋于胸中，智慧藏匿而不显露于身外，只怀着一颗仁爱真诚之心。因而自然界甘雨及时降落，五谷繁茂生长，春生夏长，秋收冬藏。按月检查，每季考察，到年底向祖宗神灵汇报丰收成功的喜讯，按季节尝吃新谷，在明堂祭祀祖宗神灵。
English: In the past, the Shennong clan ruled the world. The spirit was calm but not restless, it ran in the chest, the wisdom was hidden and not revealed to the outside world, with only a heart of benevolence and sincerity. As a result, the nature's sweet rain fell in time, the grain flourished, the spring sprouted, the summer lengthened, and the autumn harvest was stored in the winter. Monthly inspections, quarterly inspections, and at the end of the year, the good news of the successful harvest was reported to the ancestral deities, the new valley was tasted according to the season, and the ancestral deities were sacrificed in the Ming Hall.

古文：明堂之制，有盖而无四方；风雨不能袭，寒暑不能伤。
现代文：明堂的建制式样，有天穹一样的圆形顶盖而无四面墙壁，但风雨却不能侵袭，寒暑也不能伤害。
English: The building style of the Ming Hall has a dome-like dome roof without four walls, but wind and rain can not invade, cold and heat can not hurt.

古文：迁延而入之，养民以公。
现代文：每当祭祀祖宗神灵时，怀着公心养育民众的神农氏率领随从胸襟坦荡步履从容地进入明堂。
English: Whenever the ancestral deities were being worshipped, the Shinnong clan, who had nurtured the people with sincerity, led the procession into the Ming Hall.

古文：其民朴重端悫，不忿争而财足，不劳形而功成，因天地之资而与之和同，是故威厉而不杀，刑错而不用，法省而不烦，故其化如神。
现代文：他的民众朴素稳重、正直诚实，不用互相争夺，因为财物富足，不用过分劳累身体而能大功告成。他凭借着大自然的资助，而与天地自然融会一体。所以，他尽管身处威厉地位，但却从不逞威逞凶；制定刑法政令，但却不必动用；法令简略而不烦杂，所以对民众的教化功效神奇。
English: His people are simple and stable, honest and honest, do not have to compete with each other, because they are rich in wealth, and can accomplish great feats without excessive physical exertion. He relies on the support of nature and is naturally integrated with heaven and earth. Therefore, although he is in a commanding position, he never behaves arrogantly; he makes criminal law decrees, but does not have to use them; the decrees are simple and not complicated, so they have a magical effect on the enlightenment of the people.

古文：其地南至交阯，北至幽都，东至暘谷，西至三危，莫不听从。
现代文：他的管辖范围南到交趾，北到幽都，东到旸谷，西到三危，各处无不听从归附。
English: His jurisdiction extends as far south as Jiaozuo, as far north as Yudu, as far east as Shibuya, and as far west as Sanhe, and everywhere he is obeyed.

古文：当此之时，法宽刑缓、囹圄空虚，而天下一俗，莫怀奸心。
现代文：在这个时候，法律宽厚，刑罚轻缓，监狱空虚，而天下风俗却纯一，谁也不怀奸诈之心。
English: At this time, the law is lenient, the punishment is light, the prison is empty, and the customs are pure, and no one is treacherous.

古文：末世之政则不然，上好取而无量，下贪狼而无让，民贫苦而忿争，事力劳而无功，智诈萌兴，盗贼滋彰，上下相怨，号令不行，报政有司，不务反道矫拂其本，而事修其末，削薄其德，曾累其刑，而欲以为治，无以异于执弹而来鸟，掸税而狎犬也，乱乃逾甚。
现代文：而晚世的政治就不是这样了。君主热衷于索取而没有休止，官吏贪婪得不懂得半点谦让；民众因贫困而被迫互相怨恨争夺，费尽辛劳而不得报酬；智巧奸诈从此萌发兴起，盗贼从此滋生泛滥；上上下下互相怨恨，法规号令不能推行实施；政府各级官员不致力于归依天道，而是违逆治国的根本，只注意修饰枝节、小事；这时德政受到砍削，而刑罚却得到加强增重，而想这样来治理好天下，无异于手拿弹弓却想招引鸟雀，挥动木棍却想与狗玩耍，那只会乱上添乱。
English: However, this is not the case with late-era politics. Monarchs are keen on demanding without stopping, officials are so greedy that they do not know how to be half-way humble; the people are forced to hate and compete with each other due to poverty, and they are not rewarded for their hard work; cleverness and treachery have sprung up from this, and thieves have proliferated from this; up and down resent each other, and regulations and orders cannot be implemented; government officials at all levels are not committed to adhering to the heavenly way, but are contrary to the fundamentals of governing the country, and only pay attention to decorating branches and trifles; at this time, German

古文：夫水浊则鱼脸，政苛则民乱。
现代文：水混浊则鱼儿就会浮出水面呼吸喘气，政令烦琐苛刻则民众烦躁不安。
English: If the water is muddy, the fish will come to the surface to breathe, and if the government orders are tedious and harsh, the people will be restless.

古文：故夫养虎豹犀象者，为之圈槛，供其嗜欲，适其饥饱，违其怒恚，然而不能终其天年者，形有所劫也。
现代文：所以那些驯养虎、豹、犀牛、大象的人，尽管给这些动物修建了栅栏，供给这些动物喜爱吃的食物，并适时投放不让这些动物挨饿，改变这些动物的暴怒性情，使之驯驯服服，但就是不能使它们享尽自然寿命，原因何在？
English: So why is it that those who have tamed tigers, leopards, rhinos, and elephants, despite building fences for these animals, providing them with the food they like to eat, and releasing them at the right time so that these animals do not starve, changing the violent nature of these animals and taming them, cannot make them enjoy their natural life span?

古文：是以上多故则下多诈，上多事则下多态，上烦扰则下不定，上多求则下交争。
现代文：这是因为这些动物的身体受到了强制的约束和胁迫。因此，在上的君主多智巧，在下的臣民就多奸诈；在上的君主多事情，在下的臣民易生事；在上的君主好烦扰，在下的臣民必受干扰而不安定；在上的君主多贪欲，在下的臣民好争斗。
English: This is because the bodies of these animals are constrained and coerced by force. Therefore, the higher the wisdom of the monarch, the more treacherous the subjects below; the higher the monarch, the more troublesome the subjects below; the higher the monarch, the more disturbed and unstable the subjects below; the higher the greed of the monarch, the more combative the subjects below.

古文：不直之于本，而事之于未，譬犹扬垛而弭尘，抱薪以救火也。
现代文：不立足根本而去追求末节，就好像扬起尘土去制止飞尘、抱着薪柴去救火一样。
English: To pursue the latter end without basing oneself on the former is like lifting up the dust to stop the flying dust and carrying the firewood to put out the fire.

古文：故圣人事省而易治，求寡而易澹，不施而仁，不言而信，不求而得，不为而成，块然保真，抱德推诚，天下从之，如响之应声，景之像形，其所修者本也。
现代文：所以，圣人简省事务而治理容易，欲求少而容易满足；不需布施而能表示仁爱，不须信誓旦旦反能显示诚实，不需索取就能获得，不用做什么反而能收到成效；他安然不动保持纯真，怀抱道德以诚待人；天下的人都归顺跟随他，如同回音应和声音，物影跟随形体：这些都在于圣人修养根本的缘故。
English: Therefore, the sage is frugal and easy to govern; his desires are few and easy to satisfy; he does not need to give, but he can show benevolence; he does not need to swear, but he can show honesty; he does not need to ask, but he can obtain; he does not need to do anything, but he can receive results; he remains immovable and pure, embraces morality and treats people with sincerity; people all over the world are obedient and follow him, like echoes and voices, and shadows follow shapes: these are the fundamental reasons for the cultivation of the sage.

古文：刑罚不足以移风，杀戮不足以禁奸，唯神化为贵，至精为神。
现代文：刑罚不足以移风易俗，杀戮不足以禁绝奸邪；唯有从精神上纯化才是根本，那至精的无为之道才有神奇作用。
English: Punishment is not enough to change customs, killing is not enough to banish evil; only spiritual purification is fundamental, and only the most refined way of doing nothing has a magical effect.

古文：夫疾呼不过闻百步，志之所在，逾于千里。
现代文：大声呼喊只能传到百步之远，而心志精神却能超越千里之外。
English: Loud shouts can only be heard a hundred paces away, but the spirit of aspiration can go beyond a thousand miles away.

古文：冬日之阳，夏日之阴，万物归之而莫使之然。
现代文：冬天的阳光、夏天的荫凉，万物都向往并喜欢它，却又没有谁要求万物这样子。
English: The sunshine of winter, the shade of summer, everything yearns for it and loves it, but no one asks everything to be like this.

古文：故至精之像，弗招而自来，不麾而自往，窈窈冥冥，不知为之者谁，而功自成。智者弗能诵，辩者弗能形。
现代文：所以，最纯精的东西，你不用召唤它就会自然到来、不用挥手它就会自然离去；它幽深玄妙，神不知鬼不觉地就使事物自然成功；有智慧者无法说清楚，善辩者又无法形容它。
English: Therefore, the purest thing, you do not have to summon it will naturally come, without waving it will naturally leave; it is subtle and mysterious, God unconsciously makes things naturally successful; the wise cannot say clearly, and the eloquent cannot describe it.

古文：昔孙叔敖恬卧，而邱人无所害其锋；市南宜辽弄丸，而两家之难无怕关其辞。
现代文：以前，孙叔敖安然静卧，使楚国不用刀枪却能称雄天下；楚都城南的勇士宜辽熊面对白公胜举剑威逼，心志不惧泰然自若地转动着手中的球丸，表达自己保持中立的立场，使自己在白公胜和令尹子西两家的战难中免受牵连。
English: In the past, Sun Shuxuan slept peacefully, so that the State of Chu was able to dominate the world without the use of swords and guns. In the face of Bai Gongs victory, the warriors of Liao Xiong in the south of the capital of Chu were forced to raise their swords. They were not afraid to turn the ball in their hands, expressing their neutral position, so that they would not be implicated in the battle between Bai Gongs victory and Ling Yin Zixi.

古文：鞅鞈铁铠，瞋目扼腕，其于以御兵刃，县矣！
现代文：披挂着皮革护胸甲和铁制铠甲，怒目扼腕、情绪激愤、立马横刀来抵御敌兵的刀枪，其功效要比以德服人差远了！
English: Wearing a leather breastplate and an iron breastplate, frowning, angry, and immediately wielding a sword to fend off the enemy's sword and gun, the effect is far worse than serving people with virtue!

古文：券契束帛，刑罚斧钺，其于以解难，薄矣！
现代文：以钱财笼络、刑法镇慑，这样来解决危难，其作用要比以德感化小得多！
English: To use money and wealth, and criminal law as a deterrent, to solve the crisis in this way, its role is much smaller than that of moral influence!

古文：待目而照见，待言而使令，其于为治，难矣！
现代文：凭眼睛观察事物、靠言辞发号施令，这样治理天下比无为而治难很多！
English: It is much more difficult to govern the world by observing things with one's eyes and giving orders with words than by doing nothing!

古文：蘧伯玉为相。子贡往观之，曰： 何以治国？ 
现代文：过去蘧伯玉做卫国的丞相，子贡前去拜访他，问： 你是怎么治理国家的？ 
English: In the past, Zibo Yu served as the Minister of National Defense, and Zigong went to visit him and asked: How do you govern the country?

古文：曰： 以弗治治之。 
现代文：蘧伯玉回答说： 靠不治来治理。 
English: Zou Bo-yu replied: Relying on incurable diseases to govern.

古文：简子欲伐卫，使史黯往觌焉。
现代文：赵简子准备征伐卫国，先派史墨前去侦察。
English: Zhao Jianzi was preparing to conquer and defend the country, and sent Shi Mo to scout ahead.

古文：还报曰： 蓬伯玉为相，未可以加兵。 
现代文：史墨回来报告说： 蘧伯玉担当卫国的丞相，所以不可以出兵。 
English: Shi Mo came back and reported: Zou Bo-yu is in charge of the Minister of National Defense, so he is not allowed to send troops.

古文：固塞险阻，何足以致之！
现代文：由此看来，坚固的要塞和险峻的关隘又怎么能起到这种功效呢？
English: From this point of view, how can a solid fortress and a precipitous pass have such an effect?

古文：故皋陶瘖而为大理，天下无虐刑，有贵于言者也；师旷瞽而为太宰，晋无乱政，有贵于见者也。
现代文：所以皋陶尽管聋哑，但就是凭着哑疾而做上了舜帝的司法官，天下没有暴虐的刑罚，哑巴却有着比语言更值得珍贵的地方；师旷眼瞎而当上晋国的太宰，晋国便没有混乱的政局，瞎子有着比明目者更珍贵的东西。
English: Therefore, although Juntao was deaf and mute, it was by virtue of his muteness that he became Emperor Juntao's judicial officer. There is no tyrannical punishment in the world, but a mute has something more precious than language; if a teacher is blind and becomes the Dazhai of Jin, there will be no chaotic political situation in Jin, and the blind have something more precious than the sighted.

古文：故不言之令，不视之见，此伏羲、神农之所以为师也。
现代文：所以说，不动嘴说话就能实行政令，不睁眼观看就能明察秋毫，这就是伏羲和神农能成为后人师表的缘故。
English: Therefore, without moving the mouth to speak, you can implement the executive order, and without opening your eyes to watch, you can clearly see the autumn, which is why Fuxi and Shennong can become the teachers of future generations.

古文：故民之化也，不从其所言而从所行。
现代文：民众受感化，不是根据君主的言传，而是根据君主的身教。
English: The people are influenced, not by the monarch's words, but by the monarch's example.

古文：故齐庄公好勇，不使斗争，而国家多难，其渐至于崔杼之乱。
现代文：所以，齐庄公好养武士和穷兵黩武，尽管他并没有要百姓互相争斗，但国家就是多灾多难，致使后来崔杼弑君作乱。
English: Therefore, although he did not want the people to fight each other, the state was plagued by many disasters and difficulties, which later led to the rebellion of Cui Yongjun.

古文：项襄好色，不使风议，而民多昏乱，其积至昭奇之难。
现代文：楚襄王专淫好色，尽管他并没有公开宣传色情，但民众却淫乱昏昧，最后发展到国土丧失、逃离京城的灾难发生。
English: King Chu Xiang specialized in lewdness and lust. Although he did not openly promote pornography, the people were lewd and dim-witted, which eventually led to the loss of the country and the disaster of fleeing the capital.

古文：故至精之所动，若春气之生，秋气之杀也，虽驰传骛置，不若此其亟。
现代文：所以最精粹的精神感化作用，就像春天生长、秋天肃杀一样，哪怕是驿马传递，都不如它快速。
English: Therefore, the most refined spiritual influence, just like the spring growth and the autumn death, even if it is transmitted by a horse, is not as fast as it.

古文：故君人者，其犹射者乎！于此豪末，于彼寻常矣。
现代文：所以，治理国家的君主，大概就像射手一样，瞄准发射时的毫毛之差，都会造成很大误差的后果。
English: Therefore, the monarch who governs the country, probably like the archer, the difference of a hair's breadth at the time of aiming and launching, will result in a large error.

古文：故慎所以感之也。
现代文：所以要慎重地对待精神感化这一事情。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to treat this matter of spiritual inspiration with caution.

古文：夫荣启期一弹，而孔子三日乐，感于和：邹忌一徽，而威王终夕悲，感于优。
现代文：荣启期弹奏一支乐曲，孔子听了快乐三天，这是因为孔子受到了曲调平和之情的感染。
English: Playing a piece of music during the Rongqi period, Confucius listened happily for three days. This is because Confucius was infected by the peacefulness of the tune.

古文：动诸琴瑟，形诸音声，而能使人为之哀乐。
现代文：邹忌挥手弹拨一曲，齐威王听了悲伤一整夜，这是因为齐威王受到了曲调忧伤之情的感动。
English: Zhai Boi waved his hand to play a tune, and King Qi Wei listened to the sadness all night long. This was because King Qi Wei was moved by the sadness of the tune.

古文：县法设赏而不能移风易俗者，其诚心弗施也。
现代文：人在琴瑟上的弹奏，感情通过乐曲声音表现出来，人听了后就会引起悲哀或快乐。
English: When people play the piano, their emotions are expressed through the sound of the music, and when people listen to it, it can cause sadness or happiness.

古文：甯戚商歌车下，桓公喟然而寤，至精入人深矣！
现代文：颁布法令、设置奖赏而不能达到移风易俗的目的，这是在于实施赏罚制度的人没有随之推行他的诚心。
English: The promulgation of laws and regulations and the establishment of rewards cannot achieve the purpose of changing customs. This is because the person who implemented the reward and punishment system did not promote his sincerity.

古文：故曰：乐听其音则知其俗，见其俗则知其化。
现代文：宁戚在牛车下唱起商调歌曲，齐桓公听后感叹醒悟，明白了宁戚的苦衷，终于任他为官，可见最精粹的精神感化作用是多么地大啊！
English: Ning Qi sang a commercial song under the ox cart, Qi Huan Gong sighed and woke up after listening, understood the hardships of Ning Qi, and finally appointed him as an official. You can see how great the most exquisite spiritual influence is!

古文：孔子学鼓琴于师襄，而谕文王之志，见微以知明矣。
现代文：所以说，能听懂看懂音乐舞蹈，也就能知道了解这其中所包含的思想内容和风俗习惯，也就明白它所具有的感化作用。
English: Therefore, if you can understand music and dance, you can also understand the ideological content and customs contained therein, and you can also understand the influence it has.

古文：延陵季子听鲁乐而知殷、夏之风，论近以识远也。
现代文：孔子向师襄学习鼓瑟弹琴，并从中明白了周文王的志向，这是孔子通过音乐语言而领悟出的主题内涵。
English: Confucius learned to play the drums and harp from his teacher, and from this he understood the aspirations of King Zhou Wen, which is the theme connotation that Confucius grasped through the language of music.

古文：作之上古，施及千岁，而文不灭，况于并世化民乎！
现代文：同样，延陵季子从聆听欣赏鲁国的传统音乐中了解知道殷商的风俗习惯，这是延陵季子通过今天近世而认知到遥远的过去。
English: Similarly, Yanling Qizi learned about the customs and habits of Yin merchants from listening to and appreciating the traditional music of Lu. This is Yanling Qizi's recognition of the distant past through today's modern world.

古文：汤之时，七年旱，以身祷于桑林之际，而四海之云凑，千里之雨至。
现代文：这些创作完成于上古的音乐诗篇，流传千年而不磨灭，还能给人以启迪和影响，更不用说这些音乐在当时的感化作用了。商汤的时候，连续七年干旱，汤王亲自到桑林向神祈祷，以自责来感化天神，因而很快乌云密布四海，大雨降临千里大地。
English: These creations were completed in the ancient music poem, which has been passed down for thousands of years without fading, and can still inspire and influence people, not to mention the influence of these music at that time. When Shang Tang, there was a drought for seven consecutive years, Tang Wang personally went to the mulberry grove to pray to God, and used self-condemnation to influence the gods. As a result, dark clouds soon covered the four seas, and heavy rain fell on thousands of miles of land.

古文：抱质效诚，感动天地、神谕方外，令行禁止，岂足为哉！
现代文：所以说，怀着质朴真诚之心，就能感动天地，神奇般地感化所有一切；所以靠行政命令来规定人们干什么不可干什么，哪有上述如此神奇的功效！
English: Therefore, with a simple and sincere heart, you can move heaven and earth, and magically affect everything; therefore, relying on administrative orders to stipulate what people can and cannot do, how can there be such a magical effect!

古文：古圣王至精形于内，而好憎忘于外，出言以副情，发号以明旨，陈之以礼乐，风之以歌谣，业贯万世而不壅，横扃四方而不穷，禽兽昆虫，与之陶化，又况于执法施令乎！
现代文：古代圣王将最精粹的精神形成保存在内心，又将好憎之情抛到九霄云外；他言论符合真情，号令则阐明仁慈的旨意；他通过礼乐来陶冶民性，用歌谣讽喻民风；他的这种精神感化功业持续贯通万代而不会停止、横贯跨越四方而不会穷尽；就连禽兽昆虫也随之受到陶育感化，更何况由这样的圣王执法施令，天下谁不听从感化？
English: The ancient sage-king kept the most exquisite spiritual formation in his heart, and threw the feelings of good and evil into the clouds; his words corresponded to the true feelings, and his orders clarified the benevolent intention; he cultivated the folk character through the liturgy, and used the ballads to simulate the folk style; his spiritual influence work continued to permeate all generations without stopping, and crossed the four directions without exhausting; even the animals and insects were also influenced by the edification, not to mention the enforcement of orders by such a sage-king. Who in the world does not obey the influence?

古文：故太上神化，其次使不得为非，其次赏贤而罚暴。
现代文：所以治理天下，最上策的是从精神上感化，其次是用礼制方法来约束民众使他们不做错事，而用奖赏贤才惩罚暴虐的方法来治理天下是最下策的。
English: Therefore, the best way to govern the world is to influence people from the spirit, the second is to use the etiquette method to restrain the people so that they do not do wrong, and the best way to govern the world is to reward the wise and punish the tyrannical.

古文：衡之于左右，无私轻重，故可以为平。绳之于内外，无私曲直，故可以为正。
现代文：秤对于所称之物来说，不会根据自己的私心来改变它们的轻重；墨绳对于所量之物来说，也不会凭自己的私心来决定它们的曲直，所以秤和绳是公平正直的。
English: The scales for what is weighed do not change their weight according to their own selfishness; the ink cords for what is measured do not determine their curvature according to their own selfishness, so the scales and cords are fair and honest.

古文：人主之于用法，无私好憎。故可以为命。
现代文：君主用法也是如此，不能因为自身的爱好、憎恶而改变执法标准、量刑尺度，正因为这样，所以他能实施法制政令。
English: The same is true of the monarch's usage. He cannot change the standards of law enforcement and sentencing because of his own likes and dislikes. It is precisely for this reason that he can implement legal decrees.

古文：夫权轻重不差蚊首，扶拨在挠不失针锋，直施矫邪不私辟险，好不能枉，谗不能乱，德无所立，怨无所藏，是任术而释人心者也。故为治者不与焉。
现代文：权衡轻重，哪怕是蚊子头那么小的误差也不能发生；矫正枉屈，哪怕是针尖那么大的误差也不能发生；纠正歪邪，不以私心回避风险；奸诈小人不能使他枉法，谗佞之人不能使他乱法；因为执法公正严明，所以怨恨也不会产生藏匿，恩德也无从谈起：这种凭借法术治国而不重视人心改造的做法，真正治理天下的君主是不会采用的。
English: Weighing the weight, even if the error is as small as the head of a mosquito, it cannot happen; correcting the injustice, even if the error is as large as the tip of a needle, cannot happen; correcting the crookedness, not avoiding the risk with selfishness; the treacherous villain cannot make him abuse the law, and the scoundrel cannot make him break the law; because the law enforcement is strict and fair, so there will be no hiding of resentment, and there is no way to talk about grace: This practice of governing the country by magic without paying attention to the transformation of the people's hearts will not be adopted by the monarch who truly governs the world

古文：夫舟浮于水，车转于陆，此势之自然也。
现代文：船航行在水面，车行走在陆地，这是自然之势决定的。
English: A boat sails on water, a car drives on land. This is determined by nature.

古文：木击折轊，水戾破舟，不怨木石而罪巧拙者，知故不载焉。是故道有智则惑，德有心则险，心有目则眩。
现代文：行车时由树木撞断车轴、行船时急流暗礁撞破船只，人们不抱怨树木和礁石，而怪罪撑船者和驾车人的拙劣驾御技术，这是因为木石本身不含有像人那样的智巧和心计。所以，人在遵 道 、循 道 中一旦掺杂了智巧心计就会使人惑乱，人在守 德 、行 德 中一旦加掺了心计智谋就会使人陷入危险，总之，人一旦心胸狭窄就会迷惑昏乱。
English: People do not complain about trees and reefs, but blame the poor driving skills of boatmen and drivers. This is because the wood and stone itself does not contain the same cleverness and cunning as humans. Therefore, once people add cleverness and cunning to following the road and path, it will confuse people. Once people add cunning and cleverness to protecting morality and ethics, it will put people in danger. In short, once people are narrow-minded, it will confuse and confuse.

古文：兵莫憯于志而莫邪为下；寇莫大于阴阳而抱鼓为小，今夫权衡规矩，一定而不易，不为秦楚变节，不为胡越改容，常一而不邪，方行而不流，一日刑之，万世传之，而以无为为之。
现代文：心计智谋比兵器还厉害，莫邪宝剑与其比较也算不了什么；战争中没有比运用战略战术智谋计策更重要的了，与它相比较，临阵击鼓进军冲锋就显得微不足道了。现在人们使用的那些权衡规矩，一旦制定就不再变更了，它不因秦、楚强权政治而改变，也不因胡、越地域差异而变化，永远保持一致而不偏斜，公正地度量一切而不走样，一旦定型，便万世传下去，它们就是在无知无觉中为人们做着度量物体的事情。
English: The mind, wit and strategy are more powerful than weapons, and the sword is nothing compared to it; there is nothing more important in war than the use of strategy and tactics, and compared to it, the drumming of drums into the attack is insignificant. The weighing rules that people use now will not change once they are formulated, it will not change due to Qin and Chu power politics, nor will it change due to Hu and Yue regional differences, it will always be consistent and not skewed, it will measure everything fairly and not go out of shape, and once it is set, it will be passed down forever. They are doing things for people in ignorance and unconsciousness.

古文：故国有亡主，而世无废道；人有困穷，而理无不通。
现代文：所以，世上会有被废弃的亡国君主，却不会有被废弃的道术；人会有穷困潦倒的时候，而事理却不会有困阻行不通的时候。
English: Therefore, in the world, there will be abandoned ruined monarchs, but there will not be abandoned Taoism; people will have times of impoverishment, but there will not be times when things are impeded.

古文：由此观之，无为者，道之宗。
现代文：由此看来， 无为 是道之根本。
English: From this perspective, non-action is the essence of the Way.

古文：故得道之宗，应物无穷；任人之才，难以至治。
现代文：人能掌握无为之道，就能应对任何变化；只凭个人的才智，是难以实现天下大治的。
English: If a person can master the way of doing nothing, he can cope with any change; it is difficult to achieve world domination with only personal talent.

古文：汤、武，圣主也，而不能与越人乘斡舟而浮于江湖。伊尹，贤相也，而不能与胡人骑骡马而服驹駼。孔、墨博通，而不能与山居者入棒薄险阻也。
现代文：汤王、武王都是圣明的君主，但习惯于陆地生活的他们却不能像南方越人那样乘小舟而游泛于江湖；伊尹是贤明的宰相，但生活在中原地方的他却不能像北方胡人那样骑着骏马去驯服野马；孔子、墨子尽管博学多才，却不能像山民那样自由自在出入草莽丛林、高山峻岭。
English: Tang Wang and Wu Wang were both enlightened monarchs, but they were accustomed to living on land, but they could not swim across the rivers and lakes in a small boat like the southern Yue people; Yi Yin was a wise prime minister, but living in the Central Plains, he could not ride a steed to tame wild horses like the northern Hu people; Confucius and Mozi, despite their erudition and talent, could not freely enter and leave the scrub jungle and high mountains like the mountain people.

古文：由此观之，则人知之于物也，浅矣。而欲以遍照海内，存万方，不因道之数，而专己之能，则其穷不达矣。
现代文：由此看来，人的智能对事物的认知和驾御，是有限的；想以个人的有限智能光照四海、施震海内、保护四方，而不因循道术，只凭一己之能，那么他离走投无路的日子也就不远了。
English: From this point of view, human intelligence is limited in its ability to recognize and control things. If a person wants to use his limited intelligence to illuminate the four seas, cause earthquakes in the sea, and protect the four directions, and not rely on his own ability because of the method, then he is not far away from the day when he is cornered.

古文：故智不足以治天下也，梁之力，制觡伸钩，索铁歙金，椎移大牺，水杀鼋鼍，陆捕熊罴，然汤革车三百乘，困之鸣条，擒之焦门。由此观之，勇力不足以持天下矣。
现代文：所以， 智 不足以治理天下。夏桀算得上勇武有力，能徒手折断骨角、拉直铁钩、绞铁成索、揉合金块；桀王手下的推侈、大牺，下水能杀大鳖和鼍龙、上山能擒熊罴；但是一到商汤率兵车三百于鸣条围着夏桀、擒困推侈、大牺于南巢时，这些勇武有力最终有力无用处。由此看来，凭借个人的勇力是保不住天下的。
English: Therefore, wisdom is not enough to govern the world. Xia Yao was reckoned to be brave and powerful, able to break bone corners with his bare hands, straighten iron hooks, twist iron into cables, and knead alloy blocks; the push and great sacrifice of the king's men could kill the dragon and the dragon, and the mountain could be climbed by the bear; but when Shang Tang led more than three hundred chariots around Xia Yao, the rescue push and the great sacrifice in the southern nest, these brave and powerful were ultimately useless. From this point of view, the world cannot be preserved by personal courage.

古文：智不足以为治，勇不足以为强，则人材不足任，明也。
现代文：智慧不足以治国、勇力不足以逞强，那么个人的才智也不值得依恃，这是明摆着的道理。
English: Wisdom is not enough to govern the country, courage is not enough to be assertive, so personal talent is not worth clinging to, this is a clear reason.

古文：而君人者不下庙堂之上，而知四海之外者，因物以识物，因人以知人也。故积力之所举，则无不胜也。
现代文：但反过来说，君主是不出朝廷，却能知道天下大事，这是因为他能以身边的事物推知其他事物，以身边的人推知其他个人，这就是说积集体力量、聚集体智慧，所以能战无不胜，事无不成。
English: But, on the other hand, the sovereign does not leave the court, but can know the world's major events. This is because he can infer other things from the things around him, and infer other individuals from the people around him. That is to say, he can accumulate collective strength and gather collective wisdom, so he can be invincible and achieve anything.

古文：众智之所为，则无不成也。坎井之无鼋鼍，隘也；园中之无修木，小也。
现代文：井里、小水坳内之所以没有鼋鼍，就在于它们太狭窄；园圃中之所以没有参天大树，就在于园圃的面积太有限。
English: The reason why there are no caterpillars in wells and small reservoirs is that they are too narrow; the reason why there are no towering trees in gardens is that the area of gardens is too limited.

古文：夫举重鼎者，力少而不能胜也，及至其移徙之，不待其多力者。
现代文：一个人举重鼎，力气小举不起，但等到众人合力将鼎举起移开，就不一定要等大力士来完成了。
English: A single person can lift a heavy canopy with little strength, but when all the people work together to lift and move the canopy, they don't have to wait for a strong man to finish.

古文：故千人之群无绝梁，万人之聚无废功。
现代文：所以千人之中一定会有栋梁之才，万人聚集没有什么事情办不成。
English: Therefore, among a thousand people, there will certainly be a great talent, and there is nothing that cannot be done when a million people gather.

古文：夫华骝、绿耳，一日而至千里，然其使之搏兔，不如豺狼，伎能殊也。
现代文：骅骝、绿耳这样的骏马，一天跑上千里不在话下，但如果让它们去捕捉兔子的话，那还不如猎犬，这是因为各自的技能不同的缘故。
English: It's no secret that horses such as mules and greyhounds can run thousands of miles a day, but if they were allowed to catch rabbits, they would not be as good as hounds, because of their different skills.

古文：鸱夜撮蚤蚊，察分秋豪，昼日颠越，不能见丘山，形性诡也。
现代文：猫头鹰晚上能抓得着蚤子和蚊子，真是明察秋毫，但一到白天，即使两眼圆睁，却连山丘这样的庞大物体都看不清，这是因为猫头鹰的生理特性所决定。
English: Owls can catch fleas and mosquitoes at night, it's really clear, but in the daytime, even if both eyes are wide open, they can't even see huge objects such as hills, because of the owl's physiological characteristics.

古文：夫螣蛇游雾而动，应龙乘云而举，猨得木而捷，鱼得水而鹜。
现代文：这也就像螣蛇在雾中升腾、应龙驾云上升、猿猴在林中敏捷跳跃，鱼得到水，则游得飞快，都是由这些生物体的生理特性所决定。
English: This is also like the python rising in the fog, the dragon rising in the clouds, the monkey jumping rapidly in the forest, and the fish swimming fast when it gets water, all of which are determined by the physiological characteristics of these organisms.

古文：故古之为车也，漆者不画，凿者不斫，工无二伎，士不兼官，各守其职，不得相奸，人得其宜，物得其安，是以器械不苦，而职事不嫚。
现代文：所以古时候制造车子，漆工不管画图、雕匠不管砍削，各类工匠只擅长一种技能，就像士人不兼官职一样，这样各守其职，反而相安无事、互不侵犯、各尽其职；这样人得其宜，物得其安，器具不受损伤，事情不会耽搁，职责明确不得懈怠。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, when making cars, painters did not care about drawing, carvers did not care about chopping, and all kinds of craftsmen were only good at one skill. Just as the nobles did not have a part-time job, so they each kept their duties, but they were at peace with each other, did not encroach on each other, and each did their duty. In this way, people got what they wanted, things got what they wanted, equipment was not damaged, things would not be delayed, and duties were clear and could not be neglected.

古文：夫责少者易偿，职寡者易守，任轻者易权，上操约省之分，下效易为之功，是以君臣弥久而不相厌。
现代文：债少就容易还清，职位职责少容易守职尽职，担子任务轻容易完成并且大家都乐意承担。所以在上的君主持守简约，在下的官员就更容易做好本职工作，这样君臣虽然经常在一起相处，但不会产生厌倦的感觉。
English: With fewer debts, it is easier to pay them off, with fewer duties, it is easier to keep one's duty, and with lighter burdens, it is easier to accomplish tasks, and everyone is willing to undertake them. Therefore, it is easier for the higher-ranking officials to keep their duties simple, and for the lower-ranking officials to do their duties well. In this way, although the monarchs and ministers often get along with each other, there will be no feeling of boredom.

古文：君人之道，其犹零星之尸也，严然玄默，而吉祥受福，是故得道者不为丑饰，不为伪善，一人被之而不褒，万人蒙之而不褊。
现代文：治理民众的方法，就应当像祭祀灵星时的尸主那样：庄重静默、端坐无言，使祭祀的人在不知不觉中吉祥受福。所以，得 道 之君不为丑陋掩饰，不为美善隐藏。一个人承受到君主的恩惠，不会觉得太大；万人分享这种恩惠，也不会觉得太小。
English: The method of governing the people should be the same as that of the corpse lord at the sacrifice of the spirit star: solemn silence, sitting in silence, so that the person who sacrifices is unconsciously blessed. Therefore, the prince of the way is not hidden for ugliness, not hidden for beauty. A person inheriting the grace of the monarch will not feel too big; sharing this grace with everyone will not feel too small.

古文：是故重为惠。若重为暴，则治道通矣。
现代文：因此君主慎重对待恩惠和慎重对待惩暴，他不轻易施予人恩惠，就像他不轻易对人惩处一样。这样，使他治国之道畅通无阻。
English: For this reason, the sovereign is careful with his favors and with his punishments. He does not easily grant favors, just as he does not easily punish people. In this way, his way of governing the country is unimpeded.

古文：为惠者，尚布施也。无功而厚赏，无劳而高爵，则守职者懈于官，而游居者亟于进矣。
现代文：因为施行恩惠，就会热衷于施舍给予，以致使无功者得到奖赏，无劳者得到爵位，这样一来，使轻易得到爵位官职的人会玩忽职守、松懈职责，而那些闲居游荡的士人也会极力谋取爵位官职。
English: Because of the practice of favor, there will be a zeal to give alms, so that those who do not work will be rewarded, and those who do not work will get a knighthood. In this way, those who easily obtain a knighthood will neglect their duties and slacken their duties, and those who are idle and wandering will also strive to obtain a knighthood.

古文：为暴者，妄诛也。无罪者而死亡，行直而被刑，则修身者不劝善，而为邪者轻犯上矣。
现代文：同样，施行惩暴，就会随意诛杀惩罚，以致使那些无罪者得以屈死，品行端正的人受到惩罚，这样一来，使那些注重自我修性的人不愿再努力为善，而那些行为不轨者倒反而敢于犯上作乱了。
English: In the same way, if violence is used to punish, the punishment will be arbitrary, so that those who are not guilty will die, and those who are good will be punished, so that those who are self-disciplined will no longer strive to be good, and those who behave badly will dare to commit disorder.

古文：故为惠者生奸，而为暴者生乱。奸乱之俗，亡国之风。
现代文：所以轻易广施恩惠容易助长奸邪、轻易施行惩罚容易滋生动乱；而一旦有这种奸邪、动乱，就是亡国的征兆。
English: Therefore, it is easy to spread favors, it is easy to promote evil, and it is easy to punish, it is easy to breed turmoil; and once there is such evil and turmoil, it is a sign of the fall of the country.

古文：是故明主之治，国有诛者而主无怒焉，朝有赏者而君无与焉，诛者不怨君，罪之所当也。赏者不德上，功之所致也。
现代文：因此，英明的君主治理天下，他不因为国家有受诛罚之事而恼怒，也不会因朝廷有奖赏活动而赞誉高兴。这是因为受诛罚者没有必要怨恨国君，这是他们罪有应得；受奖赏者也没必要感谢国君，这是他们劳动所得、功劳所致。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch governs the world. He does not get angry when the country is punished, nor is he pleased when the court rewards activities. This is because those who are punished do not need to resent the sovereign, which is their due; those who are rewarded do not need to thank the sovereign, which is the result of their labor income and merit.

古文：民知诛赏之来，皆在于身也，故务功修业，不受赣于君。
现代文：而民众一旦知道明白这赏罚的由来一一均取决于自身表现，也就会努力工作，建功立业而不指望君主个人会恩赐什么。
English: And once the people know and understand that the origin of this reward and punishment all depends on their own performance, they will also work hard and make contributions without expecting anything from the monarch personally.

古文：是故朝廷芜而无迹，田野辟而无草。
现代文：这样一来，朝廷反而人迹稀少，大家都去从事自己的工作，使开辟出来的荒地都没有杂草。
English: As a result, the imperial court was sparsely populated, and everyone went about their business, so that the newly opened wasteland was free of weeds.

古文：故太上下知有之。
现代文：这就是远古时代的 无为而治 ，现在大家都知道。
English: This is the ancien régime of inaction, as we all know by now.

古文：桥直植立而不动，俯仰取制焉；人主静漠而不躁，百官得修焉。
现代文：桔槔的立柱直立而不活动，控制着横木杠杆上下运动汲水取物；君主如同立柱庄重静穆而不躁动，下属百官就能办好政事。
English: The pillars of the mandarin orange stand upright without moving, controlling the up-and-down movement of the crossbar lever to draw water; the monarch, like the pillars, is dignified and does not move, and the subordinate officials can do a good job of government.

古文：譬而军之持麾者，妄指则乱矣。
现代文：这也好像军队中拿指挥旗帜的将领，这旗帜乱挥妄指就会导致部队混乱、阵脚动摇。
English: This is also like a general in the army holding a flag of command. If this flag is waved around recklessly, it will lead to confusion in the troops and wavering in the ranks.

古文：慧不足以大宁，智不足以安危，与其誉尧而毁桀也，不如掩聪明而反修其道也。
现代文：所以，治国如施以小恩小惠，是不足以使天下得到安宁的；施用智力聪慧也难以使国家转危为安的；与其赞誉尧帝而诋毁桀王，不如现在就收起所谓的聪明而归返到无为而治之道。
English: Therefore, it is not enough to bring peace to the world by administering the country with small favors; it is also difficult to turn the country around by applying intelligence and wisdom. Instead of praising the emperor and slandering the king, it is better to put away the so-called wisdom and return to the way of doing nothing.

古文：清静无为，则天与之时：廉俭守节，则地生之财；处愚称德，则圣人为之谋。
现代文：奉行清静无为的话，连上天都会赐给时运；推行廉俭守节，连大地都会助育生财的；而君主守朴处愚办事合情合理，就连圣人也会为他出谋献策的。
English: If one pursues tranquility and inaction, even the heavens will give him good luck; if one pursues thrift and frugality and observes the festival, even the earth will support the generation of wealth; and if a monarch pursues simplicity and avoids folly in a reasonable manner, even a saint will come up with a plan for him.

古文：是故下者万物归之，虚者天下遗之。
现代文：所以说处于低处、谦卑自居的人，万物都会归附他，天下也会归他所有。
English: Therefore to him that is lowly and of a contrite spirit all things are added, and he is before all things.

古文：夫人主之听治也，清明而不暗，虚心而弱志，是故群臣辐凑并进，无愚智贤不肖莫不尽其能，于是乃始陈其礼，建以为基，是乘众势以为车，御众智以为马，虽幽野险涂。
现代文：君主治理天下，清明而不昏昧，心胸虚静而心志温和，这样，群臣就会像车辐聚集到车轴一样入朝辅佐君主，不管是愚笨的还是聪明的、贤能的还是不才的，无不各尽其能、各尽其力。达到这种君臣和谐的境界，才能谈得上君臣之礼节，也才能建立起治理天下的基础。于是，君主凭借众人力量作为车，驾御众人智慧作为马，这样即使是行走在幽暗险要的道路上，也不会使君主迷失方向。
English: Monarchs rule the world with a clear and unclouded mind, a tranquil heart and a gentle spirit. In this way, the courtiers will gather like the spokes of a car to the axle to assist the monarch. No matter whether they are stupid or clever, capable or incompetent, they will all do their best and do their best. To achieve this state of harmony between the monarch and the courtiers, it is necessary to talk about the etiquette of the monarch and the courtiers, and to establish the foundation for governing the world. Therefore, the monarch relies on the strength of the people as a car and drives the wisdom of the people as a horse, so that even

古文：则无由惑矣。人主深居隐处以避燥湿，闺门重袭以避奸贼，内不知闾里之情，外不知山泽之形，帷幕之外，目不能见十里之前，耳不能闻百步之外，天下之物无不通者，其灌输之者大，而斟酌之者众也。
现代文：君主深居隐处以避开燥热寒湿，室门关闭以避奸佞之徒。他内没有亲眼看到过巷里民情，外没有亲自巡视过山川湖泽；居室以外的地方，他两眼只能看到十里以内的东西，两耳只能听到百步之内的声音，可是天下事物却无所不知、无所不通，这是因为向君主输送信息知识的渠道广宽畅通、与君主一起商讨并出谋划策的人又很多。
English: The monarch lives in a secluded place to avoid the heat, cold and humidity, and the door of the room is closed to avoid traitors. He has not personally seen the people's conditions in the alleys, and has not personally inspected the mountains, rivers and lakes outside. Outside the room, his eyes can only see things within ten miles, and his ears can only hear sounds within a hundred steps, but the things of the world are omniscient and omnipresent. This is because the channels for conveying information and knowledge to the monarch are broad and smooth, and there are many people who discuss and make plans with the monarch.

古文：是故不出户而知天下，不窥牖而知天道。
现代文：所以他足不出户而能知天下事、眼不窥牖而能知天象。
English: Therefore, he can know the things of the world without leaving home, and he can know the heavenly beings without looking at them.

古文：乘众人之智，则天下之不足有也，专用其心，则独身不能保也。
现代文：这就是说充分聚集、发挥众人的智力才能，这天下就不够他治理了；而只凭借个人的智力，就有可能连自己的命都难保。
English: That is to say, it is not enough to gather and give full play to the intellectual talents of many people to govern the world; but by relying only on personal intelligence, it may be difficult to even save one's own life.

古文：是故人主覆之以德，不行其智，而因万人之所利。
现代文：所以君主用道德来治理天下，而不只运用个人的才智，依顺万民之利益来办事处事，因而他稍抬脚便能让天下人获得利益。
English: Therefore, the sovereign uses morality to govern the world, and does not only use his personal talent to do things in accordance with the interests of the people, so that he can make the world benefit by lifting his foot a little.

古文：夫举踵天下而得所利，故百姓载之上，弗重也；错之前，弗害也；举之而弗高也，推之而弗厌。
现代文：这样，百姓即使将君主顶在头上也不会感到压迫、放在眼前也不会感到碍事、举过头顶也不会感到高不可攀、推崇他也不会产生厌恶感。
English: In this way, even if the people hold the monarch on their heads, they will not feel oppressed, they will not feel a hindrance when they are placed in front of them, they will not feel unattainable when they are held above their heads, and they will not feel disgusted when they admire him.

古文：主道员者，运转而无端，化育如神，虚无因循，常后而不先也。
现代文：君主治国方法灵活圆通，周而复始而运转不停，孕育万物神妙无比，虚静无为而因循天道，常居后而不争先。
English: The monarch's method of governing the country is flexible and complete. It is cyclical and never stops. It gives birth to all things miraculous. It is idle and does nothing, but follows the path of heaven. It always lags behind and does not strive to be ahead.

古文：臣道员者运转而无方者，论是而处当，为事先倡，守职分明，以立成功也。
现代文：而下属大臣办事处事方方正正，言论得体、处事恰当；遇事先行倡导，职责分明而不推诿，以此来建立功绩。
English: On the other hand, the subordinate minister's office is honest and upright, speaks in a proper manner, and handles things appropriately; in the case of advance advocacy, the responsibilities are clear and not prevaricated, in order to establish merit.

古文：是故君臣异道则治，同道则乱，各得其宜，处其当，则上下有以相使也。
现代文：所以君行无为之道、臣行有为之道，君臣异道天下太平；反之君臣同道则天下大乱；这就是说君主清静无为，臣则恪守职位，各自处在应处的位置上，这样上下便能默契合作、互相制约和促进。
English: Therefore, the way of the monarch is to do nothing, and the way of the vassal is to do something. If the monarch and the vassal are on different paths, the world will be peaceful. On the other hand, if the monarch and the vassal are on the same path, the world will be chaotic. That is to say, the monarch is quiet and inactive, and the vassal abides by the position, and they are in their respective positions. In this way, the upper and lower levels can tacitly cooperate, restrict and promote each other.

古文：夫人主之听治也，虚心而弱志，清明而不暗，是故群臣辐凑并进，无愚智贤不肖莫不尽其能者，则君得所以制臣，臣得所以事君，治国之道明矣。
现代文：君主治理天下，心胸虚静而心志温和，清明而不昏昧，这样，群臣就会像车辐聚集到车轴一样入朝辅佐君主，不管是愚笨的还是聪明的、贤能的还是不才的，无不各尽其能、各尽其力。这样君主能充分驾御下属大臣、下属大臣能充分事奉效力君主，治国之道就是这样明了。
English: The monarch governs the world with a calm mind and a gentle spirit, clear and not dim. In this way, the courtiers will enter the court and assist the monarch like the spokes of a car gathered to the axle. No matter whether they are stupid or clever, capable or incompetent, they will all do their best. In this way, the monarch can fully control the subordinate ministers, and the subordinate ministers can fully serve the effective monarch. The way to govern the country is so clear.

古文：文王智而好间，故圣；武王勇而好问，故胜，夫乘众人之智，则无不任也；用众人之力，则无不胜也。
现代文：周文王聪明而且好向别人请教，所以他圣明；周武王英勇而且好向他人讨教，所以他能取得胜利。所以说凭借利用众人的智慧就没有什么不能成功的；利用借助众人的力量就没有什么不能胜任的。
English: King Zhou Wen was clever and was good at seeking advice from others, so he was saintly; King Zhou Wu was brave and was good at seeking advice from others, so he could achieve victory. Therefore, by using the wisdom of all people, there is nothing that cannot be successful; by using the power of all people, there is nothing that cannot be competent.

古文：千钩之重，乌获不能举也；众人相一，则百人有余力矣。
现代文：千钧的重量，大力士乌获不能举起来；众人一起用力，那么上百人就够了。
English: The weight of a thousand cymbals cannot be lifted by the strong man Wu Guo; if everyone works hard together, then a hundred people will be enough.

古文：是故任一人之力者，则乌获不足恃，乘众人之制者，则天下不足有也。
现代文：所以只用一个人的力量，那么像乌获这样的大力士也不值得去炫耀；而借用众人的智力，那么天下也就小得不够你治理。
English: Therefore, if you only use the strength of one person, then a Hercules like Wu Guo is not worth showing off; but if you borrow the intelligence of many people, then the world is too small for you to govern.

古文：禹决江疏河，以为天下兴利，而不能使水西流；稷辟土晕草，以为百姓力农，然不能使禾冬生。
现代文：大禹疏通长江引导黄河，替天下人兴修水利，然而他却不能使江河西流；后稷开垦荒地，引导百姓致力于农业生产，然而他却不能让禾苗冬天生长。
English: Dayu dredged the Yangtze River to guide the Yellow River and build water conservancy for the people of the world, but he could not make the rivers flow westward. Later, he opened up the wasteland and guided the people to devote themselves to agricultural production, but he could not let the seedlings grow in winter.

古文：岂其人事不至哉？
现代文：这难道是他们还没有将本事全部发挥出来？
English: Could it be that they have not yet brought their full potential to bear?

古文：其势不可也。
现代文：不是的，而是自然的趋势不允许！
English: No, the situation doesn't allow it!

古文：夫推而不可为之势，而不修道理之数，虽神圣人不能以成其功，而况当世之主乎！
现代文：如果勉强去做那些自然趋势不允许的事情、不遵循事物客观规律，那么你尽管是圣人神仙也是无法将事情办成功的，又何况你还只是当今的普通君主呢？
English: If you reluctantly do things that are not allowed by the natural trend and do not follow the objective laws of things, then even if you are a saint or a god, you will not be able to do things successfully, and what's more, you are just an ordinary monarch today?

古文：夫载重而马羸，虽造父不能以致远；车轻马良，虽中工可使追速。
现代文：车载负荷沉重而马又疲弱，这时你就是是高明的驾御手一一造父都难以驾车赶路去远方；反过来说，如果车辆轻便、马儿健壮，你就是是一般性的驾御手都能驾车疾驰。
English: If the cart is heavy and the horse is weak, you are a good driver; if the cart is light and the horse is strong, you are an average driver.

古文：是故圣人举事也，岂能拂道理之数，诡自然之性，以曲为直，以屈为伸哉？
现代文：所以，圣人办事岂可违背事物规律、乖悖自然本性，将生来弯曲的变为笔直的、将原本卷屈的变为舒展的？
English: Therefore, can a sage act contrary to the laws of things, contrary to the nature of nature, turning the naturally curved into the straight, and the originally curled into the stretched?

古文：未尝不因其资而用之也。
现代文：他无不依循事物的本性天资而加以利用的。
English: He uses things according to their natural talents.

古文：是以积力之所举，无不胜也；而众智之所为，无不成也。
现代文：所以积聚众力来办事，没有什么不能胜任的；利用众人的智慧来做事，没有什么不能成功的。
English: Therefore, there is nothing that cannot be accomplished by gathering the power of the people to do things, and there is nothing that cannot be accomplished by using the wisdom of the people to do things.

古文：聋者可令嗺筋，而不可使有闻也；瘖者可使守圉，而不可使言也。
现代文：聋人可以让他去嚼生牛筋，而不能派他去伺听；哑巴可以叫他去看守马圈，而不能派他去传话。
English: A deaf man may be sent to chew raw beef, but not to listen; a dumb man may be sent to watch the stables, but not to speak.

古文：形有所不周，而能有所不容也。
现代文：这是因为他们生理形体上有缺陷，因而有些功能就不具备。
English: This is because they have a defect in their physiological body, and therefore some functions are not available.

古文：是故有一形者处一位，有一能者服一事。
现代文：所以有哪种功能的就安排他处在合适这种功能的岗位上，有哪种技能的就让他干合适这种技能的事情。
English: So whichever function he has, he should be placed in a post suitable for this function, and whichever skill he has, he should be allowed to do things suitable for this skill.

古文：力胜其任，则举之者不重也；能称其事，则为之者不难也。
现代文：他的能力能胜任这项事情工作，那么他就不会感到压力重；他的能力和他做的这项事情相称，那么他就不会觉得困难。
English: If his ability is commensurate with the work, then he will not feel the pressure; if his ability is commensurate with the work, then he will not feel the difficulty.

古文：毋小大修短，各得其宜，则天下一齐，无以相过也。
现代文：所以，不论能力大小、水平高低，让他们干适宜自己能力和水平的事，那么天下人都可以一样发挥各自的作用，以至于不会有因无法胜任而出现的过失。
English: Therefore, regardless of ability size and level, let them do what is suitable for their ability and level, then everyone in the world can equally play their respective roles, so that there will be no mistakes due to incompetence.

古文：圣人兼而用之，故无弃才。
现代文：这就是圣人兼容并蓄使用各种人才，所以天下也就没有什么无用的人。
English: This means that sages use all kinds of talents in an inclusive manner, so there are no useless people in the world.

古文：人主贵正而尚忠，忠正在上位，执正营事，则谗佞奸邪无由进矣。譬犹方员之不相盖，而曲直之不相入。
现代文：君主看重和推崇正直忠诚的人，让他们身处高位，担任要职，执政理事，那么谗佞奸邪之徒就无机会往上爬，这就好像方圆不能相合、曲直不能相入。
English: Monarchs value and promote honest and loyal people, let them be in high positions, hold important positions, and serve as governing directors, then the traitors and evil-doers will not have the opportunity to climb up. It is as if the square circle cannot meet, and the zigzag cannot enter.

古文：夫鸟兽之不可同群者，其类异也；虎鹿之不同游者，力不敌也，是故圣人得志而在上位，谗佞奸邪而欲犯主者，譬犹雀之见朗而鼠之遇狸也，亦必无余命矣。
现代文：鸟兽不能同群，是因为他们不是同类；虎鹿不能同游，是因为他们力量不等。所以圣人受重视处高位，这谗佞奸邪之徒如果想要干扰破坏，那就像小鸟碰到鹞鹰、老鼠遇到狸猫一样，必定要丧命的。
English: Birds and beasts cannot be in the same flock because they are not of the same kind; tigers and deer cannot travel together because their strength is unequal. Therefore, sages are highly valued, and if this traitorous evil-doer wants to interfere with the destruction, it is like a bird meets an eagle, a mouse meets a cat, and must die.

古文：是故人主之一举也，不可不慎也。
现代文：所以君主的每一个举动，都不可不慎。
English: Therefore, the monarch's every move must not be imprudent.

古文：所任者得其人，则国家治，上下和，群臣亲，百姓附。所任非其人，则国家危，上下乖，群臣怨，百姓乱。
现代文：如果君主用人得当，那么国家就能治理得好，上下和洽，群臣亲和，百姓归附；如果君主用人不当，那么国家就有危险，上下乖悖，群臣怨恨，百姓动乱。
English: If the monarch employs people properly, then the country can be governed well, the upper and lower levels are in harmony, the ministers are friendly, and the people are attached; if the monarch employs people improperly, then the country is in danger, the upper and lower levels are disobedient, the ministers are resentful, and the people are in turmoil.

古文：故一举而不当，终身伤。
现代文：所以君主一次政策失误，便会终身受害。
English: Therefore, once the monarch makes a policy mistake, he will suffer for life.

古文：得失之道，权要在主，是故绳正于上，木直于下，非有事焉，所缘以修者然也。
现代文：这国政的得失，关键在于君主。这就好比上面的绳墨取得正，下面的木材就必定直，这并不需要工匠花费多少力气的，只要按拉直的墨线顺势修整就可以了。
English: The key to the success or failure of this national policy lies with the monarch. This is like getting the upper rope ink straight, and the lower wood must be straight. This does not require the craftsman to spend much effort, as long as it can be trimmed according to the straightened ink line.

古文：故人主诚正，则直士任事，而奸人伏匿矣。人主不正，则邪人得志，忠者隐蔽矣。
现代文：所以君主如果诚信正直，那么国家政权也必定由正直人士来执掌，谗佞奸邪之徒就没有活动的市场；反之，君主如果不诚信正直，那么得志者必定是谗佞奸邪之徒，忠贞之士就隐退藏匿。
English: Therefore, if the monarch is honest and upright, then the state power must also be controlled by honest people, and there is no market for the activities of the traitors; on the other hand, if the monarch is not honest and upright, then the aspirants must be the traitors, and the loyal people will retreat and hide.

古文：夫人之所以莫抓玉石而抓瓜瓤者，何也？
现代文：人之所以不去剖裂玉石而去剖裂开瓠瓜做瓢，这是什么原因呢？
English: What is the reason why people don't try to crack the cobbles, but instead try to crack open a pumpkin to make a cake?

古文：无得于玉石，弗犯也，使人主执正持平，如从绳准高下，则群臣以邪来者，犹以卵投石，以火投水。
现代文：因为剖裂玉石没有什么用处，再加上玉石坚硬不易剖裂。如果君主公平正直，就像用绳墨水准测定曲直高低一样，那么大臣中尽管有人敢搞歪门邪道，但这结果必定是像以卵击石、以火投水那样。
English: For it is of little use to split the jade, and the jade is hard and not easy to split. If the sovereign is fair and honest, just like using a rope to measure the level of ink, then even if someone in the ministry dares to do something crooked, the result must be like throwing pebbles and water on fire.

古文：故灵王好细要，而民有杀食自饥也；越王好勇，而民皆处危争死。
现代文：这就说明君主在治理国家中的主导作用。正因为这样，所以楚灵王喜欢杨柳细腰，楚国百姓则纷纷效仿缩食减肥；越王崇尚勇武，越国百姓则纷纷处危争死。
English: This shows the leading role of the monarch in the governance of the country. It is for this reason that King Chu Ling likes the willow thin waist, and the people of Chu have followed the example of shrinking food and losing weight; King Yue advocates bravery, and the people of Yue have fought to the death.

古文：由此观之，权势之柄，其以移风易俗矣。
现代文：由此看来，君主的权势，足以产生影响以致移风易俗。
English: From this point of view, the power of the monarch is enough to have an impact on changing customs.

古文：尧为匹夫，不能仁化一里；桀在上位，令行禁止。
现代文：当尧还只是一个平头百姓时，他的仁慈感化不了同一巷子里的邻居；而夏桀占居了帝位，便能令行禁止，推行他的一套。
English: When Hao was just a commoner, his benevolence could not inspire his neighbors in the same alley; but when Xia Yao occupied the imperial throne, he was able to impose a ban and carry out his plan.

古文：由此观之，贤不足以为治，而势可以易俗，明矣。
现代文：再由此看来，贤明倒反而治理不了天下，而权势却能移风易俗，这也是再清楚不过的事实了。
English: From this point of view, it is clear that wisdom cannot govern the world, but power can change customs.

古文：《书》曰： 一人有庆，万民赖之。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 一个人做了善事，万民都依仗着他。 
English: "Shangshu" said: One person did a good deed, and all the people relied on him.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：天下多眩于名声，而寡察其实。
现代文：天下人常常被一些表面的名声所迷惑，而很少去考察这些名声的实际内容。
English: The world is often bewitched by some superficial fame, but rarely examine the actual content of these reputations.

古文：是故处人以誉尊，而游者以辩显。
现代文：所以那些隐士就常常借着人们对他的称誉而获得尊贵，游士则常常凭着善辩而显达。
English: For this reason, those who are hermits are often distinguished by the esteem in which they are held, and wanderers are often distinguished by their eloquence.

古文：察其所尊显，无他故焉，人主不明分数利害之地，而贤众口之辩也。
现代文：考察他们之所以尊贵、显达的原由，实在是没有什么其他的原因，只是由于君主没有很好地明察他们的真实本领而一味相信众人的溢美之辞而已。
English: There is really no other reason to consider the reason why they are noble and distinguished, but because the monarch did not properly inspect their true abilities and simply believed the praise of many people.

古文：治国则不然。言事者必究于法，而为行者必治于官。上操其名以责其实，臣守其业以效其功。言不得过其实，行不得逾其法。群臣辐凑，莫敢专君。
现代文：但如果要治理好一个国家就不能这么简单了，那就需要君主对谈论国事的说客一定要深究他们的言论是否符合国法，对那些仕人一定要放在官职上来考校他们是否真有才干胜任；君主也一定要以官职的名分来要求下属百官必须名实相符克守本职来奉献功绩；而下属百官也一定要言论符合实际、行为符合法规；这样才能使群臣紧密团结在君主身边，没人敢挟制君主。
English: But if it is not so simple to govern a country well, then it is necessary for the monarch to thoroughly investigate whether the speech of the lobbyists who talk about state affairs is in line with the national law, and to put those servants on the official post to examine whether they are really talented and competent; the monarch must also use the title of the official post to require that the subordinate officials must be true to their name and perform their duties; and the subordinate officials must also speak in line with reality and act in accordance with laws and regulations; in this way, the courtiers can be closely united around the monarch, and no one dares to blackmail the monarch.

古文：事不在法律中而可以便国佐治，必参五行之，阴考以观其归，并用周听以察其化，不偏一曲，不党一事，是以中立而遍，运照海内，群臣公正，莫敢为邪，百官述职，务致其公迹也。
现代文：如果下面官吏所做的事不合常规，但只要于国有利、能辅佐国政，就必须加以反复检验、考校后加以推行，君主还应暗中查访官吏来观察他们的归向，并全面地听取多方意见来观察他们的变化；不偏听偏信片面之辞，也不偏私地根据偶然一事作出结论。因此，君主能够站得中正，看得全面，洞察一切；群臣们都公平正直，不敢做出邪恶事情；百官们都忠于责职，致力于政绩功绩。
English: If the things done by the officials below are not in line with the norm, but as long as they are beneficial to the country and can support national politics, they must be repeatedly tested and implemented after the examination. The monarch should also secretly visit officials to observe their direction, and comprehensively listen to multiple opinions to observe their changes; do not listen to one-sided words, nor selfishly make conclusions based on chance. Therefore, the monarch can stand in the middle, see comprehensively, and insight everything; the ministers are fair and honest, and dare not do evil things; the officials are loyal to their duties and are committed to political achievements.

古文：主精明于上。官劝力于下，奸邪灭迹，庶功日进，是以勇者尽于军。
现代文：在上的君主精明审察，在下的百官勉力从事，奸佞之徒灭绝，众人的功业日益进步。这样，有智者勤于职事、有勇者尽力于军事。
English: In this way, those who are wise will be diligent in their duties, and those who are brave will do their best in the military.

古文：乱国则不然，有众咸誉者无功而赏，守职者无罪而诛。主上暗而不明，群臣党而不忠，说谈者游于辩，修行者竞于往。主上出令，则非之以与；法令所禁，则犯之以邪。为智者务于巧诈，为勇者务于斗争。
现代文：动乱的国家就不是这样了，只要是众人称誉的人，没有功劳也受到奖赏；忠于职守的人，反而无罪受到惩罚；君主昏庸糊涂，群臣百官结党营私没有忠心；说客们摇唇鼓舌争辩标榜，仕人们争先恐后追逐名利；君主发布政令，下属官员就开始非议诽谤；法令明禁的东西，下属官员就用歪门邪道加以触犯；凭智谋混饭吃的人就热衷于搞计巧，靠勇力谋职位的人就全力以赴搞争斗；大臣专权，下吏持势，结党拉派，戏弄君主。
English: This is not the case in a country in turmoil. As long as a person is praised by everyone, he will be rewarded without merit; a person who is loyal to his duties will be punished without guilt; the monarch is dim-witted, and the ministers are not loyal; the lobbyists argue with each other, and the servants are scrambling to chase fame and fortune; the monarch issues a decree, and the subordinate officials begin to criticize and slander; the subordinate officials use crooked ways to violate what is clearly prohibited by the decree; those who eat with wisdom are keen on scheming, and those who seek positions with courage are all out to fight; the ministers have exclusive power, and the

古文：大臣专权，下吏持势，朋党周比，以弄其上，国虽若存，古之人曰亡矣。
现代文：这时国家表面上掌握在君主手里，但按古人的说法是早已名存实亡了。
English: At this time, the country was ostensibly in the hands of the monarch, but according to the ancients, it was already dead in name.

古文：且夫不治官职，而被甲兵，不随南亩，而有贤圣之声者，非所以都于国也。
现代文：再说那些不称官职、不能披甲上阵、不懂稼穑而徒有 贤圣 虚名的人，是不能由他们来实施国家教化的。
English: Moreover, those who are not qualified for official posts, cannot wear armor and go into battle, do not know how to make money, but have a false reputation of being virtuous and holy, cannot be used by them to carry out the state's indoctrination.

古文：骐骥騄駬，天下之疾马也。驱之不前，引之不止，虽愚者不加体焉。
现代文：骐骥、騄駬，是闻名天下的千里马，但如果驱赶它它不前止，勒住它它不停止，那么这种情况下，笨蛋也知道不能去骑它。
English: The mule, the mule, is the most famous horse in the world, but if you drive it, it will not stop, and if you hold it, it will not stop. In this case, even a fool knows not to ride it.

古文：今治乱之机，辙迹可见也，而世主莫之能察，此治道之所以塞。
现代文：现在国家治乱的关键像车辙那样清楚地摆着，可是当代君主却不能察觉，这就是治国之道阻塞不通的原因。
English: At present, the key to governing the country is as clear as a rut, but the current monarch cannot detect it, which is why the way of governing the country cannot be blocked.

古文：权势者，人主之车舆；爵禄者，人臣之辔衔也。
现代文：权力帝位是君主的车子，爵位利禄是君主驾御人臣的缰绳和嚼头。
English: The throne of power is the monarch's chariot, and the knighthood is the reins and bridle with which the monarch drives his subjects.

古文：是故人主处权势之要，而持爵禄之柄，审缓急之度，而适取予之节，是以天下尽力而不倦。
现代文：因此，君主掌握着权势要害和控制着封赏爵禄的权柄，所以能谨慎地把握着处事缓急的分寸、施予剥夺的节奏，因而天下人也能竭尽能力而不倦怠。
English: Therefore, the monarch holds the key to power and controls the power of awarding peerages, so he can cautiously grasp the proportion of dealing with priorities and the rhythm of giving and depriving, so that the people of the world can exhaust their abilities without fatigue.

古文：夫臣主之相与也，非有父子之厚、骨肉之亲也，而竭力殊死，不辞其躯者何也？
现代文：君臣相处，关系和感情没有像父子那样亲密深厚，也没有骨肉之间的亲情，但下属官员却能竭尽全力、不惜为君主牺牲生命，这是为什么呢？
English: Princes and courtiers do not get along with each other, the relationship and feelings are not as close and deep as father and son, and there is no flesh-and-blood kinship, but subordinate officials can do their best and sacrifice their lives for the monarch. Why is this?

古文：势有使之然也。
现代文：这是国家君主所利用的权势而导致他们这样做。
English: It is the power wielded by the country's monarchs that has led them to do so.

古文：昔者豫让，中行文子之臣。
现代文：以前有个豫让，本是晋国范氏中行文子的家臣。
English: There was a Yuzhen in the past, who was originally a vassal of the middle-ranking Fanzi of the Fan clan in Jin Province.

古文：智伯伐中行氏，并吞其地。豫让背其主而臣智伯。
现代文：智伯攻打中行氏，吞并了中行氏的领地，豫让背叛了原先的主子中行文子而投奔智伯。
English: Zhi Bo attacked the Zhong Xing clan, annexed the territory of the Zhong Xing clan, and Yuzhang betrayed the original master, Zhong Xing Fanzi, and defected to Zhi Bo.

古文：智伯与赵襄子战于晋阳之下，身死为戮，国分为三。
现代文：后来智伯为争夺土地与赵襄子开战，在晋阳城智伯惨败被杀，由他掌握的晋国也因此分为韩、赵、魏三国。
English: Later, Zhibo went to war with Zhao Xiangzi to fight for land. Zhibo was defeated and killed in Jinyang City, and Jin Province, which he controlled, was divided into Han, Zhao, and Wei.

古文：豫让欲报赵襄子，漆身为厉，吞炭变音，摘齿易貌。
现代文：豫让为了报答智伯的知遇宠爱之恩，决心向赵襄子报杀主之仇。他用油漆涂满全身，让身上生出恶疮，并吞下木炭改变自己的声音，又敲掉门牙，改变容貌以便能行刺赵襄子。
English: In order to repay Zhi Bo's kindness, Yu Zhan was determined to take revenge on Zhao Xiangzi. He covered his whole body with paint, let his body grow sores, swallowed charcoal to change his voice, and knocked out his front teeth to change his appearance so that he could stab Zhao Xiangzi.

古文：夫以一人之心而事两主，或背而去，或欲身徇之，岂其趋舍厚薄之势异哉？
现代文：同样是长着一颗心的豫让却先后侍奉两个主子，对先前主子背叛离弃，而对后来主子却甘心奉献生命，难道是豫让根据主子的权势大小厚薄来决定自己的取舍？
English: Similarly, Yuzhen, who has one heart, served two masters successively. He betrayed and abandoned the previous master, but was willing to sacrifice his life for the later master. Is it Yuzhen who decides his choice according to the size and power of the master?

古文：人之恩泽使之然也。
现代文：不是的，而是主子的恩泽决定了豫让的取舍去留。
English: No, it was the grace of the master that decided to stay.

古文：纣兼天下，朝诸侯，人迹所及，舟揖所通，莫不宾服。
现代文：纣王占据整个天下，使诸侯无不对他朝拜，凡有人迹的地方、车舟相通的区域，无不称臣降服。
English: Shao Wang occupied the whole world, so that all the princes worshiped him, and wherever there were traces of people and areas connected by carriages and boats, they all submitted to him.

古文：然而武王甲卒三千人，擒之于牧野。岂周民死节，而殷民背叛哉？
现代文：然而，周武王只率三千甲卒就将纣王打败，难道是周朝百姓愿为君主效死、殷朝民众生就背叛的个性所决定？
English: However, King Zhou Wu led only three thousand and six foot soldiers to defeat King Yao. Was it because the people of the Zhou Dynasty were willing to die for the monarch and the people of the Yin Dynasty were willing to betray?

古文：其主之德义厚而号令行也。
现代文：不是的，而是周武王对民众德义深厚导致他们能听从号令并加以执行。
English: No, it was King Zhou Wu's deep sense of loyalty to the people that led them to obey and carry out his orders.

古文：夫疾风而波兴，木茂而鸟集，相生之气也。
现代文：风大则波浪自然兴起，林大则鸟雀自然聚集，自然界的现象就是如此。
English: When the wind is strong, waves naturally arise, when the forest is large, birds and sparrows naturally gather. This is the phenomenon of the natural world.

古文：是故臣不得其所欲于君者，君亦不能得其所求于臣也。君臣之施者，相报之势也。
现代文：因此，下属官员如果不能从君主身上获得自己想要的东西，那么君主也就休想从下属官员那里获得自己想要的东西。君臣之间的施予，就是这样有施有报。
English: Therefore, if subordinate officials cannot get what they want from the monarch, then the monarch will not want to get what they want from subordinate officials.

古文：是故臣尽力死节以与君，臣计功垂爵以与臣。
现代文：所以下属大臣竭尽全力、不惜牺牲生命来事奉君主，那君主就该按功劳大小赐爵封位对待臣下。
English: Therefore, subordinate ministers do their best to serve the monarch at the cost of sacrificing their lives, and the monarch should give knighthoods to his subjects according to their merits.

古文：是故君不能赏无功之臣，臣亦不能死无德之君。君德不下流于民，而欲用之，如鞭蹄马矣。是犹不待雨而求熟稼，必不可之数也。
现代文：因此君主就不该赐赏无功臣子，臣子也不会替无德之君拼死卖力，君主的恩泽如果不能遍洒人民群众，却想要他们乖乖听驱使，这就像用鞭子去降服烈马一样，也好比不降雨水就希望庄稼成熟丰收一样，根本不可能有这种统御之术的。
English: Therefore, the sovereign should not reward unmeritorious vassals, and the vassals should not work hard for the unethical prince. If the monarch's grace cannot be spread throughout the people, but he wants them to be obediently driven, it is like using a whip to subdue a fierce horse, or like hoping that the crops will be ripe and plentiful without rainwater. It is impossible to have this kind of control.

古文：君人之道，处静以修身，俭约以率下。
现代文：统治人民的方法，应用处静以修养身心，以勤俭节约为下属作出表率。
English: The method of ruling the people is to cultivate the mind and body, to be diligent and frugal, and to set an example for subordinates.

古文：静则下不扰矣，俭则民不怨矣。
现代文：君主如果处静以修身则民众就不受骚扰，君主如果勤俭节约则民众就不抱怨。
English: If the monarch leads a quiet life and cultivates himself, the people will not be bothered; if the monarch is frugal and thrifty, the people will not complain.

古文：下扰则政乱，民怨则德薄；政乱则贤者不为谋，德薄则勇者不为死。
现代文：因为民众骚扰不安，政局就混乱；民众怨声载道则说明君主恩德薄浅。接下来就是，政局混乱则贤能人士就不会替君主出谋献策，君主恩德浅薄则勇武之士就不会替君主卖命拼死。
English: Because the people are harassed and uneasy, the political situation is chaotic; the people's complaints indicate that the monarch's benevolence is shallow. The next is that if the political situation is chaotic, the virtuous people will not make suggestions for the monarch, and if the monarch's benevolence is shallow, the brave men will not work hard for the monarch.

古文：是故人主好鸷鸟猛兽，珍怪奇物，狡躁康荒，不爱民力，驰骋田猎，出入不时，如此，则百官务乱，事勤财匮，万民悉苦，生业不修矣。
现代文：所以，君主若是喜好收养观赏猛兽凶禽、收藏怪异奇特之物、性情暴躁、好乐昏乱、不惜民力、驰马打猎、出入不按时节，这样朝政百官必定随之混乱不堪，事务辛苦，财钱贫乏，万民愁苦而生产荒废。
English: Therefore, if the monarch likes to adopt wild animals and birds for viewing, collect strange and peculiar things, have a hot temper, enjoy a chaotic life, spare the people's strength, ride a horse to hunt, and enter and leave at irregular times, then the government officials will inevitably be in chaos, the affairs will be hard, the money will be poor, and the production will be wasted.

古文：人主好高台深池，雕琢刻镂，黼黻文章，絺绤绮绣，宝玩珠玉；则赋敛无度，而万民力竭矣。
现代文：君主如果喜好高楼深池、雕琢刻镂及华丽的纹彩、各种精美织物和珍宝珠玉，就必定要想方设法搜刮以致赋敛无度，这时民众就会被弄得财穷力尽、疲惫不堪。
English: If the monarch is fond of tall buildings and deep pools, carved idols and gorgeous patterns, all kinds of exquisite fabrics and precious jewels, he must find ways and means to scrape so that he is endlessly rich. At this time, the people will be exhausted and exhausted.

古文：尧之有天下也，非贪万民之富而安人主之位也，以为百姓力征，强凌弱，众暴寡，于是尧乃身服节俭之行，而明相爱之仁，以和辑之。
现代文：尧帝拥有天下，不是为着贪求万民百姓的财富，利用君位来享受安乐的，而是为百姓改变连年征伐战争、以强凌弱、以多欺少的混乱局面的，因此尧帝亲自带头实行节俭、向民众昭示仁爱之心、让人们和睦相处。
English: Emperor Zhou owned the whole country, not for the purpose of coveting the wealth of all the people and using his position to enjoy peace and happiness, but for the people to change the chaotic situation of years of war, with the strong overpowering the weak, and with the many oppressing the few. Therefore, Emperor Zhou personally took the lead in practicing thrift, showing the people the heart of benevolence, and letting people live in harmony.

古文：是故茅茨不翦，采椽不断，大路不画，越席不缘，大羹不和，粢食不？巡狩行教，勤劳天下，周流五岳。
现代文：所以他的住房是茅草盖顶、不加修剪，柞木为梁、不加砍削；乘坐的车子不加绘画，蒲草席垫不镶花边；祭祀用的食物不调五味，吃的主食不舂捣细；巡视狩猎只为推行教化，辛劳地奔波于三山五岳。
English: Therefore, his house is a thatched roof, no pruning, birch beams, no cutting; the car he rides is not painted, the rush mat is not laced with lace; the food used for worship is not seasoned, and the staple food is not mashed; the inspection hunting is only for the promotion of enlightenment, and he is laboriously running around the three mountains and five mountains.

古文：岂其奉养不足乐哉！
现代文：这些难道是他所应得的奉养还不足以使他享乐而为此辛劳奔波？
English: Are these his just dues, and not enough for him to enjoy and toil for?

古文：举天下而以为社稷，非有利焉。
现代文：不是的，是因为尧帝一心为的是国泰民安、天下社稷，他在这当中并未获得任何利益好处。
English: No, it's because Emperor Zou is single-mindedly committed to the safety of the people of the country and the world, and he has not gained any benefits from this.

古文：年衰志悯，举天下而传之舜，犹却行而脱屣也。
现代文：而到他年老衰弱、精力不济的时候，便将整个天下传给舜，这犹如倒退脱鞋一样简单容易。
English: But when he is old and weak and his energy is low, he will pass on the whole world to the dragonfly, which is as simple and easy as taking off his shoes backwards.

古文：衰世则不然。
现代文：而到衰败时代，情况就不是这样了。
English: In the age of decay, this is no longer the case.

古文：一日而有天下之富，处人主之势，则竭百姓之力，以奉耳目之欲，志专在宫室台榭，陂池苑囿，猛兽熊罴，玩好珍怪。
现代文：有些君主哪怕是只有一天拥有天下、处在君主位子上，也要竭尽全力来消耗百姓的财力和精力，以供养满足他的声色享乐，一心用在宫殿楼阁、池塘苑林、奇兽怪物、珍宝奇物这些事上。
English: Some monarchs, even if they only rule the world for one day and are in the throne, will do their best to consume the people's money and energy to provide and satisfy their pleasures, focusing on palaces, ponds, gardens, strange beasts and monsters, treasures and wonders.

古文：是故贫民糟糠不接于口，而虎狼熊罴厌刍豢；百姓短褐不完，而宫室衣锦绣。
现代文：这样导致贫苦百姓连酒糟、谷糠都吃不到，而皇宫里畜养的虎狼熊罴却吃厌了猪羊牛肉。贫苦百姓连粗布短衣都没一件完整的，而宫室里的人却穿的是锦缎。
English: As a result, the poor people couldn't even eat wine lees and grain mash, while the tigers, wolves and bears raised in the imperial palace were fed up with pork and mutton. The poor people didn't even have a complete pair of coarse cloth shorts, while the people in the imperial palace wore brocade.

古文：人主急兹无用之功，百姓黎民，憔悴于天下。是故使天下不安其性。
现代文：君主忙乎的都是些于社会民事无用的事情，从而使黎民百姓疲于奔命于天下，弄得憔悴不堪、精疲力尽，整个天下人都无法安生。
English: Monarchs are always busy with useless social and civil affairs, which makes the people of Li tired of running for their lives, exhausted and exhausted, and the whole world cannot live in peace.

古文：人主之居也，如日月之明也。天下之所同侧目而视，侧耳而听，延颈举踵而望也。
现代文：君主所处的地位，就像天空中发射光明的日月，天底下的人都侧目仰视、侧目恭听、伸长脖子抬起脚跟来眺望。
English: The position of the monarch is like the sun and moon shining brightly in the sky. People all over the world look up sideways, listen attentively, crane their necks and lift their heels to look around.

古文：是故非澹薄无以明德，非宁静无以致远，非宽大无以兼覆，非慈厚无以怀众，非平正无以制断。
现代文：所以，君主只有淡泊才能显示美德，只有宁静才能维持久远，只有宽大才能容纳一切，只有仁慈才能怀拥民众，只有公正才能明断是非。
English: Therefore, it is only through indifference that a prince can display virtue, only through tranquility that he can maintain long-term stability, only through magnanimity that he can accommodate everything, only through benevolence that he can embrace the people, and only through justice that he can distinguish right from wrong.

古文：是故贤主之用人也，犹巧工之制木也，大者以为舟航柱梁，小者以为楫楔，修者以为櫩榱，短者以为朱儒枅栌。无小大修短，各得其所宜；规矩方圆，各有所施。
现代文：因此贤明的君主任用人才，就像高明的工匠裁取木料一样：大的用来做舟船柱梁，小的拿来做船桨楔子，长的用来做屋檐椽条，短的拿来做短柱斗拱；无论大小长短，都将它们派上用场，规矩方圆都恰到好处。
English: Therefore, the wise ruler uses talents, just as a skilled craftsman cuts wood: the large ones are used to make the beam of the boat, the small ones are used to make the oar wedge, the long ones are used to make the eaves, and the short ones are used to make the short column arch; regardless of the size and length, they are used, and the rules are just right.

古文：天下之物，莫凶于鸡毒，然而良医橐而藏之，有所用也。
现代文：天下毒物，没有比乌头更毒的了，然而良医就是将它装在袋里收藏起来，因为有用得着它的时候和地方。
English: Of all the poisons in the world, none is more poisonous than aconite, but a good doctor puts it in a bag and stores it away, because there is a time and a place for it.

古文：是故林莽之材，犹无可弃者，而况人乎？
现代文：所以，莽莽森林中的野草树木，尚且没有可抛弃的，更何况是人呢！
English: Therefore, there is nothing to discard in the wild grass and trees in the wild forest, let alone people!

古文：今夫朝廷之所不举，乡曲之所不誉，非其人不肖也，其所以官之者非其职也。
现代文：今天那些朝廷不荐举、乡里不赞誉的人，并不是他们无才缺德，而是这些人用非所能。
English: Today, those who are not recommended by the imperial court and not praised by the countryside are not those who lack talent and virtue, but those who are useless.

古文：鹿之上山，獐不能跂也，及其下，牧竖能追之；才有所修短也。
现代文：鹿上山时，快得连獐子都赶不上，但等到鹿下山时，牧童都可以追上它。这说明一种能耐有其长处也有其短处。
English: When the deer goes up the mountain, it is so fast that even the mule cannot catch up with it, but when the deer comes down the mountain, the herd boy can catch up with it. This shows that a kind of endurance has its advantages and disadvantages.

古文：是故有大略者，不可责以捷巧；有小智者，不可任以大功。
现代文：所以有雄才大略者不可用雕虫小技来苛求他，而只能耍小聪明者不可委以大任。
English: Therefore, those who have great talent should not use the small skills of carving insects to challenge him, but those who can only play small clever people should not be entrusted with big tasks.

古文：人有其才，物有其形，有任一而太重，或任百而尚轻。
现代文：人有各种各样的才干，物有各种各样的形状，有人任一份工就嫌太重太累，但有人任多份工都不嫌吃力。
English: People have a variety of talents, things have a variety of shapes, some people do not like any work too heavy and tiring, but some people do not like any multiple work.

古文：是故审豪厘计者，必遗天下之大数；不失小物之选者，惑于大数之举。
现代文：所以能计较弄清毫厘小数的人，一定弄不清天下这大数；盘算精明到小数目都不会出差错的人，碰到大数目就会糊涂困惑。
English: Therefore, those who can calculate and figure out the smallest decimals will not be able to figure out the world's largest number; those who are clever enough to calculate small numbers will not make mistakes, and those who encounter large numbers will be confused.

古文：譬犹狸之不可使搏牛，虎之不可使捕鼠也。
现代文：这些就像不能让狸猫去与牛搏斗、让虎去捕鼠一样。
English: It's like you can't let a cat fight a cow or a tiger catch a mouse.

古文：今人之才，或欲平九州，并方外，存危国，继绝世，志在直道正邪，决烦理挐，而乃责之以闺阁之礼，隩窔之间；或佞巧小具，谄进愉说，随乡曲之俗，卑下众人之耳目，而乃任之以天下之权，治乱之机。是犹以斧赞刂毛，以刀伐木也，皆失其宜矣。
现代文：今天有些人的才能，可以平定九州、兼并域外、挽救危难中的国家、恢复濒临灭绝的世族，这些人的志向在于宏扬正气纠正邪恶、决断处理烦难杂乱的问题，而现在却要他们去管理一些宫内家庭事务；有些人只具备一些小本事，却相当机巧奸诈、善于奉承献媚、讨好主子、追随浅陋习俗、低三下四地哗众取宠，却被交付委任以天下大权，参与治理国家的机要大事：这种大才小用、无才重用的做法，就像是用斧头去剪毛发、用剃刀去砍树木一样，都失去了它们所适宜的东西。
English: Today, some people whose talents can pacify Kyushu, annex foreign territories, save a country in peril, and restore an endangered world race, whose aspirations are to promote righteousness, rectify evil, and resolutely deal with troublesome problems, are now asked to manage some palace family affairs; some people only have some small skills, but are quite cunning and treacherous, good at flattery and flattery, pleasing the master, following shallow customs, and making a fuss, but have been entrusted with the power of the world and participating in the governance of the country is very important: this kind of talent is of little use and no use is like using an axe to cut hair and a ra

古文：人主者，以天下之目视，以天下之耳听，以天下之智虑，以天下之力争。
现代文：君主应凭借天下人的眼光观看事物、借助天下人的耳力聆听声音、凭借天下人的智慧考虑问题、依仗天下人的力量争取胜利。
English: A monarch should look at things with the eyes of the world, listen to voices with the ears of the world, consider problems with the wisdom of the world, and rely on the strength of the world to win.

古文：是故号令能下究，而臣情得上闻。百官修同，群君辐凑，喜不以赏赐，怒不以罪诛。是故威立而不废，聪明光而不蔽，法令察而不苛，耳目达而不暗，善否之情，日陈于前而无所逆。
现代文：因此，君主发布的号令能够向下贯彻，群臣的情况能够上达；百官同心协力，群臣紧密聚集；君主不凭一时喜怒而实施赏赐和诛罚；所以君主树立起来的权威不易废弃，聪明广远不易蒙蔽；法令明察而不苛刻，耳目通达而不闭塞；善恶是非每天出现在眼前而不会弄错。
English: Therefore, the orders issued by the monarch can be carried out downwards, and the situation of the ministers can be reached upwards; hundreds of officials work together, and the ministers are closely gathered; the monarch does not reward and punish based on momentary anger; therefore, the authority established by the monarch is not easy to discard, and the wisdom is far from easy to be blinded; the laws are clear and not harsh, and the eyes are open and not closed; good and evil appear in front of us every day without making mistakes.

古文：是故贤者尽其智，而不肖者竭其力。德泽兼覆而不偏，群臣劝务而不怠，近者安其性，远者怀其德。
现代文：因此，贤能的人能充分地发挥他们的智慧，能力差的也竭尽全力；君主的恩德施予普遍而不偏私，群臣勤奋工作而不懈怠；附近居民安居乐业，边远民众归顺德政。
English: As a result, those who are capable can give full play to their wisdom, and those who are less capable can do their best; the monarch's benevolence is universal and not biased, and the courtiers work diligently without slacking; the nearby residents live and work in peace, and the outlying people are obedient to the government.

古文：所以然者，何也？
现代文：能够有这样的结果其原因何在？
English: What are the reasons for such a result?

古文：得用人之道，而不任己之才者也。
现代文：是在于君主采用了正确的用人选人方法，而不是只靠君主一个人的才能。
English: It is because the monarch has adopted the correct method of selecting people, rather than relying on the talent of the monarch alone.

古文：故假舆马者，足不劳而致千里；乘舟楫者，不能游而绝江海。
现代文：所以借助车马的人，脚腿不辛苦而能到达千里之外，乘坐舟船的人，不会游泳而能横渡江河大海。
English: Therefore, with the help of chariots and horses, people can travel thousands of miles with their feet and legs without difficulty, and people who take boats can cross rivers and seas without swimming.

古文：夫人主之情，莫不欲总海内之智，尽众人之力，然而群臣志达效忠者，希不困其身。
现代文：君主在主观思想上，没有一个不想集天下人智慧、用众人力量去处事办事的，然而那些对君主表达效忠之心的人，却很少不使君主产生困惑的。
English: In the subjective thought of the monarch, there is no one who does not want to gather the wisdom of the world and use the power of the people to do things. However, those who express their loyalty to the monarch rarely do not confuse the monarch.

古文：使言之而是，虽在褐夫刍荛，犹不可弃也；使言之而非也，虽在卿相人君，揄策于庙堂之上，未必可用。
现代文：因此，君主对那些言论正确的，即使是役民樵夫，也不能弃之不用、拒之千里；对那些言论错误的，即使是常给朝廷出谋的卿相，也不一定非用不可。
English: Therefore, the monarch cannot discard or reject those who speak correctly, even if they are servants of the people; for those who speak incorrectly, even if they are nobles who often give advice to the imperial court, they are not necessarily indispensable.

古文：是非之所在，不可以贵贱尊卑论也。
现代文：是非曲直，不是以地位贵贱尊卑来确定的。
English: The rights and wrongs are not determined by the status of nobility and inferiority.

古文：是明主之听于群臣，其计乃可用，不羞其位；其言可行，而不责其辩。
现代文：所以英明的君主听取群臣意见时，如果他的计策管用，就没有必要因他的地位低微而羞于采纳；如果他的意见可行，就没有必要嫌他嘴笨而不去采纳。
English: Therefore, when a wise prince listens to the advice of his courtiers, if his strategy is effective, there is no need to be ashamed to adopt it because of his low status; if his advice is feasible, there is no need to be embarrassed by his mouth and not adopt it.

古文：暗主则不然。
现代文：但是，昏庸的君王却不是这样。
English: However, this is not the case with the dim-witted king.

古文：所爱习亲近者，虽邪枉不正，不能见也；疏远卑贱者，竭力尽忠，不能知也。
现代文：他喜欢那些熟悉的习性相近的人，即使是行为不正派，也装作不看见；而那些他所疏远、被看不起的人，即使是为他竭力效忠努力工作，也只当不知道。
English: He likes those who are familiar and have similar habits, even if they behave inappropriately, pretending not to see; and those who are alienated and despised by him, even if they try to be loyal and work hard for him, they just don't know.

古文：有言者穷之以辞，有谏者诛之以罪。
现代文：或者将那些进善言的人抢白得哑口无言，或者对直言进谏的人套以罪名无辜诛杀。
English: Or robbing those who speak out of kindness, leaving them speechless, or blaming those who speak out, killing the innocent.

古文：如此而欲照海内，存万方，是犹塞耳而听清浊，掩目而视青黄也，其离聪明则亦远矣！
现代文：像这样的昏主还想光照四海、抚慰万方，这就像堵塞耳朵听音乐、蒙着双眼看颜色，实际上他离耳聪目明还远着呢！
English: Such a faint-hearted master still wants to illuminate the four seas and soothe all directions, which is like plugging his ears to listen to music and seeing colors with his eyes covered. In fact, he is still far from being able to hear and see clearly!

古文：法者，天下之度量，而人主之准绳也。
现代文：法是天下社会的度量标准，也是君主手中的准绳。
English: Law is the yardstick of the world society, and it is also the yardstick in the hands of the monarch.

古文：县法者，法不法也；设赏者，赏当赏也。
现代文：社会制订颁行刑法，是为了依法惩处犯法者；设置实行奖赏制度，是为了奖赏有功之士。
English: Society formulates and issues criminal laws in order to punish lawbreakers in accordance with the law; it sets up and implements a reward system in order to reward meritorious people.

古文：法定之后，中程者赏，缺绳者诛。
现代文：这种刑法和制度一经制定，符合奖赏制度的就要嘉奖、触犯法律的就要受罚。
English: Once this kind of criminal law and system is established, those who meet the reward system will be rewarded, and those who violate the law will be punished.

古文：尊贵者不轻其罚，而卑贱者不重其刑，犯法者虽贤必诛，中度者虽不肖必无罪，是故公道通而私道塞矣。
现代文：尊贵者触犯法律也不得减轻处罚，卑贱者犯了法也不会加重处罚。犯法者尽管贤能也一定严惩，守法者虽然无能也不可无端治罪。所以秉公执法风气盛行，徇私枉法之路就被堵塞。
English: Honorable people who break the law may not have their punishment reduced, and lowly people who break the law may not have their punishment increased. Those who break the law must be severely punished, even if they are capable, and those who abide by the law may not be punished without reason, even if they are incompetent. Therefore, the culture of enforcing the law impartially prevails, and the road of abusing the law for personal gain is blocked.

古文：古之置有司也，所以禁民，使不得自恣也；其立君也，所以剬有司，使无专行也；法籍礼仪者，所以禁君，使无擅断也。
现代文：古代设置理官，是用来制约民众，不让他们恣意放纵。
English: In ancient times, magistrates were set up to control the people and prevent them from indulging.

古文：人莫得自恣，则道胜；道胜而理达矣，故反于无为。
现代文：设立君主，是用来制约官员，不让他们专行妄为。
English: The establishment of a monarch is used to control officials and prevent them from acting arbitrarily.

古文：无为者，非谓其凝滞而不动也，以其言莫从己出也。
现代文：而宗法礼义的制定，又是用来限制君主的，不让他独断专横。
English: On the other hand, the establishment of patriarchal etiquette was used to restrict the monarch and prevent him from acting arbitrarily.

古文：夫寸生于䅺，䅺生于日，日生于形，形生于景，此度之本也。
现代文：这样，在这个社会中没有人可以不受限制而放纵专行，那么 道 就占了主导地位、取得胜利， 道 取得胜利，这事理就通畅，于是便可返回到无为而治的境地。
English: Thus, in this society, no one can indulge in unrestrained self-indulgence, then the way will dominate and win, the way will win, the matter will be smooth, and then it can return to the situation of doing nothing.

古文：乐生于音，音生于律，律生于风，此声之宗也。
现代文：同样，音乐产生于五音，五音产生于十二律，十二律产生于风，这就是声音的根本原理。
English: In the same way, music comes from the five tones, the five tones come from the twelve rhythms, and the twelve rhythms come from the wind. This is the fundamental principle of sound.

古文：法生于义，义生于众适，众适合于人心，此治之要也。
现代文：法的情况也一样，它产生于公众的道义，这道义产生于公众生活的需要，并符合最广大民众的心愿，这就是法治社会的要害。
English: The same is true of the law. It arises from public morality, which arises from the needs of public life and conforms to the wishes of the greatest number of people. This is the crux of a society governed by the rule of law.

古文：故通于本者不乱于末，睹于要者不惑于详。
现代文：所以，与这些 根本 、 本原 、 要害 相通，就不会被末节搞乱，掌握了这些 根本 、 本原 、 要害 ，就不会被繁琐搞糊涂。
English: Therefore, if you are in touch with these fundamentals, origins, and key points, you will not be confused by the ending, and if you master these fundamentals, origins, and key points, you will not be confused by the tediousness.

古文：法者，非天堕，非地生，发于人间，而反以自正。
现代文：法，不是从天上掉下来的，也不是从地下冒出来的，而是产生于人间社会又转过来制约人们使之正派。
English: The law did not fall from the sky, nor did it emerge from the ground, but was born in human society and in turn constrained people to be decent.

古文：是故有诸己不非诸人，无诸己不求诸人。
现代文：所以，自己身上有这样的缺点过错，就不要非难他人身上有的同样缺点过错；自己身上没有的优点美德，也就不要要求别人有这种优点美德。
English: Therefore, if you have such faults in yourself, don't blame others for the same faults; if you don't have virtues in yourself, don't ask others to have such virtues.

古文：所立于下者，不废于上；所禁于民者，不行于身。
现代文：由此推出，要求下层民众遵循法律，那么上层君主百官也应遵循法规；禁止百姓民众不能做的事，那么君主自身也不能做。
English: From this it follows that if the lower classes are required to obey the law, then the upper echelons of the monarchy should also obey the law; if the people are prohibited from doing something that the people cannot do, then the monarch himself cannot do it.

古文：所谓亡国，非无君也，无法也。
现代文：这才叫法制社会。
English: This is what we call a law-based society.

古文：变法者，非无法也，有法者而不用，与无法等。
现代文：所谓 亡国 ，不是说这个国家没有君主，而是说这个国家没有 法 ；现在说变更法制，并不是没有法，而是有法不用，有法不用等于没有法。
English: The so-called "ruin of a country" does not mean that the country does not have a monarch, but that the country does not have a law; now, to change the legal system is not to say that there is no law, but that there is a law not to be used, and that there is a law not to be used is equal to no law.

古文：是故人主之立法，先自为检式仪表，故令行于天下。
现代文：因此，君主立法，首先自己要作出执法守法的榜样，这样法令就能施行于天下。
English: Therefore, the monarch's legislation, first of all, must set an example of law enforcement and law-abiding, so that the decree can be enforced in the world.

古文：孔子曰： 其身正，不令而行；其身不正，虽令不从。
现代文：孔子说： 其身正，不令而行；其身不正，虽令不从。 
English: Confucius said, "If you are upright, you will do what you are told; if you are crooked, you will not do what you are told."

古文：故禁胜于身，则令行于民矣。
现代文：所以，还是一句话，君主如能用法严格地约束自身，那么法令政令就能够在百姓中施行无阻。
English: Therefore, in a word, if the monarch can use the law to strictly restrain himself, then the laws and decrees can be implemented without hindrance among the people.

古文：圣主之治也，其犹造父之御。齐辑之于辔衔之际，而急缓之于唇吻之和；正度于胸臆之中，而执节于掌握之间；内得于心中，外合于马志。
现代文：圣明君主治理天下，就好像造父驾御马车：善于控制缰绳、调节辔头来使马儿步伐整齐和谐，通过他平和的吆喝来调节车辆的快慢；驾御马车的法术熟谙于胸中，而竹鞭又紧紧地握在手里；那缰绳的松紧，吆喝声的高低，竹鞭的使用等无不传达他的意旨，而马儿也能领会他的意思。
English: The Sage Monarch governs the world as if he were a father driving a carriage: he is good at controlling the reins, adjusting the hoe to make the horse's pace neat and harmonious, and adjusting the speed of the vehicle through his peaceful shouting; the magic of driving the carriage is familiar in his chest, and the bamboo whip is tightly held in his hand; the tightness of the reins, the pitch of the shouting, the use of the bamboo whip, etc. all convey his meaning, and the horse can understand his meaning.

古文：是故能进退履绳，而旋曲中规；取道致远，而气力有余。
现代文：所以马车的进退、转弯都能符合规矩，取道上路多远都能到达，可人马不会感到精疲力竭，这都应当归功于神奇的驾御术。
English: Therefore, the advance and retreat of the carriage, the turn can meet the rules, and the road can be reached as far as the road, but the horse will not feel exhausted, which should be attributed to the magical driving skills.

古文：诚得其术也。是故权势者，人主之车舆也；大臣者，人主之驷马也。
现代文：所以说，王位和权力是君主的车辆；而大臣则是君主的驾车马匹。
English: So throne and power are the monarch's chariot; and ministers are the monarch's draught horses.

古文：体离车舆之安，而手失驷马之心，而能不危者，古今未有也。
现代文：身体还没在车上坐稳，马儿又不听使唤，就开始启动而不出车毁人亡的危险，从古到今好像还没有过。
English: The body has not yet settled on the car, and the horse does not listen to the call, it begins to start without getting out of the car, and the danger of death and destruction seems to have not passed since ancient times.

古文：是故舆马不调，王良不足以取道；君臣不和，唐、虞不能以为治。
现代文：所以车、马不协调，即使是王良也不敢驱车上路；同样君、臣不和谐，即使是唐虞也不能治理好天下。
English: Therefore, the car and the horse are not coordinated, even Wang Liang does not dare to drive on the road; likewise, the prince and the vassal are not harmonious, even Tang Yu cannot govern the world well.

古文：执术而御之，则管、晏之智尽矣；明分以示之，则蹠、荞之奸止矣。
现代文：掌握驾御法术，使管仲、晏婴的才智得以最大限度地施展出来；明确君臣名分，使盗跖、庄蹻这样的大盗也难以作乱耍奸。
English: Master the magic of driving, so that the talents of Guanzhong and Zou Ying can be maximally exhibited; clear the names of the monarchs and ministers, so that it is difficult for the great thieves such as Zou Zou and Zhuang Zou to make mischief.

古文：夫据除而窥井底，虽达视犹不能见其晴，借明于鉴以照之，则寸分可得而察也。
现代文：趴在井栏朝着井水照脸，眼睛视力再好也不易看清自己的眼珠子；而用明镜来照脸，脸上的毛孔和斑点都能看得一清二楚。
English: If you lie down on the well railing facing the well water and look at your face, it is not easy to see your own eyeballs no matter how good your eyesight is; but if you look at your face with a clear lens, you can see the pores and spots on your face clearly.

古文：是故明主之耳目不劳，精神不竭，物至而观其象，事来而应其化，近者不乱，远者治也。
现代文：所以英明的君主耳目不劳累，精神不耗竭，物体来到时能看清它们的形象、事情发生了能应对它们的变化，不论远近都能治理得井井有条。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch does not strain his eyes and ears, does not exhaust his spirit, can see the objects clearly when they arrive, can deal with their changes when things happen, and can govern in an orderly manner regardless of distance.

古文：是故不用适然之数，而行必然之道，故万举而无遗策矣。
现代文：因此不靠偶然的机会而遵循必然规律，所以无论做什么事，都不会有失误。
English: Therefore, do not rely on chance and follow the law of necessity, so no matter what you do, there will be no mistakes.

古文：今夫御者，马体调于车，御心和于马，则历险致远，进退周游，莫不如志。
现代文：那优秀的驾御手，使马儿的体形动作和车子协调一致，御手的心思想法又和马儿沟通一致，那么就是经过险阻，到达远方，进退转弯，没有不称心的。
English: That excellent driver's hand, so that the horse's body movements are coordinated with the car, and the driver's heart and mind are in line with the horse's communication, then it is through the obstacle, reaching the distance, advancing and retreating, turning, there is nothing unsatisfactory.

古文：虽有骐骥騄駬之良，臧获御之，则马反自恣，而人弗能制矣。
现代文：反过来说，即使有骐骥、騄駬这样的良马，但让臧获这样的愚者去驾御，那良马反而变得暴躁放纵起来，没法控制它了。
English: On the other hand, even if there is a good horse such as a mule or a donkey, if such a fool is allowed to drive it, the good horse will become irritable and indulgent, and it will be impossible to control it.

古文：故治者不贵其自是，而贵其不得为非也。
现代文：所以治理政务的官吏，不贵在其自身行为的正确与否，而贵在不能做坏事。
English: Therefore, officials who manage government affairs do not care whether their own actions are correct or not, but they care that they cannot do bad things.

古文：故曰：勿使可欲，毋曰弗求，勿使可夺，毋曰不争。
现代文：所以说： 不要助长人的贪欲，但也不要压抑人的正常要求；不要鼓励人争名争利，但也不要人放弃合理的竞争。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Do not encourage people's greed, but also do not suppress people's normal requirements; do not encourage people to compete for fame and profit, but also do not want people to give up reasonable competition.

古文：如此，则人材释而公道行矣。
现代文：这样恰到好处，人欲能合理释放，真正的公正合理之道才得以实行。
English: In this way, people's desires can be rationally released, and a truly fair and reasonable way can be implemented.

古文：美者正于度，而不足者建于用，故海内可一也。
现代文：才德皆佳的人按法度正确使用，才德欠佳的人也应放适当的位置使用，这样，天下就成一个和谐的整体。
English: Those whose talents are all good should use them correctly according to the law, and those whose talents are not good should also use them in the appropriate position. In this way, the world will become a harmonious whole.

古文：夫释职事而听非誉，弃公劳而用朋党，则奇材佻长而干次，守官者雍遏而不进。
现代文：如果不是根据人的才能是否称职，而是根据他人的非议或赞誉来评品人之优劣，抛弃勤于公职努力工作的人而任用结党营私之徒，那么奇异之才就会躁进跻身处在与他才能不相称的位置，忠于职守的官员反被堵塞而不得提拔晋升。
English: If people are judged not on the basis of whether they are competent or not, but on the basis of the criticism or praise of others, abandoning those who work hard in public office and appointing party members, then the extraordinary talent will be forced into a position that is not commensurate with his talent, and officials who are loyal to their duties will be blocked from promotion.

古文：如此，则民俗乱于国，而功臣争于朝。
现代文：这样一来，全国的民间风气就被搞乱，有功之臣也因不得提拔晋升而争于朝廷。
English: As a result, the folk culture of the whole country was disrupted, and meritorious courtiers also competed with the imperial court because they were not allowed to be promoted.

古文：故法律度量者，人主之所以执下，释之而不用，是犹无辔衔而驰也，群君百姓反弄其上。
现代文：所以法律准则是君主用来控制下面群臣百官民众百姓的，如果放弃不用，就好像不用缰绳嚼子、骑光背马疾驰一样，百官百姓反过来会戏弄君主。
English: Therefore, the rule of law is used by the monarch to control the ministers, officials and people below. If it is not used, it is like riding a horse without a bridle and galloping, and the officials and people will tease the monarch in turn.

古文：是故有术则制人，无术则制于人。
现代文：所以说君主有法术就可制御群臣百姓，不用法术或无法术就要被群臣百姓控制。
English: Therefore, it is said that if the monarch has magic, he can control his subjects. If he does not have magic or cannot do so, he will be controlled by his subjects.

古文：吞舟之鱼，荡而失水，则制于蝼蚁，离其居也；猿?失木，而禽于狐狸，非其处也。
现代文：吞舟的大鱼，离开水面跳到陆上，就会被蝼蛄、蚂蚁欺侮，这是因为它离开了赖以生存的水域；猿猴离开树林，就会被狐狸擒获，这是因为它处在它不该处的地方。
English: A big fish that swallows a boat will be bullied by cormorants and ants if it jumps out of the water onto land, because it has left the water where it lives; an ape will be caught by a fox if it leaves the forest, because it is in the wrong place.

古文：君人者释所守而与臣下争，则有司以无为持位，守职者以从君取容。是以人臣藏智而弗用，反以事转任其上矣。
现代文：统御臣民的君主如果放弃君主本应持守之道，去干涉下属官员分内的事，这样使下属官员反而感到不好办，以无为的态度来对待自己职能范围内的事；而那些忠于职责的官员也只能顺从君主的意愿、看着君主的脸色行动以讨君主欢心；他们也只得收藏起自己的主观能动性和智慧不用，反将自己分内的事，乃至责任全都推到君主身上。
English: If the monarch who rules over his subjects abandons the principle that the monarch should be on the defensive and interferes in the affairs of subordinate officials, this will make subordinate officials feel uncomfortable and treat the affairs within their scope of functions with a do-nothing attitude; and those officials who are loyal to their duties can only obey the wishes of the monarch and watch the monarch's face and actions to please the monarch; they also have to collect their own subjective initiative and wisdom, but do not use them, but push their own affairs, and even their responsibilities, all onto the monarch.

古文：夫富贵者之于劳也，达事者之于察也，骄恣者之于恭也，势不及君；君人者不任能而好自为之，则智日困而自负其责也。
现代文：在这种君主事必亲躬、包揽一切的情况下，那些尊贵的卿相对于勤劳政事，通达事理的官员对于考察事理，骄横放纵的官僚对于恭谨守职，势必不如君主。君主不很好地运用群臣的才能而喜欢每事必亲躬，就会每天伤透脑筋、背着所有的责任包袱无法摆脱。
English: In such a situation where the monarch must personally attend to and take care of everything, those noble lords are bound to be inferior to the monarch in terms of diligent government affairs, knowledgeable officials in terms of investigating matters, and arrogant and indulgent bureaucrats in terms of respectfully performing their duties. If the monarch does not make good use of the talents of his ministers and likes to personally attend to everything, he will be brain-broken every day and unable to get rid of the burden of all responsibilities.

古文：数穷于下，则不能伸理；行堕于国，则不能专制。
现代文：这样，君主原本有限的统御群臣之术就在日常事务中被削弱，办事处事就不能合理有效；君主每天陷于繁琐具体的国务之中，就不能很好地控制掌握天下大事。
English: In this way, the monarch's originally limited ability to rule over his subjects is weakened in daily affairs, and office affairs cannot be reasonably effective; the monarch is trapped in the cumbersome and specific state affairs every day, and cannot well control and grasp the world's major events.

古文：智不足以为治，威不足以行诛，则无以与天下交也。
现代文：君主的个人智慧不足以治理天下，君主的威严不足以施行惩罚，这样就无法与群臣百官产生交往。
English: The personal wisdom of the monarch is not enough to govern the world, the majesty of the monarch is not enough to punish, so it is impossible to interact with hundreds of officials.

古文：喜怒形于心，者欲见于外，则守职者离正而阿上，有司枉法而从风，赏不当功，诛不应罪，上下离心，而君臣相怨也。
现代文：还有，君主如果在内心世界产生喜怒情感，就会在外表神态、言语中表现出来，这样使那些忠于职守的人偏离正道而转到逢迎阿附君主，有些官吏就会出于私心破坏法律来顺从不正之风，于是奖赏与功劳不相符合，处罚与罪行不相对称，上下离心离德、君臣互相埋怨。
English: Moreover, if the monarch produces emotions of joy and anger in the inner world, they will be manifested in the outward appearance and speech, thus causing those who are loyal to their duties to deviate from the right path and turn to the monarch. Some officials will break the law out of selfishness to comply with the wrong style, so the reward is not consistent with the merit, the punishment is not commensurate with the crime, and the up and down are separated from morality, and the monarchs and ministers complain to each other.

古文：是以执政阿主，而有过则无以责之。有罪而不诛，则百官烦乱，智弗能解也；毁誉萌生，而明不能照也。
现代文：所以执政官员阿附逢迎君主，那么当他们有过失时，君主就无法责备他们；而有罪不加以惩处，百官群臣就会议论纷纷心情烦躁而思想混乱，这时君主再有智慧也无法解决这些思想问题；当诽谤和吹捧风气一旦滋生，君主再英明也无法照亮人们。
English: Therefore, if the government officials are too close to the monarch, then when they make mistakes, the monarch will not be able to blame them; and if the guilty are not punished, the hundreds of officials and ministers will be irritated and confused about the meeting, and the monarch will not be able to solve these ideological problems with wisdom; when the slander and touting culture once breeds, the monarch will not be able to illuminate the people with wisdom.

古文：不正本而反自然，则人主逾劳，人臣逾逸，是犹代庖宰剥牲，而为大匠斫也。
现代文：不正本清源返回自然无为，那么君主是越辛劳而下属百官是越安逸，这就像代替厨师宰杀牲口，取代木匠斫削木料。
English: It is like replacing a cook with slaughtering animals, or a carpenter with milling wood, unless the original source is returned to nature. The more laborious the monarch is, the more comfortable the subordinates are.

古文：与马竞走，筋绝而弗能及，上车执辔，则马死于衡下。
现代文：你与马赛跑，筋骨跑断也追不上马；但坐上马车手操缰绳辔头，那么马就不得不听你的使唤，以至累死马儿也是相当简单的。
English: If you run against a horse, you will not be able to catch up with the horse; but if you sit in the driver's seat and steer the reins, then the horse will have to listen to your command, and it is quite simple to tire the horse.

古文：故伯乐相之，王良御之，明主乘之，无御相之劳而致千里者，乘于人资以为羽翼也。
现代文：所以让伯乐去相马、由王良来驾御，英明君主只须稳坐马车厢里，无须亲手驾御就能到达千里之外，这就是在于能利用他人的特长才智来作为自己驰骋的羽翼。
English: Therefore, let Bo Le go to Soma, and let Wang Liang drive him. The wise monarch only needs to sit steadily in the carriage, and can reach thousands of miles away without having to drive himself. This is because he can use the special talents of others as the wings of his gallop.

古文：是故君人者，无为而有守也，有为而无好也。
现代文：所以统御民众的君主就该持清静无为之道而守着根本，有治国平天下的才能而无个人贪欲偏好。
English: Therefore, the monarch who rules over the people should keep a clear, quiet and inactive way and keep the fundamentals, have the ability to govern the country and the world without personal greed preference.

古文：有为则谗生，有好则谀起。
现代文：君主要知道，处处想插手表现自我，那么谗佞就会产生；而有个人偏好贪欲，那么阿谀就会兴起。
English: The ruler knows that if he wants to intervene everywhere to express himself, then a tantrum will arise; and if there is a personal preference for greed, then a tantrum will arise.

古文：昔者齐桓公好味，而易牙烹其首子而饵之；虞君好宝，而晋献以璧马钓之；胡王好音，而秦穆公以女乐诱之。
现代文：过去齐桓公喜爱美食，易牙就蒸煮了他的长子献给齐桓公以骗取宠信；虞国国君贪好璧玉良马，晋献公就用璧玉良马来满足他的欲望以便能借道进军；西戎国王爱好音乐，秦穆公就用歌女诱惑使之丢失土地。
English: In the past, King Qi Huan loved delicious food, so Yiga steamed his firstborn son and offered it to King Qi Huan to trick him into granting him favors; the ruler of the State of Yu was greedy for Biryani horses, so King Jin Xian used Biryani horses to satisfy his desire so that he could march through the country; the King of Xirong loved music, so King Qin Mu used female singers to tempt him into losing his land.

古文：是皆以利见制于人也。
现代文：这些均因国君好利贪欲而被人算计。
English: All of these were calculated by people because of the king's greed for profit.

古文：故善建者不拔。
现代文：所以只有从内心世界建立起某种信念，只要自我不变质，外界是没有什么力量能将此拔去的。
English: Therefore, only by establishing a certain belief from the inner world, as long as the self does not deteriorate, there is no external force that can pull it out.

古文：夫火热而水灭之，金刚而火销之，木强而斧伐之，水流而土遏之，唯造化者，物莫能胜也。
现代文：反观物质世界：那火虽然热得灼人，但水能泼灭它；金属虽然坚硬无比，但火能销熔它；树木虽然结实，但利斧能砍伐它；水虽然漫溢渗透，但土能堵遏它；只有自然造化的东西才没什么能制服它。
English: On the other hand, if we look at the material world, we will see that fire, although it is very hot, can be extinguished by water; metal, although it is very hard, can be melted by fire; trees, although they are strong, can be cut down by axes; water, although it is pervasive, can be stopped by soil; and only natural things can subdue it.

古文：故中欲不出谓之扃，外邪不入谓之塞。
现代文：所以心中的欲念不外逸，就叫做把住了门户，外界的邪气不能入侵攻心，就叫做守住了关卡。
English: Therefore, if the desire in the heart does not escape, it is called holding the portal, and if the external evil spirit cannot invade the heart, it is called guarding the checkpoint.

古文：中扃外闭，何事之不节！
现代文：心欲不外逸、邪气不入侵，还有什么事情不能节制？
English: Desire does not escape, evil spirits do not invade, what other things cannot be controlled?

古文：外闭中扃，何事之不成？弗用而后能用之，弗为而后能为之。
现代文：什么事情不能成功？那才是不用然后能用，无为然后有力。
English: What can't be successful? It's what doesn't need to be done and can be done, what doesn't need to be done and is powerful.

古文：精神劳则越，耳目淫则竭。
现代文：人的精神劳累就会离散，耳目淫荡精气就会衰竭。
English: People's mental fatigue will be scattered, and the ears, eyes, lustful spirit will be exhausted.

古文：故有道之主，灭想去意，清虚以待，不伐之言，不夺之事，循名责实，使有司，任而弗诏，责而弗教，以不知为道，以奈何为宝。如此，则百官之事，各有所守矣。
现代文：所以得道体道的君主是熄灭欲火、抛弃杂意，以清静无为来对付所有一切；他不替任何人说三道四，他不将他人的事务揽于手中；他只是按照各种名分来落实实际事务，使各种官吏完成各自分内的事情。任用他们而不瞎指挥，提出责职权益而不多下指令；以无法规定、无可奈何的 道 作为法宝，这样百官群臣就能各守自己的岗位而尽心尽力了。
English: Therefore, a dignified monarch is one who extinguishes the fire of desire, discards all distractions, and deals with everything with serenity and inaction; he does not speak for anyone, he does not take the affairs of others into his hands; he only implements the actual affairs according to various names, and enables various officials to complete their own affairs. He does not blindly command them, and does not give more orders. He uses the way that cannot be specified and cannot be helped as a magic weapon, so that hundreds of officials and ministers can each keep their own posts and do their best.

古文：摄权势之柄，其于化民易矣。
现代文：君主如果能掌握利用好权势，那么对于教化民众这点来说，就非常容易了。
English: It is very easy for a monarch to educate the people if he knows how to use his power well.

古文：卫君役子路，权重也；景、桓公臣管晏，位尊也。怯服勇而愚制智，其所托势者胜也。
现代文：过去，无能的卫国君之所以能役使勇武的子路，就在于他掌握了权力的缘故；而平庸的齐景公和齐桓公能让精明能干的管仲、晏婴做他们的臣子，也是因为景、桓两公身处君位的缘故。
English: In the past, the reason why the incompetent Emperor Wei was able to use the path of the brave was because he had power; and the reason why the mediocre Emperors Qi Jing and Qi Huan were able to make the shrewd and capable Guanzhong and Xingyao their vassals was also because the Emperors Jing and Huan were monarchs.

古文：故枝不得大于榦，末不强于本，则轻重大小，有以相制也。
现代文：这怯懦的制服勇武的、愚庸的制服聪明的，是因为怯懦、愚庸的身处地位要超过勇武聪明的。
English: This cowardly uniform of the brave, the stupid uniform of the clever is because the position of the cowardly and the stupid is higher than that of the brave, the stupid and the clever.

古文：若五指之属于臂，搏援攫捷，莫不如志。言以小属于大也。
现代文：所以树枝不能大于树干、树梢不能强于树根，这样大的重的就能够制约小的轻的；就像五指属于臂控制，手指的搏拉抓取十分敏捷灵巧，没有不随心所欲的，这就是说小的属于大的控制。
English: Therefore, the branches cannot be larger than the trunk, the treetops cannot be stronger than the roots, so the big heavy ones can control the small light ones; just as the five fingers belong to the arm control, the fingers' pawl grasping is very agile and dexterous, there is nothing that is not arbitrary, that is to say, the small ones belong to the big control.

古文：是故得势之利者，所持甚小，其存甚大；所守甚约，所制甚广。
现代文：正因为这样，谁获得重要位置、有利形势就显得很重要，这样他尽管掌握持有的很小，但所能胜任的却很大；他尽管掌握守持的很小，但所能掌握的却很广。
English: Because of this, whoever gains an important position and a favorable situation is important, so that although his grasp is small, what he can do is large; although his grasp is small, what he can do is wide.

古文：是故十围之木，持千钧之屋；五寸之键，制开阖之门。
现代文：因此，十围粗的木柱，却能支撑千钧重的房屋的重量；五寸长的插销，却能控制大门的开关。
English: Therefore, a ten-circumference thick wooden column can support the weight of a thousand-weight house; a five-inch long plug can control the switch of the gate.

古文：岂其材之巨小足哉？
现代文：这难道是木柱和插销的粗细长短足以胜任房屋重量和大门开关？
English: Are the thickness and length of the wooden posts and pins sufficient for the weight of the house and the gate switch?

古文：所居要也。
现代文：不是的，而是因为它们处的位置太重要关键了。
English: No, it's because the position they are in is so important.

古文：孔丘、墨翟，修先圣之术，通六艺之论，口道其言，身行其志，慕义从风，而为之服役者不过数十人。
现代文：孔丘和墨翟研究先圣的学问、通晓六艺的理论，但是后来继承传播他们的言论思想、亲身实践他们的志向、仰慕追随他们的义理和风格，并为他们奔走效劳的门徒只不过数十人。
English: Confucius and Mo Xun studied the teachings of the Ancients and were well versed in the theories of the Six Arts, but later there were only dozens of disciples who inherited and spread their speech and thought, personally practiced their aspirations, admired and followed their principles and style, and worked for them.

古文：使居天子之位，则天下遍为儒、墨矣。
现代文：假使孔丘和墨翟处在天子的位置，那么天下儒、墨的门徒就不是数十个人了，可能天下到处都是儒、墨的门徒了。
English: If Confucius and Mochizuki were in the position of heavenly sons, then there would not be dozens of disciples of Confucius and Mochizuki in the world. Perhaps there would be disciples of Confucius and Mochizuki everywhere in the world.

古文：楚庄王伤文无畏之死于宋也，奋袂而起，衣冠相连于道，遂成军宋城之下，权重也。
现代文：楚庄王为文无畏在宋国被害而感到悲伤，并为之挥袖而起，领兵攻打宋国，一路上跟随前往的追随者接连不断，浩浩荡荡攻到宋国都城、并取得胜利，这一切因为楚庄王掌握权势而导致的。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang was saddened by the death of Wen Daowu in Song, and he rose up to lead the army to attack Song. Along the way, he was followed by a succession of followers, stormed the capital city of Song, and achieved victory. All of this was caused by the fact that Chu Zhuang Wang seized power.

古文：楚文王好服獬冠，楚国效之，赵武灵王贝带鵕翿而朝，赵国化之。
现代文：楚文王喜好戴獬豸冠，使楚国人都仿效他；赵武灵王佩着贝带、戴着砫砮冠上朝，整个赵国人都被他同化。
English: King Chu Wen liked to wear a skull and crossbones crown, so the people of Chu emulated him; King Zhao Wuling wore a sash and a skull and crossbones crown when he ascended the throne, and the entire people of Zhao were assimilated by him.

古文：使在匹夫布衣，虽冠獬冠，带贝带鵕翿而朝，则不免为人笑也。
现代文：假如楚文王、赵武灵王只是一个平民百姓、处平民百姓的地位上，即使也戴着獬豸冠、佩着贝带、戴着砫砮冠而上朝，就不免被人耻笑了。
English: If King Chu Wen and King Zhao Wuling were just ordinary people, in the position of ordinary people, even if they also wore a crown of thorns, a sash, and a crown of thorns and ascended to the throne, they would inevitably be laughed at.

古文：夫民之好善乐正，不待禁诛而自中法度者，万无一也。
现代文：在整个社会中，能够自觉爱好善良，乐意正派，不靠禁令惩罚而就能遵守法规的老百姓，大概是一万人当中也没有一个。
English: In the whole society, there is probably no one among ten thousand people who can consciously love goodness, be willing to be decent, and abide by laws and regulations without relying on prohibitions and punishments.

古文：下必行之令，从之者利，逆之者凶，日阴未移，而海内莫不被绳矣。
现代文：因为这样，所以君主发布法令就应坚决、实行就应坚定，服从者就让他得到好处，违逆者就叫他遭殃，这样，转眼功夫，天下就没有不遵守法规的了。
English: Because of this, the monarch should be resolute in issuing decrees, firm in implementing them, benefit from those who obey, and suffer from those who disobey. In this way, there will be no failure to comply with laws and regulations in the world.

古文：故握剑锋，以离北宫子，司马蒯蒉不使应敌；操其觚，招其末，则庸人能以制胜。
现代文：所以如果手握剑锋，将剑倒着迎战敌人，即使是像北宫子和司马蒯蒉这样的勇士恐怕也难以去与敌人交战；而手握剑柄、以剑锋对准敌人，即使是武功平庸的人也能战胜敌人。
English: Therefore, if you hold the sword in your hand and face the enemy with the sword upside down, even warriors such as Hokimiya and Sima Yi may find it difficult to engage the enemy; and if you hold the hilt of the sword in your hand and aim the sword at the enemy, even a person with mediocre martial arts can defeat the enemy.

古文：今使乌获、藉蕃从后牵牛尾，尾绝而不从者，逆也；若指之桑条以贯其鼻，则五尺童子，牵而周四海者，顺也。
现代文：这也可以这样讲，如果让乌获、藉蕃这样的大力士去牵拉牛尾巴，你就是将牛尾巴拉断，这牛还是不听你的话，原因是在于你违逆了牛的本性；如果你用手指粗细的枝条贯穿牛的牛鼻，这样即使是弱小的五尺牧童也能牵着牛周游天下，使牛服服帖帖，原因是顺应了本性。
English: It can also be said that if you let Wuhou, a Hercules like Zou, pull the cow's tail, you will pull the cow's tail, and the cow will still not listen to you, because you have violated the nature of the cow; if you use the thick branches of your fingers to pierce the cow's nose, then even a weak five-foot herd boy can lead the cow around the world and make the cow dress up, because it conforms to nature.

古文：夫七尺之桡而制船之左右者，以水为资；天子发号，令行禁止，以众为势也。
现代文：七尺船桨能够控制船只的左右方向，是由于凭借水的作用力；天子君主发号施令能够令行禁止，是依靠民众的势力。
English: The seven-foot oars can control the left and right direction of the ship by virtue of the action of water; the emperor can issue orders to prohibit it by relying on the power of the people.

古文：夫防民之所害，开民之所利，威行也，若发决唐。
现代文：能够堵塞防止危害民众的事，开发推行有益于民众的事，这样君主的威信，就像挖开池堤池水畅通灌溉田地一样深入人心。
English: The prestige of a monarch who is able to block things that are harmful to the people and to develop and promote things that are beneficial to the people is as deeply rooted in people's minds as digging up a pond to allow water to flow freely to irrigate the fields.

古文：故循流而下易以至，背风而驰易以远。
现代文：所以说顺流而下是很容易到达目的地，背对着风奔跑是容易跑得远的。
English: Therefore, it is easy to reach the destination by going down the river, and it is easy to run far by running against the wind.

古文：桓公立政，去食肉之兽，食粟之鸟，係罝之网，三举而百姓说。纣杀王子比干而骨肉怨，斮朝涉者之胫而万民叛，再举而天下失矣。
现代文：齐桓公登基执政，下令不许畜养食肉的猛兽和吃粮食的鸟儿，撤除捕捉动物的网罗，仅这三项措施实施就使百姓心悦诚服；而殷纣王残杀王子比干就使骨肉间产生怨恨，斩断早晨趟水过河人的胫骨就引起万民叛乱，仅这二项罪行就使他丢掉了天下。
English: When King Qi Huan ascended the throne, he issued an order forbidding the raising of meat-eating beasts and grain-eating birds, and removing the traps for catching animals. The implementation of these three measures alone made the people's hearts happy and sincere; while the murder of Prince Bi Gan by King Yin Xuan caused resentment between bones and flesh, and the cutting of the shinbone of a man crossing the river in the morning caused the rebellion of all the people. These two crimes alone made him lose the world.

古文：故义者，非能遍利天下之民也，利一人而天下从风；暴者，非尽害海内之众也，害一人而天下离叛。
现代文：所以君主的义举，用不着使天下所有人同时都获得利益，而其中只要有一人得利获益，就能使天下人从中受感化；纣王的暴行，并没有使天下所有人同时受害，但只要残害了一人，天下人就会离心背叛。
English: Therefore, the righteous deed of the monarch does not need to make all the people in the world benefit at the same time, and as long as only one of them benefits, the people in the world can be influenced by it; the brutality of the king did not make all the people in the world suffer at the same time, but as long as one person is harmed, the people in the world will betray each other.

古文：故桓公三举而九合诸侯，纣再举而不得为匹夫。故举错不可不审。
现代文：所以齐桓公靠办三项事件便九次会合诸侯；殷纣王只做二件蠢事就遭灭亡，此时想做名普通老百姓都不可能了。
English: Therefore, Prince Qi Kuan relied on three events to hold the ninth meeting of the princes; King Yin Xuan only did two stupid things and was destroyed. At this time, it was impossible for ordinary people to become famous.

古文：人主租敛于民也。
现代文：所以君主的一举一动都不可不慎重。
English: Therefore, the monarch's every move must be prudent.

古文：必先计岁收，量民积聚，知饥馑有余不足之数，然后取车舆衣食供养其欲。
现代文：君主要向人民征收赋税，一定要事先盘算一下年成好坏，估计一下人民手中的积蓄，弄清百姓是饥还是饱、有余还是不足，做到心中有数，然后才酌情征收供君王车马衣食所需的赋税。
English: When the ruler levies taxes on the people, he must first calculate the annual income and expenditure, estimate the savings in the hands of the people, find out whether the people are hungry or full, and whether there is surplus or shortage, and then collect the taxes needed for the king's chariots, horses, clothing and food.

古文：高台层榭，接屋连阁，非不丽也，然民有掘穴狭庐所以托身者，明主弗乐也。肥醲甘脆，非不美也，然民有糟糠菽粟不接于口者，则明主弗甘也。匡床蒻席，非不宁也，然民有处边城，犯危难，泽死暴骸者，明主弗安也。
现代文：高耸的楼台、层叠连片的榭屋和宫室，十分壮观漂亮，但是老百姓还挤在土房窄屋里栖身，那么英明的君主就不会以住入这些华丽的宫室楼台里为快乐；肥砵醇厚、甘甜酥脆的酒食，也十分味美可口，但是老百姓还过着糟糠粗粮都吃不上的日子，那么英明的君主就不会以享用这些美味佳肴为甜美；安适的床榻、细软的席垫，也十分舒适，但是老百姓还过着戍守边境、遭受危难、战死野外、尸骨暴露的日子，那么英明的君主就不会以寝卧舒适为安适。
English: The soaring towers, the cascade of adjoining pavilions and palaces, are very spectacular and beautiful, but the common people are still crowded in the narrow houses of the earthen house, so the wise monarch will not be happy to live in these gorgeous palace towers; the fat, mellow, sweet and crisp liquor and food are also very delicious and delicious, but the common people still live in the days when they can't eat the waste coarse grains, so the wise monarch will not enjoy these delicacies as sweet; the comfortable beds and soft cushions are also very comfortable, but the common people still live in the days of guarding the border, suffering from danger, dying in the field

古文：故古之君人者，其惨怛于民也。国有饥者，食不重味；民有寒者，而冬不被裘。岁登民丰，乃始县钟鼓，陈干戚，君臣上下，同心而乐之，国无哀人。
现代文：所以古时候的君主，他对百姓的痛苦而担忧、悲伤，只要国家里有挨饿的人，他就不会对食物挑东拣西；只要国家中还有挨冻的人，他就不会身穿裘皮；只有当年成丰收百姓富足时，君主才悬挂钟鼓、陈设干戚，君臣上下与民同乐，国家因此无一人悲哀。
English: Therefore, the monarch in ancient times, he was worried and saddened by the suffering of the people. As long as there were starving people in the country, he would not pick and choose the food; as long as there were people in the country who were freezing, he would not wear furs; only when the harvest was abundant and the people were rich, the monarch would hang the bell and drum, set up the relatives, and the monarchs and ministers would have fun with the people. Therefore, no one in the country was sad.

古文：故古之为金石管弦者，所以宣乐也；兵革斧钺者，所以饰怒也；觞酌俎豆，酬酢之礼，所以效善也；衰绖菅屦，辟踊哭泣，所以谕哀也。
现代文：所以，古代制造铜钟、石磬、箫琴，是用来表达快乐之情的；制造兵器、铠甲、斧钺，是用来表示愤怒的；制定祭祀、应酬礼节，是用来传递互相友善、喜悦的；而穿丧服系麻绳着草鞋、捶胸顿足号啕痛哭，是为了表述哀悼之情的。
English: Therefore, the manufacture of bronze bells, stone gongs, and harps in ancient times was used to express happiness; the manufacture of weapons, armor, and axes was used to express anger; the establishment of sacrificial rites and entertainment etiquette was used to convey mutual friendship and joy; and the wearing of mourning clothes with hemp ropes and straw shoes, the beating of chests and the beating of feet were used to express feelings of mourning.

古文：此皆有充于内而成像于外。
现代文：这些喜怒哀乐之情，都是发自内心世界，又以一定的外在形式表现出来。
English: These emotions come from the inner world and are expressed in a certain external form.

古文：及至乱主，取民则不裁其力，求于下则不量其积，男女不得事耕织之业，以供上之求，力勤财匮，君臣相疾也。
现代文：到了乱世昏主，搜刮民脂民膏时不顾百姓的承受力、聚敛财富时不看百姓的家底积蓄，民众从事的男耕女织根本无法供给上面君王的奢求，这样导致民力疲乏，财源枯竭，君臣互相怨恨。
English: When the world was in chaos, the rulers lost sight of the people, disregarded the people's endurance when they collected the people's fat and ointment, and disregarded the people's household savings when they accumulated wealth. The men and women engaged in the people's work were simply unable to supply the extravagant demands of the monarchs above. This led to the exhaustion of the people's strength, the depletion of financial resources, and the mutual resentment of the monarchs and ministers.

古文：故民至于焦唇沸肝，有今无储，而乃始撞大钟，击鸣鼓，吹竽笙，弹琴瑟，是犹贯甲胄而入宗庙，被罗纨而从军旅，失乐之所由生矣。
现代文：因此人民是被弄得唇焦舌燥、心急火燎，吃了上顿没有下顿，在这样一种生活状态下却去撞击大钟、擂击响鼓、吹奏竽笙、弹拨琴瑟，就好像是披戴盔甲进入宗庙祭祀神灵、穿着细软华丽的锦衣出征打仗一样，完全失去了原本制定音乐的目的了。
English: As a result, the people were made to be anxious, anxious, and anxious, and ate up every morsel, but in such a state of life, they went to strike the clock, beat the drums, blow the gongs, and play the harpsichord, as if they were wearing armor to enter the ancestral temple to worship the gods, and wearing soft and gorgeous brocades to go to war. They completely lost the original purpose of making music.

古文：夫民之为生也，一人跖耒而耕，不过十亩，中田之获，卒岁之收，不过亩四石，妻子老弱，仰而食之，时有涔旱灾害之患，无以给上之征赋车马兵革之费。
现代文：百姓维持生计主要靠农业生产，一个男性劳动力所耕种的土地不过十亩，中等土质的地一年每亩收获不过四石。妻子儿女老老少少都靠这些收获过日子，有时还要碰到水旱虫灾，就无法缴纳赋税供给政府朝廷的车马军队的费用。
English: The people's livelihood mainly depends on agricultural production. The land cultivated by a male laborer is only ten mu, and the average soil quality is only four stone per mu per year. Wives and children of all ages rely on these harvests to make a living. Sometimes they also encounter floods, droughts and insect plagues, and they are unable to pay taxes to supply the government with the cost of the army of chariots and horses of the imperial court.

古文：由此观之，则人之生，悯矣！
现代文：由此看来，人民百姓的生活也够令人忧愁的。
English: From this point of view, the life of the people is also quite depressing.

古文：夫天地之大，计三年耕而余一年之食，率九年而有三年之畜，十八年而有六年之积，二十七年而有九年之储，虽涔旱灾害之殃，民莫困穷流亡也。
现代文：全国可耕种面积，按三年耕种积余一年粮食来计算，九年只有三年积蓄，十八年则有六年的储备，二十七年就有九年的储备积累。这样如遇水旱虫灾，人民百姓就不至于陷入困境流亡逃荒。
English: The arable area of the whole country is calculated according to the three years of cultivation and the remaining one year of grain. In nine years, there are only three years of savings, in eighteen years, there are six years of reserves, and in twenty-seven years, there are nine years of reserve accumulation. In this way, if there is a flood, drought or insect infestation, the people will not fall into difficulties and flee.

古文：故国无九年之畜，谓之不足；无六年之积，谓之悯急；无三年之畜，谓之穷乏。
现代文：所以，一个国家如无九年的储备积累，就叫不足；一个国家如无六年的积蓄储备，就叫悯急；一个国家如无三年的积蓄，就叫穷乏。
English: Therefore, a country without nine years of reserve accumulation is called insufficient; a country without six years of reserve accumulation is called urgent; a country without three years of reserve accumulation is called poor.

古文：故有仁君明王，其取下有节，自养有度，则得承受于天地，而不离饥寒之患矣。
现代文：正因为这样，有的英明君主，取用民财知道节制，自己消费知道限制，这样就能承受天地的施予和奉养，而不至于会遭受饥寒的灾难。
English: It is for this reason that some wise monarchs know how to restrain their use of the people's wealth and limit their own consumption, so that they can bear the gifts and sustenance of heaven and earth without suffering the disaster of hunger and cold.

古文：若贪主暴君，挠于其下，侵渔其民，以适无穷之欲，则百姓无以被天和而履地德矣。
现代文：反过来，如果是贪婪残暴的君王，那么他可能是不停地骚扰百姓，侵夺吞没百姓的财物以满足他的无穷贪欲，这时，百姓们就无法承受天恩地德所赐的福利。
English: On the other hand, if the king is greedy and cruel, then he may constantly harass the people, plunder and devour the people's property to satisfy his endless greed, and then the people will not be able to bear the blessings bestowed by heaven.

古文：食者，民之本也；民者，国之本也；国者，君之本也。
现代文：食是人民的根本；而人民又是国家的根本；国家则是君主的根本。
English: Food is the foundation of the people; and the people are the foundation of the state; and the state is the foundation of the monarch.

古文：是故人君者，上因天时，下尽地财，中用人力，是以群生遂长，五谷蕃殖，教民养育六畜，以时种树，务修田畴，滋植桑麻，肥墧高下，各因其宜。
现代文：知道这道理，治理国家的君主就应上循天时、下尽地财、中用民力，这样万物就能顺利生长，五谷就能繁茂生长。君主还应指导人民养育六畜，按季节种植各种树木植物，致力于农业耕种，发展桑麻业，按各种不同肥沃贫瘠的高原山地来种植相宜的农作物。
English: Knowing this, the monarch who governs the country should make the best use of the time, the resources, and the people's power, so that all things can grow smoothly and the crops can grow luxuriantly. The monarch should also guide the people to raise six animals, plant various trees and plants according to the season, devote themselves to agricultural cultivation, develop the mulberry industry, and plant suitable crops according to various fertile and barren plateau mountains.

古文：丘陵阪险不生五谷者，以树竹木，春伐枯槁，夏取果苽，秋畜疏食，冬伐薪蒸，以为民资。
现代文：而对那些丘陵险地及不能种植五谷的地域，则种以竹木，春季可以砍伐枯林，夏季可以摘收瓜果，秋季可以积蓄蔬菜杂粮，冬季可以砍伐薪柴以供民用。
English: But for those hilly dangerous areas and areas where it is not possible to grow cereals, bamboo trees are planted, dead forests can be cut down in spring, melons and fruits can be harvested in summer, vegetables and grains can be stored in autumn, and firewood can be cut down in winter for civilian use.

古文：是故生无乏用，死无转尸。
现代文：因此，活着不会缺少用品，死后不至于抛尸荒野。
English: Therefore, there will be no shortage of supplies while you are alive, and you will not be thrown into the wilderness when you die.

古文：故先王之法，畋不掩群，不取麛夭。不涸泽而渔，不焚林而猎。
现代文：所以，先王治国的方法是：畋猎时不得杀绝成群的野兽，不捕捉幼小的麋鹿，不放干池湖之水而捕鱼，不焚烧森林打猎。
English: Therefore, the former king's method of governing the country was as follows: when hunting, he must not kill entire herds of wild animals, he must not capture young elk, he must not release the water of the dry pond lake to catch fish, and he must not burn the forest to hunt.

古文：豺未祭兽，罝罦不得布于野；獭未祭鱼，网罟不得入于水；鹰隼未挚，罗网不得张于溪谷；草木未落，斤斧不得入山林；昆虫未蛰，不得以火烧田。
现代文：不到能捕杀弱兽的时间，不让在野外设置捕捉的罗网；没到水獭捕捉鱼群的时间，不得在水中撒网；不到老鹰隼鸟捕杀兔等食物的时间，不得在山谷安装罗网；草木还没凋落之前，不许进山林砍伐；昆虫还没开始蛰伏之前，不准放火烧荒。
English: It is not allowed to set up traps to catch crabs in the field before the time to catch and kill weak animals; it is not allowed to spread nets in the water before the time for otters to catch fish; it is not allowed to install traps in the valley before the time for eagles and ostriches to catch and kill rabbits and other food; it is not allowed to cut into the mountain forest before the grass has fallen; it is not allowed to set fire to the wasteland before the insects have begun to lie down.

古文：孕育不得杀，卵不得探，鱼不长尺不得取，彘不期年不得食。
现代文：不准捕杀怀胎的母兽，不准掏取孵化着的鸟蛋，不许捕捞长不足一尺的鱼，不得宰杀不满一年的幼猪。
English: It is not allowed to hunt and kill a pregnant female animal, it is not allowed to take out a hatching bird's egg, it is not allowed to catch fish less than one foot long, and it is not allowed to slaughter a piglet less than one year old.

古文：是故草木之发若蒸气，禽兽之归若流泉，飞鸟之归若烟云，有所以致之也。
现代文：正因为这些规定，保护了生态环境，所以草木生长如气一样蒸蒸升腾，禽兽归山如泉水一样奔流，飞鸟入林如烟云聚集，所有这些均归功于君主保护生物的措施得当。
English: It is precisely because of these regulations that the ecological environment is protected, so the growth of plants and trees is like steam, the animals return to the mountains like spring water, and the birds enter the forest like clouds of smoke. All of these are due to the monarch's measures to protect living things.

古文：故先王之政，四海之云至，而修封疆；虾蟆鸣燕降，而达路除道；阴降百泉，则修桥梁；昬张中，则务种谷；大火中，则种黍菽；虚中，则种宿麦；昴中，则收敛畜积，伐薪木。
现代文：所以先王执政理事，雨季将到之时就要农民修整田疆；虾蟆鸣叫燕子归来之时就组织劳力修整道路；阴气降临百川之时就发动民众修建桥梁；黄昏张星宿位于正南方中天的时候，就要抓紧种植谷物；大火星宿位于正南方中天的时候，就要抓紧播种黍豆；虚星宿位于正南方中天的时候，就要抓紧种好越冬麦子；昂星宿位于正南方中天的时候，就要做好收敛储藏、砍伐薪柴以便过冬。
English: Therefore, when the rainy season is about to arrive, it is necessary for the farmers to improve the fields; when the shrimps sing and the swallows return, it is necessary to organize labor to repair the roads; when the gloomy weather falls on the rivers, it is necessary to mobilize the people to build bridges; at dusk, when the Zhang star constellation is located in the middle of the southern sky, it is necessary to plant cereals; when the Great Mars constellation is located in the middle of the southern sky, it is necessary to sow peas; when the False star constellation is located in the middle of the southern sky, it is necessary to plant winter wheat; when the Ang star constellation is located in the

古文：上告于天，下布之民。
现代文：这些政令，上告苍天，祈求保佑，下达万民，令其实施。
English: These decrees, appeal to the heavens, pray for blessing, issue to all the people, and order their implementation.

古文：先王之所以应时修备，富国利民，实旷来远者，其道备矣。
现代文：先王之所以能顺应天时，处事周全，富国利民，使国库民囤财物充盈，让远方异族归顺，是因为他的道性完备的缘故。
English: The reason why the previous king was able to adapt to the times, handle affairs well, enrich the country and benefit the people, fill the treasury with people's money and property, and make distant foreign nations submit, was because of his complete moral character.

古文：非能目见而足行之也，欲利之也。欲利之也，不忘于心，则官自备矣。
现代文：这道性不能显现目见，但能付之履行；想使百姓得利获益不忘于心，这样这道性的器官功能就自然具备了。
English: This nature cannot be seen, but it can be fulfilled; if you want to make the people benefit and not forget, then this kind of organ function will naturally be available.

古文：心之于九窍四支也，不能一事焉。然而动静听视皆以为主者，不忘于欲利之也。
现代文：人心对于人体的九窍四肢来说，尽管它不能代替九窍四肢这样具体器官的功能，但手脚的一举一动和耳目的视听都以心为主宰，并不忘心给予它们的主宰作用和好处。
English: For the nine-limbed limbs of the human body, although it cannot replace the function of such a specific organ as the nine-limbed limbs, the human heart dominates every movement of the hands and feet, as well as the vision and hearing of the eyes and ears, and does not forget to give them the dominant role and benefits.

古文：故尧为善而众善至矣，桀为非而众非来矣。
现代文：所以尧帝心地善良，众人的心地也随之善良起来；夏桀心狠手辣胡作非为，众人也就随之为非胡乱起来。
English: Therefore, Emperor Qian was kind-hearted, and the hearts of the people became kind-hearted as a result; Emperor Xia's heart was cruel and he did bad things, and the people also became bad-tempered as a result.

古文：善积则功成，非积则祸极。
现代文：善行积累则功业告成，恶贯满盈则祸害来临。
English: Accumulation of good deeds will lead to the completion of the work, and evil will come when evil runs rampant.

古文：凡人之论，心欲小而志欲大，智欲员而行欲方，能欲多而事欲鲜。
现代文：所谓品行端正，是说站得直、不弯腰屈服，朴素洁白而不受污染；穷困时不改变操守，通达时不放纵自满。所谓才能广泛多样，是说文武具备，动静符合法度，举止恰如其分，没有阻碍和抵触，没有不完全适宜的。
English: The so-called moral rectitude means standing up straight, not bending down and yielding, plain and white without being polluted; not changing ethics when impoverished, and not indulging in complacency when enlightened. The so-called talents are wide and diverse, meaning that they are literate, dynamic and static are in accordance with the law, their manners are appropriate, there are no obstacles and conflicts, and there is nothing that is not completely appropriate.

古文：所以心欲小者，虑患未生，备祸未发，戒过慎微，不敢纵其欲也；志欲大者，兼包万国，一齐殊俗，并覆百姓，若合一族，是非辐凑而为之毂；智欲员者，环复转运，终始无端，旁流四达，渊泉而不竭，万物并兴，莫不响应也；行欲方者，直立而不挠，素白而不污，穷不易操，通不肆志；能欲多者，文武备具，动静中仪，举动废置，曲得其宜，无所击戾，无不毕宜也；事欲鲜者，执柄持术，得要以应众，执约以治广，处静持中，运于璇枢，以一合万，若合符者也。
现代文：所谓处事简约，是说掌握权柄、运用权术，以简约驾驭繁琐、以少制多，处静执中，如同璇枢掌握斗柄运转一样，以一合众，就像符节相合。
English: The so-called simplicity of handling affairs means mastering power and using power techniques, using simplicity to control the cumbersome, using less to control more, and handling things quietly, like a pivot grasping the handle of a bucket, and using a comma, like a chord.

古文：故心小者，禁于微也；志大者，无不怀也；智员者，无不知也；行方者，有不为也；能多者，无不治也；事鲜者，约所持也。
现代文：所以心细谨慎者就应将错误禁绝于微细萌芽中，胸襟开阔、志向远大者就应无所不容，智谋圆通者就应无所不知，品行端正者必有所不为，才能广泛者必无事不能，处事简约者必持简要原则。
English: Therefore, those who are careful and prudent should prevent mistakes from sprouting, those who are broad-minded and ambitious should tolerate everything, those who are clever should know everything, those who are virtuous must do something, those with broad talents must do nothing, and those who are simple must keep a simple principle.

古文：古者天子听朝，公卿正谏，博士诵诗，瞽箴师诵，庶人传语，史书其过，宰彻其膳。
现代文：古代天子上朝听政，有公卿正面进谏，博士朗诵读歌，乐师规劝告诫，平民百姓的街市议论由有关官吏报告君主，史官记载天子的过失，宰臣减少天子膳食以示思过，尽管这样，天子对这些监督仍嫌不足。
English: In ancient times, the emperor went to the court to listen to the government, nobles went to the court, doctors recited songs, musicians gave advice and admonitions, the common people's street discussions were reported to the monarch by the relevant officials, the historian recorded the emperor's mistakes, and the vice-minister reduced the emperor's meals to show that he had thought about it. In spite of this, the emperor was still not satisfied with these supervision.

古文：犹以为未足也，故尧置敢谏之鼓，舜立诽谤之木，汤有司直之人，武王立戒慎之鞀。过若豪厘，而既已备之也。
现代文：所以尧设置供进谏者敲击的鼓，舜树立了供人们书写意见的木柱，汤设立了监察官员，武王备用了警戒自己谨慎的摇鼓，哪怕出现细微的过失，他们都已做好了防备的措施。
English: Therefore, the dragon set up a drum for those who enter the dragon to beat, the dragon erected a wooden post for people to write opinions, the soup set up a supervisory official, and King Wu used his cautious drum. Even if there is a slight mistake, they have prepared preventive measures.

古文：夫圣人之于善也，无小而不举；其于过也，无微而不改。
现代文：这些圣人明主，对于善事，无论有多小也必定去做；对于过失，不管有多小也一定去改。
English: These sages knew that good deeds, no matter how small, must be done, and faults, no matter how small, must be corrected.

古文：尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，皆坦然天下而南面焉。
现代文：所以，尧、舜、禹、汤、文王、武王，都能心胸坦荡而称王拥有天下。
English: Therefore, Zou, Zou, Yu, Tang, Wen Wang, Wu Wang, can all have an open mind and say that the king owns the world.

古文：当此之时，鼛鼓而食，奏《雍》而彻，已饭而祭灶，行不用巫祝，鬼神弗敢祟，山川弗敢祸，可谓至贵矣。
现代文：在那个时候，君主饭前要先击鼛鼓，饭毕演奏完《雍》乐后再撤席，用过饭后还要祭灶神；他们办事处事时不用巫祝通鬼神，而鬼神却不敢作祟，山川之神也不敢为祸作乱，这可以称得上最可贵的德政了。
English: At that time, the monarchs had to strike the gong and drum before dinner, withdraw after the meal after the performance of "Yong," and worship the stove god after the meal. Their offices did not need to use magic to pray for ghosts and gods, but the ghosts and gods did not dare to cause trouble, and the gods of the mountains and rivers did not dare to cause trouble. This can be called the most precious German politics.

古文：然而战战栗栗，日慎一日。
现代文：但是他们仍然战战兢兢，一天比一天谨慎小心。
English: But they remain wary, growing more cautious by the day.

古文：由此观之，则圣人之心小矣。
现代文：由此看来，圣人君主是多么地小心啊。
English: From this it appears how careful the saintly monarch was.

古文：《诗》云：惟此文王，小心翼翼，昭事上帝，聿怀多福。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 就是这位周文王，言行谨慎小心，心胸光明地事奉上天，给国家百姓带来很多福利。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: It was this King Zhou Wen who was prudent in words and deeds, served heaven with a bright heart, and brought a lot of benefits to the people of the country.

古文：其斯之谓欤！
现代文：说的大概就是这种情况吧？
English: That's probably the case, isn't it?

古文：武王伐纣，发钜桥之粟，散鹿台之钱，封比干之墓，表商容之闾，朝成汤之庙，解箕子之囚。使各处其宅，田其田，无故无新，惟贤是亲，用非其有，使非其人，晏然若故有之。
现代文：武王讨伐纣王，打开巨桥粮仓将粮食分发给百姓、将鹿台府库里的钱财分发给民众；同时修整忠臣比干的坟墓，在商容的故里表彰商容的贤德，朝拜商汤的宗庙以示敬仰，并解除对箕子的囚禁；让人们都返回家园，耕种自己的田地；没有故旧、新人之分，只要贤能就亲近他们，任命使用的并不都是他自己原有的亲信旧臣，但安然地如同本来就拥有他们一样，使他们能像原有的亲信旧臣一样各安其位。
English: King Wu fought against King Gong, opened the huge bridge granary to distribute grain to the people, and distributed the money from the Ludaifu Treasury to the people; at the same time, he repaired the tomb of his loyal vassal Bi Gan, commended the virtues of Shang Rong in his hometown, worshiped the ancestral temple of Shang Tang to show respect, and released the prisoners; let people return to their homes and cultivate their own fields; there is no distinction between the old and the new, as long as the virtuous are close to them, the appointment is not used by his own original trusted old ministers, but safely as if he had them originally, so that they can settle in their places like

古文：由此观之，则圣人之志大也。
现代文：由此看来，圣人君主的胸怀是多么地博大啊、志向是多么地远大啊。
English: From this perspective, how broad-minded the sage-monarch is, and how far-reaching his aspirations are.

古文：文王、周公观得失，遍览是非，尧、舜所以昌，桀、纣所以亡者，皆著于明堂，于是略智博问，以应无方。
现代文：文王全面考察先王施政的得和失，广泛地研究以往治国的是和非，尧舜之所以昌盛、桀纣之所以灭亡的教训，都记录在册存放明堂以供借鉴。
English: King Wen comprehensively examined the gains and losses of his predecessor's governance, extensively studied the rights and wrongs of past governance, and recorded and stored the lessons of the reasons for the prosperity and demise of the Han Dynasty for reference.

古文：由此观之，则圣人之智员矣。
现代文：然后广泛求教、集思广益，以便能处理应对所碰到的天下大事。由此看来，圣人君主的智谋是多么地圆通啊。
English: He then sought advice and brainstormed extensively in order to be able to deal with the world's major events that he encountered. From this point of view, the wisdom of the sage monarch is so perfect.

古文：成、康继文、武之业，守明堂之制，观存亡之迹，见成败之变，非道不言，非义不行，言不苟出，行不苟为，择善而后从事焉。
现代文：周成王、周康王继承文王、武王的事业，恪守祖宗留下的制度成法，研究观察前人存亡的事迹，看清了成败演变的规律，不合乎道的话不说，不符合义的事不做，一言一行都不随随便便，有所选择后才去做。
English: Zhou Cheng Wang and Zhou Kang Wang inherited the cause of King Wen and King Wu, adhered to the system and laws left by their ancestors, studied and observed the deeds of their predecessors, and saw the law of the evolution of success and failure. Do not say things that are not in accordance with the Tao, do not do things that are not in accordance with righteousness, and do not say or do anything arbitrarily, and only do it after making a choice.

古文：由此观之，则圣人之行方矣。
现代文：由此看来，圣人君主的品行是多么地端正啊。
English: From this point of view, the conduct of the saintly monarch is perfectly correct.

古文：孔子之通，智过于苌弘，勇服于孟贲，足蹑效菟，力招城关，能亦多矣。
现代文：孔子算得上通才，他的智慧超过苌弘，勇力压倒孟贲，腿脚灵敏能追上野兔，力气能举起城门闩门的横木，他的才能够多的了。
English: Confucius can be considered a generalist. His wisdom surpasses that of Zhuangzhuang, his courage surpasses that of Mencius, his legs and feet are nimble enough to catch a hare, and his strength can lift the crossbeam of the city gate. His talents can be multiplied.

古文：然而勇力不闻，伎巧不知，专行教道，以成素王，事亦鲜矣。
现代文：然而孔子的勇力并不为常人所知，孔子的技艺也并不为人们所了解，他专门推行政教之道，终被人们尊称为 素王 ，可见他的处事原则是强调简约的。
English: However, the courage of Confucius is not known to the common people, and the skills of Confucius are not understood by the people. He specialized in promoting the way of the government, and was eventually revered as King Su. It can be seen that his operating principle is to emphasize simplicity.

古文：《春秋》二百四十二年，亡国五十二，弑君三十六，采善Θ丑，以成王道，论亦博矣。
现代文：春秋二百四十二年中，被灭亡的国家有五十二个，被臣下杀掉的国君有三十六，孔子收集善事、隐去丑事，编写《春秋》以弘扬王道，其中阐述的理论也够广博的。
English: In the 242 years of the Spring and Autumn period, 52 countries were destroyed, and 36 sovereigns were killed by their subjects. Confucius collected good deeds and concealed bad deeds, and compiled "Spring and Autumn" to promote the royal way. The theory expounded in it is also quite extensive.

古文：然而围于匡，颜色不变，弦歌不辍，临死亡之地，犯患难之危，据义行理而志不慑，分亦明矣。
现代文：然而孔子在宋国被人围困，却面不改色、弦歌不停，身临死亡境地、遭受患难危险，仍根据义理行事而心无恐惧，这说明孔子对命运的理解也相当透彻的。
English: However, Confucius was besieged by people in the Song Dynasty, but he did not change his face, did not stop chanting, was in a state of death, was in danger of suffering, and still acted according to the principle and had no fear. This shows that Confucius' understanding of fate is also quite thorough.

古文：然为鲁司寇，听狱必为断，作为《春秋》，不道鬼神，不敢专己。
现代文：到孔子担任鲁国司寇时，处理案件诉讼总能谨慎决断。著述《春秋》，又不言及鬼神、也不敢专任己意主观臆断。
English: When Confucius served as the Secretary of Lu, he was always able to make prudent decisions in handling cases and lawsuits. In his book "Spring and Autumn," he did not mention ghosts and gods, nor did he dare to make his own subjective judgments.

古文：夫圣人之智，固已多矣。其所守者约，故举而必荣。愚人之智，固已少矣，其所事者多，故动而必穷矣。
现代文：圣人的智慧已经够多的了，再加上他处事简约，所以使他的事业兴旺发达；而那些愚蠢的人，智慧本来就少，却又喜欢卷入过多的繁琐事务，处事又不简约，所以一举一动均行不通办不成。
English: The sage's wisdom is already abundant, and his simplicity makes his business prosperous; while the foolish man, who has little wisdom, likes to get involved in too many complicated matters, and his business is not simple, so his every move is impracticable.

古文：吴起、张仪，智不若孔、墨，而争万乘之君，此其所以车裂支解也。
现代文：正因为这样，所以智慧不如孔子墨子的吴起和张仪，却想使大国君主互相争斗，结果导致自己被车裂肢解。
English: Because of this, Wu Qi and Zhang Yi, who were not as wise as Confucius and Mozi, wanted to make the great powers and monarchs fight each other. As a result, they were dismembered by the chariot.

古文：夫以正教化者，易而必成；以邪巧世者，难而必败。
现代文：所以，凭着正道实施教化，则容易且一定能成功；以邪道欺蒙世人，则困难且必定要失败。
English: Therefore, it is easy and certain to succeed in carrying out enlightenment with the right way; it is difficult and certain to fail in deceiving the world with the wrong way.

古文：凡将设行立趣于天下，舍其易成者，而从事难而必败者，愚惑之所致也。
现代文：大凡想在天下实施自己志向、却又舍弃容易且一定能成功的简约方法、而选择采用繁琐困难且必要失败的方法的，都是由愚昧惑迷所造成的。
English: Those who, desiring to realize their ambition in the world, abandon the simple method, which is easy and certain of success, in favor of the difficult method, which is difficult and certain of failure, are led by ignorance and illusion.

古文：凡此六反者，不可不察也。
现代文：这上述讲的六种相成相反的处事原则，不可不察呀。
English: The above-mentioned six mutually contradictory principles of conduct should not be overlooked.

古文：遍知万物而不知人道，不可谓智；遍爱群生而不爱人类，不可谓仁。
现代文：全面了解万物而不知道社会人情世故，就不能叫做 智 ；普遍地爱护各种生物而不爱护人类本身，就不能叫做 仁 。
English: To have a comprehensive understanding of all things without knowing the social human conditions and customs cannot be called wisdom; to universally care for all living things without caring for human beings themselves cannot be called benevolence.

古文：仁者爱其类也，智者不可惑也。
现代文：所谓 仁 ，就是要爱护人的同类；所谓 智 ，就是不可糊涂。
English: The so-called "benevolence" is to love and care for one's fellow human beings; the so-called "wisdom" is not to be confused.

古文：仁者虽在断割之中，其所不忍之色可见也。
现代文：仁慈的人，虽然有时不得不割爱，但他那不忍心的神色还是会流露出来。
English: A merciful person, although sometimes he has to cut love, but his impatient look will still come out.

古文：智者虽烦难之事，其不暗之效可见也。
现代文：聪慧的人，虽然有时碰到烦难之事，但他那聪慧的心志还是会呈现出来。
English: An intelligent person, although he sometimes encounters troubles, his intelligent mind will still appear.

古文：内恕反情，心之所欲，其不加诸人，由近知远，由己知人，此仁智之所合而行也。
现代文：心地宽厚的人能经常反躬自省，自己所不愿意的，就不会强加给别人；由近而知远，由己而知人。这就是仁智结合运用的结果。
English: Generous-hearted people can always reflect on themselves, and will not impose on others what they do not want. From near to far, from oneself to others. This is the result of the combination of benevolence and wisdom.

古文：小有教而大有存也，小有诛而大有宁也，唯恻隐推而行之，此智者之所独断也。
现代文：对小的毛病加以管教，是为了使他大了有出息，对小的错误加以责罚，是为了使他大了能安宁，只是出于爱护同情之心才推行这种做法的，也就是智者的决断做法。
English: To discipline him for small faults is to make him more productive, to punish him for small faults is to make him more peaceful, and it is only out of love and compassion that this practice, the wise man's resolute practice, is carried out.

古文：故仁智错，有时合，合者为正，错者为权，其义一也。
现代文：而一味讲仁的人是难以做到这点的。所以仁和智有时是错开有矛盾的，有时又结合相一致的。仁和智结合，就是正道做法，有时仁和智错开不相合，就是权变做法。
English: But it is difficult for a person who focuses on benevolence to achieve this. Therefore, benevolence and wisdom are sometimes staggered and contradictory, and sometimes combined. The combination of benevolence and wisdom is the right way, and sometimes benevolence and wisdom are staggered and inconsistent, which is the power change approach.

古文：府吏守法，君制义，法而无义，亦府吏也，不足以为政。
现代文：这两者的含义则是一样的，都是出于知人爱人。一般官吏遵守法度，而一般君子则受义制约。如果光遵守法度而不讲道义，就像一般的官吏那样，是没有资格主持国家大政的。
English: The meaning of these two is the same, both are out of acquaintance and love. Ordinary officials abide by the law, while ordinary gentlemen are subject to righteousness. If you only abide by the law and do not preach morality, like ordinary officials, you are not qualified to preside over the country's major affairs.

古文：耕之为事也劳，织之为事也扰，扰劳之事而民不舍者，知其可以衣食也。
现代文：耕作农田之事是相当辛苦的，纺纱织布之事也是相当麻烦的，但老百姓就是在这辛苦麻烦中也不放弃耕织，是因为他们知道只有靠耕织才能过日子。
English: Farming is quite hard, spinning and weaving are also quite troublesome, but the people do not give up weaving even in the midst of these troubles, because they know that they can only make a living by weaving.

古文：人之情不能无衣食，衣食之道，必始于耕织，万民之所公见也。
现代文：吃饭穿衣是人之常情，而要获得衣食的途径只能从事耕织，这道理平民百姓看得清清楚楚。
English: It is human nature to eat and dress, and the only way to obtain food and clothing is to engage in farming and weaving, which is clearly understood by the common people.

古文：物之若耕织者，始初甚劳，终必利也。
现代文：他们还知道，这种耕田织布像其他事物一样，开始时是辛苦麻烦，但最终是会获利的，然而在众多蠢人中间能明白这一点的人是很少的。
English: They also know that this kind of farmyard weaving, like everything else, is troublesome at first, but profitable in the end, but only a few of the many fools understand this.

古文：众愚人之所见者寡，事可权者多，愚之所权者少，此愚者之所多患也。
现代文：事情可以变通灵活处置的方法很多，然而蠢人能变通灵活处置事情的很少。这也就是愚蠢人之所以多灾多难的原因。
English: There are many ways to deal with things flexibly and flexibly, but there are few ways for stupid people to deal with things flexibly and flexibly. This is the reason why stupid people are so troublesome.

古文：物之可备者，智者尽备之；可权者，尽权之；此智者所以寡患也。
现代文：事物所具备的物性，聪明人也都具备；事物可以变通，聪明人也都能灵活变通。
English: The physical properties possessed by things are also possessed by smart people; things can be flexible, and smart people can also be flexible.

古文：故智者先忤而后合，愚者始于乐而终于哀。
现代文：这也就是聪明人之所以顺顺利利的原因。所以聪明人往往是先处逆境而后顺遂如意，愚蠢人常常是开始得意高兴而后悲哀痛苦。
English: This is the reason why smart people succeed. Therefore, smart people often face adversity first and then succeed. Stupid people often start out happy and then sad and miserable.

古文：今日何为而荣乎？旦日何为而义乎？
现代文：所以你告诉他今天干什么便能成功享受荣华富贵、明天再考虑怎样做合符道义的事，他很能听得进；但你告诫他应该先做些合符道义的事，以后再考虑享受荣华富贵，他就很难听得进你的话。
English: Therefore, if you tell him that what he should do today is to enjoy prosperity and wealth, and tomorrow he should think about how to do moral things, he will listen well; but if you tell him that he should do moral things first, and then think about enjoying prosperity and wealth, it will be difficult for him to listen to you.

古文：此易言也。
现代文：这就是愚蠢人之所以愚蠢的地方。
English: That's what makes stupid people stupid.

古文：今日何为而义，旦日何为而荣，此难知也。问瞽师曰： 白素何如？ 
现代文：当问盲乐师： 洁白的颜色是怎样的？ 他会说： 就像洁白的丝绸那样。 又问： 黑色是怎样的？ 
English: If you ask a blind musician, "What is the color of pure white?" he will say, "It is like pure white silk," and ask, "What is black?"

古文：曰： 缟然。 
现代文：他会说： 就像熟透的桑葚一样。 
English: He would say: Just like a ripe mulberry.

古文：曰： 黑何若？ 
现代文：但你真的拿出白与黑两种颜色的东西叫他分辨，他就无法分辨了。
English: But if you actually take out something that is black and white and ask it to tell the difference, it can't tell the difference.

古文：曰： 《黑甚》然。 授白黑而示之，则不处焉。人之视白黑以目，言白黑以口，瞽师有以言白黑，无以知白黑，故言白黑与人同，其别白黑与人异。
现代文：这是因为分辨白与黑靠眼睛，而说出白与黑则靠口，盲乐师可以用口来描述白与黑色，但无法用眼来辨别白与黑，所以当他用口描述白与黑时，其能力与常人一样；但当他要用眼睛来辨别白与黑时，其能力就与常人不一样。
English: This is because distinguishing between white and black depends on the eyes, while saying white and black depends on the mouth. A blind musician can describe white and black with his mouth, but cannot distinguish between white and black with his eyes. Therefore, when he describes white and black with his mouth, his ability is the same as that of an ordinary person; but when he wants to distinguish between white and black with his eyes, his ability is different from that of an ordinary person.

古文：入孝于亲，出忠于君，无愚智贤不肖，皆知其为义也，使陈忠孝行而知所出者，鲜矣！
现代文：在家孝顺父母，外出做官忠于君王，这道理无论是聪明人愚蠢人、贤德者不肖者都知道是合符道义的，但要他们讲清楚怎样尽孝尽忠、为何要尽孝尽忠，那就很少有人能做到这点。
English: To be filial to one's parents at home, and to be loyal to the king when serving as an official abroad, is a principle that all people, whether they are wise, foolish, virtuous or infamous, know to be consistent with morality. However, if they are asked to explain clearly how and why they should be filial to their parents, very few people will be able to do this.

古文：凡人思虑，莫不先以为可而后行之，其是或非，此愚智之所以异。凡人之性，莫贵于仁，莫急于智。
现代文：大凡人们考虑问题，总是首先认为可行的，然后才去实施，但最后的结果是，有人收到预期的效果，有人却没有收到预期效果，这是由于聪明和愚蠢所造成的。
English: When people think about problems, they always consider what is feasible first and then implement it, but the final result is that some people receive the expected effect, while others do not receive the expected effect, which is caused by cleverness and stupidity.

古文：仁以为质，智以行之，两者为本，而加之以勇力、辩慧、捷疾、劬录、巧敏、迟利、聪明、审察，尽众益也。
现代文：就人的本性来说，没有比仁更珍贵的、没有比智更重要的。将 仁 作为主体，用 智 去实施它；这样以 智 、 仁 作为基础根本，再加上勇力和辩才，处事迅速勤快、灵巧机敏，聪明地审察分析，这样就集中了所有长处，十分完美了。
English: As far as human nature is concerned, there is nothing more precious than benevolence, nothing more important than wisdom. Take benevolence as the main body and use wisdom to implement it; thus, with wisdom and benevolence as the foundation, coupled with courage and eloquence, work quickly and diligently, deftly and astutely, and intelligently examine and analyze, so that all the strengths are concentrated and very perfect.

古文：身材未修，伎艺曲备，而无仁智以为表干，而加之以众美，则益其损。
现代文：如果自身的才能没有多少，却学会了一些雕虫小技，又没有仁和智来作为主干表现在外，而拥有的上述这些 捷疾、劬录 等，只会增加它的危害性。
English: If you don't have much of your own talent, but you have learned some minor skills of carving insects, and you don't have the benevolence and wisdom to act as the backbone, and you have the above-mentioned shortcuts, shortcuts, etc., it will only increase its harmfulness.

古文：故不仁而有勇力果敢，则狂而操利剑；不智而辩慧怀给，则弃骥而不式。
现代文：所以不 仁 却勇武有力、果断敢为，就会像疯子握利剑一样，后果难测；没有 大智 却能言善辩、机敏乖巧，就会像骑着骏马驰骋而漫无目标。
English: Therefore, if you are not humane, but brave, powerful, and decisive, you will be like a madman holding a sharp sword, and the consequences will be unpredictable; if you do not have great wisdom, but you can be eloquent, quick-witted, and good-natured, you will be like riding a galloping horse without a goal.

古文：虽有材能，其施之不当，其处之不宜，适足以辅伪饰非，伎艺之众，不如其寡也。
现代文：所以虽然有才能，但使用不当，所处不适宜，那就会被用来助长虚伪、粉饰错误，这样，所具有的技艺多还不如少些好。
English: Therefore, although there is talent, if it is used improperly and inappropriately, it will be used to promote hypocrisy and whitewash mistakes, so it is better to have more skills than less.

古文：故有野心者，不可借便势；有愚质者，不可与利器。
现代文：所以不仁且有野心者，是不能让他获得有利地位、处有利形势的。
English: Therefore, those who are unkind and have ambition cannot be allowed to gain a favorable position and be in a favorable situation.

古文：鱼得水而游焉则乐，唐决水涸，则为蝼蚁所食。
现代文：而那些天质愚笨者，是不能授予重要权力的。鱼得到水才能游得快乐；如果池塘决口水干涸，脱离了水的鱼就可能被蝼蛄蚂蚁所吞食。
English: But those who are stupid by nature cannot be given important powers. If the fish get water, they can swim happily; if the pond breaks and the water dries up, the fish out of the water may be swallowed by the ants.

古文：有掌修其堤防，补其缺漏，则鱼得而利之，国有以存，人有以生。
现代文：所以要有人负责修理池塘堤防，补好缺口，这样鱼就能得水而获利。国家有赖以生存的东西，人也应有赖以生存的东西。
English: Therefore, someone must be responsible for repairing the pond embankment and filling in the gaps, so that the fish can get water and make a profit. The country has something to live on, and people should have something to live on.

古文：国之所以存者，仁义是也；人之所以生者，行善是也。
现代文：这国家赖以生存下来的东西是 仁义 ，而人赖以生存的东西则是 行善 。
English: What this country relies on to survive is benevolence and righteousness, while what people rely on to survive is doing good.

古文：国无义，虽大必亡；人无善志，虽勇必伤。
现代文：一个国家一旦到了不讲 仁义 ，那即使大国也必亡无疑；一个人一旦没有了 善心 ，就是勇武有力也必定会受到伤害。
English: Once a country does not speak of benevolence and righteousness, then even the great powers will undoubtedly perish; once a person does not have a good heart, even the brave and powerful will certainly be harmed.

古文：治国上使不得与焉。孝于父母，弟于兄嫂，信于朋友，不得上令而可得为也。
现代文：治理国家是上面君主的事，一般人难以参与；而在家孝敬父母、顺从兄嫂、取信朋友这些事却用不着君主发布命令就可去做的。
English: Governing the country is the business of the monarch above, and it is difficult for ordinary people to participate; however, at home, it is possible to do such things as honor one's parents, obey one's brothers and sisters, and take letters from friends without the need for the monarch to issue an order.

古文：释己之所得为，而责于其所不得制，悖矣。士处卑隐，欲上达，必先反诸己。
现代文：撇开自己所能做、所应做的事，而要求自己去做那些自己无法控制的、自己不应做的事，这实际上是违背了事理。士人处在卑微隐逸的地位时，要想上进有所表现，必须首先从自我修身养性做起。
English: It is actually against reason to set aside what you can do and what you should do, and ask yourself to do things that you cannot control and should not do. When a scholar is in a humble and secluded position, if you want to improve and perform, you must first start with self-cultivation.

古文：上达有道，名誉不起，而不能上达矣；取誉有道，不信于友，不能得誉；信于友有道，事亲不说，不信于友；说亲有道，修身不诚，不能事亲矣；诚身有道，心不专一，不能专诚。
现代文：所以进取为官是有门道的，你如果名气声誉不佳，还是不能被选中任用的。同样获取名誉也是有门道的，如果你不能取信于朋友，也是难以获得好声誉的。同样取信于朋友也是有门道的，你在家侍奉孝敬父母都不能让父母愉悦，那又怎么会使你在交朋友中取信于友？
English: Therefore, there is a doorway to enter the government. If your reputation is not good, you still cannot be selected for appointment. Similarly, there is a doorway to gain reputation. If you cannot gain the trust of friends, it is difficult to gain a good reputation. Similarly, there is a doorway to gain the trust of friends. If you cannot make your parents happy by serving and respecting them at home, then how can you gain the trust of friends in making friends?

古文：道在易而求之难，验在近而求之远，故弗得也。
现代文：能让父母愉悦舒坦也是有条件的，你自身的修养都不真诚，又怎么能侍奉好父母双亲？同样，修身真诚也是有准则的，如果心不专一，就难以做到心性真诚。
English: There are conditions that can make parents happy and comfortable. Your own cultivation is not sincere. How can you serve good parents? Similarly, there are standards for cultivating sincerity. If your heart is not single-minded, it is difficult to achieve sincerity of heart.

