古文：古者，以仁为本，以义治之之谓正。
现代文：古人以仁爱为根本，以正义的方法处理国家大事，这就叫做政治。
English: The ancients took benevolence as the foundation and dealt with national affairs in a just manner. This is called politics.

古文：正不获意则权。
现代文：政治达不到目的时，就要使用权势。
English: When politics does not achieve its goal, it is necessary to use power.

古文：权出于战，不出于中人。
现代文：权势总是出于战争，而不是出于中和与仁爱。
English: Power always springs from war, not from conciliation and benevolence.

古文：是故杀人安人，杀之可也；攻其国，爱其民，攻之可也；以战止战，虽战可也。
现代文：因而，杀掉坏人而使大众得到安宁，杀人是可以的；进攻别的国家，出于爱护它的民众，进攻是可以的；用战争制止战争，即使进行战争，也是可以的。
English: Therefore, it is permissible to kill evil-doers in order to pacify the public; it is permissible to attack another country out of love for its people; it is permissible to use war to stop war, and it is permissible to wage war.

古文：故仁见亲，义见说，智见恃，勇见身，信见信。
现代文：因此，君主应该以仁爱治国，才能使百姓愿意亲近他；以正义为民众所喜爱；以智谋为民众所倚重；以勇敢为民众所效法；以诚实为民众所信任。
English: Therefore, the sovereign should rule the country with benevolence and love in order to make the people want to be close to him; with justice as the people's favorite; with wisdom as the people's reliance; with courage as the people's imitation; with honesty as the people's trust.

古文：内得爱焉，所以守也；外得威焉，所以战也。
现代文：这样，在国内就能得到民众的爱戴，借以守土卫国；对外就能具有威慑力量，借以战胜敌人。
English: In this way, it will be able to win the love of the people at home to defend the homeland; it will have a deterrent force to the outside world to defeat the enemy.

古文：战道：不违时，不历民病，所以爱吾民也；不加丧，不因凶，所以爱夫其民也；冬夏不兴师，所以兼爱其民也。
现代文：作战的原则是：不违背农时，不在疾病流行时兴兵作战，为的是爱护自己的民众；不乘敌人国丧时去进攻它，也不趁敌国灾荒时去进攻它，为的是爱护敌国的民众；不在冬夏两季兴师，为的是爱护双方的民众。
English: The principles of the war are: not to violate the agricultural time, not to raise troops to fight when the disease is prevalent, in order to protect their own people; not to take advantage of the enemy's death to attack it, nor to take advantage of the enemy's disaster to attack it, in order to protect the enemy's people; not to raise troops in winter and summer, in order to protect the people of both sides.

古文：故国虽大，好战必亡；天下虽安，忘战必危。
现代文：所以国家虽然强大，好战必定灭亡；天下虽然太平，忘掉战争准备，必定危险。
English: Therefore, although the country is strong, belligerence is sure to perish; although the world is peaceful, forgetting to prepare for war is sure to be dangerous.

古文：天下既平，天下大恺，春蒐秋狝，诸侯春振旅，秋治兵，所以不忘战也。
现代文：即使天下已经平定，全国欢腾，每年春秋两季还是要用打猎来进行军事演习，各国诸侯也要在春天整顿军队，秋天训练军队，这都是为了不忘战争准备。
English: Even if the world has been pacified and the whole country is rejoicing, every year in the spring and autumn it is still necessary to use hunting to carry out military exercises, and the princes of all countries should rectify the army in the spring and train the army in the autumn. This is all in order not to forget the preparation for war.

古文：古者，逐奔不过百步，纵绥不过三舍，是以明其礼也。
现代文：古时候，追击溃逃的敌人不超过一百步，追踪主动退却的敌人不超过九十里，这是为了表示礼让。
English: In ancient times, the pursuit of the fleeing enemy did not exceed one hundred paces, and the pursuit of the actively retreating enemy did not exceed ninety miles, which was to show courtesy.

古文：不穷不能而哀怜伤病，是以明其仁也。
现代文：不残杀丧失战斗力的敌人，并哀怜它的伤病人员，这是为了表示仁爱。
English: It is an act of kindness not to kill an enemy who has lost his fighting strength, and to have pity on his wounded and sick.

古文：成列而鼓是以明其信也。
现代文：等敌人布阵完毕再发起进攻，这是为了表示诚信。
English: It is to show good faith to wait for the enemy to complete their deployment before launching an attack.

古文：争义不争利，是以明其义也。
现代文：争大义而不争小利，这是为了表示战争的正义性。
English: To fight for the greater good and not for petty profit, this is to show the justness of war.

古文：又能舍服，是以明其勇也。
现代文：赦免降服的敌人，这是表明军队的勇敢。
English: Pardoning a surrendering enemy is an indication of the army's bravery.

古文：知终知始，是以明其智也。六德以时合教，以为民纪之道也，自古之政也。
现代文：能够预见战争开始和结局，这是表示统帅的智慧，根据 礼、仁、信、义、勇、智 六德按时集合民众进行教育，作为管理民众的准则，这是从古以来治军作战的方法。
English: Being able to foresee the beginning and end of a war is a sign of a commander's wisdom. According to the six virtues of courtesy, benevolence, faith, righteousness, courage, and wisdom, he should gather the people on time to educate them. As a guideline for managing the people, this is a method of governing the army and fighting since ancient times.

古文：先王之治，顺天之道，设地之宜，官司之德，而正名治物，立国辨职，以爵分禄，诸侯说怀，海外来服，狱弭而兵寝，圣德之治也。
现代文：从前的君王治理天下，顺应自然规律，适合地理条件，任用贤德的人，设官分职，各司其事，分封诸侯，区分等级，按照爵位高低给以不同的俸禄。这样，使诸侯都心悦诚服，外国也向往归附，诉讼和战争也都没有了，这就是圣王用仁德治理的天下。
English: Former monarchs governed the world in accordance with the laws of nature and suited to the geographical conditions, appointed virtuous people, set up a division of officials, each doing their own thing, divided vassals, distinguished grades, and gave different salaries according to the level of nobility. In this way, the vassals were pleased, foreign countries aspired to join, and there were no lawsuits or wars. This is the world governed by a saintly king with benevolence.

古文：其次，贤王制礼乐法度，乃作五刑，兴甲兵以讨不义。
现代文：其次，贤王制定礼乐法度，设置五刑来治理国家，使用军队讨伐不义。
English: Secondly, the wise king formulated the ritual law, set up five punishments to govern the country, and used the army to fight injustice.

古文：巡狩省方，会诸侯，考不同。
现代文：亲自巡视各诸侯的领地，访察地方，会见诸侯，考核他们是否遵守 礼乐法度 。
English: He personally toured the territories of each vassal, visited places, met with vassals, and assessed whether they complied with the "Law of Ceremonial Music."

古文：然后冢宰征师于诸侯曰： 某国为不道，征之，以某年月日师至于某国，会天于正刑 。
现代文：对那些玩忽职守、触犯法纪、败坏道德、逆天行事和迫害功臣的国君，便通令各国的诸侯，公布他的罪行，并上告于天地神灵和祖先。然后由冢宰向诸侯征调军队，发布命令说： 某国无道，应出兵征伐。各诸侯的军队应于某年某月某日到达某国，会同天子惩治罪犯。 
English: For those sovereigns who neglect their duties, violate laws and regulations, corrupt morals, act against heaven and persecute meritorious soldiers, the princes of various countries were ordered to announce his crimes and appeal to the gods and ancestors of heaven and earth. Then, the emperor sent troops to the princes and issued an order saying: "A certain country is immoral and should send troops to fight. The army of each prince should arrive in a certain country on a certain day of a certain month in a certain year, and punish the criminals together with the Son of Heaven.

古文：冢宰与百官布令于军曰： 入罪人之地，无暴圣祗，无行田猎，无毁土功，无燔墙屋，无伐林木，无取六畜，禾黍、器械，见其老幼，奉归勿伤。
现代文：冢宰又使百官向军队宣布命令说： 进入该国的地区，不准亵渎神位，不准打猎，不准破坏水利工程，不准烧毁房屋建筑，不准砍伐树木，不准擅取家畜、粮食和用具。见到老人和儿童，要护送他们回家，不准伤害。
English: He also had hundreds of officials announce orders to the army, saying: "When entering the country's regions, do not blaspheme, do not hunt, do not destroy water conservancy projects, do not burn houses and buildings, do not cut down trees, and do not take livestock, grain, and equipment without permission. If you see the elderly and children, escort them home and do not harm them."

古文：虽遇壮者，不校勿敌，敌若伤之，医药归之。 
现代文：即使遇到少壮的人，只要他们不抵抗就不以敌人对待。对于受伤的敌人，给予治疗，而后放他们回去。 
English: Even if they encounter young and strong people, as long as they do not resist, they will not be treated as enemies. For injured enemies, they will be treated and then let them go back.

古文：既诛有罪，王及诸侯修正其国，举贤立明，正复厥职。
现代文：惩办了首恶后，天子和诸侯们还要帮助整顿好那个国家，选用贤能，另立明君，调整、恢复其各级官职。
English: After punishing the head of the evil, the heavenly sons and princes should also help to rectify the country, select the virtuous, set up a new emperor, and adjust and restore their official positions at all levels.

古文：王霸之所以治诸侯者六：以土地形诸侯，以政令平诸侯，以礼信亲诸侯，以礼力说诸侯，以谋人维诸侯，以兵革服诸侯。
现代文：王霸治理诸侯的办法有六种：用调整封地的大小来控制诸侯；用政策法令约束诸侯；用礼仪威信亲近诸侯；用馈赠财物悦服诸侯；用有智谋的人去扶持诸侯；用强大的军队慑服诸侯。
English: There are six ways for the king to govern the vassals: to control the vassals by adjusting the size of the fief; to restrict the vassals with policies and laws; to be close to the vassals with etiquette and prestige; to please the vassals with gifts of wealth; to support the vassals with clever people; and to deter the vassals with a powerful army.

古文：同患同利以台诸侯，比小事大以和诸侯。
现代文：还要以共同的利害来使诸侯联合起来，大国亲近小国，小国尊敬大国，和睦相处。
English: It is also necessary to unite the princes with common interests, the big countries are close to the small countries, the small countries respect the big countries, and live in harmony.

