古文：边文礼见袁奉高，失次序。
现代文：边文礼谒见袁奉高的时候，举止失措。
English: When Bianwen Liyuan saw Yuan Fenggao, his demeanor was at a loss.

古文：奉高曰： 昔尧聘许由，面无怍色，先生何为颠倒衣裳？ 
现代文：袁奉高说： 古时候尧请许由出来做官，许由脸上丝毫没有愧色。先生为什么弄得穿错了衣裳呢？ 
English: Yuan Fenggao said, "In the old days, I invited Xu Rong to come out to be an official, and Xu Rong's face was not ashamed at all. Why did he wear the wrong clothes?

古文：文礼答曰： 明府初临，尧德未彰，是以贱民颠倒衣裳耳。 
现代文：文礼回答说： 明府您刚到任，还没有显现出像尧一样的德行，所以我才穿错了衣裳呢！ 
English: Wenli replied, "Mingfu, you have just taken office, and you haven't yet displayed the virtue of a dragonfly, so I'm wearing the wrong clothes!"

古文：徐孺子年九岁，尝月下戏。人语之曰： 若令月中无物，当极明邪？ 
现代文：徐孺子九岁时，有一次在月光下玩耍，有人对他说： 如果月亮上面什么也没有，会更加明亮吧？ 
English: When Xu Yanzi was nine years old, he was once playing in the moonlight. Someone said to him, "If there was nothing on the moon, would it be brighter?"

古文：徐曰： 不然，譬如人眼中有瞳子，无此必不明。 
现代文：徐孺子说： 不是这样。好比人的睛睛里有瞳仁，如果没有这个，就什么都看不见。 
English: Xu Yanzi said, "It's not like that. It's like the pupil in the human eye. If you don't have it, you can't see anything.

古文：孔文举年十岁，随父到洛。
现代文：孔文举十岁的时候，跟随他的父亲来到洛阳。
English: When Kong Wencu was ten years old, he followed his father to Luoyang.

古文：时李元礼有盛名，为司隶校尉，诣门者皆俊才清称及中表亲戚乃通。
现代文：当时李元礼很有名望，任司隶校尉；登让拜访的都必须是才子、名流和内外亲属，才会通报。
English: At that time, Li Yuanli was very famous, and he was appointed as a lieutenant of the Division of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army. Those who were allowed to visit had to be talented people, celebrities, and relatives at home and abroad before they were notified.

古文：文举至门，谓吏曰： 我是李府君亲。 
现代文：孔文举来到他家，对掌门官说： 我是李府君的亲戚。 
English: Kong Wenqiu came to his house and said to the head gatekeeper: I am a relative of Li Fuchun.

古文：既通，前坐。
现代文：经通报后，入门就坐。
English: After notification, please sit down when you start.

古文：元礼问曰： 君与仆有何亲？ 
现代文：元礼问道： 您和我有什么亲戚关系呢？ 
English: Yuan Li asked: What kind of relationship do you have with me?

古文：对曰： 昔先君仲尼与君先人伯阳，有师资之尊，是仆与君奕世为通好也。 
现代文：孔文举回答道： 以前我的祖先仲尼曾经拜您的祖先伯阳为师，这样看来，我和您就是老世交了。 
English: Kong Wenju replied, "In the past, my ancestor Zhongni used to worship your ancestor Bo Yang as a teacher, so it seems that you and I are old friends.

古文：元礼及宾客莫不奇之。
现代文：李元礼和宾客们听了，没有不感到惊异的。
English: Li Yuanli and the guests were surprised to hear this.

古文：太中大夫陈韪后至，人以其语语之。韪曰： 小时了了，大未必佳！ 
现代文：太中大夫陈韪来得晚一些，别人就把孔文举的应对告诉他，陈韪说： 小时候聪明伶俐，长大了未必出众。 
English: Chen Xi, the Vice-Marshal of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, arrived a little late, so others told him the answer to the Confucius quote. Chen Xi said: When I was a child, I was smart, but when I grow up, I may not be outstanding.

古文：文举曰： 想君小时，必当了了！ 
现代文：文举应声说： 您小时候，想必是很聪明的了。 
English: The citation replied: When you were a child, you must have been very clever.

古文：韪大踧踖。
现代文：陈韪听了，感到十分的尴尬。
English: Chen Yao listened and felt very embarrassed.

古文：孔文举有二子，大者六岁，小者五岁。
现代文：孔文举有两个儿子：大儿子六岁，小儿子五岁。
English: Kong Wenju has two sons: the eldest is six years old and the youngest is five years old.

古文：昼日父眠，小者床头盗酒饮之。大儿谓曰： 何以不拜？ 答曰： 偷，那得行礼！ 
现代文：有一次孔文举午睡，小儿子就到床头来偷酒喝，大儿子对他说： 喝酒为什么不先行礼呢？ 小的回答说： 偷酒喝，哪里还要行礼呢！ 
English: Once, when Kongwen was taking an afternoon nap, the younger son came to the head of the bed to steal wine and drink it. The older son said to him, "Why don't you bow first when you drink wine?" The younger son replied, "If you steal wine and drink it, why should you bow?"

古文：孔融被收，中外惶怖。
现代文：孔融被捕，朝廷内外都很惶恐。
English: When Kong Rong was arrested, there was panic both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：时融儿大者九岁，小者八岁。二儿故琢钉戏，了无遽容。
现代文：当时，孔融的大儿子九岁，小儿子八岁，两个孩子依旧在玩琢钉戏，一点也没有恐惧的样子。
English: At that time, Kong Rong's eldest son was nine years old, his youngest son was eight years old, and the two children were still playing pinball. There was no fear at all.

古文：融谓使者曰： 冀罪止于身，二儿可得全不？ 
现代文：孔融对前来逮捕他的差使说： 希望惩罚只限于我自己，两个孩子能保全性命吗？ 
English: Kong Rong said to the agents who came to arrest him: I hope the punishment is limited to myself. Can two children save their lives?

古文：儿徐进曰： 大人岂见覆巢之下，复有完卵乎？ 
现代文：这时，孔融的儿子从容地上前说： 父亲难道看见过打翻的鸟巢下面还有完整的蛋吗？ 
English: At this time, Kong Rong's son calmly stepped forward and said, "Did my father ever see a bird's nest that had been knocked over with a complete egg underneath?

古文：寻亦收至。
现代文：随即，两个儿子也被拘捕了。
English: Immediately, the two sons were also arrested.

古文：颍川太守髡陈仲弓。
现代文：颖川太守把陈仲弓判了髡刑。
English: The governor of Yingchuan sentenced Chen Zhongyu to be beaten to death.

古文：客有问元方： 府君何如？ 
现代文：有位客人问陈仲弓的儿子元方说： 太守这个人怎么样？ 
English: A guest asked Chen Zhongyun's son, Yuan Fang, "What about this person, the governor?"

古文：元方曰： 高明之君也。 
现代文：元方说： 是个高尚、明智的人。 
English: "He is a noble and wise man," said Yuan Fang.

古文： 足下家君何如？ 
现代文：又问： 您父亲怎么样？ 
English: He also asked: How is your father?

古文：曰： 忠臣孝子也。 
现代文：元方说： 是个忠臣孝子。 
English: The original party said: He is a loyal subject and filial son.

古文：客曰： 易称 二人同心，其利断金；同心之言，其臭如兰。 
现代文：客人说： 《易经》上说： 两个人同一条心，就像一把钢刀，锋利的刀刃能斩断金属；同一个心思的话，它的气味像兰花一样芳香。 
English: The guest said: In the I Ching, it says: Two people with the same heart are like a steel knife, a sharp blade can cut through metal; with the same mind, its smell is as fragrant as an orchid.

古文：何有高明之君而刑忠臣孝子者乎？ 
现代文：那么，怎么会有高尚明智的人惩罚忠臣孝子的事呢？ 
English: So, how could a noble and wise person punish a loyal subject?

古文：元方曰： 足下言何其谬也！
现代文：元方说： 您的话怎么这样荒谬啊！
English: The original party said: How can your words be so absurd!

古文：故不相答。 
现代文：因此我不回答你。 
English: That's why I'm not answering you.

古文：客曰： 足下但因伛为恭不能答。 
现代文：客人说： 您不过是拿驼背当做恭敬，其实是不能回答。 
English: The guest said, "You are just using the humpback as a form of homage, but you can't really answer.

古文：元方曰： 昔高宗放孝子孝己，尹吉甫放孝子伯奇，董仲舒放孝子符起。
现代文：元方说： 从前高宗放逐了孝子孝己；尹吉有放逐了孝子伯奇，董仲舒放逐了孝子符起。
English: Yuan Fang said: In the past, Gao Zong exiled the filial son Xiaoji; Yin Jiyu exiled the filial son Boqi; Dong Zhongshu exiled the filial son Fuqi.

古文：唯此三君，高明之君；唯此三子，忠臣孝子。 
现代文：这三个做父亲的，恰恰都是高尚明智的人；这三个做儿子的，恰恰都是忠臣孝子。 
English: These three fathers are precisely noble and wise men; these three sons are precisely loyal and filial sons.

古文：客惭而退。
现代文：客人很羞愧，就退走了。
English: The guest was mortified and left.

古文：荀慈明与汝南袁阆相见，问颍川人士，慈明先及诸兄。
现代文：荀慈明和汝南郡袁阆见面时，袁阆问起颖川郡有哪些才德之士，慈明先就提到自己的几位兄长。
English: When Gong Ciming met with Yuan Qi of Runan County, Yuan Qi asked about the talented people in Yingchuan County. Ciming first mentioned several of his brothers.

古文：阆笑曰： 士但可因亲旧而已乎？ 
现代文：袁阆讥笑他说： 才德之士只能靠亲朋故旧来扬名吗？ 
English: Yuan Qi scoffed at him and said, "Can a man of talent only rely on his relatives and friends to make a name for himself?

古文：慈明曰： 足下相难，依据者何经？ 
现代文：慈明说： 您责备我，依据什么原则？ 
English: Ciming said, "On what principle do you blame me?"

古文：阆曰： 方问国士，而及诸兄，是以尤之耳。 
现代文：袁阆说： 我刚才问国士，你却谈自己的诸位兄长，因此我才责问你呀！ 
English: Yuan Qi said, "I just asked the statesmen, but you talked about your own brothers and sisters. That's why I'm asking you!

古文：慈明曰： 昔者祁奚内举不失其子，外举不失其讎，以为至公。
现代文：慈明说： 从前祁奚在推荐人才时，对内不忽略自己的儿子，对外不忽略自己的仇人，人们认为他是最公正无私的。
English: Ciming said: In the past, when recommending talents, he did not ignore his own son internally, and did not ignore his enemies externally. People thought he was the most fair and selfless.

古文：公旦文王之诗，不论尧舜之德，而颂文武者，亲亲之义也。
现代文：周公旦作《文王》时，不去叙说远古帝王尧和舜的德政，却歌颂周文王、周武王，这是符合爱亲人这一大义的。
English: When Zhou Gongdan wrote "Wen Wang," instead of describing the ancient emperors' virtuous politics, he sang the praises of Zhou Wen Wang and Zhou Wu Wang, which is in line with the great meaning of loving relatives.

古文：春秋之义，内其国而外诸夏。
现代文：《春秋》记事的原则是：把本国看成亲的，把诸侯国看成疏的。
English: The principle of "Spring and Autumn" is: to regard the motherland as a relative, and to regard the vassal states as estranged.

古文：且不爱其亲而爱他人者，不为悖德乎？ 
现代文：再说不爱自己的亲人而爱别人的人，岂不是违反了道德准则吗？ 
English: Besides, isn't it a violation of the moral code for someone to love someone else but not their own relatives?

古文：祢衡被魏武谪为鼓吏，正月半试鼓。
现代文：祢衡被魏武帝曹操贬为鼓吏。
English: Neheng was demoted to the position of drummer by Emperor Cao Cao.

古文：衡扬枹为渔阳掺檛，渊渊有金石声，四坐为之改容。
现代文：正巧遇上八月中大会宾客的时候要检验鼓的音节，祢衡挥动鼓槌奏《渔阳掺挝》曲，鼓声深沉凝重，有金石之音，满座的人都为之动容。
English: When he happened to meet the guests of the Mid-August Conference, he wanted to check the syllables of the drums. Youheng waved the drumstick to play the "Yuyang Dopo Lao" song. The drum sound was deep and steady, with a golden tone, and everyone in the auditorium was moved.

古文：孔融曰： 祢衡罪同胥靡，不能发明王之梦。 
现代文：孔融说： 祢衡的罪和胥靡的罪相同，只是不能让英明的君主感动。 
English: Kong Rong said, "The sins that weigh you down are the same as the sins that weigh you down, but they cannot move a wise monarch.

古文：魏武惭而赦之。
现代文：魏武帝听了很惭愧，就赦免了祢衡。
English: Emperor Wu of Wei was very ashamed to hear this, and pardoned Nehei.

古文：南郡庞士元闻司马德操在颍川，故二千里候之。
现代文：南郡庞士元听说司马德操住在颖川，特意走了两千里路去拜访他。
English: Pang Shiyuan of Nan County heard that Sima De lived in Yingchuan, and deliberately walked two thousand miles to visit him.

古文：至，遇德操采桑，士元从车中谓曰： 吾闻丈夫处世，当带金佩紫，焉有屈洪流之量，而执丝妇之事。 
现代文：到了那里，遇上德操正在采桑叶，土元就在车里对德操说： 我听说大丈夫处世，就应该做大官，办大事，哪有压抑长江大河的流量，去做蚕妇的事！ 
English: When they got there, they met De Dua who was picking mulberry leaves. In the car, Tu Yuan said to De Dua: "I heard that if you behave well in the world, you should become a high-ranking official and do important things. How can you suppress the flow of the Yangtze River and become a silkworm!"

古文：德操曰： 子且下车，子适知邪径之速，不虑失道之迷。
现代文：德操说： 您姑且下车来。您只知道走小路快，却不担心迷路。
English: De Fu said, "Let me ask you to get off the bus. You only know how to walk fast, but you don't worry about getting lost.

古文：昔伯成耦耕，不慕诸侯之荣；原宪桑枢，不易有官之宅。
现代文：从前伯成宁愿回家种地，也不羡慕做诸侯的荣耀；原宪宁愿住在破屋里，也不愿换住达官的住宅。
English: Once upon a time, Bochen preferred to return home to farm the land, rather than envy the glory of being a prince; the original constitution preferred to live in a broken house, rather than change the residence of a dignitary.

古文：何有坐则华屋，行则肥马，侍女数十，然后为奇。
现代文：哪里有住就要住在豪华的宫室里，出门就必须肥马轻车，左右要有几十个婢妾侍候，然后才算是与众不同的呢！
English: Wherever you live, you have to live in a luxurious palace, and when you go out, you have to travel by horse-drawn carriage, and you have to be waited on by dozens of maidservants and concubines. Only then can you be considered unique!

古文：此乃许、父所以慷慨，夷、齐所以长叹。
现代文：这正是隐士许由、巢父感慨的原因，也是清廉之士伯夷、叔齐长叹的来由。
English: This is precisely the reason why the hermit Xu Yue and the father of the nest are feeling sad, and also the reason why the incorruptible men Bo Yi and Uncle Qi are sighing.

古文：虽有窃秦之爵，千驷之富，不足贵也！ 
现代文：就算有吕不韦那样的官爵，有齐景公那样的富有，也是不值得尊敬的。 
English: Even if you have a peerage like Lü Buwei, or are as rich as Qi Jing Gong, you are not worthy of respect.

古文：士元曰： 仆生出边垂，寡见大义。
现代文：士元说： 我出生在边远偏僻的地方，很少见识到大道理。
English: Shi Yuan said: I was born in a remote and isolated place, and I rarely saw the truth.

古文：若不一叩洪钟，伐雷鼓，则不识其音响也。 
现代文：如果不叩击一下大钟、雷鼓，那就不知道它的音响啊。 
English: If you don't strike the big bell, thunder drum, then you don't know its sound.

古文：刘公干以失敬罹罪，文帝问曰： 卿何以不谨于文宪？ 
现代文：刘桢因为失敬受到判罪。魏文帝问他： 你为什么不注意法纪呢？ 
English: Emperor Wei asked him: "Why don't you pay attention to the laws and regulations?

古文：桢答曰： 臣诚庸短，亦由陛下纲目不疏。 
现代文：刘桢回答说： 臣确实平庸浅陋，但也是由于陛下法网不够稀疏。 
English: Liu Ye replied, "It is true that the minister is mediocre and shallow, but it is also because His Majesty's legal network is not sparse enough.

古文：钟毓、钟会少有令誉。年十三，魏文帝闻之，语其父钟繇曰： 可令二子来。 
现代文：钟毓、钟会兄弟俩少年时就有美好的名声，钟毓十三岁时，魏文帝听说他们兄弟两，便对他们的父亲钟繇说： 可以叫两个孩子来见我！ 
English: When Zhong Hui and the two Zhong Hui brothers were boys, they had a good reputation. When Zhong Hui was thirteen years old, Wei Wendi heard about their two brothers and said to their father Zhong Hui: You can call two children to see me!

古文：于是敕见。
现代文：于是兄弟俩奉旨觐见。
English: Therefore, Zhong Rong and Zhong Hui were ordered to come to the court to see Emperor Weiwen.

古文：毓面有汗，帝曰： 卿面何以汗？ 
现代文：觐见时钟毓脸上有汗，文帝问道： 你脸上为什么出汗？ 
English: When he saw the clock, he had sweat on his face, and Emperor Wen asked, "Why is your face sweating?

古文：毓对曰： 战战惶惶，汗出如浆。 
现代文：钟毓回答说： 战战惶惶，汗出如浆。 
English: Zhongyao replied, "In the turmoil of battle, I sweat profusely.

古文：复问会： 卿何以不汗？ 
现代文：文帝又问钟会： 你为什么不出汗？ 
English: Wen Di also asked Zhong Hui: Why aren't you sweating?

古文：对曰： 战战栗栗，汗不敢出。 
现代文：钟会回答说： 战战栗栗，汗不敢出。 
English: The bell ringers replied: "We shudder and tremble, we dare not break a sweat."

古文：钟毓兄弟小时，值父昼寝，因共偷服药酒。
现代文：钟毓兄弟俩小时候，有一次趁父亲睡午觉的时候，一块去偷药酒喝。
English: When the Zhongyu brothers were children, they once took advantage of their father's nap time to steal medicinal wine and drink it together.

古文：其父时觉，且托寐以观之。
现代文：他父亲当时已睡醒了，一直装睡，来看他们怎么做。
English: His father had woken up and was pretending to be asleep to see what they were doing.

古文：毓拜而后饮，会饮而不拜。
现代文：钟毓行过礼才喝，钟会只顾喝，不行礼。
English: The bell-ringers only drink when they have performed a courtesy. The bell-ringers only drink when they have performed a courtesy.

古文：既而问毓何以拜，毓曰： 酒以成礼，不敢不拜。 
现代文：过了一会，他父亲起来问钟毓为什么行礼，钟毓说： 酒是完成礼仪用的，我不敢不行礼。 
English: After a while, his father got up and asked Jonghyun why he was bowing. Jonghyun said, "Wine is used to complete the etiquette. I dare not not bow."

古文：又问会何以不拜，会曰： 偷本非礼，所以不拜。 
现代文：又问钟会为什么不行礼，钟会说： 偷酒喝本来就不合于礼，因此我不行礼。 
English: He also asked the bell ringers why they didn't salute. The bell ringers said, "It's not polite to steal alcohol, so I don't salute."

古文：魏明帝为外祖母筑馆于甄氏。
现代文：魏明帝在甄家给外祖母修建了一所华丽的住宅。
English: Wei Mingdi built a magnificent house for his grandmother in Zhenjia.

古文：既成，自行视，谓左右曰： 馆当以何为名？ 
现代文：建成以后，亲自前去察看，并且问随从的人： 这所住宅应该起个什么名字呢？ 
English: And when it was finished, he went and saw it for himself, and asked his servants, saying, What shall we call this house?

古文：侍中缪袭曰： 陛下圣思齐于哲王；罔极过于曾、闵。
现代文：侍中缪袭说： 陛下的思虑和贤明的君主一样周到，报恩的孝心超过了曾参、闵子骞。
English: The chamberlain said, "Your majesty's thoughts are as thoughtful as those of a wise monarch, and your filial piety in repaying favors surpasses that of Zeng Zhen and Zhang Zixuan."

古文：此馆之兴，情钟舅氏，宜以 渭阳 为名。 
现代文：这处府第的兴建，感情专注于舅家，应该用渭阳来做它的名字。 
English: The construction of this prefecture, which is emotionally focused on the uncle's family, should use the name "Fenyang."

古文：何平叔云： 服五石散，非唯治病，亦觉神明开朗。 
现代文：何平叔说： 服食五石散，不但能够治病，还会觉得神清气爽，心情愉悦。 
English: Uncle He Ping said: "Taking Wukishi powder is not only able to cure diseases, but also makes you feel refreshed and happy.

古文：嵇中散语赵景真： 卿瞳子白黑分明，有白起之风，恨量小狭。 
现代文：中散大夫嵇康对赵景真说： 你的眼睛黑白分明，有白起那样的风度，遗憾的是你的气量小了些。 
English: Zhongshan doctor Yu Kang said to Zhao Jingzhen: Your eyes are black and white, with the same demeanor as Baiqi. Unfortunately, your stamina has decreased.

古文：赵云： 尺表能审玑衡之度，寸管能测往复之气；何必在大，但问识如何耳！ 
现代文：赵景真说： 一尺长的表尺就能审定浑天仪的度数，一寸长的竹管就能测量出乐音的高低。何必在乎大不大呢，只要问才智怎么样就可以了。 
English: Zhao Jingzhen said: A meter-long ruler can verify the degree of the armillary sphere, and a one-inch-long bamboo tube can measure the pitch of the music. Why care about the size, just ask the talent.

古文：司马景王东征，取上党李喜，以为从事中郎。
现代文：司马景王东征的时候，选取上党的李喜来担任中郎将。
English: When Sima Jingwang went on an eastward expedition, he selected Li Xilai, a member of the upper party, to serve as a middle-ranking general.

古文：因问喜曰： 昔先公辟君不就，今孤召君，何以来？ 
现代文：李喜到任时他问李喜： 以前先父任用你，您不肯到任；现在我启用您，为什么愿意来呢？ 
English: When Li Xi took office, he asked Li Xi: In the past, my father appointed you, but you refused to take office; now that I have appointed you, why are you willing to come?

古文：喜对曰： 先公以礼见待，故得以礼进退；明公以法见绳，喜畏法而至耳！ 
现代文：李喜回答说： 当年令尊以礼相待，所以我能按礼节来决定进退；现在您用法令来限制我，我只是害怕犯法才来的呀。 
English: Li Xi replied, "Back then, your father treated me with courtesy, so I was able to decide whether to advance or retreat according to etiquette; now you use laws to restrict me. I only came here because I was afraid of breaking the law."

古文：邓艾口吃，语称艾艾。
现代文：邓艾说话结巴，自称时常重复说 艾艾 。
English: Deng Ai stutters when she speaks and says she often repeats "Ai Ai."

古文：晋文王戏之曰： 卿云艾艾，定是几艾？ 
现代文：晋文王和他开玩笑说： 你老是说 艾艾 ，到底是几个艾？ 
English: King Jinwen joked with him, "You always say Ai Ai, how many Ai are there?"

古文：对曰： 凤兮凤兮，故是一凤。 
现代文：邓艾回答说：  凤兮凤兮 ，其实只有一只凤呀。 
English: Deng Ai replied, "In fact, there is only one phoenix.

古文：嵇中散既被诛，向子期举郡计入洛，文王引进，问曰： 闻君有箕山之志，何以在此？ 
现代文：中散大夫嵇康被杀以后，向子期被郡守荐举，与上计吏一同到京都洛阳去，司马文王召见了他，问他： 听说您有意隐居不出，为什么到了京城？ 
English: After the death of Dr. Zhongshan Jiankang, he was recommended by the county governor to go to Kyoto Luoyang together with the chief accountant. Sima Wenwang summoned him and asked him: I heard that you intended to live in seclusion, why did you come to Beijing?

古文：对曰： 巢、许狷介之士，不足多慕。 
现代文：向子期回答说： 巢父、许由是孤高傲世的人，不值得赞扬和效仿。 
English: He replied to his son: "Nest father, Xu You is a lonely and arrogant person, not worthy of praise and imitation.

古文：王大咨嗟。
现代文：文王听了，大为叹赏。
English: King Wen listened with great admiration.

古文：晋武帝始登阼，探策得 一 。
现代文：晋武帝刚登位的时候，用蓍草占卜，得到一。
English: When Emperor Jinwu had just ascended the throne, he used valerian for divination and got 1.

古文：王者世数，系此多少。
现代文：要推断帝位能传多少代，就在于这个数目的多少。
English: To deduce how many generations the imperial throne can be passed down, it depends on how much this number is.

古文：帝既不说，群臣失色，莫能有言者。
现代文：因为只得到一，武帝很不高兴，群臣也吓得脸色发白，没人敢出声。
English: Because he only got one, Emperor Wu was very unhappy, and the courtiers turned white with fright. No one dared to speak out.

古文：侍中裴楷进曰： 臣闻天得一以清，地得一以宁，侯王得一以为天下贞。 
现代文：这时，侍中裴楷进言道： 臣听说，天得到一就清明，地得到一就安宁，侯王得到一就能做天下的中心。 
English: At this time, the chamberlain, Pei Kai, said, "Courtier, I have heard that as soon as the sky clears, the land will be at peace, and as soon as the lord is at peace, he will be the center of the world.

古文：帝说，群臣叹服。
现代文：武帝一听，高兴了，群臣都赞叹而且佩服裴楷。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Wu was delighted, and his courtiers all admired and admired Pei Kai.

古文：满奋畏风。
现代文：满奋怕风。
English: Full of gusts of wind.

古文：在晋武帝坐，北窗作琉璃屏，实密似疏，奋有难色。
现代文：一次在晋武帝旁侍坐，北窗是琉璃窗，实际很严实，看起来却像透风似的，满奋就面有难色。
English: Once, he was seated next to Emperor Jinwu. The north window was a frosted glass window. It was actually very solid, but it looked like it was open to the air. It was so full of energy that it was hard to look at.

古文：帝笑之。奋答曰： 臣犹吴牛，见月而喘。 
现代文：武帝笑他，满奋回答说： 臣好比是吴地的牛，看见月亮就喘起来了。 
English: Emperor Wu laughed at him and replied enthusiastically, "My vassal is like a cow in Wu, when he sees the moon, he gasps for breath."

古文：诸葛靓在吴，于朝堂大会。孙皓问： 卿字仲思，为何所思？ 
现代文：诸葛靓在吴国的时候，有一次在朝堂大会上，孙皓问他： 你字仲思，你想的是什么？ 
English: When Zhuge Liang was in the State of Wu, once at a general assembly in the imperial hall, Sun Yat-sen asked him, "You, Zhaozhong Si, what are you thinking about?"

古文：对曰： 在家思孝，事君思忠，朋友思信，如斯而已。 
现代文：诸葛靓回答说： 在家想着尽孝，侍奉君主想着尽忠，和朋友交往想着诚实。如此而已！ 
English: Zhuge Liang replied, "At home, I think about filial piety, when I serve the monarch, I think about loyalty, and when I socialize with friends, I think about honesty. That's all!

古文：蔡洪赴洛，洛中人问曰： 幕府初开，群公辟命，求英奇于仄陋，采贤俊于岩穴。
现代文：蔡洪到洛阳后，洛阳的人问他： 官府设置不久，众公卿征召人才，要在平民百姓中寻求才华出众的人，在山林隐逸中寻访才德高深之士。
English: After Cai Hong arrived in Luoyang, the people of Luoyang asked him: Not long after the establishment of the government, the nobles conscripted talents, to seek talents among the common people, and to search for talents in the mountains and forests.

古文：君吴楚之士，亡国之余，有何异才，而应斯举？ 
现代文：先生是南方人士，亡国遗民，有什么特出才能，敢来接受这一选拔？ 
English: Those of you who came to Beijing from the south of the Yangtze River, from the land of Wu and Chu, who were originally lucky to survive after the collapse of the nation, what special talents do you have to answer this call?

古文：蔡答曰： 夜光之珠，不必出于孟津之河；盈握之璧，不必采于昆仑之山。
现代文：蔡洪回答说： 夜光珠不一定都出在孟津一带的河中，满把大的壁玉，不一定都从昆仑山开采来。
English: Cai Hong replied: The glow-in-the-dark beads may not all come from the rivers around Mengjin, and the handful of large wall beads may not all be mined from Mount Kunlun.

古文：大禹生于东夷，文王生于西羌，圣贤所出，何必常处。
现代文：大禹出生在东夷，周文王出生在西羌，圣贤的出生地，为什么非要在某个固定的地方呢！
English: Dayu was born in Dongyi, Zhou Wenwang was born in Xicheng, the birthplace of sages, why do they have to be in a fixed place!

古文：昔武王伐纣，迁顽民于洛邑，得无诸君是其苗裔乎？ 
现代文：从前周武王打败了殷纣，把殷代的顽民迁移到洛邑，莫非诸位先生就是那些人的后代吗？ 
English: King Zhou Wu defeated the Yin Dynasty and moved the Yin people to Luoyang a long time ago. Aren't you the descendants of those people?

古文：诸名士共至洛水戏。还，乐令问王夷甫曰： 今日戏乐乎？ 
现代文：名土们一起到洛水边游玩，之后，尚书令乐广问王夷甫： 今天玩得高兴吗？ 
English: The famous people went to Luoshui to play together, after which Shang Shuling Leguan asked Wang Yifu: Are you having fun today?

古文：王曰： 裴仆射善谈名理，混混有雅致；张茂先论史汉，靡靡可听；我与王安丰说延陵、子房，亦超超玄箸。 
现代文：王夷甫说： 裴仆射擅长谈名理，滔滔不绝，意趣高雅；张茂先谈《史记《汉书》，娓娓动听；我和王安丰谈论延陵、子房，也极为奥妙。
English: Wang Yifu said: Pei Puxia is good at talking about philosophy, he talks endlessly, and his meaning is elegant; Zhang Maoxian talks about "Hanshu," a historical record, which is very beautiful; Wang Anfeng and I talk about Yanling and Zibo, which is also very mysterious.

古文：王武子、孙子荆、各言其土地人物之美。
现代文：透彻，超尘拔俗。 王武子和孙子荆各自谈论自己家乡的土地、出色的人物。
English: Wang Wu Zi and Sun Zi Jing each talk about their home land and outstanding people.

古文：王云： 其地坦而平，其水淡而清，其人廉且贞。 
现代文：王武子说： 我的家乡土地平坦，河水淡而清，人廉洁又公正。 
English: Wang Wuzi said, "In my hometown, the land is flat, the rivers are light and clear, and the people are honest and fair.

古文：孙云： 其山嶵巍以嵯峨，其水渫而扬波，其人磊呵而英多。 
现代文：孙子荆说： 我的家乡山险峻巍峨，水浩浩荡荡，那里的人才杰出而众多。 
English: Sun Zi Jing said: My hometown is home to towering mountains and vast water. The talents there are outstanding and numerous.

古文：乐令女适大将军成都王颖。
现代文：尚书令乐广的女儿嫁给大将军成都王司马颖。
English: Shang Shu ordered the daughter of Le Guang to marry the general of Chengdu, Wang Sima Ying.

古文：王兄长沙王执权于洛，遂构兵相图。
现代文：成都王的哥哥长沙王正在京都洛阳掌管朝政，成都王于是起兵图谋讨伐他。
English: The brother of the Chengdu king, Changsha Wang, was in charge of the imperial government in Kyoto Luoyang, so the Chengdu king raised an army to fight him.

古文：长沙王亲近小人，远外君子，凡在朝者，人怀危惧。
现代文：长沙王平素亲近小人，疏远君子；凡是在朝居官的，无不心中满是惶恐惊惧。
English: The king of Changsha has always been close to villains and estranged from gentlemen. All officials in the imperial court are filled with fear and trepidation.

古文：乐令既允朝望，加有婚亲，群小谗于长沙。
现代文：乐广在朝廷中很有威望，又和成都王有姻亲关系，一些小人就在长沙王面前诬陷他。
English: Le Guang was very prestigious in the imperial court, and he was related to the king of Chengdu by marriage. Some villains framed him in front of the king of Changsha.

古文：长沙尝问乐令，乐令神色自若，徐答曰： 岂以五男易一女？ 
现代文：长沙王为这事曾经查问过乐广，乐广神色很自然，从容地回答说： 我难道会用五个儿子去换一个女儿？ 
English: The King of Changsha once questioned Le Guang about this. Le Guang looked very natural and calmly replied: "Would I trade five sons for one daughter?

古文：由是释然，无复疑虑。
现代文：于是长沙王打消了疑虑，不再怀疑和顾虑他。
English: So the Changsha king dispelled his doubts and no longer doubted or worried about him.

古文：陆机诣王武子，武子前置数斛羊酪，指以示陆曰： 卿江东何以敌此？ 
现代文：陆机去拜访王武子，正好王武子跟前摆放着几斛羊奶酪，他指着羊奶酪给陆机看，问道： 你们江南有什么名菜能和这个相比呢？ 
English: The land plane went to visit Wang Wu Zi. Wang Wu Zi happened to have several yaks of goat cheese in front of him. He pointed out the goat cheese to the land plane and asked: What famous dishes in the south of the Yangtze River can compare with this?

古文：陆云： 有千里莼羹，但未下盐豉耳！ 
现代文：陆机说： 我们那里有千里湖出产的莼羹可以比美，只是还不必放盐豉呢！ 
English: The land machine said: We have the bean curd soup produced by Qianli Lake, which can be compared to the United States, but we don't have to add salt!

古文：中朝有小儿，父病，行乞药。
现代文：西晋时，有个小孩子的父亲病了，他四处求医讨药。
English: In the Western Jin Dynasty, the father of a small child fell ill, and he went everywhere to seek medical treatment.

古文：主人问病，曰： 患疟也。 
现代文：主人问他病情，他说： 得了疟疾。 
English: When his master asked him how he was, he said, "I have malaria."

古文：主人曰： 尊侯明德君子，何以病疟？ 
现代文：主人问： 令尊是位德行高洁的君子，为什么会患疟子呢？ 
English: The host asked: Your father is a virtuous and noble gentleman, why does he have malaria?

古文：答曰： 来病君子，所以为疟耳。 
现代文：小孩儿回答说： 正因为它来祸害君子，才是疟啊！ 
English: The child replied, "It is precisely because it comes to afflict the gentleman that it is malaria!"

古文：崔正熊诣都郡。都郡将姓陈，问正熊： 君去崔杼几世？ 
现代文：崔正熊去拜访大郡太守，郡将姓陈，他问正熊： 您距离崔杼多少代？ 
English: Cui Zhengxiong went to visit the grand county governor, the county general surnamed Chen. He asked Zhengxiong: How many generations are you from Cui Yingxiong?

古文：答曰： 民去崔杼，如明府之去陈恒。 
现代文：崔正熊回答说： 小民距离崔杼的世代，正像府君距离陈恒那样。 
English: Cui Zheng Xiong replied: The common people are as far away from Cui Yao's generation as the prefects are from Chen Heng.

古文：元帝始过江，谓顾骠骑曰： 寄人国土，心常怀惭。 
现代文：晋元帝刚到江南的时候，对骠骑将军顾荣说道： 寄居在他人国土上，心里常常感到惭愧。 
English: When Emperor Jin Yuan had just arrived in the south of the Yangtze River, he said to the general Gu Rong: I often feel ashamed to live in someone else's land.

古文：荣跪对曰： 臣闻王者以天下为家，是以耿、亳无定处，九鼎迁洛邑。
现代文：顾荣跪着回答说： 臣听说帝王把天下看成家，因此商代的君主或者迁都耿邑，或者迁都毫邑，没有固定的地方，周武王也把九鼎搬到洛邑。
English: Gu Rong knelt down and replied, "Minister, I have heard that the emperor regards the whole world as his family. Therefore, the monarchs of the Shang Dynasty either moved the capital to Gengyi or moved the capital to Mianyi. There is no fixed place. King Zhou Wu also moved Jiuding to Luoyang.

古文：愿陛下勿以迁都为念。 
现代文：希望陛下不要惦念着迁都的事。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will not think about moving the capital.

古文：庾公造周伯仁。伯仁曰： 君何所欣说而忽肥？ 
现代文：庚亮去拜访周伯仁，伯仁说： 您在高兴什么呢，以至于忽然胖起来了？ 
English: Geng Liang went to visit Zhou Boren. Boren said, "What are you so happy about that you suddenly gained weight?"

古文：庾曰： 君复何所忧惨而忽瘦？ 
现代文：庾亮说： 您又有什么忧愁的事情，以至于忽然消瘦下去？ 
English: Hao Liang said, "What are you so worried about that you suddenly lost weight?"

古文：伯仁曰： 吾无所忧，直是清虚日来，滓秽日去耳。 
现代文：伯仁说： 我没有忧愁，只是清净淡泊一天天地增加，渣滓污秽一天天地远离罢了。 
English: Boren said, "I'm not sad, it's just that the cleanliness is increasing day by day, and the filth is disappearing day by day."

古文：过江诸人，每至美日，辄相邀新亭，藉卉饮宴。
现代文：渡江南下避难的那些人，每逢风和日丽的日子，总是互相邀约到新亭去，坐在草地上饮酒作乐。
English: Those people who crossed the river to take refuge in the south always invited each other to go to the new pavilion and sit on the grass to drink and make music on sunny days.

古文：周侯坐而叹曰： 风景不殊，正自有山河之异！ 
现代文：有一次，武城侯周颌在饮宴的中途，叹息道： 这里的风景和中原没有什么不同，只是山河不一样了！ 
English: Once upon a time, Wucheng marquis Zhou Yu sighed in the middle of a banquet: The scenery here is no different from that of the Central Plains, but the mountains and rivers are different!

古文：皆相视流泪。
现代文：大家都你看我，我看你，凄然泪下。
English: Everyone, you look at me, I look at you, burst into tears.

古文：唯王丞相愀然变色曰： 当共戮力王室，克复神州，何至作楚囚相对？ 
现代文：只有丞相王导脸色变得很不高兴，说道： 大家应该齐心协力辅佐王室，收复中原，哪里至于像囚犯似的相对流泪呢？ 
English: Only the chancellor Wang Du became very unhappy, saying: Everyone should make a concerted effort to assist the royal family and recover the Central Plains, but what about shedding tears like a prisoner?

古文：卫洗马初欲渡江，形神惨悴，语左右云： 见此芒芒，不觉百端交集。
现代文：太子洗马卫玠刚要渡江，面容憔悴，神情凄惨，对身边的人说： 看见这茫茫大江，不不禁百感交集。
English: Prince Saima Weiwei just wanted to cross the river, his face was haggard, his expression was miserable, and he said to the people around him: Seeing this vast river, I can't help but have a mixture of feelings.

古文：苟未免有情，亦复谁能遣此！ 
现代文：只要还有点感情，谁又能排遣得了这种种忧伤！ 
English: As long as there is a bit of emotion, who can get rid of this kind of sadness!

古文：顾司空未知名，诣王丞相。
现代文：司空顾和还没有出名的时候，去拜访丞相王导。
English: When Tsukuda Guwa was not yet famous, he went to visit Prime Minister Wang Du.

古文：丞相小极，对之疲睡。
现代文：王导有点疲乏，对着他打瞌睡。
English: Wang Du was a bit tired and dozed off in front of him.

古文：顾思所以叩会之，因谓同坐曰： 昔每闻元公道公协赞中宗，保全江表，体小不安，令人喘息。 
现代文：顾和考虑着怎样才能和王导见面并请教他，便对同座的人说： 过去常常听元公谈论王公辅佐中宗，保全了江南。现在王公贵体不太舒适，真叫人焦急不安。 
English: Gu He, thinking about how to meet Wang Du and ask him for advice, said to those present: "In the past, I often heard the Yuan Guo talk about Wang Guo Fu Zuo Zhongzong, who preserved the south of the Yangtze River. Now Wang Guo is not very comfortable, which really makes people anxious.

古文：丞相因觉，谓顾曰： 此子圭璋特达，机警有锋。 
现代文：王导听见他说，便醒来了。对在座的人评论顾和说： 这个人才德可贵，很机警，词锋犀利。 
English: When Wang Du heard him speak, he woke up. He commented on Gu He to those present, saying, "This man is very talented, very alert, and has a sharp wit.

古文：会稽贺生，体识清远，言行以礼。不徒东南之美，实为海内之秀。
现代文：会稽郡贺循，禀性清纯，见识高深，言语行动都合乎礼；他不只是东南地区的杰出人物，也是国内的优秀人才。
English: He Xun, the county auditor, has a pure temperament, profound insight, and proper speech and action; he is not only an outstanding figure in the southeastern region, but also an outstanding talent in China.

古文：刘琨虽隔阂寇戎，志存本朝，谓温峤曰： 班彪识刘氏之复兴，马援知汉光之可辅。
现代文：刘琨虽然被入侵者阻隔在黄河以北，心中总不忘朝廷。他对温峤说： 班彪认识到刘氏王室能够复兴，马援知道汉光武帝可以辅佐。
English: Although Liu Bei was blocked by invaders north of the Yellow River, he never forgot the imperial court in his heart. He said to Wen Qi: Ban Biao realized that the Liu royal family could be revived, Ma Yuan knew that Han Guangwu could assist.

古文：今晋阼虽衰，天命未改。
现代文：现在晋室的国运虽然衰微，可是天命还没有改变。
English: Now, although Jinmu's national movement is waning, the fate of the country has not changed.

古文：吾欲立功于河北，使卿延誉于江南。
现代文：我想在黄河以北建功立业，而且想让你在江南扬名，你大概会去吧？ 
English: I want to build a successful career north of the Yellow River, and I want you to make a name for yourself in the south of the river, will you go?

古文：子其行乎？ 温曰： 峤虽不敏，才非昔人，明公以桓、文之姿，建匡立之功，岂敢辞命！ 
现代文：温峤说： 我虽然不聪敏，才能也比不上前辈，可是明公想用齐桓、晋文那样的才智，建立救国中兴的功业，我怎么敢不受命呢！ 
English: Wen Rong said: Although I am not intelligent and my talent is not as good as that of my predecessors, but Ming Gong wants to use the talents of Qi Huan and Jinwen to establish the cause of saving the country and ZTE, how dare I not be ordered!

古文：温峤初为刘琨使来过江。
现代文：温峤出任刘琨的使节刚到江南来。
English: Wen Jiabao has just arrived in the south of the Yangtze River as Liu Bei's envoy.

古文：于时江左营建始尔，纲纪未举。
现代文：这时，江南的政权建立工作刚着手，法纪还没有制定，社会秩序不稳定。
English: At this time, the establishment of political power in the south of the Yangtze River had just begun, laws and regulations had not yet been formulated, and the social order was unstable.

古文：温新至，深有诸虑。
现代文：温峤初到，对这种种情况很是担忧。
English: When he first arrived, Mr. Wen was very worried about this kind of situation.

古文：既诣王丞相，陈主上幽越，社稷焚灭，山陵夷毁之酷，有黍离之痛。
现代文：接着便去拜访丞相王导，诉说晋帝被囚禁流放、社稷宗庙被焚烧、先帝陵墓被毁坏的酷烈情况，表现出亡国的哀痛。
English: Next, he went to visit the prime minister, Wang Du, and told him about the terrible circumstances of Emperor Jin's imprisonment and exile, the burning of the Shifang ancestral temple, and the destruction of the former emperor's mausoleum, showing the grief of losing the country.

古文：温忠慨深烈，言与泗俱，丞相亦与之对泣。
现代文：温峤忠诚愤慨的感情深厚激烈，边说边哭，王导也随着他一起流泪。
English: The feelings of warmth, loyalty and indignation were deep and intense. He cried as he spoke, and Wang Du also shed tears with him.

古文：叙情既毕，便深自陈结，丞相亦厚相酬纳。
现代文：温峤叙述完实际情况以后，就真诚地诉说结交之意，王丞相也深情地接纳他的心愿。
English: After Wen Jiabao finished describing the actual situation, he sincerely expressed his intention to make friends, and Premier Wang Rong accepted his wish with affection.

古文：既出，欢然言曰： 江左自有管夷吾，此复何忧？ 
现代文：出来以后，他高兴地说： 江南自有管夷吾那样的人，这还担心什么呢！ 
English: After he came out, he said happily, "There are people like me in Jiangnan Province, so what is there to worry about?"

古文：王敦兄含为光禄勋。
现代文：王敦的哥哥王含任光禄勋。
English: Wang Dun's brother Wang Han Ren Guang Rukun was the first.

古文：敦既逆谋，屯据南州，含委职奔姑孰。
现代文：王敦谋反以后，领兵驻扎在南州。王含就弃职投奔姑孰。
English: After Wang Dun plotted a rebellion, the leader of the army was stationed in Nanzhou. Wang Han abandoned his post and went to Gushan.

古文：王丞相诣阙谢。
现代文：丞相王导为这事上朝谢罪。
English: The prime minister, Wang Du, apologized to the emperor for the incident.

古文：司徒、丞相、扬州官僚问讯，仓卒不知何辞。
现代文：这时候，司徒、丞相、扬州府中的官员都来打听消息，匆忙间不知应该怎样措辞。
English: At this time, Szeto, the chancellor, and officials from the Yangzhou prefectural government all came to inquire about the news, and in their haste, they did not know how to phrase it.

古文：顾司空时为扬州别驾，援翰曰： 王光禄远避流言，明公蒙尘路次，群下不宁，不审尊体起居何如？ 
现代文：司空顾和当时任扬州别驾，拿起笔来写道： 王光禄远远地躲开了流言，明公每天在路上风尘仆仆，下属们心里都很不安，不知贵体饮食起居怎么样？ 
English: He took up his pen and wrote: "Wang Guanglu has far evaded the rumor. Ming Gong is on the road every day, and his subordinates are very uneasy. I don't know how you eat and live.

古文：郗太尉拜司空，语同坐曰： 平生意不在多，值世故纷纭，遂至台鼎。
现代文：太尉郗鉴就任司空一职，他和同座的人说： 我平生志向不高，遇上世事纷乱，便升到三公位。
English: He and his companions said, "I never had high aspirations in my life, but when the world was in turmoil, I was promoted to the Third Court Rank.

古文：朱博翰音，实愧于怀。 
现代文：想起朱博徒有空名，内心实在有愧。 
English: When I remember that Zhubotu has an empty name, my heart is really ashamed.

古文：高坐道人不作汉语，或问此意，简文曰： 以简应对之烦。 
现代文：高坐和尚不说汉语。有人问起这是什么意思，晋简文帝说： 因为要省去应酬的烦扰。 
English: The high-seated monk does not speak Chinese. When someone asked what this meant, Emperor Jinjianwen said: Because he wanted to avoid the bother of entertaining.

古文：周仆射雍容好仪形，诣王公，初下车，隐数人，王公含笑看之。
现代文：尚书仆射周凯举止温和从容，仪表堂堂。他去拜访王导，刚下车，就要几个人搀扶着，王导含笑看着他。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, Zhou Kai, had a gentle and calm demeanor, with a dignified appearance. He went to visit Wang Du, and as soon as he got off the bus, he needed a few people to help him. Wang Du looked at him with a smile.

古文：既坐，傲然啸咏。
现代文：坐下以后，旁若无人地吹奏口哨。
English: After sitting down, he whistled as if no one was around.

古文：王公曰： 卿欲希嵇、阮邪？ 
现代文：王导说： 你想学习嵇康、阮籍吗？ 
English: Wang Du said, "Do you want to learn the names of Quang Khanh and Nguyen Quoc?"

古文：答曰： 何敢近舍明公，远希嵇、阮！ 
现代文：周凯回答说： 怎么敢舍去眼前的明公，去学习前代的嵇康、阮籍！ 
English: Zhou Kai replied, "How dare you give up the Ming and Gong in front of you, and learn from the previous generation of Gongkang and Ruan!

古文：庾公尝入佛图，见卧佛，曰： 此子疲于津梁。 
现代文：庾亮曾经去过佛寺，看见卧佛，就说： 这位先生因普渡众生而疲劳了。 
English: He once went to a Buddhist temple, saw the reclining Buddha, and said, "This gentleman is tired because of all the sentient beings in Purdu.

古文：于时以为名言。
现代文：当时人们把这句话看成是名言。
English: At the time, people regarded this sentence as a famous saying.

古文：挚瞻曾作四郡太守，大将军户曹参军，复出作内史，年始二十九。
现代文：挚瞻曾经担任四个郡的太守和大将军户曹参军，又出任内史之职，年纪才二十九岁。
English: At the age of twenty-nine, Jingzhan once served as the governor of four counties and the general of the general household Cao, and also served as the position of internal history.

古文：尝别王敦，敦谓瞻曰： 卿年未三十，已为万石，亦太蚤。 
现代文：曾在向大将军王敦告别之时，王敦对他说： 你还未满三十，就做了万石俸禄的高官，也太早了吧。 
English: When he was bidding farewell to the great general Wang Dun, Wang Dun said to him: "You are not yet thirty, and you have become a high-ranking official with a salary of ten thousand koku. It's too early."

古文：瞻曰： 方于将军，少为太蚤；比之甘罗，已为太老。 
现代文：挚瞻说： 和将军您相比，确实稍微早了些；但是和甘罗相比，我已经太老了。 
English: Zhengjian said, "Compared to you, the general, I am indeed a little older; but compared to Ganluo, I am already too old."

古文：梁国杨氏子，九岁，甚聪惠。
现代文：梁国有一家姓杨的，他的儿子才九岁，非常聪明。
English: There is a family in Liangguo with the surname Yang. Their son is only nine years old and very smart.

古文：孔君平诣其父，父不在，乃呼儿出，为设果。
现代文：有一次孔君平去拜访他父亲，他父亲不在，这家便叫儿子出来，给孔君平摆上果品。
English: Once, Kong Junping went to visit his father. When his father was not there, the family called their son to come out and give Kong Junping some fruit.

古文：果有杨梅，孔指以示儿曰： 此是君家果。 
现代文：果品里头有杨梅，孔君平指着杨梅给他看，说道： 这是你家的果子。 
English: The fruit contained Yangmei. Kong Junping pointed to the Yangmei and said, "This is your family's fruit."

古文：儿应声答曰： 未闻孔雀是夫子家禽。 
现代文：孩子应声回答说： 没听说过孔雀是您家的家禽。 
English: The child replied: "I haven't heard that the peacock is your family's fowl.

古文：孔廷尉以裘与从弟沈，沈辞不受。
现代文：廷尉孔君平把一件皮衣送给堂弟孔沈，孔沈辞谢了，不肯收。
English: The courtier Kong Junping gave a fur coat to his cousin Kong Sheng, but Kong Sheng declined to accept it.

古文：廷尉曰： 晏平仲之俭，祠其先人，豚肩不掩豆，犹狐裘数十年，卿复何辞此？ 
现代文：孔君平说： 晏平仲那么俭省，祭祀祖先的时候，所用的小猪是那么小，伸开两只猪时也盖不满盘子，可是还穿了几十年狐皮袍子。
English: Kong Junping said: Zou Pingzhong was so frugal. When he was sacrificing ancestors, the piglets he used were so small. When he stretched out two pigs, he didn't even cover the dishes, but he still wore a fox fur robe for decades.

古文：于是受而服之。
现代文：你又为什么不肯收下这件呢！ 
English: Why don't you take this one!

古文：佛图澄与诸石游，林公曰： 澄以石虎为海鸥鸟。 
现代文：孔沈这才把皮衣收下来穿上。佛图澄和尚同石氏诸人有交往，支道林说： 他把石虎当做海鸥鸟。 
English: It was only then that Kong Sheng took off the fur coat and put it on. Buddha Tucheng Monk had dealings with many people from the Shishi clan, and Shih Dorlin said: He thought of the stone tiger as a seabird.

古文：谢仁祖年八岁，谢豫章将送客，尔时语已神悟，自参上流。
现代文：谢仁祖八岁的时候，他父亲豫章太守谢鲲已经领着他送客。
English: When Xie Renzu was eight years old, his father Yu Zhang Taizhong Xie Yao had already led him to see off guests.

古文：诸人咸共叹之曰： 年少一坐之颜回。 
现代文：那时他说话便显示出奇异的悟性，已经能够参与到名流的交谈之中了。大家都很赞许他，说他： 这个少年年纪虽小，也是座中的颜回。 
English: At that time he spoke with a singular sagacity, and was already able to take part in the conversation of the great men; they all praised him, saying, "This young man, though small, is the apple of their eye."

古文：仁祖曰： 坐无尼父，焉别颜回？ 
现代文：谢仁祖说： 座中如果没有孔子，怎么能识别颜回！ 
English: Xie Renzo said, "If there is no Confucius in the audience, how can we recognize Yan Hui?"

古文：陶公疾笃，都无献替之言，朝士以为恨。
现代文：陶侃病势沉重，可是有关朝廷兴利除弊、官吏进退等大事，没有一句遗言。朝中官员都认为是憾事。
English: Dao Kan was gravely ill, but he did not have a last word about important matters such as the imperial court's rise and fall, and the promotion and demotion of government officials. Officials in both North Korea and China thought it was a pity.

古文：仁祖闻之曰： 时无竖刁，故不贻陶公话言。 
现代文：谢仁祖听到这事，就说： 现在没有像竖刁那样的人，所以陶公不用留下遗训。 
English: When Xie Renzhu heard this, he said, "Nowadays, there is no one like Shizhao, so Tao Gong doesn't need to leave behind his last teachings.

古文：时贤以为德音。
现代文：当时人士认为这是有德者的话。
English: At the time, people thought that this was a German saying.

古文：竺法深在简文坐，刘尹问： 道人何以游朱门？ 
现代文：竺法深做了简文帝的座上客，在座上，丹阳尹刘惔问他： 道人为什么同达官显贵来往？ 
English: Zang Foshen was a guest of Emperor Jianwen. At the banquet, Danyang Yin Liuqi asked him: Why do Taoists socialize with high-ranking officials?

古文：答曰： 君自见其朱门，贫道如游蓬户。 
现代文：竺法深回答道： 您自己看见那是官宦人家，我却如同与贫苦人家交往一样。 
English: Gong Faxian replied, "You can see for yourself that they are bureaucrats, but I'm just like dealing with poor people.

古文：或云卞令。
现代文：有人说，不是刘惔发问，而是卞壶。
English: Some people said that it was not Liu Ye who asked the question, but Zou Jiu.

古文：孙盛为庾公记室参军，从猎，将其二儿俱行。
现代文：孙盛任庚亮的记室参军，一次随着质亮去打猎，并且带着自己的两个儿子一起去。
English: Sun Sheng joined the army from Geng Liang's office, once went hunting with him, and took his two sons with him.

古文：庾公不知，忽于猎场见齐庄，时年七八岁。庾谓曰： 君亦复来邪？ 
现代文：庾亮本不知道，忽然在猎场看见他的次子齐庄，当时这孩子只有七八岁，庾亮问他说： 您也来了吗？ 
English: Unbeknownst to Hao Liang, he suddenly saw his second son Qizhuang at the hunting ground. At that time, the boy was only seven or eight years old. Hao Liang asked him, "Are you here too?"

古文：应声答曰： 所谓 无小无大，从公于迈 。 
现代文：齐庄接口回答说： 正如古诗所说的 无小无大，从公于迈。  
English: The Qizhuang interface replied: As the ancient poem said, there is no small and no big, from the public to the private.

古文：孙齐由、齐庄二人小时诣庾公，公问： 齐由何字？ 答曰： 字齐由。 
现代文：孙齐由、齐庄兄弟二人，小时候去拜见庾亮。庾亮问齐由别名是什么，齐由回答说： 字齐由。 
English: Two brothers, Sun Qiyu and Qizhuang, went to see Huanliang when they were children. Huanliang asked Qiyu what his other name was, and Qiyu replied: Zhe Qiyu.

古文：公曰： 欲何齐邪？ 
现代文：又问： 想向谁看齐呢？ 
English: He also asked: Who do you want to emulate?

古文：曰： 齐许由。 
现代文：齐由说： 向许由看齐。 
English: Qiyu said, "Look at Xu Yue.

古文： 齐庄何字？ 答曰： 字齐庄。 
现代文：接着又问齐庄的别名是什么。齐庄回答说： 字齐庄。 
English: He then asked what Qizhuang's other name was. Qizhuang replied, "Qizhuang."

古文：公曰： 欲何齐？ 
现代文：问他： 想向谁看齐？ 
English: Ask him: Who do you want to emulate?

古文：曰： 齐庄周。 
现代文：齐庄说： 向庄周看齐。 
English: Qi Zhuang said: Look at Zhuang Zhou.

古文：公曰： 何不慕仲尼而慕庄周？ 
现代文：庾亮问： 为什么不仰慕孔子而仰幕庄周？ 
English: Zou Liang asked: Why not admire Confucius and admire Zhuang Zhou?

古文：对曰： 圣人生知，故难企慕。 
现代文：齐庄回答说： 圣人生来就知道一切，所以很难仰慕。 
English: Qizhuang replied, "A sage is born knowing everything, so it's hard to admire him.

古文：庾公大喜小儿对。
现代文：庚亮对这个小儿子的回答非常满意。
English: Geng Liang was very satisfied with his little son's answer.

古文：张玄之、顾敷，是顾和中外孙，皆少而聪惠。和并知之，而常谓顾胜，亲重偏至，张颇不恹。
现代文：张玄之、顾敷是顾和的外孙和孙子，两人都年少聪慧，顾和对他们都很欣赏，但常常认为顾敷更胜一筹，对顾敷更为亲近、偏爱，张玄之很不满。
English: Zhang Xianzhi and Gu Shiki are Gu He's grandson and grandchild. Both are young and intelligent. Gu He appreciates both of them, but often thinks that Gu Shiki is superior, and is closer to and prefers Gu Shiki. Zhang Xianzhi is very dissatisfied.

古文：于时张年九岁，顾年七岁，和与俱至寺中。见佛般泥洹像，弟子有泣者，有不泣者，和以问二孙。
现代文：当时张玄之九岁，顾敷七岁，顾和带着他们一起来到寺庙中，看见卧佛像，弟子们的像有的在哭，有的不哭。顾和问外孙和孙子，为什么会这样。
English: At that time, Zhang Xuanzhi was nine years old and Gu Zhi was seven years old. Gu He took them to the temple together and saw the reclining Buddha statue. Some of the disciples were crying and some were not crying. Gu He asked his grandchildren why this was happening.

古文：玄谓 被亲故泣，不被亲故不泣 。
现代文：张玄之说： 受到佛的亲近与宠爱，所以哭泣；没有受到佛的亲近与宠爱，所以不哭。 顾敷说： 不对。
English: Zhang Xianzhi said: If you are close to and loved by the Buddha, you will cry; if you are not close to and loved by the Buddha, you will not cry.

古文：敷曰： 不然，当由忘情故不泣，不能忘情故泣。 
现代文：应该是能够忘情的人不哭；不能忘情，所以哭泣。 
English: It should be that those who can forget their feelings do not cry; those who cannot forget their feelings cry.

古文：康法畅造庾太尉，握麈尾至佳，公曰： 此至佳，那得在？ 
现代文：庾法畅去拜访太尉庾亮，手中拿的拂尘非常好看。庾亮问道： 这么好的东西，怎么还能留得住？ 
English: Zou Fangchang went to visit Lieutenant Zou Liang. The whisk dust in his hand was very beautiful. Zou Liang asked: How can such a good thing be kept?

古文：法畅曰： 廉者不求，贪者不与，故得在耳。 
现代文：法畅说： 廉洁的人不会向我要，贪婪的人我也不会给，所以能够留下来。 
English: "I can stay here because honest people won't ask me for money, and I won't give it to greedy people," she said.

古文：庾稚恭为荆州，以毛扇上武帝。武帝疑是故物。
现代文：庾稚恭任荆州刺史的时候，向晋武帝进献羽毛扇，武帝怀疑是用过的旧物。
English: When Zou Zhiqiong, the governor of Jingzhou, made history, he presented a feather fan to Emperor Wu of the Jin Dynasty. Emperor Wu suspected that the fan was an old used one.

古文：侍中刘劭曰： 柏梁云构，工匠先居其下；管弦繁奏，钟、夔先听其音。
现代文：侍中刘劭说： 柏梁台那样高耸入云的楼台，是工匠先处在里面；管弦齐奏，也是知音的人和乐工们先审察它的音。
English: Attendant Liu Wei said, "The craftsmen were the first to build the tower, which is so high that it reaches into the clouds, and the orchestra played in unison. It was also the musicians and musicians who first examined its sound.

古文：稚恭上扇，以好不以新。 
现代文：稚恭进献扇子，是因为它好，不是因为它新。 
English: If you give a fan to a child, it is because it is good, not because it is new.

古文：庾后闻之曰： 此人宜在帝左右。 
现代文：庾稚恭后来听说这件事，便说： 这个人适合在皇帝身边。 
English: When Zou Zhiqiong heard about this, he said, "This man is fit to be with the emperor."

古文：何骠骑亡后，徵褚公入。
现代文：骠骑将军何充逝世后，征召褚裒入朝。
English: After the death of the cavalry general He Chong, he was conscripted into the imperial court.

古文：既至石头，王长史、刘尹同诣褚。褚曰： 真长何以处我？ 
现代文：褚裒到石头城后，左长史王濛和丹阳尹刘真长一起去拜访他。褚裒问道： 真长，朝廷怎么安置我呢？ 
English: After he arrived at Stone Town, the left-hand ruler Shi Wangjun and Danyang Yin Liu Zhenlong went to visit him. Zhenjun asked: Zhenlong, how will the court place me?

古文：真长顾王曰： 此子能言。 
现代文：真长看着王濛说： 这一位善于言谈。 
English: He looked at Wang Yao for a long time and said, "This person is good at talking."

古文：褚因视王，王曰： 国自有周公。 
现代文：褚裒于是望着王濛，王濛说： 朝中本来有周公。 
English: Zou then looked at Wang Yao, and Wang Yao said: Originally, there was Zhou Gong in the dynasty.

古文：桓公北征经金城，见前为琅邪时种柳，皆已十围，慨然曰： 木犹如此，人何以堪！ 
现代文：桓温北伐的时候，经过金城，看见从前任琅邪内史时所种的柳树，都已经十围那么粗了，就感慨地叹道： 树木尚且这样，人怎么经受得起呢！ 
English: During the Northern Expedition of Emperor Kuanwen, when he passed through Jincheng, he saw that the willow trees he had planted during his predecessor's reign of terror had grown so thick, and he sighed with emotion, "How can people tolerate trees that are still like this!"

古文：攀枝执条，泫然流泪。
现代文：攀着树枝，抓住柳条儿，泪流不止。
English: Clinging to the branches, clutching the wicker, the tears flowed.

古文：简文曰： 所谓 无小无大，从公于迈 。 顾悦与简文同年，而发蚤白。
现代文：晋简文帝任抚军将军的时候，有一次和桓温一同上朝，两人多次互相谦让，要对方走在前面。顾悦和简文帝同岁，可是头发早已白了。
English: When Emperor Jinjianwen was appointed general of the army, he once went to the North together with Emperor Huanwen, and the two of them repeatedly made allowances for each other and asked the other to walk in front. Gu Yue was the same age as Emperor Jinjianwen, but his hair had already turned white.

古文：简文曰： 卿何以先白？ 
现代文：简文帝问他： 你为什么头发比我先白呢？ 
English: Jane Wendi asked him: Why is your hair turning white before mine?

古文：对曰： 蒲柳之姿，望秋而落；松柏之质，经霜弥茂。 
现代文：顾悦回答说： 蒲柳的资质差，一到秋天就凋零了；松柏质地坚实，经历过秋霜反而更加茂盛。 
English: Gu Yue replied: The quality of the willow is poor, and it withers as soon as autumn comes; the conifer is solid, but it is more lush after the autumn frost.

古文：桓公入峡，绝壁天悬，腾波迅急。
现代文：桓温率兵进入三峡，看见陡峭的山崖好像悬挂在天上，翻腾的波涛迅猛飞奔。
English: Kuan Wen led his soldiers into the Three Gorges, and saw the steep cliffs seem to hang in the sky, and the churning waves rushing swiftly.

古文：迺叹曰： 既为忠臣，不得为孝子，如何？ 
现代文：于是叹息道： 既然要做忠臣，就不能做孝子，有什么办法呢！ 
English: Then he sighed, "Since I have to be a loyal subject, I can't be a filial son. What can I do?

古文：初，荧惑入太微，寻废海西。
现代文：当初，火星进入太微区域，不久海西公被废。
English: At first, Mars entered the too-small region, and soon Haishigong was scrapped.

古文：简文登阼，复入太微，帝恶之。
现代文：简文帝即位后，火星又进入太微，简文帝对这事很厌恶。
English: After Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, Mars entered into a solar eclipse. Emperor Jianwen was very disgusted by this.

古文：时郗超为中书在直。
现代文：这时郗超任中书侍郎，轮到值班。
English: At this time, Zou Chao was assigned to be a junior secretary, and it was his turn to be on duty.

古文：引超入曰： 天命脩短，故非所计，政当无复近日事不？ 
现代文：简文帝招呼他进里面，说道： 国家寿命的长短，本来就不是我所能考虑的。只是不会重复最近发生的事吧？ 
English: Emperor Jianwen beckoned him inside and said, "The length of a country's life span is not something I can consider. I just can't repeat what happened recently, can I?

古文：超曰： 大司马方将外固封疆，内镇社稷，必无若此之虑。
现代文：郗超说： 大司马正要对外巩固边疆，对内安定国家，一定不会有这样的打算。
English: Zou Chao said: Da Sima is just trying to consolidate the frontier to the outside world, and to stabilize the country internally, there will definitely not be such a plan.

古文：臣为陛下以百口保之。 
现代文：臣用上百口家人的性命来给陛下担保。 
English: The vassal used the lives of hundreds of family members to guarantee his majesty's escape.

古文：帝因诵庾仲初诗曰： 志士痛朝危，忠臣哀主辱。 
现代文：简文帝于是朗诵庾仲初的两句《从征诗》： 志士痛朝危，忠臣哀主辱。 
English: Emperor Jianwen then recited the first two lines of "From the Call for Poems" by Xizhong: "Courageous men suffer from danger, loyal subjects mourn the humiliation of their lord."

古文：声甚凄厉。
现代文：声音非常凄厉。
English: The sound is very intense.

古文：郗受假还东，帝曰： 致意尊公，家国之事，遂至于此！
现代文：后来郗超请假回会稽看望父亲，简文帝对他说： 向令尊转达我的问候之意，王室和国家的事情，竟到了这个地步！
English: Later, Zou Chao asked for leave to return to see his father, and Emperor Jianwen said to him: "I would like to convey my greetings to your father. The affairs of the royal family and the country have come to this!

古文：由是身不能以道匡卫，思患预防，愧叹之深，言何能喻？ 
现代文：因此我不能用正确的主张纠正失误，保卫国家，思虑灾难之将至，防患于未然。我的羞愧、感慨之深重，言语怎么能说得清啊！ 
English: Therefore, I cannot use correct ideas to correct mistakes, defend the country, think about the impending disaster, and prevent it in advance. My shame and emotion are so deep, how can I speak clearly!

古文：因泣下流襟。
现代文：说完便哭得泪满衣襟。
English: She ended up crying her eyes out.

古文：简文在暗室中坐，召宣武。宣武至，问上何在？
现代文：简文帝在暗室里坐着，召桓温进宫，桓温到了，问皇上在哪里。
English: Emperor Jianwen was sitting in the darkroom and summoned Kanwen to the palace. When Kanwen arrived, he asked the emperor where he was.

古文：简文曰： 某在斯。 
现代文：简文帝说： 某在斯。 
English: Jianwen Di said: A certain person is in Si.

古文：时人以为能。
现代文：当时人们认为他有才能。
English: At the time, people thought he had talent.

古文：简文入华林园，顾谓左右曰： 会心处，不必在远。翳然林水，便自有濠、濮闲想也。觉鸟兽禽鱼，自来亲人。 
现代文：简文帝进华林园游玩，回头对随从说： 令人心领神会的地方不一定在很远，林木蔽空，山水掩映，就自然会产生濠水、濮水上那样悠然自得的想法，觉得鸟鲁禽鱼自己会来亲近人。 
English: Emperor Jianwen went to the Hualien Forest Park for a tour and said to his retinue: "The place that makes you understand the world is not necessarily very far away. The forest is covered by the sky and the landscape is covered by the water. This will naturally give rise to the idea of leisurely self-indulgence in the water and on the water, and feel that the birds and birds will come close to people.

古文：谢太傅语王右军曰： 中年伤于哀乐，与亲友别，辄作数日恶。 
现代文：太傅谢安对右军将军王羲之说： 人过中年，总是容易被悲伤的情绪感染，每次和亲友告别，都会难过好几天。 
English: Taifu Xie'an said to the right-wing general Wang Xizhi: People who have passed middle age are always easily infected by sad emotions. Every time they say goodbye to relatives and friends, they will be sad for several days.

古文：王曰： 年在桑榆，自然至此，正赖丝竹陶写。
现代文：王羲之说： 我也到晚年了，自然会这样，只能靠听听音乐来消磨消磨时光。
English: Wang Shanzhi said, "I am also in my later years, so it is natural that I can only listen to music to pass the time.

古文：恒恐儿辈觉，损欣乐之趣。 
现代文：还经常要担心孩子们过来捣乱，搅了这份雅兴。 
English: You also often have to worry about the children coming over and causing trouble, disturbing this yakitori.

古文：支道林常养数匹马。
现代文：支道林和尚经常养着几匹马。
English: Monks in the tributary forest often keep a few horses.

古文：或言道人畜马不韵，支曰： 贫道重其神骏。 
现代文：有人说： 和尚养马并不风雅。 支道林说： 我是看重马的神采姿态。 
English: Some people say: It is not elegant for a monk to keep a horse. Shidolin said: I value the horse's graceful posture.

古文：刘尹与桓宣武共听讲礼记。
现代文：丹阳尹刘恢和桓温一起听讲《礼记》。
English: Danyang Yin Liu Wei and Huan Wen listen to a lecture on "The Book of Etiquette."

古文：桓云： 时有入心处，便觉咫尺玄门。 
现代文：桓温说： 有时有所领悟，便觉得离高深境界不远了。 
English: Kuan Wen said: Sometimes, when I have some understanding, I feel that I am not far from the higher realm.

古文：刘曰： 此未关至极，自是金华殿之语。 
现代文：刘惔却说： 这还没有涉及最精妙的境界，还只是金华殿上的老生常谈。 
English: However, Liu Wei said: This has not yet involved the most exquisite realm, it is just a commonplace of the Jinhua Palace.

古文：羊秉为抚军参军，少亡，有令誉。
现代文：羊秉任抚军将军的参军，年纪很轻就死了，他很有名望。
English: Yang Bing joined the army as a general and died at a very young age. He was very famous.

古文：夏侯孝若为之叙，极相赞悼。
现代文：夏侯湛给他写了叙文，极力赞颂并哀悼他。
English: Xia Houtan wrote a narrative to him, praising and mourning him.

古文：羊权为黄门侍郎，侍简文坐。帝问曰： 夏侯湛作羊秉叙绝可想。
现代文：羊权任黄门侍郎时，一次，陪侍简文帝，简文帝问他： 夏侯湛写的《羊秉叙》，很令人怀念羊秉。
English: When Yang Quan was a waiter at Huangmen, he once accompanied Emperor Jianwen. Emperor Jianwen asked him: "Yang Bingxiu" written by Xia Hou Tan is very nostalgic.

古文：是卿何物？有后不？ 
现代文：不知他是你的什么人？有后代没有？ 
English: I don't know who he is to you. Are there any descendants?

古文：权潸然对曰： 亡伯令问夙彰，而无有继嗣。虽名播天听，然胤绝圣世。 
现代文：羊权流着泪回答说： 亡伯声誉一向很好，可是没有后代；虽然陛下也听到了他的名声，可惜他却没有后嗣来领受圣世的隆恩。 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Yang Quan replied, "My late uncle had a very good reputation, but he had no descendants. Although His Majesty also heard of his fame, he unfortunately had no heir to receive the blessings of the holy world.

古文：帝嗟慨久之。
现代文：简文帝听了，感叹了很久。
English: Emperor Jianwen listened and sighed for a long time.

古文：王长史与刘真长别后相见，王谓刘曰： 卿更长进。 
现代文：司徒左长史王濛和刘真长两人别后重逢，王濛对刘真长说： 你更有长进了。 
English: When the two leaders met again after their separation, Wang Yao said to Liu Zhenlong: You have grown more mature.

古文：答曰： 此若天之自高耳。 
现代文：刘真长答道： 这就好像天那样，本来就是高的呀！ 
English: Liu Zhenlong replied, "It's just like the sky, it's naturally high!"

古文：刘尹云： 人想王荆产佳，此想长松下当有清风耳。 
现代文：刘真长说： 人们想象王荆产人才出众，其实这等于想象高大的松树下定会有清风罢了。 
English: Liu Zhenchang said: People imagine that the talents produced by Wang Jing are outstanding. In fact, this is equivalent to imagining that there will definitely be a breeze under the tall pine trees.

古文：王仲祖闻蛮语不解，茫然曰： 若使介葛卢来朝，故当不昧此语。 
现代文：王仲祖听见外族人说话，一点也不懂，他丧气他说： 如果介葛卢来朝见，想必懂得这种话。 
English: When Wang Zhongzu heard the foreigner speak, he did not understand at all. He was frustrated and said, "If Jie Gulu comes to the Imperial Court, he will surely understand this kind of speech."

古文：刘真长为丹阳尹，许玄度出都就刘宿。
现代文：刘真长任丹阳尹的时候，许玄度到京都去，便到他那里住宿。
English: When Liu Zhenlong was in Danyangyin, Xu Xundu went to Kyoto and stayed with him.

古文：床帷新丽，饮食丰甘。
现代文：他设置的床帐簇新、华丽，饮食丰盛味美。
English: His bedspreads are new and gorgeous, and his food is plentiful and delicious.

古文：许曰： 若保全此处，殊胜东山。 
现代文：许玄度说： 如果保全住这个地方，比隐居东山强多了。 
English: Xu Xundu said, "If we preserve and live in this place, it will be much better than living in seclusion in Dongshan."

古文：刘曰： 卿若知吉凶由人，吾安得不保此！ 
现代文：刘真长说： 你如果能肯定祸福由人来决定，我怎么会不保全这里呢！ 
English: Liu Zhenlong said, "If you can be sure that people decide what is good and what is bad, why would I not protect this place?"

古文：王逸少在坐曰： 令巢、许遇稷、契，当无此言。 
现代文：当时工逸少也在座，就说： 如果巢父。许由遇见稷和契，一定不会说这样的话。 
English: At that time, Gong Yixiao was also present, and said: If the nest father. Xu Yue met the peace treaty, he would not say such a thing.

古文：二人并有愧色。
现代文：刘、许两人听了，都面有愧色。
English: When Liu and Xu heard this, they both felt ashamed.

古文：王右军与谢太傅共登冶城。谢悠然远想，有高世之志。
现代文：右军将军王羲之和太傅谢安一起登上冶城，谢安悠闲地凝神遐想，有超尘脱俗的志趣。
English: Wang Xizhi, the general of the Right Army, and Grand Master Xie An boarded the Yecheng together. Xie An was leisurely lost in reverie and had a lofty ambition.

古文：王谓谢曰： 夏禹勤王，手足胼胝；文王旰食，日不暇给。
现代文：王羲之就对他说： 夏禹操劳国事，手脚都长了趼子；周文王忙到天黑才吃上饭，总觉得时间不够用。
English: Wang Xizhi said to him: "Xia Yu is so busy with state affairs that his hands and feet have grown lice; Zhou Wen Wang is so busy that he doesn't have time to eat dinner until it's dark.

古文：今四郊多垒，宜人人自效。
现代文：现在国家战乱四起，人人都应当自觉地为国效劳。
English: Now that the country is in turmoil, everyone should consciously serve the country.

古文：而虚谈废务，浮文妨要，恐非当今所宜。 
现代文：而空谈荒废政务，浮辞妨害国事，恐怕不是当前所应该做的吧。 
English: But idle talk about wasteful government affairs, and empty rhetoric that interferes with state affairs, I'm afraid that's not what we should be doing right now.

古文：谢答曰： 秦任商鞅，二世而亡，岂清言致患邪？ 
现代文：谢安回答说： 秦国任用商鞅，可是秦朝只传两代就灭亡了，这难道也是清谈所造成的灾祸吗？ 
English: Xie'an replied, "Qin appointed merchants, but the Qin Dynasty only lasted two generations before it was destroyed. Is this also a calamity caused by chatting?

古文：谢太傅寒雪日内集，与儿女讲论文义。
现代文：太傅谢安在一个寒冷的下雪天把家里人聚在一起，和儿女们讲解谈论文章。
English: On a cold, snowy day, Taifu Xie'an gathered his family together to explain and talk about the article with his children.

古文：俄而雪骤，公欣然曰： 白雪纷纷何所似？ 
现代文：一会儿，雪下得又大又急，谢安兴致勃勃地问道： 白雪纷纷何所似？ 
English: After a while, the snow was falling thick and fast, and Xie An enthusiastically asked: What does the white snow look like?

古文：兄子胡儿曰： 撒盐空中差可拟。 
现代文：侄子胡儿说： 撒盐空中差可拟。 
English: Nephew Hu'er said: "Spreading salt in the air can be imagined.

古文：兄女曰： 未若柳絮因风起。 
现代文：侄女说： 未若柳絮因风起。 
English: My niece said, "Miwaka willow shoots are up because of the wind."

古文：公大笑乐。
现代文：谢安大笑，非常高兴。
English: Xie An laughed loudly, very happy.

古文：即公大兄无奕女，左将军王凝之妻也。
现代文：这位侄女就是谢安的大哥谢无奕的女儿，左将军王凝之的妻子。
English: This niece was the daughter of Xie Wuyi, the eldest brother of Xie An, and the wife of Left General Wang Xunzhu.

古文：王中郎令伏玄度、习凿齿论青、楚人物。
现代文：北中郎将王坦之叫伏玄度、习凿齿两人评论青州、荆州两地历代人物。
English: Kitanakamuro will call Wang Tan's character Fu Xundu, and the two actors will comment on historical figures from Qingzhou and Jingzhou.

古文：临成，以示韩康伯。
现代文：等到评论完了，王坦之拿来给韩康伯看，韩康伯一句话也没说。
English: After the comment was over, Wang Tanzhi showed it to Han Kangbo. Han Kangbo didn't say a word.

古文：康伯都无言，王曰： 何故不言？ 
现代文：王坦之间他： 为什么不说话？ 韩康伯说： 他们的评论无所谓对，也无所谓不对。 
English: Between Wang Tan and him: Why don't you talk? Han Kangbo said: It doesn't matter if their comments are right or wrong.

古文：韩曰： 无可无不可。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘真长说： 每逢风清月明。就不免思念玄度。 
English: Danyang Yin Liu Zhenchang said: Every time the wind is clear and the moon is bright, we can't help but think about the darkness.

古文：刘尹云： 清风朗月，辄思玄度。 荀中郎在京口，登北固望海云： 虽未睹三山，便自使人有凌云意。
现代文：北中郎将荀羡在京口任职时，登上北固山远望东海说： 虽然不曾望见三座仙山，已经让人有超尘出世的意想。
English: When serving in Kyoguchi, Kitanakucho climbed Mount Kitagusan to look far and wide at the East Sea and said: Although I have never seen the three fairy mountains, I have already made people have the idea of super-earthly birth.

古文：若秦、汉之君，必当褰裳濡足。 
现代文：如果像秦始皇和汉武帝那样，一定会提起衣裳下海去的。 
English: If you are like the First Emperor of Qin and Emperor Wu of Han, you will certainly take off your clothes and go to sea.

古文：谢公云： 贤圣去人，其闲亦迩。 
现代文：谢安说： 圣人、贤人和普通人之间的距离也是很近的。 
English: Xie An said: The distance between saints, sages and ordinary people is also very close.

古文：子侄未之许。
现代文：他的子侄不同意这种看法。
English: His nephew disagrees.

古文：公叹曰： 若郗超闻此语，必不至河汉。 
现代文：谢安叹息说： 如果郗超听见这话，一定不至于不相信。 
English: Xie An sighed and said, "If Gong Chao-wu hears this, he won't believe it."

古文：支公好鹤，住剡东山。
现代文：支道林喜欢养鹤，住在刻县东面的岇山上。
English: Branch Road Lin likes to raise cranes and lives on the Lushan Mountain in the east of Ke County.

古文：有人遗其双鹤，少时翅长欲飞。支意惜之，乃铩其翮。
现代文：有人送给他一对小鹤。不久，小鹤翅膀长成，将要飞了，支道林心里舍不得它们就剪短了它们的翅膀。
English: Someone gave him a pair of little cranes. Soon, the little cranes grew wings and were about to fly. The branch forest could not bear to have them, so they cut their wings short.

古文：鹤轩翥不复能飞，乃反顾翅，垂头视之，如有懊丧意。
现代文：鹤高举翅膀却不能飞了，便回头看看翅膀，低垂着头，看去好像有懊丧的意思。
English: The crane held its wings aloft, but could not fly, so it looked back at its wings, hanging its head low, as if in a gesture of remorse.

古文：林曰： 既有凌霄之姿，何肯为人作耳目近玩？ 
现代文：支道林说： 既然有直冲云霄的资质，又怎么肯给人做就近观赏的玩物呢！ 
English: Shidolin said: Since it has the ability to fly straight up into the sky, how can it be made into a toy for people to look at up close?

古文：养令翮成，置使飞去。
现代文：于是喂养到翅膀再长起来，就放了它们，让它们飞走了。
English: So they fed them until their wings grew back, then released them and let them fly away.

古文：谢中郎经曲阿后湖，问左右： 此是何水？ 
现代文：西中郎将谢万路过曲阿后湖时，问随从的人： 这是什么湖？ 
English: When Xi Zhong Lang was leading Xie Wan through Lake A Hou, he asked his followers: What lake is this?

古文：答曰： 曲阿湖。 
现代文：随从的人回答说： 曲阿湖。 
English: The follower replied: Qua Hu.

古文：谢曰： 故当渊注渟著，纳而不流。 
现代文：谢万就说： 那自然要聚积储存，只注入而不流出。 
English: Xie Wan said: It is natural to accumulate and store, only injecting and not flowing out.

古文：晋武帝每饷山涛山少。
现代文：晋武帝每次赏赐东西给山涛，总是很少。
English: Every time Emperor Jinwu gave something to Shantao, it was always very little.

古文：谢太傅以问子弟，车骑答曰： 当由欲者不多，而使与者忘少。 
现代文：太傅谢安就这件事问子侄们是什么意思，谢玄回答说： 这应是由于受赐的人要求不多，才使得赏赐的人不觉得少。 
English: Father Xie An asked his nephews and nieces what they meant by this. Xie Xuan replied, "It is because the recipient does not ask for much that the giver does not feel short-changed."

古文：谢胡儿语庾道季： 诸人莫当就卿谈，可坚城垒。 
现代文：谢胡儿告诉庾道季说： 大家也许会到你这里来清谈，你应该加固城池堡垒，小心防备。 
English: "People may come to you to have a clear talk. You should fortify the city and be careful," Xie Huer told Gong Daojie.

古文：庾曰： 若文度来，我以偏师待之；康伯来，济河焚舟。 
现代文：庾道季说： 要是王文度来，我用部分兵力就能对付他；如果韩康伯来，我就决心跟他挨个你死我活。 
English: Zou Daoji said: If Wang Wendu comes, I can deal with him with a part of my army; if Han Kangbo comes, I am determined to fight with him to the death.

古文：李弘度常叹不被遇。
现代文：李弘度经常慨叹得不到赏识提拔的机会。
English: Li Hongdu often laments the lack of opportunities for appreciation and promotion.

古文：殷扬州知其家贫，问： 君能屈志百里不？ 
现代文：扬州刺史殷浩知道他家境贫困，就问他： 您能不能屈就，到一个小地方去？ 
English: Knowing that his family was poor, Yinhao, the Yangzhou magistrate, asked him: Can you give in and go to a small place?

古文：李答曰： 北门之叹，久已上闻。穷猿奔林，岂暇择木！ 
现代文：李弘度回答说： 像《北门》篇那样的慨叹，早就让您听到了；我现在像无路可走的猿猴奔窜山林，哪里还顾得上去挑选该逃上哪棵树呢！ 
English: Li Hongdu replied, "I have already let you hear my sigh like the one in the "North Gate" story; I am now like an ape with no way out, running through the mountains and forests, where I still have to go and choose which tree to escape to!

古文：遂授剡县。
现代文：殷浩于是就委任他做剡县县令。
English: Yin Hao then appointed him as the county magistrate of Jixian County.

古文：王司州至吴兴印渚中看。
现代文：王胡之到吴兴郡的印诸去观赏景致。
English: Wang Huzhi went to Wuxing County's Yanzhong to enjoy the scenery.

古文：叹曰： 非唯使人情开涤，亦觉日月清朗。 
现代文：赞叹他说： 不只是能让人心情开朗清净，也觉得日月更加明朗。 
English: He said with admiration: Not only can it make people feel cheerful and clear, but also feel that the sun and moon are clearer.

古文：谢万作豫州都督，新拜，当西之都邑，相送累日，谢疲顿。
现代文：谢万出任豫州都督，刚接到任命，要西行到任所去，亲友连日给他送行，谢万疲惫得支持不住。
English: Xie Wan was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou. He had just received the appointment and wanted to go west to the office. His relatives and friends saw him off every day. Xie Wan was too tired to support him.

古文：于是高侍中往，径就谢坐，因问： 卿今仗节方州，当疆理西蕃，何以为政？ 
现代文：这时，侍中高崧去见他，径直往谢万身旁坐下，便问他： 你现在受命主管一州，就要去治理西部地区，打算怎样处理政事呢？ 
English: At this time, Gao Yao, the chamberlain, went to see him and sat down next to Xie Man. He asked him, "You are now in charge of one province, and you are about to govern the western region. How do you plan to handle the affairs of state?"

古文：谢粗道其意。
现代文：谢万大略他说出自己的想法。
English: Xie Wan generally speaks his mind.

古文：高便为谢道形势，作数百语。谢遂起坐。
现代文：高崧就给他叙说当地地理人事情况，长篇大论。谢万终于起身坐着。
English: Gao Yao gave him a long story about the local geographical and personnel situation. Xie Wan finally got up and sat down.

古文：高去后，谢追曰： 阿酃故粗有才具。 
现代文：高崧走后，谢万回想起来说： 阿酃确实是有点才能。 
English: After Gao Yao left, Xie Wan recalled and said: "Amao is really a bit talented.

古文：谢因此得终坐。
现代文：谢万也因此能始终奉陪不倦。
English: As a result, Xie Wan has been able to work tirelessly.

古文：袁彦伯为谢安南司马，都下诸人送至濑乡。
现代文：袁彦伯出任安南将军谢奉的司马，京都的友人给他送行一直送到濑乡。
English: Yuan Yanbo served as Sima for General Annan Xie Bong, and his friends from Kyoto saw him off all the way to Xiangxiang.

古文：将别，既自凄惘，叹曰： 江山辽落，居然有万里之势。 
现代文：快到分手的时候，他已经不胜伤感愁闷，慨叹说： 江山辽阔，显然有万里的气势。 
English: When they were about to break up, he was already sad and gloomy, lamenting: The country is vast and obviously has great potential.

古文：孙绰赋遂初，筑室畎川，自言见止足之分。
现代文：孙绰创作《遂初赋》来表明自己的志向，在畎川建一所房子住，自己说已经明白了安分守己是自己的本分。
English: Sun Cao created "The First Gift" to show his ambition, built a house in Luochuan to live in, and said that he had understood that it was his duty to keep himself safe.

古文：斋前种一株松，何自手壅治之。
现代文：房前种着一棵松树，他经常亲手培土灌溉。
English: A pine tree is planted in front of the house, and he often irrigates the soil with his own hands.

古文：高世远时亦邻居，语孙曰： 松树子非不楚楚可怜，但永无栋梁用耳！ 
现代文：高世远这时正跟他做邻居，对他说： 小松树不是不茂盛可爱，只是永远不能用做栋梁呀！ 
English: Gao Shiyuan, who was his neighbor at the time, said to him, "Small pine trees are not unlush and lovely, but they can never be used as pillars!"

古文：孙曰： 枫柳虽合抱，亦何所施？ 
现代文：孙绰说： 枫树、柳树虽然长得合抱那么粗，又能派什么用场呢？ 
English: Sun Qiao said: Although maple and willow trees grow so thick, what use can they be?

古文：桓征西治江陵城甚丽，会宾僚出江津望之，云： 若能目此城者有赏。 
现代文：征西大将军桓温修筑江陵城，非常壮丽，完工后，会集宾客僚属出汉江渡口来远远观赏城景。他说： 准如果能恰当品评这座城，有奖赏。 
English: Western Conquest General Huan Wen built Gangneung City, which is very magnificent. After completion, he would gather guests and colleagues from the Han River ferry to watch the city from afar. He said: If you can properly evaluate this city, there is a reward.

古文：顾长康时为客，在坐，目曰： 遥望层城，丹楼如霞。 
现代文：顾长康当时是客人，正在座上，就评论道： 遥望层城，丹楼如霞。 
English: Gu Changkang, who was a guest at the time, was sitting in the audience and commented: "From a distance, Danlou is like a mist.

古文：桓即赏以二婢。
现代文：桓温当即赏给他两个婢女。
English: Kanon immediately gave him two maids.

古文：王子敬语王孝伯曰： 羊叔子自复佳耳，然亦何与人事？ 
现代文：王子敬对王孝伯说： 羊叔子这个人自然是不错的呀，可是又何尝有助于世事！
English: Prince Kei said to Wang Xiao Bo, "Uncle Yang is naturally a good person, but how can he help the world?

古文：故不如铜雀台上妓。 
现代文：所以比不上铜雀台上的歌姬舞女。 
English: Therefore, it is not comparable to the singer and dancer on the copper sparrow stage.

古文：林公见东阳长山曰： 何其坦迤！ 
现代文：支道林和尚看见东阳郡的长山时说： 怎么这么平缓又弯弯曲曲啊！ 
English: When the Branch Road Lin Monk saw the Changshan of Dongyang County, he said: How can it be so smooth and curved!

古文：顾长康从会稽还，人问山川之美，顾云： 千岩竞秀，万壑争流，草木蒙笼其上，若云兴霞蔚。 
现代文：顾长康从会稽回来，人们问他那边山川的秀丽情状，顾长康形容说： 那里千峰竞相比高，万壑争先奔流，茂密的草木笼罩其上，有如彩云涌动，霞光灿烂。 
English: When Gu Changkang returned from the meeting, people asked him about the beauty of the mountains and rivers on the other side. Gu Changkang described: There are thousands of peaks competing to be the highest, thousands of rivers competing to be the first to flow, and dense vegetation shrouding them, like colorful clouds surging, and brilliant sunshine.

古文：简文崩，孝武年十余岁立，至暝不临。
现代文：晋简文帝逝世，孝文帝当时才十几岁就登上帝位，服丧期间，一次也没有见他去哀哭。
English: When Emperor Jinjianwen died, Emperor Xiaowen was only a teenager when he ascended to the throne. During the mourning period, I did not see him cry once.

古文：左右启 依常应临 。帝曰： 哀至则哭，何常之有！ 
现代文：侍从向他启奏说： 按惯例您应该去哭丧表示哀悼。 
English: The attendant explained to him: According to the custom, you should go to mourn and express your condolences.

古文：孝武将讲孝经，谢公兄弟与诸人私庭讲习。
现代文：孝武帝说： 悲痛到来时，自然就会哭，有什么惯例不惯例的！ 孝武帝将要研讨《孝经》，谢安、谢石兄弟和众人先在家里研讨、讲习。
English: Emperor Xiaowu said: When grief comes, it is natural to cry, what is customary and not customary! Emperor Xiaowu will study the "Xiaojing," Xie An, Xie Shi brothers and everyone will first study and study at home.

古文：车武子难苦问谢，谓袁羊曰： 不问则德音有遗，多问则重劳二谢。 
现代文：车武子提出一些疑难、急迫的问题来问谢安兄弟，并且对袁羊说： 不问，就怕漏掉精湛的言论；问得多了，又怕使二谢辛劳。 
English: Che Wuzi put forward some difficult and urgent questions to ask the Xie An brothers, and said to Yuan Yang: If you don't ask, you are afraid of missing out on the exquisite speech; if you ask too much, you are afraid of making Er Xie work hard.

古文：袁曰： 必无此嫌。 
现代文：袁羊说： 一定不会引起这种烦恼的。 
English: Yuan Yang said, "It definitely won't cause this kind of trouble."

古文：车曰： 何以知尔？ 
现代文：车武子说： 怎么知道会是这样呢？ 
English: Che Buko said: How did you know it would be like this?

古文：袁曰： 何尝见明镜疲于屡照，清流惮于惠风。 
现代文：袁羊说： 何曾见过明亮的镜子会因为连续照影而疲劳，清澈的流水会害怕微风？ 
English: Yuan Yang said: Have you ever seen a bright mirror get tired because of continuous photography, or clear running water be afraid of the breeze?

古文：王子敬云： 从山阴道上行，山川自相映发，使人应接不暇。
现代文：王子敬说： 从山阴道上走过时，一路上山光水色交相辉映，使人眼花缭乱，看不过来。
English: The prince said: "When walking along the mountain road, the colors of the landscape and water reflect each other along the way, making people dazzled and unable to see.

古文：若秋冬之际，尤难为坏。 
现代文：如果是秋冬之交，更是让人难以忘怀。 
English: If it is the turn of autumn and winter, it is even more unforgettable.

古文：谢太傅问诸子侄： 子弟亦何预人事，而正欲使其佳？ 
现代文：太傅谢安问众子侄： 子侄们又何尝需要过问政事，为什么总想培养他们成为优秀子弟？ 
English: Grandfather Xie An asked all the sons and nephews: Why do the sons and nephews need to be involved in politics? Why do you always want to train them to be good sons and nephews?

古文：诸人莫有言者，车骑答曰： 譬如芝兰玉树，欲使其生于阶庭耳。 
现代文：大家都不说话。车骑将军谢玄回答说： 这就好比芝兰玉树，总想使它们生长在自家的庭院中啊！ 
English: No one spoke. General Xie Xuan replied, "It's like the magnolia and the jade tree, you always want them to grow in your own yard!"

古文：道壹道人好整饰音辞，从都下还东山，经吴中。
现代文：道壹和尚喜欢修饰言辞。他从京都回东山时，经过吴中。
English: When he was returning from Kyoto to Higashiyama, he passed through Wuzhong.

古文：已而会雪下，未甚寒。
现代文：随即遇到下雪，还不是很冷。
English: Then it started to snow, but it wasn't very cold.

古文：诸道人问在道所经。
现代文：回来后，和尚们问他途中见闻。
English: When he returned, the monks asked him what he had seen.

古文：壹公曰： 风霜固所不论，乃先集其惨澹。郊邑正自飘瞥，林岫便已皓然。 
现代文：道壹说： 风霜固然不用说了，它却先凝聚起一片暗淡；郊野、村落还只是雪花飞掠，树林和山峰就已经白茫茫一片。 
English: "Of course, it goes without saying that the wind and frost are increasing, but it has first condensed a gloomy area; the countryside and villages are still just snowflakes flying, and the woods and peaks are already a white expanse.

古文：张天锡为凉州刺史，称制西隅。
现代文：张天锡任凉州刺史，在西部地区称王。
English: Zhang Tianxi served as the chief historian of Liangzhou, and was famous in the western region.

古文：既为苻坚所禽，用为侍中。
现代文：被苻坚俘虏以后，任用为侍中。
English: After being captured by Shujian, he was appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：后于寿阳俱败，至都，为孝武所器。
现代文：后来随苻坚攻晋，在寿阳县大败，便归顺晋朝，来到京都，得到晋孝武帝的器重。
English: Later, he followed Shujian to attack Jin, and after a crushing defeat in Shouyang County, he returned to the Shun Jin Dynasty and came to Kyoto, where he gained the respect of Emperor Jin Xiaowu.

古文：每入言论，无不竟日。
现代文：每次入朝谈论，没有不谈一整天的。
English: Every time we visit North Korea, we talk about it for the whole day.

古文：颇有嫉己者，于坐问张： 北方何物可贵？ 
现代文：很有一些妒忌他的人当众问他： 北方什么东西可贵？ 
English: Many envious people asked him in public: What is precious in the north?

古文：张曰： 桑椹甘香，鸱鸮革响。淳酪养性，人无嫉心。 
现代文：张天锡回答说： 桑葚香甜，鸱鸮振翅作响；醇厚的乳酪怡情养性，人们没有妒忌之心。 
English: Zhang Tianxi replied, "Mulberry is sweet and fragrant, and the dragonfly's wings are vibrating; mellow cheese is pleasant and nourishing, and people are not jealous.

古文：顾长康拜桓宣武墓，作诗云： 山崩溟海竭，鱼鸟将何依。 
现代文：顾长康去拜谒桓温的陵墓，并且作诗说： 山崩溟海竭，鱼鸟将何依！ 
English: Gu Changkang went to pay homage to the mausoleum of Zou Kuanwen, and wrote a poem saying: "When the mountains and seas are exhausted, what will the fish and birds do?"

古文：人问之曰： 卿凭重桓乃尔，哭之状其可见乎？ 
现代文：有人问他说： 你过去倚重桓温才会这样说，你痛哭桓温的情状大概可以描述描述吧？ 
English: Someone asked him, "You used to rely on Kuan Wen before you said this. Your situation of crying over Kuan Wen can probably be described, right?"

古文：顾曰： 鼻如广莫长风，眼如悬河决溜。 
现代文：顾长康说： 鼻息像旷野生风，眼泪像瀑布倾泻。 
English: Gu Changkang said: Nose breathing is like a wild wind, tears are pouring down like a waterfall.

古文：或曰： 声如震雷破山，泪如倾河注海。 
现代文：又一说是： 哭声像疾雷震破山岳，眼泪像江河倾泻大海。 
English: Another said, "Crying is like a thunderbolt that shatters the mountains, and tears are like rivers that flow into the sea."

古文：毛伯成既负其才气，常称： 宁为兰摧玉折，不作萧敷艾荣。 
现代文：毛伯成既然自负有才气，就常常声称： 宁可做被摧残的香兰，被打碎的美玉，也不做开花的艾蒿。 
English: Since Mao BoCheng was conceited and talented, he often claimed: I would rather be a ruined fragrant orchid, a broken jewel, than a blooming mugwort.

古文：范甯作豫章，八日请佛有板。众僧疑，或欲作答。
现代文：范宁作豫章太守的时候，到四月八日用文书向庙里请佛像，众和尚猜测是否须要给一个答复。
English: When Fan Ning was the grand abbot of Yuzhang, on April 8th, he sent a letter to the temple to request a Buddha statue, and the monks speculated whether he needed to give an answer.

古文：有小沙弥在坐末曰： 世尊默然，则为许可。 
现代文：这时有个坐在未座上的小和尚说： 世尊不说话，就是准许了。 
English: At this time, a little monk who was sitting on a chair said, "If the world-honored one does not speak, it is permitted."

古文：众从其义。
现代文：大家都赞同他的意见。
English: Everyone agreed with him.

古文：司马太傅斋中夜坐，于时天月明净，都无纤翳。太傅叹以为佳。
现代文：太傅司马道子夜里在书房闲坐，这时天空明朗，月光皎洁，一点云彩也没有，太傅赞叹不已，认为美极了。
English: Grand Master Sima Daozi was sitting idly in his study at night, when the sky was clear, the moon was shining brightly, and there were no clouds at all. Grand Master Sima Daozi was full of admiration and thought it was extremely beautiful.

古文：谢景重在坐，答曰： 意谓乃不如微云点缀。 
现代文：当时谢景重也在座。回答说： 私意以为倒不如有点微云点缀。 
English: At that time, Xie Jingzhu was also present. He replied: I think it would be better to have a little decoration.

古文：太傅因戏谢曰： 卿居心不净，乃复强欲滓秽太清邪？ 
现代文：太傅便打趣谢景重说： 你自己心地不干净，还硬要老天也不干净吗？ 
English: Taifu then made fun of Xie Jingzhuang and said: Your own heart is not clean, do you still insist that God is not clean?

古文：王中郎甚爱张天锡，问之曰： 卿观过江诸人经纬，江左轨辙，有何伟异？
现代文：北中郎将王但之很喜爱张天锡，问他： 你看过江来的这些人治理江南的途径，有什么特别的地方？
English: The Northern Middle Lord loved Zhang Tianxi very much, and asked him: "Have you seen the way these people from the Yangtze River govern the south of the Yangtze River? Is there anything special about it?"

古文：后来之彦，复何如中原？ 
现代文：后起之秀，和中原人士相比又怎么样？ 
English: What about the up-and-comers, compared to the Central Plains people?

古文：张曰： 研求幽邃，自王、何以还；因时脩制，荀、乐之风。 
现代文：张天锡说： 说到研讨深奥的玄学，自王弼、何晏以来是最好的了；说到根据时势修订规章制度，那就有荀、荀勖和乐广的作风。 
English: Zhang Tianxi said: When it comes to the study of esoteric metaphysics, it is the best since Wang Xi and He Xi; when it comes to revising rules and regulations according to the current situation, it is the style of Zou, Zou and Leguang.

古文：王曰： 卿知见有余，何故为苻坚所制？ 
现代文：王坦之说： 你很有远见卓识，为什么会被苻坚挟制呢？ 
English: Wang Tanzhi said: You are very far-sighted and insightful, why would you be held back by stubbornness?

古文：答曰： 阳消阴息，故天步屯蹇；否剥成象，岂足多讥？ 
现代文：张天锡回答说： 阳衰阴盛，所以国运艰难；时运不好，难道这也值得大加讥笑吗？ 
English: Zhang Tianxi replied: The sun is waning and the moon is waxing, so the national fortune is difficult; the time is not good, is this also worthy of ridicule?

古文：谢景重女适王孝伯儿，二门公甚相爱美。
现代文：谢景重的女儿嫁给王孝伯的儿子，两位亲家翁互相都很赞赏、敬重。
English: Xie Jingliu's daughter married Wang Xiaobing's son. The two relatives appreciated and respected each other.

古文：谢为太傅长史，被弹；王即取作长史，带晋陵郡。
现代文：谢景重任太傅司马道子的长史，被人家检举了孝王教伯就把谢请去做他的长史，并兼管晋陵郡。
English: The long history of Xie Jing's important role as the grand tutor of Sima Daozi, was reported by someone, and Xiaowang Jiaobing invited Xie to do his long history, and also managed Jinling County.

古文：太傅已构嫌孝伯，不欲使其得谢，还取作咨议。外示絷维，而实以乖闲之。
现代文：太傅跟孝伯早有嫌隙，不想让他拉走谢景重，又安排谢做咨议；表面上显示自己要罗致人才，实际上是用这种做法来离间他们两人。
English: Taifu had a grudge against Xiaobing for a long time, and did not want him to take away Xie Jingzhu, and arranged for Xie to do the consultation. On the surface, he showed that he wanted to attract talent, but in fact, he used this practice to separate the two of them.

古文：及孝伯败后，太傅绕东府城行散，僚属悉在南门要望候拜，时谓谢曰： 王甯异谋，云是卿为其计。 
现代文：等到王孝伯起兵失败以后，有一次，太傅绕着住宅的围墙行散，一班僚属都在南门迎候参拜。当时大傅对谢景重说： 王宁谋反，听说是你给他出的主意。 
English: After the failure of Wang Xiao Bo to raise an army, there was a time when Taifu walked around the wall of the residence, and a group of colleagues were waiting at the south gate to visit. At that time, Daifu said to Xie Jingzhong: Wang Ning plotted a rebellion, and I heard that you gave him the idea.

古文：谢曾无惧色，敛笏对曰： 乐彦辅有言： 岂以五男易一女？  
现代文：谢景重听后毫无惧色，从容地收拢饬回答说： 乐彦辅有句话： 难道会用五个儿子去换一个女儿。  
English: After listening to Xie Jingzhuo, he was fearless and calmly closed his eyes and replied: Lok Yan Fu has a saying: Would he exchange five sons for one daughter?

古文：太傅善其对，因举酒劝之曰： 故自佳！
现代文：太傅认为他回答得好，便举起杯来劝他酒，并且说： 这当然很好！
English: The abbot thought that his answer was good, so he raised his glass to persuade him to drink, and said: "Of course it's good!

古文：故自佳！ 
现代文：这当然很好！ 
English: Of course it's good!

古文：桓玄义兴还后，见司马太傅，太傅已醉，坐上多客，问人云： 桓温来欲作贼，如何？ 
现代文：桓玄从义兴郡回到京部后，去谒见司马太傅。这时太傅已经喝醉了，在座的还有很多客人，太傅就问大家说： 桓温从来都想造反，怎么回事？ 
English: After Kuan Xuan returned to Beijing from Yixing County, he went to see Sima Taifu. At this time, Taifu was already drunk and there were many guests present. Taifu asked everyone, "Kuan Wen has always wanted to rebel, what's going on?"

古文：桓玄伏不得起。
现代文：桓玄拜伏在地不敢起来。
English: Kanzenbai prostrated on the ground, not daring to get up.

古文：谢景重时为长史，举板答曰： 故宣武公黜昏暗，登圣明，功超伊、霍。
现代文：谢景重当时任长史，拿起手板来回答说： 已故的宣武公废黜昏庸的人，扶助圣明君主登上帝位，功勋超过伊尹、霍光。
English: At that time, Xie Jingzhong was the chief historian, and he picked up the tablet to answer: The late Xuanwu Gong dethroned the dull and mediocre people, helped the Holy Emperor ascend to the throne, and his merits exceeded those of Yi Yin and Huo Guang.

古文：纷纭之议，裁之圣鉴。 太傅曰： 我知！我知！ 
现代文：至于那些乱纷纷的议论，只有靠太傅英明的鉴识来裁决了。 太傅说： 我知道！我知道！ 
English: As for the various arguments, they could only be settled by the sage's wise judgment. "I know! I know!" said the sage.

古文：即举酒云： 桓义兴，劝卿酒。 
现代文：随即举起酒杯说： 桓义兴，敬你一杯！ 
English: He then raised his glass and said: Kan Yixing, a toast to you!

古文：桓出谢过。
现代文：桓玄离开座位向太傅谢罪。
English: Kuan Xuan left his seat to apologize to Taifu.

古文：宣武移镇南州，制街衢平直。
现代文：桓温移镇南州，他规划修建的街道很平直。
English: When Kuan Wen moved to Nanzhou, the streets he planned to build were very straight.

古文：人谓王东亭曰： 丞相初营建康，无所因承，而制置纡曲，方此为劣。 
现代文：有人对东亭侯王珣说： 丞相当初筹划修筑建康城的街道时，没有现成图样可以仿效，所以修筑得弯弯曲曲，和这里相比就显得差些。 
English: Someone said to Dongting Hou Wangyao, "When you first planned to build the streets of Kangcheng, there was no ready-made pattern to imitate, so the construction was crooked, and it looked worse than here.

古文：东亭曰： 此丞相乃所以为巧。
现代文：王珣说： 这正是丞相规划得巧妙的地方。
English: Wang Yao said: This is exactly what the prime minister has cleverly planned.

古文：江左地促，不如中国；若使阡陌条畅，则一览而尽。故纡余委曲，若不可测。 
现代文：江南地方狭窄，比不上中原。如果街道畅通无阻，就会一眼看到底；特意拐弯抹角，就给人一种幽深莫测的感觉。 
English: The area south of the Yangtze River is narrow, not as narrow as the Central Plains. If the streets are unobstructed, you can see the bottom at a glance; if you deliberately take a sharp turn, it will give you a sense of the unfathomable.

古文：桓玄诣殷荆州，殷在妾房昼眠，左右辞不之通。
现代文：桓玄去拜访荆州刺史殷仲堪，殷正在侍妾的房里睡午觉，手下的人谢绝给他通报。
English: Huan Xuan went to visit Yin Zhongkan, the chief of Jing Province, who was taking a nap in his concubine's room. His subordinates declined to inform him.

古文：桓后言及此事，殷云： 初不眠，纵有此，岂不以 贤贤易色 也。 
现代文：桓玄后来谈起这事，殷仲堪说： 我从来不睡午觉。如果有这样的事，岂不是把重贤之心变成重色了吗！ 
English: Later, when Huan Xuan talked about this, Yin Zhongkan said, "I never take a nap. If there is such a thing, wouldn't it turn the heart of a great sage into a dark place?"

古文：桓玄问羊孚： 何以共重吴声？ 
现代文：桓玄问羊孚： 为什么都爱听吴地歌曲？ 
English: Huan Xuan asked Yang Fu: Why do you all like listening to Wu Di songs?

古文：羊曰： 当以其妖而浮。 
现代文：羊孚说： 自然是因为它又婉转动听又轻柔。 
English: Yang Fu said, "Naturally, it's because it's gentle and soft.

古文：谢混问羊孚： 何以器举瑚琏？ 
现代文：谢混问羊孚： 为什么说到器皿就要举出瑚琏？ 
English: Xie Ming asked Yang Fu: When it comes to utensils, why is it necessary to hold up a beaker?

古文：羊曰： 故当以为接神之器。 
现代文：羊孚说： 自然是因为它是迎神的器物。 
English: Yang Fu said, "Naturally, it is because it is an object to welcome the gods."

古文：桓玄既篡位，后御床微陷，群臣失色。
现代文：桓玄篡位以后，他的坐塌稍微陷下去一点，大臣们大惊失色。
English: After Kuan Xuan usurped the throne, his seat slumped a little bit, and the ministers were shocked.

古文：侍中殷仲文进曰： 当由圣德渊重，厚地所以不能载。 
现代文：侍中殷仲文上前说： 这是由于皇上德行深厚，以致于厚重的大地也承受不起。 
English: Yin Zhong, an aide-de-camp, said in advance: This is because the emperor's virtue is so profound that even the thick earth cannot bear it.

古文：时人善之。
现代文：当时的人都称赞他这句话说得很得体。
English: People at the time praised him for saying it so well.

古文：桓玄既篡位，将改置直馆，问左右： 虎贲中郎省，应在何处？ 
现代文：桓玄篡位以后，想要另行设立值班官署，就问手下的人： 虎贲中郎省应该设在什么地方呢？ 
English: After Huan Xuan usurped the throne, he wanted to set up a separate duty office, so he asked his subordinates: Where should the province of Quzhou Zhonglang be located?

古文：有人答曰： 无省。 
现代文：有人回答说： 没有虎贲中郎省。 
English: Someone replied: "There is no such thing as a tiger cub in the middle of a farmer's field."

古文：当时殊忤旨。
现代文：这个回答在当时特别违逆圣旨。
English: At the time, this answer was particularly unorthodox.

古文：问： 何以知无？ 
现代文：桓玄问： 你是怎么知道没有？ 
English: Kuan Xuan asked: How did you know?

古文：答曰： 潘岳秋兴赋叙曰： 余兼虎贲中郎将，寓直散骑之省。 
现代文：那个人回答说： 潘岳在《秋兴赋叙》里说过： 我兼任虎贲中郎将，寄宿在散骑省值班。  
English: The man replied: Pan Yue said in "Autumn Festival Fuxiu": I am also the vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment, and I am on duty at the Sanzhi Province.

古文：玄咨嗟称善。
现代文：桓玄赞赏他，认为他说得好。
English: Kuan Xuan appreciated him and thought he spoke well.

古文：谢灵运好戴曲柄笠，孔隐士谓曰： 卿欲希心高远，何不能遗曲盖之貌？ 
现代文：谢灵运喜欢戴曲柄斗笠，隐士孔淳之对他说： 你醉心于高超旷远的境界，为什么不能丢弃曲盖的形状？ 
English: Xie Lingyun likes to wear a cranked top hat, the hermit Kong Junzhi said to him: You are obsessed with the high and distant realm, why can't you discard the shape of the curved cap?

古文：谢答曰： 将不畏影者，未能忘怀。 
现代文：谢灵运回答说： 恐怕是怕影子的人还不能忘记影子吧！ 
English: Xie Lingyun replied: I'm afraid that people who are afraid of the shadow can't forget the shadow!

