古文：国有六职，百工与居一焉。
现代文：国家有六类职业，百工是其中之一。
English: There are six types of occupations in the country, and the hundred craftsmen is one of them.

古文：或坐而论道，或作而行之，或审曲面执，以饬五材，以辨民器，或通四方之珍异以资之，或饬力以长地财，或治丝麻以成之。
现代文：有的人安坐而谋虑治国之道；有的人起来执行治国之道；有的人审视五材的曲直、方圆，以加工整治五材，而具备民众所需的器物；有的人使四方珍异的物品流通以供人们购取；有的人勤力耕耘土地而使之生长财富；有的人纺绩丝麻而制成衣服。
English: Some people sit quietly and think about the way of governing the country; some people rise up and carry out the way of governing the country; some people examine the five timbers of the rectangular and square, and process and rectify the five timbers to have the necessary equipment for the people; some people circulate rare items in the four directions for people to purchase; some people diligently cultivate the land and make it grow wealth; some people spin silk and make clothes.

古文：坐而论道，谓之王公；作而行之，谓之士大夫；审曲面执，以饬五材，以辨民器，谓之百工；通四方之珍异以资之，谓之商旅；饬力以长地财，谓之农夫；治丝麻以成之，谓之妇功。
现代文：安坐而谋虑治国之道的，是王公；起来执行治国之道的，是士大夫；审视五材的曲直、方圆，以加工整治五材，而具备民众所需器物的，是百工；使四方珍异物品流通以供人们购取的，是商旅；耕耘土地而使之生长财富的，是农夫；纺绩丝麻而制成衣服的，是妇功。
English: It is the prince who sits quietly and thinks about the way of governing the country; it is the scholar-official who stands up and implements the way of governing the country; it is the hundred craftsmen who examine the five materials and rectify the five materials by processing them, and have the necessary utensils for the people; it is the merchant who circulates the rare goods in the four directions for people to purchase; it is the farmer who cultivates the land and makes it grow in wealth; it is the woman who spins silk and makes clothes.

古文：粤无鏄，燕无函，秦无庐，胡无弓车。
现代文：越地没有制作铸的工匠，燕地没有制作铠甲的工匠秦地没有制作矛、戟等长柄武器的工匠，匈奴没有制作弓、车的工匠。
English: Yue did not have craftsmen who made castings, Yan did not have craftsmen who made armor, Qin did not have craftsmen who made long-handled weapons such as spears and crossbows, and Xiongnu did not have craftsmen who made bows and chariots.

古文：粤之无鏄也，非无庐也，夫人而能为庐也；燕之无函也，非无函也，夫人而能为函也；秦之无庐也，非无庐也，夫人而能为庐也；胡之无弓车也，非无弓车也，夫人而能为弓车也。
现代文：越地没有制作铸的工匠，不是说没有能够制作镩的人，而是说那里人人都能制作镩。燕地没有制作铠甲的工匠，不是说没有能够制作铠甲的人，而是说那里人人都能制作铠甲。秦地没有制作矛、戟等长柄武器的工匠，不是说没有能够制作长柄武器的人，而是说那里人人都能制作长柄武器。匈奴没有制作弓、车的工匠，不是说没有能够制作弓、车的人，而是说那里人人都能制作弓、车。
English: The fact that there are no casting craftsmen in Yue does not mean that there are no people who can make ploughshares, but that everyone there can make ploughshares. The fact that there are no armour craftsmen in Yan does not mean that there are no people who can make armour, but that everyone there can make armour. The fact that there are no craftsmen who make long-handled weapons such as spears and crossbows in Qin does not mean that there are no people who can make long-handled weapons, but that everyone there can make long-handled weapons. The fact that there are no craftsmen who make bows and chariots in Xion

古文：知得创物，巧者述之守之，世谓之工。
现代文：智慧的人创造器物，心灵手巧的人循其法式，守此职业世代相传，叫做工。
English: Clever people create objects, and clever people follow the rules of their profession, which has been passed down from generation to generation. This is called work.

古文：百工之事，皆圣人之作也。
现代文：百工制作的器物，都是圣人创造的。
English: The objects made by a hundred craftsmen were all created by saints.

古文：烁金以为刃，凝土以为器，作车以行陆，作舟行水，此皆圣人之所作也。
现代文：熔化金属而制作带利刃的器具，使土坚凝而制作陶器，制作车而在陆地上行进，制作船而在水上行驶：这些都是圣人的创造。
English: Melting metal to make a sharp-edged tool, hardening earth to make pottery, making a car to travel on land, making a boat to travel on water: these are the creations of a sage.

古文：天有时，地有气，材有美，工有巧，合此四者，然后可以为良。
现代文：天有寒温之时，地有刚柔之气，材质有优良的，工艺有精巧的：把这四方面结合起来，然后可以制作精良的器物。
English: When the weather is cold, the ground is hard and soft, the material is fine, and the craftsmanship is exquisite: combine these four aspects, and then you can make exquisite utensils.

古文：材美工巧，然而不良，则不时，不得地气也。
现代文：材质优良、工艺精巧，然而制作的器物却不精良，就是因为不合天时、不得地气。
English: The materials are fine and the craftsmanship is exquisite, but the products are not well-made, because they are not suitable for the weather and are not natural.

古文：橘窬淮而北为枳，瞿□鹆不逾济，貉逾汶则死，此地气然也；郑之刀，宋之斤，鲁之削，吴粤之剑，迁乎其地而弗能为良，地气然也。
现代文：橘迁种到淮北就变成枳，八哥鸟不向北飞越济水，貉向北越过汶水就会死：这些都是地气造成的。郑地的刀，宋地的斧，鲁地的削，吴、越的剑，离开当地而制作，就不能精良：这也是地气造成的。
English: The tangerine that is transplanted to Huaibei turns into a dragonfly, the mynah bird into a cormorant if it does not fly north over Jishui, and the dragonfly dies if it flies north over Wenshui: these are all caused by the earth's atmosphere. The sword of Zhengdi, the axe of Songdi, the whetstone of Ludi, and the sword of Wu and Yue cannot be made well if they are made away from the local area: this is also caused by the earth's atmosphere.

古文：燕之角，荆之干，妢胡之笴，吴粤之金锡，此材之美者也。
现代文：燕地的牛角，荆地的弓干，始胡的箭杆，吴、越的金、锡：这些都是优良的材料。
English: The horn of the cow in Yan, the stem of the bow in Jing, the shaft of the arrow in Shihu, the gold and tin in Wu and Yue: these are all fine materials.

古文：天有时以生，有时以杀；草木有时以生，有时以死，石有时以泐，水有时以凝，有时以泽，此天时也。
现代文：天有时使万物生长，有时使万物凋零；草木有时生长，有时枯死；石头有时会产生裂纹；水有时会凝固，有时冰冻会消解：这些都是天时造成的。
English: The heavens sometimes cause things to grow and sometimes cause things to wither; plants sometimes grow and sometimes die; stones sometimes crack; water sometimes freezes and sometimes freezes: all of these are caused by the heavens.

古文：凡攻木之工七，攻金之工六，攻皮之工五，设色之工五，刮摩之工五，搏埴之工二。
现代文：凡治理木材的工匠有七种，治理金属的工匠有六种，治理皮革的工匠有五种，染色的工匠有五种，刮摩的工匠有五种，用黏土制作器物的工匠有两种。
English: There are seven types of craftsmen who treat wood, six types of craftsmen who treat metal, five types of craftsmen who treat leather, five types of craftsmen who dye, five types of craftsmen who scrape, and two types of craftsmen who make pottery.

古文：攻木之工：轮、舆、弓、庐、匠、车、梓；攻金之工：筑、冶、凫、□、段、桃；攻皮之工：函、鲍、韗、韦、裘；设色之工：画、缋、锺、筐、□荒；刮摩之工：玉？
现代文：治理木材的工匠有：轮人、舆人、弓人、庐人、匠人、车人、梓人。治理金属的工匠有：筑氏、冶氏、凫氏、栗氏、段氏、桃氏。治理皮革的工匠有：函人、鲍人、韗人、韦人、裘人。染色的工匠有：画人、绩人、钟氏、筐人、荒氏。
English: The craftsmen who treat wood include: wheelmen, mortar men, bowmen, chiselmen, craftsmen, wheelmen, and chiselmen. The craftsmen who treat metal include: Chiku, Yae, Kaji, Kuri, Dan, and Momo. The craftsmen who treat leather include: Hakodate, Bao, Hayato, Wei, and Qiu. The craftsmen who dye include: painters, carpenters, bell makers, basket makers, and barbers.

古文：雕、矢、磬；搏埴之工：陶、瓬。
现代文：刮摩的工匠有：玉人、榔人、雕人、矢人、磬氏。用泥制作器物的工匠有：陶人、瓬人。
English: Craftsmen who scrape are: Tamahito, Hayato, Tsuruma, Sugihito, Yato, and Kaji. Craftsmen who make objects from mud are: Pottery, Hayato.

古文：有虞氏上陶，夏后氏上匠，殷人上梓，周人上舆。
现代文：有虞氏尊尚制作陶器之工，夏后氏尊尚建造宫室、开挖沟渠主工，殷人尊尚制作主压器县之工，周人尊尚制浩车舆之工。
English: The Yu clan is honored for the production of pottery, the Xiaguo clan is honored for the construction of palace rooms and the main work of digging ditches, the Yin people are honored for the production of main pressure vessels, and the Zhou people are honored for the production of large carts.

古文：故一器而工聚焉者，车为多。
现代文：制作一种器物而需要聚集数个工种的，以制作车聚集的工种为最多。
English: For the production of one type of ware, which requires the aggregation of several types of work, the production of cars is the most aggregated type of work.

古文：车有六等之数：车轸四尺，谓之一等；戈柲六尺有六寸，即建而迤，崇于轸四尺，谓之二等；人长八尺，崇于戈四尺，谓之三等；殳长寻有四尺，崇于人四尺，谓之四等；车戟常，崇于殳四尺，谓之五等；酋矛常有四尺，崇于戟四尺，谓之六等。
现代文：车有六等差数：车轸高四尺，这是第一等；戈连柄长六尺六寸，插在车上而让它斜倚着，比轸高出四尺，这是第二等；人长八尺，站在车上比戈高出四尺，这是第三等；殳长一寻零四尺，插在车上比人高出四尺，这是第四等；车戟长一常，插在车上比殳高出四尺，这是第五等；酋矛长一常零四尺，插在车上比戟高出四尺，这是第六等。
English: The chariot has six degrees of difference: the chariot is four feet high, which is the first degree; the golem is six feet six inches long, inserted on the chariot and let it recline, four feet higher than the plough, which is the second degree; the man is eight feet long, standing on the chariot four feet higher than the golem, which is the third degree; the plough is one point four feet long, inserted on the chariot four feet higher than the man, which is the fourth degree; the chariot is one point long, inserted on the chariot four feet higher than the plough, which is the fifth degree; the

古文：车谓之六等之数；凡察车之道，必自载于地者始也，是故察车自轮始。
现代文：因此说车有六等差数。凡观察车子的要领，必须从车子着地的部位开始，因此观察车子要从车轮开始。
English: Therefore, it is said that the car has a six-fold difference. Anyone who observes the essentials of the car must start from the part where the car lands, so the observation of the car should start from the wheel.

古文：凡察车之道，欲其朴属而微至，不朴属。
现代文：凡观察车子的要领，车轮要结构坚固而与地的接触面小。
English: When observing the essentials of the car, the wheels should have a solid structure and a small contact surface with the ground.

古文：无以为戚速也。轮已崇，则人不能登也，轮已庳，则于马终古登阤也。
现代文：结构不坚固，就不能经久耐用；与地的接触面不小，就不能快速。车轮过高，就不便人登车；车轮过低，对于马来说就常常像爬坡一样吃力。
English: If the structure is not strong, it cannot be durable; if the contact surface with the ground is not small, it cannot be fast; if the wheels are too high, it is not convenient for people to board; if the wheels are too low, it is often as difficult for horses as climbing a slope.

古文：故兵车之轮六尺有六寸，田车之轮六尺有三寸，乘车之轮六尺有六寸，六尺有六寸之轮，轵崇三尺有三寸也，加轸与轐焉，四尺也。
现代文：因此兵车车轮高六尺六寸，田车车轮高六尺三寸，乘车车轮高六尺六寸。六尺六寸高的车轮，轵高三尺三寸，再加上轸木与车模就是四尺。
English: Therefore, the chariot wheel is six feet six inches high, the chariot wheel is six feet three inches high, the carriage wheel is six feet six inches high, the chariot wheel is six feet six inches high, the plow is three feet three inches high, and the plow is four feet high.

古文：人长八尺，登下以为节。
现代文：人高八尺，以此作为方便人上下的轸高的节度。
English: People are eight feet tall, which is used as a height restriction to make it easier for people to climb up and down.

