古文：又东过槐里县南，又东，涝水从南来注之。
现代文：又往东流过槐里县南边，又往东流，涝水从南方流来注入。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Bali County, and flows eastward again, and Surabaya water is injected from the south.

古文：渭水径县之故城南。
现代文：渭水流经槐里县老城南边。
English: The Surabaya River flows through the southern part of the old city of Surabaya.

古文：《汉书集注》，李奇谓之小槐里。县之西城也。
现代文：按《汉书集注》，李奇称为小槐里，是槐里县的西城。
English: According to the "Compendium of Chinese Classics," Lichi is called Xiaobuli, and is the western city of Bili County.

古文：又东与芒水枝流合，水受芒水于竹圃。东北流，又屈而北入于渭。
现代文：又往东流，与芒水的支流汇合。这条支流在竹圃承接芒水，往东北流，又转弯向北注入渭水。
English: It flows eastward again, merging with a tributary of the Mangsui. This tributary joins the Mangsui in the bamboo grove, flows northeast, and turns north to inject the Surabaya.

古文：渭水又东北径黄山宫南，即《地理志》所谓县有黄山宫，惠帝二年起者也。《东方朔传》曰：武帝微行，西至黄山宫，故世谓之游城也。
现代文：渭水又往东北流经黄山宫南边，《地理志》说：县里有黄山宫，建于惠帝二年说：武帝微服出游，西至黄山宫，所以人们称为游城。
English: Surabaya also flows to the northeast through the south of Huangshan Palace. "Geography" said: There is Huangshan Palace in the county. It was built in the second year of Hui Di. It was said: Emperor Wu traveled to the west of Huangshan Palace, so people called it a tour city.

古文：就水注之。
现代文：就水注入渭水。
English: Pour boiling water over the water.

古文：水出南山就谷，北径大陵西。世谓之老子陵。
现代文：就水发源于南山就谷，往北流经大陵西边，人们称为老子陵。
English: The Luo Shui originates from the Nanshan Valley and flows north through the western side of Daling. It is known as the Laozi Mausoleum.

古文：昔李耳为周柱史，以世衰入戎，于此有冢，事非经证。
现代文：从前李耳在周当柱史，因为世道衰微，避世进入戎族地区，因此这里有他的坟。
English: Once upon a time, Li Er was in Zhou Dangzhu History, because of the decline of the world, he avoided the world and entered the Wulong area, so his grave is here.

古文：然庄周著书云：老聃死，秦失吊之，三号而出。
现代文：关于这一点并无确实证据，但庄周著书说：老聊死后，秦失去吊悼他，号哭了三次方才出来。
English: There is no concrete evidence about this, but Zhuang Zhou wrote a book saying: After the death of Lao Chat, Qin lost his mourning for him and cried three times before coming out.

古文：是非不死之言。人禀五行之精气，阴阳有终变，亦无不化之理。
现代文：这里没有说他不死；而且人承受了五行的精气，阴阳也总有终结的变化，当然也没有不死的道理。
English: It does not say here that he does not die; moreover, a person receives the essence of the five elements, and the yin and yang always have changes in the ending, of course, there is no reason for him not to die.

古文：以是推之，或复如传。
现代文：照此推断，或许流传下来的说法是可信的。
English: Taken to its logical conclusion, perhaps the tradition is credible.

古文：古人许以传疑。
现代文：古人容许存疑，所以把两种说法都记下来备查。
English: The ancients tolerated doubts, so they wrote down both statements for reference.

古文：故两存耳。就水历竹圃，北与黑水合。
现代文：就水流经竹圃北边，与黑水汇合。
English: The water flows through the northern side of the bamboo grove and merges with the black water.

古文：水上承三泉，就水之右，三泉奇发，言归一渎，北流左注就水，就水又北流注于渭。
现代文：黑水上流承接三泉，在就水右边，三条源泉一齐涌出，合为一条，北流向左注入就水；就水又往北流，注入渭水。
English: The upstream flow of the black water connects the three springs. On the right side of the flowing water, the three springs gush out together and merge into one. The north flow injects the flowing water to the left; the flowing water flows north and injects the salty water.

古文：渭水又东合田溪水，水出南山田谷，北流径长杨宫西，又北径盩厔县故城西。
现代文：渭水又往东流，汇合了田溪水。田溪水发源于南山田谷，往北流经长杨宫西边，又往北流经盐屋县老城西边，又往东北流，与一水汇合。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward, merging with Tianxi's water. Tianxi's water originates in Minamiyamada Valley, flows northward through the west of Changyang Palace, flows northward through the west of the old city of Yanoya County, and flows northeastward, merging with Isshu.

古文：又东北与一水合，水上承盩厔县南源，北径其县东。又北径思乡城西，又北注田溪。
现代文：这条水上流承接盐屋县南源，往北流经县东，又往北流经思乡城西边，又往北流注入田溪。
English: This upstream stream connects the south source of Yanoya County, flows northward through the east of the county, flows northward through the west side of Sengokucho, and flows northward into Tianxi.

古文：田溪水又北流注于渭水也。
现代文：田溪水又往北流，注入渭水。
English: The Tianxi water also flows northward, injecting salty water.

古文：县北有蒙笼渠，上承渭水于郿县东，径武功县为成林渠。
现代文：县北有蒙笼渠，上流在郡县承接渭水，往东流经武功县，就是成林渠；往东流经县北，又叫灵积渠。
English: In the north of the county, there is the Mengcai Canal. The upstream of the canal connects the county with Shishui. The eastward flow through Wugong County is the Chenglin Canal. The eastward flow through the north of the county is also called the Lingzhi Canal.

古文：东径县北，亦曰灵轵渠，《河渠书》以为引堵水。
现代文：《河渠书》以为是从堵水引水的。徐广说，此渠又叫诸川。
English: "The Book of Canals" thinks that water is diverted from blocked water. Xu Guang said that this canal is also called Zhuchuan.

古文：即上林故地也。
现代文：水又往东流经槐里县老城南边。
English: The water also flows eastward through the southern side of the old town of Bali County.

古文：《东方朔传》称：武帝建元中微行，北至池阳，西至黄山，南猎长杨，东游宜春，夜漏十刻乃出，与侍中、常侍武骑、待诏及陇西、北地良家子能骑射者，期诸殿下，故有期门之号。
现代文：槐里县，就是古时的大丘邑，露王曾建都于此；秦时称为废丘，又叫舒丘。帝把这地方封给左中郎将皇甫篙，中平元年微服巡行，北到池阳，西到黄山，南在长杨狩猎，东在宜春游览。夜间漏下十刻，就出去和侍中、常侍、武骑、待诏及陇西、北地能骑射的良家子弟约会于殿下，所以有期门之名。
English: Baili County is an ancient large hill county. Lu Wang once built the capital here; in the Qin Dynasty, it was called Wast Hill, also known as Shu Qiu. The emperor granted this place to Zuo Zhong Lang, the general of the Emperor Fu Xi. In the first year of the Middle Ages, he made a small parade, north to Chiyang, west to Huangshan, south to Changyang for hunting, and east to Yichun for sightseeing. At ten o'clock in the night, he went out to meet with the chamberlains, the regular attendants, the military cavalry, the waiters, and the good children who could ride and shoot in Shaanxi and

古文：且明入山下，驰射鹿豕狐兔，手格熊罴。上大欢乐之。
现代文：天明后，就在山下乘马奔驰，射猎鹿、野猪、狐和兔，又徒手与熊署格斗，皇上非常高兴。
English: After daybreak, he rode a horse-drawn carriage down the mountain, shot deer, wild boar, foxes and rabbits, and fought with the bear department with his bare hands. The emperor was very happy.

古文：上乃使大中大夫虞邱寿王与待诏能用算者，举籍；阿城以南，盩厔以东，宜春以西，提封顷亩及其贾直，属之南山以为上林苑。
现代文：于是皇上派遣大中大夫虞丘寿王和能运算的待诏，登记阿城以南，盐座以东，宜春以西所辖田亩及其售价，把这片土地划为上林苑，与南山连在一起。
English: Therefore, the emperor dispatched Yuqiu Shouwang, a senior middle-school doctor, and Diao Zhao, who could do arithmetic, to register the acres of land under his jurisdiction south of Acheng, east of Yanza, and west of Yichun, as well as their selling prices, and to classify this land as Shanglinyuan, which was connected to Nanshan.

古文：东方朔谏，秦起阿房而天下乱，因陈泰阶六符之事。上乃拜大中大夫、给事中，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：东方朔以秦建阿房宫而天下大乱的历史教训来进谏，陈述了按泰阶六符观察天象预卜吉凶变化的道理，皇上于是封他为大中大夫、给事中，赏赐黄金百斤。
English: Dongfang Shuo took the historical lesson of Qin's building of the Afang Palace and the world's great turmoil as a starting point, and stated the principle of observing the celestial phenomena according to the six Thai steps and predicting the changes in fortune and misfortune. The emperor then appointed him as a university junior doctor, and rewarded him with one hundred pounds of gold.

古文：卒起上林苑。
现代文：最后造了上林苑。
English: Finally, Shanglin Court was built.

古文：故相如请为天子游猎之赋，称乌有先生、亡是公而奏《上林》也。
现代文：因而司马相如做了一篇天子游猎的赋，托称乌有先生、亡是公，在上林苑呈递给武帝。
English: As a result, Sima Xiangru made a fable of the Son of Heaven on a hunting trip, and presented it to Emperor Wu in Shanglin Court, claiming that Wu You was a gentleman and that his death was a public event.

古文：又东，丰水从南来注之。
现代文：又东流，丰水从南方流来注人。
English: And the east wind bloweth, and the south wind bloweth, and the rain falleth upon the earth.

古文：丰水出丰溪西，北流分为二水，一水东北流为枝津，一水西北流又北交，水自东入焉。又北，昆明池水注之，又北径灵台西，又北至石墩，注于渭。
现代文：丰水源出丰溪，往西北流，分成两条：一条往东北流，是支流；一条往西北流，接着又往北流，有交水从东边注入；又往北流，有昆明池水注入；又往北流经灵台西；又往北流，到石墩注入渭水。
English: Fengshui originates from Fengxi, flows to the northwest, and is divided into two streams: one flows to the northeast and is a tributary; one flows to the northwest and then to the north, with cross-flow water being injected from the east; another flows to the north, with water from Kunming Lake being injected; another flows to the north through the west of Lingtai; and another flows to the north, injecting salty water into Shizhao.

古文：《地说》云：渭水又东，与丰水会于短阴山内。水会，无他高山异峦，所有惟原阜石激而已。
现代文：《地理志》说：渭水又东流，与丰水汇合于短阴山内，二水汇合处并无别的高山奇岭，唯有原野丘陵和石堤而已。
English: "Geography" said: the Surabaya River flows to the east, and merges with the Fengshui River in the Panyin Mountains. At the confluence of the two rivers, there is no other mountain ridge, only the plain hills and stone dikes.

古文：水上旧有便门桥，与便门对直，武帝建元三年造。
现代文：水上旧时有便门桥，正对便门，建于武帝建元三年。
English: In the old days, there was a drawbridge over the water, just opposite the drawbridge. It was built in the third year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：张昌曰：桥在长安西北，茂陵东。
现代文：张昌说：桥在长安西北，茂陵东边。
English: Zhang Chang said: The bridge is in the northwest of Chang'an and the east of Muling.

古文：如淳曰，去长安四十里。
现代文：如淳说：桥离长安四十里。
English: As Jun said, the bridge is forty miles away from Chang'an.

古文：渭水又径太公庙北。庙前有太公碑，文字虢缺，今无可寻。
现代文：渭水又流经太公庙北，庙前有太公碑，文字残缺，现在已无法辨认了。
English: Surabaya also flows through the north of the Taikoo Temple. There is a Taikoo monument in front of the temple, but the writing is incomplete, and it is now unrecognizable.

古文：渭水又东北与鄗水合，水上承鄗池于昆明池北。周武王之所都也。
现代文：渭水又往东北流，与部水汇合。部水上流在昆明池北承接部池，就是周武王建都的地方。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast and merges with part of the water. Part of the water flows upstream in the Kunming Pool north of the junction pool, which is where Zhou Wu Wang built the capital.

古文：故《诗》云：考卜维王，宅是鄗京，维龟正之，武王成之。
现代文：所以《得经》说；武王前来卜卦，建都选定镐京，灵龟昭示大吉，武王都城建成。
English: Therefore, the "Decheng" said: King Wu came to make divination, the capital was selected as Beijing, the spirit turtle showed great success, and the capital city of King Wu was built.

古文：自汉武帝穿昆明池于是地，基构沦虢，今无可究。
现代文：自从汉武帝在这里开凿昆明池，周都基址已遭毁坏，现在已无处探寻了。
English: Since Emperor Hanwu dug the Kunming Pool here, the Zhoudu foundation site has been destroyed, and now there is nowhere to explore.

古文：《春秋后传》曰：使者郑容入柏谷关，至平舒置，见华山有素车白马，问郑容安之？答曰：之咸阳。
现代文：《春秋后传》说：使者郑容进了柏谷关，到平舒置时，看见华山有素车白马，车上人间郑容到哪里去，郑容答道：去咸阳。
English: "After the Spring and Autumn Period" said: the messenger Zheng Rong entered the Kashiwaguan Pass, and when he arrived at Pingshu, he saw Huashan with a white horse. On the car, where would Zheng Rong go, Zheng Rong replied: to Xianyang.

古文：车上人曰：吾华山君使，愿托书致鄗池君。
现代文：车上人说：我是华山君的使者，想请你带封信给部池君。
English: The occupant of the car said, "I am Huashan-kun's messenger, and would like to ask you to take a letter to Buike-kun."

古文：子之咸阳，过鄗池，见大梓下有文石，取以款列梓，当有应者，以书与之。
现代文：你到咸阳去，要经过部池。看到大梓树下面有块有花纹的石头，你去拿来敲一下梓树，就会有人来迎接你的。
English: If you go to Xianyang, you will have to go through Buquan. If you see a stone with a pattern under the big tree, you can take it and knock on the tree. Someone will come to greet you.

古文：勿妄发，致之得所欲。
现代文：你把信交给他，但切勿乱拆。信交到后，你可以得到你所想望的东西。
English: You give him the letter, but don't tear it up. When the letter arrives, you can get what you want.

古文：郑容行至鄗池，见一梓下，果有文石，取以款梓。
现代文：郑容到了高池，看见一棵梓树下果然有一块有花纹的石头。
English: When Zheng Rong arrived at the pond, he saw a stone with a pattern under a tree.

古文：应曰：诺。郑容如睡，觉而见宫阙，若王者之居焉。
现代文：他拿起石头敲了一下梓树，有人回答道：来了！郑容就恍如睡梦中一般，清醒过来时，他看到一座宫阔，样子像是帝王的住所。一个侍者出来了，接过信到里面去了。
English: He picked up a stone and knocked on a tree. Someone answered: "Come!" Zheng Rong seemed to be in a dream. When he woke up, he saw a palace that looked like the emperor's residence. A waiter came out, took the letter and went inside.

古文：谒者出，受书，入，有顷，闻语声言：祖为死。
现代文：过了一会儿，听到里面有说话声，说是祖龙死了。
English: After a while, I heard a voice inside saying that the ancestor dragon was dead.

古文：神道茫昧，理难辨测，故无以精其幽致矣。
现代文：神明的事暗昧渺茫，是难以照常理来推想的，所以也无从细究它的秘奥了。
English: The things of the gods are obscure and vague, and it is difficult to deduce them according to common sense, so there is no way to scrutinize their secrets.

古文：鄗水又北流，西北注，与盩厔池合。
现代文：高水又北流，往西北与浇池汇合。
English: The high water also flows north, merging with the irrigation pond to the northwest.

古文：水出鄗池西，而北流入于鄗。
现代文：浇池的水是从高池西边出来的，西北流注入部水。
English: The water of the watering pond comes from the west side of the high pond, and the northwest flow injects the water.

古文：《毛诗》云：鄗，流貌也。
现代文：《毛诗》说：浇，是水流动时的波浪。
English: "Mao Shi" said: pouring is a wave when water flows.

古文：而世传以为水名矣。
现代文：但世人相传，却以为是水名。
English: However, people around the world thought it was a nickname.

古文：郑玄曰：丰鄗之间，水北流也。
现代文：郑玄说：丰、高下之间，水往北流。
English: Zheng Xuan said: Between Feng and Gaoshan, the water flows to the north.

古文：鄗水北径清泠台西，又径磁石门西。
现代文：高笋水往北流经清冷台西边，又流经磁石门西边。
English: The high turbidity water flows northward through the west side of the cooling tower, and also flows through the west side of the magnet gate.

古文：门在阿房前，悉以磁石为之，故专其目。
现代文：磁石门在阿房宫前，全都用磁石砌成，所以就以磁石为门名。
English: The Magnet Gate in front of the Afang Palace is made entirely of magnets, hence the name.

古文：令四夷朝者，有隐甲怀刃入门而胁之以示神，故亦曰胡门也。鄗水又北，注于渭。
现代文：四方外族入朝的人，如果身上暗藏着刀剑恺甲进门，就会觉察到，可以责令他出示神明，所以也叫却胡门。部水又北流，注入渭水。
English: If a foreigner from the four directions enters the imperial court with a sword and armor hidden on his body, he will realize that he can be ordered to show the gods, so it is also called Chao Humen.

古文：渭水北有杜邮亭，去咸阳十七里、今名孝里亭，中有白起祠。
现代文：渭水北岸有杜邮亭，离咸阳十七里，现在叫孝里亭，里面有白起祠。
English: On the north shore of Surabaya, there is Du Posting, 17 miles from Xianyang, now called Xiaoli Ting, which has a Baiqi Shrine.

古文：嗟乎！有制胜之功，惭尹、商之仁，是地即其伏剑处也。
现代文：白起作战有克敌制胜的本领，却愧无尹商的仁德，这里就是他自勿的地方，岂不可悲！
English: Starting a battle in vain, he has the ability to defeat the enemy and win, but he is not worthy of the benevolence of a businessman. This is the place where he should not be. Isn't it sad!

古文：渭水又东北径渭城南，文颖以为故咸阳矣。秦孝公之所居高宫也。
现代文：渭水又往东北流经渭城南边，文颖以为就是旧时的咸阳，是秦孝公所居住的离宫。
English: Surabaya water flows to the northeast through the southern side of Surabaya, and Wen Ying thought that it was the old Xianyang, and it was the palace where Qin Xiaogong lived.

古文：献公都栎阳，天雨金。
现代文：献公建都栋阳，天上纷纷落下金子。
English: Doyang, dedicated to the public, was built, and gold began to fall from the sky.

古文：周太史儋见献公曰：周故与秦国合而别，别五百岁复合，合七十岁而霸王出。
现代文：周太史檐去见献公，说：从前周与秦国由合而分，分后五百年又合，合后七十年才出霸王。
English: Zhou Taishi went to see Xian Gong and said: From the previous week, Zhou and Qin were separated from each other, and they were separated again five hundred years later, and it was seventy years after the separation that Zhou became the overlord.

古文：《史记》曰：秦始皇三十五年，以咸阳人多，先王之宫小，乃作朝宫于渭南，亦曰阿城也。
现代文：到孝公建咸阳，筑冀网，才迁都到这里来。所以《西京赋》说：秦的居处在北方，就是咸阳。太史公说：长安，就是旧时的咸阳。汉高帝改名为新城，武帝元鼎三年因咸阳人多，先王的宫殿小，于是在渭南建筑朝宫，也叫阿城。
English: It was not until Xiaogong built Xianyang and built the Hebei network that the capital was moved here. Therefore, "Sijing Fu" said: Qin's residence is in the north, that is, Xianyang. Taishigong said: Chang'an, that is, the old Xianyang. Emperor Han Gao changed his name to Xincheng. Emperor Wu was enthroned in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty because there were many people in Xianyang and the palace of the former king was small. Therefore, he built the Imperial Palace, also called Acheng, in southern Fujian.

古文：始皇先作前殿阿房，可坐万人，下可建五丈旗，周驰为阁道，自殿直抵南山。表山巅为阙。为复道自阿房度渭，属之咸阳，象天极阁道，绝汉抵营室也。
现代文：秦始皇先修建了前殿阿房宫，殿上可坐一万人，殿下可以竖立五丈高的旗。四周绕以阁道，从殿里一直通到南山；在山巅建阀，从阿房宫修建复道跨过渭水，与咸阳相连；以咸阳象征天极，阁道则表示跨过天汉，通到营室星。
English: Qin Shi Huangdi first built the front hall of Afang Palace, the hall can seat ten thousand people, and his highness can erect a five-story-high flag. Surrounded by a gallery, from the hall all the way to Nanshan; built a valve at the top of the mountain, built a complex road from Afang Palace across the Surabaya, connected to the salty sun; with the salty sun symbolizing the celestial pole, the gallery road is said to cross Tianhan, leading to Ying Muxing.

古文：《关中记》曰：阿房殿在长安西南二十里。殿东西千步，南北三百步，庭中受十万人。
现代文：《关中记》说：阿房殿在长安西南二十里，东西长一千步，南北宽三百步，庭中可容十万人。
English: "Guanzhong Ji" said: Afang Hall is 20 miles southwest of Chang'an, with a length of 1,000 paces from east to west and a width of 300 paces from north to south. The courtyard can accommodate 100,000 people.

古文：其水又屈而径其北东北流注堨水陂。
现代文：昆明池水又转向阿房宫北面流过，往东北流注入竭水破。
English: The water of the Kunming pond turned to the north of the Afang Palace and flowed past, injecting the exhausted water into the northeastern stream.

古文：陂水北出，径汉武帝建章宫东，于凤阙南，东注泬水。
现代文：破水从北面流出，经汉武帝建章宫东，在凤阀南边往东注入沈水。
English: The broken water flowed out from the north, through the east of the Han Emperor Jianzhang's palace, and injected the sinking water to the east at the south of the phoenix valve.

古文：泬水又北径凤阙东。
现代文：汰水又往北流经凤网东边。
English: The floodwaters then flowed north through the eastern side of Fengwang.

古文：《三辅黄图》曰：建章宫，汉武帝造，周二十余里，千门万户。
现代文：《三辅黄图》说：建章宫，汉武帝建，周围二十余里，宫内有成千上万的门窗。
English: "Three Auxiliary Yellow Maps" said: "Build Zhang Palace, Han Emperor built, more than 20 miles around, thousands of doors and windows in the palace.

古文：其东凤阙，高七丈五尺，俗言贞女楼，非也。
现代文：东边是凤网，高七丈五尺，俗名贞女楼，其实不是。
English: To the east is Fengwang, standing seven-feet-five-feet tall, popularly known as Zhengrou, but it's not.

古文：《汉武帝故事》云：阙高二十丈。
现代文：《汉武帝故事》说：阀高二十丈。
English: "The Story of Emperor Hanwu" says: The valve is 20 meters high.

古文：《关中记》曰：建章宫圆阙，临北道，有金凤在阙上，高丈余，故号凤阙也。
现代文：《关中记》说：建章宫圆形的门网，面对北道，上面有金凤，高丈余，所以叫凤网。
English: "Guanzhong Ji" said: the circular gate net of Jianzhang Palace was built, facing the North Road, with gold and phoenixes on top, and the height was too high, so it was called Fengwang.

古文：故繁钦《建章凤阙赋叙》曰：秦汉规模，廓然毁泯，惟建章凤阙，岿然独存。虽非象魏之制，亦一代之巨观也。
现代文：繁钦《建章凤阀赋》说：秦汉时的规模，已荡然无存了，只有建章宫的凤网，还独自屹立着，虽然不是宫外张贴告示的象魏的规制，但也可算是一代伟大的楼观了。
English: "Jian Zhang Feng Valve Fu" by Fan Qin said: The scale of the Qin and Han dynasties has completely disappeared. Only the phoenix net of Jian Zhang Palace still stands alone. Although it is not the regulation of the Wei Dynasty posted outside the palace, it can also be regarded as a generation of great view of the building.

古文：泬水又北，分为二水，一水东北流，一水北径神明台东。
现代文：谊水又北流，分为两条：一条往东北流，一条往北流经神明台东边。
English: The Yeisui River also flows north, and is divided into two streams: one flows northeast, and the other flows north through the eastern edge of Shimmingtai.

古文：《傅子。宫室》曰：上于建章中作神明台、并于楼，咸高五十余丈，皆作悬阁，辇道相属焉。
现代文：《傅子•宫室》说：皇上在建章宫中筑了神明台、井干楼，高度都有五十余丈，上面都建了悬阁，下面有车路相通。
English: "Fu Zi • Palace Room" said: The emperor built the Shinmeidai and the Jingan Building in the middle of the Jianzhang Palace. The height is more than 50 meters, and the upper floors are suspended, and the lower floors are connected by a road.

古文：《三辅黄图》曰：神明台在建章宫中，上有九室，今人谓之九子台，即实非也。
现代文：《三辅黄图》说：神明台在建章宫里面，台上有九个房间，现在人们称为九子台，其实不是。
English: "Sanfu Huangtu" said: Shenmingtai is located in Jianzhang Palace. There are nine rooms on the stage. People now call it Jiuzidai, but it is not.

古文：泬水又径渐台东。
现代文：沈水又流经渐台东。
English: The sinking water flows through the eastern Taiwan gradually.

古文：《汉武帝故事》曰：建章宫北有太液池，池中有渐台，高三十丈。
现代文：《汉武帝故事》说：建章宫北有太掖池，池中有渐台，高三十丈。
English: "The Tale of Emperor Hanwu" says: In the north of Jianzhang Palace, there is a pond with a pond pond, and in the pond, there is a platform, which is 30 meters high.

古文：渐，浸也，为池水所渐。一说，星名也。
现代文：渐，是浸的意思，就是就被池水所浸；还有丫个说法，以为渐是星名。
English: "Zhengyan" means to be immersed, that is, to be immersed by the water of the pool; there is also a saying that "Zhengyan" is a star name.

古文：南有璧门三层，高三十余丈、中殿十二间，阶陛咸以玉为之。
现代文：南有璧门三层，高三十余丈；中殿十二间，台阶都用玉砌成。
English: In the south, there is a three-story gate, 30 meters high and more; in the middle, there are 12 rooms, and the steps are made of jade.

古文：铸铜凤，高五丈，饰以黄金，楼屋上。椽首，薄以玉璧，因曰璧玉门也。
现代文：铸了铜凤一只，高五丈，以黄金作为装饰；楼屋上方的椽头上贴着玉璧，因此叫璧玉门。
English: A bronze phoenix was cast, five stories high, with gold as decoration; the skull above the building was affixed with a jade gem, hence the name jade gem gate.

古文：泬水又北流注渭，亦谓是水为泬水也。故吕忱曰：泬水出杜陵县。
现代文：汰水又往北流，注入渭水。汰水又名濡水，所以吕忱说：濡水发源王杜陵县。
English: Lingshui also flows to the north, injecting brackish water. Lingshui is also known as wet water, so Lu Zhen said: the source of wet water is Wangduling County.

古文：《汉书音义》曰：泬，水声，而非水也。
现代文：《汉书音义》说：濡是水声，并不是水名。
English: "Hanshu Yinyi" says: wet is the sound of water, not the name of water.

古文：亦曰高都水。
现代文：此水又叫高都水。
English: This water is also called Kodu water.

古文：前汉之末，王氏五侯大治池宅，引泬水入长安城，故百姓歌之曰：五侯初起，曲阳最怒。
现代文：前汉末年，王氏五侯大规模开池建宅，把汰水引入长安城。所以老百姓的歌谣道：五侯开始兴起，曲阳最为盛富。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the five princes of the Wang Dynasty built houses on a large scale and brought water to Chang'an City. Therefore, the folk song said: the five princes began to rise, and Quyang was the most prosperous.

古文：坏决高都，竟连五杜。
现代文：毁堤毁去高都，水流连结五杜。
English: The destruction of the dike destroyed the high capital, and the water flow connected the five provinces.

古文：土山渐台，像西白虎。
现代文：筑成土山、渐台，象征西方白虎。
English: It is built into a hill and a crescent, symbolizing the western white tiger.

古文：即是水也。
现代文：说的就是这条水。
English: It is this water that is being talked about.

古文：又东过长安县北，渭水东分为二水。
现代文：又往东流过长安县北边，渭水东流，分成两条。
English: It flows eastward through the northern part of Chang'an County, splitting into two streams.

古文：《广雅》曰：水自渭出为泶，其犹河之有雍也。
现代文：《广雅》说：从渭水分出的支流就是汞水，正像河有雍水一样。
English: "Guangya" said: "The tributary flowing from the turbid water is mercury water, just like the river with yang water.

古文：此渎东北流，径《魏雍州刺史郭淮碑》南。又东南合一水，径两石人北。
现代文：这条水渠往东北流经魏雍州刺史郭淮碑南边，又往东南流，汇合了一条水，流经两座石人的北面。
English: This water channel flows to the northeast through the south side of the Wei Yongzhou jade Guo Huai monument, and flows to the southeast, merging a water, flowing through the north side of the two stone people.

古文：秦始皇造桥，铁镦重不能胜，故刻石作力士孟贲等像以祭之，镦乃可移动也。
现代文：秦始皇造桥时，千斤椎太重，拿都拿不动，因而用石块雕刻成大力士孟贵等人像，向他们致祭，这样，千斤椎才拿得动了。
English: When Emperor Qin Shihuang was building the bridge, the jacks were too heavy for him to hold, so he carved statues of the great warrior Meng Gui and others out of stone and offered sacrifices to them. Only then was he able to hold the jacks.

古文：又东径阳侯祠北，涨辄祠之。
现代文：水又往东流经阳侯祠北边，水涨时就要去祭祀。
English: The water also flows eastward through the north side of Yanghou Shrine. When the water rises, it is necessary to go to the sacrificial rites.

古文：此神能为大波，故配食河伯也。
现代文：这位水神能掀起大浪，所以与河伯一起享祭。
English: This water god can make big waves, so he enjoys the festival with Hebe.

古文：后人以为邓艾祠。
现代文：但后世人们却错当成是邓艾祠，真是可悲！
English: But later generations mistakenly thought it was Deng Ai Ancestral Hall. How sad!

古文：悲哉！谗胜道消，专忠受害矣。
现代文：谗人得志，世道沦亡，忠良就要受害了！
English: If one's aspiration is not achieved, one's way of life will be ruined and one's loyalty will suffer!

古文：此水又东注渭水。
现代文：水又东流，注入渭水。
English: Water also flows to the east, injecting brackish water.

古文：水上有梁，谓之渭桥，秦制也，亦曰便门桥。
现代文：水上有桥，称为渭桥，秦时所建，也叫便门桥。
English: There is a bridge over the water, known as the Dragon Bridge, built by Qin Shi, also known as the Benmen Bridge.

古文：秦始皇作离宫于渭水南北，以象天宫。故《三辅黄图》曰：渭水贯都以象天汉，横桥南度以法牵牛。
现代文：秦始皇在渭水南北都建了离宫，以象征天宫，所以《三辅黄图》说：渭水穿过都城，象征天汉；跨河建桥通往南岸，以仿牵牛星。
English: Qin Shihuang built a detached palace north and south of Surabaya to symbolize the Celestial Palace, so the "Three Auxiliary Yellow Maps" said: Surabaya crosses the capital city to symbolize Tianhan; cross the river to build a bridge to the south bank to imitate the Altair.

古文：南有长乐宫，北有咸阳宫，欲通二宫之间，故造此桥，广六丈，南北三百八十步，六十八间，七百五十柱，百二十二梁，桥之南北有堤激，立石柱，柱南，京兆主之，柱北，冯翊主之，有令丞，各领徒千五百人，桥之北首，垒石水中，故谓之石柱桥也。
现代文：南岸有长乐宫，北岸有咸阳宫，为使两宫间可以相通，因此建造了这座桥。桥宽六丈，南北三百八十步，桥上建屋六十八间，有柱七百五十根，有梁一百二十二爷。桥的南北两头有堤，立石柱。柱南由京兆尹主管，柱北由左冯诩主管；设有令承等官，各带役徒一千五百人。桥的北端，在水中堆垒石块，所以石柱桥。
English: There is Changle Palace on the south bank and Xianyang Palace on the north bank. In order to connect the two palaces, this bridge was built. The bridge is six meters wide, 380 steps from north to south, with 68 buildings on the bridge, 750 pillars, and 122 beams. There are embankments and standing stone pillars on the north and south ends of the bridge. The south side of the pillar is supervised by Jing Zhaoyun, and the north side of the pillar is supervised by Zuo Fengyao. There are officers, each with 1,500 apprentices. The northern end of the bridge is stacked with stones in the water, so it is a stone pillar bridge.

古文：旧有忖留神像。
现代文：旧时有忖留神像。
English: In the old days, there was a statue of a deity.

古文：此神尝与鲁班语，班令其人出。
现代文：此神曾和鲁班谈话，鲁班叫他出来。
English: The god had spoken with Reuben, and Reuben had called him out.

古文：忖留曰：我貌很丑，卿善图物容，我不能出。
现代文：忖留说：我的相貌很丑陋，你善于描画人物容貌，我不能出来。
English: "My appearance is very ugly. You're good at drawing people's faces. I can't come out," he said.

古文：班于是拱手与言曰：出头见我。
现代文：鲁班于是拱手作揖，对他说：请你把头露出来和我相见吧。
English: Then Reuben beckoned to him and said, "Please uncover your head and come with me."

古文：忖留乃出首，班于是以脚画地，忖留觉之，便还没水，故置其像于水，惟背以上立水上。
现代文：于是忖留露出头来，鲁班就以脚画地。忖留觉察到了，就重新没入水中。所以他的像是放在水上的，只有背部以上露出水面。
English: As a result, 留 bared his head, and Luban drew the ground with his foot. 留 became aware of this and sank back into the water. So his likeness was placed on the water, with only his back above the surface of the water.

古文：后董卓入关，遂焚此桥。魏武帝更修之，桥广三丈六尺。
现代文：后来董卓入关，烧掉这座桥梁；魏武帝重修，桥宽三丈六尺。
English: Later, Dong Zhuo entered the pass and burned the bridge; Emperor Wu of Wei rebuilt it, and the bridge is now three feet high and six feet wide.

古文：忖留之像，曹公乘马见之，惊，又命下之。
现代文：忖留的像，因曹公骑马时看到吃了一惊，又命令把它拿掉。
English: Cao Gong was surprised to see the statue when he was riding his horse, and ordered it to be removed.

古文：《燕丹子》曰：燕太子丹质于秦，秦王遇之无礼，乃求归。
现代文：《燕丹子》说：燕太子丹留秦作人质，秦王待他无礼，就要求回国。
English: "Yan Danzi" said: Prince Yan Dan stayed in Qin as a hostage. The Qin king treated him rudely and demanded that he return to China.

古文：秦王为机发之桥，欲以陷丹，丹过之，桥不为发。
现代文：秦王造了一座装了机关的桥，想用来谋害他，但在太子丹过桥时，机关却没有触发。
English: King Qin built a bridge equipped with a trigger, intending to use it to assassinate him, but when Prince Dan crossed the bridge, the device did not trigger.

古文：又一说，交龙扶舆而机不发。
现代文：还有一种说法，说是两龙相交，抬起他的车子，所以机关不发。
English: There is also a saying that the two dragons intersected and lifted his car, so the organ did not go out.

古文：但言今不知其故处也。
现代文：但现在已弄不清原来的地点了。
English: But now the original location is no longer clear.

古文：渭水又东与泬水枝津合，水上承泬水，东北流径邓艾祠南，又东分为二水，一水东入逍遥园，注藕池。
现代文：渭水又东流，与沈水支流汇合。这条支流上流承接沈水，往东北流经邓艾祠南边，又东流分成二条。一条往东流入逍遥园，注入藕池。
English: The Surabaya River flows eastward and merges with the Shenshui tributary. The upstream of this tributary is connected to the Surabaya River and flows northeast through the south side of Deng Ai Ancestral Hall. The eastward flow divides into two streams. One stream flows eastward into the Happy Garden and pours into the Surabaya Pond.

古文：池中有台观，莲荷被浦，秀实可玩。
现代文：池中有高台和楼阁，水上盖满碧荷，荷花和莲实可供玩赏。
English: There are terraces and pavilions in the pool, and the water is covered with lotus flowers and lotus seeds.

古文：其一水，北流注于渭。
现代文：另一条北流注入渭水。
English: Another northerly flow enters Surabaya.

古文：渭水又东径长安城北。
现代文：渭水又往东流经长安城北边。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the northern side of Chang'an City.

古文：汉惠帝元年筑，六年成，即咸阳也。
现代文：长安城于汉惠帝元年开始修筑，六年建成，这就是咸阳城。
English: The construction of Chang'an City began in the first year of the Han Dynasty and was completed in six years. This is Xianyang City.

古文：秦离宫无城，故城之。
现代文：秦时的离宫是没有城的，所以给它造城。
English: There was no city at the time of Qin's departure from the palace, so a city was built for it.

古文：王莽更名常安。
现代文：王莽改名为常安。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Chang An.

古文：十二门，东出北头第一门，本名宣平门，王莽更名春王门正月亭，一曰东都门，其郭门亦曰东都门，即逢萌挂冠处也。
现代文：长安城有十二座城门。从东边出城，北端第一门原名宣平门，王莽改名春王门、正月亭，又名东都门；外城城门也叫东都门，就是逢萌挂冠弃官而去的地方。
English: There are twelve city gates in Chang'an City. Starting from the eastern side of the city, the first gate at the northern end was originally named Xuanping Gate. Wang Mang changed his name to Chunwang Gate and Zhengyue Pavilion, also known as Dongdu Gate. The outer city gate is also called Dongdu Gate, which is the place where Feng Meng hung his crown and left his post.

古文：第二门本名清明门，一曰凯门，王莽更名宣德门布恩亭。内有藉田仓，亦曰藉田门。
现代文：第二门原名清明门，又叫凯门，王莽改名为宣德门、布恩亭；内有藉田仓，又称藉田门。
English: The second gate was originally called the Qingming Gate, also known as the Kai Gate, but Wang Mang changed its name to the Xuande Gate and the Boonting Gate. There is a rice field storehouse inside, also known as the rice field gate.

古文：第三门本名霸城门，王莽更名仁寿门无疆亭。民见门色青，又名青城门，或曰青绮门，亦曰青门。
现代文：第三叮原名霸城门，王莽改名为仁寿门、无疆亭；人们看到城门是青色的，又叫青城门，或名青绮门，又叫青门。
English: On the third day, Wang Mang changed the name of the gate to Renshou Gate and Mujiang Pavilion. People saw that the gate was blue and called it Qingcheng Gate, or the famous Qingcheng Gate, and called it Qingmen.

古文：门外旧出好瓜。
现代文：旧时门外出产好瓜。
English: In the old days, people went out to produce good melons.

古文：昔广陵人邵平为秦东陵侯，秦破，为布衣，种瓜此门，瓜美，故世谓之东陵瓜。
现代文：从前广陵人邵平是秦时的东陵侯，秦亡后做了平民百姓，在这座城门外种瓜，瓜很甜美，所以人们称为东陵瓜。
English: Former Guangling man Shao Ping was the Dongling marquis during the Qin Dynasty. After Qin's death, he became a commoner and grew melons outside the city gate. The melons were very sweet, so people called them Dongling melons.

古文：是以阮籍《咏怀诗》云：昔闻东陵瓜，近在青门外，连畛拒阡陌，子母相钩带。
现代文：阮籍《咏怀诗》说：从前听说有东陵瓜，就在青门外近畔。瓜田一畦接着一畦，大瓜小瓜相连成串。
English: Nguyn Quc said in his poem, "I once heard that there was a Dongling melon, just outside the city of Qingmen. In the melon field, one melon followed another, and the large melons and small melons were strung together.

古文：指谓此门也。
现代文：诗里说的就是此门。
English: This is the gate mentioned in the poem.

古文：南出东头第一门，本名覆盎门，王莽更名永清门长茂亭。
现代文：从南边出城，东端第一门原名覆盎门，王莽改名为永清门、长茂亭。
English: Coming out of the city from the south, the first gate at the east end was originally named the Huanong Gate, but Wang Mang changed it to the Yongqing Gate and Changmaoting.

古文：其南有下杜城。
现代文：此门以南有下杜城。
English: To the south of this gate is Shimoda Castle.

古文：应劭曰：故杜陵之下聚落也，故曰下杜门。又曰端门，北对长乐宫。
现代文：应劭说：下杜城就是旧时杜陵的下聚落，所以叫下杜门，又叫端门，北与长乐宫相望。
English: Ying Yao said: Lower Doucheng was the lower settlement of Du Ling in the old days, so it was called Lower Doumen, also known as Duanmen. It faces the Changle Palace to the north.

古文：第二门本名安门，亦曰鼎路门，王莽更名光礼门显乐亭。北对武库。
现代文：第二门原名安门，又称鼎路门，王莽改名为光礼门、显乐亭，北对武库。
English: The second gate was originally known as Anmen, also known as Dinglumen, but Wang Mang changed its name to Guanglimen, Henle Pavilion, and the north to the arsenal.

古文：第三门本名平门，又曰便门，王莽更名信平门诚正亭。
现代文：第三门原名平门，又叫便门，王莽改名为信平门、诚正亭。
English: The third gate was originally called Pingmen, also known as Benmen, but Wang Mang changed its name to Xinpingmen and Chengzheng Pavilion.

古文：一曰西安门，北对未央宫。
现代文：又叫西安门，北与未央宫相望。
English: Also known as Xi'an Gate, it faces the Weiyang Palace to the north.

古文：西出南头第一门，本名章门，王莽更名万秋门亿年亭，亦曰光华门也。
现代文：从西边出城，南端第一门原名章门，王莽改名为万秋门、亿年亭，又叫光华门。
English: From the west out of the city, the southern end of the first door originally named Zhangmen, Wang Mang changed its name to Wanqiumen, Billion Years Pavilion, also known as Guanghuamen.

古文：第二门本名直门，王莽更名直道门端路亭，故龙楼门也。
现代文：第二门原名直门，王莽改名直道门、端路亭，就是旧时的龙楼门。
English: The second gate was originally called the straight gate, but Wang Mang changed the name to the straight gate and the end road pavilion, which is the old Dragon Gate.

古文：张晏曰：门楼有铜龙。
现代文：张宴说：门楼上有铜龙。
English: Zhang Yan said: There is a bronze dragon on the gate tower.

古文：《三辅黄图》曰：长安西出第二门即此门也。
现代文：《三辅黄图》说：这是长安西出第二门，说的就是此门。
English: "Three Auxiliary Yellow Maps" said: This is the second gate out of the west of Chang'an, it is this gate.

古文：第三门本名西城门，亦曰雍门，王莽更名章义门著义亭。
现代文：第三门原名西城门，又叫雍门王莽改名为章义门、著义亭。
English: The third gate, formerly known as the West Gate, also called Yongmen Wang Mang, was renamed Zhangyi Gate and Chouyi Pavilion.

古文：其水北入，有函里，民名曰函里门，亦曰突门。
现代文：水从城北流入，有函里，人们称为函里门，又叫侠门。
English: Water flows in from the north of the city, there is Hanzhongli, people call it Hanzhongli Gate, also known as Chivalry Gate.

古文：北出西头第一门，本名横门，王莽更名霸都门左幽亭。
现代文：从北边出城，西端第一门原名横门，王莽改名霸都门、左幽亭。
English: From the north out of the city, the west end of the first door originally named the side door, Wang Mang changed his name to the hegemonic city gate, Zuoyuting.

古文：如淳曰：横音光，故曰光门。
现代文：横，如淳说：音光，所以叫光门。
English: Horizontally, as Jun said: sound and light, that's why it's called the light gate.

古文：其外郭有都门，有棘门。
现代文：外城有都门、棘门。
English: The outer city has the city gate and the ridge gate.

古文：徐广曰：棘门在渭北。
现代文：徐广说：棘门在渭北。
English: Xu Guang said: The thorn gate is in the north of Shandong.

古文：孟康曰：在长安北，秦时宫门也。
现代文：孟康说；在长安北，是秦时的宫门。
English: Meng Kang said that in the north of Chang'an, it is the palace gate of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：如淳曰：《三辅黄图》曰棘门，在横门外。
现代文：如淳说：《三辅黄图》称，棘门在横门外。
English: As Jun said: "Three auxiliary yellow maps" said that the thorn gate is outside the side gate.

古文：按《汉书》，徐厉军于此，备匈奴。
现代文：按《汉书》，徐厉曾驻军于此，以防匈奴。
English: According to the "Hanshu," Xu Li once stationed troops here to prevent the Huns from coming.

古文：又有通门、亥门也。
现代文：又有通门、亥门。
English: There is also a pass-through gate and a boar's gate.

古文：第二门，本名厨门，又曰朝门，王莽更名建子门广世亭，一曰高门。
现代文：第二门原名厨门，又叫朝门，王莽改名为建子门、广世亭，又叫高门。
English: The second door, originally the famous kitchen door, was also called the morning door, and Wang Mang changed its name to the Jianzi door, Guang Shitei, and also called the high door.

古文：苏林曰：高门，长安城北门也。
现代文：苏林说：高门是长安城北门。
English: Su Lin said: Gaomen is the north gate of Chang'an City.

古文：其内有长安厨官在东，故名曰厨门也。
现代文：门内有长安厨官在东边，所以叫厨门。
English: There is a Chang'an chef on the east side of the door, so it is called the kitchen door.

古文：如淳曰：今名广门也。
现代文：如淳说：现在叫广门。
English: As Jun said, it is now called Guangmen.

古文：第三门本名杜门，亦曰利城门，王莽更名进和门临水亭。
现代文：第三门原名杜门，又日！利城门，王莽改名为进和门、临水亭。
English: The third gate was originally called Dumen, and later, Licheng Gate, but Wang Mang changed its name to Jinhe Gate and Linshui Pavilion.

古文：其外有客舍，故民曰客舍门，又曰洛门也。
现代文：城门外有客舍，所以人们称为客舍门，又叫洛门。
English: There is a guest house outside the city gate, so people call it the guest house gate, also known as Lomon.

古文：凡此诸门，皆通逵九达，三途洞开，隐以金椎，周以林木，左出右入，为往来之径。行者升降，有上下之别。
现代文：所有这些城门都有通衙大道四通八达，每座大开的城门各有三条大路穿过。修建大路时以大铁锤夯土，两边种植林木。左边出门，右边进门，往来有一定的路径；行人出入，有上行道和下行道的分别。
English: All of these gates have access roads in all directions, and each wide-open gate has three roads passing through it. When the road was built, the soil was raked with a large hammer, and trees were planted on both sides. There is a certain path to go out on the left and enter on the right; pedestrians enter and exit, and there are up and down roads.

古文：汉成帝之为太子，元帝尝急召之。太子出龙楼门，不敢绝驰道，西至直城门，方乃得度。
现代文：汉成帝做太子时，元帝曾有急事要他速去，太子出龙楼门，不敢横穿御道，就一直往西到直城门才得过去。
English: When Emperor Hancheng was crown prince, Emperor Yuan had an urgent matter and wanted him to go quickly. The prince went out of the Dragon Tower Gate and did not dare to cross the Imperial Road, so he had to go all the way west to the Straight City Gate.

古文：上怪迟，问其故，以状对。
现代文：他这么久才到、皇上心里觉得奇怪，间他是什么缘故。
English: He had taken so long to arrive that the Emperor wondered what had happened to him.

古文：上悦，乃著令，令太子得绝驰道也。
现代文：太子把情况讲给他听，皇上很高兴，于是下了诏令，特许太子可以横穿御道。
English: The prince explained the situation to him, and the emperor was pleased, so he issued an imperial decree, allowing the prince to cross the imperial road.

古文：渭水东合昆明故渠，渠上承昆明池东口，东径河池陂北，亦曰女观陂。又东合泬水，亦曰漕渠。
现代文：渭水往东流，与昆明旧渠汇合。旧渠上流承接昆明池东口，往东流经河池破北―也叫女观破，又往东流，与沈水汇合，此渠又叫嘈渠。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward to meet the Kunming Old Canal. The upstream of the old canal is connected to the east entrance of Kunming Pond, and flows eastward through the north of the pond - also known as the Jianguan Canal, and flows eastward to meet the sinking water. This canal is also called the Noisy Canal.

古文：又东径长安县南，东径明堂南。
现代文：渠水又往东流经长安县南边，往东流经明堂南边。
English: The canal water also flows eastward through the south of Chang'an County and eastward through the south of Myeongdong.

古文：旧引水为辟雍处，在鼎路门东南七里。
现代文：明堂就是从前引水围绕最高学府辟雍处，地址在鼎路门东南七里。
English: Myeongdong is the place where water was once diverted around the highest university, Biyong, and is located seven miles southeast of Dinglumen.

古文：其制上圆下方，九宫十二堂，四向五室。
现代文：辟雍的规范建筑形式上圆下方，内有九宫十二堂，四向有五个房间。
English: The standard architectural form of Biyong is round at the top and bottom, with twelve halls in the nine palaces and five rooms in all directions.

古文：堂北三百步，有灵台，是汉平帝元始四年立。
现代文：堂北三百步，有观察天象的灵台，是汉平帝元始四年所建。
English: Three hundred paces north of Dongbei, there is a spiritual platform for observing celestial phenomena. It was built by Emperor Hanping in the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：即此也。故渠之北，有白亭、博望苑，汉武帝为太子立，使通宾客，从所好也。
现代文：水渠南岸有汉时原来祭天的圆丘，成帝建始二年前，废除了雍五峙，才开始在长安南郊祭祀皇天上帝。应肋说：天郊在长安南面，就是这个圆丘。旧渠北有白亭、博望苑，是汉武帝为太子而建的，依他的爱好，让他在那里可与宾客交游。
English: On the south bank of the canal, there is a round mound that was originally used to worship the heavens during the Han Dynasty. Two years before the construction of the Chengdi, the Yong Wuzhi was abolished, and only then did the southern suburb of Chang'an begin to worship the God of Heaven. It is said that: the southern suburb of Chang'an is this round mound. To the north of the old canal, there is Baiting and Bohangyuan, which was built by Emperor Hanwu for the prince, according to his hobbies, so that he could meet guests there.

古文：太子巫蛊事发，斫杜门东出。史良娣死，葬于苑北，宣帝以为戾园，以倡优千人乐思后园庙，故亦曰千乡。
现代文：太子弄巫术害人一案被揭发后，砍开杜门向东出逃，史良娣被杀，葬开苑北，宣帝称为庚园；又因有戏子千人在思后的园庙里作乐，所以又叫千乡。
English: After the case of the prince who used witchcraft to harm people was exposed, he cut open the door to the east and fled. Shi Liangyao was killed and buried in the north of the garden, and Emperor Xuan was called Hengyuan. Also, because there were a thousand actors playing music in the garden and temple afterwards, it was also called Qianxiang.

古文：故渠又东而北屈，径青门外，与泬水枝渠会，渠上承泬水于章门西。飞渠引水入城。
现代文：旧渠又东流，接着北转流经青门外，与沈水的支渠汇合。支渠上流在章门西承按汰水，渠道引水入城，东边是仓池。
English: The old canal flows to the east, then turns north through the outskirts of Qingmen and merges with the submerged branch canal. The upstream of the branch canal carries water west of Zhangmen, the channel draws water into the city, and the east is Cangchi.

古文：东为仓池，池在未央宫西。池中有渐台，汉兵起，王莽死于此台。
现代文：池在未央宫西，池中有渐台，汉兵兴起后，王莽死于此台。
English: The pond is in the west of Weiyang Palace. There is a gradual platform in the pond. Wang Mang died on this platform after the rise of Han soldiers.

古文：又东径未央宫北。
现代文：渠水又往东流经未央宫北边。
English: The canal water also flows eastward through the northern side of the Miang Palace.

古文：高祖在关东，令萧何成未央宫。何斩龙首山而营之。
现代文：高祖在关东时，命令萧何去兴建未央宫，萧何就开辟龙首山来营建这座宫殿。
English: When Gaozu was in Kanto, he ordered Xiao He to build the Weiyang Palace, and Xiao He opened up Longshou Mountain to build this palace.

古文：山长六十余里，头临渭水，尾达樊川。
现代文：山长六十余里，山头俯临渭水，山尾伸到樊川；山头高二十丈，山尾渐低，高五六丈；土壤呈红色，很坚硬。
English: The length of the mountain is more than sixty miles, with the top of the mountain overlooking Surabaya and the bottom of the mountain stretching to the Surabaya River; the top of the mountain is twenty meters high, and the bottom of the mountain is gradually lower, with a height of five or six meters; the soil is red and very hard.

古文：头高二十丈，尾渐下高五六丈，土色赤而坚，云昔有黑龙从南山出，饮渭水，其行道因山成迹，山即基，阙不假筑，高出长安城。
现代文：传说从前有黑龙从南山出来，去饮渭水，所经过的路线依山而形成痕迹。建宫依山为基，门阀也不须再筑台址，就已高出长安城之上了。
English: Legend has it that a black dragon once came out of the Nanshan Mountains to drink the spring water. Traces of the route it took formed along the mountain. The palace was built on the mountain, and the gate valve did not need to build a platform, it was already higher than the Chang'an City.

古文：北有玄武阙，即北阙也。
现代文：北有玄武阀，就是北网。
English: The north has the Xuanwu Valve, which is the north net.

古文：东有苍龙阙，阙内有阊阖、止车诸门。
现代文：东有苍龙网，网内有阎阖、止车诸门。
English: In the east, there is a dragon net, and inside the net, there are gates with gates.

古文：未央殿东有宣室、玉堂、麒麟、含章、白虎、凤皇、朱雀、鹓鸾、昭阳诸殿，天禄、石渠、麒麟三阁。
现代文：未央殿东有宣室、玉堂、麒麟、含章、白虎、凤凰、朱雀、鹤莺、昭阳诸殿，天禄、石渠、麒麟三阁。
English: To the east of the Miao Hall are the Xuanwu Room, the Jade Hall, the Kirin, the Han Zhang, the White Tiger, the Phoenix, the Suzaku, the Crane, and the Zhao Yang Halls, as well as the Tianlu, the Stone Canal, and the Kirin Pavilion.

古文：未央宫北即桂宫也，周十余里，内有明光殿、走狗台、柏梁台，旧乘复道，用相径通。
现代文：未央宫以北，就是桂宫，周围十余里，里面有明光殿、走狗台、柏梁台，从前有复道相通。
English: To the north of Wangyang Palace is Guigong Palace. It is surrounded by more than ten miles. There are Mingguang Palace, Zhaogudai, Bai Liangdai, and there used to be a complex road.

古文：故张衡《西京赋》曰：钩陈之外，阁道穹隆属长乐与明光，径北通于桂宫。
现代文：所以张衡《西京赋》说：后宫之外，漫长的阁道弯弯曲曲，通往长乐宫和明光殿，往北通到桂宫。
English: Therefore, Zhang Heng's "Sijing Fu" said: "Outside the harem, there is a long, winding path leading to the Changle Palace and the Mingguang Palace, and northward to the Katsura Palace.

古文：故渠出二宫之间，谓之明渠也。
现代文：旧渠在二宫之间流过，称为明渠。
English: The old canal flows between the two palaces and is called the open canal.

古文：又东历武库北。
现代文：又东经武库北，从前擂里子葬在这里。
English: It also runs east to the north of Wukou. Formerly, Yuriko was buried here.

古文：旧樗里子葬于此，樗里子名疾，秦惠王异母弟也，滑稽多智，秦人号曰智囊，葬于昭王庙西，渭南阴乡樗里，故俗谓之樗里子。
现代文：槽里子名疾，是秦惠王的异母弟，为人滑稽而富于智谋，秦人称他为智囊。他葬在昭王庙西边，即渭南阴乡的搏里，所以民间称他为擂里子。
English: He was the half-brother of Qin Hui Wang. He was funny and resourceful, and the Qin people called him the brain. He was buried on the west side of the Zhao Wang Temple, that is, in the south of Yin Township, so the people called him the son of the dragon.

古文：云：我百岁后，是有天于之宫夹我墓。
现代文：他曾说：我百年之后，在我坟墓西边会夹建起天子的宫殿。
English: He once said: "A hundred years from now, on the west side of my grave, I will build a palace for the Son of Heaven."

古文：疾以昭王七年卒，葬于渭南章台东。
现代文：赢疾死于昭王七年前,葬于渭南章台东边。
English: Zhao Wang died of illness seven years ago and was buried on the east side of Zhang Tai in southern Anhui Province.

古文：至汉，长乐宫在其东，未央宫在其西，武库直其墓。
现代文：到了汉时，长乐宫在他墓东，未央宫在他墓西相继修建起来，武库则正对着他的坟墓。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Changle Palace was built to the east of his tomb, while Weiyang Palace was built to the west of his tomb. The arsenal was built directly opposite his tomb.

古文：秦人喭曰力则任鄙，智则樗里是也。
现代文：秦人谚语说：力气要数任鄙，智慧要数得里。
English: A proverb of the Qin people says: Strength is to be counted as much as possible, wisdom is to be counted as much as possible.

古文：明渠又东径汉高祖长乐宫北，本秦之长乐宫也，周二十里，殿前列铜人，殿西有长信、长秋、永寿、永昌诸殿。殿之东北有池，池北有层台，俗谓是池为酒池，非也。
现代文：明渠又往东流经汉高祖长乐宫北边，就是原来秦时的长乐宫。此宫周围二十里，殿前排列着铜人，殿西有长信、长秋、永寿、永昌诸殿；宫殿泊匕有池，池北有层台，民间称此池为酒池，实则不是。
English: The Ming Canal also flows eastward through the northern side of the Changle Palace of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, which is the original Changle Palace of the Qin Dynasty. Twenty miles around this palace, there are bronze people lined up in front of the hall, and there are Changxin, Changqiu, Yongshou and Yongchang halls to the west of the hall; the palace has a pond, and there is a terrace to the north of the pond. People call this pond a wine pond, but it is not.

古文：故渠北有楼，竖汉京兆尹司马文预碑。
现代文：旧渠北面有楼，立着汉京兆司马文预碑。
English: There is a building on the north side of the old canal, and there is a pre-monument of Han Jing Zhaosi Mawen.

古文：故渠又东出城，分为二渠，即《汉书》所谓王渠者也。
现代文：旧渠又东流出城，分为两条，就是《汉书》所说的王渠。
English: The old canal also flows out of the city to the east and is divided into two, which is the "King Canal" mentioned in the "Chinese Book."

古文：苏林曰：王渠，官渠也，犹今御沟矣。
现代文：苏林说：王渠就是官渠，正如现在所说的御沟。
English: Su Lin said: Wangqiu is the official canal, just like the present-day Gogou.

古文：晋灼曰：渠名也，在城东覆盎门外。
现代文：晋灼说：王渠是渠名，在城东覆盎门处。
English: Jin Jiao said: Wangqiu is the name of the canal, in the east of the city, at the entrance to the city.

古文：一水径杨桥下，即青门桥也。侧城北，径邓艾祠西，而北注渭，今无水。其一水，右入昆明故渠，东径奉明县广城乡之廉明苑南。
现代文：一条流经杨桥下－一就是青门桥，傍着城边往北流经邓艾祠西边，往北注入渭水，现在已经无水了；另一条向右边注入昆明旧渠，往东流经奉明县广城乡的廉明苑南边。
English: One flows under the Yangqiao Bridge - the first is the Qingmen Bridge. It flows north along the edge of the city, through the west side of the Dengai Shrine, and northward into the floodwaters. Now there is no water. The other flows to the right into the Kunming Old Canal, and eastward through the south side of the Liangming Garden in Guangcheng Township, Fengming County.

古文：史皇孙及工夫人葬于郭北，宣帝迁苑南，卜以为悼园，益园民千六百家，立奉明县以奉二园。
现代文：史皇孙及王夫人葬在城北，宣帝把他们迁葬到苑南，经占卜选为修建悼园的地址，迁了一千六百家民户进来，以补充人口，并设置奉明县以照管两座墓园。
English: Emperor Xuanzong and Empress Wang were buried in the north of the city, Emperor Xuanzong moved them to the south of the garden. After divination, it was chosen as the address for the construction of a memorial garden, and 1,600 households moved in to supplement the population, and Fengming County was set up to take care of the two cemeteries.

古文：园在东部门。
现代文：墓园在东都门。
English: The cemetery is at Dongdumen.

古文：昌邑王贺自霸御法驾；郎中令龚遂骏乘，至广明东都门是也。
现代文：昌邑王贺自霸驾驭着皇帝的车驾，郎中令龚遂陪乘，到广明东都门，就是此门。
English: Changyi Wang He Ziba drove the emperor's chariot, and was accompanied by his son-in-law, Zou, to the Guangdong Dongdu Gate, which is this gate.

古文：故渠东北径汉太尉夏侯婴冢西。
现代文：旧渠往东北流经汉太尉夏侯婴墓西边。
English: The old canal flows to the northeast through the west side of the infant tomb of Han Taifu Xia Hou.

古文：葬日，柩马悲鸣，轻车罔进，下得石椁，铭云：于嗟滕公居此室！
现代文：夏侯婴殡葬那天，驾枢车的马悲鸣，轻车不能前进。地下掘出石榔，铭文说：唉！让滕公就住在这间房子里吧！
English: On the day of Xia Houfang's funeral, the horses driving the carriage wailed in grief, and the carriage could not move forward. A stone coffin was dug out underground, with an inscription saying: Alas! Let Teng Gong live in this house!

古文：故遂葬焉。
现代文：于是就在这里安葬。
English: So he was buried here.

古文：冢在城东八里，饮马桥南四里，故时人谓之马冢。
现代文：墓在城东八里，饮马桥以南四里，所以当时人称为马家。
English: The tomb is eight miles east of the city, four miles south of the drinking horse bridge, so at that time it was called the horse house.

古文：故渠又北，分为二渠，一水东径虎圈南，而东入霸，一水北合渭，今无水。
现代文：旧渠又北流，分成两条：一条往东流经虎圈南边，往东注入霸水；一条往北流与渭水汇合，现在已经无水了。
English: The old canal also flowed north and was divided into two: one flowed eastward through the south side of the tiger enclosure and injected overpowering water to the east; one flowed northward and merged with turbid water, and now there is no water.

古文：又东过霸陵县北，霸水从县西北流注之。
现代文：又往东流过翎陵县北边，翎水从县城西北流来注人。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northern part of Fuling County, and the Surabaya River flowed from the northwest of the county seat.

古文：霸者，水上地名也。
现代文：霸，是水上地名，这条水古时叫滋水。
English: Ha is the name of a place on the water. In ancient times, this water was called Shishimizu.

古文：古曰滋水矣，秦穆公霸世，更名滋水为霸水，以显霸功。
现代文：秦穆公称霸于世时，把滋水改名为霸水，以显耀他称霸的功业。
English: When Qin Mu publicly claimed hegemony in the world, he changed the name of Shishui to Bansui to show off his hegemony.

古文：王莽恶之，下书曰：甲午火桥，乙未，立春之日也。
现代文：霸水发源于蓝田县的蓝田谷，就是以多玉而闻名的地方。西北有铜谷水，稍东有惘谷水， 二水汇合后西流，又往西注入坚水。
English: The overpowering water originates from the Lantian Valley in Lantian County, which is a place famous for its multi-beads. There is copper valley water in the northwest, Shibuya water a little to the east, and after the two waters converge, it flows west, and hard water is injected to the west.

古文：予以神明圣祖黄虞遗统受命，至于地皇四年为十五年，正以三年终冬，绝灭霸驳之桥，欲以兴成新室，统一长存之道。其名霸桥，为长存桥。
现代文：堡水又往西流经晓关，往北流经晓柳城，东西有两城并峙，魏在城内部署了青坚军，所以人们又称为青堡城。秦二世三年设县，汉宣帝元康元年已有十五年了。正好在三年冬尽的时日，毁去这座不正的桥梁，正是要振兴新朝，促进统一长存之道，就将霸桥改名为长存桥。
English: The castle water flowed westward through Xiaoguan and northward through Xiaoliucheng, and the two cities stood side by side. Wei deployed the Qing Jian army inside the city, so it was also known as the Qing Castle City. Qin II set up the county for three years, and Han Xuan Emperor Yuan Kang was fifteen years old in the first year of the year. Just at the end of the three years of winter, to destroy this improper bridge, it was to revitalize the new dynasty and promote the unified way of long-term existence, so he changed the name of the bridge to the long-term bridge.

古文：霸水又北，左纳漕渠，绝霸右出焉。
现代文：霸水又北流，左边接纳了潜渠，水流穿过霸水，从右边流出。
English: The overflowing water flows to the north, and the left side receives the submerged canal. The water flows through the overflowing water and flows out from the right side.

古文：东径霸城北，又东径子楚陵北。
现代文：往东流经霸城北边，又往东流经子楚陵北边。
English: It flows eastward through the northern part of Baicheng and eastward through the northern part of Ziuling.

古文：皇甫谧曰：秦庄王葬于芷阳之丽山。
现代文：皇甫谧说：秦庄王葬于芷阳的丽山。
English: Emperor Fuxi said: Qin Zhuang Wang was buried in the Lishan Mountain in Fenyang.

古文：京兆东南霸陵山，刘向曰：庄王大其名，立坟者也。
现代文：京兆东南的霸陵山，刘向说：庄王因山的名气大，就在那里筑墓。
English: Liu Xiang said, "Zhuang Wang built a tomb there because of the mountain's fame.

古文：《战国策》曰：庄王字异人，更名子楚，故世人犹以子楚名陵。
现代文：《战国策》说：庄王字异人，改名子楚，所以世人至今还称为子楚陵。
English: "Strategy of Warring States" said: Zhuo Wang was a stranger and changed his name to Zi Chu, so the world is still called Zi Chu Ling.

古文：又东径新丰县，右会故渠。
现代文：又往东流经新丰县，在右边汇合了旧渠。
English: It also flows eastward through Xinfeng County, and merges with the old canal on the right.

古文：更始三年，为赤眉所杀，故侍中刘恭，夜往，取而埋之。光武使司徒邓禹收葬于霸陵县。
现代文：旧渠上流承接霸水，往东北流经霸城县旧城南边。霸城县就是汉文帝的霸陵县，王莽改名为水章。魏明帝景初元年被赤眉所杀，前侍中刘恭乘夜去把他的尸体运回掩埋了，光武派遣司徒邓禹把他安葬于霸陵县。
English: The upstream flow of the old canal was taken over by the Baishui, and it flowed to the northeast through the south of the old city of Baicheng County. Baicheng County was the Han Emperor's Haring County, and Wang Mang changed his name to Suizhang. In the first year of the Wei Ming Dynasty, Emperor Jing was killed by the Red Eyebrows, and the former chamberlain Liu Gong took the night to transport his body back and bury it, and Guangwu dispatched the scholar Deng Yu to bury him in Haring County.

古文：更始尚书仆射、行大将军事鲍永，持节安集河东，闻更始死，归世祖，累迁司隶校尉。
现代文：更始帝的尚书仆射、行大将军事鲍永，受命把军队结集在河东，听说更始帝已死，就投向世祖，一再升官，当上司隶校尉。
English: Shang Shuxu, a retainer of the Qian Shi Emperor, and Baoyong, a military general, were ordered to gather the army in the east of the river. When they heard that the Qian Shi Emperor was dead, they threw themselves into the service of the founder, and were promoted again and again, and became superiors and lieutenants.

古文：行县，经更始墓，遂下拜，哭尽哀而去。
现代文：他巡察京瓷时经过更始帝墓，就一马拜哭，吊悼完毕，方才离去。
English: When he was inspecting Kyocera, he passed the tomb of Emperor Genshaku, and immediately began to weep and mourn, and only then did he leave.

古文：帝问公卿，大中大夫张湛曰：仁不遗旧，忠不忘君，行之高者。
现代文：光武帝去问公卿，大中大夫张湛说：仁爱的人不遗弃旧友，忠贞的人不忘记君主，这是德行崇高的人啊！
English: Emperor Guangwu went to ask the noblemen, and Zhang Zhan, a senior middle school doctor, said: "A benevolent person does not abandon old friends, a loyal person does not forget the monarch, this is a noble person!

古文：帝乃释。
现代文：于是光武帝心中的疑虑才消除了。
English: As a result, Emperor Guangwu's doubts were eliminated.

古文：又东北径新丰县，右合漕渠，汉大司农郑当时所开也。
现代文：又往东北流经新丰县，又向右流汇合了嘈渠，此渠是汉大司农郑当时所开。
English: It also flowed to the northeast through Xinfeng County, and merged with a noisy canal to the right, which was opened by Nong Zheng, Secretary of Han University at the time.

古文：以渭水难漕，命齐水工徐伯发卒穿渠引渭。
现代文：他因渭水难以运粮，就叫齐国的水利专家徐伯调派兵丁开渠，把渭水引进来。
English: Since it was difficult to transport grain through the floodwaters, he asked the water conservancy expert Xu Bo from Qi to send soldiers to open the canal and bring the floodwaters in.

古文：其渠自昆明池南傍山原，东至于河，且田且漕，大以为便。今无水。
现代文：渠道从昆明池起，南边沿着山脚，往东通到大河，既有助于耕作，又可以运粮，利处很多，但现在已经无水了。
English: The channel starts from Kunming Pond, runs along the foot of the mountain in the south, and runs east to the Great River. It is not only helpful for farming, but also for transporting grain. There are many advantages, but now there is no water.

古文：霸水又北径秦虎圈东。
现代文：霸水又往北流经秦虎圈东边。
English: The overpowering water flowed northward through the eastern side of Qinhu Circle.

古文：《列士传》曰：秦昭王会魏王，魏王不行，使朱亥奉壁一双。
现代文：《列士传》：秦昭王约魏王会见，魏王不去，只派朱亥送了一对璧给他。
English: "Less biography": Qin Zhao Wang asked Wei Wang to meet, Wei Wang did not go, only sent Zhu Hai to send him a pair of pearls.

古文：秦王大怒，置朱亥虎圈中。
现代文：秦王大怒，把朱亥关到虎栏里去。
English: Qin Wang flew into a rage and locked Zhu Hai in the tiger pen.

古文：亥瞋目视虎，毗裂，血出溅虎，虎不敢动，即是处也。
现代文：朱亥对着老虎怒目圆睁，眼角都睁裂了，血滴溅到老虎身上，老虎怕得动也不敢动，就是在这地方。
English: Zhu Hai glared at the tiger, his eyes were wide open, and drops of blood splattered onto the tiger's body. The tiger was too scared to move, and it was in this place.

古文：霸水又北，入于渭水。
现代文：霸水又往北流，注入渭水。
English: The overflowing water flows north again, injecting salty water.

古文：渭水又东，会成国故渠。
现代文：渭水又往东流，与成国旧渠汇合。
English: Surabaya's water flowed eastward and merged with the old canal of Chengguo.

古文：渠，魏尚书左仆射卫臻征蜀所开也。号成国渠，引以浇田。
现代文：这条渠道是魏尚书左仆射卫臻征蜀时所开，号为成国渠，用以引水灌溉田亩。
English: This channel was opened by Wei Shangshu's right-hand man, Shawei Zenzhen, during the conquest of Shu. It was called the Chengguo Canal and was used to divert water to irrigate acres of fields.

古文：其渎上承汧水于陈仓东，东径郿及武功、槐里县北。渠左有安定梁严冢，碑碣尚存。
现代文：渠道上流在陈仓以东承接沂水，往东流经郡、武功、槐里县以北，渠左有安定梁严墓，现在还有碑褐存在。
English: The upstream of the channel is east of Chencang to connect with Surabaya, and flows eastward through the county, Wukong, and north of Bali County. There is a stable Liangyan tomb on the left of the canal, and there is still a monument.

古文：又东径汉武帝茂陵南，故槐里之茂乡也。
现代文：水又往东流经汉武帝茂陵南边，就是从前槐里的茂乡。
English: The water also flows eastward through the south side of Hanwu Emperor's Mausoleum, that is, the former Shili's Maoxiang.

古文：应劭曰：帝自为陵，在长安西北八十余里。
现代文：应肋说：武帝亲自在长安西北八十余里建陵。
English: Ying Li said: Emperor Wu personally built a mausoleum more than eighty miles northwest of Chang'an.

古文：《汉武帝故事》曰：帝崩后，见形谓陵令薛平曰：吾虽失势，犹为汝君，奈何令吏卒上吾陵磨刀剑乎？
现代文：《汉武帝故事》说：武帝死后，显灵对陵令薛平说：我虽已失势，但到底还是你的君主，怎么可以让下吏兵卒之辈到我陵上来磨刀剑呢？
English: "The Story of Emperor Wudi" says: After Emperor Wudi's death, a spirit appeared to the mausoleum commander Xue Ping and said: Although I have lost power, I am still your monarch. How can I let the lower-ranking officers and soldiers come to my mausoleum to sharpen their swords?

古文：自今以后可禁之。
现代文：从今以后，你要禁止他们。
English: From now on, you must forbid them.

古文：平顿首谢，因不见。
现代文：薛平叩头请罪，武帝忽然不见了。
English: Xue Ping kowtowed and pleaded guilty, and Emperor Wu suddenly disappeared.

古文：推问陵旁，果有方石，可以为砺，吏卒常盗磨刀剑，霍光欲斩之。
现代文：他去查问，果然陵墓旁边有一块方石，可以当磨石用，下吏兵卒常常偷偷地在那里磨刀剑。
English: He went to investigate, and sure enough, there was a square stone next to the mausoleum, which could be used as a grindstone. The lower-ranking officers and soldiers often secretly sharpened their swords there.

古文：张安世曰：神道茫昧，不宜为法。
现代文：霍光想把那些人杀了，张安世说；神道之事幽渺难知，不宜作为执法的依据。
English: Huo Guang wanted to kill those people, Zhang Anshi said; the matter of Shinto is obscure and difficult to know, and should not be used as a basis for law enforcement.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是才作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：故阮公《咏怀诗》曰：失势在须臾，带剑上吾丘。
现代文：所以阮公《咏怀诗》说：片刻间就失去权势，让人们带剑走上我坟墓。
English: That's why Nguyn Qung said in his poem, "I lost power in an instant, and people came to my grave with swords."

古文：陵之西而北一里，即李夫人冢。冢形三成，世谓之英陵。
现代文：陵墓西边偏北一里，就是李夫人墓，有三层，人们叫英陵。
English: The west side of the mausoleum is one mile north, which is Mrs. Li's tomb. It has three floors, and people call it Yingling.

古文：夫人兄延年知音，尤善歌舞，帝爱之。每为新声变曲，闻者莫不感动。
现代文：李夫人兄李延年懂音律，尤其善于歌舞，武帝很喜欢他；每当制作了新曲，听众无不受到感动。
English: Mrs. Li's brother, Li Yannian, knew music and was especially good at singing and dancing. Emperor Wu liked him very much; whenever he made a new song, the audience was moved.

古文：常侍上，起舞，歌曰：北方有佳人，绝世而独立。
现代文：他常常在侍候武帝时跳舞，唱道：北方有一位美人，有举世无双绝色。
English: He often danced while serving Emperor Wu, singing: There is a beauty in the north, a matchless beauty.

古文：一顾倾人城，再顾倾人国。
现代文：看一眼会毁一座城，再一眼就亡一个国。
English: One glance can destroy a city, and another glance can ruin a country.

古文：宁不知倾城复倾国，佳人难再得！
现代文：难道你不知道毁城又亡国，绝世美人难再得！
English: Don't you know that when a city is destroyed and a country is ruined, it's hard to get a once-in-a-lifetime beauty!

古文：上曰：世岂有此人乎？
现代文：皇上说：世界上难道会有这样的人吗？
English: The emperor said, "Can there really be such a person in the world?"

古文：平阳主曰：延年女弟。
现代文：平阳主说：有，就是李延年的妹妹。
English: Lord Pingyang said: Yes, that is Li Yan Nian's younger sister.

古文：上召见之，妖丽，善歌舞，得幸，早卒。
现代文：武帝召她进宫， 见她艳丽迷人，善于歌舞，大为宠爱，但她不幸早死；武帝怜悯她，就以皇后之礼安葬她。
English: Emperor Wu summoned her to the palace, saw that she was beautiful and charming, good at singing and dancing, and was greatly loved, but she unfortunately died early; Emperor Wu took pity on her and buried her with the salute of the queen.

古文：上悯念之，以后礼葬，悲思不已，赋诗悼伤。
现代文：武帝心里悲伤，时时刻刻思念着她，并作诗悼亡。
English: Emperor Wu was sad in his heart, thinking of her all the time, and wrote a poem to mourn her death.

古文：故渠又东径茂陵县故城南。武帝建元二年置。
现代文：旧渠往东流经茂陵县老城南边，茂陵县于武帝建元二年设置。
English: The old canal flowed eastward through the south side of the old city of Murye County. Murye County was established in the second year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：《地理志》曰：宣帝县焉，王莽之宣成也。
现代文：《地理志》说：宣帝设置为县，就是王莽的宣成。
English: "Geography" said: Xuan Di was set up as a county, that is, Wang Mang's Xuan Cheng.

古文：故渠又东径龙泉北，今人谓之温泉，非也。
现代文：旧渠又往东流经龙泉北边，现在人们称为温泉，其实不对。
English: The old canal flowed eastward through the northern side of Longquan, and now people call it a hot spring, which is actually wrong.

古文：渠北故坂北即龙渊庙。
现代文：渠北旧堤北边，就是龙渊庙。
English: On the north side of the old embankment north of the canal is Longyuan Temple.

古文：如淳曰：《三辅黄图》有龙渊宫，今长安城西有其庙处，盖宫之遗也。
现代文：如淳说：《三辅黄图》有龙渊宫，现在长安城西有龙渊庙所在的地点，就是龙渊宫的遗址。
English: As Jun said: "Three subsidiary yellow maps" have Longyuan Palace, and now there is a Longyuan Temple in the west of Chang'an City, which is the site of Longyuan Palace.

古文：故渠又东径姜原北。渠北有汉昭帝陵，东南去长安七十里。
现代文：旧渠又往东流经姜原以北，渠北有汉昭帝陵墓，东南距长安七十里。
English: The old canal also flows eastward to the north of Jiangyuan. There is the mausoleum of Emperor Han Zhao to the north of the canal, and it is 70 miles southeast of Chang'an.

古文：又东径平陵县故城南。
现代文：又往东流经平陵县老城南边。
English: It also flows eastward to the south of the old city of Pingling County.

古文：《地理志》曰：昭帝置。王莽之广利也。
现代文：《地理志》说：平陵县是昭帝所置，就是王莽的广利。
English: "Geography" said: Pingling County was established by Emperor Zhao, that is, Wang Mang's Guangli.

古文：故渠之南有窦氏泉，北有徘徊庙。
现代文：旧渠南有窦氏泉，北有徘徊庙。
English: To the south of the old canal is Douji Spring, and to the north is the wandering temple.

古文：又东径汉大将军魏其侯窦婴冢南，又东径成帝延陵南，陵之东北五里，即平帝康陵坂也。
现代文：又往东流经汉大将军魏其侯窦婴墓南边；又往东流经成帝延陵南边。延陵东北五里，就是平帝康陵所在的山坡。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern side of the infant tomb of Han Dynasty General Wei Qihou Dou; it also flows eastward through the southern side of Emperor Chengdu's Yanling Mausoleum. Five miles northeast of Yanling is the hillside where Emperor Ping's Kang Mausoleum is located.

古文：《春秋》晋献公五年，伐之，获丽姬于是邑。丽戎，男国也，姬姓。秦之丽邑矣。
现代文：旧渠又往东流经渭障南边。元帝永光四年伐丽戎，就在此城得到丽姬。丽戎是男爵一级的封国，姓姬，就是秦时的丽邑。
English: The old canal also flowed eastward through the south side of the moat. In the fourth year of the Yuan Emperor Yongguang, he conquered Lirong, and in this city he obtained Lijiang. Lijiang is a first-class baronial fief, with the surname of Hijiang, which is the Lijiang of Qin Dynasty.

古文：又北，右总三川，径鸿门东，又北径戏亭东。
现代文：戏水又北流，右边汇集了三条溪水，流经鸿门东边，又往北流经戏亭东边。
English: The river flows north, and three streams converge on the right, flowing through the east side of the Honmen, and flowing north through the east side of the Teahouse.

古文：应劭曰：戏，宏农湖县西界也。
现代文：应劭说：戏，是弘农湖县的西部边界。
English: It is the western border of Hongnonghu County.

古文：地隔诸县，不得为湖县西。
现代文：但这里和湖县隔了好几个县，不可能是湖县的西部。
English: But there are several counties between here and Huxian, so it can't be the western part of Huxian.

古文：苏林曰：戏，邑名，在新丰东南四十里。盂康曰：乃水名也，今戏亭是也。
现代文：苏林说：戏是城名，在新丰东南四十里，孟康说：戏是水名，就是现在的戏亭水。
English: Su Lin said, "Theatre is the name of the city." Forty miles southeast of Xinfeng, Meng Kang said, "Theatre is the name of the water," which is the current Theatre Pavilion Water.

古文：渭水又东与竹水合。水南出竹山，北径媚加谷，历广乡原东，俗谓之大赤水，北流注于渭。
现代文：从前周幽王想取悦褒姐，褒似不笑，幽王就敲起鼓，点起烽火来征召诸侯。 诸侯都来了，但并没有敌人打进来，褒姐这才笑起来，幽王也非常高兴。
English: Last week, Yu Wang wanted to please Bao Jie, but Bao Jie did not smile, so Yu Wang beat a drum and lit a bonfire to summon the princes. The princes all came, but there was no enemy, which made Bao Jie laugh, and Yu Wang was also very happy.

古文：渭水又东得白渠口。大始二年，赵国中大夫白公，奏穿渠。
现代文：后来犬戎真的来了，幽王又点起烽火征召诸侯，诸侯都不来，幽王就在戏水上打了败仗，在丽山以北被杀。所以《国语》说：幽王灭亡。汉成帝建始二年始二年前，赵国中大夫白公上书建议开渠。
English: Later, Injun Rong really came, Yu Wang also lit a bonfire to summon the lords, but the lords did not come. Yu Wang lost the battle on the water and was killed north of Lishan. Therefore, "National Language" said: Yu Wang perished. Two years before the founding of Han Dynasty, Bai Gong, the doctor of Zhao Province, proposed to open the canal.

古文：引泾水，首起谷口，出于郑渠南，名曰白渠。
现代文：引导径水，上端从谷口开始，从郑渠南边流出，名叫白渠。
English: Guiding runoff water, the upper end starts from the valley mouth and flows out from the south of Zhengqiu, called Baiqiu.

古文：民歌之曰：田于何所，池阳谷口。
现代文：民间歌谣道：在哪里耕田？在池阳谷口。
English: Folk song: Where is the farmland? It's in Chiyang Valley.

古文：郑国在前，白渠起后。
现代文：郑国渠在前，白渠开凿在后。
English: The Zhengguo Canal is in the foreground, with the White Canal excavated behind.

古文：即水所始也。
现代文：民谣说的池阳谷口，就是白渠的起端。
English: The Chiyang Valley mouth mentioned in folk songs is the beginning of the White Canal.

古文：东径宜春城南，又东南径池阳城北，枝渎出焉，东南历藕原下，又东径鄣县故城北，东南入渭。今无水。
现代文：渠水往东流经宜春城南边，又往东南流经池阳城北边，有支渠流出。支渠往东南流经藕原下，又往东流经郭县老城北边，往东南注入渭水，现在已经无水了。
English: The canal water flows eastward through the south side of Yichun City, and flows southeastward through the north side of Chiyang City, with a branch canal flowing out. The branch canal flows southeastward through the lower part of Yuyuan, and flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Guo County, injecting Yuyuan water to the southeast. Now there is no water.

古文：白渠又东，枝渠出焉。东南径高陵县故城北。
现代文：白渠又东流，有支渠分出，往东南流经高陵县旧城北边。
English: The White Canal also flows eastward, with a branch canal branching off, and flows southeastward through the northern part of the old city of Goryeong County.

古文：《地理志》曰：左辅都尉治，王莽之千春也。
现代文：《地理志》说：高陵县是左辅都尉治所，就是王莽的千春。
English: "Geography" said: Goryeong County is the left auxiliary governor's office, that is, Wang Mang's Chiharu.

古文：《太康地记》谓之曰高陆也。
现代文：《太康地记》称为高陆。
English: "Tai Kang Di Ji" is called Gao Lu.

古文：车频《秦书》曰：苻坚建元十四年，高陆县民穿井，得龟，大二尺六寸，背文负八卦古字，坚以石为池，养之，十六年而死，取其骨以问吉凶，名为客龟。
现代文：车频《秦书》说：符坚建元十四年，高陆县有人挖井，捉到一只大乌龟，长二尺六寸，背上有八卦古字，符坚用石块砌成水池来养。十六年后龟死，取龟骨来占卜吉凶，名为客龟。
English: "Qin Shu" said: In the 14th year of the first century, someone dug a well in Gaolu County and caught a large turtle, two feet and six inches long, with the ancient characters of the Eight Trigrams on its back. Fu Jian used stones to build a pool to keep it alive. Sixteen years later, the turtle died, and the turtle's bones were taken to tell fortunes. It was called the guest turtle.

古文：大卜佐高鲁梦客龟言，我将归江南，不遇，死于秦。
现代文：大卜佐高鲁梦见客龟说：我将回江南，但机遇不好，以致死于秦。
English: In a dream, Dabo Zagoru saw a tortoise and said, "I will return to the south of the Yangtze River, but the opportunity is not good, so I will die in Qin."

古文：鲁于梦中自解曰：龟三万六千岁而终，终必亡国之征也。
现代文：高鲁梦中自己解梦说：龟活到三万六千岁才死，龟死必定是亡国的预兆。
English: In his interpretation of the dream, Gaolu said, "The turtle lived to be 36,000 years old before it died. The turtle's death must be an omen of the country's downfall."

古文：为谢玄破于淮肥，自缢新城浮图中，秦祚因即沦矣。
现代文：符坚在把水被谢玄打得大败，在新城佛塔内自溢而死，前秦于是也亡了。
English: Fu Jian was defeated by Xie Xuan in the water fight and died from overflowing in the new city pagoda, so Qian Qin also died.

古文：又东径栎阳城北。
现代文：又往东流经栋阳城北。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Dongyang City.

古文：《史记》，秦献公二年，城栎阳，自雍徙居之。十八年雨金于是处也。
现代文：按《史记》，秦献公二年前，在栋阳建城，从雍迁居到那里，十八年前，这里天降金雨。
English: According to "Historical Records," two years before Qin Xian Gong, he built a city in Dongyang and moved there from Yong. Eighteen years ago, the sky rained gold here.

古文：项羽以封司马欣为塞王。
现代文：项羽把这里封给司马欣，号为塞王。
English: Cao Yu gave this place to Sima Xin and called him King of Sai.

古文：按《汉书》，高帝克关中，始都之，王莽之师亭也。
现代文：按《汉书》，高帝攻下关中才建都于此，就是王莽的师亭。
English: According to the "Hanshu," Emperor Gao conquered Guanzhong and built the capital here, which is Wang Mang's teacher's pavilion.

古文：后汉建武二年，封骠骑大将军景丹为侯国。
现代文：后汉建武二年，把这里封给漂骑大将军景丹，立为侯国。
English: In the second year of Jianwu of the Later Han Dynasty, it was assigned to the general of the cavalry, Jing Dan, and established as a vassal state.

古文：丹让，世祖曰：富贵不还故乡，如衣锦夜行，故以封卿。
现代文：景丹谦让，世祖说：做人有了荣华富贵而不回家乡，正如枉穿了漂亮的锦缎在黑夜里行走一样，所以把这桑梓之地封给你。
English: Jing Dan Qian, let the ancestor say: To be a man with glory and wealth and not go home is like wearing beautiful brocade and walking in the dark, so this mulberry land is sealed to you.

古文：白渠又东，径秦孝公陵北，又东南径居陵城北，莲芍城南，又东注金氏陂，又东南注于渭。
现代文：白渠又往东流经秦孝公陵北，又往东南流经居陵城北、莲芍城南，又往东流，注入金氏破，最后往东南注入渭水。
English: The White Canal also flows eastward through the north of Qin Xiaogong's Mausoleum, and flows southeastward through the north of Jiling City and the south of Lianye City, and flows eastward, injecting Kim's Canal, and finally injecting Surabaya to the southeast.

古文：故《汉书。沟洫志》曰白渠首起谷口，尾入栎阳是也。今无水。
现代文：所以《汉书•沟恤志》说：白渠首端起于谷口，终端流人栋阳，现在此渠也已无水了。
English: Therefore, "Hanshu•Gou Xizhi" said: the head of the white canal starts from Taniguchi, the terminal flows to Dongyang, and now this canal has no water.

