古文：天祚皇帝三保大元年春正月丁酉朔，改元，肆赦。初，金人兴兵，郡县所失几半。
现代文：保大元年春正月初一，改元，赦免犯人。当初，金人举兵内侵，我国郡县丢失了将近一半。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Bao Dai, the yuan was changed and the prisoners were pardoned. At the beginning, the Jin people raised troops to invade, and nearly half of the counties in our country were lost.

古文：上有四子：长赵王，母赵昭容；次晋王，母文妃；次秦王、许王，皆元妃生。
现代文：皇上有四子：长子赵王，母为昭容；次子晋王，母为文妃；再次秦王、许王，均为元妃所生。
English: The emperor had four sons: the eldest son, King Zhao, whose mother was Zhaorong; the second son, King Jin, whose mother was Princess Wen; and again, King Qin and King Xu, all of whom were born to Empress Yuan.

古文：国人知晋王之贤，深所属望。
现代文：国人都知道晋王贤明，深孚众望。
English: The Chinese people all know that Jin Wang is wise, and Shenfu is popular.

古文：元妃之兄枢密使萧奉先恐秦王不得立，潜图之。
现代文：元妃的哥哥枢密使萧奉先担心秦王不能立为太子，暗里图谋陷害晋王。
English: Yuanfei's brother, the confidential envoy Xiao Bongxian, worried that Qin Wang could not be made the crown prince, and secretly plotted to frame Jin Wang.

古文：文妃姊妹三人：长适耶律挞曷里，次文妃，次适余睹。
现代文：文妃姊妹共三人：长姊嫁于耶律挞曷里，次为文妃，再次嫁给余睹。
English: There are a total of three sisters of Princess Wen: the eldest sister married in Yerutpuli, followed by Princess Wen, who married again in Yuzhen.

古文：一日，其姊若妹俱会军前，奉先讽人诬驸马萧昱及余睹等谋立晋王，事觉，昱、挞曷里等伏诛，文妃亦赐死；独晋王未忍加罪。
现代文：一日，姊妹三人一同在军前相会，奉先委婉地劝别人诬蔑驸马萧昱及余睹等人阴谋扶立晋王为帝且事情败露，萧昱、挞曷里等人被诛杀，文妃也被赐死；独有晋王皇上不忍心给他加以罪名。
English: One day, the three sisters met together at the front of the army. They first advised others to slander Xiao Zhen and the others who witnessed the conspiracy to establish Jin Wang as emperor, and the matter was revealed. Xiao Zhen, Baoli and others were killed, and Wenfei was also given death; only the Emperor of Jin did not have the heart to accuse him.

古文：余睹在军中，闻之大惧，即率千余骑叛入金。
现代文：余睹在军中，听说后十分恐惧，当即率千余骑叛逃至金。
English: After witnessing it in the army, he was very afraid when he heard about it, and immediately led more than a thousand horsemen to defect to Kim.

古文：上遣知奚王府事萧遐买、北府宰相萧德恭、大常衮耶律谛里姑、归州观察使萧和尚奴、四军太师萧斡将所部兵追之。
现代文：皇上派遣奚王府事萧遐买、北府宰相萧德恭、大常衮耶律谛里姑、归州观察使萧和尚奴、四军太师萧干率所部兵马追赶余睹，在闾山县追赶上了。
English: The emperor dispatched Xiao Qimai, the governor of Shandong Province, Xiao Deqong, the prime minister of Beifu Province, Dazhong Ya Rujidi Ligu, and the observation of returning to the state, so that Xiao Monk Niu and Xiao Gan, the fourth army master, led the troops of the headquarters to catch up, and caught up in Shaoshan County.

古文：及诸闾山县，诸将议曰： 主上信萧奉先言，奉先视吾辈蔑如也。余睹乃宗室豪俊，常不肯为奉先下。
现代文：诸将商议说： 皇上宠信萧奉先，奉先将我们看得一钱不值。余睹乃是宗室豪俊，平时不肯屈服于奉先。
English: The generals deliberated and said: The emperor's favorite, Xiao Bongxian, has been promoted, and Bongxian regards us as worthless. Bongxian is the ancestor of Gao Jun, and he usually refuses to yield to Bongxian.

古文：若擒余睹，他日吾党皆余睹也！不若纵之。 还，即绐曰： 追袭不及。 
现代文：如果捉住余睹，将来我们这些人也会一个一个走余睹的老路！不如放他走。 回来，便诳称说 ：追赶不及。 
English: If you catch a bystander, in the future we will also take the old road of bystanders one by one! It is better to let him go. When you come back, you will say: I can't catch up.

古文：奉先既见余睹之亡，恐后日诸校亦叛，遂劝骤加爵赏，以结众心。
现代文：奉见既已眼见余睹出逃，恐怕日后诸位也反叛，于是劝皇上骤然加给他们爵位赏赐，以揽结众人之心。
English: I am afraid that you will also rebel in the future, since you have already seen the escape, so I advise the emperor to suddenly give them a knighthood reward to win the hearts of everyone.

古文：以萧遐买为奚王，萧德恭试中书门下平章事兼判上京留守事，耶律谛里姑为龙虎卫上将军，萧和尚奴金吾卫上将军，萧斡镇国大将军。
现代文：以萧遐买为奚王，萧德恭试中书门下平章事兼判上京留守事，耶律谛里姑为龙虎卫上将军，萧和尚奴为金吾卫上将军，萧干为镇国大将军。
English: Xiao Xiabao was crowned the king of Shanshan, Xiao Dequn was awarded the title of Pingzhang and was allowed to stay in Beijing, Ye Rui Ti Li Gu was named the general of Longhu Wei, Xiao He Shangnuo was named the general of King Wu Wei, and Xiao Gan was named the general of Zhenguo.

古文：二月，幸鸳鸯泺。
现代文：二月，临幸鸳鸯泊。
English: In February, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche passed away.

古文：夏五月，至曷里狘。
现代文：夏五月，到曷里犭戊。
English: In the summer of May, I went to Bali.

古文：秋七月，猎炭山。
现代文：秋七月，出猎于炭山。
English: Autumn and July, hunting in the mountains of coal.

古文：九月，至南京。
现代文：九月，到南京。
English: In September, I went to Nanjing.

古文：冬十一月癸亥，以西京留守赵王习泥烈为惕隐。
现代文：冬十一月初二，以西京留守赵王习泥烈为惕隐。
English: On the second day of the first month of November in winter, Zhao Wangxi, who stayed behind in West Beijing, went into seclusion.

古文：二年春正月乙亥，金克中京，进下泽州。
现代文：二年春正月十五日，金军攻克中京，进而攻下泽州。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Chinese army conquered Zhongjing, and then conquered Zezhou.

古文：上出居庸关，至鸳鸯泺。
现代文：皇上出居庸关，到鸳鸯泊。
English: The emperor went to live in Yongguan and then to Oshidomari.

古文：闻余睹引金人娄室孛堇奄至，萧奉先曰： 余睹乃王子班之苗裔，此来欲立甥晋王耳。
现代文：得知余睹引领金人娄室孛堇猝然而至，萧奉先说： 余睹乃是王子班的后代，这次前来不过是想立其外甥晋王为帝罢了。
English: Upon learning that Yu Jian was the one who led the sudden move of the goldsmith, Xiao Feng said: Yu Jian is a descendant of the prince class, this time he just came to make his nephew, Jin Wang, the emperor.

古文：若为社稷计，不惜一子，明其罪诛之，可不战而余睹自回矣。 
现代文：如果为社稷着想，不吝惜一个儿子，明正其罪而诛杀之，可以不必交战而余睹自行撤回了。 
English: If, for the sake of the society, you don't begrudge a son, if you punish him for his crime, you can withdraw without a fight.

古文：上遂赐晋王死，素服三日，耶律撒八等皆伏诛。
现代文：皇上于是赐晋王死，素服三日，耶律撒八等人均被诛杀。
English: The emperor then had the king of Jin put to death, and on the third day of his imprisonment, Jerusha and eight others were all killed.

古文：王素有人望，诸军闻其死，无不流涕，由是人心解体。
现代文：晋王一向得人心，诸军听说他死了，无不潸然泪下，从此人心涣散。
English: Jin Wang had always won the hearts of the people. When the soldiers heard that he had died, they all burst into tears. From then on, the hearts of the people were broken.

古文：余睹引金人逼行宫，上率卫兵五千余骑幸云中，遗传国玺于桑乾河。
现代文：余睹引领金人进逼行宫，皇上率领卫兵五千余骑临幸云中，将传国玺遗失于桑干河中。
English: The Emperor led more than five thousand guards in a procession to the palace, accompanied by a golden man. The Emperor rode to the palace in a cloud of happiness, but lost the imperial scepter in the Sangan River.

古文：二月庚寅朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：二月初一，日食，为日全食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse, a total solar eclipse.

古文：甲午，知北院大王事耶律马哥、汉人行宫都部署萧特末并为都统，太和宫使耶律补得副之，将兵屯鸳鸯泺。
现代文：初五，知北院大王事耶律马哥、汉人行宫都部署萧特末同时担任都统，太和宫使耶律补得为副统，率兵屯驻于鸳鸯泊。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Chihokuin Daigosho, Yeru Mago, and the Han Renjing Palace all deployed Xiao Terma to serve as the governor of the capital at the same time, and the Taihegu Palace made Yeru Supplement as the deputy governor, leading the troops stationed in Xiangbo.

古文：己亥，金师败奚王霞末于北安州，遂降其城。
现代文：初十，金军击败奚王霞末于北安州，于是收降其城。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Jin army defeated the Shao Wang Xiamou in Bei'an, and then took back the city.

古文：三月辛酉，上闻金师将出岭西，遂趋白水泺。
现代文：三月初二，皇上得知金军将出击岭西，于是前往白水泊。
English: On the second day of March, the emperor learned that the Chinese army would attack west of Ling, so he went to Baishuipo.

古文：乙丑，群牧使谟鲁斡降金。
现代文：初六，群牧使谟鲁斡降金。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the herd herdsmen sent Moru to mediate and reduce the money.

古文：丙寅，上至女古底仓。
现代文：初七，皇上到达女古底仓。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the emperor arrived at the ancient dungeon.

古文：闻金兵将近，计不知所出，乘轻骑入夹山，方悟奉先之不忠。
现代文：听说金兵正在逼近，无计可施，乘轻骑进入夹山，这才明白了萧奉先不忠。
English: Hearing that the golden soldiers were approaching, and that there was nothing to be done but to ride lightly into the mountains, Xiao Fengxian's disloyalty became clear.

古文：怒曰： 汝父子误我至此，今欲诛汝，何益于事！
现代文：恼怒地说 ：你们父子俩误我到今天这一步，如今就是想杀你，又于事何补！
English: He said angrily, "You two fathers and sons have tricked me into taking this step today, and now you want to kill me, what's the use?"

古文：恐军心忿怨，尔曹避敌苟安，祸必及我，其勿从行。 
现代文：恐怕军士心中忿怒怨恨于你等避敌苟安，造出祸事来必定会连累于我，你不要跟随我入山。 
English: I'm afraid that the anger and resentment in the sergeant's heart will cause you to avoid the enemy and seek peace. If you create a disaster, you will certainly be involved with me. Don't follow me into the mountains.

古文：奉先下马，哭拜而去。
现代文：奉先下马，哭拜而离去。
English: Bong dismounted first, wept and left.

古文：行未数里，左右执其父子，缚送金兵。
现代文：走不上几里，左右抓住他们父子，捆绑后送交金兵。
English: After walking for a few miles, they grabbed the father and son and tied them up before handing them over to the soldiers.

古文：金人斩其长子昂，以奉先及其次子昱械送金主。
现代文：金人杀死其长子萧昂，将奉先及其次子萧昱戴上刑具送交金主。
English: The goldsmith killed his eldest son, Xiao Ang, and sent Bongxian and his second son, Xiao Yao, to the goldsmith with instruments of torture.

古文：道遇辽军，夺以归国，遂并赐死。
现代文：途中遇到辽军，夺回奉先父子回国，于是一同赐死。
English: On the way, they encountered the Liao Army, recaptured Bongxian and his son and returned to the country, whereupon they were both sentenced to death.

古文：逐枢密使萧得里底，召挞不也典禁卫。
现代文：斥逐枢密使萧得里底。召挞不也典掌禁卫。
English: Xiao Delidi was expelled as a privy councillor. Zhao Xunfu was also banished.

古文：丁卯，以北院枢密副使萧僧孝奴知北院枢密使事，同知北院枢密使事萧查剌为左夷离毕。
现代文：初八，以北院枢密副使萧僧孝奴为知北院枢密使事，以同知北院枢密使事萧查剌为左夷离毕。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Xiao Zengxiao, the vice-envoy of the Northern Yuan Privy Council, was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Privy Council, and Xiao Zhaqi, the envoy of the Northern Yuan Privy Council, was appointed as the Zuoying.

古文：戊辰，同知殿前点检事耶律高八率卫士降金。
现代文：初九，同知殿前点检事耶律高八率领卫士降金。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the year, the former inspector of the Tongzhi Hall, Ye Lu High School, led the guards to reduce the money.

古文：己巳，侦人萧和尚、牌印郎君耶律哂斯为金师所获。
现代文：初十，侦人萧和尚、牌印郎君耶律哂斯为金军所俘获。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the investigator Xiao Monk and the pawnbroker Ye Liuzhi were captured by the Golden Army.

古文：癸酉，以诸局百工多亡，凡扈从不限吏民，皆官之。
现代文：十四日，因诸局百工大多逃亡，凡是随从人员不限为吏为民，一律授予官职。
English: On the 14th, due to the fact that most of the hundreds of workers in various bureaus fled, all the attendants were not limited to officials and citizens, and were all awarded official positions.

古文：初，诏留宰相张琳、李处温与秦晋国王淳守燕。处温闻上入夹山，数日命令不通，即与弟处能、子奭，外假怨军，内结都统萧干，谋立淳。
现代文：当初，诏令留下宰相张琳、李处温与秦晋国王耶律淳守卫燕京，处温听说皇上逃入夹山，一连几天命令不通，便与其弟李处能、儿子李商议，在外借助怨军之力，在内结连都统萧干，打算立耶律淳为帝。
English: At first, the imperial edict left the chancellor Zhang Lin, Li Shuan Wen and the Qin Jin king Yerutun to guard Yanjing. When Shuan Wen heard that the emperor had fled into the mountains, and the order could not be passed for several days, he discussed with his brother Li Shuaneng and his son Li, and with the help of the forces of resentment, they planned to make Yerutun emperor.

古文：遂与诸大臣耶律大石、左企弓、虞仲文、曹勇义、康公弼集蕃汉百官、诸军及父老数万人诣淳府。
现代文：于是与众大臣耶律大石、左企弓、虞仲文、曹勇义、康公弼会集蕃汉百官、诸军及父老数万人到晋王府。
English: Therefore, he and his ministers, Ye Lu Daishi, Zuo Jiyu, Yu Zhongwen, Cao Yongyi, and Kang Gongyi, gathered hundreds of officials, soldiers, and tens of thousands of people to the Jin royal palace.

古文：处温邀张琳至，白其事。
现代文：处温邀请张琳前来，告知其事。
English: Zhenwen invited Zhang Lin to come and tell her about it.

古文：琳曰： 摄政则可。 
现代文：张琳说： 如果为摄政则可行。 
English: Zhang Lin said: If it is a regent, it is feasible.

古文：处温曰： 天意人心已定，请立班耳。 
现代文：处温说： 天意人心已定，请您站到朝班上去吧。 
English: Zhenwen said: The will of heaven has been decided, please stand up and go to the morning shift.

古文：处温等请淳受礼，淳方出，李奭持赭袍被之，令百官拜舞山呼。
现代文：处温等人请耶律淳接受大礼，耶律淳这才出来，李手持赭袍披到他身上，命令百官拜舞，山呼万岁。
English: Suan Wen and others invited Ye Lu Chun to receive the grand salute. Ye Lu Chun came out only then. Li, holding a ceremonial robe, draped it over him and ordered all officials to bow and dance and shout "long live the mountain."

古文：淳惊骇，再三辞，不获已而从之。
现代文：耶律淳惊骇无比，再三推辞，不得已便听从了。
English: Yeluchun was so shocked that he had to listen to her repeated refusals.

古文：以处温守太尉，左企弓守司徒，曹勇义知枢密院事，虞仲文参知政事，张琳守太师，李处能直枢密院，李奭为少府少监，提举翰林医官李爽、陈秘十余人曾与大计，并赐进士及第，授官有差。
现代文：任命李处温为守太尉，左企弓为守司徒，曹勇义为知枢密院事，虞仲文为参知政事，张琳为守太师，李处能代理枢密院，李为少府少监，提举翰林医官，李爽、陈秘十余人曾参与废立大计，一并赐予进士及第，授给官职各有等差。
English: He appointed Li Duanwen as the captain of the palace guards, Zuo Qiqiu as the guardian of the palace guards, Cao Yongyi as the member of the Privy Council, Yu Zhongwen as the member of the Privy Council, Zhang Lin as the guardian of the palace guards, Li Duanneng as the deputy of the Privy Council, Li as the deputy superintendent of the minor prefectures, Hanlin as the medical officer, Li Shuang and Chen Ji, more than ten people who had participated in the abolition of the grand plan, were awarded the title of knight and the title, and the official positions were awarded with different ranks.

古文：萧干为北枢密使，驸马都尉萧旦知枢密院事。
现代文：以萧干为北枢密使，以驸马都尉萧旦为知枢密院事。
English: Xiao Gan was appointed as the Northern Privy Envoy, and Xiao Dan, the Captain of the Horse, was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：改怨军为常胜军。
现代文：改怨军为常胜军。
English: Change the grudge army to the ever-winning army.

古文：于是肆赦，自称天锡皇帝，改元建福，降封天祚为湘阴王。
现代文：于是赦免囚犯，自称天锡皇帝，改元建福，降封天祚为湘阴王。
English: As a result, he pardoned the prisoners, claimed to be the Emperor of Tianxi, changed his name to Jianfu, and downgraded his title to the King of Hunan.

古文：遂据有燕、云、平及上京、辽西六路。
现代文：于是据有燕、云、平以及上京、辽西六路。
English: As a result, there are six roads in Yan, Yun, Ping, Shangjing and West Liaoning.

古文：天祚所有，沙漠已北，西南、西北路两都招讨府、诸蕃部族而已。
现代文：天祚所拥有的，只是沙漠以北，西南、西北路两都招讨府，诸蕃部族而已。
English: What Tianyao has is only the tribes north of the desert, south-west and north-west, which are both Zhaotongfu and Zhuye.

古文：夏四月辛卯，西南面招讨使耶律佛顶降金，云内、宁边、东胜等州皆降。
现代文：夏四月初三，西南面招讨使耶律佛顶降金，云内、宁边、东胜等州均投降。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of summer, the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of the southwestern side of

古文：阿疏为金兵所擒。
现代文：阿疏为金兵所擒获。
English: Aso was captured by the Jin soldiers.

古文：金已取西京，沙漠以南部族皆降。
现代文：金人已经攻取西京，沙漠以南部族都投降了。
English: The gold people have already captured West Beijing, and the desert and southern peoples have all surrendered.

古文：上遂遁于讹莎烈。时化部谟葛失赆马、驼、食羊。
现代文：皇上于是逃到讹莎烈，这时北部谟葛失赠送马、骆驼和食羊给皇上。
English: The emperor then fled to Buxar. At this time, the northern Mughals presented the emperor with horses, camels and sheep.

古文：五月甲戌，都统马哥收集散亡，会于沤里谨。
现代文：五月十七日，都统马哥收集溃散逃亡的队伍，会集于沤里谨。
English: On the 17th of May, the Margo of the capital collected the scattered fugitive troops and gathered them in Bali.

古文：丙子，以马哥知北院枢密使事，兼都统。
现代文：十九日，任命马哥为知北院枢密使事、兼都统。
English: On the 19th, Margo was appointed Privy Counsellor of the Chihoku-in Imperial Palace, as well as the first Emperor of Japan.

古文：六月，淳寝疾，闻上传檄天德、云内、朔、武、应、蔚等州。合诸蕃精兵五万骑，约以八月入燕；并遣人问劳，索衣裘、茗药。
现代文：六月，耶律淳卧病，听说皇上传檄于天德、云内、朔、武、应、蔚等州，会合诸蕃精兵五万骑，约定在八月进入燕京；并派人慰问，索要皮毛衣物、茶药。
English: In June, when Ye Lu Chun was ill in bed, he heard that the emperor had sent envoys to Tiande, Yunnai, Shuo, Wu, Ying, Wei and other provinces. He gathered 50,000 elite soldiers and agreed to enter Yanjing in August. He also sent condolences and asked for furs, clothing and tea medicine.

古文：淳甚惊，命南、北面大臣议。
现代文：耶律淳十分惊慌，命令南、北面大臣商议。
English: Yeruchun was very alarmed and ordered the Southern and Northern ministers to discuss.

古文：而李处温、萧干等有迎秦拒湘之说，集蕃汉百官议之。
现代文：而李处温、萧干等人有迎秦王拒湘阴王的想法，召集蕃汉百官商议。
English: However, Li Duanwen, Xiao Gan and others had the idea of welcoming the King of Qin and rejecting the King of Xiangyin, and convened hundreds of officials from the Han Dynasty to discuss the matter.

古文：从其议者东立，惟南面行营都部署耶律宁西立。
现代文：听从其意见的，东向而立；只有南面行营都部署耶律宁面西而立。
English: Those who followed his advice, stood facing east; only those who camped in the south were deployed. Yerushalmi preferred to stand facing west.

古文：处温等问故，宁曰： 天祚果能以诸蕃兵大举夺燕，则是天数未尽，岂能拒之？
现代文：处温等问其缘故，耶律宁说： 天祚果真能率领诸蕃兵马大举夺取燕京，则是天数未尽，怎么能抗拒得住？
English: When asked about the reason for this, Ye Lu Ning said, "If it is true that Heaven's Armies can lead all the soldiers and horses to seize Yanjing in a big way, then the days are not exhausted. How can we resist?

古文：否则，秦、湘，父子也，拒则皆拒。
现代文：否则，秦王、湘阴王，是父与子，要抵制就同时抵制。
English: Otherwise, the King of Qin and the King of Hunan are father and son. If you want to resist, you should resist at the same time.

古文：自古安有迎子而拒其父者？ 
现代文：自古哪有迎接儿子而抵制父亲的道理？ 
English: Since ancient times, has there been a reason for welcoming the son and rejecting the father?

古文：处温等相顾微笑，以宁扇乱军心，欲杀之。
现代文：处温等人相视微笑，想以耶律宁惑乱军心为罪名杀掉他。
English: They smiled at each other and wanted to kill Yeruning on the charge that he had disturbed the morale of the troops.

古文：淳欹枕长叹曰： 彼忠臣也，焉可杀？
现代文：耶律淳靠在枕上说 ：他是个忠臣啊，怎么能杀他呢？
English: Yerutsun leaned on his pillow and said, "He's a loyal subject, how can you kill him?"

古文：天祚果来，吾有死耳，复何面目相见耶！ 
现代文：天祚要是真的前来，我有死而已，又哪里还有脸去与他相见呢？ 
English: If God really came, I would only be dead, and where would I have the face to meet him?

古文：已而淳死，众乃议立其妻萧氏为皇太后，主军国事。
现代文：不久耶律淳死了，众人于是商议立其妻为皇太后，主持军国大事。
English: Soon after, Jeruchon died, and the people discussed making his wife the empress dowager to preside over military affairs.

古文：奉遗命，迎立天祚次子秦王定为帝。
现代文：奉耶律淳遗命，迎立天祚次子秦王为帝。
English: According to the will of Ye Lu Chun, Emperor Qin, the second son of Emperor Tianmu, was enthroned.

古文：太后遂称制，改元德兴。
现代文：太后于是称制摄国政，改元德兴。
English: The empress dowager then proclaimed a regency and changed the era name to Dexing.

古文：处温父子惧祸，南通童贯，欲挟萧太后纳土于宋，北通于金，欲为内应，外以援立大功自陈。
现代文：处温父子害怕被定罪，于是在南与宋之童贯相交结，想挟持萧太后向宋纳地称臣，在北与金人交结，想做金人内应，对外自称有扶立帝后之大功。
English: Fearing that they would be convicted, Yuan Wen and his son made contact with the Song dynasty's children in the south, and wanted to hold Empress Xiao hostage and offer her as a vassal to the Song dynasty. In the north, they made contact with the Jin dynasty, and wanted to do the inner work of the Jin dynasty. To the outside world, they claimed to have made great contributions to the establishment of the Qing dynasty.

古文：萧太后骂曰： 误秦晋国王者，皆汝父子！ 
现代文：萧太后骂道： 迷惑并贻害于秦晋国王，都是你们父子所为！ 
English: Empress Dowager Xiao scolded: Your father and son are the ones who have confused and harmed King Qin Jin!

古文：悉数其过数十，赐死，脔其子奭而磔之；籍其家，得钱七万缗，金玉宝器称是，为宰相数月之间所取也。
现代文：一一列数其罪过数十条，赐死，碎割其子李，将处温处以剐刑；籍没其家，得到钱七万缗，金玉宝器数量也与此相当，这些都是在任宰相几个月之内所搜括而来的。
English: Dozens of his crimes were listed one by one, he was sentenced to death, his son Li was chopped into pieces, and he was flogged; he lost his home, received 70,000 baht in money, and the number of gold and jade treasures was also equivalent to this. All of these were collected within a few months of his appointment as prime minister.

古文：谟葛失以兵来援，为金人败于洪灰水，擒其子陀古及其属阿敌音。
现代文：谟葛失派兵前来援救我国，为金人击败于洪灰水，金人并擒获其子陀古以及亲属阿敌音。
English: Muge sent soldiers to rescue our country and defeated Jinren in the floods. Jinren also captured his son, Togu, as well as his relative, Ahchuen.

古文：夏国援兵至，亦为金所败。
现代文：夏国援兵前来，也为金人击败。
English: When Xia Guo's reinforcements arrived, they were also defeated by the Jin.

古文：秋七月丁巳朔，敌烈部皮室叛，乌古部节度使耶律棠古讨平之，加太子太保。
现代文：秋七月初一，敌烈部皮室反叛，乌古部节度使耶律棠古讨伐平定之，棠古加号太子太保。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the rebels in the Leather Division rebelled, and the Wu Gu Division defeated the Yelu Tanggu, and Tanggu became the Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：乙丑，上京毛八十率二千户降金。
现代文：初九，上京毛八十率领两千户投降于金。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Mao Yasi, who had come to Beijing, led 2,000 households to surrender to Kim.

古文：辛未，夏国遣曹价来问起居。
现代文：十五日，夏国派遣曹价前来问候皇上起居。
English: On the fifteenth day, Xia Guo sent Cao Jian to come and greet the emperor when he moved in.

古文：八月戊戌，亲遇金军，战于石辇驿，败绩，都统萧特末及其侄撒古被执。
现代文：八月十二日，皇上遭遇金军，交战于石辇驿，我国失败，都统萧特末及其侄儿撒古被俘。
English: On August 12th, the emperor encountered the Golden Army, which fought in Shizhao. Our country was defeated, and Tutong Xiaotemad and his nephew Zagu were captured.

古文：辛丑，会军于欢挞新查剌，金兵追之急，弃辎重以遁。
现代文：十五日，会合众军于欢挞新查剌，金兵急切追赶，我军抛弃了辎重逃走。
English: On the 15th, the United Front Army made a new inspection in Huanqian, and the gold soldiers eagerly chased after them. Our army abandoned their baggage and fled.

古文：九月，敌烈部叛，都统马哥克之。
现代文：九月，敌烈部反叛，都统马哥平定之。
English: In September, the enemy's stronghold rebelled, and the city of Mago was pacified.

古文：冬十月，金兵攻蔚州，降。
现代文：冬十月，金兵攻蔚州，蔚州降。
English: In the winter of October, the Golden Army attacked Ulshu, and Ulshu fell.

古文：十一月乙丑，闻金兵至奉圣州，遂率卫兵屯于落昆髓。
现代文：十一月初十，得知金兵到了奉圣州，皇上率领卫兵驻扎于落昆髓。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, it was learned that the gold soldiers had arrived in Feng Sheng Prefecture, and the emperor and his guards were stationed in Lok Kun Mei.

古文：秦晋王淳妻萧德妃五表于金，求立秦王，不许，以劲兵守居庸。
现代文：秦晋王耶律淳之妻萧德妃五次上表于金，请求册立秦王，金主不肯，德妃便派精兵把守居庸。
English: Xiao Defei, the wife of Qin Jin King Yerutun, petitioned Jin five times to set up a Qin king. Jin refused, and Tefei sent elite soldiers to guard Juyong.

古文：及金兵临关，厓石自崩，戍卒多压死，不战而溃。
现代文：及至金兵逼近居庸关，崖石自行崩塌，守军大多被压死，不战而溃。
English: When the gold soldiers approached Juyongguan, the cliff collapsed on its own, and most of the defenders were crushed to death and collapsed without a fight.

古文：德妃出古北口，趋天德军。
现代文：德妃逃出古北口，前往天德军。
English: Defeated, she fled out of the Old North Gate and headed for the Heavenly German Army.

古文：十二月，知金主抚定南京，上遂由扫里关出居四部族详稳之家。
现代文：十二月，得知金主已安抚平定南京，皇上便由扫里关出居于四部族详稳家中。
English: In December, after learning that his benefactor had pacified and pacified Nanjing, the emperor left Saoliguan to live in the home of the Four Tribes.

古文：三年春正月丁巳，奚王回离保僣号，称天复元年，命都统马哥讨之。
现代文：三年春正月初三，奚王回离保僭号称帝，称天复元年，皇上命都统马哥讨伐之。
English: On the third day of the third month of the first month of the third year of the Spring, the king of Zhao withdrew from Bao Zhao and called himself emperor, saying that it was the year of the restoration of heaven, and the emperor ordered the capital to fight against Marco.

古文：甲子，初，张瑴为辽兴军节度副使，民推瑴领州事。
现代文：初十，平州降金。当初，张任辽兴军节度副使，众人推举他代理平州知州。
English: At the beginning of the 10th day of the first month, Pingzhou was reduced to gold. At the beginning, Zhang served as the deputy envoy of the Liao Xing Army, and the people elected him as the deputy of Pingzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：秦晋王淳既死，萧德妃遣时立爱知平州。
现代文：秦晋王耶律淳死后，萧德妃派时立爱为平州知州。
English: After the death of Qin Jin King Yerutun, Xiao Defei sent Shi Liyao to Pingzhou and Chizhou.

古文：瑴知辽必亡，练兵畜马，籍丁壮为备。
现代文：张知道辽国必亡，便操练军士，畜养马匹，登记丁壮为后备军。
English: Zhang knew that Liaoning was doomed, so he trained sergeants, bred horses, and registered Ding Zhuang as a reserve.

古文：立爱至，瑴弗纳。
现代文：立爱到平州，张不肯接纳他。
English: When he moved to Pingzhou, Zhang refused to accept him.

古文：金帅粘罕入燕，首问平州事于故参知政事康公弼。
现代文：金军将领粘罕进入幽都，首先向前参知政事康公弼询问平州事宜。
English: The general of the gold army, Mu Han, entered the capital, and first asked the former senator and politician, Kang Gongtao, about Pingzhou.

古文：公弼曰： 瑴狂妄寡谋，虽有乡兵，彼何能为？
现代文：公弼说 ：张狂妄而缺少谋略，尽管拥有乡兵，那些人能管什么用？
English: The public prosecutor said: Zhang is arrogant and lacks strategy, despite having soldiers, what can those people do?

古文：示之不疑，图之未晚。 
现代文：向他表明对他没有疑心，再慢慢吃掉他不晚。 
English: Show him that you don't have any doubts about him, and then it's not too late to eat him slowly.

古文：金人招时立爱赴军前，加瑴临海军节度使，仍知平州。
现代文：金人招时立爱前往军前，升张为临海军节度使，仍为平州知州。
English: When Jinren recruited Li Ai, he went to the front of the army, Zhang was promoted to the deputy naval commander, and he was still the leader of Pingzhou Zhizhou.

古文：既而又欲以精兵三千先下平州，擒张瑴。
现代文：接着粘罕又想率精兵三千先攻下平州，捉拿张。
English: Next, Mu Han wanted to lead 3,000 elite soldiers to attack Pingzhou first and capture Zhang.

古文：公弼曰： 若加兵，是趣之叛也。 
现代文：康公弼说： 如果对平州用兵，是促使张氏反叛。 
English: Kang Gongyong said: If soldiers are used against Pingzhou, it will encourage the Zhang clan to rebel.

古文：公弼请自往觇之。
现代文：公弼请求让自己前往侦察一下。
English: The public is being asked to come and have a look for themselves.

古文：瑴谓公弼曰： 辽之八路，七路已降；独平州未解甲者，防萧幹耳。 
现代文：张对公弼说 ：辽国八路，其中七路已经降金，只有平州不曾放下武器，我是想为金国防范萧干来取平州。 
English: Zhang said to Gonglu, "There are eight provinces in Liaoning Province, seven of which have been reduced in gold, but only Pingzhou has not laid down arms. I want to defend Fan Xiaogang from Jin and take Pingzhou."

古文：厚赂公弼而还。
现代文：厚赠公弼让他回去。
English: He was allowed to return with a generous public subsidy.

古文：公弼复粘罕曰： 彼无足虑。 
现代文：公弼又对粘罕说 ：此人不足为虑。 
English: Gong Li also said to Mu Han, "Don't worry about this person.

古文：金人遂改平州为南京，加瑴试中书门下平章事，判留守事。
现代文：金人于是改平州为南京，升张为试中书门下平章事，判南京留守事。
English: Jinren then changed Pingzhou to Nanjing, promoted Zhang to the position of junior high school student, and was sentenced to remain in Nanjing.

古文：庚辰，宜、锦、乾、显、成、川、豪、懿等州相继皆降。上京卢彦伦叛，杀契丹人。
现代文：二十六日，宜、锦、乾、显、成、川、豪、懿等州相继都投降了，上京卢彦伦反叛，杀契丹人。
English: On the 26th, Yi, Jin, Qian, Xian, Chengdu, Sichuan, Gao, Handan and other provinces surrendered one after another. Lu Yanlun went to Beijing to rebel and kill the Khitan people.

古文：二月乙酉朔，兴中府降金。
现代文：二月初一，兴中府降金。
English: On the first day of February, Xingzhong Prefecture reduced the price.

古文：来州归德军节度使田颢、权隰州刺史杜师回、权迁州刺史高永昌、权润州刺史张成，皆籍所管户降金。
现代文：来州归德军节度使田颢、权隰州刺史杜师回、权迁州刺史高永昌、权润州刺史张成，都将所管户口登记造册降于金人。
English: When the German army came to Guizhou to return, Tian Qi, Quanzhang, Quanzhang, Quanzhang, Gao Yongchang, and Quanzhang, all the household registration records were reduced to gold.

古文：丙戌，诛萧德妃，降淳为庶人，尽释其党。
现代文：初二，皇上诛杀萧德妃，降耶律淳为庶人，对其党人一概释免。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor killed Xiao Defei, reduced Ye Lu Jun to a commoner, and released and pardoned all his party members.

古文：癸巳，兴中、宜州复城守。
现代文：初九，兴中、宜州重新据城防守。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, Xingzhong and Yizhou renewed the defense of the city.

古文：三月，驻跸于云内州南。
现代文：三月，歇驾于云内州南。
English: In March, it stopped in the south of Yunnan.

古文：夏四月甲申朔，以知北院枢密使事萧僧孝奴为诸道大都督。
现代文：夏四月初一，以知北院枢密使事萧僧孝奴为诸道大都督。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Xiao Zengxiao, the envoy of the Privy Council of Chihoku-in, was appointed as the grand governor of all the provinces.

古文：丙申，金兵至居庸关，擒耶律大石。
现代文：十三日，金兵到达居庸关，活捉了耶律大石。
English: On the 13th, the gold soldiers arrived at Juyongguan and captured Yelu Daishi alive.

古文：上遣牌印郎君谋卢瓦送兔纽金印伪降，遂西遁云内。
现代文：十五日，金兵在青冢包围了辎重家小，硬寨太保特母哥偷偷带着梁王雅里逃走，秦王、许王、众王妃、公主、从臣均陷入敌人手中。十七日，梁宋大长公主特里逃回。
English: On the fifteenth day, the gold soldiers surrounded the small family of Zou Chou in Qinghai, and the hard-hearted special mother brother of the eunuch secretly fled with Liang Wang Yali. King Qin, King Xu, the queens, princesses, and courtiers all fell into the hands of the enemy. On the seventeenth day, the eldest princess of Liang Song, Terry, fled back.

古文：驸马都尉乳奴诣金降。
现代文：十九日，金派人前来招降。
English: On the 19th, Kim sent an envoy to offer his surrender.

古文：己酉，金复以书来招，答其书。壬子，金帅书来，不许请和。
现代文：二十日，皇上答应求和。二十三日，金兵送族人亲属和辎重东行，又派兵在白水泊拦击我军，赵王习泥烈、萧道宁均被俘。
English: On the 20th day, the emperor promised to sue for peace. On the 23rd day, the gold soldiers sent the relatives of the tribesmen and the eunuchs to the east, and also sent soldiers to intercept our army in Baishuipo. Zhao Wang Xi Murei and Xiao Daoning were captured.

古文：是月，特母哥挈雅里至，上怒不能尽救诸子，诘之。
现代文：皇上派牌印郎君谋卢瓦送兔纽金印到金营伪降，于是一行人西逃云内。同月，特母哥带着雅里前来，皇上恼恨他不能将诸子全都救出，重重地诘责了他。
English: The emperor sent a seal-bearer to Luwa to send a hare and a gold seal to the gold camp for a fake surrender, so the party fled to the west. In the same month, the special mother brother came with Yali, and the emperor was angry that he could not rescue all the sons, and severely reprimanded him.

古文：五月乙卯，夏国王李乾顺遣使请临其国。
现代文：五月初三，夏国王李乾顺派使者请皇上前往夏国。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the king of Xia, Li Qianshun, sent an envoy to invite the emperor to go to Xia.

古文：庚申，军将耶律敌烈等夜劫梁王雅里奔西北部，立以为帝，改元神历。
现代文：初八，军将耶律敌烈等人乘夜劫持梁王雅里出奔于西北部，立梁王为帝，改元神历。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the generals of the army, such as Ye Lu and others, took the night to kidnap Liang Wang Yali and rushed to the northwest, establishing Liang Wang as emperor and changing the Yuan calendar.

古文：辛酉，渡河，止于金肃军北。
现代文：初九，皇上渡过黄河，歇宿于金肃军北。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the emperor crossed the Yellow River and stayed in the north of Gansu.

古文：回离保为众所杀。
现代文：回离保为部众所杀。
English: He was killed by his subordinates when he turned back.

古文：六月，遣使册李乾顺为夏国皇帝。
现代文：六月，派使者册立李乾顺为夏国皇帝。
English: In June, he sent an envoy to proclaim Li Qianshun as the emperor of Xia.

古文：秋九月，耶律大石自金求归。
现代文：秋九月，耶律大石从金营逃回。
English: In autumn and September, Ye Lu Daishi escaped from Jin Ying and returned.

古文：冬十月，复渡河东还，居突吕不部。
现代文：冬十月，再度渡黄河往东回行，居于突吕不部。
English: In winter and October, he crossed the Yellow River again and traveled back to the east, living in Turufube.

古文：梁王雅里殁，耶律术烈继之。
现代文：梁王雅里死，耶律术烈继立。
English: Liang Wang Yali died, and Yelu Jiu Zong continued to rise.

古文：十一月，术烈为众所杀。
现代文：十一月，术烈为部众所杀。
English: In November, the warrior was killed by his followers.

古文：四年春正月，上趋都统马哥军。
现代文：四年春正月，皇上前往都统马哥军中。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year, the emperor went to the capital of the Mago army.

古文：金人来攻，弃营北遁，马哥被执。
现代文：金人前来攻击，皇上弃军营北逃，马哥被俘。
English: The goldsmiths came to attack, the emperor abandoned his camp and fled north, and Marco was captured.

古文：谟葛失来迎，赆马、驼、羊，又率部人防卫。
现代文：谟葛失前来迎驾，馈赠马匹、骆驼、羊，又率领部人防卫。
English: Muge came to welcome him, presented him with horses, camels, and sheep, and led his men in the defense.

古文：时侍从乏粮数日，以衣易羊。
现代文：当时侍从缺粮已有数日，便以衣服换羊。
English: At that time, the attendants had been short of food for several days, so they exchanged clothes for sheep.

古文：至乌古敌烈部，以都点检萧乙薛知北院枢密使事，封谟葛失为神于越王。
现代文：到乌古敌烈部，以都点检萧乙薛为知北院枢密使事，封谟葛失为神于越王。
English: In the fierce battle of the ancient enemies of Wu, Xiao Yixue, the inspector of the capital city, was the envoy of the Privy Council of Chihokuin, and Homu Ge was the god of King Yue.

古文：特母哥降金。
现代文：特母哥降金。
English: The special mother's brother reduced the money.

古文：二月，耶律遥设等十人谋叛，伏诛。
现代文：二月，耶律遥设等十人阴谋反叛，被诛杀。
English: In February, Ye Luo Yao and ten others conspired to rebel and were killed.

古文：夏五月，金人既克燕，驱燕之大家东徙，以燕空城及涿、易、檀、顺、景、蓟州与宋以塞盟。
现代文：夏五月，金人在攻下幽都之后，驱使幽都府大户人家东迁，将幽都空城以及涿、易、檀、顺、蓟六州交给宋人以敷衍盟约。
English: In the summer of May, after conquering Yudofu, the Jin people drove the large households of Yudofu to move to the east, and handed over Yudofu Kuching and the six prefectures of Ye, Yi, Dan, Shun, and Min to the Song people as a perfunctory treaty.

古文：左企弓、康公弼、曹勇义、虞仲文皆东迁。
现代文：左企弓、康公弼、曹勇义、虞仲文均随之东迁。
English: Zuo Qigong, Kang Gongjun, Cao Yongyi, and Yu Zhongwen all moved east.

古文：燕民流离道路，不胜其苦，入平州，言于留守张瑴曰： 宰相左企弓不谋守燕，使吾民流离，无所安集。
现代文：幽都百姓流离于道路，无法忍受其苦，进入平州，对留守张说 ：宰相左企弓不策划守卫燕京，致使我们这些百姓流离失所，无处安身。
English: The people of Youdu, who were displaced on the road, could not bear the suffering, and entered Pingzhou. They said to Zhang, who was left behind, "Prime Minister Zuo Qigong did not plan to guard Yanjing, which led to the displacement of these people and left us with nowhere to stay."

古文：公今临巨镇，握强兵，尽忠于辽，必能使我复归乡土，人心亦惟公是望。 
现代文：您如今抚临大镇，手握强兵，如能对大辽尽忠，必定能使我们回归故土，人心也都会向着您。 
English: You are now approaching a large town, holding a strong army. If you can be loyal to Daliao, you will surely be able to return us to our homeland, and people's hearts will turn to you.

古文：瑴遂召诸将领议。
现代文：张于是召集众将领商议。
English: Zhang then called the generals together for discussion.

古文：皆曰： 闻天祚兵势复振，出没漠南。
现代文：都说： 听说天祚兵势重振，在漠南一带活动。
English: They all said, "I heard that Tianyao's troops have been reinvigorated and are active in the southern desert.

古文：公若仗义勤王，奉迎天祚，以图中兴，先责左企弓等叛降之罪而诛之，尽归燕民，使复某业，而以平州归宋，则宋无不接纳，平州遂为蕃镇矣。
现代文：将军如果仗义勤王，迎回天祚帝，以图谋辽室中兴，先点数左企弓等人叛变降金之罪而诛杀之，将燕京百姓全部遣返，让他们恢复旧业，同时据平州归附于宋，那么宋人没有不接纳之理，平州便成为藩镇了。
English: If the general fought for the king of righteousness and diligence, welcomed back the emperor of heaven and earth, and killed the people of Yanjing and repatriated all the people of Yanjing, so that they could resume their old business, and at the same time Pingzhou was attached to Song, then the Song people had no reason not to accept it, and Pingzhou became a town of the Han Dynasty.

古文：即后日金人加兵，内用平山之军，外得宋为之援，又何惧焉！ 
现代文：即使日后金人派兵来攻，我们在内用平州之军，在外得宋人之援助，又有什么可害怕的呢！ 
English: Even if the Jin sent troops to attack us in the future, if we use the Pingzhou army at home and the Song people's assistance abroad, what is there to be afraid of?

古文：瑴曰： 此大事也，不可草草。
现代文：张说： 此乃大事，不可草率行事。
English: Zhang said: This is an important matter, and we must not act hastily.

古文：翰林学士李石智而多谋，可召与议。 
现代文：翰林学士李石足智多谋，可召他前来商议。 
English: Li Shishi, a scholar of Hanlin, is resourceful and can call him to come to discuss.

古文：石至，其言与之合。
现代文：李石前来，所言与众将相合。
English: When Li Shishi arrived, his words resonated with the generals.

古文：乃遣张谦率五百余骑，传留守令，召宰相左企弓、曹勇义、枢密使虞仲文、参知政事康公弼至滦河西岸，遣议事官赵秘校往数十罪，曰： 天祚播迁夹山，不即奉迎，一也；劝皇叔秦晋王僣号，二也；诋讦君父，降封湘阴，三也；天祚遣知閤王有庆来议事而杀之，四也；檄书始至，有迎秦拒湘之议，五也；不谋守燕而降，六也；不顾大义，臣事于金，七也；根括燕财，取悦于金，八也；使燕人迁徙失业，九也；教金人发兵先下平州，十也。
现代文：于是张便派遣张谦率领五百余骑，传南京留守命令，召宰相左企弓、曹勇义、枢密使虞仲文、参知政事康公弼到滦河西岸，派议事官赵秘校前往列举他们十条罪状，说： 天祚帝流离于夹山，并不立即迎接，罪之一；劝皇叔秦晋王僭号称帝，罪之二；诋毁攻讦君父，将他降封为湘阴王，罪之三；天祚帝派遣知阁王有庆前来商议大事却杀了他，罪之四；皇上檄书刚到，你等便有迎秦王拒湘阴之谋议，罪之五；不谋求守卫燕京却出降金人，罪之六；不顾大义，称臣奉事于金，罪之七；将燕民财产搜括尽净，取悦于金人，罪之八；致使燕人飘泊迁徙失去本业，罪之九；教唆金人派兵先攻平州，罪之十。
English: So Zhang sent Zhang Qian, leading more than five hundred horsemen, with orders to stay in Nanjing. He summoned the chancellor Zuo Qianqiu, Cao Yongyi, the confidential envoy Yu Zhongwen, and the councillor and politician Kang Gongyi to the west bank of the Min River. He sent the deliberation officer Zhao Shike to enumerate their ten charges, saying: Tianyao Emperor wandered in the mountains, and did not immediately meet, one of the charges; persuaded the emperor's uncle Qin Jin Wang to proclaim himself emperor, second of the charges; slandered the emperor's father, and demoted him to the king of Hunan,

古文：尔有十罪，所不容诛。 
现代文：你等有罪行十条，杀之不足以解恨。 
English: If you have ten crimes, killing is not enough to get rid of hatred.

古文：左企弓等无以对，皆缢杀之。
现代文：左企弓等人无言以对，赵秘校将他们全部缢杀。
English: Zuo Kegong and others were speechless, and Zhao Shigong killed them all.

古文：仍称保大三年，画天祚象，朝夕谒，事必告而后行，称辽官秩。
现代文：张仍称保大三年，绘制天祚画像，早晚拜谒，有事必先于画像前奏告而后施行，并采用辽之官制封官。
English: Zhang still said that he would stay at the university for three years, draw pictures of Tianyao, and visit Tianyao in the morning and evening. If something happens, it must be reported before the picture is taken, and the official seal of Liao will be adopted.

古文：六月，榜谕燕人复业，恒产为常胜军所占者，悉还之。
现代文：六月，张出榜晓谕燕人恢复旧业，旧有田产为常胜军所侵夺者，全部归还。
English: In June, a list was published instructing the Yan people to resume their old business, and all the former farmland that had been seized by the ever-victorious army was returned.

古文：燕民既得归，大悦。
现代文：燕民既已得以返乡，皆大欢喜。
English: Now that the Yan people have been able to return home, everyone is very happy.

古文：翰林学士李石更名安弼，偕故三司使高党往燕山，说宋王安中曰： 平州带甲万余，瑴有文武材，可用为屏翰；不然，将为肘腋之患。 
现代文：翰林学士李石改名安弼，偕同前三司使高党前往燕山，劝宋将王安中说： 平州有甲兵一万余人，张有文武全才，可以利用来屏障拱卫；不然，将会成为近边的心腹之患。 
English: Li Shih, a scholar of Hanlin, changed his name to An Qi, and together with the former three departments, he sent Gao Party to Yanshan to persuade Wang An, the Song general, saying: Pingzhou has more than 10,000 A soldiers, Zhang has literary and military talents, and can be used to barrier and defend the arch; otherwise, it will become a headache for the neighborhood.

古文：安中深然之，令安弼与党诣宋。
现代文：王安中深以为然，命安弼与高党前往宋廷。
English: Wang Anzhong was deeply offended, and he and Gao went to Songting.

古文：宋主诏帅臣王安中、詹度厚加安抚，与免三年常赋。
现代文：宋主诏令帅臣王安中、詹度对他们好生安抚，免去他们三年的常规赋税。
English: Emperor Song ordered his powerful vassals Wang Anzhong and Zhandu to appease them and exempt them from three years of regular taxation.

古文：瑴闻之，自谓得计。
现代文：张听说后，自认为这一步走对了。
English: After Zhang heard about it, he thought it was the right move.

古文：秋七月，金人屯来州，阇母闻平州附宋，以二千骑问罪，先入营州。
现代文：秋七月，金人屯驻于来州，母得知平州依附于宋，派二千骑讨伐其罪，先进入营州。
English: In autumn and July, the Jin people settled in Lishuo. When the mother learned that Pingzhou was attached to Song, she sent two thousand horsemen to fight against the crime, and first entered Yingzhou.

古文：瑴以精兵万骑击败之。
现代文：张率精兵一万骑击败了母。
English: Zhang Rui defeated his mother with ten thousand horsemen.

古文：宋建平州为泰宁军，以瑴为节度使，以安弼、党为徽猷阁待制，令宣抚司出银绢数万犒赏。
现代文：宋朝将平州建制为泰宁军，任命张为节度使，以安弼、高党为徽猷阁待制，下令由宣抚司发放银绢数万加以犒赏。
English: The Song Dynasty established Pingzhou as the capital of the Taining Army, appointed Zhang as the commander of the army, put Anhui and Gaotang under the command of Huiyang, and ordered the Propaganda Department to issue tens of thousands of silver ingots as a reward.

古文：瑴喜，远迎。
现代文：张大喜，远道迎接。
English: Zhang Daxi, welcome from afar.

古文：金人谍知，举兵来袭，瑴不得归，奔燕。
现代文：金人侦察得知，派兵前来攻袭，张无法回平州，便逃奔燕京。
English: When Jinren reconnaissance learned that Zhang was unable to return to Pingzhou after sending troops to attack, he fled to Yanjing.

古文：金人克三州，始来索瑴，王安中讳之。
现代文：金人攻克平、滦、营三州之后，这才来索要张，王安中说没有。
English: It was only after the Jin people conquered the three states of Keping, Nanning and Ying that they came to ask for Zhang. Wang An said no.

古文：索急，斩一人貌类者去。
现代文：金人追得急了，王安中便杀了一个长相类似的人送去。
English: The goldsmith was in a hurry, so Wang Anzhong killed a similar-looking man and sent him on his way.

古文：金人曰，非瑴也，以兵来取。
现代文：金人说，这不是张，派兵来取。
English: The goldsmith said, "This is not Zhang, send soldiers to get it."

古文：安中不得已，杀瑴，函其首送金。
现代文：安中不得已，杀了张，函盛其首级送至金国。
English: As a last resort, An Zhong killed Zhang, and Han Sheng sent his head to Jin.

古文：天祚既得林牙耶律大石兵归，又得阴山室韦谟葛失兵，自谓得天助，再谋出兵，复收燕、云。
现代文：天祚既已得到耶律大石率兵归附，又得到阴山室韦谟葛失的兵力，自认为得到天助，想图谋再次出兵，收复燕、云二州。
English: Tianzhu not only had the soldiers led by Yelu Daishi returned to him, but also the lost troops of Yin Shan Mu and Wei Mu Ge. He thought that he had received divine help and wanted to try to send out troops again to recover Yan and Yun two states.

古文：大石林牙力谏曰： 自金人初陷长春、辽阳，则车驾不幸广平淀，而都中京；及陷上京，则都燕山；及陷中京，则幸云中；自云中而播迁夹山。
现代文：大石林牙全力谏阻说： 自从金人初次攻陷长春、辽阳，皇上便无法前往广平淀，而建都中京；及至攻陷上京，皇上则建都燕山；待到攻陷中京，皇上来到云中，又从云中流离到夹山。
English: Daishi Lingya resisted with all his might, saying, "Since the first time the Jin conquered Changchun and Liaoyang, the emperor was unable to go to Guangpingdian, but built the capital in Zhongjing; and when he conquered Shangjing, the emperor built the capital in Yanshan; when he conquered Zhongjing, the emperor came to Yunzhong, and then moved from Yunzhong to Jiashan.

古文：向以全师不谋战备，使举国汉地皆为金有。
现代文：从前有全国之兵而不肯谋划攻战守备，致使全国之汉地均为金人占有。
English: In the past, there were soldiers from all over the country who did not want to plan offensive and defensive preparations, resulting in the Han people occupying all the land in the country.

古文：国势至此，而方求战，非计也。
现代文：国家形势到了这一步，这才求战，这不是办法。
English: The national situation has reached such a stage that war must be resorted to. This is not the way.

古文：当养兵待时而动，不可轻举。 
现代文：应当息养兵力等待时机发动，不可轻举妄动。 
English: We should conserve our forces and wait for the right time to launch, and we should not act rashly.

古文：不从。大石遂杀乙薛及坡里括，置北、南面官属，自立为王，率所部西去。
现代文：天祚帝不听，耶律大石便杀死萧乙薛及坡里括，设置北、南面官属，自立为王，率领所部奔西而去。
English: Emperor Tianzhong did not listen, so Yelu Daishi killed Xiao Yixue and Po Lihong, set up officials in the north and south, established himself as king, and led the headquarters to the west.

古文：上遂率诸军出夹山，下渔阳岭，取天德、东胜、宁边、云内等州。
现代文：皇上便率领诸军出夹山，下渔阳岭，夺取了天德、东胜、宁边、云内等州。
English: The emperor then led the troops out of Jianshan and down Yuyangling, capturing Tiande, Dongsheng, Ningbian, Yunnan and other provinces.

古文：南下武州，遇金人，战于奄遏下水，复溃，直趋山阴。
现代文：又南下武州，遭遇金人，接战于奄遏下水，军队再度溃散，皇上直奔山阴。
English: He also went south to Wuzhou, where he encountered the Jin people, engaged in a battle at the mouth of the canal, the army once again broke up, and the emperor headed straight for the mountains.

古文：八月，国舅详稳萧挞不也、笔砚祗候察剌降金。
现代文：八月，国舅详稳萧挞不也、笔砚祗候察剌投降金国。
English: In August, the country's uncle Jiao Jian surrendered to Kim.

古文：是月，金主阿骨打死。
现代文：同月，金主阿骨打死去。
English: In the same month, the owner of the money, Akotsuma, died.

古文：九月，建州降金。
现代文：九月，建州投降于金。
English: In September, Gyeongju surrendered to Kim.

古文：冬十月，纳突吕不部人讹哥之妻谙葛，以讹哥为本部节度使。
现代文：冬十月，皇上纳娶突吕不部人讹哥之妻谙葛，任命讹哥为本部节度使。
English: In the winter of October, Empress Dowager Na married Gongge, the wife of Gongge, who was a member of the Tur Lvf department, and appointed Gongge as the head of the festival.

古文：昭古牙率众降金。
现代文：昭古牙率众降金。
English: Zhaogu Fang led the crowd in lowering the price.

古文：金攻兴中府，降之。
现代文：金军进攻兴中府，兴中府降。
English: The Chinese army attacked Xingzhongfu, and Xingzhongfu surrendered.

古文：十一月，从行者举兵乱，北护卫太保术者、舍利详稳牙不里等击败之。
现代文：十一月，随行之人举兵叛乱，北护卫太保术者、舍利详稳牙不里等击败之。
English: In November, the people who accompanied him raised an army and rebelled, and the Northern Guards, the Taihōshū, and the Shōryō were defeated.

