古文：楚将伐齐，鲁亲之，齐王患之。
现代文：楚国准备攻打齐国，鲁国与楚国关系紧密，齐王对此很是担忧。
English: The State of Chu was preparing to attack the State of Qi, and the relationship between the State of Lu and the State of Chu was close. The King of Qi was very worried about this.

古文：张丐曰： 臣请令鲁中立。 
现代文：张丐说： 臣下请求去鲁国说服，使鲁国中立。 
English: Zhang Gai said: My vassal asked me to go to Lu to persuade him and make Lu neutral.

古文：乃为齐见鲁君。
现代文：于是张丐代表齐国去拜见鲁国国君。
English: As a result, Zhang Ye, on behalf of the State of Qi, went to meet the Emperor of the State of Lu.

古文：鲁君曰： 齐王惧乎？ 。
现代文：鲁康公说： 齐王害怕了吗？ 
English: Lu Kang Gong said, "Is King Qi afraid?"

古文：曰： 非臣所知也，臣来吊足下。 
现代文：张丐说： 这不是臣下所能知道的事情，臣下是来哀悼您的。 
English: Zhang Gai said, "This is not something your vassals can know about. Your vassals are here to mourn you."

古文：鲁君曰： 何吊？ 
现代文：鲁康公说： 为什么哀悼我？ 
English: Lu Kang Gong said: Why mourn me?

古文：曰： 君之谋过矣。
现代文：张丐说： 大王的谋划错了。
English: Zhang Gai said: The great king's plan was wrong.

古文：君不与胜者而与不胜者，何故也？ 
现代文：大王不帮助胜利者而去帮助失败者，这是什么缘故？ 
English: Why does the king help the loser and not the winner?

古文：鲁君曰： 子以齐、楚为孰胜哉？ 
现代文：鲁康公说： 您认为齐、楚两国哪一方能取胜呢？ 
English: Lu Kangong said: Which side of Qi and Chu can win, do you think?

古文：对曰： 鬼且不知也。 
现代文：张丐回答说： 就是鬼也不知道。 
English: Zhang Ye replied, "Even the ghosts don't know."

古文： 然则予何以吊寡人？ 
现代文：鲁康公说： 这样说来，那么您凭什说哀悼寡人？ 
English: Lu Kang said: In this way, how can you say that there are not many mourners?

古文：曰： 齐、楚之权敌也，不用有鲁与无鲁。
现代文：张丐说： 齐国、楚国势均力敌，不在乎有鲁国还是没有鲁国的帮助。
English: Zhang Gai said: Qi and Chu are evenly matched, and it doesn't matter whether they have the help of Lu or not.

古文：足下岂如令众而合二国之后哉!楚大胜齐，其良士选卒必殪，其余兵足以待天下；齐为胜，其良士选卒亦殪。
现代文：您哪里赶得上保持中立在两国交战之后联合胜利一方啊如果楚国大胜齐国，楚国的良将精兵一定有很多伤亡，其余的军队完全可以对付天下的侵略者；如果齐国取胜，齐国的良将精兵也会有很大死伤。
English: How can you be so hasty to remain neutral and join the winning side after the two countries have been at war? If Chu wins a great victory over Qi, the good soldiers of Chu must have many casualties, and the rest of the army can fully deal with the aggressors of the world; if Qi wins, the good soldiers of Qi will also have a lot of deaths and injuries.

古文：而君以鲁众合战胜后，此其为德也亦大矣，其见恩德亦其大也。 
现代文：然而君王率领鲁国的兵众联合战胜的一方，这大概施的恩德也够大了。 
English: However, the king led the troops of the Lu country to jointly defeat the other side, which is probably a big enough blessing.

古文：鲁君以为然，身退师。
现代文：鲁康公认为说得有理，亲自率领军队后退。
English: Lu Kanggong thought it was reasonable and personally led the army to retreat.

