古文：子列子居郑圃，四十年人无识者。
现代文：列子住在郑国圃田，四十年来没有人赏识他。
English: Letsi lives in Putian, Zhengzhou, and no one has recognized him for forty years.

古文：国君卿大夫眎之，犹众庶也。
现代文：郑国的国君、公卿、大夫看待他，就像看待一般老百姓一样。
English: The sovereigns, nobles, and doctors of Zhengzhou regarded him as they did the common people.

古文：国不足，将嫁于卫。
现代文：郑国发生了饥荒，列子准备到魏国去。
English: There was a famine in Zheng, and the envoys were preparing to go to Wei.

古文：弟子曰： 先生往无反期，弟子敢有所谒，先生将何以教？
现代文：他的学生说： 老师这次出门不知什么时候才能回来，学生冒昧请教一些问题，老师将用什么来教导我们呢？
English: His students said: The teacher is out of the house this time and we don't know when he will be back. The students ventured to ask some questions. What will the teacher use to teach us?

古文：先生不闻壶丘子林之言乎？ 
现代文：老师没有听到过壶丘子林先生的言谈吗？ 
English: Hasn't the teacher heard Mr. Kuchuko Zilin's speech?

古文：子列子笑曰： 壶子何言哉？
现代文：列子笑着说： 壶丘先生说了什么呢？
English: Lets say with a smile: What did Mr. Kettle Hill say?

古文：虽然，夫子尝语伯昏瞀人，吾侧闻之，试以告女。
现代文：即使如此，先生曾经告诉过伯昏瞀人一些话，我在旁边听见了，姑且告诉你们。
English: Even so, my master once said something to a man from Bc Thm, which I overheard, so let me tell you.

古文：其言曰：有生不生，有化不化。
现代文：他说：产生万物的，自身却不能被他物所生；那化育万物的，自身却不被他物所化。
English: He said, "He that begetteth all things, can himself not be begotten; and he that bringeth forth all things, can himself not be begotten."

古文：不生者能生生，不化者能化化。
现代文：不被产生的能够产生出万物；不被化育的，能够使万物变化。
English: That which is not produced can produce all things; that which is not developed can cause all things to change.

古文：生者不能不生，化者不能不化，故常生常化。
现代文：所有的产生是因为不得不产生，所有的变化是因为不得不变化，所以万物总是在产生，经常在变化。
English: All things come into being because they have to come into being, and all things change because they have to change, so all things are always coming into being and are always changing.

古文：常生常化者，无时不生，无时不化。
现代文：那产生与化育万物者，没有一刻不在产生，没有一刻不在变化。
English: There is never a moment when the Creator and Nurturer of all things is not creating, and never a moment when He is not changing.

古文：阴阳尔，四时尔，不生者疑独，不化者往复。
现代文：阴阳二气是这样，一年四季也是这样，那不被产生的，固定不变而独立永存；那不被化育的，循环往复而轮回始终。
English: The yin and yang are like this, and so are the four seasons of the year. That which is not produced is fixed, unchanging, and eternally exists independently; that which is not transmuted and nurtured goes through a cycle of reciprocation and reincarnation.

古文：往复，其际不可终；疑独，其道不可穷。
现代文：那循环往复的，它的边界没有终结；那独立永存的，它的道理不可穷尽。
English: That which is cyclic, its boundaries are endless; that which is self-sustaining, its principles are inexhaustible.

古文：《黄帝书》曰：谷神不死，是谓玄牝。
现代文：《黄帝书》说：空虚的神妙作用不会消逝，就叫做玄牝。
English: "The Yellow Emperor's Book" says: The miraculous effect of emptiness will not disappear, it is called Xuan Zang.

古文：玄牝之门，是谓天地之根。
现代文：玄牝的门户，就叫做天地的根源。
English: The gateway to the universe is called the root of heaven and earth.

古文：绵绵若存，用之不勤。
现代文：它连绵不断若有若无，发挥作用永不止息。
English: It goes on and on and on, and it never stops working.

古文：故生物者不生，化物者不化。
现代文：所以产生万物的，它自身不被产生；化育万物的，它自身不被变化。
English: Therefore that which produces all things is not itself produced, and that which produces all things is not itself changed.

古文：自生自化，自形自色，自智自力，自消自息。
现代文：万物是自然而然产生与变化，自然而然显现形状与色彩，自然而然运用智慧与力量，自然而然消亡与生长的。
English: All things spontaneously arise and change, spontaneously appear in shape and color, spontaneously exercise wisdom and power, spontaneously die and grow.

古文：谓之生化、形色、智力、消息者，非也。 
现代文：把这一切说成是刻意的产生、变化、显形、着色、运智、用力、消亡、生长，是错误的。 
English: It would be wrong to describe all this as a deliberate process of creation, change, manifestation, colouring, luck, effort, death and growth.

古文：子列子曰： 昔者圣人因阴阳以统天地。
现代文：列子说： 过去圣人凭借阴阳二气来统御天地万物。
English: Reiko said, "In the past, sages used their yin and yang to govern all things in heaven and earth.

古文：夫有形者生于无形，则天地安从生？
现代文：有形态的事物是从无形态的事物产生出来的，那么有形态的天地万物是从哪里产生的呢？
English: Forming things come from formless things, so where did the form of heaven and earth come from?

古文：故曰：有太易，有太初，有太始，有太素。
现代文：所以说：天地万物的产生过程有大易阶段，有太初阶段，有太始阶段，有太素阶段。
English: Therefore, it is said that the process of the creation of heaven and earth and all things has a great easy stage, a very early stage, a very early stage, and a very elementary stage.

古文：太易者，未见气也；太初者，气之始也；太始者，形之始也；太素者，质之始也。
现代文：所谓太易，是指元气尚未形成的状态；所谓太初，是指元气萌发时的状态；所谓太始，是指元气形成并且具有了一定形态时的状态；所谓太素，是指元气不仅有了形态还有脸固定的性质时的状态。
English: The so-called "too easy" refers to the state in which the original qi has not yet formed; the so-called "too early" refers to the state when the original qi germinated; the so-called "too early" refers to the state when the original qi formed and had a certain shape; the so-called "too prime" refers to the state when the original qi not only had a shape but also a fixed face.

古文：气形质具而未相离，故曰浑沦。
现代文：元气、形态、性质共同具备且未互相分离，所以叫做浑沦。
English: The vitality, form, and nature are common and not separated from each other, so it is called muddled.

古文：浑沦者，言万物相浑沦而未相离也。
现代文：所谓浑沦，说的是万物浑然一体而没有分离开来的状态。
English: The so-called entanglement refers to the state in which all things are seamlessly integrated and not separated.

古文：视之不见，听之不闻，循之不得，故曰易也。
现代文：看它看不见，听它听不到，摸它摸不着，所以叫做易。
English: You can't see it, you can't hear it, you can't touch it, that's why it's called Yi.

古文：易无形埒，易变而为一，一变而为七，七变而为九。
现代文：易没有形状，易经过变化而成为一，一经过变化而成为七，七经过变化而成为九。
English: Easy has no shape, easy changes to become one, one changes to become seven, seven changes to become nine.

古文：九变者，究也；乃复变而为一。
现代文：九是变化的终极，于是反过来又变化而成为一。
English: Nine is the ultimate of change, so in turn it changes and becomes one.

古文：一者，形变之始也。清轻者上为天，浊重者下为地，冲和气者为人；故天地含精，万物化生。 
现代文：一是形状变化的开始，清灵轻巧之气上浮成为天，浑浊厚重之气下沉成为地，阴阳二气中和交会便成为人，所以天地蕴含着阴阳精气，万物由此变化而生。 
English: First, it was the beginning of a change in shape. The clear, light and delicate air floated up to become the sky, the turbid, thick and heavy air sank to become the earth, and the meeting of yin and yang became a person. Therefore, heaven and earth contain the essence of yin and yang, and everything is born from this change.

古文：子列子曰： 天地无全功，圣人无全能，万物无全用。
现代文：列子说： 天地没有完备的功效，圣人没有完备的能力，万物没有完备的用途。
English: Liang Zi said: Heaven and earth do not have perfect efficacy, sages do not have perfect ability, and all things do not have perfect use.

古文：故天职生覆，地职形载，圣职教化，物职所宜。
现代文：所以天的职责在于生长覆盖，地的职责在于成形载物，圣人的职责在于教育感化，万物的职能为各自的性质所规定。
English: Therefore, the role of heaven is to grow and cover, the role of earth is to form and support, and the role of saints is to educate and influence. The functions of all things are determined by their respective natures.

古文：然则天有所短，地有所长，圣有所否，物有所通。
现代文：这样看来，天有短缺之功，地有擅长之事，圣人有困滞的时候，万物有通达的时候。
English: From this perspective, the heavens have shortages, the earth has things to excel at, sages have times of stagnation, and all things have times of attainment.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：生覆者不能形载，形载者不能教化，教化者不能违所宜，宜定者不出所位。
现代文：这是因为覆育生命的天不能承载万物，承载万物的不能教育感化，教育感化的不能违背它的适当用途，事物适宜的功用已经确定了的，便不能再超出它所担负的职责。
English: This is because the sky that nurtures life cannot support all things, and the sky that supports all things cannot be influenced by education, and the influence of education cannot go against its proper use. Once the proper function of a thing has been determined, it can no longer exceed the responsibilities it bears.

古文：故天地之道，非阴则阳；圣人之教，非仁则义；万物之宜，非柔则刚：此皆随所宜而不能出所位者也。
现代文：所以天地的运行规律，不是阴便是阳；圣人的教讹，不是仁便是义；万物的本质，不是柔便是刚；这些都是按照它所适宜的功用而不能超出它所担负的职责的。
English: Therefore, the laws of heaven and earth are either yin or yang; the teachings of saints are either benevolence or righteousness; the essence of all things is either soft or hard; all of these are in accordance with its appropriate function and cannot exceed the responsibility it bears.

古文：故有生者，有生生者；有形者，有形形者；有声者，有声声者；有色者，有色色者；有味者，有味味者。
现代文：所以有生命，就有产生生命的本原；有有形状的事物，就有产生形状的事物的本原；有有声音的事物，就有使有声之物发出声音的本原；有有颜色的事物，有使有色之物表现出颜色的本原；有有滋昧的事物，有使有味之物呈现出滋味的本原。
English: Therefore, if there is life, there is the origin of life; if there are things with shape, there is the origin of things with shape; if there are things with sound, there is the origin of things with sound; if there are things with color, there is the origin of things with color; if there are things with flavor, there is the origin of things with flavor.

古文：生之所生者死矣，而生生者未尝终；形之所形者实矣，而形形者未尝有；声之所声者闻矣，而声声者未尝发；色之所色者彰矣，而色色者未尝显；味之所味者尝矣，而味味者未尝呈：皆无为之职也。
现代文：有生命的事物所呈现出的生命死亡了，但使有生之物产生的本原却没有终止；有形状的事物所呈现出的形状是实在的了，但使有形之物成形的本原却没有出现；有声音的事物所呈现出的声音已经被听到了，但使有声之物发声的本原却没有发声；有颜色的事物所呈现出的颜色显明了，但使有色之物出色的本原却没有显露；有滋味的事物所呈现出的滋味已经被尝到了，但使有味之物出味的本原却没有呈现：这些都是无为的道的作用。
English: The life exhibited by a living thing has died, but the principle that produced the living thing has not ended; the shape exhibited by a shaped thing is real, but the principle that formed the tangible thing has not appeared; the sound exhibited by a sound-producing thing has been heard, but the principle that gave voice to the sound-producing thing has not appeared; the color exhibited by a color-producing thing has become clear, but the principle that made the color-producing thing outstanding has not appeared; the taste exhibited by a taste-producing thing has been tasted, but the principle that made the taste-producing thing delicious has not appeared: These are the effects of the way of non-action.

古文：能阴能阳，能柔能刚，能短能长，能员能方，能生能死，能暑能凉，能浮能沉，能宫能商，能出能没，能玄能黄，能甘能苦，能羶能香。
现代文：它使事物能够表现出阴的特性，也能够表现出阳的特性；能够表现出柔的特性，也能够表现出刚的特性；能够缩短，也能够延长；能够呈现圆的形状，也能够呈现方的形状；能够产生，也能够死亡；能够暑热，也能够凉爽；能够上浮，也能够下沉；能够发出宫声，也能够发出商声；能够呈现，也能够隐没；能够表现出黑的颜色，也能够表现出黄的颜色；能够呈现出甜的滋味，也能够呈现出苦的滋味；能够发出羶的气味，也能够发出香的气味。
English: It enables things to exhibit the characteristics of yin and yang; to exhibit the characteristics of softness and stiffness; to shorten and lengthen; to take on the shape of a circle and a square; to produce and die; to be hot and cool; to rise and sink; to emit the sound of the palace and the sound of commerce; to appear and disappear; to exhibit the color black and the color yellow; to exhibit the taste of sweetness and the taste of bitterness; to emit the smell of pus and the smell of incense.

古文：无知也，无能也，而无不知也，而无不能也。 
现代文：它没有知觉，没有能力，却又无所不知，无所不能。 
English: It has no consciousness, no power, yet it knows everything and can do everything.

古文：子列子适卫，食于道，从者见百岁髑髅。
现代文：列子到卫国去，在路边吃饭，跟从的学生看见道旁已有百年的死人头骨。
English: The procession went to the homeland, ate by the roadside, and the students who followed saw the skull of a dead man who had been dead for a hundred years by the roadside.

古文：攓蓬而指，顾谓弟子百丰曰： 唯予与彼知而未尝生未尝死也。
现代文：列子拔开蓬蒿而手指着它，回头对他的学生百丰说： 只有我和他懂得万物既没有生，也没有死的道理。
English: "Only he and I understand the truth that all things neither live nor die," he said, pointing to his pupil, Baifeng.

古文：此过养乎？
现代文：死亡果真令人悲愁吗？
English: Is death really sad?

古文：此过欢乎？
现代文：活着果真使人欢喜吗？
English: Does being alive really make you happy?

古文：种有几：若蛙为鹑，得水为畿，得水土之际，则为圭黾蠙之衣。
现代文：物种之中藏有极微妙的变化因素：就像青蛙变为鹌鹑，得到水的滋润又会继续变化长成细如断丝的㡭草，到了水土交会之处，就会长出青苔。
English: Species contain very subtle factors of change: just as a frog changes into a tadpole, and when water moistens it, it continues to change and grow into a reed grass as fine as broken silk, and when soil and water meet, moss grows.

古文：生于陵屯，则为陵舄。
现代文：生长在高土堆上，便成为车前草。
English: Growing on high mounds, it becomes the plantain.

古文：陵舄得郁栖，则为乌足。
现代文：车前草得到了粪土，又变为乌足草。
English: The plantain got manure and turned into blacklegged weed.

古文：乌足之根为蛴螬，其叶为胡蝶。
现代文：乌足草的根变为土蚕，它的叶子则变为蝴蝶。
English: The roots of Blackfoot grass turn into silkworms, and its leaves turn into butterflies.

古文：胡蝶胥也化而为虫，生灶下，其状若脱，其名曰鸲掇。
现代文：蝴蝶很快就又变为虫子，这种虫生长在灶下，它的形状就会像蜕了皮一样，它的名字叫鸲掇虫。
English: The butterfly soon turns into a worm again. This kind of worm grows under the stove, and its shape will be like a peeled skin. Its name is the ladybug.

古文：鸲掇千日化而为鸟，其名曰乾馀骨。
现代文：鸲掇虫经过一千天的变化，又变化成为鸟，它的名字叫乾馀骨。
English: After a thousand days of change, the maggot changes into a bird, and its name is dry bone.

古文：乾馀骨之沫为斯弥，斯弥为食醯颐辂，食醯颐辂生乎食醯黄軦，食醯黄軦生乎九猷，九猷生乎瞀芮，瞀芮生乎腐蠸。
现代文：乾馀骨鸟口中的唾沫变成为斯弥虫，斯弥虫又变成为酒醋上的颐辂虫。酒醋上的颐辂虫生出了酒醋上的黄軦虫，酒醋上的黄軦虫又生出了九猷虫，九猷虫生出了瞀芮虫，瞀芮虫又生出了萤火虫。
English: The spittle in the bird's mouth of the dry leftover bone turned into the blackfly, and the blackfly turned into the aphid on the wine vinegar. The aphid on the wine vinegar gave birth to the yellow aphid on the wine vinegar, the yellow aphid on the wine vinegar gave birth to the nine aphids, the nine aphids gave birth to the aphid, and the aphid gave birth to the firefly.

古文：羊肝化为地皋，马血之为转邻也，人血之为野火也。
现代文：羊肝变化为附在地面上的白气，马血变成为能转动的磷火，人血变成为在野外流窜的鬼火。
English: The sheep's liver changes into white gas attached to the ground, the horse's blood changes into phosphorous fire that can rotate, and the human blood changes into a ghost fire that flows in the wild.

古文：鹞之为鹯，鹯之为布谷，布谷久复为鹞也。
现代文：鹞鸟变成为晨风鸟，晨风鸟变成为布谷鸟，布谷鸟时间长了又反过来变为鹞鸟。
English: The ostrich becomes the morning glory, the morning glory becomes the cuckoo, the cuckoo becomes the ostrich again.

古文：燕之为蛤也，田鼠之为鹑也，朽瓜之为鱼也，老韭之为苋也，老羭之为猨也，鱼卵之为虫。
现代文：燕子变成为蛤蜊，田鼠变成为鹌鹑，腐朽的瓜变成为鱼，老韮菜变成为苋菜，老母羊变成为猿猴，鱼的卵又变成为虫子。
English: The swallow becomes a toad, the field mouse becomes a toad, the rotten melon becomes a fish, the old leek becomes a leek, the old ewe becomes a monkey, and the fish's egg becomes a worm.

古文：亶爰之兽自孕而生曰类。河泽之鸟视而生曰鶂。
现代文：亶爱山上的兽自己怀孕而生崽叫做类，河泽中的鸟互相看着而生子叫做。
English: The beasts in the mountains are called baboons when they are pregnant and give birth, and the birds in the river are called cormorants when they look at each other and give birth.

古文：纯雌其名大腰，纯雄其名稚蜂。
现代文：全是母的动物的名字叫大腰，全是公的动物的名字叫稚蜂。
English: All-female animals are called great apes, and all-male animals are called brood bees.

古文：思士不妻而感，思女不夫而孕。
现代文：单相思的男士不娶妻子而受胎，单相思的女子不嫁丈夫而怀孕。
English: An unattached man conceives without a wife, and an unattached woman conceives without a husband.

古文：后稷生乎巨迹，伊尹生乎空桑。
现代文：后稷因为母亲踏了天帝的足迹而诞生，伊尹因为母亲梦遇神仙而生于空桑。
English: Houyi was born because his mother walked in the footsteps of the heavenly emperor, and Yi Yin was born in Kuanshan because his mother had a dream about a god.

古文：厥昭生乎湿，醯鸡生乎酒。
现代文：蜻蛉虫生在潮湿之处，蠛蠓生在酒醋之中。
English: The tapeworm lives in damp places and thrives in wine vinegar.

古文：羊奚比乎不笋，久竹生青宁，青宁生程，程生马，马生人，人久入于机。
现代文：羊奚草与不长笋子的老竹相比美，不长笋子的老竹生出了青宁虫，青宁虫生出了豹子，豹子生出了马，马生出了人，人老后就返归自然之中。
English: Compared with the old bamboo that does not grow lice, the old bamboo that does not grow lice gave birth to the nymph, the nymph gave birth to the leopard, the leopard gave birth to the horse, the horse gave birth to the human, and the human returned to nature when he was old.

古文：万物皆出于机，皆入于机。 
现代文：万物生命都产生于大道，死后又复归于大道。
English: All living things are born on the avenue, and return to the avenue after death.

古文：《黄帝书》曰： 形动不生形而生影，声动不生声而生响，无动不生无而生有。 
现代文：《黄帝书》说： 形体运动不产生形体而产生影子，声音运动不产生声音而产生回响，虚无运动不产生虚无而产生实有。 
English: "The Yellow Emperor's Book" says: The movement of form does not produce form, but shadow; the movement of sound does not produce sound, but reverberation; the movement of nothingness does not produce nothingness, but reality.

古文：形，必终者也；天地终乎？
现代文：有形之物是一定会终结的。天地会终结吗？
English: Tangible things will certainly come to an end. Will heaven and earth come to an end?

古文：与我偕终。
现代文：和我一样要终结。
English: Like me, it has to end.

古文：终进乎？
现代文：终结有穷尽的时候吗？
English: Is there an end to the end?

古文：不知也。
现代文：不知道。
English: I don't know.

古文：道终乎本无始，进乎本不久。
现代文：道终结于原来没有开始的时候，穷尽在本来就没有形态的地方。
English: The Tao ends where it did not begin, and is exhausted where there is no form.

古文：有生则复于不生，有形则复于无形。
现代文：一切有生命的事物终将回到没有生命的状态，有形体的事物终将回到没有形体的状态。
English: All living things will eventually return to a lifeless state, and corporeal things will eventually return to a formless state.

古文：不生者，非本不生者也；无形者，非本无形者也。
现代文：先有生命而后又死亡的事物，并不是从来不曾有过生命；先有形体而后又没有形体的事物，并非从来不曾具有形体。
English: Things which are alive and then die have not never been alive; things which are corporeal and then incorporeal have not never been corporeal.

古文：生者，理之必终者也。
现代文：凡是产生出来的事物，按照自然法则是必定会终结的。
English: Whatever comes into being must, according to the laws of nature, come to an end.

古文：终者不得不终，亦如生者之不得不生。
现代文：该终结的事物不得不终结，就像该产生的事物不能不产生一样。
English: That which is to end must end, just as that which is to be produced must be produced.

古文：而欲恒其生，画其终，惑于数也。
现代文：而想要使生命成为永恒，妄图制止它的终结，这是不懂得自然之道啊！
English: But to want to make life eternal, to try to prevent its end, is not to understand the way of nature!

古文：精神者，天之分；骨骸者，地之分。
现代文：精神，属是天所具有的；骨骸，是地所具有的。
English: The spirit is of the heavens; the bones are of the earth.

古文：属天清而散，属地浊而聚。
现代文：属于天的清明而四散飘逸，属于地的混浊厚重而凝结聚合。
English: That which belongs to heaven is clear and diffuse, while that which belongs to the earth is thick and dense.

古文：精神离形，各归其真，故谓之鬼。
现代文：精神离开了形骸，各自回归它们的本原，所以称之为鬼。
English: Spirits left the formless remains and each returned to their original state, so they are called ghosts.

古文：鬼，归也，归其真宅。
现代文：鬼，意思是归，回归到本原之地。
English: Ghost, meaning to return, to return to the original place.

古文：黄帝曰： 精神入其门，骨骸反其根，我尚何存？ 
现代文：黄帝说： 精神进入众妙之门，骨骸回归物质本原，我还有什么留存呢？ 
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The spirit enters the gate of wonders, and the skeleton returns to the original substance. What do I have left?

古文：人自生至终，大化有四：婴孩也，少壮也，老耄也，死亡也。
现代文：人从出生到死亡，大的变化有四个阶段：婴孩，少壮，老耄，死亡。
English: From birth to death, there are four stages of major change: infancy, adolescence, old age, and death.

古文：其在婴孩，气专志一，和之至也；物不伤焉，德莫加焉。
现代文：人在婴孩阶段，意气专一，是最和谐的时候，外物不能伤害它，德行不能比这再高了。
English: In the infant stage, a person's spirit is single-minded, and it is the most harmonious time. Foreign objects cannot harm it, and virtue cannot be higher than this.

古文：其在少壮，则血气飘溢，欲虑充起；物所攻焉，德故衰焉。
现代文：人在少壮阶段，血气飘浮横溢，各种欲望思虑充盈体内，外物便来侵扰，德行也就开始衰败了。
English: When a person is young and vigorous, his blood and qi are buoyant and overflowing, all kinds of desires and thoughts fill his body, foreign objects come to intrude, and virtue begins to decay.

古文：其在老耄，则欲虑柔焉；体将休焉，物莫先焉；虽未及婴孩之全，方于少壮，闲矣。
现代文：人在老耄阶段，欲望思虑不断减弱，身体将休憩，外物也就不和它争先了。这时的德虽然不如婴孩时的完备，但与少壮阶段相比，却称得上安稳闲静了。
English: In the old man's stage, desires and thoughts are constantly weakening, the body will rest, and foreign objects will not compete with it. Although the virtue at this time is not as complete as that of a baby, compared with the young man's stage, it can be said to be stable and quiet.

古文：其在死亡也，则之于息焉，反其极矣。
现代文：人在死亡阶段，那就到了完全安息的时候，重新回归于自然的本原。
English: At the stage of death, that is, when it comes to complete rest, people return to the original nature.

古文：孔子游于太山，见荣启期行乎郕之野，鹿裘带索，鼓琴而歌。
现代文：孔子在泰山游览，看见荣启期漫步在郕邑的郊野，穿着粗皮衣，系着粗麻绳，一面弹琴，一面唱歌。
English: When Confucius visited Mount Tai, he saw Rongqi walking in the countryside of Handan, wearing a coarse leather coat and a thick hemp rope, playing the piano and singing.

古文：孔子问曰： 先生所以乐，何也？ 
现代文：孔子问道： 先生这样快乐，是因为什么呢？ 
English: Confucius asked, "What makes you so happy?"

古文：对曰： 吾乐甚多：天生万物，唯人为贵；而吾得为人，是一乐也。
现代文：荣启期回答说： 我快乐的原因很多：自然生养万物，只有人最尊贵；而我既然能够成为人，那自然就是我快乐的第一个原因了。
English: Rong Qizhi replied, "There are many reasons for my happiness: Nature gives birth to and nurtures all things, and only human beings are the most precious; and since I can become a human being, that is naturally the first reason for my happiness.

古文：男女之别，男尊女卑，故以男为贵；吾既得为男矣，是二乐也。
现代文：人类中男女有别，男人地位尊贵，女人地位卑下，所以男人最为尊贵；而我既然能够成为男人，那自然就是我快乐的第二个原因了。
English: There is a difference between men and women in the human race, men have a higher status and women have a lower status, so men are the most respected; and since I can become a man, that is naturally the second reason for my happiness.

古文：人生有不见日月、不免襁褓者；吾既已行年九十矣，是三乐也。
现代文：人出生有没有见到太阳月亮、没有离开襁褓就夭亡的，而我已经活了九十多岁，那自然就是我快乐的第三个原因了。
English: People are born whether or not they have seen the sun and the moon, and die young without leaving the cocoon, and I have lived for more than ninety years, that is naturally the third reason for my happiness.

古文：贫者，士之常也；死者，人之终也。
现代文：贫穷是读书人的普遍状况，死亡是人的必然结局。
English: Poverty is the common condition of readers, and death is the inevitable outcome.

古文：处常得终，当何忧哉？ 
现代文：我处在读书人普遍的常情中，等候着必然降临的结局，还有什么使我忧虑的呢？ 
English: I'm in the general mood of a reader, waiting for the inevitable ending, what else worries me?

古文：孔子曰： 善乎！
现代文：孔子说： 说得好！
English: Confucius said, "Well said!

古文：能自宽者也。 
现代文：真是个能自我宽慰的人。 
English: He's a self-soothing person.

古文：林类年且百岁，底春被裘，拾遗穗于故畦，并歌并进。
现代文：林类的年纪将近一百岁了，到了春天还穿着粗皮衣，在田地里拾取收割后遗留下来的谷穗，一面唱歌，一面往前走。
English: The trees are nearly a hundred years old, and in the spring they are still dressed in coarse coats, picking up the ears of grain left over after the harvest in the fields, singing and walking forward.

古文：孔子适卫，望之于野。顾谓弟子曰： 彼叟可与言者，试往讯之！ 
现代文：孔子到卫国去，在田野上看见了他，回头对学生说： 那位老人是个值得对话的人，谁愿意过去问问他？ 
English: Confucius went to the old country, saw him in the fields, and turned to his students and said, "That old man is a man worthy of conversation. Who would like to go and ask him?"

古文：子贡请行。
现代文：子贡请求前往。
English: Zigong requested to go.

古文：逆之垄端，面之而叹曰： 先生曾不悔乎，而行歌拾穗？ 
现代文：子贡在田埂的一头迎面走去，面对着他感叹道： 先生没有后悔过吗？还这样边走边唱地拾谷穗？ 
English: Zigong walked towards him at one end of the rice paddy and, facing him, exclaimed: Hasn't the teacher ever regretted it? Still picking up ears of corn while walking and singing?

古文：林类行不留，歌不辍。
现代文：林类脚步不停地往前走，照样唱歌不止。
English: Forestry footsteps keep moving forward, still singing.

古文：子贡叩之不已，乃仰而应曰： 吾何悔邪？ 
现代文：子贡再三追问，他才抬头回答说： 我有什么后悔的？ 
English: Zigong asked again and again before he looked up and replied: "What do I regret?

古文：子贡曰： 先生少不勤行，长不竞时，老无妻子，死期将至：亦有何乐而拾穗行歌乎？ 
现代文：子贡说： 您少年时懒惰不努力，长大了又不争取时运，到老了还没有妻子儿女，现在死期将近，又有什么快乐值得拾谷穗时边走边唱歌呢？ 
English: Zigong said: When you were young, you were lazy and didn't work hard. When you grew up, you didn't fight for good luck. When you got old, you didn't have a wife or children. Now you are about to die. What kind of happiness is worth singing while walking while picking up ears of corn?

古文：林类笑曰： 吾之所以为乐，人皆有之，而反以为忧。
现代文：林类笑着说： 我快乐的原因，人人都有，但他们却反而以此为忧。
English: Lin smiled and said, "Everyone has a reason to be happy, but they are worried about it.

古文：少不勤行，长不竞时，故能寿若此。
现代文：我少年时懒惰不努力，长大了又不争取时间，所以才能这样长寿。
English: When I was young, I was lazy and didn't work hard. When I grew up, I didn't fight for time. That's why I've been able to live so long.

古文：老无妻子，死期将至，故能乐若此。 
现代文：老了没有妻子儿女，死期也将近了，所以才能这样快乐。 
English: To be so happy when you are old and have no wife or children and your time to die is near.

古文：子贡曰： 寿者人之情，死者人之恶。
现代文：子贡问： 长寿是人人所希望的，死亡是人人所厌恶的。
English: Zigong asked: Long life is what everyone hopes for, and death is what everyone hates.

古文：子以死为乐，何也？ 
现代文：您却把死亡当作快乐，为什么呢？ 
English: You, on the other hand, see death as a joy. Why?

古文：林类曰： 死之与生，一往一反。
现代文：林类说： 死亡与活着，不过是一去一回。
English: Forests say: To die and to live, but only once.

古文：故死于是者，安知不生于彼？
现代文：所以在这儿死去了，怎么知道不在另一个地方重新诞生呢？
English: So if you die here, how do you know you won't be reborn somewhere else?

古文：故吾知其不相若矣？
现代文：所以又怎么知道生和死不是相等的呢？
English: So how do we know that life and death are not equal?

古文：吾又安知营营而求生非惑乎？
现代文：我又怎么知道苦苦谋求生存不是一种糊涂呢？
English: How do I know that struggling to survive isn't a form of insanity?

古文：亦又安知吾今之死不愈昔之生乎？ 
现代文：而且我又怎么知道我今天的死不胜过往昔的生呢？ 
English: And how do I know that my death today is not better than my life in the past?

古文：子贡闻之，不喻其意，还以告夫子。
现代文：子贡听了，不明白他的意思，回来告诉了孔子。
English: When Zigong heard this, he didn't understand what he meant, so he came back and told Confucius.

古文：夫子曰： 吾知其可与言，果然；然彼得之而不尽者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 我知道他是值得对话的，果然如此；可是他懂得的自然之理并不完全彻底。 
English: Confucius said: I know that he is worthy of dialogue, and so it is; but his understanding of the laws of nature is not complete.

古文：子贡倦于学，告仲尼曰： 愿有所息。 
现代文：子贡对学习有些厌倦，便对孔子说： 希望能休息一下。 
English: Zigong was a little tired of studying, so he said to Confucius, "I hope I can take a break."

古文：仲尼曰： 生无所息。 
现代文：孔子说： 人生是没有休息的。 
English: Confucius said: There is no rest in life.

古文：子贡曰： 然则赐息无所乎？ 
现代文：子贡问： 那么我也就没有休息的时候了吗？ 
English: Zigong asked: So I don't have time to rest either?

古文：仲尼曰： 有焉耳。
现代文：孔子回答说： 有休息的时候。
English: Confucius replied, "There is a time to rest.

古文：望其圹，睪如也，宰如也，坟如也，鬲如也，则知所息矣。 子贡曰： 大哉死乎！君子息焉，小人休焉。 仲尼曰： 赐！
现代文：你看那空旷的原野上，有高起来的地方，好像是墓穴，又像是土丘，又像是底朝上的饭锅，就知道休息的时候了。 子贡说： 死亡真伟大啊！君子在其中安息，小人在其中埋葬。 孔子说： 赐！
English: Look at that empty field, there are high places, like a tomb, like a mound, and like a bottom-up cooking pot, so you know it's time to rest. Zigong said: Death is really great! The gentleman rests in it, and the little man is buried in it. Confucius said: Give!

古文：汝知之矣。
现代文：你现在已经明白了。
English: You've got it now.

古文：人胥知生之乐，未知生之苦；知老之惫，未知老之佚；知死之恶，未知死之息也。
现代文：人们都知道活着的快乐，却不知道活着的痛苦；都知道老年的疲惫，却不知道老年的安逸；都知道死亡的可恶，却不知道死亡是一种休息。
English: People know the joy of living, but they don't know the pain of living; they know the fatigue of old age, but they don't know the comfort of old age; they know the abomination of death, but they don't know that death is a rest.

古文：晏子曰： 善哉，古之有死也！
现代文：晏子说过： 真好啊，自古以来就有死亡！
English: The cripple said, "That's great, death has been around since ancient times!"

古文：仁者息焉，不仁者伏焉。 
现代文：仁义的人在那时休息了，不仁的人在那时被埋葬了。 
English: At that time, the righteous rested, and the wicked were buried.

古文：死也者，德之徼也。
现代文：所谓死亡，就是德性的复归。
English: The so-called death is the return of virtue.

古文：古者谓死人为归人。
现代文：古人把死人叫做 归人 。
English: The ancients called the dead "returnees."

古文：夫言死人为归人，则生人为行人矣。
现代文：说死人是 归人 ，那么活着的人就是 行人 了。
English: To say that the dead are returned is to say that the living are pedestrians.

古文：行而不知归，失家者也。
现代文：一直在外面行走而不知道回家，那是抛弃了家庭的人。
English: Someone who walks outside all the time without knowing how to get home is someone who has abandoned his family.

古文：一人失家，一世非之；天下失家，莫知非焉。
现代文：一个人抛弃了家庭，所有世人都责备他；天下的人都抛弃了家庭，就没有人责备了。
English: When a man abandons his family, the whole world blames him; when the whole world abandons the family, no one blames him.

古文：有人去乡土、离六亲、废家业、游于四方而不归者，何人哉？
现代文：有人离开了家乡，抛弃了亲人，荒废了家业，到处游荡而不知道回家，这是怎样的人呢？
English: Someone left his hometown, abandoned his relatives, ruined his family business, wandered around and did not know how to get home. What kind of person is this?

古文：世必谓之为狂荡之人矣。
现代文：世上的人一定会说他是放荡而疯狂的人。
English: The world would say he was a wild and crazy man.

古文：又有人钟贤世，矜巧能、修名誉、夸张于世而不知已者，亦何人哉？
现代文：又有人专心致志于盛世之治，自以为聪明能干，于是博取功名，到处夸夸其谈而不知道停止，这又是怎样的人呢？
English: There are others who are dedicated to the rule of the prosperous world, who think they are clever and capable, so they gain fame, and talk about it everywhere without knowing how to stop. What kind of person are they?

古文：世必以为智谋之士。
现代文：世上的人一定会认为他是有智慧谋略的人。
English: People around the world are bound to think he is a man of wisdom and strategy.

古文：此二者，胥失者也。而世与一不与一，唯圣人知所与，知所去。 
现代文：这两种人是有过错的，可是世人都肯定智谋之士而否定狂荡之人。只有圣人才知道什么该赞扬，什么该反对。 
English: Both are at fault, but the world approves of the man of wisdom and disapproves of the man of folly; only the sage knows what to praise and what to condemn.

古文：或谓子列子曰： 子奚贵虚？ 
现代文：有人对列子说： 您为什么以虚无为贵呢？ 
English: Someone said to Reiko, "Why do you value nothing?

古文：列子曰： 虚者无贵也。 
现代文：列子说： 虚无本身是没有贵贱的。 
English: Reiko said, "Nothingness itself is not precious or cheap.

古文：子列子曰： 非其名也，莫如静，莫如虚。
现代文：列子又说： 要否定人为的名义，就不如保持清静，保持虚无。
English: Reiko also said, "In order to deny the artificial name, it is better to keep quiet and maintain nothingness."

古文：静也虚也，得其居矣；取也与也，失其所矣。
现代文：清静、虚无，就掌握了道之所在；索取、给予，就丧失了道之所在。
English: Calmness, nothingness, is where the path is found; taking, giving, is where the path is lost.

古文：事之破为而后有舞仁义者，弗能复也。 
现代文：事物的本性被毁坏以后，再来舞弄仁义的说教，是不能使之复原的。 
English: After the nature of things has been destroyed, it is impossible to restore it by preaching about benevolence and righteousness.

古文：粥熊曰： 运转亡已，天地密移，畴觉之哉？
现代文：鬻熊说： 万事万物运动流转永无止息，连天地也在悄悄地移动，谁感觉到了呢？
English: Raccoon said: The movement of all things never stops, even the heavens and the earth are quietly moving, who felt it?

古文：故物损于彼者盈于此，成于此者亏于彼。
现代文：所以事物在那里减损了，就会在这里充盈；在这里完成，就会在那里毁坏。
English: So that what is diminished there is increased here, and what is completed here is destroyed there.

古文：损盈成亏，随世随死。
现代文：亏损、充盈、完成、毁坏，随时发生，随时消亡。
English: Loss, fullness, completion, destruction, occur at any time, and disappear at any time.

古文：往来相接，间不可省，畴觉之哉？
现代文：一往一来，头尾相接，一点间隙也看不出来，谁感觉到了呢？
English: One after another, head to toe, not a single gap to be seen. Who felt it?

古文：凡一气不顿进，一形不顿亏，亦不觉其成，亦不觉其亏。
现代文：所有的元气都不是突然增长，所有的形体都不是突然亏损，所以我们也就不觉得它的完成，也感觉不到它的损毁。
English: All vitality is not a sudden increase, and all forms are not a sudden loss, so we do not feel its completion, nor do we feel its damage.

古文：亦如人自世至老，貌色智态，亡日不异；皮肤爪发，随世随落，非婴孩时有停而不易也。
现代文：这也像人们从出生到衰老一样，容貌、肤色、智慧、体态，没有一天不发生变化；皮肤、指甲、毛发，随时生长，随时脱落，并不是在婴孩时就停顿而不再变化了。
English: This is also like people from birth to aging, appearance, skin color, intelligence, physique, there is no day without change; skin, nails, hair, grow at any time, fall off at any time, not in the baby to pause and no longer change.

古文：间不可觉，俟至后知。 
现代文：变化一点觉察不到，只有等到变化发展的结果出现之后才会明白。 
English: The change is imperceptible, and will only be understood when the results of the change and development appear.

古文：杞国有人忧天地崩坠，身亡所寄，废寝食者。
现代文：杞国有个人担忧天会塌下来，地会陷下去，自身没有可以寄托的地方，因而睡不着觉，吃不下饭。
English: People in Shan State are worried that the sky will fall and the ground will sink, and they have no place to rest, so they can't sleep and can't eat.

古文：又有忧彼之所忧者，因往晓之，曰： 天，积气耳，亡处亡气。
现代文：又有一个担忧那个怕天塌地陷之人的人，于是前去开导他，说： 天是积聚的气，没有一处没有气。
English: There was also a man who was worried about the man who was afraid of the sky falling down, so he went to enlighten him, saying: The sky is the accumulation of air, there is no place without air.

古文：若屈伸呼吸，终日在天中行止，奈何忧崩坠乎？ 
现代文：就像你弯腰挺身、呼气吸气，整天在天中生活，为什么要担忧它崩塌下来呢？ 
English: Just as you bend forward, breathe in and breathe out, and live in the sky all day, why worry about it collapsing?

古文：其人曰： 天果积气，日月星宿，不当坠耶？ 
现代文：那人说： 天果真是气的积聚，那日月星辰不会掉下来吗？ 
English: The man said, "Natural fruits are really the accumulation of qi. Won't the sun, moon and stars fall that day?"

古文：晓之者曰： 日月星宿，亦积气中之有光耀者，只使坠，亦不能有所中伤。 
现代文：开导他的人说： 日月星辰，也是积聚起来的气中有光辉的物体，即使掉下来，也不会伤害什么。 
English: The person who enlightened him said: The sun, moon and stars are also luminous objects in the accumulated air, and even if they fall, they will not hurt anything.

古文：其人曰： 奈地坏何？ 
现代文：那人说： 地陷下去怎么办呢？ 
English: The man said, "What about sinking to the ground?"

古文：晓者曰： 地积块耳，充塞四虚，亡处亡块。
现代文：开导的人说： 地是土块的积聚，充盈在四面八方，无处没有土块。
English: The enlightened ones say: The earth is an accumulation of clods, full in all directions, nowhere is there a clod.

古文：若躇步跐蹈，终日在地上行止，奈何忧其坏？ 
现代文：就像你停走踩踏，整天在地上生活，为什么要担忧它陷裂下去呢？ 
English: It's like if you stop pedaling and live on the ground all day, why worry about it caving in?

古文：其人舍然大喜，晓之者亦舍然大喜。
现代文：那人放下心来，十分高兴；那个为他担心的人也放下心来。
English: The man relaxed and was very happy; the man who was worried about him also relaxed.

古文：长庐子闻而笑之曰： 虹蜺也，云雾也，风雨也，四时也，此积气之成乎天者也。
现代文：长庐子听说后笑着说： 虹霓呀，云雾呀，风雨呀，四季呀，这些是气在天上积聚而形成的。
English: After hearing this, Nagamune smiled and said, "Rainbows, clouds, wind and rain, and the four seasons are all formed by the accumulation of qi in the sky.

古文：山岳也，河海也，金石也，火木也，此积形之成乎地者也。
现代文：山岳呀，河海呀，金石呀，火木呀，这些是有形之物在地上积聚而形成的。
English: The mountains, the rivers, the seas, the precious stones, the firewood, all these were formed by the accumulation of material things on the earth.

古文：知积气也，知积块也，奚谓不坏？
现代文：知道它们是气的积聚，是土块的积聚，为什么还说它们不会毁坏呢？
English: Knowing that they are accumulations of gasses, accumulations of clods, why do you say that they cannot be destroyed?

古文：夫天地，空中之一细物，有中之最巨者。
现代文：天地是宇宙中的一个微小的物体，但却是有形之物中最巨大的东西。
English: Heaven and earth is a tiny object in the universe, but it is the largest thing among the tangible things.

古文：难终难穷，此固然矣；难测难识，此固然矣。
现代文：它们难以终结，难以穷尽，这是必然的；人们难以观测，难以认识，也是必然的。
English: It is inevitable that they are difficult to end and difficult to exhaust; it is also inevitable that they are difficult to observe and difficult to know.

古文：忧其坏者，诚为大远；言其不坏者，亦为未是。
现代文：人们担忧它会崩陷，实在是担忧的太远了；说它不会崩陷，也是不正确的。
English: People are worried that it will collapse, it is too far to worry about; it is not true to say that it will not collapse.

古文：天地不得不坏，则会归于坏。
现代文：天地不可能不毁坏，最终总会毁坏的。
English: It is impossible for heaven and earth not to be destroyed, and they will always be destroyed in the end.

古文：遇其坏时，奚为不忧哉？ 
现代文：如果遇到天崩地坠，怎么能不担忧呢？ 
English: If the sky is falling, how can you not be worried?

古文：子列子闻而笑曰： 言天地坏者亦谬，言天地不坏者亦谬。
现代文：列子听到后，笑着说： 说天地会毁坏是荒谬的，说天地不会毁坏也是荒谬的。
English: Upon hearing this, Letson smiled and said, "It is absurd to say that heaven and earth will be destroyed, and it is also absurd to say that heaven and earth will not be destroyed.

古文：坏与不坏，吾所不能知也。
现代文：毁坏与不毁坏，是我们不可能知道的事情。
English: To destroy or not to destroy is something we cannot possibly know.

古文：虽然，彼一也，此一也。
现代文：既然这样，天地毁坏是一种可能，不毁坏也是一种可能。
English: Since this is the case, the destruction of heaven and earth is a possibility, and not destroying them is also a possibility.

古文：故生不知死，死不知生；来不知去，去不知来。
现代文：所以活着不知道死后的境地，死后也不知道生前的遭遇；未来不知道过去的情况，过去也不知道未来的情况。
English: Therefore, the living do not know the situation after death, and the dead do not know what happened to them before death; the future does not know the situation of the past, and the past does not know the situation of the future.

古文：坏与不坏，吾何容心哉？ 
现代文：天地会坏或不会坏，又为什么要放在心上呢？ 
English: Heaven and earth may or may not go bad, but why should we care?

古文：舜问乎烝曰： 道可得而有乎？ 
现代文：舜问烝说： 治理天下的道可以获得并据为己有吗？ 
English: Zou Qianqian said: Can the way of governing the world be obtained and possessed?

古文：曰： 汝身非汝有也，汝何得有夫道？ 
现代文：烝回答说： 你的身体都不属于你，你又怎么能据有道呢？ 
English: The donkey answered, "Your body does not belong to you, so how can you have any rights to it?

古文：舜曰： 吾身非吾有，孰有之哉？ 
现代文：舜问： 我的身体不属于我所有，是谁据有它呢？ 
English: Question: My body does not belong to me, who owns it?

古文：曰： 是天地之委形也。
现代文：烝回答说： 是天地把形体托付给你的。
English: The dragonfly replied, "Heaven and earth have entrusted the form to you.

古文：生非汝有，是天地之委和也。
现代文：生命不属于你所有，它只是天地托付给你的和顺之气。
English: Life does not belong to you all, it is just the harmony entrusted to you by heaven and earth.

古文：性命非汝有，是天地之委顺也。
现代文：寿命不属于你所有，它只是天地托付给你的顺化之气。
English: Life does not belong to you, it is just a blessing entrusted to you by heaven and earth.

古文：孙子非汝有，是天地之委蜕也。
现代文：子孙后代不属于你所有，他们只是天地以蜕变的生机赋予你的结果。
English: Future generations do not belong to you, they are just the result of the transformation of life that heaven and earth have given you.

古文：故行不知所往，处不知所持，食不知所以。
现代文：所以行动不知道往哪里去，居住不知道保持处所，饮食不知道滋味。
English: Therefore, the movement does not know where to go, the residence does not know where to stay, and the diet does not know the taste.

古文：天地强阳，气也，又胡可得而有邪？ 
现代文：天地不停地运转，全是气的作用，大道又怎么可以得到并且占有呢？ 
English: Heaven and earth are in constant motion, and everything is the effect of qi. How can the avenue be obtained and possessed?

古文：齐之国氏大富，宋之向氏大贫。
现代文：齐国的国氏非常富有，宋国的向氏非常贫穷。
English: The Guo clan in Qi was very rich, while the Xiang clan in Song was very poor.

古文：自宋之齐，请其术。国氏告之曰： 吾善为盗。
现代文：向氏从宋国到齐国，向国氏请教致富的方法。国氏告诉他说： 我善于偷盗。
English: Mr. Xiang went from Song to Qi to ask Mr. Guo for advice on how to get rich. Mr. Guo told him: I am good at stealing.

古文：始吾为盗也，一年而给，二年而足，三年大穰。
现代文：我开始偷盗时，一年就够自用，二年便很富足，三年就家资丰收了。
English: When I started stealing, one year I had enough for myself, two years I was very rich, and three years I had a good harvest of family wealth.

古文：自此以往，施及州闾。 
现代文：从此以后，我还施舍州里乡亲。 
English: Since then, I have also been giving alms to my fellow villagers in the state.

古文：向氏大喜。
现代文：向氏听了非常高兴。
English: It was a great pleasure to listen to Mr. Xiang.

古文：喻其为盗之言，而不喻其为盗之道。
现代文：但他只理解了国氏偷盗的话，却没有了解国氏偷盗的方法。
English: But he only understood Mr. Guo's words of stealing, but did not understand Mr. Guo's method of stealing.

古文：遂逾垣凿室，手目所及，亡不探也。
现代文：于是跳墙打洞，凡是手摸到的，眼睛看到的，没有一件不探取。
English: So I jumped over the wall and dug a hole. Everything I touched with my hands and saw with my eyes, there was nothing I didn't explore.

古文：未及时，以赃获罪，没其先居之财。
现代文：没过多久，便以盗窃来的赃物而被问罪，连以前积蓄的财物也被没收了。
English: It didn't take long before he was charged with theft of stolen property, and even his previous savings were confiscated.

古文：向氏以国氏之谬己也，往而怨之。
现代文：向氏认为国氏欺骗了自己，便去埋怨国氏。
English: Mr. Xiang thought that Mr. Guo had deceived himself, so he went to complain to Mr. Guo.

古文：国氏曰： 若为盗若何？ 
现代文：国氏问： 你是怎样偷盗的？ 
English: Mr. Guo asked: How did you steal?

古文：向氏言其状。国氏曰： 嘻！
现代文：向氏叙述了他偷盗的情况。国氏说： 唉！
English: He recounted the circumstances of his theft to Mr. Kunishi, who said, "Alas!

古文：若失为盗之道至此乎？
现代文：你偷盗的方法竟然错到了这种程度！
English: Your method of stealing has gone so wrong!

古文：今将告若矣。
现代文：现在我就告诉你吧。
English: I'll tell you right now.

古文：吾闻天有时，地有利。
现代文：我听说天有季节性，地有利人处。
English: I've heard that the weather is seasonal and the location is advantageous.

古文：吾盗天地之时利，云雨之滂润，山泽之产育，以生吾禾，殖吾稼，筑吾垣，建吾舍。
现代文：我偷盗的是天时地利，云和雨的润泽，山林川泽的物产，用来生长我的禾苗，繁育我的庄稼，建筑我的墙垣，砌造我的房屋。
English: What I have stolen is the time and place, the moisture of clouds and rain, the produce of mountains and forests, used to grow my seedlings, breed my crops, build my walls, and brick up my houses.

古文：陆盗禽兽，水盗鱼鳖，亡非盗也。
现代文：在陆地上偷盗禽兽，在水泊中偷盗鱼鳖，没有一样不是偷盗来的。
English: Stealing animals on land, stealing bait in the water, there is nothing that is not stolen.

古文：夫禾稼、土木、禽兽、鱼鳖，皆天之所生，岂吾之所有？
现代文：这些禾苗、庄稼、土地、树木、禽兽、鱼鳖，都是天生出来的，难道是我所有的？
English: These seedlings, crops, land, trees, animals, and fish are all born naturally. Are they all mine?

古文：然吾盗天而亡殃。
现代文：然而我偷盗天的东西却没有灾殃。
English: However, my theft of heavenly things did not bring disaster.

古文：夫金玉珍宝，谷帛财货，人之所聚，岂天之所与？
现代文：至于金玉珍宝、谷布财物，是别人所积聚，哪里是天给你的呢？
English: As for the jewels, precious stones, grain, cloth, and other possessions, they were accumulated by others. Where did Heaven give them to you?

古文：若盗之而获罪，孰怨哉？ 
现代文：你偷盗它们而被问罪，能怨谁呢？ 
English: If you are accused of stealing them, who can you blame?

古文：向氏大惑，以为国氏之重罔己也，过东郭先生问焉。
现代文：向氏更加迷惑不解，以为国氏又在欺骗自己了，于是到东郭先生那里去请教。
English: Mr. Xiang was even more puzzled, thinking that Mr. Guo was deceiving himself again, so he went to Mr. Dongguo for advice.

古文：东郭先生曰： 若一身庸非盗乎？
现代文：东郭先生说： 你整个人不都是偷盗来的吗？
English: Mr. Dongguo said: Didn't you steal everything?

古文：盗阴阳之和以成若生，载若形；况外物而非盗哉？
现代文：偷盗阴阳中和之气来成就你的生命，构成你的形体，更何况你身外之物，哪一样不是偷盗来的呢？
English: Stealing the yin and yang to achieve your life and form your body, not to mention the things outside your body, which one is not stolen?

古文：诚然，天地万物不相离也；仞而有之，皆惑也。
现代文：诚然，天地和万物都是不能完全分开的，把它们认作己有，都是糊涂的。
English: It is true that heaven and earth and all things cannot be completely separated, and it is foolish to regard them as one's own.

古文：国氏之盗，公道也，故亡殃；若之盗，私心也，故得罪。
现代文：国氏的偷盗，符合公道，所以没有灾殃；你的偷盗，出于私心，所以被问罪。
English: The theft of the Guo clan is in line with justice, so there is no disaster; your theft is out of selfishness, so it is a crime.

古文：有公私者，亦盗也；亡公私者，亦盗也。
现代文：为公或者为私，都是偷盗；不为公或者不为私，也是偷盗。
English: To do something for the public or for oneself is stealing; not to do something for the public or for oneself is also stealing.

古文：公公私私，天地之德。
现代文：使公有的成其为公有的，使私有的成其为私有的，这就是天地的大德。
English: To make public what is public, and private what is private, this is the great virtue of heaven and earth.

古文：知天地之德者，孰为盗耶？
现代文：了解了天地大德，那么还有谁是在偷盗？
English: Having understood the principles of heaven and earth, then who else is stealing?

古文：孰为不盗耶？ 
现代文：还有谁不是在偷盗呢？ 
English: Who else is not stealing?

