古文：王镇恶，北海剧人也。
现代文：王镇恶，北海剧县人。
English: Wang Zhenxiong, a resident of Beihai Opera County.

古文：祖猛，仕苻坚，任兼将相。
现代文：祖父王猛，在苻坚那里做官，兼任将相。
English: His grandfather, Wang Meng, was an official there and also served as minister of war.

古文：父休，为河东太守。
现代文：父亲王休为河东太守。
English: His father, Wang Xiu, was the governor of Hedong Province.

古文：镇恶以五月生，家人以俗忌，欲令出继疏宗。
现代文：王镇恶是五月生，家里人因为风俗的忌讳，想让他出家去继承疏房远族。
English: Wang Zhenxiong was born in May, and his family wanted him to leave home to inherit the estranged family because of the taboo of customs.

古文：猛曰： 此非常儿。
现代文：王猛说： 这不是一个平常的孩子。
English: Wang Meng said: This is not an ordinary child.

古文：昔孟尝君恶月生而相齐，是儿亦将兴吾门矣。 
现代文：过去孟尝君在恶月出生而做了齐国的宰相，这孩子也将要使我们家门兴旺的。 
English: In the past, Meng Yaojun was born in a bad month and became the prime minister of Qi. This child will also make our family prosperous.

古文：故名为镇恶。
现代文：所以名字叫镇恶。
English: That's why the name is Zhenxiong.

古文：年十三而苻氏败，寓食渑池人李方家。
现代文：十三岁时苻氏失败，寄居在渑池人李方家吃饭。
English: When he was thirteen years old, he failed and lived as a guest in the home of Li Fang, a resident of Dianchi.

古文：方善遇之，谓方曰： 若遭英雄主，要取万户侯，当厚相报。 
现代文：李方对他招待得很好，他对李方说： 如果遇到一个英雄的君主，邀取到万户侯，一定要厚厚地相报。 
English: Li Fang invited him very well. He said to Li Fang: If you meet a heroic monarch and invite him to your home, you must reciprocate generously.

古文：方曰： 君丞相孙，人材如此，何患不富贵，至时愿见用为本县令足矣。 
现代文：李方说： 您是丞相的孙子，人材这么出众，何愁不会富贵，到时候希望能聘我为本县的县令就足够了。 
English: Li Fang said: You are the grandson of the prime minister, with such outstanding human resources, why worry about not being rich. At that time, it is enough to hope to hire me as the county magistrate of this county.

古文：后随叔父曜归晋，客荆州。颇读诸子兵书，喜论军国大事。骑射非长，而从横善果断。
现代文：后来随着叔父王曜归顺了晋朝，客居在荆州，很读了一些诸子的兵书，喜欢谈论军国大事，骑射不是他的特长，但是却善于果断地经营国家大事。
English: Later, after his uncle Wang You submitted to the Jin Dynasty, he lived as a guest in Jingzhou. He read a lot of soldiers' books and liked to talk about military affairs. He was not good at riding and shooting, but he was good at decisively managing national affairs.

古文：宋武帝伐广固，镇恶时为天门郡临澧令。
现代文：宋武帝讨伐广固，王镇恶当时做天门郡临澧县令。
English: Emperor Song Wudi fought against Guanggu, and Wang Zhenxiong was then the county magistrate of Linyi County, Tianmen County.

古文：人或荐之武帝，召与语，异焉，因留宿。
现代文：有人把他推荐给武帝，武帝召见，和他交谈，很惊异，于是留他住下。
English: Someone recommended him to Emperor Wu, and Emperor Wu was surprised to be summoned to meet and talk with him, so he let him stay.

古文：旦谓诸佐曰： 镇恶王猛孙，所谓将门有将。 
现代文：早晨对诸位下属官员说： 王镇恶是王猛的孙子，正是所谓将门有将。 
English: In the morning, he said to all subordinate officials: "Wang Zhenxiong is the grandson of Wang Meng. He is the so-called commander-in-chief.

古文：即以署前部贼曹。
现代文：就把他安排在了前部的贼曹。
English: and placed him at the front of the band of thieves.

古文：拒卢循有功，封博陆县五等子。
现代文：因为抵抗卢循有功，封为博陆县五等子。
English: Because of his successful resistance, Lu Xun was given the title of the fifth son of Bolu County.

古文：武帝谋讨刘毅，镇恶曰： 公若有事西楚，请给百舸为前驱。 
现代文：武帝计划讨伐刘毅，王镇恶说： 您如果要对付西楚，请拨给我一百只大船做前驱。 
English: Emperor Wu planned to fight Liu Yi, Wang Zhenxiong said: If you want to deal with the Western Chu, please assign me a hundred large ships to be the forerunner.

古文：及西讨，转镇恶参军事，使率龙骧将军蒯恩百舸前发。
现代文：等到进行西讨，转调王镇恶为参军事，让他率领龙骧将军蒯恩的一百条大船在前面出发。
English: Wait until the Western Expedition, transfer Wang Zhenxiong to join the military, and let him lead a hundred large ships of the Longjing General Zhen to set off in front.

古文：镇恶受命，便昼夜兼行，扬声刘兖州上。
现代文：王镇恶接受了命令，便昼夜兼程前进，声称是刘兖州西上。
English: Wang Zhenxiong accepted the order and advanced day and night, claiming to be Liu Yanzhou westward.

古文：毅谓为信，不知见袭。
现代文：刘毅认为是真的，不知道却将要遭到袭击。
English: Liu Yi thought it was true, but he didn't know he was about to be attacked.

古文：镇恶去江陵城二十里，舍船步上，蒯恩军在前，镇恶次之，舸留一二人，对舸岸上竖旗安鼓。语所留人曰： 计我将至城，便长严令后有大军状。
现代文：王镇恶离江陵城二十里，弃船登陆，蒯恩的军队在前面，王镇恶紧接在后头，每条大船上各留一二人，对着大船的岸上竖旗安鼓，告诉所留下的人说： 估计我们将到城下，便长久地戒严，让人看起来好像后面还有大军的样子。
English: Wang Zhenxu was twenty miles away from Gangneung City. He abandoned ship and disembarked. Xiong En's army was in the front, and Wang Zhenxu was right behind. He left one or two people on each big ship. He put up banners and drums on the shore of the big ship and told the people who stayed behind: "If we are expected to come under the city, we will impose martial law for a long time, making it look as if there is a large army behind us."

古文：又分队在后，令烧江津船。
现代文：又分出一支军队留在后面，让他们烧掉江津的船只。
English: Another detachment of troops was left behind to burn Jiangjin's ships.

古文：镇恶径前袭城，津戍及百姓皆言刘藩实上，晏然不疑。
现代文：王镇恶径直向前袭击城池，渡口守卫和百姓们都说是刘藩的军队真的到来了，心情安然毫不怀疑。
English: Wang Zhen drove straight ahead to attack the city. The guards at the ferry port and the people all said that Liu Han's army had really arrived, and there was no doubt in their minds that they were safe.

古文：将至城，逢毅要将朱显之驰前问藩所在，军人答云 在后 。
现代文：将到城中，碰上了刘毅的重要将领朱显之驰马向前问刘藩在什么地方，军人回答说 在后面。 
English: When he was about to enter the city, he met Zhu Xianzhi, an important general of Liu Yi, who galloped forward and asked where Liu Han was. The soldier replied, "In the back."

古文：及至军后不见藩，又望见江津船舰被烧而鼓声甚盛，知非藩上，便跃马告毅，令闭城门。
现代文：等到了军队的后面却不见刘藩，又望见江津的船舰被烧，而鼓声很大，知道不是刘藩到来，便飞马去告诉刘毅，让他关闭城门。
English: He waited until he was behind the army, but did not see the Liu clan. He also saw Jiangjin's ships being burned, and the drums were very loud. Knowing that the Liu clan was not coming, he flew to tell Liu Yi to close the city gate.

古文：镇恶亦驰进得入城，便因风放火，烧大城南门及东门。
现代文：王镇恶也驰马进入城内，便趁风放火，烧了大城的南门和东门。
English: Wang Zhenxiong also rode into the city and took advantage of the wind to set fire to the southern and eastern gates of the great city.

古文：又遣人以诏及赦并武帝手书凡三函示毅，毅皆烧不视。
现代文：又派人拿上诏书以及赦免文书和武帝的手书共三封交给刘毅，刘毅都烧掉不看。
English: They also sent someone to take the imperial edict, as well as the pardon document and Emperor Wu's handwritten letter, a total of three letters, and handed them to Liu Yi. Liu Yi burned them all.

古文：金城内亦未信帝自来。
现代文：城内牙城中的人也不信武帝亲自前来。
English: People in and around the city did not believe that Emperor Wu had come in person.

古文：及短兵接战，镇恶军人与毅下将或是父兄子弟中表亲亲，且斗且语，知武帝在后，人情离懈。
现代文：等到短兵接战，王镇恶的军人和刘毅手下的将领有的是父兄子弟中表亲戚，他们且战且说，知道武帝就在后面，军人的情绪便离散懈怠了。
English: When the short soldiers joined the battle, the wicked soldiers of Wang Zhen and the generals under Liu Yi had brothers and cousins, they said, knowing that Emperor Wu was behind, the soldiers' emotions were scattered and slack.

古文：初，毅常所乘马在城外不得入，仓卒无马，使就子肃取马，肃不与。
现代文：起初，刘毅平时所骑的马隔在了城外无法进来，他仓促之间没有马骑，便让人到他儿子刘肃那里去要马，刘肃不给。
English: At first, Liu Yi's horse, which he usually rode, was separated outside the city and could not come in. He did not have a horse to ride in a hurry, so he had someone go to his son Liu Su to ask for a horse, but Liu Su would not give it.

古文：朱显之谓曰： 人取汝父而惜马，汝走欲何之？ 
现代文：朱显之对他说： 别人要取你父亲的性命，而你却吝惜一匹马，你逃走想逃到什么地方去呢？ 
English: Zhu Xianzhi said to him, "Others want to take your father's life, but you are sparing a horse. Where do you want to escape to?"

古文：夺马以授毅，从大城东门出奔牛牧佛寺自缢。
现代文：夺过马来给了刘毅，从大城东门出去，逃奔至牛牧佛寺，自缢而死。
English: He took the horse and gave it to Liu Yi. He went out of the east gate of Dacheng, fled to the Niu Mu Buddhist Temple, and hanged himself to death.

古文：镇恶身被五箭，手所执槊于手中破折。
现代文：王镇恶身上中了五箭，手中所拿的长槊破折。
English: Wang Zhenxiong was hit by five arrows, and the pole he was holding broke.

古文：江陵平后二十日，大军方至，以功封汉寿县子。
现代文：江陵平定以后二十天，大军才到，王镇恶因战功封为汉寿县子。
English: Twenty days after the pacification of Gangneung, the large army arrived, and Wang Zhenxiong was awarded the title of Han Shou County because of his war service.

古文：及武帝北伐，为镇西谘议，行龙骧将军，领前锋。
现代文：后来武帝北伐，王镇恶担任镇西咨议，做龙骧将军，兼任前锋。
English: Later, in Emperor Wu's Northern Expedition, Wang Zhenxiong served as the town's western counselor, as the general of Longjing, and also as the forward.

古文：将发，前将军刘穆之谓曰： 昔晋文王委蜀于邓艾，今亦委卿以关中，卿其勉之。 
现代文：将要出发，前将军刘穆之对他说： 从前晋文王把蜀地委托给邓艾，现在也要把关中委托给您了，希望您要好好努力。 
English: When he was about to set off, the former general Liu Muzhi said to him, "Once upon a time, King Jinwen entrusted Shu to Deng Ai, and now he is entrusting Guanzhong to you. I hope you will work hard."

古文：镇恶曰： 吾等因托风云，并蒙抽擢，今咸阳不克，誓不济江。
现代文：王镇恶说： 我们借托风云，并且承蒙提拔，现在咸阳如不攻克，誓不再渡长江返回。
English: Wang Zhenxiong said: We rely on the wind and clouds, and accept the promotion. Now, if Xianyang is not conquered, I vow not to cross the Yangtze River and return.

古文：三秦若定，而公九锡不至，亦卿之责矣。 
现代文：三秦如果平定，而主公的九锡封赏不到，也就是您的责任了。 
English: If Sanqin is pacified, but the lord of Jiuxi is not rewarded, it is your responsibility.

古文：镇恶入贼境，战无不捷。破虎牢及柏谷坞。
现代文：王镇恶进入了贼军的辖地，战无不捷，攻破了虎牢关和柏谷坞。
English: Wang Zhenxiong viciously entered the jurisdiction of the thief army, and the battle was victorious, breaking through the tiger's stronghold and the Kashiwa Valley dock.

古文：进次渑池，造故人李方家。升堂见母，厚加酬赉，即授方渑池令。
现代文：进军驻扎在渑池，到了故友李方家，进了堂屋见了他的母亲，丰厚地加以酬谢赏赐，当即授职李方担任渑池令。
English: Marching troops stationed in Dianchi, arrived at the home of his late friend Li Fang, entered the hall and met his mother, generously rewarded and rewarded, and immediately appointed Li Fang as the Dianchi commander.

古文：方轨径据潼关，将士乏食，乃亲到弘农督人租。
现代文：两车并行直接占据了潼关，将士缺乏食物，他便亲自到弘农去督促缴纳粮租。
English: The two vehicles occupied Shaoguan directly in parallel. The general was short of food, so he personally went to Hongnong to urge him to pay grain rent.

古文：百姓竞送义粟，军食复振。
现代文：百姓们争着来送义谷，军粮重又丰足起来。
English: The people scrambled to send grain, and the army's rations became heavy and plentiful.

古文：初，武帝与镇恶等期，若克洛阳，须待大军，未可轻前。
现代文：起初，武帝与王镇恶等人互相约定，如果攻克洛阳，必须等待大军，不可轻率前进。
English: At first, Emperor Wu and Wang Zhenxiu and others mutually agreed that if they were to attack Luoyang, they must wait for a large army and not advance rashly.

古文：既而镇恶等至潼关，为伪大将军姚绍所拒不得进，驰告武帝求粮援。
现代文：随后王镇恶等人到了潼关，被伪大将军姚绍所抵抗，不能前进，驰马报告武帝请求粮食和支援。
English: Subsequently, Wang Zhenxiong and others arrived in Shaoguan. They were resisted by the pseudo-general Yao Shao and could not advance. They galloped to report to Emperor Wu to request food and support.

古文：时帝军入河，魏军屯河岸，军不得进。
现代文：当时武帝的军队进入黄河，魏军屯驻在河岸，军队不能前进。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu's army entered the Yellow River, and the Wei army was stationed on the riverbank, and the army could not advance.

古文：帝呼所遣人开舫北户指河上军示之曰： 我语令勿进而深入，岸上如此，何由得遣军？ 
现代文：武帝叫过来被差遣的人，打开船上北面的门，指着河上的军队让他看说： 我说不要深入前进嘛，岸上是这个样子，怎么能够派遣军队！ 
English: Emperor Wu called over the person who had been sent, opened the door on the north side of the boat, pointed to the army on the river and asked him to look at it and said: I said, don't advance too far, the shore is like this, how can you send an army!

古文：镇恶既得义租，绍又病死，伪抚军将军姚赞代绍守险，众力犹盛。
现代文：王镇恶既然得到了义租，姚绍又病死，伪抚军将军姚赞代替姚绍守险，军力仍然很强。
English: Since Wang Zhenxiong obtained the charitable rent, Yao Shao died of illness, and the fake general Yao Zan replaced Yao Shao to guard the risk, the military strength is still very strong.

古文：武帝至湖城，赞引退。
现代文：武帝到了湖城，姚赞撤退。
English: Emperor Wu arrived in Hucheng, and Yaozan withdrew.

古文：大军次潼关，谋进取计。镇恶请率水军自河入渭，直至渭桥。
现代文：大军驻在潼关，谋划进攻夺取的计策，王镇恶自己请求率领水军从黄河进入渭河，直到渭桥。
English: A large army was stationed in Shaoguan, planning to attack and seize the strategy. Wang Zhenxiong himself requested to lead the navy from the Yellow River into the Shaoguan River until the bridge.

古文：镇恶所乘皆蒙冲小舰，行船者悉在舰内，溯渭而进，舰外不见有行船人。
现代文：王镇恶所乘的都是蒙有牛皮的小舰，划船的人都在舰内，溯渭水前进，舰外看不见有划船的人。
English: Wang Zhenqiu's passengers are all small boats covered with cowhide, and the rowers are all inside the ship, tracing the water forward. No rowers can be seen outside the ship.

古文：北土素无舟楫，莫不惊以为神。
现代文：北方平时没有舟船，人们见了无不惊诧，以为是神怪。
English: In normal times, there are no boats in the north, and people are surprised to see them, thinking they are monsters.

古文：镇恶既至，令将士食毕，便弃船登岸。
现代文：王镇恶到了以后，让将士吃过饭，便弃船登岸。
English: After Wang Zhen fell ill, he let the generals have a meal and then abandoned the ship to go ashore.

古文：渭水流急，诸舰悉逐流去。镇恶抚慰士卒曰： 此是长安城北门外，去家万里，而舫乘衣粮并已逐流，唯宜死战，可立大功。 
现代文：渭水流水很急，那些舰船都随着河水流走，王镇恶抚慰士卒说： 这里是长安城北门外，离家万里，而船只衣粮全都随水流去，惟有死战，可以建立大功。 
English: The rushing water was very rapid, and those ships all went with the flow of the river. Wang Zhenxunfu comforted the soldiers and said: This is outside the north gate of Chang'an City, thousands of miles away from home, and the ships, clothes and grain all go with the flow of water. Only a battle to the death can establish great achievements.

古文：乃身先士卒。即陷长安城。
现代文：于是身先士卒，一直攻下了长安城。
English: As a result, they were the first to capture Chang'an City.

古文：城内六万余户，镇恶抚慰初附，号令严肃。
现代文：城内六万多户，王镇恶抚慰归附的人，号令严肃。
English: There are more than sixty thousand households in the city, and the people of Wangzhen who have been forced to annex are serious.

古文：于灞上奉迎，武帝劳之曰： 成吾霸业者真卿也。 
现代文：在灞上迎接武帝，武帝慰劳他说： 成就我的大业的，真是爱卿啊。 
English: He greeted Emperor Wu on the raft, and Emperor Wu consoled him, saying, "It is truly Aiqing who has accomplished my great cause.

古文：谢曰： 此明公之威，诸将之力。 
现代文：王镇恶道谢说： 这是依靠明公您的威势，各位将官的力量。 
English: Wang Zhenxiong said: "This is the power of relying on your authority, generals.

古文：帝笑曰： 卿欲学冯异邪？ 
现代文：武帝笑着说： 您是要学冯异啊？ 
English: Emperor Wu smiled and said, "You want to learn from Feng Yi?

古文：时关中丰全，镇恶性贪，收敛子女玉帛不可胜计。帝以其功大不问。
现代文：当时关中丰饶富有，王镇恶心性贪婪，收敛美女玉帛不可胜数，武帝因为他的功大而不管。
English: At that time, Guanzhong was rich and prosperous, Wangzhen was disgustingly greedy, there were countless beautiful women, and Emperor Wu did not care about them because of his great achievements.

古文：时有白帝言镇恶藏姚泓伪辇，有异志。帝使觇之，知镇恶剔取饰辇金银，弃辇于垣侧，帝乃安。
现代文：当时有人告诉武帝说王镇恶收藏了姚泓的伪辇，有异志，武帝派人去窥视，知道王镇恶是剔取装饰在辇上的金银，而把辇丢弃在墙边，武帝才安心了。
English: At that time, someone told Emperor Wu that Wang Zhenxiong had collected Yao Yao's fake ingots, and he had a different idea. Emperor Wu sent someone to take a peek. Knowing that Wang Zhenxiong had taken away the gold and silver that decorated the ingots and left the ingots on the wall, Emperor Wu was relieved.

古文：帝留第二子桂阳公义真为安西将军、雍秦二州刺史，镇长安。
现代文：武帝留下第二个儿子桂阳公刘义真为安西将军、秦雍二州刺史，镇守长安。
English: Emperor Wu left his second son, Guiyang Prince Liu Yizhen, as the Anxi general, Qin Yong, the governor of Erzhou, and the town guard of Chang'an.

古文：镇恶以征虏将军领安西司马、冯翊太守，委以扞御之任。
现代文：王镇恶担任征虏将军兼安西司马、冯翊太守，委托给他捍卫的责任。
English: Wang Zhenxiong served as the conscript general and the governor of Anxi Sima and Fenghuang, entrusting him with the responsibility of defense.

古文：及大军东还，赫连勃勃逼北地。义真遣中兵参军沈田子拒之。
现代文：等大军东还，赫连勃勃逼迫北地，刘义真派遣中兵参军沈田子抵御他。
English: When the great army was still in the east, Khelian vigorously pursued the North, and Liu Yizhen sent soldiers to join the army of Shen Tianzi to resist him.

古文：虏甚盛，田子退屯刘因堡，遣使还报镇恶。
现代文：敌军十分气盛，沈田子后退屯驻在刘因堡，派遣使者回来报告给王镇恶。
English: The enemy army was very vigorous. Shen Tianzi retreated and stationed in Liu Ying Fort. He sent an envoy back to report to Wang Zhenxuan.

古文：镇恶对田子使，谓安西长史王修曰： 公以十岁儿付吾等，当共思竭力，今拥兵不进，贼何由得平？ 
现代文：王镇恶当着沈田子的使者的面对安西长史王修说： 您把个十岁的儿童交给我们，就应当同心尽力，现在却拥兵不进，贼军怎么能够扫平？ 
English: Wang Zhenxiong said to Anxi Changshi Wang Xiu in the face of Shen Tianzi's envoy: You gave us a ten-year-old child, so you should have made a concerted effort, but now you support the soldiers and do not advance, how can the thief army sweep?

古文：使反言之，田子甚惧。
现代文：使者回去报告了，沈田子非常害怕。
English: The messenger went back to report, and Shen was very scared.

古文：王猛之相苻坚也，北人以方诸葛亮。
现代文：王猛给苻坚做宰相，北国人把他比做诸葛亮。
English: Wang Meng made Zou Jian the prime minister, and the people of the North compared him to Zhuge Liang.

古文：入关之功，又镇恶为首，时论者深惮之。
现代文：入关的功劳，又以王镇恶为首，当时的谈论者都非常害怕。
English: At that time, the talkers were very afraid of Wang Zhenxiong, who took the lead in the credit of the entry.

古文：田子峣柳之捷，威震三辅，而与镇恶争功。
现代文：沈田子的柳之捷，威震长安，从而和王镇恶争功。
English: Shen Tianzi's Liu Zhi Jie was a great success and a great shock to Chang'an, thus competing with Wang Zhen for merit.

古文：武帝将归，留田子与镇恶，私谓田子曰： 钟会不得遂其乱者，为有卫瓘等也。
现代文：武帝即将归去，留下沈田子和王镇恶，私下里对沈田子说： 钟会不能随心作乱，是因为有卫馞等人的缘故。
English: Emperor Wu was about to return, leaving Shen Tianzi and Wang Zhenqi behind. He said to Shen Tianzi in private: "The bell association can't make trouble at will, because of people like Wei Yao.

古文：语曰： 猛兽不如群狐。 
现代文：常言说： 猛兽不如群狐。 
English: As the saying goes: A ferocious beast is not as good as a pack of foxes.

古文：卿等十余人何惧王镇恶。 
现代文：你们十几个人有什么惧怕王镇恶的！ 
English: A dozen or so of you have nothing to fear from the evil king!

古文：故二人常有猜心。
现代文：所以他们二人常常互相都有猜忌。
English: So the two of them are often suspicious of each other.

古文：时镇恶师于泾上，与田子俱会傅弘之垒，田子求屏人，因斩之幕下，并兄基、弟鸿、遵、深、从弟昭、朗，凡七人。
现代文：当时王镇恶驻军在泾水上，和沈田子一起聚会在傅弘之的军垒中，沈田子摒退其他人，于是就在军幕中将他斩首，另外还斩了王镇恶的哥哥王基、弟弟王鸿、王遵、王深，堂弟王昭、王朗、王弘，共七个人。
English: At that time, Wang Zhenxuan's army was stationed on the Surabaya River, and he and Shen Tianzi gathered together in Fu Hongzhi's fortress. Shen Tianzi rejected the others, so he beheaded him in the military curtain. In addition, he also beheaded Wang Zhenxuan's brother Wang Ji, brother Wang Hong, Wang Zun, Wang Sheng, cousin Wang Zhao, Wang Lang, Wang Hong, a total of seven people.

古文：弘之奔告义真。义真率王智、王修被甲登横门以察其变。
现代文：傅弘之赶去告诉了刘义真，刘义真率领王智、王修披上盔甲登上横门来观察形势的变化。
English: Fu Hongzhi hurried to tell Liu Yizhen. Liu Yizhen led Wang Zhi and Wang Xiu to put on armor and board the side gate to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：俄而田子至，言镇恶反。
现代文：不一会沈田子到了，说王镇恶谋反。
English: Not long after, Shen Tianzi arrived, saying that Wang Zhen was plotting a rebellion.

古文：修执田子，以专戮斩焉。
现代文：王修抓住了沈田子，以擅自杀人的罪名把他斩了。
English: Wang Xiu caught Shen Tianzi and beheaded him on the charge of committing suicide.

古文：是岁，义熙十四年正月十五日也。
现代文：这一年，是义熙十四年正月十五日。
English: This year, it was the 15th day of the first month of the 14th year of Yixi.

古文：追赠左将军、青州刺史。
现代文：追赠王镇恶为左将军、青州刺史。
English: Wang Zhenxiong was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Left, and Qingzhou was awarded the title of General of the Right.

古文：及帝受命，追封龙阳县侯，谥曰壮。
现代文：等武帝接受天命登了帝位，追封他为龙阳县侯，谥号为壮。
English: Emperor Wu accepted the destiny and ascended to the throne. He was given the title of Longyang County Marquis, and his posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：传国至曾孙睿，齐受禅，国除。
现代文：传封国到曾孙王睿，齐王接受禅让，封国被废除。
English: The fief was passed down to Wang Rui's great-grandson, King Qi accepted the concession, and the fief was abolished.

古文：朱龄石，字伯儿，沛郡沛人也。
现代文：朱龄石，字叫伯儿，沛郡沛县人。
English: Zhu Lingshi, nicknamed "Uncle," is from Peixian County.

古文：世为将，伯父宪及斌并为西中郎袁真将佐。
现代文：世代为将，伯父朱宪和朱斌都是西中郎袁真的高级军官。
English: For generations, Uncle Zhu Xian and Uncle Zhu Bin were both high-ranking officers of Xi Zhonglang and Yuan Zhen.

古文：桓温伐真于寿阳，真以宪兄弟潜通温，并杀之。龄石父绰逃归温。
现代文：桓温到寿阳讨伐袁真，袁真因为朱宪兄弟暗中沟通桓温，而把他们一块杀掉，朱龄石的父亲朱绰逃走归附桓温。
English: Kuan Wen went to Shouyang to fight Yuan Zhen. Yuan Zhen killed the Zhu Xian brothers because they had secretly communicated with Kuan Wen. Zhu Lingshi's father, Zhu Yao, fled and joined Kuan Wen.

古文：寿阳平，真已死，绰辄发棺戮尸。
现代文：寿阳平定，袁真已经死去，朱绰则挖出棺材斩杀他的尸体。
English: Shouyang was pacified, Yuan Zhen was dead, and Zhu Cao dug out the coffin and chopped up his body.

古文：温怒将斩之，温弟冲请得免。
现代文：桓温十分气愤，要把他斩首，由于桓温的弟弟桓冲的请求而得以赦免。
English: Enraged, Kuan Wen wanted to behead him, but was pardoned at the request of Kuan Wen's brother, Kuan Chong.

古文：绰受冲更生之恩，事冲如父。
现代文：朱绰蒙受了桓冲的再生之恩，侍奉桓冲如同父亲。
English: Zhu Cao received the grace of rebirth from Kanchong and served him like a father.

古文：位西阳、广平太守。
现代文：职位曾为西阳、广平太守。
English: The post was previously held by Xiyang and Guangping.

古文：及冲薨，绰欧血而死。
现代文：后来桓冲去世，朱绰口吐鲜血而死。
English: Later, Huanchong died, and Zhu Yaozhong vomited blood and died.

古文：龄石少好武，不事崖检。舅淮南蒋氏才劣，龄石使舅卧听事，翦纸方寸帖着舅枕，以刀子县掷之，相去八九尺，百掷百中。
现代文：朱龄石少年的时候喜好练武，行为很不检点，他的舅舅淮南蒋氏才能低劣，朱龄石让舅舅躺在大厅里，剪一块一寸见方的纸片贴在舅舅的枕头上，用刀子远远地投掷，相隔八九尺，百掷百中。
English: When Zhu Lingshi was a teenager, he liked to practice martial arts, and his behavior was very rude. His uncle Huainan Jiang's talent was inferior. Zhu Lingshi let his uncle lie in the hall, cut a one-inch-square piece of paper and stuck it on his uncle's pillow, and threw it with a knife far away, eight or nine feet apart, a hundred throws.

古文：舅畏龄石，终不敢动。
现代文：舅舅害怕朱龄石，始终不敢动弹。
English: My uncle was afraid of Zhu Lingshi and never dared to move.

古文：舅头有大瘤，龄石伺眠密割之，即死。
现代文：舅舅的头上有一颗大瘤子，朱龄石趁他睡觉的时候偷偷地给他割除，结果死去。
English: There was a large tumor on his uncle's head, and Zhu Lingshi secretly removed it while he was sleeping. As a result, he died.

古文：武帝克京城，以为建武参军。
现代文：宋武帝攻克了京城，任命他为建武参军。
English: Emperor Songwu conquered the capital and appointed him to join the army.

古文：从至江乘将战，龄石言世受桓氏恩，不容以兵刃相向，乞在军后。
现代文：随从武帝到了江乘，即将参加战斗，朱龄石说自己家族世代蒙受桓氏的恩惠，不能容许以刀兵相对，请求留在军队后方。
English: Accompanying Emperor Wu to Jiangren, about to take part in the battle, Zhu Lingshi said that his family had been favored by the Huan clan for generations, and could not tolerate opposing soldiers with swords, and asked to stay behind the army.

古文：帝义而许之。
现代文：武帝认为他很义气，从而答应了他。
English: Emperor Wu thought he was very righteous, so he agreed.

古文：以为镇军参军，迁武康令。
现代文：任命他为镇军参军，调任武康县令。
English: He was appointed to the town army to join the army and transferred to the Wu Kang County.

古文：县人姚系祖专为劫，郡县畏不能讨。龄石至县，伪与厚，召为参军。系祖恃强，乃出应召。
现代文：本县人姚系祖专门从事抢劫，郡县官员都害怕他，不敢进行讨伐，朱龄石到了县里，假装与他友好，召他担任参军，姚系祖依恃强悍，便出来应召。
English: Yao Jiezu, a resident of this county, specialized in robbery. County officials were afraid of him and did not dare to carry out a crusade. Zhu Lingshi came to the county, pretended to be friendly with him, and called him to join the army. Yao Jiezu, who was strong, came out to answer the call.

古文：龄石斩之，掩其家，悉杀其兄弟，由是一部得清。
现代文：朱龄石于是将他杀掉，攻袭他的家园，把他的兄弟全部杀死，由此整个地区得到肃清。
English: Zhu Lingshi then killed him, attacked his home, killed all of his brothers, and the entire area was cleared.

古文：后领中兵。
现代文：后来兼任中兵。
English: Later, he also served as a middle-ranking soldier.

古文：龄石有武干，又练吏职，帝甚亲委之。
现代文：朱龄石有军事才干，又精于文官职务，武帝十分亲近和重用他。
English: Zhu Lingshi had military talent and was good at civil service. Emperor Wu was very close to him and made great use of him.

古文：平卢循有功，为西阳太守。
现代文：后来平定卢循有功，被封为西阳太守。
English: Later, Lu Xun was awarded the title of Xiyang Dazhou.

古文：义熙九年，徙益州刺史，为元帅伐蜀。
现代文：义熙九年，调任益州刺史，作为元帅讨伐蜀地。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, he was transferred to the post of marshal of Yizhou, and fought against Shu.

古文：初，帝与龄石密谋进取，曰： 刘敬宣往年出黄武，无功而退。
现代文：开始，武帝和朱龄石密谋进攻夺取地盘，说： 刘敬宣往年出兵黄武，无功而回。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu and Zhu Lingshi conspired to attack and seize the site, saying: Liu Jingxuan sent troops to Huangwu in previous years, but returned without success.

古文：贼谓我今应从外水往，而料我当出其不意犹从内水来也，必重兵守涪城以备内道。
现代文：贼军认为我们现在应该从外水前往，而估计我们当会出其不意可能要从内水攻来，必定派重兵守卫涪城以防备内道。
English: The bandits think that we should now go from the outside water, and estimate that we may have to attack from the inside water when we are taken by surprise, and will certainly send heavy troops to guard the city to prevent the inside road.

古文：若向黄武，正堕其计。
现代文：如果开往黄武，正好陷他们的诡计。
English: If you go to Huangwu, you will fall right into their tricks.

古文：今以大众自外水取成都，疑兵出内水，此制敌之奇也。 
现代文：现在以主力从外水进取成都，而以疑兵出内水，这才是制敌的奇策。 
English: Now, the main force enters Chengdu from the outside water, and the doubtful soldiers come from the inside water. This is the magic strategy to defeat the enemy.

古文：而虑此声先驰，贼审虚实，别有函封付龄石，署曰至白帝乃开。
现代文：又怕这种风声先传出去，贼军看出了虚实，便另有一封信交给朱龄石，上面写着到白帝再折开。
English: Fearing that this rumor would spread first and the bandits would find out the truth, another letter was handed over to Zhu Lingshi, which said that it would not be opened until the time of the White Emperor.

古文：诸军虽进，未知处分。至白帝发书，曰： 众军悉从外水取成都；臧熹、朱枚于中水取广汉；使羸弱乘高舰十余，由内水向黄武。 
现代文：各路军队虽然都在开进，但是并不知道整体部署，到了白帝打开信一看，上面说： 大军都从外水攻取成都；臧熙、朱枚从中水攻取广汉；让老弱兵士乘高大舰船十余艘，由内水开向黄武。 
English: Although the armies of all directions were advancing, they did not know the overall deployment. When Emperor Baidu opened the letter, he saw that it said: The great armies all captured Chengdu from the open water; Zou Xi and Zhu Mei captured Guanghan from the middle water; let the old and weak soldiers take more than ten tall ships and sail from the inland water to Huangwu.

古文：谯纵果备内水，使其大将谯道福戍涪城，遣其秦州刺史侯晖、仆射谯诜等屯彭摸，夹水为城。
现代文：谯纵果然在内水防备，派他的大将谯道福守卫涪城，派他的秦州刺史侯晖、仆射谯诜等屯驻在彭模，夹水两岸做为军城。
English: Zhaozhong was indeed prepared for inland waters. He sent his general Zhaodofu to guard Zhencheng, and sent his Qinzhou Zhishi, Houyi, and Zhuzhaobing to be stationed in Pengmo, making it a military city on both sides of the water.

古文：十年六月，龄石至彭摸。
现代文：义熙十年六月，朱龄石开到了彭模。
English: In June of the tenth year of Yixi, Zhu Lingshi drove to Pengmo.

古文：七月，龄石率刘钟、蒯恩等于北城斩侯晖、谯诜。
现代文：七月，朱龄石率领刘钟、蒯恩等在北城杀死了侯晖、谯诜。
English: In July, Zhu Lingshi led Liu Zhong, Zhen En and others to kill Hou Yao and Yao in Beicheng.

古文：朱枚至广汉，复破谯道福别军。
现代文：朱枚到了广汉，又打败了谯道福的非主力部队。
English: Zhu Haili arrived at Guanghan, and defeated the non-main force of Xing Daofu.

古文：谯纵奔涪城，巴西人王志斩送之，并获道福，斩于军门。
现代文：谯纵逃奔涪城，巴西人王志将他斩首呈送，同时也俘获了谯道福，在军营门前斩杀。
English: After fleeing to Penang, the Brazilian Wang Zhi Rong beheaded him and also captured Shantou Daofu, who was beheaded in front of the barracks.

古文：帝之伐蜀，将谋元帅，乃举龄石。
现代文：武帝讨伐蜀地，准备物色一个元帅，就提举朱龄石。
English: Emperor Wu was preparing to invade Shu and was looking for a field marshal, so he brought up Zhu Lingshi.

古文：众咸谓龄石资名尚轻，虑不克办。论者甚众，帝不从。
现代文：众人都认为朱龄石年纪还轻，不想同意，提不同意见的人很多，武帝都不听从。
English: Many people think that Zhu Lingshi is still young and do not want to agree. There are many people with different opinions, and Emperor Wu does not listen to them.

古文：乃分大军之半，令猛将劲卒悉以配之。
现代文：于是分出大军的一半，把猛将精兵全部配备给他。
English: So he divided the army in half and gave him all the best soldiers.

古文：臧熹，敬皇后弟也，亦命受其节度。
现代文：臧熙是敬皇后的弟弟，也命令他受朱龄石的指挥。
English: Zou Xi, the younger brother of the queen, also ordered him to be commanded by Zhu Lingshi.

古文：及战克捷，众咸服帝知人，又美龄石善于事。
现代文：等到战争告捷，众人都很佩服武帝的知人善任，又称美朱龄石的善于指挥。
English: When the war came to a successful conclusion, everyone admired Emperor Wu's acquaintance Shenn Rong, also known as Meizhuling Shi, for his ability to command.

古文：以平蜀功，封丰城侯。
现代文：由于平定蜀地的功劳，被封为丰城侯。
English: As a result of his contribution to the pacification of Shu, he was given the title of Prince of Fengcheng.

古文：十四年，桂阳公义真被征，以龄石为雍州刺史，督关中诸军事。
现代文：义熙十四年，桂阳公刘义真被征调，任命朱龄石为雍州刺史，督关中诸军事。
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, Liu Yizhen, the ruler of Guiyang, was conscripted and appointed Zhu Lingshi as the historian of Yongzhou and the military commander of the Middle Guan.

古文：龄石至长安，义真乃发。
现代文：朱龄石到了长安，刘义真才出发。
English: Zhu Lingshi arrived in Chang'an, and Liu Yizhen set off.

古文：义真败于青泥，龄石亦举城奔走见杀。
现代文：刘义真在青泥遭到大败，朱龄石率全城逃走被杀死。
English: Liu Yizhen suffered a crushing defeat in Qingde, Zhu Lingshi led the whole city to escape and was killed.

古文：传国至孙，齐受禅，国除。
现代文：封国传到他的孙子，齐国接受禅让，封国被废除。
English: The fief passed to his grandson, Qi accepted the concession, and the fief was abolished.

