古文：辛弃疾，字幼安，齐之历城人。
现代文：辛弃疾，字幼安，齐之历城人。
English: Hard to abandon the disease, the word is young, and the city's people are all the same.

古文：少师蔡伯坚，与党怀英同学，号 辛党 。
现代文：年少时从学于蔡伯坚，与党怀英是同学，号称辛、党。
English: When he was young, he studied under Cai Bojian, and was a classmate of the Party's Huaiying. He was known as Xin and the Party.

古文：始筮仕，决以蓍，怀英遇《坎》，因留事金，弃疾得《离》，遂决意南归。
现代文：谋求仕途之初，用蓍草占卜，党怀英得一坎卦，故留在金境，辛弃疾得一离卦，就下决心南归。
English: At the beginning of his pursuit of a career, he used the divination of eelgrass to predict that he would stay in Jinjing because he would gain a lot from the party, but he would lose a lot if he had to leave Jinjing, so he decided to return to the south.

古文：金主亮死，中原豪杰并起。
现代文：金主完颜亮死后，中原地区豪杰纷起抗金。
English: After the death of the owner of the gold, the heroes of the Central Plains rose up against the gold.

古文：耿京聚兵山东，称天平节度使，节制山东、河北忠义军马，弃疾为掌书记，即劝京决策南向。
现代文：耿京聚兵于山东，称天平节度使，节制山东、河北忠义军马，辛弃疾任掌书记，并劝耿京南向归宋。
English: Geng Jing gathered soldiers in Shandong, said that he was the envoy of the Tianping Festival, restrained the loyalist troops in Shandong and Hebei, resigned from the post of secretary, and advised Geng Jing to return to the Song Dynasty.

古文：僧义端者，喜谈兵，弃疾间与之游。
现代文：有一个叫义端的和尚，喜欢谈兵事，辛弃疾曾与他交往。
English: There was a monk named Yidang, who liked to talk about military affairs, and had once been in contact with him.

古文：及在京军中，义端亦聚众千余，说下之，使隶京。
现代文：在辛弃疾投奔耿京后，义端亦率千余人反金，辛弃疾说服他也投奔了耿京。
English: After giving up his illness to go to Beijing, Yoshihata also led more than a thousand people to return the money, and his illness convinced him to go to Beijing.

古文：义端一夕窃印以逃，京大怒，欲杀弃疾。
现代文：一天傍晚义端偷了耿京的大印逃走，耿京大怒，要斩辛弃疾。
English: One evening, Yidang stole Geng Jing's seal and ran away. Geng Jing was furious and wanted to end his suffering.

古文：弃疾曰： 丐我三日期，不获，就死未晚。 揣僧必以虚实奔告金帅，急追获之。
现代文：辛弃疾说： 请容我三日期限，若不把他抓住，再杀我不迟。 辛弃疾揣测义端必把军中的虚实告诉金帅，就急忙追赶并捕获了他。
English: Xin Qiaozi said: Please allow me three days, if I do not catch him, I will not be late to kill him again. Xin Qiaozi guessed that Yidang would tell the truth to Jin Shuai in the army, so he hurriedly chased and captured him.

古文：义端曰： 我识君真相，乃青兕也，力能杀人，幸勿杀我。 弃疾斩其首归报，京益壮之。
现代文：义端说 ：我知道你的真相，是一青兕，力能杀人，求你别杀我。 辛弃疾斩其首回营报告，耿京谅解了他并对他更信任。
English: Yidang said, "I know the truth about you, you are a young man with the power to kill, please don't kill me." Xin Qian cut short his first report to the camp, and Geng Jing understood him and trusted him more.

古文：绍兴三十二年，京令弃疾奉表归宋，高宗劳师建康，召见，嘉纳之，授承务郎、天平节度掌书记，并以节使印告召京。
现代文：绍兴三十二年，耿京命辛弃疾奉表归宋，高宗在建康慰劳军队，召见了辛弃疾，高兴地接受了耿京的奉表，封辛弃疾为承务郎、天平节度掌书记，并封耿京为天平节度使，召他南归。
English: In the 32nd year of Shaoxing, Geng Jing gave the order to return to the Song Dynasty, and Gao Zong, who was building a comfort army, received the order and gladly accepted the order from Geng Jing. Geng Jing was appointed as the secretary of the Tianping Festival, and Geng Jing was appointed as the envoy of the Tianping Festival, and he was called to return to the south.

古文：会张安国、邵进已杀京降金，弃疾还至海州，与众谋曰： 我缘主帅来归朝，不期事变，何以复命？ 乃约统制王世隆及忠义人马全福等径趋金营，安国方与金将酣饮，即众中缚之以归，金将追之不及。
现代文：此时，张安国、邵进已杀耿京降金，辛弃疾北返到海州时，与随行者商量： 我遵主帅之命来归朝，不料事态有变，何以复命？ 于是，与海州统制王世隆及忠义人马全福等约定，直奔金营，张安国正与金将酣饮，辛弃疾等就把他从众人中抓起，绑着他离去，金将没能追上。
English: At this time, Zhang An Guo and Shao Jin had already killed Geng Jing to reduce the gold, and when Xin Qian Ji Bei returned to Haizhou, he discussed with his entourage: I followed the commander's order to return to the North, but the situation changed, why did I return the order? Therefore, with the agreement of Wang Shilong, the governor of Haizhou, and Ma Quanfu, a loyal person, they went straight to the gold camp. Zhang An Guo was drinking with Jin Guo, and Xin Qian Ji grabbed him from the crowd, tied him up and left. Jin Guo could not catch up.

古文：献俘行在，斩安国于市。
现代文：张安国被送往行在斩首于市。
English: Zhang Anguo was sent to be beheaded in the city of Chongqing.

古文：仍授前官，改差江阴佥判。
现代文：朝廷仍授给辛弃疾原官职，改任为江阴佥判。
English: The imperial court still conferred the former official position on Xin Qianji, and he was reappointed as the Jiangyin magistrate.

古文：弃疾时年二十三。
现代文：辛弃疾当时二十三岁。
English: He was 23 years old at the time of his illness.

古文：乾道四年，通判建康府。
现代文：乾道四年，辛弃疾任建康府通判。
English: After four years of hard work, he resigned due to illness and became the judge of Jiankang Prefecture.

古文：六年，孝宗召对延和殿。
现代文：六年，孝宗召他在延和殿应对。
English: Six years later, Takamune called him to respond to the situation at Yanwa-den.

古文：时虞允文当国，帝锐意恢复，弃疾因论南北形势及三国、晋、汉人才，持论劲直，不为迎合。
现代文：此时虞允文掌权，皇上锐意恢复，辛弃疾趁机论述南北形势及三国、晋、汉时的人才，其论切中时弊，毫不迎合。
English: At this time, Gu Yunwen was in power, the emperor was eager to recover, and he took the opportunity to discuss the North-South situation and the talents of the Three Kingdoms, Jin Dynasty and Han Dynasty.

古文：作《九议》并《应问》三篇、《美芹十论》献于朝，言逆顺之理，消长之势，技之长短，地之要害，甚备。
现代文：做《九议》和《应问》三篇、《美芹十论》献上，对宋、金双方逆顺的道理，消长的形势，用兵的长短，地理的要害，都做了周密的分析。
English: He wrote three articles of "Nine Opinions" and "Questions to Ask" and presented "Ten Opinions on Parsley," and made a thorough analysis of the reason why the Song Dynasty and the Jin Dynasty were on opposite sides, the situation of economic growth, the length of the use of soldiers, and the key geographical factors.

古文：以讲和方定，议不行。
现代文：因和议刚定，他的建议未被采纳。
English: His suggestion was not taken up because of the peace settlement.

古文：迁司农寺主簿，出知滁州。
现代文：他升为司农寺主簿，出京城任滁州知州。
English: He was promoted to the position of the chief bookkeeper of Sino-ji Temple, and went to Beijing to serve as the magistrate of Bozhou and Chizhou.

古文：州罹兵烬，井邑凋残，弃疾宽征薄赋，招流散，教民兵，议屯田，乃创奠枕楼、繁雄馆。
现代文：滁州遭受兵祸，井邑凋残，辛弃疾对百姓宽征薄赋，招抚流亡，训练民兵，议定屯田，并创建了奠枕楼、繁雄馆。
English: Bozhou suffered from the military disaster, the withering of the wells and villages, and the abandonment disease caused the people to be recruited and sent to exile, trained the militia, agreed on the settlement of the field, and created the pillow tower and the prosperous male pavilion.

古文：辟江东安抚司参议官。留守叶衡雅重之，衡入相，力荐弃疾慷慨有大略。
现代文：被召为江东安抚司参议官，深得留守叶衡器重，叶衡任宰相后，力荐辛弃疾，认为他有雄才大略。
English: He was called to serve as a councillor of the Jiangdong Reassurance Division, but he had to stay behind because of his weight. After Ye Heng was appointed as prime minister, he strongly recommended that he give up his illness, believing that he had great talent.

古文：召见，迁仓部郎官、提点江西刑狱。
现代文：皇上召见他，又升为仓部郎官、提点江西刑狱。
English: The emperor summoned him, and he was promoted to the position of warehouse steward and sent to Jiangxi Prison.

古文：平剧盗赖文政有功，加秘阁修撰。
现代文：因剿平赖文政起义之功，加官为秘阁修撰。
English: Because of his contribution to the literary and political uprising, he was promoted to the post of secret editor.

古文：调京西转运判官，差知江陵府兼湖北安抚。
现代文：调任京西转运判官，差遣为江陵知府兼湖北安抚使。
English: He was transferred to the West Beijing Trans-shipment Judge and sent to be the governor of Gangneung and the pacification envoy of Hubei.

古文：迁知隆兴府兼江西安抚，以大理少卿召，出为湖北转运副使，改湖南，寻知潭州兼湖南安抚。
现代文：调任隆兴知府兼江西安抚使，被召入朝任大理寺少卿，又调为湖北转运副使，改为湖南转运副使，不久，任潭州知州兼湖南安抚使。
English: He was transferred to Longxing Prefecture and Jiangxi Pacifying Envoy, was called to the imperial court to serve as the junior secretary of Dali Temple, and was transferred to Hubei Transportation Deputy Envoy, changed to Hunan Transportation Deputy Envoy, and soon served as Tanzhou Chizhou and Hunan Pacifying Envoy.

古文：盗连起湖湘，弃疾悉讨平之。
现代文：辛弃疾讨平了在湖湘地区相继爆发的农民起义。
English: The peasant uprisings that broke out one after another in the Hunan region were put down with great difficulty.

古文：遂奏疏曰： 今朝廷清明，比年李金、赖文政、陈子明、陈峒相继窃发，皆能一呼啸聚千百，杀掠吏民，死且不顾，至烦大兵翦灭。
现代文：他上疏说： 当今朝政清明，近年以来，李金、赖文政、陈子明、陈峒相继起事，皆能一呼百应，杀掠吏民，不顾死活，以至于要用大军来平灭。
English: He went on to say: Today's imperial government is clear-cut. In recent years, Li Jin, Lai Wen Zheng, Chen Ziming, and Chen Yao have risen up one after another. They are all able to call for a hundred responses, kill and plunder officials and people, and do not care about life and death, so much so that they want to use a large army to quell them.

古文：良由州以趣办财赋为急，吏有残民害物之状，而州不敢问，县以并缘科敛为急，吏有残民害物之状，而县不敢问。
现代文：所以这样，是因州府征收财赋催办过急，吏行刻剥害民之政，而州府不敢过问；县衙巧立名目，大肆科敛，吏有残民害物之状，而县衙不敢过问。
English: Therefore, this is due to the fact that the prefectural government is too hasty to collect and implement the financial endowment, the officials carry out the policy of depriving the people, and the prefectural government does not dare to ask questions; the county magistrate cleverly sets up a name, and is very scientific, and the officials have the status of the remnants of the people's harm, and the county magistrate does not dare to ask questions.

古文：田野之民，郡以聚敛害之，县以科率害之，吏以乞取害之，豪民以兼并害之，盗贼以剽夺害之，民不为盗，去将安之？
现代文：普通百姓，深受州的聚敛之害，县的科率之苦，官吏的巧取豪夺，豪强的兼并，盗贼的劫掠，不起而为盗，又能如何呢？
English: What can be done for the ordinary people, who have suffered from the accumulation of the state, the suffering of the county's scientific leaders, the clever plunder of officials, the annexation of the powerful, the robbery of thieves, and the theft of the poor?

古文：夫民为国本，而贪吏迫使为盗，今年剿除，明年划荡，譬之木焉，日刻月削，不损则折。
现代文：百姓是国家的根本，而贪吏迫使他们为盗，今年剿除，明年平灭，就像木头，日刻月削，不损则折。
English: The people are the foundation of the country, but the greedy officials have forced them to become thieves. This year they will be eliminated, and next year they will be wiped out. Like wood, it is cut day by day, and it will be broken if it is not damaged.

古文：欲望陛下深思致盗之由，讲求弭盗之术，无徒恃平盗之兵。
现代文：希望陛下认真考虑导致盗贼起事的原因，讲求平盗之术，不要只靠用兵镇压。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will seriously consider the reasons that led to the thieves' uprising, emphasize the art of stealing, and not rely solely on the use of troops to suppress.

古文：申饬州县，以惠养元元为意，有违法贪冒者，使诸司各扬其职，无徒按举小吏以应故事，自为文过之地。 诏奖谕之。
现代文：告诫州县，以仁爱百姓为本，有违法贪赃者，让各部门尽职尽责，不要只纠举小官吏应付了事，而为自己掩饰过错。 皇上下诏嘉奖他。
English: He admonished the prefectures and counties to take benevolence and love for the people as the basis, and to let all departments perform their duties and responsibilities when there are illegal and greedy persons, and not to only appoint minor officials to deal with the matter, but to cover up the fault for themselves.

古文：又以湖南控带二广，与溪峒蛮獠接连，草窃间作，岂惟风俗顽悍，抑武备空虚所致。
现代文：又因为湖南连接两广，与溪峒蛮獠相接，獠人的骚扰偶有发生，不只因其风俗顽悍，也是朝廷武备空虚所致。
English: In addition, because Hunan connects the two regions and is adjacent to the Yangtze River, the harassment of foreigners occasionally occurs, not only because of its tenacious customs, but also due to the emptiness of the imperial army.

古文：乃复奏疏曰： 军政之敝，统率不一，差出占破，略无已时。
现代文：于是，辛弃疾又上疏说： 军政之弊，在于统兵将领不能长期任职，士兵被差出或私自占有用于役使，几乎没停止过。
English: As a result, the problem of abandonment of the military was once again brought to the fore: the drawback of military government is that the general officer cannot serve for a long time, and soldiers are sent out or privately owned for service, which has hardly stopped.

古文：军人则利于优闲窠坐，奔走公门，苟图衣食，以故教阅废弛，逃亡者不追，冒名者不举。
现代文：士卒则以优闲自得，躲在大营里为利，他们奔走于权势之家，苟且偷生，所以军队中教阅废弛，逃亡者不追究，冒名顶替者不查问。
English: The soldiers, on the other hand, take advantage of their leisure time to hide in the camp. They run around in the houses of power and try to steal a living. Therefore, education in the army is useless, fugitives are not pursued, and impostors are not investigated.

古文：平居则奸民无所忌惮，缓急则卒伍不堪征行。
现代文：平时奸民们毫无忌惮，遇有战事士卒不堪一击。
English: In peacetime, the villains are unscrupulous, and in the event of combatants, they are vulnerable.

古文：至调大军，千里讨捕，胜负未决，伤威损重，为害非细。
现代文：甚至调大军，从千里之外来讨伐，还没开仗，则军威已挫，辎重也受损失，为害不小。
English: Even if a large army is dispatched from thousands of miles away to fight a war, if the war has not yet begun, the military prestige has been defeated, and heavy losses have also been suffered, which is not a small harm.

古文：乞依广东摧锋、荆南神劲、福建左翼例，别创一军，以湖南飞虎为名，止拨属三牙、密院，专听帅臣节制调度，庶使夷獠知有军威，望风慑服。 
现代文：希望照广东摧锋、荆南神劲、福建左翼军的样子，另建一军，以湖南飞虎为军名，只隶属三牙、枢密院，专由帅臣节制调动，这样，可使夷獠知我军武威，而望风慑服。 
English: It is hoped that another army will be built according to the appearance of the Guangdong Destroyer, the Jingnan Divine Strength, and the Fujian Left-wing Army, with the Hunan Flying Tiger as the military name, only belonging to the Three Teeth and the Privy Council, and exclusively mobilized by the handsome ministers. In this way, the barbarians can know the military power of our army, and hope to deter the wind.

古文：诏委以规画，乃度马殷营垒故基，起盖砦栅，招步军二千人，马军五百人，傔人在外，战马铁甲皆备。
现代文：皇上下诏命辛弃疾筹建飞虎军，于是，他测量马殷的营垒故基，在此盖起砦栅，招步军二千人，马军五百人，侍从在外，战马铁甲齐备。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to abandon ill-health to prepare for the construction of the Flying Tiger Army. Therefore, he measured the original foundation of Ma Yin's camp, built a fortification here, recruited two thousand foot soldiers, five hundred horse soldiers, attendants outside, and war horses with iron armor.

古文：先以缗钱五万于广西买马五百匹，诏广西安抚司岁带买三十匹。
现代文：先用五万缗钱在广西买五百匹马，诏令广西安抚司每年顺便买三十匹。
English: First, he used 50,000 baht to buy 500 horses in Guangxi, and ordered the Guangxi Pacification Division to buy 30 horses every year.

古文：时枢府有不乐之者，数沮挠之，弃疾行愈力，卒不能夺。
现代文：当时，枢密院有人不喜欢如此，多次从中阻挠，辛弃疾却做得更尽力，终于没半途而废。
English: At that time, some people in the Privy Council did not like this and repeatedly obstructed it, but they did their best and finally did not give up halfway.

古文：经度费钜万计，弃疾善斡旋，事皆立办。
现代文：建军的费用达钜万，辛弃疾善于筹划，每事都很快办妥。
English: The cost of setting up the army reached 30 million yuan. He was good at planning, and everything was done quickly.

古文：议者以聚敛闻，降御前金字牌，俾日下住罢。
现代文：谏官弹劾他是在聚敛，皇上降下御前金字牌，让他立即停建。
English: The eunuch impeached him for being a hoarder, and the emperor lowered the imperial gold medal and ordered him to stop construction immediately.

古文：弃疾受而藏之，出责监办者，期一月飞虎营栅成，违坐军制。
现代文：当时正值秋雨连绵，负责建营栅的机构说造瓦不易，辛弃疾问 ：需要多少瓦？ 答 ：二十万。 辛弃疾说： 不要忧虑。 
English: At that time, it was the time of continuous autumn rain, and the organization in charge of building the camp fence said that it was not easy to make tiles, and Xin Qiaozi asked: How many tiles are needed? Answer: Two hundred thousand. Xin Qiaozi said: Don't worry.

古文：如期落成，开陈本末，绘图缴进，上遂释然，时秋霖几月，所司言造瓦不易，问： 须瓦几何？ 曰： 二十万。 弃疾曰： 勿忧。 令厢官自官舍、神祠外，应居民家取沟敢瓦二，不二日皆具，僚属叹伏。
现代文：命厢官从官舍、祠庙取一部分，又从每户居民家取二块瓦，不到两天就齐了，僚属都很叹服。
English: In less than two days, the officials took a part of the official residences, temples and shrines, and two pieces of tiles from each resident's home. Their colleagues and relatives were very impressed.

古文：军成，雄镇一方，为江上诸军之冠。
现代文：飞虎军成，雄镇一方，是长江沿岸各军之冠。
English: The Flying Tiger Army, on the other hand, is the crown of the armies along the Yangtze River.

古文：加右文殿修撰，差知隆兴府兼江西安抚。
现代文：他被加官为右文殿修撰，差遣为隆兴知府兼江西安抚使。
English: He was promoted to the post of Umenden Shusan and sent to Longxing Prefecture and Jiangxi Province as a peace envoy.

古文：时江右大饥，诏任责荒政。
现代文：当时江右发生严重饥荒，命他负责赈灾等事。
English: At that time, a severe famine occurred in Jiangyou, and he was ordered to be responsible for disaster relief and other matters.

古文：始至，榜通衢曰： 闭籴者配，强籴者斩。 次令尽出公家官钱、银器，召官吏、儒生、商贾、市民各举有干实者，量借钱物，逮其责领运籴，不取子钱，期终月至城下发粜，于是连樯而至，其直自减，民赖以济。
现代文：刚到灾区，就在交通要道张榜宣布： 不卖粮者发配，强买粮者斩首。 又命把官府中的官钱、银器全部拿出，召官吏、儒生、商贾、百姓选出有才干的人，负责借钱、物，并让他们负责买粮运粮，不取子钱，限月底运到城下卖出，于是运粮船接踵而至，粮价自然降低，百姓赖以接济。
English: As soon as he arrived in the disaster area, he put up banners on the major roads to announce: Those who do not sell grain will be distributed, and those who buy grain by force will be beheaded. He also ordered to take out all the government money and silverware in the government, and called on government officials, Confucians, merchants, and the people to select talented people to be responsible for borrowing money and goods, and let them be responsible for buying grain and transporting grain, not taking child money, and transporting it to the end of the month to sell it, so grain ships came one after another, grain prices naturally decreased, and the people relied on subsidies.

古文：时信守谢源明乞米救助，幕属不从，弃疾曰： 均为赤子，皆王民也。 即以米舟十之三予信。
现代文：此时，信州守臣谢源明请求救济米，辛弃疾的幕僚不同意，他说： 大家都是皇帝的子民。 就把十分之三的米船发到信州。
English: At this time, Xie Yuanming, the shogun of Shinshu, asked for relief rice, but the staff of Xin Qian Ji did not agree, he said: Everyone is the emperor's people.

古文：帝嘉之，进一秩，以言者落职，久之，主管冲佑观。
现代文：皇上嘉奖他，进秩一等，因言者反对被罢官，后来，主管冲佑观。
English: The emperor commended him and promoted him to the first rank, but he was dismissed because of his opposition to the speaker. Later, the supervisor was Chong Youkun.

古文：绍熙二年，起福建提点刑狱。
现代文：绍熙二年，被起用为福建提点刑狱。
English: In the second year of Shaoxi, he was appointed as the leader of the Fujian Provincial Penitentiary.

古文：召见，迁大理少卿，加集英殿修撰、知福州兼福建安抚使。
现代文：皇上召见他，升为大理少卿，加官集贤殿修撰、知福州兼福建安抚使。
English: The emperor summoned him, and he was promoted to Dali Shaoqing (大理少卿) and given the additional posts of Shuxing (加官集贤殿修撰) and Zhifu (知福州兼福建安抚使).

古文：弃疾为宪时，尝摄帅，每叹曰： 福州前枕大海，为贼之渊，上四郡民顽犷易乱，帅臣空竭，急缓奈何！ 至是务为镇静，未期岁，积镪至五十万缗，榜曰： 备安库 。
现代文：辛弃疾为提点刑狱时，曾主持军事，每每叹道 ：福州前面是海，为盗贼藏身之所，上四郡的百姓顽犷易乱，而帅府空虚，一旦有事，怎么办？ 于是他以安抚为务，积极储备，不到一年，积钱五十万缗，称 备安库 。
English: When he was sentenced to prison, he once presided over the military, sighing every time: Fuzhou in front is the sea, a hiding place for thieves, the people of the upper four counties are tenacious and turbulent, and the palace is empty, what if something happens? So he took appeasement as his duty and actively stocked up. In less than a year, he accumulated half a million baht and called it a safe deposit box.

古文：谓闽中土狭民稠，岁俭则籴于广，今幸连稔，宗室及军人入仓请米，出即粜之，候秋贾贱，以备安钱籴二万石，则有备无患矣。
现代文：认为闽中地少人多，年岁歉收，就到广南买粮，现在幸好连年丰收，宗室及军人来买米，于是出库粮卖给他们，等秋天价贱时，用备安钱买入二万石，这样就有备无患。
English: Believing that there were too few people in central Yunnan and that the harvest was poor year after year, he went to Guangnan to buy grain. Now, fortunately, there has been a bumper harvest year after year. His father-in-law and soldiers came to buy rice, so he sold grain from the warehouse to them. When the price was low in the autumn, he used the reserve money to buy 20,000 koku, so there was no need to worry.

古文：又欲造万铠，招强壮补军额，严训练，则盗贼可以无虞。
现代文：又想造万套铠甲，招募强壮者补充军队，严格训练，则可不以盗贼作乱为祸患。
English: If you want to make thousands of sets of armor, recruit strong people to supplement the army, and train strictly, you can not take thieves as a scourge.

古文：事未行，台臣王蔺劾其用钱如泥沙，杀人如草芥，旦夕望端坐 闽王殿 。
现代文：此事未行，台臣王蔺弹劾他用钱如泥沙，杀人如草芥，早晚要在闽中称王。
English: When this did not work out, the Taiwanese vassal Wang Yao impeached him for using money like mud and killing people like grass. Sooner or later, he would be crowned king of Taizhou.

古文：遂丐祠归。
现代文：辛弃疾请求辞官回家。
English: The official was asked to return home due to illness.

古文：庆元元年落职，四年，复主管冲佑观。
现代文：庆元元年被免官，四年，重为主管冲佑观。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he was dismissed from his post, and in the fourth year, he was reinstated as the head of Chong Youcun.

古文：久之，起知绍兴府兼浙东安无使，四年，宁宗召见，言盐法，加宝谟阁待制、提举佑神观，奉朝请。
现代文：后起用他为绍兴知府兼浙东安抚使。同年，宁宗召见他，讨论盐法，加官为宝谟阁待制、提举佑神观，定期朝见皇帝。
English: In the same year, Ningzong summoned him to discuss the salt law, and promoted him to the post of the governor of Shaoxing Prefecture and the East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy. He was also appointed to the post of the governor of Baomu County, promoted to the post of the governor of Yuxin County, and made regular visits to the emperor.

古文：寻差知镇江府，赐金带。
现代文：不久，差遣为镇江知府，赐给金带。
English: Soon, he was sent to Zhenjiang Prefecture and given a gold belt.

古文：坐缪举，降朝散大夫、提举冲佑观，差知绍兴府、两浙东路安抚使，辞免。
现代文：因推荐人才失误，降为朝散大夫、提举冲佑观，差遣为绍兴知府、两浙东路安抚使，他推辞不受。
English: Due to the mistake of recommending talents, he was reduced to Dr. Chosan, promoted to Dr. Chong Youkun, and sent to the governor of Shaoxing and the pacification envoys of the two eastern Zhejiang provinces. He did not accept the rejection.

古文：进宝文阁待制，又进龙图阁、知江陵府。
现代文：进为宝文阁待制，又进龙图阁、知江陵府。
English: It went into the Baowen Pavilion while it was still under construction, and then into the Longtu Pavilion and the Chigangling Pavilion.

古文：令赴行在奏事，试兵部侍郎，辞免。
现代文：命他去京城奏事，任为兵部侍郎，又推辞。
English: He was ordered to go to the capital to report on the matter, and was appointed to be the attendant of the military department, but he declined.

古文：进枢密都承旨，未受命而卒。
现代文：升为枢密都承旨，未受命而去世。
English: Promoted to Privy Councillor by imperial decree, he died without receiving the order.

古文：赐对衣、金带，守龙图阁待制致仕，特赠四官。
现代文：皇帝赐给他对衣、金带，在龙图阁待制的职位上辞官，特赠四官。
English: The emperor gave him a suit of clothes and a gold belt. He resigned from his post at Longtu Courtyard, and was presented with four official ranks.

古文：弃疾豪爽尚气节，识拔英俊，所交多海内知名士。
现代文：辛弃疾为人豪爽，崇尚气节，能识别和提拔有才能的人，所交多是海内名士。
English: He is a courageous person who abandons hardships and diseases, advocates the spirit of the season, and is able to identify and promote talented people. Most of his clients are famous people from overseas.

古文：尝跋绍兴间诏书曰： 使此诏出于绍兴之前，可以无事仇之大耻；使此诏行于隆兴之后，可以卒不世之大功。
现代文：曾为绍兴年间的诏书做跋说 ：假使这些诏书出现在绍兴之前，就没事奉仇敌之大耻；假使这些诏书行于隆兴之后，就会成就盖世奇功。
English: He once said of the edicts issued in Shaoxing, "If these edicts had been issued before the rise of Shaoxing, there would have been no great shame in serving the enemy; if these edicts had been issued after the rise of Luoxing, there would have been a great achievement."

古文：今此诏与仇敌俱存也，悲夫！ 人服其警切。
现代文：如今这些诏书与仇敌共存，可悲啊！ 人们佩服他的敏锐深切。
English: These edicts now co-exist with the enemy, alas! His acumen is deeply admired.

古文：帅长沙时，士人或诉考试官滥取第十七名《春秋》卷，弃疾察之信然，索亚榜《春秋》卷两易之，启名则赵鼎也。弃疾怒曰： 佐国元勋，忠简一人，胡为又一赵鼎！ 掷之地。
现代文：在长沙为帅时，读书人有上告考试官滥取第十七名《春秋》答卷，辛弃疾查出是事实，取第二榜的《春秋》答卷两相更换，启开一看，名为赵鼎，辛弃疾生气地说： 佐国元勋，只忠简一人，怎么又出一赵鼎！ 把考卷扔在地上。
English: When Changsha was a handsome city, the readers complained that the examiners abused the 17th "Spring and Autumn" answer sheet, which was found to be a fact. They took the 2nd "Spring and Autumn" answer sheet and replaced the two phases. At first glance, it was named Zhao Ding. The reader angrily said: "Sakoku Yuanxun, only Zhongjian, how can there be another Zhao Ding! Throw the exam paper on the ground."

古文：次阅《礼记》卷，弃疾曰： 观其议论，必豪杰士也，此不可失。 启之，乃赵方也。
现代文：又看《礼记》答卷，辛弃疾说： 看他的议论，定是豪杰壮士，此人不可失。 打开看，是赵方。
English: He also read the answer sheet of "Li Ji," and said: "Looking at his arguments, he must be a hero and a strong man, and this person must not be lost.

古文：尝谓： 人生在勤，当以力田为先。
现代文：他曾说： 人生在于勤劳，当以务农为先。
English: He once said: "Life is about hard work. Farming should come first."

古文：北方之人，养生之具不求于人，是以无甚富甚贫之家。
现代文：北方人，生活用品不需求他人，故无大富大贫之家。
English: Northerners do not need others for daily necessities, so there is no home of great wealth and poverty.

古文：为大理卿时，同僚吴交如死，无棺敛，弃疾叹曰： 身为列卿而贫若此，是廉介之士也！ 既厚赙之，复言于执政，诏赐银绢。
现代文：南方人多经商，故而不利农业，再加上兼并之患，就有贫富不均了。 故以 稼 名轩，为大理卿时，同僚吴交如死，没有棺殓，辛弃疾感叹 ：身为列卿而如此贫困，真是廉洁之士啊！ 他赠送财物帮助办了丧事后，又对宰执说此事，皇上下诏赐吴交如银绢。
English: Nanfang people do a lot of business, so it is not good for agriculture, and with the problem of annexation, there is inequality between the rich and the poor. Therefore, when he earned fame and fortune and was the Dali Lord, his colleague Wu Jiao was like death, without a coffin, and he lamented the pain of abandonment: As a noble and so poor, it is really an incorruptible person! After he donated his wealth to help with the funeral, he also said this to Zai Xie, and the emperor gave Wu Jiao a silver gong.

古文：弃疾尝同朱熹游武夷山，赋《九曲棹歌》，熹书 克己复礼 、 夙兴夜寐 ，题其二斋室。
现代文：辛弃疾曾和朱熹游历武夷山，做赋《九曲棹歌》，朱熹写 克己复礼 、 夙兴夜寐 ，给他的两个书斋题名。
English: Xin Qian Cai once traveled to Wuyishan with Zhu Xi, and wrote "The Nine Melodies of Yingge." Zhu Xi wrote "Ke Zi Fu Li" and "Hui Xing Yeshi" and gave him two titles for his study.

古文：熹殁，伪学禁方严，门生故旧至无送葬者。
现代文：朱熹死时，伪学正遭禁止，门生故旧甚至没有为他送葬的。
English: At the time of Zhu Xi's death, pseudoscience was being banned, and his former students did not even attend his funeral.

古文：孰谓公死，凛凛犹生！ 弃疾雅善长短句，悲壮激烈，有《稼轩集》行世。
现代文：辛弃疾写祭文去哭他说 ：垂名万世是不朽的。谁说公死，你凛然犹生！ 辛弃疾善长写词，他的词悲壮激烈，有《稼轩集》流传于世。
English: He said: "He who is famous for all eternity is immortal. Who says public death, you are brave and still alive! He was good at writing lyrics, his words were tragic and fierce, and "Gaixuan Collection" was passed down to the world.

古文：绍定六年，赠光禄大夫。
现代文：绍定六年，赠为光禄大夫。
English: Six years in Shaoding, awarded the title of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：咸淳闲，史馆校勘谢枋得过弃疾墓旁僧舍，有疾声大呼于堂上，若呜其不平，自昏暮至三鼓不绝声。
现代文：咸淳间，史馆校勘谢枋得访辛弃疾墓旁的僧舍，有痛苦的声音大呼于堂上，像是替辛弃疾鸣不平，从黄昏到三更呼声不断。
English: During the visit to the monk's house next to the tomb of Xin Qiang Ci, there was a loud cry of pain in the hall, as if it was for Xin Qiang Ci, and the cries continued from dusk to three o'clock.

古文：枋得秉烛作文，旦且祭之，文成而声始息。
现代文：谢枋得连夜点蜡烛写祭文，准备清早去祭奠他，祭文成而呼声止。
English: Xie Rong had to light a candle all night to write an offering, and prepared to go early in the morning to pay tribute to him. The offering was completed and the shouting stopped.

古文：德祐初，枋得请于朝，加赠少师，谥忠敏。
现代文：德初谢枋得向朝廷请求，朝廷加赠辛弃疾为少师，谥号为 忠敏 。
English: At the beginning of the year, Dechu Xie was able to petition the imperial court, which granted him the title of "Junior Teacher" and the posthumous name of "Chungmin."

古文：何异，字同叔，抚州崇仁人。
现代文：刘宰，字平国，金坛人。二十岁时，他进入乡学，对于去就取舍他都有自己的看法而不苟同。
English: Liu Zai, also known as Ping Guo, was born in Jintan. At the age of 20, he entered the village school. He had his own opinion about whether to go or not, but he did not agree.

古文：绍兴二十四年进士，调石城主簿，历两任，知苹乡县。
现代文：绍熙元年刘宰被推举参加进士考试，调任江宁尉。江宁特别盛行巫术，刘宰下令保伍之间互相纠察，那些从事巫术的人常常是改行当了农民。
English: In the first year of Shaoxi, Liu Zai was selected to take the entrance examination and was transferred to Jiangning. Jiangning is particularly popular for witchcraft, and Liu Zai ordered the guards to picket each other. Those who engaged in witchcraft often changed their profession to become farmers.

古文：丞相周必大、参政留正以院辖拟异，孝宗问有无列荐，正等以萍乡政绩对，乃迁国子监主簿。
现代文：发生旱灾，帅守命令刘宰用钱、粮赈济受灾的地方，救活了很多人。有掌握妖术号称 真武法 、 穿云子 、 宝华主 的人，都被刘宰禁止。
English: In the event of a drought, the commanding officer ordered Liu Zai to use money and grain to help the disaster-affected areas, saving many people. People who have mastered magic, known as true martial arts, wearing clouds, and Baohua Lord, have all been banned by Liu Zai.

古文：迁丞，转对，所言帝喜之，曰： 君臣一体，初不在事形迹，有所见闻，于银台司缴奏。 擢监察御史。
现代文：刘宰在他座位的右面写着： 不要轻易发布文引，不要轻易使用杖刑。 刘宰因事出城到郊外，他与手下人吃一样的饭菜、喝一样的水。
English: On the right-hand side of his seat, Liu Zai wrote: "Don't easily publish quotations, don't easily use the cane." Liu Zai went out of the city to the suburbs because of the matter, and he ate the same meals and drank the same water as his subordinates.

古文：异奏与丞相留正旧同官，不敢供职，御札不许引嫌，遂拜命。
现代文：他离任时，只有箱中装着的主簿赵师秀给他的酬答诗而已。
English: When he left office, the only thing he had in his box was the ledger containing the poem that Zhao Shixiu had given him as a reward.

古文：迁右正言。
现代文：刘宰被调为真州司法。
English: Liu Zai was transferred to the Zhenzhou Judicial Center.

古文：时光宗愆于定省，异入疏谏，不报。约台官联名，言奸人离间父子，当明正典刑，语极峻，又不报。
现代文：皇上下诏那些指责伪学，不读周敦颐、程颐等人的书的人，才能参加考试。刘宰叹着气说 ：平生所学的是什么？头可断，这种事实不能向上汇报。 
English: Liu Zai sighed and said, "What have I learned in my life? I can't report this fact to my superiors.

古文：丐外，授湖南转运判官。
现代文：他始终没上报那些不符合诏旨的人。
English: He never reported those who did not comply with the edict.

古文：偶摄帅事，辰蛮侵扰邵阳，异募山丁捕首乱者，蒲来矢以众来降。
现代文：刘宰被授予泰兴县令，有个杀人的案子事实已很清楚，杀人犯说： 我在偏僻的神祠中祈祷，已经杀死一个人，忽然刀又跳了三次，就又杀死了三个人，这实际是神让我杀的。 
English: Liu Zai was awarded the Taixing County Order. There was a murder case. The facts were very clear. The murderer said: I was praying in a remote shrine. I had already killed one person. Suddenly, the knife jumped three times and killed three more people. It was actually God who told me to kill.

古文：寻为浙西提点刑狱。
现代文：刘宰向州府请示，毁了那个野庙，把杀人犯砍头示众。
English: Liu Zai petitioned the state government, destroyed the temple, and beheaded the murderer.

古文：以太常少卿召，改秘书监兼实录院检讨官，权礼部侍郎、太常寺。
现代文：邻县有个在泰兴县租牛的人，租户和牛的主人有姻亲，乘办丧事的机会偷走借据逃跑。
English: In a neighboring county, there is a person who rents cattle in Taixing County. The tenant and the owner of the cattle are relatives by marriage. He took the opportunity to steal the IOU and run away.

古文：太庙芝草生，韩侂胄率百官观焉，异谓其色白，虑生兵妖，侂胄不悦。
现代文：有一天牛的主人的儿子去征收租户的租子，租户却说牛卖给他很长时间了。牛的主人的儿子连年向官府诉讼，没有借据做凭证，官府又因为涉及到别的县就搁置起来不审理。
English: One day, the son of the owner of the cow went to collect the tenant's rent, but the tenant said that the cow had been sold to him for a long time. The son of the owner of the cow has been suing the government for years, without a receipt as proof, and the government has put it on hold because it involves other counties.

古文：又以刘光祖于异交密，言者遂以异在言路不弹丞相留正及受赵汝愚荐，劾罢之，久乃予祠。
现代文：这时主人的儿子向刘宰诉讼，刘宰说： 牛已失去了十年，哪能一下子就得到它。 刘宰就召来两个乞丐慰劳他们并讲了这件事，假托因为别的事把他俩抓到牢狱中，审讯他俩时，这两个乞丐承认自己偷牛卖，刘宰派人到卖牛的地方去验证。租户说 ：我的牛是跟某人租来的。 
English: At this time, the owner's son filed a lawsuit against Liu Zai. Liu Zai said, "The cow has been lost for ten years, how can I get it at once." Liu Zai called two beggars to comfort them and told them about the matter, pretending that they were arrested for other matters. When they were interrogated, the two beggars admitted that they were stealing and selling cattle. Liu Zai sent someone to the place where the cattle were sold to verify. The tenant said, "My cow was rented from someone."

古文：起知夔州兼本路安抚。异以夔民土狭食少，同转运司籴米桩积，立循环通济仓。
现代文：乞丐极力辩解，租户就拿出借据给他们看，租户和他们一起来到官府，盗走借据的人知道自己无法抵赖，还回了牛和租子。一个富人家丢了金钗，只有两个女仆在，就把她们送到官府，这两个女人都认为冤枉。
English: The beggars tried to defend themselves, the tenants showed them their IOUs, the tenants came with them to the government office, and the person who stole the IOUs, knowing that he could not deny it, returned the cow and the tenant. A rich family lost their gold ingots, and only two maids were there, so they sent them to the government office. Both women thought they were innocent.

古文：七月丙戌，西北有星白芒坠地，其声如雷，异曰： 戌日酉时，火土交会，而妖星自东南冲西北，化为天狗，蜀其将有兵乎？ 丐祠，以宝谟阁待制提举太平兴国宫。后四年，吴曦果叛。
现代文：刘宰命令她们每人各拿一根芦草，说： 没偷金钗的人，明天早晨芦草还是原样；如果偷了金钗，芦草就比现在长二寸。 第二天早上一看，一个没变样，另一个把她拿的芦草去掉了二寸，刘宰立即审问她，她果然认罪。
English: Liu Zai ordered each of them to take a reed, saying, "If you don't steal the pot of gold, the reed will still be the same tomorrow morning; if you steal the pot of gold, the reed will be two inches longer than it is now." The next morning, one of them didn't change, and the other one removed two inches of the reed she was holding. Liu Zai immediately interrogated her, and she admitted her guilt.

古文：起知潭州，乞闲予祠者再。嘉定元年，召为刑部侍郎。五月不雨，异上封事言： 近日号令或从中出，而执政不得与闻其事，台谏不得尽行其言。
现代文：有个婆婆诉讼她的两个儿媳妇不赡养她，刘宰召来两个儿媳妇，把她们和婆婆安排在一个房间里，有的时候给儿媳妇饭吃但不给婆婆，慢慢地观察她们，一个儿媳妇常把自己的饭菜给婆婆吃，婆婆还呵斥她，而另一个儿媳妇恰恰相反。就这样持续一段时间，就得到了事情的真相。
English: There was a mother-in-law who sued her two daughters-in-law for not supporting her. Liu Zai summoned her two daughters-in-law, arranged them in a room with her mother-in-law, sometimes gave her daughter-in-law food but not her mother-in-law, and slowly observed them. One daughter-in-law often gave her mother-in-law her own food, and her mother-in-law still scolded her, while the other daughter-in-law did just the opposite. This went on for some time, and we got to the truth of the matter.

古文：陛下闵念饥民，药病殡死，遐荒僻峤，安得实惠？
现代文：刘宰父亲去世，他为父亲守丧期满后，来到京城，韩胄正计划用兵，刘宰给邓友龙、薛叔似写信极力讲这是轻率地挑起战争，是国家的大害。
English: After Liu Zai's father passed away, he came to Beijing after his father's mourning period was over, and Han Yu was planning to use soldiers. Liu Zai wrote a letter to Deng Youlong and Xue Shuxi to insist that this was a rash provocation of war and a great harm to the country.

古文：多方称提，不如缩造楮币；阜通商米，不如稍宽关市之征。 明年，权工部尚书。
现代文：后来的结果正如他说的一样。刘宰担任浙东仓司干官，他负责的事都得到了治理，他立即请求辞职，默默地观察形势的变化，顿时不乐意担任官职。不久他退职，监南岳庙。江、淮制置使黄度征召刘宰为自己的幕僚，刘宰推辞说： 皇上召我都不去，现在又能出来做官吗？ 
English: Later, the result was just as he said. Liu Zai served as a cadre of the East Zhejiang Custodian, and the matters he was responsible for were all managed. He immediately asked to resign, silently observed the changes in the situation, and was suddenly not willing to serve as an official. Soon after he retired, he supervised Nan Yue Temple. Jiang and Huai made Huang Du recruit Liu Zai as his staff, Liu Zai declined and said: The emperor did not invite me to go, can I come out to work as an official now?

古文：江、淮制置使黄度辟之入幕，宰辞曰： 君命召不往，今矧可出耶？ 嘉定四年，堂审召命且再下，不至。时相亦屡讽执政、从官贻书挽宰，宰峻辞以绝。俄题考功历，示决不复仕。理宗初即位，以为籍田令，屡辞，改添差通判建康府，又辞，乞致仕，乃以直秘阁主管仙都观。拜改秩予祠之命，辞秘阁，不允。
现代文：嘉定四年，经政事堂审查后，召用刘宰的命令将再度下达，刘宰不去。当时的宰相也多次暗示执政、从官写信挽留刘宰，刘宰都严辞拒绝了。不久品评考核功绩，刘宰表示决不再做官。理宗刚即位时，任命刘宰为籍田令，刘宰一再推辞，就改为添差通判建康府，刘宰又推辞，请求退休，他就以直秘阁的身份主管仙都观。接受了改官职并授予他管理宫观的任命，他辞直秘阁的官职，朝廷不允许。
English: In the fourth year of Jiading, after being reviewed by the State Council, the order to summon Liu Zai would be issued again, but Liu Zai would not go. The then prime minister also repeatedly hinted that he would govern and write a letter to retain Liu Zai, but Liu Zai refused. Soon after the performance evaluation, Liu Zai said that he would never again be an official. When Li Zong took the throne, he appointed Liu Zai as the hometown field marshal. Liu Zai repeatedly refused, and it was changed to the construction of Kangfu. Liu Zai refused again and asked to retire. He was the head of Xian Du Guan as a direct secretary. He accepted the

古文：端平元年，升直宝谟阁，祠如故，且尽还磨勘岁月。
现代文：端平元年，刘宰升为直宝谟阁，仍然主管仙都观，并且把磨勘的时间全都退还。
English: In the first year of Duanping, Liu Zai Sheng became Zhi Bao Mougou, still in charge of Xiantu Guan, and returned all the grinding time.

古文：未几，迁太常丞，郡守以朝命趣行，不得已勉就道，至吴门，拜疏径归。
现代文：不久，刘宰升为太常丞，郡守按朝廷的命令催促他动身去任职，刘宰不得已勉强上路，走到吴门，他进献章奏后直接回来。
English: Soon after, Liu Zai Sheng became the Grand Prince, and the county governor urged him to leave for his post in accordance with the order of the imperial court. Liu Zai had to reluctantly go on the road and walked to Wu Men. He came back directly after presenting the medals.

古文：一时誉望，收召略尽，所不能致者，宰与崔与之耳。
现代文：当时有名望的人，几乎都被朝廷召用，朝廷所不能招来的，只有刘宰和崔与之。
English: At that time, almost all famous people were summoned by the imperial court. The only ones that the imperial court could not invite were Liu Zai and Cui.

古文：帝侧席以问侍御史王遂，且俾宣抚。
现代文：皇上侧身问侍御史王遂这是怎么回事，并且让王遂去安抚他。
English: The emperor leaned over and asked the attendant, Shi Wang Sui, what was going on, and asked Wang Sui to calm him down.

古文：迁将作少监，又以直敷文阁知宁国府，皆不拜。
现代文：刘宰升为将作少监，又以直敷文阁的身份为宁国府知府，他都没接受任命。
English: Liu Zai Sheng was appointed as a junior superintendent, and he was also appointed as the governor of Ningguo Prefecture in the capacity of Jikishiki Bunkaku, but he did not accept the appointment.

古文：进直显谟阁、主管玉局观，帝犹冀宰一来也。
现代文：刘宰进升为直显谟阁、主管玉局观，皇上仍希望刘宰能来。
English: Liu Zaijin was promoted to Jianxing Mogao, the head of the Jade Bureau, and the emperor still hoped that Liu Zai could come.

古文：召奏事，讫不为起。
现代文：召他来朝廷奏事，刘宰也始终没去。
English: Liu Zai never went to the imperial court when he was summoned.

古文：寻卒，乡人罢市走送，袂相属者五十里，人人如哭其私亲。
现代文：不久，刘宰去世，同乡人罢市去送他下葬，人群的队伍长达五十里，人人都像哭自己的亲人那样哭他。
English: Soon after, Liu Zai passed away. His fellow villagers went on strike to see him off for burial. The line of people was fifty miles long, and everyone cried for him as they would for their own relatives.

古文：宰刚大正直，明敏仁恕，施惠乡邦，其烈实多。
现代文：刘宰刚毅正直，明察仁厚，对自己的家乡施以恩惠，他的功绩很多。
English: Liu Zai Gangyi was honest, benevolent, and generous to his hometown. He had many achievements.

古文：置义仓，创义役，三为粥以与饿者，自冬徂夏，日食凡万余人，薪粟、衣纩、药饵、棺衾之类，靡谒不获。
现代文：刘宰设置义仓，创立义役，三次做粥饭给挨饿的人吃，从冬天到夏天，一天有一万多人吃他给的粥饭，柴、米、衣服、药、棺椁、寿衣等物品，没有向他请求而得不到的。
English: Liu Zai set up a charity warehouse, founded a charity, and made porridge three times to feed the starving people. From winter to summer, more than 10,000 people a day ate the porridge he gave, firewood, rice, clothes, medicine, coffins, shrouds and other items that could not be obtained without asking him.

古文：某无田可耕，某无庐可居，某之子女长矣而未昏嫁，皆汲汲经理，如己实任其责。
现代文：某人没有可耕种的土地，某人没有房子住，某人的子女长大了还没娶妻或出嫁，他都一一帮助办理，就像自己负有这些责任似的。
English: Someone does not have land to cultivate, someone does not have a house to live in, someone's children have grown up without a wife or a husband, and he helps to handle them one by one, as if he had these responsibilities.

古文：桥有病涉，路有险阻，虽巨役必捐赀先倡而程其事。
现代文：桥有损坏的地方，路有不通的地方，即使是巨大的工程，刘宰也一定带头捐财物而使这些事情办成。
English: Where bridges are damaged, where roads are impassable, even if it is a huge project, Liu Zai will definitely take the lead in donating wealth to make these things happen.

古文：宰生理素薄，见义必为，既竭其力，藉质贷以继之无倦。
现代文：刘宰身体一向单薄，见到正义的事一定去做，他的财力用完后，他就借贷钱财接着做正义的事。
English: Liu Zai has always been thin, and when he sees a just cause, he will definitely do it. When his financial resources are exhausted, he will borrow money and then do a just cause.

古文：若定折麦钱额，更县斗斛如制，毁淫祠八十四所，凡可以白于有司、利于乡人者，无不为也。
现代文：比如定折麦钱的数量，按要求改变县中的牛、斛，毁掉淫邪的祠庙八十四所，凡是可以汇报给上级，有利于乡民的事，没有他不做的。
English: For example, he did not fail to report to his superiors anything that was beneficial to the villagers, such as fixing the quantity of wheat money, changing the cattle and donkeys in the county as required, and destroying eighty-four temples.

古文：宰隐居三十年，平生无嗜好，惟书靡所不读。
现代文：刘宰隐居三十年，平生没什么嗜好，只是对书他没有不读的。
English: Liu Zai lived in seclusion for thirty years. He never had any hobbies in his life, except for reading.

古文：既竭日力，犹坐以待，虽博考训注，而自得之为贵。
现代文：他读书夜以继日，不知疲倦，虽然他广泛地研究、考校训注，而把自己的心得看的最珍贵。
English: He read tirelessly day and night, and although he extensively studied and tested the school's teachings, he treasured his own thoughts the most.

古文：有《漫塘文集》、《语录》行世。
现代文：刘宰有《漫塘文集》、《语录》在世间流行。
English: Liu Zaiyu's "Mantang Collection" and "Quotations" are popular in the world.

古文：刘爚，字晦伯，建阳人。
现代文：刘爚，字晦伯，建阳人。
English: Liu Xuan, also known as Yubei, Jianyang people.

古文：与弟韬仲受学于朱熹、吕祖谦。
现代文：他和弟弟刘韬仲从学于朱熹、吕祖谦。
English: He and his brother Liu Xizhong studied under Zhu Xi and Lu Zuqian.

古文：乾道八年举进士，调山阴主簿。
现代文：乾道八年他被举荐参加进士考试，调为山阴县主簿。
English: In the eighth year of the dry road, he was recommended to participate in the entrance examination and was transferred to the main book of Sanyin County.

古文：爚正版籍，吏不容奸。
现代文：刘爚纠正户口册，不许吏人作恶。
English: Liu Wei corrected the household registration book, and forbade officials to do evil.

古文：调饶州录事，通判黄奕将以事污爚，而己自以赃抵罪去。
现代文：他被调为饶州录事，通判黄奕将诬陷刘爚，而自己却因贪赃罪被罢官。
English: He was transferred to Raozhou Records, and it was decided that Huang Yi would frame Liu Ye, but he was dismissed for corruption.

古文：都大坑冶耿某闵遗骸暴露，议用浮屠法葬之水火，爚贻书曰： 使死者有知，祸亦惨矣。 请择高阜为丛冢以葬。
现代文：都大坑冶耿某哀怜那些暴露在外的遗骸，决定用和尚的丧葬法，给他们水葬或火葬，刘爚给耿某写信说： 假使死者有知，这也是惨祸呀。 他请求选择高地作为墓地埋葬死者。
English: Liu Wei wrote to Geng, saying: "If the deceased knew, it would be a disaster." He requested to choose a highland as a cemetery to bury the dead.

古文：调莲城令，罢添给钱及纲运例钱，免上供银钱及纲本、二税甲叶、钞盐、军期米等钱，大修学校，乞行经界。
现代文：刘爚调任莲城县令，他罢去添给钱和纲运例钱，免除上供银钱及纲本、二税甲叶、钞盐、军期米等钱，大力兴办学校，请求推行经界法。
English: Liu Wei was transferred to Liancheng County, and he removed the additional money and the standard operating procedure money, exempted the upper supply money and the standard operating procedure, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax, the second tax,

古文：改知闽县，治以清简，庭无滞讼，兴利去害，知无不为。
现代文：刘爚改为闽县知县，他用清明简要的方针处理事务，使官府中没有遗留的诉讼案，兴利去害，知无不为。
English: Liu Wei changed the name of the county to Shixian Zhixian. He used a clear and concise policy to deal with affairs, so that there were no lawsuits left in the government office.

古文：差通判潭州，未上，丁父忧。
现代文：他被差遣为潭州通判，还没上任，遭父丧。
English: He was sent to serve as the chief justice of Tanzhou, but before he took office, his father passed away.

古文：伪学禁兴，爚从熹武夷山讲道读书，怡然自适。
现代文：当时开始禁止伪学，刘爚跟从朱熹在武夷山讲道读书，怡然自得。
English: At that time, pseudo-studies were banned, and Liu Ye followed Zhu Xi to read sermons in Wuyishan. He was pleased with himself.

古文：筑云庄山房，为终老隐居之计。
现代文：修建云庄山房，作为养老隐居的地方。
English: The Yunzhuang Mountain House was built as a retirement retreat.

古文：调赣州坑冶司主管文字，差知德庆府，大修学校，奏便民五事，又奏罢两县无名租钱，纠集武勇民兵。
现代文：刘爚调为赣州坑冶司主管文字，差遣为德庆府知府，他大力办学，上奏便利百姓的五件事，又奏请罢去两县的无名租钱，招集武勇民兵。
English: Liu Bing was appointed as the chief of the Department of Mines and Metallurgy of Zhangzhou, and was sent to be the governor of Deqing Prefecture. He worked hard to run the school, played the five things that were convenient for the people, and played the role of inviting the nameless renters in the two counties to leave, and summoning the brave militia.

古文：入奏言： 前者北伐之役，执事者不度事势，贻陛下忧。
现代文：刘爚入朝上奏说： 先前兴兵北伐，是执政者没估计好形势，给陛下带来忧患。
English: Liu Hui said in his report to the Imperial Court: "Previously, the Northern Expedition was launched, but it was the ruler who did not estimate the situation well and brought sorrow to His Majesty.

古文：今虽从和议，愿益恐惧修省，必开言路以广忠益，必张公道以进人才，必饬边备以防敌患。 
现代文：现在虽然和议，希望陛下更加恐惧并修身反省，一定要开言路以便广纳忠言益言，一定要振兴公道以便提拔人才，一定要整顿边备以便防御敌人。 
English: Now, despite the peace talks, I hope that His Majesty will be more fearful and self-reflective. We must open up the path of speech in order to accommodate the words of loyalty and benefit, we must revitalize justice in order to promote talents, and we must rectify the frontier in order to defend against the enemy.

古文：提举广东常平。
现代文：刘爚为提举广东常平。
English: Liu Wei was the first to nominate Guangdong Changping.

古文：令守臣岁以一半易新，春末支，及冬复偿，存其半以备缓急。
现代文：他命令守臣每年把常平米一半换成新的，春末支出，到冬天再补回，存一半准备应急。
English: He ordered his vassals to replace half of their rice with new rice every year, spending the money in late spring, replenishing it in winter, and saving half to prepare for emergencies.

古文：逋欠亭户钱十万，转运司五万，爚以公使，公用二库赢钱补之。
现代文：拖欠亭户钱十万，转运司五万，刘爚用公使、公用两库的余钱补上。
English: The pavilion households owed 100,000 yuan in arrears, the transportation department owed 50,000 yuan, and Liu Wei used the surplus money from the minister and the two public banks to make up for it.

古文：奏议仓之敝、客丁钱之敝、小官奉给之敝、举留守令之敝、吏商之敝。
现代文：他上奏讲义仓、客丁钱、小官俸禄、举荐和留任守令、官商中存在的弊病。
English: He reported on the handout warehouse, guest money, minor official salary, recommendation and retention order, and the ills that exist in government and business.

古文：召入奏事，首论： 公道明，则人心自一，朝廷自尊，虽危可安也；公道废，则人心自贰，朝廷自轻，虽安易危也。 帝嘉奖。
现代文：刘爚被召入朝中奏事，他首先论说： 公道如果清明，那么人心自然归一，朝廷自然尊贵，虽然处于危险中也可安稳；公道如果废弃，那么人心自然不同，朝廷自然不重要，虽然处于安定中也容易发生危机。 皇上嘉奖了他。
English: Liu Ye was called to report to the Central Committee of the DPRK, and he first argued: If justice is clear, then the hearts of the people will naturally become one, and the imperial court will naturally be noble, although it is in danger, it can also be stable; if justice is abandoned, then the hearts of the people will naturally be different, and the imperial court will naturally not be important, although it is stable, it is also prone to crisis. The emperor commended him.

古文：迁尚左郎官，请节内外冗费以收楮币。
现代文：他升为尚左郎官，请求节省朝内外冗费来收取纸币。
English: He was promoted to the post of Shang Zorang official, and requested to save unnecessary expenses both inside and outside the country to collect banknotes.

古文：转对言： 愿于经筵讲读、大臣奏对，反复问难，以求义理之当否，与政事之得失，则圣学进而治道隆矣。 乞收拾人才及修明军政。
现代文：百官轮次奏事时，他说： 希望陛下在经筵讲读、大臣奏对时，反复提问，以便求得义理的真谛，政事的得失，那么圣人的学说就得到应用而且国家也会兴盛了。 他请求搜求人才和修明军政。
English: He said, "I hope that Your Majesty will repeatedly ask questions during the reading of the sutras and the speeches of the ministers, in order to obtain the true meaning of righteousness and the merits and demerits of political affairs, so that the teachings of the sages will be applied and the country will prosper." He requested to search for talents and clarify military and political affairs.

古文：迁浙西提点刑狱，巡按不避寒暑，多所平反。
现代文：刘爚升为浙西提点刑狱，他巡察时不避寒暑，平反了很多冤案。
English: Liu Bingsheng is the highest-ranking prison official in western Zhejiang Province. He has not shied away from the cold and heat during his inspection, and has rectified many unjust cases.

古文：有杀人而匿权家者，吏弗敢捕，爚竟获之。
现代文：有个杀人的罪犯藏在一个权贵家中，吏人不敢去逮捕，刘爚却把罪犯捕获。
English: There was a murderous criminal hiding in the house of a dignitary. Officials did not dare to arrest him, but Liu Ye captured the criminal.

古文：迁国子司业，言于丞相史弥远，请以熹所著《论语》、《中庸》、《大学》、《孟子》之说以备劝讲，正君定国，慰天下学士大夫之心。
现代文：刘爚升为国子司业，他对宰相史弥远说，请求把朱熹所著的《论语》、《中庸》、《大学》、《孟子》的注释作为劝讲的内容，以求正君定国，慰抚天下学者和士大夫的心。
English: Liu Bingsheng was the state secretary, he said to the prime minister Shi Yiyuan, and requested that the commentary on Zhu Xi's "Analects," "Middle Way," "University" and "Mencius" be used as the content of the persuasion, in order to establish the country and comfort the hearts of scholars and scholars around the world.

古文：奏言： 宋兴，《六经》微旨，孔、孟遗言，发明于千载之后，以事父则孝，以事君则忠，而世之所谓道学也。
现代文：刘爚上奏说： 宋朝兴起，使《六经》隐微的旨意，孔、孟的古训，在千年之后得以阐明，用它事父则孝，事君则忠，它就是世人所说的道学。
English: Liu Xuan said: The rise of the Song Dynasty made the subtle intention of the Six Classics, the ancient teachings of Confucius and Mencius, be clarified after a thousand years. Using it to be filial to one's father and loyal to one's ruler, it is what the world calls morality.

古文：庆元以来，权佞当国，恶人议己，指道为伪，屏其人，禁其书，学者无所依乡，义利不明，趋向污下，人欲横流，廉耻日丧。
现代文：庆元以来，权奸当国，怕人们议论自己，就指责道学是伪学，斥退研习道学的人，禁止有关道学的书籍，使学者们无所依从，不能区别义和利，行为也不高尚，人的各种欲望泛滥起来，廉耻之心日益丧失。
English: Since the beginning of the Qing Dynasty, the traitor-in-chief, who feared that people would talk about him, accused Taoism of being a pseudo-science, expelled those who studied Taoism, banned books about Taoism, and made scholars have nothing to follow, unable to distinguish between righteousness and benefit, and their behavior was not noble. People's various desires became rampant, and their sense of shame was increasingly lost.

古文：追惟前日禁绝道学之事，不得不任其咎。
现代文：回想先前禁绝道学的事，不能不承担这个罪责。
English: Thinking back to the previous ban on Taoism, we cannot but bear this guilt.

古文：望其既仕之后，职业修，名节立，不可得也。
现代文：希望人们做官以后，恪尽职守，树立名节，却不能做到。
English: It is hoped that people will fulfill their duties and establish famous festivals after they become officials, but this cannot be done.

古文：乞罢伪学之诏，息邪说，正人心，宗社之福。 又请以熹《白鹿洞规》颁示太学，取熹《四书集注》刊行之。
现代文：请罢去关于伪学的诏书，禁止邪说，端正人心，这是国家的福分。 他又请求把朱熹的《白鹿洞规》颁行于太学，把朱熹的《四书集注》印刷颁行。
English: Please abolish the edict on pseudoscience, prohibit evil theories, and rectify the hearts of the people, which is the blessing of the country.He also requested that Zhu Xi's "White Deer Cave Rules" be issued to Taixue, and that Zhu Xi's "Annotation of the Four Books" be printed.

古文：又言： 浙西根本之地，宜诏长吏、监司禁戢强暴，抚柔善良，务储积以备凶荒，禁科敛以纾民力。 
现代文：又说 ：浙西是国家的根本之地，应该诏命长吏、监司禁止强暴，抚恤百姓，致力于储积以防备凶荒，严禁聚敛以舒缓民力。 
English: He also said: West Zhejiang is the fundamental place of the country. It is necessary to issue an order to the officials and supervisors to prohibit violence, support the people, and strive to accumulate resources to prevent disasters. It is strictly forbidden to accumulate resources to relieve the people's power.

古文：兼国史院编修官、宝录院检讨官。
现代文：刘爚兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官。
English: Liu Wei is also an editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History and a reviewer of the Institute of Historical Records.

古文：接伴金使于盱眙军。
现代文：在盱眙军接伴金国使臣。
English: He received the envoys of the Kim dynasty in the Han army.

古文：还，言： 两淮之地，藩蔽江南，干戈盗贼之后，宜加经理，必于招集流散之中，就为足食足兵之计。
现代文：回京后，他说 ：两淮地区，是江南的屏障，在兵祸盗贼破坏之后，更应加强经画治理，一定要在招集流散百姓的同时，就考虑足食足兵的计策。
English: After returning to Beijing, he said: the two Huai areas are the barrier of the south of the Yangtze River. After the destruction of the military disaster and thieves, it is even more important to strengthen the governance of the scriptures. It is necessary to consider the strategy of feeding the soldiers while recruiting the scattered people.

古文：臣观淮东，其地平博膏腴，有陂泽水泉之利，而荒芜实多。
现代文：臣看淮东，那里土地广阔肥沃，有陂泽水泉的便利条件，但荒芜的很多。
English: The minister looked at Huadong, where the land is vast and fertile, and there are convenient conditions for Heze water springs, but many are barren.

古文：其民劲悍勇敢，习边鄙战斗之事，而安集者少。
现代文：那里的百姓剽悍勇敢，熟习边防战斗的事，但安居的少。
English: The people there are tough and brave, familiar with border defense and combat, but few live in peace.

古文：诚能经画郊野，招集散亡，约顷亩以授田，使毋广占抛荒之患，列沟洫以储水，且备戎马驰突之虞。
现代文：如果真能经画郊野，招集流亡的百姓，按数量给他们授田，使他们不要担心土地被广占和抛荒，把沟渠分别储水，又可防备敌人的战马往来奔驰。
English: If you can really manage the countryside, gather the exiled people, and give them land according to the number, so that they do not worry about the land being widely occupied and abandoned, store the ditches separately, and prevent the enemy's horses from running around.

古文：为之具田器，贷种粮，相其险易，聚为室庐，使相保护，联以什伍，教以击刺，使相纠率。
现代文：替他们准备好农具，借给他们种粮，根据地形的险易，建成房屋，使他们互相保护，联结成什伍，教给他们武艺，使他们互相监督。
English: Prepare farm tools for them, lend them grain to grow, build houses according to the hazards of the terrain, let them protect each other, link them together, teach them martial arts, and let them supervise each other.

古文：或乡为一围，里为一队，建其长，立其副。
现代文：或者一乡为一团，一里为一队，设立长官和副官。
English: Or a township for a group, a mile for a team, set up a commander and an adjutant.

古文：平居则耕，有警则守，有余力则战。 帝嘉纳之。
现代文：平时就耕种土地，有敌情就防守，有余力就参战。 皇上采纳了这个意见。
English: In peacetime, he cultivated the land, defended it when there was a hostile situation, and went to war when there was spare capacity. The Emperor adopted this opinion.

古文：进国子祭酒兼侍立修注官。
现代文：刘爚升为国子祭酒兼侍立修注官。
English: Liu Bingsheng is the official attendant of the National Children's Festival.

古文：论贡举五敝。
现代文：他议奏贡举方面的五项弊端。
English: He listed five drawbacks of the tribute.

古文：兼权兵部侍郎，改兼权刑部侍郎，封建阳县开国男，赐食邑。
现代文：他兼任权兵部侍郎，改为兼权刑部侍郎，被封为建阳县开国男，赐给他封地。
English: He was concurrently appointed as an authorized attendant of the military department, changed to an authorized attendant of the criminal department, was named the founding father of Jianyang County, and was given a fiefdom.

古文：权刑部侍郎兼国子祭酒，兼太子左谕德，升同修国史、实录院同修撰。
现代文：他为权刑部侍郎兼国子祭酒，兼太子左谕德，升为同修国史、实录院同修撰。
English: He served as the attendant of the Department of Justice and Punishment, as well as the Kuniko's sacrificial wine, as well as the Prince's right-hand man, and was promoted to the position of a fellow student of national history and a fellow student of the Institute of Historical Records.

古文：时廷臣争务容默，有论事稍切者，众辄指以为异。
现代文：当时朝臣争相沉默，不论国事，有议论国事稍微恳切的，众人就认为他怪异。
English: At that time, the courtiers were silent, regardless of national affairs, and if there was a slightly earnest discussion of national affairs, everyone thought he was strange.

古文：爚奏： 愿明诏大臣，崇奖忠谠以作士气，深戒谀佞以肃具僚。
现代文：刘爚上奏说： 希望明确告诉大臣，要褒奖忠直以振作士气，惩戒奸邪使官僚恭谨。
English: Liu Wei said: I hope to clearly tell the minister that it is necessary to praise the loyalty to boost morale, and punish the treachery to make the bureaucrats respectful.

古文：乞择州县狱官。 冬雷，上恐惧，爚奏： 遴选监司以考察贪吏为先，访求民瘼，有泽未下流、令未便民者，悉以实上，变而通之，则民心悦而天意解矣。 又请择沿边诸将。
现代文：请选择州县的典狱官。 冬天打雷，皇上恐惧，刘爚上奏说 ：选择监司考察贪吏是当前的头等大事，访求百姓的疾苦，有陛下的恩泽没贯彻下去的，法令对百姓不利的，都照实汇报，朝廷给以变通，那么民心就会悦服而老天的惩罚也就解除了。 他又请求选择沿边众将。
English: Please choose a warden from the prefecture or county. As the winter thunders on and the emperor is fearful, Liu Ye said, "Choosing a supervisor to investigate corrupt officials is the top priority at the moment. Visit the people's sufferings. If there is something His Majesty did not follow through on, or if there are laws and regulations that are unfavorable to the people, report it truthfully. If the imperial court gives some flexibility, then the people's hearts will be pleased and God's punishment will be lifted." He also requested the selection of generals along the border.

古文：兼工部侍郎。
现代文：刘爚兼工部侍郎。
English: Liu Xuan was also the chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：奏 乞使沿边之民，各自什伍，教阅于乡，有急则相救援，无事则耕稼自若，军政隐然寓于田里之间，此非止一时之利也。 请城沿边州郡、罢遣贺正使。
现代文：他上奏说： 请让沿边百姓，各自结成什伍，在乡里训练教阅，有危险就互相救援，无事时就耕种，寓军于农，这不只是一时的便利。 他请求在沿边州郡筑城、停止派贺正使。
English: At the beginning of his speech, he said, "Please let the people along the border form their own groups, train and teach in the countryside, rescue each other when there is danger, cultivate when there is nothing to do, and send troops to the farmers. This is not just a temporary convenience." He requested to build cities along the border counties and stop sending congratulatory messengers.

古文：试刑部侍郎，兼职依旧，赐对衣、金带，辞，不允。
现代文：他试刑部侍郎，仍旧兼职，赐给他对衣、金带，他推辞，皇上不允。
English: He auditioned for the position of a waiter in the Penal Department, still working part-time, and was given a suit of clothes and a gold belt. He turned it down, but the emperor did not approve.

古文：两请致仕，不允。
现代文：他两次请求辞官，都没被允许。
English: He twice asked for a discharge, but was denied.

古文：奏绝金人岁币，建制置司于历阳以援两淮。
现代文：他上奏断绝给金人的岁币，在历阳建制置司以便应援两淮。
English: He made an appeal to cut off the annual money given to the Jin people, and set up a department in Liyang in order to support the two Huai.

古文：夏旱，应诏上封事，曰： 言语方壅而导之使言，人心方郁而疏之使通，上既开不讳之门，下必有尽言之士，指陈政事之阙失，明言朝廷之是非。
现代文：夏季大旱，他应诏上疏说： 言路堵塞时就疏导使人们能言，人心郁闷时就疏导使心情舒畅，上面既然开不忌讳的大门，下面定有言无不尽的人，他们指出朝政的缺失，讲明朝廷的是非。
English: In response to the summer drought, he issued an edict, saying, "When there is a blockage in the way of speech, we will guide people to speak, and when people are depressed, we will guide them to make their hearts comfortable. Since the above is an open door, there must be people with endless words below. They point out the shortcomings of the imperial government and clarify the rights and wrongs of the imperial court.

古文：或者以为好名要誉，而陛下听之，则苦言之药，至言之实，陛下弃之而不恤矣，甘言之疾，华言之腴，陛下受之而不觉矣。 气罢瑞庆圣节，谢绝金使。
现代文：有人认为这是沽名钓誉，但陛下对这些逆耳的话，真实的话，放弃它们也不觉得可惜，甜言蜜语，陛下接受它们也不觉察。 他请求罢去瑞庆圣节，谢绝金国使臣来朝。
English: Some people thought it was a trick to gain fame, but His Majesty did not feel sorry to give up these insincere and true words, nor did he notice the sweet words His Majesty accepted. He asked to be excused from the Ruiqing Festival, and refused to allow the envoys of the Kim dynasty to come to the DPRK.

古文：进封子爵。权工部尚书，赐衣带、鞍马。
现代文：刘爚被进封子爵，任权工部尚书，赐给他衣带、鞍马。
English: Liu Ye was made a viscount and given the title of Shang Shu of the Ministry of Works. He was also given a sash and a pommel horse.

古文：兼太子右庶子，仍兼左谕德。
现代文：兼任太子右庶子，仍兼左谕德。
English: He concurrently served as the Prince's right-hand son, and also as his left-hand son.

古文：每讲读至经史所陈声色嗜欲之戒，辄恳切再三敷陈之。
现代文：他每次给太子讲读到经史中所陈述的声色嗜欲之戒时，就十分恳切，反复地讲解。
English: Every time he read to the prince the precept of abstaining from sexual desire as stated in the sutras, he explained it very earnestly and repeatedly.

古文：进读《诗》之说，詹事戴溪读之为之吐舌。
现代文：献上读《诗》的体会，詹事戴溪读后很赞赏。
English: Presenting the experience of reading "Poetry," Zhan Shixi Daixi was very appreciative after reading.

古文：卒，赠光禄大夫，官其后，赐谥文简。
现代文：刘爚去世后，被赠为光禄大夫，他的后代被录用为官，赐谥号 文简 。
English: After Liu Ye's death, he was given the title of Guanglu Doctor, and his descendants were appointed as officials and given the title of Wen Jian.

古文：所著有《奏议》、《史稿》、《经筵故事》、《东宫诗解》、《礼记解》、《讲堂故事》、《云庄外稿》。
现代文：他著有《奏议》、《史稿》、《经筵故事》、《东宫诗解》、《礼记解》、《讲堂故事》、《云庄外稿》。
English: He is the author of "Proposal," "Historical Manuscript," "Economic History Story," "Eastern Palace Poem Interpretation," "Ritual Interpretation," "Lecture Hall Story" and "Yunzhuang Outline."

古文：柴中行，字与之，余干人。
现代文：柴中行，字与之，余干人。
English: The chai is in the middle of the row, the characters are next to it, and the rest are in the middle.

古文：绍熙元年进士，授抚州军事推官。
现代文：绍熙元年考中进士，被授予抚州军事推官。
English: In the first year of Shaoxi, he passed the junior high school entrance examination and was awarded the post of Fuzhou military commander.

古文：权臣韩侂胄禁道学，校文，转运司移檄，令自言非伪学，中行奋笔曰： 自幼读程颐书以收科第，如以为伪，不愿考校。 
现代文：权臣韩胄禁道学，考校文字，转运司传檄文，让柴中行自己讲伪学的错处，柴中行奋笔写道 ：我从小读程颐的书才考中进士，如果认为是伪学，不愿考校。 
English: The powerful minister Han Zheng forbade Taoism, the examination of school text, the transportation secretary Chuan Zheng's text, and let Chai Zhongxing himself lecture on the wrongs of pseudoscience. Chai Zhongxing wrote: I read Cheng Zheng's book as a child for the junior high school entrance examination, and if I thought it was pseudoscience, I would not like to take the examination.

古文：调江州学教授，母丧，免，广西转运司辟为干官，帅将荐之，使其客尝中行，中行正色曰： 身为大帅，而称人为恩王、恩相，心窃耻之。
现代文：柴中行调任江州学教授，母亲去世除去丧服后，他被广西转运司召用为干官，统帅要荐举他，派自己的门客试探柴中行，柴中行严肃地说： 身为大帅，而称别人为恩主、恩相，我感到这很可耻。
English: Chai Zhongxing was transferred to be a professor of Jiangzhou Studies. After his mother's death, he removed his mourning clothes and was appointed as a cadre by the Guangxi Transportation Department. The commander-in-chief wanted to recommend him and sent his own protégé to test Chai Zhongxing. Chai Zhongxing said seriously, "I feel it is very shameful to be a great general and call someone else a benefactor.

古文：毋污我！ 摄昭州郡事，蠲丁钱，减苗斛，赈饥羸。
现代文：不要玷污我！ 他负责昭州政事，免去丁钱，减少苗斛，赈济贫困。
English: Don't tarnish me! He is in charge of political affairs in Zhaozhou, getting rid of Dingqian, reducing seedlings, and alleviating poverty.

古文：转运司委中行代行部，由桂林属邑历柳、象、宾入邕管，问民疾苦，先行而后闻，捐盐息以惠远民。
现代文：转运司委托柴中行去巡视属郡民情，他由桂林属县经柳、象、宾州进入邕管，询问百姓的疾苦，先处理各种事情而后汇报，除去盐息使远地百姓受惠。
English: The Department of Transportation commissioned Chai Zhong to go on a tour to inspect the county's people's conditions. He went from Guilin's county through Liu, Xiang and Pennsylvania into Shandong Province, inquired about the people's sufferings, first dealt with various matters and then reported, and removed salt to benefit the people in remote areas.

古文：嘉定初，差主管尚书吏部架阁文字，迁太学正，升博士。
现代文：嘉定初年，柴中行被差遣为主管尚书吏部架阁文字，升为太学正，博士。
English: In the first year of Jiading, Chai Zhongxing was sent to be in charge of the Shoshu Librarian's Department to set up the cabinet of characters, and was promoted to Taigaku Zhenro, Doctor.

古文：转对，首论主威夺而国势轻；次论士大夫寡廉隅、乏骨鲠，宜养天下刚毅果敢之气；末论权臣用事，包苴成风，今旧习犹在，宜举行先朝痛绳赃吏之法。
现代文：百官轮次奏事，他首先论说君主的威严被侵夺那么国势就轻；其次论说士大夫寡廉耻、少骨气，应该培养天下刚毅果敢的风气；最后论说权臣当政，包庇成风，现在旧习仍在，应采用先朝严惩赃吏的法令。
English: He first argued that if the majesty of the monarch was usurped, then the national situation would be light; secondly, he argued that the scholar-officials were shameless and spineless, and that the world should cultivate a culture of fortitude and courage; finally, he argued that powerful officials were in power, and cover-ups were commonplace, and now the old practice was still in place, and the laws of the previous government should be used to severely punish corrupt officials.

古文：谓太学风化首，童子科覆试胄子舍选，有挟势者，中行力言于长，守法无秋豪私。
现代文：他认为太学是风教的先锋，童子科复试胄子舍选，有恃势营私的，柴中行向长官提出，守法无私。
English: He believes that Taixue is the vanguard of the style of teaching, and the selection of the kindergarten for the children's science retest is the most important. If there is a power struggle, it is selfish, and if it is in the middle, it is unselfish and law-abiding.

古文：迁太常主簿，转军器监丞。
现代文：他升为太常主簿，转为军器监丞。
English: He was promoted to the position of the chief clerk of the Imperial Household Agency, and then to the position of the inspector of military equipment.

古文：出知光州，严保伍，精阅习，增辟屯田，城壕营砦、器械糗粮，百尔具备，治行为淮右最。
现代文：柴中行出朝任光州知州，他严格保伍法，精练兵卒，增辟屯田，城壕营寨、器械粮草，全都齐备，治理政务的成绩是淮右之首。
English: Chai Zhongxing was appointed to Gwangju and Chizhou when he came to the throne. He strictly enforced the law of conscription, trained soldiers, and built additional military camps, trenches, equipment, and grain and grass fields. His achievements in the governance of government affairs are second to none.

古文：又条画极边、次边缓急事宜上之朝廷，大概谓： 边兵宜如蛇势，首尾相应。
现代文：又逐条规定离边境最近、离边境稍近的地方，有紧急事应上奏朝廷，大概说： 边防兵应像蛇一样，首尾相应。
English: It also stipulated, one by one, that in the places closest to the border, or a little closer to the border, urgent matters should be reported to the imperial court. It said, roughly, "Border guards should be like snakes, responding accordingly.

古文：草寇合兵大入，则邻道援之；分兵轻袭，则邻郡援之。
现代文：草寇合兵进犯，那么邻道来救援，草寇分兵袭击，那么邻郡来救援。
English: If a group of grasshoppers attack, then the neighboring road will come to the rescue; if a group of grasshoppers attack, then the neighboring county will come to the rescue.

古文：援兵既多，虽危不败。 又言： 淮、襄土豪丁壮，往者用兵，倾赀效力者，朝廷吝赏失信，宜亟加收拾，亦可激昂得其死力。 
现代文：援兵多，虽危险但不会失败。 又说： 淮、襄的土豪丁壮，过去用兵时，对那些倾财效力的人，朝廷没守信用，不给以赏赐，应该立即加以补救，也可以使他们情绪激昂，为国效死力。 
English: There are many reinforcements, although it is dangerous, but it will not fail. He also said: Huai and Xiang's local strongmen, Ding Zhuang, in the past, when they used soldiers, the imperial court did not keep their trust and did not give rewards to those who invested their money and efforts. They should be remedied immediately. It can also make them emotional and work hard for the country.

古文：迁西京转运使兼提点刑狱。
现代文：柴中行升为西京转运使兼提点刑狱。
English: Chai Zhongxing was promoted to Saikyo transshipment envoy and sentenced to prison.

古文：中行谓襄阳乃自古必争之地，备御尤宜周密。
现代文：他认为襄阳是自古以来必争之地，守备尤其应该周密。
English: He believes that Yangyang has been a place of contention since ancient times, and it should be carefully guarded.

古文：时任边寄者政令烦苛，日夜与民争利，中行讽之，不听。
现代文：当时任边帅的人政令烦苛，日夜同老百姓争利，柴中行规劝他们，他们不听。
English: At that time, the person in charge of the frontier was a troublesome person. He fought with the common people day and night. Chai Zhongxing tried to persuade them, but they would not listen.

古文：天方旱，尽捐酒税，斥征官，黥务吏，甘澍随至。
现代文：当时天大旱，柴中行除去全部酒税，指斥征税官，给酷吏处以黥刑，随后就下雨了。
English: At that time, there was a severe drought, Chai Zhongxing removed all liquor taxes, rebuked the tax collectors, and punished the cruel officials with flogging, and then it rained.

古文：官取盐钞赢过重，课日增，入中日寡，钞日壅。
现代文：官府收取盐钞赢余过重，赋税日益增多，商人不愿意经营，官府收入日益减少，盐钞日益滞积。
English: The government collected too much surplus salt money, taxes were increasing day by day, merchants were unwilling to do business, government revenue was decreasing day by day, and salt money was accumulating.

古文：中行揭示通衢，一钱不增，商贾大集。
现代文：柴中行在交通要道出告示，表示盐税一钱不增，商人又集中在这里。
English: Chai Zhongxing put out a notice on the main road, saying that the salt tax would not increase by a penny, and merchants concentrated here.

古文：改直秘阁、知襄阳兼京西帅，仍领漕事。
现代文：柴中行改任直秘阁、襄阳知府兼京西统帅，仍任转运使。
English: Chai Zhongxing was reappointed as the direct secretary of the cabinet, the governor of Xiangyang and the commander of West Beijing, and still served as the transfer envoy.

古文：江陵戎司移屯襄州，兵政久驰。
现代文：江陵戎司移驻到襄州，兵政久已松弛。
English: The military governor of Gangneung was transferred to Yangzhou, and the military government had long been weakened.

古文：中行白于朝，考核军实，旧额二万二千人，存者才半，亟招补虚籍。
现代文：柴中行向朝廷汇报，考核军队虚实，旧额有军人二万二千，现存的才半数，立即招补缺额。
English: Chai Zhongxing reported to the imperial court that the assessment of the army was false and true. The old quota had 22,000 soldiers, and the existing quota was only half. The shortage was immediately recruited.

古文：自是朝廷以节制之权归帅司。
现代文：从此朝廷把节制的权力归到帅司。
English: From then on, the imperial court assigned the power of restraint to the commander-in-chief.

古文：重劾李珙不法以惩贪守，时扈再兴有功以厉宿将，上关朝廷，下关制阃。
现代文：强烈弹劾李珙的不法以惩戒贪官，阐明扈再兴有功以勉励宿将，上关朝廷，下关将帅。
English: Strongly impeach the illegality of Li Qiye to punish corrupt officials, clarify that there is merit in the rejuvenation of Qiye to encourage the general, go up to the imperial court, and go down to the general.

古文：迁江东转运司判官，旋改湖南提点刑狱。
现代文：柴中行升为江东转运司判官，不久改为湖南提点刑狱。
English: Chai Zhongxing was promoted to judge of the Jiangdong Transportation Division, and was soon transferred to Hunan Provincial Penitentiary.

古文：豪家习杀人，或收养亡命，横行江湖，一绳以法。
现代文：豪强家习于杀人，或者收养亡命之徒，横行江湖，柴中行把他们都绳之以法。
English: Heroic and powerful families are accustomed to killing people, or adopting outlaws, running amok, and Chai Zhongxing brought them all to justice.

古文：华亭令贪虐，法从交疏荐之，中行笑曰： 此欲断吾按章也。 卒发其辜。
现代文：华亭县令贪虐，执法的吏人交相推荐他，柴中行笑着说： 这是想阻止我按规定处理他呀。 
English: Huating County's magistrate is greedy and abusive, law enforcement officials recommend him to each other, and Chai Zhongxing said with a smile: This is to prevent me from handling him according to regulations.

古文：入为吏部郎官。
现代文：最终还是处治了他。柴中行入京为吏部郎官。
English: In the end, he was punished. Chai Zhongxing entered the capital as a bureaucrat.

古文：以立志启迪君心，言好进、好同、好欺，士大夫风俗三敝。
现代文：因为他立志要启迪君心，上奏说喜欢升官、苟同、欺罔，是士大夫风俗的三个弊病。
English: Because he was determined to enlighten the prince's heart, he recited that liking promotion, connivance, and bullying are the three ills of the scholar-officer custom.

古文：选曹法大坏，吏缘为奸，中行遇事持正，不为势屈，由是铨综平允。
现代文：选择曹官的法则被破坏，官吏互相攀援为奸，柴中行遇事都持平公正，不为权势所屈服，因此选官公平。
English: The rules for the selection of officials were broken, officials helped each other and acted as spies, and all officials acted fairly and impartially, and did not succumb to power, so the selection of officials was fair.

古文：擢宗正少卿。
现代文：柴中行被提升为宗正少卿。
English: Chai Zhongxing was promoted to the position of Zongzheng Shaoqing.

古文：上疏谓： 陛下初政则以刚德立治本，更化则以刚德除权奸，今者顾乃垂拱仰成，安于无为。
现代文：他上疏说 ：陛下刚秉政就把刚德定为治国的根本，改变风俗就用刚德除去权奸，如今可以垂衣拱手，无为而治。
English: He went on to say, "Your Majesty, as soon as you began to uphold the rule of law, you made moral courage the foundation of governing the country. When you changed the customs, you used moral courage to remove the usurpers. Now you can fold your arms and govern without doing anything.

古文：夫刚德实人主之大权，不可以久出而不收，覆辙在前，良可鉴也。 又曰： 朝廷用人，外示涵洪而阴掩其迹，内用牢笼而微见其机，观听虽美，实无以大服天下之心。
现代文：但是刚德实在是人主的大权，不能总拿出来而不收回，先前的教训，是可以很好地借鉴呀。 又说 ：朝廷用人，表面上显示包容，而暗地里掩饰情迹，内定要任用得宠的人，而表面上故意突出他，让他有机会表现，听到和看到的虽然很好，实际没什么可以使天下人心服的。
English: But chivalry is really the prerogative of the master, it cannot always be brought out without being taken back, and the lessons of the past can be used as a good reference.Also said: the court employs people, shows tolerance on the surface, but secretly conceals the traces of affection, intends to appoint a favorite person, and deliberately highlights him on the surface, giving him the opportunity to perform, although it is good to hear and see, there is actually nothing that can convince the people of the world.

古文：曩者更化，元气复挽回矣。
现代文：先前改变风俗，元气已被挽回了。
English: The morale has been restored after the previous change of customs.

古文：比年欲求安静，颇厌人言，于是臣下纳说，非观望则希合，非回缓则畏避，而面折廷诤之风未之多见，此任事大臣之责也。 
现代文：近年想求得清静，十分厌恶人们进言，于是大臣奏事，不是观望就是迎合，不是徘徊就是退避，而当面和陛下争辩的风气不多了，这是掌权大臣的责任。 
English: In recent years, he has tried to be calm and is very averse to people's suggestions, so the minister has made a report, either watching or pandering, either wandering or retreating, and there is not much of a culture of arguing with His Majesty in person. This is the responsibility of the minister in power.

古文：兼国史编修、实录检讨。
现代文：柴中行兼任国史编修、实录检讨。
English: Chai Zhongxing also served as the editor of the national history and the review of the record.

古文：孟春，大雨震电，雷雹交作，边烽告急，至失地丧师，淮甸震汹。
现代文：四月，天降大雨冰雹，雷电交加，边境告急，以致失地丧师，淮甸震动。
English: In April, the sky fell heavy rain and hail, thunder and lightning were added, the border was in a hurry, resulting in the loss of land, and Huai Dian was shaken.

古文：中行亟奏内外二失，朝廷十忧，大要言： 今日之事，人主尽委天下以任一相，一相尽以天下谋之三数腹心，而举朝之士相视以目，噤不敢言。
现代文：柴中行马上奏明朝内外有二条失误，朝廷有十条忧患，大概是： 今日的事，是因为君主把天下事都委托给一个宰相，这个宰相又把治理天下的策略只和几个心腹商议，而满朝官员只能相视以目，不敢进言。
English: Chai Zhong Xing immediately reported that there were two mistakes inside and outside the Ming Dynasty, and the imperial court had ten troubles, probably: Today's matter is because the monarch entrusted all the affairs of the world to a prime minister, and this prime minister only discussed the strategy of governing the world with a few confidants, while the officials of the Manchu Dynasty could only look at each other and did not dare to speak.

古文：甚至边庭申请，久不即报，脱有阙误，咎当谁执？ 
现代文：甚至边境地区有什么请求，很久也不报上来，如果有什么失误，谁来负责？ 
English: Even if there is a request from the border region, it will not be reported for a long time. If there is a mistake, who will be responsible?

古文：调秘书监、崇政殿说书。
现代文：柴中行被调为秘书监、崇政殿说书。
English: Chai Zhongxing was transferred to the post of secretary supervisor, and the story of the Sui Dynasty was told.

古文：极论 往年以道学为伪学者，欲加远窜，杜绝言语，使忠义士箝口结舌，天下之气岂堪再沮坏如此耶？ 又谓： 欲结人心，莫若去贪吏；欲去贪吏，莫若清朝廷。
现代文：他透彻地论述说 ：往年把道学看作伪学的人，想把讲求道学的人流放到远方，堵塞言路，使忠义的人闭口不言，天下的风气怎能再被破坏成这样呢？ 又说 ：要想获得人心，不如除去贪吏；要想除去贪吏，不如使朝廷清明。
English: He thoroughly discussed and said, "In previous years, those who regarded Taoism as a pseudo-science wanted to banish those who preached and sought Taoism to distant places, to block the path of speech, and to make the faithful shut up. How can the world's culture be destroyed like this again?" He also said, "In order to win the hearts of the people, it is better to remove the corrupt officials; in order to remove the corrupt officials, it is better to make the imperial court clear."

古文：大臣法则小臣廉，在高位者以身率下，则州县小吏何恃而敢为？ 又论内治外患，辨君子小人，大略谓： 执政、侍从、台谏、给舍之选，与三衙、京尹之除，皆朝廷大纲所在，故其人必出人主之亲擢，则权不下移。
现代文：大臣守法则小臣廉洁，身居高位的人以身作则，那么州县小吏凭什么敢胡作非为？ 又论说治理内政和外患，分辨君子和小人，大概是：执政、侍从、台谏、给舍的选用，和任命三衙、京尹，都是朝廷的大事，因此选用的人一定是君主亲自提拔的，这样大权不交给臣下。
English: On the other hand, on the governance of internal affairs and external threats, and distinguishing between a gentleman and a villain, it is probably: the selection of a ruler, an attendant, a vassal, a vassal, and the appointment of a samurai and a general, are all important matters for the imperial court. Therefore, the person selected must be promoted by the monarch himself, and such power is not given to a vassal.

古文：今或私谒，或请见，或数月之前先定，或举朝之人不识。
现代文：现在或是私谒，或是请见，或是在几个月之前就先定下来，或者是满朝官员不认识。
English: Now it's either a private meeting, or a meeting in person, or it was decided months ago, or they don't know anyone in the government.

古文：附会者进，争为妾妇之道，则天下国家之利害安危，非惟己不敢言，亦且并绝人言矣。
现代文：附会的人被任用，争相做妇人做的事，对天下国家的利害安危，不只自己不敢说，而且也不许别人说。
English: The members of the affiliated society are appointed and compete to do what women do, which is dangerous to the interests of the world and the country. Not only do they not dare to say it, but they also do not allow others to say it.

古文：大臣为附会之说所误，边境之臣实遁者掩以为诬，真怯者誉以为勇，金帛满前，是非交乱，以欺庙堂，以欺陛下。
现代文：大臣被附会的邪说所贻误，边境守臣中真正逃跑的被他们遮掩而认为是受到诬陷，真正怯懦的被他们赞扬成是勇敢，金帛堆在陛下面前，是非混淆，来欺骗国家，欺骗陛下。
English: The ministers are deluded by the heresies of the secret society, the real escapees of the border guards are covered up by them and considered to be framed, the real cowards are praised by them as brave, and the gold ingots are piled up in front of His Majesty, confusing right and wrong, to deceive the country and deceive His Majesty.

古文：愿明诏大臣，绝私意，布公道。 
现代文：希望明确诏告大臣，去掉私心，开诚布公。 
English: I hope that you will clearly tell the minister, get rid of selfishness, and be open and honest.

古文：进秘阁修撰、知赣州。
现代文：柴中行升为秘阁修撰、赣州知州。
English: Chai Zhongxing was promoted to Hike Shuxian and Zhangzhou Chizhou.

古文：汉盗有方，境内清肃。
现代文：他治盗有方，赣州地区很清静。
English: He has a way of dealing with theft, and the Zhangzhou area is very quiet.

古文：丐祠得请，以言罢。
现代文：他请求辞官回家祭祀，得到允许，因言论被罢官。
English: He asked the dictionary officer to go home and make a sacrifice. He was allowed to do so, but was dismissed for his remarks.

古文：理宗即位，以右文殿修撰主管南京鸿庆宫，赐金带。
现代文：理宗即位后，柴中行以右文殿修撰的身份主管南京鸿庆宫，理宗赐给他金带。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Rizong, Chai Zhongxing was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Hongqing Palace in the capacity of the Right Reverend, and Emperor Rizong gave him a gold belt.

古文：卒。
现代文：柴中行去世。
English: To die.

古文：所著有《易系集传》、《书集传》、《诗讲义》、《论语童蒙说》。
现代文：柴中行著有《易系集传》、《书集传》、《诗讲义》、《论语童蒙说》。
English: Chai Zhongxing is the author of "I Ching Collection Biography," "Book Collection Biography," "Poetry Lectures," and "Discourse on Tongmeng."

古文：李孟传，字文授，资政殿学士光季子也。
现代文：李孟传，字文授，是资政殿学士李光的四儿子。
English: Li Mengchuan, a teacher of Chinese characters and literature, is the fourth son of Li Guang, a scholar of the Imperial Palace.

古文：光谪岭海，孟传才六岁，奉母居乡，刻志于学。
现代文：李光被贬到岭海时，李孟传才六岁，他侍奉母亲住在乡间，立志学习。
English: When Li Guang was demoted to Linghai, Li Mengchuan was only six years old. He served his mother, lived in the countryside, and was determined to study.

古文：贺允中、徐度皆奇之，而曾几妻以其孙。
现代文：贺允中、徐度都认为他是奇人，曾几乎把自己的孙女嫁给了他。
English: Both He Yongzhong and Xu Du thought he was a strange man, and once almost married his granddaughter to him.

古文：龙大渊黜为浙东总管，知孟传为名门子，解后必就语，孟传正色辞之。
现代文：龙大渊被降官担任浙东总管，知道李孟传是名门子弟，偶然相遇后一定去谈话，李孟传严辞拒绝了他。
English: Long Dayuan was demoted to the post of East Zhejiang Governor. He knew that Li Mengchuan was a famous person. After a chance encounter, he was sure to talk to him. Li Mengchuan sternly refused him.

古文：干办江东提刑司，易浙东常平司。
现代文：李孟传为干办江东提刑司，改到浙东常平司任职。
English: Li Mengchuan was assigned to the Criminal Division of the Jiangdong Provincial People's Procuratorate, and was transferred to the East Zhejiang Provincial People's Procuratorate.

古文：母丧，免，调江山县丞，弃去，监南岳庙、行在编估局，未上，改楚州司户参军，单车赴官。
现代文：李孟传的母亲去世，他为母亲守丧期满后，调任江山县丞，他辞去这个官职，为监南岳庙、行在编估局，还没上任，又改为楚州司户参军，他自己乘车去上任。
English: Li Mengchuan's mother passed away. After his mother's mourning period was over, he was transferred to Jiangshan county magistrate. He resigned from this official post, and worked as a supervisor in Nanyue Temple and in the Compilation and Appraisal Bureau. Before he took office, he changed his position to Chuzhou family secretary and joined the army. He took his own car to take office.

古文：公退，闭户读《易》。
现代文：办完公事后，他就关起门来读《易》。
English: After finishing his work, he closed the door and read "Yi."

古文：郡守、部使者不敢待以属吏。徐积墓在境内，芜没既久，加葺之。
现代文：郡守、部使者都不敢把他看待成下属的官吏，徐积的坟墓在楚州境内，被野草淹没了很久，李孟传加以修整。
English: Neither the county governor nor the provincial envoy dared to regard him as a subordinate official. Xu Jie's grave was in the territory of Chuzhou and had been submerged by weeds for a long time. Li Mengchuan had it repaired.

古文：修复陈公塘，有灌溉之利。
现代文：他修复了陈公塘，使农田得到了灌溉。
English: He restored Chen Gongtang, so that the farmland was irrigated.

古文：知象山县，守荐为邑最，从官多合荐之，主管官告院，与同列上封事，请诣北宫，又移书宰相。
现代文：他担任象山县知县，知州认为他是属县中最有政绩的知县，就把他推荐给朝廷，从官也大多数联合起来推荐他，李孟传主管官告院，他与同僚一起上封事，请求到北宫，又给宰相写信。
English: He served as the magistrate of Xiangshan County. The magistrate believed that he was the most distinguished magistrate in the county, and recommended him to the imperial court. Most of the officials also united to recommend him. Li Mengchuan, the competent official, sued the court. He and his colleagues went to the courthouse, requested to go to the North Palace, and wrote to the prime minister.

古文：迁将作监主簿。
现代文：李孟传升为将作监主簿。
English: Li Meng Chuan is promoted to be the supervisor of the main book.

古文：丞相赵汝愚初当国，适大侵，遣孟传按视江、池、鄂三大军所屯积粟，道除太府丞。
现代文：丞相赵汝愚刚掌权，正赶上严重的饥荒，李孟传被派去巡视江、池、鄂三大军所储备的粮食，在巡视途中他被任命为太府丞。
English: When Premier Zhao Ruugang took power, the country was in the midst of a severe famine. Li Mengchuan was sent to inspect the grain reserves of the three major military bases in the Yangtze River, the Yangtze River and the Hubei River. During the inspection, he was appointed Taifu no jo.

古文：既复命，汝愚去国，党论起，而孟传奉使无失指，面对言： 比以使事往返四千里，所过民生困穷，衣食不赡。
现代文：李孟传完成任务后，赵汝愚被罢去，朋党的议论兴起，而李孟传奉命巡视没有违背皇上旨意的地方，他当着皇上面说： 我曾经因为出使的事往返四千里，经过的地方老百姓都十分穷困，吃穿都很缺乏。
English: After Li Mengchuan completed his mission, Zhao Rugu was ousted, and the discussion of the cronies of the party arose. Li Mengchuan was ordered to inspect the places that did not violate the emperor's will. He said in front of the emperor: I once traveled four thousand miles back and forth because of the business of the envoy, and the local people were very poor and lacked food and clothing.

古文：国之安危，以民为本，今根本既虚，形势俱见，保邦之虑，宜勤圣念。 时韩侂胄连逐留正及汝愚，太府簿吴璹与侂胄有连姻，因言台谏将论朱熹，孟传奋然曰： 如此则士大夫争之，鼎镬且不避。 
现代文：国家的安危，是以老百姓为根本的，如今根本已空虚，形势已很明显，陛下应该时刻想着如何保住这个国家。 当时韩胄逐走留正和赵汝愚，太府簿吴王寿和韩胄是姻亲，就说台谏将要弹劾朱熹，李孟传气愤地说： 如果这样的话，那么士大夫将要争辩，即使遭到鼎镬这样的酷刑也不退避。 
English: The safety of the country is based on the common people. Today, the foundation is empty, the situation is obvious, and His Majesty should always think about how to protect the country. At that time, Han Xuan was staying with Zhao Rugu, and the official record of the Great Palace of the State of Wu Wang Shou and Han Xuan were in-laws. It was said that Tai Xuan was going to impeach Zhu Xi, and Li Meng said angrily: If this is the case, then the judge will argue, and even if he is tortured like Ding Xi, he will not retreat.

古文：兼考功郎。
现代文：李孟传兼任考功郎。
English: Li Mengchuan also served as a laureate.

古文：复因对言： 国家长育人才，犹天地之于植物，滋液渗漉，待其既成而后足以供大厦之用。
现代文：他又趁机对皇上说 ：国家长期培养人才，就像天地哺育植物一样，供给它们水分养料，等它们长成后就能够作为大厦的栋梁。
English: He also took the opportunity to say to the emperor: The country has been cultivating talents for a long time, just as heaven and earth nurture plants, providing them with water and nutrients, and when they grow up, they can serve as the pillars of the building.

古文：今士大夫皆有苟进之心，治功未优，功能尚薄，而意已驰骛于台阁，不稍有以扶持正饬之，其敝将甚。 又言： 武举及军士比试，专取其力，临敌难以必胜。
现代文：现在士大夫都有苟且升官的心思，他们的政绩也不显著，才能还小时，而心思已经跑到担任台阁上了，国家不稍微加以扶持和整顿，将有很大的弊病。 李孟传又说： 武举和士兵比武时，专门取那些力气大的，这样在战场上难以做到一定取得胜利。
English: At present, the senior officers are all anxious to be promoted, their political achievements are not significant, their talents are still small, and their minds have already run to the top of the table. If the state does not support and rectify them a little, there will be great ills. Li Mengchuan also said: When martial arts and soldiers compete, they specifically take those with great strength. In this way, it is difficult to achieve a certain victory on the battlefield.

古文：唐世取人由步射、弓弩以至马射，各以其中之多寡为等级，宜采取行之。 韩侂胄与孟传故，尝致侂胄意，孟传谢曰： 行年六十，去意已决。 侂胄惭而退。
现代文：唐代时取人的标准是：徒步射箭、弓弩以至骑马射箭，各以射中目标的多少为等级，应该采用这个标准实行。 韩胄与李孟传有老交情，韩胄曾向李孟传致意，李孟传辞谢说： 我已经六十岁了，已经决心不做官了。 
English: The standard for selecting people in the Tang Dynasty was: archery on foot, bow and arrow, and even horse riding archery, each with the degree of hitting the target, should be implemented using this standard.Han Yu and Li Meng Chuan have a long friendship.Han Yu once paid his respects to Li Meng Chuan.Li Meng Chuan said: I am sixty years old, I have decided not to be an official.

古文：请外，知江州，狱讼止息。
现代文：韩胄羞愧地离去。李孟传请求到地方任职，他被任命为江州知州，他在任时江州的诉讼官司没有了。
English: Han Xuan left in shame. Li Mengchuan asked to be appointed to a local post. He was appointed to Jiangzhou Zhizhou. When he was in office, there were no lawsuits in Jiangzhou.

古文：侂胄不悦。
现代文：韩胄对李孟传不满意。
English: Han Ye is not satisfied with Li Meng Chuan.

古文：丐归，复知处州。
现代文：李孟传请求辞官，他又为处州知州。
English: Li Mengchuan asked to be demoted, and he was demoted again.

古文：迁广西提点刑狱，改江东提举常平，移福建。
现代文：李孟传升为广西提点刑狱，改为江东提举常平，调到福建任职。
English: Li Meng Chuan was promoted to the Guangxi Provincial Penitentiary, changed to the Jiangdong Provincial Penitentiary and transferred to Fujian.

古文：诏入对，首论用人宜先气节后才能，益招徕忠谠以扶正论。
现代文：皇上下诏让李孟传回到京城去奏对，他首先议论说，用人应该先看是否有气节然后再看是否有才能，应该招用忠直的人以便扶持公正的议论。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Li Mengcheng to return to Beijing to play the flute. He first argued that the employer should first see if there is a temperament and then see if there is talent. Loyal people should be recruited in order to support fair discussion.

古文：故人有在政府者，折简问劳勤甚，孟传逆知其意，即谢曰： 孤踪久不造朝，获一望清光而去，幸矣。 对毕即出关。
现代文：旧友中有在政府任职的，屈己来问候他特别殷勤，李孟传知道他的用意，就辞谢说： 我长期不去朝廷，能得到一个好名声，就是幸福了。 说完这些话后李孟传立即出关。
English: One of his old friends was in the government, and he came to greet him with special courtesy. Li Mengchuan knew his intention, but declined to thank him, saying: I have not been to the imperial court for a long time, and if I can get a good reputation, I will be happy. After saying these words, Li Mengchuan immediately left the customs.

古文：至闽，大饥，发廪劝分，民无流莩。
现代文：李孟传来到闽，闽地发生大饥荒，他就打开粮仓赈济饥民，劝人们互相帮助，灾民没有流落饿死的。
English: When Li Mengchuan came to Handan, there was a great famine in Handan. He opened the granary to feed the hungry and advised people to help each other. The victims did not starve to death.

古文：侂胄诛，就迁提点刑狱，移江东，又辞。
现代文：韩胄被杀，李孟传又升为提点刑狱，调到江东任职，他又推辞。
English: After Han Kui was killed, Li Mengchuan was promoted to the post of prison commissar and transferred to Jiangdong, but he refused to take the post.

古文：丞相史弥远，其亲故也，人谓进用其时矣，卒归使节，角巾还第。
现代文：丞相史弥远，是他的亲戚，人们认为这正是李孟传被提拔任用的时机，但李孟传交回提点刑狱的官印，穿着普通人的衣服回到家中。
English: The prime minister, Shiyiyuan, was his relative, and people thought that this was the right time for Li Mengchuan to be promoted and appointed, but Li Mengchuan returned the official seal of the prison and returned home wearing ordinary clothes.

古文：再奉祠，以仓部郎召，又辞。
现代文：李孟传再次担任管理宫观的闲职，朝廷又以仓部郎召用他，他又推辞。
English: Li Mengchuan once again took on the sinecure of managing the palace, and the imperial court called him to serve as a warehouse keeper, but he declined.

古文：迁浙东提点刑狱，未数月，申前请，章再上，加直秘阁，移江东，不赴，主管明道宫。
现代文：李孟传升为浙东提点刑狱，没几个月，他又请求辞官，再次上奏章，他被加官为直秘阁，调到江东任职，他没上任。而去主管明道宫。
English: Li Mengchuan was promoted to the East Zhejiang Provincial Penitentiary, and a few months later, he asked for his resignation and was once again sent to the capital. He was promoted to the direct secretary cabinet and transferred to the East Jiangsu Province. He did not take up the post, but went to be in charge of the Mingdao Palace.

古文：进直宝谟阁，致仕，卒，年八十四。
现代文：李孟传进升为直宝谟阁，他退休，去世，终年八十四岁。
English: Li Meng Chuan was promoted to Zhiobohm Cabinet. He retired and passed away at the age of 84.

古文：常诫其子孙曰： 安身莫若无竞，修己莫若自保。
现代文：李孟传常告诫自己的子孙说 ：立身不如与世无争，涵养自己不如自己保护自己。
English: Li Mengchuan often admonished his children and grandchildren, saying, "It is better to stand firm than to be at odds with the world. It is better to nurture oneself than to protect oneself."

古文：守道则福至，求禄则辱来。 有《磐溪集》、《宏词类稿》、《左氏说》、《读史》、《杂志》、《记善》、《记异》等书行世。
现代文：遵守法度则福到，追求爵禄则辱来。 他有《盘溪集》、《宏词类稿》、《左氏说》、《读史》、《杂志》、《记善》、《记异》等书在世间流行。
English: His books such as "Panxi Collection," "Compendium of Chinese Proverbs," "The Sayings of Zuo Shi," "Reading History," "Magazine," "Remembering Goodness" and "Remembering Differences" are popular in the world.

