古文：赵普赵普字则平，幽州蓟人。
现代文：赵普字则平，幽州蓟人。
English: Zhao Pu Zheping, a native of Yuzhou.

古文：后唐幽帅赵德钧连年用兵，民力疲弊。
现代文：后唐时幽州主将赵德钧连年发动战争，人民疲敝。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, when the governor of Yuzhou, Zhao Deyu, waged war for years, the people were exhausted.

古文：普父回举族徙常山，又徙河南洛阳。
现代文：赵普的父亲赵率领全族人迁居常山，又迁居河南洛阳。
English: Zhao Pu's father Zhao led the whole family to move to Changshan and then to Luoyang in Henan Province.

古文：普沈厚寡言，镇阳豪族魏氏以女妻之。
现代文：赵普为人忠厚，寡言少语，镇阳豪门大族魏氏把女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: Zhao Pu was a loyal person with few words. The Wei clan, a powerful family in Zhenyang, married his daughter to him.

古文：周显德初，永兴军节度刘词辟为从事，词卒，遗表荐普于朝。
现代文：周显德初年，永兴军节度刘词征召他为从事，刘词死后，上遗表向朝廷推荐赵普。
English: In the first year of Zhou Xiande, Liu Zi, commander of the Yongxing Army, conscripted him to serve. After Liu Zi's death, Zhao Pu was recommended to the imperial court.

古文：世宗用兵淮上，太祖拨滁州，宰相范质奏普为军事判官。
现代文：周世宗用兵淮上，太祖攻下滁州，宰相范质奏请任命赵普为军事判官。
English: Zhou Shizong used soldiers to rise, Taizu conquered Zhangzhou, and Prime Minister Fan Qiao requested the appointment of Zhao Pu as a military judge.

古文：宣祖卧疾滁州，普朝夕奉药饵，宣祖由是待以宗分。
现代文：宣祖在滁州养病，赵普朝夕侍奉药饵，宣祖于是以宗族的情份来对待他。
English: Xuanzu recuperated in Bozhou, Zhao Pu served as a medicine man in the morning and evening, so Xuanzu treated him according to the circumstances of the clan.

古文：太祖尝与语，奇之。
现代文：太祖曾经与他交谈，觉得他很不寻常。
English: My great-grandfather used to talk to him and thought he was unusual.

古文：时获盗百馀，当弃市，普疑有无辜者，启太祖讯鞫之，获全活者众。
现代文：当时捕获盗贼一百多人，律当被斩，赵普怀疑其中有无辜的人，请太祖讯问他们，后来得以存活的很多。
English: At that time, more than a hundred thieves were captured and brutally beheaded. Zhao Pu suspected that there were innocent people among them and asked his great-grandfather to interrogate them. Later, many survived.

古文：淮南平，调补渭州军事判官。
现代文：淮南平定后，调赵普补任渭州军事判官。
English: After Huainan was pacified, Zhao Puxu was transferred to be the military judge of Zhangzhou.

古文：太祖领同州节度，辟为推官；移镇宋州，表为掌书记。
现代文：太祖领任同州节度时，征召他为推官；太祖移驻宋州后，又上书朝廷任他掌书记。
English: When the great-grandfather took over the festival of the same state, he was conscripted as a pusher; after the great-grandfather moved to Songzhou, he also sent a letter to the court to be the secretary.

古文：太祖北征至陈桥，被酒卧帐中，众军推戴，普与太宗排闼入告。
现代文：太祖北征到陈桥，酒后醉卧帐中，众军推戴他做皇帝，赵普与太宗开门进去告诉他。
English: The great-grandfather of the Northern Expedition arrived at Chenqiao, drunk and lying in bed. The troops made him emperor. Zhao Pu and Taizong opened the door and told him.

古文：太祖欠伸徐起，而众军擐甲露刃，喧拥麾下。
现代文：太祖呵欠着伸展四肢慢慢起床，而众军披甲带刃，喧哗着拥挤在旗帜下。
English: The great-grandfather yawns and slowly gets up, stretching his limbs, while the troops, clad in armor and swords, crowd noisily under the flag.

古文：及受禅，以佐命功，授右谏议大夫，充枢密直学士。
现代文：太祖受禅即位后，因为辅佐有功，赵普被封为右谏议大夫，充任枢密直学士。
English: After Emperor Taizu ascended to the throne, Zhao Pu was appointed as the doctor of the Right Division of the Council of Elders because of his meritorious service as an assistant. He was also appointed as the leading scholar of the Privy Council.

古文：车驾征李筠，命普与吕馀庆留京师，普愿扈从，太祖笑曰： 若胜胃介乎？ 从平上党，迁兵部侍郎、枢密副使，赐第一区。
现代文：太祖亲自征伐李筠，命令赵普与吕馀庆留守京师，赵普愿跟从太祖出征，太祖笑着说 ：你能够胜任战事吗？ 赵普随从太祖平定上党，迁升为兵部侍郎、枢密副使，朝廷赐给他住宅一栋。
English: The great-grandfather personally conquered Lihong, and ordered Zhao Pu and Lü Yuqing to stay in Beijing. Zhao Pu was willing to go to war with the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather smiled and said, "Are you capable of fighting?" Zhao Pu followed the great-grandfather and joined the party. He was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department and the vice-minister of the privy council. The imperial court gave him a house.

古文：建隆三年，拜枢密使、检校太保。
现代文：建隆三年，任命赵普为枢密使、检校太保。
English: In the third year of Jianlong, Zhao Pu was appointed as a privy councillor and school inspector.

古文：乾德二年，范质等三相同日罢，以普为门下侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：乾德二年，范质等三位宰相同日被罢，任命赵普为门下侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: In the second year of Qiande, the three vice-governors, including Ganji, were dismissed on the same day, and Zhao Pu was appointed as a subordinate attendant, a subordinate official, and a scholar of Jixian Palace.

古文：中书无宰相署敕，普以为言，上曰： 卿但进敕，朕为卿署之可乎？ 普曰： 此有司职尔，非帝王事也。 令翰林学士讲求故实，窦仪曰： 今皇弟尹开封，同平章事，即宰相任也。 令署以赐普。
现代文：中书省没有宰相签署敕令，赵普以此为由上奏太祖，太祖说 ：卿只管呈进敕令，朕为卿签署可以吗？ 
English: The Chinese Ministry of Literature did not have a prime minister to sign the imperial decree, so Zhao Pu used this as a reason to appeal to the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather said: Sir, just submit the imperial decree, can I sign it for you?

古文：既拜相，上视如左右手，事无大小，悉咨决焉。
现代文：赵普任宰相后，皇上把他看作左右手，事情无论大小，都向他咨询以后决断。
English: After Zhao Pu was appointed prime minister, the emperor regarded him as his right and left hand, and all matters, no matter how big or small, were decided after consulting him.

古文：是日，普兼监修国史。
现代文：当时，赵普兼任监修国史。
English: At that time, Zhao Pu also served as the supervisor of national history.

古文：命薛居正、吕馀庆参知政事以副之，不宣制，班在宰相后，不知印，不预奏事，水押班，但奉行制书而已。
现代文：太祖命令薛居正、吕余庆为参知政事以辅助赵普，不能宣布皇帝的诏谕，位次列在宰相之后，不掌印，不参预上奏议事，朝会时不领班，只是奉令制作敕令而已。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Xue Juzheng and Lyu Yuqing to be co-chairs of government affairs to assist Zhao Pu, unable to announce the emperor's edict, ranked after the prime minister, not to hold the seal, not to participate in the pre-reporting of the proceedings, and not to lead the shift at the imperial meeting, but to be ordered to produce the imperial decree.

古文：先是，宰相兼敕，皆用内制，普相止用敕，非旧典也。
现代文：原先，宰相副署敕令，都用内制，赵普任宰相后只有敕，不是原来的典章制度。
English: Originally, the orders issued by the Vice-Minister of the Prime Minister's Office all used the internal system. After Zhao Pu was appointed as the Prime Minister, only the orders were issued, which was not the original award system.

古文：太祖数微行过功臣家，普每退朝，不敢便衣冠。
现代文：太祖常常便装出行经过功臣之家，赵普每次退朝，不敢随便穿戴。
English: The great-grandfather often traveled in casual clothes through the hero's home. Zhao Pu did not dare to wear casual clothes every time he returned to China.

古文：一日，大雪向夜，普意帝不出。
现代文：一天，深夜下着大雪，赵普以为皇帝不会出来。
English: One day, when it was snowing heavily late at night, Zhao Pu thought that the emperor would not come out.

古文：久之，闻叩门声，普亟出，帝立风雪中，普惶惧迎拜。
现代文：过了一段时间，听见叩门声，赵普急忙出门，皇帝站在风雪中，赵普惶恐迎拜。
English: After a period of time, hearing the knocking on the door, Zhao Pu hurried out of the door. The emperor stood in the wind and snow, and Zhao Pu panicked and bowed.

古文：帝曰： 已约晋王矣。 已而太宗至，设重裀地坐堂中，炽炭烧肉。
现代文：皇帝说 ：已经约好晋王了。 一会儿后太宗来到，赵普铺设厚垫子在地上请他们坐在堂中，在炽红的炉火上烧肉吃。
English: The emperor said, "We have already made an appointment with the King of Jin." A short while later, Emperor Taizong arrived, and Zhao Pu spread a thick mat on the ground and invited them to sit in the hall and eat roasted meat over a red-hot fire.

古文：普妻行酒，帝以嫂呼之。
现代文：赵普的妻子敬酒，皇帝称她为嫂。
English: Zhao Pu's wife made a toast, and the emperor called her his sister-in-law.

古文：因与普计下太原。
现代文：于是与赵普商议攻伐太原。
English: So he discussed with Zhao Pu about attacking Taiyuan.

古文：普曰 太原当西北二面，太原既下，则我独当之，不如姑俟削平诸国，则弹丸黑子之地，将安逃乎？ 帝笑曰： 吾意正如此，特试卿尔。 
现代文：赵普说： 太原地当西、北二面，太原如果攻下，则我国须单独抵挡这两面，不如等削平诸国以后，则太原这一弹丸黑子之地，能够哪里逃得掉呢？ 皇帝笑着说： 我的意思正是这样，特地来试试你罢了。 
English: Zhao Pu said: Taiyuan has two sides, the west and the north. If Taiyuan is conquered, our country will have to resist these two sides alone. It would be better to wait for the countries to be leveled, then where can Taiyuan, the land of bullet holes, escape? The emperor smiled and said: That's exactly what I mean, I just came to test you.

古文：五年春，加右仆射、昭文馆大学士。
现代文：五年春季，朝廷给赵普加官右仆射、昭文馆大学士。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the imperial court gave Zhao Puja the post of right-hand man, and Zhao Puja became a scholar of the Shouwen Academy.

古文：俄丁内艰，诏起复视事。
现代文：不久，赵普遭母丧，守丧制未毕，太祖诏令起用赵普处理政事。
English: Soon after, Zhao Pu's mother passed away, and the mourning period was not yet over. Emperor Taizu issued an order to use Zhao Pu to handle political affairs.

古文：遂劝帝遣使分诣诸道，征丁壮籍名送京师，以备守卫；诸州置通判，使主钱谷。
现代文：于是他劝皇帝派遣使者分赴诸道，征发丁壮编好名册送到京师，以备守卫之兵；各州设置通判一官，主管钱粮。
English: Therefore, he advised the emperor to send emissaries to all provinces to solicit and send Ding Zhuang to compile a good roster and send it to the Beijing Division to prepare the guards; each province set up a magistrate to be in charge of money and grain.

古文：由是兵甲精锐，府为充实。
现代文：从此军队和武器都很精锐，府库充实。
English: Since then, the army and weapons have been very elite, and the treasury has been enriched.

古文：开宝二年冬，普尝病，车驾幸中书。
现代文：开宝二年冬天，赵普有病，皇帝到中书省来看望。
English: In the winter of the second year of Kaibao, Zhao Pu was ill, and the emperor came to visit Zhongshuo.

古文：三年春，又幸其第抚问之。赐赉加等。
现代文：三年春天，皇帝又到他家里慰问他，赏赐加倍。
English: In the spring of the third year, the emperor went to his home to console him and doubled the reward.

古文：六年，帝又幸其第。
现代文：六年，皇帝又到他家。
English: Six years later, the emperor came to his house again.

古文：时钱王俶遣使致书于普，及海物十瓶，置于庑下。
现代文：当时钱王亻叔派人送书信给赵普，还送来十瓶海物，赵普把瓶子放在廊房下。
English: At that time, Qian Wangyun's uncle sent someone to send a letter to Zhao Pu, and also sent ten bottles of seafood. Zhao Pu put the bottles under the corridor.

古文：会车驾至，仓卒不及屏，帝顾问何物，普以实对。
现代文：适逢皇帝来到，匆忙之间来不及掩藏，皇帝问是什么东西，赵普以实情回答。
English: When the emperor came, there was no time to hide in the rush. The emperor asked what it was, and Zhao Pu answered truthfully.

古文：上曰： 海物必佳。 即命启之。皆瓜子金也。
现代文：皇上说： 海物一定很好。 就命令开启瓶子，一看，都是瓜子金。
English: The emperor said, "The seafood must be very good," and ordered the bottle to be opened.

古文：普惶恐顿首谢曰： 臣未发书，实不知。 帝叹曰： 受之无妨，彼谓国家事皆由汝书生尔！ 
现代文：赵普惶恐叩头谢罪说 ：臣没有开启书信，实在不知。 皇帝叹道： 受之无妨，他们认为国家政事都由你一个书生处决罢了！ 
English: Zhao Pucheng, afraid to kowtow to Xie Sin, said, "I really don't know why the minister didn't open the letter." The emperor sighed, "It doesn't matter, they think that the affairs of state are all executed by you, a scholar!"

古文：普为政颇专，廷臣多忌之。
现代文：赵普执政很专断，朝廷大臣多忌恨他。
English: Zhao Pu ruled very arbitrarily, and the ministers of the imperial court hated him.

古文：时官禁私贩秦、陇大木，普尝遣亲吏诣市屋材，联巨筏至京师治第，吏因之窃货大木，早称普市货鬻都下。
现代文：当时官府禁止私人贩卖秦、陇二地的大树木，赵普曾经派亲近的小吏到市场上购买木材，编大筏运至京师造住房，小吏于是偷取大木材，冒称赵普在京师附近鬻卖。
English: At that time, the government banned the private sale of large trees in Qin and Shandong provinces. Zhao Pu had sent a minor official close to him to the market to buy wood and arrange for large logs to be transported to Beijing to build houses. The minor official then stole the large logs and pretended to be Zhao Pu selling them near Beijing.

古文：权三司使赵玭廉得之以闻。
现代文：权三司使赵王比查访知道告诉皇上。
English: The three departments of power let Zhao Wangbi know about the visit and told the emperor.

古文：太祖大怒，促令追班，将下制逐普，赖王溥奏解之。
现代文：太祖大怒，下令追夺班位，准备下诏驱逐赵普，幸得王溥上奏解救。
English: The great-grandfather was furious, ordered to seize the shift, and prepared to issue an edict to expel Zhao Pu. Fortunately, Wang Xuan was able to rescue him.

古文：故事，宰相、枢密使每候对长春殿，同止卢中；上闻普子承宗娶枢密使李崇矩女，即令分异之。
现代文：旧制，宰相、枢密使每次在长春殿等候召问，一起在庐中等候；皇上听说赵普的儿子赵承宗娶枢密使李崇矩的女儿为妻，于是命令他们分开等候。
English: Under the old system, the prime minister and the privy council waited for summons in the Changchun Palace, and waited together in the Great Hall. When the emperor heard that Zhao Pu's son, Zhao Chengzong, had married the daughter of the privy councilor, Li Chongkang, he ordered them to wait separately.

古文：普又以隙地私易尚食蔬圃以广其居，又营邸店规利。
现代文：赵普又用空闲地私自换取皇家菜地来扩建自己的住宅，又经营客店谋利。
English: Zhao Pu also used idle private land in exchange for royal vegetable land to expand his residence, and ran an inn for profit.

古文：卢多逊为翰林学士，因召对屡攻其短。
现代文：卢多逊任翰林学士，趁着皇上召见时多次攻击赵普的短处。
English: Ludoson, a scholar of Hanlin, took advantage of the emperor's summons to repeatedly attack Zhao Pu's shortcomings.

古文：会雷有粼击登闻鼓，讼堂后官胡赞、李可度受赇骫法及刘伟伪作摄牒得官，王洞尝纳赂可度，赵孚授西川官称疾不上，皆普庇之。
现代文：正好雷有邻敲响登闻鼓，告发堂后官胡赞、李可度受贿枉法以及刘伟伪造代理官职文书而得官，王洞曾经收受李可度的贿赂，赵孚除授西川官却称病不到任，都受到赵普的庇护。
English: At the same time, Lei's neighbors were beating the news drum, denouncing the court officials Hu Zan and Li Kedu for accepting bribes and Liu Wei for forging official documents to gain office. Wang Dong had received bribes from Li Kedu, and Zhao Fu, in addition to conferring the West River official, said that he was ill and could not take office. They were all protected by Zhao Pu.

古文：太祖怒，下御史府按问，悉抵罪，以有粼为秘书省正字。
现代文：太祖大怒，下令御史府审查讯问，他们都受到处罚。任命雷有邻为秘书省正字。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and ordered the Imperial Historian's Office to review the interrogation, and they were all punished.

古文：普恩益替，始诏参知政事与普更知印、押班、奏事，以分其权。
现代文：太祖对赵普的恩宠渐渐疏淡了，开始下诏参知政事与赵普交替掌印、领班、奏事，来分夺赵普的权力。
English: The great-grandfather's favor for Zhao Pu gradually dwindled, and he began to issue an edict to the sanshi of government affairs and Zhao Pu, alternating the sign of the palm, the foreman, and the report, to divide and conquer Zhao Pu's power.

古文：未几，出为河阳三城节度、检校太傅、同平章事。
现代文：不久，把赵普调出京师任河阳三城节度、检校太傅、同平章事。
English: Soon, Zhao Pu was transferred out of Beijing to serve as the festival master of the three cities in Heyang, the inspector of schools, and the secretary of Tongping.

古文：太平兴国初入朝，改太子少保，迁太子太保。
现代文：太平兴国初期进入朝廷，改任太子少保，迁升为太子太保。
English: Taiping entered the imperial court in the early days of the rejuvenation of the country, and was reassigned to the position of Prince Junior Protector and promoted to Prince Senior Protector.

古文：颇为卢多逊所毁，奉朝请数年，郁郁不得志。
现代文：常被卢多逊诋毁，在朝廷任官几年，郁郁不得志。
English: Often denigrated by Ludoson, he served as an official in the imperial court for several years.

古文：会柴禹锡、赵镕等告秦王廷美骄恣，将有阴谋窃发。
现代文：遇到柴禹锡、赵等人告发秦王廷美骄奢恣肆，将会发生阴谋。
English: If Chai Yuxi, Zhao and others were to accuse Qin Wangting of arrogance and extravagance, there would be a conspiracy.

古文：帝召问，普言愿备枢轴以察奸变，退又上书，自陈预闻太祖、昭宪皇太后顾托之事，辞甚切至。
现代文：太祖召问，赵普表示希望在机要部门来观察事变，退朝后又上书太宗，自陈参预知道太祖、昭宪皇太后临终顾托之事，言辞非常恳切。
English: The great-grandfather called for questions, Zhao Pu said that he hoped to observe the events in the important departments. After retiring, he wrote a letter to Emperor Taizong. Since Chen San foresaw that the great-grandfather and Empress Dowager Zhaoxian would be cared for on their deathbeds, his words were very earnest.

古文：太宗感悟，召见慰谕。
现代文：太宗感动醒悟，召赵普加以慰谕。
English: Taizong was moved to wake up and called Zhao Pu to comfort him.

古文：俄拜司徒兼侍中，封梁国公。
现代文：不久任赵普为司徒兼侍中，封为梁国公。
English: Zhao Pu was soon appointed as an attendant and chamberlain, and was given the title of Prince of Liang.

古文：先是，秦王廷美班在宰相上，至是，以普勋旧，再登元辅，表乞居其下，从之。
现代文：原先，秦王赵廷美位次在宰相之上，到这时，因为赵普是勋旧大臣，又任宰相，秦王上表请求位次在赵普之下，太宗听从了。
English: Originally, the Qin King Zhao Tingmei was ranked higher than the prime minister. At this time, because Zhao Pu was a former minister and also served as prime minister, the Qin King requested the table to be ranked lower than Zhao Pu, and the Taizong obeyed.

古文：及涪陵事败，多逊南迁，皆普之力也。
现代文：到涪陵事败，卢多逊迁往南方，都是赵普的功劳。
English: The defeat at Fuling and Ludosun's move to the south were all the work of Zhao Pu.

古文：八年，出为武胜军节度、检校太尉兼侍中。
现代文：八年，外调任武胜军节度、检校太尉兼侍中。
English: Eight years later, he was transferred to serve as the military governor of the Busho army, and was also a lieutenant inspector and a chamberlain.

古文：帝作诗以饯之，普奉而泣曰： 陛下赐臣诗，当刻石，与臣朽骨同葬泉下。 帝为之动容。
现代文：皇帝作诗给他饯别，赵普捧诗而哭说 ：陛下赐臣诗，应当刻石，与臣朽骨一并葬在地下。 皇帝被他感动了。
English: When the emperor wrote a poem to bid him farewell, Zhao Pu held the poem aloft and wept, saying, "Your Majesty, who gave poetry to your vassals, should be carved in stone and buried in the ground together with the bones of your vassals." The emperor was moved by him.

古文：翌日，谓宰相曰： 普有功国家，朕昔与游，今齿发衰矣，不容烦以枢务，择善地处之，因诗什以导意。
现代文：第二天，皇帝对宰相说： 赵普对国家有功，朕先前与他同游，现在牙齿头发都衰落了，不能用枢务政事烦扰他，选择善地来安置他，因此作诗篇来表达我的本意。
English: The next day, the emperor said to the prime minister: Zhao Pu is of great service to the country. I used to travel with him, but now my teeth and hair are fading. I can't bother him with central government affairs and choose a good place to settle him. Therefore, I wrote a poem to express my intention.

古文：普感激泣下，朕亦为之堕泪。 宋琪对曰： 昨日普至中书，执御诗涕泣，谓臣曰： 此生馀年，无阶上答，庶希来世得效太马力。
现代文：赵普感激得哭泣流涕，朕也为之泪下。 宋琪回答说： 昨天赵普到中书省，手拿御诗哭泣，对我说： 此生余年，无法报答皇上，希望来世能为皇上效犬马之力。 
English: Zhao Pu wept with gratitude, and I also shed tears for him. Song Qi replied, "Yesterday, Zhao Pu went to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, wept with a poem in his hand, and said to me, 'I can't repay the emperor for the rest of my life, but I hope that in the next life I can be of help to the emperor.

古文：臣昨闻普言，今复闻宣谕，君臣始终之分，可谓两全。 
现代文：臣昨天听到赵普的话，今天又听到皇上的宣谕，君臣之间善始善终的情份，可以说是两全啊！ 
English: Yesterday, the minister heard Zhao Pu's words, and today he heard the emperor's proclamation. The good beginning and good ending between the monarch and the minister can be said to be a perfect match!

古文：雍熙三年春，大军出讨幽蓟，久未班师，普手疏谏曰：
现代文：雍熙三年春天，大军征讨幽蓟，很长时间没有获胜回师，赵普上手疏谏阻皇上说：
English: In the spring of the third year of the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, when a large army was sent to subjugate Yuxuan and did not win back the division for a long time, Zhao Pu said:

古文：伏睹今春出师，将以收复关外，屡闻克捷，深快舆情。
现代文： 我看今年春天出师征讨，将要收复关外，多次听见克敌的捷报，深感痛快。
English: I think that this spring, I will go out to recruit, and I will recover outside the pass. I have heard the good news of defeating the enemy many times, and I am deeply pleased.

古文：然晦朔屡更，荐臻炎夏，飞挽日繁，战斗未息，老师费财，诚无益也。
现代文：但是时间消逝，转眼又到炎夏季节，军事一天天繁忙，战争没有停息，军队疲劳而耗费钱财，实在无益。
English: But time passes, and suddenly we are in the hot summer season, the military is busy every day, the war has not stopped, and the army is tired and spends money, which is really useless.

古文：伏念陛下自翦平太原，怀徕闽、浙，混一诸夏，大振英声，十年之间，遂臻广济。远人不服，自古圣王置之度外，何足介意。
现代文： 我认为陛下自从平定太原以来，闽、浙归顺，统一中国，大振英名，十年之间，就传遍天下，远方的人不归服，自古圣王置之度外，不足介意。
English: I think that since His Majesty has pacified Taiyuan, Shandong and Zhejiang have surrendered, China has been unified, and His Majesty's fame has spread all over the world in the past ten years. People from far away do not surrender, and they do not mind the lack of attention since the time of ancient holy kings.

古文：窃虑邪谄之辈，蒙蔽睿聪，致兴无名之师，深蹈不测之地。
现代文：我个人考虑奸邪谄媚的人，蒙蔽皇上的聪明睿智，以致发动师出无名的战争，陷入深不可测的境地。
English: Personally, I am thinking of betraying the wicked and flattering people, blinding the emperor's wisdom and wisdom, so as to launch a nameless war and fall into an unfathomable situation.

古文：臣载披典籍，颇识前言，窃见汉武时主父偃、徐乐、严安所上书及唐相姚无崇献明皇十事，忠言至论，可举而行。
现代文：臣遍读典籍，很知道些以往的事，我认为汉武帝时主父偃、徐乐、严安的上书及唐朝宰相姚崇上书唐明皇十件事，都是忠言至论，可以实行。
English: The minister has read all the classic books and knows a lot about the past. I think that the letter written by Emperor Hanwu's father Zhai, Xu Le and Yan An, as well as the letter written by the Tang Dynasty's Prime Minister Yao Chong on the ten matters of Emperor Ming, are all true and can be implemented.

古文：伏望万机之暇，一赐观览，其失未远，虽悔可追。
现代文：希望陛下万忙之中，有幸读一读，过失并不深远，即使后悔也来得及追回。
English: I hope that in the midst of His Majesty's busy schedule, you have the privilege of reading it. The fault is not far-reaching, and even if you regret it, you can recover it in time.

古文：臣窃念大发骁雄，动摇百万之众，所得者少，所丧者多。
现代文： 臣以为大发骁勇善战的雄兵，动辄使用百万军队，得到的少，而失去的多。
English: The vassals thought they were dealing with brave and skillful soldiers, so they used millions of troops. They gained little, but lost a lot.

古文：又闻战者危事，难保其必胜；兵者凶器，深戒于不虞。
现代文：又听说战争是件危险的事，难以保证一定获胜；战争是凶器，最戒忌的是不测。
English: I also heard that war is a dangerous thing, and it is difficult to guarantee a certain victory; war is a deadly weapon, and the most important precaution is to be prepared for the unexpected.

古文：所系甚大，不可不思。
现代文：关系很大，不能不三思。
English: It's a big deal, and you have to think about it.

古文：臣又闻上古圣人，心无固必，事不凝滞，理贵变通。
现代文：我又听说上古圣人，心不固执，理贵变通。
English: I also heard that the ancient sages were not obstinate, but flexible.

古文：前书有 兵久生变 之言，深为杰可虑，苟或更图稽缓，转失机宜。
现代文：前人的书上有 兵久生变 的话，实在值得考虑，如果改变迟缓计划，会失去机遇。
English: In the book of the predecessors, there is a saying, "Changing soldiers for a long time," which is really worth considering. If you change a slow-moving plan, you will lose opportunities.

古文：旬朔之间，时涉秋序，边庭早凉，弓劲马肥，我军久困，切虑此际，或误指踪。
现代文：十天半月过去，时间就到了秋季，北边转入秋凉，弓弩强劲，战马肥壮，我军久困，考虑到这个时候，可能会导致错误的指挥谋划。
English: Ten days and a half months have passed, the time has come to autumn, the north side has turned into autumn cool, the bow and arrow are strong, the war horse is fat, and our army has been sleepy for a long time. Considering this time, it may lead to wrong command planning.

古文：臣方冒宠以守藩，曷敢兴言而沮众。
现代文：臣刚刚蒙皇上宠爱驻守地方，哪里敢妄言阻止军队。
English: If a vassal has just been favored by the emperor to garrison a place, how dare he say anything to stop the army.

古文：盖臣已日薄西山，馀沅无几，酬恩报国，正在斯时。
现代文：因为臣年岁已老，剩余的时间不多，报答国家和皇帝的恩情，正是这个时候。
English: Because the vassal is old and has little time left, it is time to repay the kindness of the country and the emperor.

古文：伏望速诏班师，无容玩敌。
现代文：希望迅速颁发诏令回师，不能轻视敌人。
English: He hoped that the imperial rescript would be issued quickly, and the enemy should not be taken lightly.

古文：臣复有全策，愿达圣聪。
现代文： 臣还有万全之策，愿献给皇上。
English: I also have a perfect plan, which I would like to present to the Emperor.

古文：望陛下精调御膳，保养圣躬，挈彼疲氓，转之富庶。
现代文：希望陛下精心调制膳食，保养身体，提携那些贫民，使他们转为富庶。
English: I hope that His Majesty will carefully prepare meals, take care of his body, and help those poor people to become rich.

古文：将见边烽不警，外户不扃，率土归仁，殊方异俗，相率响化，契丹独将焉往？
现代文：将来会看到边烽无事，大门不关，天下都归于仁德，不同风俗的地区，相继向慕归化，归顺朝廷，契丹又能单独怎么样呢？
English: In the future, we will see that there is nothing wrong with the border, the door is not closed, the whole world belongs to benevolence, and regions with different customs will successively naturalize to Mu and submit to the imperial court. How can the Khitan be alone?

古文：陛下计不出此，乃信邪诌之徒，谓契丹主少事多，所以用武，以中陛下之意。
现代文：陛下不为这样考虑，而相信奸邪谄媚之徒，以为契丹皇帝年少而国事繁多，所以诉诸武力，恰好迎合陛下的意思。
English: His Majesty did not consider this, but believed that the Qidan Emperor was young and had many affairs of state, so he resorted to force, just to cater to His Majesty's will.

古文：陛下乐祸求功，以为万全，臣窃以为不可。
现代文：陛下以祸为乐，求功心切，以为万全之策，臣认为万万不可。
English: His Majesty takes pleasure in calamity, earnestly seeks merit, and believes that everything is possible, while his vassal believes that nothing is possible.

古文：伏愿陛下审其虚实，究其妄谬，正奸臣误国之罪，罢将士伐燕之师。
现代文：希望陛下审察虚实，追究妄谬，惩治奸臣误国之罪，停止伐燕军队的行动。
English: I hope that His Majesty will examine the truth and falsehood, investigate the absurdity, punish the treacherous crime of misleading the country, and stop the actions of the felling army.

古文：非特多难兴王，抑亦从谏则圣也。
现代文：不仅可以从困难中振兴国家，而且可因纳谏而成为圣人。
English: He can not only revitalize the country from the difficulties, but also become a saint by reading the Bible.

古文：古之人尚闻尸谏，老臣未死，岂敢百谀为安身之计而不言哉？
现代文：古人曾经说过尸谏的事，老臣没有死掉，哪能为了安身保位而当面阿谀不进谏呢？ 
English: The ancients once said about the corpse, the old minister did not die, how can the old minister not enter the coffin in order to secure his position?

古文：帝赐手诏曰：
现代文：皇帝赐给他手书的诏令说：
English: The Emperor gave him a handwritten edict, which said:

古文：朕昨者兴师选将，止令曹彬、米信等顿于雄、霸，裹粮坐甲以张军声。
现代文： 朕原来部署军队选择将领，只令曹彬、米信等人驻守雄、霸二地，贮积粮食带着兵器来声张军威。
English: Originally, the army was deployed to select generals, but Cao Bin, Yixin and others were ordered to garrison Xiong, occupy two places, store grain and bring weapons to assert military power.

古文：俟一两月间山后平定，潘美、田重进等会兵以进，直抵幽州，然后控扼险固，恢复旧疆，此朕之志也。
现代文：等一两个月山后平定后，潘美、田重进等人合兵进讨，直到幽州，然后控制险要之地，恢复原来的疆土，这是朕的志向。
English: After waiting for a month or two after the mountain is pacified, Pan Mei, Tian Chongjin and others will advance together until Yuzhou, and then control the dangerous place and restore the original territory. This is my ambition.

古文：奈何将帅等不遵成算，各骋所见，领十万甲士出塞远门斗，速取其郡县，更还师以援辎重，往复劳弊，为辽人所袭，此责在主将也。
现代文：无奈将领们不遵照原来的谋划算计，各持己见，率领十万军队出塞远征，迅速攻取契丹的郡县，又返师来领辎重，往复弊劳，被辽人袭击，这个责任在于主将。
English: However, the generals did not follow the original plan and calculation, each with their own opinions. They led 100,000 troops on an expedition out of Tibet, quickly captured the counties of Qidan, returned to the division to receive the heavy loads, and were attacked by the Liao people. This responsibility lies with the captain.

古文：况朕踵百王之末，粗到承平，盖念彼民陷于边患，将救焚而拯溺，匪黩武以佳兵，卿当悉之也。
现代文： 况且朕继承百王的事业，刚刚使天下稍稍太平，考虑人民苦于边患，将以救民于水火，并非想黩武穷兵，卿应当是知道的。
English: Moreover, I have inherited the cause of a hundred kings and have just made the world a little more peaceful. Considering that the people are suffering from border troubles, I will save the people from water and fire. I do not want to be a poor soldier, as you should know.

古文：疆场之事，已为之备，卿勿为忧。
现代文：疆场上的事，已经作好部署，卿不必为此忧虑。
English: As far as matters on the battlefield are concerned, the arrangements have already been made. Sir, there is no need to worry about this.

古文：卿社稷元臣，忠言苦口，三复来奏，嘉愧实深。
现代文：卿是国家的元勋大臣，忠言苦口，三次上奏，忠心实在可嘉。 
English: Sir is the country's Minister of the Order of Merit. His loyalty is commendable.

古文：普表谢曰：
现代文：赵普上表谢说：
English: Expressing his gratitude, Zhao Pujang said:

古文：昨以天兵久驻塞外，未克恢复，渐及炎蒸，事危势迫，辄陈狂狷，甘俟宪章。
现代文： 昨天因为军队久驻塞外，没有能够恢复故土，慢慢又到了炎夏季节，事势危险急迫，就上书陈述妄见，等待皇上宣谕。
English: Yesterday, because the army had been stationed outside the country for a long time, it was not able to restore the homeland, and slowly it came to the hot summer season, the situation was dangerous and urgent, so he submitted a letter stating his delusion and waiting for the emperor's proclamation.

古文：陛下特鉴衷诚，亲纡宸翰，密谕圣谋。
现代文：陛下特别体察忠诚，亲笔书写翰章，秘密宣谕皇帝圣谋。
English: His majesty was particularly conscious of loyalty, and wrote the edict in his own handwriting, secretly proclaiming the emperor's secret plan.

古文：臣窃审命师讨罪，信为上策，将帅能遵成算，必可平定。
现代文：我个人认为兴师伐罪，诚信为上策，将帅如果能遵守已有的谋算，一定可以平定。
English: I personally believe that the best policy is to encourage the discipline and honesty, and if the generals can abide by the existing plans, they can certainly be pacified.

古文：惟其不副天心，由兹败事。
现代文：正因为将帅们没有按照皇上的意志行事，导致事败。
English: It was precisely because the generals did not act in accordance with the emperor's will that led to the defeat.

古文：今既边鄙有备，更复何虞。
现代文：现在既然边疆已有防备，哪里还需要忧虑？
English: Now that the frontiers have been fortified, what need is there to worry?

古文：况陛下登极十年，坐隆大业，无一物之失所，见万国之咸宁。
现代文：况且陛下登极十年，使基业兴隆，没有一件事失当，只见国家安宁。
English: Moreover, in the ten years since His Majesty ascended to the throne, the foundation has flourished, nothing has gone wrong, and the country is at peace.

古文：所宜端拱穆清，啬神和志，自可远继九皇，俯观五帝。
现代文：陛下应当端身拱手，保养精神，清静心志，自然可以上继九皇，下观五帝。
English: His majesty should take care of himself, maintain his spirit, and keep his mind calm. Naturally, he can succeed the Nine Emperors and look down on the Five Emperors.

古文：岂必穷边极武，与契丹较胜负哉？
现代文：哪里需要穷兵黩武，与契丹一较胜负呢？ 
English: Where is there a need for overwhelming military force to win or lose a battle with the Khitan?

古文：臣素亏壮志，矧在衰龄，虽无功伐，愿竭忠纯。
现代文：臣历来缺乏壮志，况且人已衰老，虽然没有功劳可以夸耀，但愿意竭尽忠纯之心。 
English: The vassal has always lacked ambition, moreover, the person has aged, although there is no merit to boast of, but is willing to do his best to be loyal.

古文：观者咸嘉其忠。
现代文：观者都赞许他的忠诚。
English: Viewers have praised his loyalty.

古文：四年，移山南东道节度，自梁国公改封许国公。
现代文：四年，改任山南东道节度，从梁国公改封为许国公。
English: Four years later, he was appointed as the host of the Shannan Festival, and his title was changed from Liang Guogong to Xu Guogong.

古文：会诏下亲耕籍田，普表求入觐，辞甚恳切。
现代文：遇到皇上下诏亲自耕种籍田，赵普上表请求入见，言辞非常恳切。
English: Encountering the emperor personally cultivating his ancestral land, Zhao Pu made a request to the emperor, and his words were very earnest.

古文：上恻然谓宰相曰： 普开国元臣，朕所尊礼，宜从其请。 既至，慰抚数四，普呜咽流涕。
现代文：皇上诚恳地对宰相说： 赵普是开国元勋，朕所尊重礼敬的人，应当听从他的请求。 赵普来到后，皇上对他再三慰抚，赵普感激得呜咽泪下。
English: The emperor sincerely said to the prime minister: Zhao Pu is the founding father of the country, and those whom I respect and revere should listen to his request. After Zhao Pu arrived, the emperor repeatedly comforted him, and Zhao Pu was so grateful that he sobbed and shed tears.

古文：陈王元僖上言曰：
现代文：陈王元僖上书皇帝说：
English: Chen Wangyuan wrote a letter to the emperor saying:

古文：臣伏见唐太宗有魏玄成、房玄龄、杜如晦，明皇有姚崇、宗魏知古，皆任以辅弼，委之心膂，财成帝道，康济九区，宗祀延洪，史策昭焕，良由登用得其人也。
现代文： 臣见唐太宗有魏玄成、房玄龄、杜如晦，唐明皇有姚崇、宋王景、魏知古，都被任为宰相，把他们当作心腹，才成就帝王之道，普济天下，宗祀延续，史书记载彰明，确实由于用人得当所至啊！
English: Tang Taizong had Wei Xuancheng, Fang Xuanling, Du Ruwang, Tang Ming Emperor had Yao Chong, Song Wangjing, Wei Zhigu, all of whom were appointed as prime ministers, and they were regarded as confidants, only to achieve the emperor's way.

古文：今陛下君临万方，焦劳庶政，宵衣旰食，以民为心。
现代文：现在陛下统治天下，操劳政事，勤于政务，心里想着百姓。
English: Now that His Majesty rules the world, he is busy with work and government affairs, diligent in government affairs, and thinks about the people.

古文：历考前王，诚无所让，而辅相之重，未偕曩贤。
现代文：遍考先前帝王，确实没有可以谦让的，但宰相的任用，比不上以往的贤臣。
English: It is true that there is nothing to be modest about, but the appointment of the prime minister is not comparable to the wise men of the past.

古文：况为邦在于任人，任人在乎公正，公正之道莫先于赏罚，斯为政之大柄也。
现代文：况且治理国家在于任用人才，任用人才在于公正，公正之道首先在于赏罚，这是执政的大事。
English: Moreover, the governance of the country lies in the appointment of talent, the appointment of talent lies in justice, and the way of justice lies first and foremost in reward and punishment, which is the most important thing in governing.

古文：敬赏罚匪当，淑慝莫分，朝廷纪纲，渐致隳紊。
现代文：如果赏罚不当，忠奸不分，朝廷的纲纪，就会渐渐导致紊乱。
English: If rewards and punishments are improper, and there is no distinction between loyalists and traitors, the discipline of the imperial court will gradually lead to disorder.

古文：必须公正之人典衡轴，直躬敢言，以辨得失，然后彝伦式序，庶务用康。
现代文：必须由公正之人出任宰相，正直敢言，以分辨得失，然后常伦有道，按次第叙录功劳，处理政事自然得宜。
English: An impartial person must be appointed as prime minister. He must be honest and dare to distinguish between gains and losses. Then he must be consistent, list his merits in order, and handle political affairs appropriately.

古文：伏见山南东道节度使赵普，开国元老，参谋缔构，厚重有识，不妄希求恩顾以全禄位，不私徇人情以邀名望，此真圣朝之良臣也。
现代文： 我认为山南东道节度使赵普，身为开国元老，参谋政事，深沉有见识，不妄希求恩宠来保全禄位，不循私人之情来邀取名望，这真是圣明的良臣啊！
English: I think that Shannan's hosting of the festival has made Zhao Pu, as a founding elder and political adviser, profound and insightful, not desiring to seek grace to preserve the position, not following personal feelings to invite fame, this is really a saintly minister!

古文：窃闻之辈，朋党比周，众口嗷嗷，恶直丑正，恨不斥逐遐徼，以快其心。
现代文：我听说逢迎弄巧的人，结党营私，大造舆论，厌恶攻击正直之人，恨不得将正直大臣斥逐远方，以快其心，为什么呢？
English: I have heard that he is fond of courting opportunists, forming parties, and creating public opinion, that he abhors attacks on honest people, and would like nothing more than to banish the Minister of Honesty to a faraway place, just to cheer himself up. Why?

古文：何者？盖虑陛下之再用普也。
现代文：因为恐怕陛下再次启用赵普啊。
English: Because, I'm afraid, His Majesty is going to use Zhao Pu again.

古文：然公谠之人，咸愿陛下复委以政，启沃君心，羽翼圣化。
现代文：但是公正之人，都希望陛下再次以政事重用赵普，让他以治国的道理开导皇上，帮助皇上教化百姓。
English: However, fair-minded people all hope that His Majesty will once again make use of Zhao Pu in political affairs, let him enlighten the Emperor with the principles of governing the country, and help the Emperor to enlighten the people.

古文：国有大事，使之谋之；朝有宏纲，使之举之；四目未察，使之明之；四聪未至，使之达之 官人以材，则无窃禄，致君以道，则无苟容。
现代文：国家有重大政事，让他谋划；朝廷有重大措施，让他实施；各地事情没有察明的，让他查明；各方计策没有献上的，让他代为传达。任官以才，就没有窃取禄位的，统治有道就没有苟且容让的。
English: If the country has major political affairs, let him plan them; if the imperial court has major measures, let him implement them; if things in various regions are not clear, let him find out; if the parties have not presented their strategies, let him convey them on their behalf.

古文：贤愚洞分，玉石殊致，当使结朋党以驰骜声势者气索，纵巧佞以援引侪类者道消。
现代文：贤明和愚钝加以分辨，宝玉和石头不同对待，应当使那些勾结成朋党而扩张声名权势的人气焰完结，玩弄巧佞而拉帮结派的人道路堵塞。
English: To distinguish between the wise and the dull, and to treat jewels and stones differently, is to put an end to those who conspire to become friends and expand their fame and power, and to block the roads of those who play tricks and pull gangs.

古文：沈冥废滞得以进，名儒懿行得以显，大政何患乎不举，生民何患乎不康，匪窬期月之间，可臻清静之治。
现代文：隐退废罢的贤人得到进用，名儒善行的人才得以彰显，大政哪里还怕不能兴举，百姓哪里能不富裕，不超过一个月的时间，可以达到清静之治。
English: The sages who have retired to seclusion have been put to good use, and the talents of famous Confucians and good deeds have been highlighted. Where there is still fear that grand politics cannot be carried out, and where there are people who are not rich, it will take no more than one month to achieve the rule of tranquility.

古文：臣知虑庸浅，发言鲁直。
现代文：臣知识考虑浅薄，出言鲁莽直率。
English: The minister's knowledge is considered shallow, and his speech is reckless and forthright.

古文：伏望陛下旁采群议，俯察物情，苟用不失人，实邦国大幸。
现代文：希望陛下采纳众议，审察事势，如果用人得当，实在是国家的幸福。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will accept the opinions of the public and review the situation. If the appointment is made properly, it will truly be a blessing for the country.

古文：籍田礼毕，太宗欲相吕蒙正，以其新进，藉普旧德为之表率，册拜太保兼侍中。
现代文：皇帝亲耕农田礼仪完毕后，太宗想任用吕蒙正为宰相，因为他是新提升的人，借赵普原来的品行作为他的表率，颁册任命赵普为太保兼侍中。
English: After the completion of the emperor's pro-farming farmland etiquette, Emperor Taizong wanted to appoint Lv Mengzheng as the prime minister, because he was a newly promoted person. Taking Zhao Pu's original character as his model, he appointed Zhao Pu as the eunuch and chamberlain.

古文：帝谓之曰： 卿国之勋旧，朕所毗倚，古人耻其君不及尧、舜，卿其念哉。 普顿首谢。
现代文：皇帝对赵普说 ：卿是国家的勋旧大臣，朕所倚靠的人，古人常以其君不如尧、舜为耻，卿应当考虑啊！ 赵普叩头拜谢。
English: The emperor said to Zhao Pu, "Your Excellency is a national honor and a former minister. The people I rely on, the ancients were often ashamed that their princes were not as good as their queens and queens. Your Excellency should consider this! Zhao Pu bowed his head in thanks.

古文：时枢密副使赵昌言与胡旦、陈象舆、董俨、梁颢厚善。
现代文：当时枢密副使赵昌言与胡旦、陈象舆、董俨、梁颢等人非常相好。
English: At that time, Zhao Changyan, the vice-secretary of the Privy Council, was very friendly with Hutan, Chen Xiangwu, Dong Qi, Liang Qi and others.

古文：会旦令翟马周上封事，排毁时政，普深嫉之，奏流马周，黜昌言等。
现代文：正好胡旦命翟马周上书言事，毁谤时政，赵普很嫉恨他们，上奏流放马周，黜除昌言等人。
English: Just as Hudan ordered Ma Zhou to write a speech and slander the current government, Zhao Pu was very jealous of them and sent Ma Zhou into exile and eliminated Changyan and others.

古文：郑州团练使侯莫陈利用骄肆僣侈，大为不法，普廉得之，尽以条奏，利用坐流商州，普固请诛之。
现代文：郑州团练使陈利用骄纵恣肆过度，很不守法，赵普查访得知，把他的事详细写出上奏皇上，利用因罪流放商州，赵普再三请求诛杀他。
English: Zhengzhou regimental drill made Chen take advantage of his arrogance and excesses, and he was very lawless. Zhao Pu's interview learned that Chen had written his case in detail to the emperor, and that Chen had been exiled to Shangzhou for crimes. Zhao Pu repeatedly asked Chen to kill him.

古文：其嫉恶强直皆此类。
现代文：赵普嫉恨坏人，刚强正直达到这样的程度。
English: Zhao Pu envies the bad guys, and is strong and honest to such an extent.

古文：李继迁之扰边，普建议以赵保忠复领夏台故地，因令图之。
现代文：李继迁侵扰边境，赵普建议让赵保忠重新管理夏台故地。
English: Li Jiqian invaded the border, Zhao Pu suggested that Zhao Baozhong be allowed to re-manage the former site of Xatai.

古文：保忠反与继迁同谋为边患，时论归咎于普，颇为同列所窥，不得专决。
现代文：皇上于是命令他趁机图谋李继迁。赵保忠反而与李继迁同谋制造边患，当时舆论归咎于赵普，同僚们很想窥伺间隙图谋赵普，赵普不能一个人决断。
English: The emperor then ordered him to take advantage of the opportunity to plot Li Jiqian. Zhao Baozhong, on the other hand, conspired with Li Jiqian to create a border crisis. At that time, public opinion blamed Zhao Pu. Colleagues were eager to spy on the gap between Zhao Pu's plot and Zhao Pu. Zhao Pu could not decide alone.

古文：旧制，宰相以未时归第，是岁大热，特许普夏中至午时归私第。
现代文：旧制，宰相于未时退朝归家，这一年非常炎热，特地准许赵普夏中至午时归家。
English: Under the old system, the prime minister had to leave the palace before midnight to return home. This year was very hot, so Zhao Puxia was specially allowed to return home between noon and noon.

古文：明年，免朝谒，止日赴中书视事，有大政则召对。
现代文：第二年，免除赵普朝见的礼节，只是每天到中书省办公，遇有重大政事就召见他问对。
English: In the second year, he exempted Zhao Pu from the etiquette of seeing the emperor, but he went to the office of the Ministry of Literature every day, and in the event of major political events, he was summoned to ask the right questions.

古文：冬，被疾请告，车驾屡幸其第省之，赐予加等。
现代文：这年冬天，赵普病倒请求休假，皇帝多次到他家看望他，赏赐加倍。
English: This winter, Zhao Pu fell ill and asked for a leave of absence. The emperor visited him at his home several times and doubled the reward.

古文：普遂称疾笃，三上表求致仕，上勉从之，以普为西京留守、河南尹，依前守太保兼中书令。
现代文：赵普于是声称病重，三次上表请求罢官，皇上勉强依从，任命赵普为西京留守、河南尹，仍旧兼任太保兼中书令。
English: Zhao Pu then claimed to be seriously ill and requested to be removed from office three times. The emperor reluctantly complied, appointing Zhao Pu as the West Beijing Remainder and Henan Yin, still concurrently serving as Taibao and Chushirei.

古文：普三表恳让。赐手诏曰： 开国旧勋，惟卿一人，不同他等，无至固让，俟首涂有日，当就第与卿为别。 普捧诏涕泣，因力疾请对，赐坐移晷，颇言及国家事，上嘉纳之。
现代文：赵普三次上表恳切辞让，皇上赐他手写诏书说 ：开国旧勋，只有你一个人，与他人不能等同，不要再推让，等出发上路那天，我到你家来与你道别。 赵普捧着手诏哭泣，于是请求带病与皇上面谈，皇上赐座与他面谈很久，多谈论国家大事，皇上赞许并采纳他的意见。
English: Three times, Zhao Pu presented his resignation, and the emperor gave him a handwritten edict saying: "Founding father, you are the only one, you cannot be equated with others, do not push for more concessions, so on the day you set out on the road, I will come to your house to say goodbye to you." Zhao Pu held the handwritten edict and cried, so he asked to talk to the emperor while he was ill. The emperor gave him a seat and interviewed him for a long time, talking more about national affairs. The emperor approved and accepted his opinion.

古文：普将发，车驾幸其第。
现代文：赵普即将出发，皇帝来到他家。
English: Zhao Pu was about to leave, and the emperor came to his house.

古文：淳化三年春，以老衰久病，令留守通判刘昌言奉表求致政，中使驰传抚问，凡三上表乞骸骨。
现代文：淳化三年春天，因年老久病，赵普命留守通判刘昌言送呈上表请求罢仕，朝廷使者驾驿站车马来慰问，共三次上表请求罢仕。
English: In the spring of the third year of Chunhua, due to old age and long-term illness, Zhao Pu's life was left behind, and Liu Changyan sent a request to resign, and the imperial envoy drove a horse to the station to offer condolences, a total of three requests to resign.

古文：拜太师，封魏国公，给宰相奉料，令养疾，俟损日赴阙，仍遣其弟宗正少卿安易赍诏书赐之。
现代文：皇上任命他为太师，封为魏国公，赐给宰相俸禄，让他养病，等到有一天能到朝廷，仍派遣赵普的弟弟宗正少卿赵安易持诏书赐给他。
English: The emperor appointed him Grand Master, named him Prince of Wei, gave the prime minister a salary, let him recover from illness, and sent Zhao Pu's brother, Zong Zheng Shaoqing Zhao Anyi, to hold the imperial rescript and give it to him when he could come to the court one day.

古文：又特遣使赐普诏曰： 卿顷属微瑑，恳求致政，朕以居守之重，虑烦耆耋，维师之命，用表尊贤。
现代文：又专门派遣使者赐给赵普诏书说 ：卿前段时间得了小病，恳求致仕，朕委以居守的重任，怕打扰老臣，我把你当老师看待，特下表尊重贤臣。
English: He also specially sent an envoy to give Zhao Pu Zhao a letter saying: Sir, some time ago I got a minor illness, I implored you to serve me, I entrusted you with the important task of staying on duty, afraid to disturb the old minister, I regard you as a teacher, and I especially respect the wise minister.

古文：伫闻有瘳，与朕相见。
现代文：等你病愈，就来与朕相见。
English: When you are better, come and see me.

古文：今赐羊酒如别录，卿宜爱精神，近医药，强饮食，以副朕眷遇之意。 七月卒，年七十一。
现代文：现在赐给你羊酒如别录，卿应当保养精神，注意医药，加强饮食，以不负朕眷念的心意。 七月，去世，终年七十一岁。
English: Now that I have given you sheep's wine as a farewell gift, you should maintain your spirit, pay attention to medicine, strengthen your diet, and live up to my fond memories.July, passed away at the age of 71.

古文：卒之先一岁，普生日，上遣其子承宗赍器币、鞍马就赐之。
现代文：去世的前一年，赵普生日这天，皇上派遣他的儿子承宗持器币、鞍马来赐给他。
English: The year before his death, on the day of Zhao Pu's birthday, the emperor sent his son to receive the heirloom coins and pommel horse to give to him.

古文：承宗复命，未几卒。
现代文：承宗完成使命后，不久去世。
English: He died shortly after completing his mission.

古文：次岁，普已罢中书令。
现代文：第二年，赵普已罢中书令一职。
English: In the following year, Zhao Pu resigned from the post of secretary.

古文：故事，无生辰之赐，特遣普侄婿左正言、直昭文馆张秉赐之礼物。
现代文：按旧制，没有生辰之日的赏赐，皇上特地派遣赵普的侄女婿左正言、直昭文馆张秉赐给他礼物。
English: According to the old system, there was no reward on the day of birth, so the emperor specially sent Zhao Pu's niece and son-in-law Zuo Zhengyan and Zhao Zhaozhaobing to give him a gift.

古文：普闻之，因追悼承宗，秉未至而普疾笃。
现代文：赵普听说后，追悼承宗，张秉还未到时赵普病已很重。
English: When Zhao Pu heard that Zhang Bing had not yet arrived to pay tribute to Zhezong, Zhao Pu was already very ill.

古文：先是，普遣亲吏甄潜诣上清太平宫致祷，神为降语曰： 赵普，宋朝忠臣，久被病，亦有冤累耳。 潜还，普力疾冠带，出中庭受神言，涕泗感咽，是夕卒。
现代文：在此之前，赵普派亲近官吏甄潜到上清太平宫祈祷，神仙降语说： 赵普，宋朝忠臣，长期患病，也有冤累。 甄潜回来后，赵普急忙脱下官帽，到中庭受听神言，哭泣流涕，这天傍晚就去世。
English: Prior to this, Zhao Pu sent a close official, Zhenxian, to the Taiping Palace in the Upper Qing Dynasty to pray, and the gods said: Zhao Pu, a loyal vassal of the Song Dynasty, has been ill for a long time and is also tired. After Zhenxian returned, Zhao Pu hastily took off his official cap, went to the courtyard to listen to God's word, wept profusely, and died in the evening of this day.

古文：上闻之震悼。
现代文：皇上听说赵普死讯非常悲痛。
English: The Emperor was very sad to hear of Zhao Pu's death.

古文：谓近臣曰： 普事先帝，与朕故旧，能断大事，响与朕尝有不足，众所知也。
现代文：对亲近的大臣说： 赵普奉事先帝，与朕是故旧之交，能决断大事。以前与朕有不愉快之处，大家都知道。
English: He said to a close minister: Zhao Pufeng is the former emperor, and we are old friends, and we can decide on important matters. There were unpleasant things with me before, everyone knows that.

古文：朕君临以来，每优礼之，普亦倾竭自效，尽忠国家，真社稷臣也，朕甚惜之。 因出涕，左右感动。
现代文：朕登位以来，每次都以优厚礼遇待他，赵普也倾其所能为朕效力，对国家尽忠，真是国家大臣啊！朕很痛惜他的死。 于是泪流，左右大臣深为感动。
English: Since I ascended to the throne, I have treated him with great courtesy every time, and Zhao Pu has also done his best to serve me and be loyal to the country. What a national minister! I am very sorry for his death. As a result, tears flowed, and the left and right ministers were deeply moved.

古文：废朝五日，为出次发哀。
现代文：罢朝五天，为赵普出次发哀。
English: The strike lasted five days, and Zhao Pu was the second to be mourned.

古文：赠尚书令，追封真定王，赐谥忠献。
现代文：赠尚书令，追封为真定王，赐谥号为忠献。
English: He was given the title of Shang Shuling, the posthumous title of Zhending Wang, and the posthumous title of Zhongxian.

古文：上撰神道碑铭，亲八分书以赐之。
现代文：皇上撰写神道碑铭文，亲自用八分书书体书写赐给他家。
English: The emperor wrote the inscription for the Shinto monument and personally wrote it in the octavo script and gave it to his family.

古文：遣右谏议大夫范杲摄鸿胪卿，护丧事。缚绡布各五百匹，米面各五百石。
现代文：派遣右谏议大夫范杲代行鸿胪卿之职，护送丧事，赐绢布五百匹，米面各五百石。
English: He sent Dr. Fan Ye, the right-hand man of the council, to act as the representative of Hongyeqing, escort the funeral procession, and bestow him with five hundred yakitori and five hundred rice noodles.

古文：葬日，有司设卤簿鼓吹如式。
现代文：下葬那天，官府设卤簿鼓吹仪式。
English: On the day of the burial, the government set up a memorial service.

古文：二女皆笄，普妻和氏言愿为尼，太宗再三谕之，不能夺。赐长女名志愿，号智果大师；次女名志英，号智圆大师。
现代文：赵普的两个女儿都已成年，赵普的妻子和氏声称希望当尼姑，太宗再三劝谕她，但不能改变她的志向，赐长女名志愿，号为智果大师；次女名志英，号为智圆大师。
English: Zhao Pu's two daughters have both reached adulthood. Zhao Pu's wife and daughter-in-law claimed that they hoped to become nuns. Emperor Taizong repeatedly advised her, but she could not change her aspiration. He gave the eldest daughter the name Volunteer, called Master Zhiguo, and the second daughter the name Zhiying, called Master Zhiyuan.

古文：初，太祖侧微，普从之游，既有天下，普屡以微时所不足者言之。
现代文：当初，太祖卑贱，赵普与他交好，到占有天下后，赵普常把太祖卑贱时的不足之处当作话柄谈论。
English: At first, Zhao Pu befriended the humble great-grandfather. After he gained control of the world, Zhao Pu often talked about the shortcomings of the humble great-grandfather.

古文：太祖豁达，谓普曰： 若尘埃中可识天子、宰相，则人皆物色之矣。 自是不复言。
现代文：太祖很豁达，对赵普说： 如果在尘世中可以识别天子、宰相，那么人人都会去寻找啊！ 
English: The great-grandfather was very open-minded and said to Zhao Pu: If you can identify the heavenly son and prime minister in the earthly world, then everyone will go looking for it!

古文：普少习吏事，寡学术，及为相，太祖常劝以读书。
现代文：从此赵普不再说这些事。赵普从小就学过处理官府事务，对系统的学问知道不多，当宰相后，太祖劝他多多读书。
English: From then on, Zhao Pu stopped talking about these things. Zhao Pu had learned to deal with government affairs from a young age and did not know much about the system. After he became prime minister, his great-grandfather advised him to study more.

古文：晚年手不释卷，每归私第，阖户启箧取书，读之竟日。
现代文：他晚年手不释卷，每次回家后，关门闭户打开书柜取出书来，读到很晚。
English: In his later years, he was obsessed with books. Every time he came home, he would close the door, open the bookcase and take out a book. He would read until very late.

古文：及次日临政，处决如流。
现代文：到第二天处理政事，顺利而又流畅。
English: By the next day, the handling of political affairs was smooth and smooth.

古文：既薨，家人发箧视之，则《论语》二十篇也。
现代文：死后，家人打开他的书柜一看，是《论语》二十篇。
English: After his death, his family opened his bookcase and saw that there were twenty Analects.

古文：普性深沈有岸谷，虽多忌克，而能以天下事为己任。
现代文：赵普性格深沉，胸有城府，虽然常常忌恨刻薄，但能以天下政事为己任。
English: Zhao Pu's character is deep, he has the city government in his heart, although he often hates and is mean, he can take the world's political affairs as his responsibility.

古文：宋初，在相位者多龌龊循默，普刚毅果断，未有其比。
现代文：宋初，官居宰相的人大多拘于小节，循规蹈矩，赵普却刚毅果断，没有人能与他相比。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, most of the people in the official residence of the prime minister were sticking to the rules and following the rules, but Zhao Pu was resolute and decisive. No one could compare with him.

古文：尝奏荐某人为某官，太祖不用。
现代文：曾经上奏荐举某人任某官，太祖不予任用。
English: I once submitted a recommendation for someone to be appointed to a certain post, but my great-grandfather was not appointed.

古文：普明日复奏其人，亦不用。
现代文：赵普第二天又上奏荐举此人，太祖又不予任用。
English: The next day, Zhao Pu again submitted a recommendation to nominate this person, and Taizu was not appointed.

古文：明日，普又以其人奏，太祖怒，碎裂奏牍掷地，普颜色不变，跪而拾之以归。
现代文：第三天，赵普又荐举此人，太祖大怒，撕碎奏折扔在地上，赵普神色不改，跪在地上捡起撕碎的奏折回家。
English: On the third day, Zhao Pu also recommended this person. The great-grandfather was furious and tore up the record and threw it on the ground. Zhao Pu did not change his expression and knelt on the ground to pick up the torn record and go home.

古文：他日补缀旧纸，复奏如初。太祖乃悟，卒用其人。
现代文：以后把碎奏折粘贴连起来，再次像第一次那样上奏。太祖于是醒悟，最终还是任用此人。
English: Later, he pasted the fragments together and played it again as he did the first time. The great-grandfather then came to his senses and finally appointed this person.

古文：又有群臣当迁官，太祖素恶其人，不与。
现代文：又有一个大臣应当升官，太祖一向厌恶这个人，不予升迁。
English: There was another minister who should have been promoted. The great-grandfather had always disliked this man and would not allow him to be promoted.

古文：普坚以为请，太祖怒曰： 朕固不为迁官。
现代文：赵普坚持请求，太祖怒道： 朕坚决不给他升官，卿又能怎么样呢？ 
English: Zhao Pu persisted in his request, and the great-grandfather angrily said, "I will resolutely not give him a promotion. What can you do?

古文：卿若之何？ 普曰： 刑以惩恶，赏以酬功，古今通道也。
现代文：赵普说： 刑罚用来惩处恶人，赏赐用来酬谢功臣，这是古今相通的道理。
English: Zhao Pu said: Punishment is used to punish evildoers, and rewards are used to reward meritorious officials. This is a principle that has been consistent from ancient times to the present.

古文：且刑赏天下之刑赏，非陛下之刑赏，岂得以喜怒专之。 太祖怒甚，起，普亦随之。太祖入宫，普立于宫门，久之不去，竟得俞允。
现代文：况且刑罚赏赐是国家的刑罚赏赐，不是陛下一个人的刑罚赏赐，怎么能因为喜怒而专断呢？ 太祖更加发怒，起身就走，赵普跟随其后，太祖进入内宫，赵普站在宫门口，很久不离开，最终得到允许。
English: Moreover, the punishment reward is the punishment reward of the country, not the punishment reward of a person, how can it be arbitrarily decided because of joy and anger? The great-grandfather was even more angry, got up and left, Zhao Pu followed him, the great-grandfather entered the inner palace, Zhao Pu stood at the gate of the palace, did not leave for a long time, and was finally allowed.

古文：太宗入弭德超之谗，疑曹彬有轨，属普再相，为彬辨雪保证，事状明白。
现代文：太宗听信弭德超的谗言，怀疑曹彬有不轨行为，适值赵普再次为相，赵普替曹彬辩白保证，事情得以澄清。
English: Emperor Taizong listened to Yu Dechao's advice and suspected Cao Bin of misconduct. When the time was right, Zhao Pu again acted as a witness. Zhao Pu assured Cao Bin that he would defend him, and the matter was clarified.

古文：太宗叹曰： 朕听断不明，几误国事。 即日窜逐德超，遇彬如旧。
现代文：太宗叹道 ：朕听断不明，险些误了国事。 当天斥逐弭德超，对待曹彬像往日一样。
English: Emperor Taizong sighed, "I am not very good at listening, and I almost made a mistake in state affairs. On that day, I dismissed Zhu Dechao and treated Cao Bin the same way as before.

古文：祖古守郡为奸利，事觉下狱，案劾，爱书未具。
现代文：祖吉任郡守干了坏事，事情发觉后被关进牢狱，审察查办，记录囚犯口供的文书没有具结。
English: Zuji, a county official, did a bad thing. After the matter was discovered, he was put in prison, examined and investigated, and the document recording the prisoner's confession was not completed.

古文：郊礼将近，太宗疾其贪墨，遣中使谕旨执政曰： 郊赦可特勿贷祖吉。 普奏曰： 败官抵罪，宜正刑辟。
现代文：郊礼快要临近，太宗痛恨祖吉贪暴，派中使下令执政官说： 郊赦可以不宽恕祖吉。 赵普上奏说 ：干好事的官员抵偿应负的罪责，应当遵照刑律处以死刑。
English: As the suburb ceremony was approaching, Emperor Taizong hated Zuji's corruption and sent an envoy to order the consul to say: "The suburb may not pardon Zuji." Zhao Pu Shengxiao said: "Officials who have done good deeds to atone for their guilt should be sentenced to death in accordance with the criminal law."

古文：然国家卜郊肆类，对越天地，告于神明，奈何以吉而隳陛下赦令哉？ 太宗善其言，乃止。
现代文：但是国家举行郊祀，德配于天地，祀告于神明，为什么因为祖吉而破坏陛下的赦令呢？ 太宗认为他的意见正确，于是停止不赦祖吉的命令。
English: But the country holds suburban religious services, virtue is worthy of heaven and earth, and worship is reported to the gods, so why break His Majesty's pardon order because of Zuji? Taizong thought his opinion was correct, so he stopped the order not to pardon Zuji.

古文：真宗咸平初，追封韩王。
现代文：真宗咸平初年，追封赵普为韩王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hanping of the True Sect, Zhao Pu was crowned King of Korea.

古文：二年，诏曰： 故太师赠尚书令、追封韩王赵普，识冠人彝，才高王佐，翊戴兴运，光启鸿图，虽吕望肆伐之勋，萧何指纵之效，殆无以过也。
现代文：二年，下诏说： 已故太师赠尚书令、追封韩王赵普，学识是人间第一，才能高于帝王的辅佐，拥戴兴运，开创鸿图，即使吕望征战之功，萧何指挥谋划之力，都不能超过他。
English: In the second year, the next imperial edict said: "The late Grand Master gave Shang Shuling to Wang Zhao Pu, who was the successor to Han Wang Zhao Pu. His learning is the best in the world. His ability is higher than that of the emperor's assistant, he supports prosperity, and creates a grand plan. Even if Lu Wang's military exploits and Xiao He's ability to command and plan cannot surpass him.

古文：自辅弼两朝，周旋三纪，茂岩廊之硕望，分屏翰之剧权，正直不回，始终无玷，谋猷可复，风烈如生。
现代文：自从辅佐两朝先帝，为官三十余年，赢得朝廷的崇高名望，分担国家重任。正直不阿，从始至终没有污迹，计谋可以再用，遗风如生。
English: Since assisting the emperors of the past two dynasties, he has been an official for more than 30 years, won the high reputation of the imperial court, and shared the heavy responsibilities of the country. To be honest, there is no stain from beginning to end, the strategy can be reused, and the legacy is still alive.

古文：宜预享于大丞，永同休于宗祏，兹为茂典，以答旧勋，其以普配飨太祖庙庭。 
现代文：应当配享皇庙祀祠，神位永远放在宗庙。在举行盛典的时候，以报答旧勋大臣，让赵普配享太祖庙庭。 
English: He should be entitled to the imperial temple and shrine, and the divine throne should always be placed in the ancestral temple. When the grand ceremony is held, in order to reward the former minister of honors, let Zhao Pu be entitled to the ancestral temple garden.

古文：普子承宗，羽林大将军，知潭、郓二州，皆有声；承煦，成州团练使。
现代文：赵普儿子赵承宗，任羽林大将军，知潭、郓二州，都有良好的从政声望。儿子赵承煦，任成州团练使。
English: Zhao Pu's son, Zhao Chengzong, was appointed General of Yulin, and had a good reputation in politics in the two prefectures of Zhitan and Handan. Zhao Pu's son, Zhao Chengzong, was appointed as a Chengzhou regimental drill sergeant.

古文：弟固、安易。
现代文：赵普两个兄弟：赵固、赵安易。
English: Zhao Pu's two brothers: Zhao Gu and Zhao An Yi.

古文：固至都官郎中。
现代文：赵固官做到都官郎中。
English: Zhao Guan was one of the most powerful officials in the capital.

