古文：定婚店崔元综卢承业女琴台子武殷卢生郑还古
现代文：定婚店崔元综卢承业女琴台子武殷卢生郑还古
English: Choe Won-soo, Choi Won-soo, Choe Won-soo, Choe Won-soo, Choe Won-soo, Choe Won-soo, Choe Won-soo

古文：定婚店
现代文：定婚店
English: Wedding shop

古文：杜陵韦固，少孤，思早娶妇，多歧，求婚不成。
现代文：杜陵的韦固从小失去父母，想要早一点结婚，但是多次求亲都没有成功。
English: Du Ling's Weigu lost his parents at a young age and wanted to get married earlier, but his many courtships were unsuccessful.

古文：贞观二年，将游清河，旅次宋城南店。
现代文：唐太宗贞观二年，他去清河游历，中途住在宋城南面的旅店。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang, he traveled to Qinghe and stayed at a hotel in the south of Songcheng.

古文：客有以前清河司马潘昉女为议者，来旦期于店西龙兴寺门。
现代文：旅客中有一个人为他提亲，女方是以前的清河司马潘昉的女儿，并让韦固第二天清早去店西的龙兴寺门前同潘家的人见面。
English: One of the travelers introduced him to a relative, the daughter of the former Qinghe Sima Panjun, and asked Wei Gu to go to the front of Longxing Temple, west of the store, early the next morning to meet with the Pan family.

古文：固以求之意切，旦往焉。斜月尚明，有老人倚巾囊，坐于阶上，向月检书。
现代文：韦固心中急切，第二天很早就赶去了，到了庙门前，月亮还在天上高高地挂着。他看见一个老头倚着一个口袋，坐在台阶上，借着月光看书。
English: Weigu was so eager that he left early the next day. When he arrived at the temple gate, the moon was still high in the sky. He saw an old man sitting on the steps, leaning on a bag, reading a book in the moonlight.

古文：觇之，不识其字。固问曰： 老父所寻者何书？
现代文：韦固也在旁边看，却不认识书上的字，便问老头说： 老先生看的是什么书啊？
English: Wei Gu was also watching from the side, but he didn't know the words on the book, so he asked the old man, "What book is the old man reading?"

古文：固少小苦学，字书无不识者。西国梵字，亦能读之。唯此书目所未觌，如何？ 
现代文：我从小学习，没有不认识的字，就是西方的梵文，我也能看懂，只是这本书上的字从来没见过，这是怎么回事？ 
English: I've been studying since I was a child. I don't know any unfamiliar characters, that is, Western Sanskrit. I can understand it, but I've never seen the characters in this book. What's going on?

古文：老人笑曰： 此非世间书，君因得见。 
现代文：老头笑着说： 这不是人间的书，你怎么会见过。 
English: The old man smiled and said, "This is not a human book, how could you have seen it?

古文：固曰： 然则何书也？ 
现代文：韦固又问： 那是哪里的书啊？ 
English: Weigu also asked: Where is that book from?

古文：曰： 幽冥之书。 
现代文：老头说： 阴间的书。 
English: The old man said, "A book from the underworld."

古文：固曰： 幽冥之人，何以到此？ 
现代文：韦固问： 阴间的人，怎么到了这里？ 
English: Wei Gu asked: People of the underworld, how did you get here?

古文：曰： 君行自平，非某不当来也。凡幽吏皆主人生之事，主人可不行其中乎？
现代文：老头说： 你来的太早，不是我不应该来，凡是阴间的官员都管阳间的事，管理人间的事，怎么能不在人间行走呢？ 韦固问： 那么您管什么事啊？ 
English: The old man said, "You came too early. It's not that I shouldn't have come. All the officials of the underworld are in charge of the affairs of the sun and moon, and they manage the affairs of the human world. How can they not walk among the people?" Wei Gu asked, "Then what are you in charge of?"

古文：今道途之行，人鬼各半，自不辨耳。 
现代文：老头说： 天下所有人的婚姻大事。 
English: The old man said, "Marriage is a big deal for everyone in the world.

古文：固曰： 然则君何主？ 曰： 天下之婚牍耳。 
现代文：韦固心中暗喜，说： 我从小失去父母，想早一点结婚，以便多生儿女，传宗接代，这十多年来，我多方求亲，竟不能如愿。
English: Wei Gu secretly rejoiced in his heart and said, "I lost my parents when I was a child, and I wanted to get married earlier so that I could have more children and pass down the family line. For more than ten years, I have made many requests for marriage, but have not been able to fulfill my wish.

古文：固喜曰： 固少孤，尝愿早娶，以广后嗣。尔来十年，多方求之，竞不遂意。
现代文：今天有人到这里来给我提潘司马的女儿，这件婚事能够成功吗？ 老头回答： 不能成功，你的媳妇刚刚三岁，等到十七岁才能进你们家的门。 韦固问： 你口袋里装的什么东西？ 老头回答： 红绳啊！ 
English: Today someone came here to propose to me, the daughter of Sima Pan, will this marriage be successful? The old man answered: It cannot be successful, your daughter-in-law is just three years old, and she cannot enter your home until she is seventeen. Wei Gu asked: What are you carrying in your pocket? The old man answered: A red rope!

古文：今者人有期此，与议潘司马女，可以成乎？ 
现代文：用来系夫妻两人脚的。等到冥间为他们定下了，我就偷偷地把红绳系在他们的脚上。
English: It was used to tie the feet of a husband and wife. When the match was set for them, I secretly tied the red rope to their feet.

古文：曰： 未也，君之妇适三岁矣。
现代文：不管这两家是仇敌，还是贫富相差悬殊，或者是相隔千山万水，只要红绳一系，再也逃不掉了。
English: Whether the two families are enemies, or the gap between rich and poor is huge, or they are separated by thousands of mountains and rivers, as long as there is a red rope, they can no longer escape.

古文：年十七，当入君门。 
现代文：你的脚已经和她的脚系在一起了，你再找别的人有什么好处呢？ 
English: Your feet are already bound to hers, so what good would it do you to find someone else?

古文：因问囊中何物？
现代文：韦固问： 我的媳妇是谁？
English: Wei Gu asked: Who is my daughter-in-law?

古文：曰： 赤绳子耳，以系夫妇之足，及其坐则潜用相系。
现代文：家在哪里？ 老头回答： 旅店北面卖菜那个老太太家的女孩。 韦固问： 能去看一看吗？ 
English: Where is home? The old man replied, "The girl from the old lady's house who sells vegetables on the north side of the inn." Wei Gu asked, "Can I take a look?"

古文：虽仇敌之家，贵贱悬隔，天涯从宦，吴楚异乡，此绳一系，终不可逭。君之脚已系于彼矣，他求何益。 
现代文：老头说： 老太太经常抱着她卖菜，你跟着我走，我指给你看。 等到天亮了，韦固等的人没有来。
English: The old man said, "The old lady often holds her to sell vegetables. If you follow me, I'll show you. When it was dawn, the people waiting for Wei Gu didn't come.

古文：曰： 固妻安在？
现代文：老头卷起书，背着口袋，韦固跟着老头来到菜市场，看见一个瞎了一只眼的老太太，抱着一个三岁的女孩，看起来非常肮脏丑陋。老头指着女孩对韦固说： 那就是你的妻子。 韦固生气地问： 我杀了她行不行？ 
English: The old man rolled up his book and put his bag on his back. Wei Gu followed the old man to the vegetable market. He saw an old lady who was blind in one eye, holding a three-year-old girl who looked very dirty and ugly. The old man pointed to the girl and said to Wei Gu, "That's your wife." Wei Gu angrily asked, "Can I kill her?"

古文：其家何为？ 曰： 此店北卖菜家妪女耳。 
现代文：老头说： 这女孩命中注定有大富贵，还要跟着你享福呢，怎么杀得了呢？ 
English: The old man said, "This girl is fated to be very rich, and she will also follow you to enjoy your good fortune. How can you kill her?

古文：老人遂隐： 固磨一小刀，付其奴曰： 汝素干事，能为我杀彼女，赐汝万钱。 
现代文：说完老头就不见了。韦固回去后磨了一把刀子，交给仆人说： 你历来很能办事，如果为我杀了那个女孩，我给你一万钱。 仆人说： 是，明白了。 
English: After saying this, the old man disappeared. After Wei Gu returned, he sharpened a knife and gave it to the servant, saying, "You have always been very capable. If you kill that girl for me, I will give you ten thousand dollars." The servant said, "Yes, I understand."

古文：奴曰： 诺。 明日，袖刀入菜肆中，于众中刺之而走。一市纷扰，奔走获免。问奴曰： 所刺中否？ 
现代文：仆人将刀藏到袖子里来到菜市场，趁着人多混乱的时候，刺了女孩一刀就跑，市场大乱，仆人得以逃脱。韦固问仆人： 刺没刺中？ 
English: The servant hid the knife in his sleeve and came to the vegetable market. Taking advantage of the confusion of the crowd, he stabbed the girl and ran away. The market was in turmoil, and the servant was able to escape. Wei Gu asked the servant: Was the stab in the stab?

古文：曰： 初刺其心，不幸才中眉间。 
现代文：仆人说： 一开始我想刺她的心脏，可是没刺准，刺到了眉间。 
English: The servant said, "At first I wanted to stab her in the heart, but I didn't get the right place, so I stabbed her between the eyebrows."

古文：尔后求婚，终不遂。
现代文：韦固以后求婚，一直没有成功。
English: Weigu later proposed marriage, but it was not successful.

古文：又十四年，以父荫叅相州军。刺史王泰俾摄司户掾，专鞫狱，以为能，因妻以女。
现代文：又过了十四年，他靠父亲的老关系，到相州参军刺史王泰手下任职，专门负责审讯囚犯。
English: Fourteen years later, relying on his father's old connections, he went to Sangju to join the army and served under the general Shi Wangtai, where he was specifically responsible for interrogating prisoners.

古文：可年十六七，容色华丽。
现代文：王泰因为他能干，将女儿许配给他。
English: Wang Tai betrothed his daughter to him because of his ability.

古文：固称惬之极。然其眉间常贴一花钿，虽沐浴闲处，未尝暂去。
现代文：韦固的新媳妇十六七岁，容貌美丽，韦固非常满意，但是他发现妻子的眉间总是贴着一个小纸花，无论干什么没有一刻拿下去的时候。
English: Weiguo's new daughter-in-law is sixteen or seventeen years old, with a beautiful face. Weiguo is very satisfied, but he found that his wife always has a small paper flower between her eyebrows. No matter what she does, there is never a moment to take it down.

古文：岁余，固逼问之，妻潸然曰： 妾郡守之犹子也，非其女也。
现代文：过年的时候，他逼问妻子，妻子哭着说： 我是郡守大人的侄女，不是他的亲生女儿。
English: At the time of the New Year, he pressed his wife, who cried and said: I am the niece of the county magistrate, not his biological daughter.

古文：畴昔父曾宰宋城，终其官。
现代文：我的父亲生前当宋城县令，死在任职上。
English: My father was the governor of Songcheng County during his lifetime, but he died in office.

古文：时妾在襁褓，母兄次殁。
现代文：当时我还在襁褓之中，母亲和哥哥也相继死了。
English: At that time, I was still in my infancy, and my mother and brother also died one after another.

古文：唯一庄在宋城南，与乳母陈氏居，去店近，鬻蔬以给朝夕。
现代文：家里剩下的唯一宅院在城南，乳母陈氏带着我居住，每天卖菜度日。
English: The only house left in my family is in the south of the city. My nanny, Ms. Chen, lives with me and sells vegetables every day.

古文：陈氏怜小，不忍暂弃。三岁时，抱行市中，为狂贼所刺。刀痕尚在，故以花子覆之。
现代文：陈氏可怜我太小，总把我带在身边，三岁的时候陈氏抱着我走在菜市场里，被一个狂徒用刀刺中眉心，留下了伤疤，所以用纸花盖上。
English: Mr. Chen pitied me for being too small and always carried me around with him. When I was three years old, Mr. Chen held me as we walked in the vegetable market. A madman stabbed me in the eyebrow with a knife, leaving a scar, so I covered it with paper flowers.

古文：七八年间，叔从事卢龙，遂得在左右，以为女嫁君耳。 
现代文：七八年以后，叔叔来到卢龙任职，我便跟着叔叔了，并以他女儿的名义嫁给你。 
English: Seventy-eight years later, when my uncle came to work in Lulong, I followed him and married you in the name of his daughter.

古文：固曰： 陈氏眇乎？ 
现代文：韦固问： 陈氏是不是瞎一只眼？ 
English: Wei Gu asked: Is Mr. Chen blind in one eye?

古文：曰： 然，何以知之？ 
现代文：妻子说： 对，你怎么知道的？ 
English: My wife said, "Yes, how did you know?"

古文：固曰： 所刺者固也。 乃曰奇也。
现代文：韦固说： 刺你的人就是我派去的，这真是一件奇事！ 
English: Weigu said, "The person who stabbed you was sent by me. This is really a miracle!"

古文：因尽言之，相敬逾极。
现代文：便将事情的经过都跟妻子说了。
English: He told his wife everything that had happened.

古文：后生男鲲，为雁门太守，封太原群左夫人。
现代文：从此夫妻更加互敬互爱，后来生了个男孩叫韦鲲，当了雁门太宗。母亲被封为太原郡太夫人。
English: From then on, the husband and wife respected and loved each other even more. Later, a boy named Wei Wei was born, and he became the Ganmen Taizong. His mother was named the First Lady of Taiyuan County.

古文：知阴骘之定，不可变也。
现代文：才知道命中注定的事，是不会因人力而改变的。
English: Only to know that the fated things will not be changed by manpower.

古文：宋城宰闻之，题其店曰 定婚店 。
现代文：宋城县官听说了这件事，为那家旅店题名为： 定婚店 。
English: Songcheng County officials heard about this and gave the hotel the title of "wedding shop."

古文：崔元综
现代文：崔元综
English: Choi Won-soo

古文：崔元综任益州叅军日，欲娶妇，吉日已定。忽假寐，见人云： 此家女非君之妇，君妇今日始生。 
现代文：崔元综任益州参军以后，想要结婚，日期已经定了下来，忽然做了一个梦，梦中有个人对他说： 这家的女子不是你的媳妇，你的媳妇今天才出生。 
English: After Cui Yuan Zong Ren Yizhou joined the army, he wanted to get married, and the date had already been set. Suddenly, he had a dream. In the dream, someone said to him, "This woman is not your daughter-in-law. Your daughter-in-law was only born today."

古文：乃梦中相随，向东京履信坊十字街西道北有一家，入宅内东行屋下，正见一妇人生一女子，云： 此是君妇。 
现代文：他便在梦中跟着这个人来到东京履信坊十字街西道北的一户人家，进到院子里的东屋旁，看到一个妇女正好生了一个女儿。领他来的那个人对他说： 这才是你的媳妇。 
English: In his dream, he followed this person to a house on West Kawaramachi, Shijo-dori Street, Lushinbo, Tokyo. He entered the yard next to the outhouse and saw a woman who had just given birth to a daughter. The person who brought him there said to him, "This is your daughter-in-law."

古文：崔公惊寤，殊不信之。
现代文：崔元综从梦中惊醒，但他不相信梦中的事。
English: Cui Yuan-sumi woke up from the dream, but he didn't believe what happened in the dream.

古文：俄而所平章女，忽然暴亡。
现代文：这时传来消息，他正要娶的那个女人突然死了。
English: Then came the news that the woman he was about to marry had died suddenly.

古文：自此后官至四品，年五十八，乃婚侍郎韦陟堂妹，年始十九。
现代文：从这以后他升官一直到四品官，年纪五十八岁了，才同侍郎韦陟的堂妹结婚。新娘子才十九岁。
English: From then on, he rose through the ranks until he reached the rank of fourth-ranked officer. At the age of 58, he married the cousin of his servant, Wei Wei. The bride was only 19 years old.

古文：虽嫌崔公之年，竟嫁之。
现代文：虽然觉得崔元综的年龄大了一些，但还是嫁给了他。
English: Although she felt that Cui Yuanzong was a little older, she still married him.

古文：乃于履信坊韦家宅上成亲，果在东行屋下居住。
现代文：婚礼是在履信坊韦家宅院举办的，新娘子原来正是住在东屋。
English: The wedding was held at the Wei family residence in Lushinfang, and the bride originally lived in the annex.

古文：寻勘岁月，正是所梦之日，其妻适生。崔公至三品，年九十。
现代文：推算起来，她出生的年月，正是崔元综做梦的那一天，崔元综后来又升为三品官，活到九十岁。
English: According to the calculation, the year of her birth was the day of the dream of Cui Yuanxiao, who was later promoted to the third grade and lived to the age of ninety.

古文：韦夫人与之偕老，向四十年，食其贵禄也。
现代文：韦夫人与他白头偕老，共同生活四十年，享尽了荣华富贵。
English: Mrs. Wei and he have been together for forty years, and have enjoyed prosperity and wealth.

古文：卢承业女
现代文：卢承业女
English: Lu Chengyuan

古文：户部尚书范阳卢承庆，有兄子，将笄而嫁之，谓弟尚书左丞承业曰： 吾为此女，择得一婿乃曰裴居道。其相位极人臣。然恐其非命破家，不可嫁也。 
现代文：户部尚书范阳卢承庆想要为哥哥的刚刚十六岁的女儿找户人家嫁出去，对弟弟卢承业说： 我为这姑娘找了个女婿叫裴居道，看他的面相能当上丞相，然而恐怕他后来遭厄运破产，不能嫁给他。 
English: Lu Chengqing wanted to find a family to marry off his brother Lu Chengye's 16-year-old daughter, and said to his brother Lu Chengye, "I have found a son-in-law for this girl named Pei Ju Dao. Judging by his face, he can become prime minister. However, I am afraid that he will be ruined by bad luck and will not be able to marry him."

古文：承业曰： 不知此女相命，终他富贵否？ 
现代文：卢承业说： 不知道这个姑娘的面相能不能同他享受富贵到底。 
English: Lu Chengye said: I don't know if this girl's face can enjoy the wealth with him.

古文：因呼其侄女出，兄弟熟视之。承业又曰： 裴即位至郎官，其女即合丧逝，纵后遭事，不相及也。
现代文：于是将侄女叫出来，兄弟两个人仔细端详了一会儿，卢承业又说： 裴居道当上郎官，这个姑娘就会死了，纵然裴居道以后运气逆转出事，也和侄女没有关系了。 
English: So he called out his niece, and the two brothers looked at her carefully for a while. Lu Chengye said, "If Pei Ju Dao becomes the steward, this girl will die. Even if something happens to Pei Ju Dao, it will have nothing to do with his niece.

古文：年嫁与之。
现代文：于是他们将姑娘嫁给了裴居道。
English: So they married the girl off to Peiju.

古文：居道官至郎中，其妻果殁。
现代文：裴居道官做到郎官时，妻子果然死了。
English: When Pei Ju Dao Guan was made a vassal, his wife died.

古文：后居道竟拜中书令，被诛籍没，久而方雪。 
现代文：后来裴居道又当上中书令以后，被诛杀抄家，很长时间才平反昭雪。
English: Later, after Pei Ju Dao was promoted to the position of Zhongshu Ling, he was beaten to death and his house was ransacked. It took a long time to rehabilitate Zhao Xue.

古文：琴台子
现代文：琴台子
English: Kitaro-daiji Choir

古文：赵郡李希仲，天宝初，宰偃师。
现代文：赵郡的李希仲在天宝初年当上了偃师县令，他有个女儿叫闲仪，刚刚九岁。
English: Li Xizhong of Zhao County became the county magistrate of Jinshi County in the first year of Tianbao. He has a daughter named Jiao Yi, who is just nine years old.

古文：有女曰闲仪，生九岁，嬉戏于廨署之花栏内。忽有人遽招闲仪曰： 鄙有恳诚，愿托贤淑，幸毕词，勿甚惊骇。 
现代文：一天，闲仪在花栏里玩耍，忽然有一个人招呼她，对她说： 我有一个恳求，想要托付给你一件事，你听了我说的话不要惊慌害怕。 
English: One day, the idler was playing in the flower bed, when suddenly a man called out to her and said to her: "I have a request, I want to entrust you with something. When you hear what I say, don't panic and be afraid.

古文：乃曰： 鄙为崔氏妻，有二男一女。
现代文：然后又说： 我是崔家的媳妇，有两个男孩，一个女孩。
English: Then she said, "I am the daughter-in-law of the Cui family. There are two boys and one girl.

古文：男名琴台子，鄙尤钟念。
现代文：最小的男孩，小名叫琴台子，尤其使我挂念。
English: I especially miss the youngest boy, whose nickname is Kintaizi.

古文：生六十日，鄙则谢去。
现代文：他刚生下来六十天，我就死了。
English: Sixty days after he was born, I died.

古文：夫人当为崔之继室，敢以念子为托。
现代文：你以后会成为崔家的续弦，孩子的继母。
English: In the future, you will become the second string of the Cui family, the child's stepmother.

古文：实仁愍之。 因悲恸怨咽，俄失所在。
现代文：我把孩子托付给你，请你以仁慈的心肠好好对待他。 说完悲伤地哽咽着，一转身就没有了。
English: I entrust my child to you, and I ask you to treat him well, with a merciful heart.

古文：闲仪亦沉迷无所觉知矣。家人善养之，旬日无恙。
现代文：闲仪也处于昏迷状态，家里人妥善地照顾她，十多天以后就好了。
English: Liang Yi was also in a coma. Her family members took good care of her, and she recovered after more than ten days.

古文：希仲秩满，因家洛京。
现代文：李希仲任期满了之后，将家搬到洛京。
English: After Li Xizhong's term of office expired, he moved his family to Loking.

古文：天宝末，幽蓟起戎，希仲则挈家东迈，以避兵乱。
现代文：天宝末年，幽州和蓟州兴起战事，李希仲带领全家往东迁移，以逃避战乱。
English: At the end of the Tenpo era, war broke out in Yuzhou and Zhangzhou, and Li Xizhong led his whole family to migrate to the east to escape the war.

古文：行至临淮，谒县尹崔祈。既相见，情款依然。各叙祖姻。崔乃内外三从之昆仲也。
现代文：走到临淮，拜见县尹崔祈，见面后交谈得十分融洽，各自叙述自己的祖宗家谱，知道了崔祈还是李希仲的远亲。
English: When they came to Linhuai, they met Yin Cuiqi from the county. After the meeting, they had a very harmonious conversation. They each described their own ancestral genealogy. They knew that Cuiqi was still a distant relative of Li Xizhong.

古文：时崔丧妻半岁，中馈无主，幼稚零丁。因求娶于希仲。
现代文：这时崔祈丧妻才半年，没有妇女在家主持饮食家务，孩子年幼无人照顾，崔祈恳求李希仲将女儿嫁给他。
English: At this time, Cui Jie had only been widowed for half a year, there was no woman at home to preside over meals and housework, and the children were young and uncared for. Cui Jie implored Li Xizhong to marry his daughter to him.

古文：希仲家贫时危，方为远适，女况成立，遂许成亲。
现代文：李希仲正赶上遭难，全家又要远行，女儿已经长大，就同意了这门亲事。
English: Li Xizhong was just catching up with the disaster, the whole family had to travel far away, and his daughter had grown up, so he agreed to this marriage.

古文：女既有归，将谋南度。
现代文：女儿有了归宿，他们一家准备继续往南走。
English: Now that their daughter has a home, the family is preparing to continue their journey south.

古文：偃师故事，初不省记。
现代文：闲仪幼时在偃师所遇到的事情一开始已经毫无记忆了。
English: At first, Liangyi had no memory of what happened to her when she was a child.

古文：一日，忽闻崔氏中堂，沉痛大哭。即令询问，乃闲仪耳。
现代文：有一天忽然听到崔祈的家里有人大哭，派人过去一问，原来闲仪在哭。
English: One day, she suddenly heard someone crying loudly in Cui Qi's home. She sent someone over to ask, and it turned out that she was crying.

古文：希仲遇自询问，则出一年孤孩曰： 此花栏所谓琴台子者也。 
现代文：李希仲赶忙过去询问女儿，闲仪领出来一个一岁的男孩说： 这就是花栏中我遇到的那个人所说的琴台子，从这以后，闲仪对琴台子备加爱护，为他起个名字，叫 灵遇 。
English: Li Xizhong hurried over to inquire about her daughter, and Liang Yi brought out a one-year-old boy and said, "This is the piano stand that the person I met in the flower bed told me about. From then on, Liang Yi took great care of the piano stand and gave it a name, called "Spiritual Encounter."

古文：因是倍加抚育，名之灵遇，及长，官至陈郡太守。
现代文：灵遇长大以后，做了陈郡太守。
English: After Lingtu grew up, he became the governor of Chen County.

古文：武殷
现代文：武殷
English: Wu Yin

古文：武殷者，邺郡人也。
现代文：武殷是邺郡人，想要娶同郡的郑氏作妻子。
English: Wu Yin, a resident of Handan County, wanted to marry Zheng, a resident of the same county.

古文：尝欲娶同郡郑氏，则殷从母之女。
现代文：郑氏是他姨母的女儿，长得异常美丽，并且知情达理，武殷对她非常爱慕。
English: Zheng was his aunt's daughter. She was unusually beautiful and intelligent. Wu Yin was very fond of her.

古文：姿色绝世，雅有令德，殷甚悦慕，女意亦愿从之。
现代文：她也愿意嫁给武殷，武殷向她求婚，两家订了婚约。
English: She was also willing to marry Wu Yin. Wu Yin proposed to her, and the two families entered into a marriage contract.

古文：因求为婿，有诚约矣。
现代文：由于知心朋友的推荐。
English: Due to the recommendation of a close friend.

古文：无何，迫于知己所荐，将举进士。期以三年，从母许之。
现代文：武殷准备考取进士的功名，预计需要三年的时间，姨母同意了。
English: It is estimated that it will take three years for Wu Yin to prepare for the entrance examination, and his aunt agreed.

古文：至洛阳，闻勾龙生善相人，兼好饮酒，时特造焉。
现代文：武殷走到洛阳，听说勾龙生很会给人看相算命，并喜欢喝酒，便带了好酒去拜访。
English: When Wu Yin went to Luoyang, he heard that Guo Longsheng was very good at fortune-telling and liked to drink, so he brought good wine to visit.

古文：生极喜，与之意夕。因为殷曰： 子之禄与寿甚厚，然而晚遇，未至七十而有小厄。 
现代文：勾龙生非常高兴，与他谈到深夜，对他说： 你的官运和寿命都很好，然而结婚很晚，快到七十岁的时候有一点小的灾难。 
English: He was very happy and talked to him late at night. He said to him, "Your career and life expectancy are very good. However, you got married very late. When you were almost 70, you had a small disaster.

古文：殷曰： 今日之虑，未暇于此。请以近事言之。 
现代文：武殷说： 我现在考虑的不是那么远的事情，请你说一说近期的事。 
English: Wu Yin said: I am now considering something that is not so far away. Please tell me something about the near future.

古文：生曰： 君言近事，非名与婚乎？ 殷曰： 然。 
现代文：勾龙生说： 你要知道近期的事，莫非是指功名和婚姻吗？ 武殷说： 对。 
English: Guo Longsheng said, "If you want to know about recent events, don't you mean fame and marriage?" Wu Yin said, "Yes."

古文：生曰： 自此三年，必成大名。如婚娶，殊未有兆。 
现代文：勾龙生说： 从现在起三年之内，你必然取得功名，但如果说婚姻，却没有先兆。 
English: "Within three years from now, you will certainly achieve fame, but if you say marriage, there is no sign.

古文：殷曰： 约有所娶，何言无兆？ 
现代文：武殷说： 我有婚约，怎么能说没有先兆？ 
English: Wu Yin said: I have a marriage contract, how can I say there is no sign?

古文：生笑曰： 君之娶郑氏乎？ 
现代文：勾龙生笑着说： 你要娶的是郑氏吗？ 
English: Hokuryongsheng said with a smile: Are you going to marry Zheng?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：武殷说： 对。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：生曰： 此固非君之妻也。
现代文：勾龙生说： 她不是你的妻子，你应该娶韦氏。
English: He said, "She is not your wife, you should marry Mr. Wei."

古文：君当娶韦氏，后二年始生，生十七年而君娶之。 
现代文：两年后她才出生，出生以后十七年你才能娶她。
English: She was born two years later, and you can't marry her until seventeen years after her birth.

古文：时当官，未逾年而韦氏卒。
现代文：那时你做官，娶韦氏不到一年她就会死去。 
English: At that time, you were an official, and she would die within a year of marrying Wei.

古文：殷异其言，固问郑氏之夫，曰： 即同郡郭子元也。子元娶五年而卒。
现代文：武殷对勾龙生的话感到很惊异，又问郑氏的丈夫是谁。勾龙生说： 就是你们同郡的郭子元，郭子元结婚五年就会死去。
English: Wu Yin was surprised by Guo Longsheng's words and asked who Zheng's husband was. Guo Longsheng said, "It is Guo Zi Yuan from your county. Guo Zi Yuan will die after five years of marriage."

古文：然将嫁之夕，君其梦之。 
现代文：郑氏将要嫁给他的前一天，你会梦到她的。 
English: The day before Zheng is to marry him, you will dream of her.

古文：既二年，殷下第，有内黄人郭绍，家富于财，闻郑氏美，纳赂以求其婚。
现代文：武殷连续参加两年科举考试都没有被录取，这时有个非常有钱的人叫郭绍，他听说郑氏长得美丽，便送重礼到她家求婚。
English: When Wu Yin failed to get into the college entrance examination for two years in a row, a very rich man named Guo Shao heard that Ms. Zheng was beautiful and sent a gift to her house to propose marriage.

古文：郑氏之母聚族谋曰： 女年既笄，殷未成事。吾老矣，且愿见有所适。今有郭绍者求娶，吾欲许之，何如？ 
现代文：郑氏的母亲召集家里的人商量说： 女儿已经长大了，武殷还没有功名，我老了，但又想看到女儿结婚，现在郭绍前来求婚，我打算将女儿嫁给他，你们认为怎么样？ 大家说： 就按您的意思办。 
English: Mr. Zheng's mother gathered the family members to discuss and said, "My daughter has grown up, Wu Yin has not yet achieved fame, I am old, but I still want to see my daughter get married, now Guo Shaowu has come to propose marriage, I plan to marry my daughter to him, what do you think?" Everyone said, "Do as you wish."

古文：诸子曰： 唯命。 郑氏闻之泣恚，将断发为尼者数四。
现代文：郑氏知道以后非常气愤，整天哭泣，四次想要剪掉头发出来去当尼姑。
English: Ms. Zheng knew that later she would be very angry, cry all day, and want to cut off her hair four times to become a nun.

古文：及嫁之夕，忽得疾昏眩，若将不救。
现代文：她在将要出嫁的头一天晚上，忽然得病昏迷，似乎无法救治了。
English: On the night before she was to be married, she suddenly fell ill and fell into a coma, which seemed to be incurable.

古文：时殷在京师，其夕梦一女，鸣咽流涕，似有所诉。视之即郑氏也。
现代文：这时武殷正在京城，这天晚上他梦到一个女子哭着要对他说什么，他仔细一看是郑氏，吃惊地问她有什么事？
English: At this time, Wu Yin was in Beijing. That night, he dreamed of a woman crying and wanting to say something to him. He took a closer look and saw it was Ms. Zheng. Surprised, he asked her, "What's the matter?"

古文：乃惊问，久之言曰： 某尝慕君子之德，亦知君之意，且曾许事君矣。今不幸为尊长所逼，将适他氏。没身之叹，知复何言。 
现代文：过了一会郑氏说： 我爱慕公子的学识品德，也知道公子对我的情义，并且已经与公子订下婚约，可是不幸被长辈逼迫，就要嫁给别人了，终身的遗憾，无法表达！ 
English: After a while, Mr. Zheng said: "I admire my son's knowledge and moral character, and I know his feelings for me, and I have already signed a marriage contract with my son, but unfortunately I was forced by my elders to marry someone else. I regret it for the rest of my life, I cannot express it!

古文：言讫，相对而泣。
现代文：说完，两人相对着哭泣。
English: After saying this, the two of them wept together.

古文：因惊觉悲惋，且异其事。
现代文：武殷醒了以后非常悲伤，又感到这事很奇怪，便派人回去打探消息加以验证。
English: After Wu Yin woke up, he was very sad and felt that this was very strange, so he sent someone back to investigate the news and verify it.

古文：乃发使验之，则果适人。问其姓氏，则郭绍也。
现代文：结果郑氏确实已经嫁人，武殷问郑氏的丈夫叫什么名字，回答说叫郭绍。
English: As it turned out, Zheng was indeed married. Wu Yin asked Zheng's husband what his name was, and he replied that his name was Guo Shao.

古文：殷数日，思勾龙生言颇验，然疑其名之异耳。
现代文：过了几天，武殷想起勾龙生的话，觉得他说得很准，可是又觉得郑氏丈夫的名字和勾龙生说的不一样。
English: A few days later, Wu Yin recalled the words of Zheng Longsheng and felt that he was very accurate, but he also felt that the name of Zheng's husband was different from that of Zheng Longsheng.

古文：及肃宗在储名绍，遂改为子元也。
现代文：等到肃宗当上太子，名字也是一个 绍 字，郭绍只好将自己的名字改为 子元 。
English: When Su Zong became the crown prince, his name was also a Shao character, and Guo Shao had to change his name to Zi Yuan.

古文：殷明年擢第。
现代文：武殷第二年考中进士。
English: Wu Yin passed the second year of the middle school entrance examination.

古文：更二年而子元卒。
现代文：又过了两年，郭士元死了。
English: Two years later, Guo Shiyuan died.

古文：后十余年，历位清显。
现代文：以后的十多年里，武殷的官越做越大，但多次想要结婚，都没有成功。
English: Over the next ten years, Wu Yin's official circle grew larger and larger, but he tried to get married many times without success.

古文：每求娶，辄不应。后自尚书郎谪官韶阳，郡守韦安贞固以女妻之。殷念勾龙生之言，恳辞不免。娶数月而韦氏亡矣。
现代文：后来他从尚书郎被贬官到韶阳，郡守韦安贞要将女儿嫁给他。他想起勾龙生的话，恳切地想要推辞，但没能推辞掉，结婚几个月以后，妻子韦氏就死了。
English: Later, he was demoted from Shang Shulang to Fenyang, and the county governor Wei Anzhen wanted to marry his daughter to him. He remembered the words of Goryong Sheng and earnestly wanted to refuse, but he could not refuse. A few months after the marriage, his wife Wei died.

古文：其后皆验，如勾龙生之言尔。
现代文：这些事以及以后发生的事都准确地验证了勾龙生所说的话。
English: These events, and those that followed, proved exactly what Gokulongsang had said.

古文：卢生
现代文：卢生
English: Luzheng

古文：弘农令之女既笄，适卢生。
现代文：弘农县令的女儿长大了，许配给了卢生。
English: When the daughter of the county magistrate of Hongnong County grew up, she was given to Lu Sheng.

古文：卜吉之日，女巫有来者。李氏之母问曰： 小女今夕适人，卢郎常来，巫当屡见，其人官禄厚薄？ 
现代文：出嫁日期这一天来了一个女巫，李氏的母亲问女巫说： 我女儿今天嫁人，女婿卢生经常来，你应当见过多次，你看他的命运怎么样？ 
English: On this day, a witch came. Mr. Li's mother asked the witch, "My daughter is getting married today. My son-in-law Lu Sheng often comes here. You must have met him many times. What do you think of his fate?"

古文：巫者曰： 所言卢郎，非长髯者乎？ 
现代文：女巫说： 你说的卢生，是不是长着长胡子？ 
English: The witch said, "The Lu Sheng you mentioned, does he have a long beard?"

古文：曰： 然。
现代文：李氏的母亲回答说： 对。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：然则非夫人之子婿也。夫人之婿，中形而白，且无须也。 
现代文：女巫说： 可是他不是夫人的女婿，夫人的女婿中等身材，面孔白皙，并且没有胡子。 
English: But he is not my wife's son-in-law, said the witch. My wife's son-in-law is of medium height, with a fair face, and has no beard.

古文：夫人惊曰： 吾之女今夕适人，得乎？ 
现代文：李氏的母亲吃惊地说： 我女儿今天嫁人，能办成吗？ 
English: Mr. Li's mother said in surprise, "My daughter is getting married today, can it be done?"

古文：巫曰： 得 。
现代文：女巫说： 能够办成。 
English: The witch said: It can be done.

古文：夫人曰： 既得适人，又何以云非卢郎乎？ 
现代文：李氏的母亲说： 既然今天嫁人，怎么又说女婿不是卢生呢？ 
English: Mr. Li's mother said, "Since you are getting married today, how can you say that your son-in-law is not Lu Sheng?"

古文：曰： 不知其由，则卢终非夫人之子婿也。 
现代文：女巫说： 不知道什么原因，但是卢生确实不是夫人的女婿。 
English: The witch said, "I don't know why, but Lu Sheng is not my wife's son-in-law.

古文：俄而卢纳采，夫人怒巫而示之。
现代文：一会儿，卢生来送求亲的礼物行聘，李氏的母亲生气地将卢生指给女巫看。
English: After a while, Lu Sheng came to send a gift to the witch. Li's mother angrily pointed out Lu Sheng to the witch.

古文：巫曰： 事在今夕，安敢妄言。 
现代文：女巫说： 事情就在今天，我怎么敢胡说呢？ 
English: The witch said, "It happened today, how can I lie about it?

古文：其家大怒，共唾而逐之。
现代文：李氏的全家都非常生气，共同将女巫赶走了。
English: Mr. Li's whole family was very angry, and together they drove the witch away.

古文：及卢乘轩车来，展亲迎之礼。宾主礼具。解珮约花，卢生忽惊而奔出，乘马而遁，众宾追之不返。
现代文：等到卢生坐着官员乘坐的那种车子前来举行迎亲仪式，宾主双方礼毕，卢生和李氏互相交换礼物的时候，卢生忽然大叫一声，逃了出去，骑上一匹马就跑了。
English: When Lu Sheng came to hold the welcoming ceremony in a car of the kind used by officials, and the two guests were polite, and Lu Sheng and Mr. Li exchanged gifts with each other, Lu Sheng suddenly shouted, fled out, and rode a horse and ran away.

古文：主人素负气，不胜其愤。
现代文：参加庆贺的客人们追上去喊他，他也没回来。
English: Guests at the party chased after him shouting for him, but he did not return.

古文：且恃其女之容，邀容皆入，呼女出拜。
现代文：李氏的父母历来重视脸面，非常生气，她恃仗着女儿的容貌，将客人们都请进屋里，然后将女儿叫出来，拜见大家。
English: Ms. Li's parents, who had always paid attention to their daughter's face, were very angry. She took advantage of her daughter's appearance, invited all the guests into the house, and then called her daughter out to meet everyone.

古文：其貌之丽，天下罕敌。
现代文：李氏的容貌非常美丽，天下少有。
English: Mr. Li's appearance is very beautiful, rare in the world.

古文：指之曰： 此女岂惊人者耶？
现代文：李氏的父母指着女儿说： 我的女儿长得吓人吗？
English: Mr. Li's parents pointed at their daughter and said, "Is my daughter scary-looking?"

古文：令而不出，人其以为兽形也。 
现代文：今天如果不让她出来，大家还以为她长得像个怪兽呢。 
English: If they didn't let her out today, everyone would think she looked like a monster.

古文：众人莫不愤叹。
现代文：大家都非常气愤而又叹息。
English: Everyone was very angry and sad.

古文：主人曰： 此女已奉见，宾客中有能聘者，愿赴今夕。 
现代文：李氏的父母又说： 我的女儿大家都看见了，客人中间如果有愿意求婚的，今天就可以结婚。
English: Mr. Li's parents also said, "Everyone has seen my daughter. If there is anyone among the guests who is willing to propose, you can get married today.

古文：时郑某官某，为卢之傧，在坐起拜曰： 愿示门馆。 
现代文：客人中有一个姓郑的官员，是卢生请来的男傧，他在座位上站起来说： 我愿意娶您的女儿。 
English: Among the guests was an official surnamed Zheng, a young man invited by Lu Sheng. He stood up from his seat and said: I am willing to marry your daughter.

古文：于是奉书择相，登车成礼。
现代文：于是填写聘书，举行迎亲仪式，将李氏接上车去。
English: So they filled out the job offer, held a welcoming ceremony, and took Mr. Li to the car.

古文：巫言之貌宛然。乃知巫之有知也。
现代文：这些同女巫说得完全一样，这时候才知道女巫有先见之明。
English: These words were exactly the same as those of the witch, and it was only then that it became clear that the witch had foresight.

古文：后数年，郑任于京，逢卢问其事。
现代文：几年后，姓郑的官员调到京城任职，碰到卢生后询问当时的情景。
English: A few years later, an official surnamed Zheng was transferred to work in Beijing. When he met Lu Sheng, he asked him about the situation at that time.

古文：卢曰： 两眼赤，且太如朱盏，牙长数寸，出口之两角。
现代文：卢生说： 那李氏的两只眼睛通红，大得像两盏灯笼，牙长数寸，从两只嘴角中伸出你能不害怕的逃跑吗？ 
English: Lu Sheng said: Mr. Li's two eyes are bright red, as big as two lanterns, his teeth are several inches long, and protrude from the corners of his mouth, can you run away without fear?

古文：得无惊奔乎？ 郑素与卢相善，骤出其妻以示之，卢大惭而退。
现代文：姓郑的官员历来和卢生的关系很好，便突然将妻子叫出来让卢生看一看，卢生非常惭愧地走了。
English: The official surnamed Zheng has always had a good relationship with Lu Sheng, so he suddenly called his wife out to let Lu Sheng have a look. Lu Sheng walked away very ashamed.

古文：乃知结缡之亲，命固前定，不可苟而求之也。
现代文：这才知道，挑选结婚的对象，都是命中预先确定的，不是强求能够成功的。
English: This is how we know that the selection of a marriage partner is predetermined by fate, not by force to be successful.

古文：郑还古
现代文：郑还古
English: Zheng Wanggu

古文：太学博士郑还古，婚刑部尚书刘公之女。纳吉礼后，与道士寇璋宿昭应县。夜梦乘车过小三桥，至一寺后人家，就与婚姻。主人姓房。
现代文：太学博士郑还古，与刑部尚书刘公的女儿订亲，选定婚期之后，他与道士寇璋夜晚住在昭应县，梦见坐车经过三座小桥，来到庙后面的一户人家，和一个姑娘结婚，主持人姓房。
English: Dr. Zheng Yangu, the dean of the university, became engaged to the daughter of Liu Gong, the secretary of the Ministry of Justice. After choosing the wedding date, he and Taoist priest Kou Ye stayed in Zhaoying County at night. He dreamed of driving through three small bridges to a house behind the temple and marrying a girl. The host was surnamed Fang.

古文：惊觉，与寇君细言，以纸笔记其事。
现代文：他惊醒后将梦中的情节详细地讲给寇璋听，并拿出纸笔，将这件事记录下来。
English: After he woke up, he recounted the details of the dream to Kou Ye, and took out a pen and paper to write it down.

古文：寇君曰： 新婚偶为此梦，不足怪也。 
现代文：寇璋说： 要结婚的时候偶然做这样的梦，没有什么可奇怪的。 
English: "There's nothing strange about accidentally having such a dream when you're about to get married," Kou said.

古文：刘氏寻卒，后数年，向东洛，再娶李氏。于昭城寺后假宅拜席日，正三桥，宅主姓韩。
现代文：妻子刘氏死了之后，过了几年，他又娶了东洛的李氏，在昭应县城庙后面的一户宅院举行婚礼的那天，正是路过了三座桥，房屋的主人姓韩。
English: After the death of his wife, Mr. Liu, a few years later, he married Mr. Li from Dongluo. On the day of the wedding, which was held in a house behind the city temple in Zhaoying County, they passed three bridges. The owner of the house was surnamed Han.

古文：时房直温为东洛少尹，是妻家旧，筵馔之类，皆房公所主。
现代文：当时房直温担任东洛少尹，他是李氏家里的老朋友，宴席仪式等都由他主持。
English: At that time, Fang Zhaowen served as Dongluo Shaoyin, he was an old friend of the Li family, and he presided over the banquet ceremony.

古文：还古乃悟昔年之梦，话于宾客，无不叹焉。
现代文：郑还古这时明白了，当年所做的一梦就是预示着今天的婚姻，他将这件事讲给大家听，客人们没有不感叹的。
English: At this time, Zheng Wanggu understood that the dream he had that year was a harbinger of today's marriage. He told everyone about this, and the guests couldn't help but sigh.

