古文：郭躬弟子镇陈宠子忠郭躬字仲孙，颍川阳翟人也。
现代文：◆郭躬传，郭躬字仲孙，颍川阳翟人。家中世代做官。
English: ◆ Guo Mian Chuan, Guo Mian Zi Zhong Sun, Xingchuan Yang Xuan Ren. Generations of officials in his family.

古文：家世衣冠。父弘，习《小杜律》。太守寇恂以弘为决曹掾，断狱至三十年，用法平。
现代文：父郭弘，学习《小杜律》太守寇恂用郭弘做决曹掾，断狱至三十年，用法公平。
English: His father, Guo Hong, learned "Little Du Lu" from the eunuch Guo Yao, and used Guo Hong to make a decision Cao Yao. He was sentenced to thirty years in prison, and the usage was fair.

古文：诸为弘所决者，退无怨情，郡内比之东海于公。
现代文：凡是被郭弘所判案子，退后没有怨恨之情，郡内将弘比为东海于公。
English: In all cases judged by Guo Hong, there is no resentment to retreat, and the county will compare Hong to the East China Sea in public.

古文：年九十五卒。
现代文：郭弘九十五岁死去。
English: Guo Hong died at the age of 95.

古文：躬少传父业，讲授徒众常数百人。
现代文：郭躬年少时即继承父业，讲授徒众常数百人。
English: When Guo Mian was young, he inherited his father's business and taught hundreds of students.

古文：后为郡吏，辟公府。
现代文：后来做了郡吏，召入公府。
English: Later, he became a county official and was called to the public office.

古文：永平中，奉车都尉窦固出击匈奴，骑都尉秦彭为副。
现代文：永平年间，奉车都尉窦固出兵打匈奴，骑兵都尉秦彭做副帅。
English: During the Yongping era, Feng Chariot Captain Dou Gu dispatched troops to fight the Xiongnu, and Cavalry Captain Qin Peng served as deputy commander.

古文：彭在别屯而辄以法斩人，固奏彭专擅，请诛之。
现代文：秦彭在别处驻扎而常按法杀人，窦固奏称秦彭专权，请求杀掉他。
English: Qin Peng was stationed elsewhere and often killed people in accordance with the law. Dou Guoqiao said that Qin Peng had the exclusive right and requested to kill him.

古文：显宗乃引公卿朝臣平其罪科。
现代文：显宗于是引公卿朝臣评定秦彭的罪科。
English: Emperor Xuanzong then brought in court nobles and courtiers to evaluate Qin Peng's criminal record.

古文：躬以明法律，召入议。
现代文：郭躬因为明白法律，召入朝参加评议。
English: Guo Wei was summoned to the DPRK to participate in the review because he understood the law.

古文：议者皆然固奏，躬独曰： 于法，彭得斩之。 
现代文：议论的人都同意窦固所奏，郭躬独自说： 在法律上，彭该斩首。 
English: All the commentators agreed with Dou Gu's statement, but Guo Mian said, "Legally, Peng should be beheaded."

古文：帝曰： 军征，校尉一统于督。
现代文：帝说： 军队出征，校尉一统于都督。
English: The emperor said, "The army has left for the war, and all the lieutenants have gathered at the capital.

古文：彭既无斧钺，可得专杀人乎？ 
现代文：彭既无斧钅戊，可以专权杀人吗？ 
English: Since Peng has no axe to grind, can he commit murder with absolute power?

古文：躬对曰： 一统于督者，谓在部曲也。今彭专军别将，有异于此。
现代文：郭躬答道： 一统于督，是讲部曲。今彭专军别将，和这有些不同。
English: Guo M replied: "Unity under one leader is a story. Now, Peng Chun's army is divided, and this is somewhat different.

古文：兵事呼吸，不容先关督帅。
现代文：兵事很紧迫如人之呼吸一般，不允许事先关照督帅。
English: Military affairs are as urgent as breathing. It is not allowed to take care of the superintendent in advance.

古文：且汉制戟即为斧钺，于法不合罪。 
现代文：况且汉朝的制度，螷卓戈就是斧钅戊，在法律上不算有罪。 
English: Moreover, the system of the Han Dynasty, that is to say, the rule of the axe and the rule of the sword, is not guilty in the eyes of the law.

古文：帝从躬议。
现代文：皇帝听从郭躬的意见。
English: The emperor listened to Guo Miao's advice.

古文：又有兄弟共杀人者，而罪未有所归。
现代文：又有兄弟一起杀人的，而罪行不好归在谁身上。
English: And there are brothers who kill together, and it is not good for the offense to be imputed to anyone.

古文：帝以兄不训弟，故报兄重而减弟死。
现代文：皇帝认为兄不管教弟，所以报称兄宜重判而弟减死罪。
English: The emperor thought that the elder brother did not care about the younger brother, so the report said that the elder brother should be sentenced to a heavy sentence while the younger brother reduced the death penalty.

古文：中常侍孙章宣诏，误言两报重，尚书奏章矫制，罪当腰斩。
现代文：中常侍孙章宣读诏书，误言两报重，尚书奏称孙章假传旨意，罪当腰斩。
English: Sun Zhang, the general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, read out the imperial edict. He was found guilty of two counts of making a false report, and was sentenced to be beheaded.

古文：帝复召躬问之，躬对 章应罚金 。
现代文：帝又召郭躬来问，郭躬答道： 孙章应罚金。 
English: The emperor also summoned Guo Miao to ask, and Guo Miao replied: Sun Zhang should be fined.

古文：帝曰： 章矫诏杀人，何谓罚金？ 
现代文：皇上说 ：孙章假传诏书杀人，怎么说只罚金？ 
English: The emperor said, "Sun Zhang forged the imperial edict and committed murder. How can he only be fined?"

古文：躬曰： 法令有故、误，章传命之谬，于事为误，误者其文则轻。 
现代文：郭躬说 ：法律上有故意杀人和误杀人之分，孙章传达命令的错误，属于误杀，误杀人在条文上就轻些。 
English: Guo Wei said: According to the law, there are intentional homicide and manslaughter. Sun Zhang's mistake in conveying the order is manslaughter, and manslaughter is lighter in terms of the provisions.

古文：帝曰： 章与囚同县，疑其故也。 
现代文：皇上说： 孙章与囚犯同县，疑他是故意。 
English: The emperor said, "Sun Zhang is from the same county as the prisoner, I suspect he did it on purpose."

古文：躬曰：  周道如氏，其直如矢。  君子不逆诈。 君王法天，刑不可以委曲生意。 
现代文：郭躬说 ： 大道如砥之平，其直如矢  ，君子不逆诈 ，君王以天为法，刑不可以委曲生意。 
English: Guo Wei said: The road is as smooth as a wheel and as straight as an arrow, a gentleman does not cheat, a monarch takes heaven as the law, and punishment cannot be imposed on business.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：皇上说： 好。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：迁躬廷尉正，坐法免。
现代文：授躬为廷尉正，后因犯法免职。
English: He was promoted to the rank of court lieutenant, but was later dismissed for violating the law.

古文：后三迁，元和三年，拜为廷尉。
现代文：后来三次升迁，元和三年，拜为廷尉。
English: Later, he was promoted three times, and in Yuan and three years, he became a court lieutenant.

古文：躬家世掌法，务在宽平，及典理官，决狱断刑，多依矜恕，乃条诸重文可从轻者四十一事奏之，事皆施行，著于令，章和元年，赦天下系囚在四月丙子以前减死罪一等，勿笞，诣金城，而文不及亡命未发觉者。
现代文：郭躬家世代掌法，务在宽平，当典理官时，决狱断刑，多依矜恕的原则办事，于是依照重刑可从轻发落的四十一件事奏之皇上，事都施行，著于法令。章和元年，赦天下在狱囚犯在四月丙子以前减死罪一等，不用笞刑，到金城，而文中没涉及逃亡未发觉的。
English: Guo Mijia's generation was in charge of the law, and he was in charge of Guangping. When he was a procurator, he was in charge of sentencing and punishment, and he acted more according to the principle of leniency. Therefore, according to the Emperor's Forty-one Cases in which Heavy Penalties Can Be Issued Lightly, all matters were implemented, written in the decree. In the first year of the year, the Emperor pardoned the prisoners in the world before April Fools' Day to reduce the death penalty to the first class, without flogging, to Jincheng, and the text did not involve escape undetected.

古文：躬上封事曰： 圣恩所以减死罪使戍边者，重人命也。
现代文：郭躬上封事道 ：圣恩减死罪使戍边的原因，是重在人命。
English: Guo Wen said at the ceremony: The reason why the death penalty was reduced by grace is that human life is important.

古文：今死罪亡命无虑万人，又自赦以来，捕得甚众，而诏令不及，皆当重论。
现代文：今死罪亡命的大概有万人，又自赦以来，捕得罪犯甚多，而诏令没有涉及，都应重罪论处。
English: About ten thousand people are currently serving life sentences for capital crimes, and many criminals have been arrested since the amnesty, but they are not covered by the edict, and all of them should be treated as serious crimes.

古文：伏惟天恩莫不荡宥，死罪已下并蒙更生，而亡命捕得独不沾泽。
现代文：想到天恩没有不宽厚，死罪以下都得到再生，而逃亡后被捕的却不沾恩泽。
English: It occurred to me that God's grace is not ungenerous. Those who committed capital crimes or less were regenerated, but those who were arrested after escaping did not receive any grace.

古文：臣以为赦前犯死罪而系在赦后者，可皆勿笞诣金城，以全人命，有益于边。 
现代文：臣以为赦免以前犯死罪而囚系在赦后的，可以都不用笞刑到金城，以保全人命，也有益于边疆。 
English: The courtiers thought that prisoners who had committed capital crimes before being pardoned and were imprisoned after being pardoned could go to Jincheng without being flogged in order to save lives and also benefit the frontier.

古文：肃宗善之，即下诏赦焉。
现代文：肃宗认为很好，立刻下诏赦免。
English: Su Zong thought it was a good idea and immediately issued an amnesty.

古文：躬奏谳法科，多所生全。
现代文：郭躬奏谳法科，多所保全性命。
English: Guo Wisong, a legal scholar, has saved many lives.

古文：若乃推己以议物，舍状以贪情，法家之能庆延于世，盖由此也！
现代文：永元六年，死在官府。中子郭日至，也明法律，官做到南阳太守，政有名迹。
English: Yongyuan six years, died in the government. Zhongzi Guo Zi, also known as the law, the official to do Nanyang Daju, politics famous.

古文：陈宠字昭公，沛国人也。
现代文：◆陈宠传，陈宠字昭公，沛国氵交人。
English: ◆ Chen Zhi Chuan, Chen Zhi Zi Zhao Gong, Pei Guo Zhi Jia Ren.

古文：曾祖父咸，成、哀间以律令为尚书。
现代文：曾祖父陈咸，成帝、哀帝时代以律令做尚书。
English: Chen Xian, the great-grandfather, used the ritsuryo code as a textbook in the era of Emperor Chengdi and Emperor Paidei.

古文：平帝时，王莽辅政，多改汉制，咸心非之。
现代文：平帝时，王莽辅政，多改动汉朝制度，陈咸心里不满。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ping, Wang Mang assisted the government and made many changes to the Han Dynasty system. Chen Xian was dissatisfied.

古文：及莽因吕宽事诛不附己者何武、鲍宣等，咸乃叹曰： 《易》称 君子见几而作，不俟终日 ，吾可以逝矣！ 
现代文：等到王莽因吕宽事杀掉不附自己的何武、鲍宣等，陈咸就叹息道： 《易经》上说 君子见机而作，不俟终日 ，吾可以逝矣！ 
English: When Wang Mang killed He Wu, Bao Xuan, and others who did not attach themselves to him because of the matter of Lü Guang, Chen Xian sighed: "The I Ching says that a gentleman does what he can, and does not hesitate all day, I can die!

古文：即乞骸骨去职。
现代文：立即请求离职而去。
English: He immediately asked to be relieved of duty and left.

古文：及莽篡位，召咸以为掌寇大夫，谢病不肯应。
现代文：等到王莽篡位，召陈咸以为掌寇大夫，陈以病为由不肯就职。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the throne, he called Chen Xian to assume the post of the head of the bandits. Chen refused to take the post on the grounds of illness.

古文：时，三子参、丰、钦皆在位，乃悉令解宫，父子相与归乡里，闭门不出入，犹用汉家祖腊。
现代文：这时三个儿子参、丰、钦都在官位，于是全部叫他们解除官职，父子一道回到乡里，闭门不出入，还是用汉家的习俗在腊月举行祭礼。
English: At this time, the three sons, San, Feng, and Qin, were all in official positions, so they were all dismissed from their official positions. Father and son returned to the countryside together, closed the door and did not enter, and still held a festival in Lazyue according to the customs of the Han family.

古文：人问其故，咸曰： 我先人岂知王氏腊乎？ 
现代文：人家问他的缘故，陈咸说： 我的先人难道知道王氏的腊祭吗？ 
English: When asked why, Chen Xianling said, "Did my ancestors know about the wax festival of the Wang clan?

古文：其后莽复征咸，遂称病笃。于是乃收敛其家律令书文，皆壁藏之。
现代文：后来王莽又召陈咸，就称病重，于是就收敛家中的律令书文，都藏在墙壁里面。
English: Later, Wang Mang called Chen Xian again and said that he was seriously ill, so he gathered all the legal documents at home and hid them inside the walls.

古文：咸性仁恕，常戒子孙曰： 为人议法，当依于轻，虽有百金之利，慎无与人重比。 
现代文：陈咸性格仁恕，常告诫子孙道： 替人议法，当依于轻，即使有百金的好处，切莫与人重比。 
English: Chen Xian had a forgiving nature and often admonished his children and grandchildren: When discussing the law on behalf of others, you should be light-hearted. Even if you have the benefit of a hundred gold coins, you should not be heavy-handed with others.

古文：建武初，钦子躬为廷尉左监，早卒。
现代文：建武初年，陈钦子陈躬做廷尉左监，早死。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, Chen Qin Zi Chen Wei became a courtier and left overseer, but died early.

古文：躬生宠，明习家业，少为州郡吏，辟司徒鲍昱府。
现代文：陈躬生了陈宠，明习家业，宠年轻时做过州郡吏，被召到司徒鲍昱府。
English: Chen Xi was born to Chen Zi, who was familiar with the family business. When Zi was young, he worked as a state and county official, and was called to Stowe's Bowen House.

古文：是时，三府掾属专尚交游，以不肯视事为高。
现代文：这时三府掾属专好交游，以不肯干事为高尚。
English: At this time, officials from the three prefectures were eager to travel together, and it was considered noble to refuse to be an official.

古文：宠常非之，独勤心物务，数为昱陈当世便宜。
现代文：陈宠常不以为然，独自勤心事务，几次对鲍昱陈述当代政治。
English: Chen Zhaozhong was often unconvinced. He was diligent in his own affairs and made several presentations on contemporary politics to Bao Tong.

古文：昱高其能，转为辞曹，掌天下狱讼。
现代文：鲍昱肯定宠的能耐，转为辞曹，掌天下的官司。
English: Bao Tong affirmed the ability of the pet, turned into a wordsmith, in charge of the world's lawsuits.

古文：其所平决，无不厌服众心。
现代文：他所判决很公平，没有不满足大家的心愿。
English: His decision was very fair and did not fail to satisfy everyone's wishes.

古文：时司徒辞讼，久者数十年，事类溷错，易为轻重，不良吏得生因缘。
现代文：当时司徒处理官司，久的拖延几十年，事情复杂，易为轻重，不良的官吏得依附以生轻重。
English: At that time, judges and magistrates dealt with lawsuits, long delays of decades, things were complicated, easy to be important, and bad officials had to attach importance.

古文：宠为昱撰《辞讼比》七卷，决事科条，皆以事类相从。
现代文：陈宠替鲍昱撰写《辞讼比》七卷，处理案情的科条，都用事类相从。
English: Chen Zhi wrote seven volumes of "Resignation and Litigation" for Bao Tong, and the articles dealing with the circumstances of the case are all based on the same categories.

古文：昱奏上之，其后公府奉以为法。
现代文：鲍昱奏上这个，后来公府奉之以为榜样。
English: Bao Tong played this, and later the government took it as a model.

古文：三迁，肃宗初，为尚书。
现代文：三次升迁，肃宗初年，做了尚书。
English: He was promoted three times, and in the first year of Sui Zong, he was made Shang Shu.

古文：是时承永平故事，吏政尚严切，尚书决事率近于重，宠以帝新即位，宜改前世苛俗。
现代文：这时继承永平年间的旧例，吏政提倡严厉，尚书处理案件一般偏于重判，陈宠认为皇上刚即位，应改变前代的苛刻政治。
English: At this time, following the old practice during the Yongping era, officials and politicians advocated strictness, and the handling of cases by official documents generally favored heavy sentences. Chen Zhui believed that the emperor had just ascended to the throne and should change the harsh politics of the previous generation.

古文：乃上疏曰：臣闻先王之政，常不僭，刑不滥，与其不得已，宁僭不滥。
现代文：于是上疏道： 臣下听说先王之政，赏不僭越，刑不滥用，与其不得已，宁可僭而不滥。
English: As a result, Shangxiao said, "Our vassals have heard that the former king's policies are not to be prized, not to be abused, and not to be abused, rather than being forced to do so.

古文：故唐尧著典， 眚灾肆赦 ；周公作戒， 勿误庶狱 ；伯夷之典， 惟敬五刑，以成三德 。
现代文：所以唐尧著有《尧典》，主张 眚灾肆赦 。周公作戒 ，勿误庶狱 伯夷之典，惟敬五刑，以成三德 。
English: For this reason, Tang Xuan wrote the "Book of Five Chastisements" and advocated "relief from calamity and forgiveness for all." Zhou Gong issued the commandment, "Do not mistake the Book of Five Chastisements for the Book of Five Chastisements for the Book of Three Virtues."

古文：由此言之，圣贤之政，以刑罚为首。
现代文：这样看来，圣贤之政，以刑罚为首。
English: From this perspective, the rule of sages is headed by punishment.

古文：往者断狱严明，所以威惩奸慝，奸慝既平，必宜济之以宽，陛下即位，率由此义，数诏群僚，弘崇晏晏。
现代文：过去断狱严明，所以从严处置坏人，坏人既平，必须以宽大为好。陛下即位，大都照此办理，多次号召群僚，大肆弘扬温和之政。
English: In the past, prison sentences were severe, so it was necessary to deal severely with bad people. Since the bad people were not bad, it was better to be lenient. When His Majesty ascended the throne, he mostly followed this procedure. He repeatedly called on his colleagues to vigorously promote a policy of moderation.

古文：而有司执事，未悉奉承，典刑用法，犹尚深刻。
现代文：而有司办事，没有全部照办，典刑用法，还提倡苛刻。
English: But there are departments to do things, not all are done, and the use of final punishment is also advocated to be harsh.

古文：断狱者急于格酷烈之痛，执宪者烦于诋欺放滥之交，或因公行私，逞纵威福。
现代文：审理案件急于严刑拷打，执法的烦于诋毁欺诈放滥之文字，有的还假公行私，作威作福。
English: In the rush to try cases, they are eager to torture, and law enforcement is tired of slandering, defrauding, and indulging in writing, and some are also engaged in false public and private conduct, and are arrogant.

古文：夫为政犹张琴瑟，大弦急者小弦绝。
现代文：为政等于弹琴，大弦急了小弦就会断绝。
English: Playing politics is like playing the piano. If the strings are too tight, the melody will break.

古文：故子贡非臧孙之猛法，而美郑乔之仁政。
现代文：所以子贡否定臧孙的猛法，而赞美郑之乔的仁政。
English: Therefore, Zigong denied the fierce law of Sun Yat-sen and praised the benevolent government of Zheng Zhiqiao.

古文：《诗》云： 不刚不柔，布政优优。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 不刚不柔，布政优优 。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If it is not firm, it is not soft, but if it is well-governed, it is excellent."

古文：方今圣德充塞，假于上下，宜隆先王之道，荡涤烦苛之法。轻薄楚，以济群生；全广至德，以奉天心。
现代文：当今圣德充塞天地，应遵照先王之道，清除烦苛之法。轻用刑罚，以济百姓，推广至德，以奉天心。 
English: Since today holiness fills heaven and earth, it is necessary to follow the path of the former king and eliminate the law of vexation. Lightly use punishment to help the people, promote virtue, and follow the heart of heaven.

古文：帝敬纳宠言，每事务于宽厚。
现代文：皇上恭敬采纳宠的话，每事提倡宽厚。
English: The emperor respectfully accepted the favor and advocated clemency in all matters.

古文：其后遂诏有司，绝钻钻诸惨酷之科，解妖恶之禁，除文致之请谳五十余事，定著于令。
现代文：后来号召有司，杜绝惨酷之刑罚，解除妖恶之禁令，革除前人无罪，文饰致于法中的五十多件事，定著在法令之上。
English: Later, there was a call for judges to eliminate cruel punishments, lift the ban on evil, and expunge the innocence of predecessors. More than 50 things that were written in the law were fixed on the law.

古文：是后人俗和平，屡有嘉瑞。
现代文：从此以后，民俗和平，屡有好兆出现。
English: Since then, the people have been peaceful, and there have been many good signs.

古文：汉旧事断狱报重，常尽三冬之月，是时帝始改用冬初十月而已。
现代文：汉朝惯例断案处死刑，常在三冬之月，这时皇帝才改用冬初十月而已。
English: According to the Han Dynasty's practice, the death penalty was usually pronounced in the third month of winter, but the emperor only changed it to the beginning of winter in October.

古文：元和二年，旱，长水校尉贾宗等上言，以为断狱不尽三冬，故阴气微弱，阳气发泄，招致灾旱，事在于此。
现代文：元和二年，旱灾，长水校尉贾宗等上言，认为断狱不尽三冬，所以阴气微弱，阳气发泄，招致旱灾，事情的根源在此。
English: In the year and two years of the Yuan Dynasty, the drought, Changshui Lieutenant Jia Zong and others made a speech, saying that the prison break would not last three winters, so the yin was weak and the yang was released, causing the drought, and the root of the matter was here.

古文：帝以其言下公卿议宠奏曰：夫冬至之节，阳气始萌，故十一月有兰、射干、芸、荔之应。
现代文：皇上把他的话交给公卿议论，陈宠奏道： 冬至这个节气，阳气才萌芽，所以十一月有兰花、射干、芸、荔等物发生。
English: The emperor gave his words to the nobles for discussion, and Chen Zhaozong said: The winter solstice is the solar term, and the yang qi only sprouts, so in November there are orchids, shooting, performing arts, ly and other things.

古文：《时令》曰： 诸生荡，安形体。 
现代文：《时令》说 ：诸生荡，安形体 。
English: "Season" says: All beings are wandering, and all forms are static.

古文：天以为正，周以为春。
现代文：天以为正，而周朝用为岁首。
English: Tian thought it was correct, but the Zhou Dynasty used it as the beginning of the year.

古文：十二月阳气上通，雉鸡乳，地以为正，殷以为春。
现代文：十二月阳气上通，家鸡野鸡孵化，地以为正，商代把它作为岁首。
English: In December, the yang is ascendant, domestic chickens and pheasants hatch, and the country thinks it is positive. The merchants regard it as the beginning of the year.

古文：十三月阳气已至，天地已交，万物皆出，蛰虫始振，人以为正，夏以为春。
现代文：十三月阳气已至，天地已交，万物都出，蛰虫开始振动，人以为正，夏朝把它作为岁首。
English: In March, the yang has arrived, heaven and earth have been handed over, everything is out, and the aphids begin to vibrate. People think it is positive, and the summer morning takes it as the beginning of the year.

古文：三微成著，以通三统。
现代文：三微成著，以通三统。
English: The three dynasties evolved the budding phenomenon of animals and plants into the three calendars of the adult dynasty, the earth dynasty, and the heavenly dynasty.

古文：周以天元，殷以地元，夏以人元。
现代文：周以天之始，商以地之始，夏以人之始。
English: Zhou is the beginning of heaven, Shang is the beginning of earth, Xia is the beginning of man.

古文：若以此时行刑，则殷、周岁首皆当流血，不合人心，不稽天意。
现代文：如果在这时行刑，那么商、周岁首都该流血，不合人心，不合天意。
English: If executions are carried out at this time, then the Shang and Zhou capitals should bleed, which is not in line with the will of the people and the will of Heaven.

古文：《月令》曰： 孟冬之月，趣狱刑，无留罪。 
现代文：《月令》说： 孟冬之月，趣狱刑，无留罪。 
English: "Monthly Order" said: Meng Dong's month, prison sentence, not guilty.

古文：明大刑毕在立冬也。
现代文：说明大刑完毕应在立冬哩。
English: This indicates that the execution should be completed by the beginning of winter.

古文：又： 仲冬之月，身欲宁，事欲静。 
现代文：《月令》又说： 仲冬之月，身欲宁，事欲静。 
English: "The Lunar Calendar" also says: In the midwinter month, the body is tranquil and things are quiet.

古文：若以降威怒，不可谓宁；若以行大刑，不可谓静。
现代文：如果以降威怒，不能说是宁；如果行大刑，不能说是静。
English: If it is followed by arrogance, it cannot be said to be peaceful; if it carries out capital punishment, it cannot be said to be peaceful.

古文：议者咸曰： 旱之所由，咎在改律。 
现代文：议论的人都说： 旱灾的由来，归咎于改律。 
English: Commentators say: The origin of the drought is to be blamed on the change in the law.

古文：臣以为殷、周断狱不以三微，而化致康平，无有灾害。
现代文：臣以为商、周断狱不以三微，而化成康平之世，没有灾害。
English: The vassal thought that the imprisonment of Shang and Zhou was not trivial, but would turn into a peaceful world with no disasters.

古文：自元和以前，皆用三冬，而水旱之异，往往为患。
现代文：自元和年间以前，都用三冬，而水旱的灾异，往往为患。
English: Since the Yuan Dynasty and before, there have always been three winters, and floods and droughts are often the cause.

古文：由此言之，灾异自为它应，不以改律。
现代文：由此说来，灾害自为它应，不是因为改动律法。
English: So the disaster came of its own accord, not because of any change in the law.

古文：秦为虐政，四时行刑，圣汉初兴，改从简易。
现代文：秦朝为虐政，四季都行刑，汉朝刚兴起，改从简易。
English: The Qin Dynasty was a tyrannical regime, and executions were carried out in all four seasons. The Han Dynasty was just emerging, and the punishment was changed from simple.

古文：萧何草律，季秋论囚，俱避立春之月，而不计天地之正，二王之春，实颇有违。
现代文：萧何草创刑律，定在季秋论囚，都是避免立春之月，而不考虑天地之正，及殷、周二王之春，实在有些违背正道。
English: Xiao He Cao's creation of the criminal law, and the setting of the prisoner's trial in the season of autumn, are to avoid the month of the beginning of spring, without considering the correctness of heaven and earth, and Yin, Tuesday's king of spring, are really somewhat contrary to the right path.

古文：陛下探幽析微，允执其中，革百载之失，建永年之功，上有迎承之敬，下有奉微之惠，稽《春秋》之文，当《月令》之意，圣功美业，不宜中疑。
现代文：陛下探幽析微，信执中正之道，革除百年的错失，建立永年之大功，上有迎承之教，下有奉承三微之惠，查《春秋》之文字，合《月令》的意思，圣功美业，不应怀疑。 
English: Your majesty should study and analyze the fine points, believe in and adhere to the correct way, eliminate the mistakes of a hundred years, establish the great merit of eternity, embrace the teachings on the one hand, and flatter the three benefits on the other, check the words of "Spring and Autumn" to match the meaning of "Lunar Calendar," and do not doubt the sacred merits and beauties.

古文：书奏，帝纳之，遂不复改。
现代文：书奏上，帝采纳了，便不再改动了。
English: In the case of calligraphy, once the emperor adopted it, it could not be changed.

古文：宠性周密，常称人臣之义，苦不畏慎。
现代文：陈宠性周密，常说人臣的意义，苦不畏慎。
English: Chen Zhaoxing is meticulous, often said to be the meaning of a vassal, and is not afraid to be cautious.

古文：自在枢机，谢遣门人，拒绝知友，惟在公家而已。朝廷器之。
现代文：自从在枢密机关后，谢遣门人，拒绝知心朋友，只在公家罢了，朝廷十分器重他。
English: Since, after his time in the Privy Council, he had only thanked those who showed him hospitality and rejected close friends in the public sector, the Imperial Court held him in the highest esteem.

古文：皇后弟侍中窦宪，荐真定令张林为尚书，帝以问宠，宠对 林虽有才能，而素行贪浊 ，宪以此深恨宠。
现代文：皇后的弟弟待中窦宪，推荐真定令张林做尚书，皇帝把这事问陈宠。宠答道 ：张林虽有才能，而平日行为有贪污。 窦宪因这深恨陈宠。
English: Dou Xian, the younger brother of the empress, recommended that Zhang Lin be promoted to the position of imperial secretary, and the emperor asked Chen Jia about this. Chen Jia replied that although Zhang Lin was talented, his everyday behavior was corrupt. Dou Xian deeply hated Chen Jia because of this.

古文：林卒被用，而以臧污抵罪。
现代文：张林终于被用了，而以臧氵于抵罪。
English: Zhang Lin was finally used, and he confessed to the crime.

古文：及帝崩，宪等秉权，常衔宠，乃白太后，令典丧事，欲因过中之。
现代文：皇帝死后，窦宪等掌权，常常对陈宠衔恨在心。于是报告太后，使宠主管丧事，想找过失中伤他。
English: After the death of the emperor, Dou Xian and others took power, and they often held a grudge against Chen Jiaqi. So they reported to the empress dowager, made Jiaqi responsible for the funeral, and wanted to find fault and slander him.

古文：黄门侍郎鲍德素敬宠，说宪弟夏阳侯瑰曰： 陈宠奉事先帝，深见纳任，故久留台阁，赏赐有殊。
现代文：黄门侍郎鲍德素来敬重陈宠，劝说窦宪之弟夏阳侯窦道： 陈宠侍奉先帝时，很被信任，所以久留在台阁，赏赐有些特殊。
English: Huangmen waiter Bao De has always respected Chen Ji, and persuaded Dou Xian's brother, Xia Yang Hou Dou, to do the same: Chen Ji was very trusted when he served the former emperor, so he stayed in Taigak for a long time, and the reward was somewhat special.

古文：今不蒙忠能之赏，而计几微之故，诚伤辅政容贷之德。 
现代文：今不受忠能的赏赐，而计较他细微的错失，的确有伤害辅政容贷之德。 
English: Now he is not rewarded for his loyalty, and considering his minor mistakes, he has indeed harmed the virtue of supporting the government and tolerating loans.

古文：瑰亦好士，深然之，故得出为太山太守。
现代文：窦也是好士之人，很以为对，所以陈宠得到出为太山太守的机会。
English: Dou was also a good man, and he thought it was right, so Chen Zhe was given the opportunity to become the governor of Taishan.

古文：后转广汉太守。
现代文：后来转为广汉太守。
English: Later, he became the governor of Guanghan.

古文：西州豪右并兼，吏多奸贪，诛讼日百数。
现代文：西州豪绅搞并兼，官吏多奸邪贪污，诉讼案每天百数件。
English: The wealthy gentry of Xizhou engage in mergers and acquisitions, government officials commit many crimes and corruptions, and there are hundreds of lawsuits every day.

古文：宠到，显用良吏王涣、镡显等，以为腹心，讼者日减，郡中清肃。
现代文：陈宠到任，用了良吏王涣、镡显等作为心腹，打官司的日渐减少，郡中清静严肃。
English: When Chen Zi took office, he used the good officials Wang Zi and Zou Xian as confidants. The number of lawsuits has gradually decreased, and the county is calm and serious.

古文：先是，洛县城南，每阴雨，常有哭声闻于府中，积数十年。
现代文：行旬雒县城南，每逢阴雨天气，常有哭声在府中听到，已经几十年了。
English: It has been decades since people in Seongnam, Gyeonggi County, often heard crying in the government office whenever the weather was rainy.

古文：宠闻而疑其故，使吏案行。
现代文：陈宠听说而疑其必有缘故，派官吏查察案情。
English: When Chen Zhaotong heard about it and suspected that there must be a reason, he sent officials to investigate the case.

古文：还言： 世衰乱时，此下多死亡者，而骸骨不得葬，傥在于是？ 
现代文：吏回来报告说： 世道衰乱之时，这下面多有死亡之人，而骸骨不得埋葬，可能原因就在这里么？ 
English: The magistrate came back and reported: When the world was in decline, there were many dead people down here, and the skeletons could not be buried. Could this be the reason?

古文：宠怆然矜叹，即敕县尽收敛葬之。
现代文：陈宠凄怆地叹惜，即命令县府全部收殓埋葬起来。
English: Chen Zhaodong lamented bitterly, that is, he ordered the county government to collect and bury them all.

古文：自是哭声遂绝。
现代文：从此哭声就没有了。
English: There was no more crying.

古文：及窦宪为大将军征匈奴，公卿以下及郡国无不遣吏子弟奉献遗者，而宠与中山相汝南张郴、东平相应顺守正不阿。
现代文：后来窦宪做大将军征匈奴，公卿以下及郡国没有人不派官吏子弟馈赠财物的，而陈宠与中山相汝南张郴、东平相应顺守正道不阿谀。
English: Later, Dou Xian became the general to conquer the Xiongnu, and there was no one below the nobility and the county who did not send gifts of wealth to the sons and sons of officials, while Chen Ji and Zhongshan Xuan Nan Zhang Ye and Dongping respectively followed the right path.

古文：后和帝闻之，擢宠为大司农，郴太仆，顺左冯翊。
现代文：后来和帝听说了，提升陈宠做大司农，张郴做太仆，应顺做左冯翊。
English: Later, when Emperor He heard about it, he promoted Chen Ji to the post of chief farmer, Zhang Ye to the post of eunuch, and Zuo Fengyu to the post of eunuch.

古文：永元六年，宠代郭躬为廷尉。
现代文：永元六年，陈宠代郭躬做廷尉。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongyuan era, Chen Zhaozhong replaced Guo Min as a court lieutenant.

古文：性仁矜。
现代文：性格仁慈矜特。
English: She has a benevolent personality.

古文：及为理官，数议疑狱，常亲自为奏，每附经典，务从宽恕，帝辄从之，济活者甚众。
现代文：后来做了审判官，多次议论疑案，常亲自上奏，每附经典，务从宽恕，皇帝常听从他，救活的犯人很多。
English: Later, he became a judge, repeatedly discussed doubtful cases, often personally played, each with a classic, must obey forgiveness, the emperor often listened to him, and many prisoners were saved.

古文：其深文刻敝，于此少衰。
现代文：那些深文刻敝的案件，这时才减少许多。
English: It was only then that the number of well-documented cases dropped significantly.

古文：宠又钩校律令条法，溢于《甫刑》者除之。
现代文：陈宠又清理律令条法，出于《甫刑》的除掉。
English: Chen Zhao also cleaned up the law of the ritsuryo code, which was removed from the "Final Punishment."

古文：曰：臣闻礼经三百，威仪三千，故《甫刑》大辟二百，五刑之属三千。
现代文：并且说： 臣听说礼经三百，威仪三千，所以《甫刑》杀头的大辟罪二百，五刑之类三千。
English: He also said, "The minister heard that there are three hundred rites and rituals, and three thousand dignities, so the punishment for killing a head is two hundred, and the five punishments are three thousand.

古文：礼之所去，刑之所取，失礼则入刑，相为表里者也。
现代文：礼之所去，刑之所取，失礼就入刑，相互为表里。
English: Where the courtesy goes, the punishment follows, and where the discourtesy is, the punishment follows.

古文：今律令死刑六百一十，耐罪千六百九十八，赎罪以下二千六百八十一，溢于《甫刑》者千九百八十九，其四百一十大辟，千五百耐罪，七十九赎罪。
现代文：今律令死刑六百一十，耐罪千六百九十八，赎罪以下二千六百八十一，出于《甫刑》的一千九百八十九，其中四百一十大辟，千五百耐罪，七十九赎罪。
English: At present, the number of death sentences is 610, the number of pardons is 1,698, and the number of pardons and commutations is 2,681. According to the "Final Punishment," the number of pardons and commutations is 1,989, of which 410 are pardons, 1,500 are commutations, and 79 are commutations.

古文：《春秋保乾图》曰： 王者三百年一蠲法。 
现代文：《春秋保乾图》说 ：王者三百年一蠲法。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Protection" said: The emperor reduces and exempts the criminal law once every three hundred years.

古文：汉兴以来，三百二年，宪令稍增，科条无限。
现代文：汉兴以来，三百二年，宪令稍增，科条无限。
English: Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it has been three hundred and two years, the laws and regulations have gradually increased, and the subjects are endless.

古文：又律有三家，其说各异。
现代文：又律有三家，其说各不相同。
English: There are also three schools of law, each of which has a different view.

古文：宜令三公、廷尉平定律令，应经合义者，可使大辟二百，而耐罪、赎罪二千八百，并为三千，悉删除其余令，与礼相应，以易万人视听，以致刑措之美，传之无穷。
现代文：应该令三公、廷尉平定律令，应经合义的，可使大辟二百，而耐罪、赎罪二千八百，并为三千，全部删除其余令，与礼相应，来改变万人的视听，以致得到刑措不用之美誉，传之无穷的后代。 
English: It should be ordered that the three kings and the court officials should be punished according to the law, and that those who should be punished according to the law should be punished 200 times, and those who should endure and atone for crimes should be punished 2,800 times, and those who should atone for crimes should be punished 3,000 times, and the remaining orders should all be deleted, so as to change the audio-visual of all people in accordance with the etiquette, so as to obtain the reputation of not using punitive measures, and pass it on to future generations.

古文：未及施行，会坐诏狱吏与囚交通抵罪。
现代文：来不及施行，碰上诏狱吏与囚犯交往抵罪。
English: Before it could be enforced, a prison officer was found guilty of consorting with a prisoner.

古文：诏特免刑，拜为尚书。
现代文：朝廷下诏免刑，拜为尚书。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict to commute his sentence, and he was pardoned.

古文：迁大鸿胪。
现代文：升为大鸿胪。
English: Cui Lin was promoted to Da Hongzhu.

古文：宠历二郡三卿，所在有迹，见称当时。
现代文：陈宠经历二郡三卿，所在都有事迹被称于当时。
English: Chen Zhao experienced two counties and three nobles, all of which were said to be successful at that time.

古文：十六年，代徐防为司空。
现代文：十六年，代徐防作司空。
English: Sixteen years later, he replaced Xu Bao as Siku.

古文：宠虽传法律，而兼通经书，奏议温粹，号为任职相。
现代文：陈宠虽专法律，而兼通经书，奏议温粹，号为任职相。
English: Although Chen Zhaotong is a specialist in law, he is also a scholar of scripture, and is known as a minister.

古文：在位三年薨。
现代文：在位三年死去。
English: He died three years into his reign.

古文：以太常南阳尹勤代为司空。
现代文：以太常南阳尹勤代为司空。
English: Tai Chang, Nanyang, and Yin Qin acted as the flight attendants.

