古文：渭水出陇西首阳县渭谷亭南鸟鼠山，渭水出首阳县首阳山渭首亭南谷，山在鸟鼠山西北。
现代文：渭水发源于陇西郡首阳县渭谷亭南边的鸟鼠山，渭水发源于首阳县首阳山的渭首亭南谷，首阳山在鸟鼠山西北。
English: Ershui originated in the south of Shugu Ting, Shuyang County, Shaanxi County, and originated in the south valley of Shugu Ting, Shuyang County. Shuyang Mountain is in the northwest of Shuyang Mountain.

古文：此县有高城岭，岭上有城，号渭源城，渭水出焉。
现代文：首阳县有高城岭，岭上有城，叫渭源城，渭水就发源在这里。
English: There is Gaocheng Ridge in Shouyang County, and there is a city on the ridge, which is called Yuyuan City. The source of the Yuanshui River is here.

古文：三源合注，东北流径首阳县西，与别源合，水南出鸟鼠山渭水谷，《尚书。禹贡》所谓渭出鸟鼠者也。
现代文：渭水由三个源头合流而成，往东北流经首阳县西，又与另匕个源头汇合。这个源头出自南边的鸟鼠山渭水谷，就是《尚书•禹声》所说的渭水发源于鸟鼠山。
English: Surabaya's water is formed by the confluence of three sources. It flows to the northeast through the west of Shouyang County, and then merges with another source. This source comes from the south of the Bird Mouse Mountain, Surabaya's water valley. That is, the "Shang Shu • Yu Sheng" says that Surabaya's water originates from the Bird Mouse Mountain.

古文：《地说》曰：鸟鼠山，同穴之枝干也。
现代文：《地说》说：鸟鼠山是同穴山的主脉。
English: "Say," said: "Bird Mouse Mountain is the main vein of Tongan Mountain.

古文：渭水出其中，东北过同穴枝间，既言其过，明非一山也。
现代文：渭水发源于其间，往东北流过同穴山支脉之间。既然说流过，显然就不是一座山了。
English: Surabaya's water originates in this area and flows to the northeast between the branches of the same mountain. Since it is said to have flowed, it is obviously not a mountain.

古文：又东北流而会于殊源也。
现代文：又往东北流，与另一个源头汇合。
English: It flows to the northeast again, where it meets up with another source.

古文：渭水东南流径首阳县南，右得封溪水，次南得广相溪水，次东得共谷水，左则天马溪水，次南则伯阳谷水，并参差翼注，乱流东南出矣。
现代文：渭水往东南流过首阳县南，在右边汇合了封溪水，稍南，汇合了广相溪水；稍东，汇合了共谷水；左边又有了天马水；稍南，有伯阳谷水。诸水参差地从两旁注入，乱流奔向东南。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast through the south of Shouyang County. On the right side, the water of Fong Creek converges. Slightly south, the water of Guangxiang Creek converges. Slightly east, the water of Gonggu River converges. On the left side, there is the water of Tianma River. Slightly south, there is the water of Boyang Valley. The water is injected unevenly from both sides, and the turbulent flow runs to the southeast.

古文：东北过襄武县北，广阳水出西山，二源合注，共成一川，东北流注于渭。
现代文：往东北流过襄武县北边，广阳水发源于西山，由两个源头合流成为一水，往东北流，注入渭水。
English: It flows to the northeast through the northern part of Xiangwu County. Guangyang Water originates from the West Mountain, merges from two sources to become one water, flows to the northeast, and injects water from the Xiangwu River.

古文：渭水又东南径襄武县东北，荆头川水入焉，水出襄武西南鸟鼠山荆谷，东北径襄武县故城北。
现代文：渭水又往东南流经襄武县东北，有荆头川水注入，荆头川水发源于襄武西南的鸟鼠山荆谷，往东北流经襄武县老城北边，王莽改名为相桓。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the northeast of Xiangwu County, and is injected with water from the Jingtou River. The water of the Jingtou River originates in the southwest of Xiangwu, in the Bird and Mouse Mountain Jing Valley, and flows to the northeast through the north of the old city of Xiangwu County. Wang Mang was renamed Sahuan.

古文：王莽更名相桓，汉护羌校尉温序行部，为隗嚣部将苟宇所拘，衔须自刎处也。
现代文：汉护羌校尉温序视察下属，被魄嚣部将苟宇所扣留，就在此处衔须自则。此水往东北流，注入渭水。
English: Lieutenant Han, who was inspecting his subordinates, was detained by General Guo Yu, commander of the crackdown department, and he had to go his own way. This water flowed to the northeast and was injected into Surabaya.

古文：其水东北流注于渭，渭水常若东南，不东北也。
现代文：渭水总是往东南流，而不是流向东北的。又往东流，有某水注入。
English: Surabaya's water always flows to the southeast, not to the northeast. It also flows to the east, and some water is injected.

古文：又东，枲水注之，水出西南雀富谷，东北径襄武县南，东北流入于渭。
现代文：棠水发源于西南的雀富谷，往东北流经襄武县南，往东北注入渭水。
English: The Tang water originates from the southwest of the Sparrow Valley, flows to the northeast through the south of Xiangwu County, and is injected into the northeast by the Surabaya water.

古文：《魏志》称：咸熙二年，襄武上言，大人见，身长三丈余，迹长三尺二寸，白发，著黄单衣巾，拄杖，呼民王始语云，今当太平。十二月，天禄永终，历数在晋。
现代文：《魏志》说，咸熙二年襄武县上书说，有巨人出现，身长三丈余，足迹长三尺二寸，满头白发，身穿黄色单衣，戴着黄头巾，拄杖呼叫了几声民王，方才说道：如今天下会太平了，到十二月，天位就此永远终结，要由晋朝来继承了。
English: "Weizhi" said that in the second year of the Han Dynasty, a document was written in Xiangwu County, saying that a giant appeared, with a height of more than three meters, a footprint of three feet and two inches long, a full head of white hair, wearing a yellow singlet, wearing a yellow headscarf, and a cane called out to the people's king several times, and then said: If today will be peaceful, by December, the heavenly throne will end forever, and it will be inherited by the Jin Dynasty.

古文：遂迁魏而事晋。
现代文：于是就废魏而奉晋。
English: As a result, the Wei Dynasty was abolished and replaced by the Jin Dynasty.

古文：又东过镡道县南，右则岑溪水，次则同水，俱左注之。
现代文：又往东流过源道县南边，渭水右边有岑溪水，接着是同水，都从左边注入；接着有过水，从右边注入。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Yuandao County. On the right side of Surabaya, there is water from Surabaya Creek, followed by the same water, both of which are injected from the left side; then there is water, which is injected from the right side.

古文：次则过水右注之，渭水又东南，径源道县故城西。
现代文：渭水又往东南流经源道县老城西。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the southeast, passing west of the old city in Yuen-do.

古文：昔秦孝公西斩戎之源王。
现代文：从前秦孝公西征，杀了戎族的源王。
English: Former Qin Xiaogong led a western expedition and killed the Emperor Yuan of the Wushu tribe.

古文：应劭曰：源，戎邑也。
现代文：应劭说：源是戎族的都邑。
English: Ying Yao said: "The source is the capital of the Wusong people.

古文：汉灵帝中平五年，别为南安郡。
现代文：汉灵帝中平五年，分地设立南安郡。
English: In the 5th year of Hanling Emperor Zhongping, Nan'an County was established separately.

古文：赤亭水出郡之东山赤谷，西流径城北，南入渭水。
现代文：赤亭水发源于该郡东山的赤谷，往西流过城北，往南注入渭水。
English: The Akatei Water originates in Akatani in the county's Higashiyama, flows west through the north of the city, and flows south into Surabaya.

古文：渭水又径城南，得粟水，水出西南安都谷，东北流注于渭。
现代文：渭水又流经城南，接纳了粟水。粟水发源于西南的安都谷，往东北流，注入渭水。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the south of the city, receiving poppy water. The poppy water originates in the southwest of Andú Valley, flows to the northeast, and is injected into Surabaya water.

古文：渭水又东，新兴川水出西南乌鼠山，二源合舍、东北流与彰川合。
现代文：渭水又东流，新兴川水发源于西南的鸟鼠山，两条水源汇合后，流经东北与彰川汇合。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the east. The water of the Xinxing River originates from the southwest of the Bird and Mouse Mountain. After the two water sources converge, it flows through the northeast and merges with the Changchuan River.

古文：水出西南溪下，东北至彰县南。
现代文：彰川发源于西南方的溪下，往东北流到彰县南边。
English: The Changchuan River originates in the southwest under the creek and flows to the northeast to the south of Chang County.

古文：本属故道候尉治，后汉县之，永元元年，和帝封耿秉为侯国也。
现代文：彰县原属故道候尉治所，后汉时立为县。永元元年，和帝将彰县封给耿秉，立为侯国。
English: Changxian County was originally under the jurisdiction of the late Daowuyi, and was established as a county in the late Han Dynasty. In the first year of the Yongyuan Dynasty, Emperor He assigned Changxian County to Geng Bing and established it as a vassal state.

古文：万年川水出南山，东北流注之。又东北注新兴川。
现代文：万年川水发源于南山，往东北流，注入彰川；又往东北流，注入新兴川。
English: The water of the Mannen River originates in Nanshan, flows to the northeast, and is injected into the Changchuan River; it also flows to the northeast, and is injected into the Xinxingchuan River.

古文：又东北径新兴县北，《晋书地道记》，南安之属县也。
现代文：又往东北流经新兴县北。按《晋书•地道记》，新兴县是南安郡的属县，水又往东北流，与南川水汇合。
English: It also flows to the northeast through the north of Xinxing County. According to the "Jinshu • Local History," Xinxing County is a county of Nan'an County, and the water flows to the northeast and merges with the Nanchuan Water.

古文：其水又东北，与南川水合，水出西南山下，东北台北水，又东北注于渭水。渭水又东径武城县西，武城川水入焉。
现代文：南川水发源于西南山下，往东北流与北水汇合；又往东北注入渭水。渭水又往东流经武城县西，有武城川水注入。
English: The Nanchuan River originates in the southwestern mountains, flows to the northeast to meet the Beishui River, and then flows to the northeast to inject the Surabaya River. The Surabaya River flows to the east through the west of Wucheng County, and is then injected by the Wucheng River.

古文：津源所导，出鹿部西山，两源合注，东北流径鹿部南，亦谓之鹿部水。
现代文：武城川水源出鹿部的西山，两条水源汇合后，往东北流经鹿部南，也叫鹿部水。
English: The source of the Wucheng River flows out of the western mountains of Ljubu. After the two water sources converge, it flows to the northeast through the south of Ljubu. It is also called Ljubu Water.

古文：又东北，昌丘水出西南丘下，东北注武城水，乱流东北注渭水。
现代文：又往东北流，昌丘水发源于西南的丘岗下，往东北注入武城水，然后往东北乱流，注入渭水。
English: It also flows to the northeast, the Changqiu water originates from the southwest under the hill, and the Wucheng water is injected to the northeast, and then the turbulent flow to the northeast, and the Surabaya water is injected.

古文：渭水又东入武阳川。又有关城川水出南，安城谷水出北，两川参差注渭水。
现代文：渭水又往东流，进入武阳川，又有关城川水自南而来，安城谷水自北而来，错落地注入渭水。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward, into the Wuyang River, and the relevant water of the city river comes from the south, and the water of the Ancheng Valley comes from the north, injecting Surabaya's water at random.

古文：渭水又东，有落门西山东流，三谷水注之，三川统一，东北流，注于渭水。
现代文：渭水又往东流，三府谷水注入，三府谷水源出落门西山，往东流，三水合为一流后，往东北注入渭水。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward, Sanfu valley water is injected, the source of Sanfu valley water flows out of the west mountain, flows eastward, and after the three waters are combined into one, Surabaya water is injected into the northeast.

古文：有落门聚，昔冯异攻落门，未拔而薨。
现代文：水边有个落门聚。从前冯异攻打落门，没有攻下就死了。
English: At the water's edge, there is a gathering of fallen enemies. Once upon a time, Feng Yixing attacked a fallen enemy and died without capturing it.

古文：建武十年，来歙又攻之，擒魄嚣子纯，陇右平。
现代文：建武十年，来款又去攻打，俘获魄嚣的儿子魄纯，平定了陇右。
English: In the tenth year of the Jianwu era, he went to attack and capture the son of Zhaozhong, Zhaozhong, and pacified the right flank.

古文：渭水自落门东至黑水峡，左右六水夹往。左则武阳溪水，次东得土门谷水，俱出北山，南流入渭。右则温谷水，次东有故城溪水，次东有间里溪水，亦名习溪水，次东有黑水，井出南山。
现代文：渭水从落门往东流到黑水峡，左右两边有六条水注入：左边有武阳溪水，稍东又接纳了土门谷水，两条水都发源于北山，南流注入渭水；右边则有温谷水，稍东有故城溪水，稍东有间里溪水―又名习溪，稍东有黑水，都发源于南山，北流注入渭水。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward from the gate to the Black Water Gorge, with six streams flowing into it on both sides: Wuyang Stream on the left, and Tumen Valley Water a little to the east. Both streams originate from the North Mountain, and the south stream flows into Surabaya water. On the right, there is Wenggu Water, a little to the east is the Old Town Stream, and a little to the east is the Jiali Stream - also known as Xi Creek, and a little to the east is the Black Water. Both streams originate from the South Mountain, and the north stream flows into Surabaya water.

古文：北流入渭，渭水又东出黑水峡，历冀川。
现代文：渭水又往东流，经黑水峡而出，流过冀川。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward, exiting through the Black Water Gorge and flowing through the Jie River.

古文：又东过冀县北，渭水自黑水峡至岑峡，南北十一水注之。
现代文：又往东流过冀县北边，渭水从黑水峡到岑峡之间，南北两边共有十一条水注入。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Ji County, and the floodwaters flow from the Black Water Gorge to the Dragon's Throat Gorge. A total of eleven rivers of water are injected from the north to the south.

古文：北则温谷水，导平襄县南山温溪，东北流，径平襄县故城南，故襄戎邑也。
现代文：北面有温谷水，导源于平襄县南山的温溪，往东北流经平襄县老城南边。
English: To the north is the Wen Valley Water, which originates from the Wen Creek in Nanshan, Pingxiang County, and flows northeast through the southern edge of the old city of Pingxiang County.

古文：王莽之所谓平相矣。
现代文：平襄就是旧时的襄戎邑，王莽称为平相。
English: Pingxiang is the old-time Xiang Rong Eup, Wang Mang is called Pingxiang.

古文：其水东南流，历三堆南，又东流南屈，历黄槐川，梗津渠，冬则辍流，春夏水盛则通川注渭。
现代文：此水往南流过三堆南；又东流南转，流入黄槐川。水道梗塞不畅，冬季断流，春夏水大时才能畅通，注入渭水。
English: This water flows southward through three piles of south; it also flows southward to the east and flows into the Huangpi River. The waterway is blocked, the flow is interrupted in winter, and it can only flow smoothly in spring and summer when the water is high, and it is injected with salty water.

古文：次则牛谷水，南入渭水。
现代文：接着是牛谷水，南流注入渭水。
English: Next is the Ushigaya water, and the south stream injects the Surabaya water.

古文：黑水西南出悬镜峡，又西南入瓦亭水，又有水自西来会，世谓之鹿角口。
现代文：南面有长堑谷水，稍东有安蒲溪水，稍东有衣谷水，都发源于南方的朱围山。山在梧中聚，有石鼓，不敲自会发响，鼓响就有战事。
English: In the south, there is the Nagasakitani water, in the east, there is the Anpu Creek water, and in the east, there is the Itakitani water, all of which originate from the Zhuwei Mountain in the south. The mountains are gathered in Wuzhong, and there are stone drums. If they are not beaten, they will start to sound, and if the drums are beaten, there will be war.

古文：又南径阿阳县故城东。中平元年，北地羌胡与边章侵陇右，汉阳长史盖勋屯阿阳以拒贼，即此城也。其水又南与燕无水合，水源延发东山，西注瓦亭水。
现代文：汉成帝鸿嘉三年北地羌胡与边章侵犯陇右，汉阳长史盖勋驻兵于阿阳，抵抗敌兵，就是此城。瓦亭水又往南流，与燕无水汇合，燕无水源头远出于东山，往西流注入瓦亭水。
English: In the 3rd year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hongjia invaded the northern provinces of Yanhu and Bianzhang, and the Hanyang chancellor Shigexun stationed troops in Ayang to resist the enemy soldiers. This is the city. The Watting water flowed southward and merged with the Yan no water. The source of the Yan no water flowed far from the east mountain and flowed westward into the Watting water.

古文：瓦亭水又南，左会方城川，西注瓦亭水。
现代文：瓦亭水又往南流，左边与方城川汇合，往西流注入瓦亭水。
English: Watating Water flows southward, merges with Fangcheng River on the left, and flows westward to infuse Watating Water.

古文：瓦亭水又南，径成纪县东，历长离川，谓之长离水。
现代文：瓦亭水又往南流，经过成纪县东边，流过长离川，称为长离水，右边与成纪水汇合。
English: Watating water flows southward, passing through the east of Chengji County, flowing through the Changli River, known as the Changli Water, and merging with the Chengji Water on the right.

古文：右与成纪水合，水导源西北当亭川，东流出破石峡，津流遂断。
现代文：成纪水发源于西北的当亭川，东经破石峡流出，水流就断了。
English: The Chengji flood originates from the northwest of the Doting River, and flows out of the east through the Broken Rock Gorge, and the water flow is broken.

古文：故渎东径成纪县。
现代文：旧水道东经成纪县，汉时立为天水郡。
English: The old waterway ran eastward through Chengji County, and became Tianshui County in Han Dynasty.

古文：故帝大皞庖牺所生之处也。
现代文：古代帝王太峰、厄牺就降生在这里。
English: The ancient emperors Taifeng and Yue were born here.

古文：汉以为夭水郡县，王莽之阿阳郡治也。
现代文：成纪县是王莽阿阳郡的治所。
English: Chengji County is the county seat of Wang Mang Ayang County.

古文：又东，潜源隐发，通入成纪水，东南入瓦亭水。
现代文：又往东，地下的伏流又冒出来了，通入成纪水，往东南注入瓦亭水。
English: Further to the east, underground undercurrents emerged again, flowing into the Chengji Water and the Watting Water to the southeast.

古文：瓦亭水又东南，与受渠水相会，水东出大陇山，西径受渠亭北，又西南入瓦亭水。
现代文：瓦亭水又往东南流，与受渠水汇合。受渠水发源于东方的大陇山，往西流经受渠亭北边，又往西南注入瓦亭水。
English: Watatei water flows to the southeast and merges with the canalized water. The canalized water originates from the Dabaoshan Mountains in the east, flows westward through the northern side of Watatei, and injects Watatei water to the southwest.

古文：瓦亭水又西南流，历僵人峡。
现代文：瓦亭水又往西南流，穿过僵人峡。
English: The Watting water also flows to the southwest, passing through the Jianren Gorge.

古文：路侧岩上有死人僵尸峦穴，故岫壑取名焉。
现代文：路旁岩上一个山洞里有人死后成为僵尸，所以峡谷以僵人为名。
English: In a cave on a rock by the road, someone died and became a zombie, so the canyon is named after the zombie.

古文：释鞍就穴直上，可百余仞，石路逶迤，劣通单步，僵尸倚窟，枯骨尚全，唯无肤发而已。
现代文：下马一直朝山洞攀登约百余初，石径弯弯曲曲，勉强可容一人通行。僵尸倚着洞壁，尸骸还完好，只是没有皮肤头发而已。
English: After dismounting, it was about the hundredth time of climbing towards the cave. The stone path was crooked, barely allowing one person to pass. The zombie was leaning against the cave wall. The corpse was still intact, but without skin or hair.

古文：访其川居之士，云其乡中父老作童儿时，已闻其长旧传此，当是数百年骸矣。
现代文：访间在水边居住的人，说是乡中老人小时就早已听到长辈说起了。那么僵尸应当是数百年前的骸骨了。
English: People who live near the water during the visit said that the elderly in the village had already heard the elders speak about it. Then the zombie should be a skeleton from hundreds of years ago.

古文：其水又西南与略阳川水合，水出陇山香谷西，西流，右则单溪西注，左则阁川水入焉。
现代文：瓦亭水又往西南流，与略阳川水汇合。略阳川水发源于陇山香谷西，往西流，右边有单溪往西注入，左边有阁川水流进来。
English: The Watting water flows to the southwest and merges with the water of the Liaoyang River. The water of the Liaoyang River originates from the west of Lushan Xiangyuan and flows westward. On the right, there is a single stream flowing westward, and on the left, there is water from the Gege River.

古文：其水又西历蒲池郊，石鲁水出东南石鲁溪，西北注之。
现代文：水又往西流，经蒲池郊，发源于东南方石鲁溪的石鲁水，往西北注入。
English: The water also flows westward, passing through the outskirts of Putu, originating from the southeast of Shilu Creek, Shilu Water, and injected into the northwest.

古文：其水又西历略阳川，西得破社谷水，次西得平相谷水，又西得金里谷水，又西得南室水，又西得蹄谷水，并出南山，北流于略阳城东，扬波北注。
现代文：水又往西流经略阳川，往西流接纳了破社谷水，稍西又接纳了平相谷水，又西接纳了金里谷水，又西接纳了南室水，又西接纳了蹄谷水―诸水都发源于南山，北流到略阳城东，扬着轻波往北注入川水。
English: The water also flows westward through the Liaoyang River, and the westward flow receives the water of the Basha Valley, the westward flow receives the water of the Pingjia Valley, the westward flow receives the water of the Jinli Valley, the westward flow receives the water of the South Chamber, and the westward flow receives the water of the Hoof Valley - all the water originates from the Nanshan Mountains, flows north to the east of Liaoyang City, and carries light waves to the north to inject river water.

古文：川水又西径略阳道故城北，埿渠水出南山，北径埿峡北，入城。
现代文：川水又往西流，经过略阳道老城北面，坚渠水发源于南山，往北流经坚峡北面，流入城中。
English: The river water flows westward, passing through the north side of the old city of Liaoyang Road. The strong canal originates from the Nanshan, flows northward through the north side of the Jian Gorge, and flows into the city.

古文：建武八年，中郎将来歙，与祭遵所部护军王忠、右辅将军朱宠将二千人，皆持卤刀斧。自安民县之杨城。
现代文：建武八年，中郎将来款与祭遵部下护军王忠、右辅将军朱宠，率领二千人，都持着刀斧，从安民县去到杨城。
English: In the eighth year of the Jianwu era, the middle brother, the future emperor, and his subordinates, the guards Wang Zhong and the right assistant general Zhu Zhu, led 2,000 people, all holding swords and axes, from Anmin County to Yangcheng.

古文：元始二年，成帝罢安定滹沱苑以为安民县，起官寺市里。
现代文：安民县是元始二年，平帝撤废安定淖沱苑后所立，当时修建官署和街市里巷。
English: Anmin County was established in the first two years of the Yuan Dynasty, after the abolition of the Anping Yingyuan by Emperor Ping. At that time, government offices and streets and alleys were built.

古文：从番须回中，伐树木，开山道，至略阳，夜袭击嚣，拒守将金梁等，皆杀之，因保其城，隗嚣闻略阳陷，悉众以攻歙，激水灌城。
现代文：他们从番须、回中砍掉树木，开辟了一条到略阳的山路，对魄嚣的守将金梁等发起夜袭，把他们都杀了。占领了此城。魄嚣听说略阳失陷就调动了所有的军队去进攻来款，并决水灌城。
English: They cut down trees from Fansu and Huizhong, opened up a mountain road to Liaoyang, and launched a night attack on the valiant defenders, such as Jin Liang, and killed them all. They occupied the city. When the valiant heard that Liaoyang had fallen, they mobilized all the troops to attack the enemy, and flooded the city.

古文：光武亲将救之，嚣走西城，世祖与来歙会于此。
现代文：光武帝亲自领兵去援救，魄嚣逃往西城，世祖与来款在此会师。
English: Emperor Guangwu personally led the soldiers to the rescue, and fled to the west city. The founder and the new emperor met here.

古文：其水自城北注川，一水二川，盖嚣所堨以灌略阳也。
现代文：堡渠水从城北注入川中，一水分成两条，大概就是魄嚣拦河引水淹略阳城时形成的。
English: The water of the castle canal is injected into the river from the north of the city, and one water is divided into two, which was probably formed when the river was brazenly diverted to flood Yangcheng.

古文：川水西得白杨泉，又西得蒲谷水，又西得蒲谷西川，又西得龙尾溪水，与蒲谷水合，俱出南山飞清，北入川水。
现代文：川水往西流，接纳了白杨泉；又往西流，接纳了蒲谷水；又往西流，接纳了蒲谷西川；又往西流，接纳了龙尾溪水，与蒲谷水汇合。诸水都发源于南山，清流飞溅，往北注入川水。
English: The river water flows westward and receives the Poplar Spring; it also flows westward and receives the Po Valley Water; it also flows westward and receives the Po Valley West River; it also flows westward and receives the Longwei Creek Water and merges with the Po Valley Water. All the water originates from the Nanshan Mountain, and the clear stream splashes and injects the river water to the north.

古文：川水又西南得水洛口，水源东导陇山，西径水洛亭，西南流，又得犊奴水口，水出陇山，西径犊奴川，又西径水洛亭南，西北注之，乱流西南，径石门峡，谓之石门水，西南注略阳川。
现代文：川水又往西南流，就到水洛口。此口的水源出东方的陇山，西经水洛亭，往西南流，又到犊奴水口。此口的水发源于陇山，往西流过犊奴川，又往西流经水洛亭南，往西北注入川水，乱流往西南穿过石门峡，称为石门水，往西南注入略阳川。
English: The water of the river flows to the southwest and reaches the Shuiluokou. The water source of this mouth originates in Shaoshan in the east, passes through Shuiluoting in the west, flows to the southwest, and reaches the Jinuu water outlet. The water of this mouth originates in Shaoshan, flows westward through the Jinuu River, flows westward through the south of Shuiluoting, and injects the river water to the northwest. The turbulent flow passes through the Shimen Gorge to the southwest, known as the Shimen Water, and injects the Liaoyang River to the southwest.

古文：略阳川水又西北流入瓦亭水。
现代文：略阳川水又往西北流，注入瓦亭水。
English: The water of the Liaoyang River flows to the northwest and is injected into the water of the watchtower.

古文：瓦亭水又西南出显亲峡，石宕水注之。
现代文：瓦亭水又往西南流出显亲峡，有石宕水注入。
English: Watating water flows out of Hsien Kiang Gorge to the southwest, and is injected with Shitago water.

古文：水出北山，山上有女娲祠。
现代文：石宕水发源于北山，山上有女蜗祠。
English: Ishitago water originates from Kitayama, and there is a shrine of a female godmother on the mountain.

古文：庖羲之后，有帝女娲焉，与神农为三皇矣。
现代文：厄羲以后有女蜗，与神农合称三皇。水往南流，注入瓦亭水。
English: After the Egret, there was the Maiden Egret, also known as the Three Emperors together with the Shennong. The water flowed to the south and was injected into the Watingting River.

古文：其水南流，注瓦亭水，瓦亭水又西南径显亲县故城东南，汉封大鸿胪窦固为侯国。
现代文：瓦亭水又往西南流，经过显亲县老城东南，汉时将该县封给大鸿肿窦固，立为侯国。
English: The Watting water also flows to the southwest, passing southeast of the old town of Xianqian County. During the Han Dynasty, the county was given to Dahongwu Dougu and established as a princely state.

古文：自石宕次得虾蟆溪水，次得金黑水，又得宜都溪水，咸出左右，参差相入。
现代文：从石宕以下，接着有虾蟆溪水，接着有金黑水，接着又有宜都溪水，都是从左右两边流来，参差地注入瓦亭水。
English: From Ishitago and below, there is the water of the Shrimp Creek, followed by the water of the Gold and Black Creek, followed by the water of the Yidu Creek, all of which flow from the left and right sides and are mixed with the water of the watchtower.

古文：瓦亭水又东南合安夷川口，水源东出胡谷，西北流历夷水川，与东阳川水会，谓之取阳交。
现代文：瓦亭水又往东南流，汇合于安夷溪川口，安夷溪水源出东边的胡谷，往西北流经夷水川，与东阳川水汇合，汇流处叫取阳交。
English: The Watting Water also flows to the southeast and meets at the mouth of the Anyi River. The source of the Anyi River flows out of the Hutu Valley in the east, flows northwest through the Anyi River, and meets the water of the Dongyang River. The confluence is called Yangjiao.

古文：又西得何宕川水，又西得罗汉水，并自东北西南注夷水。
现代文：又往西流，汇合了何宕川水；又往西流，汇合了罗汉水―二水都从东北流来，往西南注入夷水。
English: It also flows to the west, merging with the water of the Hotago River; it also flows to the west, merging with the water of the Luohan River - the two waters flow from the northeast, injecting the Yiwu water to the southwest.

古文：夷水又西径显亲县南，西注瓦亭水。
现代文：夷水又往西流过显亲县南，往西注入瓦亭水。
English: The floodwaters also flowed westward through the south of Hsien Chien County and westward into the Watingting River.

古文：瓦亭水又东南，得大华谷水，又东南，得折里溪水，又东，得六谷水，皆出近溪湍峡，注瓦亭水。
现代文：瓦亭水又往东南流，接纳了大华谷水；又往东南流，接纳了折里溪水；又往东流，接纳了六谷水―诸水都发源于附近峡谷的急流，注入瓦亭水。
English: The Watting water flows to the southeast and receives the Dahua valley water; it flows to the southeast and receives the Ori creek water; it flows to the east and receives the Rokkoku water - all the waters originate from the rapids of the nearby canyon and are injected into the Watting water.

古文：又东南出新阳峡，崖岫壁立，水出其间，谓之新阳崖水，又东南注于渭也。
现代文：瓦亭水又往东南流出新阳峡，两边崖岸陡峭如壁，水流经过其间，称为新阳崖水；又往东南注入渭水。
English: The Watting water flows out of the Xinyang Gorge to the southeast, the cliff banks on both sides are steep as a wall, and the water flow through them is called the Xinyang cliff water; it also flows into the Xinyang Gorge to the southeast.

古文：又东过上邦县，渭水东历县北邽山之阴，流径固岭东北，东南流，兰渠川水出自北山，带佩众溪，南流注于渭。
现代文：又往东流过上邦县，渭水往东流，经过上卦县北面的卦山北麓，流经固岭东北，往东南流，有发源于北山的兰渠川水，带同诸溪南流注入渭水。
English: It also flows eastward through Shangbang County, Surabaya water flows eastward, passes through the northern foot of the Guashan Mountain in the north of Shanggua County, flows through the northeast of Guling, flows southeastward, and has the Lancu River water originating from the North Mountain, with the southern stream of the Juxi River injecting Surabaya water.

古文：渭水东南与神涧水合。《开山图》所谓灵泉池也，俗名之为万石湾。渊深不测，实为灵异，先后漫游者，多罹其毙。
现代文：渭水往东南流，与神涧水汇合，就是《开山图》所谓的灵泉池，俗名万石湾，深不可测，非常灵异，先后有不少游人在这里淹死。
English: The Surabaya water flows to the southeast and merges with the Shenshan water, which is the so-called spiritual spring pool in the "Kaishan Map." Commonly known as Wanshi Bay, it is unfathomable and very magical. Many tourists have drowned here.

古文：渭水又东南，得历泉水，水北出历泉溪，东南流注于渭。
现代文：渭水又往东南流，接纳了历泉水，历泉水发源于北边的历泉溪，往东南注入渭水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, receiving the waters of Licheng Spring. Licheng Spring water originates from Licheng Creek in the north and flows into Surabaya water to the southeast.

古文：渭水又东南，出桥亭西，又南得藉水口，水出西山，百涧声流，总成一川，东历当亭川，即当亭县洽也。
现代文：渭水又往东莆流，从桥亭西边流出；又往南流，就到藉水口。此口的水发源于西山，成百条山涧水涂涂流泻，汇集成一条山溪，往东流经当亭川，当亭县的治所就在这里。
English: The torrent flows eastward and flows out from the west side of the bridge pavilion; it flows southward and reaches the water outlet. The water at this outlet originates from the west mountain, and hundreds of torrents of mountain torrents flow and gather into a mountain stream, flowing eastward through the Doting River. The administrative center of Doting County is here.

古文：左则当亭水，右则曾席水注之。
现代文：左边有当亭水，右边有曾席水注入。
English: On the left there is water from the pavilion, on the right there is water from the seating area.

古文：又东与大弁川水合，水出西山，二源合注，东历大弁川，东南流注于藉水。
现代文：又往东流，与大弃川水汇合，川水发源于西山，二源汇合后，东经大弃川，往东南流注入藉水。
English: It also flows to the east, merging with the water of the Great Forsaken River. The river water originates from the West Mountain, and after the two sources converge, it flows to the east through the Great Forsaken River and flows into the southeast.

古文：藉水又东南流，与竹岭水合，水出南山竹岭，二源同泻，东北入籍水。
现代文：藉水又往东南流，与竹岭水汇合。竹岭水发源于南山竹岭，二源同流，往东北注入藉水。
English: The water of Zhuling originates from Nanshan Zhuling, the two sources flow together, and the water of Zhuling is injected into the northeast.

古文：藉水又东北径上邦县，左佩四水：东会占溪水，次东有大鲁谷水，次东得小鲁谷水，次东有杨反谷水，咸自北山流注藉水。
现代文：藉水又往东北流经上卦县，左边流来四条水：往东先汇合了占溪水，稍东有大鲁谷水，稍东是小鲁谷水，稍东有杨反谷水―诸水都从北山流来，注入藉水。
English: By water, it flows to the northeast through Shanggua County, and four waters flow to the left: to the east is the confluence of Zhan Creek, a little to the east is Dalu Valley Water, a little to the east is Xiaolu Valley Water, and a little to the east is Yangtang Valley Water - all the waters flow from the North Mountain and are injected by water.

古文：藉水右带四水，竹岭东得乱石溪水，次东得木门谷水，次东得罗城溪水，次东得山谷水，皆导源南山，北流入籍水。
现代文：藉水右边也流来四条水：在竹岭东，汇合了乱石溪水，稍东有木门谷水，稍东有罗城溪水，稍东有山谷水，都发源于南山，北流注入藉水。
English: On the right side of the stream, there are also four streams: in the east of Zhuling, the confluence of the Chaoshi Creek, a little east of the Kumen Valley Water, a little east of the Luocheng Creek, and a little east of the valley water. They all originate from Nanshan, and the north stream is injected by the stream.

古文：藉水又东，黄瓜水注之，其水发源黄爪西谷，东流径黄爪县北，又东，清溪白水左右夹注。
现代文：藉水又往东流，有黄瓜水注入。黄瓜水发源于黄瓜西谷，往东流经黄瓜县北；又往东流，清溪和白水从左右两边注入。
English: The Cucumber Water originates in the West Cucumber Valley and flows eastward through the north of Cucumber County; flowing eastward, the Clear Creek and White Water are injected from both sides.

古文：又东北，大旱谷水南出旱溪，历涧北流，泉溪委漾，同注黄瓜水。
现代文：又往东北流，大旱谷水发源于南边的旱溪，经山涧北流，溪流透逸长流，一同注入黄瓜水。
English: It also flows to the northeast, and the water of the Great Arid Valley originates from the Arid Creek in the south, flows through the mountains and the north stream, and the stream flows through the long stream, together injecting cucumber water.

古文：黄爪水又东北历赤谷，咸归于藉。
现代文：黄瓜水又往东北流，穿过赤谷，都汇集于藉水。
English: The cucumber water then flows to the northeast, passing through the Akaya Valley, and all of it collects in the Kuruma River.

古文：藉水又东，得毛泉谷水，又东径上邦城南，得核泉水，并出南山，北流注于藉。
现代文：藉水又往东流，接纳了毛泉谷水；又往东流经上卦城南，接纳了窍泉水―二水都发源于南山，北流注入藉水。
English: Both water sources originate from Nanshan Mountain, and the north stream is fed by the water from the Maoquan Valley.

古文：藉水，即洋水也。
现代文：藉水就是洋水。北有檬水注入。
English: By water is foreign water. The north is infused with lemonade.

古文：北有濛水注焉，水出县西北邽山，翼带众流，积以成溪，东流南屈，径上邦县故城西，侧城南出。
现代文：檬水发源于上卦县西北的卦山，两边汇合了许多涧水，汇集成为溪流，东流南转，流经上卦县老城西，傍着城边往南流出上卦县境。
English: The lemonade originates from the Gua Mountain in the northwest of Shanggua County. A lot of brackish water converges on both sides of the mountain and gathers into a stream. The east stream turns south and flows through the west of the old city of Shanggua County. It flows south along the edge of the city and flows out of the border of Shanggua County.

古文：上邦，故邦戎国也。
现代文：七卦就是古时的圭队是个戎族小国。
English: In ancient times, Gyeongju was a small military state.

古文：秦武公十年，伐邽县之，旧天水郡治。
现代文：秦武公十年伐卦，设置为县，是旧天水郡的治所。
English: Qinwukong's ten-year campaign, set up as a county, is the administrative center of the old Tianshui County.

古文：五城相接，北城中有湖水，有白龙出是湖，风雨随之，故汉武帝元鼎三年，改为天水郡。
现代文：这里有五城相连接，北城中有湖水，湖中曾出现过白龙，随着就是一阵风雨，所以汉武帝元鼎三年，把它改名为天水郡。
English: There are five cities connected here, and there is a lake in the northern city. A white dragon once appeared in the lake, followed by a storm, so Emperor Hanwu renamed it Tianshui County in the third year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：其乡居悉以板盖屋，《诗》所谓西戎板屋也，濛水又南注藉水。
现代文：郡中乡间的民房都用木板盖成，就是《诗经》里的所谓西戎板屋。檬水又南流注入藉水。
English: The houses in the middle and rural areas of the county are all made of wooden planks, which is the so-called Xi Rong board house in the "Song of Songs." The lemonade is infused with water from the south stream.

古文：《山海经》曰：邽山，邽水出焉，而南流注于洋，谓是水也。
现代文：《山海经》说：圭卜山，壕水就发源在这里，南流注入洋水，指的就是此水。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: Mount Guib, the trench water originated here, the southern current injected the ocean water, referring to this water.

古文：藉水又东得阳谷水，又得宕谷水，并自南山北入于藉。
现代文：藉水又往东流，接纳了阳谷水，又接纳了宕谷水，都从南山北流，注入藉水。
English: The Nanshan River flows to the east and receives the Yanggu River and the Tagu River, both of which flow from the Nanshan River to the north and are fed by the Nanshan River.

古文：藉水又东合段溪水，水出西南马门溪，东北流合藉水。
现代文：藉水又往东流，汇合了段溪水。段溪水发源于西南方的马门溪，往东北流，汇合于藉水。
English: The water of Duan Creek originates from the southwest of Ma'men Creek and flows to the northeast, where it meets the water of Duan Creek.

古文：藉水又东入于渭。
现代文：藉水又往东流，注入渭水。
English: Through the water, it flows to the east, injecting brackish water.

古文：渭水又历桥亭南，而径绵诸县东，与东亭水合，亦谓之为桥水也，清水又或为通称矣。
现代文：渭水又经过桥亭南，流经绵诸县东边，与东亭水汇合，又称桥水，清水或者也是通称。
English: Surabaya water passes south of Qiao Ting and flows through the eastern edge of Mian Zhu County, merging with Dongting water, also known as bridge water, clear water or also commonly known.

古文：水源东发小陇山，众川泻注，统成一水，西入东亭川为东亭水，与小祗、大祗二水合。
现代文：水源出自东方的小陇山，诸涧流泻，合成一水，往西流入东亭川，就是东亭水，与小抵、大抵二水汇合。
English: The source of the water comes from the Xiaobai Mountain in the east, and flows down from the mountains to form one water, which flows into the Dongting River in the west, that is, the Dongting water, and merges with the small tributary and the large tributary of the second water.

古文：又西北得南神谷水，三川并出，东南差池泻注。
现代文：又往西北流，接纳了南神谷水。这三条水都发源于东南方，参差错落地流泻着。
English: It also flows to the northwest and receives water from the South Shingle Valley. All three rivers originate in the southeast and have a jagged course.

古文：又有埋蒲水，翼带二川，与延水并西南注东亭水。
现代文：又有埋蒲水，带着侧翼的两条川流，与延水一同往西南注入东亭水。
English: There is also a buried stream, flanked by two streams, which, together with the main stream, flows south-west into the East Pavilion.

古文：东亭水又西，右则叹沟水，次西得宕谷水，水出东南，二溪西北流，注东亭川。
现代文：东亭水又往西流，右边有叹沟水，稍西又有鞠谷水，发源于东南方，二溪都往西北流，注入东亭川。
English: The Dongting Water also flows westward. On the right, there is the Sighing Ditch Water, and a little to the west, there is the Jugu Water. It originates in the southeast, and the two streams flow northwest into the Dongting River.

古文：东亭川水，右则温谷水，出小陇山，又西，莎谷水出南山莎溪，西南注东亭川水。
现代文：东亭川水的右边，有温谷水发源于小陇山；又西，有莎谷水发源于南山莎溪，往西南注入东亭川水。
English: On the right side of the Dongting River, there is the Wenggu River, which originates from the Xiaobaoshan Mountain; on the west side, there is the Shaggu River, which originates from the Nanshan Shaxi and flows into the Dongting River to the southwest.

古文：东亭川水又西得清水口，水导源东北陇山，二源俱发，西南出陇口，合成一水，西南流，历细野峡，径清池谷，又径清水县故城东。王莽之识睦县矣。
现代文：东亭川水又往西流，到了清水口。清水发源于东北方的陇山，两个源头齐发，往西南流出陇口，汇合成为一条水，往西南流经细野峡，流过清池谷，又流过清水县老城东，这就是王莽的识睦县。
English: The water of the Dongting River flows westward to the mouth of the clear water. The clear water originates from Lushan in the northeast, the two sources flow together, flow out of the mouth to the southwest, merge into one water, flow southwest through the Hosono Gorge, flow through the Qingchi Valley, and flow through the old city east of Shimizu County, which is Wang Mang's Zhimu County.

古文：其水西南合东亭川，自下亦通谓之清水矣。
现代文：水往西南流，与东亭川汇合，自此以下也通称为清水了。
English: The water flows to the southwest, merging with the Higashitei River, henceforth also known as Shimizu.

古文：又径清水城南，又西与秦水合，水出东北大陇山秦谷，二源双导，历三泉合成一水，而历秦川。
现代文：又流经清水城南边，又往西流与秦水汇合。秦水发源于东北大陇山的秦谷，两个源头齐发，经过三泉汇合成一条，流过秦川。
English: It also flows to the south of the city of Shimizu and to the west, where it merges with the Qin River. The Qin River originates in the Qin Valley of the northeastern Daxishan Mountains. The two headwaters flow together, merge into one through the confluence of three springs, and flow through the Qin River.

古文：川有故秦亭，秦仲所封也。秦之为号，始自是矣。
现代文：秦川旧时有秦亭，是秦仲所封的地方，秦的国号就是从那时开始的。
English: In the old days, there was a Qin Pavilion in the Qin River. It was a place sealed by Qin Zhong, and the country name of Qin began from that time.

古文：秦水西径降陇县故城南，又西南，自亥、松多二水出陇山，合而西南流，径降陇城北，又西南注秦水。
现代文：秦水往西流过降陇县老城南边，又往西南流，与发源于陇山的自亥水和松多水汇合，往西南流过降陇城北面，又往西南注入秦水。
English: The Qin water flows westward through the south side of the old city of Fenying County, and flows southwestward, merging with the Zihai water and the Songta water originating from Lushan Mountain, flowing southwestward through the north side of Fenying City, and injecting Qin water to the southwest.

古文：秦水又西南，历陇川，径六盘口，过清水城西，南注清水。
现代文：秦水又往西南流，穿过陇川，流经六架口，流过清水城，往西南注入清水。
English: Qin water also flows to the southwest, crosses the Qin River, flows through six crossings, flows through Qingshui City, and injects fresh water to the southwest.

古文：清水上下，咸谓之秦川。
现代文：清水上下游一带都叫秦川。
English: Shimizu's upstream and downstream areas are all called the Qin River.

古文：又西，羌水注焉。
现代文：又往西流，有羌水注入。
English: It's moving west again, injecting brackish water.

古文：水北出羌谷，引纳众流，合以成溪。
现代文：羌水就发源于羌谷，接纳了众多的涧水，汇合成一条溪流，又有偕水注入。
English: Surabaya water originates from Surabaya Valley, which has received a lot of surabaya water and merged into a stream. Surabaya water is also injected.

古文：水星会，谓之小羌水。
现代文：汾水称为小羌水。
English: The swamp water is called small swamp water.

古文：西南流，左则长谷水西南注之，右则东部水东南入焉。
现代文：羌水往西南流，左有长谷水往西南注入，右有东部水往东南注入。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southwest, Hase water flows to the southwest on the left, and eastern water flows to the southeast on the right.

古文：羌水又南入清水。
现代文：羌水又往南流注入清水。
English: The brackish water then flows south and injects fresh water.

古文：清水又西南得绵诸水口，其水导源西北绵诸溪，东南有长思水，北出长思溪，南入绵诸水。
现代文：清水又往西南流，就到绵诸水口。绵诸水发源于西北的绵诸溪，往东南流，与长思水汇合。长思水发源于北方的长思溪，南流注入绵诸水。
English: The clear water flows to the southwest and reaches the mouth of Mianzhu. Mianzhu Water originates from Mianzhu Creek in the northwest and flows to the southeast, merging with Changsi Water. Changsi Water originates from Changsi Creek in the north, and the southern flow injects Mianzhu Water.

古文：又东南，历绵诸道故城北，东南入清水。
现代文：又往东南流经绵诸道老城北边，往东南注入清水。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the north side of the old city, injecting fresh water to the southeast.

古文：清水东南注渭。
现代文：清水往东南，注入渭水。
English: Clear water to the southeast, infused with brackish water.

古文：渭水又东南合泾谷水，水出西南径谷之山，东北流，与横水合，水出东南横谷。
现代文：渭水又往东南流，汇合了径谷水。径谷水发源于西南方的径谷之山，往东北流，与横水汇合。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, merging with Jinggu water. Jinggu water originates from the southwest of Jinggu Mountain, flows to the northeast, and merges with cross water.

古文：西北径横水圹，又西北入泾谷水。
现代文：横水发源于东南方的横谷，往西北流经横水扩，又往西北流，注入径谷水，然后往西北乱流，穿过径谷峡流出。
English: The transverse water originates from the southeast valley, flows northwest through the transverse water expansion, and flows northwest to inject the valley water, and then flows northwest through the valley canyon.

古文：乱流西北，出泾谷峡，又西北，轩辕谷水注之，水出南山轩辕溪。
现代文：又往西北流，有轩辕谷水注入。轩辕谷水发源于南山的轩辕溪。
English: It also flows to the northwest and is fed by water from Xuanlu Valley, which originates from Xuanlu Creek in Nanshan.

古文：南安姚瞻以为黄帝生于天水，在上邦城东七十里轩辕谷。
现代文：南安姚瞻认为黄帝生于天水，在上卦城东七十里的轩辕谷。
English: Nan'an Yaozhun believed that the Yellow Emperor was born in Tianshui, in Xuanwu Valley, 70 miles east of Shangguacheng.

古文：皇甫谧云生寿丘，丘在鲁东门北，未知孰是也。
现代文：皇甫谧说：黄帝生于寿丘，丘在鲁东门北面。不知哪个说法正确。
English: Huangdi was born in Shouqiu, and Shouqiu is north of the Ludong Gate. I don't know which one is correct.

古文：其水北流注泾谷水。
现代文：轩辕谷水北流注入径谷水。
English: The north flow of the Xuanlu Valley water is injected into the valley water.

古文：泾谷水又西北，白城溪东北流，白娥泉水出其西，东注白城水。启城水又东北入泾谷水。
现代文：径谷水又往西北流，有白城溪往东北流，白娥泉西来，东注白城水，白城水又往东北流注入径谷水。
English: The valley water flows to the northwest, the Baicheng Creek flows to the northeast, the Baiequan Spring flows to the west, the Baicheng Water flows to the east, and the Baicheng Water flows to the northeast to inject the valley water.

古文：泾谷水又东北，历董亭下。
现代文：径谷水又往东北流过董亭下。
English: The water in the valley flowed to the northeast, passing under Dongting.

古文：杨难当使兄子保宗镇董亭，即是亭也。
现代文：杨难当派他哥哥的儿子保宗镇守董亭，就是此亭。
English: Yang Nantang sent his brother's son, Baozong, to guard Dongting, which is this pavilion.

古文：其水东北流注于渭。
现代文：水往东北流，注入渭水。
English: The water flows to the northeast, injecting brackish water.

古文：《山海经》曰泾谷之山，泾水出焉，东南流注于渭，是也。
现代文：《山海经》说：径谷之山是径水的发源地，往东南流，注入渭水。
English: "Sanghaikyo" says: The mountain of the valley is the source of the running water, flowing to the southeast and infusing the fresh water.

古文：渭水又东，伯阳谷水入焉。
现代文：渭水又往东流，有伯阳谷水注入。
English: Surabaya's water also flows eastward, with water from the Boyang Valley being injected.

古文：水出刑马之山伯阳谷。北流，白水出东南白水溪，西北注伯阳水。
现代文：伯阳谷水发源于刑马之山的伯阳谷，往北流，有白水发源于东南的白水溪，往西北注入伯阳水。
English: The water of the Boyang Valley originates from the Boyang Valley of the Shima Mountain and flows to the north. Some white water originates from the Baishui Creek in the southeast and is injected into the northwest by the Boyang Water.

古文：伯阳水又西北历谷，引控群流，北注渭水。
现代文：伯阳水又往西北穿过山谷，汇集诸涧水流，往北注入渭水。
English: The Boyang River also flows northwest through the valley, bringing together the Zhuye River and injecting the Zhuye River to the north.

古文：渭水又东历大利，又东南流，苗谷水注之。
现代文：渭水又东经大利，又往东南流，有苗谷水注入。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the east and south-east, and is infused with water from Miaotian.

古文：水南出刑马山，北历平作，西北径苗谷，屈而东径伯阳城南，谓之伯阳川。
现代文：苗谷水南发源于刑马山，往北流经平作西北，穿过苗谷，折向东边流经伯阳城南，称为伯阳川。
English: The South Miao Valley Water originates from Zhima Mountain, flows northward through the northwest of Pingyao, passes through Miao Valley, and flows eastward through the south of Boyang City, known as Boyang River.

古文：盖李耳西入，往径所由，故山原畎谷，往往播其名焉。
现代文：李耳西行，沿途所经的山峰、原野、山谷，往往都留有他的名字。
English: As Li Er traveled west, the peaks, fields, and valleys he passed along the way often bore his name.

古文：渭水东南流，众川泻浪，雁次鸣注，左则伯阳东溪水注之，次东得望松水，次东得毛六溪水，次东得皮周谷水，次东得黄杜东溪水，出北山，南入渭水。其右则明谷水，次东得丘谷水，次东得丘谷东溪水，次东有钳岩谷水，并出南山，东北注渭。
现代文：渭水往东南流，许多河流带着滚滚的波浪奔泻，依次潺潺注入：左边先有伯阳东溪水注入，稍东有望松水，稍东有毛六溪水，稍东有皮周谷水，稍东有黄杜东溪水―诸水都发源于北山，南流注入渭水；右边有明谷水，稍东有丘谷水，稍东有丘谷东溪水，稍东有钳岩谷水―诸水都发源于南山，往东北注入渭水。
English: Surabaya's water flows to the southeast, and many rivers rush with rolling waves, in turn injecting surabaya: on the left, there is the injection of water from Bojangdong Stream, slightly to the east, there is the expected loose water, slightly to the east, there is the water from Maoroki Stream, slightly to the east, there is the water from Pizhou Valley, slightly to the east, there is the water from Huangdudong Stream - all the water originates from Beishan, and the south stream injects surabaya; on the right, there is the water from Ming Valley, slightly to the east, there is the water from Qiu Valley, slightly to

古文：渭水又东南，出石门，度小陇山，径南由县南，东与楚水合，世所谓长蛇水。
现代文：渭水又往东南从石门流出，流过小陇山，流经南由县南边，往东与楚水汇合。
English: Surabaya water flows out of Shimen to the southeast, flows through Xiaobaoshan, flows south from the southern edge of the county, and merges with Chushui to the east.

古文：水出汧县之数历山也。南流，径长蛇戍东。
现代文：楚水，世人称为长蛇水，发源于济县数历山，往南流过长蛇戍东。
English: Chushui, known to the world as the Long Snake Water, originates from Qulishan Mountain in Jixian County and flows southward through the East of the Long Snake.

古文：魏和平三年筑，徙诸流民以遏陇寇。
现代文：这个这防城堡是魏和平三年所筑，把流民迁到这里，以阻挡陇寇的进犯。
English: This fortified castle was built by Wei Heping in the third year of the war, and the refugees were moved here to block the raiders' attack.

古文：楚水又南流，注于渭。
现代文：楚水又往南流，注入渭水。
English: The Chushui also flows south, injecting salty water.

古文：阚駰以是水为汧水焉。
现代文：阐驯以为这条水就是济水。
English: Yan Tamer thought that this water was the water supply.

古文：渭水又东，汧汗二水入焉。
现代文：渭水又往东流，有沂水和汗水注入。
English: The salty water flowed eastward again, and salty water and sweat flowed in.

古文：余按诸地志，汧水出济县西北，阚駰《十三州志》与此同，复以汧水为龙鱼水，盖以其津流径通，而更摄其通称矣。
现代文：我按各种地理书籍，济水发源于沂县西北。阐驰《十三州志》也持同样的说法，又以为济水就是龙鱼水，都是因诸水干流、支流相通，于是就兼有通称了。
English: According to various geography books, Jishui originated in the northwest of Handan County. The "History of the Thirteen Provinces" also holds the same view, and also believes that Jishui is dragon fish water, because all the water mains and tributaries are connected, so they both have a common name.

古文：渭水东入散关。
现代文：渭水往东流，进入散关。
English: Surabaya's water flows eastward and enters Sankuan.

古文：《抱朴子。神仙传》曰：老子西出关，关令尹喜候气，知真人将有西游者，遇老子，强令之著书，耳不得已，为著《道》、《德》二经，谓之《老子》书也。
现代文：《抱扑子•神仙传》说：老子西行出关，关令尹喜望气，知道将有真人西游，碰到老子，就留住他非要他著书。李耳不得已，为他著了《道德二经》，称为《老子书》。
English: "The Legend of the Divine Immortal" says: Lao Zi went to the west and went out of the gate. The gate ordered Yin Xi Wangqi, knowing that there would be a real person traveling west. When he met Lao Zi, he kept him and forced him to write a book. Li Er had no choice but to write "The Second Book of Morals" for him, known as "The Book of Lao Zi."

古文：有老子庙。
现代文：那里还有老子庙。
English: There is also the Laozi Temple.

古文：干宝《搜神记》云：老子将西入关，关令尹喜好道之士，睹真人当西，乃要之途也。
现代文：干宝《搜神记》说：老子将西行入关，关令尹喜是个好道的人，看到真人要来西方了，于是就在路上强留住他。
English: Gan Bao's "A Record of the Search for the Gods" says: "Lao Zi marched westward and entered Guanling. Guanling Yin Xi was a virtuous man. When he saw that the real person was about to come to the west, he forcibly detained him on the road.

古文：皇甫士安《高士传》云：老子为周柱下史，及周衰，乃以官隐，为周守藏室史，积八十余年，好无名接，而世莫知其真人也。
现代文：皇甫士安《高士传》说：老子在周朝做柱下史的官，到周衰微以后，就借做官而隐居。他在周做藏室史一连八十余年，追求无名，重修炼接纳，世人都不知道他是真人。
English: Emperor Fu Shian's "History of Gao Shi" said: "Lao Zi was an official in the Zhou Dynasty, and after Zhou's decline, he borrowed an official to live in seclusion. He has been doing library history in Zhou for more than eighty years, pursuing anonymity, re-cultivating and accepting, and the world does not know that he is a real person.

古文：至周景王十年，孔子年十七，遂适周见老聃。
现代文：到周景王十年砍过这棵大树，但树上伤口随砍随合。
English: It had been ten years since Zhou Jingwang had cut down this big tree, but the wounds on the tree were getting worse and worse.

古文：昔秦文公二十七年代之，树疮随合，秦文公乃遣四十人持斧斫之，犹不断，疲士一人，伤足不能去，卧树下，闻鬼相与言曰：劳攻战乎？
现代文：于是秦文公派了四十人持斧去砍，还是砍不断。有个人砍得精疲力尽，脚受了伤，走不动了，就躺在树下，听到鬼和树神在谈话。
English: So Qin Wenguang sent forty men with axes to chop, and they kept on chopping. One man was so exhausted from chopping that his feet were injured and he couldn't walk, so he lay down under a tree and heard the ghost and the tree god talking.

古文：其一曰足为劳矣。
现代文：一个间道：这一仗打得够累了吧？
English: On a side note: Aren't you tired from this battle?

古文：又曰：秦公必持不休。
现代文：树神于是沉默无言了。
English: The tree god then fell silent.

古文：答曰：其如我何？又曰：赤灰跋于子何如？乃默无言，卧者以告。令士皆赤衣，随所所以灰跋，树断，化为牛入水，故秦为立祠。
现代文：躺在树下的人把听到的话报告文公，文公就叫伐木人都穿上红衣，一边砍，一边拿灰围上，树就被砍断了，变成一条牛跳到水里去，所以秦给树神立祠。
English: The man lying under the tree reported what he had heard to Wen Gong. Wen Gong then ordered the woodcutters to put on red coats, and to chop on one side and gather ash on the other. The tree was cut down and turned into a cow and jumped into the water. Therefore, Qin erected a shrine to the tree god.

古文：其水又东北历大散关而入渭水也。
现代文：扦水又往东北流过大散关，注入渭水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the northeast through the Great Sankan, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：渭水又东南，右合南山五溪水，夹涧流注之。
现代文：渭水又往东南流，在右边汇合了南山五溪水。溪水在山涧两边奔流，注入渭水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast, merging with the Nanshan Five Streams on the right. Streams run on both sides of the mountains, injecting Surabaya water.

古文：又东过陈仓县西。
现代文：又往东流过陈仓县西。
English: It also flows eastward through the west of Chencang County.

古文：县有陈仓山，山上有陈宝鸡鸣祠。
现代文：陈仓县有陈仓山，山上有陈宝鸡鸣祠。
English: There is Chencang Mountain in Chencang County, and there is Chenbao Rooster Singing Shrine on the mountain.

古文：昔秦文公感伯阳之言，游猎于陈仓，遇之于此坂，得若石焉，其色如肝，归而宝祠之，故曰陈宝。
现代文：从前秦文公因听了伯阳的话而心动，到陈仓去打猎，就在山坡上得到一块宝石，颜色就像肝一样。他回来后把它当作宝物供奉起来，所以叫陈宝。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Wengu, moved by the words of Boyang, went hunting in Chencang and found a gemstone on the hillside, the color of which was like liver. After his return, he offered it up as a treasure, hence the name Chenbao.

古文：其来也自东南，晖晖声若雷，野鸡皆鸣，故曰鸡鸣神也。
现代文：石头是从东南方来的，光辉熠熠，声如雷鸣，野鸡也都叫起来，所以叫鸡鸣神。
English: The stone came from the southeast, shining brightly, sounding like thunder, and the pheasants also crowed, which is why the chickens are called crowing gods.

古文：《地理志》曰：有上公、明星、黄帝孙、舜妻盲冢祠。有羽阳宫，秦武王起。
现代文：《地理志》说：有上公、明星、黄帝孙及舜妻盲的坟墓和祠堂；还有羽阳宫，是秦武王所建。
English: "Geography" said: There are tombs and ancestral halls of Shangguo, Xingxing, Huangdi Sun and Xingzhuang; there is also Hanyang Palace, which was built by King Qin Wu.

古文：应劭曰：县氏陈山。
现代文：应劭说：陈仓县因陈山而得名。
English: Ying Qi said: Chencang County was named after Mount Chen.

古文：姚睦曰：黄帝都陈言在此。
现代文：姚睦说：黄帝建都于陈，说是就在这地方。
English: Yao Mutu said: The Yellow Emperor built the capital in Chen, and it is said to be in this place.

古文：荣氏《开山图注》曰：伏牺生成纪，徙治陈仓，非陈国所建也。
现代文：荣氏《开山图注》说：伏牺生成纪，把治所迁到陈仓，陈仓并非陈国所建。
English: Rong's "Note on the Map of the Founding of a Mountain" says: "In the Cenozoic Era, the government office was moved to Chen Cang. Chen Cang was not built by Chen Guo.

古文：魏明帝遣将军太原郝昭筑陈仓城成，诸葛亮围之。
现代文：魏明帝派遣将军太原郝昭筑陈仓城，建成后，诸葛亮包围了此城。
English: Emperor Wei Ming dispatched General Taiyuan Shizhao to build Chencang City. After it was completed, Zhuge Liang encircled the city.

古文：亮使昭乡人靳祥说之，不下。亮以数万攻昭千余人，以云梯、冲车、地道逼射昭，昭以火射连石拒之。
现代文：诸葛亮叫郝昭的老乡靳祥去游说他，但没有成功，于是就以数万的兵力去进攻郝昭的千余人，用云梯、冲车、地道攻城，向城上放箭；郝昭则用火射连石来抵抗。
English: Zhuge Liang called Zou Zhao's fellow countryman Zou Xiang to lobby him, but without success, so he attacked Zou Zhao's more than one thousand people with tens of thousands of troops, attacked the city with ladders, rushing cars, and tunnels, and shot arrows at the city; Zou Zhao used fire to resist.

古文：亮不利而还。
现代文：诸葛亮失利，就退兵而回。
English: When Zhuge Liang was defeated, he left the army and returned.

古文：今研水对亮城，是与昭相御处也。
现代文：现在沂水上的对亮城，就是诸葛亮与郝昭对抗的地方。
English: Now, the city of Duelang on the Surabaya River is the place where Zhuge Liang and Zhaozhao fight.

古文：陈仓水出于陈仓山下，东南流注于渭水。
现代文：陈仓水发源于陈仓山下，往东南流，注入渭水。
English: Chencang Water originates from the bottom of Chencang Mountain, flows to the southeast, and is infused with reed water.

古文：渭水又东与绥阳溪水合，其水上承斜水，水自斜谷分注绥阳溪，北届陈仓，入渭。
现代文：渭水又往东流，与绥阳溪水汇合。溪水上流承接斜水，斜水从斜谷分流，注入绥阳溪，北流到陈仓，注入渭水。
English: Surabaya water flows to the east and merges with Surabaya Yang Stream. The upstream stream receives the oblique water, the oblique water branches off from the valley and flows into Surabaya Yang Stream, and the northern stream flows to Chencang and flows into Surabaya water.

古文：故诸葛亮《与兄瑾书》曰：有绥阳小谷，虽山崖绝险，溪水纵横，难用行军。昔逻候往来，要道通入。
现代文：所以诸葛亮《与兄瑾书》中说：有绥阳小谷，虽然山崖极其险峻，溪水纵横交错，行军有很大困难，但从前巡逻守望，来来往往，有要道通向谷内。
English: That's why Zhuge Liang said in the "Book of Brothers and Sisters": There is a small valley in Fenyang. Although the cliffs are extremely steep, the streams are crisscrossed, and the marching is very difficult, there used to be patrols and patrols, and there were important roads leading to the valley.

古文：今使前军斫治此道，以向陈仓，足以扳连贼势，使不得分兵东行者也。
现代文：现在派先头部队去修筑这条道路，逼向陈仓，就足以牵制敌人的兵势，使他们不能分兵东进了。
English: Sending the leading troops to build this road now and forcing them to Chen Cang is enough to hold back the enemy's troops and prevent them from entering the east.

古文：渭水又东径郁夷县故城南。
现代文：渭水又往东流，经过郁夷县老城南面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward, passing through the southern part of the old city of Ikui.

古文：《地理志》曰，有汧水祠。
现代文：《地理志》说：郁夷县有沂水祠。
English: "Geography" said: Ikui County is home to the Jinshui Ancestral Temple.

古文：王莽更之曰郁平也。
现代文：王莽改名为郁平。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Yu Ping.

古文：《东观汉记》曰：隗嚣围来歙于略阳。世祖诏曰：桃花水出，船槃皆至郁夷，陈仓分部而进者也。
现代文：《东观汉记》说：魄嚣把来款包围于略阳，世祖下诏说：桃花水涨，船架都可通向郁夷、陈仓。可分兵前进。
English: "Dongguan Han Ji" said: The adventurous encircled the invaders in Liaoyang, and the ancestor issued an edict: The peach blossoms are in full bloom, and the boat frames can all lead to Ikui and Chencang. The soldiers can advance separately.

古文：汧水入焉。
现代文：沂水在这里注入渭水。
English: Here, brackish water is injected into brackish water.

古文：水出汧县之蒲谷乡弦中谷，决为弦蒲薮。
现代文：沂水发源于沂县的蒲谷乡弦中谷，积成弦蒲蔽。
English: Surabaya's water originates from the middle valley of the valley of the valley of the valley of the valley of the valley of the valley of the valley of the valley.

古文：《尔雅》曰：水决之泽为汧。汧之为名，实兼斯举。
现代文：《尔雅》说水流积成沼泽叫沂，沂水一名，实际上就兼有这一意义。
English: "Lya" says that water flowing into a swamp is called mire, and mire water is a name, which actually has this meaning.

古文：水有二源，一水出县西山，世谓之小陇山。岩嶂高险，不通轨辙。故张衡《四愁诗》曰：我所恩兮在汉阳，欲往从之陇坂长。
现代文：沂水有两个源头，一个出自县西山，人们称为小陇山，山高峰险，车马不通，所以张衡《四愁诗》说：我所想念的人在汉阳，想去依从他，怎奈陇坂太长。
English: Surabaya has two sources of water. One comes from the county's West Mountain. People call it Little Surabaya Mountain. The mountain is too high for cars and horses to pass. Therefore, Zhang Heng said in "The Four Sorrows": The person I miss is in Hanyang. If I want to follow him, why is Surabaya Mountain too long?

古文：其水东北流，历涧，注以成渊，潭涨不测。出五色鱼，俗以为灵，而莫敢采捕。因谓是水为龙鱼水，自下亦通谓之龙鱼川。
现代文：水往东北流，穿过山涧，积成深渊，潭水升涨，深不可测，水中有五色鱼，民间以为神灵，不敢去捕捉，因而把这条溪流称为龙鱼水；自此以下，也通称龙鱼川。
English: The water flows to the northeast, through the mountains, and accumulates into a deep abyss. The pool water rises and rises, unfathomable. There are five-colored fish in the water. People think they are gods and dare not catch them. Therefore, this stream is called the dragon fish water; henceforth, it is also known as the dragon fish river.

古文：川水东径汧县故城北。
现代文：川水往东流经济县老城北面。
English: The river flows eastward to the north of the old town of Economic County.

古文：《史记》，秦文公东猎汧田，因遂都其地，是也。
现代文：《史记》载，秦文公往东边的沂田去打猎，于是就在那里建都。
English: According to the "Histories," Qin Wengong went to the eastern Hetian to hunt, so he built the capital there.

古文：又东历泽，乱流为一。
现代文：又往东流过沼泽，乱流合并成一条溪流，右边接纳了白龙泉。
English: It flowed eastward through the swamp, and the turbulent flow merged into a stream, receiving the White Dragon Spring on the right.

古文：右得白龙泉，泉径五尺，源穴奋通。沦漪四泄，东北流，注于汧。
现代文：泉源口径五尺，泉水从洞穴中涌出，水波荡漾四散，往东北流注于济水。
English: The caliber of the spring is five feet, the spring water gushes out from the cave, the water ripples and scatters, and flows to the northeast to feed the water.

古文：汧水又东，会一水，水发南山西侧。
现代文：济水又往东流，汇合了一条溪水，溪水发源于南山西侧，俗称此山为吴山。
English: Feeding water also flows eastward, merging a stream. The stream originates from the west side of Nanshan Mountain, commonly known as Wushan Mountain.

古文：俗以此山为吴山，三峰霞举，叠秀云天，崩峦倾返，山顶相捍，望之恒有落势。《地理志》曰：吴山在县西，古文以为汧山也。《国语》所谓西虞矣。
现代文：三座峰峦层迭高起，秀色上与云霞相接；危崖斜歌着，山顶仿佛靠在一起，望去像要塌下来似的。《地理志》说：吴山在县西，《古文》以为这就是沂山，《国语》却叫虞山。
English: The three peaks rise up in layers, and they are beautifully connected with the clouds and haze; the cliffs are singing obliquely, the mountain tops seem to be close together, and it looks like they are about to collapse. "Geography" said: Wushan is in the west of the county, "Ancient Literature" thought that this was Shaoshan, but "National Language" called it Yushan.

古文：山下石穴，广四尺，高七尺，水溢石空，悬波侧注，漰渀震荡，发源成川，北流注于汧。
现代文：山下石洞宽四尺，高七尺；水从石洞涌出，从悬崖上直泻而下，轰隆之声震动山谷。水从源头下来，成为一条溪流，往北流注入沂水。
English: The stone cave under the mountain is four feet wide and seven feet high; water gushes out of the stone cave, falls straight down from the cliff, and the thunderous sound shakes the valley. The water descends from the source, becomes a stream, and flows north into Surabaya.

古文：自水会上下，咸谓之为龙鱼川。
现代文：从两水汇合处起，上下流都可叫龙鱼川。
English: From the confluence of the two rivers, both upstream and downstream can be called Longyu River.

古文：城北有《汉邠州刺史赵融碑》，灵帝建安元年立。
现代文：沂水又往东南流，经过瑜糜县老城南。喻糜就是王莽的扶亭，从前郭象以王莽的征召为耻，避世隐居在这里。建武四年所立。
English: Surabaya also flows to the southeast, passing through the south of the old city of Yuyi County. Yuyi is Wang Mang's pavilion. Former Guozhang was ashamed of Wang Mang's conscription and secluded himself here. It was built in the fourth year of Jianwu.

古文：汧水又东流，注于渭。
现代文：济水又往东流，注入渭水。
English: Feeding water also flows to the east, injecting brackish water.

古文：渭水之右，磻溪水注之。
现代文：渭水右岸，有播溪水注入。
English: On the right bank of the Surabaya River, there is a stream of water pouring in.

古文：水出南山兹谷，乘高激流，注于溪中。
现代文：播溪水发源于南山兹谷，水从高处流泻而下，注入溪中。
English: The water of Banxi Stream originates from the Nanshanzi Valley. The water flows down from a high place and is injected into the stream.

古文：溪中有泉，谓之兹泉，泉水潭积，自成渊渚，即《吕氏春秋》所谓太公钓兹泉也。
现代文：溪中有泉，称为兹泉。泉水积成深潭，就是《吕氏春秋》中所说的太公垂钓处的兹泉。
English: There is a spring in the stream, known as the Zi Spring. The spring water accumulates into a deep pool, which is the Zi Spring at the Taigong fishing place mentioned in "Lu's Spring and Autumn."

古文：今人谓之丸谷，石壁深高，幽隍邃密，林障秀阻，人迹罕交。
现代文：现在人们叫那里的山谷为丸谷，谷中石壁又高又险，幽静的竹林又深又密，有深林和高山阻隔，人迹很少到这样的地方。
English: Nowadays, people call the valley there a whole valley. The stone walls in the middle of the valley are high and dangerous, and the secluded bamboo forest is deep and dense, separated by deep forests and high mountains. Traces of people rarely reach such a place.

古文：东南隅有一石室，盖太公所居也。
现代文：东南角有个石洞，传说是太公住过的地方。
English: There is a stone cave in the southeast corner, which is said to be the place where the Grand Duke once lived.

古文：水次平石钓处，即太公垂钓之所也。
现代文：水边有一块平坦的岩石，就是太公垂钓处。
English: There is a flat rock at the water's edge, which is Taiko's fishing spot.

古文：其投竿跽饵，两膝遗迹犹存，是有磻溪之称也。
现代文：他放钓竿，跪着装鱼饵，两膝的印痕还在，所以有播溪之称。
English: He put out fishing rods, kneeled to load the bait, and the imprint of both knees is still there, so it is known as the "Broadcasting Creek."

古文：其水清泠神异，北流十二里，注于渭，北去维堆城七十里。
现代文：溪水清凉异常，北流十二里注入渭水，这里北距维堆城七十里。
English: The water of the stream is unusually clear and cool. The north stream is twelve miles long and is filled with brackish water. It is seventy miles north of Vitebsk.

古文：渭水又东径积石原，即北原也。
现代文：渭水又往东流，经过积石原，就是北原。
English: The Surabaya River flows eastward, passing through Jishihara, which is Kitahara.

古文：青龙二年，诸葛亮出斜谷，司马懿屯渭南。
现代文：青龙二年，诸葛亮取道斜谷进兵，此时司马爵屯兵于渭南。
English: In the second year of Qinglong, Zhuge Liang marched into the valley, at this time Sima Jie sent troops to the south of Longtan.

古文：雍州刺史郭淮策亮必争北原而屯，遂先据之。
现代文：雍州刺史郭淮料定诸葛亮必定会夺取北原屯兵，于是先去占领。
English: Guo Huai, the governor of Yongzhou, was certain that Zhuge Liang would capture the Beiyuan garrison, so he occupied it first.

古文：亮至，果不得上。
现代文：诸葛亮到时，果然就上不去了。
English: When Zhuge Liang arrived, he couldn't go up.

古文：渭水又东径五丈原北。
现代文：渭水又往东流，经过五丈原北面。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward, passing through the northern part of Gojohara.

古文：《魏氏春秋》曰：诸葛亮据渭水南原，司马懿谓诸将曰：亮若出武功，依山东转者，是其勇也。若西上五丈原，诸君无事矣。
现代文：《魏氏春秋》说：诸葛亮占据了渭水的南原。司马鼓对诸将说：诸葛亮若从武功出兵，依山势转向东边，那就是他的胆略了；如果他西上五丈原，诸位就都平安无事了。
English: "Wei's Spring and Autumn" said: Zhuge Liang occupied the southern plains of Surabaya. Sima Gu said to the generals: If Zhuge Liang sent troops from the martial arts and turned to the east along the mountain, that would be his audacity; if he went west to Wuzhongyuan, you would all be safe.

古文：亮果屯此原，与懿相御。
现代文：诸葛亮果然屯兵于五丈原，与司马鳃相对抗。
English: Zhuge Liang did indeed set up a garrison in Wuzhongyuan to oppose Sima Yi.

古文：渭水又东径郿县故城南。
现代文：渭水又往东流，经过郡县老城南边。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward, passing the southern edge of the county's old town.

古文：《地理志》曰：右辅都尉治。
现代文：《地理志》说：这是右辅都尉的治所。
English: "Geography" said: This is the seat of the right assistant captain.

古文：《魏氏春秋》，诸葛亮寇郿，司马懿据郿拒亮，即此县也。
现代文：《魏氏春秋》载，诸葛亮侵犯郡，司马彭据守于郡，抗截诸葛亮，说的就是此县。
English: "Wei's Spring and Autumn" recorded that Zhuge Liang invaded the county, Sima Peng defended the county, resisted Zhuge Liang, and said that this was the county.

古文：渭水又东径郿坞南。
现代文：渭水又往东流经郡坞以南。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastwards, passing south of the county dock.

古文：《汉献帝传》曰：董卓发卒筑郿坞，高与长安城等，积谷为三十年储，自云事成，雄据天下，不成，守此足以毕老，其愚如此。
现代文：筑得和长安城一样高，城内贮粮可供三十年食用。他自己这样说：事情如果成功，就可以称雄于天下；不成功，守住这里也足以安度晚年了。真是愚蠢极了！
English: It is built as high as Chang'an City, and the grain stored in the city can be used for thirty years. He said so himself: if things are successful, they can dominate the world; if they are not successful, it is enough to stay here and live well into old age. It is really stupid!

