古文：天顺中，朝廷好宝玩。
现代文：原文明朝天顺年间，明英宗爱好搜集奇珍异宝。
English: During the Asatrisun era of the original civilization, the Ming and Ying dynasties were fond of collecting rare treasures.

古文：中贵言，宣德中尝遣太监王三保使西洋，获奇珍无算。
现代文：有宦官说，宣德年间，朝廷曾派遣三保太监出使西洋，得到无数的珍奇宝物。
English: A eunuch said that during the Xuande era, the imperial court had sent three eunuchs to the West to obtain countless rare treasures.

古文：帝乃命中贵至兵部，查王三保至西洋水程。
现代文：于是英宗就命宦官到兵部，查看三保下西洋之时的航海路线。
English: Therefore, Emperor Yingzong ordered the eunuch to go to the military department to check the navigation route of the Western Sea when Sanbo was under siege.

古文：时刘大夏为郎，项尚书公忠令都吏检故牒，刘先检得，匿之。
现代文：当时刘大夏任兵部侍郎，兵部尚书项忠命令都吏查阅旧公文档案，寻找相关资料。
English: At that time, Liu Daxia served as the secretary of the military department, and the military department ordered Shang Shuxiangzhong to inspect the old official documents and archives to find relevant information.

古文：都吏检不得，复令他吏检。
现代文：刘大夏先找到，便偷偷藏了起来，都吏怎么找也找不到，项忠又命令别的吏员去找。
English: Liu Daxia found it first, then secretly hid it. The officials couldn't find it no matter how they looked, and Xiang Zhong ordered other officials to look for it.

古文：项诘都吏曰： 署中牍焉得失？ 
现代文：项忠质问都吏道： 官署中的旧公文怎么会遗失呢？ 
English: "How can old official documents in government offices be lost?

古文：刘微笑曰： 昔下西洋，费钱谷数十万，军民死者亦万计。此一时弊政，牍即存，尚宜毁之，以拔其根，犹追究其有无耶？ 
现代文：刘大夏笑着说： 三保太监下西洋，花费数十万钱，牺牲了上万的军民，这是当时朝政上的一大弊端，即使公文还在也应该毁掉，以期永远消除这件事情而带来的坏影响，现在还追究它有没有干吗？ 
English: Liu Daxia said with a smile: The Three Imperial Guards eunuchs went to the West, spending hundreds of thousands of money and sacrificing tens of thousands of soldiers and civilians. This was a major drawback in the government at that time. Even if the official document is still there, it should be destroyed in order to eliminate the bad influence brought about by this matter forever. Is there any reason to investigate it now?

古文：项耸然，再揖而谢，指其位曰： 公达国体，此不久属公矣。 
现代文：项忠又惊又奇，再三称谢，指着自己的职位说： 先生通达大体，这个位子不久就应该属于先生了。 
English: Surprised and surprised, Xiang Zhong stood up and repeatedly thanked him, pointing to his position and saying, "Sir, you have a good grasp of the situation. This position should soon belong to you."

古文：又，安南黎灏侵占城池，西略诸土夷，败于老挝。
现代文：还有一次，安南的黎灏侵占城池，向西侵略夷人，后来在老挝打了败仗。
English: On another occasion, Annan's Lihong occupied the city and invaded the west of the barbarians, and later lost the battle in Laos.

古文：中贵人汪直欲乘间讨之，使索英公下安南牍。大夏匿弗予。
现代文：民死者亦万计。宦官汪直想乘机讨伐他，派人来要当年英公下安南的旧文档资料，刘大夏却将公文偷偷藏起来不给。
English: The eunuch Wang Zhizhong wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to fight him, and sent someone to ask for the old documents of the Annan era, but Liu Daxia secretly hid the documents and would not give them.

古文：尚书为榜吏至再，大夏密告曰： 衅一开，西南立糜烂矣。 
现代文：项忠因此几次责打负责文书的官员，追查此事。刘大夏秘密告诉项忠说： 仗一旦打起来，西南各地就要饱受战争之苦了。 
English: Liu Daxia secretly told Xiang Zhong, "Once the war breaks out, all areas in Southwest China will suffer from the war.

古文：尚书悟，乃已。
现代文：项尚书听了立即醒悟过来，并中止追查此事。
English: He immediately came to his senses and stopped investigating the matter.

古文：此二事，天下阴受忠宣公之赐而不知。
现代文：这两件事都是天下人暗中受了刘大夏的好处却不知道啊。
English: Both of these things are benefits that people around the world have secretly received from Liu Daxia, but they don't know it.

