古文：初六日晨起而饭。
现代文：初六日早晨起床吃饭。
English: On the morning of the sixth day of the first month, I got up to eat.

古文：其夫至，付钱整担而行；以一饭包加其上，辄弃之去，遂不得行。余乃散步东溪，有大木横其上为桥，即顺宁道也。
现代文：那脚夫来了，付钱后整理担子上路；把一包饭加在担子上，他立即抛下担子离开了，终于不能成行，我于是到东溪散步，有大树横在溪上作为桥梁，这就是去顺宁的路了。
English: The porter came, paid the money, sorted out the load and went on his way; he put a packet of rice on the load, he immediately dropped the load and left, and finally couldn't make it, so I went for a walk to Dongxi. There are big trees across the stream as bridges, this is the way to Shuning.

古文：仍西上公馆，从其西南下西溪，是为猛峒道。
现代文：仍向西上到公馆，从公馆的西南下到西溪，这是去猛恫的路。
English: Still westward up to the mansion, from the southwest of the mansion down to the West Stream, this is the way to storm.

古文：有茅茨从北冈上，是为锡铅街子。
现代文：有茅屋聚集在北冈上，那是锡铅街子。
English: There are thatched cottages clustered on the north hill, which is a tin lead street.

古文：问得一夫，其索价亦贵甚，且明日行，遂返邸作记。
现代文：问到一个脚夫，他要价也非常贵，并且是明天才走，于是返回客店写日记。
English: He asked for a porter, who was also very expensive and would not leave until the next day, so he returned to the inn to write his diary.

古文：初七日前弃担去者复来，乃饭而同之行。
现代文：初七日前一天抛下担子离开的人又来了，就吃了饭同他上路。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the man who had left his burden behind on the previous day came again, and he ate and went on his way.

古文：从公馆东向下，涉东溪独木桥，遂东上坡。
现代文：从公馆向东下走，涉过东溪上的独木桥，就向东上坡。
English: From the mansion, walk eastward, cross the one-tree bridge over the Dongxi River, and walk eastward uphill.

古文：半里，平行坡上，或穿坳而南，或穿坳而北，南北皆深坑，而路中穿之。
现代文：半里，平缓行走在坡上，有时穿到山坳的南边，有时穿行在山坳的北面，南北全是深坑，而路从中间穿行。
English: Half a mile, gently walking on the slope, sometimes penetrating to the south of the ridge, sometimes penetrating to the north of the ridge, the north and south are all deep pits, and the road passes through the middle.

古文：东去二里余，沿南崖北转，半里，穿西突之坳，半里，复东逾岭而南，半里，又出南崖上。
现代文：往东去二里多，沿南面的山崖向北转，半里，穿过向西突的山坳，半里，再向东越岭往南走，半里，又到了南面的山崖上。
English: Go east for more than two miles, turn north along the southern cliff, half a mile, pass through the mountains that jut out to the west, half a mile, then go south east over the ridge, half a mile, and reach the southern cliff.

古文：于是见南壑大开，壑中支条崩叠，木树茸茏，皆出其下，而锡铅南山，其南又叠一支，纡而东南下，以开此壑。
现代文：在这里见南边的壑谷十分开阔，壑谷中条状的支峰崩裂重叠，树木蒙茸葱笼，全出现在脚下，而锡铅的南山，它南面又叠起一条支脉，往东南纤曲下垂，所以敞开此处壑谷。
English: Here, you can see the very wide Shibuya on the south side. The strip-like spurs in the Shibuya collapse and overlap, and the trees are covered with green, all appearing at the foot. And the tin-lead Nanshan, which has another branch stacked up on the south side, sags to the southeast, so the Shibuya is open here.

古文：所陟山东自东大山分支，西突此冈，为锡铅东锁钥，直西南逼凑南山，水下其中甚束，至此而始出东壑也。
现代文：所登的山自东面的东大山分支，向西突为此冈，成为锡铅东面的军事要地，一直往西南逼向南山，水下流到其中非常狭窄，到此处后开始流出东面的壑谷。
English: The mountain climbed from the branch of Dongdaeshan in the east, to the west of this hill, became a military important place in the east of tin and lead, all the way to the southwest to Nanshan, the underwater flow to which was very narrow, and after this point it began to flow out of the east of Shibuya.

古文：瞰南倚北，又二里，见冈北亦嵌为东西坞，闻水声淙淙，余以为即西下锡铅东溪者，而孰知从倚北之岭已分脊，此坞且东南下矣。
现代文：下瞰着南壑紧靠北山又走了二里，见山冈北面也下嵌为东西向的山坞，听见水声徐涂，我以为就是向西下走锡铅东溪的路，可谁知从紧靠着的北岭上山脊已经分开，此坞将往东南下延了。
English: Looking down on Nanlu, I walked another two miles close to Beishan. I saw that the northern side of the mountain was also embedded as an east-west dock. I heard the sound of water slowly moving. I thought that I was walking west down the road of the East Stream, but who knew that the ridge on the north ridge had separated, and this dock would be extended to the southeast.

古文：于是反倚坡北下，共半里而涉一桥，度坞中水，是为孟祐之西溪，其水南出前坞，与锡铅之水合于孟祐之南，所谓孟祐河者也。
现代文：于是反向背靠山坡往北下走，共半里后涉过一座桥，越过坞中的溪水，这是孟枯的西溪，这溪水往南流到前边的山坞，与锡铅的水流在孟佑的南边合流，是所谓的孟佑河了。
English: So I walked in the opposite direction, with my back against the hillside to the north. After a total of half a mile, I waded across a bridge and crossed the stream in the dock. This is the west stream of Mengkuan. This stream flows south to the dock in front, and merges with the tin-lead stream on the south side of Mengyou. It is the so-called Mengyou River.

古文：涧之东，居庐叠出，有坡自北来悬其中，一里，东向蹑其上，当坡而居者甚盛；又东转，再盘一坡，共一里，又有居庐当坡，皆所谓孟祐村矣。
现代文：山涧的东面，居民房屋层层叠叠出现，有山坡自北方伸来悬在坞中，一里，向东登坡上走，在坡上居住的人家十分繁盛；又向东转，再绕过一道坡，共一里，又有居民房屋位于坡上，全是所谓的孟佑村了。
English: On the east side of the ridge, there are residential houses stacked on top of each other. There is a hillside extending from the north and hanging in the dock, one mile. Going east up the slope, the people living on the slope are very prosperous. Turning east again, and then going around a slope, a total of one mile, there are also residential houses on the slope. They are all so-called Mengyou villages.

古文：此右甸东分支南下第四重之尽处也。
现代文：这是右甸东面分支南下的第四重山的尽头处。
English: This is the end of the fourth heavy mountain branching southward on the east side of the right dian.

古文：于是又见一溪自东坞出，环坞而前，与西溪交盘南壑中。
现代文：在这里又见一条溪流自东面山坞中流出，环绕在山坞中往前流，与西溪交错盘绕在南面壑谷中。
English: Here you can also see a stream flowing out of the dockyard on the east side, flowing around the dockyard and interlacing with the West Stream in the valley on the south side.

古文：南壑平开，而南抵南山下，锡铅之水，沿其北麓，又破峡东南去，东南开峡甚遥，而溪流曲折其间，直达云州旧城焉。
现代文：南面壑谷平平展开，往南抵达南山下，锡铅的水，沿南山的北麓，又冲破峡谷而东南流去，东南方敞开的峡谷非常遥远，而溪流曲折在其间，直达云州的旧城。
English: To the south, Shugu Valley spreads out flatly, reaching the foot of Nanshan to the south. The brackish water flows along the northern foot of Nanshan, then breaks through the canyon and flows southeast. The open canyon in the southeast is very far away, and the stream twists and turns in between, reaching the old city of Yunnan.

古文：由村东即循峡北入东坞，一里东下，度峡中桥，其桥东西跨溪上，上覆以亭，桥内大水自东北透峡出，桥外小水自东南透峡出。
现代文：由村东就沿山峡向北走入东坞，一里往东下行，越过峡中的桥。此桥呈东西向跨在溪上，上边盖有亭子，桥以内大水自东北方穿过峡谷流出来，桥以外小水自东南穿过峡谷流出来。
English: From the east of the village, walk north along the mountain gorge to the east dock, go one mile east and cross the bridge in the gorge. This bridge spans the stream in an east-west direction, with a pavilion on top. Large water flows from the northeast through the canyon inside the bridge, and small water flows from the southeast through the canyon outside the bridge.

古文：过桥东向，缘西垂之岭上，其上甚峻，曲折梯危，折而左，则临左峡，折而右，则临右峡，木荫藤翳，连幄牵翠，高下亏蔽，左右叠换，屡屡不已。
现代文：过桥后向东，沿西垂的山岭上走，那上去的路非常陡峻，曲折攀登危崖，折向左边，就下临左峡，折向右边，便下临右峡，木荫藤蔽，如相连的筛慢，翠色连片，上下荫蔽，左右重叠变换，屡屡不断。
English: After crossing the bridge, go east and walk up the mountain range along the west slope. The road up there is very steep. Climb the cliff with twists and turns. Turn to the left and go down the left gorge. Turn to the right and go down the right gorge. The shade of the canes is like a continuous sieve.

古文：五里渐平，则或沿左坡，或沿右坡，或涉中脊，脊甚狭，而左右下瞰者，亦与前无异也。
现代文：五里后渐平坦起来，便有时沿左边山坡走，有时沿右面山坡走，有时上登中间的山脊，山脊十分狭窄，可往左右下瞰，也与前边无异。
English: After five miles, it gradually flattens out, and sometimes you walk along the left side of the hill, sometimes along the right side of the hill, and sometimes up the ridge in the middle. The ridge is very narrow, and you can look down to the left and right, and it is no different from the front.

古文：又三里，则从坡右稍下。
现代文：又行三里，就从坡右稍下走。
English: After another three miles, walk slightly down the slope to the right.

古文：约一里，陟脊坳而东，又缘坡左上。
现代文：约一里，登上脊坳往东，又沿山坡左面上爬。
English: About one mile, climb the ridge to the east, and then climb along the left side of the slope.

古文：一里，临南坡之上，于是回望孟祐、锡铅诸山，层环叠绕，山外复见山焉。
现代文：一里，下临南坡之上，在这里回头望孟枯、锡铅的群山，层层叠叠环绕，山外又见有山。
English: One mile down, on the southern slope, here I looked back at the mountains of Mengwu, tin and lead, surrounded by layers of layers, and there were mountains outside the mountain.

古文：余初疑锡铅西岭颇伏，何以猛峒之道不西由其坳而南陟其岑。
现代文：我最初疑惑锡铅的西岭相当低伏，为何去猛桐的路不往西经由那里的山坳却往南上登那座小山？
English: At first, I wondered why the road to Mengdong did not go west through the mountains there, but went south to climb the hill.

古文：又疑湾甸之界，既东以猛峒，而猛峒以北，杜伟山以南，其西又作何状？
现代文：又疑惑湾甸州的分界，既然东面以猛炯划分，可猛娟以北，杜伟山以南，这一线以西又作什么状况？
English: They also doubt the demarcation of Banten Prefecture. Since the eastern side is divided by Mammoth, what is the situation north of Mammoth, south of Duwei Mountain, and west of this line?

古文：至是而遥见西岭，又有崇峰一重臂抱于西。
现代文：到此地后遥见西岭，又有一层高峰环臂围抱在西方。
English: After arriving here, the West Ridge can be seen in the distance, and there is another layer of high peaks encircled in the west.

古文：盖枯柯东岭老脊之南度者，一由瓦房哨东度脊西南下，其亘反高，夹永昌之流而南下哈思坳；坳之南其脉犹未尽，故亦登、温板、鸡飞在此脊之西者，犹顺宁属；而其南即东与杜伟山自草房哨度脊者，如椅之交环其臂，其中皆丛沓之山，直下东南，而开峡底于猛峒西坳之伏处，其西正开峡之始，南降三十里而后及猛峒焉。
现代文：大概是枯柯东岭的主脊往南延伸的山脉，一条由瓦房哨往东延伸的山脊处向西南下延，它绵亘的山势反而高，夹住永昌的水流往南下流到哈思坳；哈思坳之南它的山脉仍然未完，所以亦登、温板、鸡飞在此条山脊西面的地方，仍是顺宁府的属地；而它的南段就是东面与杜伟山从草房哨延伸的山脊，如交椅的扶手一样手臂环抱，两者中间全是成丛杂沓的山峦，一直下垂到东南，而后在猛炯西面山坳的低伏处敞开为峡底，它的西边正是峡谷裂开开始的地方，往南下降三十里后到达猛酮。
English: It is probably the mountain range extending southward from the main ridge of the Kaike Dongling. A ridge extending eastward from the tile house sentry post extends down to the southwest. Its long mountain range is high, but the water that caught Yongchang flows southward to Hasu; south of Hasu, its mountains are still unfinished, so Yidang, Warman, and Qianfei on the west side of this ridge are still the territory of Shuning Prefecture; and its southern section is the ridge extending east from Du Wei Mountain from the grass house sentry post, like the arm of a chair, the two are completely intertwined. The two are all clumps of

古文：猛峒富庶，以其属湾甸境也。此正西遥望之所及者。
现代文：这是遥望正西所能见到的。
English: This can be seen from as far away as due west.

古文：而正南则前夹之顶，至是平等，而犹不能瞰其外，正北则本坡自障之；正东即其过脉分支之处，第见南峡之犹自东北环来也。
现代文：而正南则是前边相夹的山顶，到这里同样平缓，但仍不能看到它的外面；正北则是本处山坡自己挡住了视线；正东就是那延伸而过的山脊分支之处，只见南峡仍然是自东北环绕而来。
English: But due south is the top of the mountain clamped in front, here it is also flat, but you still can't see it outside; due north is where the slope itself blocks the line of sight; due east is where the branch of the ridge extends past, only to see that the South Gorge is still surrounded from the northeast.

古文：又东上五里余，坡脊遂中夹为槽。
现代文：又向东上走五里多，坡脊上于是中央对夹为沟槽。
English: I walked eastward for more than five miles, and on the ridge of the slope, the center of the clamp became a trench.

古文：卖腐以供旅人之饭云，既饭，由馆左又东半里，转而北透一坳。
现代文：路由沟槽中行一里多，向东钻出沟槽，山脊于是向北转，山下右边的壑谷盘绕杂沓如初，而左边的峡谷又下坠成向南下延的深坑，所以路顺着山脊往北转。
English: The road went through the trench for more than a mile, drilled out the trench to the east, and the ridge turned to the north. The valley on the right under the mountain was coiled as before, while the canyon on the left fell down into a deep pit extending southward, so the road turned north along the ridge.

古文：其西峰即中火之馆所倚者，比其后过脉处，与东峰夹成坳。由其中北透半里即东转，挟过脉东峰之北东向下。
现代文：又走一里，山脊东面有山峰当中突起，稍上走，有中火的客馆，向西靠着山峰屹立，匾额题为 金马雄关 ，前边有两家人，就是所谓的塘报了，卖豆腐供应旅客的饭，饭后，由客馆左边又向东半里，转向北穿过一个山坳。它的西峰就是中火的客馆背靠之处，此地是它后面山脉延过之处，与东峡夹成山坳。由两峰中间向北穿越半里马上向东转，傍着东峰山脉延过处的北面向东下走。
English: After another mile, on the east side of the ridge, there is a mountain peak protruding in the middle. A little further up, there is a guest house with a medium fire, standing to the west against the mountain peak. The plaque is entitled "Kin Ma Xiong Guan." There are two families in front, the so-called "Tang Pao," selling tofu and serving meals to tourists. After the meal, from the left side of the guest house and half a mile to the east, turn north through a ridge. Its west peak is the back of the guest house with a medium fire. This place is where the mountains extend behind it, sandwiched between the East Gorge

古文：半里，又临北壑之上，旋入夹槽中，两崖如剖，中嵌仅通三尺，而底甚平。
现代文：半里，又下临在北边壑谷之上，旋即走入相夹的沟槽中，两侧山崖如刀剖开一样，中间深嵌仅通有三尺宽，可槽底非常平坦。
English: Half a mile further, it descends above Shibuya on the north side, and immediately enters the trench between the two cliffs. The cliffs on both sides open up like a knife, and the deep cut in the middle is only three feet wide, but the bottom of the trench is very flat.

古文：槽上丛木交蔽。
现代文：沟槽上方树丛交缠密蔽。
English: Above the ditch, the bushes are densely intertwined.

古文：半里，有倒而横跨其上者，连两株，皆如从桥下行，又一里，其跨者巨而低，必伛伏而过焉。
现代文：半里，有倒卧横跨在沟槽上的树，接连两棵，都如同是从桥下走，又一里，这里横跨的树又大又低，必得弯腰趴伏才能过去。
English: For half a mile, there are trees lying upside down across the ditch, two trees in a row, as if they were walking under a bridge, and another mile, where the trees are large and low, and you have to bend over to get past.

古文：槽南阙同 缺 处犹时时见西坠之峡，最后又见槽北之峡犹西坠也。
现代文：沟槽南的缺口处还时时望得见往西下坠的山峡，最后又见沟槽北的峡谷仍是向西下坠。
English: At the gap to the south of the trench, the canyon falling to the west can still be seen from time to time. Finally, the canyon to the north of the trench can still be seen falling to the west.

古文：共二里，稍东上，逾脊南转，有架木为门踞岭东者，为白沙铺哨。
现代文：共二里，稍向东上走，越过山脊向南转，有用木头架为门盘踞在岭东的地方，是白沙铺哨。
English: A total of two miles, a little to the east, over the ridge to the south, there is a wooden frame for the door, and in the east of the ridge, there is a white sand pavement.

古文：此南度之脊也，乃右甸东分支南下之第五重。
现代文：这是往南延伸的山脊，是右甸东面分支南下的第五重山。
English: This is the ridge extending to the south. It is the fifth heaviest mountain south of the eastern branch of the right dian.

古文：其脉独长。挟西分四支而抱于内，又南度而东南行，与右甸南杜伟山之脊，西夹孟祐河而出于云州旧城西；又与第六重沿澜沧南崖之脊，东夹顺宁河而出于云州旧城东；从此南度，纡而西南，折而东南下，东突为顺宁郡城，又东南而尽于云州旧城焉。
现代文：它的山脉很长，傍着向西分支的第四重支脉而环抱于内，又向南延伸后走向东南，与右甸南面杜伟山的山脊，在西面夹住孟枯河流到云州旧城西边；又与第六重山沿澜沧江南岸的山脊，在东面夹住顺宁河流到云州旧城东面；从此往南延伸，向西南纤曲，折向东南下延，往东突为顺宁府城，又向东南在云州旧城到了尽头。
English: Its mountains are very long. It is encircled by the fourth branch of the westward branch, and extends to the south and then to the southeast. With the ridge of Du Wei Mountain to the south of the right dian, it is sandwiched by the Mengkai River to the west of the old city of Yunnan in the west; and with the ridge of the sixth mountain along the south bank of the Lancang River, it is sandwiched by the Shuning River to the east of the old city of Yunnan in the east; from here it extends to the south, curves to the southwest, bends down to the southeast, juts out to the east as Shuning

古文：由哨门南向稍下，辄闻水声潺潺，从西南迸峡下，即东北坠坑去，而路从其南东向下，犹有夹槽坠其中。
现代文：由哨门向南稍下走，就听见潺潺的水声，从西南峡中涌流而下，立即向东北坠入坑谷流去，而路从它的南边向东下行，仍然有相夹的沟槽。
English: A short walk south from the watchtower, you will hear the sound of rushing water, pouring down from the southwest gorge, immediately falling to the northeast into the valley stream, while the road from its south to the east down, there are still clamped grooves.

古文：二里余，出槽，东行冈脊上，于是见北壑之北，则澜沧南岸之山，纡回东抱而南，为老脊东之第六支，屏亘于顺宁河之东，今谓之东山，即《志》所称某山也。
现代文：坠入沟槽中走二里多，出了沟槽，往东前行在冈脊上，在此处见北边壑谷的北面，就是澜沧江南岸的山，纤绕到东面向南环抱，是主脊东面的第六条支脉，屏风样横亘在顺宁河的东面，今夭称之为东山，也就是志书所称的某某山了。
English: After falling into the ditch, I walked for more than two miles. I got out of the ditch and walked eastward on the ridge. Here, I can see the north side of Shibuya on the north side, which is the mountain on the south bank of the Lancang River. The fiber wraps around to the east and wraps around to the south. It is the sixth branch of the east side of the main ridge. The screen-like shape stretches across the east side of the Shuning River. Today, it is called Dongshan, which is also the so-and-so mountain mentioned in the book.

古文：其脊南至云州西南突者，尽于新城西；东北由茅家哨过脉而南者，尽于云州日城所合二水东下而入澜沧处。
现代文：此条山脊往南到云州向西南前突的，在新城西边到了尽头；山脉由东北茅家哨往南延伸的，在云州旧城两条水流合流后向东下流进澜沧江之处到了尽头。
English: This mountain ridge extends southward to Yunnan in the southwest and ends in the west of the new city; the mountains extend southward from the northeastern Maojia Sentinel and end in the place where the two streams of the old city of Yunnan meet and flow eastward into the Lancang River.

古文：南壑之南，则即此白沙脊南度东转，为老脊东之第五支，屏亘于顺宁城之西。
现代文：南面壑谷之南，便就是此条白沙脊往南延伸后向东转，成为主脊东面的第五条支脉，屏风样横亘在顺宁府城之西。
English: South of Shibuya on the south side, this white sand ridge extends to the south and turns to the east, becoming the fifth branch of the main ridge to the east. The screen shape extends to the west of Shuningfucheng.

古文：今谓之西山，即《志》所称某山也。
现代文：今天称之为西山，就是志书所称的某某山了。
English: Today, it is called the West Mountain, which is the so-and-so mountain referred to in the book.

古文：两山夹坞东南去，而顺宁郡城踞其中西山下；西北盘东山之坳，为三台山渡江大道；东南坞尽之隙，则云州在焉。
现代文：两条山脉夹住山坞往东南延去，而顺宁府城雄踞在坞中的西山下；往西北绕过东山的山坳，是从三台山渡江的大道；东南方山坞尽头的空隙，便是云州在那里了。
English: Two mountain ranges sandwich the dock to the southeast, and Shuning Fucheng Yongsheng is at the bottom of the west mountain in the dock; to the northwest, bypassing the mountains of the east mountain, is the road from Sandai Mountain to the river; the gap at the end of the southeast dock is where Yunnan is.

古文：此一川大概也，而川中欹侧同 窄 ，不若永昌、腾越之平展云。
现代文：这是这一条平川的大概形势，可川中倾斜不平，不如永昌、腾越那样平展。
English: This is the general situation of this flat river, but it is unevenly inclined in the middle of the river and is not as flat as Yongchang and Tengyue.

古文：从冈平行二里，又稍下一里，前有一峰中道而突，穿其坳而上，约一里，有一二家倚坡东，是为望城关，从东南壑中遂见郡城故也。
现代文：从山冈上平缓前行二里，又稍下走一里，前方有一座山峰在道路中央突起，穿过峰上的山坳上走，约一里，有一二家人紧靠在坡东，这是望城关，是从东南方的壑谷中便能望见府城的缘故。
English: From the top of the hill, walk gently for two miles, and then walk slightly down for one mile. In front of you, there is a mountain peak protruding in the center of the road. Walk across the ridge on the peak, and walk for about one mile. There are one or two families close to the east slope. This is the lookout pass, which is the reason why you can see the capital from the southeastern valley.

古文：从此又迤逦下坡，十里，抵坡下。
现代文：从此又透邀下坡，十里，抵达坡下。
English: Since then, I have been invited to go downhill, ten miles, and arrived at the bottom of the slope.

古文：东出大路，两度小桥，上一坡，约二里，入郡城新城之北门。
现代文：向东走上大路，两次越过小桥，上了一道坡，约二里，走入府城新城的北门。
English: Walk east on the main road, cross the small bridge twice, walk up a slope for about two miles, and enter the north gate of Fucheng New Town.

古文：南过郡治前，稍转东街，则市肆在焉。
现代文：向南经过府衙门前，稍稍转到东街，就有集市店铺在这里了。
English: Go south past Fuximen, turn slightly to Dongjie, and you will find a bazaar store here.

古文：又南逾一坡，出南门，半里而入龙泉寺，寺门亦东向，其地名为旧城，而实无城也。
现代文：又往南越过一条坡，走出南门，半里后进入龙泉寺，寺门也是向东。此地名为旧城，可实际上无城。
English: Another slope to the south, out of the south gate, half a mile later into Longquan Temple, the temple gate is also to the east. This place is called the old city, but in fact there is no city.

古文：时寺中开讲甫完，僧俗扰扰，余入适当其斋，遂饱餐之而停担于内。
现代文：此时寺中开堂讲经刚完，僧俗扰扰攘攘，我进寺时恰好赶上寺中施斋，便饱餐斋饭后停放担子住在寺内。
English: At this time, the sermon in the temple hall had just ended, and the monks and lay people were disturbing the hustle and bustle. When I entered the temple, it was just in time for the sermon in the temple. After the sermon, I parked the burden and lived in the temple.

古文：初八日晨起，从殿后静室往叩讲师宣讲佛法的僧侣，当其止静，未晤而出。
现代文：初八日清晨起床，从殿后的静室去叩见讲经的法师，正遇上他入定打禅，未见面便出来了。
English: On the morning of the eighth day of the first month, I got up and went from the quiet room behind the hall to knock on the mage who was preaching the sutras. I met him just as he was entering the meditation hall, and he came out without meeting me.

古文：余时欲趋云州，云州有路可达蒙化。
现代文：我此时打算赶去云州，云州有路可到达蒙化。
English: At this time, I plan to rush to Yunnan. Yunnan has a road to Monhua.

古文：念从此而往，则雇夫尚艰，不若仍返顺宁，可省两日负载。
现代文：考虑从此地前去，雇脚夫还很难，不如仍返回顺宁，可省去两天的负重。
English: Considering going from here, it is still difficult to hire porters. It is better to return to Shuning, which can save two days of burden.

古文：乃以行李寄住持师达周，以轻囊同仆行。
现代文：于是把行李寄存给住持禅师达周，拿着轻装同仆人上路。
English: So he left his luggage with the abbot, Zen master Dazhou, and set out with his servant, carrying light luggage.

古文：达师留候饭。
现代文：达周禅师挽留等着吃了饭。
English: Dazhou Zen Master waited and ate his meal.

古文：上午，乃出寺前，东随小溪下川中。
现代文：上午，才出到寺前，向东顺小溪下到平川中。
English: In the morning, I went out to the front of the temple and walked east down the creek to the middle of the Hirakawa River.

古文：一里，渡亭桥，循东界山麓南行。
现代文：一里，越过一座亭桥，沿东面一列山的山麓往南行。
English: One mile, over a pavilion bridge, along the eastern side of the foot of a mountain to the south.

古文：三里，稍上一西突之坡，村庐夹道，有普光寺傍东山西向。
现代文：三里，慢慢上登一条西突的山坡，村庄房屋夹道，有个普光寺傍着东山面向西。
English: Three miles, slowly climbing up a hillside with a steep slope to the west, village houses sandwiched in between, there is a Phu Quang Temple next to the East Mountain facing west.

古文：又东南半里，下涉一小涧，仍南上坡，居庐不绝。
现代文：又向东南半里，下涉一条小山涧，仍向南上坡，居民房屋不断。
English: Another half-mile to the southeast, a small ridge descends, still climbing southward, and residents' houses continue.

古文：由桥南里余，渐西南上东突之坡。
现代文：继而那山向东夹立而入，又有小溪自东面壑谷中流来，渡过小溪。
English: Then the mountain rises to the east and enters, and a stream flows from the middle of the valley in the east and crosses the stream.

古文：上一里，村庐夹道。倚西山东向，有长窑高倚西坡，东下而西上，是为瓦罐窑。
现代文：又往东南翻越一坡，共五里，就见大溪的水自西向东折，有座亭桥跨在水上，溪水浩浩荡荡。由桥南走一里多，渐渐向西南上登东突的山坡。上爬一里，村庄房屋夹道。紧靠西山向东处，有长长的瓦窑高高依傍着西坡，东边往下而西边上伸，这是瓦罐窑。
English: Further to the south-east, climb a slope for a total of five miles, and you will see the water of the large stream turn from west to east. There is a pavilion bridge across the water, and the stream is vast and turbulent. Walk more than a mile from the south of the bridge, and gradually climb to the south-west to climb the hillside of Dongdu. Climb one mile, and the village houses are parallel. Close to the west mountain to the east, there is a long tile kiln high and leaning next to the west slope, the east side goes down and the west side goes up, this is a tile kiln.

古文：由其南再越东突之脊一里余，东南下东出之峡一里，又东南上，循西界山麓南行。
现代文：由它的南边再翻越东突的山脊一里多，向东南走下往东出去的山峡一里，又向东南上登，沿西面一列山的山麓往南行。
English: From its southern side, it then climbs over the ridge of the eastern spur for more than a mile, descends to the southeast for a mile to the east of the gorge, climbs again to the southeast, and travels south along the foothills of the mountain chain to the west.

古文：再下再上，五里，有一二家倚东突之坡，坡间有小池一方，是为鸭子塘。
现代文：两次上爬两次下走，五里，有一二家人紧靠东突的山坡，坡上有一片小水池，这是鸭子塘。
English: After two climbs and two descents, after five miles, there are one or two families close to the eastern slope of the mountain. There is a small pond on the slope, which is a duck pond.

古文：又东南五里，冈头有村，倚西冈东向，是为象庄，此未改流时土酋猛廷瑞畜象之所也。
现代文：又往东南五里，冈头有村子，背靠西冈面向东，这是象庄，此地是未改设流官时土人酋长猛廷瑞养象的处所。
English: Another five miles to the southeast, there is a village at the head of the ridge, with its back against the west ridge and facing east. This is Xiangzhuang, the place where the aboriginal chief Meng Ting Rui raised elephants before he was exiled.

古文：由其南稍折而下，一里，渡一涧。
现代文：由村南稍往下折，一里，渡过一条山涧。
English: From the south of the village, turn slightly down, one mile, and cross a mountain pass.

古文：其涧悬冈东下，其西山环峡复东。
现代文：此涧高悬在山冈上向东下流，冈边的西山环绕成峡谷。
English: This raft hangs high on the mountain and flows down to the east, with the west side of the hill surrounded by a canyon.

古文：南上二里，逾其东突之冈，盘之而西南下。
现代文：再向东南上登二里，越过那东突的山冈。绕着它往西南下走，二里，抵达西边的山坳下。
English: Then climb two miles to the southeast, over the jagged mountain. Walk around it to the southwest, two miles, and arrive at the foot of the mountain in the west.

古文：二里，抵西坳下，折而循南冈东上。盘嘴而南，六里，有坊倚路左，其上有村，曰安乐村。
现代文：转弯沿南冈向东上走，绕过山嘴往南走，六里，有牌坊紧靠在路左，牌坊上边有村庄，叫安乐村。
English: Turn along the South Hill to the east, go around the mountain mouth to the south, six miles, there is a archway close to the left of the road, and there is a village above the archway, called Anle Village.

古文：又东南四里，稍下，有村倚西坡东向，是为鹿塘。
现代文：又向东南四里，稍下走，有村庄背靠西坡面向东，这是鹿塘。
English: Another four miles to the southeast, a little further down, there is a village with its back to the west slope and facing east, this is Lu Tang.

古文：自归化桥渡溪右。循西界山行，其南支峰东突，溪流盘峡中；至鹿塘，其下壑稍盘而开，田塍益盛，村庐之踞东西两山者甚繁，而西坡之鹿塘尤为最云。
现代文：自从在归化桥渡到溪右，沿西面一列山行，它南边的支峰向东突，溪流盘绕在山峡中；来到鹿塘，山下的壑谷稍稍回绕开阔些，田地更多，村庄房屋高踞在东西两面山上十分繁荣，而西坡的鹿塘尤其繁盛。
English: Since crossing the naturalization bridge to the right of the stream, a line of mountains runs along the west side, its southern peak juts eastward, and the stream coils in the canyon; when it comes to Lutang, the valley under the mountain is slightly wider, there are more fields, and village houses are very prosperous in the mountains on both sides of the east and west, and Lutang on the west slope is particularly prosperous.

古文：时日才下午，前无宿店，遂止邸楼作记。
现代文：此时才到下午，前方无住宿的客店，就住在客店楼上写日记。
English: It wasn't until the afternoon at this point that I left the inn, where there was no accommodation in front of me, and went to live upstairs in the inn to write my diary.

古文：初九日平明，饭而行。
现代文：初九日黎明，吃饭后上路。
English: At dawn on the 9th day of the first month, after eating, I hit the road.

古文：仍循西界山南行，八里，西界山忽横突而东，大溪乃东北折入峡，有小溪自西南山腋来合。
现代文：仍沿西面一列山往南行，八里，西面一列山忽然向东横突，大溪于是向东北折入山峡，有小溪自西南的山侧流来会合。
English: Still following the line of mountains to the south in the west, eight miles later, a line of mountains to the west suddenly juts out to the east, causing the large stream to turn into the mountain gorge in the northeast, and a small stream to join from the mountain side in the southwest.

古文：乃舍大溪，溯小溪南半里，东度小溪石桥，又南半里，有村三四家倚南山东坳。
现代文：于是离开大溪，溯小溪往南半里，向东越过小溪上的石桥，又向南半里，有个三四家人的村庄紧靠南山东面的山坳。
English: So they left the large stream, followed the small stream half a mile to the south, crossed the stone bridge over the small stream to the east, and half a mile to the south, there was a village of three or four families close to the mountains east of Nanshan.

古文：由南山蹑西坳而上，一里，南逾东突之脊，有茅屋三楹踞脊间，是为把边关，有两三家傍之居，即西山之东突者，而溪流则绕其东峡而南焉。
现代文：由南山登西边的山坳上走，一里，往南越过东突的山脊，有三间茅屋高踞在山脊上，这是把边关，有两三家人傍关口居住，这就是西山向东突的山脊，而溪流则绕到它的东峡往南流。
English: From the Nanshan, walk up the ridge on the west side of the ridge, one mile, and go south over the ridge on the east side of the ridge. There are three huts on the ridge. This is the border. There are two or three families living near the border. This is the ridge of the west mountain to the east, and the stream flows around it to the east gorge to the south.

古文：由关南下峡中，半里，透峡，仍循西山行，复东见溪流自其东破峡南出。
现代文：由关南下到峡中，半里，穿出峡谷，仍沿西山行，再次望见东方溪流自它的东边冲破峡谷向南流出去。
English: From the south of Guan to the middle of the canyon, half a mile, out of the canyon, still along the West Mountain, once again see the Dongfang Stream from its east break through the canyon to the south.

古文：又下一里，溪流西南来，路东南临其上。
现代文：又下走一里，溪流自西南流来，路向东南登临到溪上。
English: Another mile down, the stream flows from the southwest, and the road climbs southeast to the stream.

古文：两盘西湾之峡，又稍上，共一里，有村踞路右冈上。
现代文：两次绕过向西弯曲的山峡，又稍上走，共一里，有村庄高踞在路右的山冈上。
English: Two times around the west-bending mountain gorge, and then slightly up, for a total of one mile, there is a village of sorghum on the mountain to the right of the road.

古文：又南一里，稍下，再盘西湾，南逾小石东行之脊，遂东南行坡塍间。
现代文：又向南一里，稍下走，再绕过西面的山湾，往南越过小石山往东延伸的山脊，于是向东南行走在坡上的田野间。
English: Another mile to the south, walk down a little, then around the bay on the west, south over the ridge of Little Rock stretching east, then walk southeast between the fields on the slope.

古文：一里余，又稍上东突之坡，东南盘其嘴。
现代文：一里多，又渐渐登上东突的山坡，向东南绕过山嘴。
English: After more than a kilometer, I gradually ascended the eastern slope of the hill and went around the mountain mouth to the southeast.

古文：一里余，路分两岐，一东南下峡者，为渡溪往新城道，一西南循岭者，为翁溪往旧城道，盖新城道由溪东峡中行，旧城道由溪西崖半行也。
现代文：一里多，路分为两条岔路，一条向东南下到峡中的，是从渡溪前去新城的路，一条往西南沿山岭走的，是翁溪前往旧城的路，原来去新城的路由溪东的峡中行，去旧城的路由溪西的山崖半腰上走。
English: For more than a kilometer, the road is divided into two branch roads. One goes southeast to the middle of the gorge, which is the road from the river to the new city. One goes southwest along the mountains, which is the road from Wengxi to the old city. Originally, the road to the new city went through the middle of the gorge east of the stream, and the road to the old city went halfway up the mountain cliff west of the stream.

古文：时峡中溪桥已为水涨冲去，须由翁溪涉溪而渡，而水急难涉，不若由旧城东北度桥，迂道至新城，虽绕路十里，而免徒涉之艰焉。
现代文：此时峡中溪上的桥已被上涨的流水冲去，必须由翁溪涉溪水渡过去，可水急难涉，不如由旧城东北过桥，绕道到新城，虽然绕十里路，但免去了徒步涉水的艰难了。
English: At this time, the bridge over the creek in the gorge has been washed away by the rising water. It is necessary to wade through the water of Weng Creek, but the water is difficult to wade. It is better to cross the bridge from the northeast of the old city and take a detour to the new city. Although it is a ten-mile road, it avoids the difficulty of wading on foot.

古文：时闻杨州尊已入帘去主持乡试，闪知愿书亦不必投，正可从旧城兼收之。
现代文：此时听说杨知州大人已入任帘官去了，闪知愿的信也不必投递了，正可从旧城走兼收两地的景色。
English: At this time, I heard that Yang Zhizhou's adult has been appointed as a curtain official, and the letter of the wish does not have to be delivered. It is possible to walk from the old city and receive the scenery of the two places.

古文：乃由溪西西南循山行，复入坡塍，一里，东南上东突之坡。
现代文：于是由溪西往西南沿山行，再次走入坡上的田野，一里，向东南上登东突的山坡。
English: So he walked along the mountain from the west of Xixi to the southwest, walked into the fields on the slope again, one mile, and climbed the hillside of Dongtu to the southeast.

古文：又南二里，有村倚西山岭上，是为翁溪村。
现代文：又往南二里，有村庄紧靠在西山的岭上，这是翁溪村。
English: Another two miles to the south, there is a village close to the ridge of the West Mountain, this is Wengxi Village.

古文：村之南，西界山又环而东突，东界山亦折而东向去，中开东西坞，大溪东盘坞底，平畴夹之。
现代文：村子之南，西面一列山又环绕向东突，东面一列山也折向东延去，中间敞开成东西向的山坞，大溪向东盘曲在坞底，平旷的田野夹住溪流。
English: To the south of the village, a line of mountains on the west stretches around to the east, and a line of mountains on the east stretches to the east. The middle is open to the east and west, and the creek is bent at the bottom of the dock to the east. The flat fields hold the stream.

古文：翁溪之村，正东向而下临坞中，有路下涉坞中者，即渡溪往新城道也，由村南循南山东转者，即旧城道也。
现代文：叫翁溪的村庄，正好向东下临着坞中，有条下涉坞中的路，就是从渡溪前往新城的路了；由村南沿南山向东转的，就是去旧城的路了。
English: In the village called Wengxi, just east of the dock, there is a road in the middle of the dock, which is the road from Duoxi to the new city; from the south of the village along the Nanshan to the east is the road to the old city.

古文：乃循山东行一里，复东南缘坡上，北瞰坞中溪，南逼坡足，潆而东流。
现代文：于是沿山往东行一里，再向东南沿山坡上登，俯瞰北边坞中的溪流，往南逼近坡脚，漂绕着往东流去。
English: So he walked east along the mountain for a mile, then climbed up the mountain slope to the southeast, overlooking the stream in the north dock, approaching the foot of the slope to the south, and drifting around to the east.

古文：路蹑坡上，甚峻，二里，东登岭头，乃转南行，坞亦随之，南向破峡出。
现代文：上登山坡的路非常陡峻，二里，向东登上岭头，于是转向南行，山坞也顺着山岭伸展，向南破开山峡出去。
English: The road up the mountain slope is very steep, two miles, eastward to the top of the ridge, then turn southbound, the dock also stretches along the mountain ridge, breaking the mountain canyon to the south.

古文：路南行西坡，一里，大溪纡东南去，路乃南下坡。
现代文：路由南向西坡延伸，一里，大溪纤曲向东南流去，路就向南下坡。
English: The road extends from the south to the west slope, one mile, the Daxi filigree flows to the southeast, and the road climbs downhill to the south.

古文：二里，有数家分庐坞中，是为顺德堡。
现代文：二里，有数家人房屋分散在山坞中，这是顺德堡。
English: After two miles, there are several family houses scattered in the dockyard, this is Shunde Fort.

古文：堡南有山，自西界横度而东突，大溪纡之。
现代文：堡南有山，自西面一列山横向延伸往东前突，大溪绕过此山。
English: There is a mountain to the south of the castle. A line of mountains extends horizontally from the west to the east, and a large stream runs around the mountain.

古文：路南由其度脊处穿坳而过，半里，抵坳南，辄分峡下。
现代文：路往南由那山脊延伸之处穿过山坳，半里，抵达山坳南边，马上分出峡谷下延。
English: The road to the south from the ridge extends through the mountains, half a mile, arriving at the south side of the mountains, immediately branching out into the canyon.

古文：又一里，有峡自南来。
现代文：又走一里，有峡谷自南边前来。
English: After walking another mile, there was a canyon coming from the south.

古文：盖西大山由坳西直南去，南抵旧城之后，其东余支又北转如掉尾，而中夹为坞，其来颇深，有村庐倚西坡上，二峡合于前，遂东向成流坠峡下。
现代文：西面的大山由山坳西边一直向南延去，南边直达旧城的后面，它东面剩下的支脉又向北转如尾巴掉转过来一样，而中间夹成山坞，它来的地方相当深远，有村庄房屋紧靠在西坡上，两条峡谷在前方会合，于是向东形成溪流坠下峡谷。
English: The big mountain in the west stretches from the western side of the mountain ridge all the way to the south, and the southern side reaches behind the old city. The remaining branch in the east turns to the north like a tail turned around, and the middle is sandwiched into a dock. The place it comes from is quite far away. There are village houses close to the western slope, and two canyons meet in front, thus forming a stream falling down the canyon to the east.

古文：路亦挟北坡东下，随之半里，度峡中小桥，其南则掉尾之支，又横度东突，路复南向其度脊处穿坳而上。
现代文：路也傍着北坡向东下走，顺山坡走半里，越过峡中的小桥，桥南就是尾部掉转的支脉，又横向延伸向东突，路再向南从山脊延伸处穿过山坳往上走。
English: The road also goes down the north slope to the east, half a mile along the mountain slope, crosses the small bridge in the gorge, the south of the bridge is the branch of the tail turn, and extends horizontally to the east, and the road then goes south from the ridge extension through the mountains.

古文：一里余，逾岭坳南下，有村在南坞，大溪自马鞍山西，盘西界东突之嘴，循东山南行坞东，路循西麓南行坞西。
现代文：一里多，越过岭坳南下，有村庄在南面山坞中，大溪自马鞍山西边，绕过西面一列山向东突的山嘴，沿东山往南流淌在山坞东面，路沿西麓往南行走在山坞西面。
English: For more than a mile, crossing the ridge to the south, there are villages in the dock on the south side, the creek from the west side of Ma'anshan, bypassing the west side of the mountain to the east, flowing south along the east side of the dock on the east side, and walking south along the west foot on the west side of the dock.

古文：二里，西界山之南，复一支横障而东，又有数家倚南山，庐间曲路随山东转，溪亦随坞东折。
现代文：二里，西面一列山的南边，又有一条支脉横挡着往东延伸，又有数家人背靠南山，村舍间弯曲的路顺山势向东转，溪水也顺山坞向东折。
English: Two miles to the south of a line of mountains to the west, there is another tributary stretching east across the barrier, and several families have their backs to Nanshan. The curved road between the village houses turns east along the mountain, and the stream also turns east along the mountain dock.

古文：一里余，盘其东突之嘴，大溪亦直捣其下，路与水俱抱之而南。
现代文：一里多，绕过那向东突的山嘴，大溪也直捣在山嘴下，路与水流都怀抱山嘴往南去。
English: For more than a mile, we skirted the eastward-jutting promontory, with the creek running directly under the promontory. The road and the current both hugged the promontory and headed south.

古文：南壑颇开，庐塍交错，黍禾茂盛，半秀半熟，间有刈者。
现代文：南面的壑谷相当开阔，房屋田野交错，黍米稻谷茂盛，一半开花一半已成熟，间或有收割的人。
English: The valley to the south is quite open, with houses and fields interlaced. The glutinous rice is flourishing, with half of it in bloom and the other half already ripe. There are occasional harvesters.

古文：壑中诸庐，函宗地名最大，倚西山而居壑中。
现代文：壑谷中的诸处房屋，函宗最大，背靠西山居住在壑谷中。
English: Of all the houses in Shibuya, the largest is in Hanzo. People live in Shibuya, away from the West Hills.

古文：一里余及之，由其前东南行塍间，一里余，南从大溪西岸行。
现代文：一里多到达函宗，由它前边往东南走在田野间，一里多，往南从大溪西岸走。
English: I walked more than a kilometer to reach Hanzong, and from there I walked in front of it to the southeast among the fields. I walked more than a kilometer to the south from the west bank of Daxi.

古文：二里余，东西两界余支交环于前，而西支回突为尤甚，既东向环而至，中复起一小下，则其南壑又大开，坡流杂沓于其间。
现代文：二里多，东西两列山余下的支脉交相环绕在前方，而西边的支脉回绕前突尤其厉害，向东环绕到此后，中间又耸起一个小山尖，好似挡在门口的标杆，水由它东边裂开的堑谷流出去，路由它的西边越过山坳向上走，这里是顺宁、云州的分界处。越过山脊南下，就见山脊南面的壑谷又十分开阔，山坡上水流杂沓于其间。
English: For more than two miles, the intersection of the remaining branches of the east-west two rows of mountains encircles the front, while the branch on the west recirculates the protrusion, which is particularly strong. After that, it encircles the east, and a small mountain peak rises in the middle, like a benchmark at the door. Water flows out of the cracked valley on the east side of it, and goes up through the ridge on the west side of it. Here is the demarcation between Shuning and Yunnan. Going south over the ridge, you can see the valley on the south side of the ridge is also very open, and the water flow on the

古文：而远山旁午，或斜叠于南，则西大脊自锡铅南盘绕而东者；或夭矫于东，则东界分支，沿澜沧西岸，度茅家哨而南尽于顺江小水者。
现代文：而远山纷繁交错，有的斜斜地重叠在南面，是西面的大山脊自锡铅南面向东盘绕的山；有的屈曲盘绕在东方，是东面一列山的分支，沿澜沧江西岸，延过茅家哨往南在顺江小水处到尽头的山。
English: And the distant mountains are numerous and intertwined. Some overlap obliquely in the south, and are the mountains on the west side of the great ridge coiled from the south to the east; some are bent and coiled in the east, and are the branches of a line of mountains in the east, along the west coast of the Lancang River, extending southward past the Moya Sentinel at the small water of the Shun River to the end of the mountain.

古文：此其外绕之崇峰也。
现代文：这是那外围环绕的高峰。
English: This is the peak of the outer ring.

古文：而近山，则坞北西山之脉，至此南尽于西，为旧城，东山之脉，至此南尽于东，为新城；坞西则西大脊之中，一峰从湾中东突，直临旧城之西；坞南，则西大脊东转之支，又从南大脊之北，先夹一支为近案；坞东，则东界沿江之支，又从东西转，直抱于新城之前为龙砂。
现代文：而近处的山，是山坞北面西山的山脉，到此地在西边到了南面的尽头，成为旧城，东山的山脉，到此地在东面到了南面的尽头，辟为新城；山坞西边是西面大山脊的中段，一座山峰从山湾中向东突，一直下临在旧城的西边；山坞南面，是西面大山脊向东转的支脉，又从南面大山脊的北边，先有一条支脉夹立成为近处的案山；山坞东面，是东面一列山沿江的支脉，又从东向西转，一直围抱在新城之前成为龙砂。
English: And the nearby mountains are the mountains of the West Mountain to the north of the dock, and the area to the west reaches the end of the south and becomes the old city, and the mountains of the East Mountain, and the area to the east reaches the end of the south and becomes the new city; the west side of the dock is the middle section of the great ridge on the west side, and a mountain peak protrudes from the mountain bay to the east and falls to the west of the old city; the south side of the dock is the branch of the great ridge on the west side turning to the east, and from the north side of the great ridge on the south side, there is a branch

古文：此其内逼之回峦也。
现代文：这是那向内逼近回绕的山峦。
English: This is the mountain range that loops inward.

古文：然犹近不见壑中诸水，而只见旧城庐落即在南冈；一里及之，亦饭于旧城，乃东向下坡。
现代文：不过仍看不见近处壑谷中的诸条水道，而只见旧城的房屋聚落就在南冈上；一里后走到旧城，也是处有数百家人的聚居地。在旧城吃饭，于是向东下坡。
English: However, we still couldn't see the nearby waterways in the valley, but we could only see the cluster of houses in the old town on the south hill. A mile later, we reached the old town, which is also a place where hundreds of families live. After eating in the old town, we headed downhill to the east.

古文：半里，有大道沿坡西南去者，兴隆厂道也；东北去者，新城道也。
现代文：半里，有条大道沿山坡往西南去的，是去兴隆厂的路；往东北去的，是去新城的路。
English: Half a mile away, there is an avenue along the hillside to the southwest, which is the road to Xinglong Factory; to the northeast, is the road to Xincheng.

古文：于是东北行田塍间。
现代文：于是往东北，行在田野间。
English: So I went to the northeast, walking through the fields.

古文：半里，有新墙一围，中建观音阁甚整，而功未就，然规模雄丽，亦此中所未睹也。
现代文：半里，有一圈新墙，中间建有观音阁，十分整齐，但工程尚未完成，不过规模雄伟壮丽，也是这一带所未见到过的。
English: Half a mile away, there is a circle of new wall, with a Guanyin Pavilion built in the middle, very neat, but the project has not yet been completed, but the scale is majestic and magnificent, which has never been seen in this area.

古文：其处当壑之中两水交会处，目界四达。
现代文：此处正当壑谷之中央两条水流相互会合之处，眼界四面畅达。
English: This is where the two streams meet in the middle of Shibuya, and the view is unobstructed on all sides.

古文：于是始见孟祐河即绕其东，顺宁河即出其北，遂共会于东北焉。
现代文：在这里才见到孟佑河就回绕在它东面，顺宁河就流在它北边，于是共同在东北会合。
English: It was only here that I saw the Mengyou River flowing back and forth to the east of it, and the Shuning River flowing to the north of it, and then meeting together in the northeast.

古文：于是西向遥望，有特出而临于西者，即大脊湾中东突之峰；其北开一隙自西北来者，孟祐河所从出也，其南纡一隙向西南峡者，兴隆厂所从逾也。
现代文：在这里向西遥望，有特别耸出而下临在西边的山，就是大山脊从山湾中向东突的山峰；它北面分开一条缝隙自西北而来的地方，是孟枯河从那里流来之处；它南面一条缝隙纤曲通向西南峡中的，是去兴隆厂穿越的地方。
English: Here, looking far to the west, there is a mountain that particularly protrudes and descends on the west, that is, a mountain peak with a large ridge protruding from the mountain bay to the east; on the north, it is separated by a gap coming from the northwest, which is where the Mangkhut River flows from; on the south, a gap curves into the middle of the Southwest Gorge, which is the place to cross the Xinglong Factory.

古文：有中界而垂于东者，即沿江渡茅家哨西环之支；其北开一隙，直上而夹茅家哨者，新城所托之坞也；其南进一隙，东叠而注于顺江小水者，诸流所汇之口也。
现代文：有隔在中间垂到东方的山，那就是沿江延过茅家哨向西环绕的支脉；那北面分开的一条缝隙，一直上延而夹住茅家哨的地方，是新城依托的山坞；那南面迸裂开的一条缝隙，东面层层叠叠流注到顺江小水的地方，是诸条水流汇合的河口。
English: There is a mountain that hangs in the middle to the east, that is, the tributary that stretches along the river through the cottage post and surrounds it to the west; the gap that separates the north side, where it extends up and clamps the cottage post, is the dock supported by the new city; the gap that is cracked on the south side, where the layers of the east side flow into the small water along the river, is the estuary of the confluence of various currents.

古文：小憩阁中，日色正午，凉风悠然。
现代文：在阁中稍作休息，天色正当中午，凉风悠悠然。
English: Take a short break in the pavilion, the sky is just right at noon, the cool breeze is leisurely.

古文：僧瀹茗为供。
现代文：僧人烹茶献上。
English: The monk prepared tea and offered it.

古文：已出围墙北，则顺宁之水，正出当门之堑。
现代文：不久走出围墙北边，就见顺宁河的河水，正流过当门处的堑沟中。
English: Soon after leaving the north side of the wall, I saw the water of the Shuning River flowing through the ditch at the gate.

古文：循北崖东转，架亭桥其上，名曰砥柱。
现代文：沿北面的山崖向东转，在河上架有亭桥，名叫砒柱。
English: Along the northern cliff to the east, there is a pavilion bridge over the river, called the pillar.

古文：其水出桥东，绕观音阁后，则孟祐河自西南来合之，东去入水口峡者也。
现代文：河水流出桥东，绕到观音阁后，就有孟枯河自西南流来会合，向东去流入河口所在的峡谷处。
English: The river flows out of the bridge to the east, and after circling to Guanyin Pavilion, the Mengkai River flows from the southwest to meet and flow eastward into the canyon where the estuary is located.

古文：度桥即东北上坡。
现代文：过桥后立即向东北上坡。
English: Immediately after crossing the bridge, go uphill to the northeast.

古文：是坡即顺宁东山之支，自澜沧西岸迤逦而来，其东南直下者，过茅家哨；此其西南分支者，至此将尽，结为马鞍山，东下之脉为新城，而此其东南尽处也。
现代文：此坡就是顺宁东山的支脉，自澜沧江西岸透迄而来，那向东南一直下延的，延过茅家哨，此处是它向西南分支的山脉，到此地将到尽头，盘结为马鞍山。往东下延的山脉是新城，而此坡是它东南的尽头处。
English: This slope is the branch of Shuning Dongshan, coming from the west coast of the Lancang River to the east, and the one that extends to the southeast extends past the Maojia Sentinel, here is the mountain range that it branches to the southwest, and here it will come to an end, coiled into Ma'anshan. The mountain range that extends to the east is Xincheng, and this slope is its southeast end.

古文：登坡里余，下瞰二流既合，盘曲壑底，如玉龙曲折。
现代文：登坡一里多，下瞰两条河流会合后，盘曲在壑谷底，如玉龙一样曲折。
English: After climbing more than a mile and overlooking the meeting of two rivers, the track twists and turns like a dragon at the bottom of the valley.

古文：其北又有一坡东下，即新旧两城中界之砂，夹水而逼于南山者。
现代文：它北边又有一条山坡向东下斜，就是隔在新、旧两城中间的地脉，是夹住河水近逼南山之处。
English: On the north side of it, there is another hill slope sloping down to the east, which is the vein separating the new and old cities, and is the place where the river water is caught close to Nanshan.

古文：稍下而上，里余，又越其脊，始望见新城在北峡之口，倚西山东下之脉。
现代文：稍下走后上登，一里多，又越过山脊，这才望见新城在北峡的峡口，是背靠西山向东下延的山脉。
English: After walking down a bit, I climbed up, more than a mile, and then crossed the ridge. It was only then that I saw the new city at the mouth of the North Gorge, a mountain range stretching eastward behind the West Mountain.

古文：又三里，稍下，越一小桥，又半里，抵城之东南角。
现代文：又行三里，稍下走，越过一座小桥，又走半里，抵达城的东南角。
English: Walk another three miles, walk down a bit, cross a small bridge, walk another half mile, and arrive at the southeast corner of the city.

古文：循城北行，又半里，入云州东门。
现代文：沿城墙往北行，又是半里，进入云州东门。
English: Walk north along the city wall for another half mile and enter the East Gate of Yunnan.

古文：州中寥寥，州署东向，只一街当其前，南北相达而已。
现代文：州城中荒寂不堪，州衙门向东，只有一条街道在衙门前，南北相通而已。
English: The middle of the state capital is desolate, and the state gate faces east. There is only one street in front of the gate, and it is only connected to the north and south.

古文：至时日才过午，遂止州治南逆旅。
现代文：来到时才过中午，就住在州衙南边的客店中。
English: He arrived just after noon and stayed in a guest house in the southern part of the state.

古文：云州即古之大侯州也。
现代文：云州就是古时候的大侯州。
English: In ancient times, Yunnan was a vassal state.

古文：昔为土知州俸姓，万历间，俸贞学以从逆诛，遂并顺宁，设流官，即以比州属之。
现代文：从前的土知州姓傣，万历年间，傣贞由于跟随反叛被诛杀，便并人顺宁府设置了流官，就把此州归属顺宁。
English: The former Tochi Prefecture was called Shun. During the Wanli era, Shuzhen was killed for following the rebellion, and Shuning Prefecture was set up as a stream official, so this prefecture belonged to Shuning.

古文：州治前额标 钦命云州 四字，想经御定而名之也。
现代文：州衙前的匾额写明 钦命云州 四个字，想来是经皇帝亲自确定并给它命名的了。
English: The plaque in front of the state seal reads, "The Qin ordered Yunnan" in four characters. It is believed that the emperor personally determined and named it.

古文：今顺宁猛廷瑞后已绝，而俸氏之后，犹有奉祀子孙，岁给八十五金之饩ｘì所赠的谷物或钱财焉。
现代文：如今顺宁府猛廷瑞的后代已经死绝，而棒家的后人，还有供奉祭祀的子孙，每年拨给八十五两黄金的薪资。
English: Nowadays, the descendants of Shuning Meng Ting Rui have died out, while the descendants of the Bao family, as well as the descendants of those who offer sacrifices, are allocated a salary of eighty-five taels of gold each year.

古文：云州疆界：北至顺宁界止数里，东北至沧江渡八十里为蒙化界，西南逾猛打江二百三十里为耿马界，东至顺江小水一百五十里为景东界，东南至夹里沧江渡二百里亦景东界。
现代文：云州的疆界：北边到顺宁府边界只有几里，东北到澜沧江渡江八十里是蒙化府的分界，西南越过猛打江二百三十里是耿马安抚司的分界，东面到顺江小水一百五十里是景东府的边界，东南到夹里澜沧江渡口二百里也是景东府的边界。
English: Yunnan's borders: only a few miles to the north to the border of Shuning Prefecture, 80 miles to the northeast to the Lancang River crossing is the boundary of Monhua Prefecture, 230 miles to the southwest across the Mengta River is the boundary of Gengma Amusement Park, 150 miles to the east to the Shuning River is the border of Jingdong Prefecture, and 200 miles to the southeast to the Lancang River crossing is also the border of Jingdong Prefecture.

古文：余初意云州晤杨州尊，即东南穷澜沧下流，以《一统志》言澜沧从景东西南下车里，而于元江府临安河下元江，又注谓出自礼社江，由白崖城合谰沧而南。
现代文：我当初心想在云州会晤了杨知州大人，立即向东南去穷究澜沧江的下游，因为《一统志》说澜沧江从景东向西南下流到车里宣慰司，而后在元江府临安河下流进元江，又在注释中认为出自礼社江，由白崖城会合澜沧江往南流。
English: At first, I wanted to meet the adults from Yangchizhou in Yunnan and immediately go to the southeast to thoroughly investigate the downstream of the Lancang River, because the "Historical Record" said that the Lancang River flowed from Jingdong to the southwest to Xuanliaozi, and then flowed down the Lin'an River in Yuanjiang Prefecture into the Yuanjiang River, and in the commentary that it was from the Reisha River and flowed southward from Baiyao City to the Lancang River.

古文：余原疑澜沧不与礼社合，与礼社合者，乃马龙江及源自禄丰者，但无明证澜沧之直南而不东者，故欲由此穷之。
现代文：我原来怀疑澜沧江不与礼社江合流，与礼社江合流的，是马龙江及发源于禄丰的江，但无澜沧江一直往南流却不向东流的证明，所以想由此去穷究它的源流。
English: I originally suspected that the Lancang River did not merge with the Reisha River, and that it was the Malong River and the river originating from Lufeng that merged with the Reisha River, but there was no proof that the Lancang River flowed south but not east, so I wanted to investigate its source.

古文：前过旧城遇一跛者，其言独历历有据，曰： 潞江在此地西三百余里，为云州西界，南由耿马而去，为渣里江，不东曲而合澜沧也。
现代文：先前路过旧城时遇上一个瘸子，他的话唯独清清楚楚有根有据，说： 潞江在此地西面三百多里，是云州的西境，往南由耿马而去，称为渣里江，不向东弯曲会合澜沧江。
English: When I passed by the old city, I met a traveler. His words were the only ones that were clear and well-founded. He said: The Li River is more than three hundred miles west of this place. It is the western border of Yunnan. It goes south from Gengma and is called the Jiali River. It does not bend to the east and meets the Lancang River.

古文：澜沧江在此地东百五十里，为云州东界，南由威远州而去，为挝龙江，不东曲而合元江也。 
现代文：澜沧江在此地东面一百五十里，是云州的东境，往南由威远州而去，称为挝龙江，不向东弯曲会合元江。 
English: The Lancang River is one hundred and fifty miles east of this place. It is the eastern border of Yunnan Province. It flows southward from Wiyuan Province and is called the Lao Longjiang River. It does not bend to the east and joins the Yuanjiang River.

古文：于是始知挝龙之名，始知东合之说为妄。
现代文：到此时才知道挝龙江的名称，才知向东合流的说法是荒谬的。
English: It is absurd to know the name of the Laolong River and the eastward confluence only at this time.

古文：又询之新城居人，虽土著不能悉，间有江右、四川向走外地者，其言与之合，乃释然无疑，遂无复南穷之意，而此来虽不遇杨，亦不度也。
现代文：又向新城的居民打听此事，虽然土著人不能详知，但其间有江右人、四川人一向走外地，他们说的与他的相合，这才释然无疑，就不再有向南穷究的想法，而此番前来虽没有遇上杨知州，也不算虚度了。
English: He also asked the residents of Xincheng about the matter. Although the aborigines could not know in detail, there were people from Jiangyuan and Sichuan who had always been out of the country. They said that they agreed with him. This was undoubtedly a relief. There was no longer the idea of exploring the south. And although they did not encounter Yangchizhou this time, it was not a waste.

古文：初十日平明起饭。
现代文：初十日黎明起床吃饭。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I got up at dawn to eat.

古文：出南门，度一小坑桥，即西南循西山坡而行。
现代文：走出南门，越过一座小坑上的桥，立即往西南沿西面山坡前行。
English: Go out of the south gate, cross the bridge over a small pit, and immediately head southwest along the western slope.

古文：二里余，渐折而沿其南坑之崖西向上，二里余，南盘崖嘴。此嘴东北起为峰顶，分两丫，即所谓马鞍山也；东南下为条冈，直扼旧城溪而东逼东山，界两城之间，为旧城龙砂，新城虎砂者也。
现代文：二里多，渐渐转向沿它南面坑谷的山崖向西上走，二里多，往南绕过崖嘴，此处崖嘴向东北突起成为峰顶，分成两 ，就是所谓的马鞍山了；往东南下垂成为条形的山冈，直接扼住旧城的溪流往东逼近东山，隔在两城之间，成为旧城的龙砂、新城的虎砂。
English: For more than two miles, it gradually turned westward along the cliff of the pit valley to the south. For more than two miles, it went south around the cliff, where the cliff protruded to the northeast to become the peak, divided into two, which is the so-called Ma'anshan; to the southeast it sagged into a striped hill, directly choking the stream of the old city to the east approaching Dongshan, separated between the two cities, becoming the dragon sand of the old city and the tiger sand of the new city.

古文：此乃顺宁东山之脉，由三沟水西岭过脊南下而尽于此者。
现代文：此山是顺宁东山的山脉，由三沟水西岭延过的山脊向南下延后在此地到了尽头的山。
English: This mountain is the mountain range of Shuning Dongshan. It is the mountain that extends southward from the ridge of Sangou Shui Xiling and ends here.

古文：由此循峰西向北上，又二里，始平行峰西。
现代文：由此沿山峰西面向北上登，又走二里，才平缓前行在峰西。
English: From there, we climbed north along the west side of the mountain, and walked another two miles before we reached the west side of the mountain.

古文：一里，出马鞍峰后，为马鞍岭。
现代文：一里，出到马鞍峰后，是马鞍岭。
English: One mile beyond Saddleback Peak is Saddleback Ridge.

古文：有寺倚峰北向，前有室三楹当岭头，为茶房。
现代文：有寺庙背靠山峰面向北方，寺前有三间房子位于岭头，是茶房。
English: There is a temple with its back against the mountain facing the north, and in front of the temple there are three houses in Lingtou, which are tea houses.

古文：从岭脊西向峻下，二里始平，又半里及山麓，有涧自东北小峡来，西注顺宁河，此已为顺宁属矣。
现代文：从岭脊向西下走路很陡峻，二里后才平缓些，又走半里到达山麓，有山涧自东北小峡中流来，往西注入顺宁河，此地已是顺宁府的属地了。
English: The walk from the ridge ridge to the west is very steep. After two miles, it becomes more gentle, and after half a mile, it reaches the foot of the mountain. A mountain stream flows from the middle of the Northeast Gorge and flows west into the Shuning River. This place is now part of Shuning Prefecture.

古文：盖云州北界，新城以马鞍山，旧城以函宗南小尖束水之坳，其相距甚近也。
现代文：大体上云州北部的边界，新城以马鞍山，旧城以函宗南面小尖山紧束水流的山坳划分，它们相距非常近。
English: On the northern border of Yunnan, the new city is divided by Ma'anshan Mountain, and the old city is divided by the ridge of Xiaojian Mountain, which is south of Hanzong. They are very close to each other.

古文：渡涧北上坡，盘北山西麓行，四里，东西崖突夹，顺宁溪捣其中出，路逾其东崖而入。
现代文：渡过山涧向北上坡，绕着北山酋麓行，四里，东西两面山崖突立相夹，顺宁溪冲捣在其中流出，路翻越那东面的山崖进去。
English: Cross the ridge to the north uphill, go around the foot of the North Mountain, four miles, cliffs on both sides of the east and west are jutting out, Shuning Creek flows out in the middle, and the road climbs over the eastern cliff.

古文：又北一里，其坡西悬坞中，是为花地，其坡正与翁溪村东西遥对，中坠为平坞，则田塍与溪流交络焉。
现代文：又向北一里，那山坡往西悬在坞中，这是花地，此坡正好与翁溪村东西遥遥相对，中间下坠为平坦的山坞，只见田间土埂与溪流交互缠绕。
English: Another mile to the north, the hillside to the west hangs in the dock, this is the flower field. This slope is exactly opposite to the east and west of Wengxi Village, and it falls into a flat dock in the middle. You can see the field mounds and streams intertwined.

古文：乃西北下坡，半里及坞，又有涧自东北小峡来，西注顺宁溪。
现代文：于是向西北下坡，半里到达坞中，又有山涧自东北小峡中流来，向西注入顺宁溪。
English: As a result, it flows downhill to the northwest, half a mile to the dock, and the mountain stream flows from the middle of the northeast canyon and flows into Shuning Creek to the west.

古文：路从溪北西向行坞中，三里余，将逼翁溪村之麓，大溪自北峡出，漱西麓而界之，当从此涉溪上翁溪村，出来时道，见溪东有路随北峡入，遂从之。
现代文：路从溪流北岸向西延伸向坞中，三里多，将逼近翁溪村所在的山麓时，有大溪从北面峡谷中流出来，冲刷着西麓把它隔开，应当从此处涉溪上登翁溪村，走上来时的路，见溪东有路顺北面的峡谷进去，就从此路走。
English: The road extends westward from the north bank of the stream to the dock in the middle, more than three miles. When approaching the foot of the mountain where Wengxi Village is located, a large stream flows out of the north canyon and washes the west foot to separate it. It is necessary to wade into the stream from here to ascend Wengxi Village. When walking up the road, if there is a road to the east of the stream to enter the canyon on the north side, take this road.

古文：又里余，路渐荒。
现代文：又是一里多，路渐渐荒凉。
English: Another kilometer passed, and the road gradually became desolate.

古文：又里余，坠崖而下，及于溪，即断桥处也。
现代文：又走一里多，坠下山崖，来到溪边，就是断桥之处了。
English: After walking for more than a mile, he fell down the cliff and came to the edge of the stream, where the bridge was broken.

古文：新城之道，实出于此，不由翁溪，从东崖坠流间架桥以渡；自桥为水汩，乃取道翁溪，以溪流平坞间，可揭而涉也。
现代文：去新城的路，实际在此通过，不经由翁溪村，从东面山崖上坠到溪流间架桥渡过去；自从桥被水淹没，只好取道翁溪，因为溪水流淌在平坦的山坞间，可以提起衣服涉水。
English: The road to Xincheng actually passes through here, without passing through Wengxi village, from the eastern cliff to the bridge between the streams; since the bridge was flooded, I had to take Wengxi, because the stream water flows between the flat docks, you can lift clothes and wade.

古文：临溪波涌不得渡，乃复南还三里，西渡翁溪。
现代文：面对溪流水波汹涌不能渡水，只得再向南回走三里，向西渡到翁溪。
English: Faced with the raging waves of the stream, they couldn't cross the water, so they had to walk another three miles south and west to reach Wengxi.

古文：然溪阔而流涨，虽当平处，势犹悬激，抵其中流，波及小腹，足不能定，每一移趾，辄几随波荡去。
现代文：然而溪流宽阔而水流上涨，虽处于平缓之处，水势仍然高悬激荡，抵达溪水的中流，水波没及小腹，脚下不能立稳，每移动一只脚，总是几乎随波浪漂荡而去。
English: However, the stream is wide and the current is rising, although it is in a flat place, the water potential is still high and turbulent, and when it reaches the middle of the stream, the water wave does not reach the lower abdomen, the foot cannot be stable, and every time a foot is moved, it always drifts away almost with the wave.

古文：半晌乃及西岸，复由田塍间上坡。
现代文：半晌才涉到西岸，再经由田间土埂上坡。
English: It takes half a day to get to the west coast, and then it's uphill through the fields.

古文：一里，西抵村下大路，乃转而北，即来时道也。
现代文：一里，向西抵达村子下边的大路，于是转向北，就是来时的路了。
English: One mile west to the main road at the bottom of the village, then turn north, which is the way to come.

古文：循西山蹑坡而下，三里，有岐自峡中来合，即断桥旧境矣，于是随大路又六里，过把边关，瀹汤而饭。
现代文：沿西山踩着山坡下走，三里，有岔路自峡中前来会合，这就是先前去断桥的地方了。于是顺大路又走六里，路过把边关，烧汤吃饭。
English: Walking down the slope along the West Mountain, three miles, there is a fork in the road coming from the middle of the gorge to meet, this is the place where the bridge was previously broken. So I walked another six miles along the main road, passed the border gate, and cooked soup for dinner.

古文：下坳东北一里余，渡小桥。
现代文：走下山坳往东北走一里多，渡过小桥。
English: Walk down the ridge to the northeast for more than a mile and cross the small bridge.

古文：又一里，复与大溪遇，溯其西崖，北十里而至鹿塘。
现代文：又是一里，再次与大溪相遇，溯大溪西面的山崖走，往北十里后来到鹿塘。
English: Another mile, another encounter with the creek, a walk along the cliffs to the west of the creek, and then another ten miles north to Lu Tang.

古文：时才过午，以暑气逼人，遂停旧主人楼作记。
现代文：此时才过中午，因为暑气逼人，便停住在先前主人的楼上写日记。
English: At this time, just after noon, because the heat was oppressive, he stopped to write a diary on the previous owner's floor.

古文：十一日由鹿塘三十里，过归化桥。
现代文：十一日由鹿塘行三十里，走过归化桥。
English: On the 11th, I walked 30 miles from Lutang and passed the Naturalization Bridge.

古文：从溪东循东山麓行，五里，入普光寺。
现代文：从溪东沿东山山麓行，五里，进入普光寺。
English: From Xidong, go along the foot of Dongshan Mountain for five miles and enter the Fuguang Temple.

古文：余疑以为即东山寺也，入而始知东山寺尚在北。
现代文：我疑心以为就是东山寺了，进去后才知东山寺还在北边。
English: Suspiciously, I thought it was Higashiyama-dera Temple, but when I entered, I learned that Higashiyama-dera Temple was still to the north.

古文：乃复随大路三里，抵南关坡下亭桥，即从桥东小径东北上坡。
现代文：于是再顺大路走三里，抵达南关山坡下的亭桥，立即从桥东的小径向东北上坡。
English: So I walked three miles along the main road and arrived at the pavilion bridge under the slope of Nanguan Mountain. I immediately walked uphill to the northeast from the trail east of the bridge.

古文：又二里而东山寺倚东山西向，正临新城也。
现代文：又走二里后就是背靠东山面向西方的东山寺，正好下临新城了。
English: After walking another two miles, you will reach Dongshan Temple, which faces west with its back to Dongshan, and is right next to Xincheng.

古文：入寺，拾级而上。
现代文：进寺后，沿石阶逐级上登。
English: After entering the temple, climb up the stone steps step by step.

古文：正殿前以楼为门，而后有层阁，阁之上层奉玉帝，登之，则西山之支络，郡堞之回盘，可平揖而尽也。
现代文：正殿前边用楼作为大门，而后面有层层楼阁。楼阁的上层供奉玉皇大帝，登上楼阁，就见西山交相回绕，府城的城墙回旋盘绕，都可以平视而一眼览尽了。
English: The front of the main hall uses a building as a gate, while the back has a multi-storey pavilion. The upper floor of the pavilion is dedicated to the Jade Emperor, and when you go up to the pavilion, you can see the West Mountain intersecting and circling, and the city wall of the capital city circling and circling, all of which can be seen at a glance.

古文：下阁，入其左庐，有一僧曾于龙泉一晤者，见余留同饭。
现代文：下阁后，进入它左侧的客房，有一个僧人曾在龙泉寺见过一面，见到我挽留一同吃饭。
English: After leaving the pavilion, I entered the guest room on the left side of it. There was a monk who had once seen me at Longquan Temple and saw me lingering to eat together.

古文：既饭而共坐前门楼，乃知其僧为阿禄司西北山寺中僧也，以听讲至龙泉，而东山僧邀之饭者。
现代文：饭后一同坐在前边的门楼中，才知此僧是阿禄司西北山间寺中的和尚，为听讲经来到龙泉寺，东山寺的和尚就邀请他吃饭。
English: After the meal, they sat together in the gate tower in front of the temple. It was only then that they learned that the monk was a monk from the mountain temple northwest of Aluxi. He had come to Longquan Temple to listen to a sermon, and the monk from Dongshan Temple had invited him to dinner.

古文：为余言，自少曾遍历挝龙、木邦、阿瓦之地，其言与旧城跛者、新城客商所言，历历皆合。
现代文：给我讲起，从少年时起曾遍历过挝龙江、木邦、阿瓦的地方，他的话与旧城的瘸子、新城的客商所说的，清清楚楚全都相合。
English: He told me that since he was a boy, he had traveled all over Laos, Longjiang, Mubang, and Awah, and his words clearly coincided with those of the mules in the old city and the merchants in the new city.

古文：下午乃出寺。
现代文：下午才出寺。
English: I didn't leave the temple until the afternoon.

古文：一里，度东门亭桥，入顺宁东门。
现代文：一里，越过东门的亭桥，进入顺宁府东门。
English: After one mile, cross the pavilion bridge of the East Gate and enter the East Gate of Shuning Prefecture.

古文：觅夫未得，山雨如注，乃出南关一里，再宿龙泉寺。
现代文：找脚夫未找到，山雨如注，只好出南关走一里，再次住在龙泉寺中。
English: The porter was not found, and the mountain rain was so heavy that they had to walk one mile out of Nanguan and live in Longquan Temple again.

