古文：彦节少以宗室清谨见知，孝武时，其弟遐坐通嫡母殷氏养女云敷，殷每禁之。
现代文：刘彦节在少年时候就以宗室中的清雅恭谨者而知名。孝武帝时，他弟弟刘遐因为私通嫡母殷氏的养女云敷，常常被殷氏禁闭。
English: When he was a boy, Liu Yan Jie was known as the most elegant and respectful member of his family. During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, his younger brother Liu Xi was often locked up by the Yin family for having an affair with the adopted daughter of the Yin family, Yun Jiki.

古文：及殷亡，口血出，衆疑遐行毒害。
现代文：殷氏死了以后，口中出血，众人怀疑是刘遐毒害的。
English: After Mr. Yin's death, his mouth bled profusely, and people suspected that Liu Ye had poisoned him.

古文：孝武使彦节从弟祗讽彦节啓证其事。
现代文：孝武帝让刘彦节的堂弟刘祗启发刘彦节出面证明这件事。
English: Emperor Xiaowu asked Liu Yanzhong's cousin Liu Hui to inspire Liu Yanzhong to come forward to prove the matter.

古文：彦节曰： 行路之人尚不应尔，今日乃可一门同尽，无容奉敕。 
现代文：刘彦节说： 过路的人尚且不应该这样，今日怎么可以同门的人一块都死？
English: Liu Yanshi said: People who pass by shouldn't be like this, how can everyone die together today?

古文：衆以此称之。
现代文：我不能接受圣旨。 
English: I can't accept the will.

古文：后废帝即位，累迁尚书左仆射，参选。
现代文：众人因此对他非常称赞。后废帝即位，他逐步升迁为尚书左仆射，参与选拔官员。
English: After the abdication of the emperor, he was gradually promoted to Shoshuzuke and participated in the selection of officials.

古文：元徽元年，领吏部，加兵五百人。
现代文：元徽元年，兼管吏部，增加兵士五百人。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was also in charge of the cadre department and increased the number of soldiers by five hundred.

古文：桂阳王休范爲逆，中领军刘勉出守石头，彦节权兼领军将军，所给加兵，自随入殿。
现代文：桂阳王刘休范反叛，中领军刘面力出京守卫石头城，刘彦节临时兼任领军将军，所派给他的卫兵跟随进入宫殿。
English: Liu Xuan, the king of Guiyang, rebelled, and Liu Mian, the leader of the central army, went to Beijing to guard the Stone City. Liu Huan Jie temporarily served as the leading general, and the guards assigned to him followed him into the palace.

古文：封当阳侯，与齐高帝、袁粲、褚彦回分日入直，平决机事，迁中书令，加抚军将军。
现代文：封为当阳侯，与齐高帝、袁粲、褚彦回分天入宫值勤，平等地决定机要大事。又改任中书令，加官为辅军将军。
English: He was appointed as a vassal lord of the Yang di-Pertuan Agong, sharing the duty of entering the palace with Emperor Qigong, Yuan Shun and Yan Yan, and deciding important matters on an equal footing. He was also appointed as the secretary of the Central Military Commission, and was promoted to the position of general of the auxiliary army.

古文：及帝废爲苍梧王，彦节出集议，于路逢从弟韫。
现代文：后来皇帝被废为苍梧王，刘彦节出去参加集体议事，在路上遇见了堂弟刘韫。
English: Later, the emperor was dethroned as King Cangwu, and Liu Hanzhong went out to participate in the collective deliberation. On the way, he met his cousin Liu Yong.

古文：韫问曰： 今日之事，故当归兄邪？ 
现代文：刘韫问他说： 今天的事，当然应该归于兄长了吧？ 
English: Liu Ye asked him, "Today's matter, of course, should be attributed to your brother, right?

古文：彦节曰： 吾等已让领军矣。 
现代文：刘彦节说： 我们已经让出了领军了。 
English: Liu Yanshi said, "We have lost our leading position.

古文：韫捶胸曰： 兄肉中讵有血邪，今年族矣。 
现代文：刘韫捶着胸脯说： 兄长肉中难道还有血吗？今年我们要全家被杀了！ 
English: Liu clutched his chest and said, "Is there still blood in my brother's flesh? This year, our whole family will be killed!"

古文：齐高帝闻而恶之。
现代文：齐高帝听说后非常厌恶。
English: Emperor Qigong was very disgusted when he heard about it.

古文：顺帝即位，转尚书令。
现代文：顺帝即位，刘彦节转任中书令。
English: Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, and Liu Hanzi was transferred to the post of chancellor.

古文：时齐高帝辅政，彦节知运祚将迁，密怀异图。
现代文：当时齐高帝辅政，刘彦节知道宋朝的天命将要完结，秘密地怀有异图。
English: At that time, Emperor Qigong was in office, and Liu Hanzhong knew that the Song Dynasty's destiny would come to an end, and secretly harbored a different plan.

古文：及沈攸之举兵，齐高帝入屯朝堂，袁粲镇石头，潜与彦节及诸大将黄回等谋夜会石头，诘旦乃发。
现代文：沈攸之起兵后，齐高帝入京屯驻朝堂，袁粲镇守石头城，暗中与刘彦节以及诸位大将黄回等人谋划夜会石头城，决定次日凌晨出发。
English: After Shen Yue's army was raised, Emperor Qigong entered Beijing and stationed in the imperial court, Yuan Shizhen guarded the Stone City, secretly plotted with Liu Hanzi and generals Huang Hui and others to hold a night party in the Stone City, and decided to leave in the early morning of the next day.

古文：彦节素怯，骚扰不自安。
现代文：刘彦节平素怯弱，慌乱不能自安。
English: Liu Hanzhong is usually timid and weak, and can't calm down when he's panicked.

古文：再晡后，便自丹阳郡车载妇女，尽室奔石头。
现代文：下午后半晌，便从丹阳郡用车拉上妇女，全部奔向石头城。
English: In the late afternoon, he picked up the women from Danyang County by car, and they all rushed to Stone Town.

古文：临去，妇萧氏强劝令食，彦节歠羹写胸中，手振不自禁。
现代文：临走的时候，妇人萧氏强劝着让他吃些饭，刘彦节端着羹糊，洒在了胸前，手一直在发抖，不能自控。
English: When he was about to leave, the woman, Xiao Shiqiang, persuaded him to eat some food. Liu Hanzhong brought him some jelly paste and sprinkled it on his chest. His hands were shaking all the time and he couldn't control himself.

古文：其主簿丁灵卫闻难即入，语左右曰： 今日之事，难以取济。但我受刘公厚恩，义无二情。 
现代文：他的主簿丁灵卫听到危难消息，立即进宫，对身边的人们说： 今天的事情，难以成功，但我受了刘公的厚恩，坚守信义，决无二心。 
English: His main book, Ding Lingwei, heard the news of the disaster, immediately entered the palace, and said to the people around him: Today's matter is difficult to succeed, but I have received Liu Gong's kindness, adhere to the truth, and have no second thoughts.

古文：及至见粲，粲惊曰： 何遽便来，事今败矣。 
现代文：等见了袁粲，袁粲惊愕地说： 怎么现在就来了？事情现在要失败了！ 
English: When he saw Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao said in surprise, "How come you're here now? Things are going to fail now!"

古文：彦节曰： 今得见公，万死何恨。 
现代文：刘彦节说： 今天能够见到您，就万死无恨了。 
English: Liu Yanshi said, "If I could see you today, I would die without hatred."

古文：从弟韫直省内，与直合将军卜伯兴谋其夜共攻齐高帝，会彦节事觉，秣陵令刘实、建康令刘遐密告齐高帝，高帝夜使骁骑将军王敬则收杀之，伯兴亦遇害。
现代文：他的堂弟刘韫在台省值勤，和直阁将军卜伯兴谋划这天夜里共同进攻齐高帝，正遇上刘彦节的事情被发觉，秣陵令刘实、建康令刘遐秘密地报告了齐高帝，高帝连夜派骁骑将军王敬则把他抓住杀死，卜伯兴也同时遇害。
English: His cousin Liu Bei was on duty in Taiwan Province, and he and Zhigag General Bu Bo Xing planned to jointly attack Qigong Emperor that night. Just as the Liu Yan Festival was about to take place, the matter was discovered. Gu Ling ordered Liu Shi and Jian Kang ordered Liu Bei to secretly report to Qigong Emperor. Emperor Gao sent the cavalry general Wang Jing to seize and kill him overnight. Bu Bo Xing was also killed at the same time.

古文：粲败，彦节踰城走，于额檐湖见禽被杀。
现代文：袁粲失败，刘彦节越过城墙逃走，在鹅檐湖被捉住杀死。
English: Yuan Shao failed, Liu Hanzhong escaped over the city wall and was caught and killed in the Goose Lake.

古文：彦节子俣尝赋诗云： 城上草，植根非不高，所恨风霜早。 
现代文：刘彦节的儿子刘俣和弟弟刘陔曾经赋诗说： 城上草，植根非不高，所恨风霜早。 
English: Liu Mata, the son of Liu Yan, and his brother Liu Yao once said in a poem: "The grass on the city, the roots are not high, the hated wind and frost are early."

古文：时咸云此爲祅句。
现代文：当时都说这是妖句。
English: At the time, everyone said it was a magic phrase.

古文：事败，俣与弟陔剃发被法服向京口，于客舍爲人识，执于建康狱尽杀之。
现代文：事情失败后，刘俣和刘陔剃了头发、披了法服逃向京口，在客舍被人认出，抓到了建康监狱全都杀死。
English: After the failure of the case, Liu Mata and Liu Yao shaved their hair, put on the legal uniform and fled to Beijing. They were recognized in the guest house, caught and killed in Jiankang Prison.

古文：彦节既贵，士子自非三署不得上方榻，时人以此少之。
现代文：当初刘彦节身份变得高贵以后，士子除了三署的官员都不会被让到上方的坐榻上，当时的人们因此而对他很有微词。
English: At first, after Liu Hanzhong's status became noble, the officials of the three departments would not be allowed to sit on the upper bed, and the people at that time were very critical of him for this reason.

古文：其妻萧思话女也，常惧祸败，每谓曰： 君富贵已足，故应爲儿作计。 
现代文：他的妻子是萧思话的女儿，常常害怕遇祸败亡，经常说： 您的富贵已经足够了，所以应该为儿女考虑。 
English: His wife, the daughter of a gossip, always afraid of disaster, often said: "Your wealth is enough, so you should think about your children."

古文：彦节不从，故及祸。
现代文：刘彦节不听，所以遭了祸患。
English: Liu Hanzi did not listen, so he suffered a misfortune.

古文：彦节弟遐字彦道，爲嫡母殷暴亡，有司纠之，徙始安郡。
现代文：刘彦节的弟弟刘遐字彦道，因为嫡母殷氏暴死，有关部门对他进行纠弹，把他迁到了始安郡。
English: Liu Yanqing's younger brother, Liu Zhaohan, because of the sudden death of his mother Yin, the relevant departments made a correction to him and moved him to Shi'an County.

古文：后得还，位吴郡太守，至是亦见诛。
现代文：后来得以返回，位居吴郡太守，到现在也被杀死。
English: Later, he was able to return and became the governor of Wu County. He has since been killed.

古文：遐人才甚凡，自讳名有同主讳，常对客曰： 孝武无道，见枉杀母。 
现代文：刘遐人材非常平凡，自己忌讳自己的名字像君主忌讳自己的名字一样，常常对客人说： 孝武帝无道，冤枉地杀死了我的母亲。 
English: Liu Ye was a very ordinary person. He avoided his own name like a monarch would avoid his own name. He would often say to his guests, "Xiaowu Emperor has no honor, he killed my mother without reason."

古文：义庆爲荆州，庙主当随往江陵，文帝下诏褒美勋德及慈荫之重，追崇丞相，加殊礼，鸾辂九旒，黄屋左纛，给节钺，前后部羽葆、鼓吹，虎贲班剑百人。
现代文：他就是这样地呆痴。等刘彦节当了权，刘遐多次要求做地方诸侯。
English: This is how stupid he is. When Liu Hanzhong gained power, Liu Bei repeatedly asked to be made a local prince.

古文：及长沙太妃檀氏、临川太妃曹氏后薨，葬皆准给。
现代文：刘彦节说： 我在这个地位，而任用你做州郡长官，在名声上很不好听。 刘遐说： 富贵了就说不能彼此相关，如果是连坐的时候，能够幸免吗？ 
English: Liu Yanshi said: I am in this position, and appointing you to be the governor of the state and county is very unpleasant in terms of reputation. Liu Wei said: If you are rich, you can say that you can't be related to each other. If you are sitting together, can you be spared?

古文：义庆幼爲武帝所知，年十三袭封南郡公。
现代文：到现在果然也被杀死。刘义庆幼年时就被武帝所闻知，十三岁时世袭封爵为南郡公。
English: Liu Yijing was known to Emperor Wu when he was a child, and at the age of 13 he was hereditary knighted as the Prince of Nan County.

古文：永初元年，袭封临川王。
现代文：永初元年，袭封临川王。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, he was crowned King of Linchuan.

古文：元嘉中爲丹阳尹。
现代文：元嘉时期担任丹阳尹。
English: During the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, he served as Danyang Yin.

古文：有百姓黄初妻赵杀子妇遇赦，应避孙雠。
现代文：当时有一个老百姓黄初的妻子赵氏杀死了儿子的媳妇，又遇到了赦免，应该回避孙子的仇视。
English: At that time, there was a commoner Huangchu's wife Zhao who killed her son's daughter-in-law and was pardoned. She should avoid her grandson's hatred.

古文：义庆议以爲 周礼父母之仇，避之海外，盖以莫大之冤，理不可夺。
现代文：刘义庆的意见认为 按照周朝的礼法，关系到父母的仇恨，要到海外避开，因为那是最大的冤仇，用道理无法消除。
English: Liu Yiqing's opinion is that according to the Zhou Dynasty's etiquette, it is related to the hatred of parents, and it is necessary to go abroad to avoid it, because it is the biggest grudge and cannot be eliminated with reason.

古文：至于骨肉相残，当求之法外。
现代文：至于亲骨肉相残杀，必须在法律之外寻求解决。
English: In the case of fratricide, a solution must be found outside the law.

古文：礼有过失之宥，律无雠祖之文。
现代文：礼法上有对于过失的宽大，法律上无仇视祖辈的条文。
English: In the etiquette law, there is a leniency for faults, and in the law, there is no provision for hatred of ancestors.

古文：况赵之纵暴，本由于酒，论心即实，事尽荒耄。
现代文：况且赵氏发生暴行，根本原因是在于酗酒，推论人心对照实况，事情完全是荒唐的。
English: Moreover, Zhao's violence occurred, the root cause is alcoholism, inferring that people's hearts are against the facts, the matter is completely absurd.

古文：岂得以荒耄之王母，等行路之深雠，宜共天同域，无亏孝道 。
现代文：怎能把荒唐的老祖母，等同于一般的大仇人，应该共戴一天、同处一地，不损害孝道。 
English: How can the absurd old grandmother be equated with an ordinary great enemy, and should be worn together for a day, in the same place, without compromising filial piety.

古文：六年，加尚书左仆射。
现代文：元嘉六年担任尚书左仆射。
English: For six years, Yuan Jia served as Shang Shushi's right-hand man.

古文：八年，太白犯左执法，义庆惧有灾祸，乞外镇。
现代文：八年，太白星侵犯了左执法星，刘义庆害怕会有灾祸，请求到外地任职。
English: Eight years ago, when the white star invaded the left law enforcement star, Liu Yiqing was afraid that there would be a disaster and asked to work in another place.

古文：文帝诏谕之，以爲 玄象茫昧，左执法尝有变，王光禄至今平安。
现代文：文帝下诏书对他进行开导，认为： 天象幽暗不明，左执法星曾经有过变化，可是王光禄至今平安无事。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict to enlighten him, saying: The sky is dark and unclear, the left law enforcement star has changed, but Wang Guanglu has been safe so far.

古文：日蚀三朝，天下之至忌，晋孝武初有此异。
现代文：正月初一日蚀，是天下最大的忌讳，晋孝武帝最先遇到这种异象。
English: An eclipse on the first day of the first month is the biggest taboo in the world. Emperor Jin Xiaowu was the first to encounter this phenomenon.

古文：彼庸主耳，犹竟无他 。
现代文：他不过是一个庸碌的君主，仍是最终没有什么妨害。 
English: He is but a mediocre monarch, still ultimately no impediment.

古文：义庆固求解仆射，乃许之。
现代文：刘义庆坚持请求解除仆射之职，才最后批准了他。
English: Liu Yixing persisted in his request to be relieved of the post of deputy commander before he was finally approved.

古文：九年，出爲平西将军、荆州刺史，加都督。
现代文：元嘉九年，出朝担任平西将军、荆州刺史，加任都督。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Jia, he was appointed as the general of Pingxi, the governor of Jingzhou, and the governor of the capital.

古文：荆州居上流之重，资实兵甲居朝廷之半，故武帝诸子遍居之。
现代文：荆州占据着上游这一重要地位，物资兵甲占朝廷的一半，所以武帝的各位儿子普遍都在那里任过职。
English: Jingzhou occupies an important position in the upstream, and supplies and armaments account for half of the imperial court, so all the sons of Emperor Wu generally served there.

古文：义庆以宗室令美，故特有此授。
现代文：刘义庆因为是宗室的美才，所以特别授予了这一职务。
English: Liu Yiqing was specially awarded this position because he is the beauty of the family.

古文：性谦虚，始至及去镇，迎送物并不受。
现代文：他性情谦虚，刚刚到任和最后离任而去，欢迎和欢送的财物一律不收。
English: He is modest in nature, just arrived and finally left office, and did not accept any welcome or farewell belongings.

古文：十二年，普使内外群臣举士，义庆表举前临沮令新野庾实、前征奉朝请武陵龚祈、处士南阳师觉授。
现代文：元嘉十二年，普遍地让朝内外的臣僚们举荐人材，刘义庆上表推荐前临沮县令新野人庾实、前征奉朝请武陵人袭祈、无官人士南阳人师觉授。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Jia, he generally asked the ministers inside and outside the dynasty to recommend talents. Liu Yijing recommended the former Linshu County Governor Xinshanzhi to the table, the former conscript to the dynasty asked the Wuling people to attack and pray, and the non-official person Nanyang people to the table.

古文：义庆留心抚物，州统内官长亲老不随在官舍者，一年听三吏饷家。
现代文：刘义庆注意安抚人心，州辖以内官长的双亲和老人没有跟随住在官舍中的，一年之中允许三次由官吏给家里赠送东西。
English: Liu Yiqing paid attention to appease the hearts of the people. The parents and the elderly of the officials under the jurisdiction of the state did not live in the official residence. Three times a year, the officials were allowed to give gifts to the family.

古文：先是，王弘爲江州，亦有此制。
现代文：在此以前，王弘治理江州也有这种规定。
English: Prior to this, Wang Hongzhuang also had such a provision.

古文：在州八年，爲西土所安。
现代文：刘义庆在荆州呆了八年，成为西部的一个安定地区。
English: Liu Yiqing stayed in Jingzhou for eight years and became a stable area in the west.

古文：撰徐州先贤传十卷奏上之。
现代文：他写成了《徐州先贤传》十卷上奏给朝廷。
English: He wrote the ten-volume "Biography of the Xuzhou Sages" and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：又拟班固典引爲典叙，以述皇代之美。
现代文：又模仿班固的《典引》写成了《典叙》，用以叙述当朝功德的美好。
English: He also imitated Banggu's "Citation" and wrote "Citation" to describe the beauty of the merits of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：改授江州，又迁南兖州刺史，并带都督。
现代文：后来改换任职地点到江州，又调任南兖州刺史，都兼任都督。
English: Later, he changed his post to Jiangzhou, and was also transferred to the Southern Luzhou Provincial Historian, both of which concurrently served as governor.

古文：寻即本号加开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久又在本职基础上加封开府仪同三司。
English: Soon, he was given the additional post of Kaifu Yi and the three departments on the basis of this post.

古文：性简素，寡嗜欲，爱好文义，文辞虽不多，足爲宗室之表。
现代文：他性情简约朴素，很少特殊嗜好和欲望，爱好文章义理，文章辞赋虽然不多，但是足可以作为宗室的表率。
English: His disposition is simple and plain, he has few special hobbies and desires, he is fond of literary theories, and although he has few literary gifts, he can serve as a role model for his family.

古文：历任无浮淫之过；唯晚节奉沙门颇致费损。
现代文：他在历次任职期间都没有浮华淫逸的过失；只是晚年供养僧徒耗费颇大。
English: During all his terms of office, he did not make any extravagant or lewd mistakes; however, in his later years, he spent a great deal of money to support the monks.

古文：少善骑乘，及长，不复跨马，招聚才学之士，远近必至。
现代文：他少年时代就善于骑马，长大以后，不再跨马，招聚有才学的士人，不论远近一定前来。
English: When he was a boy, he was good at riding a horse. When he grew up, he no longer straddled the horse, and recruited talented scholars, whether far or near, to come.

古文：太尉袁淑文冠当时，义庆在江州请爲卫军谘议。
现代文：太尉袁淑文在当时最为杰出，义庆在江州时请他为卫军咨议。
English: Captain Yuan Shuwen was the most outstanding at that time, and when Yijing was in Jiangzhou, he asked him to advise the guards.

古文：其馀吴郡陆展、东海何长瑜、鲍照等，并有辞章之美，引爲佐吏国臣。
现代文：其他像吴郡的陆展、东海的何长瑜、鲍照等，都有美妙的辞章，他都引为辅佐官吏和国家大臣。
English: Others, such as Lu Zhan of Wu County, He Changyu and Baozhao of the East China Sea, have wonderful slogans, and they are all referred to as assistant officials and state ministers.

古文：所着世说十卷，撰集林二百卷，并行于世。
现代文：他所著的《世说》十卷，撰写的《集林》二百卷，一起在世上流传。
English: The ten volumes of "The Story of the World" written by him and the two hundred volumes of "The Collection of Forests" written by him have been circulated around the world.

古文：义真无子，文帝以第五子绍字休胤嗣，袭庐陵王。
现代文：文帝每次给义庆写信，常常都是用心斟酌。刘义庆在广陵生了病，而有白虹贯城，野獐进入府中，他心里十分厌恶，便上书请求回京，文帝准许他解除州上的职务，以本官号还朝。
English: Every time Emperor Wen wrote to Yixing, he often weighed his intentions. Liu Yixing fell ill in Guangling, and there was a white rainbow crossing the city, and a wild boar entered the government. He was very disgusted, so he sent a letter requesting to return to Beijing. Emperor Wen allowed him to discharge his duties on the state level and return to the government with his official title.

古文：绍少宽雅，位扬州刺史。
现代文：元嘉二十一年，在京城逝世，追赠为司空，谥号为康王。
English: In the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, he died in Beijing. He was posthumously awarded the title of Siku, and his posthumous name was Kang Wang.

古文：薨。无子，以南平王铄子敬先嗣。
现代文：他的儿子哀王刘晔承袭爵位，被元凶劭杀死。
English: His son, the king of lamentation, Liu Ye, succeeded to the title, but was killed by the original murderer.

古文：彭城王义康，永初元年，封彭城王。
现代文：刘晔的儿子刘绰又承袭爵位，升明三年被杀，封地革除。彭城王刘义康，在永初元年，被封为彭城王。
English: Liu Yao's son Liu Cao also inherited the title of nobility, but was killed three years after ascending the throne and his fiefdom was abolished. Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was crowned king of Pengcheng in the first year of the Yongzheng Emperor.

古文：历南豫、南徐二州刺史，并加都督。
现代文：历任南豫、南徐二州刺史，并且都兼任都督。
English: Nanyu and Nanxu were successively appointed as the heads of the two prefectures, and both concurrently served as governors.

古文：文帝即位，爲骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：文帝即位，封为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, and he was given the titles of General of the Horse, Grand Master of the Imperial Household, and Third Secretary.

古文：元嘉三年，改授都督、荆州刺史，给班剑三十人。
现代文：元嘉三年，改授都督、荆州刺史，配给仪仗三十人。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, he was re-awarded the title of the governor of the capital, Jingzhou, and was assigned to 30 honor guards.

古文：义康少而聪察，及居方任，职事修理。
现代文：刘义康少年时候就很聪颖明察，后来担任地方长官，工作优异而有条理。
English: Liu Yikang was very intelligent and perceptive when he was a boy. Later, he served as a local governor, and his work was excellent and systematic.

古文：六年，司徒王弘表义康宜还入辅。
现代文：元嘉六年，司徒王弘上表推荐刘义康应该还朝辅佐朝政。
English: In the sixth year of Yuan Jia, Liu Yikang was recommended by Wang Hong, a scholar, to be an aide-de-camp to the emperor.

古文：征爲侍中、司徒、录尚书事、都督、南徐州刺史。
现代文：于是被征调为侍中、司徒、录尚书事、都督、南徐州刺史。
English: As a result, he was conscripted as a chamberlain, an attendant, a recorder, a governor, and a historian of southern Xuzhou.

古文：二府置佐领兵，与王弘共辅朝政。
现代文：两府设置官佐领兵，与王弘共同辅佐朝政。
English: The two prefectures set up officials to lead the troops, and he and Wang Hong jointly assisted the imperial government.

古文：弘既多疾，且每事推谦，自是内外衆务一断之义康。
现代文：王弘多病，而且常常进行推辞谦让，从此内外各种事务全都由刘义康决定。
English: Wang Hongdu is often ill, and often makes concessions. From now on, all domestic and foreign affairs will be decided by Liu Yikang.

古文：太子詹事刘湛有经国才用，义康昔在豫州，湛爲长史，既素情款，至是待遇特隆，动皆谘访，故前后在藩多善政。
现代文：太子詹事刘湛有治国才能，刘义康过去在豫州，刘湛为长史，他们素来情意深厚，到这时待遇特别厚重，有事就去上门咨询，所以前后在地方职位上有很多善政。
English: Prince Zhan Zhi Liu Zhan has the ability to govern the country, Liu Yikang used to be in Yuzhou, and Liu Zhan has a long history. They have always been affectionate, and at this time the treatment is particularly heavy. If there is anything, they will go to the door to consult, so there are a lot of good governance in local positions.

古文：九年，王弘薨，又领扬州刺史。
现代文：元嘉九年，王弘逝世，又兼任扬州刺史。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Jia, Wang Hong passed away, and he also served as the Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：十二年，又领太子太傅。
现代文：十二年，又兼任太子太傅。
English: Twelve years later, he also served as Crown Prince Taifu.

古文：义康性好吏职，锐意文案，纠剔是非，莫不精尽。
现代文：刘义康的性格爱好普通官吏的职务，专心于文案，鉴别是非，无不精细透彻。
English: Liu Yikang's personality likes the duties of ordinary officials, concentrates on copywriting, discriminates between right and wrong, and is meticulous and thorough.

古文：既专朝权，事决自己，生杀大事，皆以录命断之。
现代文：专掌朝中大权后，事情都由自己决定，生杀大事，都要根据记录材料判定。
English: After taking charge of the supreme power of the DPRK and the People's Republic of China, things are decided by themselves, and life-and-death events must be judged according to recorded materials.

古文：凡所陈奏，入无不可，方伯以下，并委义康授用，由是朝野辐凑，权倾天下。
现代文：凡是他提出的奏议，交给皇帝没有不批准的，诸侯以下的官员，全都交给刘义康选任，因此成为朝野运转的轴心，权力盖过天下。
English: All the petitions he proposed and submitted to the emperor without the emperor's disapproval, and the officials below the princes, were all submitted to Liu Yikang for appointment, thus becoming the axis of the operation of the court and the country, and power over the world.

古文：义康亦自强不息，无有懈倦。
现代文：刘义康也自强不息，毫不松懈疲倦。
English: Liu Yikang is also tirelessly self-improvement, tirelessly tired.

古文：府门每旦常有数百乘车，虽重定卑人微，皆被接引。
现代文：他的府门前每天早晨常常有几百辆车子，即使是位卑人微，也都被接待。
English: There are often hundreds of cars in front of his house every morning, and even a lowly person is received.

古文：又聪识过人，一闻必记，尝所暂遇，终身不忘。
现代文：他又聪明博识过人，听到一次，必定会记住，曾经暂时遇到的事情，终身不忘。
English: He is also intelligent and knowledgeable. Once he hears something, he will surely remember it. He will never forget what he has temporarily encountered.

古文：稠人广坐，每标题所忆，以示聪明，人物益以此推服之。
现代文：大庭广众之中，他常常写下自己所记忆的东西，以显示聪慧，人们越发因此而推重佩服他。
English: In public, he often wrote down what he remembered to show his cleverness, which made people admire him all the more.

古文：爱惜官爵，未尝以阶级私人。
现代文：他很爱惜自己掌管的官爵，从不以此赠送私人。
English: He was very protective of the official title he held, and never gave it to a private individual.

古文：凡朝士有才用者，皆引入己府，自下乐爲竭力，不敢欺负。
现代文：凡是朝士中的有才能的，都招入自己的府中，下面的人都乐于效力，不敢欺骗和辜负他。
English: All the talented members of the imperial household were invited to join him in his palace, and the people below him were all willing to work hard and did not dare to deceive or betray him.

古文：文帝有虚劳疾，每意有所想，便觉心中痛裂，属纩者相系。
现代文：文帝有虚劳的疾病，常常是意中有所想，便觉得心中疼痛欲裂，要不断地用丝绵放在口鼻前试验有无呼吸。
English: Emperor Wen has the disease of vanity. He often thinks about something in his mind, and then feels pain in his heart. He should constantly test whether he is breathing by placing a silk cloth in front of his mouth and nose.

古文：义康入侍医药，尽心卫奉，汤药饮食，非口所尝不进。
现代文：刘义康进去服侍用药，尽心伺候，汤药和饭，不是自己亲口尝过的不送给文帝吃。
English: Liu Yikang went in to serve the medicine and waited on him with all his heart. He did not give the soup and rice to Emperor Wen unless he had tasted it himself.

古文：或连夕不寝，弥日不解衣。
现代文：有时连续几夜不睡，整天不解衣服。
English: Sometimes I don't sleep for several nights in a row, and I don't take off my clothes all day.

古文：内外衆事，皆专决施行。
现代文：内外各种事情，都是独自决定施行。
English: All matters at home and abroad are decided and implemented independently.

古文：十六年，进位大将军，领司徒。
现代文：元嘉十六年，晋升职位为大将军、兼司徒。
English: In the 16th year of the Yuan Jia era, he was promoted to the position of general, and also a scholar.

古文：义康素无术学，待文义者甚薄。
现代文：刘义康素来没有什么学问和专长，对待有文才的人很淡薄。
English: Liu Yikang has never had any knowledge or expertise, and treats people with literary talent very lightly.

古文：袁淑尝诣义康，义康问其年，答曰： 邓仲华拜衮之岁。 
现代文：袁淑曾经去拜访刘义康，刘义康问他的年龄，回答说： 邓仲华拜为大司徒之岁。 
English: Yuan Shu once went to visit Liu Yikang. Liu Yikang asked him how old he was and replied, "Deng Zhonghua is the same age as the eldest disciple."

古文：义康曰： 身不识也。 
现代文：刘义康说： 我不知道啊。 
English: Liu Yikang said: I don't know.

古文：淑又曰： 陆机入洛之年。 
现代文：袁淑又说： 陆机入洛阳之年。 
English: Yuan Shu also said: This is the year that the land machine enters Luoyang.

古文：义康曰： 身不读书，君无爲作才语见向。 
现代文：刘义康说： 我不读书，您不要用文才语言向我介绍。 
English: Liu Yikang said: I don't read, so don't use literary language to introduce me.

古文：其浅陋若此。
现代文：他就是这样的浅陋。
English: That's how shallow he is.

古文：既闇大体，自谓兄弟至亲，不复存君臣形迹。率心而行，曾无猜防。
现代文：刘义康熟知大体，自己认为兄弟是至亲，不再计较君臣的界限，随意而行，不加猜疑和提防。
English: Liu Yikang was well-acquainted with the general situation. He considered his brothers to be his closest relatives, and no longer cared about the boundaries of princes and ministers. He did as he pleased, without suspicion or caution.

古文：私置僮六千馀人，不以言台。
现代文：他私自设置仆婢六千多人，不告诉省台。
English: He set up more than six thousand servants and maids without telling the provincial government.

古文：时四方献馈，皆以上品荐义康，而以次者供御。
现代文：当时四方贡献馈赠，都是把上品献给刘义康，而把较次的献给皇帝。
English: At that time, the contributions and gifts of the four parties were to dedicate the superior product to Liu Yikang, and the inferior one to the emperor.

古文：上尝冬月噉柑，叹其形味并劣,义康在坐，曰： 今年柑殊有佳者。 
现代文：皇帝曾经在冬天吃柑子，慨叹形状和味道都太差。刘义康在座，说： 今年的柑子有些是很漂亮的。 
English: The emperor once ate mandarin oranges in winter, lamenting that the shape and taste were too bad. Liu Yikang was present and said: Some of this year's mandarin oranges are very beautiful.

古文：遣还东府取柑，大供御者三寸。
现代文：就派人到东府去取回一些柑子，比献给皇帝的要大出三寸。
English: He sent someone to Dongfu to retrieve some mandarin oranges, which were three inches larger than the ones dedicated to the emperor.

古文：仆射殷景仁爲帝所宠，与刘湛素善，而意好晚乖，湛常欲因宰辅之权倾之。
现代文：仆射殷景仁被皇帝所宠爱，他和刘湛一向很要好，而后来却关系恶化。刘湛常常想借助于宰相的权力压过他。
English: Servant Yin Jingren was favored by the emperor, and he and Liu Zhan had always been very good, but later the relationship deteriorated. Liu Zhan often tried to use the power of the prime minister to overpower him.

古文：景仁爲帝所保持，义康屡言不见用，湛愈愤。
现代文：殷景仁被皇帝所保护，刘义康屡次上言不被采用，刘湛越发愤怒。
English: Yin Jingren was protected by the emperor, Liu Yikang repeatedly petitioned not to be adopted, Liu Zhan became more and more angry.

古文：南阳刘斌，湛之宗也，有涉俗才用，爲义康所知，自司徒右长史擢爲左长史。
现代文：南阳刘斌，是刘湛同一家族的，有经管世俗事务的才能，被刘义康所熟知，从司徒右长史提升为左长史。
English: Nanyang Liu Bin, a member of the same family as Liu Zhan, had the ability to manage worldly affairs and was well known by Liu Yikang. He was promoted from the Right Long History to the Left Long History.

古文：从事中郎琅邪王履、主簿沛郡刘敬文、祭酒鲁郡孔胤秀并以倾侧自入，见帝疾笃，皆谓宜立长君。
现代文：从事中郎琅笽王刘履、主簿沛郡人刘敬文、祭酒鲁郡人孔胤秀都是靠排挤其他人自己升迁上来的，看到皇帝病重，都说应该另立年长的君主。
English: Liu Li, who was engaged in the middle, Liu Jingwen, who was in charge of the book, and Kong Yanshu, who was in charge of the wine, all promoted themselves by crowding out others. When they saw that the emperor was seriously ill, they all said that an older monarch should be set up.

古文：上尝危殆，使义康具顾命诏。
现代文：皇上曾经病情危险，让刘义康写一份临终遗命的诏书。
English: The emperor was in critical condition and asked Liu Yikang to write an imperial edict on his deathbed.

古文：义康还省，流涕以告湛及景仁。
现代文：刘义康回到省台，流着眼泪把情况告诉了刘湛和殷景仁。
English: Liu Yikang returned to Taiwan Province and tearfully told Liu Zhan and Yin Jingren about the situation.

古文：湛曰： 天下艰难，讵是幼主所御。 
现代文：刘湛说： 天下局面艰难，哪里是幼主所能驾驭的？ 
English: Liu Zhan said: The situation in the world is difficult, where is the young master able to control?

古文：义康、景仁并不答；而胤秀等辄就尚书仪曹索晋咸康立康帝旧事，义康不知也。
现代文：刘义康、殷景仁都不回答；而孔胤秀等人则从尚书仪曹那里找到了晋朝咸康年间立康帝的旧事，刘义康却不知道。
English: Liu Yikang and Yin Jingren did not answer; while Kong Yanshu and others found from Shang Shuxi Cao the old story of the establishment of Emperor Kang during the reign of Emperor Xiankang of the Jin Dynasty, Liu Yikang did not know.

古文：及帝疾瘳，微闻之；而斌等既爲义康所宠，遂结朋党，若有尽忠奉国不同己者，必构以罪黜。
现代文：等皇帝的病痊愈，稍微听到了一些；而刘斌等人既然被刘义康所宠爱，于是便结成朋党，如果有尽忠报国不同于自己的，一定要找个罪名把他们罢免。
English: When the emperor's illness was cured, they heard a little more; but since Liu Bin and others were favored by Liu Yikang, they formed a crony party. If there are those who are loyal to the country and different from themselves, they must find a crime to remove them.

古文：每采景仁短长，或虚造同异以告湛，自是主相之势分矣。
现代文：他们常常挑剔殷景仁的一些长短，或者捏造一些异同去告诉刘湛，从此君主和宰相的双方对立就很明显了。
English: They often criticized some of the strengths and weaknesses of Yin Jingren, or fabricated some similarities and differences to tell Liu Zhan. From then on, the opposition between the monarch and the prime minister was obvious.

古文：义康欲以斌爲丹阳尹，言其家贫。上觉之，曰： 以爲吴郡。 
现代文：刘义康打算让刘斌做丹阳尹，说他家里贫寒，皇上觉察到了，就说： 让他去吴郡吧。 
English: Liu Yikang planned to have Liu Bin become Danyang Yin, saying that his family was poor. The emperor noticed this and said, "Let him go to Wuxian."

古文：后会稽太守羊玄保求还，义康又欲以斌代之。
现代文：后来会稽太守羊玄保请求回京，刘义康又想让刘斌代替他。
English: Later, Yang Xuanbao, the auditor-general, requested to return to Beijing, and Liu Yikang wanted Liu Bin to replace him.

古文：上时未有所拟，仓卒曰： 我已用王鸿。 
现代文：皇上当时没有准备，就仓促地说： 我已经用了王鸿。 
English: The Emperor was unprepared at the time, and hastily said, "I have already used Wang Hong."

古文：上以嫌隙既成，将致大祸，十七年，乃收刘湛；又诛斌及大将军录事参军刘敬文并贼曹孔劭秀、中兵邢怀明、主簿孔胤秀、丹阳丞孔文秀、司空从事中郎司马亮、乌程令盛昙泰；徙尚书库部郎何默子、余姚令韩景之、永兴令顔遥之、湛弟黄门郎素、斌弟给事中温于广州；王履废于家。
现代文：皇上看到矛盾已经形成，将会导致大祸，元嘉十七年，便逮捕了刘湛；又杀了刘斌以及大将军录事参军刘敬文和贼曹孔劭秀、中兵邢怀明、主簿孔胤秀、丹阳丞孔文秀、司空从事中郎司马亮、乌程令盛昙泰；外调尚书库部郎何默子、余姚令韩景之、永兴令颜遥之、刘湛的弟弟黄门郎刘素、刘斌的弟弟给事中刘温到广州；王履罢官回家。
English: The emperor saw that a contradiction had formed, which would lead to a great disaster. In the 17th year of Yuan Jia, he arrested Liu Zhan; he also killed Liu Bin, as well as the general Liu Jingwen and the thief Cao Kongyu Xiu, the general Cao Huaming, the general Kong Yinxiu, the general Danyang, the general Confucius Ma Liang, the general Wu Chengling Sheng, the vice-governor Wang Lu, the vice-governor Shang Shuxu, the vice-governor He Murzi, the vice-governor Yu Yao, the vice-governor Han Jingzhi, the vice-

古文：青州刺史杜骥勒兵殿内，以备非常。
现代文：青州刺史杜骥率兵进入殿内，以防备异常情况发生。
English: Qingzhou Zhishi Duyun led the soldiers into the hall to prevent abnormal situations from occurring.

古文：义康时入宿，留止中书省，遣人宣旨告以湛等罪。
现代文：刘义康当时入宫住宿，留在中书省中，皇帝派人去宣读圣旨宣告刘湛等人的罪状。
English: At that time, Liu Yikang entered the palace to stay and stayed in the Chinese Literature Department. The emperor sent someone to read out the sacred edict to declare the guilt of Liu Zhan and others.

古文：义康上表逊位，改授江州刺史，出镇豫章，实幽之也。
现代文：刘义康上表退位，改授他担任江州刺史，出京镇守豫章，其实是把他囚禁起来。
English: Liu Yikang abdicated at the table, he was re-assigned to serve as the governor of Jiangzhou, and went to Beijing to guard Yuanzhang. In fact, he was imprisoned.

古文：停省十馀日，桂阳侯义融、新渝侯义宗、秘书监徐湛之往来慰视。
现代文：停止了中书省职务十余天，桂阳侯刘义融、新渝侯刘义宗、秘书监徐湛之往来慰问探视。
English: For more than ten days, Guiyang Hou Liu Yirong, Xinwu Hou Liu Yizong, and Secretary Supervisor Xu Zhan visited each other to offer condolences.

古文：于省奉辞，便下渚，上唯对之恸哭，遣沙门慧琳视之。
现代文：在吕书省告辞，便乘船上路了，皇上只是对着他痛哭，派遣和尚慧琳前去看他。
English: After saying his farewells in Lushu Province, he left by boat. The emperor just wept bitterly over him and sent Monk Huilin to go and see him.

古文：义康曰： 弟子有还理不？ 
现代文：刘义康说： 弟子还有回来的可能么？ 
English: Liu Yikang said: Is it possible for a disciple to come back?

古文：琳公曰： 恨公不读数百卷书。 
现代文：慧琳说： 遗憾您不读万卷书。 
English: Huilin said, "I'm sorry you don't read tens of thousands of books.

古文：征虏司马萧斌爲义康所昵，刘斌等谗之被斥，乃以斌爲谘议，领豫章太守，事无大小皆委之。
现代文：征虏司马萧斌曾被刘义康所亲近，由于刘斌等人的谗毁而被排斥，刘义康便以萧斌为咨议，兼豫章太守，事情不分大小都委托给他。
English: Conscript Sima Xiaobin was once close to Liu Yikang, but was ostracized due to the sabotage of Liu Bin and others. Liu Yikang then took Xiaobin as a consultant, as well as the governor of Yuzhang, and entrusted him with all matters, regardless of size.

古文：司徒主簿谢综素爲义康所狎，以爲记室。
现代文：司徒主簿谢综平素被刘义康所亲昵，就让他做记室。
English: When Liu Yikang took a liking to Xie Jipingsu, the chief bookkeeper of St. Peter's, he asked him to be his secretary.

古文：左右爱念者并听随从至豫章。
现代文：身边随从凡是他所喜欢留恋的都听凭跟随他到豫章。
English: He has followers around him, and everyone he likes and misses can follow him to Yuzhang.

古文：辞州见许，资奉优厚，朝廷大事，皆报示之。
现代文：后来申请辞去江州的职务，得到批准，补贴优厚，朝廷大事，都报告他知道。
English: Later, he applied to resign from his post in Jiangzhou, was approved, received generous subsidies, and reported on major events at the imperial court.

古文：义康未败时，东府听事前井水忽涌，野雉江鸥并入所住斋前。
现代文：刘义康没有失败的时候，东府厅堂前面井里的水忽然上涌，野鸡江鸥都进入他所住的斋房前面。
English: When Liu Yikang did not fail, the water in the well in front of the East Government Hall suddenly surged, and the pheasants all entered the front of the temple where he lived.

古文：龙骧参军巴东扶令育上表申明义康，奏，即收付建康狱赐死。
现代文：龙骧参军巴东人扶令育上表申明刘义康的情况，上奏以后，即被逮捕交付建康监狱赐命他自杀。
English: Long Yu, who joined the army to support the education of the Padong people, stated the situation of Liu Yikang on the table. After the report, he was arrested and handed over to Jiankang Prison and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：会稽长公主于兄弟爲长，帝所亲敬。
现代文：会稽长公主比兄弟年长，皇帝对她十分亲近敬重。
English: The chief auditor princess is older than her brothers, and the emperor is very close to her and respects her.

古文：上尝就主宴集甚欢，主起再拜顿首，悲不自胜。
现代文：皇上曾经到公主那里参加宴会，十分欢欣，公主起身跪拜磕头，悲痛不能自制。
English: The emperor once went to the princess to attend a banquet, he was very happy, the princess got up and knelt to worship the skull, she could not control her grief.

古文：上不晓其意，起自扶之，主曰： 车子岁暮,必不见容，特乞其命。 
现代文：皇上不明白她的意思，起身自己把她扶起来，公主说： 车子在今年年末，必定不会被宽容，我特地为他乞求性命。 
English: The Emperor did not understand what she meant, and got up to help her up. The Princess said, "The carriage will not be tolerated at the end of this year. I specifically begged for his life."

古文：因恸哭。
现代文：于是悲伤痛哭。
English: Then she burst into tears.

古文：上亦流涕，指蒋山曰： 必无此虑，若违今誓，便是负初宁陵。 
现代文：皇上也一起流泪，指着蒋山说： 一定不要有这样的顾虑，如果违背了今天的誓约，便是辜负了初宁陵的父母。 
English: The emperor also shed tears together, pointing to Jiangshan and saying, "Be sure not to have such concerns. If you violate today's oath, you will fail the parents of Huningling."

古文：即封所饮酒赐义康曰： 会稽姊饮忆弟，所饮余，今封送。 
现代文：就把所喝的酒封起来赐给刘义康说： 会稽姐姐饮了这酒便想起弟弟，饮后所剩下的，现在封存赠送给你。 
English: He sealed up the wine he had drunk and gave it to Liu Yikang, saying, "My sister, the auditor, drank this wine and remembered my brother. What was left after drinking is now sealed and given to you."

古文：车子，义康小字也。
现代文：车子，就是刘义康的小字。
English: "Chaozi" is Liu Yikang's nickname.

古文：二十二年，太子詹事范晔等谋反，事连义康，诏特宥大辟，并子女并免爲庶人，绝属籍，徙安成郡。
现代文：元嘉二十二年太子詹事范晔等谋反，事情与刘义康有关连，诏令特别宽大免除大辟的刑罚，与他的子女一起免为平民，革除族籍，迁到安成郡。
English: In the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Prince Zhan Zhi Fan Rong and others conspired to rebel, and the matter was related to Liu Yikang. The imperial edict was particularly lenient and exempted him from the severe punishment, and he and his children were exempted from being civilians, expelled from the family, and moved to Ancheng County.

古文：义康在安成读汉书见淮南厉王长事，废书叹曰： 前代乃有此，我得罪爲宜也。 
现代文：刘义康在安成郡读《汉书》，看到了淮南厉王刘长的旧事，撂下书本慨叹说： 前代就有这种事情，我犯罪受罚理所应当。 
English: Liu Yikang read the "Chinese Book" in Ancheng County, saw the old story of Liu Chang, the king of Huainan Li, and sighed under the book: There were such things in the previous generation, I should be punished for my crime.

古文：二十四年，豫章胡诞世、前吴平令袁恽等谋奉戴义康，太尉江夏王义恭奏徙义康广州，奏可，未行，会魏军至瓜步，天下扰动，上虑有异志者奉义康爲乱，孝武时镇彭城及尚书左仆射何尚之并言宜早爲之所。
现代文：二十四年，豫章胡诞世、前吴平令袁恽等谋划拥戴刘义康，太尉江夏王刘义恭奏表建议把刘义康迁徙到广州，得到批准，还没有执行，正赶上魏军开到了瓜步，天下骚动，皇上恐怕有异心的人推戴刘义康作乱，孝武帝当时镇守彭城，他和尚书左仆射何尚之都说应该及早作出安排。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, the birth of Yu Zhanghu, the former Wu Ping ordered Yuan Xuan and others to plan to support Liu Yikang, the lieutenant of Jiangxia King Liu Yigong suggested that Liu Yikang be moved to Guangzhou. It was approved, but not yet implemented. It was just in time for the Wei army to reach Guapu. The world was in turmoil. The emperor was afraid that people with different intentions would push Liu Yikang to make trouble. Emperor Xiaowu was guarding Pengcheng at the time, and he and Shang Shushi said that they should make arrangements as soon as possible.

古文：二十八年正月，遣中书舍人严麝持药赐死。
现代文：二十八年正月，派遣中书舍人严麝带着药去赐他自杀。
English: In the first month of the 28th year, Yan Xun, a Chinese scholar, was sent to him with medicine to make him commit suicide.

古文：义康不肯服药，曰： 佛教自杀不复人身。 
现代文：刘义康不肯服药，说： 佛教说自杀的人不能再还为人身。 
English: Liu Yikang refused to take medicine, saying, "Buddhism says that a person who commits suicide can no longer return to the human body.

古文：乃以被掩杀之，以侯礼葬安成郡。
现代文：于是便用被子把他闷死，以对待侯爵的礼节把他葬在安成郡。
English: So they smothered him with a quilt and buried him in Anceng County, with all due respect to the Marquis.

古文：子允，元凶杀之。
现代文：他的儿子，被元凶劭所杀死。
English: His son was killed by the perpetrator.

古文：孝武大明四年，义康女玉秀等乞反葬旧茔，诏听之。
现代文：孝武帝大明四年，刘义康的女儿刘玉秀等请求迁回到旧坟地重葬，诏令同意她进行办理。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Liu Yuxiu, the daughter of Liu Yikang, requested to be moved back to the old cemetery for reburial, and the imperial edict agreed to her request.

