古文：申光逊孙光宪渔人妻陈寨陶俊张易广陵木工飞盅菌毒田承肇蛇毒冶葛鸩杂说药
现代文：申光逊孙光宪渔人妻陈寨陶俊张易广陵木工飞盅菌毒田承肇蛇毒冶葛鸩杂说药
English: Shen Guang's descendant, Sun Guangxian's fisherman's wife, Chen Zhai, Tao Jun, Zhang Yi, Guangling, woodworker, aspergillus, toadstool, poisonous field, Zheng Zhao, snake poison, yakitori, yakitori, mixed medicine

古文：异疾绛州僧崔爽刘录事句容佐史崔融刁俊朝李生魏淑皇甫及王布侯又玄李言吉蒯亮
现代文：异疾绛州僧崔爽刘录事句容佐史崔融刁俊朝李生魏淑皇甫及王布侯又玄李言吉蒯亮
English: Zhangzhou Monk Cui Shuang Liu's Record of Events: Yong Zi Shi, Cui Rong, Jun Cha, Li Sheng, Wei Shu, Huang Fu, Wang Bu, and Xuan Lijian

古文：申光逊
现代文：申光逊
English: Shen Guangxiong

古文：近代曹州观察判官申光逊，言本家桂林。
现代文：近代，曹州的观察判官申光逊，说自己的老家在桂林。
English: In modern times, the observation judge of Caozhou, Shen Guangxun, said that his hometown was in Guilin.

古文：有官人孙仲敖，寓居于桂，交广人也。
现代文：有位叫孙仲敖的官人，寄居在桂林，申光逊广交各方人士。
English: There was a government official named Sun Zhongyao, who lived in Guilin as a sojourner, and Shen Guangxun had extensive contacts with people from all walks of life.

古文：申往谒之，延于卧内。
现代文：他去拜访孙仲敖，被请到卧室。
English: He went to visit Sun Zhongyao and was invited to his bedroom.

古文：又于枕函中，取一黑漆筒，如今之笙项，安于鼻窍，吸之至尽，方就枕，有汗出表，其疾立愈，盖鼻饮蛮獠之类也。
现代文：孙仲敖尚未梳洗就与申光逊相见，他说：不是我懒得盥洗，是因为我头痛啊。申光逊立即让准备一升多酒，辛辣物胡椒，干姜等研成粉末半杯，用温酒浸泡调合。又从枕匣中取出一黑色漆筒，象现在的笙管，安放在孙仲敖的鼻孔处，让他把酒吸完，然后才躺下。出了汗，这病立刻就好了。这种用鼻子饮服的方法，和西南少数民族治病的方法相类似。
English: Sun Zhongyao had not yet combed his hair when he met Shen Guangxun. He said, "It's not that I'm too lazy to wash, it's because I have a headache." Shen Guangxun immediately had a liter of wine prepared, and half a cup of spicy pepper, dried ginger, etc. ground into powder and mixed with warm wine. A black lacquer tube, like the current fistula, was taken out of the pillow case and placed in Sun Zhongyao's nostrils, so that he could suck up the wine before lying down. Sweat came out, and the disease was immediately cured. This method of using the nose to drink clothes is

古文：孙光宪
现代文：孙光宪
English: Sun Guangxian

古文：火烧疮无出醋泥，甚验。
现代文：治疗烧伤没有比醋泥更有效的，特别灵验。
English: There is no more effective treatment for burns than vinegar mud, it is particularly effective.

古文：孙光宪尝家人作煎饼，一婢抱玄子拥炉，不觉落火炭之上，遽以醋泥傅之，至晓不痛，亦无瘢痕。
现代文：有一次孙光宪的家人作煎饼，一使女在炉边环绕着炉子烙煎饼，不小心一个木炭落在她身上，忙用醋泥敷上，到第二天早上就不痛了，也没留下疤痕。
English: Once, when Sun Guangxian's family was making pancakes, a servant girl was standing by the stove, burning pancakes. A piece of charcoal accidentally fell on her, and she quickly covered it with vinegar. By the next morning, there was no pain and no scar was left.

古文：是知俗说不厌多闻。
现代文：从此知道，民间的验方搜集的越多越好。
English: Since then, it has been known that the more the private inspection side collects, the better.

古文：渔人妻
现代文：渔人妻
English: The Fisherman's Wife

古文：瓜村有渔人妻得劳疾，转相染著，死者数人。
现代文：瓜村有打鱼人的妻子得了结核病，转相传染，死了好几个人。
English: In Gua village, the wife of a fisherman contracted tuberculosis, which turned into an infection, and several people died.

古文：或云：取病者生钉棺中弃之，其病可绝。
现代文：有人说：把病人活着装进棺材中，丢弃掉，这种病就可以断绝。
English: Some people say: put the patient alive in a coffin and discard it, and the disease can be stopped.

古文：顷之，其女病，即生钉棺中，流之于江。
现代文：时隔不久，这个人的女儿得了肺结核，就被活着装进棺材里，丢到江中任其漂流。漂流到了金山。
English: Not long after, the man's daughter contracted tuberculosis and was placed in a coffin alive, thrown into the river and left to drift. She drifted to Jinshan.

古文：至金山，有渔人见而异之，引之至岸。开视之，见女子犹活，因取置渔舍。每多得鳗黧鱼以食之，久之病愈。
现代文：有一位打鱼的人看见，觉得奇怪，就把棺材引到岸边，打开看视，见一女子还活着，就把她接到渔舍中，每天打很多鳗黧给她吃，吃了很长时间，病好了。
English: A fisherman saw this and thought it was strange, so he brought the coffin to the shore. He opened it and saw that a woman was still alive. He took her to his fishing hut, where he caught a lot of bream every day to feed her. She ate for a long time and recovered.

古文：遂为渔人之妻，今尚无恙。
现代文：于是她嫁给了这位打鱼的人做妻子，到现在还没有什么病。
English: So she married the fisherman as a wife, and she hasn't had any illnesses so far.

古文：陈寨
现代文：陈寨
English: Chenzhai

古文：陈寨者，泉州晋江巫也，善禁祝之术。
现代文：陈寨，泉州晋江一带的巫师，擅长用真气、符咒等治邪病。
English: Chen Zhai, a sorcerer from the Quanzhou-Jinjiang area, is good at using true qi and spells to cure evil diseases.

古文：为人治疾，多愈者。
现代文：他给人治病，多数都能治好。
English: He cures people, and most of them get better.

古文：有漳州逆旅苏猛，其子病狂。
现代文：漳州人苏猛，是一旅店的店主。
English: Su Meng, a native of Zhangzhou, is an innkeeper.

古文：人莫能疗，乃往请陈。
现代文：他的儿子得了疯病，别人治不了，苏猛就到泉州请陈寨。
English: When his son fell ill with a disease that no one else could cure, Su Meng went to Quanzhou to ask Chen Zhai for help.

古文：陈至，苏氏子见之，戟手大骂。
现代文：陈寨到苏家，苏猛的儿子见了陈寨，指点着他大骂。
English: Chen Zhai went to Su's house. Su Meng's son saw Chen Zhai and pointed at him and cursed him.

古文：寨曰：此疾入心矣。
现代文：陈寨见状说：他这病已经进入心脏了。
English: Chen Zhai read the notice and said, "This disease has entered his heart."

古文：乃立坛于堂中，戒人无得窃视。
现代文：陈寨在堂屋中设置法坛，他告诫人不得偷看。
English: Chen Zhai set up a Dharma altar in the hall, and he warned people not to peek.

古文：至夜，乃取苏氏子，劈为两片，悬堂之东壁，其心悬北檐下。
现代文：到了夜晚，陈寨捉住苏子，把他劈成两半，悬挂在堂屋的东墙上，把他的心挂在北面的房檐下，才开始在堂屋中作法。
English: In the evening, Chen Zhai caught Su Zi, split him into two halves, hung him on the east wall of the hall, and hung his heart under the eaves on the north side, before he began to practice in the hall.

古文：寨方在堂中作法，所悬之心，遂为犬食。
现代文：这时悬挂着的心，被狗叼去吃了。寨找不到心，又惊又怕。
English: At this time, the hanging heart was eaten by the dogs. The village could not find the heart, and they were shocked and afraid.

古文：寨求之不得，惊惧，乃持刀宛转于地，出门而去。主人弗知，谓其作法耳。
现代文：他拿着刀在地上来回走了几趟，就出门而去。主人并不知道，以为他还在作法。
English: He paced back and forth on the ground with the knife for a few times, then left the house. His owner didn't know, thinking he was still practicing.

古文：食顷，乃持心而入，内于病者之腹。
现代文：一顿饭工作，陈寨拿着心回来，放在病人腹中。
English: After working for one meal, Chen Zhai came back with the heart and placed it in the patient's stomach.

古文：被发连叱，其腹遂合。
现代文：然后他披头散发连声喝叱，苏子被剖开的肚子就合上了。
English: Then he bowed his head and let out a series of scolding noises, and Suzi's dissected stomach closed.

古文：苏氏子既悟。但连呼递铺，递铺。
现代文：不久之后，苏猛的儿子明白过来了，但是口中连呼：递铺！递铺！
English: Soon after, Su Meng's son came to understand, but he kept shouting: "Pass the shop! Pass the shop!"

古文：家人莫之测。
现代文：家里人都不知道是怎么回事。
English: No one in the family knows what happened.

古文：乃其日去家数里，有驿吏手持官文书，死于道傍。
现代文：就在这天，离苏家几里以外的地方，有一个驿吏手里拿着公文，死在了道傍。
English: On this very day, a few miles away from Su's home, a bailiff died on the side of the road, holding a document in his hand.

古文：初南中驿路，二十里置一递铺。驿吏持符牒，以次传授。欲近前铺，辄连呼以警之。
现代文：当初南中的驿路，二十里设一驿站，名叫递铺，驿吏拿着符牒，依次传递，快要到前一个驿站时，就连喊：递铺，让这个驿站的人早有准备。
English: At that time, there was a post station on the south-central fork in the road, twenty miles away, called the post office. The postman would take a token and pass it in turn. When he was about to reach the previous post station, he would even shout: "Post office, let the people at this post station prepare early."

古文：乃寨取驿吏之心而活苏氏。
现代文：原来是陈寨取走了驿吏的心救活了苏猛的儿子。
English: It turned out that Chen Zhai took away the heart of the eunuch and saved the son of Su Meng.

古文：苏遂愈如故。
现代文：苏猛的儿子的病就好了，和原来一样。
English: Su Meng's son's illness was cured, just like before.

古文：陶俊
现代文：陶俊
English: Tao Jun

古文：江南吉州刺史张曜卿，有傔力者陶俊性谨直。尝从军征江西，为飞石所中，因有腰足之疾，恒扶杖而行。张命守舟于广陵之江口。
现代文：江南吉州刺史张曜卿，有一个仆从名叫陶俊性格谨慎直爽，曾参军征讨江西，被飞石击中，因此腰、脚都留下了残疾，长期拄着拐行走，张曜卿就让他在广陵渡口看守船只。
English: Zhang Youqing, the governor of Jizhou, Jiangnan Province, had a servant named Tao Jun, who had a prudent and straightforward personality. He had joined the army to conquer Jiangxi Province. He was hit by a flying stone, which left him with a disability in his waist and feet. He walked with a limp for a long time. Zhang Youqing asked him to guard the ships at the Guangling Ferry Port.

古文：因至白沙市，避雨于酒肆。
现代文：借机到白沙市去，因遇雨，在酒馆内避雨。
English: I took the opportunity to go to Baisha City. Due to the rain, I took shelter from the rain in a pub.

古文：同立者甚众。
现代文：同时站在那儿避雨的人很多。
English: At the same time, there are many people standing there sheltering from the rain.

古文：有二书生过于前，独顾俊。
现代文：这时有两位书生，从面前经过，唯独注意陶俊。
English: At this time, there were two students passing in front of him, but they only paid attention to Tao Jun.

古文：相与言曰：此人好心，宜为疗其疾。
现代文：他俩相互谈论着，说：这个人心眼好，应该给他治病。
English: And they reasoned with one another, saying, "This man is MENTALLY HEALTHY; let him be healed."

古文：即呼俊，与药二丸曰：服此即愈。
现代文：于是招唤陶俊，给他两丸药，说：服了它，你的病就好了。
English: So he summoned Tao Jun, gave him two pills, and said, "Take it, and your illness will be cured."

古文：乃去。
现代文：说完就走了。
English: So Gaozu set off.

古文：俊归舟吞之。良久，觉腹中痛楚甚，顷之痛止，疾亦多差。
现代文：陶俊回到船上把药吃了，过了半晌，觉得腹中痛得很厉害。又过了一会儿不痛了，病也好了许多。
English: Tao Jun went back to the boat and took the medicine. After a while, he felt a severe pain in his abdomen. After a while, there was no more pain, and his illness was much better.

古文：操篙理缆，尤觉轻健。
现代文：操篙解缆，觉得特别轻健。
English: When I unhooked the cable, I felt very light and healthy.

古文：白沙去城八十里，一日往复，不以为劳。
现代文：白沙离城八十里，陶俊一天走个来回，也不觉得累。
English: Baisha is eighty miles away from the city. Tao Jun walks back and forth every day and does not feel tired.

古文：后访二书生，竟不复见。
现代文：后来陶俊访寻二位书生，竟没有再见到他们。
English: Later, Tao Jun went to look for the two students, but he never saw them again.

古文：张易
现代文：张易
English: Zhang Yi

古文：江南刑部郎中张易少居菑川。
现代文：江南刑部郎中张易年轻时住在菑州。
English: Zhang Yi, a member of the Gangnam Criminal Investigation Department, lived in Zhangzhou when he was young.

古文：病热，困惙且甚。恍惚见一神人长可数寸，立于枕前。持药三丸曰：吞此可愈。
现代文：因患病身体发烧，感到特别疲劳困倦，恍惚之间见一位约几寸长的神人，站在枕前，手里拿着三丸药，说：吃了这个，病就可以好了。
English: Due to illness, his body had a fever, and he felt particularly tired and sleepy. While in a trance, he saw a god-man about a few inches long, standing in front of his pillow, holding three pills in his hand, saying, "Eat this, and your illness will be cured."

古文：易受而亟吞之，二丸嗛之，一丸落席有声。
现代文：张易接过来忙吞下，两丸药衔在嘴时，一丸药掉落在床席上发出声响。
English: Zhang Yi took over and swallowed quickly. When the two pills were in his mouth, one pill fell on the bed and made a noise.

古文：因自起求之不得。
现代文：于是张易起来去找，没有找到。
English: So Zhang Yi got up to look for it, but couldn't find it.

古文：家人惊问何为，具述所见，病因即愈。尔日出入里巷，了无所苦。
现代文：他的病也马上就好了。
English: His illness will soon be over.

古文：广陵木工
现代文：广陵木工
English: Guangling Woodworking

古文：广陵有木工，因病，手足皆拳缩，不能复执斤斧。
现代文：广陵有一位木工，因为有病，手和脚全都拳屈着，不能再拿斧子了。
English: There is a carpenter in Guangling. Because of illness, his hands and feet are all fists and knees, and he can no longer hold an axe.

古文：扶踊行乞，至后土庙前，遇一道士。
现代文：只好扶着特制的踊鞋上街乞讨。一天，行乞到后街土庙前，遇见一位道士。
English: He had no choice but to go begging on the streets with his specially made dancing shoes. One day, while begging in front of a backstreet temple, he met a Taoist monk.

古文：长而黑色，神采甚异。
现代文：那道士身材高大，面堂黝黑，神采丰异。
English: The Taoist monk was tall, dark-skinned, and full of energy.

古文：呼问其疾，因与药数丸曰：铒此当愈，旦日平明，复会于此。
现代文：招呼木工，问他是什么病，然后给他几丸药说：吃了这几丸药就能好。明天天大亮的时候，我们再在这里见面。
English: He hailed the carpenter, asked him what his ailment was, then gave him a few pills and said, "Take these pills and you'll be fine. We'll meet here again at dawn tomorrow."

古文：木工辞曰：某不能行，家去此远，明日虽晚，尚未能至也。
现代文：木工推辞说：我不能行走，家离这里很远，明天约定的时间虽然很晚，但我还是不能走到这里。
English: The carpenter said, "I can't walk, my home is very far from here, and although it's very late tomorrow, I still can't walk here."

古文：道士曰：尔无忧，但早至此。
现代文：道士说：你不要担心，只要你早点到这就行。
English: The priest said, "Don't worry, as long as you get there early, you'll be fine."

古文：遂别去。
现代文：说罢离去。
English: Just say it and walk away.

古文：木工既归，铒其药。
现代文：木工马上回到家里，吃了药，不一会儿，手脚痛得特别厉害。
English: The carpenter immediately returned home, took the medicine, and soon his hands and feet were in extreme pain.

古文：顷之，手足痛甚，中夜乃止，因即得寐。
现代文：到了半夜就不痛了。
English: By midnight, it doesn't hurt anymore.

古文：五更而寤，觉手足甚轻，因下床，趋走如故。
现代文：因此很快睡着了。五更时分木工醒了，感觉手脚特别轻快。于是下床，试一试，无论是疾走，还是慢走都和过去一样。
English: Therefore, I fell asleep quickly. At five o'clock, the carpenter woke up and felt his hands and feet were particularly light. So I got out of bed and tried it. Whether it was a fast walk or a slow walk, it was the same as before.

古文：即驰诣后土庙前。久之，乃见道士倚杖而立。
现代文：他立刻飞奔到后街土庙前，等了好半天，才见道士倚杖站在那里。
English: He immediately rushed to the back street before the earthen temple, and waited for a long time before he saw the Taoist priest standing there leaning on his staff.

古文：再拜陈谢。
现代文：木工重又拜谢道士。
English: The carpentry is heavy and thanks to the priest.

古文：道士曰：吾授尔方，可救人疾苦。
现代文：道士说：我传授给你秘方，可以救人疾苦。
English: The Taoist said, "I will teach you the secret recipe of the dragonfly, which can save people's suffering."

古文：无为木匠耳。
现代文：不要做木匠了。
English: Don't be a carpenter.

古文：遂再拜受之。
现代文：木工再次拜谢道士，接受秘方。
English: The carpenter thanked the priest again and accepted the secret recipe.

古文：因问其名居。
现代文：木工问道士姓名，居住何处。
English: The carpenter asked the man's name and where he lived.

古文：曰：吾在紫极宫，有事可访吾也。
现代文：道士说：我住在紫极宫，有事可以找我。
English: The Taoist said, "I live in the Purple Palace, you can come to me if you need anything."

古文：遂去。
现代文：说完离去。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：木匠得方，用以治疾，无不愈者。
现代文：木匠得到秘方，用它来治病，没有治不好的。
English: A carpenter obtains a secret recipe and uses it to cure an illness. Nothing is incurable.

古文：至紫极宫访之，竟不复见。
现代文：木工到紫极宫拜访他，竟然没有再见到道士。
English: The carpenter went to visit him at the Purple Palace, but never saw the Taoist again.

古文：后有妇人久疾，亦遇一道士，与药而差。
现代文：后来有一位妇人病了很长时间，也遇一道士，给了她药，吃了病就好了。
English: Later, there was a woman who had been ill for a long time, and she also met a doctor, who gave her medicine, and she got better.

古文：言其容貌，亦木工所见也。
现代文：听妇人说，那道士的容貌，也是木工所见的那位。
English: According to the woman, the priest's appearance was also that of the carpenter.

古文：广陵寻乱，木工竟不知所之。
现代文：木工找遍广陵，竟没有找到那位道士。
English: The carpenter searched Guangling all over, but did not find the Taoist.

古文：飞盅
现代文：飞盅
English: 飛

古文：江岭之间有飞盅，其来也有声，不见形，如鸟鸣啾啾唧唧然。
现代文：长江与岭南之间有飞盅，它来的时候带着声响，却看不见它的踪影，象鸟叫似的啾啾唧唧。
English: Between the Yangtze River and Lingnan, there is a flying cormorant. When it comes, it brings a sound, but you can't see it. It's a cormorant that sounds like a bird.

古文：中人即为痢，便血，医药多不差。
现代文：人中了飞盅立刻得痢疾，便血，医药大多都不能治好。
English: People who get infected with fly maggots immediately get dysentery, bloody stools, and most medicines can't cure them.

古文：旬日间必不救。
现代文：十多日一定丧命。
English: He must have been dead for more than ten days.

古文：菌毒
现代文：菌毒
English: mycotoxins

古文：岭南风俗，多为毒药。
现代文：岭南的风俗，多制毒药。
English: The custom in Lingnan is to use multiple poisons.

古文：令老奴食治葛死，埋之。
现代文：让老奴吃毒草野葛，死后埋掉。
English: Let the old slave eat the poisonous grass field arrowroot, and bury him after death.

古文：土堆上生菌子，其正当腹上，食之立死。
现代文：土堆上生菌子，菌子正生在腹部位置上的，吃了立刻就死。
English: Bacteria are growing on the mound. The bacteria are growing on the abdomen. If eaten, they will die immediately.

古文：手足额上生者，当日死。
现代文：生在手、足、额部位上的，吃了，当天死。
English: Born on hands, feet, forehead, eaten, died the same day.

古文：旁自外者，数日死。
现代文：生在旁边远一点的几天之内死。
English: Born nearby, die within a few days.

古文：渐远者，或一月两月。
现代文：渐远的，一个月或两个月死。
English: Gradually, a month or two to die.

古文：全远者，或二年三年。
现代文：最远的，或二、三年内死。
English: Farthest away, or die within two or three years.

古文：无得活者。
现代文：没有能活着的。
English: There's nothing left to live for.

古文：惟有陈怀卿家药能解之。
现代文：只有陈怀卿家制的解药能解这种菌毒。
English: Only Chen Huaiqing's home-made antidote can solve this kind of mycotoxin.

古文：或有以菌药涂马鞭头马控上，拂着手即毒，拭着口即死。
现代文：如果有人将菌毒涂在马鞭鞘、马控上，碰着手就中毒，沾上嘴立刻就死。
English: If someone smears mycotoxin on a whip sheath or a riding crop, they will be poisoned if they touch their hand, and will die immediately if they touch their mouth.

古文：田承肇
现代文：田承肇
English: Tian Chengzhao

古文：王蜀将田承肇常领骑军戍于凤翔。
现代文：五代十国时期，前蜀将领田承肇曾带领兵戍守在凤翔。
English: During the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, the former Shu general, Tian Chengzhao, led the troops to stay in Fengxiang.

古文：因引骑潜出，解鞍憩于林木之下。面前忽见方圆数尺静地中，有小树子一茎高数尺。并无柯叶，挺然而立，尤甚光滑。
现代文：一次因带领骑兵秘密外出执行任务，在小树林中解马下鞍休息时，田承肇忽然看见面前方圆几尺洁净的地方中，有一棵几尺高的小树，没有枝叶，直挺挺地立在那儿，显得特别光滑。
English: On one occasion, when he was leading his cavalry out on a secret mission and taking a break from saddling his horse in a grove, Tian Chengzhao suddenly saw in front of him, in a round, clean place, a small tree several feet high, without any branches or leaves, standing straight up and looking particularly smooth.

古文：肇就之玩弄，以手上下摩娑。
现代文：田承肇顺手玩弄它，用手上下抚摸。
English: Tian Chengzhao played with it, stroking it up and down.

古文：顷刻间，手指如中毒药，苦不禁。于是鞭马归营。
现代文：立时，手指象中了毒药似的，疼痛不止，于是他骑马回营。
English: Immediately, his finger felt as if it had been poisoned, and the pain continued, so he rode back to camp.

古文：至，臂膊已粗于桶。
现代文：回到营中时。他的臂膊已经肿得象桶那么粗了。
English: By the time he got back to camp, his arm was swollen to the size of a barrel.

古文：时有村妪善禁，居在深山中。
现代文：当时有个乡村老太太擅长禁咒之术，她住在深山中，田承肇急忙派人把她召来。
English: At that time, there was a village old lady who was good at the art of forbidding spells. She lived deep in the mountains, and Tian Cheng Zhao hurriedly sent someone to summon her.

古文：急使人召得，已将不救。
现代文：这时田承肇已经快要不能救治了。
English: At this time, Tian Chengzhao was almost beyond treatment.

古文：妪曰：此是胎生七寸蛇戏处，喷毒在树木间。扪者树枝立合，致卒。
现代文：老太太说：这是胎生七寸蛇玩耍的地方，它的毒汁射在林间的树木上，摸着树的人立刻和树一样，也中上蛇的毒汁，可以遭至死亡。
English: The old lady said, "This is the place where the seven-inch snake plays. Its venom shoots into the trees in the forest, and anyone who touches the tree is immediately infected with the snake's venom, just like the tree, and can die.

古文：肇曰：是也。
现代文：田承肇说：是啊。
English: Tian Chengzhao said: Yes.

古文：急使人就彼劚之。
现代文：他忙派人在那个地方挖掘。
English: He was busy sending people to dig in the area.

古文：果获二蛇，长六七寸。
现代文：果然挖到两条长六、七寸的小蛇，把它们弄死了。
English: He did manage to dig up two small snakes, about six or seven inches long, and killed them.

古文：毙之。
现代文：于是老妇人施行禁咒之术。
English: So the old woman cast a spell.

古文：妪遂禁勒。自膊间趁，渐渐下至于腕，又併趁入食指，尽食指一节，趁之不出。蹙成一球子许肉丸。
现代文：先从臂膊间开始赶，慢慢下手到手腕处，又一并赶到食指间，最后全部赶到食指最末的一节，就赶不出去了，收缩成一球肉丸。
English: First, start from between the arms, slowly move down to the wrist, then all together to the index finger, and finally all to the last section of the index finger, then you can't get out, shrinking into a ball of meatballs.

古文：遂以利刀断此一节，所患方除。
现代文：于是用快刀割断了这一节食指，病患才除掉。
English: So he cut off the affected index finger with a sharp knife, and the patient was removed.

古文：其断下一节，巨如一气球也。蛇毒
现代文：被割断的这一节食指，大得象一个气球。蛇毒
English: This severed index finger is as big as a balloon.

古文：赵延禧云：遭恶蛇虺所螫处，帖之艾炷，当上灸之，立差。
现代文：赵延禧说：遭到蝮蛇咬伤的地方，贴上艾炷，马上灸烤，立刻就能好。
English: Zhao Yanxi said, "If you are bitten by a boa constrictor, apply moxibustion and moxibustion immediately, and you will feel better immediately."

古文：不然即死。
现代文：不然，就得等死。
English: Otherwise, you have to wait for death.

古文：凡蛇啮即当啮处灸之，引去毒气，即止。
现代文：凡是被毒蛇咬伤，应该立即在被咬伤的地方灸，引去毒汁，就可以了。
English: If you are bitten by a venomous snake, you should immediately carry out moxibustion at the site of the bite to draw out the venom.

古文：冶葛鸩
现代文：冶葛鸩
English: 冶葛

古文：冶葛食之立死。
现代文：野葛吃了就得死。
English: If you eat wild gooseberry, you will die.

古文：有冶葛处，即有白藤花，能解冶葛毒。
现代文：生长野葛的地方，就长有白藤花，它能解野葛的毒。
English: Where the Nagano kudzu grows, there grows the white wisteria, which can dissolve the poison of the kudzu.

古文：鸩鸟食水之处，即有犀牛，犀牛不濯角其水，物食之必死。
现代文：鸩鸟饮水的地方，就有犀牛，犀牛不洗角的地方，生物喝了这水一定得死。
English: Where an ostrich drinks water, there is a rhinoceros. Where a rhinoceros does not wash its horns, the creature must die if it drinks this water.

古文：为鸩食蛇之故。
现代文：因为鸩鸟吃蛇的缘故。
English: Because ostriches eat snakes.

古文：杂说药
现代文：杂说药
English: Word of mouth

古文：医书言虎中药箭，食清泥；野猪中药箭，豗荠而食。
现代文：医书中说，虎中了药箭，吃清泥；野猪中了药箭，撞蒺藜并吃它。
English: According to the medical book, the tiger was hit by a medicine arrow and ate mud; the wild boar was hit by a medicine arrow, hit the earthworm and ate it.

古文：雉被鹰伤，以地黄叶帖之。
现代文：雉鸡被鹰弄伤，用地黄叶贴在伤口上。
English: A pheasant was injured by an eagle, and yellow leaves were used to cover the wound.

古文：又礜石可以害鼠。
现代文：又，礜石可毒死老鼠。
English: In addition, vermiculite can poison mice.

古文：张鷟曾试之，鼠中毒如醉，亦不识人，犹知取泥汁饮之，须臾平复。
现代文：有个叫张鷟的人曾经做过试验。老鼠中了毒，就象喝醉酒一般，也不能辩别人，但却知道寻找泥汁喝，一会就恢复了平静。
English: A man named Zhang Xuan once did an experiment. When a rat was poisoned, it was like being drunk, and could not argue with others, but it knew to look for muddy juice to drink, and it soon regained its calm.

古文：鸟兽虫物，犹知解毒，何况人乎！
现代文：鸟兽虫物，还知道解毒，何况人呢！
English: Birds, animals and insects also know how to detoxify, not to mention humans!

古文：被蚕啮者，以甲虫末傅之；被马咬者，烧鞭鞘灰涂之。
现代文：被蚕咬的人，用甲虫末敷伤口；被马咬的人，将鞭鞘烧成灰涂在患处。
English: If bitten by a silkworm, apply beetle powder to the wound; if bitten by a horse, burn the whip sheath to ashes and apply it to the affected area.

古文：盖取其相服也。
现代文：都是取他们相克的作用。
English: It's all a result of their mutual rivalry.

古文：蜘蛛啮者，雄黄末傅之；筋断须续者，取旋覆根绞取汁，以筋相对，以汁涂而封之，即相续如故。
现代文：被蜘蛛咬的人，将雄黄末敷在伤口上。筋断了，须接续的，取来旋覆根绞取它的汁液，把筋对上，涂上汁液，包扎好，就能接上，与原来一样。
English: If a person is bitten by a spider, apply horseradish to the wound. If the string is broken and needs to be connected, take the coiled root, squeeze out its juice, align the string, apply the juice, bandage it well, and it can be connected, just like the original.

古文：蜀儿奴逃走，多刻筋，以此续之，百不失一。
现代文：蜀地的奴隶逃跑时，许多磕断了筋的人，用这种方法接治，一百个人没有一个不好的。
English: When the slaves in Shu ran away, many of them had broken bones. They were treated in this way, and none of the hundred were bad.

古文：异疾
现代文：异疾
English: Different diseases

古文：绛州僧
现代文：绛州僧
English: Zhangzhou Monk

古文：永徽中，绛州有一僧病噎，都不下食。
现代文：唐高宗永徽年间，绛州有一个和尚得了噎病，咽不下食物，病了好几年。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty in Yonghui, there was a monk in Zhangzhou who got rickets, could not swallow food, and was ill for several years.

古文：如此数年，临命终，告其弟子云：吾气绝之后，便可开吾胸喉，视有何物，欲知其根本。
现代文：临死时，告诉他的弟子说：我气绝之后，可以剖开我的胸部和咽喉，看看有什么东西，要知道其中的因由。
English: When he was about to die, he told his disciples, "After I die, you can open my chest and throat and see what's there, and find out why."

古文：言终而卒。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：弟子依其言开视，胸中得一物，形似鱼而有两头，遍体悉是肉鳞。
现代文：弟子依照他说的剖开了胸腔和咽喉，从胸中取出一个东西，形状象鱼，但有两个头，满身全是肉鳞。
English: According to him, the disciple cut open the thorax and throat, and took out from the chest something that looked like a fish, but had two heads and was covered with scales.

古文：弟子致钵中，跳跃不止。
现代文：弟子把它放在钵中，它不停地跳跃。
English: The disciple put it in a cocoon, and it kept jumping.

古文：戏以诸味致钵中，虽不见食，须臾，悉化成水。
现代文：弟子象玩似的把食物放在钵中，虽然没看见它吃，但不一会儿，食物全部化成了水。
English: The disciple put the food in the bowl as if it were a toy. Although he did not see it being eaten, in a short while, the food all turned into water.

古文：又以诸毒药内之，皆随销化。
现代文：又把各种毒药放进钵中，全都跟随着溶化了。
English: He also put all kinds of poisons into the reeds, and they all melted away.

古文：时夏中蓝熟，寺众于水次作靛，有一僧往，因以少靛致钵中，此虫恇惧，绕钵驰走，须臾化成水。
现代文：当时正值仲夏蓝草成熟季节，寺院附近的群众在水边作蓝靛，有一和尚去了水边，随便带回了少许蓝靛，把它放在钵中。这虫很害怕，绕着钵不停地奔跑，一会化成了水。
English: At that time, it was the midsummer bluegrass ripening season, and the people near the temple were making blue ripples at the water's edge. A monk went to the water's edge, casually brought back a little blue ripple, and placed it in the ripple. The insect was very scared and kept running around the ripple, and it turned into water for a while.

古文：世传以靛水疗噎疾。
现代文：后来，世间就流传着用蓝靛治疗噎病。
English: Later, blue ginseng was used to treat rickets.

古文：崔爽
现代文：崔爽
English: Cui Shuang

古文：永徽中，有崔爽者。
现代文：唐高宗永徽年间，有位叫崔爽的人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, there was a man named Cui Shuang.

古文：每食生鱼，三斗乃足。
现代文：每次吃生鱼片，三斗才够。
English: Every time you eat sashimi, three buckets are enough.

古文：于后饥，作鲙未成，爽忍饥不禁，遂吐一物，状如虾蟆。自此之后，不复能食鲙矣。
现代文：后来，有一次饿了，未做成生鱼片，崔爽忍不住饥饿，就吐出一个东西，形状象蛤蟆，从此以后，再也不能吃生鱼片了。
English: Later, once hungry, not made into sashimi, Cui Shuang could not help but hunger, spit out a thing, shaped like a beak, from now on, can no longer eat sashimi.

古文：刘录事
现代文：刘录事
English: Liu Rongji

古文：和州刘录事者，大历中罢官，居和州旁县。
现代文：和州刘录事，唐代宗大历年间辞官弃职，住在和州旁县。
English: According to the records of Wazhou Liu, he resigned from his post during the Tang Dynasty and lived in Wazhoubong County.

古文：食兼数人，尤能食鲙，尝言鲙味未尝果腹。
现代文：他每顿能吃好几个人的饭，尤其能吃生鱼片。他曾说，他吃生鱼片从来没有吃饱过。
English: He could eat several people's meals at a time, especially sashimi, which he said he never had enough of.

古文：邑客乃网鱼百余斤，会于野庭，观其下箸。
现代文：邑客就打了一百多斤鱼，在外面的庭院中集会，观看他吃鱼。
English: The townspeople caught more than a hundred kilos of fish and gathered in the courtyard outside to watch him eat the fish.

古文：刘初食鲙数碟，忽似小哽，因咯出一骨珠子大如豆。
现代文：开始，刘录事吃了几碟生鱼片，忽然好象有点噎住了，于是咯了一下，吐出一个豆粒大小的骨头珠了。
English: At the beginning, Liu Luo ate several plates of sashimi. Suddenly, he seemed to choke a little, so he choked and spit out a bean-sized bone bead.

古文：乃置于茶瓯中，以碟覆之。
现代文：他随手放在茶盅里，用碟盖上。
English: He put it in a tea urn and covered it with a plate.

古文：食未半，怪覆瓯碟倾侧。举视之，向骨珠子已长数寸如人状。
现代文：还未吃到一半，他奇怪盖在茶盅上的碟倾到了一边，就拿起来看，方才那颗骨珠子已经长了好几寸，象人的形状似的，在座的客人都争抢着观看。
English: Before he was halfway through his meal, he noticed that the plate he had curiously placed over the tea urn had tipped to one side. He picked it up to see that the bone bead had just grown several inches, resembling the shape of a person, and the guests present were all vying to see it.

古文：座客竞观之，随视而长，顷刻长及人。
现代文：骨珠随看随长，不一会儿就长到人那么大。
English: The bone bead grows as it grows, and soon it grows to the size of a person.

古文：遂捽刘，因相殴流血。
现代文：于是揪住刘录事，两个人相互欧斗，打出了血。
English: So he grabbed Liu Luo, and the two fought with each other, drawing blood.

古文：良久各散走，一循厅之西，一转厅之左，俱乃后门，相触，翕成一人，乃刘也。
现代文：过了许久，两个人各自走开。一个顺着大厅向西面走，一个转到大厅的左边，都走到了后门，两人相接触，合成了一个人，就是刘录事。
English: After a long time, two people walked away separately. One walked along the hall to the west, one turned to the left of the hall, and both walked to the back door. The two came into contact and formed one person, that is, Liu Rongji.

古文：神已痴矣，半日方能语。
现代文：这时他的神情已经呆痴了，半天才能说话。
English: By this time, his expression had turned to a blank stare, and it took him half a day to speak.

古文：访其所以，皆不省之。刘自是恶鲙。
现代文：问他是怎么回事，全然不知，从此，刘录事厌恶吃生鱼片。
English: When I asked him what was going on, he didn't know at all. From then on, Liu Luo had an aversion to eating raw fish.

古文：句容佐史
现代文：句容佐史
English: Junko Sasaki

古文：句容县佐史能啖鲙至数十斤，恒吃不饱。
现代文：句容县佐史每次能吃生鱼片几十斤，总也吃不饱。
English: Sashi, a resident of Guorong County, can eat dozens of pounds of sashimi every time, but he can never get enough.

古文：县令闻其善啖，乃出百斤，史快食至尽。
现代文：县令听说他能吃，于是拿来一百斤生鱼，让他快吃，直到吃完。
English: The county magistrate heard that he could eat, so he brought a hundred pounds of raw fish and let him eat it until it was finished.

古文：因觉气闷，久之，吐出一物，状如麻鞋底。
现代文：因为吃得太快，觉得有些气闷，半晌吐出一物，形状象麻鞋底。
English: Because he ate too quickly, he felt a little stuffy, and he vomited up something, shaped like the sole of a shoe.

古文：县令命洗出，安鲙所，鲙悉成水。
现代文：县令让洗净，放在生鱼片上，生鱼片全变成了水。
English: The county ordered that it be washed and placed on the sashimi, and the sashimi all turned into water.

古文：累问医人术士，莫能名之。
现代文：问了许多医生和术士都叫不出它的名来。
English: Many doctors and magicians have been asked, but they cannot name it.

古文：令小吏持往扬州卖之，冀有识者。诫之：若有买者，但高举其价，看至几钱。
现代文：县令让小吏拿着到扬州去卖。希望能有认识这种东西的人，告诫说：若有买的人，要高抬它的价格，看能给到多少钱。
English: The county magistrate told the clerk to take it to Yangzhou to sell it. Hoping that there would be someone who knew this kind of thing, he warned: If there are people who buy it, they should raise its price and see how much money they can get.

古文：其人至扬州，四五日，有胡求买。
现代文：小吏到了扬州，过了四、五天，有个胡人要买。
English: When the petty official arrived in Yangzhou, after four or five days, there was a Hu man who wanted to buy a camel.

古文：初起一千，累增其价。到三百贯文，胡辄还之。
现代文：开始要一千钱，一次次往上提价，到三百贯文钱时，胡人还价。
English: At first, he asked for a thousand yuan, and raised the price again and again. When the price reached three hundred yuan, he counter-offered.

古文：初无酬酢。
现代文：交易始终没有谈成。
English: No deal has been struck.

古文：人谓胡曰：是句容县令家物，君必买之，当相随去。
现代文：有人对胡人说：这是句容县令家的东西，你一定要买，应该跟他走。
English: Someone said to Hu, "This is a gift from the governor of Gu Rong County. You must buy it. You should go with him."

古文：胡因随至句容。
现代文：胡人就跟随小吏到了句容县。
English: Hu Ren followed the petty official to Jurong County.

古文：县令问此是何物，胡云：此是销鱼之精，亦能销人腹中块病。人有患者、以一片如指端，绳系之，置病所。其块既销。
现代文：县令问胡人，这是什么东西，胡人说：这是销化鱼的精灵，也能消融人腹中的病块，有患病的人，用象手指尖大的一片，用绳系上放在病处，那个病块就化了。
English: The county magistrate asked Hu Rong what it was, and Hu Rong said, "It is the spirit of a fish that can dissolve fish. It can also dissolve a disease in a person's abdomen. If a person has a disease, he can use a piece of it that is as big as the tip of his finger and place it on the diseased area with a string, and the disease will be dissolved."

古文：我本国太子，少患此病，父求愈病者，赏之千金。
现代文：我本是国中的太子，小时候得了这种病，父亲为寻找能治这种病的人，悬赏黄金千两。
English: I used to be the crown prince of my country. When I was a child, I contracted this disease. My father offered a reward of a thousand taels of gold to anyone who could cure me.

古文：君若见卖，当获大利。
现代文：你要是肯卖给我，能获大利。
English: If you're willing to sell it to me, you can make a lot of money.

古文：令竟卖半与之。崔融
现代文：县令最后卖给他一半。崔融
English: The county magistrate finally sold him half. Cui Rong was the winner.

古文：唐国子司业知制诰崔融病百余日，腹中虫蚀极痛不能忍。
现代文：唐朝时，国子司业知制诰崔融，有病一百多天了，肚子被虫蛀食，痛得不能忍受。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Secretary of State for Industry and Commerce, Gong Cui Rong, was ill for more than a hundred days. His stomach was eaten by worms, and the pain was unbearable.

古文：有一物如守宫，从下部出，须臾而卒。
现代文：有一个象壁虎似的东西，从肛门出来，不一会儿就死了。
English: There was a gecko-like thing that came out of the anus and died soon after.

古文：刁俊朝
现代文：刁俊朝
English: 俊朝

古文：安康伶人刁俊朝，其妻巴妪项瘿者。
现代文：安康有位演奏乐器的艺人叫刁俊朝，他的妻子巴氏女脖子上长个瘤子。
English: In Ankang, there is an artist who plays a musical instrument called Gong Juncha. His wife, Ms. Ba, has a lump on her neck.

古文：初微若鸡卵，渐巨如三四升瓶盎。积五年，大如数斛之鼎，重不能行。
现代文：开始只有鸡蛋大，渐渐长到能装三、四升酒的容器那么大，过了五年，大到象能装几十斗东西的鼎那么大，重得不能走路。
English: At first, it was only the size of an egg. Gradually, it grew to the size of a container that could hold three or four liters of wine. After five years, it was as big as a canister that could hold dozens of buckets. It was so heavy that I couldn't walk.

古文：其中有琴瑟笙磬埙篪之响，细而听之，若合音律，泠泠可乐。
现代文：瘤子里面有琴、瑟、笙、磬、埙、篪诸多乐器的演奏声，仔细听，很附合音律，清越动听。
English: Inside the lump, there is the sound of many musical instruments such as qin, ser, gong, gong, gong and gong. Listen carefully, it fits the melody very well and is more beautiful.

古文：积数年，瘿外生小穴如针芒者，不知几亿。
现代文：又过了好几年，瘤子外面生出象针芒样的小穴，不计其数。
English: After several more years, countless pinprick-like holes appeared on the outside of the lump.

古文：每天欲雨。则穴中吹白烟，霏霏如丝缕。
现代文：每到天要下雨时，穴中吹出白烟，霏霏如丝如缕，渐渐向高处飘散开去。
English: Every time it starts to rain, white smoke blows out of the hole, wafting like a thread, gradually drifting to higher ground and dispersing.

古文：渐高布散，结为屯云，雨则立降。
现代文：集结成云气，雨就立刻降下来了。
English: The clouds gathered and the rain fell immediately.

古文：其家少长惧之，咸请远送岩穴。
现代文：他家的老少都惧怕这个大瘤子，全都请求把她送到远处山洞里。
English: Everyone in his family, young and old, was afraid of this big lump, and they all begged her to be taken to a cave far away.

古文：俊朝恋恋不能已，因谓妻曰：吾迫以众议，将不能庇於伉俪。送君于无人之境，如何？
现代文：刁俊朝恋恋不舍，就对妻子说：我迫于大家的意见，不能看在夫妻的情分上保护你，我送你到没有人的地方去，怎么样？
English: He said to his wife, "I am forced by everyone's opinion, and I cannot protect you as a husband and wife. How about I take you to a place where there is no one?

古文：妻曰：吾此疾诚可憎恶。送之亦死，拆之亦死。
现代文：妻说：我的病确实令人憎恶，送我走，我也是死，拆开它，我也是死。
English: My wife said: "My illness is truly abominable. Send me away and I'll die. Take it apart and I'll die."

古文：君当为我决拆之，看有何物。
现代文：你就给我拆开它吧，看里面有什么东西。
English: Why don't you take it apart for me and see what's inside.

古文：俊朝即磨淬利刃，挥挑将及妻前。瘿中轩然有声，遂四分披裂。有一大猱。跳跃蹋而去。
现代文：刁俊朝立即磨快刀，挥刀到妻子面前欲挑，就在这时，瘤子中轰然作响，响声未落，瘤子破裂四散分开，一只大猱猿跳跃着离开。
English: Gong Jun immediately sharpened the knife, waved the knife in front of his wife and wanted to pick it up. At this time, there was a loud noise in the lump, the sound did not go away, the lump broke apart, and a large baboon jumped away.

古文：即以帛絮裹之，虽瘿疾顿愈，而冥然大渐矣。
现代文：夫妻二人立刻用帛絮把伤口包扎好。虽然大瘤子立刻消失了，可是他妻子也昏迷不醒病情加重了。
English: The couple immediately bandaged the wound with a bandage. Although the lump disappeared immediately, his wife also fell into a coma and her condition worsened.

古文：明日，有黄冠扣门曰：吾乃昨曰瘿中走出之猱也。
现代文：第二天，有位道士前来叩门，说：我就是昨天从瘤子走出来的猱猿。
English: The next day, a Taoist priest came to knock on the door and said, "I am the baboon who walked out of the tumour yesterday."

古文：吾本猕猴之精，解致风雨。
现代文：我本是猕猴精，通晓风雨。
English: I am originally a macaque monkey, and I am familiar with wind and rain.

古文：无何与汉江鬼愁潭老蛟还往，常与觇船舸将至，俾他覆之，以求舟中餱粮，以养孙息。
现代文：不知为什么就与汉江鬼愁潭的老蛟相交往了，常和他们一起窥视江中船只行来时，乘机把船倾翻，弄到船中的粮食等物。来供养子孙，繁衍后代。
English: I don't know why, but I came into contact with the old cormorants of the Han River Ghost Pool. When I often watched the boats coming and going in the river with them, I took the opportunity to tip the boat over and get food and other things into the boat. To provide for my children and grandchildren, and to reproduce future generations.

古文：昨者太一诛蛟，搜索党与，故借君夫人蝤蛴之领，以匿性命。
现代文：前些年天神太一诛杀鬼愁潭老蛟，搜索他的党羽，我无处躲藏，所以就借你夫人的美项，以藏性命。
English: A few years ago, Heavenly Father killed the old man of Ghosts and Sorrows, and searched for his followers. I had nowhere to hide, so I borrowed your wife's beauty to save my life.

古文：虽分不相干，然为累亦甚矣。今于凤凰山神处，求得少许灵膏，请君涂之，幸当立愈。
现代文：虽然与你们毫不相干，但是拖累了你们这么多年，今天我在凤凰山神那里要了一点灵膏，请您把它涂在伤口上，希望能立刻就好。
English: Although it has nothing to do with you, it has been dragging you down for so many years. Today, I asked the Phoenix Mountain God for a little ointment. Please apply it to the wound, and I hope it will be better immediately.

古文：俊朝如其言涂之，随手疮合。
现代文：刁俊朝按照他说的给妻子涂上了灵膏，药刚涂上，疮口就愈合了。
English: In accordance with what he said, Gong Juncha applied the ointment to his wife. As soon as the medicine was applied, the sores were healed.

古文：俊朝因留黄冠，烹鸡设食。食讫，贳酒欲饮，黄冠因转喉高歌，又为丝匏琼玉之音，罔不铿锵可爱。
现代文：于是刁俊朝挽留道士，烹鸡摆饭招待他，吃完后，主人赊来了酒，正要饮，道士就转动歌喉，放声高唱，接着又做笙、竽、丝弦等美妙动听的乐音，无不铿锵悦耳。
English: So Gong Jun stayed with the Taoist in the morning, cooked chicken and served him dinner. After eating, the host brought wine, and just as he was about to drink it, the Taoist turned his voice and sang loudly, and then made beautiful and beautiful music such as gongs, cymbals, and silk strings, all of which were pleasing to the ear.

古文：既而辞去，莫知所诣。
现代文：不多时道士就辞别而去，不知他到什么地方去了。
English: It didn't take long for the Taoist priest to say goodbye and leave. I don't know where he went.

古文：时大定中也。
现代文：这是大定年间的事。
English: This happened during the Taisho era.

古文：李生
现代文：李生
English: Li Sheng

古文：天宝中，有陇西李生自白衣调选桂州参军。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间，陇西有位叫李生的，从平民调选任桂州的参军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Li Sheng in Shaanxi Province who was transferred from the civilian population to join the army in Guizhou.

古文：既至任，以热病旬余。
现代文：李生到任后便染上了热病，已经十多天了。
English: It has been more than ten days since Li Sheng contracted a fever after taking office.

古文：觉左乳痛不可忍，及视之，隆若痈肿之状，即召医验其脉。
现代文：感觉左乳疼痛难忍，看时，见肿起一病，他立刻找医生验脉。
English: He felt excruciating pain in his left breast, and when he looked at it, he saw a swollen mass. He immediately went to the doctor to have his pulse checked.

古文：医者曰：脏腑无他，若臆中有物，以喙攻其乳，乳痛而痈不可为也。
现代文：医生说：五脏六腑里没有别的什么，如果胸中有东西，用嘴攻击你的乳，乳就痛，但痈不能动呵。
English: The doctor said, "There's nothing else in your internal organs. If there's something in your chest, attack your breast with your mouth. Your breast will hurt, but your nipple can't move."

古文：又旬余，病甚。
现代文：又过了十多天，李生病势加重。
English: After more than ten days, Li's illness worsened.

古文：一日痈溃，有一雉，自左乳中突而飞出，不知所止。
现代文：一天，痈溃烂了，有一只雉鸡从左乳中突然飞出来。不知落在了那里。
English: One day, the maggot was festering, and a pheasant suddenly flew out of the left breast. I don't know where it landed.

古文：是夕李生卒。
现代文：这天夜里，李生就死了。
English: That night, Li Sheng died.

古文：魏淑
现代文：魏淑
English: Wei Shu

古文：大历中，元察为邛州刺史。
现代文：唐代宗大历年间，元察任邛州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zongda in the Tang Dynasty, Yuan Zha was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：而州城将有魏淑者，肤体洪壮，年方四十，亲老妻少。
现代文：州城将中有一个叫魏淑的人，身体高大健壮，年方四十岁，双亲年事已高，妻子尚年轻。
English: Among the prefects, there is a person named Wei Shu, who is tall and robust, forty years old, his parents are old, and his wife is young.

古文：而忽中异疾，无所酸苦，但饮食日损，身体日销耳。医生术士，拱手无措。
现代文：忽然，他得了一种奇怪的病，身体并没有什么疼痛，只是饮食一天天渐少，身体一天天变小，医生术士都毫无办法。
English: Suddenly, he got a strange disease. There was no pain in his body, but his diet was getting smaller and smaller day by day. Doctors and sorcerers could do nothing.

古文：寒暑未周，即如婴孩焉，不复能行坐语言。
现代文：不到一年，就象一个婴儿那么大了。不能行走，不会坐立，也不会说话。
English: Less than a year old, he's the size of a baby. He can't walk, sit up, or talk.

古文：其母与妻，更相提抱。
现代文：他的母亲和妻子，轮换着抱他。
English: His mother and wife took turns holding him.

古文：遇淑之生曰，家人召僧致斋。其妻乃以钗股挟之以哺，须臾，能尽一小瓯。
现代文：到魏淑生日这天，家人召来位僧人设斋祈祀，他的妻子用钗股挟食物喂他，不一会儿，能吃完一小钵。
English: On the day of Wei Shu's birthday, his family summoned a monk to set up a fast and pray. His wife fed him with a gourd sandwich, and soon he was able to eat a small gourd.

古文：自是日加所食，身亦渐长，不半岁，乃复其初。
现代文：从这一天起，一天比一天吃得多，身体也一天天长大，不到半年，就和原来一样了。
English: From that day on, she ate more and more every day, and her body grew day by day. In less than half a year, she was the same as before.

古文：察则授与故职，趋驱气力，且无少异。
现代文：元察又授给他原来的职位，或疾走，或策马驰驱，仍然和过去一样有力气。
English: Yuan Zha also gave him his original position, or gallop, or horse gallop, still as powerful as in the past.

古文：后十余年，捍蛮，战死于陈。
现代文：以后的十多年中，他强捍勇猛。最后战死在陈地。
English: Over the next ten years, he fought bravely and bravely. He eventually died in battle in Chenchi.

古文：皇甫及
现代文：皇甫及
English: The Imperial Household Agency

古文：皇甫及者，其父为太原少尹，甚钟爱之。
现代文：皇甫及，他的父亲任太原少尹，特别钟爱他。
English: Emperor Fuyi, whose father was Taiyuan Shaoyin, was especially fond of him.

古文：及生如常儿，至咸通壬辰岁，年十四矣，忽感异病。
现代文：皇甫及出生的时候，和平常的孩子一样。到唐懿宗咸通壬辰年，他十四岁时，忽然得了怪异的病。
English: When Emperor Wu was born, he was just like an ordinary child. When he was 14 years old, he suddenly fell ill with a strange disease.

古文：非有切肌彻骨之苦，但暴长耳。逾时而身越七尺，带兼数围，长啜大嚼，复三倍于昔矣。
现代文：不是有切肌透骨的疼痛，但是猛往上长，过了些时候，身体就超过了七尺，腰带加长好几围，特别能吃能喝，饭量是过去的三倍。
English: Not with excruciating pain, but with a sudden upward growth. After a while, the body exceeded seven feet, the belt lengthened several times, especially able to eat and drink, and the amount of food was three times that of the past.

古文：明年秋，无疾而逝。
现代文：第二年秋天，没有病就死了。
English: In the autumn of the following year, he died without any illness.

古文：王布
现代文：王布
English: Wang Bu

古文：永贞年，东市百姓王布知书，藏钱千万，商旅多宾之。
现代文：唐顺宗永贞年间，长安东街有一位叫王布的普通百姓，知书达礼，家财千万，臣商大贾都敬他为上宾。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng of Tang Shunzong, there was an ordinary citizen named Wang Bu in the East Street of Chang'an. He was a scholar and a gentleman, with a family fortune of tens of millions. The vassals and merchants all respected him as the chief guest.

古文：有女年十四五，艳丽聪悟。
现代文：王布有一个女儿，十四、五岁，艳丽聪敏。
English: Wang Bu has a daughter, fourteen, five years old, bright and intelligent.

古文：鼻两孔各垂息肉，如皂夹子，其根细如麻綖，长寸许，触之痛入心髓。
现代文：她鼻的两孔各垂一条息肉，象皂荚子，根细如麻线，长一寸多，碰一下，钻心般疼痛。
English: In each of the two nostrils of her nose hung a polyp, like a bar of soap, with roots as thin as twine, more than an inch long, and when touched, it hurt like a drill.

古文：其父破钱数百万治之，不差。
现代文：她的父亲花掉几百万钱为她治疗，一直没治好。
English: Her father spent millions of dollars trying to cure her, but she never got better.

古文：忽一日，有梵僧乞食，因问布：知君女有异疾，可一见，吾能止之。
现代文：忽然有一天，一位印度僧人来讨饭，问王布，说：我知道你女儿有怪异的病，让我看一下，我能治。
English: Suddenly, one day, an Indian monk came begging for food and asked Wang Bu, saying, "I know your daughter has a strange illness. Let me take a look. I can cure her."

古文：布被问大喜。
现代文：王布听僧人问很高兴，立刻让见他女儿。
English: Wang Bu was very happy to hear the monk's question and immediately let him see his daughter.

古文：即见其女，僧乃取药色正白，吹其鼻中。
现代文：印度僧人取纯白色药末，吹到他女儿的鼻孔中去。
English: The Indian monk took some pure white powder and blew it into his daughter's nostrils.

古文：少顷摘去之，出少黄水，都无所苦。
现代文：过一会儿，摘去息肉，出了一点黄水，毫无痛苦，王布赏给僧人一百两黄金。
English: After a while, the polyp was removed, a little yellow liquid came out, and there was no pain. Wang Bo rewarded the monk with one hundred and two gold coins.

古文：布赏之百金，梵僧曰：吾修道之人，不受厚施，唯乞此塞肉。遂珍重而去，势疾如飞。
现代文：印度僧人说：我是修道的人，不接受厚礼，只要这息肉。于是很珍重地收起息肉离去，疾走如飞。
English: The Indian monk said: "I am a religious man, I do not accept gifts, as long as this polyp. So it is very precious to collect the polyp and leave, fly away.

古文：布亦意其贤圣也。
现代文：王布以为他一定是位圣贤。
English: Wang Bu thought he must be a sage.

古文：计僧去五六坊，复有一少年，美如冠玉，骑白马，遂扣其门曰：适有胡僧到无？
现代文：估计印度僧人未出去有五、六条街坊，又有一位骑白马，面如美玉的少年，叩王布家的门，问：方才有没有一个胡僧来过？
English: It is estimated that there are five or six neighborhoods where Indian monks have not gone out. Another young man on a white horse, with a face like a jewel, knocks on the door of Wang Bu's house, asking: Has there been a goth monk just now?

古文：布遽延入，具述胡僧事。
现代文：王布忙把少年请进屋内，详细进述了印度僧人为他女儿摘除鼻中息肉的事情。
English: Wang Bu hurriedly invited the boy into the house and gave him a detailed account of how an Indian monk had removed a polyp from his daughter's nose.

古文：其人吁嗟不悦曰：马小蹶足，竟后此僧。
现代文：少年听后叹了口气，不高兴地说：我的马小跑得慢，竟然落在这个僧人的后面。
English: Hearing this, the boy sighed and said unhappily, "My horse trotted so slowly that it fell behind this monk."

古文：布惊异，诘其故。
现代文：王布很惊异，问是怎么回答。
English: Wang Bu was very surprised and asked what the answer was.

古文：曰：上帝失乐神二人，近知藏于君女鼻中。我天人也，奉命来取，不意此僧先取之，当获谴矣。
现代文：少年说：天帝走失乐神二人，最近得知，那二人藏在你女儿鼻中，我是天上的人，奉命来取，不料让这和尚先取走了，我该受到责罚了。
English: The boy said, "The heavenly emperor has lost the two gods of joy. Recently, I learned that the two gods were hidden in your daughter's nose. I am a heavenly being, and I was ordered to retrieve them. However, I let this monk take them first. I should be punished."

古文：布方作礼，举手而失。
现代文：王布刚要施礼，举手之间，少年不见了。
English: Wang Bu just wanted to salute, but between raising his hands, the boy disappeared.

古文：侯又玄
现代文：侯又玄
English: Hou Mata Xuan

古文：荆州处士侯又玄，尝出郊，厕于荒冢上。
现代文：荆州处士侯又玄，一次去郊处，在荒坟上解手。
English: Hou Mataixuan, a clerk in Jingzhou, once went to the suburbs to relieve himself on a deserted grave.

古文：及下，跌伤其肘，疮甚。
现代文：往下走时，跌了一跤摔伤了肘部，伤势很重。
English: As he was going down, he fell and injured his elbow, which was very serious.

古文：行数百步，逢一老人。
现代文：他走出几百步，遇见一位老人，问他为什么这样痛苦。
English: After a few hundred steps, he met an old man who asked him why he was in such pain.

古文：问何所若也，又玄具言，且见其肘。
现代文：侯又玄把一切都告诉了他，并把自己受伤的肘部给老人看。
English: Hou Yuexuan told him everything and showed the old man his injured elbow.

古文：老人言：偶有良药，可封之，十日不开，必愈。
现代文：老人说：正好我有好药，可以涂上，包扎好，十日之内不要打开，一定能好。
English: The old man said, "I happen to have some good medicine. You can apply it and bandage it well. Do not open it for ten days. You will definitely get better."

古文：又玄如其言，及解视，一臂遂落。
现代文：侯又玄按照老人说的涂上药。包扎好，十天后，拆开一看，这只臂膊掉在了地上。
English: Hou Mata Xuan followed the old man's advice and applied the medicine. The bandage was put on, and ten days later, when he took it off, the arm fell to the ground.

古文：又玄兄弟五六人互病，病必出血月余。
现代文：侯又玄弟兄五、六人连续都病了，得病一定出血一个多月。
English: Five or six of Hou Mataixuan's brothers fell ill in succession, and must have bled for more than a month.

古文：又玄见兄两臂，忽病疮六七处。
现代文：侯又玄看见哥哥的两臂，忽然长了六、七块疮。
English: When Hou Mataixuan saw his brother's arms, he suddenly developed six or seven sores.

古文：小者如榆钱，大者如钱，皆或人面。
现代文：小的象榆树钱，大的如钱币，全都象人的脸。
English: The small ones are like birch money, the big ones are like coins, and they all look like human faces.

古文：又江表尝有商人，左臂有疮，悉如人面，亦无他苦。商人戏滴酒口中，其面亦赤。
现代文：又，江南曾经有一位商人，左臂生了疮，全都象人的脸，也没有什么痛苦，商人象玩似的在它口中滴了几滴酒，它的脸也变红。
English: In addition, there was once a merchant in the south of the Yangtze River who had sores on his left arm, all of which resembled a human face, and there was no pain. The merchant dripped a few drops of wine into his mouth like a toy, and his face also turned red.

古文：以物食之，凡物必食。
现代文：凡是给它食物，它就吃。
English: If you give it food, it will eat.

古文：食多，觉膊内肉涨起，疑胃在其中也。
现代文：吃多了，感觉到臂膊的肉发涨，他怀疑胃在里面。
English: He ate more, felt the flesh of his arm rise, and suspected that his stomach was inside.

古文：或不食之，则一臂瘠焉。
现代文：有时不给食物吃，这胳臂就瘦下去。
English: Sometimes I don't give him food to eat, and his arm gets thinner.

古文：有善医者，教其历试诸药。
现代文：有位擅长医术的人，告诉他用金、石、草、木各种药都试着给它吃。
English: A person who was good at medicine told him to try to give it all kinds of medicines using gold, stone, grass, and wood.

古文：金石草木悉试之，至贝母，其疮乃聚眉闭口。商人喜曰：此药必治也。
现代文：试到贝母时，这个疮脸就皱眉闭口。商人高兴地说：这种药一定能治这种脸疮。
English: When he tried betel nut, the sore face frowned and shut up. The merchant said happily: "This medicine will definitely cure this kind of face sore."

古文：数日成痂。
现代文：于是用小苇筒戳毁它的嘴，把药灌了进去。
English: So he used a small syringe to pierce its mouth and pumped the medicine into it.

古文：遂愈。
现代文：几天以后结成痂，就好了。
English: After a few days, they will form a cocoon and be fine.

古文：李言吉
现代文：李言吉
English: Li Yanji

古文：金州防御使崔尧封有亲外甥李言吉者。左目上脸忽痒，而生一小疮。渐长大如鸭卵，其根如弦。
现代文：金州防御使崔尧封，有个亲外甥叫李言吉，左眼睛上眼睑忽然骚痒，而且生了一块小疮，渐渐长到象鸭蛋那么大，它的根象弦丝，长期压着眼睛不能睁开。
English: Jinzhou defense made Cui Yifeng, there is a relative and nephew called Li Yanji, the upper eyelid of the left eye suddenly itched, and a small sore was born, gradually growing to the size of a duck egg, its root like a string, long-term pressure on the eyes can not open.

古文：恒压其目不能开，尧封每患之。
现代文：崔尧封每天为他外甥的病忧虑。
English: Cui Junfeng worries about his nephew's illness every day.

古文：他日饮之酒，令大醉，遂剖去之。言吉不知觉也，赘既破，中有黄雀，鸣噪而去。
现代文：一天，二人在一起饮酒，崔尧封将李言吉灌醉，用刀割掉他眼睑上的赘瘤，剖开，从里面飞出来一只黄雀，鸣叫着飞走了。
English: One day, the two of them were drinking together. Cui Junfeng got Li Yanji drunk, cut out the mole on his eyelid with a knife, opened it, and a yellow finch flew out of it, chirping and flying away.

古文：蒯亮
现代文：蒯亮
English: 亮

古文：处士蒯亮，言其所知额角患瘤。医为割之，得一黑石棋子。巨斧击之，终不伤缺。
现代文：隐士蒯亮，说他知道有人额角上长个瘤子，医生给割开了，得到一颗黑棋子，用大斧子敲击它，始终也没能损坏它一点。
English: The hermit said brightly that he knew someone who had a bump on the corner of his forehead. The doctor cut it open, got a black piece, hit it with a big axe, and still couldn't damage it at all.

古文：复有足胫生瘤者。
现代文：还有一个人，小腿上长一个瘤子。
English: Another man had a lump on his calf.

古文：因至亲家，为猘犬所齰，正啮其瘤。
现代文：一次去亲戚家被疯狗咬了。正好咬在瘤子上。
English: Once I went to a relative's house and was bitten by a mad dog. It happened to bite me on the anus.

古文：其中得针百余枚，皆可用，疾亦愈。
现代文：从瘤子里面得到了一百多枚针，全都可以用，病也就好了。
English: I got more than a hundred needles from inside the lump, all of which can be used, and my illness is cured.

