古文：耿豪，钜鹿人也，本名令贵。
现代文：耿豪，钜鹿人，原名令贵。
English: Geng Hao, a native of Elk, was originally named Rong Gui.

古文：其先家于武川。豪少粗犷，有武艺，好以气陵人。
现代文：他从小性情粗犷，身怀武艺，好使气以超过别人。
English: He was a rough character from a young age, with martial arts skills, so that he could surpass others.

古文：贺拔岳西征，引为帐内。
现代文：贺拔岳西征，征聘他随侍帐中。
English: He was recruited to accompany the accountant in the Western Expedition of He Baturake.

古文：从讨侯莫陈悦及迎孝武，录前后功，封平原子。
现代文：贺拔岳被杀死，他归附宇文泰，以勇敢无畏被宇文泰所器重，他也自认为找到了好的主人。
English: He Baduyue was killed, and he was attached to Uwentai. He was valued by Uwentai for his bravery and fearlessness, and he thought he had found a good master.

古文：沙苑之战，豪杀伤甚多，血染甲裳尽赤。
现代文：沙苑之战，他杀伤敌兵最多，敌兵的鲜血把他的衣甲都染成红色。
English: In the Battle of Sha Yuan, he killed and injured the most enemy soldiers. The blood of the enemy soldiers dyed his armor red.

古文：周文叹曰： 令贵武猛，所向无前，观其甲裳，足以为验，不须更论级数也。 
现代文：宇文泰感叹道 ：令贵勇猛威武，所向无敌，看他的衣甲就足以证明，不要再统计他斩杀敌人首级的数目了。 
English: Uven Tai sighed: Ling Gui is brave, fierce and powerful, and invincible. Looking at his armor is enough to prove it. Don't count the number of enemies he has decapitated.

古文：进爵为公。从周文战芒山，豪谓所部曰： 大丈夫除贼，须右手拔刀，左手把槊，直斫直刺，慎莫畏死。 
现代文：他跟着宇文泰在邙山与敌兵交战，对部下说： 大丈夫杀贼，须右手握刀，左手提矛，直砍直刺，千万不要怕死。 
English: He followed Uwentai to fight the enemy soldiers in Shaoshan, and said to his subordinates: "It's okay to kill thieves, you must hold a knife in your right hand, carry a spear in your left hand, and stab straight. Don't be afraid of death."

古文：遂大呼独入，敌人锋刃乱下，当时咸谓豪殁。
现代文：便大声呼喊着单独闯入敌阵，敌兵的武器纷纷向他刺来，当时人们都认为他必定会阵亡。
English: Then, shouting loudly, he broke into the enemy lines alone, and the weapons of the enemy soldiers stabbed him one after another. At that time, people thought that he would certainly die in battle.

古文：俄然奋刀而还。
现代文：他忽然又挥舞着战刀出现。
English: He suddenly reappears brandishing a sword.

古文：战数合，当豪前者死伤相继。
现代文：与敌兵交战多个回合，到他面前寻战的敌人一个个受伤或死掉。
English: He fought with the enemy soldiers for several rounds, and the enemies who came to fight in front of him were injured or killed one by one.

古文：又谓左右曰： 吾岂乐杀人，但壮士除贼，不得不尔。
现代文：他对周围的人说 ：我难道就乐于杀人吗？但壮士要为国除去贼人，不得不这样。
English: He said to the people around him: "Am I happy to kill people? But a strong man has to do this if he wants to get rid of thieves for the country."

古文：进位侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：如果不杀死敌人，又不被敌人伤害，何异于去逐杀坐在那里不动的人啊！ 
English: If you do not kill the enemy and are not harmed by the enemy, how is it different from killing someone who sits there and does not move?

古文：豪性凶悍，言多不逊，周文惜其骁勇，每优容之。
现代文：宇文泰极为喜欢他。他的性情凶狠强悍，说话多不恭顺。宇文泰爱惜他的骁勇，常常原谅他。
English: Uwentai likes him very much. He has a fierce and strong temperament, and his speech is often disobedient. Uwentai cherishes his courage and often forgives him.

古文：豪亦自谓意气冠群，终无所屈。
现代文：他也认为自己的意志气概冠绝一时，所以从不向任何人屈服。
English: He also believes that his willpower is second to none, so he never gives in to anyone.

古文：李穆、蔡祐初与豪同时开府，后并居豪之右。
现代文：李穆、蔡最初与他同时任开府，后来官职都在他的上面。
English: Li Mu and Cai initially held the position of the head of the government at the same time as him, and later the official positions were all above him.

古文：豪不能平，谓周文曰： 人间物议，谓豪胜李穆、蔡祐。 
现代文：他颇感不平，对宇文泰说： 人们议论，都认为我胜过李穆、蔡。 
English: He was quite dissatisfied and said to Yu Wentai: People talk about it, they all think I'm better than Li Mu and Cai.

古文：周文曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：宇文泰问： 为什么这样说？ 
English: Uwentai asked: Why do you say that?

古文：豪曰： 人言李穆、蔡祐是丞相髆髀，耿豪、王勇，丞相咽项，以在上，故为胜也。 
现代文：他答道： 人们都说李穆、蔡是丞相您的大腿，耿豪、王勇是您的脖颈，因为脖颈在上面，所以我胜过他们。 
English: He replied: People say that Li Mu and Cai are your thighs, Geng Hao and Wang Yong are your neck, because the neck is on top, so I beat them.

古文：豪之粗猛皆此类。
现代文：他的粗疏都有类于此。
English: His coarseness is similar to this.

