古文：吕布字奉先，五原郡九原人也。
现代文：吕布，字奉先，是五原郡九原人。
English: Lvbu, whose Chinese name is Fengxian, is a native of Wuhuan County, Jiuyuan.

古文：以骁武给并州。
现代文：他凭借骁勇善战在并州任职。
English: He served the state with valor and courage.

古文：刺史丁原为骑都尉，屯河内，以布为主簿，大见亲待。
现代文：刺史丁原此时担任骑都尉，驻守河内，任命吕布为主簿，对他非常器重，以礼相待。
English: At this time, Zhishidun was a cavalry captain stationed in Hanoi and appointed Lv Bu as his chief, treating him with great respect and courtesy.

古文：灵帝崩，原将兵诣洛阳。与何进谋诛诸黄门，拜执金吾。
现代文：灵帝驾崩后，丁原率军到洛阳，和何进策划杀掉朝中的宦官，这时候被任命为执金吾。
English: After the death of Emperor Lingdi, Ding Yuan led the army to Luoyang and plotted with He Jin to kill the eunuch of the dynasty. At this time, he was appointed as the leader of the Jinwu.

古文：进败，董卓入京都，将为乱，欲杀原，并其兵众。
现代文：但计划失败，何进被杀，董卓又在这时候来到洛阳，想要挑起祸乱，杀掉丁原，然后收编丁原的部队。
English: But the plan failed, He Jin was killed, and Dong Zhuo came to Luoyang at this time, wanting to stir up trouble, kill Ding Yuan, and then reorganize Ding Yuan's troops.

古文：卓以布见信于原，诱布令杀原。
现代文：董卓发现丁原十分信任吕布，就引诱吕布将丁原杀了。
English: Dong Zhuo found that Ding Yuan trusted Lv Bu very much, so he lured Lv Bu to kill Ding Yuan.

古文：布斩原首诣卓，卓以布为骑都尉，甚爱信之，誓为父子。
现代文：吕布杀了丁原并斩下他的首级送到董卓那里，董卓就任命他为骑都尉，对他很是倚重信赖，还盟誓结为义父义子。
English: Lv Bu killed Ding Yuan and cut off his head and sent it to Dong Zhuo. Dong Zhuo appointed him as a cavalry captain. He trusted him very much and swore to be his father-in-law.

古文：布便弓马，膂力过人，号为飞将。
现代文：吕布擅长骑马射箭，臂力过人，被人称为 飞将 。
English: Lvbu is good at horse riding and archery. He has superior arm strength and is known as the "flying general."

古文：稍迁至中郎将，封都亭侯。
现代文：不久之后就被提升为中郎将，还加封都亭侯。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to churo shogun and given the additional title of duke.

古文：卓自以遇人无礼，恐人谋己，行止常以布自卫。
现代文：董卓知道自己与人交往总是粗鲁无礼，担心有人会因此谋害自己，所以进出都让吕布跟随在自己左右。
English: Dong Zhuo knew that he was always rude and impolite in his dealings with people, and he was worried that someone would try to kill him, so he let Lv Bu follow him around when he went in and out.

古文：然卓性刚而褊，忿不思难，尝小失意，拔手戟掷布。
现代文：但董卓生性刚烈又心胸狭窄，气愤的时候就忘记自己处于危难之中，曾经有小事让他不高兴，就随手拿起手戟掷向吕布。
English: However, Dong Zhuosheng is stubborn and narrow-minded. When he is angry, he forgets that he is in danger. There was once a small thing that made him unhappy, so he picked it up and threw it at Lv Bu.

古文：布拳捷避之，为卓顾谢，卓意亦解。
现代文：还好吕布身手敏捷，才避开了，还因为这件小事向董卓道歉，董卓的怒气才慢慢消了。
English: Fortunately, Lü Bu was quick enough to avoid it. He also apologized to Dong Zhuo for this trifle, and Dong Zhuo's anger slowly dissipated.

古文：由是阴怨卓。
现代文：但吕布也因为这件事，心中对董卓产生了怨恨。
English: But Lü Bu also felt resentment towards Dong Zhuo because of this incident.

古文：卓常使布守中閤，布与卓侍婢私通，恐事发觉，心不自安。
现代文：董卓曾经让吕布守在自己宫门口，吕布与董卓的婢女私通，害怕事情败露，心中常常不安。
English: Dong Zhuo once let Lv Bu stand guard at the gate of his palace. Lv Bu had an adulterous affair with Dong Zhuo's maid. He was afraid that the affair would be exposed and was often uneasy in his heart.

古文：先是，司徒王允以布州里壮健，厚接纳之。
现代文：吕布还没有在董卓身边的时候，司徒王允因为吕布是并州的勇士，对他以礼相待。
English: When Lv Bu was not yet at Dong Zhuo's side, because Lv Bu was a hero of the annexation of the state, Stu Wang Yun treated him with courtesy.

古文：后布诣允，陈卓几见杀状。
现代文：后来吕布去见王允，将董卓几乎杀掉自己的经过都讲给王允。
English: Later, Lü Bu went to see Wang Yun and told Wang Yun all about how Dong Zhuo almost killed him.

古文：时允与仆射士孙瑞密谋诛卓，是以告布使为内应。
现代文：当时王允和仆射士孙瑞正在密谋诛杀董卓，所以就将计划告知吕布让他作为内应。
English: At that time, Wang Yun and his henchman Sun Rui were plotting to kill Dong Zhuo, so they told Lv Bu about the plan and asked him to act as a middleman.

古文：布曰： 奈如父子何！ 
现代文：吕布说： 我们是义父义子，怎么能这样做呢？ 
English: Lüb said: We are father and son, how can we do this?

古文：允曰： 君自姓吕，本非骨肉。
现代文：王允说： 你姓吕，你们二人本来就不是亲生骨肉。
English: Wang Yun said: Your surname is Lu. You two are not flesh and blood.

古文：今忧死不暇，何谓父子？ 
现代文：现在担忧自己什么时候会被杀还来不及，还谈什么父子？ 
English: It's too late to worry about when you're going to be killed. What's there to talk about?

古文：布遂许之，手刃刺卓。
现代文：吕布就答应了王允，并亲手杀了董卓。
English: Lü Bu agreed with Wang Yun and killed Dong Zhuo with his own hands.

古文：语在卓传。
现代文：这件事在《董卓传》中有记载。
English: This incident is recorded in detail in "The Biography of Dong Zhuo."

古文：允以布为奋武将军，假节，仪比三司，进封温侯，共秉朝政。
现代文：王允因此任命吕布为奋武将军，授予符节，各种礼节比照三司，后又进封为温侯，与他一起处理朝政。
English: As a result, Wang Yun appointed Lv Bu as the General of Fenwu, awarded him the Three Orders of the Garter, and all kinds of etiquette. Later, he appointed him as the Prince of Wen, and together they handled the affairs of the court.

古文：布自杀卓后，畏恶凉州人，凉州人皆怨。
现代文：吕布自从杀了董卓后，对凉州人是又怕又恨，凉州人对他也满是怨恨。
English: Since Lv Bu killed Dong Zhuo, he has both feared and hated Liangzhou people. Liangzhou people are also full of resentment towards him.

古文：由是李傕等遂相结还攻长安城。布不能拒，傕等遂入长安。
现代文：所以李傕等人就合兵攻打长安，吕布没能抵挡住，李傕等人就率兵攻入了长安。
English: Therefore, Li Xi and others joined forces to attack Chang'an. Lü Bu was unable to resist, and Li Xi and others led their troops into Chang'an.

古文：卓死后六旬，布亦败。将数百骑出武关，欲诣袁术。
现代文：董卓死后两个月，吕布也战败，仓促带着几百名随从奔出武关，想要前去投靠袁术。
English: Two months after the death of Dong Zhuo, Lü Bu was also defeated, and hastily rushed out of Wuguan with several hundred followers, wanting to go to Yuan Shu.

古文：布自以杀卓为术报雠，欲以德之。
现代文：吕布认为自己杀了董卓为袁术报了仇，袁术会对自己以礼相待。
English: Lü Bu thought that he had killed Dong Zhuo to avenge Yuan Shuxu. Yuan Shuxu would treat him with courtesy.

古文：术恶其反覆，拒而不受。
现代文：没想到袁术厌恶他的反复无常，没有接纳他。
English: Unexpectedly, Yuan Shou detested his capriciousness and did not accept him.

古文：北诣袁绍，绍与布击张燕于常山。
现代文：吕布没办法，又往北想去投靠袁绍，袁绍接纳了他，并和他一起到常山攻打张燕。
English: Unable to do anything, Lv Bu again wanted to go north to seek help from Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao accepted him and went with him to Changshan to attack Zhang Yan.

古文：燕精兵万馀，骑数千。
现代文：张燕的精锐士兵有上万人，骑兵数千人。
English: Zhang Yan had tens of thousands of elite soldiers and thousands of cavalry.

古文：布有良马曰赤兔。
现代文：吕布有一匹良马名叫赤兔。
English: There is a good horse in Lvbu called Red Rabbit.

古文：常与其亲近成廉、魏越等陷锋突陈，遂破燕军。
现代文：吕布经常和他的亲近将领成廉、魏越等人一起冲锋陷阵，最后大胜张燕军队。
English: Lü Bu often charged into battle with his close generals Cheng Lian, Wei Yue and others, and finally defeated Zhang Yan's army.

古文：而求益兵众，将士钞掠，绍患忌之。
现代文：吕布打败张燕后，加紧增加自己部下人马扩大势力，但手下的将士对百姓抢夺掳掠，袁绍也渐渐猜忌他。
English: After Lv Bu defeated Zhang Yan, he intensified his efforts to increase the number of his subordinates and expand their power. However, his soldiers robbed and plundered the people, and Yuan Shao gradually became suspicious of him.

古文：布觉其意，从绍求去。
现代文：吕布察觉到了袁绍的想法，就向袁绍请求离开。
English: Lv Bu sensed Yuan Shao's thoughts and asked Yuan Shao to leave.

古文：绍恐还为己害，遣壮士夜掩杀布，不获。
现代文：他离开之后，袁绍担心他会返回来谋害自己，就派遣精壮士兵晚上趁吕布不备杀掉他，但没有成功。
English: After he left, Yuan Shao, fearing that he would return to plot his own death, sent strong soldiers to take advantage of Lü Bu's unpreparedness to kill him in the evening, but they were unsuccessful.

古文：事露，布走河内，与张杨合。
现代文：袁绍的想法败露后，吕布就跑到河内跟张杨联合。
English: After Yuan Shao's idea was exposed, Lü Bu went to Hanoi to join Zhang Yang.

古文：绍令众追之，皆畏布，莫敢逼近者。
现代文：袁绍派部下前去追击，但士兵们都畏惧吕布，没有人敢逼近他。
English: Yuan Shao sent his subordinates to pursue, but the soldiers were afraid of Lü Bu, and no one dared to approach him.

古文：张邈字孟卓，东平寿张人也。
现代文：张邈，字孟卓，是东平寿张人。
English: Zhang Jun, also known as Meng Zhuo, is a member of the Dongping Shou Zhang people.

古文：少以侠闻，振穷救急，倾家无爱，士多归之。
现代文：年少时就因为侠气为人熟知，他常常赈济扶助穷困的人，倾家荡产也没有什么吝惜的，那些侠士也大多愿意归附他。
English: When he was young, he was well-known for his chivalry. He often gave money to help the poor. He had no regrets about giving away his fortune, and most of those knights were willing to follow him.

古文：太祖、袁绍皆与邈友。
现代文：太祖曹操和袁绍都是张邈的朋友。
English: The great-grandfather Cao Cao and Yuan Shao were both friends of Zhang Ye.

古文：辟公府，以高第拜骑都尉，迁陈留太守。
现代文：后来朝廷征召他入朝为官，他也在考试中取得的优秀的成绩，被授予骑都尉的官职，后来又提升为陈留太守。
English: Later, the imperial court called him to join the court as an official. He also achieved excellent results in the examination, was awarded the official position of cavalry captain, and later promoted to Chen Liu Dazhou.

古文：董卓之乱，太祖与邈首举义兵。
现代文：董卓祸乱京城的时候，太祖曹操和张邈是第一批起兵要讨伐董卓的人。
English: When Dong Zhuo wreaked havoc on Beijing, Cao Cao and Zhang Ye were the first to raise an army to fight Dong Zhuo.

古文：汴水之战，邈遣卫兹将兵随太祖。
现代文：在汴水之战中，张邈派手下将领卫兹率部跟随太祖作战。
English: In the Battle of Surabaya, Zhang Ye sent his subordinates to lead the guards to follow his grandfather in battle.

古文：袁绍既为盟主，有骄矜色，邈正议责绍。
现代文：袁绍成为讨伐董卓联军的盟主后，渐渐有了骄傲自大的样子，张邈经常义正言辞地劝责袁绍。
English: After Yuan Shao became the leader of the anti-Dong Zhuo allied forces, he gradually became proud and arrogant. Zhang Ye often admonished Yuan Shao with righteous words.

古文：绍使太祖杀邈，太祖不听，责绍曰： 孟卓，亲友也，是非当容之。
现代文：袁绍指使曹操杀掉张邈，曹操没有听从，还责备袁绍说： 张邈，是我们的好友，无论对错都应该有所包容。
English: Yuan Shao ordered Cao Cao to kill Zhang Xuan, but Cao Cao did not listen and blamed Yuan Shao, saying, "Zhang Xuan is our good friend, no matter what is right or wrong, we should be tolerant.

古文：今天下未定，不宜自相危也。 邈知之，益德太祖。
现代文：现在天下动乱还没有平定，我们不应该自相残杀。 后来张邈听说了这件事，对曹操更加亲厚敬重。
English: Now that the turmoil in the world has not been settled, we should not kill each other. Later, Zhang Ye heard about this and became more affectionate and respectful towards Cao Cao.

古文：太祖之征陶谦，敕家曰； 我若不还，往依孟卓。 
现代文：曹操率军征讨陶谦的时候，告诉家人说： 如果我不能生还，你们就依靠张邈吧。 
English: When Cao Cao led an army to conquer Tao Qian, he told his family: "If I don't survive, you can rely on Zhang Ye."

古文：后还，见邈，垂泣相对。
现代文：后来曹操得胜回来，与张邈相见，两人相对而泣。
English: Later, Cao Cao came back victorious and met Zhang Ye, and the two of them cried together.

古文：其亲如此。
现代文：他们的关系亲近到这种程度。
English: Their relationship is as close as it gets.

古文：吕布之舍袁绍从张杨也，过邈临别，把手共誓。
现代文：吕布离开袁绍前去投奔张杨的时候，经过张邈的住处，与他拜别，两人还拉着手立下誓言。
English: When Lü Bu left Yuan Shao to go to Zhang Yang, he passed by Zhang Ye's residence and said goodbye to him. The two also held hands and swore an oath.

古文：绍闻之，大恨。
现代文：袁绍听说之后，心中非常怨恨。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Shao felt very resentful.

古文：邈畏太祖终为绍击己也，心不自安。
现代文：张邈也担心曹操终有一天会因为袁绍的关系攻打自己，心里常常不安。
English: Zhang Ye was also worried that Cao Cao would eventually attack him one day because of Yuan Shao's relationship, and he was often uneasy.

古文：兴平元年，太祖复征谦，邈弟超，与太祖将陈宫、从事中郎许汜、王楷共谋叛太祖。
现代文：兴平元年，太祖曹操再次率军攻打陶谦，而张邈的弟弟张超，和太祖的将帅陈宫、从事中郎许汜、王楷共同商议背叛太祖。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, the great-grandfather Cao Cao once again led an army to attack Tao Qian, while Zhang Yao's younger brother Zhang Chao, and the great-grandfather's general Chen Gong, engaged middlemen Xu Yao and Wang Kai jointly discussed betraying the great-grandfather.

古文：宫说邈曰： 今雄杰并起，天下分崩，君以千里之众，当四战之地，抚剑顾眄，亦足以为人豪，而反制于人，不以鄙乎！
现代文：陈宫劝张邈说： 现在天下群雄蜂起，各自为政导致天下分崩离析，将军您占据广大的土地，处于四面受敌的困境，抚剑四顾，也足以称得上英雄豪杰，但现在却被他人压制，这难道不是有损身份吗？
English: Chen Gong advised Zhang Ye, saying, "Nowadays, the world is in a state of uprisings, and the world is falling apart as a result of everyone's actions. General, you occupy a vast land, you are in a predicament of being attacked from all sides, and you look around while stroking your sword. You are worthy of being called a hero, but now you are being suppressed by others. Isn't this a loss of identity?

古文：今州军东征，其处空虚，吕布壮士，善战无前，若权迎之，共牧兖州，观天下形势，俟时事之变通，此亦纵横之一时也。 邈从之。
现代文：现在兖州城的守军都以出征，城内空虚，吕布是壮士，骁勇善战，如果暂且将他迎回来，一同控制兖州，然后观察天下形势变化，伺机而动，这也是能成就一番事业的。 张邈听从了他的建议。
English: Now, the defenders of Zhangzhou City have all left for the war, the city is empty, and Lü Bu is a strong man, brave and good at fighting. If he is temporarily welcomed back, he will control Zhangzhou together, and then observe the changes in the situation around the world and wait for the opportunity to move, which can also achieve a cause. Zhang Ye listened to his suggestion.

古文：太祖初使宫将兵留屯东郡，遂以其众东迎布为兖州牧，据濮阳。
现代文：太祖率军征讨陶谦时，让陈宫带领一部分人马留守东郡，陈宫就率领这队人马往东迎接吕布，并让他做兖州牧，还占据了濮阳。
English: When the great-grandfather led the army to recruit Tao Qian, he let Chen Gong lead a part of the men and horses to stay in Dong County. Chen Gong led this group of men and horses to the east to meet Lv Bu, and let him be the herdsman of Bozhou, and also occupied Fenyang.

古文：郡县皆应，唯鄄城、东阿、范为太祖守。
现代文：周围的郡县都纷纷响应他，只有鄄城、东阿、范县等地依然忠于曹操。
English: The surrounding counties all responded to him one after another, with only Lucheng, Dong'a, Fan County and other places remaining loyal to Cao Cao.

古文：太祖引军还，与布战於濮阳，太祖军不利，相持百馀日。
现代文：曹操率军回来，在濮阳和吕布人马交战，没有取得胜利，两军对峙了一百多天。
English: Cao Cao returned with his army and fought against Lvbu in Fenyang, but failed to achieve victory. The two armies confronted each other for more than a hundred days.

古文：是时岁旱、虫蝗、少谷，百姓相食。
现代文：这时刚好久旱无雨，又出现蝗灾，粮食几乎颗粒无收，甚至出现了人吃人的惨象。
English: At this time, just after a long drought without rain, there was another locust plague, the grain harvest was almost non-existent, and there was even a tragedy of people eating people.

古文：布东屯山阳。二年间，太祖乃尽复收诸城，击破布于钜野。布东奔刘备。
现代文：吕布这时候率军驻扎在山阳，在短短的两年时间里，曹操率军将失去的地盘全都收复了，并在巨野击败吕布，吕布只好往东逃奔向刘备。
English: At this time, Lv Bu led the army stationed in Shanyang. In just two years, Cao Cao and his army regained all the lost territory and defeated Lv Bu in the meadow. Lv Bu had to flee east to Liu Bei.

古文：邈从布，留超将家属屯雍丘。
现代文：张邈跟吕布一起逃跑，留下张超带着家里亲属驻守在雍丘。
English: Zhang Qian fled with Lv Bu, leaving Zhang Chao to stay in Yongqiu with his relatives.

古文：太祖攻围数月，屠之，斩超及其家。
现代文：曹操率军将他们包围了几个月，最后攻破了雍丘并下令屠城，将张超和所有家属都斩杀了。
English: Cao Cao and his army besieged them for several months, and finally broke through Yongqiu and ordered a massacre, killing Zhang Chao and all his family members.

古文：邈诣袁术请救未至，自为其兵所杀。
现代文：张邈到袁术那里请求救援，但还没有走到袁术那里，自己就被手下士兵杀害了。
English: Zhang Xuan went to Yuan Shou to ask for help, but before he could get there, he was killed by soldiers under his command.

古文：备东击术，布袭取下邳，备还归布。
现代文：刘备率军向东征讨袁术，吕布趁他不备攻占了下邳，刘备只好回去归附吕布。
English: Liu Bei led his army to the east to fight Yuan Shu, and Lü Bu took advantage of his absence to capture the lower Yunnan. Liu Bei had to return to the north to join Lü Bu.

古文：布遣备屯小沛。
现代文：吕布派刘备驻守小沛。
English: Lvbu sent Liu Bei to garrison Xiaopei.

古文：布自称徐州刺史。
现代文：吕布自称为徐州刺史。
English: Lvbu describes himself as a historian of Xuzhou.

古文：术遣将纪灵等步骑三万攻备，备求救于布。
现代文：袁术派纪灵等部将率领步兵和骑兵共三万多人攻打刘备，刘备向吕布求援。
English: Yuan Shu sent Ji Ling and other officials to lead a total of more than 30,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Liu Bei. Liu Bei appealed to Lv Bu for help.

古文：布诸将谓布曰： 将军常欲杀备，今可假手於术。 布曰： 不然。
现代文：吕布手下将领对他说： 将军您一直想除掉刘备，现在正好趁这个机会借袁术的手杀掉他。 吕布说： 这样不行。
English: Lü Bu's generals said to him: "General, you have always wanted to get rid of Liu Bei, and now you are taking this opportunity to kill him with the help of Yuan Shu." Lü Bu said: "This is not possible.

古文：术若破备，则北连太山诸将，吾为在术围中，不得不救也。 
现代文：袁术如果打败了刘备，那他就能联合北面太山一带的人马，那我们就会处在袁术的势力包围中，所以现在不能不救他。 
English: If Yuan Shuxu defeats Liu Bei, then he will be able to unite the people and horses in the Taishan area in the north, then we will be surrounded by Yuan Shuxu's forces, so now we must save him.

古文：便严步兵千、骑二百，驰往赴备。
现代文：就整饬了两千步兵和两百骑兵，迅速赶往小沛援救刘备。
English: He rounded up two thousand infantrymen and two hundred cavalrymen and quickly rushed to Xiaopei to rescue Liu Bei.

古文：灵等闻布至，皆敛兵不敢复攻。
现代文：纪灵等人听说吕布率军赶来，都收兵不敢再进攻。
English: Ji Ling and others heard that Lü Bu and his army had arrived, and they all withdrew and dared not attack again.

古文：布於沛西南一里安屯，遣铃下请灵等，灵等亦请布共饮食。
现代文：吕布在距离小沛西南一里的地方安营扎寨，派手下卫士去请纪灵等人，纪灵等人也邀请吕布一起宴饮。
English: Lvbu camped in a place one mile southwest of Xiaopei and sent his guards to invite Ji Ling and others. Ji Ling and others also invited Lvbu to a banquet.

古文：布谓灵等曰： 玄德，布弟也。
现代文：吕布对纪灵说： 刘备，是我的弟弟。
English: Lv Bu said to Ji Ling: Liu Bei is my younger brother.

古文：弟为诸君所困，故来救之。
现代文：现在他被你们率军围困，所以我才赶来救他。
English: Now he is besieged by your army, so I have come to rescue him.

古文：布性不喜合斗，但喜解斗耳。 
现代文：我本性不喜欢与人互相争斗，但喜欢替别人解除纷争。 
English: By nature, I don't like to fight with people, but I like to resolve conflicts for others.

古文：布令门候于营门中举一只戟，布言： 诸君观布射戟小支，一发中者诸君当解去，不中可留决斗。 
现代文：吕布让门侯在军营门口竖起一支戟，并说： 请各位看我用箭射射戟上的小支，如果一发就射中了，那希望各位停止进攻离开这里，如果射不中，那各位就留下与刘备决一死战。 
English: Lü Bu asked the doorkeeper to erect a crossbow at the gate of the military camp, and said: "Please look at me shooting the arrow at the small branch on the crossbow. If I hit it with one shot, then I hope you will stop the attack and leave here. If you don't hit it, then you will stay and prepare for a fight to the death with Liu."

古文：布举弓射戟，正中小支。
现代文：说完，就拉弓向戟射出一箭，正射中了戟上的小支。
English: And when he had finished speaking, he drew his bow and shot an arrow into the beak, and it hit the little branch on the beak.

古文：诸将皆惊，言 将军天威也 ！
现代文：在座的将领都很吃惊，都说： 将军真是天降神威啊！ 
English: The generals present were very surprised and all said, "The general is really a godsend!"

古文：明日复欢会，然后各罢。
现代文：第二天又再次与各位将领举行宴会，然后各自罢兵回去。
English: The next day, they again held a banquet with the generals, and then each of them went home.

古文：术欲结布为援，乃为子索布女，布许之。
现代文：袁术想要联络吕布以为外援，就替自己的儿子求娶吕布的女儿，以结成儿女亲家，吕布答应了。
English: Yuan Shu wanted to contact Lv Bu for foreign aid, so he asked Lv Bu to marry his son to Lv Bu's daughter in order to form a family. Lv Bu agreed.

古文：术遣使韩胤以僣号议告布，并求迎妇。
现代文：袁术派韩胤为使节，将他要登基称帝的事情告诉吕布，同时请求迎接吕布的女儿。
English: Yuan Shou sent Han Yin as an envoy to tell Lü Bu that he wanted to be enthroned as emperor, and at the same time requested to meet Lü Bu's daughter.

古文：沛相陈珪恐术、布成婚，则徐、扬合从，将为国难，於是往说布曰； 曹公奉迎天子，辅赞国政，威灵命世，将征四海，将军宜与协同策谋，图太山之安。
现代文：沛相陈珪担心吕布和袁术结成亲家后关系更密切，那徐州、扬州就会合成一体，那将会成为危害天下的隐患，就前往游说吕布： 曹操将天子迎到许都，辅佐政事，得天受命，威望很高，并率军征讨四方，将军您应该与他一起谋划行动，齐心协力谋取天下安定。
English: Pei Xiang Chen Yao was worried that the relationship between Lv Bu and Yuan Shou would become closer after they became a family, then Xuzhou and Yangzhou would merge into one, which would become a hidden danger to the world, so he went to lobby Lv Bu: Cao Cao welcomed the Son of Heaven to many cities, assisted in political affairs, received orders from Heaven, had a high prestige, and led the army to solicit the four directions. General, you should plan actions with him and work together to seek stability in the world.

古文：今与术结婚，受天下不义之名，必有累卵之危。 
现代文：现在和袁术结为儿女婚姻，就会背负上不义的名声，那对您来说情况就非常不利了。 
English: If you marry Yuan Shuxu now, you will be saddled with an unfair reputation, and the situation will be very unfavorable for you.

古文：布亦怨术初不己受也，女已在涂，追还绝婚，械送韩胤，枭首许市。
现代文：吕布心中也对袁术最开始没有接纳自己而有所埋怨，女儿已经在去往许都的路上，就派人追去将她追回来，并断绝了这门亲事，还抓住韩胤，给他戴上手铐脚镣，送到许都街市上斩首示众。
English: Lv Bu also complained in his heart that Yuan Shuxu did not accept him at the beginning. His daughter was already on her way to Xudu, so he sent someone to chase her back, and broke off the relationship. He also caught Han Yin, handcuffed him, and sent him to Xudu Street Market to be beheaded.

古文：珪欲使子登诣太祖，布不肯遣。
现代文：陈珪想派儿子陈登去曹操那里说和，但吕布没有同意。
English: Chen Yu wanted to send his son Chen Deng to Cao Cao to make peace, but Lü Bu did not agree.

古文：会使者至，拜布左将军。
现代文：恰好曹操派出的使者到达，传达天子的诏令，任命吕布为左将军。
English: Just at that time, an envoy sent by Cao Cao arrived to convey the emperor's edict, appointing Lü Bu as General Zuo.

古文：布大喜，即听登往，并令奉章谢恩。
现代文：吕布非常高兴，立刻允许陈登前往曹操那里，还让他捧着奏章向天子谢恩。
English: Lv Bu was very pleased and immediately allowed Chen Deng to go to Cao Cao, and also let him hold the music to thank the Son of Heaven.

古文：登见太祖，因陈布勇而无计，轻於去就，宜早图之。
现代文：陈登见到曹操，就将吕布有勇无谋、反复无常的情况告诉了曹操，希望曹操早日除掉他。
English: When Chen Deng saw Cao Cao, he told Cao Cao about Lv Bu's reckless and capricious behavior, hoping that Cao Cao would get rid of him as soon as possible.

古文：太祖曰： 布，狼子野心，诚难久养，非卿莫能究其情也。 
现代文：曹操说： 吕布有狼子野心，确实不能让他久留在世上，如果不是你，是不能了解其中具体情况的。 
English: Cao Cao said: Lü Bu has the ambition of a werewolf, and it is true that he cannot be allowed to stay in the world for long. If it were not for you, I would not be able to understand the specific circumstances.

古文：即增珪秩中二千石，拜登广陵太守。
现代文：就下令将陈珪年俸禄提到二千石，并任命陈登为广陵太守。
English: He ordered that Chen Xi's annual salary be increased to 2,000 koku, and appointed Chen Deng as the governor of Guangling.

古文：临别，太祖执登手曰： 东方之事，便以相付。 
现代文：临别之时，曹操拉着陈登的手说： 吕布那边的事，就全托付给你了。 
English: At the time of parting, Cao Cao took Chen Deng's hand and said, "Things on the other side of the Lvbu River are entirely entrusted to you.

古文：令登阴合部众以为内应。
现代文：让陈登暗地里联络人马作为自己的内应。
English: Let Chen Deng secretly contact Ma as his inside man.

古文：始，布因登求徐州牧，登还，布怒，拔戟斫几曰： 卿父劝吾协同曹公，绝婚公路；今吾所求无一获，而卿父子并显重，为卿所卖耳！
现代文：刚开始的时候，吕布想通过陈登谋求徐州刺史的职位，但没能成功，陈登回来的时候，吕布非常生气拔出手戟砍上桌子，说： 你父亲劝我联合曹操共同谋事，我就断绝了袁术的儿女亲事；现在你去曹操那里，我想要的东西一点都没有得到，你们父子俩却地位更加显赫，我是被你们出卖了！
English: At the beginning, Lü Bu wanted to seek the post of Xuzhou assassin through Chen Deng, but was not successful. When Chen Deng returned, Lü Bu was very angry, pulled out his handkerchief and slashed it on the table, saying: Your father persuaded me to work together with Cao Cao, so I cut off Yuan Shu's children's relationship; now you go to Cao Cao, I have not got what I want at all, but your father and son have a more prominent position, I have been betrayed by you!

古文：卿为吾言，其说云何？ 
现代文：你告诉我，你在曹操面前说了些什么？ 
English: Tell me, what did you say in front of Cao Cao?

古文：登不为动容，徐喻之曰； 登见曹公言： 待将军譬如养虎，当饱其肉，不饱则将噬人。 
现代文：陈登面不改色，从容回答到： 我见到曹操之后说 对待将军您就好像养老虎，应该让它吃饱，如果吃不饱，那就会吃人了。 
English: Chen Deng did not change his expression, and calmly replied: After I saw Cao Cao, I said that you treated the general like a retired tiger. You should let it eat its fill. If it does not get enough to eat, it will eat people.

古文：公曰： 不如卿言也。
现代文：曹操说： 不是像你说的那样。
English: Cao Cao said, "It's not like what you said.

古文：譬如养鹰，饥则为用，饱则扬去。 
现代文：应该是像养老鹰，他饿的时候能为我所用，要是吃饱了就会自己飞走。 
English: It should be like an elderly eagle. When it is hungry, it can be of use to me. If it is full, it will fly away on its own.

古文：其言如此。 
现代文：我们就是谈论了这些。 
English: That's what we talked about.

古文：布意乃解。
现代文：吕布的怒气才消解了。
English: Only then did Lü Bu's anger subside.

古文：术怒，与韩暹、杨奉等连势，遣大将张勋攻布。
现代文：袁术因为被吕布取消亲事的事非常生气，就和韩暹、杨奉等人联合，派出大将张勋率军攻打吕布。
English: Yuan Shuxu was very angry because his marriage had been annulled by Lü Bu, so he allied with Han Siem, Yang Bong and others and sent the army led by General Zhang Xun to attack Lü Bu.

古文：布谓珪曰： 今致术军，卿之由也，为之奈何？ 
现代文：吕布对陈珪说： 现在把袁术的大军招来，都是因为你，你说该怎么办？ 
English: Lv Bu said to Chen Yao: Now you have brought Yuan Shu's large army here, all because of you. What should you do?

古文：珪曰： 暹、奉与术，卒合之军耳，策谋不素定，不能相维持，子登策之，比之连鸡，势不俱栖，可解离也。 
现代文：陈珪说： 韩暹、杨奉和袁术，不过是仓促之间的联合，各种计划不是事先确定好的，不会能很好地维持合作关系，就好像鸡生性不能群栖一样，他们的关系也不牢固，让我的儿子陈登去离间他们，就可以离散他么。 
English: Chen Yao said: Han Siem, Yang Bong and Yuan Shucun are nothing but a hasty union between them. Various plans are not predetermined and will not be able to maintain a good cooperative relationship. Just as chickens cannot live in groups, their relationship is not strong. Let my son Chen Deng separate them, can he be separated?

古文：布用珪策，遣人说暹、奉，使与己并力共击术军，军资所有，悉许暹、奉。
现代文：吕布采纳了陈珪的计策，派人前去游说韩暹、杨奉，让他们和自己联合攻打袁术，得到的所有物资，都归韩暹、杨奉所有。
English: Lv Bu adopted Chen Yao's strategy and sent people to persuade Han Siem and Yang Bong to jointly attack Yuan Shu with him. All the materials obtained were owned by Han Siem and Yang Bong.

古文：於是暹、奉从之，勋大破败。
现代文：于是韩暹、杨奉就选择和吕布合作，最后大胜张勋。
English: As a result, Han Siem and Yang Bong chose to cooperate with Lv Bu, and Zhang Xun won in the end.

古文：建安三年，布复叛为术，遣高顺攻刘备於沛，破之。
现代文：建安三年，吕布再次反叛朝廷依附袁术，并派高顺率军到小沛攻打刘备，大胜而回。
English: In the third year of Jian'an, Lv Bu again rebelled against the imperial court to adhere to Yuan Shu, and sent Gao Shun and his army to attack Liu Bei in Xiaopei, and returned with a great victory.

古文：太祖遣夏侯惇救备，为顺所败。
现代文：曹操派夏侯惇率部援救刘备，又被高顺打败。
English: Cao Cao sent Xia Houyi and his troops to rescue Liu Bei, but they were defeated by Gao Shun.

古文：太祖自征布，至其城下，遗布书，为陈祸福。
现代文：曹操亲自率军征讨吕布，大军开到下邳城，派人给吕布送上书信，陈述福祸得失。
English: Cao Cao personally led an army to conquer Lvbu. The army drove to the city of Xiamen, and sent a letter to Lvbu, stating the good fortune and misfortune.

古文：布欲降，陈宫等自以负罪深，沮其计。
现代文：吕布看完信后想要投降，陈宫等人认为自己罪责深重，劝吕布打消了这个念头。
English: After reading the letter, Lü Bu wanted to surrender. Chen Gong and others thought that they were guilty and advised Lü Bu to give up the idea.

古文：布遣人求救于术，自将千馀骑出战，败走，还保城，不敢出。
现代文：吕布只好派人到袁术那里求救，自己就率领一千多骑兵出城迎战，但大败，只好退回城中驻守，不敢再出去迎战。
English: Lü Bu had no choice but to send someone to Yuan Shu for help, and he himself led more than a thousand cavalry out of the city to meet the battle, but he was defeated and had to return to the city to stay, not daring to go out to meet the battle again.

古文：术亦不能救。
现代文：袁术也无法援救他。
English: Yuan Shu couldn't save him either.

古文：布虽骁猛，然无谋而多猜忌，不能制御其党，但信诸将。
现代文：吕布虽然骁勇善战，但没有智谋还经常猜忌，对部下不能控制，对于将领也都言听计从。
English: Although Lv Bu was brave and good at fighting, he was always suspicious without any wisdom or strategy. He could not control his subordinates, and he listened to his generals.

古文：诸将各异意自疑，故每战多败。
现代文：但他手下的将领也心思各异，互相猜疑，所以与人交战的时候常常大败而回。
English: But the generals under his command were also divided and suspicious of each other, so when they fought with others, they were often defeated.

古文：太祖堑围之三月，上下离心，其将侯成、宋宪、魏续缚陈宫，将其众降。
现代文：曹操下令在下邳城周围挖掘壕沟，将下邳包围了三个月，城中将士也不团结，吕布手下将领侯成、宋宪、魏续捆着陈宫，率手下队伍向曹操投降。
English: Cao Cao ordered a trench to be dug around the city of Xiamen, and the city of Xiamen was besieged for three months. The generals in the city were not united, and Lü Bu's subordinates, the generals Houcheng, Song Xian, and Wei Cui, tied up Chen Gong and led their troops to surrender to Cao Cao.

古文：布与其麾下登白门楼，兵围急，乃下降。
现代文：吕布和麾下将士登上白门楼，看到曹操的军队包围得越来越近，就决定下城投降。
English: Lü Bu and his subordinate officers boarded the White Gate Tower, saw Cao Cao's army encircled closer and closer, and decided to leave the city and surrender.

古文：遂生缚布，布曰： 缚太急，小缓之。 
现代文：曹操就生擒了吕布，捆绑的时候，吕布说： 绑得太紧了，稍微松一点吧。 
English: Cao Cao handcuffed Lü Bu, and as he was tying him up, Lü Bu said, "You've tied him up too tightly, loosen him up a bit."

古文：太祖曰： 缚虎不得不急也。 
现代文：曹操说： 捆绑老虎是不能不紧的。 
English: Cao Cao said, "You can't tie a tiger too tightly.

古文：布请曰： 明公所患不过於布，今已服矣，天下不足忧。
现代文：吕布又请求说： 您所担心的不过是我吕布，现在我已经向你臣服了，天下已经没有值得你担心的事了。
English: Lu Bu also pleaded, "What you are worried about is just me, Lu Bu. Now that I have submitted to you, there is nothing in the world worth worrying about."

古文：明公将步，令布将骑，则天下不足定也。 
现代文：如果你统率步兵，我统率骑兵，那天下就没有什么不能平定的了。 
English: If you command the infantry and I command the cavalry, then there will be nothing that cannot be pacified.

古文：太祖有疑色。
现代文：曹操犹疑不定。
English: Cao Cao hesitated.

古文：刘备进曰： 明公不见布之事丁建阳及董太师乎！ 太祖颔之。
现代文：刘备进言说： 明公您难道没有看到吕布侍奉丁建阳和董太师时发生的事吗？ 
English: Liu Bei said, "My lord, didn't you see what happened when Lü Bu served Ding Jianyang and Dong Taishi?

古文：布因指备曰： 是儿最叵信者。 
现代文：曹操才点头认可。吕布就指责刘备说： 你这人才是最不可信的！ 
English: Cao Cao only nodded his approval. Lü Bu then accused Liu Bei, saying: You are the most untrustworthy person!

古文：於是缢杀布。布与宫、顺等皆枭首送许，然后葬之。
现代文：然后曹操就将吕布绞死了，并把吕布、陈宫、高顺的首级都砍下来送到许都，然后将他们的尸体下葬。
English: Then Cao Cao hanged Lv Bu, and cut off the heads of Lv Bu, Chen Gong, and Gao Shun and sent them to Xu Du, and then buried their bodies.

古文：太祖之禽宫也，问宫欲活老母及女不？
现代文：曹操生擒陈宫的时候，问陈宫想不想要自己的老母亲和女儿活着。
English: When Cao Cao visited Chen Gong when he was still alive, he asked Chen Gong if he wanted his old mother and daughter to live.

古文：宫对曰： 宫闻孝治天下者不绝人之亲，仁施四海者不乏人之祀，老母在公，不在宫也。 
现代文：陈宫回答说： 我听说以孝道治理天下的人不会杀掉别人的亲人，仁义广施天下的人不会断绝别人的宗庙延续，我死之后我的母亲能否活着是由你决定，不是我。 
English: Chen Gong replied: I have heard that those who govern the world with filial piety will not kill other people's relatives, and those who are benevolent and generous will not cut off the continuation of other people's ancestral temples. Whether my mother can live after my death is up to you to decide, not me.

古文：太祖召养其母终其身，嫁其女。
现代文：曹操就将陈宫的家人接过来，并奉养他母亲直到她去世，并给陈宫的女儿许配了人家。
English: Cao Cao took over Chen Gong's family and raised his mother until her death, and married off Chen Gong's daughter.

古文：陈登者，字元龙，在广陵有威名。
现代文：陈登，字元龙，在广陵地区很有威望。
English: Chen Deng, also known as Yuanlong, is highly respected in the Guangling area.

古文：又掎角吕布有功，加伏波将军，年三十九卒。
现代文：又因为铲除吕布有功，被加封为伏波将军，三十九岁的时候就去世了。
English: He was also awarded the title of General Fubo for his contribution to the eradication of Lvbu. He died at the age of 39.

古文：后许汜与刘备并在荆州牧刘表坐，表与备共论天下人，汜曰： 陈元龙湖海之士，豪气不除。 
现代文：后来许汜和刘备一起在荆州牧刘表府上做客，席上刘表和刘备一起评论天下英雄，许汜说： 陈元龙本来是江湖中人，所以身上的豪爽之气至今也没有消散。 
English: Later, Xu Wei and Liu Bei were guests together at the Liu Bei Palace in Muxiu, Jingzhou. At the table, Liu Wei and Liu Bei commented on the world's heroes together. Xu Wei said: Chen Yuanlong was originally a man of the people, so the heroic spirit in him has not dissipated so far.

古文：备谓表曰： 许君论是非？ 
现代文：刘备对刘表说： 许汜的说法对不对？ 
English: Liu Bei said to Liu Biao: Xu Yao's argument is right?

古文：表曰： 欲言非，此君为善士，不宜虚言；欲言是，元龙名重天下。 
现代文：刘表说： 如果说不对，许汜是位好人，向来不会随意评论他人；如果说对，陈元龙的确名扬天下。 
English: Liu table said: If it is not true, Xu Yao is a good person and will never comment on others at will; if it is true, Chen Yuanlong is indeed famous all over the world.

古文：备问汜： 君言豪，宁有事邪？ 
现代文：刘备又问许汜说： 您说陈元龙豪爽，有事情可以证明吗？ 
English: Liu Bei also asked Xu Jun and said: You said that Chen Yuanlong was heroic, is there anything you can prove?

古文：汜曰： 昔遭乱过下邳，见元龙。
现代文：许汜说： 我曾经遇上祸乱经过下邳，去见元龙。
English: Xu Yao said: I once encountered a calamity and went through the lower jaw to see Yuan Long.

古文：元龙无客主之意，久不相与语，自上大床卧，使客卧下床。 
现代文：元龙对待我没有区分主客的意思，很久没有跟我说一句话，自己径直到大床上睡觉，把下床留给我。 
English: Yuanlong treated me as if there was no distinction between host and guest. He didn't say a word to me for a long time. He went to sleep in the big bed and left the rest of the bed to me.

古文：备曰： 君有国士之名，今天下大乱，帝主失所，望君忧国忘家，有救世之意，而君求田问舍，言无可采，是元龙所讳也，何缘当与君语？
现代文：刘备说： 您有国士的名声，现在天下大乱，天子都颠沛流离居无定所，希望您能为国家大事忧虑，不应过多地考虑自身，才能匡扶天下，但您却求田问舍，言语中也没有什么深度，这是元龙所讨厌的，怎么还会有话和你说呢？
English: Liu Bei said, "You have the reputation of a statesman. Now the world is in turmoil, and all the sons of heaven are scattered and wandering without a fixed abode. I hope that you can worry about national affairs, and should not think too much about yourself, so that you can help the world. However, you ask for help, and there is no depth in your speech. This is what Yuan Long hates. How can there be anything to say to you?

古文：如小人，欲卧百尺楼上，卧君於地，何但上下床之间邪？ 
现代文：如果是我，我还希望我睡在百尺的高楼，让你睡在地下，哪里只有上下床的距离呢？ 
English: If it were me, would I still want to sleep in a hundred-foot high building, let you sleep in the basement, where there is only the distance between the upper and lower beds?

古文：表大笑。
现代文：刘表听了这番话，大笑。
English: Liu Biao laughed loudly when he heard this.

古文：备因言曰： 若元龙文武胆志，当求之於古耳，造次难得比也。 
现代文：刘备就继续说： 像元龙这样有勇有谋，文韬武略的人，大概只能在古代贤人中寻找，现在的人很难和他相比了。 
English: Liu Bei went on to say: A man as courageous and resourceful as Yuan Long could only be found among the sages of ancient times, and it is difficult to compare him with people today.

古文：臧洪字子源，广陵射阳人也。
现代文：臧洪，字子源，是广陵射阳人。
English: Yan Hong, also known as Ziyuan, is a Guangling Yang person.

古文：父旻，历匈奴中郎将、中山、太原太守，所在有名。
现代文：父亲臧旻，曾担任过匈奴中郎将和中山、太原太守，在任职的地区都很有声望。
English: His father,, once served as the Xiongnu general and the governor of Zhongshan and Taiyuan, and was very popular in the regions where he served.

古文：洪体貌魁梧，有异於人，举孝廉为郎。
现代文：臧洪身材魁梧，和常人不同，曾被推举为孝廉，当了郎官。
English: Yan Hong is a big man, different from ordinary people. He was once elected as a filial son and became a vassal.

古文：时选三署郎以补县长；琅邪赵昱为莒长，东莱刘繇下邑长，东海王朗菑丘长，洪即丘长。
现代文：当时正好在五官署、左署和右署中选拔郎官来补任县长，琅邪人赵昱当了莒县县长，东莱人刘繇当下邑县县长，东海人王朗成为了菑丘县县长，而臧洪成为了即丘县县长。
English: At that time, it was just right to select a successor from among the five government bureaus, the left and right bureaus to fill the post of county governor. Zhao Hao, an evil person, became the county governor of Handan County, Liu Hao, a Donglai person, became the county governor of Zhengyi County, Wang Lang, a Donghai person, became the county governor of Handan County, and Hao Hong became the county governor of Handan County.

古文：灵帝末，弃官还家，太守张超请洪为功曹。
现代文：灵帝末年，臧洪辞官回家，太守张超延请他来担任功曹。
English: At the end of Lingdi's life, Yan Hong retired and returned home. Zhang Chao Yan, the Tai Shou, invited him to serve as gong cao.

古文：董卓杀帝，图危社稷，洪说超曰： 明府历世受恩，兄弟并据大郡，今王室将危，贼臣未枭，此诚天下义烈报恩效命之秋也。
现代文：董卓杀了少帝，想要扰乱天下谋取帝位，臧洪劝说张超： 您府上历代都深受皇恩，兄弟几个都担任大郡的掌管，现在王室衰微，乱臣贼子还没有被剿灭，这正是天下义士豪杰报效皇恩的时候。
English: Dong Zhuo killed the young emperor, wanting to disrupt the world and seek the imperial throne, and instigated Hong Yu to persuade Zhang Chao: Your dynasty has been deeply blessed by the imperial grace, several brothers have been in charge of large counties, now the royal family is fading, and the ruffian thieves have not yet been annihilated, this is exactly the time for the world's heroes to repay the imperial grace.

古文：今郡境尚全，吏民殷富，若动枹鼓，可得二万人，以此诛除国贼，为天下倡先，义之大者也。 
现代文：现在您所在的郡还能保全自身不受战乱之苦，从官吏到百姓都殷实富足，如果您敲响战鼓，立刻就会有两万义士前来响应。您依靠这支部队铲除乱臣贼子，为天下人做出表率，这就是大义了。 
English: At present, your county can still protect itself from the sufferings of war. From the officials to the people, everyone is rich and affluent. If you sound the war drum, there will immediately be twenty thousand righteous people to respond. You can rely on this army to eradicate the traitors and set an example for the world. This is great righteousness.

古文：超然其言，与洪西至陈留，见兄邈计事。
现代文：张超认为他的话很有道理，就和臧洪一起往西去陈留见兄长张邈，和他一同谋划起兵事宜。
English: Zhang Chao thought his words were very reasonable, so he went to the west to stay with Zhang Hong to see his brother Zhang Ye, and together they planned to raise an army.

古文：邈亦素有心，会于酸枣，邈谓超曰： 闻弟为郡守，政教威恩，不由己出，动任臧洪，洪者何人？ 
现代文：张邈一直以来也有这样的想法，于是两支部队在酸枣会合，张邈对张超说： 听说你当了太守，政务教化以及对百姓恩威并施，都不是自己做主，而是因为任用臧洪，这个人是谁？ 
English: Zhang Xuan had always had such an idea, so the two forces met at the sour jujube. Zhang Xuan said to Zhang Chao: I heard that you became the grand marshal, and you did not make decisions on your own, but because of the appointment of Zhai Hong. Who is this person?

古文：超曰： 洪才略智数优超，超甚爱之，海内奇士也。 
现代文：张超回答说： 臧洪才智过人，我很欣赏他，他真是个天下的奇人。 
English: Zhang Chao replied, "Hui Hong is a brilliant man. I admire him very much. He is truly an amazing person.

古文：邈即引见洪，与语大异之。
现代文：张邈就让张超引见了臧洪并和他交谈，也深感惊讶。
English: Zhang Yao let Zhang Chao introduce him to Zhai Hong and talk to him, and was also deeply surprised.

古文：致之于刘兖州公山、孔豫州公绪，皆与洪亲善。
现代文：于是又将他介绍给兖州刺史刘岱，豫州刺史孔伷，他们和臧洪的关系也非常好。
English: So he introduced him to Zhangzhou chief Liu Wei and Yuzhou chief Kong Wei. Their relationship with Zhai Hong is also very good.

古文：乃设坛场，方共盟誓。
现代文：于是设立了坛场，准备在那里定下誓约，永为兄弟。
English: So they set up an altar and prepared to make a covenant there, to be brothers forever.

古文：诸州郡更相让，莫敢当，咸共推洪。
现代文：各州郡的长官互相推让，谁也不愿意第一个上坛，他们一致推举了臧洪。
English: The governors of the various states and counties pushed each other to make concessions. No one wanted to be the first to go to the altar. They unanimously nominated Zhai Hong.

古文：洪乃升坛操槃歃血而盟曰： 汉室不幸，皇纲失统，贼臣董卓乘衅纵害，祸加至尊，虐流百姓，大惧沦丧社稷，翦覆四海。
现代文：臧洪就登上坛场，拿着承盘，歃血发誓说: 汉室不幸，导致现在朝政混乱，贼子董卓乘机挑起事端危害社稷，祸及天子，百姓流离失所，大有颠覆四海，侵吞天下的野心。
English: Zhai Hong ascended the altar, took the plate, and swore bloodily, saying: "The misfortune of the Han Dynasty has led to the current chaos in the imperial government. The thief Dong Zhuo took the opportunity to stir up trouble, endangering the society, harming the emperor, displacing the people, and having the ambition to subvert the four seas and devour the world."

古文：兖州刺史岱、豫州刺史伷、陈留太守邈、东郡太守瑁、广陵太守超等，纠合义兵，并赴国难。
现代文：兖州刺史刘岱、豫州刺史孔伷、陈留太守张邈、东郡太守桥瑁、广陵太守张超等人联合人马，共同面对国家危难。
English: Zhangzhou Grand Historian Liu Qi, Yuzhou Grand Historian Kong Qi, Chenliu Grand Marshal Zhang Qi, Dongguan Grand Marshal Qiao Qi, Guangling Grand Marshal Zhang Chao and others joined hands to face the national crisis.

古文：凡我同盟，齐心戮力，以致臣节，殒首丧元，必无二志。
现代文：凡是今天一起发誓的人，都应同心协力，做出身为臣子的贡献，就算身死魂丧，也绝对不怀二心。
English: All those who swear together today should make a concerted effort to make a contribution as a vassal, even if they die, they will never have second thoughts.

古文：有渝此盟，俾坠其命，无克遗育。
现代文：如果有谁违背今日的誓言，不但他自身性命难保，还会祸及他的子孙后代。
English: If anyone violates today's oath, not only will his own life be in danger, but also the lives of his descendants.

古文：皇天后土，祖宗明灵，实皆鉴之！ 
现代文：天地为证，祖宗神明在上，都会仔细地看着我们！ 
English: As evidenced by heaven and earth, the ancestors of the gods above will watch us carefully!

古文：洪辞气慷慨，涕泣横下，闻其言者，虽卒伍厮养，莫不激扬，人思致节。
现代文：臧洪的话慷慨激昂，声泪俱下，在场听到他誓词的人，就算是地位低下的士兵仆役，也没有不情绪激昂的，每个人都想要做一点贡献。
English: Hao Hong's words were impassioned and tearful, and those who were present to hear his oath, even the low-ranking soldiers' servants, were not without emotion, everyone wanted to make a little contribution.

古文：顷之，诸军莫適先进，而食尽众散。
现代文：然而不久之后，各路人马还没有决定好谁先出战，就因为粮食吃尽而各自散去了。
English: However, soon after, all the people had not yet decided who would go to war first, and they dispersed because they had run out of food.

古文：超遣洪诣大司马刘虞谋，值公孙瓒之难，至河间，遇幽、冀二州交兵，使命不达。
现代文：张超派臧洪到大司马刘虞那里商量对策，但又遇上公孙瓒将刘虞杀了，到了河间地区，又遇上幽、冀二州交战，他就没能完成使命。
English: Zhang Chao sent Yan Hong to discuss countermeasures with the chief secretary Ma Liu Yu, but when he met Gongsun Yao, he killed Liu Yu, and when he came to the Hema area, he also met Yu and Jie two states at war, he could not complete his mission.

古文：而袁绍见洪，又奇重之，与结分合好。
现代文：袁绍见到臧洪，认为他有奇才，非常器重他，不管在不在一起，两人都是好友。
English: When Yuan Shao met Yu Hong, he thought he was a genius and held him in high esteem. Whether they were together or not, the two of them were good friends.

古文：会青州刺史焦和卒，绍使洪领青州以抚其众。
现代文：刚好遇上青州刺史焦和去世，袁绍就让臧洪先主管青州事务以安抚当地百姓。
English: Just as the Qingzhou assassin Jiao He passed away, Yuan Shao let Gong Hong take charge of Qingzhou affairs to appease the local people.

古文：洪在州二年，群盗奔走。
现代文：臧洪在青州主事两年，原来州里的盗匪全都逃走。
English: Yan Hong has been in charge in Qingzhou for two years. Originally, all the robbers in Qingzhou had fled.

古文：绍叹其能，徙为东郡太守，治东武阳。
现代文：袁绍感叹他的才能，就提升他为东郡太守，治理东武阳。
English: Yuan Shao lamented his talent and promoted him to be the governor of Dong County, governing Dongwuyang.

古文：太祖围张超于雍丘，超言： 唯恃臧洪，当来救吾。 
现代文：曹操率军将张超围困在雍丘，张超说： 现在只能依靠臧洪了，他应该会来救我。 
English: Cao Cao led his army to besiege Zhang Chao in Yongqiu. Zhang Chao said, "Now I can only rely on Yao Hong. He should come to my rescue."

古文：众人以为袁、曹方睦，而洪为绍所表用，必不败好招祸，远来赴此。
现代文：但大家都认为袁绍和曹操的关系有所缓和，但臧洪已经很明显地被袁绍重用，他一定不会毁掉目前的大好前程而自招祸事，从那么远的地方赶来援救张超。
English: However, everyone thought that the relationship between Yuan Shao and Cao Cao had eased, but Yan Hong had obviously been used by Yuan Shao, and he would certainly not ruin the current good prospects and bring disaster on himself by coming from so far away to rescue Zhang Chao.

古文：超曰： 子源，天下义士，终不背本者，但恐见禁制，不相及逮耳。 
现代文：张超说： 臧洪，是天下有名的义士，他一定不会背弃旧主，只是担心他可能会被袁绍阻止，赶不及前来相救。 
English: Zhang Chao said: Gong Hong is a famous righteous man in the world, he will not betray the old master, but he is worried that he may be stopped by Yuan Shao and will not be able to come to the rescue.

古文：洪闻之，果徒跣号泣，并勒所领兵，又从绍请兵马，求欲救超，而绍终不听许。
现代文：臧洪听说了这件事，果然赤着脚嚎啕大哭，并召集他所率领的队伍，又向袁绍请求增兵，想要援救张超，但袁绍最终也没有答应他的请求。
English: Hearing of this, Yan Hong really got up, weeping and wailing with his bare feet, and called together the troops he was leading. He also asked Yuan Shao for more troops to rescue Zhang Chao, but Yuan Shao ultimately did not agree to his request.

古文：超遂族灭。
现代文：张超最后被灭族了。
English: Zhang Chao was finally exterminated.

古文：洪由是怨绍，绝不与通。
现代文：臧洪因为此事对袁绍心存怨恨，断绝的和他的一切来往。
English: Because of this, Yan Hong harbored a grudge against Yuan Shao and cut off all contacts with him.

古文：绍兴兵围之，历年不下。
现代文：袁绍就发兵去围攻他，但好几年都没有取得胜利。
English: Yuan Shao sent troops to besiege him, but they did not achieve victory for several years.

古文：绍令洪邑人陈琳书与洪，喻以祸福，责以恩义。
现代文：袁绍就让手下人，臧洪的同乡陈琳给臧洪写信，信中将祸福得失都讲的很清楚，又用恩情道义来指责他。
English: Yuan Shao had one of his subordinates, Chen Lin, a fellow villager of Sui Hong, write a letter to Sui Hong. In the letter, he made it very clear that it was all a matter of good or bad, and accused him of being ungrateful.

古文：洪答曰：
现代文：臧洪回信说：
English: Zhai Hong wrote back:

古文：隔阔相思，发于寤寐。
现代文： 我们阔别已久，对你的思念无论是睡梦中还是醒着的时候都很强烈。
English: We've been separated for a long time, and I miss you very much, whether I'm asleep or awake.

古文：幸相去步武之间耳，而以趣舍异规，不得相见，其为怆悢，可为心哉！
现代文：也很庆幸我们之间的距离很短，但因为我们选择的标准不同，遵守的道义不同，所以未能相见，我心中感到十分凄凉悲怆！
English: I am also very grateful that the distance between us is very short, but because the standards we choose are different and the morals we observe are different, we could not see each other. I feel very desolate and sad in my heart!

古文：前日不遗，比辱雅贶，述叙祸福，公私切至。
现代文：前段时间，承蒙你没有忘记我，给我写了两封书信，信中你为我陈说利害得失，于公于私都非常恳切。
English: Some time ago, thanks to you for not forgetting me, you wrote me two letters, in which you explained the pros and cons for me, both publicly and privately, very earnestly.

古文：所以不即奉答者，既学薄才钝，不足塞诘；亦以吾子携负侧室，息肩主人，家在东州，仆为仇敌。
现代文：我之所以没有立即回复你，不仅因为我才疏学浅，性情愚钝，没有办法立即回复你的诘责；也因为你带着小妾在袁绍那里逍遥享受，可你的家人还在城里，而我又是袁绍的敌人。
English: The reason why I didn't reply to you immediately is not only because I'm a slow learner and have a dull temperament, so I can't reply to your reproach immediately; it's also because you and your concubine are enjoying themselves at Yuan Shao's place, but your family is still in the city, and I'm Yuan Shao's enemy.

古文：以是事人，虽披中情，堕肝胆，犹身疏有罪，言甘见怪，方首尾不救，何能恤人？
现代文：你在这样的处境中还为袁绍办事，虽然忠心耿耿，披肝沥胆，却依然是被疏远的罪人，言语中还要受袁绍的责难，你自己的事情都自顾不暇，又怎么能怜悯别人呢？
English: In such a situation, you also work for Yuan Shao. Although you are loyal and diligent, you are still an alienated sinner, and you still have to be reproached by Yuan Shao in your words. You are too busy with your own affairs, so how can you pity others?

古文：且以子之才，穷该典籍，岂将闇于大道，不达余趣哉！
现代文：况且以你非凡的才能，博览群书的学问，又怎么会在道义之事上糊涂，不了解我的志向呢？
English: Moreover, with your extraordinary talent and extensive knowledge of books, how can you be confused in moral matters and not understand my aspirations?

古文：然犹复云云者，仆以是知足下之言，信不由衷，将以救祸也。
现代文：但你在信中还是翻来覆去地说，我就知道你的这些话不是出自你的本心，只是想借此解除自己的祸事。
English: But you still said it over and over again in your letter, so I knew that these words of yours did not come from your true heart, but that you just wanted to use this to get rid of your misfortune.

古文：必欲算计长短，辩谘是非，是非之论，言满天下，陈之更不明，不言无所损。
现代文：假如一定要计较得失对错的话，那么关于是非的标准，天下间各有各的说法，要说出来是说不清楚的，不说也没有什么损失。
English: If we must weigh the pros and cons of right and wrong, then the standard of right and wrong, there are various sayings in the world, it is not clear to say, and there is no loss without saying.

古文：又言伤告绝之义，非吾所忍行也，是以捐弃纸笔，一无所答。
现代文：况且，要是说出来，就会使我二人绝交，这是我不忍心的，所以才丢开纸笔，什么都不回复。
English: Besides, if I said it, it would mean the end of our friendship, which I couldn't bear, so I threw away my pen and paper and didn't reply to anything.

古文：亦冀遥忖其心，知其计定，不复渝变也。
现代文：也希望你能谅解我的心情，知道我已经打定主意，不会再改变了。
English: I also hope that you can understand my mood and know that I have made up my mind and will not change it again.

古文：重获来命，援引古今，纷纭六纸，虽欲不言，焉得已哉！
现代文：但又一次收到你的来信，援引古今事例，洋洋洒洒写了六页纸，虽然本来没有打算和你说，看来是不可能了。 
English: But once again, I received a letter from you, quoting ancient and modern cases, and wrote a six-page paper, although I did not intend to tell you, it seems impossible.

古文：仆小人也，本因行役，寇窃大州，恩深分厚，宁乐今日自还接刃！
现代文： 我只是一个低微的人，原本为袁绍效劳，有幸能主管大州事务，袁绍对于我实在是恩情深厚，我现在怎么忍心反过来和他兵戎相见呢？
English: I am just a lowly person. Originally, I worked for Yuan Shao and was fortunate to be in charge of the affairs of Dazhou. Yuan Shao was really deeply grateful to me. How can I bear to meet him face to face now?

古文：每登城勒兵，望主人之旗鼓，感故友之周旋，抚弦搦矢，不觉流涕之覆面也。
现代文：所以每次登上城楼指挥军队，遥望主人袁绍的旗鼓，感念故友的从中周旋，抚弦握箭，不知不觉间就已泪流满面。
English: Therefore, every time he went up to the tower to command the army, he looked at the master Yuan Shao's banner and drum from a distance, thought about his old friend, circled around from the middle, stroked the strings and held the arrows, and before he knew it, he was in tears.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：自以辅佐主人，无以为悔。
现代文：我自认为辅佐主人，没有什么可后悔的。
English: I consider myself to have assisted my master, and I have nothing to regret.

古文：主人相接，过绝等伦。
现代文：主人对我的恩宠超出了所有人。
English: My master's kindness to me surpasses all others.

古文：当受任之初，自谓究竟大事，共尊王室。
现代文：我在接受使命主持会盟的时候，发誓一定要结束现在天下动乱的局面，尊奉王室。
English: When I accepted the mission to preside over the alliance, I vowed to end the current turmoil in the world and honor the royal family.

古文：岂悟天子不悦，本州见侵，郡将遘牖里之厄。
现代文：谁料天子不悦，张超所在的州郡被曹操占据，郡中将领就像周文王被拘囚牖里一样困厄。
English: Who would have thought that heaven would not be pleased. The prefecture where Zhang Chao was located was occupied by Cao Cao, and the generals in the prefecture were in the same predicament as King Zhou Wen was in the dungeon.

古文：陈留克创兵之谋，谋计栖迟，丧忠孝之名，杖策携背，亏交友之分。
现代文：张超败走陈留，想要我发兵援救攻打曹军。如果我的计划实行得晚，那就会失掉忠孝的名声，如果拄着拐杖带上财物离开，就会损害了朋友间的道义。
English: Zhang Chao defeated Chen Rui and wanted me to send troops to rescue and attack Cao's army. If my plan was implemented late, it would lose the reputation of loyalty and filial piety, and if I left on crutches with my belongings, it would damage the morality between friends.

古文：揆此二者，与其不得已，丧忠孝之名与亏交友之道，轻重殊涂，亲疏异画，故便收泪告绝。
现代文：比较这两种选择，实在是不得已，丧失忠孝的名声和损害朋友间的道义，程度轻重不同，亲疏有别，所以只好含泪宣布绝交。
English: Comparing these two options, it is really a last resort. The loss of the reputation of loyalty and filial piety and the damage to the morality between friends are different in degree, and there is a difference in closeness, so I had to tearfully announce the severance of friendship.

古文：若使主人少垂故人，住者侧席，去者克己，不汲汲于离友，信刑戮以自辅，则仆抗季札之志，不为今日之战矣。
现代文：如果主人稍稍怜悯故人，对在身边做事的朋友以礼相待，对离开的友人宽宏大量，不去追究他们的离去，依靠刑罚辅佐自己，那我也会学习吴季札谦让君位的节操，现在也不会与主人交战了。
English: If the master had a little compassion for the deceased, treated his friends who worked around him with courtesy, and was generous to his friends who left, did not pursue their departure, and relied on punishment to assist himself, then I would also learn the discipline of Wu Jizakian to give up the throne, and now I would not fight with the master.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：但他没有这样做，我又怎么仿效季札呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：昔张景明亲登坛喢血，奉辞奔走，卒使韩牧让印，主人得地；然后但以拜章朝主，赐爵获传之故，旋时之间，不蒙观过之贷，而受夷灭之祸。
现代文：从前，张景明亲自登上祭坛，歃血为盟，靠着辞令四处奔走游说，最后让冀州牧韩馥让出印信，主人得到了冀州地盘。但不久之后他仅仅因为迎吕布担任兖州牧，得到封赏的缘故，转瞬之间，不但没有得到谅解，反而遭到抄家灭族。
English: Once upon a time, Zhang Jingming personally ascended the altar, fought for the alliance, and relied on the words to run around and lobby. Finally, he asked the Jizhou herdsman Han Zheng to give up the seal letter, and the owner got the Jizhou site. But soon after that, just because he received the reward for serving as the herdsman of Jizhou, he not only did not get understanding, but was persecuted and killed.

古文：吕奉先讨卓来奔，请兵不获，告去何罪？
现代文：吕布为讨伐董卓，前来请求增兵，没有没有得到应允，便告辞离去，这有什么罪过?
English: In order to fight against Dong Zhuo, Lv Bu came to ask for more troops. When he did not get a reply, he resigned and left. What was his crime?

古文：复见斫刺，滨于死亡。
现代文：却反受到攻击，差一点就没命了。
English: But he was attacked and almost lost his life.

古文：刘子琪奉使逾时，辞不获命，畏威怀亲，以诈求归，可谓有志忠孝，无损霸道者也；然辄僵毙麾下，不蒙亏除。
现代文：刘子璜为袁绍效力很久，他想要辞官却没有得到允准，他既惧怕威势又思念家中亲人，只好说谎请求归乡，这可以说是于忠于孝都做得很好了，也没有损害袁绍的权威，然而不仅请求没有得到批准，就连自己也被打死在袁绍的旌旗之下。
English: Liu Zixuan worked for Yuan Shao for a long time. He wanted to become a diplomat but was not allowed to do so. He was afraid of authority and missed his relatives at home, so he had to lie and ask to return to his hometown. This can be said to have done a good job of loyalty and filial piety, and did not damage Yuan Shao's authority. However, not only was the request not approved, but even he was killed under Yuan Shao's banner.

古文：仆虽不敏，又素不能原始见终，睹微知著，窃度主人之心，岂谓三子宜死，罚当刑中哉？
现代文：我虽然不聪明，向来也不能推因知果，但由这些事情来看，揣度主人的心思，又怎么能说这三人本就该死，对他们的处罚是得当的呢？
English: Although I am not clever and have never been able to deduce the cause and effect, but from these things, judging the owner's mind, how can I say that these three people deserved to die, and the punishment for them was appropriate?

古文：实且欲一统山东，增兵讨雠，惧战士狐疑，无以沮劝，故抑废王命以崇承制，慕义者蒙荣，待放者被戮，此乃主人之利，非游士之原也。
现代文：况且袁绍原本也打算统一泰山以东地区，扩张势力讨伐仇人，又担心将士们心中疑虑，不能对他们加以劝阻或鼓励，所以就废止君王的命令而推崇承制，仰慕他道义而来的人受到欢迎，想要离他而去的人却遭杀戮，这些都只是袁绍的心意，而不是那些游宦之人的意愿。
English: Moreover, Yuan Shao had originally planned to unify the region east of Mount Tai, expand his forces and fight the enemy, but he was worried about the doubts in the hearts of his generals and could not dissuade or encourage them, so he revoked the king's order and promoted the succession system. Those who admired his morality were welcomed, but those who wanted to leave him were killed. These were just the thoughts of Yuan Shao, not the wishes of those who wandered.

古文：故仆鉴戒前人，困穷死战。
现代文：所以我以前人的遭遇为诫，就算走投无路也要死战到底。
English: That's why I take people's experiences in the past as a warning, and even if I'm cornered, I will fight to the death.

古文：仆虽下愚，亦尝闻君子之言矣，此实非吾心也，乃主人招焉。
现代文：我虽然卑微愚蠢之极，也曾听到过君子的言论，这实在不是出自我的本心，都是袁绍逼迫我到这种地步。
English: Although I am extremely humble and stupid, I have also heard the words of a gentleman, which really did not come from my true heart, but Yuan Shao forced me to this point.

古文：凡吾所以背弃国民，用命此城者，正以君子之违，不適敌国故也。
现代文：大概我之所以背弃百姓，下令坚守此城，就是因为背离君子之道，而不顺从敌国吧。
English: Probably the reason why I turned my back on the people and ordered to hold on to this city was because I turned away from the way of a gentleman and did not obey the enemy country.

古文：是以获罪主人，见攻逾时，而足下更引此义以为吾规，无乃辞同趋异，非君子所为休戚者哉！
现代文：所以得罪主人，被围攻了很久，而你又引用这个道理来规劝我，难道不是言语相同而意思相反吗，这不是君子对待福祸的态度。 
English: Therefore, I have offended my master and have been besieged for a long time, and you use this principle to persuade me. Isn't it the same word but the opposite meaning? This is not a gentleman's attitude towards good and evil.

古文：吾闻之也，义不背亲，忠不违君，故东宗本州以为亲援，中扶郡将以安社稷，一举二得以徼忠孝，何以为非？
现代文： 我听说，遵循道义也不能违逆父母，尽忠职守不能违背君主，所以我奉东面的张超为主，把他当做亲援，在东郡辅助袁绍选人用将以安定天下，一举两得，忠孝两全，有什么不对的呢？
English: I have heard that one cannot disobey one's parents by following moral principles, and one cannot disobey the monarch by fulfilling one's duties. Therefore, I regard Zhang Chao from the east as my master and regard him as my close aide. Assisting Yuan Shao in selecting a successor in Dong County will bring stability to the world, and it is a win-win situation. What is wrong with loyalty and filial piety?

古文：而足下欲吾轻本破家，均君主人。
现代文：但你却想要我舍弃至亲，只奉袁绍为君主，这是让我不忠啊。
English: But you want me to give up my closest relatives and only worship Yuan Shao as the monarch, which makes me disloyal.

古文：主人之於我也，年为吾兄，分为笃友，道乖告去，以安君亲，可谓顺矣。
现代文：袁绍对于我来说，年龄上相当于兄长，情分上是至交好友，因为意见不同而离开他以使至亲安定，这是名正言顺的。
English: As far as I am concerned, Yuan Shao is my elder brother in terms of age and my best friend in terms of feelings. It is only fair to leave him because of our different opinions in order to keep our relationship stable.

古文：若子之言，则包胥宜致命於伍员，不当号哭於秦庭矣。
现代文：如若向你所说，那申包胥就该为伍子胥卖命，而不应该在秦朝大殿上痛哭了。
English: If I were to say to you, then Shen Baoqi should have worked hard for Wu Ziqi, and should not have cried bitterly at the Qin Dynasty Great Hall.

古文：苟区区於攘患，不知言乖乎道理矣。
现代文：虽然你只是为了解除自己的祸患，却不知道你的话已经违背了你想表达的道理。
English: Although you are just trying to get rid of your misfortune, you do not know that your words have violated the truth you want to express.

古文：足下或者见城围不解，救兵未至，感婚姻之义，惟平生之好，以屈节而苟生，胜守义而倾覆也。
现代文：或者你是见到城池被围困无法解救，援军又还没有到，有感于姻亲的情谊，念着平时的友好关系，认为投降以偷生，胜过坚守道义而死，所以才来劝穷。
English: Or perhaps you have seen a city under siege and unable to be rescued, and reinforcements have not yet arrived, and you are moved by the feelings of your in-laws, thinking of the usual friendly relations, and thinking that surrendering to live secretly is better than adhering to morality and dying, so you come to persuade the poor.

古文：昔晏婴不降志於白刃，南史不曲笔以求生，故身著图象，名垂后世，况仆据金城之固，驱士民之力，散三年之畜，以为一年之资，匡困补乏，以悦天下，何图筑室反耕哉！
现代文：但从前晏婴面对楚人的刀斧也没有改变气节，齐国史官南史没有为君主隐讳以求生路，所以被画成图像，流传后世，况且我占据着坚固的防御工事，调动城中所有人的力量，发放三年的储备作为一年的用度，赈济穷困潦倒的人，让天下人高兴，哪里还需要想着盖房去种田以求安逸生活呢？
English: However, the sword and axe of the Chu people in the face of the former infant did not change the temperament. Nan Shi, the historian of Qi, did not hide for the monarch to survive, so he was painted as an image, passed down to posterity. Moreover, I occupy solid fortifications, mobilize the power of all people in the city, issue three-year reserves as a one-year use, help the poor and the downtrodden, and make the world happy. Where else do you need to think about building a house to farm for a comfortable life?

古文：但惧秋风扬尘，伯珪马首南向，张杨、飞燕，膂力作难，北鄙将告倒县之急，股肱奏乞归之诚耳。
现代文：现在我只担心秋风乍起，伯珪率军向南进发，张杨、飞燕也挥师发难，导致北边的边陲告急，而得力助手都请求归家罢了。
English: Now I'm just worried that the autumn wind will suddenly start blowing, Bo Xun will lead the army to the south, and Zhang Yang and Feiyan will also send teachers to the north, causing the northern borderlands to be in a hurry, and the right-hand assistants will all ask to return home.

古文：主人当鉴我曹辈，反旌退师，治兵邺垣，何宜久辱盛怒，暴威於吾城下哉？
现代文：主人应该了解我们这边的情况，审时度势地调转旗帜，撤回兵马，回到邺城整顿军队，怎么能任凭怒气长久地折磨自己，在我的城下耍威风呢？
English: The master should understand the situation on our side, timely change the flag, withdraw the soldiers and horses, and return to Lucheng to rectify the army. How can he allow himself to be tormented by anger for a long time and play a dignified role under my city?

古文：足下讥吾恃黑山以为救，独不念黄巾之合从邪！
现代文：你嘲讽我倚仗黑山军作为后援，怎么不想着与黄巾军的联合呢？
English: You ridicule me for relying on the Montenegrin army for support. Why don't you think about uniting with the Yellow Turban Army?

古文：加飞燕之属悉以受王命矣。
现代文：再加上 飞燕 的属下全部听受王。
English: Plus, all of Fei Yan's subordinates obey the king.

古文：昔高祖取彭越于钜野，光武创基兆于绿林，卒能龙飞中兴，以成帝业，苟可辅主兴化，夫何嫌哉！
现代文：从前高祖皇帝在钜野战胜并斩杀了彭越，光武帝在绿林中奠定基业，最终光复汉室，成就帝王伟业，如果可以辅佐君主成就伟业，还有什么不甘心呢？
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Gaozu defeated and killed Peng Yue in the wilderness, Emperor Guangwu laid the foundation in the green forest, and finally restored the Han dynasty, achieving the emperor's great cause. If you can assist the monarch in achieving a great cause, what else would you not be willing to do?

古文：况仆亲奉玺书，与之从事。
现代文：况且我是带着君主的印信诏书来这里与他们共事的。  去吧陈琳！
English: Moreover, I have come here to work with them with the imperial seal of the monarch. Go Chen Lin!

古文：行矣孔璋！足下徼利於境外，臧洪授命於君亲；吾子讬身於盟主，臧洪策名於长安。
现代文：你在境外追逐名利，而我受命与君亲；你为盟会的主人效力，我在长安因仕宦而献身朝廷。
English: You are chasing fame and fortune abroad, while I am ordered to be with the royal family; you are working for the owner of the alliance, and I am in Chang'an to serve the emperor and devote myself to the imperial court.

古文：子谓余身死而名灭，仆亦笑子生死而无闻焉，悲哉！
现代文：你认为我身死之后无人记得，我也笑你无论生死都无人记得，真是悲哀啊！
English: You think that no one remembers me after my death, I also laugh at you, no one remembers you whether you are alive or dead, it's really sad!

古文：本同而末离，努力努力，夫复何言！
现代文：我们本来是同一根树枝，现在却各自分开，努力努力吧，还有什么好说的呢！ 
English: We were originally the same branch, but now we are separated from each other, let's work hard, what else is there to say!

古文：绍见洪书，知无降意，增兵急攻。
现代文：袁绍受到臧洪的回信，知道他不会投降，就增加兵力加紧攻城。
English: Yuan Shao received a reply from Yao Hong, and knowing that he would not surrender, he increased his forces and intensified the siege of the city.

古文：城中粮谷以尽，外无强救，洪自度必不免，呼吏士谓曰： 袁氏无道，所图不轨，且不救洪郡将。
现代文：城中粮食已经吃尽，又没有强有力的外援，臧洪估计自己是一定不能幸免的了，就召集手下将士说： 袁氏不守天道，图谋不轨，而且不肯援救城中的将士。
English: The grain in the city had been exhausted, and there was no strong foreign aid. Zhaohong estimated that he must not be spared, so he gathered his subordinates and said: The Yuan family did not follow the heavenly way, plotted, and refused to rescue the soldiers in the city.

古文：洪於大义，不得不死，今诸君无事空与此祸！
现代文：我从大义来讲，是不得不死了，但现在你们没有得罪袁绍却遭此大祸！
English: From the perspective of justice, I had to die, but now you have not offended Yuan Shao but have suffered this great disaster!

古文：可先城未败，将妻子出。 
现代文：你们可以在城还没有被攻破之前，带着自己的亲属逃出城去。 
English: You can escape with your relatives before the city is breached.

古文：将吏士民皆垂泣曰： 明府与袁氏本无怨隙，今为本朝郡将之故，自致残困，吏民何忍当舍明府去也！ 
现代文：在场的将士百姓都流着泪说： 您和袁绍原本没有什么仇怨，现在只是因为是本朝的郡守，才招来这样的祸事，我们怎么忍心舍弃您独自逃跑呢！ 
English: The soldiers and people present all shed tears and said: You and Yuan Shao originally had no grudge, but now it is only because you are the county governor of this dynasty that you have caused such a disaster. How can we bear to abandon you and run away alone!

古文：初尚掘鼠煮筋角，后无可复食者。
现代文：刚开始的时候，城中将士百姓还还掘老鼠、挖树根充饥，到后来就没有可吃的东西了。
English: At the beginning, the soldiers and civilians in the city were still digging up mice and digging up tree roots to satisfy their hunger. Later, there was nothing to eat.

古文：主簿启内厨米三斗，请中分稍以为糜粥，洪叹曰： 独食此何为！ 
现代文：城中主簿官中厨房中拿出三斗米，想要从中分一部分给臧洪煮一点稠粥给臧洪，臧洪感叹说： 我自己这样吃做什么呢？ 
English: The city's chief bookkeeper took out three buckets of rice from the kitchen and wanted to divide a portion of it to boil a bit of thick porridge for Su Hong. Su Hong sighed and said, "What am I doing eating like this?

古文：使作薄粥，众分歠之，杀其爱妾以食将士。
现代文：就令人全部煮成稀粥，和大家一起分食。后来还将自己的爱妾杀了分给将士们吃。
English: He had them all boiled into thin gruel and shared it with everyone. Later, he also killed part of his beloved concubine for the soldiers to eat.

古文：将士咸流涕，无能仰视者。
现代文：将士们都痛哭流涕，没有敢抬起头看的。
English: The generals were in tears and did not dare to look up.

古文：男女七八千人相枕而死，莫有离叛。
现代文：以至于到后来城中男女七八千人相枕而死，也没有一个叛逃的。
English: So much so that seven or eight thousand men and women in the city later died side by side, and not one of them defected.

古文：城陷，绍生执洪。
现代文：后来城被攻破，袁绍生擒了臧洪。
English: Later, the city was breached, and Yuan Shao Sheng captured Shihong.

古文：绍素亲洪，盛施帏幔，大会诸将见洪，谓曰： 臧洪，何相负若此！
现代文：他与臧洪向来关系很好，就在帐篷中大摆宴席，召集手下将领都来见臧洪，并对臧洪说： 臧洪啊，你怎么这样背叛我呢？
English: He had always had a good relationship with Suhong, so he held a grand banquet in the tent, gathered his generals to meet Suhong, and said to Suhong: Suhong, how could you betray me like this?

古文：今日服未？ 
现代文：现在你服不服？ 
English: Now are you convinced or not?

古文：洪据地瞋目曰： 诸袁事汉，四世五公，可谓受恩。
现代文：臧洪撑在地上瞪大眼睛说： 袁氏几代在汉家朝廷为官，四朝中有五人位列三公，可以称得上深受皇恩了。
English: Gao Hong propped up on the ground, staring wide-eyed, said: The Yuan family has served as officials in the Han imperial court for several generations. Five of the four dynasties are ranked as the three princes, which can be said to be deeply favored by the emperor.

古文：今王室衰弱，无扶翼之意，欲因际会，希冀非望，多杀忠良以立奸威。
现代文：现在刘王室衰微，你不但没有辅佐之意，还趁着天下动乱生出非分之想，杀害众多忠臣良将来树立自己的淫威。
English: Now that the Liu royal family is in decline, you not only have the intention of assisting, but also take advantage of the turmoil in the world to create unreasonable thoughts, kill many loyal subjects, and establish your own arrogance in the future.

古文：洪亲见呼张陈留为兄，则洪府君亦宜为弟，同共戮力，为国除害，何为拥众观人屠灭！
现代文：我亲眼见到你称呼张邈为兄长，那么我府君张超也该算是你的弟弟，你们应该齐心协力为国锄奸，你怎么能坐拥强大的军力却眼看着被人被杀灭屠尽呢？
English: I saw with my own eyes that you called Zhang Xuan your elder brother. Then our prefect Zhang Chao should also be considered your younger brother. You should work together as traitors to the country. How can you have a strong military force but watch people being killed and slaughtered?

古文：惜洪力劣，不能推刃为天下报仇，何谓服乎！ 
现代文：可惜我力量弱小，不能亲自拿着兵刃杀了你为天下报仇，又怎么能臣服呢？ 
English: Unfortunately, my strength is weak, and I cannot personally take a sword and kill you to avenge the world. How can I submit?

古文：绍本爱洪，意欲令屈服，原之；见洪辞切，知终不为己用，乃杀之。
现代文：袁绍本来就爱惜臧洪，只是想要他屈服，那就能原谅他，但看见臧洪言语激烈恳切，之大他到底是不会为自己所用的，就杀了他。
English: Yuan Shao had always cherished Sui Hong, and only wanted him to submit, then he would be able to forgive him, but when he saw that Sui Hong's words were fierce and earnest, so much so that he would not use them for himself, he killed him.

古文：洪邑人陈容少为书生，亲慕洪，随洪为东郡丞；城未败，洪遣出。
现代文：洪邑人陈容，跟臧洪是同乡，年轻是是个读书人，很是仰慕臧洪，就追随臧洪担任了东郡的一名小官；城还未被攻破的时候，臧洪将他派出城。
English: Chen Rong, who was from Hong's hometown, was a fellow villager of Sui Hong. The young man was a reader and admired Sui Hong very much. He followed Sui Hong and served as a minor official in Dong County. When the city had not yet been breached, Sui Hong sent him to the city.

古文：臧洪发举为郡将，奈何杀之！ 绍惭，左右使人牵出，谓曰： 汝非臧洪俦，空复尔为！ 
现代文：袁绍与臧洪见面时，也让他在场看着，他看到臧洪要被处死，就起身对袁绍说： 将军要谋划大业，是希望为天下了斩奸除恶，但现在却先诛杀忠义之人，这不是违背了天意吗?袁绍恼羞成怒，叫人把他拉了出去，并对他说: 你是不是臧洪的同伙?不然你为什么为他求情? 
English: When Yuan Shao met with Yan Hong, he also let him be present to watch. When he saw that Yan Hong was about to be executed, he stood up and said to Yuan Shao: The general wants to plan a great career, hoping to eliminate evil for the world, but now he is killing a loyal person first. Isn't this against the will of heaven? Yuan Shao was so angry that he pulled him out and said to him: Are you an accomplice of Yan Hong? Otherwise, why did you ask for his forgiveness?

古文：容顾曰： 夫仁义岂有常，蹈之则君子，背之则小人。
现代文：陈容回头说: 仁义是否有一定的标准呢，施行仁义的人是君子，违背仁义的人是小人。
English: Chen Rong looked back and said: Does benevolence and righteousness have a certain standard? Those who practice benevolence and righteousness are gentlemen, while those who violate benevolence and righteousness are villains.

古文：今日宁与臧洪同日而死，不与将军同日而生！ 
现代文：今天我宁愿与臧洪同日死，也不与你同日生。 
English: Today, I would rather die on the same day as Su Hong than be born on the same day as you.

古文：复见杀。
现代文：于是双双被杀。
English: Both were killed.

古文：在绍坐者无不叹息，窃相谓曰： 如何一日杀二烈士！ 
现代文：在座的袁绍部下没有不叹息痛心的，私下相互议论说： 怎么能一天之内连杀两位忠烈之人呢？ 
English: Yuan Shao's subordinates, who were present, did not fail to sigh bitterly and privately discuss with each other: How can two loyal people be killed in one day?

古文：先是，洪遣司马二人出，求救于吕布；比还，城已陷，皆赴敌死。
现代文：在城还未被攻破之时，臧洪曾派二名司马出城向吕布求援，等到回来的时候城已经陷落，二人都冲进战场，与敌人交战而死。
English: When the city had not yet been breached, Yan Hong had sent two Sima leaders out of the city to ask Lv Bu for help. By the time they returned, the city had fallen, and both of them rushed into the battlefield and died in battle with the enemy.

古文：评曰：吕布有虓虎之勇，而无英奇之略，轻狡反覆，唯利是视。
现代文：评曰：吕布有咆哮老虎那样的勇猛，却没有超群智慧的谋略，轻抚狡诈而反复无常，眼中有的只是私利。
English: The review said: Lüb has the courage of a roaring tiger, but does not have the superior wisdom of a strategist. He is cunning and capricious, with only self-interest in his eyes.

古文：自古及今，未有若此不夷灭也。
现代文：从古到今，像这样的人没有不被消灭的。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been anyone like this who has not been eliminated.

古文：昔汉光武谬於庞萌，近魏太祖亦蔽于张邈。
现代文：从前汉光武帝被庞萌欺骗，近世魏太祖被张邈所蒙蔽。
English: In the past, Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty was deceived by Pang Meng, and the modern-day Emperor Taizu of the Wei Dynasty was deceived by Zhang Ye.

古文：知人则哲，唯帝难之，信矣！
现代文：所以能识人的就是哲人，但这就连帝王也难做到，这是正确的啊！
English: Therefore, a philosopher is someone who can recognize people, but this is difficult for even an emperor to do, and rightly so!

古文：陈登、臧洪并有雄气壮节，登降年夙陨，功业未遂，洪以兵弱敌强，烈志不立，惜哉！
现代文：陈登、臧洪都有英雄的气概和节操，但陈登英年早逝，未能成就一番功业，臧洪因为军力较弱而敌人强盛，壮志也未能成就，可惜啊！
English: Both Chen Deng and Sui Hong had heroic spirit and discipline, but Chen Deng Ying died young and failed to achieve any great feat. Sui Hong, because of his weak military strength and strong enemy, failed to achieve his great ambition. What a pity!

