古文：王世充，字行满，本姓支，西域胡人也。
现代文：王世充，字行满，本来姓支，是西域的胡人。
English: Wang Shichong, whose family name was originally Shih, is a Hu person from the western region.

古文：寓居新丰。
现代文：寄居在新丰。
English: He lived as a sojourner in Xinfeng.

古文：祖支颓耨，早死。
现代文：他祖父支颓耨年纪轻轻就死了。
English: His grandfather, Shikotsu, died young.

古文：父收，随母嫁霸城王氏，因冒姓焉，仕至汴州长史。
现代文：他父亲支收跟随他的改嫁到霸城王家的母亲生活，因而就改为姓王，官职升到汴州长史。
English: His father paid for his mother to live with him after she married into the Baecheng Wang family, so he changed his surname to Wang and was promoted to the post of governor of Zou.

古文：世充颇涉经史，尤好兵法及龟策、推步之术。
现代文：王世充广泛阅读了各类书籍，尤其爱好兵法以及卜卦算命、推算天文历法方面的学问。
English: Wang Shichong read a wide range of books, especially books on military tactics, fortune-telling and the astronomical calendar.

古文：开皇中，以军功拜仪同，累转兵部员外郎。
现代文：隋文帝开皇中叶，按战功被授予仪同三司的官职，接着提升为兵部员外郎。
English: In the middle of the reign of the Sui Emperor, he was awarded the official post of the Third Division of the Ministry of Military Affairs according to his war service, and then promoted to the position of Foreigner of the Military Department.

古文：善敷奏，明习法律，然舞弄文法，高下其心。
现代文：他善于向朝廷陈事进言，通晓各种律令条文，因而利用法律条文徇私作弊，随心所欲。
English: He was good at giving advice to the imperial court and was familiar with various provisions of the ritsuryo, so he used the provisions of the law to cheat and do whatever he wanted.

古文：或有驳难之者，世充利口饰非，辞议锋起，众虽知其不可而莫能屈。
现代文：有的时候有人批驳他，他就巧言诡辩文过饰非，言辞激烈，人们虽然明知他不正确又没有谁能使他认错。
English: Sometimes, when he is contradicted, he is so eloquent, so eloquent, so vehement, that no one can convince him that he is wrong, even though he knows he is wrong.

古文：大业中，累迁江都丞，兼领江都宫监。
现代文：隋炀帝大业年间，提升为江都丞，兼任江都宫监。
English: During the reign of Emperor Sui and Emperor Xuanzong, he was promoted to the position of Jiangduzheng (江都丞) and concurrently served as the palace inspector of Jiangdu.

古文：时炀帝数幸江都，世充善候人主颜色，阿谀顺旨，每入言事，帝必称善。
现代文：当时炀帝多次巡视江都，王世充善于观察炀帝的脸色，奉承谄媚顺从他的心意，每次上朝谈论政事，炀帝总是说好。
English: At that time, Emperor Xizong visited Jiangdu many times. Wang Shiyi was good at observing Emperor Xizong's face, flattering and obeying his wishes. Every time he went to the court to talk about politics, Emperor Xizong always said yes.

古文：乃雕饰池台，阴奏远方珍物，以媚于帝，由是益昵之。
现代文：于是制作玉石雕刻和风景彩画，诈称远方的珍贵工艺品，献给炀帝讨好，因此炀帝更加宠信他。
English: As a result, he made jade carvings and landscape paintings, falsely claiming to be precious handicrafts from far away, dedicated to pleasing Emperor Xuan, so Emperor Xuan trusted him more.

古文：世充知隋政将乱，阴结豪俊，多收群心，有系狱抵罪，皆枉法出之，以树私恩。
现代文：王世充知道隋朝的政局将会混乱，就暗地结交英雄豪杰，广泛收买人心，那些犯罪坐牢的人，都用曲解法律的办法予以释放，从而显示私人的恩惠。
English: Wang Shichong knew that the political situation in the Sui Dynasty would be chaotic, so he secretly made friends with heroes and heroes, extensively bribed people's hearts, and those who were imprisoned for crimes were released by means of distorting the law, thus showing private favors.

古文：及杨玄感作乱，吴人硃燮、晋陵人管崇起兵江南以应之，自称将军，拥众十余万。
现代文：后来杨玄感叛乱，吴人朱燮、晋陵人管崇在江南起兵响应，自称将军，聚集十多万人马。
English: Later, Yang Xuanxuan rebelled, and Wu people Zhu Xi and Jinling people Guanzhong responded by raising an army in the south of the Yangtze River, calling themselves generals and gathering more than 100,000 people.

古文：隋遣将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗等讨之，不克。
现代文：隋朝朝廷派遣将军吐万绪、鱼俱罗等讨伐，没有取胜。
English: The Sui Dynasty sent generals such as Tu Wanxu and Yu Qiao Luo to the imperial court for a crusade, but did not win.

古文：世充为其偏将，募江都万余人，频击破之。
现代文：王世充作为吐万绪等的偏将，在江都招募了一万多人马，连续进攻打败了叛军。
English: Wang Shichong, as a partial general of Tuwanshu and others, recruited more than ten thousand horses in Jiangdu, and defeated the rebels in a continuous attack.

古文：每有克捷，必归功于下，所获军实，皆推与士卒，由此人争为用，功最居多。
现代文：每次打了胜仗，都算作部下的功劳，所得到的战利物品，都让给普通战士，因此人人抢着为他卖力，在平叛中他的功劳最多。
English: Every time he won a battle, it was considered to be the merit of his subordinates. The trophies and goods he received were all given to ordinary soldiers, so everyone rushed to work hard for him. In the counter-insurgency, his merit was the most.

古文：十年，齐郡贼帅孟让自长白山寇掠诸郡，至盱眙，有众十余万。
现代文：大业十年，齐郡的叛军统帅孟让从山东长白山出发侵犯各个州郡，到盱眙，发展到十多万人马。
English: In the tenth year of the Great Leap Forward, the Qi County thief-soldier Marshal Meng Yuxiang descended from the Changbai Mountain to invade and plunder counties. By the time he arrived in Qi, there were more than one hundred thousand people.

古文：世充以兵拒之，保都梁山，为五栅，相持不战，乃倡言兵走，羸师示弱。
现代文：王世充率领部队抵御，以都梁山为据点，设置五道营栅，敌我相对而不交战，还扬言撤退，部队表现出疲惫不堪毫无战斗力的样子。
English: Wang Shichong led the troops to resist, taking Du Liangshan as a stronghold, setting up five camp fences, opposing the enemy without fighting, and threatening to withdraw, the troops showed a look of exhaustion and no combat effectiveness.

古文：让笑曰： 王世充文法小吏，安能领兵？
现代文：孟让耻笑地说 ：王世充是个只懂法令条文的小官，哪能带兵打仗？
English: Meng Zhan said with a smile: Wang Shichong is a minor official who only understands the provisions of laws and regulations. How can he lead soldiers to war?

古文：吾令生缚取之，鼓行而入江都。 
现代文：我要活捉他，一直打到江都去。 
English: I want to capture him alive and fight him all the way to Jiangdu.

古文：时百姓皆入壁，野无所掠，贼众渐馁，又苦栅当其道，不得南侵，即分兵围五栅。
现代文：这时当地百姓都住进了部队营垒，遍地没有东西可抢，叛军慢慢地没有吃的，又为营栅挡住道路而伤脑筋，不能向南方进军，就分兵包围王世充的五处营栅。
English: At this time, the local people were all living in the army camp, there was nothing to rob everywhere, the rebels were slowly running out of food, and they were worried about the camp gate blocking the road. Unable to march south, the detachment surrounded Wang Shichong's five camp gates.

古文：世充每日击之，阳不利，走还入栅。
现代文：王世充每天出兵打一下，表面装作失利，跑回营栅。
English: Wang Shichong sent troops to fight every day, pretended to be defeated, and ran back to the camp gate.

古文：如是数日，让益轻之，乃稍分人于南方抄，留兵才足以围栅。
现代文：像这样搞了好几天，孟让更加小看他，就慢慢分派人马到南边去搜抢财物，留下的兵力只够围住营栅。
English: This went on for several days, and Meng Zhan despised him even more, and slowly sent men and horses to the south to search for property, leaving only enough troops to surround the camp gate.

古文：世充知其懈，乃于营中夷灶撤幕，投方阵，四面外向，毁栅而出，奋击，大破之，让以数十骑遁去，斩首万余级，俘虏十余万人。
现代文：王世充知道敌人放松了警惕，就在军营中填平了灶坑，拆下了帷帐，摆设起方阵，四面朝外，拔掉栅栏出击，奋力作战，大败敌军，孟让带着几十个人悄悄逃走了，杀死了一万多人，俘虏了十多万人。
English: Wang Shichong knew that the enemy had relaxed their vigilance, so he filled up the cooking pits in the military camp, removed the curtains, set up a square formation, facing outward on all sides, pulled out the fence, attacked, fought hard, and defeated the enemy army. Meng Zhan quietly fled with dozens of people, killed more than 10,000 people, and captured more than 100,000 people.

古文：炀帝以世充有将帅才略，复遣领兵讨诸小盗，所向尽平。
现代文：炀帝认为王世充有将帅的才干谋略，又派他率领部队讨伐各个小股叛军，所到之处全部荡平。
English: Emperor Qian believed that Wang Shiyu had the ability to strategize, and sent him to lead the troops to fight all the small rebel forces, and all the places he went were leveled.

古文：十一年，突厥围炀帝于雁门。
现代文：大业十一年，突厥人在雁门围困了炀帝。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taie period, the Turks besieged Emperor Shun at the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：世充尽发江都人将往赴难，在军中蓬首垢面，悲泣无度，晓夜不解甲，藉草而卧。
现代文：王世充带领江都的全部人马准备到雁门赴救国难，在队伍里蓬头垢面，痛哭得失去常态，日夜不脱盔甲，躺在草上睡觉。
English: Wang Shichong led all the men and horses of Jiangdu to prepare to go to the Wild Goose Gate to save the country from disaster. He was disheveled in the ranks, crying so hard that he lost his normal state. He did not take off his armor day and night, and lay on the grass to sleep.

古文：炀帝闻之，以为忠，益信任之。
现代文：炀帝听到这些，认为他忠诚，更信任他。
English: When Emperor Xuan heard this, he thought he was loyal and trusted him even more.

古文：十二年，迁江都通守。
现代文：大业十二年，升任江都通守。
English: In the twelfth year of Daye's reign, he was promoted to the post of the governor of Jiangdu.

古文：时厌次人格谦为盗数年，兵十余万在豆子中，为太仆卿杨义臣所杀，世充帅师击其余众，破之。
现代文：当时厌次人格谦当了多年盗匪，带着十多万人在豆子一带活动，被太仆卿杨义臣杀掉，王世充统率部队攻打格谦的残存队伍，打败了他们。
English: At that time, Yan Shiji, who had been a bandit for many years and led more than a hundred thousand people in the Beans area, was killed by Yang Yixin, the Great Servant. Wang Shicheng led the troops to attack Ge Qian's remaining team and defeated them.

古文：又击卢明月于南阳，虏获数万。
现代文：又出兵到南阳攻打卢明月，俘虏了好几万人。
English: He also sent troops to Nanyang to attack Lu Mingyue, and captured tens of thousands of people.

古文：后还江都，炀帝大悦，自执杯酒以赐之。
现代文：班师回到江都，炀帝非常高兴，亲自举杯赏赐他。
English: When the class teacher returned to Jiangdu, Emperor Qian was very happy and personally raised a glass to reward him.

古文：及李密攻陷洛口仓，进逼东都，炀帝特诏世充大发兵，于洛口拒密，前后百余战，未有胜负。
现代文：到李密打下洛口仓，进逼东都洛阳，炀帝特令王世充统帅大队人马，到洛口抵御李密，前后交战一百多次，还不分胜负。
English: When Li Mi attacked Lokuchang and forced his way into the eastern capital Luoyang, Emperor Qian ordered Wang Shichong to lead a large army to Lokuch to resist Li Mi. There were more than a hundred battles back and forth, with no distinction between winners and losers.

古文：又遣就军拜世充为将军，趣令破贼。
现代文：炀帝又派人到部队任命王世充为将军，催促打败李密。
English: Emperor Gong also sent someone to the army to appoint Wang Shichong as a general and urge him to defeat Li Mi.

古文：世充引军渡洛水，与李密战，世充军败绩，溺死者万余人，乃率余众归河阳。
现代文：王世充带领部队渡过洛水跟李密作战，吃了败仗，被淹死了一万多人，就率领余部返回河阳。
English: Wang Shichong led the troops across the Luoshui River to fight against Li Mi, suffered a defeat, and more than 10,000 people were drowned. He then led the rest of the troops back to Heyang.

古文：时天寒大雪，兵士在道冻死者又数万人，比至河阳，才以千数。
现代文：碰上天气寒冷大雪纷飞，沿途冻死了好几万人，等到抵达河阳，只剩一千来人。
English: When the cold weather and heavy snows hit, tens of thousands of people froze to death along the way. By the time they arrived in Heyang, only about a thousand people were left.

古文：世充自系狱请罪，越王侗遣使赦之，征还洛阳，置营于含嘉仓城，收合亡散，复得万余人。
现代文：王世充自我囚禁起来向炀帝请罪，越王杨侗派遣使者释放了他，召回洛阳，驻扎在含嘉仓城，收集逃散的士卒，又有了一万多人。
English: Wang Shichong imprisoned himself and pleaded guilty to Emperor Qian. Emperor Yue sent an envoy to release him, recalled him to Luoyang, and stationed him in the city of Han and Jia Cang to collect the scattered soldiers, which numbered more than ten thousand.

古文：俄而宇文化及作难，太府卿元文都、武卫将军皇甫无逸、右司郎中卢楚，奉越王侗嗣位于东都，拜世充为吏部尚书，封郑国公。
现代文：不久，宇文化及杀死炀帝举行叛乱，太府卿元文都、武卫将军皇甫无逸、右司郎中卢楚拥戴越王杨侗在东都洛阳继承了皇位，授予王世充吏部尚书的官职，封郑国公的爵位。
English: Soon after, the Yu Culture and the killing of Emperor Qian led to a rebellion, and Yang Zhen, King of Yue, who was supported by the Grand Mufu of Yuanmingdu, the General of Wuwei, the Empress Dowager Fu Muxiyu, and the Right Hand of Lu Chu, succeeded to the throne in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and granted Wang Shichong the official post of the Secretary of the Ministry of Letters, and the title of Duke of Zheng.

古文：文都谓楚等曰： 今化及弑逆，仇耻未报，吾虽志在枕戈，而力所不及。
现代文：元文都对卢楚等人说： 如今宇文化及杀君叛逆，仇未报耻未雪，我虽然复仇心切，但力不从心。
English: Yuan Wendu said to Lu Chu and others, "Nowadays, the culture of the universe and the rebellion of killing the prince are the same, and there is no shame in taking revenge. Although I am eager for revenge, I can't do it.

古文：为国计者，莫如以尊官宠李密，以库物权啖之，使击化及，令两贼自斗，化及既破，而密之兵固亦疲矣。
现代文：从国家大局考虑，不如用高官笼络李密，拿国库的资财暂时利诱他，让李密去攻打宇文化及，使得两伙叛军自相残杀，宇文化及被打败后，李密的兵马必然也疲惫不堪了。
English: Considering the overall situation of the country, it would be better to use high-ranking officials to entrap Li Mi, lure him temporarily with the resources of the national treasury, and let Li Mi attack Ulan Bator, causing the two groups of rebels to kill each other. After Ulan Bator was defeated, Li Mi's soldiers must have been exhausted.

古文：又其士卒得我之赏，居我之官，内外相亲，易为反间，我师养力以乘其弊，则密亦可图也。 
现代文：再说李密的士卒得到了朝廷的奖赏，担任着朝廷官职，朝廷多跟他们建立感情，容易运用离间之计，我们的军队养精蓄锐来钻他们疲惫困乏的空子，那么李密也是可以对付的。 
English: Moreover, Li Mi's soldiers have been rewarded by the imperial court, and they are holding official posts of the imperial court. The imperial court is more likely to build up feelings with them, and it is easy to use divisive tactics. Our army is energized and sharp to drill their tired and weary loopholes. Then Li Mi can also be dealt with.

古文：楚等以为然。
现代文：卢楚等人认为应当如此。
English: Lu Chu and others believe that this should be the case.

古文：即日遣使拜密为太尉、尚书令，令讨化及。
现代文：当天就派使者授予李密太尉、尚书令的官职，命令他讨伐宇文化及。
English: On the same day, an envoy was sent to confer the official position of Lieutenant Li Mi, Shang Shuling, and ordered him to fight against world culture and imperialism.

古文：密遂称臣奉制，以兵拒化及于黎阳。每战胜，则遣使告捷，众皆悦。
现代文：李密于是向朝廷称臣，接受朝廷命令，带兵到黎阳抵御宇文化及，凡是打了胜仗就派遣使者向朝廷报捷，人们都很高兴。
English: Li Mi then declared himself a vassal to the imperial court, accepted the imperial order, led the troops to Liyang to resist the Yu culture and, whenever he won a battle, sent an envoy to the imperial court to report his success. People were very happy.

古文：世充独谓其麾下诸将曰： 文都之辈，刀笔吏耳，吾观其势，必为李密所擒。
现代文：王世充单单对他手下的各将领说 ：元文都那帮人，写写划划文官而已，我看事态的趋势，一定会被李密抓起来。
English: Wang Shicheng said to the generals under his command: "Those people in Yuanmingdu are just clerks, I see the trend of the situation, they will definitely be arrested by Li Mi.

古文：且吾军人每与密战，杀其父兄子弟，前后已多，一旦为之下，吾属无类矣！ 
现代文：再说我的部队多次跟李密作战，杀死他的父兄子弟，前前后后已经很多，一旦成为他的下属，我们这些人就没有生路了！ 
English: Besides, my troops have fought against Li Mi many times and killed many of his brothers and brothers. Once we become his subordinates, there is no way out for us!

古文：出言以激怒其众。
现代文：说这番话是为了激怒他的将士们。
English: He said it to rile up his troops.

古文：文都知而大惧，与楚等谋，因世充入内，伏甲而杀之，期有日矣。
现代文：元文都知道后非常恐惧，跟卢楚等人商议，趁王世充上朝的时候，布下伏兵杀掉他，已经约定时间了。
English: After the original text was known, he was very afraid, and he discussed with Lu Chu and others to take advantage of Wang Shifeng's accession to the throne, and set an ambush to kill him. The time had already been agreed upon.

古文：纳言段达庸懦，恐事不果，遣其女婿张志以楚等谋告世充。
现代文：纳言段达平庸怯懦，害怕这事办不成功，就派他的女婿张志把卢楚等人的计谋告诉了王世充。
English: Na Yan Duan was mediocre and cowardly, and he was afraid that the matter would not succeed, so he sent his son-in-law Zhang Zhi to tell Wang Shichong about the schemes of Lu Chu and others.

古文：其夜，勒兵围宫城，将军费曜、田阇等拒战于东太阳门外，曜军败，世充遂攻门而入，无逸以单骑遁走，获楚杀之。
现代文：当天夜晚王世充带领人马包围宫城，将军费曜、田等人在东太阳门外迎战，费曜战败，王世充夺取城门冲了进去，将军皇甫无逸只身逃脱，抓住卢楚杀了。
English: On the evening of the same day, Wang Shichong led men and horses to encircle Miyagi. General Feiyu, Tian and others fought outside the East Sun Gate. Feiyu was defeated, Wang Shichong seized the gate and rushed in. General Huang Fu escaped unhindered, caught Lu Chu and killed him.

古文：时宫门闭，世充遣人扣门言于侗曰： 元文都等欲执皇帝降于李密，段达知而告臣，臣非敢反，诛反者耳。 
现代文：这时皇宫大门紧闭，王世充派人敲着宫门对杨侗说 ：元文都他们要挟持皇上投降李密，段达得知后告诉了我，我不敢背叛朝廷，是来讨伐背叛朝廷的人哩。 
English: At this time, the gate of the imperial palace was closed. Wang Shichong sent someone to knock on the palace gate and said to Yang Mi: "They wanted to kidnap the emperor to surrender to Li Mi. After learning this, Duanda told me that I did not dare to betray the imperial court, but came to fight those who betrayed the imperial court."

古文：初，文都闻变，入奉侗于乾阳殿，陈兵卫之，令将帅乘城以拒难。
现代文：开始，元文都听到发生变故，来到乾阳殿伺候杨侗，指挥部队保卫，命令将士们凭借城池抵御兵变。
English: At the beginning, Yuanwen heard that there was a change of fortune, came to the Qianyang Palace to wait for Yang Zheng, commanded the troops to defend, and ordered the soldiers to use the castle to resist the mutiny.

古文：段达矫侗命，执文都送于世充，至则乱击而死。
现代文：段达诈称杨侗的命令捉住元文都押送给王世充，一到就乱棍打死。
English: Duan Dada fraudulently claimed that Yang Hui's order was to arrest and escort Yuanwen to Wang Shichong, and beat him to death with a club as soon as he arrived.

古文：达又矫侗命，开门以纳世充。世充悉遣人代宿卫者，然后入谒陈谢曰： 文都等无状，谋相屠害，事急为此，不敢背国。 
现代文：段达又诈称杨侗的命令，打开宫门迎接王世充，王世充派人换下了宫中的全部警卫人员，然后拜见杨侗道歉，说 ：元文都等人犯下说不完的罪行，阴谋制造内乱，情况紧急才采取这种办法，我是不敢背叛国家的。 
English: Danda also falsely claimed to have been ordered by Yang Mi, and opened the palace gate to welcome Wang Shicheng. Wang Shicheng sent someone to replace all the guards in the palace, and then apologized to Yang Mi, saying, "Yuan Wendu and others have committed unspeakable crimes and conspired to create civil unrest. I only took this measure in an emergency. I dare not betray the country."

古文：侗与之盟。
现代文：杨侗跟他誓约结盟。
English: Yang Hui and Wang Shicheng swear an oath.

古文：其日，进拜尚书左仆射，总督内外诸军事。
现代文：当天，升任尚书左仆射，总管监督朝廷内外各项军务。
English: On the same day, he was promoted to the position of Shangshu Zuopu Jia, the general manager supervising all military affairs inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：世充去含嘉城，移居尚书省，专宰朝政。
现代文：王世充离开含嘉城，搬进尚书省官署居住，独揽朝政大权。
English: Wang Shichong left Hanjia City and moved into the government office of Shangshu Province to occupy the supreme political power.

古文：以其兄世恽为内史令，入居禁中，子弟咸拥兵马，镇诸城邑。
现代文：任命他的哥哥王世恽为内史令，住进皇宫，侄子后辈都握有兵权，镇守各地城镇。
English: He appointed his elder brother, Wang Shih-tao, as the Inner Historian, and he lived in the imperial palace. His nephews and descendants all held military power and guarded towns and cities across the country.

古文：未几，李密破化及还，其劲兵良马多战死，士卒疲倦。
现代文：没过多久，李密打败宇文化及班师回朝，他的精兵骏马多半战死，剩下的疲劳困乏。
English: Not long after, Li Mi defeated Yubun and his team to return to the North. Most of his elite soldiers were killed in the battle, and the rest were exhausted.

古文：世充欲乘其弊而击之，恐人心不一，乃假托鬼神，言梦见周公。
现代文：王世充想乘机攻打他，又怕人心不齐，就借助鬼神征兆，说是梦见了周公。
English: Wang Shizhong wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to attack him, and fearing that people's hearts would be unequal, he used the signs of ghosts and gods to say that he had dreamed of Zhou Gong.

古文：乃立祠于洛水，遣巫宣言周公欲令仆射急讨李密，当有大功，不则兵皆疫死。
现代文：于是在洛水岸边修建了周公祠，叫巫师宣扬周公命令尚书左仆射赶快讨伐李密，会立大功，不然兵士们就会全部死于瘟疫。
English: Therefore, a Zhou Gong shrine was built on the bank of Luoshui, and the sorcerer was told to preach that Zhou Gong ordered his left-hand man, Shang Shuxu, to quickly fight against Li Mi, otherwise the soldiers would all die of the plague.

古文：世充兵多楚人，俗信妖言，众皆请战。
现代文：王世充的兵士多半是楚地人，习俗上相信欺骗迷惑人心的怪诞言词，大家都请求作战。
English: Most of Wang Shichong's soldiers were from Chudi. According to custom, they believed in deception and bewildering grotesque words. Everyone begged to fight.

古文：世充简练精勇，得二万余人，马二千余匹，军于洛水南。
现代文：王世充挑选精锐骁勇的人马，有两万多名将士，两千多匹战马，在洛水南边扎营。
English: Wang Shichong selected elite and brave men and horses, more than twenty thousand soldiers and more than two thousand horses, and camped on the south side of Luoshui.

古文：密军偃师北山上。
现代文：李密在偃师的北山头驻扎。
English: Li Mi was stationed in the northern mountain head of Shanshi.

古文：时密新破化及，有轻世充之心，不设壁垒。
现代文：当时李密刚刚打败宇文化及，有渺视王世充的情绪，不筑壁垒工事。
English: At that time, Li Mi had just defeated Yu Cultura and, with the mood of despising Wang Shicheng, did not build barrier construction.

古文：世充夜遣三百余骑潜入北山，伏溪谷中，令军人秣马蓐食，迟明而薄密。
现代文：王世充在夜间派遣三百多名骑兵秘密进入北山，埋伏在山谷中，命令全体将士马要喂饱，人要吃好，黎明时分进逼李密。
English: Wang Shichong secretly sent more than three hundred cavalrymen into the Beishan Mountain at night and lay in wait in the valley. He ordered everyone to feed the horses well and the people to eat well. At dawn, he entered and forced Li Mi.

古文：密出兵应之，陈未成列而两军合战。
现代文：李密出兵应战，队形还没摆好就打起来了。
English: Li Mi sent out troops for the battle, and they started fighting before the formation was set up.

古文：其伏兵发，乘高而下，驰压密营，又纵火焚其庐舍，密军溃，降其将张童仁、陈智略，进下偃师，密走保洛口。
现代文：王世充埋伏的骑兵发起冲锋，居高临下，冲向李密的营地，放火焚烧他的军营，李密的队伍逃散了，他的将领张童仁、陈智略投降了，乘胜追击打下了偃师，李密逃跑退守洛口。
English: The cavalry of Wang Shichong's ambush launched a charge, took the high ground, rushed to Li Mi's camp, set fire to his camp, Li Mi's team fled, his generals Zhang Tongren and Chen Zhiliu surrendered, took advantage of the pursuit and defeated the enemy, Li Mi fled and retreated to Lokou.

古文：初，世充兄世伟及子玄应随化及至东郡，密得而囚之于城中，至是尽获之。
现代文：当初，王世充的哥哥王世伟和儿子王玄应跟随宇文化及到东郡，李密打败宇文化及后捉住他们关在偃师城里，到这里都找到了。
English: At the beginning, Wang Shichong's brother Wang Shihwei and his son Wang Xuanren should have followed U Culture and went to Dong County. Li Mi defeated U Culture and then caught them and locked them up in Jinshi City. They were all found here.

古文：又执密长史邴元真妻子、司马郑虔象之母及诸将子弟，皆抚慰之，各令潜呼其父兄。
现代文：还拘捕了李密的长史邴元真的老婆孩子、司马郑虔象的母亲以及各个部将的后辈，对他们都进行安抚慰问，一个个单独地命令他们秘密动员父亲兄长投诚。
English: He also comforted the wives and children of Li Mi's eldest son Shi Xuan Yuanzheng, the mother of Sima Zheng Qianxiang, and the children of Li Mi's generals, and let them secretly call for their fathers and brothers to join him.

古文：世充进兵，次洛口，邴元真、郑虔象等举仓城以应之。密以数十骑走河阳，率余众入朝。
现代文：王世充继续进军，在洛口驻下，邴元真、郑虔象等人猝然哗变接应王世充，李密带着几十个人逃往河阳，率领残部入关朝见唐高祖。
English: Wang Shichong continued to march forward, and stationed in Lokou, Yu Yuanzheng, Zheng Qianxiang and others suddenly mutinied in response to Wang Shichong, Li Mi fled to Heyang with dozens of people, and led the remnants into the customs to see Tang Gaozu.

古文：世充尽收其众，振旅而还。
现代文：王世充活捉了他的全部人马，整顿部队返回朝廷。
English: Wang Shixin captured all his men and horses alive, and the rectification troops returned to the imperial court.

古文：侗进拜世充太尉，以尚书省为其府，备置官属。
现代文：杨侗提升王世充为太尉，把尚书省作为他的官署，配齐属吏。
English: Yang Hui promoted Wang Shichong to the rank of lieutenant, and made Shangshu Province his government office, with all subordinate officials.

古文：世充立三榜于府门之外：一求文才学识堪济世务者，一求武艺绝人摧锋陷阵者，一求能理冤枉拥抑不申者。
现代文：王世充在官署门外张贴了三份布告：一份招聘文才学问足以帮助处理政务的文职人员，一份招聘武艺超群敢于冲锋陷阵的武职人员，一份招聘善于审理冤案、疑案的司法人员。
English: Wang Shichong posted three notices outside the gate of the government office: a recruitment of civil servants who are literate and learned enough to help handle government affairs, a recruitment of military personnel who dare to charge into battle, and a recruitment of judicial personnel who are good at hearing unjust cases and doubtful cases.

古文：于是上书陈事，日有数百，世充皆躬自省览，殷勤慰劳。
现代文：从此呈递书函当面介绍以推荐或自荐的，每天都有几百人，王世充一概亲自考核，殷勤慰问款待。
English: Since then, there are hundreds of people every day who submit letters to introduce themselves by recommendation or self-recommendation, and Wang Shichong personally examines them all and provides them with warm hospitality.

古文：好行小惠，下至军营骑士，皆饰辞以诱之。
现代文：他爱搞小恩小惠，从上至下直到部队的普通士卒，都用夸饰动听的言词进行引诱。
English: He likes to engage in small favors, from the top down to the ordinary soldiers of the army, all using boastful and beautiful words to seduce.

古文：当时有识者见其心口相违，颇以怀贰。
现代文：当时的有识之士见他口是心非，断定他怀有二心。
English: Those with insight at the time saw that he was duplicitous and concluded that he harbored double-mindedness.

古文：世充尝于侗前赐食，还家大呕吐，疑遇毒所致，自是不复朝请，与侗绝矣。
现代文：王世充有一次在杨侗跟前吃他赏赐的食物，回家大吐一场，怀疑是食物中毒造成的，从此以后不再朝见杨侗，跟他不打照面了。
English: On one occasion, Wang Shichong ate the food he had given to Yang Hui in front of him. When he got home, he vomited profusely, which was suspected to be caused by food poisoning. From then on, he no longer saw Yang Hui in the morning and did not see him again.

古文：遣云定兴、段达入奏于侗，请加九锡之礼。二年三月，遂策授相国，总百揆，封郑王，加九锡备物。
现代文：他派遣云定兴、段达向杨侗禀奏，要求赐给衣服、朱户、纳陛、车马、乐器、虎贲、斧钺、弓矢、禾巨鬯等九种器物，发出了夺取政权的信号。唐高祖武德二年三月，杨侗只得当面发给诏书任命王世充为相国，统管百官，封为郑王，如数赐给九种器物。
English: He sent Yun Dingxing and Duan Da to play for Yang Xuan and asked for nine kinds of articles of clothing, Zhu household, Na Majesty, chariot and horse, musical instruments, vise, axe and sickle, bow and arrow, and huge straw, and sent out a signal to seize power. In March of the second year of the Tang Emperor Gao Wude, Yang Xuan had to personally issue an edict to appoint Wang Shicheng as a relative of the country, to govern the hundred officials, and to be named King Zheng, and to give nine kinds of articles.

古文：有道士桓法嗣者，自言解图谶，乃上《孔子闭房记》，画作丈夫持一竿以驱羊。释云： 隋，杨姓也。
现代文：有一个法号叫桓法嗣的道士，自称善于解释占卜图书，于是呈上《孔子闭房记》，图画为一个男人手持竹竿赶羊，解释说： 隋朝，皇帝姓杨。
English: There was a Taoist with the Dharma name of Huan Faji, who claimed to be good at interpreting divination books, so he presented "Confucius's Secret Diary," a picture of a man driving sheep with a bamboo pole, and explained: In the Sui Dynasty, the emperor's surname was Yang.

古文：干一者，王字也。
现代文：干一嘛，合起来是个 王 字。
English: If you add one to a dry character, it's a king character.

古文：王居羊后，明相国代隋为帝也。 
现代文：王在羊后，预示相国取代隋朝当皇帝。 
English: The king in the sheep indicates that his country will replace the Sui Dynasty as emperor.

古文：又取《庄子人间世》、《德充符》二篇上之，法嗣释曰： 上篇言 世 ，下篇言 充 ，此即相国名矣，明当德被人间，而应符命为天子也。 
现代文：接着拿出《庄子人间世》、《德充符》两篇呈递给王世充，解释说 ：上篇谈 世 ，下篇谈 充 ，这就是相国的名嘛，预示您应当恩德遍布人间，顺应符命当天子。 
English: Then he took out two articles, "The World of Zhuangzi" and "The Virtue of Fulfillment," and presented them to Wang Shicheng, explaining: "The first article is about the world, and the second article is about fulfillment. This is the name of your country, and it indicates that you should spread kindness throughout the world, and be obedient to the Son of Heaven.

古文：世充大悦曰： 此天命也。 
现代文：王世充十分高兴地说 ：这是上天的旨意呀。 
English: Wang Shichong was very happy and said, "This is fate!"

古文：再拜受之，即以法嗣为谏议大夫。
现代文：拜了两拜接过图谶，立即任命桓法嗣为谏议大夫。
English: Bai Du Bai took over from Tu Yao, and immediately appointed Kuan Fa He to be the chief of consultation.

古文：世充又罗取杂鸟，书帛系其颈，自言符命而散放之。
现代文：王世充又捕捉各种鸟雀，把写好所谓符命的帛系在它们的颈子上，一只一只地放飞。
English: Wang Shichong also caught all kinds of birds and finches, tied the so-called life-signing shackles on their necks, and let them fly one by one.

古文：有弹射得鸟来而献者，亦拜官爵。
现代文：打下这种鸟雀前来进献的人，也授予官职头衔。
English: An official title is also given to the person who shoots the bird.

古文：段达、云定兴等入见于侗曰： 天命不常，郑王功德甚盛，愿陛下揖让告禅，遵唐、虞之迹。 
现代文：段达、云定兴等人把这些符命送进皇宫对杨侗展示说： 天命不是凡间小事，郑王功德很高，请您禅让皇位，仿效唐尧、虞舜的榜样。 
English: Danda, Yun Dingxing and others sent these signs of fate into the imperial palace to show to Yang Xuan and said: Destiny is not a trivial matter, King Zheng's merit is very high, please give up the throne and follow the example of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan.

古文：侗怒曰： 天下者，高祖之天下，若隋德未衰，此言不可发，必天命有改，亦何论于禅让？
现代文：杨侗愤怒地说 ：这天下是高祖的天下，如果我隋朝的气数还没有衰竭，这种话就不该讲，如果天意要改朝换代，那还谈什么禅让不禅让？
English: Yang Hui said angrily, "This world is the world of Gao Zu. If I have not exhausted the energy of the Sui Dynasty, I should not say such things. If the providence wants to change the dynasty, then what is there to talk about?

古文：公等皆是先朝旧臣，忽有斯言，朕复当何所望！ 
现代文：您们各位都是先帝的老臣，突然说出这种话，我真失望啊！ 
English: You are all old ministers of the former emperor, to suddenly say such a thing, I am really disappointed!

古文：段达等莫不流涕。
现代文：段达等人没有谁不流泪。
English: There is no one who does not shed tears for Danda and others.

古文：世充又使人谓曰： 今海内未定，须得长君，待四方乂安，复子明辟。
现代文：王世充又派人对杨侗说 ：现在国内还没有平定，必须有个年长的君主，等到天下太平无事了，恢复您这圣明的皇上。
English: Wang Shichong also sent someone to tell Yang Xuan: The country has not yet been pacified, there must be an elderly monarch, and when there is peace and tranquility in the world, restore your holy emperor.

古文：必若前盟，义不违负。 
现代文：一定遵守以前的盟约，决不违背。 
English: As you have sworn before, you shall not go back on it.

古文：四月，假为侗诏策禅位，遣兄世恽废侗于含凉殿，世充僭即皇帝位，建元曰开明，国号郑。
现代文：同年四月，冒充杨侗发出诏书把隋朝帝位让给王世充，王世充派遣哥哥王世恽到含凉殿废除了杨侗，违法地登上了皇帝宝座，建立年号叫开明，国号叫郑。
English: In April of the same year, impersonating Yang Hui issued an edict to cede the imperial throne of the Sui Dynasty to Wang Shicheng. Wang Shicheng sent his brother Wang Shicheng to the Han Liang Palace to abolish Yang Hui and illegally ascended to the imperial throne. The year of establishment was called Kaiming, and the country was called Zheng.

古文：先封同姓王隆为淮阳王，整为东郡王，楷为冯翊王，素为乐安王。
现代文：先封族人王隆为淮阳王，王整为东郡王，王楷为冯翊王，王素为乐安王。
English: Wang Long, a member of the Qianfeng ethnic group, is the king of Huaiyang, Wang Jie is the king of Dongguan, Wang Kai is the king of Fenghuang, and Wang Su is the king of Le'an.

古文：次封叔琼为陈王，兄世衡为秦王，世伟为楚王，世恽为齐王。
现代文：再封叔父王琼为陈王；哥哥王世衡为秦王，王世伟为楚王，王世恽为齐王。
English: Re-appointed uncle Wang Qiong as the King of Chen; brother Wang Shiheng as the King of Qin, Wang Shihwei as the King of Chu, and Wang Shihong as the King of Qi.

古文：又封琼子辩为杞王，衡子虔寿为蔡王，伟子弘烈为魏王，行本为荆王，琬为代王；恽子仁则为唐王，道诚为卫王，道询为赵王，道夌为燕王；兄世师子太为宋王，君度为越王。
现代文：还封王琼的儿子王辩为杞王；王世衡的儿子王虔寿为蔡王；王世伟的儿子王弘烈为魏王，王行本为荆王，王琬为代王；王世恽的儿子王仁则为唐王，王道诚为卫王，王道询为赵王，王道眣为燕王；他哥哥王世师的儿子王太为宋王，王君度为越王。
English: He also named Wang Qiong's son, Wang Fen, as the king of Qi; Wang Shiheng's son, Wang Qianshou, as the king of Cai; Wang Shihwei's son, Wang Honglie, as the king of Wei; Wang Xingben as the king of Jing; Wang Qian as the king of Wei; Wang Shihong's son, Wang Ren, as the king of Tang; Wang Daocheng as the king of Wei; Wang Daoyun as the king of Zhao; Wang Daojun as the king of Yan; his brother, Wang Shishi's son, Wang Taizhi, as the king of Song; and

古文：立子玄应为皇太子，封子玄恕为汉王。
现代文：立儿子王玄应为皇太子，封儿子王玄恕为汉王。
English: The son of Wang Xuan should be crown prince, and the son of Wang Xuan should be crown prince.

古文：世充每听朝，必殷勤诲谕，言辞重复，千端万绪，百司奉事，疲于听受。
现代文：王世充每当接受群臣朝见处理政务，都要情意恳切地指教一番，语言重复，千头万绪，朝廷所有侍奉他的官员，都为他的频繁差遣而疲惫不堪。
English: Whenever Wang Shichong received courtiers from the court to deal with government affairs, he had to earnestly instruct them. The language was repetitive and there were thousands of officials. All the officials at the court who served him were exhausted by his frequent dispatches.

古文：或轻骑游历街衢，亦不清道，百姓但避路而已，按辔徐行，谓百姓曰： 昔时天子深坐九重，在下事情，无由闻彻。
现代文：他有时带上几个随从人员到通衢要道上巡视，并不布置警戒禁止行人，百姓只让让路就行了，拉紧马缰慢步行走，对百姓们说 ：以往的皇帝高坐在宫廷里头，民间的情况，无法了解透彻。
English: He would sometimes take a few of his attendants to inspect the main roads leading to Tonglu. He did not set up a guard to prohibit pedestrians. The people only had to give way. He would walk slowly, pulling his horse's reins tight. He said to the people: The previous emperors sat at the head of the court, unable to thoroughly understand the situation of the people.

古文：世充非贪宝位，本欲救时，今当如一州刺史，每事亲览，当与士庶共评朝政。
现代文：我王世充不是贪恋皇位，根本目的是要挽救艰危的时局，我现在应该像一个州刺史，每件事情都要亲自处理，应该跟黎民百姓一起评论朝政得失。
English: I, Wang Shichong, am not greedy for the throne. The fundamental purpose is to save the difficult current situation. I should now be like a state historian, dealing with everything personally. I should comment on the gains and losses of the government together with the people.

古文：恐门禁有限，虑致壅塞，今止顺天门外置座听朝。 
现代文：担心宫门禁令有着限制，大家的意见传不进去，如今在顺天门外安置座位处理政务。 
English: Worried that the ban on the palace gate has limitations and that everyone's opinions will not be heard, seats are now being placed outside the palace gate to handle government affairs.

古文：又令西朝堂受抑屈，东朝堂受直谏。
现代文：又命令在西朝堂受理诉讼案件，在东朝堂听取批评建议。
English: He also ordered that lawsuits be accepted in the West Court and criticisms and suggestions be heard in the East Court.

古文：于是献书上事，日有数百，条疏既烦，省览难遍，数日后不复更出。
现代文：于是呈递书信陈述意见，每天有几百人，书信奏疏已很烦杂，考虑难得周全，几天之后就不再出宫。
English: As a result, several hundred people submitted letters to state their opinions every day. The letters were already very complicated and considered, and after a few days they would no longer leave the palace.

古文：五月，世充礼部尚书裴仁基及其子左辅大将军行俨、尚书左丞宇文儒童等数十人谋诛世充，复尊立侗。
现代文：同年五月，王世充的礼部尚书裴仁基以及他的儿子左辅大将军裴行俨、尚书左丞宇文儒童等几十人商议处死王世充，再次拥立杨侗为皇帝。
English: In May of the same year, Wang Shizhong's ceremonial head, Shangshu Pei Renji, and his son, Zuo Fu Da Geng Pei Xingtao, Shangshu Zuo Yu Wen Ru Tong, and dozens of others discussed the death of Wang Shizhong and the reinstatement of Yang Jie as emperor.

古文：事泄，皆见害，夷其三族。
现代文：事情泄露，全被杀害，灭绝他们的三族。
English: When the affair became known, they were all killed, and their three tribes were exterminated.

古文：六月，世恽因劝世充害侗，以绝众望。
现代文：六月，王世恽趁机而鼓动王世充杀掉杨侗，以使断绝人们复辟的念头。
English: In June, Wang Shihong took the opportunity to encourage Wang Shichong to kill Yang Hui, so as to cut off people's thoughts of restoration.

古文：世充遣其侄行本鸩杀侗，谥曰恭皇帝。
现代文：王世充派遣自己的侄儿王行本用鸩毒杀害了杨侗，给了个称号叫恭皇帝。
English: Wang Shichong sent his nephew Wang Xingben to kill Yang Hui with poison and gave him the title of Emperor Gong.

古文：其将军罗士信率其众千余人来降。
现代文：杨侗的将军罗士信带领一千多个士卒投降。
English: Yang Hui's general, Luo Shixin, led more than a thousand soldiers to surrender.

古文：十月，世充率众东徇地，至于滑州，仍以兵临黎阳。
现代文：十月，王世充率领人马向东攻占土地，打到滑州，接着带兵来到黎阳。
English: In October, Wang Shichong led the troops eastward to occupy the land, reaching Leshou, and then led the troops to Liyang.

古文：十一月，窦建德入世充之殷州，杀掠居人，焚烧积聚，以报黎阳之役。
现代文：十一月，窦建德攻入王世充的殷州，屠杀抢劫当地居民，焚烧王世充的粮仓，作为对黎阳一仗失利的报复。
English: In November, Dou Jiande invaded Wang Shizhong's Yinzhou, massacred and robbed local residents, and burned Wang Shizhong's granary as revenge for the defeat in the Battle of Liyang.

古文：三年二月，世充殿中监豆卢达来降。
现代文：武德三年二月，王世充的殿中监豆卢达投降李唐朝廷。
English: In February of the third year of Wude, the overseer of Wang Shichong's palace, Dou Luda, surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：世充见众心日离，乃严刑峻制，家一人逃者，无少长皆坐为戮，父子、兄弟、夫妻许其相告而免之。
现代文：王世充见人心一天一天散失，就用酷刑严厉控制，家里有一个人逃跑，全家不论老少都株连被杀，父子、兄弟、夫妻之间只要告发就可免罪。
English: Wang Shifeng saw that people's hearts were being scattered day by day, so he used torture to strictly control them. One person in the family ran away, and the whole family, regardless of age, was killed. Fathers, sons, brothers, and husbands and wives could be exonerated as long as they reported the crime.

古文：又令五家相保，有全家叛去而邻人不觉者，诛及四邻。
现代文：又命令五家为一保，互相监督，如果有人全家叛逃而邻居没有发觉，四周的邻居都要处死。
English: He also ordered that the five families should be protected as one, and they should supervise each other. If someone's whole family defected and the neighbors did not find out, all the neighbors would be put to death.

古文：杀人相继，其逃亡益甚。至于樵采之人，出入皆有限数，公私窘急，皆不聊生。
现代文：处死的事接连不断，人们叛逃越来越厉害，甚至上山砍柴的人，出去回来都有时间限制，弄得公家私人人人自危，都无法生活。
English: The executions keep happening, people are defecting more and more, and even people who go to the mountains to cut firewood have a time limit to go out and come back, making everyone in the public and private sectors at risk and unable to live.

古文：又以宫城为大狱，意有所忌，即收系其人及家属于宫中。
现代文：并且把宫廷作为大监狱，只要产生怀疑，就把人家连同家属捆绑起来送进宫廷关押。
English: Moreover, the court was used as a large prison, and if there was any doubt, the person and his family were tied up and sent to the court for detention.

古文：又每使诸将出外，亦收其亲属质于宫内。
现代文：每当派遣将领出外作战，也把他的亲属拘留在宫里作为人质。
English: Whenever a general was sent out to fight, his relatives were also detained in the palace as hostages.

古文：囚者相次，不减万口，既艰食，馁死者日数十人。
现代文：被囚禁的人一个紧挨一个，不少于一万人，没有食物，饥饿而死的一天几十人。
English: No less than ten thousand people were imprisoned one next to the other, without food, and dozens died of hunger every day.

古文：世充屯兵不散，仓粟日尽，城中人相食。
现代文：王世充在中央大量囤积兵马而不把他们遣散到地方，库存的粮食很快吃光，城里的人吃人肉。
English: Wang Shichong amassed a large number of soldiers and horses in the center without sending them to the provinces. The grain reserves were quickly exhausted, and the people in the city ate human flesh.

古文：或握土置甕中，用水淘汰，沙石沉下，取其上浮泥，投以米屑，作饼饵而食之，人皆体肿而脚弱，枕倚于道路。
现代文：有的人抓来泥土放进瓦瓮，用水淘洗，沙石沉在底下，取出浮在上面的泥浆，把糠麸掺在里头，做成饼子来吃，人人都身体肿胀而腿脚发软，一个个躺在道路上。
English: Some of them took earth and put it in a pot, and washed it with water. Sand and gravel sank to the bottom, and they took out the mud that floated on the surface, mixed it with earthworms, and made cakes to eat. Everyone's body was swollen, and their legs and feet were weak, and they were all lying on the road.

古文：其尚书郎卢君业、郭子高等皆死于沟壑。
现代文：王世充的尚书郎卢君业、郭子高等人都饿死在山沟里。
English: Wang Shichong's disciple Lu Junye and Guo Zi Gaoliang both starved to death in the ravine.

古文：七月，秦王率兵攻之，师至新安，世充镇堡相次来降。
现代文：同年七月，秦王李世民率领军队进攻王世充，到达新安，王世充各城镇守军纷纷投降。
English: In July of the same year, Qin King Li Shimin led an army to attack Wang Shichong and reached Xin'an. The defenders of Wang Shichong's towns surrendered one after another.

古文：八月，秦王陈兵于青城宫，世充悉兵来拒，隔涧而言曰： 隋末丧乱，天下分崩，长安、洛阳，各有分地，世充唯愿自守，不敢西侵。
现代文：八月，秦王在青城宫摆开了战斗阵式，王世充统率全部军队抵御，隔着涧水说： 隋朝末年死丧祸乱不断发生，国家分崩离析，长安、洛阳，各有管辖区域，我只想守住自己的地盘，不想向西扩展。
English: In August, the Qin king set up a battle formation in the Qingcheng Palace. Wang Shicheng led all the troops to resist, and said across the Surabaya: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, death and disaster continued to occur. The country was falling apart. Chang'an and Luoyang each had their own jurisdiction areas. I only wanted to hold on to my territory and did not want to expand westward.

古文：计熊、谷二州，相去非远，若欲取之，岂非度内？
现代文：熊、二州的距离，相距并不遥远，如果想要得到，难道不是想要就要的事？
English: Xiong, the distance between the two states is not far. If you want to get it, isn't it a matter of wanting it?

古文：既敦邻好，所以不然。
现代文：我愿结为友好邻邦，所以没有这样做。
English: I wanted to be a friendly neighbor, so I didn't do it.

古文：王乃盛相侵轶，远入吾地，三崤之道，千里馈粮，以此出师，未见其可。 
现代文：秦王您才是对我大举突然袭击，老远地跑到我的地盘上来，靠着三崤山的崎岖小道，千里迢迢运送粮草，在这种情况下出兵征战，我还看不出那怎么能取胜。 
English: It was you, King Qin, who suddenly attacked me in a big way. You came to my territory from far away, along the rugged trails of the Three Mountains, carrying grain and grass for thousands of miles. In this situation, you sent troops to fight. I still don't see how you can win.

古文：太宗谓曰： 四海之内，皆承正朔，唯公执迷，独阻声教。
现代文：太宗李世民对王世充说： 全国各地，都接受我大唐制度，只有你先生执迷不悟，单单地阻止我大唐的声威教化。
English: Taizong Li Shimin said to Wang Shichong: All over the country, they all accept my Great Tang system. Only your husband is stubborn and refuses to understand, and simply prevents my Great Tang from becoming a glorified teaching.

古文：东都士庶，亟请王师，关中义勇，感恩致力。
现代文：东都洛阳的百姓，一再请求我皇家军队，我关中的正义之师，感怀恩德愿尽力拼杀。
English: The people of Luoyang, the eastern capital, have repeatedly asked my royal army, the righteous division of my Guanzhong, to be willing to fight as hard as possible.

古文：至尊重违众愿，有斯吊伐。
现代文：皇上几次没有答应百姓的请求，这次才出兵讨伐有罪的人来抚慰天下民众。
English: The emperor several times did not agree to the people's request, only this time he sent troops to fight the guilty to appease the people of the world.

古文：若转祸来降，则富贵可保；如欲相抗，无假多言。 
现代文：你如果变祸为福前来投降，那么富贵就有保障，如想抗拒，就没有时间多说了。 
English: If you surrender to misfortune for good, then wealth is guaranteed, if you want to resist, there is no time to say more.

古文：世充无以报。
现代文：王世充无话回答。
English: Wang Shicheng was speechless.

古文：太宗分遣诸将攻其城镇，所至辄下。
现代文：太宗分头派遣各路将士进攻王世充的城镇，一打就胜。
English: Taizong sent soldiers from all directions to attack Wang Shichong's town, and won by a dozen.

古文：九月，王君廓攻拔世充之轘辕县，东徇地至管城而还，于是河南州县相次降附。
现代文：九月，王君廓攻克王世充的頧辕县，一直向东攻占到管城才返回，于是河南的各个州县纷纷投降归附。
English: In September, Wang Junku defeated Wang Shichong's Jixian County, and went east to capture Guancheng before returning. As a result, all the states and counties in Henan surrendered one after another.

古文：窦建德自侵殷州之后，与世充遂结深隙，信使断绝。
现代文：窦建德自从进犯殷州之后，就跟王世充结下了深深的怨恨，断绝了联系。
English: Ever since Dou Jiande attacked Yinzhou, he developed a deep grudge against Wang Shicheng and broke off contact.

古文：十一月，窦建德又遣人结好，并陈救援之意。
现代文：十一月，窦建德又派人去讲和，并且表示愿意援助王世充。
English: In November, Dou Jiande also sent someone to talk peace, and expressed his willingness to assist Wang Shichong.

古文：世充乃遣其兄子琬及内史令长孙安世报聘，且乞师。
现代文：王世充就派遣他哥哥的儿子王琬和内史令长孙安世回访，请求出兵援助。
English: Wang Shichong sent his brother's son, Wang Qian, and the Chief of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, Sun Anshi, to return the visit and ask for military assistance.

古文：四年二月，世充率兵出方诸门，与王师相抗，世充军败。因乘胜追之，屯其城门。世充步卒不得入，惊散南走，追斩数千级，虏五千余人。
现代文：武德四年二月，王世充率领军队出方诸门，跟李唐朝廷的军队对抗，王世充的军队败退，李唐朝廷的军队乘胜追击，在城门外驻守，王世充的步兵不能进城，惊恐溃散向南逃跑，李唐朝廷的军队追杀了几千人，俘虏了五千多人。
English: In February of the 4th year of Wude, Wang Shichong led the army out of Fangzhumen and confronted the army of Li Tang's court. Wang Shichong's army was defeated, Li Tang's army pursued the victory and stationed outside the city gate. Wang Shichong's infantry could not enter the city, panicked and scattered to the south to escape. The army of Li Tang's court killed several thousand people and captured more than five thousand people.

古文：世充从此不复敢出，但婴城自守，以待建德之援。
现代文：王世充从此以后不敢再出城，只是环城固守，等待窦建德的救援。
English: From then on, Wang Shichong did not dare to go out of the city again, but stuck to the ring of the city, waiting for Dou Jiande's rescue.

古文：三月，秦王擒建德并王琬、长孙安世等于武牢，回至东都城下以示之，且遣安世入城，使言败状。
现代文：三月，秦王在武牢活捉了窦建德和王琬、长孙安世等人，回到洛阳城外把他们给王世充观看，并且派长孙安世进城，让他去讲失败的情况。
English: In March, King Qin captured Dou Jiande, Wang Yao, and his eldest son An Shih alive in Wuyong, and returned to Luoyang to show them to Wang Shihong, and sent his eldest son An Shih into the city to tell him about the failure.

古文：世充惶惑，不知所为，将溃围而出，南走襄阳，谋于诸将，皆不答，乃率其将吏诣军门请降。
现代文：王世充惊慌疑惑，不知道怎么办，打算冲出包围，向南逃往襄阳，跟将领们商议，都不应声，只得统领文武官员到秦王的军营门前请求投降。
English: Wang Shichong panicked and doubted, not knowing what to do. He planned to break out of the encirclement and flee south to Xiangyang. He consulted with the generals, but they did not respond. He had to lead the civil and military officials to the front of Qin Wang's military camp to request surrender.

古文：于是收其府库，颁赐将士。
现代文：于是没收王世充库存的财物，颁发赏赐秦王的官兵。
English: As a result, Wang Shichong's treasury was confiscated, and rewards were given to Qin's officers and soldiers.

古文：世充黄门侍郎薛德音以文檄不逊，先诛之，次收世充党与段达、杨注、单雄信、杨公卿、郭士衡、郭什柱、董浚、张童仁、硃粲等十余人，皆戮于洛渚之上。
现代文：王世充的黄门侍郎薛德音由于在他草拟的文书中写了大不恭敬的话，最先杀掉，接着拘捕王世充的同党段达、杨汪、单雄信、阳公卿、郭士衡、郭什柱、董浚、张童仁、朱粲等十多人，都绑赴洛水的小洲上斩首示众。
English: Because Wang Shichong's Yellow Gate attendant, Xue Deyin, wrote very disrespectful words in the document he drafted, he was first killed, and then arrested Wang Shichong's fellow party members Danda, Yang Wang, Shan Xiongxin, Yang Gongqing, Guo Shigeng, Guo Shizhu, Dong Jun, Zhang Tongren, Zhu Xi and more than ten others, all of whom were tied up and beheaded on the small island of Luoshui.

古文：秦王以世充至长安，高祖数其罪，世充对曰： 计臣之罪，诚不容诛，但陛下爱子秦王许臣不死。 
现代文：秦王把王世充带到长安，高祖历数他的罪行，王世充回答说： 按照我的罪过，实在是死有余辜，但您的爱子秦王曾许诺不杀我。 
English: King Qin brought Wang Shichong to Chang'an, Gaozhu recounted his crimes, and Wang Shichong replied: "According to my sins, I really deserve to die, but your beloved son, King Qin, once promised not to kill me.

古文：高祖乃释之。
现代文：高祖于是释放了他。
English: Gaozu then released him.

古文：与兄苪、妻、子同徙于蜀，将行，为仇人定州刺史独孤修所杀。
现代文：他和哥哥王絏、老婆、孩子一起流放蜀州，正准备动身，就被仇人定州刺史独孤修杀死。
English: He was exiled to Shuzhou together with his brother Wang Yao, his wife and child, and was preparing to leave when he was killed by his enemy Dingzhou Shishi Duxiu.

古文：子玄应及兄世伟等在路谋叛，伏诛。
现代文：他的儿子王玄应和哥哥王世伟等人在流放途中阴谋叛乱，受了死刑。
English: His son, Wang Xuanying, and his brother, Wang Shwei, plotted a rebellion while in exile and were sentenced to death.

古文：世充自篡位，凡三年而灭。
现代文：王世充从篡夺杨侗的帝位，共三年时间就灭亡了。
English: It took a total of three years for Wang Shichong to perish after he usurped the imperial throne from Yang Hui.

古文：窦建德，贝州漳南人也。
现代文：窦建德，贝州漳南县人。
English: Dou Jiande, a native of Beizhou's Yinan County.

古文：少时，颇以然诺为事。
现代文：年轻时，把履行诺言看得很重。
English: When he was young, he put a lot of emphasis on keeping his promises.

古文：尝有乡人丧亲，家贫无以葬，时建德耕于田中，闻而叹息，遽辍耕牛，往给丧事，由是大为乡党所称。
现代文：曾经有个同乡死了父母，家境贫寒无力安葬，当时窦建德正在耕田，听到后直叹气，立即放下农活，主动送去办理丧事所需要的全部财物，因此深受乡亲们称赞。
English: There was once a fellow villager whose parents had died and whose family was too poor to bury them. At the time, Dou Jiande was working in the fields. Upon hearing this, he immediately let go of his farm work and took the initiative to send all the property needed to handle the funeral. As a result, he was praised by the villagers.

古文：初，为里长，犯法亡去，会赦得归。
现代文：原先，他当过里长，因犯法逃出去了，碰到朝廷大赦天下才回家。
English: Originally, he had been a lieutenant colonel and had escaped for breaking the law, only to return home when he was pardoned by the imperial court.

古文：父卒，送葬者千余人，凡有所赠，皆让而不受。
现代文：他父亲去世，送葬的有一千多人，凡是有人送礼，一概辞谢而不接受。
English: When his father died, there were more than a thousand people who attended the funeral. If anyone gave him a gift, he refused to accept it.

古文：大业七年，募人讨高丽，本郡选勇敢尤异者以充小帅，遂补建德为二百人长。
现代文：隋炀帝大业七年，朝廷招兵征讨高丽，郡里挑选勇敢优异的人当小帅，于是委任窦建德为二百人长。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Sui, the imperial court recruited soldiers to fight against Goryeo, and the county selected brave and outstanding people to be junior commanders, so Dou Jiande was appointed as the commander of 200 soldiers.

古文：时山东大水，人多流散，同县有孙安祖，家为水所漂，妻子馁死。
现代文：当时山东发生水灾，百姓大多逃荒去了，同县有个孙安祖，房屋财产被洪水冲走，老婆孩子饥饿而死。
English: At that time, floods occurred in Shandong, and most of the people fled to the countryside. There was a Sun Anzu in the same county. Houses and property were washed away by the floods, and his wife and children died of starvation.

古文：县以安祖骁勇，亦选在行中。
现代文：县里看上孙安祖骁勇，也把他选进了队伍。
English: The county was impressed with Sun Anzu's bravery and selected him to join the team.

古文：安祖辞贫，白言漳南令，令怒笞之。安祖刺杀令，亡投建德，建德舍之。
现代文：孙安祖以家庭贫穷为理由不愿入伍，向漳南县令当面申说，县令大发脾气狠狠打他，孙安祖杀死县令，逃跑投奔窦建德，窦建德收留了他。
English: On the grounds that his family was poor, Sun Anzu did not want to enlist in the army. He told the Yinan County magistrate in person that the county magistrate lost his temper and beat him severely. Sun Anzu killed the county magistrate, fled to Dou Jiande, and Dou Jiande took him in.

古文：是岁，山东大饥，建德谓安祖曰： 文皇帝时，天下殷盛，发百万之众以伐辽东，尚为高丽所败。
现代文：这一年，山东大闹饥荒，窦建德对孙安祖说： 文帝在位时，天下富裕兴旺，派出百万人马征讨辽东，尚且被高丽打败。
English: In that year, Shandong was ravaged by famine. Dou Jiande said to Sun Anzu: "When Emperor Wen was on the throne, the world was prosperous. He sent a million men to conquer Liaodong, but was defeated by Goryeo.

古文：今水潦为灾，黎庶穷困，而主上不恤，亲驾临辽，加以往岁西征，疮痍未复，百姓疲弊，累年之役，行者不归，今重发兵，易可摇动。
现代文：今年发生水灾，百姓贫困，但皇上不体恤民情，要亲自到辽东督战，加上往年西征，损伤的元气还没有恢复，百姓疲劳困乏，连年征战，长年在外的人不能回家，如今又要出兵，容易酿成动乱。
English: Floods occurred this year, the people are poor, but the emperor does not sympathize with the people's feelings, he has to personally go to the Liaodong governor's war, coupled with the previous year's western expedition, the injured vitality has not been restored, the people are tired and exhausted, they have been fighting for years, and those who have been away for a long time cannot go home, and now they have to send troops, which is likely to lead to turmoil.

古文：丈夫不死，当立大功，岂可为逃亡之虏也？
现代文：男子汉大丈夫只要不死，就该建功立业，怎能去当仓皇逃跑的俘虏啊。
English: A man is all right as long as he does not die, he should build a career, how can he be a prisoner who runs away in a panic.

古文：我知高鸡泊中广大数百里，莞蒲阻深，可以逃难，承间而出，虏掠足以自资。既得聚人，且观时变，必有大功于天下矣。 
现代文：我熟悉高鸡泊面积辽阔方圆几百里，湖沼上的蒲草又密又深，可以到那里去隐藏起来，找机会出来抢劫，足够生活、积蓄，拉起人马以后，等待时局动荡，必然干出一番惊天动地的大事业。 
English: I am familiar with the vast expanse of several hundred miles around Gaochipo. The rushes on the lake are dense and deep. You can go there to hide, find opportunities to rob, enough to live and save. After pulling up people and horses, waiting for the turbulent situation, you will inevitably do the most earth-shattering great cause.

古文：安祖然其计。
现代文：孙安祖赞同他的计划。
English: Sun Anzu approved of his plan.

古文：建德招诱逃兵及无产业者，得数百人，令安祖率之，入泊中为群盗，安祖自称将军。
现代文：窦建德招集引诱逃避征兵和没有家产的，得到了几百人，让孙安祖带领，进高鸡泊当草寇，孙安祖自称将军。
English: Dou Jiande recruited and enticed hundreds of men to evade conscription and those who had no family property, and let Sun Anzu lead them into Gaojinbo as a grasshopper. Sun Anzu called himself a general.

古文：鄃人张金称亦结聚得百人，在河阻中。
现代文：俞阝县人张金称也邀集了上百人，在黄河的险要水域活动。
English: Zhang Jin, a resident of Handan County, said that he had also invited hundreds of people to participate in activities in the dangerous waters of the Yellow River.

古文：蓚人高士达又起兵得千余人，在清河界中。
现代文：艹县人高士达又兴兵造反招集了一千多人，在清河郡一带活动。
English: More than a thousand people were mobilized by the high-ranking officials of Min County to form an armed rebellion, which was active in the area of Qinghe County.

古文：时诸盗往来漳南者，所过皆杀掠居人，焚烧舍宅，独不入建德之闾。
现代文：当时往来于漳南县境的各股盗匪，沿路屠杀抢劫当地百姓，焚烧房屋，惟独不到窦建德的家乡骚扰。
English: At that time, various groups of robbers traveled to and from the territory of Yinan County, slaughtering and robbing local people along the road, burning houses, but they did not harass Dou Jiande's hometown.

古文：由是郡县意建德与贼徒交结，收系家属，无少长皆杀之。
现代文：因此郡里县里料定窦建德跟盗匪们相互勾结，就拘捕了他的家属，不论老少都杀掉了。
English: Therefore, the county suspected Dou Jiande of colluding with the robbers and arrested his family members, killing them all, young and old.

古文：建德闻其家被屠灭，率麾下二百人亡归。
现代文：窦建德听到他全家已被杀光，率领他手下的两百人逃跑投靠了高士达。
English: When Dou Jiande heard that his entire family had been killed, he led two hundred of his men to flee and joined Gao Shida.

古文：士达自称东海公，以建德为司兵。
现代文：高士达自称东海公，任命窦建德为司兵。
English: Gao Shida claimed to be the ruler of the East China Sea and appointed Dou Jiande as a sergeant.

古文：后安祖为张金称所杀，其兵数千人又尽归于建德。
现代文：后来孙安祖被张金称杀掉，他的几千名士卒又全部投奔窦建德。
English: Later, Sun Anzu was killed by Zhang Jin, and his thousands of followers all fled to Dou Jiande.

古文：自此渐盛，兵至万余人，犹往来高鸡泊中。
现代文：从此逐渐壮大，队伍发展到一万多人，还是在高鸡泊一带活动。
English: Since then, it has gradually grown, and the team has grown to more than 10,000 people, and is still active in the Gaojinbo area.

古文：每倾身接物，与士卒均执勤苦，由是能致人之死力。
现代文：他往往拿出身上的所有财物接济别人，跟士卒一样吃苦耐劳，因此能激发人们为他拼命。
English: He tends to help others with all the wealth he was born with, and works hard like a soldier, so he can inspire people to work hard for him.

古文：十二年，涿郡通守郭绚率兵万余人来讨士达。
现代文：大业十二年，涿州通守郭绚率领一万多人马到高鸡泊讨伐高士达。
English: In the 12th year of the Taiei era, Guo Hua, the governor of Zhangzhou, led more than ten thousand people to Gaoji Po to fight Gao Shida.

古文：士达自以智略不及建德，乃进为军司马，咸以兵授焉。
现代文：高士达自己知道智慧谋略不如窦建德，就提升他为军司马，把军权全部交给了他。
English: Gao Shida himself knew that his wisdom and strategy were not as good as Dou Jiande, so he promoted him to the position of army chief and handed over all military power to him.

古文：建德既初董众，欲立奇功以威群贼，请士达守辎重，自简精兵七千人以拒绚，诈为与士达有隙而叛之。
现代文：窦建德初次统领兵众，想建立奇功来显示自己的威严，请高士达守卫军用物资，自己精选强兵七千人抵御郭绚，假装跟高士达闹矛盾而叛离他。
English: Dou Jiande led the troops for the first time, wanted to establish a miracle to show his majesty, asked Gao Shida to guard military supplies, and selected seven thousand strong soldiers to resist Guo Huan, pretending to quarrel with Gao Shida and defecting from him.

古文：士达又宣言建德背亡，而取虏获妇人绐为建德妻子，于军中杀之。
现代文：高士达又宣扬说窦建德叛逃，还拉出一名俘虏来的女人诈说成窦建德的妻子，当着留守部队的面杀掉。
English: Gao Shida also spread the rumor that Dou Jiande had defected. He also dragged out a woman who had been captured and deceived her into thinking she was Dou Jiande's wife, and killed her in front of the remaining troops.

古文：建德伪遣人遗绚书请降，愿为前驱，破士达以自效。
现代文：窦建德装假派人送信给郭绚请求投降，愿意当先头部队，打败高士达来为自己报仇。
English: Dou Jiande pretended to send someone to Guo Hua to request surrender, and was willing to be the vanguard and defeat Gao Shida to avenge himself.

古文：约信之，即引兵从建德至长河界，期与为盟，共图士达。
现代文：郭绚相信了，就带领军队跟随窦建德来到长河边界，准备跟他订立盟约，共同设法干掉高士达。
English: Guo Hua believed it, and led the army to follow Dou Jiande to the Changhe border, ready to sign a covenant with him and jointly try to kill Gao Shida.

古文：绚兵益懈而不备，建德袭之，大破绚军，杀略数千人，获马千余匹，绚以数十骑遁走，遣将追及于平原，斩其首以献士达。
现代文：郭绚的军队更加松懈而不做防备，窦建德突然攻打他们，大败郭绚，杀死俘获几千人，得到战马一千多匹，郭绚带着几十个人悄悄逃走，派遣部将一直追赶到平原县，斩下他的首级进献给高士达。
English: Guo Huan's army was more lax and unprepared. Dou Jiande suddenly attacked them, defeated Guo Huan, killed and captured thousands of people, and obtained more than a thousand horses. Guo Huan quietly fled with dozens of people. The dispatching department would chase him all the way to Pingyuan County, and cut off his head and presented it to Gao Shida.

古文：由是建德之势益振。
现代文：从此窦建德的权势更加提高。
English: Since then, Dou Jiande's influence has increased even more.

古文：隋遣太仆卿杨义臣率兵万余人讨张金称，破之于清河，所获贼众皆屠灭，余散在草泽间者复相聚而投建德。
现代文：杨隋朝廷派太仆卿杨义臣率领一万多人讨伐张金称，在清河打败了他，抓到张金称的士卒都杀掉了，逃散在湖沼中的残兵又集合起来投奔窦建德。
English: Yang Yichen, who led more than ten thousand people to fight against Zhang Jin, said that he defeated him in Qinghe. The soldiers who caught Zhang Jin were all killed. The remaining soldiers who fled and scattered in the lake gathered together and went to Dou Jiande.

古文：义臣乘胜至平原，欲入高鸡泊中，建德谓士达曰： 历观隋将，善用兵者，唯义臣耳。
现代文：杨义臣乘胜进军来到平原县，准备打进高鸡泊里，窦建德对高士达说： 数遍隋朝的所有将领，会打仗的只有杨义臣。
English: When Yang Yichen marched to Pingyuan County after his victory and was preparing to enter Gaochibori, Dou Jiande said to Gao Shida: All the generals of the Sui Dynasty have been to war several times, but only Yang Yichen.

古文：新破金称，远来袭我，其锋不可当。请引兵避之，令其欲战不得，空延岁月，将士疲倦，乘便袭击，可有大功。
现代文：刚刚打败张金称，长途跋涉进攻我们，他们的锐气是不可抵挡的，请让我带着军队避开他们，使他们想打又打不到，白白地拖他几个月，等他的将士们疲劳厌倦了，乘机打他个猝不及防，可以夺取大的胜利。
English: Having just defeated Zhang Jin, he said, "They have come a long way to attack us. Their sharpness is irresistible. Please let me take the army to avoid them, make them want to fight and not be able to fight, drag him for months in vain, wait for his soldiers to get tired and tired, and take the opportunity to hit him off guard, and can win a great victory."

古文：今与争锋，恐公不能敌也。 
现代文：如果眼下跟他争高低，只怕您抵挡不住。 
English: If you compete with him right now, you may not be able to resist.

古文：士达不从其言，因留建德守壁，自率精兵逆击义臣。战小胜，而纵酒高宴，有轻义臣之心。
现代文：高士达不听他的意见，便留下窦建德守卫大本营，自己率领精兵迎战杨义臣，初战取得小小的胜利，就纵情喝酒大摆筵席，产生了轻敌思想。
English: Gao Shida did not listen to his advice, so he left Dou Jiande to guard the base camp. He led the elite soldiers to fight against Yang Yichen. After achieving a small victory in the first battle, he indulged in drinking and had a grand banquet, giving rise to the idea of a light enemy.

古文：建德闻之曰： 东海公未能破贼而自矜大，此祸至不久矣。
现代文：窦建德得知后说 ：东海公还没有打败敌人就自高自大，灾祸过不几天就会来了。
English: After learning this, Dou Jiande said: "Tonghaigong has not yet defeated the enemy, he is arrogant, and the disaster will come in a few days."

古文：隋兵乘胜，必长驱至此，人心惊骇，吾恐不全。 
现代文：隋朝的军队乘胜追击，必然径直打到这里，人心震惊恐惧，我怕守不住了。 
English: The army of the Sui Dynasty took advantage of the victory to pursue, and inevitably hit straight here. People were shocked and frightened, and I was afraid I couldn't hold on.

古文：遂留人守壁，自率精锐百余据险，以防士达之败。
现代文：于是留下人马守卫军营，自己带领精兵强将一百多人占据险要位置，以防高士达吃败仗。
English: So he left his men and horses to guard the military camp, and he himself led the elite soldiers to occupy more than a hundred people in a critical position to prevent Gao Shida from losing the battle.

古文：后五日，义臣果大破士达，于阵斩之，乘势追奔，将围建德。
现代文：过了五天，杨义臣果然大败高士达，在战场上斩杀了他，乘胜追击，就要围攻窦建德。
English: After five days, Yang Yichen defeated Gao Shida, killed him on the battlefield, and took advantage of the victory to besiege Dou Jiande.

古文：守兵既少，闻士达败，众皆溃散。
现代文：军营的守兵本来就少，听说高士达已被打败，大家都四散逃跑了。
English: There were only a few guards in the camp. Hearing that Gao Shida had been defeated, everyone scattered and fled.

古文：建德率百余骑亡去，行至饶阳，观其无守备，攻陷之，抚循士众，人多愿从，又得三千余兵。
现代文：窦建德带着一百多人逃走，到了饶阳县，见没有防备，就打下了，安抚城里的士民百姓，很多人愿意跟随他，又有了三千多人马。
English: Dou Jiande fled with more than a hundred people. When he arrived at Raoyang County, he saw that there was no defense, so he attacked and pacified the city's civilians. Many people were willing to follow him, and there were more than three thousand horses.

古文：初，义臣既杀士达，以为建德不足忧。
现代文：开始，杨义臣杀掉高士达后，认为打败窦建德没有问题。
English: At the beginning, after Yang Yichen killed Gao Shida, he thought that there was no problem in defeating Dou Jiande.

古文：建德复还平原，收士达败兵之死者，悉收葬焉。为士达发丧，三军皆缟素。
现代文：窦建德却乘其不备返回平原县，收拾跟随高士达战死者的遗体，都掩埋好，还为高士达举行葬礼，全军穿起白色的丧服。
English: Dou Jiande, however, took advantage of his unpreparedness to return to Pingyuan County, collect the bodies of those who died in the battle with Gao Shida, and bury them. He also held a funeral for Gao Shida, and the whole army wore white mourning clothes.

古文：招集亡卒，得数千人，军复大振，始自称将军。
现代文：又招集逃散的士卒，得到几千人，军队又振奋起来，窦建德开始自称将军。
English: He also called up the soldiers who had run away and got several thousand of them. The army became excited again, and Dou Jiande began to call himself a general.

古文：初，群盗得隋官及山东士子皆杀之，唯建德每获士人，必加恩遇。
现代文：当初，匪徒们捉到隋朝的官吏和当地士绅全都杀掉，惟独窦建德捉到他们，一定以礼相待。
English: At first, the bandits killed all the officials and local gentry of the Sui Dynasty when they caught them, but when Dou Jiande caught them, he treated them with courtesy.

古文：初得饶阳县长宋正本，引为上客，与参谋议。
现代文：最初得到饶阳县的长官宋正本，当作贵客，跟他商讨大计方针。
English: At first, Song Zhengben, the governor of Raoyang County, received him as a distinguished guest and discussed the overall policy with him.

古文：此后隋郡长吏稍以城降之，军容益盛，胜兵十余万人。
现代文：此后隋朝郡县的长官逐渐地献城投降他，军队气势更加兴旺，精兵强将十多万人。
English: After that, the governors of the counties and counties of the Sui Dynasty gradually surrendered to him, and the army was more prosperous, with more than 100,000 strong soldiers.

古文：十三年正月，筑坛场于河间乐寿界中，自称长乐王，年号丁丑，署置官属。
现代文：大业十三年正月，在河间、乐寿两县的交界处设立祭坛举行典礼，自称长乐王，年号就用这年的干支叫丁丑，设置机构委任官吏。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of the Taiei era, an altar was set up and a ceremony was held at the junction of the two counties of Hama and Leju. He called himself Changle Wang, and the year was named after the zodiac animal of the year, Dingwu. An agency was set up to appoint officials.

古文：七月，隋遣右翊卫将军薛世雄率兵三万来讨之，至河间城南，营于七里井。
现代文：七月，杨隋朝廷派遣右翊卫将军薛世雄率领三万人马讨伐窦建德，到河间城南边，在七里井扎营。
English: In July, the Yang and Sui dynasties dispatched General Xue Shixiong of the Right Division of the National Guard, who led 30,000 soldiers to fight Dou Jiande, to the south of the city of Hebei and set up camp at Qilijing.

古文：建德闻世雄至，选精兵数千人伏河间南界泽中，悉拔诸城伪遁，云亡入豆子中。
现代文：窦建德听说薛世雄来了，挑选几千名精兵埋伏在河间县南部边界的沼泽里，各城镇的守军全部拔营伪装偷跑，说是躲进豆子湖里。
English: Dou Jiande heard that Xue Shixiong had arrived and selected several thousand elite soldiers to lie in ambush in the swamp on the southern border of Hema County. The defenders of all the towns pulled out their camps and ran away in disguise, saying that they were hiding in the bean lake.

古文：世雄以为建德畏己，乃不设备。
现代文：薛世雄以为窦建德害怕自己，并不构筑军事设施。
English: Xue Shixiong thought Dou Jiande was afraid of him and did not build military facilities.

古文：建德觇知之，自率敢死士一千人袭击世雄。
现代文：窦建德探清这些情况，亲自率领一千名敢于死拼的士卒袭击薛世雄。
English: Dou Jiande investigated these circumstances and personally led a thousand soldiers who dared to fight to the death to attack Xue Shixiong.

古文：会云雾昼晦，两军不辨，隋军大溃，自相踏藉，死者万余，世雄以数百骑而遁，余军悉陷。
现代文：碰上遍地浓雾，两军辨认不清，隋军撒腿就跑，自相践踏，死了一万多人，薛世雄带着几百人逃走，剩下的部队全被打败。
English: Encountering thick fog all over the place, the two armies could not be identified. The Sui army ran away and trampled on each other, killing more than 10,000 people. Xue Shixiong fled with a few hundred people, and the remaining troops were all defeated.

古文：于是建德进攻河间，频战不下。
现代文：窦建德接着攻打河间县城，多次进攻没有打下。
English: Dou Jiande went on to attack the county seat of Kawama, and failed to defeat the attack several times.

古文：其后城中食尽，又闻炀帝被弑，郡丞王琮率士吏发丧，建德遣使吊之，琮因使者请降，建德退舍具馔以待焉。
现代文：后来城里粮食光了，又得到炀帝被杀的消息，河间郡丞王琮带领官吏向百姓宣告噩耗，窦建德派遣使者进城表示哀悼，王琮乘机托付使者请求投降，窦建德后退三十里办好酒席等着他。
English: Later, the city ran out of grain and received the news that Emperor Qian had been killed. Wang Quan, the governor of Kawama County, led the officials to announce the bad news to the people. Dou Jiande sent an envoy to the city to express his condolences. Wang Quan took the opportunity to entrust the envoy with a request to surrender. Dou Jiande retreated thirty miles and prepared a banquet to wait for him.

古文：琮率官属素服面缚诣军门，建德亲解其缚，与言隋亡之事，琮俯伏裴哀，建德亦为之泣。
现代文：王琮带着官吏们身穿白色丧服、双手反绑在背后来到军营门前，窦建德亲自为他们松绑，跟他们谈论隋朝灭亡的事，王琮低头弯腰伤心痛苦，窦建德也为此而抽泣。
English: Wang Yao took the officials, dressed in white mourning clothes and with their hands tied behind their backs, to the front of the barracks. Dou Jiande personally untied them and talked to them about the demise of the Sui Dynasty. Wang Yao bowed his head in sorrow and pain, and Dou Jiande also sobbed for this.

古文：诸贼帅或进言曰； 琮拒我久，杀伤甚众，计穷方出，今请烹之。 
现代文：有的将领向窦建德提议说： 王琮长时间地抵抗我军，被杀受伤的人很多，没有办法才出城投降，我们要求煮死他。 
English: Some generals proposed to Dou Jiande, saying, "Wang Ye has resisted our army for a long time, many people have been killed and injured, there is no way to leave the city and surrender, we demand that he be boiled to death."

古文：建德曰： 此义士也。
现代文：窦建德说 ：这是一位有节操的人。
English: Dou Jiande said: "This is a man of integrity.

古文：方加擢用，以励事君者，安可杀之！
现代文：正好予以提拔任用，以便鼓励忠心侍奉国君的人，怎么能够杀他。
English: How can someone who was promoted and appointed just to encourage loyal service to the sovereign kill him?

古文：往在泊中共为小盗，容可恣意杀人，今欲安百姓以定天下，何得害忠良乎？ 
现代文：从前在高鸡泊一起当盗匪，也许可以随便杀人，如今要稳定百姓平定天下，怎能伤害忠良呢？ 
English: Once upon a time, when we were bandits together in Gaochipo, we could perhaps kill people at will. Now, if we want to stabilize the people and pacify the world, how can we harm Zhongliang?

古文：因令军中曰： 先与王琮有隙者，今敢动摇，罪三族。 
现代文：于是在军队里传布命令说 ：以前跟王琮有仇的人，如今敢于煽动人心，罪灭三族。 
English: So an order was circulated in the army, saying: "Those who were enemies with Wang Xuan before, now dare to incite the hearts of the people and destroy the three ethnic groups."

古文：即日授琮瀛州刺史。
现代文：当天任命王琮为瀛州刺史。
English: On the same day, Wang Qian was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：始都乐寿，号曰金城宫，自是郡县多下之。
现代文：开始以乐寿为都城，取名叫金城宫，从此攻占了很多郡县。
English: It began with Leju as the capital, named Jincheng Palace, and has since conquered many counties.

古文：武德元年冬至日，于金城宫设会，有五大鸟降于乐寿，群鸟数万从之，经日而去，因改年为五凤。
现代文：唐高祖武德元年冬至那天，窦建德在金城宫聚会文武官员，有五只大鸟降落在乐寿城，几万只鸟雀跟着飞来，整整过了一天才飞走，因此改取年号为五凤。
English: On the day of the winter solstice in the first year of Tang Gao Zuwude, Dou Jiande held a gathering of literary and military officials in the Jinshan Palace. Five large birds landed in Le Shoucheng, followed by tens of thousands of birds and finches. It took a whole day to fly away, so the year number was changed to Wufeng.

古文：有宗城人献玄珪一枚，景城丞孔德绍曰： 昔夏禹膺箓，天锡玄珪。
现代文：有一个宗城人进献一枚玄王圭，景城丞孔德绍说 ：古时夏禹亲受符命，上天赐给玄王圭。
English: There was a man from the same city who presented a piece of Genwanggui, and the Jingcheng chancellor, Kong Deshau, said: In ancient times, Xia Yuqin received the mission, and Heaven gave it to Genwanggui.

古文：今瑞与禹同，宜称夏国。 
现代文：现在吉兆跟夏禹一样，应当称为夏国。 
English: Now, Kiccho, like Xia Yu, should be called Xia Guo.

古文：建德从之。
现代文：窦建德听从了这个建议。
English: Dou Jiande listened to this suggestion.

古文：先是，有上谷贼帅王须拔自号漫天，拥众数万，入掠幽州，中流矢而死。
现代文：在这之前，上谷郡的贼军统帅王须拔自称漫天王，聚集几万人马，进犯幽州，中箭而死。
English: Prior to this, Wang Suba, the commander of the bandits in Shanggu County, claimed to be the King of Heaven, gathered tens of thousands of people and horses, invaded Yuzhou, and was killed by an arrow.

古文：其亚将魏刀兒代领其众，自号历山飞，入据深泽，有徒十万。
现代文：副将魏刀儿接替统率这支人马，自称历山飞，盘踞在深泽县，有十万人马。
English: Vice-commander Wei Tou Er took over the leadership of this team, calling himself Leshan Fei, and is based in Fukasawa County, with a hundred thousand people.

古文：建德与之和，刀兒因弛守备，建德袭破之，又尽并其地。
现代文：窦建德跟他订立和约，魏刀儿就对他放松了防备，窦建德突然袭击，打败了他，吞并了他的全部地盘。
English: Dou Jiande concluded a peace treaty with him, and Wei Toure relaxed his guard against him. Dou Jiande suddenly attacked, defeated him, and annexed all of his territory.

古文：二年，宇文化及僭号于魏县，建德谓其纳言宋正本、内史侍郎孔德绍曰： 吾为隋之百姓数十年矣，隋为吾君二代矣。
现代文：武德二年，宇文化及在魏县僭越称帝，窦建德对他的纳言宋正本、内史侍郎孔德绍说 ：我当隋朝的百姓几十年了，隋朝当我的君主有两代了。
English: In the second year of Wu De, when Emperor Wu of the Sui Dynasty and Emperor Xuan of the Wei Dynasty were crowned in Wei County, Dou Jiande said to his best friend Song Zhengben, the master of history, Kong Deshao: "I have been the people of the Sui Dynasty for decades, and the Sui Dynasty has been my monarch for two generations.

古文：今化及杀之，大逆无道，此吾仇矣，请与诸公讨之，何如？ 
现代文：现在宇文化及杀害了炀帝，大逆不道，他就是我的仇敌了，请让我和各位一起讨伐他，怎么样？ 
English: Now that the Emperor has been overthrown and killed, he has become my enemy. How about letting me fight him with you?

古文：德绍曰： 今海内无主，英雄竞逐，大王以布衣而起漳浦，隋郡县官人莫不争归附者，以大王仗顺而动，义安天下也。
现代文：孔德绍说： 如今国家没有君主，英雄豪杰竞相逐鹿，大王您以普通百姓的身份从漳浦起兵，隋朝郡县的官员没有谁不抢着归附您，是因为您凭倚天意顺应民心行动，用礼义安定天下。
English: Kong Dessau said: Today, the country has no monarch, heroes and heroines compete to chase deer, great king, you started the army as an ordinary citizen from Mapo, and there is no Sui Dynasty county official who does not rush to join you, because you rely on the will of heaven to act in accordance with the people's hearts and use courtesy to stabilize the world.

古文：宇文化及与国连姻，父子兄弟受恩隋代，身居不疑之地，而行弑逆之祸，篡隋自代，乃天下之贼也。
现代文：宇文化及跟朝廷是姻亲关系，父子兄弟都得到隋朝的恩惠，身居不可比拟的高官，却干出杀君叛逆的坏事，篡夺隋朝的皇位，是天下的公敌。
English: Yu Culture and the imperial court are relatives by marriage. Both father and son brothers received the favors of the Sui Dynasty. They were incomparably high-ranking officials, but they committed the evil of killing the prince and usurping the throne of the Sui Dynasty. They are the public enemies of the world.

古文：此而不诛，安用盟主！ 
现代文：对这样的人不给惩处，怎么履行您身为义军领袖的责任？ 
English: How can you fulfil your responsibilities as a rebel leader if you do not punish such people?

古文：建德称善。
现代文：窦建德说好。
English: Dou Jiande said yes.

古文：即日引兵讨化及，连战，大破之。
现代文：当天就带领部队讨伐宇文化及，连续几仗大败宇文化及。
English: On the same day, he led the troops to fight against and win several battles in succession.

古文：化及保聊城，建德纵撞车抛石，机巧绝妙，四面攻城，陷之。
现代文：宇文化及退守聊城，窦建德放抛石车投掷石块，装置极端灵巧，四面攻城，终于攻陷。
English: After Yu Wenchuan retreated to Liaocheng, Dou Jiande launched a stone-throwing vehicle to throw stones. The device was extremely dexterous, attacked the city from all sides, and finally fell.

古文：建德入城，先谒隋萧皇后，与语称臣。
现代文：窦建德进城之后，先去拜见萧皇后，跟她讲话自己称臣。
English: After Dou Jiande entered the city, he first went to see Empress Xiao and spoke to her, praising himself.

古文：悉收弑炀帝元谋者宇文智及、杨士览、元武达、许弘仁、孟景，集隋文武官，对而斩之，枭首辕门之外。
现代文：拘捕杀害炀帝的全部主谋人宇文智及、杨士览、元武达、许弘仁、孟景，召集隋朝文武官员核对之后就斩下首级，挂在辕门之外示众。
English: They arrested all the masterminds of the murder of Emperor Xizong, including Wu Wenzhi, Yang Shizhan, Yuan Wuda, Xu Hongren, and Meng Jing. After summoning Sui and Qing officials to check, they cut off the heads and hung them outside the imperial gate for the public to see.

古文：化及并其二子同载以槛车，至大陆县斩之。
现代文：宇文化及连同他的两个儿子一起关进槛车，拖到大陆县杀了。
English: Mr. Yu, together with his two sons, was put into a truck, dragged to the mainland county and killed.

古文：建德每平城破阵，所得资财，并散赏诸将，一无所取。
现代文：窦建德每当攻陷城镇打败敌军，所得到的财物，一起分发奖赏给各位将领，自己一样东西都不要。
English: Whenever Dou Jiande captured a town and defeated the enemy army, he distributed the rewards to the generals together with the property obtained. He did not want anything for himself.

古文：又不啖肉，常食唯有菜蔬、脱粟之饭。
现代文：又不吃肉，日常吃的只是蔬菜、脱皮粟米饭。
English: They don't eat meat, and all they eat on a daily basis is vegetables and skinned poppy seed rice.

古文：其妻曹氏不衣纨绮，所使婢妾才十数人。
现代文：他的妻子曹氏不穿丝织衣裳，小妻、侍女只有十几人。
English: His wife Cao did not wear silk clothes, and there were only a dozen or so concubines and maids.

古文：至此，得宫人以千数，并有容色，应时放散。
现代文：进聊城后，得到上千名宫女，都有姣艳的容貌姿色，当即遣散。
English: After entering Liaocheng, he got thousands of concubines, all of whom had glamorous looks and appearance, and was immediately dismissed.

古文：得隋文武官及骁果尚且一万，亦放散，听其所去。又以隋黄门侍郎裴矩为尚书左仆射，兵部侍郎崔君肃为侍中，少府令何稠为工部尚书，自余随才拜授，委以政事，其有欲往关中及东都者亦恣听之，仍给其衣粮，以兵援之，送出其境。
现代文：得到隋朝文武官员和骁勇果敢的武士上万人，也遣散，听凭他们到哪里去，还任命隋朝的黄门侍郎裴矩为尚书左仆射，兵部侍郎崔君肃为侍中，少府令何稠为工部尚书，其他人按照才能专长授予官职，交付实权。他们中有想到关中和东都去投奔别人的，照样发给足够的衣物食粮，派兵护卫，送出辖区。
English: Tens of thousands of civil and military officials and brave warriors of the Sui Dynasty were also dismissed, no matter where they went. He also appointed the Yellow Gate attendant of the Sui Dynasty, Pei Jian, as Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, the attendant of the Military Department, Cui Junsu, as the attendant, and the minor prefectural governor, He Zhou, as Shang Shuxi of the Ministry of Industry. Others were awarded official positions according to their talents and delivered real power. Some of them thought that Guanzhong and Dongdu would go to others, but they still sent enough clothing and food, sent guards, and sent them out of

古文：攻陷洺州，虏刺史袁子干。
现代文：打下氵名州，俘虏氵名州刺史袁子干。
English: Yan Mingzhou was defeated, and Yan Mingzhou's prisoner, Zhishi Yuan Zigan, was captured.

古文：迁都于洺州，号万春宫。
现代文：都城迁到氵名州，叫万春宫。
English: The capital was moved to Saginaw, called the Banshun Palace.

古文：遣使往灌津，祠窦青之墓，置守冢二十家。
现代文：派人到灌津，为他父亲窦青祭扫坟墓，安排二十家人家看护墓地。
English: He sent people to Guanzin to sweep the grave of his father Dou Qing Festival and arranged for twenty family members to take care of the cemetery.

古文：又与王世充结好，遣使朝隋越王侗于洛阳。
现代文：又跟王世充结为友好，派遣使者到洛阳朝拜隋朝越王杨侗。
English: He also became friendly with Wang Shifeng and sent an envoy to Luoyang to pay homage to the Sui and Yue King Yang Di.

古文：后世充废侗自立，乃绝之，始自尊大，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，下书言诏。
现代文：后来王世充废除杨侗自立为帝，就跟他绝交，开始妄自尊大，设置天子的旌旗仪仗，外出就要布置警戒禁止行人，所发文告称为诏书。
English: Later, Wang Shichong abolished Yang Xuan's independence as an emperor, broke off diplomatic relations with him, began to be arrogant, set up a flag-raising ceremony for the son of heaven, and issued a warning to prohibit pedestrians from going out. The announcement was called an edict.

古文：追谥隋炀帝为闵帝，封齐王暕子政道为郧公。
现代文：给隋炀帝追谥号为闵帝，封齐王杨日柬的儿子杨政道为郧公。
English: To the Sui and Qian Dynasties, the title of the Emperor of the Sui and Qian Dynasties was the Emperor of the Sui and Qian Dynasties, and the son of the King of the Qi Dynasty, Yang Zhengdao, was the Prince of the Sui and Qian Dynasties.

古文：然犹依倚突厥。隋义城公主先嫁突厥，及是遣使迎萧皇后，建德勒兵千余骑送之入蕃，又传化及首以献公主。
现代文：然而还是依靠突厥，隋朝义城公主先前嫁到突厥，到这时派遣使者迎接萧太后，窦建德率领一千多人马护送她到突厥去，还传递宇文化及的首级向义城公主献礼。
English: However, they still relied on the Turks. The princess of Yicheng in the Sui Dynasty had previously married into the Turks. At this time, they sent an envoy to meet Empress Dowager Xiao. Dou Jiande led more than a thousand people to escort her to the Turks, and also passed on the culture of Yu and the first-class gifts to the princess of Yicheng.

古文：既与突厥相连，兵锋益盛。
现代文：同突厥相互联合之后，军队的锐气更加旺盛。
English: After the union with the Turks, the army became more vigorous.

古文：九月，南侵相州，河北大使淮安王神通不能拒，退奔黎阳。
现代文：同年九月，向南进犯相州，河北大使淮安王李神通抵御不住，撤退到黎阳。
English: In September of the same year, the Hebei ambassador Huai'an Wang Lishentong was unable to resist the southward attack on Xiangzhou and retreated to Liyang.

古文：相州陷，杀刺史吕珉。
现代文：相州被攻破，杀掉刺史吕珉。
English: Sangju was breached, and the assassin, Lyu Qi, was killed.

古文：又进攻卫州，陷黎阳，左武卫大将军李世勣、皇妹同安长公主及神通并为所虏。
现代文：接着进攻卫州，打下黎阳，唐朝左武卫大将军李世责力、高祖皇妹同安长公主和李神通一起被俘。
English: Next, they attacked Weizhou and laid siege to Liyang. The Tang Dynasty's General of the Left Division of Wei Li Shileili and Emperor Gaozhu's younger sister were captured together with Princess An Chang and Li Shentong.

古文：滑州刺史王轨为奴所杀，携其首以奔建德，曰： 奴杀主为大逆，我何可纳之！ 
现代文：滑州刺史王轨被奴仆杀死，奴仆带着他的首级投奔窦建德，窦建德说： 奴仆杀主人是犯大逆不道的罪行，我怎能收留他。 
English: Slanting Slanting Slanting Slanting Slanting Slanting Slanting Slanting Slanting Slanting

古文：命立斩奴，而返轨首于滑州。
现代文：下令立即处斩奴仆，而把王轨的首级送回滑州。
English: The order was given to immediately execute the slave servants, and the head of Wang Luo was sent back to Lushan.

古文：吏人感之，即日而降。
现代文：滑州的官吏百姓为之感动，当天就投降了。
English: The officials and people of Slant were so moved by this that they surrendered on the same day.

古文：齐、济二州及兗州贼帅徐圆朗皆闻风而下。
现代文：齐州、济州以及兖州叛军统帅徐圆朗等都闻风而降。
English: Qizhou, Jeju and Zhangzhou rebel commander Xu Yuanlang all capitulated.

古文：建德释李世勣，使其领兵以镇黎州。
现代文：窦建德释放了李世责力，派他带领部队镇守黎州。
English: Dou Jiande released Li Shileili and sent him to lead the troops to defend Li Prefecture.

古文：三年正月，世勣舍其父而逃归，执法者请诛之，建德曰： 勣本唐臣，为我所虏，不忘其主，逃还本朝，此忠臣也，其父何罪！ 
现代文：武德三年正月，李世责力撇下父亲逃回李唐朝廷去了，执法官吏请求杀掉他的父亲，窦建德说： 李世责力本来是唐朝廷的臣子，被俘以后，不背叛他的国君，逃回他自己的朝廷，这是忠臣，他的父亲有什么罪过？ 
English: In the first month of the third year of Wude, Li Shiliuli left his father and fled back to the court of Li Tang. The law enforcement officials asked to kill his father. Dou Jiande said: Li Shiliuli was originally a vassal of the Tang court. After being captured, he did not betray his sovereign and fled back to his own court. This is a loyal vassal. What is his father guilty of?

古文：竟不诛。
现代文：一直没有杀他。
English: I never killed him.

古文：舍同安长公主及神通于别馆，待以客礼。
现代文：把同安长公主和李神通安排在客馆居住，以宾客的礼仪对待他们。
English: He arranged for Tong'an Elder Princess and Li Shentong to live in a guest house and treated them with the etiquette of guests.

古文：高祖遣使与之连和，建德即遣公主与使俱归。
现代文：唐高祖派遣使者跟窦建德缔结和好，窦建德立即让同安长公主跟使者一起回去。
English: Tang Gaozhu sent an envoy to conclude a reconciliation with Dou Jiande, and Dou Jiande immediately let the Tongan princess go back with the envoy.

古文：尝破赵州，执刺史张昂、邢州刺史陈君宾、大使张道源等，以侵轶其境，建德将戮之。
现代文：曾经攻陷赵州，捉住赵州刺史张昂、邢州刺史陈君宾、大使张道源等人，由于突然袭击窦建德辖区的边境，窦建德就要杀掉他们。
English: He once invaded Zhaozhou and captured Zhaozhou assassin Zhang Angren, Zhangzhou assassin Chen Junbin, ambassador Zhang Daoyuan and others. Due to the sudden attack on the border of Dou Jiande's jurisdiction, Dou Jiande was about to kill them.

古文：其国子祭酒凌敬进曰： 夫犬各吠非其主，今邻人坚守，力屈就擒，此乃忠确士也。
现代文：国子祭酒凌敬劝谏说 ：狗子对不是它主人的人都会吠叫，现在邻居防守牢固，因力量用尽而被俘，这才是忠诚可靠的男子汉。
English: Guo Zi sacrificed wine to Ling Jing to persuade Zou to say: The dog will bark at anyone who is not its owner. Now the neighbor is well defended and has been captured due to exhaustion. This is a loyal and reliable man.

古文：若加酷害，何以劝大王之臣乎？ 
现代文：如果处死他们，怎么勉励大王您的臣下们呢？ 
English: If you put them to death, how will you encourage your vassals?

古文：建德盛怒曰： 我至城下，犹迷不降，劳我师旅，罪何可赦？ 
现代文：窦建德大怒说 ：我已兵临城下，他还执迷不悟不肯投降，使我的部队吃了苦头，死罪怎么能够赦免？ 
English: Dou Jiande said angrily, "I have sent soldiers to attack the city, but he still persisted and refused to surrender, causing my troops to suffer. How can the death penalty be pardoned?"

古文：敬又曰： 今大王使大将军高士兴于易水抗御罗艺，兵才至，士兴即降，大王之意复为可不？ 
现代文：凌敬又说 ：如今您派大将军高士兴在易水抵御罗艺，罗艺军队才到，高士兴就投降，您又认为行不行呢？ 
English: Ling Jing also said, "Nowadays, you have sent the great general Gao Shixing to resist Luo Yi at Yishui. Luo Yi's army has just arrived, and Gao Shixing has surrendered. Do you think this is acceptable?"

古文：建德乃悟，即命释之。
现代文：窦建德这才明白，就下令放了他们。
English: When Dou Jiande understood this, he ordered that they be released.

古文：其宽厚从谏，多此类也。
现代文：他宽容厚道听从劝谏，大多是像这种情况。
English: He is tolerant and kind and listens to advice, mostly like this.

古文：又遣士兴进围幽州，攻之不克，退军旅笼火城，为艺所袭，士兴大溃。
现代文：又派遣高士兴进军围攻幽州，没有获胜，撤退到笼火城，遭到罗艺袭击，高士兴的士卒顿时逃散。
English: He also sent Gao Shixing's army to besiege Yuzhou, but they did not win. They retreated to Jiefu City and were attacked by Luo Yi. Gao Shixing's soldiers immediately fled.

古文：先是，其大将王伏宝多勇略，功冠等伦，群帅嫉之。
现代文：在这之前，高士兴的大将王伏宝有勇有谋，在同辈中功劳第一，将领们妒忌他。
English: Prior to this, Gao Shixing's general Wang Fubao was courageous and resourceful. He was the most distinguished among his peers, and the generals envied him.

古文：或言其反，建德将杀之，伏宝曰： 我无罪也，大王何听谗言，自斩左右手乎？ 
现代文：有人散布他要反叛，窦建德就要杀他，王伏宝说 ：我是无罪的，您怎么听信那些中伤我的话，自己砍掉自己的左右手啊？ 
English: Someone spread the rumor that he was going to rebel and that Dou Jiande was going to kill him. Wang Fubao said, "I am not guilty. How can you listen to those who slander me and cut off your own right and left hand?"

古文：既杀之，后用兵多不利。
现代文：还是杀了他，后来打仗经常失利。
English: They killed him anyway, and later they often lost the war.

古文：九月，建德自帅师围幽州，艺出兵与战，大破之，斩首千二百级。
现代文：同年九月，窦建德亲自统帅部队围攻幽州，罗艺出兵跟他作战，大败窦建德，斩杀一千二百人。
English: In September of the same year, Dou Jiande personally led the troops to besiege Yuzhou, and Luo Yi sent troops to fight him, defeating Dou Jiande and killing 1,200 people.

古文：艺兵频胜而骄，进袭其营，建德列阵于营中，填堑而出，击艺败之。
现代文：罗艺多次获胜骄傲起来，进军袭击窦建德的军营，窦建德在营地摆好阵式，顺着战壕冲出，打败了罗艺。
English: Luo Yiyi became proud of his many victories and marched to attack Dou Jiande's camp. Dou Jiande set up a formation in the camp, rushed out along the trench, and defeated Luo Yiyi.

古文：建德薄其城，不克，遂归洺州。
现代文：窦建德逼近幽州，没有获胜，就回师氵名州。
English: Dou Jiande approached Yuzhou, but did not win, so he returned to his master, Yunnan.

古文：其纳言宋正本好直谏，建德又听谗言杀之。
现代文：他的纳言宋正本爱直言劝谏，窦建德又听信别人中伤他的话而杀了他。
English: His superior, Song Zhengben, liked to speak frankly to persuade others, but Dou Jiande also listened to others' slanderous words and killed him.

古文：是后人以为诫，无复进言者，由此政教益衰。
现代文：此后人们把这当作教训，没有人再进忠言，从此刑赏教化更加衰微。
English: Since then, people have taken this as a lesson, and no one has ever been promoted to the post of chujin again. From then on, the practice of punishment, reward, and indoctrination has further declined.

古文：先，曹州济阴人孟海公拥精兵三万，据周桥城以掠河南之地。
现代文：从前，曹州济阴县人孟海公聚集了三万精兵，占据周桥城到黄河以南进行掳掠。
English: Once upon a time, Meng Haigong, a native of Jiyin County, Caozhou, gathered thirty thousand elite soldiers to occupy Zhouqiao City and plunder it south of the Yellow River.

古文：其年十一月，建德自率兵渡河以击之。
现代文：那年十一月，窦建德亲自率领军队渡过黄河攻打他。
English: In November of that year, Dou Jiande personally led an army across the Yellow River to attack him.

古文：时秦王攻王世充于洛阳，建德中书舍人刘斌说建德曰： 今唐有关内，郑有河南，夏居河北，此鼎足相持之势也。
现代文：当时秦王李世民在洛阳进攻王世充，窦建德的中书舍人刘斌对他分析说： 现在唐占据关中，郑占据河南，我们占据河北，这是鼎足三立相互对峙的局势。
English: At that time, Qin King Li Shimin attacked Wang Shichong in Luoyang. Liu Bin, Dou Jiande's Chinese scholar, analyzed him and said: Now Tang occupies Guanzhong, Zheng occupies Henan, and we occupy Hebei. This is a situation of three opposing forces.

古文：闻唐兵悉众攻郑，首尾二年，郑势日蹙而唐兵不解。
现代文：听说唐用全部兵力攻打王世充，连头连尾两年时间，郑的形势一天比一天紧急，而唐的围攻毫不放松。
English: It is said that Tang attacked Wang Shichong with all its forces for two years in a row. Zheng's situation became more and more urgent day by day, and Tang's siege never relaxed.

古文：唐强郑弱，其势必破郑，郑破则夏有齿寒之忧。
现代文：唐的兵力强、郑的兵力弱，发展趋势必然是打败王世充，王世充被打败，那么我们就有唇亡齿寒的忧虑。
English: Tang's military strength is strong, Zheng's military strength is weak, and the development trend is bound to defeat Wang Shichong, and if Wang Shichong is defeated, then we will be worried about losing our lips and teeth.

古文：为大王计者，莫若救郑，郑拒其内，夏攻其外，破之必矣。
现代文：为您着想，不如援救王世充，王世充在里边抵御，我们在外边进攻，打败唐军是一定的了。
English: For your sake, it is better to rescue Wang Shichong. Wang Shichong will defend inside, we will attack outside. Defeating the Tang army is certain.

古文：若却唐全郑，此常保三分之势也。
现代文：如果打走了唐军保全了王世充，这是长期保持鼎足三分局面的战略。
English: If the Tang army was driven away and Wang Shichong was preserved, this was a long-term strategy to maintain a three-point situation.

古文：若唐军破后而郑可图，则因而灭之，总二国之众，乘唐军之败，长驱西入，京师可得而有，此太平之基也。 
现代文：如果唐军被打败后，王世充也可打败，那么就乘机消灭他，集中我们和王世充的兵力，乘着唐军战败的时机，直向西打，长安就能到手，这是平定天下的基础。 
English: If, after the defeat of the Tang army, Wang Shichong can also be defeated, then we should take the opportunity to eliminate him, concentrate our and Wang Shichong's forces, take advantage of the opportunity of the defeat of the Tang army, go straight to the west, and Chang'an can be obtained. This is the basis for pacifying the world.

古文：建德大悦曰： 此良策矣。 
现代文：窦建德非常高兴说 ：这才是好谋略啊。 
English: Dou Jiande was very pleased and said, "This is a good strategy."

古文：适会世充遣使乞师于建德，即遣其职方侍郎魏处绘入朝，请解世充之围。
现代文：恰好这时王世充派遣使者向窦建德要求出兵援救，就派遣职方侍郎魏处绘到长安朝见唐高祖，请求解除对王世充的包围。
English: Just at this time, Wang Shichong sent an envoy to Dou Jiande to request the dispatch of troops for rescue, and dispatched the official's attendant Wei Shizhu to Chang'an to see Tang Gaozu and request the lifting of the siege on Wang Shichong.

古文：四年二月，建德克周桥，虏海公，留其将范愿守曹州，悉发海公及徐圆朗之众来救世充。
现代文：武德四年二月，窦建德攻克周桥城，俘获孟海公，留下部将范愿守卫曹州，带领孟海公和徐圆朗的全部人马来援救王世充。
English: In February of the 4th year of Wude, Dou Jiande conquered Zhouqiao City and captured Meng Haigong, leaving his subordinate general Fan Zheng to guard Caozhou, leading Meng Haigong and all the men of Xu Yuanlang to rescue Wang Shichong.

古文：军至滑州，世充行台仆射韩洪开城纳之，遂进逼元州、梁州、管州，皆陷之，屯于荥阳。
现代文：军队走到滑州，王世充的行台仆射韩洪打开城门迎接，于是进逼元州、梁州、管州，都打下了，聚集在荥阳。
English: The army marched to Lashu, and Wang Shichong's footman Han Hong opened the gate to welcome them, so they forced their way into Wenzhou, Liangzhou, and Guanzhou, all of which were defeated and gathered in Fenyang.

古文：三月，秦王入武牢，进薄其营，多所伤杀，并擒其将殷秋、石瓚。
现代文：三月，秦王到了武牢，接近窦建德的军营，杀伤杀死不少的人，并捉拿了他的部将殷秋、石瓒。
English: In March, Qin Wang arrived at Wu Prison, close to Dou Jiande's military camp, killed and injured a lot of people, and captured his subordinates Yin Qiu and Shijun.

古文：时世充弟世辨为徐州行台，遣其将郭士衡领兵数千人从之，合众十余万，号为三十万，军次成皋，筑宫于板渚，以示必战。
现代文：当时王世充的弟弟王世辨任徐州行台，派遣他的部将郭士衡带领几千人跟随窦建德，集中人马十多万，号称三十万，军队驻扎在成皋，在板渚修建营房，以示决战。
English: At that time, Wang Shichong's younger brother, Wang Shibian, was in charge of Xuzhou and Xingtai, and he sent his general, Guo Shiheng, to lead several thousand people to follow Dou Jiande, concentrating more than one hundred thousand people, known as three hundred thousand. The army was stationed in Chengdu, and barracks were built in Panyu to show the decisive battle.

古文：又遣间使约世充共为表里。
现代文：又派遣密使约定王世充里外夹攻。
English: He also dispatched a secret envoy to arrange for Wang Shicheng to make a pincer attack.

古文：经二月，迫于武牢，不得进。
现代文：经过两个月的战斗，逼近武牢，就不能继续前进。
English: After two months of fighting, approaching Wuhu prison, it is impossible to move forward.

古文：秦王遣将军王君廓领轻骑千余抄其粮运，获其大将张青特，虏获甚众。
现代文：秦王派遣将军王君廓带领轻装骑兵一千多人绕到窦建德的背后袭击他的运粮队伍，捉住大将张青特，俘虏士卒很多人。
English: King Qin dispatched General Wang Junku and led more than a thousand light cavalry to attack Dou Jiande's grain transport team behind his back, capturing General Zhang Qingte and taking many prisoners.

古文：建德数不利，人情危骇，将帅已下破孟海公，皆有所获，思归洺州。
现代文：窦建德多次失利，人心惊恐不安，上到将帅，下到士卒，打败孟海公时，都有收获，想回氵名州。
English: Dou Jiande has lost many times, his heart is frightened and uneasy, he is a general at the top and a soldier at the bottom, when he defeated Meng Haigong, he gained a lot, and he wants to return to Renmeizhou.

古文：凌敬进说曰： 宜悉兵济河，攻取怀州河阳，使重将居守。
现代文：凌敬提议说： 应当全军渡过黄河北上，攻占怀州河阳，安排主将镇守。
English: Ling Jing proposed: The whole army should cross the Yellow River to the north, capture Huaizhou Heyang, and arrange for the commander to guard the town.

古文：更率众鸣鼓建旗，逾太行，入上党，先声后实，传檄而定。
现代文：再率领大队人马击鼓举旗，跨越太行山，开进上党县，虚张声势隐藏目的，不必麻烦作战。
English: He then led a large group of people and horses to beat drums and raise flags, crossed Taihang Mountain, drove into Shangdang County, bluffed to hide the purpose, and did not have to worry about fighting.

古文：渐趋壶口，稍骇蒲津，收河东之地，此策之上也。
现代文：加速赶到壶口，逐渐惊扰蒲津，夺取河东土地，这是上策。
English: The best strategy is to speed up to Hukou, gradually scare Pudong, and seize the land east of the river.

古文：行此必有三利：一则入无人之境，师有万全；二则拓土得兵；三则郑围自解。 
现代文：实行这个方针定有三条好处：一是到无人防守的地方，军队万无一失；二是扩大地盘招募兵卒；三是唐军对王世充的包围自己就会解除。 
English: The implementation of this policy will have three advantages: First, the army will be infallible when it comes to unguarded areas; second, the territory will be expanded to recruit soldiers; and third, the Tang army's encirclement of Wang Shichong will be lifted.

古文：建德将从之，而世充之使长孙安世阴赍金玉，啖其诸将，以乱其谋。
现代文：窦建德准备采纳这个建议，但是王世充的使者长孙安世私下送给金银珠宝利诱各个将领，来扰乱他的决策。
English: Dou Jiande was ready to accept the proposal, but Wang Shichong's emissary, the eldest grandson An Shih, privately sent gold, silver and jewelry to lure various generals to disrupt his decision-making.

古文：众咸进谏曰： 凌敬，书生耳，岂可与言战乎？ 
现代文：各个将领全都劝谏说 ：凌敬不过是个书生，怎能跟他谈打仗呢？ 
English: All the generals tried to persuade him, saying, "Ling Jing is just a scholar, how can you talk to him about war?"

古文：建德从之，退而谢敬曰： 今众心甚锐，此天赞我矣。
现代文：窦建德听从了他们的意见，回头向凌敬道歉说： 现在群臣振奋，这是老天助我。
English: Dou Jiande listened to their advice, turned back to Ling Jing and apologized, saying: Now the ministers are excited, this is God help me.

古文：因此决战，必将大捷。
现代文：凭这决战，必定会大获全胜。
English: With this decisive battle, we will surely win a great victory.

古文：已依众议，不得从公言也。 
现代文：我已听从了大家的意见，不能照您的话办了。 
English: I've listened to everyone and I can't do what you say.

古文：敬固争，建德怒，扶出焉。
现代文：凌敬坚持争辩，窦建德很生气，强制撑持着走了。
English: Ling Jing insisted on arguing, Dou Jiande was very angry and forced him to walk away.

古文：其妻曹氏又言于建德曰： 祭酒之言可从，大王何不纳也？
现代文：他的妻子曹氏又对窦建德议论说 ：祭酒凌敬的意见可以采纳，您为什么不采纳呢？
English: His wife, Ms. Cao, also argued with Dou Jiande, saying, "The opinion of offering wine to Ling Jing can be adopted, why don't you adopt it?"

古文：请自滏口之道，乘唐国之虚，连营渐进，以取山北，又因突厥西抄关中，唐必还师以自救，此则郑围解矣。
现代文：请您沿着滏口那条路，乘着唐朝兵力空虚，集中兵力加速前进，以便夺取山北的土地，再凭借突厥的力量向西包抄关中，唐朝廷必然招回军队保卫自己，那么对王世充的包围就解除了。
English: Please follow the path of Hekou, take advantage of the emptiness of the Tang Dynasty troops, concentrate the troops to accelerate the advance, in order to seize the land north of the mountain, and then rely on the strength of the Turks to encircle the pass in the west, the Tang Dynasty will inevitably call back the army to defend themselves, then the siege of Wang Shichong will be lifted.

古文：今顿兵武牢之下，日月淹久，徒为自苦，事恐无功。 
现代文：如今部队滞留在武牢城外，时间拖得长了，白白地自己劳苦自己，事情只怕办不成。 
English: Now the troops are stranded outside the city of Wuchang, the time has been dragged out for a long time, they have been working hard for themselves in vain, and they are afraid that they will not be able to do it.

古文：建德曰： 此非女子所知也。
现代文：窦建德说 ：打仗不是女人过问的事。
English: Dou Jiande said: "Fighting is not a woman's business.

古文：且郑国悬命朝暮，以待吾来，既许救之，岂可见难而退，示天下以不信也？ 
现代文：再说郑国命在旦夕，等待我们快去，既然答应援救他们，怎能碰上困难就退走，向天下表明我们说话不算话呢？ 
English: Besides, the fate of Zheng Guo is hanging in the balance, waiting for us to leave soon. Since we promised to rescue them, how can we retreat in the face of difficulties and show the world that our words are meaningless?

古文：于是悉众进逼武牢，官军按甲挫其锐。
现代文：于是全部人马压向武牢，唐军按兵不动以挫伤窦建德的锐气。
English: As a result, all the men and horses pressed towards Wuye, and the Tang army did not move in order to frustrate Dou Jiande's spirit.

古文：及建德结阵于汜水，秦王遣骑挑之，建德进军而战，窦抗当之。
现代文：等到窦建德把人马聚集在汜水，秦王派遣骑兵去挑战，窦建德发兵进攻，秦王派窦抗抵挡。
English: Waiting for Dou Jiande to gather the men and horses in Surabaya, the Qin king sent cavalry to challenge, Dou Jiande sent troops to attack, and the Qin king sent Dou to resist.

古文：建德少却，秦王驰骑深入，反覆四五合，然后大破之。
现代文：窦建德渐渐后退，秦王派遣骑兵冲进敌阵，反复鏖战四五次，最后大败窦建德。
English: Dou Jiande gradually retreated, and the Qin king sent cavalry to rush into the enemy line, repeatedly fought four or five times, and finally defeated Dou Jiande.

古文：建德中枪，窜于牛口渚，车骑将军白士让、杨武威生获之。
现代文：窦建德被枪刺中，逃跑到牛口渚，车骑将军白士让、杨武威活捉了他。
English: Dou Jiande was stabbed with a gun and fled to Niukou Nagisa. He was captured alive by the cavalry generals Bai Shizhen and Yang Wuwei.

古文：先是，军中有童谣曰： 豆入牛口，势不得久。 
现代文：在这之前，部队里头传开童谣说： 豆入牛口，势不得久。 
English: Prior to this, there was a nursery rhyme in the army that said: "It doesn't take long for the beans to get into the cow's mouth."

古文：建德行至牛口渚，甚恶之，果败于此地。
现代文：窦建德走到牛口渚，非常憎恶它，果然失败在这个地方。
English: Dou Jiande walked to Niukouzhu, hated it very much, and failed in this place.

古文：建德所领兵众，一时奔溃，妻曹氏及其左仆射齐善行将数百骑遁于洺州。
现代文：窦建德所带领的人马，一下子就逃散了，妻子曹氏以及他的左仆射齐善行率领几百人逃回氵名州。
English: The people led by Dou Jiande immediately dispersed, and his wife Cao and his left-hand man, She Qi Shan Xing, led hundreds of people to flee back to Shennan Prefecture.

古文：余党欲立建德养子为主，善行曰： 夏王平定河朔，士马精强，一朝被擒如此，岂非天命有所归也？
现代文：剩余的党徒想立窦建德的养子为君主，齐善行说： 夏王平定了河北，兵强马壮，一下子就被捉走了，难道不是天命注定的吗？
English: The remaining party members wanted to establish Dou Jiande's adopted son as the monarch, Qi Shanzhong said: Xia Wang leveled Hebei, the army was strong, and he was captured at once. Wasn't it fate?

古文：不如委心请命，无为涂炭生人。 
现代文：不如一心请求唐朝保全大伙儿的生命，不要给老百姓造成灾难困苦。 
English: It is better to wholeheartedly ask the Tang Dynasty to save everyone's lives and not to cause disaster and hardship to the people.

古文：遂以府库财物悉分士卒，各令散去。
现代文：于是把库存的财物全部分发给士卒，让他们各自离开。
English: He then distributed the entire inventory of belongings to the soldiers and let them leave separately.

古文：善行乃与建德右仆射裴矩、行台曹旦及建德妻率伪官属，举山东之地，奉传国等八玺来降。
现代文：齐善行这才跟窦建德的右仆射裴矩、行台曹旦以及窦建德的妻子带领夏国的官员属吏进献山东的土地，交出夏国的八枚印章向唐朝投降。
English: It was Qi Shan Xing who, together with Dou Jiande's right-hand man Sha Pei Jian, Gong Tai Cao Dan, and Dou Jiande's wife, led the officials of Xia Province to present the land of Shandong, and surrendered the eight seals of Xia Province to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：七月，秦王俘建德至京师，斩于长安市，年四十九。
现代文：七月，秦王把窦建德押到京城，在长安市斩首，时年四十九岁。
English: In July, King Qin sent Dou Jiande to Beijing and beheaded him in Chang'an at the age of forty-nine.

古文：自起军至灭，凡六岁，河北悉平。
现代文：从起事到灭亡，共六年，河北全部平定。
English: From the beginning to the end, a total of six years, Hebei has been completely pacified.

古文：其年，刘黑闼复盗据山东。
现代文：当年，刘黑闼又窃据山东。
English: That year, Liu Heyao also stole Shandong.

