古文：安徐正静，其被节先肉。善与而不静，虚心平意以待倾损。
现代文：如果身居君位的人能做到安祥、从容、正派、沉静，制定法度无不柔和通顺，愿意给予并与与臣民相处谦虚谨慎、心平气和，这以防天下大乱。
English: If a person who holds the position of monarch can be peaceful, calm, decent, and tranquil, can enact laws smoothly and smoothly, and is willing to give and get along with his subjects with modesty, prudence, and peace of mind, this will prevent chaos in the world.

古文：右主位。
现代文：以上所说指君主要善于保住君位。
English: The above-mentioned means that you are mainly good at maintaining your position.

古文：目贵明，耳贵聪，心贵智。
现代文：对眼睛来说，最重要的就是洞明世事；对耳朵来说，最重要的是灵敏警觉；对心灵来说，最重要的就是充满智慧。
English: The eyes are precious, the ears are precious, the heart is precious.

古文：以天下之目视者，则无不见；以天下之耳听者，则无不闻；以天下之心思虑者，则无不知；辐辏并进，则明不可塞。
现代文：君主如果能用天下人的眼睛去观看，就不会有什么看不见的；如果用天下人的耳朵去听，就不会有什么听不到的；如果用天下人的心去思考，就不会有什么不知道的。如果天下人都像车辐条集辏于毂上一样，齐主协力，就可明察一切，无可阻塞。
English: If a monarch could see with the eyes of the world, there would be nothing he could not see; if he could hear with the ears of the world, there would be nothing he could not hear; if he could think with the heart of the world, there would be nothing he could not know.

古文：右主明。
现代文：以上指君主要圣明。
English: The above are the major saints.

古文：德之术曰勿坚而拒之，许之则防守，拒之则闭塞。
现代文：君主崇尚德行的方法是：不要随意许诺，也不要随意拒绝。
English: The way for the monarch to promote virtue is: do not promise at will, and do not refuse at will.

古文：高山仰之可极，深渊度之可测，神明之德术正静，其莫之极。
现代文：如果能听信人言，就使自己有了一层保护，如果拒绝别人进言就使自己受到了封闭。高山仰望可看到顶，深渊计量可测到底，而神明的心境既正派又深觉，是无法测到底的。
English: If you can listen to others, you will have a layer of protection. If you refuse to listen to others, you will be closed. Looking up at the mountain, you can see the top, measuring the abyss can be measured to the end, but the god's state of mind is both decent and deeply conscious, and cannot be measured to the end.

古文：右主德。
现代文：以上虚纳谏。
English: That's all for now.

古文：用赏贵信，用刑贵正。
现代文：运用奖赏时，最重要的是守信用。运用刑罚时，贵在坚决。
English: When using rewards, the most important thing is to keep your word. When using punishments, you should be firm.

古文：赏赐贵信，必验而目之所闻见，其所不闻见者，莫不谙化矣。
现代文：处罚与赏赐的信誉和坚决，应验证于臣民所见所闻的事情，这样对于那些没有亲眼看到的和亲耳听到的人也有潜移默化的作用。
English: The credibility and firmness of punishment and reward should be verified by what the subjects have seen and heard, so that it has a subtle effect on those who have not seen with their own eyes and heard with their own ears.

古文：诚畅于天下神明，而况奸者干君。
现代文：君主的诚信如果能畅达天下，那么连神明也会来保护，又何惧那些奸恶之徒干涉君位呢？
English: If the integrity of the monarch can reach the whole world, then even the gods will come to protect, and what are those treacherous people afraid of interfering with the monarchy?

古文：右主赏。
现代文：以上讲君主施行赏罚。
English: As mentioned above, the monarch administers rewards and punishments.

古文：一曰天之，二曰地之，三曰人之；四方上下，左右前后，荧惑之处安在。
现代文：君主要把握天、地、人三才之道，以及四方上下、左右前后的情况，要向圣贤之人多加询问，就会没有迷惑不解的地方。
English: The ruler should grasp the way of heaven, earth and man, as well as the situation of the four directions, up and down, left and right. If you ask the sages, there will be no puzzling place.

古文：右主问。
现代文：以上所讲指君主要善于发问。
English: As mentioned above, you are mainly good at asking questions.

古文：心为九窍之始，君为五官之长。
现代文：心是九窍的统帅，君是五官的首长。
English: Mind is the commander of the nine organs, and you are the head of the five organs.

古文：为善者，君与之赏；为非者，君与之罚。
现代文：做好事的臣民，君主会给他们赏赐；做坏事的臣民，君主会给他们惩罚。
English: Subjects who do good deeds will be rewarded by the monarch; subjects who do bad deeds will be punished by the monarch.

古文：君因其所以求，因与之，则不劳。
现代文：君主根据臣民的政绩来任用，斟酌实际情况给予赏赐，这样就不会劳民伤财。
English: The monarch appoints according to the political achievements of the subjects, and rewards them according to the actual situation, so that there will be no harm to the people and the country.

古文：圣人用之，故能赏之。
现代文：圣人要重用这些臣民，因此能很好地掌握他们。
English: The sage makes heavy use of these subjects and is therefore able to control them well.

古文：因之循理，故能长久。
现代文：遵循事物只见的规律，才能使国家长治久安。
English: Only by following the law of things can the country enjoy long-term peace and stability.

古文：右主因。
现代文：以上是讲要遵规循理。
English: The above is to follow the rules and be reasonable.

古文：人主不可不周；人主不周，则群臣生乱，家于其无常也，内外不通，安知所闻，开闭不善，不见原也。
现代文：作为君主必须广泛了解外界事物，如果不通情达理，那么就容易发生骚乱。世间鸦雀无声是不正常的，君主与外界没有交流，怎么能知道世界的变化。开放和封闭不适当，就无法发现事物的根源。
English: As a monarch, you must have a broad understanding of the outside world. If you are unreasonable, you are prone to unrest. It is not normal for the world to be silent. If the monarch does not communicate with the outside world, how can he know the changes in the world? If openness and closure are not appropriate, it is impossible to discover the root of things.

古文：右主周。
现代文：以上讲的是君主要形事情周密。
English: The above is a detailed description of the monarchical form of government.

古文：一曰长目，二曰飞耳，三曰树明。
现代文：君主不仅要有千里眼，还要有顺风耳，并要具备洞察一切的能力。
English: The first is to see far, the second is to hear far, and the third is to see clearly.

古文：明知千里之外，隐微之中，是谓洞天下奸，莫不谙变更。
现代文：弄清千里之外的事物，在隐微中看出事情的端倪，辨明天下奸邪，使其不得不暗自改变。
English: To find out things that are thousands of miles away, to see the beginnings of things in the subtleties, to identify the evil that will come tomorrow, so that it will have to change secretly.

古文：右主恭。循名而为贵，安而完，名实相生，反相为情，故曰名当则生于实，实生于理，理生于名实之德，德生于和，和生于当。
现代文：名分与实际相符就能得以治理，不相符则易产生动乱。名分产生于实际，实际产生于意愿，意愿产生于分析，分析产生于智慧，智慧则产生于适当。
English: If the name is in accordance with reality, it can be governed, but if it is not, it is easy to create turmoil. The name comes from reality, reality comes from will, will comes from analysis, analysis comes from wisdom, and wisdom comes from appropriate.

古文：右主名。
现代文：以上讲名实相符。
English: The above is consistent with the facts.

