古文：王方庆，雍州咸阳人也，周少司空石泉公褒之曾孙也。
现代文：王方庆，雍州咸阳人，前朝周代少司空石泉公王褒的曾孙。
English: Wang Fangqing, a native of Xianyang, Yongzhou, is the great-grandson of the former Zhou Dynasty's minor general, Ku Shiquan.

古文：其先自琅邪南度，居于丹阳，为江左冠族。
现代文：原籍琅笽，后南迁居丹阳，为江左名门望族。
English: Originally from Handan, Hounan moved to Danyang and became a member of the prestigious Jiangza family.

古文：褒北徙入关，始家咸阳焉。
现代文：王褒北迁入关，才家居咸阳。
English: Wang Bo moved to Guanzhong from the north, and his family moved to Xianyang.

古文：祖軿，隋卫尉丞。
现代文：王方庆的祖父，是隋卫尉丞。
English: Wang Fangqing's grandfather was Sui Wei Rong.

古文：伯父弘让，有美名，贞观中为中书舍人。
现代文：他的伯父王弘让，有美名。贞观年间为中书舍人。
English: His uncle, Wang Hongzhang, was a well-known scholar, and was a renunciant of Chinese calligraphy during the Zhenguan period.

古文：元昌览书而遽止。渐见疏斥，转荆王友。
现代文：他的父亲王弘直，是汉王元昌的朋友，汉王打猎无节制，就上书提意见，情意恳切。元昌看了，便马上停止，不再打猎。
English: His father, Wang Hongzhi, was a friend of Han Wang Yuanchang. Han Wang hunted without restraint, and he wrote a letter to express his opinion. Yuanchang read the letter and immediately stopped hunting.

古文：龙朔中卒。
现代文：后渐被疏远排斥，龙朔年中去世。
English: He was gradually alienated and ostracized, and died in the middle of the year.

古文：方庆年十六，起家越王府参军。
现代文：王方庆十六岁，就被任用为越王府参军。
English: At the age of sixteen, Wang Fangqing was appointed to join the army of Yuewangfu.

古文：尝就记室任希古受《史记》、《汉书》。希古迁为太子舍人，方庆随之卒业。
现代文：曾经向记室任希古学习《史记》、《汉书》，任希古升迁太子舍人，王方庆也受业终止。
English: He once studied "History" and "Chinese Classics" with Ren Xigu of the Records Office. Ren Xigu was promoted to the position of crown prince, and Wang Fangqing was also terminated.

古文：永淳中，累迁太仆少卿。
现代文：唐高宗永淳年中，王方庆任太仆少卿。
English: In the middle of the Tang Gao Zong Yongjun year, Wang Fangqing was appointed as the servant of the young lord.

古文：则天临朝，拜广州都督。
现代文：武则天临朝当政时，王方庆授广州都督。
English: When the Wu Zetian Lin Dynasty was in power, Wang Fangqing was appointed the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：广州地际南海，每岁有昆仑乘舶以珍物与中国交市。
现代文：广州在南海之滨，每年有马来人乘船运珍物珠之类货到中国来卖。
English: Guangzhou is on the coast of the South China Sea. Every year, Malaysians take ships to transport precious beads and other goods to China to sell them.

古文：旧都督路元睿冒求其货，昆仑怀刃杀之。
现代文：旧都督路元容贪求他们的货物，被马来人杀了。
English: The former governor, Lu Yuan Rong, coveted their goods and was killed by the Malays.

古文：方庆在任数载，秋毫不犯。
现代文：王方庆在任期间，秋毫无犯。
English: Wang Fangqing did not commit any crimes during his term of office.

古文：又管内诸州首领，旧多贪纵，百姓有诣府称冤者，府官以先受首领参饷，未尝鞫问。
现代文：另外他所管辖之内的各州首领，过去多贪婪放纵，有百姓到官府诉冤，官员因先受首领贿赂，也未追查。
English: In addition, the heads of the states under his jurisdiction have been greedy and indulgent in the past. Some people have gone to the government to complain about their grievances. Officials have not been investigated because they were bribed by the leaders.

古文：方庆乃集止府僚，绝其交往，首领纵暴者悉绳之，由是境内清肃。
现代文：王方庆就禁止府僚，断绝他们与各州首领的私人交往，放纵残暴的首领均以法律来制裁，由此，境内清静肃穆。
English: Wang Fangqing banned government officials, cut off their personal contacts with the leaders of various states, and the leaders who indulged in cruelty were all sanctioned by law. As a result, the territory was quiet and solemn.

古文：当时议者以为有唐以来，治广州者无出方庆之右。
现代文：当时人们议论，认为唐以来治广州的官长没有谁能超出王方庆的。
English: At that time, people argued that no one could surpass Wang Fangqing as the governor of Guangzhou since the Tang Dynasty.

古文：有制褒之曰： 朕以卿历职著称，故授此官，既美化远闻，实副朝寄。令赐卿杂采六十段，并瑞锦等物，以彰善政也。 
现代文：皇上也亲笔褒扬 ：朕因为卿一贯很称职，所以授此官，这使大唐的美名远闻，这的确符合朝廷的希望，现赐卿杂彩六十段并瑞锦等物，以彰善政。 
English: The emperor also personally praised: "I have given this post to you because you have always been very competent, which has made the reputation of Datang known far and wide. This is indeed in line with the hopes of the imperial court. I am now giving you 60 pieces of miscellaneous colors and brocades to highlight good governance."

古文：证圣元年，召拜洛州长史，寻加银青光禄大夫，封石泉县男。
现代文：证圣元年，王方庆被任洛州长史，不久加银青光禄大夫，封石泉县男。
English: In the first year of Zheng Sheng, Wang Fangqing was appointed as the governor of Luo Province, and soon became the doctor of Qingguanglu, and the man of Shiquan County.

古文：万岁登封元年，转并州长史，封琅邪县男。
现代文：万岁登封元年，调任并州长史，封琅笽县男。
English: In the first year of his enthronement, he was transferred to the post of prefectural governor, and became the first man to be enthroned in Min County.

古文：未行，迁鸾台侍郎、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：未走马上任，又升迁鸾台侍郎，同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: Before taking up the post, he was promoted to the position of Xingtai waiter, and became a member of Tongfeng Pavilion Xingtai Pingzhang.

古文：俄转凤阁侍郎，依旧知政事。
现代文：不久又任凤阁侍郎，依旧代理宰相主持政事。
English: Soon after, he was appointed Fengge's chamberlain, and continued to preside over government affairs as acting prime minister.

古文：神功元年七月，清边道大总管建安王攸宜破契丹凯还，欲以是月诣阙献俘。
现代文：神功元年七月，清边道大总管建安王攸宜攻破契丹凯旋归来，想在七月上朝廷献俘。
English: In July of the first year of Sheng Gong, Jian'an Wang Youyi, the head of the Chingbian Road University, defeated Khitan and returned in triumph, and wanted to offer prisoners to the imperial court in July.

古文：内史王及善以为将军入城，例有军乐，既今上孝明高皇帝忌月，请备而不奏。方庆奏曰： 臣按礼经，但有忌日，而无忌月。
现代文：内史王及善认为将军入城，按例应有军乐，但此月又是孝明高皇帝的忌月，只要备军乐而不奏，王方庆上奏道： 臣查了礼经，只有忌日，没有忌月。
English: Wang Yishan thought that when a general entered the city, military music should be played as usual, but this month is the month of Emperor Xiaominggao's death. As long as military music is prepared, it will not be played. Wang Fangqing played: The minister checked the ritual, only the death day, no death month.

古文：晋穆帝纳后，用九月九日，是康帝忌月，于时持疑不定。下太常，礼官荀讷议称： 礼只有忌日，无忌月。若有忌月，即有忌时、忌岁，益无理据。 
现代文：晋穆帝纳皇后，用九月九日，这是晋康帝的忌日，在这个时候持疑问不能定，下太常讨论，礼官荀讷议道： 礼只有忌日，无忌月，如有忌月，就有忌时、忌岁，这就更加没有理据了。 
English: Empress Jinmudina used September 9th, which is the day of the death of Emperor Jinkang, at this time, doubts cannot be determined, it is too often discussed, and the etiquette officer argued: The etiquette is only the day of death, there is no death month, if there is a death month, there is a death time and death year, which is even more unreasonable.

古文：当时从讷所议。
现代文：当时皇上听从荀讷的意见。
English: At that time, the emperor listened to Xuan's opinion.

古文：军乐是军容，与常不等，臣谓振作于事无嫌。 
现代文：军乐是军容，与常乐不能等同看待，臣认为奏军乐对国中有振作而没有什么犯嫌的。 
English: Military music is a military form, and cannot be equated with ordinary music. The minister believed that playing military music was good for the country and there was nothing wrong with it.

古文：则天从之。
现代文：武则天听从了他的意见。
English: Wu Zetian followed his advice.

古文：则天尝幸万安山玉泉寺，以山迳危悬，欲御腰舆而上。
现代文：武则天曾到万安山玉泉寺，因为山路危险，准备用轿抬上去。
English: Wu Zetian once went to Yuquan Temple on Mount Wan'an, and because the mountain road was dangerous, he was prepared to be carried up in a sedan.

古文：方庆谏曰： 昔汉元帝尝祭庙，出便门，御楼船，光禄勋张猛奏曰： 乘船危，就桥安。 
现代文：王方庆提意见道 ：过去汉元帝曾经去祭庙，出便门，乘楼船，光禄勋张猛上奏道： 乘船危，走桥安。 
English: Wang Fangqing raised his opinion: In the past, Emperor Han Yuan used to go to the temple, go out of the port, take the liner, and the honorable Zhang Meng went on to say: It is dangerous to take the ship, and it is safe to walk on the bridge.

古文：元帝乃从桥，即前代旧事。
现代文：元帝就徒步行走过。这是前代的旧事。
English: Emperor Yuan passed by on foot. This is an old story from the previous generation.

古文：今山径危险，石路曲狭，上瞻骇目，下视寒心，比于楼船，安危不等。
现代文：今山路危险，石路曲狭，向上看骇目，向下视寒心，把这比于楼船，安危相等。
English: Now the mountain road is dangerous, the stone road is narrow, looking up is terrifying, looking down is chilling, compare this to the houseboat, safety and danger are equal.

古文：陛下蒸人父母，奈何践此畏涂？
现代文：陛下是众人的父母，怎么能走这可怕的险道呢？
English: Your Majesty is the parent of many people, how can you take this terrible risk?

古文：伏望停舆驻跸。 
现代文：伏望陛下停止这一行动。 
English: I appeal to His Majesty to stop this action.

古文：则天纳其言而止。
现代文：武则天采纳了他的意见而没去。
English: Wu Zetian took his advice and did not go.

古文：若以为无明堂故无告朔之礼，有明堂即合告朔，则周、秦有明堂而无天子每月告朔之事。
现代文：这年，王方庆改封石泉子。当时有常制，每月一日在明堂行告朔之礼，司礼博士辟闾仁讠胥奏议，大意是 ：经史正文，没有天子每月告朔的事。
English: In this year, Wang Fangqing changed his title to Shi Quanzi. At that time, there was a regular system, and the ceremony of announcing the new year was held in the Ming Hall on the first day of each month. The officiating doctor gave a speech, to the effect that: According to the main text of history, there is no heavenly son to announce the new year every month.

古文：臣等参求，既无其礼，不可习非，以天子之尊而用诸侯之礼。 
现代文：臣等请求，既然没有这个礼就不可习非，以天子之尊来用诸侯之礼。 
English: At the request of the vassals, since they did not have this rite, they could not learn it from others, but had to use the Rite of Princes in honor of the Son of Heaven.

古文：方庆又奏议，其略曰： 明堂，天子布政之宫也。谨按《谷梁传》云： 闰者，附月之余日，天子不以告朔。 
现代文：王方庆又奏议，大意是： 明堂是天子布政的地方，根据《春秋谷梁传》记载： 闰月，就是加上十二月之余日，天子不在闰月告朔。 
English: Wang Fangqing also made a report, to the effect that: Myeongdong is the place where the Son of Heaven established the government, according to the "Spring and Autumn Leaves of the Valley" record: the leap month, that is, plus the remaining days of December, the Son of Heaven is not in the leap month.

古文： 非礼也。
现代文：但又说： 这样非礼。
English: But he added: "It's so rude.

古文：闰以正时，时以作事，事以厚生，生人之道，于是乎在矣。不告闰朔，弃时政也。 
现代文：闰月是为了正时，正时是为了指导农事，农事是维持人类生存的，人类生存之道，就在于此。闰月不告朔，这就是弃时政。 
English: The intercalary month is for the sake of the right time, the right time is for the guidance of agriculture, agriculture is to maintain human survival, the way of human survival lies in this. If the intercalary month is not announced, this is the abandonment of time politics.

古文：臣据此文，则天子闰月亦告朔矣。宁有他月而废其礼乎？
现代文：臣据此文，天子闰月也要行告朔之礼，岂有另外的月份而废弃此礼的呢！
English: According to this text, the heavenly child, the intercalary month, should also perform the New Year's greeting. How could there be another month and abandon this greeting?

古文：先儒旧说，天子行事，一年十八度入明堂矣。
现代文：先儒旧说，天子行事一年十八度入明堂。
English: The early Confucians used to say that the Son of Heaven enters the hall of enlightenment 18 times a year.

古文：隋炀帝命学士撰《江都集礼》，只抄撮旧礼，更无异文。《贞观》、《显庆礼》及《祠令》不言告朔者，盖为历代不传，所以其文乃阙。
现代文：刘宋时，何承天的《礼论》，梁代崔灵恩的《三礼义宗》，隋炀帝命学士写的《江都集礼》，以及《贞观》、《显庆礼》和《词令》不讲告朔，不等于没有告朔，只是其文乃缺。
English: At the time of Liu Song, He Chengtian's "Theory of Etiquette," Liang Dynasty Cui Lingren's "Three Rites of the Yizong," the "Ecumenical Collection of Rites" written by the Sui and Qian Dynasties, as well as "The Virtue of Chastity," "Celebration of Virtue" and "Lyrics" were not completed, which did not mean that they were not completed, but their texts were lacking.

古文：各有缘由，不足依据。今礼官引为明证，在臣诚实有疑。 
现代文：各书都有各书的缘由，不足为依据，今礼官引用来做证据，在臣来说确实感到有疑惑。 
English: Each book has its own reasons for being insufficient as a basis, and now the etiquette officer is citing them as evidence. For the minister, he really feels doubtful.

古文：则天又令春官广集众儒，取方庆、仁谞所奏议，以定得失。
现代文：武则天又令礼官广集众儒，取王方庆、辟闾仁讠胥所奏议的内容，来定得失。
English: Wu Zetian also ordered the etiquette officials to gather a large number of Confucianists and take the content of the report proposed by Wang Fangqing and Bijun Rensheng to determine the gains and losses.

古文：时成均博士吴扬善、太学博士郭山恽等奏： 按《周礼》及《三传》，皆有天子告朔之礼，秦灭《诗》、《书》，由是告朔礼废。望依方庆议。 
现代文：当时成钧博士吴扬善、太学博士郭山恽等上奏： 按周礼及三传皆有天子告朔之礼，秦灭《诗》、《书》，由此告朔礼废。望依王方庆说。 
English: At that time, Dr. Wu Yangshan of Chengyu University and Dr. Guo Shanqin of Taixue University were the first to play: According to the weekly ritual and the three traditions, there is a ceremony to announce the birth of the son of heaven, and Qin Zhao's "Poetry" and "Book" were cancelled. Wang Yifangqing said.

古文：有制从之。则天以方庆家多书籍，尝访求右军遗迹。
现代文：武则天下诏书，按王方庆的主张每月行告朔之礼。武则天以王方庆家多藏书，曾经找他访求王羲之墨迹。
English: According to Wang Fangqing's idea, Wu Ze Tian Zhaozhi would make a new year's greeting every month. Since Wang Fangqing's family had a large collection of books, Wu Ze Tian would visit him to ask for Wang Zhaozhi's ink.

古文：方庆奏曰： 臣十代从伯祖羲之书，先有四十余纸，贞观十二年，太宗购求，先臣并已进之。
现代文：王方庆奏道 ：臣十代从伯祖王羲之的书法，先有四十余张，贞观十二年，太宗购求，先祖一并进献。
English: Wang Fang Qingsao said: In the 10th generation of vassals, there were more than 40 pieces of calligraphy from the great-grandfather Wang Xi, and in the 12th year of Zhenguan, Taizong purchased it, and the ancestors presented it together.

古文：唯有一卷见今在。又进臣十一代祖导、十代祖洽、九代祖珣、八代祖昙首、七代祖僧绰、六代祖仲宝、五代祖骞、高祖规、曾祖褒，并九代三从伯祖晋中书令献之已下二十八人书，共十卷。 
现代文：只有一卷还在家中珍藏，现进献皇上，并进献臣十一代祖王导、十代祖王洽、九代祖王王旬、七代祖王云首、七代祖王僧绰、六代祖王仲宝、五代祖王骞、高祖王规、曾祖王褒，并九代三从伯祖晋中书令王献之已下二十八人书法共十卷。 
English: Only one scroll is still treasured at home. It is now presented to the emperor, along with the offerings of the eleventh generation ancestor Wang Du, the tenth generation ancestor Wang Cai, the ninth generation ancestor Wang Jun, the seventh generation ancestor Wang Yunshou, the seventh generation ancestor Wang Soqiao, the sixth generation ancestor Wang Zhongbao, the fifth generation ancestor Wang Xuan, the sixth generation ancestor Wang Gao, the tenth generation ancestor Wang Bao, and the third generation ancestor Wang Zeng. A total of ten volumes of calligraphy from twenty-eight people have been presented to the king.

古文：则天御武成殿示群臣，仍令中书舍人崔融为《宝章集》，以叙其事，复赐方庆，当时甚以为荣。
现代文：武则天武成殿传示群臣，又令中书舍人崔融编《宝章集》，来叙这件事，又赏赐王方庆，当时很是荣耀。
English: It was a great honor for the Emperor Wu Zetian (武则天武成殿) to instruct his courtiers, to have the Chinese scholar Cui Rong (崔融) compile the "Treasure Collection" to recount this event, and to reward Wang Fangqing.

古文：方庆又举： 令杖 期丧、大功未葬，不预朝贺；未终丧，不预宴会。 比来朝官不遵礼法，身有哀容，陪预朝会，手舞足蹈，公违宪章，名教既亏，实玷皇化。
现代文：王方庆又上告 ：法令明文规定 ：期丧，大功未葬，不参加朝贺，未终丧，不能参加宴会， 近来朝官不遵礼法，身有哀容，随同参加朝会，手舞足蹈，公然违背礼法，名教既亏，实在是玷污风化。
English: Wang Fangqing also appealed: the decree clearly stipulates: the period of mourning, the great achievement has not been buried, do not participate in the morning greeting, not the end of mourning, can not attend the banquet, recently the imperial officials do not follow the etiquette, have a sad face, attend the imperial meeting, dance with hands and feet, openly violate the etiquette, and the famous religion is a loss, it is really a defilement of etiquette.

古文：伏望申明令式，更禁断。 
现代文：伏望陛下申明礼法，加以禁止。 
English: His Majesty Fushimi affirmed the etiquette and prohibited it.

古文：从之。
现代文：武则天听从了这意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：方庆渐以老疾，乞从闲逸，乃授麟台监修国史。
现代文：王方庆慢慢因年老多病，请求不参与政事，于是被授麟台监修国史。
English: Due to his old age and illness, Wang Fangqing gradually asked not to participate in politics, so he was given the supervision of Lin Tai to supervise the national history.

古文：及中宗立为东宫，方庆兼检校太子左庶子。
现代文：到中宗立为太子，王方庆兼检校太子左庶子。
English: At the time of the enthronement of Zhongzong, Wang Fangqing was the prince's illegitimate son.

古文：圣历二年一日，则天欲季冬讲武，有司稽缓，延入孟春。
现代文：圣历二年元月，武则天想在冬十二月讲习练武，有司考查，缓延到第二年早春二月。
English: In January of the second year of the lunar calendar, Wu Zetian wanted to hold a martial arts training course in the winter of December. However, after investigation, it was postponed until the early spring of February of the following year.

古文：方庆上疏曰： 谨按《礼记月令》： 孟冬之月，天子命将帅讲武，习射御角力。 
现代文：王方庆上疏 ：谨按礼记月令 ：孟冬之月，天子命将帅讲武，练习射箭和御马比武。 
English: Wang Fangqing Shangsuo: I would like to follow the lunar calendar according to the Book of Rites: in the month of Meng Dong, God's Son will give a speech on martial arts, practice archery and horse racing.

古文：此乃三时务农，一时讲武，以习射御，角校才力，盖王者常事，安不忘危之道也。 孟春之月，不可以称兵。 
现代文：这就是三季务农，一季抓练武，来练习射箭、御马、比武，这是王者常规，表明安不忘危之道， 孟春之月，不可以举兵。 
English: This is the three seasons of farming, one season of practicing martial arts, to practice archery, horse riding, and martial arts, this is the king's routine, indicating that the road to safety is not forgotten, the month of Mengchun, it is impossible to raise an army.

古文：兵者，甲胄干戈之总名。
现代文：兵，是甲胄干戈的总名。
English: "Hei" (兵) is the general name of the armored goose.

古文：兵金性，克木，春盛德在木，而举金以害盛德，逆生气。 孟春行冬令，则水潦为败，雪霜大挚，首种不入。 
现代文：兵，金性，金克木，春盛德在木上，而去举金害盛德，违逆生气，如果 孟春行冬令，那么水涝而败坏庄稼，霜雪大至，首种不入。 
English: Soldiers, gold, precious wood, spring prosperity on the tree, and go to raise money to harm prosperity, rebellious anger, if Mengchun goes to winter, then the crops will be damaged by waterlogging, frost and snow will be large, and the first kind will not enter.

古文：蔡邕《月令章句》云： 太阴新休，少阳尚微，而行冬令以导水气，故水潦至而败生物也。
现代文：蔡邕月令章句说： 太阳刚刚休息，少阳还很微弱，而行冬令来导水气，故出现水灾而败坏生物。
English: Cai Wei's chapter on the lunar calendar says: The sun has just set, the sun is still very weak, and the winter solstice leads to water vapor, so floods occur and destroy living things.

古文：雪霜大挚，折阳者也。
现代文：霜雪大至，挫折阳气。
English: The frost and snow have arrived, and the yang is frustrated.

古文：太阴干时，雨雪而霜，故大伤首种。
现代文：太阳干扰时令，再雪进而大霜，故大大伤首种。
English: The sun interferes with the season, causing snow and then a heavy frost, so the first species is greatly injured.

古文：首种，谓宿麦也，麦以秋种，故谓之首种。
现代文：首种，就是宿麦，一般麦子秋天种，宿麦春种，所以叫首种。
English: The first kind, is the dormouse, the general wheat autumn seed, the dormouse spring seed, so called the first kind.

古文：入，收也，春为沍寒所伤，故至夏麦不成长也。 
现代文：入，收也。春天严寒冰冻所伤，所以导致夏麦不能成长。 
English: In and out, too. The severe cold and frost in the spring hurt the sprouts, so the summer barley could not grow.

古文：今孟春讲武，是行冬令，以阴政犯阳气，害发生之德。
现代文：今春二月讲武练兵，是行冬令，以阴政犯阳气，伤害万物生长之德。
English: This spring, February is the time for martial arts training, it is the time for wintering, it is the time for yin and yang, it is the time to harm the growth of all things.

古文：臣恐水潦败物，霜雪损稼，夏麦不登，无所收入也。伏望天恩不违时令，至孟冬教习，以顺天道。 
现代文：臣担心水涝败坏庄稼，霜雪损坏庄稼，夏麦不能很好生长，没有粮食收入，伏望陛下能顺时令，到冬月讲武习兵，来顺应天道。 
English: The courtiers were worried that the floods would ruin the crops, the frost and snow would damage the crops, the summer barley would not grow well, and there would be no grain income. Fubo's majesty would be able to go with the times and teach martial arts apprentices in the winter months to conform to the heavenly way.

古文：手制答曰： 比为久属太平，多历年载，人皆废战，并悉学文。
现代文：武则天亲笔下诏 ：这次讲武练兵是因为长久太平，多历年载，人皆废战，均去学文。
English: Wu Zetian himself wrote the following edict: This lecture on martial arts training soldiers is because of the long-term peace, many years of history, everyone is a waste of war, and everyone goes to study literature.

古文：今者用整兵威，故令教习。
现代文：现在讲武其目的在整兵威，故此令教习演武。
English: Nowadays, the purpose of teaching martial arts is to build up the military's prestige. Therefore, teaching and practicing martial arts is no longer necessary.

古文：卿以春行冬令，则水潦为败，举金伤木，则便害发生。
现代文：卿以春行冬令，则水涝伤庄稼，举金伤木则影响农业生产。
English: If spring is followed by winter, the water will damage the crops, and if winter is followed by spring, the water will damage the crops, and if winter is followed by winter, the water will damage the crops.

古文：涛中朝名士，必详典故，其不称名，应有凭准。
现代文：卿所陈述，深合典礼，若违此请，这就是使月令虚行，希望倡导直言，依表行事。 
English: As stated by His Excellency, the Deepening Ceremony, if it is contrary to this request, it is to make the lunar calendar false, hoping to advocate straight talk and act according to the table.

古文：朝官尚犹如此，宫臣归则不疑。
现代文：这年，授太子左庶子，封石泉公，其他职务如故，俸禄等同职事三品，兼侍皇太子读书。
English: In this year, the crown prince's left illegitimate son, Prince Ishizumi, was conferred the title of crown prince, and other duties remained the same as before, such as salary and three prizes, as well as serving the crown prince in his studies.

古文：今东宫殿及门名，皆有触犯，临事论启，回避甚难。
现代文：王方庆又上言 ：谨按史籍所载，人臣和君主在上表中，没有直接写皇太子其名的，皇储太子名应尊重，所以不直接写名，今东宫殿和门名，皆有触犯，临事论议，回避甚难。
English: Wang Fangqing also made the following comment: According to historical records, courtiers and monarchs did not directly write the name of the crown prince in the above table. The name of the crown prince should be respected, so do not directly write the name. Both the present East Palace and the door name have infringements, issues and discussions, and it is difficult to avoid.

古文：孝敬皇帝为太子时，改弘教门为崇教门；沛王为皇太子，改崇贤馆为崇文馆。
现代文：孝敬皇帝李弘为太子时，改弘教馆为崇教馆；沛王李贤为皇太子，改崇贤馆为崇文馆。
English: When Li Hong, the emperor of filial piety, was crown prince, the teaching hall of Li Hong was changed to the teaching hall of Chong; when Li Xian, the king of Pei, was crown prince, the teaching hall of Chong Xian was changed to the teaching hall of Chongwen.

古文：皆避名讳，以遵典礼。
现代文：皆避名讳，以遵典制。
English: Everyone avoids name-calling and follows the rules.

古文：此即成例，足为轨模。伏望天恩因循旧式，付司改换。 
现代文：这已成常例，应成为轨模，望陛下能因循旧式，交付有司改换。 
English: This has become a common practice and should become a model. We hope that His Majesty can follow the old style and change the delivery department.

古文：制从之。
现代文：武则天下旨听从。
English: Wu Zetian obeyed the will of the world.

古文：长安二年五月卒，赠衮州都督，谥曰贞。
现代文：长安二年五月，王方庆去世，赠兖州都督，谥号贞。
English: In May of the second year of Chang'an, Wang Fangqing passed away, and was presented with the title of the governor of Zhangzhou and the posthumous name Zhen.

古文：中宗即位，以宫僚之旧，追赠吏部尚书。
现代文：中宗即位，以宫僚之旧，追赠吏部尚书。
English: When Emperor Zhongzong ascended to the throne, he posthumously bestowed the title of "Imperial Secretary" to his former palace staff.

古文：方庆博学好著述，所撰杂书凡二百余卷。
现代文：王方庆博学好著述，所撰写的各种书有二百余卷。
English: Wang Fangqingbo is a good student and a good writer. He has written more than 200 volumes of various books.

古文：少子晙，工书知名，尤善琴棋，而性多严整，官至殿中侍御史。
现代文：他尤其精通三礼，好讲究礼节的人大多向他讨教。他每有酬答，都有典据，当时人把他所讲的礼，编辑成礼杂答问。他家藏书多，不少于礻必阁，至于图画，也多异本。
English: He was especially proficient in the three etiquettes, and most people who were keen on etiquette asked him for advice. He had a reference for every reward and answer, and at that time people edited the etiquette he spoke of into etiquette questions and answers. He had a large collection of books, not less than that of Shubigakou, and as for pictures, there were also many different books.

古文：姚璹，字令璋，散骑常侍思廉之孙也。
现代文：但他的子孙不能守其业，他死后不久书画也多散亡。姚璹，字令璋，是散骑常侍姚思廉的孙子。
English: However, his children and grandchildren were not able to maintain his business, and soon after his death, most of his paintings and calligraphy were also lost.

古文：少孤，抚弟妹以友爱称。
现代文：少年时就没有父母，自己抚养弟妹，以友爱被世人称扬。
English: When he was a boy, he had no parents. He raised his younger brothers and sisters by himself, and was praised by the world for his friendship.

古文：博涉经史，有才辩。
现代文：他广博学习经史，有才辩。
English: He has studied history extensively and is a talented debater.

古文：永徽中明经擢第。累补太子宫门郎。与司议郎孟利贞等奉令撰《瑶山玉彩》书，书成，迁秘书郎。
现代文：永徽年中，考明经科中举，授太子宫门郎之职，他与司议郎孟利贞等奉令撰写《瑶山玉彩》一书，书成，升迁秘书郎。
English: In the middle of the Yonghui year, he was awarded the position of the prince's concubine, and he and the chairman, Meng Lizhen, were ordered to write the book "Lushan Yucai," which was written by the promotion secretary.

古文：调露中，累迁至中书舍人，封吴兴县男。
现代文：调露年中升迁中书舍人，封吴兴县男。
English: In the mid-year promotion and transfer, a man from Wuxing County was promoted.

古文：则天临朝，迁夏官侍郎。
现代文：武则天临朝，迁任夏官侍郎。
English: Bu Zetian moved to the imperial court and was appointed as the summer official's chamberlain.

古文：坐从父弟敬节同徐敬业之乱，贬桂州都督府长史。
现代文：因表弟姚敬节参与徐敬业的叛乱受连累，贬桂州都督府长史。
English: Because his cousin, Yao Jingjie, was implicated in Xu Jingjie's rebellion, he was demoted from governor of Guizhou to prefectural governor.

古文：时则天雅好符瑞，璹至岭南，访诸山川草树，其名号有 武 字者，皆以为上膺国姓，列奏其事。
现代文：当时武则天雅好符瑞，姚璹到岭南，遍查山川草木，其名凡号有 武 字的，都把它作为承应国姓，一一列表上奏。
English: At that time, Wu Zetian Yao was fond of Fu Rui. Yao Zetian went to the south of Lingnan to investigate the mountains, rivers and plants. If there was a Wu character in his name, he took it as the surname of the country, and listed it one by one.

古文：则天大悦，召拜天官侍郎。
现代文：武则天很高兴，召回京拜为天官侍郎。
English: Bu Zetian was very pleased and recalled Kyobai to be the official attendant of the emperor.

古文：善于选补，时人称之。长寿二年，迁文昌左丞、同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：长寿二年，升任文昌左丞，同凤阁鸾台平章事。
English: After two years of longevity, he was promoted to the post of Wenchang Zuorong, Tongfeng Pavilion, Taihei Chapter.

古文：自永徽以后，左、右史虽得对仗承旨，仗下后谋议，皆不预闻。
现代文：自永徽年以后，左史、右史虽然要在仪仗下承受圣旨，但谋议却在史官、谏官退朝后密奏，均不参与谋议。
English: Since the Year of the Yonghui Emperor, although the Left Historian and the Right Historian were to receive the imperial edict in a ceremonial manner, the deliberation took place behind closed doors after the Historian and the Eunuch retired from the imperial court, and neither participated in the deliberation.

古文：璹以为帝王谟训，不可暂无纪述，若不宣自宰相，史官无从得书。
现代文：姚璹认为帝王决策训导，不可没有记述，如不叫宰相得知，史官也无从记事。
English: Yao Wei believed that the emperor's decision-making and training must be recorded. If the prime minister is not informed, the historian will not be able to record.

古文：乃表请仗下所言军国政要，宰相一人专知撰录，号为时政记，每月封送史馆。
现代文：他便上表请求凡史官、谏官退朝后所商讨的军国大事，宰相应有一人专门记录，称为时政记，每月封送史馆。
English: He then requested that all historians and eunuchs discuss the military and national events that occurred after the emperor's abdication, and correspondingly, have a special record, known as a chronicle of politics, sealed and sent to the history museum every month.

古文：宰相之撰时政记，自璹始也。
现代文：宰相撰时政记，就是从姚璹开始的。
English: The political chronicle of the time when the prime minister was writing it all started with Yao Wei.

古文：是岁九月，坐事转司宾少卿，罢知政事。
现代文：这年九月，因事犯错，降为司宾少卿，罢免了宰相职务。
English: In September of that year, due to a mistake, he was demoted to the position of Privy Councillor and removed from the post of Prime Minister.

古文：延载初，擢拜纳言。
现代文：延载初年，提升为纳言。
English: In the first year of extension, it was upgraded to Naganobu.

古文：有司以璹从父弟犯法，奏言不合更为侍臣。
现代文：有司以姚璹的表弟犯法，上奏说姚璹不适合继续为侍臣。
English: Yu Si took Yao Yao's cousin to be in violation of the law, and said that Yao Yao was not suitable to continue to be a courtier.

古文：璹上言： 昔王敦称兵犯顺，王导仍典枢机；嵇康戮于晋朝，嵇绍忠于晋室。
现代文：姚璹上言 ：过去王敦起兵反叛，王导仍任枢机重职；稽康在晋朝被杀，嵇绍还是忠于晋王室。
English: Yao Xuan's last words: In the past, Wang Dun started a rebellion, Wang Du still held the important post of cardinal; Ji Kang was killed in the Jin Dynasty, and Zou Shao was still loyal to the Jin royal family.

古文：窃惟前古，尚不为疑；今奉圣恩，岂由臣下。
现代文：就是前代，尚不被怀疑；今天奉圣朝，哪里会这样呢？
English: In the previous generation, it was not suspected; today, it is a sacred rite. How can this be?

古文：必以体例有乖，伏请甘从屏退。 
现代文：如果一定要说与体例有违的话，臣请求甘愿屏退。 
English: If it must be said that it is contrary to the style, the vassal requests that the screen be willing to retreat.

古文：则天曰： 此乃我意，卿复何言！
现代文：武则天道 ：这就是我的意思，卿不要再说了。
English: Wu Zetian: That's what I mean, sir, stop talking.

古文：但当尽忠，无听浮说。 
现代文：只要尽忠心，不要听浮言。 
English: Just be loyal and don't listen to gossip.

古文：时武三思率蕃夷酋长，请造天枢于端门外，刻字纪功，以颂周德，璹为督作使。
现代文：当时，武三思率领各少数民族的酋长，请求铸铜柱为天枢，刻武则天功德，立于端门之外，姚璹为督作使。
English: At that time, Wu Sansi, leading the chiefs of various ethnic minorities, requested the casting of a bronze pillar as the heavenly center, engraved with Wu Zetian Gongde, standing outside the end gate, and Yao Zhe as the superintendent.

古文：证圣初，璹加秋官尚书、同平章事。是岁，明堂灾，则天欲责躬避正殿，璹奏曰： 此实人火，非曰天灾。
现代文：证圣初年，姚璹加官职任秋官尚书，代理宰相，这年，明堂遭火灾，武则天自责而避离正殿，姚璹上奏道： 这实际上是人造成的火灾，并非天灾。
English: In the first year of Zheng Sheng, Yao Xuan was promoted to the post of Qiu Guan Shang Shu, acting prime minister. In this year, the Ming Hall suffered a fire, Wu Zetian blamed himself and avoided the main hall. Yao Xuan said: This is actually a man-made fire, not a natural disaster.

古文：至如成周宣榭，卜代愈隆；汉武建章，盛德弥永。
现代文：成周时洛阳的宣檄讲武之地，汉武时的建章宫均遭过火灾，但盛德仍然久远。
English: Luoyang at the time of Cheng Zhou was a place where martial arts were preached, and the Jianzhang Palace at the time of Han Wu had been burned, but Shengde was still far away.

古文：臣又见《弥勒下生经》云，当弥勒成佛之时，七宝台须臾散坏。
现代文：臣又见《弥勒下生经》说，当弥勒成佛的时候，七宝台须臾之间散毁。
English: The minister also saw "Miroku Shoseki" which said that when Miroku became a Buddha, the Seven Treasures were scattered and destroyed.

古文：睹此无常之相，便成正觉之因。
现代文：看见这无常之相，弥勒便成正觉之因。
English: Seeing this impermanence, Maitreya became the cause of enlightenment.

古文：故知圣人之道，随缘示化，方便之利，博济良多。
现代文：所以，圣人之道，随缘而化，因循客观事物变化之利。
English: Therefore, the sage's way is to follow the fate, to follow the changes of objective things.

古文：可使由之，义存于此。况今明堂，乃是布政之所，非宗庙之地，陛下若避正殿，于礼未为得也。 左拾遗刘承庆廷奏云： 明堂宗祀之所，今既被焚，陛下宜辍朝思过。 
现代文：何况今日之明堂，是布政之所，并非宗庙之地，陛下如避正殿，于礼法上也不妥当。 左拾遗刘承庆却上奏说： 明堂是祭祀的地方，今既已被焚，陛下应当闭门思过。 
English: Moreover, today's Myeongdong is the seat of government, not a place of ancestral temple. If His Majesty avoids the main hall, it is not appropriate in terms of etiquette. However, Liu Chengqing, the heir to the throne, wrote: Myeongdong is a place of worship, and now that it has been burned, His Majesty should think about it behind closed doors.

古文：璹又持前议以争之，则天乃依璹奏。
现代文：姚璹又持前议争论，武则天则依姚璹的意见行事。
English: Yao Yao argued and argued, and Wu Zetian acted according to Yao Yao's opinion.

古文：先令璹监造天枢，至是以功当赐爵一等。
现代文：先要姚璹监造天枢，至此以功赐爵一等。
English: First, Yao Jun oversaw the creation of the heavenly center, and was awarded a first-class knighthood for his work.

古文：璹表请回赠父一官，乃追赠其父豫州司户参军处平为博州刺史。
现代文：姚璹上表请求给自己父亲赠一官，武则天就追赠他的父亲原豫州司户参军姚处平为博州刺史。
English: Yao Zhen requested that his father be given an official title, and Wu Zetian later presented his father, the former governor of Yuzhou who joined the army, Yao Shuping, with the title of governor of Bozhou.

古文：天后将封嵩岳，命璹总知撰仪注，并充封禅副使。
现代文：武则天将去嵩山封禅，命姚璹总管仪礼，充封禅副使。
English: Wu Zetian will go to Songshan to seal the zen, and he will order Yao Jun, the chief of ceremonies, to be the deputy envoy of the zen.

古文：及重造明堂，又令璹充使督作，以功加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：到重造明堂时，又令姚璹充当监造的使者，因建造有功加银青光禄大夫。
English: When it came to the rebuilding of the Ming Hall, Yao Tong was also made to act as an envoy to supervise the construction. He was awarded silver and silver medals for his work.

古文：时有大石国使请献狮子，璹上疏谏曰： 狮子猛兽，唯止食肉，远从碎叶，以至神都，肉既难得，检为劳费。
现代文：当时有大石国派使来献狮子。姚璹上疏谏道 ：狮子是猛兽，只食肉，远从碎叶来到京都，肉既难得，极为劳累耗费。
English: At that time, an envoy from Oishi Province was sent to offer a lion. Yao Yan Shangshuo said: The lion is a beast of prey, it only eats meat, it came to Kyoto from far away, meat is rare, and it is extremely tiring and expensive.

古文：陛下以百姓为心，虑一物有失，鹰犬不蓄，渔猎总停。运不杀以阐大慈，垂好生以敷至德，凡在翾飞蠢动，莫不感荷仁恩。
现代文：陛下以百姓为心，担忧一物有失，鹰犬也不蓄养，渔猎总是停止，用不杀生来表现大慈悲，来显好生的高尚道德，凡是天上的飞禽，地上的虫兽，没有不感受陛下仁恩的。
English: His Majesty is concerned about the people, worried about the loss of one thing, does not keep eagle dogs, fishing and hunting are always stopped, it is not necessary to kill to show great mercy, to show the noble morality of good living, all the birds in the sky, the beasts and insects on the ground, do not feel His Majesty's benevolence.

古文：岂容自菲薄于身，而厚资给于兽，求之至理，必不然乎 。
现代文：哪里能容得对自身菲薄，而对猛兽给厚资。讲求至理，必然不能这样。 
English: Where can you tolerate being stingy to yourself and generous to beasts of prey? If you want to be reasonable, it must not be like this.

古文：疏奏，遽停来使。
现代文：疏奏上，武则天便马上要来使不要送狮子来京都。
English: According to the rhyme, Wu Zetian will soon come to make sure that lions are not sent to Kyoto.

古文：又九鼎初成，制令黄金千两涂之。
现代文：另外，当时铸九鼎成功，武则天下旨用黄金千两涂饰。
English: In addition, at that time, the casting of Jiuding was successful, and Wu Zetian ordered the whole world to decorate with a thousand pieces of gold.

古文：璹进谏曰： 夫鼎者神器，贵在质朴自然，无假别为浮饰。
现代文：姚璹进谏道： 鼎，是神器，贵在质朴自然，不必要另外加上浮饰。
English: Yao Yujin: Ding is a sacred artifact. It is precious for its simplicity and naturalness. There is no need to add embellishments.

古文：臣观其状，先有五彩辉焕，错杂其间，岂待金色，方为炫耀？ 
现代文：臣观鼎的形状，先有五彩光辉，昏杂其间，哪里还要什么金色才算炫耀呢？ 
English: The shape of the vassal ding ding, first of all, has colorful brilliance, mixed in between, where else would you need what kind of gold to show off?

古文：则天又从之。
现代文：武则天又听从了他的意见。
English: Wu Zetian also followed his advice.

古文：寻属契丹犯塞，命梁王武三思为榆关道安抚大使、璹为副使以备之。
现代文：不久契丹侵犯边塞，武则天命梁王武三思为榆关道安抚大使，姚璹为副使来防备。
English: Soon after, the Khitan invaded the border fortress, and Wu Zetian appointed Liang Wang Wu San Si as the ambassador to pacify the Shiguan Road, and Yao Zhe as the deputy envoy to guard it.

古文：及还，坐事，神功初左授益州大都督府长史。
现代文：到归来，因处事有误，在神功初年，降职调任益州大督府长史。
English: Upon his return, he was demoted and transferred to the post of governor of Yishu Prefecture due to his erroneous actions in the first year of his service.

古文：蜀中官吏多贪暴，璹屡有发扌适，奸无所容。则天嘉之，降玺书劳之曰： 夫严霜之下，识贞松之擅奇，疾风之前，知劲草之为贵。
现代文：蜀中官吏多贪婪残暴，姚璹多次进行严厉打击，奸邪无所容身，武则天对姚璹予以赞扬，下玺书慰劳： 严霜之下，才识青松的高尚；疾风之前，方知劲草的可贵。
English: The officials in Shuzhong were greedy and cruel. Yao Tong repeatedly cracked down on them, and there was no place for treachery and evil. Wu Zetian praised Yao Tong and wrote a letter of consolation: "Under a hard frost, it is difficult to know the nobility of young pine trees; before a strong wind, it is difficult to know the value of vigorous grasses."

古文：物既有此，人亦宜哉。
现代文：物既如此，人也是一样。
English: Things being what they are, people are the same.

古文：卿早荷朝恩，委任斯重。
现代文：卿早荷朝恩，委以重任。
English: Sir Hayato Chonen, entrusted with an important task.

古文：居中作相，弘益已多，防边训兵，心力俱尽。
现代文：在朝中做相，成绩很大；防边训兵，操尽心力。
English: In the DPRK and China, he has made a great achievement; in the border defense training, he has done his best.

古文：岁寒无改，终始不渝。
现代文：岁寒不改，始终不渝。
English: Never changing, never changing.

古文：讵劳期月，康此黎元，言念德声，良深嘉尚。宜布琅邪之化，当以豫州为法。 
现代文：又眷顾蜀中，民俗很乱，久缺好的地方官，在侵吞民利上成为官吏之弊，收刮民财成为政务，人无所措手足。
English: He also visited Shuzhong, where folk customs are in disarray, where good local officials have been lacking for a long time, where embezzling people's profits has become the vice of officials, and where the collection of people's wealth has become government affairs. People are at their wits' end.

古文：则天又尝谓侍臣曰： 凡为长官，能清自身者甚易，清得僚吏者甚难。至于姚璹，可谓兼之矣。 
现代文：因此命卿出镇，果然能驾驭得当，政风澄清，治政整肃，吏不敢犯，奸无所容，前后纠偏打击犯罪，致使贪残的人躲藏，抢夺的人逃遁。未用一月，安定了世俗百姓，人民念卿之德，很是赞扬。 武则天又曾对侍臣说 ：凡为长官，能使自身清白容易，能使下属廉洁很难。而姚璹，可以称得上二者兼有。 
English: Therefore, Myungyeong came out of the town, and he was able to properly control the situation, clarify the political style, and rectify the political system. Officials did not dare to commit crimes, and there was no tolerance for treachery. He corrected and cracked down on crimes, causing the greedy to hide and the robbers to flee. In less than a month, the secular people were stabilized, and the people's virtue of remembering Myungyeong was very commendable. Wu Zetian also once said to his vassal: "When you are a superior officer, it is easy to make yourself innocent, but it is difficult to make your subordinates clean. And Yao

古文：时新都丞朱待辟坐赃至死，逮捕系狱。
现代文：当时新都丞朱待辟贪赃有死罪，逮捕入狱。
English: At that time, Xinduzheng Zhu Dibai was arrested and jailed for corruption and bribery, which were capital offenses.

古文：待辟素善沙门理中，阴结诸不逞，因待辟以杀璹为名，拟据巴蜀为乱。
现代文：朱待辟一向善于佛教教理，他阴谋结交那些不得志之人，朱待辟以杀姚璹为名，打算据巴蜀作乱。
English: Zhu Dibai had always been good at Buddhist teachings. He plotted to make friends with those who had no aspiration. Zhu Dibai planned to make trouble in the name of Ba Shu in the name of killing Yao Yu.

古文：人密表告之者，制令璹按其狱。璹深持之，事涉疑似引而诛死者，仅以千数。
现代文：有人秘密上表告发此事。武则天下旨令姚璹以法制裁，姚璹把涉嫌有牵连的人处死差不多上千人。
English: Someone secretly reported the matter to the authorities. Wu Zetian decreed that Yao Xuan be punished by law, and Yao Xuan executed almost a thousand people suspected of being involved.

古文：则天又令洛州长史宋元爽、御史中丞霍献可等重加详覆，亦无所发明。
现代文：武则天又令洛州长史宋元爽、御史中丞霍献可等重新加以详细覆查，也没有什么问题。
English: Wu Zetian also ordered the governor of Luo Province, Shi Songyuan Shuang, and the vice-governor of Luo Province, Zhongzheng Huo Xianke, to re-examine the case in detail, and there was no problem.

古文：逮系狱数百人，不胜酷毒，递相附会，以就反状。
现代文：抓进狱中的数百人，受不了酷刑毒打，都承认反叛罪名。
English: Hundreds of people who were taken into custody, tortured and severely beaten, all confessed to the crime of rebellion.

古文：因此籍没者复五十余家，其余称知反配流者亦十八九，道路冤之。
现代文：因此没收家产又有五十多家，其余称知情者十有八九被流放，冤声载道。
English: As a result, more than 50 people had their family property confiscated, and the remaining people who claimed to be in the know were in all likelihood exiled, and their grievances carried with them.

古文：监察御史袁恕己劾奏其事。则天初令璹与恕己对定，又寻令罢推。
现代文：监察御史袁恕己劾奏此事，武则天开始令姚璹与袁恕己对质，后又令不再追问。
English: The supervising magistrate, Yuan Shuxi, investigated the matter, and Wu Zetian ordered Yao Jun to confront Yuan Shuxi, and then ordered him not to pursue the matter any further.

古文：俄拜地官尚书。
现代文：不久，姚璹拜地官尚书。
English: Soon, Yao Yibai and local official Shang Shuxu arrived.

古文：岁余，转冬官尚书，仍西京留守。
现代文：一年多，调任冬官尚书，仍为西京留守。
English: For more than a year, Shang Shu, who was transferred to the Winter Palace, remained in West Beijing.

古文：长安中，累表乞骸骨，制听致仕，进爵为伯。遇官名复旧，为工部尚书。
现代文：长安年中，上表请求告老还乡，武则天下旨，姚璹晋爵为伯，正遇上官名复旧，为工部尚书。
English: In the middle of the Chang'an year, the above table requested the old man to return to his hometown, Wu was the order of the day, Yao Yu Jinjie was the mayor, and the official name was restored to the old one, and it was the Ministry of Industry.

古文：神龙元年卒，遗令薄葬，赠越州都督，谥曰成。
现代文：神龙元年姚璹去世。生前遗嘱令薄葬，赠越州都督，谥号成。
English: In the first year of the Dragon God, Yao Yao passed away. According to his last will and testament, he was given a short funeral, given the title of Yuezhou governor, and given a posthumous name.

