古文：起柔兆涒滩五月，至九月，不满一年。
现代文：起柔兆涒滩五月，至九月，不满一年。
English: From May to September, less than a year.

古文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝上之下
现代文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝上之下
English: Su Zong, civilized, virtuous, great saint, great sage, Emperor Xuanxiao, above and below

古文：至德元年丙申，公元七五六年
现代文：唐肃宗至德元载五月丁巳，鲁炅兵败，退守南阳，被叛军包围。
English: From Tang Su Zong to De Yuan Zang

古文：五月，丁巳，炅众溃，走保南阳，贼就围之。太常卿张垍荐夷陵太守虢王巨有勇略，上征吴王祗为太仆卿，以巨为陈留、谯郡太守、河南节度使，兼统岭南节度使何履光、黔中节度使赵国珍、南阳节度使鲁炅。国珍，本牂柯夷也。
现代文：太常卿张推荐说夷陵太守虢王李巨有勇有谋，玄宗就征召吴王李祗为太仆卿，任命虢王李巨为陈留及谯郡太守、河南节度使，并统领岭南节度使何履光、黔中节度使赵国珍和南阳节度使鲁炅。赵国珍本是柯地方的夷人。
English: Zhang recommended that Li Jiu, the governor of Yiling, was brave and resourceful, so Xuanzong recruited Wu Wang Li Jiao as his servant, appointed Li Jiao as Chen Rui and governor of Yixian County, Henan Festival envoy, and led the Lingnan Festival to He Liguang, the Mid-Autumn Festival to Zhao Guozhen, and the Nanyang Festival to Lu Yao. Zhao Guozhen was originally a local of Ke.

古文：戊辰，巨引兵自蓝田出，趣南阳。
现代文：戊辰，李巨率兵从蓝田出发，向南阳进军。
English: In the afternoon, Li Jiu and his soldiers set out from Lantian and marched to Nanyang.

古文：贼闻之，解围走。
现代文：叛军得知后，解围而去。
English: When the rebels found out, they broke the siege and left.

古文：令狐潮复引兵攻雍丘。
现代文：令狐潮又率兵来攻打雍丘。
English: The fox tide led the soldiers to attack Yongqiu again.

古文：潮与张巡有旧，于城下相劳苦如平生，潮因说巡曰： 天下事去矣，足下坚守危城，欲谁为乎？ 
现代文：令狐潮与张巡有交情，二人就在城下像平时见面那样互相问候，令狐潮借机对张巡说： 现在唐朝的大势已去，您还在为谁苦守危城呢？ 
English: Ling Xuchao and Zhang Jun had a friendship, and the two greeted each other at the foot of the city as they usually met. Ling Xuchao took the opportunity to say to Zhang Jun: Now that the general trend of the Tang Dynasty has gone, for whom are you still struggling to defend the dangerous city?

古文：巡曰： 足下平生以忠义自许，今日之举，忠义何在！ 
现代文：张巡说： 你平常总是说自己如何忠义，而现在这种叛逆行为那有一点忠义的味道！ 
English: Zhang Jun said: You usually always say how loyal you are, but now this rebellious behavior has a bit of a loyal flavor!

古文：潮惭而退。
现代文：令狐潮听后惭愧而退。
English: After listening to the fox tide, he felt ashamed and retreated.

古文：郭子仪、李光弼还常山，史思明收散卒数万踵其后。子仪选骁骑更挑战，三日，至行唐，贼疲，乃退。
现代文：郭子仪与李光弼率兵退回常山，史思明又收罗散兵数万随后追击，郭子仪挑选骁勇善战的骑兵轮番挑战，三天以后，到了行唐县，叛军因疲劳无力再战，才退兵。
English: Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao led their troops back to Changshan. Shi Siming gathered tens of thousands of scattered soldiers and then chased them. Guo Ziyi selected the cavalry who were brave and good at fighting. Three days later, when they arrived at Xiangtang County, the rebels were too tired to fight again, so they withdrew.

古文：子仪乘之，又败之于沙河。
现代文：郭子仪乘机出击，又败叛军于沙河县。
English: Guo Ziyi took the opportunity to attack and defeated the rebels in Shahe County.

古文：蔡希德至洛阳，安禄山复使将步骑二万人北就思明，又使牛廷玠发范阳等郡兵万馀人助思明，合五万馀人，而同罗、曳落河居五分之一。
现代文：蔡希德到了洛阳，安禄山又让他率领步、骑兵二万人向北靠近史思明，并派牛廷发范阳等郡兵一万多人增援史思明，合兵共五万多人，其中同罗、曳落河精兵占五分之一。
English: Cai Xide arrived in Luoyang, and Anlu Mountain let him lead the march with 20,000 cavalry to the north near Shisiming, and sent more than 10,000 county soldiers such as Niu Tingfa Fanyang to reinforce Shisiming, with a total of more than 50,000 soldiers, of which one-fifth were soldiers from Tongluo and Huihuohe.

古文：子仪至恒阳，思明随至，子仪深沟高垒以待之；贼来则守，去则追之，昼则耀兵，夜斫其营，贼不得休息。
现代文：郭子仪抵达恒阳，史思明也率兵追到，郭子仪依靠深沟高垒，以逸待劳，叛军来攻就固守，撤兵就追击，白天以大兵向叛军炫耀武力，夜里则派部队袭击敌营，使叛军不得安宁。
English: Guo Ziyi arrived in Hengyang, and Shi Siming also led the troops to chase him. Guo Ziyi relied on the deep ditch and high ramparts to wait for labor. When the rebels attacked, they held fast, and when they withdrew, they pursued. During the day, they showed off their strength to the rebels with soldiers, and at night, they sent troops to attack the enemy camp, so that the rebels had no peace.

古文：数日，子仪、光弼议曰。 贼倦矣，可以出战。 
现代文：这样持续了数天，郭子仪与李光弼商议说： 叛军已经疲劳，可以出战。 
English: This went on for several days, and Guo Ziyi conferred with Li Guangyao and said: The rebels are tired and can go to war.

古文：壬午，战于嘉山，大破之，斩首四万级，捕虏千馀人。
现代文：壬午，两军战于嘉山，叛军大败，被杀四万多人，被俘一千多人。
English: At Renwu, the two armies fought in Jiashan, the rebels were defeated, more than forty thousand people were killed, and more than one thousand people were captured.

古文：思明坠马，露髻跣足步走，至暮，杖折枪归营，奔于博陵；光弼就围之，军声大振。
现代文：史思明从马上坠落下来，发髻散乱，赤脚步行而逃，到了晚上，拄着折断的长枪回到军营，然后又逃奔博陵。李光弼率兵紧紧地围住了博陵，军势大振。
English: Shi Siming fell off his horse, his hair was disheveled, and he fled on foot barefoot. In the evening, he returned to the military camp with a broken long gun, and then fled to Boling. Li Guangya and his soldiers tightly surrounded Boling, and the army was greatly strengthened.

古文：于是河北十馀郡皆杀贼守将而降。
现代文：于是河北地区原先被叛军占据的十多个州郡都杀了叛军的守将而归降朝廷。
English: As a result, more than ten prefectures and counties in the Hebei region that were originally occupied by the rebels killed the rebel commanders and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：渔阳路再绝，贼往来者皆轻骑窃过，多为官军所获，将士家在渔阳者无不摇心。
现代文：范阳的归路再次被切断，叛军往来都是轻骑偷偷摸摸地通过，就是这样还大多被官军俘获，家在范阳的叛军将士都心中动摇。
English: Fan Yang's return route was once again cut off. The rebels' only means of communication was to sneak through on horseback. This is how most of them were captured by the government army. The rebel soldiers in Fan Yang were deeply shaken.

古文：禄山大惧，召高尚、严庄诟之曰： 汝数年教我反，以为万全。
现代文：安禄山十分恐惧，把高尚与严庄召来骂道： 数年来你们都劝我反叛，认为一定能够成功。
English: An Lushan was very frightened, and he called Noble and Solemn to scold them, saying, "For several years, you have all advised me to rebel, thinking that I would definitely succeed.

古文：今守潼关，数月不能进，北路已绝，诸军四合，吾所有者止汴、郑数州而已，万全何在？
现代文：而现在大军被阻于潼关，数月不能攻破，北归的路也被断绝，官军大集，我们所占据的只有汴州、郑州等几个州郡，如何能够取胜呢？
English: But now the great army is blocked at Shaoguan, it cannot be broken through for several months, and the road of returning north has also been cut off. The official army is large, and we only occupy several states and counties such as Zhangzhou and Zhengzhou. How can we win?

古文：汝自今勿来见我！ 
现代文：从现在开始你们再也不要来见我！ 
English: From now on, don't ever come to see me again!

古文：尚、庄惧，数日不敢见。
现代文：高尚与严庄听后极为害怕，好多天都不敢去见安禄山。
English: After listening to Gao Shang and Yan Zhuang, they were extremely afraid and did not dare to go to Anlu Mountain for many days.

古文：田乾真自关下来，为尚、庄说禄山曰： 自古帝王经营大业，皆有胜败，岂能一举而成！
现代文：这时田乾真从潼关回来，为高尚、严庄说话，劝安禄山说： 自古以来，凡是要成就大事业的帝王，都有胜有败，怎么能够指望一举成功呢！
English: At this time, Tian Kenzhen returned from Shaoguan, spoke for the noble and solemn, and advised An Lushan to say: Since ancient times, all emperors who want to achieve great things have won or lost, how can they expect to succeed at one stroke!

古文：今四方军垒虽多，皆新募乌合之众，未更行陈，岂能敌我蓟北劲锐之兵，何足深忧！
现代文：现在四面八方的官军虽然多，但都是新召募的乌合之众，没有经过战阵，怎么能够敌得过我们蓟北的这些精兵强将呢！
English: Now, although there are many government troops on all sides, they are all newly recruited rabble. Without going through the battle, how can they defeat these elite soldiers and strongmen in our north?

古文：尚、庄皆佐命元勋，陛下一旦绝之，使诸将闻之，谁不内惧！
现代文：您根本不用担忧。高尚、严庄都是跟随您多年的功臣元勋，陛下就这样一下子把他们抛弃，如果让诸位将领知道了，那一个能不心中恐惧呢！
English: You don't have to worry at all. Noble and solemn are the heroes and heroines who have followed you for many years. Your Majesty has abandoned them all at once. If you let your generals know this, they will be terrified!

古文：若上下离心，臣窃为陛下危之！ 
现代文：如果内部分裂，上下离心，我觉得陛下的处境就危险了！ 
English: If there is an internal split, if the top and bottom are not aligned, I think Your Majesty's position is in danger!

古文：禄山喜曰： 阿浩，汝能豁我心事。 
现代文：安禄山听后高兴地说： 阿浩，你真能够体谅我的心事。 
English: After listening, An Lushan said happily: Ah Hao, you are really able to understand my heart.

古文：即召尚、庄，置酒酣宴，自为之歌以侑酒，待之如初。
现代文：于是就把高尚与严庄召来，摆投宴席招待，安禄山还为他们唱歌以劝酒，仍像以前那样对待他们。
English: So he invited the noble and the dignified, and held a banquet for them. Anlu Mountain also sang for them to persuade them to drink, and treated them as before.

古文：阿浩，乾真小字也。
现代文：阿浩是田乾真的小名。
English: Ah Hao is a nickname of Tian Qianxin.

古文：禄山议弃洛阳，走归范阳，计未决。
现代文：安禄山计划放弃洛阳，率军回保范阳，但还没有下定决心。
English: An Lushan plans to abandon Luoyang and lead the army back to Fanyang, but has not yet made up his mind.

古文：是时，天下以杨国忠骄纵召乱，莫不切齿。
现代文：这时，人们都人为安禄山叛乱是因为杨国忠骄横放纵所致，无不对杨国忠切齿痛恨。
English: At this time, people all believed that the Anlu Mountain Rebellion was caused by the arrogance and indulgence of Yang Guozhong, and they all hated Yang Guozhong.

古文：又，禄山起兵以诛国忠为名，王思礼密说哥舒翰，使抗表请诛国忠，翰不应。
现代文：而且安禄山起兵是以讨杨国忠为名，所以王思礼就悄悄地劝哥舒翰，让他上表请求玄宗杀掉杨国忠，哥舒翰没有答应。
English: Moreover, Anlu Mountain raised an army in the name of killing Yang Guozhong, so Wang Sili quietly persuaded Brother Shu Han to ask Xuanzong to kill Yang Guozhong. Brother Shu Han did not agree.

古文：思礼又请以三十骑劫取以来，至潼关杀之。翰曰： 如此，乃翰反，非禄山也。 
现代文：王思礼又请求率领三十个骑兵把杨国忠劫持出京师，到潼关把他杀掉，哥舒翰说： 如果这样做就是我谋反，而不是安禄山谋反。 
English: Wang Sili also asked him to lead thirty cavalrymen to kidnap Yang Guozhong from the Beijing Division and kill him in Shaoguan. Brother Shuhan said, "If I do this, I will be plotting a rebellion, not Anlu Mountain."

古文：或说国忠： 今朝廷重兵尽在翰手，翰若援旗西指，于公岂不危哉！ 
现代文：有人劝杨国忠说： 现在朝廷的重兵都在哥舒翰掌握之中，他如果挥兵西向京城，您不就危险了吗！ 
English: Someone advised Yang Guozhong, saying, "Nowadays, all the important soldiers of the imperial court are under the control of Goshukhan. If he sends his soldiers westward to the capital, won't you be in danger?"

古文：国忠大惧，乃奏： 潼关大军虽盛，而后无继，万一失利，京师可忧。请选监牧小儿三千于苑中训练。 
现代文：杨国忠大为恐惧，于是就上奏玄宗说： 现在潼关虽然有大军把守，但后无援兵，一旦潼关失守，京师就难保，请求挑选牧马的士卒三千人于禁宛中训练，以应付不测。 
English: Yang Guozhong was very afraid, so he sent a message to Xuanzong, saying: Although there is a large army guarding Shaoguan now, there is no reinforcement. Once Shaoguan is lost, the Beijing division will be difficult to protect. He requested that three thousand horse-herding officers be selected to train at the Forbidden City to cope with any eventuality.

古文：上许之，使剑南军将李福德等领之。
现代文：玄宗同意，于是就派剑南军将李福德等人统领这支队伍。
English: Xuanzong agreed, so he sent the Jiannan Army to take Li Fude and others to lead this team.

古文：又募万人屯灞上，令所亲杜乾运将之，名为御贼，实备翰也。
现代文：杨国忠又招募了一万人屯兵于灞上，命令他的亲信杜乾运率领，名义上是抵御叛军，实际上却是为了防备哥舒翰。
English: Yang Guozhong recruited another ten thousand soldiers and ordered his close friend Du Qianyun to lead them. In name, it was to resist the rebels, but in reality, it was to guard against Goshukhan.

古文：翰闻之，亦恐为国忠所图，乃表请灞上军隶潼关。
现代文：哥舒翰得知后，也怕被杨国忠谋算，于是就上表玄宗请求把驻扎在灞上的军队归于潼关军队统一指挥。
English: After learning of this, Goshukhan was also afraid of being plotted by Yang Guozhong, so he asked Emperor Xuanzong to place the troops stationed in Shuguang under the unified command of the Shuguang army.

古文：六月，癸未，召杜乾运诣关，因事斩之；国忠益惧。
现代文：六月癸未，哥舒翰把杜乾运召到潼关，借机杀了他，杨国忠更加害怕。
English: On the last day of June, Yang Guozhong was even more afraid when his brother Shuhan summoned Du Qian to Shaoguan and took the opportunity to kill him.

古文：会有告崔乾祐在陕，兵不满四千，皆羸弱无备，上遣使趣哥舒翰进兵复陕、洛。
现代文：这时有人告诉玄宗说崔乾佑在陕郡的兵力不到四千，都是老弱兵，而且没有准备，玄宗就派人催促哥舒翰出兵收复陕郡和洛阳。
English: At this time, someone told Xuanzong that Cui Qianyou's troop strength in Shaanxi County was less than four thousand. They were all old and weak soldiers, and without preparation, Xuanzong sent someone to urge Goshukhan to send troops to recover Shaanxi County and Luoyang.

古文：翰奏曰： 禄山久习用兵，今始为逆，岂肯无备！
现代文：哥舒翰上奏说： 安禄山善于用兵，现在刚举兵反叛，怎么能够不设防呢！
English: Goshukhan said at the beginning of the performance: Anlu Mountain is good at using soldiers, now it has just raised an army to rebel, how can it not be defended!

古文：是必羸师以诱我。若往，正堕其计中。
现代文：这一定是故意示弱来引诱我们，如果出兵攻打，正中了他的计谋。
English: This must be a deliberate show of weakness to lure us, and if he sends troops to attack, he is right in his strategy.

古文：且贼远来，利在速战；官军据险以扼之，利在坚守。
现代文：再说叛军远来，利在速战速决，我们据险扼守，利在长期坚持。
English: Besides, the rebels have come from far away, the advantage is to fight quickly and make a quick decision, we have to defend ourselves from danger, and the advantage is to persist for a long time.

古文：况贼残虐失众，兵势日蹙，将有内变；因而乘之，可不战擒也。
现代文：何况叛军残暴，失去人心，兵势正在变为不利，将会有内乱，到那时再乘机进攻，就可不战而获胜。
English: Besides, the rebels were brutal and losing heart, the tide was turning against them, there would be civil strife, and by that time, if they attacked again, they would win without a fight.

古文：要在成功，何必务速！
现代文：我们最主要是要取胜，何必要立刻出兵呢！
English: The most important thing for us is to win, so why do we need to send troops right away!

古文：今诸道征兵尚多未集，请且待之。 
现代文：现在各地所征的兵大多都还没有到达，请暂且等待一段时间。 
English: Most of the soldiers recruited from various regions have not yet arrived, so please wait for a while.

古文：郭子仪、李光弼亦上言： 请引兵北取范阻，覆其巢穴，质贼党妻子以招之，贼必内溃。
现代文：郭子仪与李光弼也上言说： 请让我们率兵向北攻取范阳，直捣叛军巢穴，抓住他们的妻子、儿子作为人质用来招降，这样叛军内部必定大乱。
English: Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao also came up and said, "Please let us lead our troops to the north to capture Fanyang, directly attack the rebels' lair, and seize their wives and sons as hostages to be used to invite surrender. In this way, there will surely be great turmoil within the rebels."

古文：潼关大军，帷应固守以弊之，不可轻出。 
现代文：坚守潼关的大军应该固守以挫敌锐气，不可轻易出战。 
English: An army that holds fast to Shaoguan should hold fast to frustrate the enemy's spirit, and should not go to war easily.

古文：国忠疑翰谋己，言于上，以贼方无备，而翰逗留，将失机会。
现代文：杨国忠怀疑哥舒翰想要谋害他，就告诉玄宗说叛军没有准备，而哥舒翰却逗留拖延，将要失去战机。
English: Yang Guozhong suspected that Goshukhan was plotting to kill him, so he told Xuanzong that the rebels were unprepared, while Goshukhan lingered and delayed, and was about to lose the fighter plane.

古文：上以为然，续遣中使趣之，项背相望。
现代文：玄宗信以为然，于是又派宦官去催促出兵，连续不断。
English: Xuanzongxin thought so, so he sent eunuchs to urge the dispatch of troops, continuously.

古文：翰不得已，抚膺恸哭；丙戌，引兵出关。
现代文：哥舒翰没有办法，抚胸痛哭。丙戌，亲自率兵出关。
English: Brother Shuhan had no choice but to cry, stroking his chest. He personally led the soldiers out of the pass.

古文：己丑，遇崔乾祐之军于灵宝西原。
现代文：已丑，官军与崔乾佑的叛军相遇于灵宝西原。
English: Already ugly, the government army and the rebels of Cui Qianyou met at Lingbao West Plains.

古文：乾祐据险以待之，南薄山，北阻河，隘道七十里。
现代文：崔乾佑的军队占据着险要之地，南靠大山，北据黄河天险，有狭道七十里。
English: Cui Qianyou's army occupies a dangerous place, south of the mountains, north of the Yellow River, there are 70 miles of narrow roads.

古文：庚寅。官军与乾祐会战。
现代文：庚寅，官军与崔乾佑的叛军交战。
English: Geng Yin, the government army and the rebels led by Cui Qianyou engage in battle.

古文：乾祐伏兵于险，翰与田良丘浮舟中流以观军势，见乾祐兵少，趣诸军使进。
现代文：崔乾佑先把精兵埋伏在险要的地方，哥舒翰与田良丘乘船在黄河中观察军情，看见崔乾佑兵少，就命令大军前进。
English: Cui Qianyou first ambushed the elite soldiers in the critical place. Brother Shuhan and Tian Liangqiu took a boat to observe the military situation in the Yellow River. Seeing that Cui Qianyou's soldiers were few, he ordered the army to advance.

古文：王思礼等将精兵五万居前，庞忠等将馀兵十万继之，翰以兵三万登河北阜望之，鸣鼓以助其势。
现代文：王思礼等率领精兵五万在前，庞忠等率领其余的十万在后，哥舒翰率丘三万登上黄河北岸的高丘观察指挥，并鸣鼓助战。
English: Wang Sili and others led 50,000 elite soldiers in the front, Pang Zhong and others led the remaining 100,000 in the rear, and Goshukhan led 30,000 onto the hill on the north bank of the Yellow River to observe and command, and to beat drums to help the war.

古文：乾祐所出兵不过万人，什什伍伍，散如列星，或疏或密，或前或却，官军望而笑之。
现代文：崔乾佑出兵不到一万，三五成群，稀稀拉拉，队伍有疏有密，士兵有前有后，官军看见后都大笑叛军不会用兵。
English: Cui Qianyu dispatched less than ten thousand soldiers, in three or five groups, sparse cheerleading, the team is sparse and dense, the soldiers are before and after, the government army laughs when they see the rebels will not use soldiers.

古文：乾祐严精兵，陈于其后。
现代文：而崔乾佑却把精兵摆在阵后。
English: But Cui Qianyou has left the elite soldiers behind.

古文：兵既交，贼偃旗如欲遁者，官军懈，不为备。
现代文：两军一交战，叛军偃旗息鼓假装败逃，官军斗志松懈，毫无准备。
English: As soon as the two armies clashed, the rebels withdrew and pretended to flee in defeat, while the government army lost its fighting spirit and was unprepared.

古文：须臾，伏兵发，贼乘高下木石，击杀士卒甚众。
现代文：不一会，叛军伏兵齐发，占据着高地，用滚木石块打击官军，官军死伤惨重。
English: Not long after, the rebels ambushed and occupied the highlands, attacking the government troops with rolling stones. The government troops suffered heavy casualties.

古文：道隘，士卒如束，枪槊不得用。
现代文：又因为道路狭窄，士卒拥挤，刀枪伸展不开。
English: Also, because the road is narrow and the soldiers are crowded, the swords and guns cannot be extended.

古文：翰以氈车驾马为前驱，欲以冲贼。
现代文：哥舒翰又让马拉毡车为前队，去冲击叛军。
English: Goshukhan also let the horse-drawn cart be the vanguard to attack the rebels.

古文：日过中，东风暴急，乾祐以草车数十乘塞氈车之前，纵火焚之，烟焰所被，官军不能开目，妄自相杀，谓贼在烟中，聚弓弩而射之。
现代文：过了中午，东风骤起，崔乾佑把数十辆草车塞于毡车之前，放火焚烧。顿时大火熊熊，烟雾蔽天，官军睁不开眼睛，敌我不分，互相冲杀，以为叛军在烟火中，就召集弓箭手和弩机手射击。
English: After noon, the easterly wind suddenly arose, and Cui Qianyou jammed dozens of grass carts in front of the carts and set them on fire. At that time, the fire was raging, the smoke covered the sky, the government troops could not open their eyes, and the enemy and I rushed to kill each other. Thinking that the rebels were in the fireworks, they called for archers and crane operators to shoot.

古文：日幕，矢尽，乃知无贼。
现代文：持续到天黑，箭已射尽，才知道没有叛军。
English: It took until dark, when they had fired all their arrows, to realize that there were no rebels.

古文：乾祐遣同罗精骑自南山过，出官军之后击之，官军首尾骇乱，不知所备，于是大败；或弃甲窜匿山谷，或相挤排入河溺死，嚣声振天地，贼乘胜蹙之。
现代文：这时崔乾佑派同罗精锐骑兵过南山，从官军后面发起进攻，官军腹背受敌，首尾大乱，不知道如何抵挡，因此大败。有的丢盔弃甲逃入山谷，有的互相拥挤被推入黄河中淹死，喊声振天动地，叛军又乘胜追击。
English: At this time, Cui Qianyou sent the elite cavalrymen across the Nanshan with Luo and launched an attack from behind the government army. The government army suffered from the enemy and was in chaos. They did not know how to resist, so they were defeated. Some abandoned their armor and fled into the valley, and some crowded together and were pushed into the Yellow River and drowned. Their cries shook the earth, and the rebels chased after them.

古文：后军见前军败，皆自溃，河北军望之亦溃，瞬息间，两岸皆空。
现代文：官军后面的将士看见前军大败，也纷纷溃逃，黄河北岸的军队看见了也向后逃跑。
English: The soldiers in the rear of the government army saw the great defeat of the former army and fled in droves. The troops on the north bank of the Yellow River also fled backwards.

古文：翰独与麾下百馀骑走，自首阳山西渡河入关。
现代文：哥舒翰仅与部下数百骑兵得以逃脱，从首阳山西面渡过黄河，进入潼关。
English: Goshukhan only managed to escape with a few hundred cavalrymen, crossing the Yellow River from the western side of Shouyang Mountain and entering Shaoguan.

古文：关外先为三堑，皆广二丈，深丈，人马坠其中，须臾而满；馀众践之以度，士卒得入关者才八千馀人。
现代文：潼关城外先前挖了三条深沟，都是宽二丈，深一丈，过关的人马坠落沟中，很快就填满了沟，后面的人踏着他们得以通过，残兵逃入关内的才八千多人。
English: Three deep ditches had previously been dug outside the city of Shaoguan, all of which were two meters wide and one meter deep. The people who passed through the ditch fell into the ditch and quickly filled the ditch, and the people behind them were able to pass through them. Only more than eight thousand left-over soldiers escaped into the pass.

古文：辛卯，乾祐进攻潼关，克之。
现代文：辛卯，崔乾佑率兵攻陷潼关。
English: Xinwu, Cui Qianyou and their troops invaded Shiguan.

古文：翰至关西驿，揭榜收散卒，欲复守潼关。
现代文：哥舒翰到了关西驿站，张贴告示收罗逃散的士卒，想重新守卫潼关。
English: When Goshukhan arrived at the Kansai station, he put up a notice to collect the escaped soldiers and wanted to guard the station again.

古文：蕃将火拔归仁等以百馀骑围驿，入谓翰曰： 贼至矣，请公上马。 
现代文：这时蕃人将领火拔归仁等率领一百余名骑兵包围了驿站，进去对哥舒翰说： 叛军来了，请您赶快上马。 
English: At this time, Xingren led more than a hundred cavalrymen to surround the post, and said to Goshukhan: The rebels are coming, please get on your horse quickly.

古文：翰上马出驿，归仁帅众叩头曰： 公以二十万众一战弃之，何面目复见天子！
现代文：哥舒翰上马出驿站后，火拔归仁率部下叩头说： 您率领二十万军队一战而全军覆没，还有什么脸面去见天子呢！
English: After Goshukhan mounted his horse and rode out of the stable, the fire-breathing Kujin led his subordinates in prostration and said: You led two hundred thousand troops into battle and the entire army was destroyed, what other face is there to meet the Son of God!

古文：且公不见高仙芝，封常清乎？
现代文：再说您没有看到封常清与高仙芝的下场吗？
English: Besides, didn't you see what happened to Feng Changqing and Gao Xianzhi?

古文：请公东行。 
现代文：还不如向东去归降安禄山。 
English: It would be better to go east and return to Mt. Anlu.

古文：翰不可，欲下马。
现代文：哥舒翰不同意，想要下马。
English: Goshukhan disagrees and wants to dismount.

古文：归仁以毛縻其足于马腹，及诸将不从者，皆执之以东。
现代文：火拔归仁就用毛绳把他的双脚捆绑在马肚子下，对于将领中不愿意投降的，也都捆起来押往东方。
English: They tied his feet to the underbelly of the horse with a rope, and those generals who did not want to surrender were also tied up and driven to the east.

古文：会贼将田乾真已至，遂降之，俱送洛阳。
现代文：这时叛军将领田乾真赶到，火拔归仁就投降了他，被一起送往洛阳。
English: At this time, the rebel general Tian Qianzhen arrived, and Hui Ba Guiren surrendered to him and was sent to Luoyang together.

古文：安禄山问翰曰： 汝常轻我，今定何如？ 
现代文：安禄山问哥舒翰说： 你过去总是看不起我，现在怎么样呢？ 
English: An Lushan asked Brother Shu Han, "You always looked down on me in the past, what about now?

古文：翰伏地对曰： 臣肉眼不识圣人。
现代文：哥舒翰伏地而拜回答说： 我凡人肉眼不识圣人。
English: Goshukhan bowed to the ground and replied: "I am an ordinary man, I do not know a saint with my naked eyes.

古文：今天下未平，李光弼在常山，李祗在东平，鲁炅在南阳，陛下留臣，使以尺书招之，不日皆下矣。 
现代文：现在天下还没有平定，李光弼率兵在常山，吴王李祗在东平，鲁炅在南阳，陛下如果能够留我一条性命，让我写信招降他们，用不了多长时间就会平定。 
English: At present, the world has not been pacified. Li Guangya and his soldiers are in Changshan, Wu Wang Li Yao is in Dongping, and Lu Yao is in Nanyang. If Your Majesty can spare my life and let me write a letter to invite them to surrender, it will not take long to pacify.

古文：禄山大喜，以翰为司空、同平章事。
现代文：安禄山很高兴，于是就拜哥舒翰为司空、同平章事。
English: An Lushan was very happy, so he invited his brother Shuhan to be the sky steward and to be equal to him.

古文：谓火拔归仁曰： 汝叛主，不忠不义。 
现代文：又对火拔归仁说： 你背叛了你的主人，是不忠不义。 
English: He also said to Abaqir: "You have disobeyed your master. This is disloyalty and unrighteousness."

古文：执而斩之。
现代文：然后就杀了他。
English: And then they killed him.

古文：翰以书招诸将，皆复书责之。
现代文：哥舒翰写信招降其他将帅，他们都复信责备他的背叛行为。
English: Goshukhan wrote letters to recruit other generals, all of whom wrote back blaming him for his treachery.

古文：禄山知无效，乃囚诸苑中。
现代文：安禄山知道没有什么效果，就把哥舒翰囚禁于禁苑中。
English: Knowing that it would have no effect, An Lushan imprisoned Goshukhan in the Forbidden City.

古文：潼关既败，于是河东、华阴、冯翊、上洛防御使皆弃郡走，所在守兵皆散。
现代文：潼关既已失守，于是河东、华阴、冯翊、上洛等郡的防御使都弃郡而逃，部下的守兵也纷纷逃命。
English: Since Shaoguan had already been lost, the defense of counties such as Hedong, Huayin, Fengye and Shangluo caused them to abandon the county and flee, and their guards also fled for their lives.

古文：是日，翰麾下来告急，上不时召见，但遣李福德等将监牧兵赴潼关。
现代文：潼关失守的当天，哥舒翰的部下到朝廷报告情况危急，玄宗当时没有召见，只是派李福德等人率领监牧小儿组成的军队开赴潼关增援。
English: On the day Shouguan was lost, Go Shuhan's subordinates went to the imperial court to report that the situation was critical. Xuanzong did not summon them at that time, but sent Li Fude and others to lead an army composed of overseers and shepherds to go to Shoguan for reinforcement.

古文：及暮，平安火不至，上始惧。
现代文：到了晚上，没看到报告平安的烽火，玄宗才感到惧怕。
English: In the evening, when he didn't see the bonfires that were reported to be safe, Xuanzong became afraid.

古文：壬辰，召宰相谋之。
现代文：壬辰，玄宗把宰相召来商议对策。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Xuanzong summoned the prime minister to discuss countermeasures.

古文：杨国忠自以身领剑南，闻安禄山反，即令副使崔圆阴具储偫，以备有急投之，至是首唱幸蜀之策。
现代文：杨国忠因为自己兼任剑南节度使，安禄山反叛后，即命令节度副使崔圆暗中准备物资，以防备危急时到剑南使用，所以这时他首先提出到蜀中避难。
English: Yang Guozhong, because he was also the Jiannan Festival Envoy, ordered the Deputy Festival Envoy Cui Yuan to secretly prepare materials to use in Jiannan in case of emergency after the Anlu Mountain rebellion, so he first proposed to take refuge in Shuzhong.

古文：上然之。
现代文：玄宗赞成他的意见。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：癸巳，国忠集百官于朝堂，惶懅流涕；问以策略，皆唯唯不对。
现代文：癸巳，杨国忠召集百官于朝堂，神色惊惧，痛哭流涕地问他们有什么计策，百官都不回答。
English: At this time, Yang Guozhong called together a hundred officials in the imperial court. Looking alarmed, he asked them, with tears streaming down his face, what they had planned. None of the officials would answer.

古文：国忠曰： 人告禄山反状已十年，上下之信。
现代文：杨国忠说： 人们告安禄山的反状已有十年了，但皇上总是不相信。
English: Yang Guozhong said: People have been complaining about Anlu Mountain for ten years, but the emperor has never believed them.

古文：今日之事，非宰相之过。 
现代文：现在事情发展到这种地步，不是宰相的过错。 
English: It is not the prime minister's fault that things have come to this.

古文：仗下，士民掠扰奔走，不知所之，市里萧条。
现代文：罢朝后卫兵退下，这时长安城中的百姓惊慌逃命，都不知道该往那里躲避，店铺关门，市里一片萧条。
English: After the attack, the guards retreated. At this time, the people in Chang'an City panicked and fled for their lives. They did not know where to hide. Shops closed, and the city was in a depression.

古文：国忠使韩、虢入宫，劝上入蜀。
现代文：杨国忠又让韩国夫人与虢国夫人入宫，劝说玄宗到蜀中去避难。
English: Yang Guozhong also let the South Korean wife and the wife of Shandong Province enter the palace, and persuaded Xuanzong to take refuge in Shu.

古文：甲午，百官朝者什无一二。
现代文：甲午，百官上朝的不到十分之一二。
English: At the time of Emperor Gao, less than two-tenths of a hundred officials were from the Shang Dynasty.

古文：上御勤政楼，下制，云欲亲征，闻者皆莫之信。
现代文：玄宗登临勤政楼，下制书说要亲自率兵征讨安禄山，听到的人都不相信。
English: Xuanzong went to the Gongzheng Tower and wrote a letter saying that he would personally lead an army to conquer Anlu Mountain, but no one believed him.

古文：以京兆尹魏方进为御史大夫兼置顿使；京兆少尹灵昌崔光远为京兆尹，充西京留守；将军边令诚掌宫闱管钥。
现代文：玄宗又任命京兆尹魏方进为御史大夫兼置顿使，京兆少尹灵昌人崔光远为京兆尹，兼西京留守，让将军边令诚掌管宫殿的钥匙。
English: Xuanzong also appointed Jingzhao Yin Wei Fangjin as the imperial historian and appointed him as the envoy, and the Jingzhao Shao Yin Lingchang person, Cui Guangyuan, as the imperial historian and stayed in West Beijing, and let the general Bian Rongcheng hold the key to the palace.

古文：托以剑南节度大使颍王璬将赴镇，令本道设储偫。
现代文：玄宗假称剑南节度大使颖王李将要赴镇，命令剑南道准备所用物资。
English: Xuanzong pretended that Ying Wang Li, the ambassador of the Jianan Festival, would go to the town and ordered the Jianan Province to prepare the materials used.

古文：是日，上移仗北内。
现代文：当天，玄宗移居大明宫。
English: On the same day, Xuanzong moved into the Daming Palace.

古文：既夕，命龙武大将军陈玄礼整比六军，厚赐钱帛，选闲厩马九百馀匹，外人皆莫之知。
现代文：天黑以后，玄宗命令龙武大将军陈玄礼集合禁军六军，重赏他们金钱布帛，又挑选了闲厩中的骏马九百余匹，所做的这些事情外人都不知晓。
English: After dark, Emperor Xuanzong ordered Longwu's general Chen Xuanli to gather the forbidden six armies, rewarded them with money and cloth, and selected more than 900 horses from the idle stables. Outsiders do not know these things.

古文：乙未，黎明，上独与贵妃姊妹、皇子、妃、主、皇孙、杨国忠、韦见素、魏方进、陈玄礼及亲近宦官、宫人出延秋门，妃、主、皇孙之在外者，皆委之而去。
现代文：乙未，天刚发亮，玄宗只与杨贵妃姊妹、皇子、皇妃、公主、皇孙、杨国忠、韦见素、魏方进、陈玄礼及亲信宦官、宫人从延秋门出发，在宫外的皇妃、公主及皇孙都弃而不顾，只管自己逃难。
English: Shortly before dawn, Emperor Xuanzong set out from the Yanqiu Gate with only Yang Guifei's sister, the prince, the empress, the princess, the emperor's grandson, Yang Guozhong, Wei Mingsu, Wei Fangjin, Chen Xuanli, and close eunuchs and courtiers. The empress, the princess, and the emperor's grandson outside the palace were left behind, and they had no choice but to flee.

古文：上过左藏，杨国忠请焚之，曰： 无为贼守。 上愀然曰： 贼来不得，必更敛于百姓；不如与之，无重困吾赤子。 
现代文：玄宗路过左藏库，杨国忠请求放火焚烧，并说： 不要把这些钱财留给叛贼， 玄宗心情凄惨地说： 叛军来了没有钱财，一定会向百姓征收，还不如留给他们，以减轻百姓们的苦难。 
English: Xuanzong passed by the Zuo Caves. Yang Guozhong asked him to set fire to them and said, "Don't leave this money to the traitors." Xuanzong said sadly, "When the rebels came, they didn't have any money, so they must have collected it from the people. It would be better to leave it to them to alleviate the suffering of the people."

古文：是日，百官犹有入朝者，至宫门，犹闻漏声，三卫立仗俨然。门既启，则宫人乱出，中外扰攘，不知上所之。
现代文：这一天，百官还有入朝的，到了宫门口，还能听到漏壶滴水的声音，仪仗队的卫士们仍然整齐地站在那里，待宫门打开后，则看见宫人乱哄哄地出逃，宫里宫外一片混乱，都不知道皇上在那里。
English: On this day, hundreds of officials still entered the court, and when they arrived at the palace gate, they could still hear the sound of a leaking kettle dripping water. The guards of the honor guard were still standing there neatly. After the palace gate was opened, they saw the palace people fleeing in disorder. There was chaos inside and outside the palace, and no one knew where the emperor was.

古文：于是王公、士民四出逃窜，山谷细民争入宫禁及王公第舍，盗取金宝，或乘驴上殿。
现代文：于是王公贵族、平民百姓四出逃命，山野小民争着进入皇宫及王公贵族的宅第，盗抢金银财宝，有的还骑驴跑到殿里。
English: As a result, the princes and nobles and the common people fled for their lives in all directions, and the commoners fought to enter the royal palace and the houses of the princes and nobles, stealing gold, silver and treasures, and some even rode donkeys to the palace.

古文：又焚左藏大盈库。
现代文：还放火焚烧了左藏大盈库。
English: They also set fire to the Zuozang Daying Library.

古文：崔光远、边令诚帅人救火，又募人摄府、县官分守之，杀十馀人，乃稍定。
现代文：崔光远与边令诚带人赶来救火，又召募人代理府、县长官分别守护，杀了十多个人，局势才稳定下来。
English: Cui Guangyuan and border guard Cheng brought people to fight the fire, and also recruited agents to guard the government and the county magistrate separately, killing more than ten people, before the situation stabilized.

古文：光远遣其子东见禄山，令诚亦以管钥献之。
现代文：崔光远派他的儿子去见安禄山，边令诚也把宫殿各门的钥匙献给安禄山。
English: Cui Guangyuan sent his son to see Anlu Shan, and the governor also presented the keys to each door of the palace to Anlu Shan.

古文：上过便桥，杨国忠使人焚桥。上曰： 士庶各避贼求生，奈何绝其路！ 
现代文：玄宗一行经过便桥后，杨国忠派人放火烧桥，玄宗说： 官吏百姓都在避难求生，为何要断绝他们的生路呢！ 
English: After Xuanzong and his party passed over the Benqiao Bridge, Yang Guozhong sent people to set fire to the bridge. Xuanzong said, "Officials and commoners are all taking refuge to survive, why should we cut off their way of life?

古文：留内侍监高力士，使扑灭乃来。
现代文：于是就把内侍监高力士留下，让他把大火扑灭后再来。
English: So he left the chamberlain, Colossus, and told him to put out the fire and come back.

古文：上遣宦者王洛卿前行，告谕郡县置顿。
现代文：玄宗派宦官王洛卿先行，告诉郡县官作好准备。
English: Xuanzong sent eunuch Wang Luoqing ahead and told the county officials to make preparations.

古文：食时，至咸阳望贤宫，洛卿与县令俱逃，中使征召，吏民莫有应者。
现代文：到吃饭的时候，抵达咸阳县望贤宫，而王洛卿与咸阳县令都已逃跑。宦官去征召，官吏与民众都没有人来。
English: When it was time to eat, they arrived at the Wangxian Palace in Xianyang County, but Wang Luoqing and the Xianyang County magistrate had already fled. The eunuchs went to be conscripted, but no officials or people came.

古文：日向中，上犹未食，杨国忠自市胡饼以献。
现代文：已到了中午，玄宗还没有吃饭，杨国忠就亲自用钱买来胡饼献给玄宗。
English: It was already noon, and Xuanzong had not yet eaten, so Yang Guozhong personally used his own money to buy coarse biscuits to give to Xuanzong.

古文：于是民争献粝饭，杂以麦豆；皇孙辈争以手掬食之，须臾而尽，犹未能饱。
现代文：于是百姓争献粗饭，并参杂有麦豆，皇孙们争着用手抓吃，不一会儿就吃光了，还没有吃饱。
English: As a result, the people fought to offer coarse rice, mixed with wheat and beans, and the grandchildren fought to catch it with their hands. They soon ran out of food and were not yet full.

古文：上皆酬其直，慰劳之。
现代文：玄宗都按价给了他们金钱，并慰劳他们。
English: Xuanzong gave them money according to the price and consoled them.

古文：众皆哭，上亦掩泣。
现代文：众人都涕泣流泪，玄宗也禁不住哭泣。
English: Everyone was in tears, and Xuanzong couldn't help but cry.

古文：有老父郭从谨进言曰： 禄山包藏祸心，固非一日；亦有诣阙告其谋者，陛下往往诛之，使得逞其奸逆，致陛下播越。
现代文：这时有一位名叫郭从谨的老人进言说： 安禄山包藏祸心，阴谋反叛已经很久了，其间也有人到朝廷去告发他的阴谋，而陛下却常常把这些人杀掉，使安禄山奸计得逞，以致陛下出逃。
English: At this time, an old man named Guo Congzhen said, "An Lushan has been harboring evil intentions and plotting rebellion for a long time. During this time, some people came to the imperial court to denounce his plot, but Your Majesty often killed these people, so that the plot of the An Lushan traitors succeeded, causing Your Majesty to flee.

古文：是以先王务延访忠良以广聪明，盖为此也。
现代文：所以先代的帝王务求延访忠良之士以广视听，就是为了这个道理。
English: It is for this reason that the previous emperors sought to extend the visit to the loyal and good people with a wide range of audio-visual aids.

古文：臣犹记宋璟为相，数进直言，天下赖以安平。
现代文：我还记得宋作宰相的时候，敢于犯颜直谏，所以天下得以平安无事。
English: I still remember that when Song was the prime minister, he dared to be outspoken, so the world was safe.

古文：自顷以来，在廷之臣以言为讳，惟阿谀取容，是以阙门之外，陛下皆不得而知。
现代文：但从那时候以后，朝廷中的大臣都忌讳直言进谏，只是一味地阿谀奉承，取悦于陛下，所以对于宫门之外所发生的事陛下都不得而知。
English: However, since then, the ministers in the imperial court have been shamelessly flattering and pleasing His Majesty, so His Majesty is not aware of what has happened outside the palace gates.

古文：草野之臣，必知有今日久矣，但九重严邃，区区之心，无路上达。
现代文：那些远离朝廷的臣民早知道会有今日了，但由于宫禁森严，远离陛下，区区效忠之心无法上达。
English: Those subjects who are far away from the imperial court have long known that this day would come, but due to the strict palace ban, far away from His Majesty, their loyalty cannot be surpassed.

古文：事不至此，臣何由得睹陛下之面而诉之乎！ 
现代文：如果不是安禄山反叛，事情到了这种地步，我怎么能够见到陛下而当面诉说呢！ 
English: If it wasn't for the An Lushan Rebellion, and things had come to this, how would I have been able to see His Majesty and tell him face to face!

古文：上曰： 此朕之不明，悔无所及！ 
现代文：玄宗说： 这都是我的过错，但后悔已经来不及了。 
English: Xuanzong said, "It's all my fault, but it's too late to regret.

古文：慰谕而遣之。
现代文：然后安慰了一番郭从谨，让他走了。
English: He then consoled Guo Congzheng and let him go.

古文：俄而尚食举御膳以至，上命先赐从官，然后食之。
现代文：不一会儿，管理皇上吃饭的官吏给玄宗送饭来了，玄宗命令先赏赐给随从的官吏，然后自己才吃。
English: Soon after, the official in charge of the emperor's meal brought the meal to Emperor Xuanzong. Emperor Xuanzong ordered that the meal be given to the accompanying officials first, and then he would eat it himself.

古文：命军士散诣村落求食，期未时皆集而行。
现代文：玄宗命令士卒分散到各村落去寻找食品，约好未时集合继续前进。
English: Xuanzong ordered his soldiers to disperse to various villages to look for food, and to make an appointment to assemble at any time to continue moving forward.

古文：夜将半，乃至金城。县令亦逃，县民皆脱身走，饮食器皿具在，士卒得以自给。
现代文：快半夜时，到了金城县，县令和县民都已逃走，但食物和器物都在，士卒才能够吃饭。
English: It was nearly midnight when they arrived in Jincheng County. The county magistrate and county residents had already fled, but the food and utensils were still there, so the soldiers were able to eat.

古文：时从者多逃，内侍监袁思艺亦亡去，驿中无灯，人相枕藉而寝，贵贱无以复分辨。
现代文：当时跟随玄宗的官吏逃跑的也很多，宦吏内侍监袁思艺就借机逃走了。驿站中没有灯火，人们互相枕藉而睡，也不管身份的贵贱。
English: At that time, there were also many officials who fled with Xuanzong, and Yuan Siyi, the eunuch's supervisor, took the opportunity to escape. There were no lights in the station, and people slept on each other's backs, regardless of their status.

古文：王思礼自潼关至，始知哥舒翰被擒；以思礼为河西、陇右节度使，即令赴镇，收合散卒，以俟东讨。
现代文：王思礼从潼关赶到后，玄宗才知道哥舒翰被俘，于是就任命王思礼为河西、陇右节度使，命令他立刻赴任，收罗散兵，准备向东进讨叛军。
English: It was only after Wang Sili arrived from Shaoguan that Xuanzong learned that Goshukhan had been captured, so he appointed Wang Sili as the west of the river and the right of Shaoguan, and ordered him to take office immediately, collect the scattered soldiers in Luo, and prepare to go east to fight the rebels.

古文：丙申，至马嵬驿，将士饥疲，皆愤怒。
现代文：丙申，玄宗一行到了马嵬驿，随从的将士因为饥饿疲劳，心中怨恨愤怒。
English: Bishin, Xuanzong and his entourage arrived in Malang. The soldiers who accompanied him were hungry and tired, and their hearts were filled with resentment and anger.

古文：陈玄礼以祸由杨国忠，欲诛之，因东宫宦者李辅国以告太子，太子未决。
现代文：龙武大将军陈玄礼认为天下大乱都是杨国忠一手造成的，想杀掉他，于是就让东宫宦官李辅国转告太子，太子犹豫不决。
English: Longwu General Chen Xuanli believed that the world turmoil was caused by Yang Guozhong, and wanted to kill him, so he asked the East Palace eunuch Li Yuxuo to tell the prince. The prince hesitated.

古文：会吐蕃使者二十馀人遮国忠马，诉以无食，国忠未及对，军士呼曰： 国忠与胡虏谋反！ 
现代文：这时有吐蕃使节二十余人拦住杨国忠的马，向他诉说没有吃的，杨国忠还没有来得及回答，士卒们就喊道： 杨国忠与胡人谋反！ 
English: At this time, more than twenty envoys from Tu Wei stopped Yang Guozhong's horse and told him that there was no food. Yang Guozhong did not have time to answer, and the soldiers shouted: "Yang Guozhong and the Hu people are plotting a rebellion!"

古文：或射之，中鞍。
现代文：有人用箭射击，射中了杨国忠坐骑的马鞍。
English: Someone shot an arrow and hit the saddle of Yang Guozhong's horse.

古文：国忠走至西门内，军士追杀之，屠割支体，以枪揭其首于驿门外，并杀其子户部侍郎暄及韩国、秦国夫人。
现代文：杨国忠急忙逃命，逃至马嵬驿西门内，被士兵追上杀死，并肢解了他的尸体，把头颅挂在矛上插于西门外示众，然后杀了他的儿子户部侍郎杨暄与韩国夫人、秦国夫人。
English: Yang Guozhong hurriedly ran for his life, fled to the west gate of Ma'an, was caught and killed by soldiers, and dismembered his corpse, hung his head on a spear outside the west gate to show it to the public, and then killed his son, household servant Yang Jie, and his Korean wife, Qin Guo's wife.

古文：御史大夫魏方进曰： 汝曹何敢害宰相！ 
现代文：御史大夫魏方进说： 你们胆大妄为，竟敢谋害宰相！ 
English: Chief historian Wei Fangjin said: "You are so audacious, how dare you plot to kill the prime minister!

古文：众又杀之。
现代文：士兵们又把他杀了。
English: The soldiers killed him again.

古文：韦见素闻乱而出，为乱兵所挝，脑血流地。
现代文：韦见素听见外面大乱，跑出驿门察看，被乱兵用鞭子抽打得头破血流。
English: Wei Mingsuo heard the commotion outside, ran out of the gate to investigate, and was beaten bloody by the ruffians with a whip.

古文：众曰： 勿伤韦相公。 
现代文：众人喊道： 不要伤了韦相公。 
English: The crowd shouted: "Don't hurt Wei Xiangmo."

古文：救之，得免。
现代文：韦见素才免于一死。
English: Wei Xian was spared from death.

古文：军士围驿，上闻喧哗，问外何事，左右以国忠反对。
现代文：士兵们又包围了驿站，玄宗听见外面的喧哗之声，就问是什么事，左右侍从回答说是杨国忠谋反。
English: The soldiers surrounded the station again. When Xuanzong heard the noise outside, he asked what was going on. The attendants answered that Yang Guozhong was plotting a rebellion.

古文：上杖屦出驿门，慰劳军士，令收队，军士不应。
现代文：玄宗走出驿门，慰劳军士，命令他们撤走，但军士不答应。
English: Xuanzong walked out of the gate, consoled the labor sergeant and ordered them to withdraw, but the sergeant did not agree.

古文：上使高力士问之，玄礼对曰： 国忠谋反，贵妃不宜供奉，愿陛下割恩正法。 
现代文：玄宗又让高力士去问话，陈玄礼回答说： 杨国忠谋反被诛，杨贵妃不应该再侍奉陛下，愿陛下能够割爱，把杨贵妃处死。 
English: Xuanzong also asked Gao Lixi to ask questions, and Chen Xuanli replied: Yang Guozhong plotted to overthrow the emperor, Yang Guifei should no longer serve his majesty, may his majesty be able to sever love and put Yang Guifei to death.

古文：上曰： 朕当自处之。 
现代文：玄宗说： 这件事由我自行处置。 
English: Xuanzong said: I will handle this matter on my own.

古文：入门，倚杖倾首而立。
现代文：然后进入驿站，拄着拐杖侧首而立。
English: He then entered the station and stood on his crutches with his head to the side.

古文：久之，京兆司录韦谔前言曰： 今众怒难犯，安危在晷刻，愿陛下速决！ 
现代文：过了一会儿，京兆司录参军韦谔上前说道： 现在众怒难犯，形势十分危急，安危在片刻之间，希望陛下赶快作出决断！ 
English: After a while, Jingzha Siroku, Wei Wei, who had joined the army, stepped forward and said, "Now the people are angry and difficult to offend, the situation is very critical, safety is in a few moments, I hope His Majesty will make a decision soon!"

古文：因叩头流血。
现代文：说着不断地跪下叩头，以至血流满面。
English: Then he hit his head so hard he cracked it.

古文：上曰： 贵妃常居深宫，安知国忠反谋！ 
现代文：玄宗说： 杨贵妃居住在戒备森严的宫中，不与外人交结，怎么能知道杨国忠谋反呢？ 
English: Xuanzong said: Yang Guifei lives in a heavily guarded palace and does not associate with outsiders. How could she know that Yang Guozhong was plotting a rebellion?

古文：高力士曰： 贵妃诚无罪，然将士已杀国忠，而贵妃在陛下左右，岂敢自安！
现代文：高力士说： 杨贵妃确实是没有罪，但将士们已经杀了杨国忠，而杨贵妃还在陛下的左右侍奉，他们怎么能够安心呢！
English: Gao Lixi said: Yang Guifei is indeed innocent, but the soldiers have already killed Yang Guozhong, and Yang Guifei is still serving around His Majesty, how can they be at ease!

古文：愿陛下审思之，将士安，则陛下安矣。 
现代文：希望陛下好好地考虑一下，将士安宁陛下就会安全。 
English: I hope His Majesty will think about it carefully, and His Majesty will be safe.

古文：上乃命力士引贵妃于佛堂，缢杀之。
现代文：玄宗这才命令高力士把杨贵妃引到佛堂内，用绳子勒死了她。
English: It was then that Xuanzong ordered Gao Lixi to lure Yang Guifei into the Buddhist hall and strangle her with a rope.

古文：舆尸置驿庭，召玄礼等入视之。
现代文：然后把尸体抬到驿站的庭中，召陈玄礼等人入驿站察看。
English: They then carried the body to the yard of the station and called Chen Xuanli and others to inspect it.

古文：玄礼等乃免胄释甲，顿首请罪，上慰劳之，令晓谕军士。
现代文：陈玄礼等人脱去甲胄，叩头谢罪，玄宗安尉他们，并命令告谕其他的军士。
English: Chen Xuanli and the others took off their armor, bowed their heads in penitence, and Xuanzong relieved them and ordered them to inform the other officers.

古文：玄礼等呼万岁，再拜而出，于是始整部伍为行计。
现代文：陈玄礼等都高喊万岁，拜了两拜而出，然后整顿军队准备继续行进。
English: Chen Xuanli and others shouted "Long live!" and marched out after bowing twice, and then the army was reorganized and prepared to continue marching.

古文：谔，见素之子也。
现代文：韦谔是韦见素的儿子。
English: Wei Wei is the son of Wei Weiming.

古文：国忠妻裴柔与其幼子晞及虢国夫人、夫人子裴徽皆走，至陈仓，县令薛景仙帅吏士追捕，诛之。
现代文：杨国忠的妻子裴柔与她的小儿子杨、虢国夫人与她的儿子裴徽都乘乱逃走，到了陈仓县，被县令薛景仙率领官吏抓获杀掉。
English: Yang Guozhong's wife Pei Rong and her youngest son Yang Rong, and Lady Yan Guo and her son Pei Hui all fled to Chencang County and were captured and killed by officials led by the county magistrate Xue Jingxian.

古文：丁酉，上将发马嵬，朝臣惟韦见素一人，乃以韦谔为御史中丞，充置顿使。
现代文：丁酉，玄宗将要从马嵬驿出发，朝臣中只有韦见素一人随行，于是就任命韦谔为御史中丞，并兼任置顿使。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was about to depart from Malatya, only Wei Mingsu, one of his courtiers, accompanied him. Therefore, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Wei Mingsu as the Vice-Minister of History and concurrently appointed him as the envoy to Dongtan.

古文：将士皆曰： 国忠谋反，其将吏皆在蜀，不可往。 
现代文：这时将士们都说： 杨国忠谋反被杀，而他的部下亲信都在蜀中，不能去那里避难。 
English: At this time, the soldiers all said: Yang Guozhong was killed, and his subordinates and close friends were in Shu, and they could not go there for refuge.

古文：或请之河、陇，或请之灵武，或请之太原，或言还京师。
现代文：有人请求去河西、陇右，有人请求去灵武，有人请求去太原，还有的请求回京师。
English: Some people asked to go to Hexi and Handan, some people asked to go to Lingwu, some people asked to go to Taiyuan, and others asked to go back to Beijing.

古文：上意在入蜀，虑违众心，竟不言所向。
现代文：玄宗想去蜀中，又恐怕违背众心，所以沉默不言。
English: Xuanzong wanted to go to Shuzhong, but he was afraid that he would go against the will of the people, so he kept silent.

古文：韦谔曰： 还京，当有御贼之备。
现代文：韦谔说： 如果要返回京师，就要有足够的兵力抵御叛军。
English: Wei Wei said: If we want to return to the Beijing Division, we must have enough troops to resist the rebels.

古文：今兵少，未易东向，不如且至扶风，徐图去就。 
现代文：而现在兵力单薄，不要轻易向乐。不如暂时到扶风郡，再慢慢考虑去向。 
English: But now the troops are thin, so don't be too happy. It's better to go to Fufeng County for the time being, and then slowly consider where to go.

古文：上询于众，众以为然，乃从之。
现代文：玄宗征求大家的意见，大家都同意，于是准备去扶风。
English: Xuanzong solicited everyone's opinions, and everyone agreed, so he was ready to help the wind.

古文：及行，父老皆遮道请留，曰： 宫阙，陛下家居，陵寝，陛下坟墓，今舍此，欲何之？ 
现代文：等到出发时，当地的父老乡亲拦在路中请求玄宗留下，并说： 森严宏壮的宫殿是陛下的家室，那些列祖列宗的陵园是陛下先人的葬地，现在都舍弃不顾，想要到那里去呢？ 
English: When it was time to leave, the local fathers and fellow villagers stopped in the middle of the road to ask Xuanzong to stay, and said: The majestic palace is His Majesty's family, and those ancestral cemeteries are the burial grounds of His Majesty's ancestors. Now they are all abandoned, where do you want to go?

古文：上为之按辔久之，乃命太子于后宣慰父老。
现代文：玄宗骑在马上停留了很长时间，然后命令太子留在后面安慰这些父老乡民。
English: Xuanzong stayed on the horse for a long time, and then ordered the prince to stay behind to comfort the villagers.

古文：父老因曰： 至尊既不肯留，某等愿帅子弟从殿下东破贼，取长安。
现代文：父老们因此对太子说： 皇上既然不愿意留下来，我们愿意率领子弟跟随殿下向东讨伐叛军，收复长安。
English: Therefore, the patriarchs said to the prince: Since the emperor does not want to stay, we are willing to lead our sons and follow His Imperial Highness to the east to fight the rebels and recover Chang'an.

古文：若殿下与至尊皆入蜀，使中原百姓谁为之主？ 
现代文：如果殿下与皇上都逃向蜀中，那么谁为中原的百姓们作主呢？ 
English: If both His Imperial Highness and the Emperor fled to Shuzhong, then who would rule the people of the Central Plains?

古文：须臾，众至数千人。
现代文：不一会儿，来到太子跟前的多达数千人。
English: Soon there were thousands of people in front of the prince.

古文：太子不可，曰： 至尊远冒险阻，吾岂忍朝夕离左右。
现代文：太子不肯，并说： 父皇冒艰历险，远出避难，我怎么忍心早晚都不在他身边呢！
English: The prince refused, and said: "My father, the emperor, took great risks and fled far away, how can I bear not to be with him sooner or later!"

古文：且吾尚未面辞，当还白至尊，更禀进止。 
现代文：再说我也没有当面向他辞别，我要回去告诉父皇，然后听候他的吩咐。 
English: Besides, I didn't say goodbye to him in person. I want to go back and tell my father, the emperor, and then wait for his orders.

古文：涕泣，跋马欲西。
现代文：说着涕泣流泪，要回马西行。
English: Saying with tears and tears, I want to go back to Masi.

古文：建宁王倓与李辅国执鞚谏曰： 逆胡犯阙，四海分崩，不因人情，何以兴复！
现代文：这时建宁王李与宦官李辅国拉着太子的马笼头进谏说： 逆胡安禄山举兵反叛，进犯长安，以至四海沸腾，国家分裂，如果不服从民意，怎么能够复兴大唐天下呢！
English: At this time, Jianning Wang Li and eunuch Li Shuo Guo pulled the prince's horse cage head into the cocoon and said: If you do not obey the will of the people, how can you revive the Great Tang Dynasty?

古文：今殿下从至尊入蜀，若贼兵烧绝栈道，则中原之地拱手授贼矣。
现代文：现在殿下随从皇上入蜀中避难，如果叛军焚烧断绝了通向蜀中的栈道，那么中原大地就拱手送给叛军了。
English: Now His Imperial Highness is following the Emperor into Shuzhong to take refuge. If the rebels burn and cut off the causeway leading to Shuzhong, then the Central Plains will be handed over to the rebels.

古文：人情既离，不可复合，虽欲复至此，其可得乎！
现代文：人心既已分离，就难以再聚合，到那时就是想要有所作为，恐怕也不可能了。
English: Once the human heart has been separated, it is difficult to re-unite it, and by that time, even trying to make a difference may not be possible.

古文：不如收西北守边之兵，召郭、李于河北，与之并力东讨逆贼，克复二京，削平四海，使社稷危而复安，宗庙毁而更存，扫除宫禁以迎至尊，岂非孝之大者乎！
现代文：不如现在收聚西北边防的镇兵，再加上郭子仪与李光弼在河北地区的兵力，与他们合兵东讨叛贼，收复两京，平定四海，挽救国家于危难之中，使大唐的帝业得以继续，然后再打扫宫殿，迎接皇上返回京师，这难道不是最好的孝顺行为吗！
English: Wouldn't it be the best act of filial piety to gather the town soldiers of the northwest border defense now, plus the troops of Guo Zi Yi and Li Guangyao in the Hebei region, join forces with them to fight the traitors in the east, recover the two capitals, pacify the four seas, save the country in the midst of danger, so that the imperial cause of the Great Tang Dynasty can continue, and then clean the palace to welcome the emperor back to Beijing?

古文：何必区区温情，为儿女之恋乎！ 
现代文：何必因为区区温情，而作儿女之恋呢！ 
English: Why should children fall in love with each other just because they are warm-hearted?

古文：广平王亻叔亦劝太子留。
现代文：广平王李也劝太子留下来。
English: Guangping Wang Li also advised the prince to stay.

古文：父老共拥太子马，不得行。
现代文：父老乡亲们都拦住太子的马，使他无法前行。
English: My father's fellow villagers all stopped the prince's horse, making it impossible for him to go forward.

古文：太子乃使亻叔驰白上。
现代文：于是太子就让广平王李驰马去报告玄宗。
English: As a result, the prince asked Guangping King Li Chima to report to Xuanzong.

古文：上总辔待太子，久不至，使人侦之，还白状，上曰： 天也！ 
现代文：玄宗骑在马上等待太子，久等不见，就派人去打听，被派去的人回来报告了太子的情况，玄宗说： 这真是天意！ 
English: Xuanzong rode on horseback to wait for the prince. After waiting for a long time, he did not see him, so he sent someone to inquire. The person who was sent returned and reported the prince's condition. Xuanzong said, "This is truly God's will!"

古文：乃命分后军二千人及飞龙厩马从太子，且谕将士曰： 太子仁孝，可奉宗庙，汝曹善辅佐之。 
现代文：于是就从后军中分出二千人，再加上一批最好的飞龙厩马给予太子，并且告谕将士说： 太子仁义孝顺，能够继承我们大唐的帝业，希望你们好好辅佐他。 
English: Therefore, he separated two thousand people from the rear army, plus a group of the best flying dragons and stable horses to give to the prince, and told the soldiers: The prince is kind, righteous and filial, and can inherit our imperial inheritance of the Great Tang Dynasty. I hope you will support him well.

古文：又谕太子曰： 汝勉之，勿以吾为念。
现代文：然后又告谕太子说： 希望你好自为之，不要为我而担心。
English: Then he said to the prince, "I hope you will behave yourself and not worry about me.

古文：西北诸胡，吾抚之素厚，汝必得其用。 
现代文：西北地区的各族胡人，我一直待他们厚道，你一定能用得上。 
English: The Hu people of all ethnic groups in the northwest region, I have always treated them kindly, you can certainly use it.

古文：太子南向号泣而已。
现代文：太子听后向南号叫哭泣。
English: After hearing this, the prince cried out to Nanxiang.

古文：又使送东宫内人于太子，且宣旨欲传位，太子不受。
现代文：玄宗又派人把太子东宫中的宫女送给太子，并且宣旨说要传帝位给太子，太子不接受。
English: Xuanzong also sent someone to give the princess in the eastern palace of the prince to the prince, and declared that he wanted to pass the throne to the prince, but the prince did not accept.

古文：亻叔、倓，皆太子之子也。己亥，上至岐山。
现代文：广平王李和建宁王李都是太子的儿子。已亥，玄宗到达岐山县。
English: Guangping Wang Li and Jianning Wang Li are both sons of the prince. Already, Xuanzong has arrived in Qishan County.

古文：或言贼前锋且至，上遽过，宿扶风郡。
现代文：这时有人传言说叛军的前锋立刻就到，玄宗不敢停留，继续前行，晚上宿于扶风郡。
English: At this time, there was a rumor that the rebel army's vanguard would arrive immediately. Xuanzong did not dare to stay, but continued on his way and spent the night in Fufeng County.

古文：士卒潜怀去就，往往流言不逊，陈玄礼不能制，上患之。
现代文：随从保驾的士卒暗谋出路，往往出言不逊，龙武大将军陈玄礼无力控制，玄宗十分担忧。
English: The policemen accompanying the escort secretly plot a way out, often making insolent remarks. Longwu General Chen Xuanli is powerless to control them, and Xuan Zong is very worried.

古文：会成都贡春彩十馀万匹，至扶风，上命悉陈之于庭，召将士入，临轩谕之曰： 朕比来衰耄，托任失人，致逆胡乱常，须远避其锋。
现代文：适逢成都进献给朝廷的春织丝绸十余万匹到了扶风，玄宗命令把这些丝绸都陈放在庭中，召来随从将士，然后在殿前的台阶上告诉他们说： 朕近年来由于衰老糊涂，任人失当，以致造成安禄山举兵反叛，逆乱天常，朕不得不远行避难，躲其兵锋。
English: At the right time, more than a hundred thousand spring-woven silks from Chengdu, which were dedicated to the imperial court, arrived at Fu Feng. Xuanzong ordered that all of these silks be displayed in the courtyard, summoned the attendants, and then told them on the steps in front of the palace: "In recent years, due to aging and confusion, I have allowed people to misbehave, which has caused Anlu Mountain to raise an army and rebel against nature. I had to go far away to take refuge and hide from their soldiers.

古文：知卿等皆苍猝从朕，不得别父母妻子，茇涉至此，劳苦至矣，朕甚愧之。
现代文：朕知道你们仓促之间跟随出来，来不及与自己的父母妻子告别，艰难跋涉到了这里，非常辛苦，朕感到十分惭愧。
English: I know that you followed me out in a hurry, and didn't have time to say goodbye to your parents and wife. It was very hard to get here, and I feel very ashamed.

古文：蜀路阻长，郡县褊小，人马众多，或不能供，今听卿等各还家，朕独与子、孙、中官前行入蜀，亦足自达。
现代文：去蜀中的道路艰险长远，而且那里地方狭小，难以供应如此众多的人马，现在允许你们各自回家，朕只与儿子、孙子以及侍奉的宦官前往蜀中，这些人也足以保朕到达。
English: The road to Shuzhong is long and arduous, and the place is too small to accommodate so many people. Now you are allowed to go home separately. I will only go to Shuzhong with my son, grandson, and the eunuchs who serve me. These people are also enough to ensure my arrival.

古文：今日与卿等诀别，可共分此彩，以备资粮。
现代文：现在就与你们分别了，你们可把这些丝绸分掉作为资费。
English: Now that we have separated from you, you can divide these silks up as expenses.

古文：若归，见父母及长安父老，为朕致意，各好自爱也！ 
现代文：如果你们回去，见到自己的父母与长安城中的父老们，请代朕向他们问好，让他们多多保重！ 
English: If you go back and see your parents and grandparents in Chang'an City, please say hello to them on my behalf, and take good care of them!

古文：因泣下沾襟。
现代文：说着泪流沾襟。
English: Saying this, he shed tears and wet his collar.

古文：众皆哭，曰： 臣等死生从陛下，不敢有贰。 
现代文：将士们听完玄宗的话后，都哭着说： 我们生死在所不惜，愿意永远跟随陛下，不敢有二心！ 
English: After listening to Xuanzong's words, the generals all cried and said, "We will do whatever it takes to live or die, we are willing to follow His Majesty forever, we dare not have two hearts!"

古文：上良久曰： 去留听卿。 
现代文：玄宗等了一会儿说： 去留听从你们自愿。 
English: Xuanzong waited for a while and said, "I'll stay and listen to you voluntarily."

古文：自是流言始息。
现代文：从此哪些不恭敬的言语才平息了下来。
English: The disrespectful language has since died down.

古文：太子既留，未知所适。
现代文：太子留下来以后，不知道该往哪里去。
English: After the prince stayed behind, he didn't know where to go.

古文：广平王亻叔曰： 日渐晏，此不可驻，众欲何之？ 
现代文：广平王李说： 天已经快黑了，此地不宜久留，大家觉得到哪里去好呢？ 
English: Guangping Wang Li said: It is getting dark, it is not suitable to stay here for a long time, where do you think it is best to go?

古文：皆莫对。
现代文：众人都不说话。
English: No one spoke.

古文：建宁王倓曰： 殿下昔尝为朔方节度大使，将吏岁时致启，倓略识其姓名。
现代文：这时建宁王李说： 殿下过去曾经做过朔方节度大使，朔方镇的将领官吏每年送来问安书，我大略记得他们的姓名。
English: At this time, Jianning Wang Li said: His Royal Highness used to be the ambassador of the Shuofang Festival in the past. The generals and officials of Shuofang Town sent greetings every year. I can roughly remember their names.

古文：今河西、陇右之众皆败降贼，父兄子弟多在贼中，或生异图。
现代文：现在河西与陇右的兵都因战败投降了叛军，父兄子弟多有在叛军中的，到那里去恐怕有危险。
English: Now, the soldiers in Hexi and Shizhu have all surrendered to the rebels due to their defeat. Most of the fathers, brothers and children are in the rebel army. I'm afraid it's dangerous to go there.

古文：贼入长安方虏掠，未暇徇地，乘此速往就之，徐图大举，此上策也。
现代文：而朔方距离较近，军队完好，兵马强盛，再说河西行军司马裴冕出自世家大族，一定不会有二心。叛军正在进入长安大肆抢掠财物，还顾不上向外攻城略地，趁此机会应该立刻往朔方，到那里以后再图谋大计，这是最好的战略。 
English: On the other hand, the Shuo side is closer, the army is intact, the soldiers and horses are strong, and the Sima Pei Guan, the commander of the troops marching to the west of the river, comes from a large family, so there will be no second thoughts. The rebels are entering Chang'an to plunder wealth, but they do not care about attacking the city. They should take this opportunity to go to the Shuo side immediately, and try to make a plan after they get there. This is the best strategy.

古文：众皆曰善。
现代文：大家听后都说： 好！ 
English: Everyone said yes.

古文：至渭滨。遇潼关敗卒，误与之战，死伤甚众。
现代文：到了渭河岸边，遇上了潼关战败后退下来的士卒，误以为是叛军而交战，死伤了许多人。
English: When they arrived at the bank of the Li River, they encountered the soldiers who had retreated after the defeat of Shaoguan. They mistakenly thought they were rebels and fought, killing and injuring many people.

古文：已，乃收馀卒，择渭水浅处，乘马涉渡；无马者涕泣而返。
现代文：不久弄清楚后，就又收罗散兵，选择了一处水浅的地方，乘马渡过渭水，没有马匹的人只好流泪而返回。
English: Soon after finding out, he gathered the scattered soldiers of Luo, chose a place with shallow water, and took a horse to cross Surabaya. Those who did not have horses had to return in tears.

古文：太子自奉天北上，比至新平，通夜驰三百馀里，士卒、器械失亡过半，所存之众不过数百。
现代文：太子从奉天县向北，到达新平，一夜行进了三百里，清点士卒和武器装备，已丢失大半，留下来的人也不过数百。
English: From Fengtian County to the north, the prince reached Xinping and traveled 300 miles overnight. He counted the soldiers and weapons and equipment. Most of them have been lost, and only a few hundred people remain.

古文：新平太守薛羽弃郡走，太子斩之，是日，至安定，太守徐亦走，又斩之。
现代文：新平太守薛羽弃郡逃跑，被太子杀掉。当天到了安定郡，太守徐也要逃跑，太子又把他杀了。
English: Xinping's daimyō, Xue Yaguo, fled the county and was killed by the crown prince. On the same day, the daimyō, Xu, also fled the county and was killed by the crown prince.

古文：庚子，以剑南节度留后崔圆为剑南节度等副大使。
现代文：庚子，玄宗任命剑南节度留后崔圆为剑南节度副大使。
English: Geng Zi and Xuanzong appointed Cui Yuan as the deputy ambassador of the Jianan Festival after the Jianan Festival.

古文：辛丑，上发扶风，宿陈仓。
现代文：辛丑，玄宗从扶风出发，晚上住在陈仓。
English: Xin Qiu and Xuan Zong set out from Fu Feng and stayed in Chen Cang at night.

古文：太子至乌氏，彭原太守李遵出迎，献衣及糗粮。
现代文：太子到了乌氏县，彭原太守李遵出来迎接，并献上衣服和干粮。
English: When the prince arrived in Wushi County, Pengyuan Grand Empress Dowager Li Zun came out to greet him and presented him with clothes and dry food.

古文：至彭原，募士，得数百人。是日，至平凉，阅监牧马，得数万匹，又募士，得五百馀人，军势稍振。
现代文：到了彭原，招募了数百名士卒，当天到了平凉郡，太子察看监牧所养的马，有数万匹，又招募士卒五百余人，军势稍微得到加强。
English: When they arrived in Pengyuan, they recruited hundreds of soldiers. On the same day, when they arrived in Pingliang County, the prince inspected the tens of thousands of horses raised by the overseer, and recruited more than 500 soldiers. The military strength was slightly strengthened.

古文：壬寅，上至散关，分扈从将士为六军，使颍王璬先行诣剑南。寿王瑁等分将六军以次之。
现代文：壬寅，玄宗到达散关，把护卫的士兵分为六军，派颍王李先往剑南，寿王李瑁分别率领六军随后。
English: When Ren Yin and Xuan Zong arrived at Sankuan, they divided the soldiers of the escort into six armies. They sent Wang Li of Jian first to the south of Jian, followed by Wang Li of Shou, who led the six armies separately.

古文：丙午，上至河池郡。
现代文：丙午，玄宗到达河池郡。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Xuanzong arrived in Hechi County.

古文：崔圆奉表迎车驾，具陈蜀土丰稔，甲兵全盛。
现代文：蜀郡长史崔圆持表书前来迎接，并说蜀中富饶，粮食丰收，兵马强盛。
English: The governor of Shu County, Shi Cuiyuan, came to greet them, holding a certificate, and said that Shu is rich, grain is abundant, and soldiers and horses are strong.

古文：上大悦，即日，以圆为中书侍郎、同平章事，蜀郡长史如故。
现代文：玄宗非常高兴，当天就任命崔圆为中书侍郎、同平章事，仍兼蜀郡长史。
English: Xuanzong was very pleased, and on the same day, he appointed Cui Yuan as the secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC Central Committee, Tongping Zhangji, and still the chief historian of Shu County.

古文：以陇西公瑀为汉中王、梁州都督、山南西道采访防御使。
现代文：又任命陇西公李为汉中王、梁州都督、山南西道采访及防御使。
English: He also appointed Gong Li of Shaanxi Province as the King of the Han Dynasty, the Governor of Liangzhou, and the Interpreter and Defense Envoy of the West Shannan Province.

古文：瑀，璡之弟也。
现代文：李是李的弟弟。
English: Li is Li's younger brother.

古文：王思礼至平凉，闻河西诸胡乱，还，诣行在。
现代文：王思礼到达平凉后，得知河西镇胡人作乱，就又返回玄宗的行在。
English: After Wang Sili arrived in Pingliang, he learned that the Hu people in Hexi Town had caused a disturbance, so he returned to the lineage of Xuanzong.

古文：初，河西诸胡部落闻其都护皆从哥舒翰没于潼关，故争自立，相攻击；而都护实从翰在北岸，不死，又不与火拔归仁俱降贼。
现代文：起初，河西镇的各胡人部落听说他们的都护跟随哥舒翰平叛死于潼关之战，所以争着自立为王，互相攻击。而实际上都护跟随哥舒翰在黄河北岸，并没有战死，也没有与火拔归仁一起投向叛军。
English: At first, the various Hu tribes in Hexi Town heard that their tutelary followed Goshukhan and died in the Battle of Shaoguan, so they fought to become independent kings and attacked each other. However, in fact, the tutelary followed Goshukhan on the north bank of the Yellow River and did not die in battle, nor did he join the rebels together with Hui Ba Guiren.

古文：上乃以河西兵马使周泌为河西节度使，陇右兵马使彭元耀为陇右节度使，与都护思结进明等俱之镇，招其部落。
现代文：于是玄宗就任命河西兵马使周泌为河西节度使，陇右兵马使彭元耀为陇右节度使，让他们与都护思结进明等人一起到镇赴任，招抚胡人部落。
English: Therefore, Xuanzong appointed Zhou Xiu, the military commander of Hexi, as the military commander of Hexi, and Peng Yuanyao, the military commander of the right, as the military commander of the right, so that they could go to the town together with Du Fu, Sijie, Jinming and others to work to appease the Hu tribe.

古文：以思礼为行在都知兵马使。
现代文：玄宗又任命王思礼为行在都知兵马使。
English: Emperor Xuanzong also appointed Wang Sili as the envoy to march in Sichuan.

古文：戊申，扶风民康景龙等自相帅击贼所署宣慰使薛总，斩首二百馀级。
现代文：戊申，扶风郡百姓康景龙等人自动组织起来攻打叛军所任命的宣慰使薛总，杀死叛军二百余人。
English: Wushin, the people of Fufeng County, Kang Jinglong and others spontaneously organized to attack the general Xue, appointed by the rebels, and killed more than two hundred rebels.

古文：庚戌，陈仓令薛景仙杀贼守将，克扶风而守之。
现代文：庚戌，陈仓县令薛景仙杀掉叛军守将，攻克了扶风郡而率兵镇守。
English: Geng Yao, Chencang County ordered Xue Jingxian to kill the rebel guard, conquered Fu Feng County and led the soldiers to defend the town.

古文：安禄山不意上遽西幸，遣使止崔乾祐兵留潼关，凡十日，乃遣孙孝哲将兵入长安，以张通儒为西京留守，崔光远为京兆尹；使安忠顺将兵屯苑中，以镇关中。
现代文：安禄山没料想玄宗那么快就会西去避难。就派人让崔乾留兵潼关，十天后才派孙孝哲率兵进入长安，任命张通儒为西京留守，崔光远为京兆尹。派安忠顺率重兵驻守在禁苑中，以镇抚关中地区。
English: An Lushan did not expect that Xuanzong would go to the west for refuge so soon. So he sent someone to let Cui Qian stay in Zhuguangguan. Ten days later, he sent Sun Xiao Zhe to lead the troops into Chang'an, appointing Zhang Tongru to stay in West Beijing, and Cui Guangyuan to stay in Beijing Zhaoyun. He sent a large number of soldiers to stay in the middle of the Forbidden Garden, and to guard the middle area of Zhuguangguan.

古文：孝哲为禄山所宠任，尤用事，常与严庄争权；禄山使监关中诸将，通儒等皆受制于孝哲。
现代文：孙孝哲是安禄山最宠信的心腹，喜欢专权用事，常常与严庄争权。安禄山派孙孝哲监督关中诸将帅的军队，张通儒等人都受他的节制。
English: Sun Xiao Zhe was the most trusted confidant of An Lushan. He liked to wield absolute power and often fought for power with Yan Zhuang. An Lushan sent Sun Xiao Zhe to supervise the army of generals in Guanzhong. Zhang Tongru and others were subject to his restraint.

古文：教哲豪侈，果于杀戮，贼党畏之。
现代文：孙孝哲性情粗犷，处事果断，用刑严厉，叛军将领都十分害怕他。
English: The rebel generals were very afraid of Sun Xiao Zhe, who had a coarse temperament, was decisive in his actions, and used harsh punishments.

古文：禄山命搜捕百官、宦者、宫女等，每获数百人，辄以兵卫送洛阳。
现代文：安禄山命令搜捕朝臣、宦官和宫女，每抓到数百人时，就派兵护送到洛阳。
English: An Lushan ordered the roundup of courtiers, eunuchs and concubines, and whenever hundreds of people were caught, he sent soldiers to escort them to Luoyang.

古文：王、侯、将、相扈从车驾、家留长安者，诛及婴孩。
现代文：对于跟随玄宗避难而家还留在长安的王侯将相，连婴儿也杀死。
English: For the princes who fled with Xuanzong and whose families remained in Chang'an, even the babies were killed.

古文：陈希烈以晚节失恩，怨上，与张均、张垍等皆降于贼。
现代文：陈希烈因为晚年失去玄宗的信任，所以心中怨恨，就与张均、张兄弟等人投降了叛军。
English: Because Chen Xilei lost the trust of Xuanzong in his later years, he harbored resentment in his heart and surrendered to the rebels with Zhang Jun, Zhang brothers and others.

古文：禄山以希烈、垍为相，自馀朝士皆授以官。
现代文：安禄山任命陈希烈、张为宰相，其余投降的朝臣都授以官职。
English: An Lushan appointed Chen Xilei and Zhang as prime ministers, and the remaining surrendered courtiers were given official positions.

古文：于是贼势大炽，西胁汧、陇，南侵江、汉，北割河东之半。
现代文：因此叛军的势力大盛，向西威胁阳、陇州，向南侵扰江南与汉水流域，向北占领了河东道的一半。
English: As a result, the rebel forces were in full force, threatening Yang and Zhangzhou in the west, invading the southern part of the Yangtze River and the Han River basin in the south, and occupying half of Hetao in the north.

古文：然贼将皆粗猛无远略，既克长安，自以为得志，日夜纵酒，专以声色宝贿为事，无复西出之意，故上得安行入蜀，太子北行亦无追迫之患。
现代文：但是叛军将领都勇猛有余，而智谋不足，既已攻陷长安，志骄意满，日夜纵酒取乐，沉湎于声色珍宝财物，再也没有向西进攻的意图，所以玄宗得以安全地避入蜀中，而太子北上也不必担心敌军的追赶逼迫。
English: However, the rebel generals were more than brave, but not clever enough. They had already captured Chang'an, were full of pride, drank and had fun day and night, and indulged in ostentation and precious treasures. They had no intention of attacking to the west, so Xuanzong was able to safely enter Shu, and the prince did not have to worry about the pursuit of the enemy army.

古文：李光弼围博陵未下，闻潼关不守，解围而南。
现代文：李光弼率兵攻打博陵，没有攻克，得知潼关失守，便撤兵向南退去。
English: Li Guangyao led his troops to attack Boling, but failed to conquer it. When he learned that Shaoguan was lost, he withdrew his troops to the south.

古文：史思明踵其后，光弼击却之，与郭子仪皆引兵入井陉，留常山太守王俌将景城、河间团练兵守常山。
现代文：史思明率兵追击，被李光弼击退，李光弼与郭子仪都率兵入井陉关，留下常山太守王率领景城与河间郡的团练兵守卫常山。
English: Shi Siming led the troops in pursuit, but was repulsed by Li Guangyao. Li Guangyao and Guo Ziyi both led their troops into Jing'an Pass, leaving Changshan's grand marshal Wang to lead the regiments of Jingcheng and Haima County to guard Changshan.

古文：平卢节度使刘正臣将袭范阳，未至，史思明引兵逆击之，正臣大败，弃妻子走，士卒死者七千馀人。
现代文：平卢节度使刘正臣将要袭击范阳，军队还未到，史思明就率兵来阻击，刘正臣大败，丢弃妻子而逃，部下士卒七千余人战死。
English: The Pinglu Festival caused Liu Zhengcheng to attack Fan Yang. Before the army arrived, Shi Siming led the army to block it. Liu Zhengcheng was defeated, abandoned his wife and fled. More than seven thousand subordinates and officers died in the battle.

古文：初，颜真卿闻河北节度使李光弼出井陉，即敛军还平原，以待光弼之命。
现代文：当初颜真卿听说河北节度使李光弼率兵出井陉关，就收兵回平原，等待李光弼的命令。
English: At first, Yan Zhenqing heard that the Hebei Festival had made Li Guangya and his soldiers come out of the Well Pass, so he gathered his troops back to the plain and waited for Li Guangya's order.

古文：闻郭、李西入井陉，真卿始复区处河北军事。
现代文：此时得知郭子仪与李光弼又率兵西入井陉关，颜真卿就重新暂时指挥河北地区反抗叛军的军事行动。
English: At this time, when it was learned that Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao had again led their troops west into Jing'an Pass, Yan Zhenqing resumed temporary command of the military operations against the rebels in Hebei.

古文：太子至平凉数日，朔方留后杜鸿渐、六城水陆运使魏少游、节度判官崔漪、支度判官卢简金、盐池判官李涵相与谋曰： 平凉散地，非屯兵之所，灵武兵食完富，若迎太子至此，北收诸城兵，西发河、陇劲骑，南向以定中原，此万世一时也。 
现代文：太子李亨到达平凉数天以后，朔方留后杜鸿渐、六城水陆运使魏少游、节度判官崔漪、支度判官卢简金与盐池判官李涵等人商议说： 平凉地势平坦，不是屯驻军队之地，而灵武兵强粮足，如果把太子迎接到该地，向北召集诸郡之兵，向西征发河西、陇右的精锐骑兵，然后挥师南下，平定中原，这实在是千载难逢的大好时机。 
English: A few days after the arrival of Prince Li Heng in Pingliang, Du Hongqian, the six-city land and water transportation envoy Wei Shaoyu, the festival judge Cui Yan, the preparation judge Lu Jianjin and the salt pond judge Li Han and others discussed and said: Pingliang is flat, it is not a place to station troops, and the spirit of the soldiers is strong. If the prince is welcomed to the place, the soldiers of the counties will be gathered to the north, the elite cavalry of Hexi and Shijiu will be sent to the west, and then the division will go south to pacify the Central Plains. This is really a great opportunity in a

古文：乃使涵奉笺于太子，且籍朔方士马、甲兵、谷帛、军须之数以献之。
现代文：于是就派李涵持笺表上于太子，并且把朔方镇的士卒、马匹、武器、粮食、布帛以及其他军用物资的帐籍一同奉献给太子。
English: Therefore, he sent Li Han to the prince with a copy of the account book, and presented the prince with the account book of the soldiers, horses, weapons, grain, cloth and other military supplies of Shuofang Town.

古文：涵至平凉，太子大悦。
现代文：李涵到平凉见太子后，太子非常高兴。
English: After Li Han came to Pingliang to see the prince, the prince was very happy.

古文：会河西司马裴冕入为御史中丞，至平凉见太子，亦劝太子之朔方，太子从之。
现代文：这时河西司马裴冕入朝为御史中丞，路过平凉见到太子，也奉劝太子去朔方，太子同意。
English: At this time, Sima Pei Guan of Hexi Province entered the imperial court as the imperial secretary. He passed by Pingliang and saw the prince. He also advised the prince to go to Shuo, and the prince agreed.

古文：鸿渐，暹之族子；涵，道之曾孙也。
现代文：杜鸿渐是杜暹同族的侄子。李涵是李道的曾孙。
English: Du Hongyan is the nephew of Du Siam's compatriot. Li Han is the great-grandson of Li Dao.

古文：鸿渐、漪使少游居后，葺次舍，庀资储，自迎太子于平凉北境，说太子曰： 朔方，天下劲兵处也。
现代文：杜鸿渐与崔漪让魏少游留下来修葺房舍，准备食物用具，自己去平凉的北面去迎接太子，并对太子说： 朔方镇是天下精兵强将所聚之地。
English: Du Hongqian and Cui Gan asked Wei Shaoyou to stay behind to repair the house, prepare food utensils, and go to the cool north to meet the prince, and said to the prince: Shuo Fang Town is the place where the world's best soldiers gather.

古文：今吐蕃请和，回纥内附，四方郡县大抵坚守拒贼以俟兴复。
现代文：现在境外吐蕃求和，回纥归附，境内的郡县大都坚守城池，抵御叛军，等待大唐王朝的复兴。
English: Now, outside the borders of Tibet, Tibet has sued for peace and returned to China, and most of the counties in the territory have held fast to the castle, resisted the rebels, and waited for the revival of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：殿下今理兵灵武，按辔长驱，移檄四方，收揽忠义，则逆贼不足屠也。 
现代文：殿下如果能够集兵于灵武，然后挥师长驱，南下平叛，传告四方郡县，收揽忠义之士，则反叛的逆贼就不难平定。 
English: If His Royal Highness can gather troops at Lingwu, then drive them south with a full-strength army, subdue the rebels, spread the news to the four provinces and counties, and win over the loyalists, then it will not be difficult to suppress the rebel traitors.

古文：少游盛治宫室，帷帐皆仿禁中，饮膳备水陆。
现代文：魏少游留下来后，大力修治宫室，就连所用的帐幕都模仿皇宫中的样子，所备的饮食水陆之物俱备。
English: After Wei Shaoyou stayed, he vigorously repaired the palace room. Even the tents used imitated the appearance of the royal palace. The food and drink prepared were well-prepared.

古文：秋，七月，辛酉，太子至灵武，悉命撤之。
现代文：秋季，七月辛酉，太子到达灵武，命令把这些奢侈品全部撤去。
English: In the autumn, at the end of July, the prince arrived in Lingwu and ordered all these luxury goods to be removed.

古文：甲子，上至普安，宪部侍郎房琯来谒见。
现代文：甲子，玄宗到达普安郡，宪部侍郎房赶来晋见。
English: Koshi, Xuanzong arrived at Dapu'an County, and Kenbu's chamberlain came to see him.

古文：上之发长安也，群臣多不知，至咸阳，谓高力士曰： 朝臣谁当来，谁不来？ 
现代文：玄宗从长安出发时，朝中群臣大多数都不知道，到了咸阳，玄宗对高力士说： 你说朝臣中谁会赶来，谁不会赶来？ 
English: When Xuanzong set out from Chang'an, most of the courtiers in the court did not know about it. When he arrived in Xianyang, Xuanzong said to Gao Lixi, "Who of the courtiers will come and who will not come?

古文：对曰： 张均、张垍父子受陛下恩最深，且连戚里，是必先来。
现代文：高力士回答说： 张均、张兄弟和他的父亲张说受陛下的恩惠最深，并且张还是驸马，与陛下连亲，所以他们兄弟一定会先赶来。
English: Koryo replied, "Zhang Jun, brother Zhang and his father Zhang say that they are the most favored by Your Majesty, and Zhang is a prince and is related to Your Majesty, so their brother will definitely come first."

古文：时论皆谓房琯宜为相，而陛下不用，又禄山尝荐之，恐或不来。 
现代文：大家都认为房应该拜相，而陛下却不加重用，而且安禄山也曾经推荐过他，所以他可能不来。 
English: Everyone thinks Fong should be the best man, but His Majesty doesn't use him much, and Anlu Shan once recommended him, so he may not come.

古文：上曰： 事未可知。 
现代文：玄宗说： 此事难以预料。 
English: Xuanzong said: It's hard to predict.

古文：及琯至，上问均兄弟，对曰： 臣帅与偕来，逗留不进：观其意，似有所蓄而不能言也。 
现代文：房赶到后，玄宗就问张均、张兄弟的情况，房说： 我约他们一起来追随陛下，而他们却犹豫不决，看他们的意思，好像有什么难言之隐。 
English: After Fong arrived, Xuanzong asked him about Zhang Jun and the Zhang brothers. Fong said, "I invited them to come with me to follow Your Majesty, but they hesitated, judging by their intentions, as if there was something difficult to say."

古文：上顾力士曰： 朕固知之矣。 
现代文：玄宗看着高力士说： 朕早就知道他们不会来。 
English: Xuanzong looked at Gao Lixin and said, "I already knew they wouldn't come.

古文：即日，以垍为文部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：当天，玄宗就任命房为文部侍郎、同平章事。
English: On the same day, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Fong as the secretary of the Ministry of Education and Tongping as the secretary.

古文：初，张垍尚宁亲公主，听于禁中置宅，宠渥无比。
现代文：当初张娶了玄宗的女儿宁亲公主为妻，玄宗允许他在宫中建设宅第，宠信无比。
English: At first, Zhang married Princess Ning Xian, the daughter of Emperor Xuanzong. Emperor Xuanzong allowed him to build a residence in the palace, and he was very fond of him.

古文：陈希烈求解政务，上幸垍宅，问可为相者。
现代文：当时陈希烈请求罢相，玄宗到张的宅第，问他谁可以当宰相。
English: At that time, Chen Xilei asked for the resignation of the prime minister, and Xuanzong went to Zhang's home and asked him who could be the prime minister.

古文：垍未对。
现代文：张没有回答。
English: Zhang did not answer.

古文：上曰： 无若爱婿。 
现代文：玄宗说： 都不如我的爱婿。 
English: Xuanzong said, "They are not as good as my beloved son-in-law."

古文：垍降阶拜舞。
现代文：张听后急忙伏到台阶下拜舞。
English: After listening to Zhang, she hurriedly bowed down to the steps to worship.

古文：既而不用，故垍怀怏怏，上亦觉之。
现代文：但后来没有拜他为宰相，所以张心怀怨意，玄宗也能够感觉到。
English: However, he did not become the prime minister later, so Zhang harbored resentment, and Xuanzong could also feel it.

古文：是时均、垍兄弟及姚崇之子尚书右丞奕、萧蒿之子兵部侍郎华、韦安石之子礼部侍郎陟、太常少卿斌，皆以才望至大官，上尝曰： 或命相，当遍举故相子弟耳。 
现代文：当时张均、张兄弟及姚崇的儿子尚书右丞姚奕、萧嵩的儿子兵部侍郎萧华、韦安石的儿子礼部侍郎韦陟、太常少卿韦斌等，都因才华名望而位至高官，玄宗曾经说过： 我要任命宰相，就选拔前宰相的子弟。 
English: At that time, Zhang Jun, the Zhang brothers, and Yao Chong's son, Shang Shuyong, Yao Yi, Xiao Song's son, the military secretary, Xiao Hua, Wei Anshi's son, the ceremonial secretary, Wei Wei, and Taizang Shaoqing, Wei Bin, were all promoted to high-ranking officials because of their talent and fame. Xuanzong once said: "If I want to appoint a prime minister, I will select the children of the former prime minister."

古文：既而皆不用。
现代文：而后来却全都没有任用。
English: But then none of them were appointed.

古文：裴冕、杜鸿渐等上太子笺，请遵马嵬之命，即皇帝位，太子不许。
现代文：裴冕、杜鸿渐等人向太子上笺表，请求他遵照玄宗在马嵬驿的命令即皇帝位，太子不同意。
English: Fei Guan, Du Hongyan and others went to the prince and asked him to follow the order of Emperor Xuanzong in the horse, that is, the emperor's throne. The prince did not agree.

古文：冕等言曰： 将士皆关中人，日夜思归，所以崎岖从殿下远涉沙塞者，冀尺寸之功。
现代文：裴冕等人对太子说： 殿下所率领的将士都是关中人，日夜思念着家乡，他们所以经历艰险跟随殿下到这种荒沙野城中来，就是希望能够建功立业。
English: Fei Guan and others said to the prince: The soldiers led by His Royal Highness are all Guanzhong people, day and night thinking about their hometown. They have experienced hardships and dangers to follow His Royal Highness to this desert city, hoping to make a career.

古文：若一朝离散，不可复集。
现代文：这些人一旦离散，就难以再聚集到一起。
English: Once these people are dispersed, it is difficult to bring them back together.

古文：愿殿下勉徇众心，为社稷计！ 
现代文：希望殿下能够顺应人心，也为国家着想！ 
English: I hope that His Royal Highness will be able to follow the will of the people and also think about the country!

古文：笺五上，太子乃许之。
现代文：一连五次上笺奏，太子才同意。
English: It took five consecutive performances for the prince to agree.

古文：是日，肃宗即位于灵武城南楼，群臣舞蹈，上流涕歔欷。
现代文：当天，肃宗于灵武城南楼即帝位，群臣拜舞，肃宗也流涕欷。
English: On the same day, Su Zong was enthroned in the South Tower of Lingwu City. A group of courtiers bowed to him, and Su Zong also bowed.

古文：尊玄宗曰上皇天帝，赦天下，改元。
现代文：尊称玄宗为上皇天帝，大赦天下，改天宝十五载为至德元载。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was given the honorific title of Shanghuang Tiandi (the last emperor of heaven) and was pardoned by the emperor. He was given the title of Tianbao 15 Jia (the 15th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China).

古文：以杜鸿渐、崔漪并知中书舍人事，裴冕为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：肃宗任命杜鸿渐、崔漪为中书舍人，裴冕为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Su Zong appointed Du Hong Qian and Cui Yao as chancellors, Fei Guan as chancellor and Tongping as secretary.

古文：改关内采访使为节度使，徒治安化，以前蒲关防御使吕崇贲为之。
现代文：改关内采访使为节度使，把治所迁到安化郡，任命前蒲关防御使吕崇贲为节度使。
English: He changed the commanding officer in charge of the gate to the commander of the festival, moved the administrative office to Anhua County, and appointed the former commander of the defense of Baguan, Lv Chongyao, as the commander of the festival.

古文：以陈仓令薛景仙为扶风太守，兼防御使；陇右节度使郭英乂为天水太守，兼防御使。
现代文：又任命陈仓县令薛景仙为扶风太守，兼防御使；陇右节度使郭英又为天水太守，兼防御使。
English: He also appointed Xue Jingxian, the governor of Chencang County, as the governor of Fufeng and defense envoy; Guo Ying, the governor of Zhudao, as the governor of Tianshui and defense envoy.

古文：时塞上精兵皆选入讨贼，惟馀老弱守边，文武官不满三十人，披草莱，立朝廷，制度草创，武人骄慢。
现代文：当时塞外的精兵都入内地讨伐叛军，只剩下老弱残兵防守边疆，文武官吏不到三十人，他们披荆斩棘，建立朝廷，但因为制度草创，武人骄横傲慢。
English: At that time, the elite soldiers from outside the country went inland to fight the rebels, leaving only the old and weak remnants to defend the border. There were less than thirty civil and military officials. They worked hard to establish the imperial court, but because the system was created, the warriors were arrogant.

古文：大将管崇嗣在朝堂，背阙而坐，言笑自若，监察御史李勉奏弹之，系于有司。
现代文：大将管崇嗣在朝堂中背对宫阙而坐，言笑自若，监察御史李勉上奏弹劾他，并把他关了起来。
English: The general, Guan Chongzhi, sat in the middle of the hall with his back to the palace guard, laughing to himself. The inspector, Guo Shi Li, went up to impeach him and locked him up.

古文：上特原之，叹曰： 吾有李勉，朝廷始尊！ 
现代文：肃宗特下令赦免了管崇嗣，并感叹说： 我只是因为有李逸这样的人，朝廷才开始有尊严！ 
English: Su Zongte pardoned Guan Chongzhi with an order, and lamented: "It is only because of people like Li Yat that the imperial court began to have dignity!"

古文：勉，元懿之曾孙也。
现代文：李勉是李元懿的曾孙。
English: Li Tsun is the great-grandson of Li Yuanxuan.

古文：旬日间，归附者渐众。
现代文：肃宗即帝位后十多天内，归附的人越来越多。
English: More than ten days after the enthronement of Emperor Suizong, more and more people have become adherents.

古文：张良娣性巧慧，能得上意，从上来朔方。
现代文：张良娣性情乖巧聪明，善于讨肃宗的欢心，所以跟随肃宗来到朔方。
English: Zhang Liangyao was good-natured, clever, and good at winning Su Zong's favor, so he followed Su Zong to Shuo Fang.

古文：时从兵单寡，良娣每寝，常居上前。
现代文：当时保卫肃宗的兵力不多，张良娣每当睡觉时，总是睡在肃宗的前面。
English: At that time, there were not many soldiers to protect Su Zong. Whenever Zhang Liangyao went to sleep, he always slept in front of Su Zong.

古文：上曰： 御寇非妇人所能。 
现代文：肃宗说： 抵御敌寇不是妇人的事情。 
English: Su Zong said, "It's not a woman's job to fend off invaders.

古文：良娣曰： 苍猝之际，妾以身当之，殿下可从后逸去。 
现代文：张良娣却说： 如果发生了意外的事情，我可先用身体抵挡一阵，以使殿下能够从后面逃走。 
English: Zhang Liangyao, however, said: If something unexpected happens, I can first use my body to resist for a while, so that His Royal Highness can escape from behind.

古文：至灵武，产子；三日起，缝战士衣。
现代文：到了灵武，张良娣生了一个孩子，三天后就起来为战士们缝补衣服。
English: When she arrived in Lingwu, Zhang Liangyao gave birth to a child. Three days later, she got up and sewed clothes for the soldiers.

古文：上止之，对曰： 此非妾自养之时。 
现代文：肃宗阻止她，她说： 现在不是我休养身体的时候。 
English: Su Zong stopped her and said, "Now is not the time for me to recuperate."

古文：上以是益怜之。
现代文：因此肃宗对她更加怜爱。
English: As a result, Sozong became more sympathetic towards her.

古文：丁卯，上皇制： 以太子享充天下兵马元帅，领朔方、河东、河北、平卢节度都使，南取长安、洛阳。
现代文：丁卯，玄宗下制书说： 任命太子李亨为天下兵马元帅，统辖朔方、河东、河北、平卢节度都使，南下收复长安、洛阳。
English: Ding, Xuanzong's subordinate, wrote: Appoint Prince Li Heng as the world's marshal of soldiers and horses, supervise the armies of Shuofang, Hedong, Hebei, and Pinglu, and go south to recover Chang'an and Luoyang.

古文：以御史中丞裴冕兼左庶子，陇西郡司马刘秩试守右庶子；永王璘充山南东道、岭南、黔中、江南西道节度都使，以少府监窦绍为之傅，长沙太守李岘为都副大使；盛王琦充广陵大都督，领江南东路及淮南、河南等路节度都使，以前江陵都督府长史刘汇为之傅，广陵郡长史李成式为都副大使；丰王珙充武威都督，仍领河西、陇右、安西、北庭等路节度都使，以陇西太守济阴邓景山为之傅，充都副大使。
现代文：任命御史中丞装裴冕兼左庶子，陇西郡司马刘秩试兼右庶子；永王李为山南东道、岭南、黔中、江南西道节度都使，少府监窦绍做他的师傅，长沙太守李岘为都副大使；任命盛王李琦为广陵大都督，统辖江南东路及淮南、河南等路节度都使，前江陵都督府长史刘汇做他的师傅，广陵郡长史李成式为都副大使；任命丰王李珙为武威都督，仍然统辖河西、陇右、安西、北庭等路节度都使，陇西太守济阴人邓景山做他的师傅，并兼任都副大使。
English: He appointed Mishi Zhongzheng to be the crown prince and the left illegitimate son, and Ma Liu Ritsuchin, the county magistrate of Shaanxi, to be the right illegitimate son; Yong Wang Li to be the host of Shannan, Lingnan, Shuzhong, and the west of the Yangtze River, and the deputy governor of Shandong Province, and the deputy governor of Changsha to be the deputy ambassador of Shandong Province; appointed Sheng Wang Li to be the grand governor of Guangling Province, and the deputy governor of Jiangnan East Road and Huainan and Henan Province, and the former governor of Jiangling Province, Shi Liuhui, to be

古文：应须士马、甲仗、粮赐等，并于当路自供。
现代文：各自所需要的士卒、马匹、武器以及粮资等，都在当地征求，自行解决。
English: The men, horses, arms, provisions, etc. needed by each side were all solicited locally and settled on their own.

古文：其诸路本节度使虢王巨等并依前充使。
现代文：其他各地原来的节度使如虢王李巨等仍旧为节度使。
English: In other regions, the original festival emissaries, such as Gong Wang and Li Jiu, are still festival emissaries.

古文：其署置官属及本路郡县官，并任自简择，署讫闻奏。 
现代文：各王所需要任命的部下官吏以及所统辖地方的郡县官，可以由自己挑选，任命以后再上奏报告。 
English: The subordinate officials that each king needs to appoint, as well as the county and prefectural officials of the areas under their jurisdiction, can be selected by themselves, and the report will be submitted after the appointment.

古文：时琦、珙皆不出阁，惟璘赴镇。
现代文：当时盛王李琦、丰王李珙等都不亲身赴任，只有永王李赴镇就职。
English: At that time, Sheng Wang Li Rong, Feng Wang Li Rong and others did not personally go to the post, only Yong Wang Li went to the town to take office.

古文：置山南东道节度，领襄阳等九郡。
现代文：又设置山南东道节度使，统辖襄阳等九郡。
English: It also set up the Shannan Host Festival Envoy, with jurisdiction over nine counties including Xiangyang.

古文：升五府经略使为岭南节度，领南海等二十二郡。
现代文：升五府经略使为岭南节度使，统辖南海等二十二郡。
English: Five prefectures were elevated to the status of Lingnan Festival Delegate, with jurisdiction over 22 counties including Nanhai.

古文：升五溪经略使为黔中节度，领黔中等诸郡。
现代文：升五溪经略使为黔中节度使，统辖黔中等州郡。
English: Shengwuxi Jingliao Envoy was appointed as the envoy of the Central Party Committee of Shandong Province, with jurisdiction over Shandong Zhongzhou County.

古文：分江南为东、西二道，东道领馀杭，西道领豫章等诸郡。
现代文：分江南道为东、西二道。东道统辖余杭郡，西道统辖豫章等州郡。
English: Binjiang South Road is divided into East Road and West Road, with Yuhang County as the host county and Yuzhang and other counties as the West Road.

古文：先是四方闻潼关失守，莫知上所之，及是制下，始知乘舆所在。
现代文：以前，四方人士听说潼关失守，都不知玄宗去向，这道制书颁下后，人们才知道皇上在何处。
English: In the past, people in the four directions heard that Shaoguan was lost, but they did not know where Xuanzong went. After this book was issued, people only knew where the emperor was.

古文：汇，秩之弟也。
现代文：刘汇是刘秩的弟弟。
English: Liu Hui is Liu Chizhi's younger brother.

古文：安禄山使孙孝哲杀霍国长公主及王妃、附马等于崇仁坊，刳其心，以祭安庆宗。
现代文：安禄山让孙孝哲于长安崇仁坊杀了霍国长公主以及王妃、驸马等人，挖下他们的心肝，用来祭奠安庆宗。
English: Anlu Mountain allowed Sun Xiao Zhe to kill the eldest princess of Huo Province, as well as the princess and her horse, in Chongrenfang, Chang'an, and dug out their hearts and used them to commemorate Anqing Sect.

古文：凡杨国忠、高力士之党及禄山素所恶者皆杀之，凡八十三人，或以铁棓揭其脑盖，流血满街。
现代文：凡是杨国忠、高力士的亲信党羽以及安禄山平时憎恨的人都被杀掉，总共八十三人。有的被叛军用铁棒揭去脑盖，以至血流满街。
English: A total of eighty-three people, including Yang Guozhong, close followers of Gao Lixi, and people who were hated by Anlu Shan in peacetime, were killed. Some were decapitated with iron rods by the rebels, so that blood flowed all over the streets.

古文：己巳，又杀皇孙及郡、县主二十馀人。
现代文：己巳，叛军又杀死皇孙及郡主、县主二十余人。
English: Soon after, the rebels killed more than twenty people, including the emperor's grandson, the county head, and the county governor.

古文：庚午，上皇至巴西；太守崔涣迎谒。
现代文：庚午，玄宗到达巴西郡，太守崔涣来迎接。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Xuanzong arrived in Baxi County, and was greeted by Empress Dowager Cui Rong.

古文：上皇与语，悦之，房琯复荐之，即日，拜门下侍郎、同平章事，以韦见素为左相。
现代文：玄宗与崔涣谈话，十分欣赏他，又加上房的推荐，当天即任命他为门下侍郎、同平章事，又任命韦见素为左相。
English: Xuanzong had a conversation with Cui Yao, admired him very much, and with the recommendation of Fang, appointed him as a subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji, and appointed Wei Jiansu as the left minister on the same day.

古文：涣，玄之孙也。
现代文：崔涣是崔玄的孙子。
English: Cui Gan is the grandson of Cui Xuan.

古文：初，京兆李泌，幼以才敏著闻，玄宗使与忠王游。
现代文：当初，京兆人李泌年幼时因才华聪敏而著名，玄宗就让他与忠王李一起游玩。
English: At first, when Li Xiu, a man from Beijing, was young and famous for his talent and intelligence, Xuanzong let him play with Zhongwang Li.

古文：忠王为太子，泌已长，上书言事。
现代文：忠王被册封为太子时，李泌年岁已大，曾上书议论政事。
English: When Prince Chungwang was enthroned as crown prince, Li Xiu, who was already old, wrote a letter to discuss political affairs.

古文：玄宗欲官之，不可；使与太子为布衣交，太子常谓之先生。
现代文：玄宗想要授予他官职，被他拒绝，玄宗只好让他以平民的身份与太子为友，太子常常称他为先生。
English: Xuanzong wanted to give him an official post, but he refused. Xuanzong had no choice but to let him be friends with the prince as a commoner. The prince often called him Mr.

古文：杨国忠恶之，奏徒蕲春，后得归隐，居颍阳。
现代文：李泌的所作所为遭到杨国忠的憎恨，杨国忠上奏把他迁移到蕲春郡。后来李泌得以回到家乡，做了隐士，居住在颍阳县。
English: Li Xiu was hated by Yang Guozhong for his actions, and Yang Guozhong transferred him to Hunchun County. Later, Li Xiu was able to return to his hometown, became a hermit, and lived in Poyang County.

古文：上自马嵬北行，遣使召之，谒见于灵武，上大喜，出则联辔，寝则对榻，如为太子时，事无大小皆咨之，言无不从，至于进退将相亦与之议。
现代文：肃宗从马嵬驿北上后，派人去召李泌，李泌在灵武晋见肃宗。肃宗十分高兴，与李泌出则并马而行，寝则对榻而眠，仍然像自己做太子时那样，事无大小都要先征求李泌的意见，而且言听计从，甚至将相的任免都与他商议。
English: After Su Zong went north from Matsu, he sent someone to summon Li Xiu. Li Xiu met Su Zong in Lingwu Jin. Su Zong was very happy. When he went out with Li Xiu, they rode side by side, and when they slept, they slept on the same bed. He still sought Li Xiu's opinion on all matters, no matter how big or small, as he did when he was crown prince, and he listened to what Li Xiu had to say, and even discussed the appointment and dismissal of officials with him.

古文：上欲以泌为右相，泌固辞曰： 陛下待以宾友，则贵于宰相矣，何必屈其志！ 
现代文：肃宗想要任命李泌为右相，李泌坚辞不受，并说： 陛下像对待宾客朋友那样对待我，比任命我为宰相还要高贵，何必要违背我的意愿呢！ 
English: Su Zong wanted to appoint Li Xiu as the Right Minister, but Li Xiu was adamant and said, "Your Majesty treating me like a guest and friend is more noble than appointing me as the Prime Minister. Why do you need to go against my wishes?"

古文：上乃止。
现代文：肃宗这才作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：同罗、突厥从安禄山反者屯长安苑中，甲戌，其酋长阿史那从礼帅五千骑，窃厩马二千匹逃归朔方，谋邀结诸胡，盗据边地。
现代文：跟随安禄山举兵反叛的同罗和突阙部落军队屯驻在长安的禁苑中，甲戌，他们的酋长阿史那从礼率领五千骑兵，盗得二千匹厩马逃回朔方，阴谋联结其他胡人部落占领边疆地区。
English: The Tonglu and Tujia tribal armies that followed the Anlu Mountain to raise troops and rebel were stationed in the Forbidden Garden of Chang'an. Armor, their chieftain Ashina led five thousand cavalrymen from the ceremony, stole two thousand stable horses and fled back to the Shuo side, plotting to connect other Hu tribes to occupy the frontier area.

古文：上遣使宣慰之，降者甚众。
现代文：肃宗派使者去安抚，归降者极多。
English: Su Sect sent an envoy to appease them, and many of them surrendered.

古文：贼遣兵寇扶风，薛景仙击却之。
现代文：叛军派兵进攻扶风郡，被薛景仙击退。
English: The rebels sent troops to attack Fufeng County, but were repulsed by Xue Jingxian.

古文：安禄山遣其将高嵩以敕书、缯彩诱河、陇将士，大震关使郭英乂擒斩之。
现代文：安禄山派部将高嵩携带敕书和丝绸去诱降河西和陇右的将士，被大震关使郭英又抓获而杀死。
English: The An Lushan faction sent Gao Song to lure down the soldiers of Hexi and Shizhu with a satchel of books and silk. He was caught and killed by Guo Ying at the Great Earthquake Pass.

古文：同罗、突厥之逃归也，长安大扰，官吏窜匿，狱囚自出。
现代文：阿史那从礼率领同罗和突阙的部落军队逃回朔方后，长安大乱，官吏流窜躲藏，监狱中的囚犯也自行出逃。
English: After Ashina fled back to Shuofang from the tribal army led by Li with Luo and Turun, Chang'an was in turmoil, officials fled into hiding, and prisoners in the prison also fled on their own.

古文：京兆尹崔光远以为贼且遁矣，遣吏卒守孙孝哲宅。
现代文：京兆尹崔光远以为叛军要撤退，就派兵守住孙孝哲的住宅。
English: Beijing Zhao Yin Cui Guangyuan thought that the rebels would retreat, so he sent soldiers to guard Sun Xiao Zhe's house.

古文：孝哲以状白禄山，光远乃与长安令苏震帅府、县官十馀人来奔。
现代文：孙孝哲把此事告诉了安禄山，于是崔光远与长安县令苏震率领府、县官吏十余人来投奔朝廷。
English: Sun Xiaozhe told this to Anlu Mountain, so Cui Guangyuan and Chang'an County ordered Su Zhen to lead more than ten prefectural and county officials to the imperial court.

古文：己卯，至灵武，上以光远为御史大夫兼京兆尹，使之渭北招集吏民；以震为中丞。
现代文：己卯，到达灵武，肃宗任命崔光远为御史大夫兼京兆尹，让他去渭水北岸招集逃散的官吏民众；任命苏震为御史中丞。
English: When he arrived in Lingwu, Su Zong appointed Cui Guangyuan as Goshi Taifu and Jing Zhaoyun, and asked him to go to the north bank of Surabaya to gather the officials and people who had fled; he appointed Su Zhen as Goshi Chujo.

古文：震，瑰之孙也。
现代文：苏震是苏的孙子。
English: Su Zhen is Su's grandson.

古文：禄山以田乾真为京兆尹。
现代文：安禄山任命田乾真为京兆尹。
English: An Lushan appointed Tian Qianzhen as Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：侍御史吕諲、右拾遗杨绾、奉天令安平崔器相继诣灵武；以諲、器为御史中丞，绾为起居舍人、知制诰。
现代文：侍御史吕、右拾遗杨绾、奉天县令安平人崔器相继来到灵武投奔朝廷。肃宗任命吕、崔器为御史中丞，杨绾为起居舍人、知制诰事。
English: The attendant Shilu, the right-hand man Yang Jie, and the Anping man Choe Ji, who was ordered by Bongtian County, successively came to Lingwu to rush to the imperial court. Su Zong appointed Lu and Choe Ji as the assistant secretary of history, and Yang Jie as the living person and intellectual affairs.

古文：上命河西节度副使李嗣业将兵五千赴行在，嗣业与节度使梁宰谋，且缓师以观变。
现代文：肃宗命令河西节度副使李嗣业率兵五千赴灵武，而李嗣业与节度使梁宰商议，决定暂缓发兵以观形势的变化。
English: Su Zong ordered Li Siye, deputy envoy of the Hexi Festival, to lead five thousand soldiers to Lingwu, while Li Siye and the festival envoy Liang Zai discussed and decided to postpone the dispatch of troops to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：绥德府折冲段秀实让嗣业曰： 岂有君父告急而臣子晏然不赴者乎！
现代文：绥德府折冲都尉段秀实责备李嗣业说： 难道有君父告急而臣子安然不赴难的吗！
English: The governor of Shunde, Duan Shusi, scolded Li Shiye, saying, "Is it possible that a prince has an emergency and his vassal does not go to the emergency?"

古文：特进常自谓大丈夫，今日视之，乃儿女子耳！ 
现代文：您常常自称为大丈夫，现在来看，只不过是小儿女子罢了！ 
English: You used to say you were fine, but now you look like a child!

古文：嗣业大惭，即白宰如数发兵，以秀实自副，将之诣行在。
现代文：李嗣业听后十分惭愧，当即报告梁宰请如数发兵，并任命段秀实为自己的副将，率兵往灵武。
English: Li Siye was very ashamed after hearing this, and immediately reported to Liang Zai to send as many soldiers as possible, and appointed Duan Husi as his vice-general to lead the troops to Lingwu.

古文：上又征兵于安西；行军司马李栖筠发精兵七千人，励以忠义而遣之。
现代文：肃宗向安西征兵，安西行军司马李栖筠发精兵七千人，并勉励他们要为国效忠尽义。
English: Su Zong conscripted soldiers to Anxi, and the Anxi marching army secretary Ma Lixu sent seven thousand elite soldiers, and encouraged them to be loyal to the country.

古文：敕改扶风为凤翔郡。
现代文：肃宗下敕书改扶风郡为凤翔郡。
English: Su Zong changed Fufeng County to Fengxiang County.

古文：庚辰，上皇至成都，从官及六军至者千三百人而已。
现代文：庚辰，玄宗到达成都，随从到达的官吏及六军将士只有一千三百人。
English: When Geng Chen and Xuanzong arrived at the capital, there were only 1300 officials and soldiers from the Six Armies.

古文：令狐潮围张巡于雍丘，相守四十馀日，朝廷声问不通。
现代文：令狐潮率兵在雍丘包围张巡，张巡坚守了四十余天，与朝廷的联系断绝。
English: The fox tide led the soldiers to surround Zhang Jun in Yongqiu. Zhang Jun held out for more than forty days and cut off contact with the imperial court.

古文：潮闻玄宗已幸蜀，复以书招巡。
现代文：令狐潮得知玄宗已逃往蜀中，就又写信招降张巡。
English: When Ling Xuchao learned that Xuanzong had fled to Shuzhong, he sent another letter to Zhang Jun, inviting him to surrender.

古文：有大将六人，官皆开府、特进，白巡以兵势不敌，且上存亡不可知，不如降贼。
现代文：张巡有大将六人，官职都是开府、特进，他们劝张巡说，我们兵力弱小，难以抵御叛军，况且皇上的生死不得而知，不如投降。
English: Zhang Jun had six generals, whose official positions were Kaifu and Tejin. They advised Zhang Jun that our military strength was weak and it was difficult to resist the rebels. Moreover, the emperor's life and death was unknown, so it was better to surrender.

古文：巡阳许诺。
现代文：张巡假装许诺。
English: Zhang Jun pretended to promise.

古文：明日，堂上设天子画像，帅将士朝之，人人皆泣。
现代文：第二天，在堂上放置皇上的画像，率领将士朝拜，大家都泣不成声。
English: The next day, the emperor's portrait was placed in the hall, and the generals led the worship. Everyone was in tears.

古文：巡引六将于前，责以大义，斩之。
现代文：然后张巡把六位部将带到前面，责备他们不忠不义，并杀了他们。
English: Zhang then brought the six subordinates to the front, accused them of being disloyal and killed them.

古文：士心益劝。
现代文：从此军心更加坚定。
English: The military spirit has been further stimulated.

古文：中城矢尽，巡缚藁为人千馀，被以黑衣，夜缒城下，潮兵争射之，久乃知其藁人；得矢数十万。
现代文：城中的箭已经用尽，张巡就命令士卒用稻草扎成一千多草人，给他们穿上黑衣服，夜晚用绳子放到城下，令狐潮的军队争相射击，很久以后才知道是草人。这样智取箭数十万支。
English: The arrows in the city had been exhausted, so Zhang Jun ordered his soldiers to tie more than a thousand straw men with straw, dress them in black clothes, and put them under the city with a rope at night, so that the troops of the Fox Tide would fire at each other, and only after a long time would they know that they were straw men. In this way, hundreds of thousands of arrows were obtained.

古文：其后复夜缒人，贼笑不设备，乃以死士五百斫潮营；潮军大乱，焚垒而遁，追奔十馀里。
现代文：后来又用绳子把人放下城头，叛军大笑，还以为是草人，不加防备，于是用五百名敢死之士袭击叛军的大营，令狐潮的军队顿时大乱，烧掉营垒而逃，张巡率兵追击了十多里才返回。
English: Later, he used a rope to lower a man to the top of the castle. The rebels laughed and thought he was a grasshopper. They did not take precautions, so they attacked the rebels' camp with five hundred daredevils. The army of the Fox Tide was thrown into chaos, burned down the camp and fled. Zhang Jun and his soldiers chased them for more than ten miles before returning.

古文：潮惭，益兵围之。
现代文：令狐潮兵败，又气又恨，就又增兵把雍丘紧紧包围。
English: After the defeat of the Fox Tide soldiers, he was angry and hated, so he increased the number of soldiers to encircle Yongqiu tightly.

古文：巡使郎将雷万春于城上与潮相闻，语未绝，贼弩射之，面中六矢而不动。
现代文：张巡让郎将雷万春在城头上与令狐潮对话，叛军乘机用弩机射雷万春，雷万春脸上被射中了六处，仍旧巍然挺立不动。
English: Zhang Jun asked his son-in-law, Lei Wanchun, to have a dialogue with Ling Fuchao at the top of the castle. The rebels took the opportunity to shoot Lei Wanchun with a machine gun. Lei Wanchun was shot six times in the face, but still stood upright.

古文：潮疑其木人，使谍问之，乃大惊，遥谓巡曰： 向见雷将军，方知足下军令矣，然其如天道何！ 
现代文：令狐潮怀疑是木头人，就派兵去侦察，得知确实是雷万春，十分惊异，远远地对张巡说： 刚才看见雷将军，才知道您的军令是多么森严了，然而这对于天道又能怎样呢？ 
English: He was very surprised to learn that it was indeed Lei Wanchun. He said to Zhang Jun from a distance, "I just saw General Lei and realized how strict your military orders are. However, what does this mean for the way of heaven?

古文：巡谓之曰： 君未识人伦，焉知天道！ 
现代文：张巡回答说： 你已丧尽人伦，还有什么资格来谈论天道！ 
English: Zhang Jun replied, "You have already lost all human relations, what qualifications do you have to talk about the heavenly way!

古文：未几，出战，擒贼将十四人，斩道百馀级。
现代文：不久张巡又率兵出战，擒获叛将十四人，杀死一百余人。
English: Soon after, Zhang Jun led his troops into battle again, capturing fourteen rebel generals and killing more than a hundred people.

古文：贼乃夜遁，收兵入陈留，不敢复出。
现代文：于是叛军乘夜而逃，收兵入保陈留，不敢再出来交战。
English: As a result, the rebels fled during the night, gathered their forces and stayed in Bochen, not daring to come out to fight again.

古文：顷之，贼步骑七千馀众屯白沙涡，巡夜袭击，大破之。
现代文：不久，叛军步、骑兵七千余人进驻白沙涡，张巡夜间率兵袭击，大败叛军。
English: Soon, more than seven thousand rebels on foot and horseback were stationed in Baisha vortex. Zhang Jun led the troops to attack at night and defeated the rebels.

古文：还，至桃陵，遇贼救兵四百馀人，悉擒之。
现代文：张巡回军到桃陵，又与四百余名叛军救兵相遇，全部将其俘虏。
English: Zhang's roving army arrived at Taoling, where they encountered more than four hundred rebel rescuers, all of whom were taken prisoner.

古文：分别其众，妫、檀及胡兵，悉斩之；荥阳、陈留胁从兵，皆散令归业。
现代文：张巡把这些叛军分开，将其中的妫州、檀州兵以及胡人全部杀掉，荥阳、陈留的胁从兵则予以遣散，令他们各归其业。
English: Zhang Jun separated these rebels and killed all of them, including the soldiers from Zhangzhou, Danzhou, and Hu, while the soldiers from Shenyang and Chenlu were disbanded and allowed to return to their respective occupations.

古文：旬日间，民去贼来归者万馀户。
现代文：十日之间，民众脱离叛军来归附张巡的达一万余户。
English: Within ten days, more than ten thousand households had left the rebels to join Zhang Zhan.

古文：河北诸郡犹为唐守，常山太守王俌欲降贼，诸将怒，因击球，纵马践杀之。
现代文：河北地区的大多数州郡还在为唐朝而坚守着，常山太守王想要投向叛军，其他将领得知后大为愤怒，就借玩马球的机会，纵马踩死了他。
English: Most of the prefectures and counties in Hebei are still holding out for the Tang Dynasty. Changshan Taizhou Wang wanted to join the rebels, and the other generals were very angry when they found out. They took the opportunity to play polo and trampled him to death.

古文：时信都太守乌承恩麾下有朔方兵三千人，诸将遣使者宗仙运帅父老诣信都，迎承恩镇常山。
现代文：当时信都太守乌承恩部下有三千朔方兵，常山诸将派使者宗仙运带领当地父老往信都，邀请乌承恩率兵来镇守常山。
English: At that time, there were three thousand soldiers under the command of Wu Cheng'en, the governor of Xindu. The Changshan generals sent an envoy, Zong Xianyun, to lead the local elders to Xindu and invite Wu Cheng'en and his soldiers to defend Changshan.

古文：承恩辞以无诏命，仙运说承恩曰： 常山地控燕、蓟，路通河、洛，有井陉之险，足以扼其咽喉。
现代文：乌承恩以没有诏命为由而拒绝。宗仙运劝乌承恩说： 常山是战略要地，北控燕、蓟地区，南通河南、洛阳，并且有井陉关之险，占据这一要地就等于扼住了叛军的咽喉。
English: Wu Cheng'en refused on the grounds that there was no imperial decree. Zong Xianyun persuaded Wu Cheng'en to say: Changshan is a strategic place, controlling Yan and Handan regions in the north, Henan and Luoyang in the south, and there is a risk of the well being cut off. Occupying this important place is tantamount to strangling the rebels.

古文：顷属车驾南迁，李大夫收军退守晋阳，王太守权统后军，欲举城降贼，众心不从，身首异处。
现代文：前不久因为皇上向南去避难，李光弼大夫收兵退守晋阳，王太守暂时统领后军，想要举城投降叛贼，违背民意，以至身首异处。
English: Not long ago, because the emperor went to the south to take refuge, Dr. Li Guangya withdrew his troops and retreated to Jinyang. Wang Taimou temporarily led the rear army and wanted to surrender the city to the traitors, which was against the will of the people. As a result, his head was severed.

古文：大将军兵精气肃，远近莫敌，若以家国为念，移据常山，与大夫首尾相应，则洪勋盛烈，孰与为比！
现代文：大将军您兵强马壮，军令严明，天下无敌，如果能够以国家利益为重，移军常山，与李大夫遥相呼应，那么大功大勋，无人可比。
English: General, your soldiers are strong and powerful, your military orders are strict, and you are invincible in the world. If you can put the national interests first and move the army to Changshan, echoing Dr. Li, then you have done a great service, and no one can compare.

古文：若疑而不行，又不设备，常山既陷，信都岂能独全！ 
现代文：如果还犹豫不决，又不加防备，常山如果落入敌手，信都如何能够保全！ 
English: If you still hesitate, and do not take precautions, if Changshan falls into the enemy's hands, how can the letter be preserved!

古文：承恩不从。
现代文：乌承恩不听。
English: Wu Cheng'en did not listen.

古文：仙运又曰： 将军不纳鄙夫之言，必惧兵少故也。
现代文：宗仙运又说： 将军不听从我的劝告，一定是害怕兵力单薄的缘故。
English: Zong Xianyun also said: "The general did not listen to my advice, it must have been because he was afraid of the thin armed forces.

古文：今人不聊生，咸思报国，竞相结聚，屯据乡村，若悬赏招之，不旬日十万可致；与朔方甲士三千馀人相参用之，足成王事。
现代文：现在民不聊生，都想报效国家，竞相聚结为兵，屯乡据村以自保，如果能够悬赏招集，用不了十天就可集兵十万，再与您部下的三千朔方兵相互参用，一定能够成就大事。
English: Now, the people do not want to be bored, they all want to serve the country, compete with each other to gather as soldiers, stay in their hometowns and villages for self-protection. If you can offer rewards for recruitment, you can collect 100,000 soldiers in less than ten days, and then participate with the 3,000 soldiers under your command, you will surely be able to achieve great things.

古文：若舍要害以授人，居四通而自安，譬如倒持剑戟，取败之道也。 
现代文：如果放弃常山这样的要害之地不去占据，而拱手送给叛军，而自己占据着信都这样四通八达无险可守的地方想要保全，那无异于倒持剑戟与敌交战，必定会失败。 
English: If you give up such a critical place as Changshan and do not occupy it, but hand it over to the rebels, and if you want to protect such a well-connected and safe place as Xinyu, it is tantamount to fighting the enemy with the sword and sickle upside down, and you will surely fail.

古文：承恩竟疑不决。
现代文：乌承恩还是犹豫不决。
English: Wu Cheng'en still hesitates.

古文：承恩，承玼族兄也。
现代文：乌承恩是乌承的族兄。
English: Wu Cheng'en is Wu Cheng's older brother.

古文：是月，史思明、蔡希德将兵万人南攻九门。
现代文：本月，史思明与蔡希德率兵一万南攻九门。
English: This month, Shi Siming and Cai Xide led an army of ten thousand south to attack nine gates.

古文：旬日，九门伪降，伏甲于城上。
现代文：攻了十天，九门士卒假装投降，伏兵于城上。
English: After attacking for ten days, the nine soldiers pretended to surrender and ambushed the soldiers on the castle.

古文：思明登城，伏兵攻之；思明坠城，鹿角伤其左胁，夜，奔博陵。
现代文：史思明登城，中了埋伏，从城头上掉了下来，被埋在城下的树枝刺伤了左胁，连夜逃奔博陵。
English: Shi Siming entered the city, was ambushed, fell from the top of the city, was stabbed by a tree branch buried under the city, and fled to Boling overnight.

古文：颜真卿以蜡丸达表于灵武。
现代文：颜真卿派使者把蜡丸密封表书送到灵武。
English: Yan Zhenqing sent an emissary to deliver the wax round sealed form to Lingwu.

古文：以真卿为工部尚书兼御史大夫，依前河北招讨、采访、处置使，并致赦书，亦以蜡丸达之。
现代文：肃宗任命颜真卿为工部尚书兼御史大夫，仍为河北招讨、采访、处置使，又下赦书，也用蜡丸密封送达颜真卿。
English: Su Zong appointed Yan Zhenqing as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry and also the chief historian, and he was still the envoy of Hebei Province to solicit, interview and deal with, and he also issued a letter of pardon, and also sent Yan Zhenqing with a wax ball seal.

古文：真卿颁下河北诸郡，又遣人颁于河南、江、淮。
现代文：颜真卿把赦书颁下河北地区的郡州，同时又派人颁下河南与江、淮地区的各郡。
English: Yan Zhenqing issued the pardon to counties and prefectures in the Hebei region, and also sent people to issue it to counties in the Henan, Jiangsu and Huaihai regions.

古文：由是诸道始知上即位于灵武，徇国之心益坚矣。
现代文：因此各地才知道肃宗已于灵武即帝位，为国坚守抗击叛军的信心更加坚决了。
English: As a result, people all over the country came to know that Su Zong had ascended to the throne, and their confidence to stand firm against the rebels for the sake of the country became even more resolute.

古文：郭子仪等将兵五万自河北至灵武，灵武军威始盛，人有兴复之望矣。
现代文：郭子仪等率兵五万从河北到达灵武，灵武的军势开始强盛，人们才觉得大唐的复兴有了希望。
English: Guo Ziyi and others led fifty thousand soldiers from Hebei to Lingwu. Lingwu's military strength began to flourish, and people felt that there was hope for the revival of Datang.

古文：八月，壬午朔，以子仪为武部尚书、灵武长史，以李光弼为户部尚书、北都留守，并同平章事，馀如故。
现代文：八月壬午朔，肃宗任命郭子仪为武部尚书、灵武长史，李光弼为户部尚书、北都留守，二人并同平章事，其他所任的职务仍如旧。
English: In the early afternoon of August, Su Zong appointed Guo Ziyi as the secretary of the military department and the chief historian of Lingwu, and Li Guangyao as the secretary of the household department and stayed in the north. Both of them worked together, and the other positions they held were still the same.

古文：光弼以景城、河间兵五千赴太原。
现代文：李光弼率领景城、河间兵五千赴太原。
English: Li Guangyao led 5,000 soldiers from Jingcheng and Hema to Taiyuan.

古文：先是，河东节度使王承业军政不修，朝廷遣待御史崔众交其兵，寻遣中使诛之；众侮易承业，光弼素不平。
现代文：先前，河东节度使王承业不理军务，朝廷派待御史崔众收缴了他的兵权，不久又派宦官杀了他。崔众曾经侮辱王承业，李光弼早就心中不平。
English: Previously, the Hedong Festival had made Wang Chengye ignore military affairs, and the imperial court had dispatched the imperial troops to seize his military power, and soon dispatched eunuchs to kill him. The imperial troops had insulted Wang Chengye, and Li Guangya had long been uneasy.

古文：至是，敕交兵于光弼，众见光弼，不为礼，又不时交兵，光弼怒，收斩之，军中股栗。
现代文：这时，肃宗下敕书命令崔众把兵权交给李光弼，而崔众见李光弼后，不作礼，也不按时交出兵权，李光弼十分愤怒，就把崔众抓起来杀了，因此军中都十分畏惧李光弼。
English: At this time, Su Zong issued an imperial edict ordering Cui Zong to hand over the military power to Li Guangyao. However, when Cui Zong saw Li Guangyao, he did not bow and did not hand over the military power on time. Li Guangyao was very angry and arrested Cui Zong and killed him. Therefore, the army was very afraid of Li Guangyao.

古文：回纥可汗、吐蕃赞普相继遣使请助国讨贼，宴赐而遣之。
现代文：回纥可汗与吐蕃赞普相继派遣使节来请求派兵帮助唐朝讨伐叛军，肃宗宴请赏赐了他们后遣回。
English: Huizong Khan and Tubo Zampu successively sent envoys to request the dispatch of troops to help the Tang Dynasty fight the rebels. They were rewarded with a solemn banquet and then sent back.

古文：癸未，上皇下制，赦天下。
现代文：癸未，玄宗下制书，大赦天下。
English: 未, Xuan Zong's book production, amnesty to the world.

古文：北海太守贺兰进明遣录事参军第五琦入蜀奏事，琦言于上皇，以为： 今方用兵，财赋为急，财赋所产，江、淮居多，乞假臣一职，可使军无乏用。 
现代文：北海太守贺兰进明派录事参军第五琦入蜀中奏事，第五琦对玄宗说： 现在正是国家用兵之机，财赋十分重要，而财赋大多出自江、淮地区，请求任命我一个职务，可以保证军用充足。 
English: The governor of the North Sea, Helan Jinming, sent a record of his enlistment to the army to the fifth generation in Shuzhong. The fifth generation said to Xuanzong: Now is the time for the state to use soldiers. Wealth is very important, and most of the wealth comes from the Jiang and Huai regions. I request that you appoint me to a position that can ensure military sufficiency.

古文：上皇悦，即以琦为监察御史、江淮租庸使。
现代文：玄宗很高兴，即任命第五琦为监察御史、江淮租庸使。
English: Xuanzong was very pleased to appoint the fifth generation as the inspector general of history and the Jianghuai rent yong envoy.

古文：史思明再攻九门，辛卯，克之，所杀数千人；引兵东围藁城。
现代文：史思明再一次率兵攻打九门，辛卯，九门城陷，被杀数千人。史思明又领兵向东包围了藁城。
English: Once again, Shi Siming led troops to attack Jiumen, Xinwu, Jiumen fell, thousands of people were killed. Shi Siming also led troops to the east to encircle Shicheng.

古文：李庭望将蕃、汉二万馀人东袭宁陵、襄邑，夜，去雍丘城三十里置营。张巡帅短兵三千掩击，大破之，杀获太半。
现代文：李庭望率领蕃汉兵二万余人向东袭击宁陵与襄邑，夜里在雍丘城外三十里处宿营，遭到张巡率领的三千名手持短兵器的士卒袭击，叛军大败，死伤大半。
English: Li Tingwang led more than twenty thousand Han soldiers to attack Ningling and Xiangyue to the east. At night, they camped thirty miles outside the city of Yongqiu. They were attacked by three thousand soldiers armed with short weapons led by Zhang Jun. The rebels were defeated, with most of them killed or wounded.

古文：庭望收军夜遁。
现代文：李庭望收兵连夜而逃。
English: Li Tingwang withdrew his troops and fled overnight.

古文：癸巳，灵武使者至蜀，上皇喜曰： 吾儿应天顺人，吾复何忧！ 
现代文：癸巳，灵武派出的使者到了蜀中，玄宗高兴地说： 我儿子顺应天命人心，即皇帝位，我还有什么忧愁的呢！ 
English: Soon after, the emissary sent by Lingwu arrived in Shuzhong, and Xuanzong said happily: "My son has obeyed the will of Heaven, that is, the emperor's throne, so what do I have to be sad about?

古文：丁酉，制： 自今改制敕为诰，表疏称太上皇。
现代文：丁酉，玄宗下制书说： 从今以后改制敕为诰令，所上的表疏称太上皇。
English: Emperor Xuanzong, who issued the edict, said, "From now on, the imperial edict will be called the imperial edict, and the imperial edict will be called the imperial edict."

古文：四海军国事，皆先取皇帝进止，仍奏朕知；俟克复上京，朕不复预事。 
现代文：国家的军政大事都先听侯皇帝的处置，然后再奏报朕知即可。等收复京城后，朕就不再参预政事。 
English: The military and political events of the country should first listen to the disposition of the Hou Emperor, and then report to me. After the recovery of Beijing, I will no longer participate in pre-election politics.

古文：己亥，上皇临轩，命韦见素、房琯、崔涣奉传国宝玉册诣灵武传位。
现代文：己亥，玄宗亲临殿前的台阶，命令韦见素、房与崔涣奉送传国宝器与玉册往灵武传皇帝位。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuanzong personally came to the steps in front of the hall and ordered Wei Mingsu, Fang and Cui Wei to send the national treasure and the jade scroll to Lingwu to pass on the imperial throne.

古文：辛丑，史思明陷藁城。
现代文：辛丑，史思明攻陷藁城。
English: Sin Ug, Shi Siming captured Lucheng.

古文：初，上皇每酺宴，先设太常雅乐坐部、立部，继以鼓吹、胡乐、教坊、府县散乐、杂戏；又以山车、陆船载乐往来；又出宫人舞《霓裳羽衣》；又教舞马百匹，衔杯上寿；又引犀、象入场，或拜，或舞。
现代文：当初，玄宗每当聚会设宴时，先让太常雅乐的坐部和立部演奏，继后的是鼓吹曲、胡人乐，教坊、京兆府长安与万年两县的散乐以及杂戏；又让作成山状的山车和旱船载着乐队来来往往演奏；又让宫女表演《霓裳羽衣舞》；又让一百匹舞马嘴里衔杯跳舞祝寿；又让犀牛和大象入场跳舞礼拜。
English: In the beginning, whenever the Emperor Xuanzong held a banquet, he first had the sitting and standing sections of the Taizhong classical music played, followed by the trumpet music, the Hu folk music, the teaching workshop, the folk music of Chang'an and the two counties of Beijing and Shandong, and the miscellaneous drama; he also had the mountain-shaped roller coaster and the dry boat carrying the band come and go to play; he also had the court maiden perform the "Dance of the Feather Dress"; he also had a hundred dancing horses dance with cups in their mouths to celebrate his birthday; he also had the rhinoceros and the elephant enter the stage to

古文：安禄山见而悦之，既克长安，命搜捕乐工，运载乐器、舞衣，驱舞马、犀、象皆诣洛阳。
现代文：安禄山观看后很喜欢，攻克长安，就命令部下搜捕乐工，运送乐器、舞衣，驱赶舞马、犀牛和大象，全部到洛阳。
English: After watching Anlu Mountain, he liked it very much. After conquering Chang'an, he ordered his subordinates to search for musicians, transport musical instruments, dance clothes, drive dancing horses, rhinoceroses and elephants, all to Luoyang.

古文：臣光曰：圣人以道德为丽，仁义为乐；故虽茅茨土阶，恶衣菲食，不耻其陋，惟恐奉养之过以劳民费财。
现代文：臣司马光曰：圣人都以道德为美，以仁义为乐；所以他们虽然住在以茅草作顶，黄土为台的房屋中，穿粗糙的衣服，吃菲薄的饭食，但不以简陋为耻，只是担心自己生活太奢侈而劳民伤财。
English: Minister Sima Guang said, "Sages all regard morality as beauty and benevolence as joy; therefore, although they live in houses with thatch roofs and loess floors, wear coarse clothes, and eat meager meals, they are not ashamed of their simplicity, but are only worried that their lives are too luxurious and their labor is hurting the people's wealth."

古文：明皇恃其承平，不思后患，殚耳目之玩，穷声技之巧，自谓帝王富贵皆不我如，欲使前莫能及，后无以逾，非徒娱己，亦以夸人。
现代文：唐玄宗自认为天下太平，想不到会有后患，遍享耳目的欢娱，极尽歌舞精巧，认为帝王富贵都不如他，想使前无古人，后无来者，不只是娱乐自己，也借以向他人炫耀。
English: Tang Xuan Zong thought that the world was at peace, he did not expect that there would be future troubles, he enjoyed the pleasure of his ears, he was extremely skillful in singing and dancing, he thought that the emperor was not as rich as him, and he wanted to make the ancients and newcomers not only entertain themselves, but also show off to others.

古文：岂知大盗在旁，已有窥窬之心，卒致銮舆播越，生民涂炭。
现代文：却不知道强盗就在身旁，觊觎着帝王的宝座，以致最后落得仓皇出逃，生灵涂炭。
English: But he didn't know that the robber was right next to him, holding the emperor's throne, so that he ended up running away in a panic, leaving everyone in the lurch.

古文：乃知人君崇华靡以示人，适足为大盗之招也。
现代文：由此可知，君王如果一味地追求豪华奢侈的生活，并向他人夸耀，只能招来强盗。
English: From this it can be seen that if the king is blindly pursuing a luxurious life and boasting to others, he can only attract robbers.

古文：禄山宴其群臣于凝碧池，盛奏众乐；梨园弟子往往歔欷泣下，贼皆露刃睨之。
现代文：安禄山于凝碧池宴请他的臣下，盛奏各种乐曲，梨园弟子往往欷哭泣，叛军则都露着刀，斜着眼监视。
English: An Lushan invited his vassals to a banquet at Geibi Pond and played a variety of music. The disciples of Liyuan often cried, and the rebels all wore swords and watched with slanted eyes.

古文：乐工雷海清不胜悲愤，掷乐器于地，西向恸哭。
现代文：乐工雷海清不胜悲痛，把乐器扔在地上，向西痛哭。
English: Musician Lei Haiqing was overcome with grief. He threw his instruments on the ground and wept bitterly.

古文：禄山怒，缚于试马殿前，支解之。
现代文：安禄山大为愤怒，命令把雷海清捆在试马殿前，支解了他的身体。
English: Enraged, An Lushan ordered that Lei Haiqing be tied up in front of the Hall of Trial Horses, and his body was dismembered.

古文：禄山闻向日百姓乘乱多盗库物，既得长安，命大索三日，并其私财尽掠之。
现代文：安禄山听说长安城陷时老百姓多趁乱盗窃府库中的财物，攻克长安后，命令部下大肆搜索三天，连百姓的私有财物都被掠夺一空。
English: Anlu Mountain heard that when Chang'an fell, the common people took advantage of the disorderly theft of property in the government treasury. After conquering Chang'an, he ordered his subordinates to search for three days, and even the private property of the people was plundered.

古文：又令府县推按，铢两之物无不穷治，连引搜捕，支蔓无穷，民间骚然，益思唐室。
现代文：又命令府县官审讯逼供，一点财物都要穷追，并大肆搜捕，株连极多，以至民不安生，更加思念大唐王朝。
English: He also ordered the prefectural and county officials to interrogate and force confessions, chase every bit of property, and conduct a large-scale search and arrest. There were so many companies that the people were worried about their lives and missed the Great Tang Dynasty even more.

古文：自上离马嵬北行，民间相传太子北收兵来取长安，长安民日夜望之，或时相惊曰： 太子大军至矣！ 
现代文：自从肃宗离开了马嵬驿北上以后，民间都传言说太子已北上集兵要来收复长安，长安市民翘首盼望，有时人们在一起惊呼： 太子大军来了！ 
English: Ever since Su Zong left Magong to go north, the people have been spreading rumors that the prince has gone north to gather troops to recapture Chang'an. The citizens of Chang'an are full of hope. Sometimes people exclaim together: The prince's army is coming!

古文：则皆走，市里为空，贼望见北方尘起，辄惊欲走。
现代文：然后就全都跑散，市里为之一空。叛军如果看见北方扬起的沙尘，就会惊恐地想要逃走。
English: Then they all ran away and the city was empty. If the rebels saw the dust rising in the north, they would be terrified and want to run away.

古文：京畿豪杰往往杀贼官吏，遥应官军；诛而复起，相继不绝，贼不能制。
现代文：京畿地区的豪杰常常杀掉叛军所任命的官吏，与官军遥相呼应。豪杰被镇压后又起，层出不穷，叛军无法制止。
English: The heroes of the Gyeonggi region often killed the officials appointed by the rebels, echoing the official army. After the heroes were suppressed, they rose again and again, and the rebels could not stop them.

古文：其始自京畿、鄜、坊至于岐、陇皆附之，至是西门之外率为敌垒，贼兵力所及者，南不出武关，北不过云阳，西不过武功。
现代文：从京畿、州、坊州开始，一直到岐州、陇州都起来响应。这时长安城的西门以外都变成了战场，叛军兵力所能控制的地区，南不出武关，北不过云阳，西不越武功。
English: From Gyeonggi, Jeonju, and Bongju, all the way to Gyeongju and Jeonju, people rose up to respond. At this time, everything outside the west gate of Chang'an City became a battlefield. In the areas that could be controlled by the rebel forces, there was no Wuguan in the south, only Yunyang in the north, and no Wugong in the west.

古文：江、淮奏请贡献之蜀、之灵武者，皆自襄阳取上津路抵扶风，道路无壅，皆薛景仙之功也。
现代文：江、淮地区的奏疏以及贡献的物资往蜀中和灵武，都从襄阳取道上津抵达扶风，道路畅通无阻，这都是薛景仙的功绩。
English: The Song and Song dynasties in the Jiangsu and Huai'an regions, as well as the materials contributed to Shuzhong and Lingwu, all arrived in Fufeng from Xiangyang via Shangjin, and the roads were unimpeded. These are all the achievements of Xue Jingxian.

古文：九月，壬子，史思明围赵郡，丙辰，拔之；又围常山，旬日，城陷，杀数千人。
现代文：九月壬子，史思明率兵包围赵郡。丙辰，攻陷赵郡。然后又包围了常山，十天后常山城陷，被杀数千人。
English: In September, Jinzi and Shi Siming led their troops to encircle Zhao County. In Hunchun, they captured Zhao County. They then encircled Changshan. Ten days later, Changshan fell, and thousands of people were killed.

古文：建宁王倓，性英果，有才略，从上自马嵬北行，兵众寡弱，屡逢寇盗。亻炎自选骁勇，居上前后，血战以卫上。
现代文：建宁王李性格英豪果断，有雄才大略，跟随肃宗从马嵬驿北上时，兵力寡少，屡逢强盗，李就亲自挑选了一批骁勇善战之士，走在肃宗的前后，浴血奋战保卫肃宗。
English: King Li of Jianning was a heroic and decisive character with great talent. When he followed Su Zong north from Matsu, he had a small army and was often attacked by bandits. Li personally selected a group of brave and good fighters to walk in front of and behind Su Zong and fight hard to defend Su Zong.

古文：上或过时求食，倓悲泣不自胜，军中皆属目向之。
现代文：有时肃宗过了吃饭的时间还未进食，李总是悲泣不已，所以很得军心。
English: Sometimes Su Zong did not eat after the meal time, Li was always in tears, so he was very conscientious.

古文：上欲以倓为天下兵马元帅，使统诸将东征，李泌曰： 建宁诚元帅才；然广平，兄也。若建宁功成，岂可使广平为吴太伯乎！ 
现代文：肃宗想任命李为天下兵马元帅，让他统帅诸将东征，李泌说： 建宁王李确实有元帅之才，但是广平王李是兄长，如果让建宁王李功成名垂，广平王李岂不是要像周朝的吴太伯那样让位吗！ 
English: Su Zong wanted to appoint Li as the marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and have him command all the generals on the eastward march. Li Xiu said: Jianning Wang Li does have the talent of a marshal, but Guangping Wang Li is the elder brother. If Jianning Wang Li were to become famous, wouldn't Guangping Wang Li have to give way like Wu Taibo of the Zhou Dynasty!

古文：上曰： 广平，冢嗣也，何必以元帅为重！ 
现代文：肃宗说： 广平王李是嫡长子，将来要继承皇位，何必把元帅之职看得那么重呢！ 
English: Su Zong said: Guangping Wang Li is the eldest legitimate son, and he will inherit the throne in the future. Why should he attach so much importance to the post of marshal?

古文：泌曰： 广平未正位东宫。
现代文：李泌说： 广平王虽然是嫡长子，但还没有册封为太子。
English: Li Xiu said: Although Guangping Wang is the eldest son, he has not yet been crowned as the crown prince.

古文：今天下艰难，众心所属，在于元帅。
现代文：现在天下战乱，众心所向，在于元帅。
English: Now the world is at war, and everyone's heart goes out to the field marshal.

古文：若建宁大功既成，陛下虽欲不以为储副，同立功者其肯已乎！
现代文：如果建宁王大功已成，陛下虽然不想立他为太子，与他一起建功立业的人肯答应吗？
English: If Jianning Wang's great achievement has been accomplished, although His Majesty does not want to appoint him as the crown prince, will the people who have made achievements with him agree?

古文：太宗、上皇，即其事也。 
现代文：太宗和太上皇就是典型的例子。 
English: Emperor Taizong and Emperor Taizong are typical examples.

古文：上乃以广平王亻叔为天下兵马元帅，诸将皆以属焉。
现代文：于是肃宗就任命广平王李为天下兵马元帅，诸位将领都由他指挥。
English: As a result, Su Zong appointed Guangping Wang Li as the world's marshal of soldiers and horses, and all generals were commanded by him.

古文：倓闻之，谢泌曰： 此固倓之心也！ 
现代文：建宁王李得知此事后，感谢李泌说： 这本是我的心意！ 
English: After Jianning Wang Li learned about this, he thanked Li Xiu and said: This was my intention!

古文：上与泌出行军，军士指之，窃言曰： 衣黄者，圣人也。衣白者，山人也。 
现代文：肃宗与李泌出外行军，军士都指着他们私下说： 穿黄衣服的是圣人，穿白衣服的是山中隐士。 
English: Su Zong and Li Jie marched out, and the sergeants pointed at them and said privately, "Those who wear yellow clothes are saints, and those who wear white clothes are mountain hermits."

古文：上闻之，以告泌，曰： 艰难之际，不敢相屈以官，且衣紫袍以绝群疑。 
现代文：肃宗听说后，就告诉了李泌，并说： 现在是战乱时期，我不敢违背您的意志委以官职，但应该暂时着紫袍以防止众人猜疑。 
English: When Su Zong heard about this, he told Li Xiu and said, "This is a time of war, I dare not entrust you with an official post against your will, but you should temporarily wear a purple robe to prevent suspicion from the public.

古文：泌不得已，受之；服之，入谢。
现代文：李泌不得已，只好接受了紫袍。
English: Li Jing had no choice but to accept the purple robe.

古文：上笑曰： 既服此，岂可无名称！ 
现代文：穿上紫袍后，李泌入宫谢恩，肃宗笑着说： 您既已身着朝服，怎么可以没有名称呢！ 
English: After putting on the purple robe, Li gave thanks for entering the palace. Su Zong smiled and said, "Since you are already wearing the imperial robe, how can you not have a name?"

古文：出怀中敕，以泌为侍谋军国、元帅府行军长史。
现代文：于是就从怀中拿出了敕书，任命李泌为待谋军国、元帅府行军长史。
English: Therefore, he took the imperial edict out of his pocket and appointed Li Xiu as the commander-in-chief of the army and marshal of the army.

古文：泌固辞，上曰： 朕非敢相臣，以济艰难耳。
现代文：李泌坚辞不受，肃宗说： 朕不敢以宰相一职难为您，只是想任命这一职务以度过眼下的艰难时期。
English: Su Zong said: "I don't dare to make the post of prime minister difficult for you, but I just want to appoint this post to get through the current difficult period.

古文：俟贼平，任行高志。 
现代文：等平定叛乱后，就满足您归隐的志向。 
English: After quelling the rebellion, it will satisfy your desire to return to seclusion.

古文：泌乃受之。
现代文：李泌这才接受。
English: It was only then that Li Jie accepted.

古文：置元帅府于禁中，亻叔入则泌在府，泌入亻叔亦如之。
现代文：肃宗于宫中设置了元帅府，如果广平王李入宫，李泌就留在府中，如果李泌入宫，李就留在府中。
English: Su Zong set up the marshal's office in the palace. If Guangping Wang Li entered the palace, Li Xiu would stay in the office. If Li Xiu entered the palace, Li Xiu would stay in the office.

古文：泌又言于上曰： 诸将畏惮天威，在陛下前敷陈军事，或不能尽所怀；万一小差，为害甚大。
现代文：李泌又对肃宗说： 诸位将领畏惧陛下的天威，在陛下面前陈述军务大事时，常常因拘束不能尽兴，万一出现了小的差错，将会召致极大的损失。
English: Li Xiu also said to Su Zong, "All of you generals are afraid of your majesty's divine power. When you present military affairs in front of your majesty, you are often restrained from enjoying yourself. If there is a small mistake, it will cause great losses.

古文：乞先令与臣及广平熟议，臣与广平从容奏闻，可者行之，不可者已之。 
现代文：请求先向我与广平王商议，然后再向陛下报告，可行的就命令执行，不可行的就加以否决，肃宗同意。
English: The request was first discussed with Guangping Wang, and then reported to His Majesty. If it is feasible, the order will be executed. If it is not feasible, it will be vetoed. The Emperor agreed.

古文：上许之。时军旅务繁，四方奏报，自昏至晓无虚刻，上悉使送府，泌先开视，有急切者及烽火，重封，隔门通进，馀则待明。
现代文：当时军务繁忙，各地所上的奏疏整夜不断，肃宗让全部送到元帅府，由李泌先打开批阅，如果有紧急事情或烽火战报，李泌就加以重封，隔门传进宫中，其他不重要的事情就等到天亮后再奏报。
English: At that time, military affairs were busy, and reports from all over the country continued throughout the night. Su Zong sent them all to the marshal's office, and Li Xiu opened the approval first. If there was an urgent matter or a bonfire report, Li Xiu would reseal it and pass it through the next door into the palace. Other unimportant matters would wait until after dawn to be reported.

古文：禁门钥契，悉委亻叔与泌掌之。
现代文：肃宗还把宫门的钥匙和符契全部委托给广平王李与李泌掌管。
English: Su Zong also entrusted the keys and deeds of the palace gate to Guangping Wang Li and Li Xiu.

古文：阿史那从礼说诱九姓府、六胡州诸胡数万众，聚于经略军北，将寇朔方，上命郭子仪诣天德军发兵讨之。
现代文：同罗与突厥酋长阿史那从礼引诱九姓府与六胡州的诸部落胡人数万，聚集在经略军北边，准备侵略朔方，肃宗命令朔方节度使郭子仪到天德军发兵讨伐。
English: Tong Luo and the Turkic chieftain Ashina lured tens of thousands of Hu people from the Nine-Surname-Fu and the Six-Huzhou tribes, gathered in the north of the Economic-Strategic Army, and prepared to invade the Shuo side. Su Zong ordered the Shuo side to make Guo Ziyi send troops to the Tian De Army.

古文：左武锋使仆固怀恩之子玢别将兵与虏战，兵败，降之；既而复逃归，怀恩叱而斩之。
现代文：左武锋使仆固怀恩的儿子仆固玢另率兵与胡人交战，兵败而降，不久又逃了回来，被仆固怀恩责骂后杀掉。
English: Zuo Wu Feng sent Gu Hui's servant Gu Hui's son Gu Gu Yaotong to lead another army to fight the Hu people. He was defeated and surrendered, but soon escaped and returned. He was scolded and killed by Gu Hui's servant.

古文：将士股栗，无不一当百，遂破同罗。
现代文：所以其余的将士都十分畏惧，作战时奋勇争先，以一当百，于是打败了同罗。
English: Therefore, the rest of the soldiers were very afraid, and fought bravely to be the first in the battle, with one being one hundred, so they defeated Tongluo.

古文：上虽用朔方之众，欲借兵于外夷以张军势，以豳王守礼之子承寀为敦煌王，与仆固怀恩使于回纥以请兵。
现代文：肃宗虽然依靠朔方镇的兵力平叛，但还想要借外夷的兵力以壮大威势，于是就封王李守礼的儿子李承为敦煌王，与仆固怀恩一起去回纥借兵。
English: Although Su Zong relied on the military strength of Shuo Fang Town to suppress the rebellion, he also wanted to use the military strength of the foreign Yi to strengthen his power, so he appointed the son of the king Li Shouli, Li Cheng, as the king of Dunhuang, and went back to Lop Nur with his servant Gu Wai Yan to borrow soldiers.

古文：又发拔汗那兵，且使转谕城郭诸国，许以厚赏，使从安西兵入援。
现代文：又征发拔汗那的兵众，并让他转告西域各国，许以重赏，让他们跟随安西兵一起入援。
English: He also conscripted the soldiers of Bajang and ordered them to inform the countries in the western region, promising them a large reward if they would follow the Anxi soldiers to join the relief effort.

古文：李泌劝上： 且幸彭原，俟西北兵将至，进幸扶风以应之；于时庸调亦集，可以赡军。 
现代文：李泌劝肃宗说： 不如暂时先到彭原，等所征的西北地区的兵到后，再前往到扶风以接应他们，那时丝织品、布帛等庸调也到了，可以供应军队。 
English: Li Jie advised Su Zong: It would be better to go to Pengyuan first for a while, wait for the soldiers from the northwest region to arrive, and then go to Fu Feng to meet them. At that time, silk, cloth and other mediocre goods would also arrive, and the army could be supplied.

古文：上从之。
现代文：肃宗同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：戊辰，发灵武。
现代文：戊辰，肃宗从灵武出发。
English: Boshin, Suzon depart from Lingwu.

古文：内侍边令诚复自贼中逃归，上斩之。
现代文：内侍宦官边令诚从叛军中逃回，被肃宗杀掉。
English: The imperial eunuch, Bianlingcheng, fled back from the rebels and was killed by Su Zong.

古文：丙子，上至顺化。
现代文：丙子，肃宗到达顺化郡。
English: He Zi, Su Zong arrived in Hue County.

古文：韦见素等至自成都，奉上宝册，上不肯受，曰： 比以中原未靖，权总百官，岂敢乘危，遽为传袭！ 
现代文：韦见素等人从成都到达，奉上传国宝器和玉册，肃宗不肯接受，并说： 近来因为中原地区战乱，所以暂时管理百官，怎么敢乘此危机时刻，立刻就继承皇位呢！ 
English: Wei Jingsu and others arrived from Chengdu and were presented with the national treasures and the jade scroll. Su Zong refused to accept them and said, "Recently, because of the war in the Central Plains, I have temporarily managed hundreds of officials. How dare you take advantage of this time of crisis and immediately succeed to the throne!"

古文：群臣固请，上不许，置宝册于别殿，朝夕事之，如定省之礼。
现代文：群臣坚决请求，肃宗不答应，于是就把传国宝器和玉册放置在另一座殿中，如早晚礼拜父母那样去礼敬。
English: Su Zong did not agree to the emperors' insistent request, so he placed the national treasure and the jade scroll in another hall, and went to pay his respects as he would to his parents in the morning and evening.

古文：上以韦见素本附杨国忠，意薄之；素闻房琯名，虚心待之，琯见上言时事，辞情慷慨，上为之改容，由是军国事多谋于琯。
现代文：肃宗因为韦见素原来曾依附杨国忠，所以对他很冷淡。
English: Su Zong was very cold towards Yang Guozhong because Wei Sim Su had previously been attached to him.

古文：琯亦以天下为己任，知无不为，专决于胸臆；诸相拱手避之。
现代文：又因为久闻房的声名，所以对他很热情。房对肃宗谈及时事，陈辞慷慨，感情激昂，以至肃宗为之而动情，所以对于军国大事多与房商议。房也以平定天下为已任，知道的事没有不做的，其他宰相只好拱手避位。
English: Also, because he had known Fusa's reputation for a long time, he was very enthusiastic about him. Fusa talked to Sozong about current affairs, his words were generous and his feelings were passionate, so much so that Sozong was moved, so he discussed with Fusa most of the military and national events. Fusa also considered it his duty to pacify the world. There was nothing he did not know, and other prime ministers had no choice but to step aside.

古文：上皇赐张良娣七宝鞍，李泌言于上曰： 今四海分崩，当以俭约示人，良娣不宜乘此。
现代文：肃宗赏赐张良娣七宝马鞍，李泌因此对肃宗说： 现在天下大乱，分崩离析，应该以节俭处世，张良娣不应该使用这样的马鞍。
English: Su Zong rewarded Zhang Liangyao with a seven-treasure saddle, and Li Xiu said to Su Zong: Now that the world is in chaos and falling apart, we should live frugally, and Zhang Liangyao should not use such a saddle.

古文：请撤其珠玉付库吏，以俟有战功者赏之。 
现代文：请撤去马鞍上的珍珠宝玉交给府库官吏，将来赏给那些立功的战士。 
English: Please remove the pearl jewel on the saddle and give it to the government officials. In the future, it will be awarded to those meritorious soldiers.

古文：良娣自阁中言曰： 邻里之旧，何至如是！ 
现代文：这时张良娣在自己的房子里对李泌说： 您和我是乡亲，何必这样呢！ 
English: At this time, Zhang Liangyao said to Li Xiu in his house: You and I are fellow villagers, why do you have to do this!

古文：上曰： 先生为社稷计也。 
现代文：肃宗说： 李先生是为了国家的事业着想。 
English: Su Zong said: Mr. Li is acting for the sake of the country's cause.

古文：遽命撤之。
现代文：于是命令立刻撤去。
English: The order was immediately rescinded.

古文：建宁王倓泣于廊下，声闻于上；上惊，召问之，对曰： 臣比忧祸乱未已，今陛下从谏如流，不日当见陛下迎上皇还长安，是以喜极而悲耳。 
现代文：此时建宁王李在房外的廓庑下哭泣，被肃宗听见，以十分惊奇，就召来问他为什么哭泣，李回答说： 我近来非常担忧战乱难平定，现在看见陛下从谏如流，虚心待下，用不了多长时间就会看见陛下迎接上皇返回长安，所以喜极而悲泣。 
English: At this time, Jianning Wang Li was crying under the eaves outside the room. Su Zong heard him and was very surprised. He summoned him to ask him why he was crying. Li replied: I have recently been very worried about the war being difficult to quell. Now I see that Your Majesty has been waiting with bated breath. It will not be long before I see Your Majesty welcoming the Emperor back to Chang'an. So I am extremely happy and sad.

古文：良娣由是恶李泌及倓。
现代文：张良娣从此憎恨李泌与建宁王李。
English: Zhang Liangyao hated Li Xiu and Jianning Wang Li from then on.

古文：上尝从容与泌语及李林甫，欲敕诸将克长安，发其冢，焚骨扬灰。泌曰： 陛下方定天下，奈何仇死者！
现代文：肃宗曾经在闲暇时对李泌谈及李林甫的事，说要下敕书让诸将攻克长安后，挖开李林甫的坟墓，焚烧他的尸骨，把骨灰扬弃，李泌说： 陛下正在平定天下，为何要与死者为仇呢！
English: Su Zong once talked to Li Xiu about Li Linfu in his spare time, saying that he wanted to issue an imperial edict to let the generals conquer Chang'an, dig up Li Linfu's grave, burn his bones, and scatter his ashes. Li Xiu said: Your Majesty is pacifying the world, why should you be angry with the dead!

古文：彼枯骨何知，徒示圣德之不弘耳。
现代文：那尸骨又知道什么，这样做只能表示圣上的德行不够宽宏。
English: What did the skeleton know, it only showed that the saintly virtue was not generous enough.

古文：且方今从贼者皆陛下之仇也，若闻此举，恐阻其自新之心。 
现代文：再说现在跟随安禄山反叛的人都是陛下的仇敌，如果他们听到这样的举动，恐怕会阻止他们悔过自新之心。 
English: Besides, those who are now rebelling with Anlu Mountain are enemies of His Majesty, and if they hear of such an act, I'm afraid it will prevent them from repenting.

古文：上不悦，曰： 此贼昔日百方危朕，当是时，朕不保朝夕。
现代文：肃宗听后不高兴，又说： 李林甫这个奸贼过去千方百计地想要动摇朕的地位，那时朕是朝不保夕。
English: Su Zong was not happy after listening, and said: Li Linfu, the traitor, tried his best to shake my position in the past. At that time, I was insecure.

古文：朕之全，特天幸耳！
现代文：朕所以能够保全，实在是上天的帮助！
English: It is truly God's help that I am able to preserve it!

古文：林甫亦恶卿，但未及害卿而死耳，奈何矜之！ 
现代文：再说李林甫也十分憎恨先生，只不过是没有来得及害死您罢了，您为何还要可怜他呢！ 
English: Besides, Li Linfu also hated you very much, but he didn't have time to kill you. Why should you pity him?

古文：对曰： 臣岂不知！
现代文：李泌回答说： 这些事情我怎么能不知道呢！
English: Li Jie replied: "How could I not know about these things!

古文：所以言者，上皇有天下向五十年，太平娱乐，一朝失意，远处巴蜀。
现代文：只是因为上皇在帝位快五十年了，太平安乐，不料一朝祸起，天下大乱，只好远避巴蜀。
English: Just because the last emperor has been on the throne for almost fifty years, peace and tranquility have prevailed, but all of a sudden, disaster struck, the world was in turmoil, and he had no choice but to avoid Bashu.

古文：南方地恶，上皇春秋高，闻陛下此敕，意必以为用韦妃之故，内惭不怿。
现代文：南方气侯恶劣，上皇年纪已大，如果听到陛下有这样的敕书，一定会以为陛下是为了报复废掉韦妃的仇恨，心中惭愧。
English: The weather in the south is bad, and the emperor is old. If he heard that his majesty had such an imperial edict, he would certainly think that his majesty was trying to avenge the hatred of the abolition of Wei Hui, and he would feel ashamed.

古文：万一感愤成疾，是陛下以天下之大，不能安君亲。 
现代文：万一因此感愤成病，天下人就会认为陛下心胸狭隘，容不得君父。 
English: In the unlikely event that this leads to resentment, people around the world will think that His Majesty is narrow-minded and will not tolerate the monarch.

古文：言未毕，上流涕被面，降阶，仰天拜曰： 朕不及此，是天使先生言之也！ 
现代文：李泌还未说完，肃宗已泪流满面，走下台阶，仰天礼拜说： 朕没有想到这一点，是上天让先生您来告诫我的！ 
English: Before Li Xiu had finished speaking, Su Zong was already in tears, walked down the steps, and said in supplication: "I didn't think of this, it was God who sent you to warn me!

古文：遂抱泌颈泣不已。
现代文：于是抱着李泌的脖子哭泣不已。
English: So she hugged Li Xiu's neck and wept.

古文：他夕，上又谓泌曰： 良娣祖母，昭成太后之妹也，上皇所念。
现代文：一天晚上，肃宗又对李泌说： 张良娣的祖母是上皇母亲昭成太后的妹妹，上皇十分思念她。
English: One evening, Su Zong also said to Li Xuru: Zhang Liangyao's grandmother was the sister of the last emperor's mother, Empress Dowager Zhao Cheng. The last emperor missed her very much.

古文：朕欲使正位中宫，以慰上皇心，何如？ 
现代文：所以朕想把良娣立为皇后以慰藉上皇之心，如何？ 
English: Therefore, I would like to make Ryohei the empress to console the emperor's heart, how about that?

古文：对曰： 陛下在灵武，以群臣望尺寸之功，故践大位，非私己也。
现代文：李泌回答说： 陛下在灵武时，因为群臣都希望建功立业，所以即皇帝位，这并不是陛下私心想要做皇帝。
English: Li Xiu replied: When His Majesty was in Lingwu, because the ministers all hoped to make contributions, so the emperor's throne, this is not His Majesty's selfish desire to be emperor.

古文：至于家事，宜待上皇之命，不过晚岁月之间耳。 
现代文：至于家事，还是应该等待上皇的命令，不必过急，这只不过是时间早晚的问题。 
English: As for household chores, you should still wait for the emperor's order. Don't be too hasty, it's just a matter of time.

古文：上从之。
现代文：肃宗同意李泌的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：南诏乘乱陷越巂会同军，据清溪关；寻传、骠国皆降之。
现代文：南诏乘唐朝大乱之机攻陷了越郡的会同军，占据了清溪关，寻传蛮和骠国都归降了南诏。
English: Nanzhao took advantage of the chaos of the Tang Dynasty to invade the allied army of Yue County and occupied Qingxi Pass. Both Huanchuan and Shandong Province were surrendered to Nanzhao.

