古文：吴王夫差乃告诸大夫曰： 孤将有大志于齐，吾将许越成，而无拂吾虑。
现代文：吴王夫差于是对大夫们说： 我将要实行征服齐国的宏大志向，为此我将允许越国讲和的请求，你们不要干扰我的考虑。
English: Wu Wangfu then said to the doctors: I am going to carry out the grand ambition of conquering Qi, and for this I will allow the request of Viet Nam to make peace, you should not interfere with my consideration.

古文：若越既改，吾又何求？
现代文：假如越国已经改弦更张，我还要求它什么？
English: If Viet Nam has changed its tune, what else can I ask of it?

古文：若其不改，反行，吾振旅焉。 
现代文：假如越国不改正，从齐国返回后，我还可以整顿军队教训它。 
English: If Viet Nam does not mend its ways, I can still rectify the army and teach it a lesson after I return from Qi.

古文：申胥谏曰： 不可许也。
现代文：伍子胥劝告说： 不可以允许越国的求和。
English: Wu Zixuan advised: It is not permissible to allow Yue Guo's sum-suit.

古文：夫越非实忠心好吴也，又非慑畏吾兵甲之强也。
现代文：越国并非真心与吴国友好，也并非害怕慑服于我们军队的强大。
English: Vietnam is not sincere in its friendship with the State of Wu, nor is it afraid to submit to the might of our army.

古文：大夫种勇而善谋，将还玩吴国于股掌之上，以得其志。
现代文：越国的大夫文种勇敢而善于谋略，他是想玩弄吴国于股掌之上，以实现其野心。
English: Dr. Wenzong of Yue was brave and cunning, and he wanted to play with Wu to achieve his ambition.

古文：夫固知君王之盖威以好胜也，故婉约其辞，以从逸王志，使淫乐于诸夏之国，以自伤也。
现代文：他本来就知道您崇尚武力，好胜心强，所以就用委婉动听的话来放纵您的意志，让您贪图中原各国的安乐，以自取败亡。
English: He already knew that you advocated force and had a strong will to win, so he used euphemistic and beautiful words to indulge your will and let you covet the peace and happiness of the Central Plains countries, so that you could defeat yourself.

古文：使吾甲兵钝弊，民人离落，而日以憔悴，然后安受吾烬。
现代文：使我们的军队疲惫，兵器损耗，民众背弃逃亡，国力日趋衰竭，然后安安稳稳地收拾我们的残局。
English: Let our army be exhausted, our weapons worn out, our people deserting and fleeing, and our national strength withering away, and then we will calmly and steadily pick up the pieces.

古文：夫越王好信以爱民，四方归之，年谷时熟，日长炎炎。
现代文：越王重信义，爱民众，四方的人都归附于他。那里年年丰收，国势隆盛。
English: King Yue valued loyalty and loved his people, and people from all over the country flocked to him. There, the harvest was bountiful year after year, and the country flourished.

古文：及吾犹可以战也，为虺弗摧，为蛇将若何？ 
现代文：现在我们还有力量战胜他，好比一条小蛇，不打死它，长成了大蛇可怎么办？ 
English: Now we still have the power to defeat him, just like a small snake. If we don't kill it, what if it grows into a big snake?

古文：吴王曰： 大夫奚隆于越，越曾足以为大虞乎？
现代文：吴王说： 子胥大夫何必把越国讲得那么强大，越国难道会成为我们的心腹大患吗？
English: King Wu said, "Why does Dr. Zi Yao have to make Yue Guo so powerful? Will Yue Guo become a big problem for us?"

古文：若无越，则吾何以春秋曜吾军士？ 
现代文：如果越国不存在，那么春秋两季阅兵时，我向谁去炫耀我们的军威呢？ 
English: If Vietnam does not exist, then who will I show off our military power to during the spring and autumn military parades?

古文：乃许之成。
现代文：于是就答应了越国的求和。
English: As a result, it agreed to Viet Nam's request for a sum.

古文：将盟，越王又使诸稽郢辞曰： 以盟为有益乎？
现代文：两国将要举行盟誓时，越王又派诸稽郢推辞说： 你们认为盟誓有用吗？
English: When the two countries were about to take the oath, the king of Viet Nam sent his advisers to say: Do you think the oath is useful?

古文：前盟口血未干，足以结信矣。
现代文：先前盟誓时留在嘴边的血迹还没有干，足够表示结盟的信义了。
English: The blood left on the lips during the previous oath has not dried yet, which is enough to show the alliance's loyalty.

古文：以盟为无益乎？
现代文：你们认为盟誓没有用吗？
English: Do you think that vows are useless?

古文：君王舍甲兵之威以临使之，而胡重于鬼神而自轻也？ 
现代文：君王可以放弃武力威胁，亲自来役使我们就行了，何必看重鬼神的威力而看轻自己的力量呢？ 
English: The monarch can give up the threat of force and come to serve us in person. Why should he value the power of ghosts and gods and despise his own power?

古文：吴王乃许之，荒成不盟。
现代文：吴王于是同意了，达成了讲和的口头协议而没有举行正式的盟誓。
English: King Wu then agreed, reaching a verbal agreement to make peace without a formal oath.

