古文：孝宣皇帝五男。
现代文：孝宣皇帝有五个儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaoxuan had five sons.

古文：许皇后生孝元帝，张婕妤生淮阳宪王钦，卫婕妤生楚孝王嚣，公孙婕妤生东平思王宇，戎婕妤生中山哀王竟。
现代文：注皇后生孝元帝，亟蛆生淮阳宪王昼邀，卫使仔生楚孝王型嚣，公孙侄伃生束乎思王刘主，戎侄伃生中山哀王窒炉。
English: Note: The empress gave birth to Emperor Xiaoyuan, the empress gave birth to Emperor Huaiyang, the empress gave birth to Emperor Wei, the empress gave birth to Emperor Chu, the empress gave birth to Emperor Liu, and the empress gave birth to Emperor Zhongshan.

古文：淮阳宪王钦，元康三年立，母张婕妤有宠于宣帝。
现代文：淮阳宪王刘钦，元康三年被立为王，他母亲张使伃受到宣帝的宠爱。
English: Liu Qin, the constitutional king of Huaiyang, and Yuan Kang were made kings three years later. His mother, Zhang Jizhe, was favored by Emperor Xuan.

古文：霍皇后废后，上欲立张婕妤为后。
现代文：霍皇后被废后，皇帝想立张徒仔为皇后。
English: After Empress Huo was deposed, the emperor wanted to make Zhang Tu Zi the empress.

古文：久之，惩艾霍氏欲害皇太子，乃更选后宫无子而谨慎者，乃立长陵王婕妤为后，令母养太子。
现代文：时间长了，有戒于霍氏想害皇太子之事，就改变主意挑选后宫没有儿子又为人谨慎的，于是立长陵人王健伃为皇后，让她像母亲一样养育太子。
English: After a long time, he changed his mind because he was afraid that the Huo clan wanted to harm the crown prince, so he chose a harem without a son and was prudent, so he made Wang Jianyao, the person in charge of the mausoleum, the empress, and let her raise the prince like a mother.

古文：后无宠，希御见，唯张婕妤最幸。
现代文：皇后不被宠爱，很少和皇帝同房或见面，惟独张健伃最受宠爱。
English: The empress was not favored, and rarely shared a room or met with the emperor, but Zhang Jianjun was the most favored.

古文：而宪王壮大，好经书、法律，聪达有材，帝甚爱之。
现代文：而淮阳宪王长大了，喜好经书和法律，聪明有才能，宣帝很喜欢他。
English: But Huaiyang Xianwang grew up, liked scriptures and laws, was clever and talented, and Emperor Xuan liked him very much.

古文：太子宽仁，喜儒术，上数嗟叹宪王，辅曰： 真我子也！ 
现代文：太子宽厚仁慈，喜好儒术，宣帝几次赞赏宪王，说： 真是我的儿子呀！ 
English: The prince was kind and benevolent, and liked Confucianism. Several times, Emperor Xuan appreciated Emperor Xian and said, "He really is my son!"

古文：常有意欲立张婕妤与宪王，然用太子起于微细，上少依倚许氏，及即位而许后以杀死，太子蚤失母，故弗忍也。
现代文：常想立张健仔为皇后、宪王为太子，然而因为太子在平民生活中长大，宣帝年轻时依靠许氏，到即位时许后已经被害死，太子幼年失去母亲，所以不忍心。
English: He often wanted to make Zhang Jian Zi the empress and Xian Wang the crown prince. However, because the crown prince grew up in a commoner's life, relied on Xu when he was young, and was killed when he ascended to the throne, and lost his mother when he was young, he could not bear it.

古文：久之，上以故丞相韦贤子玄成阳狂让侯兄，经明行高，称于朝廷，乃召拜玄成为淮阳中尉，欲感谕宪王，辅以推让之臣，由是太子遂安。
现代文：时间长了，宣帝因为原丞相韦贤的儿子韦玄成假装发狂把侯爵让给兄长，以通晓经学和品行高尚，在朝廷中受到称赞，就召见并封韦玄成为淮阳国中尉，想让他感化教谕宪王，用谦让的大臣辅佐他，从此太子的地位就稳固了。
English: After a long period of time, because the son of the former prime minister Wei Xian, Wei Xuancheng, pretended to be mad and gave the marquis to his brother, and was praised in the court for his knowledge of the scriptures and his noble conduct, Emperor Xuan summoned and sealed Wei Xuan to become a lieutenant of Huaiyang Province. He wanted him to influence the edict of King Xian and support him with a humble minister. Since then, the position of the prince has been stable.

古文：宣帝崩，元帝即位，乃遣宪王之国。
现代文：宣帝去世，元帝即位，就命令宪王到封国去。
English: When Emperor Xuan died and Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne, he ordered Emperor Xianwang to leave the country.

古文：时，张婕妤已卒，宪王有外祖母，舅张博兄弟三人岁至淮阳见亲，辄受王赐。
现代文：这时张便伃已经去世，宪王有外祖母，他的舅舅张博兄弟三人每年要到淮阳拜见母亲，就会受到宪王的赏赐。
English: At this time, Zhang Benyao had already passed away. King Xianwang had a grandmother. His uncle, Zhang Bo, and his three brothers would visit their mother in Huaiyang every year, and they would be rewarded by King Xianwang.

古文：后王上书，请徙外家张氏于国。博上书，愿留守坟墓，独不徙。
现代文：后来宪王上书：请求迁徙外亲家张氏到淮阳国，张博上书：希望留守祖坟，偏不迁徙。
English: Later, Emperor Xianwang wrote a letter to request the Zhang family to move to Huaiyang Province, and Zhang Bo wrote a letter to stay at the ancestral tomb, but not to move.

古文：王恨之。
现代文：宪王怨恨他。
English: The gendarme resented him.

古文：后博至淮阳，王赐之少。
现代文：后来张博到淮阳国，宪王赏赐给他的少了。
English: Later, Zhang Bo went to Huaiyang Province, and the reward given to him by the Emperor was less.

古文：博言： 负责数百万，愿王为偿。 
现代文：张博说： 负债几百万。希望宪王为我偿还。 
English: Zhang Bo said, "I am millions in debt. I hope that the Emperor will repay me."

古文：王不许，博辞去，令弟光恐云王遇大人益解，博欲上书为大人乞骸骨去。
现代文：宪王不答应。张博告辞而去，派弟张光恐吓宪王说他待祖母更为懈怠了，张博想上书给自己的母亲请假回家。
English: Xian Wang did not agree. Zhang Bo said goodbye and left. He sent his younger brother Zhang Guang to threaten Xian Wang that he had been more lax in waiting for his grandmother. Zhang Bo wanted to write to his mother to ask for leave to return home.

古文：王乃遣人持黄金五十斤送博。
现代文：宪王就派人拿五十斤黄金送给张博。
English: King Xian sent someone to take fifty catties of gold and give it to Zhang Bo.

古文：博喜，还书谢，为谄语盛称誉王，因言： 当今朝廷无贤臣，灾变数见，足为寒心。
现代文：张博高兴，回信感谢，用谄媚的话极度称赞宪王，于是说： 当今朝廷中没有贤臣，灾变多次出现，很替朝廷寒。后来。
English: Zhang Bo was delighted, wrote back his thanks, and praised Emperor Xian with flattering words. He then said, "Today, there are no wise men in the imperial court. Catastrophes have occurred many times, and the imperial court is very cold. Later."

古文：万姓咸归望于大王，大王奈何恬然不求入朝见，辅助主上乎？ 
现代文：百姓都将希望寄托在大王身上，大王为什么安安静静地，不请求入朝拜见，辅佐皇帝呢？ 
English: The people put their hopes in the great king. Why didn't the great king quietly ask to go to the court to meet and assist the emperor?

古文：使弟光数说王宜听博计，令于京师说用事贵人为王求朝。
现代文：派弟张光几次劝说宪王应听从张博的计策，他自己到京师游说当权显贵者替宪王请求朝见。
English: He sent his younger brother Zhang Guang several times to persuade Emperor Xianwang to follow Zhang Bo's strategy, and he himself went to Beijing to lobby the dignitaries to request an audience with the emperor for Emperor Xianwang.

古文：许不纳其言。
现代文：宪王不采纳他的意见。
English: The constitutional monarch did not accept his opinion.

古文：后光欲至长安，辞王，复言 愿尽力与博共为王求朝。
现代文：后来张光想去长安，辞别宪王之时，又说 愿意尽力和张博一起为大王请求入朝。
English: Later, when Zhang Guang wanted to go to Chang'an to bid farewell to Emperor Xianwang, he also said that he was willing to do his best together with Zhang Bo to request entry into the imperial court for the great king.

古文：王即日至长安，可因平阳侯。 
现代文：大王即到长安，可以依靠平阳侯。 
English: Once you arrive in Chang'an, you can rely on Pingyang.

古文：光得王欲求朝语，驰使人语博。
现代文：张光得到宪王想请求朝见的话，派人飞马前去告诉张博。
English: When Zhang Guang learned that Xianwang wanted to request an audience with the emperor, he sent someone to tell Zhang Bo.

古文：博知王意动，复遗王书曰： 博幸得肺腑，数进愚策，未见省察。
现代文：张博知道宪王心思转变，又送给宪王书信说： 张博有幸成为大王心腹，几次进献愚策，没有引起您的注意。
English: Zhang Bo knew about the change in the mind of King Xian and sent a letter to King Xian saying: Zhang Bo was fortunate to become the great king's confidant, and several times he proposed foolish measures that did not attract your attention.

古文：北游燕、赵，欲循行郡国求幽隐之士，闻齐有驷先生者，善为《司马兵法》，大将之材也，博得谒见，承间进问五帝、三王究竟要道，卓尔非世俗之所知。
现代文：我北游燕赵等地，想巡行各地访求隐居的士人，听说齐国有个驷先生，通晓《司马兵法》，是大将之才，张博曾经拜见他，趁机会前去询问了五帝三王的统治要领，言谈高明，不是世俗之人所能了解的。
English: When I toured Yan Zhao and other places in the north, I wanted to make a tour of various places to visit the hermit statesmen. I heard that there was a Mr. Zou in Qi, who was familiar with the "Sima Hei Ho" and was a great general. Zhang Bo once met him and took the opportunity to inquire about the essentials of the rule of the five emperors and three kings. He was a good talker, which was not something that ordinary people could understand.

古文：今边境不安，天下骚动，微此人其莫能安也。
现代文：现在边境不安定，天下动荡，除非这个人，其他人不能平定天下。
English: Now the border is unstable, the world is in turmoil, unless this person, others can not pacify the world.

古文：又闻北海之濒有贤人焉，累世不可逮，然难致也。
现代文：我又听说北海旁边有个贤人，是几世也不可多得的人才，然而难以招致。
English: I also heard that there is a wise man near the North Sea, a talent that cannot be obtained for several generations, but it is difficult to invite.

古文：得此二人而荐之，功亦不细矣。
现代文：得到这两个人才，将他们推荐给朝廷，功劳也就不小了。
English: Getting these two talents and recommending them to the imperial court was no small feat.

古文：博愿驰西以此赴助汉急，无财币以通显之。
现代文：我愿意速西到长安以推荐这两个人来救助汉室的危急，但没有金钱来通达显贵之人。
English: I would like to rush to Chang'an to recommend these two people to help the crisis of the Han Dynasty, but I do not have the money to reach the dignitaries.

古文：赵王使谒者持牛、酒，黄金三十斤劳博，博不受；复使人愿尚女，聘金二百斤，博未许。
现代文：趟王派谒者拿着牛和酒，黄金三十斤犒劳我，我不接受；又派人来求娶我的女儿，聘金二百斤，我没有答应。
English: The king sent an envoy with oxen and wine, and offered me thirty talents of gold, which I did not accept. He also sent someone to ask for my daughter's hand in marriage, offering two hundred talents, which I did not accept.

古文：会得光书云大王已遣光西，与博并力求朝。
现代文：正好收到张光的书信说大王已经派遣他西去长安，和我一起尽力请求朝见。
English: Just received a letter from Zhang Guang saying that the Great King had sent him west to Chang'an, and that he would do his best to request an audience with me.

古文：博自以弃捐，不意大王还意反义，结以朱颜，愿杀身报德。
现代文：我自认为大王已经捐弃此事，没想到大王回心转意，和气地与我结交，我愿意以性命报答您的恩德。
English: I thought that the great king had given up the matter, but I did not expect the great king to change his mind and make friends with me. I am willing to repay your kindness with my life.

古文：朝事何足言！
现代文：朝见的事何足挂齿！
English: So much for seeing in the morning!

古文：大王诚赐咳唾，使得尽死，汤、禹所以成大功也。
现代文：大王如果赐给我一点钱财，使我出死力办事，这是汤禹所以成就大功业的道理。
English: If the great king gives me a little money and makes me work hard, this is the reason why Tang Yu has achieved great achievements.

古文：驷先生蓄积道术，书无不有，愿知大王所好，请得辄上。 
现代文：驷先生道术的修养高深，书籍无所不有，希望知道大王的爱好，能够及时献上。 
English: Mr. Zou has a high level of cultivation in Daoism, and books are everywhere. I hope to know the great king's hobbies and be able to present them in time.

古文：王得书喜说，报博书曰： 子高乃幸左顾存恤，发心恻隐，显至诚，纳以嘉谋，语以至事，虽亦不敏，敢不谕意！
现代文：宪王收到书信很高兴，给张博回信说： 幸亏子高你屈尊体恤，从内心裹发出的恻隐之情，显示了极高的诚意，献上好的计谋，把最重要的事告诉了我，我虽然不聪明，却怎敢不理解你的心意！
English: Xian Wang was very happy to receive the letter, and wrote back to Zhang Bo, saying, "Fortunately, you are very condescending and considerate, and the hidden feelings that emanate from your heart show great sincerity, offer good strategies, and tell me the most important things. Although I am not smart, how dare I not understand your intentions!

古文：今遣有司为子高偿责二百万。 
现代文：现在派有司替你偿还二百万的债务。 
English: Now you have a manager to pay off your $2 million debt.

古文：是时，博女婿京房以明《易》阴阳得幸于上，数召见言事。
现代文：这时，张博的女婿京房因为明晓《易。阴阳》而得到皇帝的宠幸，几次召见他讨论国事。
English: At this time, Jingfang, Zhang Bo's son-in-law, was favored by the emperor because he knew "Yi. Yin and Yang" and was summoned several times to discuss state affairs.

古文：自谓为石显、五鹿充宗所排，谋不得用，数为博道之。
现代文：自以为是被石显、五鹿充宗所排斥，计谋不被采用，屡次跟张博说这些事。
English: He thought that he had been ostracized by Shi Xian and Wolu Chengzong, and that the stratagem would not be adopted. He repeatedly told Zhang Bo about these things.

古文：博常欲诳耀淮阳王，即具记房诸所说灾异及召见密语，持予淮阳王以为信验，诈言： 已见中书令石君求朝，许以金五百斤。
现代文：张博常想诳骗淮阳王并向他炫耀，就全部记录了京房所说的各次灾异和皇帝召见他所说的秘密的话，拿给淮阳王当作凭据，骗他说 已经见到中书令石君请求朝见，许给他五百斤黄金。
English: Zhang Bo often wanted to deceive the King of Huaiyang and show off to him, so he recorded all the disasters and calamities that Jingfang said and the secret words that the emperor summoned him to say, and gave them to the King of Huaiyang as evidence. He lied and said that he had already seen the Chinese book ordering Shijun to request a meeting with the emperor and give him five hundred pounds of gold.

古文：贤圣制事，盖虑功而不计费。
现代文：贤圣之人做事衹考虑功业而不计较费用。
English: A virtuous person does things without considering the cost.

古文：昔禹治鸿水，百姓罢劳，成功既立，万世赖之。
现代文：大禹治水之时，虽使百姓疲劳不堪，但成功之后，却使老百姓千秋万代受益。
English: At the time of Dayu's flood control, although he made the people tired, after his success, he benefited the people for generations to come.

古文：今闻陛下春秋未满四十，发齿堕落，太子幼弱，佞人用事，阴阳不调，百姓疾疫饥馑死者且半，鸿水之害殆不过此。
现代文：现在听说皇帝年龄不到四十，头发牙齿已经脱落，太子年幼，佞臣专权，阴阳不调，百姓因疾病疫情饥荒死去的将近半数，洪水的危害也不过如此。
English: Now I hear that the emperor is less than forty years old, his hair and teeth have already fallen out, the crown prince is young, he has absolute power over his ministers, yin and yang are out of kilter, nearly half of the people have died from disease, epidemic and famine, and the harm of floods is no less than that.

古文：大王绪欲救世，将比功德，何可以忽？
现代文：大王准备拯救世人，将和古代圣王比较功德，怎么可以懈怠？
English: The great king is preparing to save the world. He will compare his merits with the ancient holy kings. How can he slack off?

古文：博已与大儒知道者为大王为便宜奏，陈安危，指灾异，大王朝见，先口陈其意而后奏之，上必大说。
现代文：我已经和博学而明道的大儒替大王见机上奏，陈述国家的安危之道，指明灾异的危害，大王朝见时，先说明大意而后上奏摺，皇帝一定会很高兴。
English: I have played the piano with the erudite and clear-sighted great Confucius, stating the way of national security and pointing out the harm of disasters. When I meet the great dynasty, I will first explain the gist and then report to the emperor. The emperor will be very happy.

古文：事成功立，大王即有周、邵之名，邪臣散亡，公卿变节，功德亡比，而梁、赵之宠必归大王，外家亦将富贵，何复望大王之金钱？ 
现代文：事情成功，功业建立，大王就有了周公、邵公的名望，奸邪的大臣四散逃走，公卿们改变节操，功德无人可比，而皇帝对梁王、赵王的宠信一定会转移于大王，我们外族也会富贵，怎能再指望大王的金钱？ 
English: If things are successful and achievements are established, the great king will have the reputation of Zhou Gong and Shao Gong, the treacherous ministers will scatter and flee, the nobles will change the discipline, and the merits are incomparable. And the emperor's favor to King Liang and King Zhao will certainly be transferred to the great king. Our foreign people will also be rich. How can we expect the great king's money?

古文：王喜说，报博书曰： 乃者诏下，止诸侯朝者，寡人憯然不知所出。
现代文：宪王高兴，给张博回信说： 过去诏书下达，禁止诸侯朝见，我痛感不知用什么计策好。
English: The Emperor was pleased and wrote back to Zhang Bo, saying, "In the past, imperial edicts were issued prohibiting the princes from meeting with the emperor. I am painfully aware that I don't know what strategy to use.

古文：子高素有颜、冉之资，臧武之智，子贡之辩，卞庄子之勇，兼此四者，世之所鲜。
现代文：子高你向来有颜渊、冉有的天资，臧武子之才智，子贡的辩才，卞庄子的勇武，兼有四者之长，举世罕见。
English: Zigao, you have always been endowed with beauty and talent. You have the wisdom of a warrior, the eloquence of a tributary, and the bravery of a warrior. You have all four qualities, which is rare in the world.

古文：既开端绪，愿卒成之。
现代文：已经开了头，希望能最终成事。
English: It's a start, and I hope it will work out.

古文：求朝，义事也，奈何行金钱乎！ 
现代文：请求朝见，是合理的事，怎么用金钱呢？ 
English: Asking to meet in the morning is a reasonable thing, but how to use money?

古文：博报曰： 已许石君，须以成事。 
现代文：张博回信说： 已经答应石君，需要用它来成就此事。 
English: Zhang Bo replied in a letter: I have already promised Shijun, and I need to use it to accomplish this.

古文：王以金五百斤予博。
现代文：宪王用五百斤黄金给张博。
English: Xian Wang gave Zhang Bo five hundred catties of gold.

古文：会房出为郡守，离左右，显具有此事告之。
现代文：正好京房出京任郡守，离开皇帝身边，石显知道了这件事的全部情况并告发了它。
English: Just as Kyofusa left the emperor's side to take up the post of county governor in Beijing, Shi Xian learned the full circumstances of the matter and reported it.

古文：房漏泄省中语，博兄弟诖误诸侯王，诽谤政治，狡猾不道，皆下狱。
现代文：京房泄露了宫禁中的谈话，张博兄弟误导诸侯王，诽谤朝政，狡诈不轨，都被逮捕。
English: Kyofang leaked a conversation from the palace, the Zhangbo brothers misled the princes, slandered the imperial government, and cheated. They were all arrested.

古文：有司奏请逮捕钦，上不忍致法，遣谏大夫王骏赐钦玺书曰： 皇帝问淮阳王。
现代文：有关部门上奏请求逮捕刘钦，皇上不忍心绳之以法，派谏大夫王骏赏赐刘钦玺印书信说： 皇帝告诉淮阳王。
English: The relevant departments made a request for the arrest of Liu Qin, and the emperor could not bear to bring him to justice. He sent the doctor Wang Qi to reward Liu Qin with a sealed letter saying: The emperor told Huaiyang Wang.

古文：有司奏王，王舅张博数遗王书，非毁政治，谤讪天子，褒举诸侯，称引周、汤，以谄惑王，所言尤恶，悖逆无道。
现代文：有关部门控告您，国舅张博多次给您书信，诋毁国政，讥谤皇帝，赞扬举荐诸侯，称述征引周公、商汤，来迷惑您，所说的尤其恶劣，忤逆无道。
English: Relevant departments have accused you. Zhang Bo, the uncle of the country, has written to you many times, slandering state affairs, mocking the emperor, praising and recommending princes, and saying that Zhou Gong and Shang Tang were recruited to confuse you. What he said is particularly bad, and there is no way back.

古文：王不举奏而多与金钱，报以好言，罪至不赦，朕恻焉不忍闻，为王伤之。
现代文：您不举报他还经常给他金钱，给他好话以报答，罪遇到了不能赦免的地步，我伤心不忍听到这件事，替您痛心于此。
English: You didn't report him, and he often gave him money and kind words in return. The crime has reached the point where it can't be pardoned. I'm heartbroken to hear about this. I'm heartbroken for you.

古文：推原厥本，不祥自博，惟王之心，匪同于凶。
现代文：推求本原，不好的东西来自张博，您的用心，不同于凶恶的人。
English: Seek the root cause, bad things come from Zhang Bo, your intentions are different from those of evil people.

古文：已诏有司勿治王事，遣谏大夫骏申谕朕意。
现代文：已经诏令有司不要治您的罪，派谏大夫王骏申明我的意思。
English: I have already ordered the magistrate not to punish you for your crime, and I have sent Dr. Wang Qi to clarify my intentions.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 靖恭尔位，正直是与。 
现代文：《诗经》不是说吗？ 忠于你的职位，应当品行正直。 您要勉励呀！ 
English: Doesn't the Book of Songs say that you should be loyal to your post and behave with integrity?

古文：王其勉之！ 骏谕指曰： 礼为诸侯制相朝聘之义，盖以考礼一德，尊事天子也。
现代文：王骏指点淮阳王说： 礼仪是诸侯制订共同朝拜聘礼的仪式，所以成全礼节同心同德，尊敬地侍奉皇帝。
English: Wang Qian pointed out to Huaiyang Wang and said: The etiquette is a ceremony for the princes to formulate a common courting ceremony, so they should fulfill the etiquette with the same spirit and serve the emperor respectfully.

古文：且王不学《诗》乎？
现代文：况且王不是学习了《诗经》吗？
English: Besides, didn't Wang study the Book of Songs?

古文：《诗》云： 俾侯于鲁，为周室辅。 今王舅博数遗王书，所言悖逆。
现代文：《诗经》说： 使他在鲁国当诸侯，作为周王室的藩辅，现在王舅张博多次给您书信，所说的话都违背圣道。
English: "The Book of Songs" said: Let him be a prince in Lu, as a vassal of the Zhou royal family, now uncle Zhang Bo has written to you many times, and what he said is contrary to the holy way.

古文：王幸受诏策，通经术，知诸侯名誉不当出竟。
现代文：您幸好受到诏令的约束，明白经术，知道诸侯的名分不应当出境。
English: Fortunately, you are bound by the imperial edict, understand the scriptures, and know that princes should not leave the country.

古文：天子普覆，德布于朝，而恬有博言，多予金钱，与相报应，不忠莫大焉。
现代文：皇帝恩德普施，仁德布及朝廷上下，而您安然接受张博的话，经常给他金钱，互相应答，不忠的罪过没有比这更大的了。
English: Emperor Ndebele, Rendezvous and the imperial court, and you calmly accept Zhang Bo's words, often give him money, and answer each other. There is no greater sin of disloyalty.

古文：故事，诸侯王获罪京师，罪恶轻重，纵不伏诛，必蒙迁削贬黜之罪，未有但已者也。
现代文：依旧例，诸侯王在京师犯罪，无论轻重，即使不被杀，也一定会受到流放、撤职、贬谪、废黜等刑罚，没有不作追究的。
English: As is still the case, if a prince commits a crime in Beijing, no matter how serious, even if he is not killed, he will certainly be punished by banishment, dismissal, demotion, and dethronement. There is no way he will not be investigated.

古文：今圣主赦王之罪，又怜王失计忘本，为博所惑，加赐玺书，使谏大夫申谕至意，殷勤之恩，岂有量哉！
现代文：现在圣明的君主赦免您的罪行，又怜惜您走错路忘记本分，被张博所迷惑，赐予玺印书信，派谏大夫申明来意，皇上的大恩大德，怎么能够估量呢！
English: Now the holy monarch pardons your crime, and pities you for walking the wrong way and forgetting your duty, for being bewitched by Zhang Bo, and bestows you with a sealed letter, and sends you a doctor to confirm your intentions. How can you estimate the great kindness of the emperor?

古文：博等所犯恶大，群下之所共攻，王法之所不赦也。
现代文：张博等人所犯的罪过严重，群臣一起攻击他，是王法所不能赦免的。
English: The crimes committed by Zhang Bo and others are serious, and the ministers attacked him together, which cannot be pardoned by the Fa.

古文：自今以来，王毋复以博等累心，务与众弃之。
现代文：从今往后，您不要再因张博等忧心，一定要和大家一起抛弃他。
English: From now on, you should stop worrying about Zhang Bo and others, and must abandon him together with everyone.

古文：《春秋》之义，大能变改。
现代文：《春秋》之义，最重要的是能改过自新。
English: The meaning of "Spring and Autumn" is that the most important thing is to be able to reform.

古文：《易》曰 借用白茅，无咎 ，言臣子之道，改过自新，洁己以承上，然后免于咎也。
现代文：《易经》说 祭祀用白茅，没有遇错 ，是说臣子的正道，改过自新，纯洁自身来辅佐皇帝，然后才能免于过错。
English: The "I Ching" says that the white cedar was used in the ritual, and there was no mistake, which means that the vassal was on the right path, reformed himself, and purified himself to assist the emperor, and then he could be free from mistakes.

古文：王其留意慎戒，惟思所以悔过易行，塞重责，称厚恩者。
现代文：您要注意谨慎警戒，考虑怎样悔过改变行为，弥补重大责任，称述皇帝大恩。
English: You should pay attention to caution and vigilance, consider how to repent and change behavior, make up for the heavy responsibility, and praise the emperor's great kindness.

古文：如此，则长有富贵，社稷安矣。 
现代文：这样，你个人就会长享富贵，国家也会安定无。 
English: In this way, you will personally enjoy prosperity, and the country will be stable.

古文：于是淮阳王钦免冠稽首谢曰： 奉藩无状，过恶暴列，陛下不忍致法，加大恩，遣使者申谕道术守藩之义。
现代文：当时淮阳王刘钦摘下帽子叩头谢罪说： 我没有尽到诸侯王的职责，罪恶昭彰，陛下不忍心依法治罪，施以大恩，派使者申明道理和作诸侯的职责。
English: At that time, Liu Qin, the king of Huaiyang, took off his hat, bowed down and said, "I have not fulfilled my duties as the prince of princes. My sins are obvious. Your majesty cannot bear to commit crimes according to the law, bestow great grace, and send an envoy to clarify the truth and perform the duties of princes."

古文：伏念博罪恶尤深，当伏重诛。
现代文：考虑张博的罪恶尤其深重，应当处以极刑。
English: Considering that Zhang Bo's crime is particularly serious, he should be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：臣钦愿悉心自新，奉承诏策。
现代文：臣刘钦愿意尽心地改过自新，恭敬地接受诏令。
English: Minister Liu Qin is willing to do his best to reform himself and respectfully accept the edict.

古文：顿首死罪。 
现代文：卑臣该死该死。 
English: Despicables be damned.

古文：京房及博兄弟三人皆弃市，妻子徙边。
现代文：京房和张博兄弟三人都被斩弃市，妻子儿女流放到边境。
English: All three brothers, Jingfang and Zhang Bo, were banished from the city, and their wives and children were exiled to the border.

古文：至成帝即位，以淮阳王属为叔父，敬宠之，异于它国。
现代文：到成帝即位，因为淮阳王作为亲属是叔父，受到成帝敬重，远在其他诸侯王之上。
English: Emperor Cheng ascended the throne, because King Huaiyang, as a relative, was an uncle, and was respected by Emperor Cheng, far above other princes.

古文：王上书自陈舅张博时事，颇为石显等所侵，因为博家属徙者求还。
现代文：淮阳王上书自己陈述舅父张博，颇受石显等人的欺负，所以为遭流放的张博的家属请求回故乡。
English: Huaiyang Wang wrote a letter stating that his uncle Zhang Bo was bullied by Shi Xian and others, so he requested to return to his hometown for Zhang Bo's family members who were exiled.

古文：丞相、御史复劾钦： 前与博相遗私书，指意非诸侯王所宜，蒙恩勿治，事在赦前。
现代文：丞相和御史大夫又弹劾淮阳王： 从前和张博互相私下通信，其意图不是诸侯王应该有的，承蒙皇恩不予治罪，事情发生于赦免之前。
English: The chancellor and the chief historian also impeached King Huaiyang: In the past, he and Zhang Bo communicated privately with each other. Their intention was not what princes should have. Thanks to the grace of the emperor, they were not punished. The incident occurred before the amnesty.

古文：不悔过而复称引，自以为直，失藩臣礼，不敬。 
现代文：他不悔过反而又引述往事，自以为正直，有失诸侯体统，犯不敬之罪。 
English: Instead of repenting, he quoted the past and thought he was being honest, which was out of character for a vassal and a crime of disrespect.

古文：上加恩，许王还徙者。
现代文：皇帝却恩准了淮阳王的请求，答应宪王迁回流放者。
English: However, the emperor graciously granted the request of King Huaiyang and allowed King Xian to resettle the exiles.

古文：三十六年薨。
现代文：宪王在位三十六年薨。
English: Emperor Gensho died after reigning for 36 years.

古文：子文王玄嗣，二十六年薨。
现代文：儿子文王刘玄继位，在位二十六年去世。
English: King Wen's son Liu Xuan succeeded to the throne, but died after 26 years on the throne.

古文：子縯嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：儿子刘縯继承王位，到王莽时断绝。
English: His son Liu Bei succeeded to the throne, but abdicated when Wang Mang took over.

古文：楚孝王嚣，甘露二年立为定陶王，三年徙楚，成帝河平中入朝，时被疾，天子闵之，下诏曰： 盖闻 天地之性人为贵，人之行莫大于孝 。楚王嚣素行孝顺仁慈，之国以来二十余年，孅介之过未尝闻，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：楚孝王刘嚣，甘露二年被立为定陶王，三年之后改封于楚国。成帝河平年间入朝，当时有疾病，皇帝怜惜他，下诏说： 听说 天地间的生命人最为尊贵，人的行为中以孝顺为最大，楚王刘嚣向来品行孝顺仁慈，到封国以来二十余年，细微的过错也没有听说过，我很欣赏他。
English: Chu Xiao Wang Liu Han was appointed as the King of Ding Tao two years later, and three years later he was transferred to the State of Chu. When Emperor Cheng Heping entered the imperial court, he was ill at the time. The emperor took pity on him and issued a decree saying, "I have heard that people in heaven and earth are the most honorable, and filial piety is the greatest in human behavior. King Liu Han of Chu has always been kind, filial and benevolent. In the more than 20 years since he came to the country, he has not heard of any minor mistakes. I admire him very much.

古文：今乃遭命，离于恶疾，夫子所痛，曰： 蔑之，命矣夫！斯人也而有斯疾也！ 
现代文：现在遭受厄运，身患重病，孑夫子所痛惜，说： 难过呀，命运啊，这样的人也会有这样的病吗！ 
English: Now he is suffering from bad luck and is seriously ill, which the woodcutter deplores, saying: "How sad, what a fate, would such a person also have such an illness!

古文：朕甚闵焉。
现代文：我很可惜他。
English: I feel sorry for him.

古文：夫行纯茂而不显异，则有国者将何勖哉？
现代文：他品行善良高尚而不显得舆众不同，那么诸侯们将怎样受到勉励呢？
English: How will the princes be encouraged if he is good and noble and does not appear to be different from the public?

古文：《书》不云乎？ 用德章厥善。 今王朝正月，诏与子男一人俱，其以广戚县户四千三百封其子勋为广戚侯。 
现代文：《尚书》不是说吗？ 赏赐有德行的人以表彰他的善良，现在是王朝正月，诏命孝王和他的一个儿子一起来上朝，以广戚县四千三百户食邑封他的儿子刘勋为广戚侯。 
English: Isn't that what "Shang Shu" says? To reward a virtuous person in recognition of his goodness, now it is the first month of the dynasty, the emperor ordered Xiao Wang to come to the imperial court with one of his sons, and to appoint his son Liu Xun as Guangji Hou of the 4,300 households in Guangji County.

古文：明年，嚣薨。
现代文：第二年，刘嚣去世。
English: The following year, Liu Han died.

古文：子怀王文嗣，一年薨，无子，绝。
现代文：儿子怀王刘文继位，一年之后去世，没有儿子，断绝。
English: His son Huai Wang Liu Wen succeeded to the throne, but died a year later without a son.

古文：明年，成帝复立文弟平陆侯衍，是为思王。
现代文：第二年，成帝又立刘文的弟弟子陆侯刘衍，这是思王。
English: In the second year, Emperor Cheng also appointed Liu Wen's younger brother and disciple, Lu Hou Liu Yan, as king.

古文：二十一年薨，子纡嗣，王莽时绝。
现代文：在位二十一年去世，儿子刘纡继位，到王莽时断绝。
English: He died in the twenty-first year of his reign, and was succeeded by his son Liu Bei, who abdicated in favor of Wang Mang.

古文：初，成帝时又立纡弟景为定陶王。
现代文：当初，成帝时又立刘纡的弟弟刘景为定陶王。
English: At first, Emperor Cheng also appointed Liu Zhen's younger brother Liu Jing as the king of Dingtao.

古文：广戚侯勋薨，谥曰炀侯，子显嗣。
现代文：广戚侯刘勋去世，谧号为炀侯，儿子刘显继位。
English: Guangqihou Liu Xun passed away, his posthumous name was Gonghou, and his son Liu Xian succeeded him.

古文：平帝崩，无子，王莽立显子婴为孺子，奉平帝后。
现代文：平帝去世，没有儿子，王莽立刘显的儿子刘婴为孺子，继位平帝之后。
English: When Emperor Ping died without a son, Wang Mang designated Liu Xian's son, Liu Jiao, as his successor.

古文：莽篡位，以婴为定安公。
现代文：王莽篡位，封刘婴为定安公。
English: Wang Mang usurped the throne and appointed Liu Jiao as Dingan Gong.

古文：汉既诛莽，更始时婴在长安，平陵方望等颇知天文，以为更始必败，婴本统当立者也，共起兵将婴至临泾，立为天子。
现代文：汉朝诛杀王莽之后，更始年间刘婴在长安，平陵人方望等人很明白天文历象，认为更始皇帝一定会失败，刘婴是根据帝统应当立为皇帝的人，一起发兵把刘婴带到临泾，立为皇帝。
English: After the Han Dynasty assassinated Wang Mang, during the reign of Emperor Qianlong, Liu Ying was in Chang'an. The Pingling people, Fang Fang and others, who understood the astronomical calendar, believed that Emperor Qianlong would certainly fail. Liu Ying was the person who should be appointed as emperor according to the imperial system. Together, they sent an army to bring Liu Ying to Linyi to be appointed as emperor.

古文：更始遣丞相李松击破杀婴云。
现代文：更始帝派丞相李松打败他们杀了刘婴。
English: The emperor sent the prime minister, Li Song, to defeat them and kill Liu Ying.

古文：东平思王宇，甘露二年立。
现代文：东平思王刘字，甘露二年立为王。
English: Dongping thought of the king Liu Zi, and in the second year of the dew, he became the king.

古文：元帝即位，就国。
现代文：元帝即位，前往封国。
English: Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne and left for the vassal state.

古文：壮大，通奸犯法，上以至亲贳弗罪，傅相连坐。
现代文：长大后，以勾结坏人而犯法，皇帝因为他是最亲近的亲属而不予治罪，他的师傅和国相连坐。
English: When he grew up, he broke the law by colluding with bad people. The emperor did not punish him because he was the closest relative. His teacher and the country sat side by side.

古文：久之，事太后，内不相得，太后上书言之，求守杜陵园。
现代文：过了一些日子以后，思王侍奉太后，不合太后心意，太后上书说这件事，请求守卫杜陵园。
English: A few days later, Si Wang served the empress dowager, which did not meet the empress dowager's intention. The empress dowager wrote a letter to say this and asked him to guard the Tu Ling Garden.

古文：上于是遣太中大夫张子蟜奉玺书敕谕之，曰： 皇帝问东平王。
现代文：皇帝于是派遣太中大夫张子娇领玺书命令晓谕他，说： 皇帝告诉束平王。
English: The emperor then sent Zhang Zijiao, the imperial physician, with a written order to tell him, saying: "The emperor tells King Sokping.

古文：盖闻亲亲之恩莫重于孝，尊尊之义莫大于忠，故诸侯在位不骄以致孝道，制节谨度以冀天子，然后富贵不离于身，而社稷可保。
现代文：听说亲近亲人的恩情没有比孝顺更重要的，尊敬尊贵的人的道理没有比忠更大的，所以诸侯在位不骄傲以尽孝道，节制谨慎以辅佐天子，如此则可以永保富贵，国家安定。
English: It is said that there is nothing more important than filial piety when it comes to being close to one's relatives, and there is nothing more important than loyalty when it comes to respecting dignitaries. Therefore, princes should not be proud when they are on the throne, but should fulfill their filial duty, be restrained and prudent, and assist the Son of Heaven. In this way, they can maintain their wealth and national stability forever.

古文：今闻王自修有阙，本朝不和，流言纷纷，谤自内兴，朕甚僣焉，为王惧之。
现代文：现在听说您自身修养有阙失，封国内部不和睦，流言纷纷出现，诽谤从内部产生，我很感痛惜，替您害怕。
English: Now that I hear that you have lost your self-cultivation, that there is disharmony within the party, that rumors have appeared one after another, and that slander comes from within, I feel very sorry and afraid for you.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 毋念尔祖，述修厥德，永言配命，自求多福 。
现代文：《诗经》不是说吗？ 思念你的祖宗，修养自己的道德，永远遵循天命，自己祈求多福。 
English: Doesn't the Book of Psalms say, "Remember your ancestors, cultivate your morals, always follow the decrees of heaven, and pray for good fortune for yourself"?

古文：朕惟王之春秋方刚，忽于道德，意有所移，忠言未纳，故临遣太中大夫子蟜谕王朕意。
现代文：我知道您正当血气方刚之时，忽略了道德，心意有所偏移，没有采纳忠言，所以亲命派遣太中大夫子娇传达给您我的意思。
English: I know that when you were young and full of vigor, you ignored morality, your mind was somewhat shifted, and you did not accept the advice, so I personally dispatched Dr. Zijo to convey my meaning to you.

古文：孔子曰： 过而不改，是谓过矣。 王其深惟孰思之，无违朕意。 
现代文：孔子说： 有过错不改正，这才是过错，您应当深思熟虑，不要违背我的意思。 
English: Confucius said: If you make a mistake and do not correct it, that is a mistake. You should think carefully and not go against my will.

古文：又特以玺书赐王太后，曰： 皇帝使诸吏宦者令承问东平王太后。
现代文：又特意以玺书赐给王太后，说： 皇帝派诸吏宦者令承告东平王太后。
English: He also specially gave the empress dowager an imperial edict, saying, "The emperor has ordered all officials and magistrates to sue the empress dowager Dongping.

古文：朕有闻，王太后少加意焉。
现代文：我听到一些事情，王太后稍微加以注意。
English: I heard something that the Queen Mother took a bit of notice of.

古文：夫福善之门莫美于和睦，患咎之首莫大于内离。
现代文：福气祥和的家庭没有比和睦更美满的，祸患错误的根源没有比内部分裂更大的。
English: There is no better source of happiness for a happy and peaceful family than harmony, and there is no greater source of evil and error than internal divisions.

古文：今东平王出襁褓之中而托于南面之位，以年齿方刚，涉学日寡，骜忽臣下，不自它于太后，以是之间，能无失礼义者，其唯圣人乎！
现代文：东平王是由您一手养育成人也因此而居王位，加以年纪正当血气方刚，学习的时间还少，轻慢大臣，和太后您的关系不同于他人，在这种情况下，能做到不失礼节的人，恐怕衹有圣人了吧！
English: You single-handedly raised King Dongping into an adult, and thus he is on the throne. In addition, you are young and vigorous, you have little time to study, you are a frivolous minister, and your relationship with the empress dowager is different from that of others. In this situation, I am afraid that there is no saint who can achieve proper etiquette.

古文：传曰： 父为子隐，直在其中矣。 王太后明察此意，不可不详。
现代文：传说： 父亲替儿子隐瞒，正直就在其中了，王太后明察这个意思，不可不周详。
English: Legend: When a father hides something from his son, honesty is involved. The Queen Mother must have been aware of this and must have been well-informed.

古文：闺门之内，母子之间，同气异息，骨肉之恩，岂可忽哉！
现代文：家庭之内，母子之间，血脉相连声息不同，骨肉的恩情，难道可以忽略吗！
English: Within a family, between a mother and her child, blood ties may be different, but can the affection of flesh and blood be ignored?

古文：岂可忽哉！
现代文：难道可以忽略吗！
English: Can it be ignored?

古文：昔周公戒伯禽曰： 故旧无大故，则不可弃也，毋求备于一人。 
现代文：从前周公告诫伯禽说： 老朋友没有大错，就不可以抛弃，不要对一个人求全责备。 
English: From the previous week's announcement, the bird said: An old friend is not a big mistake, it can not be abandoned, do not blame a person.

古文：夫以故旧之恩，犹忍小恶，而况此乎！
现代文：因为是老朋友的恩情，还容忍他的小缺点，更何况是这样的骨肉之情呢！
English: Because it is the kindness of an old friend, I still tolerate his small shortcomings, let alone such a flesh-and-blood relationship!

古文：已遣使者谕王，王既悔过服罪，太后宽忍以贳之，后宜不敢。
现代文：我已经派使者告诉思王，他已经悔过服罪了，太后您宽厚容忍来缓和这件事，以后他应该不敢了。
English: I have sent an emissary to tell King Si that he has repented and confessed his sins, and that the Empress Dowager has graciously tolerated this to mitigate the matter, and that he should not dare to do so in the future.

古文：王太后强餐，止思念，慎疾自爱。 
现代文：王太后您尽力吃饭，停止忧虑，慎重对待生病，自己保重。 
English: Empress Dowager, eat as much as you can, stop worrying, treat illness carefully, and take good care of yourself.

古文：字惭俱，因使者顿首谢死罪，愿洒心自改。
现代文：刘宇惭愧恐惧，当着使者的面叩头谢罪，愿意洗心革面，自己改过。
English: Embarrassed and afraid, Liu Yu prostrated himself in front of the envoy and thanked him for his sins. He was willing to purify his heart and face and reform himself.

古文：诏书又敕傅相曰： 夫人之性皆有五常，及其少长，耳目牵于耆欲，故五常销而邪心作，情乱其性，利胜其义，而不失厥家者，未之有也。
现代文：诏书又命令思王的师傅和国相说： 人的天性都有仁、义、礼、智、信五种品德，当他长大，听到的、见到的关系着嗜好欲望，所以五常消失之后而邪念产生，情欲扰乱他的本性，利欲战胜他的道义之心，而不丧失自己的家园的，是没有的。
English: The edict also ordered the king's mentor and the minister of state to say: Human nature has five virtues: benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and faith. When he grows up, what he hears and sees is related to addictive desires. Therefore, after the disappearance of the five elements, evil thoughts arise. Lust disturbs his nature, and greed overcomes his moral heart. There is no one who does not lose his home.

古文：今王富于春秋，气力勇武，获师傅之教浅，加以少所闻见，自今以来，非《五经》之正术，敢以游猎非礼道王者，辄以名闻。 
现代文：现在思王年富力强，气力勇猛威武，得到师傅的教诲很少，加以见闻少，从今以后，不是《五经》的正经学问，敢用游玩打猎等不守礼法的事告诉思王的，立即将他的名字上报。 
English: Now, King Si is rich and powerful, his strength is fierce and formidable, he has received little instruction from masters, and he has seen and heard little. From now on, if anyone dares to tell King Si about things that are not in accordance with the etiquette, such as hunting, his name will be immediately reported.

古文：宇立二十年，元帝崩。
现代文：刘宇在位二十年，元帝崩。
English: Liu Yu reigned for twenty years, and the former emperor passed away.

古文：宇谓中谒者信等曰： 汉大臣议天子少弱，未能治天下，以为我知文法，建欲使我辅佐天子。
现代文：刘宇对宫中谒者信等人说： 汉朝大臣议论天子年少，不能治理天下，认为我知道制度法律，建议由我辅佐天子。
English: Liu Yu said to Zhaoxin and others in the imperial court: The Han Dynasty ministers argued that Tianzi was too young and could not govern the world. They thought that I knew the system and laws, and suggested that I assist Tianzi.

古文：我见尚书晨夜极苦，使我为之，不能也。
现代文：我见到尚书夜劳苦，假使由我干这个工作，恐怕不能胜任。
English: I saw that Shang Shu worked hard at night. If I were to do this job, I'm afraid I wouldn't be able to handle it.

古文：今暑热，县官年少，持服恐无处所，我危得之！ 
现代文：现在天气炎热，天子年幼，守孝恐怕没有地方，我险些得到皇位！ 
English: Now the weather is hot, the emperor is young, I'm afraid there's no place for filial piety, I almost got the throne!

古文：比至下，宇凡三哭，饮酒食肉，妻妾不离侧。
现代文：到元帝下葬时，刘宇一共哭了三次，喝酒吃肉，妻妾不离身边。
English: At the time of Emperor Yuan's burial, Liu Yu cried a total of three times, drank wine and ate meat, and his wife and concubine did not leave his side.

古文：又姬朐臑故亲幸，后疏远，数叹息呼天。
现代文：妃子朐脯原来受他宠幸，后来疏远，常叹息呼求上天。
English: The concubine was once his favorite, but later she became estranged from him. She often sighed and cried out to the heavens.

古文：宇闻，斥朐臑为家人子，扫除永巷，数笞击之。
现代文：刘宇听说这件事，废朐腾为没有地位的宫女，让她打扫宫中小路，经常鞭打她。
English: When Liu Yu heard about this, he dethroned Zhengteng as a palace maiden with no status, made her clean the corridors of the palace, and often whipped her.

古文：朐臑私疏宇过失，数令家告之。
现代文：朐脯暗地裹分条记下刘宇的过失，几次让家人告发他。
English: He secretly wrote down Liu Yu's faults on slips of paper and had his family members denounce him several times.

古文：宇觉知，绞杀朐臑。
现代文：刘字发觉，就把朐肠绞死。
English: When Liu Zi found out, he strangled her to death.

古文：有司奏请逮捕，有诏削樊、亢父二县。
现代文：有关部门上奏请求逮捕刘宇，皇帝下诏削去樊、亢父两县。
English: Relevant departments submitted a request for the arrest of Liu Yu, and the emperor issued an edict to cut the two counties of Handan and Handan.

古文：后三岁，天子诏有司曰： 盖闻仁以亲亲，古之道也。
现代文：之后三年，皇帝诏命有司说： 听说仁政是亲近自己的亲人，这是古来的道理。
English: Three years later, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Yuji to say: I heard that benevolence is to be close to one's relatives, which is an ancient principle.

古文：前东平王有阙，有司请废，朕不忍。
现代文：从前东平王有过失，有关部门请求废黜他，我不忍心。
English: Once upon a time, King Dongping made a mistake, and the relevant departments requested to depose him. I couldn't bear it.

古文：又请削，朕不敢专。惟王之至亲，未尝忘于心。
现代文：又请求削减封国，我不敢专断，因为他是最亲近的亲人，从没有忘怀。
English: He also asked for the reduction of the state seal. I don't dare to arbitrate, because he is the closest relative, and I have never forgotten him.

古文：今闻王改行自新，尊修经术，亲近仁人，非法之求，不以奸吏，朕甚嘉焉。
现代文：现在听说他悔过自新，尊重修行经术，和仁德的人亲近，非法的要求，不求官吏，我感到欣慰。
English: Now that I have heard that he has repented and reformed, respects the practice of Buddhism, is close to people of benevolence, and does not ask officials for illegal demands, I feel relieved.

古文：传不云乎？
现代文：传不是说吗？
English: Isn't that what the legend says?

古文：朝过夕改，君子与之。
现代文：朝过夕改，君子赞之。
English: After the morning and evening reforms, the gentleman praised it.

古文：其复前所削县如故。 
现代文：恢复从前削去的封县如故。 
English: The restoration of the previously cut-off counties remains unchanged.

古文：后年来朝，上疏求诸子及《太史公书》，上以问大将军王凤，对曰： 臣闻诸侯朝聘，考文章，正法度，非礼不言。
现代文：后年朝见，上疏请求赐予诸子之书和《史记》，皇帝拿这件事向大将军王凤询问，回答说： 我听说诸侯上朝征聘，研究文章，勘正法令制度，不合礼节的不说。
English: At the imperial court the following year, Shang Shou requested to be given the Book of Sons and the Chronicle. The emperor asked the general Wang Feng about this matter, and he replied: I heard that princes were recruited to the imperial court, and that they were required to study articles and examine the system of laws and regulations, not to mention that it was not proper etiquette.

古文：今东平王幸得来朝，不思制节谨度，以防危失，而求诸书，非朝聘之义也。
现代文：现在东平王有幸来朝见，不去考虑节制谨慎，以防过失，而索要书籍，不是朝聘的道理。
English: Now that Dongping Wang is fortunate enough to come to the court, he does not consider restraint and caution to prevent mistakes, and asking for books is not the reason for the court appointment.

古文：诸子书或反经术，非圣人；或明鬼神，信物怪；《太史公书》有战国纵横权谲之谋，汉兴之初谋臣奇策，天官灾异，地形厄塞：皆不宜在诸侯王。
现代文：诸子之书有些反对经术，诬蠛圣人，有些记录鬼神，信奉异物怪象；《史记》中有战国纵横权力诡谲的谋略，汉朝刚刚兴起时谋臣奇诡的计策，天象灾变，地势险要：都不适合给诸侯王。
English: Some of the children's books oppose scripture, slander saints, some record ghosts and gods, and believe in strange creatures and monsters; "Histories" contains the cunning strategy of the warring states' vertical and horizontal power, the cunning strategy of the strategist when the Han Dynasty was just emerging, the celestial catastrophe, and the precarious situation: all are not suitable for princes.

古文：不可予。
现代文：不可以给他。
English: You can't give it to him.

古文：不许之辞宜曰： 《五经》圣人所制，万事靡不毕载。
现代文：不同意的托辞应该说： 《五经》是圣人制作的，万事万物没有不记载的。
English: The excuse for not agreeing should be: The Five Classics were made by a sage, and there is nothing that is not recorded.

古文：王审乐道，傅相皆儒者，旦夕讲诵，足以正身虞意。
现代文：王确实乐于正道，师傅国相都是儒生，早晚讲习诵读，足以端正行为愉悦心情。
English: Wang is indeed happy to be on the right path, and his teachers and ministers are all Confucianists. Morning and evening, they study and recite, which is enough to rectify their behavior and make them happy.

古文：夫小辩破义，小道不通，致远恐泥，皆不足以留意。
现代文：小诡计破坏大义，小道理不通达，恐怕会影响远大事业，都不足以留意。
English: It is not enough to pay attention to the small tricks that undermine the great cause, and the small reason is not transparent, I am afraid it will affect the great cause.

古文：诸益于经术者，不爱于王。  
现代文：那些对经术有益处的，对王不加吝惜。  
English: Those who are of benefit to the sutra do not begrudge the king.

古文：对奏，天子如凤言，遂不与。
现代文：所说的话被上奏，皇帝听从王凤的话，就不给思王。
English: What was said was played, and the emperor listened to Wang Feng's words and did not give it to the king.

古文：立三十三年薨，子炀王云嗣。
现代文：东平思王在位三十三年去世，儿子炀王刘云继位。
English: Dongping Si Wang died in the thirty-third year of his reign, and his son Shao Wang Liu Yun succeeded to the throne.

古文：哀帝时，无盐危山土自起覆草，如驰道状，又瓠山石转立。
现代文：哀帝时，无盐危山的地面自行鼓起，上面长满了草，像驰道的形状，又在瓠山的石头转侧起立。
English: During the mourning of the emperor, the ground of the salt-free dangerous mountain swelled up on its own, and the grass grew on it, resembling the shape of a running track, and stood up on the stone side of Mount Lushan.

古文：云及后谒自之石所祭，治石象瓠山立石，束倍草，并祠之。
现代文：刘云和王后谒亲自到石头那儿祭祀，把一个石头雕成瓠山的石头那样，用束倍草作神，一并祭祀。
English: Liu Yun and the queen personally went to the stone to make a sacrifice. They carved a stone into the stone of Lushan Mountain, used a bunch of rushes to make a god, and sacrificed together.

古文：建平三年，息夫躬、孙宠等共因幸臣董贤告之。
现代文：建平三年，息夫躬、孙宠等人一起依靠得到宠幸的大臣董贤告发这件事。
English: In the third year of Jianping, Zhiwu Mu, Sun Zhao and others together relied on the favored minister Dong Xian to report this matter.

古文：是时，哀帝被疾，多所恶，事下有司，逮王、后谒下狱验治，言使巫傅恭、婢合欢等祠祭诅祝上，为云求为天子。
现代文：这时，哀帝有病，对许多事感到厌恶，将此事交给有关部门，逮捕炀王和王后谒下狱审问，说派巫师傅恭、婢女合欢等人祭祀时诅祝皇帝，替刘云祈求当皇帝。
English: At this time, Emperor Ai was ill and disgusted with many things. He handed the matter over to the relevant departments, arrested the king and queen, and sent them to prison for interrogation. He said that he would send the sorcerer Fu Gong, the servant girl He Guan and others to curse and wish for the emperor during the sacrifice, and pray for Liu Yun to become the emperor.

古文：云又与知灾异者高尚等指星宿，言上疾必不愈，云当得天下。
现代文：刘云又和知道灾异的人高尚等观察星宿，说皇帝的病一定不会痊愈，刘云应该得到天下。
English: Liu Yun also observed the stars with people who knew the calamity, saying that the emperor's illness would not be cured, and Liu Yun should be given the world.

古文：石立，宣帝起之表也。
现代文：石头起立，是宣帝兴起的象征。
English: The stone standing up is a symbol of the rise of Emperor Xuan.

古文：有司请诛王，有诏废徙房陵。
现代文：有关部门请求诛杀炀王，皇帝下诏将他废黜迁到房陵。
English: The relevant departments requested to kill the king, and the emperor decreed that he be dethroned and moved to the mausoleum.

古文：云自杀，谒弃市。
现代文：刘云自杀，谒被处死弃尸街市。
English: Liu Yun committed suicide, and Zou was executed and his body dumped in the city's morgue.

古文：立十七年，国除。
现代文：在位十七年，封国被除。
English: In the seventeenth year of Liu Yuan's reign, Kawama Province was abolished.

古文：元始元年，王莽欲反哀帝政，白太皇太后，立云太子开明为东平王，又立思王孙成都为中山王。
现代文：元始元年，王莽想改变哀帝的做法，上奏太皇太后，立刘云的太子刘开明为东平王，又立思王的孙子刘成都为中山王。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Mang wanted to change the practice of mourning the emperor, so he summoned the Grand Empress Dowager and appointed Liu Yun's son Liu Kaiming as the King of Dongping, and Liu Chengdu, the grandson of King Si, as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：开明立三年，薨，无子。
现代文：刘开明在位三年，去世，没有儿子。
English: Liu Kaiming reigned for three years and died without a son.

古文：复立开明兄严乡侯信子匡为东平王，奉开明后。
现代文：又立刘开明的兄长严乡侯刘信的儿子型匡为塞垩王，继承刘题塱之后。
English: He also appointed Liu Kaiming's brother Yan Xiang Hou Liu Xin's son Kata Kuang as the King of Sai Ye, succeeding Liu Tie Ye.

古文：王莽居摄，东郡太守翟义与严乡侯信谋举兵诛莽，立信为天子。
现代文：王菱任摄政的职位，塞蹙太守翌盏和垒塑堡型值谋划发兵诛杀玉菱，立型值为天子。
English: Wang Ling was appointed to the position of regent, and the next ruler of Xieyuan was the warlord who planned to send soldiers to kill Yuling. The vertical value is the son of heaven.

古文：兵败，皆为莽所灭。
现代文：兵败，都被王菱所灭。
English: Defeated, they were all destroyed by Wang Ling.

古文：中山哀王竟，初元二年立为清河王。三年，徙中山，以幼少未之国。
现代文：中山哀王刘童，扭五二年被立为清河王，三年之后，迁到中山，因为年幼没有到封国去。
English: Liu Tong, the king of mourning in Zhongshan, was appointed the king of Qinghe in 1952. Three years later, he moved to Zhongshan because he was too young to go to the feudal state.

古文：建昭四年，薨邸，葬杜陵，无子，绝。
现代文：建昭四年，在官邸去世，葬在杜陵，没有儿子，断绝。
English: Jian Zhao four years, died in the residence, buried in the mausoleum, no son, severed.

古文：太后归居外家戎氏。
现代文：太后回去住在外戚家戎氏。
English: The empress dowager went back to live with her maternal relatives, the Ebisu clan.

古文：孝元皇帝三男。
现代文：孝元皇帝有三个儿子。
English: Emperor Xiaoyuan had three sons.

古文：王皇后生孝成帝，傅昭仪生定陶共王康，冯昭仪生中山孝王兴。
现代文：王皇后生孝成帝，傅昭仪生定陶共王刘康，冯昭仪生中山孝王刘兴。
English: Empress Wang gave birth to Emperor Xiaocheng, Fu Zhaoyi gave birth to King Liu Kang of Dingtao, and Feng Zhaoyi gave birth to King Liu Xing of Zhongshan.

古文：定陶共王康，永光三年立为济阳王。
现代文：定陶共王刘康，永光三年立为济阳王。
English: Liu Kang, the king of Dingtao, and Yongguang, the king of Jiyang.

古文：八年，徙为山阳王。
现代文：八年之后，迁为山阳王。
English: Eight years later, he moved to Sanyo-o.

古文：八年，徙定陶。
现代文：又过八年，迁到定陶。
English: Eight years later, he moved to Jingtao.

古文：王少而爱，长多材艺，习知音声，上奇器之。
现代文：定陶共王年少时被元帝所钟爱，长大后多才多艺，熟悉音乐，皇帝非常器重他。
English: King Ding Tao was loved by Emperor Yuan when he was young. When he grew up, he was multi-talented and familiar with music. The emperor held him in high esteem.

古文：母昭仪又幸，几代皇后太子。
现代文：他的母亲傅昭仪又受到宠幸，几乎代替皇后太子。
English: His mother, Fu Zhaoyi, was also favored, almost replacing the Empress with the Crown Prince.

古文：语在《元后》及《史丹传》。
现代文：事情记录在《元后》和《史丹传》中。
English: The incident was recorded in "After the Yuan Dynasty" and "Stan's Biography."

古文：成帝即位，缘先帝意，厚遇异于它王。
现代文：成帝即位后，遵守先帝之意，对定陶共王的待遇仍然不同于其他诸王。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Cheng, in accordance with the wishes of the former emperor, the treatment of King Ding Tao was still different from that of other kings.

古文：十九年薨，子欣嗣。
现代文：在位十九年去世，儿子刘欣继位。
English: He died 19 years into his reign and was succeeded by his son Liu Xin.

古文：十五年，成帝无子，征入为皇太子。
现代文：即位十五年后，成帝没有儿子，征召入宫作皇太子。
English: Fifteen years after his accession to the throne, Emperor Cheng had no son, so he was summoned to the palace to be crown prince.

古文：上以太子奉大宗后，不得顾私亲，乃立楚思王子景为定陶王，奉共王后。
现代文：皇帝因为太子要奉大宗之后，不能衹顾私家亲戚，就立楚思王的儿子刘景为定陶王，继承共王之后。
English: As the emperor could not ignore his own relatives, he appointed Liu Jing, the son of King Chuxi, as King Dingtao to succeed the co-kings.

古文：成帝崩，太子即位，是为孝哀帝。
现代文：成帝去世，太子即位，就是孝哀帝。
English: When Emperor Cheng died and the crown prince ascended to the throne, it was a time of filial piety.

古文：即位二年，追尊共王为共皇帝，置寝庙京师，序昭穆，仪如孝元帝。
现代文：即位两年，追尊共王为共皇，把寝庙置于京师，排昭穆顺序时，礼仪和孝元帝一样。
English: In the first two years of his reign, the etiquette was the same as that of Emperor Xiaoyuan when the co-emperors were honored, the sleeping temples were placed in the capital, and the emperors were ranked in order of precedence.

古文：徙定陶王景为信都王云。
现代文：改定陶王景为信都王。
English: It was decided that Tao Wangjing would be the king of the capital city.

古文：中山孝王兴，建昭二年立为信都王。
现代文：中山孝王刘兴，建昭二年被立为信都王。
English: Liu Xing, Zhongshan's filial prince, and Jian Zhao, who was appointed the prince of Xindu two years ago.

古文：十四年，徙中山。成帝之议立太子也，御史大夫孔光以为《尚书》有殷及王，兄终弟及，中山王元帝之子，宜为后。
现代文：十四年之后，迁为中山王，成帝商议立太子时，御史大夫孔光认为《尚书》有殷朝灭亡的教训，继承王位，兄长死了弟弟继位，中山王是元帝的儿子，应为后一个皇帝。
English: Fourteen years later, when he was transferred to the position of Zhongshan King and Emperor Cheng negotiated the appointment of a crown prince, the imperial historian Kong Guang believed that "Shangshu" had the lesson of the demise of the Yin Dynasty, he inherited the throne, his elder brother died and his younger brother succeeded to the throne, Zhongshan King was the son of Emperor Yuan and should be the last emperor.

古文：成帝以中山王不材，又兄弟，不得相入庙。
现代文：成帝认为中山王没有才能，又是兄弟，不能一起进入宗庙。
English: Emperor Cheng believed that Zhongshan Wang had no talent and was a brother, so they could not enter the ancestral temple together.

古文：外家王氏与赵昭仪皆欲用哀帝为太子，故遂立焉。
现代文：外戚王氏和赵昭仪都想让哀帝当太子，所以就立了他。
English: His maternal relatives, the Wang clan and Zhao Zhaoyi, both wanted to make Emperor Ai the crown prince, so they set him up.

古文：上乃封孝王舅冯参为宜乡侯，而益封孝王万户，以尉其意。
现代文：皇帝就封孝王的舅父冯参为宜乡侯，而且又加封给孝王万户，以表示安慰。
English: The emperor made Feng San, the uncle of Prince Xiao Wang, the governor of Yi Township, and also gave him the title of Prince Xiao Wang of Wanyu to express his consolation.

古文：三十年，薨，子衎嗣。
现代文：在位三十年，去世。儿子刘衍继位。
English: He died after thirty years on the throne and was succeeded by his son Liu Yan.

古文：七年，哀帝崩，无子，征中山王衎入即位，是为平帝。
现代文：在位七年，哀帝去世，没有儿子，征召中山王刘术入宫即位，就是平帝。
English: In the seventh year of his reign, Emperor Ai died without a son, and the king of Zhongshan, Liu Shu, was summoned to the palace to take the throne. This was Emperor Ping.

古文：太皇太后以帝为成帝后，故立东平思王孙桃乡顷侯子成都为中山王，奉孝王后。
现代文：太皇太后认为皇帝是成帝的后代，所以立束平思王的孙子桃乡顷侯的儿子刘成都为中山王，继承在孝王之后。
English: The empress dowager thought that the emperor was a descendant of Emperor Cheng, so Liu Chengdu, the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson of the grandson

古文：王莽时绝。
现代文：王莽时断绝。
English: Wang Mengshi broke it off.

古文：赞曰：孝元之后，遍有天下，然而世绝于孙，岂非天哉！
现代文：赞曰：孝元皇帝的后代，广有天下，然而在孙子一代就断了后嗣，难道不是天意吗！
English: Zang said, "There are descendants of Emperor Xiaoyuan all over the world, but in the grandchildren's generation, the heirs are cut off. Isn't that God's will?

古文：淮阳宪王于时诸侯为聪察矣，张博诱之，几陷无道。
现代文：淮阳宪玉在当时的诸侯中是聪明的了，趔引诱他，几乎陷于无道的境地。
English: Huaiyang Xianyu was the wisest among the princes at that time, and Zou lured him into an almost hopeless situation.

古文：《诗》云 贪人败类 ，古今一也。
现代文：《诗经》说 贪婪者是害群之马 ，古今都是如此。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that the greedy are the black sheep of the herd, and this has been true throughout the ages.

