古文：朝起早，夜眠迟。老易至，惜此时。
现代文：清晨要早起，晚上要晚睡，人的一生，倏忽间就从幼儿变成了老者，我们应珍惜此时此刻的时光。
English: We have to get up early in the morning and go to bed late at night. In a person's lifetime, they go from being a child to an old man in a blink of an eye. We should cherish the time we have right now.

古文：晨必盥，兼漱口。
现代文：早上起床必须先洗脸，然后刷牙漱口。
English: When you get up in the morning, you must first wash your face, then brush your teeth and rinse your mouth.

古文：便溺回，辄净手。
现代文：每次大小便后，一定要洗手。
English: Be sure to wash your hands after every bowel movement.

古文：冠必正，纽必结。袜与履，俱紧切。
现代文：帽子要戴端正，穿衣服要把纽扣纽好；袜子和鞋子都要穿得平整，鞋带要系紧，这样全身仪容才整齐。
English: The hat should be worn neatly, the clothes should be buttoned up; the socks and shoes should be worn flat, and the shoelaces should be tied tightly, so that the whole body is neat.

古文：置冠服，有定位。勿乱顿，致污秽。
现代文：脱下来的帽子和衣服应当放置在固定的位置，不要随手乱丢乱放，以免弄皱弄脏。
English: Hats and clothes that have been taken off should be placed in a fixed position, and should not be thrown around, so as not to wrinkle or get dirty.

古文：衣贵洁，不贵华。
现代文：穿衣服注重的是整洁，不必讲究衣服的昂贵华丽。
English: When wearing clothes, the emphasis is on neatness, and there is no need to pay attention to the expensive ornateness of clothes.

古文：上循分，下称家。
现代文：一方面应考虑自己的身份及场合，另一方面要衡量家庭的经济状况。
English: On the one hand, they should consider their own status and circumstances, and on the other hand, they should measure the economic status of the family.

古文：对饮食，勿拣择。食适可，勿过则。
现代文：对于吃的东西，不要挑挑拣拣；吃饭要适可而止，不要过量。
English: Don't be picky about what you eat; eat in moderation, not to excess.

古文：年方少，勿饮酒。饮酒醉，最为丑。
现代文：年少时不可饮酒，因为一旦喝醉了，就会丑态毕露，颜面尽失。
English: Do not drink alcohol when you are young, because once you are drunk, you will be ugly and lose face.

古文：步从容，立端正。
现代文：走路时步伐要从容不迫，站立时要端正直立。
English: When walking, the pace should be leisurely, and when standing, it should be upright.

古文：揖深圆，拜恭敬。
现代文：作揖行礼时应把身子躬下去，叩头跪拜要表现得恭恭敬敬。
English: When making prostration, you should bow your body down, and show respect and reverence when bowing and kneeling.

古文：勿践阈，勿跛倚。勿箕踞，勿摇髀。
现代文：进门时脚不要踩到门槛，站立时不要斜着身子靠在墙上，坐着时不可以伸长双腿，腿更不可以抖动。
English: Do not step on the threshold when entering the door, do not lean against the wall when standing, do not stretch your legs when sitting, and do not shake your legs.

古文：缓揭帘，勿有声。
现代文：进门时揭帘子的动作要轻缓，尽量不发出声响。
English: When entering the door, the action of opening the curtain should be gentle, and try not to make a sound.

古文：宽转弯，勿触棱。
现代文：走路转弯时与物品的边角保持较宽的距离，才不会碰伤了身体。
English: When walking and turning, keep a wide distance from the edges and corners of objects, so as not to injure your body.

古文：执虚器，如执盈。
现代文：拿空的器具要像拿盛满东西的一样小心谨慎。
English: Take empty utensils as carefully as you would a full one.

古文：入虚室，如有人。
现代文：进到没人的房间里，要像有人在一样，不可随意闲逛。
English: If you go into an empty room, act as if someone is there. Don't wander around at will.

古文：事勿忙，忙多错。勿畏难，勿轻略。
现代文：做事不要急忙慌张，匆忙就容易出错，做事情不要怕困难，不要犹豫退缩，也不要轻率随便而应付了事。
English: Don't do things in a hurry and panic, it's easy to make mistakes when you're in a hurry, don't be afraid of difficulties, don't hesitate to back down, and don't take things lightly.

古文：斗闹场，绝勿近。
现代文：凡是容易发生争吵打斗的不良场所，是非之地，绝对不可以接近。
English: Any bad place that is prone to quarrels and fights, the land of right and wrong, should never be approached.

古文：邪僻事，绝勿问。
现代文：对于邪恶怪僻、荒诞不经的事情不要好奇，不要追问。
English: Don't be curious and don't ask questions about evil, bizarre and grotesque things.

古文：将入门，问孰存。
现代文：将要入门之前先问屋内是否有人，不要冒失闯入。
English: Ask if there is anyone in the house before you go in. Don't break in.

古文：将上堂，声必扬。
现代文：将要走进厅堂时，先提高声音，要让厅堂里的人知道。
English: If you are going to enter someone's living room, make sure you make a lot of noise.

古文：人问谁，对以名。吾与我，不分明。
现代文：当有人询问你是谁的时候，应当大方地说出名字，不要只说 吾 或是 我 ，让人无法知道到底是谁。
English: When someone asks you who you are, you should generously say your name, don't just say "I" or "me," so that people don't know who you are.

古文：用人物，须明求。
现代文：要借用别人的物品，必须事先向物主提出请求。
English: If you want to borrow someone else's item, you must make a request to the owner in advance.

古文：倘不问，即为偷。
现代文：如果没有征得人家的同意，那就相当于偷窃的行为。
English: If consent is not given, it is tantamount to theft.

古文：借人物，及时还。人借物，有勿悭。
现代文：借用他人的物品用完了要立刻归还；别人借用你的东西，如果有，一定不要吝啬。
English: When you have finished using someone else's belongings, return them immediately; if someone else borrows something of yours, don't be stingy with it.

