古文：刘瓛陆澄刘瓛，字子圭，沛国相人，晋丹阳尹惔六世孙也。
现代文：刘瓛字子圭，是沛国相地人，晋丹阳尹刘恢的第六代孙。
English: Liu Zi Zi Gui, is a native of Pei Guo Xiang, the sixth generation grandson of Jin Danyang Yin Liu Wei.

古文：祖弘之，给事中。
现代文：他祖父刘弘之曾做给事中。
English: His grandfather, Liu Hongzhi, had been in the middle of something.

古文：父惠，治书御史。
现代文：他父亲刘惠，是治书御史。
English: His father, Liu Hui, is a historian.

古文：瓛初州辟祭酒主簿。
现代文：刘瓛起初被州征做祭酒主簿。
English: At first, Liu Ye was requisitioned by the state to be the master of the sacrificial wine.

古文：宋大明四年，举秀才；兄璲亦有名，先应州举。至是别驾东海王元曾与瓛父惠书曰： 比岁贤子充秀，州闾可谓得人。 
现代文：宋大明四年被举荐为秀才，他哥哥刘琏也颇有名气，在这之前就应了州的举荐，至此，别驾柬海王元曾给刘珊父亲刘惠的信中说： 连年由你的好儿子充任秀才，州裹闾裹可说是有合适人才。 
English: Song Daming was recommended as a talented person four years ago, and his brother Liu Xuanru is also quite famous. Prior to this, he had responded to the state's recommendation. At this point, his uncle, Wang Yuan, wrote to Liu Shan's father, Liu Hui, saying: "For years, your good son has been appointed as a talented person. It can be said that the state has the right talent."

古文：除奉朝请，不就。
现代文：授予刘奉朝请，他没有接受。
English: He did not accept Liu Bongchao's invitation.

古文：少笃学，博通《五经》。
现代文：刘瓛从小酷爱学习，《五经》全部精通。
English: Liu Ye loved to study from a young age, and was well-versed in the Five Classics.

古文：聚徒教授，常有数十人。
现代文：聚集门徒进行教授，门徒通常都有数十人。
English: He gathers disciples to teach, and there are usually dozens of disciples.

古文：丹阳尹袁粲于后堂夜集，巘在座，粲指庭中柳树谓巘曰： 人谓此是刘尹时树，每想高风；今复见卿清德，可谓不衰矣。 
现代文：丹阳尹袁粲曾在他的后堂晚上聚会，刘当时在座，袁粲指着庭中柳树对刘瓛说： 有人说这是刘尹时的树，每每想念他的高尚风范；现在又看到你的廉洁德行，可以说门风不衰啊。 
English: Danyang's Yin Yuanqi once held a party in the evening in his backyard. Liu Bei was present at the time. Yuanqi pointed to the willow tree in the courtyard and said to Liu Bei: Some people say that this is Liu Yinqi's tree. I always miss his noble demeanor. Now that I see your integrity and virtue, I can say that the door is still open.

古文：荐为秘书郎，不见用。
现代文：荐举他做秘书郎，没有被任用。
English: He was recommended for the post of secretary, but was not appointed.

古文：除邵陵王郡主簿，安陆王国常侍，安成王抚军行参军，公事免。
现代文：除授邵陵王郡主簿，安陆王国常侍，空虚王抚军行参军，后因公事被免职。
English: In addition to being awarded the master's book of King Shao Ling, the attendant of the Anlu Kingdom, Empty King Fuzi joined the army, and was later dismissed for official business.

古文：巘素无宦情，自此不复仕。
现代文：刘瓛一向没有做官的兴趣，从这以后没有再出来作官。
English: Liu Wei has never been interested in being an official, and has not been an official since then.

古文：除车骑行参军，南彭城郡丞，尚书祠部郎，并不拜。
现代文：除授他车骑行参军，南彭城郡丞，尚书祠部郎，他都没接受任命。
English: In addition to awarding him the car ride to join the army, Nanpeng County magistrate, Shangshu minister, he did not accept the appointment.

古文：袁粲诛，巘微服往哭，并致赙助。
现代文：袁粲遭诛，刘瓛身着便服前往哀哭，并且送了葬丧费。
English: Yuan Rong was beaten, Liu Rong went to mourn in civilian clothes, and sent the funeral expenses.

古文：太祖践阼，召巘入华林园谈语，谓巘曰： 吾应天革命，物议以为何如？ 
现代文：太祖即皇帝位，召刘瓛进华林园谈话，对刘瓛说： 我顺应天意实行革命，人们的议论会怎么样? 
English: The great-grandfather, i.e. the emperor, summoned Liu Bei to enter the Chinese Forest Garden for a talk, and said to Liu Bei: I am carrying out the revolution in accordance with God's will, what will people's discussion be like?

古文：巘对曰： 陛下诫前轨之失，加之以宽厚，虽危可安；若循其覆辙，虽安必危矣。 
现代文：刘瓛回答说： 陛下以前车之失作为告诫，又宽厚待民，即使有危险也会平安；假若沿着前车的覆辙走下去，虽说暂时乎安，终必危险。 
English: Liu Ye replied, "Your Majesty has taken the loss of the previous chariot as a warning, and treated the people generously. Even if there is danger, you will be safe. If you follow the same path as the previous chariot, even if you are temporarily safe, you will eventually be in danger.

古文：既出，帝顾谓司徒褚渊曰： 方直乃尔！学士故自过人。 
现代文：刘瓛出园后，太祖回头对司徒褚渊说： 这般正直，学士毕竟超过常人。 
English: After Liu Ye left the garden, the great-grandfather looked back and said to Szeto Qianyuan: With such honesty, the scholar is, after all, above ordinary people.

古文：敕巘使数入，而巘自非诏见，未尝到宫门。
现代文：后来皇上多次传敕召塑噬，而型銮自己不是召见，就不曾到宫门来。
English: Later, the emperor summoned Shifu several times, but Shifu did not come to the palace gate unless summoned.

古文：上欲用巘为中书郎，使吏部尚书何戢喻旨。
现代文：皇上想任用刘瓛做中书郎，派吏部尚书何戢说明旨意。
English: The emperor wanted to appoint Liu Xuan as a middle school teacher, and sent the clerk, Shangshu Hejun, to explain his intention.

古文：戢谓巘曰： 上意欲以凤池相处，恨君资轻，可且就前除，少日当转国子博士，便即后授。 
现代文：何戢对刘城说： 皇上的意思想把你安置在中书省，遗憾的是你的资历浅了，可以暂时接受前面的任命，遇些日子会转国子博士，随后就可授后面的任命。 
English: He Zhen said to Liu Cheng: The emperor's intention is to place you in the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Unfortunately, your seniority is shallow, so you can temporarily accept the previous appointment. In some days, you will be promoted to Dr. Guo Zi, and then you can be awarded the latter appointment.

古文：巘曰： 平生无荣进意，今闻得中书郎而拜，岂本心哉！ 
现代文：刘瓛说： 平生就没有荣耀进取的想法，现在听说能就职中书郎，哪是我的本心呢! 
English: Liu Wei said: I have never had the idea of glory and progress in my life. Now I hear that I can take up the post of middle school teacher. What is my true intention?

古文：后以母老阙养，重拜彭城郡丞，谓司徒褚渊曰： 自省无廊庙之才，所愿唯保彭城丞耳。 
现代文：后来他因母亲老了缺少家用，重又就职彭城郡丞。他对司徒褚渊说： 我自省不是朝廷大臣之才，心中的愿望衹要保住彭城丞就够了。 
English: Later, because of his mother's old age and lack of a home, he was re-appointed as Pengcheng county magistrate. He said to Sitou Yuanyuan: I am not a minister of the court. My heart's desire to keep Pengcheng county magistrate is enough.

古文：上又以瓛兼总明观祭酒，除豫章王骠骑记室参军，丞如故，瓛终不就。
现代文：皇上又任用刘瓛兼总明观祭酒，除豫章王骠骑记室参军，丞一职依前不变。
English: The emperor also appointed Liu Xuan as the head of the Mingguan Festival, and in addition to Yu Zhang, Wang Xuan, and the cavalry regiment, the position of the general remained unchanged.

古文：武陵王晔为会稽太守，上欲令瓛为晔讲，除会稽郡丞，学徒从之者转众。
现代文：刘瓛最终没有接受。武陵王刘晔为会稽太守，皇上想让刘瓛为刘晔讲学，除授铋艳为会稽郡丞，跟随他的学生越来越多。
English: In the end, Liu Ye did not accept. Wuling King Liu Ye was the auditor general of the association, and the emperor wanted Liu Ye to give lectures to Liu Ye. In addition, Zhuo Yan was the auditor general of the association, and more and more students followed him.

古文：永明初，竟陵王子良请为征北司徒记室。
现代文：永明初年，竟陵王子良请他做征北司徒记室。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, he was invited by the Prince of Jingling to be the secretary of the Northern Expedition.

古文：瓛与张融、王思远书曰： 奉教使恭召，会当停公事，但念生平素抱，有乖恩顾。
现代文：刘瓛给张融、王思远的信说：奉承教令使人庄重地召请：理当停止原本的公事，衹是想到我平生志愿，违背好意惠顾。
English: Liu Wei's letter to Zhang Rong and Wang Siyuan said: Flattery of the edict makes people solemnly call for: It is reasonable to stop the original business, but it is to think of my lifelong voluntary, contrary to goodwill patronage.

古文：吾性拙人间，不习仕进，昔尝为行佐，便以不能及公事免黜，此皆眷者所共知也。
现代文：我生性笨拙、惯于闲适，没有学习过仕途进取，先前曾经做行佐，便因为不能胜任公事而罢免，这是熟悉我的人都知道的。
English: Those who are familiar with me know that I am clumsy by nature, accustomed to idleness, and have not learned how to make progress. I was previously an assistant, but was dismissed because I was not competent for public affairs.

古文：量己审分，不敢期荣。
现代文：衡量自己掂量职分，不敢期望荣耀。
English: Measure yourself by the weight of your duties, and do not dare to expect glory.

古文：夙婴贫困，加以疏懒，衣裳容发，有足骇者。
现代文：早年因为受贫困缠绕，加上疏懒成性，衣裳头发容貌，够吓人的。
English: In his early years, because of poverty and laziness, his clothes, hair, and appearance were quite frightening.

古文：中以亲老供养，褰裳徒步，脱尔逮今，二代一纪。
现代文：期间因为亲老供养，拎着衣裳走来走去，从那时到现在，跨越二代共十二年。
English: During that time, because of the support of relatives, they walked around with their clothes on. From then until now, it has been a total of twelve years spanning two generations.

古文：先朝使其更自修正，勉厉于阶级之次，见其繿缕，或复赐以衣裳，袁、褚诸公咸加劝励，终不能自反也。
现代文：先朝让我自行修正，劝勉鼓励在阶级的末端，见我衣衫破烂，有时赏赐些衣裳，袁、褚诸公都劝我鼓励我，最终还是不能自己改正过来。
English: The previous government asked me to correct myself, encouraged and encouraged me at the end of the class, saw that my clothes were tattered, and sometimes rewarded me with some clothes. Yuan, Xing and other princes all advised me to encourage me, but in the end I could not correct myself.

古文：一不复为，安可重为哉？
现代文：一次以后就不能再次，怎能重来呢?
English: You can't do it again after the first time, how can you do it again?

古文：昔人有以冠一免不重加于首，每谓此得进止之仪。
现代文：从前的人头上的冠一摘除就不再戴到头上，每每认为这是符合进止的礼仪的。
English: The crowns of the ancients were no longer worn on the head as soon as they were removed, which was considered to be in accordance with progressive etiquette.

古文：古者以贤制爵，或有秩满而辞老，以庸制禄，或有身病而求归者，永瞻前良，在己何若。
现代文：古代以贤德设置爵位，或许有人轶满而告老辞归，以功勋设置禄位，或许有人身体患病而求归乡里，远望前代贤良，自己与他们有哪些相像。
English: In ancient times, nobility was set up by virtue, perhaps someone was full of wealth and retired, and a reward was set up by merit, perhaps someone was physically ill and wanted to return to the countryside, looking forward to the previous generation of virtuous people, and what similarities they had with them.

古文：又上下年尊，益不愿居官次，废晨昏也。
现代文：加上上上下下的人年龄大了，更加不愿做着官而不能早晚问安。
English: In addition, people up and down the country are getting older, and they are even more reluctant to work as an official and not be able to say hello sooner or later.

古文：先朝为此，曲申从许，故得连年不拜荣授，而带帖薄禄。
现代文：先朝因为逭一点经我委婉申说而批准了我，所以能够连年不接受那些荣耀的职街，而祇是附带薄禄。
English: The previous government approved me because it was a bit of a euphemism, so I can not accept those glorious career opportunities for years, but only with a small bonus.

古文：既习此岁久，又齿长疾侵，岂宜摄斋河间之听，厕迹东平之僚？
现代文：已经这样过了好多年了，而今年龄大、疾病侵袭，怎么能适合提起衣摆恭恭敬敬地在河闲听命，跻身于东平的幕僚之中呢?
English: It's been like this for many years, but now that I'm old and sick, how can it be appropriate to dress up, respectfully obey orders, and join Dongping's staff?

古文：本无绝俗之操，亦非能偃蹇为高，此又诸贤所当深察者也。
现代文：原本没有超脱尘俗的操行，也不傲慢地白高自大，这又是诸位贤良应当仔细体察的。
English: Originally, there was no practice of detachment from the world, nor was there any arrogance of self-importance. This is something that all of you should carefully observe.

古文：近奉初教，便自希得托迹于客游之末，而固辞荣级，其故何耶？
现代文：最近刚刚得到要我出来做官的教令后，就希望自己能寄身于出京做官的后列，可是坚决推辞光荣的地位，那是什么缘故呢?
English: Recently, after receiving the order to become an official, I hoped that I could be in the back row of officials leaving Beijing, but I resolutely rejected the glorious position. What is the reason for that?

古文：以古之王侯大人，或以此延四方之士，甚美者则有辐凑燕路，慕君王之义，骧镳魏阙，高公子之仁，继有追申、白而入楚，羡邹枚而游梁，吾非敢叨夫曩贤，庶欲从九九之遗踪。
现代文：古代王侯大人，有些是用这延揽四方的士人，最为突出的是七人投奔明主，就像车辐趋向车轴一样挤满了去燕国的道路，追慕君王的高义，奋蹄扬镳在魏国宫外的阙门。推崇公子的仁德，相继有人追崇申、白而进入楚地，羡慕邹阳、枚乘而游于梁，我不是敢叨先前那些贤人的光，是希图顺应阴阳天道留下的一点踪迹。
English: In ancient times, there were some scholars who used this method to conquer the four directions. The most prominent one was the seven who rushed to Mingzhu. The road to Yan's country was crowded like the spokes of a car moving toward the axle. They admired the king's lofty righteousness and ran outside the Wei State Palace. They praised the boy's benevolence. One after another, some people followed Chongshin, entered Chu and became white, and envied Fenyang, and swam in Liang and became white. I dare not speak of the light of those wise men before, but it is a little trace left by those who hoped to follow the path of Yin and Yang.

古文：既于闻道集泮不殊，而幸无职司拘碍，可得奉温凊，展私计，志在此尔。 
现代文：既然在集泮闻道没有什么不同，而我幸好没官职的约束妨碍，可以侍奉老母能冬暖夏凉，实施我个人的打算，我的志趣在这点罢了。
English: Since there is no difference in the way of collecting and listening to stories, and I fortunately do not have the constraints of an official position to hinder me, I can serve my old mother to warm the winter and cool the summer, and implement my personal plan. My ambition is just this.

古文：除步兵校尉，并不拜。
现代文：除授步兵校尉，他也不接受任职命令。
English: In addition to the award of infantry captain, he also did not accept the order of service.

古文：瓛姿状纤小，儒学冠于当时，京师士子贵游莫不下席受业。
现代文：刘瓛身材矮小，儒家学识却是当时最渊博的，京城的士人贵戚没有不坐下接受他的教育的。
English: Liu Xuan was small in stature, but his knowledge of Confucianism was the most profound at that time. The noblemen of Beijing did not have to sit down to receive his education.

古文：性谦率通美，不以高名自居。
现代文：他为人谦恭坦率平和，不以名声大自居。
English: He is humble, frank and peaceful, and does not boast of his fame.

古文：游诣故人，唯一门生持胡床随后，主人未通，便坐问答。
现代文：拜访老朋友时，衹用一个学生拿着交椅跟在后面，主人尚未出来相会前，就坐下来进行问答。
English: When visiting an old friend, the baboon follows behind with a student holding a chair. Before the owner comes out to meet him, he sits down for a Q&A.

古文：住在檀桥，瓦屋数间，上皆穿漏。
现代文：住在擅摄，数间瓦屋，屋顶都穿孔漏雨了。
English: I live in a place where I'm not allowed to take pictures. There are several tile houses, and the roofs are all leaking.

古文：学徒敬慕，不敢指斥，呼为青溪焉。
现代文：学徒敬仰他，没有敢指责的，把这裹称为青溪。
English: Apprentices admired him, and those who dared not criticize him called him Qingxi.

古文：竟陵王子良亲往修谒。
现代文：竟陵王王皇亲往进见请教。
English: In fact, the crown prince went to see him to ask for advice.

古文：七年，表世祖为瓛立馆，以扬烈桥故主第给之，生徒皆贺。
现代文：永明七年，上表世祖请求给刘瓛建立教馆，把扬烈桥的故主府第给刘瓛做了教馆，学生们都来恭贺。
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, the founder of the Shang Dynasty requested Liu Xuan to build a teaching hall, and the former head office of Yang Lai Bridge was made into a teaching hall for Liu Xuan. The students all came to congratulate.

古文：瓛曰： 室美为人灾，此华宇岂吾宅邪？
现代文：刘瓛说： 房屋华美会成为人的灾祸，这座华美的屋宇能作我的住宅吗?
English: Liu Wei said, "A beautiful house can be a disaster for people. Can this beautiful house be my home?

古文：幸可诏作讲堂，犹恐见害也。 
现代文：幸而是有诏作为讲堂，还担心被害啊! 
English: Fortunately, there is a hall as a lecture hall, but I'm still worried about damage!

古文：未及徙居，遇病，子良遣从瓛学者彭城刘绘、顺阳范缜将厨于瓛宅营斋。
现代文：没来得及迁去居住，遇上生病，子良派遣跟刘瓛学习的人彭城刘绘、从顺阳范缜带着厨具在刘瓛的住宅做饭。
English: Before he had time to move to live, when he fell ill, Ziliang sent Pengcheng Liu Ping, who studied with Liu Ye, and Fan Ye from Shunyang with kitchen utensils to cook in Liu Ye's house.

古文：及卒，门人受学者并吊服临送。
现代文：等到死时，门生和受过他教育的人都来吊服送丧。
English: When he died, his disciples and those who had been educated by him came to see him off.

古文：时年五十六。
现代文：当时他五十六岁。
English: He was fifty-six years old.

古文：瓛有至性，祖母病疽经年，手持膏药，渍指为烂。
现代文：刘瓛性情纯厚，祖母经年生疽。他亲手敷膏药，手指被药汁浸渍烂了。
English: Liu Hui is a pure-hearted person, and his grandmother suffered from gangrene. He applied the plaster himself, and his fingers were impregnated with the medicinal juice and rotted.

古文：母孔氏甚严明，谓亲戚曰： 阿称便是今世曾子。 
现代文：他母亲孔氏很严明，对亲戚说： 阿称就是当今的曾子。 
English: His mother, Ms. Kong, was very strict and said to her relatives, "A is today's great-grandson.

古文：阿称，巘小名也。
现代文：阿称是刘珊的小名。
English: A is a nickname for Liu Shan.

古文：年四十余，未有婚对。
现代文：四十多岁，尚未婚配。
English: He is in his forties and not yet married.

古文：建元中，太祖与司徒褚渊为巘娶王氏女。
现代文：建元年间，太祖与司徒褚渊为刘娶了姓王的女子。
English: During the first year of the Jianyuan era, the great-great-grandfather married a woman surnamed Wang for Liu Ye.

古文：王氏椓壁挂履，土落孔氏床上，孔氏不悦，巘即出其妻。
现代文：王氏在墙上钉木钉挂鞋，泥土落到孔氏的床上，孔氏不高兴，刘珊当即把他妻子打发走了。
English: Mr. Wang was nailing wooden pegs on the wall to hang shoes, and dirt fell on Mr. Kong's bed. Mr. Kong was not happy, and Liu Shan immediately sent his wife away.

古文：及居父丧，不出庐，足为之屈，杖不能起。
现代文：待到他为父亲守丧，他不走出守墓的庐屋，腿弯屈久了，拄着拐杖都站不起来。
English: Until he attends his father's funeral, he does not go out of the tomb, his legs are long bent, and he cannot stand up on crutches.

古文：今上天监元年，下诏为巘立碑，谥曰贞简先生。
现代文：天监元年，当今皇上下韶为刘珊树立碑石，给他的谧号是贞简先生。
English: In the first year of Tianjun, the current emperor and empress set up a monument for Liu Shan, and gave him the nickname Mr. Zhengyan.

古文：所著文集，皆是《礼》义，行于世。
现代文：所撰著的文集，都是《礼》的义理，在社会上流行。
English: The anthologies he has written are all based on the principles of "Rite" and are popular in society.

古文：初，巘讲《月令》毕，谓学生严植曰： 江左以来，阴阳律数之学废矣。
现代文：先前，刘瓛讲解《礼记月令》完毕，对学生严植说： 自从晋室江左中兴以来，阴阳律数的学问荒废了。
English: Earlier, after Liu Wei finished his explanation of "Rites and Rituals of the Month," he said to the students: Since Jin Muroe Zuo Zhongxing, the knowledge of yin and yang laws has been wasted.

古文：吾今讲此，曾不得其仿佛。 
现代文：我现在讲的这些内容，还够不上一个大概。 
English: What I'm about to say is not enough of an outline.

古文：时济阳蔡仲熊礼学博闻，谓人曰： 凡钟律在南，不容复得调平。昔五音金石，本在中土；今既来南，土气偏陂，音律乖爽。 
现代文：当时济阳蔡仲熊尊重学问、知识渊博，对人说： 钟律在南方，不能再得音调协谐，从前五音金石，原本在中原，现在迁来南方，士气偏斜，音律不够顺畅。 
English: At that time, Jiyang Cai Zhongxiong respected learning and was very knowledgeable. He said to people: The bell rhythm is in the south, and it is no longer possible to get the tone harmony. The former five-tone gold and stone, originally in the Central Plains, has now moved to the south. Morale is skewed, and the rhythm is not smooth enough.

古文：巘亦以为然。
现代文：刘聪也认为这话说得对。
English: Liu Cong also thinks this is true.

古文：仲熊历安西记室，尚书左丞。
现代文：蔡仲熊曾做过安西记室，尚书左丞。
English: Cai Zhongxiong once worked in the Anxi Records Office, Shangshu Zuoxiao.

古文：巘弟璡。
现代文：刘瓛的弟弟名叫刘璡。
English: Liu Wei's younger brother is named Liu Wei.

古文：璡字子璥。
现代文：刘璡字子璥。
English: Liu Xuan's character Zi Xuan.

古文：方轨正直。
现代文：方正耿直与刘瓛不相上下。
English: Fang Zhenggeng is on a par with Liu Xuan.

古文：宋泰豫中，为明帝挽郎。
现代文：宋泰豫年间，为明帝挽郎。
English: During the Song and Taiyuan dynasties, he was the favorite of the Ming Emperor.

古文：举秀才，建平王景素征北主簿，深见礼遇。
现代文：举荐为秀才，建乎王景素征北主簿，很受尊重信用。
English: He was recommended as an outstanding talent. He is very respected and trusted.

古文：邵陵王征虏安南行参军。
现代文：邵陵王征虏安南行参军。
English: King Shao Ling conscripted soldiers to march south to join the army.

古文：建元初，为武陵王晔冠军征虏参军。
现代文：建元初年，为武陵王萧晕冠军征虏参军。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he joined the army as a conscript for the champion of Wuling Wang Xiao Huan.

古文：晔与僚佐饮，自割鹅炙。
现代文：萧毕同幕僚助手饮酒，亲自剖鹅肉烤。
English: Xiao Bi drank alcohol with his staff assistant and roasted goose meat himself.

古文：璡曰： 应刃落俎，膳夫之事，殿下亲执鸾刀，下官未敢安席。 
现代文：刘稚说： 用刀在砧板上切割，这是厨师的事，殿下亲自执刀，下官不敢安稳而坐。 
English: Liu Zhi said: It is the chef's job to use the knife to cut on the cutting board. His Royal Highness himself wields the knife, and subordinates do not dare to sit quietly.

古文：因起请退。
现代文：因而起身退出。
English: So he got up and left.

古文：与友人孔澈同舟入东，澈留目观岸上女子，璡举席自隔，不复同坐。
现代文：他跟朋友孔澈同船到东边去，孔澈注目观看岸上的女人，刘稚拿起席子把自己遮隔起来，不再跟他坐在一起。
English: He sailed to the east with his friend Kongché. Kongché watched the woman on the shore. Liu Wuchang took up the mat to shield himself and no longer sat with him.

古文：豫章王太尉板行佐。
现代文：为豫章王太尉板行佐。
English: He was a subordinate of Yuzhang Wangtaifu Banxing.

古文：兄瓛夜隔壁呼璡共语，璡不答，方下床著衣立，然后应。
现代文：他哥哥刘夜晚隔着墙壁呼喊刘雌去谈话，刘珐迟迟不答话，直待他下床穿好衣服站立后，才答应。
English: His brother, Liu Hui, would shout across the wall at night for Liu Mei to come and talk to him. Liu Hui would not answer until he got out of bed, dressed and stood up, and only then did he agree.

古文：瓛问其久，璡曰： 向束带未竟。 
现代文：刘佩问他怎么那样久才答应，刘珐说： 刚才穿衣结带没完好。 
English: When Liu Pei asked him why it took him so long to agree, Liu Yao said: Just now, the dressing knot was not intact.

古文：其立操如此。
现代文：他立身操守到这般地步。
English: He has stood up to this level of scrutiny.

古文：文惠太子召璡入侍东宫，每上事，辄削草。
现代文：文惠太子召刘糙到束宫承侍，每次陈说事情，都要谨慎地反复删改草稿。
English: Prince Wen Hui summoned Liu Bang to attend him at the Imperial Palace. Every time he made a speech, he had to carefully and repeatedly delete and amend the draft.

古文：寻署中兵，兼记室参军大司马军事。射声校尉，卒官。
现代文：不久署中兵，兼记室参军大司马军事，射声校尉，死在官任上。
English: Soon after, Lieutenant Lieutenant, concurrently with the secretary of the office, joined the army, the chief secretary of the military, the captain of the shooting voice, died in office.

古文：陆澄，字彦渊，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆澄字彦渊，吴郡吴人人。
English: Lu Cheng Zi Yan Yuan, Wu County Wu Renren.

古文：祖邵，临海太守。
现代文：他祖父陆邵，任临海太守。
English: His grandfather, Lu Shao, was the governor of Linhai.

古文：父瑗，州从事。
现代文：他父亲陆瑗，任州从事。
English: His father, Lu Yao, worked for the state.

古文：澄少好学，博览无所不知，行坐眠食，手不释卷。
现代文：陆澄从小好学，博览群书、无所不知，行路安坐睡觉吃饭，他都手不释卷。
English: Lu Cheng has been eager to learn since he was a child. He is well-versed in books and knows everything. When he travels, sleeps, sits and eats, he is always on the go.

古文：起家太学博士，中军卫军府行佐，太宰参军，补太常丞，郡主簿，北中郎行参军。
现代文：起始离家出来做官为太学博士，中军卫军府行佐，太宰参军，补太常丞，郡主簿，北中郎行参军。
English: At the beginning, he left home to become an official as a doctor of taigaku, a lieutenant colonel of the Central Army, a member of the Imperial Guard, a member of the Imperial Guard, a member of the Imperial Guard, a member of the Imperial Guard, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, and a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：宋泰始初为尚书殿中郎，议皇后讳及下外，皆依旧称姓。
现代文：宋泰始初年，做尚书殿中郎，在议论皇后避讳以及以下的称谓时，主张依旧称姓。
English: In the first year of Song Taishi, when he was the middle son of Shang Shuden, when discussing the queen's shunning and the following titles, he still advocated the surname.

古文：左丞徐爰案司马孚议皇后不称姓，《春秋》逆王后于齐。澄不引典据明，而以意立议，坐免官，白衣领职。
现代文：左丞徐爰考查司马孚评议主张皇后不称姓，《春秋》有到齐迎王后的句子，陆澄不引用经典据以说明，而凭自己的想法提出建议，因而受到免官的处罚，而以干民百姓的身份兼管职事。
English: Zu Rong Xu's examination of Mafu's review advocated that the empress not use her surname. "Spring and Autumn" has a sentence about welcoming the queen. Lu Cheng did not quote the classics to explain, but made suggestions based on his own ideas. As a result, he was punished by removal from office, and concurrently managed his duties as a commoner.

古文：郎官旧有坐杖，有名无实。澄在官积前后罚，一日并受千杖。
现代文：郎官以前还要因此受杖刑，但有名无实，陆澄在官任累积前后应受的处罚，一天合应受一千杖责。
English: Previously, a vassal would have been punished with the cane for this, but this was a myth. The punishment that Lu Cheng should have received before and after he was appointed to the post amounted to a thousand canes a day.

古文：转通直郎，兼中书郎，寻转兼左丞。
现代文：转通直郎，兼中书郎，时隔不久转兼左丞。
English: He was transferred to Naorō, and also to Chushiro, and soon after to Sadanojo.

古文：泰始六年，诏皇太子朝贺服衮冕九章，澄与仪曹郎丘仲起议： 服冕以朝，实著经文。
现代文：泰始六年，有诏令皇太子朝贺时穿戴饰有九种图纹的衮衣和冠冕，陆澄和仪曹郎丘仲起提议说： 穿戴一定的服饰冠帽朝贺，确实在经文上有记载。
English: In the sixth year of the Taisho era, there was a decree ordering the crown prince to wear a nine-patterned robe and crown for morning greetings. Lu Cheng and the etiquette expert Cao Langqiu made a proposal, saying, "Wearing a certain type of clothing and a crown and hat for morning greetings is indeed recorded in scripture.

古文：秦除六冕，汉明还备。
现代文：秦废除了穿六种冕服的制度，到汉明帝时，才恢复服饰的古制。
English: The Qin Dynasty abolished the system of wearing six kinds of crowned robes, and it was not until the time of Emperor Han Ming that the ancient system of clothing was restored.

古文：魏晋以来，不欲令臣下服衮冕，故位公者加侍官。
现代文：魏晋以来，不想让臣下穿戴衮衣和冠冕，所以地位到了公的人外加侍官。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, they didn't want their subjects to wear the imperial robes and crowns, so the position was given to commoners plus attendants.

古文：今皇太子礼绝群后，宜遵圣王盛典，革近代之制。 
现代文：现今皇太子的礼服超越了历代君主，应遵循圣明君主时代的盛典，革除近代的礼制。 
English: The present-day crown prince's ceremonial dress surpasses that of previous monarchs. It should follow the grandeur of the era of the holy emperors and abolish the modern ceremonial system.

古文：寻转著作正员郎，兼官如故。
现代文：事隔不久转著作正员郎，兼任官职依前未变。
English: Soon after the incident, he was transferred to the post of vice-minister, and his official position remained unchanged.

古文：除安成太守，转刘韫抚军长史，加绥远将军、襄阳太守，并不拜。
现代文：除授安成太守，转刘报抚军长史，加封绥远将军、襄阳太守，他都没接受任职命令。
English: In addition to the award of Ancheng Daju, the transfer of Liu Baofu to the army commander history, the addition of General Xinyuan, and the Yangyang Daju, he did not accept the appointment order.

古文：仍转刘秉后军长史、东海太守。
现代文：还是转刘秉后军长史、东海太守。
English: After Liu Bing, he was still the commander-in-chief and the governor of the East Sea.

古文：迁御史中丞。
现代文：迁御史中丞。
English: He was later promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：建元元年，骠骑谘议沈宪等坐家奴客为劫，子弟被劾，宪等晏然。左丞任遐奏澄不纠，请免澄官。
现代文：建元元年，骠骑谘议沈宪等因家奴门客为劫盗，子弟被纠劾，沈宪等反而安逸的事，左丞任遐弹奏陆澄不进行纠察，请求罢免陆澄的官。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, Shen Xian and others were picketed because their family members were robbers, their children were impeached, but Shen Xian and others were at ease. Zuo Zheng did not picket Lu Cheng and requested the removal of Lu Cheng's officials.

古文：澄上表自理曰：
现代文：陆澄上表自己申说理由说：
English: Lu Cheng stated the following as the reason for his resignation:

古文：周称旧章，汉言故事，爰自河雒，降逮淮海，朝之宪度，动尚先准。
现代文：周时称说先前的章程，汉朝则讲说过去的事例，于是自河雒开始，降到淮海，朝廷宪章制度，动辄崇尚先前的法则。
English: Zhou Zhi talked about the previous regulations, and the Han Dynasty talked about the past cases, so starting from Hebei and down to Huaihai, the imperial charter system always advocated the previous rules.

古文：若乃任情违古，率意专造，岂谓酌诸故实，择其茂典？
现代文：假如竟是任由情感违背古制，由着自己的意思专心造就，哪还能说从以前诸多实例中斟酌出来，选择其中美好的制度?
English: If emotions are allowed to go against the old system, and it is created by one's own will and concentration, how can it be said that it is possible to consider many examples from the past and choose the best system?

古文：案遐启弹新除谘议参骠骑大将军军事沈宪、太子庶子沈旷并弟息，敕付建康，而宪被使，旷受假，俱无归罪事状。
现代文：考查任遐弹奏新除授的谘议参骠骑大将军军事沈宪、太子庶子沈旷及其弟弟和子嗣，有敕交付建康，可是沈宪当时已被派做使臣，沈旷受假，都没有追究罪责的情状。
English: In the examination of the newly-dismissed advisory cavalry general military Shen Xian, the prince's illegitimate son Shen Kuang and his younger brother and son, there was evidence of delivery to Jiankang, but Shen Xian had been sent as an envoy at that time, Shen Kuang was on leave, and there was no situation of criminal responsibility.

古文：臣以不纠宪等为失。
现代文：我因为没有对沈宪等督察检举而被指责为过失。
English: I was accused of negligence for failing to report Shen Xian and other inspectors.

古文：伏寻晋、宋左丞案奏，不乏于时，其及中丞者，从来殆无。
现代文：随即检核晋、宋的左丞文书案卷，那时弹劾的奏章不少，其中追究到中丞的，几乎从来没有。
English: Thereupon, the left senatorial documents of Jin and Song were examined. At that time, there were quite a few impeachment motions, and those that were investigated to the middle senate were almost never investigated.

古文：王献之习达朝章，近代之宗，其为左丞，弹司徒属王濛惮罚自解，属疾游行，初不及中丞。
现代文：王献之对朝廷制度熟悉通达，是近世的宗师，他做左丞，弹劾司徒属下的吏员王濛担心受罚白行辩解，带病行走，起初没有究及到中丞。
English: Wang Xianzhi was well-versed in the imperial court system and was a modern-day mentor. He was a middleman, and when he tried to impeach the official under the tutelage of the tutor, Wang Yao, he was afraid of being punished and justified his actions by saying that he was ill. At first, he did not investigate the middleman.

古文：桓秘不奔山陵，左丞郑袭不弹秘，直弹中丞孔欣时，又云别摄兰台检校，此径弹中丞之谓。
现代文：桓秘没去祭皇陵，左丞郑袭不弹劾桓秘，而直接弹劾中丞孔欣时，又说及别摄兰台检校，造才属于直接弹劾中丞的说法。
English: When Emperor Kangxi did not go to the imperial mausoleum, General Zheng He did not impeach Emperor Kangxi, but directly impeached Vice-Admiral Kongxin, he also said that it was a direct impeachment of Vice-Admiral Kangxi.

古文：唯左丞庾登之奏镇北檀道济北伐不进，致虎牢陷没，蕃岳宰臣，引咎谢愆，而责帅之劾，曾莫奏闻，请收治道济，免中丞何万岁。
现代文：衹有左丞庾登之弹奏镇北将军檀道济北伐不进取，致使虎牢关陷落，州府大吏、朝廷重臣，纷纷引咎谢罪，可是对于身负重要责任的主帅的弹劾，竟然没有奏明，当请收治檀道济，罢免中丞何万岁。
English: There is a legend that Zuo Zheng played the role of Zhenbei General Dandoji in the Northern Expedition and failed to advance, resulting in the fall of Hougou Guan. The prefectural officials and the chief ministers of the imperial court have blamed Xie Sin. However, the impeachment of the commander, who bears important responsibilities, has not been reported. It is time to arrest Dandoji and dismiss Zhongzheng.

古文：夫山陵情敬之极，北伐专征之大，秘霸季之贵，道济元勋之盛，所以咎及南司，事非常宪，然秘事犹非及中丞也。
现代文：对于皇陵的拜祭这是人情中至关重要的，北伐这是用兵中的大事，桓秘是霸业时代的权贵，檀道济是元勋重臣中声威鼎盛的人物，所以追究罪责涉及南司，事情不属寻常法典，然而桓秘的事也还未追及中丞。
English: For the worship of the imperial mausoleum, this is of vital importance in the human condition, the Northern Expedition is a major event in the use of soldiers, Kansai is a powerful person in the era of hegemony, and Dandoji is a powerful figure among the senior generals, so the investigation of the crime involves Nanshi, the matter is not an ordinary code, but the matter of Kansai has not yet caught up with Chujo.

古文：今若以此为例，恐人之贵贱，事之轻重，物有其伦，不可相方。
现代文：现在假如把这当作先例，恐怕贵人贱人，重事轻事，各有类别，不能相比。
English: Now if we take this as a precedent, I'm afraid nobles and commoners, important and unimportant, all have their own categories and cannot be compared.

古文：左丞江奥弹段景文，又弹裴方明；左丞甄法崇弹萧珍，又弹杜骥，又弹段国，又弹范文伯；左丞羊玄保又弹萧汪；左丞殷景熙弹张仲仁；兼左丞何承天弹吕万龄。并不归罪，皆为重劾。
现代文：左丞江奥弹劾段景文，又弹劾裴方明；左丞甄法崇弹劾萧珍，又弹劾杜骥，又弹劾段国，又弹劾范文伯；左丞羊玄保又弹劾萧汪；左丞殷景熙弹劾张仲仁；兼左丞何承天弹劾吕万龄都没归罪，都属重要弹劾。
English: Zuoying Jianguo impeached Duan Jingwen, and also impeached Pei Fangming; Zuoying Zhengfa impeached Xiao Zhen, and also impeached Du Xi, and also impeached Duan Guo, and also impeached Fan Wenbo; Zuoying Yang Xuanbao also impeached Xiao Wang; Zuoying Yin Jingxi impeached Zhang Zhongren; and Zuoying He Chengtian impeached Lu Wanling, all of which were not convicted, all of which were important impeachments.

古文：凡兹十弹，差是宪、旷之比，悉无及中丞之议。
现代文：总此十次弹劾，差不多可与沈宪、沈旷的事情相比，全都没涉及评议中丞的过错。
English: In total, these ten impeachments, almost comparable to the Shen Xian and Shen Guang affairs, all did not involve the fault of the review vice-chairman.

古文：左丞荀万秋、刘藏、江谧弹王僧朗、王云之、陶宝度，不及中丞，最是近例之明者。
现代文：左丞荀万秋、刘藏、江谧弹劾王僧朗、王云之、陶宝度，没有追究到中丞，是近代最显明的例证。
English: The impeachment of Wang Zenglang, Wang Yunzhi, and Tao Baodu by Zuo Zheng, Liu Zang, and Jiang Zheng did not go as far as Zhong Zheng, which is the most obvious example in modern times.

古文：谧弹在今龛蒐之后，事行圣照。
现代文：江谧弹劾在今宠琶的后面，事行圣照。
English: The impeachment of Jiang Zemin is now behind the pet lute, and everything is going according to plan.

古文：远取十奏，近征二案，自宜依以为体，岂得舍而不遵？
现代文：从距今时间远的选取十次弹奏，从距今时间近的选取两例案卷，自然适宜把这些作为体例，哪能舍弃不遵从呢?
English: It is naturally appropriate to take ten pieces of music from the distant past and two cases from the recent past as examples. How can they be abandoned and not followed?

古文：臣窃此人乏，谬奉国宪。
现代文：我窃处这缺乏人才的时候，错误地得有执掌国家的法制刑律的职责。
English: I took advantage of this lack of talent when I was mistakenly given the responsibility of running the country's legal system and criminal law.

古文：今遐所纠，既行一时，若默而不言，则向为来准，后人被绳，方当追请，素餐之责，贻尘千载。
现代文：现在任遐检举弹奏的说法，已流传一时，我若默不作声，那么就使先前的事例成了后来事情的标准，待到后人被以此为准绳比照处治时，无功受禄的指责，要使我千载蒙受尘垢了。
English: It has been said for some time now that if I had remained silent, I would have allowed the previous case to become the standard for future cases. When future generations are judged by this standard, I would be accused of not doing enough, and I would be tarnished for a thousand years.

古文：所以备举显例，弘通国典，虽有愚心，不在微躬。
现代文：所以详尽列举明显的事例，以贯彻弘扬国家典章制度，虽说有一番蠢笨的心意，却没有一点功劳。
English: Therefore, listing the obvious examples in detail in order to carry out the promotion of the national award system, although there is the most stupid intention, there is no merit.

古文：请出臣表付外详议。
现代文：我请求将我的这份奏表交付外廷审察讨论。
English: I request that this brief of mine be submitted to the court for review and discussion.

古文：若所陈非谬，裁由天鉴。
现代文：假若我陈奏的错了，任由皇上审察裁定。
English: If I have made a mistake in my performance, let the emperor examine and decide.

古文：诏委外详议。
现代文：皇帝诏示将奏表委交外廷审察讨论。
English: The emperor issued an edict to submit the report of the watch committee to the foreign court for examination and discussion.

古文：尚书令褚渊奏： 宋世左丞荀伯子弹彭城令张道欣等，坐界劫累发不禽，免道欣等官；中丞王准不纠，亦免官。
现代文：尚书令褚渊奏说： 宋世左丞萄伯子弹劾彭城令张道欣等，因管辖地界内劫案屡次发生不能擒捉受追究，免了张道欣等的官；中丞王准不纠察检举，也因此免官。
English: Shang Shuling told Gongyuan: Song Shizao Rongzhi impeached Pengcheng Rongzhi and ordered Zhang Daoxin and others to be pardoned because robberies repeatedly occurred within the jurisdictional boundaries and could not be caught and prosecuted; Zhong Rong Wang agreed not to picket and prosecute, and was therefore pardoned.

古文：左丞羊玄保弹豫州刺史管义之谯梁群盗，免义之官；中丞傅隆不纠，亦免隆官。
现代文：左丞羊玄保弹劾豫州刺史管义之所管辖谯、梁地方出现群盗，免了管义之的官；中丞傅隆没有检举弹劾，也免去了傅隆的官。
English: Zu Rong Yang Xuan Bao impeached Yu Zhou Zhishi Guan Yi, and there was a group of thieves in Yu and Liang areas under the jurisdiction of Guan Yi; Fu Rong did not prosecute the impeachment, but also removed Fu Rong's officials.

古文：左丞羊玄保又弹兖州刺史郑从之滥上布及加课租绵，免从之官；中丞傅隆不纠，免隆官。
现代文：左丞羊玄保又弹劾兖州刺史郑从之滥用税赋名目以及增加租绵课税，免去郑从之的官；中丞傅隆没有检举弹劾，免去了傅隆的官。
English: Zuocheng Yang Xuanbao also impeached Zheng Zongrong, the governor of Zhangzhou, for abuse of taxes and increased taxes on rents, and removed Zheng Zongrong's official; Zhongzheng Fulong did not report the impeachment, and removed Fulong's official.

古文：左丞陆展弹建康令丘珍孙、丹阳尹孔山士劫发不禽，免珍孙、山士官；中丞何勖不纠，亦免勖官。
现代文：左丞陆展弹劾建康令丘珍孙、丹阳尹孔山士出了劫盗不去擒捉，免了丘珍孙、孔山士的官；中丞何勖没有检举弹劾，也免去了何勖的官。
English: Zu Cheng Lu Zhan impeached Jian Kang for ordering Qiu Jinsun and Danyang Yin Kongsanshi to commit robbery and not to catch them, and pardoned Qiu Jinsun and Kongsanshi's officers; Zhong Cheng He Jian did not report the impeachment, and also pardoned He Jinsun's officers.

古文：左丞刘矇弹青州刺史刘道隆失火烧府库，免道隆官；中丞萧惠开不纠，免惠开官。
现代文：左丞刘蒙弹劾青州刺史刘道隆失火烧了府库，免去刘道隆的官；中丞萧惠开没有检举弹劾，免了萧惠开的官。
English: The left senator Liu Meng impeached the governor of Qingzhou, Liu Daolong, set fire to the government treasury, and removed Liu Daolong from office; the middle senator Xiao Huikai did not report the impeachment, and removed Xiao Huikai from office.

古文：左丞徐爰弹右卫将军薛安都属疾不直，免安都官；中丞张永结免。
现代文：左丞徐爰弹劾右卫将军薛安都托辞有病不当值，免了薛安都的官；中丞张永以免官具结。
English: The left senator Xu Wei impeached the right guard general Xue Andu on the pretext that he was ill and unfit for the post, and removed Xue Andu from the post; the middle senator Zhang Yong was removed from the post to avoid a tie.

古文：澄謏闻肤见，贻挠后昆，上掩皇明，下笼朝识，请以见事免澄所居官。 
现代文：陆澄小有名声见识肤浅，给后代子孙留下枉屈，对上掩蔽了皇帝的圣明，对下蒙混了朝臣的识辨，请以此事免去陆澄所任的官职。 
English: Lu Chengxiao is famous for his superficial knowledge, leaving the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants.

古文：诏曰： 澄表据多谬，不足深劾，可白衣领职。 
现代文：皇帝有诏说： 陆澄的表章依据错误很多，不足深入弹劾，可用平民身份领管原有职事。 
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: Lu Cheng's badge is based on many errors, lacks in-depth impeachment, and can be used as a civilian to take charge of the original duties.

古文：明年，转给事中，秘书监，迁吏部。
现代文：第二年，陆澄转给事中、秘书监，迁吏部。
English: In the second year, Lu Cheng was transferred to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Secretary Supervision, and Relocation Department.

古文：四年，复为秘书监，领国子博士。
现代文：建元四年，又为秘书监，领国子博士。
English: In the fourth year of Jianyuan, he was also the secretary supervisor, leading Dr. Guo Zi.

古文：迁都官尚书。
现代文：迁都官尚书。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Tokyo government official, Shosho.

古文：出为辅国将军、镇北镇军二府长史，廷尉，领骁骑将军。
现代文：外任辅国将军、镇北镇军二府长史，廷尉，领骁骑将军。
English: He served as the general of the auxiliary province, the governor of the second prefecture of the Zhenbei Town Army, the court lieutenant, and the general leading the cavalry.

古文：永明元年，转度支尚书。
现代文：永明元年，转度支尚书。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, the turn of the year was recorded.

古文：寻领国子博士。
现代文：不久领国子博士。
English: Dr. Kuniko soon followed.

古文：时国学置郑王《易》，杜服《春秋》，何氏《公羊》，麋氏《谷梁》，郑玄《孝经》。
现代文：当时国学裹设有郑王注易》，杜服注《春秋》，何氏注《公羊》，麋氏注谷梁》，郑玄注《孝经》。
English: At that time, the study of Chinese classics included Zheng Wang's Commentary on Yi, Du Fu's Commentary on Spring and Autumn, He Shi's Commentary on Ram, Zou Shi's Commentary on Gu Liang, and Zheng Xuan's Commentary on Xiao Jing.

古文：澄谓尚书令王俭曰： 《孝经》，小学之类，不宜列在帝典。 
现代文：陆澄对尚书令王俭说： 《孝经》，小学之类，不适宜开列在帝王的法典中。 
English: Lu Cheng said to Wang Jian: "The Filial Piety Sutra, primary schools and the like are not suitable to be listed in the emperor's legal code.

古文：乃与俭书论之曰：
现代文：于是在给王俭的信中讨论这件事说：
English: So he discussed the matter in a letter to Wang Jian, saying:

古文：《易》近取诸身，远取诸物，弥天地之道，通万物之情。
现代文：《易》近取之于自身，迩取之于它物，充满天地间的道理，通晓万物的情状。
English: Yi is close to itself, close to other things, full of the truth between heaven and earth, and familiar with the situation of all things.

古文：自商瞿至田何，其间五传。
现代文：自商瞿至田何，其间传五代。
English: It has been passed down for five generations, from Shangguan to Tianhe.

古文：年未为远，无讹杂之失；秦所不焚，无崩坏之弊。
现代文：年代不算久远，没有讹误错杂的缺陷；秦始皇时不曾焚烧，没有毁坏的弊病。
English: The era is not too long ago, there are no mistakes and defects; Qin Shihuang did not burn, and there are no maladies of destruction.

古文：虽有异家之学，同以象数为宗。数百年后，乃有王弼。
现代文：虽说有不同学家的阐说，都以象数为根本，数百年后，才有了王弼。
English: Although there are different scholars' explanations, all of them are based on the elephant number, and it was hundreds of years later that Wang Qi came into being.

古文：王济云弼所悟者多，何必能顿废前儒。若谓《易》道尽于王弼，方须大论，意者无乃仁智殊见。
现代文：王济说王弼领悟的多，何必能一下废黜前代儒学，假若说《易》的道理被王弼领悟尽了，正是需要很好讨论，料想无非是仁者见仁、智者见智似的见解不同。
English: Wang Jie said that Wang Xi has a lot of understanding, why should he be able to overthrow the previous generation of Confucianism. If the truth of "Yi" is fully understood by Wang Xi, it is precisely the need for a good discussion. The assumption is nothing more than that the benevolent see benevolence, and the wise see wisdom.

古文：且《易》道无体不可以一体求，屡迁不可以一迁执也。
现代文：况且《易》的道理没有什么事物不可以从个体去探求，屡屡变化不可以凭一次变化去把握。
English: Moreover, there is nothing that cannot be explored from an individual, and repeated changes cannot be grasped with one change.

古文：晋太兴四年，太常荀菘请置《周易》郑玄注博士，行乎前代，于时政由王、庾，皆俊神清识，能言玄远，舍辅嗣而用康成，岂其妄然。
现代文：晋太兴四年，太常荀崧请求设置《周易》郑玄注博士，在前代实行了，当时由王、庾辅政，他们神情俊美见识高明，能讲述深奥的玄理，舍王辅嗣而用郑康成，那是他的狂乱。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Taixing, Emperor Taizhong requested the setting up of "Zhou Yi" by Dr. Zheng Xuanchu, which was implemented in the previous generation. At that time, it was administered by Wang and Zou Fu, who were handsome, beautiful, knowledgeable, and able to narrate profound metaphysics. However, Wang Fu used Zheng Kangcheng, which was his madness.

古文：太元立王肃《易》，当以在玄、弼之间。
现代文：太元年间设立王肃的《易》，学术见解应是介于郑玄与王弼之间。
English: Wang Su's "Yi" was established in the first year of the Taiyuan era, and the academic opinion should be between Zheng Xuan and Wang Xuan.

古文：元嘉建学之始，玄、弼两立。
现代文：元嘉年间，建立学校的起始，郑玄、王弼两派学说一起设立。
English: During the Yuan Jia period, the beginning of the establishment of the school, Zheng Xuan and Wang Qi's two schools of thought were established together.

古文：逮颜延之为祭酒，黜郑置王，意在贵玄，事成败儒。
现代文：直到颜延之任祭酒，罢黜郑学而设置王学，用意在贵重玄学，事情办成损害了儒学。
English: Until Yan Yan was appointed as the sacrificial wine, Zheng Xue was ousted and Wang Xue was set up, with the intention of valuing metaphysics, and the matter was done to the detriment of Confucianism.

古文：今若不大弘儒风，则无所立学。众经皆儒，惟《易》独玄，玄不可弃，儒不可缺。
现代文：假如现在不大力弘扬儒学风范，那么就没有地方建立学校，众多经典都是儒家的，衹有易》一经独自倡导玄学，玄学不能舍弃，儒学也不能缺少。
English: If we do not vigorously promote the Confucianism style now, then there will be no place to build schools. Many classics are Confucian. Once you independently advocate metaphysics, metaphysics cannot be abandoned, and Confucianism cannot be lacking.

古文：谓宜并存，所以合无体之义。
现代文：说它应当并存，是以此符合无体的本意。
English: Saying that it should co-exist is in line with the intention of incorporeality.

古文：且弼于注经中已举《系辞》，故不复别注。
现代文：而且王弼在注经中已举系辞》，因而不再另外注释。
English: Moreover, Wang Xi had already mentioned the word "lineage" in the commentary, so there was no need for another commentary.

古文：今若专取弼《易》，则《系》说无注。
现代文：现在假如专意选用王弼的《易经》，则《系》说就无注。
English: Now, if you specifically choose Wang Qian's "I Ching," then there will be no note of "system."

古文：《左氏》太元取服虔，而兼取贾逵《经》，由服传无《经》，虽在注中，而《传》又有无《经》者故也。
现代文：《左氏》太元年间采用服虔注的，而兼用买逵的《经》，这是由于脓虔注的《传》没有《经》，《经》虽在注中，可《传》又有无《经》的缘故。
English: During the first year of the reign of King Taejo, "The Book of Zuo" used the "Book of Zhuo," which was written by Bu Qian, but also used the "Book of Zhuo." This was because the "Book of Zhuo" written by Bu Qian did not have the "Book of Zhuo." Although the "Book of Zhuo" was written in the "Book of Zhuo," the "Book of Zhuo" did not have the "Book of Zhuo."

古文：今留服而去贾，则《经》有所阙。
现代文：现在若用服虔的而舍弃买逵的，那就缺了《经》。
English: If we now use the pious and abandon the idolatrous, then we will lack the "scripture."

古文：案杜预注《传》，王弼注《易》，俱是晚出，并贵后生。
现代文：考察丝预注《传》，王弼注《易》，都是后来才作出的，并被年轻人推崇。
English: The pre-annotation of "Zhuan" and the annotation of "Yi" by Wang Xi were both made later, and were highly respected by young people.

古文：杜之异古，未如王之夺实，祖述前儒，特举其违。
现代文：杜预的注同古人不同，却没有像：王强那样失实，师法前代儒学大师进行陈述，特意列举与他们不同的说法。
English: Du Yu's annotation is different from that of the ancients, but it is not as untruthful as: Wang Qiang, the previous generation of Confucian masters made a presentation of the teaching method, specifically listing the different statements.

古文：又《释例》之作，所弘惟深。
现代文：又《释例》的写作，阐发的义理是很深奥的。
English: Also, in the writing of "Examples of Interpretation," the expounded meaning is very profound.

古文：《谷梁》太元旧有麋信注，颜益以范宁，麋犹如故。
现代文：《谷梁》太元年间原先有麇信注，颜延之把范宁的补充进来，麋信注的仍然如前不变。
English: "Guliang" was originally inscribed with  during the Taiyuan era, but Yan Yanzhi added Fanning's inscription, and the  remains unchanged.

古文：颜论闰分范注，当以同我者亲。
现代文：颜延之论闰时分范注，认为应亲近和我相同的。
English: Yan Yanzhi's theory of the leap second paradigm, believes that should be close to the same as me.

古文：常谓《谷梁》劣，《公羊》为注者又不尽善。
现代文：常说《谷梁》低劣；《公羊》作注的又不完美。
English: It is often said that "Guliang" is inferior; "Ram" is not perfect.

古文：竟无及《公羊》之有何休，恐不足两立。
现代文：竟然没提及《公羊》注中有何休的注，恐怕不值得两者一起设立。
English: I'm afraid it's not worth setting up the two together.

古文：必谓范善，便当除麋。
现代文：一定说是范注的《谷梁》好，就应除去麋信的注。
English: If "Guliang" is good, which must be said to be the model note, then the note of the letter should be removed.

古文：世有一《孝经》，题为郑玄注，观其用辞，不与注书相类。
现代文：社会上有一种《孝经》，题作郑玄注，观察那运用的词语，不和郑玄注的书相似。
English: There is a kind of "Filial Piety Sutra" in the society, the title of which was annotated by Zheng Xuan, observe the words used, which are not similar to the book annotated by Zheng Xuan.

古文：案玄自序所注众书，亦无《孝经》。
现代文：考察郑玄自己叙说所注的各书，也没有《孝经》。
English: Examining the books that Zheng Xuan himself annotated, there is no "filial piety."

古文：俭答曰： 《易》体微远，实贯群籍，施、孟异闻，周、韩殊旨，岂可专据小王，便为该备？
现代文：王俭答覆说： 《易经》道理精微深远，其实体现在各种《易经》书籍中，施雠传的《易》学和孟喜传的《易》学说法是不相同的，周、韩的要旨也不一样，怎么能专一依据小王，便算是该备?
English: Wang Jian replied, "The principles of the I Ching are subtle and far-reaching. In fact, they are embodied in various books of the I Ching. The "I Ching" teachings of Shi Min and the "I Ching" teachings of Meng Xi are different, and the gist of Zhou and Han is also different. How can it be considered to be prepared according to Xiao Wang?

古文：依旧存郑，高同来说。
现代文：依旧存有郑玄之说，高同来说。
English: There is still Zheng Xuan's saying, Gao Tong said.

古文：元凯注《传》，超迈前儒，若不列学官，其可废矣。
现代文：杜元凯注的《传》，超越了前代儒家学者，假若不在学宫中开列，那就可以废弃这部书不用。
English: Du Yuankai's "Biography" surpasses the previous generation of Confucian scholars. If it is not listed in the palace of learning, then this book can be discarded.

古文：贾氏注《经》，世所罕习，《谷梁》小书，无俟两注，存麋略范，率由旧式。
现代文：贾氏注的《经》，世上的人少有学习的，《谷梁》小书，用不着要两注并用，保存糜信的注而省去范宁的注，就按旧有的样子。
English: Jia's Annotated Classic of Confucianism, which few people in the world have studied, and Gu Liang's small book, do not need to use two annotations at the same time. Preserve the annotation of Xingxin and omit the annotation of Fanning, and follow the old way.

古文：凡此诸义，并同雅论。
现代文：大凡这书籍阐说的各种义理，应共同视作高雅之论。
English: All the principles expounded in this book should be regarded as the theory of elegance.

古文：疑《孝经》非郑所注，仆以此书明百行之首，实人伦所先，《七略》、《艺文》并陈之六艺，不与《苍颉》《凡将》之流也。
现代文：怀疑《孝经》不是郑玄所注，我认为这书阐明了百行之首要的孝的义理，遣实在是人伦的先导。《七略》、《艺文》并陈的六艺，与《苍颉》、《凡将》不属同一类。
English: I suspect that the "Book of Filial Piety" was not annotated by Zheng Xuan. I believe that this book clarifies the principle of filial piety, which is the first of a hundred practices, and is a precursor to human ethics. "Seven Sketches," "Art and Literature" and Chen's six arts do not belong to the same category as "Heron" and "Everyman."

古文：郑注虚实，前代不嫌，意谓可安，仍旧立置。 
现代文：郑注是虚是实，前代并不疑惑，意思就是可以，仍然按旧有的设立。 
English: Zheng's comment is whether it is true or false, the previous generation does not doubt, the meaning is that it is possible, still according to the old establishment.

古文：俭自以博闻多识，读书过澄。
现代文：王俭自以为学识广博，读书超过陆澄。
English: Wang Jian believed that he had a broad knowledge and read more books than Lu Cheng.

古文：澄曰： 仆年少来无事，唯以读书为业。
现代文：陆澄说： 我年轻时没有别事，衹把读书作为自己的职业。
English: Lu Cheng said: When I was young, I didn't have anything else to do, so I made reading my career.

古文：且年已倍令君，令君少便鞅掌王务，虽复一览便谙，然见卷轴未必多仆。 
现代文：况且我的年龄已是令君的两倍，令君年纪轻轻便执掌皇家政务，即使看一遍就记熟了，然而看见的书卷文轴也未必比我多。 
English: Besides, I am twice as old as you, and you are young enough to take charge of the royal government. Even if you read it once, you will remember it well, but you may not see more scrolls and scrolls than I do.

古文：俭集学士何宪等盛自商略，澄待俭语毕，然后谈所遗漏数百千条，皆俭所未睹，俭乃叹服。
现代文：王俭召集学士包塞等举行盛大的商讨会，陆攫待王俭说完，然后再谈遗漏的数百上千条，都是王俭没有看过的，王俭才感慨心服。
English: Wang Jian convened a grand discussion meeting, including the bachelor party, and Lu Wei waited for Wang Jian to finish his speech, and then talked about the hundreds of thousands of missing articles, which Wang Jian had not seen before. Wang Jian was deeply impressed.

古文：俭在尚书省，出巾箱几案杂服饰，令学士隶事，事多者与之，人人各得一两物；澄后来，更出诸人所不知事复各数条，并夺物将去。
现代文：王俭在尚书省，拿出衣箱几案各种服饰，让学士们分门别类编撰相应的从前的事例，事例编撰多的就多分舱，每位都得了一两件，陆澄后到，更拿出各位不知道的每类几条事例，把各位学士得的服饰夺下带走了。
English: In Shangshu Province, Wang Jian took out several cases of clothing and various clothing, and asked the bachelors to compile the corresponding previous cases according to different categories. The more cases were compiled, the more compartments, and everyone got one or two. After Lu Cheng arrived, he also took out several cases of each category that you did not know, and took away the clothing obtained by the bachelors.

古文：转散骑常侍，秘书监，吴郡中正，光禄大夫。
现代文：陆澄转散骑常侍，秘书监，昱郡中正，光禄大夫。
English: Lucheng Tuan Sanzhong riding attendant, secretary supervisor, county magistrate, Guanglu doctor.

古文：加给事中，中正如故。
现代文：后加给事中，中正职依前未变。
English: In addition, the post of vice-premier remains unchanged.

古文：寻领国子祭酒。
现代文：随后领国子祭酒。
English: This was followed by the serving of kokuriko festival sake.

古文：以竟陵王子良得古器，小口方腹而底平，可将七八升，以问澄，澄曰： 此名服匿，单于以与苏武。 
现代文：竞陵王子良得到一古代器皿，口小腹方而底是干的，可容纳七八升，拿去询问陆澄，陆澄说： 这个器皿北方人叫作服匿，单于曾把它送给苏武。 
English: Geuling Prince Liang got an ancient vessel, the mouth is small and the bottom is dry, it can hold seven or eight liters. He took it to inquire Lu Cheng. Lu Cheng said: This vessel is called "clothing hiding" by the northerners. It was once given to Su Wu.

古文：子良后详视器底，有字仿佛可识，如澄所言。
现代文：子良后来仔细观察器皿的底部，有字，虽然模糊，但可识别，跟陆澄说的一样。
English: Later, Zilang carefully observed the bottom of the vessel. There was writing, although fuzzy, but recognizable, just as Lu Cheng had said.

古文：隆昌元年，以老疾，转光禄大夫，加散骑常侍，未拜，卒。
现代文：隆昌元年，陆澄因为年老有病，转光禄大夫，加散骑常侍，没有接受任命，逝世了。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, Lu Cheng did not accept the appointment because he was old and sick, and he died.

古文：年七十。
现代文：当时七十岁。
English: He was seventy years old at the time.

古文：谥靖子。
现代文：谧号为靖子。
English: Her nickname was Yasuko.

古文：澄当世称为硕学，读《易》三年不解文义，欲撰《宋书》竟不成。王俭戏之曰： 陆公，书厨也。 
现代文：陆澄在当时被称为大学问家，读《易》三年不理解文中的意义，想撰写《宋书最终没有成功，王俭同他开玩笑说： 陆公是书厨。 
English: At that time, Lu Cheng was known as a college dropout. He read "Yi" for three years and did not understand the meaning of the text. He wanted to write "Song Shu" but was not successful in the end. Wang Jian joked with him: "Lu Gong is a book cook."

古文：家多坟籍，人所罕见。
现代文：家中古代典籍很多，是人们极少见到的。
English: There are many ancient classics at home, which people rarely see.

古文：撰地理书及杂传，死后乃出。
现代文：撰写了地理书及杂传，他死后才出版。
English: He wrote a geography book and a miscellany, which were published after his death.

古文：澄弟鲜，得罪宋世，当死。
现代文：陆澄的弟弟陆鲜，宋朝时犯了罪，应当处死。
English: Lu Cheng's younger brother, Lu Xiang, committed a crime during the Song Dynasty and should be executed.

古文：澄于路见舍人王道隆，叩头流血，以此见原。
现代文：陆澄在路上看到舍人王道隆，向他叩头求情以至于流出血来，因而被原谅。
English: Lu Cheng saw Wang Daolong on the road, bowed down to him and begged for mercy until he bled, and was thus forgiven.

古文：扬州主簿顾测以两奴就鲜质钱，鲜死，子晖诬为卖券。
现代文：扬州主簿顾测用两个奴仆到陆鲜那裹抵押换钱。
English: Yangzhou's chief accountant Gu Zheng used two servants to go to Luxian to exchange money for the mortgage.

古文：澄为中丞，测与书相往反，后又笺与太守萧纟面云： 澄欲遂子弟之非，未近义方之训，此趋贩所不为，况搢绅领袖，儒宗胜达乎？ 
现代文：陆鲜死了，他的儿子陆睥诬赖作卖券，陆澄任中丞；顾测与他书信往来争议，后又写信给太守萧缅蜕： 陆澄想实现子弟非分之想，远离做人正道的训教。这是小商贩不干的事，何况捂绅的领袖，儒学的宗师贤达呢? 
English: Lu Xian died, his son Lu Yao was accused of selling tickets, and Lu Cheng was appointed vice-chairman; Gu Gui had a dispute with his correspondence, and later wrote to the governor Xiao Mengyao: Lu Cheng wanted to realize his children's dreams, and stay away from the training of being a righteous person. This is something that small traders do not do, not to mention the leaders of the gentry, the masters of Confucianism.

古文：测遂为澄所排抑，世以此少之。
现代文：顾测于是被陆澄排挤压抑，世人因此小看他
English: As a result, Gu Gu was suppressed by Lu Chengxu, and the world looked down on him.

古文：时东海王摛，亦史学博闻，历尚书左丞。
现代文：当时东海王摛，也研究历史，知识渊博，任尚书左丞。
English: At that time, Wang Yao of the East China Sea also studied history and was very knowledgeable.

古文：竟陵王子良校试诸学士，唯摛问无不对。
现代文：竞陵王：丛校试诸学士，衹有王撞祇要问没有不能答覆的。
English: Jingling Wang: The series of school examinations lead to a bachelor's degree. There is no question that can't be answered.

古文：永明中，天忽黄色照地，众莫能解。
现代文：永明年问，天上忽然有黄颜色光气照耀大地，没有人能解释。
English: Yongjing asked. Suddenly, there was a yellow light in the sky, shining on the earth. No one could explain it.

古文：摛云是荣光。
现代文：刘摛说是五色祥云。
English: Liu Ye said it was the five-colored auspicious cloud.

古文：世祖大悦，用为永阳郡。
现代文：世祖很高兴，任用他做永阳郡太守。
English: The ancestor was very pleased and appointed him as the Yongyang County Governor.

古文：史臣曰：儒风在世，立人之正道；圣哲微言，百代之通训。
现代文：史臣曰：儒家风范在世上，是做人的正道；圣哲的简短话语，可作百代的通用训教。
English: Shichen said: Confucianism in the world is the right way to be a human being; the short words of the sage can be used as a universal teaching for hundreds of generations.

古文：洙泗既往，义乖七十；稷下横论，屈服千人。
现代文：孔子在洙泗教授之后，义理分授给七十贤人；齐宣王在稷门设馆纵横议论，折服千人。
English: Confucius, after teaching in Xing, distributed the principles of righteousness to seventy sages; King Qi Xuan set up a hall in Xingmen for long and short discussions, which attracted thousands of people.

古文：自后专门之学兴，命氏之儒起，石渠朋党之事，白虎同异之说，《六经》五典，各信师言，嗣守章句，期乎勿失。
现代文：从这以后专门的学问兴起，著名的儒学家产生了，漠宣帝与诸儒学家在石渠合讲《五经》，由漠宣帝裁决划一，汉章帝集合各著名儒学家在白虎观讲论《五经》同异，《六经》五典，各自相信各自师长的话，继承固守其章句，希望不要失传。
English: From then on, specialized learning arose, and famous Confucianists emerged. Emperor Mu Xuan and other Confucianists jointly lectured on the Five Classics in Shiqu, and Emperor Mu Xuan ruled that they were all the same. Emperor Han Zang gathered famous Confucianists to discuss the Five Classics in the White Tiger View, and the Five Classics in the Six Classics. Each believed in the words of their teachers, inherited and adhered to their chapters, and hoped that they would not be lost.

古文：西京儒士，莫有独擅；东都学术，郑贾先行。
现代文：西京的儒学士子，没有能独专擅的；东都的学术领域，郑玄、贾逵领先。
English: There are no Confucian scholars in West Beijing who can excel in their own fields; in the academic fields of the eastern capital, Zheng Xuan and Jia Wei are leading the way.

古文：康成生炎汉之季，训义优洽，一世孔门，褒成并轨，故老以为前修，后生未之敢异。
现代文：郑康成生长在汉代，解说义理优美恰当，一生在孔门习学，褒成与他并驾齐驱，年老阅历广的人把他们看成前代有品德的人，年轻人没有敢对他表示异议。
English: Zheng Kangcheng grew up in the Han Dynasty. He explained the principles beautifully and appropriately. He studied Confucianism all his life. His achievements were on a par with him. The old and experienced people regarded him as a man of previous generations. The young people did not dare to disagree with him.

古文：而王肃依经辩理，与硕相非，爰兴《圣证》，据用《家语》，外戚之尊，多行晋代。
现代文：但是王肃依据经文辩说义理，同大学问家辩驳，才创作了《圣证》，据以应用的《家语》，对帝王母族和妻族的尊重，在晋代大多施行。
English: However, it was Wang Su who created the "Holy Book" on the basis of arguing the righteousness of the scriptures and arguing with the scholars of the university. According to the application of the "Family Language," respect for the emperor's mother and wife families was mostly implemented in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：江左儒门，参差互出，虽于时不绝，而罕复专家。
现代文：江左以后儒家学派的人物，纷纭并出，虽说那时也是络绎不绝，但也难得有专门研究的著名学者。
English: After Jiang Zuo, figures of the Confucian school appeared in a variety of ways. Although there was an endless stream of people at that time, it was rare to find a famous scholar who specialized in this field.

古文：晋世以玄言方道，宋氏以文章闲业，服膺典艺，斯风不纯，二代以来，为教衰矣。
现代文：晋世用玄学谈论来抵制儒学正道，宋代用文章离间儒业，衷心信服从事经艺的学习，这种风气不纯良，二代以来，儒家礼教衰败了。
English: The Jin dynasty used metaphysical discussions to resist the true path of Confucianism, while the Song dynasty used articles to divide Confucianism and wholeheartedly engaged in the study of literature and art. This kind of ethos is not pure and good. Since the second generation, Confucianism has decayed.

古文：建元肇运，戎警未夷，天子少为诸生，端拱以思儒业，载戢干戈，遽诏庠序。
现代文：建元开运，战乱尚未平定，天子少年时是儒生，端身拱手想弘扬儒学，把兵器收藏起来，立即下诏各地设立学校。
English: At the beginning of the Jianyuan era, the war was not yet settled. When Tianzi was a boy, he was a Confucian, and he wanted to promote Confucianism. He collected weapons and immediately issued an edict to set up schools in various regions.

古文：永明纂袭，克隆均校，王俭为辅，长于经礼，朝廷仰其风，胄子观其则，由是家寻孔教，人诵儒书，执卷欣欣，此焉弥盛。
现代文：永明承袭前代做法，各学校更为兴隆，王俭做辅臣，擅长经书礼学，朝廷景仰他的风范，国子学生把他的言行视为自己的准则，由此家家追寻孔门教诲，人人诵读儒学书籍，高高兴兴地手捧书卷，这时儒学十分兴盛。
English: Sun Myung inherited the practices of the previous generation, and the schools flourished even more. Wang Jian was an assistant minister and excelled in the study of scripture and etiquette. The court admired his demeanor. Kuniko students regarded his words and deeds as their own standards. As a result, families pursued the teachings of Confucius. Everyone read Confucian books and happily held the books in their hands. At this time, Confucianism was very prosperous.

古文：建武继立，因循旧绪，时不好文，辅相无术，学校虽设，前轨难追。刘瓛承马、郑之后，一时学徒以为师范。
现代文：建武帝萧鸾继位做皇帝，沿袭陈旧的一套做法，当时流行风气不好文学，辅臣宰相没有学识，学校虽然设置了，先前行事规范再也难找，刘锹承继马融、鄯玄之后，一个时期学生门徒把他看作是师长楷模。
English: Emperor Jianwu Xiao Rong's succession to the throne as emperor followed an old set of practices. At that time, the popular style was not good literature, the vice-minister of the prime minister had no knowledge, although the school was set up, the previous code of conduct was no longer difficult to find. Liu Rongcheng followed Ma Rong and Yu Xuan. For a period of time, student disciples regarded him as a model teacher.

古文：虎门初辟，法驾亲临，待问无五更之礼，充庭阙蒲轮之御，身终下秩，道义空存，斯故进贤之责也。
现代文：帝王视朝的路寝之门刚刚打开，皇帝的车驾亲自来到，等待询问却没有古代帝王敬重那年老而经历丰富的人那种所谓五更的礼节，满庭院摆着皇帝用的车辇仪仗而缺少征聘贤士驾御时用蒲草裹轮的礼敬，一生空有道义，始终处在下等职位，这原本是荐引贤能的人的责任。
English: The emperor's carriage arrived in person, waiting for the inquiry, but there was no ancient emperor to respect the old and experienced person, the so-called five-step etiquette, the courtyard was full of the emperor's carriage and ceremonial battle, but the courtesy of wrapping the wheel with papyrus when recruiting sages to drive the imperial car was lacking, and there was no morality in his life, and he was always in a lower position, which was originally the responsibility of recommending a capable person.

古文：其余儒学之士，多在卑位，或隐世辞荣者，别见他篇云。
现代文：其余的儒家学者，大多处在卑下的地位，有的隐藏人世躲避荣禄，在其他的篇章裹可以见到。
English: The rest of the Confucian scholars, mostly in a lowly position, some hiding from the world to avoid honor, can be seen in other chapters.

古文：赞曰：儒宗义肆，纷纶子圭。
现代文：赞曰：继承儒学彰明义理，子珪学识最为渊博。
English: Zang said: inheriting the principles of Confucianism, Zibo's knowledge is the most profound.

古文：升堂受业，事越关西。
现代文：深得儒学奥秘而教授学生，事迹超越了后汉的关西。
English: Profound in the mysteries of Confucianism and teaching students, his achievements surpass those of Kansai in the later Han Dynasty.

古文：璡居暗室，立操无携。
现代文：刘璡身居暗室，树立操行，连结根衣带都不马虎。
English: Liu Xuan is in the darkroom, setting up the operation, and the connection of the root garment is not sloppy.

古文：彦渊书史，疑问穷稽。
现代文：彦渊对于书籍史事，深入钻研认真考查不放过任何疑问。
English: For the history of books, Hikobuchi does not let go of any doubts through in-depth study and careful examination.

