古文：灵王虐，白公子张骤谏。
现代文：楚灵王暴虐无道，白公子张多次劝谏。
English: King Chuling was violent and ruthless, and Bai Gongzhi Zhang repeatedly persuaded him.

古文：王患之，谓史老曰： 吾欲已子张之谏，若何？ 
现代文：灵王很讨厌，对史老说： 我想制止子张的劝谏，怎么样？ 
English: Ling Wang was disgusted and said to Shi Lao: I want to stop Zi Zhang's persuasion, how about it?

古文：对曰： 用之实难，已之易矣。
现代文：史老回答说： 接受劝谏很难，制止它容易。
English: Shi Lao replied, "It is difficult to accept persuasion, but it is easy to stop it.

古文：若谏，君则曰余左执鬼中，右执殇宫，凡百箴谏，吾尽闻之矣，宁闻他言？ 
现代文：如果他再劝谏，您就说我左手掌握着鬼身，右手掌握着鬼的居处，凡是各种告诫劝谏，我全听到了，哪里需要听别的什么劝告？ 
English: If he advises you again, tell him that I hold the ghost's body in my left hand and the ghost's dwelling place in my right hand. I have heard all kinds of admonitions and advice. What other advice do you need to hear?

古文：白公又谏，王如史老之言。
现代文：白公又来劝谏，灵王按照史老讲的说了。
English: Bai Gong came to persuade him again, and the King of Soul did as Shi Lao said.

古文：对曰： 昔殷武丁能耸其德，至于神明，以入于河，自河徂亳，于是乎三年，默以思道。
现代文：白公回答说： 以前殷高宗武丁能够敬慎德行，和神明相通，先迁到河内，又从河内迁到亳地，从此三年沉默不语，思考治国的道理。
English: Bai Gong replied: In the past, Yin Gao Zong Wuding was able to be prudent and virtuous, and was in communication with the gods. He first moved to Hanoi, and then from Hanoi to Handi. Since then, he has been silent for three years, thinking about the principles of governing the country.

古文：卿士患之，曰： 王言以出令也，若不言，是无所禀令也。 
现代文：卿士们为此担忧，说： 君王讲话才能发出命令，如果不说话，我们就无法接受命令了。 
English: The nobles were worried about this, saying, "The king can only give orders by speaking, and if we don't speak, we can't receive orders."

古文：武丁于是作书，曰： 以余正四方，余恐德之不类，兹故不言。 
现代文：于是武丁就写了文书，说： 要我统治天下，我恐怕德行不好，所以才不讲话。 
English: So Wuding wrote a document, saying: If I am to rule the world, I am afraid that I am not virtuous, so I will not speak.

古文：如是而又使以象梦旁求四方之贤，得傅说以来，升以为公，而使朝夕规谏，曰： 若金，用女作砺。
现代文：这样写了以后，又派人根据梦中的形象到四方寻访贤人，得到了傅说，把他请来，提升他为上公，让他早晚规谏，说： 如果我是剑，就把你当作磨刀石。
English: After I had written this, I sent someone to search for the wise man in the four directions according to the image in the dream. I got Fu said, invited him, promoted him to Shangguan, let him rule the day and night, and said: If I am a sword, I will use you as a grindstone.

古文：若津水，用女作舟。
现代文：如果我要渡河，就把你当船。
English: If I want to cross the river, I'll use you as a boat.

古文：若天旱 用女作霖雨。
现代文：如果天旱，就把你当作连绵的雨。
English: If the weather is dry, think of yourself as a continuous rain.

古文：启乃心，沃朕心。
现代文：敞开你的心扉，滋润我的心田。
English: Open your heart and nourish my heart.

古文：若药不瞑眩，厥疾不瘳。
现代文：如果药力不足以使人头晕目眩，那病就不会痊愈。
English: If the medicine is not strong enough to make people dizzy, the disease will not be cured.

古文：若跣不视地，厥足用仿。 
现代文：如果光着脚走路不看地面，那脚就要受伤。 
English: If you walk barefoot without looking at the ground, that foot is going to hurt.

古文：若武丁之神明也，其圣之睿广也，其智之不疚也，犹自谓未乂，故三年默以思道。
现代文：像武丁那样和神明相通，他的圣明智慧广博，他的聪明没有毛病，还自认为不能治理好国家，所以三年中沉默不语，思考治国的道理。
English: Like Wuding, he communicated with the gods, his wisdom was vast, and his intelligence was flawless. He also thought that he could not govern the country well, so he was silent for three years and thought about the principles of governing the country.

古文：既得道，犹不敢专制，使以象旁求圣人。
现代文：已经知道了为君之道，还不敢专断独行，派人根据梦中的形象去寻访贤人。
English: He already knew the way to be king, but he did not dare to act arbitrarily, so he sent someone to search for the sage according to the image in the dream.

古文：既得以为辅，又恐其荒失遗忘，故使朝夕规诲箴谏，曰： 必交修余，无余弃也。 
现代文：已经得到了贤人辅佐自己，还怕疏忽遗忘，所以叫他早晚教诲规谏，说： 一定要教诲帮助我，不要抛弃我。 
English: Having already obtained the assistance of a wise man, and fearing that he might forget it through carelessness, he asked him to instruct him every morning and evening, saying, "Be sure to instruct and help me, and do not abandon me."

古文：今君或者未及武丁，而恶规谏者，不亦难乎！
现代文：现在您也许还赶不上武丁，却讨厌规谏您的人，要治理好国家不是太难了吗！
English: Now you may not be able to catch up with Wuding, but you hate those who regulate you. Isn't it too difficult to govern the country well?

古文： 齐桓、晋文，皆非嗣也，还轸诸侯，不敢淫逸，心类德音，以德有国。
现代文： 齐桓公和晋文公，都不是嫡长子，他们流亡周游诸侯各国，不敢骄奢淫逸，心中喜爱有德的言论，因为修养德行做了国君。
English: Prince Qi Huan and Prince Jinwen were not the eldest legitimate sons. They went into exile and traveled all over the countries of the princes. They did not dare to indulge in debauchery. In their hearts, they loved virtuous speech, because they cultivated virtue and became kings.

古文：近臣谏，远臣谤，舆人诵，以自诰也。
现代文：身旁大臣劝谏，远方臣僚批评，众人诵诫议论，他们都能用来告诫自己。
English: They can all be used to admonish oneself, whether it is the minister at one's side exhorting, the distant minister criticizing, or the crowd chanting admonitions.

古文：是以其入也，四封不备一同，而至于有畿田，以属诸侯，至于今为令君。
现代文：因此他们刚回国即位时，四面的封疆方圆不到一百里，后来发展到方圆一千里，会合诸侯做了霸主，一直到今天还被称为贤君。
English: Therefore, when they first returned to China and ascended the throne, the four-sided fiefdom was less than a hundred miles in circumference. Later, it grew to a thousand miles in circumference. The princes gathered together and became the overlords, and they are still known as the wise men to this day.

古文：桓、文皆然，君不度忧于二令君，而欲自逸也，无乃不可乎？
现代文：齐桓公、晋文公都是如此，您不思考担忧赶不上两位贤君，却想贪图安逸，恐怕不行吧？
English: This is the case for both Prince Qihuan and Prince Jinwen. You can't catch up with the two wise men without thinking and worrying, but if you want to be comfortable, I'm afraid you can't, right?

古文：《周诗》有之曰： 弗躬弗亲，庶民弗信。 
现代文：《周诗》上有这样的话： 不亲自处理政事，百姓不会相信。 
English: There is a saying in the "Weekly Poetry": If you do not personally handle political affairs, the people will not believe you.

古文：臣惧民之不信君也，故不敢不言。
现代文：我怕百姓不信任您，因此不敢不说。
English: I'm afraid the people don't trust you, so I don't dare not to say it.

古文：不然，何急其以言取罪也？ 
现代文：不然的话，我何必急着进谏因而获罪呢？ 
English: Otherwise, why would I be in such a hurry to be arrested and charged with a crime?

古文：王病之，曰： 子复语。
现代文：灵王担忧白公的话，说： 你再说下去。
English: King Ling was worried about Bai Gong's words and said, "You should go on talking."

古文：不穀虽不能用，吾慭置之于耳。 
现代文：我虽然不能照着做，但我愿意把这些话放在耳朵里。 
English: I can't live up to it, but I'm willing to take it on the chin.

古文：对曰： 赖君用之也，故言。
现代文：白公回答说： 希望您接受我的规谏，所以我才说。
English: Bai Gong replied: I hope you accept my discipline, that's why I said.

古文：不然，巴浦之犀、犛、兕、象，其可尽乎，其又以规为瑱也？ 
现代文：否则，巴浦地方犀牛、牦牛、兕、象的角和牙齿做塞耳的耳瑱，难道用得完吗？
English: Otherwise, will we ever run out of the horns and teeth of rhinoceroses, yaks, baboons and elephants in Bapu to make cochlear implants?

古文：遂趋而退，归，杜门不出。
现代文：还用得着用规谏之词来做耳瑱吗？ 于是便快步退下，回到家中，闭门不出。
English: Is it still necessary to use the language of rules and regulations to make the deaf hear? So they quickly retreated, returned home, and closed the door.

古文：七月，乃有乾溪之乱，灵王死之。
现代文：过了七个月，就发生了乾溪之乱，灵王死在这场叛乱之中。
English: Seven months later, the Dry Creek Rebellion occurred, and King Ling died in the midst of this rebellion.

