古文：贺拔胜字破胡，神武尖山人也。
现代文：贺拔胜字破胡，是神武尖山人。
English: He Ba Sheng Zi Hu is a native of Shenwu Jianshan.

古文：其先与魏氏同出阴山。
现代文：他的祖先与魏氏最早都在阴山一带生活。
English: His ancestors and the Wei clan were the first to live in the Yinshan area.

古文：有如回者，魏初为大莫弗。
现代文：有一个叫如回的，曾在魏初任大莫弗。
English: There was a man with the same name who served as Grand Moff in the early days of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：祖尔头，骁勇绝伦，以良家子镇武川，因家焉。
现代文：祖父尔头，勇猛过人，以良家子弟的出身镇守武川，就在那里安家。
English: My grandfather was the head of the family, and he was extremely brave. He was from a good family, and he guarded the town of Takekawa, and he made his home there.

古文：献文时，茹茹数为寇，北边患之。
现代文：魏献文帝时，蠕蠕多次侵犯，成为北部边境的祸患。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei Jianwen, creeping locusts repeatedly invaded and became a scourge on the northern border.

古文：尔头将游骑深入觇候，前后以八十数，悉知虏之倚伏。
现代文：尔头率领流动骑兵深入侦察，前后有八十来次，详细了解敌人活动规律。
English: He led the mobile cavalry in-depth reconnaissance, there are more than eighty times before and after, to understand in detail the enemy activity pattern.

古文：后虽有寇至，不能为害。
现代文：后来蠕蠕虽然仍有侵犯，但不能为害。
English: Later, although the creepy-crawlies still encroached, they could do no harm.

古文：以功赐爵龙城侯。
现代文：以功赐爵龙城侯。
English: He was awarded the title of Baron of Longcheng with merit.

古文：父度拔，性果毅，为武川军主。
现代文：父亲度拔，性格果敢刚毅，任武川军主。
English: His father, Duba, was a courageous and strong-willed man, and he became the commander of the army of the Bukawa clan.

古文：魏正光末，沃野镇人破六汗拔陵反，南侵城邑。
现代文：魏正光末年，沃野镇人破六汗拔陵反叛，向南侵占城池。
English: At the end of the Wei Zhengguang era, the people of Wuye Town rebelled against Liukang and Bailing Mausoleum, and invaded and occupied the city to the south.

古文：怀朔镇将杨钧闻度拔名，召补统军，配以一旅。
现代文：怀朔镇将杨钧听说度拔的名气，将他召来，补任统军，让他统率一旅人马。
English: When the town of Waishuo heard of Yang Jie's fame, they summoned him to supplement the unified army and let him lead a group of travelers.

古文：其贼伪署王卫可孤徒党尤盛，既围武川，又攻怀朔。
现代文：贼人中以伪王卫可孤势力最大，包围武川以后，又进攻怀朔。
English: Among the thieves, Pseudo-Wang Wei was the most powerful. After encircling Bukawa, he attacked Waishuo.

古文：胜少有志操，善骑射，北边莫不推其胆略。
现代文：贺拔胜从少年时就有志向操行，善于骑马射箭，在北部边境地区，没有人不推重他的胆气谋略。
English: Since he was a young boy, He Baxing has been ambitious and good at riding a horse and archery. In the northern border area, no one does not pay attention to his courage and strategy.

古文：时亦为军主，从度拔镇守。
现代文：贺拔胜当时也担任军主，随度拔防守怀朔。
English: At that time, He Puxin also served as the commander of the army, and the defense of Huai Shuo followed.

古文：既围经年，而外援不至，胜乃慷慨白杨钧曰： 城围蹙迫，事等倒悬，请告急于大军，乞师为援。 
现代文：被包围一年，援军不到，贺拔胜情绪激昂地对杨钧说： 形势紧迫，事不宜迟，请允许我向大军告急，乞求援军。 
English: After being besieged for a year, with no reinforcements arriving, He Buxing said to Yang Hui in an impassioned mood: "The situation is urgent, it is not too late, please allow me to rush to the army and beg for reinforcements."

古文：钧许之。
现代文：杨钧允诺。
English: Yang Jie agreed.

古文：乃募勇敢少年十余骑，夜伺隙溃围而出。
现代文：于是招募勇敢少年十余名，乘夜伺机骑马突围而出。
English: As a result, more than ten brave boys were recruited to ride out on horseback at night.

古文：贼追及之。
现代文：贼军追上。
English: The bandits have caught up.

古文：胜曰： 我贺拔破胡也。 
现代文：贺拔胜说： 我是贺拔破胡。 
English: He Baxing said: I am He Baxing.

古文：贼不敢逼。
现代文：贼军不敢逼近。
English: The enemy did not dare to advance.

古文：至朔州，白临淮王元彧曰： 怀朔被围，旦夕沦陷，士女延首，企望官军。
现代文：到了朔州，报告临淮王元道： 怀朔被围，即将沦陷。百姓翘首，盼望官军。
English: When he arrived in Shuozhou, he reported to Wangyuan Dao: "Wai Shuo is surrounded and is about to fall. The people are looking forward to the arrival of the government army.

古文：大王帝室藩维，与国休戚，受任征讨，理宜唯敌是求，今乃顿兵不进，犹豫不决。
现代文：大王是帝室屏障，与国共荣，受命征讨，理应迎击敌军，如今竟屯兵不进，犹豫观望。
English: The great king is the barrier between the imperial family and the common prosperity of the country. He was ordered to collect taxes and was supposed to meet the enemy army, but now he hesitates and waits.

古文：怀朔若陷，则武川随亦危矣。
现代文：如果怀朔陷落，则武川随之危险。
English: If Waisaku falls, Takkawa will be in danger.

古文：逆贼因兹，锐气百倍，虽有韩、白之勇，良、平之谋，亦不能为大王用也。 
现代文：倘若如此，贼军将军威大振，即便有韩信、白起的勇敢，张良、陈平的谋略，也不能帮大王的忙了。 
English: If this is the case, the general of the Kleptocratic Army will be greatly emboldened. Even if Han Xin, Bai Zhui's brave, Zhang Liang, Chen Ping's strategy, it will not help the great king.

古文：彧以胜辞义恳至，许以出师，还令报命。
现代文：由于贺拔胜言词恳切，元答应出兵，让他回去报告。
English: Yuan saw his words as sincere and promised to send troops to rescue him. He ordered him to report back to Huai Shuo.

古文：胜复突围而入，贼追之，射杀数人。
现代文：贺拔胜又突围而入，贼人追击，被射死数人。
English: He Baxing broke through the encirclement and pursued the thieves, and several people were shot dead.

古文：至城下，大呼曰： 贺拔破胡与官军至矣。 
现代文：到了城下，贺拔胜大喊道： 贺拔破胡与官军到了！ 
English: When he reached the outskirts of the city, He Baxian shouted: He Baxian and the government army have arrived!

古文：城中乃开门纳之。
现代文：城中人打开城门让他进去。
English: The people of the city opened the gates and let him in.

古文：钧复遣胜出觇武川，而武川已陷，胜乃驰还。
现代文：杨钧又派贺拔胜出城侦察武川情况，而武川已经陷落，贺拔胜驰马而归。
English: Yang Pi also sent He Baxing out of the city to reconnoitre the state of Bukawa, but Bukawa had already fallen, and He Baxing returned on horseback.

古文：怀朔亦溃，胜父子遂为贼所虏。
现代文：怀朔守军也溃败，贺拔胜父子被贼军俘虏。
English: The Huai Shuo defenders were also defeated, and He Baxing and his son were captured by the invaders.

古文：后随度拔与德皇帝合谋，率州里豪杰舆珍、念贤、乙弗库根、尉迟真檀等，招集义勇，袭杀可孤。
现代文：后来随度拔与德皇帝共同策划，率领州中豪杰舆珍、念贤、乙弗库根、尉迟真檀等人，招集义勇，偷袭卫可孤，把他杀掉。
English: Later, he plotted with the German emperor and led the state middle-ranking heroes, such as Muxin, Nianxian, Yifu Kugen, and Fuchi Zhendan, to recruit volunteers to attack Wei Kekou and kill him.

古文：朝廷嘉之，未及封赏，会度拔与铁勒战没。
现代文：朝廷嘉许，还没有来得及封官赏赐，度拔在与铁勒交战中阵亡。
English: He was commended by the imperial court, but before he could receive the reward of an official seal, he was killed in battle with Tille.

古文：孝昌中，追赠安远将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：孝昌年间，追封为安远将军、肆州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he was posthumously awarded the title of General Anyuan and the title of Wuzhou Historian.

古文：初，度拔杀可孤之后，令胜驰告朔州，未反而度拔已卒。
现代文：当初，度拔杀死卫可孤以后，命令贺拔胜驰马报告朔州，尚未返回而度拔已死。
English: At first, after Du Pu killed Wei Ke Guo, he ordered He Ba Sheng to ride his horse to report to Shuozhou. Du Pu had not yet returned and was dead.

古文：刺史费穆奇胜才略，厚礼留之，遂委其事，常为游骑。
现代文：刺史费穆惊奇贺拔胜的才能谋略，以丰厚的待遇将他留下，加以委用，常常担任流动骑兵。
English: Surprised by He Puxin's ability to strategize, Feimu left him with a rich treatment and commissioned him, often serving as a mobile cavalryman.

古文：于时广阳王元深在五原，为破六汗贼所围，昼夜攻战。召胜为军主。
现代文：当时，广阳王元深在五原，被破六汗拔陵包围，日夜进攻，征召贺拔胜为军主。
English: At that time, King Yuan Shen of Guangyang was in the Five Plains. He was besieged by the Han and Liukang armies, attacked day and night, and conscripted He Baxing as his commander.

古文：胜乃率募二百人，开东城门出战，斩首百余级。
现代文：贺拔胜于是率领招募的二百人，打开东城门出战，斩首一百余级。
English: He Bansheng then led the recruited two hundred people, opened the East City Gate to go to war, and beheaded more than a hundred people.

古文：贼遂退军数十里。
现代文：贼人退军数十里。
English: Thieves have retreated dozens of miles.

古文：广阳以贼稍却，因拔军向朔州，胜常为殿。
现代文：广阳王由于敌军稍退，趁机率军向朔州靠拢，贺拔胜常常殿后担任警戒。
English: As the enemy army retreated slightly, Guangyang Wang took advantage of the opportunity to move his army closer to Shuozhou. He Baxing often served as a guard behind the palace.

古文：以功拜统军，加伏波将军。
现代文：以战功任统军，加伏波将军衔。
English: He was awarded the rank of General Gafubo for his distinguished service in the war.

古文：又隶仆射元纂镇恒州。
现代文：又曾隶属仆射元纂，镇守恒州。
English: He was also subordinate to Genzang, the town guard of Hengzhou.

古文：时有鲜于阿胡拥朔州流民，南下为寇。
现代文：当时有鲜于人阿胡，率领朔州流亡百姓，南下侵犯。
English: At that time, there was a rare person, Ahu, who led the exiled people of Shuozhou to invade the south.

古文：恒州城中人乃潜与谋，以城应之。
现代文：恒州城中有人偷偷与阿胡联系，拿恒州城响应阿胡。
English: Someone in the city of Hengzhou secretly contacted Ahu, and took the city of Hengzhou to respond to Ahu.

古文：胜与兄允弟岳相失，南投肆州。
现代文：贺拔胜与兄长贺拔允、弟弟贺拔岳走散，向南投奔肆州。
English: He Bansheng and his elder brother He Bajong and younger brother He Bajue went their separate ways and headed for Nantou.

古文：允、岳投尔朱荣。
现代文：贺拔允、贺拔岳投奔尔朱荣。
English: He Banyun, He Banyue to Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：荣与肆州刺史尉庆宾构隙，引兵攻肆州。
现代文：尔朱荣与肆州刺史尉庆宾不和，率军进攻肆州。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not get along with Qing Bin, the commander of the Zhouzhou garrison, and led the army to attack Zhouzhou.

古文：肆州陷，荣得胜，大悦曰： 吾得卿兄弟，天下不足平也。 
现代文：肆州陷落，尔朱荣得到贺拔胜，大喜道： 我得到你们兄弟，天下不愁不平定。 
English: After the fall of Wuzhou, Le Zhu Rong won the victory of He Bi, and said with great joy: I won your brothers, the world will not be disturbed.

古文：胜委质事荣。时杜洛周阻兵幽、定，葛荣据有冀、瀛。
现代文：贺拔胜归顺尔朱荣后，当时杜洛周阻断幽州、定州，葛荣占据冀州、瀛州。
English: After He Bi Sheng returned to Shun'er Zhu Rong, at that time, Du Luo Zhou blocked Yuzhou and Dingzhou, and Ge Rong occupied Jizhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：荣谓胜曰： 井陉险要，我之东门。
现代文：尔朱荣对贺拔胜说： 井陉险要，犹如我们的东大门。
English: Le Zhu Rong said to He Baxing: "Jinglu is dangerous, just like our eastern gate.

古文：意欲屈君镇之，未知君意如何？ 
现代文：我想委屈你，让你去镇守，不知你意下如何？ 
English: I want to offend you and make you the town guard. I don't know what you're thinking.

古文：胜曰： 少逢兵乱，险阻备尝，每思效力，以报知。
现代文：贺拔胜答道： 我自小遭遇战乱，备尝艰辛，常思效力，报答知己。
English: He Baxian replied: Since I was a child, I have encountered war, prepared for hardships, often thought about effectiveness, and rewarded my friends.

古文：今蒙驱使，实所愿也。 
现代文：今日得蒙派遣，实在符合我的心愿。 
English: Being dispatched today is truly in line with my wishes.

古文：荣乃表胜为镇远将军、别将，领步骑五千镇井陉。
现代文：尔朱荣于是上表，推荐贺拔胜为镇远将军、别将，率领步兵、骑兵共五千人镇守井陉。
English: Le Zhu Rong then went to the table and recommended He Baxing as the general of Zhenyuan and the second general, leading a total of five thousand infantry and cavalry to guard Jingyao.

古文：孝昌末，从荣入洛，以定策立孝庄帝功，封易阳县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：孝昌末年，跟着尔朱荣进入洛阳，以拥戴孝庄帝有功，封易阳县伯，食邑四百户。
English: At the end of Xiaochang's life, he followed Le Zhu Rong into Luoyang, and with the support of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was able to secure 400 households in Bo and Shuei in Yiyang County.

古文：累迁直合将军、通直散骑常侍、平南将军、光禄大夫、抚军将军。
现代文：多次升迁，历任直阁将军、通直散骑常侍、平南将军、光禄大夫、抚军将军等职。
English: He was promoted many times, and successively held positions such as General Naoko, Tsuchida Sanshiro, General Hiranami, Doctor Koroku, and General Fushun.

古文：从太宰元穆北征葛荣，为前锋大都督。
现代文：随从太宰元穆北征葛荣，任前锋大都督。
English: He followed the Northern Expedition of Dazaimotomus Ge Rong and served as the vanguard grand governor.

古文：战于滏口，大破之，虏获数千人。
现代文：在滏口作战，大败敌军，俘虏数千人。
English: He fought in Hekou, defeated the enemy and took thousands of prisoners.

古文：时洛周余烬韩娄在蓟城结聚，为远近之害。
现代文：这时，杜洛周的余党韩娄在蓟城聚众，成为远近的祸患。
English: At this time, Du Luo Zhou's remaining party, Han Yu, gathered a crowd in Handan City, becoming a near and far scourge.

古文：复以胜为大都督，镇中山。
现代文：又任命贺拔胜为大都督，镇守中山。
English: He also appointed He Baxian as the grand governor and the town guard of Zhongshan.

古文：娄素闻胜威名，竟不敢南寇。
现代文：韩娄早就听说贺拔胜的威名，竟然不敢南侵。
English: Han Zheng had long heard of He Bi Sheng's prestige and dared not invade the south.

古文：元颢入洛阳，孝庄帝出居河内。
现代文：元颢入据洛阳，孝庄帝出居河内。
English: Yuan Shao entered Luoyang and Emperor Xiaozhuang moved to Hanoi.

古文：荣征胜为前军大都督，领千骑与尔朱兆自硖石度，大破颢军，擒其子领军将军冠受，及梁将陈思保等，遂前驱入洛。
现代文：尔朱荣征调贺拔胜担任前军大都督，率领千余名骑兵，与尔朱兆从硖石渡过黄河，大败元颢军，活捉元颢之子、领军将军元冠受及梁国将领陈思保等人，于是率先进入洛阳。
English: Le Zhu Rongzheng led more than a thousand cavalrymen to cross the Yellow River from Shishi with Le Zhu Zhao, defeating the Yuan Shao army, capturing the sons of Yuan Shao, the leading general Yuan Guanzhu and Liang Guo general Chen Si Bao, and then took the lead in entering Luoyang.

古文：拜武卫将军、金紫光禄大夫，增邑六百户，进爵真定县公，迁武卫将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：被任命为武卫将军、金紫光禄大夫，食邑增加六百户，晋爵真定县公，升右卫将军，加散骑常侍衔。
English: He was appointed as Wuwei general, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, the number of food villages increased by 600, he was promoted to Jinjie County official, promoted to Yuwei general, and given the rank of Sanzhijian.

古文：及荣被诛，事起仓卒，胜复随世隆至于河桥。
现代文：尔朱荣被杀时，事情非常突然，贺拔胜又随尔朱世隆抵达河桥。
English: When Er Zhu Rong was killed, the matter was very sudden, and He Bansheng arrived at the river bridge with Er Zhu Shilong.

古文：胜以为臣无雠君之义，遂勒所部还都谒帝。
现代文：贺拔胜认为臣子无仇君之说，率领部下回到京都，朝见皇帝。
English: He Bansheng thought that the vassal had no enemy, so he led his subordinates back to Kyoto to see the emperor.

古文：大悦，以本官假骠骑大将军、东征都督，率骑一千，会郑先护讨尔朱仲远。
现代文：皇帝大喜，以原有官职加授骠骑大将军、东征都督衔，率领一千名骑兵，会合郑先护讨伐尔朱仲远。
English: The emperor was overjoyed, and in addition to his former official position, he was awarded the title of grand general of cavalry and the title of governor of the Eastern Expedition, and led a thousand cavalrymen to meet Zheng Xian to protect and fight against Var Zhu Zhongyuan.

古文：为先护所疑，置之营外，人马未得休息。
现代文：被郑先护怀疑，拒于军营之外，人马未能休息。
English: Suspected by Zheng Xianbao, even though they were outside the military camp, they were unable to rest.

古文：俄而仲远兵至，与战不利，乃降之。
现代文：不久，尔朱仲远兵到，贺拔胜失利，于是向尔朱仲远投降。
English: Soon, the soldiers of Lzhu Zhongyuan arrived, and He Bi defeated, so he surrendered to Lzhu Zhongyuan.

古文：复与尔朱氏同谋，立节闵帝。
现代文：又与尔朱氏共同策划，拥立节闵帝。
English: He also co-planned with the Er Zhu clan and supported the establishment of the Emperor.

古文：以功拜右卫将军，进车骑大将军、仪同三司、左光禄大夫。
现代文：由于立功，被任命为镇军将军，升车骑大将军、仪同三司、左光禄大夫。
English: As a result of his meritorious service, he was appointed as the general of the town army, the general of the carriage and cavalry, the three divisions of the ceremony, and the doctor of the left light.

古文：齐神武怀贰，尔朱氏将讨之。
现代文：齐神武怀有野心，尔朱氏准备讨伐他。
English: Qi Shenwu is ambitious, and the Lzhu clan is preparing to fight him.

古文：度律自洛阳引兵，兆起并州，仲远从滑台，三帅会于邺东。
现代文：尔朱度律从洛阳出兵，尔朱兆从并州出兵，尔朱仲远从滑台出兵，三位元帅在邺城东面会师。
English: Lr Zhu Du Lu dispatched troops from Luoyang, Lr Zhu Zhao dispatched troops from Bianzhou, Lr Zhu Zhongyuan dispatched troops from Slidai, and the three marshals joined the division in the east of Lucheng.

古文：时胜从度律。
现代文：此时贺拔胜隶于尔朱度律帐下。
English: At this time, He Baxian was subordinate to Er Zhu Duru.

古文：度律与兆不平。
现代文：尔朱度律与尔朱兆不和。
English: There is discord between the Ruling Council and the Council of Elders.

古文：胜以临敌构嫌，取败之道，乃与斛斯椿诣兆营和解之，反为兆所执。
现代文：贺拔胜认为临战不和，会导致失败，就与斛斯椿到尔朱兆军营为二人和解，反而被尔朱兆囚禁起来。
English: He Baxing thought that discord on the eve of battle would lead to defeat, so he and Jinshuchin went to the Lzhu Zhao military camp to reconcile the two, but were instead imprisoned by Lzhu Zhao.

古文：度律大惧，遂引军还。
现代文：尔朱度律十分害怕，领兵退回。
English: Terrified, he led his troops back.

古文：兆将斩胜，数之曰： 尔杀可孤，罪一也；天柱薨后，复不与世隆等俱来，而东征仲远，罪二也。
现代文：尔朱兆打算杀掉贺拔胜，历数他的罪过，说道： 你杀死卫可孤，是第一条罪状；尔朱荣去世后，你不同尔朱世隆等一块前来，反而东征尔朱仲远，这是第二条罪状。
English: Lzhu Zhao planned to kill He Baxian and recounted his sins, saying: You killed Wei Kehua, which is the first crime; after Lzhu Rong's death, instead of waiting for Lzhu Shilong to come with you, you went to the east to search for Lzhu Zhongyuan, which is the second crime.

古文：我欲杀尔久矣，今复何言？ 
现代文：我早就想杀你，今天还有什么话说？ 
English: I've wanted to kill you for a long time. What else can I say today?

古文：胜曰： 可孤作逆，为国巨患，胜父子诛之，其功不小，反以为罪，天下未闻。
现代文：贺拔胜答道： 卫可孤叛乱，为国家大患，我们父子把他杀掉，功劳不小，你反而认为是罪过，天下人没有听说过。
English: He Baxian replied: Wei Keqiang's rebellion was a great national calamity. Our father and son killed him, which was no small achievement. You, on the other hand, think it was a crime. No one in the world has heard of it.

古文：天柱被戮，以君诛臣，胜宁负朝廷？
现代文：尔朱荣被杀，是君王处死臣子，贺拔胜难道能对不起朝廷？
English: Lzhu Rong was killed, it was the king who executed his vassal. Can He Puxin forgive the imperial court?

古文：今日之事，生死在王。
现代文：今日之事，生死在于大王。
English: What happens today, life or death, is up to you.

古文：但去贼密迩，骨肉构隙，自古迄今，未有不破亡者。
现代文：只是距敌甚近，兄弟不和，从古到今，没有不败亡的。
English: But from ancient times to the present, there has never been anyone who has been so close to the enemy that they have not been able to defeat him.

古文：胜不惮死，恐王失策。 
现代文：我不怕死，只担心大王失算。 
English: I'm not afraid of death, and I'm afraid it's a big mistake for you to do this.

古文：兆乃舍之。
现代文：尔朱兆于是放了他。
English: Lzhu Zhao then let him go.

古文：胜既得免，行百余里，方追及度律军。
现代文：贺拔胜被释放后，急行一百多里，才追上尔朱度律的军队。
English: After He Baxian was released, he made an express trip of more than a hundred miles before he caught up with the army of Er Zhudu Lu.

古文：齐神武既克相州，兵威渐盛。
现代文：齐神武占领相州后，军威渐盛。
English: After Qi Shenwu occupied Xiangzhou, the military power gradually increased.

古文：于是尔朱兆及天光、仲远、度律等众十余万，阵于韩陵。
现代文：尔朱兆及尔朱天光、尔朱仲远、尔朱度律等人率军十余万人，在韩陵排开阵势。
English: Lzhu Zhao, Lzhu Tianguang, Lzhu Zhongyuan, Lzhu Duru and others led an army of more than 100,000 people and lined up at the Han Mausoleum.

古文：兆率铁骑陷阵，出齐神武之后，将乘其背而击之。
现代文：尔朱兆率领铁甲骑兵冲入敌阵，从齐神武后方转出，打算攻击其尾部。
English: Er Zhu Zhao led the armored cavalry into the enemy lines, turned from the rear of Qi Shenwu, intending to attack its tail.

古文：度律恶兆之骄悍，惧其陵己，勒兵不肯进。
现代文：尔朱度律厌恶尔朱兆的傲慢，害怕他欺凌自己，下令部属不得进击。
English: Lzhu Duru detested Lzhu Zhao's arrogance, feared that he would bully himself, and ordered his subordinates not to attack.

古文：胜以其携贰，遂率麾下降于齐神武。
现代文：贺拔胜认为尔朱度律怀有二心，就率领部下投降齐神武。
English: He Baxing thought that Er Zhu Duru harbored double-mindedness, so he led his subordinates to surrender to Qi Shenwu.

古文：度律军以此先退，遂大败。
现代文：尔朱度律的军队因此而率先撤退，于是大败。
English: As a result, the forces of the Rzhu Duru retreated, and the armies of the Rzhu clan were soundly defeated.

古文：太昌初，以胜为领军将军，寻除侍中。
现代文：太昌初年，任领军将军，随即被任命为侍中。
English: In the first year of Taichang, the imperial court ordered He Bu Sheng to be the leading general, and he was soon appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：孝武帝将图齐神武，以胜弟岳拥众关西，欲广其势援，乃拜胜为都督三荆、二郢、南襄、南雍七州诸军事，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，加授南道大行台尚书左仆射。
现代文：孝武帝打算对付齐神武，由于贺拔胜之弟贺拔岳在函谷关以西拥有军队，想扩大声势，就任命贺拔胜为都督三荆、二郢、南襄、南雍七州诸军事，升任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，加授南道大行台尚书左仆射衔。
English: Emperor Xiaowu planned to deal with Qishenwu. Since He Baxing's younger brother He Bajue had an army west of Hanyu Pass and wanted to expand his influence, he appointed He Baxing as the military governor of the seven provinces of Sanjing, Erqian, Nanshan and Nanyang. He was promoted to the general of cavalry, the third secretary of Kaifu, and the first secretary of Jingzhou. He was also awarded the title of the left-handed servant of Shangshu in the Southern Highway.

古文：胜攻梁下溠戍，擒其戍主尹道珍等。
现代文：贺拔胜进攻梁国的下氵差戍，活捉戍主尹道珍等人。
English: He Baosheng attacked Liangguo's Lower Yunnan Province and captured the warlord Yin Daozhen and others alive.

古文：又使人诱动蛮王文道期，率其种落归款。
现代文：又派人利诱蛮王文道期，使他率其部落归降。
English: He also sent Li to lure the barbarian king Wen Dao to surrender with his tribe.

古文：梁雍州刺史萧续击道期不利，汉南大骇。
现代文：梁国雍州刺史萧续进攻文道期，作战失利，汉水以南震惊。
English: Liang Guo, Yong Zhou and Zhishi launched a series of attacks during the period of literature and art. They were defeated in battle, and the south of Han Shui was shocked.

古文：胜遣大都督独孤信、军司史宁。欧阳酇城。南雍州刺史长孙亮、南荆州刺史李魔怜、大都督王元轨取久山、白洎，都督拔略昶、史仵龙取义城、均口，擒梁将庄思延，获甲卒数千人。
现代文：贺拔胜派大都督独孤信、军司史宁攻占欧阳、赞阝城，南雍州刺史长孙亮、南荆州刺史李魔怜、大都督王元轨攻占久山、白洎，都督拔略昶、史仵龙攻占义城、均口，活捉梁国将领庄思延，俘虏带甲士兵数千人。
English: He Baisheng sent the grand governor Du Duxunxin, the military commander Shining to capture Ouyang and Zhanlu City, the governor of Nanyang to capture Sun Liang, the governor of South Jing Province to capture Li Maoli, the grand governor Wang Yuanlu to capture Jushan and Baiyao, the governor to capture Liaocheng, the military commander Shijialong to capture Yicheng and Jiankou, the general of Liang Province Zhuang Siyan to be captured alive, and thousands of soldiers with armor to be captured.

古文：攻冯翊、安定、阳，并平之。
现代文：又进攻冯翊、安定、沔阳，将其全部平定。
English: They also attacked Fenghuang, Ding'an, and Shenyang, and completely subdued them.

古文：胜军于樊、邓之间。
现代文：贺拔胜驻军在樊州、邓州之间。
English: He Baxing's garrison was located between Ganzhou and Dangzhou.

古文：梁武敕续曰： 贺拔胜北间骁将，尔宜慎之。 
现代文：梁武帝告诫萧续道： 贺拔胜是北方骁将，你一定要谨慎对待。 
English: Emperor Liangwu admonished Xiao: He Baxing is a great general of the North, you must be careful.

古文：续遂城守不敢出。
现代文：萧续于是固守城池，不敢出战。
English: With poor results, they stick to the castle and do not dare to go to war.

古文：寻进位中书令，增邑二千户，进爵琅邪郡公。
现代文：不久，升中书令，食邑增加二千户，晋爵琅笽郡公。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking official, the number of households in the county increased by two thousand, and he was given the title of Jinzhe and became the county magistrate.

古文：续遣柳仲礼守谷城，胜攻之未拔。
现代文：萧续派柳仲礼防守谷城，贺拔胜未能攻下。
English: Liu Zhongli was sent in succession to defend Gucheng, but failed to capture He Bi Sheng.

古文：属齐神武与帝有隙，诏胜引兵赴洛，至广州，犹豫未进，而帝已西迁。
现代文：正巧齐神武与皇帝不和，诏命贺拔胜领兵赶赴洛阳，到广州后，犹豫不决，没有继续前进，而皇帝已经西迁。
English: It just so happened that Qi Shenwu was at odds with the emperor. The imperial edict ordered He Puxing to rush to Luoyang to lead the troops. After arriving in Guangzhou, he hesitated and did not move forward, while the emperor had already moved west.

古文：胜还军南阳，遣右丞休之奉表入关，又令府长史元颍行州事。
现代文：贺拔胜回军南阳，派右丞阳休之奉表入函谷关，又令府长史元颍代理州事。
English: He returned to Nanyang with victory, sent a letter from Ujo Yanghyu to Hakodate, and appointed the prefectural governor Shi Yuanjun as acting governor.

古文：胜自率所部，将西赴关中，进至淅阳，诏封胜太保、录尚书事。
现代文：贺拔胜亲自率领所属军队，准备西去关中。抵达淅阳时，诏命封贺拔胜为太保、录尚书事。
English: He Bachsheng personally led his army and prepared to go west to Guanzhong. When he arrived in Shenyang, he was ordered to seal He Bachsheng as a Taipo and record his records.

古文：时齐神武已陷潼关，屯军华阴。
现代文：当时齐神武已经攻陷潼关，屯兵华阴。
English: At that time, Qi Shenwu had already captured Shaoguan, and the troops were stationed in Huayin.

古文：胜乃还荆州。
现代文：贺拔胜回到荆州。
English: He Baxing returned to Jingzhou.

古文：州民邓诞执元颍，北引侯景。
现代文：州中百姓邓诞捉住元颍，从北面引来侯景。
English: Deng Xizhi, a commoner from the middle of the state, captured Yuan Xuan and brought Houjing from the north.

古文：胜至，景逆击之，胜军不利，率麾下数百骑，南奔梁。
现代文：贺拔胜刚到，侯景上前迎击，贺拔胜军队失利，率部下数百名骑兵，向南投奔梁国。
English: As soon as He Baxing arrived, Hou Jing advanced to meet the attack. He Baxing's army was defeated, and he led hundreds of cavalrymen to rush south to Liangguo.

古文：在江表三年，梁武帝遇之甚厚。
现代文：在江南三年，梁武帝待他十分丰厚。
English: During his three years in the south of the Yangtze River, Emperor Liangwu treated him very well.

古文：胜常乞师北讨齐神武，既不果，乃求还。
现代文：贺拔胜常常请求拨给他军队，北上讨伐齐神武，但未能成功，于是要求回去。
English: He Baxing often requested that an army be assigned to him to go to the north to fight against Qi Shenwu, but it was not successful, so he asked to go back.

古文：梁武帝许之，亲饯于南苑。
现代文：梁武帝答应他，亲自在南苑为他饯别。
English: Emperor Liangwu agreed and personally escorted him to Nanyuan.

古文：胜自是之后，每行执弓矢，见鸟兽南向者皆不射之，以申怀德之志也。既至长安，诣阙谢罪。
现代文：从此以后，贺拔胜每当行猎，看见向南去的鸟兽都不射，以表达感激之情。到长安后，入朝请罪。
English: From then on, He Buxing would express his gratitude whenever he went hunting and saw that the birds and beasts heading south did not shoot. After arriving in Chang'an, he went to the imperial court to plead guilty.

古文：朝廷嘉其还，乃授太师。
现代文：朝廷嘉许他返回，授官太师。
English: The Imperial Court commended his return and awarded him the title of Grand Master.

古文：后从太祖擒窦泰于小关，加授中军大都督。
现代文：后来跟随太祖在小关活捉窦泰，加授中军大都督。
English: Later, he followed his great-grandfather to capture Dou Tai alive in Xiaoguan, and was awarded the title of Grand Governor of the Chinese Army.

古文：又从太祖攻弘农。
现代文：又跟随太祖进攻弘农。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather to attack Hongnong.

古文：胜自陕津先渡河，东魏将高干遁，胜追获，囚之。
现代文：贺拔胜从陕津率先渡过黄河，东魏将领高干逃跑，被贺拔胜追上活捉，囚禁起来。
English: He Baxing was the first to cross the Yellow River from Shaanxi and Tianjin. Eastern Wei general Gao Gan escaped, but was caught alive by He Baxing and imprisoned.

古文：下河北，擒郡守孙晏。
现代文：攻占河北，活捉郡守孙晏。
English: Capture Hebei and capture the county governor, Sun Yat-sen, alive.

古文：崔乂。从破东魏军于沙苑，追奔至河上。
现代文：又参与在沙苑击败东魏军，追击败军直到黄河岸边。
English: He also participated in the defeat of the Eastern Wei Army in Shayuan and chased the defeated army to the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：仍与李弼别攻河东，略定汾、绛。增邑并前五千户。
现代文：又与李弼另攻河东，平定汾州、绛州，食邑增至五千户。
English: He also invaded the eastern part of Hebei Province with Li Qiye, pacified Ganzhou and Ganzhou, and increased the number of food villages to five thousand.

古文：河桥之役，胜大破东魏军。
现代文：河桥之战，贺拔胜大胜东魏军。
English: In the Battle of Heqiao, He Bi won a great victory over the Eastern Wei Army.

古文：太祖命胜收其降卒而还。
现代文：太祖命令贺拔胜收编降卒返回。
English: The great-grandfather ordered He Baxing to collect the fallen soldiers and return.

古文：及齐神武悉众攻玉壁，胜以前军大都督从太祖追之于汾北。
现代文：后来齐神武全力攻打玉壁，贺拔胜以前军大都督身份跟随太祖在汾水以北追击他。
English: Later, Qi Shenwu made every effort to attack Yubi, and He Bi Sheng, as the former military governor, followed his great-grandfather to pursue him north of Surabaya.

古文：又从战邙山。
现代文：又参与邙山之战。
English: He also participated in the Battle of Shaoshan.

古文：时太祖见齐神武旗鼓，识之，乃募敢勇三千人，配胜以犯其军。
现代文：当时太祖望见齐神武的旗鼓，认出是敌军主帅，就招募勇士三千人，配合贺拔胜进击敌军。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather looked at Qi Shenwu's banner and drum, recognized him as the enemy's commander, and recruited three thousand warriors to attack the enemy with He Bi Sheng.

古文：胜适与齐神武相遇，因告之曰： 贺六浑，贺拔破胡必杀汝也。 
现代文：贺拔胜恰巧同齐神武相遇，就告诉他： 贺六浑，我一定要杀掉你！ 
English: He Baxing happened to meet Qi Shenwu, and told him: He Liuhun, I must kill you!

古文：时募士皆用短兵接战，胜持矛追齐神武数里，刃垂及之。
现代文：当时所募勇士都用短兵器交战，贺拔胜手持丈八长矛追击齐神武数里，矛尖几乎刺中齐神武。
English: The warriors recruited at that time all fought with short weapons, and He Bi Sheng chased Qi Shenwu for several miles with a long spear in his hand. The tip of the spear almost pierced Qi Shenwu.

古文：会胜马为流矢所中，死，比副骑至，齐神武已逸去。
现代文：恰巧贺拔胜的坐骑被乱箭射中而死，等随从赶到时，齐神武已经逃走。
English: Coincidentally, He Buxing's horse was hit by a stray arrow and died. By the time the attendants arrived, Qi Shenwu had already fled.

古文：胜叹曰： 今日之事，吾不执弓矢者，天也！ 
现代文：贺拔胜叹息道： 今日之事，我没有带弓箭，真是天意啊！ 
English: He sighed and said, "Today's event was not a success. I regret that I did not bring a bow and arrow. It was truly God's will!"

古文：是岁，胜诸子在东者，皆为齐神武所害。
现代文：当年，贺拔胜在东部的儿子，全部被齐神武杀害。
English: That year, all of He Baxian's sons in the east were killed by Qi Shenwu.

古文：胜愤恨，因动气疾。
现代文：贺拔胜悲愤异常，气闷之病发作。
English: He Baxing was unusually sad and angry, and suffered from a bout of gout.

古文：大统十年，薨于位。
现代文：大统十年，在职位上去世。
English: Ten years after unification, he died in office.

古文：临终，手书与太祖曰： 胜万里杖策，归身阙庭，冀望与公扫除逋寇。
现代文：临终前，写信给太祖说： 我西驰万里，投奔朝廷，希望同您一块扫除残寇。
English: Before his death, he wrote to his great-grandfather, saying: "I have traveled thousands of miles to the west to join the imperial court, and I hope to work with you to sweep away the remaining bandits.

古文：不幸殒毙，微志不申。
现代文：不幸早逝，微志难申。
English: Unfortunately, he died today and his goal could not be achieved.

古文：愿公内先协和，顺时而动。
现代文：希望您和谐内部，顺时而动。
English: I hope you are harmonious inside and move smoothly.

古文：若死而有知，犹望魂飞贼庭，以报恩遇耳。 
现代文：我如死而有知，还盼望魂飞贼庭，来报答您的恩惠知遇。 
English: If there is knowledge after death, I also hope that my soul will fly to the enemy's court to repay the court's kindness to me.

古文：太祖览书，流涕久之。
现代文：太祖看了信，泪水久久不干。
English: When the great-grandfather read the letter, his tears flowed for a long time.

古文：胜长于丧乱之中，尤工武艺，走马射飞鸟，十中其五六。
现代文：贺拔胜生长在战乱之中，尤精于武艺，驰马射飞鸟，十中五六。
English: He Baxing grew up in the turmoil, especially proficient in martial arts. He rode a horse and shot birds, with a score of 56 out of 10.

古文：太祖每云： 诸将对敌，神色皆动，唯贺拔公临阵如平常，真大勇也。 
现代文：太祖常常说： 诸将临敌作战，神色皆变，只有贺拔公临战像平常一样，真是最勇敢的人。 
English: The great-grandfather often said, "All generals go into battle against the enemy, and their faces change. Only He Bago, who goes into battle as usual, is truly the bravest man.

古文：自居重位，始爱坟籍。
现代文：从担任高官以后，才开始爱读书。
English: It was only after he became a high-ranking official that he began to love reading.

古文：乃招引文儒，讨论义理。
现代文：于是请来文人儒士，讨论经义名理。
English: The author then invited a Confucian scholar to discuss the meaning of the name.

古文：性又通率，重义轻财，身死之日，唯有随身兵仗及书千余卷而已。
现代文：为人又坦率，看重义气，轻视钱财，去世之日，只有随身兵器和书籍千余卷。
English: He was a straightforward person who valued loyalty and despised money. On the day of his death, he had nothing but his sidearm and more than a thousand volumes of books.

古文：初，胜至关中，自以年位素重，见太祖不拜，寻而自悔，太祖亦有望焉。
现代文：当初，贺拔胜到关中，自认为年纪大，官职高，见了太祖也不叩拜，随即感到后悔，太祖也有不满。
English: At first, when He Baxian came to Guanzhong, he thought that he was too old and had a high official position. When he saw his great-grandfather, he did not bow to him. He immediately felt regret, and his great-grandfather was also dissatisfied.

古文：后从太祖宴于昆明池，时有双凫游于池上，太祖乃授弓矢于胜曰： 不见公射久矣，请以为欢。 
现代文：后来，跟随太祖在昆明池宴饮，当时有两只凫鸟游在池中，太祖就把弓箭递给贺拔胜，说： 很久不见您射箭，请显示箭法取乐。 
English: Later, following the great-grandfather at a banquet in Kunming Pond, when there were two ostriches swimming in the pond, the great-grandfather handed the bow and arrow to He Baxeng and said: I haven't seen you shoot arrows for a long time, please show me how to shoot arrows for fun.

古文：胜射之，一发俱中。
现代文：贺拔胜一箭就射中两只凫鸟。
English: He Baxing shot two ostriches with one arrow.

古文：因拜太祖曰： 使胜得奉神武，以讨不庭，皆如此也。 
现代文：乘机叩拜太祖道： 倘若我能奉您之命，讨伐叛逆，但愿都像这样。 
English: Take the opportunity to worship the great ancestor: If I can follow your order to fight against rebellion, I hope it will all be like this.

古文：太祖大悦。
现代文：太祖大喜。
English: I am very happy.

古文：自是恩礼日重，胜亦尽诚推奉焉。
现代文：从此对他恩惠礼遇愈重，贺拔胜也尽力拥戴太祖。
English: From then on, he received more and more favors, and He Baxing also tried his best to support his great-grandfather.

古文：赠定冀等十州诸军事、定州刺史、太宰、录尚书事，谥曰贞献。
现代文：追赠他为定冀等十州诸军事、定州刺史、太宰、录尚书事，谥号贞献。
English: He was posthumously awarded the military titles of ten prefectures, such as Dingji, Dingzhou Shishi, Dazai, Rokushang Shuji, and his posthumous name was Zhenxian.

古文：明帝二年，以胜配享太祖庙庭。
现代文：明帝二年，以贺拔胜配祭太祖庙庭。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the Great Ancestor's Temple Garden was decorated with a festival to celebrate the victory.

古文：胜无子，以弟岳子仲华嗣。
现代文：贺拔胜没有儿子，以兄弟贺拔岳之子贺拔仲华承嗣。
English: He Baxing did not have a son, so he named his brother He Baxing, the son of He Baxing, as his successor.

古文：大统三年，赐爵樊城公。
现代文：大统三年，赐爵樊城公。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, he was given the title of Duke of Shicheng.

古文：魏废帝时，为通直郎、散骑常侍，迁黄门郎，加车骑大将军、仪同三司，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：魏废帝时，任通直郎、散骑常侍，升黄门郎，加车骑大将军、仪同三司、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司等衔。
English: When Emperor Wei was dethroned, he had the following ranks: Ren Tong Naorong, Zangjie Changzhuang, Shenghuangmenro, Xacheng Jiaotang, Yi Tong Sanji, Zangjie Jiaotang, Kaifu Jiaotang Sanji.

古文：六官建，拜守庙下大夫。
现代文：六官建立后，任守庙下大夫。
English: After the establishment of the six offices, he served as the doctor of the temple.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，袭爵琅邪公，除利州刺史。
现代文：孝闵帝登基，袭封琅笽公，任利州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, succeeded to the title of Shigong, and was appointed as the governor of Lishu.

古文：大象末，位至江陵总管。
现代文：大象末年，官至江陵总管。
English: At the end of his life, he rose to the post of Gangneung chief.

古文：胜兄弟三人，并以豪侠知名。
现代文：贺拔胜兄弟三人，都以豪侠出名。
English: The three He Baxing brothers are famous for their heroic deeds.

古文：兄允字阿泥，魏孝武时，位至太尉，封燕郡王，为神武所害。
现代文：兄长贺拔允，字阿泥，魏孝武帝时，官至太尉，封燕郡王，被齐神武杀害。
English: His elder brother He Bajun, also known as Ami, was a high-ranking officer and the king of Yan County during the reign of Emperor Wei Xiaowu. He was killed by Qi Shenwu.

古文：岳字阿斗泥。
现代文：贺拔岳字阿斗泥。
English: Mt. He pulls out the word "A Dou" from the mud.

古文：少有大志，爱施好士。
现代文：从少年时就有远大志向，好施舍，爱结交读书人。
English: Ever since he was a boy, he had lofty ambitions, was good at giving alms, and loved to make friends with readers.

古文：初为太学生，及长，能左右驰射，骁果绝人。
现代文：最初是太学生，长大后，能驰马左右射箭，勇猛过人。
English: At first, he was a high school student. When he grew up, he was able to gallop around and shoot arrows. He was very brave.

古文：不读兵书而暗与之合，识者咸异之。
现代文：不读兵书，而能与兵法一致，有识见的人都认为他是个奇才。
English: He does not read military manuals, but is able to act in accordance with military methods. People with insight consider him to be a prodigy.

古文：与父兄诛卫可孤之后，广阳王元深以岳为帐内军主。又表为强弩将军。
现代文：与父兄杀掉卫可孤之后，广阳王元深任命贺拔岳为帐内军主，又上表推荐他担任强弩将军。
English: After he and his father and brother killed Wei Keguo, Guangyang Wang Yuan Sheng appointed He Batyue as the commander of the army, and recommended him to be the general of Qiang Xuan.

古文：后与兄胜俱镇恒州。
现代文：后来同兄长贺拔胜一起镇守恒州。
English: Later, together with his elder brother He Baxian, he took part in the defense of Hengzhou.

古文：州陷，投尔朱荣。
现代文：州城陷落，投奔尔朱荣。
English: Shucheng fell, and Zhu Rong took the lead.

古文：荣待之甚厚，以为别将，寻为都督。
现代文：尔朱荣待他十分丰厚，任为别将，随即又升任都督。
English: Le Zhu Rong treated him very generously, appointing him second-in-command, and he was immediately promoted to the post of governor.

古文：每居帐下，与计事，多与荣意合，益重之。
现代文：每次在帐幕中参与策划事情，大多与尔朱荣意见相合，尔朱荣更加看重他。
English: Every time he participated in planning things in the tent, he mostly agreed with Le Zhurong, and Le Zhurong valued him more.

古文：荣士马既众，遂与元天穆谋入匡朝廷。谓岳曰： 今女主临朝，政归近习。
现代文：尔朱荣兵马众多，就与元天穆共同谋划匡复朝廷，对贺拔岳说： 如今女主临朝，政权归于亲信。
English: Zhu Rong had a large number of soldiers and horses, so he and Yuan Tianmu jointly planned the restoration of the imperial court, and said to He Batyue: "Nowadays, the empress is on the throne, and the power belongs to her close confidants."

古文：盗贼蜂起，海内沸腾，王师屡出，覆亡相继。
现代文：盗贼遍地，海内动乱，官军屡次出击，相继败亡。
English: Thieves were everywhere, there was unrest at sea, and the government army made repeated attacks and was defeated one after another.

古文：吾累世受恩，义同休戚。
现代文：我世代承蒙恩泽，应当与之同甘共苦。
English: Our generation has inherited the blessings, and we should share the joys and sorrows with them.

古文：今欲亲率士马，电赴京师，内除君侧，外清逆乱。
现代文：如今打算亲率兵马，急赴京师，内除奸臣，外清叛乱。
English: Now he intends to lead his own soldiers and horses and rush to Beijing, excluding the traitorous vassals and the Qing rebellion.

古文：取胜之道，计将安出？ 岳对曰： 夫立非常之事，必俟非常之人。
现代文：请问有什么取胜之计？ 贺拔岳答道： 欲行非常之事，必有非常之人。
English: What is the winning strategy, please? He Batyue replied: If you want to do something extraordinary, you must have extraordinary people.

古文：将军士马精强，位任隆重。
现代文：将军兵马强盛，位高望重。
English: The generals were powerful and highly respected.

古文：若首举义旗，伐叛匡主，何往而不克，何向而不摧。
现代文：如果首举义旗，征伐叛逆，辅佐君王，何往而不胜？何向而不摧？
English: If you are the first to raise the banner of righteousness, conquer and rebel, and assist the king, what will you not win? What will you not destroy?

古文：古人云： 朝谋不及夕，言发不俟驾 ，此之谓矣。 
现代文：古人说： 早晨议定的事，等不到晚上；说好出发，就等不及驾好车辆。 
English: The ancients said: What is agreed upon in the morning cannot wait until the evening; if you have agreed on the departure, you cannot wait to drive the vehicle.

古文：荣与天穆相顾良久，曰： 卿此言，真丈夫之志也。 
现代文：就是指的这类事啊！ 尔朱荣与元天穆相视良久，说道： 您这番话真是大丈夫的志向啊！ 
English: That's the kind of thing I'm referring to! Le Zhu Rong and Yuan Tianmu looked at each other for a long time and said: Your words are really okay aspirations!

古文：未几而魏孝明帝暴崩，荣疑有故，乃举兵赴洛。
现代文：不久，魏孝明帝突然驾崩，尔朱荣怀疑其中必有缘故，就率兵赶赴洛阳。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wei Xiaoming died suddenly, and Er Zhu Rong suspected that there must be a reason for this, so he led his troops to Luoyang.

古文：配岳甲卒二千为先驱，至河阴。
现代文：分派给贺拔岳带甲士兵二千人作为先锋，到达河阴。
English: Two thousand soldiers were assigned to He Batyue to lead the vanguard to arrive in Hexin.

古文：荣既杀害朝士，时齐神武为荣军都督，劝荣称帝，左右多欲同之，荣疑未决。
现代文：尔朱荣杀害朝臣，当时齐神武是尔朱荣部下的都督，劝尔朱荣称帝，尔朱荣犹豫不决。
English: Er Zhurong killed the courtier. At that time, Qi Shenwu was the governor of Er Zhurong's subordinates, and he advised Er Zhurong to proclaim himself emperor. Er Zhurong hesitated.

古文：岳乃从容进而言曰： 将军首举义兵，共除奸逆，功勤未立，逆有此谋，可谓速祸，未见其福。 
现代文：贺拔岳于是从容劝道： 将军首举义兵，共除叛贼，今大功未立，反而有此图谋，可说是加速引来祸患，不会有什么好处。 
English: He Batyue then calmly advised, "The general was the first to raise a volunteer army to remove the traitors, but he did not achieve great success. On the contrary, this scheme, which can be said to accelerate the evil, will not do any good.

古文：荣寻亦自悟，乃尊立孝庄。
现代文：尔朱荣随即也醒悟过来，于是尊立孝庄帝。
English: Le Zhu Rong then also came to his senses, and so he set up the Xiaozhuang Emperor.

古文：岳又劝荣诛齐神武以谢天下。
现代文：贺拔岳又劝尔朱荣处死齐神武，来向天下谢罪。
English: He also advised Zhu Rong to execute Qi Shenwu to apologize to the world.

古文：左右咸言： 高欢虽复庸疏，言不思难，今四方尚梗，事藉武臣，请舍之，收其后效。 
现代文：身边的人都说： 高欢虽然平庸疏懒，但不避艰险，如今四方动乱，凭借武将，请留他一条活命，让他以后效力。 
English: People around him said: Although Gao Huan is a mediocre and lazy person, he does not avoid hardships and dangers. Nowadays, there are upheavals in all directions. With the help of the military commander, please let him live and let him serve in the future.

古文：荣乃止。
现代文：尔朱荣就没有处死齐神武。
English: Jiurong did not execute Qi Shenwu.

古文：以定策功，授前将军、太中大夫，赐爵樊城男。
现代文：以拥戴皇帝有功，贺拔岳被任命为前将军、太中大夫，赐爵樊城乡男。
English: For his service in supporting the emperor, He Batyue was appointed as a former general, grand vice-admiral, and given the title of "Man of Town and Country."

古文：复为荣前军都督，破葛荣于滏口。
现代文：又任尔朱荣前军都督，在滏口击败葛荣。
English: He also served as the governor of the former army of Le Zhu Rong and defeated Ge Rong in Hekou.

古文：迁平东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：升平东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: General Shengping Dong and Doctor Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：坐事免。诏寻复之。
现代文：因罪免官，随即诏命复官。
English: Dismissed for his crime, he was immediately reinstated by imperial edict.

古文：从平元颢，转左光禄大夫、武卫将军。
现代文：随从平定元颢，转任左光禄大夫、武卫将军。
English: He followed the pacification of Yuan Shao and was transferred to the positions of Doctor of the Left Guanglu and General Wuwei.

古文：时万俟丑奴僭称大号，关中骚动，朝廷深以为忧。
现代文：当时万俟丑奴妄称帝号，关中动荡，朝廷十分担忧。
English: At that time, the imperial court was very worried about the fact that many villains were arrogantly claiming the title of emperor and the situation in the imperial palace was turbulent.

古文：荣将遣岳讨之。
现代文：尔朱荣打算派贺拔岳前去讨伐。
English: Le Zhurong planned to send He Baturu to fight.

古文：岳私谓其兄胜曰： 丑奴拥秦、陇之兵，足为勍敌。
现代文：贺拔岳私下对兄长贺拔胜说： 万俟丑奴拥有秦、陇之兵，足为劲敌。
English: Privately, He Bajue said to his elder brother He Bajue: "If the ugly bastard has the soldiers of Qin and Qi, he is a strong opponent.

古文：若岳往而无功，罪责立至；假令克定，恐谗愬生焉。 
现代文：如果我劳而无功，责罚跟着就到；倘若定期将其荡平，又恐招致谗言。 
English: If I labour in vain, chastisement will follow; if I regularly smooth it over, I may incur reproach.

古文：胜曰： 汝欲何计自安？ 
现代文：贺拔胜说： 你打算用什么计策保住自己？ 
English: He Basheng said: What strategy do you plan to use to protect yourself?

古文：岳曰： 请尔朱氏一人为元帅，岳副贰之，则可矣。 
现代文：贺拔岳说： 请尔朱氏派一个人担任元帅，我当副职，就可以了。 
English: He Batyue said: Let's ask the Zhu clan to send someone to be a marshal, and I'll be a deputy.

古文：胜然之，乃请于荣。
现代文：贺拔胜认为有理，就向尔朱荣请求。
English: He Baxing thought it was reasonable, so he made a request to Le Zhu Rong.

古文：荣大悦，乃以天光为使持节、督二雍二岐诸军事、骠骑大将军、雍州刺史，以岳为持节、假卫将军、左大都督，又以征西将军代郡侯莫陈悦为右都督，并为天光之副以讨之。
现代文：尔朱荣大喜，于是任命尔朱天光为使持节、督二雍二岐诸军事、骠骑大将军、雍州刺史，任命贺拔岳为持节、假卫将军、左大都督，又任命征西将军代郡人侯莫陈悦为右大都督，与贺拔岳都担任尔朱天光的副手，前去征讨。
English: Zhu Rong was overjoyed, so he appointed Er Zhu Tianguang as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the two yongs, the two branches of the military, the commander of the cavalry, and the governor of Yongzhou, appointed He Batyue as the envoy of the festival, the general of the false guard, and the governor of the left side, and appointed the general of the western expedition, the deputy of the county, Hou Mo Chen Yue, as the governor of the right side, and He Batyue and He Batyue both served as the deputy of Er Zhu Tianguang, and went to investigate.

古文：时赤水蜀贼，阻兵断路。
现代文：当时赤水蜀地的贼人，派兵隔断道路。
English: At that time, the thieves in Chishui Shudi sent soldiers to cut off the road.

古文：天光之众，不满二千。
现代文：尔朱天光的部属，不满二千人。
English: There are less than two thousand subordinates of Lzhu Tianguo.

古文：及军次潼关，天光有难色。
现代文：等到军队驻扎在潼关时，尔朱天光面有为难之色。
English: When the army was stationed in Shaoguan, Erzhu Tianguang was in a difficult situation.

古文：岳曰： 蜀贼草窃而已，公尚迟疑，若遇大敌，将何以战。 
现代文：贺拔岳说： 蜀地贼人不过是一群草寇，您尚且迟疑不决，如果遇到强大的敌人，将如何作战？ 
English: He Batyue said: The Shu thieves are just a group of grasshoppers. You are still hesitant. If you encounter a powerful enemy, how will you fight?

古文：天光曰： 今日之事，一以相委，公宜为吾制之。 
现代文：尔朱天光说： 今日之事，完全委托给你，你为我制定方略。 
English: Le Zhu Tianguang said: Today's matter is entirely entrusted to you, you will work out a strategy for me.

古文：于是进军，贼拒战于渭北，破之，获马二千疋，军威大振。
现代文：于是进兵，贼军在渭水以北抵抗，大败贼军，缴获战马二千匹，军威大振。
English: As a result, the soldiers marched in, and the bandit army resisted north of Surabaya. They defeated the bandit army, captured two thousand horses, and their military power was greatly enhanced.

古文：天光与岳进至雍州，荣又续遣兵至。
现代文：尔朱天光与贺拔岳进抵雍州，尔朱荣又接着派军到达。
English: Lzhu Tianguang and He Bi Yue entered and arrived in Yongzhou, and Lzhu Rong then sent troops to arrive.

古文：时丑奴自率大众围岐州，遣其大行台尉迟菩萨、仆射万俟仵同向武功，南渡渭水援。
现代文：当时万俟丑奴自己率领大军围攻岐州，派其大行台尉迟菩萨、仆射万俟仵一齐向武功推进，南下渡过渭水，围攻栅栏。
English: At that time, Wanzhong Ugliness himself led a large army to besiege Qizhou, and sent his grand marshal Chi Bodhisattva and general Wanzhong together to advance to Wugong, cross the Surabaya River to the south, and besiege the fence.

古文：菩萨攻栅已克，还岐州。
现代文：尔朱天光派贺拔岳率一千名骑兵赴援。而尉迟菩萨已攻克栅栏，返回岐州。
English: Zhu Tianguang sent He Baturu and a thousand cavalrymen to help. However, it was not long before Bodhisattva conquered the fence and returned to Qizhou.

古文：岳以轻骑八百北渡渭，擒其县令二人，获甲首四百，杀掠其民以挑。
现代文：贺拔岳用轻装骑兵八百人北渡渭水，活捉其县令二人，俘虏甲长四百人，杀死百姓，抢掠民财，向尉迟菩萨挑战。
English: He Batyue led eight hundred light cavalry to Beidu and Surabaya, captured two of his county magistrates alive, captured four hundred of his commanders, killed the common people, plundered the common people's wealth, and challenged Xingyi Bodhisattva.

古文：菩萨率步骑二万至渭北。
现代文：尉迟菩萨率步兵、骑兵共二万人，到达渭水北岸。
English: Yi Chi Bodhisattva led a total of 20,000 infantry and cavalry and reached the northern shore of Surabaya.

古文：岳以轻骑数十与菩萨隔水交言。
现代文：贺拔岳率轻装骑兵数十人，隔河与尉迟菩萨交谈。
English: He Baturake led dozens of lightly armed cavalrymen across the river to talk with Fuchi Bodhisattva.

古文：岳称扬国威，菩萨自言强盛，往复数反。
现代文：贺拔岳称扬国威，尉迟菩萨自言强盛，彼此辩驳几句。
English: He Baduyue praised the promotion of national prestige, and Fuxi Bodhisattva said that he was strong, and they argued with each other a few times.

古文：菩萨乃自骄踞，令省事传语岳。
现代文：尉迟菩萨傲慢无礼，让传令之吏把话转达贺拔岳。
English: Li Chi Bodhisattva was arrogant and impolite, and asked the messenger to convey the message to He Batur.

古文：岳怒曰： 我与菩萨言，卿是何人，与我对语？ 
现代文：贺拔岳怒道： 我与尉迟菩萨说话，你是什么人，竟敢同我对话？ 
English: He Batyue said angrily, "I'm talking to a bodhisattva. Who are you that you dare to talk to me?"

古文：省事恃隔水，应答不逊。岳举弓射之，应弦而倒。
现代文：传令之吏依恃隔河，答话无礼，贺拔岳举弓便射，传令之吏应弦而倒。
English: The herald leaned against the wall across the river and answered rudely. He Baturake raised his bow and shot, and the herald fell to the ground.

古文：时已逼暮，于是各还。
现代文：当时天色已晚，各自退回。
English: By this time it was dusk, and both sides withdrew.

古文：岳密于渭南傍水，分精骑数十为一处，随地形便置之。明日，自将百余骑，隔水与贼相见。
现代文：贺拔岳在渭水南岸，悄悄地把精锐骑兵几十人分在一起，随地形埋伏下来，次日，自己率领百余名骑兵，隔河与贼军会面。
English: On the south bank of the Surabaya River, He Batyue quietly divided dozens of elite cavalrymen and ambushed them according to the terrain. The next day, he led more than a hundred cavalrymen to meet the bandits across the river.

古文：岳渐前进，先所置骑随岳而进，骑既渐增，贼不复测其多少。
现代文：贺拔岳缓缓推进，原来埋伏下的骑兵随贺拔岳前进，骑兵人数逐渐增多，贼人猜不出有多少。
English: Mount He Batur was advancing slowly. The originally ambushed cavalry advanced with Mount He Batur. The number of cavalry gradually increased, and the thief could not guess how many.

古文：行二十里许，至水浅可济之处，岳便驰马东出，以示奔遁。
现代文：行了二十多里，到水浅可渡之处，贺拔岳便驰马东走，装出要逃跑的样子。
English: After traveling more than twenty miles, to where the water is shallow and can be crossed, He Batyue will go east, pretending to run away.

古文：贼谓岳走，乃弃步兵，南渡渭水，轻骑追岳。
现代文：贼军以为贺拔岳逃走，就扔下步兵，向南渡过渭水，以轻装骑兵追赶贺拔岳。
English: The bandits thought that He Baturake had fled, so they abandoned the infantry, crossed the Surabaya River to the south, and chased after He Baturake with light cavalry.

古文：岳东行十余里，依横冈设伏兵以待之。
现代文：贺拔岳向东跑了十几里，根据山冈横立的地形埋伏下兵马等待敌军。
English: Mt. Hebatake ran eastward for more than ten miles, waiting for the enemy army under ambush according to the terrain of the mountains and hills.

古文：贼以路险不得齐进，前后继至，半度冈东，岳乃回与贼战，身先士卒，急击之，贼便退走。
现代文：由于道路险峻，贼兵无法齐头并进，只得前后变成一条长线，有一半已经绕过山冈东面，贺拔岳于是回身交战，冲在士兵前面。在突然攻击下，贼兵退走。
English: Due to the steepness of the road, the bandits could not advance together, so they had to form a long line in front and behind. Half of them had already gone around the eastern side of the mountain. Therefore, Mt. He Batur turned around to fight and rushed in front of the soldiers. Under the sudden attack, the bandits retreated.

古文：岳号令所部，贼下马者，皆不听杀。
现代文：贺拔岳命令部下，凡是贼人下马者，一律不准杀害。
English: He Batyue ordered his subordinates not to kill anyone who dismounted from a horse as a thief.

古文：贼顾见之，便悉投马。
现代文：贼人看见这种情况纷纷下马。
English: Seeing this, the enemy soldiers dismounted one after another.

古文：俄而虏获三千人，马亦无遗，遂擒菩萨。
现代文：一小会儿就俘虏三千人，马匹也无丢失，于是活捉尉迟菩萨。
English: In a short time, they captured three thousand prisoners, and no horses were lost, so they captured Ipchi Bosatsu alive.

古文：仍渡渭北，降步卒万余，并收其辎重。
现代文：又渡过渭水，到达北岸，收降步兵一万余人，缴获其军用物资。
English: It also crossed Surabaya and reached the north bank, where it captured more than 10,000 infantrymen and seized their military supplies.

古文：丑奴寻弃岐州，北走安定，置栅于平亭。
现代文：万俟丑奴随即放弃岐州，向北逃向安定，在平亭设置栅栏。
English: Manju Ugly immediately abandoned Qizhou, fled to the north to stability, and set up a fence in Ping Ting.

古文：天光方自雍至岐，与合势。
现代文：尔朱天光这时才从雍州到达岐州，与贺拔岳会师。
English: It was only then that Zhu Tianguang arrived in Qizhou from Yongzhou and met with He Batyue.

古文：军至汧、渭之间，宣言远近曰： 今气候渐热，非征讨之时，待秋凉更图进取。 
现代文：军队到水、渭水之间，向远近扬言道： 如今气候渐渐炎热，不是打仗的时候，等到秋天凉爽时再来。 
English: The army went to the rivers and streams, proclaiming to those far and near, "Nowadays the weather is getting hotter. This is not the time for war. Wait until the autumn when it is cooler.

古文：丑奴闻之，遂以为实，分遣诸军散营农于岐州之北百里细川，使其太尉侯元进领兵五千，据险立栅。
现代文：万俟丑奴听说，信以为真，就分别派遣各军，分散队伍，在岐州以北的百里细川务农，派太尉侯伏侯元进领兵五千，在险要之处设置栅栏。
English: When he heard about it and believed it to be true, he dispatched various armies and dispersed teams to work in agriculture in Hyakuri Hosokawa, north of Qizhou. He sent Lieutenant Hou Fuhou Yuanjin to lead five thousand soldiers and set up fences in critical areas.

古文：其千人以下为栅者有数处，且战且守。
现代文：其千人以下立栅者有数处，边作战，边耕田。
English: There are several places where there are less than a thousand people standing guard, fighting and ploughing the fields.

古文：岳知其势分，乃密与天光严备。
现代文：贺拔岳得知其兵力分散，就与尔朱天光悄悄严加戒备。
English: When He Baturake learned that his forces had been dispersed, he and Er Zhu Tianguang quietly went on high alert.

古文：晡时，潜遣轻骑先行路，于后诸军尽发。
现代文：下午，秘密派遣轻装骑兵先行切断退路，而后各军全部出动。
English: In the afternoon, light cavalry was secretly dispatched to first cut off the escape route, and then all the armies were dispatched.

古文：昧旦，攻围元进栅，拔之，即擒元进。
现代文：到天色将明，已经攻克侯伏侯元进的栅栏，随即活捉侯伏侯元进。
English: By dawn, they had already broken through the fence of Hou Fuhou Yuanjin and captured him alive.

古文：诸所俘执皆放之，自余诸栅悉降。
现代文：将俘虏全部释放，其余各栏也都一一投降。
English: All prisoners were released, and the remaining columns surrendered one by one.

古文：岳星言径趣泾州，其刺史俟几长贵以城降。
现代文：贺拔岳扬言直取泾州，其刺史俟几长贵举城投降。
English: He Baturak threatened to take Bozhou directly, but the city surrendered at the last minute.

古文：丑奴乃弃平亭而走，欲向高平。
现代文：万俟丑奴放弃平亭逃跑，打算逃向高平。
English: In the unlikely event that the villain abandons Ping Ting and escapes, he plans to flee to Gaoping.

古文：岳轻骑急追，明日，及丑奴于平凉之长坑，一战擒之。
现代文：贺拔岳率轻装骑兵急急追击，次日，在平凉的长坑追上万俟丑奴，一战将其活捉。
English: The next day, the light cavalry led by He Baduyue hurriedly chased down and caught up with the Ugly Bastard in the cool Changkeng, and captured him alive in one battle.

古文：高平城中又执萧宝寅以。
现代文：高平城中守军又捉住萧宝寅而投降。
English: The defenders in Gaoping Castle also captured Xiao Baotang and surrendered.

古文：贼行台万俟道洛率众六千，退保牵屯山。
现代文：贼军行台万俟道洛率军六千，退守牵屯山。
English: The invaders marched to the capital of Manchukuo, where Luo led an army of six thousand and retreated to Tutun Mountain.

古文：岳攻之。
现代文：贺拔岳进攻。
English: Mt. Hebatake is under attack.

古文：道洛败，率千骑而走，追之不及，遂得入陇，投略阳贼帅王庆云。
现代文：万俟道洛兵败，率千余骑兵逃跑，贺拔岳没有追上，万俟道洛于是得以进入陇山，投奔略阳贼帅王庆云。
English: Wanying Daoluo was defeated and led more than a thousand cavalrymen to escape, He Baturu did not catch up, so Wanying Daoluo was able to enter Lushan and go to Wang Qingyun.

古文：庆云以道洛骁果绝伦，得之甚喜，以为大将军。
现代文：王庆云认为万俟道洛勇猛过人，得到他很高兴，任命为大将军。
English: Wang Qingyun thought that Wanxuan Daoluo was a brave and fierce person, and he was very pleased to be appointed as a general.

古文：天光又与岳度陇至庆云所居水洛城。
现代文：尔朱天光又与贺拔岳越过陇山，抵达王庆云所居的水洛城。
English: Zhu Tianguang and He Badu also crossed the Lushan Mountain and arrived at Shuiluo City, where Wang Qingyun lived.

古文：庆云、道洛频出城拒战，并擒之。
现代文：王庆云、万俟道洛出城交战，都被活捉。
English: Wang Qingyun and Wanying Daoluo went out of the city to fight and were both captured alive.

古文：余众皆降，悉坑之，死者万七千人。
现代文：剩下的士卒全部投降，一律被活埋，共杀死一万七千人。
English: The remaining soldiers all surrendered and were all buried alive, killing a total of 17,000 people.

古文：三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯州咸来归款。
现代文：三秦、河、渭、瓜、凉、鄯等州都来归附。
English: People from the areas of Sanqin, He, Handan, Gua, Liang, and Zhangzhou have all come to return.

古文：贼帅夏州人宿勤明达降于平凉，后复叛，岳又讨擒之。
现代文：贼帅、夏州人宿勤明达在平凉投降，后来再度反叛，贺拔岳又去讨伐，将其活捉。
English: The Thief-in-Chief, Xiazhou resident Suqin Mingda, surrendered in Pingliang, and later rebelled again, and He Baturake went to fight and captured him alive.

古文：天光虽为元帅，而岳功效居多。
现代文：尔朱天光虽然是元帅，可是贺拔岳立功最多。
English: Although Er Zhu Tianguang was a field marshal, it was He Batyue who made the most contributions.

古文：加车骑将军，进爵为伯，邑二千户。
现代文：加车骑将军衔，晋封伯爵，食邑二千户。
English: He was promoted to the rank of cavalry general, given the title of count, and fed 2,000 households.

古文：寻授都督泾北豳二夏四州诸军事、泾州刺史，进爵为公。
现代文：随即被任命为都督泾北豳二夏四州诸军事、泾州刺史，晋封公爵。
English: He was immediately appointed as the military governor of the four states of the North, the South, the East, and the South, and the Duke of Jinfeng.

古文：天光入洛，使岳行雍州刺史。
现代文：尔朱天光入据洛阳，让贺拔岳代理雍州刺史。
English: Zhu Tianguang entered Luoyang and let He Batyue act as the representative of Yongzhou.

古文：建明中，拜骠骑大将军，增邑五百户。
现代文：建明年间，任骠骑大将军，食邑增加五百户。
English: During the construction of the next year, he was appointed as a cavalry general, and the food village increased by 500 households.

古文：普泰初，除都督二岐东秦三州诸军事、仪同三司、岐州刺史，进封清水郡公，增邑通前三千户。
现代文：普泰初年，任都督二岐东秦三州诸军事、仪同三司、岐州刺史，晋封清水郡公，食邑增至三千户。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was appointed as the governor of two provinces of East Qin, three provinces of military, three departments of ceremony and etiquette, the history of Qizhou, the governor of Qingshui County, and the food villages increased to three thousand households.

古文：寻加侍中，给后部鼓吹，进位开府仪同三司，兼尚书左仆射、陇右行台，仍停高平。
现代文：随即加侍中衔，赏给后部乐器，升任开府仪同三司，兼任尚书左仆射、陇右行台，仍然镇守高平。
English: He was immediately promoted to the middle rank of attendant, was awarded the rear musical instrument, was promoted to Kaifu giri and three divisions, concurrently served as Shangshu Zuopu shooting, Zou Zuogongdae, and was still the town guard of Gaoping.

古文：二年，加都督三雍三秦二岐二华诸军事、雍州刺史。
现代文：中兴二年，加都督三雍三秦二岐二华诸军事、雍州刺史衔。
English: In the second year of rejuvenation, the governor of Sanyong, Sanqin, Erqi and Erhua were promoted to the ranks of military and Yongzhou.

古文：天光将率众拒齐神武，遣问计于岳。
现代文：尔朱天光打算率军抵抗齐神武，派人向贺拔岳询问计谋。
English: Zhu Tianguang planned to lead the army to resist Qi Shenwu and sent people to inquire about the stratagem from He Batur.

古文：岳报曰： 王家跨据三方，士马殷盛，高欢乌合之众，岂能为敌。
现代文：贺拔岳禀告说： 大王跨据三方，兵马壮盛，高欢乌合之众，岂是对手？
English: He Batyue's obituary said: The great king straddles the three sides, the soldiers and horses are strong, and the crowd of high-spirited rabble, is it an opponent?

古文：然师克在和，但愿同心戮力耳。
现代文：可是取胜靠内部和睦，只希望同心协力罢了。
English: But winning depends on internal harmony, we just hope to work together.

古文：若骨肉离隔，自相猜贰，则图存不暇，安能制人。
现代文：假若兄弟不和，自相猜疑，那就无暇自保，怎能胜人？
English: If brothers do not get along and are suspicious of each other, then they have no time to protect themselves. How can they win over others?

古文：如下官所见，莫若且镇关中，以固根本；分遣锐师，与众军合势。
现代文：依下官看来，不如暂且镇守关中，使基地牢固；然后分别派出精锐部队，与众军形成合击之势。
English: According to the subordinate officer, it is better to temporarily keep the town in check and make the base solid; then separately send elite troops to form a joint attack with the army.

古文：进可以克敌，退可以克全。 
现代文：这样，进可胜敌，退可自安。 
English: In this way, you can defeat the enemy and retreat with peace of mind.

古文：天光不从，果败。
现代文：尔朱天光不听，果然兵败。
English: However, Zhu Tianguang did not listen, and the army was defeated.

古文：岳率军下陇赴雍，擒天光弟显寿以应齐神武。
现代文：贺拔岳率领军队从陇山而下，奔赴雍州，活捉尔朱天光之弟尔朱显寿，响应齐神武。
English: He Batur led the army down from Lushan, rushed to Yongzhou, captured Zhu Xianshou, the younger brother of Zhu Tianguang, alive, and responded to Qi Shenwu.

古文：魏孝武即位，加关中大行台，增邑千户。
现代文：魏孝武帝登基，加关中大行台衔，食邑增加一千户。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu ascended to the throne, added the title of Guanzhong Dajang, and the number of food villages increased by one thousand.

古文：永熙二年，孝武密令岳图齐神武，遂刺心血，持以寄岳，诏岳都督二雍二华二岐豳四梁三益巴二夏蔚宁泾二十州诸军事、大都督。
现代文：永熙二年，魏孝武帝密令贺拔岳除去齐神武，刺血为字，寄给贺拔岳，诏命贺拔岳为都督二雍、二华、二岐、幽、四梁、三益、巴、二夏、蔚、宁、泾二十州诸军事、大都督。
English: In the second year of Yongxi, Emperor Wei Xiaowu secretly ordered He Baduyue to remove Qi Shenwu, and sent the letter to He Baduyue. He ordered He Baduyue to be the military governor and grand governor of 20 states, including Eryong, Erhua, Erki, Yu, Siliang, Sanyi, Ba, Erxia, Wei and Ning.

古文：齐神武既忌岳兄弟功名，岳惧，乃与太祖协契。语在太祖本纪。
现代文：齐神武忌妒贺拔岳兄弟的功名，贺拔岳害怕，就与太祖联合，事见《太祖本纪》。
English: Qi Shenwu was jealous of the exploits of He Batyue's brothers, and He Batyue was afraid, so he allied with Taizu, as seen in "Taizu Benki."

古文：岳自诣北境，安置边防。
现代文：贺拔岳抵达北部边境，布置边防。
English: Mt. Hebatake reached the northern border, and the border defense was set up.

古文：率众趣平凉西界，布营数十里，托以牧马于原州，为自安之计。
现代文：又率军前往平凉的西部边界，布下营帐，连绵数十里，借口在原州放马，以求自保。
English: He also led the army to the cool western border, camped under the cloth, stretching for dozens of miles, on the pretext of releasing horses in Wonju, in order to protect themselves.

古文：先是，费也头万俟受洛干、铁勒斛律沙门、斛拔弥俄突、纥豆陵伊利等，并拥众自守，至是皆款附。
现代文：最初，费也头的万俟受洛干、铁勒斛律沙门、斛拔弥俄突、纥豆陵伊利等人，都拥军自守，这时都先后归附。
English: At first, Fei Ya Tou's Wan Xun, Luo Gan, Tie Le, Luo Lixamen, Zhaba Miotru, Peasling Yili and others all supported the army to defend themselves, and then all of them were successively annexed.

古文：秦、南秦、河、渭四州刺史又会平凉，受岳节度。
现代文：秦、南秦、河、渭四州刺史又在平凉聚会，接受贺拔岳指挥。
English: The four prefectures of Qin, Southern Qin, He and Min also met in Pingliang and accepted the restraint of Mount He.

古文：唯灵州刺史曹泥不应召，乃通使于齐神武。
现代文：只有灵州刺史曹泥不应征召，与齐神武互通使者。
English: Only Lingzhou assassin Cao Di should not be conscripted, and should exchange envoys with Qi Shenwu.

古文：三年，岳召侯莫陈悦于高平，将讨之，令悦为前驱。
现代文：三年，贺拔岳在高平召见侯莫陈悦，打算讨伐曹泥，命令侯莫陈悦担任先锋。
English: Three years later, He Batyue summoned Hou Mo Chen Yue in Gaoping, intending to fight Cao Di, and ordered Hou Mo Chen Yue to serve as the vanguard.

古文：而悦受齐神武密旨图岳，弗之知也，而先又轻悦。
现代文：但是侯莫陈悦已经接受齐神武的密令，要除掉贺拔岳，而贺拔岳并不知道，而且原来又轻视侯莫陈悦。
English: However, Hou Mo Chen Yue had already accepted Qi Shenwu's secret order to get rid of He Baturan, while He Baturan did not know, and originally despised Hou Mo Chen Yue.

古文：悦乃诱岳入营，共论兵事，令其婿元洪景斩岳于幕中。
现代文：侯莫陈悦于是诱骗贺拔岳进入军营，共同讨论军事，命令女婿元洪景在帐幕中杀死了贺拔岳。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue then tricked He Bajue into entering the military camp to discuss military matters, and ordered his son-in-law Yuan Hongjing to kill He Bajue in the tent.

古文：朝野莫不痛惜之。
现代文：朝野没有不痛惜的。
English: Upon hearing the news that he had been killed, everyone in the morning and evening was filled with sorrow.

古文：赠侍中、太傅、录尚书、都督关中三十州诸军事、大将军、雍州刺史，谥曰武壮，葬以王礼。
现代文：追赠侍中、太傅、录尚书、都督关中三十州诸军事、大将军、雍州刺史，谥号武壮，以王礼安葬。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai, Taifu, Record of Honor, and Governor of Thirty Provinces, Military, General, and Yongzhou, and was given the posthumous name of Wu Zhuang. He was buried with full military honors.

古文：子纬嗣，拜开府仪同三司。
现代文：儿子贺拔纬承袭封号，任开府仪同三司。
English: His son, He Biwei, inherited the title and was appointed as the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：保定中，录岳旧德，进纬爵霍国公，尚太祖女。
现代文：保定年间，追论贺拔岳功德，将贺拔纬爵位进为霍国公，娶太祖女儿为妻。
English: During the Baoding period, he discussed the merits of He Baduyue, promoted He Baduyue to the title of Duke of Huo, and married the daughter of his great-grandfather.

古文：侯莫陈悦，少随父为驼牛都尉。长于西，好田猎，便骑射。
现代文：侯莫陈悦，少年时跟随父亲任驼牛都尉，在西河长大，喜欢打猎，善于骑马射箭。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue, who followed his father as a camel captain when he was a boy, grew up in the West River. He likes hunting and is good at riding horses and archery.

古文：会牧子作乱，遂归尔朱荣。
现代文：适逢牧民作乱，就投奔尔朱荣。
English: When the herdsmen rioted, he joined Bener Zhu Rong.

古文：荣引为府长流参军，稍迁大都督。
现代文：尔朱荣引荐他担任府长流参军，后升任大都督。
English: Le Zhu Rong recommended him to join the army as a prefectural governor, and later he was promoted to grand governor.

古文：魏孝庄帝初，除征西将军、金紫光禄大夫、封柏人县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝庄帝初年，被任命为征西将军、金紫光禄大夫，封柏人县侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, the lord of the county of Hebei, and the head of 500 households in the county.

古文：尔朱天光西讨，荣以悦为天光右都督，本官如故。
现代文：尔朱天光西征时，尔朱荣让侯莫陈悦担任尔朱天光的右大都督，原有官职不变。
English: At the time of the Western Expedition of Lzhu Tianguang, Lzhu Rong made Hou Mo Chen Rong serve as the right grand governor of Lzhu Tianguang, and the original official position remained unchanged.

古文：西伐克获，功亚于贺拔岳。
现代文：西征获胜，功劳仅次于贺拔岳。
English: The Western Expedition was a success, second only to Mount Heba.

古文：以本将军除鄯州刺史。
现代文：以征西将军职出任鄯州刺史。
English: He was appointed to the post of Western Conquest General and served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：建明中，拜车骑大将军、渭州刺史，进爵白水郡公，增邑五百户。
现代文：建明年间，任车骑大将军、渭州刺史，晋爵白水郡公，食邑增加五百户。
English: In the next few years, 500 households will be added to the food village, including the General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the Governor of Zhangzhou, and the Governor of Baishui County, Jinzhe.

古文：普泰中，除骠骑大将军、仪同三司、秦州刺史。
现代文：普泰年间，任骠骑大将军、仪同三司、秦州刺史。
English: During the Putai era, he held the posts of General of Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and Secretary of State of Qin Province.

古文：及天光赴洛，悦与岳俱下陇趣雍州，擒天光弟显寿。
现代文：尔朱天光赴洛阳时，侯莫陈悦与贺拔岳都下陇山而赴雍州，活捉尔朱天光之弟尔朱显寿。
English: When Zhu Tianguang went to Luoyang, Hou Mo, Chen Yue and He Batyue all went down to Lushan and went to Yongzhou to capture Zhu Xianshou, Zhu Tianguang's younger brother.

古文：魏孝武初，加开府仪同三司、都督陇右诸军事，仍加秦州刺史。
现代文：魏孝武帝初年，加授开府仪同三司、都督陇右诸军事衔，仍兼任秦州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he was additionally awarded the military titles of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Tudou Zou Yu, and still served as the Qin State Historian.

古文：及悦杀岳，岳众莫不服从。
现代文：侯莫陈悦杀害贺拔岳后，贺拔岳的部下没有不服从的。
English: After Hou Mo Chen Yue killed He Batyue, He Batyue's subordinates did not disobey.

古文：悦犹豫，不即抚纳，乃迁陇右。
现代文：侯莫陈悦犹豫不决，没有立即安抚收编，而是迁居陇山以西。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue hesitated, did not immediately appease the editor-in-chief, but moved to the west of Lushan.

古文：太祖勒众讨之，悦遂亡败。
现代文：太祖率军讨伐，侯莫陈悦于是兵败身亡。
English: The great-grandfather led the army in the crusade, and Hou Mo Chen Yue was defeated and died.

古文：语在太祖本纪。悦子弟及同谋杀岳者八九人，并伏诛。
现代文：侯莫陈悦的儿子、侄子以及参与谋杀贺拔岳的共八九个人，全部被处死。
English: The son and nephew of Hou Mo Chen Yue, as well as a total of eight or nine people who participated in the murder of He Baturake, were all executed.

古文：唯中兵参军豆卢光走至灵州，后奔晋阳。
现代文：只有中兵参军豆卢光逃到灵州，后来又逃往晋阳。
English: Only the middle-ranking soldiers who joined the army fled to Lingzhou, and later to Jinyang.

古文：悦自杀岳后，神情恍忽，不复如常。
现代文：自从杀害贺拔岳后，侯莫陈悦神情恍惚，不像平时。
English: Since the killing of He Baturake, Hou Mo Chen Yue has been in a trance, unlike usual.

古文：恒言 我纔睡即梦见岳云： 兄欲何处去！ 
现代文：常说： 我刚入睡，就梦见贺拔岳说： 兄长想往哪里去！ 
English: He often said, "I just fell asleep, and I dreamed of He Batyue saying, 'Where does my brother want to go?'

古文：随逐我不相置 。因此弥不自安，而致破灭。
现代文：追着我不放。 因此心中更加惶恐，导致败亡。
English: He pursues me and does not let go, so I become more and more frightened, which leads to defeat.

古文：念贤字盖卢。
现代文：念贤字盖卢。
English: Chanting the virtuous character of Gaylu.

古文：美容质，颇涉书史。
现代文：容貌姿质俊美，广泛涉猎经书史籍。
English: He has a handsome appearance and posture, and is widely involved in the study of scriptures and historical books.

古文：为儿童时，在学中读书，有善相者过学，诸生竞诣之，贤独不往。
现代文：在儿童时，他在学堂中读书，有位善于看相的人经过学堂，学生们都争着前去，衹有念贤不去。
English: When he was a child, he was reading in the schoolroom. A person who was good at reading faces passed by the schoolroom, and the students all rushed forward.

古文：笑谓诸生曰： 男儿死生富贵在天也，何遽相乎。 少遭父忧，居丧有孝称。
现代文：他笑着对同学们说： 男儿的生死富贵在于上天，何必争着去看相呢。 年少时遭受父亲去世，在为父亲服丧时以孝著称。
English: He said to his classmates with a smile, "A man's life and death are in the hands of the gods, so why do we have to fight to see his face?" He suffered the death of his father when he was young, and was known for his filial piety when he was mourning his father.

古文：后以破卫可孤功，除别将。
现代文：后来因为击败卫可孤的功劳，任别将。
English: Later, because of the merit of defeating Wei Kehuo, he was appointed as general.

古文：寻招慰云州高车、鲜卑等，皆降下之。
现代文：不久他招抚云州的高车、鲜卑等族，使他们都降服。
English: Before long, he had persuaded the Gaochao, Xianbei and other tribes in Yunnan to submit.

古文：除假节、平东将军，封屯留县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：任假节、平东将军，封为屯留县伯，食邑五百户。
English: General Pingdong was given the title of Tunliu County Mayor, and 500 households in the county were provided with food.

古文：建义初，为大都督，镇井陉，加抚军将军、黎阳郡守。
现代文：建义初年，任大都督，镇守井陉，加授抚军将军、黎阳郡郡守。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was appointed as the grand governor, the town guard of Jingyao, the general of the auxiliary army, and the county governor of Liyang County.

古文：尔朱荣入洛，拜车骑将军、右光禄大夫、太仆卿，兼尚书右仆射、东行台，进爵平恩县公，增邑五百户。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛阳，拜为车骑将军、右光禄大夫、太仆卿，兼尚书右仆射、束道行台，晋爵为平恩县公，增加食邑五百户。
English: Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, and was worshipped as the General of Chariots and Cavalry, the Doctor of Right Light and Luck, the Great Servant of the Lord, as well as the Right Servant of Writing, the Right Servant of Shooting, and the Prince of Ping'an County, increasing the number of food villages by 500 households.

古文：普泰初，除使持节、瀛州诸军事、骠骑将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：普泰初年，任使持节、瀛州诸军事、骠骑将军、瀛州刺史。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was appointed to hold the festival, the military of Zhangzhou, the general of Zhangjiajie, and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：永熙中，拜第一领民酋长，加散骑常侍，行南兖州事。
现代文：永熙年间，任第一领民酋长，加授散骑常侍，行南兖州事。
English: During the Yongxi era, he served as the first territorial chief of the people, and was awarded the title of straggling horseman, and traveled to the southern part of the state.

古文：寻进号骠骑大将军，入为殿中尚书，加仪同三司。
现代文：不久加号为骠骑大将军，入朝为殿中尚书，加授仪同三司。
English: He was soon given the additional title of General of the Cavalry and entered the imperial court as a courtier, and was awarded the same honors as the other three generals.

古文：魏孝武欲讨齐神武，以贤为中军北面大都督，进爵安定郡公，增邑一千户，加侍中、开府仪同三司。
现代文：魏孝武帝打算讨伐齐神武，任命念贤为中军北面大都督，晋爵为安定郡公，增加食邑一千户，加授侍中、开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu planned to fight against Qishenwu, and appointed Nianxian as the general governor of the northern front of the Chinese army, Jinjie as the governor of the county of Anping, increased the number of counties by a thousand, and conferred the titles of chamberlain, keifu and three divisions.

古文：大统初，拜太尉，出为秦州刺史，加太傅，给后部鼓吹。三年，转太师、都督河凉瓜鄯渭洮沙七州诸军事、大将军、河州刺史。
现代文：大统初年，拜为太尉，出任秦州刺史，加授太傅，给后部鼓吹大统三年，改任太师、都督河凉瓜鄯渭洮沙七州诸军事、大将军、河州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to the rank of captain, served as the Qin State chief historian, was awarded the title of grand master, preached the Great Reunification to the rear for three years, and was reappointed as the grand master, the governor of He Lianggua, the military of the seven states of Sha, the general, and the chief historian of Hezhou.

古文：久之还朝，兼录尚书事。
现代文：很久后回朝，兼任录尚书事。
English: A long time later, he returned to the Imperial Court, where he was also in charge of record-keeping.

古文：河桥之役，贤不力战，乃先还，自是名誉颇减。
现代文：在妪战役中，盒宣没有全力作战，就先退回，从此名声大为减损。
English: In the Battle of Yunnan, Box Xuan did not fight with all his strength, he retreated first, and his reputation was greatly diminished.

古文：五年，除都督秦渭原泾四州诸军事、秦州刺史。
现代文：左筮五年，任都督童周厘迳四州诸军事、室姐刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Zuoying's reign, Tong Zhouli, the military governor of the four states, and his sister-in-law stabbed history.

古文：薨于州。
现代文：死在州中。
English: Died in Xiangzhou

古文：谥曰昭定。
现代文：谧号为!驴。
English: His nickname is! Zong Zong.

古文：贤于诸公皆为父党，自太祖以下，咸拜敬之。
现代文：念贤对于所有的王公来说他是父辈，自太祖以下的人，都拜见尊敬他。
English: Nian Xian is the father of all princes, and people from the great-grandfathers onward have paid homage to and respected him.

古文：子华，性和厚，有长者风。
现代文：他的儿子念华，性情温和敦厚，有长者风范。
English: His son, Nianhua, is mild-mannered and dignified, with the demeanor of an elder.

古文：官至开府仪同三司、合州刺史。
现代文：官至开府仪同三司、合蛆刺史。
English: Officials from the Kaifu Rite, the Three Departments, and the Shishi were gathered together.

古文：史臣曰：胜、岳昆季，以勇略之姿，当驰竞之际，并邀时投隙，展效立功。
现代文：史臣曰：贺拔胜、贺拔岳兄弟，以勇猛有谋的姿质，处于奔竞的时代，他们都寻求时机，施展才能建立功绩。
English: Shichen said: Brothers He Basse and He Bage, with their brave and resourceful attitude, are in a fast-paced era. They are all looking for opportunities to exert themselves in order to build achievements.

古文：始则委质尔朱，中乃结款高氏，太昌之后，即帝图高，察其所由，固非守节之士。
现代文：开始则依附尔朱氏，中间又结交高氏，太昌之后，投靠皇帝对付高氏，考察他们这样做的缘由，本来就不是恪守节操的人。
English: At the beginning, they relied on the Zhu clan, and in the middle, they made friends with the Gao clan. After Taichang, they relied on the emperor to deal with the Gao clan, and examined the reasons for doing so. They were not originally people who adhered to discipline.

古文：及胜垂翅江左，忧魏室之危亡，奋翼关西，感梁朝之顾遇，有长者之风矣。
现代文：到贺拔胜在江东失势受挫时，忧虑魏室的危亡。在关西振作有为时，感激梁朝的知遇之恩，有长者的风范。
English: When He Bansheng suffered a setback in the east of the Yangtze River, he was worried about the death of Weishu. When he was doing well in Kansai, he was grateful for the wisdom of the Liang Dynasty. He had the demeanor of an elder.

古文：终能保其荣宠，良有以焉。
现代文：他最终能保全自己的官位和恩宠，确实是有原因的。
English: There is indeed a reason why he was able to retain his position and favour in the end.

古文：岳以二千之羸兵，抗三秦之勍敌，奋其智勇，克翦凶渠，杂种畏威，遐方慕义，斯亦一时之盛也。
现代文：贺拔岳以二千人的弱兵，抗拒三秦的劲敌，鼓起他的智谋和勇气，剪除元凶，杂乱的异族惧怕他的威势，远方的人仰慕他的正道，这也是一时的盛事。
English: With two thousand weak soldiers, He Batyue resisted the powerful enemy of the Three Qin Dynasties, summoned his wisdom and courage, and eliminated the culprit. The chaotic foreign tribes feared his power, and people from far away admired his righteous path. This was also a momentous event.

古文：卒以勋高速祸，无备婴戮。
现代文：最后因为功高而加速了灾祸的到来，没有防备被人杀戮。
English: In the end, because of his high achievement, he accelerated the arrival of the disaster, and was unprepared to be killed.

古文：惜哉！
现代文：可惜啊!
English: What a shame!

古文：陈涉首事不终，有汉因而创业；贺拔元功夙殒，太祖藉以开基。 不有所废，君何以兴 ，信乎其然矣。
现代文：陈涉首先起事没有结果，汉朝因此而创立了帝业；贺拔氏的首功早早殒落，太祖藉此开创了基业。 没有衰败的，君主怎么能兴起 ，确实是这样的啊。
English: Chen Zhou was the first to start an uprising without any results, and the Han Dynasty created an empire as a result; He Ba's first achievement fell early, and the great-grandfather created a foundation with this. How can a monarch rise without decay, it is really like this.

