古文：李牧，赵北边良将也。
现代文：原文李牧是赵国戍守北方边境的大将。
English: Li Mu is the general of Zhao Guojun guarding the northern border.

古文：尝居雁门备匈奴，以便宜置吏，市租皆输入幕府，为士卒费。
现代文：他曾经驻守雁门，防御匈奴。他有权依现实的情况设置官吏，租税都缴入幕府，作为犒赏士兵的费用。
English: He was once stationed at the Wild Goose Gate to defend against the Huns. He had the right to appoint officials according to the actual situation, and all taxes were paid to the shogunate as the cost of rewarding soldiers.

古文：日击牛飨士，习骑射、谨烽火、多间谍、厚遇战士，为约曰： 匈奴即入盗，急入收保，有敢捕虏者，斩。 
现代文：每天宰杀牛只为士兵加菜，又加李牧强训练士兵骑马射箭的技巧，留心敌人动向，常派间谍刺探军情，并与士兵约法： 匈奴即将入侵，要加紧保护牲畜，但不可与匈奴人正面冲突，违者斩首。 
English: Cattle were slaughtered every day to make vegetables for the soldiers, and Li Muqiang also trained the soldiers to ride horses and shoot arrows, paid attention to the enemy's movement, sent spies to spy on the military situation, and made a deal with the soldiers: The Huns are about to invade, we must step up the protection of livestock, but we must not have a head-to-head conflict with the Huns, and the violators will be beheaded.

古文：如此数岁，匈奴以牧为怯，虽赵边兵亦以为吾将怯。
现代文：因此每当匈奴人侵扰边境，李牧的兵士就驱赶牲畜回营，不肯作战。
English: Therefore, whenever the Huns invaded the border, Li Mu's soldiers drove the livestock back to the camp and refused to fight.

古文：赵王让李牧，牧如故；赵王怒，召之，使他人代将。
现代文：如此过了几年，匈奴人都认为李牧胆子小，不敢与匈奴人交战，甚至连赵国本身镇守边境的士兵也这么看。赵王下令责备他，李牧仍一如往昔，赵王终于生气，派其他的将领取代他。
English: After several years of this, the Xiongnu all thought that Li Mu was too timid to fight the Xiongnu, even the soldiers guarding the border of the State of Zhao themselves thought so. King Zhao ordered him to be reprimanded, Li Mu remained the same as before, King Zhao finally got angry and sent other generals to replace him.

古文：岁余，匈奴每来，出战数不利，失亡多，边不得田畜。乃复请李牧。
现代文：经过一年多，每次出战都失利，损伤众多，边境多事，根本无法耕种、放牧，不得已赵王只有再度任命李牧。
English: After more than a year, every time he went to war, he lost, there were many injuries, the border was eventful, and it was impossible to farm and graze. As a last resort, Zhao Wang had to reappoint Li Mu.

古文：牧固称疾，赵王强起之，牧曰： 必用臣，臣如前，乃可奉令。 
现代文：李牧称病推辞，赵王再三地请托，李牧说： 如果大王一定要用臣，必先请大王准许臣如昔日一样的做法，臣才敢受命。 
English: Li Mu said that he was ill and declined, and Zhao Wang repeatedly asked him to do so. Li Mu said, "If the great king must use his vassal, he must first ask the great king to allow his vassal to do the same as in the past. Only then will the vassal dare to accept the order."

古文：王许之，李牧如故约。
现代文：赵王答应他。
English: Zhao Wang agreed.

古文：匈奴终岁无所得，然终以为怯。边士日得赏赐而不用，皆愿一战。
现代文：李牧来到边境，又如以往般和士兵约定不可与匈奴冲突，匈奴几年间都一无所获，但始终认为李牧胆怯，边境的士兵每天都得到李牧的赏赐，却没有立功报答的机会，都希望能上战场作战。
English: Li Mu came to the border and, as usual, agreed with the soldiers not to clash with the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu did not gain anything for several years, but always thought that Li Mu was timid. The soldiers at the border were rewarded by Li Mu every day, but they did not have the opportunity to repay the favor, and they all hoped to go to the battlefield.

古文：于是乃具选车，得千三百乘，选骑得万三千匹，百金之士五万人，彀者十万人，悉勒习战。
现代文：李牧见时机成熟，就挑选坚固的战车一千三百辆，良马一万三千匹，能擒敌杀将的勇士五万人，神箭手十万人，要求他们加强训练。
English: When Li Mu saw that the time was ripe, he selected thirteen hundred sturdy chariots, thirteen thousand good horses, fifty thousand warriors who could defeat the enemy, and one hundred thousand archers, and asked them to strengthen their training.

古文：大纵畜牧，人民满野。匈奴小入，佯北，以数千人委之，单于闻之，大率众来入。牧多为奇阵，张左右翼击之，大破，杀匈奴十余万骑。单于奔走，其后十余岁，不敢近边。
现代文：一面又任意放牧牲畜，要百姓四散于郊外，当前来侵扰的匈奴人少时，就装退败让数千人被擒，单于听到消息，以为良机可趁，遂率领大军入侵，李牧排列许多奇阵，指挥左、右二军夹攻，大破匈奴十多万大军，单于奔逃而去，往后十多年间，不敢再侵犯赵国边境。
English: On the other hand, he grazed livestock at will and wanted the people to scatter in the suburbs. When there were few Huns to invade, he pretended to retreat and let thousands of people be captured. Just after hearing the news, he thought it was a good opportunity and led a large army to invade. Li Mu lined up many strange formations, commanded the left and right two armies to attack, defeated the Hun army of more than 100,000, and fled alone. In the next more than ten years, he did not dare to violate the border of Zhao.

古文：厚其遇，故其报重；蓄其气，故气发猛。
现代文：对待部属愈是仁厚有如自家人，部属报答之心也愈是深切，能凝聚士兵奋勇作战的士气，才能一发而气势威猛。
English: The more benevolent the treatment of subordinates as if they were one's own family, the deeper the subordinate's heart of reward. It can rally the morale of soldiers to fight bravely, and the more powerful the momentum.

古文：故名将用死士。兵之力，往往一试而不再，亦一试而不必再也!
现代文：古代名将往往只须一次的战役就能定胜负了，不必一战再战。
English: Ancient great generals often needed only one battle to win a decisive victory, without having to fight another battle.

古文：今之所谓兵者，除一二家丁外，率丐而甲，尪而立者耳。
现代文：反观今天所谓带兵的将领，除了拥有一两名亲信部属外，其余的士兵都是带人不带心，有如外借之兵。
English: On the other hand, today's so-called generals with soldiers, except for one or two trusted subordinates, the rest of the soldiers are careless, like soldiers on loan.

古文：呜呼!
现代文：唉，兵多又有什么用呢？
English: Alas!

