古文：李迪王曾张知白杜衍
现代文：李迪字复古，先世为赵郡人，后来移住幽州。
English: Li Di (李迪) is a retro character. He was born in Zhao County and later moved to Yuzhou.

古文：李迪字复古，其先赵郡人，后徙幽州。
现代文：曾祖父李在钦，为躲避五代战乱，又移住濮州。
English: Great-grandfather Li Zaiqin, in order to escape the five-generation war, also moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：曾祖在钦，避五代乱，又徙家濮。迪深厚有器局，尝携其所为文见柳开，开奇之曰： 公辅材也。 
现代文：李迪深厚稳重有才学，曾经携带他所写的文章拜见柳开，柳开认为他是一个奇才，并说： 李迪是辅佐人主之才。 
English: Li Di is a profound, steady and talented scholar. He once brought his article to meet Liu Kai. Liu Kai thought he was a genius and said: Li Di is a great talent.

古文：举进士第一，授将作监丞，历通判徐、兖州。
现代文：推举为进士第一，授予将作监丞，历任徐州、兖州通判。
English: He was selected as the first to be promoted to the rank of academician, awarded the title of superintendent, and successively served as the judge of Xuzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：改秘书省著作郎、直史馆，为三司盐铁判官。
现代文：改任秘书省著作郎、直史馆，任三司盐铁判官。
English: He was appointed secretary of the Ministry of Literature and Literature, the Ministry of History, and the Third Salt and Iron Judge.

古文：东封泰山，复通判兖州，坐尝解开封府进士失当，谪监海州税。
现代文：东封泰山，又任兖州通判，曾经因为解送开封府进士失当，被贬为监海州税。
English: Dongfeng Taishan, also known as Zhangzhou Tongzhan, was once relegated to supervising the sea state tax because it was improper to dismiss the opening of the Fengfu.

古文：改右司谏，起知郓州，诏纠察在京刑狱，迁起居舍人，安抚江、淮，以尚书吏部员外郎为三司盐铁副使，擢知制诰。
现代文：改为右司谏，起任郓州知州，被召任纠察在京刑狱，升任起居舍人，安抚江州、淮州，以尚书吏部员外郎任三司盐铁副使，提升为知制诰。
English: He was changed to the right secretary and became the secretary of Zhangzhou and Zhizhou, was called to be the picket in the Beijing Penal Prison, was promoted to be the resident overseer to pacify Jiangzhou and Huaizhou, and was promoted to the secretary and deputy envoy of the three departments of salt and iron, and promoted to the secretary of Zhizhou.

古文：真宗幸亳，为留守判官，遂知亳州。
现代文：真宗巡幸亳州，李迪为留守判官，于是任亳州知州。
English: The Shinshong traveled to Bozhou, and Li Di was the judge who stayed behind, so he was appointed as the Bozhou magistrate.

古文：亡卒群剽城邑，发兵捕之，久不得。
现代文：逃亡的士卒合伙抢劫城市，朝廷派兵进行追捕，长久没有结果。
English: The fugitive officers robbed the city together, and the imperial court sent soldiers to hunt them down, but there was no result for a long time.

古文：迪至，悉罢所发兵，阴听察知贼区处，部勒骁锐士，擒贼，斩以徇。
现代文：李迪到达亳州，撤除所有朝廷派兵，暗中派人侦察弄清了盗贼活动区域和住所，派遣骁勇之士，捉拿盗贼，将他们斩首示众。
English: Li Di arrived in Zhangzhou, removed all the soldiers sent by the imperial court, secretly sent people to scout and find out the thieves' activity area and residence, and sent brave men to catch the thieves and behead them.

古文：代归，会唃厮啰叛，帝忧关中，召对长春殿，进右谏议大夫、集贤院学士、知永兴军。
现代文：回京，恰遇口角厮口罗发动叛乱，真宗忧虑关中，将李迪召对长春殿，升任右谏议大夫、集贤院学士、知永兴军。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he happened to be in the middle of the Genzong Anxious Pass, and he summoned Li Di to the Changchun Palace, and promoted him to the position of the right-hand councilor, the scholar of the Jixian Academy, and the scholar of the Yongxing Army.

古文：城中多无赖子弟，喜犯法，迪奏取其甚者，部送阙下。
现代文：城中有许多游手好闲之辈，经常作乱犯法，李迪上奏捉拿贼首，派人送往朝廷。
English: There are many idlers in the city, who often make trouble and break the law. Li Di played the role of catching the thief's head and sent someone to the imperial court.

古文：徙陕西都转运使，入为翰林学士。
现代文：李迪调任陕西都转运使，入京城成为翰林学士。
English: Li Di was transferred to the post of Shaanxi capital transfer envoy, and entered Beijing to become a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：尝归沐，忽传诏对内东门，出三司使马元方所上岁出入材用数以示迪。
现代文：曾经于假日回家省亲，忽然接到朝廷诏令问对于内东门，真宗拿出三司使马元方所上奏的每年朝廷收入和支出的数目给李迪看。
English: Once, when he went home on a holiday to visit his relatives, he suddenly received an imperial edict from the court. When asked about the Inner East Gate, Zhenzong took out the number of the annual income and expenditure of the imperial court as reported by the three emissaries of Ma Yuanfang and showed it to Li Di.

古文：时频岁蝗旱，问何以济，迪请发内藏库以佐国用，则赋敛宽，民不劳矣。
现代文：这时每年都要发生虫灾和旱灾，真宗询问用什么办法来补救损失，李迪请求拿出内藏库所藏来资助国家急需，那么赋税征敛宽松，老百姓不会感到烦劳。
English: At this time, insect plagues and droughts occur every year. Zhenzong inquired about the methods to be used to remedy the losses. Li Di requested to take out the contents of the repository to fund the urgent needs of the country. Then the tax collection would be relaxed, and the people would not feel tired.

古文：帝曰： 朕欲用李士衡代元方，俟其至，当出金帛数百万借三司。 迪曰： 天子于财无内外，愿下诏赐三司，以示恩德，何必曰借。 帝悦。
现代文：真宗说 ：朕打算让李士衡接替马元方，等李士衡到任后，朕会拿出金帛数百万借给三司。 李迪说 ：天子的财产没有内外之分，希望下诏将金帛赐予三司，来显示皇帝的恩德，又何必说借呢。 
English: Zhenzong said, "I intend to let Li Shiheng succeed Ma Yuan Fang, and after Li Shiheng takes office, I will lend millions of gold ingots to Sanji." Li Di said, "There is no distinction between the property of the son of heaven and that of the emperor, and I hope to issue an edict to give the gold ingots to Sanji to show the emperor's benevolence, so why do I need to borrow it?"

古文：又言： 陛下东封时，敕所过毋伐木除道，即驿舍或州治为行宫，裁令加涂塈而已。
现代文：真宗十分喜悦。李迪又说 ：陛下东封泰山时，下敕令所过之处不要砍伐树木清除道路，将驿舍或州治的官署作为行宫，仅仅派人修饰休息罢了。
English: Shinshong was very pleased. Ridi also said, "When His Majesty moved to the eastern side of Mount Tai, he issued an order not to cut down trees and clear the roads wherever he passed. He used the imperial villa or the state government office as a palace, and only sent people to decorate and rest.

古文：及幸汾、亳，土木之役，过往时几百倍。
现代文：到巡幸汾州、亳州，土木劳役，超过往年百倍。
English: The number of civil engineering laborers sent on inspection tours to Bozhou and Ganzhou exceeded that of previous years by a hundredfold.

古文：今蝗旱之灾，殆天意所以儆陛下也。 帝深然之。
现代文：如今虫旱之灾，大概是上天降下旨意警告陛下。 真宗认为很正确。
English: The current plague of insects and droughts is probably a warning to His Majesty sent down by the will of heaven. Shinshu is quite right.

古文：他日，又召对龙图阁，命迪草诏，徐谓迪曰： 曹玮在秦州，屡请益兵，未及遣，遽辞州事，第怯耳。
现代文：又一天，李迪被召到龙图阁应对，真宗命李迪起草诏书，慢慢地对李迪说： 曹玮在秦州，多次请求增加兵力，没有等到朝廷派兵，就辞去了秦州之事，只是害怕而已。
English: On another day, Li Di was called to Longtu Pavilion to respond, and Zhenzong's life Li Di drafted an edict and slowly said to Li Di: Cao Pi was in Qinzhou and repeatedly requested to increase the number of troops. He did not wait for the imperial court to send troops and resigned from the Qinzhou matter. He was just afraid.

古文：谁可代玮者？ 迪对曰： 玮知唃厮啰欲入寇，且窥关中，故请益兵为备，非怯也。
现代文：谁可以替代曹玮呢？ 李迪奏对说： 曹玮知道口角厮口罗打算叛乱，并要窥探关中，因此请求增加兵力加以防备，不是害怕。
English: Who can replace Cao Cao? Li DiSao said: Cao Cao was not afraid to ask for more troops to be prepared, because he knew that Zhang Quanzhang and Guo Kuo Luo were planning to rebel and wanted to spy on Guanzhong.

古文：且玮有谋略，诸将皆非其比，何可代？
现代文：而且曹玮有谋略，诸将都不能和他相比，谁能代替他呢？
English: Moreover, Cao Pi has a strategy, all generals cannot be compared with him, who can replace him?

古文：陛下重发兵，岂非将上玉皇圣号，恶兵出宜秋门邪？
现代文：陛下如派遣大军，难道不是将加封玉皇称号，忌讳从宜秋门出兵吗？
English: If His Majesty were to dispatch a large army, wouldn't he be given the title of the Jade Emperor, and wouldn't it be taboo to send troops from the Yixiu Gate?

古文：今关右兵多，可分兵赴玮。 帝因问关右兵几何，对曰： 臣向在陕西，以方寸小册书兵粮数备调发，今犹置佩囊中。 帝令自探取，目黄门取纸笔，具疏某处当留兵若干，余悉赴塞下。帝顾曰： 真所谓颇、牧在禁中矣。 未久，唃厮啰果犯边。秦州方出兵，复召迪问曰： 玮此举胜乎？ 对曰： 必胜。 居数日，奏至，玮与敌战三都谷，果大胜。帝曰： 卿何以知玮必胜？ 迪曰： 唃厮啰兵远来，使谍者声言以某日下秦州会食，以激怒玮。
现代文：李迪说 ：口角厮口罗的军队远道而来，派遣间谍放言说某一天到秦州会合庆祝胜利，来激怒曹玮。
English: Li Di said: The army of the quarrelsome and quarrelsome came from afar and sent spies to say that one day they would meet in Qinzhou to celebrate the victory, to infuriate Cao Pi.

古文：玮勒兵不动，坐待敌至，是以逸待劳也。
现代文：曹玮按兵不动，原地等待敌人到来，这是以安逸之军对待疲劳之军。
English: Cao Pi did not move his troops and waited for the enemy to arrive. This was the army of ease against the army of fatigue.

古文：臣用此知其胜。 帝益重之，自是欲大用矣。
现代文：臣下根据这点知道曹玮一定取胜。 真宗因此更加器重李迪，从此以后打算对李迪委以重任。
English: On the basis of this, his vassals knew that Cao Pi was sure to win. As a result, the True Sect paid more attention to Li Di, and from then on, he planned to play an important role in the Li Di Committee.

古文：初，上将立章献后，迪屡上疏谏，以章献起于寒微，不可母天下。
现代文：起初，真宗打算立章献后，李迪多次上疏规劝，认为章献后出身贫寒，不能作为皇后。
English: At first, after the True Sect planned to establish Zhang Xuan, Li Di repeatedly tried to dissuade her, saying that since Zhang Xuan was born poor, she could not be the empress.

古文：章献深衔之。
现代文：章献从此十分恨李迪。
English: Zhang Xian hated Li Di very much from then on.

古文：天禧中，拜给事中、参知政事。
现代文：天禧年间，授予给事中、参知政事之职。
English: During the Jubilee Year, the posts of vice-president and vice-councilor of state were conferred.

古文：周怀政之诛，帝怒甚，欲责及太子，群臣莫敢言。
现代文：周怀政的被诛，真宗十分恼怒，打算连同太子一起责罚，大臣们都不敢劝谏。
English: When Zhou Huai Zheng was arrested, Zhenzong was very angry and planned to punish him together with the prince. The ministers did not dare to persuade Zhenzong.

古文：迪从容奏曰： 陛下有几子，乃欲为此计。 上大寤，由是独诛怀政等。
现代文：李迪从容上奏说 ：陛下有多少个儿子，却打算执行这一办法？ 真宗完全恢复了理智，因此只诛杀了周怀政等人。
English: Ridi calmly said, "How many sons does your majesty have, yet he intends to carry out this plan? Shinsong has completely regained his sanity, so he only killed Zhou Huai Zheng and others."

古文：仁宗为皇太子，除太子太傅，迪辞以太宗时未尝立保傅，止兼太子宾客，诏皇太子礼宾客如师傅。
现代文：仁宗为皇太子，李迪被任命为太子太傅，李迪以太宗时没有设立保傅，只兼任太子宾客，诏令皇太子对待宾客要像对待师傅一样优礼有加。
English: While Rinzong was the crown prince, Li Di was appointed as the prince's tutor. When Li Di was the prince, there was no tutor, he was only the prince's guest. The imperial edict ordered the prince to treat his guests with the same courtesy as his master.

古文：加礼部侍郎。
现代文：兼任礼部侍郎。
English: He also served as a chamberlain in the Ceremonial Department.

古文：寇准罢，帝欲相迪，迪固辞。
现代文：寇准被罢去宰相，真宗打算让李迪任宰相，李迪坚决辞谢。
English: Kou Jun was ousted as prime minister, Zhenzong planned to appoint Li Di as prime minister, and Li Di resolutely resigned.

古文：一日，对滋福殿，有顷，皇太子出拜曰： 陛下用宾客为宰相，敢以谢。 帝顾谓迪曰： 尚可辞邪！ 拜吏部侍郎兼太子少傅、同中书门下平章事、景灵宫使、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：一天，在滋福殿应对，不久，皇太子出门拜见说： 陛下用宾客当宰相，怎么辞谢呢？ 
English: One day, shortly after the meeting at Shifu-den, the Crown Prince went out to pay his respects and said, "Your Majesty uses guests as prime ministers, how can I refuse to thank you?"

古文：初，真宗不豫，寇准议皇太子总军国事，迪赞其策，丁谓以为不便，曰： 即日上体平，朝廷何以处此？ 迪曰： 太子监国，非古制邪？ 力争不已。
现代文：起初，真宗身体不适，寇准议奏皇太子总管军国之事，李迪赞同此策，丁谓认为不妥，说： 等到以后陛下身体康复，朝廷又将怎样处理此事呢？ 李迪说 ：太子监督国事，难道不是古已有之的制度吗？ 
English: At first, when Emperor Zhenzong was unwell, Colon agreed to discuss the matter of making the crown prince the commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Li Di agreed with this policy, but Ding Zuo thought it was inappropriate, saying, "After His Majesty recovers, how will the imperial court handle this matter?" Li Di said, "Isn't it an ancient system that the crown prince oversees state affairs?

古文：于是皇太子于资善堂听常事，他皆听旨。
现代文：据理力争，于是皇太子在资善堂听取日常国事，其他事情都听从皇上旨意。
English: According to the reasoning, the crown prince listened to the daily affairs of state in Shizen-do Hall, and obeyed the emperor's will in all other matters.

古文：准既贬，谓浸擅权用事，至除吏不以闻。
现代文：寇准被贬以后，丁谓逐渐独断专权，以至于给官吏授职、任命官员都不上报朝廷。
English: After Kojun was dethroned, Ding Zuo gradually assumed dictatorial powers, so much so that the conferring of posts and the appointment of officials were not reported to the imperial court.

古文：迪愤然语同列曰： 迪起布衣至宰相，有以报国，死犹不恨，安能附权幸为自安计邪！ 自此不协。
现代文：李迪愤怒地对同僚们说 ：我是从布衣出身而官至宰相的，只要能报答国家，即使一死也毫无遗憾，又怎么能依附权贵奸佞来考虑自己的安乐呢？ 从此与丁谓不和。
English: Li Di angrily said to his colleagues: I was born in cloth and rose to the position of prime minister. As long as I can repay the country, even if I die, I have no regrets. How can I rely on the power of the noble traitor to consider my own well-being? Since then, there has been no peace with Ding Zhe.

古文：时议二府皆进秩兼东宫官，迪以为不可。
现代文：这时朝廷议论二府都进官秩兼东宫官，李迪认为不行。
English: At this time, the imperial court was debating whether the two prefectures should both be promoted to the rank of official and the East Palace official, but Li Di thought it was not possible.

古文：谓又欲引林特为枢密副使，而迁迪中书侍郎兼尚书左丞。
现代文：丁谓又准备任用林特为枢密副使，而升迁李迪任中书侍郎兼尚书左丞。
English: Ding is also said to be preparing to appoint Lin Te as Privy Vice-Envoy, while Li Di will be promoted to the post of Junior Secretary and Senior Secretary.

古文：故事，宰相无为左丞者。
现代文：按过去的惯例，宰相没有兼任尚书左丞的。
English: According to past practice, the Prime Minister did not concurrently serve as the Vice Chancellor.

古文：既而帝御长春殿，内出制书置榻前，谓辅臣曰： 此卿等兼东宫官制书也。 迪进曰： 东宫官属不当增置，臣不敢受此命。
现代文：不久真宗御驾长春殿，拿出制书放在床榻前，对辅佐大臣说 ：这是你们兼任东宫官的制书。 李迪进言说 ：东宫官之类不应当增置，臣下不敢接受这一任命。
English: Soon after, Emperor Jinsong drove to Changchun Palace, took out the book and placed it in front of the bed, and said to the Vice-Minister, "This is the book of your concurrently serving as the Eastern Palace Officer."Ri Di Jin said, "The Eastern Palace Officer should not be added, and subjects dare not accept this appointment."

古文：宰相丁谓罔上弄权，私林特、钱惟演而嫉寇准。
现代文：宰相丁谓欺骗皇上玩弄权术，偏私林特、钱惟演而嫉妒寇准。
English: Prime Minister Ding is said to have deceived the emperor and played power games, favouring his own interests and money, while being jealous of Qujun.

古文：特子杀人，事寝不治，准无罪罢斥，惟演姻家使预政，曹利用、冯拯相为朋党。
现代文：林特的儿子杀人，事情被压住而不处治，寇准无罪被罢官，钱惟演身为姻家干预朝政，曹利用、冯拯互相结成朋党。
English: Lint's son committed murder, the case was suppressed and not dealt with, Kuo Jun was dismissed without charge, Qian Yu acted as the in-law to intervene in the government, Cao Yu and Feng Zheng formed a party of friends.

古文：臣愿与谓俱罢，付御史台劾正。 帝怒，留制不下，左迁迪户部侍郎。
现代文：臣下愿与丁谓一起免官，交付御史台弹劾。 真宗恼怒，留下制书没有下达，李迪降为户部侍郎。
English: The vassal was willing to be relieved of his post together with Ding Zhao, and submitted to the impeachment of the Imperial Historian. Shinsong was angry, leaving the book-making without being issued, and Li Di was relegated to the household attendant.

古文：谓再对，传口诏入中书复视事，出迪知郓州。
现代文：丁谓再次上对，传达真宗口头诏令入中书省视事，李迪离京知郓州。
English: Ding Zi once again went to the right, conveyed the oral edict of the True Sect to enter the Ministry of Education, and Li Di left Beijing to go to Zhangzhou.

古文：仁宗即位，太后预政，贬准雷州，以迪朋党傅会，贬衡州团练副使。
现代文：仁宗即位，太后参预朝政，将寇准贬到雷州，以李迪为寇准朋党，李迪被贬为衡州团练副使。
English: When Emperor Nenzong ascended to the throne, the empress dowager took part in the pre-imperial politics, and relegated Qojun to Leizhou, with Li Di as Qojun's comrade, and Li Di was relegated to the position of deputy envoy of Hengzhou Rehearsal.

古文：谓使人迫之，或讽谓曰： 迪若贬死，公如士论何？ 谓曰： 异日诸生记事，不过曰 天下惜之 而已。
现代文：丁谓派人迫害李迪，有人讥讽地对丁谓说： 李迪若被贬致死，你认为天下人会如何评价他呢？ 丁谓说 ：以后诸生记载这件事，只不过说 天下怜惜他 罢了。 
English: Ding Zuo sent people to persecute Li Di. Someone said sarcastically to Ding Zuo: "If Li Di is degraded to death, how do you think the world will evaluate him?" Ding Zuo said: "In future lifetimes, we will record this event, but just say that the world pities him."

古文：谓败，起为秘书监、知舒州，历江宁府、兖州、青州，复兵部侍郎、知河南府。
现代文：丁谓事败，李迪起职为秘书监、知舒州，历任江宁府尹，兖州、青州知州，又任兵部侍郎、知河南府。
English: Ding called it a failure, and Li Di started his career as a secretary-supervisor, Chishuzhou, and successively served as Jiangningfu Yin, Ganzhou, Qingzhou Chizhou, and also served as an attendant of the military department, South Chiheno.

古文：来朝京师，时太后垂帘，语迪曰： 卿向不欲吾预国事，殆过矣。
现代文：到京师上朝，这时太后在帘后对李迪说： 你一直不想让我参预国事，恐怕是一种过失。
English: In the morning after arriving in Beijing, the empress dowager said to Li Di behind the curtain, "I'm afraid it was a mistake that you didn't want me to take part in the pre-election state affairs.

古文：今日吾保养天子至此，卿以为何如？ 迪对曰： 臣受先帝厚恩，今日见天子明圣，臣不知皇太后盛德，乃至于此。 太后亦喜。
现代文：如今我将天子抚养成人并登皇位，你以为怎么样？ 李迪对答说 ：臣下蒙受先帝的恩德，如今见天子聪明通达事理，臣不知道皇太后的大德，到了这种地步。 太后也很高兴。
English: What do you think of me now that I have raised my son to adulthood and ascended to the throne? Li Di replied: My vassals have received the grace of the former emperor, and now they see that the son of heaven is clever and knowledgeable, and the vassal does not know the great virtue of the empress dowager, to such an extent. The empress dowager is also very happy.

古文：以尚书左丞知河阳，迁工部尚书。
现代文：以尚书左丞知河阳，升任工部尚书。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu of the Engineering Department.

古文：太后崩，召为资政殿学士、判尚书都省。
现代文：太后去世，奉召任资政殿学士、判尚书都省。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, he was appointed as a scholar of the Palace of Succession, and was awarded the title of Shuto Province.

古文：未几，复拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：不久，又授予同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: Not long after, he was also awarded the title of Shihira Shoji and Jixianden University Scholar.

古文：景祐中，范讽得罪，迪坐姻党，罢为刑部尚书，知亳州，改相州。
现代文：景祐年间，范讽获罪，李迪由于与范讽为姻亲而被获罪，罢为刑部尚书、知亳州，后又改任相州知州。
English: During the Jingyu era, Fan Lian was found guilty, and Li Di was found guilty because he and Fan Lian were in-laws. He was transferred to the criminal department of Shangshu and Zhishu, and later he was transferred to the criminal department of Xiangshu and Zhishu.

古文：既而为资政殿大学士、翰林侍读学士，留京师。
现代文：不久又任资政殿大学士、翰林侍读学士，留任京师。
English: Soon after that, he was appointed as a scholar of the University of the Palace of Councillors, and as an attendant scholar of Hanlin, and remained as a teacher in Beijing.

古文：迪素恶吕夷简，因奏夷简私交荆王元俨，尝为补门下僧惠清为守阙鉴义。
现代文：李迪一直讨厌吕夷简，于是上奏吕夷简私自结交荆王赵元俨，曾经补门下僧惠清为守阙鉴义。
English: Li Di had always disliked Lü Yijan, so he secretly befriended the king of the Jing dynasty, Zhao Yuanzhang, and had his disciple, the monk Hui Qing, act as the guardian of the seal.

古文：夷简请辨，诏讯之，乃迪在中书所行事，夷简以斋祠不预。
现代文：吕夷简请求辩护，诏令对吕夷简加以审讯，都是李迪在中书所行之事，吕夷简因而没有参预祭祠神殿。
English: Lv Yijian's request for defense and the imperial edict to put Lv Yijian on trial were all things that Li Di did in Zhongshu. As a result, Lv Yijian did not attend the pre-sacrifice shrine.

古文：降太常卿、知密州。
现代文：李迪降为太常卿、知密州。
English: Li Di was demoted to Tai Changqing and Zhimizhou.

古文：复刑部尚书、知徐州。
现代文：又为刑部尚书、知徐州。
English: He is also a member of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：迪奏所部邻兖州，欲行县因祠岳为上祈年、祷皇子。
现代文：李迪上奏自己所在之地邻近兖州，打算巡视州县顺便祭祠大山来为皇上祈求丰年、皇子。
English: Li Di played up his location near Zhangzhou, intending to visit various prefectures and counties as well as the Dashan Temple to pray for a prosperous year and a prince for the emperor.

古文：仁宗语辅臣曰： 大臣当为百姓访疾苦，祈祷非迪所宜，其毋令往。 久之，改户部尚书、知兖州，复拜资政殿大学士。
现代文：仁宗对辅臣说： 大臣应当替百姓访问疾苦，祈祷对李迪不适宜，不要让他前往。 以后，李迪又改任户部尚书、知兖州，又授予资政殿大学士。
English: Rinzong said to the assistant minister: The minister should visit the sick for the people, and it is not appropriate for Li Di to pray, so don't let him go. Later, Li Di was reappointed to the household department of Shangshu and Zhisheng, and was awarded the degree of Scholar of the House of Councillors.

古文：元昊攻延州，武事久弛，守将或为他名以避兵。
现代文：赵元昊攻打延州，因为宋朝军备早已废弛，守将有的以其他名义来逃避敌兵的攻打。
English: Zhao Yuanhao attacked Yanzhou, because the Song Dynasty's armaments had long been exhausted, and some defenders used other names to evade the enemy's attack.

古文：迪愿守边，诏不许，然甚壮其意。
现代文：李迪愿意防守边疆，诏令不许，但十分欣赏李迪的心意。
English: Li Di is willing to defend the frontier, but the edict does not allow it, but he fully appreciates Li Di's intentions.

古文：除彰信军节度使、知天雄军，徙青州。
现代文：授予彰信军节度使、知天雄军，调任青州。
English: The Zhangxin Army was awarded the title of Festival Envoy, and the Zhitian Army was awarded the title of Young Army and transferred to Qingzhou.

古文：逾年，之本镇。请老，以太子太傅致仕，归濮州。
现代文：第二年，驻守本镇，请求告老回乡，以太子太傅致仕，归濮州。
English: The next year, he was stationed in the town and asked to return to his hometown. He was promoted to the rank of Tai Fu and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：后其子柬之为侍御史知杂事，奉迪来京师。
现代文：后来李迪之子李柬之为侍御史知杂事，侍奉李迪来到京师。
English: Later, Li Di's son, Li Kam Rong, came to Beijing to serve Li Di.

古文：帝数遣使问劳，欲召见，以疾辞。
现代文：仁宗多次派遣使者前来慰问，并想召见他，李迪以身体有病而辞谢。
English: Rinzong repeatedly sent emissaries to offer condolences and wanted to summon him, but Li Di declined, saying that he was ill.

古文：薨，年七十七。
现代文：去世，终年七十七岁。
English: He died at the age of 77.

古文：赠司空、侍中，谥文定。
现代文：追赠司空、侍中，谥号 文定 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Jikku and Samurai, and his posthumous name was changed to Wenjing.

古文：孝称请班兄下，不许。避亲嫌，徙工部。
现代文：仁宗以篆书撰写了他的墓碑，叫作《遗直之碑》，又将其所葬之处邓侯乡改名为遗直乡。
English: Renzong wrote his tombstone with a pen and ink, called "The Monument of Zizhi," and changed the name of the place where he was buried from Denghou Township to Zizhi Township.

古文：卒，赠光禄大夫。王曾，字孝先，青州益都人。
现代文：李迪之子有李柬之、李肃之、李承之、李及之，孙子李孝寿、李孝基、李孝称。王曾字孝先，青州益都人。
English: Li Di's sons were named Li Kamizhi, Li Suizhi, Li Chengzhi, Li Jiuzhi, and his grandsons were named Li Xiaoshou, Li Xiaoji, and Li Xiaoxian. Wang Zeng was named Xiaoxian and was from Yidu, Qingzhou.

古文：少孤，鞠于仲父宗元，从学于里人张震，善为文辞。
现代文：年少丧父，由其叔父王宗元抚养成人，向里人张震学习学问，善于写作文辞。
English: He lost his father at a young age and was raised by his uncle Wang Zongyuan. He learned from his uncle Zhang Zhen and was good at writing.

古文：咸平中，由乡贡试礼部、廷对皆第一。
现代文：咸平年间，由乡贡试礼部、廷对都是第一名。
English: During the Xianping era, the township tribute rehearsal club and the imperial court pair were the first.

古文：杨亿见其赋，叹曰： 王佐器也。 以将作监丞通判济州。
现代文：杨亿见到了王曾所作之赋，赞叹说 ：这是辅佐帝王的人才。 以将作监丞通判济州。
English: Yang Yili saw Wang Zeng's performance and said with admiration, "This is the talent to assist the emperor.

古文：代还，当召试学士院，宰相寇准奇之，特试政事堂，授秘书省著作郎、直史馆、三司户部判官。
现代文：回京，奉召试学士院，宰相寇准对王曾感到很惊奇，特地考试政事堂，授予秘书省著作郎、直史馆、三司户部判官。
English: Back in Beijing, he was summoned to the Examination Academy. The Prime Minister, Ko Jun, was very surprised by Wang Zeng, and specially examined the Government House, awarding the Secretary of the Ministry of Literature, the Direct History Museum, and the Judge of the Third Division of the Household Department.

古文：景德初，始通和契丹，岁遣使致书称南朝，以契丹为北朝。
现代文：景德初年，宋朝才开始与契丹交往讲和，宋朝每年派使者给契丹的书信都自称为南朝，以契丹作为北朝。
English: In the first year of Jingde, the Song Dynasty only began to interact with the Khitan Empire to talk about peace. The letters sent by the Song Dynasty to the Khitan Empire every year called themselves the Southern Dynasty, with the Khitan Empire as the Northern Dynasty.

古文：曾曰： 从其国号足矣。 业已遣使，弗果易。
现代文：王曾说 ：遵从契丹的国号就可以了。 使者已经出发，最终没有更改。
English: The king once said: it is enough to follow the national anthem of Khitan, the messenger has set off, and there is no change in the end.

古文：迁右正言、知制诰兼史馆修撰。
现代文：升任右正言、知制诰兼史馆修撰。
English: He was promoted to the post of Ujishogen (Major Councillor of the Right) and Chisei Shosei (Minister of Education).

古文：时瑞应沓至，曾尝入对，帝语及之。
现代文：这时各种吉祥的现象纷纷出现，王曾曾入朝进对，真宗向他说及了此事。
English: At this time, various auspicious phenomena appeared one after another. Wang Zeng entered the imperial court, and Shenzong mentioned the matter to him.

古文：曾奏曰： 此诚国家承平所致，然愿推而弗居，异日或有灾沴，则免舆议。 及帝既受符命，大建玉清昭应宫，下莫敢言者，曾陈五害以谏。
现代文：王曾上奏说： 这确实是国家太平的结果，但希望陛下进一步推广而不要居功自骄，如果有一天发生灾荒，则可以免除世人的议论。 到真定接受符命，大建玉清昭应宫，臣下都不敢劝谏，王曾陈述了五大危害用以劝谏。
English: Wang Zeng said: This is indeed the result of the country's peace and tranquility, but I hope that His Majesty will further promote it and not take credit for it. If one day a disaster occurs, it can be exempted from the world's discussion. To truly accept the mission, build the Jade Qing Zhaoying Palace, his subjects are afraid to persuade him. Wang Zeng stated the five harms to persuade him.

古文：旧用郎中官判大理寺，帝欲重之，特命曾。
现代文：过去任用郎中官判大理寺，真宗想重新沿用这一官制，特地任命王曾任此职。
English: In the past, the chancellor of Dali Temple was appointed by the emperor, but the Shinshu sect wanted to re-adopt this official system, and specially appointed Wang Zengru to this post.

古文：且谓曾曰： 狱，重典也，今以屈卿。 曾顿首谢。
现代文：并且对王曾说： 刑狱，是国家的一项重要制度，如今将以此职委屈你了。 王曾叩头致谢。
English: And he said to Wang Zeng: "Imprisonment is an important system of the country, and now I will use this grievance against you." Wang Zeng bowed his head in gratitude.

古文：仍赐钱三十万，因请自辟僚属，著为令。
现代文：赐钱三十万，于是请求自己征召幕僚，作为一项规定。
English: He gave 300,000 yuan, and then asked himself to conscript staff as a rule.

古文：迁翰林学士。
现代文：升任翰林学士。
English: Fan Zhen was transferred to the post of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：帝尝晚坐承明殿，召对久之，既退，使内侍谕曰： 向思卿甚，故不及朝服见卿，卿勿以我为慢也。 其见尊礼如此。
现代文：真宗曾经晚上坐在承明殿，召见王曾并应对很长时间，退朝后，真宗派内侍告诉王曾说： 我十分想见你，因此来不及穿着官服见你，请你不要以为我慢待你。 王曾被真宗如此尊重礼待。
English: The True Sect once sat in the evening in the Jeongmyeongjeon Palace, summoned the King and dealt with him for a long time. After the abdication, the True Sect's chambermaid told the King, "I really want to see you, so I can't meet you in my official uniform. Please don't think that I'm waiting for you." The King was treated with such respect and courtesy by the True Sect.

古文：知审刑院。
现代文：主管审刑院。
English: The Criminal Court is in charge.

古文：旧违制无故失，率坐徒二年，曾请须亲被旨乃坐。既而有犯者，曾乃以失论。
现代文：以往对于违背制书无论是故意还是过失，都被判罚服劳役两年，王曾请求只对接受皇帝亲自下诏者才予以判刑。不久有违制者，王曾于是以过失论处。
English: In the past, anyone who violated the rules of book production, whether intentionally or through negligence, was sentenced to two years of hard labor. Wang had requested that only those who accepted the edict personally issued by the emperor should be sentenced. Soon, anyone who violated the rules was punished for negligence.

古文：帝曰： 如卿言，是无复有违制者。 曾曰： 天下至广，岂人人尽晓制书，如陛下言，亦无复有失者。 帝悟，卒从曾议。
现代文：真宗说： 按你所说，这样就没有违反制书的人了。 王曾说 ：天下无限广大，又怎能人人都知道皇帝的诏令，像陛下所说，也不再有犯过失罪的人了。 真宗领悟了，最后依从了王曾的建议。
English: Shingon said, "According to what you said, there will be no one who will violate the edict." The king had said, "The world is infinitely vast, so how can everyone know the emperor's edict? As your majesty said, there will no longer be anyone who commits sins." Shingon understood and finally followed the king's advice.

古文：再迁尚书主客郎中。知审官院、通进银台司，勾当三班院，遂以右谏议大夫参知政事。
现代文：又升任为尚书主客郎中，知审官院、通进银台司、勾当三班院，于是以右谏议大夫参知政事。
English: In addition, he was promoted to be a guest disciple of Shoshu, member of the Board of Examiners, a member of the Board of Bankers, and a member of the Third Division of the Board of Trustees. As a result, he became a member of the Board of Governors as a member of the Board of Trustees.

古文：时宫观皆以辅臣为使。
现代文：这时宫观都以辅臣为使者。
English: At this time, the imperial court regarded all vassals as emissaries.

古文：王钦若方挟符瑞，傅会帝意，又阴欲排异己者，曾当使会灵，因以推钦若，帝始疑曾自异。
现代文：王钦若正携带着符瑞，来附会真宗的旨意，又暗中排除异己，这时王曾将出使会灵，于是向朝廷推荐王钦若，这样真宗就怀疑王曾有异心。
English: If Wang Qin was carrying Fu Rui to carry out the will of the True Sect and secretly eliminate dissidents, then the king would have sent an emissary to the meeting spirit, and then recommended Wang Qin Ruo to the court. In this way, the True Sect would suspect that the king had a different intention.

古文：及钦若相，会曾市贺皇后家旧第，其家未徙去，而曾令人舁土置门外，贺氏诉禁中。
现代文：到王钦若任宰相时，恰好王曾在出卖贺皇后家的旧宅，贺家还没有迁走，王曾就让人在门外抬土填屋，贺皇后在宫中向真宗哭诉。
English: When Wang Qinru was the prime minister, it happened that Wang had sold the old house of the He family. The He family had not yet moved away, and Wang had people carry earth outside the door to fill the house. Empress He cried to the Emperor in the palace.

古文：明日，帝以语钦若，乃罢曾为尚书礼部侍郎、判都省，出知应天府。
现代文：第二天上朝，真宗向王钦若提及此事，于是将王曾罢官为尚书礼部侍郎、判都省，离开京师任应天府知府。
English: On the second day of the previous year, when Shinsong mentioned the matter to Wang Qinruo, Wang Zeng was dismissed from his post as the attendant of the Shoshu Rites Department and assigned to the provincial capital, and he left the capital and was assigned to the provincial capital of Tianfu.

古文：天禧中，民间讹言有妖起若飞帽，夜搏人，自京师以南，人皆恐。
现代文：天禧年间，民间传出谣言有妖像飞帽一样飘来飘去，到了晚上就抓人，从京师以南，人们都害怕。
English: During the Tenmei era, rumors spread among the people that there were demons that floated around like flying hats and caught people in the evening. People from the south of Beijing were afraid of them.

古文：曾令夜开里门，敢倡言者即捕之，卒无妖。
现代文：王曾下令晚上打开里门，有胆敢说妖者马上逮捕，最终无妖怪。
English: The king had ordered the inner door to be opened at night, and anyone who dared to say that there was a monster was immediately arrested. In the end, there was no monster.

古文：徙天雄军，复参知政事，迁吏部侍郎兼太子宾客。
现代文：调往天雄军，复任参知政事，升任吏部侍郎兼太子宾客。
English: He was transferred to the Tianxiong Army, reinstated as a member of the Council of State, and promoted to the position of a chamberlain and a guest of the prince.

古文：真宗不豫，皇后居中预政，太子虽听事资善堂，然事皆决于后，中外以为忧。
现代文：真宗身体不适，皇后执掌朝政，太子虽然在资善堂听事，但一切都由皇后决定，朝廷内外都为此而担忧。
English: Emperor Jianzong is unwell, the Empress is in charge of the government, and although the Crown Prince is attending an audience at Shishentang, everything is decided by the Empress. Both inside and outside the court are worried about this.

古文：钱惟演，后戚也，曾密语惟演曰： 太子幼，非宫中不能立。
现代文：钱惟演是皇后的亲戚，属于外戚，王曾悄悄地对钱惟演说 ：太子年小，不是皇后执政就不能立法。
English: Qian Youyuan is a relative of the queen, a maternal relative. The king once said quietly to Qian Youyuan: The prince is young, and cannot legislate unless the queen is in power.

古文：加恩太子，则太子安；太子安，所以安刘氏也。 惟演以为然，因以白后。
现代文：加恩太子，则太子安定；太子安定，也就是安定了刘氏家族。 钱惟演认为王曾说得有理，于是就告诉皇后。
English: Prince Ghan, then the prince is stable; the prince is stable, that is, the Liu family is stable. Qian Yueyuan thought that Wang Zeng was right, so he told the queen.

古文：帝崩，曾奉命入殿庐草遗诏： 以明肃皇后辅立皇太子，权听断军国大事。 丁谓入，去 权 字。
现代文：真宗逝世，王曾奉命入殿庐起草遗诏： 以明肃皇后辅立皇太子，权听断军国大事。 丁谓进来，说去掉 权 字。
English: After the death of Emperor Zhenzong, Wang Zeng was ordered to go to the imperial palace to draft his last will and testament: The Empress Mingsu should be appointed as the crown prince, with the power to decide military affairs. Ding Zeng came in and said to remove the word "power."

古文：曾曰： 皇帝冲年，太后临朝，斯已国家否运。
现代文：王曾说： 皇帝年幼，太后执掌朝政，这已经是国运不好的表现。
English: Wang Zeng said: The emperor is young, and the empress dowager is in charge of the government, which is already a bad performance of the national movement.

古文：称 权 ，犹足示后。
现代文：称 权 ，还表示后继有人。
English: He also indicated that there would be a successor.

古文：且增减制书有法，表则之地，先欲乱之邪？ 遂不敢去。
现代文：而且增减诏令有一定的章法，表则之地，难道我们要破坏它吗？ 于是不敢去掉 权 字。
English: Moreover, the edict of adding and subtracting has a certain set of rules and regulations, a place for formulas. Should we destroy it? Therefore, we dare not remove the word of authority.

古文：仁宗立，迁礼部尚书。
现代文：仁宗即位，升任礼部尚书。
English: Emperor Ninsong ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to the position of the ceremonial secretary.

古文：群臣议太后临朝仪，曾请如东汉故事，太后坐帝右，垂帘奏事，丁谓独欲帝朔望见群臣，大事则太后召对辅臣决之，非大事令入内押班雷允恭传奏禁中，画可以下。
现代文：大臣们议论太后上朝的仪式，王曾请求像东汉过去的礼仪一样，太后坐在皇帝的右边，垂帘奏事。丁谓却想皇帝只在每月初一日和十五日接见大臣，大事则由太后召见辅臣断定，不是大事就让入内，押班雷允恭传奏禁中，决定可由雷允恭下达。
English: The ministers discussed the ceremony of the empress dowager's ascension to the throne. The king had requested that the empress dowager sit on the right side of the emperor and deliver a report, just like the etiquette of the Eastern Han Dynasty in the past. However, Ding said that the emperor only wanted to receive the ministers on the first day and the 15th day of each month. The important matters would be determined by the empress dowager's summoning of the aides-de-camp. If it was not an important matter, it would be allowed to enter the palace.

古文：曾曰： 两宫异处，而柄归宦官，祸端兆矣。 谓不听。
现代文：王曾说： 两宫不在一处，但大权归宦官执掌，这是祸害的一种征兆。 丁谓不听。
English: The king once said: The two palaces are not in the same place, but the power is in the hands of the eunuchs, which is a sign of evil.

古文：既而允恭坐诛，谓亦得罪。
现代文：不久雷允恭犯罪被杀，丁谓也由此而获罪。
English: Soon after, Lei Yungong was killed for committing a crime, and Ding Zeta was also convicted.

古文：自是两宫垂帘，辅臣奏事如曾议。
现代文：从此以后两宫垂帘，辅臣上奏议事都依照王曾的建议。
English: From then on, the curtains of the two palaces were drawn, and the attendants reported the proceedings in accordance with Wang Zeng's suggestion.

古文：谓初败，任中正言： 谓被先帝顾托，虽有罪，请如律议功。 曾曰： 谓以不忠得罪宗庙，尚何议邪！ 时真宗初崩，内外汹汹，曾正色独立，朝廷倚以为重。
现代文：丁谓罪行开始败露，任中正说： 丁谓受到先帝的关照和托护，虽然有罪，请按照刑律定罪时考虑他的功绩。 王曾说 ：丁谓以不忠诚获罪于宗庙，还有什么可商议的呢？ 这时真宗刚驾崩，朝廷内外一片争辩喧闹，纷乱不已，王曾面容严肃，神态庄重，朝廷将王曾作为重要大臣加以依靠。
English: When Ding's crimes began to come to light, Ren Zhongzheng said: Ding was taken care of and protected by the former emperor, although he was guilty, please consider his merits when convicting him according to the criminal law. Wang Zeng said: Ding was convicted of disloyalty in the ancestral temple, what else is there to discuss? At this time, Geng Zong had just passed away, and there was a noisy and chaotic debate inside and outside the court. Wang Zeng had a serious face and a solemn demeanor, and the court relied on Wang Zeng as an important minister.

古文：拜中书侍郎兼本官、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士、会灵观使。
现代文：授予中书侍郎兼任本官、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士、会灵观使。
English: He was awarded the title of Chusho-jiro (chancellor of the middle school) and concurrently served as the headmaster, Chusho-mon (master of the middle school) Shitahira-shoji, Shisen-dono Daigakuin, and Kairyo-kanshi.

古文：王钦若卒，曾以门下侍郎兼户部尚书为昭文馆大学士、监修国史、玉清昭应宫使。
现代文：王钦若死后，王曾以门下侍郎兼户部尚书任昭文馆大学士、监修国史、玉清昭应宫使。
English: After the death of Wang Qinruo, Wang was appointed as a scholar of the Shouwen Academy, a supervisor of national history, and an envoy to the court of Emperor Taizong of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：曾以帝初即位，宜近师儒，即召孙奭、冯元劝讲崇政殿。
现代文：王曾以仁宗刚即位，应当亲近儒生以他们为师，于是召集孙、冯元在崇政殿讲学。
English: The king once said that since Emperor Ninsong had just ascended to the throne, he should be close to Confucian scholars and use them as his teachers, so he summoned Sun and Feng Yuan to lecture at the Sui Dynasty Hall.

古文：天圣四年夏，大雨。
现代文：天圣四年夏天，天降大雨。
English: In the summer of the 4th year of Tensho, it rained heavily.

古文：传言汴口决，水且大至，都人恐，欲东奔。
现代文：纷纷传言汴河决口，将要发生大水，京城人都十分害怕，打算向东逃窜。
English: There were many rumours that there was going to be a flood at the mouth of the Li River, and the people of Beijing were very afraid and planned to flee east.

古文：帝问曾，曾曰： 河决奏未至，第民间妖言尔，不足虑也。 已而果然。
现代文：仁宗问王曾，王曾说： 黄河决口，并没有奏报，只是民间流传的蛊惑人心的话罢了，不值得忧虑。 后来果然如王曾所说。
English: Rinzong asked Wang Zeng, and Wang Zeng said, "There is no report about the Yellow River bursting its banks, it's just a popular rumor, it's not worth worrying about." Later, it turned out as Wang Zeng had said.

古文：陕西转过使置醋务，以榷其利，且请推其法天下，曾请罢之。
现代文：陕西转运使设置醋务，靠家专营来获利，准备将这种办法推广至全国，王曾请求罢除此法。
English: Shaanxi transshipment company set up vinegar business, relying on home franchise to make a profit, and is preparing to promote this approach to the whole country. Wang Yu had requested the cancellation of this law.

古文：曾方严持重，每进见，言利害事，审而中理；多所荐拔，尤恶侥幸。
现代文：王曾方正严整稳重，每次进朝觐见皇帝，陈述事情的利害得失，都详细切中事理，许多人受他推荐而被朝廷提拔，他特别厌恶侥幸受宠之人。
English: Wang Zeng Fang Zheng was strict, orderly and steady. Every time he went to the imperial court to see the emperor, he explained the advantages and disadvantages of the matter in detail. Many people were recommended by him and promoted by the court. He was particularly disgusted with those who were favored by chance.

古文：帝问曾曰： 比臣僚请对，多求进者。 曾对曰： 惟陛下抑奔竞而崇恬静，庶几有难进易退之人矣。 曹利用恶曾班己上，尝怏怏不悦，语在《利用传》。
现代文：仁宗问王曾说 ：等到臣僚请对，许多都是想得到一官半职。 王曾说 ：只要陛下抑制投机钻营者崇尚恬静，这样就有升官难而降职容易的人了。 曹利用嫉妒王曾官级比他高，曾经因不服气而不高兴，其言语记载在《曹利用传》中。
English: When Rinzong asked the king, he said, "When it comes to ministers, many of them just want to get a post and a half." The king said, "As long as His Majesty suppresses speculators and advocates tranquility, there will be people who are difficult to promote and easy to demote." Cao Rongji was jealous of Wang, who had a higher official rank than him, and was once unhappy because he was not convinced, and his words are recorded in "Cao Rongji Biography."

古文：及利用坐事，太后大怒，曾为之解。
现代文：到曹利用因事而犯罪时，太后大怒，王曾反而替曹利用辩解。
English: When Cao Cao committed a crime as a result of the incident, the empress dowager was furious. On the contrary, Wang Zeng defended Cao Cao.

古文：太后曰： 卿尝言利用强横，今何解也？ 曾曰： 利用素恃恩，臣故尝以理折之。
现代文：太后说： 爱卿曾经说曹利用强行蛮横，如今又为什么要替他辩解呢？ 王曾说： 曹利用一直依仗皇恩，臣下因此曾经以理驳斥他，现在曹利用被加以大恶之名，臣下并不知道。 
English: The empress dowager said, "Aicheng once said that Cao Rong forced his way into arrogance, so why should I defend him now?" The king once said, "Cao Rong always relied on the favor of the emperor, so his subjects used to refute him with reason, but now Cao Rong is called a great evil, and his subjects do not know it."

古文：今加以大恶，则非臣所知也。 太后意少释，卒从轻议。始，太后受册，将御大安殿，曾执以为不可，及长宁节上寿，止共张便殿。
现代文：太后稍稍息怒，最后对曹利用从轻发落。开始，太后受册封，将御驾大安殿，王曾坚持认为不可以，到长宁节给太后祝寿，只在便殿恭敬地进行庆典。
English: The empress dowager calmed down her anger for a while, and finally began to treat Cao Lian lightly. At the beginning, the empress dowager was given a title of honor, and she was allowed to drive to the Great Hall of the People. The king had insisted that she could not drive to the Great Hall of the People to wish the empress dowager a happy birthday on Changning Festival, and the celebration was respectfully carried out only in the hall.

古文：太后左右姻家稍通请谒，曾多所裁抑，太后滋不悦。
现代文：太后的左右姻亲之家请求王曾通报求见太后，王曾往往加以制裁和压制，太后更加不高兴。
English: The dowager's family of in-laws on both sides asked the king to inform and meet the dowager, but the king often sanctioned and suppressed them, which made the dowager even more unhappy.

古文：会玉清昭应宫灾，乃出知青州。
现代文：正好玉清昭应宫发生火灾，王曾于是被逐出京任青州知州。
English: Just as a fire broke out in the palace of the Jade Emperor, Wang Zeng was expelled from Beijing and appointed to Qingzhou and Chizhou.

古文：以彰信军节度使复知天雄军，契丹使者往还，敛车徒而后过，无敢哗者。
现代文：以彰德军节度使再次知天雄军，契丹使者来往，征召车夫来护送使者，没有人敢议论。
English: No one dared to discuss the fact that the German military festival had once again been used as an occasion for the emissaries of the Khitan Empire to visit and recruit drivers to escort the emissaries.

古文：人乐其政，为画像而生祠之。
现代文：当地百姓对其治理措施十分高兴，替王曾画一幅像并为他建祠庙进行祭祀。
English: The local people were very pleased with his governance measures, painted a portrait of Wang Zeng and built an ancestral temple for him.

古文：改天平军节度使、同中书门下平章事、判河南府。
现代文：改任天平军节度使、同中书门下平章事、判河南府。
English: He was appointed as the military commander of the Tianping Army, and was awarded Henan Prefecture.

古文：景祐元年，为枢密使。
现代文：景元年任枢密使。
English: He was appointed as a privy envoy in the reign of King Gyeongwon.

古文：明年，拜右仆射兼门下侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士，封沂国公。
现代文：第二年，授予右仆射兼门下侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士，封为沂国公。
English: In the second year, he awarded his right-hand man, Sakane, his servant, Taira no Shoshoji, and Shikenden Daigaku Daigaku Daishi, and made Ryo the prince of Shikoku.

古文：曾进退士人，莫有知者。
现代文：王曾推荐和贬斥士人，没有人知道。
English: Wang had recommended and disparaged scholars, and no one knew.

古文：范仲淹尝问曾曰： 明扬士类，宰相之任也。
现代文：范仲淹曾问王曾说： 公开选拔士人，是宰相的职责。
English: Fan Zhongyun once asked Wang Zeng: It is the responsibility of the Prime Minister to publicly select scholars.

古文：公之盛德，独少此耳。 曾曰： 夫执政者，恩欲归己，怨使谁归？ 仲淹服其言。
现代文：您的大德，唯独缺少这一点。 王曾说： 执政的人，如果将恩德归于自己，那怨恨又归于谁呢？ 范仲淹深深佩服他所说的话。
English: Your great virtue lacks only this. The king once said: "If those in power attribute grace to themselves, to whom does that resentment belong?" Fan Zhongyan deeply admired what he said.

古文：初，吕夷简参知政事，事曾谨甚，曾力荐为相。
现代文：开初，吕夷简任参知政事，对王曾十分谨慎地服侍，王曾极力推荐他任宰相。
English: At the beginning of the year, Lyu Yijian served as a political advisor to the governor. He served Wang very carefully, and Wang strongly recommended him for the post of prime minister.

古文：及夷简位曾上，任事久，多所专决，曾不能堪，论议间有异同，遂求罢。
现代文：到吕夷简位在王曾之上，任职时间一长，往往独断专行，王曾不能忍受，议论中双方意见不一，于是请求朝廷罢免吕夷简。
English: To Lyu Yijian's rank above Wang Zeng, he had been in office for a long time, often acting arbitrarily. Wang Zeng could not bear it, and the two sides had different opinions during the discussion, so he asked the court to dismiss Lyu Yijian.

古文：仁宗疑以问曾曰： 卿亦有所不足邪？ 时外传知秦州王继明纳赂夷简，曾因及之。帝以问夷简，曾与夷简交论帝前。
现代文：仁宗疑惑地问王曾说 ：你也有不足之处吗？ 这时外面纷纷传言秦州知州王继明贿赂吕夷简，王曾因此请求罢免吕夷简，仁宗以此问讯吕夷简，王曾与吕夷简在仁宗面前辩论不休。
English: At this time, there were rumors from the outside that Wang Jiming of Qinzhou Chizhou had bribed Lü Yizhen. Wang had therefore requested the dismissal of Lü Yizhen, and Nanzong used this to interrogate Lü Yizhen. Wang had argued with Lü Yizhen in front of Nanzong.

古文：曾言亦有过者，遂与夷简俱罢，以左仆射、资政殿大学士判郓州。
现代文：王曾说自己也有过错，于是与吕夷简一起被罢官，以左仆射、资政殿大学士判郓州。
English: Wang once said that he was also at fault, so he was dismissed together with Lü Yizhen, and sentenced to Zhangzhou as a left-handed shot and a member of the Senate.

古文：宝元元年冬，大星晨坠其寝，左右惊告。
现代文：宝元元年冬天，大星坠落在王曾的寝处，左右惊恐地告诉他。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Hōgen era, a large star fell on Wang Zeng's bed, and he was terrified.

古文：曾曰： 后一月当知之。 如期而薨，年六十一。赠侍中，谥文正。
现代文：王曾说 ：一个月后就可以知道后果了。 一月后王曾死，终年六十一岁，被追赠侍中，谥号 文正 。
English: Wang Zeng said, "In a month's time, we'll know the consequences." Wang Zeng died a month later, at the age of sixty-one, and was posthumously awarded the title of "Wen Zheng" (文正).

古文：曾资质端厚，眉目如画。
现代文：王曾五官端正厚重，眉目像画的一样浓黑。
English: Wang Zeng's facial features were straight and thick, and his eyebrows were as dark as a painting.

古文：在朝廷，进止皆有常处，平居寡言笑，人莫敢干以私。
现代文：在朝廷进退举止都有常规，不苟言笑，人们不敢私自请托。
English: In the imperial court, there is a routine for entering and leaving, and people do not dare to ask for help without permission.

古文：少与杨亿同在侍从，亿喜谈谑，凡僚友无不狎侮。
现代文：年轻时与杨亿同在侍从，杨亿喜欢谈论言语诙谑，凡是幕僚没有不被他轻侮的。
English: When he was young, he was a waiter with Yang Yili, Yang Yili liked to talk about words, and he did not despise any staff members.

古文：至与曾言，则曰： 余不敢以戏也。 平生自奉甚俭，有故人子孙京来告别，曾留之具馔，食后，合中送数轴简纸，启视之，皆它人书简后裁取者也。
现代文：到与王曾谈论，则说： 我不敢与他开玩笑。 一生中对自己的生活都十分节俭，王曾一位朋友的儿子孙京来到京师与他告别，王曾将他留下吃饭，总共送给他许多卷简纸，打开一看，都是其他人所来书信后将它们裁取下来的。
English: When talking to Wang Zeng, he said, "I don't dare to joke with him." Throughout his life, he was very frugal with his life. Wang Zeng, the son of a friend, Sun Jing, came to Beijing to say goodbye to him. Wang Zeng left him for dinner and gave him a total of many rolls of paper. When he opened them, they were all letters from other people and cut them out.

古文：皇祐中，仁宗为篆其碑曰 旌贤之碑 ，后又改其乡曰旌贤乡。
现代文：皇年间，仁宗替王曾以篆书写了墓碑叫作《旌贤之碑》，后来又将其所葬之乡改名旌贤乡。
English: During the reign of the emperor, Emperor Nizong wrote a tombstone for the king with ink and call it "The Monument of Nian Xian," and later renamed the township where he was buried as Nian Xian Township.

古文：大臣赐碑篆自曾始。
现代文：大臣被皇帝赐予墓碑是从王曾开始的。
English: The tombstone given to the minister by the emperor began with Wang Zeng.

古文：仁宗既祔庙，诏择将相配享，以曾为第一。
现代文：仁宗在宗庙祭祀先祖，诏令选择将相进行配祭，将王曾列为第一。
English: The Rinzong worshipped their ancestors in the ancestral temple, and the imperial edict selected the Guo Xiang to carry out the sacrificial offering, and listed Wang Zeng as the first.

古文：曾无子，养子曰縡。
现代文：王曾没有儿子，养子叫王纟宰。
English: The king had no son, but he had an adopted son called Wang Xizai.

古文：又以弟子融之子绎为后，尚书兵部郎中、秘阁校理致仕，卒。
现代文：又将其弟王子融之子王绎过继为后，以尚书兵部郎中、秘阁校理致仕，死。
English: In addition, his younger brother, Prince Rong's son, Wang Yanyu, succeeded him, and he died with the title of Shang Shuheibun's junior, and Hikkaku Shoryu's junior.

古文：子融字熙仲。
现代文：张知白字用晦，沧州清池人。
English: Zhang Zhibai is a native of Cangzhou, Qingchi.

古文：初以曾奏，为将作监主簿。
现代文：幼年酷爱学习，考中进士，经多次升迁河阳节度判官。
English: He loved to study at a young age, passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was promoted many times to be the judge of the Kheyang Festival.

古文：祥符进士及第，累迁太常丞、同知礼院。献所为文，召试，直集贤院。
现代文：咸平年间上疏奏对，言说当今最要紧的事情，真宗感到十分奇异，奉召应试舍人院，代理右正言。敬献《凤箴》，出知剑州。
English: During the Han and Ping Dynasties, Shingon Buddhism felt very strange about the fact that so many people were playing the piano and talking about the most important things of the day. He was called to take an exam and was sent to an orphanage to act as the representative of the Right Upright Speech. He dedicated "Phoenix Prophecy" to Shichijiazhuang.

古文：尝论次国朝以来典礼因革，为《礼阁新编》上之。
现代文：过了一年，奉召考试中书，兼任直史馆，真宗亲自给他赐予五品官服，判三司开拆司。
English: A year later, he was summoned to write in the examination, and also served as a direct history museum. Shinshu personally gave him five official uniforms and sentenced him to open and demolish three divisions.

古文：以其书藏太常。
现代文：江南发生干旱，张知白与李防分路安抚。
English: A drought occurred in the south of the Yangtze River, and Zhang Zhibai and Li Fang separated to appease the drought.

古文：权三司度支、盐铁判官。
现代文：回到京师后，暂时主管京东转运使事。
English: After returning to the Beijing Division, he was temporarily in charge of the Beijing East Transportation Envoy.

古文：任布请铸大钱，行之京城。
现代文：天上星象不断出现，司天将它作为祥瑞上奏，大臣们跪伏在官署表示庆贺。
English: The stars in the sky kept appearing, and Siten played it as Xiangrui. The ministers knelt down at the government office to express their congratulations.

古文：江南旱，与李防分路安抚。及还，权管勾京东转运使事。周伯星见，司天以瑞奏，群臣伏阁称贺。知白以为人君当修德应天，而星之见伏无所系，因陈治道之要。帝谓宰臣曰： 知白可谓乃心朝廷矣。 东封，进右司谏。又言： 咸平中，河湟未平，臣尝请罢郡国所上祥瑞。
现代文：张知白认为人君应当实行德政来符合上天的旨意，而星象出现群臣跪伏庆贺没有任何根据，因而张知白陈述治理国家事务的关键。真宗对执政大臣们说 ：张知白可说是忠于朝廷啊。 真宗东封泰山，张知白任右司谏。张知白又进言说 ：咸平年间，河湟还没有平定，臣下曾请求罢除郡国所敬献的祥瑞。
English: Zhang Zhibai believed that people should practice virtue politics to conform to the will of heaven, and there was no basis for the appearance of the stars to celebrate the kneeling of the ministers, so Zhang Zhibai stated the key to governing the affairs of the state. Zhenzong said to the ruling ministers: Zhang Zhibai can be said to be loyal to the imperial court. Zhenzong Dongfeng Taishan, Zhang Zhibai served as the right secretary. Zhang Zhibai also said: During the Heian and Qing dynasties, the rivers had not been pacified, and the vassals had requested the removal of Xiang Rui, who was revered by the county and

古文：今天下无事，灵贶并至，望以《泰山诸瑞图》寘玉清昭应宫，其副藏秘阁。 
现代文：如今天下平安，神灵的赏赐不断显现，望将《泰山诸瑞图》放置在玉清昭应宫，将副本收藏在秘阁。 
English: If today is a peaceful day, and the rewards of the gods continue to appear, it is hoped that the "Taishan Zhuritu" will be placed in the Jade Qing Zhaoying Palace, and the copy will be stored in the secret cabinet.

古文：陕西饥，命按巡之。
现代文：陕西发生饥荒，朝廷命令张知白进行巡视。
English: When famine occurred in Shaanxi, the imperial court ordered Zhang Zhibai to make an inspection tour.

古文：寻知邓州。
现代文：不久任邓州知州。
English: Soon to be Dangzhou, Chizhou.

古文：会关右流佣至境，知白既发仓廪，又募民出粟以济。
现代文：正好关右流民到达邓州，张知白既发给流民粮食，又招募流民供给粮食来救济饥民。
English: Just as Guan Yu's exiles arrived in Dengzhou, Zhang Zhibai not only distributed grain to the exiles, but also recruited exiles to supply grain to relieve the famine.

古文：擢龙图阁待制、知审官院，再迁尚书工部郎中，使契丹。
现代文：提升为龙图阁待制、知审官院，再升任尚书工部郎中，出使契丹。
English: He was promoted to the Longtu Pavilion, the Academy of Intellectual Property, and then he was promoted to the vice-minister of the Department of Calligraphy, and sent to Khitan.

古文：知白以朝廷制官，重内轻外，为引唐李峤议迁台阁典藩郡，乃自请补外，不许，遂命纠察在京刑狱，固请，知青州。
现代文：张知白认为朝廷的官制，重视京官而轻视外官，给朝廷引用唐李峤建议让台阁主管属国郡县，于是自己上疏请求出京补官，未获批准，于是被朝廷命令督察在京的刑事案件，坚决请求离开京师外补，任青州知州。
English: Zhang Zhibai believed that the official system of the imperial court valued the Beijing officials and despised the foreign officials. He quoted Tang Lixuan's suggestion to the imperial court that the cabinet chiefs should be subordinate to the counties and counties of the country. Therefore, Zhang Zhibai's request to go to Beijing to supplement the officials was not approved. Therefore, he was ordered by the imperial court to inspect the criminal cases in Beijing. He firmly requested to leave the Beijing division to supplement the officials and be appointed to Qingzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：还京师，求领国子监。
现代文：回到京师，请求主管国子监。
English: He went back to the Beijing Division and asked the competent State Children's Supervisor to come.

古文：帝曰： 知白岂倦于处剧邪？ 宰臣言： 知白更践中外，未尝为身谋。 乃迁右谏议大夫、权御史中丞、拜给事中、参知政事。
现代文：真宗说： 张知白难道对复杂繁难的事务感到厌倦吗？ 执政大臣说： 张知白在朝内外任职，没有为自己作过任何谋划。 于是张知白被升任为右谏议大夫、权御史中丞，授予给事中、参知政事。
English: Zhenzong said: Is Zhang Chibai tired of complex and difficult affairs? The ruling minister said: Zhang Chibai has served in and out of the court, and has not made any plans for himself. Therefore, Zhang Chibai was promoted to the position of the right-hand senate doctor, the position of the right-hand governor, and the position of the right-hand governor.

古文：郊礼成，迁尚书工部侍郎。
现代文：郊祀礼仪完成后，张知白升任尚书工部侍郎。
English: After the completion of the suburb worship ceremony, Zhang Zhibai was promoted to the chamberlain of the Shang calligraphy department.

古文：时同列王曾迁给事中，犹班知白上，知白心不能平，累表辞之。
现代文：这时同僚王曾升任为给事中，官级仍在张知白之上，张知白心里不能平衡，多次上表请求辞职。
English: At this time, his colleague Wang Zeng was promoted to the middle of the matter, and the official rank was still above Zhang Zhibai. Zhang Zhibai could not balance in his heart, and repeatedly requested to resign.

古文：曾亦固请列知白下，乃加知白金紫光禄大夫，复为给事中、判礼仪院。
现代文：王曾也请求位居张知白之下，朝廷于是给张知白授予金紫光禄大夫，又任为给事中、判礼仪院。
English: Wang Zeng also requested to be placed under Zhang Zhibai, and the imperial court then awarded Zhang Zhibai with the title of Golden and Purple Light Doctor, and he was also appointed to the Court of Justice and the Court of Ceremonies.

古文：曾罢，还所辞官。
现代文：王曾罢官，将王曾所任之职授予张知白。
English: Wang Zeng stepped down from his post and gave the position to Zhang Zhibai.

古文：时王钦若为相，知白论议多相失，因称疾辞位，罢为刑部侍郎、翰林侍读学士、知大名府。
现代文：这时王钦若任宰相，张知白与王钦若的意见经常不一致，于是张知白声称有病而辞去官位，被免为刑部侍郎、翰林侍读学士、知大名府。
English: At this time, if Wang Qin was the prime minister, Zhang Zhibai and Wang Qin's opinions would often be at odds. Therefore, Zhang Zhibai claimed to be ill and resigned his official position. He was dismissed from his positions as the attendant of the criminal investigation department, the attendant of Hanlin's bachelor's degree, and the famous palace of Zhidao University.

古文：及钦若分司南京，宰相丁谓素恶钦若，徙知白南京留守，意其报怨。
现代文：到王钦若分管南京，宰相丁谓一直讨厌王钦若，就将张知白调任南京留守，意在报复王钦若。
English: When Wang Qinru was put in charge of Nanjing, Prime Minister Ding Shou said that he had always hated Wang Qinru, so he transferred Zhang Zhibai to stay in Nanjing, intending to take revenge on Wang Qinru.

古文：既至，待钦若加厚。
现代文：张知白到任后，对王钦若十分友好。
English: After Zhang Zhibai took office, he was very friendly to Wang Qinluo.

古文：谓怒，复徙知白亳州，迁兵部。
现代文：丁谓十分气愤，又将张知白调任亳州，升为兵部。
English: Ding was so angry that he transferred Zhang Zhibai to Zhangzhou and promoted him to the military department.

古文：仁宗即位，进尚书右丞，为枢密副使，以工部尚书同中书门下平章事、会灵观使、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：仁宗即位后，张知白进升尚书右丞，为枢密副使，以工部尚书同中书门下平章事、会灵观使、集贤殿大学士。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, Zhang Zhibai was promoted to Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Education, Vice-Minister of the Privy Council, Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education, Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：时进士唱第，赐《中庸篇》，中书上其本，乃命知白进读，至修身治家之道，必反复陈之。
现代文：这时公布进士的等级，张知白被赐予《中庸篇》，中书敬献此篇，朝廷于是命张知白进行注解，关于修身治家的道理，一定反复陈述。
English: At this time, the ranks of the scholars were announced, and Zhang Zhibai was given the "Middle Way" as a gift. The imperial court then ordered Zhang Zhibai to make annotations, and he repeatedly stated the principle of self-cultivation and family management.

古文：知白在相位，慎名器，无毫发私。
现代文：张知白任宰相，慎用名器，没有一丝一毫的私心。
English: Zhang Zhibai was appointed as the prime minister. He used the famous utensils carefully and had no selfishness at all.

古文：常以盛满为戒，虽显贵，其清约如寒士。
现代文：经常以太满作为警戒，虽然身为显贵，但仍像一般士大夫一样清贫节俭。
English: Although he was a prominent person, he was still as poor and frugal as an ordinary scholar and doctor.

古文：然体素羸，忧畏日侵，在中书忽感风眩，舆归第。帝亲问疾，不能语，薨。
现代文：张知白身体一直瘦弱，每天忧虑担心外族入侵，任中书时突然感染风寒致使眼睛发花，看不清东西，坐车回到官邸。仁宗亲自询问他的病情，张知白不能说话，去世。
English: Zhang Zhibai's body had always been thin and weak, and every day he worried about the invasion of foreigners. When he was in charge of the book, he suddenly contracted cold and wind, which caused his eyes to bleed and he could not see clearly. He took a car and returned to the official residence. Rinzong personally inquired about his condition. Zhang Zhibai could not speak and passed away.

古文：为罢上巳宴，赠太傅、中书令。
现代文：仁宗因此撤除了上巳宴，给他追赠太傅、中书令。
English: As a result, Ninsong cancelled the banquet and gave him the posthumous gifts of Taifu and Chushirei.

古文：礼官谢绛议谥文节，御史王嘉言言： 知白守道徇公，当官不挠，可谓正矣，谥文正。 王曾曰： 文节，美谥矣。 遂不改。
现代文：礼官谢绛建议授予张知白谥号 文节 ，御史王嘉言说 ：张知白坚持真理为公殉职，为官正直，可说公正无私了，应赠谥号 文正 。 王曾说 ： 文节 是一个美好的谥号。 于是不改变。
English: The etiquette officer Xie Yao suggested that Zhang Zhibai be awarded the honorary title of Wen Jie, and Wang Jiayin said: Zhang Zhibai adhered to the truth, died in the line of duty, was an honest official, can be said to be fair and selfless, and should be awarded the honorary title of Wen Zheng. Wang Zeng said: Wen Jie is a beautiful honorary title. So it will not change.

古文：知白九岁，其父终邢州，殡于佛寺。
现代文：张知白九岁时，父亲在邢州过世，灵柩停放在佛寺中。
English: When Zhang Zhibai was nine years old, his father died in Zhangzhou, and his coffin was placed in a Buddhist temple.

古文：及契丹寇河北，寺宇多颓废，殡不可辨。
现代文：契丹侵犯河北时，寺宇大多颓败废旧，灵柩不能辨认。
English: When Khitan invaded Hebei, most of the temples were dilapidated and the caskets were unrecognizable.

古文：知白既登第，徒行访之，得佛寺殿基，恍然识其处。
现代文：张知白考中进士后，步行寻访，寻得佛寺的大殿基石，猛然明白认出了他父亲灵柩的停放处。
English: After Zhang Zhibai passed the junior high school entrance examination, he searched on foot, found the foundation stone of the main hall of the Buddhist temple, and suddenly clearly recognized the parking place of his father's coffin.

古文：既发，其衣衾皆可验，众叹其诚孝。
现代文：打开一看，其父所穿葬服都一一得到了验证，众人都感叹他确实孝顺。
English: At first glance, the funeral clothes worn by his father have all been verified one by one, and everyone laments that he is indeed filial.

古文：尝过陕州，与通判孙何遇，读道旁古碑凡数千言，及还，知白略无所遗。
现代文：曾经路过陕州，与通判孙何相遇，阅读道旁古碑共数千字，回来后，张知白能全部背诵出来，没有任何遗落。
English: He once passed through Shaanxi, met with Tongzhan Sun He, and read thousands of words from the ancient monument next to the road. After returning, Zhang Zhibai could recite all of them, leaving nothing behind.

古文：天圣中，契丹大阅，声言猎幽州，朝廷患之。
现代文：天圣年间，契丹大规模检阅军队，扬言要攻取幽州，朝廷为此十分忧虑。
English: During the Sacred Year of Heaven, Khitan made a large-scale inspection of the army and threatened to capture Yuzhou. The imperial court was very worried about this.

古文：帝以问二府，众曰： 备粟练师，以备不虞。 知白曰： 不然，契丹修好未远，今其举者，以上初政，试观朝廷耳，岂可自生衅邪！
现代文：仁宗以此询问二府，大臣们都说： 准备粮食训练军队，以防备不测。 张知白说： 不能这样，契丹与我们刚建交不久，如今大举发兵，是因为仁宗刚即位，来以此观察朝廷的举动罢了，我们怎能自造祸乱呢！
English: The ministers all said, "Let's prepare grain and train the army to be prepared for any eventuality." Zhang Zhibai said, "This can't be right. The Khitan Empire has just established diplomatic relations with us, and now they are sending troops en masse. This is because Emperor Nizong has just ascended to the throne, and they are just observing the actions of the imperial court. How can we create our own disaster?"

古文：若终以为疑，莫如因今河决，发兵以防河为名，彼亦不虞也。 未几，契丹果罢去。
现代文：如果对他们有怀疑，还不如利用黄河决口，派兵以防止黄河决口为由，契丹也不会担心。 不久，契丹果然撤兵离去。
English: If there is any doubt about them, it is better to use the Yellow River mouth and send troops to prevent the mouth of the Yellow River, and the Khitan will not worry.Soon, the Khitan withdrew.

古文：无子，以兄子子思为后，仕至尚书工部侍郎致仕。
现代文：张知白无子，以其兄之子张子思为后，官至尚书工部侍郎后退休。
English: Zhang Zhibai had no children, and was succeeded by his brother's son, Zhang Zisi. He retired after serving as an official in the Ministry of Calligraphy.

古文：杜衍，字世昌，越州山阴人。
现代文：杜衍字世昌，越州山阴人。
English: Du Yan, also known as Shichang, was born in Shanyin, Yuezhou.

古文：父遂良，仕至尚书度支员外郎。
现代文：父亲杜遂良，官至尚书度支员外郎。
English: His father, Du Suiliang, was a government official and the younger brother of a member of the Shudu branch.

古文：衍总发苦志厉操，尤笃于学。
现代文：杜衍束发苦志厉操，尤其酷爱读书。
English: Du Yanquan works hard, and especially loves to read.

古文：擢进士甲科，补扬州观察推官，改秘书省著作佐郎、知平遥县。
现代文：考中进士甲科，补扬州观察推官，改任秘书省著作佐郎、知平遥县。
English: He was promoted to Division A in the junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as the Yangzhou observation officer. He was also appointed as the secretary of the provincial works of Saro and Jipingyao counties.

古文：使者荐之，通判晋州。
现代文：朝廷使者推荐他，任晋州通判。
English: An emissary of the imperial court recommended him, and he was appointed as the chief judge of Jinzhou.

古文：诏举良吏，擢知乾州。
现代文：诏令推举品质优良的官吏，杜衍被提升为乾州知州。
English: Duyan was promoted to be the highest-ranking official in Qianzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：陈尧咨安抚陕西，有诏藩府乃赐宴，尧咨至乾州，以衍贤，特赐宴，仍徙衍权知凤翔府。
现代文：陈尧咨安抚陕西，朝廷诏令藩府赐宴，陈尧咨到乾州，由于杜衍有才能，特地赐宴，于是将杜衍调任凤翔府知府。
English: Chen Peizhe pacified Shaanxi, and the imperial court issued a decree to give a banquet to the government of the domain. Chen Peizhe went to Qianzhou, and because Duyan was talented, he gave a special banquet, so Duyan was transferred to the government of Fengxiang.

古文：及罢归，二州民邀留境上，曰： 何夺我贤太守也？ 以太常博士提点河东路刑狱，迁尚书祠部员外郎。
现代文：到罢官回乡，二州的老百姓将杜衍阻拦在州境上，说： 为什么要调走我们贤明的太守呢？ 以太常博士提点河东路刑狱，升任尚书祠部员外郎。
English: When the dismissed officials returned to their hometowns, the people of the two states stopped Du Yan on the state border and said: Why should we transfer our wise governor? Dr. Du Yan was often sent to the Hedong Road Penal Prison and was promoted to the member of the Shangshu Shrine.

古文：按行潞州，折冤狱，知州王曙为作《辨狱记》。
现代文：巡视潞州，澄清冤案，知州王曙因此写了《辨狱记》。
English: After inspecting Zhangzhou and clarifying the unjust case, Wang Shuguang of Zhizhou wrote "An Analysis of Prison Records."

古文：高继升知石州，人告继升连蕃族谋变，逮捕系治，久不决，衍辩其诬，抵告者罪。
现代文：高继升任石州知州，有人报告说高继升勾结外族策划变乱，将其逮捕捉拿，久不判决，杜衍辨明这是一起冤案，于是将诬告者治罪。
English: Gao Jisheng was promoted to the post of Shishu Zhizhou. It was reported that Gao Jisheng had colluded with foreigners to plan a riot. He was arrested and detained, but no judgment was made for a long time. Du Yan identified that this was a wrongful case, so he punished the false accuser.

古文：宁化军守将鞫人死罪，不以实，衍覆正之。
现代文：宁化军守将将人审讯定为死罪，案情不实，杜衍反复核实加以改正。
English: Ninghua military garrison will be the trial of a person as a capital crime, the case is not true, Du Yan repeatedly verified and corrected.

古文：守将不伏，诉之，诏为置狱，果不当死。
现代文：守将不伏罪，上诉朝廷，诏令刑狱复审，果然罪不当死。
English: The guard would not give in to the crime, appealed to the imperial court, and the imperial edict ordered a review of the prison sentence. The crime was indeed wrongful death.

古文：徒京西路，又徙知扬州。
现代文：移任京西路，又调任扬州知州。
English: He was transferred to West Beijing Road, and then to Yangzhou-Chizhou.

古文：有司奏衍辨狱法当赏，迁刑部。
现代文：有司上奏杜衍辨别冤狱依法当受赏赐，升职刑部。
English: Senior Superintendent Du Yan was awarded a promotion to the Criminal Division for distinguishing unjust imprisonment according to law.

古文：章献太后遣使安抚淮南，使还，未及他语，问杜衍安否，使者以治状对。
现代文：章献太后派遣使者安抚淮南，使者回京，还没有说其他话，就问杜衍是否安康，使者将杜衍的治理情况向太后做了汇报。
English: Empress Dowager Zhang Jian sent an envoy to pacify Huainan, and the envoy returned to Beijing. Before saying anything else, she asked Duyan if he was well. The envoy reported the situation of Duyan's governance to the empress dowager.

古文：太后叹曰： 吾知之久矣。 
现代文：太后感叹说 ：我知道很久了。 
English: The Empress Dowager sighed and said, "I've known for a long time.

古文：徙河东转运副使、陕西转运使。
现代文：调任河东转运副使、陕西转运使。
English: He was transferred to the post of deputy envoy for transit in Hedong and envoy for transit in Shaanxi.

古文：召为三司户部副使，擢天章阁待制、知江陵府。
现代文：奉召任三司户部副使，提升为天章阁待制、知江陵府。
English: He was appointed as the deputy envoy of the Third Division of the Household Department, and was promoted to Tianzhangge, and then to Zhijianglingfu.

古文：未行，会河北乏军费，选为都转运使，迁工部郎中，不增赋于民而用足。
现代文：未到任，恰遇河北军费缺乏，转为都转运使，升为工部侍郎，不向老百姓征收赋税而军费充足。
English: Before taking office, just as Hebei was facing a shortage of military spending, he was transferred to the capital transfer envoy, promoted to the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and did not collect taxes from the common people, but the military expenditure was sufficient.

古文：还为枢密直学士。求补外，以右谏议大夫知天雄军。
现代文：回京，任枢密直学士，求出京补外，以右谏议大夫知天雄军。
English: He returned to Beijing and was appointed as a privy direct bachelor, and sought out Beijing to supplement the army.

古文：始，衍为治谨密，不以威刑督吏，然吏民亦惮其清整。
现代文：开初，杜衍为政严谨细密，不用严刑来督责官吏，但官吏和百姓也畏惧他的清廉严整。
English: At the beginning, Du Yan was a strict and meticulous politician. He did not use severe punishment to supervise officials, but officials and people were also afraid of his integrity.

古文：仁宗特召为御史中丞。
现代文：仁宗特地召他为御史中丞。
English: Ninsong specially summoned him to be a goshi chujo.

古文：奏言： 中书、枢密，古之三事大臣，所谓坐而论道者也。
现代文：杜衍上奏说 ：中书、枢密，是古代所说的三事大臣，也就是所谓坐而论道之人。
English: Du Yan said in his report: Zhongshu, privy, is what the ancients called the minister of three things, that is, the so-called person who sits and talks about the Tao.

古文：止只日对前殿，何以尽天下之事？
现代文：如果只逢双日进对前殿，又凭什么来全知天下之事呢？
English: If you only go to the front hall every other day, how can you know everything about the world?

古文：宜迭召见，赐坐便殿，以极献替可否，其他，不必亲烦陛下也。 又议常平法曰： 岁有丰凶，谷有贵贱，官以法平之，则农有余利矣。
现代文：应不断地召见他们，赐坐便殿，来敬献可否之议，其他，就不必亲自烦劳陛下了。 又议论常平法说 ：年成有好有坏，因而谷价有高有低，官府用法律来平抑价格，那么老百姓能获利。
English: They should be constantly summoned, given a toilet, to discuss whether or not to make a donation, and the others should not have to personally bother His Majesty.They also discussed the common law, saying: the year is good and bad, so the grain price is high and low, and the government uses the law to control the price, so that the people can make a profit.

古文：今豪商大贾，乘时贱收，水旱，则稽伏而不出，冀其翔踊，以图厚利，而困吾民也。
现代文：如今富商大贾，乘粮价低时收取，发生旱涝灾荒时，则进行囤积而不发放，希望价格不断上涨，来获取丰厚之利，这样老百姓就会感到生活困难。
English: Nowadays, rich businessmen take advantage of low grain prices to collect, and in the event of droughts and floods, they hoard and do not distribute, hoping that prices will continue to rise to obtain rich profits, so that ordinary people will feel difficulties in life.

古文：请量州郡远近，户口众寡，严赏罚，课责官吏，出纳无壅，增损有宜。
现代文：请求根据州郡的远近，户口的多少，严格赏罚，督促官吏，按时收放不要误时，价格要适宜。
English: Request according to the state and county's proximity, the number of household registration, strict reward and punishment, supervise officials, collect and release on time, do not be late, the price should be appropriate.

古文：公籴未充，则禁争籴以规利者；籴毕而储之，则察其以供军为名而假借者。
现代文：官府买进的粮食不充足，则禁止争相买粮来谋求暴利；买完粮食将它们进行储藏，则要考察有的以供应军队为名谋取暴利。
English: If the grain purchased by the government is insufficient, it is forbidden to compete in buying grain to seek windfall profits; if the grain is purchased and stored, it is necessary to investigate whether some are seeking windfall profits in the name of supplying the army.

古文：州郡阙母钱，愿出官帑助之。
现代文：州郡缺少母钱，希望拿出官府的钱物救济它们。
English: The state and county are short of money and hope to get some government money to help them out.

古文：否则劝课之官，家至日见，亦奚益于事哉。 
现代文：否则劝课之官，即使到其家每天觐见，对事情又有什么益处呢。 
English: Otherwise, what good would it do for the school counsellor to visit his home every day?

古文：兼判吏部流内铨。
现代文：兼任吏部流内铨主管。
English: He also served as the head of the Internal Affairs Division of the Internal Affairs Division.

古文：选补科格繁长，主判不能悉阅，吏多受赇，出缩为奸。
现代文：选补条律繁多冗长，主判官不能全部阅览，官吏多接受贿赂，在支出和征收上钻法律的空子。
English: The supplementary regulations are numerous and lengthy, the chief judge cannot read them all, officials mostly accept bribes, and legal loopholes are exploited in expenditure and collection.

古文：衍既视事，即敕吏函铨法，问曰： 尽乎？ 曰： 尽矣。 力阅视，具得本末曲折。
现代文：杜衍接任后，立即颁发给属史们函铨法，并问说 ：全部都知道了吗？ 回答说 ：都知道。 
English: After Du Yan took over, he immediately issued a letter to the historians, and asked: Do you know everything? He replied: We all know.

古文：明日，令诸吏无得升堂，各坐曹听行文书，铨事悉自予夺，由是吏不能为奸利。
现代文：杜衍尽力阅览，将本末典折全部了解清楚了。第二天，命令其他官吏不要升堂，各自在本署听取行文书，选举之事全部由自己决定，这样官吏就不能谋取奸利。
English: The next day, Du Yan ordered other officials not to go to the hall, each of them to listen to the documents at this office, and to decide all the election matters by themselves, so that officials could not seek illegal gains.

古文：数月，声动京师。
现代文：过了数日，声闻惊动京师。
English: A few days later, rumours alerted the capital's architects.

古文：改知审官院，其裁制如判铨时。
现代文：改任知审官院，裁决取断就像主管官吏选举时一样。
English: He was transferred to the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and the decision-making process was interrupted, just as it would be in the case of the election of a competent official.

古文：迁尚书工部侍郎、知永兴军。
现代文：升任尚书工部侍郎、知永兴军。
English: Tomonaga Shingun was promoted to the position of chamberlain of the calligraphy department.

古文：民有昼亡其妇者，为设方略捕，立得杀人贼，发所瘗尸，并得贼杀他妇人尸二，秦人大惊。
现代文：当地有位百姓白天失去了他的妻子，杜衍为了捕捉杀人贼采用了一定的谋略，立即捕捉了杀人贼，将埋葬的尸体发掘出来，还获得了贼杀死其他妇人的两具尸体，秦人大为震惊。
English: A local citizen lost his wife during the day. Duyan adopted a certain strategy in order to catch the murderer. He immediately caught the murderer, excavated the buried body, and also obtained two bodies of other women killed by the thief. Qin Rongda was shocked.

古文：徙并州。
现代文：调任并州。
English: Transferred and merged into the state.

古文：元昊反，以太原要冲，加龙图阁学士。
现代文：赵元昊叛乱，因为太原为战略要地，加封龙图阁学士。
English: Zhao Yuanhao rebelled, because Taiyuan is a strategic location, and the Dragon Pavilion was added.

古文：宝元二年，迁刑部侍郎、复知永兴军。
现代文：宝元二年，升任刑部侍郎，复知永兴军。
English: In the second year of the Hogen period, he was promoted to the position of a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department, and returned to the Yongxing Army.

古文：时方用兵，民苦调发，吏因缘为奸。
现代文：这时朝廷正大举用兵，老百姓对征发兵役感到痛苦，官吏因此为奸。
English: At this time, the imperial court was using soldiers on a large scale, and the common people were distressed by the conscription of military service, so the officials were traitors.

古文：衍区处计画，量道里远近，宽其期会，使民得次第输官，比他州费，省钱过半。
现代文：杜衍分别处置进行策划，根据道路的远近，给予充裕的集合时间，让老百姓依次服役，与其他各州的费用相比，要节省一半的费用。
English: Duyan separately disposed to plan, according to the distance of the road, give sufficient assembly time, let the people serve in turn, compared with the cost of other states, to save half the cost.

古文：召还，权知开封府，权近闻衍名，莫敢干以私。
现代文：回到京师，暂代开封府知府，在其任职附近的人久闻了杜衍的名声，都不敢私自请托。
English: When he returned to Beijing, he temporarily became the governor of Kaifeng Prefecture. People around him had heard of Duyan's reputation for a long time, and they did not dare to ask him for help.

古文：拜同知枢密院事，改枢密副使。
现代文：授职同知枢密院事，改任枢密副使。
English: He was promoted to Privy Counsellor, and later to Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：夏竦上攻守策，宰相欲用出师。
现代文：夏竦上奏攻守策，宰相打算采用出兵。
English: The prime minister plans to send in troops.

古文：衍曰： 侥幸成功，非万全计。 争议久之，求罢不许，赐手诏敦勉。
现代文：杜衍说： 偶然成功，不是万全之计。 争议了很长时间，请求罢免未获允许，被仁宗亲自赐予诏书以资劝勉鼓励。
English: Du Yan said: Accidental success is not a panacea. The dispute lasted for a long time, the request for recall was not allowed, and was personally given by Rinzong an edict to encourage and encourage.

古文：为河东宣抚使，拜吏部侍郎、枢密使。
现代文：任河东宣抚使，授职吏部侍郎、枢密使。
English: He was appointed as an envoy of the Henan-Tibetan diplomatic mission, an attendant of the office-conferring department, and a confidential envoy.

古文：每内降恩，率寝格不行，积诏旨至十数，辄纳帝前。
现代文：每次逢到朝内降恩，杜衍都放置起来不执行，共积累诏旨至十封，便献纳在仁宗面前。
English: Every time Du Yan received a favor from the emperor, he did not carry it out. He accumulated a total of ten imperial edicts and presented them to Rinzong.

古文：谏官欧阳修入对，帝曰： 外人知杜衍封还内降邪？
现代文：谏官欧阳修入朝进对，仁宗说： 外人都知道杜衍将朝内降恩旨退还吗？
English: To the eunuch Ouyang Shujin in the morning, Rinzong said: Do outsiders know that Duyan will return the imperial favor?

古文：凡有求于朕，每以衍不可告之而止者，多于所封还也。 
现代文：凡是有求于朕的人，每次都以杜衍不同意而告知于求者从而停止的，比杜衍所封还的降恩诏书要多得多。 
English: All those who have petitioned me, each time Du Yan disagreed and told the petitioner to stop, which is much more than the imperial edict of abdication issued by Du Yan.

古文：契丹与元昊战黄河外，参知政事范仲淹宣抚河东，欲以兵自从。
现代文：契丹与赵元昊在黄河外交战，参知政事范仲淹宣抚河东，想自己率兵出战。
English: Qidan and Zhao Yuanhao were engaged in a diplomatic war in the Yellow River, and he wanted to lead his troops into battle.

古文：衍曰： 二国方交斗，势必不来，我兵不可妄出。 仲淹争议帝前，诋衍，语甚切。
现代文：杜衍说 ：二国正在交战，势力正盛，我们不可轻易出兵。 范仲淹在仁宗面前与杜衍争议，并诋毁杜衍，言辞十分尖刻急迫。
English: Duyan said: "The two countries are at war, the forces are at their peak, we cannot easily send troops." Fan Zhong drowned in front of Rinzong in a dispute with Duyan, and slandered Duyan, the rhetoric was very sharp and urgent.

古文：仲淹尝父行事衍，衍不以为恨。
现代文：范仲淹曾经以父行服侍杜衍，杜衍不因此而忌恨他。
English: Fan Zhongyun once served Duyan with his father's line, and Duyan hated him for it.

古文：契丹婿刘三嘏避罪来归，辅臣议厚馆之，以诘契丹阴事。
现代文：契丹女婿刘三嘏为逃避罪行前来归顺，辅臣们议论要丰厚地安置他，来追问契丹的秘密军事。
English: Qidan's son-in-law, Liu Sanjun, came to surrender in order to escape the crime, and the aides-de-camp discussed richly placing him to question Qidan's secret military.

古文：谏官欧阳修亦请留三嘏，帝以问衍。
现代文：谏官欧阳修也请求留住刘三嘏，仁宗以此来问杜衍。
English: Ouyang Xiu, a eunuch, also requested to keep Liu Sanqi, and Ren Zong asked Du Yan about this.

古文：衍曰： 中国主忠信，若自违誓约，纳叛亡，则不直在我。
现代文：杜衍说： 我国提倡忠信，如果自己违背誓约，接纳叛逃之人，那么我们就不理直气壮了。
English: Du Yan said, "Our country advocates loyalty. If we renege on our pledge and accept defectors, then we will be unjustifiably emboldened.

古文：且三嘏为契丹近亲，而逋逃来归，其谋身若此，尚足与谋国乎！
现代文：而且刘三嘏是契丹的近亲，而逃跑前来归顺，这样谋身，还能与他计谋国事吗？
English: Moreover, Liu Sanjie is a close relative of Khitan, and fled to surrender, thus seeking refuge, can he still conspire with him in state affairs?

古文：纳之何益，不如还之。 乃还三嘏。
现代文：接纳他有什么益处，还不如将他归还契丹。 
English: If there is no benefit in accepting him, it is better to return him to the Khitan.

古文：拜同平章事、集贤殿大学士兼枢密使。
现代文：于是将刘三嘏归还契丹。授职同平章事、集贤殿大学士兼枢密使。
English: Therefore, Liu Samye was returned to Khitan. He was given the same post as Ping Zhangji, and became a scholar of Jixian Palace and a privy councilor.

古文：衍好荐引贤士，而沮止侥幸，小人多不悦。
现代文：杜衍喜欢推荐贤士，阻止佞幸之徒，因此小人多不高兴。
English: Du Yan likes to recommend the wise men and prevent the lucky ones, so the villains are not happy.

古文：其婿苏舜钦，少年能文章，论议稍侵权贵，监进奏院，循前例，祠神以伎乐娱宾，集贤校理王益柔为衍所知，或言益柔尝戏作《傲歌》，御史皆劾奏之，欲因以危衍。
现代文：他的女婿苏舜钦，少年时就能写文章，论议有些冒犯权贵，监进奏院，按照以前的惯例，祭祠神庙时要使用伎乐来使宾客得到娱乐。集贤校理王益柔被杜衍推荐，有人说王益柔曾经戏作《傲歌》，御史将王益柔、杜衍一一上奏弹劾，想以此使杜衍感到危难。
English: His son-in-law, Su Binqin, was able to write articles when he was a boy, and his arguments were somewhat offensive to the powerful. He was sent to a music school, and according to the previous practice, trick music should be used to entertain guests at shrines and temples. Wang Yijiao, a scholar, was recommended by Du Yan. Some people said that Wang Yijiao had once made a play "Pride Song," and the historian impeached Wang Yijiao and Du Yan one by one, in order to make Du Yan feel in danger.

古文：谏官孙甫言： 丁度因对求大用，请属吏。 度知甫所奏误，力求置对。
现代文：谏官孙甫说： 丁度因上奏问对求以大用，请求以此任用官吏。 丁度知道孙甫上奏有误，极力请求置对。
English: Sun Fu, the eunuch, said, "I just used the question-and-answer session to ask for a promotion, and I asked to be appointed as an official. I just knew that Sun Fu's question-and-answer session was wrong, and I tried my best to set it right.

古文：衍以甫方奉使契丹，寝甫奏，度深衔之。
现代文：杜衍由于孙甫刚奉诏出使契丹，扣留了孙甫的上奏，丁度因此对杜衍十分怀恨。
English: Du Yan held a grudge against Sun Fu because Sun Fu had just sent an envoy to Khitan by imperial edict and detained Sun Fu's envoys.

古文：及衍罢，度草制指衍朋比。
现代文：到杜衍罢职，丁度起草诏书制令指责杜衍结纳朋党。
English: At the time of Duyan's resignation, he had just drafted an edict accusing Duyan of being a party member.

古文：时范仲淹、富弼欲更理天下事，与用事者不合，仲淹、弼既出宣抚，言者附会，益攻二人之短。
现代文：这时范仲淹、富弼想重新治理国事，与执政者不和，范仲淹、富弼已离京任宣抚使，上奏者附会执政者，更加攻击二人的过失。
English: At this time, Fan Zhongyun and Fuxi wanted to re-administer state affairs and started a feud with the rulers. Fan Zhongyun and Fuxi had left Beijing to serve as envoys, and the envoys attached themselves to the rulers, further attacking the faults of the two men.

古文：帝欲罢仲淹、弼政事，衍独左右之，然衍平日议论，实非朋比也。
现代文：仁宗打算罢免范仲淹、富弼，杜衍独自相助，但杜衍平日的议论，实际上并不是结纳朋党。
English: Rinzong intends to remove Fan Zhongyun and Fuxi, and Duyan will help him independently. However, Duyan's daily discussions are not actually about uniting the party.

古文：以尚书左丞出知兖州。
现代文：以尚书左丞离开京师任兖州知州。
English: He left Beijing to serve as a teacher in Bozhou and Chizhou.

古文：庆历七年，衍甫七十，上表请还印绶，乃以太子少师致仕。
现代文：庆历七年，杜衍刚刚七十岁，上奏请求归还官印，于是以太子少师致仕。
English: In the seventh year of Qing Lian, when Du Yan was just seventy years old, he requested the return of the official seal, so he sent the young prince to serve.

古文：衍为宰相，贾昌朝不喜，议者谓故相一上章得请，以三少致仕，皆非故事，盖昌朝抑之也。
现代文：杜衍任宰相，贾昌朝不高兴，有人说以前的宰相一旦上章，得以三少致仕，都不是过去的成例，这是由于贾昌朝压抑他。
English: Du Yan was appointed prime minister, and the Jia Chang Dynasty was not happy. Some people said that the previous prime minister, once he became emperor, was able to serve for less than three years, which was not the case in the past. This was because the Jia Chang Dynasty suppressed him.

古文：皇祐元年，特迁太子太保，召陪祀明堂，仍诏应天府敦遣就道，都亭驿设帐具几杖待之，称疾固辞。
现代文：皇元年，特地升任太子太保，奉召陪祀明堂，诏令应天府敦促派遣杜衍上道，都亭驿站设置帐具几仗等待他，杜衍声称有病极力辞谢。
English: In the first year of the reign of the emperor, he was specially promoted to the position of the prince's bodyguard, and was summoned to accompany the worship of the Ming Dynasty. At the urging of the heavenly government, the imperial edict sent Du Yan to the road. Du Yan set up several tents at the pavilion station to wait for him. Du Yan claimed to be ill and tried his best to apologize.

古文：进太子太傅，赐其子同进士出身，又进太子太师。
现代文：任太子太傅，赐予他的儿子同进士出身，又任太子太师。
English: He was given the title of Prince Daifu, and his son was given the title of Prince Daishi.

古文：知制诰王洙谒告归应天府，有诏抚问，封祁国公。
现代文：知制诰王洙拜谒告归应天府，朝廷下诏抚问，封为祁国公。
English: The king of Qin submitted a petition to the court of heaven, and the court granted the petition and made him the prince of Qin.

古文：衍清介不殖私产，既退，寓南都凡十年，第室卑陋，才数十楹，居之裕如也。
现代文：杜衍清廉正直不积聚私产，退职后，寄寓南都共十年，房屋简陋狭小，只有数十楹，居住好像宽余。
English: Du Yan, honest and incorruptible, did not accumulate private property. After retiring, he lived in Nandu for a total of ten years. The house was simple and narrow, with only a few dozen rooms, and it seemed to be too wide to live in.

古文：出入从者十许人，乌帽、皂履、绨袍、革带。
现代文：出入随从的人约十来人，戴乌帽、穿皂绨袍、系革带。
English: The entourage of about a dozen people, wearing a black hat, a sable robe, and a leather belt.

古文：或劝衍为居士服，衍曰： 老而谢事，尚可窃高士名邪！ 善为诗，正书、行、草皆有法、病革，帝遣中使赐药，挟太医往视，不及，卒，年八十。
现代文：有人规劝杜衍穿居士服，杜衍说： 年老谢职，还可以盗用高士之名吗？ 善于写诗，正书、行、草都有章法。病重，仁宗派遣宦官赐药，带着太医前去看望，没有来得及，去世，终年八十岁。
English: Some people advised Du Yan to wear the robe of a layman. Du Yan said, "Since I am old and grateful for my duties, can I still steal the name of a high-ranking official? I am good at writing poems. There are rules and regulations for writing, walking, and weeding. When I was seriously ill, Rinzong sent a eunuch to give me medicine and brought the great doctor to visit me. I did not have time to visit him, and he passed away at the age of eighty.

古文：赠司徒兼侍中，谥正献。
现代文：追赠司徒兼侍中，谥号 正献 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Jito (magistrate) and attendant, and his posthumous name was Matsu.

古文：戒其子努力忠孝，敛以一枕一席，小圹庳冢以葬。
现代文：告诫他的儿子努力忠孝，用一枕一席来进行装殓，用小的墓穴低矮的坟冢来安葬。
English: He exhorted his son to be loyal and filial, to decorate with a pillow and a seat, and to be buried in a small grave in a low grave.

古文：自作遗疏，其略曰： 无以久安而忽边防，无以既富而轻财用，宜早建储副，以安人心。 语不及私。
现代文：曾自作遗疏 ：不要由于长久平安而忽略边防，不要因为已经富裕就轻视财产的节用，应当尽早地树立皇太子，来安定人心。 言语中没有谈到私事。
English: There was a self-inflicted legacy: do not neglect border defense because of long-term peace, do not despise the use of property because you are already rich, and should establish a crown prince as soon as possible to stabilize people's hearts.

