古文：乌桓鲜卑
现代文：乌桓，原是东胡族。
English: Wu Kuan, originally from the Eastern Hu ethnic group.

古文：乌桓者，本东胡也。汉初，匈奴冒顿灭其国，余类保乌桓山，因以为号焉。
现代文：汉朝初期，匈奴冒顿减掉了东胡，剩下的人守保乌桓山，就以乌桓作为部族称号。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, the Xiongnu arbitrarily removed Donghu, and the remaining people guarded Wuhuan Mountain, using Wuhuan as the tribal title.

古文：俗善骑射，弋猎禽兽为事。
现代文：乌桓习俗是擅长骑马射箭，乌桓人主要从事射猎飞禽走兽。
English: Wuhuan customs are good at riding horses and archery. Wuhuan people are mainly engaged in shooting birds and beasts.

古文：随水草放牧，居无常处。
现代文：乌桓人逐水草放牧，没有固定的住处。
English: The Wuhuan people graze on grass and water, and have no fixed place to live.

古文：以穹庐为舍，东开向日。
现代文：他们用毡帐作为房屋，门向东开朝着太阳。
English: They made their houses out of wicker, and their doors faced east, toward the sun.

古文：食肉饮酪，以毛毳为衣。
现代文：他们吃肉食，喝奶酪，用鸟兽的毛制作衣服。
English: They eat meat, drink cheese, and make clothes from the hairs of animals and birds.

古文：贵少而贱老，其性悍塞。
现代文：他们重视年轻人，轻视年老的人，性情强悍而不豁达。
English: They value the young, despise the old, and are tough-minded rather than open-minded.

古文：怒则杀父兄，而终不害其母，以母有族类，父兄无相仇报敌也。
现代文：发怒时就杀死父亲兄弟，然而始终不杀害母亲，因为母亲有自己的部族，而父亲兄弟没有人报仇的缘故。
English: He killed his father's brothers when he was angry, but he never killed his mother, because his mother had her own tribe, and his father's brothers had no one to take revenge on.

古文：有勇健能理决斗讼者，推为大人，无世业相继。
现代文：谁勇猛强健，能够处理决断格斗争讼事情的人，就被推选为部族首领，首领没有世代继承的。
English: Those who are brave and strong, who can handle the decisive struggle and litigation, are elected as tribal leaders. Leaders are not inherited by generations.

古文：邑落各有小帅，数百千落自为一部。
现代文：每个邑落各有自己的小首领，几百几千个邑落各自结成一个部落。
English: Each township has its own small leader, and hundreds of thousands of townships form a tribe.

古文：大人有所召呼，时刻木为信，虽无文字，而部众不敢违犯。
现代文：部落首领有事情呼唤，就刻木作为符信，虽然没有文字，但部众不敢违犯。
English: When the tribal leader calls out for something, he carves wood as a symbol. Although there is no writing, his followers do not dare to disobey.

古文：氏姓无常，以大人健者名字为姓。
现代文：乌桓人没有固定的姓氏，以首领中强健的人的名字作为姓氏。
English: The Wuhuan people do not have a fixed surname, but take the name of a strong leader as their surname.

古文：大人以下，各自蓄牧营产，不相徭役。
现代文：自首领以下的人，各自放养牲畜，经营产业，彼此之间不相互役使。
English: The people below the chiefs keep their own livestock and run their own businesses, and do not serve each other.

古文：其嫁娶则先略女通情，或半岁百日，然后送牛、马、羊畜，以为娉币。
现代文：在婚嫁方面他们先抢来女子同居，有时过了半年上百天，而后给女方送去牛、马、羊等牲畜，作为聘礼。
English: In terms of marriage, they first snatched women to live together, sometimes after half a year and a hundred days, and then sent cattle, horses, sheep and other livestock to the woman as a betrothal gift.

古文：婿随妻还家，妻家无尊卑，旦旦拜之，而不拜其父母。
现代文：女婿跟着妻子回娘家，对妻子家中的人不管尊长卑下，天天向他们行拜礼，但不拜妻子的父母。
English: The son-in-law followed his wife back to his daughter's house and bowed down to the people in his wife's family, regardless of their rank, and prayed to them every day, but not to his wife's parents.

古文：为妻家仆役，一二年间，妻家乃厚遣送女，居处财物一皆为办。
现代文：在妻子家做仆人做的事情，过上一两年，妻子家中这才送给他们很多东西打发女儿走，日常生活用品和财物全部为他们置办齐备。
English: After a year or two of doing what servants do in the wife's home, the wife's family gave them a lot of things to send their daughter away. Daily necessities and belongings were all prepared for them.

古文：其俗妻后母，报寡嫂，死则归其故夫。
现代文：乌桓人的习俗是娶后母为妻，与守寡的嫂子私通，但后母和嫂子死后则和原来的丈夫合葬。
English: It was the custom of the Wuhuan people to marry their stepmothers and fornicate with their widowed sisters-in-law, but when their stepmothers and sisters-in-law died, they were buried together with their former husbands.

古文：计谋从用妇人，唯斗战之事乃自决之。
现代文：在计谋方面他们听从妇女的意见，衹有格斗打仗的时候才自己作决断。
English: They defer to women in matters of strategy and make their own decisions when it comes to fighting.

古文：父子男女，相对踞蹲。
现代文：父子之间、男女之间面对面蹲坐。
English: Between father and son, between men and women, they squat and sit face to face.

古文：以髡头为轻便。
现代文：他们认为剃去头发简便。
English: They think it's easy to shave it off.

古文：妇人至嫁时乃养发，分为髻，著句决，饰以金碧，犹中国有步摇。
现代文：妇女到出嫁的时候才蓄发，分开盘在头顶两边，以句决做头饰，上面用金玉作装饰，就好像中原的个步摇。
English: Women do not wear their hair long until they are married. It is parted on the top of the head on both sides, made into a headdress, and decorated with gold on top. It is like a step in the middle of the plain.

古文：妇人能刺韦作文绣，织氀曷毛。
现代文：妇女能够在皮革上刺绣，编织毛织品。
English: Women were able to embroider on leather and weave woolen fabrics.

古文：男子能作弓矢鞍勒，锻金铁为兵器。
现代文：男的能够制作弓箭、马鞍和马络头，冶炼铜铁做成兵器。
English: Men can make bows and arrows, saddles and stirrups, and smelt copper and iron to make weapons.

古文：其土地宜及东墙。
现代文：镗的土地适合种植标子和束婶。
English: The land is suitable for planting bamboo shoots and bunches.

古文：东墙似蓬草，实如子，至十月而熟。
现代文：束藉像蓬草，果实像襟米，过十个月就成熟。
English: The bunch is like pengcao, and the fruit is like puffed rice, and it matures in ten months.

古文：见鸟兽孕乳，以别四节。
现代文：乌桓人见到飞乌走兽怀孕生育，就以此区分四季。
English: The Wuhuan people distinguish the four seasons by observing the pregnancy and birth of flying animals.

古文：俗贵兵死，敛尸以棺，有哭泣之哀，至葬则歌舞相送。
现代文：乌桓的习俗是推崇战死，他们用棺木收殓尸体，有悲哀哭泣的仪式，但到下葬的时候用歌舞相送。
English: It is the custom of the Wuhuans to honor the war dead. They gather the bodies in coffins and have a sad weeping ceremony, but at the time of burial they send them off with song and dance.

古文：肥养一犬，以彩绳缨牵，并取死者所乘马衣物，皆烧而送之，言以属累犬，使护死者神灵归赤山。
现代文：他们养一只肥肥的狗，用彩色的绳子牵着，而且取来死者所骑的马和衣服物品，都用火焚烧，用以送走死者，意思是托付狗，要狗护送死者的魂灵返回赤山。
English: They keep a fat dog, led by a colored rope, and take the horse the deceased was riding and clothes items, all of which are burned with fire to send the deceased away, which means entrusting the dog to escort the soul of the deceased back to Akayama.

古文：赤山在辽东西北数千里，如中国人死者魂神归贷山也。
现代文：赤山在辽东的西北方向，有几千里远，就像中原的人死去以后魂灵返回泰山一样。
English: Akayama is in the northwest direction of Liaodong, thousands of miles away, just like the souls of people in the Central Plains return to Mount Tai after they die.

古文：敬鬼神，祠天地、日月、星辰、山川及先大人有健名者。
现代文：他们尊敬神鬼，祭祀天地、日月、星辰、山川和先代首领中有强健名声的人。
English: They respect the gods and spirits, and worship the heavens and the earth, the sun, the moon, the stars, the mountains, the rivers, and the former leaders who have strong reputations.

古文：祠用牛、羊，毕皆烧之。
现代文：他们用牛羊祭祀，祭祀结束将牛羊全部烧死。
English: They used cattle and sheep for sacrifice, and at the end of the sacrifice they burned all the cattle and sheep to death.

古文：其约法：违大人言者，罪至死；若相贼杀者，令部落自相报，不止，诣大人告之，听出马、牛、羊以赎死；其自杀父兄则无罪；若亡畔为大人所捕者，邑落不得受之，皆徙逐于雍狂之地，沙漠之中。
现代文：乌桓人规定：违背部落首领的话，其罪处死；要是互相侵犯杀害的人，让部落自己互相报仇，如果报仇没完没了，就去禀告部落首领，听任仇家拿出马、牛、羊来赎性命；如果自己杀死父亲兄弟，没有罪；如果逃走背叛而被部落首领追捕的人，任何村落不得收留，将这些人一概放逐到闭塞荒远的地方，或者沙漠中。
English: The Wuhuan people stipulated that: if they disobeyed the tribal leader, they would be put to death; if they violated and killed each other, they would let the tribe take revenge on each other; if the revenge was endless, they would go to sue the tribal leader and let the enemy take out horses, cattle and sheep to redeem their lives; if they killed their father and brother, they would not be guilty; if they fled and betrayed the people who were pursued by the tribal leader, no village could accept them, and they would all be banished to a remote place, or to the desert.

古文：其土多蝮蛇，在于令西南，乌孙东北焉。
现代文：乌桓地多蝮蛇，位于丁令的西南和乌孙的东北方向。
English: There are many pythons in the Wuhuan area, which is located southwest of Dingling and northeast of Wusun.

古文：乌桓自为冒顿所破，众遂孤弱，常臣伏匈奴，岁输牛、马、羊皮，过时不具，辄没其妻子。
现代文：乌桓自从被冒顿打败，部众就孤单弱小，经常向匈奴臣服，每年送去牛、马、羊的皮，超过期限没准备好，妻子孩子经常被抓走。
English: Ever since Wu Huan was defeated by Htun, his followers have been lonely and weak. They often submit to the Xiongnu. Every year, they send the skins of cattle, horses, and sheep, but they are not ready before the deadline. Their wives and children are often taken away.

古文：及武帝遣骠骑将军霍去病击破匈奴左地，因徙乌桓于上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东五郡塞外，为汉侦察匈奴动静。
现代文：到武帝派骠骑将军霍去病攻取匈奴左部地区，就将乌桓人迁徙到上谷、渔阳、右北平、辽西、辽东五个郡的塞外，为汉侦察匈奴的动静。
English: When Emperor Wu sent the cavalry general Huo to attack the left area of the Xiongnu, the Wuhuans migrated to the five counties of Shanggu, Yuyang, Right Beiping, West Liaoning and East Liaoning to spy on the movement of the Xiongnu.

古文：其大人岁一朝见，于是始置护乌桓校尉，秩二千石，拥节监领之，使不得与匈奴交通。
现代文：乌桓部族首领每年向天子朝拜一次，这时候开始设置护乌桓校尉，俸禄为二千石，持天子符节监察统管乌桓，不让乌桓与匈奴往来。
English: The chiefs of the Wuhuan tribe worshipped the Heavenly Son once a year, and at this time they began to set up a Wuhuan guard lieutenant, with a salary of two thousand koku, to supervise and control the Wuhuan with the Heavenly Son's seal, and not to allow the Wuhuan to interact with the Xiongnu.

古文：昭帝时，乌桓渐强，乃发匈奴单于冢墓，以报冒顿之怨。
现代文：昭帝时，乌桓逐渐强盛，就掘开了匈奴单于的坟墓，以报复对冒顿的仇恨。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhao, Wu Huan became increasingly powerful, and he dug up the grave of the Xiongnu Emperor Xian Yu to avenge his hatred of the Emperor.

古文：匈奴大怒，乃东击破乌桓。
现代文：匈奴人大怒，于是向东击败了乌桓。
English: Enraged, the Xiongnu defeated the Wuhu to the east.

古文：大将军霍光闻之，因遣度辽将军范明友将二万骑出辽东邀匈奴，而虏已引去。
现代文：大将军霍光得知后，就派度辽将军范明友率领两万骑兵从辽东出发拦截匈奴，但敌虏已经退去。
English: After General Huo Guang learned of this, he sent Liao general Fan Mingyou and 20,000 cavalrymen from Liaodong to intercept the Xiongnu, but the enemy had already retreated.

古文：明友乘乌桓新败，遂进击之，斩首六千余级，获其三王首而还。
现代文：范明友趁着乌桓刚刚战败，就进兵攻打乌桓，杀了六千多乌桓人，获得旦担三位侯王的首级回来。
English: Taking advantage of the fact that Wuhuan had just been defeated, Fan Mingyou marched into the army to attack Wuhuan, killed more than six thousand Wuhuan people, and returned with the heads of the three princes of Dantan.

古文：由是乌桓复寇幽州，明友辄破之。
现代文：自此以后蛊桓又进攻盥姐，总是被明友打败。
English: From then on, Yan Kan attacked Yan Jie again, but was always defeated by Ming You.

古文：宣帝时，乃稍保塞降附。
现代文：宣帝的时候，乌桓人才渐渐投降归顺，守保边关。
English: When Emperor Xuan was proclaimed, the Wuhu people gradually surrendered and became obedient, guarding the border.

古文：及王莽篡位，欲击匈奴，兴十二部军，使东域将严尤领乌桓、丁令兵屯代郡，皆质其妻子于郡县。
现代文：到王莽篡位时，王莽想进攻匈奴，征调十二部的军队，派束域将严尤统领乌桓、丁令的部队驻守代郡，将他们的妻子孩子全部留在郡县做人质。
English: At the time of Wang Mang's usurpation, Wang Mang wanted to attack the Xiongnu, so he conscripted and dispatched a twelve-division army, dispatched troops under the command of Wu Huan and Ding Ling to garrison the county, and left all their wives and children as hostages in the county.

古文：乌桓不便水土，惧久屯不休，数求谒去。
现代文：乌桓人不服水土，害怕长期驻守没有尽头，多次请求让他们走。
English: The Wuhuan refused to accept the land and water, fearing that their long-term stay would never end, and repeatedly requested that they be allowed to leave.

古文：莽不肯遣，遂自亡畔，还为抄盗，而诸郡尽杀其质，由是结怨于莽。
现代文：王莽不肯让他们走，乌桓人就自己逃走反叛，而且反过来抄掠财物，各郡又将乌桓的人质全部杀死，由此乌桓同王莽结下仇恨。
English: Wang Mang refused to let them go, and the Wu Huan people fled and rebelled on their own. In turn, they plundered property, and each county killed all of the Wu Huan's hostages. As a result, Wu Huan and Wang Mang developed a grudge.

古文：匈奴因诱其豪帅以为吏，余者皆羁縻属之。
现代文：匈奴趁机引诱乌桓的酋豪首领担任官员，对其他人都加以笼络使其归附。
English: The Xiongnu took advantage of the opportunity to lure Wuhuan's chieftain leaders to serve as officials, and enticed everyone else to join them.

古文：光武初，乌桓与匈奴连兵为寇，代郡以东尤被其害。
现代文：光武初期，乌桓与匈奴联合出兵入侵边界，代郡以束的地区受害尤其严重。
English: In the early days of Guangwu, Wuhuan and Xiongnu jointly sent troops to invade the border, and the area of Daigun and Sokcho suffered particularly badly.

古文：居止近塞，朝发穹庐，暮至城郭，五郡民庶，家受其辜，至于郡县损坏，百姓流亡。
现代文：乌桓人住的地方靠近边界，早晨从毡帐出发，天黑就到了城下。五个郡的老百姓，家家全都受到侵害。造成郡县被毁坏，百姓流离失所。
English: The Wuhuans live close to the border. In the morning, they set out from Bijie, and by nightfall, they reached the outskirts of the city. The people of the five counties were all violated, resulting in the destruction of the counties and the displacement of the people.

古文：其在上谷塞外白山者，最为强富。
现代文：在上谷边塞外的白山乌桓，最为强盛富有。
English: In the upper valley outside the dam, the Bai Shan Wu Huan is the most powerful and rich.

古文：建武二十一年，遣伏波将军马援将三千骑出五阮关掩击之。
现代文：建武二十一年，朝廷派伏波将军马援率领三千骑兵从五阮关出境袭击乌桓。
English: In the 21st year of Jianwu, the imperial court sent Fu Bo's general Ma Yuan to lead 3,000 cavalry from Wu Ruan Pass to attack Wu Huan.

古文：乌桓逆知，悉相率逃走，追斩百级而还。
现代文：乌桓事先得知消息，全部相继逃走了，马援追赶，杀了一百多乌桓人回军。
English: Wuhuan learned the news in advance, and all of them fled one after another. Ma'an chased them and killed more than a hundred Wuhuan people who were returning to the army.

古文：乌桓复尾击援后，援遂晨夜奔归，比入塞，马死者千余匹。
现代文：乌桓人又尾随马援的后面进攻，结果马援昼夜兼程逃回，等到进入边塞，已死了一千多马匹。
English: The Wuhuans also followed Ma Yuan's attack. As a result, Ma Yuan fled back both day and night. By the time he entered the border fortress, more than a thousand horses had died.

古文：二十二年，匈奴国乱，乌桓乘弱击破之，匈奴转北徙数千里，漠南地空，帝乃以币帛赂乌桓。
现代文：二十二年，匈奴国内动乱，乌桓趁着匈奴衰弱，击败了匈奴，匈奴向北迁移了几千里，沙漠以南的地区全空了，皇帝于是用钱和布帛贿赂乌桓。
English: In the 22nd year, the Xiongnu was in turmoil. Wuhuan took advantage of the weakness of the Xiongnu to defeat the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu migrated thousands of miles to the north, and the area south of the desert was completely empty. The emperor then bribed Wuhuan with money and cloth.

古文：二十五年，辽西乌桓大人赦旦等九百二十二人率众向化，诣阙朝贡，献奴婢、牛、马及弓、虎豹貂皮。
现代文：二十五年，辽西的乌桓首领郝旦等九百二十二人率领部众归服漠，到朝廷朝拜进贡，献上奴婢、牛马、弓箭和虎、豹、貂的皮。
English: In 25 years, 922 people, including the leader of the Wuhuan tribe in western Liaoning Province, Shantan, led the people to return to the desert, and paid tribute to the imperial court, offering slaves, cattle, horses, bows and arrows, and the skins of tigers, leopards, and donkeys.

古文：是时，四夷朝贺，络驿而至，天子乃命大会劳飨，赐以珍宝。
现代文：遣时，四方的少数民族都来朝拜庆贺，络绎不绝，天子于是下令举行盛大宴会慰问他们，赏给他们珍宝。
English: When the time came, the ethnic minorities from all over the country came to pay homage and celebrate, in an endless stream. As a result, the heavenly son ordered a grand banquet to be held to console them and give them precious treasures.

古文：乌桓或愿留宿卫，于是封其渠帅为侯王君长者八十一人，皆居塞内，布于缘边诸郡，令招来种人，给其衣食，遂为汉侦候，助击匈奴、鲜卑。
现代文：有的乌桓人愿意留下来做警卫，皇帝于是封了八十一个乌桓的首领为侯王君长，让他们住在塞内，分布在边境的各郡，要他们招来自己部族的人，给他们衣服粮食，乌桓人于是替汉侦察敌人动静，帮助漠进攻匈奴、鲜卑。
English: Some Wuhuans were willing to stay behind as guards, so the emperor appointed eighty-one Wuhuan chiefs as princes and princes, let them live in Senai and distribute them in the border counties, and asked them to invite people from their own tribes and give them clothes and food. The Wuhuans then scouted the enemy's movements for Han and helped attack the Xiongnu.

古文：时，司徒掾班彪上言： 乌桓天性轻黠，好为寇贼，若久放纵而无总领者，必复侵掠居人，但委主降掾史，恐非所能制。
现代文：当时司徒掾班彪上奏说： 乌桓人天性轻佻狡猾，喜欢做贼寇，若是长期放纵他们而没有人管辖使其归附聚集，他们必定还会入侵抄掠住在那儿的百姓，仅是交给接受投降者的佐吏负责，恐怕不能控制他们。
English: At that time, Ban Biao said: Wuhuan people are naturally light and cunning, and like to be thieves and robbers. If they are indulged for a long time and there is no one to govern their attachment and gathering, they will certainly invade and plunder the people living there. They are only responsible to the officers who accept the surrender, and I am afraid they cannot control them.

古文：臣愚以为宜复置乌桓校尉，诚有益于附集，省国家之边虑。 
现代文：臣愚意认为最好重新设置乌桓校尉，这对于使乌桓人归附聚集诚然有益处，减少国家对边境的忧虑。 
English: He thought that it would be best to re-establish Wuhuan as a lieutenant, which would certainly be beneficial for bringing Wuhuan people together and reducing the country's concerns about the border.

古文：帝从之，于是始复置校尉于上谷宁城，开营府，并领鲜卑，赏赐质子，岁时互市焉。
现代文：皇帝采纳了这个建议。于是在上谷的蜜城开始再次设立乌桓校尉，开设武将府，同时统领鲜卑。又赏赐当人质的乌桓人的儿子，每年四季和他们互通贸易。
English: The emperor accepted this suggestion, and the Wuhuan captaincy was re-established in the honey city of Shanggu, the military commander's residence was opened, and the Xianbei were ruled at the same time. The son of the Wuhuan who was a hostage was also rewarded, and they exchanged trade with each other every four seasons.

古文：及明、章、和三世，皆保塞无事。
现代文：到明帝、章帝、和帝三代，乌桓人都守保边塞，没发生什么事情。
English: Up to the three generations of Emperor Ming, Emperor Zhang, and Emperor He, the Wuhuan people all guarded the border, and nothing happened.

古文：安帝永初三年夏，渔龙乌桓与右北平胡千余寇代郡、上谷。
现代文：安帝永初三年夏天，渔阳的乌桓人和右北平的胡人有一千多人，进犯代郡、上谷。
English: In the summer of the third year of An Di Yong's reign, more than a thousand Wuhuan people from Yuyang and Hu people from Right Beiping invaded Dai County and Shanggu.

古文：秋，雁门乌桓率众王无何，与鲜卑大人丘伦等，及南匈奴骨都侯，合七千骑寇五原，与太守战于九原高渠谷。汉兵大败，杀郡长吏。
现代文：这年秋天，雁门的乌桓率众王无何，与鲜卑首领丘伦等人以及南匈奴的骨都侯，合起来有七千多骑兵进犯五原，与五原太守在九原的高渠谷交战，汉军大败，郡县官吏遭到杀害。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wuhuan of the Wild Goose Gate led the kings, together with the lowly leaders Chulun and others, as well as the bone capital of the Southern Xiongnu, a total of more than seven thousand cavalrymen invaded the Five Plains, and fought with the Five Plains Governor in the Gaojiu Valley of the Nine Plains. The Chinese army was defeated, and county officials were killed.

古文：乃遣车骑将军何熙、度辽将军梁等击，大破之。
现代文：朝廷于是派车骑将军何熙、度辽将军梁懂等人攻打无何，大败无何。
English: The imperial court then sent chariot-riding generals He Xi and Du Liao's general Liang Gan and others to attack, but to no avail.

古文：无何乞降，鲜卑走还塞外。
现代文：无何乞求投降，鲜卑人逃还边塞以外。
English: There was no begging for surrender, and the men fled back across the border.

古文：是后乌桓稍复亲附，拜其大人戎朱为亲汉都尉。
现代文：自此以后乌桓人又逐渐亲近归附汉，朝廷授乌桓的部族首领戎朱魔为亲汉都尉。
English: Since then, the Wuhuan people have gradually become closer to the Han Dynasty, and the Imperial Court has awarded Wuhuan's tribal leader, Rong Zhu Ma, the title of pro-Han captain.

古文：顺帝阳嘉四年冬，乌桓寇云中，遮截道上商贾车牛千余两，度辽将军耿晔率二千余人追击，不利，又战于沙南，斩首五百级。
现代文：顺帝阳嘉四年冬，乌桓入侵云中，拦截路上商人的牛车达一千多辆，度辽将军耿晔率领二千多人追击乌桓人，战况不利，又在沙南交战，消灭了五百人。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Shun Diyang Jia, Wuhuan invaded Yunzhong, intercepted more than a thousand ox carts of merchants on the road, and Du Liao General Geng Yao led more than two thousand people to pursue Wuhuan. The war situation was unfavorable, and they also fought in Shannan, eliminating five hundred people.

古文：乌桓遂围晔于兰池城，于是发积射士二千人，度辽营千人，配上郡屯，以讨乌桓，乌桓乃退。
现代文：乌桓人接着在兰池城包围了耿晔，朝廷于是征调二千寻迹而射的士兵和度辽军营的一千士兵，配合上郡的驻守部队，征讨乌桓，乌桓人造才撤退。
English: The Wuhuan people then surrounded Geng Yao in Lanchicheng, and the imperial court then conscripted two thousand soldiers and one thousand soldiers from the Du Liao military camp, in cooperation with the garrison troops in Shang County, to fight the Wuhuan. The Wuhuan man-made only retreated.

古文：永和五年，乌桓大人阿坚、羌渠等与南匈奴左部句龙吾斯反畔，中郎将张耽击破斩之，余众悉降。
现代文：永和五年，乌桓的部族首领阿坚、羌渠等人和南匈奴左部的句龙吾斯反叛，中部将张耽击败并杀死了他们，其余的人全部投降。
English: In the fifth year of the Yonghe era, Wuhuan's tribal leaders A Jian, Xuan Qu and others rebelled with the Southern Xiongnu's left wing, Gu Longwu, while the Central Xiongnu defeated and killed Zhang Tan, and all the rest surrendered.

古文：桓帝永寿中，朔方乌桓与休著屠各并畔，中郎将张奂击平之。
现代文：桓帝永寿年间，朔方的乌桓人与休着屠各一同反叛，中郎将张奂攻打并平定了敌人。
English: During Emperor Huan's longevity, Wuhuan of the Shuo side rebelled together with Hui and Tu, and Zhong Lang attacked Zhang Ye and pacified the enemy.

古文：延熹九年夏，乌桓复与鲜卑及南匈奴寇缘边九郡，俱反，张奂讨之，皆出塞去。
现代文：延熹九年的夏天，乌桓又同鲜卑以及南匈奴侵犯沿边的九个郡，他们同时反叛，张奂征讨敌人，他们都出边塞离去。
English: In the summer of the ninth year of Yancheng, Wuhuan, together with Xianbei and Southern Xiongnu, invaded the nine counties along the border. They simultaneously rebelled, Zhang Ye conscripted the enemy, and they all left the border fortress.

古文：灵帝初，乌桓大人上谷有难楼者，众九千余落，辽西有丘力居者，众五千余落，皆自称王；又辽东苏仆延，众千余落，自称峭王；右北平乌延，众人百余落，自称汗鲁王；并勇健而多计策。
现代文：灵帝初年，上谷有个叫难楼的部族首领，拥有九千多个邑落的部众，辽西有个叫丘力居的首领，拥有五千多个邑落的部众，他们都自称为王。另外，辽东的苏仆延，拥有一千多个邑落的部众，自称为峭王；右北平的乌延，拥有八百多个邑落的部众，自称为汗鲁王：他们都勇猛强健，又有很多的计谋。
English: In the first year of Lingdi, there was a tribal leader in Shanggu called Nanlou, who had more than nine thousand followers in more than five thousand villages. In the west of Liao, there was a tribal leader called Qiu Liju, who had more than five thousand followers in more than five thousand villages, and they all called themselves kings. In addition, there was a tribal leader in Su Duyan, Liaodong, who had more than one thousand followers in more than one thousand villages, and who called himself King Qiao, and a tribal leader in Wuyan, Debeiping, who had more than eight hundred followers in more than one thousand villages, and who called himself King Khanlu

古文：中平四年，前中山太守张纯畔，入丘力居众中，自号弥天安定王，遂为诸郡乌桓元帅，寇掠青、徐、幽、冀四州。
现代文：虫垩四年，原虫山太守强堑反叛，他进了丘力居的部族，自称为弥天安定王，接着当上各郡乌桓人的元帅，入侵抄掠青州、徐州、幽州、冀州四个州。
English: In the 4th year of Worm Dragon, the original Worm Mountain's warlord, Qiang Xuan, rebelled. He joined the tribe of Qiu Li Ju, calling himself the King of Heaven and Earth, and then became the marshal of the Wuhuan people in each county, invading and plundering Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yuzhou, and Jizhou four states.

古文：五年，以刘虞为幽州牧，虞购募斩纯首，北州乃定。
现代文：五年，朝廷任命刘虞为幽州牧，刘虞悬赏招募人割下了张纯的脑袋，北方各州这才平定。
English: Five years later, the imperial court appointed Liu Yu as the governor of Yuzhou. Liu Yu offered a reward to the recruiter who cut off Zhang Chun's head. This was the beginning of the pacification of the northern states.

古文：献定初平中，丘力居死，子楼班年少，从子蹋顿有武略，代立，总摄三部，众皆从其号令。
现代文：献帝初平年间，丘力居死了，他的儿子楼班年纪小，侄子蹋顿会用兵有谋略，取代楼班继位，总管三个郡的乌桓人，部众都听从他的号令。
English: At the time of Emperor Xianping's enthronement in the early Heian period, Qiu Liju died. His son, Louban, was young, and his nephew, Shandong, would replace Louban's succession with a military strategy. He was the head of the three counties of Wuhuan, and his subordinates all obeyed his orders.

古文：建安初，冀州牧袁绍与前将军公孙瓚相持不决，蹋顿遣使诣绍求和亲，遂遣兵助击瓚，破之。
现代文：建安初年，冀州牧袁绍与前将军公孙瓒相持不下，蹋顿派使者来见袁绍，请求和亲，接着派军队帮助袁绍攻打公孙瓒，打败了公孙瓒。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, Yuan Shao, the governor of Jizhou Province, and the former general Gongsun Yao could not stand each other. The general sent an envoy to Yuan Shao to request a reconciliation, and then sent an army to help Yuan Shao attack Gongsun Yao and defeat Gongsun Yao.

古文：绍矫制赐蹋顿、难楼、苏仆延、乌延等，皆以单于印绶。
现代文：袁绍假托朝廷名义，赐给蹋顿、难楼、苏仆延、乌延等人全是单于印绶。
English: Yuan Shao pretended to be in the name of the imperial court, and bestowed the titles of Xingtang, Nanlou, Su Puyan, Wuyan, etc. to all of them.

古文：后难楼、苏仆延率其部众奉楼班为单于，蹋顿为王，然蹋顿犹秉计策。
现代文：后来难楼、苏仆延率领部众拥戴楼班为单于，蹋顿为王，然而蹋顿仍然负责出谋划策。
English: Later, Nanlu, Su Duan and Yan led the leadership of the masses to support Louban as a single, and Xington as a king, but Xington was still responsible for making plans and suggestions.

古文：广阳人阎柔，少没乌桓、鲜卑中，为其种人所归信，柔乃因鲜卑众，杀乌桓校尉邢举而代之。
现代文：广阳人间柔，自小失陷在乌桓、鲜卑，为乌桓人、鲜卑人所归附和信任，阎柔于是利用鲜卑部众，杀死了乌桓校尉邢举，取而代之。
English: Guanyang human Jiao, since childhood lost in Wuhuan and Xianbei, was attached and trusted by Wuhuan and Xianbei people, so Yan Rong took advantage of the Xianbei members, killed Wuhuan Lieutenant Zhi Jiao, and replaced him.

古文：袁绍因宠慰柔，以安北边。
现代文：袁绍因此宠信安慰阎柔，藉以安定北部边境。
English: Yuan Shao therefore trusted and comforted Yan Rong, thereby stabilizing the northern border.

古文：及绍子尚败，奔蹋顿。
现代文：到袁绍的儿子袁尚失败时，投奔蹋顿。
English: When Yuan Shao's son, Yuan Shang, failed, he fled to Shandong.

古文：时，幽、冀吏人奔乌桓者十万余户，尚欲凭其兵力，复图中国。
现代文：逭时幽州、冀州的官吏百姓投奔乌桓的有十多万户，袁尚想凭藉蹋顿的兵力，重新图谋夺取中原。
English: At that time, more than one hundred thousand households of officials and common people from Yuzhou and Jizhou rushed to Wuhuan. Yuan Shang wanted to use the troops of Xingtang to try to seize the Central Plains again.

古文：会曹操平河北，阎柔率鲜卑、乌桓归附，操即以柔为校尉。
现代文：赶上曹操平定黄河以北，阎柔率领鲜卑、乌桓人归附，曹操随即任命阎柔为校尉。
English: Cao Cao conquered the north of the Yellow River, Yan Rong led the Xianbei, Wuhuan people joined, and Cao Cao immediately appointed Yan Rong as a lieutenant.

古文：建安十二年，曹操自征乌桓，大破蹋顿于柳城，斩之，首虏二十余万人。
现代文：建安十二年，曹操亲自征讨乌桓，在柳城大败蹋顿，杀了蹋顿，杀死俘获的敌虏有二十多万。
English: In the twelfth year of Jian'an, Cao Cao personally conquered Wuhuan, defeated and killed Xingdong in Liucheng, and killed more than 200,000 captured enemy prisoners.

古文：袁尚与楼班、乌延等皆走辽东，辽东太守公孙康并斩送之。
现代文：袁尚舆楼班、乌延等人都逃往辽东，辽东太守公孙康一并杀了他们，将他们的首级送给曹操。
English: Yuan Shang, Wu Yan and others fled to Liaodong. Liaodong's governor Sun Kang killed them all and sent their heads to Cao Cao.

古文：其余众万余落，悉徙居中国云。
现代文：其他剩下的一万多邑落，全都迁入中原居住。
English: The remaining more than ten thousand villages all moved to live in the Central Plains.

古文：鲜卑者，亦东胡之支也，别依鲜卑山，故因号焉。
现代文：鲜卑，也是东胡的一支，鲜卑人另外依凭鲜卑山，所以就以此作为族号。
English: Xianbei is also a branch of Donghu. Xianbei people also rely on Xianbei Mountain, so they use it as their clan name.

古文：其言语习俗与乌桓同。
现代文：鲜卑人的语言和习俗与乌桓相同。
English: The language and customs of the Xianbei people are the same as those of the Wuhuan.

古文：唯婚姻先髡头，以季春月大会于饶乐水上，饮晏毕，然后配合。
现代文：衹有结婚，他们先剃去头发，在春季最后一个月在饶乐水边大规模相会，吃喝结束后就男女交合。
English: After getting married, they first shave off their hair. In the last month of spring, they meet on a large scale at the Raole waterside, and after eating and drinking, they have sexual intercourse.

古文：又禽盖异于中国者，野马、原羊、角端牛，以角为弓，俗谓之角端弓者。
现代文：那裹的飞禽走兽与中原不同，有野马、螈羊、角端牛。用这种牛的角可以制作成弓，民间称之为角端弓。
English: Unlike the Central Plains, the birds and beasts there include wild horses, yakitori sheep, and horned cattle. The horns of such cattle can be used to make bows, which the people call horned bows.

古文：又有貂？鼲子，皮毛柔蠕，故天下以为名裘。
现代文：还有貂、铀、鼹子，它们的皮和毛很柔软，所以天下的人都用它们做成名贵的皮裘。
English: There are also mink, uranium, and lice. Their skin and fur are very soft, so people all over the world use them to make expensive fur coats.

古文：汉初，亦为冒顿所破，远窜辽东塞外，与乌桓相接，未常通中国焉。
现代文：汉初，鲜卑也被冒顿打败，远远逃到辽东的边塞外，与乌桓相邻，但未尝同汉有来往。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, Xianbei was also defeated by the Mongols and fled far away to the border fortress of Liaodong, adjacent to Wuhuan, but did not have any contact with the Han Dynasty.

古文：光武初，匈奴强盛，率鲜卑与乌桓寇抄北边，杀略吏人，无有宁岁。
现代文：扯巳初年，鱼蛆强盛，率领盘卑和蛊桓入侵抄掠北部边境，杀害和掳掠官吏百姓。没有一年安定。
English: In the first year of the Meiji era, the Uozu clan prospered, and led by Pan Bie and Su Huan, invaded and plundered the northern border, killing and capturing officials and civilians. There was not a single year of stability.

古文：建武二十一年，鲜卑与匈奴入辽东，辽东太守祭肜击破之，斩获殆尽，事已具《肜传》，由是震怖。
现代文：建武二十一年，鲜卑与匈奴进入辽东，辽东太守祭肜击败了敌人，几乎将他们全都杀死或者俘虏，事情已经记载在《祭肜传》。
English: In the 21st year of Jianwu, the Xianbei and the Xiongnu entered Liaodong. The Liaodong Empress Dowager Sacrifices defeated the enemy, and almost all of them were killed or captured. The story has been recorded in "Sacrifices."

古文：及南单于附汉，北虏孤弱，二十五年，鲜卑始通驿使。
现代文：鲜卑人自此震动恐惧。到南单于归顺漠，北部的敌虏孤立衰弱。二十五年，鲜卑这才和汉互通使者。
English: From then on, the Xianbei people were shaken with fear. In the south, they were left alone in the wilderness, and their enemies in the north were isolated and weak. It took 25 years for the Xianbei to communicate with the Han.

古文：其后都护偏何等诣祭肜求自效功，因令击北匈奴左伊育訾部，斩首二千余级。
现代文：自此以后，都护偏何等人来见祭肜，请求让自己出力建功，祭肜就要他们攻打北匈奴的左伊育訾部，杀了二千多人。
English: From then on, many people from the capital came to see the sacrificial pallbearers to ask for their contribution. The sacrificial pallbearers asked them to attack the Zuoying District of the Northern Huns, killing more than two thousand people.

古文：其后偏何连岁出兵击北虏，还辄持首级诣辽东受赏赐。
现代文：以后偏何连年出兵进攻北方的敌虏，回军时总是拿了敌人的首级到辽东接受赏赐。
English: After that, he sent troops to attack the enemy in the north for several consecutive years. When he returned to the army, he always took the enemy's head to Liaodong to receive the reward.

古文：三十年，鲜卑大人於仇贲、满头等率种人诣阙朝贺，慕义内属。
现代文：三十年，鲜卑部族首领于仇责、满头等人率领部族到京城朝拜庆贺，仰慕汉之德义，归顺朝廷。
English: For thirty years, the leaders of the Xianbei tribe, such as Yu Zhubei and Manju, led the tribe to the capital to worship and celebrate, admire the virtue of Han, and submit to the imperial court.

古文：帝封於仇贲为王，满头为侯。
现代文：皇帝封于仇贲为王，封满头为侯。
English: The emperor made Yuchuan the king and Fuman the vassal.

古文：时渔阳赤山乌桓歆志贲等数寇上谷。
现代文：当时，渔阳境内的赤山乌桓歆志贲等人多次入侵上谷。
English: At that time, the Akayama Wukan Shizoku and others in the territory of Yuyang repeatedly invaded the upper valley.

古文：永平元年，祭肜复赂偏何击歆志贲，破斩之，于是鲜卑大人皆来归附，并诣辽东受赏赐，青、徐二州给钱岁二亿七千万为常。
现代文：永平元年，祭肜再次贿赂偏何，进攻歆志贲，打败并杀死了歆志贲，这样，鲜卑的部族首领都来归顺，一起到辽东接受赏赐，青州、徐州两个州每年给他们钱二亿七千万，以此作为常例。
English: In the first year of the Yongping era, the sacrificial eunuchs bribed the deviants again, attacked the eunuchs, defeated and killed the eunuchs. In this way, the lowly tribal leaders all surrendered and went to Liaodong together to receive rewards. The two states of Qingzhou and Xuzhou gave them 270 million yuan each year as a rule.

古文：明、章二世，保塞无事。
现代文：明帝、章帝两代，鲜卑人守保边关，没发生什么事。
English: Emperor Ming and Emperor Zhang of the two generations, the newly humble people guarded the border, and nothing happened.

古文：和帝永元中，大将军窦宪遣右校尉耿夔击破匈奴，北单于逃走，鲜卑因此转徙据其地。
现代文：和帝永元年间，大将军窦宪派右校尉耿夔击败匈奴，北单于逃走，鲜卑人因此搬迁占据了匈奴人居住的地盘。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, the general Dou Xian sent his right lieutenant Geng Yao to defeat the Xiongnu, and Beidan fled. As a result, the Xianbei people moved to occupy the territory where the Xiongnu lived.

古文：匈奴余种留者尚有十余万落，皆自号鲜卑，鲜卑由此渐盛。
现代文：匈奴留下来的部族还有十多万个邑落，他们都自称鲜卑人，鲜卑由此逐渐强盛。
English: The tribes left behind by the Xiongnu still have more than a hundred thousand villages. They all call themselves Xianbei, and Xianbei gradually became powerful.

古文：九年，辽东鲜卑攻肥如县，太守祭参坐沮败，下狱死。
现代文：九年，辽东的鲜卑人进攻肥如县，太守祭参因遭受挫败获罪，下在狱中而死。
English: In the ninth year, the Xianbei people of Liaodong attacked Hiryu County, and Taishu Saisan was convicted for his defeat and died in prison.

古文：十三年，辽东鲜卑寇右北平，因入渔阳，渔阳太守击破之。
现代文：十三年，辽东的鲜卑人入侵右北平，接着进入渔阳，被渔阳太守打败。
English: In the thirteenth year, the Xianbei people of Liaodong invaded the right Beiping, then entered Yuyang, and were defeated by the Yuyang governor.

古文：延平元年，鲜卑复寇渔阳，太守张显率数百人出塞追之。兵马掾严授谏曰： 前道险阻，贼势难量，宜且结营，先令轻骑侦视之。 
现代文：延平元年，鲜卑再次入侵渔阳，太守张显率领几百人出边塞追赶敌人，兵马掾严授劝阻说： 前面的道路艰险阻隔，敌人的力量很难估计，最好暂且构筑军营，先派轻装骑兵侦察敌人动静。 
English: In the first year of the Yanping era, Xianbei invaded Yuyang again, and the eunuch Zhang Xian led several hundred people out of the border fortress to chase the enemy. The Terracotta Warriors and Horses were strictly instructed to dissuade them, saying: The road ahead is difficult and dangerous, and the enemy's strength is difficult to estimate. It is best to build a military camp for the time being and send light cavalry to scout the enemy's movements first.

古文：显意甚锐，怒欲斩之。
现代文：张显的意气非常强盛，他很恼怒，想杀掉严授。
English: Zhang Xian's spirit was very strong. He was very angry and wanted to kill Yan Zhu.

古文：因复进兵，遇虏伏发，士卒悉走，唯授力战，身被十创，手杀数人而死。
现代文：因此就进兵，结果遇到敌人的伏兵出击，士兵们全都逃走，祇有严授拼力死战，他身上受了十多处伤，亲手杀了好几个敌人而死。
English: As a result, he joined the army. As a result, he encountered an ambush by the enemy. The soldiers all fled, and he was forced to fight to the death. He suffered more than ten wounds and killed several enemies with his own hands.

古文：显中流矢，主簿卫福、功曹徐咸皆自投赴显，俱殁于阵。
现代文：张显被流箭射中，主簿卫福、功曹徐咸都赶去救张显，一起牺牲在战场上。
English: Zhang Xian was shot by a stray arrow. Master Wei Fu and Gong Cao Xu Xian both rushed to save Zhang Xian and died together on the battlefield.

古文：邓太后策书褒叹，赐显钱六十万，以家二人为郎，授、福、咸各钱十万，除一子为郎。
现代文：邓太后下策书称赞张显等人，赏给张显家中六十万钱，任命他家两个人担任郎；赏赐严授、卫福、徐咸每家各十万钱，每家任命一个儿子为郎。
English: Empress Dowager Deng issued a policy document praising Zhang Xian and others, awarding Zhang Xian's family 600,000 yuan and appointing two people from his family as his son-in-law; awarding 100,000 yuan to each family of Yan Zhuo, Wei Fu and Xu Han, and appointing one son from each family as his son-in-law.

古文：安帝永初中，鲜卑大人燕荔阳诣阙朝贺，邓太后赐燕荔阳王印绶，赤车参驾，令止乌桓校尉所居宁城下，通胡市，因筑南北两部质馆。
现代文：安帝永初年间，鲜卑部族首领燕荔阳到朝廷朝拜庆贺，邓太后赐给燕荔阳侯王印绶，三匹马拉的红色马车，要他住在乌桓校尉所住的蜜城城边，和胡人通贸易，并因此建造了南北两座接受投降者和送来的人质的馆舍。
English: In the early years of the Andean dynasty, Yan Liyang, the leader of the Xianbei tribe, went to the imperial court to pay homage and celebrate. Empress Dowager Deng gave Yan Liyang the prince's seal and a three-horse-drawn red carriage, and asked him to live on the outskirts of the honey city where Captain Wu Huan lived, and to trade with the Hu people. As a result, he built two buildings in the north and south to accept the surrenderers and the hostages sent.

古文：鲜卑邑落百二十部，各遣入质。
现代文：鲜卑的一百二十个部落，各自派人来做人质。
English: One hundred and twenty tribes, each one of them, sent people to be hostages.

古文：是后或降或畔，与匈奴、乌桓更相攻击。
现代文：在此以后，鲜卑人有时投降，有时反叛，与匈奴、乌桓互相攻打。
English: After this, the Xianbei people sometimes surrendered, sometimes rebelled, and fought against the Xiongnu and Wuhuan.

古文：元初二年秋，辽东鲜卑围无虑县，州郡合兵，固保清野，鲜卑无所得。
现代文：元初二年秋天，辽东的鲜卑人包围了无虑县，州郡联合兵力坚守并转移人口、牲畜、粮食、财物，鲜卑人什么也没得到。
English: In the autumn of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Xianbei people of Liaodong surrounded Buxian County. The combined forces of the state and county held firm and transferred the population, livestock, grain, and property. The Xianbei people got nothing.

古文：复攻扶黎营，杀长吏。
现代文：他们又进攻扶黎营，杀害郡县官吏。
English: They also attacked Fuli Camp, killing county and prefectural officials.

古文：四年，辽西鲜卑连休等遂烧塞门，寇百姓。
现代文：四年，辽西的鲜卑连休等人竟烧毁塞关门，侵掠百姓。
English: In four years, Xianbei Lianyu and others in western Liaoning Province actually burned down the gate and invaded and plundered the people.

古文：乌桓大人於秩居等与连休有宿怨，共郡兵奔击，大破之，斩首千三百级，悉获其生口、牛、马、财物。
现代文：乌桓部族首领于秩居等人与连休一向有仇，就联合辽西郡的部队赶去进攻连休，大败连休，杀死一千三百人，活着的人和牛马财物全部为汉军所获。
English: Wuhuan tribal leader Yu Chichiji and others always had a grudge against Lianhui, so they united with the troops of Liaoxi County to attack Lianhui, defeated Lianhui, killed 1,300 people, and the Chinese army captured all the living people, cattle, horses and property.

古文：五年秋，代郡鲜卑万余骑遂穿塞入寇，分攻城邑，烧官寺，杀长吏而生。
现代文：五年秋天，代郡的一万多鲜卑骑兵于是穿过边塞入侵，分兵攻打城邑，烧毁官府，杀害郡县官吏而去。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year, more than ten thousand cavalrymen representing the county invaded through the frontier fortress, attacking towns, burning government offices, and killing county officials.

古文：乃发缘边甲卒、黎阳营兵，屯上谷以备之。
现代文：于是朝廷微调沿边的部队、黎阳营的士兵，驻守上谷防备鲜卑。
English: As a result, the imperial court fine-tuned the troops along the edge, the soldiers of the Liyang camp, stationed in the upper valley for defense.

古文：冬、鲜卑入上谷，攻居庸关，复发缘边诸郡、黎阳营兵、积射士步骑二万人，屯列冲要。
现代文：冬天，鲜卑进入上谷，进攻居庸关，朝廷再次征调边境各郡的部队、黎阳营的士兵、寻迹而射的士兵、步兵和骑兵共有二万人，把守各个要害地方。
English: In winter, Xianbei entered the upper valley and attacked Juyongguan, and the imperial court once again conscripted troops from all counties along the border, soldiers from the Liyang camp, soldiers, infantrymen and cavalrymen, a total of 20,000 people, to guard various key areas.

古文：六年秋，鲜卑入马城塞，杀长吏。度辽将军邓遵发积射士三千人，及中郎将马续率南单于，与辽西、右北平兵马会，出塞追击鲜卑，大破之，获生口及牛、羊、财物甚众。
现代文：六年秋天，鲜卑人马进入马城边塞，杀害郡县官吏，度辽将军邓遵派出三千寻迹而射的士兵，和中郎将马续率领南单于的军队，与辽西、右北平的兵马会合，出边塞追击鲜卑人，大败鲜卑，获得了很多人口和牛羊、财物。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year, the Xianbei people and horses entered the border fortress of Macheng, killed the county and county officials, and the general of Du Liao, Deng Zun, sent three thousand soldiers to find and shoot the soldiers, and Zhong Lang continued to lead the army of Nan Shan Yu, and met with the soldiers and horses of West Liao and Right Beiping, went out of the border fortress to chase the Xianbei people, defeated the Xianbei people, and gained a lot of population, cattle, sheep, and property.

古文：又发积射士三千人，马三千匹，诣度辽营屯守。
现代文：朝廷又征调三千寻迹而射的士兵、三千匹马，派到度辽将军的军营驻守。
English: The imperial court also conscripted and dispatched three thousand soldiers and three thousand horses to guard General Du Liao's military camp.

古文：永宁元年，辽西鲜卑大人乌伦、其至鞬率众诣邓遵降，奉贡献。
现代文：永宁元年，辽西的鲜卑部族首领乌伦、其至鞑率领部众来向邓遵投降，献上贡品。
English: In the first year of the Yongning Dynasty, Uren, the leader of the Xianbei tribe in western Liaoning, and his son-in-law led the troops to surrender to Deng Zun and pay tribute.

古文：诏封乌伦为率众王，其至鞬为率众侯，赐彩缯各有差。
现代文：天子下韶书封乌伦为率众王，封其至鞑为率众侯，赏给他们不同数目的彩色丝帛。
English: The heavenly son wrote down and sealed Uren as the leader of the kings, and sealed his sons as the leaders of the princes, and gave them different numbers of colorful silk cocoons.

古文：建光元年秋，其至鞬复畔，寇居庸，云中太守成严击之，兵败，功曹杨穆以身捍严，与俱战殁。
现代文：建光元年秋天，其至鞑又反叛，入侵居庸，云中太守成严攻打其至鞑，结果战败，功曹杨穆用身体保卫成严，与成严一同战死。
English: In the autumn of Jianguang in the first year of the 21st century, his son-in-law rebelled again and invaded Juyong. Yunzhong Taishou Cheng Yan attacked his son-in-law. As a result, he was defeated. Gong Cao Yang Mu defended Cheng Yan with his body and died together with Cheng Yan.

古文：鲜卑于是围乌桓校尉徐常于马城。
现代文：鲜卑人马因此包围了在马城的乌桓校尉徐常。
English: As a result, the Xianbei men and horses surrounded Wuhuan Captain Xu Chang, who was in Horse Town.

古文：度辽将军耿夔与幽州刺史庞参发广阳、渔阳、涿郡甲卒，分为两道救之；常夜得潜出，与夔等并力并进，攻贼围，解之。
现代文：度辽将军耿夔同幽州刺史庞参征调广阳、渔阳、涿郡的士兵，分两路救援；徐常在夜间悄悄出城，与耿夔等人合力进攻，攻打敌人的包围部队，解了围。
English: Geng Yao, the general of Du Liao, sent soldiers from Guangyang, Yuyang and Handan County to participate in the rescue together with the general of Yuzhou, Shi Pang. The rescue was divided into two ways; Xu Chang quietly left the city at night, attacked with the joint efforts of Geng Yao and others, attacked the enemy's encircling forces, and relieved the siege.

古文：鲜卑既累杀郡守，胆意转盛，控弦数万骑。
现代文：鱼哩既然多次杀害郡守，胆量和志意变得更大，能作战的骑兵有几万人。
English: Since the fish repeatedly killed the county magistrate, the courage and ambition have become greater, and there are tens of thousands of cavalrymen who can fight.

古文：延光元年冬，复寇雁门、定襄，遂攻太原，掠杀百姓。
现代文：延光元年冬天，鲜卑又入侵雁门、定襄，接着进攻太原，抄掠杀害百姓。
English: In the winter of the first year of Yan Guang, the Xianbei invaded Yanmen and Dingxiang, and then attacked Taiyuan, plundering and killing the people.

古文：二年冬，其至鞬自将万余骑入东领候，分为数道，攻南匈奴于曼柏，薁鞬日逐王战死，杀千余人。
现代文：二年冬天，其至鞑亲自率领一万多骑兵进入东领边境哨所，兵分几路，进攻在曼柏的南匈奴，奠犍曰逐王战死，被杀的有一千多人。
English: In the winter of the second year, his son-in-law personally led more than ten thousand cavalry into the Donglian border post. The soldiers were divided into several routes and attacked the Southern Xiongnu in Manbai. According to the legend, the king was killed in battle, and more than a thousand people were killed.

古文：三年秋，复寇高柳，击破南匈奴，杀渐将王。
现代文：三年秋天，其至鞑又入侵高柳，打败了南匈奴，杀害了渐将王。
English: In the autumn of the third year, his vassals invaded Gaoliu again, defeated the Southern Xiongnu, and killed Emperor Qian.

古文：顺帝永建元年秋，鲜卑其至鞬寇代郡，太守李超战死。
现代文：顺帝永建元年秋天，鲜卑其至鞑入侵代郡，太守李超战死。
English: In the autumn of the first year of Emperor Shun's reign, Emperor Yongjian invaded the county, and Emperor Li Chao died in the battle.

古文：明年春，中郎将张国遣从事将南单于兵步骑万余人出塞，击破之，获其资重二千余种。
现代文：第二年春天，中郎将张国派从事率领南单于的一万多步兵和骑兵出边塞，击败了其至鞑，获得他们的辎重有二千多种。
English: In the spring of the next year, Zhong Lang sent Zhang Guoqi to lead more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry from Nan Dan to the frontier fortress, and defeated their troops, gaining more than two thousand of their troops.

古文：时，辽东鲜卑六千余骑亦寇辽东玄菟，乌桓校尉耿晔发缘边诸郡兵及乌桓率众王出塞击之，斩首数百级，大获其生口、牛、马、什物，鲜卑乃率种众三万人诣辽东乞降。
现代文：当时辽东的鲜卑有六千多骑兵也入侵辽东和玄菟，乌桓校尉耿晔征调沿边各郡的部队和乌桓率众王出边塞进攻鲜卑，杀了几百人，获得大量的人口、牛、马和各种器物。鲜卑首领这才率领三万部众到辽东乞求投降。
English: At that time, more than six thousand cavalrymen from Xianbei in Liaodong also invaded Liaodong and Xuanzang. Wuhuan's lieutenant Geng Yao sent troops from all the counties along the border and Wuhuan led the kings to attack Xianbei from the border fortress, killing several hundred people and gaining a large number of people, cattle, horses and various utensils. It was only then that the leader of Xianbei led thirty thousand people to Liaodong to beg for surrender.

古文：三年，四年，鲜卑频寇渔阳、朔方。
现代文：永建三年和永建四年，鲜卑人多次入侵渔阳、朔方。
English: In the third year of Yongjian and the fourth year of Yongjian, the Xianbei people repeatedly invaded Yuyang and Shuo Fang.

古文：六年秋，耿晔遣司马将胡兵数千人，出塞击破之。
现代文：六年秋天，耿晔派司马率领几千胡人士兵，出边塞打败了鲜卑人。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year, Geng Yao sent Sima to lead several thousand Hu soldiers to defeat the Xianbei.

古文：冬，渔阳太守又遣乌桓兵击之，斩首八百级，获牛、马、生口。
现代文：冬天，渔阳太守又派乌桓军队进攻鲜卑，杀了八百人，获得牛、马和人口。
English: In winter, Emperor Yuyang sent the Wuhuan army to attack Xianbei again, killing eight hundred people and gaining cattle, horses and population.

古文：乌桓豪人扶漱官勇健，每与鲜卑战，辄陷敌，诏赐号 率众君 。
现代文：乌桓的豪杰扶漱官英勇强健，每次同鲜卑作战，他总是深入敌阵，皇帝下诏书赐给他 率众君 的称号。
English: Wu Huan's hero, Fu Shuangguan, was heroic and strong. Every time he fought with the lowly, he always went deep into the enemy's lines. The emperor gave him the title of "leading all princes" in an imperial edict.

古文：阳嘉元年冬，耿晔遣乌桓亲汉都尉戎朱率众王侯咄归等，出塞抄击鲜卑，大斩获而还，赐咄归等已下为率众王、侯、长，赐彩缯各有差。
现代文：阳嘉元年冬天，耿晔派乌桓亲漠都尉戎朱魔率领咄归等众位王侯，出边塞包抄进攻鲜卑，杀了很多敌人并获得很多东西回来。朝廷赐给咄归等以下的人为率众王、侯、长，赏给他们不同数目的彩色丝帛。
English: In the winter of the first year of Yang Jia, Geng Yao sent Wu Huan Kinshimai's lieutenant, Rong Zhu Mao, to lead many princes such as Gui Gui. They went to the border to encircle and attack the Xianbei, killed a lot of enemies and gained a lot of things back. The imperial court gave the kings, princes and chiefs led by people below Gui Gui, and awarded them different numbers of colored silk cocoons.

古文：鲜卑后寇辽东属国，于是耿晔乃移屯辽东无虑城拒之。
现代文：鲜卑后来入侵辽东属国，于是耿晔就将驻营搬到辽东的无虑城以抵御鲜卑。
English: Xianbei later invaded the Liaodong Province, so Geng Yao moved his camp to the carefree city in Liaodong to resist Xianbei.

古文：二年春，匈奴中郎将赵稠遣从事将南匈奴骨都侯夫沈等，出塞击鲜卑，破之，斩获甚众，诏赐夫沈金印紫绶及缣彩各有差。
现代文：二年春天，匈奴中郎将赵稠派从事率领南匈奴骨都侯夫沈等人，出边塞进攻鲜卑，打败了鲜卑人，杀了很多鲜卑人，获得的东西很多，天子下诏书赐给夫沈金印紫绶和不同数量的丝织品。
English: In the spring of the second year, the Xiongnu middle-man sent Zhao Zeguo to lead the Southern Xiongnu capital Hof Shen and others to attack the Xianbei, defeated the Xianbei, killed a lot of Xianbei, and obtained a lot of things. The emperor gave the husband Shen gold-sealed purple satin and a different amount of silk fabrics.

古文：秋，鲜卑穿塞入马城，代郡太守击之，不能克。
现代文：秋天，鲜卑人穿过边塞进入马城，代郡太守攻打鲜卑人，未能取胜。
English: In autumn, the Xianbei people crossed the border fortress into Ma Cheng, and the deputy county governor attacked the Xianbei people, but failed to win.

古文：后其至鞬死，鲜卑抄盗差稀。
现代文：后来其至犍死了，鲜卑人的抄掠入侵逐渐减少。
English: Later, when his son-in-law died, the raiding invasion of the Xianbei people gradually decreased.

古文：桓帝时，鲜卑檀石槐者，其父投鹿侯，初从匈奴军三年，其妻在家生子。
现代文：桓帝时，鲜卑有个叫檀石槐的人，他的父亲叫投鹿侯，起初在匈奴从军三年，他的妻子在家中生了孩子。
English: At the time of Emperor Huan, there was a man named Danshihong in Xianbei. His father was named Toulu Hou. At first, he served in the Xiongnu army for three years. His wife gave birth to a child at home.

古文：投鹿侯归，怪欲杀之。
现代文：投鹿侯回来后，感到奇怪，想杀掉孩子。
English: When she returned, she felt strange and wanted to kill the child.

古文：妻言尝昼行，闻雷震，仰天视而雹入其口，因吞之，遂身，十月而产，此子必有奇异，且宜长视。
现代文：妻子说她曾经在大白天走路，听到雷响，就抬头朝天上看，刚好有冰雹掉进嘴裹，她就吞了下去，接着就怀了孕，十个月后生下孩子，这个孩子必定有过人的地方，最好暂且抚养他长大。
English: The wife said that she had been walking in broad daylight, heard thunder, looked up at the sky, just as hail fell into her mouth, she swallowed it, and then became pregnant. Ten months later, she gave birth to a child. This child must have had a human place. It is best to raise him for the time being.

古文：投鹿侯不听，遂弃之。
现代文：投鹿侯不听，就将孩子丢掉了。
English: When he didn't listen, he threw the child away.

古文：妻私语家令收养焉，名檀石槐。
现代文：妻子私下告诉娘家人，要他们收养，取名为檀石槐。
English: The wife privately told her daughter's family that she wanted them to adopt her and name her Danshihong.

古文：年十四五，勇健有智略。
现代文：檀石槐十四五岁时，英勇强健而有智谋。
English: At the age of fourteen or fifteen, Danshihong was brave, strong and resourceful.

古文：异部大人抄取其外家牛、羊，檀石槐单骑追击之，所向无前，悉还得所亡者，由是部落畏服。
现代文：另外一个部族的首领掠夺走他外公家的牛羊，檀石槐只身骑马追去和他们交战，所向无敌，将被抢去的牛马全部追了回来。
English: The leader of another tribe plundered the cattle and sheep of his grandfather's family, and the sandstone donkey chased them on horseback and fought with them. He was invincible, and all the stolen cattle and horses were chased back.

古文：乃施法禁，平曲直，无敢犯者，遂推以为大人。
现代文：自此以后部落中的人对他都害怕服从。于是檀石槐颁布法律禁令，评判是非，没有人敢违犯，终于被推为部族首领。
English: From then on, the people in the tribe were afraid to obey him. Therefore, Dangshizhen issued a legal ban, judged right and wrong, and no one dared to violate it. Finally, he was promoted to the tribal leader.

古文：檀石槐乃立庭于弹汗山仇水上，去高柳北三百余里，兵马甚盛，东西部大人皆归焉。
现代文：檀石槐于是在弹汗山歌仇水边建立了王庭，距高柳北边有三百多里。檀石槐的人马非常强盛，东部和西部的部族首领都归顺檀石槐。
English: So, Dangseokjeong built a royal palace on the edge of the Songhe River, more than three hundred miles north of Goryeo. The people of Dangseokjeong were very powerful, and the leaders of the eastern and western tribes all belonged to Shun Dangseokjeong.

古文：因南抄缘边，北拒丁零，东却夫馀，西击乌孙，尽据匈奴故地，东西万四千余里，南北七千余里，网罗山川水泽盐池。
现代文：檀石槐趁此机会向南抄掠汉边境地区，北面抵御丁零，束面击退夫余，西面进攻乌孙，占领了匈奴原先的全部地盘，东西长达一万四千多里，南北宽七千多里，山川水泽和盐池都在其管辖范围。
English: Taking this opportunity, Danshihong took advantage of the opportunity to plunder the Han border area to the south, resisting Dingzheng in the north, repelling Fuyu in the north, and attacking Usun in the west. It occupied the entire territory of the Xiongnu, with a length of more than fourteen thousand miles from east to west, a width of more than seven thousand miles from north to south, and mountains, rivers, lakes and ponds are all under its jurisdiction.

古文：永寿二年秋，檀石槐遂将三四千骑寇云中。
现代文：永寿二年秋天，檀石槐于是率领三四千骑兵入侵云中。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Yongshou's reign, Dan Shih led three or four thousand cavalry to invade Yunzhong.

古文：延熹元年，鲜卑寇北边。
现代文：延熹元年，鲜卑入侵北部边境。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, the Xianbei invaded the northern border.

古文：冬，使匈奴中郎将张奂率南单于出塞击之，斩首二百级。
现代文：冬天，朝廷派匈奴中郎将张奂率领南单于出边界攻打鲜卑，杀了二百人。
English: In the winter, the imperial court sent the Xiongnu Zhonglang to attack the Xianbei at the out-of-bounds of Nandan, led by Zhang Xuanru, and killed two hundred people.

古文：二年，复入雁门，杀数百人，大抄掠而去。
现代文：二年，鲜卑人又闯入雁门，杀死了几百个人，大肆抢掠而去。
English: Two years later, the Xianbei broke into the Wild Goose Gate again, killed several hundred people, and plundered away.

古文：六年夏，千余骑寇辽东属国。
现代文：六年夏天，一千多鲜卑骑兵入侵辽东属国。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, more than a thousand cavalrymen invaded the Liaodong Province.

古文：九年夏，遂分骑数万人入缘边九郡，并杀掠吏人。于是复遣张奂击之，鲜卑乃出塞去。
现代文：九年夏天，鲜卑竟然分派几万骑兵进入沿边的九个郡，并且杀害掳掠官吏百姓，于是朝廷又派张奂进攻鲜卑入侵者，敌人造才出边塞离去。
English: In the summer of the ninth year, Xianbei even dispatched tens of thousands of cavalry to enter the nine counties along the border, and killed and plundered officials and people. Therefore, the court also sent Zhang Qian to attack the Xianbei invaders, and the enemy was forced to leave the border fortress.

古文：朝廷积患之而不能制，遂遣使持印绶封檀石槐为王，欲与和亲。
现代文：朝廷长期对鲜卑感到忧虑，但又没法制止，就派使者拿了印绶封檀石槐为王，想同他和亲。
English: For a long time, the imperial court was worried about Xianbei, but they could not stop him, so they sent an envoy to take the seal and seal the sandal stone as the king, and wanted to be related to him.

古文：檀石槐不肯受，而寇抄滋甚。
现代文：檀石槐不肯接受，而且入侵掠夺越来越严重。
English: The sandstone cliffs refused to accept it, and the invasion and plunder became more and more serious.

古文：乃自分其地为三部：从右北平以东至辽东，接夫余、濊貊二十余邑为东部，从右北平以西至上谷十余邑为中部，从上谷以西至敦煌、乌孙二十余邑为西部。各置大人主领之，皆属檀石槐。
现代文：接着，檀石槐自己将地盘分为三部，从右北平以束到辽东，和夫余、减貊相连的二十多个城邑为束部，从右北平以西到上谷的十多个城邑为中部，从上谷以西到敦煌、乌孙的二十多个城邑为西部，各设一名首领管辖，他们都臣属于檀石槐。
English: Next, Danshih himself divided the territory into three parts, from the right Beiping to the east of Liaodong, and the more than 20 townships connected to Hofu and Yancheng to the west, the more than 10 townships from the west of the right Beiping to the upper valley to the center, and the more than 20 townships from the west of the upper valley to Dunhuang and Wusun to the west, each under the jurisdiction of a leader. They all belong to Danshih.

古文：灵帝立，幽、并、凉三州缘边诸郡无岁不被鲜卑寇抄，杀略不可胜数。
现代文：灵帝即位以后，幽州、并州、凉州三个州沿边各郡没有一年不遭到鲜卑的入侵抄掠，被杀害和掳掠的人没法计算。
English: After Emperor Ling ascended the throne, there was not a single year in which the counties along the three provinces of Yuzhou, Bozhou and Liangzhou were not invaded and plundered, and the number of people killed and plundered was incalculable.

古文：熹平三年冬，鲜卑入北地，太守夏育率休著屠各追击破之。
现代文：熹平三年冬天，鲜卑进入韭丝，太守夏直率领休着屠各追赶击败了叠圣皇军队。
English: In the winter of the 3rd year of the Heian period, when Shinshibe entered the Hanseatic League, the Taishu (governor) Xia Zhizhong led the rest of the troops to chase down and defeat the army of the Holy Emperor.

古文：迁育为护乌桓校尉。
现代文：朝廷将李育调任为护乌桓校尉。
English: The imperial court transferred Li Yu to the post of Wu Huan's bodyguard.

古文：五年，鲜卑寇幽州。
现代文：五年，鲜卑入侵幽州。
English: Five years later, the Xianbei invaded Yuzhou.

古文：六年夏，鲜卑寇三边。
现代文：六年夏天，鲜卑侵犯三州边境。
English: In the summer of the sixth year, Xianbei invaded the border of the three states.

古文：秋，夏育上言： 鲜卑寇边，自春以来，三十余发，请征幽州诸郡兵出塞击之，一冬二春，必能禽灭。 
现代文：秋天，夏育上书说： 鲜卑入侵边境，自春天以来，发生三十多起，请微调幽州各郡的部队出边塞攻打鲜卑，用一个冬天和两个春天的时间，一定能够消灭敌人。 
English: In the autumn, Xia Yu wrote: There have been more than 30 incidents of Xianbei invading the border since the spring. Please fine-tune the troops of various counties in Yuzhou to attack Xianbei outside the border fortress. With one winter and two springs, you will surely be able to eliminate the enemy.

古文：朝廷未许。
现代文：朝廷没有同意。
English: The court did not agree.

古文：先是，护羌校尉田晏坐事论刑被原，欲立功自效，乃请中常侍王甫求得为将，甫因此议遣兵，与育并力讨贼。帝乃拜晏为破鲜卑中郎将。
现代文：在这以前护羌校尉田晏因事被判罪但被赦免，他想通过立功效力，就请求中常侍王甫帮忙而得以当上将领，王甫因此商议派兵与夏育合力征讨敌人，皇帝于是授田晏为破鲜卑中郎将。
English: Prior to this, the escort lieutenant Tian Yao was convicted of a crime but was pardoned. He wanted to become a general through meritorious service, so he asked the vice-minister Wang Fu for help. Wang Fu therefore negotiated to send soldiers to join forces with Xia Yu to conquer the enemy, and the emperor then awarded Tian Yao the title of junior lieutenant general.

古文：大臣多有不同，乃召百官议朝堂。
现代文：大臣中很多人不同意。皇帝于是召集大臣们在朝堂上商讨遣件事情。
English: Many of the ministers disagreed. The emperor then summoned the ministers to discuss the matter in the imperial court.

古文：议郎蔡邕议曰：《书》戒猾夏，《易》伐鬼方，周有猃狁、蛮荆之师，汉有阗颜、瀚海之事。
现代文：议郎蔡邕发表意见说：《尚书》告诫警惕蛮夷扰乱华夏，《周易》记载高宗征讨鬼方。周朝派军队攻打捡狁、蛮荆，汉有到阗颜山和瀚海的事情。
English: Councilor Cai Wei expressed his opinion: "Shang Shu" warned against the barbarians disturbing Huaxia, "Zhou Yi" recorded Gao Zong's conquest of the evil side. Zhou Dynasty sent troops to attack and collect straw and barley, and the Han Dynasty had to go to the Yan Mountains and the vast sea.

古文：征讨殊类，所由尚矣。
现代文：征讨其他族类，由来已久了。
English: It has been a long time since other ethnic groups were solicited.

古文：然而时有同异，势有可否，故谋有得失，事有成败，不可齐也。
现代文：然而时代有相同的地方也有不同的地方，形势有可以做的条件也有不可以做的条件，所以谋划有得有失，事情有成有败，不可一样看待。
English: However, the times have the same places and different places, the situation has conditions that can be done and conditions that cannot be done, so there are gains and losses in planning, things have successes and failures, and they cannot be viewed the same way.

古文：武帝情存远略，志辟四方，南诛百越，北讨强胡，西伐大宛，东并朝鲜。
现代文：武帝心怀深远的谋略，立志要开拓四方的边境，南方征讨百越，北方讨伐强大的胡人，西方攻打大宛，东方吞并朝鲜。
English: Emperor Wu had a far-reaching strategy in mind, determined to open up the borders of the four sides, the south to fight the hundred Viets, the north to fight the powerful Hu people, the west to attack Dawan, and the east to annex Korea.

古文：因文、景之蓄，借天下之饶，数十年间，官民俱匮。
现代文：武帝凭藉文帝、景帝时候的积蓄，依靠全国的富足，几十年时间，官府百姓全都匮乏。
English: Emperor Wu relied on the savings of the time of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing to rely on the wealth of the whole country. For decades, the government and the people were all in need.

古文：乃兴盐铁酒榷之利，设告缗重税之令。民不堪命，起为盗贼，关东纷扰，道路不通。
现代文：于是实行国家专有卖盐、铸铁和卖酒的利益，颁布奖励告发富户隐瞒财产的人和增加税款的法令，老百姓没法承受，就起来反叛当盗贼，关东地区动荡不安，道路已经中断。
English: As a result, the interests of selling salt, cast iron and selling alcohol, which are exclusively owned by the state, were implemented, and a decree was issued to reward those who denounce the rich for concealing their property and to increase taxes. The common people could not bear it, so they rebelled and became thieves. The Kanto region is in turmoil, and roads have been interrupted.

古文：绣衣直指之使，奋鈇钺而并出。
现代文：身穿绣花衣服的直指使者，举着鈇娥同时出京。
English: Wearing an embroidered dress, the finger-pointing emissary, holding Chang'e, simultaneously left for Beijing.

古文：既而觉悟，乃息兵罢役，封丞相为富民侯。
现代文：不久皇帝醒悟，这才停止战争，罢免劳役，封丞相为富民侯。
English: Soon the emperor came to his senses, and only then did he stop the war, dismiss the forced laborers, and appoint the chancellor as Fumin Hou.

古文：故主父偃曰： 夫务战胜，穷武事，未有不悔者也。 
现代文：所以主父偃说： 一心想着打胜仗，一味忙于战事，没有人不后悔。 
English: That's why Master Zou said, "With one's heart set on winning the war and one's mind preoccupied with the war, no one is without regret."

古文：夫以世宗神武，将相良猛，财赋充实，所拓广远，犹有悔焉。
现代文：凭着世宗神明英武，将相贤良勇猛，财物贡赋充实富足，所开拓的土地辽阔遥远，仍然感到后悔。
English: I still feel regret for the vast and distant lands I have explored thanks to the wisdom and bravery of the world-renowned Shinto deities, the virtuous and brave leaders of the world, and the rich and plentiful financial and material tribute.

古文：况今人财并乏，事劣昔时乎！
现代文：何况现在人力财物两方面都不足，事情要比从前差远了呢？
English: What's more, both human and material resources are now inadequate, and things are much worse than before.

古文：自匈奴遁逃，鲜卑强盛，据其故地，称兵十万，才力劲健，意智益生。
现代文：自从匈奴逃走以后，鲜卑强大兴盛，占领了匈奴原先的地方，号称有十万军队，财力强劲，越加生发心计。
English: Since the Xiongnu fled, the Xianbei have prospered mightily, occupied the original place of the Xiongnu, claimed to have a hundred thousand troops, strong financial resources, and more and more plans.

古文：加以关塞不严，禁网多漏，精金良铁，皆为贼有；汉人逋逃，为之谋主，兵利马疾，过于匈奴。
现代文：加上边关把守不严，法纲禁令多有疏漏，精良的铜铁，都为敌人所拥有；逃脱追捕的汉人，为他们当主要谋划人。鲜卑的武器锋利，马又速度快，这都超过匈奴。
English: In addition, the frontier gates were not strictly guarded, there were many omissions in the prohibition of laws and regulations, and the enemy possessed all the fine copper and iron. The Han people who escaped the pursuit were the main planners for them. The inferior weapons were sharp, and the horses were fast, all of which were superior to the Huns.

古文：昔段良将，习兵善战，有事西羌，犹十余年。
现代文：以前段颖是优秀的将领，他熟悉军事，善于作战，对西方羌人用兵，尚且打了十多年。
English: In the past, Duan Ying was an excellent general. He was familiar with military affairs and good at fighting. He used soldiers against the Western Han people and fought for more than ten years.

古文：今育、晏才策，未必过，鲜卑种众，不弱于曩时。
现代文：现在夏育、田晏的才能谋略，未必超过段频，鲜卑种族部众，不比以往弱小。
English: Now, Xia Yu and Tian Qi's ability to strategize may not exceed the frequency of the section, and they are not inferior to other ethnic groups, and they are not weaker than before.

古文：而虚计二载，自许有成，若祸结兵连，岂得中休？
现代文：而他们凭空打算用两年时间，自以为能够成功，如果双方军队交战，结下灾难，怎么能够得到中止呢？
English: But they planned to use two years out of thin air, thinking that they could succeed. If the two armies fight and create a disaster, how can they be stopped?

古文：当复征发众人，转运无已，是为耗竭诸夏，并力蛮夷。
现代文：一定又要征调许多人，无休无止地运送东西，这是耗尽中原的力量，给蛮夷增加实力。
English: It is certain that many people will have to be conscripted again to transport things endlessly. This will deplete the strength of the Central Plains and increase the strength of the barbarians.

古文：夫边垂之患，手足之蚧搔；中国之困，胸背之瘭疽。
现代文：边境的灾难，好比手脚上的疥疮；中原的困乏，好比胸前和后背的毒疮。
English: The disasters at the border are like scabies on the hands and feet; the hardships in the Central Plains are like poisonous sores on the chest and back.

古文：方今郡县盗贼尚不能禁，况此丑虏而可伏乎！
现代文：眼下郡县的盗贼尚且不能制止，何况这样的敌人难道能够制服吗？
English: At the moment, the county's thieves are still unable to stop, let alone can such an enemy be subdued?

古文：昔高祖忍平城之耻，吕后弃慢书之诟，方之于今，何者为甚？
现代文：从前高祖忍着在平城所受的耻辱，吕后抛开匈奴的轻慢书信所给予的污辱，逭同现在相比，哪一个更严重呢？
English: Compared to now, which is more serious, the humiliation Gaozu endured in Pingcheng, or the humiliation inflicted by Lv Hou, who cast aside the contemptuous letters of the Xiongnu?

古文：天设山河，秦筑长城，汉起塞垣，所以别内外，异殊俗也。
现代文：上天创设的山河，秦修筑长城，汉建造边关城墙，都是用来分开国内国外，区别不同的习俗。
English: The mountains and rivers created by heaven, the Great Wall built by the Qin Dynasty, and the Border Wall built by the Han Dynasty, are all used to separate domestic and foreign countries and distinguish different customs.

古文：苟无国内侮之患则可矣，岂与虫蚁狡寇计争往来哉！
现代文：衹要是不出现使国家面临窘迫、受到侮辱的灾难就可以了，难道需要同蚁虫和狡猾的敌寇计较相争长短吗？
English: Is it not enough that there should be no calamity to embarrass and humiliate the nation? Is it necessary to contend with the ant-worm and the cunning of the enemy?

古文：虽或破之，岂可殄尽，而方令本朝为之旰食乎！
现代文：虽然有时打败鲜卑，难道能将他们全部消灭吗？
English: Although we sometimes defeat the lowly, can we eliminate them all?

古文：夫专胜者未必克，挟疑者未必败。
现代文：而且现在皇上忙得连吃饭的时间都没有呢？一心想获胜的人未必胜利，持怀疑态度的人未必失败。
English: And now the emperor is so busy that he doesn't even have time to eat? Those who are determined to win may not win, and those who are skeptical may not fail.

古文：众所谓危，圣人不任，朝议不嫌，明主不行也。
现代文：众人都认为危险，圣明的人不予采用；朝堂上的意见觉得旮猜疑的地方，贤明的君主不予实施。
English: Where all men think it dangerous, wise men will not adopt it; where the opinion of the court is suspect, wise princes will not execute it.

古文：昔淮南王安谏伐越曰： 天子之兵，有征无战。言其莫敢校也。
现代文：从前淮南王刘安劝阻征伐越国时说： 天子的军队，衹有征讨而没有交战，意思是说没有人敢对抗。
English: When Liu An, the king of Huainan, tried to dissuade the conquest of Yue, he said: "The army of the Son of Heaven has never been conquered, but has never fought. This means that no one dares to fight against it.

古文：如使越人蒙死以逆执事厮舆之卒，有一不备而归者，虽得越王之首，而犹为大汉羞之。 
现代文：如果越国人不顾生死来同天子对抗，那些出身微贱的士卒们万一没有防备战败而归，即使得到了越国王的脑袋，臣仍然为大汉感到耻辱。 
English: If the people of Viet Nam, regardless of life and death, fight against the Son of Heaven, those low-born soldiers will not be prepared for defeat, and even if they get the head of the king of Viet, the minister will still be ashamed of the big man.

古文：而欲以齐民易丑虏，皇威辱外夷，就如其言，犹已危矣，况乎得失不可量邪！
现代文：而且打算以乎民百姓去换取众多的敌虏，拿皇上的声威去蒙受外夷的侮辱，就算像他们所说的那样，就已经危险了，何况成败没法估计呢？
English: Moreover, if they intend to exchange the people for a large number of captives, and take the emperor's prestige to suffer the insults of foreigners, even if it is as they say, it is already dangerous, and what's more, success or failure cannot be estimated?

古文：昔珠崖郡反，孝元皇帝纳贾捐之言，而下诏曰： 珠崖背畔，今议者或曰可讨，或曰弃之。
现代文：从前珠崖郡反叛，孝元皇壶采纳置扭的意见，而且下诏书说： 迭崖背叛，现在大家的意见有的主张可以征讨，有的认为放弃算了。
English: Once upon a time, Zhuya County rebelled, and Emperor Xiaoyuan adopted Zhuyao's opinion, and the following edict said: "Due to Zhuyao's betrayal, now some of our opinions can be solicited, and some think that we should give up."

古文：朕日夜惟思，羞威不行，则欲诛之；通于时变，复忧万民。
现代文：朕日夜考虑，耻于威权不能推行，就想去征讨珠崖；根据时世变化作变通处理，又担心成千上万的百姓。
English: I considered day and night, ashamed of the fact that authoritarianism cannot be implemented, I wanted to go to conquer the cliff; according to the changes of the times to make flexible treatment, but also worried about thousands of people.

古文：夫万民之饥与远蛮之不可讨，何者为大？
现代文：天下百姓的饥饿同不去征讨远方的蛮夷相比，哪个重要？
English: Which is more important, the hunger of the people of the world, or not going to conquer the barbarians far away?

古文：宗庙之祭，凶年犹有不备，况避不嫌之辱哉！
现代文：宗庙的祭祀，在灾荒年份尚且不能充分备列，何况回避算不上仇恨的侮辱呢？
English: The sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple cannot be fully prepared in the years of disaster and famine, not to mention that avoidance is not an insult of hatred?

古文：今关东大困，无以相赡，又当动兵，非但劳民而已。
现代文：现在关东非常穷困，拿不出东西救济他们，又准备兴起战争，就不仅仅是劳动百姓了。
English: It is not just the working people who are now very poor in the Kanto region, who cannot afford to help them, and who are preparing for war.

古文：其罢珠崖郡。 
现代文：所以撤销珠崖郡。 
English: Therefore, Zhuya County was revoked.

古文：此元帝所以发德音也。
现代文：这是元帝发布的仁德之音。
English: This is the "sound of benevolence" issued by the Yuan Emperor.

古文：夫恤民救急，虽成郡列县，尚犹充之，况障塞之外，未尝为民居者乎！
现代文：体恤百姓，救济急需，即使是完整的郡和许多县尚且放弃，何况边关外面从未成为百姓居住的地方呢！
English: Compassion for the people, relief is urgently needed, even complete counties and many counties have been abandoned, not to mention that the outside of the border has never been a place where people live!

古文：守边之术，李牧善其略；保塞之论，严尤申其要。
现代文：守卫边境的办法，李牧擅长这方面的谋略；守保边关的见解，严尤说出了其中关键。
English: The method of guarding the border, Li Mu is good at this kind of strategy; the opinion of guarding the border, strictly speaking out the key.

古文：遗业犹在，文章具存。循二子之策，守先帝之规，臣曰可矣。
现代文：他们留下的业绩还在，文章都在，依照他们俩所说的策略，遵守先代皇帝的谋划，臣认为可以了。
English: The achievements they left behind are still there, the articles are still there, according to the strategy they both said, to comply with the previous emperor's plan, the minister thought it was okay.

古文：帝不从，遂遣夏育出高柳，田晏出云中，匈奴中郎将臧旻率南单于出雁门，各将万骑，三道出塞二千余里。
现代文：皇帝不予采纳，于是派夏育由高柳出发，田晏由云中出发，匈奴中郎将臧曼率领南单于由雁门出发，各自率领一万骑兵，分三路出边塞二千多里。
English: The emperor did not accept this, so Pai Xia Yu set out from Gaoliu, Tian Yao set out from Yunzhong, and Xiongnu Zhongro set out from Nan Shan with Qimen leading, each leading ten thousand cavalrymen and covering more than two thousand miles in three routes.

古文：檀石槐命三部大人各帅众逆战，育等大败，丧其节传辎重，各将数十骑奔还，死者十七八。
现代文：檀石槐命令三部首领各自统率部众迎战，夏育等人大败，丧失了符节和辎重，各自带了几十个骑兵逃了回来，死的人达十之七八。
English: Dang Shih-tao ordered the leaders of the three departments to lead their subordinates to meet the battle. Xia Yu and others were defeated, lost their coats of arms and baggage, and each fled back with dozens of cavalrymen. Seventy-eight out of ten people died.

古文：三将槛车征下狱，赎为庶人。
现代文：三位将领被朝廷用囚车征召下狱，他们用钱将自己赎为一般百姓。
English: The three generals were called out of prison in a prison van by the court, and they used the money to redeem themselves as ordinary people.

古文：冬，鲜卑寇辽西。
现代文：冬天，鲜卑入侵邃西。
English: In winter, Xianbei invaded western Shaanxi.

古文：光和元年冬，又寇酒泉，缘边莫不被毒。
现代文：光和元年冬天，鲜卑又进犯酒泉，沿边各地没有不遭受毒害的。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Guanghe era, the Xianbei also invaded the wine spring, and there was no place along the border that was not poisoned.

古文：种众日多，田畜射猎不足给食，檀石槐乃自徇行，见乌集秦水广从数百里，水停不流，其中有鱼，不能得之。
现代文：鲜卑人口日益增多，农业、畜牧和射猎满足不了吃饭，檀石槐于是亲自巡视，他见到乌侯塞水有几百里宽阔，水不流动，水中有鱼，但没办法得到鱼。
English: The population of Xianbei was increasing day by day, and agriculture, animal husbandry and hunting could not meet the demand for food. Therefore, Danshi Yao personally inspected. He saw that the water of Wuhou River was hundreds of miles wide, the water did not flow, there were fish in the water, but there was no way to get fish.

古文：闻倭人善网捕，于是东击倭人国，得千余家，徙置秦水上。令捕鱼以助粮食。
现代文：檀石槐听说倭国人善于用纲捕鱼，于是向东进攻倭国，获得一千多家的倭国人，将他们迁到秦水边居住，要他们捕鱼，以弥补粮食不足。
English: He heard that the Wakoku people were good at catching fish with a crane, so he attacked Wakoku to the east, obtained more than a thousand Wakoku people, moved them to live near the Qin River, and asked them to catch fish to make up for the shortage of food.

古文：光和中，檀石槐死，时年四十五，子和连代立。
现代文：光和年间，檀石槐死了，时年四十五岁，他的儿子和连继承职位。
English: At the age of forty-five, Danshihong died in the year of Guanghe, and his son and company inherited the post.

古文：和连才力不及父，亦数为寇抄，性贪淫，断法不平，众畔者半。
现代文：和连的能力比不上他父亲，他也多次入侵抄掠汉之边境，和连本性贪婪荒淫，判决诉讼不公正，背叛他的人有一半。
English: Wo Lian's ability is not as good as his father's. He has also invaded and plundered Han's borders many times. Wo Lian is greedy and lewd by nature. He judges lawsuits unfairly, and half of his people have betrayed him.

古文：后出攻北地，廉人善弩射者射中和连，即死。
现代文：后来他外出攻打北地，廉县有个擅长射箭的入射中了和连，当即被射死。
English: Later, he went out to attack the North, and a good archer in Lian County shot and hit the company, and was immediately shot dead.

古文：其子骞曼年小，兄子魁头立。
现代文：和连的儿子骞曼年龄小，和连的侄子魁玺继位。
English: Hou Lian's son, Qimen, was younger, and Hou Lian's nephew, Qui Xuan, succeeded to the throne.

古文：后骞曼长大，与魁头争国，众遂离散。
现代文：后来画曼长大成人，与宴岖争夺国家，部众因此分裂溃散。
English: Later, when the painter became an adult, he competed with Banpaku for the country, and the group split and dispersed.

古文：魁头死，弟步度根立。
现代文：皇妪死后，他的弟弟步度根继位。
English: After the death of the Empress Dowager, his younger brother Budugen succeeded to the throne.

古文：自檀石槐后，诸大人遂世相传袭。
现代文：自檀石槐以后，各部首领就世代继承。
English: Since Dangshizhong, the leaders of each department have been inherited for generations.

古文：论曰：四夷之暴，其势互强矣。
现代文：论曰：四方夷人横暴，在力量上交互强盛。
English: On the other hand, it was said that the barbarians in the four directions were more violent and more powerful than each other.

古文：匈奴炽于隆汉，西羌猛于中兴。
现代文：匈奴在漠兴旺时期强盛，西羌在中兴时期凶猛。
English: The Xiongnu was strong during the prosperous period of the desert, and the Xidi was fierce during the prosperous period.

古文：而灵、献之间，二虏迭盛。石槐骁猛，尽有单于之地；蹋顿凶桀，公据辽西之土。
现代文：但在灵帝、献帝之间，乌桓、鲜卑先后强大，檀石槐骁勇凶猛，占领了单于的全部地盘，蹋顿凶悍非常，公然占领辽西的土地。
English: However, between Lingdi and Xiandi, Wuhuan and Xianbei were successively strong, Danshi was brave and fierce, and occupied the entire territory of Xianyu, and Shandong was very fierce, and openly occupied the land of West Liao.

古文：其陵跨中国，结患生人者，靡世而宁焉。
现代文：他们侵凌横跨中原，给人民造成灾祸，没有一个时期能够安宁。
English: They have encroached across the Central Plains, wreaking havoc on the people, and there has never been a period of peace.

古文：然制御上略，历世无闻；周、汉之策，仅得中下。
现代文：然而制服驾驭外族的上等策略，历代都没听说；周朝、汉朝的谋略，仅仅够得上中策和下策。
English: However, the superior strategy of the uniform driving the foreign race has not been heard of in all ages; the strategy of the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty is only enough for the upper middle and lower strategies.

古文：将天之冥数，以至于是乎？
现代文：难道是冥冥天数，造成这样的结果吗？
English: Was it the number of days that caused such a result?

古文：赞曰：二虏首施，鲠我北垂。道暢则驯，时薄先离。
现代文：赞曰：乌桓、鲜卑窥伺观望，为害我北部边境朝廷道德畅达，他们就驯服；时世衰微，他们就背离。
English: Zang said: Wuhuan, Xianbei peeped and watched, to the detriment of our northern border, the imperial court's morality was smooth, they tamed; when the times were fading, they deviated.

