古文：豫章太守顾邵，是雍之子。
现代文：豫章太守顾劭是顾雍的儿子。
English: Emperor Yuanzhang's father-in-law, Gu Xi, was Gu Yong's son.

古文：邵在郡卒，雍盛集僚属，自围棋。
现代文：顾劭死在任内，当时顾雍正请同僚聚会，饮酒作乐，他自己在下着围棋。
English: When Gu Yongzheng invited his colleagues to gather and drink alcohol, he himself was playing Go.

古文：外启信至，而无儿书，虽神气不变，而心了其故。
现代文：外面禀报说豫章有送信人到，却没有他儿子的书信。顾雍虽然神态不变，可是心中已经明白了其中缘故。
English: A false report said that there was a messenger from Yuanzhang, but there was no letter from his son. Although Gu Yong's demeanor remained unchanged, he already understood the reason in his heart.

古文：以爪掐掌，血流沾褥。
现代文：他悲痛得用指甲紧掐手掌，血流出来沾湿了座褥。
English: Grief-stricken, he pressed his fingernails into his palms. Blood oozed out and drenched his face.

古文：宾客既散，方叹曰： 已无延陵之高，岂可有丧明之责？ 
现代文：直到宾客散去以后，才悲伤地叹气说： 已经不可能有延陵季子那么高尚，难道我可以再受因丧子而哭瞎眼睛的责备吗？ 
English: It was only after the guests had dispersed that she sighed sadly and said, "It is no longer possible to be as noble as Yanling Qizi. Can I be reproached for crying my eyes out over the loss of my son?

古文：于是豁情散哀，颜色自若。
现代文：于是就放开胸怀，驱散哀痛之情，神色自若。
English: So he let go of his heart, dispelled the feeling of sorrow, and looked confident.

古文：嵇中散临刑东市，神气不变。
现代文：中散大夫嵇康在法场处决时，神色完全没有变化。
English: When Dr. Zhongshan Qikang was executed at the scene of the crime, his expression did not change at all.

古文：索琴弹之，奏广陵散。
现代文：要来了琴，弹奏了一曲《广陵散》。
English: When the harpist came, he played a piece called "Guangling San."

古文：曲终曰： 袁孝尼尝请学此散，吾靳固不与，广陵散于今绝矣！ 
现代文：弹完后说： 袁孝尼曾经请求学这支曲子，我吝惜固执不肯传给他，《广陵散》从今以后要失传了！ 
English: After he finished playing, he said: Yuan Xiaoni once asked me to learn this piece, but I grudgingly and stubbornly refused to pass it on to him. "Guangling San" will be lost from now on!

古文：太学生三千人上书，请以为师，不许。
现代文：当时，三千名太学生曾上书，请求拜他为师，朝廷不准许。
English: At that time, three thousand students had written to the court asking to be taught by him, but the court would not allow it.

古文：文王亦寻悔焉。
现代文：嵇康被杀后，文王司马昭随即也后悔了。
English: After Gongkang was killed, King Sima Zhao immediately regretted it.

古文：夏侯太初尝倚柱作书。时大雨，霹雳破所倚柱，衣服焦然，神色无变，书亦如故。
现代文：夏侯太初有一次靠着柱子写字，当时下着大雨，雷电击坏了他靠着的柱子，衣服烧焦了，他神色不变，照样写字。
English: At the beginning of the summer, Xia Hou once leaned against a pillar to write. At that time, it was raining heavily. The lightning destroyed the pillar he was leaning against. His clothes were scorched. His appearance remained unchanged, and he still wrote.

古文：宾客左右，皆跌荡不得住。
现代文：宾客和随从都跌跌撞撞，站立不稳。
English: Guests and attendants alike stumbled, unsteady on their feet.

古文：王戎七岁，尝与诸小儿游。看道边李树多子折枝。诸儿竞走取之，唯戎不动。
现代文：王戎七岁的时候，有一次和一些小孩儿出去游玩，看见路边的李树挂了很多果，压弯了树枝，小孩儿们争先恐后跑去摘李子，只有王戎站着不动。
English: When Wang Rong was seven years old, he once went out to play with some children. He saw a lot of fruit hanging from a roadside plum tree, bending the branches. The children scrambled to pick plums. Only Wang Rong stood still.

古文：人问之，答曰： 树在道边而多子，此必苦李。 
现代文：别人问他，他回答说： 树长在路边，还有这么多李子，这一定是苦的李子。 
English: When asked, he replied: "The tree grows by the roadside, and there are so many plums, it must be a bitter plum.

古文：取之，信然。
现代文：拿李子来一尝，果真是苦的。
English: Try the plum, it's really bitter.

古文：魏明帝于宣武场上断虎爪牙，纵百姓观之。
现代文：魏明帝在宣武场上将老虎关在笼中，举行人、虎搏斗表演，任凭百姓观赏。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei kept tigers in cages on the battlefield, held human and tiger fighting performances, and allowed the people to watch.

古文：王戎七岁，亦往看。
现代文：王戎当时七岁也跑去观看。
English: Wang Rong, who was seven years old at the time, also ran to watch.

古文：虎承闲攀栏而吼，其声震地，观者无不辟易颠仆。
现代文：老虎乘隙攀住栅栏大吼，吼声震天动地，围观的人全都吓得退避不迭，跌倒在地。
English: The tiger took advantage of a gap to cling to the fence and roar. The roar shook the earth. All the onlookers were so scared that they retreated and fell to the ground.

古文：戎湛然不动，了无恐色。
现代文：王戎却平平静静，一动不动，一点也不害怕。
English: Wang Rong, on the other hand, remained calm and motionless, and was not afraid at all.

古文：王戎为侍中，南郡太守刘肇遗筒中笺布五端，戎虽不受，厚报其书。
现代文：王戎任侍中的时候，南郡太守刘肇送给他十丈筒中细布，王戎虽然没有受礼，还是深情地给他写了一封回信。
English: When Wang Rong was an attendant, Liu Zhaowu, the governor of Nan County, presented him with a thin cloth in a ten-meter tube. Although Wang Rong did not receive the courtesy, he still wrote a reply to him affectionately.

古文：裴叔则被收，神气无变，举止自若。
现代文：裴叔则被逮捕时，神态不变，举动如常。
English: When Uncle Pei was arrested, his demeanor remained unchanged and he acted as usual.

古文：求纸笔作书。书成，救者多，乃得免。
现代文：要来纸笔写信给亲朋故旧，信发出后，营救他的人很多，才得以免罪。
English: He needed a pen and paper to write to his friends and relatives. After the letter was sent, many people came to his rescue, and he was exonerated.

古文：后位仪同三司。
现代文：后来位至仪同三司。
English: Later, he was promoted to the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：王夷甫尝属族人事，经时未行，遇于一处饮燕，因语之曰： 近属尊事，那得不行？ 
现代文：王夷甫曾经托族人办事，过很长时间族人还没有去办。后来两人在宴会上遇上，王夷甫便问那位族人： 原先托您办的事，怎么还不去办呢？ 
English: Wang Yifu once asked a tribesman to do something, but after a long time, the tribesman still hadn't done it. Later, the two met at a banquet, and Wang Yifu asked the tribesman: Why haven't you done what you were originally asked to do?

古文：族人大怒，便举樏掷其面。
现代文：族人听后非常生气，就举起食盒扔到他脸上。
English: The tribesmen were very angry after hearing this, so they picked up the lunch box and threw it at his face.

古文：夷甫都无言，盥洗毕，牵王丞相臂，与共载去。
现代文：王夷甫一言不发，洗干净后，挽着丞相王导的手，和他一起坐牛车走了。
English: Wang Yifu did not utter a word. After washing himself, he took the hand of the prime minister Wang Dao and rode away with him in the ox cart.

古文：在车中照镜语丞相曰： 汝看我眼光，迺出牛背上。 
现代文：在车里照着镜子，对王导说： 你看我的眼光，竟然超出牛背之上。 
English: Looking in the mirror in the car, he said to Wang Duwa: "Look at my eyes, they're even higher than a cow's back."

古文：裴遐在周馥所，馥设主人。
现代文：裴遐在周馥家做客，周馥以主人身分宴请大家。
English: Pei Yao was a guest at Zhou Ye's house. Zhou Ye invited everyone to the banquet as the host.

古文：遐与人围棋，馥司马行酒。
现代文：裴遐和别人下围棋，周馥的司马负责劝酒。
English: Pei Yao played Go with others, Zhou Yao's Sima was in charge of persuading others to drink.

古文：遐正戏，不时为饮。司马恚，因曳遐坠地。
现代文：裴遐当时正在下棋，没有及时喝酒，司马很生气，便把他拽倒在地上。
English: Baekhyun was playing chess at the time and did not drink in time. Sima was very angry and pulled him to the ground.

古文：遐还坐，举止如常，颜色不变，复戏如故。
现代文：裴遐爬起来回到座位上，举动如常，脸色不变，照样下棋。
English: Pei Yao got up and returned to his seat. He acted as usual, his face remained unchanged, and he continued to play chess.

古文：王夷甫问遐 当时何得颜色不异？ 
现代文：后来王夷甫问他： 当时怎么能做到面不改色呢？ 
English: Later, Wang Yifu asked him: How was it possible to perform at that time without changing one's face?

古文：答曰： 直是闇当故耳。 
现代文：他回答说： 只不过是默默忍受罢了！ 
English: He replied: "I just suffer in silence!"

古文：刘庆孙在太傅府，于时人士，多为所构。唯庾子嵩纵心事外，无迹可闲。
现代文：刘庆孙在太傅府任职，在这期间，名人多被他构陷，只有庾子嵩不把心思放在世事上，使他没有空子可钻。
English: Liu Qingsun served in the Taifu government. During this period, celebrities were mostly framed by him. Only Zou Zixong did not put his mind on worldly affairs, so that he had no loopholes to drill.

古文：后以其性俭家富，说太傅令换千万，冀其有吝，于此可乘。
现代文：后来就抓住庾子嵩生性吝啬而家境富裕这点，怂恿太傅向庾子嵩借千万钱，希望他表现得吝啬不肯借，然后在这里找到可乘之机。
English: Later, he seized on the fact that Zou Zixong was born stingy and came from a wealthy family. Zou Taifu borrowed tens of millions of money from Zou Zixong, hoping that he would be stingy and refuse to borrow, and then find an opportunity here.

古文：太傅于众坐中问庾，庾时颓然已醉，帻坠几上，以头就穿取，徐答云： 下官家故可有两娑千万，随公所取。 
现代文：于是太傅就在大庭广众中间庾子嵩借钱，这时庾子嵩已经醉醺醺的了，头巾颠落在小桌上，他把头伸进头巾里戴上，慢吞吞地回答说： 下官家原来大约有两三千万，随您取多少。 
English: So the great-grandfather borrowed money from Zou Zi Song in the middle of the large crowd. At this time, Zou Zi Song was already drunk, and his headscarf lay upside down on the small table. He put his head into the headscarf and slowly answered: The lower officials originally had about twenty or thirty million, take as much as you like.

古文：于是乃服。
现代文：刘庆孙这才佩服了。
English: Liu Qingsun was impressed by this.

古文：后有人向庾道此，庾曰： 可谓以小人之虑，度君子之心。 
现代文：后来有人向庾子嵩谈起这件事，庾子嵩说： 这可以说是以小人之心，度君子之腹。 
English: Later, someone mentioned this to Zou Zizong, and Zou Zizong said: This can be said to be the heart of a villain and the stomach of a gentleman.

古文：王夷甫与裴景声志好不同。景声恶欲取之，卒不能回。
现代文：王夷甫和裴景声两人志趣、爱好不同，景声非常不满意王夷甫想任用自己，可是始终没法改变王夷甫的主意。
English: Wang Yifu and Pei Jingxuan have different interests and hobbies. Jingxuan is very dissatisfied. Wang Yifu wants to appoint himself, but he still can't change Wang Yifu's mind.

古文：乃故诣王，肆言极骂，要王答己，欲以分谤。
现代文：于是就故意到王夷甫那里，肆意攻击，痛骂一番，想让王夷甫回骂自己，用这种办法使王夷甫分担别人的指责。
English: Therefore, he deliberately went to Wang Yifu's place, attacked and cursed him at will, hoping that Wang Yifu would curse him back, and use this method to make Wang Yifu share the blame of others.

古文：王不为动色，徐曰： 白眼儿遂作。 
现代文：王夷甫却始终不动声色，从容地说： 白眼儿终于发作了。 
English: Wang Yifu, however, remained impassive, and calmly said, "The white eye has finally occurred."

古文：王夷甫长裴成公四岁，不与相知。
现代文：王夷甫比裴頠大四岁，两人的关系不好好。
English: Wang Yifu is four years older than Pei Yao, and the relationship between the two is not good.

古文：时共集一处，皆当时名士，谓王曰： 裴令令望何足计！ 
现代文：有一次，两人聚会在一起，在座的都是当时的名士，有人对王夷甫说： 裴令的名望哪里值得考虑！ 
English: Once, when the two of them were together at a gathering, where everyone present was a famous person at the time, someone said to Wang Yifu: "Where is Pei Ling's reputation worth considering?

古文：王便卿裴。裴曰： 自可全君雅志。 
现代文：王夷甫便称呼裴为卿，裴说： 我自然可以成全您的高雅情趣。 
English: Wang Yifu then addressed Pei as "Sir." Pei said, "I can naturally fulfill your high taste."

古文：有往来者云：庾公有东下意。
现代文：有很多来来往往的人说庾亮有东下侵犯京师的意图。
English: There are a lot of people who come and go and say that Hao Liang has the intention to invade Beijing.

古文：或谓王公： 可潜稍严，以备不虞。 
现代文：有人对王导说： 应该暗中略作戒备，以防发生不测。 
English: Someone said to Wang Du: You should secretly be on the alert to prevent accidents from happening.

古文：王公曰： 我与元规虽俱王臣，本怀布衣之好。
现代文：王导说： 我和元规虽然都是国家大臣，但我们俩也有着普通人的友谊。
English: Wang Du said: Although I and Yuan Gui are both ministers of state, we both have the friendship of ordinary people.

古文：若其欲来，吾角巾径还乌衣，何所稍严。 
现代文：假若他要来，我立即辞官隐退，戴上角巾，回到乌衣巷家里去，有什么防备不防备的！ 
English: If he were to come, I would immediately resign my post, retire into seclusion, put on a kerchief, and return to my home on Uchi Lane. There is nothing to be prepared for!

古文：王丞相主簿欲检校帐下。公语主簿： 欲与主簿周旋，无为知人几案闲事。 
现代文：丞相王导的主簿要检查帐下僚属办理公务的情况，王导对主簿说： 我要与主簿打交道，因此不需要去检查他处理公文的这些事情。 
English: Wang Du, the secretary-general of the Communist Party of China, wanted to check the status of his subordinates' handling of official business. Wang Du said to the secretary-general: I want to deal with the secretary-general, so I don't need to check his handling of official documents.

古文：祖士少好财，阮遥集好屐，并恒自经营，同是一累，而未判其得失。
现代文：祖士少喜欢钱财，阮遥集喜欢木屐，两人经常都是亲自料理。两种嗜好同是一种毛病，可是还不能从此判定两人的高下。
English: Zushi likes money, Ruan likes rafts, and both of them often cook by themselves. The two hobbies are the same kind of problem, but it is not possible to judge the height of the two from now on.

古文：人有诣祖，见料视财物。客至，屏当未尽，余两小簏箸背后，倾身障之，意未能平。
现代文：有人到祖士少家，看见他正在收拾、查点财物；客人到了，还没有收拾完，剩下两小箱，他就放在背后，侧身挡着，还有点心神不定的样子。
English: Someone came to Zushi Shao's house and saw that he was packing up and checking some belongings. When the guest arrived, he had not yet finished packing and had two small boxes left. He put them behind his back and stood sideways, looking a little uncertain.

古文：或有诣阮，见自吹火蜡屐，因叹曰： 未知一生当箸几量屐？ 
现代文：又有人到阮遥集家，看见他亲自点火给木屐打蜡；因此还叹息说： 不知这一辈子还会穿几双木屐！ 
English: Another person went to Ruan Yao's home to collect wood and saw him himself lighting a fire to wax a pair of clogs; therefore, he also sighed and said: I don't know how many pairs of clogs I will wear in this lifetime!

古文：神色闲畅。
现代文：说时神态安详自在。
English: He spoke with a serene, relaxed air.

古文：于是胜负始分。
现代文：于是两人的高下才见分晓。
English: It was only then that the height difference between the two became clear.

古文：许侍中、顾司空俱作丞相从事，尔时已被遇，游宴集聚，略无不同。
现代文：侍中许璪和司空顾和一起在丞相王导手下任从事，那时两人都已经得到赏识，凡是游乐、宴饮、聚会，两人都参加，没有丝毫不同。
English: At that time, both of them had already been appreciated, and both of them took part in all kinds of entertainment, banquets, and gatherings, and there was no difference at all.

古文：尝夜至丞相许戏，二人欢极，丞相便命使入己帐眠。
现代文：有一次两人晚上到王导家玩，玩得高兴极了。王导便叫他们到自己的床上睡。
English: Once, the two of them went to Wang Du's home in the evening and had a great time. Wang Du told them to sleep in their own beds.

古文：顾至晓回转，不得快孰。许上床便咍台大鼾。
现代文：顾和辗转反侧直到天亮，不能很快习惯；许璪一上床就鼾声如雷。
English: He and Gu tossed and turned until dawn, unable to get used to it quickly; Xu Yao would snore loudly as soon as he got into bed.

古文：丞相顾诸客曰： 此中亦难得眠处。 
现代文：王导回头对客人们说： 这里也难得到个睡觉的地方。 
English: Wang Du turned to the guests and said, "It's hard to get a place to sleep here, too.

古文：庾太尉风仪伟长，不轻举止，时人皆以为假。
现代文：太尉庾亮风度仪容，奇伟出众，举止稳重，当时人们都认为这是一种假象。
English: At the time, people thought he was a fake. He had a dashing demeanor, a distinguished appearance, and a steady demeanor.

古文：亮有大儿数岁，雅重之质，便自如此，人知是天性。
现代文：庾亮有个大儿子，只有几岁，从小就稳重高雅，人们才知道这是本性。
English: Hao Liang has an older son who is only a few years old. He has been steady and elegant since he was a child. People only know that this is his nature.

古文：温太真尝隐幔怛之，此儿神色恬然，乃徐跪曰： 君侯何以为此？ 
现代文：温太真曾经藏在帷帐后面吓唬他，但是这个孩子却是毫不慌张，只是慢慢地跪下问道： 君侯为什么做这样的事？ 
English: Wen Taizhen once hid behind the curtain to scare him, but the child did not panic, but slowly knelt down and asked: Why did the prince do such a thing?

古文：论者谓不减亮。
现代文：舆论界认为他的气质不亚于庾亮。
English: The public opinion believes that his temperament is no less than brilliant.

古文：苏峻时遇害。
现代文：他在苏峻叛乱时被杀害了。
English: He was killed during the Sushun Rebellion.

古文：或云： 见阿恭，知元规非假。 
现代文：有人说： 看见阿恭的样子，就知道元规不是装假。 
English: Some people said: Seeing the appearance of Agong, you know that Yuan Gui is not a fake.

古文：褚公于章安令迁太尉记室参军，名字已显而位微，人未多识。
现代文：褚季野从章安县令升任太尉郗鉴的记室参军，当时名声已经很大，可是官位低，很多人还不认识他。
English: Gong Qino joined the army from the Zhang'an County government and was promoted to the record office of Lieutenant Gong Jian. At that time, his reputation was already great, but his official rank was low, and many people did not know him.

古文：公东出，乘估客船，送故吏数人投钱唐亭住。
现代文：诸季野坐着商船往东去，和几位送旧官的属吏到钱唐亭投宿。
English: Zhu Qino went east on a merchant ship, and went to Qiantangting to lodge with several subordinate officials who were escorting the old officials.

古文：尔时吴兴沈充为县令，当送客过浙江，客出，亭吏驱公移牛屋下。
现代文：这时，吴兴人沈充任钱唐县令，正好要送客过浙江，客人到来，亭吏就赶出褚季野，把他移到牛屋里。
English: At this time, Wu Xingren Shencong, the governor of Qiantang County, was just about to send guests across Zhejiang. When the guests arrived, the pavilion officials drove him out of Shujino and moved him to a cow shed.

古文：潮水至，沈令起彷徨，问： 牛屋下是何物？ 吏云： 昨有一伧父来寄亭中，有尊贵客，权移之。 
现代文：夜晚江水涨潮，沈县令起来在亭外徘徊，问牛屋里是什么人，亭吏说： 昨天有个北方佬来亭中寄宿，因为有尊贵客人，就姑且把他挪到这里。 
English: In the evening, when the water of the river rose to high tide, the governor of Shen County got up and wandered around outside the pavilion. He asked who was in the cowshed. The pavilion official said, "Yesterday, a Yankee came to stay in the pavilion. Since there was a distinguished guest, I moved him here."

古文：令有酒色，因遥问 伧父欲食饼不？
现代文：县令这时已有几分酒意，便远远地问道： 北方佬想吃饼吗？
English: The sheriff, by this time a little tipsy, asked from a distance: Does the Yankee want some pie?

古文：姓何等？
现代文：你姓什么？
English: What's your last name?

古文：可共语。 
现代文：可以出来交谈交谈。 
English: You can come out and have a conversation.

古文：褚因举手答曰： 河南褚季野。 
现代文：褚季野便拱手回答道： 河南褚季野。 
English: "Henan Province, Qian Qian Ye," Qian Qian Ye replied.

古文：远近久承公名，令于是大遽，不敢移公，便于牛屋下修刺诣公。
现代文：远近的人久仰褚季野的大名，县令于是大为惶恐。又不敢起动他，便在牛屋里呈上名片拜谒他，并且另外宰杀牲畜，整治酒食。
English: People from near and far had long admired the daimyo of Kiso, so the prefectural governor was greatly alarmed. He did not dare to touch him, so he presented his business card in the cowshed to pay homage to him, and also slaughtered livestock and regulated the food and wine.

古文：更宰杀为馔，具于公前，鞭挞亭吏，欲以谢惭。
现代文：还当着褚季野的面鞭责亭吏，想用这些做法来道歉，表示愧意。
English: He also scolded the officials of the pavilion in front of Ogino, and wanted to use these actions to apologize and show his remorse.

古文：公与之酌宴，言色无异，状如不觉。
现代文：褚季野和县令对饮，言谈、脸色没有什么异样表现，好像对这一切都没在意似的。
English: There were no unusual expressions on the faces of Sakino and the prefectural governor as they drank, talked, and looked at each other, as if they didn't care about any of this.

古文：令送公至界。
现代文：后来县令把他一直送到县界。
English: Later, the county magistrate sent him all the way to the county border.

古文：郗太傅在京口，遣门生与王丞相书，求女婿。
现代文：太傅郗鉴在京口的时候，派门生送信给丞相王导，想在他家挑个女婿。
English: When Taifu Shujian was in the capital, he sent a disciple to send a letter to the chancellor Wang Du, hoping to find a son-in-law in his family.

古文：丞相语郗信： 君往东厢，任意选之。 
现代文：王导告诉郗鉴的来人说： 您到东厢房去，随意挑选吧。 
English: Wang Du told the people who came from Shujian: You should go to the east wing room and choose whatever you like.

古文：门生归，白郗曰： 王家诸郎，亦皆可嘉，闻来觅婿，咸自矜持。唯有一郎，在床上坦腹卧，如不闻。 郗公云： 正此好！ 
现代文：门生回去禀告郗鉴说： 王家的那些公子还都值得夸奖，听说来挑女婿，就都拘谨起来，只有一位公子在东边床上袒胸露腹地躺着，好像没有听见一样。 郗鉴说： 正是这个好！ 
English: When his protégé returned, he reported to Zou Jian: "All the princes of the Wang family are worthy of praise. When they heard that they were to choose a son-in-law, they all became stiff-necked. There was only one prince who lay on the east side of the bed with his chest and belly exposed, as if he had not heard. Zou Jian said: "This is exactly right!

古文：访之，乃是逸少，因嫁女与焉。
现代文：一查访，原来是王逸少，便把女儿嫁给他。
English: Upon inspection, it turned out to be Wang Yixiao, and she married her daughter to him.

古文：过江初，拜官，舆饰供馔。
现代文：晋室南渡的初期，新宫接受任命时，都要备办酒宴招待前来祝贺的人。
English: In the early days of Jinmu Nandu, when the new palace was appointed, it was necessary to prepare a banquet to invite those who came to congratulate.

古文：羊曼拜丹阳尹，客来蚤者，并得佳设。
现代文：羊曼出任丹阳尹时，客人来得早的，都能吃到丰盛的酒食。
English: When Yangman was in charge of Danyangyin, guests who came early could enjoy sumptuous food and drink.

古文：日晏渐罄，不复及精，随客早晚，不问贵贱。
现代文：来晚了，备办的东西逐渐吃完了，就不能再吃上精美的酒食了，只是随客人来得早晚而不同，不管官位高低。
English: If you come late, and the prepared food is gradually eaten, you can no longer eat fine food and wine, but it varies with the guests who come early or late, regardless of their rank.

古文：羊固拜临海，竟日皆美供。
现代文：羊固出任临海太守时，从早到晚都有精美的酒宴。
English: When Yang Gu served as Linhai Taishou, there were exquisite wine feasts from morning to night.

古文：虽晚至，亦获盛馔。
现代文：虽然到得很晚的，也能吃上丰盛的酒食。
English: Although I arrived very late, I was able to eat a hearty meal and drink wine.

古文：时论以固之丰华，不如曼之真率。
现代文：当时的舆论认为羊固的酒宴虽然丰盛、精美，但是比不上羊曼的本性真诚直率。
English: At that time, the public opinion believed that although the wine banquet of Yang Gu was rich and exquisite, it was not as sincere and straightforward as Yang Man's nature.

古文：周仲智饮酒醉，瞋目还面谓伯仁曰： 君才不如弟，而横得重名！ 
现代文：周仲智喝酒喝醉了，瞪着眼扭着头对他哥哥伯仁说： 您才能比不上我，却意外地获得大名声！ 
English: Zhou Zhongzhi drank and got drunk, stared and twisted his head at his brother Bo Ren and said: Your talent is not as good as mine, but you have unexpectedly gained a great reputation!

古文：须臾，举蜡烛火掷伯仁。伯仁笑曰： 阿奴火攻，固出下策耳！ 
现代文：接着，举起点着的蜡烛扔到伯仁身上，伯仁笑着说： 阿奴用火攻，原来是用的下策啊！ 
English: Next, he held up a lit candle and threw it at Biren. Biren smiled and said, "Anu attacked with fire, which turned out to be a useful strategy!"

古文：顾和始为杨州从事。月旦当朝，未入顷，停车州门外。
现代文：顾和当初任扬州州府从事的时候，到初一该进见长官了，他还没有进府，暂时在州府门外停下车。
English: When Gu He was engaged in the Yangzhou prefectural government, it was time for him to see the governor on the first day of the year. He had not yet entered the prefectural government, so he temporarily stopped his car outside the prefectural government.

古文：周侯诣丞相，历和车边。和觅虱，夷然不动。
现代文：这时武城侯周颌也到丞相王导那里去，从顾和的车子旁边经过，顾和正在抓虱子，安闲自在，没有理他。
English: At this time, Wucheng marquis Zhou Ye also went to the chancellor Wang Dao, and passed by Gu He's car. Gu He was catching pliers, at ease, and did not care about him.

古文：周既过，反还，指顾心曰： 此中何所有？ 
现代文：周瞋已经过去了，又折回来，指着顾和的胸口问道： 这里面装些什么？ 
English: Zhou Xuan had already passed by, but he turned back and pointed at Gu He's chest and asked: "What's in here?"

古文：顾搏虱如故，徐应曰： 此中最是难测地。 
现代文：顾和照样掐虱子，慢吞吞地回答说： 这里面是最难捉摸的地方。 
English: Gu He, still puzzled, slowly replied, "This is the most elusive place.

古文：周侯既入，语丞相曰： 卿州吏中有一令仆才。 
现代文：周瞋进府后，告诉王导说： 你的下属里有一个可做尚书令或仆射的人才。 
English: After Zhou Qi entered the palace, he told Wang Du, "Among your subordinates, there is a talented person who can be a courier or a gunner.

古文：庾太尉与苏峻战，败，率左右十余人，乘小船西奔。
现代文：太尉庾亮率军和苏峻作战，打败了，带着十几个随从坐小船往西边逃去。
English: Captain Gao Liang led the army to fight against Su Jun, defeated him, and fled to the west with a dozen followers in a small boat.

古文：乱兵相剥掠，射误中柂工，应弦而倒。
现代文：这时叛乱的士兵正抢劫百姓，小船上的人用箭射贼兵，失手射中舵工，舵工随即倒下了，全船的人都吓得脸色发白想逃散。
English: At this time, the rebellious soldiers were robbing the people. The people on the small boat shot the thieves with arrows. The helmsman was shot by mistake. The helmsman immediately fell down. The whole ship was scared and white-faced and wanted to escape.

古文：举船上咸失色分散，亮不动容，徐曰： 此手那可使箸贼！ 
现代文：庾亮神色自若，慢慢说道： 这样的手怎么可以用来杀贼！ 
English: "How can such a hand be used to kill a thief!" he said slowly, with a bright and confident look.

古文：众迺安。
现代文：大家这才安定下来。
English: Everyone just settled down.

古文：庾小征西尝出未还。
现代文：征西将军庾翼有一次外出还没有回来。
English: The general of the Western Conquest, Zou Ying, once went out and did not come back.

古文：妇母阮是刘万安妻，与女上安陵城楼上。
现代文：他的岳母阮氏，是刘万安的妻子，和女儿一起上安陵城楼观望。
English: His mother-in-law, Ruan, the wife of Liu Wan'an, and her daughter went to the Anling Tower to watch.

古文：俄顷翼归，策良马，盛舆卫。
现代文：一会儿，庾翼回来了，骑着高头大马，带领着浩大的车马卫队。
English: After a while, Xing Ying returned, riding a tall horse, leading a huge cavalry guard.

古文：阮语女： 闻庾郎能骑，我何由得见？ 
现代文：阮氏对女儿说： 听说庾郎会骑马，我怎么能见一见呢？ 
English: Mr. Nguyen said to his daughter, "I heard that Quynh Lang can ride a horse, how can I meet him?

古文：妇告翼，翼便为于道开卤簿盘马，始两转，坠马堕地，意色自若。
现代文：庾翼妻子于是告诉庾翼，庾翼就为她在道上摆开仪仗，骑着马绕圈子，刚转了两圈，就从马上摔下来了，可是他神态自如，满不在乎。 
English: Xing Ying's wife then told Xing Ying that Xing Ying had staged a ceremonial battle for her on the road, riding a horse around in circles. He had just turned around twice when he fell off the horse, but he looked relaxed and unconcerned.

古文：宣武与简文、太宰共载，密令人在舆前后鸣鼓大叫。
现代文：桓温和简文帝、太宰共坐一辆车，桓温暗中叫人在车前车后敲起鼓来，大喊大叫。
English: Kuanwen, Emperor Jianwen and Dazai were all sitting in a car, and Kuanwen secretly called for people to beat drums in front of and behind the car and shout.

古文：卤簿中惊扰，太宰惶怖求下舆。
现代文：仪仗队伍受惊混乱，太宰神色惊惶恐惧，要求下车。
English: The honor guard was shocked and confused, and Dazai looked alarmed and frightened and asked to get off the bus.

古文：顾看简文，穆然清恬。
现代文：桓温回看简文帝，他却镇定自若，满不在乎。
English: When Kan-Wen looked back at Emperor Jianwen, he was calm and unconcerned.

古文：宣武语人曰： 朝廷闲故复有此贤。 
现代文：后来桓温告诉别人说： 朝廷里仍然有这样的贤能人才。 
English: Later, Kuan Wen told others: There are still such virtuous people in the imperial court.

古文：王劭、王荟共诣宣武，正值收庾希家。
现代文：王劭、王荟一起去拜访桓温，恰好碰上桓温派人逮捕庾希一家。
English: Wang Hui and Wang Hui went to visit Kuan Wen together, and just as they met, Kuan Wen sent someone to arrest the Yu Xi family.

古文：荟不自安，逡巡欲去；劭坚坐不动，待收信还，得不定迺出。
现代文：王荟心里不安，徘徊犹豫，想离开；王劭却稳稳当当地坐着不动，直等到派去逮捕的官吏回来，知道事情的结果后才退出。
English: Wang Yao felt uneasy, hesitated and wanted to leave; Wang Yao, on the other hand, sat firmly and did not move until the officials sent to arrest him returned and knew the outcome of the matter before leaving.

古文：论者以劭为优。
现代文：评论者认为王劭比王荟强。
English: Commentators believe that Wang Xuan is stronger than Wang Xuan.

古文：桓宣武与郗超议芟夷朝臣，条牒既定，其夜同宿。
现代文：桓温和郗超商议撤换朝廷大臣的事，上报名单拟定后，当晚两人同一处安歇。
English: Huan Wen and Zou Chao discussed the removal and replacement of the imperial minister. After the list was prepared, the two men rested in the same place that evening.

古文：明晨起，呼谢安、王坦之入，掷疏示之。
现代文：第二天桓温一早起来，就传呼谢安和王坦之进来，把拟好的奏疏扔给他们看。
English: The next day, Kuan Wen got up early in the morning and called Xie An and Wang Tan Zhi to come in and show them the prepared music.

古文：郗犹在帐内，谢都无言，王直掷还，云：多！
现代文：当时郗超还在帐子里没起床。谢安看了奏疏，一句话也没说，王坦之径直扔回给桓温，说： 太多了！ 
English: At that time, Zou Chao was still in the tent and didn't get up. Xie An watched the recital and didn't say a word. Wang Tanzhi threw it straight back to Kuan Wen and said, "It's too much!"

古文：宣武取笔欲除，郗不觉窃从帐中与宣武言。
现代文：桓温拿起笔想删去一些，这时郗超不自觉地偷偷从帐子里和桓温说话。
English: Kuanwen picked up the pen to erase some, at which time Zou Chao unintentionally spoke to Kuanwen from behind the curtain.

古文：谢含笑曰： 郗生可谓入幕宾也。 
现代文：谢安含笑说： 郗生可以说是入幕之宾呀。 
English: Xie An said with a smile: "You can say that I am a guest of the curtain call.

古文：谢太傅盘桓东山时，与孙兴公诸人泛海戏。
现代文：太傅谢安在东山居留期间，时常和孙兴公等人坐船到海上游玩。
English: During his stay in Dongshan, Taifu Xie'an often went to the sea with Sun Xinggong and others.

古文：风起浪涌，孙、王诸人色并遽，便唱使还。
现代文：有一次起了风，浪涛汹涌，孙兴公、王羲之等人一齐惊恐失色，便提议掉转船头回去。
English: Once, when the wind picked up and the waves were rough, Sun Xinggong, Wang Xizhi and the others panicked and lost their composure, so they proposed to turn the bow around and go back.

古文：太傅神情方王，吟啸不言。
现代文：谢安这时精神振奋，兴致正高，又朗吟又吹口哨，不发一言。
English: At this time, Xie An was in high spirits, her spirits were high, and she sang and whistled without saying a word.

古文：舟人以公貌闲意说，犹去不止。
现代文：船夫因为谢安神态安闲，心情舒畅，便仍然摇船向前。
English: The boatman still rocked the boat forward because Xie An looked relaxed and was in a good mood.

古文：既风转急，浪猛，诸人皆諠动不坐。
现代文：一会儿，风势更急，浪更猛了，大家都叫嚷骚动起来，坐不住。
English: After a while, the wind got stronger, the waves got stronger, and everyone was shouting and getting agitated, unable to sit still.

古文：公徐云： 如此，将无归！ 众人即承响而回。
现代文：谢安慢条斯理地说： 这如果大家都这样乱成一团，我们就回去不去了！ 大家立即响应，就回去了。
English: Xie An said slowly and rationally: If everyone is in such a mess, we can't go back! Everyone immediately responded and went back.

古文：于是审其量，足以镇安朝野。
现代文：从这件事里人们明白了谢安的气度，认为他完全能够镇抚朝廷内外，安定国家。
English: From this incident, people understood Xie An's temperament and believed that he was fully capable of pacifying both inside and outside the imperial court and stabilizing the country.

古文：桓公伏甲设馔，广延朝士，因此欲诛谢安、王坦之。
现代文：桓温埋伏好甲士，设宴遍请朝中百官，想趁此机会杀害谢安和王坦之。
English: Kan-Wen ambushed the good warrior, held a banquet and invited hundreds of officials from all over the country, hoping to take advantage of this opportunity to kill Xie An and Wang Tan Zhi.

古文：王甚遽，问谢曰： 当作何计？ 
现代文：王坦之非常惊恐，问谢安： 应该采取什么办法？ 
English: Wang Tanzhi was very frightened and asked Xie An: What should I do?

古文：谢神意不变，谓文度曰： 晋阼存亡，在此一行。 
现代文：谢安神色不变，对王坦之说： 晋朝的存亡，决定于我们这一次去的结果。 
English: Looking unchanged, Xie An said to Wang Tanzhi: The survival of the Jin Dynasty depends on the outcome of our visit this time.

古文：相与俱前。王之恐状，转见于色。谢之宽容，愈表于貌。
现代文：两人一起前去赴宴，王坦之惊恐的状态，越来越明显地表现在脸色上；谢安的宽宏大量，也在神态上表示得更加清楚。
English: The two of them went to the banquet together. Wang Tan's state of alarm was more and more evident on his face; Xie An's magnanimity was also more clearly expressed in his demeanor.

古文：望阶趋席，方作洛生咏，讽 浩浩洪流 。
现代文：他到台阶上就快步入座，模仿洛阳书生读书的声音，朗诵起 浩浩洪流 的诗篇。
English: When he got to the steps, he quickly took a seat, imitated the sound of Luoyang students reading, and recited the poem "From the Great Torrent."

古文：桓惮其旷远，乃趣解兵。
现代文：桓温害怕他那种旷达的气量，便赶快撤走了埋伏的甲士。
English: Kuanwen was afraid of his expansive spirit, so he quickly removed the ambushed warrior.

古文：王、谢旧齐名，于此始判优劣。
现代文：原先王坦之和谢安名望相等，通过这件事才分出了高低。
English: Originally, Wang Tanzhi and Xie An were of equal fame, and it was only through this incident that the high and low were distinguished.

古文：谢太傅与王文度共诣郗超，日旰未得前，王便欲去。谢曰： 不能为性命忍俄顷？ 
现代文：太傅谢安和王文度一起去拜望郗超，一直等到天色晚了还不能上前会见。王文度便想走，谢安说： 你就不能为了性命再忍耐一会儿？ 
English: Daifu Xie An and Wang Wendu went to visit Gong Chao, and waited until it was too late to meet. Wang Wendu wanted to leave, and Xie An said, "Can't you be patient for the sake of your life?"

古文：支道林还东，时贤并送于征虏亭。
现代文：支道林要回到东边去，当时名士一起到征虏亭给他饯行。
English: Branch Road Lin wanted to go back to the east, when celebrities went to Zheiru Pavilion together to give him a ride.

古文：蔡子叔前至，坐近林公。谢万石后来，坐小远。
现代文：蔡子叔先到，就坐到支道林身旁；谢万石后到，坐得稍为远点。
English: When Cai Zixu arrived first, he sat next to the branch forest; when Xie Wanshi arrived later, he sat a little further away.

古文：蔡暂起，谢移就其处。
现代文：蔡子叔走开了一会儿，谢万石就移坐到他的座位上。
English: Uncle Cai Zi walked away for a while, and Xie Wanshi moved to his seat.

古文：蔡还，见谢在焉，因合褥举谢掷地，自复坐。
现代文：蔡子叔回来，看见谢万石坐在自己位子上，就连坐垫一块抬起他扔到地上，自己再坐回原处。
English: When Uncle Cai Zi returned, he saw Xie Wanshi sitting in his seat. He even picked up a cushion and threw it to the ground, and then sat back down.

古文：谢冠帻倾脱，乃徐起振衣就席，神意甚平，不觉瞋沮。
现代文：谢万石头巾都跌掉了，便慢慢地爬起来，拍干净衣服，回到自己座位上去，神色很平静，看不出他生气或颓丧。
English: Xie Wan's stone scarf had fallen off, so he slowly got up, took off his clean clothes, and returned to his seat. He looked very calm, and I couldn't tell if he was angry or depressed.

古文：坐定，谓蔡曰： 卿奇人，殆坏我面。 
现代文：坐好了，对蔡子叔说： 你真是个怪人，差点儿碰破了我的脸。 
English: After he was seated, he said to Uncle Cai Zi: You are really a freak, you almost broke my face.

古文：蔡答曰： 我本不为卿面作计。 
现代文：蔡子叔回答说： 我本来就没有替你的脸打算。 
English: Uncle Cai replied, "I didn't plan to paint your face.

古文：其后，二人俱不介意。
现代文：后来两个人都不介意。
English: Later, neither of them minded.

古文：郗嘉宾钦崇释道安德问，饷米千斛，修书累纸，意寄殷勤。
现代文：郗嘉宾很钦佩、推崇道安和尚的道德、名望，送他千担米，并且写了一封长长的信，情意恳切深厚。
English: Zou Jiabin admired and respected the morality and reputation of Daoan Monk, sent him a thousand taels of rice, and wrote a long letter with deep feelings.

古文：道安答直云： 损米。 愈觉有待之为烦。
现代文：道安的回信只是说： 蒙赐米，也更加觉得有所依靠是烦恼的。 
English: Daoan's reply simply said: "Given rice, it is even more troublesome to feel dependent.

古文：谢安南免吏部尚书还东，谢太傅赴桓公司马出西，相遇破冈。
现代文：安南将军谢奉被免去吏部尚书的官职后回东边老家去，太博谢安因为应召出任桓温的司马往西去，两人在破冈相遇。
English: General Annan Xie Bong returned to his hometown in the east after he was relieved of his post as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, while Taibo Xie An went to the west because he was called to serve as the secretary of Kuanwen, and the two met in the barren hills.

古文：既当远别，遂停三日共语。
现代文：既然就要久别了，便停留三天一起叙叙旧。
English: Since it was going to be a long goodbye, they stayed for three days to catch up on old times.

古文：太傅欲慰其失官，安南辄引以它端。
现代文：谢安对他丢了官一事想安慰几句，谢奉总是借别的事避开这个问题。
English: Xie An wanted to say a few words of consolation to him about losing his post, but Xie Bong always avoided the issue by taking advantage of other things.

古文：虽信宿中涂，竟不言及此事。
现代文：虽然两人半路上同住了两夜，却始终没有谈到这件事。
English: Although they spent two nights together halfway across the country, they never talked about it.

古文：太傅深恨在心未尽，谓同舟曰： 谢奉故是奇士。 
现代文：谢安因为心意还没有表达出来，深感遗憾，就对同船的人说： 谢奉确实是个奇特的人。 
English: Deeply regretting that he had not been able to express his thoughts, Xie An said to his shipmates: Xie Feng is indeed a strange person.

古文：戴公从东出，谢太傅往看之。
现代文：戴逵从会稽到京都，太傅谢安去看望他。
English: Dai Yao went to Kyoto from the auditor's office, and Taifu Xie An went to visit him.

古文：谢本轻戴，见但与论琴书。
现代文：谢安原来轻视他，见了面，只是和他谈论琴法、书法。
English: Xie An used to despise him. When they met, they only talked about the piano and calligraphy.

古文：戴既无吝色，而谈琴书愈妙。
现代文：戴逵不但没有不乐意的表情，而且谈起琴法、书法来更加高妙。
English: Daju not only does not have a displeased expression, but also talks about the piano and calligraphy in a more sophisticated way.

古文：谢悠然知其量。
现代文：谢安从这里了解到他那种闲适自得的气量。
English: It was here that Xie An learned of his idle, self-satisfied temperament.

古文：谢公与人围棋，俄而谢玄淮上信至。看书竟，默然无言，徐向局。
现代文：谢安与人下围棋，不久，谢玄从淮河前线派来的信使到了，谢安看完信，默默无语，从容地转向棋局。
English: Xie An played Go with others. Soon, a messenger sent by Xie Xuan from the Huaihe frontline arrived. After reading the letter, Xie An silently turned to the board.

古文：客问淮上利害？答曰： 小儿辈大破贼。 
现代文：客人问起淮河战事的胜负，谢安回答： 孩子们已经大败贼兵。 
English: Guests asked about the outcome of the Huaihe battle, Xie An replied: The children have been defeated by the bandits.

古文：意色举止，不异于常。
现代文：他的神情举动，与平常没什么不同。
English: His demeanour, his behaviour, was nothing out of the ordinary.

古文：王子猷、子敬曾俱坐一室，上忽发火。子猷遽走避，不惶取屐；子敬神色恬然，徐唤左右，扶凭而出，不异平常。
现代文：王徽之、王献之曾经同坐在一间屋内，屋上忽然起火，王徽之慌忙逃跑避开，来不及穿上木屐；王献之神情安定，不慌不忙地让左右侍从搀着他走出来，和平时没什么不同。
English: Wang Huizhi and Wang Xianzhi were once sitting together in a room, when suddenly a fire broke out on the roof. Wang Huizhi hurriedly ran away to avoid it, and did not have time to put on the raft. Wang Xianzhi's expression was stable, and he unhurriedly let the right and left attendants carry him out. It was no different from peacetime.

古文：世以此定二王神宇。
现代文：世人凭这件事来判定王氏兄弟俩的胸襟气度。
English: The world relied on this incident to judge the Wang brothers' heart.

古文：符坚游魂近境，谢太傅谓子敬曰： 可将当轴，了其此处。 
现代文：苻坚的鬼子兵逼近边境，太傅谢安对王子敬说： 可以用个执政大臣为统帅，把他们就地消灭。 
English: When fierce demon soldiers approached the border, Grand Master Xie An said to Prince Jing, "You can use a ruling minister as a commander and wipe them out on the spot."

古文：王僧弥、谢车骑共王小奴许集。
现代文：王珉和谢玄一起在王荟的家里做客。
English: Wang Yao and Xie Xuan were guests at Wang Yao's home.

古文：僧弥举酒劝谢云： 奉使君一觞。 
现代文：王珉举起酒杯向谢敬酒道： 我敬你一杯。 
English: Wang Yao raised his glass to Xie and said, "I'll drink a toast to you."

古文：谢曰： 可尔。 
现代文：谢说： 这是应该的。 
English: Xie said, "This is as it should be.

古文：僧弥勃然起，作色曰： 汝故是吴兴溪中钓碣耳！
现代文：王珉一听就很生气地站了起来，脸色都变了说道： 你不过如吴兴溪中的钓羯而已，怎么可以在我面前如此放肆？ 
English: Upon hearing this, Wang Yao stood up very angrily, his face changed, and said: You are nothing more than a fishing bait in Wuxing Creek, how can you be so presumptuous in front of me?

古文：何敢诪张！ 谢徐抚掌而笑曰： 卫军，僧弥殊不肃省，乃侵陵上国也。 
现代文：谢慢慢地笑着鼓掌，并说道： 卫军，王珉太不自量了，居然敢侵犯大国诸侯。 
English: Xie slowly laughed and clapped his hands, and said: Guards, Wang Yao is too reckless to dare to encroach on the great powers and princes.

古文：王东亭为桓宣武主簿，既承藉，有美誉，公甚欲其人地为一府之望。
现代文：东亭侯王珣任桓温的主薄，既受到祖辈的福荫，名声又很好，桓温很希望他在人品和门第上都能成为整个官府所敬仰的榜样。
English: Dongting marquess Wang Xuan, who was appointed as Kanwen's chief adviser, was both blessed by his ancestors and had a good reputation. Kanwen very much hoped that he would become a role model admired by the entire government in terms of character and lineage.

古文：初，见谢失仪，而神色自若。坐上宾客即相贬笑。
现代文：当初，他回答桓温问话时，有失礼之处，可是神色自若，在座的宾客立刻贬低并且嘲笑他。
English: At first, when he answered the question from Huan Wen, he was impolite, but he looked confident, and the guests present immediately belittled and laughed at him.

古文：公曰： 不然，观其情貌，必自不凡。
现代文：桓温说： 不是这样的，看他的神情态度，一定不平常。
English: Kan-Wen said, "It's not like that, look at his facial expression and attitude, it's definitely unusual."

古文：吾当试之。 
现代文：我要试试他。 
English: I'm going to try him.

古文：后因月朝阁下伏，公于内走马直出突之，左右皆宕仆，而王不动。
现代文：后来趁着初一僚属进见、王珣正在官厅里的时候，桓温就从后院骑着马直冲出来。手下的人都给吓得跌跌撞撞，王珣却稳坐不动。
English: Later, taking advantage of the first colleague's visit, when Wang Yao was in the government office, Kuan Wen rode a horse straight out from the backyard. His subordinates were scared and stumbled, but Wang Yao sat still.

古文：名价于是大重，咸云 是公辅器也 。
现代文：于是声价大为提高，大家都说： 这是辅弼大臣的人材呀。 
English: As a result, the bidding price increased greatly, and everyone said: This is the talent of an assistant minister.

古文：太元末，长星见，孝武心甚恶之。
现代文：太元末年，彗星出现，孝武帝心中十分厌恶。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, a comet appeared, and Emperor Xiaowu was very disgusted.

古文：夜，华林园中饮酒，举杯属星云： 长星！
现代文：夜晚，在华林园中饮酒，他举杯对着星星说： 彗星！
English: In the evening, after drinking in the Hualin Garden, he raised his glass to the stars and said: Comet!

古文：劝尔一杯酒。自古何时有万岁天子？ 
现代文：敬你一杯酒，自古以来，什么时候有过万岁天子！ 
English: A glass of wine to you, since ancient times, when has there ever been a hooray for the son of heaven!

古文：殷荆州有所识，作赋，是束皙慢戏之流。
现代文：荆州刺史殷仲堪有了点见解，就写成一篇赋，是束皙那种游戏文章一类的。
English: Jingzhou Zishi Yin Zhongkan had a little insight, and wrote a fufu, which is a kind of game article.

古文：殷甚以为有才，语王恭： 适见新文，甚可观。 
现代文：殷仲堪自认为很有才华，告诉王恭说： 我刚见到一篇新作，很值得看一看。 
English: Yin Zhongkan, who considers himself very talented, told Wang Qiong: I just saw a new work, it's worth a look.

古文：便于手巾函中出之。
现代文：说着便从手中套子里拿出文章来。
English: As he spoke, he took out an article from the slip of paper in his hand.

古文：王读，殷笑之不自胜。
现代文：王恭一面读，殷仲堪一面得意地笑个不停。
English: As Wang Gong read, Yin Zhongkan kept smiling with pride.

古文：王看竟，既不笑，亦不言好恶，但以如意帖之而已。
现代文：王恭看完后，既不笑，也不说文章好坏，只是拿个如意压着它罢了。
English: After reading the article, Wang Qiong did not smile or say whether the article was good or bad, but just pressed it as he wished.

古文：殷怅然自失。
现代文：殷仲堪很失望，心里觉得丢了点什么。
English: Yin Zhongkan was very disappointed and felt that she had lost something.

古文：羊绥第二子孚，少有俊才，与谢益寿相好，尝蚤往谢许，未食。
现代文：羊绥的次子羊孚，少年时就才智出众，和谢益寿很要好。有一次，他一大早就到谢家去，还没有吃早饭。
English: Yang Fu, the second son of Yang Hui, was brilliant when he was young, and was very close to Xie Yishou. Once, he went to Xie's house early in the morning and had not eaten breakfast.

古文：俄而王齐、王睹来。既先不相识，王向席有不说色，欲使羊去。
现代文：一会儿王齐、王睹也来了，他们原先不认识羊孚，落了座，脸色就有点不高兴，想让羊孚离开。
English: After a while, Wang Qi and Wang Gan also came. They didn't know Yang Fu before, but when they sat down, they looked a little unhappy and wanted Yang Fu to leave.

古文：羊了不眄，唯脚委几上，咏瞩自若。
现代文：羊孚看都不看他们，只是把脚搭在小桌子上，无拘无束地吟诗、观赏。
English: Yang Fu did not even look at them, but just put his feet on the small table, chanting and watching without restraint.

古文：谢与王叙寒温数语毕，还与羊谈赏，王方悟其奇，乃合共语。
现代文：谢益寿和二王寒暄了几句后，回头仍旧和羊孚谈论、品评；二王方才体会出他不同一般，这才和他一起说话。
English: After Xie Yishou and the two kings exchanged a few words, they still talked and commented with Yang Fu. It was only when the two kings realized that he was different from ordinary people that they spoke with him.

古文：须臾食下，二王都不得餐，唯属羊不暇。
现代文：一会儿摆上饭菜，二王一点也顾不上吃，只是不停地劝羊孚吃喝。
English: After a while, when the food was set out, the two kings did not care about eating at all, but kept persuading Yang Fu to eat and drink.

古文：羊不大应对之，而盛进食，食毕便退。
现代文：羊孚也不大搭理他们，却大口大口地吃，吃完便告辞。
English: Yang Fu did not pay much attention to them, but he ate a big mouthful, and then said goodbye.

古文：遂苦相留，羊义不住，直云： 向者不得从命，中国尚虚。 二王是孝伯两弟。
现代文：二王苦苦挽留，羊孚不肯留下，只是说： 刚才我不能顺从你们的心意马上走开，是因为肚子还是空空的。 二王是王孝伯的两个弟弟。
English: The two kings tried hard to persuade him to stay, but Yang Fu refused to stay. He only said, "Just now, I couldn't follow your wishes and leave immediately, because my stomach is still empty. The two kings are the two younger brothers of Wang Xiao'er.

