古文：一曰：季秋之月，日在房，昏虚中，旦柳中。
现代文：季秋季秋九月，太阳的位置在房宿。初昏时刻，虚宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，柳宿出现在南方中天。
English: In the fall, autumn and September, the sun's position is in the house. At dusk, the hollow house appears in the southern sky, and at dawn, the willow house appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日庚辛，其帝少皞，其神蓐收，其虫毛，其音商，律中无射。
现代文：这个月于天干属庚辛，它的主宰之帝是少皞，佐帝之神是蓐收，应时的动物是老虎一类的毛族，相配的声音是商音，音律与无射相应。
English: This month belongs to Genghis Khan in the Chinese Zodiac. Its ruling emperor is Shao Zang, the god of the Eastern Zodiac is Received, the corresponding animal is a tiger-like animal of the Mao tribe, the corresponding sound is the commercial sound, and the rhythm corresponds to the no-shock.

古文：其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其祀门，祭先肝。
现代文：这个月的数字是九，味道是辣味，气味是腥气，要举行的祭祀是门祭，祭祀时祭品以肝脏为尊。
English: The number of this month is nine, the taste is spicy, the smell is pungent, the sacrifice to be held is the door sacrifice, and the sacrificial offering is the liver.

古文：候雁来，宾爵入大水为蛤。
现代文：这个月，候鸟从北方飞来，栖息于屋宇的雀鸟钻进大海变成了蛤蜊。
English: This month, migratory birds flew in from the north, and house sparrows plunged into the sea to become cormorants.

古文：菊有黄华，豺则祭兽戮禽。
现代文：秋菊开了黄花。豺把捕到的野兽四面摆开，像祭祀一样，开始杀戮禽兽。
English: The chrysanthemums have opened their yellow flowers. The storks spread out the captured beasts on all sides and, like a ritual, begin to kill the animals.

古文：天子居总章右个，乘戎路，驾白骆，载白旂，衣白衣，服白玉，食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：天子住在西向明堂的右侧室，乘坐白色的兵车，车前驾着白色的马，车上插着白色的绘有龙纹的旗帜。天子穿着白色的衣服，佩戴着白色的饰玉，吃的食物是麻籽和狗肉，用的器物锐利而深邃。
English: Tianzi lived in the right side room of Xixiangming Hall. He rode in a white chariot with a white horse in front and a white dragon-patterned flag on the chariot. Tianzi wore white clothes and white ornaments. He ate hemp seeds and dog meat. The utensils he used were sharp and deep.

古文：是月也，申严号令，命百官贵贱无不务入，以会天地之藏，无有宣出。
现代文：这个月，要重申严明各种号令。命令百官贵贱人等无不从事收敛的工作。来应合天地收藏的时气，不得有宜泄散出。
English: This month, it is necessary to reiterate the strictness of various orders, and order all officials, nobles and commoners to engage in the work of convergence. In order to meet the trend of world collection, it is necessary to let go and disperse.

古文：命冢宰，农事备收，举五种之要。藏帝籍之收于神仓，祗敬必饬。
现代文：命令太宰，在农作物全部收成之后，建立登记五谷的帐簿，把天子籍田中收获的谷物藏入专门储藏供祭祀上天神祗所用谷物的谷仓，必须恭敬严正。
English: He ordered the dazai, after all the crops had been harvested, to establish an account book for registering grain, and to hide the grain harvested in the fields of the sons of heaven into a grain barn specially stored for the purpose of sacrificing the grain used for the god of heaven, must be respectful and strict.

古文：是月也，霜始降，则百工休。
现代文：这个月，霜开始降落，各种工匠不再制作器物。
English: This month, when it started to frost, all kinds of craftsmen stopped working and rested.

古文：乃命有司曰: 寒气总至，民力不堪，其皆入室。 
现代文：同时命令司徒说： 寒气突然来到，百姓经受不起，让他们都进屋准备过冬。 
English: At the same time, he ordered the bishop to say: The cold weather has come suddenly, the people can't stand it, let them all go into the house to prepare for the winter.

古文：上丁，入学习吹。
现代文：这个月上旬的丁日，进入太学练习吹笙竽，演习礼物。
English: In the first half of this month, on the 10th day of the month, I went to Taixu to practice blowing, a gift of exercise.

古文：是月也，大飨帝，尝牺牲，告备于天子。
现代文：这个月，天子要遍祭五帝，并命夸主管官吏用牺牲祭祀群神。事情完毕，向天子禀告祭祀已经齐备。
English: This month, the heavenly son wanted to sacrifice the five emperors everywhere, and ordered the officials in charge to sacrifice the gods. After the matter was over, they reported to the heavenly son that the sacrifice was ready.

古文：合诸侯，制百县，为来岁受朔日，与诸侯所税于民，轻重之法，贡职之数，以远近土地所宜为度，以给郊庙之事，无有所私。
现代文：天子要聚会诸侯，百县大夫，向他们颁授来年的朔日，以及诸侯向百姓收税轻重的法规，诸侯向天子缴纳贡赋的多少，抽税轻重、纳贡多少都以远近和土地出产的情况为依据。这些东西供祭天祭祖之用，没有属于私有的。
English: The Son of Heaven wants to gather the lords and governors of a hundred counties to present them with the New Year's Day of the coming year, as well as the laws and regulations of the lords to collect taxes from the people, the amount of tribute paid by the lords to the Son of Heaven, the amount of tax and the amount of tribute are based on the distance and the land production situation. These things are for the use of the ancestors of the heavenly sacrifice, and are not private.

古文：是月也，天子乃教于田猎，以习五戎，獀马。
现代文：这个月，天子借打猎教练治兵之法，熟悉各种兵器，选择良马。
English: This month, the son of heaven borrowed the method of military management from the hunting coach, familiarized himself with various weapons, and chose a good horse.

古文：命仆及七驺咸驾，载旍旐舆，受车以级，整设于屏外；司徒搢扑，北向以誓之。
现代文：命令田仆和管套车卸马的吏都来驾车，车上插着各种旗帜，参加田措的人按照等级授予车辆，并按次序整齐地摆在屏垣之外。司徒把教刑用具插在带间，向北面告诫众人。
English: He ordered the field servants and the officials in charge of unloading the horses from the wagons to come and drive. Various flags were placed on the wagons. The participants of the field inspection were awarded vehicles according to their rank, and they were neatly placed outside the screen wall in order. Stu put the disciplinary tools between the belts and warned everyone to the north.

古文：天子乃厉服厉饬，执弓操矢以射。
现代文：夭子穿着威武的戎装，佩戴着刀剑等饰物，拿着弓箭来射措。
English: The child was dressed in a formidable military uniform, wearing a sword and other ornaments, holding a bow and arrow to shoot.

古文：命主祠祭禽于四方。
现代文：命令主管祭祀的官吏用猎获的鸟兽祭祀四方之神。
English: The officials in charge of the sacrifices were ordered to use the hunted birds and beasts to sacrifice to the gods of the four directions.

古文：是月也，草木黄落，乃伐薪为炭。
现代文：这个月，草木黄落了，可以砍伐山柴烧制木炭。
English: This month, the grass withered and the leaves fell, so they cut firewood and burned charcoal.

古文：蛰虫咸俯在穴，皆墐其户。
现代文：蛰伏的动物都藏伏在洞穴里，封严它们的洞口。
English: Hiding animals are hiding in caves, sealing their openings.

古文：乃趣狱刑，无留有罪，收禄秩之不当者，共养之不宜者。
现代文：这个月，要督促诉讼断案的事，不要留下有罪应判决的案件。收缴那些无功之人不应得的俸禄和官爵，以及那些不应得到国家供养的人所得到的供养之物。
English: This month, it is necessary to push for the conclusion of the litigation, not to leave the guilty cases to be judged, to collect the undeserved salaries and titles of those who have no merit, and the objects of support received by those who do not deserve to be supported by the state.

古文：是月也，天子乃以犬尝稻，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，天子就着狗肉品尝稻米，并首先进献给祖庙。
English: This month, the son of heaven came to taste the new rice with dog meat. Before tasting the new rice, he first offered it to the ancestral temple.

古文：季秋行夏令，则其国大水，冬藏殃败，民多鼽窒；行冬令，则国多盗贼，边境不宁，土地分裂；行春令，则暖风来至，民气解堕，师旅必兴。
现代文：季秋实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，国家就会大水成灾，收藏起来准备过冬的谷物菜蔬就会毁坏，百姓就会出现鼻塞窒息的疾病。如果实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，国家就会盗贼横生，边境就不能安宁，土地就会被侵削分割。如果实行应在春天实行的政令，那么暖风就会来到，百姓就会懈怠，战争就会兴起。
English: If the government order to be implemented in winter is implemented, the country will be plagued by thieves, the border will not be peaceful, and the land will be invaded and divided. If the government order to be implemented in spring is implemented, the warm wind will come, the people will slack off, and war will break out.

古文：二曰：先王先顺民心，故功名成。
现代文：顺民先王治理天下首先顺依民心，所以功成名就。
English: To govern the country in accordance with the will of the people, the former king first obeyed the will of the people, which is why he achieved great success.

古文：夫以德得民心以立大功名者，上世多有之矣。
现代文：依靠仁德博取民心而建立大功、成就美名的，古代大有人在。
English: Relying on benevolence and virtue to win the hearts of the people and establish great achievements, achievements and fame, there are many people in ancient times.

古文：失民心而立功名者，未之曾有也。
现代文：失去民心而建立功名的却不曾有过。
English: There has never been a circus that has built its reputation on losing the hearts of the people.

古文：得民必有道，万乘之国，百户之邑，民无有不说。
现代文：获得民心是有方法的，无论是具有万辆兵车的大国，还是仅有百户的小邑，人民无不有所喜悦。
English: There is a way to win the hearts and minds of the people. Whether it is a big country with ten thousand chariots or a small town with only a hundred households, the people are always happy.

古文：取民之所说而民取矣，民之所说岂众哉？
现代文：只要做人民所喜悦的事，民心就获得了。人民所喜悦的事难道会很多吗？
English: As long as you do things that please the people, you will win the hearts of the people. Can there be many things that please the people?

古文：此取民之要也。
现代文：这是取得民心的关键。
English: This is the key to winning the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：昔者汤克夏而正天下。
现代文：从前，汤灭掉夏，治理天下。
English: Once upon a time, soup put an end to summer and ruled the world.

古文：天大旱，五年不收，汤乃以身祷于桑林，曰： 余一人有罪，无及万夫。万夫有罪，在余一人。
现代文：天大旱，五年没有收成。汤于是在桑林用自己的身体向神祈祷，说； 我一人有罪，不要祸及天下人，即使天下人有罪，罪责也都在我一人身上。
English: There was a great drought, and there was no harvest for five years. So Tang used his body to pray to God in the mulberry grove, saying: I alone am guilty, do not bring disaster to the whole world. Even if the whole world is guilty, the blame is on me alone.

古文：无以一人之不敏，使上帝鬼神伤民之命。 
现代文：不要因我一人不才，致使天帝鬼神伤害人民的生命。 
English: Do not, because of my incompetence alone, cause the gods and spirits to harm the lives of the people.

古文：于是翦其发，磿其手，以身为牺牲，用祈福于上帝。
现代文：于是汤剪断自己的头发，拶起自己的手指，把自己的身体作为牺牲，向天帝求福。
English: Therefore, Tang cut off his hair, saluted his fingers, sacrificed his body, and asked for blessings from the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：民乃甚说，雨乃大至。
现代文：人民于是非常高兴，雨于是也大下起来。
English: The people were very happy and it rained a lot.

古文：则汤达乎鬼神之化、人事之传也。
现代文：汤可说是通晓鬼神的变化、人事转移的道理了。
English: Tang can be said to be familiar with the changes of ghosts and gods, the reason for the transfer of personnel.

古文：文王处岐事纣，冤侮雅逊，朝夕必时，上贡必适，祭祀必敬。
现代文：文王住在岐山臣事纣王，虽遭冤枉侮慢，依然雅正恭顺，早晚朝拜不失其时，进献贡物一定合宜，祭祀一定诚敬。
English: King Wen lived in Qishan and was subject to King Jian. Although he was unjustly scorned, he was still upright and obedient. Morning and evening worship was not out of place. It was certainly appropriate to offer tribute, and it was certainly respectful to offer sacrifices.

古文：纣喜，命文王称西伯，赐之千里之地。
现代文：纣很高兴，封文王为西伯，赏他纵横千里的土地。
English: He was very pleased that the King of Fongwen was Xibe and rewarded him with thousands of miles of land.

古文：文王载拜稽首而辞曰: 愿为民请炮烙之刑。 
现代文：文王再拜稽首，辞谢说； 我不要千里的土地，只愿替人民请求废除炮烙之刑。 
English: King Wen bowed his head again and said, "I don't want thousands of miles of land. I only want to ask for the abolition of the punishment of burning for the people."

古文：文王非恶千里之地，以为民请炮烙之刑，必欲得民心也。
现代文：文王并不是厌恶纵横千里的土地，用它替人民请求废除炮烙之刑，必定是想要博得民心。
English: King Wen did not detest the land stretching for thousands of miles. He used it to request the abolition of the punishment of cannon fire for the people. He must have wanted to win the hearts of the people.

古文：得民心则贤于千里之地，故曰文王智矣。
现代文：得到民心，它的好处胜过纵横千里的土地。所以说，文王是相当明智了。
English: To win the hearts and minds of the people is better than conquering thousands of miles of land. Therefore, King Wen was quite wise.

古文：越王苦会稽之耻，欲深得民心，以致必死于吴。
现代文：越王深为会稽之耻而痛苦，想要深得民心以求和吴国拼死一战。
English: Yue Wang was deeply pained by the shame of the meeting and wanted to win the hearts and minds of the people in order to fight to the death with the State of Wu.

古文：身不安枕席，口不甘厚味，目不视靡曼，耳不听钟鼓。
现代文：于是他身不安于枕席，口不尝食美味，眼睛不看美色，耳不听音乐。
English: As a result, he does not feel comfortable in the pillow seat, his mouth does not taste delicious food, his eyes do not see beauty, and his ears do not listen to music.

古文：三年苦身劳力，焦唇干肺，内亲群臣，下养百姓，以来其心。
现代文：三年的时间，苦心劳力，唇干肺伤，对内爱抚群臣，对下教养百姓，以便使他们一心归顺自己。
English: Three years of painstaking labor, dry lips and sore lungs, caressing the courtiers inwardly and educating the people outwardly, in order to make them submit to him wholeheartedly.

古文：有甘脆不足分，弗敢食；有酒流之江，与民同之。
现代文：有甜美的食物，如不够分，自己不敢独自吃，有酒把它倒入江中，与人民共饮。
English: There is sweet food, if it is not enough, they dare not eat alone, there is wine, pour it into the river and drink it with the people.

古文：身亲耕而食，妻亲织而衣。
现代文：靠自己亲身耕种吃饭，靠妻子亲手纺织穿衣。
English: He grows and eats his own food, and his wife weaves and dresses his clothes.

古文：味禁珍，衣禁袭，色禁二。
现代文：饮食不追求珍奇，衣服不会穿两层，禁止使用二色为饰。
English: The diet does not pursue rarity, the clothes will not wear two layers, and the use of two colors as decoration is prohibited.

古文：时出行路，从车载食，以视孤寡老弱之渍病、困穷、颜色愁悴、不赡者，必身自食之。
现代文：他还时常出外巡视，随从车辆装载着食物，去探望孤寡老弱中生病的、困厄的、面色忧愁憔悴的，饮食不足的人，一定亲自给他们食物吃。
English: He also often went on inspection tours, accompanied by vehicles loaded with food, to visit the lonely, the old, the weak, the sick, the destitute, the sad-looking, the undernourished, and he would certainly give them food to eat.

古文：于是属诸大夫而告之曰： 愿一与吴徼天之衷。
现代文：然后，他召集诸大夫，向他们宣告说： 我愿与吴国一次求得上天裁正。
English: Then he called together all the doctors and announced to them, "I am willing to once again seek heavenly justice with the State of Wu.

古文：令吴、越之国相与俱残，士大夫履肝肺，同日而死，孤与吴王接颈交臂而偾，此孤之大愿也。
现代文：让吴，越两国彼此一道毁灭，士大夫踏肝践肺同日战死，我跟吴王颈臂相交肉搏而亡，这是我最大的砾望。
English: Let the two countries of Wu and Vietnam destroy each other. The scholar and the doctor died in battle on the same day. I died in hand-to-hand combat with King Wu. This is my greatest sorrow.

古文：若此而不可得也，内量吾国不足以伤吴，外事之诸侯不能害之，则孤将弃国家，释群臣，服剑臂刃，变容貌，易名姓，执箕帚而臣事之，以与吴王争一旦之死。
现代文：如果这些办不到，从国内考虑估量我们的国力不足以损伤吴国，从国外考虑结盟的诸侯也不能毁灭它，那么，我将抛弃国家，离开群臣，身带佩剑，手执利刃，改变容貌，更换姓名，充当仆役，执箕帚侍奉吴王，以便跟吴王决死于一旦之间。
English: If these things are not possible, if our national strength is not enough to damage the state of Wu, and if the allied princes cannot destroy it, then I will abandon the country, leave the ministers, carry a sword, hold a sharp blade, change my appearance, change my name, serve as a servant, and serve the king of Wu, so that I can die with the king of Wu.

古文：孤虽知要领不属，首足异处，四枝布裂，为天下戮，孤之志必将出焉！ 
现代文：我虽然知道这样做会遭致腰断颈绝，头脚异处，四肢分裂，被天下人所差辱，但是我的志向一定要付诸实施。 
English: Although I know that doing so will cause my waist and neck to be cut off, my head and feet to be in different places, my limbs to be split, and I will be humiliated by the world, I must put my ambition into practice.

古文：于是异日果与吴战于五湖，吴师大败，遂大围王宫，城门不守，禽夫差，戮吴相，残吴二年而霸。
现代文：后来越国终干与吴国在五湖决战，吴国军队大败，紧接着越国军队包围了吴王的王官，攻下城门，活捉了夫差，杀死了吴相。灭掉吴国之后二年越国称霸诸侯。
English: Later, Vietnam and Wu finally fought a decisive battle in the Five Lakes, and the army of Wu was defeated. Immediately afterwards, the Vietnamese army surrounded the royal officials of the king of Wu, captured the city gate, captured the husband alive, and killed Wu Xiang. Two years after the elimination of Wu, Vietnam dominated the princes.

古文：此先顺民心也。
现代文：这都是先顺依民心的结果啊。
English: This is all the result of following the will of the people.

古文：齐庄子请攻越，问于和子。
现代文：齐庄子请求攻打越国，征求和子的意见。
English: Qizhuangzi requested to attack Yue, soliciting Kazo's opinion.

古文：和子曰： 先君有遗令曰： 无攻越。
现代文：和子说。先君有遗命说： 不可攻打越国。
English: Kazuko said, "The former emperor had a last will and testament that said, 'Don't attack Yue.'

古文：越，猛虎也。 
现代文：越国是只猛虎。
English: Yue Guo is just a fierce tiger.

古文：庄子曰： 虽猛虎也，而今已死矣。 
现代文：齐庄子说： 虽然是只猛虎，但是现在已经死了。 
English: Qi Zhuangzi said: Although it was a fierce tiger, it is now dead.

古文：和子以告鸮子。鸮子曰： 已死矣，以为生。 
现代文：和子把这话告诉鸮子，鸮子说。 虽然已经死了，但人们还认为它活着。 
English: Kazuko told this to the cripple, and the cripple said that although he was dead, people still thought he was alive.

古文：故凡举事，必先审民心，然后可举。
现代文：所以，凡行事，一定要先考察民心，然后才可以去做。
English: Therefore, whenever you act, you must first examine the people's hearts before you can do it.

古文：三曰：今有千里之马于此，非得良工，犹若弗取。
现代文：知士假如有日行千里的骏马，但如果遇不到善于相马的人仍然不会被当作千里马使用。
English: If a connoisseur has a horse that can travel a thousand miles in a day, but if he does not meet someone who is good at horse riding, he will still not be used as a horse.

古文：良工之与马也，相得则然后成，譬之若枹之与鼓。
现代文：善于相马的人与千里马，须互相依赖，然后才得以成名，就像鼓槌和鼓彼此相依一样。
English: A good horseman and a good charioteer must depend on each other before they can become famous, just as a drumstick and a drum depend on each other.

古文：夫士亦有千里，高节死义，此士之千里也。
现代文：士中也有超群出众的千里马。气节高尚、为正义而献身的人就是士中的千里马。
English: There are also outstanding heroes among the soldiers. Those who are noble and dedicated to justice are the heroes among the soldiers.

古文：能使士得千里者，其惟贤者也。
现代文：能够使士驰骋千里的，大概只有贤人吧。
English: It is probably only wise men who can make a chariot travel thousands of miles.

古文：静郭君善剂貌辨。
现代文：静郭君裉喜爱他的门客剂貌辨。
English: Jingguo Junyao likes his customers to be good-looking.

古文：剂貌辨之为人也多訾，门人弗说。
现代文：剂貌辨为人毛病很多，其他门客都不喜欢他。
English: He has a lot of personality disorders, and the other clients don't like him.

古文：士尉以证静郭君，静郭君弗听，士尉辞而去。
现代文：士尉为此谏诤静郭君，静郭君不听。于是士尉告辞离开了静郭君的门下。
English: For this reason, the captain taunted Jing Guo-kun, but Jing Guo-kun did not listen. So the captain left Jing Guo-kun's service.

古文：孟尝君窃以谏静郭君，静郭君大怒曰： 刬而类，揆吾家，苟可以傔剂貌辨者，吾无辞为也！ 
现代文：孟尝君私下为此劝说静郭君，静郭君大怒说： 即使把你们都杀死，把我家拆得四分五裂，只要能让剂貌辨先生满足，我也在所不辞！ 
English: Meng Yuqun privately persuaded Jing Guoqun for this, and Jing Guoqun said angrily: Even if I kill you all and tear my family apart, as long as I can satisfy Mr. Jie Maoban, I will not refuse!

古文：于是舍之上舍，令长子御，朝暮进食。
现代文：于是让剂貌辨隹在上等客舍，让他的长子侍奉，早晚进献食物。
English: So he let his eldest son serve him in a high-class guest house, bringing food to him in the morning and evening.

古文：数年，威王薨，宣王立。
现代文：过了几年，齐宣王死了，齐闵王即位。
English: A few years later, King Qiwei passed away, and Tianying's half-brother, King Xuan, ascended the throne.

古文：静郭君之交，大不善于宣王，辞而之薛，与剂貌辨俱。
现代文：静郭君的处世交往很不为闵王所赞许，他被迫辞官，回到封地薛，仍踉剂貌辨在一起。
English: Jing Guo Jun's dealings in the world were not appreciated by the king of Qi. He was forced to resign and returned to the fief of Xue. They are still together.

古文：留无几何，剂貌辨辞而行，请见宣王。
现代文：在薛地住了没多久，剂貌辨辞行，请求去谒见闵王。
English: After living in Xueji for a short time, he asked to see the king.

古文：静郭君曰： 王之不说婴也甚，公往，必得死焉。 
现代文：静郭君说： 大王不喜欢我到极点了，您去必定遭到杀害。 
English: Shizuka said, "The great king dislikes me to the extreme. If you go, you will surely be killed."

古文：剂貌辨曰： 固非求生也。
现代文：剂貌辨说： 我本来就不是去求活命的。
English: "I didn't really want to live," he said.

古文：请必行！ 
现代文：我一定要去！ 
English: I have to go!

古文：静郭君不能止。
现代文：静郭君劝阻不住他。
English: Jing Guo could not dissuade him.

古文：剂貌辨行，至于齐。
现代文：剂貌辨走了，到了齐国都城。
English: After the identification, they went to the capital city of Qi.

古文：宣王闻之，藏怒以待之。
现代文：闵王听说了，心怀恼怒等着他。
English: When the king heard of this, he was furious and waited for him.

古文：剂貌辨见，宣王曰： 子，静郭君之所听爱也？ 
现代文：剂貌辨拜见闵王，闵阕王说： 你就是静郭君言听计从、非常喜爱的那个人吧？ 
English: He bowed to the king, and the king said, "Are you the one who listened to Jing Guo and loved him so much?"

古文：剂貌辨答曰： 爱则有之，听则无有。
现代文：剂貌辨回答说： 喜爱是有，至于言听计从根本谈不上。
English: He replied, "There is affection, but there is no way to talk about words and deeds.

古文：王方为太子之时，辨谓静郭君曰： 太子之不仁，过颐豕视，若是者倍反。
现代文：当初大王正作太子的时候，我对静韩君说： 太子耳后见腮，下斜偷视，相貌不仁，像这样的人背理行事。
English: When the great king was crown prince, I said to Jing Han Jun, "Crown princes see behind their ears, look down, and are not kind. People like this act unreasonably."

古文：不若革太子，更立卫姬婴儿校师。 
现代文：不如废掉太子，改立卫姬的幼子校师。 
English: It would be better to abolish the crown prince and replace him with the kindergarten teacher of Wei Ji's young son.

古文：静郭君泫而曰： 不可，吾弗忍为也。 
现代文：静韩君流着汩说： 不行。我不忍心这样做。 
English: Quietly Han Jun said, "No, I can't. I can't bear to do this."

古文：且静郭君听辨而为之也，必无今日之患也。
现代文：如果静郭君听从我的话并这样做了，一定不会有今天的祸患。
English: If Jing Guo Jun had listened to me and done this, there would not have been today's disaster.

古文：此为一也。
现代文：这是一个例证。
English: This is an example.

古文：至于薛，昭阳请以数倍之地易薛，辨又曰： 必听之。 
现代文：回到薛地之后，楚相昭阳请求用大于薛几倍的土地交换薛地。我又说： 一定要应允他。 
English: When Jing Jun arrived at Xuecheng, Chu Xiang Shoyang wanted to use several times more land to exchange for Xuecheng, and I said to Jing Guo Jun: You must accept this request.

古文：静郭君曰： 受薛于先王，虽恶于后王，吾独谓先王何乎？
现代文：静郭君说： 我从先王那里承受了薛地，现在虽被后王所厌恶，但如果我把薛地换给别人，栽怎么对先王说呢？
English: Jing Guo Jun said, "I inherited Xue Di from the previous king. Although it is now detested by the previous king, if I were to exchange Xue Di for someone else, how would I tell the previous king?

古文：且先王之庙在薛，吾岂可以先王之庙予楚乎？ 
现代文：再说先王的宗庙在薛，我怎么可以把先王的宗庙给楚国昵？ 
English: Besides, the ancestral temple of the former king is in Xue, how can I give the ancestral temple of the former king to Chu?

古文：又不肯听辨。
现代文：他又不肯听我的话。
English: He wouldn't listen to my advice.

古文：此为二也。 
现代文：这是第二个例证。 
English: This is the second example.

古文：宣王太息，动于颜色，曰： 静郭君之于寡人，一至此乎！
现代文：闵王长叹，显出很激动的神色，说； 静郭君对我竟爱到这个地步吗？
English: Shao Wang sighed and showed a very excited expression, saying: Does Shing Guo Jun really love me to this extent?

古文：寡人少，殊不知此。
现代文：我年纪幼小，这些都不知道。
English: I was too young and didn't know much about it.

古文：客肯为寡人少来静郭君乎？ 
现代文：您愿意替我把静郭君请来吗？ 
English: Would you like to invite Jing Guo Jun here for me?

古文：剂貌辨答曰： 敬诺。 
现代文：剂貌辨回答说一 遵命。 
English: He replied that he would do as he was told.

古文：静郭君来，衣威王之服，冠其冠，带其剑。
现代文：静郭君来到国都，穿着宣王所赐的衣服，鼓着宣王所赐的帽子，佩着宣王所赐的宝剑。
English: Jing Guo Jun came to the capital, wearing the clothes given by King Xuan, wearing the hat given by King Xuan, and wearing the sword given by King Xuan.

古文：宣王自迎静郭君于郊，望之而泣。
现代文：闵王亲自到郊外迎接静郭君，远远望见他就流下泪来。
English: Shao Wang himself went to the suburbs to meet Jing Guo Jun, and when he saw him from afar, he shed tears.

古文：静郭君至，因请相之。
现代文：静郭君到了以后，闵王就请他作齐相。
English: After Shizukuokun arrived, the king asked him to pose for a portrait.

古文：静郭君辞，不得已而受。
现代文：静郭君再三辞谢，不得已才接受下来。
English: Shizukuokun repeatedly declined the offer, but was forced to accept it.

古文：十日，谢病强辞，三日而听。
现代文：十天之后，他托病辞官，极力推辞，三夭之后闵王才应允。
English: Ten days later, he asked for a sick leave and strongly refused. Three days later, the king agreed.

古文：当是时也，静郭君可谓能自知人矣。
现代文：在当时，静郭君可称的上善于亲自了解人了。
English: At that time, Jing Guo Jun could be said to be good at getting to know people personally.

古文：能自知人，故非之弗为阻。
现代文：正因为他善于亲自了解人，所以别人的非议妨碍不了他。
English: It is precisely because he is good at getting to know people personally that the criticism of others does not hinder him.

古文：此剂貌辨之所以外生乐、趋患难故也。
现代文：这正是剂貌辨之所以把生命与欢乐置之度外，为静郭君奔赴患难的缘故。审己
English: This is precisely the reason why Jie Maobian put his life and happiness aside and went to the trouble for Jing Guo Jun.

古文：四曰：凡物之然也，必有故。
现代文：大凡物之所以这样，必有原因。
English: There must be a reason why ordinary things are like this.

古文：而不知其故，虽当，与不知同，其卒必困。
现代文：如果不知道它的原因，即使行为符合外物的变化，也和不知相同，最终必为外物所困。
English: If you don't know the cause of it, even if the behavior conforms to the changes of the external object, it is also different from the unknown, and you will eventually be trapped by the external object.

古文：先王、名士、达师之所以过俗者，以其知也。
现代文：先代君王、知名之士、通达之师之所以超过平庸之辈，正是因为他们知道事物之所以这样的原因。
English: The reason why past kings, great men, and great teachers were better than the mediocre is that they knew why things were the way they were.

古文：水出于山而走于海，水非恶山而欲海也，高下使之然也。
现代文：水从山中流出奔向大海，并不是水厌恶山而向往海，而是山高海低的形势使它选样的。
English: Water flows from the mountains to the sea. It is not that water abhors the mountains and yearns for the sea, but that the situation of high mountains and low seas makes it choose the mountains.

古文：稼生于野而藏于仓，稼非有欲也，人皆以之也。
现代文：庄稼生在田野而贮藏在仓中，并不是庄稼有这种欲望，而是人们都需用它啊。
English: Crops are grown in the field and stored in warehouses. It's not that the crops have this desire, but people need to use it.

古文：故子路揜雉而复释之。
现代文：所以子路捉到雉却又放了它，是由于自己尚未知道捉到它的原因。
English: Therefore, the reason why Zi Lu caught the dragonfly and then released it was because he did not yet know why he had caught it.

古文：子列子常射中矣，请之于关尹子。
现代文：子列子曾射中目标，于是向关尹子请教关于射箭的道理。
English: Zileizi had hit the target, so he asked Guan Yinzi for advice on archery.

古文：关尹子曰： 知子之所以中乎？ 
现代文：关尹子问： 你知道你射中的道理吗？ 
English: Guan Yin Zi asked: Do you know the reason why you hit the ball?

古文：答曰： 弗知也。 
现代文：子列子回答说； 不知道。 
English: "I don't know," the boy replied.

古文：关尹子曰： 未可。 退而习之三年，又请。
现代文：关尹子说： 现在还不能跟你谈论大道。 
English: Guan Yin Zi said, "I can't talk to you about the avenue right now.

古文：关尹子曰： 子知子之所以中乎？ 子列子曰： 知之矣。 
现代文：子列于回去练习射箭，练了三年，又去请教。关尹子问： 你知道你射中的道理吗？ 子列子说： 知道了。 
English: Guan Yin Zi asked: Do you know the reason why you hit the target? Zi Lie Zi said: I know.

古文：关尹子曰： 可矣，守而勿失。 
现代文：关尹子悦， 可以了，你要奉守它而不要失掉。 
English: Guan Yin Ziyue, it's okay, you should keep it and not lose it.

古文：非独射也，国之存也，国之亡也，身之贤也，身之不肖也，亦皆有以。
现代文：不只射箭如此，国家的生存，国家的灭亡，人的贤明，人的不肖，也都各有原因。
English: Not only archery, but also the survival of a country, the destruction of a country, the wisdom of a person, and the ugliness of a person, all have their own reasons.

古文：圣人不察存亡、贤不肖，而察其所以也。
现代文：圣人不去考察存亡，贤不肖本身，而是考察造成它们这样的原因。
English: The sage does not examine the existence or non-existence of things as such, but the causes that make them so.

古文：齐攻鲁，求岑鼎。
现代文：齐国攻打鲁国，索取鲁国的岑鼎。
English: Qi attacked Lu and demanded the throne of Lu.

古文：鲁君载他鼎以往。
现代文：鲁君把另一只鼎进到齐国。
English: Lu Jun brought another Ding into Qi.

古文：齐侯弗信而反之，为非，使人告鲁侯曰： 柳下季以为是，请因受之。 
现代文：齐侯不相信，把它退了回来，认为不是岑鼎，并派人告诉鲁侯说： 如果柳下季认为这是岑鼎，我愿意接受它。 
English: Qi Hou didn't believe it and sent it back, thinking it wasn't Zhaoding. He also sent someone to tell Lu Hou, saying, "If Liu Xiaoqi thinks it's Zhaoding, I'm willing to accept it."

古文：鲁君请于柳下季，柳下季答曰： 君之赂以欲岑鼎也，以免国也。
现代文：鲁君向柳下季求助。柳下季答复说： 您答应把齐侯想要的岑鼎送给他，为的是借以使国家免除灾难。
English: Lu Jun asked Liu Shitian for help. Liu Shitian replied: You promised to give him the gong ding that Qi Hou wanted, in order to use it to save the country from disaster.

古文：臣亦有国于此。
现代文：我自己这里也有个 国家 ，这就是信誉。
English: I myself have a country here, and that is credibility.

古文：破臣之国以免君之国，此臣之所难也。 
现代文：毁灭我的 国家 来挽救您的国家，这是我难以办到的。 
English: Destroy my country to save your country, I can hardly do it.

古文：于是鲁君乃以真岑鼎往也。
现代文：于是鲁君就把真的岑鼎过往齐国去了。
English: As a result, Lu Jun took the real Ding Ding and went to Qi Province.

古文：且柳下季可谓能说矣。
现代文：像柳下季这样可称得上善于劝说国君了。
English: Like Yanagishitose, he can be said to be good at persuading the sovereign.

古文：非独存己之国也，又能存鲁君之国。
现代文：不仅保持自己的信誉，又能保存住鲁君的国家。
English: It can not only maintain its own credibility, but also preserve Lu Jun's country.

古文：齐湣王亡居于卫，昼日步足，谓公玉丹曰： 我已亡矣，而不知其故。
现代文：齐湣王流亡国外，住在卫国。有一次，白天散步，齐湣王对公玉丹说： 我已流亡国外了，却不知道流亡的原因。
English: Once, while taking a walk during the day, King Qi Xuan said to Prince Yudan, "I have gone into exile, but I don't know the reason for my exile.

古文：吾所以亡者，果何故哉？
现代文：我之所以流亡，究竟是什么原因呢？
English: What was the reason for my exile?

古文：我当已。 
现代文：我当纠正自己的过失。 
English: I have to correct my mistake.

古文：公玉丹答曰： 臣以王为已知之矣，王故尚未之知邪？
现代文：公玉丹回答说： 我以为大王您已经知道了呢，您竟然还不知道吗？
English: The princess replied, "I thought you already knew everything, but you still don't know?"

古文：王之所以亡也者，以贤也。
现代文：您之所以流亡国外，是因为您太贤明的缘故。
English: You went into exile because you were too clever.

古文：天下之王皆不肖，而恶王之贤也，因相与合兵而攻王。
现代文：天下的君主都不肖，因而憎恶大王您的贤碍，于是他们互相勾结，合兵进攻大王。
English: The monarchs of the world are not good-looking, so they hate the great king, so they collude with each other and attack the great king.

古文：此王之所以亡也。 
现代文：这就是大王您流亡的原因啊！ 
English: This is the reason for your exile, great king!

古文：湣王慨焉太息曰： 贤固若是其苦邪？ 
现代文：湣王很感慨，叹息说， 君主贤明原来要受这样的苦啊！ 
English: Shao Wang was very sorry and said with a sigh, "Master Xianming had to suffer so much!"

古文：此亦不知其所以也。
现代文：这也是不知道白己为什么灭亡啊！
English: This is also why I don't know why I died!

古文：此公玉丹之所以过也。
现代文：这正是公玉丹之所以能够蒙骗他的原因。
English: This is precisely the reason why Prince Yudan was able to deceive him.

古文：越王授有子四人。
现代文：越王授有四个儿子。
English: King Yue had four sons.

古文：越王之弟曰豫，欲尽杀之，而为之后。
现代文：越王的弟弟名叫豫，他想把越王的四个儿子全都杀掉，让自己成为越王的继承人。
English: King Yue's younger brother was named Yu, and he wanted to kill all four of King Yue's sons so that he could become King Yue's heir.

古文：恶其三人而杀之矣。
现代文：豫毁谤其中三子，让越王把他们杀掉了。
English: Yu slandered three of them and had King Yue kill them.

古文：国人不说，大非上。
现代文：国人很不满，纷纷指责王。
English: The Chinese people were very dissatisfied and accused the king one after another.

古文：又恶其一人而欲杀之，越王未之听。
现代文：豫又毁谤剩下的一子，想让越王杀掉他，越王没有听从豫的话。
English: Yu also slandered the remaining son and wanted Yue Wang to kill him. Yue Wang did not listen to Yu's words.

古文：其子恐必死，因国人之欲逐豫，围王宫。
现代文：越王的儿子害怕自己必被杀死，于是借着国人的愿望把豫驱遂出国，并包围了王官。
English: King Yue's son was afraid that he would be killed, so he used the wishes of the people to drive Yu out of the country and surround the royal officials.

古文：越王太息曰： 余不听豫之言，以罹此难也。 
现代文：越王叹息说： 我不听从豫的话，所以才遗到这样的灾祸。 
English: Yue Wang sighed and said, "I didn't listen to Yu, that's why this disaster happened."

古文：亦不知所以亡也。
现代文：这也是不知自己为什么灭亡啊。
English: This is also why I don't know why I died.

古文：五曰：人或谓兔丝无根。
现代文：精通有人说菟丝这种植物没有根。
English: Some people say that the plant does not have roots.

古文：兔丝非无根也，其根不属也，伏苓是。
现代文：其实菟丝不是没有根，只是它的根与菟丝不相连，茯苓就是它的根。
English: In fact, cocoon silk is not without roots, but its roots are not connected to cocoon silk. The cocoon is its root.

古文：慈石召铁，或引之也。
现代文：磁石吸引铁，是有一种力在吸引它。
English: When a magnet attracts iron, there is a force that attracts it.

古文：树相近而靡，或之也。
现代文：树木彼此生得近了，就要互相摩擦，是有一种力在推它。
English: When trees grow close to each other, they have to rub against each other. There is a force pushing it.

古文：圣人南面而立，以爱利民为心，号令未出，而天下皆延颈举踵矣，则精通乎民也。
现代文：圣人面南为君，胸怀爱民利民之心，号令还没有发出，天下人就都伸长脖子，踮起郸跟殷切盼望了。
English: The saint faces south for you, with the heart of loving the people and benefiting the people. The call has not yet been issued, and people all over the world are craning their necks, holding their beaks and eagerly looking forward to it.

古文：夫贼害于人，人亦然。
现代文：这是圣人与人民精气相通的缘故。
English: This is due to the close affinity between the saint and the people.

古文：今夫攻者，砥厉五兵，侈衣美食，发且有日矣，所被攻者不乐，非或闻之也，神先告也。
现代文：暴君伤害人民，人民也会有类似的反应。假如有国家准备进攻他国，正在磨砺兵器，犒赏军队，距离出征没几天丁，这时即将遭受进攻的国家肯定不会快乐，并不是他们有人听到了风声，而是精神先感知到了。
English: If a country is preparing to attack another country, is sharpening weapons, rewarding troops, and is a few days away from going to war, then the country that is about to be attacked will certainly not be happy. It is not that they have heard the news, but the spirit has sensed it first.

古文：身在乎秦，所亲爱在于齐，死而志气不安，精或往来也。
现代文：一个人身在秦国，他所亲爱的人在齐国，如果在齐国的人死了，在秦国的人就会心神不安，这是精气互相往来的缘故啊！
English: A person is in Qin and his loved one is in Qi. If the person in Qi dies, the person in Qin will be worried. This is due to the exchange of energy.

古文：德也者，万民之宰也。月也者，群阴之本也。
现代文：德是万民的主宰，月亮是各种属阴之物的根本。
English: Virtue is the master of all people, and the moon is the root of all things of the underworld.

古文：月望则蚌蛤实，群阴盈；月晦则蚌蛤虚，群阴亏。
现代文：月满的时候，蚌蛤的肉就充实，各种属阴之物也都满盈；月光尽敛的时侯，蚌蛤的肉就空虚，各种属阴之物也都亏损。
English: When the moon is full, the flesh of the cocoon is full, and all kinds of yin things are also full; when the moonlight is concentrated, the flesh of the cocoon is empty, and all kinds of yin things are also loss.

古文：夫月形乎天，而群阴化乎渊；圣人行德乎己，而四荒咸饬乎仁。
现代文：月相变化显现于天空，各种属阴之物都随着变化于深水之中。圣人修养自己的品德，四方荒远之地的人民都随着整饬自己，归向仁义。
English: The changes in the phases of the moon appear in the sky, and all kinds of shadowy things appear in the deep water with the changes. The saints cultivate their moral character, and the people in the desolate places in all directions rectify themselves and return to benevolence and righteousness.

古文：养由基射，兕中石，矢乃饮羽，诚乎兕也。
现代文：养由基射兕，射中石头，箭羽没人石中这是由于他把石头当成兕，精神集中手兕的缘故。
English: He shoots a crossbow and hits a stone, but the arrow does not hit the stone. This is because he regards the stone as a crossbow and concentrates on the crossbow.

古文：伯乐学相马，所见无非马者，诚乎马也。
现代文：伯乐学相马，眼睛看到的除了马以外没有别的东西，这是由于他精神集中于马的缘故。
English: Bo Le learned to ride a horse, and his eyes saw nothing else but the horse, which was due to his concentration on the horse.

古文：宋之庖丁好解牛，所见无非死牛者，三年而不见生牛，用刀十九年，刃若新研，顺其理，诚乎牛也。
现代文：宋国的庖丁喜好分解牛的肢体，眼睛看到的除了牛以外没有别的东西，整整三年眼前不见活牛，一把刀用了十九年，刀刃仍然锋利得像刚磨过，这是由于他分解牛的肢体时顺着牛的肌理，精神集中于牛的缘故。
English: Song Dynasty's Heding likes to disassemble the limbs of cattle. His eyes see nothing but cattle. For three whole years, he has not seen a live cow. He has used a knife for nineteen years, and the blade is still as sharp as if it had just been sharpened. This is because when he disassembles the limbs of cattle, he follows the texture of the cow and concentrates on the cow.

古文：钟子期夜闻击磬者而悲，使人召而问之曰： 子何击磬之悲也？ 
现代文：钟子期在间听到有人击磬，发出悲哀之声，就派人把击磐的人叫来，问他说； 你击磐击出的声音怎么这么悲哀啊？ 
English: When the son of the bell heard someone striking a gong and a mournful sound, he sent for the man who struck the rock and asked him, "Why is the sound of your hammering so mournful?"

古文：答曰： 臣之父不幸而杀人，不得生；臣之母得生，而为公家为酒；臣之身得生，而为公家击磬。
现代文：回答说， 我的父亲不幸杀了人，无法活命，我的母亲虽得以活命，却没入官府替公家造酒，我自身虽得以活命，却替公家击磐。
English: He replied, "My father, unfortunately, killed someone and could not live, my mother, although she survived, did not go to the government to make wine for the public, and I myself, although I survived, hit the rock for the public.

古文：臣不睹臣之母三年矣。
现代文：我已经三年没有见到自己的母亲了。
English: I haven't seen my mother for three years.

古文：昔为舍氏睹臣之母，量所以赎之则无有，而身固公家之财也，是故悲也。 
现代文：昨天晚上在舍氏见到了我的母亲，想要赎她可是没有钱，而且连自身也本是公家的财产，因此心中悲哀。 
English: I saw my mother last night in Shejhuang. I wanted to ransom her, but I didn't have the money, and I'm a public property myself, so I felt sad.

古文：钟子期叹嗟曰： 悲夫！
现代文：钟子期叹息说： 可悲呀，可悲！
English: Zhong Zi Shi sighed and said: How sad, how sad!

古文：悲夫！心非臂也，臂非椎、非石也。悲存乎心而木石应之。 
现代文：心并不是手臂，手臂也不是椎，不是磐，但悲哀存于心中，而椎磬却能与它应和。 
English: The heart is not an arm, the arm is not a vertebra, it is not a rock, but sorrow is in the heart, and the vertebrae can accommodate it.

古文：故君子诚乎此而谕乎彼，感乎己而发乎人，岂必强说乎哉？
现代文：所以君子心中有所感，就会在外面表现出来，自己心中有所感，就可以影响到他人，哪里用得着一定要用言辞表述昵？
English: Therefore, if a gentleman has a feeling in his heart, he will show it outside. If he has a feeling in his heart, he can influence others. Where is it necessary to express it in words?

古文：周有申喜者，亡其母，闻乞人歌于门下而悲之，动于颜色，谓门者内乞人之歌者，自觉而问焉，曰： 何故而乞？ 与之语，盖其母也。
现代文：他告诉守门的人让唱歌的乞丐进来，亲自见她，并询问说： 什么原因使你落到求乞的地步？ 跟她交谈才知道，那乞丐原来正是他的母亲。
English: He told the doorkeeper to let the singing beggar in, to see her in person, and asked: What brought you to begging?

古文：故父母之于子也，子之于父母也，一体而两分，同气而异息。若草莽之有华实也，若树木之有根心也。
现代文：所以，无论父母对于子女来说，还是子女对于父母来说，实际都是一个身体而分为两处，精气相同而呼吸各异，就像草莽有花有果，树木有根有心一样。
English: Therefore, whether parents are for their children, or children are for their parents, it is actually one body divided into two parts, with the same essence but different breaths, just as grass has flowers and fruits, and trees have roots and hearts.

古文：虽异处而相通，隐志相及，痛疾相救，忧思相感，生则相欢，死则相哀，此之谓骨肉之亲。
现代文：虽在异处却可值此相通，心中志向互相连系，有病痛互相救护，有忧思互相感动，对方活着心里就高兴，对方死了心里就悲哀，这就叫作骨肉之亲。
English: Although they are in different places, they can be connected, their hearts are connected, they help each other when they are sick, they are moved by each other when they are sad, they are happy when the other person is alive, and sad when the other person is dead. This is called being a relative.

古文：神出于忠而应乎心，两精相得，岂待言哉？
现代文：这种天性出于至诚，而彼此心中互相应和，两方精气相通难道还要靠言语吗？
English: This kind of nature is out of sincerity, and each other's hearts correspond to each other, and the two sides share the same essence. Is it necessary to rely on words?

