古文：张辽字文远，雁门马邑人也。
现代文：张辽字文远，雁门郡马邑人。
English: Zhang Liao Zi Wenyuan, a native of Ma'e, Yanmen County.

古文：本聂壹之后，以避怨变姓。
现代文：本来是聂壹的后裔，因为躲避仇怨才改换了姓。
English: Originally, he was a descendant of Xing Yi, but he changed his surname to avoid hatred.

古文：少为郡吏。
现代文：年少的时候就在郡中担任小吏。
English: When he was young, he worked as a clerk in the county.

古文：汉末，并州刺史丁原以辽武力过人，召为从事，使将兵诣京都。
现代文：汉朝末年，并州刺史丁原因为张辽勇武力量超过常人，召他来担任从事，让他率兵到京城去。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, because Zhang Liao's bravery and military strength exceeded that of an ordinary person, he was summoned to Beijing to lead the troops.

古文：何进遣诣河北募兵，得千馀人。
现代文：何进派遣他到河北招募士兵，招到了一千多人。
English: He Jin sent him to recruit soldiers in Hebei, and he recruited more than a thousand people.

古文：还，进败，以兵属董卓。
现代文：返回的时候，适逢何进失败，张辽就率队归顺董卓。
English: When returning, coinciding with He Jin's failure, Zhang Liao led the team to Shun Dong Zhuo.

古文：卓败，以兵属吕布，迁骑都尉。
现代文：董卓也失败后，张辽又率队归顺吕布，被提升为骑都尉。
English: After Dong Zhuo also failed, Zhang Liao led the team to surrender to Lvbu and was promoted to captain.

古文：布为李傕所败，从布东奔徐州，领鲁相，时年二十八。
现代文：吕布被李傕攻破，张辽跟随吕布往东逃奔向徐州，兼任鲁相，当时他二十八岁。
English: Lvbu was defeated by Li Yao, and Zhang Liao followed Lvbu and fled east to Xuzhou, concurrently serving as the prime minister of Lushan. He was twenty-eight years old at the time.

古文：太祖破吕布於下邳，辽将其众降，拜中郎将，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：太祖在下邳攻破吕布，张辽带领手下队伍投降，被任命为中郎将，赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: The great-great-grandfather defeated Lü Bu at the Lower Yangtze River, and Zhang Liao led his men to surrender. He was appointed as a middle-ranking general and given the title of Kuanai marquis.

古文：数有战功，迁裨将军。
现代文：张辽多次建立战功，被提升为裨将军。
English: Zhang Liao repeatedly established his military merit and was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：袁绍破，别遣辽定鲁国诸县。
现代文：袁绍被攻破后，太祖另外派遣张辽平定鲁国各县。
English: After Yuan Shao was defeated, Taizu also sent Zhang Liao to pacify the counties of Dinglu.

古文：与夏侯渊围昌豨於东海，数月粮尽，议引军还，辽谓渊曰： 数日已来，每行诸围，豨辄属目视辽。
现代文：张辽和夏侯渊在东海围攻昌豨，几个月后军粮吃尽，他们商议着率军撤退，张辽对夏侯渊说： 几天以来，我每次巡查被包围的军营，昌豨都一直盯着我。
English: Zhang Liao and Xia Houyuan besieged Chang Juan in the East China Sea. A few months later, the army ran out of food. They discussed leading the army to retreat. Zhang Liao said to Xia Houyuan: "For several days, every time I inspected the encircled military camp, Chang Juan kept staring at me.

古文：又其射矢更稀，此必豨计犹豫，故不力战。
现代文：而且他们的箭矢也越来越少，这一定是昌豨正在犹豫是继续作战还是投降，所以没有全力作战。
English: Moreover, their arrows and arrows are also becoming fewer and fewer. This must be because Chang Juan is hesitating whether to continue fighting or to surrender, so he is not fighting with all his strength.

古文：辽欲挑与语，傥可诱也？ 
现代文：我想要诱导他和我谈话，也许可以诱降他呢？ 
English: I'm trying to get him to talk to me, maybe get him to back down?

古文：乃使谓豨曰： 公有命，使辽传之。 
现代文：就派人对昌豨说： 曹公有令让我向你传达。 
English: So they sent a messenger to Chang Qi, saying, "Cao Gong has ordered me to convey this to you."

古文：豨果下与辽语，辽为说 太祖神武，方以德怀四方，先附者受大赏 。
现代文：昌豨果然下来和张辽谈话，张辽说： 太祖英明神武，正在凭借德行感化四方势力，最先依附他的都能受到丰厚的赏赐。 
English: Changchun did indeed come down to talk with Zhang Liao. Zhang Liao said, "The great ancestor, the great sage, is using his virtue to influence the four great powers. Those who are the first to adhere to him will receive a rich reward."

古文：豨乃许降。
现代文：昌豨就答应投降。
English: Chang Ho agreed to surrender.

古文：辽遂单身上三公山，入豨家，拜妻子。
现代文：张辽就只身登上三公山，到昌豨家中，拜访他的妻子孩子。
English: Zhang Liao climbed the San Gong Mountain alone and went to the home of Chang Wei to visit his wife and children.

古文：豨欢喜，随诣太祖。
现代文：昌豨很高兴，跟随张辽去见太祖。
English: Changyu was very happy and followed Zhang Liao to meet the great ancestor.

古文：太祖遣豨还，责辽曰： 此非大将法也。 
现代文：太祖让昌豨回去，然后责备张辽说： 这不是身为大将应该采取的办法。 
English: The great-grandfather let Chang Kui go back, and then reproached Zhang Liao, saying: This is not the way a general should act.

古文：辽谢曰： 以明公威信著於四海，辽奉圣旨，豨必不敢害故也。 
现代文：张辽道歉说： 因为明公的威德信义天下皆知，我奉着圣旨，昌豨一定不敢加害我。 
English: Zhang Liao apologized and said, "Since the virtue, faith and righteousness of Ming Gong are known to the whole world, I will carry out the sacred will, and Chang Xi will certainly not dare to harm me."

古文：从讨袁谭、袁尚於黎阳，有功，行中坚将军。
现代文：又跟随太祖到黎阳征讨袁谭、袁尚，建立了军功，代理中坚将军。
English: He also followed the great-grandfather to Liyang to recruit Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang, establishing military merit and acting as a key general.

古文：从攻尚於邺，尚坚守不下。
现代文：又随从太祖在邺城攻打袁尚，袁尚坚守邺城，大军没有能攻克。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather to attack Yuan Shang in Lucheng. Yuan Shang firmly defended Lucheng, and the large army was unable to conquer Lucheng.

古文：太祖还许，使辽与乐进拔阴安，徙其民河南。
现代文：太祖返回许都，让张辽和乐进攻打并攻克阴安，将城中的百姓迁移到河南。
English: The great-grandfather returned to Xudu, let Zhang Liao and Le attack and conquer Yinan, and moved the people in the city to Henan.

古文：复从攻邺，邺破，辽别徇赵国、常山，招降缘山诸贼及黑山孙轻等。
现代文：又跟随太祖攻打邺城，邺城被攻破，张辽被另外派往赵国、常山招降沿山各路贼寇以及黑山的孙轻等人。
English: Zhang Liao was also sent to Zhao Province, Changshan to recruit and defeat the bandits along the mountain roads, as well as Sun Qiao and others from Montenegro.

古文：从攻袁谭，谭破，别将徇海滨，破辽东贼柳毅等。
现代文：然后又随从攻打袁谭，袁谭被攻破后，又另外率军攻取海滨，攻破了辽东的贼寇柳毅等部。
English: Then he followed Yuan Tan to attack, and after Yuan Tan was defeated, he led another army to capture the seashore, and defeated the Liaodong thief Liu Yi and other departments.

古文：还邺，太祖自出迎辽，引共载，以辽为荡寇将军。
现代文：张辽回到邺城，太祖亲自出来迎接，拉着他一起乘车，任命他为荡寇将军。
English: When Zhang Liao returned to Lucheng, Taizu personally came out to greet him, took him along for the ride, and appointed him as the general of the bandits.

古文：复别击荆州，定江夏诸县，还屯临颍，封都亭侯。
现代文：又另外攻打荆州，平定了江夏各县，然后返回临颍驻扎，又被封为都亭侯。
English: In addition, he attacked Jingzhou, leveled all counties in Jiangxia, and then returned to Linyi to stay, and was once again made the prince of the capital.

古文：从征袁尚於柳城，卒与虏遇，辽劝太祖战，气甚奋，太祖壮之，自以所持麾授辽。
现代文：随从太祖到流程征讨袁尚，突然遇上敌军，张辽劝说太祖迎战，气势很是振奋，太祖受到鼓舞，将自己手中的的麾旗交给了他。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to the process of recruiting Yuan Shang, and suddenly encountered the enemy army. Zhang Liao persuaded his great-grandfather to go to war. The momentum was very exciting. The great-grandfather was encouraged and handed over his banner to him.

古文：遂击，大破之，斩单于蹋顿。
现代文：于是张辽率队迎战，大获全胜，斩杀了单于蹋顿。
English: As a result, Zhang Liao led the team to fight, won a complete victory, and killed Shan Yu Xing Tong.

古文：时荆州未定，复遣辽屯长社。
现代文：当时荆州还没有平定，太祖又派张辽驻守长社。
English: At that time, Jingzhou had not yet been pacified, and Emperor Taizu sent Zhang Liao to garrison Chosha.

古文：临发，军中有谋反者，夜惊乱起火，一军尽扰。
现代文：将要出发时，军中有人谋反作乱，晚上防火作乱，整个军队都被惊动。
English: When they were about to set out, some in the army plotted a mutiny, and in the evening a conflagration broke out. The entire army was alarmed.

古文：辽谓左右曰： 勿动。
现代文：张辽对身边人说： 不要乱动。
English: Zhang Liao said to those around him: Don't move around.

古文：是不一营尽反，必有造变者，欲以动乱人耳。 
现代文：不是整个军营都在作乱，一定是有制造叛乱的人，想要以此来扰乱全军罢了。 
English: It's not that the whole battalion has turned against them, but it must be that the mutineers want to use this as a means of confusing people!

古文：乃令军中，其不反者安坐。
现代文：就在军中下令，不想要参与叛变的就不要随意动。
English: He issued an order in the army that those who did not want to participate in the rebellion should not move at will.

古文：辽将亲兵数十人，中陈而立。
现代文：张辽率领几十名亲信，在军营正中列阵。
English: Zhang Liao led dozens of cronies and lined up in the middle of the military camp.

古文：有顷定，即得首谋者杀之。
现代文：不久，全军都安定下来，立即就抓到了带头谋反的人并斩杀了。
English: Soon, the whole army settled down, and immediately caught and killed the person who led the rebellion.

古文：陈兰、梅成以氐六县叛，太祖遣于禁、臧霸等讨成，辽督张郃、牛盖等讨兰。成伪降禁，禁还。
现代文：陈兰、梅成凭借六安县的氐族人反叛，太祖派于禁、臧霸等人讨伐梅成，让张辽督领张郃、牛盖等人征讨陈兰、梅成假装向于禁投降，于禁就率军返回。
English: Chen Lan and Mei Cheng rebelled with the help of the Yi people in Lu'an County. The Great Ancestor sent Yu Gan, Yaoba and others to fight against Mei Cheng, and asked Zhang Liao Du to lead Zhang Yao, Niu Gai and others to recruit Chen Lan and Mei Cheng to pretend to surrender to Yu Gan, and return with Yu Gan's army.

古文：成遂将其众就兰，转入灊山。
现代文：然后梅成带领手下部众投靠陈兰，转战进入灊山。
English: Then, Mei Cheng led his subordinates to support Chen Lan and moved to Lushan.

古文：灊中有天柱山，高峻二十馀里，道险狭，步径裁通，兰等壁其上。
现代文：灊山里有天柱山，高拔陡峭，方圆二十多里，道路狭窄难走，宽度只能让一个人通过，陈兰等人就在上面修建营垒。
English: In Shaoshan, there is Tianzhu Mountain, which is steep and high, with a circumference of more than 20 miles. The road is narrow and difficult to walk, and the width can only allow one person to pass. Chen Lan and others built a camp on it.

古文：辽欲进，诸将曰： 兵少道险，难用深入。 
现代文：张辽想要进攻，众位将领说： 我军人少，道路又狭窄难行，难以深入进军。 
English: When Zhang Liao wanted to attack, the generals said, "We have few soldiers, the roads are narrow and difficult, and it is difficult to advance deeply.

古文：辽曰： 此所谓一与一，勇者得前耳。 遂进到山下安营，攻之，斩兰、成首，尽虏其众。
现代文：张辽说： 这就是古人说的 一对一 的局势，勇武的一方就能得胜。 于是率军到山下安营驻守，进攻敌军，将陈兰、梅成斩杀了，将他们的部众都俘虏了。
English: Zhang Liao said: This is what the ancients called a one-on-one situation, and the brave side can win. So he led the army to camp at the foot of the mountain, attacked the enemy army, killed Chen Lan and Meicheng, and captured all their subordinates.

古文：太祖论诸将功，曰： 登天山，履峻险，以取兰、成，荡寇功也。 
现代文：太祖记述众位将领的功劳，说： 攀登险峻高山，踏过险境，攻取了陈兰、梅成，有平定寇匪的功劳。 
English: Describing the merits of the generals, the great-grandfather said: Climbing the steep mountain, stepping through the dangerous situation, capturing Chen Lan and Meicheng, and having the merit of suppressing the bandits.

古文：增邑，假节。
现代文：就为张辽增加食邑，并授予符节。
English: Zhang Liao was given more food and wine, and was also awarded a rune festival.

古文：太祖既征孙权还，使辽与乐进、李典等将七千馀人屯合肥。
现代文：太祖征讨孙权回来以后，让张辽和乐进、李典等人率领七千多士兵驻守在合肥。
English: After the great-grandfather returned from the conquest of Sun Quan, Zhang Liao, Le Jin, Li Dian and others led more than seven thousand soldiers stationed in Hefei.

古文：太祖征张鲁，教与护军薛悌，署函边曰 贼至乃发 。
现代文：太祖征讨张鲁，临行前将一封信函交给护军薛悌，在信函边写着 敌军来到再打开 。
English: Before leaving, Emperor Taizu sent a letter to the escort, Xue Qi, with the words "When the enemy comes, open it again" written on the side.

古文：俄而权率十万众围合肥，乃共发教，教曰： 若孙权至者，张、李将军出战；乐将军守，护军勿得与战。 
现代文：不久，孙权率领十万人马包围了合肥，于是众位将领一起打开信函，上面写着： 如果孙权率兵来到，张辽、李典两位将军迎战；乐进率兵守城，护军薛悌不能上阵作战。 
English: Soon, Sun Quan led a hundred thousand soldiers to surround Hefei, so all the generals opened the letter together, which read: If Sun Quan led the soldiers to come, Zhang Liao and Li Dian would meet the two generals; Le Jin led the soldiers to defend the city, and Xue Yao, the escort, could not fight.

古文：诸将皆疑。
现代文：众位将领都心存疑虑。
English: Many generals have misgivings.

古文：辽曰； 公远征在外，比救至，彼破我必矣。
现代文：张辽说： 曹公在远处征讨，等到援兵来到，敌军一定已经攻破我们了。
English: Zhang Liao said: Cao Gong is on a long-distance campaign, and by the time reinforcements arrive, the enemy forces will have defeated us.

古文：是以教指及其未合逆击之，折其盛势，以安众心，然后可守也。
现代文：所以指示我们趁着敌军还没有合围进攻我们的时候，挫伤他们的气势，以安定士兵，这样才能守城。
English: Therefore, instruct us to take advantage of the fact that the enemy troops have not yet encircled and attacked us, to frustrate their momentum, to stabilize the soldiers, so that we can defend the city.

古文：成败之机，在此一战，诸君何疑？ 
现代文：成功与失败的机会，就在这一战，众位还有什么疑虑呢？ 
English: The chance of success or failure, it is in this battle, what doubts do you have?

古文：李典亦与辽同。
现代文：李典的意见也和张辽一样。
English: Li Dian's opinion is also the same as Zhang Liao's.

古文：於是辽夜募敢从之士，得八百人，椎牛飨将士，明日大战。
现代文：于是张辽趁着夜色招募敢于跟随的勇士，召到了八百人，随后杀牛犊犒赏士兵，决定第二天大战。
English: So Zhang Liao took advantage of the darkness to recruit warriors who dared to follow him, summoning eight hundred people. He then killed a bull to reward the soldiers and decided to go to war the next day.

古文：平旦，辽被甲持戟，先登陷陈，杀数十人，斩二将，大呼自名，冲垒入，至权麾下。
现代文：等到天亮，张辽身穿战甲手持战戟，摔进攻入敌阵，斩杀了几十个敌军和两个将领，大喊着自己的姓名，冲入营垒中，到了孙权旗帜下面。
English: At dawn, Zhang Liao, wearing battle armor and holding a war club, charged into the enemy lines, killed dozens of enemy troops and two generals, shouted his own name, rushed into the camp, and came under Sun Quan's banner.

古文：权大惊，众不知所为，走登高冢，以长戟自守。
现代文：孙权大惊，众人不知道该怎么办，都跑到山顶，拿着长戟护着自己。
English: Sun Quan was so shocked that people didn't know what to do. They all ran to the top of the mountain to protect themselves with long ropes.

古文：辽叱权下战，权不敢动，望见辽所将众少，乃聚围辽数重。
现代文：张辽大呼孙权下来交战，孙权不敢行动，又望见张辽率领的部众少，就召集士兵将张辽包围了好几层。
English: Zhang Liao called on Sun Quan to come down and fight. Sun Quan did not dare to act, and when he saw that Zhang Liao's army was small, he gathered soldiers and surrounded Zhang Liao for several floors.

古文：辽左右麾围，直前急击，围开，辽将麾下数十人得出，馀众号呼曰： 将军弃我乎！ 
现代文：张辽左右突围，径直向前猛烈功绩，包围圈被冲开，张辽率领手下几十人得以冲出，剩下的人大声呼喊： 将军要抛弃我们吗！ 
English: Zhang Liao broke through the encirclement left and right, and went straight ahead with fierce exploits. The encirclement was broken, and Zhang Liao led dozens of his men to break out. The rest of the people shouted loudly: Does the general want to abandon us!

古文：辽复还突围，拔出馀众。
现代文：张辽又返回突围，将剩下的人都带出来。
English: Zhang Liao returned to the breakout and brought the rest of the people out.

古文：权人马皆披靡，无敢当者。
现代文：孙权士兵都纷纷倒下，没有斗志，没有人敢阻拦张辽。
English: Sun Quan's soldiers all fell one after another. They had no fighting spirit, and no one dared to stop Zhang Liao.

古文：自旦战至日中，吴人夺气，还修守备，众心乃安，诸将咸服。
现代文：战斗从天亮持续到中午，吴军的士气渐渐低落，撤退修筑防御工事，大家才安心下来，众位将领都很佩服张辽。
English: The battle lasted from dawn to noon. The morale of the Wu army gradually declined. They retreated to build fortifications. Only then did everyone feel at ease. The generals all admired Zhang Liao.

古文：权守合肥十馀日，城不可拔，乃引退。
现代文：张辽坚守合肥十几天，孙权的部队没有能攻克，就率军撤退了。
English: Zhang Liao Jian defended Hefei for more than ten days, but Sun Quan's troops were not able to conquer the city, so he withdrew with his army.

古文：辽率诸军追击，几复获权。
现代文：张辽率各路人马追击，几乎再次抓获孙权。
English: Zhang Liao led all the people to chase and almost caught Sun Quan again.

古文：太祖大壮辽，拜征东将军。
现代文：太祖被张辽的勇武感动，任命他为征东将军。
English: The great-grandfather was moved by Zhang Liao's bravery and appointed him as a general to conquer the East.

古文：建安二十一年，太祖复征孙权，到合肥，循行辽战处，叹息者良久。
现代文：建安二十一年，太祖再次征讨孙权，大军到了合肥，太祖沿着当初张辽作战的地方巡视，感叹了很久。
English: In the 21st year of Jian'an, the great ancestor once again enquired about Sun Quan, and the great army arrived in Hefei. The great ancestor inspected along the place where Zhang Liao originally fought, and sighed for a long time.

古文：乃增辽兵，多留诸军，徙屯居巢。
现代文：于是给张辽增加兵力，将各路人马大部分都留了下来，然后转移到居巢驻守。
English: As a result, Zhang Liao increased the number of troops, kept most of the people and horses, and then moved to the residence.

古文：关羽围曹仁於樊，会权称藩，召辽及诸军悉还救仁。
现代文：关羽在樊城包围曹仁，适逢孙权表示臣服，太祖诏令张辽和各路军队全都返回援助曹仁。
English: Guan Yu encircled Cao Ren in Lucheng. When Sun Quan expressed his submission, the Great Ancestor issued an edict ordering Zhang Liao and all the armies to return to aid Cao Ren.

古文：辽未至，徐晃已破关羽，仁围解。
现代文：张辽还没有赶到，徐晃就已经攻破了关羽，曹仁的困境就解除了。
English: Zhang Liao hadn't arrived yet, but Xu Akira had already broken through Guan Yu, and Cao Ren's predicament was solved.

古文：辽与太祖会摩陂。
现代文：张辽和太祖在摩陂合军。
English: Zhang Liao and Taizu join forces in Mahan.

古文：辽军至，太祖乘辇出劳之，还屯陈郡。
现代文：张辽军队来到，太祖乘坐辇车出来慰问他们，随后张辽率军返回陈郡驻扎。
English: Zhang Liao's army arrived, Taizu came out in a carriage to console them, and then Zhang Liao led the army back to Chen County and stationed there.

古文：文帝即王位，转前将军。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，调任张辽为前将军。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of Wei and transferred Zhang Liao to be a former general.

古文：分封兄汎及一子列侯。
现代文：并分封他的哥哥张汎郃一个儿子为列侯。
English: He also made his brother Zhang Panjun's only son a vassal.

古文：孙权复叛，遣辽还屯合肥，进辽爵都乡侯。
现代文：孙权再次反叛，文帝派张辽返回合肥驻军，进封张辽的爵位为都乡侯。
English: Sun Quan rebelled again, Emperor Wen sent Zhang Liao back to Hefei to garrison the troops, and Zhang Liao's title of nobility was elevated to that of the capital's vassal.

古文：给辽母舆车，及兵马送辽家诣屯，敕辽母至，导从出迎。所督诸军将吏皆罗拜道侧，观者荣之。
现代文：还赐给张辽母亲舆车，并派兵马护送张辽的家属到他驻守的地方，还下令等到张辽母亲到达的时候，要恭敬地出来迎接，张辽所督领的众位将领吏役都要到路边排列下拜，看到的人都认为张辽一家很荣耀。
English: He also gave Zhang Liao's mother a public carriage, and sent soldiers and horses to escort Zhang Liao's family members to the place where he was stationed. He also ordered that when Zhang Liao's mother arrived, they should come out to greet her respectfully. All the generals and officials under Zhang Liao's command should line up on the roadside to bow down. Everyone who saw them thought that Zhang Liao's family was very honorable.

古文：文帝践阼，封晋阳侯，增邑千户，并前二千六百户。
现代文：文帝登基后，封张辽为晋阳侯，增加一千户封邑，加上之前的一共两千六百户。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, Zhang Liao was given the title of Prince of Jinyang, and the number of fiefs was increased by 1,000, bringing the total to 2,600.

古文：黄初二年，辽朝洛阳宫，文帝引辽会建始殿，亲问破吴意状。
现代文：黄初二年，张辽到洛阳宫朝拜，文帝在建始殿会见张辽，亲自问他攻破吴国的状况。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Zhang Liao made a pilgrimage to Luoyang Palace. Emperor Wen met with Zhang Liao in Jianshi Hall and personally asked him about the situation of conquering Wu.

古文：帝叹息顾左右曰： 此亦古之召虎也。 
现代文：文帝叹息着对身边的侍从说： 这也是跟周代的召虎一样的人啊。 
English: Emperor Wen sighed and said to the attendants around him: This is also the same person as Zhou Dynasty's summoning tiger.

古文：为起第舍，又特为辽母作殿，以辽所从破吴军应募步卒，皆为虎贲。
现代文：文帝为张辽修建府邸，又特地为他的母亲修建了殿宇，将张辽招募的并跟随他攻破吴军的将士都称为虎贲。
English: Emperor Wen built a mansion for Zhang Liao, and specially built a hall for his mother, and called the soldiers recruited by Zhang Liao and who followed him to defeat the Wu Army as "tiger cubs."

古文：孙权复称藩。
现代文：孙权再次表示归顺。
English: Sun Quan once again surrendered.

古文：辽还屯雍丘，得疾。
现代文：张辽返回雍丘驻守，生了病。
English: Zhang Liao returned to the Yongqiu garrison and fell ill.

古文：帝遣侍中刘晔将太医视疾，虎贲问消息，道路相属。
现代文：文帝派侍中刘晔带着太医前去探病，虎贲军也一直询问张辽的状况，一路上都没有断绝。
English: Emperor Wen sent the attendant Liu Wei to go with the great doctor to investigate the illness, and the Tigress army also kept asking about Zhang Liao's condition, and they did not break off along the way.

古文：疾未瘳，帝迎辽就行在所，车驾亲临，执其手，赐以御衣，太官日送御食。
现代文：张辽病情没有痊愈，文帝将他迎接到自己所在的地方，亲自前来探视，拉着张辽的手，赐给他御衣，让太官每天都送来御食。
English: Zhang Liao's illness did not get better, Emperor Wen welcomed him to his place, came to visit him in person, took Zhang Liao's hand, gave him a royal robe, and asked the eunuch to send royal food every day.

古文：疾小差，还屯。
现代文：病情有所好转后，张辽就返回驻地。
English: After his condition improved, Zhang Liao returned to his residence.

古文：孙权复叛，帝遣辽乘舟，与曹休至海陵，临江。
现代文：孙权再次反叛，文帝派遣张辽和曹休乘船到海陵县，靠近长江。
English: Sun Quan rebelled again, and Emperor Wen sent Zhang Liao and Cao Xiu by ship to Hailing County, near the Yangtze River.

古文：权甚惮焉，敕诸将： 张辽虽病，不可当也，慎之！ 
现代文：孙权非常忌惮，敕令将领们说： 张辽虽然生病，但也不可抵挡，大家要谨慎。 
English: Sun Quan was very cautious. The generals of the imperial command said: Although Zhang Liao is sick, he is also irresistible. Everyone should be cautious.

古文：是岁，辽与诸将破权将吕范。
现代文：这一年，张辽和将领们攻破孙权的大将吕范。
English: That year, Zhang Liao and his generals defeated Sun Quan's general Lv Fan.

古文：辽病笃，遂薨于江都。
现代文：张辽病情严重，最后在江都去世。
English: Zhang Liao was seriously ill and eventually died in Jiangdu.

古文：帝为流涕，谥曰刚侯。
现代文：文帝为他的死而哭泣，谥号为刚侯。
English: Emperor Wen wept for his death, and his nickname was Gangu.

古文：子虎嗣。
现代文：张辽的儿子张虎继承爵位。
English: Zhang Liao's son Zhang Hu inherited the title.

古文：六年，帝追念辽、典在合肥之功，诏曰： 合肥之役，辽、典以步卒八百，破贼十万，自古用兵，未之有也。
现代文：黄初六年，文帝感念张辽、李典在合肥的战功，诏令说： 合肥的战役，张辽、李典用八百步兵击败了敌军十万人，自古以来用兵的效果，没有能做到这样的。
English: In the sixth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen was moved by the war exploits of Zhang Liao and Li Dian in Hefei. The imperial edict said: In the battle of Hefei, Zhang Liao and Li Dian used eight hundred infantrymen to defeat the enemy army of one hundred thousand. Since ancient times, the effect of using soldiers has not been able to achieve such a thing.

古文：使贼至今夺气，可谓国之爪牙矣。
现代文：导致贼人到现在依然萎靡不振，张辽可以说是国家的勇士啊。
English: As a result, the thieves are still sluggish, and Zhang Liao can be said to be a national hero.

古文：其分辽、典邑各百户，赐一子爵关内侯。 
现代文：现在下令分封给张辽、李典各一百户封邑，赐封他们的一个儿子为关内侯。 
English: Now, he ordered the allocation of fiefs to Zhang Liao and Li Dian, one hundred fiefs each, and gave one of their sons the title of Guan Nei Hou.

古文：虎为偏将军，薨。子统嗣。
现代文：张虎担任偏将军，他去世之后，他的儿子张统继承爵位。
English: Zhang Hu served as a general, and after his death, his son Zhang Tong inherited the title.

古文：乐进字文谦，阳平卫国人也。
现代文：乐进字文谦，阳平郡卫国人。
English: Lejin Ziwenqian, Yangping County defender of the country.

古文：容貌短小，以胆烈从太祖，为帐下吏。
现代文：他身材矮小，因为胆气刚烈而得以追随太祖，是他账下的一名小吏。
English: He is short in stature, and because of his courage, he was able to follow his great-grandfather. He is a minor official under his account.

古文：遣还本郡募兵，得千馀人，还为军假司马、陷陈都尉。
现代文：太祖派他回到阳平郡招募士兵，招到了一千多人，回来后担任军中的假司马、陷阵都尉。
English: The great-grandfather sent him back to Yangping County to recruit soldiers, and he recruited more than a thousand people. After returning, he served as a fake Sima and a captain in the army.

古文：从击吕布於濮阳，张超於雍丘，桥蕤於苦，皆先登有功，封广昌亭侯。
现代文：乐进跟随太祖在濮阳进攻吕布，到雍丘攻击张超，到苦县攻打桥蕤，都因为率先登上城墙而建立了战功，被封为广昌亭侯。
English: Lejin followed his great-grandfather to attack Lvbu in Fenyang, to attack Zhang Chao in Yongqiu, and to attack the bridgehead in Qixian. Because he was the first to climb the city wall, he was awarded the title of Prince of Guangchang.

古文：从征张绣於安众，围吕布於下邳，破别将，击眭固於射犬，攻刘备於沛，皆破之，拜讨寇校尉。
现代文：随从太祖在安众征讨张绣，在下邳围攻吕布，击败了吕布了另一名将领，又在射犬攻打眭固，在沛县进攻刘备，都将他们打败了，被任命为讨寇校尉。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to enlist Zhang Xiu in Anzhu, besieged Lvbu in Jiaozuo, defeated another general in Lvbu, attacked Zenggu in Shaoxing, and attacked Liu Bei in Peixian. He defeated all of them and was appointed as a reconnaissance lieutenant.

古文：渡河攻获嘉，还，从击袁绍於官渡，力战，斩绍将淳于琼。
现代文：渡过黄河进攻获嘉，回来后跟随太祖在官渡攻打袁绍，奋力作战，斩杀了袁绍的将领淳于琼。
English: After crossing the Yellow River and winning the attack, he came back and followed his great-grandfather to attack Yuan Shao in Guandu. He fought hard and killed Yuan Shao's general, Chun Yu Qiong.

古文：从击谭、尚於黎阳，斩其大将严敬，行游击将军。
现代文：跟随太祖到黎阳攻打袁谭、袁尚，斩杀了他们手下大将严敬，随后代理游击将军。
English: He followed the great-grandfather to Liyang to attack Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang, and killed their subordinates, General Yan Qian, and then the acting guerrilla general.

古文：别击黄巾，破之，定乐安郡。
现代文：另外率队攻打黄巾军，取得胜利，平定了安乐郡。
English: In addition, he led the team to attack the Yellow Turban Army, achieved victory, and leveled Anle County.

古文：从围邺，邺定，从击袁谭於南皮，先登，入谭东门。
现代文：又随从太祖围攻邺城，邺城被平定后，又跟随太祖在南皮进攻袁谭，他率先登上城楼，进入袁谭驻守的东门。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather's siege of Lucheng. After Lucheng was pacified, he followed his great-grandfather to attack Yuan Tan in Nanpi. He was the first to climb the city tower and enter the east gate where Yuan Tan was stationed.

古文：谭败，别攻雍奴，破之。
现代文：袁谭战败后，乐进另外率军进攻雍奴城并顺利攻取。
English: After Yuan Tan's defeat, Lejin led another army to attack Yongnu City and successfully captured it.

古文：建安十一年，太祖表汉帝，称进及于禁、张辽曰： 武力既弘，计略周备，质忠性一，守执节义，每临战攻，常为督率，奋强突固，无坚不陷，自援枹鼓，手不知倦。
现代文：建安十一年，太祖上表给汉献帝，称赞乐进、于禁和张辽说： 本来实力已经很强大，计划周详，品质忠诚专一，坚守节操，每次交战时，常常率先上阵，奋力作战，没有不能攻克的，还会亲自擂起战鼓，不知疲倦。
English: In the eleventh year of Jian'an, the great-grandfather presented the emperor of Han to the emperor, praised Lejin, Yu Huan and Zhang Liao, and said: Originally, the strength was already very strong, the plan was thorough, the quality was loyal and dedicated, and the discipline was adhered to. Every time there was a battle, he often took the lead in the battle and fought hard. If there was nothing that could not be conquered, he would personally beat the war drums, tirelessly.

古文：又遣别征，统御师旅，抚众则和，奉令无犯，当敌制决，靡有遗失。
现代文：派他们单独出兵征战时，统领全军，安抚众人，不会违犯禁令，面对敌人制定计策，没有疏漏的。
English: When they are sent out to fight alone, they will lead the whole army, pacify the people, not violate the ban, and formulate strategies in the face of the enemy.

古文：论功纪用，宜各显宠。 
现代文：评论记述他们的功劳，应该各自给他们加以恩赏。 
English: The review describes their merits, and they should be rewarded individually.

古文：於是禁为虎威；进，折冲；辽，荡寇将军。
现代文：于是汉献帝任命于禁为虎威将军，乐进为折冲将军，张辽为荡寇将军。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanxian appointed Yu Zhen as General Huwei, Lejin as General Renchong, and Zhang Liao as General Xiangkou.

古文：进别征高幹，从北道入上党，回出其后。
现代文：乐进另外征讨高幹，从北边进入上党郡，从高幹的后方迂回出击。
English: Lejin also recruited high-ranking cadres, entered Shangdang County from the north, and made a detour from the rear of the high-ranking cadres.

古文：幹等还守壶关，连战斩首。
现代文：高幹等人回军据守壶关，两军连续交战，乐进斩杀很多敌人。
English: The high-ranking officers and others of the returning army defended Kuguan, the two armies fought continuously, and Lejin killed many enemies.

古文：幹坚守未下，会太祖自征之，乃拔。
现代文：高幹坚守壶关，乐进没有能攻克，适逢太祖亲自率军前来征讨，才攻占了壶关。
English: Gao Jian held fast to Kuguan, Lejin was unable to conquer it, and it was only when Taizu himself led an army to come and conquer it that Kuguan was conquered.

古文：太祖征管承，军淳于，遣进与李典击之。
现代文：太祖征讨管承，驻军在淳于，派乐进和李典进攻。
English: Taizhu conquered Guancheng, stationed troops in Chunyu, and sent Lejin and Lisen to attack.

古文：承破走，逃入海岛，海滨平，荆州未服，遣屯阳翟。
现代文：管承战败逃走，逃入海岛，海滨地区因此平定，此时荆州还没有服从，太祖就派乐进驻扎阳翟。
English: Guancheng fled in defeat and fled to the island, and the coastal area was thus pacified. At this time, Jingzhou had not yet obeyed, and the great-grandfather sent Le to station in Yangshuo.

古文：后从平荆州，留屯襄阳，击关羽、苏非等，皆走之，南郡诸郡山谷蛮夷诣进降。
现代文：后来乐进跟随太祖平定荆州，又留守襄阳，进攻关羽、苏非等人，都取得胜利，南部各郡那些山谷中的少数民族都前来投降。
English: Later, Lejin followed his great-grandfather to conquer Jingzhou, and stayed behind in Xiangyang to attack Guan Yu, Soviet Africa, and others. They all achieved victory, and the ethnic minorities in the valleys of the southern counties all came to surrender.

古文：又讨刘备临沮长杜普、旌阳长梁大，皆大破之。
现代文：乐进又征讨刘备治下的临沮县长杜普、旌阳县长梁大，都大败他们。
English: Lejin also solicited Du Pu, the governor of Linshe County, and Liang Da, the governor of Fenyang County, under the reign of Liu Bei, and defeated them.

古文：后从征孙权，假进节。
现代文：后来跟随太祖征讨孙权，被授予符节。
English: Later, he followed his great-grandfather in the conquest of Sun Quan and was awarded the Fu Festival.

古文：太祖还，留进与张辽、李典屯合肥，增邑五百，并前凡千二百户。
现代文：太祖回军，留下乐进、张辽和李典驻守合肥，并给乐进增加食邑五百户，加上之前的一共一千两百户。
English: The great-grandfather returned to the army, leaving Lejin, Zhang Liao and Li Dian stationed in Hefei, and added five hundred households to Lejin, adding to the previous total of twelve hundred households.

古文：以进数有功，分五百户，封一子列侯；进迁右将军。
现代文：因为乐进多次立下战功，食邑增加五百户，封他的一个儿子为列侯；乐进也被提升为右将军。
English: Because of Lejin's repeated war exploits, 500 households were added to the food village, and one of his sons was made a vassal; Lejin was also promoted to the rank of right general.

古文：建安二十三年薨，谥曰威侯。
现代文：乐进在建安二十三年去世，谥号为威侯。
English: Lejin died in the 23rd year of Jianan, and his nickname was Wei Hou.

古文：子綝嗣。
现代文：他的儿子乐綝继承爵位。
English: His son Le Yao succeeded to the peerage.

古文：綝果毅有父风，官至扬州刺史。
现代文：乐綝刚毅果敢，有他父亲的风范，做官到扬州刺史。
English: Le Yao was a strong-willed and courageous man. He followed his father's example and became an official in Yangzhou.

古文：诸葛诞反，掩袭杀綝，诏悼惜之，追赠卫尉，谥曰愍侯。
现代文：诸葛诞反叛，趁乐綝没有防备杀了他。朝廷下诏表示哀悼痛惜，追赠他为卫尉，谥号为愍侯。
English: Zhuge Zheng rebelled and took advantage of Le Yao's unpreparedness to kill him. The imperial court expressed its condolences and regret, posthumously awarding him the rank of lieutenant and the title of marquis.

古文：子肇嗣。
现代文：乐綝的儿子乐肇继承爵位。
English: His son Sima Zhao succeeded to the throne.

古文：于禁字文则，泰山钜平人也。
现代文：于禁字文则，泰山郡钜平人。
English: In the case of the banned words, it was the people of Suiping, Taishan County.

古文：黄巾起，鲍信招合徒众，禁附从焉。
现代文：黄巾军起兵，鲍信召集部众，于禁就跟随他。
English: The Yellow Turban Army raised an army, Bao Xin called up his subordinates, and Yu Han followed him.

古文：及太祖领兖州，禁与其党俱诣为都伯，属将军王朗。
现代文：等到太祖担任衮州刺史，于禁和他的队伍到一起到他部下担任军官，隶属与将军王朗。
English: When his great-grandfather became the governor of Zhangzhou, Yu Kan and his team joined his subordinates as officers under the command of General Wang Lang.

古文：朗异之，荐禁才任大将军。
现代文：王朗认为他有奇才，就向太祖举荐他，说他的才能足够担任大将军。
English: Wang Lang thought he was a genius and recommended him to his great-grandfather, saying that his talent was enough to serve as a general.

古文：太祖召见与语，拜军司马，使将兵诣徐州，攻广戚，拔之，拜陷陈都尉。
现代文：太祖召见于禁和他谈论，让他担任军中的司马，让他率兵到徐州，进攻广戚县，顺利攻克，被封为陷陈都尉。
English: The great-grandfather summoned Yu Zhan to talk with him, let him serve as the Sima in the army, let him lead the troops to Xuzhou, attack Guangqi County, successfully overcome, and was named the trapped Chen captain.

古文：从讨吕布於濮阳，别破布二营於城南，又别将破高雅於须昌。
现代文：后来跟随太祖在濮阳征讨吕布，另外率部在濮阳城南面攻破吕布的两个营，又另外率军在须昌攻破高雅。
English: Later, he followed his great-grandfather to conquer Lvbu in Fenyang. He also led an army to conquer two battalions of Lvbu in the south of Fenyang City, and another army to conquer Gaoya in Suchang.

古文：从攻寿张、定陶、离狐，围张超於雍丘，皆拔之。
现代文：跟随太祖进攻寿张、定陶、离狐，在雍丘围攻张超，都攻克了。
English: He followed the great ancestor to attack Shou Zhang, Ding Tao, and Li Jixu, and besieged Zhang Chao in Yongqiu, and conquered them all.

古文：从征黄巾刘辟、黄邵等，屯版梁，邵等夜袭太祖营，禁帅麾下击破之，斩邵等，尽降其众。
现代文：又随太祖征讨黄巾军刘辟、黄邵等部，在版梁驻军，黄邵等人趁着夜色袭击太祖军营，于禁率领部下迎战并取胜，斩杀了黄邵等人，降服了他全部队伍。
English: In addition, along with Liu Bi, Huang Shao and other members of the Yellow Turban Army, Huang Shao and others took advantage of the night to attack the Tai Zu army camp, led his subordinates to fight and win, killed Huang Shao and others, and defeated his entire team.

古文：迁平虏校尉。
现代文：于禁被提升为平虏校尉。
English: Yu Kan was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel.

古文：从围桥蕤於苦，斩蕤等四将。
现代文：又跟随太祖在苦县围攻桥蕤，斩了桥蕤等四名敌将。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather in besieging the bridgehead in Quxian, and killed four enemy generals including the bridgehead.

古文：从至宛，降张绣。
现代文：随从太祖到宛城，降服了张绣。
English: He followed his great-grandfather to Wancheng and submitted to Zhang Xiu.

古文：绣复叛，太祖与战不利，军败，还舞阴。
现代文：张绣再次反叛，太祖和他交战，都失利，大军败退，撤回舞阴。
English: Zhang Xiu rebelled again, the great-grandfather fought with him, both were defeated, the army retreated, and Wuyin withdrew.

古文：是时军乱，各间行求太祖，禁独勒所将数百人，且战且引，虽有死伤不相离。
现代文：当时军中混乱，将士们都各自暗中求见太祖，只有于禁约束这所带领的几百人，一边作战一边后退，即使有死伤也没有互相分散。
English: At that time, there was confusion in the army, and the generals all secretly sought to see the great-grandfather, only to be restrained by the hundreds of people led by this, while fighting and retreating, even if there were deaths and injuries, they did not disperse.

古文：虏追稍缓，禁徐整行队，鸣鼓而还。
现代文：敌军追击的气势减缓了一些，于禁慢慢整理部队，敲着战鼓回营。
English: The momentum of the enemy's pursuit slowed down a bit, and Yu Han slowly organized the troops and returned to the camp, beating the war drum.

古文：未至太祖所，道见十馀人被创裸走，禁问其故，曰： 为青州兵所劫。 
现代文：还没有到太祖居所，在路上看到十几个衣衫褴褛的伤兵，于禁向他们询问原因，他们说： 是被青州的士兵劫掠。 
English: Before reaching the residence of the great-grandfather, he saw a dozen ragged wounded soldiers on the road and asked them the reason. They said: They were robbed by soldiers from Qingzhou.

古文：初，黄巾降，号青州兵，太祖宽之，故敢因缘为略。
现代文：当初，黄巾军投降，编号为青州军，太祖宽纵他们，所以他们敢趁机劫掠。
English: At first, the Yellow Turban Army surrendered and was numbered as the Qingzhou Army. Emperor Taizu indulged them, so they dared to take advantage of the opportunity to loot.

古文：禁怒，令其众曰： 青州兵同属曹公，而还为贼乎！ 
现代文：于禁大怒，号令他的部众说： 青州兵和我们一样隶属与曹公，却还敢作乱吗！ 
English: Enraged at the ban, he ordered his subordinates to rise up and say: "The Qingzhou soldiers are subordinate to Cao Gong just like us, but do they still dare to make trouble!

古文：乃讨之，数之以罪。
现代文：就率队征讨他们，历数他们的罪行。
English: He led a team to round them up and enumerate their crimes.

古文：青州兵遽走诣太祖自诉。
现代文：青州士兵迅速跑到太祖那里告状。
English: The Qingzhou soldier quickly ran to his great-grandfather to complain.

古文：禁既至，先立营垒，不时谒太祖。
现代文：于禁回到后，先修建了营垒，没有按时去拜见太祖。
English: After returning from the ban, he first built a camp and did not go to see his grandfather on time.

古文：或谓禁： 青州兵已诉君矣，宜促诣公辨之。 
现代文：有人对于禁说： 青州兵已经向太祖告状了，应该赶快到太祖那里自辩。 
English: Some people said about the ban: Qingzhou soldiers have already filed a complaint with the great-grandfather, so they should quickly go to the great-grandfather to defend themselves.

古文：禁曰： 今贼在后，追至无时，不先为备，何以待敌？
现代文：于禁说： 现在敌军在后，不知道什么时候就追击而来，不先做好防备，用什么来抵御敌人呢？
English: Yu Gan said, "Now that the enemy troops are behind us, we don't know when they will attack us. If we don't take precautions first, what can we use to defend ourselves against the enemy?"

古文：且公聪明，谮诉何缘！ 
现代文：况且曹公明智，他们诬告我又有什么用! 
English: Besides, Cao Gong is wise, what use is it for them to falsely accuse me!

古文：徐凿堑安营讫，乃入谒，具陈其状。
现代文：就慢慢开凿壕沟安营扎寨，做完后才前去拜见太祖，将情况详细地告知太祖。
English: He slowly dug a trench and set up camp, and only after he had finished did he go to visit Taizu and inform him of the situation in detail.

古文：太祖悦，谓禁曰： 淯水之难，吾其急也，将军在乱能整，讨暴坚垒，有不可动之节，虽古名将，何以加之 於是录禁前后功，封益寿亭侯。
现代文：太祖很高兴，对于禁说： 淯水危难之时，我多么着急，将军能在混乱中整顿军队，讨伐暴行，加固营垒，有着不可动摇的节操，即使是古时的名将，又怎么能超过你呢！ 于是记录于禁前后立下的功劳，封他为益寿亭侯。
English: The great-grandfather was very pleased and said to Han: "When Surabaya was in danger, how anxious I was. A general can reorganize the army in chaos, crack down on violence, strengthen the fortifications, and has unshakable discipline. Even if he was a famous general in ancient times, how could he surpass you!" So the merits set before and after the ban were recorded, and he was awarded the title of Prince of Yishou.

古文：复从攻张绣於穰，禽吕布於下邳，别与史涣、曹仁攻眭固於射犬，破斩之。
现代文：又跟随太祖在穰县进攻张绣，在下邳生擒吕布，另外和史涣、曹仁在射犬攻打眭固，大获全胜并斩杀了眭固。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather to attack Zhangxiu in Zhixian County, Zengqian and Lvbu in Lower Zhixian County, and fought with Shi Yan and Cao Ren in Shaoxing against Yeguo, winning a complete victory and killing Yeguo.

古文：太祖初征袁绍，绍兵盛，禁原为先登。
现代文：太祖刚开始征讨袁绍时，袁绍兵力强盛，于禁表示愿意率先进攻。
English: When Taizu had just begun to recruit Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao had a strong army, and he expressed his willingness to lead the first attack.

古文：太祖壮之，乃遣步卒二千人，使禁将，守延津以拒绍，太祖引军还官渡。
现代文：太祖为他的勇武感动，就派出两千步兵，由于禁率领，据守延津以抵御袁绍，太祖率军返回官渡。
English: The great-grandfather was moved by his bravery and sent out two thousand infantrymen. As he was forbidden to lead, he guarded Yanjin to resist Yuan Shao. The great-grandfather led the army back to Guandu.

古文：刘备以徐州叛，太祖东征之。
现代文：刘备凭借徐州反叛，太祖往东征讨。
English: Liu Bei took advantage of Xuzhou's rebellion to lead the Eastern Expedition.

古文：绍攻禁，禁坚守，绍不能拔。
现代文：袁绍攻打于禁，于禁率队坚守，袁绍没有能攻克。
English: Yuan Shao attacked in the penalty, and the team led by Yuan Shao held firm in the penalty. Yuan Shao was not able to conquer the peak.

古文：复与乐进等将步骑五千，击绍别营，从延津西南缘河至汲、获嘉二县，焚烧保聚三十馀屯，斩首获生各数千，降绍将何茂、王摩等二十馀人。
现代文：于禁又和乐进等将领率五千步兵和骑兵，进攻袁绍其他军营，从延津西南沿黄河直到汲、获嘉两个县，烧毁了敌军聚众守卫的三十多个驻地，斩杀和俘虏的各有几千人，降服了袁绍将领何茂、王摩等二十多人。
English: With 5,000 infantrymen and cavalrymen led by generals such as Yu Ganyu and Lejin, they attacked Yuan Shao's other military camps from the southwest of Yanjin along the Yellow River to the two counties of Gu and Guoxia, burned more than 30 garrisons guarded by the enemy, killed and captured several thousand people, and subdued more than 20 people including Yuan Shao's generals He Mao and Wang Mo.

古文：太祖复使禁别将屯原武，击绍别营於杜氏津，破之。
现代文：太祖又派于禁另外率军在原武驻扎，在杜氏津攻破了袁绍的又一处营寨。
English: The great-great-grandfather was also sent to Han to lead another army stationed in the original Wu, and broke through another camp of Yuan Shao in Du Shi Jin.

古文：迁裨将军，后从还官渡。
现代文：于禁被提升为裨将军，后来跟随太祖返回官渡。
English: Yu Kan was promoted to General Bu, and later he followed his great-grandfather back to Guandu.

古文：太祖与绍连营，起土山相对。
现代文：太祖和袁绍都将自己的军营连接起来，相对着堆起土山。
English: Both the great-grandfather and Yuan Shao connected their military camps and piled up mounds of earth.

古文：绍射营中，士卒多死伤，军中惧。
现代文：袁绍想太祖营中射箭，士兵死伤很多，军中惊恐。
English: Yuan Shao wanted to shoot arrows in the Tai Zu camp, many soldiers were killed and injured, and the army was terrified.

古文：禁督守土山，力战，气益奋。
现代文：于禁亲自在土山上督战，奋力作战，气势越来越振奋。
English: Yu Han personally supervised the battle on the hill, fought hard, and the momentum became more and more exciting.

古文：绍破，迁偏将军。
现代文：袁绍被攻破后，于禁被提升为偏将军。
English: After Yuan Shao was defeated, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：冀州平。
现代文：冀州被平定。
English: Jizhou was pacified.

古文：昌豨复叛，遣禁征之。
现代文：昌豨再次反叛，太祖派于禁率军征讨。
English: Changchun rebelled again, and Emperor Taizu sent troops to subdue the rebels.

古文：禁急进攻豨；豨与禁有旧，诣禁降。
现代文：于禁迅速进攻昌豨；昌豨和于禁原来有矫情，他就到于禁那里投降。
English: Yu Kan quickly attacked Chang Kuo; Chang Kuo and Yu Kan had a quarrelsome relationship, so he went to Yu Kan to surrender.

古文：诸将皆以为豨已降，当送诣太祖，禁曰： 诸君不知公常令乎！
现代文：将领们都认为昌豨已经投降，就应该将他送到太祖那里，于禁说： 众位不清楚曹公通常的命令吗！
English: The generals all thought that Chang Xuan had already surrendered, so they should send him to his great-grandfather and say to him, "Don't you all know Cao Gong's usual orders?"

古文：围而后降者不赦。
现代文：围攻之后才投降的人不会赦免。
English: There will be no amnesty for those who surrendered after the siege.

古文：夫奉法行令，事上之节也。
现代文：所谓尊奉律法完成命令，是侍奉主上的节操。
English: The so-called honoring the law and fulfilling the commandment is the discipline of serving the Lord.

古文：豨虽旧友，禁可失节乎！ 
现代文：昌豨虽然是我的旧友，难道我可以失去节操吗！ 
English: Even though Chang Hao is my old friend, can I lose my temper?

古文：自临与豨决，陨涕而斩之。
现代文：就亲自和昌豨诀别，然后哭着斩了他。
English: He said goodbye to Chang Hao in person and then beheaded him while weeping.

古文：是时太祖军淳于，闻而叹曰： 豨降不诣吾而归禁，岂非命耶！ 
现代文：当时太祖在淳于驻军，得知这件事后感叹说： 昌豨要投降，不到我这里而是去了于禁那里，难道不是命吗！ 
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was stationed in Chunyu, and after learning of this incident, he lamented: Changyu wanted to surrender, and instead of coming to me, he went to the forbidden place. Isn't that life!

古文：益重禁。
现代文：于是更加看重于禁。
English: As a result, more importance is attached to the crane than to the ban.

古文：东海平，拜禁虎威将军。
现代文：东海被平定后，太祖授予于禁虎威将军的职位。
English: After the East China Sea was pacified, Emperor Taizu awarded him the position of General Zhenhuwei.

古文：后与臧霸等攻梅成，张辽、张郃等讨陈兰。
现代文：后来于禁和臧霸等人进攻梅成，张辽、张郃等人奉命讨伐陈兰。
English: Later, Yu Zhenhe and others attacked Meicheng, and Zhang Liao, Zhang Xuan and others were ordered to fight Chen Lan.

古文：禁到，成举众三千馀人降。
现代文：于禁到之后，梅成率领三千多部众投降。
English: After Yu arrived, Mei Cheng led more than three thousand people to surrender.

古文：既降复叛，其众奔兰。
现代文：投降之后又再次反叛，他的部下都投奔陈兰。
English: After surrendering, he rebelled again, and his subordinates all went to Chen Lan.

古文：辽等与兰相持，军食少，禁运粮前后相属，辽遂斩兰、成。
现代文：张辽和陈兰等人相持不下，军粮缺乏，于禁运输粮草前后相继，张辽斩杀了陈兰、梅成。
English: Zhang Liao and Chen Lan and others could not stand each other, there was a shortage of military food, and the prohibited transportation of grain and grass occurred one after another. Zhang Liao killed Chen Lan and Mei Cheng.

古文：增邑二百户，并前千二百户。
现代文：太祖给于禁增加两百户食邑，加上之前的一共一千两百户。
English: The great-grandfather added two hundred households to the ban, adding to the previous total of twelve hundred households.

古文：是时，禁与张辽、乐进、张郃、徐晃俱为名将，太祖每征伐，咸递行为军锋，还为后拒；而禁持军严整，得贼财物，无所私入，由是赏赐特重。
现代文：当时，于禁同张辽、乐进、张郃、徐晃都是有名的将领，太祖每次出军征讨，都让他们轮流担任先锋，或者回军的时候殿后；而于禁治理军队严明，缴获敌军财物，没有私藏起来的，所以得到的赏赐也特别贵重。
English: At that time, Yu Xingdong, Zhang Liao, Lejin, Zhang Xuan and Xu Huan were all famous generals. Every time the great-grandfather went out to recruit soldiers, he let them take turns as the vanguard, or when returning to the army, behind the palace; while Yu Xinggu strictly governed the army, seized the enemy's property, and did not hide it, so the reward he received was also very valuable.

古文：然以法御下，不甚得士众心。
现代文：但他以军法严厉要求部下，不是很得人心。
English: However, he was not very popular with his subordinates because of his strict military discipline.

古文：太祖常恨朱灵，欲夺其营。
现代文：太祖一直怨恨朱灵，想要夺取他的营帐。
English: The great-grandfather had always resented Zhu Ling and wanted to seize his camp.

古文：以禁有威重，遣禁将数十骑，赍令书，径诣灵营夺其军，灵及其部众莫敢动；乃以灵为禁部下督，众皆震服，其见惮如此。
现代文：因为于禁有威势，就派于禁带着几十名骑兵，带着命令，径直到朱灵的军营中夺取了他的部队，朱灵和他的部下没有敢轻举妄动的；太祖就将朱灵的部下交给于禁督领，众人都服从，他被人畏惧到这种程度。
English: Because Yu Han had authority, he sent Yu Han with dozens of cavalry, with orders, all the way to Zhu Ling's military camp to seize his troops. Zhu Ling and his subordinates did not dare to act rashly; the great-grandfather handed Zhu Ling's subordinates over to the commander, and everyone obeyed. He was feared to such an extent.

古文：迁左将军，假节钺，分邑五百户，封一子列侯。
现代文：后来，于禁被提升为左将军，持节钺，太祖又分封他食邑五百户，封他的一个儿子为列侯。
English: Later, Yu Han was promoted to the rank of General of the Left Division, holding the title of Cossack, and his great-grandfather gave him the title of 500 households, and made one of his sons a vassal.

古文：建安二十四年，太祖在长安，使曹仁讨关羽於樊，又遣禁助仁。
现代文：建安二十四年，太祖在长安，派曹仁到樊城征讨关于，又派于禁援助曹仁。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jian'an, the great-grandfather in Chang'an sent Cao Ren to Lucheng to solicit about it, and also sent Yu Han to assist Cao Ren.

古文：秋，大霖雨，汉水溢，平地水数丈，禁等七军皆没。
现代文：秋季，大雨不止，汉水泛滥，平地的水深达好几丈，连于禁在内的七支部队都被淹没。
English: In the autumn, the heavy rain continued, the Han River flooded, the water depth of the plain reached several meters, and even the seven troops including the prohibition were flooded.

古文：禁与诸将登高望水，无所回避，羽乘大船就攻禁等，禁遂降，惟庞德不屈节而死。
现代文：于禁和将领们登上高处望着洪水，没有地方可以躲避，关羽乘着大船靠近攻打于禁等人，他们只好投降，只有庞德因为不愿意屈节辱命而死。
English: Yu Han and his generals ascended high places to watch the flood, there was no place to escape, Guan Yu rode a large ship close to attack Yu Han and others, they had to surrender, only Pound died because he did not want to humiliate his life.

古文：太祖闻之，哀叹者久之，曰： 吾知禁三十年，何意临危处难，反不如庞德邪！ 
现代文：太祖得知后，哀伤地感叹了很久，说： 我和于禁相知三十年了，怎么面临危难的时候反而不如庞德呢！ 
English: After learning of this, the great-grandfather sighed sadly for a long time, saying, "I have known Yu Han for thirty years, how could I not be as good as Pound when facing a crisis!"

古文：会孙权禽羽，获其众，禁复在吴。
现代文：适逢孙权抓住了关羽，俘虏了他的部队，于禁又归附吴国。
English: At the right time, Sun Quan seized Guan Yu, captured his troops, and annexed Wu to Hunan.

古文：文帝践阼，权称藩，遣禁还。
现代文：文帝登基后，孙权表示愿意臣服，遣送于禁回来。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Sun Quan expressed his willingness to submit and was sent back to Han.

古文：帝引见禁，须发皓白，形容憔悴，泣涕顿首。
现代文：文帝召见于禁，于禁头发胡子都白了，脸色非常憔悴，流着泪叩头。
English: Emperor Wen summoned Yu Zheng, Yu Zheng's hair and beard turned white, his face was very pale, and he bowed his head with tears.

古文：帝慰谕以荀林父、孟明视故事，拜为安远将军。
现代文：文帝用荀林父、孟明视的事安慰他，封他为安远将军。
English: Emperor Wen consoled him with the story of Yulin's father, Meng Mingxi, and named him General Anyuan.

古文：欲遣使吴，先令北诣邺谒高陵。
现代文：文帝想派他到吴国出使，先让他到邺城拜谒太祖的陵墓。
English: Emperor Wen wanted to send him as an envoy to the State of Wu, but first he had to visit the mausoleum of Emperor Wu's great-grandfather in Lucheng.

古文：帝使豫於陵屋画关羽战克、庞德愤怒、禁降服之状。
现代文：文帝派人预先在陵堂上画关羽胜利，庞德愤怒不屈，于禁投降的情状。
English: Emperor Wen sent someone to paint Guan Yu's victory on the mausoleum in advance, and Pound's anger was unyielding and he surrendered to the ban.

古文：禁见，惭恚发病薨。
现代文：于禁看到后，惭愧愤恨，发病而死。
English: After seeing Yu Han, he was ashamed and angry, and died of the disease.

古文：子圭嗣封益寿亭侯。
现代文：他的儿子于圭继承爵位，被封为益寿亭侯。
English: His son, Yu Gui, succeeded to the peerage and was given the title of Prince of Yishuting.

古文：谥禁曰厉侯。
现代文：给于禁赐封号为厉侯。
English: He was given the title of Rikuhō.

古文：张郃字俊乂，河间鄚人也。
现代文：张郃字俊乂，河间郡鄚县人也。
English: Zhang Yanzi, also known as Juntong, is from Yanzhong County, Kawama County.

古文：汉末应募讨黄巾，为军司马，属韩馥。
现代文：汉朝末年响应朝廷招募征讨黄巾军，在军中担任司马，隶属与韩馥部下。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, in response to the imperial court's recruitment of the Yellow Turban Army, he served as a Sima in the army and was subordinate to Han Xuan.

古文：馥败，以兵归袁绍。
现代文：韩馥战败后，他率兵归附袁绍。
English: After the defeat of Han Yu, he led his troops to Yuan Shao.

古文：绍以郃为校尉，使拒公孙瓒。
现代文：袁绍任命他为校尉，并派他抗击公孙瓒。
English: Yuan Shao appointed him as a lieutenant and sent him to fight Gongsun Zang.

古文：瓒破，郃功多，迁宁国中郎将。
现代文：公孙瓒被攻破，张郃因为功劳多，被提升为宁国中郎将。
English: Gongsun Yao was defeated, and Zhang Yao was promoted to the position of Ning Guozhong.

古文：太祖与袁绍相拒於官渡，绍遣将淳于琼等督运屯乌巢，太祖自将急击之。
现代文：太祖和袁绍在官渡对峙，袁绍派淳于琼等将领督运物资驻扎乌巢，太祖亲自率军迅速进攻。
English: Emperor Taizu and Yuan Shao confronted each other in Guandu. Yuan Shao sent generals such as Jun Yu Qiong to supervise the transportation of supplies to Wu Chao. Emperor Taizu personally led the army in a swift attack.

古文：郃说绍曰： 曹公兵精，往必破琼等；琼等破，则将军事去矣，宜急引兵救之。 
现代文：张郃劝说袁绍： 曹公士兵精锐，他亲自率军前往，一定会打败淳于琼等人；他们被打败，那将军您的大事就没有指望了，应该迅速派兵援助他们。 
English: Zhang Ye persuaded Yuan Shao: Cao Gong's soldiers are elite, he personally led the army to go, he will surely defeat Chun Yu Qiong and others; if they are defeated, then the general has no hope for your great cause, you should quickly send troops to help them.

古文：郭图曰： 郃计非也。
现代文：郭图说： 张郃的计策是不对的。
English: Guo Tu said: Zhang Ye's strategy is wrong.

古文：不如攻其本营，势必还，此为不救而自解也。 
现代文：我们不如攻打曹操的大本营，他一定会回军，这就是不必援救而困境也能解除了。 
English: We might as well attack Cao Cao's base camp, he will definitely return to the army, which means that the predicament can be solved without rescue.

古文：郃曰： 曹公营固，攻之必不拔，若琼等见禽，吾属尽为虏矣。 
现代文：张郃说： 曹公军营坚固，进攻那里肯定不能取胜，如果淳于琼等人被擒获，我们这些都会被俘虏了。 
English: Zhang Ye said: Cao Gong's military camp is strong, the attack there will certainly not win. If Chun Yu Qiong and others are captured, we will all be captured.

古文：绍但遣轻骑救琼，而以重兵攻太祖营，不能下。
现代文：袁绍只派了一队轻装骑兵援救淳于琼，而派重病进攻太祖大本营，没有能攻下。
English: Yuan Shao only sent a team of light cavalry to rescue Chunyu Qiong, but sent the seriously ill to attack Taizu's base camp, but failed to capture it.

古文：太祖果破琼等，绍军溃。
现代文：太祖果然攻破淳于琼等人，袁绍军队溃败。
English: Emperor Taizu successfully defeated Junyujong and others, and Yuan Shao's army was routed.

古文：图惭，又更谮郃曰： 郃快军败，出言不逊。 
现代文：郭图惭愧，又污蔑张郃说： 张郃希望我军战败，所以言语不恭敬。 
English: Guo Tu was ashamed and also slandered Zhang Ye, saying: Zhang Ye hoped that our army would be defeated, so his words were disrespectful.

古文：郃惧，乃归太祖。
现代文：张郃担心，就前去归附太祖。
English: Zhang Ye was worried, so he went to join his great-grandfather.

古文：太祖得郃甚喜，谓曰： 昔子胥不早寤，自使身危，岂若微子去殷、韩信归汉邪？ 
现代文：太祖得到张郃，很是高兴，对他说： 过去伍子胥没有早点醒悟，让自己处于危难之中，怎么比得上微子离开殷纣王，韩信归附汉室呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather was very happy to get Zhang Ye, and said to him: In the past, Wu Zi Yao did not wake up early and put himself in danger. How can it be compared to the time when Wu Zi Yao left Yin Zi Wang, and Han Xin returned to the Han family?

古文：拜郃偏将军，封都亭侯。
现代文：就让张郃担任偏将军，封为都亭侯。
English: Let Zhang Ye serve as a part-time general and be appointed as the governor of the capital.

古文：授以众，从攻邺，拔之。
现代文：并将部队交给他，让他跟随着攻打邺城，顺利攻克。
English: He also handed over the troops to him, allowing him to follow the attack on the city of Handan and successfully conquer it.

古文：又从击袁谭於渤海，别将军围雍奴，大破之。
现代文：又随从太祖在渤海攻打袁谭，另外率军围攻雍奴，大获全胜。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather to attack Yuan Tan in the Bohai Sea, and led another army to besiege Yongnu, winning a complete victory.

古文：从讨柳城，与张辽俱为军锋，以功迁平狄将军。
现代文：跟随太祖征讨柳城，和张辽一同是军中先锋，因为战功被提升为平狄将军。
English: He followed the great ancestor to conquer Liucheng, and was a pioneer in the army together with Zhang Liao. Because of his war service, he was promoted to General Ping Di.

古文：别征东莱，讨管承，又与张辽讨陈兰、梅成等，破之。
现代文：另外率军征讨东莱郡，征讨管承，又和张辽讨伐陈兰、梅成等人，击溃了敌军。
English: In addition, he led the army to conquer Donglai County, conquer Guancheng, and fight with Zhang Liao against Chen Lan, Mei Cheng and others, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：从破马超、韩遂於渭南。围安定，降杨秋。
现代文：随从太祖在渭南地区攻破马超、韩遂。围攻安定，降服了杨秋。
English: The followers of Taizu defeated Ma Chao and Han Sui in the south of Fujian. The siege was stable, and Yang Qiu was defeated.

古文：与夏侯渊讨鄜贼梁兴及武都氐。
现代文：和夏侯渊在鄜城讨伐贼人梁兴以及武都一带的氐族叛军。
English: He and Xia Houyuan fought against the bandit Liang Xing and the Yi rebels around Wudu in Handan.

古文：又破马超，平宋建。
现代文：又击溃了马超，平定了宋建。
English: He also defeated Ma Chao and subdued Song Jian.

古文：太祖征张鲁，先遣郃督诸军讨兴和氐王窦茂。
现代文：太祖征讨张鲁，先派张郃督领各军讨伐梁兴和氐族王窦茂的部队。
English: Emperor Taizu conquered Zhang Lu and first sent Zhang Ye to lead the armies to conquer Liang Xing and the troops of the Yi King Dou Mao.

古文：太祖从散关入汉中，又先遣郃督步卒五千於前通路。
现代文：太祖从散关进入汉中，又预先派遣张郃督领五千步兵在前面开路。
English: The great-grandfather entered Hanzhong from Sankuan, and in advance dispatched Zhang Xuandu to lead five thousand infantrymen to open the way ahead.

古文：至阳平，鲁降，太祖还，留郃与夏侯渊等守汉中，拒刘备。
现代文：到了阳平，张鲁投降，太祖回军，将张郃和夏侯渊等将领留守汉中抗击刘备。
English: When they arrived at Yangping, Zhang Lu surrendered and Taizu returned to the army, leaving generals such as Zhang Xuan and Xia Houyuan to fight against Liu Bei.

古文：郃别督诸军，降巴东、巴西二郡，徙其民於汉中。
现代文：张郃另外督领各路军队降服了巴东、巴西两个郡，将郡中的百姓都迁移到汉中。
English: In addition, Zhang Ye led the armies of all directions to subjugate the two counties of Badong and Brazil, and relocated the people in the county to Hanzhong.

古文：进军宕渠，为备将张飞所拒，引还南郑。
现代文：又进军宕渠城，受到刘备将领张飞的抵抗，张郃只好率军返回南郑。
English: He also marched into the city of Tagu, but was resisted by Liu Bei's general Zhang Fei, so Zhang Ye had to lead his army back to Nan Zheng.

古文：拜荡寇将军。
现代文：后被任命为荡寇将军。
English: He was later appointed as the general of the wandering pirates.

古文：刘备屯阳平，郃屯广石。
现代文：刘备在阳平郡驻军，张郃在广石郡驻军。
English: Liu Bei garrisoned troops in Yangping County, and Zhang Ye garrisoned troops in Guangshi County.

古文：备以精卒万馀，分为十部，夜急攻郃。
现代文：刘备将一万多精锐士兵分成十队，趁夜色迅速进攻张郃。
English: Liu Bei divided more than ten thousand elite soldiers into ten teams and took advantage of the darkness to quickly attack Zhang Ye.

古文：郃率亲兵搏战，备不能克。
现代文：张郃率领亲兵奋力作战，刘备没有能攻克。
English: Zhang Ye led his soldiers to fight hard, but Liu Bei was not able to defeat him.

古文：其后备於走马谷烧都围，渊救火，从他道与备相遇，交战，短兵接刃。
现代文：这之后刘备在走马谷焚烧都围，夏侯渊去救火，在小路上遇上刘备，两军交战，十分激烈。
English: After that, Liu Bei was walking in the Horse Valley to burn the capital, Xia Houyuan went to fight the fire, met Liu Bei on the path, and the two armies fought, very fierce.

古文：渊遂没，郃还阳平。
现代文：夏侯渊因此被杀，张郃返回阳平郡。
English: Xia Houyuan was killed as a result, and Zhang Ye returned to Yangping County.

古文：当是时，新失元帅，恐为备所乘，三军皆失色。
现代文：在那个时候，军中失去了主帅，士兵都担心刘备会趁机进攻，军中很恐慌。
English: At that time, the army lost its commander, the soldiers were worried that Liu Bei would take the opportunity to attack, and the army was very panicked.

古文：渊司马郭淮乃令众曰： 张将军，国家名将，刘备所惮；今日事急，非张将军不能安也。 
现代文：夏侯渊的司马郭淮便命令全军说： 张将军是国家的名将，也是刘备所忌惮的；现在事情紧急，非张将军不能安定军心。 
English: Xia Houyuan's Sima Guo Huai then ordered the entire army to march forward, saying: General Zhang is a national great general, and is also feared by Liu Bei; now things are urgent, and General Zhang is the only one who can stabilize the military spirit.

古文：遂推郃为军主。
现代文：于是推举张郃为军队主帅。
English: As a result, Zhang Ye was elected as the commander of the army.

古文：郃出，勒兵安陈，诸将皆受郃节度，众心乃定。
现代文：张郃出来，整顿军队排列阵型，将领们都接受张郃的调度，军心才安定下来。
English: Zhang Xuan came out and rectified the formation of the army. The generals all accepted Zhang Xuan's dispatching, and the military spirit settled down.

古文：太祖在长安，遣使假郃节。
现代文：太祖在长安，派使者给张郃送去符节。
English: The great-grandfather was in Chang'an and sent an emissary to Zhang Ye to attend the festival.

古文：太祖遂自至汉中，刘备保高山不敢战。
现代文：随后太祖亲自到汉中，刘备死守高山不敢迎战。
English: Subsequently, the great-grandfather himself came to Hanzhong, and Liu Bei desperately guarded Takayama and did not dare to fight.

古文：太祖乃引出汉中诸军，郃还屯陈仓。
现代文：太祖就将汉中地区各路军队带领出来，张郃返回陈仓驻守。
English: The great-great-grandfather led all the troops in the Hanzhong area out, and Zhang Ye returned to Chencang to stay.

古文：文帝即王位，以郃为左将军，进爵都乡侯。
现代文：文帝继位魏王后，让张郃担任左将军，进封爵位为都乡侯。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of the Wei queen, let Zhang Ye serve as the left general, and was ennobled as the capital township lord.

古文：及践阼，进封鄚侯。
现代文：等到文帝登基后，进封为鄚侯。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he was given the title of imperial vassal.

古文：诏郃与曹真讨安定卢水胡及东羌，召郃与真并朝许宫，遣南与夏侯尚击江陵。
现代文：文帝诏令张郃和曹真征讨安定一带的卢水胡人和东部羌人，又令张郃和曹真一起到许昌宫中朝拜，随后让张郃往南和夏侯尚一起攻打江陵。
English: Emperor Wen ordered Zhang Xuan and Cao Zhen to recruit Lu Shuihu and Eastern Han people in the area of stability, and ordered Zhang Xuan and Cao Zhen to worship together in the Xu Chang Palace, and then let Zhang Xuan go south to attack Jiangling with Xia Hou Shang.

古文：郃别督诸军渡江，取洲上屯坞。
现代文：张郃另外督领部队渡江，夺取百里洲上的屯坞。
English: In addition, Zhang Ye led the troops to cross the Yangtze River and seize the dockyard on Baili Island.

古文：明帝即位，遣南屯荆州，与司马宣王击孙权别将刘阿等，追至祁口，交战，破之。
现代文：明帝登基后，派张郃往南在荆州驻守，和司马宣王攻打孙权部下将领刘阿等人，追击到祁口，两军交战，张郃击溃了敌军。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Zhang Ye was sent to the south to garrison Jingzhou. He and Sima Xuanwang attacked Liu Ah, a general under Sun Quan, and others, and pursued them to Hekou. The two armies engaged in battle, and Zhang Ye defeated the enemy army.

古文：诸葛亮出祁山。
现代文：诸葛亮出兵祁山。
English: Zhuge Liang led the troops out of Lushan Mountain.

古文：加郃位特进，遣督诸军，拒亮将马谡於街亭。
现代文：明帝加封张郃特进，派他督领各路军队，在街亭抗击诸葛亮部下将领马谡。
English: Emperor Ming sealed Zhang Ye's special envoy and sent him to lead the various armies to resist Zhuge Liang's subordinate general Ma Jun in the street pavilion.

古文：谡依阻南山，不下据城。
现代文：马谡倚仗南山地势驻扎，没有下山占据城池。
English: The horse-drawn carriage was stationed in the Nanshan terrain, and did not go down the mountain to occupy the city.

古文：郃绝其汲道，击，大破之。
现代文：张郃断绝了他取水的道路，然后进攻，大获全胜。
English: Zhang Ye cut off his access to water, then attacked and won a complete victory.

古文：南安、天水、安定郡反应亮，郃皆破平之。
现代文：南安、天水、安定三郡都反叛响应诸葛亮，张郃将他们都击溃平定了。
English: Nan'an, Tianshui, and Anding counties all rebelled in response to Zhuge Liang, and Zhang Ye defeated and leveled them all.

古文：诏曰： 贼亮以巴蜀之众，当虓虎之师。
现代文：明帝下诏说： 贼人诸葛亮凭借巴蜀地区的百姓，抵挡威猛的部队。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict saying: The thief Zhuge Liang relied on the people of the Bashu region to fend off the powerful troops.

古文：将军被坚执锐，所向克定，朕甚嘉之。
现代文：将军披着战甲手持利器，所到之处没有不被平定的，朕非常赞赏他。
English: The general wore battle armor and carried a sharp weapon. He did not go anywhere without being subdued. I very much appreciate him.

古文：益邑千户，并前四千三百户。 
现代文：现在下令增加张郃的食邑一千户，加上之前的一共四千三百户。 
English: Now it has been ordered to increase the number of restaurants in Zhangye by 1,000, adding to the previous total of 4,300.

古文：司马宣王治水军於荆州，欲顺沔入江伐吴，诏郃督关中诸军往受节度。
现代文：司马宣王在荆州操练水军，想要顺着沔水进入长江征讨吴国，明帝下诏张郃督领关中地区各路军队前往接受调度。
English: King Sima Xuan drills his naval forces in Jingzhou, and wants to follow the Surabaya River into the Yangtze River to conquer the State of Wu. Under the Ming Dynasty, Zhang Xuan led all the armies in the central Guanzhong region to accept the dispatch.

古文：至荆州，会冬水浅，大船不得行，乃还屯方城。
现代文：张郃率军来到荆州，适逢冬季，江水较浅，大船无法行进，就返回方城驻扎。
English: Zhang Ye led the army to Jingzhou. It was winter, the river was shallow, and large ships could not travel. They returned to Fangcheng and stationed there.

古文：诸葛亮复出，急攻陈仓，帝驿马召郃到京都。
现代文：诸葛亮再次率军出击，迅速攻打陈仓，明帝派驿马急召张郃到京城。
English: Zhuge Liang once again led the army to attack, quickly attacking Chen Cang, and the Ming Emperor sent a horse to urgently summon Zhang Rong to the capital.

古文：帝自幸河南城，置酒送郃，遣南北军士三万及分遣武卫、虎贲使卫郃，因问郃曰： 迟将军到，亮得无已得陈仓乎！ 
现代文：明帝亲自来到河南郡，备办酒席送别张郃，还派南北士兵三万人以及武卫、虎贲护卫张郃，趁机问张郃说： 等将军到陈仓，诸葛亮会不会已经攻占那里了！ 
English: Emperor Ming personally came to Henan County to prepare a banquet to bid farewell to Zhang Xuan, and also sent 30,000 soldiers from the north and south, as well as martial guards and tiger guards to escort Zhang Xuan. He took the opportunity to ask Zhang Xuan: When the general arrives at Chencang, will Zhuge Liang have already occupied there!

古文：郃知亮县军无谷，不能久攻，对曰： 比臣未到，亮已走矣；屈指计亮粮不至十日。 
现代文：张郃知道诸葛亮劳师远征缺少军粮，不能长久进攻作战，回答说： 臣还没有到那里，诸葛亮已经撤退了；臣屈指计算，诸葛亮军队的粮食不足以支撑十天。 
English: Zhang Xuan knew that Zhuge Liang's army was short of food and could not continue to attack and fight for a long time. He replied: "The vassal has not yet arrived there, Zhuge Liang has already retreated; the vassal has calculated that the food of Zhuge Liang's army is not enough to support ten days.

古文：郃晨夜进至南郑，亮退。
现代文：张郃日夜进军到南郑，诸葛亮已经退军。
English: Zhang Ye marched to Nan Zheng day and night, but Zhuge Liang had already retreated.

古文：诏郃还京都，拜征西车骑将军。
现代文：明帝诏令张郃返回京城，任命他为征西车骑将军。
English: The Ming Emperor ordered Zhang Ye to return to Beijing and appointed him as the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：郃识变数，善处营陈，料战势地形，无不如计，自诸葛亮皆惮之。
现代文：张郃了解事物的变化，善于驻军列阵，预料地形和战场形势，没有不像他估计的那样，蜀国从诸葛亮到将领都忌惮他。
English: Zhang Ye understood the changes of things, was good at garrisoning and lining up, and anticipated the terrain and battlefield situation. It was not unlike his estimation that Shu from Zhuge Liang to generals were afraid of him.

古文：郃虽武将而爱乐儒士，尝荐同乡卑湛经明行修，诏曰： 昔祭遵为将，奏置五经大夫，居军中，与诸生雅歌投壶。
现代文：张郃虽然是武将但喜爱儒生，曾经推举同乡人卑湛，说他精通经学修养自身，明帝下诏说： 过去祭遵担任将军，上奏请求设立五经大夫，虽然身在军中，但也能和儒生歌唱雅诗，行酒投壶。
English: Although Zhang Ye was a military commander, he was fond of Confucianism. He once praised his fellow villager Bei Chan, saying that he was well versed in the study of Confucianism and had cultivated himself. Emperor Ming issued an edict saying: In the past, Saizun served as a general and requested the establishment of a doctor of the Five Classics. Although he was in the army, he could also sing elegant poems with Confucianism and drink wine and throw pots.

古文：今将军外勒戎旅，内存国朝。
现代文：现在将军在外统领军队，心中怀着国家。
English: Now the general leads the army abroad, with the country in his heart.

古文：朕嘉将军之意，今擢湛为博士。 
现代文：朕赞赏将军的心意，特令提升卑湛为博士。 
English: I appreciate the general's intention and specially order the promotion of Bitchan to Ph.D.

古文：诸葛亮复出祁山，诏郃督诸将西至略阳，亮还保祁山，郃追至木门，与亮军交战，飞矢中郃右膝，薨，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：诸葛亮再次出兵祁山，明帝诏令张郃督领将领们往西到略阳。诸葛亮回军驻守祁山，张郃追击到木门谷，和诸葛亮部队交战，流箭射中张郃的右边膝盖，因此阵亡，谥号为壮侯。
English: Zhuge Liang once again sent troops to Lushan. The Ming Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Zhang Hui to lead the generals west to Liaoyang. Zhuge Liang returned to the army stationed in Lushan. Zhang Hui chased them to Mumen Valley and fought with Zhuge Liang's troops. A stray arrow hit Zhang Hui's right knee, so he died in battle. His posthumous name was Zhuang Hou.

古文：子雄嗣。
现代文：他的儿子张雄继承爵位。
English: His son Zhang Xiong succeeded to the title.

古文：郃前后征伐有功，明帝分郃户，封郃四子列侯。赐小子爵关内侯。
现代文：张郃先后征讨建立军功，明帝给他分封食邑，封张郃的四个儿子为列侯，并赐封他的小儿子的爵位为关内侯。
English: Zhang Ye successively solicited and established military merit, and the Ming Emperor gave him the fief of Shifu, made Zhang Ye's four sons lords, and gave his youngest son the title of Guanai.

古文：徐晃字公明，河东杨人也。
现代文：徐晃字公明，河东郡杨县人。
English: Xu Xingzhe Gongming, from Yang County, Hedong County.

古文：为郡吏，从车骑将军杨奉讨贼有功，拜骑都尉。
现代文：曾在郡中担任小吏，跟随车骑将军杨奉征讨贼军有功，担任骑都尉。
English: He once served as a minor official in the county, followed the chariot and cavalry general Yang Fengzheng, and served as a cavalry captain.

古文：李傕、郭汜之乱长安也，晃说奉，令与天子还洛阳，奉从其计。
现代文：李傕、郭汜在长安作乱，徐晃劝说杨奉，让他和天子返回洛阳，杨奉听从了他的计策。
English: Li Yao and Guo Yao wreaked havoc in Chang'an. Xu Ak persuaded Yang Bong to let him and Tianzi return to Luoyang. Yang Bong followed his advice.

古文：天子渡河至安邑，封晃都亭侯。
现代文：献帝渡过黄河到达安邑，封徐晃为都亭侯。
English: Emperor Xian crossed the Yellow River and arrived in Anyi. Xu Jiao was appointed as the prince of the capital.

古文：及到洛阳，韩暹、董承日争斗，晃说奉令归太祖；奉欲从之，后悔。
现代文：等到天子到洛阳，韩暹、董承每日都在争斗，徐晃劝说杨奉依附太祖；杨奉想要听从，随后又返回。
English: By the time Tianzi arrived in Luoyang, Han Siem and Dong Cheng were fighting every day. Xu Ao persuaded Yang Bong to follow the great ancestor; Yang Bong wanted to obey, and then returned.

古文：太祖讨奉於梁，晃遂归太祖。
现代文：太祖在梁县征讨杨奉，徐晃就归附了太祖。
English: The great-grandfather collected Yang Bong in Liang County, and Xu Qiao was attached to the great-grandfather.

古文：太祖授晃兵，使击卷、原武贼，破之，拜裨将军。
现代文：太祖将士兵交给徐晃，让他攻打卷县、原武县的贼人，击溃了敌军，后被任命为裨将军。
English: The great-grandfather gave the soldiers to Xu Akira, let him attack the bandits in Wulian County and Yuanwu County, defeated the enemy army, and was later appointed as a general.

古文：从征吕布，别降布将赵庶、李邹等。
现代文：跟随太祖征讨吕布，另外率队降服了吕布的将领赵庶、李邹等。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in conquering Lvbu, and in addition, he led a team to subdue the generals of Lvbu, including Zhao Shiao and Li Xi.

古文：与史涣斩眭固於河内。
现代文：又和史涣在河内斩杀了眭固。
English: He and Shi Yan also killed Gong Guo in Hanoi.

古文：从破刘备，又从破颜良，拔白马，进至延津，破文丑，拜偏将军。
现代文：跟随太祖击溃了刘备，又随从攻破颜良，夺取了白马城，进军到延津，大败文丑，担任偏将军。
English: He followed his great-grandfather in defeating Liu Bei, followed him in defeating Yan Liang, captured Baima City, marched into Yanjin, defeated Wencu, and served as a partial general.

古文：与曹洪击〈氵隱〉强贼祝臂，破之，又与史涣击袁绍运车於故市，功最多，封都亭侯。
现代文：随后又同曹洪攻打氵隐强的贼寇祝臂，大获全胜，又和史涣在故市进攻袁绍的运输部队，因为功劳最多，被封为都亭侯。
English: Later, together with Cao Hong, he fought against the vaguely powerful bandit Zhurong and won a complete victory. Together with Shi Yan, he attacked Yuan Shao's transportation force in the old city, and because of his most meritorious service, he was awarded the title of Du Ting Hou.

古文：太祖既围邺，破邯郸，易阳令韩范伪以城降而拒守，太祖遣晃攻之。
现代文：太祖包围邺城后，占据了邯郸，易阳县令韩范假装献城投降却守城不出，太祖派徐晃攻打。
English: After Emperor Taizu encircled the city of Handan, he occupied Handan. Yiyang County ordered Han Fan to pretend to surrender the city, but he did not defend the city. Emperor Taizu sent Xu Jiao to attack Handan.

古文：晃至，飞矢城中，为陈成败。
现代文：徐晃率军来到，将信件绑在箭上射入城中，向韩范陈述成败的利害关系。
English: Xu Qiao led the army to come, tied the letter to an arrow and shot it into the city, explaining to Han Fan the stakes of success and failure.

古文：范悔，晃辄降之。
现代文：韩范后悔了，徐晃因此降服了他。
English: Han Fan regretted it, and Xu Ao won him over.

古文：既而言於太祖曰： 二袁未破，诸城未下者倾耳而听，今日灭易阳，明日皆以死守，恐河北无定时也。
现代文：不久之后徐晃对太祖说： 袁谭、袁尚两兄弟没有攻破，那些没有能夺取的州郡都在观察局势，现在要是灭了易阳，明天各城一定都会死守，到时候恐怕河北地区就没有安定的时候了。
English: Soon after, Xu Xiang said to Taizu: The two brothers Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang did not break through, and those states and counties that could not be captured are observing the situation. If Yiyang is destroyed now, every city will definitely hold out tomorrow. By then, I'm afraid there will be no time for stability in Hebei.

古文：愿公降易阳以示诸城，则莫不望风。 
现代文：希望曹公能降服易阳以展示给各城看，那么各城就会看着情况行动了。 
English: It is hoped that Cao Gong can surrender to Yiyang to show it to the cities, so the cities will look at the situation and act.

古文：太祖善之。
现代文：太祖认为他说得对。
English: The great-grandfather thinks he is right.

古文：别讨毛城，设伏兵掩击，破三屯。
现代文：徐晃另外率军征讨毛城，设下伏兵袭击，攻破了三个驻地。
English: Xu Huan also led an army to conquer Maocheng, set up an ambush attack, and broke through three stations.

古文：从破袁谭於南皮，讨平原叛贼，克之。
现代文：又跟随太祖在南皮攻破袁谭，讨伐平原郡的叛贼，顺利攻克。
English: He also followed his great-grandfather in Nanpi to defeat Yuan Tan and the traitors in Pingyuan County, and successfully defeated them.

古文：从征蹋顿，拜横野将军。
现代文：随同太祖讨伐蹋顿，后来被任命为横野将军。
English: He accompanied his great-great-grandfather in the campaign against Kotono, and was later appointed as General Yokono.

古文：从征荆州，别屯樊，讨中庐、临沮、宜城贼。
现代文：又随同太祖征讨荆州，徐晃另外率队在樊城驻守，又讨伐中庐、临沮、宜城的贼寇。
English: He also accompanied the Great Ancestor to invade Jingzhou, and Xu Xing led another team to stay in Lucheng. He also fought the bandits in Zhongyuan, Linduo and Yicheng.

古文：又与满宠讨关羽於汉津，与曹仁击周瑜於江陵。
现代文：又和满宠在汉津讨伐关于，和曹仁在将领进攻周瑜。
English: He also fought with Manchong against Hanjin, and with Cao Ren against Zhou Yu.

古文：十五年，讨太原反者，围大陵，拔之，斩贼帅商曜。
现代文：建安十五年，徐晃率军征讨太原郡的反叛军，包围大陵顺利攻克，斩杀了敌军首领商曜。
English: In the 15th year of Jian'an, Xu Ao led the army to conquer the rebel army in Taiyuan County, surrounded and successfully conquered Daling, and killed the leader of the enemy army, Shang You.

古文：韩遂、马超等反关右，遣晃屯汾阴以抚河东，赐牛酒，令上先人墓。
现代文：韩遂、马超在关右举兵反叛，太祖派徐晃在汾阴驻扎并安抚河东，赐给他牛酒，让他拜祭祖先陵墓。
English: Han Sui and Ma Chao raised an army and rebelled in Guan Yu. The Great Ancestor sent Xu Xiang to stay in Suyin and pacify Hedong, gave him cow wine, and let him worship the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：太祖至潼关，恐不得渡，召问晃。
现代文：太祖来到潼关，担心无法渡河，就召来徐晃询问。
English: When Taizu came to Shaoguan, he was worried that he would not be able to cross the river, so he summoned Xu Akira to inquire.

古文：晃曰： 公盛兵於此，而贼不复别守蒲阪，知其无谋也。
现代文：徐晃说： 曹公的部队在这里，而敌军不另外派兵守住蒲阪，可见他们没有智谋。
English: Xu Aki said, "Cao Gong's troops are here, but the enemy did not send any other troops to defend Busan, which shows that they do not have a plan.

古文：今假臣精兵渡蒲坂津，为军先置，以截其里，贼可擒也。 太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：现在给我一支精锐部队，从蒲阪津渡过黄河，作为大军的先锋部队，以截断敌军的通道，就能擒获敌军了。 太祖说： 好。 
English: Now, give me an elite force to cross the Yellow River from Busan to Tianjin as the vanguard force of a large army to cut off the enemy's passage, and I will be able to capture the enemy.

古文：使晃以步骑四千人渡津。
现代文：就给徐晃四千步兵和骑兵，让他率队渡过黄河。
English: He gave Xu Xiang four thousand infantry and cavalry, and let him lead the team across the Yellow River.

古文：作堑栅未成，贼梁兴夜将步骑五千馀人攻晃，晃击走之，太祖军得渡。
现代文：徐晃驻军，挖掘壕沟修建栅栏的事还没有完成，敌将梁兴就趁着夜色率领五千多步兵骑兵攻打徐晃，徐晃将他击退，太祖大军就得以渡河。
English: The enemy general Liang Xing took advantage of the darkness to lead more than five thousand infantry and cavalry to attack Xu Xiao's garrison, dig a trench and build a fence. Xu Xiao repulsed him, and Taizu's army was able to cross the river.

古文：遂破超等，使晃与夏侯渊平隃麋、汧诸氐，与太祖会安定。
现代文：随后攻破了马超等人，太祖派徐晃与夏侯渊平定隃麋、汧诸县的各部落氐族人，然后和太祖在安定会合。
English: Later, after defeating Ma Chao and others, the great ancestor sent Xu Akira and Xia Houyuan to subdue the various tribes of the Yao people in Dingbai and Zhouzhu County, and then met with the great ancestor in the stable.

古文：太祖还邺，使晃与夏侯渊平鄜、夏阳馀贼，斩梁兴，降三千馀户。
现代文：太祖返回邺城，派徐晃和夏侯渊平定鄜城、夏阳县的敌军余党，斩杀了梁兴，投降的人有三千多户。
English: The great-grandfather returned to Lucheng, sent Xu and Xia Houyuan to subdue the remaining enemy forces in Lucheng and Xiayang County, and killed Liang Xing. There were more than 3,000 people who surrendered.

古文：从征张鲁。
现代文：徐晃又跟随太祖讨伐张鲁。
English: Xu Akira also followed his great-grandfather to fight against Zhang Lu.

古文：别遣晃讨攻椟、仇夷诸山氐，皆降之。
现代文：太祖另外派徐晃去攻打椟、仇夷各处山上的氐族人，徐晃都降服了他们。
English: In addition, the great-great-grandfather sent Xu Qiang to attack the Yao, the enemy of the Yao everywhere in the mountains, and Xu Qiang conquered them all.

古文：迁平寇将军。
现代文：徐晃被提升为平寇将军。
English: Xu Akira was promoted to General Pingko.

古文：解将军张顺围。
现代文：后来还解救了张顺将军被围困的困局。
English: Later, he also rescued General Zhang Shun from the siege.

古文：击贼陈福等三十馀屯，皆破之。
现代文：随后攻打贼人陈福等人的三十多个屯兵据点，都顺利攻克。
English: Subsequently, they attacked more than thirty garrison strongholds of the thief Chen Fu and others, all of which were successfully conquered.

古文：太祖还邺，留晃与夏侯渊拒刘备於阳平。
现代文：太祖返回邺城，将徐晃留下和夏侯渊一起在阳平郡抗击刘备。
English: Taizu returned to Lucheng, leaving Xu Akira and Xia Houyuan to fight Liu Bei in Yangping County.

古文：备遣陈式等十馀营绝马鸣阁道，晃别征破之，贼自投山谷，多死者。
现代文：刘备派陈式等十几个营断绝了马鸣阁道，徐晃另外率队击溃了他们，敌军走投无路跳入山谷中，死伤很多。
English: Liu Bei sent more than a dozen battalions, including Chen Shikong, to cut off Ma Mingge Road, and Xu Xiang led another team to defeat them. The enemy army jumped into the valley out of nowhere, causing many deaths and injuries.

古文：太祖闻，甚喜，假晃节，令曰： 此阁道，汉中之险要咽喉也。
现代文：太祖得知后，很是高兴，授予徐晃符节，下令说： 这条阁道，是汉中地区险要又重要的地方。
English: After learning of this, the great-grandfather was very pleased and awarded Xu Kuan Fu Festival, and ordered: "This lofty road is a dangerous and important place in Hanzhong region.

古文：刘备欲断绝外内，以取汉中。
现代文：刘备通过断绝它以阻隔汉中内外的联系，以便夺取汉中。
English: Liu Bei used it to cut off the connection between Han and the outside world in order to seize Han.

古文：将军一举，克夺贼计，善之善者也。 
现代文：将军这一行动，断绝了敌人的计划，是妙计中的妙计啊！ 
English: General, this action, interrupting the enemy's plans, is the best of the best!

古文：太祖遂自至阳平，引出汉中诸军。
现代文：于是太祖亲自来到阳平郡，将汉中各路军队带领出去。
English: Therefore, the great-grandfather personally came to Yangping County and led the armies of the Han Dynasty and the Middle Kingdom out.

古文：复遣晃助曹仁讨关羽，屯宛。
现代文：又派徐晃协助曹仁征讨关羽，驻扎在宛城。
English: He also sent Xu Akira to assist Cao Ren in the conquest of Guan Yu and stationed him in Wancheng.

古文：会汉水暴隘，于禁等没。
现代文：适逢汉水暴涨，于禁等部队被淹没。
English: At the same time, the water level of the Han River rose sharply, and the troops such as Yu Hanzhong were flooded.

古文：羽围仁於樊，又围将军吕常於襄阳。
现代文：关羽围攻樊城，又在襄阳包围了将军吕常。
English: Guan Yu besieged Lucheng and encircled General Lv Chang in Xiangyang.

古文：晃所将多新卒，以羽难与争锋，遂前至阳陵陂屯。
现代文：徐晃统率的大多是新兵，很难和关羽的军队抗衡，于是往前开进到阳陵陂驻扎。
English: Most of Xu Qingtong's troops were new recruits, and it was difficult to compete with Guan Yu's army, so he drove forward to Yangling and stationed there.

古文：太祖复还，遣将军徐商、吕建等诣晃，令曰： 须兵马集至，乃俱前。 
现代文：太祖又回来，派将军徐商、吕建等人到徐晃那里，传令说： 一定要等人马都集中完毕，再一同进军。 
English: The great-grandfather came back again and sent generals Xu Shang, Lujian and others to Xu Xiao, with a message saying, "Be sure to wait until all the horses are concentrated before marching together."

古文：贼屯偃城。
现代文：敌军驻守在偃城。
English: The enemy troops are stationed in Lucheng.

古文：晃到，诡道作都堑，示欲截其后，贼烧屯走。
现代文：徐晃来到之后，假装要修建壕沟，表示要截断敌军的后路，敌军就烧毁了营寨撤退。
English: After Xu Ak came, he pretended to build a trench, saying that he wanted to cut off the enemy's back way. The enemy burned down the camp and retreated.

古文：晃得偃城，两面连营，稍前，去贼围三丈所，未攻。
现代文：徐晃夺取了偃城，将两边营寨连在一起，又将营寨往前移，距离敌军的包围圈三丈左右的地方，没有进攻。
English: Xu Xiang captured the city of Handan, linked the camps on both sides together, and moved the camps forward. There was no attack in the area about three meters away from the enemy's encirclement.

古文：太祖前后遣殷署、朱盖等凡十二营诣晃。
现代文：太祖先后派了殷署、朱盖等一共十二个营到徐晃这里。
English: After the Great Ancestor sent a total of twelve battalions, including the Yin Division and Zhu Gai, to Xu Xing here.

古文：贼围头有屯，又别屯四冢。
现代文：敌军包围圈前面又人驻守，又另外还有四支部队。
English: In front of the enemy's encirclement, there was another garrison, and another four troops.

古文：晃扬声当攻围头屯，而密攻四冢。
现代文：徐晃宣扬要进攻包围圈前面的守军，但暗中进攻四支部队。
English: Xu Xiao preached to attack the defenders in front of the encirclement, but secretly attacked four troops.

古文：羽见四冢欲坏，自将步骑五千出战，晃击之，退走，遂追陷与俱入围，破之，或自投沔水死。
现代文：关羽看到四冢将要被攻破，亲自率领五千步兵骑兵迎战，徐晃进攻，关羽败退，徐晃追击到包围圈中，击溃了敌军，很多人自投沔水而死。
English: Guan Yu saw that the four ridges were about to be breached, and personally led five thousand infantry and cavalry to meet the battle, Xu Xing attacked, Guan Yu was defeated, Xu Xing chased into the encirclement, defeated the enemy army, and many people died from throwing themselves into the water.

古文：太祖令曰： 贼围堑鹿角十重，将军致战全胜，遂陷贼围，多斩首虏。
现代文：太祖下令说： 贼军包围的壕堑像鹿角一样层层累积，将军进攻，大获全胜，陷入敌军包围圈中，依然斩杀俘虏了很多敌军。
English: The great-grandfather ordered, "The trenches surrounded by the bandits are piled up like antlers. The general attacked, won a great victory, fell into the enemy's encirclement, and still killed and captured many enemy troops.

古文：吾用兵三十馀年，及所闻古之善用兵者，未有长驱径入敌围者也。
现代文：我用兵三十多年，还有听闻的古往今来擅长用兵的人，都没有过长驱直入敌军重围的。
English: I have been using soldiers for more than thirty years, and I have heard of people who have been good at using soldiers from ancient times to the present. None of them have driven straight into the enemy's encirclement for too long.

古文：且樊、襄阳之在围，过於莒、即墨，将军之功，逾孙武、穰苴。 
现代文：况且樊城、襄阳被围困的情况，比战国时的莒城、即墨要严重，将军的功劳，也超过孙武和司马穰苴。 
English: Moreover, the situation of the siege of Lucheng and Yangyang was more serious than that of Lucheng and Moxi during the Warring States period. The merits of the generals also exceeded those of Sun Wu and Sima Yi.

古文：晃振旅还摩陂，太祖迎晃七里，置酒大会。
现代文：徐晃整顿军队返回摩陂，太祖到城外七里出迎接，准备酒宴大会将士。
English: Xu Xiang rectified the army and returned to Macheng. Taizu went seven miles outside the city to meet and prepare the wine banquet for the soldiers.

古文：太祖举卮酒劝晃，且劳之曰： 全樊、襄阳，将军之功也。 
现代文：太祖举着酒杯向徐晃劝酒，并且慰劳他说： 保全樊城、襄阳，是将军的功劳啊。 
English: The great-grandfather raised a glass of wine to persuade Xu Qiang to drink, and consoled him by saying, "Protecting Lucheng and Xiangyang is the merit of the general."

古文：时诸军皆集，太祖案行诸营，士卒咸离陈观，而晃军营整齐，将士驻陈不动。
现代文：当时各路部队都聚集在一起，太祖巡视各营，士兵们都离开阵营探看太祖，而徐晃部队军容严整，将士都在阵列中排列不动。
English: At that time, all the troops were gathered together. The great ancestor inspected each battalion. The soldiers all left the camp to look for the great ancestor, while the Xuhuang troops were well-formed, and the soldiers were all lined up in the array.

古文：太祖叹曰： 徐将军可谓有周亚夫之风矣。 
现代文：太祖感叹说： 徐将军真可以说是有汉代周亚夫的风姿啊。 
English: The great-grandfather sighed and said: General Xu can truly be said to have the style of Zhou Yafu in the Han Dynasty.

古文：文帝即王位，以晃为右将军，进封逯乡侯。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，任命徐晃为右将军，进封爵位为逯乡侯。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of the Wei Dynasty, appointed Xu Akira as the right general, and promoted him to the peerage as the Xingxiang marquis.

古文：及践阼，进封杨侯。
现代文：等到登基后，进封为杨侯。
English: After ascending to the throne, he was crowned Yang Hou.

古文：与夏侯尚讨刘备於上庸，破之。
现代文：徐晃和夏侯尚在上庸郡攻打刘备，击溃了他。
English: Xu Akira and Xia Hou Shang attacked Liu Bei in Shangyong County and defeated him.

古文：以晃镇阳平，徙封阳平侯。
现代文：因为徐晃镇守阳平郡，提升爵位为阳平侯。
English: Because Xu Xingzhen guarded Yangping County, he was promoted to Yangping marquis.

古文：明帝即位，拒吴将诸葛瑾於襄阳。
现代文：明帝登基后，徐晃在襄阳抗击吴国将领诸葛瑾。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Xu Xiang fought against the Wu general Zhuge Liang in Xiangyang.

古文：增邑二百，并前三千一百户。
现代文：后被加封食邑两百户，加上之前的一共三千一百户。
English: Later, two hundred households in food villages were sealed, adding to the previous total of 3,100 households.

古文：病笃，遗令敛以时服。
现代文：后来他病重，临终前嘱咐要用平常的衣服入殓。
English: Later, he became seriously ill, and on his deathbed he ordered that he be buried in his normal clothes.

古文：性俭约畏慎，将军常远斥候，先为不可胜，然后战，追奔争利，士不暇食。
现代文：徐晃生性节俭慎重，统领军队时常常不需要侦察人员，先做好战败的准备，然后再交战，穷追不舍，争取实利，将士常常顾不上吃饭。
English: Xu Qiao was prudent and frugal by nature. When he led the army, he often did not need reconnaissance personnel. He first prepared for defeat, and then engaged in battle. He pursued relentlessly and strived for real profits. The soldiers often did not care about eating.

古文：常叹曰： 古人患不遭明君，今幸遇之，常以功自效，何用私誉为！ 
现代文：他时常感叹说： 古人都担心不能遇上圣明的君主，现在我有幸遇到，应该时常建功效力，哪里需要自身的荣名呢！ 
English: He often lamented, "The ancients were worried that they would not be able to meet the enlightened monarch, but now that I have been fortunate enough to meet him, I should always do my best, where is the need for my own fame?"

古文：终不广交援。
现代文：始终也没有结交很多朋友。
English: He never made many friends.

古文：太和元年薨，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：他在太和元年去世，谥号为壮侯。
English: He died in the first year of the Taihe era, and his nickname was Zhuang Hou.

古文：子盖嗣。
现代文：他的儿子徐盖继承爵位。
English: His son Xu Gai succeeded to the title.

古文：盖薨，子霸嗣。
现代文：徐盖去世后，儿子徐霸继承爵位。
English: After the death of Xu Gai, his son Xu Ba inherited the title.

古文：明帝分晃户，封晃子孙二人列侯。
现代文：明帝分封徐晃的食邑，封徐晃的两个儿孙为列侯。
English: The Ming Emperor assigned the fief of Xu Aoki to Shiyu, and the two children and grandchildren of Xu Aoki were made lords.

古文：初，清河朱灵为袁绍将。
现代文：当初，清河郡的朱灵是袁绍的部将。
English: At first, Zhu Ling from Qinghe County was Yuan Shao's captain.

古文：太祖之征陶谦，绍使灵督三营助太祖，战有功。
现代文：太祖征讨陶谦，袁绍派朱灵督领三营协助太祖，战场上建立了军功。
English: The great ancestor conquered Tao Qian, and Yuan Shao sent Zhu Ling to lead three battalions to assist the great ancestor, establishing military merit on the battlefield.

古文：绍所遣诸将各罢归，灵曰： 灵观人多矣，无若曹公者，此乃真明主也。
现代文：袁绍派来协助的将领都各自返回，朱灵说： 我看的人很多，没有谁像曹公那样，这是真正的明主。
English: The generals sent by Yuan Shao to assist all returned separately. Zhu Ling said, "I see many people. No one is like Cao Gong. This is the true Lord.

古文：今已遇，复何之？ 遂留不去。
现代文：现在我遇到了，还到哪里去呢？ 
English: Now that I've met you, where else can I go?

古文：所将士卒慕之，皆随灵留。
现代文：于是留在太祖身边没有回去。他统率的士兵都仰慕太祖，都跟着朱灵留下。
English: As a result, he stayed with his grandfather and did not go back. The soldiers he led all admired their grandfather and stayed with Zhu Ling.

古文：灵后遂为好将，名亚晃等，至后将军，封高唐亭侯。
现代文：朱灵后来也成为良将，声名仅次于徐晃，官至后将军，被封为高唐亭侯。
English: Later, Zhu Ling also became a good general. His fame was second only to that of Xu Xiao. He was promoted to the rank of general and was named the Prince of Gaotangting.

古文：评曰：太祖建兹武功，而时之良将，五子为先。
现代文：评曰：太祖建立这样的功业，当时的良将中，这五个人是首要的。
English: The commentary said: "Among the great generals at that time, these five people were the most important.

古文：于禁最号毅重，然弗克其终。
现代文：于禁最是刚毅文中，但没有能坚持始终。
English: The ban is the most rigid in the text, but it has not been able to persist.

古文：张郃以巧变为称，乐进以骁果显名，而鉴其行事，未副所闻。
现代文：张郃以机巧灵变著称，乐进凭借骁勇果敢闻名，但观察他们的行事作风，和听闻的不相符。
English: Zhang Xuan is famous for his dexterity, and Lejin is famous for his bravery and courage, but observing their behavior does not match what they have heard.

古文：或注记有遗漏，未如张辽、徐晃之备详也。
现代文：也许是记录有遗漏，不像张辽、徐晃的事迹那么完备周详。
English: Perhaps there are omissions in the records, which are not as complete and detailed as the deeds of Zhang Liao and Xu Aki.

