古文：不法法，则事毋常；法不法，则令不行。
现代文：不以法推行法度，则国事没有常规；法度不用法的手段推行，政令就不能贯彻实施。
English: If laws are not enforced by legal means, there will be no regularity in state affairs; if laws are not enforced by legal means, government decrees cannot be implemented.

古文：令而不行，则令不法也；法而不行，则修令者不审也；审而不行，则赏罚轻也；重而不行，则赏罚不信也；信而不行，则不以身先之也。
现代文：君主发令而不能贯彻执行，是因为政令没有其合法性；合法性的政令不能贯彻执行，是因为起草政令不够慎重周密；慎重而不能贯彻，是因为赏罚太轻；赏罚重而不能贯彻，是因为赏罚还不信实；信实而不能贯彻，是因为君主不以身作则。
English: The monarch gives orders but cannot carry them out because the decrees are not legitimate; legitimate decrees cannot be carried out because the decrees are not carefully drafted; careful decrees cannot be carried out because the rewards and punishments are too light; heavy rewards and punishments cannot be carried out because the rewards and punishments are not true; and faithful decrees cannot be carried out because the monarch does not lead by example.

古文：故曰：禁胜于身，则令行于民矣。
现代文：所以说：禁律能够管柬君主自身，政令就可以行于民众。
English: Therefore, it is said that if the prohibition can control the monarch himself, the decree can be carried out on the people.

古文：闻贤而不举，殆；闻善而不索，殆；见能而不使，殆；亲人而不固，殆；同谋而离，殆；危人而不能，殆；废人而复起，殆；可而不为，殆；足而不施，殆；几而不密，殆。
现代文：知道有贤才而不举用，要失败；听到有好事而不调查，要失败；见到能干的人而不任使，要失败；亲信于人而不坚定，要失败；家已富而不施，要失败；机要而不能保密，也要失败。
English: To know of a talent and not use it, is to fail; to hear of a good deed and not investigate it, is to fail; to see a man of ability and not employ him, is to fail; to be intimate with a man and not firm, is to fail; to be rich and not generous, is to fail; to have an opportunity and not be able to keep it secret, is to fail.

古文：人主不周密，则正言直行之士危；正言直行之士危，则人主孤而毋内；人主孤而毋内，则人臣党而成群。
现代文：人君行事不严加保密，正言直行的人就危险；正言直行的人危险，君主就孤立无亲；君主孤立无亲，人臣就结成朋党。
English: If a prince acts without strict secrecy, he will be in danger if he speaks the truth; if he speaks the truth, he will be in danger if he acts the truth, the prince will be alone without relatives; if the prince is alone without relatives, the vassals will form a party of friends.

古文：使人主孤而毋内、人臣党而成群者，此非人臣之罪也，人主之过也。
现代文：使君主孤立无亲，人臣结成朋党的，责任不在人臣，而是君主自身的错误。
English: It is not the vassal's fault, but the monarch's own fault, that the monarch is alone and has no relatives, while his vassals have formed a party of cronies.

古文：民毋重罪，过不大也，民毋大过，上毋赦也。
现代文：人民没有重罪，是因为过失不大；人民不犯大过，是因为君主不随意赦免。
English: People do not commit serious crimes because their faults are minor; people do not commit major offenses because the monarch does not pardon them at will.

古文：上赦小过，则民多重罪，积之所生也。
现代文：君主赦小过，则人民多重罪，这是逐渐积累所形成的。
English: If the monarch pardons too little, the people will commit multiple crimes, which is formed by gradual accumulation.

古文：故曰：赦出则民不敬，惠行则过日益。
现代文：所以说，赦令出，人民就不加做惕；恩惠行，过失就日益增多。
English: Therefore, when a pardon is issued, the people become careless; when a favor is done, the faults increase.

古文：惠赦加于民，而囹圄虽实，杀戮虽繁，奸不胜矣。
现代文：把恩惠和宽赦政策加于人民，监狱虽满，杀戮虽多，坏人也不能制止了。
English: With the policy of granting favors and amnesty to the people, although the prisons are full and the killings are numerous, the bad people cannot be stopped.

古文：故曰：邪莫如蚤禁之。
现代文：所以， 惠 ，是人民的仇敌； 法 ，是人民的父母。
English: Therefore, Hui is the enemy of the people; Fa is the parent of the people.

古文：赦过遗善，则民不励。有过不赦，有善不遗，励民之道，于此乎用之矣。
现代文：最上等的是事先用法制规范人的行止，其次是有错误能制止，虽然有过还不至于很严重。赦过忘善，人民就不能勉励；有过不赦，有善不忘，勉励人民的政策，就发挥作用了。
English: The most important thing is to use the legal system to regulate people's behavior in advance, and secondly, there are mistakes that can be stopped, although there are still not very serious. Forgive and forget the good, the people can not encourage; if there is no forgiveness, there is good and do not forget, the policy of encouraging the people will play a role.

古文：故曰：明君者，事断者也。
现代文：所以说：英明君主，就是要掌握这善恶的裁决。
English: Therefore it is said: A wise ruler is one who grasps this judgment of good and evil.

古文：君有三欲于民，三欲不节，则上位危。
现代文：君主对人民有三项要求，三项要求不节制，君主地位就危险。
English: The monarch has three requirements for the people. If these three requirements are not restrained, the monarch's position will be in danger.

古文：三欲者何也？
现代文：三项要求是什么呢？
English: What are the three demands?

古文：一曰求，二曰禁，三曰令。
现代文：一是索取，二是禁阻，三是命令。
English: First, it is a request, second, it is a ban, and third, it is an order.

古文：求必欲得，禁必欲止，令必欲行。
现代文：索取总是希望得到，禁阻总是希望制止，命令总是希望推行。
English: Demands are always expected to be met, prohibitions are always expected to be stopped, orders are always expected to be carried out.

古文：求多者，其得寡；禁多者，其止寡；令多者，其行寡。
现代文：但索取太多，得到的反而少；禁阻太多，制止的反而少；命令太多，所推行的反而少。
English: But too much is asked for, and too little is given; too much is forbidden, and too little is restrained; too many orders are given, and too few are carried out.

古文：求而不得，则威日损；禁而不止，则刑罚侮；令而不行，则下凌上。
现代文：索取而不得，威信就日益降低；禁阻而不止，刑罚将受到轻视；命令而不执行，下面就欺凌君上。
English: If it is not allowed, the prestige of the emperor will be lower and lower; if it is not allowed, the punishment will be despised; if it is not enforced, the emperor will be bullied.

古文：故未有能多求而多得者也，未有能多禁而多止者也，未有能多令而多行者也。故曰：上苛则下不听，下不听而强以刑罚，则为人上者众谋矣。
现代文：从来没有多求而多得，多禁而多止，多令而能多行的。所以说：上面过于苛刻，下面就不会听令；下面不听命而强加以刑罚，君主就会被众人谋算。
English: It has never been the case that if you ask for more, you get more; if you forbid more, you do more; if you order more, you can do more. Therefore, it is said that if the top is too harsh, the bottom will not obey orders; if the bottom does not obey orders and imposes punishment, the monarch will be plotted by everyone.

古文：为人上而众谋之，虽欲毋危，不可得也。
现代文：君主而被众人所谋算，虽想没有危险，也办不到了。
English: The monarch is being plotted against by everyone, and although there is no danger, it can't be done.

古文：号令已出又易之，礼义已行又止之；度量已制又迁之，刑法已错又移之。如是，则庆赏虽重，民不劝也；杀戮虽繁，民不畏也。
现代文：号令已出又改变，礼仪已行又废止，度量已定又变换，刑法已行又动摇，这样，赏赐虽重，人民也不勉力；杀戮虽多，人民也不害怕了。
English: The proclamation has been issued and changed, the etiquette has been implemented and abolished, the measure has been set and changed, the criminal law has been implemented and shaken, so that although the reward is heavy, the people do not struggle; although there are many killings, the people are not afraid.

古文：故曰：上无固植，下有疑心。国无常经，民力必竭，数也。
现代文：所以说：上面意志不坚定，下面就有疑心；国家没有常法，人民就不肯尽力，这都是规律。
English: Therefore, it is said: If the will is not firm at the top, there will be suspicion at the bottom; if the country does not have a standing law, the people will not be willing to do their best. These are all laws.

古文：明君在上位，民毋敢立私议自贵者，国毋怪严，毋杂俗，毋异礼，士毋私议。
现代文：英明的君主在上，人民自然不敢有私立异说而妄自尊大的，国家没有荒诞的事情、杂乱的风俗、怪异的礼节，士人也没有私立异说的。
English: With a wise monarch at the top, the people naturally dare not have private dissent and arrogance. The country does not have absurd things, disorderly customs, strange etiquette, and the judges do not have private dissent.

古文：倨傲易令，错仪画制，作议者尽诛。故强者折，锐者挫，坚者破。
现代文：对于傲慢不恭、改变法令、自己立法定制、制造异说的都加以诛罚，那么，强硬的屈服，冒尖的受挫折，顽固的也可以攻破。
English: For arrogance, change of laws and regulations, self-legislation customization, and creation of heresy, all will be punished. Then, tough submission, stubborn frustration, and stubbornness can also be broken.

古文：引之以绳墨，绳之以诛僇，故万民之心皆服而从上，推之而往，引之而来。
现代文：再用法度来引导，用杀戮来管制，因而，万民之心都会服从上面，推之而往，引之而来。
English: Then, using the law to guide and killing to control, the hearts of all people will obey the above, pushing and pulling.

古文：彼下有立其私议自贵，分争而退者，则令自此不行矣。
现代文：如果，下面有私立异说，妄自尊大，纷争而不负责任的，君令就再也无法实行。
English: If, below, there are private dissenters, arrogant, quarrelsome and irresponsible, the king's order can no longer be implemented.

古文：故曰：私议立则主道卑矣。况主倨傲易令，错仪画制，变易风俗，诡服殊说犹立。
现代文：所以说，私立异说一立，君主威信就低，何况还有傲慢不恭、改变法令、自行立法定制、改风俗、变服装、奇谈怪论的存在呢？
English: Therefore, as soon as private dissent arises, the prestige of the monarch is low, not to mention the existence of arrogance, change of laws and regulations, self-legislation customization, change of customs, change of clothing, and bizarre talk.

古文：上不行君令，下不合于乡里，变更自为，易国之成俗者，命之曰不牧之民。
现代文：那种上不行君令，下不合乡里，随意独行，改变一国既成风俗的，叫作 不服治理的人 。
English: The kind of people who do not accept the king's order at the top, do not fit into the countryside at the bottom, walk alone at will, and change the established customs of a country are called people who are not amenable to governance.

古文：不牧之民，绳之外也；绳之外诛。
现代文：不服治理的人是跑到法度以外了。法度以外的人，应该杀。
English: Those who refuse to be governed have gone beyond the bounds of the law. Those who go beyond the bounds of the law should be killed.

古文：使贤者食于能，斗士食于功。
现代文：应当使贤者靠能力用事，斗士靠战功用事。
English: Wise men should be made to succeed by their ability, and warriors by their war exploits.

古文：贤者食于能，则上尊而民从；斗士食于功，则卒轻患而傲敌。
现代文：贤者靠能力用事，则君主尊严而人民顺从；斗士靠战功用事，则士卒不怕患难而蔑视敌人。
English: A wise man relies on his ability, then the dignity of the monarch prevails and the people obey; a fighter relies on military performance, then the soldier is not afraid of difficulties and despises the enemy.

古文：惠者，多赦者也，先易而后难，久而不胜其祸：法者，先难而后易，久而不胜其福。
现代文：君主尊严而人民服从；士卒不怕患难而蔑视敌人，两者树立于国内，则天下得治君主得安了。
English: The dignity of the monarch and the obedience of the people; a statesman who does not fear adversity and despises the enemy. If these two are established in the country, then the world will be ruled by a monarch.

古文：故惠者，民之仇雠也；法者，民之父母也。
现代文：爵位不尊，俸禄不重，就不会有人为他赴难冒险，因为他的办法还不足以调动人们这样做。
English: Without the dignity of a knighthood or the weight of a salary, no one would risk their lives for him, because his methods are not enough to motivate people to do so.

古文：太上以制制度，其次失而能追之，虽有过，亦不甚矣。
现代文：因此，先王规定轩冕，是用来区别贵贱，不是求美；设立爵禄，是用来定其待遇，不是求好看。
English: Therefore, the former king stipulated that the crown should be used to distinguish between high and low, not to seek beauty; the establishment of peerage should be used to determine its treatment, not to look good.

古文：明君制宗庙，足以设宾祀，不求其美；为宫室台榭，足以避燥湿寒暑，不求其大；为雕文刻镂，足以辨贵贱，不求其观。
现代文：要使君子靠治国之道来生活，小人靠出力劳动生活。君子靠治国之道生活，则君主尊严而人民顺从；小人靠出力劳动生活，即财物丰厚而生活富裕。君主尊严，人民顺从，财物丰厚，生活富裕，四个条件具备，就不难待时而成王业了。英明的君主建造宗庙，足以殡尸设祭就行了，不求它的美；修筑宫室台榭，足以防避燥湿寒暑就行了，不求它的大；雕制花纹，刻木楼金，足以分辨贵贱等级就行了，不求它的壮观。
English: It is necessary to make the gentleman live by the way of governing the country, and the villain live by the power of labor. If the gentleman lives by the way of governing the country, then the monarch is dignified and the people are obedient; if the villain lives by the power of labor, that is, the wealth is abundant and the life is rich. If the dignity of the monarch, the obedience of the people, the wealth is abundant and the life is rich, and the four conditions are met, it is not difficult to become a king. The wise monarch can build the ancestral temple, which is enough for the funeral and the festival, without seeking its beauty; build the palace platform, which is enough to

古文：故农夫不失其时，百工不失其功，商无废利，民无游日，财无砥墆。
现代文：这样，农夫不耽误农时，工匠能保证功效，商人没有失利的，人民没有游荡的，财货也没有积压的。
English: In this way, the farmer does not delay the farming time, the craftsman can ensure the effectiveness, the merchant does not lose, the people do not wander, and the goods are not backlogged.

古文：故曰：俭其道乎！
现代文：所以说：节俭才是正道呵！
English: So they say: frugality is the right way!

古文：令未布而民或为之，而赏从之，则是上妄予也。
现代文：法令没有正式公布，人民偶然做到了，就加以行赏，那是君主的错误赏赐。
English: The decree was not officially promulgated, the people accidentally did it and rewarded it, which was the monarch's wrong reward.

古文：上妄予，则功臣怨；功臣怨，而愚民操事于妄作；愚民操事于妄作，则大乱之本也。
现代文：君主进行错赏则功臣抱怨，功臣抱怨则愚民胡作非为，愚民胡作非为，这是大乱的根源。
English: If the monarch makes a wrong award, the meritorious person complains; if the meritorious person complains, the stupid people do something wrong; if the stupid people do something wrong, this is the root cause of chaos.

古文：令未布而罚及之，则是上妄诛也。
现代文：法令没有正式公布，就给予惩罚，那是君主的错罚。
English: It is the error of the sovereign to punish without promulgating the decree.

古文：上妄诛，则民轻生；民轻生，则暴人兴、曹党起而乱贼作矣。
现代文：君主进行错罚，则人民轻生，人民轻生，暴人就要兴起，帮派朋党就要出现，而乱贼就要造反了。
English: If the monarch carries out the wrong punishment, then the people will be careless, the people will be careless, the thugs will rise, the gangs and cronies will appear, and the ruffians will rebel.

古文：令已布而赏不从，则是使民不劝勉、不行制、不死节。
现代文：法令已经公布，而不能依法行赏，这就是叫人民不勉力从公，不执行军令，不为国死节。
English: The decree has been promulgated, but it cannot be rewarded according to law. This is to tell the people not to work hard in public service, not to implement military orders, and not to celebrate the National Day of the Dead.

古文：民不劝勉、不行制、不死节，则战不胜而守不固；战不胜而守不固，则国不安矣。
现代文：人民不勉力从公，不执行军令，不为国死节，则战不能胜而守不能固；战不胜而守不固，国家就不会安全了。
English: If the people do not diligently perform public duties, do not carry out military orders, and do not celebrate the anniversary of the country's death, then the war cannot be won and the defense cannot be solid; if the war cannot be won and the defense cannot be solid, the country will not be safe.

古文：令已布而罚不及，则是教民不听。
现代文：法令已经公布，而不能依法行罚，这就是叫人民不服从法令。
English: The decree has been promulgated, but it cannot be punished according to law. This is to call on the people to disobey the decree.

古文：民不听，则强者立；强者立，则主位危矣。
现代文：人民不服从法令，强人就要兴起；强人兴起，君主地位就危险了。
English: If the people do not obey the law, a strong man will arise; if a strong man arises, the position of the monarch is in danger.

古文：故曰：宪律制度必法道，号令必著明，赏罚必信密，此正民之经也。
现代文：所以说：法律制度一定要合于治国之道，号令一定要严明，赏罚一定要信实坚决，这都是规正人民的准则。
English: Therefore, it is said that the legal system must conform to the way of governing the country, the proclamation must be clear, and the reward and punishment must be faithful and resolute. These are all the standards for regulating the people.

古文：凡大国之君尊，小国之君卑。
现代文：凡是大国的君主地位都高，小国的君主地位都低。
English: The status of the monarch of a large country is always high, and the status of the monarch of a small country is always low.

古文：大国之君所以尊者，何也？曰：为之用者众也。
现代文：大国君主何以地位高呢？回答是：被他使用的人多。
English: Why is the status of a great power monarch so high? The answer is: he uses a lot of people.

古文：小国之君所以卑者，何也？
现代文：小国的君主地位何以低呢？
English: How low is the position of a monarch in a small country?

古文：曰：为之用者寡也。
现代文：回答是：被他使用的人少。
English: The answer is: fewer people are being used by him.

古文：然则为之用者众则尊，为之用者寡则卑，则人主安能不欲民之众为己用也？
现代文：既然，被他用的多就高，用的少就低，那么，君主那有不希望更多的人民为己所用呢？
English: Since the more he uses, the higher he is, and the less he uses, the lower he is, does the sovereign not want more people to use for himself?

古文：使民众为己用，奈何？
现代文：要使人民多为己用，怎么办？
English: What should be done to make the people more useful to themselves?

古文：曰：法立令行，则民之用者众矣；法不立，令不行，则民之用者寡矣。
现代文：回答是：法立令行，人民听用的就多了；法不立，令不行，人民听用的就少了。
English: The answer is: if laws are made and orders are carried out, the people will listen to them more; if laws are not made and orders are not carried out, the people will listen to them less.

古文：故法之所立、令之所行者多，而所废者寡，则民不诽议；民不诽议，则听从矣。
现代文：所以，成立的法律和行通的命令多，而所废者少，人民就不非议，人民不非议就听从了。
English: Therefore, more laws and executive orders are established, and fewer are abolished. The people do not criticize, and the people obey without criticism.

古文：法之所立，令之所行，与其所废者钧，则国毋常经；国毋常经，则民妄行矣。
现代文：成立的法律和行通的命令，如果与所废者均等，国家就没有正常的准则，国家没有正常的准则，人民就去胡作非为了。
English: If the established laws and effective orders are the same as those that have been abolished, the country will not have a normal standard, and if the country does not have a normal standard, the people will go rogue.

古文：法之所立、令之所行者寡，而所废者多，则民不听；民不听，则暴人起而奸邪作矣。
现代文：成立的法律和行通的命令少，而所废者多，人民就不肯服从，人民不服从法令，暴人就要兴起而奸邪之辈就要作乱了。
English: Few laws and decrees are established, but many are abrogated. The people refuse to obey. The people disobey the decrees. The violent are bound to arise, and the treacherous are bound to create disorder.

古文：计上之所以爱民者，为用之爱之也。
现代文：考察君主之所以爱民，乃是为了使用他们而爱的。
English: Consider that the sovereign loves the people in order to use them.

古文：为爱民之故，不难毁法亏令，则是失所谓爱民矣。
现代文：为了爱民的原故，不怕毁坏法度，削减命令，那就失去爱民的意义了。
English: If, for the sake of loving the people, one is not afraid to destroy laws and regulations and cut down on orders, then the meaning of loving the people will be lost.

古文：夫以爱民用民，则民之不用明矣。
现代文：单用爱民的办法使用人民，则人民不服使用，这是很明显的。
English: It is very clear that if the people are used solely by the method of loving the people, then the people will not accept the use.

古文：夫至用民者，杀之危之，劳之苦之，饥之渴之；用民者将致之此极也，而民毋可与虑害己者，明王在上，道法行于国，民皆舍所好而行所恶。
现代文：善于使用人民的，他可以用杀戮、危害、劳累、饥饿、口渴等方法，用民者可以用这种极端的手段，而人民没有考虑以为害己的，是因为明王在上，道和法通行全国，人民都能舍弃爱干的私事而做不爱干的的公务。
English: If he is good at using the people, he can use methods such as killing, harming, exhausting, starving, and thirsting. Those who use the people can use such extreme means, and the people do not consider that they are harming themselves, because the emperor is on high, and Tao and Fa are prevalent throughout the country, and the people can give up the private affairs they like to do and do the public affairs they do not like to do.

古文：故善用民者，轩冕不下拟，而斧钺不上因。
现代文：所以，善于使用人民的，总是赏赐不任意折扣，刑罚不任意增加。
English: Therefore, if you are good at using people, you will always be rewarded with no arbitrary discount, and the punishment will not be arbitrarily increased.

古文：如是，则贤者劝而暴人止。
现代文：这样，贤人知所勉力而暴人平息。
English: In this way, the wise man knows what to do and the violent man calms down.

古文：贤者劝而暴人止，则功名立其后矣。
现代文：贤人勉力而暴人平息，功业就随之而立了。
English: When the wise man makes an effort and the violent man calms down, the cause is established.

古文：蹈白刃，受矢石，入水火，以听上令；上令尽行，禁尽止。引而使之，民不敢转其力；推而战之，民不敢爱其死。
现代文：人们可以踏白刃，受矢石，赴汤蹈火来执行君令，君令可以尽行，禁律可以尽止，召来使用，人民不敢转移力量；送去战争，人民不敢姑惜生命。
English: People can tread on the white sword, suffer the arrow stone, and go through the fire to carry out the royal order. The royal order can be carried out to the fullest, the prohibition can be stopped to the fullest, and the people are called to use, and the people dare not transfer power; send to war, and the people dare not spare their lives.

古文：不敢转其力，然后有功；不敢爱其死，然后无敌。
现代文：不敢转移力量，然后可以立功；不敢姑惜生命，然后可以无敌。
English: Do not dare to transfer power, and then you can make meritorious contributions; do not dare to spare life, and then you can be invincible.

古文：进无敌，退有功，是以三军之众皆得保其首领，父母妻子完安于内。
现代文：进无敌，退有功，于是三军之众都能够保全首领，使父母妻子完好安居于国内。
English: Invincible in battle, successful in retreat, the three armies were able to save their leaders, and their parents and wives were able to live safely in the country.

古文：故民未尝可与虑始，而可与乐成功。
现代文：所以，对人民不必同他商量事业的创始，而可以同他欢庆事业的成功。
English: Therefore, the people do not need to discuss the founding of the cause with him, but can celebrate the success of the cause with him.

古文：是故仁者、知者、有道者，不与大虑始。
现代文：因此，仁者、智者、有道者，都不与人民商量事业之开始。
English: Therefore, the benevolent, the wise, and the virtuous do not consult with the people about the beginning of the undertaking.

古文：国无以小与不幸而削亡者，必主与大臣之德行失于身也，官职、法制、政教失于国也，诸侯之谋虑失于外也，故地削而国危矣。
现代文：国家从来没有因为小和不幸而削弱危亡的，一定是因为君主和大臣自身失德，国内的官职、法制、政教有失误，国外对诸侯国的谋虑有失误，因而地削而且国危。
English: The country has never been weakened and in danger because of smallness and misfortune. It must be because the monarch and ministers themselves are immoral, there are mistakes in the domestic official position, legal system, government and religion, and there are mistakes in foreign countries' consideration of the vassal states. Therefore, the land is cut and the country is in danger.

古文：国无以大与幸而有功名者，必主与大臣之德行得于身也。官职、法制、政教得于国也，诸侯之谋虑得于外也。
现代文：国家也没有因为大和侥幸而成功立名的，一定是因为君主和大臣自身有德，国内官职、法制、政教有成就，国外对诸侯国的谋虑有成就。
English: The country did not succeed in establishing its name because of luck or chance. It must be because the monarch and ministers themselves have virtue, domestic official positions, legal system, politics and religion have achievements, and foreign countries have achievements in their consideration of the vassal states.

古文：然后功立而名成。
现代文：然后功立而且名成。
English: And then success and fame.

古文：然则国何可无道？
现代文：既然如此，治国怎么可以没有正道？
English: That being the case, how can there be no right way to govern the country?

古文：人何可无求？
现代文：用人怎么可以不用贤人？
English: How can the employer do without the sage?

古文：得道而导之，得贤而使之，将有所大期于兴利除害。
现代文：得正道而引导之，得贤才而使用之，将是对于兴利除害大有希望的。
English: To be guided by the right path, and to be used by the wise, will be very promising for the benefit and elimination of harm.

古文：期于兴利除害莫急于身，而君独甚。
现代文：希望兴利除害，没有比以身作则更急需的了，而国君尤为重要。
English: There is nothing more urgently needed than leading by example, and the sovereign is particularly important.

古文：伤也，必先令之失。
现代文：如事业受到损害，那一定首先是法令有错误。
English: If the cause is harmed, it must first be a mistake in the law.

古文：人主失令而蔽，已蔽而劫，已劫而弑。
现代文：人主将因法令错误而受蒙蔽，因蒙蔽而被劫制，因受劫制而被杀。
English: The human owner will be deceived by the error of the law, robbed by the deception, and killed by the robbery.

古文：凡人君之所以为君者，势也。
现代文：凡人君之所以成为人君，因为他有权势。
English: The reason why an ordinary person becomes an extraordinary person is because he is powerful.

古文：故人君失势，则臣制之矣。
现代文：所以，人君失掉权势，臣下就控制他了。
English: Therefore, if the ruler loses his power, his vassals will control him.

古文：势在下，则君制于臣矣；势在上，则臣制于君矣。
现代文：权势在下面，君主就被臣下所控制；权势在上面，臣下由君主控制。
English: With power below, the monarch is controlled by his subjects; with power above, the subjects are controlled by the monarch.

古文：故君臣之易位，势在下也。
现代文：所以，君臣的地位颠倒，就因为权势下落。
English: Therefore, the reversal of the status of princes and ministers is due to the decline of power.

古文：在臣期年，臣虽不忠，君不能夺也；在子期年，子虽不孝，父不能服也。
现代文：大臣得势一整年，臣虽不忠，君主也不能夺；儿子得势一整年，子虽不孝，父亲也不能制服。
English: If a minister gains power for a whole year, even if the minister is disloyal, the monarch cannot take it away; if a son gains power for a whole year, even if the son is unfilial, the father cannot subdue him.

古文：故《春秋》之记，臣有弑其君、子有弑其父者矣。
现代文：所以《春秋》记事，臣有杀君的，子有杀父的。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" records that the vassal has killed the prince, and the son has killed the father.

古文：故曰：堂上远于百里，堂下远于千里，门庭远于万里。
现代文：所以说：堂上可以比百里还远，堂下可以比千里还远，门庭可以比万里还远。
English: Therefore, it is said that the hall can be more than a hundred miles away, the hall can be more than a thousand miles away, and the courtyard can be more than a million miles away.

古文：今步者一日，百里之情通矣；堂上有事，十日而君不闻，此所谓远于百里也。步者十日，千里之情通矣；堂下有事，一月而君不闻，此所谓远于千里也。步者百日，万里之情通矣，门庭有事，期年而君不闻，此所谓远于万里也。
现代文：现在，步行一天，一百里地之内的情况就知道了，堂上有事，过十天君主还不知道，这就叫作比一百里还远了；步行十天，可以了解一千里地的情况，堂下有事，过一月君主还不知道，这就叫比一千里还远了；步行百天，可以了解一万里地的情况，门庭有事，过一年君主还不知道，这就叫作比一万里还远了。
English: Now, if you walk for one day, you will know the situation within a hundred miles, and there will be an event in the palace. If you walk for ten days and the monarch does not know, it is called more than a hundred miles away. If you walk for ten days, you can know the situation within a thousand miles, and there is an event in the palace, and the monarch does not know after a month, it is called more than a thousand miles away. If you walk for a hundred days, you can know the situation within ten thousand miles, and there is an event in the palace. If you walk for a year and the monarch does not know, it is called more than ten thousand miles away.

古文：故请入而不出谓之灭，出而不入谓之绝，入而不至谓之侵，出而道止谓之壅。
现代文：所以，情况进而不出，叫作 灭 ；情况出而不进，叫作 绝 ；情况报上去而不能达到君主，叫作 侵 ；情况下达而中途停止，叫作 壅 。
English: Therefore, the situation of going in but not coming out is called 灭; the situation of going out but not coming in is called 绝; the situation of reporting and not being able to reach the monarch is called 侵; the situation of reaching and stopping in the middle is called.

古文：灭绝侵壅之君者，非杜其门而守其户也、为政之有所不行也。
现代文：有了灭、绝、侵、堕问题的国君，并不是杜绝或封守了他的门户，而是政令有所不能推进的原故。
English: Having the problem of the extinction, extermination, invasion, and fall of the sovereign, it is not the elimination or sealing of his portal, but the reason why the decree cannot be promoted.

古文：故曰：令重于宝，社稷先于亲戚，法重于民，威权贵于爵禄。
现代文：所以说：政令重于宝物，政权先于至亲，法度重于人民，威权重于爵禄。
English: Therefore, it is said that decrees are more important than treasures, political power is more important than relatives, laws are more important than people, and authority is more important than peerage.

古文：故不为重宝轻号令，不为亲戚后社稷，不为爱民枉法律，不为爵禄分威权。
现代文：所以，不可为重宝而看轻政令，不可为至亲而把国家政权放在后面，不能为爱民而歪曲法律，不能为爵禄而分让权威。
English: Therefore, it is not permissible to treat government decrees lightly for the sake of treasure, nor to put the state power behind for the sake of one's relatives, nor to distort the law for the sake of love for the people, nor to cede authority for the sake of peerage.

古文：故曰：势非所以予人也。政者，正也。
现代文：所以说：权势是不能给予他人的。政，就是 正 。
English: Therefore, it is said that power cannot be given to others.

古文：正也者，所以正定万物之命也。
现代文：所谓正，是用来正确确定万物之命的。
English: The so-called positive is used to correctly determine the life of all things.

古文：是故圣人精德立中以生正，明正以治国。
现代文：因此，圣人总是精修德性，确定中道以培植这个 正 字，宣扬这个 正 字来治理国家。
English: Therefore, sages have always refined morality and determined the middle way to cultivate this principle and promote this principle to govern the country.

古文：故正者，所以止过而逮不及也。
现代文：所以， 正 ，是用来制止过头而补不及的。
English: Therefore, positive reinforcement is used to stop overcompensation.

古文：过与不及也，皆非正也；非正，则伤国一也。
现代文：过与不及都不是正。不正都一样损害国家。
English: Neither too much nor too little is correct. Incorrectness harms the country equally.

古文：勇而不义伤兵，仁而不法伤正。
现代文：勇而不义损害军队，仁而不正损害法度。
English: Bravery without righteousness harms the army, benevolence without righteousness harms the law.

古文：故军之败也，生于不义；法之侵也，生于不正。
现代文：军队失败，产生于不义；法度的侵蚀，就是产生于不正。
English: The failure of an army is born of injustice; the erosion of the rule of law is born of injustice.

古文：故言有辨而非务者，行有难而非善者。故言必中务，不苟为辩；行必思善，不苟为难。
现代文：说话有雄辩而不务正的，行为有敬惧而不善良的，所以，说话必须合于务正，不苟且强为雄辩；行为必须考虑良善，不苟且保持敬惧。
English: Speech should be eloquent, but not too eloquent, and action should be reverent, but not too reverent. Therefore, speech should be in accordance with virtue, and should be careful and eloquent; action should be considerate of virtue, and careful and reverent.

古文：规矩者，方圜之正也。
现代文：规矩，是矫正方圆的。
English: The rule is to square the circle.

古文：虽有巧目利手，不如拙规矩之正方圜也。
现代文：人虽有巧目利手，也不如粗笨的规矩能矫正方圆。
English: Although people are clever, it is not as good as a rough rule to correct the square.

古文：故巧者能生规矩，不能废规矩而正方圜。
现代文：所以，巧人可以造规矩，但不能废规矩而正方圆。
English: Therefore, a clever person can make rules, but can not waste rules and square the circle.

古文：虽圣人能生法，不能废法而治国。
现代文：圣人能制定法度，但不能废法度而治国家。
English: A sage can make laws, but he cannot abolish them and rule the country.

古文：故虽有明智高行，倍法而治，是废规矩而正方圜也。
现代文：所以，虽有明彻的智慧、高尚的品德，违背法度而治国，就等于废除规矩来矫正方圆一样。
English: Therefore, in spite of having clear wisdom and high moral character, governing the country in violation of the law is the same as abolishing rules to rectify the square circle.

古文：一曰：凡人君之德行威严，非独能尽贤于人也；曰人君也，故从而贵之，不敢论其德行之高卑有故。
现代文：有一种说法：人君的威严，不是因为他的德行特别能比一切人都好，而因为他是人君，因而人们尊崇他，并不敢计较他德行的高低。
English: There is a saying: the dignity of a prince is not because his virtue is particularly better than all others, but because he is a prince, so people respect him and do not dare to consider the level of his virtue.

古文：为其杀生，急于司命也；富人贫人，使人相畜也；良人贱人，使人相臣也。
现代文：因为他有杀和生的大权，比司命之神还厉害；他还有使人贫富，并使之互相供养的大权；还有使人贵贱，并使之互相服从的大权。
English: For he hath power to kill and to make alive, which power is greater than that of God; and he hath power to make poor and rich, and to make them mutually dependent; and he hath power to make rich and poor, and to make them mutually obedient.

古文：人主操此六者以畜其臣，人臣亦望此六者以事其君，君臣之会，六者谓之谋。
现代文：君主就是掌握这六项权限来统治臣下，臣下也看此六者来事奉君主，君臣的结合，便靠这六者为媒介。
English: The monarch is the master of these six powers to rule his subjects, and the subjects also see these six to serve the monarch, and the combination of the monarch and the subjects relies on these six as the medium.

古文：六者在臣期年，臣不忠，君不能夺；在子期年，子不孝，父不能夺。
现代文：这六者掌握在大臣手里一年，臣虽不忠，君主也不能夺；在太子手里一年，子虽不孝，父亲也不能夺。
English: These six are held in the hands of the minister for one year. Although the minister is unfaithful, the monarch cannot take them away. Although the son is unfilial, the father cannot take them away from the prince for one year.

古文：故《春秋》之记，臣有弑其君，子有弑其父者，得此六者，而君父不智也。
现代文：所以《春秋》记事，有臣杀君的，有子杀父的，就因为得此六者而君父还不知道的原故。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" records that if a vassal kills a prince, or a son kills his father, it is because of these six things that the prince's father does not yet know.

古文：六位在臣，则主蔽矣；主蔽者，失其令也。
现代文：六项权限落在臣下手里，君主就受蒙蔽了。君主受蒙蔽，就是失其政令。
English: If the six powers fall into the hands of a vassal, the monarch is deceived. If the monarch is deceived, he has failed in his duty.

古文：故曰：令入而不出谓之蔽，令出而不入谓之壅，令出而不行谓之牵，令入而不至谓之瑕。
现代文：所以说：令入而不出叫作 蔽 ，令出而不入叫作 壅 ，令出而不行叫作 牵 ，令入而不能到达君主叫作 瑕 。
English: Therefore, it is said that: to let in but not to let out is called covering, to let out but not to let in is called covering, to let out but not to let in is called pulling, to let in but not to let in is called pulling, and to let in but not to let in is called missing.

古文：牵瑕蔽壅之事君者，非敢杜其门而守其户也，为令之有所不行也。
现代文：有了牵、瑕、蔽、壅问题的君主，不是谁敢杜绝和封守他的门户，而是令不能行的原故。
English: The monarch who has the problem of traction, blemish, cover-up, and paralysis is not the one who dares to put an end to and seal his portal, but the reason why he can't do it.

古文：此其所以然者，在贤人不至而忠臣不用也。
现代文：这种情况之所以出现，是因为贤人不来而忠臣不用。
English: The reason for this situation is that the wise men do not come and the loyal subjects do not need them.

古文：故人主不可以不慎其令。
现代文：所以，君主对于令不可以不慎重。
English: Therefore, the sovereign cannot be careless with the order.

古文：令者，人主之大宝也。
现代文：令，是君主的大宝。
English: It is a great treasure of the monarch.

古文：一曰：贤人不至谓之蔽，忠臣不用谓之塞，令而不行谓之障，禁而不止谓之逆。
现代文：有一种说法：贤人不来叫作 蔽 ，忠臣不用叫作 塞 ，令而不行叫作 障 ，禁而不止叫作 逆 。
English: There is a saying: Wise men don't call it a cover, loyal subjects don't have to call it a stop, orders can't be called a hindrance, and prohibitions can't be called anything but the opposite.

古文：蔽塞障逆之君者，不敢杜其门而守其户也，为贤者之不至、令之不行也。
现代文：有了蔽、塞、障、逆问题的君主，并不是因为谁敢杜绝和关闭他的门户，而是贤人不来，令不能行的原故。
English: The monarch who has the problem of concealment, obstruction, hindrance, and reverse is not because who dares to put an end to and close his portal, but because the wise men do not come and make it impossible.

古文：凡民从上也，不从口之所言，从情之所好者也；上好勇，则民轻死；上好仁，则民轻财。故上之所好，民必甚焉。
现代文：凡人民趋从君主，不是趋从他口里说的什么话，而是趋从他性情之所好。君主好勇则人民轻死，君主好仁则人民轻财，所以说上面喜爱什么，下面就一定爱好什么，而且更厉害。
English: When the people follow a prince, they do not follow what he says, but what his character desires. If the prince is brave, the people will die lightly; if the prince is kind, the people will be rich. Therefore, what is loved above must be loved below, and even more strongly.

古文：是故明君知民之必以上为心也，故置法以自治，立仪以自正也。
现代文：由此，明君知道人民一定是以君主为出发点的，所以要确立法制以自己治理自己，树立礼仪以自己规正自己。
English: From this, Emperor Ming knew that the people must take the monarch as their starting point, so they must establish a legal system to govern themselves, and establish etiquette to regulate themselves.

古文：故上不行，则民不从；彼民不服法死制，则国必乱矣。
现代文：所以，上面不以身作则，下面就不会服从，如人们不肯服从法令，不肯死于制度，国家就一定要乱了。
English: Therefore, if those above do not lead by example, those below will not obey. If people do not want to obey the laws and do not want to die under the system, the country will definitely be in chaos.

古文：彼矜者，满也；满者，虚也。
现代文：所以。有道的君主，行法令、修制度，总是先于人民躬行实践的。
English: Therefore, a virtuous monarch, when making laws and regulations and reforming the system, always practices before the people.

古文：满虚在物，在物为制也。
现代文：凡评定人物都有要领：骄傲的人，没有伟大人物。骄傲，就是自满；自满，就是空虚。
English: There are essentials to any assessment of a person: a proud man is no great man. Pride is complacency; complacency is emptiness.

古文：矜者，细之属也。
现代文：行事有了自满与空虚，事情就被限制。骄傲，是渺小的。
English: With complacency and emptiness, things are limited. Pride is small.

古文：凡论人而远古者，无高士焉。
现代文：凡评价人物而违背古道的，没有高士。
English: Anyone who evaluates a person and goes against the ancient path is not worthy of high rank.

古文：既不知古而易其功者，无智土焉。
现代文：既不知古道而轻易作出论断的，没有智士。
English: There is no wise man who does not know the ancient way and easily makes a judgment.

古文：德行成于身而远古，卑人也。
现代文：德行未成于自身而违背古道的，是卑人。
English: Those who do not practice virtue within themselves, but go against the ancient path, are despicable.

古文：事无资，遇时而简其业者，愚士也。
现代文：事业无根底，遇机会就简弃其业的，是愚人。
English: He is a fool who has no foundation for his business and abandons it at the first opportunity.

古文：钓名之人，无贤士焉。钓利之君，无王主焉。
现代文：猎取虚名的人，没有贤士；猎取货利的君主，没有成王业的君主。
English: There is no wise man who hunts for a false name. There is no prince who hunts for goods and profits without becoming a king.

古文：贤人之行其身也，忘其有名也；王主之行其道也，忘其成功也。
现代文：贤人立身行事，不想到要出名；成王业的君主行道，也不计较成败。
English: A wise man acts without thinking of fame; a prince acts without thinking of success or failure.

古文：贤人之行，王主之道，其所不能已也。
现代文：贤人行事，成王业的君主行道，都是自己想停下来也不可能的。
English: It is impossible for a wise man to stop on his way to becoming a king.

古文：明君公国一民以听于世，忠臣直进以论其能。
现代文：明君以公治国统一人民来对待当世，忠臣以直道求进来表明他的才能。
English: The Ming emperor treated the contemporary world with the principle of governing the country and unifying the people, and the loyal vassal showed his talent by asking for help in a straightforward manner.

古文：明君不以禄爵私所爱，忠臣不诬能以干爵禄。
现代文：明君不肯私授爵禄给所爱的人，忠臣不冒充有能来猎取爵禄。
English: The Emperor Ming refused to give knighthoods to his loved ones, and loyal subjects did not pretend to be able to hunt for knighthoods.

古文：君不私国，臣不诬能，行此道者，虽未大治，正民之经也。
现代文：君主不以私对国，大臣不冒充有能，能够这样做的，虽不能大治，也合于规正人民的准则。
English: Monarchs do not use their private interests against the country, and ministers do not pretend to be competent. Those who can do so, although they cannot rule the country, also conform to the principle of regulating the people.

古文：今以诬能之臣事私国之君，而能济功名者，古今无之。
现代文：当前，任用冒充有能的大臣，事奉以私对国的君主，这样而能完成功业的，从古至今都不会有。
English: At the present time, there has never been a case of appointing someone who pretends to be a competent minister and serves a monarch who is a traitor to the country in order to complete a successful career.

古文：诬能之人易知也。
现代文：冒充有能的人是容易识破的。
English: It's easy to spot someone pretending to be competent.

古文：臣度之先王者，舜之有天下也，禹为司空，契为司徒，皋陶为李，后稷为田。此四士者，天下之贤人也，犹尚精一德以事其君。
现代文：我想了想先王的情况，舜有天下的时候，禹为司空，契为司徒，皋陶为治狱的官，后稷为农业的官；这四人都是天下的贤人，还仅只各精一事服务于君主。
English: I thought about the situation of the former king. When there was a world, Yu was the steward of the sky, Ji was the steward of the state, Shao Tao was the official of the prison, and Hou Yi was the official of agriculture. These four people were the wise men of the world, and they only served the monarch in their own way.

古文：今诬能之人，服事任官，皆兼四贤之能。
现代文：现在冒充有能的人，做事当官，都是身兼四贤的职责。
English: Now, pretending to be a competent person and working as an official are the responsibilities of the four sages.

古文：自此观之，功名之不立，亦易知也。
现代文：由此看来，功业之不成，也就容易理解了。
English: From this point of view, it is easy to understand why the work is not accomplished.

古文：故列尊禄重，无以不受也；势利官大，无以不从也；以此事君，此所谓诬能篡利之臣者也。
现代文：所以，那些对高爵重禄无不接受，对势利官大无不乐从的人，用这些为君主服务，就是所谓冒充有能、纂取财利的大臣。
English: Therefore, those who do not refuse to accept the high rank and high salary, and who are happy to follow the snobbish officials, and use these to serve the monarch, are the so-called ministers who pretend to be capable and collect money.

古文：世无公国之君，则无直进之士；无论能之主，则无成功之臣。
现代文：世上没有以公治国的君主，就没有以直道求进的士人；没有识别贤能的君主，就没有成就功业的大臣。
English: In the world, if there is no monarch who governs the country with justice, there will be no scholar who advances in a straight line; if there is no monarch who recognizes virtue, there will be no minister who has achieved merit.

古文：昔者三代之相授也，安得二天下而杀之。
现代文：从前三代的授受天下，哪有第二个天下可供营私的呢？
English: From the previous three generations of giving and receiving the world, where is the second world that can be used for business?

古文：贫民伤财，莫大于兵；危国忧主，莫速于兵。
现代文：劳民与伤财，莫过于用兵；危国与伤君，也没有比用兵更快的。
English: There is no faster way to hurt the people and the wealth than to use the army; there is no faster way to endanger the country and to hurt the prince than to use the army.

古文：此四患者明矣，古今莫之能废也。
现代文：这四者之为害是很明显的，但古往今来都不能废除。
English: The harm caused by these four things is very obvious, but they cannot be abolished from ancient times to the present.

古文：兵当废而不废，则古今惑也；此二者不废而欲废之，则亦惑也。此二者伤国一也。
现代文：兵当废而不废，是错误的；兵不当废而废之，也是错误的。这两者之为害于国家，都是一样。
English: It is wrong to scrap soldiers when they should be scrapped, but not to scrap them; it is also wrong to scrap soldiers when they should not be scrapped. Both of these are equally harmful to the country.

古文：黄帝唐虞，帝之隆也，资有天下，制在一人。当此之时也，兵不废。今德不及三帝，天下不顺，而求废兵，不亦难乎？
现代文：黄帝、唐尧、虞舜的盛世，资有天下，权操于一人，这时，兵备都没有废除，现今，德行不及上述三帝，天下又不太平，而求废除兵备，不是太难了么？
English: In the golden age of the Yellow Emperor, the Tang Dynasty, and the Yue Dynasty, when the wealth of the world was concentrated in the hands of a single person and power was concentrated in the hands of a single person, there was no abolition of military reserves. Today, when virtue is not as strong as that of the above-mentioned three emperors and the world is not at peace, is it not too difficult to abolish military reserves?

古文：故明君知所擅，知所患。
现代文：所以，英明的君主懂得应该专务什么，防患什么。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch knows what to focus on and what to prevent.

古文：国治而民务积，此所谓擅也。动与静，此所患也。
现代文：国治而人民注意积蓄，这就是所谓专务的事；动静失宜，这就是所要防患的。
English: To govern the country while the people pay attention to savings, this is the so-called special task; to prevent the ups and downs, this is what we must do.

古文：是故明君审其所擅，以备其所患也。
现代文：因此，明君总是审慎对待所专务的事，而防其所患。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun is always cautious about the things he is dedicated to, and prevents them from happening.

古文：猛毅之君，不免于外难；懦弱之君，不免于内乱。
现代文：猛毅的君主，不免于外患；懦弱的君主，不免于内乱。
English: The strong-willed monarch is not exempt from external disasters; the weak-willed monarch is not exempt from civil unrest.

古文：猛毅之君者轻诛，轻诛之流，道正者不安；道正者不安、则材能之臣去亡矣。
现代文：猛毅的君主轻于杀人，轻杀的流弊，就是使行正道者不安全。行正道者不安全，有才能之臣就要出亡国外。
English: A strong-willed ruler is lighter than a murderer. The evil of light killing is that it makes those who follow the right path insecure. If those who follow the right path are insecure, talented ministers will have to flee abroad.

古文：彼智者知吾情伪，为敌谋我，则外难自是至矣。
现代文：这些智者知道我们的虚实，为敌国谋取我们，外患就从此到来了。
English: These wise men know our falsity and truth, and seek us out for the enemy country, and the foreign plague has come from here.

古文：故曰：猛毅之君，不免于外难。
现代文：所以说：猛毅的君主不免于外患。
English: Therefore, it is said that a strong-willed monarch is not immune to external disasters.

古文：懦弱之君者重诛，重诛之过，行邪者不革；行邪者久而不革，则群臣比周；群臣比周，则蔽美扬恶；蔽美扬恶，则内乱自是起。
现代文：懦弱的君主姑借刑杀，姑惜刑杀的错误，就是使行邪道者不改正；行邪道者久而不改，群臣就结党营私；群臣结党营私，就隐君之善而扬君之恶；隐善扬恶，内乱就从此发生了。
English: The cowardly empress dowager's mistake of using torture and killing and condoning torture and killing is to make the evil-doers not correct themselves; if the evil-doers do not change for a long time, the ministers will form a party to fight against each other; if the ministers form a party to fight against each other, the good of the prince will be concealed and the evil of the prince will be promoted; if the good is concealed and the evil promoted, civil disorder will occur.

古文：故曰：懦弱之君，不免于内乱。
现代文：所以说：懦弱的君主，不免于内乱。
English: Therefore it is said: A weak monarch is not immune to civil strife.

古文：明君不为亲戚危其社稷，社稷戚于亲；不为君欲变其令、令尊于君；不为重宝分其威，威贵于宝；不为爱民亏其法，法爱于民。
现代文：明君不为至亲危害他的国家政权，关怀国家政权甚于关怀至亲；不为个人私欲改变法令，尊重法令甚于尊重人君；不为重宝分让权力，看重权力甚于看重宝物；不为爱民削弱法度，爱法更甚于爱民。
English: The Ming Emperor did not endanger his state power for the sake of his loved ones; he cared more for the state power than for his loved ones; he did not change the law for personal selfishness; he respected the law more than he respected the people; he did not give up power for the sake of the treasure; he valued power more than the treasure; he did not weaken the law for the sake of the people; he loved the law more than he loved the people.

