古文：子谓公冶长： 可妻也，虽在缧绁之中，非其罪也！ 
现代文：孔子谈论到公冶长时，说： 可以把女儿嫁与他为妻，他虽然有过牢狱之灾，但这并不是他的罪过。 
English: When Confucius was talking about Gongye Chang, he said: You can marry your daughter to him. Although he was imprisoned, it was not his fault.

古文：以其子妻之。
现代文：便把自己的女儿嫁给了他。
English: and she gave him her daughter in marriage.

古文：子谓南容： 邦有道不废；邦无道免于刑戮。 
现代文：孔子评论南容时说： 国家政治清明的时候，他入仕为官不会被罢免；国家黑暗的时候，他也可以不被刑罚。 
English: Commenting on Nan Rong, Confucius said: When the country's politics are clear, he will not be removed from office; when the country is dark, he can not be punished.

古文：以其兄之子妻之。
现代文：于是把自己的侄女嫁给了他。
English: So she married her niece to him.

古文：子谓子贱： 君子哉若人！
现代文：孔子评论子贱说： 这个人真是个君子呀！
English: Commenting on Zi Tian, Confucius said: This man is really a gentleman!

古文：鲁无君子者，斯焉取斯？ 
现代文：如果鲁国没有君子的话，他从哪里获得这种好品德的呢？ 
English: If there is no gentleman in Russia, where did he get such a good character?

古文：子贡问曰： 赐也何如？ 
现代文：子贡问孔子说： 我这个人怎么样？ 
English: Zigong asked Confucius: How am I?

古文：子曰： 女器也。 
现代文：孔子说： 你呀好比一个器具。 
English: Confucius said: You are like a tool.

古文：曰： 何器也？ 
现代文：子贡又问： 是什么器具呢？ 
English: Zigong said: What kind of ware is it?

古文：曰： 瑚琏也。 
现代文：孔子说： 祭祀时盛粮食的瑚琏。 
English: Confucius said, "The fireflies in the ancestral temple are beautiful.

古文：或曰： 雍也仁而不佞。 
现代文：有人说： 冉雍这个人有仁德，但是没有什么口才。 
English: Some people said: "This person, Ran Yong, has benevolence, but no eloquence.

古文：子曰： 焉用佞？
现代文：孔子说： 为什么一定要有口才呢？
English: Confucius said, "Why do you have to be eloquent?

古文：御人以口给，屡憎于人。
现代文：伶牙利齿的和他人争辩顶嘴，会被人讨厌。
English: Someone with a sharp tongue who argues with others and talks back will be disliked.

古文：不知其仁，焉用佞？ 
现代文：我不知道他是否可称得上仁，但为什么要有口才呢？ 
English: I don't know if he can be called a gentleman, but why does he have to be eloquent?

古文：子使漆雕开仕，对曰： 吾斯之未能信。 
现代文：孔子让漆雕开入仕做官。漆雕开回答说： 我对做官这件事还没有信心。 
English: Confucius asked Urushi Chokai to become an official. Urushi Chokai replied, "I don't have the confidence to become an official."

古文：子说。
现代文：孔子听了很高兴。
English: Confucius was very pleased to hear this.

古文：子曰： 道不行，乘桴浮于海，从我者其由与？ 
现代文：孔子说： 如果我的主张行不通，我就坐木筏子漂流海外。能跟从我的大概只有仲由吧！ 
English: Confucius said, "If my proposition does not work, I will take a raft and drift overseas. There is probably only one reason why you can follow me."

古文：子路闻之喜，子曰： 由也好勇过我，无所取材。 
现代文：子路听到这话很高兴。孔子说： 仲由勇武过人，他的勇猛甚至超过了我。但不善于裁夺事理。 
English: Zilu was very happy to hear this. Confucius said, "Nakayo is very brave, his bravery is even greater than mine, but he is not good at handling things.

古文：孟武伯问： 子路仁乎？ 
现代文：孟武伯问孔子： 子路算得上有仁德吗？ 
English: Meng Wubo asked Confucius: Can a path be said to have benevolence?

古文：子曰： 不知也。 
现代文：孔子说： 不知道。 
English: Confucius said, "I don't know."

古文：又问，子曰： 由也，千乘之国，可使治其赋也，不知其仁也。  求也何如？ 
现代文：孟武伯又问一遍。孔子说： 仲由啊，一个具备千辆兵车的大国，可以让他去负责军事。至于他有没有仁德，我就不知道了。 又问： 冉求怎么样？ 
English: Meng Wu Bo asked again. Confucius said, "Nakayu, a big country with a thousand chariots can put him in charge of military affairs. As for whether he has benevolence, I don't know." He also asked, "What about Ran Kui?"

古文：子曰： 求也，千室之邑、百乘之家，可使为之宰也，不知其仁也。 
现代文：孔子说： 冉求呢，一个千户规模的大邑，一个具备兵车百辆的大夫封地，可以让他当总管。至于他的仁德，我弄不清。 
English: Confucius said, "If you ask me, a large town of a thousand households, a doctor's fiefdom with a hundred chariots, can make him the general manager. As for his benevolence, I don't know.

古文： 赤也何如？ 
现代文：孟武伯继续问： 公西赤怎么样？ 
English: Meng Wubo continued to ask: What about Gongxi Red?

古文：子曰： 赤也，束带立于朝，可使与宾客言也，不知其仁也。 
现代文：孔子说： 赤呀，穿上礼服，站在朝廷上，可以让他和宾客会谈。我也不知道他是不是做到了仁。 
English: Confucius said: Red, put on a ceremonial robe and stand in the imperial court, you can let him talk to guests. I don't know if he did it.

古文：子谓子贡曰： 女与回也孰愈？ 
现代文：孔子对子贡说： 你和颜回两个相比，谁好些？ 
English: Confucius said to Zigong, "Compared to the two of you, who is better?

古文：对曰： 赐也何敢望回？
现代文：子贡回答说： 我怎么能和颜回相比！
English: Zigong replied, "How can I be compared to Yan Hui!

古文：回也闻一以知十，赐也闻一以知二。 
现代文：颜回他听到一件事就可以推知十件事；我知道一件事，只能推知两件事。 
English: Yan Hui heard one truth and was able to deduce ten truths. I heard one truth and was able to deduce two truths.

古文：子曰： 弗如也，吾与女弗如也！ 
现代文：孔子说： 你是不如他，我和你都不如他啊！ 
English: Confucius said, "You are not as good as him, and neither I nor you are as good as him!"

古文：宰予昼寝，子曰： 朽木不可雕也，粪土之墙不可圬也，于予与何诛？ 
现代文：宰予白天睡觉。孔子说： 腐烂的木头不堪雕刻，烂草加泥巴垒成的墙无法粉刷。对于宰予，还能再苛求什么呢！ 
English: Confucius said: "Rotten wood cannot be carved, and a wall made of rotten grass and mud cannot be painted. What more can be asked of Zhaiyao?"

古文：子曰： 始吾于人也，听其言而信其行；今吾于人也，听其言而观其行。
现代文：孔子说： 以前我对人的态度，是听了他的话便相信他的行为；现在我对人的态度，是听了他的话还要观察他的行为。
English: Confucius said: In the past, my attitude toward a person was to listen to his words and believe in his actions; now my attitude toward a person is to listen to his words and observe his actions.

古文：于予与改是。 
现代文：我是因宰予的表现而改变了对人的态度的。 
English: I changed my attitude towards people because of my performance.

古文：子曰： 吾未见刚者。 
现代文：孔子说： 我还没有见过刚强不屈的人。 
English: Confucius said, "I have yet to meet a person who is unyielding."

古文：或对曰： 申枨。 
现代文：有人回答说： 申枨就是。 
English: One person replied: "It's the same as shen xiao zong."

古文：子曰： 枨也欲，焉得刚？ 
现代文：孔子说： 申枨的欲望太多，怎么能刚毅不屈？ 
English: Confucius said, "If one's desires are too much, how can one be unyielding?"

古文：子贡曰： 我不欲人之加诸我也，吾亦欲无加诸人。 
现代文：子贡说： 我不愿别人把事情强加在我的身上，我也不愿把事情强加在别人身上。 
English: Zigong said, "I don't want others to impose things on me, and I don't want to impose things on others.

古文：子曰： 赐也，非尔所及也。 
现代文：孔子说： 赐呀，这不是你可以做得到的。 
English: Confucius said, "Granted, this is not something you can do.

古文：子贡曰： 夫子之文章，可得而闻也；夫子之言性与天道，不可得而闻也。 
现代文：子贡说： 老师关于《诗》《书》《礼》《乐》等古代文献方面知识的讲述，我们能够听得到；老师关于天性和天道的言论，我们听不到。 
English: Zigong said: We can listen to the teacher's talk about the knowledge of ancient literature such as "Poetry," "Book," "Rite" and "Music"; we cannot listen to the teacher's speech about nature and heaven.

古文：子路有闻，未之能行，唯恐有闻。
现代文：子路听了做人处事的道理，但没有能亲自实践的时候，便害怕又听到新的道理。
English: If you don't act immediately when you hear one thing, you'll hear something else.

古文：子贡问曰： 孔文子何以谓之文也？ 
现代文：子贡问道： 孔文子的谥号为什么是 文 ？ 
English: Zigong asked: Why is Confucius's nickname "Wen"?

古文：子曰： 敏而好学，不耻下问，是以谓之文也。 
现代文：孔子说： 他天资聪明而又好学的人，不以向地位比自己低、学识比自己差的人请教为耻，所以给他谥号叫 文 。 
English: Confucius said: He was a gifted, clever and studious person, and he was not ashamed to ask for advice from people with lower status and less knowledge than himself, so he was given the nickname Wen.

古文：子谓子产： 有君子之道四焉：其行己也恭，其事上也敬，其养民也惠，其使民也义。 
现代文：孔子评论子产说： 他有四个方面符合君子的标准：他自己言行谨重，事奉君主恭敬，养护百姓有恩惠，征募使用百姓公正合理。 
English: Commenting on Zi Yuan, Confucius said: There are four aspects of him that meet the standards of a gentleman: his own words and deeds are honorable, he serves the monarch respectfully, he protects the people with grace, and he recruits and uses the people fairly and reasonably.

古文：子曰： 晏平仲善与人交，久而敬之。 
现代文：孔子说： 晏平仲擅长与人交朋友，时间久了，大家都很尊敬他。 
English: Confucius said: Zou Pingzhong is good at making friends with people. It has been a long time, and everyone respects him.

古文：子曰： 臧文仲居蔡，山节藻棁，何如其知也？ 
现代文：孔子说： 臧文仲为产自蔡地的大乌龟盖了一间房子，中有雕刻成山形的斗拱和画着藻草的梁柱，他这个人怎么能算是有智慧呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "How can it be said that Gong Wenzhong is a man of wisdom when he has built a house for the giant tortoise from Cai Di, with a mountain-shaped arch and pillars painted with algae?

古文：子张问曰： 令尹子文三仕为令尹，无喜色，三已之无愠色，旧令尹之政必以告新令尹，何如？ 
现代文：子张问孔子说： 子文几次担任令尹的职务，没有显出高兴的样子；几次被免职，也没有显出怨恨的样子。
English: Zi Zhang asked Confucius: Several times Zi Wen held the post of Ling Yin, he did not show any joy; several times he was dismissed from his post, he did not show any resentment.

古文：子曰： 忠矣。 
现代文：一定把自己的一切政事全部告诉给来接任的人。他这个人怎么样？ 
English: He must tell all his political affairs to the person who takes over. What is he like?

古文：曰： 仁矣乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 可算算得上是对国家尽忠了。 
English: Zhang Zi said, "Can you be considered to have benevolence?

古文：曰： 未知，焉得仁？ 
现代文：子张问： 算得上是仁德了吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "I don't know, how can this be regarded as benevolence?"

古文： 崔子弑齐君，陈文子有马十乘，弃而违之。
现代文：孔子说： 不知道。
English: Confucius said: I don't know.

古文：至于他邦，则曰： 犹吾大夫崔子也。 
现代文：这怎么能算仁呢？ 子张又问： 崔杼杀了他的君主齐庄公，陈文子有四十匹马，他都丢弃不要，就离开了。
English: How can this be regarded as benevolence? Zi Zhang asked again, "Cui Xuan killed his sovereign, Qi Zhuang, and Chen Wenzi had forty horses. He did not want to discard them, so he left."

古文：违之。之一邦，则又曰： 犹吾大夫崔子也。 
现代文：到了另一个国家，说： 这里的执政者和我国的崔子差不多 ，又离开了。
English: When he arrived in another country, he said, "The ruler here is almost the same as Cui Zi of our country," and left again.

古文：违之，何如？ 子曰： 清矣。 
现代文：再到了一国，说： 这里的执政者和我国的崔子差不多 ，还是离开了。这人怎么样？ 孔子说： 很清高。 
English: When he came to another country, he said, "The ruler here is almost the same as Cui Zi of our country, but he has left. How is this person?" Confucius said, "He is very bright and tall."

古文：曰： 仁矣乎？ 
现代文：子张说： 算得上有仁德吗？ 
English: Zhang Zi said, "Can you be considered to have benevolence?

古文：曰： 未知，焉得仁？ 
现代文：孔子说： 不知道，这怎么能算有仁德呢？ 
English: Confucius said, "I don't know, how can this be regarded as benevolence?"

古文：季文子三思而后行，子闻之曰： 再斯可矣。 
现代文：季文子每次做事的时候都要考虑很多次才行动。孔子听到了，说： 考虑两次就可以了。 
English: Confucius heard this and said, "You only need to think twice."

古文：子曰： 宁武子，邦有道则知，邦无道则愚。
现代文：孔子说： 宁武子这个人，当国家政治清明时，他就显得聪明，当国家政治黑暗时，他就装得很愚笨。
English: Confucius said: Ning Wuzi, when the national politics are clear, he appears to be clever, but when the national politics are dark, he pretends to be stupid.

古文：其知可及也，其愚不可及也。 子在陈，曰： 归与！
现代文：他的那种聪明别人可以做得到，他的那种装傻别人就做不到了。 孔子在陈国说： 回去吧！
English: His kind of cleverness can be done by others, but his kind of pretending to be stupid cannot be done by others.Confucius said in the State of Chen: Go back!

古文：归与！
现代文：回去吧！
English: Go back!

古文：吾党之小子狂简，斐然成章，不知所以裁之。 
现代文：家乡的那帮学生志向远大而行为粗疏；文采尚可但还不知道怎样来节制自己。 
English: The students in my hometown are ambitious but rude; they are literate but don't know how to control themselves.

古文：子曰： 伯夷、叔齐不念旧恶，怨是用希。 
现代文：孔子说： 伯夷、叔齐两个人不记往日仇怨，因此，别人对他们的怨恨也很少。 
English: Confucius said, "Bo Yi and Uncle Qi are two people who do not remember past grudges, so there is little resentment towards them.

古文：子曰： 孰谓微生高直？
现代文：孔子说： 谁说微生高这个人直率？
English: Confucius said, "Who says that the man with a high birth weight is straightforward?

古文：或乞醯焉，乞诸其邻而与之。 
现代文：有人向他讨点醋，他不直说没有，却暗地到他邻居家里讨了点给人家。 
English: Someone asked him for some vinegar. He didn't say no, but secretly went to his neighbor's house to ask for some.

古文：子曰： 巧言、令色、足恭，左丘明耻之，丘亦耻之。
现代文：孔子说： 花言巧语，表面伪善，用过分恭敬的态度接近别人，左丘明认为这种人可耻，我也这么认为。
English: Confucius said: Flattery, hypocrisy on the surface, approaching others with excessive respect, Zuo Qiuming thinks that such people are shameful, and I also think so.

古文：匿怨而友其人，左丘明耻之，丘亦耻之。 
现代文：把仇恨藏在心里，表面上却装出友好的样子，左丘明认为这种人可耻，我也这样认为。 
English: Zuo Qiuming thought it was shameful for a person to hide hatred in his heart and pretend to be friendly on the surface, and I also think so.

古文：颜渊、季路侍，子曰： 盍各言尔志？ 
现代文：颜渊、季路站在孔子身边。孔子说： 为什么不说说你们的愿望呢？ 
English: Yan Yuan and Qi Lu stood next to Confucius. Confucius said, "Why don't you talk about your wishes?"

古文：子路曰： 愿车马衣轻裘，与朋友共，敝之而无憾。 
现代文：子路说： 我希望将车马、轻软的皮衣都拿出来，与朋友们共同享用，即使用坏了也不懊恼。 
English: Zi Lu said, "I hope to take out my car, horse, and light and soft fur coat and enjoy them with my friends. Even if they are broken, I won't be upset.

古文：颜渊曰： 愿无伐善，无施劳。 子路曰： 愿闻子之志。 
现代文：颜渊说： 我希望做到不夸耀自己的长处，不把劳苦的事情施加在别人身上。 子路说： 您的愿望是什么呢？ 
English: Yan Yuan said, "I hope to achieve the goal of not boasting about my strengths, and not imposing my hard work on others." Zilu said, "What is your wish?"

古文：子曰： 老者安之，朋友信之，少者怀之。 
现代文：孔子说： 使年老的人得到安乐，使朋友相互信任，使年少的人得到关怀。 
English: Confucius said: Let the old be at ease, let friends trust each other, and let the young be cared for.

古文：子曰： 已矣乎！吾未见能见其过而内自讼者也。 
现代文：孔子说： 算了吧，我还没有看见过能够看到自己的错误便能自我责备的人。 
English: Confucius said: Come to think of it, I have yet to see a person who can see his own mistakes and then blame himself.

古文：子曰： 十室之邑，必有忠信如丘者焉，不如丘之好学也。 
现代文：孔子说： 即使只有十户人家的地方，也一定有像我这样讲忠信的人，只是赶不上我这样好学罢了。 
English: Confucius said, "Even if there are only ten families in a place, there must be people like me who are loyal, but they are not as eager to learn as I am."

