古文：圣水出上谷，故燕地，秦始皇二十三年，置上谷郡。
现代文：圣水发源于上谷，上谷是旧时燕国的领土，秦始皇二十三年前，在这里设置上谷郡。
English: The holy water originated in Shanggu, which was the territory of Yan in the old days. Twenty-three years ago, Qin Shihuang set up Shanggu County here.

古文：王隐《晋书地道志》曰：郡在谷之头，故因以上谷名焉。
现代文：王卿《晋书•地道志》说：郡治在河谷的上头，因此以上谷为郡名。
English: Wang Xing's "Jinshu•Jidoshi" said: the county seat is at the top of the valley, so the name of the county comes from the upper valley.

古文：王莽更名朔调也。
现代文：王莽时改名朔调郡。
English: Wang Mangshi changed the name to Shuo County.

古文：水出郡之西南圣水谷，东南流径大防岭之东首，山下有石穴，东北洞开，高广四五丈，入穴转更崇深，穴中有水。
现代文：圣水发源于该郡西南的圣水谷，往东南流经大防岭东端。山下有个石洞，洞口朝向东北，高、宽都有四五丈，进洞后变得更高了，直向纵深伸展，洞中有水。
English: The holy water originates from the holy water valley in the southwest of the county and flows southeast through the eastern end of the Great Defense Ridge. There is a stone cave at the bottom of the mountain. The cave entrance faces northeast, and is four or five meters high and wide. After entering the cave, it becomes higher, and extends straight to the depth, and there is water in the cave.

古文：耆旧传言，昔有沙门释惠弥者，好精物隐，尝篝火寻之，傍水入穴三里，有余穴分为二：一穴殊小，西北出，不知趣诣；一穴西南出，入穴经五六日方还，又不测穷深。
现代文：据老人相传，过去有个叫惠弥的和尚，对隐秘的事物喜欢寻根究底，曾举着火把去探寻。顺着水流走了三里多，洞穴一分为二：一个很小，向西北延伸，不知通到哪里；另一个通向西南，进去走了五六天还不见尽头，只好回来，也不知到底有多探。
English: According to the old man's legend, in the past there was a monk named Huiya, who liked to dig deep into hidden things, and he used to hold a torch to explore. He walked more than three miles along the water stream, and the cave was divided into two: one was small, extending to the northwest, and he didn't know where it led; the other led to the southwest, and he went in for five or six days without seeing the end, so he had to come back, and he didn't know how far he could explore.

古文：其水夏冷冬温，春秋有白鱼出穴，数日而返，人有采捕食者，美珍常味，盖亦丙穴嘉鱼之类也。
现代文：洞里的水冬暖夏凉，春秋季节洞内有白鱼游出，几天后又游回洞内，有人捕到这种鱼吃过，异常鲜美，大概也是丙穴嘉鱼一类。
English: The water in the cave is warm in winter and cool in summer. In the spring and autumn, white fish swim out of the cave and swim back into the cave a few days later. Some people have caught and eaten this kind of fish, which is extremely delicious. It is probably also a kind of Bixianjia fish.

古文：是水东北流入圣水。
现代文：水往东北流，注入圣水。
English: The water flows to the northeast, injecting holy water.

古文：圣水又东径玉石山，谓之玉石口，山多珉玉、燕石，故以玉石名之。
现代文：圣水又往东流经玉石山，那山口叫玉石日。因山上多氓玉、燕石，因此以玉石为名。
English: The holy water also flows eastward through the Jade Mountain, and the mountain pass is called Jade Day. Because there are many jade and swallow stones on the mountain, it is named after jade.

古文：其水伏流里余，潜源东出，又东。
现代文：圣水到了这里潜入地下流了一里多，又在东边流出地面。
English: When the holy water arrived here, it flowed underground for more than a mile, and then flowed out of the ground in the east.

古文：颓波泻涧，一丈有余，屈而南流也。
现代文：水继续向东流去，从一丈多高的山涧泻下，折向南流。
English: The water continued to flow to the east, sinking down from the high mountains and turning to the south.

古文：东过良乡县南，圣水南流，历县西转，又南径良乡县故城西，王莽之广阳也，有防水注之，水出县西北大防山南，而东南流径羊头阜下，俗谓之羊头溪。其水又东南流，至县东入圣水。
现代文：往东流过良乡县南面，圣水往南流经良乡县，折向西边，又南流，从良乡县旧城西面流过―良乡县就是王莽时的广阳县―有防水注入。防水发源于良乡县西北的大防山南麓，往东南从羊头阜下流过，俗称羊头溪；又往东南流，到了县城往东注入圣水。
English: Flowing eastward through the south of Liangxiang County, the holy water flows southward through Liangxiang County, turns westward, and flows south again, flowing from the west of the old city of Liangxiang County - Liangxiang County is Guangyang County at the time of Wang Mang - with waterproofing injection. Waterproofing originates from the south foot of Daboshan in the northwest of Liangxiang County, flowing southeast from Yangtoufu, commonly known as Yangtou Creek; it also flows southeast, injecting holy water to the east of the county seat.

古文：圣水又南与乐水合，水出县西北大防山南，东南流，历县西而东南流注圣水。
现代文：圣水又往南流，与乐水汇合。乐水发源于良乡县西北的大防山南麓，往东南流经县西，流向东南注入圣水。
English: The holy water then flows southward to meet the holy water. The holy water originates from the southern foot of Mount Dafo in the northwest of Liangxiang County, flows southeast through the west of the county, and flows southeast to infuse the holy water.

古文：圣水又东径其县故城南，又东径圣聚南，盖藉水而怀称也。
现代文：圣水又往东流经旧县城南面，又往东流经圣聚南面。圣聚就是因圣水而得名的。
English: The holy water also flows eastward through the southern part of the old county seat, and eastward through the southern part of Shengju. Shengju is named after the holy water.

古文：又东与侠河合，水出良乡县西甘泉原东谷，东径西乡县故城北，王莽之移风也，世谓之都乡城。
现代文：圣水又东流，与侠河汇合。侠河发源于良乡县西部的甘泉原东谷，往东流经西乡县旧城北面，就是王莽时的移风，世人称都乡城。
English: The holy water also flows eastward, merging with the Xiaohe River. The Xiaohe River originates in the east valley of the Ganquan Plain in the west of Liangxiang County, and flows eastward through the north of the old city of Xixiang County, which is the wind of Wang Mang, known to the world as the capital city.

古文：案《地理志》，涿郡有西乡县而无都乡城，盖世传之非也。
现代文：据《地理志》，琢郡有个西乡县，却没有都乡城，这大概是世间口头相传造成的错误。
English: According to "Geography," there is a Xixiang County in Taku County, but there is no capital town, which is probably a mistake caused by the world's oral tradition.

古文：又东径良乡城南，又东北注圣水，世谓之侠活河，又名之曰非理之沟也。
现代文：侠河又往东流，经良乡城南，又往东北注入圣水，世人称为侠活河，又叫非理之沟。
English: The Chivalry River also flows eastward, passing through Liangxiang, south of the city, and injecting holy water to the northeast. The world is known as the Chivalry River, also known as the Irrational Ditch.

古文：又东过阳乡县北，圣水自涿县东与桃水合，水首受涞水于徐城东南良乡，西分垣水，世谓之南沙沟，即桃水也。
现代文：又往东流过阳乡县北面，圣水从琢县东流与桃水汇合。桃水上口承接沫水。沫水在徐城东南面、良乡西面分出一条垣水，世人称为南沙沟，这就是桃水。
English: It also flows eastward through the north of Yangxiang County, and the holy water flows from the east of Tuo County to the confluence with the peach water. The mouth receives the foam water on the peach water. The foam water separates a walled water in the southeast of Xucheng and the west of Liangxiang, which is known to the world as the Nansha ditch. This is the peach water.

古文：东径逎县北，又东径涿县故城下与涿水合，世以为涿水，又亦谓之桃水，出涿县故城西南奇沟东八里大坎下，数泉同发，东径桃仁墟北，或曰因水以名墟，则是桃水也，或曰终仁之故居，非桃仁也。
现代文：桃水往东流经遒县北面，又往东流经琢县旧城下与琢水汇合。世人把它叫琢水，又称桃水，发源于琢县旧城西南奇沟东八里的大坎下，几处源泉一同涌出，往东流经桃仁墟北面。有人说桃仁墟是因水而得名，那么此水就是桃水了；也有人说这原是终仁的故居，不是桃仁。
English: The peach water flows eastward through the north of Min County, and then eastward through the old town of Taku County and merges with Taku Water. The world calls it Taku Water, also known as peach water. It originates in the old town of Taku County, southwest of Qigou, east of the Great Canal, and several sources gush out together. It flows eastward through the north of Taojin Market. Some people say that Taojin Market is named after water, so this water is peach water; others say that this was originally the former residence of Shaoren, not Taojin.

古文：余案《地理志》，桃水上承涞水，此水所发，不与《志》同，谓终为是。
现代文：我按《地理志》，桃水上承沫水，但这条水发源与《地理志》所说不同，说终仁才对。
English: According to the "Geography," the peach water is the source of the foaming water, but the source of this water is different from that of the "Geography," and it is right to say that benevolence is the end.

古文：又东北与乐堆泉合，水出堆东，东南流注于涿水。
现代文：此水又往东北流，与乐堆泉汇合。乐堆泉发源于乐堆东面，往东南注入琢水。
English: This water flows to the northeast and merges with the Le Dui Spring. The Le Dui Spring originates from the eastern side of the Le Dui and injects melted water to the southeast.

古文：涿水又东北径涿县故城西注于桃。
现代文：琢水又往东北经过琢县旧城西流，注入桃水。
English: The Taku River flows to the northeast through the west stream of the old town of Taku County, injecting peach water.

古文：应劭曰：涿郡，故燕，汉高帝六年置，其南有涿水郡，盖氏焉。
现代文：应肋说：琢郡，原属燕国，汉高祖六年在此设置琢郡，郡南有琢水，琢郡就是按水来命名的。
English: Ying Li said: Taku County, originally belonged to Yan Guo, Henkel's ancestor set up Taku County here for six years, there is Taku water in the south of the county, and Taku County is named after water.

古文：阚駰亦言是矣。
现代文：阐胭也这样说。
English: This was also said by Ye Xuanqin.

古文：今于涿城南无水以应之，所有惟西南有是水矣。
现代文：现在琢城南面却没有相应的水，只有西南面这条水。
English: Now, there is no corresponding water on the south side of Takushiro, only this water on the southwest side.

古文：应劭又云：涿水出上谷涿鹿县，余案涿水自涿鹿东注漯水。
现代文：应肋又说：琢水发源于上谷琢鹿县，我查过琢水是在琢鹿县东边注入漂水的。
English: Ying Li also said: "Tuolu water originates from Shanggu, Tuolu County. I have checked that the water is drained from the east of Tuolu County.

古文：漯水东南径广阳郡与涿郡分水，汉高祖六年，分燕置涿郡，涿之为名；当受涿水通称矣，故郡、县氏之。
现代文：漂水往东南流经广阳郡，与琢郡以水为分界。汉高祖六年分出燕地另设琢郡。以琢字为郡名，应当是根据琢水，所以郡和县都是因水而得名的。
English: Drifting water flows to the southeast through Guangyang County, and is separated from Taku County by water. In the sixth year of the founder of the Han Dynasty, Yan Di was separated to create Taku County. The word Taku for the county name should be based on Taku Water, so both the county and the county are named after water.

古文：又东，洛水注之，水上承鸣泽渚，渚方十五里。汉武帝元封四年，行幸鸣泽者也。服虔曰：泽名，在逎县北界。
现代文：照此推断，也许出入不大，但究竟不是稳妥的说法。桃水又往东流经琢县老城北面，王莽时改名为垣翰，晋泰始元年出巡鸣泽。服虔说：这是个泽名，在遒县北部边界，指的就是这片沼泽。
English: According to this deduction, there may not be much difference, but it is not a safe statement. The peach water flows eastward through the north of the old city of Taku County. Wang Mangshi changed his name to Gakihan, and Jin Tai began the first year of the year with a tour of Mingze. Fuxian said: This is a Ze name, in the northern border of the county, it refers to this swamp.

古文：即此泽矣。西则独树水注之，水出逎县北山，东入渚。北有甘泉水注之，水出良乡西山，东南径西乡城西，而南注鸣泽渚。
现代文：鸣泽西面又有独树水注入，独树水发源于遒县北山，东流注入泽中；北有甘泉水注入，甘泉水发源于良乡县的西山，往东南流经西乡城西面，往南注入鸣泽诸。
English: The single-tree water originates from Beishan in Handan County and flows eastward into the middle of the lake. In the north, there is sweet spring water. The sweet spring water originates from Xishan in Liangxiang County and flows southeastward through the west side of Xixiangcheng and southward into the middle of the lake.

古文：渚水东出为洛水，又东径西乡城南，又东径垣县而南入垣水。
现代文：从鸣泽诸往东流出的叫洛水，往东流经西乡城南面，又往东流经垣县，往南注入垣水。
English: The so-called Luo water, which flows eastward from Mingze, flows eastward through the south of Xixiangcheng, and eastward through Qixian, and southward into Qixian.

古文：垣水又东径涿县北，东流注于桃。
现代文：垣水又往东流经琢县北面，东流注入桃水。
English: The backwater flows eastward through the northern part of Taku County, and the eastward flow injects peach water.

古文：故应劭曰：垣水东入桃。
现代文：因此应动说：垣水东流注入桃水。
English: Therefore, it should be said: the east stream of the hedge water is infused with peach water.

古文：阚駰曰：至阳乡注之。
现代文：阐胭也说：垣水流到阳乡注入桃水。
English: Elucidation also said: the flow of water from the hedge to Yangxiang is injected with peach water.

古文：今案经脉而不能届也。
现代文：现在按照典籍探寻水道，却不能到达阳乡。
English: Now they are searching for waterways according to the classics, but they cannot reach Yangxiang.

古文：桃水东径阳乡，东注圣水。
现代文：桃水往东流入阳乡，往东注入圣水。
English: The peach water flows eastward into Yangxiang, and the holy water is injected eastward.

古文：圣水又东，广阳水注之，水出小广阳西山，东径广阳县故城北；又东，福禄水注焉。
现代文：圣水又东流，汇合了广阳水。广阳水发源于小广阳西山，往东流经广阳县老城北面，又东流，福禄水注入。
English: The holy water also flows to the east, merging with the Guangyang water. The Guangyang water originates from the small West Mountain of Guangyang, flows eastward through the north of the old city of Guangyang County, and flows to the east, where it is infused with the holy water.

古文：水出西山，东南径广阳县故城南，东入广阳水，乱流东南至阳乡县，右注圣水。
现代文：福禄水发源于西山，往东南流经广阳县老城南面，往东注入广阳水，乱流往东南到阳乡县，向右注入圣水。
English: The Fulou Water originates from the West Mountain, flows southeast through the south of the old city of Guangyang County, and injects Guangyang Water to the east. The turbulent flow goes southeast to Yangxiang County, and injects holy water to the right.

古文：圣水又东南径阳乡城西，不径其北矣。县，故涿之阳亭也。
现代文：圣水又往东南流经阳乡县城西面，并不经过城北：阳乡县，原是旧时琢县的阳亭。
English: The holy water also flows southeast through the west side of the city of Yangxiang County, and does not pass through the north of the city: Yangxiang County, which was originally the Yangting of old Zhituo County.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：涿县东五十里有阳乡亭，后分为县。
现代文：《地理志风俗记》说：琢县东边五十里有阳乡亭，后来划分出来设置为县。
English: "Geography and Customs" said: There are 50 Yangxiang pavilions in the east of Taku County, which were later divided and set up as counties.

古文：王莽时，更名章武，即长乡县也。
现代文：王莽时改名为章武，就是长乡县。
English: When Wang Mang changed his name to Zhang Wu, it was Changxiang County.

古文：案《太康地记》，涿有长乡而无阳乡矣。
现代文：按照《太康地记，琢郡有个长乡县，却没有阳乡县。
English: According to "Tai Kang Di Ji," Taku County has a Changxiang County, but no Yangxiang County.

古文：圣水又东径长兴城南，又东径方城县故城北李牧伐燕取方城是也，魏封刘放为侯国。
现代文：圣水又往东流经长兴城南面，又往东流过方城县老城北面，这就是李牧伐燕时夺取的方城。魏时把这地方封给刘放，立为侯国。
English: The holy water also flowed eastward through the south side of Changxing City, and eastward through the north side of the old city of Fangcheng County. This is the Fangcheng that Li Mu captured when felling the Yan. In the Wei Dynasty, this place was given to Liu Fang and established as a vassal state.

古文：圣水又东，左会白祀沟，沟水出广阳县之娄城东，东南流，左合娄城水，水出平地。
现代文：圣水继续东流，在左边与白祀沟汇合。白祀沟从广阳县娄城东面流出，往东南流，在左边与娄城水汇合。
English: The holy water continued to flow eastward, merging on the left with Baishigu ditch. Baishigu ditch flowed out from the east of Lucheng, Guangyang County, and flowed to the southeast, merging with Lucheng water on the left.

古文：导源东南流，右注白祀水，乱流东南径常道城西。
现代文：娄城水从平地涌出，往东南流，从右边注入白祀水，乱流奔向东南，流经常道城西面―这就是原来的乡亭。
English: The Xicheng water gushes out of the flat land and flows to the southeast, and the Baixishui water is injected from the right, the turbulent flow runs to the southeast, and the current flows to the west of the city - this is the original country pavilion.

古文：故乡亭也，西去长乡城四十里，魏少帝璜甘露三年所封也。
现代文：常道城西距长乡城四十里，魏甘露三年，少帝曹磺被封在这里。
English: It is forty miles west of Changxiang City, three years after Wei Kanlu, and the young emperor Caoshuang was sealed here.

古文：又东南入圣水。
现代文：白祀水又往东南流注入圣水。
English: The Baixishui water then flows to the southeast and injects the holy water.

古文：圣水又东南径韩城东。
现代文：圣水又往东南流经韩城东面。
English: The holy water also flows southeast through the eastern side of Hancheng.

古文：《诗。韩奕章》曰：溥彼韩城，燕师所完，王锡韩侯，其追其貊，奄受北国。
现代文：《诗•韩奕》一章说：那广大的韩城，是燕国军队所筑。周王封给韩侯，有追、貂等小国，拥有北方诸国领土。
English: The first chapter of "Poetry • Han Yi" says: The vast Korean city was built by the army of Yan. King Zhou assigned it to Han, and there were small countries such as Tsui and Tong, which owned the territories of the northern countries.

古文：郑玄曰：周封韩侯，居韩城为侯伯，言为猃夷所逼，稍稍东迁也。
现代文：郑玄说：周朝分封韩侯，居留在韩城，称为侯伯，后为俨犹所逼，稍稍向东迁移。
English: Zheng Xuan said: Zhou Dynasty was divided into Han Hou and stayed in Han City, known as Hou Bo. Later, he was forced to move a little to the east by Qiu Yu.

古文：王肃曰：今涿郡方城县有韩侯城，世谓之寒号城，非也。
现代文：王肃说：现在琢郡方城县有韩侯城，世人称为寒号城，这是弄错了。
English: Wang Su said, "Nowadays, there is Hanhou City in Fangcheng County, Taku County. The world calls it Cold Signal City. This is a mistake.

古文：圣水又东南流，右会清淀水，水发西淀，东流注圣水，谓之刘公口也。
现代文：圣水又往东南流，向右流与清淀水汇合。清淀水发源于西淀，东流注于圣水，汇流处叫刘公口。
English: The holy water flows to the southeast and merges with the clear water to the right. The clear water originates from West Yodo, the eastern stream flows into the holy water, and the confluence is called Liu Gongkou.

古文：又东过安次县南，东入于海。
现代文：又往东流过安次县南面，往东注人大海。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Anji County and flows eastward into the sea.

古文：圣水又东径勃海安次县故城南。
现代文：圣水往东流经勃海安次县老城南面。
English: The holy water flows eastward through the southern part of the old town of Bohai Anji County.

古文：汉灵帝中平三年，封荆州刺史王敏为侯国。
现代文：汉灵帝中平三年，把这里封给荆州刺史王敏，立为侯国。
English: In the third year of Hanling Emperor Zhongping, he gave this place to Jingzhou prince Wang Min and established it as a vassal state.

古文：又东南流注于巨马河而不达于海也。
现代文：圣水又往东南流，注入巨马河，并不直接流入大海。
English: The holy water also flows to the southeast, and is injected into the Giant Horse River, and does not flow directly into the sea.

古文：巨马河出代郡广昌县涞山，即涞水也，有二源，俱发涞山，东径广昌县故城南，王莽之广屏矣，魏封乐进为侯国。
现代文：巨马河发源于代郡广昌县的沫山，巨马河就是沫水，有两个源头，都出自沫山。往东流经广昌县老城南面，这就是王莽时的广屏。魏时把这些地方封给乐进，立为侯国。
English: The Giant Horse River originates from Mody Mountain in Guangchang County, Dayi County. The Giant Horse River is the foam water. It has two sources, both from Mody Mountain. It flows eastward through the south of the old city of Guangchang County, which is Wang Mang's Guangping. In the Wei Dynasty, these places were given to Lejin and established as a princely state.

古文：滦水又东北径西射鱼城东南而东北流；又径东射鱼城南，又屈径其城东。
现代文：沫水又往东北流经西射鱼城东南，流向东北，又流经东射鱼城南面，又转弯流过城东。
English: The foam water also flows to the northeast through the southeast of Xizhao Yucheng, flows to the northeast, flows through the south of Xizhao Yucheng, and flows through the east of the city.

古文：《竹书纪年》曰：荀瑶伐中山取穷鱼之丘。
现代文：《竹书纪年》说：荀瑶讨伐中山，夺取穷鱼之丘。
English: The "Chronicle of the Bamboo Cutter" says: The cormorant fights the mid-mountain and captures the hill of the poor fish.

古文：穷、射字相类，疑即此城也，所未详矣。
现代文：穷与射字形相似，可能就是此城，这也难说。
English: It's hard to say, but it's probably this city, which is similar to the arrow shape.

古文：涞水又径三女亭西，又径楼亭北，左属白涧溪，水有二源，合注一川，川石皓然，望同积雪，故以物色受名。
现代文：沫水又流过三女亭西面，又流过楼亭北面，在左岸与白涧溪相通。溪水有两个源头，合流成为一溪，溪石呈白色，望去如同积雪一般，所以溪就以石色而得名了。
English: The foam water also flowed through the west side of Sanjyo-tei and the north side of the pavilion. On the left bank, it connected with Shiranui Creek. The stream water has two sources, and the confluence becomes a stream. The stream stones are white and look like snow, so the stream is named after the stone color.

古文：其水又东北流，谓之石槽水，伏流地下，溢则通津委注，谓之白涧口。
现代文：水又向东北流，名叫石槽水，水到这里潜流到地下，只有水满时才能流通，注人沫水，汇流处叫白涧口。
English: The water also flows to the northeast, called the stone trough water. The water flows underground here, and can only circulate when the water is full, pouring human foam water. The confluence is called the chalk mouth.

古文：涞水又东北，桑谷水注之，水南发桑溪，北注涞水。
现代文：沫水又往东北流，有桑谷水注入。桑谷水发源于南方的桑溪，往北注入沫水。
English: The foam also flows to the northeast and is injected with Mulberry Valley water. Mulberry Valley water originates from Mulberry Creek in the south and is injected with foam to the north.

古文：涞水又北径小黉东，又东径大黉南，盖霍原隐居教授处也。
现代文：沫水又往北流经小簧岭东面，又东转，流经大簧岭南面。这里大概是霍原隐居教学的地方。
English: The foaming water then flows north through the eastern side of the Xiaoling Mountains, and then turns east and flows through the southern side of the Dairen Mountains. This is probably the place where Huo Yuan lived in seclusion and taught.

古文：徐广云：原隐居广阳山，教授数千人，为王浚所害，虽千古世悬，犹表二黉之称，既无碑颂，竟不知定谁居也。
现代文：徐广说：霍原隐居广阳山，教授弟子数千人，后来被王浚所害。虽然时代已经很遥远，至今还留着大簧小簧的名称，但却没有留下碑文颂辞，也就无从肯定到底是谁在这里隐居过了。
English: Xu Guang said: Huo Yuan lived in seclusion on Guangyang Mountain, teaching thousands of disciples, and was later victimized by Wang Jun. Although the era is very distant, it still retains the name of the big reed small reed, but it did not leave an inscription eulogy, so there is no way to be sure who lived in seclusion here.

古文：涞水又东北历紫石溪口与紫水合，水北出圣人城北大亘下，东南流，左会磊砢溪水，盖山崩委涧，积石沦隍，故溪涧受其名矣。
现代文：沫水又往东北流到紫石溪口，与紫水汇合。紫水发源于圣人城北边的大亘山下，在东南流，在左岸汇合磊柯溪水。大概从前此处发生山崩，塌下的乱石堆满溪涧，所以溪水也就因此而得名了。
English: The foaming water flows to the northeast to the mouth of Purple Rock Creek, where it merges with Purple Water. Purple Water originates at the foot of Mt. Dawu on the north side of Sage City. It flows southeast and merges with Lei Ke Creek on the left bank. A landslide probably occurred here in the past, and the rocks that fell down filled the creek bed, which is why the creek got its name.

古文：水出东北，西南流注紫石溪水。
现代文：磊呵溪水发源于东北，流向西南注入紫石溪水。
English: The water of Leihao Creek originates in the northeast, and flows to the southwest to infuse the water of Zishan Creek.

古文：紫石溪水又径圣人城东，又东南，右会檐车水，水出檐车硎，东南流径圣人城南，南流注紫石水，又南注于涞水。
现代文：紫石溪水又流经圣人城东，又往东南流，向右流与檐车水汇合。檐车水发源于檐车删，往东南流经圣人城南面，南流注入紫石水。紫石水又南流注入沫水。
English: The water of Zishi Creek also flows through the east of Sage City, and flows to the southeast, and merges with the water of Yingche to the right. The water of Yingche originates from Yingche, flows to the southeast through the south of Sage City, and the south stream injects the water of Zishi. The water of Yingche also injects the foam water.

古文：涞水又东南径榆城南，又屈径其城东，谓之榆城河。
现代文：沫水又往东南流经榆城县南，又转弯从城东绕过，叫榆城河。
English: The foam also flows southeast through the south of Lucheng County, and turns around from the east of the city, called the Lucheng River.

古文：涞水又南径藏刀山下，层岩壁立，直上干霄，远望崖侧，有若积刀，镮镮相比。咸悉西首。
现代文：沫水又往南流经藏刀山下。藏刀山层岩陡峭耸立，直插云霄，远望好像无数的刀堆在一起，刀环靠着刀环一把把排列着，刀头都朝向西方。
English: The foaming water also flows southwards under the Tibetan sword mountain. The Tibetan sword mountain rock stands steeply, jutting into the sky. Looking into the distance, it looks like countless knives are piled together, the knife ring is lined up against the knife ring, and the knife head is facing west.

古文：涞水东径徐城北，故渎出焉，世谓之沙沟水。又东，督亢沟出焉。
现代文：沫水往东流经徐城北面，有一条旧河道在这里分出，人们称为沙沟水；又东流，分出督亢沟。
English: The foaming water flows eastward through the north of Xucheng. An old river is separated here, and people call it the sand ditch water. It also flows eastward, and is separated by the Duyun ditch.

古文：一水东南流，即督亢沟也；一水西南出，即涞水之故渎矣。
现代文：一条往东南流，就是督亢沟；一条往西南流，就是沫水的旧河道。
English: A southeast-flowing stream is the Duyun ditch; a southwest-flowing stream is the old river channel of the foam.

古文：水盛则长津宏注，水耗则通波潜伏，重源显于逎县，则旧川矣。
现代文：涨水时就长流滚滚；干枯时就潜入地下，到遒县后又重新流出地面，这就是旧河道了。
English: When the water rises, the long stream rolls; when it dries, it sinks into the ground, and when it reaches Jixian, it flows out of the ground again. This is the old river channel.

古文：东过逎县北，涞水上承故渎于县北垂，重源再发，结为长潭，潭广百许步，长数百步，左右翼带涓流，控引众水，自成渊渚。
现代文：往东流过遒县北面，沫水在遒县北部边境承接旧河道，水源重新流出，积聚成为长潭，宽约一百步，长数百步，左七对边接纳了许多小支流，汇集成为深潭。
English: Flowing eastward through the north of Handan County, the foam water undertook the old river at the northern border of Handan County. The water source flowed out again and accumulated into a long pool, about one hundred paces wide and several hundred paces long. The left seven sides received many small tributaries and gathered into a deep pool.

古文：长川漫下十许里，东南流径逎县故城东。
现代文：潭水往下流十来里，往东南流经遒县老城东面。
English: The pond water flows down for ten miles and flows southeast through the eastern part of the old city of Handan County.

古文：汉景帝中三年，以封匈奴降王隆疆为侯国，王莽更名逎屏也。
现代文：汉景帝中元三年前，将这地方封给投降汉朝的匈奴王隆疆，立为侯国，王莽时改名为遒屏。
English: Three years ago in the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Emperor Han Jing gave this place to the Hun King Longjiang, who surrendered to the Han Dynasty, and established it as a vassal state. Wang Mangshi changed the name to Yuping.

古文：谓之巨马河，亦曰渠水也。
现代文：这条水称为巨马河，又叫渠水。
English: This water is called the Giant Horse River, also known as the canal water.

古文：又东南流，袁本初遣别将崔巨业攻固安不下，退还，公孙瓒追击之于巨马水，死者六七千人，即此水也。
现代文：沫水又往东南流，袁本初派遣别将崔巨业去攻打固安，但攻不下来。他退回时，公孙攒追击到巨马水，死了六七千人，说的就是这条水。
English: The foam continued to flow to the southeast. Yuan Benchu sent his general, Cui Jue, to attack Gu'an, but he was unable to take it. When he returned, Gongsun Bao chased him to the Giant Horse Water, where sixty-seven thousand people died. It was this water he was talking about.

古文：又东南径范阳县故城北，易水注之。
现代文：沫水又往东南流经范阳老城北面，易水注入。
English: The foam water also flowed to the southeast through the north of Fanyang Old Town, injecting fresh water.

古文：又东南过容城县北，巨马水又东，郦亭沟水注之，水上承督亢沟水于逎县东，东南流，历紫渊东。
现代文：又往东南流过容城县北面，巨马水又东流，丽肠亭沟水注入。丽吓亭沟上流在遒县东面承接督亢沟水，往东南流经紫渊东边。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the north of Rongcheng County, and the water of the giant horse flows to the east, and the water of the Lijioting ditch is injected. The upstream of the Lijioting ditch takes over the water of the Dugu ditch in the east of Handan County, and flows to the southeast through the east of Ziyuan.

古文：余六世祖乐浪府君，自涿之先贤乡爰宅其阴，西带巨川，东翼兹水，枝流津通，缠络墟圃，匪直田渔之赡可怀，信为游神之胜处也。
现代文：我的六世祖是乐浪太守，从琢县的先贤乡移到水南。住宅西边是巨马水，东面就是这条水，支流相通，弯弯曲曲地在田园间流过，不但有鱼米之富令人怀想，实在也是游览的胜地。
English: My sixth-generation ancestor was the ruler of Lelang. He moved to Suinan from Senxian Township in Taku County. The west side of the house is the Giant Horse Water, and the east side is this water. The tributaries are connected, and they flow through the countryside in a meandering way. Not only is the wealth of fish and rice impressive, but it is also a tourist attraction.

古文：其水东南流，又名之为郦亭沟。
现代文：这条水往东南流，又叫哪亭沟。
English: This water flows to the southeast and is also called the Neatei ditch.

古文：其水又西南转，历大利亭南入巨马水。
现代文：又转向西南，经过大利亭，往南注入巨马水。
English: It also turned to the southwest, passing through Dali Ting and injecting giant horse manure to the south.

古文：又东径容城县故城北。
现代文：巨马水又往东流经容城县老城北面，又东流，督亢沟水注入。
English: The water of the giant horse flowed eastward to the north of the old city of Rongcheng County, and the eastward flow injected the water of Duxungou.

古文：又东，督亢沟水注之，水上承涞水于涞谷，引之则长津委注，遏之则微川辍流，水德含和，变通在我。
现代文：督亢沟水上流在沫谷承接沫水，打开水口放水，便长流直下；堵住水口，就成为一缕细流以至断水。水性和顺，如何加以改造和利用，全靠我们自己。
English: The upstream flow of the Douluo ditch receives the foaming water in the foaming valley, opens the water outlet to release the water, and then flows straight down; if the water outlet is blocked, it becomes a thin stream until the water is cut off. Water quality and smoothness, how to transform and use it, all depend on ourselves.

古文：东南流径逎县北，又东径涿县郦亭楼桑里南，即刘备之旧里也。
现代文：督亢沟水往东南流经遒县北面，又往东流经琢县哪亭楼桑里南面，这就是刘备的故乡。
English: The water of Duyun ditch flows to the southeast through the northern part of Handan County, and flows to the east through the southern part of the southern part of Taku County, which is Liu Bei's hometown.

古文：又东径督亢泽，泽苞方城县，县故属广阳，后隶于涿。
现代文：又往东流经督亢泽，这片沼泽把方城县环抱在里面。方城县原属广阳郡，后来划归琢郡。
English: It also flows eastward through Dokuzawa, and this swamp encircles Fangcheng County. Fangcheng County was originally part of Guangyang County, but was later transferred to Taku County.

古文：《郡国志》曰：县有督亢亭。
现代文：《郡国志》说：方城县有督亢亭。
English: "County National History" said: Fangcheng County's Yudokutei is famous.

古文：孙畅之《述画》有《督亢地图》，言燕太子丹使荆轲赍入秦，秦王杀轲，图亦绝灭。
现代文：孙杨之的《述画》中有督亢地图，说到燕太子丹派荆柯到秦国献图，秦始皇杀了荆柯，图也从此亡佚了。
English: In Sun Yangzhi's "Notes on Painting," there is a map of Du Fu, which says that Yan Taizi Dan sent Jing Ke to Qin to present a map, Qin Shi Huang killed Jing Ke, and the map has since died.

古文：《地理书上古圣贤冢地记》曰，督亢地在涿郡。今故安县南有督亢陌，幽州南界也。
现代文：地理书《上古圣贤家地记》说：督亢在琢郡，现在的故安县南面有督亢陌，是幽州的南界。
English: The geography book "Ancient Records of Saints and Sages" says: Duxun is in Taku County, and there is Duxun Miao in the south of the current An County, which is the southern boundary of Yuzhou.

古文：《风俗通》曰：沆，漭也。
现代文：《风俗通》说：伉，就是浩森。
English: "Fuzoku-tsu" said:, that is, Hao Mori.

古文：言乎淫淫漭漭，无崖际也。
现代文：有烟波浩森无边无际的意思。
English: It means vast and boundless.

古文：沆泽之无水，斥卤之谓也。
现代文：无水的洼地叫沉，就是盐碱地。
English: Waterless depressions are called sink, that is, saline.

古文：其水自泽枝分，东径涿县故城南，又东径汉侍中卢植墓南，又东，散为泽渚，督亢泽也。北屈注于桃水。
现代文：沟水从泽地分支流出，往东流经琢县老城南面，又往东流经汉侍中卢植墓南，又分散东流，形成沼泽，就是督亢泽，向北转弯注入桃水。
English: The ditch water flows out from the branch of the lake, flows eastward through the south of the old town of Taku County, flows eastward through the south of Han Zhi Zhonglu Zhi Tomb, and disperses eastward, forming a swamp, that is, Duyu Lake, turning north to inject peach water.

古文：督亢水又南，谓之白沟水，南径广阳亭西，而南合枝沟，沟水西受巨马河，东出为枝沟，又东注白沟，白沟又南，入于巨马河。
现代文：督亢水又南流，叫白沟水，往南流经广阳亭西面，然后南流汇合了支沟。沟水西头引入巨马河水，向东分出成为支沟，又东流注入白沟。白沟又南流，汇入巨马河。
English: Duxun Water also flows south, called Bai Gou Water, flowing south through the west of Guangyang Pavilion, and then the south stream merges with the branch ditch. The west end of the ditch water is introduced into the water of the Juma River, branching out to the east to become a branch ditch, and the east stream is injected into the Bai Gou. The Bai Gou also flows south, merging into the Juma River.

古文：巨马河又东南径益昌县，护淀水右注之，水上承护陂于临乡县故城西，东南径临乡城南，汉封广阳顷王千云为侯国。
现代文：巨马河又往东南流经益昌县，护淀水从右边注入，护淀水上流在临乡县老城西面承接护破，往东南流经临乡城南。汉时把这地方封给广阳顷王的儿子云，立为侯国。
English: The Giant Horse River also flows southeastward through Yichang County, and the water of the Baoding Lake is injected from the right side. The upstream water of the Baoding Lake flows west of the old town of Linxiang County, and flows southeastward through the south of Linxiang City. In the Han Dynasty, this place was sealed to the son of Guangyang He Wang, Yun, and was established as a vassal state.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：方城南十里有临乡城，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：方城南面十里有临乡城，是一座旧县城。
English: "Geography and Customs" said: There are ten townships south of Fangcheng, and it is an old county seat.

古文：淀水又东南径益昌县故城西，南入巨马水。
现代文：淀水又往东南流经益昌老城西南，流入巨马水。
English: The stagnant water also flows southeast through the southwest of the old city of Yichang and flows into the giant horse water.

古文：巨马水东径益昌县故城南，汉封广阳顷王子婴为侯国，王莽之有秩也。
现代文：巨马水往东流经益昌县老城南面，汉朝把这里封给广阳顷王的儿子婴，立为侯国，就是王莽时的有秩。
English: The giant horse water flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Yichang County. The Han Dynasty assigned this place to the infant son of Guangyang He Wang and established it as a principality, which is the rank of Wang Mangshi.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：方城县东八十里有益昌城，故县也。
现代文：《地理风俗记》说：方城县东八十里有益昌城，是旧时的县城。
English: "Geography and Customs" says: Ulu Changcheng, 80 miles east of Fangcheng County, was the old county seat.

古文：又东，八丈沟水注之，水出安次县东北平地，东南径安次城东，东南径泉州县故城西，又南，右合滹沱河枯沟，沟自安次西北，东径常道城东、安次县故城西，晋司空刘琨所守以拒石勒也。
现代文：巨马水又东流，八丈沟水注入。八丈沟水从安次县东北的平地上涌出，流向东南，经过安次城东面，往东南流经泉州县老城西面，又南流，在右边汇合淖沱河的枯沟。枯沟从安次县西北往东流经常道城以东、安次县老城以西，晋时司空刘垠驻守这里抗击石勒。
English: The water of the Hachijo ditch gushes out from the flat land in the northeast of Anji County, flows to the southeast, passes the east of Anji City, flows to the southeast through the west of the old city of Quanzhou County, and flows south to join the dry ditch of the Wei River on the right side. The dry ditch flows from the northwest of Anji County to the east of the regular road city and west of the old city of Anji County, and the Jinshi Sifu Liu Wei was stationed here to resist Shi Le.

古文：又东南至泉州县西南，东入八丈沟，又南入巨马河，乱流东注也。
现代文：枯沟又往东南流，到了泉州县西南，往东注入八丈沟；八丈沟又往南注入巨马河，乱流往东奔去。
English: The withered ditch flowed to the southeast, reached the southwest of Quanzhou County, and poured into the Hachijo ditch to the east; the Hachijo ditch poured into the Juma River to the south, and the turbulent flow rushed to the east.

古文：又东过勃海东平舒县北，东入于海。
现代文：又往东流过勃海东平舒县北面，往东注人大海。
English: It also flows eastward through the north of Dongpingshu County in the Bohai Sea, and flows eastward into the East China Sea.

古文：《地理志》曰：涞水东南至容城入于河。河，即濡水也，盖互以明会矣。
现代文：《地理志》说：沫水往东南流，到容城入河。 这里所说的河就是濡水，两水相互汇合。
English: "Geography" said: The foam water flows to the southeast and enters the river at Rongcheng. The river mentioned here is wet water, and the two waters converge.

古文：巨马水于平舒城北，南入于滹沱，而同归于海也。
现代文：巨马河从平舒城北面，往南注入滹沱河，合流奔向大海。
English: The Giant Horse River flows from the north of Pingshu City to the south into the Fen River, and the confluence rushes to the sea.

