古文：伯颜伯颜，蒙古八邻部人。
现代文：伯颜，蒙古族八邻部人。
English: Boyan, a member of the Mongolian eight-neighborhood group.

古文：曾祖述律哥图，事太祖，为八邻部左千户。
现代文：曾祖述律哥图，侍奉太祖，为八邻部左千户。
English: There was an ancestor who served the great-grandfather, and there were eight thousand households in the neighborhood.

古文：祖阿剌，袭父职，兼断事官，平忽禅有功，得食其地。
现代文：祖父阿剌，承袭其父职，兼为断事官，平忽禅有功。
English: His grandfather, Grandpa Yan, inherited his father's position and also served as adjudicator. He made great contributions to Pinghu Zen.

古文：父晓古台世其官，从宗王旭烈兀开西域。
现代文：父亲晓古台，承袭祖辈官职，随宗王旭烈兀开拓西域。
English: His father, Xiao Guotai, inherited the official position from his forefathers and explored the western region with King Xu Lijun.

古文：二年七月，拜光禄大夫、中书左丞相。
现代文：伯颜长于西域。至元初年，旭烈兀派伯颜入朝奏陈有关西域事，世祖见他貌言非凡，留在京师。
English: Bo Yan grew up in the western region. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hu Rong sent Bo Yan into the morning to play Chen about the western region. The ancestor saw his extraordinary appearance and stayed in Beijing.

古文：诸曹白事，有难决者，徐以一二语决之。
现代文：同他谈论国事，其言论总是高于朝臣，世祖更加器重，以中书右丞相安童之妹为妻。
English: When discussing state affairs with him, his comments were always higher than those of a courtier, and the founder of the dynasty was even more important. He was married to the sister of Ando, the chancellor of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：众服曰： 真宰辅也。 四年，改中书右丞。
现代文：至元二年七月，拜光禄大夫、中书左丞相。四年改任中书右丞。
English: In July of the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, Baiguanglu became a doctor and the secretary of the Left Division of the Central Secretariat of the Communist Party of China. Four years later, he was appointed the Secretary of the Right Division of the Communist Party of China.

古文：七年，迁同知枢密院事。
现代文：七年调任同知枢密院事。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the Privy Council.

古文：十年春，持节奉玉册立燕王真金为皇太子。
现代文：十年春，朝廷派遣他奉玉册立燕王真金为皇太子。
English: In the spring of the 10th year, the imperial court sent him to appoint Yan Wang Zhenjin as the crown prince.

古文：十一年，大举伐宋，与史天泽并拜中书左丞相，行省荆湖。
现代文：至元十一年，元军大举伐宋，伯颜与史天泽一同拜为中书左丞相，主管荆湖行省事。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army launched a large-scale campaign against the Song Dynasty, and Bo Yan, together with Shi Tianze, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Left, responsible for the administration of Jinghu.

古文：时荆湖、淮西各建行省，天泽言，号令不一，或致败事。
现代文：当时荆湖、淮西各建为行省，史天泽陈奏两省号令不一，可能于政事有损。
English: At that time, Jinghu and Huaixi were each established as a province, and Shi Tianze and Chen Song issued different orders for the two provinces, which may have been detrimental to political affairs.

古文：诏改淮西行省为行枢密院。
现代文：于是朝廷诏改淮西行省为行枢密院。
English: As a result, the imperial edict changed the name of Huaixi Province to Huaixi Privy Council.

古文：天泽又以病，表请专任伯颜，乃以伯颜领河南等路行中书省，所属并听节制。
现代文：天泽因病，上表请伯颜专理行枢密院事。于是令伯颜主管河南等路行中书省。
English: Due to Tianze's illness, the above table asked Bo Yan to be in charge of the Privy Council. Therefore, he ordered Bo Yan to be in charge of Henan and other provinces.

古文：伯颜曰： 吾且飞渡大江，而惮此潢潦耶！ 
现代文：是年七月，伯颜奉命南征，世祖告诫说 ：宋朝初期，曹彬以不好杀人而平定江南，希望你体会朕意，成为本朝的曹彬。 
English: In July of that year, Boyan was ordered to march south, and the ancestor admonished him: In the early days of the Song Dynasty, Cao Bin pacified the south of the Yangtze River by killing people. I hope you will understand my intention and become the Cao Bin of this dynasty.

古文：乃召一壮士，负甲仗，骑而前导，麾诸军毕济。
现代文：至元十一年九月初一，蒙古军会师于襄阳，分三路进军。
English: On the first day of September in the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Mongolian army assembled in Xiangyang and marched in three directions.

古文：癸巳，次盐山，距郢州二十里。
现代文：十三日，伯颜与平章阿术由中路沿汉江直趋郢州，万户武秀为前锋。二十日，进至盐山，距郢州二十里。
English: On the 13th, Bo Yan and Ping Zhang A Shu drove from the middle of the road along the Han River to Bozhou, with Wanyu Wu Xiu as the striker. On the 20th, they entered Yanshan, 20 miles from Bozhou.

古文：郢在汉水北，以石为城，宋人又于汉水南筑新郢，横铁绳，锁战舰，密树桩木水中。
现代文：郢州在汉江北岸，城为石城，宋军又于汉江南岸筑新郢城，铁索横江，水中密插木桩，战舰不能通行。
English: Bozhou is on the north bank of the Han River, and the city is a stone city. The Song Army also built a new Bozhou City on the south bank of the Han River. There are iron cables across the river, and wooden piles are densely embedded in the water. Warships cannot pass through.

古文：下流黄家湾堡，亦设守御之具，堡之西有沟，南通藤湖，至江仅数里。
现代文：下游黄家湾堡亦有防御设施。堡西有沟，南通藤湖，离江仅数里。
English: There are also defensive facilities in the lower reaches of the Huangjiawan Fort. There is a ditch to the west of the fort, and Fujiko to the south, just a few miles from the river.

古文：乃遣总管李庭、刘国杰攻黄家湾堡，拔之，破竹席地，荡舟由藤湖入汉江。
现代文：伯颜遣总管李庭、刘国杰攻取黄家湾堡，破竹席地，乘船由藤湖入汉江。
English: Li Ting and Liu Guojie, the chief commanders of the Boyan Expedition, captured the Hwangjiawan Fort, broke the bamboo seat, and took a boat from the Fuji Lake into the Han River.

古文：诸将请曰： 郢城，我之喉襟，不取，恐为后患。 
现代文：诸将请求进攻郢城，认为郢为咽喉地，不取，恐为后患。
English: The generals requested an attack on Lucheng, believing that Lucheng was a chokepoint. If they did not take it, they feared that it would be a hindrance.

古文：伯颜曰： 用兵缓急，我则知之。
现代文：伯颜不准，指出： 用兵缓急我心中有数。
English: Bo Yan did not approve, pointing out: I have a number of priorities for the use of troops.

古文：伯颜、阿术殿后，不满百骑。
现代文：攻城是下策，大军南征，岂是为夺此一城？ 
English: Attacking the city is the next step, the great army is marching south, is it to capture this city?

古文：十月戊午，行大泽中，郢将赵文义、范兴以骑二千来袭，伯颜、阿术未及介胄，亟还军迎击之。伯颜手杀文义，擒范兴杀之，其士卒死者五百人，生获数十人。
现代文：于是放弃郢城不攻，顺江而下。十月十六日，元军在大泽中行进，宋郢城守将赵文义、范兴率二千骑兵来袭，伯颜、阿术率军士回击，伯颜斩赵文义，擒杀范兴，宋军士卒死五百人，被俘数十人。
English: On October 16th, the Yuan army marched into Osawa, Song and Song's castle guards, Zhao Wenyi and Fan Xing, led 2,000 cavalry to attack, Bo Yan and Ah Zhur led the sergeants to fight back, Bo Yan beheaded Zhao Wenyi, Fan Xing was killed, Song's sergeant died 500 people, and dozens of people were captured.

古文：甲子，次沙洋。
现代文：十月二十二日，元军进至沙洋。
English: On October 22nd, the Yuan army marched into the Sand Sea.

古文：乙丑，命断事官杨仁风招之，不应。
现代文：二十三日，伯颜命断事官杨仁风去招降，宋军不应。
English: On the 23rd, Boyan ordered the adjudicator Yang Renfeng to invite the Song army to surrender.

古文：复使一俘持黄榜、檄文，传赵文义首，入城，招其守将王虎臣、王大用。
现代文：再命一被俘宋士兵持黄榜、檄文及赵文义人头，入城招沙洋宋军守将王虎臣、王大用投降。
English: The captured Song soldiers held the heads of Huangbang, Xingwen and Zhao Wenyi for a second time, and went to the city to recruit the Song military commanders Wang Huchen and Wang Dayong to surrender.

古文：虎臣等斩俘，焚黄榜。
现代文：虎臣等杀死了那个被俘的军士，烧了黄榜。
English: Hu Chen and others killed the captured sergeant and burned the yellow banner.

古文：裨将傅益以水军十七人来降，虎臣等又斩其军之欲降者。
现代文：裨将傅益率水军十七人来降，虎臣等又杀了那些也想投降的人。
English: Fu Yi led the seventeen sailors to surrender, and Hu Zhen and others killed those who also wanted to surrender.

古文：伯颜复命吕文焕招之，又不应。
现代文：伯颜又命吕文焕招降，仍不降。
English: Bo Yan also ordered Lu Wenhuan to offer a surrender, but he still did not surrender.

古文：日暮，风大起，伯颜命顺风掣金汁炮，焚其庐舍，烟焰涨天，城遂破。万户忙古歹生擒虎臣、大用等四人，余悉屠之。
现代文：日暮大风，伯颜命顺风进行攻击，焚毁敌军房舍，城被攻破。万户忙古歹生擒虎臣、大用等四人，其余全被屠杀。
English: At dusk, a strong wind blew, and Bo Yan ordered his men to attack with the wind, burn down the enemy's buildings, and the city was breached. Four members of the family were killed, and the rest were all slaughtered.

古文：丙寅，次新城，令万户帖木儿、史弼列沙洋所馘于城下，射黄榜、檄文于城中以招之。
现代文：二十四日，元军进至新城，令万户帖木儿、史弼将在沙洋所杀宋军的左耳列于城下，又将黄榜、檄文射入城中以招降。
English: On the 24th, the Yuan army marched into Xincheng and ordered Wanhu Timur and Shi Yan to line up the left ears of the Song army killed by Shayang at the foot of the city. They also shot Huangbang and Xingwen into the city to invite them to surrender.

古文：其守将边居谊，邀吕文焕与语。
现代文：守将边居谊请吕文焕说话。
English: The governor invited Lü Wenhuan to speak at the banquet.

古文：丁卯，文焕至城下，飞矢中右臂，奔还。
现代文：二十五日，文焕至城下，城上飞矢中其右臂，忙回本营。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Wen Huan went to the outskirts of the city, but an arrow flew over the city and hit his right arm. He hurried back to the main camp.

古文：戊辰，其总制黄顺逾城出降，即授招讨使，佩以金符，令呼城上军，其部曲即缒城下，居谊邀入城，悉斩之。
现代文：二十六日，宋军守城总制黄顺越城投降，伯颜授他为招讨使，佩金符，令他去招降，其部曲立即缒城而下。边居谊又把他们拦回城内，全数杀死。
English: On the 26th, Huang Shun, the general commander of the Song Army's garrison in Yuecheng, surrendered, and Bo Yan gave him a golden badge as an envoy to invite him to surrender, and he immediately marched down the city. The borderline friendship stopped them from returning to the city and killed them all.

古文：己巳，其副都统制任宁亦降，居谊终不出，乃令总管李庭攻破其外堡，诸军蚁附而登，拔之。余众三千，犹力战而死，居谊举家自焚。
现代文：二十七日，守军副都统制任宁也降，而居谊始终不降。伯颜命总管李庭攻破该城外堡，诸军如蚂蚁般纷纷登城，城破，守军只剩下的三千人还奋力死战，居谊及全家自焚。
English: On the 27th, Ren Ning, the vice-commander of the defending army, also surrendered, but Juyou never surrendered. Li Ting, the general manager of Baiyan, broke through the outer fort of the city, and the armies came to the city like ants and broke the city. The remaining 3,000 defenders fought to the death, and Juyou and his whole family self-immolated.

古文：丁酉，往观汉口形势。
现代文：二十五日，伯颜亲往汉口察看形势。
English: On the 25th, Bo Yan personally went to Hankou to inspect the situation.

古文：宋淮西制置使夏贵等，以战舰万艘，分据要害，都统王达守阳逻堡，京湖宣抚朱礻异孙以游击军扼中流，兵不得进。
现代文：宋淮西制置使夏贵等，以战舰万艘分据要害，都统王达守阳逻堡，京湖宣抚朱祀孙率游击军扼守中流，使元军不得前进。
English: Song Huaixi ordered Xia Gui and others to take 10,000 warships as the key to defend Yangluo Fort, and the King of Tongtong, Zhu Xi and Sun led the guerrilla army to guard the middle stream, so that the Yuan army could not advance.

古文：千户马福建言，沦河口可通沙芜入江，伯颜使觇沙芜口，夏贵亦以精兵守之。
现代文：千户马福报告说，沦河口可通沙芜入江。伯颜派人去察看沙芜口，见夏贵以精兵把守。
English: Chihou Mafu reported that the mouth of the river can be drained into the river. Bo Yan sent someone to inspect the mouth of the river and found that Xia Gui was guarded by elite soldiers.

古文：乃围汉阳军，声言由汉口渡江，贵果移兵援汉阳。
现代文：元军围攻汉阳军，声言要由汉口渡江。夏贵果然调兵支援汉阳。
English: The Yuan army besieged the Hanyang army, claiming to cross the river from Hankou. Xia Gui actually sent troops to support Hanyang.

古文：十二月丙午，军次汉口。
现代文：十二月四日，元军至汉口。
English: On December 4, the Yuan army marched to Hankou.

古文：辛亥，诸将自汉口开坝，引船入沦河，先遣万户阿剌罕以兵拒沙芜口，逼近武矶，巡视阳罗城堡，径趋沙芜，遂入大江。
现代文：九日，诸将自汉口开坝，引船入沦河，先遣万户阿剌罕率兵堵住沙芜口宋军，逼近武矶，巡视阳逻城堡，直趋沙芜，而入大江。
English: On the 9th, the generals from Hankou opened the dam, led the ship into the Nanhe River, and sent Wanhu Ajuhan and his soldiers to block the Song Army at Shajingkou, approaching Wuye, patrolling Yangluo Castle, heading straight for Shajing, and entering the Yangtze River.

古文：有术者来言： 天道南行，金、木相犯，若二星交过，则江可渡。 
现代文：初十，伯颜战舰数以万计相继入江，以数千艘停泊于沦河湾口；又将蒙古、汉军共数十万骑部署于江北，令修整军械，准备进军阳逻堡。十一日，遣人去招降，阳逻堡守军不听。十二日，再遣人去招降，宋军誓死拒守。
English: In the early 10th, tens of thousands of Bojan warships successively entered the river, and thousands of ships were anchored at the mouth of the Narrow River Bay; and hundreds of thousands of Mongolian and Han troops were deployed in the north of the river, ordered to repair their ordnance and prepare to march into Yangluo Fort. On the 11th, the Yangluo Fort defenders did not listen. On the 12th, the Song Army refused to defend.

古文：伯颜却之，使勿言。
现代文：伯颜指挥诸将进攻，连攻三日未下。
English: Bo Yan commanded the generals to attack, and the attack lasted for three days.

古文：乃密谋于阿术曰： 彼谓我必拔此堡，方能渡江。此堡甚坚，攻之徒劳。
现代文：与阿术密谋道 ：宋军以为我军必先攻下此堡方能渡江，但此堡甚坚，不能攻克。
English: Conspiring with Ah Shu: The Song army thought that our army must first capture this fortress before it could cross the river, but this fortress is very strong and cannot be conquered.

古文：汝今夜以铁骑三千，泛舟直趋上流，为捣虚之计，诘旦渡江袭南岸。
现代文：你今夜率铁骑三千，乘舟直趋下游，实行声东击西之计，清晨渡江袭击南岸。
English: Tonight, you will ride three thousand miles on an iron horse, go straight downstream by boat, implement the strategy of sounding east to west, and cross the river to attack the south bank in the morning.

古文：已过，则速遣人报我。 
现代文：过江后，速遣人回来报告。 
English: After crossing the river, the courier came back to report.

古文：乙卯，分遣右丞阿里海牙督万户张弘范、忽失海牙、折的迷失等，先以步骑攻阳罗堡，夏贵来援。
现代文：十三日，遣右丞阿里海牙督率万户张弘范、忽失海牙、折的迷失等，先攻阳逻堡。夏贵率军来援。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the commander-in-chief of the Imperial Japanese Army, Ali Haigas, led by Zhang Hongfan, who had lost control of the Imperial Japanese Army, attacked Yangluo Fort first. Xia Gui led the army to come to the rescue.

古文：遂俾阿术出其不意，率万户晏彻儿、忙古歹、史格、贾文备四翼军，溯流西上四十里，对青山矶而泊。
现代文：阿术出其不意，率万户晏彻儿、忙古歹、史格、贾文备四翼军，逆江而上四十里，泊于青山矶对岸。
English: Unexpectedly, Ah Jiu led a four-winged army consisting of Wanzhong, He Kuo, Shige, and Jia Wenbi to travel forty miles upstream and camp on the opposite bank of the Qing Mountains.

古文：是夜，雪大作，遥见南岸多露沙洲，阿术登舟，指示诸将，令径趋是洲，载马后随。万户史格一军先渡，为其都统程鹏飞所却。
现代文：是夜大雪，遥见南岸露出沙州，阿术指挥诸军直趋沙州，自己乘船载马随后。万户史格一军先渡，受宋军都统程鹏飞的狙击而退。
English: It was a night of heavy snow. From a distance, the south bank of the river revealed Shazhou. Ah Shiu commanded the troops to head straight for Shazhou, followed by himself on a horse-drawn boat. Wanyu Shige's army crossed the river first, but was attacked by the Song Army's Du Tong Cheng Pengfei and retreated.

古文：阿术横身荡决，血战中流，擒其将高邦显等，死者无算，鹏飞被七创，败走，得船千余艘，遂得南岸。
现代文：阿术率战舰与宋军血战，擒宋将高邦显，程鹏飞也七处受创，败走。元军俘获船千余艘，登陆南岸。
English: A Zhi led the warship in a bloody battle with the Song army. Gao Bangxian, the commander of the Song Dynasty, and Cheng Pengfei were also injured in seven places and lost. The Yuan army captured more than a thousand ships and landed on the south coast.

古文：阿术与镇抚何玮等数十人，攀岸步斗，开而复合者数四。
现代文：阿术与镇抚何玮等数十人继续与宋军搏斗，搭起浮桥，后续部队得以渡江。
English: Dozens of people, including Ah Shu and the governor He Xuan, continued to fight against the Song army and built a pontoon bridge so that the following troops could cross the river.

古文：南军阻水，不得相薄，遂起浮桥，成列而渡。阿里海牙继遣张荣实、解汝楫等四翼军，舳舻相衔，直抵夏贵。
现代文：阿里海牙遣张荣实、解汝楫等四翼军，乘船直抵夏贵。
English: Ali Hague sent Zhang Rongshi, Xie Rongyi and other four-wing troops to take the boat directly to Xia Gui.

古文：贵引麾下军数千先遁，诸军乘之，斩溺不可数计，追至鄂州东门而还。丙辰，阿术遣使来报，伯颜大喜，挥诸将急攻破阳罗堡，斩王达。宋军大溃，数十万众死伤几尽。
现代文：打败夏贵，追至鄂州东门而还。十四日，阿术遣使报捷，伯颜大喜，指挥诸将迅速攻下阳逻堡，斩守将王达，宋军大溃，数十万军几乎全部伤亡，夏贵只身逃至白虎山。
English: Defeated Xia Gui, chased him to the east gate of Ezhou, and then fought back. On the 14th, Ah Shu sent a messenger to report the victory, Bo Yan was overjoyed, and commanded the generals to quickly capture Yangluo Fort, cut off the defense of Wang Da, the Song Army was routed, hundreds of thousands of troops were almost all casualties, and Xia Gui fled to Baihu Mountain.

古文：伯颜从之。
现代文：伯颜与阿术商议下步用兵方略。
English: Bo Yan and Ah Shu discussed the strategy of foot soldiers.

古文：己未，师次鄂州，遣吕文焕、杨仁风等谕之曰： 汝国所恃者，江、淮而已，今我大兵飞渡长江，如履平地，汝辈何不速降。 
现代文：有人提议先取蕲州和黄州。阿术主张先取鄂州、汉阳，伯颜采纳阿术的主张。十七日，大军至鄂州，遣吕文焕、杨仁风去说降。
English: Some people proposed to take Luzhou and Huangzhou first. Ah Shou advocated taking Ezhou and Hanyang first, and Bo Yan adopted Ah Shou's proposal. On the 17th, the army went to Ezhou and sent Lv Wenhuan and Yang Renfeng to talk about surrender.

古文：鄂恃汉阳，将战，乃焚其战舰三千艘，火照城中，两城大恐。
现代文：鄂州守军依恃汉阳的应援，不降。元军焚毁宋军战船三千艘，火光照天，鄂州、汉阳两城大恐。
English: The defenders of Ezhou relied on the support of Hanyang and did not retreat. The Yuan Army burned three thousand warships of the Song Army, the flames lit up the sky, and the two cities of Ezhou and Hanyang were terrified.

古文：庚申，知鄂州张晏然、知汉阳军王仪、知德安府来兴国，皆以城降，程鹏飞以其军降。
现代文：十八日，鄂州知府张晏然、知汉阳军王仪、德安知府来兴国以及程鹏飞，纷纷降元，伯颜把他们的军队编入元军各部。
English: On the 18th, the Ezhou prefectures of Zhang Yulan, Zhihanyang Junwangyi, De'an prefectures of Laixing and Cheng Pengfei were successively demoted to Yuan. Bo Yan organized their armies into the various departments of the Yuan army.

古文：壬戌，定新附官品级，撤宋兵，分隶诸将。先是，边民戍卒陷入宋境者，悉纵遣之。丁卯，遣万户也的哥、总管忽都歹，入奏渡江之捷。分命阿剌罕先锋黄头取寿昌粮四十万斛，以充军饷。留右丞阿里海牙等，以兵四万分省于鄂，规取荆湖。己巳，伯颜与阿术以大军水陆东下，俾阿术先据黄州。
现代文：二十五日，伯颜遣万户也的哥、总管忽都歹回京入奏渡江之捷，又命阿剌罕先锋黄头至寿昌运粮四十万斛以充军饷，留右丞阿里海牙等领兵四万屯驻鄂州，做进取荆、湖的准备。二十七日，伯颜与阿术率大军水陆东下，派阿术先去占据黄州。
English: On the 25th, Bo Yan sent his elder brother and general manager, Hu Du Gang, back to Beijing to report on the success of the crossing of the Yangtze River. He also ordered the Ao Han vanguard, Huang Tou, to transport 400,000 baht of grain to Shuchang to replenish the war chest, and left the right-hand man, Ali Hague, and other leaders of 40,000 troops stationed in Ezhou to prepare for the capture of Jing and the lake. On the 27th, Bo Yan and Ah Xiu led a large army to the east by land and sea, and sent Ah Xiu to occupy Huangzhou first.

古文：十二年春正月癸酉朔，至黄州。
现代文：至元十二年正月初一，元军至黄州。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army arrived in Huangzhou.

古文：甲戌，沿江制置副使、知黄州陈奕降，伯颜承制授奕沿江大都督。
现代文：初二，宋沿江制置副使兼黄州知府陈奕开城投降，伯颜授陈奕为沿江大都督。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Chen Yi, the vice-envoy of the Song Dynasty and governor of Huangzhou, surrendered in Kaicheng, and Bo Yan appointed Chen Yi as the governor of the riverside.

古文：奕遣书至涟水招其子岩，岩降。
现代文：奕写信至涟水，招其子陈岩亦降。
English: Yi wrote a letter to Surabaya, inviting his son Chen Yan to join him.

古文：遣吕文焕、陈奕以书招蕲州安抚使管宗模，复遣阿术以舟师造其城下。
现代文：十一日，伯颜至蕲州，宋安抚使管景模开门投降，授管景模为淮西宣抚使。
English: On the 11th day, Bo Yan went to Bozhou, Song Anfu made Guan Jingmo open the door and surrender, and Guan Jingmo was appointed as Huaxi's envoy.

古文：癸未，伯颜至蕲州，宗模出降，即承制授以淮西宣抚使，留万户带塔儿守之。
现代文：留万户带塔儿守蕲州。同时，阿术率水军直趋江州，宋兵部尚书吕师夔、知州钱真孙投降。十四日，伯颜至江州，任师夔守江州。
English: At the same time, Ah Ju led the navy straight to Jiangzhou, and the Song military department Shangshu Lv Shiqi and Chizhou Qian Zhensun surrendered. On the 14th, Bo Yan went to Jiangzhou to serve as the commander of Jiangzhou.

古文：二月壬寅朔，伯颜至安庆，承制授文虎两浙大都督，文虎以其从子友信知安庆府事，命万户乔珪戍之。丁未，次池州，都统制张林以城降；戊申，通判权州事赵昴发与其妻自经死，伯颜入城，见而怜之，令具衣衾葬焉。
现代文：师夔在庾公楼宴请伯颜等，并挑选宋朝赵氏宗室女子二人送给伯颜，遭伯颜斥责。知南康军叶阊、殿前都指挥使兼安庆知府范文虎相继投诚。伯颜率大军自湖口渡江。二月初一日，伯颜至安庆，按制度规定授范文虎为两浙大都督。初六日，至池州，宋都统制张林献城投降。初七日，宋通判权州事赵昂发与其妻自缢死，伯颜入城，令备衣棺安葬。
English: Shi Yan invited Bo Yan and others to a banquet at the Ying Gong Building, and selected two women from the Zhao family of the Song Dynasty to give to Bo Yan, who was rebuked by Bo Yan. Ye Ye, commander of the Zhunan Kang Army, and Fan Wenhu, commander of the Anqing prefectural government, successively surrendered. Bo Yan led a large army from Hukou to the river. On the first day of February, Bo Yan went to Anqing and, according to the system regulations, awarded Fan Wenhu as the two great governors of Zhejiang. On the sixth day of the first month, to Chizhou, Zhang Lin, the Song capital, surrendered. On

古文：宋宰臣贾似道遣宋京致书，请还已降州郡，约贡岁币。
现代文：宋丞相贾似道遣宋京来致书议和，请求归还已降州郡，每年向元朝纳贡。
English: Song Zheng sent a letter to Song Jing to discuss peace, requesting the return of the county that had been reduced to the state, and paying tribute to the Yuan Dynasty every year.

古文：伯颜遣武略将军囊加歹同其介阮思聪报命，止京以待，且使谓似道曰： 未渡江，议和入贡则可，今沿江诸郡皆内附，欲和，则当来面议也。 
现代文：伯颜留下宋京，派武略将军囊加歹同其副将阮思聪回朝廷请示。留宋京待命，遣使去宋国对贾似道说： 元军尚未渡江，议和纳贡是可以的。今沿江诸郡均归附元朝，要议和，你应当来面谈。 
English: Bo Yan left Songjing and sent General Wu Liang and his deputy General Ruan Sicong back to the imperial court to ask for instructions. He kept Songjing on standby and sent an envoy to Song to say to Jia Li Dao: The Yuan army has not yet crossed the river, it is possible to discuss and pay tribute. All counties along the river are now attached to the Yuan dynasty, if you want to discuss peace, you should come for an interview.

古文：囊加歹还，乃释宋京。
现代文：囊加歹回来后才释放宋京。
English: Song Jing was only released after the gangster came back.

古文：阿术以小旗麾何玮、李庭等并舟深入，伯颜命步骑左右掎之，追杀百五十余里，溺死无算，得船二千余艘，及其军资器仗、图籍符印。
现代文：二月十九日，元军自池州出发，二十一日，抵丁家洲。贾似道统率诸路兵马十三万，号称百万，步军指挥使孙虎臣为前锋，淮西制置使夏贵以战舰二千五百艘横亘江中，贾似道率军为后盾。伯颜命左右翼万户率骑兵夹江而进，炮声隆隆，震撼百里，夏贵先逃，贾似道仓皇失措，立即鸣锣收军，宋军大溃。伯颜命大军追杀一百五十余里，溺死无数，缴获船二千余艘，及军械、图籍、符印等物。
English: On February 19th, the Yuan army set out from Chizhou and arrived in Dingjiazhou on the 21st. Jiaxian Dao led 130,000 soldiers and horses, known as a million, the infantry commander made Sun Huchen the front, Huaixi system made Xia Gui with 2,500 warships across the river, Jiaxian Dao led the army as the backing. Bo Yan's left and right wings of 10,000 households led the cavalry into the river, the cannon sounded loudly and shook hundreds of miles, Xia Gui fled first, Jiaxian Dao lost his balance, immediately gathered troops, Song Army routed. Bo Yan's army chased more than

古文：似道东走扬州，贵走庐州，虎臣走泰州。
现代文：似道东逃扬州，夏贵逃庐州，虎臣逃往泰州。
English: It seems that Doudong fled to Yangzhou, Xia Gui fled to Zhangzhou, and Hucheng fled to Taizhou.

古文：甲子，攻太平州。
现代文：二十三日，元军攻太平州。
English: On the 23rd, Yuan's army attacked Taiping.

古文：丁卯，知州孟之缙及知无为军刘权、知镇巢军曹旺、知和州王喜，俱以城降。
现代文：二十六日，知州孟之缙及知无为军刘权、知镇巢军曹旺、和州知州王喜均降。
English: On the 26th, Meng Zhixuan of Chizhou, Liu Quan of the Wushu Army of Chizhou, Sergeant Wang of the Chizhen Nest Army, and Wang Xi of Chizhou were all demoted.

古文：庚午，师次建康之龙湾，大赉将士。
现代文：二十九日，元军抵建康之龙湾，伯颜大赏将士。
English: On the 29th, the Yuan army arrived at Jiankang's Longwan, and Bo Yan rewarded the soldiers.

古文：三月癸酉，宋沿江制置赵溍遁，溍兄淮起兵溧阳，就执而死。都统徐王荣、翁福等以城降，命招讨使唆都守之。
现代文：三月初二日，宋沿江制置赵缙逃遁，缙兄赵淮在溧阳起兵抗元，被捕处死，都统徐王荣、翁福等开门投降，伯颜命招讨使唆都守溧阳城。
English: At the beginning of March 2nd, Song Yangtze River ordered Zhao Yao to flee the capital, Zhao Yao's brother Zhao Huai raised an army in Fenyang to resist Yuan, and was arrested and executed. Xu Wang Rong, Weng Fu and others opened the door to surrender, and Bo Yan ordered them to guard Fenyang City.

古文：知镇江府洪起畏遁，总管石祖忠以城降。
现代文：镇江知府洪起畏逃遁，总管石祖忠降。
English: The governor of Zhenjiang Prefecture, Hong Qiji, fled, and the head of the administration, Shi Zu, resigned.

古文：知宁国府赵与可遁，知饶州唐震死，而江东诸郡皆下。
现代文：宁国知府赵与可逃遁，饶州知州唐震死，江东诸郡皆为元所有。
English: The governor of Ning Province, Zhao Ye, was able to escape, the governor of Raozhou, Chizhou, died in the earthquake, and the counties in the east of the Yangtze River were all owned by Yuan.

古文：淮西滁州诸郡亦相继降。
现代文：淮西滁州诸郡也相继投降。
English: The counties of Bozhou in Huaixi Province also surrendered one after another.

古文：丙子，国信使廉希贤至建康，传旨令诸将各守营垒，毋得妄有侵掠。
现代文：初五日，国信使廉希贤至建康，传旨令诸将各守营垒，不准妄有侵掠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the messenger of the state, Lian Xixian, came to Jiankang and sent an order to the generals to guard the camps and not to go out to plunder.

古文：希贤与严忠范等奉命使宋，请兵自卫，伯颜曰： 行人以言不以兵，兵多，徒为累使事。 
现代文：希贤与严忠范等奉朝廷之命作为使臣去宋朝，请伯颜派兵护卫。伯颜说 ：使臣去执行任务是靠言论而非靠武力，兵多反而坏事。 
English: Xixian and Yan Zhongfan were ordered by the imperial court to go to the Song Dynasty as envoys, and they asked Bojan to send soldiers to escort them. Bojan said: Envoys carry out their missions by words rather than by force, and more soldiers are a bad thing.

古文：希贤固请，与之。
现代文：希贤坚持派兵。
English: Xi Xian insisted on sending troops.

古文：丙戌，至独松岭，果为宋人所杀。
现代文：十五日，希贤等行至独松岭，果然为宋人所杀。
English: On the fifteenth day, Xi Xian and others went to Du Songling, and were indeed killed by Song people.

古文：庚寅，伯颜遣左右司员外郎石天麟诣阙奏事，世祖大悦，悉可其奏。
现代文：十九日，伯颜派遣左右司员外郎石天麟至京陈奏大军进展情形及其今后进军方略，世祖大喜，准其所奏。
English: On the 19th, Bo Yan dispatched the left and right steward, Wairo Shi Tianlin, to Beijing to play the progress of the army and its future military strategy. The founder was very pleased and agreed to play it.

古文：伯颜以行中书省驻建康，阿塔海、董文炳以行枢密院驻镇江，阿术别奉诏攻扬州。
现代文：命伯颜作为行中书省丞相驻建康，阿塔海、董文炳为行枢密院官员驻镇江，阿术继续进攻扬州。
English: Mu Boyan was stationed in Jiankang as the acting Minister of Education, Atahai and Dong Wenjun were stationed in Zhenjiang as the acting officials of the Privy Council, and Ah Shu continued to attack Yangzhou.

古文：江东岁饥，民大疫，伯颜随赈救之，民赖以安。
现代文：江东遭饥荒，瘟疫流行，伯颜赈救，百姓得以安生。
English: Jiangdong suffered from famine and plague, and the people were able to live in peace thanks to Bo Yan's rescue.

古文：宋人遣都统洪模移书徐王荣等，言杀使之事太皇太后及嗣君实不知，皆边将之罪，当按诛之，愿输币，请罢兵通好。
现代文：宋朝遣都统洪模致书徐王荣等，申述杀元朝国使之事，朝廷实在不知，是边将所为，当按罪惩处，愿纳贡，请订和约。
English: The Song Dynasty sent the capital Hongmo to write to Xu Wang Rong and others, complaining that they had killed the Yuan Dynasty and the country, but the court did not really know. It was the actions of the border guards, and they should be punished according to the crime. May they pay tribute, and please sign a peace treaty.

古文：伯颜曰： 彼为谲诈之计，以视我之虚实。
现代文：伯颜认为 ：这是宋朝的诡计，是来探我虚实的。
English: Bo Yan thought: This is a trick of the Song Dynasty, it is to probe my reality.

古文：当择人以同往，观其事体，宣布威德，令彼速降。 
现代文：我们应择人去进行考察，宣布威德，令彼速降。 
English: We should select a person to investigate, announce Weide and make him step down quickly.

古文：乃命议事官张羽等持王荣答书，至平江驿，宋人又杀之。
现代文：令议事官张羽等持王荣的回信去，行至平江驿，又为宋人所杀。
English: He ordered the councilor Zhang Yu and others to take Wang Rong's reply letter and go to the Pingjiang estuary, where they were killed by the Song people.

古文：四月乙丑，有诏以时暑方炽，不利行师，俟秋再举。
现代文：四月二十四日，朝廷有令，盛夏不利于用兵，等秋天再举。
English: On April 24th, the imperial court issued an order, saying that the height of summer was not conducive to the use of troops, and that it would be held again in the fall.

古文：伯颜奏曰： 宋人之据江海，如兽保险，今已扼其吭，少纵之则逸而逝矣。 
现代文：伯颜奏道： 宋人据有江海，似无可虞。现在已卡住他们的咽喉，如稍有放松，他们就逃走了。 
English: Bo Yan recited, "The Song people had control of the rivers and seas, and seemed to have no fear. Now it has stuck in their throats, and if they relax a little, they will run away.

古文：世祖语使者曰： 将在军，不从中制，后法也。宜从丞相言。 
现代文：世祖对伯颜派去的使者说： 兵法说，将在外君令有所不受，应听从丞相的意见。 
English: The patriarch said to the envoy sent by Bo Yan: According to the laws of war, if you do not accept the orders of your father-in-law, you should listen to the advice of the prime minister.

古文：五月丁亥，复命奉御爱先传旨，召伯颜赴阙，以阿剌罕为参政，留治省事。
现代文：五月十七日，召伯颜回朝，以阿剌罕为参政，留行中书省管理军政事务。
English: On May 17th, Bo Yan was summoned back to the imperial court, and he participated in politics with Ah Nhan. He stayed in Zhongshu to manage military and political affairs.

古文：伯颜至镇江，会诸将计事，令各还镇，乃渡江北行，入见于上都。
现代文：伯颜行至镇江同诸将商议军务后才北行至上都。
English: Bo Yan went to Zhenjiang to discuss military affairs with the generals before heading north to the capital.

古文：七月癸未，进中书右丞相，让功于阿术，遂以阿术为左丞相。
现代文：七月十三日，晋升伯颜为中书右丞相，以阿术为左丞相，平江南之功让于阿术。
English: On July 13th, Bo Yan was promoted to the Vice-Minister of the Right of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Ah Shu was promoted to the Vice-Minister of the Left of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：十一月乙亥，伯颜分军为三道，期会于临安。参政阿剌罕等为右军，以步骑自建康出四安，趋独松岭；参政董文炳等为左军，以舟师自江阴循海趋澉浦、华亭；伯颜及右丞阿塔海由中道，节制诸军，水陆并进。
现代文：八月初五日，伯颜带着给宋国皇帝的诏书回到行省。他取道益都，巡视沂州等处军防情形，调淮东都元帅孛鲁欢、副都元帅阿里伯，率所部兵将逆淮河而进。九月十一日，会师淮安城下，招守将投降，不降。十三日，攻克淮安。十九日，进抵宝应军。二十一日，抵高邮。十月十三日，围攻扬州，未克，大军南行。二十五日，至镇江。十一月九日，伯颜分军三路进伐，约期会师于临安：参政阿剌罕等为右军，率步兵骑兵自建康出四安，直趋独松岭；参政董文炳等为左军，率水军自江阴沿海道趋澉浦、华亭；伯颜及右丞阿塔海为中军，水陆并进。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Bo Yan returned to Xingguo with the edict for the Emperor of Song. He took the capital of Daoyu, inspected the military defense situation in Luzhou and other places, transferred the Huai Dongdu Marshal Gonglu Huan and the deputy capital marshal Ali Bo, and led the soldiers of the headquarters to march against the Huai River. On September 11th, he went to Huai'an City, and invited the guards to surrender without surrendering. On the 13th, he conquered Huai'an. On the 19th, he entered Bao Yingjun. On the 21st, he arrived at Gaoyou. On

古文：壬午，伯颜军至常州。
现代文：十六日，伯颜军抵达常州。
English: On the 16th, Bo Yan's army arrived in Changzhou.

古文：先是，常州守王宗洙遁，通判王虎臣以城降，其都统制刘师勇与张彦、王安节等复拒之，推姚为守，固拒数月不下。
现代文：在此以前，常州宋将王宗洙已逃，通判王虎臣欲开门投降，而其都统制刘师勇与张彦、王安节不肯，推姚山言为守将，顽固抵抗数月。
English: Prior to this, Wang Zongqi, the Song general of Changzhou, had already fled, and Wang Huchen wanted to open the door and surrender, but Liu Shiyong, Zhang Yan and Wang Anjie, who controlled the capital, refused to do so, and pushed Yao Shanyan to be the guard, and stubbornly resisted for several months.

古文：刘师勇变服单骑奔平江，诸将请追之，伯颜曰： 勿追，师勇所过，城守者胆落矣。 以行省都事马恕为常州尹。
现代文：伯颜遣人至城下射书城中招降，不成功，于是以炮火、弓箭日夜攻城。宋浙西制置文天祥派尹玉、麻士龙来支援，皆战死。十八日，攻下常州，宋守将姚山言及通判陈火召等均战死，王安节被俘处斩，刘师勇单骑逃往平江。
English: Bo Yan sent people to the middle of the city of Shuxi to recruit and surrender, but they were not successful, so they attacked the city day and night with artillery fire and bows and arrows. Song Zhe Xi Shi Zi Wen Tian Xiang sent Yin Yu and Ma Shilong to support, and they all died in battle. On the 18th, after capturing Changzhou, Song Shou mentioned Yaoshan to Chen Hui Zhao, and they all died in battle. Wang An Jie was captured and beheaded, and Liu Shiyong fled to Pingjiang on horseback.

古文：尔宋昔得天下于小儿之手，今亦失于小儿之手，盖天道也，不必多言。 
现代文：伯颜指责宋朝拘禁元使臣十六年及无故杀害廉奉使等种种不信不义的行为。
English: Bo Yan accused the Song Dynasty of detaining the former envoy for 16 years and killing the corrupt envoy without reason, and other acts of disbelief and injustice.

古文：岳顿首泣不已。遣招讨使抄儿赤，以柳岳来使事，及严奉使所赍国书入奏。
现代文：遣招讨使抄儿赤将柳岳奉宋朝求和事及严奉使所进呈宋朝国书，一并奏报朝廷。
English: The Red General Liu Yue was sent to the Song Dynasty to sue for peace, and the envoy was sent to the Song Dynasty to submit a state report, which was also reported to the imperial court.

古文：先是，平江守潜说友遁，通判胡玉等既以城降，而复为宋人所据。
现代文：原先，平江守将潜说友已逃，通判胡玉已降，而后来平江又为宋军占据。
English: Originally, the commander of the Pingjiang River secretly said that his friend had fled, and the general verdict was that Hu Yu had fallen, but later the Pingjiang River was occupied by the Song Army.

古文：甲辰，众军次平江，都统王邦杰、通判王矩之率众出降。
现代文：十二月初八日，元军会师平江，宋都统王邦杰、通判王矩之率众出降。
English: On the 8th day of the 12th month of the year, the former military leader Pingjiang, the king of the Song Dynasty, Bonjie, and the king of the Song Dynasty, Tongzhan, all surrendered.

古文：庚戌，遣囊加歹同其使柳岳还临安。
现代文：十四日，遣囊加歹同宋使柳岳至临安。
English: On the 14th, he sent a package to Linyi, together with Song, to send Liu Yue to Lin'an.

古文：以忙古歹、范文虎行两浙大都督事。
现代文：以忙古歹、范文虎行两浙大都督事。
English: Busy with ancient misdeeds, Fan Wenhong became the governor of the two capitals of Zhejiang.

古文：遣宁玉修吴江长桥，不旬日而成。
现代文：遣宁玉修吴江长桥，不到十天而成。
English: The construction of the Wujiang Yangtze River Bridge was completed in less than ten days.

古文：庚申，囊加歹同宋尚书夏士林、侍郎吕师孟、宗正少卿陆秀夫以书来，请尊世祖为伯父，而世修子侄之礼，且约岁币银二十五万两，帛二十五万匹。
现代文：十二月二十四日，囊加歹同宋尚书夏士林、侍郎吕师孟、宗正少卿陆秀夫携带宋朝国书来议和，尊世祖为伯父，宋皇帝世代行子侄之礼，每年贡银二十五万两、帛二十五万匹。
English: On December 24th, Xia Shilin, the attendant of Song Shangshu, and Lu Shimen, the attendant of Song Shangshu, and Lu Xiuwu, the younger brother of Zongzheng, brought the Song Dynasty's state book to discuss peace. His great-grandfather was an uncle, and the Song Emperor's generation was a son and nephew, with an annual tribute of 250,000 silver and 250,000 horses.

古文：癸亥，遣囊加歹同师孟等还临安。遣忙古歹、范文虎会阿剌罕、昔里伯取湖州，知州赵良淳死之。
现代文：二十七日，伯颜遣囊加歹同吕师孟等回临安，遣忙古歹、范文虎会同阿剌罕、昔里伯取湖州。三十日，宋将赵舆可降。
English: On the 27th, Boyan sent his bag to Linyan together with Lu Shi Meng and others, and sent Busy Old Gangster, Fan Wenhu Association with Ao Han, and Old Boyan to take Huzhou. On the 30th, Song sent Zhao Myouke down.

古文：甲申，次阜亭山，宋主遣知临安府贾余庆，同宗室保康军承宣使尹甫、和州防御使吉甫，奉传国玺及降表诣军前。伯颜受讫，遣囊加歹以余庆等还临安，召宋宰臣出议降事。
现代文：伯颜离开平江，留游显、怀都、忽都不花等屯兵镇守，遣宁玉守长桥。十三年正月初三日，元军进至嘉兴，宋安抚使刘汉杰降，留万户忽都虎戍守。初七、初九、十五日，宋宰相陈宜中三次遣使议和。十八日，元军至皋亭山，宋朝皇帝遣使奉国玺及降表来军前，伯颜受纳，派囊加歹随宋使临安知府贾余庆还临安，召宋丞相来议投降事。
English: On the 7th, 9th, and 15th, the prime minister of the Song Dynasty, Chen Yizhong, sent envoys three times to negotiate a peace treaty. On the 18th, the prime minister of the Song Dynasty, Chen Yizhong, sent envoys to Shanting Mountain to negotiate a surrender. The emperor of the Song Dynasty sent envoys to the front of the army to pay tribute to the country and to lower the table. The prime minister of the Song Dynasty, Bo Yan, received the envoys. He sent a bag of goods to follow the envoy of the Song Dynasty, Lin'an Zhifu Jia Yuqing, to Lin'an and

古文：时宜中已遁，以文天祥代为丞相，不拜，自请至军前。乙酉，进军至临安北十五里，分遣董文炳、吕文焕、范文虎巡视城堡，安谕军民。
现代文：这时，陈宜中已逃，宋朝以文天祥为丞相。十九日，元军进至临安北十五里，分派董文炳、吕文焕、范文虎巡视城堡，安抚百姓。
English: At this time, Chen Yizhong had fled, and the Song Dynasty appointed Wen Tianxiang as the prime minister. On the 19th, the Yuan army advanced to 15 li north of Lin'an, and dispatched Dong Wenqi, Lü Wenhuan, and Fan Wenhu to inspect the castle and pacify the people.

古文：囊加歹、洪模来报，宜中与张世杰、苏刘义、刘师勇等，挟益王、广王下浙江，航海而南，惟谢太后及幼主在宫中。
现代文：囊加歹、洪模报告：陈宜中与张世杰、苏刘义、刘师勇等，挟益王赵曰正、广王赵籨下浙江，航海南去，宫中只有谢太后及幼主。
English: According to the Hong Miao report, Chen Yizhong and Zhang Shijie, Su Liu Yi, Liu Shiyong, etc. persuaded Wang Zhao Zhaizheng and Guang Wang Zhao to sail south from Zhejiang, leaving only Empress Dowager Xie and her young master in the palace.

古文：天祥怒曰： 我此来为两国大事，彼皆遣归，何故留我？ 伯颜曰： 勿怒。
现代文：伯颜派右军阿剌罕、奥鲁赤，左军董文炳、范文虎去追赶，但未追到。二十日，伯颜下令禁止军士进临安城，遣吕文焕持黄榜安抚城中军民。二十二日，谢太后遣丞相吴坚、文天祥，枢密谢堂，安抚贾余庆，内官邓惟善来见伯颜，伯颜送走他们，而把文天祥软禁下来。
English: On the 20th, Boyan ordered to ban the sergeants from entering Lin'an City, and sent Lu Wenhuan and Huang Pang to pacify the soldiers and civilians in the city. On the 22nd, Empress Dowager Xie sent the prime minister Wu Jian, Wen Tianxiang, the privy councilor Xiedang, the pacifier Jia Yuqing, and the privy councilor Deng Weishan to see Boyan, and Boyan sent them away, and placed Wen Tianxiang under house arrest.

古文：汝为宋大臣，责任非轻，今日之事，政当与我共之。 
现代文：天祥多次要求放他回去，质问留他不放的缘故。伯颜说 ：请不必怒，你是宋朝大臣，责任重大，形势到如此地步，我们共同执政。 
English: Tianxiang repeatedly asked for him to be allowed to return, questioning the reason for not letting him go. Bo Yan said: Please do not be angry, you are a minister of the Song Dynasty, the responsibility is great, the situation is so far, we govern together.

古文：令忙古歹、唆都馆伴羁縻之。令程鹏飞、洪双寿同贾余庆易宋主削帝号降表。
现代文：原来是想要他降元。伯颜又令程鹏飞、洪双寿同宋朝的安抚贾余庆更换取消宋皇帝称号的降表。
English: Originally, he wanted to demote him to Yuan. Bo Yan also ordered Cheng Pengfei, Hong Shuangshu and Jia Yuqing, the pacifier of the Song Dynasty, to replace the demotion table that cancelled the title of the Song Emperor.

古文：己丑，驻军临安城北之湖州市。
现代文：二十三日，元军驻临安城北之湖州市。
English: On the 23rd, the former army was stationed in Huzhou, north of Lin'an City.

古文：癸巳，谢后复使人来劳问，仍以温言慰遣之。甲午，分置其三衙诸司兵于各翼，以俟调遣；其生募等军，愿归者听。
现代文：遣千户囊加歹等将宋朝皇帝的传国玉印奉献于朝廷。正月二十四日，伯颜率左右翼万户巡视临安城，受宋朝宗室大臣的进见。二十五日，令镇抚唐古歹解散文天祥所招募的二万余义兵。二十六日，命唆都抚谕临安军民，部署守城军队护卫宋朝宫廷。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the year, thousands of households were sent to Lin'an to dedicate the imperial seal of the Song Dynasty to the imperial court. On the 25th day, more than 20,000 soldiers recruited by Emperor Wen Tianxiang were ordered to be disbanded. On the 26th day, Emperor Wen Tianxiang ordered the military and civilians of Lin'an to be deployed to guard the Song Dynasty palace.

古文：分遣萧郁、王世英等，招谕衢、信诸州。
现代文：二十八日，遣肖郁、王世英去招降衢州、信州等地。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Yu and Wang Shiying were sent to recruit soldiers from Zhangzhou, Shinshu and other places.

古文：二月丁酉，遣刘颉等往淮西招夏贵，仍遣别将徇地浙东、西，于是知严州方回、知婺州刘怡、知台州杨必大、知处州梁椅，并以城降。
现代文：二月初一日，遣刘颉等去淮西招降夏贵，另遣将攻占浙东、浙西。严州知府方回、婺州知府刘怡、台州知府杨必大、处州知府梁椅，相继投降。
English: On the first day of February, Liu Bei and others were sent to Huaixi to recruit and demote Xia Gui, while others were sent to conquer East and West Zhejiang. Yanzhou Governor Fang Hui, Zhangzhou Governor Liu Yi, Taizhou Governor Yang Bida, and Wenzhou Governor Liang Zhi surrendered one after another.

古文：命右丞张惠，参政阿剌罕、董文炳、吕文焕入见谢后，宣布德意，以慰谕之。
现代文：伯颜命右丞张惠，参政阿剌罕、董文炳、吕文焕入宋朝皇宫向谢太后宣布元朝的盛德。
English: Zhang Hui, who was appointed by Bo Yan as the right-hand man, and Ayhan, Dong Wenyi, and Lu Wenyuan, who were involved in politics, entered the imperial palace of the Song Dynasty to announce the prosperity of the Yuan Dynasty to Empress Dowager Xie.

古文：辛丑，宋主率文武百僚，望阙拜发降表。
现代文：初五日，宋朝皇帝率文武百官投降。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Emperor of the Song Dynasty led a hundred officials to surrender.

古文：伯颜承制，以临安为两浙大都督府，忙古歹、范文虎入治府事。复命张惠、阿剌罕、董文炳、吕文焕等入城，籍其军民钱谷之数，阅实仓库，收百官诰命、符印图籍，悉罢宋官府。取宋主居之别室。
现代文：伯颜以临安为两浙大都督府，命忙古歹、范文虎管理都督府中，命张惠、阿剌罕、董文炳、吕文焕等入城，清理宋朝的钱粮，收缴百官诰命、符印、图册，废除宋朝的官府衙门，将宋亡国之君移居于别处。
English: Bo Yan chose Lin'an as the capital of the two Zhejiang Dynasties, and ordered Zhang Hui, Ajangan, Dong Wenzhong, Lu Wenzhong and others to enter the city, clean up the Song Dynasty's money and grain, collect the hundreds of officials' decrees, seals, and maps, abolish the Song Dynasty's government offices and gates, and relocate the dead kings of the Song Dynasty to other places.

古文：分遣新附官招谕湖南北、两广、四川未下州郡。
现代文：遣新归附的宋朝官员去招降湖南北、两广、四川之尚未攻克的州郡。
English: The newly annexed Song Dynasty officials were sent to recruit the states and counties that had not yet been conquered in Hunan, Nanbei, Liangangguang and Sichuan.

古文：部分诸将，分屯要害，仍禁人不得侵坏宋氏山陵。
现代文：部署诸将分兵屯驻要害之地。禁止偷盗和破坏宋皇室陵墓。
English: It is forbidden to steal and destroy the imperial mausoleum of the Song Dynasty.

古文：乙亥，伯颜发临安。
现代文：初七日，伯颜上表朝廷，祝贺江南大捷。二月初五日，宋恭帝赵降。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, Bo Yan went to the imperial court to congratulate Jiangnan on the great victory. On the 5th day of the second month of the year, Emperor Song Gong abdicated.

古文：丁丑，阿塔海等宣诏，趣宋主、母后入觐，听诏毕，即日俱出宫，惟谢后以疾独留，隆国夫人黄氏、宫人从行者百余人，福王与芮、沂王乃猷、谢堂、杨镇而下，官属从行者数千人，三学之士数百人。宋主求见，伯颜曰： 未入朝，无相见之礼。 五月乙未，伯颜以宋主至上都，世祖御大安阁受朝，降授宋主鳷开府仪同三司、检校大司徒，封瀛国公。
现代文：二十二日，夏贵在淮西降。三月二日，伯颜入临安城，令郎中孟祺清理登记宋宫中之礼乐祭器、册宝、仪仗、图书等物。伯颜离开临安回京。之前，令阿剌罕、董文炳留行省主持政务，以经略闽粤；令忙古歹督镇浙西并兼管浙东；令唐兀歹、李庭护送宋亡国君臣北上。五月初一日，伯颜同亡宋君主至上都，朝拜大元皇帝，世祖授宋主赵开府仪同三司、检校大司徒，封瀛国公。
English: On the 22nd, Xia Gui abdicated in Huaxi. On the 2nd of March, Bo Yan entered Lin'an City, and ordered his son, Meng Wei, to clean up and register the ceremonial instruments, treasures, ceremonial games, books and other items in the Song court. Bo Yan left Lin'an to return to Beijing. Previously, he had ordered Ah Guan and Dong Wenyi to stay in the province to preside over the government affairs, and to oversee the affairs of Guangdong; he had ordered Bushu Guan to be the governor of the town of Zhejiang in the west, and to also manage the affairs of Zhejiang in the east; and he had ordered Tang Y

古文：宋平，得府三十七、州百二十八、关监二、县七百三十三。
现代文：灭宋，得府三十七、州百二十八、关监二、县七百三十三。
English: In the Song Dynasty, there were 37 prefectures, 128 counties, 2 customs inspectorates, and 733 counties.

古文：是岁，颁群臣食邑，诏益以藤州等处四千九百七十七户。
现代文：世祖慰劳伯颜，拜同知枢密院，赐银鼠青鼠只孙二十袭。对有功将校一百二十三人各有赏赐。
English: The world's forefathers consoled the laboring peasants, honored the intellectuals of the Privy Council, and gave the silver rat and the green rat only 20 grandchildren. There were rewards for each of the 123 meritorious officers.

古文：伯颜之取宋而还也，诏百官郊迎以劳之，平章阿合马先百官半舍道谒，伯颜解所服玉钩绦遗之，且曰： 宋宝玉固多，吾实无所取，勿以此为薄也。 
现代文：伯颜灭宋还京时，世祖诏令百官至郊外迎接，平章阿合马先于百官在十五里外谒见伯颜。伯颜将所系玉钩丝带送给他，且说： 宋宝玉固多，但我实在没拿，请不要嫌此礼薄。 
English: When Bo Yan returned to Beijing after defeating Song, the founder of the dynasty, Emperor Zhao, ordered hundreds of officials to go to the suburbs to greet him. Ping Zang Ah Ma went ahead of the hundreds of officials to meet Bo Yan fifteen miles away. Bo Yan gave him his jade hook ribbon and said: Song Bao has a lot of jade, but I really didn't take it, please don't think this is disrespectful.

古文：奏李庭、董士选将汉军，得以汉法战。乃颜之党金家奴、塔不歹进逼乘舆，汉军力战，乃皆溃，卒擒乃颜。
现代文：阿合马认为是看不起他，暗地中伤伯颜，诬告伯颜在平宋时取走了玉桃盏。世祖命追查，无结果，释放伯颜，复其职务。阿合马死后，有人献此玉桃盏，世祖大惊道： 几乎陷害我忠良！ 至元二十四年四月，乃颜反，伯颜随世祖亲征，奏请以李庭、董士选率汉军，用汉人兵法作战，汉军奋力战斗，大败叛军，生擒乃颜。
English: Ahama thought that he looked down on him, secretly slandered Bo Yan, and falsely accused Bo Yan of taking the jade peach wreath in the Song Dynasty. The ancestor's life was traced, without result, released Bo Yan, and resumed his duties. After the death of Ahama, someone offered this jade peach wreath, and the ancestor was shocked: I was almost framed! In April of the 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Na Yan rebelled, and Bo Yan was recruited by the ancestor himself, and was asked to lead the Chinese army with Li Ting and Dong Shi, and fight with the Chinese military method. The Chinese army fought hard, defeated

古文：二十六年，进金紫光禄大夫、知枢密院事，出镇和林，和林置知院，自伯颜始。
现代文：至元二十六年，伯颜晋升为金紫光禄大夫、知枢密院事，出镇和林。和林置枢密院，就是从伯颜开始的。
English: In 1861, Bo Yan was promoted to the position of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor and Zhi Privy Councilor, and went out of the town and into the forest. It was from Bo Yan that the Privy Council was established in the forest.

古文：军中获谍者，忻都欲杀之，伯颜不许，厚赐之，遣赍书谕明里铁木儿以祸福，明里铁木儿得书感泣，以众来归。
现代文：二十九年秋，宗王明理铁木儿挟海都反叛，伯颜奉诏讨伐，他身先陷阵，诸军奋力战斗，大破叛军。伯颜致书明理铁木儿，谕以祸福。明里铁木儿受感动，率众来归附。
English: In the autumn of the 29th year, the patriarch Mingli Tiemu'er rebelled across the sea, and Bo Yan issued an edict to fight. He was the first to fall into the battle, and all the armies fought hard to defeat the rebels. Bo Yan sent a letter to Mingli Tiemu'er, telling him about the misfortunes and blessings. Mingli Tiemu'er was moved and led the people to return.

古文：诸将曰： 请任之。 即还军击败之，海都果脱去。
现代文：不久，海都再犯边疆，伯颜用计击溃，海都逃走。
English: Soon after, Haidu invaded the frontier again, and Bo Yan defeated Haidu with a plan, and Haidu fled.

古文：乃召玉昔帖木儿至军，授以印而行。
现代文：在赶走海都之前，朝廷有人向世祖进谗言，说伯颜与海都通好，故军无进展。世祖诏令由御史大夫玉昔帖木儿取代伯颜。
English: Before driving away Haidu, someone from the imperial court suggested to Shizuru that Bo Yan was on good terms with Haidu, so there was no progress in the army. Shizuru issued a decree to replace Bo Yan with the Imperial Historian, Yuxi Timur.

古文：时成宗以皇孙奉诏抚军北边，举酒以饯曰： 公去，将何以教我？ 
现代文：当时成宗以皇孙的地位奉诏在北方抚军。赶走海都后，玉昔帖木儿才来接任。
English: At that time, Chengzong, with the status of the emperor's grandson, was ordered to raise an army in the north. After driving away the capital, Yuxi Timur took over.

古文：伯颜举所酌酒曰： 可慎者，惟此与女色耳。
现代文：伯颜离任时，成宗设宴饯行，向伯颜请教今后方略，伯颜举着酒杯对成宗说 ：应当慎重对待的是酒与女色。
English: When Bo Yan left the post, Cheng Zong held a banquet and asked Bo Yan for advice on future strategies. Bo Yan held up a wine glass and said to Cheng Zong: What should be treated with caution is wine and women.

古文：军中固当严纪律，而恩德不可偏废。
现代文：军队应当纪律严明，但还须施以恩德，二者不可偏废。
English: The army should be disciplined, but it must also be benevolent. The two must not be neglected.

古文：冬夏营驻，循旧为便。 
现代文：冬夏扎营，还是按照原先定制为好。 
English: Winter and summer camping, it is better to follow the original custom.

古文：成宗悉从之。
现代文：成宗都听从。
English: Chengzong all obeyed.

古文：时相有忌之者，伯颜语之曰： 幸送我两罂美酒，与诸王饮于宫前，余非所知也。 江南三省累请罢行枢密院，成宗问于伯颜，时已属疾，张目对曰： 内而省、院各置为宜，外而军、民分隶不便。 
现代文：三十年十二月，朝廷自大同召回伯颜。三十一年正月，世祖崩，成宗即位于上都大安阁。亲王不服，伯颜仗剑宣读祖宗宝训，说明成宗应继皇位的理由，声色俱厉，诸王畏惧，纷纷上殿叩头。五月，拜伯颜为开府仪同三司、太傅、录军国重事，仍知枢密院事。
English: In December of the thirtieth year, the imperial court recalled Bao Yan from Datong. In the first month of the thirty-first year, the death of the ancestor, Chengzong was located in Shangdu Da'an Ge. The prince was not satisfied, Bao Yan read the ancestor's sermon with a sword, explaining the reasons why Chengzong should succeed to the throne. The voices were fierce, the kings were afraid, and they went to the palace to kowtow. In May, Bao Yan was the keeper of the ceremony, the third secretary, the grand steward, and the military affairs, and still knew the Privy Council affairs.

古文：成宗是之，三院遂罢。
现代文：江南三省多次请求废除行枢密院，成宗问伯颜应如何处理。
English: The three provinces in southern Jiangsu have repeatedly requested the abolition of the Privy Council, and Chengzong asked Bo Yan what should be done.

古文：冬十二月丙申，有大星陨于东北。
现代文：这时伯颜已病在床，对成宗说： 在朝廷内，中书省与枢密院应该分开为好，而在外地，若将军政分开则多有不便。 
English: At this time, Bo Yan was already ill in bed and said to Cheng Zong: In the imperial court, it is better to separate the Ministry of Literature and the Privy Council, but in other places, it is more inconvenient to separate the military and the government.

古文：己亥，雨木冰。
现代文：成宗听取了他的意见，撤销各省行枢密院。
English: Chengzong listened to his opinion and abolished the provincial branches of the Privy Council.

古文：庚子，伯颜薨，年五十九。
现代文：十二月二十五日，伯颜逝世，年五十九岁。
English: On December 25th, Bo Yan passed away at the age of 59.

古文：伯颜深略善断，将二十万众伐宋，若将一人，诸帅仰之若神明。
现代文：伯颜深谋远略，善于决断，率二十万大军伐宋如领导指挥一人，诸将帅敬仰如神明。
English: Bo Yan was a shrewd strategist and good at making decisions. He led 200 thousand troops in the Song Dynasty. If he was the leader and commanded one person, the generals would respect him as a god.

古文：毕事还朝，归装惟衣被而已，未尝言功也。
现代文：灭宋还朝，行装仅衣被而已，从不夸耀自己的功劳。
English: When the Song Dynasty was still in power, they only wore bedclothes and never boasted of their achievements.

古文：大德八年，特赠宣忠佐命开济功臣、太师、开府仪同三司，追封淮安王，谥忠武。
现代文：大德八年，特赠宣忠佐命开济功臣、太师、开府仪同三司，追封淮安王，谥 忠武 。
English: In the 8th year of the Great German Reign, Emperor Taizong specially bestowed the title of Kaizhi meritorious subject, grand master, Kaifu Yi and three other titles on Xuan Zhongsu, and posthumously awarded the title of Huai'an King to him.

古文：至正四年，加赠宣忠佐命开济翊戴功臣，进封淮王，余如故。
现代文：至正四年，加赠宣忠佐命开济翊戴功臣，进封淮王，其余如故。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Taizong bestowed the title of Xuanzhongzha on a meritorious subject, the title of Huaiwang, and the rest remained the same.

古文：子买的，佥枢密院事；囊加歹，枢密副使。
现代文：有子二人：买的，任佥枢密院事；囊加歹，任枢密副使。
English: He had two sons: the one he bought was appointed to the Privy Council, and the one he acquired was appointed to the post of Deputy Privy Counsellor.

