古文：黄帝燕坐，召雷公而问之曰：汝受术诵书者，若能览观杂学，及于比类，通合道理，为余言子所长，五脏六腑，胆、胃、大小肠、脾、胞、膀胱、脑髓，涕、唾、哭泣、悲哀，水所从行，此皆人之所生，治之过失，子务明之，可以十全，即不能知，为世所怨。
现代文：黄帝安闲地坐着，召唤雷公问道：你是学习医术、诵读医书的人，若能达到博览群书，并能取象比类，可以说你已经贯通融会医学道理了，对我谈谈你的学习体会吧，比如：五脏六腑，胆、胃、大小肠、脾、胞宫、膀胱、脑髓，眼泪、唾液，哭泣、悲哀，水液的运行，这些都是人体所必须的，也是治疗中容易产生过失的，你务必要明白其中的道理，这样治病时就可以十全，若不能通晓，就不免要出差错，而为世人抱怨。
English: Huang Di sat at ease, summoned Lei Gong and asked: You are a person who studies medicine and reads medical books. If you can achieve a wide range of books and can compare like with like, it can be said that you have thoroughly integrated medical principles. Talk to me about your learning experience, for example: the five viscera, the gallbladder, the stomach, the large and small intestines, the spleen, the uterus, the bladder, the brain marrow, tears, saliva, crying, sadness, and the flow of fluid. These are all necessary for the human body, and are also prone to mistakes in treatment. You must understand the truth, so that you can be perfect when treating the

古文：雷公曰：臣请诵《脉经·上下篇》甚众多矣，别异比类，犹未能以十全，又安足以明之？
现代文：雷公回答说：我诵读《脉经·上下篇》很多遍了，但对取象比类还没有十分把握，又怎能说完全明白理解了呢？
English: Lei Gong replied, "I have read the "Pulse Sutra" many times, but I still don't have a good grasp of the analogy. How can I say that I have fully understood it?

古文：帝曰：子别试通五脏之过，六腑之所不和，针石之败，毒药所宜，汤液滋味，具言其状，悉言以对，请问不知。
现代文：黄帝说：你试试以你所通晓的理论，来解释五脏之所病，六腑之所不和，针石治疗之所败，毒药治疗之所宜，以及汤液滋味等方面的内容，并具体说明其症状，详细地作出回答，如果有不知道的地方，请提出来问我。
English: Huang Di said: Try to use the theory you are familiar with to explain the disease of the five organs, the disharmony of the six organs, the failure of the acupuncture treatment, the appropriateness of the poison treatment, and the taste of the soup and other aspects, and specify the symptoms and answer in detail. If there is anything you don't know, please ask me.

古文：雷公曰：肝虚、肾虚、脾虚，皆令人体重烦冤，当投毒药、刺灸、砭石、汤液，或已或不已，愿闻其解。
现代文：雷公说：肝虚、肾虚、脾虚，都能使人身体沉重和烦冤，当施以毒药、刺灸、砭石、汤液等方法治疗，但是有的治愈，有的不愈，我想知道你对此的解释。
English: Lei Gong said: Liver deficiency, kidney deficiency, and spleen deficiency can all make a person's body heavy and vexatious, and should be treated with poison, moxibustion, vermiculite, decoction and other methods, but some are cured, and some are not. I would like to know your explanation for this.

古文：帝曰：公何年之长而问之少？
现代文：黄帝说：你已经年纪不小了，怎么能提出这么幼稚的问题呢？
English: Huang Di said: You are already quite old, how can you ask such a childish question?

古文：余真问以自谬也。
现代文：这可能是我所提的问题不太恰当吧。
English: Maybe that's not the right question to ask.

古文：吾问子窈冥，子言上下篇以对，何也？
现代文：我想问的是医学深奥的道理，你却用《脉经·上下篇》的内容来回答，这是什么缘故呢？
English: What I want to ask is the profound truth of medicine, but you answer with the content of "Pulse Sutra, Part Two and Three." Why is this?

古文：夫脾虚浮似肺，肾小浮似脾，肝急沉散似肾，此皆工之所时乱也，然从容得之。
现代文：脾脉本宜微软，今病而现虚浮，与肺脉相似；肾脉本应微沉，今病而现小浮，与脾脉相似；肝脉本应急紧而散，今病而现急沉散，与肾脉相似，这些都是普通医生时常易于相混淆的，然而只要按照相应的方法去诊断，就可以分辨清楚。
English: The splenic vein should be soft, but now it is swollen, similar to the pulmonary vein; the renal vein should be slightly depressed, now it is swollen, similar to the splenic vein; the hepatic vein should be tight and loose, now it is rapidly sinking, similar to the renal vein. These are often easily confused by ordinary doctors, but as long as they are diagnosed according to the corresponding method, they can be clearly distinguished.

古文：若夫三脏，土木水参居，此童子之所知，问之何也！
现代文：至于脾、肝、肾三脏，分属于土、木、水，三者均居膈下，部位相近，这是小孩子都知道的，你问它有什么意义呢？
English: As for the three organs of the spleen, liver and kidney, they are divided into earth, wood and water. All three are under the armpit, and the parts are similar. This is known to children. What is the meaning of it?

古文：雷公曰：于此有人头痛，筋挛，骨重，怯然少气，哕，噫，腹满，时惊，不嗜卧，此何脏之发也？
现代文：雷公说：有一个这样的病人，头痛，筋脉拘挛，骨节沉重，畏怯少气，干呕，嗳气，腹满，时常惊骇，不欲卧，不知应归于哪一脏发生了病变呢？
English: Lei Gong said: There is such a patient, headache, muscle cramps, heavy bones, timidity, shortness of breath, retching, shortness of breath, full belly, often startled, unwilling to lie down, I do not know to which organ the lesion occurred?

古文：脉浮而弦，切之石坚，不知其解，复问所以三脏者，以知其比类也。
现代文：其脉象浮而弦，重按则坚硬如石，我不知应如何解释，因此要再次向你请教是否为脾、肝、肾三脏都有病了，以求能够知道如何比类辨析。
English: I do not know how to explain it, so I would like to ask you again whether it is because the spleen, liver and kidney are all sick, so that I can know how to distinguish between them.

古文：帝曰：夫从容之谓也。
现代文：黄帝说：这应按照取象比类的方法进行分析。
English: Huang Di said: This should be analyzed according to the method of image comparison.

古文：夫年长则求之于腑，年少则求之于经，年壮则求之于脏。
现代文：一般的说，老年人的病，应从六腑来探求；少年的病，应从经脉来探求；壮年的病，应从五脏来探求。
English: Generally speaking, the diseases of the elderly should be explored from the six gills; the diseases of the young should be explored from the meridians; the diseases of the young should be explored from the five viscera.

古文：今子所言皆失，八风菀热，五脏消烁，传邪相受。
现代文：现在你所讲得都是错的，八风郁结而发热这是外感，五脏消烁受损这是内伤，而内外之邪是会相互传变的。
English: What you are saying now is all wrong. The eight winds are heavy and hot, which is an external sensation; the five internal organs are damaged, which is an internal injury; and the internal and external evils will be transmitted to each other.

古文：夫浮而弦者，是肾不足也；沉而石者，是肾气内着也；怯然少气者，是水道不行，形气消索也；咳嗽烦冤者，是肾气之逆也。
现代文：如果，脉浮而弦的，是肾气不足；脉沉而坚硬如石的，是肾气停留不运行了；畏怯少气的，是因为水道不畅通，行气消失了；咳嗽烦闷的，是肾气上逆所致。
English: If the pulse is buoyant and stringy, it is a lack of kidney gas; if the pulse is heavy and hard as stone, it is the kidney gas that stops and does not run; if it is timid and short of breath, it is because the waterway is not smooth and the flow of gas has disappeared; if the cough is troublesome, it is the result of kidney gas.

古文：一人之气，病在一脏也，若言三脏俱行，不在法也。
现代文：总而言之这个病人的病因在肾脏，如果你认为是三脏俱病，是不符合医理的。
English: All in all, the cause of this patient's illness is in the kidneys. If you think it is a disease of the three viscera, it is not consistent with medical principles.

古文：雷公曰：于此有人四肢懈堕，喘嗽，血泄，而愚诊之以为伤肺，切脉浮大而紧，愚不敢治。
现代文：雷公问：另有一个病人，四肢懈怠无力，气喘、咳嗽而大便出血，我初步诊断的结果是肺病，其脉象是浮大而紧也与病症相符，但我还是未敢治疗。
English: Lei Gong asked: there is another patient, limbs slack and weak, asthma, cough and feces bleeding, I initially diagnosed the result is lung disease, its pulse is large and tight also consistent with the disease, but I still did not dare to treat.

古文：粗工下砭石，病愈多出血，血止身轻，此何物也？
现代文：有一个鲁莽的医生，治之以砭石，病愈，但出血多，血止以后，身体觉得轻快，这是什么病呢？
English: There was a reckless doctor who cured a patient with flint. The patient recovered, but bled profusely. After the bleeding stopped, the patient felt light-headed. What kind of illness is this?

古文：帝曰：子所能治，知亦众多，与此病失矣。
现代文：黄帝说：你所能治的病已经很多了，你所知道的医理也不少了，但对这个病人的诊断却错了。
English: Huang Di said: There are many diseases that you can cure, and you know a lot of medical principles, but the diagnosis of this patient is wrong.

古文：譬以鸿飞，亦冲于天。夫圣人之治病，循法守度，援物比类，化之冥冥，循上及下，何必守经？
现代文：医学的道理是非常深奥的，好比鸿雁的飞翔，虽亦能上冲于天，却得不到浩渺长空的边际。所以高明的医生治病，首先要遵循法度，取象比类，掌握变化于冥冥莫测之中，察上可以及下，不能拘泥于经书。
English: The principles of medicine are very profound, just like the flight of wild geese. Although they can soar into the sky, they cannot reach the edge of the vastness of space. Therefore, a skilled doctor must first follow the law, take images and compare them, and grasp the changes in the unpredictable. You can see up and down, but you can't stick to the scriptures.

古文：今夫脉浮大虚者，是脾气之外绝，去胃外归阳明也。
现代文：这个病例，脉象见浮大而虚，这是脾气外绝，不能为胃行其津液，以致津液独归于阳明经。
English: In this case, the pulse seems to be large and false, which is out of temper, and the stomach can not carry out its juice, so that the juice is attributed to the Yang Mingjing.

古文：夫二火不胜三水，是以脉乱而无常也。
现代文：由于二火不能胜三水，所以脉乱而无常。
English: Because two fires can't beat three waters, so the pulse is chaotic and unstable.

古文：四肢懈堕，此脾精之不行也。
现代文：四肢懈怠无力，是脾精不能输布的缘故。
English: The weakness of the limbs is due to the inability of the spleen to secrete.

古文：喘咳者，是水气并阳明也。
现代文：气喘咳嗽，是水气泛滥于阳明胃经所致。
English: Wheezing and coughing are caused by gas flooding through the Yangming stomach.

古文：血泄者，脉急，血无所行也。
现代文：大便出血，是由于脉急而血溢其外。
English: Bleeding in the stool, caused by blood rushing out of the body.

古文：若夫以为伤肺者，由失以狂也。
现代文：你把本病诊断为肺病，是判断失误而说的狂悖之言。
English: Your diagnosis of the disease as a lung disease is a misjudgment and a wild statement.

古文：不引比类，是知不明也。夫伤肺者，脾气不守，胃气不清，经气不为使，真脏坏决，经脉旁绝，五脏漏泄，不衂则呕。
现代文：诊病不能取象比类，是知之不明，如果肺气受伤，则脾气不能内守，致胃气不清，经气也不为其所使，肺脏损坏，则治节不通，致经脉有所偏绝，五脏之气俱漏泄，不是鼻出血就是呕血。
English: Diagnosis cannot be made by analogy, it is unknown, if the lung qi is injured, then the temper cannot be protected, the gastric qi is not clear, and the meridian is not caused by it, if the lung is damaged, then the incision is not clear, the menstrual pulse is deviated, and the five viscera are leaking, and either the nose bleeds or vomits blood.

古文：此二者不相类也，譬如天之无形，地之无理，白与黑相去远矣。
现代文：病在肺在脾，二者是不相类同的，这就好像，天不分其形，地不分其理，黑白不能分辩，未免相距太远了。
English: The disease is in the lungs and spleen, and the two are not similar. It is as if the sky does not distinguish its shape, the earth does not distinguish its reason, black and white cannot be distinguished, and the distance is too far.

古文：是失吾过矣，以子知之，故不告子，明引比类《从容》，是以名曰诊轻，是谓至道也。
现代文：这个失误是我的过错，我以为你已经知道了，所以没有告诉你，现在我传授给你取象比类的《从容》方法，它被称为诊断的法规，是最高明的医道。
English: This mistake was my fault. I thought you already knew, so I didn't tell you. Now I'm going to teach you the "calm" method of making analogies. It's called the law of diagnosis, and it's the wisest medical path.

