古文：起旃蒙单阏，尽强圉大荒落，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。
English: A total of three years.

古文：烈祖明皇帝中之下青龙三年
现代文：魏明帝青龙三年
English: Wei, Ming and Qing dynasties

古文：春，正月，戊子，以大将军司马懿为太尉。
现代文：春季，正月，戊子，任命大将军司马懿为太尉。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Go-Daigo appointed General Sima Ye to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：丁巳，皇太后郭氏殂。
现代文：丁己，皇太后郭氏去世。
English: Ding Zi, Empress Dowager Guo passed away.

古文：帝数问甄后死状于太后，由是太后以忧殂。
现代文：明帝多次向太后询问母亲甄氏致死的情状，于是，太后因忧惧而死。
English: Emperor Ming repeatedly asked the Empress Dowager about the circumstances of her mother Zhen's death. As a result, the Empress Dowager died of anxiety.

古文：汉杨仪既杀魏延，自以为有大功，宜代诸葛亮秉政；而亮平生密指，以仪狷狭，意在蒋琬。
现代文：蜀杨仪已然杀掉魏延，自认为立有大功，应当代替诸葛亮执政。可是，诸葛亮生前另有秘密指令，认为杨仪胸襟狭隘而且性情急躁，意向是由蒋琬接任。
English: Shu Yangyi had already killed Wei Yan, and thought that he had done a great service and should replace Zhuge Liang in power. However, Zhuge Liang had another secret order before his death, believing that Yang Yi was narrow-minded and impatient, and intended to be succeeded by Jiang Chen.

古文：仪至成都，拜中军师，无所统领，从容而已。
现代文：杨仪到达成都后任中军师，没有统管的具体工作，只是悠闲而已。
English: After Yang Yi arrived in Chengdu, he served as a Chinese military instructor. He did not have any specific work to supervise, but was just idle.

古文：初，仪事昭烈帝为尚书，琬时为尚书郎。
现代文：最初，杨仪侍奉昭烈帝刘备担任尚书职务，蒋琬当时只是尚书郎。
English: In the beginning, Yang Yi served the Emperor Liu Bei as Shang Shuro, while Jiang Chen was just Shang Shuro.

古文：后虽俱为丞相参军、长史，仪每从行，当其劳剧；自谓年宦先琬，才能逾之，于是怨愤形于声色，叹咤之音发于五内，时人畏其言语不节，莫敢从也。
现代文：后来，虽然两人都担任了丞相参军、长史的职务，但杨仪每次随诸葛亮行动，承担的任务比较繁重，自认为资历深于蒋琬，才干也超过蒋琬，于是抱怨愤恨之情显露于声色中，叹息怒斥之声发自心底。当时人们害怕他言炎话语没有约束，不敢和他来往。
English: Later, although both of them served as chancellor, minister of war, and minister of long history, Yang Yi always followed Zhuge Liang's actions and undertook more arduous tasks. He considered himself to be more senior than Chiang Kai-shek and more talented than Chiang Kai-shek. Therefore, he complained that his feelings of resentment were revealed in his tone of voice, and his sighs and angry rebukes came from the bottom of his heart. At that time, people were afraid of his unrestrained words and did not dare to associate with him.

古文：惟后军师费祎往慰省之，仪对祎恨望，前后云云。又语祎曰： 往者丞相亡没之际，吾若举军以就魏氏，处世宁当落度如此邪！
现代文：只有后军师费前去安慰问候他，杨仪对费发泄心中的怨恨，把前后经过如此如此地说了一遍，又对费说： 当初丞相刚刚去世之时，我如果率军投奔魏，为人处世怎会零落失意到这种地步？
English: It was only after the war that Fei went to comfort and greet him. Yang Yi vented her resentment on Fei, telling her everything that had happened before and after. She also said to Fei: When the prime minister had just died, if I had led the army to Wei, how could I have been so disheartened in my personal life?

古文：令人追悔，不可复及！ 
现代文：令人后悔，不可能再追回了！ 
English: Regrettably, it is impossible to get it back!

古文：祎密表其言。汉主废仪为民，徙汉嘉郡。
现代文：费把他的话秘密上表，汉后主遂把杨仪免职贬为平民，流放到汉嘉郡。
English: Fei made his words public in secret, and the emperor then dismissed Yang Yi as a commoner and exiled her to Hanga County.

古文：仪至徙所，复上书诽谤，辞指激切。遂下郡收仪，仪自杀。
现代文：杨仪到达流放地点后，又上书进行诽谤，言辞激烈强硬，于是下令郡府逮捕杨仪，杨仪自杀。
English: After Yang Yi arrived at the place of exile, she wrote a defamatory letter, and her words were fierce and tough. Therefore, the county government ordered to arrest Yang Yi, and Yang Yi committed suicide.

古文：三月，庚寅，葬文德皇后。
现代文：三月，庚寅，安葬皇太后郭氏。
English: In March, Emperor Go-In buried Empress Dowager Guo.

古文：夏，四月，汉主以蒋琬为大将军、录尚书事；费祎代琬为尚书令。
现代文：夏季，四月，汉后主任命蒋琬担任大将军、录尚书事；费接替蒋琬担任尚书令。
English: In the summer, in April, the empress of the Han Dynasty appointed Chiang Kai-shek as the grand general to record the official records; Fei succeeded Chiang Kai-shek as the official record keeper.

古文：帝好土功，既作许昌宫，又治洛阳宫，起昭阳太极殿，筑总章观，高十馀丈。
现代文：明帝热衷于土木建筑工程，已经兴建了许昌宫，又修复洛阳宫，建起昭阳太极殿，筑成总章观，观高十余丈。
English: Emperor Ming was keen on civil engineering projects. He built the Xu Chang Palace, restored the Luoyang Palace, built the Zhaoyang Taiji Temple, and built the General Chapter View, which is more than ten meters high.

古文：力役不已，农桑失业。
现代文：于是不停地征调劳役，农桑之事几乎停顿。
English: As a result, laborers were constantly recruited and transferred, and the farming of mulberry almost came to a standstill.

古文：司空陈群上疏曰： 昔禹承唐、虞之盛，犹卑宫室而恶衣服。况今丧乱之后，人民至少，比汉文、景之时，不过一大郡。
现代文：司空陈群上书说： 古代大禹承继唐尧、虞舜的昌盛基业，还是居住低矮的宫室，身穿粗劣的衣服，何况如今正在战乱之后，人口很少，比之汉文帝、汉景帝之时，不超过当时的一个大郡。
English: Siku Chenqun wrote: In ancient times, Dayu, who inherited the prosperity of Tang Xuan and Yu Xi, still lived in a low palace, wearing coarse clothes. Moreover, after the war, the population was very small. Compared to the time of Han Wendi and Han Jingdi, it was no more than a large county at that time.

古文：加以边境有事，将士劳苦，若有水旱之患，国家之深忧也。
现代文：加之边疆战事不断，将士劳累辛苦，如果出现水灾、旱灾，就会成为国家的深重忧虑。
English: In addition, the frontier war is incessant, the soldiers are overworked, and if there are floods and droughts, it will become a serious concern for the country.

古文：昔刘备自成都至白水，多作传舍，兴费人役，太祖知其疲民也。
现代文：以前刘备从成都出发到白水，沿途大建居室馆所，耗费大量人力，太祖知道他是使民众疲惫。
English: In the past, Liu Bei set out from Chengdu to Baishui, and built a large residence hall along the way, consuming a lot of manpower. Taizu knew that he was making the people tired.

古文：今中国劳力，亦吴、蜀之所愿。此安危之机也，惟陛下虑之！ 
现代文：而今中原大用民力，也正是吴国、西蜀所希望的，这是关系国家安危的关键问题，愿陛下考虑！ 
English: Now that the Central Plains are making extensive use of the people's power, this is exactly what the State of Wu and the State of West Shu hope for. This is a critical issue that concerns the safety and security of the country. May His Majesty consider it!

古文：帝答曰： 王业、宫室，亦宜并立。灭贼之后，但当罢守御耳，岂可复兴役邪！
现代文：明帝答道： 帝王之业和帝王宫殿，也应该并行建立，消灭敌人之后，只须罢兵防守，怎么可以再大兴劳役呢？
English: Emperor Ming replied: The emperor's business and the emperor's palace should also be built in parallel. After eliminating the enemy, it is only necessary to strike and defend. How can labor service be rejuvenated?

古文：是固君之职，萧何之大略也。 
现代文：这本来是你的职责，同萧何当初修治未央宫一样。 
English: This should have been your responsibility, just as it was for Xiao He when he first built and administered the Summer Palace.

古文：群曰： 昔汉祖惟与项羽争天下，羽已灭，宫室烧焚，是以萧何建武库、太仓，皆是要急，然高祖犹非其壮丽。
现代文：陈群说： 从前汉高祖只与项羽争夺天下，项羽已然被灭，而宫室都被烧毁，所以萧何修建了武器库、粮库，都是紧急需要，然而高祖还责怪修建得过于华丽。
English: Chen Qun said: Once upon a time, the Han Emperor Gaozu only competed with Xiang Yu for the world. Xiang Yu had already been destroyed, and the palace was burned down. Therefore, Xiao He built a weapons depot and a grain depot, both of which were urgent needs. However, Gaozu also blamed the building for being too gorgeous.

古文：今二虏未平，诚不宜与古同也。
现代文：而今吴、蜀两国还没平定，实在不应与古代等同并论。
English: However, the two countries of Wu and Shu have not yet been pacified, and they really should not be equated with ancient times.

古文：夫人之所欲，莫不有辞，况乃天王，莫之敢违。
现代文：人们要想满足私欲，没有找不到托辞的，何况帝王，更没有人敢于违抗。
English: If people want to satisfy their selfish desires, there is no excuse, not to mention the emperor, and no one dares to defy.

古文：前欲坏武库，谓不可不坏也；后欲置之，谓不可不置也。
现代文：陛下以前想要拆毁武器库，说是不可不拆毁；以后打算重新设置，又说不可不设置。
English: If you wanted to destroy the arsenal before, you had to tear it down; if you want to build it again in the future, you have to keep it alive.

古文：若必作之，固非臣下辞言所屈；若少留神，卓然回意，亦非臣下之所及也。
现代文：如果一定要兴建，固然不是臣下的话所能改变的；如果稍加留意历史教训，臣下回心转意，也不是高瞻远瞩地所能比得上的。
English: If it must be built, it certainly cannot be changed by the words of a vassal; if you pay a little attention to the lessons of history, the vassals will change their minds, and it is not comparable to the far-sightedness.

古文：汉明帝欲起德阳殿，钟离意谏，即用其言，后乃复作之；殿成，谓群臣曰： 钟离尚书在，不得成此殿也。 
现代文：汉明帝打算修建德阳殿，钟离意直言规劝，就采纳了他的意见，以后又重新兴建；宫殿建成后，对群臣说： 如果钟离尚书还在，此殿就建不成了。 
English: Emperor Hanming planned to build the Deyang Palace, but Zhong Liang was outspoken and persuasive, so he accepted his opinion and later rebuilt it. After the palace was completed, he said to his courtiers: If Zhong Liang Shangshu is still alive, this palace will not be built.

古文：夫王者岂惮一臣！
现代文：作为帝王怎么可以只怕一个人？
English: How can an emperor be afraid of just one person?

古文：盖为百姓也。
现代文：应该一切为百姓考虑。
English: Everything should be considered for the people.

古文：今臣曾不能少凝圣德，不及意远矣。 
现代文：现在我不能使陛下稍稍听取一些意见，比起钟离意差得太远了。 
English: Now I can't get His Majesty to listen to a bit of advice, it's too far from my mind.

古文：帝乃为之少有减省。
现代文：为此，明帝稍有减省。
English: For this reason, Mingtai has slightly reduced production.

古文：帝耽于内宠，妇官秩石拟百官之数，自贵人以下至掖庭洒扫者，凡数千人，选女子知书可付信者六人，以为女尚书，使典省外奏事，处当画可。
现代文：明帝沉迷于宠妃美女之中，宫中女官的官位和俸禄比照文武百官的数目，自贵人以下到担任宫廷洒扫的宫女有千人，挑选读书识字可以信赖的六人任为女尚书，让她们审查不经尚书省直接上奏的朝臣奏章，分别处理，可者准奏。
English: Emperor Ming was obsessed with his favorite beauties. The official ranks and salaries of court ladies in the palace were compared according to the number of civil and military officials. There were thousands of court ladies, from noblemen and below to those who served as palace cleaners. Six people who could be trusted to read and write were selected as court ladies. They were allowed to review the courtier's music, which was not played directly by the Ministry of Song and Literature, and deal with it separately, but they could play it.

古文：廷尉高柔上疏曰： 昔汉文惜十家之资，不营小台之娱；去病臣匈奴之害，不遑治第之事。况今所损者非惟百金之费，所忧者非徒北锹之患乎！
现代文：廷尉高柔上书说： 从前汉文帝爱惜十家的资财，不建造一个小小的楼台娱乐，霍去病忧虑匈奴的危害，没有闲暇营治宅第，何况现在所耗费的绝非只是百金的资财，所忧虑的绝非只是北狄的危害！
English: The courtier Gao Rong wrote: Once upon a time, Emperor Wen of the Han Dynasty cherished the wealth of ten families, did not build a small entertainment tower, worried about the dangers of the Xiongnu, and did not have leisure time to run the household. What's more, what is being spent now is by no means just the wealth of a hundred gold coins, and what is worried about is by no means just the dangers of the Northern Di!

古文：可粗成见所营立以充朝宴之仪，讫罢作者，使得就养；二方平定，复可徐兴。
现代文：我认为，只可粗略地完成已动工的工程，充当朝会和宴会之用，竣工之后遣返在工地上劳动的民夫，使他们能够回去务农，待西蜀和吴国平定之后，再可慢慢兴建。
English: In my opinion, the project that has already begun can only be roughly completed, used for imperial meetings and banquets, and after completion, the people who worked on the construction site can be repatriated so that they can go back to farming. After West Shu and Wuxi are pacified, it can be slowly built.

古文：《周礼》：天子后妃以下百二十人，嫔嫱之仪，既已盛矣。
现代文：《周礼》规定，天子可有后妃以下一百二十人，嫔妃的仪制，已经够盛大了。
English: The "Weekly Ritual" stipulates that the heavenly son can have one hundred and twenty people below the empress, and the ceremony of the empress is already grand enough.

古文：窃闻后庭之数，或复过之，圣嗣不昌，殆能由此。
现代文：我私下听说，后宫的人数可能已超过这个数目，圣下的子嗣未能昌盛，大概全是由于此吧。
English: Privately, the minister heard that the number of concubines in the harem may even exceed this number, and that His Majesty's heirs are not flourishing, probably because of this situation.

古文：臣愚以为可妙简淑媛以备内官之数，其馀尽遣还家，且以育精养神，专静为宝。
现代文：我认为可以挑选少量贤淑美女，备齐内官的数目，其余的全部遣送回家，陛下可以育精养神，专一静养。
English: I think that a small number of virtuous and beautiful women can be selected, the number of officials can be prepared, and the rest can be sent home. His Majesty can cultivate his spirit and concentrate on meditation.

古文：如此，则《螽斯》之征可庶而致矣。 
现代文：那么，《经·螽斯》所说多子多孙的征兆不久就可出现了。 
English: So, the signs of having many children and grandchildren, as mentioned in the Sutra, may soon appear.

古文：帝报曰： 卿辄昌言，他复以闻。 
现代文：明帝回答说： 你经常正言进谏，其它事情，请再进言。 
English: Emperor Ming replied, "You often speak with a straight face. For other matters, please speak again."

古文：是时猎法严峻，杀禁地鹿者身死，财产没官，有能觉告者，厚加赏赐。
现代文：这时狩猎的法规极其严厉，杀死皇家禁地内麋鹿的人要处以死刑，没收财产，有能发现并告发的人，给以重赏。
English: At this time, the hunting regulations were extremely strict. Anyone who killed a moose in the royal restricted area was to be sentenced to death, their property was to be confiscated, and a reward was to be given to anyone who could find out and report it.

古文：柔复上疏曰： 中间以来，百姓供给众役，亲田者既减；加顷复有猎禁，群鹿犯暴，残食生苗，处处为害，所伤不赀，民虽障离，力不能御。
现代文：高柔又上书说： 近年来，百姓提供了各种劳役，从事田间劳动的人已经减少，再加上又有猎禁之法，群鹿有时暴性发作，贪吃毁坏地里长着的嫩苗，处处为害，所损害的不计其数，民众虽然设障防备，但力量不够，防不胜防。
English: Gao Rong also wrote: In recent years, the people have provided all kinds of laborers, and the number of people engaged in field labor has decreased. In addition, there is a law prohibiting hunting. The deer sometimes have violent attacks, and they are greedy and destroy the young seedlings growing in the fields. They are harmful everywhere, and the number of damages is countless. Although the people have set up barriers and prepared, they are not strong enough to prevent it.

古文：至如荥阳左右，周数百里，岁略不收。
现代文：以至到了荥阳附近地区，周围数百里，年年几乎没有收成。
English: Even in the area around Shenyang, hundreds of miles away, there is almost no harvest year after year.

古文：方今天下生生者甚少，而麋鹿之损者甚多，卒有兵戎之役，凶年之灾，将无以待之。
现代文：而今天下创造财富的很少，而麋鹿造成的损失很多，如果突然爆发战争动员兵役，或者荒年降临颗粒不收，将没有办法应付。
English: Today, however, very little wealth is created, and the losses caused by the elk are many. If war suddenly breaks out and military service is mobilized, or if grain is not harvested in a bad year, there will be no way to cope.

古文：惟陛下宽放民间，使得捕鹿，遂除其禁，则众庶永济，莫不悦豫矣。 
现代文：请陛下对待民间宽大放松一些，准许民众捉捕麋鹿，尽快解除猎禁，那么百姓将有长久的接济，没有谁会不高兴了。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to be more lenient and relaxed towards the people, to allow the people to catch elk and lift the hunting ban as soon as possible. Then the people will have long-term support, and no one will be unhappy.

古文：帝又欲平北芒，令于其上作台观，望见孟津。
现代文：明帝又想铲平北芒山顶，下令在上面建造台观，以便远望孟津。
English: Emperor Ming also wanted to raze the top of Beimang Mountain and ordered a viewing platform to be built on top so that he could see as far as Mengjin.

古文：卫尉辛毘谏曰： 天地之性，高高下下。
现代文：卫尉辛毗规劝说： 天地成自然，本来就是高高低低。
English: Guardsman Xin Bijie advised: "Heaven and earth are natural, and they are naturally high and low.

古文：今而反之，既非其理；加以损费人功，民不堪役。
现代文：现在要反其道而行，已经违背了天理；加之耗费人工，民众已无力承担。
English: To do the opposite now would be against the laws of nature, and it would be too much work for the people to bear.

古文：且若九河盈溢，洪水为害，而丘陵皆夷，将何以御之！ 
现代文：如果九河涨满，洪水为害时，丘陵都被夷为平地，将靠什么防御呢？ 
English: If the nine rivers are swollen and the hills are flattened when the floods are harmful, what defense will they rely on?

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：明帝这才作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：少府杨阜上疏曰： 陛下奉武皇帝开拓之大业，守文皇帝克终之元绪，诚宜思齐往古圣贤之善治，总观季世放荡之恶政。
现代文：少府杨阜上书说： 陛下承继武皇帝开拓的帝王大业，保持文皇帝一贯遵循的方向，实在应该向古代圣贤的治世看齐，总观各朝末世放荡的弊政。
English: Young prefect Yang Fu said in his letter: Your Majesty, inheriting the great imperial cause pioneered by Emperor Wu and maintaining the direction consistently followed by Emperor Wen, should really look to the reigns of ancient sages, and take an overall view of the debauched maladministration of the last days of each dynasty.

古文：曩使桓、灵不废高祖之法度，文、景之恭俭，太祖虽有神武，于何所施，而陛下何由处斯尊哉！
现代文：以前假使汉桓帝、汉灵帝不废驰汉高祖的法令制度，不破坏汉文帝、汉景帝的谦恭节俭，我们太祖虽有神武之威，又往何处施展，而陛下又怎么能够处在至尊地位呢？
English: In the past, if Emperor Han Huan and Emperor Han Ling did not abolish the legal system of Emperor Han Gao, and did not destroy the modesty and frugality of Emperor Han Wen and Emperor Han Jing, although our great-grandfathers had the divine power, where did they exert it, and how could His Majesty be in the supreme position?

古文：今吴、蜀未定，定旅在外，诸所缮治，惟陛下务从约节。 
现代文：而今吴、蜀两国还没平定，军队在外戍边，各项修缮整治工程，请陛下务必简约节省。 
English: Now that the two countries of Wu and Shu have not been pacified, and the army is on the outskirts of the country, various repair and rectification projects, please His Majesty must be simple and economical.

古文：帝优诏答之。
现代文：明帝下诏对他的意见表示称赞。
English: The Empress Dowager replied.

古文：阜复上疏曰： 尧尚茅茨而万国安其居，禹卑宫室而天下乐其业。
现代文：杨阜又上书说： 尧帝推崇简陋的茅屋，万国安居，大禹居住低矮的宫室，天下乐业。
English: Yang Fu also submitted a letter saying: Emperor Qianlong revered the humble thatched cottage, all nations lived in peace, Emperor Yu lived in a low-slung palace, and the world was happy.

古文：及至殷、周，或堂崇三尺，度以九筵耳。
现代文：到了商朝和周朝，殿堂堂基不过高三尺，宽只能容纳九张席子而已。
English: In the Shang and Zhou dynasties, the foundation of the hall of fame was only three feet high and could only accommodate nine seats.

古文：桀作璇室象廊，纣为倾宫鹿台，以丧其社稷；楚灵以筑章华而身受祸；秦始皇作阿房，二世而灭。
现代文：夏桀用玉石建造居室，用象牙装饰走廊，商纣建造倾宫、鹿台，因而断送了王朝大业。楚灵王因修筑章华台而身遭大祸，秦始皇修建阿房宫，传位二世即归灭亡。
English: Xia Yao used jade to build his living room and ivory to decorate the corridors, and Shang Yao built the Tang Palace and Deer Terrace, thus ending the great cause of the dynasty. King Chuling suffered a great disaster due to the construction of the Zhanghuatai, Emperor Qin Shi Huang built the Afang Palace, and the second to succeed to the throne died.

古文：夫不度万民之力，以从耳目之欲，未有不亡者也。
现代文：如果不估量民力的极限，只为满足自己耳目的享受，没有哪一个不灭亡的。
English: He who does not estimate the power of the people, and does not obey the dictates of his own ears and eyes, will perish.

古文：陛下当以尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武为法则，夏桀、殷纣、楚灵、秦皇为深诫，而乃自暇自逸，惟宫台是饰，必有颠覆危亡之祸矣。
现代文：陛下应当以尧、舜、禹、商汤、文王、武王为榜样，以夏桀、殷纣、楚灵王、秦始皇的教训为鉴戒，不这样而是贪图自己闲暇安逸，只是关心宫殿台阁的修饰，一定有朝廷颠覆国家灭亡的灾祸。
English: His Majesty should follow the examples of Emperor Xizong, Emperor Zhao, Emperor Yu, Shang Tang, King Wen, and King Wu, and the lessons of Emperor Xia, King Yin, King Chuling, and Emperor Qin as a warning. Otherwise, he will covet his own leisure and comfort, and only care about the decoration of the palace pavilion. There must be a calamity of the imperial court subverting the country.

古文：君作元首，臣为股肱，存亡一体，得失同之。
现代文：君王好比是头脑，大臣好比是四肢，生死与共，利害相同。
English: The king is like the head, and the minister is like the limbs. They share life and death, and have the same interests.

古文：臣虽驽怯，敢忘争臣之义！言不切至，不足以感寤陛下。陛下不察臣言，恐皇祖、烈考之祚坠于地。
现代文：我虽然愚蠢胆怯，岂敢忘记诤臣的大义，言辞不激切，便不足以感动陛下；陛下如不体察我的进言，恐怕皇祖、先帝创建的大业将坠落在地。
English: Although I am stupid and timid, I dare not forget the great justice of my vassals. Words without passion are not enough to move Your Majesty. If Your Majesty does not consider my advice, I am afraid that the great cause created by the Emperor's ancestors will fall to the ground.

古文：使臣身死有补万一，则死之日犹生之年也。
现代文：即使我以身死而能于事有万分之一的补救，那么我死去了也如同活着。
English: Even if I die and there is a one-in-a-thousand chance that I can fix things, then I'm just as alive when I'm dead.

古文：谨叩棺沐浴，伏俟重诛！ 
现代文：谨敲击棺木，沐浴更衣，听候诛杀。 
English: Respectfully knock on the coffin, take a shower, change clothes, and wait for the fight.

古文：奏御，帝感其忠言，手笔诏答。
现代文：奏章呈上后，明帝被他的忠言感动，亲笔写诏回答。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Ming was moved by his words of loyalty and replied in his own handwriting.

古文：帝尝著裮，被缥绫半袖。阜问帝曰： 此于礼何法服也？ 
现代文：明帝曾经头戴便帽，身穿淡青色短袖绸衫，杨阜问明帝： 这是符合礼制的哪一种服装？ 
English: Emperor Ming once wore a cap on his head and a light blue short-sleeved silk shirt. Yang Fu asked Emperor Ming: Which kind of clothing conforms to the etiquette?

古文：帝默然不答。
现代文：明帝沉默不语。
English: Emperor Wu remained silent and did not answer.

古文：自是不法服不以见阜。
现代文：从此以后，不穿礼制规定的标准服装不见杨阜。
English: Since then, Yang Fu has not been seen wearing the standard dress prescribed by the etiquette system.

古文：阜又上疏欲省宫人诸不见幸者，乃召御府吏问后宫人数。吏守旧令，对曰： 禁密，不得宣露！ 
现代文：杨阜又上书打算减去宫女中那些不被皇帝宠幸的人，于是召来御府吏员询问后宫人数，吏员遵守原有的规定，答道： 这是宫中的秘密，不能泄漏。 
English: Yang Fu also submitted a letter intending to subtract from the number of maids of honor those who were not favored by the emperor, so he summoned the imperial official to inquire about the number of people in the harem. The official complied with the original regulations and replied: This is a secret in the palace and cannot be divulged.

古文：阜怒，杖吏一百，数之曰： 国家不与九卿为密，反与小吏为密乎！ 
现代文：杨阜大怒，责打他一百棍，数落他说： 国家对九卿没有秘密，反而对小吏有什么秘密吗？ 
English: Yang Fu flew into a rage and beat him with a hundred sticks, at which point he said: The state has no secrets from the nine nobles, but does it have any secrets from the minor officials?

古文：帝愈严惮之。
现代文：明帝更加惧惮杨阜。
English: From then on, Emperor Ming respected and feared Yang Fu even more.

古文：散骑常侍蒋济上疏曰： 昔句践养胎以待用，昭王恤病以雪仇，故能以弱燕服强齐，羸越灭劲吴。
现代文：散骑常侍蒋济上书说： 从前勾践鼓励生育，准备国家征用，燕昭王抚慰疾病贫苦的人民，是打算报仇雪耻，所以能以弱小的燕国战胜强大的齐国，贫穷的越国消灭了强劲的吴国。
English: "In the past, Yan Zhaowang encouraged fertility and prepared for national requisition. Yan Zhaowang consoled the sick and poor people. He intended to avenge the shame of the past. Therefore, he was able to defeat the powerful Qi with the weak Yan, and the poor Yue wiped out the strong Wu.

古文：今二敌强盛，当身不除，百世之责也。
现代文：如今吴、蜀两敌强盛，陛下在位时不能翦除，将为后代百世所谴责。
English: Now that the two enemies, Wu and Shu, are strong, they cannot be eliminated when His Majesty is on the throne, and will be condemned by future generations.

古文：以陛下圣明神武之略，舍其缓者，专心讨贼，臣以为无难矣。 
现代文：凭着陛下圣明神武的韬略，舍弃那些可以缓办的事情，一心一意讨伐敌人，我认为没有什么难办的。 
English: On the basis of His Majesty's wise and divine counsel, he first put aside those loose affairs and devoted himself to fighting the thieves. The vassal thought there would be no difficulty.

古文：中书侍郎东莱王基上疏曰： 臣闻古人以水喻民曰： 水所以载舟，亦所以覆舟。 
现代文：中书侍郎东莱人王基上书说： 我听说古人用水比喻人民说： 水可以载舟，也可以覆舟 。
English: In the middle of the book, Wang Jizhe, the steward of the Donglai people, said: I heard that the ancients used water as a metaphor for the people, saying: Water can carry a boat, and it can also overturn a boat.

古文：颜渊曰 东野子之御，马力尽矣，而求进不已，殆将败矣。 
现代文：颜渊说： 东野子驾车，马力已经用尽了，但仍不停地向前驱赶，终将毁掉马匹。 
English: Yan Yuan said, "Higashi Noko is driving the cart, the horsepower has been exhausted, but he still keeps driving forward, which will eventually destroy the horses.

古文：今事役劳苦，男女离旷，愿陛下深察东野之敝，留意舟水之喻，息奔驷于未尽，节力役于未困。
现代文：如今劳役辛苦，男女分离，希望陛下深察东野子驾车的弊病，留意舟水关系的比喻，让奔跑的马匹在力气还没用尽时得到休息，在人民还没困竭时减省力役。
English: Nowadays, labor is hard, men and women are separated. I hope that His Majesty will deeply observe the ills of driving, pay attention to the metaphor of the relationship between boat and water, let the running horses get rest when their strength is not exhausted, and reduce the labor service when the people are not exhausted.

古文：昔汉有天下，至孝文时唯有同姓诸侯，而贾谊忧之曰： 置火积薪之下而寝其上，因谓之安。 
现代文：从前汉朝取得天下，到文帝时只有同姓诸侯，可是贾谊仍然忧虑地说： 把火苗放在柴堆下面而睡其上，还认为是平安。 
English: The former Han Dynasty conquered the world, and when Emperor Wen came to power, there were only princes with the same surname, but Jia Yi still said anxiously: If you put a flame under a pile of firewood and sleep on it, you still think it is safe.

古文：殿中监督役，擅收兰台令史，右仆射卫臻奏案之。
现代文：如今贼寇未灭，猛将拥兵自重，限制约束他们就无法应付敌人，长久下去则难以交代给子孙，当此国家盛明之时，还不全力除害，如果将来子孙不强，必定是国家的忧患。
English: Today, the bandits have not been eliminated, the soldiers are self-respecting, and they can not cope with the enemy if they are restricted and constrained. If this continues for a long time, it will be difficult to pass on to their children and grandchildren. When this country is flourishing, it is not doing its best to eliminate the harm. If the children and grandchildren are not strong in the future, it must be a national sorrow.

古文：诏曰： 殿舍不成，吾所留心，卿推之，何也？ 
现代文：假使贾谊复活，一定比从前感受更加深切。 明帝都不采纳。
English: If the Jia friendship is revived, it will certainly be felt more deeply than before.

古文：臻曰： 古制侵官之法，非恶其勤事也，诚以所益者小，所堕者大也。
现代文：殿中监监督营造宫室，擅自拘捕兰台令史。右仆射卫臻奏请查办，明帝颁诏说： 宫殿不能完工，是我最关心的，你推究查办此事，是为什么？ 卫臻说： 古代有禁止官吏互相侵犯职权的法规，不是厌恶他们勤于办事，实在是因为收效小而破坏大。
English: The palace superintendent oversaw the construction of the palace room, and arrested Lan Tai Ling Shi without authorization. His right-hand man, Sha Wei Zhenso, asked for an investigation, and the Ming Emperor issued an edict saying: The palace cannot be completed, which is my greatest concern. Why did you investigate and investigate this matter? Wei Zhen said: In ancient times, there were laws prohibiting officials from infringing on each other's powers. It was not because they were averse to doing things, but because they had little effect and caused great damage.

古文：臣每察校事，类皆如此，若又纵之，惧群司将遂越职，以至陵夷矣。 
现代文：我每次检查校事的工作，都有同类毛病，如果再对此放纵，我恐怕各部门马上就要越职越权，以至王权衰颓了。 
English: Every time I inspect the work of school affairs, there are similar problems. If I indulge in this again, I am afraid that all departments will immediately exceed their duties and powers, and the royal power will decline.

古文：尚书涿郡孙礼固请罢役，帝诏曰： 钦纳谠言。 
现代文：尚书涿郡人孙礼坚持请求停止劳役，明帝下诏说： 敬佩并接受你的正直之言。 
English: Sun Li, a resident of Zhangye County, persisted in his request to stop the labor service. Emperor Ming issued an edict saying, "I admire and accept your honest words.

古文：促遣民作；监作者复奏留一月，有所成讫。
现代文：催促把民夫遣返回家。但监工官吏又上奏留一个月，以便使工程完结。
English: urged that the workers be sent home. However, the supervisors were given one more month to complete the project.

古文：礼径至作所，不复重奏，称诏罢民，帝奇其意而不责。
现代文：孙礼直接来到工地，不再重新上奏，宣称皇帝颁布诏书遣返民工，明帝对孙礼的做法感到新奇，因而没有责怪。
English: Sun Li came directly to the construction site, and declared that the emperor had issued an edict to repatriate the migrant workers. Emperor Ming was surprised by Sun Li's actions and did not blame him.

古文：帝虽不能尽用群臣直谏之言，然皆优容之。
现代文：明帝虽然不能全部采用群臣的直言进谏，却都能宽容他们。
English: Although Emperor Ming could not adopt all of the outspoken views of his ministers, he was able to tolerate them.

古文：秋，七月，洛阳崇华殿灾。帝问侍中领太史令泰山高堂隆曰： 此何咎也？
现代文：秋季，七月，洛阳崇华殿发生火灾，明帝问侍中兼太史令的泰山人高堂隆说： 这是什么灾祸？
English: In the autumn, in July, a fire broke out in Luoyang's Chonghua Palace. Emperor Ming asked Gaodang Long, an attendant and Grand Historian, "What kind of disaster is this?"

古文：于礼宁有祈禳之义乎？ 
现代文：在礼仪上有没有祈福除灾的意义吗？ 
English: Is there a saying in the etiquette about praying for good fortune and for calamity?

古文：对曰： 《易·传》曰： 上不俭，下不节，孽火烧其室。 
现代文：高堂隆对答说： 《易传》说： 居上不俭朴，在下不节约，灾火烧他的宫室。 
English: Gaodong Rong said in reply: "Yichuan Lu" said: "He who is at the top is not frugal, and he who is at the bottom is not thrifty. The fire destroyed his palace."

古文：又曰： 君高其台，天火为灾。 
现代文：还说： 君王高筑楼台，天火成灾。 
English: And he said, The Lord hath exalted his throne above the heavens, and given it to the beast.

古文：此人君务饰宫室，不知百姓空竭，故天应之以旱，火从高殿起也。 
现代文：这是君王一心只致力于修饰宫殿，不了解百姓亏空竭尽，所以上天以旱灾回报，火就从高高的宫殿燃起。 
English: This is a king who devotes himself only to decorating the palace, not understanding that the people are exhausted, so the sky returns with a drought, and the fire burns from the high palace.

古文：诏问隆： 吾闻汉武帝之时柏梁灾，而大起宫殿以厌之，其义云何？ 
现代文：明帝用诏书问高堂隆： 我听说汉武帝的时候柏梁发生火灾，反而是用大建宫殿来镇慑，这又怎么解释？ 
English: Emperor Ming asked Gao Donglong in his imperial edict: I heard that there was a fire at Bai Liang during the reign of Emperor Han, but they used to build a large palace to contain the fire. How do you explain this?

古文：对曰： 夷越之巫所为，非圣贤之明训也。
现代文：对答说： 这是夷、越族的巫师所为，不是圣贤的明训。
English: The answer said: This is the work of the wizards of the Yi and Yue ethnic groups, not the teachings of the sages.

古文：《五行志》曰： 柏梁灾，其后有江充巫蛊事。 
现代文：《五行志》记载： 柏梁火灾，在这以后有江充巫蛊之事。 
English: "Wu Xing Zhi" recorded: Bai Liang fire, after this, there was Jiangchong Wushan.

古文：如《志》之言，越巫建章无所厌也。令宜罢散民役。
现代文：正如《五行志》所记，越人巫师诱惑修筑建章台，并没有镇慑灾难的作用，现在应该遣散民役。
English: As recorded in the "Five Elements," the temptation of the Viet shamans to build and build a platform did not have the effect of deterring the disaster, and now the civil service should be dismissed.

古文：宫室之制，务从约节，清扫所灾之处，不敢于此有所立作，则萐莆、嘉禾必生此地。
现代文：宫殿的建制，务必从简节约；清扫火灾的地方，不要冒昧地另行施工，那么瑞草、禾苗一定能在这儿生长起来。
English: The construction of the palace must be simple and economical; clean the place of the fire, do not dare to carry out other construction, then the grass and seedlings can definitely grow here.

古文：若乃疲民之力，竭民之财，非所以致符瑞而怀远人也。 
现代文：如果继续耗费民力，枯竭民财，不是招致符瑞、安抚远方之人的做法。 
English: If we continue to expend people's energy and deplete people's wealth, this is not the way to invite friends and appease those far away.

古文：八月，庚午，立皇子芳为齐王，询为秦王。
现代文：八月，庚午，立皇子曹芳为齐王、曹询为秦王。
English: In August, at the stroke of noon, Cao Fang was crowned King of Qi, and Cao Zhen was crowned King of Qin.

古文：帝无子，养二王为子，宫省事秘，莫有知其所由来者。
现代文：明帝没有儿子，收养曹芳和曹询为子，皇宫禁地事情极其秘密，无人知晓他俩的来历。
English: Emperor Ming had no son, so he adopted Cao Fang and Cao Zhen as his sons. The palace's forbidden land was a closely guarded secret, and no one knew where they came from.

古文：或云：芳，任城王楷之子也。
现代文：有人说，曹芳是任城王曹楷的儿子。
English: Some people say that Cao Fang is the son of the king of Rencheng, Cao Kai.

古文：丁巳，帝还洛阳。
现代文：丁巳，明帝返回洛阳。
English: Soon after, Emperor Ming returned to Luoyang.

古文：诏复立崇华殿，更名曰九龙。
现代文：颁诏重新修建崇华殿，改名为九龙殿。
English: The edict was issued to rebuild the Chonghua Hall and rename it the Kowloon Hall.

古文：通引穀水过九龙殿前，为玉井绮栏，蟾蜍含受，神龙吐出。
现代文：开渠引来水流过九龙殿前，用玉石砌成水井，用彩缎包裹井栏，水从玉雕蟾蜍的口中流入，再从玉雕神龙的口中吐出。
English: A canal was opened to bring water to flow through the front of the Nine Dragons Hall. A well was built with jade, and the well column was wrapped with colored reeds. Water flowed in through the mouth of the jade carved reed, and then spit out through the mouth of the jade carved dragon.

古文：使博士扶风马钧作司南车，水转百戏。
现代文：命博士扶风人马钧制作司南车，制作以水为动力旋转活动的百戏车。
English: He ordered Dr. Fu Feng Ren Ma Jie to make the Sina car, and to make the water-powered spinning car.

古文：陵霄阙始构，有鹊巢其上，帝以问高堂隆，对曰： 《诗》曰： 惟鹊有巢，惟鸠居之。 
现代文：陵霄阙刚刚起架时，有喜鹊在上面筑巢，明帝以此事询问高常隆，高堂隆回答说： 《诗经》说： 鹊筑巢，鸠居之 。
English: When the mausoleum had just been erected, there were magpies building nests on it. Emperor Ming inquired about this from Gao Changlong, and Gaodanglong replied: "The Book of Songs says: "The magpie builds a nest and dwells in it."

古文：今兴宫室，起陵霄阙，而鹊巢之，此宫未成身不得居之象也。
现代文：如今大兴宫殿，又新起陵霄阙，并且有喜鹊在上面筑巢，这是宫殿没建成不能在里面居住的象征。
English: Today, the Daxing Palace has a newly built mausoleum, and magpies have built nests on it, which is a symbol that the palace cannot be lived in without being built.

古文：大意若曰： 宫室未成，将有他姓制御之 。
现代文：上天的旨意好像是说： 宫殿未成，就会有外姓人统治支配它。 
English: Heaven's will seems to say: Before the palace is completed, there will be foreigners ruling and dominating it.

古文：斯乃上天之戒也。
现代文：这就是上天的告诫。
English: This is God's warning.

古文：夫天道无亲，惟与善人，太戊、武丁睹灾悚惧，故天降之福。
现代文：天道没有亲疏，只赐福于善良的人。太戊、武丁看见灾异征兆后惶悚恐惧，所以上天改降福分。
English: The heavenly way has no estrangement, and only bestows blessings on those who are good. Tae-woo and Wuding were terrified when they saw the signs of disaster, so they changed their blessings from heaven.

古文：今若休罢百役，增崇德政，则三王可四，五帝可六，岂惟商宗转祸为福而已哉！ 帝为之动容。
现代文：现今如果能够停止各种劳役，增施德政，那么三王可以增为四王，五帝可以增为六帝，难道只是商代的帝王可以转祸为福吗？ 明帝为之动容。
English: Nowadays, if it is possible to stop all kinds of labor service and increase the promotion of virtue, then the three kings can be increased to four kings, and the five emperors can be increased to six emperors. Is it only the emperors of the Shang Dynasty that can turn misfortune into blessing? Emperor Ming was moved.

古文：帝性严急，其督修宫室有稽限者，帝亲召问，言犹在口，身首已分。
现代文：明帝性情严厉急躁，对那些监督修建宫殿而没能如期完工的人，亲自召来责问，话还没出口，已被杀头。
English: Emperor Ming was a stern and impatient man. He personally summoned those who had overseen the construction of the palace and failed to complete it on schedule for questioning. Before the words could be uttered, they had been beheaded.

古文：散骑常侍领秘书监王肃上疏曰： 今宫室未就，见作者三四万人。
现代文：散骑常侍兼秘书监王肃上书说： 而今宫殿还没建成，参加劳作的人已有三四万。
English: Wang Su Shangshu, the imperial equerry and secretary, said in a letter: Now the palace has not yet been built, and there are already thirty to forty thousand people participating in the work.

古文：九龙可以安圣体，其内足以列六宫；惟泰极已前，功夫尚大。
现代文：九龙殿可以使陛下安居，里面足够安置六宫人员；只有泰极殿前边的工程尚大。
English: The Kowloon Palace can accommodate His Majesty, there is enough to accommodate the staff of the Six Palaces; only the front of the Taiji Palace is still under construction.

古文：愿陛下取常食禀之士，非急要者之用，选其丁壮，择留万人，使一期而更之。
现代文：愿陛下指派领取国家粮饷目前又无紧急任务的士兵，挑选身体强壮者一万人，让他们一年轮换一次。
English: May His Majesty designate the soldiers who receive the national food rations and who do not have an urgent mission at present, and select ten thousand able-bodied men to rotate them once a year.

古文：咸知息代有日，则莫不悦以即事，劳而不怨矣。
现代文：都知道休息替代有日可待，就都会乐于在工地劳动，虽然辛苦而不再有怨言了。
English: They all know that a replacement for rest can be expected one day, so they will be happy to work at the construction site, although it is hard and there are no more complaints.

古文：计一岁有三百六十万夫，亦不为少。
现代文：总计一年有三百六十万工，也不算少。
English: That's 3.6 million people a year, which is not a small number.

古文：当一岁成者，听且三年，分遣其馀，使皆即农，无穷之计也。
现代文：本应当一年完成的，不妨三年完成，遣散其余的民工，使他们都回去务农，这是长远之计。
English: It should have been completed in one year, but it may be completed in three years. It is a long-term plan to dismiss the remaining migrant workers and make them all go back to farming.

古文：夫信之于民，国家大宝也。
现代文：取信于民，是国家的重要珍宝。
English: Gaining the trust of the people is an important national treasure.

古文：前车驾当幸洛阳，发民为营，有司命以营成而罢；既成，又利其功力，不以时遣。
现代文：以前陛下临幸洛阳，征发百姓修建营垒，有关部门命令营垒修成就放民工回家；结果营垒建成，又贪图百姓工力的便宜，不按时放还。
English: Previously, His Majesty went to Luoyang to solicit the people to build a camp, and the relevant departments ordered the camp to be repaired and the migrant workers to go home. As a result, the camp was built, and the people were greedy for cheap labor and did not return it on time.

古文：有司徒营目前之利，不顾经国之体。
现代文：有关部门只营求眼前利益，不顾治国大体。
English: Relevant departments only seek short-term profits, regardless of the overall governance of the country.

古文：臣愚以为自今已后，傥复使民，宜明其令，使必如期，以次有事，宁使更发，无或失信。
现代文：我愚昧地认为，从今以后，倘若再使用民工，应该明确宣布期限，使用民工一定遵守时限。如果又有劳役，宁可重新征发，也不要失信。
English: I foolishly thought that from now on, if we use migrant workers again, we should clearly announce the deadline, and the use of migrant workers must comply with the time limit. If there is labor service, it is better to re-solicit and send, rather than lose trust.

古文：凡陛下临时之所行刑，皆有罪之吏、宜死之人也；然众庶不知，谓为仓卒。
现代文：凡陛下临时施刑的人，都是有罪的官吏、当死的人，可是众人不知道详情，说是仓促行事。
English: All those whom your majesty has punished in haste are guilty officials, deserving of death, but the people do not know the details and say that it was done in haste.

古文：故愿陛下下之于吏，而暴其罪，钧其死也，无使污于宫掖而为远近所疑。
现代文：所以，愿陛下交给主管官吏处理。同样是死，不要让罪犯的血污染宫廷，还被远近猜疑。
English: Therefore, may His Majesty be handed over to the competent officials to deal with. The same is death, do not let the blood of the criminal pollute the palace, nor be suspected from far and near.

古文：且人命至重，难生易杀，气绝不续者也，是以圣贤重之。
现代文：况且人命至重，容易诛杀而难于复生，一旦气绝，不可能再接续，所以圣对此都很重视。
English: Moreover, human life is the most important, it is easy to kill and difficult to revive, once the breath is exhausted, it is impossible to continue, so the saint attaches great importance to this.

古文：昔汉文帝欲杀犯跸者，廷尉张释之曰： 方其时，上使诛之则已，今下廷尉，廷尉，天下之平，不可倾也。 
现代文：以前汉文帝想要杀死冒犯御驾的人，廷尉张释之说： 正当事情发生时，皇上派人诛杀他就算了，现在既然下交到廷尉，廷尉是天下的天平，不可偏颇。 
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen wanted to kill those who offended him, but the imperial lieutenant Zhang Xizhi said: "When the incident happened, the emperor sent someone to kill him. Now that it has been handed over to the imperial lieutenant, the imperial lieutenant is the balance of the world and must not be biased.

古文：臣以为大失其义，非忠臣所宜陈也。
现代文：我认为这是完全失去大义，不是忠臣所该说的话。
English: It is not for a loyal subject to make a report on a matter which he thinks will cause him to lose his loyalty.

古文：廷尉者，天子之吏也，犹不可以失平，而天子之身反可以惑谬乎！
现代文：廷尉也是天子的属官，都不可以失去公平，而天子反倒可以迷惑错谬吗？
English: The imperial lieutenant is also a subordinate official of the Son of Heaven, and no one can lose fairness, but can the Son of Heaven, on the other hand, confuse and mislead?

古文：斯重于为己而轻于为君，不忠之甚也，不可不察！ 
现代文：这是看重自己而轻视帝王，是严重不忠的人，不可不明察。 
English: This is a person who values himself and despises the emperor. This is a person who is seriously unfaithful and must not be overlooked.

古文：中山恭王衮疾病，令官属曰： 男子不死于妇人之手，亟以时营东堂。 
现代文：中山恭王曹衮病重，命令官属说： 男人不应死在女人手上，赶快给我在东面营造一座殿堂。 
English: Cao Pi, the king of Zhongshan, was seriously ill and ordered his officials to say: "Men should not die at the hands of women. Quickly, build me a palace in the east."

古文：堂成，舆疾往居之。
现代文：殿堂建成，带病前去居住。
English: When the hall of fame was completed, he took sick leave to go and live there.

古文：又令世子曰： 汝幼为人君，知乐不知苦，必将以骄奢为失者也。
现代文：又命令嫡子说： 你年纪尚小便作了王，只知道欢乐而不知道痛苦，一定会因骄恣奢华而出现过失。
English: He also ordered his son-in-law: "You are too young to be king, you only know joy and not pain, you will surely make mistakes due to your arrogance and extravagance.

古文：兄弟有不良之行，当造膝谏之，谏之不从，流涕喻之，喻之不改，乃白其母，犹不改，当以奏闻，并辞国土。
现代文：兄弟们如有不良行为，你应当前去规劝，规劝不被接受，要流泪劝告，再不改正，就告诉他们的母亲，还不改就应当奏报皇上，并辞退封国食邑。
English: Brothers, if there is any bad behavior, you should go forward to persuade, and if the persuasion is not accepted, you should advise with tears, and if they do not correct it, you should tell their mother, and if they do not change, you should report to the emperor, and refuse to seal the national food village.

古文：与其守宠罹祸，不若贫贱全身也。
现代文：与其依仗恩宠招祸，不如贫贱保全性命。
English: It is better to live a life of poverty in order to preserve oneself, than to keep the grace and suffer the calamity.

古文：此亦谓大罪恶耳，其微过细故，当掩覆之。 冬，十月，己酉，衮卒。
现代文：这当然是指犯了大罪，如是细小过失，便应当替他掩饰。 冬季，十月，已酉，曹衮去世。
English: This, of course, refers to committing a serious crime, and if it is a minor fault, it should be covered up for him.Winter, October, has passed, Cao Wei passed away.

古文：十一月，丁酉，帝行如许昌。
现代文：十一月，丁酉，明帝前往许昌。
English: In November, Ding Xi and Ming Di went to Xuchang.

古文：是岁，幽州刺史王雄使勇士韩龙刺杀鲜卑轲比能。
现代文：这一年，幽州刺史王雄派遣勇士韩龙刺杀了鲜卑首领轲比能。
English: This year, Yuzhou assassin Wang Xiong dispatched warrior Han Long to assassinate Xianbei leader Gong Bineng.

古文：自是种落离散，互相侵伐，强者远遁，弱者请服，边陲遂安。
现代文：从此以后，鲜卑部落分崩离析，互相攻击，强者远遁，弱者归顺，边境平安。
English: Since then, the Xianbei tribes have fallen apart and attacked each other, the strong are far away, the weak are submissive, and the border is safe.

古文：张掖柳谷口水溢涌，宝石负图，状象灵龟，立于川西，有石马七及凤皇、麒麟、白虎、牺牛、璜玦、八卦、列宿、孛彗之象，又有文曰 大讨曹 。
现代文：张掖柳谷口水满涌出，露出一块玉石，带有图案，形状如灵龟，竖立在水面，上有七个石马及凤凰、麒麟、白虎、牺牛、璜、八卦、星宿、孛星和彗星的图形，并有 大讨曹 三字。
English: Zhangye Willow Valley mouth water gushed out, revealing a piece of jade, with a pattern, shaped like a turtle, standing on the water surface, with seven stone horses and phoenix, unicorn, white tiger, sacrificial ox, dragonfly, gossip, star, shooting star and comet graphics, and there are three words.

古文：诏书班天下，以为嘉瑞。
现代文：明帝下诏公告天下，认为是祥瑞。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict announcing to the world that it was Xiang Rui.

古文：任令于绰连赍以问巨鹿张臶，臶密谓绰曰： 夫神以知来，不追已往，祥兆先见，而后废兴从之。
现代文：任县县令于绰带着诏书及玉石图案去问巨鹿人张。张秘密地对于绰说： 神因为知道未来，不追溯往事，吉祥征兆先显现出，然后接着就有兴有废。
English: The county magistrate sent Yu Pei with the edict and the jade pattern to ask Zhang the Deer Man. Zhang secretly said to Pei: Because God knows the future, he does not look back on the past. The auspicious signs appear first, and then there is the waste.

古文：今汉已久亡，魏已得之，何所追兴祥兆乎！
现代文：如今汉朝灭亡已久，魏已得天下，怎么还会是兴魏的吉祥预兆呢？
English: Now that the Han Dynasty has long since perished and the Wei Dynasty has conquered the world, how can it still be an auspicious omen for the rise of the Wei Dynasty?

古文：此石，当今之变异而将来之符瑞也。 
现代文：这块玉石，是当今之世要有变异而预示将来的符瑞。 
English: This piece of jade is a sign that the present world is subject to change and a harbinger of the future.

古文：帝使人以马易珠玑、翡翠、玳瑁于吴，吴主曰： 此皆孤所不用，而可以得马，孤何爱焉。 
现代文：明帝派人去吴国用马匹换取珍珠、翡翠、玳瑁。吴王说： 这些东西都是我不用的，而可用来换到马匹，我为什么要吝惜呢？ 
English: Emperor Ming sent someone to the State of Wu to exchange horses for pearls, emeralds, and enamel. The King of Wu said, "I don't need these things, but I can exchange them for horses. Why should I be stingy?"

古文：皆以与之。
现代文：于是，全都给了来使。
English: As a result, everything was left to chance.

古文：烈祖明皇帝中之下青龙四年春，吴人铸大钱，一当五百。
现代文：青龙四年春季，吴铸造大钱，一当五百。
English: In the spring of Qinglong's fourth year, Wu minted a large amount of money, five hundred at a time.

古文：三月，吴张昭卒，年八十一。
现代文：三月吴张昭去世，享年八十一岁。
English: In March, Wu Zhang Zhao passed away at the age of 81.

古文：昭容貌矜严，有威风，吴主以下，举邦惮之。
现代文：张昭容貌高傲，威风凛凛，自吴王以下，举国敬畏。
English: Zhang Zhao's appearance is haughty, dignified, from the king of Wu down, the whole country is in awe.

古文：夏，四月，汉主至湔，登观阪，观汶水之流，旬日而还。
现代文：夏季，四月，汉后主到达湔氐道，登上观阪，观看汶水水道，停留十日返回。
English: In the summer, in April, the empress dowager arrived at the causeway, boarded the observation wheel, watched the Wenshui waterway, stayed for ten days and returned.

古文：武都氐王符健请降于汉；其弟不从，将四百户来降。
现代文：武都郡氐族人苻健向蜀汉请降，其弟不跟从，率四百户来降魏。
English: Jian Jian, a member of the Yi people of Wudu County, asked Shu Han for a reduction, but his younger brother did not follow, and he led four hundred households to reduce Wei.

古文：五月，乙卯，乐平定侯董昭卒。
现代文：五月，乙卯，乐平定侯董昭去世。
English: In May, Leping Dinghou Dong Zhao passed away.

古文：冬，十月，己卯，帝还洛阳宫。
现代文：冬季，十月，己卯，明帝返回洛阳宫。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Ming returned to Luoyang Palace.

古文：甲申，有星孛于大辰，又勃于东方。
现代文：甲申，在大辰星旁出现异星，后又出现在东方天际。
English: In Jiaxing, a strange star appeared next to the Big Star, and then appeared again in the eastern sky.

古文：高堂隆上疏曰： 凡帝王徙都立邑，皆先定天地、社稷之位，敬恭以奉之。
现代文：高堂隆上书说： 凡是帝王迁移都城或者兴建城邑，都要先选定祭祀天地和社稷神的地方，恭恭敬敬地尊奉他们。
English: Gaodang Rong wrote: Whenever an emperor moves the capital city or builds a town, he must first select a place to worship the gods of heaven and earth and the gods of the community, and respectfully worship them.

古文：将营宫室，则宗庙为先，厩库为次，居室为后。
现代文：将要营建宫殿时，也要先建祖先祭庙，然后再建马厩、仓库，最后才兴建居室。
English: If a palace is to be built, the family temple should be built first, followed by the depot and granary, and then the palace.

古文：今圜丘、方泽、南北郊、明堂、社稷神位未定，宗庙之制又未如礼，而崇饰居室，士民失业，外人咸云 宫人之用与军国之费略齐 ，民不堪命，皆有怨怒。
现代文：如今圜丘、方泽、南北郊、明堂及社稷，各神神位都没有确定，祖先祭庙的建制也不符合礼法，而只是大修宫殿，使人民失掉生计。外人都说： 宫中的花费与军国总费用几乎相等 ，百姓忍受不了，都抱有怨恨愤怒的情绪。
English: Nowadays, the deities of Mengqiu, Fangze, Nanbei Suburb, Ming Hall and Shifang have not been determined, and the establishment of ancestor temples does not conform to the etiquette, but only overhauls the palace, causing the people to lose their livelihoods. Outsiders say: The cost of the palace is almost equal to the total cost of the military, the people can not bear it, and they all hold resentment and anger.

古文：《书》曰： 天聪明自我民聪明，天明畏自我民明威。 
现代文：《尚书》说： 上天耳聪目明，实际是人民耳聪目明，上天显赫威灵，实际是人民显赫威灵。 
English: "Shangshu" said: "Heaven has keen ears and eyes, but it is actually the people who have keen ears and eyes. Heaven has a great spirit, but it is actually the people who have a great spirit."

古文：言天之赏罚，随民言，顺民心也。
现代文：这是说上天的奖赏和惩罚，随从民意，顺应民心。
English: This is to say that the reward and punishment of heaven, follow the public opinion, conform to the people's hearts.

古文：夫采椽、卑宫，唐、虞、大禹之所以垂皇风也；玉台、琼室，夏癸、商辛之所以犯昊天也。
现代文：用原木做椽子，建造陋室居住，是唐尧、虞舜、大禹留下来的风范；修玉台、造琼室，是夏桀、商纣对皇天的冒犯。
English: Using logs to make rafts and building shacks to live in is the style left behind by Tang Xuan, Yu Xuan, and Dayu; repairing the Yutai and building the Qiongxing is the offense of Xia Xuan and Shang Xuan to the emperor.

古文：今宫室过盛，天彗章灼，斯乃慈父恳切之训。
现代文：如今宫殿修建过盛，彗星在天空闪烁，这就是仁慈的天父发出恳切的训诫。
English: Today, palaces are overbuilt, comets twinkle in the sky, and merciful Heavenly Father issues earnest admonitions.

古文：当崇孝子祗耸之礼，不宜有忽，以重天怒。 
现代文：陛下应当尊崇孝子恭谨接受的礼仪，不应当忽视它，以免加重上天的愤怒。 
English: His Majesty should respect the etiquette that filial sons and daughters respectfully accept, and should not ignore it, so as not to aggravate the wrath of heaven.

古文：隆数切谏，帝颇不悦。
现代文：高堂隆多次恳切直言规劝，明帝颇不高兴。
English: Gaodang Long repeatedly earnestly and bluntly advised Emperor Ming, but Emperor Ming was not happy.

古文：侍中卢毓进曰： 臣闻君明则臣直，古之圣王惟恐不闻其过，此乃臣等所以不及隆也。 
现代文：侍中卢毓进言说： 我听说君王圣明则臣下正直，古代的圣王唯恐听不到自己的过失，这正是我们不及高堂隆之处。 
English: Lu Xunjin, an aide-de-camp, said, "I have heard that the king, Shengming, is honest, while his vassals are not. In ancient times, the king could not hear his own faults. This is where we are inferior to Gaodanglong.

古文：帝乃解。
现代文：明帝怒意才算消解。
English: That's when Taizong lost his temper.

古文：毓，植之子也。
现代文：卢毓是卢植的儿子。
English: Lu Wei is the son of Lu Zhi.

古文：十二月，癸巳，颍阴靖侯陈群卒。
现代文：十二月，癸巳，颍阴靖侯陈群去世。
English: In December, Chen Qun, the mayor of Jinying, passed away.

古文：群前后数陈得失，每上封事，辄削其草，时人及其子弟莫能知也。
现代文：陈群曾前后多次上书陈述治国得失，每次都是封好上奏即毁掉底稿，当时的人和他的儿子、兄弟都不知道其中内容。
English: Chen Qun had repeatedly submitted a letter stating the gains and losses of governing the country. Each time, he sealed and destroyed the draft, and neither the person at the time nor his son and brother knew the contents.

古文：论者或讥群居位拱默；正始中，诏撰群臣上书以为《名臣奏议》，朝士乃见群谏事，皆叹息焉。
现代文：议论的人中有的讥讽陈群身居高位，只是拱手而默无所言。正始年间，诏命选录群臣上书编纂《名臣奏议》，在朝人士才见到陈群进谏事迹，都赞叹不止。
English: Some of the commentators ridiculed Chen Qun for being in a high position, but he remained silent. At the beginning of the year, the imperial edict ordered a group of ministers to compile the "Minister's Speech," and people in the North only saw Chen Qun's deeds, and they were all full of admiration.

古文：袁子论曰：或云： 少府杨阜岂非忠臣哉！
现代文：袁宏论曰：有人说： 少府杨阜难道还不是忠臣吗？
English: Commenting on Yuan Hong, he said: Some people say: Isn't the young governor Yang Fu still a loyal subject?

古文：见人主之非则勃然触之，与人言未尝不道。 
现代文：看见君王的过错就迫不及待地尖锐指出，与人谈话时也不加隐瞒。 
English: When he sees the fault of the king, he can't wait to point it out sharply, and he doesn't hide it when talking to people.

古文：答曰： 夫仁者爱人，施之君谓之忠，施于亲谓之孝。
现代文：我的回答是： 仁人君子爱人，如爱的是君王则称之为忠，如爱的是父母则称之为孝。
English: My answer is: A benevolent person and a gentleman are the best lovers. If you love a king, it is called loyalty, and if you love your parents, it is called filial piety.

古文：今为人臣，见人主失道，直诋其非而播扬其恶，可谓直士，未为忠臣也。
现代文：如今作为臣属，看见君主失去道义，竭力批评他的过错并且处处宣扬，这种人可称为直士，但不可当作忠臣。
English: Now, as a vassal, who sees that the prince has lost his virtue, and tries to criticize his faults and spread them everywhere, he can be called a loyal vassal, but not a loyal vassal.

古文：故司空陈群则不然，谈论终日，未尝言人主之非；书数十上，外人不知。
现代文：前司空陈群就不是这样，他终日谈论，也未曾讲过君主的过错，上书规劝数十次，外人都不知道。
English: This was not the case with the former governor, Chen Qun. He talked about the monarch's faults all day long, but never spoke about them. He wrote dozens of letters of exhortation, but no one outside the palace knew about it.

古文：君子谓群于是乎长者矣。 
现代文：君子因此称陈群是长者。 
English: The nobles therefore called Chen Qun the Elder.

古文：乙未，帝行如许昌。
现代文：乙未，明帝前往许昌。
English: In the evening, Emperor Ming went to Xuchang.

古文：诏公卿举才德兼备者各一人，司马懿以兗州刺史太原王昶应选。
现代文：诏命三公九卿每人推举才德兼备者一人，司马懿推荐的兖州刺史太原人王昶应选。
English: The imperial edict ordered each of the three princes and nine nobles to nominate one person who was both talented and virtuous. Wang Xi, a native of Zhangzhou and Taiyuan, recommended by Sima Yi, should be selected.

古文：昶为人谨厚，名其兄子曰默，曰沈，名其子曰浑，曰深，为书戒之曰： 吾以四者为名，欲使汝曹顾名思义，不敢违越也。
现代文：王昶为人恭谨忠厚，他给侄子起名王默、王沉，给儿子起名王浑、王深，写信告诫他们说： 我以这四字作为你们的名字，是要你们能顾名思义，不敢违犯。
English: Wang Xi was a respectful and loyal person. He named his nephews Wang Miao and Wang Shen, and his sons Wang Hun and Wang Shen. He wrote to them and warned them: "I have given you these four characters as your names so that you can consider the meaning of the names and not violate the law."

古文：夫物速成则疾亡，晚就而善终，朝华之草，夕而零落，松柏之茂，隆寒不衰，是以君子戒于阙党也。
现代文：事物都是成熟得快死亡得也快，晚成必有好结果；早晨开花的小草，到晚上就凋零了，松柏的茂盛，寒冬也不会衰减，所以君子都以 阙党小子 的急于求成为戒鉴。
English: All things ripen fast, die fast, and good results come late; the grass that blooms in the morning withers in the evening, the pine and cypresses are in full bloom, and the cold winter will not abate, so the gentlemen all take the impatience of the "party boy" as a warning.

古文：夫能屈以为伸，让以为得，弱以为强，鲜不遂矣。
现代文：如果能把委曲看作是舒展，能把谦让看作是获得，能把柔弱看作是刚强，便很少不能成功了。
English: Will be able to look down as unyielding, will be humble to see as a gain, weak to see as strong, so there is little that can not be preserved.

古文：夫毁誉者，爱恶之原而祸福之机也。孔子曰： 吾之于人，谁毁谁誉。 
现代文：毁谤和赞誉，是喜爱和厌恶的根源，也是灾祸和福分的契机。孔子说： 我对别人，不毁谤，不赞誉。
English: Slander and praise are the root of liking and disliking, and also the cause of calamity and blessing. Confucius said: I do not slander or praise others.

古文：以圣人之德犹尚如此，况庸庸之徒而轻毁誉哉！
现代文：凭圣人的德行尚且如此，何况平庸之辈，怎么可以轻易毁谤和赞誉呢？
English: With the virtue of a saint, even so, how can the mediocre be easily slandered and praised?

古文：人或毁己，当退而求之于身。若己有可毁之行，则彼言当矣；若己无可毁之行，则彼言妄矣。
现代文：别人有时攻击自己，应当退而自己质问自己，如自己有可以攻击的行为，那么别人的攻击就是对的；如果自己没有应受攻击的行为，那么他的话就是虚妄之言。
English: Others sometimes attack themselves, you should step back and question yourself. If you have actions that can be attacked, then the attack of others is right; if you do not have actions that should be attacked, then his words are false.

古文：当则无怨于彼，妄则无害于身，又何反报焉！
现代文：说得对就不要怨恨他，说得不对也无害于己，又何必报复他？
English: If you say the right thing, don't hate him. If you say the wrong thing, it won't hurt you. Why do you have to take revenge on him?

古文：谚曰： 救寒莫如重裘，止谤莫如自修。 
现代文：谚语说： 救寒草如厚皮袄，止谤莫如自修身。 
English: A proverb says: To save the cold grass is like a thick skin, to stop slander is like self-cultivation.

古文：斯言信矣！ 
现代文：这句话确实如此啊！ 
English: This sentence is really true!

古文：烈祖明皇帝中之下景初元年
现代文：景初元年春季，正月，壬辰，山荏县奏报说看见黄龙。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, in the spring, in the first month of the year, in the month of Imjin, the report of Shanxi County said that they saw a yellow dragon.

古文：春，正月，壬辰，山茌县言黄龙见。高堂隆以为： 魏得土德，故其瑞黄龙见，宜改正朔，易服色，以神明其政，变民耳目。 
现代文：高堂隆认为： 魏得的是土德，所以它的瑞兆是出现黄龙，应改变历法，换服装颜色，依靠神灵使政治清明，使万民耳目一新。 
English: Gaotang Long believed that: Wei was born of the soil of Germany, so its auspicious sign was the appearance of the yellow dragon. It should change the calendar, change the color of clothing, rely on the gods to make politics clear, and make the ears of all people fresh.

古文：帝从其议。
现代文：明帝同意此议。
English: The emperor followed his advice.

古文：三月，下诏改元，以是月为孟夏四月，服色尚黄，牺牲用白，从地正也。更名《太和历》曰《景初历》。
现代文：三月，下诏改年吨，以本月为孟夏四月，服色尚黄，祭祀牲畜用白，依从天地人三正中的地正，改太和历为景初历。
English: In March, the year was changed from the following month to the following month, the color of clothing was yellow, the sacrificial animals were white, and the alignment of heaven and earth was changed from the middle of the three equinoxes to the first day of the first month.

古文：五月，己巳，帝还洛阳。
现代文：五月，己巳，明帝返回洛阳。
English: In May, Emperor Ming returned to Luoyang.

古文：己丑，大赦。
现代文：己丑，魏大赦天下。
English: On the 21st, a general amnesty was implemented.

古文：六月，戊申，京都地震。
现代文：六月，戊申，魏京都发生地震。
English: In June, an earthquake occurred in Boshin, west of Kyoto.

古文：己亥，以尚书令陈矫为司徒，左仆射卫臻为司空。
现代文：己亥，明帝任命尚书令陈矫担任司徒，左仆射卫臻担任司空。
English: At the same time, Emperor Ming appointed Shang Shuling Chen Jiao as a tutor, and his left-hand man, Shoei Zhen, as a steward.

古文：有司奏以武皇帝为魏太祖，文皇帝为魏高祖，帝为魏烈祖；三祖之庙，万世不毁。
现代文：主管官吏奏请以武皇帝曹操为魏太祖，文皇帝曹丕为魏高祖，明帝曹睿为魏烈祖；三祖的祭庙，万世不能毁坏。
English: The officials in charge requested that Emperor Cao Cao of the Wu Dynasty be the Wei Taizu, Emperor Cao Cao of the Wen Dynasty be the Wei Gao Zu, and Emperor Cao Rui of the Ming Dynasty be the Wei Lei Zu. The temple of the three ancestors cannot be destroyed forever.

古文：孙盛论曰：夫谥以表行，庙以存容。
现代文：孙盛论曰：谥号用以表明死者的行为，祭庙用以存留死者的容貌。
English: Sun Sheng said: "The name of the deceased is used to indicate the behavior of the deceased, and the temple is used to preserve the appearance of the deceased.

古文：未有当年而逆制祖宗，未终而豫自尊显。
现代文：没有活着的时候而事先确立自己称祖称宗，没有去世而预先使自己尊崇显耀的。
English: There is no temple name that was predetermined to be that of a certain ancestor of a certain sect in the year when the monarch was alive, and there is no temple name that was predetermined to be that of a certain ancestor of a certain sect when the monarch was alive.

古文：魏之群司于是乎失正矣。
现代文：魏国的主事之官在此失当了。
English: The leading official of the state of Wei was in the wrong here.

古文：秋，七月，丁卯，东乡贞侯陈矫卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁卯，东乡贞公陈矫去世。
English: Autumn, July, Dingwu, Dongxiang Zhenggong Chen Jia passed away.

古文：公孙渊数对国中宾客出恶言，帝欲讨之，以荆州刺史河东毌丘俭为幽州刺史。
现代文：公孙渊多次对魏的宾客口出恶言，明帝打算讨伐他，命荆州刺史丘俭担任幽州刺史。
English: Gongsun Yuan repeatedly spoke ill of Wei's guests, and Emperor Ming planned to crack down on him, ordering Jingzhou's chief historian Qiu Jian to serve as Yuzhou's chief historian.

古文：俭上疏曰： 陛下即位已来，未有可书。吴、蜀恃险，未可卒平，聊可以此方无用之士克定辽东。 
现代文：丘俭上书说： 陛下即位以来，没有可以载入史书的丰功伟绩，吴、蜀两国依仗地势险阻，不能很快平定，暂且可以调用这里无处用武的士兵平定辽东。 
English: Qiu Jian said in his letter: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, there have been no great achievements that can be recorded in the history books. The two countries of Wu and Shu cannot be quickly pacified due to the difficult terrain. For the time being, soldiers who have nowhere to use their weapons can be called in to pacify Liaodong.

古文：光禄大夫卫臻曰： 俭所陈皆战国细术，非王者之事也。
现代文：光禄大夫卫臻说： 丘俭所述的都是战国时代的细微之术，不是帝王的大事。
English: Guanglu doctor Wei Zhen said: What Qiu Jian described is a subtle technique of the Warring States period, not a big deal for the emperor.

古文：吴频岁称兵，寇乱边境，而犹按甲养士，未果致讨者，诚以百姓疲劳故也。
现代文：吴国年年频繁地举兵侵犯边境，而我们仍是按兵不动休养士卒，没有前去征讨，原因实在是百姓极度疲劳的缘故。
English: Year after year, Wu frequently raised troops to invade the border, but we still rested and recuperated as soldiers, and did not go to collect. The reason is really due to the extreme fatigue of the people.

古文：渊生长海表，相承三世，外抚戎夷，内修战射，而俭欲以偏军长驱，朝至夕卷，知其妄矣。 
现代文：公孙渊生长在海边，子孙三代相承，在外安抚戎狄，在内练兵备战，而丘俭打算以偏师长驱作战，早晨到达晚上就能席卷得胜，可见这些话完全是胡说。 
English: Gongsunyuan grew up by the sea, and his three generations of descendants have succeeded each other. Outside, he pacified the Yongdi, and inside, he trained soldiers to prepare for war. However, Qiu Jian planned to fight with a superior division, and would be able to sweep to victory in the morning and in the evening. It can be seen that these words are complete nonsense.

古文：帝不听，使俭率诸军及鲜卑、乌桓屯辽东南界，玺书征渊。
现代文：明帝不听劝说，命丘俭统率各军及鲜卑、乌桓部落在辽东南界驻屯，以玺书征召公孙渊入朝。
English: Emperor Ming did not listen to the persuasion, and Mokgyo Jian, leading the armies of the Xianbei and Wuhuan tribes, stationed in the southeastern region of Liaoning, and summoned Gongsun Yuan to the imperial court with an imperial edict.

古文：渊前发兵反，逆俭于辽隧。
现代文：公孙渊立即发兵反叛，在辽隧迎战丘俭。
English: Gongsunyuan immediately sent troops to rebel and fought against Qiu Jian in Liaocheng.

古文：会天雨十馀日，辽水大涨，俭与战不利，引军还右北平。
现代文：当时正值大雨下了十多天，辽河大涨，丘俭出战不利，率军回到右北平。
English: At that time, it had been raining heavily for more than ten days, the Liao River had risen sharply, Qiu Jian was unfavorably out of the war, and he led the army back to the right Beiping.

古文：渊因自立为燕王，改元绍汉，置百官，遣使假鲜卑单于玺，封拜边民，诱呼鲜卑以侵扰北方。
现代文：公孙渊乘机自立为燕王，改年号为绍汉，设置文武百官，派遣使节授予鲜卑单于印玺，对边民封官授爵，引诱鲜卑人侵扰魏北部边境。
English: Gongsun Yuan took the opportunity to establish himself as Yan Wang, changed his era name to Shaohan, set up a hundred civil and military officials, dispatched envoys to award the Xianbei single to the seal, knighted the border people, and lured the Xianbei people to invade the northern border of Wei.

古文：汉张后殂。
现代文：蜀国张皇后去世。
English: Empress Zhang of Shu passed away.

古文：九月，冀、兗、徐、豫大水。
现代文：九月，冀州、兖州、徐州、豫州发生水灾。
English: In September, floods occurred in Jizhou, Ganzhou, Xuzhou and Yuzhou.

古文：西平郭夫人有宠于帝，毛后爱弛。
现代文：西平人郭夫人被明帝宠爱，明帝对毛皇后的宠爱逐渐消失。
English: Lady Xipingren Guo was favored by Emperor Ming, and Emperor Ming's favor for Empress Mao gradually disappeared.

古文：帝游后园，曲宴极乐。郭夫人请延皇后，帝弗许，因禁左右使不得宣。
现代文：明帝游逛后花园，尽兴欢宴，郭夫人请让毛皇后参加，明帝不准许，并下令左右的人不得泄漏。
English: Emperor Ming roamed the back garden, enjoying the feast. Madame Guo asked the Empress Mao to attend, but Emperor Ming did not allow it, and ordered the people around him not to leak.

古文：后知之，明日，谓帝曰： 昨日游宴北园，乐乎？ 
现代文：毛皇后知道了这件事，第二天问明帝说： 昨日在北园游乐欢宴，高兴吗？ 
English: When Empress Mao learned of this, she asked Emperor Ming the next day, "Are you happy about the pleasure feast held in the North Garden yesterday?

古文：帝以左右泄之，所杀十馀人。
现代文：明帝因左右的人泄漏出去，一连杀了十几人。
English: Emperor Ming believed that the left and right attendants told the matter to Empress Mao, and killed more than a dozen close attendants.

古文：庚辰，赐后死，然犹加谥曰悼。
现代文：庚辰，命毛皇后自尽，然而还是追加谥号，称悼皇后。
English: Geng Chen, the Queen of Life and Death, committed suicide, but still added a nickname to mourn the Queen.

古文：癸丑，葬愍陵。
现代文：癸丑，把毛皇后安葬在愍陵。
English: Gong Yuxi buried Empress Mao in Gong Mausoleum.

古文：迁其弟曾为散骑常侍。
现代文：又提升毛皇后的弟弟毛曾担任散骑常侍。
English: Queen Mao's younger brother Mao, who was also promoted, once served as a strolling equerry.

古文：冬，十月，帝用高堂隆之议，营洛阳南委杰山为圆丘，诏曰： 昔汉氏之初，承秦灭学之后，采摭残缺，以备郊祀，四百馀年，废无禘礼。
现代文：冬季，十月，明帝采用高堂隆的建议，在洛阳城南委粟山上建造圜丘，下诏说： 从前汉朝初年，正是秦朝焚书坑儒之后，当时搜集残缺失散的文献，作为郊外祭祀天地之用，四百余年来，礼荒废失传。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Ming used the suggestion of Gaodanglong to build a mound on the Maoshan Hill of the Southern Committee of Luoyang City, and issued the following edict: In the first year of the former Han Dynasty, just after the Qin Dynasty burned books and pits, it was time to collect the remaining scattered documents, as a suburban sacrifice for the use of heaven and earth. For more than four hundred years, the etiquette has been lost.

古文：曹氏世系出自有虞，今祀皇皇帝天于圆丘，以始祖虞舜配；祭皇皇后地于方丘，以舜妃伊氏配；祀皇天之神于南郊，以武帝配；祭皇地之祇于北郊，以武宣皇后配。 
现代文：曹氏世系是有虞氏后裔，如今在圜丘祭祀皇皇帝天，以始祖虞舜配享；在方丘祭祀皇皇后地，以舜妃伊氏配享；在南郊祭祀皇天之神，以武帝配享；在北郊祭祀皇地之神，以武宣皇后配享。 
English: The Cao family line is descended from the Yu clan. Today, Emperor Tian is worshipped in Shaoqiu, with ancestor Yu Xi as the deity; Empress Dowager Land is worshipped in Fangqiu, with Empress Dowager Yi as the deity; Emperor Wu is worshipped as the deity of Emperor Tian in Nanjiao; and Empress Wu Xuan is worshipped as the deity of Emperor Tian in Beilun.

古文：庐江主薄吕习密使人请兵于吴，欲开门为内应。
现代文：庐江主簿吕习秘密派遣使节向吴国请求出兵接应，想要打开城门里应外合。
English: Lu Xi secretly dispatched envoys to Wu to request the dispatch of troops to answer, and wanted to open the city gate.

古文：吴主使卫将军全琮督前将军硃桓等赴之，既至，事露，吴军还。
现代文：吴王派卫将军全琮督领前将军朱桓等赶赴庐江，到达时事情败露，吴军返回。
English: The king of Wu sent General Quan Wei, the governor of Yunnan, and the former general Zhu Huan to rush to the Minjiang River. When they arrived, the matter was exposed, and the Wu army returned.

古文：诸葛恪至丹杨，移书四部属城长吏，令各保其疆界，明立部伍；其从化平民，悉令屯居。
现代文：诸葛恪到达丹阳，用正式公文通知四部属城长官，命令他们各自严密防守疆界，整顿部队；已经归顺的山越平民，一律设屯聚居。
English: Zhuge Ke arrived in Danyang and used an official document to inform the four subordinate city governors, ordering them to strictly defend the borders and rectify the troops; all the citizens of Shan Yue who had surrendered were required to set up settlements.

古文：乃内诸将，罗兵幽阻，但缮籓篱，不与交锋，候其谷稼将熟，辄纵兵芟刈，使无遗种。
现代文：然后又调各将领，率兵据守险要，只修缮防御工事，不与山越交兵。等待稻米快成熟时，即下令士兵收割，使地上不留稻种。
English: Then he transferred the generals, and led the soldiers according to the principle of "safeguarding risks," only repairing the fortifications, and not engaging in battle with the Shan Yue. When waiting for the rice to ripen, he ordered the soldiers to harvest, so that no rice seeds would remain on the ground.

古文：旧谷既尽，新谷不收，平民屯居，略无所入。
现代文：原有的粮食已经吃尽，新稻又没有收成，平民设屯聚居，劫掠不到任何东西。
English: The original grain has been exhausted, the new rice has not been harvested, the civilians have set up settlements, and there is nothing to loot.

古文：于是山民饥穷，渐出降首。
现代文：于是山民饥饿难忍，逐渐出山归降。
English: As a result, the mountain people were so hungry that they could not bear it and gradually left the mountain to return.

古文：恪乃复敕下曰： 山民去恶从化，皆当抚慰，徙出外县，不得嫌疑，有所拘执！ 
现代文：诸葛恪遂又下命令说： 山民只要痛改前非，接受教化，都应当抚慰，迁移到外县，不能随意猜疑，拘押逮捕。 
English: Zhuge Keqiu also issued an order saying: Mountain people should be comforted and moved to other counties as long as they make amends for their wrongdoings and accept edification, and they should not be suspected and arrested at will.

古文：臼阳长胡伉得降民周遗，遗旧恶民，困迫暂出，伉缚送言府。
现代文：臼阳县长胡伉获得降民周遗，周遗原是一个恶霸，迫于饥饿暂时出山。
English: Usiyang County Governor Hu Wei was demoted to Zhou Yi. Zhou Yi was a bully who was forced to temporarily leave the mountain due to hunger.

古文：恪以伉违教，遂斩以徇。
现代文：胡伉把他捆绑起来，送到郡府惩办。诸葛恪认为胡伉违抗命令，于是将胡伉斩首。
English: Hu Yao tied him up and sent him to the county government for punishment. Zhuge believed that Hu Yao disobeyed the order, so he beheaded Hu Yao.

古文：民闻伉坐执人被戮，知官惟欲出之而已，于是老幼相携而出，岁期人数，皆如本规。
现代文：山民听说胡伉因随意捕人被杀，知道官府的目的只是想让他们离开山区，于是扶老携幼，大批出山，一年之后统计人数，都同原来计划的一样。
English: The mountain people heard that Hu Rong was killed for arbitrarily arresting people, and knew that the aim of the government was just to get them to leave the mountain area. So they helped the elderly with their children and went out of the mountain in large numbers. A year later, the number of people was the same as originally planned.

古文：恪自领万人，馀分给诸将。
现代文：诸葛恪亲自统领一万人，其余的分给其他将领。
English: Zhuge Ke personally led ten thousand people, and the rest were distributed to other generals.

古文：吴主嘉其功，拜恪威北将军，封都乡侯，徙屯庐江皖口。
现代文：吴王嘉奖他的功劳，任命诸葛恪为威北将军、封为都乡侯，移驻庐江皖口。
English: The king of Wu commended his service and appointed Zhuge Ke as the general of Weibei and the vassal of the capital, and moved to the estuary of the Minjiang River.

古文：是岁，徙长安钟虡、橐佗、铜人、承露盘于洛阳。
现代文：这一年，把原设在长安的钟、橐佗、铜人、承露盘移到洛阳。
English: In the same year, the clock, gong, bronze man and candlestick originally located in Chang'an were moved to Luoyang.

古文：盘折，声闻数十里。
现代文：承露盘折断，响声传出几十里。
English: The dew disc broke, and the noise was heard for dozens of miles.

古文：铜人重，不可致，留于霸城。
现代文：铜人太重，无法运到洛阳，只好留在霸城。
English: The coppersmith was too heavy to be transported to Luoyang, so he had to stay in Baicheng.

古文：大发铜铸铜人二，号曰翁仲，列坐于司马门外。
现代文：广为征集黄铜，铸成铜人两个，称为翁仲，并排安放在皇宫司马门外。
English: Brass was widely collected, and two bronze figures, known as Weng Zhong, were cast and placed side by side outside the Sima Gate of the Imperial Palace.

古文：又铸黄龙、凤皇各一，龙高四丈，凤高三太馀，置内殿前。
现代文：又熔铸黄龙、凤凰各一个，黄龙高四丈，凤凰高三丈多，安置在皇宫内殿前。
English: In addition, a yellow dragon and a phoenix were cast. The yellow dragon was four meters tall, and the phoenix was three meters tall. They were placed in front of the palace.

古文：起土山于芳林园西北陬，使公卿群僚皆负土，树松、竹、杂木、善草于其上，捕山禽杂兽致其中。
现代文：在芳林园西北角堆起一座土山，命三公九卿等众官员都去搬运泥土，在土山上种植松树、竹子、杂木和美草，捕来山禽杂兽放到丛中豢养。
English: A mound of earth was piled up in the northwest corner of the Fanglin Garden, and all the officials, including the three emperors and nine emperors, went to carry the soil, plant pine trees, bamboo, weeds and grasses on the mound, and catch the birds and beasts to raise in the bushes.

古文：司徒军议掾董寻上疏谏曰： 臣闻古之直士，尽言于国，不避死亡，故周昌比高祖于桀、纣，刘辅譬赵后于人婢。
现代文：司徒军议掾董寻上书劝谏说： 我听说古代的正直之士，把应说的话毫无保留地对国君全部讲出，不躲避杀身逃亡之祸，所以周昌把汉高祖比作夏桀、商纣，刘辅把赵后比作婢女。
English: I have heard that in ancient times, an honest person would tell the sovereign everything that needed to be said without reservation, and would not avoid the disaster of killing himself and fleeing. Therefore, Zhou Chang compared the Han Emperor Gaozu to Xia Yao and Shang Yao, and Liu Fu compared the Empress Zhao to a maid.

古文：天生忠直，虽白刃沸汤，往而不顾者，诚为时主爱惜天下也。
现代文：天生忠诚正直之臣，虽然面对白刃和沸腾的开水，都敢于上前而不畏惧，实在是为了当时的君王，珍惜君王的天下。
English: A loyal and honest vassal by nature, although he dared to go forward without fear in the face of white blades and boiling water, it was really for the sake of the king at that time, to cherish the king's world.

古文：建安以来，野战死亡，或门殚户尽，虽有存者，遗孤老弱。
现代文：建安以来，野战中死去和逃亡的无以计数，有的已门户尽灭，即使还有幸存的人，也是孤寡老弱。
English: Since Jian'an, there have been countless deaths and escapes in the field battle. Some have been completely wiped out, and even if there are survivors, they are old and weak.

古文：若今宫室狭小，当广大之，犹宜随时，不妨农务，况乃作无益之物！
现代文：假如果真是现在宫殿狭小，应当扩建，也还应随顺农时，不要妨碍农业生产，何况是制作毫无益处的器物？
English: If it is true that the palace is small now, it should be expanded, and it should also follow the agricultural time and not interfere with agricultural production, let alone the production of useless utensils?

古文：黄龙、凤皇、九龙、承露盘，此皆圣明之所不兴也，其功三倍于殿舍。
现代文：黄龙、凤凰、九龙、承露盘，这些都是圣明的君王不愿制作的东西，制作所需的工夫是修建宫殿的三倍。
English: The yellow dragon, the phoenix, the nine dragons and the tray of dewdrops are all things that the king of the holy land does not want to make. It takes three times as much time to make a dragon as it does to build a palace.

古文：陛下既尊群臣，显以冠冕，被以文绣，载以华舆，所以异于小人；而使穿方举土，面目垢黑，沾体涂足，衣冠了鸟，毁国之光以崇无益，甚非谓也。
现代文：陛下既然尊重群臣，让他们头戴官帽，身穿绣衣，出门乘坐华丽的车轿，用以和平民区别；可又让他们挖坑抬土，面目又脏又黑，衣冠破碎不整，丢尽国家的脸面，为的只是对国家毫无益处的林园，实在很不对。
English: Since His Majesty respects his ministers and lets them wear official caps, embroidered clothes, and go out in luxurious cars to distinguish themselves from the common people, it is very wrong to let them dig pits and carry soil, their faces dirty and black, their clothes broken and disheveled, and lose the face of the country, just for the sake of a forest garden that is of no benefit to the country.

古文：孔子曰： 君使臣以礼，臣事君以忠。 
现代文：孔子说： 君王对臣下以礼相待，臣下侍奉君王效尽忠心。 
English: Confucius said: The sovereign treats his vassals with courtesy, and the vassals are dutiful and loyal to the sovereign.

古文：无忠无礼，国何以立！
现代文：没有忠义没有礼法，国家靠什么维持？
English: Without loyalty, without etiquette, how can a country be sustained?

古文：臣知言出必死，而臣自比于牛之一毛，生既无益，死亦何损！
现代文：我知道此言既出，肯定被杀，可是我自比为牛身之一毛，活着既然无益于国家，死了又会有什么损失？
English: I know that if I say this, I will surely be killed, but I compare myself to a hair on a cow's body. If I don't benefit the country while I'm alive, what will I lose when I die?

古文：秉笔流涕，心与世辞。
现代文：持笔流泪，心已与世辞别。
English: Holding a pen and shedding tears, my heart has said goodbye to the world.

古文：臣有八子，臣死之后，累陛下矣！ 
现代文：我有八个儿子，我死之后，还要拖累陛下了。 
English: I have eight sons, and after my death, I will still be a burden to Your Majesty.

古文：将奏，沐浴以待命。
现代文：将要上奏前，沐浴等待命令。
English: I'm going to take a shower before the recital and wait for orders.

古文：帝曰： 董寻不畏死邪！ 
现代文：明帝说： 董寻不怕死吗？ 
English: Ming Di said, "Isn't Dong Xiang afraid of death?"

古文：主者奏收寻，有诏勿问。
现代文：主事官奏请拘捕董寻，明帝下诏说不必追究。
English: The chief magistrate requested the arrest of Dong Xiang, but Emperor Ming decreed that there was no need to investigate.

古文：高堂隆上疏曰： 今之小人，好说秦、汉之奢靡以荡圣心；求取亡国不度之器，劳役费损以伤德政。非所以兴礼乐之和，保神明之休也。 
现代文：高堂隆上书说： 如今世上邪恶之人，喜好议论秦、汉之时的奢靡生活以动摇陛下的圣心，引诱陛下求取已亡国家不合法度的器物，致使百姓劳苦，钱财浪费，伤害德政，这不是提倡礼乐的和谐，保持神明的喜庆。 
English: Gaodang Rong wrote: Nowadays, the evil people in the world like to talk about the luxurious life of the Qin and Han dynasties in order to shake His Majesty's sacred heart, lure His Majesty to seek the illegal items of the dead country, causing the people to work hard, waste money, and harm the moral government. This is not to promote the harmony of the ritual music and maintain the celebration of the gods.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：明帝不采纳。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：隆又上书曰： 昔洪水滔天二十二载，尧、舜君臣南面而已。
现代文：高堂隆又上书说： 古代洪水泛滥，波浪滔天，历时二十二年，唐尧、虞舜依然面朝南方而坐，平安无事。
English: Gaodang Long also wrote: The ancient floods have been raging for 22 years, and the waves are huge. Tang Jun and Yu Jun are still sitting facing south, safe and sound.

古文：今无若时之急，而使公卿大夫并与厮徒共供事役，闻之四夷，非嘉声也，垂之竹帛，非令名也。
现代文：如今没有那时的紧急情况，可是却让三公九卿大夫等官员与厮役共同从事力役，让四方蛮夷知道，记载在史书上，不是好的名声。
English: Now, there is no emergency like that time, but to let the noble minister and these people participate in the labor service together, if the surrounding countries know, this is not a good reputation, it will be recorded in the history books in the future, and it is not a good reputation.

古文：今吴、蜀二贼，非徒白地、小虏、聚邑之寇，乃僭号称帝，欲与中国争衡。
现代文：而今吴、蜀二敌，不是大漠游散的胡人以及占据乡邑的盗贼，而是僭号称帝、欲与中原抗衡。
English: But now, the two enemies of Wu and Shu are not the Hu people who roam the desert and the thieves who occupy the townships, but the so-called emperor and the desire to compete with the Central Plains.

古文：今若有人来告： 权、禅并修德政，轻省租赋，动咨耆贤，事遵礼度， 陛下闻之，岂不惕然恶其如此，以为难卒讨灭而为国忧乎！
现代文：如果现在有人来报告： 孙权、刘禅都在修德政，减轻田租赋税，有事向前辈贤者咨询，事事遵循礼仪法度， 陛下听到这些，难道能不警惕、厌恨他们，感到将难以很快消灭他们，而为国家忧虑吗？
English: If someone were to report to you now: Sun Quan and Liu Zhen are carrying out the policy of cultivating virtue, reducing land rent and taxes, consulting the elders and sages when necessary, and following the rules of etiquette and law in all matters, upon hearing this, wouldn't Your Majesty be alarmed and disgusted with them, feel that it would be difficult to quickly eliminate them, and worry for the country?

古文：若使告者曰： 彼二贼并为无道，崇侈无度，役其士民，重其赋敛，下不堪命，吁嗟日甚， 陛下闻之，岂不幸彼疲敝而取之不难乎！
现代文：如果有人说， 那两个敌国都行无道，崇尚侈华没有限度，奴役它的士人与庶民，加重田租赋税，下面承受不了，怨叹之声一天比一天厉害 。陛下听到这些，难道不庆幸他们的疲惫败落而认为攻取他们不会很难吗？
English: If someone were to say, "Those two enemy countries are both lawless, their worship of luxury knows no bounds, their enslavement of officials and commoners, and the increase of taxes and rents are unbearable, and their complaints are getting louder and louder day by day," wouldn't Your Majesty, upon hearing this, be glad of their exhaustion and defeat, and think that it wouldn't be difficult to conquer them?

古文：苟如此，则可易心而度，事义之数亦不远矣！
现代文：如果是这样，那么可以变换位置思考一下，掌握事物的道理便不远了。
English: If so, then you can change your position and think about it, and the truth of mastering things is not far away.

古文：亡国之主自谓不亡，然后至于亡；贤圣之君自谓亡，然后至于不亡。
现代文：将要亡国的君主自以为不会灭亡，然后导致亡国；圣贤的君主自认为有亡国之危，然后才不会亡国。
English: The prince who is about to be overthrown thinks that he will not be overthrown, and then he will be overthrown; the saintly prince thinks that he is in danger of being overthrown, and then he will not be overthrown.

古文：今天下雕敝，民无儋石之储，国无终年之蓄，外有强敌，六军暴边，内兴土功，州郡骚动，若有寇警，则臣惧版筑之士不能投命虏庭矣。
现代文：而今天下凋敝衰败，人民没有一石以上的存粮，国家没有维持一年的储备，外有强敌虎视眈眈，大军只能长期驻守边防，国内大兴土木工程，州郡骚动不安，万一有敌人入侵的警报，那么，我恐怕修建宫墙的官员便不能舍命破敌了。
English: But today, the country is withering and decaying, the people do not have more than one stone of stored grain, the country does not maintain a one-year reserve, there are strong enemies outside, the army can only guard the border for a long time, the country is busy with civil engineering projects, the states and counties are restless. In case there is a warning of enemy invasion, then I am afraid that the officials building the palace wall will not be able to break the enemy.

古文：又，将吏奉禄，稍见折减，方之于昔，五分居一，诸受休者又绝禀赐，不应输者今皆出半，此为官入兼多于旧，其所出与参少于昔。
现代文：加之武将文官的俸禄逐渐减少，与从前相比，只有五分之一，很多受命退休的官员，不再发给生活费用，不应该交纳赋税的如今都要交纳一半，国家的收入比以前多出一倍，而支出比以前减少三分之一。
English: In addition, the salaries of military generals and civil servants have been gradually reduced to only one-fifth of what they used to be, and many officials who have been ordered to retire are no longer paid living expenses. Those who should not pay taxes now have to pay half. The country's income has doubled and expenditures have been reduced by one-third.

古文：而度支经用，更每不足，牛肉小赋，前后相继。
现代文：可是，预算支出，筹划经费，愈加不够，缴纳牛肉作为额外赋税，接连不断。
English: However, the expenditure of funds will be insufficient every time, and the collection of small taxes such as beef has also been carried out many times before and after.

古文：反而推之，凡此诸费，必有所在。
现代文：反过来推算，多出的费用必定另有用途。
English: Returning to the corollary, these cost expenditures must have a place.

古文：且夫禄赐谷帛，人主所以惠养吏民而为之司命者也，若今有废，是夺其命矣。
现代文：俸禄发给米谷和布帛，是君王恩待官吏，让他们赖以为生，如果现在取消，就是夺去他们的性命了。
English: Moreover, the stipend of grain and cloth was used by the monarch to support officials and the people so that they could live. If it were abolished now, it would mean taking away their lives.

古文：既得之而又失之，此生怨之府也。 
现代文：已然得到的又失去，是怨恨集聚的根源。 
English: Having gained and lost, this is where resentment sets in.

古文：帝览之，谓中书监、令曰： 观隆此奏，使朕惧哉！ 
现代文：明帝看后，对中书监、中书令说： 看到高堂隆这一奏章，使朕感到恐惧。 
English: After reading it, Emperor Ming said to the Superintendent of the Chinese Library and the Director of the Chinese Library, "Seeing this movement of Gaodanglong made me feel fear.

古文：尚书卫觊上疏曰： 今议者多好悦耳：其言政治，则比陛下于尧、舜；其言征伐，则比二虏于狸鼠。臣以为不然。
现代文：尚书卫觊上书说： 如今议论的人多爱说好听的话，他们谈论政治，则把陛下比作尧、舜；谈论征伐，就把吴、蜀两敌比作狸猫和田鼠，我认为并不如此。
English: Shang Shuwei wrote in his last will and testament: Nowadays, people who talk about politics are more likely to say nice things. When they talk about politics, they compare His Majesty to a rooster and a hen; when they talk about conquest, they compare the two enemies of Wu and Shu to a cockerel and a field mouse. I don't think that's true.

古文：四海之内，分而为三，群士陈力，各为其主，是与六国分治无以为异也。
现代文：四海之内，分而为三，群僚尽力，各自效忠自己的君主，这与当初六国分治的形势没什么差别。
English: Within the four seas, divided into three, the members of the group do their best, each loyal to their own monarch, which is no different from the situation of the original six countries.

古文：当今千里无烟，遗民困苦。陛下不善留意，将遂凋敝，难可复振。
现代文：如今千里无炊烟，百姓贫困不堪，陛下如不多加留意，必将很快衰败，再难以振兴起来。
English: Today, there is no cooking smoke for thousands of miles, and the people are extremely poor. If His Majesty does not pay much attention, it will soon decay, and it will be difficult to revive it.

古文：武皇帝之时，后宫食不过一肉，衣不用锦绣，茵蓐不缘饰，器物无丹漆，用能平定天下，遗福子孙，此皆陛下之所览也。
现代文：武皇帝时候，后宫每餐不超过一盘肉，衣服不穿锦缎绣饰，坐垫不镶花边，所用器物也没有红漆，所以才能平定天下，给子孙留下福分，这都是陛下亲眼所见的。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, the harem did not exceed one plate of meat per meal, clothes did not wear brocade embroidery, cushions did not have lace, and the utensils used did not have red lacquer, so they could only pacify the world and leave blessings for their children and grandchildren. This was all seen by His Majesty with his own eyes.

古文：当今之务，宜君臣上下，计校府库，量入为出，犹恐不及；而工役不辍，侈靡日崇，帑藏日竭。
现代文：当务之急应是君臣上下，核算国家财政库存，量入为出，恐怕还来不及；如果还是征调工匠役夫不停，侈奢糜费一天胜似一天，国家府库将日渐枯竭。
English: The most urgent task of the day should be for the monarchs and the subjects to calculate the national financial inventory and live within their means, but I am afraid that it is too late; if craftsmen and women are still conscripted, and luxury expenses increase day by day, the national treasury will be increasingly depleted.

古文：昔汉武信神仙之道，谓当得云表之露以餐玉屑，故立仙掌以承高露，陛下能明，每所非笑。
现代文：从前汉武帝相信神仙之道，说应当取得云表的露水来和玉屑一起服用，所以竖立了仙掌来承接从高而下的露水，陛下通达圣明，每每嗤笑其非。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Hanwu believed in the way of the immortals, saying that the dew of the cloud watch should be obtained to take it with the jade chips, so he erected a cactus to receive the dew from above. His majesty was able to reach the holy light, and he laughed at every mistake.

古文：汉武有求于露而犹尚见非，陛下无求于露而空设之，不益于好而糜费功夫，诚皆圣虑所宜裁制也。 
现代文：汉武帝有求于露水还被非议，陛下无求于露水而虚设承露盘，毫无益处并浪费了很多人力，这些实在都是陛下圣虑所应克制减省的啊！ 
English: Emperor Hanwu was criticized for asking for dew, and His Majesty did not ask for dew and set up a dew tray, which was useless and wasted a lot of manpower. These are all things that His Majesty should refrain from doing!

古文：时有诏录夺士女前已嫁为吏民妻者，还以配士，听以生口自赎，又简选其有姿首者内之掖庭。
现代文：当时，有诏书命令搜括强取天下仕女，已经嫁给下级官吏和平民为妻的，一律改嫁给出征兵士，允许以相当数目的牛马牲畜赎回。还选拔其中更美貌的送到皇宫。
English: At that time, there was an imperial edict ordering to search for and forcibly take the world's maidens, and those who had married lower-level officials and civilians as wives would all be remarried to conscripted soldiers, and allowed to be redeemed with a considerable number of cattle and horses. The more beautiful ones were also selected and sent to the imperial palace.

古文：太子舍人沛国张茂上书谏曰： 陛下，天之子也，百姓吏民，亦陛下子也，今夺彼以与此，亦无以异于夺兄之发妻弟也，于父母之恩偏矣，又，诏书听得以生口年纪、颜色与妻相当者自代，故富者则倾家尽产，贫者举假贷贳，贵买生口以赎其妻。
现代文：太子舍人沛国人张茂上书直言劝谏： 陛下是上天之子，小吏、平民也是陛下之子。如今夺取那个给予这个，也和夺兄之妻嫁给弟弟没什么区别，作为父母来说，就是有所偏爱了。还有，诏书说可以用年龄、毛色与妻子价值相当的马牛牲畜代替，所以富家则倾家荡产，穷人则典当借债，用昂贵的价钱买来牲畜以赎回他的妻子。
English: Zhang Mao, a member of the Prince's household, wrote a letter to the emperor, saying, "Your Majesty is the son of Heaven, and the petty officials and commoners are also the sons of Your Majesty. Nowadays, taking away one to give this is no different from taking away a brother's wife to marry a brother. As a parent, it is a matter of preference. Also, the imperial edict said that horse and cattle of the same age and color as the wife could be used as a substitute, so the rich would plunder their wealth, while the poor would pawn their debts and buy livestock at a high price to redeem his wife.

古文：县官以配士为名而实内之掖庭，其丑恶乃出与士。
现代文：朝廷以配妻给出征战士为名义而实际上是送到皇宫，色衰丑陋的才配给士兵。
English: In the name of providing wives for conscripted soldiers, the imperial court actually sent them to the imperial palace, and soldiers were only provided with the faded and ugly ones.

古文：得妇者未必喜而失妻者必有忧，或穷或愁，皆不得志。
现代文：这样，配到妻子的人未必高兴，而失去妻子的人必定忧伤，或者穷困或者忧愁，都不如愿。
English: So then he that findeth a wife findeth not a good thing, and he that loseth his wife is in bitterness, and poverty, and sorrow.

古文：夫君有天下而不得万姓之欢心者，鲜不危殆。
现代文：一个拥有天下而得不到万民欢心的君王，很少有不陷于危险的。
English: A king who possesses the whole world and is not loved by all the people is rarely without danger.

古文：且军师在外数十万人，一日之费非徒千金，举天下之曲以奉此役，犹将不给，况复有宫庭非员无录之女。
现代文：况且军队驻扎在外数十万人，一天的开支绝非只是千金，把全国赋税都用在兵役开支上，还将供给不上，何况又有皇宫中那么多超额的美女。
English: Moreover, hundreds of thousands of troops are stationed abroad, and the daily expenses are by no means just thousands of dollars. The national taxes are all used for military service expenses, and will not be able to supply, not to mention so many excess beauties in the royal palace.

古文：椒房母后之家，赏赐横与，内外交引，其费半军。
现代文：对后妃及太后娘家随意赏赐，内外开支，费用与军费相半。
English: The empress dowager and her daughters were given whatever they wanted, and the expenses at home and abroad were half of the military expenses.

古文：昔汉武帝掘地为海，封土为山，赖是时天下为一，莫敢与争者耳。
现代文：从前汉武帝挖地造海，堆土造山，依赖的是当时天下统一，没有敢与他抗争的人。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Hanwu dug up the earth to make the sea and heaped up the earth to make the mountains. He relied on the unification of the world at that time, and there was no one who dared to fight against him.

古文：自衰乱以来，四五十载，马不舍鞍，士不释甲，强寇在疆，图危魏室。
现代文：自从衰乱以来，四、五十年，马不离鞍，士不解甲，强敌压境，企图吞灭魏室。
English: Since the decline, for forty or fifty years, the horse does not leave the saddle, the warrior does not disarm, the strong enemy oppresses the border, and attempts to devour the Wei family.

古文：陛下不战战业业，念崇节约，而乃奢靡是务，中尚方作玩弄之物，后园建承露之盘，斯诚快耳目之观，然亦足以骋寇雠之心矣！
现代文：陛下不兢兢业业，考虑崇尚节俭，反而追求奢糜，中尚方制作出游戏器物，后园竖起承露盘，这当然能使耳目愉悦，然而也足以助长敌人的图我之心！
English: His majesty is not a conscientious person, he thinks of advocating frugality, but pursues luxury. The Chinese side produces game equipment, the backyard erects a dew tray, which of course can make the eyes and ears happy, but it is also enough to promote the enemy's self-image!

古文：惜乎，舍尧、舜之节俭而为汉武帝之侈事，臣窃为陛下不取也。 
现代文：可惜啊，舍弃尧、舜的节俭而仿效汉武帝的奢侈，我私下认为陛下不应这样。 
English: It's a pity, but I don't think His Majesty should give up his frugality and emulate the extravagance of Emperor Hanwu.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：明帝不理睬。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：高堂隆疾笃，口占上疏曰： 曾子有言曰： 人之将死，其言也善。 
现代文：高堂隆病重，口授上书说： 曾子曾经说过： 人之将死，其言也善。 
English: Takashi Kodo, who was seriously ill, dictated a letter saying: Zengzi once said: When a person is about to die, his words are good.

古文：臣寝疾有增无损，常恐奄忽，忠款不昭，臣之丹诚，愿陛下少垂省览！
现代文：我卧床病重，有增无减，常常恐怕猝然去世，款款忠心不能昭然于世，我的一片赤诚，愿陛下稍稍垂阅深思！
English: I am seriously ill in bed, with no signs of improvement. I am often afraid that I will die suddenly. My loyalty cannot be revealed to the world. My heart is red. I hope His Majesty will read this and think about it for a while!

古文：臣观三代之有天下，圣贤相承，历数百载，尺土莫非其有，一民莫非其臣。
现代文：我观察夏、商、周三代占有天下时，圣贤的君王前后相承，历经数百年，天下每一尺土地都归他所有，每一个子民都是他的臣属。
English: I observed that when the Xia, Shang and San dynasties occupied the world, the kings of the sages succeeded one another. After hundreds of years, every foot of land in the world belonged to him, and every citizen was his subject.

古文：然癸、辛之徒，纵心极欲，皇天震怒，宗国为墟，纣枭白旗，桀放鸣条，天子之尊，汤、武有之。
现代文：可是，夏桀、商纣之辈，放纵私心，极尽私欲，皇天震怒，国家化为废墟。纣被斩首县悬挂在白旗之上，桀被放逐到鸣条山，天子尊位，被商汤、周武居有。
English: However, members of the Xia and Shang dynasties indulged their selfishness and fulfilled their desires to the utmost, the emperor was furious, and the country was reduced to ruins. Zhou was beheaded, the county was hung on a white flag, Zhou was banished to the Mingzha Mountain, and Shang Tang and Zhou Wu lived there.

古文：岂伊异人？
现代文：难道夏桀、商纣与普通人不同？
English: Are Xia Yao and Shang Yao different from ordinary people?

古文：皆明王之胄也。
现代文：他们也都是圣明君王的后裔。
English: They are also all descendants of King Shengming.

古文：黄初之际，天兆其戒，异类之鸟，育长燕巢口爪胸赤，此魏室之大异也。宜防鹰扬之臣于萧墙之内。
现代文：黄初年间，上天预示警告，异类之鸟，在燕巢中抚育长大，嘴、爪、胸部都是红色，这是魏室的特大怪事，应该防备飞扬跋扈的大臣在宫墙之内发难。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Heaven foretold and warned that a strange bird would be raised in a swallow's nest, and its beak, claws, and chest would be red. This was a very strange occurrence in Wei's palace, and the high-flying minister should be prepared for trouble within the palace walls.

古文：可选诸王，使君国典兵，往往棊跱，镇抚皇畿，翼亮帝室。
现代文：可以选拔亲王，让他们在自己封国之内建立军队，亲自统率，象棋子一样，分布全国，镇抚皇家的疆土，辅翼弘扬皇室。
English: Princes can be selected, and they can be allowed to establish an army within their own fiefdom, personally lead it, and distribute it across the country like chess pieces, pacify the royal territory, and help promote the royal family.

古文：夫皇天无亲，惟德是辅。
现代文：皇天不特别亲近谁，只辅佑有德的圣君。
English: There is no one who is close to heaven, only those who are virtuous.

古文：民咏德政，则延期过历；下有怨叹，则辍录授能。
现代文：百姓赞咏德政，则享国年数自然长久；下面怨声载道，上天就会另外选授新的贤能。
English: If the people praise the virtuous government, they will naturally enjoy the years of the country for a long time; if the people complain, the heavens will select a new virtuous ability.

古文：由此观之，天下乃天下之天下，非独陛下之天下也！ 
现代文：由此看来，天下乃是全体民众的天下，而不单是陛下的天下了。 
English: From this point of view, the world is the world of all the people, not just the world of His Majesty.

古文：帝手诏深慰劳之。
现代文：明帝亲手写下诏书，深切慰劳高堂隆。
English: Emperor Ming personally wrote down the edict, expressing his deep condolences to Lao Gaodonglong.

古文：未几而卒。
现代文：不久，高堂隆去世。
English: Soon after, Baikai died.

古文：陈寿评曰：高堂隆学业修明，志存匡君，因变陈戒，发于恳诚，忠矣哉！
现代文：陈寿评曰：高堂隆学业昌明，立志辅助君王，在天变灾异发生时提出劝诫警告，发自诚恳之心，堪称是忠臣啊！
English: Chen Shourai said: Gaodanglong has a brilliant academic record, is determined to assist the king, and issues exhortations and warnings when natural disasters occur, from a sincere heart. He can be called a loyal subject!

古文：及至必改正朔，俾魏祖虞，所谓意过其通者欤！
现代文：及至他一定要改变历法，让魏国以虞舜为祖先，这就是人们所说的意念超过了通博吧！
English: Wait until he has to revise Zhengshuo and ask Cao Wei to use the era of Yuyao as a model, that is, the spirit of contrivance exceeds the flexibility.

古文：帝深疾浮华之士，诏吏部尚书卢毓曰： 选举莫取有名，名如画地作饼，不可啖也。 
现代文：明帝对华而不实的士人深恶痛绝，下诏给吏部尚书卢毓说： 选拔举荐人才时，不要唯名是取，名声如同地上的画饼，只能看不能吃。 
English: Emperor Ming detested pompous and insincere scholars, and issued an edict to the personnel department, Shangshu Luqi, saying: When selecting and recommending talents, do not just take the name, the reputation is like a picture cake on the ground, you can only look at it and not eat it.

古文：毓对曰： 名不足以致异人而可以得常士：常士畏教慕善，然后有名，非所当疾也。
现代文：卢毓说： 凭名声选拔，不足以得到奇异的人才，但可以得到一般的人才；一般的人敬畏教化、仰慕善行，然后才会出名，不应当痛恶这样的人。
English: Lu Wei said: "Selecting by reputation is not enough to get extraordinary talents, but it can get ordinary talents; ordinary people fear enlightenment and admire good deeds before they become famous, and they should not hate such people.

古文：愚臣既不足以识异人，又主者正以循名案常为职，但当有以验其后耳。
现代文：我既不能够识别奇异的人才，而主事官吏的责任又是根据名次按常规任命官职，只有从以后的实际中检验了。
English: I am not able to identify extraordinary talents, and the responsibility of the responsible officials is to appoint officials according to the rank according to the routine, which is only tested from the future reality.

古文：古者敷奏以言，明试以功；今考绩之法废，而以毁誉相进退，故真伪浑杂，虚实相蒙。 
现代文：古代以上奏陈事考察言谈，用实际工作考察能力。如今考绩的办法已经废驰，只是凭借赞誉或毁谤的舆论决定晋升和罢免，所以真假混杂，虚实难辨。 
English: In ancient times, people used to play records, study speeches, and use actual work to examine ability. Nowadays, the method of performance evaluation has been scrapped, and promotion and dismissal are decided by public opinion based on praise or slander. Therefore, truth and falsehood are mixed, and it is difficult to distinguish truth from falsehood.

古文：帝纳其言。诏散骑常侍刘邵作考课法。
现代文：明帝接受了他的建议，颁布诏书让散骑常侍刘邵制定考课法。
English: Emperor Ming accepted his suggestion and issued an edict to let Liu Shao, the imperial equestrian, formulate the examination curriculum.

古文：卲作《都官考课法》七十二条，又作《说略》一篇，诏下百官议。
现代文：刘邵制定《都官考课法》七十二条，又作《说略》一篇，下诏让百官讨论。
English: Liu Shao formulated 72 articles of the "Civil Service Examination Course Law," and also made a "Summary," which was discussed by hundreds of officials.

古文：司隶校尉崔林曰： 案《周官》考课，其文备矣。
现代文：司隶校尉崔林说： 《周官》考课之法，条例已十分完备了。
English: Lieutenant Colonel Cui Lin said: "The regulations for the examination of "Zhou Guan" have been fully completed.

古文：自康王以下，遂以陵夷，此即考课之法存乎其人也。
现代文：从周康王以后，就逐渐废驰，这就说明考课之法能否保持完全看人的掌握。
English: From the time of King Zhou Kang, it gradually fell into disuse, which shows whether the method of examination can be fully controlled by human beings.

古文：及汉之季，其失岂在乎佐吏之职不密哉！
现代文：到汉代末年，失误岂止在于佐吏的职责不详密！
English: By the end of the Han Dynasty, the fault lay not only in the fact that the duties of the officials were not detailed!

古文：方今军旅或猥或卒，增减无常，固难一矣。
现代文：如今军队或聚或散，减增无常，本来就很难统一标准。
English: Nowadays, it is difficult to unify standards, as the military forces are either amassed or dispersed, and their increase or decrease is not constant.

古文：且万目不张，举其纲，众毛不整，振其领，皋陶仕虞，伊尹臣殷，不仁者远。
现代文：况且万目不张，就要拉住它的纲绳；裘毛不整，就要抖动它的衣领。皋陶在虞舜的手下做事，伊尹在商王朝供职，邪恶的人自会远离。
English: Moreover, if the eyes are not open, it is necessary to pull the cords; if the hair is not in order, it is necessary to shake the collar. Zhai Tao worked under Yu Yao, Yi Yin served in the Shang Dynasty, and evil people would stay away.

古文：若大臣能任其职，式是百辟，则孰敢不肃，乌在考课哉！ 
现代文：如果大臣们能尽到他的职责，成为百官效法的榜样，那么谁敢不恭恭敬敬地尽职尽责，难道在于考核吗？ 
English: If ministers can fulfill their duties and set an example for other officials to follow, then who would dare not to respectfully perform their duties? Is it a matter of assessment?

古文：黄门侍郎杜恕曰： 明试以功，三考黜陟，诚帝王之盛制也。
现代文：黄门侍郎杜恕说： 公开考核官员的能力，三年进行一次考绩，确实是帝王最完善的制度。
English: Huangmen waiter Du Shou said: Openly assessing the ability of officials and conducting a performance appraisal once every three years is indeed the most perfect system for emperors.

古文：然历六代而考绩之法不著，关七圣而课试之文不垂，臣诚以为其法可粗依，其详难备举故也。
现代文：然而经过六个朝代，考绩办法没有明著于世，经过七位圣人，考核条例也没能流传下来，我的确认为这是由于考核的原则可以粗略地依据，详细规定很难一一列举的缘故。俗语说： 世上有恶人，没有恶法。 
English: However, after six dynasties, the performance appraisal method has not been clearly written in the world, and after seven saints, the appraisal regulations have not been passed down. I truly believe that this is because the principles of appraisal can be roughly based, and detailed regulations are difficult to list one by one. As the saying goes: There are evil people in the world, but no evil laws.

古文：语曰 世有乱人而无乱法 ，若使法可专任，则唐、虞可不须稷、契之佐，殷、周无贵伊、吕之辅矣。
现代文：如果法制是万能的，那么唐尧、虞舜可以不必需要后稷、子契的辅佐，商朝、周朝也不会以伊尹、吕尚的辅助为可贵了。
English: If the legal system is all-powerful, then Tang Xuan and Gu Xuan may not need the assistance of Hou Xuan and Zi Qi, and the Shang and Zhou dynasties will not value the assistance of Yi Yin and Lushang.

古文：今奏考功者，陈周、汉之云为，缀京房之本旨，可谓明考课之要矣。
现代文：而今主张考绩的人，陈述了周朝、汉朝的所说所为，辍叙了汉代京房考功课吏的本义，可以说是使考课的要旨更加显明了。
English: However, those who advocate performance evaluation now have stated what the Zhou and Han dynasties said and did, and have omitted the original meaning of the examination officials of the Han Dynasty, which can be said to make the essence of the examination more obvious.

古文：于以崇揖让之风，兴济济之治，臣以为未尽善也。
现代文：盼望用这种办法崇尚谦恭推让的世风，振兴美好的治绩，我认为还不是尽善尽美。
English: I hope to use this method to advocate the world style of humility and concession, and to revitalize the good performance of treatment. I think it is not perfect.

古文：其欲使州郡考士，必由四科，皆有事效，然后察举，试辟公府，为新民长吏，转以功次补郡守者，或就增秩赐爵，此最考课之急务也。
现代文：打算让州、郡举行任官考试，必须经由四科，都有实际成效，然后保举，经官府考试征用，任不地方官吏，根据功绩补升为郡守，或者增加禄秩，赐予爵位，这最是考核官吏的当务之急。
English: If a state or county plans to hold an examination for the appointment of officials, it is necessary to pass four subjects, all of which have practical results, and then be promoted. After being requisitioned by the government examination, local officials will be appointed, and according to their merits, they will be promoted to county governors, or their ranks will be increased, and they will be given a peerage. This is the most urgent task for the assessment of officials.

古文：臣以为便当显其身，用其言，使具为课州郡之法，法具施行，立必信之赏，施必行之罚。
现代文：我认为被任职的官员应当使他们的身分显贵，采用他们的建议，命他们都分别制定州郡官吏考核办法，切实施行，确立可信的必赏制度、可行的必罚制度。
English: The minister believes that it is necessary to highlight their identity, adopt their suggestions, let them work out a detailed assessment method for state and county officials, implement the system, and the reward or punishment must be implemented.

古文：至于公卿及内职大臣，亦当俱以其职考课之。
现代文：至于三公九卿及内职大臣，也应当都就他们的职务进行考核。
English: As for the three princes and nine nobles and the minister of the interior, they should also be assessed on their duties.

古文：古之三公，坐而论道；内职大臣，纳言补阙，无善不纪，无过不举。
现代文：古代的三公，坐在君王身旁讨论治国大道，内职大臣，时时弥补君王的疏忽和错误，再小的善行也要记载，再小的过失也要纠举。
English: In ancient times, the three princes sat next to the king to discuss the way of governing the country, and the minister of the interior always made up for the king's negligence and mistakes. Even small good deeds should be recorded, and even small mistakes should be corrected.

古文：且天下至大，万机至众，诚非一明所能遍照；故君为元首，臣作股肱，明其一体相须而成也。
现代文：况且天下如此之大，大事如此之多，绝非一盏明灯就能照亮每个角落，所以君王好比是头脑，大臣好比是四肢，必须明白同属一体、互相依赖才能成事的道理。
English: Moreover, the world is so big and there are so many important events, it is by no means a bright light that can illuminate every corner. Therefore, the king is like the head, the minister is like the limbs, and it is necessary to understand the principle of belonging to the same body and relying on each other to get things done.

古文：是以古人称廊庙之材，非一木之枝，帝王之业，非一士之略。
现代文：所以古人说廊庙所以需的木材，绝非一根木头就能支撑，帝王的宏大事业，绝非只靠一个臣僚的谋略。
English: Therefore, the ancients said that the wood needed for the corridor temple could not be supported by a single piece of wood, and the grand cause of the emperor was by no means dependent on the strategy of a single minister.

古文：由是言之，焉有大臣守职办课，可以致雍熙者哉！
现代文：由此看来，怎么可能只靠大臣守职尽责办理课试，就可以使天下太平和乐呢？
English: From this point of view, how is it possible to make the world too peaceful and happy just by relying on ministers to perform their duties and take exams?

古文：诚使容身保位，无放退之辜，而尽节在公，抱见疑之势，公义不修而私议成欲，虽仲尼为课，犹不能尽一才，又况于世俗之人乎！ 
现代文：如果容身保位没有被放逐罢官之罪，而为国尽节，也处在被怀疑的形势中，公道没有树立起来，私下议论却成为风气，这样即使是孔子来主持考核，恐怕也不能发挥一点点才能，何况世俗的普通人呢？ 
English: If maintaining one's position is not a crime punishable by banishment or dismissal, but a national duty, and if one is also in a situation of suspicion, justice has not been established, and private discussion has become a custom, then even if Confucius presides over the examination, he may not be able to exert a little talent, let alone ordinary people in the world.

古文：司空掾北地傅嘏曰： 夫建官均职，清理民物，所以立本也。
现代文：司空掾北地人傅嘏说： 设置官吏分担职责，管理百姓，是治国的根本。
English: Fu Yao, an official of the Kuomintang and a native of the North, said: "Setting up officials to share responsibilities and manage the people is fundamental to governing the country.

古文：循名考实，纠励成规，所以治末也。
现代文：依照官职考察官员的实际工作，依照规章进行督促检查，是治国的细微末节。
English: To inspect the actual work of officials in accordance with their official duties and to conduct supervision and inspection in accordance with regulations is a fine detail of state governance.

古文：本纲未举而造制末程，国略不崇而考课是先，惧不足以料贤愚之分，精幽明之理也。 
现代文：大纲不举而抓细小之事，不重视国家大政方针，而以制定考课之法为先，恐怕不足以区分贤能和愚昧，显示出明暗之理。 
English: It is not enough to distinguish between wisdom and stupidity, and it shows the principles of light and darkness.

古文：议久之不决，事竟不行。
现代文：于是，久议不决，此事竟没有实行。
English: As a result, after long deliberation, the matter was not implemented.

古文：臣光曰：为治之要，莫先于用人，而知人之道，圣贤所难也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：治理国家的关键，没有比用人更重要的了；然而识别人才的办法，连圣贤也感到困难。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The key to governing the country is no more important than employing people; however, even sages find it difficult to identify talent.

古文：是故求之于毁誉，则爱憎竞进而善恶浑殽；考之于功状，则巧诈横生而真伪相冒。
现代文：所以只好求助于舆论的毁谤或赞誉，于是个人爱憎争相掺杂进来，使善良和邪恶混淆；用档案进行考核，于是巧诈横生，真假不明。
English: Therefore, they had to resort to the slander or praise of public opinion, so personal love and hatred were mixed in to confuse good and evil; the assessment was carried out with archives, so the cunning was rampant and the truth was unknown.

古文：要之，其本在于至公至明而已矣。
现代文：总之，识别人才的根本在于主上的至公至明而已。
English: In short, the basis for identifying talent lies in the Lord's supremacy and clarity.

古文：为人上者至公至明，则群下之能否焯然形于目中，无所复逃矣。
现代文：居上位的人至公至明，那么属下有能无能就会清清楚楚地反映在眼中，无所遁形。
English: If the people at the top are very open and transparent, then the ability or inability of their subordinates will be clearly reflected in their eyes, and there will be nothing to hide.

古文：苟为不公不明，则考课之法，适足以为曲私欺罔之资也。
现代文：如果不公不明，那么考绩之法，恰好能够成为徇私、欺骗的凭借。
English: If the unfairness is not clear, then the method of performance appraisal can just become the reliance of favoritism and deception.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：公明者，心也；功状者，迹也。
现代文：所谓至公至明，是要出自内心，所谓档案，反映的是外在表现。
English: The so-called most public and clear is to come from the heart, the so-called archives reflect the external performance.

古文：己之心不能治，而以考人之迹，不亦难乎！
现代文：自己的内心都不能理正，而要去考察别人的表现，不也很难吗？
English: You can't straighten out your own heart, but isn't it difficult to examine the performance of others?

古文：为人上者，诚能不以亲疏贵贱异其心，喜怒好恶乱其志，欲知治经之士，则视其记览博洽，讲论精通，斯为善治经矣；欲知治狱之士，则视其曲尽情伪，无所冤抑，斯为善治狱矣；欲知治财之士，则视其仓库盈产，百姓富给，斯为善治财矣；欲知治兵之士，则视其战胜攻取，敌人畏服，斯为善治兵矣。
现代文：居上位的人，如果真能做到不以亲疏贵贱改变心思，不因喜怒好恶改变意志，那么，想要了解谁是擅长经学的人，只要看他博学强记，讲解精辟通达，那他就是饱学之士了；想要了解谁是执法人才，只要看他断案穷尽真相，不使人含冤受屈，那他就是善于理财了；想要了解治军的将领，只要看他战必胜、攻必取，能使敌人畏服，那他就是善于治军了。
English: If people in high positions can truly change their minds without relying on their relatives and superiors, and without changing their wills because of their likes and dislikes, then if you want to understand who is good at studying, just look at his erudite memory and insightful explanation, then he is a well-educated person; if you want to understand who is a law enforcement talent, just look at him adjudicating the case, exhausting the truth, and not making people suffer unjustly, then he is good at financial management; if you want to understand the general who governs the army, just look at him winning the war, attacking and conquering, and being able to intimidate the enemy, then

古文：至于百官，莫不皆然。
现代文：至于文武百官，莫不如此。
English: As far as the civil and military officials are concerned, this is not the case.

古文：虽询谋于人而决之在己，虽考求于迹而察之在心，研核其实而斟酌其宜，至精至微，不可以口述，不可以书传也，安得豫为之法而悉委有司哉！
现代文：虽然要听取别人的意见，但决断在于自己；虽然考核要看实际表现，但审察却在自己内心。探讨实情而斟酌是否适宜，最为精密最为细微，不可以口述，也不可以笔录，怎么可以预先定出法规而全部委派给有关部门办理呢？
English: Although it is necessary to listen to the opinions of others, the decision lies with oneself; although the assessment depends on the actual performance, the examination is in one's own heart. Is it appropriate to explore the facts and consider whether it is appropriate, the most precise and the most subtle, can not be dictated, nor can it be recorded, how can the regulations be predetermined and all delegated to the relevant departments?

古文：或者亲贵虽不能而任职，疏贱虽贤才而见遗；所喜所好者败官而不去，所怒所恶者有功而不录，询谋于人，则毁誉相半而不能决；考求于迹，则文具实亡而不能察。
现代文：有的人因是皇亲显贵，虽然无能但仍被任官授职；有的人因为关系疏远出身卑贱，虽然有德有才但仍被排斥。当权者所喜欢的人即使失职也不被罢免，所恼怒厌恶的人即使有功也不被录用。向人咨询，毁誉各半而不能决断；考核事迹，文书具备内容空洞而不能觉察。
English: Some people were appointed to high-ranking positions because they were relatives of emperors, although they were incompetent; some people were born in a lowly family, although they were virtuous and talented, but they were ostracized because of their distant relationship; people who were liked by those in power were not dismissed even if they failed in their duties, and people who were irritated and disgusted were not hired even if they were meritorious; people were consulted and their reputations were damaged, but no decision could be made; deeds were evaluated, and documents had empty content but could not be detected.

古文：虽复为之善法，繁其条目，谨其簿书，安能得其真哉！
现代文：即使制定了再好的考核办法，增加考核条目，完备档案文簿，又怎么能得到真实情况呢？
English: Even if the best assessment method is developed, the assessment items are added, and the archives and books are completed, how can the real situation be obtained?

古文：或曰：人君之治，大者天下，小者一国，内外之官以千万数，考察黜陟，安得不委有司而独任其事哉？
现代文：有人说：君主的治理，大到天下，小到封国，里里外外的官吏成千上万，要一一考察任免，怎么能不委派给有关部门而独自承担呢？
English: Some people say: the governance of the monarch, large to the world, small to the fiefdom, thousands of officials at home and abroad, need to be examined one by one, how can they not be assigned to the relevant departments and bear it alone?

古文：曰：非谓其然也。
现代文：回答是：当然不是这个意思。
English: The answer is: Of course not.

古文：凡为人上者，不特人君而已。太守居一郡之上，刺史居一州之上，九卿居属官之上，三公居百执事之上，皆用此道以考察黜陟在下之人，为人君者亦用此道以考察黜陟公卿、刺史、太守，奚烦劳之有哉！或曰：考绩之法，唐、虞所为，京房、刘邵述而修之耳，乌可废哉？
现代文：居上位的人，不只是君王而已；太守居于一郡之上，三公居于百官之上，如果各级都用这个办法考察任免自己的下属，君王也用这个办法考察任免三公、九卿、郡守，还会有什么烦劳呢？有人说：考绩之法，是唐尧、虞舜所制定，京房、刘邵不过是加以陈述及修订罢了，怎么可以废除呢？
English: It is not only the king who is in a higher position; the grand vizier is above a county, and the three princes are above a hundred officials. If all levels use this method to examine the appointment and dismissal of their subordinates, and the king also uses this method to examine the appointment and dismissal of the three princes, nine lords, and the county governor, what other troubles will there be? Some people say: The law of performance appraisal was formulated by Tang Xi and Yu Xi, and Beijing Fang and Liu Shao only stated and revised it. How can it be abolished?

古文：曰：唐、虞之官，其居位也久，其受任也专，其立法也宽，其责成也远。
现代文：回答是：唐尧、虞舜的官吏，任职时间长，所担职责专，设立法规宽，完成期限远。
English: The answer is: the officials of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan have been in office for a long time, their duties are special, the laws and regulations are broad, and the deadlines are far away.

古文：是故鲧之治水，九载绩用弗成，然后治其罪；禹之治水，九州攸同，四隩既宅，然后赏其功；非若京房、刘卲之法，校其米盐之课，责其旦夕之效也。
现代文：所以姒鲧治水，历经九年尚未完成，然后才治他的罪；大禹治水，等到九州全部安定，四方土地都可以居住，然后才嘉奖他的功劳；不象京房、刘邵的办法，考核官吏琐刺碎碎的功绩，检查他们一朝一夕的成效。
English: Therefore, Yan's water control, after nine years, has not yet been completed, and only then will his crime be punished; Dayu's water control, until all of Kyushu is stable, and the land in all directions can be lived in, and only then will he be commended for his service; unlike the methods of Jingfang and Liu Shao, assessing the trivial merits of officials and checking their overnight results.

古文：事固有名同而实异者，不可不察也。
现代文：事情本来就有名同而本质不同的一面，不可不明察。
English: It is impossible to ignore the fact that the two sides of the story are essentially the same.

古文：考绩非可行于唐、虞而不可行于汉、魏，由京房、刘卲不得其本而奔趋其末故也。
现代文：考绩之法并不是只在唐尧、虞舜时才可能实行，而在汉、魏不可行，是由于京房、刘邵没有弄清根本问题而只追求细微末节的缘故。
English: The performance appraisal method is not only possible in Tang and Yu Dynasties, but it is not feasible in Han and Wei Dynasties, because Jingfang and Liu Shao did not understand the fundamental problem and only pursued the fine details.

古文：初，右仆射卫臻典选举，中护军蒋济遗臻书曰： 汉祖遇亡虏为上将，周武拔渔父为太师，布衣厮养，可登王公，何必守文，试而后用！ 
现代文：起初，右仆射卫臻主持推举选拔人才的工作，中护军蒋济给卫臻写信说： 汉高祖遇见逃犯，任命为上将；周武王延聘渔夫担任太师。平民百姓甚至奴仆，可以登上王公之位，何必墨守成文，非得考试以后才能任用？ 
English: At first, his right-hand man, Sha Weizhen, presided over the work of nominating and selecting talents. The leader of the Middle Guards, Jiang Jie, wrote to Weizhen, saying: Han Gao Zu met a fugitive and appointed him as a general; King Zhou Wu hired a fisherman to serve as the grandmaster. Commoners and even slaves can ascend to the throne of the prince. Why do you have to stick to the written form? You can only be appointed after an examination.

古文：臻曰： 不然。
现代文：卫臻说： 不然。
English: Wei Zhen said: Otherwise.

古文：子欲同牧野于成、康，喻断蛇于文、景，好不经之举，开拔奇之津，将使天下驰骋而起矣！ 
现代文：你想要把牧野大战比同于周成王、周康王时代，把汉王斩蛇起义比同于汉文帝、汉景帝时代，喜好出乎常规的举动，开提拔奇才的先河，将会使天下混乱起来。
English: If you want to compare the Battle of Makino with the era of King Zhoucheng and King Zhoukang, and compare the Han Dynasty's Snake-chopping Uprising with the era of Emperor Hanwen and Emperor Hanjing, your preference for unconventional actions and for pioneering the promotion of prodigies will cause chaos in the world.

古文：卢毓论人及选举，皆先性行而后言才，黄门郎冯翊李丰尝以问毓，毓曰： 才所以为善也，故大才成大善，小才成小善。
现代文：卢毓议论人才及选举之事，都是优先考虑德性品行而后再谈才干。黄门郎冯翊人李丰曾经就这个问题问卢毓，卢毓说： 才干是要用来行善的，所以大才干能够成就大的善行，小才干能够成就小的善行。
English: Lu Xun's discussion of talent and election is to give priority to moral conduct and then talk about talent. Huangmen Lang Feng Xun's disciple Li Feng once asked Lu Xun about this issue. Lu Xun said: Talent is to be used to do good, so great talent can achieve great good deeds, and small talent can achieve small good deeds.

古文：今称之有才而不能为善，是才不中器也！ 
现代文：如今只说是有才而不能行善，这样的才干是不适合作官的！ 
English: Nowadays, it is only said that one has talent but cannot do good. Such talent is not suitable for an official!

古文：丰服其言。
现代文：李丰佩服他的见解。
English: Li Feng admired his opinion.

