古文：符瑞下嘉禾，五谷之长，王者德盛，则二苗共秀。
现代文：嘉禾是五谷之长，如帝王有盛德便二苗一起荣秀。
English: Jiahe is the leader in grain, if the emperor has virtue, the two seedlings will rise together.

古文：于周德，三苗共穗；于商德，同本异穟；于夏德，异本同秀。
现代文：因为台目的德行，三苗共一穗；因为商塑的德行，同根而异穗；因为夏塑的德行，异根而共同荣秀。
English: Because of the virtue of Taimei, the three seedlings are all one spike; because of the virtue of Shangzhuang, the same root but different spikes; because of the virtue of Xiazhuang, different roots but common glory.

古文：汉宣帝元康四年，嘉谷玄稷，降于郡国。
现代文：汉宣帝元康四年，嘉谷黑粟，在郡国降生。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Yuan Kang of the Han Dynasty, Jiayu Black Corn was born in the county.

古文：汉章帝元和中，嘉禾生郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，嘉禾生长于郡国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zong of the Yuan Dynasty, Jiahe was grown in the county.

古文：汉安帝延光二年六月，嘉禾生九真，百五十六本，七百六十八穗。
现代文：汉安帝延光二年六月，嘉禾生在九真，一百五十六条茎，生有七百六十八条穗。
English: In June of the second year of Han's reign, Jia He was born in Jiu Zhen, with 156 stems and 768 ears.

古文：汉桓帝建和二年四月，嘉禾生大司农帑。
现代文：汉桓帝建和二年四月，嘉禾在大司农的国库裹生长。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Han Huan's reign, Jiahe was grown in the treasury of the Grand Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：汉桓帝永康元年八月，嘉禾生魏郡。
现代文：汉桓帝永康元年八月，嘉禾生于魏郡。
English: In August of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongkang of the Han Dynasty, Jia He was born in Wei County.

古文：魏文帝黄初元年，郡国三言嘉禾生。
现代文：魏文帝黄初元年，郡国三次上报说嘉禾生长。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang, the county government reported three times that Jiahe was growing.

古文：吴孙权黄龙三年十月，会稽南始平言嘉禾生。
现代文：吴孙权黄龙三年十月，会稽的亩并王说有嘉禾生长。
English: In October of the third year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the mu and wang of the audit said that there was growth of Jiahe.

古文：孙权赤乌七年秋，宛陵言嘉禾生。
现代文：孙权赤乌七年秋，鱼陆说有嘉禾生长。
English: In the autumn of the seventh year of Sun Quan's reign, Yu Lu said that there was growth of Jiahe.

古文：晋武帝泰始八年十月，泸水胡王彭护献嘉禾。
现代文：晋武帝泰八年十月，泸水胡王堑谨献上嘉禾。
English: In October of the eighth year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, King Wu of Shishui presented Jiahe to the emperor.

古文：晋武帝太康四年十二月，嘉禾生扶风雍。
现代文：晋武帝太康四年十二月，嘉禾生于迭凰的雍地。
English: Jinwu Emperor Taikang was born in December of the fourth year of Jia He in the Yangtze River.

古文：太康五年七月，嘉禾生豫章南昌。
现代文：太康五年七月，嘉禾生在豫章的南昌。
English: In July of Taikang's fifth year, Jia He was born in Nanchang, Yuzhang.

古文：太康八年闰三月，嘉禾生东夷校尉园。
现代文：太康八年闰三月，嘉禾生于东夷校尉的园。
English: In the leap March of the eighth year of Taikang, Jia He was born in the garden of the Dongyi lieutenant.

古文：太康八年九月，嘉禾生东莱掖。
现代文：太康八年九月，嘉禾生于东莱郡的掖。
English: In September of the eighth year of Taikang, Jiahe was born in Donglai County.

古文：晋愍帝建兴元年八月癸亥，嘉禾生襄平县，一茎七穗。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴元年八月癸亥，嘉禾生于襄平县，一茎有七穗。
English: Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty was born in Yangping County in August of the first year of the year. He was born with seven ears on one stalk.

古文：建兴二年六月，嘉禾生平州治，三实同蒂。
现代文：建兴二年六月，嘉禾生于干州的州治，三实同在一蒂之上。
English: In June of the second year of Jianxing, Jiahe was born in the prefecture of Ganzhou.

古文：建兴三年七月，嘉禾生襄平县，异体同蒂。
现代文：建兴三年七月，嘉禾生于襄平县，异体同在一蒂之上。
English: In July of the third year of Jianxing, Jiahe was born in Xiangping County.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二年十月，嘉禾生颍川阳翟，太守垣苗以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二年十月，嘉禾生于颖川的阳翟，太守垣苗上报朝廷。
English: In October of the second year of Song Emperor Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in the impotence of Yingchuan, and was reported to the imperial court by the eunuch Gaki Miao.

古文：元嘉九年三月，嘉禾生义阳，豫州刺史长沙王义欣以献。
现代文：元嘉九年三月，嘉禾生于义阳，豫州刺史长沙王刘义欣献上朝廷。
English: In March of the ninth year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Yiyang, and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yixin, the Prince of Changsha.

古文：元嘉十年八月，嘉禾生汝南苞信，豫州刺史长沙王义欣以献。
现代文：元嘉十年八月，嘉禾生于汝南苞信，豫州刺史长沙王刘义欣献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 10th year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Yunnan Yuxin, and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yixin, the prince of Changsha in Henan Province.

古文：元嘉十一年八月，嘉禾一茎九穗生北汝阴，太守王玄谟以献。
现代文：元嘉十一年八月，嘉禾一茎有九穗生于北汝阴郡，太守王玄谟献上朝廷。
English: In August of the eleventh year of the Yuan Jia, a stem of nine ears of Jiahe was born in North Ruyin County, and the governor Wang Xuanmu presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年六月，嘉禾一茎九穗生上庸新安，梁州刺史刘道以献。
现代文：元嘉二十年六月，嘉禾一茎有九穗生于上庸的新安，梁州刺史刘真道献上朝廷。
English: In June of the 20th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jiahua, a stem with nine spikes, was born in Xian'an, Shangyong, and presented to the imperial court by Liu Zhendao, a scholar from Liangzhou.

古文：元嘉二十一年，嘉禾生新野邓县，雍州刺史萧思话以献。
现代文：元嘉二十一年，嘉禾生于新野的邓县，雍州刺史萧思话献上朝廷。
English: In the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Deng County, Nianye, and presented the poem of Xiao Si to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年六月，嘉禾生籍田，一茎九穗。
现代文：元嘉二十二年六月，嘉禾生于皇室的籍田中，一茎九穗。
English: In June of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in the middle of the royal family's fief.

古文：元嘉二十二年七月癸酉，嘉禾生平虏陵，徐州刺史臧质以献。
现代文：元嘉二十二年七月癸酉曰，嘉禾生于平虏陵，徐州刺史臧质献上朝廷。
English: In July of the 22nd year of Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Pingru Mausoleum, and the Xuzhou engraved seal was presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年九月，嘉禾生太尉府田，太尉江夏王义恭以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年九月，嘉禾生于太尉府田中，太尉江夏王刘义恭上报朝廷。
English: In September of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in the captaincy of the prefecture of Tanzhong. The captaincy of the king of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年九月，嘉禾生扬州东耕田，刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年九月，嘉禾生于扬州束部的农田中，刺史始兴王刘浚上报朝廷。
English: In September of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in the farmland of Yangzhou Sokube, and the history of Prince Liu Jun was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年，嘉禾生华林园，百六十穗，园丞陈袭祖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年，嘉禾生在华林园，有一百六十穗，园丞陈袭祖上报朝廷。
English: In the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in the Hualin Garden, with one hundred and sixty ears. The garden master Chen Yuzhu reported this to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年，嘉禾生颍川阳白，豫州刺史赵伯符以献。
现代文：元嘉二十二年，嘉禾生于题川的曲阳，豫州刺史赵伯符献上朝廷。
English: In the 22nd year of Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Quyang, Tiechuan, and presented the imperial court with the Henzhou Zizhi Zhao Bo Fu.

古文：元嘉二十三年七月乙丑，嘉禾旅生藉田，藉田令褚熙伯以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年七月乙丑曰，嘉禾野生在籍田，籍田令褚熙伯上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 23rd year of Yuan Jia, Yi Jiu said that Jia He Wild was in the registered field, and the registered field order was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年七月庚午，嘉禾生丹阳椒唐里，扬州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年七月庚午，嘉禾生于丹阳的椒唐里，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of July 23, Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Danyang's Jiaotangli, and Yangzhou's crown prince Liu Jun was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年七月庚辰，嘉禾生醴湖屯，屯主王世宗以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年七月庚辰曰，屯主王世宗上报朝廷。
English: In Gengchen, July 23, Yuan Jia, the lord of the settlement, Wang Shizong, reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年八月己酉，嘉禾生华林园，园丞陈袭祖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年八月已酉曰，嘉禾生在华林国，园丞速袭担上报朝廷。
English: In August 23rd, Yuan Jia passed away. It was reported to the imperial court that Yuan Jia was born in Hualin.

古文：元嘉二十三年九月庚申，嘉禾生沛郡萧，征北大将军衡阳王义季以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年九月庚申，嘉禾生于沛郡的萧县，征北大将军衡阳王刘义季上报朝廷。
English: In September of the 23rd year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Xiao County, Pei County, and was reported to the imperial court by Hengyang King Liu Yizi, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：元嘉二十三年，嘉禾生江夏汝南，荆州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年，嘉禾生在江夏的汝南，荆州刺史南谯王刘义宣上报朝廷。
English: In the 23rd year of Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in the south of the Yunnan River in Jiangxia, Jingzhou, and stabbed Liu Yixuan, the king of the Southern Wei Dynasty, to report to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯，嘉禾旅生华林园及景阳山，园丞梅道念以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯曰，嘉禾野生于华林园和景阳山，园丞梅道念上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 24th year of Yuan Jia, Yi Wu said that Jiahe was wild in Hualin Garden and Jingyang Mountain, and the garden master, Mei Dao, wanted to report to the imperial court.

古文：太尉江夏王义恭上表曰：
现代文：太尉江夏王刘义恭上表说：
English: Captain Jiang Xia Wang Liu Yigong said on the table:

古文：臣闻居高听卑，上帝之功；天且弗违，圣王之德。
现代文：臣闻位居上天而俯察人间，这是上帝的功用；不违背天命，这是圣王的德行。
English: It is God's function to be enthroned in heaven and to look down on mankind; it is the virtue of a holy king not to go against the mandate of heaven.

古文：故能影响二仪，甄陶万有。
现代文：所以能影响阴阳两仪，养育万物。
English: Therefore, it can influence the yin and yang and nurture all things.

古文：鉴观今古，采验图纬，未有道阙化亏，而祯物著明者也。
现代文：通观古今，博采检验谶纬图书，从来也没有在德行不足，教化有亏的情况下出现吉祥的瑞物。
English: Throughout the ancient times and modern times, there has never been an auspicious auspicious item in the case of a lack of virtue and a disadvantage in enlightenment.

古文：自皇运受终，辰曜交和，是以卉木表灵，山渊效宝。
现代文：自从皇帝承受天命，日月星辰和顺，因而花卉草木显灵，山川献宝。
English: Ever since the emperor received the Mandate of Heaven, the sun, moon, and stars have been in harmony. As a result, flowers, plants, and trees have manifested their spirits, and mountains and rivers have offered their treasures.

古文：伏惟陛下体《乾》统极，休符袭逮。
现代文：陛下承奉天命，统驭天，吉祥的符瑞连续出现。
English: His Majesty, following the mandate of heaven, presided over the day, and the auspicious auspice appeared in succession.

古文：若乃凤仪西郊，龙见东邑，海酋献改缁之羽，河祗开俟清之源。
现代文：至于如凤凰来到西郊，苍龙出现于束邑，海上的鲸鱼露出浅黑色的鳍翅，黄河神衹开拓了清澈的源头。
English: As for example, the phoenix came to the western suburbs, the celestial dragon appeared in Sokchon, the whale on the sea showed light black fins, and the Yellow River god opened up a clear source.

古文：三代象德，不能过也。
现代文：星、直、周三代象征德行的符瑞也超不过今天。
English: Star, straight, three generations of the symbol of virtue Fu Rui also surpasses today.

古文：有幽必阐，无远弗届，重译岁至，休瑞月臻。
现代文：陛下的圣德在任何幽暗之处也一定会显示出来，所以遥远之地也不受限制，因而有关符瑞的传闻年年有，吉祥的征兆月月来。
English: His majesty's holiness is sure to manifest itself in any dark place, so there is no limit to the faraway places, so there are rumors about Furui year after year, and auspicious signs come and go.

古文：前者躬藉南亩，嘉谷仍植，神明之应，在斯尤盛。
现代文：前段时期陛下亲自在南亩耕种，嘉谷生长荣茂，神明的应显，在这方面尤其繁多。
English: During the previous period, His Majesty personally cultivated in Nanmu, Jiayu grew prosperous, and the gods appeared, especially in this respect.

古文：四海既穆，五民乐业，思述汾阳，经始灵囿。
现代文：四海和融顺穆，各类民众安居乐业，考虑到妪歌圣主恩德，吉祥的符瑞屡次出现在刚开始营建的御苑。
English: The four seas are in harmony with Shunmu, all kinds of people live and work in peace, taking into account the hymn of the Lord Ende, the auspicious Fu Rui has repeatedly appeared in the imperial garden that has just begun to be built.

古文：兰林甫树，嘉露频流，板筑初就，祥穗如积。
现代文：兰林刚种上树木，甘露就频频降临，围墙才建成，嘉禾便屡屡长出。
English: As soon as the trees were planted in Lanlin, the nectar came down frequently, the fence was built, and the jiahe repeatedly sprouted.

古文：太平之符，于是乎在。
现代文：天下太平的符瑞，就在这里充分表现出来了。
English: The peacefulness of the world is fully demonstrated here.

古文：臣以寡立，承乏槐铉，沐浴芳津，预睹冥庆，不胜抃舞之情。
现代文：下臣以浅薄的德行，承蒙皇恩而居宰辅之位，得以在用芬芳的香水沐浴之后，亲眼目睹上天恩赐的吉祥，不胜欢欣鼓舞之情。
English: With a shallow virtue, the vassal, by the grace of the emperor, was able to occupy the position of Zaiyu, and after bathing with fragrant perfume, he witnessed the auspiciousness of God's gift with his own eyes, and was overwhelmed with joy and encouragement.

古文：谨上《嘉禾甘露颂》一篇，不足称扬美烈，追用悚汗。
现代文：谨上《嘉禾甘露颂》一篇，不足以称扬盛美的功业，追想之下惶恐汗颜。
English: It is not enough to praise the work of Shengmei in the "Song of Jiahe Nectar," but it is frightening and embarrassing to recall.

古文：其颂曰：
现代文：颂词说：
English: The hymn goes:

古文：二象攸分，三灵乐主。齐应合从，在今犹古。
现代文：乾坤各在其位，天、地、人乐于拥戴君主，一齐顺从，如今情况犹如古圣王时期。
English: The heavens, the earth, and the people are happy to support the monarch, and they all obey, and now the situation is like the period of the ancient holy kings.

古文：天道谁亲，唯仁斯辅。
现代文：天道亲近谁?祇是仁德的君子。
English: Who is close to the heavenly way? Only the gentleman of benevolence.

古文：皇功帝绩，理冠区宇。
现代文：陛下丰功伟绩，冠绝天下。
English: Your Majesty's great achievements are the best in the world.

古文：四民均极，我后体兹。
现代文：四海百姓向往的目标，我们圣明的君主充分予以体察。
English: The goal that the people of the four seas yearn for has been fully perceived by our holy monarch.

古文：惟机惟神，敬昭文思。九族既睦，万邦允厘。
现代文：那上天的神灵，敬重地昭示陛下的功业和德行普天之下百姓和睦，万邦大治。
English: The gods of heaven respectfully proclaim Your Majesty's deeds and virtues, peace among all peoples, and the rule of all nations.

古文：德以位叙，道致雍熙。
现代文：按德行来区分官职爵位，治道达上下和乐之境。
English: According to the virtue of the line to distinguish the official rank and title, and the administration of justice to achieve a harmonious and happy environment.

古文：于穆不已，显允东储。
现代文：陛下在为皇储之时，便受人称赞不已。
English: When he was crown prince, his majesty was praised by everyone.

古文：生知夙睿，岳茂渊虚。
现代文：生而知之，早年聪慧，像山岳那样峻伟，像泉渊那样深沉。
English: Born with knowledge, wise from an early age, as grand as a mountain, as deep as a deep well.

古文：因心则哲，令问弘敷。
现代文：行事凭藉良心，以圣哲为楷模，美好的名声遐迩尽传。
English: To act according to conscience, to follow the example of the saints, and to pass on a good reputation.

古文：继徽下武，俪景辰居。
现代文：继承先帝功德而即帝位，如太阳光照，似北极永驻。
English: To succeed to the throne after inheriting the merits of the previous emperor is like the sun shining and the North Pole remaining forever.

古文：轩制合宫，汉兴未央。
现代文：从前轩辕氏修筑合宫，汉代兴建未央宫。
English: In the past, the Huanqiu clan built the Hehe Palace, and the Han Dynasty built the Weiyang Palace.

古文：矧伊圣朝，九有已康。
现代文：更何况我煌煌圣朝，九州已经安乐康宁。
English: What's more, in my glorious holy era, Kyushu has been able to enjoy peace and tranquility.

古文：率由旧典，思烛前王。
现代文：一切依照前朝典则，思量借鉴前代圣主。
English: Everything was done in accordance with the rules of the former imperial court and with consideration for the example of the previous emperor.

古文：乃造陵霄，遂作景阳。
现代文：于是造陵霄殿，修景阳山。
English: As a result, the Mausoleum Hall was built, and Mount Jingyang was rebuilt.

古文：有蔼景阳，天渊之涘。
现代文：树木茂密的景阳山，就在天渊的岸边。
English: The densely wooded Jingyang Mountain, right on the shore of Tianyuan.

古文：清暑爽立，云堂特起。
现代文：清暑宫巍然耸立，高入云天。
English: The Summer Palace stands tall, high into the sky.

古文：植类斯育，动类斯止。
现代文：植物在这裹种植，动物在这里栖息。
English: Plants are grown here, animals live here.

古文：极望江波，遍对岳峙。
现代文：眺望长江水波，面对祟山峻岭。
English: Looking out over the waves of the Yangtze River, facing the towering peaks of the Kunlun Mountains.

古文：化德惟达，休瑞惟懋。
现代文：教化的恩德遍施万物，吉祥的符瑞频繁出现。
English: The benevolence of enlightenment pervades all things, and auspicious signs appear frequently.

古文：诞降嘉种，呈祥初构。
现代文：上天降下嘉禾的种子，在景阳山初建之时便呈现吉兆。
English: When Mount Jingyang was first built, the auspicious seeds of Jiahe, which were sent down from heaven, began to sprout.

古文：甘露春凝，祯穟秋秀。
现代文：甘露在春天凝结，嘉穗在秋天繁茂。
English: The nectar condenses in the spring, and the scions flourish in the fall.

古文：于今匪烈，嗣岁仍富。
现代文：蕴含滋润秀美繁盛，第二年嘉禾依然丰富。
English: Containing moisturizing beauty and prosperity, the second year of Jiahe is still rich.

古文：昔在放勋，历荚数朝。
现代文：从前在帝尧时期，瑞草历荚多次出现。
English: Once upon a time, in the imperial period, the Sui Cao calendar appeared many times.

古文：降及重华，倚扇清庖。
现代文：到了帝舜之时，藉助扇脯使厨房中肉菜不致腐臭。
English: When it was time for the imperial banquet, a fan was used to keep the meat and vegetables in the kitchen from becoming rancid.

古文：铄矣皇庆，比物竞昭。
现代文：皇上的福分多么辉煌，各种符瑞竞相呈现。
English: How splendid the emperor's good fortune is, with all kinds of auspicious signs competing with each other.

古文：伦彼典策，被此风谣。
现代文：记载于典策之中，为民间歌谣所传颂。
English: It is recorded in the imperial edicts and is sung in folk songs.

古文：资臣六蔽，任兼两司。
现代文：下臣资质浅陋不学无术，却兼任太尉、司徒二职。
English: His subordinate vassals were poorly qualified, uneducated and unskilled, but they served concurrently in the two positions of captain and steward.

古文：既恧仲衮，又惭郑缁。岂忘衡泌，乐道明时。
现代文：我为自己没有仲虺作诰的才能而羞惭，又因为不能像郑师文那样拨动琴弦带来祥瑞而惭愧。岂能忘怀于隐居山林，衹是乐于称道圣明之时。
English: I am ashamed that I don't have the talent to play the flute, and I am ashamed that I can't pluck the strings to bring auspiciousness like Zheng Shiwen. I can't forget the time when I lived in seclusion in the mountains and was happy to praise the holy light.

古文：敢述休祉，愧阙令辞。
现代文：怎敢叙述吉祥的福祉，但因缺乏华美的辞令而感到惭愧。
English: How dare I describe the auspicious welfare, but I feel ashamed for the lack of beautiful words.

古文：中领军吉阳县侯沈演之奏上《嘉禾颂》曰：
现代文：中领军吉阳县候选远之向朝廷上奏《嘉禾颂》说：
English: The leading candidate of Jiyang County, Yuanzhi, played "Ode to Joy" to the imperial court and said:

古文： 焕炳祯图，昭晰瑞典。
现代文：吉祥的物象灿烂辉煌，祥瑞的典仪显著光明。
English: The auspicious objects are resplendent, and the auspicious ceremonies are remarkably bright.

古文：运倾方，时亨始显。
现代文：国运倾斜已被扶正，太平盛世正在来临。
English: The national trend has been corrected, and a peaceful and prosperous era is approaching.

古文：绨状既章，鸟文斯辨。
现代文：朝廷典章已经昭彰，官制礼仪已经区分。
English: The imperial court ceremony has been highlighted, and the official etiquette has been distinguished.

古文：于皇圣辟，承物纪远。明两辰丽，昌辉天衍。
现代文：伟大的圣明皇帝，顺应符瑞治理四方光明似月那样绚丽，盛德如天宇那样深广。
English: The great Emperor Shengming, in accordance with the governance of the Four Directions, is as brilliant as the moon, and his virtue is as deep and wide as the sky.

古文：理妙位崇，事神业盛。
现代文：其一治政美妙而皇位崇高，礼事神明而帝拥兴盛。
English: On the one hand, the governance is wonderful and the throne is lofty, the rituals are divine and the emperor is prosperous.

古文：渊渥德泽，虚寂道政。
现代文：恩德深厚，政治简要。
English: Benevolence is profound, but politics is brief.

古文：协化安心，调乐移性。
现代文：四境和睦而民情安定，乐声协调而民俗向善。
English: The four regions are in harmony and the people's feelings are stable. The music is harmonious and the folk customs are good.

古文：玉衡从体，瑶光得正。
现代文：玉衡星归从本位，瑶光星得以归正。
English: Yuheng Star returned to its original position, and Shuguang Star was able to return to its original position.

古文：巨星垂采，景云立庆。
现代文：巨星垂耀光彩，祥云呈现福祉。
English: The great star shines brightly, the auspicious cloud presents well-being.

古文：极仁所被，罔幽不攘。
现代文：其二无穷的仁德所到之处，四境无不沾溉恩泽。
English: Wherever the second infinite benevolence goes, the four realms are all touched by the blessing.

古文：至和所感，靡况弗彰。
现代文：在最高的和顺感召之下，八方无不政绩显著。
English: Under the highest call of harmony and harmony, all parties have made remarkable achievements.

古文：鸳出丹穴，鹦起西湘。
现代文：鸳鸾在丹穴出现，鹦鹉从西部湘州飞起。
English: Dragonflies appear in Dan's hole, and parrots fly up from western Hunan.

古文：白鹿逾海，素鸟越江。
现代文：白鹿跨过大海，素鸟越过江河。
English: The white deer crossed the sea, and the wild birds crossed the rivers.

古文：结响穹阴，仪形钟阳。
现代文：它们的鸣声响彻云霄，它们的仪态呈现在钟山之南。
English: Their song resounds through the sky, and their appearance is seen in the south of Zhongshan Mountain.

古文：治人奉天，乃勤乃格。
现代文：其三治理万民奉行天道，既勤政爱民又整肃纲纪。
English: The third is to govern all the people according to the heavenly way, both diligently loving the people and rectifying discipline.

古文：黛耒俶载，高廪已积。
现代文：用铁未来耕作，不久高大的粮仓便粮食堆积。
English: Iron was used for future farming, and soon the tall grain silos began to accumulate grain.

古文：嘉禾重穋，甘露流液。
现代文：嘉禾有生长期长短之分，甘露流洒下浆液。
English: Jiahe has a long and short growing period, and the nectar flow sprinkles the slurry.

古文：擢秀辰畦，扬颖角泽。
现代文：在辰星的田地里吐花，在角星的湖泽中抽穗。
English: Spitting flowers in the fields of the stars, plucking ears in the lakes of the constellations.

古文：离穟合豪，荣区廕斥。
现代文：不同的禾穗长在同一枝茎上，无论肥沃的田地还是阴湿的盐咸地都生长嘉禾。
English: Different ears of grain grow on the same stem, whether it is a fertile field or a damp, salty land.

古文：盈箱征殷，贯桑表周。
现代文：其四谷物满箱是殷代盛德的象征，桑树相连是周代盛德的体现。
English: The four-grain full box is a symbol of the prosperity of the Yin Dynasty, and the mulberry tree is the embodiment of the prosperity of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：今我大宋，灵贶绸缪。
现代文：如今我大宋王朝，神灵恩赐的嘉瑞连绵不断。
English: Now that I am the Great Song Dynasty, the blessings of the gods continue to flow.

古文：帝终捴谦，绎思勿休。
现代文：皇帝始终谦逊，缜密的思虑周详。
English: The emperor has always been modest and thoughtful.

古文：躬荐宗庙，温恭率由。
现代文：亲自贡献给宗庙，温良恭谨，遵循典制。
English: Personally contribute to the ancestral temple, be gentle and respectful, and follow the award system.

古文：降福以诚，孝享虔羞。
现代文：因为陛下的诚意，先帝降福；因为陛下的孝心，先帝飨用祭祀的珍镒。
English: Because of His Majesty's sincerity, the former emperor bestowed blessings; because of His Majesty's filial piety, the former emperor made use of the sacrificial treasures.

古文：颁趾推功，登徽睿诏。
现代文：其五为政不扰民，受到百姓爱戴，陛下登基，发布睿智的诏令。
English: The fifth is that the government does not disturb the people and is loved by the people. His Majesty ascended to the throne and issued a wise edict.

古文：恩覃隐显，赏延荒徼。
现代文：恩泽深入朝野，赏赐施及荒远。
English: Benevolence penetrates into the morning and the fields, and rewards are given far and wide.

古文：河溓海夷，山华岳耀。
现代文：河海平静，山岳壮美。
English: The rivers and seas are calm, and the mountains are magnificent.

古文：憬琛夐赆，兼泽委效。
现代文：远方邦国贡献珍宝财物，湖泽都为朝廷效力。
English: Faraway countries have contributed precious treasures and goods, and lakes have served the imperial court.

古文：日表地外，改服请教。
现代文：境外荒蛮的民众，都改换服饰，请求教化。
English: The barbaric people outside the country have all changed their clothes and asked for enlightenment.

古文：茂对盛时，绥万屡丰。
现代文：其六福庆频繁降临盛时，万邦安宁而屡年丰收。
English: Its six auspicious festivals frequently fall at the best time, and the country is peaceful and has a bumper harvest for many years.

古文：厌厌归素，秩秩大同。
现代文：百姓和悦民风趋于淳朴，万邦清明归于大同。
English: The people and the people-pleasing style tend to be simple, and the nation's clearness is attributed to Datong.

古文：上藏诸用，下知所从。仰式王度，俯歌《南风》。
现代文：朝廷各种制度齐备，吏民知道依法行事仰首敬慕皇帝的仪度，俯首咏唱《南风》之歌。
English: The imperial court was equipped with all kinds of systems, and the officials and people knew how to act in accordance with the law, bow their heads in reverence to the emperor, and sing the song "South Wind."

古文：鸿名称首，永保无穷。 
现代文：陛下盛名允称首位，永保江山世代无穷。
English: His majesty's reputation is the first, and there are endless generations in the Yongbao country.

古文：元嘉二十四年八月乙巳，嘉禾生鱼城内晋陵，南徐州刺史广陵王诞以闻。
现代文：其七元嘉二十四年八月乙巳日，嘉禾生于鱼城内的晋陵，南徐州刺史广陵王刘逛上报朝廷。
English: On the 24th day of the 8th month of the 7th month of the 24th year of Jia He's reign, Jia He was born in Jinling in Yucheng, and went to the southern Xuzhou to visit the Guangling Wang Liu, which was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年六月壬寅，嘉禾旅生华林园，十株七百穗，园丞梅道念以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年六月壬寅日，嘉禾野生于华林图，十株有七百穗，园丞梅道上报朝廷。
English: On June 25th, Yuan Jia's 25th year, the Jiahe wildflowers in Hualintu, with seven hundred ears on ten plants, were reported to the imperial court by the gardener Mei Tao.

古文：元嘉二十五年六月壬子，嘉禾生藉田，藉田令褚熙伯以献。
现代文：元嘉二卜五年六月壬子，嘉禾生于籍田，籍田令褚熙伯献上朝廷。
English: Yuan Jiabo was born in Jianzi in June of the fifth year of the Jinshi era, in Jiahe's birthplace. Jiahe was presented to the imperial court by Jian Xi Bo.

古文：元嘉二十五年七月壬辰，嘉禾生北海，青、冀二州刺史杜坦以献。
现代文：元嘉：二十五年七月壬辰门，嘉禾生长于北海，青、冀二州刺史杜坦献上朝廷。
English: Yuan Jia: In July 25th, the Imjin Gate, Jiahe grew in the North Sea, and the two states of Qing and Hebei were presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年八月丙午，嘉禾生太尉江夏王义恭果园，江夏国典书令陈颖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年八月丙午曰，嘉禾生于太尉江夏王刘义恭的果园中，江夏国典书令陈颖上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of August 3rd in the 25th year of Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in the orchard of Liu Yigong, the first lieutenant of the King of Jiangxia, and Chen Ying was reported to the imperial court by Jiangxia's imperial edict.

古文：元嘉二十五年八月壬子，嘉禾生建康化义里，令丘珍孙以献。
现代文：元嘉二十五年八月王子曰，嘉禾生于建康的化义里，县令丘珍孙献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, the prince said that Jia He was born in Jiankang's Huayi Village, and was presented to the imperial court by the prefectural governor Qiu Jinsun.

古文：元嘉二十五年八月癸丑，嘉禾生华林园，园丞梅道念以献。
现代文：元嘉二十五年八月癸丑闩，嘉禾生于华林园，园丞梅道念献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 25th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Jia He was born in Hualin Garden. He was presented to the imperial court by the garden master, Mei Dao.

古文：元嘉二十五年十一月，嘉禾生巴东，荆州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉：十五年十一月，嘉禾生于巴束，荆州刺史南谯王刘义宣上报朝廷。
English: Yuan Jia: In November of the fifteenth year, Jia He was born in Bachu, Jingzhou stabbed the Southern Wei King Liu Yixuan to report to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年五月癸酉，嘉禾生建康禁中里，扬州刺史始兴王浚以献。
现代文：元嘉二十六年五月癸酉，嘉禾生于建康的禁中坚，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚献上朝廷。
English: At the end of May of the 26th year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Jiankang, the core of the forbidden, and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Jian, the king of Yangzhou.

古文：元嘉二十六年六月甲寅，嘉禾生藉田，藉田令褚熙伯以献。
现代文：元嘉二十六年六月甲寅曰，嘉禾牛于籍田，籍田令褚熙伯献上朝廷。
English: In June of the 26th year of Yuan Jia, Jia Yin said that the Jia He cattle were in the family field, and the family field ordered Zou Xi Bo to present them to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年七月，嘉禾生巴东朐，荆州刺史南谯王义宣以献。
现代文：元嘉二十六年七月，嘉禾生于巴束的朐腮，荆州刺史南谯王刘义宣献上朝廷。
English: In July of the 26th year of the Yuan Jia, Jia He was born in Ba Sok, and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yi Xuan, the king of the Southern Han Dynasty in Jing Province.

古文：元嘉二十七年十月己丑，嘉禾生北海，青州刺史杜坦以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十七年十月己丑臼，嘉禾生于北海，青州刺史杜坦上报朝廷。
English: In October 27th, Yuan Jia was born in the North Sea, Qingzhou Zhi Shi Du Tan reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十八年七月戊戌，嘉禾生广陵邵伯埭，兗州刺史江夏王义恭以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十八年七月戊戌，嘉禾生于广陵的邵伯埭，兖州刺史江夏王刘义恭上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 28th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Liu Yigong, King of the Xia Dynasty of the Jiangsu Province, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝孝建二年六月癸巳，嘉禾二株生江夏王义恭东田。
现代文：孝武帝孝建二年六月癸巳曰，有二株嘉禾生于江夏王刘义恭的束田。
English: Emperor Xiaowu said in June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojian that there were two strains of Jiahe born in the Sokuda of Liu Yigong, King of Jiangxia.

古文：孝建二年九月己丑朔，嘉禾异亩同颖生齐郡广饶县。
现代文：孝建二年九月己丑初一，在蛮盛广饶县有嘉禾在不同的田亩裹长出相同的禾穗。
English: In September of the second year of Xiao Jian's reign, on the first day of the first month of his reign, in the prosperous Guangrao County, there were the same ears of grain in different fields.

古文：孝建三年七月庚午，嘉禾生吴兴武康。
现代文：孝建三年七月庚午，嘉禾生长于吴兴的武康。
English: On the afternoon of July in the third year of Xiao Jian's reign, Jia He was growing up in Wu Kang, Wuxing.

古文：孝武帝大明元年五月戊午，嘉禾一株五茎生清暑殿鸱尾中。大明元年八月甲申，嘉禾生青州，异根同穗。大明三年九月乙亥，嘉禾生北海都昌县，青州刺史颜师伯以闻。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年五月戊午，嘉禾一株有五茎生于清暑殿的鸱尾中，大明元年八月甲申，嘉禾生于青州，异根而同穗大明三年九月乙亥日，嘉禾生于北海都昌县，青州刺史颜师伯上报朝廷。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was born in May of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, and at noon, Jiahe, a plant with five stems, was born in the appendix of the Summer Palace. In August of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Jiahe was born in Qingzhou. In September of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Jiahe was born in Duchang County of the North Sea, and was reported to the imperial court by Shixian Shibo of Qingzhou.

古文：大明六年八月辛未，嘉禾生乐陵，青、冀二州刺史刘道隆以闻。
现代文：大明六年八月辛末日，嘉禾生于乐陵，青、冀二州刺史刘道隆上报朝廷。
English: At the end of August in the year of the Great Ming Dynasty, Jiahe was born in Leling, and Liu Daolong, a poet from Qing and Hebei provinces, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始二年七月己酉，嘉禾生会稽永兴，太守巴陵王休若以献。
现代文：明帝泰始二年七月己酉曰，嘉禾生于会稽的丞里，太守巴陵王刘休若献上朝廷。
English: In July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi of the Ming Dynasty, Ji Ji said that Jia He was born in the auditor's office, and was presented to the imperial court by the governor of Baling, Liu Xujia.

古文：汉章帝元和中，嘉麦生郡国。
现代文：漠章帝元和年间，嘉麦生于郡国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mozhang, Jiamei was born in the county.

古文：晋武帝太康十年六月，嘉麦生扶风郡，一茎四穗。
现代文：晋武帝太康十年六月，嘉麦生长于扶风郡，一茎有四穗。
English: In June of the tenth year of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, Jiamei grew in Fufeng County, with one stem having four spikes.

古文：是岁收三倍。
现代文：这年的收成是往年的三倍。
English: This year's harvest is three times that of previous years.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十三年，醴湖屯生嘉粟，一茎九穗，屯主王世宗以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十三年，醴湖屯长有嘉栗，一茎有九穗，屯主王世塞上报朝廷。
English: In the 23rd year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, the governor of Wuhu Town had nine ears of corn and nine ears of chestnuts. The governor of the town, Wang Shisei, reported this to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年六月壬子，嘉黍生藉田，藉田令褚熙伯以献。
现代文：元嘉二十五年六月壬子曰，嘉黍生于籍刚，籍田令鲨皿侦献卜朝廷。
English: In June of the 25th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Ren Zi said that Jiayu was born in Qigang, and the Qigang Emperor ordered a shark dish to be scouted and presented to the imperial court.

古文：吴孙权黄龙三年，由拳野稻生，改由拳为禾兴。
现代文：吴孙权黄龙三年，虫茎有野稻生长，将由拳改为禾兴。
English: In the third year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, when there was wild rice growing on corms, he changed the name of the festival from "Ken" to "He Xing."

古文：吴孙亮五凤元年，交址稗草化为稻。
现代文：吴孙亮五凤元年，交肚的稗草变为稻子。
English: In the first year of Wu Sunliang's five phoenixes, the ephemeral ephemera turned into rice.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十三年，吴郡嘉兴盐官县野稻自生三十许种，扬州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十三年，吴郡嘉兴盐官县生的野稻有三十多种，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚报朝廷。
English: In the 23rd year of Emperor Yuanjia of Song Dynasty, there were more than 30 kinds of wild rice grown in Yanquan County, Jiaxing, Wuxi County, and the imperial court of Prince Liu Junbo of Yangzhou.

古文：元嘉二十八年七月癸卯，寻阳柴桑菽粟旅生，弥漫原野，江州刺史建平王宏以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十八年七月癸卯曰，寻阳柴桑有野生的菽粟，弥漫了原野，江州刺史建平王刘宏上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 28th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Liu Hong, the King of Jianping, reported to the imperial court that wild opium poppies had spread from the Chaixang Mountains to the plains of Jiangzhou.

古文：汉章帝元和中，嘉瓜生郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，嘉瓜生长于郡国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zong of the Yuan Dynasty, jia gua was grown in the county.

古文：汉安帝元初三年三月，东平陵有瓜异处共生，八瓜同蒂。
现代文：汉安帝元初三年三月，束平陵有瓜在不同之处一起生长，八瓜共一根蒂。
English: In March of the third year of the Han and An Dynasty, there were melons growing together in different places in the Sokuping Mausoleum, and all the melons had the same stem.

古文：汉桓帝建和二年七月，河东有嘉瓜，两体共蒂。
现代文：汉桓帝建和二年七月，回墓有嘉瓜，两瓜共一蒂。
English: In July of the second year of Emperor Han Huan's reign, there was a double melon in the tomb, two melons and one stem.

古文：晋武帝太康三年六月，嘉瓜异体同蒂，生河南洛阳辅国大将军王浚园。
现代文：晋武帝太康三年六月，有异体同蒂的嘉瓜，生长在苎适没阳辅国大将军工渣的园中。
English: In June of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, there was a cross-species, same-stemmed jia melon growing in the garden of Zushi without Yang Fu, the general of the country.

古文：晋武帝太康元年十二月戊子，嘉瓠生宁州，宁州刺史费统以闻。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年十二月戊于曰，嘉瓠生扒空州，宁州刺史费统上报朝廷。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, Jiayu Sheng reported to the imperial court that Jiayu Sheng had captured Kuzhou, and Ningzhou had captured Shifei.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十五年四月戊辰，嘉瓠生京邑新园，园丞徐道兴以献。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十五年四月戊辰曰，嘉瓠小于京邑的新园，园丞徐道兴献给朝廷。
English: Song Emperor Yuan Jia said in April 25th, Wu Chen, that Jiayu was smaller than the new garden in Beijing, and the garden master Xu Daoxing dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明五年五月，嘉瓜生建康蒋陵里，丹阳尹王僧朗以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年五月，嘉瓜生长于建康的蒋陵里，是阳尹王但朗献上朝廷。
English: In May of the fifth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Jiagua was grown in Jiangling in Jiankang. It was presented to the imperial court by Yang Yin Wang Dan Lang.

古文：明帝太始二年八月戊午，嘉瓜生南豫州，南豫州刺史山阳王休祐以献。
现代文：明帝太始二年八月戊午，嘉瓜生长于南豫州，南豫州刺史山逛刘鳄献上朝廷、
English: In the afternoon of August in the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Jiagua was grown in South Henan Province, and presented to the imperial court.

古文：文帝元嘉七年七月乙酉，建康頟檐湖二莲一蒂。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉七年七月乙酉曰，建康的额檐湖有二莲共一蒂。
English: Song Wendi Yuanjia said in July of the seventh year that Jiankang's Lake Erlang has two lotuses and one stem.

古文：元嘉十六年七月壬申，华林池双莲同干。
现代文：元嘉十六年七月壬申日，华林池双连同一枝干。
English: In July of the 16th year of Yuan Jia, on the day of Jinshin, the two Warin ponds were connected by the same branch.

古文：元嘉十年七月己丑，华林天渊池芙蓉异花同蒂。
现代文：元嘉十年七月己丑曰，华林天渊池芙蓉异花同一蒂。
English: In July of the 10th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, it was said that the hibiscus flowers of Hualin Tianyuan Pond had the same stem.

古文：元嘉十九年八月壬子，扬州后池二莲合华，刺史始兴王浚以献。
现代文：元嘉十九年八月壬子日，扬州后池二莲同一蒂，刺史始兴王刘浚献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 19th year of Yuan Jia, on the day of Ren Zi, Yangzhou Houchi two lotuses with the same stem were presented to the imperial court by Liu Jun, the Prince of Shi Xing.

古文：元嘉二十年五月，庐陵郡池芙蓉二花一蒂，太守王渊以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十年五月，庐陵郡池的芙蓉二花共一蒂，太守王渊上报朝廷。
English: In May of the 20th year of the Yuan Jia, the two flowers of the hibiscus in the pond of Fuling County were the same, and the eunuch Wang Yuan reported it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年六月壬寅，华林天渊池芙蓉二花一蒂，园丞陈袭祖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十年六月壬寅，茎昼天渊池的芙蓉二花同一蒂。园丞陈袭祖卜报朝廷。
English: In June of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, there was a rhinoceros, the stem of which was the same as the hibiscus and two flowers of Tianyuan Pond. The garden master Chen followed the ancestor and reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年夏，永嘉郡后池芙蓉二花一蒂，太守臧艺以闻。
现代文：元嘉二二十年夏，永嘉郡后池的芙蓉二花同一蒂，太守臧艺上报朝廷。
English: In the summer of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, the hibiscus and two flowers of Houchi, Yongjia County, had the same stem, and the eunuch was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年七月，吴兴郡后池芙蓉二花一蒂，太守孔山士以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十年七月，呈垦邓后池的芙蓉二花同一蒂，太守孔山士上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 20th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the hibiscus and two flowers in the pond of Emperor Deng were found to have the same stem. The imperial governor Kong San Shih reported this to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年，扬州后池芙蓉二花一蒂，刺史始兴王浚以献。
现代文：元嘉二十年，扬州后池的芙蓉二花共一蒂，刺史始兴王刘浚献上朝廷。
English: In the 20th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the hibiscus of Yangzhou Houchi had two flowers in one stem, which was presented to the imperial court by Liu Jian, the Prince of Shi Xing.

古文：元嘉二十一年六月丙午，华林园天渊池二莲同干，园丞陈袭祖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十一年六月丙午曰，萋林园天渊池二莲同一枝干，园丞陈袭祖上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of June 21st, Yuan Jia, the two lotuses in the Tianyuan Pond of the Yulin Garden were of the same stem, and the gardener Chen Yuzhu reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年四月，乐游苑池二莲同干，苑丞梅道念以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年四月，乐游苑池二莲同一枝干，苑丞梅道念上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, the two lotuses in the pond of Leyouyuan were of the same stem, and it was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年七月，东宫玄圃园池二莲同干，内监殿守舍人宫勇民以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年七月，东宫玄圃园池二莲同一枝干，内监殿守舍人宫勇民上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, the two lotuses in the East Palace's garden and pond sprouted from the same stem, and the brave people guarding the palace reported this to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年六月壬寅，华林天渊池芙蓉二花一蒂，园丞陈袭祖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年六月壬寅曰，萎垫玉曲的芙蓉二花同一蒂，园丞陈袭祖上报朝廷。
English: In June 23rd, Yuan Jia told Ren Yin that the hibiscus and two flowers of the withered jade flower were the same, and the gardener Chen Yuzhu reported this to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年六月辛丑，太子西池二莲共干，池统胡永祖以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年六月辛丑日，太子西池二莲同一枝干，池统胡永祖卜报朝廷。
English: In June of the 23rd year of the Yuan Jia, on the day of the Ugly Duckling, the Prince of Xicheng, Erlian, and the Prince of Qi, Hu Yongzu, reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年八月己酉，鱼邑三周池二莲同干，园丞徐道兴以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年八月己酉日，鱼邑的三周池二莲共一枝干，园丞徐道兴上报朝廷。
English: On August 23rd, Yuan Jia's 23rd year, the imperial court was notified of the death of the garden master, Xu Daoxing.

古文：孝武帝孝建二年六月庚寅，玄武湖二莲同干。
现代文：孝武帝圣建二年六月庚寅日，玄武湖二莲同一枝干。
English: On Geng Yin Day in June of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu Shengjian, the two lotuses of Xuanwu Lake sprouted from the same stem.

古文：孝武帝大明五年，藉田芙蓉二花同蒂，大司农萧邃以献。
现代文：孝武帝圣建五年，籍田有芙蓉二花同一蒂，大司农萧邃献上朝廷。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Shengjian, whose family farm had two flowers of hibiscus growing on the same stem, was presented to the imperial court by the chief farmer Xiao Yu.

古文：明帝太始二年八月丙辰，五城澳池二莲同干，都水使者罗僧愍以献。太始二年八月己未，豫州刺史山阳王休祐献莲，二花一蒂。
现代文：明帝太始二年八月丙辰，亘越澳迤二连同一枝干，都水使者罗灯启献上朝廷太始二年八月己未，豫州刺史山阳王刘休枯献上莲花，二花共一蒂。
English: In August of the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty

古文：太始五年六月甲子，嘉莲生湖熟，南台侍御史竺曾度以闻。
现代文：太始五年六月甲子，嘉莲生于湖熟，南台侍御史竺曾度上报朝廷。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Jiu Zi, Jialian was born in Hukuru, and the Nantai attendant, Shi Xuan, once reported to the imperial court.

古文：太始六年六月壬子，嘉莲生东宫玄圃池，皇太子以闻。
现代文：太始六年六月壬子日，嘉莲生于束宫的玄圃池，皇太子上报朝廷。
English: On Jinshi Day in June of the sixth year of the Taisho era, Jialian was born in the garden pond of the Imperial Palace, and the crown prince reported to the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝太始二年六月壬申，嘉柰一蒂十实，生酒泉。
现代文：晋武帝太始二年六月壬申，在酒泉出现了一蒂有十实的嘉沙果。
English: In Jinshin in June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, there appeared in the Jiuquan a large clump of Jia Sha fruit.

古文：太始七年六月己亥，东宫玄圃池芙蓉二花一蒂，皇太子以献。
现代文：太始七年六月己亥日，东宫玄圃池的芙蓉二二花共一蒂，皇太子献上朝廷。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in June of the 7th year of the Taisho era, the crown prince presented a bunch of hibiscus flowers from the East Palace's garden pond to the imperial court.

古文：晋成帝咸和六年，镇西将军庾亮献嘉橘，一蒂十二实。
现代文：晋成帝咸和六年，镇西将军庾亮献上嘉橘，一蒂有十二个果实。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Xianhe's reign, Zhenxi General Zou Liang presented a mandarin orange with a cluster of twelve fruits.

古文：晋安帝隆安三年，武陵临沅献安石榴，一蒂六实。
现代文：晋安帝隆安三年，武陵临沅献安石榴，一蒂有六个果实。
English: In the third year of Emperor Longan of the Jin Dynasty, Wuling Linyi offered pomegranates. There are six fruits in a cluster.

古文：云有五色，太平之应也，曰庆云。
现代文：云有五种色彩，这是太平盛世的应征，就是庆云。
English: The clouds have five colors, which is the Taiping Shengshi's application, that is, the Qingyun.

古文：若云非云，若烟非烟，五色纷缊，谓之庆云。
现代文：似云非云，似烟非烟，五色缤纷，就称作庆云。
English: Like clouds, not clouds, like smoke, not smoke, five colors, it is called Qingyun.

古文：汉宣帝神爵四年春，斋戒之莫，神光显著。
现代文：汉宣帝神爵四年春，在斋戒曰的傍晚，祥光明亮地照耀大地。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, in the evening of the fasting day, Xiang shone brightly on the earth.

古文：荐鬯之夕，神光交错，或降于天，或登于地，或从四方，来集于坛上。
现代文：在祭祀日的夜晚，祥光在天地之间交错纵横，有的从天下降，有的笼罩大地，有的从四方涌来，全部聚集在祭坛上。
English: On the night of the day of sacrifice, the auspicious light criss-crosses between heaven and earth, some falling from the sky, some enveloping the earth, some pouring in from all directions, all gathered on the altar.

古文：汉章帝元和三年正月，车驾北巡，以太牢祠北岳山，见黄白气。
现代文：汉章帝元和三年正月，皇帝车驾北巡，用太牢祭祀北岳恒山，看见了黄白云气。
English: In the first month of the reign of Emperor Han Zheng of the Han Dynasty and the first month of the third year of the Han Dynasty, the emperor drove the car to the north, used the dungeon to worship Beidake Hengshan, and saw the yellow and white clouds.

古文：宋孝武帝大明元年五月壬子，紫气从景阳楼上层出，状如烟，回薄良久。
现代文：宋孝武帝大明元年五月壬子，紫色云气从景阳楼上层涌出，其状如烟，迥环了很长时间。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Song Xiaowu's reign, the purple cloud gas gushed out from the upper floor of the Jingyang Building. It looked like smoke and lingered for a long time.

古文：明帝泰始二年三月丙午，黄紫云从景阳楼出，随风回，久乃消，华林园令臧延之以闻。
现代文：明帝泰始二年三月丙午曰，黄紫色的云彩从景阳楼涌出，随风回荡，许久才消失，华林园令臧延之上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of March 3 in the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, the yellow-purple clouds gushed out from Jingyang Tower, reverberated with the wind, and disappeared for a long time. It was reported to the imperial court from the Waring Garden.

古文：泰始二年六月己卯，日入后，有黄白赤白气东西竟天，光明润泽，久乃消。
现代文：泰始二年六月己卯曰，太阳下山后，有黄白赤白色云气弥漫东西整个天空，光明柔和，许久才消失。
English: In June of the second year of Taizhi, Ji Wu said that after the sun went down, there were yellow-white-red-white clouds that permeated the entire sky, the light was soft, and it took a long time to disappear.

古文：泰始四年十一月辛未，崇宁陵令上书言，自大明八年至今四年二月，宣太后陵明堂前后数有光及五色云，又芳香四满，又五采云在松下，状如车盖。
现代文：泰始四年十一月辛未，崇宁陵令上书说：从去大明八年至现在四年二月，宣太后陵墓明引?的前后多次有光照和五色云，又到处飘溢养香，又有五彩云在松树下，其形状像车盖。
English: In November of the 4th year of Taizhi, the order of Chongning Mausoleum was written: From the 8th year of the Great Ming Dynasty to February of the 4th year of the present, the tomb of Empress Dowager Xuanzong has been illuminated with light and five-colored clouds many times, and incense is everywhere, and there are also five-colored clouds under the pine trees, which are shaped like car covers.

古文：泰始七年四月戊申夜，京邑崇虚馆堂前有黄气，状如宝盖，高十许丈，渐有五色，道士陆修静以闻。
现代文：泰始七年四月戊申夜，京邑崇虚馆堂前有黄色云气，形状如宝盖，有十余丈高，依稀可辨有五色，道士陆脩静上报朝廷。
English: On the night of April 7th in the year of Taishi, there was a yellow cloud in front of the Chongxu Hall in Beijing, shaped like a treasure lid, more than ten meters high, and faintly distinguishable in five colors. Taoist priest Lu Yingjing reported it to the imperial court.

古文：白兔，王者敬耆老则见。
现代文：白兔这种吉祥物，王者敬重六十岁以上的老人就会出现。
English: The White Rabbit, a mascot that is revered by people over the age of 60, will make an appearance.

古文：汉光武建武十三年九月，南越献白兔。
现代文：汉光武建武十三年九月，南越献白兔。
English: In September of the thirteenth year of Han Guangwu Jianwu, South Vietnam presented a white rabbit.

古文：章帝元和中，白兔见郡国。
现代文：章帝元和年间，白兔出现于郡国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhang, the White Rabbit appeared in the county.

古文：魏文帝黄初中，郡国十九言白兔见。
现代文：魏文帝黄初年间，十九个郡国说出现了白兔。
English: In the early years of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang, the White Rabbit appeared in nineteen counties.

古文：晋武泰始五年七月己亥，白兔见北海即墨，即墨长获以献。
现代文：晋武泰始五年七月己亥曰，白兔出现于北海的即墨，即墨长捕获献卜朝廷。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinmu, the White Rabbit appeared in the North Sea and was captured and offered to the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝咸宁二年十月癸亥，白兔二见河南阳翟，阳翟令华衍获以献。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁二年十月癸亥日，白兔二次出现于迥唐的隧翟，荡翟令茎扭捕获献上朝廷。
English: In October of the second year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, the White Rabbit appeared twice in the tunnels of the Southern Tang Dynasty. It was caught by twisting the stem and presented to the imperial court.

古文：咸宁四年六月，白兔见天水。
现代文：咸宁四年六月，白兔出现于天水。
English: In June of the fourth year of Xianning, the White Rabbit appeared in Tianshui.

古文：晋武帝太康二年八月壬子，白兔见彭城。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年八月壬子曰，白兔出现于彭城。
English: In August of the second year of Emperor Taikang's reign, the White Rabbit appeared in Pengcheng.

古文：太康二年十月，白兔见赵国平乡，赵王伦获以献。
现代文：太康二年十月，白兔出现于赵国的平乡，赵王司马伦捕获献上朝廷。
English: In October of the second year of Taikang, the White Rabbit appeared in Pingxiang, Zhao Province. Zhao Wang Sima Lun was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：太康四年十一月癸未，白兔见北地富平。
现代文：太康四年十一月癸末日，白兔出现于北地的宣工。
English: At the end of November of the 4th year of Taikang, the White Rabbit appeared in the propaganda work in the north.

古文：太康八年十二月庚戌，白兔见陈留酸枣，关内侯成公忠获以献。
现代文：太康八年十二月庚戌曰，白兔出现于陈留的壁画，关内侯盛公盅捕获献上朝廷。
English: In December of the 8th year of Taikang, Geng Zi said that the white rabbit appeared in Chen Rui's mural painting, and Guanai Hou Sheng Gongyi captured it and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：晋穆帝永和十二年九月甲申，白兔见鄱阳，太守王耆之以献，并上颂一篇。
现代文：晋穆帝丞和十二年九月甲申，白兔出现于逊挝，太守王耆献上朝廷，并上颂一篇。
English: In September of the 12th year of Emperor Jinmu and the 12th year of Emperor Jiaxin, the White Rabbit appeared in Sulao, and was presented to the imperial court by the daimyō Wang Xi, who also wrote a poem about it.

古文：晋穆帝升平三年十二月庚申，北中郎将郗昙献白兔。
现代文：晋穆帝升平三年十二月庚申日，北中郎将郗昙献上白兔。
English: When Emperor Jinmu ascended to the throne in December of the 3rd year of the Heian period, Kitanakachiro presented a white rabbit to the emperor.

古文：晋海西公太和九年四月，阳谷献白兔。
现代文：晋海西公太和九年四月，阳谷献上白兔。
English: In April of the ninth year of the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi of Jinhai, Yanggu presented a white rabbit.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十五年三月，白兔见淮南寿阳。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十五年三月，白兔出现于淮南的寿阳。
English: In March of the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, the White Rabbit appeared in Shouyang, Huainan.

古文：晋安帝义熙二年四月，无锡献白兔。
现代文：晋安帝义熙二年四月，无锡献上白兔。
English: In April of the second year of Emperor Yixi's reign, Wuxi presented a white rabbit to the emperor.

古文：义熙二年四月，寿阳献白兔。
现代文：义熙二年四月，寿阳献上白兔。
English: In April of the second year of Yixi, Shouyang presented a white rabbit.

古文：宋文帝元嘉六年九月，长广昌阳淳于邈获白兔，青州刺史萧思话以献。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉六年九月，长广昌阳人淳于邈获得白兔，青州刺史萧思话献上朝廷。
English: In September of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Songwen of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Changguang Changyang people obtained the White Rabbit from Chun Yuxuan, and the Qingzhou Sashishi Xiao Si speech was presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉八年闰六月丁亥，司徒府白从伊生于淮南繁昌获白兔以献。
现代文：元嘉八年闰六月丁亥曰，司徒府的随从伊生在淮南的繁昌获白兔献给朝廷。
English: In the intercalary month of June of the eighth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Ding Hai said that the attendant of the Siufu, Yisheng, received a white rabbit from the prosperity of Huainan and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十三年七月甲戌，济南朝阳王道获白兔，青州刺史段宏以献。
现代文：元嘉十三年七月甲戌曰，济南翅屋人工道获得白兔，青州刺史段宏献上朝廷。
English: Yuan Jia said in July of the 13th year of Jiajing that the Jinan wing house artificial road won the white rabbit, and the Qingzhou spiny segment was presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十四年正月丙申，白兔见山阳县，山阳太守刘怀之以献。
现代文：元嘉十四年正月丙申曰，白兔出现于山阳县，山阳太守刘怀之献上朝廷。
English: In the first month of the 14th year of the Yuan Jia, Xun Shen said that the White Rabbit appeared in Sanyang County and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Huai, the governor of Sanyang.

古文：元嘉十五年七月壬申，山阳师齐获白兔，南兗州刺史江夏王义恭以献。
现代文：元嘉十五年七月壬申曰，山阳师齐获得白兔，南兖州刺史江夏王刘义恭献上朝廷。
English: In July of the 15th year of Yuan Jia, Jinshin said that Shanyang Shizi won the White Rabbit, and the Southern Luzhou Scythe was presented to the imperial court by Jiangxia King Liu Yigong.

古文：元嘉二十二年三月，白兔见东莱当利，青州刺史杜冀以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年三月，白兔出现于束莱的当利，青州刺史杜骥上报朝廷。
English: In March of the 22nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the White Rabbit appeared in Dangli, Sokrai, and the Qingzhou Sashidzuo was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年七月丁巳，白兔见兗州，刺史徐琼以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年七月丁巳日，白兔出现于兖州，刺史徐琼上报朝廷。
English: On July 24, Yuan Jia, the White Rabbit appeared in Zhangzhou, and the story of Xu Qiong was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年七月己酉，白兔见东莞，太守赵球以献。
现代文：元嘉二二十四年七月己酉曰，白兔出现于东莞，太守赵球献上朝廷。
English: Yuan Jia said in July 224 that the White Rabbit appeared in Dongguan, and the governor Zhao Qiu presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年二月壬辰，白兔见竟陵，荆州刺史南谯王义宣以献。
现代文：元嘉二十七年二月壬辰曰，白兔出现于竟陵，荆州刺史南谯王刘义献上朝廷。
English: In February 27th, Yuan Jia and Ren Chen said that the white rabbit appeared in Jingling Mausoleum and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yi, the King of the Southern Han Dynasty in Jingzhou.

古文：元嘉二十七年六月丙午，白兔见南汝阴，豫州刺史南平王铄以献。
现代文：元嘉二十七年六月丙午曰，白兔出现于南汝阴，豫州刺史南平王刘铄献上朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of June 27th, Yuan Jia, the White Rabbit appeared in South Ruyin, and was presented to the imperial court by the Prince of Nanping, Liu Xuan.

古文：孝武帝孝建二年正月庚戌，白兔见淮南，太守申坦以闻。
现代文：孝武帝孝建二年正月庚戌日，白兔出现于淮南，太守申坦上报朝廷。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian, the White Rabbit appeared in Huainan and was reported to the imperial court by the eunuch Shen Tan.

古文：孝建三年闰三月乙丑，白兔见平原，获以献。
现代文：孝建三年闰三月乙科曰，白兔出现于乎原，捕获献上朝廷。
English: In the leap March of the third year of the reign of Xiao Jian, the White Rabbit appeared in Huan and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：孝武大明元年六月庚子，白兔见即墨，获以献。
现代文：孝武大明元年六月庚子曰，白兔出现于即墨，捕获献上朝廷。
English: In June of the first year of Xiaowu Daming, Geng Zi said that the white rabbit appeared in the ink, and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明六年八月辛未，白兔见北海，青、冀二州刺史刘道隆以献。
现代文：大明六年八月辛末日，白兔出现于北海，青、冀二州刺史刘道隆献上朝廷。
English: At the end of August in the year of the Great Ming Dynasty, the White Rabbit appeared in the North Sea, and Liu Daolong, the ruler of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明六年六月乙丑，白兔见，青、冀二州刺史刘道隆以献。
现代文：大明六年六月乙丑日，白兔出现，青、冀二州刺史刘道隆献上朝廷。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty in June, the White Rabbit appeared, and Liu Daolong, the scribe of the two states of Qing and Hebei, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：斗殒精，王者孝行溢则见。
现代文：星斗坠落精光这种吉祥的现象，在帝王行事充满孝道之际就会出现。
English: The auspicious phenomenon of the star falling down and shining brightly will appear when the emperor acts with filial piety.

古文：赤乌，周武王时衔谷至，兵不血刃而殷服。
现代文：阙赤乌，在 司武王时衔禾谷而至，兵不血刃而毖朝降服。
English: At the time of King Sihwu, the war came to the valley, and the soldiers surrendered to the Han Dynasty without bloodshed.

古文：汉章帝元和中，赤乌见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年问，赤乌出现于郡国。
English: According to the Han Dynasty and the lunar calendar, Akaozu appeared in the county.

古文：吴孙权赤乌元年，有赤乌集于殿前。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌元年，有赤乌栖止于宫殿前。
English: In the first year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, a red pheasant roosted in front of the palace.

古文：吴孙休永安三年三月，西陵言赤乌见。
现代文：吴孙休永安三年三月，西陵说有赤乌出现。
English: In March of the third year of the reign of Wusun Hui Yong'an, the western mausoleum reported the appearance of red wax.

古文：晋元帝永昌二年正月，赤乌见暨阳。
现代文：晋元帝永昌二年正月，赤乌出现于暨阳。
English: In the first month of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongchong of the Jin Dynasty, the Red Pheasant appeared in Jiyang.

古文：宋武帝永初二年二月，赤乌六见北海都昌。
现代文：宋武帝永初二年二月，赤乌六次出现于北海都昌。
English: In February of the second year of the reign of Emperor Songwu Yongzheng, Akuu appeared six times in Duchang in the North Sea.

古文：孝武帝大明五年六月戊子，赤乌见蜀郡，益州刺史刘思考以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年六月戊子，赤乌出现于量郅，益州刺史刘跶献上朝廷。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was crowned in June of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, and the Red Dragonfly appeared in Chengdu, and the Yizhou Dragonfly, Liu Ye, was presented to the imperial court.

古文：白燕者，师旷时，衔丹书来至。
现代文：白燕，在师旷时，衔丹书来临。
English: Bai Yan, when the teacher is absent, the title of Dan Shu comes.

古文：汉章帝元和中，白燕见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，白燕出现于郡国。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Baiyan appeared in the county.

古文：晋惠帝元康元年七月，白燕二见酒泉郤福，太守索靖以闻。
现代文：晋惠帝元康元年七月，白燕两度出现于酒泉的禄福，太守索靖上报朝廷。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Baiyan appeared twice in Jiuquan's Lufu, which was reported to the imperial court by the eunuch So Jing.

古文：宋文帝元嘉元年七月壬戌，白燕集齐郡城，游翔庭宇，经九日乃去，众燕随从无数。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉元年七月壬戌日，白燕停集于齐郡越，在庭宇内飞翔翱游，经过九天才离开，有无数燕子随从它。
English: In July of the first year of the Song Dynasty, the White Swallow stopped in Qi County Yue, flew around the courtyard, and left after nine days. Countless swallows followed it.

古文：元嘉十四年，白燕集荆州府门，刺史临川王义庆以闻。
现代文：元嘉十四年，白燕停集于塑议州府门前，刺史临川王刘义庆上报朝廷。
English: In the 14th year of Yuan Jia, Bai Yan stopped in front of the gate of the State Government of Shuxiao and stabbed Liu Yiqing, the King of Linchuan, to report to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十八年六月，白燕产丹徒县，南徐州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉十八年六月，丹徒历出产白燕，南徐州刺史南谯王刘义宣上报朝廷。
English: In June of the 18th year of the Yuan Jia, Dantul produced Baiyan, and Nanxuzhou stabbed Nanxun King Liu Yixuan, which was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年五月，白燕集南平郡府内，内史臧绰以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十年五月，白燕停集于南平郡的郡府中，内史臧绰上报朝廷。
English: In May of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, Bai Yan stopped gathering in the county seat of Nanping County, and his report was immediately reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十一年，白燕见广陵，南兗州刺史广陵王诞以献。
现代文：元嘉二十一年，白燕出现于广陵，南兖州刺史广陵王刘诞献上朝廷。
English: In the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, Baiyan appeared in Guangling, and Nanluozhou presented the birth of Guangling King Liu to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年五月辛未，白燕集司徒府西园，太尉江夏王义恭以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年五月辛末日，白燕停集于司徒府的西园，太尉江夏王刘义恭上报朝廷。
English: On the last day of May in the 24th year of Yuan Jia, Bai Yan stopped gathering in the West Park of Szetofu, and Liu Yigong, the lieutenant of Jiangxia Wang, reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年八月壬子，白燕见广陵城，南兗州刺史徐湛之以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年八月壬子日，白燕出现于广陵城，南兖州刺史徐湛之上报朝廷。
English: On Mizi Day in August of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, Bai Yan appeared in Guangling City, and was reported to the imperial court by Xu Zhan, the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：元嘉二十六年五月戊寅，白燕产衡阳王墓亭，郎中令硃旷之获以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十六年五月戊寅日，衡阳王的墓亭有白燕，郎中令朱旷之捕获上报朝廷。
English: On May 26th, Yuan Jia's birthday, there was a white swallow in the tomb of King Hengyang. The capture of his son-in-law, Zhu Heng, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年五月甲戌，白燕产京口，南徐州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十七年五月甲戌曰，京口有白燕，南徐业刺史面兴王壁炉上报朝廷。
English: In May of the 27th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, it was reported to the imperial court that there was a white swallow in the capital, and that the South Xue Yip was stabbing the historical Xing Wang fireplace.

古文：元嘉二十七年六月壬辰，白燕见秣陵，丹阳尹徐湛之以献。
现代文：元嘉二十七年六月壬辰曰，白燕出现于秣陵，丹阳尹徐湛之献上朝廷。
English: In June, 27th year of Yuan Jia, Bai Yan appeared in Fuling, and Danyang Yin Xu Zhan presented him to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明二年五月乙巳，白燕产南郡江陵民家，荆州刺史硃修之以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明二年五月乙巳日，南郡江陵的百姓家有白燕，荆州刺史朱脩之献上朝廷。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the people of Jiangling in Nan County had Baiyan and Jingzhou Zhishi Zhuyi presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明二年五月甲子，白燕二产山阳县舍，南兗州刺史竟陵王诞以献。
现代文：大明二年五月甲子曰，山阳县舍有二只白燕，南兖州刺史竟陵王刘诞献上朝廷。
English: In May of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Jia Zi said that there were two white swallows in Shanyang County, and the birth of King Liu was presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明二年六月甲戌，白燕产吴郡城内，太守王翼之以献。
现代文：大明二年六月甲戌日，吴郡城内有白燕，太守王翼之献上朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, on the day of Jiajing, there was a white swallow in the city of Wuxian County, which was presented to the imperial court by the governor Wang Ying.

古文：大明三年五月甲申，白燕产武陵临沅民家，郢州刺史孔灵符以闻。
现代文：大明三年五月甲申曰，武陵临沅的百姓家有白燕，郢州刺史孔灵符上报朝廷。
English: In May of the third year of the Ming Dynasty, Jia Shen said that the people of Wuling Linyi had Baiyan, and the Bozhou Zhishi Konglingfu was reported to the imperial court.

古文：大明四年六月乙卯，白燕见平昌，青州刺史刘道隆以献。
现代文：大明四年六月乙卯曰，白燕出现于平昌，青州刺史刘道隆献上朝廷。
English: In June of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, Baiyan appeared in PyeongChang, and the Qingzhou scribe Liu Daolong presented it to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始二年六月，白燕见零陵，获以献。
现代文：明帝泰始二年六月，白燕出现于零陵，捕获献给朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi of the Ming Dynasty, Baiyan appeared in the Zero Mausoleum and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：金车，王者至孝则出。
现代文：金车，帝王孝顺至极就会出现。
English: A golden chariot will appear when the emperor's filial piety is at its peak.

古文：三足乌，王者慈孝天地则至。
现代文：阙三足乌，帝王对天地慈爱孝顺就会出现。
English: The emperor will appear to be merciful and filial to heaven and earth.

古文：汉章帝元和中，三足乌见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，三足乌出现于郡国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zang in the first and second years of the Han Dynasty, the three-legged owl appeared in the county.

古文：象车者，山之精也。
现代文：象车，山岳的精华。
English: Elephant carriages, the essence of the mountains.

古文：王者德泽流洽四境则出。
现代文：帝王德行恩泽施布四境就会出现阙
English: When the emperor is virtuous, benevolent and generous, there will be prosperity everywhere.

古文：白乌，王者宗庙肃敬则至。
现代文：白乌，帝王的宗庙肃敬就会出现。
English: Bai Wu, the emperor's ancestral temple reverence will appear.

古文：汉桓帝永寿元年四月，白乌见齐国。
现代文：汉桓帝永寿元年四月，白乌出现于齐国。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Han Huan's longevity, Bai Wu appeared in Qi.

古文：晋武帝咸宁五年七月戊辰，白乌见济南隰阴，太守获以献。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁五年七月戊辰曰，白乌出现于济南的隰阴，太守捕获献给朝廷。
English: In July of the fifth year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, Bai Wu appeared in Jinyang of Jinan and was captured by the emperor and presented to the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝太康元年五月庚午，白乌见襄城。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年五月庚午，白乌出现于襄城。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the fifth month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, Bai Wu appeared in Xiangcheng.

古文：太康十年五月丁丑，白乌见京兆长安。
现代文：太康十年五月丁丑曰，白乌出现于京兆的长安。
English: In May of the 10th year of Taikang, Ding Bushi said that Bai Wu appeared in Chang'an, Beijing.

古文：晋惠帝元康元年四月，白乌见河南成皋，县令刘机获以闻。
现代文：晋惠帝元康元年四月，白乌出现于河南的成皋，县令刘机捕获上报朝廷。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu, Bai Wu appeared in Chengdu, Henan Province. The county magistrate Liu Ji captured him and reported to the imperial court.

古文：元康元年五月戊戌，白乌见梁国睢阳。
现代文：元康元年五月戊戌曰，白乌出现于梁国的睢屋。
English: In May of the 1st year of the Kangxi Emperor, Bai Wu appeared in a house in Liang Province.

古文：元康元年七月辛丑，白乌见陈留，获以献。
现代文：元康元午七月辛丑日，白乌出现于陈留，捕获献上朝廷。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the seventh month of the first year of Kangxi, Bai Wu appeared in Chenliu, and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：元康四年十月，白乌见鄱阳。
现代文：元康四年十月，白乌出现于鄱阳。
English: In October of the 4th year of the Yuan Kang, Bai Wu appeared in Fenyang.

古文：晋明帝泰宁二年十一月，白乌见京都。
现代文：晋明帝泰宁二年十一月，白乌出现于京都。
English: In November of the second year of Emperor Jimmings reign, Bai Wu appeared in Kyoto.

古文：泰宁三年三月，白乌见吴郡海虞，获以献，群官毕贺。
现代文：泰宁三年三月，白乌出现于吴郡的海虞，捕获献上朝廷，群官都来祝贺。
English: In March of the third year of Taining, Baiwu appeared in Haiyu, Wuxian County. He was captured and presented to the imperial court, and officials came to congratulate him.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十一年八月乙酉，白乌集江州寺庭，群乌翔卫。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十一年八月乙酉曰，白乌停集在江州寺庙的庭前，群乌飞翔护卫着白乌。
English: Emperor Jinxiao Wu of Taiyuan said in August 11th, that the white cormorants stopped in front of the courtyard of the Jiangzhou Temple, and the flocks of cormorants flew to escort the white cormorants.

古文：太元二十一年五月癸卯，白乌见吴国，获以献。
现代文：太元二十一年五月癸卯曰，白乌出现于吴国，捕获献上朝廷。
English: In May 21st, Bai Wu appeared in the State of Wu and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：宋武帝永初二年六月丁酉，白乌见吴郡娄县，太守孟顗以献。
现代文：宋武帝永初二年六月丁酉曰，白乌出现于吴郡娄县，太守孟额献上朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wu Yong said, "Bai Wu appeared in Jixian County, Wu County, and the eunuch Meng Qu presented it to the imperial court.

古文：文帝元嘉二年十一月丙辰，白乌见山阳，太守阮宝以闻。
现代文：文帝元嘉二年十一月丙辰曰，白乌出现于山阳，太守阮宝上报朝廷。
English: In November of the second year of Emperor Wen, Emperor Yuanjia said that Bai Wu appeared in Shanyang, and the eunuch Ruan Bao reported it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉三年三月甲戌，丹阳湖熟薛爽之获白乌以献。
现代文：元嘉三年三月甲戌日，丹阳湖熟人薛爽之获得白乌献上朝廷。
English: On the third day of the third month of the third year of the Yuan Jia, the acquaintance of Danyang Lake, Xue Shuangzhi, won the white wax and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十一年六月乙巳，吴郡海盐王说获白乌，扬州刺史彭城王义康以献。
现代文：元嘉十一年六月乙巳曰，吴郡海盐人王说获得白乌，扬州刺史彭城王刘义康献上朝廷。
English: In June of the eleventh year of Yuan Jia, Liu Yikang, the king of Yangzhou's Zhishu Pengcheng, presented to the imperial court that the king of Wuxian County, Haiyan, said that he had obtained Baiwu.

古文：元嘉十三年三月戊辰，义兴阳羡令获白乌，太守刘祯以献。
现代文：元嘉十三年三月戊辰日，义兴阳羞令获得白乌，太守刘祯献上朝廷。
English: On the 13th day of the 3rd month of the 3rd month of the 13th year of Yuan Jia, Yixingyang Shiling won Baiwu, and was presented to the imperial court by the governor Liu Wei.

古文：元嘉十九年五月，海陵王文秀获白乌，南兗州刺史临川王义庆以献。
现代文：元嘉十九年五月，海陵王文秀获得白乌，南兖州刺史临川王义庆献给朝廷。
English: In May of the 19th year of Yuan Jia, Hailing Wang Wenshu won Baiwu, and Nanzhoushishi Linchuan Wang Yiqing dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十九年十月，白乌产晋陵暨阳侨民彭城刘原秀宅树，原秀以闻。
现代文：元嘉十九年十月，白乌出现于置堕暨一隧的侨民茎城刘尘秀住宅的树上，刘原壶上报朝廷。
English: In October of the 19th year of Yuan Jia, Bai Wu appeared on the tree of the residence of Liu Jianxiu in Zhu Cheng, an expatriate who fell and died in a tunnel. Liu Yuan Jiu reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年七月，彭城刘原秀又获白乌以献。
现代文：元嘉二十年七月，堑球人刘原秀又获得白乌献给朝廷。
English: In July of the 20th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Liu Yuanxiu, a golfer, won the white wax and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年八月乙巳，白乌见晋陵，南徐州刺史广陵王诞以献。
现代文：元嘉二十四年八月乙巳曰，白乌出现于晋陵，南徐州刺史广陵王刘诞献上朝廷。
English: In August 24th, Yuan Jia said that Bai Wu appeared in Jinling, South Xuzhou engraved Guangling Wang Liu's birthday and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明元年四月甲申，白乌见南郡江陵。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年四月甲申日，白乌出现于南郡的江陵。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, on the 6th day of the 7th month, Baiwu appeared in Jiangling, Nan County.

古文：明帝泰始二年六月丁巳，白乌见吴郡海盐，太守顾觊之以献。
现代文：明帝泰始二年六月丁巳曰，白乌出现于吴郡的海盐，太守顾觊之献上朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi of the Ming Dynasty, Ding Si said that Bai Wu appeared in Haiyan, Wuxian County, and was presented to the imperial court by the Great Guardian Gu Xizhi.

古文：泰始二年九月壬寅，白乌见吴兴乌程，太守郄颙以献。
现代文：泰始二年九月壬寅日，白乌出现于吴兴的乌程，太守郄愿献上朝廷。
English: In September of the second year of Taizhi, on the day of Ren Yin, Bai Wu appeared in Wu Xing's Ucheng, and the eunuch was willing to present it to the imperial court.

古文：白雀者，王者爵禄均则至。
现代文：白雀这种吉祥物，在帝王的爵位俸禄公平的时候出现。
English: The white finch, a kind of mascot, appears when the emperor's salary is fair.

古文：汉章帝元和初，白雀见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和初年，白雀出现于郡国。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, the white finch appeared in the county.

古文：魏文帝初，郡国十九言白雀见。
现代文：魏文帝初年，十九个郡国说出现了白雀。
English: In the first year of Emperor Weiwen, white finches appeared in nineteen counties.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年，白雀见梁国，梁王肜获以献。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年，白雀出现于梁国，梁王司马肜捕获献给朝廷。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, the white finch appeared in Liang Province, and King Sima of Liang captured it and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝太康二年六月丁卯，白雀二见河内南阳，太守阮侃获以献。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年六月丁卯曰，白雀二次出现于河内的南阳，太守阮侃获得献上朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of Emperor Taikang's reign, Dingwu said that the white sparrow appeared twice in Nanyang, Hanoi, and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Ruan Kan.

古文：太康二年六月，白雀二见河南，河南尹向雄获以献。
现代文：太康二年六月，白雀二次出现于河南，河南尹血壁获得献上朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of Taikang, the white sparrow appeared in Henan for the second time, and the Henan Yin blood wall was presented to the imperial court.

古文：太康七年七月庚午，白雀见豫章。
现代文：太康七年七月庚午曰，白雀出现于豫章。
English: On the afternoon of the seventh day of the seventh month of the seventh year of Taikang, the white sparrow appeared in Yuzhang.

古文：太康八年八月，白雀见河南洛阳。
现代文：太康八年八月，白雀出现于的盗鳗。
English: In August of the 8th year of Taikang, the white finch appeared in the thieving cormorant.

古文：太康十年五月丁亥，白雀见宣光北门，华林园令孙邵获以献。
现代文：太康十年五月丁亥曰，白雀出现于宣光北门，华林园令孙邵获得献上朝廷。
English: In May of the tenth year of Taikang, Ding Hai said that the white sparrow appeared at the north gate of Xuanguang, and Sun Shao was presented to the imperial court by the Hualin Garden.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年四月，尚书仆射刁协献白雀于晋王。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年四月，尚书仆射刁协献给晋王白雀。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu of Jin Dynasty, Shang Shufu dedicated the White Sparrow to the King of Jin.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十六年十二月，白雀见南海增城县民吴比屋。
现代文：晋孝武帝太元十六年十二月，白雀出现于南海增城县百姓吴比的屋上。
English: In December of the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, a white finch appeared on the rooftop of Wu Bi, a villager in Zengcheng County, Nanhai.

古文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，白雀见宜都。
现代文：晋安帝隆安五年十一月，白雀出现于宜都。
English: In November of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Jian of An, the white finch appeared in Yidu.

古文：晋安帝元兴三年六月丙申，白雀见豫章新淦，获以献。
现代文：晋安帝元兴三年六月丙申日，白雀出现于豫章的新淦，捕获以后献给朝廷。
English: On the third day of the sixth month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of the Jin and An Dynasties, a white finch appeared in Xinlu, Yuzhang, and was captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：宋文帝元嘉元年七月己巳，白雀见齐郡昌国。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉元年七月己巳日，白雀出现于齐郡的昌国。
English: In July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Songwen of the Yuan Dynasty, the white finch appeared in Changguo, Qi County.

古文：元嘉四年七月乙酉，白雀见北海剧。
现代文：元嘉四年七月乙酉日，白雀出现于北海的剧。
English: In July of the 4th year of the Yuan Jia, the white finch appeared in the North Sea.

古文：元嘉八年五月辛丑，白雀集左卫府。
现代文：元嘉八年五月辛丑曰，白雀停集在左卫府。
English: In May of the eighth year of Yuan Jia, Xin Ug said that the White Sparrow stopped at the Left Guard House.

古文：元嘉十一年五月丁丑，齐郡西安宗显获白雀，青州刺史段宏以献。
现代文：元嘉十一年五月丁丑曰，查郡西安人宗显得白雀，青州刺史段宏献给朝廷。
English: In May of the eleventh year of Yuan Jia, Ding Jiu said that the people of Xi'an, Cha County, appeared as white sparrows, and the people of Qingzhou were dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十四年五月甲午，白雀集费县员外散骑侍郎颜敬家，获以献。
现代文：元嘉十四年五月甲午曰，白雀停集在费县员外散骑侍郎垄遨的家中，捕获献给朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of May 1 of the 14th year of the Yuan Jia, the white finches stopped at the home of the Fei County official, the horseback riding attendant Rengong, and were captured and presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十四年，白雀二见荆州府客馆。
现代文：元嘉十四年，白雀两次出现于荆州府的旅舍。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Jia, the white sparrow appeared twice in the hostel of Jingzhou Prefecture.

古文：元嘉十五年五月辛未，白雀集建康都亭里，扬州刺史彭城王义康以闻。
现代文：元嘉十五年五月辛未，白雀停集在建康的垫壁哩，握州刺史堑妙王刘翅上报朝廷。
English: In May of the fifteenth year of Yuan Jia, the white finches stopped gathering at the foot of Jiankang's wall, and Liu Ying, the king of Shizhou, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十五年六月，白雀见建康定阴里，彭城王义康以献。
现代文：元嘉十五年六月，白雀出现于建康定阴里，彭城王刘盏尘献上朝廷。
English: In June of the 15th year of the Yuan Jia, the white sparrow appeared in Jiankang Dingyin, and the king of Pengcheng, Liu Jiancheng, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十五年八月，白雀见西阳，江州刺史南谯王义宣以献。
现代文：元嘉十五年八月，白雀出现于西阳，江州刺史南谯王刘义宣献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 15th year of the Yuan Jia, the white sparrow appeared in Xiyang, and was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yi Xuan, the king of Nanxi, Jiangzhou.

古文：元嘉十七年五月壬寅，白雀二集荆州后园，刺史衡阳王义季以闻。元嘉十八年七月，吴郡盐官于玄获白雀，太守刘祯以献。
现代文：元嘉十七年五月壬寅曰，白雀二次停集在荆纽州治的后园，刺史蛮疆王刘塑上报朝廷元嘉十八年七月，吴郡盐官人于玄获得白雀，太守刘祯献上朝廷。
English: In May of the seventeenth year of Yuan Jia, Ren Yin said that the white sparrow was stopped for the second time in the back garden of Jing Nuzhou, and the king of the barbarian region, Liu Shuo, reported to the imperial court. In July of the eighteenth year of Yuan Jia, the salt officials of Wuxian County obtained the white sparrow, and the eunuch Liu Xuan presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年五月乙卯，秣陵卫猗之获白雀，丹阳尹徐湛之以献。
现代文：元嘉二十年五月乙卯曰，秣陵卫猗之获得白雀，丹阳尹徐湛之献给朝廷。
English: In May of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, the White Sparrow was given to Fuling Weiqi, and the Danyang Yin Xu Zhan was presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年四月丙子，白雀见东安郡，徐州刺史臧质以献。
现代文：元嘉二十二年四月丙子曰，白雀出现在束安郡，徐州刺史臧质献给朝廷。
English: In April of the 22nd year of Yuan Jia, Xun Zi said that the white sparrow appeared in Sokan County, and the Xuzhou thistle was dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年闰五月丙午，白雀见华林园，员外散骑侍郎长沙王瑾获以献。
现代文：元嘉二十二年闰五月丙午曰，白雀出现在华林园，员外散骑侍郎长沙王刘瑾捕获以后献给朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of leap May in the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, the white sparrow appeared in the Hualin Garden. After being captured by the non-commissioned officer, the horseback riding attendant of Changsha King Liu Bei, it was presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年六月庚申，南彭城蕃县时佛护获白雀以献。
现代文：元嘉二十二年六月庚申曰，南彭城蕃县的时佛护获得白雀献给朝廷。
English: In June of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, Geng Shen said that the Southern Pengcheng County was awarded the White Sparrow as a gift to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年四月，白雀产吴郡盐官民家，太守刘祯以献。
现代文：元嘉二十四年四月，白雀产于吴郡的盐官百姓家中，太守刘祯把它献给朝廷。
English: In April of the 24th year of the Yuan Jia, the white finch was born in the home of a salt official in Wuxian County. The eunuch Liu Ye presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年六月己亥，白雀五集长沙庙，长沙王瑾以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年六月己亥曰，白雀五次停集在长沙的家庙中，长沙王刘瑾上报朝廷。
English: In June of the twenty-fourth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, it was said that the White Sparrow stopped five times to gather in the home temple of Changsha, and Changsha King Liu Ye reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十五年五月丁丑，白雀二见京都，材官吏黄公欢、军人丁田夫各获以献。
现代文：元嘉二十五年五月丁丑曰，白雀二次出现于京都，材官吏黄公欢、军人丁田夫各获得一只献上朝廷。
English: In May of the 25th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Ding Yuxi said that the white sparrow appeared twice in Kyoto, and the official Huang Gonghuan and the soldier Ding Tianfu each received one to present to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十七年六月乙卯，白雀见济南郡，薛荣以献。
现代文：元嘉二十七年六月乙卯日，白雀出现于龃郡，薛荣献上朝廷。
English: On the second day of the sixth month of the 27th year of the Yuan Jia, the white sparrow appeared in Jixian County, and Xue Rong presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十八年八月己巳，崇义军人获白雀一只，太子左率王锡以献。元嘉二十九年四月癸丑，白雀见会稽山阴，太守东海王祎获以献。
现代文：元嘉二十八年八月己巳曰，塞盏军人获得一对白雀，太子左率王锡献上朝廷元嘉二十九年四月癸丑，白雀出现于会稽的山阴，太守东海王刘讳获得上报朝廷。
English: In August of the 28th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, it was said that the soldiers of the Northern Wei Dynasty obtained a pair of white finches, and the prince of the Southern Wei Dynasty, Wang Xi, presented the pair to the imperial court. In April of the 29th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the white finches appeared in the shade of the mountain of the auditorium, and the governor of the East Sea, Wang Liu, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝孝建元年五月己亥，临沂县鲁尚期于城上得白雀，太傅假黄钺江夏王义恭以献。
现代文：孝武帝孝建元年五月己亥日，临沂县人鲁适翅在城上获得白雀，太傅假黄铁江夏王刘义恭献上朝廷。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaojian, in May of the year of the boar, Lu Shifen, a native of Linyi County, obtained a white sparrow on the castle, and the false Huang Tiejiang Xia King Liu Yigong presented it to the imperial court.

古文：孝建二年六月丙子，左卫军获白雀以献。
现代文：孝建二年六月丙子曰，左卫军人获得白雀献上朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Xiao Jian, Cixi said that the soldiers of the Left Division were presented with a white bird to the imperial court.

古文：孝建三年闰三月辛酉，黄门侍郎庾徽之家获白雀以献。
现代文：孝建三年闰二月辛酉曰，黄门侍郎庾徽之在家中获得白雀献上朝廷。
English: In February of the third year of the reign of Xiao Jian, the Yellow Gate Chamberlain Zeng Hui received a white sparrow at home and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：孝建三年五月丁卯，白雀见建康，获以献。
现代文：孝建三年五月丁卯日，白雀出现于建康，获得之后献上朝廷。
English: On the 3rd day of the 5th month of the 3rd year of the reign of Xiao Jian, a white sparrow appeared in Jiankang. After it was obtained, it was presented to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明元年四月戊申，白雀见寻阳。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年四月戊申日，白雀出现于寻阳。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, the White Sparrow appeared in Xuanyang.

古文：大明元年五月甲寅，白雀二见渤海，获以献。
现代文：大明元年五月甲寅曰，白雀二次出现于渤海，获得之后献上朝廷。
English: In May of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared twice in the Bohai Sea and was presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明元年五月甲子，白雀见建康，获以献。
现代文：大明元年五月甲子曰，白雀出现于建康，获得之后献上朝廷。
English: In May of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Jiazi said that the white finch appeared in Jiankang and was presented to the imperial court after it was obtained.

古文：大明元年六月丁亥，白雀见零陵祁阳，获以献。
现代文：大明元年六月丁亥曰，白雀出现于零陵的祁阳，获得之后献上朝廷。
English: In June of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Ding Hai said that the White Sparrow appeared in Shiyang of the Zero Mausoleum, and was presented to the imperial court after it was obtained.

古文：大明元年七月辛亥，白雀见南阳宛，获以献。
现代文：大明元年七月辛亥曰，白雀出现于南阳的宛县，获得之后献上朝廷。
English: In July of the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Xinhai said that the white finch appeared in Wan County of Nanyang, and after being obtained, it was presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明二年五月丁未，白雀见建康，扬州刺史西阳王子尚以献。
现代文：大明二年五月丁未日，白雀出现于建康，扬州刺史西阳王刘子尚献上朝廷。
English: On the eve of the 2nd day of the 5th month of the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared in Jiankang, Yangzhou, and the Prince of Xiyang, Liu Zichang, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明二年六月丁亥，白雀见河东定襄县，荆州刺史硃修之以闻。
现代文：大明二年六月丁亥日，白雀出现于河东的定襄县，荆州刺史朱脩之上报朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Dinghai Day, the White Sparrow appeared in Dingxiang County, Hedong Province, and was reported to the imperial court on the top of the Jingzhou engraving Zhu Xi.

古文：大明三年四月庚戌，白雀见秣陵，丹阳尹刘秀之以献。
现代文：大明三年四月庚戌曰，白雀出现于秣陵，丹阳尹刘秀之献上朝廷。
English: In April of the third year of the Ming Dynasty, Geng Zi said that the white sparrow appeared in Fuling, and Danyang Yin Liu Xiu presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明三年五月壬午，太宰府崇艺军人获白雀，太宰江夏王义恭以献。
现代文：大明三年五月壬午曰，太宰府崇薮军人获得白雀，太宰江夏王刘义恭献上朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of May in the year of the Dog, Dazaifu's Chongzhen soldiers won the White Sparrow, and Dazaifu's Jiangxia King Liu Yigong presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明四年五月辛巳，白雀见广陵，侍中颜师伯以献。
现代文：大明四年五月辛巳，白雀出现于广陵，侍中颜师伯献上朝廷。
English: In May of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared in Guangling, and the attendant Yan Shi Bo presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年四月庚戌，白雀见晋陵，太守沈文叔以献。
现代文：大明五年四月庚戌曰，白雀出现于晋陵，太守沈文叔献上朝廷。
English: In April of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, Geng Zi said that the white sparrow appeared in the Jin Mausoleum and was presented to the imperial court by the eunuch Shen Wen.

古文：大明五年五月癸未，白雀二见寻阳，江州刺史桂阳王休范以献。
现代文：大明五年五月癸末日，白雀二次出现于寻阳，江什!刺史桂阳王刘休范献上朝廷。
English: On the last day of May in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared for the second time in Xuanyang, Jiangsh! stabbed Guiyang King Liu Xuan and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年五月癸未，白雀二见济南，青州刺史刘道隆以献。
现代文：大明五年五月癸未，白雀二次出现于济南，青州刺史刘道隆献上朝廷。
English: Before the end of May in the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared for the second time in Jinan, and the Qingzhou scribe Liu Daolong presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年十月，白雀见太原，青州刺史刘道隆以献。
现代文：大明五年十月，白雀出现于太原，青州刺史刘道隆献上朝廷。
English: In October of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared in Taiyuan, and Liu Daolong, the governor of Qingzhou, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明六年八月辛巳，白雀见齐郡，青、冀二州刺史刘道隆以献。
现代文：大明六年八月辛巳，白雀出现于齐郡，青、冀二州刺史刺史刘道隆献上朝廷。
English: In August of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty, the white finch appeared in Qi County, and Liu Daolong, the chief of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明七年四月乙未，白雀集庐陵王第，庐陵王敬先以献。大明七年四月乙丑，白雀见历阳，太守建平王景素以献。
现代文：大明七年四月乙末日，白雀停集在庐陵王的宅第，庐陵王刘敬先献上朝廷大明七年四月乙丑曰，白雀山现于历阳。太守建乎王刘景素献上朝廷。
English: On the last day of the 4th month of the 7th year of the Ming Dynasty, the white sparrows gathered at the residence of the King of Fuling. The King of Fuling, Liu Jing, first presented the mountain to the Imperial Court. In the 4th month of the 7th year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow Mountain is now in Liyang. The King of Jianhu, Liu Jingsu, presented the mountain to the Imperial Court.

古文：大明七年五月辛未，白雀见汝阴，豫州刺史垣护之以献。
现代文：大明七年五月辛末日，白雀出现于汝阴，豫州刺史垣护之献上朝廷。
English: On the last day of May in the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the white sparrow appeared in Ruyin, and the crown of the Yuzhou sword was presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明七年六月，白雀见宝城，南豫州刺史寻阳王子房以献。
现代文：大明七年六月，白雀出现于宝城，南豫州刺史寻阳王刘子房献上朝廷。
English: In June of the 7th year of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared in Baocheng, and Liu Zifang, King of the Southern Henan Province, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明七年十月丁卯，白雀见建康，丹阳尹永嘉王子仁以献。
现代文：太明七年十月丁卯曰，白雀出现于建康，丹阳尹永嘉王刘子仁献上朝廷。
English: In October of the seventh year of the Taiming Dynasty, Dingwu said that the white sparrow appeared in Jiankang, and Danyang Yin Yongjia King Liu Ziren presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明七年十一月，车驾南巡，肄水师于梁山，中江，白雀二集华盖。
现代文：大明七年十一月，皇帝车驾南巡，在梁山检阅水军，船至辽中，有两只白雀停留在华盖上。
English: In November of the 7th year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor was on a tour of the south, inspecting the navy in Liangshan. When the ship reached Liaozhong, two white finches stayed on Huagai.

古文：前废帝永光元年四月乙亥，白雀见会稽，东扬州刺史寻阳王子房以献。
现代文：前废帝永光元年四月乙亥，白雀出现于会稽，东扬州刺史曼坠王型王虚献上朝廷。
English: In April of the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, the White Sparrow appeared at the meeting, and the East Yangzhou Sashiman pendant king-type Wang Xiu was presented to the imperial court.

古文：永光元年六月丙子，白雀见彭城，徐州刺史义阳王昶以闻。
现代文：永光元年六月丙子曰，白雀出现于彭城，徐州刺史义阳王刘昶上报朝廷。
English: In June of the first year of the Yongguang era, Cixi Zi said that the white finch appeared in Pengcheng, and the history of Xuzhou and Yiyang King Liu Bei was reported to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始二年七月戊子，白雀见虎槛洲，都督征讨诸军建安王休仁以闻。
现代文：明帝泰始二年七月戊子日，白雀出现于虎槛洲，都督征讨诸军建安王刘休仁上报朝廷。
English: In July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi of the Ming Dynasty, the White Sparrow appeared on Tiger's Threshold, and Liu Xuren, King of Jian'an, was summoned by the governor to report to the imperial court.

古文：泰始六年七月壬午，白雀二见庐陵吉阳，内史江孜以闻。
现代文：泰始六年七月壬午曰，白雀两只出现于庐陵的吉阳，内史江孜上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of July 6th, two white finches appeared in Jiyang of Fuling, and the Inner Shijiang River was reported to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰豫元年六月辛丑，白雀见广州，刺史孙超以献。
现代文：明帝泰豫元年六月辛丑日，白雀出现于广州，刺史孙超献上朝廷。
English: In June of the first year of the Ming Emperor Taiyuan, the White Sparrow appeared in Guangzhou, stabbing Sun Chao and presenting him to the imperial court.

古文：后废帝元徽五年四月己巳，白雀二见寻阳柴桑，江州刺史邵陵王友以献。
现代文：后废帝元徽五年四月己巳曰，白雀二只出现于寻阳的柴桑，江州刺史邵陵王刘友献上朝廷。
English: After the abolition of Emperor Yuanhui in April of the fifth year, it was said that two white finches appeared in the sun-seeking chai-sang, and the crown prince of Jiangsu Province, Shao Ling Wang Liu You, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明六年三月丙午，青雀见华林园。
现代文：孝武帝大明六年三月丙午日，青雀出现于圣拯厘
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month of the sixth year of Emperor Xiaowu

古文：明帝泰始二年九月庚寅，青雀见京城内，南徐州刺史桂阳王休范以献。
现代文：明帝泰始二年九月庚寅曰，青雀出现于京城内，南徐州刺史桂阳王休范整献上朝廷。
English: In September of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, Geng Yin said that the young sparrow appeared in the capital city, and the southern Xuzhou poet Guiyang Wang Xuan presented it to the imperial court.

古文：玉马，王者精明，尊贤者则出。
现代文：吉祥物玉马，帝王精明，尊重贤人就会出现。
English: The mascot Jade Horse, the emperor is shrewd, and respects the wise will appear.

古文：根车者，德及山陵则出。
现代文：阙吉祥物根车，德泽施及山陵就会出现。
English: The mascots Nemoto, Dezeshi and Yamagura will appear.

古文：白鸠，成汤时来至。
现代文：阙白鸠，成汤时曾来临。
English: The chalk chalk chalk chalk chalk chalk chalk.

古文：魏文帝黄初初，郡国十九言白鸠见。
现代文：魏文帝黄初初年，十九个郡国说出现了白鸠。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wen of Wei and the first year of Emperor Huang, egrets appeared in nineteen counties.

古文：吴孙权赤乌十二年八月癸丑，白鸠见章安。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十二年八月癸丑，白鸠出现于章安。
English: Wu Sun Quan died in August of the 12th year of the Red Wu Dynasty, and Bai Quan appeared in Zhang'an.

古文：晋武帝泰始八年五月甲辰，白鸠二集太庙南门，议郎董胄获以献。
现代文：晋武帝泰始八年五月甲辰曰，有两只白鸠停留在太庙的南门，议郎董胄获得，献上朝廷。
English: In the eighth month of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, there were two egrets staying at the south gate of the Great Temple. The egret was given to the egret's master, Dong Xuan, who presented it to the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝太康二年七月，白鸠见太仆寺。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年七月，白鸠出现于太仆寺。
English: In July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, an egret appeared at Taipo Temple.

古文：太康四年十二月，白鸠见安定临泾。
现代文：太康四年十二月，白鸠出现于安定的临泾。
English: In December of the 4th year of Taikang, egrets appeared in Linyi.

古文：太康十年正月乙亥，白鸠见河南新城。
现代文：太康十年正月乙亥曰，白鸠出现于河南的新城。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of Taikang, the white stork appeared in Xincheng, Henan Province.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十八年八月庚午，会稽山阴商世宝获白鸠，眼足并赤，扬州刺史始兴王浚以献。太子率更令何承天上表曰：
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十八年八月庚午曰，会稽山一阴人商世宝获得白鸠，眼睛和足爪都是红色的，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚献给朝廷：太子率更令何承玉上表说：
English: On the afternoon of August 18th in the year of Song Emperor Yuan Jia, He Zhengyan, a famous merchant and world treasure, obtained an egret with red eyes and paws, which was presented to the imperial court by Liu Jian, the Prince of Yangzhou. He Zhengyu, who was more likely to become the crown prince, said on the table:

古文：谨考寻先典，稽之前志，王德所覃，物以应显。
现代文：臣恭谨地考寻先朝的典籍，稽查以前的记载，帝王的仁德所到之处，瑞物就会因感应而显现。
English: The courtier respectfully searched the classics of the previous dynasty, and checked the previous records. Wherever the emperor's benevolence went, the beauty would appear by induction.

古文：是以玄扈之凤，昭帝轩之鸿烈，酆宫之雀，征姬文之徽祚。
现代文：因此玄扈山的凤凰，表明黄帝功德的崇高，酆宫的朱雀，象征着周文王国柞强盛。
English: Therefore, the phoenix of Xuanzang Mountain indicates the sublimity of the Yellow Emperor's merits, and the Suzaku of the Summer Palace symbolizes the prosperity of the Zhou Kingdom.

古文：伏惟陛下重光嗣服，永言祖武，洽惠和于地络，烛皇明于天区。
现代文：陛下继承先帝功业而即位，立志遵循和弘扬先帝的仁德，将融和的恩惠沾润大地，使辉煌的光明照彻天宇。
English: His Majesty ascended to the throne, inheriting the achievements of the previous emperor, determined to follow and promote the benevolence of the previous emperor, enrich the earth with the benefits of integration, and make the brilliant light shine throughout the sky.

古文：故能九服混心，万邦含受，员神降祥，方祗荐裕，休珍杂沓，景瑞毕臻。
现代文：所以能使天下归于一心，万邦满怀爱戴，天神降下祥瑞，地衹敬献福祉，吉祥珍贵的瑞物纷纷山现，美好的符瑞全都到来。
English: Therefore, it can unite the whole world, fill all nations with love, bring down auspiciousness from the gods, bestow blessings from the heavens, bring auspicious and precious things from the earth, and bring all the wonderful blessings.

古文：去七月上旬，时在昧旦，黄晖洞照，宇宙开朗，徽风协律，甘液洒津。
现代文：去年七月上旬，在黎明之时，黄色光芒洞照，天地间豁然开朗，阵阵和风与音律相协，甘露洒向大地。
English: In early July of last year, at dawn, a yellow glow lit up the cave, the sky and the earth were suddenly bright, the gusts of wind harmonized with the melody, and the nectar sprinkled the earth.

古文：虽硃晃瑰玮于运衡，荣光图灵于河纪，蔑以尚兹。
现代文：即使红色光芒辉耀在玉衡星座，祥瑞的荣光显灵在董回岸址，也小能超过今天了。
English: Even if the red light shines in the constellation of Jade Heng, the glory of Xiang Rui appears in the Dong Hui site, it can hardly exceed today.

古文：臣不量卑懵，窃慕击壤有作，相杵成讴。
现代文：下臣不估量自己的浅薄卑贱，私自仰慕尧时老翁击壤作歌，百姓筑土而唱起夯歌。
English: Subordinates do not measure their own shallowness and lowliness, and admire themselves when the old man hits the ground to make a song, and the people build the soil and sing a song.

古文：近又豫白鸠之观，目玩奇伟，心欢盛烈。
现代文：近来又参与观赏白鸠，亲眼见到珍奇的飞禽，为陛下的盛大功业而欢欣。
English: Recently, he also took part in watching egrets, saw the rare birds with his own eyes, and rejoiced at His Majesty's great work.

古文：谨献颂一篇。
现代文：谨献上《白鸠颂》一篇。
English: I would like to present an article from "Ode to Egrets."

古文：野思古拙，意及庸陋，不足以发挥清英，敷赞幽旨，瞻前顾后，亦各其志。
现代文：思致鄙浅，言辞朴拙。文意所及平庸凡陋，不足以表达发挥事理的精髓，敷陈赞美隐奥的旨意。前后看来，也是各言其志罢了。
English: The thoughts are shallow, the words are simple. The meaning of the text is mediocre and ordinary, and it is not enough to express the essence of the matter, and to praise the hidden intention. In hindsight, it is just the will of each word.

古文：谨冒以闻。其《白鸠颂》曰：
现代文：冒昧以《白鸠颂》上奏朝廷，说：
English: He had the temerity to play "Ode to Egrets" for the imperial court, saying:

古文：三极协情，五灵会性。
现代文：天地人三极性情协合，麟凤等五灵性情会通。
English: The three polar natures of heaven, earth and man are in harmony, and the five spiritual natures such as the unicorn and phoenix are in harmony.

古文：理感冥符，道实玄圣。
现代文：天理感应而有冥冥符瑞，治道充实而见深玄的圣意。
English: It is inspired by nature and has a mysterious charm, and it is full of wisdom and sees the profound meaning of the sacred.

古文：于赫有皇，光天配命。
现代文：多么伟大辉煌，光耀上天顺应天命。
English: What a great splendor, shining in the sky, obeying the destiny.

古文：朝景升躔，八维同映。休祥载臻，荣光播庆。
现代文：朝阳升入天空，光芒照耀八方，吉祥瑞兆来临，祥光广得福庆。
English: The morning sun rises into the sky, the light shines in all directions, the auspicious auspicious signs come, and the auspicious light is widely celebrated.

古文：宇宙照烂，日月光华。陶山练泽，是生柔嘉。
现代文：宇宙之间光辉灿烂，那是曰月光华、它陶冶了山川湖泽，于是养育了嘉谷。
English: The shining splendor between the universe is said to be the moon's radiance, which has cultivated the mountains, rivers and lakes, thus nurturing Jiayuguan.

古文：回龙表粹，离穗合柯。翩翩者鸠，亦皎其晖。
现代文：盘龙象征政治善美，茂盛的嘉穗聚合在枝茎上白鸠翩翩飞来。
English: The dragon symbolizes political goodness and beauty, and the luxuriant jiaosi are gathered on the branches and stalks, and the egrets come flying.

古文：理翮台领，扬鲜帝畿。
现代文：闪烁着洁白的光泽。在台省梳理羽翅，在京城显示优美姿态。
English: It shines with a pure white luster. In Taiwan, it combs its wings, and in Beijing, it shows a graceful posture.

古文：匪仁莫集匪德莫归。
现代文：没有仁义它就不会栖止没有德行它就不会来归。
English: If there is no benevolence and righteousness, it will not stay. If there is no virtue, it will not return.

古文：暮从仪凤，栖阁阴闱。
现代文：它夜晚随从凤凰。在宫闱栖息。
English: It follows the phoenix at night and roosts in the palace.

古文：烝哉明后，昧旦乾乾。
现代文：伟大的圣明皇帝，朝勤劳治国。
English: The great Emperor Shengming ruled the country diligently.

古文：惟德之崇，其峻如山。惟泽之瞻，其润如渊。
现代文：德行的崇高，犹如巍然的山岳、恩泽的深厚，犹如深邃的潭渊。
English: The loftiness of virtue is like a towering mountain, the profundity of benevolence is like a deep pool.

古文：礼乐四达，颂声遐宣。
现代文：礼乐传布四方，称颂之声在远方宣扬。
English: The music of the rites spread far and wide, and the voices of praise were heard far and wide.

古文：穷发纳贡，九译导言。
现代文：荒蛮之地献纳贡物，极远之地交往通言。
English: A barbarous land offers tribute, a faraway land communicates.

古文：伊昔唐萌，爱逢庆祚。
现代文：先前唐尧兴起之初，仁爱之心导致福祉。
English: In the early days of Tang Dynasty, benevolence led to well-being.

古文：余生既辰，而年之暮。
现代文：我生于戊辰之年，已是年过七十的老人。
English: I was born in the year of the horse, and I am already over seventy years old.

古文：提心命耋，式歌王度。
现代文：倾心以耄耋之年歌颂皇帝的风仪。
English: He devoted himself to singing the praises of the emperor's manners in the Year of the Rooster.

古文：晨晞永风，夕漱甘露。
现代文：清晨承受圣朝长远教化，晚上饮漱甘甜的露津。
English: In the morning, he would endure the long-term indoctrination of the Holy Dynasty, and in the evening, he would drink sweet loquat tea.

古文：思乐灵台，不遐有固。
现代文：追思《灵台》之诗欢颂文王的教化之德，这种仁德并不遥远就在目前。
English: It is not far-fetched to think that the poem "Ling Tai" extols King Wen's virtue of enlightenment.

古文：元嘉二十四年九月，白鸠又见。
现代文：元嘉二十四年九月，又出现了白鸠。
English: In September of the twenty-fourth year of Yuan Jia, another egret appeared.

古文：庚戌，中领军沈演之上表曰：
现代文：庚戌日，中领军沈演之上表说：
English: On the day of the Geng Zi, the leader of the middle army, Shen Yuan, said on the table:

古文：臣闻贞裕之美，介于盛王，休瑞之臻，罔违哲后。
现代文：臣听说清明富足的和美，衹有在强盛君主统治下才能出现，吉祥符瑞的降临，从不有背于明哲的帝王。
English: The vassal heard that purity, affluence and beauty can only appear under the rule of a powerful monarch, and the advent of auspicious and auspicious, and there has never been an emperor who has betrayed the sage.

古文：故鸣凤表垂衣之化，翔鹪征解网之仁。
现代文：所以凤凰表现了垂衣而治的教化，翱翔的鹃乌象征着解民倒悬的仁义。
English: Therefore, the phoenix shows the enlightenment of hanging out and ruling, and the soaring kite symbolizes the benevolence of lifting the people upside down.

古文：陛下道德嗣基，圣明缵世，教清鸟纪，治昌云官，礼渐同川，泽浃硃徼。
现代文：陛下以道德继承帝业，以圣明踵武先世，教化清明如少吴氏，政治昌盛似轩堑臣，礼教逐渐混同天下，恩泽滋润远方边境。
English: His majesty inherits the imperial inheritance with morality, with the holy bright heel of the previous generation, the enlightenment is clear as the Shao Wu clan, the political prosperity is similar to the Xuan Yu minister, the etiquette is gradually mixed with the world, and the grace moisturizes the distant border.

古文：天嘉明懿，民乐薰风，星辰以之炳焕，日月以之光华。
现代文：上天因明德而予以嘉赏，民众因淳和风气而感到快乐，星辰因此而灿烂光亮，曰月因此而光辉明丽。
English: The heavens are praised for their wisdom and virtue, the people are happy for their harmony and harmony, the stars are bright and bright, and the moon is bright and bright.

古文：神图祗纬，盈观序，白质黑章，充牣灵囿。
现代文：神祇的谶图纬书装满宗庙祠堂，白色质地黑色花纹的瑞物充实宫廷御苑。
English: The sacred books of the gods fill the ancestral temples and shrines, and the palace gardens are filled with white-textured, black-patterned treasures.

古文：应感之符毕臻，而因心之祥未属。
现代文：虽然感应的符兆全都来临，但依凭人心的祥瑞尚未出现。
English: Although all the signs of induction have come, the auspiciousness of relying on the human heart has not yet appeared.

古文：以素鸠自远，翰归飞，资性闲淑，羽貌鲜丽，既闻之先说，又亲睹嘉祥，不胜藻抃，上颂一首。
现代文：于是远方有白鸠，梳理羽毛飞来，天性娴静淑雅，羽毛鲜艳美丽。我既听说先前出现过白鸠，现在又亲眼目睹嘉祥的瑞物，不胜欢欣鼓舞，上《白鸠颂》一首。
English: As a result, there were egrets in the distance, their feathers combed and flying, their nature quiet and graceful, and their feathers bright and beautiful. I heard that egrets had appeared before, and now I witnessed the beauty of Jiaxiang. I was overjoyed and inspired, and wrote "Ode to Egrets."

古文：辞不稽典，分乏采章，愧不足式昭皇庆，崇赞盛美，盖率舆诵，备之篇末。
现代文：文辞既没有依傍典籍，又缺乏辞彩，不足以表明皇帝的福庆，赞美盛美的时代，甚感惭愧。聊为车夫舆人的歌诗，置于篇末。
English: The text does not follow the classics, and lacks eloquence, which is not enough to show that the emperor's Fuqing, praising the prosperous era, is very ashamed.

古文：其颂曰：
现代文：颂文是：
English: The hymn goes:

古文：有哲其仪，时惟皓鸠。
现代文：仪态具备神圣之姿，这就是应时而至的白鸠。
English: The ceremony has a sacred appearance, which is the egret that comes from time to time.

古文：性勰五教，名编素丘。
现代文：它天性与五教相和谐，英名记载于素丘。
English: Its nature is in harmony with the five teachings, and its name is recorded in Suqiu.

古文：殷历方昌，婉翘来游。
现代文：啊!
English: Ah!

古文：汉录克韡，爰降爰休。于显盛宋，睿庆遐传。圣皇在上，道照鸿轩。
现代文：显赫而强盛的宋朝，睿哲福庆传播广远圣明的皇帝在上，道德光照天下，犹如古圣王帝递和茎童。
English: The eminent and powerful Song Dynasty, the wise philosopher Fuqing, the emperor who spread far and wide the sacred light, the moral light of the world, just like the ancient holy king Emperor Ji and the stem child.

古文：称施既平，孝思永言。
现代文：国策措施平正，永远恪守孝道。
English: National policies and measures will be fair, and filial piety will always be adhered to.

古文：人和于地，神豫于天。
现代文：人民在世间和睦相处，神灵在上天予以庇护。
English: The people live in harmony in the world, and the gods protect them in heaven.

古文：礼乐孔秩，灵物咸昭。
现代文：其二礼乐教化十分清明，灵异之物全都显现。
English: His second rite music education is very clear, and all the supernatural things appear.

古文：白雀集苞，丹凤栖郊。
现代文：白雀齐集于苞草，丹凤栖息于郊野。
English: The white finches gather in the reeds, the white phoenixes roost in the countryside.

古文：文驺俪迹，嘉颖擢苗。
现代文：黑色花纹的骄虞并列留下足迹，嘉禾长出秀苗。
English: The pride of the black pattern left footprints side by side, and Jiahe sprouted beautiful seedlings.

古文：灼灼缟羽，从化驯朝。
现代文：皎皎明丽的白鸠，顺从于教化励服于圣朝。
English: A brilliant egret, obedient to the edification and encouragement of the Holy Dynasty.

古文：岂伊赴林，必周之栩。
现代文：其三难道它在林中栖止，一定要在周朝的柞树?
English: Thirdly, does it live in the forest, and must it grow up in the eucalyptus of the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：岂伊归义，必商之所。
现代文：难道它归顺仁义，一定要在商朝的国土?
English: Did it have to surrender to benevolence and righteousness in the land of the Shang Dynasty?

古文：惟德是依，惟仁是处。
现代文：衹要有德行它就依顺，衹要仁义它就栖止。
English: If it wants virtue, it obeys; if it wants benevolence, it abides.

古文：育景阳岳，濯姿帝宇。
现代文：它在山峦之南沐浴阳光，在皇宫之中洗濯毛羽。其四
English: It bathes in the sun south of the mountains and washes its feathers in the royal palace.

古文：刑历颁兴，理感迭通。
现代文：刑律和历法业已颁布，天理感应屡次相通。
English: The Criminal Law and the Calendar Law have been promulgated, and they have been communicated with each other many times.

古文：雉飞越常，鹭起西雍。
现代文：白雉飞临越常古国，白鹭振飞于西雍。
English: The egret flies to the ancient country of Yue, and the egret flies to Xi'an.

古文：烝然戾止，实兼斯容。
现代文：白鸠欣然来临，的确兼有雉鹭的仪容。
English: The egrets come gladly, indeed they have the appearance of egrets.

古文：壹兹民听，穆是王风。
现代文：民众意愿统一，帝王风化和睦盛美。
English: The will of the people is unified, and the emperor's demeanor is harmonious and prosperous.

古文：玉羊，师旷时来至。
现代文：其五玉羊，师旷时曾经来到。
English: Its five-cornered sheep, Shiguang, once came.

古文：玉鸡，王者至孝则至。
现代文：阙玉鸡，帝土孝顺至极就会来到。
English: The imperial filial piety to the extreme will come.

古文：璧流离，王者不隐过则至。
现代文：阙璧流离，帝王不隐瞒过错就会到来。
English: The emperor will come if he does not hide his faults.

古文：玉英，五常并修则见。
现代文：阙玉英，五常都完备就会出现。
English: Zhai Yuying, when the five elements are complete, the rhyme will appear.

古文：玄圭，水泉流通，四海会同则出。
现代文：阙玄圭，水泉流通，四海之水汇通就会出现。
English: If the genesis is correct, the water springs will circulate, and the water of the four seas will be brought together.

古文：汉桓帝永兴二年四月，光禄勋府吏舍，夜壁下有青气，得玉钩、玦各一。
现代文：阙汉桓帝永兴二年四月，在光禄勋府的吏舍中，夜晚在墙壁下有青气，得到玉钩、玉抉各一。
English: In April of the second year of Yongxing, Emperor Kuan of the Han Dynasty, in the officials' residence of the Guanglu Honorable Mansion, at night, there was a blue atmosphere under the walls, and he received a jade hook and a jade wedge.

古文：钩长七寸三分，玦周五寸四分，身中皆雕镂。
现代文：钩长七寸三分，殃周长五寸四分，身上全都雕镂。
English: The hook is seven-and-a-third inches long, the whip is five-and-a-quarter inches in circumference, and the body is all carved.

古文：晋怀帝永嘉六年二月壬子，玉龟出灞水。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉六年二月壬子曰，灞水出现了玉龟。
English: In February of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Huai Yongjia, Ren Zi said that a turtle had appeared in Surabaya.

古文：晋愍帝建兴二年十月，大将军刘琨掘地得玉玺，使参军郎硕奉之归于京师。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴二年十月，大将军刘琨掘地得到玉玺，派参军郎硕携带着送归京城。
English: In October of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, the great general Liu Xun obtained the Jade Urn from the excavation site and sent the army to bring it back to Beijing.

古文：建兴二年十二月，凉州刺史张实遣使献行玺一纽，封送玺使关内侯。
现代文：建兴二年十二月，凉州刺史张实遣使者献上一纽玉玺，封送玺的使者为关内侯。
English: In December of the second year of Jianxing, the envoy sent by Zhang Shizhi, the governor of Liangzhou, presented a new jade gong. The envoy who sent the gong was Guan Nei Hou.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年三月己酉，丹阳江宁民虞由垦土得白麒麟玺一纽，文曰 长寿万年 。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年三月己酉曰，丹阳江宁的百姓虞虫开垦土地得到一纽白麒麟玉玺，上面的文字是 长寿万年 。
English: Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty said in March of the first year of the Jianwu Dynasty that the people of Danyang and Jiangning obtained a string of white unicorns from the land reclaimed by the maggots. The words on the string read "Long Life."

古文：献晋王。
现代文：献给了晋王。
English: It was dedicated to King Jin.

古文：晋成帝咸康八年九月，庐江舂谷县留珪夜见门内有光，取得玉鼎一枚，外围四寸。
现代文：晋成帝咸康八年九月，庐江舂谷县的留珪夜晚见家门内有光芒，得到一只玉鼎，外围有四寸。
English: In September of the eighth year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, in the evening of the second day of the second month of the second year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, I saw a light in the door of my house in Shugu County of the Minjiang River. I got a jade ring with a circumference of four inches.

古文：豫州刺史路永以献。
现代文：豫州刺史路丞献给朝廷。
English: Yuzhou Jishi Lucheng dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：著作郎曹毗上《玉鼎颂》。
现代文：著作郎曹毗《玉鼎颂》。
English: Authored by Lang Cao Pi, "Ode to Jade."

古文：晋安帝义熙十二年六月，左卫兵陈阳于东府前淮水中得玉玺一枚。
现代文：晋安帝义熙十二年六月，左卫军人陈阳在东府前的淮水中得到一枚玉玺。
English: In June of the 12th year of Emperor Jian of An and Emperor Yixi of Jin, Chen Yang, a soldier of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, received a jade brooch in Huai Shui in front of Dongfu.

古文：宋孝武帝大明元年五月戊寅，江乘县民硃伯地中得玉璧，径五寸八分，以献。
现代文：宋孝武帝大明元年五月戊寅曰，江乘县百姓朱伯在地裹得到玉璧，直径五寸八分，献给朝廷。
English: Emperor Xiaowu of the Song Dynasty said in May of the first year of the Ming Dynasty that the people of Zhu Bo, Jiangren County, wrapped a jade gem with a diameter of 5.8 centimeters on the ground and dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：大明四年二月乙巳，徐州刺史刘道隆于汴水得白玉戟，以献。
现代文：大明四年二月乙巳，徐州刺史刘道隆在汴水得到白玉戟，献给朝廷。
English: In February of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, Liu Daolong, the prince of Xuzhou, obtained a white jade bracelet in Lishui and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始五年十月庚辰，郢州获玄璧，广八寸五分，安西将军蔡兴宗以献。
现代文：明帝泰始五年十月庚辰，郢州获得玄璧，宽八寸五分，安西将军蔡兴宗献上朝廷。
English: In October Gengchen, the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, Zhangzhou won the Xuan Bi, with a width of eight inches and five minutes, and Anxi General Cai Xingzong presented it to the imperial court.

古文：后废帝元徽四年十一月乙巳，吴兴乌程余山道人慧获苍玉璧，太守萧惠开以献。
现代文：后废帝元徽四年十一月乙巳曰，吴兴乌程余山的道人慧获得苍玉璧，太守萧惠开献给朝廷。
English: In November of the 4th year of the former Emperor Yuanhui, it was said that Wu Xing Uchen Yu Shan's Taoist wisdom won the Cangyu Bi, and the governor Xiao Huikai dedicated it to the imperial court.

古文：金胜，国平盗贼，四夷宾服则出。
现代文：吉祥物金胜，在国家平定盗贼，境外各族入朝进贡之际，就会出现。
English: The mascot Jin Sheng will appear when the country is pacifying thieves and all foreign ethnic groups are entering the country to pay tribute.

古文：晋穆帝永和元年二月，舂谷民得金胜一枚，长五寸，状如织胜。
现代文：晋穆帝永和元年二月，叠盏的百姓得到一枚金胜，长五寸，形状像织胜。
English: In February of the first year of Jin Mu Di Yonghe, the people who stacked the tiles received a golden victory, five inches long, shaped like a woven victory.

古文：明年，桓温平蜀。
现代文：第二年，但周平定蜀地。
English: The following year, however, Zhou Pingding settled in Shunde.

古文：永和元年三月，庐江太守路永上言，于舂谷城北，见水岸边有紫赤光，取得金状如印，遣主簿李迈表送。
现代文：永和元年三月，庐江太守旦眯上奏说，在昼谷越北，看见河岸边有紫红色光，取得形状如印的金块，派遣主簿李迈奉表送到朝廷。
English: In March of the first year of the Yonghe era, the governor of the Minjiang River, Danzhong Shangluo, said that in the north of the valley, he saw a purple-red light on the riverbank, obtained a gold nugget shaped like a seal, and sent the master book Li Maifong table to the imperial court.

古文：吴孙皓天玺元年，吴郡言掘地得银一，长尺，广三分，刻上有年月字。
现代文：吴孙皓天玺元年，吴郡说掘地得一银块，长有一尺，宽有三分，上面刻有年月字样。
English: In the first year of the reign of Sun Yat-sen, Wu County said that a piece of silver, one foot long and three minutes wide, with the year and month engraved on it, was dug out of the ground.

古文：丹甑五谷丰熟则出。
现代文：吉祥物丹甑，在五谷丰收时就会出现。
English: The mascot, Dandan, appears at the time of the grain harvest.

古文：白鱼，武王度孟津，中流入于王舟。
现代文：阙吉祥物白鱼，在武王渡过孟津，行至河流中央时跳入武王船中。
English: The dragonfly mascot, the white fish, jumped into King Wu's boat when he crossed the Mengjin River and reached the middle of the river.

古文：宋明帝太始二年十月己巳，幸华林天渊池，白鱼跃入御舟。
现代文：宋明帝太始二年十月己巳，皇帝来到华挞图的丢遄迤，白鱼跳入御舟内。
English: In October of the second year of the Song and Ming Dynasties, the emperor came to the lost anchor of Huayu map, and the white fish jumped into the boat.

古文：汉章帝元和三年正月，车驾北巡，以太牢具祠北岳，有神鱼跃出十数。
现代文：汉章帝互迦三年正月，皇帝车驾北巡，用太牢来祭祀韭岳祠，有十余尾神鱼从水中跃出。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Zhang of Han, when the emperor was on a tour of the north by car, he used the Taijiao to make a sacrifice to the Qiuyue ancestral shrine. More than ten tailed divine fish jumped out of the water.

古文：金人，王者有盛德则游后池。
现代文：金人这种吉祥物，在帝王有盛德的时候就会游于宫廷的后池。
English: The golden man, a kind of mascot, would swim in the back pond of the court when the emperor was in a good mood.

古文：木连理，王者德泽纯洽，八方合为一，则生。
现代文：阙木连理，帝王德行恩泽纯正融和，国家统一，就会长成。
English: The imperial virtue, the benevolence, the purity, and the unification of the country will come into being.

古文：汉章帝元和中，木连理生郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，郡国生有木连理。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zong of the Han Dynasty, Guo Guo Sheng had a son named Gu Lian Li.

古文：安帝元初三年正月丁丑，东平陵树连理。
现代文：汉安帝元初三年正月丁丑日，东平陵的树木连理。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Han Dynasty in the first year of the first year of the Han Dynasty, the trees of Dongping Mausoleum were connected.

古文：汉安帝延光三年七月，左冯翊衙有木连理。
现代文：汉安帝延光三年七月，左冯翊的衙县有木连理。
English: In July of the third year of the reign of Emperor An of the Han Dynasty, there was a succession dispute in the county of Ya County, to the left of Fengye.

古文：延光三年七月，颍川定陵有木连理。
现代文：延光三年七月，颖川的定陵有木连理。
English: In July of the 3rd year of Yan Guang, the Dingling Mausoleum in Yingchuan was destroyed.

古文：汉桓帝建和二年七月，河东有木连理。
现代文：汉桓帝建和二年七月，河东有木连理。
English: In July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianhe of the Han Dynasty, there was a succession of rulers in the eastern part of China.

古文：吴孙权黄武四年六月，皖口言有木连理。
现代文：吴孙权黄武四年六月，皖口说有木连理。
English: In June of the fourth year of Wu Sun Quan's reign over Huangwu, Hekou said that there was a wood-to-wood relationship.

古文：魏文帝黄初初，郡国二言木连理。
现代文：魏文帝黄初初年，两个郡国说有木连理。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang of Tang, the two counties were said to be in conflict.

古文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，木连理生辽东方城。
现代文：晋武帝泰始元年十二月，辽东的方城有木连理。
English: In December of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, Fangcheng, Liaodong Province, had a succession of rulers.

古文：泰始二年八月，木连理生河南成皋。
现代文：泰始二年八月，河南的成皋有木连理。
English: In August of the second year of Taizhi, Henan's Chenghuang had a wooden couple.

古文：泰始八年正月，木连理生东平范。
现代文：泰始八年正月，生东的平范有木连理。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Taixi, the birth of the east of the plain has a wooden joint.

古文：泰始八年五月甲辰，木连理生东平寿张。泰始八年十月，木连理生建宁。
现代文：泰始八年五月甲辰日，东平的寿张有木连泰始八年十月，建宁有木连理。
English: On the first hour of May in the eighth year of the Taishei era, Shou Zhang of Dongping had Muli Lian; on the first hour of October in the eighth year of the Taishei era, Jianning had Muli Lian.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年正月，木连理生汝阴南顿。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年正月，汝阴的南顿有木连。
English: In the first month of the first year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, there was a row of trees in the south of Ruyin.

古文：咸宁二年四月，木连理生清河灵。
现代文：咸宁二年四月，生清的河灵有木连理。
English: In April of the second year of Xianning, He Ling, who was born and bred in Qing Dynasty, got married to Mu Lianli.

古文：咸宁二年六月，木连理生燕国。
现代文：咸宁二年六月，燕国有木连理。
English: In June of the second year of Xianning, the state of Yan was divided.

古文：咸宁三年七月壬辰，木连理生始平鄠。咸宁四年八月，木连理生陈留长垣。
现代文：咸宁三年七月壬辰日，生始的平鄠有木连咸宁四年八月，陈留的长垣有木连理。
English: In July of the third year of Xianning, on the day of Yinchu, the beginning of the birth of Pingyao had a tree connection, and in August of the fourth year of Xianning, the Nagakaki that Chen left behind had a tree connection.

古文：咸宁五年，木连理生义阳。
现代文：咸宁五年，义阳有木连理。
English: In the fifth year of Xianning, Yiyang has a wooden bridge.

古文：咸宁五年，木连理生乐安临济。
现代文：咸宁五年，乐安的临济有木连理。
English: In the fifth year of Xianning, Linji of Le'an has a wooden lien.

古文：晋武帝太康元年正月，木连理生涪陵永平。太康元年四月，木连理生顿丘。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年正月，涪陵的永平有木连太康元年四月，顿丘有木连理。
English: In the first month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, Yongping of Fuling had a wooden palanquin; in April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, Dongqiu had a wooden palanquin.

古文：太康元年五月，木连理二生济阴乘氏，沛国。
现代文：太康元年五月，济阴的乘氏固有两对木连理。
English: In May of the first year of Taikang, there were two pairs of trees in Jiyin.

古文：太康元年七月，木连理生冯翊粟邑。
现代文：太康元年七月，冯翊的粟邑有木连理。
English: In July of the first year of the Taikang era, Feng Yao's millet wine had a wooden joint.

古文：太康二年正月，木连理生荥阳密。
现代文：太康二年正月，荣阳的密县有木连理。
English: In the first month of the second year of Taikang, Rongyang's Mishan County was divided.

古文：太康二年十月，木连理十三生南安羱道。
现代文：太康二年十月，南安的羱道有十三对木连。
English: In October of the 2nd year of Taikang, there were thirteen pairs of trees in Nan'an.

古文：太康三年四月，木连理生琅邪华。
现代文：太康三年四月，琅邪的华县有木连理。
English: In April of the 3rd year of Taikang, there was a dispute over the ownership of trees in Huaxian County.

古文：太康三年六月，木连理生广陵海西。
现代文：太康三年六月，广陵的海西有木连理。
English: In June of the third year of Taikang, Guangling, west of the sea, had a wooden couple.

古文：太康四年正月，木连理生冯翊临晋，蜀郡成都。
现代文：太康四年正月，冯翊的临晋、蜀郡的成都都有木连理。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of Taikang, Feng Qi's Linjin and Shu County's Chengdu both had Muxianli.

古文：太康四年十二月，木连理生扶风。
现代文：太康四年十二月，木连理生于扶风。
English: In December of the 4th year of Taikang, Muli Lili was born in Fufeng.

古文：太康七年三月，木连理生河南新安。
现代文：太康七年三月，河南的新安有木连理。
English: In March of the seventh year of Taikang, Xin'an, Henan Province, had a tree-related divorce.

古文：太康七年六月，木连理生始兴中宿，南乡范阳。太康八年四月，木连理生庐陵东昌。
现代文：太康七年六月，始兴的中宿、南乡的范阳有木连理太康八年四月，庐陵的东昌旦有木连理。
English: In June of the 7th year of Taikang, Fanyang in Zhongjuku and Nanxiang in Shixing had a tree-lined street. In April of the 8th year of Taikang, Dongchangdan in Fuling had a tree-lined street.

古文：太康八年九月，木连理生东莱卢乡。
现代文：太康八年九月，东莱的卢乡有木连理。
English: In September of the 8th year of Taikang, Lu Township in Donglai was divided.

古文：太康九年九月，木连理生陈留浚仪。
现代文：太康九年九月，木连理生于陈留的浚仪。
English: In September of the ninth year of Taikang, Milian Li was born in Chenliu's Dredge.

古文：太康十年十一月，木连理生鄱阳寔阳。
现代文：太康十年十一月，鄱阳的寔阳有木连理。
English: In November of the 10th year of Taikang, Shanyang's Shanyang has a wooden bridge.

古文：晋武帝太熙元年二月，木连理生河南梁。
现代文：晋武帝太熙元年二月，生河的南梁有木连理。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Tahei of the Jin Dynasty, Nanliang Yimilian was born.

古文：晋惠帝元康元年五月，木连理三生成都临邛。
现代文：晋惠帝元康元年五月，成都的临邛有三对木连理。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Jingu's reign, Linyi in Chengdu had three pairs of trees.

古文：元康元年七月辛丑，梁国内史任式上言，武平界有柞栎二树，合为一体，连理。
现代文：元康元年七月辛丑日，梁国内史任式上奏说，这武平界内有柞烁二树，合为一体，成为连理树。
English: In July of the first year of the Kangxi Dynasty, Liang Ren, a Chinese historian, wrote in his report that there were two trees in the Wu-Pyeong region, which merged into one and became the Lianli tree.

古文：晋愍帝建兴二年三月庚辰，木连理生硃提。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴二年三月庚辰日，硃提有木连理。
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, on the day of Geng Chen, there was a tree-to-tree relationship.

古文：建兴二年三月，木连理二生益州双柏。
现代文：建兴二年三月，益州的双柏有二对木连理。
English: In March of the second year of Jianxing, two pairs of double cypress trees in Yizhou were connected.

古文：建兴二年六月，木连理生襄平。
现代文：建兴二年六月，塞垩有木襄平。
English: In June of the second year of Jianxing, Xiangping of Saiyuan had wood.

古文：晋愍帝建武元年闰月乙丑，木连理生嵩山。
现代文：晋愍帝建武元年闰月乙丑曰，嵩山有木连。
English: Emperor Jianwu of the Jin Dynasty said in the leap month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th

古文：建武元年八月甲午，木连理生汝阴。
现代文：建武元年八月甲午日，汝阴有木连理。
English: On the first day of the eighth month of the first year of the Jianwu era, Ru Yin had a miscarriage.

古文：建武元年十一月，木连理生武昌，大将军王敦以闻晋王。
现代文：建武元年十一月，武昌有木连理，大将军王敦上报晋王。
English: In November of the first year of the Jianwu era, Wuchang was ruled by Gu Lianli, and the general Wang Dun reported to Jin Wang.

古文：建武元年十一月癸酉，木连理生汝阴，太守以闻。
现代文：建武元年十一月癸酉日，汝阴有木连理，太守上报朝廷。
English: On the third day of November of the first year of the Jianwu era, Ruyin Yuki Lianli, the governor-general, reported to the imperial court.

古文：晋元帝太兴元年七月戊辰，木连理生武昌，大将军王敦以闻。
现代文：晋元帝太兴元年七月戊辰日，亘过有木连理，大将军王敦上报朝廷。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taheung of the Jin Dynasty, the general Wang Dun reported to the imperial court.

古文：太兴三年十一月，木连理生零陵永昌。
现代文：太兴三年十一月，零陵的永昌有木连理。
English: In November of the third year of Taixing, Yongchang of Ziling had a tree-to-tree relationship.

古文：晋成帝咸和八年五月己巳，木连理生昌黎咸和。
现代文：晋成帝咸和八年五月己巳曰，昌黎的咸和有木连理。
English: Emperor Jincheng said in May of the eighth year of the Heian period that the Heian period in Changli was the beginning of the Heian period.

古文：咸康三年三月庚戌，木连理生平州世子府治故园中。
现代文：咸康三年三月庚戌曰，平州有木连理生在世子府治所的故园中。
English: In March of the third year of Xiankang, Geng Zi said that Pingzhou has a tree-lined path in the old garden of the Hezi Prefecture.

古文：咸康七年十二月，吴国内史王恬上言，木连理生吴县沙里。
现代文：咸康七年十二月，吴国内史王垣上奏说，吴县的沙里有木连理。
English: In December of the 7th year of Xiankang, Wang Qi, a historian in Wuzhong, said that the sand in Wuxian was made of wood.

古文：晋穆帝永和五年二月癸丑，临海太守蓝田侯述言郡界木连理。
现代文：晋穆帝永和五年二月癸丑，临海太守蓝田侯述说郡中有木连理。
English: When Emperor Jinmu died in February of the same year, the Linhai governor, Lantian Hou, said that there was a tree in the county.

古文：晋孝武帝宁康三年六月辛卯，江宁县建兴里侨民留康家树，异木连理。
现代文：晋孝武帝宁康三年六月辛卯曰，江宁县建兴里的侨民鱼尘家中的树木，异根连理。
English: In June of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jin Xiaowu of Ningkang, Xin Wu said that the expatriates in Jianxing, Jiangning County, had planted trees with different roots in their homes.

古文：晋孝武帝太元十一年四月壬申，琅邪费有榆木，异根连理，相去四尺九寸。
现代文：晋孝帝太元十一年四月壬申日，琅邪的费有有榆木，异根连理，两树相距四尺九寸。
English: On Jinshin Day, April 11, in the reign of Emperor Jinxiao, there was a tree with two different roots, and the distance between the two trees was 4 feet 9 inches.

古文：太元十八年十月戊午，临川东兴令惠欣之言，县东南溪傍有白银树、芳灵树、李树，并连理。
现代文：太元十八年十月戊午，临川的东兴县令墓毖之说，该县东南的溪水旁有白银树、芳灵树、李树，三树一起合体相连。
English: In the afternoon of October, 18th year of the Taiyuan era, Lingbo Zhi of Dongxing County in Linchuan said that there were silver trees, aromatic trees and plum trees next to the stream in the southeast of the county. The three trees were connected together.

古文：晋安帝隆安三年十一月，木连理生汝阳，太守垣苗以闻。
现代文：太元十九年正月丁亥日，茎登回延贤堂的西北有李树连理。太元二十一年正月丙子日，后面有木连理。晋安帝隆安三年十一月，汝阳有木连理太守垣苗上报朝廷。
English: On the day of Dinghai in the first month of the 19th year of the first millennium, the northwest of the stem ascending back to Yan Xian Hall had the Li Shu Lian Li. On the day of the first month of the 21st year of the first year of the second year of the second year, there was the Wood Lian Li behind. In November of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of

古文：元兴元年正月，木连理生泰山武阳。
现代文：元兴元年正月，泰山的武阳有木连理。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the first year of the year of Genxing, Wuyang of Mount Taishan had a wooden bridge.

古文：宋文帝元嘉八年四月乙亥，东莞莒县松树连理，太守刘玄以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉八年四月乙亥曰，塞差的苴悬松树连理，太守刘玄上报朝廷。
English: Emperor Songwen Yuanjia said in April of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 18th

古文：元嘉八年八月，木连理生东安新泰县。
现代文：元嘉八年八月，束安的新泰县有木连理。
English: In August of the eighth year of Yuan Jia, Arimizuri in Xintai County, Sokan, was founded.

古文：元嘉九年六月，木连理生营阳冷道，太守展禽以闻。
现代文：元嘉九年六月，营阳的泠道有木连理，太守展禽上报朝廷。
English: In June of the ninth year of the Yuan Jia, Yingyang's Shandong Province was ruled by Muxian Li, and the eunuch was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十二年二月丁卯，南郡江陵庾和园甘树连理，荆州刺史临川王义庆以献。
现代文：元嘉十二年二月丁卯曰，南郡江陵人庾和的园中甘树连理，荆州刺史临川王刘义庆献上朝廷。
English: In February of the 12th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Dingwu said that the southern county of Jiangling was the most peaceful garden in the world, and the king of Linchuan, Liu Yiqing, presented the imperial court with a maple tree.

古文：元嘉十二年三月，马头济阳柞树连理，豫州刺史长沙王义欣以闻。
现代文：元嘉十二年三月；区玺的渣堡柞树连理，辽州刺史长沙王刘义欣上报朝廷。
English: In March of the 12th year of the Yuan Jia, Liu Yixin, the Changsha King of Liaozhou, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十四年二月，宫内螽斯堂前梨树连理，豫州刺史长沙王义欣以闻。
现代文：元嘉十四年二月，宫内的盏堑窒前梨树连理，豫州刺史长沙王刘义欣上报朝廷。
English: In February of the 14th year of the Yuan Jia, Liu Yixin, the Prince of Changsha, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十四年，南郡江陵光祎之园甘李二连理。
现代文：元嘉十四年，南郡江陵光逛的园中甘李二树连理。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the two trees in the garden of the Nan County Jiangling Guanghuan were connected.

古文：元嘉十五年二月，太子家令刘征园中林檎树连理，征以闻。
现代文：元嘉十五年二月，太子家令型征园中的树林裹有檎树连理，刘征上报朝廷。
English: In February of the 15th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Liu Zheng was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十七年七月，武昌崇让乡程僧爱家候风木连理，江州刺史临川王义庆以闻。
现代文：元嘉十七年七月，武昌的崇让乡程僧爱家的候风木连理，型江州刺史临川王刘盏庆上报朝廷。
English: In July of the seventeenth year of the Yuan Jia, Wuchang's reverence for the town of Cheng, a monk who loved his family, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十七年十月，寻阳弘农祐几湖芙蓉连理，临川王义庆以闻。
现代文：元嘉十七年十月，寻阳弘农的祐几湖芙蓉连理，临川王刘义庆上报朝廷。
English: In October of the seventeenth year of the Yuan Jia, Fu Rong Lian Li of Yucai Lake and Liu Yiqing of Linchuan reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十八年十二月，木连理生历阳刘成之家，南豫州刺史武陵王骏以闻。
现代文：元嘉十八年十二月，历阳刘成之的家中有木连理，南豫州刺史武陵王刘骏上报朝廷。
English: In December of the 18th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Liu Chengzhi of Liyang reported to the imperial court that the family of Liu Chengzhi of Liyang had a son named Gu Lianli, and the family of Liu Chengzhi, the king of Wuling in southern Henan Province, had a son named Gu Lianli.

古文：元嘉二十年七月，盱眙考城县柞树二株连理，南兗州刺史临川王义庆以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十年七月，盱眙考城县有二株柞树连理，南兗州刺史临川王刘盏庆上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 20th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, there were two eucalyptus trees growing side by side in Guocheng County, and Liu Zhenqing, the king of Linchuan, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年八月，木连理生汝阴，豫州刺史刘遵考以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十年八月，汝阴有木连理，豫州刺史刘遵孝上报朝廷。
English: In August of the 20th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Ru Yin Yuki Lian Li and Yu Zhou Zishi Liu Zun Xiao were reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十一年，木连理生历阳乌江，南豫州刺史武陵王骏以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十一年，历阳的乌江有木连理，南豫州武陵王刘骏上报朝廷。
English: In the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, the Wu River in Liyang was connected by a wooden bridge, and the king of Wuling in South Henan Province, Liu Xuan, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十一年，木连理生晋陵无锡，南徐州刺史南谯王义宣以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十一年，木连理生于晋陵的无锡，南徐州刺史南谯王刘盏宣上报朝廷。
English: In the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, Milian Li was born in Jinling of Wuxi, south of Xuzhou, and was proclaimed to the imperial court by Liu Jian, the king of Nanxi.

古文：元嘉二十二年七月辛巳，南顿栎连理，豫州刺史赵伯符以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年七月辛巳日，南顿有橾木连理，豫州刺史赵伯符上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 22nd year of Yuan Jia, the imperial court was informed that there was a maple tree in Nantong, and a maple tree in Yuzhou.

古文：元嘉二十二年九月，木连理生建康，建康令张永以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年九月，建康有木连理，建康令张永上报朝廷。
English: In September, Yuanjia 22, Jiankang ordered Zhang Yong to report to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年，木连理生武昌，江州刺史庐陵王绍以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十二年，武昌有木连理，江州刺史庐陵王刘绍上报朝廷。
English: In the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Wuchang's Yimlianli and Jiangzhou's Zishi's Ling Wang Liu Shao were reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年二月辛亥，木连理生南阴柔县，太守以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年二月辛亥日，南阴柔县有木连理，太守上报朝廷。
English: In February of the 23rd year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, on the day of the Chinese Year of the Pig, Arimokurenri, the governor of Nanyinju County, reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十三年，木连理生淮南当涂，扬州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十三年，淮南的当涂有木连理，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚上报朝廷。
English: In the 23rd year of Yuan Jia, Huainan's Dang painted with Muxianli and Yangzhou's Zhishi Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun were reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年二月壬午，临川王第梨树连理，临川王烨以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年二月壬午曰，临川王府第梨树连理，临川王刘烨上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of February 24th, Yuan Jia, the first Lishu Lian Li of the Linchuan royal court, Linchuan King Liu Ye, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十四年七月壬子，晋陵无锡谷栎树连理，南徐州刺史广陵王诞以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年七月壬子日，晋陵的无锡有谷、橾二木连理，南徐州刺史广陵王刘涎上报朝廷。
English: In July of the 24th year of Yuan Jia, on the day of Ren Zi, the imperial court was informed that the tombs of Jin in Wuxi, Yougu in Wuxi, Ermu Lian Li in Ermu, and the king of Guangling in southern Xuzhou had been excavated.

古文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯，木连理生会稽诸暨，扬州刺史始兴王浚以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯日，会稽的诸暨有木连理，扰业刺史始兴王塑隧上报朝廷。
English: On July 1st, Yuan Jia's 24th year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was reported to the imperial court that Zhuji Arimokurenri, the auditor of the association, had interfered with the business of Shixing Wangpu Tunnel.

古文：会稽太守羊玄保上改连理所生处康亭村为 木连理 。
现代文：盒稽太守羊玄保请求将木连理的地方尘皇挝改为 木连理 。
English: The censor, Yang Xuanbao, requested that the place of "Mulian Li" be changed to "Mulian Li."

古文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯，临川王第梨树连理，临川王烨以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十四年七月乙卯日，堕川王的府第有梨树连理，临川王刘烨上报朝廷。
English: On July 1st, Yuan Jia's 24th year, it was reported to the imperial court that the palace of the fallen King of Lianchuan had been taken over by Lishu Lianli and the King of Lianchuan had been taken over by Liu Xi.

古文：元嘉二十五年四月戊辰，木连理生晋陵，南徐州刺史广陵王诞以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十五年四月戊辰日，置堕有木连理，南徐州刺史广陵王塑蜒上报朝廷。
English: On April 25th, Yuan Jia's 25th day of the month of Bo Chen, the imperial court was informed of the death of Guanling Wang Shuxia, the southern governor of Xuzhou.

古文：元嘉二十八十正月戊子，木连理生寻阳柴桑，又生州城内，江州刺史建平王宏以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十八年正月戊子日，寻阳的柴桑有木连理，州城内又有木连理，江州刺史建平王刘宏上报朝廷。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the 28th year of the Yuan Jia, the Chaisang who was looking for the sun had a wood-to-wood connection, the state city also had a wood-to-wood connection, and the king of Jianping, Liu Hong, reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十九年十月丁未，木连理生南琅邪，太守刘成以闻。
现代文：元嘉二十九年十月丁未日，南琅邪有木连理，太守刘成上报朝廷。
English: On the eve of October 29th, Yuan Jia, Nanzhu Yayu Moku Lianli, the governor Liu Cheng reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝孝建二年三月己酉，木连理生南郡江陵，荆州刺史硃修之以闻。
现代文：孝武帝孝建二年三月己酉曰，南郡的江陵有木连理，荆州刺史朱脩之上报朝廷。
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Xiaojian, Emperor Xiaowu reported to the imperial court that Jiangling in Nanshun County was ruled by Muxianli, and Jingzhou was ruled by Zhu Xi.

古文：孝建三年五月，木连理生北海都昌，冀州刺史垣护之以闻。
现代文：孝建三年五月，北海的都昌有木连理，冀州刺史垣护之上报朝廷。
English: In May of the third year of the reign of Xiao Jian, Ducheng in the North Sea was reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝建三年七月癸未，木连理生历阳，历阳太守袁敳以闻。
现代文：孝建三年七月癸未，历阳有木连理，历阳太守袁敛上报朝廷。
English: In July of the third year of Xiao Jian's reign, Liyang Yulongli and Liyang Daju Yuan Yuan were reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明元年正月乙亥，木连理生高平。
现代文：孝武帝大明元年正月乙亥，高干有木连理。
English: Emperor Xiaowu died in the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first

古文：大明元年二月壬寅，华林园双橘树连理。
现代文：大明元年二月壬寅日，华林园双橘树连理。
English: In February of the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, on Ren Yin Day, the twin orange trees in the Chinese Forest Garden were connected.

古文：大明元年九月乙丑，华林园梨树连理。
现代文：大明元年九月乙丑日，华林园梨树连理。
English: On the 1st day of the 9th month of the 1st year of the Great Ming Dynasty, the pear trees of Hualin Garden sprouted.

古文：大明元年十月丁丑朔，木连理生豫章南昌。
现代文：大明元年十月丁丑初一，豫章南昌有木连理。
English: In October of the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, the first day of Dingxi, Yu Zhang Nanchang had a wooden joint.

古文：大明二年四月辛丑，木连理生汝南，豫州刺史宗悫以闻。
现代文：大明二年四月辛丑日，这亩有木连理，豫州刺史宗悫上报朝廷。
English: In April of the 2nd year of the Ming Dynasty, on the Ugly Day, the imperial court was informed of this mu by Muxilian Li and Yu Zhou Zhi Zongyi.

古文：大明三年九月甲午，木连理生丹阳秣陵，材官将军范悦时以闻。
现代文：大明三年九月甲午曰，丹阳的秣陵有木连理，材官将军范悦时上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of September in the third year of the Ming Dynasty, it was reported to the imperial court that Danyang's imperial mausoleum had a wooden lintel, and the official was General Fan Yue.

古文：大明四年三月丁亥，木连理生华林园曜灵殿北。
现代文：大明四年三月丁亥日，华林园的曜灵殿北边有木连理。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Daming Dynasty, on the day of the Dinghai Festival, the north side of the Yorying Hall of the Hualin Garden was lined with trees.

古文：大明四年四月壬子，木连理生华林园日观台北。
现代文：大明四年四月壬子日，华林园的日观台北边有木连理。
English: In April of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, on the day of Ren Zi, the day view of the Hualin Garden in Taipei was surrounded by trees.

古文：大明四年六月戊戌，木连理生会稽山阴，扬州刺史西阳王子尚以闻。
现代文：大明四年六月戊戌日，会稽山阴有木连理，扬州刺史四阳王刘子尚上报朝廷。
English: In June of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, on the 6th day of the 6th month of the 4th year of the Ming Dynasty, it was reported to the imperial court that Yangzhou's four Yang kings, Liu Zi Shang, and Yangzhou's four Yang kings, Shixiang Wang, and Yangzhou's four Yang kings, Liu Zi Shang and Yang Zi Wang, had been reported to the imperial court on the 6th day of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：大明五年闰九月，木连理生边城，豫州刺史垣护之以闻。
现代文：大明五年闰九月，边城有木连理，豫州刺史垣护之上报朝廷。
English: In September of the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, the border city of Yulianli and the city of Yuzhou were reported to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年十二月戊寅，淮南松木连理，豫州刺史寻阳王子房以闻。
现代文：大明五年十二月戊寅日，进堕有松木连理，豫州刺史寻阳王刘子房上报朝廷。
English: In December of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, it was reported to the imperial court that there was a Matsuki Lian Li and a Yu Zhou Zhang Shi looking for the Yang Wang Liu Zifang.

古文：大明六年二月乙丑，木连理生晋陵，南徐州刺史新安王子鸾以闻。
现代文：大明六年二月乙丑日，晋陵有木连理，南徐州刺史新安王刘子鸾上报朝廷。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 6th year of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial court was informed that Jin's tomb contained the wood of Lian Li, and the southern Xuzhou tomb contained that of Xin'an's King Liu Ziqi.

古文：大明六年四月戊辰，木连理生营阳，湘州刺史建安王休仁以闻。
现代文：大明六年四月戊辰日，萤匿有木连理，迩业刺史建安王刘休仁上报朝廷。
English: On April 6th, Daming Day, Liu Xuren, the King of Jian'an, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：大明六年八月乙丑，木连理生彭城城内，徐州刺史王玄谟以闻。
现代文：大明六年八月乙丑日，堑越城内有木连理，徐州刺史王玄谟上报朝廷。
English: On the second day of the 8th month of the 2nd year of the 8th month of the 6th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th year of the 8th

古文：大明七年正月己酉，珊瑚连理生郁林，安始太守刘勔以闻。
现代文：大明七年正月已酉日，郁莶有珊瑚连理，叁始太守刘劻上报朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, Ikuhaku had a coral marriage, which was reported to the imperial court by the first daimyo, Liu Ye.

古文：明帝泰始二年七月，木连理生丹阳秣陵。
现代文：明帝泰始二年七月，丹阳的秣陵有木连理。
English: In July of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial mausoleum in Danyang was demolished.

古文：泰始四年三月庚戌，太子西池冬生树连理，园丞周犭禽猗以献。
现代文：泰始四年三月庚戌日，太子西池旁的冬生树连理，园丞周擒猗献上朝廷。
English: In March of the 4th year of Taishi, on the day of Geng Zi, the winter tree next to the prince's west pond was presented to the imperial court.

古文：泰始六年四月丙午，木连理生会稽永兴，太守蔡兴宗以闻。
现代文：泰始六年四月丙午日，会稽的永兴有木连理，太守蔡兴宗上报朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month of the sixth year, Yongxing Arimilian, the auditor, and Cai Xingzong, the eunuch, reported to the imperial court.

古文：泰始六年十二月壬辰，木连理生豫章南昌，太守刘愔之以闻。
现代文：泰始六年十二月壬辰曰，豫章的南昌有木连理，太守刘情之上报朝廷。
English: In December of the 6th year of Taizhi, Ren Chen said that Yu Zhang's Nanchang had a wooden connection, and the eunuch Liu Jie reported to the imperial court.

古文：泰始七年二月戊寅，木连理生吴郡钱唐，太守王延之以闻。
现代文：泰始七年二月戊寅日，吴郡钱唐有木连理，太守王延之上报朝廷。
English: In February of the seventh year of Taizhi, Wu County Qiantang Yuki Lianli, Daju Wang Yan reported to the imperial court.

古文：升明二年，木连理生豫州界内，刺史刘怀珍以闻。
现代文：升明二年，辽州境内有木连理，刺史刘怀珍上报朝廷。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial court was informed that there was a case of Muxianli and a case of Liu Huizhen in Liaozhou.

古文：比目鱼，王者德及幽隐则见。
现代文：比目鱼，帝王的恩德施及幽深隐僻之处就会出现。
English: Flounder, the emperor's bounty and the deep recesses will appear.

古文：珊瑚钩，王者恭信则见。
现代文：阙珊瑚钩，帝王恭谨仁信就会出现。
English: If you pull the coral hook, the emperor Gong Jian Renxin will appear.

古文：芝草，王者慈仁则生。
现代文：阙芝草，帝王慈爱仁德就会出现。
English: The emperor's compassion and benevolence will appear.

古文：食之令人度世。
现代文：食芝草可以令人长寿。
English: Eating turfgrass can make you live longer.

古文：汉武帝元封二年，甘泉宫内产芝，九茎连叶。
现代文：汉武帝元封二年，甘泉宫中出产了芝草，九枝茎叶叶相连。
English: In the second year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems and leaves of the nine stems.

古文：汉宣帝元康四年，金芝九茎，产于函德殿铜池中。
现代文：汉宣帝元康四年，金芝有九茎，生长于函德殿铜池中
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Han Xuan Yuan Kang, Jin Zhi has nine stems and grows in the copper pond of the Huan De Hall

古文：汉明帝永平十七年春，芝生前殿。
现代文：汉明帝永平十七年春，芝草生于宫中的前殿。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of Emperor Hanming Yongping, Zhigusa was born in the front hall of the palace.

古文：汉桓帝建和元年四月，芝草生中黄藏府。
现代文：汉桓帝建和元年四月，芝草生于中黄藏府。
English: In April of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianhe of the Han Dynasty, Zhigusa was born in Zhonghuangzangfu.

古文：宋从帝升明二年，宣城山中生紫芝一株，在所获以献。
现代文：宋从帝升明二年，宣继山中长出一株紫芝，当地人获得献上朝廷。
English: In the second year of Emperor Song's ascension to the throne, a purple grass plant sprouted in the mountains of Xuanji, which was presented to the imperial court by the local people.

古文：明月珠，王者不尽介鳞之物则出。
现代文：明月珠，帝王不竭尽介类鱼类动物就会出现。
English: Mingyue Pearl, the emperor does not exhaust the intermediary fish and animals will appear.

古文：汉高后景帝时，会稽人硃仲献三寸四寸珠。
现代文：还直丘星童时，盒稽人塞健献上三、四寸大珠。
English: When he was still a star child, box inspector Sa Jian presented him with a three- or four-inch bead.

古文：汉章帝元和中，郡国献明珠。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，郡国献上明珠。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng Yuan, the county presented a pearl to the emperor.

古文：巨鬯，三禺之禾，一稃二米，王者宗庙修则出。
现代文：酿制祭祀酒的黑黍，三里之内的禾穗，一稃中有二米，帝王宗庙完备就会出现。
English: The black locusts that brew the sacrificial wine, the ears of grain within three miles, two meters in a basket, the emperor's ancestral temple will appear when it is complete.

古文：黄帝时，南夷乘白鹿来献鬯。
现代文：黄帝之时，南夷驾着白鹿来献黑黍。
English: At the time of the Yellow Emperor, Nanyi drove a white deer to sacrifice a black stag.

古文：汉章帝元和中，秬秠生郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元年间，郡国长出黑黍。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng in the first year of the Han Dynasty, the county grew black locusts.

古文：华平，其枝正平，王者有德则生。
现代文：华平，它的枝条平正，帝王有德行就会出现。
English: Hua Ping, its branches are straight, and the emperor will appear if he is virtuous.

古文：德刚则仰，德弱则低。
现代文：德行刚强枝条便会高仰，德行柔弱就会低垂。
English: Virtuous and strong branches will be high, and virtuous and weak branches will be low.

古文：汉章帝元和中，华平生郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，郡国生出华平。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng Yuan, Guo Guosheng went to Huaping.

古文：平露，如盖，以察四方之政。
现代文：平露，形状似伞盖，用以观察国家四方的政治情况。
English: Flat, shaped like an umbrella cover, it is used to observe the political situation in the four corners of the country.

古文：其国不平，则随方而倾。
现代文：当国家某处不平安时，它便向着那个方向倾斜。
English: When a country is not safe somewhere, it tilts in that direction.

古文：蓂荚，一名历荚，夹阶而生，一日生一叶，从朔而生，望而止，十六日，日落一叶；若月小，则一叶萎而不落。
现代文：阙萁荚，又名历荚，在台阶两旁生长，每天生出一叶，从初一开始，到十五日结束，十六开始，每天脱落一叶，如果是小月，那么就有一叶枯萎而不脱落。
English: The maple, also known as the calendar maple, grows on both sides of the steps and produces a leaf every day. From the beginning to the end of the fifteenth day and the beginning of the sixteenth day, one leaf falls off every day. If it is a small moon, then one leaf will wither and not fall off.

古文：尧时生阶。
现代文：尧时黄荚生在台阶旁。
English: At that time, Huang Xinsheng was dancing by the steps.

古文：甫，一名倚扇，状如蓬，大枝叶小，根根如丝，转而成风，杀蝇。
现代文：阙萣甫，又名倚扇，形状如蓬草，枝大叶小，一根根如丝一般，旋转时有风，能杀死苍蝇。
English: Fan Fan, also known as Fan Fan, is shaped like a puff grass, the branches are large and the leaves are small, and the roots are like silk. It is windy when it rotates, and it can kill flies.

古文：尧时生于厨。
现代文：尧时生于厨房中。
English: I was born in the kitchen.

古文：硃草，草之精也，世有圣人之德则生。
现代文：阙朱草，是草中的精华，世间有圣人的德行就会生长。
English: Cinnabar grass is the essence of grass. If there are saints in the world, virtue will grow.

古文：汉光武建武中元元年五月，京师有赤草生水涯。
现代文：漠光武帝建武中元元年五月，京城有赤草生在河边。
English: In May of the first year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, there was red grass growing by the river in the capital.

古文：汉章帝元和中，硃草生郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，郡国生有朱草。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zheng Yuan, Zhu Cao was born in the county.

古文：魏文帝初，硃草生文昌殿侧。
现代文：魏文帝初年，文昌殿旁生有朱草。
English: In the first year of Emperor Weiwen, Zhu Cao was born next to Wenchang Palace.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十一年，硃草生蜀郡郫县王之家，益州刺史甄法崇以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十一年，蜀郡郫县王之的家中生有朱草，益州刺史甄法崇上报朝廷。
English: In the eleventh year of the Song Emperor Yuan Jia, Zhu Cao was born in the home of Wang Zhi of Shuxian County, and the Yizhou engraving history screening method was highly praised by the imperial court.

古文：景星，大星也。
现代文：景星是大星。
English: The setting star is the great star.

古文：状如半月，于晦朔助月为明。
现代文：大小如半个月亮，在朔日晦曰协助月亮照明。
English: It is the size of a half-moon and helps illuminate the moon on New Year's Eve.

古文：宾连阔达，生于房室，王者御后妃有节则生。
现代文：阙宾连阔达，生长于房室旁，帝王与妃后行房事有节制就会生长。
English: As long as the emperor and the empress are married, it will grow.

古文：渠溲，禹时来献裘。
现代文：阙仙人堡塑，帝垂时曾来献上皮裘。
English: Shaped like a hermit's castle, the emperor used to come here to offer furs.

古文：浪井，不凿自成，王者清静则应。
现代文：阙浪井，不用开凿而自然形成，帝王清明娴静就会应时形成。
English: The wave well is formed naturally without drilling, and the emperor clear and calm will be formed at the right time.

古文：西王母，舜时来献白环白琯。
现代文：阙仙人西王母，帝爱时曾来献上白环和白琯。
English: Xi Wangmu, a fairy godmother, once came to present white rings and white doves when the emperor was in love.

古文：越常，周公时来献白雉、象牙。
现代文：阙越当迩，旦公时曾来献上白雉、象牙。
English: In the past, Tang Gongzhi had come to present egrets and elephant tusks.

古文：汉平帝元始元年正月，越常重译献白雉一，黑雉二，诏二公荐宗庙。
现代文：阙汉平帝元始元年正月，越常国通过辗转翻译献上一只白雉，二只黑雉，皇帝韶令三公献给宗庙。
English: In the first month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th

古文：汉光武建武十三年九月，南越献白雉。
现代文：汉光武建武十三年九月，南越献上白雉。
English: In September of the 13th year of Han Guangwu Jianwu, South Vietnam presented the egret.

古文：汉章帝元和中，白雉见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，郡国出现了白雉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zong of the Yuan Dynasty, egrets appeared in the county.

古文：汉桓帝永康元年十一月，白雉见西河。
现代文：汉桓帝永康元年十一月，酉回出现了白雉。
English: In November of the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongkang of the Han Dynasty, egrets once again appeared.

古文：汉献帝延康元年四月丁巳，饶安县言白雉见；又郡国十九言白雉见。
现代文：汉献帝延康元年四月丁巳曰，饶安县说出现了白雉；又有十九个郡国说出现了白雉。
English: In April of the first year of the Han Dynasty, Ding Si said that Rao'an County said that there was a white egret; another nineteen counties said that there was a white egret.

古文：晋武帝咸宁元年四月丁巳，白雉见安丰松滋。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁元年四月丁巳曰，安丰的松滋出现了白雉。
English: In April of the first year of Emperor Xianning, Emperor Jinwu said that egrets had appeared in Songzhi, Anfeng.

古文：咸宁元年十二月丙午，白雉见梁国睢阳，梁王肜获以献。
现代文：咸宁元年十二月丙午日，梁国的睢阳出现了白雉，凿王司马肜获得献给朝廷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of December in the first year of Xianning, a white horse appeared in Fenyang, Liang Province, and Wang Simao was dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：咸宁三年十一月，白雉见渤海饶安，相阮温获以献。
现代文：咸宁三年十一月，邀一痉宣挞出现了白雉，相阮温过获得献给朝廷。
English: In November of the third year of Xianning, an egret appeared at the invitation of a egret, and the egret was dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：晋武帝太康元年庚戌，白雉见中山。
现代文：晋武帝太康元年九月庚戌曰，中山出现了白雉。
English: According to Emperor Taikang of the Jin Dynasty, in September of the first year of the Heian period, a snowy egret appeared in Zhongshan.

古文：晋愍帝建兴三年十二月戊午，白雉见襄平。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴三年十二月戊午曰，襄平出现了白雉。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of December in the year of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, an egret appeared in Xiangping.

古文：建兴三年十二月戊午，白雉见。
现代文：建兴三年十二月戊午日，出现了白雉。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of December in Jianxing, a white dragonfly appeared.

古文：安帝义熙七年五月，白雉见豫章南昌。
现代文：安帝义熙七年五月，豫章南昌出现了白雉。
English: In May of the seventh year of Emperor Andei Yixi, an egret appeared in Nanchang.

古文：宋文帝元嘉五年五月庚辰，白雉见东莞莒县，太守刘玄以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉五年五月庚辰日，白雉出现在东莞的莒县，太守刘玄上报朝廷。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of Song Emperor Yuanjia, the egrets appeared in Dongguan's Jixian County, and the eunuch Liu Xuan reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉十六年二月，白雉见陈郡，豫州刺史长沙王义欣以献。
现代文：元嘉十六年二月，陈郡出现了白雉，豫州刺史长沙王刘义欣献上朝廷。
English: In February of the 16th year of Yuan Jia, an egret appeared in Chen County, which was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yixin, the prince of Changsha, Henan Province.

古文：元嘉十八年二月癸亥，白雉见南汝阴宋县，太守文道恩以献。
现代文：元嘉十八年二月癸亥日，南汝阴宋县出现了白雉，太守文道恩献上朝廷。
English: In February of the 18th year of Yuan Jia, on the day of the Boar, a white stork appeared in South Ruyin Song County, and the eunuch Wen Dao En presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十年六月，白雉见高平方兴县，徐州刺史臧质以献。
现代文：元嘉二十年六月，白雉出现于高平的方与县，徐州刺史臧质献上朝廷。
English: In June of the 20th year of Yuan Jia, the egret appeared in Fangye County of Gaoping, and the egrets of Xuzhou were presented to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年三月戊寅，白雉见东安、沛郡各一，徐、兗二州刺史武陵王获以献。
现代文：元嘉二十六年三月戊寅曰，在束安、沛郡各有一次白雉出现，徐、兖二州刺史武陵工获得献给朝廷。
English: In March of the 26th year of Yuan Jia, Wu Yin said that a white dragonfly appeared once in each of Sok'an and Pei counties, and the two states of Xu and He were dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明二年三月己巳，白雉雌雄各一见海陵，南兗州刺史竟陵王诞以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明二年三月己巳曰，海陵出现雌雄白雉各一只，南兖州刺史竞陵王刘诞献上朝廷。
English: In March of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu said that one male and one female egret each appeared in the sea mausoleum, and the birth of King Liu, the king of the South Luzhou, was presented to the imperial court.

古文：大明五年十二月，白雉见秦郡，南兗州刺史晋安王子勋以献。
现代文：大明五年十二月，画发出现了白雉，亩室丛刺史晋安王刘子勋献上朝廷。
English: In December of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, the egret appeared in the painting, and Liu Zixun, the prince of Jinan, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：大明八年二月丁卯，白雉见南郡江陵，荆州刺史临海王子顼以献。
现代文：大明八年二月丁卯，南郡江陵出现了白雉，荆州刺史临海王刘子顼献上朝廷。
English: In February of the 8th year of the Daming Dynasty, an egret appeared in Jiangling, Nan County, and Liu Ziqi, the king of Linhai, Jingzhou, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：前废帝永光元年正月丙午，白雉见渤海，青州刺史王玄谟以献。
现代文：前废帝永光元年正月丙午日，渤海出现了白雉，青州刺史王玄谟献上朝廷。
English: On the first day of the second month of the first year of the former emperor Yongguang, the white dragonfly appeared in the Bohai Sea, and the king of Qingzhou, Xuanzhou, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：永光元年三月甲午朔，白雉见新蔡，豫州刺史刘德愿以献。
现代文：永光元年三月甲午初一，新蔡出现了白雉，豫州刺史刘德愿献上朝廷。
English: On the first day of the first day of the first month of March in the first year of Yongguang, the new Cai appeared in the egret, and Liu De, the governor of Yuzhou, was willing to present the egret to the imperial court.

古文：黄银紫玉，王者不藏金玉，则黄银紫玉光见深山。
现代文：黄银和紫玉，帝王不收藏金玉，那么黄银和紫玉的光芒就会在深山出现。
English: Yellow silver and purple jade, the emperor does not collect gold and jade, then the light of yellow silver and purple jade will appear in the mountains.

古文：宋明帝泰始二年八月，于赭圻城南得紫玉一段，围三尺二寸，长一尺，厚七尺。
现代文：宋明帝泰始二年八月，在赵丛城南得到一块紫王，外围三尺二寸，长一尺，厚七尺。
English: In August of the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, Emperor Song Ming obtained a piece of purple king in the south of Zhao Congcheng, with a circumference of 3 feet 2 inches, a length of 1 foot, and a thickness of 7 feet.

古文：太宗攻为二爵，以献武、文二庙。
现代文：太宗令人雕凿成两只酒爵，献给武、文二庙。
English: Emperor Taizong had two wine coats carved, dedicated to the two temples of Wu and Wen.

古文：玉女，天赐妾也。
现代文：玉女，上天赐的姬妾。
English: The divine concubine.

古文：《礼含文嘉》曰： 禹卑宫室，尽力沟洫，百谷用成，神龙女降。 
现代文：《礼含文嘉》说： 禹的宫室简陋，尽力开掘沟渠，百谷丰收，神龙女降临世间。 
English: "Li Hanwen Jia" said: Yu's palace was simple, he tried his best to dig ditches, the grain harvest was bountiful, and the divine dragon woman came to the world.

古文：地珠，王者不以财为宝则生珠。
现代文：阙地珠，帝王不以财物为珍宝，就会长出地珠。
English: If the emperor does not regard wealth as a precious treasure, he will grow pearls.

古文：天鹿者，纯灵之兽也。
现代文：阙天鹿，是精纯灵异的牲兽。
English: The white-tailed deer is a pure and extraordinary animal.

古文：五色光耀洞明，王者道备则至。
现代文：五色缤纷光耀洞明，帝王治道完备就会来临。
English: The five colors are bright and dazzling, and the emperor will come when his reign is complete.

古文：角端者，日行万八千里，又晓四夷之语，明君圣主在位，明达方外幽远之事，则奉书而至。
现代文：阙角端，每日行驰一万八千里，又通晓境外四夷的语言，圣明君主在位，通达知晓境外幽远的事务，就会持书来临。
English: At the end of the day, if you travel 18,000 miles a day and are familiar with the languages of the four countries outside the country, if the Holy Emperor is on the throne, and if you are familiar with the distant affairs outside the country, you will come with a book.

古文：周印者，神兽之名也，星宿之变化。王者德盛则至。
现代文：阙周印，是神兽之名。星宿变化，帝王德行昌盛就会来临。
English: Zhouyin is the name of the divine beast. As the stars change, the emperor's virtue and prosperity will come.

古文：飞菟者，神马之名也，日行三万里。
现代文：阙飞菟，是神马之名，每曰行驰三万里。
English: Zou Fei Zou is the name of the divine horse, which travels 30,000 miles every day.

古文：禹治水勤劳历年，救民之害，天应其德而至。
现代文：帝禹治水多年勤劳，拯救百姓的灾害，上天感应其德而来临。
English: Emperor Yu has worked diligently for many years to control water and save the people from disasters, and heaven has come to respond to his virtue.

古文：泽兽，黄帝时巡狩至于东滨，泽兽出，能言，达知万物之精，以戒于民，为时除害。
现代文：阙泽兽，黄帝时巡狩到东滨，泽兽出现，能说话，通达知晓万物的精灵，用以告诫百姓，为当时社会除害。
English: When the Yellow Emperor went on a hunting tour to the east coast, the Zi Beast appeared, a spirit that could speak and knew everything, which was used to warn the people and eliminate harm to the society at that time.

古文：贤君明德幽远则来。
现代文：贤能君主圣明德行幽深就会来临。
English: The virtuous monarch, the saintly, the virtuous, and the profound will come.

古文：者，幽隐之兽也，有明王在位则来，为时辟除灾害。
现代文：阙蜍，是幽隐的牲兽，有圣明的帝王在位就会来临，为当时社会消除灾害。
English: The dragonfly is a hidden animal. When a holy emperor is on the throne, he will come to eliminate disasters for the society at that time.

古文：要巉者，神马也，与飞菟同，亦各随其方而至，以明君德也。
现代文：阙骊蓑，是神马，与飞菟相同，也各自随着自己的方向来临，用以表明君主的德行。
English: The dragonfly is a divine horse, the same as the flying dragonfly, and they also come in their own direction to show the virtue of the monarch.

古文：同心鸟，王者德及遐方，四夷合同则至。
现代文：阙同心乌，帝王的恩德施及远方，四方边境统一就会出现。
English: The emperor's benevolence extends far and wide, and the unification of the four-party border will appear.

古文：趹枪蹄者，后土之兽，自能言语。
现代文：阙跌蹄，是土神之兽，自己能言语。
English: He is a beast of the earth god, able to speak for himself.

古文：王者仁孝于国则来。
现代文：帝王用仁义孝道来治国就会来临。
English: An emperor who governs the country with benevolence, righteousness and filial piety will come.

古文：禹治水而至。
现代文：帝垂治水时曾出现。
English: It once appeared when Dettori was treating water.

古文：紫达，王者仁义行则见。
现代文：阙紫达，帝王施行仁义就会出现。
English: Zi Da, the emperor's benevolence and righteousness will appear.

古文：小鸟生大鸟，王者土地开辟则至。
现代文：阙小鸟生大鸟，帝王开辟疆土就会出现。阙
English: When a small bird gives birth to a big bird, an emperor will appear to open up the territory.

古文：河精者，人头鱼身，师旷时所受谶也。
现代文：河中精灵，人头鱼身，师旷之时曾受谶言。
English: The elves in the river, the fish with a human head, were criticized when they were still young.

古文：延嬉，王者孝道行则至。
现代文：阙延嬉，帝王施行孝道就会来临。
English: The emperor's practice of filial piety will come.

古文：大贝，王者不贪财宝则出。
现代文：阙大贝，帝王不贪图财宝就会出现。
English: If the emperor is not greedy for treasure, it will appear.

古文：威蕤，王者礼备则生于殿前。
现代文：阙威蕤，帝王的礼仪完备就会生长于宫殿之前。
English: The emperor's complete etiquette will grow in front of the palace.

古文：醴泉，水之精也，甘美。
现代文：阙醴泉，水中的精华，甘洌甜美。
English: Spring water, the essence of the water, sweet and sour.

古文：王者修理则出。
现代文：帝王治国之道完备就会出现。
English: When the emperor's way of governing the country is complete, chaos will appear.

古文：汉光武建武中元元年五月，醴泉出京师及郡国。
现代文：汉光武帝建武中元元年五月，京师和郡国出现了醴泉。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jianwu in the middle of the Han Dynasty, a hot spring appeared in Beijing and the county.

古文：饮醴泉者，痼病皆愈；独眇者蹇者不差。
现代文：饮用醴泉的人，顽固的病症全都痊愈；惟有眼瞎者跛腿者不能治好。
English: Whosoever drinketh of the water of life shall be healed of all infirmities: but he that is blind or lame shall not be healed.

古文：魏文帝初，郡国二言醴泉出。
现代文：魏文帝初年，有两个郡国说出现醴泉。
English: In the first year of Emperor Weiwen, there were two counties that said that there was a hot spring.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十二年，衡阳湘乡醴泉出县庭，荆州刺史临川王义庆以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十二年，衡阳湘乡有醴泉从县治所庭前涌出，荆州刺史临川王刘义庆上报朝廷。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Songwen Yuanjia, Hengyang Hunan Township's Yuxuan Spring gushed out from the front of the county government office, and the Jingzhou stabbing of Linchuan King Liu Yiqing was reported to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝孝建三年九月甲戌，细仗队省井泉春夏深不盈尺，忽至一丈，有五色，水清澄，醴味，汲引不穷。
现代文：孝武帝孝建三年九月甲戌日，宫廷细仗队所在地的井中泉水在春夏时深不到一尺，忽然涨到了一丈，有多种色彩，水清净澄澈，有醴泉之味，汲引不尽。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xiaowu and the third year of Emperor Xiaojian, on September 6th, the spring water in the well where the palace guard was located was less than a foot deep in spring and summer, and suddenly rose to a height, with a variety of colors. The water was clean and clear, with the taste of spring water, and it was inexhaustible.

古文：孝武帝大明二年三月壬子，北汝阴楼烦平地出醴泉，豫州刺史宗悫以闻。
现代文：孝武帝大明二年三月壬子日，北汝阴的楼烦平地涌出醴泉，豫州刺史宗慇上报朝廷。
English: On the second day of the third month of the second year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign of the Ming Dynasty, a spring gushed out of a building in the north of Ruyin, and it was reported to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰豫元年四月乙酉，会稽山阴思义醴泉出，太守蔡兴宗以闻。
现代文：明帝泰豫元年四月乙酉日，会稽山阴的墨义出现了醴泉，太守茎兴塞上报朝廷。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taiyuan of the Ming Dynasty, there was a gushing spring in the shadow of the mountain, and it was reported to the imperial court by the eunuch Zhu Xi Xingjie.

古文：日月扬光，日者，人君象也。人君不假臣下之权，则日月扬光明。
现代文：曰月扬光，曰是君主的象征，君主的权力不下移给臣下，那么曰月就会扬起光明。
English: Say the moon is bright, say it is the symbol of the monarch, the power of the monarch is not transferred to the vassal, then say the moon will be bright.

古文：芝英者，王者亲近耆老，养有道，则生。
现代文：阙芝英，帝王亲近耆宿年老之人，抚养有道之人，就会生长。
English: The emperor is close to those who stay with the elderly, and those who are virtuous will grow.

古文：汉章帝元和中，芝英生郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年间，郡国生长芝英。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zang in the Yuan Dynasty, Zhiying County was established.

古文：碧石者，玩好之物弃则至。
现代文：碧石，帝王放弃玩好之物就会来临。
English: Bijie, the emperor will give up what he likes to play with.

古文：玉甕者，不汲而满，王者清廉则出。
现代文：阙玉瓮，不汲水就满溢了，帝王清廉就会出现。
English: If you do not draw water, it will overflow, and the emperor will appear.

古文：山车者，山藏之精也。
现代文：阙山车，是山中储藏的精华。
English: The roller coaster is the quintessence of the mountains.

古文：不藏金玉，山泽以时，通山海之饶，以给天下，则山成其车。
现代文：帝王不珍藏金玉，开发山岭川泽依天时而行，充分利用山岭湖海的财富，以供给天下，那么山中便形成山车。
English: Emperors do not hoard gold and jewels. The development of mountains, rivers and lakes depends on the weather, making full use of the wealth of mountains, lakes and seas to supply the world. Then a roller coaster will form in the mountains.

古文：鸡骇犀，王者贱难得之物则出。
现代文：阙鶸骇犀，帝王轻贱稀有之物就会出现。
English: Suddenly, the emperor's light and rare things will appear.

古文：陵出黑丹，王者修至孝则出。
现代文：陵出黑丹，帝王天性至孝就会出现。
English: If you bring out the black diamond, the emperor's innate filial piety will appear.

古文：神鼎者，质文之精也。
现代文：神鼎，质地花纹最为精致。
English: Divine, the texture pattern is the most exquisite.

古文：知吉知凶，能重能轻，不炊而沸，五味自生，王者盛德则出。
现代文：知凶知吉，能重能轻，不用加热而自然沸腾，各种香味自然形成，帝王的德行繁盛就会出现。
English: Knowing evil and knowing good, knowing heavy and light, boiling naturally without heating, all kinds of aromas naturally formed, and the prosperity of the emperor's virtue will appear.

古文：汉武帝元鼎元年五月五日，得鼎汾水上。
现代文：汉武帝五盘元年五月五日，在汾水之上得到神鼎。
English: Emperor Hanwu was crowned on the 5th day of the 5th month of the 1st year of the 5th month of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of

古文：汉明帝永平六年二月，庐江太守献宝鼎。
现代文：汉明帝永平六年二月，庐江太守献上从王雒山出土的宝鼎。
English: In February of the sixth year of Emperor Hanming Yongping's reign, the governor of the Li River presented a treasure ring unearthed from Mount Wangye.

古文：出王雒山。
现代文：雒又作雄。
English: He's a hero again.

古文：汉章帝建初七年十月，车驾西巡至槐里，右扶风禁上美阳得铜器于岐山，似酒尊。
现代文：汉章帝建初七年十月，皇帝车驾西巡到槐里，右扶风禁献上美阳在岐山得到的一件铜器，形状似酒尊。
English: In October of the seventh year of the first year of the reign of Emperor Han Zheng, the emperor drove westward to Baili, and presented a piece of bronze ware obtained by Miyang in Qishan, the shape of which resembled the image of wine.

古文：诏在道晨夕以为百官热酒。
现代文：皇帝韶令在西巡道上早晚用它来为百官温酒。
English: The emperor Xuling used it to brew wine for his officials in the morning and evening on his western tour.

古文：汉和帝永元元年，窦宪征匈奴，于漠北酒泉得仲山甫鼎，容五斗。
现代文：汉和帝永元元年，宝宪征伐匈奴，在漠北的酒泉得到仲山甫鼎，有五斗的容量。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Yong Yuan, Bao Xian conquered the Xiongnu, and obtained Zhongshan Fuding in the wine springs of the desert north, with a capacity of five bu.

古文：吴孙权赤乌十二年六月戊戌，宝鼎出临平湖。
现代文：吴孙权赤乌十二年六月戊戌日，宝鼎出土于临乎湖。
English: In June of the 12th year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, Baoding was unearthed near the lake.

古文：又出东部酃县。
现代文：又出土于束部酃县。
English: It was also unearthed in Sokubei County.

古文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年八月，在所言得大鼎。
现代文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年八月，所管辖的地区说得到大鼎。
English: In August of the first year of Wu Sun Ying Baoding, the area under his jurisdiction was said to be the largest.

古文：晋愍帝建兴二年十二月，晋陵武进县民陈龙在田中得铜铎五枚。
现代文：晋愍帝建兴二年十二月，晋陵武进县百姓陆龙在田中得到五枚铜铎。
English: In December of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jianxing of the Jin Dynasty, Lu Long, a commoner in Wujin County, Jinling, won five bronze ingots in Tanaka.

古文：晋成帝咸和元年十月辛卯，宣城舂谷县山岸崩，获石鼎重二斤，受斛余。
现代文：晋成帝咸和元年十月辛卯日，宣越鲞赵山岸崩溃，获石鼎重二百斤，容量达一斛以上。
English: In October of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jincheng, Xianhe, the Xuan Yue and Zhao Shan Bank collapsed, resulting in a stone ring weighing two hundred pounds, with a capacity of more than one ounce.

古文：晋成帝咸康五年，豫章南昌民掘地得铜钟四枚，太守褚裒以献。
现代文：晋成帝咸康五年，逸童直旦的百姓掘地得到四枚铜钟，太守褚哀献上朝廷。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Jiankang, the people of Yidong Zhutan excavated and obtained four bronze bells, which were presented to the imperial court by the grand marshal.

古文：晋穆帝升平五年二月乙未，南掖门有马足陷地，得铜钟一枚。
现代文：晋穆帝升平五年二月乙末日，亩筵门有马足陷进地下，得到一枚铜钟。
English: On the last day of February B, the fifth year of Emperor Jinmu's enthronement, a horse's foot sank into the ground at Mu Ye's gate, and a bronze bell was obtained.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十三年四月辛丑，武昌县章山水侧自开出神鼎，江州刺史南谯王义宣以献。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十三年四月辛孔日，武昌县章山的水边土层白开现出神鼎，江州刺史南谯王刘义宣献给朝廷。
English: On April 13th, the Xin Kong Day of the Song Emperor Wen Yuan Jia, the soil layer of the waterside of Zhangshan in Wuchang County appeared white, and the sacred tripod was presented to the imperial court by Liu Yi Xuan, the king of Nanxi in Jiangsu Province.

古文：元嘉十九年九月戊申，广陵肥如石梁涧中出石钟九口，大小行次，引列南向，南兗州刺史临川王义庆以献。
现代文：元嘉十九年九月戊申曰，广陵肥如的石梁溯中出土九口石钟，依着大小顺序，排列成行向着南方，南兖州刺史临川王刘义庆献上朝廷。
English: In September of the 19th year of Yuan Jia, Wushin said that nine stone bells were unearthed in the excavation of the stone beam of Guangling Feiryu. According to the order of size, they were arranged in a row to the south. The southern Bozhou engraving was presented to the imperial court by the king of Linchuan, Liu Yiqing.

古文：元嘉二十一年十二月，新阳获古鼎于水侧，有篆书四十二字，雍州刺史萧思话以献。
现代文：元嘉二十一年十二月，新阳在水岸获得古鼎，有篆书四十二字，雍州刺史萧思话献上朝廷。
English: In December of the twenty-first year of Yuan Jia, Xinyang won the ancient tripod on the waterfront, and presented it to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十二年，豫章豫宁县出铜钟，江州刺史广陵王绍以献。
现代文：元嘉二十二年，豫章豫宁县出土铜钟，江州刺史广陵王刘趋献上朝廷。
English: In the 22nd year of Yuan Jia, a bronze bell was unearthed in YuZhang YuNing County and presented to the imperial court by Liu Zhen, the King of GuangLing in JiangZhou.

古文：孝武帝孝建三年四月丁亥，临川宜黄县民田中得铜钟七口，内史傅徽以献。
现代文：孝武帝孝建三年四月丁亥曰，临川宜黄县百姓在田裹得到七口铜钟，临川内史傅徽献上朝廷。
English: In April of the third year of Emperor Xiaojian, Emperor Xiaowu said that the people of Yinhuang County, Linchuan, received seven bronze bells wrapped in rice and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：孝建三年四月甲辰，晋陵延陵得古钟六口，徐州刺史竟陵王诞以献。
现代文：孝建三年四月甲辰曰，晋陵的延陵得到六口古钟，徐州刺史竟陵王型诞献上朝廷。
English: Xiao Jian said in April of the third year of the Jia Chen, the Yanling of Jinling obtained six ancient bells, and the Xuzhou engraving was presented to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明七年六月，江夏蒲圻获铜路鼓，四面独足，郢州刺史安陆王子绥以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明七年六月，江夏的蒲圻获得铜路鼓，有四面一足，坚业刺史宣盐工刘土铿献上朝廷。
English: In June of the seventh year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Jiangxia's Po Lou won the bronze road drum, with four sides and one foot. Liu Dujuan, a salt worker from Xuan Shi, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始四年二月丙申，豫章望蔡获古铜钟，高一尺七寸，围二尺八寸，太守张辩以献。
现代文：明帝泰始四年二月丙申，豫章的望蔡获得古铜钟，高一尺七寸，围二尺八寸，太守张辩献给朝廷。
English: In February of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, Wang Cai, a disciple of Xuanzang, obtained a bronze bell, with a height of one foot seven inches and a circumference of two feet eight inches, which was dedicated to the imperial court by Zhang Ye, the Tai Shou.

古文：泰始五年五月壬戌，豫章南昌获古铜鼎，容斛七斗，江州刺史王景文以献。
现代文：泰始五年五月壬戌，豫章的南昌获古铜鼎，容量为一斛七斗，江州刺史王景文献给朝廷。
English: In May of the fifth year of Taizhi, Nanchang of Yuzhang was awarded a bronze tripod with a capacity of one hundred and seven dowels, and Wangjing of Jiangzhou was awarded a document to the imperial court.

古文：泰始七年六月甲寅，义阳郡获铜鼎，受一斛，并盖并隐起镂，豫州刺史段佛荣以献。
现代文：泰始七年六月甲寅日，义阳郡获得铜鼎，容量为一斛，鼎体和鼎盖都有雕镂的花纹，豫州刺史段佛荣献上朝廷。
English: In June of the seventh year of Taizhi, Yiyang County won a bronze tripod with a capacity of one urn. Both the tripod body and the lid have carved patterns. The historical section of the statue of Buddha Rong in Yuzhou was presented to the imperial court.

古文：从帝升明二年九月，建宁万岁山涧中得铜钟，长二尺一寸，豫州刺史刘怀珍以献。
现代文：从帝升明二年九月，建宁万岁山的谷涧得到铜钟，长二尺一寸，豫州刺史刘怀珍献上朝廷。
English: In September of the second year of the Emperor's ascent to heaven, Gu Yao of Jianning Mountain got a bronze bell, two feet and one inch long, presented to the imperial court by Liu Huizhen, the prince of Yuzhou.

古文：汉宣帝元康二年夏，神雀集雍。
现代文：汉宣帝元康二年夏，神雀停留在雍地。
English: In the summer of the second year of the reign of Emperor Yuan Kang of the Han Dynasty, the divine sparrow stayed in Yongdi.

古文：元康三年春，神雀集泰山。
现代文：元康三年春，神雀停留在泰山。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Yuan Kang, the divine sparrow stayed in Mount Tai.

古文：宣帝元康三年春，五色雀以万数，飞过属县。
现代文：宣帝元康三年春，五色雀数以万计，飞过属县。
English: In the spring of the third year of Xuan Di Yuan Kang, tens of thousands of five-colored finches flew over the county.

古文：元康四年三月，神雀五采以万数，飞过集长乐、未央、北宫、高寝、甘泉泰畤殿。
现代文：元康四年三月，数以万计的神雀五彩缤纷，飞过并停留在长乐、未央、北宫、高寝、甘泉泰畤殿等宫殿。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Yuan Kang, tens of thousands of colorful divine finches flew over and stayed in palaces such as Changle, Weiyang, Beigu, Gaosen, and Ganquan Taiyuan Palace.

古文：元康四年，神雀仍集。
现代文：元康四年，又有神雀停留。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Kang, the Divine Sparrow stopped by again.

古文：汉宣帝五凤三年正月，神雀集京师。
现代文：汉宣帝五凤三年正月，神雀停留在京师。
English: In the first month of the third year of Emperor Wu Feng's reign, the divine bird stayed in Beijing.

古文：汉明帝永平十七年春，神雀五色集京师。
现代文：选汉明帝永平十七年春，五色神雀停留在京城。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of Emperor Yongping, the Five-Colored Sparrow stayed in Beijing.

古文：汉章帝元和中，神雀见郡国。
现代文：汉章帝元和年问，神雀出现于郡国。
English: According to the Han Dynasty and the year of the Emperor, the divine sparrow appeared in the county.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十二年，白鹊见新野邓县，雍州刺史萧思话以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十二年，新野的邓县出现了白鹊，雍州刺史萧思话上报朝廷。
English: In the 22nd year of Emperor Songwen Yuanjia, the egrets appeared in Deng County, Nianye, and the story of Xiao Si, the egret of Yongzhou, was reported to the imperial court.

古文：元嘉二十六年五月癸酉，白鹊见建康崇孝里，扬州刺史始兴王浚以献。
现代文：元嘉二十六年五月癸酉曰，建康崇孝里出现了白鹊，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚献给朝廷。
English: On May 26th, Yuan Jia said that there was an egret in Jiankang Chongxiao, and Yangzhou's crown prince Liu Jian presented it to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明七年三月辛巳，白鹊见汝南安阳，太守申令孙以献。
现代文：孝武帝大明七年三月辛巳曰，汝南的安阳出现了白鹊，太守申令孙献上朝廷。
English: Emperor Xiaowu said in March of the 7th year of the Ming Dynasty that a white egret had appeared in Anyang, south of Yunnan, and the governor ordered Sun to present it to the imperial court.

古文：晋惠帝永嘉元年五月，白鼠见东宫，皇太子获以献。
现代文：晋惠帝永嘉元年五月，束宫有白鼠，皇太子获得献给朝廷。
English: In May of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinhui, there was a white rat in the palace, and the crown prince was given the rat to the imperial court.

古文：宋明帝泰始三年二月壬寅，白鼠见乐安，青州刺史沈文秀以献。
现代文：宋明帝泰始三年二月壬寅曰，乐安有白鼠，青州刺史选主秀献上朝廷。
English: In February of the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Song Dynasty, Ren Yin said that there was a white rat in Le An, and presented the Qingzhou thistle history selection show to the imperial court.

古文：汉昭帝始元元年二月，黄鹄下建章宫太液池中。
现代文：汉昭帝始元元年二月，黄鹄降临建章宫太液池中。
English: In February of the first year of Emperor Han Zhao's reign, Huang Qi fell into the pond at Jianzhang Palace.

古文：汉章帝元和二年二月，车驾东巡，柴祭岱宗。
现代文：汉章帝元和二年二月，皇帝车驾柬巡，焚柴祭祀泰山。
English: In February in the year of Emperor Han Zheng Yuan and the second year of the Heian period, the emperor toured the country in a chariot, burning wood and worshiping Mount Tai.

古文：礼毕，黄鹄三十从西南来，经祠坛上东北过。
现代文：祭祀完毕，有二十只黄鹄从西南飞来，经过祭坛上空往东北飞去。
English: After the ritual, twenty yellow kites flew from the southwest, passing over the altar and flying to the northeast.

古文：汉武帝太初三年二月五日，行幸东海，获赤雁。
现代文：汉武帝太初三年二月五日，皇帝来到束海，获得赤雁。
English: On February 5th, the third year of the reign of Emperor Hanwu, the emperor came to Sokhae to obtain red geese.

古文：魏文帝初，镬中生赤鱼。
现代文：魏文帝初年，鼎镬中生出赤鱼。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Weiwen, a red fish was born in the imperial cormorant.

古文：孙权时，神雀巢硃雀门。
现代文：孙权时，神雀在朱雀门筑巢。
English: At the time of Sun Quan, the divine sparrow built a nest at Suzaku Gate.

古文：孙皓天玺元年，临海郡吏伍曜在海水际得石树，高三尺余，枝茎紫色，诘屈倾靡，有光采。
现代文：孙皓天玺元年，临海郡的小吏鱼膣在海边拾得一棵石树，有三尺多高，枝干为紫色，弯弯曲曲，有光泽。
English: In the first year of Sun Yat-sen's reign, a petty official from Linhai County, Yu Vagina, found a stone tree on the seashore. It was more than three feet tall, with purple branches and twists, and shiny.

古文：《山海经》所载玉碧树之类也。
现代文：这便是《山海经》所记载的玉碧树一类的东西。
English: This is a type of jade tree described in the "Sankaikyo."

古文：晋武帝泰始二年六月壬申，白鸽见酒泉延寿，延寿长王音以献。
现代文：晋武帝泰始二年六月壬申曰，白鸰出现于酒泉的延寿，延寿长王音献上朝廷。
English: In June of the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, Jinshin said that the egret appeared in the wine spring of Yanzhou, and the Yanzhou Chao Wangyin was presented to the imperial court.

古文：晋成帝咸和九年五月癸酉，白鹅见吴国钱塘，内史虞潭以献。
现代文：晋成帝咸和九年五月癸酉曰，吴国的钱塘出现了白鹅，吴国内史虞潭献上朝廷。
English: On the third day of May in the ninth year of Emperor Jiancheng's reign, white geese appeared in Qiantang in the State of Wu, and Shiyutang in the State of Wu was presented to the imperial court.

古文：安帝义熙元年，南康雩都嵩山有金鸡，青黄色，飞集岩间。
现代文：晋安帝义熙元年，南康雩都的嵩山有金鸡，青黄色，飞停在山岩之间。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor An of Jin and Emperor Yixi of Jin, there was a golden rooster, blue-yellow, flying between the rocks on Songshan Mountain in Nankangdu.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十二年，湘州刺史南平王铄献赤鹦鹉。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十二年，湘州刺史南平王刘铄献上赤鹦鹉。
English: In the 22nd year of the Song Emperor Yuanjia, the Red Parrot was presented to the Prince of Nanping, Liu Xuan of Hunan.

古文：孝武帝大明三年正月丙申，媻皇国献赤白鹦鹉各一。
现代文：孝武帝大明三年正月丙申曰，媻皇国献上赤、白鹦鹉各一只。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Emperor Daming, Emperor Xiaowu said, "The Imperial State presents one red and one white parrot each."

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十四年十月甲午，扬州刺史始兴王浚献白鹦鹉。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十四年十月甲午日，扬州刺史始兴王刘浚献上白鹦鹉。
English: On the afternoon of October 1st, the 24th year of Emperor Yuanjia of Song Dynasty, Liu Jun, the Prince of Yangzhou, presented a white parrot.

古文：孝武帝大明五年正月丙子，交州刺史垣闳献白孔雀。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年正月丙子曰，交州刺史垣闳献上白孔雀。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Emperor Daming, Emperor Xiaowu said that the white peacock was presented by Jiaozhou Zhiqi.

古文：明帝泰始三年五月乙亥，白鸲鹆见京兆，雍州刺史巴陵王休若以献。
现代文：明帝泰始三年五月乙亥曰，白鸲鹄出现于京兆，雍州刺史巴陵王刘休若献上朝廷。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, in the month of May in the year of the boar, the egret appeared in Jingzhao, and Liu Xiu Ruo, the king of Bashan in Yongzhou, presented it to the imperial court.

古文：汉桓帝延熹九年四月，济阴、东郡、济北、平原河水清。
现代文：汉桓帝延熹九年四月，济阴、东郡、济北、平原等地的童周水变清。
English: In April of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Han Huan, the water around Tong Zhou in Jiyin, Dong County, Jibei and the plains became clear.

古文：宋文帝元嘉二十四年二月戊戌，河、济俱清，龙骧将军、青冀二州刺史杜坦以闻。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉二十四年二月戊戌日，河、济都变清，龙骧将军、责冀二州刺史杜坦上报朝廷。
English: On February 24 of the year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, the river and the city of Jidu became clear, and the report of the Longjing general and the appointment of the two states of Jishi and Dutan was reported to the imperial court.

古文：文帝元嘉二十五年五月，征北长史、广陵太守范邈上言： 所领舆县，前有大浦，控引潮流，水常淤浊。
现代文：文帝元嘉二十五年五月，征北长史、广陵太守范邈上奏说： 我所管辖的舆县，前面有入海的江河港口，与海潮相连，水经常淤塞污浊。
English: In May of the 25th year of the reign of Emperor Wen, Emperor Yuanjia made a report to the Northern Long History and Guangling Provincial Governor Fan Jun, saying: In the county under my jurisdiction, there is a river port in front of the sea, which is connected to the sea tide, and the water is often silted up.

古文：自比以来，源流清洁，纤鳞呈形。
现代文：最近以来，源流清洁，小鱼也看得清楚。
English: Recently, the headwaters have been clean, and small fish can see clearly.

古文：古老相传，以为休瑞。 
现代文：自古以来的传说，认为这是美好的瑞兆。 
English: Legend has it since ancient times that this is a good omen.

古文：孝武帝孝建三年九月，济、河清，冀州刺史垣护之以闻。
现代文：孝武帝孝建三年九月，济水、黄河澄清，冀州刺史垣护之上报朝廷。
English: In September of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu and Emperor Xiaojian, the imperial court was informed that Jishui and the Yellow River had been clarified, and that Jizhou had been protected by a wall.

古文：孝武帝大明五年九月庚戌，河、济俱清，平原太守申纂以闻。
现代文：孝武帝大明五年九月庚戌，黄河、济水全都澄清，平原太守申纂上报朝廷。
English: In September of Emperor Xiaowu Daming's fifth year, the Yellow River and the Jishui River were all clarified, and the approval of the Taiyuan governor was reported to the imperial court.

古文：明帝泰始元年二月丙寅，扬、淮水清洁有异于常，州治中从事史张绪以闻。
现代文：明帝泰始元年二月丙寅曰，扬、淮的江水清洁不同往常，州治中从事史张绪上报朝廷。
English: In February of the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, Qin Yin said that the cleanliness of the Yang and Huai rivers was different from usual, and Zhang Xu, who was engaged in state governance, reported to the imperial court.

古文：汉光武建武初，野茧、谷充给百姓。
现代文：汉光武建武初年，野茧、野谷供给百姓食用。
English: In the first year of Jianwu of Han Guangwu, wild oysters and wild rice provided food for the people.

古文：其后耕蚕稍广，二事渐息。
现代文：后来耕种桑蚕等农事渐渐发展，野茧和野谷便逐渐消失了。
English: Later, the cultivation of mulberry silkworms and other agricultural activities gradually developed, and the wild oaks and willows gradually disappeared.

古文：吴孙权黄龙三年夏，野蚕茧大如卵。
现代文：吴孙权黄龙三年夏，野蚕茧大如卵。
English: In the summer of the third year of Wu Sun Quan's reign, the wild silkworm cocoon was as big as an egg.

古文：宋文帝元嘉十六年，宣城宛陵广野蚕成茧，大如雉卵，弥漫林谷，年年转盛。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉十六年，宣城宛陵广野的野蚕结茧，大如野鸡卵，布满了树林山谷，而且一年比一年更多。
English: In the 16th year of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, the wild silkworms in the vast fields of Xuancheng Wanling were as large as pheasants' eggs, covered with forests and valleys, and more and more every year.

古文：孝武帝大明三年五月癸巳，宣城宛陵县石亭山生野蚕，三百余里，太守张辩以闻。
现代文：孝武帝大明三年五月癸巳曰，宣城宛陵县的石亭山长出野蚕，范围达三百多里，太守张辩卜报朝廷。
English: Emperor Xiaowu said in May of the third year of the Ming Dynasty that wild silkworms were growing on Shiting Mountain in Wanling County of Xuancheng, with an area of more than three hundred miles. Zhang Yebu, the eunuch, reported this to the imperial court.

古文：孝武帝大明三年十一月己巳，肃慎氏献楛矢石砮，高丽国译而至。
现代文：孝武帝大明三年十一月己巳曰，肃慎氏献楛木箭杆和石制箭镞，通过高丽国译使辗转而至。
English: In November of the 3rd year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu said that Sushen's offering of wooden arrow shafts and stone arrowheads had been translated into Korean.

古文：大明五年正月戊午元日，花雪降殿庭。
现代文：大明五年正月戊午元旦，花雪降落宫殿前面。
English: At noon on New Year's Day in the first month of the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, flowers and snow fell in front of the palace.

古文：时右卫将军谢庄下殿，雪集衣。
现代文：当时右卫将军谢莅走下宫殿，花雪落在他的衣服上。
English: At that time, the right guard general Xie Jun walked down the palace, and snowflakes fell on his clothes.

古文：还白，上以为瑞。
现代文：他又返回宫殿报告，皇上认为这是祥瑞。
English: He returned to the palace to report that the emperor thought it was Xiang Rui.

古文：于是公卿并作花雪诗。史臣按《诗》云： 先集为霰。 
现代文：于是公卿大臣都作花雪诗史臣按：《诗经》说： 起先凝聚的是霰。 
English: As a result, the nobles and ministers all wrote flowery poems, according to the scholar: "The Book of Songs says: The first thing to coalesce is the cocoon.

古文：《韩诗》曰： 霰，英也。 
现代文：《韩诗》说： 霰，就是英。 
English: "Hangul Poetry" says:, is ying.

古文：花叶谓之英。
现代文：花叶就叫做英。
English: The flowers and leaves are called ying.

古文：《离骚》云： 秋菊之落英。 
现代文：《离骚》说： 秋菊之落英。 
English: "Isso" said: The autumn chrysanthemum has fallen.

古文：左思云 落英飘濆 是也。
现代文：左墨说 落英飘飘 就是这个意思。
English: That's what Zuo Mo meant when he said, "Lok Ying Piao Piao."

古文：然则霰为花雪矣。
现代文：由此可见，霰就是花雪了。
English: From this, it can be seen that the dragonfly is the flower snow.

古文：草木花多五出，花雪独六出。
现代文：草木的花多数为五办，而花雪却有六办。
English: Most flowers of plants and trees have five petals, but snowflakes have six.

古文：明帝泰始二年五月甲寅，赭中获石柏长三尺二寸，广三尺五寸，扬州刺史建安王休仁以献。
现代文：宋明帝蚕始二年五月甲寅，赭中得到石柏，长有三尺二寸，宽有三尺五寸，扬州刺史建安王刘休仁献上朝廷。
English: In the second year of Emperor Song Ming's reign, in May of the year of Jia Yin, he obtained a stone cypress tree in the middle of the cocoon, with a length of three feet two inches and a width of three feet five inches, and presented it to the imperial court by Liu Xuren, the king of Jian'an in Yangzhou.

古文：泰始三年十一月乙卯，盱眙获石柏，宁朔将军段佛荣以献。
现代文：泰始三年十一月乙卯日，盱眙得到石柏，宁朔将军段佛荣献上朝廷。
English: On the second day of November in the third year of Taizhi, Zou obtained the stone cypress, and presented the Ningshuo General Duan Buddha Rong to the imperial court.

古文：汉和帝在位十七年，郡国言瑞应八十余品，帝让而不宣。
现代文：汉和帝在位十七年，各郡国报告各种吉祥的符瑞达八十多种，皇帝谦让而没有宣布。
English: In the seventeenth year of Emperor Han He's reign, counties and states reported more than eighty kinds of auspicious signs, but the emperor humbly conceded and did not announce them.

