古文：长沙威王晃字宣明，高帝第四子也。
现代文：长沙威王萧晃字宣明，是高帝的第四个儿子。
English: Emperor Gao's fourth son, King Xiao Huan of Changsha Wei, was named Xuanming.

古文：少有武力，爲高帝所爱。
现代文：少年的时候就很有武力，被高帝所宠爱。
English: When he was a boy, he was very strong and was favored by Emperor Gao.

古文：升明二年，代兄映爲淮南、宣城二郡太守。
现代文：升明二年，代替哥哥萧映为淮南、宣城二郡太守。
English: In the second year after his ascension, he replaced his brother Xiao Ying as the governor of Huainan and Xuancheng two counties.

古文：晃便弓马，初沈攸之事起，晃多从武容，赫弈都街，时人爲之语曰： 焕焕萧四伞。 
现代文：萧晃熟悉弓箭和骑马，起初沈攸之事变发生，萧晃带着很多武人，在街道上耀武扬威，当时的人们说他是 焕焕萧四伞 。
English: Xiao Huan was familiar with bows and arrows and horseback riding. At the beginning of the Shen Yue incident, Xiao Huan took a lot of warriors and showed off in the streets. At that time, people said that he was Huan Huan and Xiao Si Umbrella.

古文：其年，迁西中郎将、豫州刺史，监二州诸军事。
现代文：当年，调任西中郎将、豫州刺史，监二州诸军事。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the post of West Vice Admiral and Yuzhou Vice Admiral, supervising the military affairs of the two states.

古文：高帝践阼，晃每陈政事，辄爲典签所裁，晃杀之。
现代文：高帝登基，萧晃每次论说政事，都被典签所删减，萧晃就把他给杀了。
English: When Emperor Gao ascended to the throne, every time Xiao Xuan talked about politics, it was censored by the censors, and Xiao Xuan killed him.

古文：上大怒，手诏赐杖。
现代文：皇上大怒，亲手写了诏书命令对他进行杖打。
English: Enraged, the emperor personally wrote an edict ordering him to be beaten with a cane.

古文：迁南徐州刺史，加都督。
现代文：改任他为南徐州刺史，加官为都督。
English: He was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou Province, and was promoted to the governor of the capital.

古文：武帝爲皇太子，拜武进陵，于曲阿后湖斗队，使晃御马军，上闻之，又不悦。
现代文：武帝做皇太子，去参拜武进陵，在曲阿后湖让军兵对打，使萧晃带领马军。皇上听说后，又不高兴。
English: Emperor Wu, as the crown prince, went to visit the Wujin Mausoleum, let the soldiers fight in the Quahou Lake, and let Xiao Huan lead the horse army. After hearing this, the emperor was not happy.

古文：临崩，以晃属武帝，处以辇毂近蕃，勿令远出。
现代文：临死的时候，把萧晃交代给了武帝，嘱咐把他安排在京城附近地区，不要让他远出。
English: When he was on the verge of death, he gave Xiao Xing to Emperor Wu, and ordered him to be placed in the area near the capital, not to let him go far away.

古文：永明元年，以晃爲都督、南徐州刺史。
现代文：永明元年，以萧晃为都督、南徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, Xiao Ao was appointed as the governor of the capital, and the history of South Xuzhou was written.

古文：入爲中书监。
现代文：入京后做了中书监。
English: After moving to Tokyo, he became a middle school librarian.

古文：时禁诸王蓄仗，在都下者，唯置捉刀左右四十人。
现代文：当时禁止诸王设置仪仗，在京城的，只许设带刀卫士四十人。
English: At that time, it was forbidden for kings to stage ceremonial battles. In the capital, only forty guards with swords were allowed.

古文：晃爱武饰，罢徐州还，私载数百人仗还都，爲禁司所觉，投之江中。
现代文：萧晃喜爱武装铺排，从徐州免职回来，私自载了数百人的仪仗还京，被宫中主管部门发觉，给他投到了江中。
English: Xiao Yang loved the armed parade. When he returned from Xuzhou after being relieved of duty, he carried hundreds of people back to Beijing for the ceremonial battle. The competent department of the palace discovered this and threw him into the river.

古文：帝闻之大怒，将纠以法，豫章王嶷稽首流涕曰： 晃罪诚不足宥，陛下当忆先朝念白象。 
现代文：武帝听说后大怒，将要依法处置，豫章王萧嶷叩头流泪说： 萧晃的罪确实不可宽恕，但是陛下应当回忆先朝很可怜白象。 
English: Emperor Wu was furious when he heard about it and said that it would be dealt with according to the law. King Yuanzhang bowed to Xiao Wei and shed tears, saying: Xiao Wei's crime is indeed unforgivable, but His Majesty should remember that the previous government was very sorry for the white elephant.

古文：白象，晃小字也。
现代文：白象，是萧晃的小字。
English: The white elephant is Xiao Xiang's small character.

古文：上亦垂泣。
现代文：皇上也流下了眼泪。
English: The Emperor also shed tears.

古文：高帝大渐时，戒武帝曰： 宋氏若骨肉不相图，佗族岂得乘其弊？
现代文：高帝病危时，曾经告诫武帝说： 宋朝皇族如果兄弟间不互相残害，其他家族哪能钻他们的空子？
English: When Emperor Gao was critically ill, he once admonished Emperor Wu, saying: If the imperial family of the Song Dynasty did not kill each other, how could other families take advantage of them?

古文：汝深戒之。 
现代文：你要深深地以此为戒。 
English: You should be deeply aware of this.

古文：故武帝终无异意，然晃亦不见亲宠。
现代文：所以武帝终于没有其他意图，然而萧晃也得不到亲宠。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu finally had no other intention, but Xiao Ao did not get the favor.

古文：当时论者，以武帝优于魏文，减于汉明。
现代文：当时的舆论，认为武帝优于魏文帝，而不及汉明帝。
English: At that time, the public opinion held that Emperor Wu was superior to Emperor Wei, but inferior to Emperor Han.

古文：后拜车骑将军、侍中。
现代文：后来任命他为车骑将军、侍中。
English: Later, he was appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry and Vice-Admiral.

古文：薨，赠开府仪同三司。
现代文：死后，赠开府仪同三司。
English: After his death, he bequeathed the imperial regalia and the three offices.

古文：武帝尝幸锺山，晃从驾。
现代文：武帝曾经游览钟山，萧晃随行。
English: Emperor Wu once visited Zhongshan, accompanied by Emperor Xiao.

古文：以马矟刺道边枯櫱，上令左右数人引之，银缠皆卷聚而矟不出，乃令晃复驰马拔之，应手便去。
现代文：卫队以马槊刺路边的枯树，皇上让身边的几个人共同牵拽，缠上绳子一齐用力而槊不出来，于是便让萧晃骑马来拔，结果应手而出。
English: The guards pricked the dead tree on the roadside with a horse's bridle, and the emperor let several people around him pull it together, wrapped the rope together and couldn't pull it out, so he let Xiao Xing ride his horse to pull it out, and the result was a success.

古文：每远州献骏马，上辄令晃于华林中调试之。
现代文：每次边远州郡贡献了骏马，皇上便派萧晃在华林园中进行调试。
English: Each time the outlying prefectures contributed a horse, the emperor sent Xiao Jiao to debug the horse in the Hualin Garden.

古文：高帝常曰： 此我家任城也。 
现代文：高帝常说： 这是我家的任城王。 
English: Gao Di often said: This is the king of the city of my family.

古文：武帝缘此意，故諡曰威。
现代文：武帝借着这个意思，所以追谥他叫作 威 。
English: Emperor Wu took this to mean that, so the pursuit of him was called Wei.

古文：武陵昭王晔字宣昭，高帝第五子也。
现代文：武陵昭王萧晔字宣昭，是高帝的第五个儿子。
English: Wuling Zhao Wang Xiao Zi Zi Xuan Zhao was the fifth son of Emperor Gao.

古文：母罗氏，从高帝在淮阴，以罪诛。
现代文：母亲罗氏，跟随高帝在淮阴，因为有罪被杀。
English: Mother Luo, who followed Gao in Huaiyin, was killed because she was guilty.

古文：晔年四岁，思慕不异成人，每恸吐血。
现代文：萧晔当时四岁，思慕不异于成人，常常悲痛得吐血。
English: At that time, Xiao Yao was four years old. Her yearning was no different from that of an adult, and she often vomited blood out of grief.

古文：高帝敕武帝曰： 三昧至性如此，恐不济，汝可与共住，每抑割之。 
现代文：高帝下令给武帝说： 三昧这么任性，恐怕不好，你可以和他一齐住，常常控制开导他。 
English: Gao Di gave an order to Wu Di, saying, "Sanmai is so headstrong, I'm afraid it's not good. You can live with him and often control and enlighten him."

古文：三昧，晔小字也。
现代文：三昧，是萧晔的小字。
English: Sanmai is Xiao Yao's nickname.

古文：故晔见爱。
现代文：所以萧晔受到宠爱。
English: That's why Xiao Yao is so beloved.

古文：高帝虽爲方伯，而居处甚贫，诸子学书无纸笔，晔常以指画空中及画掌学字，遂工篆法。
现代文：高帝虽然做为地方长官，但生活过得很贫困，几个儿子学习写字没有纸笔，萧晔常常用手指画空中或者画手掌学字，于是精于篆法。
English: Although Gao Di was a local magistrate, he lived a very poor life. Several of his sons did not have paper and pen to learn to write. Xiao Yao often used his fingers to draw the sky or paint the palms of his hands to learn to write, so he was good at calligraphy.

古文：少时又无棋局，乃破荻爲片，纵横以爲棋局，指点行势，遂至名品。
现代文：少年时期又没有棋盘，便破芦获为片，横竖编在一起成为棋盘，指点棋路，终于成名品。
English: When he was a boy, he did not have a chessboard, so he broke the reed into pieces, knitted them together horizontally and vertically to become a chessboard, pointed out the chess way, and finally became a famous product.

古文：性刚颖俊出，与诸王共作短句诗，学谢灵运体，以呈高帝。
现代文：他性格刚强颖悟，十分杰出，曾经和几个王共同作短句诗，学谢灵运体，呈送给高帝。
English: He had a strong and brilliant character, and was very outstanding. He once made a short poem with several kings to thank the spirit carrier, and presented it to Emperor Gao.

古文：帝报曰： 见汝二十字，诸儿作中，最爲优者。
现代文：高帝回答说： 见到了你的二十字，在诸儿的作品中，最为优秀。
English: Gaudi replied: "I have seen your Two Crosses, which is the best of all your works.

古文：但康乐放荡，作体不辨有首尾，安仁、士衡深可宗尚，顔延之抑其次也。 
现代文：只是谢康乐放荡，作体辨不出首尾，潘安仁、陆士衡深可以效法，颜延之稍次。 
English: It's just that Xie Kangle is debauched, and the work can't tell the beginning from the end. Pan Anren and Lu Shi Heng Sheng can follow suit, and Yan Yan is a little behind.

古文：建元二年，爲会稽太守，加都督。
现代文：建元二年，担任会稽太守，加任都督。
English: In the second year of the first century, he served as the auditor-general of the association, and was also appointed as the governor.

古文：上遣儒士刘瓛往郡，爲晔讲五经。
现代文：皇上派遣儒士刘前往郡中，为萧晔讲《五经》。
English: The emperor sent the Confucianist Liu to Guanzhong to recite the Five Classics for Xiao Yao.

古文：武帝即位，历中书令、祠部尚书。
现代文：武帝即位，历任中书令、祠部尚书。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and all the succeeding emperors issued imperial edicts, and the ancestral hall kept imperial edicts.

古文：巫觋或言晔有非常之相，以此自负，武帝闻之，故无宠，未尝处方岳。
现代文：有的巫觋说萧晔有不平凡的相貌，他以此自负，武帝听说了，所以不受宠爱，一直没有担任地方长官。
English: Some sorcerers said that Xiao Yao had an extraordinary appearance, he was conceited with this, Emperor Wu heard about it, so he was not favored and had not served as a local governor.

古文：于御坐曲宴，醉伏地，貂抄肉柈。帝笑曰： 汙貂。 
现代文：有一次在皇帝那里参加私宴，喝醉了酒趴在地上，貂皮衣服打翻了肉盘。皇帝笑着说： 弄脏了貂皮。 
English: Once, when attending a banquet at the emperor's place, he got drunk and lay on the floor. His mink coat knocked over a plate of meat. The emperor smiled and said, "I've soiled my mink coat."

古文：对曰： 陛下爱其羽毛，而疏其骨肉。 
现代文：回答说： 陛下爱惜羽毛，而疏远骨肉。 
English: He replied, "Your Majesty is fond of feathers, but he is estranged from flesh and blood.

古文：帝不悦。
现代文：皇帝很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was not happy to hear this.

古文：性轻财重义，有古人风。
现代文：他平时性格轻财重义，有古人的遗风。
English: He usually has a character of valuing wealth over righteousness, which is a legacy of the ancients.

古文：罢会稽还都，斋中钱不满万，俸禄所入，皆与参佐宾僚共之。
现代文：罢免了会稽的职务，回到了京城，斋中的钱不满一万，俸禄收入，都和手下的官员们共同使用。
English: He was dismissed from the post of auditor and returned to Beijing. He had less than 10,000 yuan in his pocket, and his salary income was shared with his subordinate officials.

古文：常曰： 兄作天子，何畏弟无钱。 
现代文：他常常说： 哥哥做天子，怎么还怕弟弟没有钱！ 
English: He often said: "My brother is the son of God, how can I be afraid that my brother has no money!

古文：居止附身所须而已。
现代文：住处仅有自身生活所需要的东西。
English: They only have what they need to live.

古文：名后堂山爲首阳，盖怨贫薄也。
现代文：他给后堂山取名为首阳山，就是埋怨家中贫困。
English: He gave the name "Shouyang Mountain" to Houtang Mountain to complain about poverty in his family.

古文：尝于武帝前与竟陵王子良围棋，子良大北。
现代文：他曾在武帝面前和竟陵王萧子良围棋，萧子良大败。
English: He once played Go in front of Emperor Wu against King Xiao Ziliang, and Xiao Ziliang lost badly.

古文：及退，豫章文献王谓晔曰： 汝与司徒手谈，故当小相推让。 
现代文：退下以后，豫章文献王对萧晔说： 你和司徒手谈，应当小有推让。 
English: After retreating, Yu Zhang, the king of literature, said to Xiao Yao: You and Szeto should talk face to face and make concessions.

古文：答曰： 晔立身以来，未尝一口妄语。 
现代文：回答说： 萧晔立身以来，不曾有过一句虚话。 
English: He replied, "Since Xiao Jun took office, he has never uttered a false word.

古文：执心疏婞，偏不知悔。
现代文：由于坚持自己的主见而受到皇帝疏远，但是他又不知道后悔。
English: He was shunned by the emperor for standing up for his beliefs, but he had no regrets.

古文：好文章，射爲当时独绝，琅邪王瞻亦称善射，而不及晔也。
现代文：他爱好文章，射箭在当时是独具的绝招，琅笽王刘瞻也号称善射，而不如萧晔。
English: He was fond of writing. At that time, archery was a unique skill. Liu Zhan, the king of Qi, was also known to be a good archer, but not as good as Xiao Yu.

古文：武帝幸豫章王嶷东田，宴诸长王，独不召晔。
现代文：武帝到东田去看豫章王萧嶷，宴请各个长官和诸王，独独不召见萧晔。
English: Emperor Wu went to Dongtian to see Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi, invited various officials and kings to the banquet, but did not invite Xiaoqi.

古文：嶷曰： 风景殊美，今日甚忆武陵。 
现代文：萧嶷说： 风景很美，今天很想念武陵。 
English: Xiao Yao said: The scenery is very beautiful. I miss Wuling very much today.

古文：上仍呼使射，屡发命中，顾四坐曰： 手何如？ 
现代文：皇上才派人把他叫来让他射箭，屡发命中，环顾四座说： 手艺怎样？ 
English: Only then did the Emperor send someone to summon him so that he could shoot arrows. He repeatedly hit the target, looked around and said, "How is your skill?

古文：上神色甚怪，嶷曰： 阿五常日不尔，今可谓仰藉天威。 
现代文：皇上神色很奇怪，萧嶷说： 阿五平常不是这样，今天可以说是仰借您的天威。 
English: The emperor's expression was very strange. Xiao Yu said: Ah Wu, this is not usually the case. Today, we can say that we are relying on your divine power.

古文：帝意乃释。
现代文：皇上的怒意才有所缓解。
English: Only then did the emperor's anger subside.

古文：后于华林射赌，凡六箭，五破一皮，赐钱五万文。
现代文：后来在华林射箭打赌，共六支箭，有五支都射穿了同一个皮箭靶，赐钱五万文。
English: Later, he placed a bet on archery in Waring. A total of six arrows, five of which shot through the same target, won him 50,000 yuan.

古文：又上举酒劝晔，曰： 陛下常不以此处许臣。 
现代文：又皇上举酒劝萧晔，萧晔说： 陛下常常不在这里称赞臣子。 
English: The emperor also offered wine to persuade Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao said, "Your Majesty often does not come here to praise his vassals.

古文：上回面不答。
现代文：皇上扭脸不答。
English: The Emperor made a face and did not answer.

古文：豫章王于邸起土山，列种桐竹，号爲桐山。
现代文：豫章王在宅院里建起了一座土山，依次种上了桐树和竹子，号为桐山。
English: King Yuanzhang built a mound of earth in his courtyard, and successively planted paulownia trees and bamboo, which he called paulownia.

古文：武帝幸之，置酒爲乐，顾临川王映： 王邸亦有嘉名不？ 
现代文：武帝前去视察，摆下酒宴为乐，回头看着临川王萧映说： 王家的宅院中也有嘉名吧！ 
English: Emperor Wu went to inspect, put on a wine banquet for fun, looked back at Linchuan King Xiao Ying and said: There is also fame in the royal court!

古文：映曰： 臣好栖静，因以爲称。 
现代文：萧映说： 臣喜爱栖静，于是便以此为称号。 
English: Xiao Ying said, "The minister likes to live quietly, so he chose this as his title."

古文：又问晔，晔曰： 臣山卑，不曾栖灵昭景，唯有薇蕨，直号首阳山。 
现代文：又问萧晔，萧晔说： 臣家的山低，不曾栖灵昭影，只有薇蕨，所以直接称作首阳山。 
English: He also asked Xiao Yu, and Xiao Yu said: The mountain of the minister's family is low, and there is no ghost, only vines, so it is directly called Shouyang Mountain.

古文：帝曰： 此直劳者之歌也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这便是劳动者的歌谣。 
English: The emperor said, "This is the workers' song."

古文：久之，出爲江州刺史。
现代文：过了好久，调出京城担任江州刺史。
English: After a long time, he was transferred out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：上以晔方出镇，求其宅给诸皇子，遣舍人喻旨。
现代文：皇上因为萧晔刚刚出外镇守，想求他的宅院让几个皇子去住，派舍人前去传达旨意。
English: The emperor, because Xiao Yu just went out to guard the town, wanted to ask his court to let several princes live there and send someone to convey his will.

古文：晔曰： 先帝赐臣此宅，使臣歌哭有所，陛下欲以州易宅，臣请不以宅易州。 
现代文：萧晔说： 先帝赐给臣这片宅院，使臣歌哭有个地方，陛下想用州来换宅院，臣请求不用宅院来换州。 
English: Xiao Yao said: The previous emperor gave this house to the minister, and there is a place for the minister to sing and cry. His Majesty wanted to use the state to change the house, and the minister asked not to use the house to change the state.

古文：帝恨之。
现代文：皇帝非常恼恨。
English: The emperor was furious.

古文：至镇百馀日，典签赵渥之啓晔得失，征还爲左户尚书。
现代文：到了镇上一百多天，典签赵渥之上表参奏萧晔的缺失，征还为左户尚书。
English: More than a hundred days after arriving in the town, the absence of the signature of Zhao Wou and the participation of Xiao Wei on the table, the collection is also a left-handed book.

古文：迁太常卿。
现代文：迁任太常卿。
English: He was promoted to Taijo-kyo.

古文：累不得志。
现代文：多次都不得志。
English: I have been discouraged many times.

古文：冬节问讯，诸王皆出，晔独后来，上已还便殿，闻晔至，引见，问之，晔称牛羸不能取路。
现代文：冬天的节日问候，诸王都出去了，萧晔独自最后进来，皇上已经回到便殿，听到萧晔到来，让人引见了他，一问，萧晔说是牛有病不能走快。
English: Winter festival greetings, all the kings went out, Xiao Yao alone came in last, the emperor had already returned to the hall, heard Xiao Yao arrived, let people introduce him, one question, Xiao Yao said that the cow was sick and could not walk fast.

古文：上敕车府给副御牛一头。
现代文：皇上下令车府要发给御牛一头。
English: The emperor decreed that Chefu should be given one head of oxen.

古文：敕主客自今诸王来不随例者，不复爲通。
现代文：下令给主客从今以后诸王前来不随大家公例的，不再给予通融。
English: He ordered the host and guests that from now on, if kings come and do not follow everyone's rules, they will no longer be given tolerance.

古文：公事还，过竟陵王子良宅，冬月道逢乞人，脱襦与之。
现代文：有一次办完公事回来，路过竟陵王萧子良的宅院，在冬月路上遇见了一个乞丐，便脱掉身上的棉袄。
English: Once, after returning from a business trip, he passed by the house of Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum. On his way, he met a beggar and took off his cotton socks.

古文：子良见晔衣单，进襦于晔。
现代文：送给了他。萧子良见萧晔衣服单薄，便送了一件棉袄给萧晔。
English: Xiao Zi Liang thought Xiao Yao's clothes were too thin, so he sent a pair of cotton socks to Xiao Yao.

古文：晔曰： 我与向人亦复何异。 
现代文：萧晔说： 我与刚才的那个人又有什么区别！ 
English: Xiao Yao said: What's the difference between me and that person just now!

古文：尚书令王俭诣晔，晔留俭设食，盘中菘菜鱯鱼而已。
现代文：尚书令王俭去找萧晔，萧晔留下王俭为他设了饭，盘中只有菘菜咸鱼。
English: Shang Shu ordered Wang Jian to find Xiao Yao. Xiao Yao left Wang Jian to prepare a meal for him, with only pickled fish on the plate.

古文：俭重其率真，爲饱食尽欢而去。
现代文：王俭看重他的待人真率，为此饱餐一顿，尽欢而去。
English: Wang Jian valued his sincerity in dealing with people, so he had a hearty meal and left happily.

古文：寻爲丹阳尹，始不复置行事，自得亲政。
现代文：不久他担任了丹阳尹，开始不再设置行事，自己亲理政务。
English: Soon, he assumed the post of Danyang Yin, and began to no longer set up and act, but to personally manage government affairs.

古文：转侍中、护军将军，给油络车，又给扶二人。
现代文：转为侍中、护军将军，配给油络车，又给扶护二人。
English: He was transferred to the position of an attendant and a general of the escorting troops, and was assigned to an oil tanker and two guards.

古文：凡诸王被害，皆以夜遣兵围宅，或斧斫关排墙，叫噪而入，家财皆见封籍焉。
现代文：武帝临死的时候，遗诏让他做卫将军、开府仪同三司。死后殡殓，竟陵王萧子良在殿内，太孙没有来到，众人议论喧哗，存有疑心，萧晔在众人中说： 如果立长，则应该立我；如果立嫡，则应该立太孙。 
English: When Emperor Wu was on the verge of death, he made him the commander of the imperial guard, the head of the imperial household, and the third secretary. After his death, the funeral was held, but King Xiao Ziliang was in the hall, and the great-grandson did not come. People talked loudly, and there was suspicion. Xiao Zi said among the crowd: "If you set up a leader, you should set me up; if you set up an heir, you should set up a great-grandson."

古文：桂阳王铄字宣朗，高帝第八子也。
现代文：等郁林王立，对他非常依赖。隆昌元年去世，赠他为司空，仪仗二十人。桂阳王萧铄字宣朗，是高帝的第八个儿子。
English: Longchang died in the first year of the year, and he gave him the title of Siku, with the honor of twenty people. Guiyang King Xiao Xuan Zi Xuan Lang was the eighth son of Emperor Gao.

古文：永明七年爲中书令，加散骑常侍。
现代文：永明七年任中书令，加官为散骑常侍。
English: In the seventh year of Yongming's reign, he held the post of secretary, and was promoted to the position of errand horse attendant.

古文：时鄱阳王锵好文章，铄好名理，人称爲鄱桂。
现代文：当时鄱阳王萧锵喜好文章，萧铄喜好名理，被人们合称为鄱桂。
English: At that time, the king of Shenyang, Xiao Jie, liked articles, and Xiao Jie liked fame and fame, and was collectively known as Jie Gui.

古文：铄清羸有冷疾，常枕卧，武帝临视，赐床帐衾褥。
现代文：萧铄清瘦有冷疾，常常就枕卧床，武帝前去探望，赐给他床帐被褥。
English: Xiao Yueqing was thin and had a cold, so he often slept with a pillow. Emperor Wu went to visit him and gave him a bed sheet and pillow.

古文：性理偏詖，遇其赏兴，则诗酒连日，情有所废，则兄弟不通。
现代文：他性格偏颇，遇到他兴致高时，则作诗饮酒一连数日，感情颓丧时，则亲兄弟也不相通。
English: His character is biased. When he is in high spirits, he will write poetry and drink alcohol for days on end. When he is depressed, his brothers do not communicate with each other.

古文：隆昌元年，加前将军，给油络车，并给扶二人。
现代文：隆昌元年，加官为前将军，配备油络车，并给服侍者二人。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, the additional officer was a former general, equipped with an oil tanker, and gave two waiters.

古文：鄱阳王见害，铄迁中军将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：鄱阳王被害后，萧铄改任中军将军、开府仪同三司。
English: After the death of King Shenyang, Xiao Wei was appointed as the general of the Chinese army and the third secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：不自安，至东府见明帝，及出，处分存亡之计。
现代文：他感到不能自安，便到东府去见明帝，出来以后，便考虑自己的存亡之计。
English: He felt insecure, so he went to Dongfu to see Emperor Ming. After he came out, he considered his survival strategy.

古文：上爲南康王子琳起青杨巷第，新成，车驾与后宫幸第乐饮。
现代文：对侍读山胔说： 我前天去晋见皇上，皇上流着眼泪低声哭泣，而鄱阳王、随郡王便被杀死。今天见了皇上，皇上又流眼泪，而且有愧色，恐怕是针对我的吧！ 
English: I went to see the Emperor the day before yesterday, and the Emperor shed tears and wept in a low voice, while the Kings of Poyang and Su County were killed. Today, when I saw the Emperor, he shed tears again, and he was ashamed, I'm afraid it was because of me!

古文：其日鉴疾甚，上遣骑诏问疾相继，爲之止乐。
现代文：当天夜里三更的时候，宫中卫兵到来，他也被杀害。
English: On the same night, when it was time for the third watch, the palace guard arrived, and he was also killed.

古文：寻薨。江夏王锋字宣颖，高帝第十二子也。
现代文：江夏王萧锋字宣颖，是高帝的第十二个儿子。
English: Xiaofeng, also known as Xuanying, the King of Jiangxia, was the twelfth son of Emperor Gao.

古文：母张氏有容德，宋苍梧王逼取之，又欲害锋。
现代文：母亲张氏有容貌和德行，宋朝的苍梧王逼着要娶她，又想要害死萧锋。
English: Zhang's mother was good-looking and virtuous. King Cangwu of the Song Dynasty forced her to marry him and tried to kill Xiao Feng.

古文：高帝甚惧，不敢使居旧宅，匿于张氏舍，时年四岁。
现代文：高帝十分恐惧，不敢让他住在旧宅里，而把他藏在张氏的家中，当时是四岁。
English: Gao Di, who was four years old at the time, was too scared to let him live in the old house, so he hid him in Zhang's home.

古文：性方整，好学书，张家无纸劄，乃倚井栏爲书，书满则洗之，已复更书，如此者累月。
现代文：他性格方正，喜爱学习书法，张家没有纸，他就靠着井栏写字，写满了就洗掉，然后再写，就这样过了几个月。
English: His character is upright, he likes to learn calligraphy, the Zhang family does not have paper, so he writes against the well rail, washes it off when it is full, and then writes again. This is how the past few months have passed.

古文：又晨兴不肯拂窗尘，而先画尘上，学爲书字。
现代文：又早晨起来不肯拂去窗户上的尘土，而先在尘土上画道，学习写字。
English: And in the morning, instead of brushing the dust off the window, he would draw on the dust to learn how to write.

古文：五岁，高帝使学凤尾诺，一学即工。
现代文：五岁时，高帝让他学习凤尾诺，一学就很好。
English: At the age of five, Gao Di asked him to study Feng Xiong Niu, and he was very good at it.

古文：高帝大悦，以玉骐驎赐之，曰： 骐驎赏凤尾矣。 
现代文：高帝十分高兴，拿玉麒麟赐给他，说： 这是把麒麟赏给凤尾了。 
English: Emperor Gao was very pleased and gave him the jade unicorn, saying, "This is the unicorn given to Fengwei."

古文：至十岁，便能属文。
现代文：到了十岁，便能写文章。
English: By the age of ten, he could write articles.

古文：武帝时，藩邸严急，诸王不得读异书，五经之外，唯得看孝子图而已。
现代文：武帝的时候，对藩王的府邸规定很严，诸王不许读异书，《五经》之外，只能看《孝子图》。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, the rules for the residence of the king of the domain were very strict. The kings were not allowed to read different books. In addition to the "Five Classics," they could only read the "Patriarchal Chart."

古文：锋乃密遣人于市里街巷买图籍，期月之间，殆将备矣。
现代文：萧锋便秘密地派人在街市里巷中购买图书典籍，一个月之中，差不多都买齐了。
English: Xiao Feng then secretly sent people to buy books in the streets and alleys, and within a month, almost all of them were bought.

古文：好琴书，盖亦天性。
现代文：喜爱琴书，大概也是他的天性。
English: He loves music books, which is probably also his nature.

古文：尝觐武帝，赐以宝装琴，仍于御前鼓之，大见赏。
现代文：他曾经去看望武帝，武帝赐给了他一架宝装琴，他便在武帝前弹奏起来，大受赞赏。
English: He once went to see Emperor Wu, who gave him a treasure-decorated qin, and he played it in front of Emperor Wu, which was greatly appreciated.

古文：帝谓鄱阳王锵曰： 闍梨琴亦是柳令之流亚，其既事事有意，吾欲试以临人。 
现代文：武帝对鄱阳王萧锵说： 梨弹琴也是柳令一类，他既然事事有意，我想试着让他以此去对民众。 
English: Emperor Wu said to Xiao Yao, the King of Shenyang: "Pear playing the piano is also a kind of willow-waving. Since he is interested in everything, I want to try to let him use it to address the people.

古文：锵曰： 昔邹忌鼓琴，威王委以国政。 
现代文：萧锵说： 从前邹忌鼓琴，威王便托付给他国家大政。 
English: Xiao Yao said: Once upon a time, Zhai Yingqin, the King of Wei entrusted him with the country's major affairs.

古文：乃出爲南徐州刺史。
现代文：于是便调出去做南徐州刺史。
English: As a result, he was transferred to South Xuzhou to become a historian.

古文：善与人交，行事王文和、别驾江祏等，皆相友善。
现代文：他善于和人交往，与行事王文和、别驾江纏等，都互相友好。
English: He is good at interacting with people, and he is friendly with Wang Wenhe, Bei Kaijiang, and so on.

古文：后文和被征爲益州，置酒告别，文和流泪曰： 下官少来未尝作诗，今日违恋，不觉文生于性。 
现代文：后来王文和被征为益州刺史，置酒告别，王文和流着眼泪说： 下官从少年以来就不曾作诗，今日分别十分依恋，不觉得文思生于情感。 
English: Later, Wang Wenzhe was conscripted as a historian of Yizhou and bid farewell with wine. Wang Wenzhe said with tears: The lower-ranking official has not written poetry since he was a boy. Today, he is very attached to it and does not feel that poetry is born of emotion.

古文：王俭闻之，曰： 江夏可谓善变素丝也。 
现代文：王俭听到后说： 江夏王可以说是善于感化的丝弦啊。 
English: After listening to Wang Jian, he said: Jiangxia Wang can be said to be good at influencing silk strings.

古文：工书，爲当时蕃王所推。
现代文：萧锋精于书法，为当时的藩王所推重。
English: Xiao Feng was good at calligraphy, which was highly valued by the king of the domain at the time.

古文：南郡王昭业亦称工，谓武帝曰： 臣书固应胜江夏王。 
现代文：南郡王萧昭业也以精于书法见称，他对武帝说： 我的书法当然应该胜过江夏王。 
English: Xiao Zhaoye, the king of Nan County, was also known for his proficiency in calligraphy. He said to Emperor Wu: Of course, my calligraphy should be better than that of King Jiangxia.

古文：武帝答： 闍梨第一，法身第二。 
现代文：武帝回答说： 梨第一，法身第二。 
English: Emperor Wu replied: Pear first, Dharma body second.

古文：法身昭业小名，闍梨锋小名也。
现代文：法身，是萧昭业的小名；梨，是萧锋的小名。
English: Dharma body is Xiao Zhaoye's nickname; pear is Xiao Feng's nickname.

古文：隆昌元年，爲侍中，领骁骑将军，寻加秘书监。
现代文：隆昌元年，他担任侍中，兼领骁骑将军，不久加任秘书监。
English: In the first year of Longchang, he served as a chamberlain, concurrently leading the cavalry general, and soon he was appointed as a secretary supervisor.

古文：及明帝知权，蕃邸危惧，江祏尝谓王晏曰： 江夏王有才行，亦善能匿迹，以琴道授羊景之，景之着名，而江夏掩能于世，非唯七弦而已，百氏亦复如之。 
现代文：后来明帝掌权，藩王危惧，江纏曾经对王晏说： 江夏王有才能和德行，也善于隐遁形迹，他以琴道教授羊景之，景之成了著名人物，而江夏王却在世上掩盖着自己的才能，这不只是会弹七弦而已，对于诸子百家也是一样。 
English: Later, when Emperor Ming was in power and the lords of the domain were worried, Jiang Tang once said to Wang Xuan: Jiang Xiao Wang has talent and virtue, and is also good at concealing his appearance. He taught Yang Jingzhi how to play the piano, and Jingzhi became a famous person. However, Jiang Xiao Wang hides his talent in the world. It is not just about being able to play the seven strings, it is the same for all the sons and daughters.

古文：锋闻叹曰： 江祏遂复爲混沌画眉，欲益反弊耳。
现代文：萧锋听到后叹息说： 江纏成了又一个混沌画眉的张敞，想着帮忙反倒惹祸了。
English: Xiao Feng sighed after listening: Jiang tangled into another chaotic Zhang Zhan, thinking to help but getting into trouble.

古文：寡人声酒是耽,狗马是好，岂复一豪于平生哉。 
现代文：我只喜欢音乐饮酒，爱好戏狗走马，哪里需要去豪迈一番呢！ 
English: I only like music and drinking, I like to play with dogs and walk horses, where do I need to go for a ride!

古文：当时以爲话言。
现代文：当时的人们把这当成了话题。
English: People were talking about it at the time.

古文：常忽忽不乐，着修柏赋以见志，曰： 既殊群而抗立，亦含贞而挺正。
现代文：他常常烦闷不乐，写了一篇《修柏赋》来表达自己的志向，说： 不仅超群而高耸，同时坚贞而挺拔。
English: He was often bored and unhappy, and wrote an essay, "Shuibao Fu," to express his aspirations, saying: "Not only superior and towering, but also steadfast and upright."

古文：岂春日之自芳，在霜下而爲盛。
现代文：哪是春天才芬芳，处在霜下更茂盛。
English: Which is fragrant only in spring, and grows more luxuriant in frost.

古文：冲风不能摧其枝，积雪不能改其性。
现代文：暴风不能摧折它的枝条，积雪不能改变它的本性。
English: The storm cannot break its branches, the snow cannot change its nature.

古文：虽坎坛于当年，庶后凋之可咏。 
现代文：虽然当年历经坎坷，但却后凋值得咏叹。 
English: Although that year was a bumpy one, it was worth lamenting afterwards.

古文：时鼎业潜移，锋独慨然有匡复之意，逼之行事典签，故不遂也。
现代文：当时国家大业暗中转移，萧锋独自慨然有复兴的志向，由于受到行事典签的逼迫，所以不能实现。
English: At that time, the great cause of the country was secretly transferred, and Xiao Feng alone had the ambition of revival, which could not be realized due to the persecution of the event.

古文：尝见明帝，言次及遥光才力可委之意，锋答曰： 遥光之于殿下，犹殿下之于高皇，卫宗庙，安社稷，实有攸寄。 
现代文：他曾经见到明帝，谈话间说到萧遥光的才力可以委任的意思，萧锋回答说： 遥光之于殿下，犹如殿下之于高皇，保卫宗庙，安定社稷，实在可以寄托。 
English: He once met Emperor Ming. During the conversation, he said that Xiao Yaoguang's talent could be entrusted to others. Xiao Feng replied: "What Yaoguang is to His Imperial Highness, just as His Imperial Highness is to Emperor Gao, is the protection of the ancestral temple, the stability of the society, and can really be entrusted.

古文：明帝失色。
现代文：明帝听了不禁失色。
English: Emperor Ming couldn't help but lose his composure.

古文：锋有武力，明帝杀诸王，锋与书诘责，左右不爲通。
现代文：萧锋很有武力，明帝杀戮诸王，萧锋给他写信诘问指责，左右的人不给他传送。
English: Xiao Feng was very powerful. The Ming Emperor killed kings. Xiao Feng wrote letters to him, interrogating and criticizing him. People around him would not send them to him.

古文：锐典签叱左右斩之，锐见害，伯玉下狱诛。宜都王铿字宣俨，高帝第十六子也。
现代文：明帝非常害怕，不敢在府第中抓他。萧锋出外登车，兵士想要上车逼迫，萧锋用手击退了数人，都立即倒在地上，于是被杀害了。江纏听说他死去，流着眼泪说： 香兰生在门前，不能不把它除掉，这就是《修柏赋》的深意所在吧！ 宜都王萧铿字宣俨，是高帝的第十六个儿子。
English: Emperor Ming was very afraid and did not dare to catch him in the palace. Xiao Feng went out to board the car, the soldiers wanted to get on the car to force him, Xiao Feng fought off several people with his hand, they all immediately fell to the ground, and then he was killed. Jiang Tang heard that he died and said with tears: Xiang Lansheng is in front of the door, you can't help but get rid of it, that's the deep meaning of "Shubo Fu"! Yidu King Xiao Yu Zi Xuan Zi, is the sixteenth son of Emperor Gao.

古文：生三岁丧母。
现代文：生下来三岁时，死了母亲。
English: When he was three years old, his mother died.

古文：及有识，问母所在，左右告以早亡，便思慕蔬食自悲。
现代文：后来有了知识，就问他的母亲在哪里，身边的人告诉他母亲早亡，他便非常思慕，以吃蔬菜淡饭表示自己的悲伤。
English: Later, when he gained knowledge, he asked where his mother was, and the people around him told him that his mother had died prematurely. He was very pensive, and expressed his sadness by eating vegetable porridge.

古文：不识母，常祈请幽冥，求一梦见。
现代文：他不认识母亲，常常请求阴间官吏，让自己在梦中相见。
English: He does not know his mother and often asks the officials of the underworld to let him see her in his dreams.

古文：至六岁，遂梦见一女人，云是其母。
现代文：到了六岁的时候，终于梦见了一个女人，说是他的母亲。
English: When he was six years old, he finally dreamed of a woman, who he said was his mother.

古文：铿悲泣向旧左右说容貌衣服事，皆如平生，闻者莫不歔欷。
现代文：萧铿悲伤地哭着，向从前他母亲身边的人说起容貌和衣服的情形，都说与活着的时候一样，听到的人无不叹息。
English: Xiao Yao cried with sadness and told the people around his mother about his appearance and clothes. They all said that it was the same as when he was alive. Everyone who heard it sighed.

古文：清悟有学行。
现代文：萧铿清秀敏悟，有学问和德行。
English: Xiao Yingqing was quick-witted, learned and virtuous.

古文：永明十一年，爲南豫州刺史、都督二州军事。
现代文：永明十一年，他做南豫州刺史、都督二州诸军事。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongming, he served as the military governor of two states and the military governor of South Yuzhou.

古文：虽未经庶务，而雅得人心。
现代文：虽然没有负责具体事务，却很得人心。
English: Although he is not responsible for specific matters, he is very popular.

古文：举动每爲签帅所制，立意多不得行。
现代文：他的举动常常受到签帅的制约，设想大多不能实现。
English: His actions are often constrained by the signing of the coach, and most of his ideas cannot be realized.

古文：州镇姑孰，于时人发桓温女冢，得金巾箱，织金篾爲严器，又有金蚕银茧等物甚多。
现代文：在州镇姑孰，当时有人打开了桓温女儿的家，得到了一个金巾箱，用金篾织成的妆具，又有金蚕银茧等物品，数量很多。
English: At that time, someone broke into the home of Huan Wen's daughter in Guzhen, Zhouzhou Town, and obtained a large number of items, including a gold towel box, cosmetics woven with gold braid, and gold silk and silver brooches.

古文：条以啓闻，郁林敕以物赐之。
现代文：萧铿便一一写明启奏皇上知道，皇上诏令拿物品赏赐给他们。
English: Xiao Yao then wrote a manifesto to let the emperor know that the emperor had ordered that the items be given to them.

古文：铿曰： 今取往物，后取今物，如此回圈，岂可不熟念。 
现代文：萧铿说： 现在取了从前的物品，以后再取今天的物品，如此循环，哪能不仔细考虑！ 
English: Xiao Yao said, "If you take the previous item now, and then take today's item later, it's a cycle. You have to think about it carefully!"

古文：使长史蔡约自往修复，纤毫不犯。
现代文：便派长史蔡约前往修复，丝毫没有收取。
English: It then sent its director, Shi Caiyo, to repair the damage, without receiving any compensation.

古文：年十岁时，与吉景曜商略先言往行。
现代文：十岁的时候，他和吉景曜讨论前人的言行。
English: When he was ten years old, he and Yoshigeyo discussed the words and deeds of their predecessors.

古文：左右误排柟榴屏风，倒压其背，顔色不异，言谈无辍，亦不顾视。
现代文：身边的人不小心撞倒了楠榴屏风，倒下来压在他背上，他面色不变，言谈不停，也不回头观看。
English: People around him accidentally knocked down the screen, fell down and pressed on his back, his face unchanged, talking non-stop, and not looking back.

古文：弥善射，常以堋的太阔，曰： 终日射侯，何难之有。 
现代文：他更善于射箭，常常觉得箭靶太宽，说： 成天射箭，有什么难的！ 
English: He is better at archery, often feels that the target is too wide, and says: What's so hard about shooting arrows all day long!

古文：乃取甘蔗插地，百步射之，十发十中。
现代文：于是便取了一枝甘蔗插在地上，在百步远的地方射它，十发十中。
English: So he took a sugar cane, stuck it in the ground, and shot it at a distance of a hundred paces, ten times out of ten.

古文：永明中，制诸王年未三十，不得畜妾。
现代文：永明年间规定，诸王年龄不到三十，不能蓄妾。
English: In the middle of the 7th century, it was decreed that kings under the age of 30 could not have concubines.

古文：及武帝晏驾后，有劝取左右者，铿曰： 在内不无使役，既先朝遗旨，何忍而违。 
现代文：等到武帝去世后，有人劝他娶身边的女子为妾，萧铿说： 在内房中不是没有供使唤的，既然先朝立有遗旨，怎么忍心违犯呢？ 
English: After Emperor Wu died, someone advised him to marry the woman next to him as a concubine. Xiao Yao said, "In the inner chamber, there is no one to serve. Since there is a will left by the first emperor, how can I bear to violate it?"

古文：及延兴元年，明帝诛高、武、文惠诸子，铿闻之，冯左右从容雅步，咏陆机吊魏武云： 昔以四海爲己任，死则以爱子托人。 
现代文：到了延兴元年，明帝杀了高帝、武帝、文惠太子的众位儿子，萧铿听说后，手抚着左右的人从容漫步，吟咏陆机的《吊魏武》说： 从前以四海作为己任，死后把爱子托与别人。 
English: In the first year of Yanxing, Emperor Ming killed the sons of Emperor Gao, Emperor Wu, and Crown Prince Wen Hui. After hearing this, Xiao Yao strolled leisurely, stroking the people on his right and left. He sang "Hang Wei Wu" by Lu Ji, saying, "I used to take the four seas as my duty, but after my death, I entrusted my beloved son to others."

古文：如此者三，左右皆泣。
现代文：这样咏叹了三次，左右的人都哭了。
English: I sighed like this three times, and everyone around me started crying.

古文：后果遣吕文显赉药往，夜进听事，正逢八关斋。
现代文：后来果然派吕文显前去送药，夜里进到了大厅里，正遇上八关斋。
English: Later, Lu Wenxian was sent to deliver the medicine, and he entered the hall at night, just as the eight-day fast was about to begin.

古文：铿上高坐，谓文显曰： 高皇昔宠任君，何事乃有今日之行？ 
现代文：萧铿在上面高坐着，对吕文显说： 高皇帝从前对您非常宠信，为什么竟有今天的行为？ 
English: Sitting high above, Xiao Yao said to Lu Wenxian, "Emperor Gao was very fond of you in the past. Why did you act as you did today?

古文：答云： 出不获已。 
现代文：吕文显回答说： 出于不由自主。 
English: Lu Wenxian replied: I did it of my own accord.

古文：于是仰药。
现代文：于是把药喝了下去。
English: So he drank the medicine.

古文：时年十八。
现代文：当时年龄十八岁。
English: He was 18 years old at the time.

古文：身长七尺，铿状似兄嶷，咸以国器许之。
现代文：萧铿身高七尺，长相好似哥哥萧嶷，人们都称赞他将是国家栋梁。
English: Xiao Yao is seven feet tall and looks just like his brother Xiao Yao. People have praised him for being a national pillar.

古文：及死，有识者莫不痛惜。
现代文：他死了以后，有识之士无不痛惜。
English: After his death, people of insight all deplored him.

古文：初铿出合时，年七岁，陶弘景爲侍读，八九年中，甚相接遇。
现代文：起初萧铿出宫时，年龄七岁，陶弘景做他的侍读，八九年间，相待很好。
English: At the beginning, when Xiao Yao left the palace, he was seven years old, and Tao Hongjing was his chaperone. For 89 years, they treated each other well.

古文：后弘景隐山，忽梦铿来，惨然言别，云： 某日命过。身无罪，后三年当生某家。 
现代文：后来陶弘景隐居山中，有一次忽然梦见萧铿前来，凄惨地告别，说： 某日生命转过，我本身无罪，以后三年当会生在某家。 
English: Later, Tao Hongjing lived in seclusion in the mountains. Once, he had a sudden dream that Xiao Yao came to him, bade him a sad farewell, and said, "One day my life will turn around. I myself am not guilty. In the next three years, I will be born in a certain family."

古文：弘景访以幽中事，多秘不出。
现代文：陶弘景访问他阴间的情况，多是保密不说。
English: The circumstances of Tao Hongjing's visit to his netherworld are mostly confidential.

古文：觉后，即遣信出都参访，果与事符同，弘景因着梦记云。
现代文：醒来以后，他便派人出去到京城寻访，果然与事实符合，据说陶弘景就是因此而写了《梦记》。
English: After he woke up, he sent someone out to the capital to investigate, which indeed corresponded to the facts. It is said that Tao Hongjing wrote "Dream" for this reason.

