古文：昙首有智局，喜愠不见于色，闺门内雍雍如也。
现代文：王昙首有才智，喜怒不表现在脸上，闺门内十分和谐。
English: King Dagger is intelligent, his emotions are not shown on his face, and there is perfect harmony within his family.

古文：手不执金玉，妇女亦不得以爲饰玩。
现代文：他手中不拿金玉，妇女也不能用这些东西作为装饰和玩物。
English: He does not take gold ornaments in his hands, and women cannot use these things as decorations and playthings.

古文：自非禄赐，一毫不受于人。
现代文：除了俸禄和赏赐，一分一毫也不要别人的。
English: Apart from the salary and rewards, they do not want a penny from anyone else.

古文：爲文帝镇西长史，武帝谓文帝曰： 昙首辅相才也，汝可每事谘之。 
现代文：他担任文帝的镇西长史，武帝对文帝说： 昙首是宰相之才，你可以常常向他咨询。 
English: He served as Wen Di's Zhen Xi Changshi. Emperor Wu said to Wen Di: "Dagger is the talent of the prime minister, you can often consult him."

古文：及文帝被迎入奉大统，议者皆致疑，昙首与到彦之、从兄华并劝上行，上犹未许。
现代文：等文帝被迎准备入京继承皇位，议论的人都表示怀疑，王昙首与到彦之、堂兄王华都鼓励皇上登基，皇上还没答应。
English: When Emperor Wen was welcomed to Beijing to prepare to succeed to the throne, the people who discussed the matter expressed doubts. Wang Shanshu, Zhu Yanzhi, and his cousin Wang Hua all encouraged the emperor to ascend to the throne, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：昙首固陈，并言天人符应。
现代文：王昙首坚持请求，并且论说天降的祥瑞与人事相符。
English: Wang Xizhou insisted on the request, and argued that the auspiciousness of the sky is consistent with the personnel.

古文：上乃下，率府州文武严兵自卫，台所遣百官衆力不得近部伍。
现代文：皇上才行动，率领府州文武统兵自卫，台省所派的百官和兵众不得接近部队。
English: Only the emperor could act, and he led the prefectural and prefectural troops to defend themselves. The hundreds of officials and soldiers sent by Taiwan Province were not allowed to approach the troops.

古文：中兵参军朱容子抱刀在平乘户外，不解带者累旬。
现代文：中兵参军朱容子抱着刀站在平时所乘车子的门外，一连几十天都不解衣带。
English: Zhu Rongzi, a member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, stood holding a knife outside the door of the car he usually takes, and did not undo his belt for dozens of days.

古文：及即位，谓昙首曰： 非宋昌独见，无以致此。 
现代文：即位以后，对王昙首说： 如果不是有宋昌的独到远见，就不会走到今天的地步。 
English: After ascending the throne, he said to Wang Xizhu: If it were not for Song Chang's unique vision, we would not have come to where we are today.

古文：以昙首爲侍中，领骁骑将军,容子爲右军将军。
现代文：于是以王昙首为侍中，兼任骁骑将军，容子为右军将军。
English: As a result, Wang Shanshou was appointed as a chamberlain, concurrently serving as a cavalry general, and Yoko as a general of the right army.

古文：诛徐羡之等及平谢晦，皆昙首及华力也。
现代文：处死徐羡之等以及平定谢晦，都是王昙首和王华的力量。
English: The execution of Xu Enzhi and the pacification of Xie Ying are all the power of Wang Dagger and Wang Hua.

古文：元嘉四年，车驾出北堂，使三更竟，开广莫门。
现代文：元嘉四年，皇帝的车驾出北堂，让在三更已尽的时候，开广莫门。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, the emperor's car drove out of the North Hall and opened the Guangmo Gate when the three months were over.

古文：南台云， 应须白兽幡、银字檀 。
现代文：南台说： 必须有白兽幡、银字。 
English: Nantai said: There must be a white animal banner and a silver word.

古文：不肯开。
现代文：不肯开门。
English: He wouldn't open the door.

古文：尚书左丞羊玄保奏免御史中丞傅隆以下。
现代文：尚书左丞羊玄保奏表请求罢免御史中丞傅隆以下的官员。
English: Yang Xuan Bao (尚書左丞羊玄保) submitted a petition to dismiss the officials below Fu Long (御史中丞傅隆).

古文：昙首曰： 既无墨敕，又阙幡檀，虽称上旨，不异单刺。
现代文：王昙首说： 既没有手敕，又没有幡，虽然言称皇上圣旨，无异于名片。
English: Wang Xizhou said: There is neither a bracelet nor a banner, although it is said to be the emperor's sacred will, it is tantamount to a business card.

古文：元嘉元年、二年，虽有再开门例，此乃前事之违。
现代文：元嘉元年、二年，虽然有两次开门的先例，这乃是以前办事违章。
English: Although there are two precedents for opening the door in the first and second years of the Yuan Jia era, this is a violation of the previous rules.

古文：今之守旧，未爲非礼。
现代文：现在依据旧的规章，并不算是不合礼法。
English: Now, according to the old rules, it is not considered impolite.

古文：其不请白兽幡、银字檀，致开门不时，由尚书相承之失，亦合纠正。 
现代文：他们不请白兽幡、银字，以致开门不及时，这是由于尚书相承的过失，也应该加以纠正。 
English: They did not ask for the white animal banner and the silver letter, so that the door was not opened in time. This is due to the fault of inheriting the book, and should also be corrected.

古文：上特无问，更立科条。
现代文：皇上特地没加追问，又重新订立了条例。
English: The emperor specifically did not ask questions, and re-enacted the regulations.

古文：迁太子詹事，侍中如故。
现代文：王昙首调任太子詹事，侍中职务依旧不变。
English: Wang Jianshou was transferred to Prince Zhanji, and the position of chamberlain remained unchanged.

古文：自谢晦平后，上欲封昙首等，会燕集，举酒劝之，因拊御床曰： 此坐非卿兄弟，无复今日。 
现代文：自从谢晦平定以后，皇上打算加封王昙首等人，正好举行宴会，举酒相劝，于是用手拍着御床说： 这个座位如果不是爱卿兄弟，就没有今天了。 
English: Since Xie Yu was pacified, the emperor planned to add Wang Shanshu and others to the throne, and held a banquet to persuade them, so he patted the throne with his hand and said: If this seat was not Ai Qing's brother, there would be no today.

古文：出诏以示之。
现代文：便拿出诏书让他们看。
English: Then he took out the imperial edict and showed it to them.

古文：昙首曰： 岂可因国之灾，以爲身幸。
现代文：王昙首说： 怎么可以借着国家的灾祸，作为自身的幸运？
English: Wang Xizhou said: How can you take advantage of the country's disaster as your own good luck?

古文：陛下虽欲私臣，当如直史何。 
现代文：陛下虽然偏爱为臣，可怎么应付正直的史官呢？ 
English: Your Majesty, although he prefers vassals, how can he deal with an honest historian?

古文：封事遂寝。
现代文：加封的事于是作罢。
English: The matter of adding a seal was therefore abandoned.

古文：时弘录尚书事，又爲扬州刺史。
现代文：当时王弘担任录尚书事，又为扬州刺史。
English: At that time, Wang Hong was in charge of record-keeping, and he was also a historian of Yangzhou.

古文：昙首爲上所亲委，任兼两宫。
现代文：王昙首被皇上所亲近信赖，兼任两宫的职务。
English: Wang Xizhou was trusted by the emperor and also served as the official of the two palaces.

古文：彭城王义康与弘并录，意常怏怏，又欲得扬州。
现代文：彭城王刘义康与王弘共同为录尚书事，心里不乐意，又想得到扬州。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, and Wang Hong jointly recorded the records, but they were not happy and wanted to get Yangzhou.

古文：以昙首居中分其权任，愈不悦。
现代文：以王昙首为中枢，分了他的职权，更加不高兴。
English: He was even more displeased that his powers were divided with Wang Xizhe as the center.

古文：昙首固乞吴郡，文帝曰： 岂有欲建大厦而遗其栋梁？
现代文：王昙首坚持请求到吴郡任职，文帝说： 难道有想建成大厦却舍弃栋梁的么？
English: Wang Jianshou insisted on his request to work in Wuxi County, and Emperor Wen said: Is there anyone who wants to build a building but abandons the pillars?

古文：贤兄比屡称疾，固辞州任，将来若相申许，此处非卿而谁？ 
现代文：您的贤兄屡次称说有病，坚持辞去扬州的职务，将来如果批准，这里除了您还能让谁来担任？ 
English: Your elder brother has repeatedly said that he is ill and insists on resigning from his post in Yangzhou. If approved in the future, who else can be appointed in addition to you?

古文：时弘久疾，屡逊位，不许。
现代文：当时王弘久病，屡次要退位，没有答应。
English: At that time, Wang Hongjiu was ill and repeatedly wanted to abdicate, but was not allowed to.

古文：义康谓宾客曰： 王公久疾不起，神州讵合卧临？ 
现代文：刘义康对宾客说： 王公久病不起，国家难道可以卧床管理？ 
English: Liu Yikang said to the guests: Wang Gong has been ill for a long time, can the country be managed from bed?

古文：昙首劝弘减府兵力之半，以配义康，乃悦。
现代文：王昙首劝王弘减少府中兵力的一半，分配给刘义康，刘义康才高兴了。
English: Wang Jianshou advised Wang Hong to reduce half of the troops in the prefecture and allocate them to Liu Yikang. Liu Yikang was delighted.

古文：七年卒，时年三十七。
现代文：元嘉七年，王昙首去世，时年三十七岁。
English: In the seventh year of Yuan Jia, Wang Xizhou died at the age of thirty-seven.

古文：文帝临恸，叹曰： 王詹事所疾不救，国之衰也。 
现代文：文帝亲临探病，十分悲痛，叹息道： 王詹事得病不能挽救，这是国家的衰运。 
English: Emperor Wen personally visited the sick, very sad, sighed: Wang Zhan's illness cannot be saved, this is the country's bad luck.

古文：中书舍人周赳侍侧曰： 王家欲衰，贤者先殒。 
现代文：中书舍人周赳在身旁伺候，说： 王家将要衰落，贤者首先去世。 
English: Zhou Ye, the chief scribe, waited by his side and said, "The royal family will decline, and the wise men will die first."

古文：上曰： 直是我家衰耳。 
现代文：皇上说： 这直接就是我家的衰落啊！ 
English: The emperor said: This is directly the decline of my family!

古文：赠光禄大夫。
现代文：追赠光禄大夫。
English: Dr. Kōroku received a posthumous award.

古文：有五子：缉、休、諲、操、素。
现代文：元嘉九年，因为曾参与了处死徐羡之的谋划，追封豫宁县侯，谥号为 文 。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Jia, because he had participated in the planning of the execution of Xu Enzhi, he was posthumously awarded the title of prefect of Yuning County, and his posthumous name was Wen.

古文：志弟揖位太中大夫，揖子筠。
现代文：孝武帝即位，让他配享文帝庙庭。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, he was given the privilege of enjoying Emperor Wen's temple garden.

古文：筠字元礼，一字德柔，幼而警悟，七岁能属文。
现代文：他的儿子王僧绰承袭爵位。王筠字元礼，又有一字叫德柔，幼年就聪敏灵悟，七岁能写文章。
English: His son, Wang Xizhe, inherited the title. Wang Xizhe has the character of Yuan Li, and another character called De Roux. He was very intelligent at a young age, and was able to write articles at the age of seven.

古文：年十六，爲芍药赋，其辞甚美。
现代文：十六岁写了《芍药赋》，其中词藻十分华美。
English: At the age of sixteen, he wrote "Drug Fu," in which the words are very beautiful.

古文：及长，清静好学，与从兄泰齐名。
现代文：长大以后，清静好学，和他的堂兄王泰齐名。
English: After he grew up, his temperament was pure and calm, he liked to study, and his reputation was equal to that of his cousin Wang Tai.

古文：沈约见筠，以爲似外祖袁粲，谓仆射张稷曰： 王郎非唯额类袁公，风韵都欲相似。 
现代文：沈约见了王筠，认为很像他的外祖父袁粲，便对仆射张稷说： 王郎不仅额头像袁公，连风韵也都相似。 
English: Shen made an appointment to see Wang Yao, and thought that he was very similar to his grandfather Yuan Yao, so he said to his servant Zhang Yao: Wang Lang not only has a forehead like Yuan Gong, but also has a similar charm.

古文：稷曰： 袁公见人辄矜严，王郎见人必娱笑。
现代文：张稷说： 袁公见人总是矜持严肃，王郎见人必定欢乐喜笑。
English: Zhang Ye said: Yuan Gong always sees people as reserved and serious, while Wang Lang sees people as joyful and laughing.

古文：唯此一条，不能酷似。 
现代文：只是这一条，不能酷似。 
English: It's just that this one can't be exactly the same.

古文：仕爲尚书殿中郎，王氏过江以来，未有居郎署，或劝不就，筠曰： 陆平原东南之秀，王文度独步江东。
现代文：做官为尚书殿中郎，王氏从过江以来，没有人担任郎官，有人劝他不要去上任。王筠说： 陆平原是东南的优秀人才，王文度在江东是首屈一指。
English: The official was a vassal of Shang Shudun. Since Wang crossed the Yangtze River, no one has served as a vassal, and some people advised him not to take up the post. Wang Yao said: Lu Pingyuan is an outstanding talent in the southeast, and Wang Wendu is second to none in the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：吾得比踪昔人，何所多恨。 
现代文：我能够和以前的人相比，有什么更多的遗憾呢？ 
English: What more regrets can I have than those who have gone before?

古文：乃欣然就职。
现代文：于是欣然就职。
English: So he gladly took up his post.

古文：沈约每见筠文咨嗟，尝谓曰： 昔蔡伯喈见王仲宣，称曰王公之孙，吾家书籍悉当相与。
现代文：沈约每当看到王筠的文章就嗟叹，曾对他说： 从前蔡伯喈见到王仲宣，称赞他是王公的孙子，我家的书籍应当全部赠送。
English: Shen You sighed whenever he saw Wang Yao's articles, and once said to him: Once upon a time, Cai Boqin saw Wang Zhongxuan and praised him as the grandson of Wang Guo. All the books of our family should be given away.

古文：仆虽不敏，请附斯言。
现代文：我虽然并不聪敏，请附上这些话。
English: I'm not very bright, but please include these words.

古文：自谢朓诸贤零落，平生意好殆绝，不谓疲暮复逢于君。 
现代文：自从谢緿等几位贤人去世，平生的好友几乎断绝，没想到疲惫的暮年又遇上了您。 
English: Since the death of several sages such as Xie Yao, lifelong friends have almost been severed. I did not expect to meet you again in the weary twilight years.

古文：约于郊居宅阁斋，请筠爲草木十咏书之壁，皆直写文辞，不加篇题。约谓人曰： 此诗指物程形，无假题署。 
现代文：又在皇帝举行的宴会上对王筠的伯父王志说： 贤侄的文章之美，可以说是后来人中的冠军。谢緿常常对我说： 好诗圆美流转好像弹丸 。
English: Also, at a banquet held by the emperor, he said to Wang Zhi's uncle Wang Zhi: The beauty of the nephew's article can be said to be the champion among later people. Xie Zhi often said to me: A good poem is like a projectile.

古文：约制郊居赋，构思积时，犹未都毕，示筠草。
现代文：近来看到他的几首作品，才知道这话是真实的。 
English: Having recently seen several of his works, I know this to be true.

古文：筠读至 雌霓 。累迁太子洗马，中舍人，并掌东宫管记。
现代文：他经过多次调转做了太子洗马，中舍人，并且掌东宫管记。
English: After many transfers, he became the prince's groom, the middle son, and the person in charge of the East Palace.

古文：昭明太子爱文学士，常与筠及刘孝绰、陆倕、到洽、殷钧等游宴玄圃，太子独执筠袖，抚孝绰肩曰： 所谓左把浮丘袖，右拍洪崖肩。 
现代文：昭明太子喜爱文学人士，常常与王筠以及刘孝绰、陆翺、到洽、殷钧等在玄圃游宴，太子特别拉住王筠的衣袖，抚着刘孝绰的肩膀说： 这就是所谓 左把浮丘袖，右拍洪崖肩 。 
English: Prince Zhao Ming loved literary people, and often had banquets with Wang Yao, Liu Xiaoqiao, Lu Yao, Zu Cha, Yin Yao and others in the garden. The prince especially held Wang Yao's sleeve, stroked Liu Xiaoqiao's shoulder and said: This is the so-called "Left-hand Floating Hill Sleeve, Right-hand Hongyao Shoulder."

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他就是如此看重他们。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：筠又与殷钧以方雅见礼。
现代文：王筠又与殷钧大方文雅地见礼。
English: Wang Yao and Yin Yao bowed to each other graciously.

古文：后爲中书郎，奉敕制开善寺宝志法师碑文，辞甚丽逸。
现代文：后来做了中书郎，奉了圣旨写了开善寺宝志法师碑文，文词十分清丽俊逸。
English: Later, he became a chushiro (middle school scribe) and wrote the inscription of Kasen-ji Temple's treasure-hunting priest in accordance with the holy will. The words are very beautiful and graceful.

古文：又敕撰中书表奏三十卷，及所上赋颂都爲一集。
现代文：又皇上命令他撰写《中书表奏》三十卷，和他所上奏的赋颂合为一集。
English: In addition, the emperor ordered him to write 30 volumes of "Chu Shushou Sheng" and to combine it with the Fusong he had played into one volume.

古文：后爲太子家令，复掌管记。
现代文：后来担任太子家令，同时又掌管记。
English: Later, he served as the prince's heir, and at the same time, he was in charge of records.

古文：普通元年，以母忧去职。
现代文：普通元年，因为给母亲服丧离职。
English: In the first year of the year, after the death of his mother, he left his job.

古文：筠有孝性，毁瘠过礼。
现代文：王筠有孝顺的品性，哀伤消瘦超过礼法的要求。
English: Wang Yao had a filial character, and his grief and emaciation exceeded the requirements of etiquette.

古文：中大通二年，爲司徒左长史。
现代文：中大通二年担任司徒左长史。
English: In the second year of his junior high school career, he served as the head historian.

古文：三年，昭明太子薨，敕制哀策文，复见嗟赏。
现代文：三年，昭明太子去世，皇帝让他写作哀悼的策文，又受到叹赏。
English: Three years later, Prince Akira died, and the emperor asked him to write a condolence article, which was highly appreciated.

古文：寻出爲临海太守，在郡侵刻，还资有芒屩两舫，他物称是。
现代文：不久出京担任临海太守，在郡上聚敛苛严，回来时候的资产有草鞋两船，其他东西也和这相似。
English: Soon after, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Linhai, and he was very strict in the county. When he came back, his assets included straw sandals, two boats, and other similar things.

古文：爲有司奏，不调累年。
现代文：被有关部门检举，多年没有调动。
English: He was reported by the relevant departments, but was not transferred for many years.

古文：后历秘书监，太府卿，度支尚书，司徒左长史。
现代文：后来历任秘书监、太府卿、度支尚书、司徒左长史。
English: Later, successive secretaries supervisors, Dafu-kyo, Doshi Shosho, and Sito Sadanaga.

古文：及简文即位，爲太子詹事。
现代文：等简文帝即位，担任了太子詹事。
English: When Emperor Jianwen ascended the throne, Prince Zhan Zhi took the throne.

古文：筠家累千金，性俭啬，外服粗弊，所乘牛尝饲以青草。
现代文：王筠家积累钱财千金，性格俭省吝啬，服装粗破，所用的牛喂的是青草。
English: Wang Xuan's family accumulated a lot of money. They were thrifty and miserly. Their clothes were ragged. The cattle they used were fed grass.

古文：及遇乱，旧宅先爲贼焚，乃寓居国子祭酒萧子云宅。
现代文：等遇到了动乱，旧宅院首先被贼人焚烧，他便寄居在国子祭酒萧子云的家中。
English: When he encountered turmoil, the old mansion was first burned by thieves, and he stayed at the home of Kuniko Matsuri sake brewer, Xiao Ziyun.

古文：夜忽有盗攻，惧坠井，卒，时年六十九。
现代文：夜间忽然有盗贼袭击，他因为恐惧掉到了井里，死去，当时年龄六十九岁。
English: At the age of sixty-nine, he fell into a well out of fear after being attacked by thieves in the middle of the night.

古文：家人十三口同遇害，人弃尸积于空井中。
现代文：家人十三口同时遇害，那些人就把他们的尸体扔下堆积在空井里。
English: Thirteen family members were killed at the same time, and the men dumped their bodies in an empty well.

古文：筠状貌寝小，长不满六尺。
现代文：王筠体形丑陋矮小，高不到六尺。
English: Wang Zhengyi is ugly, short and less than six feet tall.

古文：性弘厚，不以艺能高人。
现代文：性格宽厚，不因为能写诗文自高。
English: He has a generous personality, and it's not because he can write poetry.

古文：而少擅才名，与刘孝绰见重当时。
现代文：少年时期就独占才名，与刘孝绰同被当时的人所看重。
English: In his boyhood, he was famous for his talent, and was highly regarded by the people of the time, along with Liu Xiaoqiao.

古文：其自序云： 馀少好抄书，老而弥笃，虽偶见瞥观，皆即疏记。
现代文：他的《自序》中说： 我少年的时候就好抄书，老年的时候更甚，虽然是偶尔读到、斜眼看见，都把它们记录下来。
English: He said in his "Autobiography": When I was young, I was good at copying books, and when I was old, I was even better, although I occasionally read and squinted, I recorded them all.

古文：后重省览，欢兴弥深。
现代文：后来重新翻看，兴致更浓。
English: Later, when I rewatched it, I was even more interested.

古文：习与性成，不觉笔倦。
现代文：习性养成了，便不觉得手累。
English: Once you've developed the habit, you won't find your hands so tired.

古文：自年十三四，建武二年乙亥，至梁大同六年，四十六载矣。
现代文：从十三四岁，建武二年乙亥，到梁朝的大同六年，四十六年了。
English: From the age of thirteen and four, Jianwu two years, Yihai, to the Datong six years of the Liang Dynasty, it has been 46 years.

古文：幼年读五经，皆七八十遍。
现代文：幼年读《五经》，都是七八十遍。
English: When I was a child, I read "The Five Classics" seventy or eighty times.

古文：爱左氏春秋，吟讽常爲口实。
现代文：喜欢《左氏春秋》，吟咏常常作为谈话材料。
English: He likes "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi," and ginger is often used as a conversation material.

古文：广略去取，凡三过五抄，余经及周官、仪礼、国语、尔雅、山海经、本草并再抄,子史诸集皆一遍。
现代文：删简挑选，共过了三次、抄了五遍，其余各《经》以及《周官》、《仪礼》、《国语》、《尔雅》、《山海经》、《本草》都是抄了两遍，子史各集都是一遍。
English: The selection of abridgements was made three times in total and copied five times. The remaining "Ching" as well as "Zhou Guan," "Rite," "National Language," "Er Ya," "Shanhai Jing" and "Hon Cao" were all copied twice, and the sub-histories were all copied once.

古文：未尝倩人假手,并躬自抄录，大小百馀卷。
现代文：不曾让别人替代，都是亲自抄录，大小一百多卷。
English: He did not let anyone else take his place, he copied everything himself, more than a hundred volumes in all.

古文：不足传之好事,盖以备遗忘而已。 
现代文：不足以传给好事者，只是用以防备遗忘罢了。 
English: It is not enough to pass it on to good people, but only to prevent it from being forgotten.

古文：又与诸儿书论家门集云： 史传称安平崔氏及汝南应氏并累叶有文才，所以范蔚宗云崔氏雕龙。
现代文：他又曾给几个儿子写信论述家门的文集说： 史传上称赞安平的崔氏和汝南的应氏都是几代有文才，所以范蔚宗说崔氏雕龙。
English: He also wrote a letter to several of his sons, describing the family's collection of literary works, saying: According to history, both the Cui clan of Anping and the Ying clan of Runan had literary talent for several generations, so Fan Weizong said that the Cui clan carved dragons.

古文：然不过父子两三世耳，非有七叶之中，名德重光，爵位相继，人人有集，如吾门者也。
现代文：然而不过是父子两三代罢了，并没有七代之中，名声道德光耀，爵位相继，人人有文集，像我们家族这样。
English: However, it is only two or three generations from father to son, and there is no family in seven generations with a shining reputation for morality, a succession of titles, and everyone has a collection of works, like our family.

古文：沈少傅约常语人云∶ 吾少好百家之言，身爲四代之史。
现代文：少傅沈约常常对别人说： 我少年喜爱百家学说，自身是四代史臣。
English: Shao Fu Shen You often said to others: My boy likes the theory of a hundred schools, and he himself is the fourth generation of historians.

古文：自开辟以来，未有爵位蝉联、文才相继如王氏之盛也。 
现代文：自从开天辟地以来，没有蝉联爵位、文学人才相继像王氏这样兴盛的。 
English: Since the dawn of time, there has never been such a succession of knighthoods and literary talents as the Wang family.

古文：汝等仰观堂构，思各努力。 
现代文：你们仰观祖宗遗业，要各自考虑如何努力。 
English: You should look up to the legacy of your ancestors and consider how to make efforts.

古文：筠自撰其文章，以一官爲一集，自洗马、中书、中庶、吏部、左佐、临海、太府各十卷，尚书三十卷，凡一百卷，行于世。
现代文：王筠自己编撰了他的文章，以一种官职为一集，《洗马》、《中书》、《中庶》、《吏部》、《左佐》、《临海》、《太府》各十卷，《尚书》三十卷，共一百卷，流行在世间。
English: Wang Yao himself compiled his articles, with one official post as an episode, "Washing Horse," "Middle Book," "Middle Subordinate," "Official Department," "Left Assistant," "Coastal Sea" and "Grand Mansion" ten volumes each, "Shang Shu" thirty volumes, a total of one hundred volumes, popular in the world.

