古文：百官建官设职，兴自炎昊，方乎隆周之册，表乎盛汉之书。
现代文：设立官职，自炎帝、吴帝兴起，记载于强周的典册，盛汉的史书。
English: The establishment of official positions, since the rise of Emperor Yan and Emperor Wu, is recorded in the manual of Qiang Zhou, the history book of Sheng Han.

古文：存改回沿，备于历代，先贤往学，以之雕篆者众矣。
现代文：留存、修订、沿袭，历代都有，从前的贤人学者，钻研官吏制度的非常多。
English: It has been preserved, revised, and handed down from generation to generation, and there are many former scholars who have studied the bureaucratic system.

古文：若夫胡广《旧仪》，事惟简撮；应劭《官典》，殆无遗恨。
现代文：诸如胡广的《旧仪》，记事简明扼要，应劭的《官典》，几乎没有什么缺憾。
English: Such as Hu Guang's "Old Rites," the record is concise and concise, and the "Official Code" that should be obeyed, has almost no shortcomings.

古文：王朗奏议，属霸国之初基；陈矫增曹，由军事而补阙。
现代文：王朗的奏议，记国家称霸的最初根基；陈矫主张增设部门，是从军事角度健全机构。
English: Wang Lang's proposal is based on the initial foundation of the country's hegemony; Chen Jia advocated the establishment of additional departments, which is a sound institution from a military perspective.

古文：今则有《魏氏官仪》、鱼豢《中外官》也。
现代文：如今则有《魏氏官仪》、鱼豢的中外官》。
English: Nowadays, there are "Wei's Official Rites" and "Fisherman's Diplomacy."

古文：山涛以意辩人，不囗囗囗；荀勖欲去事烦，唯论并省。
现代文：山涛与人争辩设官本意，不口口口。荀勖想除去烦杂事务，衹议论合并减省。
English: Shantao argued with people to set the official's original intention, and did not speak. He wanted to remove troublesome matters, and did not discuss mergers and reductions.

古文：定制成文，本之《晋令》，后代承业，案为前准。
现代文：确定制度形成文字，把《晋令》作为蓝本，后代承袭，依据作为已有标准。
English: Determine the system to form a text, take "Jinling" as a blueprint, be inherited by future generations, and use it as a basis for existing standards.

古文：肇域官品，区别阶资，蔚宗选簿梗概，钦明阶次详悉，虞通、刘寅因荀氏之作，矫旧增新，今古相校。
现代文：划分官品，区别位次，蔚宗作铨选官吏簿籍的梗概，钦明明悉官吏位次，虞通、刘寅藉助荀氏的着作，改正过时的制度，增添新的内容，把古今制度相互对照。
English: Division of official ranks, distinction of ranks, Wei Zong made the outline of the book of selected officials, Qin Ming clearly knew the ranks of officials, Yu Tong and Liu Ying corrected the outdated system, added new content, and compared the old and new systems with each other.

古文：齐受宋禅，事遵常典，既有司存，无所偏废。
现代文：齐接受宋的惮让，凡事遵守固有的典制，保存已有的各部门，没有什么偏废。
English: They all accepted Song's strict concessions, adhered to the inherent classification system in all matters, preserved the existing departments, and did not waste anything.

古文：其余散在史注，多已筌拾，览者易知，不重述也。
现代文：其余一些内容散在史书的注释中，大多已经搜罗，阅览的人很容易知道，不重复叙述。
English: The rest of the content is scattered in the annotations of the history books, most of which have been collected, and it is easy for readers to know without repeating the description.

古文：诸台府郎令史职吏以下，具见长水校尉王圭之《职仪》。
现代文：诸台府郎令史职吏以下，都见于长水校尉王珪之的《职仪》。
English: All officials below the rank of lords of Taifu are described in "Vocational Rites" by Wang Xizhi, a lieutenant of the Changshui School.

古文：相国
现代文：相国
English: Partner country

古文：萧、曹以来，为人臣极位。
现代文：自萧何、曹参以来，是官职最高的大臣。
English: He is the highest-ranking minister since Xiao He and Cao San.

古文：宋孝建用南谯王义宣。
现代文：宋孝建年间任用南谯王刘义宣为相国。
English: During the Song and Xiao Jian dynasties, Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxi, was appointed as the imperial consort.

古文：至齐不用人，以为赠，不列官。
现代文：到齐朝不设置人员，作为追封之官，不列入官位。
English: When the Qi Dynasty came to power, they did not set up any officials, and they were not included in the official ranks as the officials who chased the seals.

古文：太宰。
现代文：太宰
English: Dazai

古文：宋大明用江夏王义恭，以后无人。
现代文：宋大明年间任用江夏王刘义恭，以后就没有人担任。
English: Song University appointed Jiangxia King Liu Yigong in the middle of the next year, and no one has held the post since then.

古文：齐以为赠。
现代文：齐作为追封之官。
English: Qi was appointed as the official in charge of the imperial seal.

古文：太傅。
现代文：太傅
English: Taifu

古文：太师、太保、太傅，周旧官。
现代文：太师、太保、太傅，都是周代旧有的官职。
English: Taishi, Taibo, and Taifu were all old official positions in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：汉末，董卓为太师。
现代文：汉代末年，董卓任太师。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Dong Zhuo was appointed Grand Master.

古文：晋惠帝初，卫瓘为太保。
现代文：晋惠帝初年，卫罐任太保。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jinhui, Wei Jian was appointed as Taibo.

古文：自后无太师，而太保为赠。
现代文：此后不设太师，太保作为追封之官。
English: Thereafter, there was no position of Taishi, and Taibo served as the official of the crown prince.

古文：齐唯置太傅。
现代文：齐衹设置太傅。
English: Qianlong set up a kitchenette.

古文：大司马。
现代文：大司马
English: Dai Sima

古文：大将军。
现代文：大将军
English: The Great General

古文：宋元嘉用彭城王义康，后无人。
现代文：宋元嘉年问任用彭城王刘义康，此后无人担任。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was appointed by Song Yuan Jia Nianqian, and no one has held the post since.

古文：齐以为赠。
现代文：齐作为追封之官。
English: Qi was appointed as the official in charge of the imperial seal.

古文：太尉。
现代文：太尉
English: First Lieutenant

古文：司徒。
现代文：司徒
English: Stowe

古文：司空。
现代文：司空
English: Skytower

古文：三公，旧为通官。
现代文：三公，过去是通理各种政务的官。
English: Sangong, in the past, was an official in charge of various government affairs.

古文：司徒府领天下州郡名数户口簿籍，虽无，常置左右长史、左西曹掾属、主簿、祭酒、令史以下。
现代文：司徒府领天下州郡的名称数字以及户口簿籍。虽不任官，但常设置左右长史、左西曹掾属、主簿、祭酒、令史以下各职。
English: Although it is not an official post, it is often assigned to various posts such as the left and right long history, the left and west Cao Pi, the main book, the sacrificial wine, and the history of the order.

古文：晋世王导为司徒，右长史干宝撰立官府《职仪》已具。特进。
现代文：晋代王导任司徒，右长史干贲撰写完成官府《职仪》。特进
English: The leader of the Jin Dynasty, Wang Jintao, became a scholar, and the right-hand chief historian, Gansu, completed the official "Vocational Regulations."

古文：位从公。
现代文：位次相当于公。
English: The rank is equivalent to that of a public official.

古文：诸开府仪同三司。
现代文：诸开府仪同三司
English: Zhukaifu ceremony with three divisions

古文：骠骑将军。
现代文：骠骑将军
English: The general rode up.

古文：车骑将军。
现代文：车骑将军
English: Chariot and cavalry generals

古文：卫将军。
现代文：卫将军
English: General Wei

古文：镇军将军。
现代文：镇军将军
English: The general of the town's army

古文：中军将军。
现代文：中军将军
English: Chinese general resigns

古文：抚军将军。
现代文：抚军将军
English: General Fozjun stands up.

古文：四征将军。东、西、南、北。
现代文：四征将军柬、西、南、北。四镇将军
English: The Four Generals of Cambodia, the West, the South and the North. The Four Generals of the Towns

古文：四镇将军。凡诸将军加 大 字，位从公。
现代文：各位将军凡是加 大 字的，位次相当于公。
English: Generals, if you capitalize a word, the rank is equivalent to that of a general.

古文：开府仪同如公。
现代文：开府仪同三司位次也相当于公。
English: The Kaifu ceremony and the three ranks are also equivalent to the public.

古文：凡公督府置佐：长史、司马各一人，谘议参军二人。
现代文：凡是公的官府都设置僚属：长史、司马各一人，谘议参军二人。
English: All public government offices have subordinates: one each for Nagashi and Sima, and two for military advisers.

古文：诸曹有录事，记室，户曹，仓曹，中直兵，外兵，骑兵，长流贼曹，刑狱贼曹，城局，法曹，田曹，水曹，铠曹，车曹，士曹，集曹，右户，十八曹。
现代文：所辖各部门有录事，功曹，记室，户曹，仓曹，中、直兵，外兵，骑兵，长流，贼曹，城局，法曹，田曹，水曹，镜曹，集曹，右户，共十八个部门。
English: There are eighteen departments under the jurisdiction of each department, including Record Office, Achievement Office, Records Office, Household Office, Storehouse Office, Middle, Direct Soldier, Foreign Soldier, Cavalry, Long Stream, Thief Office, City Office, Law Office, Field Office, Water Office, Mirror Office, Collector Office, and Right Office.

古文：城局曹以上署正参军，法曹以下署行参军，各一人。
现代文：城局曹以上的长官是正参军，法曹以下的长官是行参军，各一人。
English: The superintendent of the city police department and above is enlisting in the army, and the superintendent of the police department and below is enlisting in the army, one each.

古文：其行参军无署者，为长兼员。
现代文：行参军没有任职部门的，作为长兼员。
English: If you join the army without a position, you will serve as both a commander and a member.

古文：其府佐史则从事中郎二人，仓曹掾、户曹属、东西阁祭酒各一人，主簿舍人御属二人。
现代文：以上官府的佐史是从事中郎二人，仓曹掾、户曹属、东西合祭酒各一人，主簿舍人御属二人。
English: The sashimi of the above-mentioned government offices are engaged in two middlemen, one each from the warehouse, the household, and the east and west, and two from the master bookkeeper.

古文：加崇者，则左右长史四人，中郎掾属并增数。
现代文：更加优厚的，则是左右长史四人，中郎等属员也一并增加。
English: More generous, it is the left and right long history four people, Zhong Lang and other subordinate members have also increased.

古文：其未及开府，则置府亦有佐史，其数有减。
现代文：官位达不到开府仪同三司的，官府也设有属员，数字有所减少。
English: If the official rank does not reach the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the government also has subordinates, and the number has decreased.

古文：小府无长流，置禁防参军。
现代文：小的官府没有长流，设禁防参军。
English: The small government did not last long, and it was forbidden to join the army.

古文：四安将军。
现代文：四安将军
English: General Si'an

古文：四平将军。
现代文：四平将军
English: General Shihira

古文：左、右、前、后将军。
现代文：左、右、前、后将军
English: Left, right, front, back

古文：征虏将军。
现代文：征虏将军
English: The Conscript General

古文：四中郎将。
现代文：四中郎将
English: The four middle captains

古文：晋世荀羡、王胡之并居此官。
现代文：置代荀羡、王胡之都担任此官。
English: Both King Hu and Emperor Jianzhen of the Qing Dynasty held this post.

古文：宋、齐以来，唯处诸王，素族无为者。
现代文：宋、齐以来，衹安排各位王，庶族没有担任的。
English: Since the Song and Qi dynasties, the king has been appointed by the emperor, and the commoners have not served.

古文：冠军将军。
现代文：冠军将军
English: The champion general

古文：辅国将军。
现代文：辅国将军
English: General of the Auxiliary Province

古文：宁朔将军。
现代文：宁朔将军
English: General Ning Shuo

古文：宁远将军。
现代文：宁远将军
English: General Ningyuan

古文：龙骧将军。
现代文：龙骧将军
English: General Long Hao

古文：凡诸小号，亦有置府者。
现代文：凡是各小的封号，也有设置官府的。
English: In all cases of small seals, there are also seals set up by the government.

古文：太常。
现代文：太常
English: Too often

古文：府置丞一人，五官、功曹、主簿，九府九史皆然。
现代文：官府设置丞一人，五官、功曹、主簿，九府九史都相同。
English: There is one official, five officials, a meritorious person, and a chief secretary, and nine prefectures and nine capitals are the same.

古文：领官如左：
现代文：隶属的官如下：
English: The subordinate officials are as follows:

古文：博士，谓之太学博士；
现代文：博士，称为太学博士。
English: Doctor, known as Doctor of Science.

古文：国子祭酒一人，博士二人，助教十人；
现代文：国子祭酒一人。博士二人。助教十人。
English: One Kuniko Matsuri sake. Two doctors. Ten teaching assistants.

古文：建元四年，有司奏置国学，祭酒准诸曹尚书，博士准中书郎，助教准南台御史。
现代文：建元四年，主管官吏奏请设置国学，祭酒官级相当于诸曹尚书，博士相当于中书郎，助教相当于南台御史。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the officials in charge requested to set up a Chinese language school. The official rank of the sacrificial liquor officer was equivalent to Zhu Cao Shangshu, the doctor was equivalent to Zhongshuro, and the assistant professor was equivalent to Nantai Youshi.

古文：选经学为先。
现代文：选官首先考虑精通经学的。
English: The selection of officials should first consider proficiency in the study of the classics.

古文：若其人难备，给事中以还明经者，以本位领。
现代文：如果这类人难以齐备，给事中以下考明经入仕的，以本职兼任。
English: If it is difficult to prepare such people, the following shall be given to those who have entered the service, and they shall concurrently serve in their own positions.

古文：其下典学二人，三品，准太常主簿；户曹、仪曹各二人，五品；白簿治礼吏八人，六品；保学医二人；威仪二人。
现代文：此下设典学二人，三品，官级相当于太常主簿；户曹、仪曹各二人，五品；白簿治礼吏八人，六品；保学医二人；威仪二人。
English: Under this, there are two classics, three grades, and the official level is equivalent to that of the Tai-Chang master book; two house sergeants, five grades; eight white book officials, six grades; two security doctors; two dignitaries.

古文：其夏，国讳废学，有司奏省助教以下。
现代文：这年夏天，因国丧废止国学，主管官吏奏请省去助教以下各职。
English: In the summer of that year, due to the death of the emperor, the study of Chinese classics was abolished, and the officials in charge requested that all positions below assistant professor be eliminated.

古文：永明三年，立学，尚书令王俭领祭酒。
现代文：永明三年，设立国学，尚书令王俭兼任祭酒。
English: In the third year of the Yongming era, the Chinese Academy of Sciences was established, and Wang Jian was appointed as the sacrificial liquor.

古文：八年，国子博士何胤单为祭酒，疑所服，陆澄等皆不能据，遂以玄服临试。
现代文：永明八年，国子博士包胤衹担任祭酒，犹疑穿什么色礼服，堕攫等人都不能提供依据，于是穿黑色礼服主持考试。
English: In the eighth year of the Yongming era, Dr. Kuniko Bao Yintao served as the sacrificial wine, hesitating what color dress to wear, and others could not provide evidence, so he wore a black dress to preside over the examination.

古文：月余日，博议定，乃服朱衣。
现代文：一个多月后，众人商量确定，于是穿红色礼服。
English: After more than a month, it was decided through discussion that they would wear red dresses.

古文：总明观祭酒一人；
现代文：总明观祭酒一人。
English: There is only one person who can drink the total amount of Meikan Matsuri sake.

古文：右泰始六年，以国学废，初置总明观，玄、儒、文、史四科，科置学士各十人，正令史一人，书令史二人，干一人，门吏一人，典观吏二人。
现代文：上职童始六年，因为国学撤销，最初设置总明观，分玄、儒、文、史四科，每科安排学士十人，正令史一人，书令史二人，干一人，门吏一人，典观吏二人。
English: It has been six years since the beginning of the school year. Due to the cancellation of the study of Chinese classics, the school initially set up a total of four subjects, namely, Ming Guan, Xuan Xuan, Confucianism, Literature, and History. Ten bachelors were arranged for each subject, one for history, two for literature, one for business, one for gatekeeping, and two for classicism.

古文：建元中，掌治五礼。
现代文：垂纭年间，掌管五礼研究。
English: During the years of coveting, he was in charge of the study of the Five Rites.

古文：永明三年，国学建，省。
现代文：永明三年，国学建立，该职撤销。
English: In the third year of Yongming, the Chinese language school was established, and the post was revoked.

古文：太庙令一人，丞一人；
现代文：太庙令一人，丞一人。
English: Taimyo Rei is one, Joi is one.

古文：明堂令一人，丞一人；
现代文：明堂令一人，丞一人。
English: There is one meido rei and one jo.

古文：太祝令一人，丞一人；
现代文：太祝令一人，丞一人。
English: One for the master and one for the servant.

古文：太史令一人，丞一人；
现代文：太史令一人，丞一人。
English: There is one Tai Shi Ling and one Jo.

古文：廪牺令一人，丞一人；
现代文：廪牺令一人，丞一人。
English: One for the master and one for the servant.

古文：置令丞以下皆有职吏。
现代文：设置的令、丞以下都有职吏。
English: The order to set it up has been issued, and all officials from joe on down are gone.

古文：太乐令一人，丞一人；
现代文：太乐令一人，丞一人。
English: One for Tailei, one for Jo.

古文：诸陵令；
现代文：诸陵令
English: Zhuling order issued

古文：永明末置，用二品三品勋。
现代文：永明末年设置，任用立有二品三品功劳的人。
English: It was set up at the end of the Yongming era, appointing people who had distinguished themselves in two or three fields.

古文：置主簿、户曹各一人，六品保举。
现代文：下属有主簿、户曹各一人，由六品官担保推举。
English: Each subordinate has a chief bookkeeper and a household supervisor, who are selected by the six grade officials.

古文：光禄勋。
现代文：光禄勋
English: Order of the Star

古文：府置丞一人。
现代文：官府设丞一人。
English: Only one government official remains.

古文：领官如左：
现代文：下属的官员如下：
English: The subordinate officials are as follows:

古文：左右光禄大夫；
现代文：左右光禄大夫
English: Dr. Guanglu, left and right

古文：位从公，开府置佐史如公。
现代文：官位待遇依照公，开建官府、设置僚属和公相同。
English: The treatment of official rank is in accordance with the public, the establishment of government offices and the establishment of subordinates are the same as the public.

古文：光禄大夫；
现代文：光禄大夫
English: Dr. Kōroku

古文：皆银章青绶，诏加金章紫绶者，为金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：都是银印青色丝带，诏令加给金印紫色丝带的，称为金紫光禄大夫。
English: They are all silver-printed blue ribbons, and those with gold-printed purple ribbons added by imperial decree are called gold-and-purple doctor's aprons.

古文：乐安任遐为光禄，就王晏乞一片金，晏乃启转为金紫，不行。
现代文：乐安任遐任光禄大夫，向王晏讨一片金，王晏就奏请转为金紫光禄大夫，没有得到。
English: Le'an was appointed as a doctor of Guanglu, and asked Wang Yao for a piece of gold. Wang Yao asked to be changed to a doctor of Golden Purple Guanglu, but he did not get it.

古文：太中大夫；
现代文：太中大夫
English: Deputy Chief Medical Officer

古文：中散大夫。
现代文：中散大夫
English: Dr. Nakasane

古文：诸大夫官，皆处旧齿老年，重者加亲信二十人。
现代文：各位大夫宫，都安排德高望重的老人，地位高的加给亲信二十人。
English: All of you doctors' palaces have arranged for highly respected elderly people with high status to be given 20 close confidants.

古文：卫尉。
现代文：卫尉
English: Lieutenant of the Guard

古文：府置丞一人。
现代文：官府设丞一人。
English: Only one government official remains.

古文：掌宫城管籥。
现代文：掌管宫城门钥匙。
English: He is in charge of the key to the palace gate.

古文：张衡《西京赋》曰 卫尉八屯，警夜巡昼 。
现代文：张衡《西京赋》说 卫尉驻守八处，昼夜警戒巡逻 。
English: Zhang Heng's "Sai Jing Fu" says that the guards are stationed in eight places, patrolling day and night.

古文：宫城诸却敌楼上本施鼓，持夜者以应更唱，太祖以鼓多惊眠，改以铁磬云。
现代文：宫城的各却敌楼上本来设置鼓，值夜的人击鼓与打更唱声相应，太祖认为鼓声多惊醒睡眠，改用铁磬。
English: In Miyagi, drums were originally set up on the upper floors of the castle, and people on duty at night beat the drums and sang accordingly. Taizu thought that the drums were more likely to wake up sleep, so he used a shovel instead.

古文：廷尉。
现代文：廷尉
English: Lord-Lieutenant

古文：府置丞一人，正一人，监一人，评一人，律博士一人。
现代文：官府设丞一人，正一人，监一人，评一人，律博士一人。
English: The government office has one secretary, one vice-minister, one supervisor, one assessor, and one doctor of law.

古文：大司农。
现代文：大司农
English: Chief Secretary for Agriculture

古文：府置丞一人。
现代文：官府设丞一人。
English: Only one government official remains.

古文：领官如左：
现代文：下属官员如下：
English: The subordinate officials are as follows:

古文：太仓令一人，丞一人；
现代文：太仓令一人，丞一人。
English: Okura Rei one, Jo one.

古文：导官令一人，丞一人；
现代文：导官令一人，丞一人。
English: One leader, one follower.

古文：籍田令一人，丞一人。
现代文：藉田令一人，丞一人。
English: One yakitori, one yakitori.

古文：少府。
现代文：少府
English: Shofu district

古文：府置丞一人。
现代文：官府设丞一人。
English: Only one government official remains.

古文：领官如左：
现代文：下属官员如下：
English: The subordinate officials are as follows:

古文：左右尚方令各一人，丞一人；
现代文：左右尚方令各一人，丞一人。
English: One person from each of the left and right sides, and one person from the middle.

古文：锻署丞一人；永明三年省，四年复置。
现代文：锻署丞一人。丞塱三年撤销，丞塱四年又设置。
English: There was only one forge operator. The post office was abolished three years later, and the post office was re-established four years later.

古文：御府令一人，丞一人；
现代文：御府令一人，丞一人。
English: One is a magistrate and one is a courtier.

古文：东冶令一人，丞一人；
现代文：束冶令一人，丞一人。
English: One yakitori, one yakitori.

古文：南冶令一人，丞一人；
现代文：南冶令一人，丞一人。
English: One Nanyangling, one Jo.

古文：平准令一人，丞一人。
现代文：平准令一人，丞一人。
English: One is a Heijunrei and one is a Jo.

古文：上林令一人，丞一人。
现代文：上林令一人，丞一人。
English: One went up to the forest, and one came down.

古文：亦属尚书殿中曹。
现代文：也属尚书殿中曹。
English: He was also a middle-ranking official in the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：将作大匠。
现代文：将作大匠
English: He will be a master.

古文：太仆。
现代文：太仆
English: The maid

古文：大鸿胪。
现代文：大鸿胪
English: Da Hongtao

古文：三卿不常置。
现代文：以上三卿不常设。
English: The above three lords are not permanent.

古文：将作掌宫庙土木。
现代文：将作大匠掌管宫城宗庙的土木工程。
English: He will be a great master in charge of the civil engineering project of the Miyagi ancestral temple.

古文：太仆掌郊礼执辔。
现代文：太仆主管郊祭礼中驾车。
English: The maidservant in charge of driving during the suburb festival.

古文：鸿胪掌导护赞拜。
现代文：大鸿胪掌管引导护持司仪。
English: Dahongyu is in charge of guiding and guiding the emcee.

古文：有事权置兼官，毕乃省。
现代文：有事时临时由其他官兼任，事情完毕就取消。
English: When there is an emergency, other officials will take on the duties on an ad hoc basis, and the matter will be cancelled once it is over.

古文：乘黄令一人：
现代文：乘黄令一人。
English: One person left by order of Huang.

古文：掌五辂安车，大行凶器辒辌车；
现代文：掌管五辖安车，帝王葬礼的凶器辊鲸车。
English: In charge of the Five Prefectures Ambulance, the murder weapon of the emperor's funeral is the beaked whale car.

古文：客馆令：
现代文：客馆令
English: Hotel Ordinance

古文：掌四方宾客。
现代文：掌管接待四方宾客。
English: In charge of receiving guests from all over the world.

古文：宣德卫尉、少府、太仆。
现代文：宣德卫尉、少府、太仆
English: Xuan De, Lieutenant of the Guards, Shofu, and Taifu

古文：郁林王立，文安太后即尊号，以宫名置之。
现代文：郁林王即位，文安太后受封尊号，用宫殿的名称设官。
English: King Yulin ascended to the throne, and Empress Dowager Wen'an was given a title of honor and appointed officials with the name of the palace.

古文：大长秋。
现代文：大长秋
English: Great Changqiu

古文：郁林立皇后置。
现代文：郁林王立皇后时设置。
English: It is set at the time of the coronation of the Queen of Iburin.

古文：录尚书。
现代文：绿尚书
English: The Green Book

古文：尚书令。
现代文：尚书令
English: Shang Shuling

古文：总领尚书台二十曹，为内台主。
现代文：统领尚书台二十个部门，是尚书台长官。
English: The head of the twenty departments of Shang Shudai is the Chief of Shang Shudai.

古文：行遇诸王以下，皆禁驻。
现代文：巡视时诸干以下人等遇到，都受制约。
English: When inspecting, all the people below the cadres are subject to restrictions.

古文：左右仆射分道。
现代文：左右仆射分别掌管各事。
English: The left and right deputies are in charge of each matter separately.

古文：无令，左仆射为台主，与令同。
现代文：没有尚书令时，左仆射任尚书台长官，相当于尚书令。
English: When there was no Shang Shuling, Zuoying Shao was appointed as Shang Shudai Chieftain, which was equivalent to Shang Shuling.

古文：左仆射：
现代文：左仆射
English: Left-handed shooting

古文：领殿中主客二曹事，诸曹郊庙、园陵、车驾行幸、朝仪、台内非违、文官举补满叙疾假事，其诸吉庆瑞应众贺、灾异贼发众变、临轩崇拜、改号格制、莅官铨选，凡诸除署、功论、封爵、贬黜、八议、疑谳、通关案，则左仆射主，右仆射次经，维是黄案，左仆射右仆射署朱符见字，经都丞竟，右仆射横画成目，左仆射画，令画。
现代文：领殿内主客二曹的事务，各部门的郊坛宗庙祭祀、帝王陵园、皇上出行、朝廷礼仪、台内违制、文官的举荐、补阙、任满、升级、生病、请假等事，其他诸如吉庆、祥瑞、众人祝贺，灾异、贼反、民变，皇上殿前祭拜、更改年号仪式、到任选官，凡是拜官授职、议论功劳、封给爵位、贬黜官职、八种减刑条件、有争议的定罪、贿赂案件，都由左仆射主管，右仆射其次经手，凡是尚书台的文札，左仆射右仆射用朱符署见字，经由都丞完成，右仆射横画表示过目，左仆射圈画，尚书令圈画。
English: The affairs of the host and guest of the Second Cao in the imperial palace, the suburb temple and temple rituals of each department, the imperial cemetery, the emperor's travel, the imperial etiquette, the violation of the rules in Taiwan, the recommendation of the civil servant, the supplement of the imperial edict, the completion of the appointment, the promotion, the illness, the leave, and other matters, such as the auspicious festival, the auspicious year, the congratulations of the people, the calamity, the anti-thief, the people's change, the worship in front of the imperial palace, the change of the year number ceremony, the appointment of the elected official, all the

古文：右官阙，则以次并画。
现代文：右仆射空缺，就依次共同圈画。
English: When there is a vacancy on the right, they draw a circle together.

古文：若无左右，则直置仆射在其中间，总左右事。
现代文：如果没有左右仆射之分，就衹在中间设仆射，统领左右仆射的事务。
English: If there is no left and right archery division, the archer shall set up archery in the middle to lead the affairs of left and right archery.

古文：吏部尚书：
现代文：吏部尚书
English: Rikibu Shosho

古文：领吏部、删定、三公、比部四曹。
现代文：领吏部、删定、三公、比部四个部门。
English: There are four departments: the Department of Consular Officers, the Department of Censuses, the Department of Sanctions, and the Department of Statistics.

古文：度支尚书：
现代文：度支尚书
English: 度支尚書

古文：领度支、金部、仓部、起部四曹。
现代文：领度支、金部、仓部、起部四个部门。
English: There are four departments: the leader, the branch, the gold department, the warehouse department, and the starting department.

古文：左民尚书：
现代文：左民尚书
English: Zuo Min Shang Shu

古文：领左民、驾部二曹。
现代文：领左民、驾部两个部门。
English: There are two departments, left-hand driving and right-hand driving.

古文：都官尚书：
现代文：都官尚书
English: Tōkan Shōshū

古文：领都官、水部、库部、功论四曹。
现代文：领都官、水部、库部、功论四个部门。
English: There are four departments: the territorial capital officer, the water department, the treasury department, and the theory of merit.

古文：五兵尚书：
现代文：五兵尚书
English: The Five Soldiers of Song

古文：领中兵、外兵二曹。
现代文：领中兵、外兵两个部门。
English: There are two departments, the middle-ranking soldiers and the foreign soldiers.

古文：祠部尚书：
现代文：祠部尚书
English: Ancestral Hall of Shangshu

古文：右仆射通职，不俱置。
现代文：右仆射属官，不是都设。
English: Right-hand shooters are subordinate officers, not all of them.

古文：起部尚书：
现代文：起部尚书
English: The beginning is inscribed

古文：兴立宫庙权置；事毕省。
现代文：修建宫殿庙宇时临时设置，事完后取消。
English: Temporarily set up during the construction of the palace and temple, it was cancelled after the event.

古文：左丞一人：
现代文：左丞一人。
English: Sacho is the only one left.

古文：掌宗庙郊祠、吉庆瑞应、灾异、立作格制、诸案弹、选用除置、吏补满除遣注职。
现代文：掌管宗庙郊祭、吉庆祥瑞符应、灾异、制订仪式、各弹劾案、选拔任命官员、官吏的补阙、任满、授官、派遣、按资历叙用。
English: He is in charge of the suburb festival of the ancestral temple, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious, auspicious.

古文：右丞一人：
现代文：右丞一人。
English: Ujo is the only one.

古文：掌兵士百工补役死叛考代年老疾病解遣、其内外诸库藏谷帛、刑罪创业诤讼、田地船乘、禀拘兵工死叛、考剔讨补、差分百役、兵器诸营署人领、州郡租布、民户移徙、州郡县并帖、城邑民户割属、刺史二千石令长丞尉被收及免赠、文武诸犯削官事。
现代文：掌管士兵及各种工匠补足徭役、死亡叛逃、父子相代、年老生病、解职遣散，其他内外各仓库收藏的粮食布帛，刑事产业诉讼，田地车船，奉命拘捕叛逃的士兵工匠，鉴别追讨拖欠徭役，分派各种活计，保管兵器的各营署头领、州郡的赋税、民众的迁徙、州郡县合并的文书、城邑民户的分割隶属、刺史及二千石的长官丞尉被没收财产以及赦免封赠、文武官员犯罪被削夺官职等事。
English: He was in charge of soldiers and craftsmen of all kinds, including supplemental labor, death and defection, father and son, old and sick, dismissal and demobilization, grain cloth collected by other warehouses at home and abroad, criminal industry litigation, farm vehicles and ships, soldiers and craftsmen who were ordered to arrest defectors, identification and recovery of delinquent labor, distribution of various livelihoods, heads of battalions and stations that stored weapons, state and county taxation, migration of the people, documents of state and county amalgamation, division of urban households, confiscation of property, amnesty of gifts, and criminal offenses of civil and military officials.

古文：白案，右丞上署，左丞次署。
现代文：白色文札，右丞署名在上，左丞署名在下。
English: White cards, signed by the righthand player on the top and the left-hand player on the bottom.

古文：黄案，左丞上署，右丞次署。
现代文：黄色文札，左丞署名在上，右丞署名在下。
English: Yellow cards, signed by the left jockey at the top and by the right jockey at the bottom.

古文：诸立格制及详谳大事宗庙朝廷仪体，左丞上署，右丞次署。
现代文：其他制订格式以及议罪、大型活动、宗庙、朝廷仪制，左丞署名在上，右丞署名在下。
English: For other forms of enactment, as well as deliberation, large-scale activities, ancestral temple, and imperial ceremony, the signature of the left jockey is at the top, and the signature of the right jockey is at the bottom.

古文：自令仆以下五尚书八座二十曹，各置郎中令史以下，又置都令史分领之。
现代文：白尚书令、左右仆射以下五尚书、八座、二十曹，各设郎中令史以下官职，又设都令史分别统辖。
English: Bai Shang Shuling, and the left and right subordinate commanders were divided into five Shang Shulings, eight Zhaos, and twenty Caos, each of which had an official position below the middle-ranking official, and each of which was under the control of the capital-ranking official.

古文：仆射掌朝轨，尚书掌谳奏，都丞任碎，在弹违诸曹缘常及外详谳事。
现代文：仆射掌管朝廷仪式，尚书掌管议罪禀奏，都丞负责杂务，包括弹劾各部门违反规章制度以及交由外官议罪等事。
English: The minions are in charge of the imperial ceremony, the courtiers are in charge of the deliberation, and the officials are in charge of the miscellaneous affairs, including the impeachment of various departments for violation of rules and regulations and the transfer of the deliberation to foreign officials.

古文：应须命议相值者，皆郎先立意，应奏黄案及关事，以立意官为议主。
现代文：必须要旨命与议论相当的，都是由郎先立意，应当奏请尚书及通关八座的事，把立意官作为主要的建议人。
English: If it is necessary to have a will and an order corresponding to the discussion, it is the forefathers who set up the will, and it is necessary to submit the petition and the eight customs clearance matters, and to regard the person who set up the will as the main adviser.

古文：凡辞诉有漫命者，曹缘咨如旧。
现代文：凡是文辞诉讼与命意不符的，各部门根据旧的规定咨询。
English: Where the wording of a lawsuit is inconsistent with the spirit of the law, all departments shall consult with each other in accordance with the old provisions.

古文：若命有咨，则以立意者为议主。
现代文：如果命意有据，就把立意的人作为主要的建议人。
English: If the will is well-founded, then the person who made the will should be considered the main proponent.

古文：武库令一人；
现代文：武库令一人。
English: One person from the armory.

古文：属库部。
现代文：隶属库部。
English: Affiliated to the Treasury Department.

古文：车府令一人，丞一人；
现代文：车府令一人，丞一人。
English: There is one Chefu Rei and one Jo.

古文：属驾部。
现代文：隶属驾部。
English: It is part of the driving department.

古文：公车令一人；
现代文：公车令一人。
English: One person was ordered off the bus.

古文：大官令一人，丞一人；
现代文：大官令一人，丞一人。
English: One daikanrei, one jo.

古文：大医令一人，丞一人；
现代文：大医令一人，丞一人。
English: One for the doctor and one for me.

古文：内外殿中监各一人；
现代文：内外殿中监各一人。
English: One supervisor for each of the inner and outer halls.

古文：内外骅骝厩丞各一人；
现代文：内外驿骝厩丞各一人。
English: One person from each of the inner and outer yakuza.

古文：材官将军一人，司马一人；
现代文：材官将军一人，司马一人。
English: One general officer, one Sima.

古文：属起部，亦属领军。
现代文：隶属起部，也隶属领军。
English: Belonging to the beginning, also belongs to the leading army.

古文：侍中祭酒。高功者称之。
现代文：侍中祭酒功劳高的称此名。
English: It is said that this name comes from the high merit of the Samurai's ceremonial drink.

古文：侍中。
现代文：侍中
English: Samurai Middle Rank

古文：汉世为亲近之职。
现代文：湿伐作为亲近的官职。
English: Wet logging as a close official position.

古文：魏、晋选用，稍增华重，而大意不异。
现代文：麸、置选用，地位稍加显贵重要，然而大意没有不同。
English: The  and 置 are used, and the position is slightly more important, but the meaning is the same.

古文：宋文帝元嘉中，王华、王昙首、殷景仁等，并为侍中，情在亲密，与帝接膝共语，貂拂帝手，拔貂置案上，语毕复手插之。
现代文：宋文帝元嘉年间，王茎、王垦苴、凿基仁等，都任侍中，感情亲密，与塞童促膝交谈，帽子上装饰的貂碰到文帝的手，拔下来放在桌上，谈完后再插到帽子上。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuanjia of the Song Dynasty, Wang Zhi, Wang Xuan, and Zhi Jiren all served as attendants. They were close to each other, and had a heart-to-heart conversation with Xie Tong. The decorated skull on the hat touched Emperor Wen's hand, and was pulled off and placed on the table. After the conversation, it was put back on the hat.

古文：孝武时，侍中何偃南郊陪乘，銮辂过白门阙，偃将匐，帝乃接之曰： 朕乃陪卿。 
现代文：孝武帝时，侍中妪在南郊祭祀中陪同乘车，御驾过白门间，坦僵要跪伏，圣武壶就扶持着他说： 我是陪你。 
English: During the time of Emperor Xiaowu, the attendant Yan accompanied him in the Southern Suburbs sacrificial rites. He drove through the white gate, and he had to kneel down. Shenwu Jiu supported him and said, "I am with you."

古文：齐世朝会，多以美姿容者兼官。
现代文：变饯朝廷会见，多用容貌漂亮的兼任官职。
English: She met with the imperial court infrequently, and often used her good looks to hold an official position.

古文：永元三年，东昏南郊，不欲亲朝士，以主玺陪乘，前代未尝有也。
现代文：丞五三年，束昏侯南郊祭天，不想亲近朝中人士，让主玺陪同乘车，是前代未曾有的。
English: In the 53rd year of the Joseon Dynasty, a dowager of the Southern Suburbs held a divine service. She did not want to be close to the people of the Imperial Court, so she asked her lord to accompany her by car, which was unprecedented in the previous generation.

古文：侍中呼为门下。
现代文：侍中称为门下。
English: A chamberlain is called a subordinate.

古文：亦置令史。
现代文：也设令史。
English: There is also a history of orders.

古文：领官如左：
现代文：下属官吏如下：
English: The subordinate officials are as follows:

古文：给事黄门侍郎：
现代文：给事黄门侍郎
English: The Yellow-Doored Attendant

古文：亦管知诏令，世呼为小门下；
现代文：也掌管诏令，世人称呼为小门下。
English: Also in charge of the imperial edict, the world calls it a small door.

古文：散骑常侍，通直散骑常侍，员外散骑常侍：
现代文：散骑常侍通直散骑常侍员外散骑常侍
English: strolling attendants go straight strolling attendants outside strolling attendants

古文：旧与侍中通官，其通直员外，用衰老人士，故其官渐替。
现代文：过去与侍中通理政务，其中通直和员外散骑常侍，选用衰弱老人，所以其官职逐渐被代替。
English: In the past, government affairs were managed with the chamberlains, among whom the regular chamberlains were selected from the weak elderly, so their official positions were gradually replaced.

古文：宋大明虽华选比侍中，而人情久习，终不见重，寻复如初。
现代文：宋大明时虽然显贵可与侍中相比，然而人情习惯，终不被看重，不久又恢复如初。
English: In the Song Dynasty, although the nobility could be compared to the chamberlains, the custom of human feelings was eventually not valued, and was soon restored to its original state.

古文：散骑侍郎，通直散骑侍郎，员外散骑侍郎；
现代文：散骑侍郎通直散骑侍郎员外散骑侍郎给事中
English: Sanzhiyi chamberlains, sanzhiyi chamberlains, sanzhiyi chamberlains, sanzhiyi chamberlains

古文：给事中；奉朝请；
现代文：奉朝请
English: Please come in the morning.

古文：驸马都尉；
现代文：驸马都尉
English: Captain Tsuchima

古文：集书省职，置正书、令史。
现代文：集书省官属，设正书令史。
English: The book collection belongs to the provincial government, and the official book order history is set up.

古文：朝散用衣冠之余，人数猥积。
现代文：朝廷散官任用贵族子弟，人数冗杂。
English: The imperial court appointed nobles' sons and sons as officials, and the number of them was complicated.

古文：永明中，奉朝请至六百余人。
现代文：永明年问，奉朝请达到六百多人。
English: Yongzheng asked, asking the emperor to invite more than 600 people.

古文：中书监一人，令一人，侍郎四人，通事舍人无员。
现代文：中书监一人，令一人，侍郎四人，通事舍人没
English: There is one middle school librarian, one teacher, four attendants, and no secretary.

古文：中书省职，置主书、令史、正书以下。
现代文：中书省官职，设主书、令史、正书以下。
English: An official post of the Ministry of Chinese Literature, including the posts of the chief writer, the chief historian, and the chief editor.

古文：秘书监一人，丞一人。
现代文：秘书监一人，丞一人。
English: There is one secretary supervisor and one secretary.

古文：郎。
现代文：郎。
English: My brother.

古文：著作佐郎。
现代文：著作佐郎。
English: Written by Sauro.

古文：晋秘书阁有令史，掌众书，见《晋令》。
现代文：置秘书阁有令史，掌管各类文书案牍，见于《晋令》。
English: The Cabinet has a long history of appointing secretaries, who are in charge of various types of documents, as seen in the "Imperial Rescript."

古文：令亦置令史、正书及弟子，皆典教书画。
现代文：令也设令史、正书及弟子，都主教书画。
English: The edict also set the history of the edict, the official document and the disciple, the metropolitan's calligraphy and painting.

古文：御史中丞一人。
现代文：御史中丞一人。
English: Goshi Chujo is the only one left.

古文：晋江左中丞司隶分督百僚，傅咸所云 行马内外 是也。
现代文：晋江左中丞司隶分别督察百官，就是傅咸所说的 骑马于宫城内外 。
English: Jinjiang Zuozhongzheng subordinate respectively inspector hundred officials, that is, Fu Xian said, "riding horses in and out of Miyagi."

古文：今中丞则职无不察，专道而行，驺辐禁呵，加以声色，武将相逢，辄致侵犯，若有卤簿，至相驱击。
现代文：现在中丞的职权没有不监察的，出行有专道，车马禁戒呵斥，加以声音颜色，武将相逢，就招致侵犯，如果有仪仗，竟至于互相殴打。
English: Now, there is nothing that the authority of the chujo does not supervise. There are special roads for travel, and horses and carriages are forbidden to shout, and the sound color is added. When generals meet, it will lead to encroachment, and if there is a battle of honor, they will even beat each other.

古文：宋孝建二年制，中丞与尚书令分道，虽丞郎下朝相值，亦得断之，馀内外众官，皆受停驻。
现代文：塞垄建二年的制度，中丞与尚书令出行分道，即使丞郎下朝相遇，也要隔断，其他内外各官，都要停驻让道。
English: According to the two-year system established by Selangor, the middle-ranking officials and the higher-ranking officials should be ordered to travel in separate directions. Even if the lower-ranking officials and the higher-ranking officials meet, they should be separated. All other officials at home and abroad should stop and give way.

古文：治书侍御史二人；
现代文：治书侍御史二人。
English: Two attendants from the Imperial Household Agency are depicted.

古文：侍御史十人。
现代文：侍御史十人。
English: There are ten attendants.

古文：兰台置诸曹内外督令以下。
现代文：兰台设各部门内外督令以下官职。
English: The Lantai government set up various departments to supervise the internal and external affairs and the following official positions.

古文：谒者仆射一人。
现代文：谒者仆射一人。
English: One of the snipers shot him.

古文：谒者十人。
现代文：谒者十人。
English: There were ten of them.

古文：谒者台，掌朝觐宾飨。
现代文：谒者台，掌管朝觐、宴请宾客。
English: 者台, in charge of the morning meal, banquet guests.

古文：领军将军、中领军。
现代文：领军将军、中领军
English: General leading the army, middle leading the army

古文：护军将军、中护军。
现代文：护军将军、中护军
English: General of the Guard, Middle Guard

古文：凡为中，小轻，同一官也。
现代文：凡是名为中，官位要低微，是同一个官职。
English: If the name is in the middle, the official rank should be low, and it is the same official position.

古文：诸为将军官，皆敬领、护。
现代文：各位任将军官职的，都尊敬领、护。
English: All of you who hold military posts should respect the leader and protector.

古文：诸王为将军，道相逢，则领、护让道。
现代文：诸王任将军，路上相逢，就是领、护将军让道。
English: Kings appoint generals, and when they meet on the road, it is the leader and the guardian general who give way.

古文：置长史、司马、五官、功曹、主簿。
现代文：设长史、司马、五官、功曹、主簿。
English: It is composed of a chief historian, a secretary, five officials, a meritorious student, and a chief bookkeeper.

古文：左右二卫将军。
现代文：左右二卫将军
English: The Left and Right Generals of the Second Division

古文：骁骑将军。
现代文：骁骑将军
English: The general rode up.

古文：游击将军。
现代文：游击将军
English: The guerrilla general

古文：晋世以来，谓领、护至骁、游为六军。
现代文：置伐以来，称领、护至骁、游为六军。
English: Since the felling, the six troops have been in charge of leading, guarding, and swimming.

古文：二卫置司马、次官、功曹、主簿以下。
现代文：二卫设司马、次宫、功曹、主簿以下官吏。
English: In the second ward, officials such as Sima, Tsugu, Gong Cao, and the chief clerk were set up.

古文：左右二中郎将。
现代文：左右二中郎将
English: The left and right two middle captains

古文：前军将军，后军将军，左军将军，右军将军，号四军。
现代文：前军将军、后军将军、左军将军、右军将军，号称四军。
English: Former army general, rear army general, left army general, right army general, known as the four armies.

古文：屯骑，步兵，射声，越骑，长水：五校尉。
现代文：屯骑、步兵、射声、越骑、长水五校尉虎贲中郎将
English: Five lieutenants of the garrison cavalry, infantry, artillery, cavalry, and Changshui, Lieutenant General of the Tiger Regiment

古文：虎贲中郎将。冗从仆射。
现代文：冗从仆射
English: Loud, obsequious,

古文：羽林监。
现代文：羽林监
English: 羽林监

古文：积射将军。
现代文：积射将军
English: General of the Artillery

古文：强弩将军。
现代文：强弩将军
English: General Qiang Yu

古文：殿中将军，员外殿中将军。
现代文：殿中将军、员外殿中将军
English: Generals in the palace, generals outside the palace

古文：殿中司马督。
现代文：殿中司马督
English: Chief Steward of the Household

古文：武卫将军。
现代文：武卫将军
English: General Takei

古文：武骑常侍。
现代文：武骑常侍
English: Warriors and horsemen

古文：自二卫、四军、五校已下，谓之 西省 ，而散骑为 东省 。
现代文：白二街、四军、五校以卜，称为 西省 ，而散骑称为 束省 。
English: Bai Erjie, Shijun, Wujiao and Ibu are called Xi Province, while Sanzhong is called Sok Province.

古文：丹阳尹。
现代文：丹阳尹
English: Danyang Yin

古文：位次九卿下。
现代文：位居九卿之下。
English: He ranks below the nine lords.

古文：太子太傅。
现代文：太子太傅
English: The Prince and the Pauper

古文：少傅：
现代文：少傅
English: sous-chef

古文：府置丞、功曹、五官、主簿；
现代文：官府设丞、功曹、五官、主簿。
English: The government office has a secretary, a meritorious student, five officials, and a chief clerk.

古文：太子詹事；
现代文：太子詹事
English: Prince Zhan Zhi

古文：府置丞一人以下；
现代文：官府设丞一人及以下官吏。
English: One government official and the following government officials.

古文：太子率更令；
现代文：太子率更令
English: Prince ratio climbs

古文：太子家令：
现代文：太子家令
English: Order of the Crown Prince

古文：置丞；
现代文：设丞。
English: Set chojo.

古文：太子仆；
现代文：太子仆
English: The Prince's Servant

古文：太子门大夫；
现代文：太子门大夫
English: The Prince's Gate Doctor

古文：太子中庶子；
现代文：太子中庶子
English: The Prince's Middle Child

古文：太子中舍人；
现代文：太子中舍人
English: Prince's middle son abandons his family

古文：太子洗马；
现代文：太子洗马
English: The prince washes his horse

古文：太子舍人；
现代文：太子舍人
English: The Prince's Mistress

古文：太子左右卫率各一；
现代文：太子左右卫率各一。
English: The prince's left and right guards are one each.

古文：太子翊军步兵屯骑三校尉；
现代文：太子翊军步兵屯骑三校尉
English: Third lieutenant of the Prince's Ye Army infantry cavalry

古文：太子旅贲中郎将一人；
现代文：太子旅贲中郎将一人。
English: There will be only one member of the Prince's party.

古文：太子左右积弩将军；
现代文：太子左右积弩将军
English: Princes and Generals of the Left and Right

古文：太子殿中将军、员外殿中将军；
现代文：太子殿中将军、员外殿中将军
English: Crown Prince and Vice-Admiral, Vice-Admiral

古文：太子仓官令；
现代文：太子仓官令
English: The Prince's Warehouse Order

古文：太子常从虎贲督。
现代文：太子常从虎贲督
English: Princes often rise from vassals

古文：右东宫职僚。
现代文：以上是束宫的属官。
English: The above are the subordinate officers of Sokonomiya.

古文：州牧、刺史。
现代文：州牧、刺史
English: State Pastoral, Pastoral History

古文：魏、晋世州牧隆重，刺史任重者为使持节都督，轻者为持节督。
现代文：魏、晋代州牧地位显赫，刺史责任重大的封使持节都督，责任轻的封持节督。
English: In the Wei and Jin dynasties, the position of the state shepherd was prominent, and the feudal envoy with great historical responsibility was the viceroy, while the viceroy with light responsibility was the viceroy.

古文：起汉顺帝时，御史中丞冯赦讨九江贼，督扬、徐二州军事，而何、徐《宋志》云起魏武遣诸州将督军，王珪之《职仪》云起光武，并非也。
现代文：自汉顺帝时起，御史中丞冯赦讨伐九江叛贼，督领扬、徐二州的军事，可是何、徐的《宋志》说白魏武帝派遣各州将领督率军队时起，王珪之《职仪》说自光武帝时起，都不对。
English: From the time of Emperor Han Shun, Grand Historian Feng Meng fought against the traitors of Jiujiang and commanded the military of the two states of Yang and Xu. However, Xu's "Song Zhi" said that Emperor Wei Wudi dispatched generals from each state to lead the army, and Wang Xi's "Officer's Rite" said that it was from the time of Emperor Guangwu.

古文：晋太康中，都督知军事，刺史治民，各用人。
现代文：晋太康年间，都督掌管军事，刺史管理百姓，各用其人。
English: During the reign of Jin Taikang, the governor was in charge of the military, and the magistrate was in charge of the people, each with their own staff.

古文：惠帝末，乃并任，非要州则单为刺史。
现代文：惠帝末年，把两职合并，不是重要的州衹设刺史。
English: In the last years of Emperor Hui, the merger of the two posts was not an important event in the history of the state.

古文：州朝置别驾、治中、议曹、文学祭酒、诸曹部从事史。
现代文：州府设别驾、治中、议曹、文学祭酒、诸曹部从事史。
English: The prefectural government has set up special departments for driving, governing, deliberation, literature and wine, and all departments are engaged in history.

古文：护南蛮校尉。
现代文：护南蛮校尉
English: Lieutenant Mo Namman

古文：府置佐史。
现代文：官府设佐史。
English: The government established Sasafumi.

古文：隶荆州。
现代文：隶属荆州。
English: It belongs to Jingzhou.

古文：晋、宋末省。
现代文：晋、宋末年撤销。
English: It was abolished at the end of the Jin and Song dynasties.

古文：建元元年复置，三年省。
现代文：建元元年，又设置，建元三年撤销。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, it was set up again, and revoked in the third year of Jianyuan.

古文：延兴元年置，建武省。
现代文：延兴元年设置，建武年间撤销。
English: It was established in the first year of the Yanxing Dynasty, but was abolished during the Jianwu Dynasty.

古文：护三巴校尉。
现代文：护三巴校尉
English: The captain of the third bus

古文：宋置。
现代文：宋代设置。
English: Set in the Song Dynasty.

古文：建元二年改为刺史。
现代文：建元二年，改为刺史。
English: In the second year of the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, it was changed to 刺史.

古文：宁蛮校尉。
现代文：宁蛮校尉
English: Lt. Col. Ningman

古文：府亦置佐史，隶雍州。
现代文：官府也设置佐史，隶属雍州。
English: The government office is also located in Sashi, which belongs to Yongzhou.

古文：平蛮校尉。
现代文：平蛮校尉
English: Captain Hiramaru is back

古文：永明三年置，隶益州。
现代文：永明三年设置，隶属益州。
English: Yongming was established three years ago and is affiliated with Yizhou.

古文：镇蛮校尉。
现代文：镇蛮校尉
English: Captain Zhenman

古文：隶宁州。
现代文：隶属宁州。
English: It belongs to Ningzhou.

古文：护西戎校尉。
现代文：护西戎校尉
English: Lieutenant Gosei Ryo

古文：护羌校尉。
现代文：护羌校尉
English: Lieutenant of the garrison

古文：右四校尉，亦置四夷。
现代文：以上四校尉，也设在四夷。
English: The above four lieutenants are also stationed in Shiyi.

古文：平越中郎将。
现代文：平越中郎将
English: Heiwetsu Churo Shogun

古文：府置佐史，隶广州。
现代文：官府设佐史，隶属广州。
English: The government office is located in Sashi, which is part of Guangzhou.

古文：郡太守、内史。
现代文：郡太守、内史
English: County Governor, History of Inner Mongolia

古文：县令、相。
现代文：县令、相
English: County magistrate, minister

古文：郡县为国者，为内史、相。
现代文：郡县称国的，是内史、相。
English: Counties and counties are said to be the country's internal history and physiognomy.

古文：镇蛮护军。
现代文：镇蛮护军
English: The town's armed guards march past

古文：安远护军。
现代文：安远护军
English: The Anyuan Protectorate

古文：晋世杂号，多为郡领之。
现代文：晋代的杂号，多是由郡兼管。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, most miscellaneous numbers were also administered by counties.

古文：诸王师、友、文学各一人。
现代文：诸王师、友、文学各一人。
English: One from each of the king's teachers, friends, and literature.

古文：国官郎中令、中尉、大农为三卿，左右常侍、侍郎，上军、中军、下军三军，典书、典祠、学官、典卫四令，食官、厩牧长、谒者以下。
现代文：国家官职郎中令、中尉、大农是三卿，左右常侍、侍郎，上军、中军、下军三军，典书、典祠、学官、典卫四令，食官、厩牧长、谒者以下。
English: The middle-ranking officials, lieutenants, and large farmers of the state are the three nobles, the regular attendants and attendants on the left and right, the three armies of the upper army, the middle army, and the lower army, the four commanders of the book, the shrine, the scholar, and the guard, the eater, the stable herdsman, and the eunuch.

古文：公侯置郎中令一卿。
现代文：公侯衹设郎中令一卿。
English: Prince Shinshiro's younger brother, Chujo Ryoichisei.

古文：赞曰：百司分置，惟皇命职。
现代文：赞曰：分设百官，天子授职。
English: Zang Zai said, "A hundred officials should be set up, and the post should be given to the son of heaven."

古文：云师鸟纪，各有其式。
现代文：用云、鸟名官，各有自己的格式。
English: Using clouds and birds, each has its own format.

