古文：吏文行移，只用定本，故有绝可笑者。
现代文：由于公文行移只用定本、因而有极为可笑的。
English: Since only the final copy is used for the official document, it is extremely ridiculous.

古文：如文官批书印纸，虽宫、观、岳、庙，亦必云不曾请假；或已登科级，见官台省清要，必云不曾应举若试刑法。
现代文：如文官批写印纸，即使是提举宫、观、岳、庙等事务的闲散官员，也一定要说 不曾请假 ；有些人已经科举及第、现任政府要职，却一定要说不曾应举及考试刑法。
English: For example, if a civil servant approves a printed paper, even an idle official who raises the palace, view, mountain, temple and other affairs must say that he did not take a leave of absence; some people have already passed the imperial examination and the first and current government positions, but must say that he should not have raised the criminal law examination.

古文：予在西掖时，汉州申显惠侯神，顷系宣抚司便宜加封昭应公，乞换给制书。
现代文：我在中书省任职时，汉州申奏：本州的显惠侯神以前是由宣抚使司临时加封为昭应公，请求换成皇帝下发的诏书。
English: When I was working at the Chinese Ministry of Literature, the Hanzhou Shengzhuang: Hanzhou Xian Huo Sheng was previously temporarily sealed as Zhao Yingguo by the proclamation department, and the request was replaced with an imperial decree issued by the emperor.

古文：礼、寺看详，谓不依元降指挥于一年限内自陈，欲符下汉州，告示本神知委。予白丞相别令勘当，乃得改命。
现代文：礼部和有关的寺卿审定，说显惠侯神未依照先颁布的诏令在一年的期限内自行申诉、因而准备给汉州下符，告示本神知委，我向宰相建议重新审核，才得以改下诏书。
English: The Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies and the relevant chief priests and chief priests determined that the deity Xian Hui Hou did not appeal on his own within the one-year time limit in accordance with the previously issued edict, and therefore he was preparing to issue a certificate to Hanzhou, notifying this Shenzhi Committee. I suggested to the Prime Minister to re-examine the matter, and only then was I able to amend the edict.

古文：淳熙六年，予以大礼恩泽改奏一岁儿，吏部下饶州，必欲保官状内声说被奏人曾与不曾犯决笞，有无翦刺，及曾与不曾先经补官因罪犯停废，别行改奏；又令供与予系是何服属。父之于子而问何服属，一岁婴儿而问曾与不曾入仕坐罪，岂不大可笑哉！
现代文：宋孝宗淳熙六年，我因为大礼恩泽改奏一岁的儿子为官，吏部却转交给饶州，要求在保官状内必须说明被奏人是否曾被判处若刑，有无剪刺，及是否在此前已经补百却因罪被免，于是另行改奏；吏部还要求被奏人说明与我是什么亲属关系我们是亲父子而吏部却间我们是何种亲属关系，我的儿子是个一岁的幼婴而吏部却问他是否曾做官犯罪，岂不令人笑破了肚皮？
English: In the sixth year of Song Xiaozong Junxi, I changed my one-year-old son's performance to a performance because of the grand gift of grace, but the administrative department transferred it to Raozhou, demanding that in the certificate of bailiff, it must be stated whether the person being played had been sentenced to imprisonment, with or without scissors, and whether he had previously been pardoned for a crime, so it was changed to another performance; the administrative department also asked the person being played to explain what kind of relationship he had with me We are father and son, but what kind of relationship we have between the administrative department, my son is a one-year-old baby, and the

