古文：韩观山云萧授方瑛李震王信彭伦欧磐张祐
现代文：韩观，字彦宾，虹人，高阳忠壮侯韩成的儿子。
English: Han Guan, also known as Yan Bin and Hong Ren, was the son of Gaoyang Prince Han Cheng.

古文：韩观，字彦宾，虹人，高阳忠壮侯成子也。以舍人宿卫，忠谨为太祖所知，授桂林右卫指挥佥事。
现代文：以舍人身份任警卫，忠诚谨慎被太祖知道，任命桂林右卫指挥鱼事。
English: He appointed Guilin U-Wei as the commander of the fishery. He was known for his loyalty and prudence.

古文：洪武十九年讨平柳州、融县诸蛮，累迁广西都指挥使。
现代文：洪武十九年，讨伐平定柳州、融县各蛮夷，多欢升迁至广西都指挥使。
English: In the 19th year of Hongwu, he led the crusade to subdue the barbarians in Liuzhou and Rong County, and was promoted to the post of commander in Guangxi.

古文：二十二年平富川蛮，设灵亭千户所。
现代文：二十二年，平定富川蛮夷，设置灵亭千户所。
English: In 1922, he subdued the barbarians in Buchan and set up the Lingting Senju-sho.

古文：二十五年平宾州上林蛮。
现代文：二十五年，平定宾州上林蛮夷。
English: Twenty-five years later, he conquered Pennsylvania's savage barbarians.

古文：二十七年会湖广兵讨全州、灌阳诸瑶，斩千四百余人。
现代文：二十七年，会合湖广军队讨伐全州、灌阳各部瑶民，斩杀一千四百多人。
English: In the 27th year, the army of Hunan and Guangxi joined forces to attack the people in all parts of Ganzhou and Guanyang, killing more than 1,400 people.

古文：明年捕擒宜山诸县蛮，斩其伪王及万户以下二千八百余人。
现代文：第二年，捕获宜山各县的蛮夷，斩杀他们自立的王和万户以下二千八百多人。
English: In the second year, they captured the barbarians in the counties of Yishan and killed their self-reliant king and more than 2,800 people under 10,000 households.

古文：以征南左副将军从都督杨文讨龙州土官赵宗寿，宗寿伏罪。
现代文：以征南左副将军的身份跟从都督杨文讨伐龙州土官趟宗寿，赵宗寿认罪。
English: Zhao Zongshou pleaded guilty to following Yang Wen, the prefectural governor, to subjugate Zongshou, the local official of Longzhou, as the vice-general of the south-west.

古文：移兵征南丹、奉议及都康、向武、富劳、上林、思恩、都亮诸蛮，先后斩获万余级。
现代文：调兵征讨南丹、奉议和都康、向武、富劳、上林、思恩、都亮各蛮夷，先后斩杀俘获一万多人。
English: More than 10,000 people were killed and captured in the campaigns against Nantan, Bongye and Dukang, Xiangwu, Fulao, Shanglin, Sian and Du Liang.

古文：观生长兵间，有勇略。
现代文：韩观成长于军队中，有勇气谋略。
English: Han Guan grew up in the army and has the courage to strategize.

古文：性鸷悍，诛罚无所假。
现代文：性情凶猛强悍，诛杀惩罚不宽恕。
English: His temperament is fierce and strong, and he does not tolerate punishment for fighting.

古文：下令如山，人莫敢犯。
现代文：下令如山，没有人敢违犯。
English: The orders are piling up and no one dares to disobey them.

古文：初，群蛮所在蜂起，剽郡县，杀守吏，势甚炽。
现代文：当初，群蛮到处兴起，掠夺郡县，杀害守吏，势力很旺盛。
English: At first, the barbarian hordes sprang up everywhere, plundering counties and counties, killing guards, and they were very powerful.

古文：将士畏观法，争死斗。观得贼必处以极刑。
现代文：将士畏惧韩观的法令，争着拼死战斗，韩观抓到寇贼必定处死。
English: The generals were afraid of Han Guan's decree and fought to the death. If Han Guan caught a bandit, he would certainly be executed.

古文：间纵一二，使归告诸蛮，诸蛮胆落。
现代文：偶尔释放一两个，让他们回去告诉各蛮夷，各蛮夷丧胆。
English: Occasionally release one or two, let them go back and tell each barbarian, each barbarian is discouraged.

古文：由是境内得安。
现代文：从此境内得以安定。
English: Since then, the country has been stable.

古文：二十九年召还，进都督同知。
现代文：二十九年，召回进升为都督同知。
English: In 1929, he was recalled and promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：明年复从杨文讨平吉州及五开叛苗，与顾成讨平水西诸蛮堡，还理左府事。
现代文：第二年，又随从杨文讨伐平定吉州和五开反叛的苗人，和顾成讨伐平定水西各蛮夷营垒，归还管理左府事务。
English: In the following year, he accompanied Yang Wen to subdue the Miao people who rebelled in Dingji and Wuka, and Gu Cheng to subdue the barbarian camps in the west of Dingshui, and returned to manage the affairs of Zuofu.

古文：建文元年练兵德州，御燕师无功。
现代文：建文元年，在德州训练军队，抵御燕军没有功劳。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, the army was trained in Texas, and there was no merit in resisting Yan's army.

古文：成祖即位，委任如故。
现代文：成祖即位，任用他像以前一样。
English: When Cheng Zu ascended to the throne, he was appointed as before.

古文：命往江西练军城守，兼节制广东、福建、湖广三都司。
现代文：命令去江西训练军队守卫城池，兼管广东、福建、湖广三都司。
English: Ordered to go to Jiangxi to train the army to guard the city, and concurrently in charge of Guangdong, Fujian, and Hougang.

古文：庐陵民啸聚山泽。帝不欲用兵，遣行人许子谟赍敕招谕，命观临抚之。
现代文：庐陵百姓结伙聚集于山野，皇帝不想用兵，派行人许子谟带着韶书去招抚，命令韩观亲自去安抚他们。
English: The people of Fuling gathered in groups in the mountains and fields. The emperor did not want to use troops, so he sent the passer-by Xu Zimo to appease them with an imperial edict, and ordered Han Guan to appease them personally.

古文：观至，众皆复业，赐玺书褒劳。
现代文：韩观到达，众人都恢复生产，赐予诏害褒奖慰劳。
English: When Han Guan arrived, everyone resumed production and gave him a reward for his hard work.

古文：命佩征南将军印，镇广西，节制两广官军。
现代文：命令佩带征南将军印，镇守广西，管辖两广官军。
English: He was ordered to wear the seal of the General of the Southern Expedition, guard Guangxi, and supervise the two Guangxi armies.

古文：帝知观嗜杀，赐玺书戒之曰： 蛮民易叛难服，杀愈多愈不治。
现代文：皇帝知道韩观好杀人，赐诏书警戒他说： 蛮民易反叛难归服，杀得愈多愈治理不住。
English: The emperor knew that Han Guan was fond of killing people, and issued an edict warning him, saying, "Violent people are easy to rebel and hard to submit to, and the more they kill, the more they cannot be controlled."

古文：卿往镇，务绥怀之，毋专杀戮。 
现代文：你去镇守，务必安抚关怀他们，不要一味斩杀。 
English: If you go to the town guards, be sure to appease and care for them, and don't just kill them.

古文：会群蛮复叛，帝遣员外郎李宗辅赍敕招之。
现代文：恰逢群蛮又叛乱，皇帝派员外郎李宗辅带着诏书去安抚他们。
English: At the time of the rebellion, the emperor sent his foreign minister, Li Zongyu, with an imperial edict to pacify them.

古文：观大陈兵示将发状，而遣使与宗辅俱。
现代文：韩观大规模布置军队显示将要发兵的样子，而派使者和李宗辅同去。
English: Han Guan's large-scale deployment of troops showed the appearance that troops would be dispatched, and sent an envoy to accompany Li Zongyu.

古文：桂林蛮复业者六千家，惟思恩蛮未附。
现代文：桂林蛮夷恢复产业的有六干家，只有思恩蛮夷没有归附。
English: Of the six Guilin barbarian villages that have restored their industries, only Shine barbarian village has not been annexed.

古文：而庆远、柳、浔诸蛮方杀掠吏民，乃上章请讨。
现代文：而庆远、柳、浔各蛮夷正杀掠官吏百姓，就上奏章请求讨伐。
English: However, Qingyuan, Liu, and Zou, barbarians who were killing and plundering officials and commoners, requested a crusade.

古文：永乐元年与指挥葛森等击斩理定诸县山贼千一百八十有奇，擒其酋五十余人，斩以徇。
现代文：丞乐元年，和指挥葛森等打击斩杀理定各县山贼一千一百八十多人，擒获他们的首领五十多人，斩杀示众。
English: In the first year of the Joseon Dynasty, he and commander Gessen and others cracked down on and killed more than 1,180 mountain bandits in various counties in Liding, captured more than 50 of their leaders, and killed them in public.

古文：还所掠男女于民，而抚辑其逃散者。
现代文：把被掠夺的男女归还给百姓，而安抚平定逃散的人。
English: Return the plundered men and women to the people, and pacify those who have fled.

古文：明年遣都指挥朱辉谕降宜山、忻城诸山寨。
现代文：第二年，派都指挥朱辉劝解降服宜山、忻城各山寨。
English: In the second year, Zhu Hui, the commander of the faction, persuaded all the villages in Yishan and Shicheng to surrender.

古文：荔波瑶震恐，乞为编户。
现代文：荔波瑶民震惊害怕，请求把他们编入户籍。
English: Shocked and afraid, the people of Lihbo asked to be registered.

古文：帝属观抚之，八十余洞皆归附。
现代文：皇帝嘱咐韩观安抚他们，八十多个洞都归附。
English: The emperor ordered Han Guan to appease them, and more than eighty caves were annexed.

古文：明年，浔、桂、柳三府蛮作乱，已抚复叛，遣朱辉以偏师破之。
现代文：第二年，浔、柱、柳三府蛮夷叛乱，已经安抚的又叛乱，派朱辉用部分军队擎破他们。
English: In the second year, the barbarians in the three provinces of Yan, Zhu and Liu rebelled, and those who had been pacified rebelled again. Zhu Hui sent part of the army to defeat them.

古文：蛮大惧。
现代文：蛮夷十分害怕。
English: The barbarians were very afraid.

古文：会朝廷遣郎中徐子良至，遂来降，归所掠人畜器械。
现代文：正逢朝廷派郎中徐子良到，就来归降，归还所掠夺的人口牲畜器械。
English: Just when Xu Ziliang, one of the courtiers sent by the imperial court, arrived, he came to surrender and return the plundered human and livestock equipment.

古文：四年大发兵讨安南，诏观画方略，转粟二十万石饷军。
现代文：四年，大规模发兵征讨安壶，诏令韩观谋划方略，运送粮食二十万石供给军队。
English: In the fourth year, a large-scale army was sent to collect grain, and Han Guan was ordered to devise a strategy to transport 200,000 koku of grain to supply the army.

古文：已，复命偕大理卿陈洽选土兵三万会太平，仍令观侦安南贼中动静。
现代文：事完后，又命令和大理卿陈洽选择土兵三万会集于太平，仍然令韩观侦察安南寇贼的动静。
English: After the event was over, he also ordered Daricheng Chen Cao to choose 30,000 soldiers to gather in Taiping, still allowing Han Guan to spy on the movement of Annan's bandits.

古文：寻从大兵发凭祥，抵坡垒关，以所部营关下，伐木治桥梁，给军食。
现代文：不久随从大军发兵凭祥，抵达坡垒关，命所率领的部队驻扎在关下，伐木建造桥梁，供给军粮。
English: Soon after, the troops sent from the army arrived at Po Shih Pass. The troops led by the commander were stationed at the pass, cutting trees, building bridges, and supplying grain.

古文：安南平，命措置交阯缘途诸堡，而柳、浔诸蛮乘观出，复叛。
现代文：安南平定，命令设置交趾沿途各营堡，而柳、浔各蛮族乘着韩观出去，又反叛。
English: Annan was pacified, and the order was given to set up camp forts along the way, while the barbarians of Liu and Zou went out with Han Guan and rebelled again.

古文：五年，观旋师抵柳州。
现代文：五年，韩观回师抵达柳州。
English: Five years later, Han Guan Hui arrived in Liuzhou.

古文：贼望风遁匿，观请俟秋凉深入，且请济师。
现代文：寇贼望风逃匿。韩观请求等秋凉后深入，并请求增援军队。
English: The bandits fled to avoid the wind. Han Guan requested that they wait until the autumn was cooler, and requested reinforcement of the army.

古文：帝使使发湖广、广东、贵州三都司兵，又敕新城侯张辅遣都督朱广、方政以征交阯兵协讨。
现代文：皇帝派使者征发湖广、广东、贵州三都司兵力，又诏令新城侯张辅派都督朱广、方政用征讨交趾的兵力协助讨伐。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to recruit and dispatch troops from the three capitals of Hukang, Guangdong and Guizhou, and also ordered the new city lord Zhang to send the governor Zhu Guang and Fang Zheng to help with the crusade.

古文：十月，诸军皆集，分道进剿。
现代文：十月，诸军都会集，分道进军清剿。
English: In October, all the armies will gather and march to Qingcheng.

古文：观自以贵州、两广兵由柳州攻马平、来宾、迁江、宾州、上林、罗城、融县，皆破之。
现代文：韩观自己带领贵州、两广军队由柳州攻打马平、来宾、迁江、童州、上林、罗城、融县，都攻破了。
English: Han Guan himself led Guizhou and the two Guang armies from Liuzhou to attack Ma Ping, Laibin, Qianjiang, Tongzhou, Shanglin, Luocheng, and Rong County, all of which were defeated.

古文：会兵象州，复进武宣、东乡、桂林、贵平、永福。
现代文：会师象州，又进攻武宣、束乡、桂林、贵平、永福。
English: He also attacked Wuxuan, Sokxiang, Guilin, Guiping and Yongfu.

古文：斩首万余级，擒万三千余人，群蛮复定。
现代文：斩杀一万多人，擒获一万三千多人，众蛮夷又平定了。
English: More than ten thousand people were killed, more than thirteen thousand people were captured, and the barbarians were defeated.

古文：捷闻，帝嘉劳之。
现代文：捷报上奏，皇帝嘉奖慰劳他。
English: The news of his victory was announced, and the emperor rewarded and consoled him.

古文：九年拜征夷副将军，仍佩故印，总兵镇交阯。
现代文：九年，拜授征夷副将军，仍佩带原来的印章，统领军队镇守交阢。
English: In the ninth year, he was awarded the title of Vice-General of Conscription and Emancipation, still wearing the original seal, and led the army to guard the Jiaotong Pass.

古文：明年复命转粟给张辅军。
现代文：第二年，又命令运送粮食供给张辅的部队。
English: The following year, he also ordered the transportation of grain to supply Zhang Zuo's troops.

古文：辅再出师定交阯，观皆主馈运，不为将，故功不著。
现代文：张辅又发兵平定交吐，韩观都主管运送粮食，不带兵打仗，所以功劳不显着。
English: Zhang Fu also sent troops to quell the fighting, and Han Guandu was in charge of transporting grain and did not bring soldiers to fight, so his contribution was not significant.

古文：观在广西久，威震南中，蛮人惴惴奉命。
现代文：韩观在广西时间久，威震南方，蛮夷恐惧恭敬地接受命令。
English: Han Guan has been in Guangxi for a long time, dominating the south, fearing the barbarians and respectfully accepting orders.

古文：继之者，自山云外，皆不能及。
现代文：继任的，除山云以外，都比不上他。
English: His successors, with the exception of mountains and clouds, are no match for him.

古文：十二年九月卒，无子。
现代文：十二年九月去世，没有儿子。
English: He died in September 1912 without a son.

古文：宣德二年，保定伯梁铭奏求观南京故宅。帝许之。
现代文：宣德二年，保定伯梁铭上奏索求韩观南京的旧宅，皇帝允许了。
English: In the second year of Xuande, Baoding Bo Liangming made a request for Han Guan's old house in Nanjing, and the emperor allowed it.

古文：既闻观妻居其中，曰： 观，功臣地，虽殁，岂可夺之？ 
现代文：不久听说韩观的妻子居住在那里，说： 韩观是功臣，虽然去世，哪能抢夺他的房子。 
English: He soon heard that Han Guan's wife lived there and said, "Han Guan is a hero. Even though he passed away, how can you seize his house?

古文：遂不许。
现代文：于是不允许。
English: So they disagreed.

古文：令有司以他宅赐铭。山云，徐人。
现代文：命令有关官员把其它房子赐给銮筮。山云，徐人。
English: He ordered the relevant officials to give the other houses to Zou, Shanyun and Xu Ren.

古文：父青，以百户从成祖起兵，积功至都督佥事。
现代文：父亲山青，以百户身份随从成祖起兵，积累功劳至都督愈事。
English: His father, Yamasei, raised an army as a member of the 100 families that followed Cheng Zu, and accumulated merits until he became the governor.

古文：云貌魁梧，多智略。
现代文：山云相貌魁梧，多智谋。
English: The mountains and clouds have a strong appearance, and they have a lot of wisdom.

古文：初袭金吾左卫指挥使。
现代文：刚开始承袭父功任金吾左卫指挥使。
English: He had just begun to succeed his father as the commander of the Kinguza Company.

古文：数从出塞，有功。
现代文：多次跟从出塞，有功劳。
English: It's a credit to him that he followed me out of the jam so many times.

古文：时幼军二十五所，隶府军前卫，掌卫者不任事，更命云及李玉等五人抚戢之。
现代文：当时幼军二十五所，隶属于府军前卫，掌管卫所的不管事，又命令山云和李玉等五人安抚平定。
English: At that time, there were twenty-five small armies under the vanguard of the prefectural army. The person in charge of the guard was not in charge of the matter, and he also ordered five people such as Shan Yun and Li Yu to pacify and pacify.

古文：仁守立，擢行在中军都督佥事。
现代文：仁宗即位，升任行在中军都督愈事。
English: Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne and was promoted to the post of the Chinese military governor.

古文：宣德元年改北京行都督府，命偕都御史王彰自山海抵居庸，巡视关隘，以便宜行事。
现代文：宣德元年，政任北京行都督府，命令和都御使王彰从山海抵达居庸，巡视关隘，见机行事。
English: In the first year of the Xuande Emperor's reign, when he was in Beijing as the governor of the capital, he ordered and sent Wang Zhang from the mountains and the sea to Juyong to inspect the pass and act at the right time.

古文：帝征乐安，召辅郑王、襄王居守。
现代文：皇帝征讨乐安，召山云辅佐郑王、襄王镇守京都。
English: The emperor called for peace and tranquility, summoning Shanyun to assist Zheng Wang and Xiang Wang in the defense of Kyoto.

古文：明年，柳、庆蛮韦朝烈等掠临桂诸县。
现代文：第二年，柳、庆蛮夷韦朝烈等掠夺临桂各县。
English: In the second year, Liu, Qing barbarians, Wei dynasty warriors and others plundered all counties in Linhui.

古文：时镇远侯顾兴祖以不救邱温被逮，公侯大臣举云。
现代文：当时镇远侯顾兴祖因不援救丘温被逮捕，公侯大臣推举山云。
English: At that time, Gu Xingzu, the mayor of Zhenyuan, was arrested for not rescuing Qiu Wen, and the prince minister made a big fuss.

古文：帝亦自知之。
现代文：皇帝也知道他。
English: The Emperor knows him, too.

古文：三年正月命佩征蛮将军印，充总兵官往镇。
现代文：三年正月，命令佩带征蛮将军印，任总兵官去镇守。
English: In the first month of the third year, he was ordered to wear the seal of a conscript general, and was appointed commander-in-chief to guard the town.

古文：云至，讨朝烈，破之。
现代文：山云到，讨伐韦朝烈，击破他们。
English: The mountains and clouds have arrived, let's fight against Wei Dynasty and break them.

古文：贼保山巅，山峻险，挂木于藤，垒石其上。
现代文：寇贼保守山顶。山险峻，把木头挂在藤上，在上面堆放石头。
English: Thieves guard the top of the steep mountain, hanging logs on the rattan and piling stones on top.

古文：官军至，辄断藤下木石，无敢近者。
现代文：官军到来，就割断藤条落下木石，没有敢靠近的。
English: When the government army arrived, they cut the rattan and felled the wood and stone. No one dared to approach.

古文：云夜半束火牛羊角，以金鼓随其后，驱向贼。
现代文：山云半夜里在牛羊角上扎火把，带着鼓乐跟在牛羊后面，驱赶牛羊奔向寇贼。
English: In the middle of the night, mountains and clouds tie torches on the horns of cattle and sheep, and follow the cattle and sheep with drum music, driving the cattle and sheep to run towards the robbers.

古文：贼谓官军至，亟断藤。
现代文：寇贼以为官军到来，立即割断藤条。
English: The robbers thought that the government army was coming and immediately cut the cane.

古文：比明，木石且尽，众噪而登，遂尽破之。
现代文：等到天亮，木石将尽，众人呼喊着登山，于是全部打败寇贼。
English: Wait until dawn, the wood and stone will run out, everyone is shouting to climb the mountain, so they all beat the robbers.

古文：南安、广源诸蛮悉下。
现代文：南安、广源各蛮夷都被攻下。
English: Nan'an and Guangyuan were all conquered by the barbarians.

古文：是夏，忻城蛮谭团作乱，云讨擒之。
现代文：这年夏天，忻城蛮夷谭团作乱，山云讨伐擒获他。
English: In the summer of that year, there was a riot by the barbarian Tan Troupe in Handan City, and he was caught in the crossfire.

古文：四年春，讨平柳、浔诸蛮。
现代文：四年春，讨伐平定柳、浔各蛮夷。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the campaign to subdue the barbarians of Dingliu and Zou was launched.

古文：其秋，雒容蛮出掠，遣指挥王纶破之。
现代文：这年秋天，雒容蛮夷出来劫掠，派指挥王纶击败他们。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Qoryong barbarians came out to plunder, and sent the commander Wang Qi to defeat them.

古文：云上纶功，并劾其杀良民罪，帝宥纶而心重云。
现代文：山云上奏王纶的功劳，并弹劾他杀害良民的罪行。皇帝宽恕王纶而内心器重山云。
English: The emperor praised Wang Xuan's merits and impeached him for the crime of killing good people. The emperor pardoned Wang Xuan and his heart was heavy.

古文：广西自韩观卒后，诸蛮渐横。
现代文：广西自韩观去世后，各蛮夷渐渐横行。
English: Since the death of Han Guan in Guangxi, the barbarians have gradually become rampant.

古文：云以广西兵少，留贵州兵为用，先后讨平浔、柳、平乐、桂林、宜山、思恩诸蛮。
现代文：山云因广西兵力少，一留贵州军队使用，先后讨伐平定浔、柳、平乐、桂林、宜山、思恩各蛮夷。
English: Due to the small number of troops in Guangxi, the Guizhou army had to stay in Shanyun for a while, and they successively fought to pacify Dingyao, Liu, Pingle, Guilin, Yishan, and Sian.

古文：九年又以庆远、郁林苗、瑶非大创不服，请济师。
现代文：九年，又因庆远、郁林苗人、瑶人没有重大打击不会归服，请求增援军队。
English: In the ninth year, Qingyuan, Yulin, Miao and Xing would not surrender without a major blow, and requested reinforcement of the army.

古文：诏发广东兵千五百人益云。
现代文：诏令调广东军一千五百人增援山云。
English: The imperial edict transferred 1,500 troops from the Guangdong Army to reinforce Shanyun.

古文：云分道剿捕，擒斩甚众。
现代文：山云分道清剿逮捕，擒获斩首很多。
English: They were arrested and many of them were beheaded.

古文：复遣指挥田真攻大藤峡贼，破之。
现代文：又派指挥田真攻打大藤峡的寇贼，击败了他们。
English: He also sent commander Tama to attack the bandits in Dafuji Gorge and defeated them.

古文：云在镇，先后大战十余，斩首万二千二百六十，降贼酋三百七十，夺还男女二千五百八十，筑城堡十三，铺舍五百，陶砖凿石，增高益厚。
现代文：山云在镇守地，先后大战十多次，斩首一万二千二百六十人，降服寇贼首领三百七十人，夺回男女二千五百八十人，修筑城堡十三座，巡逻士卒住房五百处，烧砖凿石，增高加厚。
English: Shanyun has been in the garrison for more than ten times, beheaded 12,260 people, subdued 370 bandit leaders, recaptured 2,580 men and women, built 13 castles, 500 houses for patrol officers, burned bricks and chiseled stones, and increased height and thickness.

古文：自是瑶、僮屏迹，居民安堵。
现代文：从此瑶、僮敛迹，居民安乐。
English: Since then, there has been no trace of it, and the residents are happy.

古文：论功，进都督同知，玺书褒劳。
现代文：评论功绩，进升为都督同知，下诏褒奖慰劳。
English: Commenting on his achievements, he was promoted to the same rank as the governor, and was awarded a prize for his hard work.

古文：云谋勇深沉，而端洁不苟取，公赏罚，严号令，与士卒同甘苦。
现代文：山云谋略勇气深沉，而且正直清廉不随意索取，赏罚公正，虢令严明，和士卒同甘共苦。
English: The courage of the strategy is profound, and the honesty and integrity are not arbitrary, the rewards and punishments are fair, the orders are strict, and the soldiers share the joys and sorrows.

古文：临机应变，战无不捷。
现代文：临机应变，战无不胜。
English: When the time comes, we will be invincible.

古文：广西镇帅初至，土官率馈献为故事。
现代文：广西镇帅初到，土官带着馊赠来进献是旧例。
English: When the Guangxi town marshal arrived for the first time, it was customary for the local officials to bring gifts of strawberries.

古文：帅受之，即为所持。
现代文：镇帅接受馊赠，就被他们挟持。
English: When the town marshal accepted the gift, he was taken hostage by them.

古文：云始至，闻府吏郑牢刚直，召问曰： 馈可受乎？ 
现代文：山云刚到，听说府吏郑牢刚强耿直，召见问他说： 馋赠可以接受吗？ 
English: As soon as he arrived, he heard that the government official, Zheng Rongqiang, summoned him and asked him: "Is it acceptable to accept gifts?"

古文：牢曰： 洁衣被体，一污不可湔，将军新洁衣也。 
现代文：郑牢说： 干净的衣服穿在身上，一点污水不能溅上，将军犹如新的干净衣服。 
English: Zheng said: Clean clothes are worn on the body, a little sewage can not splash on, the general is like a new clean clothes.

古文：云曰： 不受，彼且生疑，奈何？ 
现代文：山云说： 不接受，他们将会产生疑心。怎么办？ 
English: Yamayun said, "If they don't accept, they will be suspicious. What should we do?"

古文：牢曰： 黩货，法当死。
现代文：郑牢说： 贪污纳贿，按法律当死。
English: Zheng said, "If you are corrupt and take bribes, you will die according to the law.

古文：将军不畏天子法，乃畏土夷乎？ 
现代文：将军不害怕天子的法令，还害怕土官吗？ 
English: Is not the general afraid of the decree of the Son of God, and of the magistrate?

古文：云曰： 善。 
现代文：山云说： 好。 
English: Yamayun said: Good.

古文：尽却馈献，严驭之。
现代文：全部推辞债赠，严格管制他们。
English: Cancel all debts and gifts, and strictly control them.

古文：由是土官畏服，调发无敢后者。
现代文：从此土官畏惧顺从，调集征发没有敢落后的。
English: Since then, local officials have been afraid to obey, and have not dared to lag behind in the collection and distribution of funds.

古文：云所至，询问里老，抚善良，察诬枉，土人皆爱之。
现代文：山云所到之处，访问乡里老人，抚恤良民，察明冤情，当地人都爱戴他。
English: Wherever he goes, he visits the elderly in the countryside, treats the good people, and detects the grievances. The local people all love him.

古文：英宗即位，云坠马伤股。
现代文：英宗即位，山云坠落马下伤了大腿。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, and the horse injured his thigh when he fell down the mountain.

古文：帝遣医驰视。
现代文：皇帝派医生快马去看望。
English: The emperor sent a doctor to visit the horse.

古文：以病请代，优诏不许。
现代文：因病请求派人取代，下诏书褒美嘉奖不允许。
English: Due to illness, it is requested that someone be sent to replace the person, and it is not allowed to reward the award with the following decree.

古文：进右都督。
现代文：进升为右都督。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right-hand governor.

古文：正统二年上言： 浔州与大藤峡诸山相错，瑶寇出没，占耕旁近田。
现代文：正统二年，上疏说： 浔州和大藤峡各山相互交错，瑶人寇贼出役，占领耕种附近的田地。
English: In the second year of the orthodoxy, Shang Su said: The mountains of Zhangzhou and Dafuji Gorge are interlaced with each other, and the robbers of Zhang people go into service and occupy the fields near the cultivation.

古文：左右两江土官，所属人多田少。其狼兵素勇，为贼所畏。
现代文：左右两江土官，管辖的地方人多田少，那些狼人组成的军队向来勇敢，被寇贼畏惧。
English: The local officials around the two rivers and the local people under their jurisdiction are few and far between. Those werewolf armies have always been brave and feared by robbers.

古文：若量拨田州土兵于近山屯种，分界耕守，断贼出入。不过数年，贼必坐困。 
现代文：如酌量调拨田州土兵到靠山的地方屯垦，划界耕种守卫，切断寇贼出入道路，用不了几年，寇贼必定陷入困境。 
English: If the discretionary allocation of Tianzhou soldiers to the mountainside camp, demarcation of cultivation guards, cut off the access road of the bandits, it will take a few years, and the bandits will certainly be in trouble.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：嗣后东南有急，辄调用狼兵，自此始也。
现代文：后来东南一有急情，就调用狼人部队，是从此开始的。
English: Later, whenever Southeastern was in a hurry, they would call in the werewolf troops, and it all started from there.

古文：明年冬，卒于镇。
现代文：第二年冬天，死在镇守任上。
English: In the winter of the following year, he died on duty as town watchman.

古文：赠怀远伯，谥忠毅。
现代文：追赠怀远伯，谧号忠毅。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Huaiyuanbo and the honorary title of Zhongyi.

古文：长子俊，袭府军前卫指挥使。
现代文：长子山俊，承袭父功任府军前卫指挥使。
English: The eldest son, Yamajun, succeeded his father as commander of the vanguard of the prefectural army.

古文：广西人思云不置，立祠肖像祀焉。
现代文：广西人思念山云不能忘却，建立祠堂设肖像祭祀他。
English: People in Guangxi cannot forget his memory and have built an ancestral hall and set up a portrait to worship him.

古文：初，韩观镇广西，专杀戮。
现代文：当初，韩观镇守广西，一味杀戮。
English: At first, Han Guan guarded Guangxi and went on a killing spree.

古文：庆远诸生来迓。
现代文：庆远诸生来依附。
English: Qingyuan adheres to it.

古文：观曰： 此皆贼觇我也。 
现代文：韩观说： 这些都是寇贼来窥视我的。 
English: Han Guan said: These are robbers who came to spy on me.

古文：悉斩之。
现代文：都把他们杀了。
English: He then beheaded them all.

古文：云平恕，参佐有罪，辄上请，不妄杀人，人亦不敢犯。
现代文：山云平和宽容。部下有罪，就向上请示，不随便杀人，人们也不敢冒犯他。
English: He is peaceful and tolerant. If his subordinates are guilty, they should appeal to the top for guidance. He does not kill people at random, and people do not dare to offend him.

古文：郑牢尝逮事观。
现代文：郑牢曾经在韩观手下做事。
English: Zheng Du used to work under Han Guan.

古文：观醉，辄杀人。牢辄留之，醒乃以白。
现代文：韩观喝醉了，就要杀人，郑牢就留下那些人，酒醒后就告诉他。
English: When Han Guan was drunk, he wanted to kill someone, so he left those people behind and told him about it when he sobered up.

古文：牢为士大夫所重，然竟以隶终。
现代文：郑牢被士大夫看重，然而竟以差役告终。
English: Zheng Rong was valued by the magistrate, but he ended up as a police officer.

古文：萧授，华容人。由千户从成祖起兵，至都指挥同知。
现代文：萧授，华容人以千户身份跟随成祖起兵，任都指挥同知。
English: Xiao Zhu, Hua Rong people followed Cheng Zu to raise an army with the status of a thousand households, and all of them commanded the same friend.

古文：永乐十六年擢右军都督佥事，充总兵官，镇湖广、贵州。
现代文：永乐十六年，升任右军都督愈事，充任总兵官，镇守湖广、贵州。
English: In the 16th year of Yongle, he was promoted to the post of the right-wing military governor, served as the chief military officer, and served as the town guard of Huguang and Guizhou.

古文：宣德元年，镇远邛水蛮银总作乱。
现代文：宣德元年，镇逮邛水蛮夷银总作乱。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, the town of Zhishui made a total riot.

古文：指挥祝贵往抚，被杀。
现代文：指挥祝贵前往招抚，被杀。
English: The conductor, Zhu Gui, went to appease them and was killed.

古文：授遣都指挥张名破斩之。
现代文：萧授派都指挥张名击败斩杀了他们。
English: Xiao Ju's faction all commanded Zhang Ming to defeat and slaughter them.

古文：贵州宣慰所辖乖西、巴香诸峒寨，山箐深险，诸蛮错居。攻剽他部，伤官军，发民冢。而昆阻比诸寨亦恃险不输赋。
现代文：贵州宣慰管辖的乖西巴香各峒寨，山峰密林幽深险峻，各蛮夷交错居住，攻击劫掠其它部落，杀伤官军，发掘百姓坟墓，而昆阻比各寨也仗恃险阻不交纳赋税。
English: Guizhou Xuanlian-governed Guizhou Baxi Xiangzhai, mountain peaks, dense forests, deep and perilous, each barbarian living in a staggered manner, attacking and plundering other tribes, killing government troops, and excavating people's graves, while Kunzai compared to each village is also wary of danger and does not pay taxes.

古文：二年，授遣都指挥苏保会宣慰宋斌攻破昆阻比寨，穷追，斩伪王以下数百人。
现代文：二年，萧授派都指挥苏保会同宣慰宋斌玫破昆阻比寨，奋力追击，斩杀伪王以下数百人。
English: In the second year, Xiao Ju sent all the commanders of the Subao Association to jointly proclaim the consolation of Song Binmei to break the resistance of Kun, vigorously pursue, and kill hundreds of people below the pseudo-king.

古文：乖西诸蛮皆震慑归命。
现代文：乖西各蛮夷都震惊害怕归从。
English: All the barbarians in the west were shocked and afraid to obey.

古文：水西蛮阿闭妨宜作乱，授结旁寨酋，以计诛之。
现代文：水西蛮夷阿闭妨宜作乱，萧授结交邻近寨子的首领，用计诛杀了他。
English: Shuixi barbarian Ah Gui might as well make trouble. Xiao Zhu made friends with the leader of a nearby stockade and killed him by trickery.

古文：而西堡蛮阿骨等与寨底、丰宁、清平、平越、普安诸苗复相聚为寇，四川筠连诸蛮应之。
现代文：而西堡蛮夷阿骨等和寨底、丰宁、清平、平越、普安各地苗人又聚集焉寇，四川筠连各蛮夷响应他们。
English: However, the barbarians from Xi'an, Xi'an, Baoding, Fengning, Qingping, Pingyue, and Pu'an, as well as the Miao people from all over the country, also gathered in Yankou, and the barbarians from all over Sichuan and Qilian responded to them.

古文：授且捕且抚。
现代文：萧授一边追捕一边安抚。
English: Xiao Zhuo hunts down and pacifies.

古文：诸蛮先后听命，承制赦之。
现代文：众蛮夷先后听从命令，秉承皇帝旨意赦免了他们。
English: The barbarians successively obeyed the order and pardoned them in accordance with the emperor's will.

古文：以丰宁酋稔恶，械送京师，伏诛。
现代文：因丰宁首领罪恶深重，加刑具押送京城，被处死。
English: Due to the serious crimes of the leader of Funen, he was escorted to the capital with additional torture equipment and was executed.

古文：七年谕降安隆酋岑俊。
现代文：七年，诏谕降服安隆首领岑俊。
English: In the seventh year, Anlong leader Gong Jun surrendered.

古文：已，讨辰州蛮，擒其酋八十，斩馘无算。
现代文：后来，讨伐辰州蛮人，擒获他们的首领八十人，斩杀无数。
English: Later, he fought against the barbarians of Chenzhou, captured eighty of their leaders, and killed countless of them.

古文：移兵击江华苗，讨富川山贼，先后破擒之。
现代文：调兵攻击江华苗人，讨伐富川山贼，先后击败擒获他们。
English: He mobilized troops to attack the Jianghua Miao people, fought against the Buchuan mountain bandits, and successively defeated and captured them.

古文：先是，贵州治古、答意二长官司苗数出掠。
现代文：在此之前，贵州治古、答意二长官司的苗人多次出来掠夺。
English: Prior to this, the Miao people of Guizhou governed ancient times and responded to the two chief magistrates several times to loot.

古文：授筑二十四堡，环其地，分兵以戍，贼不得逞。
现代文：萧授修筑二十四座堡垒，环绕那个地方，分派兵力戍守，寇贼不能得逞。
English: Xiao Ju built twenty-four fortresses, surrounded the place, and sent troops to guard it. The bandits could not succeed.

古文：久之，其酋吴不尔觇官军少，复掠清浪，杀官吏。
现代文：很久以后，他们的首领昊不尔窥视官军兵少，又劫掠清浪，杀官吏。
English: After a long time, their leader Haobur peered at the small number of officers and soldiers, and also plundered Qinglang and killed officials.

古文：授遣张名击破之。
现代文：萧授派张名打败他们。
English: Xiao Ju sent Zhang Ming to defeat them.

古文：贼走湖广境，结生苗，势复张。
现代文：寇贼逃到湖广境内，勾结生苗，势力又扩张。
English: The bandits fled to the territory of Hukang, colluded with seedlings, and their power expanded.

古文：授乃发黔、楚、蜀军分道捕讨。
现代文：萧授就调动黔、楚、蜀军分路追捕讨伐。
English: Xiao Ju mobilized the Shao, Chu and Shu armies to pursue the crusade.

古文：进军筸子坪，诛不尔，斩首五百九十余级，贼悉平。
现代文：进军筚子坪，诛杀昊不尔，斩杀五百几十多人。寇贼都被平定。
English: They marched into Luziping, killed Haobur, and slaughtered more than 500 people. The bandits were all subdued.

古文：九年，都匀蛮为乱，引广西贼入掠。
现代文：九年，都匀蛮夷作乱，招引广西寇贼入境掠夺。
English: In the ninth year, the barbaric barbarians caused chaos, attracting Guangxi bandits to enter and plunder.

古文：授遣指挥陈原、顾勇分道邀击，获贼首韦万良等，降下合江蔡郎等五十余寨。
现代文：萧授派指挥陈原、颅勇分路拦击，擒获寇贼首领韦万良等，降服攻下合江蔡郎等五十多寨。
English: Xiao Ju dispatched commanders Chen Yuan and Jianyong to block the branch road, captured the bandit leader Wei Wanliang, etc., and subdued and captured Hejiang Cai Lang and more than 50 villages.

古文：英宗即位，命佩征蛮副将军印，镇守如故。
现代文：英宗即位，命令佩带征蛮副将军印，镇守的地方如以前一样。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he ordered that the seal of the Vice-Commander-in-Chief be worn, and the town was guarded as before.

古文：念授年老，以都督佥事吴亮副之。
现代文：顾念萧授年老，派都督食事昊亮辅助他。
English: In consideration of Xiao Zhu's old age, he sent the governor of the capital, Meal Haoliang, to assist him.

古文：正统元年，普定蛮阿迟等叛，僣称王，四出攻掠。
现代文：正统元年，普定蛮夷阿迟等反叛，非法称王，四处出击攻打掠夺。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Pu Ding barbarian A Chi and others rebelled, illegally proclaimed themselves kings, and attacked and plundered everywhere.

古文：授遣顾勇等捣其巢，破之。
现代文：萧授派顾勇等捣毁其巢穴，击败他们。
English: Xiao Ju sent Gu Yong and others to destroy their lair and defeat them.

古文：而广西蒙顾十六洞与湖广逃民相聚蜂起，授督兵围之。
现代文：而广西蒙顾十六洞和湖广流民相互聚集四处涌起，萧授领兵围剿他们。
English: However, the Guangxi Monggu 16th Cave and the Hukang floating people gathered and surged everywhere, and Xiao Jiu led the soldiers to encircle them.

古文：再战，悉擒斩其酋，余党就诛。
现代文：又战，全部擒获斩杀他们的首领，其余的同党被诛杀。
English: They fought again and were all captured. Their leader was beheaded, and the rest of their comrades were killed.

古文：捷闻，进右都督。
现代文：捷报上奏，进升为右都督。
English: He was promoted to the post of the right-hand governor.

古文：上言： 靖州与广西接壤，时苦苗患。
现代文：上疏说： 靖州相广西接壤，时常苦于苗人祸患。
English: Shang Zuo said, "Jingzhou, which shares a border with Guangxi, is often plagued by the scourge of seedlings.

古文：永乐、宣德间，尝储粮数万石，备军兴。
现代文：永乐、宣德年间，曾经储粮敷万石，以备军用。
English: During the Yongle and Xuande Dynasties, grain reserves were stockpiled in preparation for the military.

古文：比年储粮少。有警，发人徒转输，贼辄先觉，以故不能得贼。
现代文：这些年储粮减少，有警报，调人转运，寇贼就会先觉察，所以不能擒获寇贼。
English: In these years, grain reserves have been reduced, there are alarms, transfer of people and transportation, and the robbers will be aware of it first, so they can't catch the robbers.

古文：乞于清浪、靖州二卫，各增储五万石，庶缓急可借。 
现代文：请在清浪、靖州二卫，各增加储粮五万石，有望在紧急时可以依靠。 
English: Please increase grain reserves by 50,000 koku each in Qinglang and Jingzhou Erwei, which is expected to be able to rely on in an emergency.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：四年，贵州计沙贼苗金虫、苗总牌纠洪江生苗作乱，伪立 统千侯 、 统万侯 号。
现代文：四年，贵州计沙寇贼苗金虫、苗总牌纠集洪江生苗作乱，非法设立统千侯、统万侯的名号。
English: In four years, the Guizhou-based conspirators Miao Jinwu and Miao Chongpai gathered seedlings from the Hongjiang River to create turmoil and illegally set up the names of Tongqianhou and Tongwanhou.

古文：授督兵抵计沙，分遣都指挥郑通攻三羊洞，马晔攻黄柏山，大破之。
现代文：萧授领兵抵达计沙，分别派都指挥郑通攻打三羊洞，马晔攻打黄柏山，大败寇贼。
English: When Xiao Zhu arrived in Jiesha to lead the troops, he sent Zheng Tong to attack the Three Goats Cave and Ma Jun to attack the Huangbai Mountain, and defeated the bandits.

古文：吴亮穷追至蒲头、洪江，斩总牌，千户尹胜诱斩金虫，于是生苗尽降。
现代文：昊亮奋力追击到蒲头、洪江，斩杀苗总牌，千户尹胜诱杀苗金虫，于是生苗全部投降。
English: Hao Liang vigorously pursued to Putou, Hongjiang, and killed the total number of seedlings. Qianhu Yin Sheng lured the seedlings to kill the insects, so all the seedlings surrendered.

古文：授沉毅多计算，裨校皆尽其材，而驭军严整。
现代文：萧授沉稳坚毅多计谋，让校官都竭尽他们的才能，而治理军队严格整饬。
English: Xiao Zhu was calm, steady, determined and multi-pronged, letting the school officials exhaust their talents, and governing the army with strict rectification.

古文：自镇远侯顾成殁，群蛮所在屯结。
现代文：自从镇远侯顾成去世，群蛮到处聚集。
English: Since the death of Zhenyuan Hou Gu Cheng, the herd has gathered everywhere.

古文：官军讨之，皆无功。
现代文：官军讨伐，都没有效果。
English: The government's military crackdown has had no effect.

古文：授在镇二十余年，规画多本于成。久益明练，威信大行，寇起辄灭，前后诸帅莫及也。
现代文：萧授在职二十多年，规划多承袭顾成，久而更加明达纯熟，威信广焉通行，寇贼兴起就被消灭，前后各帅没有人赶得上他。
English: Xiao Zhu has been in office for more than 20 years. The planning is mostly inherited from Gu Cheng, and it has become more and more clear and pure, and the authority is widely accepted. The rise of the bandits was eliminated, and no one can catch up with him.

古文：论功，进左都督。
现代文：评论功绩，进升为左都督。
English: He was commended for his achievements and promoted to the post of Left Governor.

古文：是年六月召还，以老致仕。
现代文：这年六月召令回朝，因年老退休。
English: In June of that year, he was called back to the Imperial Court and retired due to old age.

古文：寻起视事右府。
现代文：不久起用管理右府。
English: He was soon put in charge of the right-wing government.

古文：十年卒。
现代文：十年去世。
English: Ten years later, he died.

古文：赠临武伯，谥靖襄。
现代文：追赠临武伯，谧号靖襄。
English: He was posthumously given the posthumous title of Linwubo and the posthumous name of Jingxiang.

古文：吴亮，来安人。
现代文：昊亮，来安人。
English: Hao Liang, Lai An Ren.

古文：永乐初，为旗手卫指挥佥事。
现代文：永乐初年，任旗手卫指挥愈事。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was appointed flag bearer and commander of the guard.

古文：宣德中，署湖广都指挥佥事。
现代文：宣德年间，代理湖广都指挥愈事。
English: During the Xuande era, the acting governor of Hubei Province was in charge of military affairs.

古文：寻以右副总兵与王瑜督漕运。
现代文：不久以右副总兵身份和王瑜管理漕运。
English: Soon after, he assumed the position of right vice admiral and managed the paddling with Wang Yu.

古文：英宗初，讨新淦贼有功，累进都督佥事，副授镇湖广、贵州。
现代文：英宗初年，讨伐新淦寇贼有功，多次进升至都督愈事，辅助萧授镇守湖魔、贵州。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yingzong, he made great achievements in the fight against the new bandits, and was promoted to the position of governor several times. He assisted Emperor Xiaozhu in the defense of Lake Mead and Guizhou.

古文：破普定蛮，进都督同知。
现代文：击败普定蛮夷，进升为都督同知。
English: He defeated the barbarians of Puting and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：平计沙苗，进右都督。
现代文：平定计沙苗人，进升为右都督。
English: He was promoted to right-wing governor.

古文：方政殁于麓川，召亮还京，命为副总兵，将兵五万往讨。
现代文：方政在麓川去世，召昊亮回京城，任命焉副总兵，领兵五万去征讨。
English: Fang Zheng died in Luchuan, summoned Hao Liang back to Beijing, appointed Yan as deputy commander-in-chief, and led fifty thousand soldiers to go and fight.

古文：至云南，贼益炽，坐金齿参将张荣败不救，逮下狱。
现代文：到云南，寇贼更加猖狂，因金齿参将张荣战败不去救援获罪，被逮入狱。
English: When they arrived in Yunnan, the bandits were even more rampant. They were arrested and jailed for failing to rescue Zhang Rong, the gold-toothed samurai.

古文：左迁都督佥事，仍佩征南副将军印，镇湖广、贵州，讨平四川都掌蛮。
现代文：降为都督余事，仍佩带征南副将军印，镇守湖庭、贵州，讨伐平定四川都掌蛮夷。
English: Although he was demoted to the position of the governor, he still wore the seal of the vice-general of the Southern Expedition, and was in charge of the towns of Hu Ting and Guizhou. He fought to pacify Sichuan and subjugate the barbarians.

古文：寻召还，视右府事。
现代文：不久召回，掌管右府事务。
English: He was soon recalled and put in charge of the right-wing affairs.

古文：正统十一年卒。
现代文：正统十一年去世。
English: He died exactly eleven years later.

古文：亮姿貌魁梧，性宽简，不喜杀戮，所至蛮人怀附。
现代文：昊亮身姿相貌魁梧，性情宽大，不喜欢杀戮，所到之处蛮人爱戴归附。
English: Hao Liang is a burly man with a big face and a big heart. He doesn't like killing, and is loved by barbarians everywhere he goes.

古文：好读书，至老，手不释卷。
现代文：喜好读书，到老书不离手。
English: Enjoys reading and can't get rid of old books.

古文：方瑛，都督政之子。
现代文：方瑛，都督方政的儿子。
English: Fang Ying, the son of the governor Fang Zheng.

古文：正统初，以舍人从父征麓川。
现代文：正统初年，以舍人身份随从父亲征讨麓川。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he followed his father to conquer the Luchuan River as a layman.

古文：父战死，瑛发愤，矢报父仇。
现代文：父亲战死，方瑛激愤，发誓报杀父之仇。
English: When his father died in the war, Fang Ying became enraged and swore to avenge his father's death.

古文：初袭指挥使，已，论政死事功，迁都指挥同知。
现代文：刚开始承袭父功任指挥使，后来，评定方政战死的功绩，升任都指挥同知。
English: At first, he inherited his father's post of commander. Later, he evaluated the merits of Fang Zheng's death in battle and was promoted to the same post as the commander.

古文：六年从王骥征麓川。
现代文：六年，随从王骥征讨麓川。
English: In the sixth year, he followed Wang Xizheng to fight against Luohu River.

古文：帅兵六千突贼垒。
现代文：率领士卒六千突击寇贼堡垒。
English: He led six thousand soldiers to storm the corsair fortress.

古文：贼渠衣黄衣帐中。
现代文：寇贼首领穿着黄衣服在帐篷中。
English: The leader of the bandits, dressed in yellow, is sitting in a tent.

古文：瑛直前，左右击斩数百人，躏死者无算，遂平其地。
现代文：方瑛直冲向前，左右攻击斩杀敷百人，踩死的无法计算，于是平定了那个地方。
English: Fang Ying rushed forward, attacked and killed hundreds of people left and right, and the number of people trampled to death was incalculable, so he leveled that place.

古文：进都指挥使。
现代文：进升为都指挥使。
English: Promoted to Metropolitan Commander.

古文：寻复从骥破贡章、沙坝、阿岭诸蛮。
现代文：不久又随从王骥击败贡章、沙坝、阿岭各蛮夷。
English: Soon after, he followed Wang Qi to defeat the barbarians of Gongzhang, Shaba and Aling.

古文：进都督佥事，莅后府事，充右参将，协守云南。
现代文：进开为都督翕事，掌管后府事务，充任右参将，协助守卫云南。
English: Jin Kai was appointed as the prefect of Yunnan Province, in charge of the back-office affairs, served as the right-hand general, and assisted in guarding Yunnan Province.

古文：十三年复从骥征麓川。
现代文：十三年又随从王骥征讨麓川。
English: In the thirteenth year, he followed Wang Xi to conquer the Luohu River.

古文：破鬼山大寨，留镇云南。
现代文：攻破鬼山大寨，留下镇守云南。
English: Break through the ghost mountain village, leaving the town guard Yunnan.

古文：景泰元年，廷议以瑛有将略，命都督毛福寿代，还，进都督同知。
现代文：景泰元年，朝廷商议认为方瑛有领兵的策略，任命都督毛福寿代替，回京，进升为都督同知。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, the imperial court deliberated and decided that Fang Ying had a strategy to lead the army, and appointed the governor Mao Fuxu to replace him. He returned to Beijing and was promoted to the governor.

古文：甫抵京，而贵州群苗叛，道梗。骥请瑛还讨。
现代文：刚抵达京城，而贵州众苗人反叛，道路阻塞，王骥请求方瑛归还讨伐。
English: He had just arrived in Beijing when the Miao people in Guizhou rebelled and blocked the road. Wang Hui asked Fang Ying to return.

古文：其年四月拜右副总兵，与保定伯梁珤、侍郎侯琎次第破走之。
现代文：这年四月，拜授右副总兵，和保定伯梁瑶、侍郎侯璀依次击败赶走他们。
English: In April of the same year, the Right Vice-Commander-in-Chief Baizhu, along with Baoding Bo Liangyao and Waiter Houyao, defeated and drove them away.

古文：进右都督。
现代文：进升为右都督。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right-hand governor.

古文：复破赏改诸寨，擒伪苗王王阿同等。
现代文：又攻破赏改各寨，擒获伪苗王王阿同等。
English: They also broke through the bounty to change each village, and won the same level as the false seedling king.

古文：琎卒，都御史王来代督军务，分道击贼香炉山。
现代文：侯璀去世，都御史王来代管军务，分道攻击寇贼于香炉山。
English: After the death of Hou Yi, the Grand Duke Shi Wang came to take charge of the military affairs and attacked the bandits in the incense mountain.

古文：瑛入自龙场，大破平之。
现代文：方瑛从龙曼进入，击败平定了他们。
English: Fang Ying entered from Longman and defeated and leveled them.

古文：三年秋，来劾瑛违法事，置不问。
现代文：三年秋天，王来弹劾方瑛违法的事情，搁置没有追问。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Wang Lai impeached Fang Ying for illegal things, and there was no follow-up question.

古文：来召还，命瑛镇守贵州。
现代文：王来被召回，命令方瑛镇守贵州。
English: Wang Lai was recalled and ordered Fang Ying to defend Guizhou.

古文：其冬，讨白石崖贼，俘斩二千五百人，招降四百六十寨。
现代文：这年冬天，讨伐白石崖的寇贼，俘获斩杀二千五百人，招抚降服四百六十寨。
English: In the winter of this year, the bandits who fought against Baishi Cliff captured and killed 2,500 people, and subdued 460 villages.

古文：进左都督。
现代文：进升为左都督。
English: He was promoted to the post of Left Governor.

古文：五年，四川草塘苗黄龙、韦保作乱，自称 平天大王 ，剽播州西坪、黄滩。
现代文：五年，四川草塘苗人黄龙、韦保作乱，自称平天大王，劫掠播州西坪、黄滩。
English: In the fifth year, Caotang Miao people of Sichuan Huanglong and Wei Bao made a riot, claiming to be the great king of Ping Tian, and plundered Xiping and Huangtan in Banzhou.

古文：瑛与巡抚蒋琳会川兵进剿，贼魁皆就缚。
现代文：方瑛和巡抚蒋琳会集四川军队进剿，寇贼首领都被捕获。
English: Fang Ying and the inspector Jiang Lin gathered Sichuan troops to enter the city, and the leaders of the bandits were all captured.

古文：因分兵克中潮山及三百滩、乖西、谷种、乖立诸寨，执伪王谷蚁丁等，斩首七千余。
现代文：于是分兵攻克中潮山和三百滩、乖西、谷种、乖立各寨，捕获伪王谷蚁丁等，斩杀七千多人。
English: As a result, the detachment of soldiers conquered Zhongchaoshan and the three hundred beaches, Guxi, Grain, and Gurlitt villages, captured the pseudo Wang Valley ant, etc., and killed more than seven thousand people.

古文：诏封南和伯。
现代文：下诏封为南和伯。
English: The next imperial seal was issued for Minami and Haku.

古文：瑛为将，严纪律，信赏罚，临阵勇敢，善抚士。
现代文：方瑛任将领，纪律严明，赏罚守信用，临阵勇敢，善于安抚士卒。
English: Fang Ying is a general, strict in discipline, trustworthy in reward and punishment, brave in battle, and good at pacifying his subordinates.

古文：士皆乐为用，以故数有功。
现代文：士卒都乐于为他所用，所以多次立功。
English: The soldiers were all happy to be of use to him, so he made meritorious contributions many times.

古文：廷臣言宜委以禁旅，乃召还，同石亨督京营军务。
现代文：朝中大臣主张应将禁军委任给他，就召回，和石亨管理京城军营的事务。
English: The Minister of the Korean Central Government advocated that the Forbidden Army should be assigned to him, so he was recalled, and he and Shi Heng managed the affairs of the Keijo Military Camp.

古文：明年，琳奏瑛前守贵州，边境宁，苗蛮畏服，乞遣还。
现代文：第二年，蒋琳上奏方瑛以前镇守贵州，边境安宁，苗人畏惧服从，请求派他回来。
English: The following year, Jiang Lin sent Fang Ying to defend Guizhou, the border was peaceful, Miao people were afraid to obey, and asked to send him back.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：皇帝不允许。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：未几，湖广苗叛，拜瑛平蛮将军，率京军讨之，而使御史张鹏侦其后。
现代文：不久，湖广苗人反叛，拜授立瑾为平蛮将军，率领京城军队讨伐，而派御史张鹏在他后面侦察。
English: Soon after, the Miao people of Hukang rebelled, and Baizhu Liqun was appointed as the general of Pingman, leading the Beijing army in the crusade, while he sent the imperial historian Zhang Peng to scout behind him.

古文：还奏，瑛所过秋毫不犯，帝大喜。
现代文：回来上奏，方瑛所过之处秋毫无犯，皇帝很高兴。
English: When he came back for the first performance, he did not make any mistakes. The emperor was very happy.

古文：七年，贼渠蒙能攻平溪卫。
现代文：七年，寇贼首领蒙能攻打平溪卫。
English: In the seventh year, the bandit leader Meng Neng attacked Pingxiwei.

古文：都指挥郑泰等击却之，能中火枪死，瑛遂进沅州。连破鬼板等一百六十余寨。
现代文：都指挥郑泰等击退他们，蒙能中火枪死去。穷瑛于是进军沅州，连续攻破鬼板等一百六十多寨。
English: Zheng Tai, the commander of both armies, and others fought them off, and Meng Neng died in the crossfire. Poor Ying then marched into Zhangzhou, and continuously broke through more than 160 villages such as the ghost board.

古文：与尚书石璞移兵天柱，率陈友等分击天堂诸寨，复大破之。
现代文：和尚书石璞移兵天柱，率领陈友等分别攻击天堂各寨，又大败他们。
English: The monk Shishizhao transferred the soldiers to Tianzhu, led by Chen You, and attacked each village of Heaven separately, and defeated them.

古文：克寨二百七十，擒伪侯伯以下一百二人。
现代文：攻克寨子二百七十个，擒获伪侯伯以下一百零二人。
English: Two hundred and seventy stockades were conquered, and one hundred and two people, including pseudo Hou Bo, were captured.

古文：时英宗已复位。
现代文：当时英宗已经复位。
English: At that time, Emperor Yingzong had already been restored to the throne.

古文：捷闻，璞召还，瑛留镇贵州、湖广。
现代文：捷报上奏，石璞被召回，方瑛留下镇守贵州、湖广。
English: After the victory was announced, Shih Kui was recalled, leaving Fang Ying as the town guard of Guizhou and Hougang.

古文：瑛讨蒙能余党，克铜鼓藕洞一百九十五寨，覃洞、上隆诸苗各斩其渠纳款。
现代文：方瑛讨伐蒙能余党，攻克铜鼓、藕洞一百九十五寨，覃洞、上隆各部苗人各自斩杀他们的首领归顺。
English: Fang Ying fought against the Meng Neng Yu Party, conquered the one hundred and ninety-fifth walled city of Tonggu and Shandong, and the Miao people in Shandong and Shanglong all killed their leaders and surrendered.

古文：帝嘉瑛功，进侯。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖方瑛的功绩，进封焉侯。
English: The emperor commended Fang Ying's achievements, and he was allowed to stay in the palace.

古文：天顺二年，东苗干把猪等僣伪号，攻都匀诸卫。
现代文：天顺二年，束苗干把猪等非法称封名号，攻打都匀各卫。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, Sokmiao Gan put the pig and other illegal names, and attacked Duyongkawei.

古文：命瑛与巡抚白圭合川、湖、云、贵军讨之，克六百余寨。
现代文：命令方瑛和巡抚白圭会合川、湖、云、贵军队讨伐他们，攻克六百多寨。
English: He ordered Fang Yinghe and the governor Bai Gui to gather the rivers, lakes, clouds and your army to fight them and conquer more than 600 villages.

古文：边方悉定。
现代文：边境全部平定。
English: The entire border has been pacified.

古文：瑛前后克寨几二千，俘斩四万余。
现代文：方瑛前后攻克寨子将近二干座，俘获斩杀四万多人。
English: Around Fang Ying, nearly two thirds of the stockade was conquered, and more than forty thousand people were captured and killed.

古文：平苗之功，前此无与比者。
现代文：平定苗人的功劳，在此之前没有能和他相比的。
English: Before this, there was no one who could match Miao Ren's achievements in pacification.

古文：寻卒于镇，年四十五。
现代文：不久死在任上，时年四十五岁。
English: He died in office shortly afterwards, aged 45.

古文：帝震悼，赐谥忠襄。
现代文：皇帝惊愕悲悼，赐谧号忠襄。
English: The emperor was shocked and saddened, and bestowed the title of "Loyal Brother" on him.

古文：瑛天姿英迈，晓古兵法。
现代文：方瑛天生才智超群，通晓古代兵法。
English: Fang Ying was born with superior intelligence and was well versed in ancient military methods.

古文：尝上练兵法及阵图，老将多称之。
现代文：曾经上奏练兵的方法和布阵图，老将多称赞他。
English: The veteran praised him for the method of training soldiers and the deployment plan.

古文：为人廉，谦和不伐。
现代文：为人清廉，谦虚平和不自夸。
English: He is a man of integrity, modest, peaceful and not boastful.

古文：所至镇以安静，民思之，久而不忘。
现代文：所镇守的地方安定平静，百姓思念他，久久不能忘怀。
English: The place where he was garrisoned is stable and calm, and the people miss him and cannot forget him for a long time.

古文：子毅，嗣伯爵，诱祖母诬从父瑞不孝，坐夺爵闲住。
现代文：儿子方毅，承袭伯爵，诱骗祖母诬陷伯父方瑞不孝顺，获罪剥夺爵位闲居。
English: His son Fang Yi, heir to the earldom, tricked his grandmother into accusing his uncle Fang Rui of being unfilial, and was stripped of his title for idleness.

古文：卒，子寿祥嗣。
现代文：去世，儿子方寿祥承袭。
English: He died and his son, Fang Shuxiang, took over.

古文：正德中，历镇贵州、湖广。
现代文：正德年闾，镇守贵州、湖广。
English: Zhengde Nianqi, the town guard of Guizhou and Huguang.

古文：传爵至明亡乃绝。
现代文：传爵位至明代灭亡纔断绝。
English: The hereditary peerage died out after the Ming Dynasty.

古文：陈友，其先西域入，家全椒。
现代文：陈友，他的先祖是西域人，家住全椒。
English: Chen You, whose ancestors are from the Western Regions, lives in Quanping.

古文：正统初，官千户，累迁都指挥佥事。
现代文：正统初年，任千户，多次迁任至都指挥愈事。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he was appointed to 1,000 households, and was transferred several times to command various affairs.

古文：频年使瓦剌有劳，寻复进都指挥使。
现代文：多年出使瓦剌有功劳，不久又进升为都指挥使。
English: After many years of meritorious service, he was soon promoted to the post of capital commander.

古文：九年充宁夏游击将军，与总兵官黄真击兀良哈。
现代文：九年充任空夏游击将军，和总兵官黄真攻击兀良哈。
English: For nine years, he served as the guerrilla general of Kuo Xia, and together with the general officer Huang Zhen, he attacked Qiliangha.

古文：多获，进都督佥事。
现代文：多擒获，进升焉都督余事。
English: There is much to be gained, and it is not enough to be promoted to the governorship.

古文：未几，出塞招答哈卜等四百人来归。
现代文：不久，出塞招降答哈卜等四百人来归。
English: Soon, four hundred people, including Habu, came back from the retreat.

古文：景帝即位，进都督同知，征湖广、贵州苗。
现代文：景帝即位，进升为都督同知，征讨湖广、贵州苗人。
English: Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, promoted to the same rank as the governor, and enlisted the help of Miao people in Guangxi and Guizhou.

古文：寻充左参将，守备靖州。
现代文：不久充任左参将，防守靖州。
English: He was soon appointed to the position of General of the Left Division, in charge of the defense of Jingzhou.

古文：景泰二年偕王来等击贼香炉山，自万潮山入，大破之。
现代文：景泰二年，和王来等攻击寇贼于香炉山。从万潮山进入，大败他们。
English: In the second year of King Tae's reign, he and Wang Lai attacked the bandits at Fragrant Hearth Mountain. They entered from Manchoushan Mountain and defeated them.

古文：留镇湖广。
现代文：留下镇守湖广。
English: leaving the town to guard the lake.

古文：论功，进右都督。
现代文：论定功绩，进升为右都督。
English: On the basis of merit, he was promoted to the post of right-hand governor.

古文：四年春奏斩苗五百余级，五年又奏斩苗三百余。
现代文：四年春上奏斩杀苗人五百多人，五年又上奏靳杀苗人三百多人，而都指挥戚安等八人战死。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, more than five hundred Miao people were killed, and in the fifth year, more than three hundred Miao people were killed, and eight people, including the commander Qi'an, died in battle.

古文：而都指挥戚安等八人战死，兵部疑首功不实，指挥蔡升亦奏友欺妄。
现代文：兵部怀疑斩获敌人首级的功劳不确实，指挥蔡升也上奏陈友欺骗。
English: The military department suspected that the achievement of winning the first rank of the enemy was not true, and the commander Cai Sheng also played up Chen You's deception.

古文：命总督石璞廉之，斩获仅三四十人，陷将士千四百人，宜罪。
现代文：命令总督石璞核实，斩获仅三四十人，阵亡将士一千四百人，应定罪。
English: He ordered Governor Shi Hao to verify, and only thirty or forty people were found, and one thousand four hundred soldiers who died in battle should be convicted.

古文：诏令杀贼自效。
现代文：下诏命令杀贼效命。
English: He gave the order to kill the thief.

古文：天顺元年随瑛征天堂诸苗，大获。
现代文：玉顺元年，随方瑛征讨天堂各部苗人，大胜。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taishun, Emperor Taishun, accompanied by Emperor Ying, fought against the seedlings of various departments in heaven, and won a great victory.

古文：命充左副总兵，仍镇湖广。
现代文：命令充任左副总兵，仍然镇守湖广。
English: He was ordered to serve as Deputy Commander of the Left Division and remained in charge of the defense of Hunan Province.

古文：已，又偕瑛破蒙能余党。
现代文：事后，又和方瑛击败蒙能的余党。
English: After the fact, he and Fang Ying defeated Meng Neng's remaining party.

古文：召封武平伯，予世券。
现代文：下诏封为武平伯，赐予世代享有特权的纤券。
English: The lower imperial seal is Wu Ping Bo, bestowing generations of privileged vouchers.

古文：孛来犯边，充游击将军，从安远侯柳溥等往御。
现代文：孛来侵犯边境，充任游击将军，随从安远侯柳溥等前往抵御。
English: came to invade the border, served as a guerrilla general, and followed Anyuan Hou Liu Xuan and others to resist.

古文：率都指挥赵瑛等与战，敌败遁。
现代文：率领都指挥赵瑛等与敌人作战，敌人战败逃跑。
English: Zhao Ying, the commander of the capital, and others fought against the enemy, and the enemy was defeated and fled.

古文：再犯镇番，复击却之，俘百六十人。
现代文：再次侵犯镇番，又击退他们，俘获一百六十人。
English: Again they attacked the town guards, and again they repulsed them, capturing a hundred and sixty of them.

古文：寻佩将军印，充总兵官，讨宁夏寇。
现代文：不久佩带将军印，充任总兵官，讨伐宁夏寇贼。
English: Soon he wore the general's seal and served as the chief military officer, fighting the Ningxia bandits.

古文：先是，寇大入甘、凉，溥及总兵卫颖等不能御，惟友稍获。
现代文：在此之前，寇贼大肆入侵甘、凉，柳溥和总兵卫颖等不能抵御，只有陈友稍有擒获。
English: Prior to this, the bandits had invaded Gan and Liang on a large scale, and Liu Yao and the general Wei Ying were unable to resist. Only Chen You was slightly captured.

古文：至是巡抚芮钊列诸将失事状，兵部请免友罪。
现代文：到这时巡抚芮钊陈列上奏众将处事失误的情况，兵部请求免除陈友罪遇。
English: At this time, the military governor put forward the situation that the public would make mistakes in handling the case, and the military department requested that Chen You be exempted from the crime.

古文：诏并宥溥等。召还，进侯，卒。
现代文：下诏一并宽恕柳溥等，召回，进封陈友为侯，去世。
English: The following edict also pardoned Liu Xuan and others, recalled Chen You, who died in captivity.

古文：传子至孙纲，弘治中，请友赠谥。
现代文：爵位传给儿子，到孙子陈纲，弘治年问，请求焉陈友追赠谧号。
English: The title of nobility was passed down to his son, and then to his grandson Chen Gang. When asked about the year of Hongzhi, he asked Chen You to give him a posthumous honorary title.

古文：诏赠沔国公，谥武僖。
现代文：下诏追赠沔国公，谧号武僖。
English: His posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous

古文：纲传子勋及熹。
现代文：陈纲传给儿子陈勋和陈熹。
English: Chen Gang passed on to his sons Chen Xun and Chen Yao.

古文：嘉靖中，吏部以友征苗功多冒滥，请停袭。
现代文：嘉靖年间，吏部以陈友征讨苗人的功绩多冒充虚报为由，请求停止世袭。
English: During the Jiajing period, the cadre department requested to stop the succession on the grounds that the achievements of Chen Youzhen Miao were mostly falsified.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：皇帝不听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：熹子大策复得嗣，至明亡乃绝。
现代文：陈熹的儿子陈大策又得以继承，到明代灭亡纔断绝。
English: Chen Daizhe, the son of Chen Zhe, was able to succeed him, and the dynasty died out in the Ming Dynasty.

古文：李震，南阳人。
现代文：李震，南阳人。
English: Li Zhen, from Nanyang.

古文：父谦，都督佥事，震袭指挥使。
现代文：父亲李谦，都督愈事，李震承袭父功任指挥使。
English: His father, Li Qian, was the governor of the capital when he died, and Li Zhen succeeded his father as commander.

古文：正统九年从征兀良哈有功，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：正统九年，随从征讨兀良哈有功，进升焉都指挥愈事。
English: In the ninth year of orthodoxy, he was a follower of Ha Liang Ha, who had made great contributions to the conquest.

古文：已，从王骥平麓川，进同知。
现代文：后来，随从王骥平定麓川，进升为同知。
English: Later, he followed Wang Qianping to Dinglu River and became a confidant of Jin Sheng.

古文：景帝即位，充贵州右参将。
现代文：景帝即位，充任贵州右参将。
English: Emperor Jing ascended to the throne and assumed the post of Guizhou's right-hand general.

古文：击苗于偏桥，败之。
现代文：在偏桥打击苗人，打败了他们。
English: We fought against the Miao people at the bridge and defeated them.

古文：景泰二年从王来征韦同烈。破锁儿、流源诸寨，俘斩千六百人，共克香炉山，获同烈。
现代文：景泰二年，随从王来征讨韦同烈，攻破锁儿、流源各寨，俘获斩杀一千六百人，共同攻克香炉山，擒获童旦型。
English: In the second year of Jing Tai, he followed Wang Lai to enlist Wei Tong Lai, broke through the locks and streams of each village, captured and killed 1600 people, jointly conquered the incense mountain, and captured the child.

古文：进都指挥使，守靖州。
现代文：进升为都指挥使，镇守靖州。
English: He was promoted to the post of commander of the capital, and became the town guard of Jingzhou.

古文：寻坐罪征还。
现代文：不久获罪征召回还。
English: He was soon convicted and recalled to active duty.

古文：方瑛讨苗，乞震随军，诏许立功赎。
现代文：方瑛讨伐苗人，请求李震随军，下诏允许立功赎罪。
English: Fang Ying fought against the felling of seedlings, asked Li Zhen to follow the army, and issued a decree to allow him to make merit and atone for his sins.

古文：已，从瑛大破天堂诸苗，仍充左参将。
现代文：后来，随从方瑛大败天堂各部苗人，仍充任左参将。
English: Later, Miao Ren, a follower of Fang Ying, still held the position of General of the Left.

古文：瑛平铜鼓诸贼，震亦进武冈，克牛栏等五十四寨。
现代文：方瑛平定锢鼓各路寇贼，李震也进攻武冈，攻克牛栏等五十四寨。
English: Fang Yingping subdued all the highway bandits, Li Zhen also attacked Wu Gang, and conquered 54 villages such as Cowshed.

古文：斩获多，进都督佥事。
现代文：斩杀擒获很多，进升为都督愈事。
English: He won a lot of victories and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：天顺中，复从瑛平贵东苗干把猪。
现代文：天顺年间，又随从方瑛平定贵束苗人干把猪。
English: During the Tenshun era, Miao Ren, a follower of Fang Yingping Ding Guizhong, also raised pigs.

古文：瑛卒，即以震充总兵官，代镇贵州、湖广。
现代文：方瑛去世，就以李震充任总兵官，代理镇守贵州、湖魔。
English: After the death of Fang Ying, Li Zhencheng was appointed as the chief military officer, acting as the town guard of Guizhou and the lake devil.

古文：初，麻城人李添保以逋赋逃入苗中。伪称唐太宗后，众万余，僣王，建元 武烈 ，剽掠远近。
现代文：当初，麻城人李添保因逃避赋税逃入苗人中，伪称是唐太宗的后人，聚众一万多人，非法称王，确立年号武烈，劫掠逮近各地。
English: At first, Li Tianbao, a resident of Macheng, fled into Miao people for tax evasion, falsely claimed to be a descendant of Tang Taizong, gathered more than ten thousand people, illegally proclaimed himself king, established the year of martial arts, and looted and arrested nearly all over the country.

古文：震进击，大破之。
现代文：李震进攻打击，大败他。
English: Li Zhen attacked and beat him.

古文：添保遁入贵州鬼池诸苗中，复诱群苗出掠。
现代文：李添保逃入量赵鬼池各部苗人中，又引诱群苗出去劫掠。
English: Li Tianbao escaped into the quantity of seedlings in all parts of Zhao Ghost Pond, and lured groups of seedlings to go out and loot.

古文：震擒之，送京师。
现代文：李震擒获了他，送到京城。
English: Li Zhenyao captured him and sent him to Beijing.

古文：寻破西堡苗。
现代文：不久攻破西垡苗人。
English: Soon after, they defeated the Xi'an Miao people.

古文：五年春剿城步瑶、僮，攻横水、城溪、莫宜、中平诸寨，皆破之。
现代文：五年春，进剿城步瑶人、僮人，攻打横水、城溪、莫宜、中平各寨，都攻下了。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the people who entered the city of Lushan and Lushan, attacked the villages of Hengshui, Chengxi, Mogi and Zhongping, and conquered them.

古文：长驱至广西西延，会总兵官过兴军，克十八团诸瑶，前后俘斩数千人。
现代文：长驱直入广西西延，会合总兵官遇兴的军队，攻克十八团各瑶人，前后俘获靳杀敷千人。
English: He drove straight into Xiyan, Guangxi, and gathered the army led by the commander-in-chief, Chu Xing, and defeated eighteen regiments of soldiers, capturing and killing a thousand people.

古文：其冬命震专镇湖广，以李安充总兵，守贵州。
现代文：这年冬天命令李震专门镇守湖广，以李安充任总兵，镇守贵州。
English: This winter, Li Zhen ordered a special town guard of Huguang, with Li An as the commander-in-chief and the town guard of Guizhou.

古文：明年夏率师由锦田、江华抵云川、桂岭、横江诸寨，破瑶，俘斩二千八百余人。
现代文：第二年夏天，率领军队从锦田、江华抵达云川、桂岭、横江各寨，击败瑶人，俘获斩杀二千八百多人。
English: In the summer of the next year, he led the army from Jin Tian and Jianghua to Yunchuan, Guiling and Hengjiang villages, defeating the Xiongren and capturing and killing more than 2,800 people.

古文：七年冬，苗据赤溪湳洞长官司。
现代文：七年冬，苗人占据赤溪浦洞长官司。
English: In the winter of the seventh year, Miao people occupied the chief magistrate's office in Pudong, Chaxi.

古文：震与安分道进，斩贼渠飞天侯等，破寨二百，遂复长官司。
现代文：李震和李安分道进攻，斩杀寇贼首领飞天侯等，攻破寨子二百座，于是恢复了长官司。
English: Li Zhen and Li An attacked in separate directions, killed the leader of the bandits, Fei Tianhou, and broke through 200 castles, and then resumed the lawsuit.

古文：进都督同知。
现代文：进升焉都督同知。
English: Shi Zhaozhong was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：明年冬，广西瑶侵湖南，夜入桂阳州大掠。
现代文：第二年冬，广西瑶人侵犯湖直，夜里进入桂阳州大肆劫掠。
English: In the winter of the following year, the Guangxi Xiongnu invaded Huzhong and entered Guiyang Province at night to carry out extensive looting.

古文：震遣兵分道追击，连败之，俘斩千余人。
现代文：李震派兵分道追击，连续击败他们，俘获斩杀一千多人。
English: Li Zhen sent soldiers to chase them in separate directions, defeated them in succession, captured and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：成化改元，守备靖州。
现代文：成化元年，守卫靖州。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he guarded Jingzhou.

古文：都指挥同知庄荣奏贵州黎平诸府密迩湖广五开诸卫，非大将总领不可，乃复命震兼镇贵州。
现代文：都指挥同知庄荣上奏贵州黎平各府靠近湖广五开各卫，非大将统领不可，就又命李震兼任镇守贵州。
English: Li Zhen was also appointed to serve as the town guard of Guizhou, after commanding Tongzhi Zhuang Rong, the governor of Guizhou, and Li Ping, the governor of Guizhou, the governor of Guizhou, the governor of Guizhou, the governor of Guizhou and the governor of Guizhou.

古文：未几，获贼首苗虫虾。
现代文：不久，擒获寇贼首领苗虫虾。
English: Soon after, the leader of the bandits, Miao Wuchang, was captured.

古文：荆、襄贼刘千斤、石和尚为乱，震进讨。
现代文：剂、襄寇贼刘千斤、石和尚作乱，李震进军讨伐。
English: Li Zhen marched into the crusade, while Liu Qianqin, the agent and the bandit, and Shi Xizang created a disturbance.

古文：贼屡败，乘胜追及于梅溪贼巢。
现代文：寇贼多次失败，乘胜追到梅溪寇贼巢穴。
English: The bandits failed many times, but they successfully chased them to the Meixi Bandit's Lair.

古文：官军不利，都指挥以下死者三十八人，有诏切责。
现代文：官军失利，都指挥以下死的有三十八人，有诏严辞斥责。
English: Thirty-eight people died following the defeat of the government army, all under his command, and he severely reprimanded them with an edict.

古文：白圭等大军至，震自南漳进兵合击，大破之，贼遂平。
现代文：白圭等大军到，李震从南漳进兵合击，大败他们，寇贼于是被平定。
English: Bai Gui and other large armies arrived, Li Zhen marched in from Nanlu to fight, defeated them, and the bandits were then subdued.

古文：论功，进右都督。
现代文：论定功绩，进升为右都督。
English: On the basis of merit, he was promoted to the post of right-hand governor.

古文：时武冈、沅靖、铜鼓、五开苗复蜂起，而贵州亦告警。
现代文：当时武冈、沅靖、铜鼓、五开苗人又四处涌起，而贵州也传来警报。
English: At that time, people from Wookang, Taojing, Tongdrum and Wukai Miao also surged everywhere, and an alert was also sent to Guizhou.

古文：震言贵州终难遥制，请专镇湖广。
现代文：李震上疏说贵州最终难以遥控，请求专门镇守湖广。
English: Li Zhenzheng said that Guizhou was ultimately difficult to control remotely, and asked for a special township to guard the lake.

古文：许之，乃还兵。
现代文：允许了他，就撤回军队。
English: allowed him to do so, he withdrew his troops.

古文：由铜鼓、天柱分四道进，连破贼，直抵清水江。
现代文：由铜鼓、天柱分四路进攻，连续击败寇贼，一直到达清水江。
English: With a four-pronged attack consisting of a bronze drum and a heavenly pillar, they continuously defeated the bandits until they reached the Shimizu River.

古文：因苗为导，深入贼境。
现代文：利用苗人作为向导，深入寇贼境内。
English: Using Miao Ren as a guide, they travel deep into the territory of the bandits.

古文：两月间破巢八百，焚庐舍万三千，斩获三千三百。而广西瑶劫桂阳者，亦击斩三千八百有奇。
现代文：两个月内攻破贼巢八百处，烧毁房屋一万三千座，斩杀擒获三千三百人，而广西瑶人劫掠桂阳的，也被斩杀三千八百多人。
English: Within two months, 800 thieves' nests were broken, 13,000 houses were burned, and 3,300 people were killed and captured. Meanwhile, more than 3,800 people were killed when the Guangxi Xiongnu plundered Guiyang.

古文：当是时，震威名著西南，苗、僚闻风畏慑，呼为 金牌李 。
现代文：当时，李震威名著称于西南，苗、僚闻风丧胆，称他为 金牌李 。
English: At that time, Li Zhenwei was famous in the southwest, and Miao and his colleagues felt discouraged and called him Gold Medal Li.

古文：七年，与项忠讨平流贼李原，招抚流民九十万人，荆、襄遂定。
现代文：七年，和项忠讨伐平定流寇李原，招抚流亡百姓九十万人，荆、襄于是被平定。
English: In seven years, He Xiangzhong fought and subdued the Dingli-flowing Qiao Li Yuan, and attracted 900,000 exiled people. Jing and Xiang were then subdued.

古文：语具忠传。
现代文：事情详见《项忠传》。
English: For details, see "The Story of Xiang Zhongxing."

古文：十一年，苗复犯武冈、靖州，湖湘大扰。
现代文：十一年，苗人又侵犯武冈、靖州，湖湘大乱。
English: In the eleventh year, the Miao people invaded Wuyuan, Jingzhou, and Hunan.

古文：震与巡抚刘敷等分五道进，破六百二十余寨，俘斩八千五百余人，获贼孥万计。
现代文：李震和巡抚刘敷等分五路进攻。攻破六百二十多寨，俘获斩杀八千五百多人，擒获寇贼妻儿敷以万计。
English: Li Zhen and the inspector Liu Shiki attacked in five directions. They broke through more than 620 villages, captured and killed more than 8,500 people, and captured tens of thousands of wives and children of the bandits.

古文：论功封兴宁伯。
现代文：论定功绩封为兴窒垣。
English: It was decided that the merit award would be given to him.

古文：时武靖侯赵辅、宁晋伯刘聚皆以功封，论者多訾议之，独震功最高，人无异言。
现代文：当时武靖侯赵辅、宁晋伯刘聚都因功封赏，议论的人多非议他们，惟独李震功劳最高，人们没有异议。
English: At that time, Wu Jing Hou Zhao Fu and Ning Jin Bo Liu Ju were both awarded for their merits, and many people criticized them, but Li Zhen's merit was the highest, and people had no objection.

古文：参将吴经者，与震有隙。
现代文：参将昊经，和李震有矛盾。
English: Party General Secretary Hao Jing is at odds with Li Zhen.

古文：弟千户绶为汪直腹心，经属绶谮之。
现代文：弟弟千户昊绶是汪直的心腹，昊经嘱咐昊绶诋毁他。
English: His younger brother, Qianhu Haoqi, was a confidant of Wang Zhi, and Hao Jing ordered Haoqi to slander him.

古文：会直方倾项忠，词连震，遂逮下狱。夺爵，降左都督，南京闲住。
现代文：恰逢汪直排斥项盅，言词牵连到李震，于是逮捕入狱，剥夺爵位，降焉左都督，在南京闲居。
English: It coincided with Wang Zhi's rejection of Xiang Yu, and his words implicated Li Zhen, who was arrested and imprisoned, stripped of his title, demoted to the post of governor, and lived idly in Nanjing.

古文：未几，直遣校尉缉事，言震阴结守备太监覃包，私通货赂。
现代文：不久，汪直派校尉侦缉，上言李震暗中勾结守备太监覃包，私下勾结贿赂。
English: Soon after, Captain Wang Zhi sent an investigation team to find out that Li Zhen secretly colluded with the eunuch Zou Bao, and secretly colluded in bribery.

古文：帝怒，遣直赴南京数包等罪，责降包孝陵司香，勒震回京。
现代文：皇帝发怒，派汪直去南京详查覃包等的罪行，责令降覃包为孝陵司香，勒令李震回京。
English: The emperor was enraged and sent Wang Zhi to Nanjing to investigate the crimes of Zou Bao in detail. He ordered that Zou Bao be demoted to the position of Xiaoling Shixiang, and ordered Li Zhen to return to Beijing.

古文：直败，震诉复爵，寻卒。
现代文：汪直失败，李震上诉恢复爵位，不久去世。
English: Wang Zhi failed, Li Zhen appealed to restore his knighthood, and died soon after.

古文：震在湖湘久，熟知苗情，善用兵。
现代文：李震在湖湘时间长，熟悉苗人情况，善于用兵。
English: Li Zhen has been in Hunan for a long time, is familiar with the situation of Miao people, and is good at using soldiers.

古文：一时征苗功，方瑛后震为最。
现代文：当时征讨苗人的功劳，方瑛之后李震功劳最大。
English: At that time, the merit of Miao people was solicited, and Li Zhen's merit was the largest after Fang Ying.

古文：然贪功好进，事交结，竟以是败。
现代文：然而贪图功名急于求成，好交结，竟因此败落。
English: However, he was greedy for fame and eager to achieve success, so he was defeated.

古文：王信，字君实，南郑人。
现代文：至信，字君实，南郑人。
English: Zhixin, Zi Junshi, Nan Zhengren.

古文：生半岁，父忠征北战殁，母岳氏苦节育之，后俱获旌。
现代文：出生半岁，父亲王忠征讨北方战死，母亲岳氏坚守节操养育他，后来都获得表彰。
English: When he was half a year old, his father, Wang Zhongzheng, was killed in the Battle of the North, and his mother, Yue Shi, raised him with strict discipline. Both of them later received commendations.

古文：正统中，信袭宽河卫千户。
现代文：正统年间，王信承袭父功任宽河卫千户。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, Wang Xin inherited his father's meritorious service to thousands of households in Guanghewei.

古文：成化初，积功至都指挥佥事，守备荆、襄。
现代文：成化初年，积累功劳任都指挥愈事，守卫剂、襄。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the accumulation of merits were all directed by the commander, the guard agent, and the brother.

古文：刘千斤反，信以房县险，进据之。
现代文：刘千斤反叛，王信因房县险要，进兵占据，百姓士卒不到一千人。
English: Liu Qianqin rebelled, Wang Xin was on the brink of losing Fang County, and the marching soldiers occupied it. There were less than a thousand people.

古文：民兵不满千人，贼众四千突至，围其城。拒四十余日，选死士，出城五六里举炮。
现代文：寇贼四千突然到来，包围了城池。抵抗了四十多天，挑选以死效力的士卒，出城五六里放炮。
English: Four thousand bandits suddenly arrived and surrounded the city. They resisted for more than forty days, selecting soldiers who would fight to the death and firing cannons five or six miles outside the city.

古文：贼疑援至，惊走，追败之。
现代文：寇贼怀疑援兵到来，惊慌逃走，追击打败了他们。
English: Suspecting the arrival of reinforcements, the bandits fled in panic, and the pursuit defeated them.

古文：已，白圭统大军至，以信为右参将，分道抵后岩山，贼遂灭。
现代文：事后，白圭统率大军到来，以王信为右参将，分路抵达后岩山，寇贼于是被消灭。
English: After the incident, Bai Gui led a large army to arrive, with Wang Xin as the right-hand general. After arriving at Iwayama, the bandits were eliminated.

古文：论功，进都指挥同知。
现代文：论定功绩，进升为都指挥同知。
English: On the basis of their merits, they were all promoted to the same rank.

古文：贼党石龙复陷巫山，信与诸将共平之。
现代文：寇贼同党石龙又攻陷巫山，王信和众将共同平定了他们。
English: The bandits together with the party Shi Long also invaded Wushan, and Wang Xin and the generals jointly pacified them.

古文：而流民仍啸荆、襄、南阳间。
现代文：而流民仍活动在剂、襄、南阳间。
English: However, the displaced people are still active in the areas of Jiao, Xiang and Nanyang.

古文：信以为忧，言于朝，即命信兼督南阳军务。
现代文：王信认为是忧患，上言于朝廷，就命令王信兼管南阳军务。
English: Wang Xin thought it was a misfortune, so he appealed to the imperial court and ordered Wang Xin to take charge of Nanyang's military affairs.

古文：贼首李原等果乱，信复与项忠讨平之。
现代文：寇贼首领李原等果然作乱，王信又和项忠讨伐平定了他们。
English: The leader of the bandits, Li Yuan, and others really caused a disturbance, and Wang Xin fought with Xiang Zhong to pacify them.

古文：擢署都督佥事，镇守临清。
现代文：提升代理都督愈事，镇守临清。
English: The acting governor was promoted, and the town guard was appointed.

古文：十三年以本官佩平蛮将军印，移镇湖广。
现代文：十三年，以原任官职佩带平蛮将军印，转移镇守湖广。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was transferred to the town of Hukang with the original official position and the seal of the general.

古文：永顺、保靖二宣慰世相仇杀，信谕以祸福，兵即解。
现代文：永顺、保靖二宣慰世代相互仇杀，王信向他们讲明祸福，军队立即撤离。
English: Yongshun and Baojing II comforted the generations of mutual hatred and killing, Wang Xin told them about the misfortunes and blessings, and the army immediately withdrew.

古文：靖州及武冈蛮久不戢，守臣议剿之。
现代文：靖州和武冈蛮族长久不停止劫掠，守臣建议剿灭他们。
English: The barbarians of Jingzhou and Wookang had not stopped pillaging for a long time, and Shoujin proposed to exterminate them.

古文：信亲诣，犒以牛酒，责其无状，众稽颡服罪。
现代文：王信亲自去造访，用牛酒犒赏，责备他们行为失检，众人叩头认罪。
English: Wang Xin personally went to visit them, rewarded them with cow wine, and scolded them for their misconduct. All of them kowtowed and confessed.

古文：十七年疏言： 湖广诸蛮虽腹心蠹，实无能为。
现代文：十七年，上疏谎： 湖广各蛮夷虽然是心腹之患，实际没有能力起事。
English: In the seventeenth year, Shang Shao lied: although the barbarians in Hukang and other provinces are a problem of the inner circle, they actually do not have the ability to rise up.

古文：久不靖者，由我将士利其窃发以邀功也。
现代文：长久不能平定，是因为我军将士利用他们暗中发动以求取功劳。
English: They could not be pacified for a long time because our soldiers used them to secretly launch attacks in order to gain credit.

古文：选精锐，慎堤防，其患自息。
现代文：挑选精兵，谨慎提防，这一忧患自然消除。
English: Select good soldiers, be cautious, and this worry will be eliminated naturally.

古文：荆、襄流逋，本避徭役，滥诛恐伤天和。
现代文：剂、襄流民，本来是逃避徭役，滥杀恐怕伤害自然和顺之理。
English: The agents and refugees were originally escaping forced labor, and the indiscriminate killing is likely to harm nature and common sense.

古文：南亩之氓咸无蓄积。
现代文：农民都没有积蓄。
English: Farmers have no savings.

古文：收获未竟，餱粮已空；机杼方停，布缕何在。
现代文：收获还没完，粮食已经空了；机杼刚停止，布匹又在哪儿呢。
English: The harvest is not over, the grain is already empty; the machine has just stopped, where are the cloths?

古文：乞选公正仁惠守令，加意抚绥。
现代文：请求选择公正仁惠的守令，加倍注意安抚。
English: Please choose a just and benevolent order, and pay more attention to appeasement.

古文：滥授冗员，无虑千百，无一矢劳，冒崇阶之赏，乞察勘削夺。 
现代文：乱授闲置的官员，大约有成百上千，没有一点功劳，冒领高官的赏赐，请求核查剥夺。 
English: There are about hundreds of thousands of officials who have been idle, without any merit, taking the reward of high-ranking officials and requesting verification and deprivation.

古文：部指挥刘斌、张全智勇，力荐于朝。
现代文：部指挥刘斌、张全智慧勇敢，竭力向朝廷推荐。
English: Liu Bin and Zhang Quanzhong, the commanders of the division, bravely and with wisdom, tried their best to recommend it to the imperial court.

古文：且云： 英雄之士，处心刚正，安肯俯首求媚。
现代文：并且说： 英雄的志士，心思刚强端正，怎么肯低头求媚。
English: And said: Hero's aspirant, strong-minded and upright, how can he bow his head to be flattered.

古文：若不加意延访，则志士沉沦，朝廷安得而用之。 
现代文：如不注意访求，那么志士落魄，朝廷怎么能得到并任用他呢。 
English: If you do not pay attention to the request, then the aspirant is doomed, how can the court get and appoint him?

古文：二十一年，巡抚马驯等言，副总兵周贤、参将彭伦官皆都督佥事，而信反止署职，宜量进一秩以重其权。
现代文：二十一年，巡抚马驯等进言说，副总兵周贤、参将彭伦官职都为都督愈事，而王信反而只是代理职务，应酌情提升一级以加重他的权力。
English: In the 21st year, the procurator Ma Jie and others said that the vice-commander Zhou Xian and the general Peng Lun's official positions were for the governor, but Wang Xin was only an acting position, and should be promoted to the first level as appropriate to increase his power.

古文：兵部言信无军功。
现代文：兵部说王信没有军功。
English: The military department said that Wang Xin had no military merit.

古文：帝特擢为都督同知。
现代文：皇帝特地提升他为都督同知。
English: The emperor specially promoted him as the governor's confidant.

古文：顷之，改总督漕运。
现代文：不久，改任总督漕运。
English: Soon after, he was appointed Governor-General of Zuoyun.

古文：帅府旧有湖，擅为利，信开以泊漕艘。
现代文：帅府原来有湖，把它利用起来，王信开通以停泊漕运的船。
English: There used to be a lake in Shuaifu, and Wang Xin used it to launch a rowing boat.

古文：势要壅水，一裁以法，漕务修举。
现代文：根据地势要蓄水的地方，一律按成法办事，漕运搞得很好。
English: According to the topography of the place where water is to be stored, all work according to the law, and the rowing is very good.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：第二年去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：信沉毅简重，好观书，被服儒雅。
现代文：玉信沉毅持重，好读书，穿着儒雅。
English: Yuxin has a strong will, is good at reading, and dresses elegantly.

古文：历大镇，不营私产。尝曰： 俭足以久，死后不累子孙，所遗多矣。 
现代文：任职于重镇，不经营私产，曾经说： 勤俭足以长久，死后不连累子孙，留给他们的已多了。 
English: He once said: "Diligence and frugality are enough for a long time. When you die, you won't burden your children and grandchildren. You'll leave them more than enough."

古文：故人婚丧，倾资助之。
现代文：朋友婚丧，尽力拿钱资助他们。
English: When friends get married or die, I do my best to get money to support them.

古文：子继善、从善皆举进士。
现代文：儿子王继善、王从善都考中进士。
English: His son Wang Jizan and Wang Zengdu passed the entrance examination.

古文：继信总漕运者，宁津都胜、合肥郭鋐。
现代文：接替王信总管漕运的是，宁津都胜、合肥郭锘。
English: Wang Xin will be succeeded by Ningjin Dusheng and Hefei Guoqi.

古文：胜袭职南京羽林左卫指挥佥事，鋐袭彭城卫指挥使。
现代文：都胜袭荫任南京羽林左卫指挥愈事，郭铉袭荫任彭城卫指挥使。
English: All of them succeeded in appointing Yin as the commanding officer of the Nanjing Yulin Left Division, and Guo Qi succeeded in appointing Yin as the commanding officer of the Pengcheng Division.

古文：成化初，胜擢署都指挥佥事，而鋐亦以从征荔浦功，进都指挥佥事，中武举，迁同知。
现代文：成化初年，都胜升任代理都指挥愈事；而郭铉也因随从征讨荔浦有功，进升为都指挥愈事，考中武举，升任同知。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Du Sheng was promoted to be the deputy commander of Du Du, and Guo Wei was promoted to be the commander of Du Du, the middle school examination, and the promotion of Tong Zhi.

古文：胜备倭扬州，击败盐徒为乱者。
现代文：都胜在扬州防备倭寇，击败贩私盐刑徒中作乱的。
English: They all won victories in Yangzhou in defending against the Japanese invaders and defeating the salt smugglers and rioters.

古文：尹旻等举胜将才，鋐亦为张懋所举。乃命胜充参将，协同漕运，而鋐代之备倭。
现代文：尹曼等举荐都胜的领兵才能，郭铉也被张懋举荐，就任命都胜充任参将，协助漕运，而郭铉代替都胜防备倭寇。
English: Yin Man and others recommended Du Sheng's ability to lead troops, and Guo Qi was also recommended by Zhang Ye, and Du Sheng was appointed as a general to assist in the transportation of troops, while Guo Qi replaced Du Sheng to guard against Japanese invaders.

古文：陕西大饥，胜奉诏输米百万石往振。
现代文：陕西大饥荒，都胜奉旨运输粮食一百万石去赈济。
English: During the great famine in Shaanxi Province, Du Sheng was ordered to transport one million kilos of grain to help the famine victims.

古文：信卒，遂迁署都指挥使，充总兵官代之，鋐代胜为参将。
现代文：王信去世，就升任代理都指挥使，提升总兵官代替他，郭铉代酱都胜为参将。
English: When Wang Xin passed away, he was promoted to acting military commander, the general officer was promoted to replace him, and Guo Bingdai was promoted to general.

古文：弘治中，胜以都督佥事带俸南京前府。
现代文：弘治年间，都胜以都督愈事的身份带俸主管南京前府。
English: During the Koji era, Dosho became the head of the former Nanjing prefecture with the status of the governor in charge.

古文：时鋐已镇守广西副总兵，破府江僮贼，遂以时望擢总漕运。
现代文：当时郭铲已经镇守广西任副总兵，击破府江僮人寇贼，于是因名望升任总漕运。
English: At that time, Guo Zhaobao had already served as deputy commander-in-chief of the Guangxi garrison and defeated the prefectural Jiangxi people's bandits, so he was promoted to commander-in-chief because of his reputation.

古文：鋐沉毅有将略。
现代文：郭铉沉毅有将才谋略。
English: Guo Yu Shen Yi has the ability to strategize.

古文：而胜无汗马勋，徒以居官廉静，故频有任使。
现代文：而都胜没有汗马功劳，祇因为任官廉洁沉静，所以被频繁任用。
English: But Du Sheng did not have hard work, only because he was a clean and quiet official, so he was frequently appointed.

古文：历任五十七年，所处皆膏腴地，而自奉简淡，日食止豆腐，时因以为号。
现代文：历任各职五十七年，所到之地都是富裕之地，而自己奉守简约淡泊，每天吃的只是豆腐，当时因此作为他的称号。
English: During his fifty-seven years in various positions, the places he visited were all affluent, while he adhered to simplicity and austerity, eating only tofu every day, which was his title at the time.

古文：鋐累进都督同知，凡军民利病多陈于朝。
现代文：郭铉多次进升至都督同知，凡是军民的利弊多陈奏于朝廷。
English: Guo Gan was promoted to the position of the governor many times. The pros and cons of the military and the people were mostly discussed in the imperial court.

古文：尝浚通州河二十里，置坝，令浅船搬运，岁省白金数万。
现代文：曾经疏通通州河二十里，设置大坝，命令吃水浅的船只转运，每年节省白银数万两。
English: He once dredged twenty miles of the Tongzhou River, set up a dam, and ordered shallow-draft ships to be transferred, saving tens of thousands of taels of silver every year.

古文：当孝宗时，朝政整肃，文武大臣率得人，鋐筦漕十三年不易。
现代文：在孝宗时，朝政整饬严肃，文武大臣都得人心，郭铉管理漕运十三年不改换。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaozong, the imperial government was seriously rectified, the ministers of literature and armed forces were popular, and Guo Gan's management of transportation did not change for thirteen years.

古文：正德初，始召佐后府，寻卒。
现代文：正德初年，纔召入辅佐后府，不久去世。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he was called to the post of assistant to Houfu, and died soon after.

古文：彭伦，初职为湖广永定卫指挥使，累功至都指挥同知。
现代文：彭伦，刚开始的职务为湖魔永定卫指挥使，累积功劳至都指挥同知。
English: Penlun, who began his career as the conductor of the Lake Demon Yongdingwei Orchestra, has accumulated a wealth of knowledge as a conductor.

古文：成化初，从赵辅平大藤峡贼。
现代文：成化初年，随从赵辅平定大藤峡寇贼。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he followed Zhao Fu to suppress the Dafuji Gorge bandits.

古文：进都指挥使，守备贵州清浪诸处，讨破茅坪、铜鼓叛苗。
现代文：进升为都指挥使，守卫贵州清浪等地，讨伐攻破茅坪、铜鼓反叛的苗人。
English: Jin Sheng was the commander and envoy of the capital, guarding Qinglang and other places in Guizhou, and fighting against the Miao people who broke through the rebellion of Maoping and Tonggu.

古文：贼掠乾溪，伦讨之。
现代文：寇贼劫掠干溪，彭伦讨伐他们。
English: The bandits plundered the dry creek, and Penlon fought them.

古文：贼还所掠，与盟而退。
现代文：寇贼归还所掠夺的东西，和他盟誓而撤退。
English: The robbers gave back what they had taken, swore an oath to him and left.

古文：伦以贼入时，道邛水诸寨，不即邀遏，乃下令，贼入境能生致者予重赏，纵者置诸法。
现代文：彭伦因为寇贼侵入时，取道邛水各寨，不能立即截击遏止，就下令，寇贼入境能活捉到的给予重赏，放跑的按法令处置。
English: When the bandits invaded, Penlun ordered that the bandits who could be captured alive should be rewarded, and those who were let go should be dealt with according to the law.

古文：由是诸司各约所属，凡生苗轶入，即擒之，送帐下者累累。
现代文：从此各司各自约束下属，凡是生苗侵入，立即擒获他们，送到帐下的很多。
English: Since then, each division has restricted its subordinates, and whenever seedlings invade, they are immediately captured and many are sent to the account.

古文：伦大会所部目、把缚俘囚，置高竿，集健卒乱射杀之，复割裂肢体，烹啖诸壮士。
现代文：彭伦广泛集合辖区的夷人头目，捆缚俘虏囚犯，置于高竿上，集合强健的士卒乱箭射死他们，又割裂肢体，煮了给众壮士吃。
English: Penlun extensively gathered the leaders of the barbarians in his jurisdiction, tied up the prisoners and put them on a high pole, gathered the strong soldiers and shot them with random arrows, then cut their limbs and cooked them for all the strong men to eat.

古文：罪轻者截耳鼻使去，曰： 以此识，再犯不赦矣。 
现代文：罪刑轻的割去耳朵鼻子让他们离去，说： 以此为标识，再违犯就不赦免了。 
English: Cut off their ears and noses for a minor offense and let them go, saying, "This is a sign; if they break this law again, they will not be forgiven."

古文：因令诸寨树牌为界，群苗股栗不敢犯。
现代文：于是命令各寨树立牌子作为界限，群苗害怕不敢侵犯。
English: So he ordered each village to set up a sign as a boundary, and the seedlings were afraid to encroach.

古文：明年充右参将，仍镇清浪。
现代文：第二年，充任右参将，仍然镇守清浪。
English: In the second year, he was appointed to the post of the right-hand general, and still kept watch over Kiyoura.

古文：益尽心边计，戎事毕举。
现代文：更加尽心于边防事务，军备之事都办得很好。
English: They have devoted more attention to border defense affairs, and the armament affairs have been well managed.

古文：妖贼石全州潜入绞洞，煽动古州苗，洪江、甘篆诸苗咸应之。
现代文：妖贼石全州偷偷进入绞洞，煽动古州苗人，洪江、甘篆各部苗人都响应他。
English: The evil thief Quanzhou sneaked into the cave and incited Guzhou Miao people. Miao people from all parts of Hongjiang and Ganlu responded to him.

古文：伦遣兵截擒，并搜获其妻子。
现代文：彭伦派兵拦截擒获，并搜查捕获他的妻子儿女。
English: Peng Lun sent soldiers to intercept and search his captured wife and children.

古文：诸苗将攻镇远，伦大败之，斩首及堕崖死者无算。
现代文：各部苗人将要攻打镇逮，彭伦大败他们，斩首和坠崖死的无法计算。
English: The Miao people of various departments were going to attack the town, and Peng Lun defeated them. The number of beheadings and deaths from falling off the cliff were incalculable.

古文：无何，邛水十四寨苗纠洪江生苗为逆。
现代文：不久，邛水十四察苗人纠集洪江生苗叛逆。
English: Not long after, fourteen seedling inspectors from Surabaya gathered seedlings from the Hongjiang River to rebel.

古文：伦分五哨往，甫行，雨如注，伦曰： 贼不虞我，急趋之，可得志也。 
现代文：彭伦分为五队前去，刚出发，下起瓢泼大雨，彭伦说： 寇贼不会料到我们会去，赶快去，可以得胜。 
English: Peng Lun divided into five teams to go forward. As soon as they set off, it began to rain heavily. Peng Lun said: The bandits will not expect us to go. Go quickly, you can win.

古文：竞进夹攻，絷其魁，俘斩余党。
现代文：竞相前进几面夹攻，抓获他们的首领，俘虏斩杀其余的同党。
English: They raced forward on several fronts, captured their leader, and the captives slaughtered the rest of their comrades.

古文：贼尽平。
现代文：寇贼全被平定。
English: The robbers were all subdued.

古文：靖州苗乱，湖广总兵官李震檄伦会讨。
现代文：靖州苗人作乱，湖广总兵官李震致檄书召彭伦会集讨伐。
English: The Miao people of Jingzhou made a disturbance, and the commander-in-chief of the Hukang army, Li Zhen, sent a letter to Peng Lun to organize a crusade.

古文：军至邛水江，诸熟苗惊，欲窜。
现代文：军队到达邛水江，各部熟萤惊骇，想要逃窜。
English: When the army arrived at the Surabaya River, all the officers were shocked and wanted to run away.

古文：伦与佥事李晃计曰 苗窜必助贼 ，乃急抚定之。
现代文：彭伦和愈事李晃商量说 苗人逃窜必定帮助寇贼 ，就急忙安抚平定他们。
English: Peng Lun and Li Huan, the doctor, discussed and said that Miao people's escape would definitely help the bandits, so they hurried to pacify and subdue them.

古文：又缘道降天堂、小坪诸苗。
现代文：又沿途降服天堂、小坪各部苗人。
English: In addition, along the way, Heaven and Miao people from all parts of Xiaoping were subdued.

古文：既抵靖州，伦将右哨，出贼背布营。
现代文：抵达靖州后，彭伦率领右路，在寇贼背后扎营。
English: After arriving in Jingzhou, Peng Lun led the right way and camped behind the bandits.

古文：贼走据高山，伦军仰攻之，贼败走。
现代文：寇贼逃跑占据高山，彭伦军队向上攻打，寇贼失败逃走。
English: The bandits fled and occupied the high mountains. The Peng Lun army attacked upwards, and the bandits fled unsuccessfully.

古文：遂渡江，捣其巢，大获。
现代文：于是渡过江，捣毁他们的巢穴，大胜。
English: So we crossed the river, destroyed their nests, and won.

古文：乘胜攻白崖塘。
现代文：乘胜攻打白崖塘。
English: Take advantage of the victory to attack Baiyatang.

古文：崖高万仞，下临深渊，称绝险。
现代文：崖高万仞，下临深渊，可称得上绝险。
English: The cliff is so high, and the abyss is so near, that it can be said to be an absolute danger.

古文：伦会左哨同进，得径路。
现代文：彭伦会集左路一同进攻，找到道路。
English: Peng Lun will gather the left road to attack together and find a way.

古文：夜登，贼仓皇溃。
现代文：夜里登山，寇贼仓皇溃散。
English: Climbing the mountain at night, the bandits scatter in panic.

古文：追斩二千余级，俘获如之，尽夷其寨。
现代文：追击斩杀二千多人，俘获同样多，全部平毁寨子。
English: The pursuit killed more than two thousand people, captured as many, and completely destroyed the stockade.

古文：初，臻剖、六洞苗侵熟苗田，不输赋，又不供驿马，有司莫敢问。
现代文：当初，臻、剖、六洞苗人侵占熟苗田地，不交纳赋税，又不供给驿马，有关官员没有人敢过问。
English: At the beginning, Zhen, Cao and Liutong Miao people occupied the fields of ripe seedlings, did not pay taxes, and did not supply horses. No relevant officials dared to inquire.

古文：伦遣人谕之，顿首请如制。
现代文：彭伦派人说服他们，叩首请求按法制办事。
English: Peng Lun sent someone to persuade them, and they bowed their heads and asked him to act according to the law.

古文：录功，进都督佥事。
现代文：记录功绩，进升为都督愈事。
English: Record achievements, and be promoted to the post of governor.

古文：久之，御史邓庠、员外郎费瑄勘事贵州，总兵官吴经等皆被劾，独荐伦智谋老成。
现代文：很久以后，御史邓庠、员外郎费管到贵州核查事情，总兵官昊经等都被弹劾，惟独推荐彭伦有智谋稳重成熟。
English: After a long time, the Minister of History, Deng Wei, and the member of the Foreign Affairs Office, Fei Guan, went to Guizhou to verify the matter. The Chief Military Officer, Hao Jing, and others were impeached, but only recommended Penlun to have wisdom, stability and maturity.

古文：弘治初，经论罢，即以伦代。
现代文：弘治初年，昊经论定罢职，就以彭伦代替。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Hao Jing decided to resign and was replaced by Peng Lun.

古文：伦用师，先计后战，故多功。
现代文：彭伦用兵，先谋划后作战，所以多有功绩。
English: Penlun used soldiers, first planning and then fighting, so he has many merits.

古文：四年以老致仕。
现代文：四年，因老退休。
English: Four years later, he retired due to old age.

古文：卒，予恤如制。欧磐，滁人。
现代文：去世，按制度给予抚恤。欧盘，滁人。
English: If he dies, he will be given a pension according to the system.

古文：袭世职指挥使。
现代文：承袭先世职务任指挥使。
English: Inherited the position of commanding envoy from the previous generation.

古文：成化中，擢广东都指挥佥事。
现代文：成化年问，升任广东都指挥愈事。
English: He was promoted to the post of Guangdong Provincial Commander.

古文：屡剿蛮寇有功。
现代文：多次清剿蛮夷寇贼有功。
English: They have made great contributions to clearing out the barbarian invaders many times.

古文：用总督朱英荐，充广西右参将，分守柳州、庆远。
现代文：因总督朱英推荐，充任广西右参将，分担镇守柳州、庆远。
English: On the recommendation of Governor Zhu Ying, he was appointed as the Guangxi Right Assistant General, sharing the town guards of Liuzhou and Qingyuan.

古文：与左参将马义讨融县八寨瑶，克之。
现代文：和左参将马义讨伐融县八砦瑶人，攻克了他们。
English: He and Zuo Gan led the Ma'ai to attack the eight forts in Rong County and defeated them.

古文：师旋。余贼复出掠，被劾。
现代文：军队撤回，余下的寇贼又出来劫掠，被弹劾。
English: The army withdrew, the remaining bandits went out to plunder again, and were impeached.

古文：帝绌磐等功，但恤死事家。
现代文：皇帝废除欧盘等人的功劳，只抚恤死者的家属。
English: The emperor abolished the merits of people such as Oppan, and only supported the families of the deceased.

古文：瑶贼方公强乱，兵部劾总镇中官顾恒，并及磐，当谪戍。
现代文：瑶人寇贼方公强作乱，兵部弹劾总镇中官顾恒，并连及欧盘，当谪降戍边。
English: When the bandits and thieves of Fang Gongqiang made a disturbance, the military department impeached the commander-in-chief of the town, Gu Heng, as well as Lian and Ou Pan, and they were forced to step down.

古文：督抚奏： 磐所守乃瑶、僮出没地。
现代文：督抚上奏说： 欧盘所镇守的是瑶、僮出没的地方。
English: The superintendent said in his report: The town guarded by Opan is a place where crickets and grasshoppers occur.

古文：磐募死士，夜入贼巢，斩其渠胡公返，威震群蛮。论功，可赎罪。 
现代文：欧盘招募效死力的士卒，夜入贼巢，斩杀他们的首领胡公返，威震群蛮，论定功绩，可以赎罪。 
English: The European platform recruits effective and deadly soldiers, enters the thief's nest at night, and kills their leader, Hu Gongfu. They are formidable and powerful, and their achievements can be judged and their sins can be atoned for.

古文：帝乃宥之，还故任。二十三年，郁林陆川贼黄公定、胡公明等乱。
现代文：皇帝就宽恕了他，还任原职二十三年，郁林陆川寇贼黄公定、胡公明等作乱。
English: The emperor forgave him, and he was reinstated in his former post for 23 years, after the Yulin-Luchuan bandits, Huang Gongding and Hu Gongming, had caused turmoil.

古文：磐偕按察使陶鲁等分五道攻破之。
现代文：欧盘和按察使陶鲁等分五路打败了他们。
English: They were defeated in five ways, including by the European side and by the Taolu side.

古文：进都指挥同知。
现代文：进升为都指挥同知。
English: His promotion to the post of metropolitan conductor was a mutual acquaintance.

古文：弘治初，谢病解职。
现代文：弘治初年，称病离职。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, he resigned, claiming illness.

古文：总督秦纮言磐多历战阵，有才有守，乞起用。
现代文：总督秦弦进言说欧盘多经历战事，有才能有操守，请求起用。
English: Governor Qin Zhenjin said that Ou Pan had experienced many wars, had talent and integrity, and requested to be appointed.

古文：诏还任。
现代文：下诏还任原职。
English: He was reinstated to his former position with the following order.

古文：八年，府江永安诸僮乱。
现代文：八年，府江永安各部僮人作乱。
English: In the eighth year, Fujiang Yongan's various departments instigated a riot.

古文：总督闵珪调兵六万，分四哨往讨。
现代文：总督闵珪调兵六莴，分四路去征讨。
English: The Governor-General dispatched six battalions of troops, divided into four groups, to investigate.

古文：磐自象州、修仁直捣陆峒，所向摧破。
现代文：欧盘从象州、修仁直捣陆峒，所遇都被攻破。
English: From Xiangzhou and Xiuren, the European pans directly attacked the land piers, and all of them were broken.

古文：已，偕诸军连破山寨百八十，斩首六千有奇。
现代文：后来，和各军连续攻破山寨一百八十座，靳杀六千多人。
English: Later, he and the other armies successively broke through 180 cottages and killed more than 6,000 people.

古文：进都指挥使，迁广西副总兵。
现代文：进升为都指挥使，迁任广西副总兵。
English: He was promoted to commander of the capital and transferred to the post of deputy commander-in-chief of Guangxi.

古文：思恩土官岑浚筑石城于丹良庄，截江括商利。
现代文：思恩土官岑溶在丹良庄修筑石城，截断水路搜刮商人钱财。
English: The local government of Shine built a stone city in Danliangzhuang, cut off the waterway and scrounged money from the merchants.

古文：帅府令毁之，不听。
现代文：帅府命令拆毁，不听从。
English: The mayor's office ordered the demolition, but it was not obeyed.

古文：磐自田州还，督兵将毁城。
现代文：欧盘从田州返回，督令兵将拆毁石城。
English: Oupan returned from Tianzhou, and the supervisors ordered the soldiers to demolish Shicheng.

古文：浚率众拒，击败之，卒夷其城。
现代文：岑浚率领众人抗拒，打败他们，最终平毁石城。
English: Dredging led the people to resist, defeat them, and eventually destroy Shicheng.

古文：都御史邓廷瓒等以磐功多，言于朝，进都督佥事。
现代文：都御史邓廷瓒等因欧盘功劳多，上言于朝廷，进升焉都督食事。
English: Dang Tingyu, the governor of the capital, and others were highly praised for their services to Europe, and they were recommended to the imperial court and promoted to the position of governor of the capital.

古文：十五年命佩平蛮将军印，镇守湖广。
现代文：十五年，命令佩带平蛮将军印，镇守湖广。
English: In the fifteenth year, he was ordered to wear the seal of the general and guard the lake.

古文：磐为将廉，能得士。
现代文：欧盘任将领清廉，能得到兵士拥戴。
English: European-style generals are clean and can win the support of soldiers.

古文：久镇南邦，蛮人畏服。
现代文：长久镇守南邦，蛮夷畏惧顺服。
English: For a long time, the town kept the southern state, and the barbarians were afraid to obey.

古文：十八年请老，又二年卒。
现代文：十八年请求退休。过了两年去世。
English: He asked to retire 18 years ago. He died two years later.

古文：祭葬如制。
现代文：祭祀葬礼按制度办理。
English: Ritual funerals are now handled according to the system.

古文：张祐，字天祐，广州人。
现代文：张佑，字天佑，广州人。
English: Zhang You, also known as Tian You, is from Guangzhou.

古文：幼好学能文。
现代文：年幼时喜好学习擅长作文。
English: When he was young, he liked to study and was good at writing.

古文：弘治中袭世职为广州右卫指挥使。
现代文：弘治年间承袭先世职务任广州右卫指挥使。
English: During the Hongzhi era, he assumed the duties of the previous generation and served as the commander of the Guangzhou Right Division.

古文：年十九，从总督潘蕃征南海寇元祖，先登有功。
现代文：十九岁时，随从总督潘蕃征讨南海寇贼棚元祖，率先攻入有功。
English: At the age of nineteen, he followed the governor Pan Zheng to recruit the founder of the South Sea corsairs, and took the lead in breaking into the meritorious.

古文：正德二年擢署都指挥佥事，守备德庆、泷水。
现代文：正德二年，升任代理都指挥愈事，守卫德庆、溘水。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, the promoted agents all commanded the army, guarding Deqing and Surabaya.

古文：瑶、僮负险者闻其威信，稍稍遁去。
现代文：瑶、僮负隅顽抗的听说他的威名，渐渐逃走。
English: After hearing of his reputation, some of the rebellious soldiers gradually ran away.

古文：总督林廷选引为中军，事无大小咨焉。
现代文：总督林廷选把他调入指挥部，事无大小都向他咨询。
English: Governor Lin Tingxuan transferred him to the headquarters and consulted him on all matters.

古文：守备惠、潮，捣盗魁刘文安、李通宝穴，平之。
现代文：守卫惠、潮，捣毁盗贼首领刘文安、李通宝的巢穴，平定了他们。
English: Guards Hui and Chaozhou destroyed the lairs of the thief leaders Liu Wen'an and Li Tongbao and pacified them.

古文：迁广西右参将，分守柳、庆。
现代文：迁任庭酉右参将，分担防守柳、庆。
English: He was transferred to the position of the right assistant captain of the palace guard, and he shared the duties of guarding Liu and Qing.

古文：总督陈金讨府江贼，命祐进沈沙口，大破之。
现代文：总督盐金讨伐府江寇贼，命令张佑进攻沈沙旦，大败他们。
English: Governor Yan Jian cracked down on the Fufu River bandits and ordered Zhang You to attack Sheng Shadan and defeat them.

古文：增俸一等，擢副总兵，镇守广西。
现代文：增加俸禄一等，升任副总兵，镇守广西。
English: His salary was raised to the first class, and he was promoted to vice-commander-in-chief and town guard of Guangxi.

古文：寻进署都督佥事。
现代文：不久进升为代理都督愈事。
English: He was soon promoted to acting governor.

古文：古田诸瑶、僮乱。
现代文：古田各部瑶、僮作乱。
English: All departments in Furuta are in turmoil.

古文：祐言： 先年征讨，率倚两江土兵，赏不酬劳。
现代文：张佑进言说： 以前征讨，都倚靠两江土兵，赏赐不够酬谢功劳。
English: Zhang Youjin said: In the past, the recruitment relied on the soldiers of the two rivers, and the rewards were not enough to reward the merits.

古文：今调多失期，乞定议优赉。 
现代文：如今调兵多错遇期限，请求商议确定重赏。 
English: Nowadays, the transfer of troops often misses the deadline, and the request for consultation to determine the reward is made.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：督都指挥沈希仪等讨临桂、灌阳诸瑶，斩首五百余级，玺书奖劳。
现代文：督令都指挥沈希仪等讨伐临桂、灌阳各部瑶人，斩杀五百多人，下诏书嘉奖慰劳。
English: The governor of Guizhou ordered Shen Xiyi and others to fight the invaders from all parts of Guizhou, Guiyang, and killed more than 500 people, and issued a decree to commend and console them.

古文：又连破古田贼，俘斩四千七百，进署都督同知。
现代文：又连续攻破古田寇贼，俘获斩首四千七百人，进升为代理都督同知。
English: He also continuously defeated the Gutian bandits, captured and beheaded 4,700 people, and was promoted to acting governor.

古文：已，复讨平洛容、肇庆、平乐诸蛮。
现代文：后来，又讨伐平定洛容、肇庆、平乐各蛮夷。
English: Later, they also fought against the barbarians of Luo Rong, Zhao Qing and Ping Le.

古文：增俸一等，荫子，世百户。
现代文：增加俸禄一等，荫袭其子，世袭百户。
English: Increase the salary of the first class, the shadow of his son, the inheritance of hundreds of households.

古文：嘉靖改元，母丧，哀毁骨立。
现代文：嘉靖元年，母亲去世，悲伤过度形貌消瘦。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, his mother died, and his grief caused him to become excessively thin.

古文：寻以疾乞休，还卫。
现代文：不久因病请求退休，回到卫所。
English: He soon asked to retire due to illness and returned to the infirmary.

古文：初，上思州土目黄镠作乱，祐购其党黄廷宝缚献之。
现代文：当初，上思州土人头目黄钖作乱，张佑收买他的同党黄廷实把他绑了进献。
English: At the beginning, the leader of the local people in Shangshizhou, Huang Qi, caused a disturbance, and Zhang You bribed his fellow party member Huang Tingshi to tie him up.

古文：总督张嵿恶祐不白己，至劾祐怀奸避难，逮系德庆狱。
现代文：总督张损怨恨张佑没有告诉自己，以致弹劾张佑心怀奸诈逃避困难，逮捕投入德庆监狱。
English: Governor Zhang You did not tell himself about the resentment of Zhang You, which led to the impeachment of Zhang You for evading difficulties with treachery, and his arrest and imprisonment in Deqing Prison.

古文：数上书讼冤，释令闲住。
现代文：多次上书诉冤，释放后命令闲居。
English: Repeatedly petitioned for redress of grievances, and ordered to live in idleness after release.

古文：卢苏、王受乱田州。
现代文：卢苏、王受扰乱田州。
English: Lusu, the king is disturbed by the disturbance in Tianzhou.

古文：总督姚镆召至军中，待以宾礼，多所裨赞。
现代文：总督姚镁把他召到军中，以宾客礼节招待他，多有辅助。
English: Governor Yao Mian called him to the army and invited him with guest etiquette.

古文：后王守仁代镆，询抚剿之宜，祐曰： 以夷治夷，可不烦兵而下。 
现代文：后来王守仁代替姚镁，询问安抚清剿的办法，张佑说： 用夷人治理夷人，可以不用兵而拿下。 
English: Later, Wang Shuren took the place of Yao Mengyu and inquired about the way to pacify the Qing Dynasty. Zhang You said, "If you use barbarians to govern barbarians, you can win without soldiers."

古文：守仁纳之，苏、受果效顺。因命祐部分其众。
现代文：王守仁采纳了他的意见，卢苏、王受果然听命顺服，于是命令张佑安排二人的部众。
English: Wang Shouren accepted his opinion, and Lu Su and Wang Zhu were obedient to his orders, so he ordered Zhang You to arrange the two men's subordinates.

古文：事宁，守仁言： 思、田初定，宜设一副总兵镇之，请即以命祐。 
现代文：事情平息，王守仁进言说： 上思州、田州刚刚平定，应设置一位副总兵镇守，请就任命张佑。 
English: When the situation calmed down, Wang Shouren said: Shangshi and Tianzhou have just been pacified. A deputy commander-in-chief should be appointed. Please appoint Zhang You.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：破封川贼盘古子，又剿广东会宁剧贼丘区长等，斩首一千二百，勒铭大隆山。
现代文：攻破封川寇贼盘古子，又清剿广东会宁大盗丘区长等，斩杀一千二百人，在大隆山刻铭记功。
English: He defeated the Fuxing River bandit Pan Guzi, and also purged the Guangdong Association Ningda Bandit Hill District Chief, etc., killing 1,200 people, and engraved his memory in Dalongshan.

古文：十一年，杨春贼赵林花陷高州，总督陶谐檄祐讨。
现代文：十一年，杨春寇贼赵林花攻陷高州。总督陶谐发檄书召张佑讨伐。
English: In the eleventh year, Yangchun's bandit Zhao Linhua invaded Gaozhou. Governor Tao Jing sent a letter to Zhang You to fight.

古文：深入，多所斩获。
现代文：深入敌境，多有斩杀擒获。
English: They penetrated deep into the enemy territory, and many of them were killed or captured.

古文：忽中危疾卒，军中为哀恸。
现代文：忽然得重病去世，军中为之哀恸。
English: He died suddenly of a serious illness, and the army mourned his death.

古文：祐身长八尺，智识绝人。
现代文：张佑身高八尺，智谋才识超过常人。
English: Zhang You is eight feet tall, and his intelligence surpasses that of ordinary people.

古文：驭军有节制，与下同甘苦，不营私产。
现代文：治军有节制，与部下同甘共苦，不经营私产。
English: He governs the army with restraint, shares the joys and sorrows with his subordinates, and does not engage in private business.

古文：性好书，每载以自随，军暇即延儒生讲论。
现代文：生性好读书，经常用车装书跟随自己，军中闲暇就请儒生讲谈论议。
English: He is good at reading, often following himself with a cartload of books. During his leisure time in the army, he would invite Confucians to talk and discuss.

古文：尝过乌蛮滩，谒马伏波祠，太息曰： 殁不俎豆其间，非夫也。 
现代文：曾经路过乌蛮滩，拜谒马伏波祠堂，长叹说： 去世后不和他们一起受祭祀，不是大丈夫。 
English: I once passed by the Ubangan Beach and paid homage to the Ma Fu Bo Shrine, and said with a long sigh, "It's not okay not to be sacrificed with them after death."

古文：题诗而去。
现代文：题诗离去。
English: The epitaph goes.

古文：后田州人立祠横山祀之。
现代文：后来田州人在横山建立祠堂祭祀他。
English: Later, the people of Tianzhou built an ancestral hall in Yokoyama to worship him.

古文：赞曰：苗蛮阻险自固，易动难服，自其性然。
现代文：赞曰：苗蛮依靠险阻巩固自己，容易变动难于驯服，他们的天性是这样。
English: Zang Zai said: Miao men rely on dangerous obstacles to consolidate themselves, easy to change and difficult to tame, this is their nature.

古文：而草薙禽狝，滥杀邀功，贪货贿，兴事端，控驭乖方，绥怀无策，则镇将之过也。
现代文：而像除草捕兽一样捕杀，滥杀邀功，贪于贿赂，挑起事端，控制违背法度，安抚没有策略，那是镇守之将的遇错。
English: But hunting and killing like weeding and trapping, indiscriminate killing for reward, greed for bribes, stirring up trouble, controlling violations of the law, and appeasing without strategy, that is the mistake of the town guard.

古文：韩观诸人，虽功最焯著，而皆以威信震慑蛮荒。
现代文：韩观等人，虽然功绩最卓著，然而都是以威信震慑蛮夷。
English: Han Guan and others, although their achievements are the most outstanding, however, they all use prestige to deter barbarians.

古文：若山云、王信、张祐之廉俭有守，士君子何以过？故尤足尚云。
现代文：像山云、王信、张佑那样廉洁节俭有操守，士人君子怎么能超过他们，所以尤其值得推崇。
English: Like Shanyun, Wang Xin and Zhang Youlu, they are honest, frugal and have ethics. How can a scholar-gentleman surpass them, so they are especially worthy of respect.

