古文：○太祖一太祖启运立极英武睿文神德圣功至明大孝皇帝讳匡胤，姓赵氏，涿郡人也。
现代文：太祖启运立极英武睿文神德圣功至明大孝皇帝，名匡胤，姓赵氏，琢郡人。
English: The great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandfather.

古文：高祖朓，是为僖祖，仕唐历永清、文安、幽都令。
现代文：高祖朓，赵匡胤称帝后追尊庙号为僖祖，在唐朝做官时历任永清、文安、幽都三县的县令。
English: Gao Zuyi, Zhao Kuangyin, called the Empress Dowager Suizong Temple as the ancestor, served as the county magistrate of the three counties of Yongqing, Wen'an and Youdu when he was an official in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：朓生珽，是为顺祖，历藩镇从事，累官兼御史中丞。
现代文：朓的儿子赵廷，即后来的顺祖，担任藩镇从事，积功升官兼御史中承。
English: Yao's son Zhao Ting, later known as Shunzu, served as a hanzhen (feudal lord) and rose through the ranks to become an official and the second-in-command.

古文：珽生敬，是为翼祖，历营、蓟、涿三州刺史。
现代文：赵廷的儿子赵敬，即后来的翼祖，历任营州、蓟州、琢州三州刺史。
English: Zhao Jing, the son of Zhao Ting, later known as the Winged Ancestor, was in charge of the history of the three states of Yingzhou, Zhangzhou, and Takuzhou.

古文：敬生弘殷，是为宣祖。
现代文：赵敬的儿子赵弘殷，即后来的宣祖。
English: Zhao Hongyin, the son of Zhao Jing, later became the founder of Xuan Zhou.

古文：周显德中，宣祖贵，赠敬左骁骑卫上将军。
现代文：后周显德年间，宣祖显贵之际，后周皇帝追赠他的父亲赵敬为左晓骑卫上将军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Xiande, when Emperor Xuan Zu was on the verge of eminence, Emperor Zhou posthumously bestowed his father, Zhao Jing, with the title of Zuo Xiao Jie Wei Shangzheng.

古文：宣祖少骁勇，善骑射，事赵王王镕，为镕将五百骑援唐庄宗于河上，有功。
现代文：宣祖年轻时十分晓勇，擅长骑马射箭，在赵王王镕帐下供职，为哑拜立领五百名骑兵在黄河沿岸增援后唐庄宗立有战功。
English: When he was young, Xuanzou was very brave and good at riding and archery. He served under Zhao Wangwang, and he was credited with leading 500 cavalrymen to reinforce Dumbai along the Yellow River.

古文：庄宗爱其勇，留典禁军。
现代文：庄宗喜爱他勇猛善战，留他掌管禁军。
English: Zhuangzong liked him for his bravery and skill in battle, and left him in charge of the forbidden army.

古文：汉乾祐中，讨王景于凤翔，会蜀兵来援，战于陈仓。
现代文：后汉乾年间，宣祖前往凤翔征讨王景，恰逢后蜀军队来援救王景，在陈仓大战。
English: During the post-Han Qian years, Xuan Zu went to Fengxiang to conquer Wangjing, which coincided with the post-Shu army coming to the rescue of Wangjing in the Chencang War.

古文：始合，矢集左目，气弥盛，奋击大败之，以功迁护圣都指挥使。
现代文：刚刚交兵，宣祖左眼中箭，但他的气势更旺盛，奋勇攻击，把敌军打得大败，因功升任护圣都指挥使。
English: Just after the battle, Xuan Zu had an arrow in his left eye, but his momentum was more vigorous, he attacked bravely, defeated the enemy army, and was promoted to the post of the commander of the Holy Protection.

古文：周广顺末，改铁骑第一军都指挥使，转右厢都指挥，领岳州防御使。
现代文：后周太祖广顺末年，改任铁骑第一军都指挥使，转任右厢都指挥使，遥领岳州防御使。
English: Later, in the last year of Zhou Taizu Guangshun, he was appointed as the commander of the First Army of the Iron Cavalry, the commander of the Right Wing, and the commander of the Yuezhou Defense.

古文：从征淮南，前军却，吴人来乘，宣祖邀击，败之。
现代文：跟随后周世宗柴荣出征淮南，前军战斗不力而退却，吴兵乘机进攻，宣祖率领军队拦腰攻击吴兵，把他们打败。
English: Subsequently, Zhou Shizong Chai Rong went to Huainan, the former army fought poorly and retreated, the Wu soldiers took the opportunity to attack, and Xuan Zu led the army to attack the Wu soldiers and defeat them.

古文：显德三年，督军平扬州，与世宗会寿春。
现代文：显德三年，统率军队攻打扬州，与周世宗在寿春会合。
English: In the third year of Xiande, he led the army to attack Yangzhou and met with Zhou Shizong in Shuchun.

古文：寿春卖饼家饼薄小，世宗怒，执十余辈将诛之，宣祖固谏得释。
现代文：寿春卖饼店的饼既薄又小，世宗大怒，捉拿了十几个卖饼人将要处死他们，宣祖坚持进谏才获得释放。
English: Shuchun bakery's cakes were thin and small, and Shizong was furious. He caught more than a dozen bakers and was going to execute them. Xuan Zu insisted on going to jail before he was released.

古文：累官检校司徒、天水县男。与太祖分典禁兵，一时荣之。
现代文：累官至检校司徒、天水县男，和儿子赵匡胤分别执掌禁军，是当时荣耀的事情。
English: At that time, it was a matter of honor for the school inspector, the man from Tianshui County, and his son, Zhao Kuangyin, to take charge of the forbidden army.

古文：卒，赠武清军节度使、太尉。
现代文：宣祖逝世，后周朝廷追赠他为武清军节度使、太尉。
English: After the death of Xuanzu, the Zhou court posthumously awarded him the title of Wuqing Army's military attaché and lieutenant.

古文：太祖，宣祖仲子也，母杜氏。
现代文：太祖，是宣祖的二儿子，母亲杜氏。
English: Taizu was the second son of Xuanzu, and his mother was a brewer.

古文：后唐天成二年，生于洛阳夹马营，赤光绕室，异香经宿不散。体有金色，三日不变。
现代文：后唐天成二年，出生在洛阳夹马营，当时红光绕室，奇异的香气一夜没有消散，身体上有金黄颜色，三天没有变。
English: He was born in Luoyang Jima Camp two years after the Tang Dynasty. At that time, the red light circled the room, the strange aroma did not dissipate overnight, the body had a golden color, and it did not change for three days.

古文：既长，容貌雄伟，器度豁如，识者知其非常人。
现代文：长大后，太祖相貌雄伟，器度豁达自如，有见识的人知道他绝非一般人。
English: After growing up, the great-grandfather's appearance was majestic, his demeanor was open-minded and easygoing, and people with insight knew that he was by no means an ordinary person.

古文：学骑射，辄出人上。
现代文：学习骑马射箭，则在常人之上。
English: Learning to ride a horse and shoot arrows is beyond ordinary people.

古文：尝试恶马，不施衔勒，马逸上城斜道，额触门楣坠地，人以为首必碎，太祖徐起，更追马腾上，一无所伤。
现代文：曾经试骑一匹脾气凶恶的烈马，不用嚼口马鞍，烈马奔上登城楼的坡道，太祖的额头撞在门框的横木而从马上摔到地下，人们都认为太祖的脑袋一定撞碎了，只见太祖慢慢站起来，再次追赶烈马飞身跳上，一点也没受伤。
English: Once he tried to ride a fierce-tempered stallion, without chewing the saddle, the stallion ran up the ramp of the city tower, the great-grandfather's forehead hit the crossbar of the door frame and fell from the horse to the ground, people all thought that the great-grandfather's head must have been crushed, only to see the great-grandfather slowly stand up, catch up with the stallion again, fly and jump up, and was not injured at all.

古文：又尝与韩令坤博土室中，雀斗户外，因竞起掩雀，而室随坏。
现代文：又曾经和韩令坤在一间土屋中赌博，麻雀在屋子外面互相啄斗，二人于是争着起身到屋子外捕捉麻雀，土屋随即坍塌。
English: He once gambled with Han Lingkun in an earthen house. Sparrows were fighting each other outside the house, so the two of them got up to catch the sparrows outside the house. The earthen house then collapsed.

古文：汉初，漫游无所遇，舍襄阳僧寺。有老僧善术数，顾曰： 吾厚赆汝，北往则有遇矣。 
现代文：后汉初年，太祖四处漫游却没有获得机遇，在襄阳寺庙中借住，有位老和尚擅长看相算命，看了太祖后说： 我给你足够的旅费，你朝北走就会有机遇了。 
English: In the first year of the Later Han Dynasty, Taizu roamed around but didn't get a chance. He borrowed a room in a temple in Yangyang. An old monk was good at fortune-telling. After seeing Taizu, he said, "I'll give you enough travel expenses. If you go north, you'll have a chance."

古文：会周祖以枢密使征李守真，应募居帐下。
现代文：正好周太祖以后汉枢密使的身份征讨李守真，太祖应募在周太祖军帐下供职。
English: Just after Zhou Taizu, Li Shouzhen was recruited as a secret envoy of the Han Dynasty. Taizu was recruited to serve under Zhou Taizu's army.

古文：广顺初，补东西班行首，拜滑州副指挥。
现代文：后周广顺初年，太祖补为禁军东西班行首，任滑州副指挥。
English: Later, in the first year of Zhou Guangshun, Taizushi became the leader of the East-West squad of the Imperial Army and served as the deputy commander of Slanting.

古文：世宗尹京，转开封府马直军使。
现代文：周世宗任开封尹，太祖转任开封府马直军使。
English: Zhou Shizong held the post of Kaifeng Yin, and the great-grandfather was transferred to the post of Kaifeng Mazuo envoy.

古文：世宗即位，复典禁兵。
现代文：周世宗即位当了皇帝，太祖又执掌禁军。
English: Zhou Shizong was enthroned as emperor, and his great-grandfather took charge of the imperial army.

古文：北汉来寇，世宗率师御之，战于高平。
现代文：北汉来侵犯，周世宗率领军队抵御来犯之敌，在高平摆开战场。
English: When the Northern Han invaded, Zhou Shizong led the army to resist the invading enemy and set up a battlefield in Gaoping.

古文：将合，指挥樊爱能等先遁，军危。太祖麾同列驰马冲其锋，汉兵大溃。
现代文：战斗将要展开的时候，指挥樊爱能等人首先逃跑，后周军十分危急，太祖指挥自己的同伴骑上马迅速冲向敌人前锋，北汉军队大败溃逃。
English: When the battle was about to begin, the commander Zou Ai Neng and others were the first to flee. Later, the Zhou army was in a very critical situation. Taizu commanded his companions to quickly rush to the enemy's front on horseback. The Northern Han army was defeated and fled.

古文：乘胜攻河东城，焚其门。左臂中流矢，世宗止之。
现代文：太祖乘胜进攻河东城，焚烧城门，左臂被流箭射中，周世宗制止他再攻城。
English: The great-grandfather took advantage of the victory to attack the city of Hedong, burned the city gate, his left arm was shot by a stray arrow, and Zhou Shizong stopped him from attacking the city again.

古文：还，拜殿前都虞候，领严州刺史。
现代文：回到京城后，太祖被任命为殿前都虞候，领严州刺史。
English: After returning to the capital, Taizu was appointed as a prefectural governor, and made history in the prefecture.

古文：三年春，从征淮南，首败万众于涡口，斩兵马都监何延锡等。
现代文：显德三年春天，太祖跟随周世宗征伐淮南，首战在涡口打败南唐军万余人，斩杀南唐兵马都监何延锡等人。
English: In the spring of the third year of Xiande, Taizu followed Zhou Shizong to invade Huainan. In the first battle, he defeated more than 10,000 Southern Tang soldiers in the vortex and killed Southern Tang's military governor He Yanxi and others.

古文：南唐节度皇甫晖、姚凤众号十五万，塞清流关，击走之。
现代文：南唐节度使皇甫晖、姚凤率领号称十五万的军队，驻扎在清流关，太祖率领军队把他们打走了。
English: During the Southern Tang Dynasty festival, Emperor Fuxiong and Yao Feng led an army of 150,000 soldiers stationed in Qingliu Pass. Grandfather led the army to drive them away.

古文：追至城下，晖曰： 人各为其主，愿成列以决胜负。 
现代文：太祖追到城下，皇甫晖说： 我们各自为了自己主人，我希望双方布好阵式以决胜负。 
English: When the great-grandfather chased him to the outskirts of the city, the Empress Dowager said, "For the sake of our masters, I hope that both sides will form a good formation to decide the outcome."

古文：太祖笑而许之。
现代文：太祖笑着回答说可以。
English: The great-grandfather smiled and replied that he could.

古文：晖整阵出，太祖拥马项直入，手刃晖中脑，并姚凤禽之。
现代文：皇甫晖摆好阵式出来迎战，太祖抱着马脖子一直冲人敌军阵内，手中兵刃砍中皇甫晖的脑袋，并把姚凤一起擒获。
English: Emperor Fuxi set up a good formation and came out to meet the battle. Grandfather held the horse's neck and kept charging into the enemy army. In his hand, he cut the head of Emperor Fuxi, and captured Yao Feng together.

古文：宣祖率兵夜半至城下，传呼开门，太祖曰： 父子固亲，启闭，王事也。 
现代文：宣祖率领军队半夜时来到城下，传呼开门，太祖说： 父子诚然是至亲，但是城门开关，却是国家的事情。 
English: Xuan Zu led his army to the outskirts of the city in the middle of the night and called for the door to be opened. The great-grandfather said, "It is true that father and son are close relatives, but the opening and closing of the city gate is a matter of state.

古文：诘旦，乃得入。
现代文：等到天亮，宣祖才得以进城。
English: It was not until dawn that Xuanzou was able to enter the city.

古文：韩令坤平扬州，南唐来援，令坤议退，世宗命太祖率兵二千趋六合。
现代文：韩令坤攻下扬州，南唐派军队来取，韩令坤主张退兵，周世宗命令太祖率兵二千赶往六合。
English: Han Lingkun conquered Yangzhou, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent troops to take it, Han Lingkun advocated withdrawal, and Zhou Shizong ordered Taizu to rush to Liuhe with 2,000 soldiers.

古文：太祖下令曰： 扬州兵敢有过六合者，断其足！ 
现代文：太祖下令说： 扬州兵敢有过六合的，砍断他们的脚。 
English: The great-grandfather ordered, "If the Yangzhou soldiers dare to have more than six horses, cut off their feet."

古文：令坤始固守。
现代文：韩令坤才固守扬州。
English: Han Lingkun was the only one to stick to Yangzhou.

古文：太祖寻败齐王景达于六合东，斩首万余级。
现代文：太祖不久在六合东面打败南唐齐王李景达，斩杀一万多人。
English: Not long after, Taizu defeated Li Jingda, the king of Southern Tang, in the east of Liuhe, killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：还，拜殿前都指挥使，寻拜定国军节度使。
现代文：回来后，太祖被任命为殿前都指挥使，不久又被委任为定国军节度使。
English: After his return, Taizu was appointed as the commander of the Imperial Household Agency, and soon after that, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Dingguo Army.

古文：四年春，从征寿春，拔连珠砦，遂下寿州。
现代文：显德四年春天，跟随周世宗出征寿春，攻克连珠寨，乘势攻下寿州。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of Xiande, he followed Zhou Shizong to march to Shoushun, conquered Lian Zhuzhai, and seized the opportunity to conquer Shoushou.

古文：还，拜义成军节度、检校太保，仍殿前都指挥使。
现代文：还军后，太祖拜义成军节度使、检校太保，仍旧担任殿前都指挥使。
English: After returning to the army, the great-great-grandfather still served as the commander-in-chief in front of the palace.

古文：冬，从征濠、泗，为前锋。时南唐砦于十八里滩，世宗方议以橐驼济师，而太祖独跃马截流先渡，麾下骑随之，遂破其砦。
现代文：这年冬天，跟随周世宗征伐壕州、泅州，充当前锋，当时南唐在十八里滩扎寨，周世宗刚刚商议用骆驼摆渡军队时，而太祖已率先单骑横渡而过，他的部下骑兵也紧随他渡过了河，因而攻破南唐军寨。
English: This winter, following Zhou Shizong's conquest of Trench State and Zhangzhou, he served as the vanguard. At that time, Southern Tang was encamped at the Eighteen-Mile Beach. When Zhou Shizong was just discussing the use of camels to ferry the army, Taizu was the first to cross the river on horseback, and his cavalry followed him across the river, thus breaking the Southern Tang army camp.

古文：因其战舰乘胜攻泗州，下之。
现代文：又用缴获的南唐战舰乘胜进攻泅州，攻克了泅州。
English: He also used the captured Nantang warships to attack Zhangzhou and conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：南唐屯清口，太祖从世宗翼淮东下，夜追至山阳，俘唐节度使陈承诏以献，遂拔楚州。
现代文：南唐在清口驻屯军队，太祖跟世宗两翼分兵沿淮河东下，连夜追到山阳，俘虏南唐节度使陈承昭献给周世宗，因而攻下楚州。
English: Southern Tang garrisoned troops in Qingkou. Taizu and Shizong's two-wing detachment marched east along the Huai River and chased them to Shanyang overnight. The captive Southern Tang gave Chen Chengzhao to Zhou Shizong, thus capturing Chuzhou.

古文：进破唐人于氵銮江口，直抵南岸，焚其营栅，又破之于瓜步，淮南平。
现代文：乘胜进军，在迎蛮江口打败南唐军，直抵南岸，烧毁敌军营寨，又在瓜步攻破南唐军，淮南平定。
English: He marched into the army with victory, defeated the South Tang Army at the mouth of the Yingba River, reached the south bank, burned down the enemy's camp, and defeated the South Tang Army at the melon step, and subdued Huainan.

古文：唐主畏太祖威名，用间于世宗，遣使遗太祖书，馈白金三千两，太祖悉输之内府，间乃不行。
现代文：南唐主畏惧太祖的威名，在周世宗那里使用离间计，派遣使臣送给太祖一封信，馈赠三千两白金，太祖把白金全部送到内府，南唐的离间计失败。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty was afraid of the prestige of the great-grandfather. They used a divider at Zhou Shizong's place. They sent an envoy to send a letter to the great-grandfather and presented him with 32,000 taels of platinum. The great-grandfather sent all the platinum to Nefu. The Southern Tang Dynasty's divider failed.

古文：五年，改忠武军节度使。
现代文：显德五年，太祖改任忠武军节度使。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Xiande's reign, Emperor Taizu was appointed as the regent of the loyal military.

古文：六年，世宗北征，为水陆都部署。
现代文：显德六年，周世宗北伐，太祖担任水陆都部署。
English: Hende served six years, Zhou Shizong led the Northern Expedition, and Taizu served as the commander of the army and navy.

古文：及莫州，先至瓦桥关，降其守将姚内斌，战却数千骑，关南平。
现代文：到达莫州，先到瓦桥关，守将姚内斌投降；打退几千名敌军骑兵，关南平定。
English: Arriving in Mozhou, the first to arrive at the tile bridge pass, guard Yao Neibin surrendered; beat back several thousand enemy cavalry, and the south of the pass was pacified.

古文：世宗在道，阅四方文书，得韦囊，中有木三尺余，题云 点检作天子 ，异之。
现代文：周世宗在行军路上，审阅各地所上文书，得到一只皮口袋，袋中有一块三尺多长的木板，上面写着 点检作天子 周世宗感到这件事十分奇怪。
English: On the march, Zhou Shizong reviewed the documents received from all over the country and received a leather bag. In the bag, there was a wooden board more than three feet long, on which was written "Dot Inspection for the Son of Heaven." Zhou Shizong found this very strange.

古文：时张永德为点检，世宗不豫，还京师，拜太祖检校太傅、殿前都点检，以代永德。
现代文：当时张永德任点检，世宗卧病，回到京城，任命太祖为检校太傅、殿前都点检，用来代替张永德。
English: At that time, Zhang Yongde was appointed as the inspector, but Shizong fell ill and returned to Beijing. He appointed Taizu as the inspector, and the front of the hall was inspected to replace Zhang Yongde.

古文：恭帝即位，改归德军节度、检校太尉。
现代文：周恭帝即位当皇帝，太祖改任归德军节度使、检校太尉。
English: Zhou Gongdi ascended the throne as emperor, and Taizu was reassigned to be the German military's regent and inspector.

古文：七年春，北汉结契丹入寇，命出师御之。
现代文：显德七年春天，北汉勾结契丹进犯后周，朝廷命令太祖率领军队抵御敌人。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Emperor Xiande, a week after the invasion of North Han in collusion with Khitan, the imperial court ordered Taizu to lead the army to resist the enemy.

古文：次陈桥驿，军中知星者苗训引门吏楚昭辅视日下复有一日，黑光摩荡者久之。
现代文：大军到达陈桥驿，军队里一名懂得天文的人苗训招呼门吏楚昭辅看太阳下面还有个太阳，黑光来回摇动了很长时间。
English: The large army arrived at Chenqiao. Miao Xun, an astronomer in the army, called the gatekeeper Chu Zhaowu to see that there was still a sun under the sun. The black light shook back and forth for a long time.

古文：夜五鼓，军士集驿门，宣言策点检为天子，或止之，众不听。
现代文：这天下半夜，军中将士集中在驿门前，当众宣布策立点检做皇帝，有人劝阻将士，大家也不听。
English: In the middle of the night, the lieutenant generals gathered in front of the main gate and publicly announced that they would set up a checkpoint to become emperor. Some people tried to dissuade the generals, but no one listened.

古文：迟明，逼寝所，太宗入白，太祖起。
现代文：天快亮的时候，将士们来到太祖寝室外，太宗进人房间向太祖报告外面发生的事情，太祖起身。
English: When it was almost dawn, the officers came to the outside of the grandfather's bedroom. The grandfather went into the living room to report to the grandfather what had happened outside. The grandfather got up.

古文：诸校露刃列于庭，曰： 诸军无主，愿策太尉为天子。 
现代文：军校们手里拿着兵器排列在庭院中，说： 现在军队没有主人，我们愿意拥立太尉当皇帝。 
English: The cadets lined up in the courtyard, weapons in hand, and said, "Now that the army has no master, we are willing to make the captain emperor."

古文：未及对，有以黄衣加太祖身，众皆罗拜，呼万岁，即掖太祖乘马。
现代文：太祖还没有来得及答话，就有人把黄袍加在太祖身上，大家围着他下拜，高喊万岁，立即扶太祖上马。
English: Before the great-grandfather could answer, someone put a yellow robe on the great-grandfather. Everyone around him bowed down, shouted "long live!" and immediately helped the great-grandfather onto the horse.

古文：太祖揽辔谓诸将曰： 我有号令，尔能从乎？ 皆下马曰： 唯命。 
现代文：太祖拉住马疆绳对将领们说： 我的号令，你们能够听从吗了众将下马答道： 一定听从命令。 
English: The great-grandfather pulled the horse's bridle and said to the generals, "Can you obey my command?" The soldiers dismounted and replied, "We must obey the command."

古文：太祖曰： 太后、主上，吾皆北面事之，汝辈不得惊犯；大臣皆我比肩，不得侵凌；朝廷府库、士庶之家，不得侵掠。
现代文：太祖说： 太后、皇帝，我都北面侍奉他们，你们这些人不能惊扰冒犯；各位大臣都是我的平辈同事，你们不得侵犯凌侮；朝廷的府库、官宦百姓的家庭，不得侵犯掠夺。
English: The great-grandfather said, "The empress dowager and the emperor, I have served them from the north, and you people must not disturb or offend them; the ministers are my peers and colleagues, and you must not encroach upon or insult them; the treasury of the imperial court, the families of officials and commoners, must not encroach upon or plunder them.

古文：用令有重赏，违即孥戮汝。 
现代文：听从命令有重赏，违抗命令就杀你们的头。 
English: If you obey orders, you will be rewarded. If you disobey orders, you will be beheaded.

古文：诸将皆载拜，肃队以入。
现代文：将领们都再次下拜，严整队伍返回开封城。
English: The generals all bowed again, and the orderly procession returned to Kaifeng City.

古文：副都指挥使韩通谋御之，王彦升遽杀通于其第。
现代文：后周副都指挥使韩通计划抵抗，王彦升情急之下把韩通杀死在他家中。
English: After the vice-commander Zhou made Han Tong plan to resist, Wang Yan suddenly killed Han Tong in his home.

古文：太祖进登明德门，令甲士归营，乃退居公署。
现代文：太祖进城登上明德门，命令将士回到军营去，自己也回到官署。
English: The great-grandfather entered the city, climbed the Mingde Gate, ordered the soldiers to return to the military camp, and returned to the government office.

古文：有顷，诸将拥宰相范质等至，太祖见之，呜咽流涕曰： 违负天地，今至于此！ 质等未及对，列校罗彦环按剑厉声谓质等曰： 我辈无主，今日须得天子。 
现代文：过了不久，将领们拥着宰相范质等人前来，太祖见了他们，低声哭泣着说： 我违背天地，今天到了这种地步广范质等人还没有来得及答话，列校罗彦瑰手按宝剑高声对范质等人说： 我们这些人没有主人，今天一定要有天子。 
English: After a short while, the generals came forward holding the prime minister and others. When the great-grandfather saw them, he wept in a low voice and said, "I have violated heaven and earth. Today, it has come to this. The great-grandfather and others did not have time to answer. The schoolmaster, Luo Yan, raised his sword and said loudly to the great-grandfather and others, "We have no master. Today, we must have a heavenly son."

古文：质等相顾，计无从出，乃降阶列拜。
现代文：范质等人互相看看，没有什么办法可想，于是退到台阶下列队下拜。
English: Norms and others looked at each other, there was nothing to think about, so they retreated to the steps and bowed down.

古文：召文武百僚，至晡，班定。
现代文：太祖召集文武百官，到了黄昏时，文武官员已排定了位置。
English: The great-grandfather summoned hundreds of civil and military officials, and by dusk, the civil and military officials had already arranged their positions.

古文：翰林承旨陶谷出周恭帝禅位制书于袖中，宣徽使引太祖就庭，北面拜受已，乃掖太祖升崇元殿，服衮冕，即皇帝位。
现代文：翰林承旨陶谷从袍袖中拿出周恭帝的禅位制书，宣徽使引导太祖到了殿前庭里，北面下拜接受制书后，又扶着太祖登上崇元殿，换上皇帝的衣帽，登上皇帝宝座。
English: Hanlin Zongzhi Tao Gu took out Zhou Gongdi's zen book from his robe sleeve. Xuan Hui guided the great-grandfather to the front yard of the palace. After bowing down to the north to accept the book, he also supported the great-grandfather to ascend the Chongyuan Palace, put on the emperor's clothes and hat, and ascend the emperor's throne.

古文：迁恭帝及符后于西宫，易其帝号曰郑王，而尊符后为周太后。
现代文：把周恭帝和符太后迁到西宫，把恭帝改为郑王，而尊奉符太后为周太后。
English: Emperor Qianlong and Empress Dowager Fu were moved to the West Palace, Emperor Qianlong was renamed King Zheng, and Empress Dowager Fu was renamed Empress Dowager Zhou.

古文：建隆元年春正月乙巳，大赦，改元，定有天下之号曰宋。
现代文：建隆元年春正月初五，大赦天下，改用新纪元，定国号为宋。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：赐内外百官军士爵赏，贬降者叙复，流配者释放，父母该恩者封赠。
现代文：赐给朝廷内外文武百官和军士爵位与奖赏，贬官降职的人恢复原职，发配流放的人一律释放，文武百官的父母亲按照应该得到的恩典加以封赠。
English: He bestowed knighthoods and awards on hundreds of civil and military officials and non-commissioned officers inside and outside the imperial court, reinstated those who had been demoted, released all those who had been exiled, and sealed gifts to the parents of civil and military officials in accordance with the grace they should receive.

古文：遣使遍告郡国。
现代文：派遣使臣通告全国各地州郡。
English: Dispatching envoys to notify states and counties across the country.

古文：丙午，诏谕诸镇将帅。
现代文：初六，太祖下诏通告各地将帅。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizu issued an imperial edict to all the generals.

古文：戊申，赐书南唐。
现代文：初八，赐给南唐书信。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a letter was sent to the Southern Tang Dynasty.

古文：赠韩通中书令，命以礼收葬。
现代文：追赠韩通为中书令，下令按照礼仪收硷安葬。
English: Han Tong was posthumously awarded the Order of the Rising Sun and ordered to be buried according to the etiquette.

古文：己酉，遣官告祭天地社稷。
现代文：初九，派遣官员祭告天地社翟。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, an official was dispatched to announce the end of the world.

古文：复安州、华州、兖州为节度。
现代文：恢复安州、华州、充州为节度州。
English: Anzhou, Huazhou and Chenzhou will be restored as festival provinces.

古文：辛亥，论翊戴功，以周义成军节度使、殿前都指挥使石守信为归德军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军副都指挥使，江宁军节度使、侍卫亲军马军都指挥使高怀德为义成军节度使、殿前副都点检，武信军节度使、侍卫亲军步军都指挥使张令铎为镇安军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军都虞候，殿前都虞候王审琦为泰宁军节度使、殿前都指挥使，虎捷右厢都虞候张光翰为江宁军节度使、侍卫亲军马军都指挥使，龙捷右厢都指挥使赵彦徽为武信军节度使，余领军者并进爵。
现代文：十一日，论定拥戴太祖为皇帝的有功人员，任命后周义成军节度使、殿前都指挥使石守信为归德军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军副都指挥使，江宁军节度使、侍卫亲军马军都指挥使高怀德为义成军节度使、殿前副都点检，武信军节度使、侍卫亲军步军都指挥使张令铎为镇安军节度使、侍卫亲军马步军都虞候，殿前都虞候王审琦为泰宁军节度使、殿前都指挥使，虎捷右厢都虞候张光翰为江宁军节度使、侍卫亲军马军都指挥使，龙捷右厢都指挥使赵彦徽为武信军节度使，其余统兵将领也一律提升爵位。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the meritorious personnel who supported the great-grandfather as the emperor were determined, and the following were appointed: Zhou Yicheng Army Festival Envoy, the commander of the palace front, Shi Shuxin as the returning German Army Festival Envoy, the deputy commander of the guards of the pro-army horse-marching army, Jiangning Army Festival Envoy, the commander of the guards of the pro-army horse-marching army, Gao Huaide as the Yicheng Army Festival Envoy, the deputy commander of the palace front, Wuxin Army Festival Envoy, the commander of the guards of the pro-army

古文：壬子，赐宰相、枢密、诸军校袭衣、犀玉带、鞍马有差。
现代文：十二日，赐给宰相、枢密使、禁军各部将领整套衣服、犀玉带、配好马鞍的骏马多少不等。
English: On the 12th, a complete set of clothes, a jade sash, and a horse with a well-fitted saddle were given to the prime minister, the confidential envoy, and the generals of the various departments of the Imperial Army.

古文：癸丑，放南唐降将周成等归国。
现代文：十三日，释放南唐投降的将领周成等人回国。
English: On the 13th, the general Zhou Cheng and others who had surrendered in Southern Tang were released and returned to China.

古文：乙卯，遣使分振诸州。
现代文：十五日，派遣使臣分别贩济各地州县。
English: On the 15th, envoys were dispatched to distribute aid to various prefectures and counties.

古文：丁巳，命周宗正郭祀周陵庙，仍以时祭享。
现代文：十七日，命令后周宗正少卿郭已祭祀后周的皇陵和太庙，仍旧按时祭祀供献。
English: On the seventeenth day, the order of Hou Zhou Zongzheng Shaoqing Guo has been to sacrifice Hou Zhou's imperial mausoleum and imperial temple, and the sacrifice is still on time.

古文：己未，宰相表请以二月十六日为长春节。
现代文：十九日，宰相上表请以二月十六日为长春节。
English: On the 19th, the Prime Minister requested that February 16th be celebrated as the Changchun Festival.

古文：癸亥，以周天雄军节度使、魏王符彦卿守太师，雄武军节度使王景守太保、太原郡王，定难军节度使、守太傅、西平王李彝殷守太尉，荆南节度使高保融守太傅，余领节镇者并进爵。
现代文：二十三日，任命后周天雄军节度使、魏王符彦卿守太师，雄武军节度使王景守太保、太原郡王，定难军节度使、守太傅、西平王李彝殷守太尉，荆南节度使高保融守太傅，其余领节度使的人一律提升了爵位。
English: On the 23rd, Zhou Tianxiong, Wei Wang Fuyanqing, Wang Jing, and Taiyuan Guo were appointed as the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty, the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty were appointed as the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty, the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty were appointed as the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty, the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty were appointed as the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty, the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty were appointed as the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty, the military envoys of the Qing Dynasty were appointed as the military envoys of the Qing

古文：甲子，赐皇弟殿前都虞候匡义名光义。
现代文：二十四日，赐皇弟殿前都虞候赵匡义改名为光义。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhao Kuangyi changed his name to Guangyi.

古文：己巳，立太庙。
现代文：二十九日，建立太庙。
English: On the 29th, the Great Temple was built.

古文：镇州郭崇报契丹与北汉军皆遁。
现代文：镇州郭崇报告契丹和北汉军队都退回去了。
English: Zhenzhou Guo Chong reported that both Khitan and Northern Han troops had retreated.

古文：二月乙亥，尊母南阳郡夫人杜氏为皇太后。
现代文：二月初五，太祖尊奉母亲南阳郡夫人杜氏为皇太后。
English: On the fifth day of the second month, the great-grandfather revered his mother, Nanyang County's Lady Du, as the empress dowager.

古文：以周宰相范质依前守司徒、兼侍中，王溥守司空、兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，魏仁浦为尚书右仆射、兼中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，枢密使吴廷祚同中书门下二品。
现代文：任命后周宰相范质和从前一样守司徒、兼侍中，王溥守司空、兼门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，魏仁浦为尚书右仆射、兼中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，枢密使吴廷柞同中书门下二品。
English: After the appointment of Zhou as prime minister, the standard was the same as before: Shou Shitou, concurrently serving as vice-premier; Wang Xi Shou Jiu, concurrently serving as vice-premier, concurrently serving as vice-premier; Wei Rimpu, concurrently serving as vice-premier, concurrently serving as vice-premier; Wu Tingya, concurrently serving as vice-premier, concurrently serving as vice-premier; Wei Rinpu, concurrently serving as vice-premier, concurrently serving as vice-premier, concurrently serving as vice-premier; and Wu Ting

古文：丙戌，长春节，赐群臣衣各一袭。
现代文：十六日，长春节，太祖赐给大臣们衣服各一套。
English: On the 16th, the Spring Festival, the great-grandfather gave each set of clothes to the ministers.

古文：三月乙巳，改天下郡县之犯御名、庙讳者。
现代文：三月初六，修改全国触犯太祖名字、已死皇帝名字的州县名称。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, the names of prefectures and counties that have violated the name of the great ancestor and the name of the dead emperor will be revised.

古文：丙辰，南唐主李景、吴越王钱俶遣使以御服、锦绮、金帛来贺。
现代文：十七日，南唐主李景、吴越王钱派遣使臣送来皇帝衣服、锦绮、金帛表示祝贺。
English: On the 17th, the Southern Tang Lords Li Jing and Wu Yue Wang Qian sent envoys to congratulate the emperor with clothes, brocade and gold brocade.

古文：宿州火，遣使恤灾。
现代文：宿州发生火灾，太祖派遣使者抚恤灾民。
English: When a fire broke out in Suzhou, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to offer condolences to the victims.

古文：壬戌，定国运以火德王，色尚赤，腊用戌。
现代文：二十三日，决定国运以火德王，颜色崇尚红色，年终岁末祭祀神的腊日用戊这一天。
English: On the 23rd, it was decided that the National Day would be celebrated with fire as the king and red as the color, and that the last day of the year to worship the gods would be on the same day.

古文：癸亥，命武胜军节度使宋延渥等率舟师巡江徼。
现代文：二十四日，太祖命令武胜军节度使宋延握等人率领水军在长江巡查。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taizu ordered the Wu Sheng Army to send Song Yanjie and others to lead the navy to patrol the Yangtze River.

古文：是春，均、房、商、洛鼠食苗。
现代文：这年春天，均州、房州、商州、洛阳田鼠吃庄稼幼苗。
English: In the spring of this year, the field mice in Junzhou, Fangzhou, Shangzhou and Luoyang began to eat crop seedlings.

古文：夏四月癸酉，窦俨上二舞十二乐曲名、乐章。
现代文：夏四月初四，窦俨进上两种舞蹈十二种乐曲的名称、乐章。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 4th month of the 6

古文：乙酉，幸玉津园。
现代文：十六日，太祖亲临玉津园。
English: On the 16th, the great-great-grandfather himself visited Tamatsuen.

古文：遣使分诣京城门，赐饥民粥。
现代文：派遣使臣分别到京城各门，赐给饥民粥。
English: Envoys were sent to each gate of the capital to distribute porridge to the hungry.

古文：丙戌，浚蔡河。
现代文：十七日，疏浚蔡河。
English: On the 17th, the Caihe River was dredged.

古文：癸巳，昭义军节度使李筠叛，遣归德军节度使石守信讨之。
现代文：二十四日，昭义军节度使李箔叛乱，太祖派遣归德军节度使石守信讨伐他。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the festival of the Shouyi army caused Li Fo to rebel, and the great-grandfather sent the festival of the German army to make Shi Shouxin fight him.

古文：五月己亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：庚子，遣昭化军节度使慕容延钊、彰德军节度使王全斌将兵出东道，与守信会讨李筠。
现代文：初二，太祖派遣昭化军节度使慕容延钊、彰德军节度使王全斌率领军队从东路出兵，和石守信会合讨伐李箔。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the great ancestor dispatched the Zhaohua army to the festival to make Murong Yanjun, and the German army to the festival to make Wang Quanbin lead the army to send troops from the east, and met with Shi Shouxin to fight against Li Foil.

古文：壬寅，窦俨上太庙舞曲名。
现代文：初四，窦俨进上太庙舞曲名称。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Dou Xuan Jin sang the name of the dance music of the Upper Temple.

古文：癸卯，石守信败李筠于长平。
现代文：初五，石守信在长平打败李箔。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Shi Shouxin defeated Li Foil in Changping.

古文：甲辰，命诸道进讨。
现代文：初六，下令各路兵马进军讨伐李箔。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he ordered soldiers and horses from all directions to march to cut down the linden trees.

古文：丙午，幸魏仁浦第视疾。
现代文：初八，太祖亲临魏仁浦的府第探视他的病情。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the great-grandfather personally visited Wei Rimpu's residence to visit his illness.

古文：己酉，西京作周六庙成，遣官奉迁。
现代文：十一日，西京洛阳建成后周六祖的宗庙，太祖派官员把后周六祖的神位由京城开封迁往西京安奉。
English: On the 11th day of the month, after the completion of the ancestral temple of the founder of the Western Capital Luoyang, the officials of the Great Patriarchate moved the deity of the founder of the Western Capital Luoyang from Beijing Kaifeng to West Beijing Anfeng.

古文：丁巳，诏亲征，以枢密使吴廷祚留守上都，都虞候光义为大内都点检，命天平军节度使韩令坤屯兵河阳。
现代文：十九日，太祖下诏亲征，派枢密使吴廷柞留守京城，都虞候赵光义任大内都点检，命令天平军节度使韩令坤屯兵河阳。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Taizu issued an imperial edict to personally recruit soldiers, and sent the imperial envoy Wu Tingya to stay in Beijing. The prefectural governor waited for Zhao Guangyi to be appointed to inspect the capital, and ordered the Tianping Army to send Han Lingkun's troops to Heyang.

古文：己未，发京师。
现代文：二十一日，太祖从京城出发。
English: On the twenty-first day, Taizu set out from Kyoto.

古文：丁卯，石守信、高怀德破筠众于泽州，禽伪节度范守图，杀北汉援兵之降者数千人，筠遁入泽州。
现代文：二十九日，石守信、高怀德在泽州打败李箔军队，擒获李箔所部节度范守图，杀掉北汉援救李箔而降宋的士兵几千人。李箔逃人泽州城。
English: On the 29th, Shi Shushin and Gao Huide defeated Li Foil's army in Zhezhou, captured the map of Li Foil's headquarters, and killed thousands of soldiers from Northern Han who had come to Li Foil's rescue and surrendered to the Song Dynasty. Li Foil fled to Zhezhou City.

古文：戊辰，王师围之。
现代文：三十日，宋军包围泽州城。
English: On the 30th, the Song army surrounded the city of Zezhou.

古文：六月癸酉，有星赤色，出心。
现代文：六月初五，有一颗红色星从心宿处出现。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month, a red star appeared from the innermost part of the heart.

古文：辛未，拔泽州，筠赴火死，命埋胔骼。释河东相卫融，禁剽掠。
现代文：辛未日，攻克泽州，李箔自焚而死。太祖下令掩埋死尸，释放北汉宰相卫融，禁止士兵抢劫掠夺。
English: On the eve of Xin's invasion of Zhezhou, Li Foil died of self-immolation. Emperor Taizu ordered the dead bodies to be buried, the Northern Han chancellor Wei Rong to be released, and soldiers to be prohibited from looting and plundering.

古文：甲申，免泽州今年租。
现代文：十六日，免征泽州今年的田租。
English: On the 16th, this year's field rent in Zezhou was exempted.

古文：有星赤色，出太微垣，历上相。
现代文：有一颗红色星从太微垣星处出现，经过上相星。
English: A red star appeared from the direction of the Taibugaki star, passing above the phase star.

古文：乙酉，伐上党。
现代文：十七日，讨伐上党。
English: On the 17th, the crusade against the party began.

古文：丁亥，筠子守节以城降，赦之。
现代文：十九日，李箔的儿子李守节在上党投降，太祖赦免了他的罪过。
English: On the 19th, Li Fo's son, Li Shoujie, surrendered to the upper party, and his great-grandfather pardoned his sins.

古文：上如潞。
现代文：太祖到潞州。
English: The great-grandfather went to Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，大赦，减死罪，免附潞三十里今年租，录阵殁将校子孙，丁夫给复三年。
现代文：二十三日，大赦天下，死罪犯人减刑，免除潞州城附近三十里内地区今年的田租，录用阵亡将士的子孙，随军丁夫免除三年摇役。
English: On the 23rd, the world was amnestied, the death penalty was commuted, the land rent for this year in the area within 30 miles around Zhangzhou City was exempted, the descendants of the fallen soldiers were hired, and the soldiers were exempted from the three-year service.

古文：甲午，永安军节度使折德扆破北汉沙谷砦。
现代文：二十六日，永安军节度使折德攻下北汉沙谷寨。
English: On the 26th, the Yong'an Army sent troops to Oride to capture Shaguzhai in Northern Han.

古文：秋七月戊申，上至自潞。
现代文：秋七月初十，太祖自潞州回到京城开封。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Taizu returned to the capital Kaifeng from Zhangzhou.

古文：壬子，幸范质第视疾。
现代文：十四日，太祖亲临范质府第探视他的病情。
English: On the 14th, the great-grandfather came to visit Fan Zi Fude to check on his condition.

古文：甲子，遣工部侍郎艾颖拜嵩、庆陵。
现代文：二十六日，派遣工部侍郎艾颖朝拜篙陵、庆陵。
English: On the 26th, Ai Ying, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, was dispatched to pay homage to Gongling and Qingling.

古文：乙丑，南唐进白金，贺平泽、潞。
现代文：二十七日，南唐进贡白金，祝贺平定泽州、潞州叛乱。
English: On the 27th, Nantang paid tribute in platinum and congratulated on the suppression of the rebellion in Zezhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：丁卯，南唐进乘舆御服物。
现代文：二十九日，南唐进贡皇帝乘坐的车子、衣服等物。
English: On the 29th, the car, clothes and other belongings of the Emperor of Southern Tang were taken away.

古文：八月戊辰朔，御崇元殿，行入阁仪。
现代文：八月初一，太祖到崇元殿，举行人阁仪式。
English: On the first day of August, the great ancestor went to Chongyuan Hall and held a memorial ceremony.

古文：辛未，遣郭飨周庙。
现代文：初四，太祖派遣郭已祭祀后周的太庙。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Guo was dispatched by the Great Ancestor to worship the Great Temple of Hou Zhou.

古文：壬申，复贝州为永清军节度。
现代文：初五，恢复贝州为永清军节度。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Baizhou was restored as the Yongqing Army Festival.

古文：甲戌，命宰相祷雨。
现代文：初七，命令宰相祈祷降雨。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered the prime minister to pray for rain.

古文：辛巳，以周武胜军节度使侯章为太子太师。
现代文：十四日，任命后周武胜军节度使侯章为太子太师。
English: On the 14th, after the appointment of Zhou Wusheng Army Festival, Hou Zhang was appointed as the prince of the prince.

古文：壬午，以光义领泰宁军节度，依前殿前都虞候。
现代文：十五日，任命赵光义领泰宁军节度，仍旧担任殿前都虞候。
English: On the 15th, Zhao Guangyi was appointed to lead the Taining Army Festival, and still served as the prefect of the palace.

古文：甲申，立琅琊郡夫人王氏为皇后。
现代文：十七日，太祖立琅监郡夫人王氏为皇后。
English: On the 17th, the great-grandfather made the wife of the county magistrate, Ms. Wang, the empress.

古文：戊子，南唐进贺平泽潞金银器、罗绮以千计。
现代文：二十一日，南唐进贡数以千计的金银器具、罗绮祝贺平定泽州、潞州叛乱。
English: On the 21st, Southern Tang paid tribute of thousands of gold and silver utensils, and Luo Gan congratulated on the suppression of the Zezhou and Zhangzhou rebellions.

古文：九月壬寅，昭义军节度使李继勋焚北汉平遥县。
现代文：九月初五，昭义军节度使李继勋火烧北汉平遥县。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, Li Jixun set fire to Pingyao County, North Hunan Province.

古文：癸卯，三佛齐国遣使贡方物。
现代文：初六，三佛齐国派遣使臣进贡当地特产。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the three Buddhist states sent envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：丙午，奉玉册谥高祖曰文献皇帝，庙号僖祖，高祖妣崔氏曰文懿皇后；曾祖曰惠元皇帝，庙号顺祖，曾祖妣桑氏曰惠明皇后；祖曰简恭皇帝，庙号翼祖，祖妣刘氏曰简穆皇后；皇考曰武昭皇帝，庙号宣祖。
现代文：初九，太祖手捧玉册给祖先加溢号，高祖父被尊为文献皇帝，庙号嘻祖，高祖母崔氏被尊为文爵皇后；曾祖父被尊为惠元皇帝，庙号顺祖，曾祖母桑氏被尊为惠明皇后；祖父被尊为简恭皇帝，庙号翼祖，祖母刘氏被尊为简穆皇后；父亲被尊为武昭皇帝，庙号宣祖。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the great-grandfather held a jade book in his hand to give the ancestors a blessing, the great-grandfather was honored as the Emperor of Literature, the temple name was He Zu, and the great-grandmother Cui was honored as the Empress of Wen Jiao; the great-grandfather was honored as the Emperor Hui Yuan, the temple name was Shun Zu, and the great-grandmother Sang was honored as the Empress Hui Ming; the grandfather was honored as the Emperor Jian Gong, the temple name was Wing Zu, and the grandmother Liu was honored as the Empress Jian Mu; the father was honored as

古文：己酉，幸宜春苑。
现代文：十二日，太祖亲临宜春苑。
English: On the 12th, the great-grandfather came to Yichun Yuan.

古文：中书舍人赵逢坐从征避难，贬房州司户参军。
现代文：中书舍人赵逢因跟随太祖征讨李箔时逃避艰险，被贬为房州司户参军。
English: Zhao Feng, a scholar of the Chinese classics, was relegated to the position of the steward of Fangzhou to join the army because he followed his great-grandfather to escape the hardships when he went to conquer Li Foil.

古文：己未，淮南节度李重进以扬州叛，遣石守信等讨之。
现代文：二十二日，淮南节度使李重进占据扬州发动叛乱，太祖派遣石守信等人率领军队讨伐他。
English: On the 22nd, the Huainan Festival made Li Chongjin occupy Yangzhou to launch a rebellion, and the great-grandfather sent Shi Shouxin and others to lead the army to fight him.

古文：甲子，归太原俘。
现代文：二十七日，归还北汉俘虏。
English: On the 27th, the Northern Han prisoners were returned.

古文：冬十月丁卯朔，赐内外文武官冬衣有差。
现代文：冬十月初一，太祖赏赐朝廷内外文武官员冬衣多少不等。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Emperor Taizu awarded winter coats to various civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：壬申，定县为望、紧、上、中、下，令三年一注。
现代文：初六，决定县分为望、紧、上、中、下几个等级，规定每三年注册一次。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, it was decided that counties would be divided into several grades, such as promising, tight, upper, middle and lower, and it was stipulated that they would be registered once every three years.

古文：壬午，河决厌次。
现代文：十六日，黄河在厌次决口。
English: On the 16th, the Yellow River was at the junction of the two rivers.

古文：乙酉，晋州兵马钤辖荆罕儒袭北汉汾州，死之。龙捷指挥石进二十九人坐不救弃市。
现代文：十九日，晋州兵马铃辖荆罕儒袭击北汉汾州，他死于这次战斗；龙捷指挥使石进等二十九人因没有去援救荆罕儒而在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 19th, Jing Hanru, who was under the command of Jinzhou's Terracotta Warriors and Horses, attacked Bozhou of the Northern Han Dynasty. He died in this battle. Long Jie commanded that 29 people, including Shi Jin, were beheaded in the city because they did not go to rescue Jing Hanru.

古文：丁亥，诏亲征扬州，以都虞候光义为大内都部署，枢密使吴廷祚权上都留守。
现代文：二十一日，太祖下诏亲征扬州，派都虞候赵光义为大内都部署，枢密使吴廷柞权上都留守。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Emperor Taizu personally conquered Yangzhou, dispatched the prefectural governor Zhao Guangyi to the capital, and sent the imperial envoy Wu Tingya to the capital.

古文：戊子，诏诸道长贰有异政、众举留请立碑者，委参军验实以闻。
现代文：二十二日，太祖下诏各个道的正副长官有优异政绩，百姓公举请求留任而立碑的人，由参军考察查实后上报朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, the great-grandfather issued an edict that the chiefs and vice-chiefs of various provinces should have outstanding political achievements. The people publicly requested that those who remained in office and erected the monument should be investigated by the military and reported to the imperial court.

古文：庚寅，发京师。
现代文：二十四日，太祖率军从京城出发。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taizu led his army out of the capital.

古文：十一月丁未，师傅扬州城，拔之，重进尽室自焚。
现代文：十一月十一日，宋军到达扬州城下，攻克扬州，李重进全家自焚而死。
English: On November 11th, the Song Army reached the outskirts of Yangzhou and conquered Yangzhou. Li Chongjin's entire family died of self-immolation.

古文：戊申，诛重进党，扬州平。
现代文：十二日，处死李重进的同党，扬州平定。
English: On the 12th, Li Shougin's fellow party members were executed, and Yangzhou was pacified.

古文：命诸军习战舰于迎銮，南唐主惧甚，其臣杜著、薛良因诡迹来奔，帝疾其不忠，斩著下蜀市，配良庐州牙校。
现代文：太祖命令各军在迎蛮操练战舰，南唐主十分恐惧。南唐臣僚杜著、薛良也因恐惧而用欺骗手段逃离南唐来投奔，太祖僧恨他们没有忠义之心，在下蜀闹市把杜著斩首，流放薛良为庐州牙校。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the armies to practice warships in welcoming the barbarians, and the Lord of Southern Tang was very afraid. The Southern Tang's ministers Du Zhe and Xue Liang also fled Southern Tang by deception due to fear. The great-grandfather monk hated them for their lack of loyalty, beheaded Du Zhe in the bustling city of Lower Shu, and exiled Xue Liang to Shanzhou Dental School.

古文：己酉，振扬州城中民人米一斛，十岁以下者半之。
现代文：十三日，贩济扬州城里百姓每人米一解，十岁以下的儿童减少一半。
English: On the 13th, the people in the city of Yangzhou, who sold rice, received one solution per person, and the number of children under the age of ten was reduced by half.

古文：胁隶为军者，赐衣屦遣还。
现代文：被李重进胁迫而当兵的人，太祖赐给他们衣服鞋子遣散回家。
English: Those who were coerced into becoming soldiers by Li Chongjin were given clothes and shoes and sent home.

古文：庚戌，给攻城役夫死者人绢三匹，复三年。
现代文：十四日，给因攻城服役而死的丁夫每人绢三匹，死者家属免除三年摇役。
English: On the 14th, three horses were given to each Dingfu who died as a result of serving in the siege of the city, and the families of the deceased were exempted from three years of military service.

古文：乙卯，南唐主遣使来犒师。
现代文：十九日，南唐主派遣使臣来慰劳征伐扬州的宋军。
English: On the 19th, the lord of Southern Tang dispatched an envoy to the Song army in Yangzhou.

古文：庚申，遣其子从镒来朝。
现代文：二十四日，南唐主派遣儿子李从锰来朝拜太祖。
English: On the 24th, the Lord of Southern Tang dispatched his son Li Zongmang to pay homage to Taizu.

古文：十二月己巳，驾还。
现代文：十二月初四，太祖起驾回京城。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth month, Taizu drove back to Beijing.

古文：丁亥，上至自扬。
现代文：二十二日，太祖从扬州回到京城开封。
English: On the 22nd, Taizu returned from Yangzhou to the capital Kaifeng.

古文：辛卯，泉州节度使留从效称藩。
现代文：二十六日，泉州节度使留从效归宋称臣。
English: On the 26th day of the month, the Quanzhou Festival was held, and Song Shoucheng returned to Quanzhou.

古文：二年春正月丙申朔，上诣太后宫门称庆。
现代文：建隆二年春正月初一，太祖到杜太后居住的宫门祝贺新春。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second spring of the second year of Jianlong, the great-grandfather went to the palace gate where the Dowager Empress Du lived to congratulate the new spring.

古文：庚子，占城国王遣使来朝。
现代文：初五，占城国王派遣使臣来朝拜。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, King Zhancheng sent envoys to pay homage.

古文：壬寅，幸造船务观习水战。
现代文：初七，太祖到造船务，检阅水军作战演习。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great-grandfather went to the shipyard to inspect the navy's combat exercises.

古文：戊申，以扬州行宫为建隆寺。
现代文：十三日，将扬州行宫改为建隆寺。
English: On the 13th, Yangzhou Gonggu was changed to Jianlong Temple.

古文：太仆少卿王承哲坐举官失实，责授殿中丞。
现代文：太仆少卿王承哲因举荐官员失实，贬为殿中承。
English: Wang Chengzhe, the servant of Shaoqing, was demoted to the position of palace junior secretary due to the recommendation officer's untruthfulness.

古文：壬子，商州鼠食苗，诏免赋。
现代文：十七日，商州田鼠吃庄稼幼苗，下诏免征赋税。
English: On the 17th, the Shangzhou vole ate crop seedlings, and was exempted from taxation.

古文：谓宰臣曰： 比命使度田，多邀功弊民，当慎其选，以见朕意。 
现代文：太祖对宰相说： 每次派遣使臣查看庄稼受灾程度，多数使臣只为自己邀功而使百姓受害，今后应当慎重选用使臣，以便让百姓了解我的爱民之意。 
English: The great-grandfather said to the chancellor: Every time I send an envoy to check the extent of the damage to the crops, most envoys only seek credit for themselves and make the people suffer. In the future, I should carefully select the envoys so that the people can understand my love for the people.

古文：丁巳，导蔡水入颍。
现代文：二十二日，疏导蔡水流人颖河。
English: On the 22nd, the diversion of Cai Shui Liu Ren Yinghe.

古文：己未，遣郭飨周庙。
现代文：二十四日，派郭已祭祀后周太庙。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the faction had already made a sacrifice to the late Zhou Taimiao.

古文：灵武节度使冯继业献马五百、橐驼百、野马十。
现代文：灵武节度使冯继业进献五百匹马、一百头骆驼、二匹野马。
English: The Lingwu Festival made Feng Jiye donate five hundred horses, one hundred camels and two wild horses.

古文：甲子，泽州刺史张崇诂坐党李重进弃市。
现代文：二十九日，泽州刺史张崇话因是李重进同党在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 29th, Zhang Chongyue, the assassin of Zhezhou, was beheaded in the city because he was a member of the same party as Li Chongjin.

古文：二月丙寅，幸飞山营，阅炮车。
现代文：二月初二，太祖到飞山营检阅炮车。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Taizu went to Feishan Camp to inspect the gun carriage.

古文：壬申，疏五丈河。
现代文：初八，疏浚五丈河。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Gojo River was dredged.

古文：癸酉，有司奏进士合格者十一人。荆南高保勖进黄金什器。
现代文：初九，经办部门报告有十一人进士合格。荆南高保歇进贡黄金器皿。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the administrative department reported that there were eleven qualified recruits. Jingnan High School paid tribute with gold utensils.

古文：甲戌，幸城南，观修水匮。
现代文：初十，太祖到城南，视察修建水医。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the great-grandfather went to the south of the city to inspect the construction of a water doctor.

古文：丁丑，南唐进长春节御衣、金带及金银器。
现代文：十三日，南唐进贡祝贺长春节的皇帝衣服、金带以及金银器皿。
English: On the 13th, the Southern Tang Dynasty paid tribute to congratulate the emperor's clothes, gold belts and gold and silverware for the Spring Festival.

古文：己卯，赐天雄军节度符彦卿粟。
现代文：十五日，太祖赐给天雄军节度使符彦卿粮食。
English: On the fifteenth day, the great-grandfather gave food to Fuyuhiko-kyo, the commander of the army.

古文：禁春夏捕鱼射鸟。
现代文：禁止春夏两季捕鱼射鸟。
English: It is forbidden to fish and shoot birds in spring and summer.

古文：己丑，定窃盗律。
现代文：二十五日，制定窃盗律。
English: On the 25th, the Theft Law was enacted.

古文：三月丙申，内酒坊火，酒工死者三十余人，乘火为盗者五十人，擒斩三十八人，余以宰臣谏获免。
现代文：三月初二，内酒坊失火，酒工三十多人被烧死，乘火灾之机进行偷盗的五十人，被抓住斩首的有三十八人，其余人因宰相进谏而免于死刑。
English: On the second day of the third month, a fire broke out in the inner tavern. More than thirty winemakers were burned to death, fifty people who took advantage of the fire to steal, and thirty-eight people who were caught beheading. The rest were spared the death penalty because the prime minister intervened.

古文：酒坊使左承规、副使田处岩以酒工为盗，坐弃市。
现代文：酒坊使左承规、副使田处岩因酒工行盗在闹市被斩首示众。
English: Sake brewer Zuo Chenggui and deputy brewer Tian Yuyan were publicly beheaded in the downtown area for stealing sake.

古文：闰月己巳，幸玉津园。谓侍臣曰： 沉湎非令仪，朕宴偶醉，恒悔之。 
现代文：闰三月初六，太祖到玉津园，对侍从大臣说： 沉酒于酒不是好榜样，我在宴席上偶然醉倒，常常为之后悔。 
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the leap year, the great-grandfather went to the Tamatsuen Garden and said to the minister's attendant: It is not a good example to indulge in alcohol. I accidentally got drunk at the banquet, and I often regret it.

古文：壬辰，南唐进谢赐生辰金器、罗绮。
现代文：壬辰日，南唐主进奉金器、罗绮用来回谢对他生日的赏赐。
English: On the day of Imjin, the lord of Southern Tang Dynasty presented a gold vessel, the Luo Jiao, as a reward for his birthday.

古文：丁丑，金、商、房三州饥，振之。
现代文：十四日，金、商、房三州发生饥荒，救济那里的百姓。
English: On the 14th, famine occurred in the three prefectures of Jin, Shang and Fang, and relief came to the people there.

古文：癸未，幸迎春苑宴射。
现代文：二十日，太祖到迎春苑举行宴会射箭。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, Taizu went to Yingchun Yuan to hold a banquet and play archery.

古文：夏四月癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。
English: Summer The first day of April, a solar eclipse.

古文：壬寅，诏郡国置前代帝王、贤臣陵冢户。
现代文：初十，诏令州县设置看守前代帝王、贤臣陵墓的陵家户。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued a decree to set up a mausoleum guarding the tombs of former emperors and wise men in Zhoushan County.

古文：己酉，无棣男子赵遇诈称皇弟，伏诛。
现代文：十七日，无棣县男子赵遇谎说自己是皇帝的弟弟，被处死刑。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Ying, a man from Muxian County, was sentenced to death for falsely claiming to be the emperor's younger brother.

古文：己未，商河县令李瑶坐赃杖死，左赞善大夫申文纬坐失觉察除籍。
现代文：二十七日，商河县令李瑶因犯赃罪被杖死，左赞善大夫申文纬因没能觉察李瑶赃罪被削官为民。
English: On the 27th, Shanghe County ordered Li Xuan to be beaten to death for committing the crime of embezzlement, and Zuo Zanzan Doctor Shen Wenwei was demoted from official to citizen for failing to notice Li Xuan's crime.

古文：庚申，班私炼货易盐及货造酒曲律。
现代文：二十八日，颁布私自炼盐贩售盐及私自贩酒造酒的法律。
English: On the 28th, the law on the sale of salt from private salt refiners and the sale of alcohol from private alcohol sellers was promulgated.

古文：五月癸亥朔，以皇太后疾，赦杂犯死罪已下。
现代文：五月初一，因皇太后病，赦免杂犯死罪以下囚犯。
English: On the first day of May, due to the illness of the Empress Dowager, she pardoned minor offenders and prisoners below the death penalty.

古文：乙丑，天狗堕西南。
现代文：初三，天狗星在西南方向坠落。
English: On the third day of the first month, the Tengu star fell in the southwest direction.

古文：丙寅，三佛齐国来献方物。
现代文：初四，三佛齐国来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, the three Buddhas of Qi Kingdom came to pay tribute to the local indigenous products.

古文：丁丑，以安邑、解两池盐给徐、宿、郓、济。
现代文：十五日，用解州安邑、解县两池盐供给徐州、宿州、军仔州、济州。
English: On the 15th, two ponds of salt from Jiezhou and Jie County were used to supply salt to Xuzhou, Suzhou, Junzai and Jeju.

古文：庚寅，供奉官李继昭坐盗卖官船弃市。
现代文：二十八日，供奉官李继昭因盗卖官船罪在闹市被斩首示众。
English: On the 28th, the sacrificial official Li Jizhao was beheaded in the middle of the city for the crime of stealing and selling the official ship.

古文：诏诸道邮传以军卒递。
现代文：诏令各道的邮传用军卒递送。
English: The imperial edict ordered that each province's mail should be delivered by soldiers.

古文：六月甲午，皇太后崩于滋德殿。
现代文：六月初二，皇太后在滋德殿逝世。
English: On the second day of June, the Empress Dowager passed away at Zide Palace.

古文：己亥，群臣请听政，从之。
现代文：初七，大臣们请求太祖治理国事，太祖听从了他们的请求。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the ministers asked the great-grandfather to govern the country, and the great-grandfather obeyed their request.

古文：庚子，以太后丧，权停时享。
现代文：初八，因太后逝世，暂停祭祀太庙。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, due to the death of the empress dowager, the rituals of the Imperial Temple were suspended.

古文：辛丑，见百官于紫宸殿门。壬子，祈雨。
现代文：初九，太祖在紫哀殿门接见百官。二十日，祈求降雨。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the great-grandfather received hundreds of officials at the gate of the Purple Shrine. On the 20th day, he prayed for rain.

古文：庚申，释服。
现代文：二十八日，太祖脱去丧服。
English: On the 28th, the great-grandfather took off his mourning clothes.

古文：秋七月壬戌，以皇太后殡，不受朝。
现代文：秋七月初一，因为杜太后殡，太祖不受朝拜。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, because of the funeral of the Dowager Empress Du, the great-grandfather was not worshipped.

古文：辛未，晋州神山县谷水泛出铁，方圆二丈三尺，重七千斤。
现代文：初十，晋州神山县山谷水中流出铁块，方圆二丈三尺，重七千斤。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, a piece of iron with a circumference of 2.3 meters and a weight of 7 kilograms flowed out of the valley water in Jinzhou Kamiyama County.

古文：壬申，以光义为开封府尹，光美行兴元尹。
现代文：十一日，太祖任命赵光义为开封府尹，赵光美行兴元府尹。
English: On the 11th day, the great ancestor appointed Zhao Guangyi as Kaifeng Fuyin and Zhao Guangmei as Xingyuan Fuyin.

古文：己卯，陇州进黄鹦鹉。
现代文：十八日，陇州进贡黄鹦鹉。
English: On the 18th, the Yellow Parrot was brought to Zhangzhou.

古文：八月壬辰朔，不视朝。
现代文：八月初一，太祖不上殿处理政事。
English: On the first day of August, the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to deal with political affairs.

古文：壬寅，诏诸大辟送所属州军决判。
现代文：十一日，太祖下诏罪至死刑的重犯送所属州军决判。
English: On the 11th day of the month, repeat offenders of crimes punishable by death were sent to the state army for sentencing.

古文：甲辰，南唐主李景死，子煜嗣，遣使请追尊帝号，从之。
现代文：十三日，南唐主李景逝世，儿子李煌即位当皇帝，派遣使臣请求太祖追尊李景皇帝称号，太祖同意了他的请求。
English: On the 13th day of the month, the lord of Southern Tang Dynasty, Li Jing, died, and his son, Li Huang, ascended to the throne as emperor. He sent an envoy to ask the great-grandfather to honor Li Jing with the title of emperor. The great-grandfather agreed to his request.

古文：己酉，执易定节度使、同平章事孙行友，削官勒归私第。
现代文：十八日，拘捕易定节度使、同平章事孙行友，削去官爵，押回私宅。
English: On the 18th, they arrested Yi Ding Jiedu, Tongping Zhang, Sun Xingyong, stripped him of his title and sent him back to his private home.

古文：辛亥，幸崇夏寺，观修三门。
现代文：二十日，太祖到崇夏寺，参观修建三门。
English: On the 20th, Taizu went to Chongxia Temple to visit the construction of the three gates.

古文：女直国遣使来朝献。
现代文：女直国派遣使臣来朝拜献礼物。
English: Lady Naokuni sent envoys to pay homage and offer gifts.

古文：大名府永济主簿郭顗坐赃弃市。
现代文：大名府永济县主簿郭领因贪污罪在闹市被斩首示众。
English: Guo Lian, the chief bookkeeper of Yongji County, Daming Prefecture, was beheaded in public for corruption.

古文：庚申，《周世宗实录》成。
现代文：二十九日，凋世宗实录修成。
English: On the 29th, the True Record of the Wuchang Sect was completed.

古文：九月壬戌朔，不御殿。
现代文：九月初一，太祖不上殿处理政事。
English: On the first day of September, the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to deal with government affairs.

古文：南唐遣使来进金银、缯彩。
现代文：南唐派遣使者来进贡金银、增彩。
English: The Southern Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to bring tribute in the form of gold and silver and to add color.

古文：甲子，契丹解利来降。
现代文：初三，契丹解利来投降。
English: On the third day of the first month, Khitan soldiers came to surrender.

古文：荆南节度使高保勖遣其弟保寅来朝。
现代文：荆南节度使高保歇派弟弟高保寅来朝拜太祖。
English: During the Southern Jing Festival, Gao Bao sent his younger brother Gao Bao Yin to pay homage to Taizu.

古文：戊子，遣使南唐赙祭。
现代文：二十七日，太祖派遣使者到南唐赠送财物以助办丧事并祭奠李景。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to Nantang to present gifts to help with the funeral and pay tribute to Li Jing.

古文：冬十月癸巳，南唐遣其臣韩熙载、田霖来会皇太后葬。
现代文：冬十月初三，南唐派遣使臣韩熙载、田霖来参加皇太后的葬礼。
English: At the beginning of October in winter, Southern Tang dispatched envoys Han Xizai and Tian Lin to attend the funeral of the empress dowager.

古文：丙申，遣枢密承旨王仁赡赐南唐礼物。
现代文：初六，太祖派遣枢密承旨王仁赡到南唐赏赐礼物。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：戊戌，禁边民盗塞外马。
现代文：初八，禁止边境地区的百姓偷盗塞外马匹。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, people in the border areas were prohibited from stealing horses from other regions.

古文：辛丑，丹州大雨、雹。
现代文：十一日，丹州下大雨冰雹。
English: On the 11th, heavy rain and hail fell in Danzhou.

古文：丙午，葬明宪皇太后于安陵。
现代文：十六日，将明宪皇太后安葬在安陵。
English: On the 16th, Empress Dowager Mingxian was buried in Anling.

古文：十一月辛酉朔，不视朝。
现代文：十一月初一，太祖不上朝处理政事。
English: On the first day of November, the great-grandfather did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：甲子，太后祔庙。
现代文：初四，把皇太后的神主牌位送人太庙祭祀。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the deity of the empress dowager was given to the temple for worship.

古文：己巳，幸相国寺，遂幸国子监。
现代文：初九，太祖到相国寺，于是又到了国子监。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, the great-grandfather went to Shokoku-ji Temple, whereupon he was sent to the provincial overseer.

古文：癸酉，沙州节度使来曹元忠、瓜州团练使曹延继等遣使献玉鞍勒马。
现代文：十三日，沙州节度使曹元忠、瓜州团练使曹延继等人派遣使者进献戴着用玉镶嵌的马鞍、马笼头的骏马。
English: On the 13th, Cao Yuanzhong, the delegate of the Shazhou Festival, Cao Yanji, the delegate of the Guazhou Rehearsal, and others sent envoys to present a horse wearing a jade-encrusted saddle and a horse's head.

古文：十二月壬申，回鹘可汗景琼遣使献方物。
现代文：十二月壬申日，回鹊可汗景琼派遣使者来进贡当地土产。
English: On December Jinshin Day, Hui Khan Jing Qiong sent an envoy to pay tribute to local local products.

古文：乙未，李继勋败北汉军，俘辽州刺史傅廷彦、弟勋来献。
现代文：初六，李继勋打败北汉军队，俘虏辽州刺史傅廷彦、他的弟弟傅勋献给朝廷。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Li Jixun defeated the North Han army, captured Liaozhou assassin Fu Tingyan, and presented his brother Fu Xun to the imperial court.

古文：辛丑，幸新修河仓。
现代文：十二日，太祖到新修河仓视察。
English: On the 12th, the great-grandfather went to Xinxiu Hecang to inspect it.

古文：庚戌，畋于近郊。
现代文：二十一日，太祖在近郊打猎。
English: On the twenty-first day, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：癸丑，遣使赐南唐、吴越马、羊、橐驼有差。
现代文：二十四日，太祖派遣使者赐给南唐、吴越马匹、羊、骆驼多少不等。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to give horses, sheep and camels to Nantang and Wuyue.

古文：三年春正月庚申朔，以丧不受朝贺。
现代文：建隆三年春正月初一，因皇太后丧不受百官朝贺新春。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Jianlong, due to the death of the empress dowager, the New Year's greetings of hundreds of officials were not accepted.

古文：己已，淮南饥，振之。
现代文：初十，淮南发生饥荒，救济那里的灾民。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, a famine occurred in Huainan, and relief began for the victims there.

古文：庚午，幸迎春苑宴射。
现代文：十一日，太祖到迎春苑宴会射箭。
English: On the 11th day, Taizu went to the Spring Festival Garden banquet to shoot arrows.

古文：甲戌，广皇城。
现代文：十五日，扩建皇城。
English: On the 15th, the expansion of the Imperial City began.

古文：诏郡国长吏劝民播种。
现代文：太祖诏令地方官员劝勉百姓春天播种。
English: Emperor Taizu ordered local officials to encourage people to sow seeds in the spring.

古文：丙子，瓜沙归义节度使曹元忠献马。
现代文：十七日，瓜沙归义节度使曹元忠进献马匹。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, in celebration of Guasa's return to righteousness, Cao Yuanzhong brought in horses for sacrifice.

古文：庚辰，女直国遣使只骨来献。
现代文：二十二日，女直国派遣使者只骨来献礼物。
English: On the 22nd, Lady Naokuni sent an emissary with a bone to offer as a gift.

古文：诏郡国不得役道路居民。
现代文：诏令各地不得役使道路居民。
English: The edict decreed that all regions must not exploit road residents.

古文：癸未，幸国子监。
现代文：二十五日，太祖到国子监视察。
English: On the 25th, Taizu went to Kuniko to observe.

古文：二月丙辰，复幸国子监，遂如迎春苑宴从官。
现代文：二月丙辰日，太祖再次视察国子监，于是又到迎春苑设宴款待陪从官员。
English: On February 4th, the great-great-grandfather once again inspected the state inspector, and then went to Yingchun Court to host a banquet for the accompanying officials.

古文：庚寅，诏文班官举堪为宾佐、令录者各一人，不当者比事连坐。
现代文：初二，诏令文班官员推荐可以担任宾佐、令录官各一名，举荐不当者比拟被推荐人所犯过失一并治罪。
English: On the second day of junior high school, a recommendation from an official of the diaoling class can serve as a guest assistant and a record officer, and those who make an inappropriate recommendation will be punished for the fault committed by the recommended person.

古文：甲午，诏自今百官朝对，须陈时政利病，无以触讳为惧。
现代文：初六，太祖下诏从现在起百官上朝奏对，必须讲述时政的对与错，不要因为触犯忌讳而惧怕。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizu decreed that from now on, all officials must tell the truth about the current political situation, and must not be afraid of breaking taboos.

古文：乙未，滑州节度使张建丰坐失火免官。
现代文：初七，滑州节度使张建丰因失火罪被免官。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Zhang Jianfeng was removed from office for the crime of misfiring.

古文：己亥，更定窃盗律。
现代文：十一日，改定窃盗律。
English: On the 11th, the theft law was revised.

古文：壬午，上谓侍臣曰： 朕欲武臣尽读书以通治道，何如？ 左右不知所对。
现代文：壬午日，太祖对侍臣说： 我希望武将们都读书以懂得治理国家的道理，怎么样了左右侍臣不知如何答对。
English: On the morning of the third day of the third month, the great-grandfather said to his retainers, "I hope the generals all read books so that they can understand the principles of governing the country. What's wrong, my retainers don't know how to answer correctly."

古文：甲寅，北汉寇潞、晋，守将击走之。
现代文：二十六日，北汉军队进犯潞州、晋州，守城将领把他们打走。
English: On the 26th, the Northern Han army invaded Bozhou and Jinzhou, and the garrison commander drove them away.

古文：三月戊午朔，厌次霣霜杀桑。
现代文：三月初一，厌次县下霜冻死桑树。
English: On the first day of March, a mulberry tree froze to death in Yanzhi County.

古文：壬戌，三佛齐国遣使来献。
现代文：初五，三佛齐国派遣使者来贡献礼物。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Three Buddhas and the State of Qi sent an envoy to contribute gifts.

古文：癸亥，祷雨。
现代文：初六，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, pray for rain.

古文：丁卯，幸太清观，遂幸开封尹后园宴射。
现代文：初十，太祖亲临太清观，于是又到开封府尹赵光义的后园举行宴会射箭。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the great-grandfather himself came to Taiching to watch, so he held a banquet in the backyard of Yin Zhao Guangyi in Kaifeng.

古文：己巳，大雨。
现代文：十二日，大雨。
English: On the 12th, it rained heavily.

古文：诏申律文谕郡国，犯大辟者刑部审覆。
现代文：太祖下诏申明法律条文通告各地州郡，犯有死罪的人送刑部复审。
English: The great-great-grandfather issued an edict affirming that the provisions of the law should be notified to all states and counties, and those who have committed capital crimes should be sent to the Criminal Law Department for review.

古文：乙亥，遣使赐南唐主生辰礼物。
现代文：十八日，太祖派遣使臣赐给南唐主李煌生日礼物。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to present a birthday gift to the Lord of Southern Tang, Li Huang.

古文：丁丑，女直国遣使来献。
现代文：二十日，女直国派遣使臣来贡献礼品。
English: On the 20th, Menaokuni sent an envoy to contribute gifts.

古文：丁亥，命徙北汉降人于邢、洺。
现代文：三十日，太祖下令把北汉投降的人迁徙到邢州、洛州。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Taizu ordered the people who had surrendered to the Northern Han to be moved to Zhangzhou and Luozhou.

古文：夏四月乙未，延州大雨雪，赵、卫二州旱。
现代文：夏四月初八，延州下大雨夹雪，赵州、卫州发生早灾。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of summer, heavy rain and sleet fell in Yanzhou, and early disasters occurred in Zhaozhou and Weizhou.

古文：丙申，宁州大雨雪，沟洫冰。
现代文：初九，宁州下大雨夹雪，沟渠水都结成冰。
English: In early September, heavy rain and sleet fell in Ningzhou, and the water in the ditches froze.

古文：戊戌，幸太清观。
现代文：十一日，太祖亲临太清观。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great-grandfather visited Taiching.

古文：庚子，回鹘阿督等来献方物。
现代文：十三日，回鹊阿督等人来进贡当地土产。
English: On the 13th, Hui Xuan and others came to pay tribute to the local local products.

古文：壬寅，丹州雪二尺。
现代文：十五日，丹州降雪深达二尺。
English: On the 15th, up to two feet of snow fell in Danzhou.

古文：乙巳，赠兄光济为邕王，弟光赞为夔王，追册夫人贺氏为皇后。
现代文：十八日，太祖追赠哥哥赵光济为琶王，弟弟赵光赞为夔王，追册夫人贺氏为皇后。
English: On the 18th, the great-grandfather posthumously presented his brother, Zhao Guangji, as the king of lutes, his brother, Zhao Guangzan, as the king of gongs, and his wife, He, as the empress.

古文：五月甲子，幸相国寺祷雨，遂幸迎春苑宴射。
现代文：五月初八，太祖亲自到相国寺祈祷降雨，于是又到迎春苑举行宴会射箭。
English: On the eighth day of the fifth month, Taizu himself went to Shokoku-ji Temple to pray for rain, and then went to Yingchun Yuan to hold a banquet and shoot arrows.

古文：乙亥，海州火。
现代文：十九日，海州发生火灾。
English: On the 19th, a fire broke out in Haizhou.

古文：开太行运路。
现代文：在太行山开辟运送物资的道路。
English: Build a road to transport supplies in Taihang Mountain.

古文：癸未，命使检诸州旱。
现代文：二十八日，命令使者检查河北各州的早情。
English: On the 28th, the envoy was ordered to inspect the situation in all the prefectures of Hebei.

古文：甲申，诏均户役，敢蔽占者有罪。
现代文：二十九日，太祖下诏均衡户役，敢于蔽占的人有罪。
English: On the 29th, the great-grandfather issued a decree to balance the household service, and those who dared to take possession were guilty.

古文：复幸相国寺祷雨。
现代文：太祖再次亲自到相国寺祈祷降雨。
English: Taizu went to Shokoku-ji Temple again to pray for rain.

古文：乙酉，广大内。
现代文：三十日，扩建皇宫。
English: On the 30th, the expansion of the Imperial Palace began.

古文：齐、博、德、相、霸五州自春不雨，以旱，减膳彻乐。
现代文：齐、博、德、相、霸五州从春天至今没有下雨，太祖因为早灾减少肴撰和停奏音乐。
English: It hasn't rained in the five prefectures of Qi, Bo, De, So and Ba since the spring. Due to the early disaster, Taizu has reduced the number of dishes and stopped playing music.

古文：六月辛卯，振宿州饥。
现代文：六月初五，贩济宿州饥荒。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, the vendor Jisukushu was starving.

古文：癸巳，吴廷祚以雄武军节度使罢。
现代文：初七，任命吴廷柞为雄武军节度使，免去他的枢密使职务。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he appointed Wu Tingtao as the military envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and relieved him of his position as a confidential envoy.

古文：乙未，赐酒国子监。
现代文：初九，太祖赐酒给国子监。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the great-grandfather gave sake to the provincial overseer.

古文：丁酉，幸太清观。
现代文：十一日，太祖亲临太清观。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great-grandfather visited Taiching.

古文：己亥，减京畿、河北死罪以下。
现代文：十三日，京城附近、河北地区犯有死罪以下罪行的囚犯减刑。
English: On the 13th, prisoners who committed crimes below the death penalty in the vicinity of Beijing and Hebei Province had their sentences reduced.

古文：壬寅，京师雨。
现代文：十六日，京城下雨。
English: On the 16th, it rained in Kyoto.

古文：壬子，蕃部尚波于等争采造务，以兵犯渭北，知秦州高防击走之。
现代文：二十六日，蕃部尚波于等人来争采造务，率军队进犯渭北，秦州知州高防把他们打败赶走。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Shangbo Yu and others from Hebei Province came to compete for mining and construction work, led the army to invade northern Hebei Province, and defeated and drove them away from Qinzhou Chizhou High-Defense Zone.

古文：乙卯，幸迎春苑宴射。
现代文：二十九日，太祖亲临迎春苑举行宴会射箭。
English: On the 29th, the great-grandfather came to the Spring Festival Garden to hold an archery banquet.

古文：黄陂县有象自南来食稼。
现代文：黄破县有大象从南面来吃庄稼。
English: An elephant came from the south to eat crops in Huangba County.

古文：秋七月庚申，南唐遣其臣翟如璧谢赐生辰礼，贡金银、锦绮千万。
现代文：秋七月初五，南唐派遣大臣翟如璧谢太祖赐给南唐主李煌的生辰礼物，进贡金银、锦绮以千万计。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Southern Tang dispatched the minister Zou Ru Bi Xie Taizu to give the birthday gift to the Lord of Southern Tang, Li Huang. The tribute of gold, silver and brocade amounted to tens of millions.

古文：壬戌，放南唐降卒弱者数千人归国。
现代文：初七，释放南唐投降士兵中几千名体弱的人回国。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, several thousand weak soldiers who had surrendered in Southern Tang were released and returned to China.

古文：乙丑，免舒州菰蒲新税。
现代文：初十，免征舒州菱白香蒲新税。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Shuzhou white cattails are exempt from the new tax.

古文：丁卯，潞州大雨、雹。
现代文：十二日，潞州下大雨夹冰雹。
English: On the 12th, there was heavy rain and sleet in Zhangzhou.

古文：索内外军不律者配沙门岛。
现代文：搜索京城内外军队中不守法的人流放到沙门岛。
English: Search for law-breakers among the military inside and outside the capital and exile them to Shamen Island.

古文：己卯，北汉捉生指挥使路贵等来降。
现代文：二十四日，北汉捉生指挥使路贵等人来投降。
English: On the 24th, the Northern Han's commanding officer sent Rugui and others to surrender.

古文：辛巳，遣从臣十人检河北旱。
现代文：二十六日，太祖派遣十名从臣检查河北早情。
English: On the 26th, Taizu sent ten of his vassals to inspect the situation in Hebei.

古文：癸未，兖、济、德、磁、洺五州蝝。
现代文：二十八日，充、济、德、磁、洛五州没有生翅膀的小蝗虫吃庄稼。
English: On the 28th, small wingless locusts from the five prefectures of Chong, Ji, De, Magong and Luo ate crops.

古文：八月癸巳，蔡河务纲官王训等四人坐以糠土杂军粮，磔于市。
现代文：八月初八，蔡河务纲官王训等四人因将糠土掺杂进军粮中，在闹市被分尸。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, four people, including Wang Xun, the Caihe program officer, were dismembered in the downtown area for mixing rammed earth into the military rations.

古文：乙未，用知制诰高锡言，诸行赂获荐者许告讦，奴婢邻亲能告者赏。
现代文：初十，采用知制浩高锡建议，凡是行贿获得推荐的人允许知情者揭发检举，奴婶邻居亲属能揭发检举的给予奖赏。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, we will adopt the recommendation of Hao Gaoxi, who suggested that anyone who pays a bribe and gets a recommendation should allow those in the know to expose the report, and the relatives of the neighbors can reward the report.

古文：诏注诸道司法参军皆以律疏试判。
现代文：太祖下诏凡按资叙授各道司法参军时都先要用正律和疏出题考试判案。
English: According to the edict of the great-great-grandfather, the judges of the courts of justice in each province should first use the regular law and the examination to judge the case.

古文：诏尚书吏部举书判拔萃科。
现代文：诏令尚书吏部奏上恢复书判拔萃科的条文。
English: He also ordered the book division to restore the provisions of the book awarding system.

古文：九月庚午，吐蕃尚波于等归伏羌县地。
现代文：九月十五日，吐蕃尚波于等人归还伏羌县土地。
English: On September 15, Shangbo Yu and others from Tubo returned the land in Fuxi County.

古文：壬申，修武成王庙。
现代文：十七日，修建武成王庙。
English: On the 17th, the construction of the King Wucheng Temple began.

古文：丙子，占城国来献。
现代文：二十一日，占城国来进献礼物。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the city-states came to present gifts.

古文：禁伐桑、枣。
现代文：禁止砍伐桑树、枣树。
English: It is prohibited to cut down mulberry and jujube trees.

古文：冬十月乙酉朔，赐百官冬服有差。
现代文：冬十月初一，太祖赐给百官冬天衣服多少不等。
English: On the first day of winter in October, the great-grandfather gave winter clothes to hundreds of officials.

古文：丙戌，幸太清观，遂幸造船务，观习水战。
现代文：初二，太祖亲临太清观，于是又前往造船务，检阅水战演习。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, the great-grandfather himself came to Taiching to watch, so he also went to the shipbuilding department to review the water war exercises.

古文：己亥，幸岳台，命诸军习骑射，复幸玉津园。
现代文：十五日，太祖到岳台，命令各军操练骑马射箭，太祖又到玉津园。
English: On the fifteenth day, the great-grandfather went to Yue Tai and ordered the troops to practice horse riding and archery. The great-grandfather also went to Yu Jin Yuan.

古文：辛丑，以枢密副使赵普为枢密使。
现代文：十七日，任用枢密副使赵普为枢密使。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Pu, Deputy Privy Envoy, was appointed as Privy Envoy.

古文：辛亥，畋近郊。
现代文：二十七日，太祖到近郊打猎。
English: On the 27th, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：十一月癸亥，禁奉使请托。
现代文：十一月初九，禁止奉命出使各道时私相嘱托。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month of the year, it was forbidden to send envoys to other provinces.

古文：县令考课以户口增减为黜陟。
现代文：考核县令政绩以辖区百姓户口增减为升降依据。
English: The assessment of the county's political performance is based on the increase and decrease of the people's household registration in the jurisdiction.

古文：丙寅，南唐遣其臣顾彝来朝。
现代文：十二日，南唐派遣使臣顾彝来朝拜。
English: On the 12th, the Southern Tang Dynasty sent the envoy Gu Xi to pay homage to the emperor.

古文：丙子，三佛齐国遣使李丽林等来献，高丽国遣李兴祐等来朝。
现代文：二十二日，三佛齐国派遣使臣李丽林等人来进献礼物，高丽国派李兴等人来朝拜。
English: On the 22nd, the Three Buddhas of Qi sent envoy Li Lilin and others to present gifts, and the State of Korea sent Li Xing and others to pay homage.

古文：己卯，畋于近郊。
现代文：二十五日，太祖在近郊打猎。
English: On the 25th, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：壬午，赐南唐建隆四年历。
现代文：二十八日，赐给南唐建隆四年历。
English: On the 28th, a four-year calendar was given to Jianlong of Southern Tang.

古文：十二月丙戌，诏县置尉一员，理盗讼。置弓手，视县户为差。
现代文：十二月初二，太祖下诏让各县设置县尉一名，主管盗窃诉讼；设置弓手，弓手的数量根据各县户数多少不等。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to have each county appoint a county lieutenant to be in charge of theft litigation; and to appoint archers, the number of archers varying according to the number of households in each county.

古文：戊戌，蒲、晋、慈、隰、相、卫六州饥，振之。
现代文：十四日，蒲、晋、慈、曝、相、卫六州发生饥荒，救济灾区百姓。
English: On the 14th, famine occurred in the six prefectures of Pu, Jin, Ci, Xing, Xiang, and Wei, and relief was sent to the people in the disaster areas.

古文：庚子，班捕盗令。
现代文：十六日，颁布捕盗令。
English: On the 16th, a theft arrest order was issued.

古文：甲辰，衡州刺史张文表叛。
现代文：二十日，衡州刺史张文表叛乱。
English: On the 20th, Hengzhou assassin Zhang Wenshu led a rebellion.

古文：是岁，周郑王出居房州。
现代文：这一年，周郑王离开京城去房州居住。
English: That year, King Zhou Zheng left Beijing to live in Fangzhou.

古文：乾德元年春正月甲寅朔，不御殿。
现代文：乾德元年春正月初一，太祖不上殿听政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Qiande era, the great-grandfather did not go to the palace to listen to politics.

古文：乙卯，发关西乡兵赴庆州。
现代文：初二，征发关西乡兵前往庆州。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Kansai villagers were conscripted and sent to Gyeongju.

古文：丁巳，修畿内河堤。
现代文：初四，修筑京城开封辖区内的黄河河堤。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, build the Yellow River embankment in the area under the jurisdiction of Beijing Kaifeng.

古文：己未，遣使赐南唐、吴越马、橐驼、羊有差。
现代文：初六，派遣使臣赐给南唐、吴越马匹、骆驼、羊多少不等。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, he sent envoys to give horses, camels and sheep to Nantang and Wuyue.

古文：庚申，遣山南东道节度使慕容延钊率十州兵以讨张文表。
现代文：初七，太祖派遣山南东道节度使慕容延钊率领十州军队去讨伐张文表。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great-grandfather sent the Shannan Host Festival to make Murong Yanqi lead the ten-state army to fight against Zhang Wenchao.

古文：乙丑，幸造船务，观造战船。
现代文：十二日，太祖亲临造船务，视察建造战船。
English: On the 12th, the great-grandfather himself came to the shipyard to inspect the construction of the warship.

古文：甲戌，诏荆南发水卒三千应延钊于潭。
现代文：二十一日，太祖诏令荆南征发三千名水军去潭州接受慕容延钊指挥。
English: On the twenty-first day, Emperor Taizu ordered Jingnan to recruit and send three thousand sailors to Tanzhou to accept the command of Murong Yanqi.

古文：己卯，女直国遣使来献。
现代文：二十六日，女直国派遣使者来进献礼物。
English: On the 26th, Lady Naokuni sent an envoy to present gifts.

古文：二月壬辰，周保权将杨师璠枭文表于朗陵市。
现代文：二月初九，周保权的将领杨师在朗陵闹市把张文表斩首示众。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the year, Zhou Baoquan's general Yang Shizhi beheaded Zhang Wencai in downtown Langling.

古文：甲午，慕容延钊入荆南，高继冲请归朝，得州三、县十七。
现代文：十一日，慕容延钊进人荆南，高继冲请求归顺朝廷，得到三个州、十七个县。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Murong Yanxun entered Jingnan, and Gao Jichong requested to submit to the imperial court, and obtained three states and seventeen counties.

古文：乙未，克潭州。
现代文：十二日，攻克潭州。
English: On the 12th, they conquered Tamzhou.

古文：辛亥，澶、滑、卫、魏、晋、绛、蒲、孟八州饥，命发廪振之。
现代文：二十八日，擅、滑、卫、魏、晋、绛、蒲、孟八州发生饥荒，太祖命令开仓救济灾民。
English: On the 28th, famine occurred in the eight prefectures of Shanzhou, Nanning, Wei, Wei, Jin, Handan, Pu and Meng, and the great-grandfather ordered the opening of warehouses to help the victims.

古文：三月辛未，幸金凤园习射，七发皆中。
现代文：三月十九日，太祖到金凤园练习射箭，七箭都中靶子。
English: On March 19th, Taizu went to Jinfeng Park to practice archery, and all seven arrows hit the target.

古文：符彦卿等进马称贺，乃遍赐从臣名马、银器有差。
现代文：符彦卿等人进献马匹表示祝贺，太祖于是遍赏随从大臣名马、银器多少不等。
English: Fuhiko-kyo and others presented horses to express their congratulations, and the great-grandfather then rewarded the minister with famous horses and silverware.

古文：壬申，高继冲籍其钱帛刍粟来上。
现代文：二十日，高继冲登记荆南所有的钱财丝帛、粮食草料来上报给太祖。
English: On the 20th, Gao Jichong registered all of Jingnan's money, wealth, silk, grain and herbs to report to the great ancestor.

古文：癸酉，班新定律。
现代文：二十一日，颁布新定的法律。
English: On the 21st, the new law was promulgated.

古文：戊寅，慕容延钊破三江口，下岳州，克复朗州，湖南平。得州十四、监一、县六十六。
现代文：二十六日，慕容延钊攻破三江口，攻克岳州，收复朗州，湖南平定，得到十四个州、一个监、六十六个县。
English: On the 26th, Murong Yanqi broke through the mouth of the Sanjiang River, conquered Yuezhou, recovered Lanzhou, and pacified Hunan, gaining fourteen provinces, one prefecture, and sixty-six counties.

古文：夏四月，旱。
现代文：夏四月，发生早灾。
English: In April, there was a drought.

古文：甲申，遍祷京城祠庙，夕雨。
现代文：初三，在京城所有的祠观庙宁祈祷降雨，傍晚时分下雨。
English: On the third day of the new year, all the temples and shrines in Beijing prayed for rain, and it rained in the evening.

古文：减荆南朗州、潭州管内死罪一等，卤掠者给主。
现代文：荆南朗州、潭州管辖内的死罪囚犯减刑一等，抢劫掠夺的财物归还原主。
English: The death penalty prisoners under the jurisdiction of Langzhou and Tanzhou in the south of Jing Province had their sentences reduced to the first class, and the robbed and plundered property was returned to the original owners.

古文：乙酉，遣使祭南岳。
现代文：初四，太祖派遣使者祭祀南岳衡山。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Taizu sent an emissary to offer a sacrifice to Nangaku Hengshan.

古文：丁亥，幸国子监，遂幸武成王庙，宴射玉津园。
现代文：初六，太祖亲临国子监，于是又去了武成王庙，在玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, the great-grandfather personally visited the provincial overseer, so he also went to the King Wucheng Temple and held a banquet for archery in the Jade Garden.

古文：庚寅，出内钱募诸军子弟凿习战池。
现代文：初九，太祖拿出内库钱币招募各军的子弟挖凿练习水战的池塘。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Taizu took out coins from the treasury to recruit the children of each army to dig and drill a pond for practicing water fights.

古文：辛卯，《建隆应天历》成，御制序。
现代文：初十，建隆应天厉编成，太祖亲自作序。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Jianlong compiled it according to Tianli, and the great-grandfather personally made the preface.

古文：壬辰，赏湖南立功将士。
现代文：十一日，赏赐平定湖南的立功将士。
English: On the 11th day of the month, awards were given to the soldiers who contributed to the pacification of Hunan Province.

古文：癸巳，幸玉津园。
现代文：十二日，太祖到玉津园。
English: On the twelfth day, Taizu went to Tamatsuen.

古文：丙申，兵部郎中曹匪躬弃市，海陵盐城屯田副使张蔼除名，并坐不法。
现代文：十五日，兵部郎中曹匪躬在闹市被斩首示众，海陵、盐城屯田副使张蔼除去官籍，都是因为违法犯罪。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Cao Gangwu, a middle-ranking official of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was beheaded in a public demonstration in the downtown area, and Zhang A, the vice-envoy of Hailing and Yancheng Tunden, was stripped of his official registration, all for illegal crimes.

古文：庚子，荆南节度使高继冲进助宴金银、罗纨、柱衣、屏风等物。
现代文：十九日，荆南节度使高继冲进贡助宴的金银、罗绮、柱衣、屏风等物品。
English: On the 19th, the Jingnan Festival made Gao Jizhe rush into the tribute banquet of gold and silver, worms, jackets, screens and other items.

古文：癸卯，辰、锦、叙等州归顺。
现代文：二十二日，辰、锦、叙等州归顺宋朝。
English: On the 22nd, the states of Chen, Jin and Xiu were ceded to the Song Dynasty.

古文：甲辰，诏疏凿三门。
现代文：二十三日，太祖下诏开凿疏浚黄河三门。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to dredge three sections of the Yellow River.

古文：禁泾、原、邠、庆等州补蕃人为边镇将。
现代文：禁止径、原？庆等州补充少数民族人担任镇守边境的将领。
English: Provinces such as Banning and Hara Gyeong have supplemented ethnic minorities to serve as border guard generals.

古文：夏西平王李彝兴献犛牛一。
现代文：夏西平王李彝兴进献一头耗牛。
English: Xia Xiping King Li Yuxing presented a cow.

古文：乙巳，幸玉津园，阅诸军骑射。
现代文：二十四日，太祖亲临玉津园，检阅各军骑马射箭。
English: On the 24th, the great-grandfather himself came to the Tamatsu Garden to inspect the troops riding horses and shooting arrows.

古文：丙午，免湖南茶税，禁陕州盐井。
现代文：二十五日，免征湖南的茶税，禁止峡州盐井。
English: On the 25th, Hunan's tea tax was exempted, and salt wells in Gorges were banned.

古文：辛亥，贷澶州民种食。
现代文：三十日，借贷种子粮食给擅州百姓。
English: On the 30th, the loaned seed grain was given to the people of Hengzhou.

古文：五月壬子朔，祷雨京城。
现代文：五月初一，太祖在京城祈祷降雨。
English: On the first day of May, Taizu prayed for rain in the capital.

古文：甲寅，遣使祷雨岳渎。
现代文：初三，太祖派遣使臣到五岳四读祈祷降雨。十四日，扩建皇宫。
English: On the third day of the first month, Emperor Taizu sent envoys to Mt. Wutake to pray for rain on the fourth day of the fourth month. On the 14th day, the imperial palace was expanded.

古文：乙丑，广大内。庚午，给荆南管内符印。
现代文：十九日，把符印发给荆南管辖内的官吏。
English: On the 19th, the seal was issued to officials within the jurisdiction of Jingnan.

古文：癸酉，幸玉津园。
现代文：二十二日，太祖到玉津园。
English: On the 22nd, Taizu went to Tamatsuen.

古文：六月乙酉，免潭州诸县无名配敛。
现代文：六月初五，免除潭州所属各县的无名摊派聚敛。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, all counties belonging to Tanzhou were exempted from anonymous apportionment.

古文：壬辰，暑，罢营造，赐工匠衫履。
现代文：十二日，天气大热，停止营造工程，赐给工匠衣衫鞋子。
English: On the twelfth day, the weather was very hot, the construction project was stopped, and the craftsmen were given shirts and shoes.

古文：乙未，诏荆南兵愿归农者听。
现代文：十五日，太祖下诏：原荆南士兵愿意回乡务农的可以回去。
English: On the 15th, the great-grandfather issued an edict: if the original Jingnan soldiers were willing to return to the countryside to work in agriculture, they could go back.

古文：丙申，诏历代帝王三年一飨，立汉光武、唐太宗庙。
现代文：十六日，诏令历代帝王每三年祭献一次，建立汉光武帝、唐太宗庙。
English: On the 16th, the emperor ordered the emperors to offer sacrifices once every three years, establishing the Han Guangwu Emperor and Tang Taizong Temple.

古文：己亥，澶、濮、曹、绛蝗，命以牢祭。
现代文：十九日，擅州、攫州、曹州、绛州发生蝗灾，太祖命令用牛羊猪三牲祭祀。
English: On the 19th, locust plagues occurred in Shanzhou, Zhangzhou, Caozhou, and Zhangzhou. Grandfather ordered the sacrifice of three animals: cattle, sheep, and pigs.

古文：庚子，百官三上表请举乐，从之。
现代文：二十日，百官三次上表请求太祖同意奏乐，太祖同意了他们的请求。
English: On the 20th day, the officials went to the table three times to ask the great-grandfather to agree to play the music, and the great-grandfather agreed to their request.

古文：减左右仗千牛员。
现代文：太祖减少左右的禁卫官员。
English: The great-great-grandfather reduced the number of palace guards.

古文：丙午，雨。
现代文：二十六日，下雨。
English: On the 30th, it rained.

古文：诏蜡祀，庙、社皆用戌腊一日。
现代文：太祖下诏年终祭祀百神的腊祭、庙祭、社祭都在举行腊祭的戊日这一天进行。
English: According to Emperor Taizu's edict, the wax festival, the temple festival, and the shrine festival for the year-end worship of the hundred gods were all held on the day of the wax festival.

古文：己酉，命习水战于新池。
现代文：二十九日，太祖命令在新挖成的水池中，演习水战。
English: On the 29th, Taizu ordered to practice water fights in a newly dug pool.

古文：秋七月辛亥朔，定州县所置杂职、承符、厅子等名数。
现代文：秋七月初一，规定州县所设置的杂职、承符、厅子等人数。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the number of miscellaneous duties, bearers, halls, etc. set up by prefectures and counties shall be increased.

古文：甲寅，以湖湘殁王事靳彦朗男承勋等三十人补殿直。
现代文：初四，将平定湖湘时战死的靳彦朗的儿子靳承勋等三十人补为殿直。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, thirty people, including Zou Chengxun, the son of Zou Yanlang, who died in the battle to pacify Hunan, were added to the line of succession.

古文：丙辰，幸新池，赐役夫钱，遂幸玉津园。
现代文：初六，太祖到新挖成的水池，赐给役夫钱，于是又到玉津园。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the great-grandfather went to the newly-dug pool, gave the attendant money, and then went to the Tamatsuen garden.

古文：丁巳，安国军节度使王全斌等率兵入太原境，以俘来献，给钱米以释之。
现代文：初七，安国军节度使王全斌等人率领军队进人太原境内，把俘虏献给朝廷，太祖赐给俘虏钱和米后释放他们。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the An Guo Jun Festival made Wang Quanbin and others lead the army into the territory of Taiyuan, presented the prisoners to the imperial court, and the great-grandfather gave the prisoners money and rice to release them.

古文：己未，诏民有疾而亲属遗去者罪之。
现代文：初九，太祖下诏百姓如有生病而亲属把他抛弃以犯罪论处。
English: In the early 9th century, Emperor Taizu decreed that if a commoner fell ill and his relatives abandoned him, he would be punished as a criminal.

古文：癸亥，湖南疫，赐行营将校药。
现代文：十三日，湖南发生瘟疫，太祖赐药给行营将校。
English: On the 13th, a plague broke out in Hunan, and the great-grandfather gave medicine to the marching officers.

古文：丁卯，幸武成王庙，遂幸新池，观习水战。
现代文：十七日，太祖亲临武成王庙，于是又去了新挖的水池，检阅水战演习。
English: On the seventeenth day, the great-grandfather personally visited the temple of King Wucheng, and then went to the newly dug pool to review the water war exercises.

古文：己巳，朗州贼将汪端寇州城，都监尹重睿击走之。
现代文：十九日，朗州贼将汪端进犯州城，都监尹重睿把他们打败赶走。
English: On the 19th, the Langzhou bandits invaded the state capital with Wangduan, and the prefectural governor Yin Chongrui defeated them and drove them away.

古文：诏免荆南管内夏税之半。
现代文：太祖下诏免征荆南全境的一半夏税。
English: The great-grandfather issued an edict exempting half of Jingnan's entire territory from the summer tax.

古文：甲戌，释周保权罪。
现代文：二十四日，免究周保权的罪行。
English: On the 24th, Zhou Bao Quan's crime was exempted from investigation.

古文：乙亥，诏缮朗州城，免其管内夏税。
现代文：二十五日，诏命修缮郎州城，免征朗州全境的夏税。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict ordered the renovation of Lanzhou City, exempting the entire territory of Lanzhou from the summer tax.

古文：丁丑，分命近臣祷雨。
现代文：二十七日，太祖分别命令身边亲近大臣祈祷降雨。
English: On the 27th, the great-grandfather separately ordered the ministers around him to pray for rain.

古文：己卯，班《重定刑统》等书。
现代文：二十九日，颁布重定刑纷等书。
English: On the 29th, the resentencing and other documents were promulgated.

古文：八月壬午，殿前都虞候张琼以陵侮军校史珪、石汉卿等，为所诬谮，下吏，琼自杀。
现代文：八月初三，殿前都虞候张琼因欺侮军校史自石汉卿等人，被他们所诬陷，交法官审讯，张琼自杀。
English: On the third day of August, Zhang Qiong, the former prefect of the palace, was framed by Shi Hanqing and others for bullying a military school historian, and was put on trial by a judge. Zhang Qiong committed suicide.

古文：丙戌，遣给事中刘载朝拜安陵。
现代文：初七，太祖派遣给事中刘载朝拜安陵。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Liu Zai paid a visit to the An Mausoleum.

古文：丁亥，王全斌攻北汉乐平县，降之。
现代文：初八，王全斌攻打北汉乐平县，乐平县投降。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wang Quanbin attacked Leping County in Northern Han, and Leping County surrendered.

古文：辛卯，以乐平县为平晋军，降卒千八百人为效顺军人，赐钱帛。
现代文：十二日，把乐平县改为平晋军，一千八百名投降士兵编为效顺军，赐给每个人钱帛。
English: On the 12th, the Leping County was changed to the Pingjin Army, and 1,800 surrendered soldiers were organized into the Heshun Army, and each person was given money.

古文：壬辰，诏九经举人下第者再试。
现代文：十三日，诏仇经举人落榜以后允许再次参加考试。
English: On the 13th day of the month, after the candidates were ranked, they were allowed to take the exam again.

古文：癸巳，女直国遣使献名马。
现代文：十四日，女直国派遣使者进献名马。
English: On the 14th, Lady Naokuni sent an envoy to present the famous horse.

古文：蠲登州沙门岛民税，令专治船渡马。
现代文：免去登州沙门岛百姓赋税，命令他们专门修造船只渡送马匹。
English: He exempted the people of Tenzhou Shamen Island from paying taxes and ordered them to build special ships to transport horses.

古文：丙申，北汉静阳十八砦首领来降。
现代文：十七日，北汉静阳十八寨首领来投降。
English: On the 17th, the leaders of 18 villages in Jingyang, North Han, came to surrender.

古文：泉州陈洪进遣使来朝贡。
现代文：泉州陈洪进派遣使者来朝拜进贡。
English: Quanzhou Chen Hongjin sent an envoy to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：齐州河决。
现代文：黄河在齐州决口。
English: The Yellow River bursts its banks in Qizhou.

古文：京师雨。
现代文：京城下雨。
English: It's raining in Kyoto.

古文：己亥，契丹幽州岐沟关使柴廷翰等来降。
现代文：二十日，契丹幽州岐沟关使柴廷翰等人来投降。
English: On the 20th, Khitan Yuzhou Qigoguan sent Chaitinghan and others to surrender.

古文：癸卯，宰相质率百官上尊号，不允。
现代文：二十四日，宰相范质率领文武百官给太祖上尊号，太祖不接受。
English: On the 24th, the prime minister, Guan Jia, led a hundred civil and military officials to give the great-grandfather the honorific title of Shangxuan, which the great-grandfather did not accept.

古文：九月甲寅，三上表请，从之。
现代文：九月初五，文武百官三次上表请求太祖接受尊号，太祖答应了他们的请求。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, the civil and military officials petitioned the great ancestor three times to accept the honorary title, and the great ancestor agreed to their request.

古文：丙寅，宴广政殿，始用乐。
现代文：十七日，太祖在广政殿设宴，开始演奏音乐。
English: On the 17th, Taizu held a banquet at the Guangzheng Hall and began to play music.

古文：丁卯，责宣徽南院使兼枢密副使李处耘为淄州刺史。
现代文：十八日，贬宣徽南院使兼枢密副使李处耘为淄州刺史。
English: On the 18th, Li Shuxuan, the envoy and vice-envoy of the Southern Court of Hubei Province, was appointed as the official historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊辰，女直国遣使献海东青名鹰。
现代文：十九日，女直国派遣使者进献名鹰海东青。
English: On the 19th, Naokuni dispatched an envoy to present the famous eagle to Dong Qing.

古文：丙子，禁朝臣公荐贡举人。
现代文：二十七日，禁止朝廷大臣公荐举人。
English: On the 27th, ministers of the Imperial Court were prohibited from publicly recommending candidates.

古文：赐南唐羊万口。
现代文：赐给南唐羊一万只。
English: He gave ten thousand sheep to Southern Tang Dynasty.

古文：磔汪端于朗州。
现代文：在朗州把汪端分尸。
English: In Lanzhou, Wang Duan's body was dismembered.

古文：戊寅，北汉引契丹兵攻平晋，遣洺州防御使郭进等救之。
现代文：二十九日，北汉引诱契丹军队进攻平晋军。太祖派遣洛州防御使郭进等人援救平晋军。
English: On the 29th, the Northern Han lured the Khitan army to attack the Ping Jin army. Taizu dispatched the Lozhou defense envoy Guo Jin and others to rescue the Ping Jin army.

古文：冬十月庚辰，诏州县征科置簿籍。
现代文：冬十月初二，太祖下诏州县征收赋税要造册登记。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, the tax collection in Zhaozhou County should be registered.

古文：己亥，畋近郊。
现代文：二十一日，太祖在近郊打猎。
English: On the fifteenth day, the great-grandfather went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：丁未，吴越国王进郊祀礼金银、珠器、犀象、香药皆万计。
现代文：二十九日，吴越国进贡南郊大礼的礼物金银、珍珠器皿、犀象、香药等都以万计。
English: On the 29th, the gifts of gold and silver, pearl ware, rhinoceros, and incense from the southern suburb of Wuyue Province were in the tens of thousands.

古文：十一月乙卯，荆南节度使高继冲进郊祀银万两。
现代文：十一月初七，荆南节度使高继冲进贡南郊大礼的银子一万两。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of November, the Jingnan Festival made Gao Jizhi rush into the outskirts of Gongnan with 10,000 taels of silver.

古文：甲子，有事南郊，大赦，改元乾德。
现代文：十六日，太祖在南郊祭祀天地，大赦天下，改年号为乾德。
English: On the 16th, the great ancestor went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven and earth, forgave the world, and changed the year name to Qiande.

古文：百官奉玉册上尊号曰应天广运仁圣文武至德皇帝。
现代文：文武百官奉玉册进上尊号为应天广运仁圣文武至德皇帝。
English: Hundreds of scholars and military officers were given the honorific title of Emperor Ying Tian Guang Yun Ren Sheng Wenwu Zhi De.

古文：丙寅，南唐进贺南郊尊号、银绢万计。
现代文：十八日，南唐进贡祝贺南郊、尊号的礼物银绢以万计。
English: On the 18th, the South Tang tribute congratulated the Southern Suburbs, and the gift of the honorary title of silver ingots exceeded ten thousand.

古文：丁卯，赐近臣袭衣、金带、器币、鞍马有差。
现代文：十九日，太祖赐给左右亲近大臣衣服、金带、器币、带鞍的马匹多少不等。
English: On the 19th, the great-grandfather gave clothes, gold belts, coins, and saddled horses to ministers close to him.

古文：乙亥，畋近郊。
现代文：二十七日，太祖在近郊打猎。
English: On the 27th, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：十二月庚辰，殿前祗候李璘以父仇杀员僚陈友，璘自首，义而释之。
现代文：十二月初二，殿前抵候李瞒因为父仇杀死员僚陈友，李瞒自首，太祖被他的孝义所感动而释放了他。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Li Zhe, who had arrived before the palace, killed his colleague Chen You because of his father's enmity. Li Zhe surrendered, and the great-grandfather was moved by his filial piety and released him.

古文：辛巳，开封府尹光义、兴元尹光美各益食邑，赐功臣号；宰相质、溥、仁浦并特进，易封，益食邑；枢密使普加光禄大夫，易功臣号；文武臣僚各进阶、勋、爵、邑。
现代文：初三，开封府尹赵光义、兴元府尹赵光美分别增加封地，赐给功臣号；宰相范质、王溥、魏仁浦都升为特进，易换封号，增加封地；枢密使赵普加官为光禄大夫，易换功臣号；文武臣僚分别提升官阶、勋位、封爵、增加食邑户数。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Yin Zhao Guangyi of the Kaifeng government and Yin Zhao Guangme of the Xingyuan government increased their fiefs respectively and were given the title of meritorious subject; the prime ministers, Wang Qi and Wei Renpu, were promoted to special promotion, and were able to change their fiefs and increase their fiefs; the confidential envoy, Zhao Puja, was promoted to Guanglu doctor, and was able to change his title of meritorious subject; and the civil and military ministers were promoted to higher ranks, honors, and knighthoods respectively, and the number of households in the county was increased.

古文：甲申，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：初六，皇后王氏逝世。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, Empress Wang passed away.

古文：辛卯，罢登州都督。
现代文：十三日，废除登州都督。
English: On the 13th, the post of Dangzhou governor was abolished.

古文：己亥，泉州陈洪进遣使贡白金千两，乳香、茶药皆万计。
现代文：二十一日，泉州陈洪进派遣使臣进贡白金一千两，乳香、茶药都以万计算。
English: On the twenty-first day, Quanzhou Chen Hongjin sent envoys to pay a tribute of one thousand taels of platinum, and the frankincense and herbal medicine were all calculated at ten thousand taels.

古文：己巳，南唐主上表乞呼名，诏不允。
现代文：己巳日，南唐主李煌上表请求直呼其名，太祖下诏不同意。
English: On the same day, the Lord of Southern Tang, Li Huang, requested to be called by his first name, but Emperor Taizu did not agree.

古文：闰月己酉朔，校医官，黜其艺不精者二十二人。
现代文：闰十二月初一，考核医官，斥退其中医术不精的二十二人。
English: On the first day of the second month of December, the medical examiner dismissed 22 people who were not proficient in medicine.

古文：甲寅，命近臣祈雪。
现代文：初六，太祖命令左右近臣祈祷降雪。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the great-grandfather ordered his close vassals to pray for snow.

古文：丁卯，覆试拔萃科，田可封、宋白、谭利用等称旨，赐与有差。
现代文：十九日，拔萃科举行复试，田可封、宋白、谭利用等人符合太祖旨意，太祖赏赐他们多少不等。
English: On the 19th, a retest was held by the Selection Science. Tian Kefeng, Song Bai, Tan Rong and others were in line with the will of the great ancestor, and the great ancestor rewarded them in varying amounts.

古文：辛未，卜安陵于巩县。
现代文：二十三日，安陵选择在巩县。
English: On the 23rd, Anling chose Gong County.

古文：乙亥，折德扆败北汉军于府州城下，禽其将杨璘。
现代文：二十七日，折德在府州城下打败北汉军队，擒获北汉军队将领杨瞒。
English: On the 27th, Oride defeated the Northern Han army under the city of Fuzhou and captured the Northern Han army general Yang Xie.

古文：以太常议，奉赤帝为感生帝。
现代文：因为太常建议，奉赤帝为感生帝。
English: Because it is too often suggested that Bong Chakdi is the emperor of inspiration.

古文：二年春正月辛巳，谕郡国长吏劝农耕作。
现代文：乾德二年春正月初四，太祖诏谕州县地方长官劝勉农民及时耕作播种。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the second year of the Qiande Spring, Taizu issued an edict to the prefectural and county governors to encourage farmers to cultivate and sow in a timely manner.

古文：有象入南阳，虞人杀之，以齿、革来献。
现代文：有大象进人南阳，掌管山泽田猎的官员杀死了大象，把大象皮和象牙拿来献给太祖。
English: An elephant came into Nanyang. The official in charge of hunting in the mountains killed the elephant and brought the elephant skin and ivory to offer to Taizu.

古文：京师雨雪、雷。
现代文：京城下雨夹雪，打雷。
English: It's sleeting and thundering in the capital.

古文：癸未，幸迎春苑宴射。
现代文：初六，太祖到迎春苑设宴射箭。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, Taizu went to Yingchun Yuan to hold a banquet and play archery.

古文：甲申，诏著四时听选式。
现代文：初七，太祖下诏编著四时听选式。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great-great-grandfather issued an edict to listen to the selection at four o'clock.

古文：回鹘遣使献方物。
现代文：回鹊派遣使者进献当地土产。
English: Huizhou sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：戊子，质以太子太傅、溥以太子太保、仁浦仍尚书左仆射罢。
现代文：十一日，罢免范质为太子太傅，王溥为太子太保，魏仁浦尚书左仆射职务。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Prince's Daifu, Wang Yao's Daibao, and Wei Renpu's Shangshu Zuofu were removed from their posts.

古文：庚寅，以赵普为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，李崇矩枢密使。
现代文：十三日，任命赵普为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，李崇矩为枢密使。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Pu was appointed as a subordinate attendant, the same as the subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate.

古文：壬辰，诏亲试制举三科，不限官庶，许直诣阁门进状。
现代文：十五日，太祖下诏亲自考试制举的三个科目，不限官员百姓，都可以直接到阎门投进书札自荐。
English: On the fifteenth day, the three subjects of the examination system raised by the great ancestor himself, not limited to officials and ordinary people, can go directly to the gate of hell to submit a bookmark self-recommendation.

古文：甲辰，诏诸道狱词令大理、刑部检详，或淹留差失致中书门下改正者，重其罪。
现代文：二十七日，太祖下诏各道所上狱词，命令大理寺检断、刑部详复，如有滞留差错失误以致需中书门下省加以改正的案件，从重处罚两个机构的负责者。
English: On the 27th, Emperor Taizong issued a proclamation to send all Taoist temples to prison, ordering the Dali Temple to be investigated and the criminal justice department to make a detailed investigation, and if there were cases of detention errors and mistakes that needed to be corrected by the Ministry of Education, the person in charge of the two institutions would be severely punished.

古文：乙已，幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：二十八日，太祖到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 28th, Taizu held a banquet in the Tamatsuen Garden and played archery.

古文：丁未，诏县令、簿、尉非公事毋至村落。
现代文：三十日，太祖下诏命令县令、主簿、尉没有公事不得下乡。
English: On the 30th, the great-grandfather issued an edict ordering the county magistrate, the chief clerk, and the captain not to go to the countryside without official business.

古文：令、录、簿、尉诸职官有耄耋笃疾者举劾之。
现代文：令、录、簿、尉等职官有年老病重的人允许弹勃。
English: Senior officials such as commanders, recorders, bookkeepers, and lieutenants who are old and seriously ill are allowed to be shot.

古文：二月戊申朔，北汉辽州刺史杜延韬以城来降。
现代文：二月初一，北汉辽州刺史杜延韬从辽州来降。
English: On the first day of February, Northern Han Dynasty Liaozhou statesman Du Yanqi came down from Liaozhou.

古文：癸丑，遣使振陕州饥。
现代文：初六，太祖派遣使臣贩济陕州饥荒。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Taizu dispatched envoys and merchants to relieve the famine in Shaanxi Province.

古文：导潩水入京。
现代文：疏导报水流人京城。
English: The dredging of the Kyo-jo River by the dredger.

古文：丁巳，治安陵，隧坏，役兵压死者二百人，命有司瘗恤。
现代文：初十，修建安陵时，隧道坍塌，压死役夫士兵二百人，太祖命令有关机构掩埋死尸并抚恤死者家庭。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, when the tomb was being built, the tunnel collapsed, crushing 200 servicemen to death. The great-grandfather ordered the relevant agencies to bury the dead bodies and support the families of the dead.

古文：庚午，府州俘北汉卫州刺史杨璘来献。
现代文：二十三日，府州俘虏北汉卫州刺史杨瞒来献给朝廷。
English: On the 23rd, Fuzhou prisoner of the Northern Han Dynasty Weizhou Zhang Shi Yang Zhe came to present to the imperial court.

古文：甲戌，南唐进改葬安陵银绫绢各万计。
现代文：二十七日，南唐进贡改葬安陵的银绩绢各以万计。
English: On the 27th, the amount of money donated by Southern Tang Dynasty for the reburial of the tomb was more than 10,000 yuan.

古文：浚汴河。
现代文：疏浚汁河。
English: Dredge the creek.

古文：三月辛巳，幸教船池，赐水军将士衣有差，还，幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：三月初五，太祖到教船池，赐给水军将士衣服多少不等，回宫时到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month, the great-grandfather went to the teaching boat pond and gave the sailors various amounts of clothes. When he returned to the palace, he held a banquet in the Tamatsuen Garden for archery.

古文：乙未，北汉耀州团练使周审玉等来降。
现代文：十九日，北汉耀州团练使周审玉等人来投降。
English: On the 19th, Northern Han's Yaozhou Rehearsal brought Zhou Xiyu and others to surrender.

古文：丁酉，遣使祈雨于五岳。
现代文：二十一日，太祖派遣使者去五岳祈祷降雨。
English: On the twenty-first day, Taizu sent an emissary to the Five Mountains to pray for rain.

古文：禁臣僚往来假官军部送。
现代文：禁止臣僚出外或返京时借官军按部护送。
English: It is forbidden for ministers to go abroad or to return to Beijing with a military escort.

古文：辛丑，遣摄太尉光义奉册宝上明宪皇太后谥曰昭宪，皇后贺氏谥曰孝惠，王氏谥曰孝明。
现代文：二十五日，太祖派遣摄太尉赵光义手捧宝册上明宪皇太后的溢号为昭宪，皇后贺氏溢号为孝惠，王氏溢号为孝明。
English: On the 25th, the great-grandfather dispatched the photographer, Lieutenant Zhao Guangyi, to hold the treasure book. In the book, the empress dowager Ming Xian's posthumous name was Zhao Xian, the empress dowager He's posthumous name was Xiao Hui, and the empress dowager Wang's posthumous name was Xiao Ming.

古文：夏四月丁未朔，策贤良方正直言极谏科，博州判官颖贽中第。
现代文：夏四月初一，贤良方正直言极谏科考试策问，博州判官颖赞中第。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, the virtuous party honestly asked questions about the examination of the discipline, and the judge from Bozhou was highly praised.

古文：戊申，振河中饥。
现代文：初二，贩济河中地区饥荒。
English: On the second day of the new year, famine struck the middle of the country.

古文：己酉，免诸道今年夏税之无苗者。乙卯，葬昭宪皇太后、孝明皇后于安陵。
现代文：初四，免征各道播种而无禾苗地区的今年夏税。初十，在安陵安葬昭宪皇太后、孝明皇后。
English: On the 4th day of the first lunar month, the summer tax of this year was exempted in areas where there were no seedlings after sowing seeds in various provinces. On the 10th day of the first lunar month, Empress Dowager Zhaoxian and Empress Xiaoming were buried in Anling.

古文：乙丑，始置参知政事，以兵部侍郎薛居正、吕余庆为之。
现代文：二十日，开始设置参知政事，任命兵部侍郎薛居正、吕余庆担任这个职位。
English: On the 20th, the establishment of the position of the Vice-Chairman of the Politburo and the appointment of the attendants of the Military Department, Xue Jizheng and Lyu Yuqing, to this position began.

古文：己已，灵武饥，转泾粟以饷。
现代文：二十四日，灵武发生饥荒，转运径州粮食进行救济。
English: On the 24th, a famine occurred in Lingwu, and grain from Jingzhou was transported to provide relief.

古文：壬申，祔二后于别庙。
现代文：二十七日，把两位皇后的神主牌位安奉在一个宗庙的两个室中。
English: On the 27th, the two queens were enshrined in two rooms of a family temple.

古文：徙永州诸县民之畜蛊者三百二十六家于县之僻处，不得复齿于乡。
现代文：迁徙永州各县百姓中发生牲畜蛊毒的三百二十六家到县所在的僻静地区，不得再在乡里饲养牲畜。
English: The 326 households in which livestock poisoning occurred among the people of Yongzhou counties were relocated to the secluded areas where the counties are located, and are no longer allowed to raise livestock in the countryside.

古文：五月己卯，知制诰高锡坐受藩镇赂，贬莱州司马。
现代文：五月初四，知制浩高锡因接受藩镇贿赂，贬为莱州司马。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month of the year, Chisei Hao Gaoxi was demoted to Laizhou Sima for accepting bribes from the town.

古文：辛巳，宗正卿赵砺坐赃杖、除籍。
现代文：初六，宗正卿赵砺因贪赃受杖刑、官籍除名。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, Zhao Yao, a member of the Zongzheng clan, was punished with a cane and expelled from the official register for corruption.

古文：癸未，幸玉津园宴射。
现代文：初八，太祖到玉津园设宴射箭。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Taizu held a banquet in Tamatsuen Garden and played archery.

古文：六月己酉，以光义为中书令，光美同中书门下平章事，子德昭贵州防御使。
现代文：六月初五，任命弟赵光义为中书令，弟赵光美为同中书门下平章事，儿子赵德昭为贵州防御使。
English: On the fifth day of June, he appointed his younger brother Zhao Guangyi as the secretary of the CPC Central Committee, his younger brother Zhao Guangmei as the deputy secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and his son Zhao Dezhao as the defense envoy of Guizhou.

古文：庚申，幸相国寺，遂幸教船池、玉津园。
现代文：十六日，太祖到相国寺，于是又去了教船池、玉津园。
English: On the 16th, Taizu went to Shokoku-ji Temple, and then went to the teaching boat pond and Tamatsuen Garden.

古文：辛未，河南、北及秦诸州蝗，惟赵州不食稼。
现代文：二十七日，黄河南北以及陕西各州发生蝗灾，只有赵州蝗虫不吃庄稼。
English: On the 27th, locust plagues occurred in the north and south of the Yellow River as well as in the states of Shaanxi. Only the locusts in Zhaozhou did not eat crops.

古文：秋七月乙亥，春州暴水溺民。
现代文：秋七月初二，春州突然发生的大水淹死了百姓。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, a sudden flood in Chunzhou drowned many people.

古文：庚辰，郃阳雨雹。
现代文：初七，阳下雨和冰雹。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, it rained and hailed in the sun.

古文：辛巳，幸玉津园。还，幸新池，观习水战。
现代文：初八，太祖到玉津园，回宫时去了新池，视察水战训练。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Taizu went to the Tamatsuen Garden, and when he returned to the palace, he went to the new pond to inspect the water battle training.

古文：辛卯，诏翰林学士陶谷、窦仪举堪为藩郡通判者各一人，不当者连坐。
现代文：十八日，太祖下诏让翰林学士陶谷、窦仪等人各自推荐一名能够胜任州郡通判职务的人，推荐不当的连坐。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizu issued an edict to let Hanlin scholars Tao Gu and Dou Yi each recommend a person who could be qualified to serve as a state and county judge, recommending improper joint sitting.

古文：九月甲戌朔，《周易》博士奚屿责乾州司户，库部员外王贻孙责左赞善大夫，并坐试任子不公。
现代文：九月初一，凋易博士奚屿贬为乾州司户，库部员外郎王贻孙贬为左赞善大夫，都是因为考试品官子弟时不公正。
English: On the first day of September, Dr. Wuyi Zouyu was demoted to the position of the Secretary of State of Qianzhou, and the treasurer's son-in-law, Wang Xinsun, was demoted to the position of Zuo Zanzhenshi, all because of the unfairness of the examination.

古文：戊子，延州雨雹。
现代文：十五日，延州下雨和冰雹。
English: On the 15th, it rained and hailed in Yanzhou.

古文：乙未，幸北郊观稼。
现代文：二十二日，太祖到京城北郊视察庄稼。
English: On the 22nd, Taizu went to the northern suburbs of Beijing to inspect the crops.

古文：辛丑，太子太傅质薨。
现代文：二十八日，太子太傅范质逝世。
English: On the 28th, Prince Taifu died.

古文：壬寅，潘美等克郴州。
现代文：二十九日，潘美等人攻克郴州。
English: On the 29th, Pan Mei and others conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月戊申，周纪王熙谨薨。辍视朝。
现代文：冬十月初六，周纪王柴熙谨逝世，太祖停止上朝处理政事。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Zhou Ji Wang Chai Xizhi passed away, and Taizu stopped handling political affairs in the Shang Dynasty.

古文：十一月甲戌，命忠武军节度使王全斌为西川行营前军兵马都部署，武信军节度崔彦进副之，将步骑三万出凤州道；江宁军节度使刘光义为西川行营前军兵马副都部署，枢密承旨曹彬副之，将步骑二万出归州道以伐蜀。
现代文：十一月初二，太祖命令忠武军节度使王全斌为西川行营前军兵马都部署，武信军节度使崔彦进任他的副手，率领步兵骑兵三万人从凤州道出发；江宁军节度使刘光义为西川行营前军兵马副都部署，枢密承旨曹彬任他的副手，率领步兵骑兵二万人从归州道出发讨伐后蜀。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, Emperor Taizu ordered Wang Quanbin to be deployed as the deputy commander of the troops and horses of the army before the campaign in the West River, and Cui Yan to be deployed as the deputy commander of the troops and horses of the army before the campaign in the West River, and to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry from the Fengzhou Road; and ordered Liu Guangyi to be deployed as the deputy commander of the troops and horses of the army before the campaign in the West River, and ordered Cao Bin to be deployed as the deputy commander of the troops and horses of the army before the campaign in the West River, and led 20,000 infantry and cavalry from the

古文：乙亥，宴西川行营将校于崇德殿，示川峡地图，授攻取方略，赐金玉带、衣物各有差。
现代文：初三，太祖在崇德殿设宴招待西川行营将校，出示川峡地图，传授将领们攻取后蜀的措施方法，赐给每人金带玉带、衣物多少不等。
English: On the third day of the first month, Taizu held a banquet at the Chongde Hall to entertain the officers of the Nishikawa campaign, presented a map of the Sichuan Gorge, taught the generals the measures and methods for capturing Hou Shu, and gave each person a gold band, a jade band, and varying amounts of clothing.

古文：壬辰，畋近郊。
现代文：二十日，太祖在近郊打猎。
English: On the 20th, Taizu went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：十二月乙巳，释广南郴州都监陈琄等二百人。
现代文：十二月初三，释放广南郴州都监陈等二百人。
English: On the third day of December, 200 people, including Chen, the governor of Ganzhou, Guangnan, were released.

古文：戊申，刘光义拔夔州，蜀节度高彦俦自焚。
现代文：初六，刘光义攻克夔州，后蜀节度使高彦侍自焚。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Liu Guangyi conquered Bozhou, and after the Shu Festival, he made Gao Yanzhu self-immolate.

古文：丁巳，蠲归、峡秋税。
现代文：十五日，免征归州、峡州秋税。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the autumn tax of Gyeongju and Gyeongju will be exempted.

古文：辛酉，王全斌克万仞、燕子二砦，下兴州，连拔石圌等二十余砦。
现代文：十九日，王全斌攻克万初、燕子两寨，攻下兴州，接连攻克石等二十多个营寨。
English: On the 19th, Wang Quanbin conquered Wanchu, Yanzi, Xingzhou, Shishi and more than 20 other camps.

古文：甲子，光义拔巫山等砦，斩蜀将南光海等八千级，禽其战翟都指挥袁德宏等千二百人。
现代文：二十二日，刘光义攻克巫山等营寨，斩杀后蜀将领南光海等八千人，擒获后蜀战掉都指挥袁德宏等一千二百人。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Guangyi conquered Wushan and other camps, killed eight thousand people such as the post-Shu general Nan Guanghai, and captured twelve hundred people such as the post-Shu commander Yuan Dehong.

古文：全斌先锋史进德败蜀人于三泉砦，禽其节度使韩保正、李进等。
现代文：王全斌的先锋史进德在三泉寨打败后蜀军队，擒获后蜀节度使韩保正、李进等人。
English: Wang Quanbin's pioneer Shi Jinde defeated the post-Shu army in Sanquanzhai, and won the post-Shu festival to make Han Baozheng, Li Jin and others.

古文：南唐进银二万两、金银器皿数百事。
现代文：南唐进贡白银二万两、金银器皿几百件。
English: Nantang paid 20,000 taels of silver and several hundred pieces of gold and silverware.

古文：庚午，诏招复山林聚匿。
现代文：二十八日，太祖下诏招抚在山林中聚集藏匿的人。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Taizu sent an imperial edict to those who had gathered and hidden in the mountains and forests.

古文：辛未，畋北郊。
现代文：二十九日，太祖在北郊打猎。
English: On the 29th, Taizu went hunting in the northern suburbs.

