古文：凡人仕宦有稽留不进，行节有毁伤不全，罪过有累积不除，声名有暗昧不明，才非下，行非悖也；又知非昬，策非昧也；逢遭外祸，累害之也。
现代文：一般人做官常有保持原状不被提升的，品行节操有遭到毁谤而不完美的，罪过有累积而不能免除的，名声有不清白的，这不是由于他们才能低下，也不是品行违反情理，更不是头脑糊涂，主意不高明，而是碰上了外来的灾祸，接连受到损害的缘故。
English: Ordinary people often remain in the same position and are not promoted, their moral conduct is not perfect but is slandered, their sins are accumulated and cannot be absolved, and their reputation is tarnished. This is not due to their low ability, nor is it a violation of morality, nor is it a muddled mind, nor is it a clever idea, but it is because they have encountered external disasters and have been damaged successively.

古文：非唯人行，凡物皆然，生动之类，咸被累害。
现代文：这种遭变累害的情况，不仅在人类中存在，但凡有万物的地方都是如此。只要有生命能活动的东西，都全会被毁伤损害。
English: This situation of being burdened by change not only exists in humans, but is also the case wherever there are living things. As long as there are living things, they will all be damaged.

古文：累害自外，不由其内。
现代文：这些毁伤损害都来自外界，并非从他们自身产生。
English: These injuries and damages come from the outside world, not from themselves.

古文：夫不本累害所从生起，而徒归责於被累害者，智不明，暗塞於理者也物以春生，人保之；以秋成，人必不能保之。
现代文：人们不去追究累害从何产生，而只是把责任归罪于被累害者，真是些头脑糊涂，不明事理的人啊。使作物在春天萌芽生长，是人力可以保证的；但是到秋天一定要有好的收成，却是人力未必能保证的。
English: People don't investigate where the damage comes from, but just blame the victim. What a bunch of muddle-headed, unreasonable people. It takes manpower to ensure that crops sprout and grow in the spring, but it takes manpower to ensure a good harvest in the fall.

古文：卒然牛马践根，刀镰割茎，生者不育，至秋不成。
现代文：不知何时牛马践踏了作物的根，镰刀割断了作物的茎，长得好好的却不结实，到秋天没有收成。
English: I don't know when the cattle and horses trampled the roots of the crops, the sickle cut the stems of the crops, they grew well but were not strong, and there was no harvest in the autumn.

古文：不成之类，遇害不遂，不得生也。
现代文：没有收成的作物，是遭受祸害发育不顺利，未能长成的缘故。
English: Crops that have not been harvested are due to the fact that they have suffered from the scourge of not developing smoothly and failing to grow.

古文：夫鼠涉饭中，捐而不食。
现代文：老鼠爬进饭中，只好扔掉不吃。
English: The mouse crawled into the meal and had to be thrown away.

古文：捐饭之味，与彼不污者钧，以鼠为害，弃而不御。
现代文：其实扔掉的饭的味道，跟那些没有被弄脏的饭，味道是同样的，只是由于老鼠的损害，只好抛弃不吃。
English: In fact, the taste of the thrown rice is the same as that of the rice that has not been soiled, but because of the damage caused by the mice, it has to be thrown away.

古文：君子之累害，与彼不育之物，不御之饭，同一实也，俱由外来，故为累害。
现代文：受毁谤损害的君子，跟那些不成熟的作物，不吃的饭，是同等的。受害因素都从外界而来，所以称为 累害 。
English: The gentleman who is damaged by slander is the same as those who do not eat rice because of immature crops. The damage factors all come from the outside, so they are called "damage."

古文：修身正行，不能来福；战栗戒慎，不能避祸。
现代文：修养身心端正品行，不能得福；战战兢兢小心谨慎，不能躲避祸害。
English: Cultivating a sound mind and body and behaving in an upright manner cannot bring good fortune; being wary and cautious cannot avoid calamity.

古文：祸福之至，幸不幸也。
现代文：祸福的到来，只是幸运与不幸运。
English: The arrival of misfortune and good fortune is just a matter of luck and bad luck.

古文：故曰：得非己力，故谓之福；来不由我，故谓之祸。
现代文：所以说：得到好处，不是靠自己的力量，所以称它是福；灾难的到来，不是由于本身原因，所以称它是祸。
English: Therefore, it is said that: getting benefits is not by one's own strength, so it is called blessing; the arrival of disaster is not due to its own cause, so it is called disaster.

古文：不由我者，谓之何由？
现代文：不是由于自身原因，说说是什么原因呢？
English: If not for its own reasons, then for what reasons?

古文：由乡里与朝廷也。
现代文：原因在乡里与朝廷。
English: The reasons lie in the countryside and the imperial court.

古文：夫乡里有三累，朝廷有三害。
现代文：乡里有三累，朝廷有三害。
English: The countryside has the three wearies, and the imperial court has the three evils.

古文：累生於乡里，害发於朝廷，古今才洪行淑之人遇此多矣。
现代文：累产生在乡里，害发生在朝廷，古往今来才能洪大品行贤淑的人，遇到这些情况多了。
English: Accidents happen in the countryside, harm happens in the imperial court, and people who have been able to perform virtuous deeds from time immemorial have encountered more of these situations.

古文：何谓三累三害？
现代文：什么叫三累三害？
English: What do you call the three evils?

古文：凡人操行，不能慎择友，友同心恩笃，异心疏薄，疏薄怨恨，毁伤其行，一累也。
现代文：就一般人的操行来看，不能慎重选择朋友。朋友之间同一条心，感情就深厚，不能同一条心感情就会疏远淡薄，一疏远冷淡就产生怨恨，就毁谤伤害朋友的品行，这是一累。
English: As far as the behavior of the average person is concerned, it is not possible to choose friends carefully. If friends have the same heart, the feelings will be deep. If they do not have the same heart, the feelings will be alienated and weak. If they are alienated and cold, resentment will arise, and slander will hurt the character of friends. This is a tiredness.

古文：人才高下，不能钧同，同时并进，高者得荣，下者惭恚，毁伤其行，二累也。
现代文：人的才能有高有低，不可能等同。同时一起去做官，才能高的得到荣升，才能低的就惭愧怨恨，就毁谤伤害朋友的品行，这是二累。
English: People's talents are high and low, and it is impossible to be equal. At the same time, to go to the official together, the talent of the high will be promoted, and the talent of the low will be ashamed of the resentment, and the slander will hurt the character of the friend. This is two tired.

古文：人之交游，不能常欢，欢则相亲，忿则疏远，疏远怨恨，毁伤其行，三累也。
现代文：人之间互相来往，不可能总是感情融洽。欢喜的时候就相亲相爱，忿恨的时候就疏远冷淡，一疏远怨恨，就毁谤伤害朋友的品行，这是三累。
English: When people interact with each other, it is impossible to always have a harmonious relationship. When they are happy, they love each other, when they are angry, they are distant and cold, and when they are estranged and resentful, they slander and hurt the character of their friends. This is the third fatigue.

古文：位少人众，仕者争进，进者争位，见将相毁，增加傅致，将昧不明，然纳其言，一害也。
现代文：职位少而想做官的人多，当官的都争着要进升，升官的又要争地位。于是见到郡守就相互诋毁，过分夸大和捏造事实，郡守糊糊涂涂还没有弄清真相，就相信并接受了那些意见，这是一害。
English: There are few positions, but many people who want to be officials. Officials are competing to be promoted, and those who are promoted are competing for positions. So when they see the county magistrate, they slander each other, exaggerate and fabricate the facts, and the county magistrate has not yet clarified the truth, and believes and accepts those opinions. This is a harm.

古文：将吏异好，清浊殊操，清吏增郁郁之白，举涓涓之言，浊吏怀恚恨，徐求其过，因纤微之谤，被以罪罚，二害也。
现代文：郡守下面的官吏爱好不一样，操行的好坏也不一样。操行高尚的官吏，名声越来越清白，不断提出高明的建议，操行恶劣的官吏，心里藏着私愤，慢慢等待时机，找别人的过错，凭着一些小诽谤，就给别人加上罪名进行惩罚，这是二害。
English: The hobbies of officials below the county magistrate are different, and their behavior is also different. Officials who behave nobly have a more and more clean reputation, and constantly put forward high-level suggestions. Officials who behave badly have hidden private anger in their hearts, and slowly wait for the opportunity to find someone else's fault, and punish others with some minor slander. These are the two evils.

古文：将或幸佐吏之身，纳信其言，佐吏非清节，必拔人越次。
现代文：郡守有的宠信辅佐官吏的品节，就相信并接纳其意见。辅佐的官吏操作不清白，一定会任意提拔亲近的人，对不顺从、不符合他们心意的，就大肆诋毁。
English: If the county magistrate has a favorite and trusted assistant official, he will believe and accept his opinion. The assistant official's operation is not innocent, he will definitely promote people who are close to him at will, and slander those who do not obey and do not meet their wishes.

古文：迕失其意，毁之过度；清正之仕，抗行伸志，遂为所憎，毁伤於将，三害也。
现代文：清廉端正的官吏，品行高尚，志向远大，于是被他们所憎恨，就在郡守面前诋毁伤害他们，这是三害。
English: There are three evils: officials who are clean, honest and upright, who have high moral standards and high aspirations, are hated by them, and they slander and hurt them in front of the county magistrate.

古文：夫未进也，身被三累；已用也，身蒙三害，虽孔丘、墨翟不能自免，颜回、曾参不能全身也。
现代文：唉，还没有做官，自己就遭受三累，当了官，自己又要蒙受三害，即使是孔丘、墨翟也不可能避免，颜回、曾参也不可能保全自己。
English: Alas, before he became an official, he suffered from the three fatigues. After he became an official, he suffered from the three evils. Even Confucius and Mo Yan could not avoid them, and Yan Hui and Zeng Zhan could not protect themselves.

古文：动百行，作万事，嫉妒之人，随而云起，枳棘钩挂容体，蜂虿之党，啄螫怀操岂徒六哉！
现代文：只要你多出力，多做事，嫉妒的人，就随之风起云涌，像枳棘钩挂人体一样，像蜂虿之类用毒刺刺人一样，哪里仅仅是三累三害啊！
English: As long as you exert more effort, do more things, the envious people will follow, like thorns hooking the human body, like bee stings and the like stinging people with poisonous spines, where is just fatigue and harm!

古文：六者章章，世曾不见。
现代文：三累三害是明摆着的，社会上却看不见。
English: The three burdens and three harms are obvious, but they are not visible in society.

古文：夫不原士之操行有三累，仕宦有三害，身完全者谓之洁，被毁谤者谓之辱；官升进者谓之善，位废退者谓之恶。
现代文：不去考察读书人的操行有三累毁伤，做官的有三害危害，见到没有遭受毁伤的，就说他操行纯洁，见到被毁谤的就说他操行污浊；见到升官的就说他操行优良，见到被罢官降职的就说他操行恶劣。
English: If you don't investigate, there are three kinds of damage to a reader's conduct, and three kinds of harm to an official's conduct. If you see someone who hasn't suffered damage, it means that his conduct is pure. If you see someone who has been slandered, it means that his conduct is dirty. If you see someone who has been promoted, it means that his conduct is good. If you see someone who has been dismissed, it means that his conduct is bad.

古文：完全升进，幸也，而称之；毁谤废退，不遇也，而訾之：用心若此，必为三累三害也。
现代文：操行完美而升官的，是幸运，被赞美；操行受毁谤被罢官降职的，只是不被赏识，遭到诋毁。用心如此，必定会助长三累三害。
English: If one's conduct is perfect and he is promoted, he is lucky and is praised; if his conduct is slandered and he is dismissed and demoted, he is just not appreciated and is slandered. If one's intentions are like this, it will surely lead to three kinds of troubles.

古文：论者既不知累害者行贤洁也，以涂博泥，以黑点缯，孰有知之？
现代文：评论者既然不知道累害从生，又不知道受累害者的操行高尚纯洁，那么，是用稀泥抹在泥上，还是用黑颜色玷污了洁白的丝织品，谁又知道呢？
English: Since the commentator does not know whether the victim has been harmed from birth, nor whether the victim's behavior is noble and pure, then who knows whether the mud has been smeared with mud or the white silk fabric has been tarnished with black color?

古文：清受尘，白取垢，青蝇所污，常在练素。
现代文：干净的容易遭受灰尘污染，洁白的容易招致污垢，青蝇弄脏的，常常是洁白的丝绢。
English: Clean silk is easily contaminated by dust, clean white silk is easily contaminated by dirt, and blue fly-stained silk is often clean white silk.

古文：处颠者危，势丰者亏，颓坠之类，常在悬垂。
现代文：居于高处的很危险，处于饱满状态的容易亏损，要倒塌坠落的，常常是高高悬挂着的东西。
English: It is very dangerous to live at high altitudes, it is easy to lose money in a full state, and it is often things hanging high that fall down.

古文：屈平洁白，邑犬群吠，吠所怪也，非俊疑杰，固庸能也。
现代文：屈平德操高尚洁白，招来村里的狗成群地对他狂叫，群狗狂叫是可奇怪的现象，其实，反对和怀疑具有卓越才能的人，本来就有这种庸人的常态。
English: Qu Ping's noble and pure morality attracted the dogs of the village to bark at him in groups. The barking of dogs is a strange phenomenon. In fact, the opposition and suspicion of people with outstanding talents have this mediocre normality.

古文：伟士坐以俊杰之才，招致群吠之声。
现代文：伟大的读书人正由于有卓越的才识，才招来群狗狂叫的声音。
English: It is the genius of the great reader that calls forth the baying of the hounds.

古文：夫如是，岂宜更勉奴下，循不肖哉？
现代文：既然这样，难道还应当再去鼓励那些蠢才，顺从那些不贤不才的人吗！
English: In view of this, should we still encourage those who are stupid and follow those who are not?

古文：不肖奴下，非所勉也，岂宜更偶俗全身以弭谤哉？
现代文：不贤不才之辈，是不可鼓励的。难道还应该再去和庸俗的人同流合污，保全自身，以求停止毁谤吗！
English: Unworthy and untalented people are not to be encouraged. Should we still go along with vulgar people and protect ourselves in order to stop the slander?

古文：偶俗全身，则乡原也。
现代文：与庸俗的人同流合污，保全自身的，则是 乡原 。
English: It is the countryside that merges with the vulgar and preserves itself.

古文：乡原之人，行全无阙，非之无举，刺之无刺也。
现代文：乡原人，行为好象完美无缺，要想非议他又提不出毛病，要想讥刺他又无可指责。
English: As a villager, his behavior seems to be perfect. If you want to criticize him, you can't find anything wrong with him. If you want to ridicule him, you can't find anything wrong with him.

古文：此又孔子之所罪，孟轲之所愆也。
现代文：这又是孔子谴责的人，孟柯认为有罪过的人。
English: Again, this is the man whom Confucius condemned and Meng Ke considered guilty.

古文：古贤美极，无以卫身。
现代文：古代贤人操行极高，也无法来保全自己。
English: The ancient sages were very high-spirited and could not protect themselves.

古文：故循性行以俟累害者，果贤洁之人也！
现代文：因此，那些按照自己本性和操行去做，藉以等待累害到来的人，才真是贤良、纯洁的人。
English: Therefore, those who do according to their own nature and conduct, and wait for harm to come, are truly virtuous and pure people.

古文：极累害之谤，而贤洁之实见焉。
现代文：遭累害、毁谤到极点，而他们操行的贤良、纯洁就更加明显。
English: They have been harassed and slandered to the extreme, and the virtue and purity of their conduct have become even more obvious.

古文：立贤洁之迹，毁谤之尘安得不生？
现代文：有贤良、纯洁的事迹，毁谤的尘垢怎能不产生？
English: If there are virtuous and pure deeds, how can the taint of slander not arise?

古文：弦者思折伯牙之指，御者愿摧王良之手。
现代文：弹琴的人想折断伯牙的手指，驾车马的人希望摧残王良的手。
English: Those who play the piano want to break Baoga's fingers, and those who drive horses want to destroy Wang Liang's hands.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：欲专良善之名，恶彼之胜己也。
现代文：这是因为想独占优秀的名声，憎恨那些胜过自己的人。
English: This is because they want to monopolize the reputation of excellence and hate those who are better than themselves.

古文：是故魏女色艳，郑袖劓之；朝吴忠贞，无忌逐之。
现代文：所以，魏女长得美丽漂亮，就被郑袖用谗言割掉了鼻子；朝吴对楚王的忠贞，就引起无忌的嫉恨而被驱逐。
English: Therefore, the Wei woman was beautiful and beautiful, and she was cut off her nose by Zheng Sleeve with insults; the loyalty of the Wu Dynasty to King Chu caused unfettered jealousy and was expelled.

古文：戚施弥妒，蘧除多佞。
现代文：谄媚争宠的人多嫉妒，讨好奉承的人多巧语。
English: Flatterers are more envious, and flatterers are more witty.

古文：是故湿堂不洒尘，卑屋不蔽风；风冲之物不得育，水湍之岸不得峭。
现代文：因此，潮湿的堂屋不需要洒水除尘，低矮的小屋用不着去遮风；被风袭击过的作物不能正常生长，常被急流冲击的堤岸不会陡峭。
English: Therefore, damp houses do not need to be sprinkled with water to remove dust, low huts do not need to be sheltered from the wind; crops that have been attacked by the wind cannot grow normally, and embankments that are often hit by rapids will not be steep.

古文：如是，牖里、陈蔡可得知，而沉江蹈河也。
现代文：像这样，周文王为什么被囚在牖里，孔夫子为什么被困在陈、蔡之间，就可以理解了；屈原为什么自投汨罗，申狄为什么抱石沉河，也就不足为怪了。
English: In this way, it is understandable why King Zhou Wen was imprisoned in a cocoon, and why Confucius was trapped between Chen and Cai; it is also not surprising why Qu Yuan threw himself into the river, and why Shen Di fell into the river.

古文：以轶才取容媚於俗，求全功名於将，不遭邓析之祸，取子胥之诛，幸矣。
现代文：以超群的才能去求得一般人的宽容和喜爱，去向郡守求得官职和名位，而不遭到邓析的灾祸，不招致子肯的被杀，就是幸运了。
English: To seek the tolerance and affection of ordinary people with superior talent, to seek an official post and a prestigious position from the county governor, without suffering the scourge of Dengye, without incurring the killing of his son Ken, is lucky.

古文：孟贲之尸，人不刃者，气绝也。
现代文：孟贲的尸体，人们不再砍杀，是因为断了气。
English: People no longer hack at Meng Xuan's corpse, because it is dead.

古文：死灰百斛，人不沃者，光灭也。
现代文：烧后的灰烬再多，人们不去浇水，是因为火光已经熄火。
English: No matter how much ash there is after a fire, people don't water because the fire has gone out.

古文：动身章智，显光气於世；奋志敖党，立卓异於俗，固常通人所谗嫉也。
现代文：有所行动就显露出智慧，就在社会上显得光气照人；舒展志向在同类人中显得很高傲，在一般人中显得才能特别优越，这本来就常会被有学识的人所谗言嫉妒。
English: To act is to show one's wisdom, to shine in society; to stretch one's ambition is to appear arrogant among one's peers, and to appear superior among ordinary people, which is often criticized and envied by learned people.

古文：以方心偶俗之累，求益反损，盖孔子所以忧心，孟轲所以惆怅也。
现代文：以正直之心却遇到俗人的三累，想求取好处反要遭受损害。这大概就是孔子所忧心，孟轲所伤感的原因。
English: This is probably the reason why Confucius was worried and Mencius was sad.

古文：德鸿者招谤，为士者多口。
现代文：德行高尚的人容易招致诽谤，有才学的人容易遭受各方攻击。
English: A virtuous man is liable to calumny, a learned man to attack from all sides.

古文：以休炽之声，弥口舌之患，求无危倾之害，远矣。
现代文：认为可以用非常美好的声誉，就能止住别人的毁谤，求得不遭受严重的祸害，难啊。
English: It's hard to think that you can use a very good reputation to stop the slander of others and not suffer serious harm.

古文：臧仓之毁未尝绝也，公伯寮之溯未尝灭也。
现代文：臧仓的毁谤未曾停止，公伯寮的诽谤不曾消失。
English: The slander of Kamakura has not stopped, and the slander of Gongbiao has not disappeared.

古文：垤成丘山，污为江河矣。
现代文：时间长了，小土堆会变成土丘高山，小池子也会汇成大江大河。
English: As time goes on, small mounds will turn into high hills, and small ponds will merge into large rivers.

古文：夫如是市虎之讹，投杼之误，不足怪，则玉变为石，珠化为砾，不足诡也。
现代文：像这样，关于市虎的谣言，关于投杼的误传，就不足为怪了；那把美玉当成顽石，把珍珠看成碎石，也就不足为奇了。
English: As such, it is not surprising that the rumors about the tigers and the misinformation about the cormorants are not surprising; it is not surprising that the gems are regarded as rocks and the pearls as rubble.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：昧心冥冥之知使之然也。
现代文：因为头脑糊涂，昏庸无知，才使他们这样。
English: It is because they are stupid and ignorant that they are like this.

古文：文王所以为粪土，而恶来所以为金玉也，非纣憎圣而好恶也，心知惑蔽。
现代文：周文王认为是粪土的，而恶来却以为是金玉。不是纣王憎恨圣人而喜欢坏人，而是他头脑糊涂。
English: King Chouwen thought it was dung, but the evil king thought it was gold. It was not that King Yao hated the saints and loved the villains, but that he was muddle-headed.

古文：蔽惑不能审，则微子十去，比干五剖，未足痛也。故三监谗圣人，周公奔楚。後母毁孝子，伯奇放流。
现代文：糊涂则不能明辨是非，就是十个微子弃官出走，五个比干被剖腹挖心，也不值得痛心。 三监 毁谤周公，周公逃奔楚国；后母诽谤伯奇，伯奇被放逐。
English: The muddle-headed cannot distinguish between right and wrong, that is to say, the ten microts abandoned their posts and ran away, and the five bogans were disemboweled, and it is not worth the pain. The three supervisors slandered Zhou Gong, and Zhou Gong fled to Chu; the stepmother slandered Berch, and Berch was banished.

古文：当时周世孰有不惑乎？
现代文：当时周朝的人谁又不被迷惑呢？
English: At that time, who in the Zhou Dynasty was not confused?

古文：後《鸱鸮》作，而《黍离》兴，讽咏之者，乃悲伤之。
现代文：之后才有《鸱鸮》的创作，《黍离》的产生，诵读者于是衷怜悲痛他们。
English: It was only after that that the creation of "" and the emergence of "離" took place, and the readers felt heartfelt pity and sorrow for them.

古文：故无雷风之变，周公之恶不灭；当夏不陨霜，邹衍之罪不除。
现代文：所以，如果不是降风雪改变了成王的态度，周公的恶名不会得到消除；要是当时夏天五月不降霜，邹衍的罪名不会得到除去。
English: Therefore, if it were not for the snowfall that changed Chengwang's attitude, Zhou Gong's notoriety would not have been eliminated; if it were not for the frost in May in the summer, Zou Yan's crime would not have been eliminated.

古文：德不能感天，诚不能动变，君子笃信审己也，安能遏累害於人？
现代文：高尚的德行不能感动上天，诚心诚意也不能感动大自然出现奇迹，君子又深信只能严格要求自己，那怎么能制止别人的累害呢？
English: Noble virtue cannot move heaven, sincerity cannot move nature to produce miracles, and a gentleman is convinced that he can only be strict with himself, so how can he stop the harm caused by others?

古文：圣贤不治名，害至不免辟，形章墨短，掩匿白长；不理身冤，不弭流言，受垢取毁，不求洁完，故恶见而善不彰，行缺而迹不显。
现代文：圣贤不追求名声，祸害来了也不回避，污点和短处被张扬，清白和长处却被掩藏，不在意自己的冤屈，不制止伤害自己的流言，遭到污蔑和诽谤，不力求恢复自己洁白完美的声誉，因此，丑的被显露而美的得不到表彰，只显出品行的缺陷，却看不见高尚的事迹。
English: The saints and sages do not seek fame, nor do they evade the disasters that come, the stains and shortcomings are publicized, the innocence and strengths are hidden, they do not care about their grievances, they do not stop the rumors that hurt themselves, they are slandered and slandered, and they do not strive to restore their reputation of whiteness and perfection. Therefore, the ugly is revealed and the beautiful is not commended, only the defects of character are shown, but no noble deeds can be seen.

古文：邪伪之人，治身以巧俗，修诈以偶众。
现代文：邪恶虚伪的人，经常乔装打扮以迎合世俗，玩弄虚假手段以讨好众人。
English: Wicked and hypocritical people often disguise themselves to cater to the world, and play with false means to please everyone.

古文：犹漆盘盂之工，穿墙不见；弄丸剑之倡，手指不知也。
现代文：就同漆盘孟的工人，把盘盂边上的洞涂上溱，使它看不见一样；如同耍弄小球和舞剑的艺人，使他手指的动作别人看不出来一样。
English: Just as the lacquerers cover the holes in the edge of the coils with enamel so that they cannot be seen, just as the players of billiards and swords hide the movements of their fingers from others.

古文：世不见短，故共称之；将不闻恶，故显用之。
现代文：社会上看不见他们的短处，因此就一齐赞美他们；郡守没听说他们的坏事，所以就重用他们。
English: Society can't see their shortcomings, so they all praise them; county governors haven't heard anything bad about them, so they reuse them.

古文：夫如是，世俗之所谓贤洁者，未必非恶；所谓邪污者，未必非善也。
现代文：这样看来，社会上一般人称作贤良高尚的人，未必不是坏人；称作邪恶污浊的人，未必不是好人。
English: From this perspective, the average person in society is called a virtuous and noble person, but not necessarily a bad person; a person who is called evil and filthy is not necessarily a good person.

古文：或曰： 言有招患，行有召耻，所在常由小人。 
现代文：有人说： 说话会召来祸患，操行会招来耻辱，原因往往是由于他们是小人。 
English: It has been said: "Speaking evokes misfortune, acting evokes disgrace, and the reason is often because they are villains."

古文：夫小人性患耻者也，含邪而生，怀伪而游，沐浴累害之中，何招召之有？
现代文：小人生来就具有祸患和耻辱，肚里怀着邪恶出生，心里怀着奸诈与人交往，整个身体都浸泡在累害之中，怎么谈得上是惹祸招耻！
English: Children are born with misfortune and disgrace, born with evil in their stomachs, and interact with people with treachery in their hearts. Their entire bodies are immersed in harm. How can you talk about causing trouble and bringing shame!

古文：故夫火生者不伤湿，水居者无溺患。
现代文：因此，那些火里产生的东西不怕干，水里生活的东西没有溺死的祸患。
English: Therefore, those things that come from fire are not afraid of dryness, and those that live in water do not have the misfortune of drowning.

古文：火不苦热，水不痛寒，气性自然焉，招之？
现代文：火不厌热，水不恨寒，气候的本性是这样，怎么能是惹祸招耻呢？
English: Fire does not hate heat, water does not hate cold, the nature of the climate is like this, how can it be embarrassing?

古文：君子也，以忠言招患，以高行招耻，何世不然？
现代文：君子，因忠诚正直的话惹祸，因高尚的操行招耻，哪个朝代不是这样！
English: Gentlemen, if you get into trouble for being loyal and honest, and are disgraced for behaving nobly, which dynasty is not like this!

古文：然而太山之恶，君子不得名；毛发之善，小人不得有也。
现代文：虽然这样，泰山样的罪恶，君子不会有；毛发样的好事，小人不会具备。
English: In spite of this, a gentleman will not have the sins of a Tarzan; a villain will not have the good deeds of a Mao.

古文：以玷污言之，清受尘而白取垢；以毁谤言之，贞良见妒，高奇见噪；以遇罪言之，忠言招患，高行招耻；以不纯言之，玉有瑕而珠有毁。
现代文：以被污染来说，干净的容易遭受灰尘污染，洁白的容易招致污垢；以毁谤来说，品德忠贞贤良的被妒忌，才能高超出众的遭叫骂；以遭罪来说，忠诚正直的话会招惹祸患，高尚的操行会招致耻辱；以不完美来说，美玉会被说得有斑点，珍珠会被视为有残缺。
English: In the case of pollution, the clean is easily polluted by dust, and the clean and white easily attract dirt; in the case of slander, the virtuous and honest are envied, and the ability to surpass the crowd is scolded; in the case of crime, the loyal and honest words will cause trouble, and the noble behavior will cause shame; in the case of imperfection, the beautiful jade will be said to be speckled, and the pearl will be regarded as defective.

古文：焦陈留君兄，名称兗州，行完迹洁，无纤芥之毁；及其当为从事，刺史焦康绌而不用。
现代文：陈留人焦贶，在兖州很有声望，操行完美，事迹高尚，没有细小差错，等到他该做从事的时候，刺史焦康却斥退不用。
English: Chen Liuren Jiaokang, very prestigious in Luzhou, perfect conduct, noble deeds, no minor errors, when he was supposed to do it, but Jiaokang refused to do it.

古文：公侯已下，玉石杂糅。贤士之行，善恶相苞。
现代文：为什么呢？因为众人说好有正直美名的人，并非真正的贤人。公侯以下，人品好坏混杂，贤达士子的操行，善良邪恶相互杂糅。
English: Why? Because many people say that people with a good reputation for honesty are not true sages. Below the rank of prince, people are a mixture of good and bad, the actions of sages, and good and evil are mixed together.

古文：夫采玉者破石拔玉，选士者弃恶取善。
现代文：那开采美玉的人，任务在于破开石头取出美玉，选拔官吏的人，任务在于废弃邪恶选择贤良。
English: For those who mine gems, the task is to break the stone and take out the gems. For those who select officials, the task is to abandon evil and choose good.

古文：夫如是，累害之人负世以行，指击之者从何往哉？
现代文：真是这样，遭受累害的人违反世俗坚持自己的操行，那些指责攻击他们的人，又向哪里去呢！
English: Indeed, those who have suffered the most persist in their behavior in defiance of the world, and where do those who accuse and attack them go?

