古文：知音其难哉！
现代文：对文学作品做出正确的理解和评论多么困难呀！
English: How difficult it is to correctly understand and comment on literary works!

古文：音实难知，知实难逢，逢其知音，千载其一乎！
现代文：正确的理解和评论文章虽然困难，遇见能正确理解作者的评论家也不容易；要碰上能彼此理解的人，大概一千年也不过一两人吧！
English: Although the correct understanding and review of the article is difficult, it is not easy to meet a critic who can correctly understand the author; to meet people who can understand each other, about a thousand years is just one or two people!

古文：夫古来知音，多贱同而思古。所谓 日进前而不御，遥闻声而相思 也。
现代文：从古以来的评论家，常常轻视同代人而仰慕前代人，真所谓： 天天在眼前的并不任用，老远听到声名却不胜思慕。 
English: Critics since ancient times have often despised their contemporaries and admired their predecessors. It's true: You don't see someone every day, but when you hear their reputation, you can't help but admire it.

古文：昔《储说》始出，《子虚》初成，秦皇汉武，恨不同时；既同时矣，则韩囚而马轻，岂不明鉴同时之贱哉！
现代文：从前韩非子的《内储说》《外储说》刚传出来，司马相如的《子虚赋》刚写成，秦始皇和汉武帝深恨不能和他们相见，但是后来相见了，结果是韩非下狱，司马相如被冷落，这不显然可以看出是对同代人的轻视吗？
English: Han Feizi's "The Inner Reservoir" and "The Outer Reservoir" had just been published, and Sima Xiangru's "The Son of Falsehood" had just been written. The First Emperor of Qin and the Emperor of Han were reluctant to meet with them, but later they did meet. As a result, Han Feizi was sent to prison, and Sima Xiangru was left out in the cold. Isn't this a clear sign of contempt for his contemporaries?

古文：至于班固、傅毅，文在伯仲，而固嗤毅云 下笔不能自休 。
现代文：至于班固和傅毅，作品成就本来都很优秀，但班固讥笑傅毅说： 傅毅写起文章来就没停止的时候。 
English: As for Ban Gu and Fu Yi, their work achievements are all excellent, but Ban Gu laughed at Fu Yi and said: When Fu Yi started writing, he didn't stop.

古文：及陈思论才，亦深排孔璋，敬礼请润色，叹以为美谈；季绪好诋诃，方之于田巴，意亦见矣。
现代文：曹植评论文人时，也常贬低陈琳；丁廙请曹植修改文章，他就称赞丁廙说话得体；刘修喜欢批评别人，他就把刘修比作古代的田巴，他的意思也很容易看清楚。
English: When Cao Zhi commented on writers, he often belittled Chen Lin; when Ding Yao asked Cao Zhi to revise an article, he praised Ding Yao for speaking properly; when Liu Xiu liked to criticize others, he compared Liu Xiu to the ancient Tianba, and his meaning was also easy to see clearly.

古文：故魏文称∶ 文人相轻 ，非虚谈也。
现代文：所以曹丕说 文人互相轻视 ，这不是一句空话。
English: Therefore, Cao Wei said that literati despise each other, which is not an empty phrase.

古文：至如君卿唇舌，而谬欲论文，乃称 史迁著书，谘东方朔 ，于是桓谭之徒，相顾嗤笑。
现代文：还有楼护以为有口才，居然荒唐得要评论文章，说什么司马迁曾请教于东方朔，于是桓谭等人都来嘲笑楼护。
English: There was also the doorman who thought he was so eloquent that he had to comment on an absurd article, saying that Sima Qian had consulted Dongfang Shuo, so Huan Tan and others came to ridicule the doorman.

古文：彼实博徒，轻言负诮，况乎文士，可妄谈哉！
现代文：楼护本来没有什么地位，信口开河就被人讥笑，何况作为一个文人学者，怎么能随便乱说呢？
English: A building custodian doesn't have much status in the first place, and if he opens his mouth, he'll be ridiculed. Besides, as a literary scholar, how can he just say whatever he wants?

古文：故鉴照洞明，而贵古贱今者，二主是也；才实鸿懿，而崇己抑人者，班、曹是也；学不逮文，而信伪迷真者，楼护是也；酱瓿之议，岂多叹哉！
现代文：由此看来，见识高超崇古非今的人就是秦始皇和汉武帝这样的人；才华卓越而喜欢抬高自己、压低别人的人就是班固和曹植这样的人；毫无文才而误信传说、不明真相的人就是楼护这类人。刘歆看了扬雄的《太玄》后说： 我怕后人用它来盖酱瓮。 这难道是多余的感叹吗？
English: From this point of view, people who see the sublime and respect the past and not the present are people like Qin Shihuang and Han Wudi; people with outstanding talents who like to elevate themselves and suppress others are people like Ban Gu and Cao Zhi; people who have no literary talent but mistakenly believe in legends and do not know the truth are people like building guards. Liu Wei said after watching Yang Xiong's "Tai Xuan": I am afraid that future generations will use it to cover the sauce ladle. Is this a superfluous exclamation?

古文：夫麟凤与麏雉悬绝，珠玉与砾石超殊，白日垂其照，青眸写其形。
现代文：麒麟和獐，凤凰和野鸡，都有极大的差别；珠宝和碎石块也完全不同，在阳光的照耀下，肉眼能够清楚地辨别它们的形态。
English: The unicorn and the rooster, the phoenix and the pheasant, are very different; the jewels and the rubble are also completely different, and under the sunshine, the naked eye can clearly distinguish their forms.

古文：然鲁臣以麟为麏，楚人以雉为凤，魏民以夜光为怪石，宋客以燕砾为宝珠。
现代文：然而鲁国官吏竟把麒麟当作獐，楚国人竟把野鸡当作凤凰，魏国老百姓把美玉误当作怪异的石头，宋国人把燕国的碎石块误当作宝珠。
English: However, the officials of the State of Lu mistook the unicorn for a dragonfly, the people of the State of Chu mistook the pheasant for a phoenix, the people of the State of Wei mistook the gem for a strange stone, and the people of the State of Song mistook the crushed stone of the State of Yan for a precious pearl.

古文：形器易征，谬乃若是；文情难鉴，谁曰易分？
现代文：这些具体的东西本不难查考，居然错误到这种地步；何况文章中的思想情感本来就不容易看清楚，谁能说易于分辨优劣呢？
English: These concrete things are not difficult to investigate, but they are actually wrong to such an extent; moreover, the thoughts and emotions in the article are not easy to see clearly, who can say that it is easy to distinguish the advantages and disadvantages?

古文：夫篇章杂沓，质文交加，知多偏好，人莫圆该。
现代文：文学作品十分复杂，内容与形式交织而多样化，评论者又常常各有偏爱，认识能力也不全面。
English: Literary works are very complex, the content and form are intertwined and diverse, reviewers often have their own preferences, and their ability to understand is not comprehensive.

古文：慷慨者逆声而击节，酝藉者见密而高蹈；浮慧者观绮而跃心，爱奇者闻诡而惊听。
现代文：性情慷慨的人遇见激昂的声调就打起拍子欣赏，心思细腻的人读到含蓄细致的作品就会很高兴，才知浮浅的人看见绮丽的文章就动心，爱好新奇的人听到奇异的故事就觉得好听。
English: Generous-natured people will appreciate a passionate tone of voice, people with delicate minds will be happy to read subtle and detailed works, shallow-minded people will be moved when they see beautiful articles, and people who love novelty will feel good when they hear strange stories.

古文：会己则嗟讽，异我则沮弃，各执一隅之解，欲拟万端之变，所谓 东向而望，不见西墙 也。
现代文：凡是符合自己兴趣爱好的作品就赞赏诵读，不符合的就看不下去；每个人都带着自己的偏见来理解衡量多种多样的文章，这就像一个人只知道向东望去，自然永远看不到西边的墙一样。
English: All works that meet their interests and hobbies are appreciated and read, and those that do not meet them cannot be read; everyone understands and measures a variety of articles with their own prejudices, just as one only knows how to look to the east and naturally never sees the west wall.

古文：凡操千曲而后晓声，观千剑而后识器。故圆照之象，务先博观。
现代文：只有弹过千百个曲调的人才能懂得音乐，看过千百口宝剑的人才能懂得武器；所以全面评价作品的方法，就是必须广泛地观察。
English: Only a person who has played thousands of tunes can understand music, and a person who has seen thousands of swords can understand weapons; therefore, the method of comprehensively evaluating works is to observe widely.

古文：阅乔岳以形培塿，酌沧波以喻畎浍。
现代文：看了高峰就更明白小山，到过大海就更知道小沟。
English: If you have seen the peak, you will understand the hill better, and if you have been to the sea, you will understand the ditch better.

古文：无私于轻重，不偏于憎爱，然后能平理若衡，照辞如镜矣。
现代文：在或轻或重上没有私心，在或爱或憎上没有偏见：这样就能和秤一样公平，和镜子一样清楚了。
English: There is no selfishness in light or heavy, no prejudice in love or hate: so it can be as fair as a scale, and as clear as a mirror.

古文：是以将阅文情，先标六观∶一观位体，二观置辞，三观通变，四观奇正，五观事义，六观宫商。
现代文：因此，要查考作品中的思想情感，先从六个方面去观察：第一是看作品采用什么体裁，第二是看作品的遣词造句，第三是看作品对前人的继承与自己的创新，第四是看作品中表现的不同手法，第五是看作品用典的意义，第六是看作品的音节。
English: Therefore, to examine the thoughts and emotions in a work, we must first observe from six aspects: the first is to see what genre the work uses, the second is to see the words and sentences of the work, the third is to see the work's inheritance of predecessors and its own innovation, the fourth is to see the different methods of expression in the work, the fifth is to see the meaning of the work's dictionary, and the sixth is to see the syllables of the work.

古文：斯术既行，则优劣见矣。
现代文：这种观察的方法如能实行，那么，作品的好坏就可以看出来了。
English: If this method of observation can be implemented, then the quality of the work can be seen.

古文：夫缀文者情动而辞发，观文者披文以入情，沿波讨源，虽幽必显。
现代文：文学创作是作家的内心有所活动，然后才表现在作品之中；文学批评却是先看作品的文辞，然后再深入到作家的内心。从末流追溯到根源，即使隐微的也可以变得显豁。
English: Literary creation is the activity of the writer's heart, and then it is manifested in the work; literary criticism is to look at the words of the work first, and then go deep into the writer's heart. From the last stream to the root, even the subtle can become obvious.

古文：世远莫见其面，觇文辄见其心。
现代文：对年代久远的作者，固然不能见面，但读了他的作品，也就可以看到作者的心情了。
English: Of course, it is not possible to meet the ancient author, but if you read his works, you can see the author's mood.

古文：岂成篇之足深，患识照之自浅耳。
现代文：难道担心作品太深奥吗？只恐怕自己见解太浅薄罢了。
English: Are you worried that your work is too profound? I'm afraid your opinion is too shallow.

古文：夫志在山水，琴表其情，况形之笔端，理将焉匿？
现代文：弹琴的人如果内心想到山和水，尚可在琴声中表达出自己的心情，何况文章既用笔写出来，其中的道理怎能隐藏？
English: If a person who plays the piano thinks of mountains and water in his heart, he can still express his feelings in the sound of the piano. Moreover, since the article is written with a pen, how can the reason be hidden?

古文：故心之照理，譬目之照形，目了则形无不分，心敏则理无不达。
现代文：所以读者内心对作品中道理的理解，就像眼睛能看清事物的外形一样：眼睛清楚的话，就没有什么形态不能辨别；内心聪慧的话，就没有什么道理不能明白。
English: Therefore, the reader's inner understanding of the truth in the work is the same as the eye can see the shape of things: if the eyes are clear, there is no form that cannot be discerned; if the heart is clever, there is no reason that cannot be understood.

古文：然而俗监之迷者，深废浅售，此庄周所以笑《折扬》，宋玉所以伤《白雪》也。
现代文：然而世俗上认识不清楚的人，深刻的作品常被抛弃，浅薄的作品反而有市场。因此，庄周就讥笑人们只爱听庸俗的《折杨》，而宋玉也慨叹高雅的《白雪》不被人欣赏。
English: However, for people who are not worldly-wise, profound works are often abandoned, while shallow works have a market. Therefore, Zhuang Zhou mocked that people only like to listen to the vulgar "Folding Poplar," while Song Yu also lamented that the elegant "White Snow" was not appreciated.

古文：昔屈平有言∶ 文质疏内，众不知余之异采。 
现代文：从前屈原说过： 我内心诚朴，而不善于表达，所以人们都不知道我的才华出众。 
English: Qu Yuan once said: I am simple at heart, but not good at expression, so people do not know my outstanding talent.

古文：见异唯知音耳。
现代文：能认识出众的才能的，只有正确的评论家。
English: Only the right critics can recognise exceptional talent.

古文：扬雄自称∶ 心好沉博绝丽之文。 其不事浮浅，亦可知矣。
现代文：扬雄曾说他自己 内心喜欢深刻的、博洽的、绝顶华丽的文章 ，那么他不喜欢浅薄的作品，也就由此可知了。
English: Yang Xiong once said that he himself likes profound, profound, and extremely gorgeous articles, so it is clear that he does not like shallow works.

古文：夫唯深识鉴奥，必欢然内怿，譬春台之熙众人，乐饵之止过客，盖闻兰为国香，服媚弥芬；书亦国华，玩绎方美；知音君子，其垂意焉。
现代文：只要是见解深刻，能看到作品深意的人，就必能在欣赏杰作时获得内心的享受；好像春天登台所见美景可以使众人心情舒畅，音乐与美味可以留住过客一样。据说兰花是全国最香的花，人们喜爱而佩在身上，就可发出更多的芬芳；文学书籍则是国家的精华，要细细体味才懂得其中的妙处。
English: It is said that orchids are the most fragrant flowers in the country, and if people love them and wear them, they can emit more fragrance; literary books are the essence of the country, and it is necessary to understand the subtleties of the taste.

古文：赞曰∶洪锺万钧，夔旷所定。
现代文：一切愿意正确评论作品的人，还是特别注意这些吧。总结：
English: All those who wish to comment correctly on the work should pay special attention to these.

古文：良书盈箧，妙鉴乃订。
现代文：三十万斤重的大钟，只有古时乐师夔和师旷才能制定。
English: The big bell weighing 300 thousand catties can only be made by the ancient musicians Zou and Shi Kuang.

古文：流郑淫人，无或失听。
现代文：满箱子的好书，就依靠卓越的评论家来判断。
English: Boxes full of great books, judged by great critics.

古文：独有此律，不谬蹊径。
现代文：郑国流荡的音乐会使人走入歧途，千万不要为它迷惑听觉。
English: Zheng Guo's wandering concert will lead people astray. Don't let it confuse your hearing.

