古文：道者，万物之始，是非之纪也。
现代文：道是万物的本原，是非的准则。
English: Tao is the origin of all things, the principle of right and wrong.

古文：是以明君守始以知万物之源，治纪以知善败之端。
现代文：因此英明的君主把握本原来了解万物的起源，研究准则来了解成败的原因。
English: Therefore, the wise monarch grasps the original understanding of the origin of all things, and studies the criteria to understand the reasons for success or failure.

古文：故虚静以待，令名自命也，令事自定也。
现代文：所以君主虚无冷静地对待一切，让事物以它反映的内容来确定名称，让事情以它自身的性质去形成。
English: Therefore, the prince of nothingness calmly treats everything, let things be named according to the content it reflects, and let things be formed according to their own nature.

古文：虚则知实之情，静则知动者正。
现代文：保持无成见的虚心，才知道实在的真相；保持冷静，才知道行动的准则。
English: Keep an open mind, and you will know the real truth; keep calm, and you will know the rules of action.

古文：有言者自为名，有事者自为形，形名参同，君乃无事焉，归之其情。
现代文：进言者自会形成主张，办事者自会形成效果，效果和主张验证相合，君主就能够无所事事，而使事物呈现出真相。
English: Those who give advice will form their own opinions, and those who do things will form their own effects. If the effects match the verification of the opinions, the monarch will be able to do nothing and make things show the truth.

古文：故曰：君无见其所欲，君见其所欲，臣自将雕琢；君无见其意，君见其意，臣将自表异。
现代文：所以说：君主不要显露自己的喜好，君主显露自己的喜好，臣下就会去粉饰自己的言行；君主不要显露自己的意图，君主显露自己的意图，臣下就会去伪装自己的观点。
English: Therefore, it is said: the monarch should not reveal his preferences, if the monarch reveals his preferences, the vassals will whitewash their words and deeds; the monarch should not reveal his intentions, if the monarch reveals his intentions, the vassals will disguise their opinions.

古文：故曰：去好去恶，臣乃见素；去旧去智，臣乃自备。
现代文：所以说：除去爱好，除去厌恶，臣下就表现实情；除去成见，除去智慧，臣下就告诫自己。
English: Therefore it is said, "Remove the likes, remove the dislikes, and the vassals will show the truth; remove the prejudices, remove the wisdom, and the vassals will admonish themselves."

古文：故有智而不以虑，使万物知其处；有贤而不以行，观臣下之所因；有勇而不以怒，使群臣尽其武。
现代文：所以君主有智慧也不用来思考，使万物处在它适当的位置上；存贤就也不表观为行动，以便察看臣下依据什么；有勇力也不用来逞威风，使臣下充分发挥他们的勇武。
English: Therefore, the wisdom of the monarch is not used to think, so that everything is in its proper place; the existence of virtue is not manifested in action, so as to see what the vassal is based on; the courage is not used to be arrogant, so that the vassal can give full play to their bravery.

古文：是故去智而有明，去贤而有功，去勇而有强。
现代文：因此君主离开智慧却仍有明察，离开贤能却仍有功绩，离开勇力却仍有强力。
English: Wherefore princes leave wisdom, but still have discernment; leave virtue, but still have merit; leave courage, but still have power.

古文：君臣守职，百官有常，因能而使之，是谓习常。
现代文：群臣恪守职责，百官都有常法，君主根据才能使用他们，这叫遵循常规。
English: The courtiers stick to their duties, the officials have the usual rules, and the monarch uses them according to their abilities. This is called following the rules.

古文：故曰：寂乎其无位而处，漻乎莫得其所。
现代文：所以说：寂静啊!君主好像没有处在君位上；廖廓啊!
English: So he said: Silence! The monarch does not seem to be on the throne; Liao Kuo!

古文：明君无为于上，群臣竦惧乎下。
现代文：臣下不知道君主在哪里。明君在上面无为而治，群臣在下面诚惶诚恐。
English: The vassals don't know where the sovereign is. The emperor is idle above, and the vassals are terrified below.

古文：明君之道，使智者尽其虑，而君因以断事，故君不穷于智；贤者勑其材，君因而任之，故君不穷于能；有功则君有其贤，有过则臣任其罪，故君不穷于名。
现代文：明君的原则是，使聪明人竭尽思虑，君主据此决断事情，所以君主的智力不会穷尽；鼓励贤者发挥才干，君主据此任用他们，所以君主的能力不会穷尽；有功劳则君主占有贤名，有过失则臣下承担罪责，所以君主的名声不会穷尽。
English: The principle of the Ming Dynasty is that the wisdom of the monarch will not be exhausted because the wise will be exhausted and the monarch will decide things accordingly; the ability of the monarch will not be exhausted because the wise will be encouraged to exert their talents and the monarch will appoint them accordingly; if there is merit, the monarch will have a reputation; if there is fault, the vassals will bear the responsibility, so the reputation of the monarch will not be exhausted.

古文：是故不贤而为贤者师，不智而为智者正。
现代文：因此不贤的却是贤人的老师，不智的却是智者的君长。
English: Therefore, the unwise is the teacher of the wise, and the unwise is the ruler of the wise.

古文：臣有其劳，君有其成功，此之谓贤主之经也。
现代文：臣下承担劳苦，君主享受成功，这就叫贤明君主的守常之道。
English: It is the wise monarch's way to be prudent, while his subjects toil and his sovereign enjoys success.

古文：道在不可见，用在不可知；虚静无事，以暗见疵。
现代文：君主原则在于不能被臣下看出自己的心意，君主作用在于不能被臣下了解自己的想法；君主保持虚静无为的态度，在暗中观察臣下的过失。
English: The principle of the monarch is that he cannot be seen by his subjects, and the role of the monarch is that he cannot be seen by his subjects; the monarch maintains a passive attitude and secretly observes the faults of his subjects.

古文：见而不见，闻而不闻，知而不知。
现代文：看见好像没看见，听见好像没听见，知道好像不知道。
English: See as if you do not see, hear as if you do not hear, know as if you do not know.

古文：知其言以往，勿变勿更，以参合阅焉。官有一人，勿令通言，则万物皆尽。
现代文：了解臣下主张以后，不要变更它，用验证办法来考察臣下言行是否合一。每个官职只有一人，不要让他们相互通气，那么万事万物的真相都会显露出来。
English: After understanding the vassal's proposition, do not change it, and use the verification method to examine whether the vassal's words and deeds are unified. There is only one person in each official position, do not let them breathe through each other, then the truth of everything will be revealed.

古文：函掩其迹，匿有端，下不能原；去其智，绝其能，下不能意。
现代文：君主掩盖行迹，隐藏自己的想法，臣下就无法探测；君主去掉智慧，不表现自己的才能，臣下就无法揣度。
English: If a ruler hides his actions and conceals his thoughts, his subjects will not be able to detect them; if a ruler removes his wisdom and does not show his talent, his subjects will not be able to guess.

古文：保吾所以往而稽同之，谨执其柄而固握之。
现代文：保守自我意图而验证臣下，谨慎地抓住权柄而牢固地掌握它。
English: Protect self-intention and validate vassals, cautiously seize power and firmly grasp it.

古文：绝其望，破其意，毋使人欲之，不谨其闭，不固其门，虎乃将存。
现代文：杜绝臣下的窥探，破除臣下的揣测，不要让人贪求君位。不能谨慎地插好门栓，不守好自己的门户，阴谋篡权的臣子就会像老虎一样闯入。
English: Eliminate the prying of vassals, eliminate the speculation of vassals, and do not let people covet the throne. If you can't carefully plug the door, if you don't guard your own portal, the vassal who conspires to usurp power will break in like a tiger.

古文：不慎其事，不掩其情，贼乃将生。
现代文：不慎重从事，不掩盖真实意图，贼子就将产生。
English: If you are not careful, if you do not hide your true intentions, you will become a thief.

古文：弑其主，代其所，人莫不与，故谓之虎。
现代文：杀死君主，篡夺君位，人们没有不归附的，这样的奸臣就叫虎。
English: Kill the monarch, usurp the throne, people have no choice but to join, such a traitor is called a tiger.

古文：处其主之侧为奸臣，闻其主之忒，故谓之贼。
现代文：在君主身边做奸臣，知晓君主过失，这样的奸臣就叫贼。
English: To be a treacherous vassal around the sovereign, knowing the sovereign's faults, such a treacherous vassal is called a thief.

古文：散其党，收其余，闭其门，夺其辅，国乃无虎。
现代文：君主应该解散他的朋党，收拾他的余孽，封闭他的门户，铲除他的帮凶，国家就没有老虎了。
English: The monarch should disband his cronies, clean up his remnants, close his doors, eradicate his accomplices, and the country will have no tigers.

古文：大不可量，深不可测，同合刑名，审验法式，擅为者诛，国乃无贼。
现代文：君道大不可量，深不可测，同一名实，检验法度，擅自行动的诛灭，国家就没有贼子了。
English: Monarchy is immeasurable, unfathomable, the same as reality, the test of legality, the annihilation of unauthorized actions, the country will have no thieves.

古文：是故人主有五壅：臣闭其主曰壅，臣制财利曰壅，臣擅行令曰壅，臣得行义曰壅，臣得树人曰壅。
现代文：因此君主有五种受蒙蔽的情况：臣下使君主闭塞是蒙蔽，臣下控制财利是蒙蔽，臣下擅自发令是蒙蔽，臣下私自给人好处是蒙蔽，臣下得以扶植党羽是蒙蔽。
English: Therefore, there are five kinds of situations in which the monarch is deceived: it is deceived when subjects obstruct the monarch, it is deceived when subjects control money and interests, it is deceived when subjects issue orders without authorization, it is deceived when subjects give benefits to others without authorization, and it is deceived when subjects are able to support political parties.

古文：臣闭其主，则主失位；臣制财利，则主失德；臣擅行令，则主失制；臣得行义，则主失明；臣得树人，则主失党。
现代文：臣下使君主闭塞，君主就失去君位；臣下控制财利，君主就失去恩德；臣下擅自发令，君主就失去控制权；臣下私自给人好处，君主就失去英明；臣下得以扶植党羽，君主就失去支持者。
English: If a vassal obstructs the monarch, the monarch loses his throne; if a vassal controls wealth and profit, the monarch loses his favor; if a vassal issues orders without authorization, the monarch loses his control; if a vassal gives personal favors, the monarch loses his wisdom; if a vassal is able to support a faction, the monarch loses his supporters.

古文：此人主之所以独擅也，非人臣之所以得操也。人主之道，静退以为宝。
现代文：这就是君主要独据、不能让臣下把持的原因。君主的原则，以静退为贵。
English: This is the reason why the monarch is the sole authority and cannot be controlled by his subjects. The principle of the monarch is to retreat.

古文：不自操事而知拙与巧，不自计虑而知福与咎。
现代文：不亲自操持事务而知道臣下办事的拙和巧，不亲自考虑事情而知道臣下谋事的福和祸。
English: If you do not personally manage affairs, you will know the ineptitude and skill of your subordinates, and if you do not personally consider things, you will know the blessings and misfortunes of your subordinates.

古文：是以不言而善应，不约而善增。
现代文：因此君主不多说话而臣下就要很好地谋事，不作规定而臣下就要很好地办事。
English: Therefore, the monarch should not talk too much, and the vassals should do a good job, and the vassals should do a good job without rules.

古文：言已应，则执其契；事已增，则操其符。
现代文：臣下已经提出主张，君主就拿来作为凭证；臣下已经作出事情，君主就拿来作为凭证。
English: If a subject has made a claim, the sovereign takes it as evidence; if a subject has done something, the sovereign takes it as evidence.

古文：符契之所合，赏罚之所生也。
现代文：拿了凭证进行验核，就是赏罚产生的根据。
English: Taking the certificate for inspection is the basis for the reward and punishment.

古文：故群臣陈其言，君以其主授其事，事以责其功。
现代文：所以群臣陈述他们的主张，君主根据他们的主张授予他们职事，依照职事责求他们的功效。
English: Therefore, the courtiers state their opinions, and the monarch grants them positions according to their opinions, and demands their effectiveness according to their positions.

古文：功当其事，事当其言，则赏；功不当其事，事不当其言，则诛。
现代文：功效符合职事，职事符合主张，就赏；功效不符合职事，职事不符合主张，就罚。
English: If the effect is in line with the duties, and the duties are in line with the propositions, it will be rewarded; if the effect is not in line with the duties, and the duties are not in line with the propositions, it will be punished.

古文：明君之道，臣不得陈言而不当。
现代文：明君的原则，要求臣下不能说话不算数。
English: Emperor Ming's principle of requiring his vassals not to speak does not count.

古文：是故明君之行赏也，暖乎如时雨，百姓利其泽；其行罚也，畏乎如雷霆，神圣不能解也。
现代文：因此明君行赏，像及时雨那么温润，百姓都能受到他的恩惠；君主行罚，像雷霆那么可怕，就是神圣也不能解脱。
English: Therefore, when the emperor rewards, it is as gentle as timely rain, and the people can receive his grace; when the emperor punishes, it is as terrible as thunder, and even the sacred cannot be relieved.

古文：故明君无偷赏，无赦罚。
现代文：所以明君不随便赏赐，不赦免惩罚。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun does not arbitrarily reward, does not pardon punishment.

古文：赏偷，则功臣墯其业；赦罚，则奸臣易为非。
现代文：赏赐随便了，功臣就懈怠他的事业；惩罚赦免了，奸臣就容易于坏事。
English: If the reward is arbitrary, the meritorious person will slacken his cause; if the punishment is pardoned, the treacherous person will be easy to do bad things.

古文：是故诚有功，则虽疏贱必赏；诚有过，则虽近爱必诛。
现代文：因此确实有功，即使疏远卑贱的人也一定赏赐；确实有罪，即使亲近喜爱的人也一定惩罚。
English: Therefore, if there is a real merit, even if it is alienated from the lowly, it will be rewarded; if there is a real sin, even if it is close to the beloved, it will be punished.

古文：疏贱必赏，近爱必诛，则疏贱者不怠，而近爱者不骄也。
现代文：疏贱必赏，近爱必罚，那么疏远卑贱的人就不会懈怠，而亲近喜爱的人就不会骄横了。
English: Those who are aloof from the lowly will not slacken, and those who are close to the beloved will not be arrogant.

