古文：孙权字仲谋。
现代文：孙权字仲谋。
English: Sun Quan became a mediator.

古文：兄策既定诸郡，时权年十五，以为阳羡长。
现代文：兄长孙策平定各郡后，当时孙权十五岁，孙策让他做阳羡县长。
English: When Sun Quan was 15 years old, after his elder brother Sun Ce had subdued all the counties, Sun Ce made him the governor of Yangzi County.

古文：郡察孝廉，州举茂才，行奉义校尉。
现代文：郡中推举他为孝廉，州中推举他为茂才，代理奉义校尉。
English: The county elected him as Xiaolian, the state elected him as Mao Cai, and the acting Fong Yi as the acting captain.

古文：汉以策远脩职贡，遣使者刘琬加锡命。
现代文：汉朝因为孙策远修职贡，派使者刘琬为孙策加封九锡。
English: The Han Dynasty, because of Sun Ce Yuan's service tribute, sent an envoy, Liu Ye, to seal Sun Ce's seal with nine silver coins.

古文：琬语人曰： 吾观孙氏兄弟虽各才秀明达，然皆禄祚不终，惟中弟孝廉，形貌奇伟，骨体不恒，有大贵之表，年又最寿，尔试识之。 
现代文：刘琬对人说: 我看孙氏兄弟虽然各自明智有才，但是地位福气都是不能长久的，只有弟弟被推举为孝廉，形貌奇伟，骨骼奇异，有大贵之相，享年最久，可以试着赏识他。 
English: Liu Yao said to the man: I think that although the Sun brothers are both wise and talented, their positions and blessings are not long-lasting. Only the younger brother was elected as a filial piety, his appearance is magnificent, his bones are strange, he has a noble appearance, and he has been dead for the longest time. You can try to appreciate him.

古文：建安四年，从策征庐江太守刘勋。
现代文：建安四年，孙权跟随孙策征讨庐江太守刘勋。
English: In the fourth year of Jianan, Sun Quan followed Sun Ce to recruit Liu Xun, the governor of the Min River.

古文：勋破，进讨黄祖於沙羡。
现代文：刘勋被攻破后，又进军到沙县征讨黄祖。
English: After Liu Xun was defeated, he marched to Sha County to recruit Huang Zu.

古文：五年，策薨，以事授权，权哭未及息。
现代文：建安五年，孙策去世，将事宜交给孙权，孙权痛哭以致无法喘气。
English: In the fifth year of Jian'an, Sun Ce passed away and handed the matter over to Sun Quan. Sun Quan cried so hard that he could not catch his breath.

古文：策长史张昭谓权曰： 孝廉，此宁哭时邪？
现代文：孙策的长史张昭对孙权说: 孝廉现在是悲伤的时候吗？
English: Zhang Zhao, a long-time disciple of Sun Ce, said to Sun Quan, "Is it time for Xiao Lin to be sad?

古文：且周公立法而伯禽不师，非欲违父，时不得行也。
现代文：况且周公立法，而伯禽不师，不是想要违背父亲指示，只是不得已。
English: Moreover, Zhou Gong legislated, and the bird did not learn, not because he wanted to disobey his father's instructions, but out of necessity.

古文：况今奸宄竞逐，豺狼满道，乃欲哀亲戚，顾礼制，是犹开门而揖盗，未可以为仁也。 
现代文：更何况现在，奸贼争夺豺狼满地，如果想要为至亲之人而痛，固守礼制，就好像开门迎接盗贼，这不是仁德。 
English: What's more, nowadays, when there are so many crooks vying for power, if you want to grieve for a loved one and stick to etiquette, it's like opening the door to a thief. That's not benevolence.

古文：乃改易权服，扶令上马，使出巡军。
现代文：于是给孙权改换服饰，扶他上马，让他出巡各军。
English: So he gave Sun Quan a change of clothes, helped him onto a horse, and let him go on a tour of the armies.

古文：是时惟有会稽、吴郡、丹杨、豫章、庐陵，然深险之地犹未尽从，而天下英豪布在州郡，宾旅寄寓之士以安危去就为意，未有君臣之固。
现代文：当时只有会稽、吴郡、丹阳、豫章、庐陵，但是偏僻险阻的地方还没有全部顺从，而天下豪杰都分布在各州郡中，门客寄托之人因安危而考虑去留，没有君臣固守的伦理。
English: At that time, only Huiqi, Wu County, Danyang, Yuzhang, and Fuling were in compliance, but not all remote and dangerous places were compliant. The world's heroes were distributed in every county in the country, and those who were entrusted by their masters were considering to stay because of their safety. They did not have the ethics of sticking to their masters.

古文：张昭、周瑜等谓权可与共成大业，故委心而服事焉。
现代文：张昭、周瑜等认为孙权可以一起成就大业，所以屈心服侍他。
English: Zhang Zhao, Zhou Yu and others believed that Sun Quan could achieve a great career together, so they bent down to serve him.

古文：曹公表权为讨虏将军，领会稽太守，屯吴，使丞之郡行文书事。
现代文：曹操上表任孙权为讨虏将军，兼任会稽太守，驻守吴地，让郡丞到郡中代理文书事宜。
English: Cao Cao appointed Sun Quan as the general to fight against the captors, and he also served as the inspector-general of the guild, stationed in Wudi, and asked Gu Junjo to go to Guanzhong to represent the paperwork.

古文：待张昭以师傅之礼，而周瑜、程普、吕范等为将率。招延俊秀，聘求名士，鲁肃、诸葛瑾等始为宾客。
现代文：以师傅之礼对待张昭，而周瑜、程普、吕范等作为将领的表率，招揽才俊，聘请名士，鲁肃、诸葛瑾人刚开始都是他的门下宾客。
English: He treated Zhang Zhao with the courtesy of a master, while Zhou Yu, Cheng Pu, Lü Fan and others, as the leaders of the generals, recruited talents and hired celebrities. Lu Su and Zhuge Xuan were his guests from the beginning.

古文：分部诸将，镇抚山越，讨不从命。
现代文：各部将领镇守各地，征讨不从命之人。
English: The generals of various ministries will guard the towns in various regions and solicit those who do not follow their orders.

古文：七年，权母吴氏薨。
现代文：建安七年，孙权母亲吴氏去世。
English: In the seventh year of Jian'an, Sun Quan's mother Wu died.

古文：八年，权西伐黄祖，破其舟军，惟城未克，而山寇复动。
现代文：建安八年，孙权往西征讨黄祖，攻破他的水军，只有城池没有攻克，而山中寇匪又再次动乱。
English: In the eighth year of Jianan, Sun Quan went to the west to fight Huang Zu and defeated his navy. Only the city was not conquered, and the bandits in the mountains were once again in turmoil.

古文：还过豫章，使吕范平鄱阳，程普讨乐安，太史慈领海昏，韩当、周泰、吕蒙等为剧县令长。
现代文：返回时经过豫章，派吕范平定了鄱阳，会稽郡的程普征讨乐安，太史慈兼任海昏，韩当、周泰、吕蒙等，担任剧县县长。
English: When he returned, he went through Yu Zhang, sent Lv Fan to level Fenyang, Cheng Puzheng of Hefei County to seek peace and happiness, Taishi Ci concurrently served as Haikou, and Handang, Zhou Tai, Lv Meng, etc. served as the head of Hefei County.

古文：九年，权弟丹杨太守翊为左右所害，以从兄瑜代翊。
现代文：建安九年，孙权的弟弟，丹阳太守孙翊被侍从杀害，让堂兄孙瑜代替孙翊。
English: In the 9th year of Jian'an, Sun Quan's younger brother, Danyang Daju Sun Yao, was killed by an attendant, and his cousin Sun Yu replaced Sun Yao.

古文：十年，权使贺齐讨上饶，分为建平县。
现代文：建安十年，孙权派贺齐征讨上饶，分为建平县。
English: In the 10th year of Jian'an, Sun Quan sent a delegation to Shangrao to collect taxes. Shangrao was divided into Jianping County.

古文：十二年，西征黄祖，虏其人民而还。
现代文：建安十二年，孙权往西征讨黄祖，俘虏了他的百姓后返回。
English: In the twelfth year of Jianan, Sun Quan went to the west to fight Huang Zu, captured his people and returned.

古文：十三年春，权复征黄祖，祖先遣舟兵拒军，都尉吕蒙破其前锋，而凌统、董袭等尽锐攻之，遂屠其城。
现代文：建安十三年春，孙权再次征讨黄祖，黄祖派水军抗击大军，都尉吕蒙攻破了大军前锋，而凌统、董袭等人率领精锐士兵攻打，随后屠戮了城池。
English: In the spring of the 13th year of Jianan, Sun Quan once again enlisted Huang Zu. Huang Zu sent a naval force to fight against the large army. Captain Lv Meng broke through the large army's vanguard, while Ling Tong, Dong Wei and others led elite soldiers to attack and then slaughter the city.

古文：祖挺身亡走，骑士冯则追枭其首，虏其男女数万口。
现代文：黄祖只身逃走，骑士冯则追击并将他枭首，俘虏了男女百姓数万人。
English: Huang Zu fled alone, while the knight Feng chased and stabbed him, capturing tens of thousands of men and women.

古文：是岁，使贺齐讨黟、歙，分歙为始新、新定、犁阳、休阳县，以六县为新都郡。
现代文：当年，孙权派贺齐征讨黟、歙等部落，并将歙县分为始新、新定、犁阳、休阳县，将六县作为新都郡。
English: In that year, Sun Quan sent out an army to subjugate the Xing and Yao tribes, and divided Yao County into Shixin, Xinding, Fenyang and Xuyang Counties, and made six counties into Xindu County.

古文：荆州牧刘表死，鲁肃乞奉命吊表二子，且以观变。
现代文：荆州牧刘表去世后，鲁肃请求奉命为刘表的两个儿子吊丧，暂且观察形势变化。
English: After the death of Liu Biao of Jingzhou Moo, Rusu requested to be ordered to hold a funeral for Liu Biao's two sons, and temporarily observe the changes in the situation.

古文：肃未到，而曹公已临其境，表子琮举众以降。
现代文：鲁肃还没到，而曹操已到达边境，刘表的儿子刘琮率众投降。
English: Rusun had not yet arrived, but Cao Cao had already reached the border. Liu Yao, the son of Liu Biao, led the crowd to surrender.

古文：刘备欲南济江，肃与相见，因传权旨，为陈成败。
现代文：刘备想要往南渡江，鲁肃与他相见，就传达孙权的想法并陈述成败的得失。
English: Liu Bei wanted to go to the south to cross the river, and Lu Su met with him to convey Sun Quan's thoughts and state the gains and losses of success.

古文：备进住夏口，使诸葛亮诣权，权遣周瑜、程普等行。
现代文：刘备进驻夏口，派诸葛亮拜访孙权，孙权派周瑜、程普等出行。
English: Liu Bei stationed in Xiakou, sent Zhuge Liang to visit Sun Quan, and Sun Quan sent Zhou Yu, Cheng Pu and others to travel.

古文：是时曹公新得表众，形势甚盛，诸议者皆望风畏惧，多劝权迎之。惟瑜、肃执拒之议，意与权同。
现代文：当时曹操刚得到了刘表的部众，势力强盛，当时的人都望风畏惧，大多都劝孙权迎接曹操，只有周瑜、鲁肃坚持抗击的想法，并且与孙权相同。
English: At that time, Cao Cao had just gained Liu Biao's subordinates, and his power was strong. At that time, people were afraid of the wind, and most of them advised Sun Quan to meet Cao Cao. Only Zhou Yu and Lu Su insisted on the idea of resistance, and they were the same as Sun Quan.

古文：瑜、普为左右督，各领万人，与备俱进，遇於赤壁，大破曹公军。
现代文：周瑜、程普担任左右都督，各率领一万人，跟刘备共同前进，在赤壁遭遇，大破曹操军队，曹公烧毁其余船只败退。
English: Zhou Yu and Cheng Pu acted as the left and right governors, each leading ten thousand people, advancing together with Liu Bei, encountered in Chibi, defeated Cao Cao's army, Cao Gong burned the remaining ships and retreated.

古文：公烧其馀船引退，士卒饥疫，死者大半。
现代文：士兵死者大半。
English: Most of the soldiers were killed.

古文：备、瑜等复追至南郡，曹公遂北还，留曹仁、徐晃於江陵，使乐进守襄阳。
现代文：刘备、周瑜等又追赶至南郡，曹操就率军回军，留下曹仁、徐晃等在江陵驻守，让乐进驻守襄阳。
English: Liu Bei, Zhou Yu, etc. also chased them to Nan County, Cao Cao led the army back to the army, leaving Cao Ren, Xu Qiang, etc. stationed in Jiangling, and allowing Le Jin to be stationed in Xiangyang.

古文：时甘宁在夷陵，为仁党所围，用吕蒙计，留凌统以拒仁，以其半救宁，军以胜反。
现代文：当时，甘宁在榆林被曹仁的部队围困，采用吕蒙的计策，留下凌统抗击曹仁，将其中的一半士兵去救援甘宁，大军得胜返回。
English: At that time, Ganning was besieged by Cao Ren's troops in Yulin. Using Lv Meng's strategy, he left Ling to resist Cao Ren, and sent half of his soldiers to rescue Ganning. The large army returned victorious.

古文：权自率众围合肥，使张昭攻九江之当涂。
现代文：孙权亲自率众围困合肥，派张昭攻打九江郡的当涂。
English: Sun Quan personally led the crowd to besiege Hefei and sent Zhang Zhao to attack Dangtuo in Jiujiang County.

古文：昭兵不利，权攻城逾月不能下。
现代文：张昭出兵不利，孙权攻城一个多月未能攻克。
English: Zhang Zhao's troops were unfavorable, and Sun Quan's siege failed to conquer the city for more than a month.

古文：曹公自荆州还，遣张喜将骑赴合肥。未至，权退。
现代文：曹操从荆州返回，派张喜率领骑兵赶赴合肥，还没有到达，孙权就撤退了。
English: Cao Cao returned from Jingzhou and sent Zhang Xi to lead the cavalry to rush to Hefei. Before they arrived, Sun Quan withdrew.

古文：十四年，瑜、仁相守岁馀，所杀伤甚众。
现代文：建安十四年，周瑜、曹仁相持一年多，死伤的人很多。
English: In the 14th year of Jianan, Zhou Yu and Cao Ren held each other for more than a year. Many people were killed and injured.

古文：仁委城走。
现代文：曹仁弃城逃走。
English: Cao Ren abandoned the city and fled.

古文：权以瑜为南郡太守。
现代文：孙权任命周瑜为南郡太守。
English: Sun Quan appointed Zhou Yu as the governor of Nan County.

古文：刘备表权行车骑将军，领徐州牧。
现代文：刘备上表，请任孙权代理车骑将军，兼任徐州牧。
English: Liu Bei went up to the table and asked Sun Quan to be the acting chariot and cavalry general, and also served as the Xuzhou herdsman.

古文：备领荆州牧，屯公安。
现代文：刘备接任荆州牧，驻守公安。
English: Liu Bei took over the post of Jingzhou magistrate and stationed at the public security center.

古文：十五年，分豫章为鄱阳郡；分长沙为汉昌郡，以鲁肃为太守，屯陆口。
现代文：建安十五年，朝廷将豫章分为鄱阳郡，将长沙分为汉昌郡，任命鲁肃为太守，驻守陆口。
English: In the 15th year of Jian'an, the imperial court divided Yuzhang into Fenyang County, divided Changsha into Hanchang County, and appointed Lu Su as the governor, stationed in Lukou.

古文：十六年，权徙治秣陵。
现代文：建安十六年，孙权将治所转移到秣陵。
English: In the 16th year of Jianan, Sun Quan moved the seat of government to Fuling.

古文：明年，城石头，改秣陵为建业。
现代文：第二年，成石头，将秣陵改为建业。
English: In the second year, Chengshi changed the name of Fuling to Jianye.

古文：闻曹公将来侵，作濡须坞。
现代文：得知曹操将要前来进攻，就修建了濡须坞。
English: Learning that Cao Cao was about to attack, they built a wet dock.

古文：十八年正月，曹公攻濡须，权与相拒月馀。
现代文：建安十八年正月，曹操攻打濡须，孙权和他相持一个多月。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of Jian'an, Cao Cao attacked Niushu, and Sun Quan held out against him for more than a month.

古文：曹公望权军，叹其齐肃，乃退。
现代文：曹操看孙权的部队，感叹他们齐整严肃，就退军了。
English: Cao Cao looked at Sun Quan's troops, lamented that they were all so serious, and withdrew.

古文：初，曹公恐江滨郡县为权所略，徵令内移。
现代文：当初，曹操担心江滨郡县被孙权掠夺，就诏令让他们往内迁移。
English: At first, Cao Cao was worried that Jiangbin County and County would be plundered by Sun Quan, so he ordered them to move inland.

古文：民转相惊，自庐江、九江、蕲春、广陵户十馀万皆东渡江，江西遂虚，合肥以南惟有皖城。
现代文：百姓互相惊吓，从庐江、九江、蕲春、广陵有十万多户百姓，都东渡长江，江西地区就空虚了，合肥以南地区只剩下皖城。
English: People startled each other. More than 100,000 households from the Li River, Jiujiang River, Hunchun River and Guangling River all crossed the Yangtze River to the east. The Jiangxi region was empty, and only Lucheng remained south of Hefei.

古文：十九年五月，权征皖城。闰月，克之，获庐江太守朱光及参军董和，男女数万口。
现代文：建安十九年五月，孙权征讨宛城，闰月，攻克皖城，抓获了庐江太守朱光以及参军董和，以及男女百姓数万人。
English: In May of the 19th year of Jian'an, Sun Quan went to the city of Wancheng and the city of Yueyue, and conquered the city of Handan. He captured Zhu Guang, the governor of the Handan River, and Dong He, who joined the army, as well as tens of thousands of men and women.

古文：是岁刘备定蜀。权以备已得益州，令诸葛瑾从求荆州诸郡。
现代文：当年，刘备平定蜀地，孙权认为刘备已经得到了益州，就令诸葛瑾前去请求荆州归还各郡。
English: That year, Liu Bei conquered Shu, and Sun Quan thought that Liu Bei had already gained Yizhou, so he ordered Zhuge Liang to go to Jingzhou to request the return of the counties.

古文：备不许，曰： 吾方图凉州，凉州定，乃尽以荆州与吴耳。 
现代文：刘备没有答应，说: 我正在图谋凉州，凉州平定后，就将荆州全部都归还给东吴罢了。 
English: Liu Bei did not agree and said, "I am plotting against Liangzhou. After Liangzhou is pacified, I will return all of Jingzhou to Eastern Wu."

古文：权曰： 此假而不反，而欲以虚辞引岁。 
现代文：孙权说: 这是借了不还，还想要用假话来拖延时间。 
English: Sun Quan said: This is borrowing and not repaying, and also trying to use lies to delay the time.

古文：遂置南三郡长吏，关羽尽逐之。
现代文：于是设置了南三郡长吏，关羽将他们全都驱逐了。
English: As a result, the governors of the three southern counties were set up, and Guan Yu expelled them all.

古文：权大怒，乃遣吕蒙督鲜于丹、徐忠、孙规等兵二万取长沙、零陵、桂阳三郡，使鲁肃以万人屯巴丘以御关羽。
现代文：孙权大怒，就派吕蒙都领鲜于单，徐中圭等人率兵两万，攻取长沙、零陵、桂阳三郡，派鲁肃率领一万人驻守巴丘以抵御关羽。
English: Sun Quan was so angry that he sent Lv Mengdu to lead Xiang Yu Shan, Xu Zhonggui and others to lead 20,000 soldiers to capture Changsha, Luling and Guiyang counties, and sent Lu Su to lead 10,000 people to guard Bachu to resist Guan Yu.

古文：权住陆口，为诸军节度。
现代文：孙权驻守陆口，作为各军的调度。
English: Sun Quan was stationed at Lukou, acting as the dispatcher of the armies.

古文：蒙到，二郡皆服，惟零陵太守郝普未下。
现代文：吕蒙到达后，二郡都归服，只有零陵太守贺普没有依附。
English: After the arrival of Lv Meng, the two counties were subjugated, and only He Pu, the governor of Luling, did not adhere to it.

古文：会备到公安，使关羽将三万兵至益阳，权乃召蒙等使还助肃。
现代文：适逢刘备到公安，派关羽率领三万士兵到益阳，孙权就征召吕蒙等使者返回援助鲁肃。
English: When Liu Bei was transferred to the Public Security Bureau, he sent Guan Yu to Yiyang with 30,000 soldiers, and Sun Quan called on Lu Meng and other emissaries to return to help Rusu.

古文：蒙使人诱普，普降，尽得三郡将守，因引军还，与孙皎、潘璋并鲁肃兵并进，拒羽於益阳。
现代文：吕蒙派人招诱霍普，霍普投降，并将三军的将士守卫都收编，随后率军返回，和孙皎、潘璋以及鲁肃的部队一同前进，在益阳抗击关羽。
English: Lv Meng sent someone to entice Hopu, Hopu surrendered, and gathered the soldiers and guards of the three armies, and then led the army back, and advanced together with the troops of Sun Qian, Pan Qian and Luzhou to resist Guan Yu in Yiyang.

古文：未战，会曹公入汉中，备惧失益州，使使求和。
现代文：还没有交战，适逢曹操进入汉中，刘备担心失去益州，派使者请求求和。
English: Cao Cao had not yet entered the war when Liu Bei, fearing the loss of Yizhou, sent an envoy to request peace.

古文：权令诸葛瑾报，更寻盟好，遂分荆州长沙、江夏、桂阳以东属权，南郡、零陵、武陵以西属备。
现代文：孙权让诸葛请回复，在寻找同盟之人，于是分荆州，长沙，江夏，贵阳以东归属孙权，南郡、零陵、武陵以西归属刘备。
English: Sun Quan asked Zhuge to please reply, he was looking for allies, so he divided Jingzhou, Changsha, Jiangxia, and Guiyang to the east to belong to Sun Quan, and Nan County, Luling, and Wuling to the west to belong to Liu Bei.

古文：备归，而曹公已还。权反自陆口，遂征合肥。
现代文：刘备返回，而曹操已经退军，孙权又从路口征讨合肥。
English: Liu Bei returned, but Cao Cao had already retreated, and Sun Quan once again marched from the intersection to Hefei.

古文：合肥未下，彻军还。
现代文：合肥没有被攻克，孙权率军返回。
English: Hefei was not conquered, and Sun Quan returned with his army.

古文：兵皆就路，权与凌统、甘宁等在津北为魏将张辽所袭，统等以死扞权，权乘骏马越津桥得去。
现代文：士兵都沿着路前行，孙权跟凌统、甘宁等人在津北，被魏朝将领张辽偷袭，凌统等人誓死保护孙权，孙权骑上骏马越过金桥得以离开。
English: The soldiers were marching along the road. Sun Quan, along with Ling Tong, Gan Ning and others, were in the north of Tsingtao. They were attacked by the Wei Dynasty general Zhang Liao. Ling Tong and others swore to protect Sun Quan to the death. Sun Quan rode his horse across the Golden Bridge and was able to leave.

古文：二十一年冬，曹公次于居巢，遂攻濡须。
现代文：建安二十一年冬天，曹操在居巢驻扎，随后进攻濡须。
English: In the winter of the 21st year of Jian'an, Cao Cao stationed himself in his lair, and then attacked Wushu.

古文：二十二年春，权令都尉徐详诣曹公请降，公报使脩好，誓重结婚。
现代文：建安二十二年春，孙权令都尉徐阳到曹操处请降，曹操回复使者，两国修好，结交婚姻。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year of Jianan, Sun Quan ordered the captain Xu Yang to go to Cao Cao's office to ask for a reduction, Cao Cao replied to the envoy, the two countries made amends, and made a marriage.

古文：二十三年十月，权将如吴，亲乘马射虎於庱亭。
现代文：建安二十三年十月，孙权将要到吴国，亲自我夌亭乘马射虎。
English: In October of the 23rd year of Jian'an, Sun Quan will go to Wuzhong to personally ride a horse and shoot a tiger.

古文：马为虎所伤，权投以双戟，虎卻废，常从张世击以戈，获之。
现代文：骏马被猛虎所伤，孙权就用双戟掷向老虎，老虎退却，身边侍从张世用长戈攻打老虎，抓获了它。
English: When Sun Quan's horse was injured by a fierce tiger, he threw a pair of darts at the tiger. The tiger retreated, and Zhang Shiyi's attendants attacked the tiger with long spears and captured it.

古文：二十四年，关羽围曹仁於襄阳，曹公遣左将军于禁救之。会汉水暴起，羽以舟兵尽虏禁等步骑三万送江陵，惟城未拔。权内惮羽，外欲以为己功，笺与曹公，乞以讨羽自效。
现代文：建安二十四年，关羽在襄阳围攻曹仁，曹操派左将军于禁援救曹仁，适逢汉水水位暴涨，关羽带领水兵俘虏了于禁及部下的步兵骑兵三万多人，并送往江陵，只有城池没有攻克孙权，内心忌惮关羽，又想要将功劳据为己有，就写信给曹操，请求攻打关羽以证明自己。
English: In the 24th year of Jian'an, Guan Yu besieged Cao Ren in Xiangyang. Cao Cao sent General Zuo to rescue Cao Ren. When the Han River water level rose sharply, Guan Yu led the sailors to capture more than 30,000 infantry and cavalry of Guan Yu and his subordinates and sent them to Jiangling. Only Chengchi did not conquer Sun Quan. Guan Yu was afraid in his heart and wanted to take the credit for himself. He wrote to Cao Cao and asked to attack Guan Yu to prove himself.

古文：曹公且欲使羽与权相持以斗之，驿传权书，使曹仁以弩射示羽。
现代文：曹操想要让关羽和孙权相持并互相争斗，就派驿使传送孙权的书信，并让曹仁射出弩箭警示关羽。
English: Cao Cao wanted Guan Yu and Sun Quan to hold each other and fight each other, so he sent an envoy to deliver Sun Quan's letter, and asked Cao Ren to shoot a crossbow arrow to warn Guan Yu.

古文：羽犹豫不能去。
现代文：关羽犹豫没有离开。
English: Guan Yu did not hesitate to leave.

古文：闰月，权征羽，先遣吕蒙袭公安，获将军士仁。
现代文：闰月，孙权征讨关羽，先派吕蒙袭击公安，抓获了将军士仁。
English: In the intercalary month, Sun Quan sent Lv Meng to attack the public security and captured the soldier Jin.

古文：蒙到南郡，南郡太守麋芳以城降。
现代文：吕蒙到了南郡，南郡太守糜芳献城投降。
English: Lv Meng arrived in Nanshun, and the governor of Nanshun, Yu Fang, surrendered the city.

古文：蒙据江陵，抚其老弱，释于禁之囚。
现代文：吕蒙占据江陵，安抚当地老弱百姓，释放了于禁抓捕的囚犯。
English: Lv Meng occupied Jiangling, pacified the local old and weak people, and released the prisoners who were under arrest.

古文：陆逊别取宜都，获秭归、枝江、夷道，还屯夷陵，守峡口以备蜀。
现代文：陆逊另外攻取了宜都，攻占了秭归、枝江、夷道，返回驻守夷陵，守卫峡谷以防备蜀国。
English: In addition, Lu Xun captured Yidu, and conquered Shugu, Shijiang, and Yidu, and returned to garrison Yiling, guarding the canyon to prevent Shu.

古文：关羽还当阳，西保麦城。权使诱之。羽伪降，立幡旗为象人於城上，因遁走，兵皆解散，尚十馀骑。
现代文：关羽返回丹阳，又往西走麦城，孙权派使者招诱他，关羽假装投降，并树立蕃旗，做了象人放在城上，趁机逃走，士兵都四处离散，只剩下十多名骑兵。
English: Guan Yu returned to Danyang and went west to Maicheng. Sun Quan sent an envoy to entice him. Guan Yu pretended to surrender and set up a banner. He made an elephant man and placed it on the city. He took the opportunity to escape. The soldiers scattered everywhere. Only more than ten cavalrymen remained.

古文：权先使朱然、潘璋断其径路。
现代文：孙权先派朱然、潘璋斩断了关羽逃走的路。
English: Sun Quan first sent Zhu Ran and Pan Ye to cut off Guan Yu's escape route.

古文：十二月，璋司马马忠获羽及其子平、都督赵累等於章乡，遂定荆州。
现代文：十二月，刘璋司马马忠在章乡擒获了关羽及他的儿子关平、都督赵累等，于是平定了荆州。
English: In December, Liu Bei's general Ma Ma Zhong captured Guan Yu, his son Guan Ping, and the governor Zhao Lei in Zhangxiang, thus pacifying Jingzhou.

古文：是岁大疫，尽除荆州民租税。
现代文：这一年有大瘟疫，孙权将荆州百姓的赋税田租全部免除。
English: In that year, there was a great plague, and Sun Quan exempted the people of Jingzhou from paying land tax altogether.

古文：曹公表权为骠骑将军，假节领荆州牧，封南昌侯。
现代文：曹操上表请任孙权为骠骑将军，持符节兼任荆州牧，封为南昌侯。
English: At Cao Cao's request, Sun Quan was appointed as the general of the cavalry. He was also appointed as the herdsman of Jingzhou and the governor of Nanchang.

古文：权遣校尉梁寓奉贡于汉，及令王惇市马，又遣朱光等归。
现代文：孙权派校尉梁寓到汉朝进贡奉献，又令王惇去买马，又派朱光等人返回。
English: Sun Quan sent Lieutenant Liang Er to pay tribute to the Han Dynasty, and ordered Wang Qian to buy horses, and sent Zhu Guang and others to return.

古文：二十五年春正月，曹公薨，太子丕代为丞相魏王，改年为延康。
现代文：建安二十五年正月，曹操去世，太子曹丕代替他做魏王，年号为延康。
English: In the first month of the 25th year of Jian'an, Cao Cao died, and Prince Cao Pi replaced him as the king of Wei. The year was called Yan Kang.

古文：秋，魏将梅敷使张俭求见抚纳。
现代文：秋天，魏朝将领梅敷派张俭请求安抚接纳。
English: In the autumn, Zhang Jian, the general of the Wei Dynasty, sent Baishiki to request appeasement and acceptance.

古文：南阳阴、酂、筑阳、山都、中卢五县民五千家来附。
现代文：南阳阴、讚、筑阳？山都、中卢五县的百姓有五千家前来归附。
English: Five thousand households in five counties of Nanyangyin, Shan, Chikuyang, Shandu and Zhonglu came to join.

古文：冬，魏嗣王称尊号，改元为黄初。
现代文：冬天，魏嗣王曹丕登帝位，改年号为黄初。
English: In winter, the Wei King Cao Pi ascended to the throne, and the year name was changed to Huangchu.

古文：二年四月，刘备称帝於蜀。
现代文：黄初二年四月，刘备在蜀地称帝。
English: In April of the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Liu Bei proclaimed himself emperor in Shu.

古文：权自公安都鄂，改名武昌，以武昌、下雉、寻阳、阳新、柴桑、沙羡六县为武昌郡。
现代文：孙权从公安都领卾郡，改名为武昌，以武昌、下雉、寻阳、阳新、柴桑、沙羡六县为武昌郡。
English: Sun Quan changed the name of Wuchang from the public security capital of Linyi County to Wuchang County, and named six counties as Wuchang County, including Wuchang, Lower Linyi, Xuanyang, Yangxin, Chaixang and Shaqian.

古文：五月，建业言甘露降。
现代文：同年五月，建业上报有甘露降临。
English: In May of the same year, it was reported in the construction report that nectar had fallen.

古文：八月，城武昌，下令诸将曰： 夫存不忘亡，安必虑危，古之善教。
现代文：八月，都城武昌，下令将领说: 生存不忘危亡，安稳一定考虑危难，就是古代很好的教导。
English: In August, the capital city of Wuchang, ordered the generals to say: "Survival does not forget peril, stability must consider danger, is a good ancient teaching.

古文：昔隽不疑汉之名臣，於安平之世而刀剑不离於身，盖君子之於武备，不可以已。况今处身疆畔，豺狼交接，而可轻忽不思变难哉？
现代文：过去隽不怀疑汉朝的功臣，在安稳的时代，尚且刀剑不离身，大概是君子对于武器防备不可以停止，更何况现在身处边疆，豺狼交接，又怎么能轻视而不考虑事情变化呢？
English: In the past, there was no doubt about the heroes and heroines of the Han Dynasty. In the era of stability, even if the sword does not leave the body, it is probably impossible for a gentleman to stop the preparation of weapons. What's more, now that we are on the frontier, the jackals are handing over, how can we despise and not consider the change of things?

古文：顷闻诸将出入，各尚谦约，不从人兵，甚非备虑爱身之谓。夫保己遗名，以安君亲，孰与危辱？
现代文：我听说将领们出入，都崇尚谦虚节俭，不让侍从跟随，这实在不是对自己倍加爱护的作为呀，保存自己，留下名声，以安定君主亲人，比危难受辱哪一个更好呢？
English: I have heard that generals go in and out, they all advocate modesty and frugality, and do not allow their attendants to follow. This is really not an act of love for themselves. Preserving oneself, leaving a reputation to stabilize the monarch's relatives, which one is better than danger and humiliation?

古文：宜深警戒，务崇其大，副孤意焉。 自魏文帝践阼，权使命称藩，及遣于禁等还。十一月，策命权曰： 盖圣王之法，以德设爵，以功制禄；劳大者禄厚，德盛者礼丰。
现代文：应该多加戒备，推崇大的方面，才符合我的想法。 自从魏文帝曹丕登基后，孙权派使者请称藩王，又派于禁等人返回，十一月，曹丕下令孙权说: 圣王之法，按照德行设立爵位，按照功劳制定俸禄，功劳大的俸禄丰厚，德行深厚的礼遇更好。
English: Since the Wei Emperor Cao Pi ascended to the throne, Sun Quan sent an envoy to ask to be called the king of the domain, and also sent Yu Kan and others to return. In November, Cao Pi ordered Sun Quan to say: The law of the holy king, according to the virtue of the establishment of the title, according to the merit of the salary, the reward of the great merit is rich, and the courtesy of the profound virtue is better.

古文：故叔旦有夹辅之勋，太公有鹰扬之功，并启土宇，并受备物，所以表章元功，殊异贤哲也。
现代文：所以，叔旦有辅佐的功劳，太公有鹰扬的功劳，并启土宇，并受备物，所以表彰元勋，对贤士特殊对待。
English: Therefore, the uncle has the merit of the assistant, the grand duke has the merit of the eagle, and the founder of the earth, and the recipient of the provision, so the commendation of the founder, and the special treatment of the sages.

古文：近汉高祖受命之初，分裂膏腴以王八姓，斯则前世之懿事，后王之元龟也。
现代文：近代汉高祖承天受命之时，分裂疆土分封八王。这是前世的美事，后代君主的遵从。
English: When the modern ancestors of the Han Dynasty received the order from Heaven, they divided the territory into eight kingdoms. This was a beautiful thing in the past life, and the descendants of the monarchs obeyed.

古文：朕以不德，承运革命，君临万国，秉统天机，思齐先代，坐而待旦。
现代文：朕以浅薄的德行，承天受命，君临万方，统管天下，希望能与先贤一样，垂拱而治。
English: With a shallow virtue, I will follow the order of heaven, reign in all directions, and govern the world. I hope to be like the sages and rule the world.

古文：惟君天资忠亮，命世作佐，深睹历数，达见废兴，远遣行人，浮于潜汉。望风影附，抗疏称藩，兼纳纤絺南方之贡，普遣诸将来还本朝，忠肃内发，款诚外昭，信著金石，义盖山河，朕甚嘉焉。
现代文：您天性忠诚正直，上天命您辅佐帝王，深知天命历数，明悉国家兴亡，身处遥远之地派遣使者渡过潜江、汉水来朝见，随即归附，上疏请为藩邦，并交纳丝绸等南方贡品，将所有将领都送回本朝，忠诚恭敬发自内心，诚意款款对外昭示，信义铭刻于金石之上，道义覆盖天下，朕非常赞赏。
English: You are loyal and honest by nature. It is your heavenly destiny to support the emperor. You are well aware of the number of days in the heavenly calendar. You are well aware of the rise and fall of the country. In a faraway land, you sent an envoy to cross the Jianjiang River and the Han River to see the emperor, and then returned to the imperial court. You invited the Shang Dynasty to become a vassal state, and paid tribute to the south such as silk. You sent all generals back to the imperial court. Loyalty and respect come from the heart, sincerity is shown to the outside world, sincerity is engraved on the gold stone, and morality covers the world.

古文：今封君为吴王，使使持节太常高平侯贞，授君玺绶策书、金虎符第一至第五、左竹使符第一至第十，以大将军使持节督交州，领荆州牧事，锡君青土，苴以白茅，对扬朕命，以尹东夏。
现代文：现在加封您为吴王，派使者持节太常高平侯贞，授予您印玺、绶带、以及封诰文书、金虎符第一至第五枚、左竹使符第一至第十枚，以大将军使持节的身份督管交州，兼任荆州牧，赐给您用白茅包裹的青土，以回复感恩朕的命令，令您管理东部中国。
English: Now, I seal you as the king of Wu, send an emissary to hold the festival of Taichang Gaoping Houzhen, award you the seal, the ribbon, and the sealing document, the first to the fifth gold tiger charms, and the first to the tenth left bamboo envoy charms, supervise Jiaozhou as the general to hold the festival, and also serve as the Jingzhou herdsman, give you the blue soil wrapped in white maypole to reply to my grateful order, and let you manage eastern China.

古文：其上故骠骑将军南昌侯印绶符策。
现代文：送上过去骠骑将军的印玺、绶带、符节及策封文书。
English: The seal, ribbon, rune and seal-making documents of the former general were presented.

古文：今又加君九锡，其敬听后命。
现代文：现在再加赏您九锡之礼，请您听从以下命令。
English: Now, to reward you with Jiuxi's gratitude, please obey the following order.

古文：以君绥安东南，纲纪江外，民夷安业，无或携贰，是用锡君大辂、戎辂各一，玄牡二驷。君务财劝农，仓库盈积，是用锡君衮冕之服，赤舄副焉。君化民以德，礼教兴行，是用锡君轩县之乐。君宣导休风，怀柔百越，是用锡君朱户以居。君运其才谋，官方任贤，是用锡君纳陛以登。君忠勇并奋，清除奸慝，是用锡君虎贲之士百人。君振威陵迈，宣力荆南，枭灭凶丑，罪人斯得，是用锡君鈇钺各一。君文和於内，武信於外，是用锡君彤弓一、彤矢百、玈弓十、玈矢千。君以忠肃为基，恭俭为德，是用锡君秬鬯一卣，圭瓒副焉。
现代文：因为您平定了东南地区，治理好长江以南地区，百姓安居乐业，无人怀有二心，所以赏赐您大车、军车各一辆，八匹枣红色公马八;因为您掌管财务劝课农桑，仓库充实，所以赏给您绣着龙的服冠，并配上红色的鞋子;因为您以德行教化百姓，使礼教盛行，所以赏给您一套钟磬乐器;因为您倡行公序良俗，以柔和政策安抚百越少数民族，所以赏给您红色大门的房子以居住；因为您运用自己的才干智谋，任用贤人，所以赏您 纳陛 ，以便登殿处理事务;因为您忠诚勇敢，消除邪邪，所以赏赐您虎贲卫士一百人可供调用;因为您威震四方，震慑荆南，消灭奸恶，使罪人罪有应得，所以赏给您铡刀、斧钺各一具;因为您对内靠文治得以和谐，对外武力依靠昭示信义，所以赏赐您红漆弓一张、红色利箭一百支、黑色漆弓十张、黑色利箭一千支;因为您以忠诚顺义为基石，将恭俭看做品德，所以赏赐您美酒一罐，以有玉制酒杓一具相配。
English: Because you have pacified the southeastern region, governed the area south of the Yangtze River well, and the people live and work in peace and contentment, no one has a double heart, so you are rewarded with a car and a military vehicle each, eight jujube red male horses; because you are in charge of finance, agricultural mulberry, and the warehouse is full, so you are awarded with a dragon embroidered crown and red shoes; because you use virtue to educate the people and make etiquette prevail, so you are awarded with a carillon musical instrument; because you advocate public order and morality, and appease the hundreds of ethnic minorities with soft policies, so you are awarded with a

古文：钦哉！
现代文：敬重吧!
English: Admiration!

古文：敬敷训典，以服朕命，以勖相我国家，永终尔显烈。 
现代文：我谨向您宣扬先王仪章，以服从朕的命令，努力辅佐我治理国家，成就您长久的伟业! 
English: I would like to preach to you the rituals of the former king, to obey my orders, to assist me in governing the country, and to achieve your long-term great cause!

古文：是岁，刘备帅军来伐，至巫山、秭归，使使诱导武陵蛮夷，假与印传，许之封赏。於是诸县及五谿民皆反为蜀。
现代文：这一年，刘备率军前来征讨，到了巫山、秭归，派使者招诱武陵的少数民族，借给他们印信绶带，答应他们给予封赏，于是各县以及五谿的少数民族都反叛为蜀国。
English: In this year, Liu Bei led the army to come to collect, went to Wushan, Sui and Gui, sent envoys to lure the ethnic minorities in Wuling, lent them the seal and ribbon, and promised to reward them, so the ethnic minorities in all counties and Wuzhong rebelled for Shu.

古文：权以陆逊为督，督朱然、潘璋等以拒之。遣都尉赵咨使魏。
现代文：孙权，以陆逊为都督，督领朱然、潘璋等人抗击刘备，派都尉赵咨出使魏国。
English: Sun Quan, with Lu Xun as the governor, and the governors Zhu Ran, Pan Ye and others resisted Liu Bei, and sent the captain Zhao Zhaorong as an envoy to Wei.

古文：魏帝问曰： 吴王何等主也？ 
现代文：魏文帝问: 吴王是什么样的主君？ 
English: Wei Wendi asked: What kind of master is King Wu?

古文：咨对曰： 聪明仁智，雄略之主也。 帝问其状，咨曰： 纳鲁肃於凡品，是其聪也；拔吕蒙於行陈，是其明也；获于禁而不害，是其仁也；取荆州而兵不血刃，是其智也；据三州虎视於天下，是其雄也；屈身於陛下，是其略也。 
现代文：赵咨回答说: 聪明人智，是有雄才大略的主君。 魏文帝问他的状况，赵咨说: 在鲁肃是平凡之时接纳他，是他的聪慧，在军中将吕蒙提拔起来，是他的明智，抓获于禁而没有杀害是他的仁德，夺取荆州而兵不血刃，是他的智慧，占据三州而虎视天下，是他的雄才。屈身侍奉陛下，是他的谋略。 
English: Zhao Ziazhi replied, "A wise man is a master with a grand strategy." Wei Wen Di asked about his condition, Zhao Ziazhi said, "It was his wisdom to accept him when Rusu was ordinary, it was his wisdom to promote Lu Meng in the army, it was his benevolence to capture him without killing him, it was his wisdom to capture Jingzhou without bloodshed, it was his brilliance to occupy the three states while keeping an eye on the world, it was his great talent. It was his strategy to bend down and serve His Majesty.

古文：帝欲封权子登，权以登年幼，上书辞封，重遣西曹掾沈珩陈谢，并献方物。
现代文：魏文帝想要封孙权的儿子孙登，孙权认为孙登年幼，上书推辞封赏，又派西曹掾沈珩陈情谢罪，并献上风俗礼物。
English: Emperor Weiwen wanted to award Sun Quan's son Sun Deng, but Sun Quan thought that Sun Deng was too young, so he wrote a letter to decline the award. He also sent Xi Cao Pi to Shen Yi to express his sympathy and gratitude, and presented him with a custom gift.

古文：立登为王太子。
现代文：后来立孙登为王太子。
English: Later, Sun Teng was appointed crown prince.

古文：黄武元年春正月，陆逊部将军宋谦等攻蜀五屯，皆破之，斩其将。
现代文：黄武元年春正月，陆逊部将宋谦等攻打蜀军的五个兵营，都攻破了，并将守将斩杀。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Huangwu, Lu Xun and Song Qian attacked the five barracks of the Shu army, all of which were broken, and the guards were killed.

古文：三月，鄱阳言黄龙见。
现代文：三月，鄱阳上报有黄龙出现。
English: In March, a yellow dragon was reported in Shenyang.

古文：蜀军分据险地，前后五十馀营，逊随轻重以兵应拒，自正月至闰月，大破之，临陈所斩及投兵降首数万人。
现代文：蜀军分占据险要之地，前后驻扎了五十多个兵营，陆逊根据各营轻重分别派出守卫抵御，从正月至闰六月，大获全胜，蜀军临阵被斩杀和放下武器投降者有几万人。
English: The Shu army occupied a critical position, with more than fifty barracks stationed in front and behind, and the Lüthong sent guards to resist according to the weight of each battalion. From the first month of the year to the leap month of June, they won a complete victory. The Shu army was killed in the front line and there were tens of thousands of people who laid down their weapons and surrendered.

古文：刘备奔走，仅以身免。
现代文：刘备逃跑，仅使得自己免于一死。
English: Liu Bei fled, only saving himself from death.

古文：初，权外讬事魏，而诚心不款。
现代文：当初，孙权对外托言依附曹魏，但心中不诚。
English: At first, Sun Quan relied on Cao Wei for external advice, but he was not sincere in his heart.

古文：魏欲遣侍中辛毗、尚书桓阶往与盟誓，并徵任子，权辞让不受。
现代文：魏国就派侍中辛毗、尚书桓阶前来东吴和孙权两方盟誓，并征召孙权的儿子去做人质，孙权推辞不接受。
English: The State of Wei sent the attendants Sin Pi and Shang Shu Kuan to Dong Wu and Sun Quan to swear an oath, and summoned Sun Quan's son to be a hostage. Sun Quan did not accept the refusal.

古文：秋九月，魏乃命曹休、张辽、臧霸出洞口，曹仁出濡须，曹真、夏侯尚、张郃、徐晃围南郡。
现代文：秋九月，魏国就命令曹休、张辽、臧霸出兵洞口，曹仁出兵濡须坞，曹真、夏侯尚、张郃、徐晃率军围攻南郡。
English: In autumn and September, Wei ordered Cao Xiu, Zhang Liao, and Yan Ba to march to Dongkou, Cao Ren to march to Nusu dock, and Cao Zhen, Xia Hou Shang, Zhang Ye, and Xu Ao to lead the army to besiege Nan County.

古文：权遣吕范等督五军，以舟军拒休等，诸葛瑾、潘璋、杨粲救南郡，朱桓以濡须督拒仁。
现代文：孙权派遣吕范等督率五路人马，依靠船只抗击曹休等，诸葛瑾、潘璋、杨粲前往救援南郡，朱桓以濡须督的身份抗击曹仁。
English: Sun Quan dispatched Lv Fan and other superintendents to lead five people and horses, relying on ships to resist Cao Xiu and others, Zhu Gejun, Pan Jun and Yang Jun went to rescue Nan County, and Zhu Huan resisted Cao Ren as the governor of Nuxu.

古文：时扬、越蛮夷多未平集，内难未弭，故权卑辞上书，求自改厉， 若罪在难除，必不见置，当奉还土地民人，乞寄命交州，以终馀年。 
现代文：当时扬、越蛮夷少数民族大多尚未平定，内患还没消除，所以孙权言辞低微地上书魏文帝，请求改正自己的罪过： 如果我的罪行难以消除，一定不会被安置，理当奉还您赏赐的土地与人民，请求让我寄身交州，终此余生。 
English: At that time, most of the Yang and Yue barbarian ethnic minorities had not yet been pacified, and internal problems had not yet been eliminated, so Sun Quan wrote to Emperor Wei in a low tone, requesting to correct his sins: If my crimes are difficult to eliminate, I will not be resettled, I should return the land and people you have rewarded, and request that I stay in Jiaozhou for the rest of my life.

古文：文帝报曰： 君生於扰攘之际，本有从横之志，降身奉国，以享兹祚。
现代文：魏文帝回信说： 您生在天下动荡之时，本来有纵横天下的志向，却屈身奉待魏国，享有现在的封赏。
English: Emperor Wei Wen replied in a letter: You were born at a time when the whole world was in turmoil, and you originally had the ambition to rule the whole world, but you bowed down to serve the State of Wei and enjoy the present reward.

古文：自君策名已来，贡献盈路。
现代文：自您被策封为吴王以来，进献的物品络绎不绝。
English: Since you were enthroned as the King of Wu, there has been an endless stream of donated items.

古文：讨备之功，国朝仰成。
现代文：征讨刘备的功绩，国家仰仗您取得成功。
English: soliciting the merits of Liu Bei, the country relies on you to succeed.

古文：埋而掘之，古人之所耻。
现代文：如果做人反复无常，古人认为是可耻的。
English: The ancients considered it shameful to be fickle.

古文：朕之与君，大义已定，岂乐劳师远临江汉？
现代文：朕与您之间，君臣大义已经确定，难道乐意劳师动众，兴师远征江、汉吗?
English: Between you and me, the sovereign and the vassal, the great justice has already been determined. Are you willing to work hard to motivate the masses and inspire the expedition of Jiang and Han?

古文：廊庙之议，王者所不得专；三公上君过失，皆有本末。
现代文：朝廷的议论，君主也不能独断专行，三公上报您的过失，都有理有据。
English: The arguments of the court, that the monarch cannot act arbitrarily, and that the three princes should report your fault, are all well-founded.

古文：朕以不明，虽有曾母投杼之疑，犹冀言者不信，以为国福。
现代文：朕虽然不够贤明，虽有曾母投杼的疑惑，但还是希望他们的话不可信，并认为这是国家褔衹。
English: Although I am not wise enough, although I have doubts about my great-grandmother's vote, I still hope that their words are not credible, and think that this is a state trick.

古文：故先遣使者犒劳，又遣尚书、侍中践脩前言，以定任子。
现代文：所以先派使者来犒劳您，再派尚书、侍中来与您修好践行盟约，以确定送太子为人质之事。
English: Therefore, I first sent an emissary to reward you, and then I sent Shosho and an attendant to fix and implement the covenant with you in order to confirm the sending of the prince as a hostage.

古文：君遂设辞，不欲使进，议者怪之。
现代文：您却言语推辞，不打算让太子入朝，众人都认为奇怪。
English: Everyone thought it was strange that you verbally declined, saying that you did not plan to allow the crown prince to ascend to the throne.

古文：又前都尉浩周劝君遣子，乃实朝臣交谋，以此卜君，君果有辞，外引隗嚣遣子不终，内喻窦融守忠而已。
现代文：又让前都尉浩周劝您送太子来，那实际是朝臣们商议后的决策，借以试探您的诚意，您果然推辞了，对外援引隗嚣送子入质而不能坚持至终，对内自比为窦融，虽不送子入朝为人质却能忠贞不渝。
English: You also asked the former lieutenant Hao Zhou to advise you to send the prince, which was actually a decision made after the courtiers had discussed it, in order to test your sincerity. You did indeed decline, citing to the outside world the clamor to send the son to the emperor, but could not stick to it to the end, and comparing yourself to the inside, although you did not send the son to the emperor as a hostage, you were able to remain faithful.

古文：世殊时异，人各有心。
现代文：时势不同，人各有心。
English: Different times, different people.

古文：浩周之还，口陈指麾，益令议者发明众嫌，终始之本，无所据仗，故遂俯仰从群臣议。
现代文：浩周回朝后，口述手指地为您说情，更加让商议的朝臣们确定对您的疑虑，您所说的对朝廷有始有终，没有任何凭据，所以我勉强同意了大臣们的建议。
English: After Hao Zhou returned to the imperial court, he interceded for you by dictating with his finger, and even more so that the courtiers who were deliberating confirmed their doubts about you. What you said about the imperial court had a beginning and an end, and there was no evidence, so I reluctantly agreed to the ministers' suggestion.

古文：今省上事，款诚深至，心用慨然，凄怆动容。
现代文：现在看了您的上表，真诚恳切，令人心中感慨，悲伤动容。
English: Now I've seen your watch, sincere and earnest, it makes me feel emotional, sad and moved.

古文：即日下诏，敕诸军但深沟高垒，不得妄进。
现代文：我即日下诏，命令各路军队只要深挖壕沟高筑壁垒，不可妄自行动。
English: I issued an edict the same day, ordering all armies to dig deep trenches and build high barriers, and not to act arbitrarily.

古文：若君必效忠节，以解疑议，登身朝到，夕召兵还。
现代文：如果您一定要表示自己的忠节，解除大家的疑虑，孙登早上来朝为人质，晚上我就诏令大军返回。
English: If you are determined to show your loyalty and remove everyone's doubts, I will order Sun Myung Moon to come to the DPRK as a hostage in the morning and to return with a large army in the evening.

古文：此言之诚，有如大江！ 
现代文：我言语中的诚意，如长江一样不可更改! 
English: The sincerity in my words, like the Yangtze River, cannot be changed!

古文：权遂改年，临江拒守。
现代文：孙权就更改年号，沿着长江驻军坚守。
English: Sun Quan changed the year and stationed troops along the Yangtze River.

古文：冬十一月，大风，范等兵溺死者数千，馀军还江南。
现代文：冬十一月，江上刮起大风，吕范等人的士兵淹死数千，其余部队返回江南。
English: In the winter of November, a gale blew up on the river, drowning thousands of soldiers, including Lü Fan. The rest of the troops returned to the south of the river.

古文：曹休使臧霸以轻船五百、敢死万人袭攻徐陵，烧攻城车，杀略数千人。
现代文：曹休指挥臧霸率领轻捷战船五百艘、敢死队一万人袭击徐陵，烧毁攻城战车，杀害俘虏了数千人。
English: Under the command of Cao Xiu, Yaoba led 500 light-jet warships and 10,000 death squads to attack Xu Ling, burned the siege chariots, and killed and captured thousands of people.

古文：将军全琮、徐盛追斩魏将尹卢，杀获数百。
现代文：吴国将军全琮、徐盛追杀魏国将领尹卢，斩杀俘虏的有数百人。
English: The Wu generals Quanzhang and Xu Sheng chased and killed the Wei general Yin Lu, slaughtering hundreds of prisoners.

古文：十二月，权使太中大夫郑泉聘刘备于白帝，始复通也。
现代文：十二月，孙权派太中大夫郑泉前往白帝城拜谒刘备，两国之间再次通好。
English: In December, Sun Quan sent the grand vizier Zheng Quan to visit Liu Bei in Baidi City, and the two countries once again became friendly.

古文：然犹与魏文帝相往来，至后年乃绝。
现代文：但孙权与魏文帝之间互相往来，到第二年才正式断绝关系。
English: However, relations between Sun Quan and Emperor Wei Wen did not officially break off until the following year.

古文：是岁改夷陵为西陵。
现代文：这年，孙权改夷陵为西陵。
English: In this year, Sun Quan changed the Yihe Mausoleum to the West Mausoleum.

古文：二年春正月，曹真分军据江陵中州。
现代文：黄武二年春正月，曹真分出军队占据江陵中州。
English: In the first month of the second year of Huangwu's reign, Cao Zhen dispatched an army to occupy Jiangling Zhongzhou.

古文：是月，城江夏山。
现代文：当月，孙权修筑江夏山城。
English: In the same month, Sun Quan began to build the Jiangxia Mountain City.

古文：改四分，用乾象历。
现代文：改正四分历，使用乾象历。
English: The quarter calendar was revised, and the lunar calendar was used.

古文：三月，曹仁遣将军常彫等，以兵五千，乘油船，晨渡濡须中州。
现代文：三月，曹仁派将军常周彡等，率五千士兵，乘坐油船，清晨渡江至濡须坞江心小岛。
English: In March, Cao Ren sent General Chang Zhou and five thousand soldiers on an oil tanker to cross the Yangtze River in the early morning to the small island in the middle of the river.

古文：仁子泰因引军急攻朱桓，桓兵拒之，遣将军严圭等击破彫等。
现代文：曹仁之子曹泰就率军猛攻朱桓，朱桓领兵迎敌，并派将军严圭等攻破常周彡等。
English: Cao Ren's son Cao Tai led the army to storm Zhu Huan, Zhu Huan led the troops to meet the enemy, and sent General Yan Gui and others to break through the Zhouzhou fortress.

古文：是月，魏军皆退。
现代文：当月，魏军全部撤退。
English: That month, the entire Wei army withdrew.

古文：夏四月，权群臣劝即尊号，权不许。
现代文：夏四月，孙权的大臣们劝他随即称帝，孙权没有同意。
English: In the summer of April, Sun Quan's ministers urged him to immediately proclaim himself emperor, but Sun Quan did not agree.

古文：刘备薨于白帝。
现代文：刘备在白帝城崩逝。
English: Liu Bei passed away in Baidicheng.

古文：五月，曲阿言甘露降。
现代文：五月，曲阿报有甘露降临。
English: In May, it was reported that there was nectar in Qu'ao.

古文：先是戏口守将晋宗杀将王直，以众叛如魏，魏以为蕲春太守，数犯边境。
现代文：之前，戏口守将晋宗杀死将军王直，率众反叛投奔魏国，魏国以晋宗为蕲春太守，多次侵犯吴国边境。
English: Previously, the play's mouthpiece, Jinzong, had killed the general Wang Zhi, and led the rebels to Wei. Wei, with Jinzong as the governor of Hunchun, repeatedly violated the borders of Wu.

古文：六月，权令将军贺齐督糜芳、刘邵等袭蕲春，邵等生虏宗。
现代文：六月，孙权下令将军贺齐率领糜芳、刘邵等攻袭蕲春，刘邵等生擒晋宗。
English: In June, Sun Quan ordered General He Qi to lead Yu Fang, Liu Shao and others to attack Hunchun, and Liu Shao and others to capture Jinsong.

古文：冬十一月，蜀使中郎将邓芝来聘。
现代文：冬十一月，蜀国派遣中郎将邓芝拜谒吴国。
English: In the winter of November, the State of Shu dispatched a middle-ranking official, Deng Zhi, to pay homage to the State of Wu.

古文：三年夏，遣辅义中郎将张温聘于蜀。
现代文：黄武三年夏，孙权派遣辅义中郎将张温到蜀国访问。
English: In the summer of the third year of Huangwu's reign, Sun Quan sent Zhou Yizhong to visit Zhang Wen in Shu.

古文：秋八月，赦死罪。
现代文：秋八月，赦免被判死刑囚犯。
English: In autumn and August, prisoners sentenced to death were pardoned.

古文：九月，魏文帝出广陵，望大江，曰 彼有人焉，未可图也 ，乃还。
现代文：九月，曹丕出京巡视广陵，面对长江，感叹地说： 长江那边有贤能之人，不可谋取啊! 随后返回。
English: In September, Cao Pi went to Beijing to inspect the Guangling Mausoleum. Facing the Yangtze River, he said with a sigh: "There are people of virtue on the other side of the Yangtze River. Don't seek them out!" He then returned.

古文：四年夏五月，丞相孙邵卒。
现代文：黄武四年夏五月，丞相孙邵去世。
English: In the summer and May of Huangwu's fourth year, the prime minister Sun Shao passed away.

古文：六月，以太常顾雍为丞相。
现代文：六月，任命太常顾雍为丞相。
English: In June, Taizang Gu Yong was appointed as chancellor.

古文：皖口言木连理。
现代文：皖口有传言，树木长成连理枝。
English: There is a rumor in Hekou that the trees will grow into twigs.

古文：冬十二月，鄱阳贼彭绮自称将军，攻没诸县，众数万人。
现代文：冬十二月，鄱阳贼寇彭绮自称将军，攻占地县，部众有几万人。
English: In the winter of December, the thief of Shenyang, Qopeng Yao, claimed to be a general, conquered and occupied counties, and had tens of thousands of followers.

古文：是岁地连震。
现代文：这年接连发生地震。
English: This year, earthquakes occurred one after another.

古文：五年春，令曰： 军兴日久，民离农畔，父子夫妇，不听相恤，孤甚愍之。
现代文：黄武五年春，孙权下令： 部队征战多年，百姓流离农业荒废，父子夫妇之间，不能相互体恤，寡人非常痛惜。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Huangwu, Sun Quan ordered: The troops have been in the war for many years, the people have been displaced and agriculture has been abandoned, and the father and son can not sympathize with each other, which is very regrettable.

古文：今北虏缩窜，方外无事，其下州郡，有以宽息。 
现代文：现在北方敌人已退缩逃窜，中原之外已没有战事，所以以下各州郡守，应该施行宽容修养政策。 
English: Now that the enemy in the north has retreated and fled, and there is no war outside the Central Plains, the following county governors should implement a policy of tolerance and cultivation.

古文：是时陆逊以所在少谷，表令诸将增广农亩。
现代文：这时陆逊因所在的地方缺粮，上表请求孙权让将领们增开农田。
English: At this time, Lu Xun asked Sun Quan to let the generals open more farmland because of the shortage of grain in the area.

古文：权报曰： 甚善。
现代文：孙权回复说： 非常好!
English: Sun Quan replied, "Very good.

古文：今孤父子亲自受田，车中八牛以为四耦，虽未及古人，亦欲与众均等其劳也。 
现代文：从今起我父子亲自管理一份农田，用给我驾车的八条牛分拉四犁耕作，虽然比不上古代贤人，也想要和大家一样共同劳作。 
English: From now on, my father and son will personally manage a piece of farmland, using eight oxen to pull four ploughs for me to drive. Although they are not as good as the ancient sages, they also want to work together with everyone.

古文：秋七月，权闻魏文帝崩，征江夏，围石阳，不克而还。
现代文：秋七月，孙权得知魏文帝曹丕去世，出军征讨江夏郡，围攻石阳城，未能攻克而返回。
English: In autumn and July, Sun Quan learned of the death of Wei Emperor Cao Pi and went out to conquer Jiangxia County, besieged Shiyang City, failed to conquer and returned.

古文：苍梧言凤皇见。
现代文：苍梧上报有凤凰出现。
English: A phoenix appeared in the Goryo report.

古文：分三郡恶地十县置东安郡，以全琮为太守，平讨山越。
现代文：孙权将三郡交接边界的偏远地区分设十个县，设置东安郡，以全琮为该郡太守，平定讨伐山越族的反叛。
English: Sun Quan divided the remote area where the borders of the three counties meet into ten counties, and set up Dongan County, with Quanzhang as the governor of the county, to suppress the rebellion of the Shan Yue people.

古文：冬十月，陆逊陈便宜，劝以施德缓刑，宽赋息调。
现代文：冬十月，陆逊上表向孙权陈说眼下应该办理的事情，劝孙权施行德政，减轻刑罚，降低田赋的征收，停止征调。
English: In the winter of October, Lu Xun made a report to Sun Quan about the things that should be handled at the moment, and advised Sun Quan to implement a virtuous government, reduce the penalty, reduce the collection of rice fields, and stop the transfer.

古文：又云： 忠谠之言，不能极陈，求容小臣，数以利闻。 
现代文：又说： 忠直之言，不能完全陈述，只求容身的小臣，经常只说功利之话。 
English: He also said: The words of loyalty and sincerity cannot be fully stated, and ministers who only want to be accommodated often only say words of utilitarianism.

古文：权报曰： 夫法令之设，欲以遏恶防邪，儆戒未然也，焉得不有刑罚以威小人乎？
现代文：孙权回复说： 律法的设置，是想借此遏制恶行，防止奸邪，防患于未然，怎能不借刑罚来威慑小人呢?
English: Sun Quan replied: The establishment of the law is to curb evil deeds, prevent treachery, and prevent problems in advance. How can we not use punishment to deter villains?

古文：此为先令后诛，不欲使有犯者耳。
现代文：这是先制定法令，后依律法判处，不想有人犯罪违法而已。
English: This is a case of enacting a law first, and then sentencing according to the law, because they don't want anyone to commit a crime or break the law.

古文：君以为太重者，孤亦何利其然，但不得已而为之耳。
现代文：你认为刑罚太重，我又哪里乐意将刑罚看做有利之物，只是不得已这样罢了。
English: You think that the punishment is too heavy, and I would like to see the punishment as a benefit, but I just have to do it.

古文：今承来意，当重谘谋，务从其可。
现代文：现在收到您的意见，应当重新加以咨询商讨，一定使其中可行的切实实行。
English: Now that we have received your opinions, we should re-consult and discuss them, and make sure that they are feasible and practical.

古文：且近臣有尽规之谏，亲戚有补察之箴，所以匡君正主明忠信也。
现代文：而且身边朝臣有尽力规谏的责任，皇亲国戚也应提出弥补疏漏的建议，用以匡正君主过失，表明自己忠义。
English: Moreover, the courtiers around him have the responsibility to do their best to control him, and the emperor's relatives should also put forward suggestions to make up for the omissions, so as to rectify the mistakes of the monarch and show their loyalty.

古文：书载 予违汝弼，汝无面从 ，孤岂不乐忠言以自裨补邪？
现代文：《尚书》中说， 我有过失你必须纠正;而你不可盲目顺从 。我难道不乐意听取忠言来弥补自己的过失吗?
English: "Shangshu" says, "I made a mistake, you must correct it; and you must not blindly obey." Am I not willing to listen to good advice to make up for my mistake?

古文：而云 不敢极陈 ，何得为忠谠哉？
现代文：而你却说 不敢完全陈述 ，怎能算是忠言直谏呢?
English: And you say that you do not dare to make a full statement, how can it be considered a straightforward statement?

古文：若小臣之中，有可纳用者，宁得以人废言而不采择乎？
现代文：如果小臣之中，有可以采纳的意见，难道能够因人废言而不采纳吗?
English: If there is an acceptable opinion among the ministers, can it be rejected because of someone's nonsense?

古文：但谄媚取容，虽闇亦所明识也。
现代文：如果是奉承媚上的，我虽不明智但也能准确识别。
English: If it's flattery, I'm not smart enough to recognize it.

古文：至於发调者，徒以天下未定，事以众济。
现代文：至于征发赋税徭役的事，只因为天下尚未平定，大事须得大家共同努力才能成功。
English: As for the collection and distribution of taxes, it is only because the world has not yet been pacified that major events require everyone to work together in order to succeed.

古文：若徒守江东，脩崇宽政，兵自足用，复用多为？
现代文：如果只是保守江东，施行宽和之政，兵力自然足够，多有户税又有何用?
English: If we only conserve the eastern part of the Yangtze River and implement a policy of broad harmony, the military force will naturally be sufficient. What is the use of having more household taxes?

古文：顾坐自守可陋耳。
现代文：但只是坚守江东，不求进取，可谓浅陋啊!
English: But just sticking to the east of the river, not seeking advancement, can be described as shallow!

古文：若不豫调，恐临时未可便用也。
现代文：如果不预先征收户税，恐怕临时征用就不那么方便了。
English: If the household tax is not collected in advance, I am afraid that temporary requisition will not be so convenient.

古文：又孤与君分义特异，荣戚实同，来表云不敢随众容身苟免，此实甘心所望於君也。 
现代文：另外，我与你名分虽然有异，但荣辱喜忧是一样的。奏表中说不敢随众人之势苟且立身，这实在是我对你的殷切希望。 
English: In addition, although I have a different name from you, the joys and sorrows are the same. The report said that I did not dare to follow the momentum of everyone and stand up, which is really my ardent hope for you.

古文：於是令有司尽写科条，使郎中褚逢赍以就逊及诸葛瑾，意所不安，令损益之。
现代文：随后孙权命令有关主管官员将全部的律法条文都写下，派郎中褚逢送给陆逊和诸葛瑾过目，如果他们有觉得有什么不妥当之处，令他们增删修改。
English: Subsequently, Sun Quan ordered the relevant competent officials to write down all the provisions of the law and send them to Lu Xun and Zhuge Li every time for review. If they felt there was anything inappropriate, they were ordered to add, delete and modify.

古文：是岁，分交州置广州，俄复旧。
现代文：当年，孙权将交州郡分设广州郡，不久又复合为交州。
English: In that year, Sun Quan divided Jiaozhou County into Guangzhou County, which was soon combined into Jiaozhou.

古文：六年春正月，诸将获彭绮。
现代文：黄武六年春正月，东吴诸将生擒彭绮等人。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Huangwu's reign, the Eastern Wu generals gave birth to Peng Yao and others.

古文：闰月，韩当子综以其众降魏。
现代文：闰十二月，韩当的儿子韩综率领部众投降魏国。
English: On leap December, Han Dang's son Han Zhao led his troops to surrender to Wei.

古文：七年春三月，封子虑为建昌侯。
现代文：黄武七年春三月，孙权封儿子孙虑为建昌侯。
English: In the spring and March of the seventh year of Huangwu, Sun Quanfeng's son, Sun Xian, became the prince of Jianchang.

古文：罢东安郡。
现代文：撤除东安郡。
English: Remove Dongan County.

古文：夏五月，鄱阳太守周鲂伪叛，诱魏将曹休。
现代文：夏五月，鄱阳太守周鲂假装反叛，引诱魏将曹休。
English: In the summer of May, Zhou Ye, the governor of Shenyang, pretended to rebel and lured Wei general Cao Xiu.

古文：秋八月，权至皖口，使将军陆逊督诸将大破休於石亭。
现代文：秋八月，孙权前往皖口，派将军陆逊率将领在石亭大破曹休。
English: In the autumn and August, Sun Quan went to Hekou and sent General Lu Xun and his generals to defeat Cao Xiu in Shiting.

古文：大司马吕范卒。
现代文：东吴大司马吕范去世。
English: Dongwu Daishi Marufan passed away.

古文：是岁，改合浦为珠官郡。
现代文：当年，孙权将合浦郡改为珠官郡。
English: In that year, Sun Quan changed Hepu County to Zhugan County.

古文：黄龙元年春，公卿百司皆劝权正尊号。
现代文：黄龙元年春，东吴文武朝臣都劝孙权正式称帝。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yellow Dragon, the courtiers of the Eastern Wu Dynasty all advised Sun Quan to formally proclaim himself emperor.

古文：夏四月，夏口、武昌并言黄龙、凤凰见。
现代文：夏四月，夏口、武昌都传言出现黄龙、凤凰。
English: In the summer of April, there were rumors of a yellow dragon and a phoenix appearing in Xiakou and Wuchang.

古文：丙申，南郊即皇帝位，是日大赦，改年。
现代文：十三日，孙权在南郊登基称帝，同日大赦天下，更改年号。
English: On the 13th, Sun Quan ascended to the throne in the southern suburbs and became emperor. On the same day, he pardoned the world and changed the year.

古文：追尊父破虏将军坚为武烈皇帝，母吴氏为武烈皇后，兄讨逆将军策为长沙桓王。
现代文：追谥父亲破虏将军孙坚为武烈皇帝，母亲吴氏为武烈皇后，哥哥讨逆将军孙策为长沙桓王。
English: His father, Sun Jian, the general who defeated the rebels, was the Emperor Wu, his mother, Wu, was the Empress Wu, and his brother, Sun Ce, the general who fought against the rebels, was the King of Changsha.

古文：吴王太子登为皇太子。
现代文：立吴王太子孙登为皇太子。
English: The grandson of the crown prince of Wu Wang was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：将吏皆进爵加赏。
现代文：将领官吏都加官封赏。
English: Generals and officials were rewarded with promotion.

古文：初，兴平中，吴中童谣曰： 黄金车，班兰耳，闿昌门，出天子。 
现代文：当初，汉献帝兴平年间，吴中有童谣： 黄金车，斑斓耳，闿昌门，出天子。 
English: At the beginning, during the reign of Emperor Xingping of the Han Dynasty, there were nursery rhymes in Wuxi: "Golden Chariot," "Pied Piper," "Changmen Gate" and "Heavenly Child."

古文：五月，使校尉张刚、管笃之辽东。
现代文：五月，孙权派遣校尉张刚、管笃出使辽东。
English: In May, Sun Quan dispatched Lieutenant Zhang Gang and Guandu to Liaodong.

古文：六月，蜀遣卫尉陈震庆权践位。
现代文：六月，蜀国派卫尉陈震前来庆贺孙权称帝。
English: In June, the State of Shu sent the guard lieutenant Chen Zhen to celebrate the enthronement of Sun Quan.

古文：权乃参分天下，豫、青、徐、幽属吴，兖、冀、并、凉属蜀。
现代文：孙权就与蜀国来使商议平分天下，豫、青、徐、幽四州归属吴;兖、冀、并、凉四州归属蜀。
English: Sun Quan negotiated with the State of Shu to divide the world equally. The four states of Yu, Qing, Xu, and You belonged to Wu; and the four states of Lu, Hebei, Bin, and Liang belonged to Shu.

古文：其司州之土，以函谷关为界，造为盟曰： 天降丧乱，皇纲失叙，逆臣乘衅，劫夺国柄，始於董卓，终於曹操，穷凶极恶，以覆四海，至令九州幅裂，普天无统，民神痛怨，靡所戾止。
现代文：司州的土地，以函谷关为界分属两国。并订立盟书说： 天降动乱，汉室王朝无序，叛臣奸贼乘机挑衅，谋夺国家大权，从董卓开始，结束于曹操，他们穷凶极恶，扰动天下，致使天下分崩离析，普天之下，纲纪无存，人神怨愤，但动乱却无止境。
English: The land of Shizhou, with the Hanzhong Pass as the boundary, belongs to the two countries. And they signed an alliance saying: The heavens descend into turmoil, the Han dynasty is disorderly, traitors and thieves take the opportunity to provoke and plot to seize state power, starting with Dong Zhuo and ending with Cao Cao, they are extremely vicious, disturb the world, causing the world to fall apart, under the whole world, there is no discipline, people and gods are angry, but the turmoil is endless.

古文：及操子丕，桀逆遗丑，荐作奸回，偷取天位，而叡么麽，寻丕凶迹，阻兵盗土，未伏厥诛。
现代文：等到曹操之子曹丕，逆贼遗子，作恶多端，谋取皇位。而曹睿又是微末小人，沿袭曹丕恶行，倚仗兵力窃据汉土，至今尚未伏法就诛。
English: Wait until Cao Cao's son, Cao Pi, the son of a traitor, commits many evil deeds and seeks the throne. And Cao Rui is a petty villain, following Cao Pi's evil deeds, relying on military force to steal Han soil, and has not yet surrendered to the law.

古文：昔共工乱象而高辛行师，三苗干度而虞舜征焉。
现代文：过去共工作乱而尧帝出兵，三苗违法而虞舜征讨。
English: In the past, Emperor Qian sent troops to quell labor unrest, while Emperor Sanmiao imposed taxes on the wealthy in violation of the law.

古文：今日灭叡，禽其徒党，非汉与吴，将复谁任？
现代文：现在消灭曹睿又，抓获他的党羽，除了蜀、吴两国，还有谁能担此大任呢?
English: Now that Cao Rui Miao has been eliminated and his henchmen have been captured, who else but Shu and Wu can take on this great task?

古文：夫讨恶翦暴，必声其罪，宜先分制，夺其土地，使士民之心，各知所归。
现代文：翦除残暴之人，一定要声讨他们的罪行，应该先定计划，夺取他们的土地，使士人百姓之心有所依附。
English: To get rid of the tyrants, it is necessary to denounce their crimes, it is necessary to draw up a plan for seizing their lands, and it is necessary to win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：是以春秋晋侯伐卫，先分其田以畀宋人，斯其义也。
现代文：所以《春秋》记载晋文公伐卫，首先将卫国土地分给宋国，就是这个道理。
English: Therefore, this is the reason why "Spring and Autumn" records that Jin, Wen, Gong, and Wei first divided the land of the defense of the country to Song.

古文：且古建大事，必先盟誓，故周礼有司盟之官，尚书有告誓之文，汉之与吴，虽信由中，然分土裂境，宜有盟约。
现代文：况且古人成就大事，比先盟誓，所以《周礼》中有司盟之官，《尚书》中有诰、誓之文。蜀汉与东吴，虽然信义发自内心，但分割魏国的土地，还是应该订立盟约。
English: Moreover, the ancients achieved great things and swore before others. Therefore, "Zhou Li" has the officer of the League, and "Shang Shu" has the letter of the oath. Although Shuhan and Dongwu believed in their hearts, they should still conclude a covenant to divide the land of Wei.

古文：诸葛丞相德威远著，翼戴本国，典戎在外，信感阴阳，诚动天地，重复结盟，广诚约誓，使东西士民咸共闻知。
现代文：诸葛亮丞相德行威望远近闻名，他辅佐蜀国皇帝，在外主管军事大权，道义诚信感动神鬼天地，再次结盟，加深约誓，使东吴、西蜀两国军民都得知结盟大事。
English: Zhuge Liangzheng, the minister of virtue and prestige, is famous far and wide. He assisted the emperor of Shu, and was in charge of military power abroad. His moral integrity moved heaven and earth. He once again allied and deepened the oath, so that the military and civilians of East Wu and West Shu were aware of the alliance event.

古文：故立坛杀牲，昭告神明，再歃加书，副之天府。
现代文：所以建立祭坛杀牺牲，昭告神明，再歃血为盟，将盟书放于牺牲上，将副本收藏于天府。
English: Therefore, the altar was built to kill the sacrifice, announce it to the gods, and then take the blood as the alliance, put the alliance book on the sacrifice, and collect the copy in the heavenly palace.

古文：天高听下，灵威棐谌，司慎司盟，群神群祀，莫不临之。
现代文：皇天在上，听取人间之事，神灵的威力帮助诚心得到实现。司慎司盟，各位神灵，都光临受祭。
English: The emperor is in heaven, listening to human affairs, and the power of the gods is helping sincerity to be realized.

古文：自今日汉、吴既盟之后，戮力一心，同讨魏贼，救危恤患，分灾共庆，好恶齐之，无或携贰。
现代文：从现在蜀、吴两国结盟之后，同心协力，共同征讨魏贼，扶危济困，祸福与共，好恶共当，无有二心。
English: From now on, after the alliance of Shu and Wu, the two countries will make concerted efforts to jointly fight the Wei bandits, help the poor, share the misfortunes and blessings, and share the likes and dislikes.

古文：若有害汉，则吴伐之；若有害吴，则汉伐之。
现代文：如果有人侵害蜀国，则吴国前去讨伐他;如果有人侵害吴国，则蜀国前往讨伐他。
English: If someone encroaches on Shu, Wu will go to fight him; if someone encroaches on Wu, Shu will go to fight him.

古文：各守分土，无相侵犯。
现代文：两国守卫各自土地，互不侵犯。
English: The two countries guard their respective territories and do not encroach on each other.

古文：传之后叶，克终若始。
现代文：盟约订立，流传后代，有始有终。
English: Covenants are made and passed down from generation to generation.

古文：凡百之约。皆如载书。
现代文：凡是各项盟约，都按盟书所记。
English: According to all the covenants, according to the writing of the covenant.

古文：信言不艳，实居于好。
现代文：诚信之言不求文辞艳丽，实是出自彼此友好之心。
English: Words of sincerity do not require fancy words, but actually come from the heart of mutual friendship.

古文：有渝此盟，创祸先乱，违贰不协，慆慢天命，明神上帝是讨是督，山川百神是纠是殛，俾坠其师，无克祚国。
现代文：如果有违背盟约的，首先招致祸乱，怀有二心制造不和，怠慢天命，神明的上帝就征讨监督他，山川诸神就会诛灭纠正他，令他失去军队和人民，不能久享皇位国祚。
English: If there is anyone who violates the covenant, first causes calamity, has double-mindedness to create discord, and neglects the destiny of heaven, the God of gods will solicit and supervise him, and the gods of mountains and rivers will annihilate and correct him, so that he will lose the army and the people, and cannot enjoy the throne and the state for a long time.

古文：于尔大神，其明鉴之！ 
现代文：伟大的神灵，请您明察吧! 
English: Great spirit, please observe!

古文：秋九月，权迁都建业，因故府不改馆，徵上大将军陆逊辅太子登，掌武昌留事。
现代文：秋九月，孙权迁都建业，就住在原来的府第中，没有另建新宫殿，征召上大将军陆逊辅佐太子孙登，掌管迁都后武昌的事宜。
English: In the autumn and September, when Sun Quan moved the capital to Wuchang, he lived in the middle of the original prefecture, did not build a new palace, and summoned the general Lu Xunfu to assist the prince Sun Deng and take charge of the affairs of Wuchang after the capital was moved.

古文：二年春正月，魏作合肥新城。
现代文：黄龙二年春正月，魏国修建合肥新城。
English: In the first month of the second year of Huanglong, Wei built Hefei New City.

古文：诏立都讲祭酒，以教学诸子。
现代文：孙权下诏设立都讲祭酒，以便教授各个儿子。
English: Sun Quan issued an edict to establish a school of sacrificial wine so that he could teach his sons.

古文：遣将军卫温、诸葛直将甲士万人浮海求夷洲及亶洲。
现代文：孙权派遣将军卫温、诸葛直率领装备良好的上万士兵，乘船到海上寻找夷洲和亶洲。
English: Sun Quan dispatched tens of thousands of well-equipped soldiers, led by Generals Wei Wen and Zhu Ge Dadao, to go by ship to the sea to search for Yizhou and Luzhou.

古文：亶洲在海中，长老传言秦始皇帝遣方士徐福将童男童女数千人入海，求蓬莱神山及仙药，止此洲不还。
现代文：亶洲在大海之间，长辈人有传言秦始皇派遣方士徐福率领几千童男童女到海中，寻找蓬莱仙山和仙药，停留在蓬莱洲就没有回来。
English: Penglai is located between the sea. There is a rumor among the elders that the First Emperor of Qin dispatched the sorcerer Xu Fu and led thousands of boys and girls to the sea to search for the Penglai Fairy Mountains and medicines. They did not return after staying in Penglai.

古文：世相承有数万家，其上人民，时有至会稽货布，会稽东县人海行，亦有遭风流移至亶洲者。
现代文：世代相传现已几万户人家，那里的百姓，时常有人到会稽一带来买卖布匹，会稽东部的人航海，也有遇上大暴风漂流到亶洲去的。
English: There are now tens of thousands of households that have been passed down from generation to generation. The people there often have people come to the meeting to bring and sell cloth, people from the east to sail, and people who have encountered a big storm have drifted to Luzhou.

古文：所在绝远，卒不可得至，但得夷洲数千人还。
现代文：亶洲地处偏远，卫温最终没能到那里，只带了几千名夷洲的人返回。
English: Luzhou is located in a remote area. Wei Wen was not able to get there in the end, and only brought back a few thousand people from Yizhou.

古文：三年春二月，遣太常潘濬率众五万讨武陵蛮夷。
现代文：黄龙三年春二月，孙权派遣太常潘濬率领五万部众征讨武陵少数民族。
English: In the spring and February of the third year of the Yellow Dragon, Sun Quan dispatched Pan Zheng to lead a 50,000-strong army to subjugate the ethnic minorities in Wuling.

古文：卫温、诸葛直皆以违诏无功，下狱诛。
现代文：卫温、诸葛直都因为违背诏令而未能建功，被收押下狱处死。
English: Wei Wen and Zhuge Zhi were both imprisoned and executed for violating the edict and failing to make meritorious contributions.

古文：夏，有野蚕成茧，大如卵。
现代文：夏天，有野蚕作茧，大如鸡蛋。
English: In summer, wild silkworms make cocoons as big as eggs.

古文：由拳野稻自生，改为禾兴县。
现代文：由拳县野稻自然生长，所以将县名改为禾兴县。
English: The rice naturally grows in the fields of Ken County, so the name of the county was changed to Hexing County.

古文：中郎将孙布诈降以诱魏将王凌，凌以军迎布。
现代文：吴中郎将孙布假装投降来招诱魏将王凌，王凌率军奉迎孙布。
English: Wu Zhonglang invited the Wei general Wang Ling to pretend to surrender to Sun Bu, and Wang Ling led the army to welcome Sun Bu.

古文：冬十月，权以大兵潜伏於阜陵俟之，凌觉而走。
现代文：冬十月，孙权率大军潜伏在阜陵等待王凌的到来，王凌发觉后率军退走。
English: In the winter of October, Sun Quan led a large army to lurk in Fulin to wait for Wang Ling's arrival. After Wang Ling found out, he led the army to retreat.

古文：会稽南始平言嘉禾生。
现代文：会稽郡南始平县传言有嘉禾生长。
English: There is a rumor that Jiahe grows in Nanshiiping County, Heji County.

古文：十二月丁卯，大赦，改明年元也。
现代文：十二月二十九日，大赦天下，改第二年为嘉禾元年。
English: On December 29th, the world was amnestied, and the second year was changed to the first year of Jiahe.

古文：嘉禾元年春正月，建昌侯虑卒。
现代文：嘉禾元年春正月，吴建昌侯孙虑去世。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Jiahe, Wu Jianchang Hou Sun Qian passed away.

古文：三月，遣将军周贺、校尉裴潜乘海之辽东。
现代文：三月，孙权派遣将军周贺、校尉裴潜乘船到辽东。
English: In March, Sun Quan sent General Zhou He and Lieutenant Pei Xuan to Liaodong by ship.

古文：秋九月，魏将田豫要击，斩贺于成山。
现代文：秋九月，魏国将领田豫半路截击，在成山斩杀周贺。
English: In autumn and September, the Wei general Lingtian Yu intercepted halfway and killed Zhou He in Chengshan.

古文：冬十月，魏辽东太守公孙渊遣校尉宿舒、阆中令孙综称藩於权，并献貂马。
现代文：冬十二月，魏国辽东太守公孙渊派校尉宿舒、阆中令孙综前来向孙权称藩，并献上貂皮、良马。
English: In the winter of December, Sun Yuan, the governor of Liaodong in the State of Wei, sent the captain Su Shu and the vice-governor Zou Zhong to order Sun Simi to come to Sun Quan to claim the domain, and to present sable skins and good horses.

古文：权大悦，加渊爵位。
现代文：孙权很高兴，给公孙渊晋爵。
English: Sun Quan was very pleased and gave Gongsun Yuan a promotion to the peerage.

古文：二年春正月，诏曰： 朕以不德，肇受元命，夙夜兢兢，不遑假寝。
现代文：嘉禾二年春正月，孙权下诏说： 朕以浅薄的德行，开始承受天命，日夜小心翼翼，没有闲暇安稳就寝。
English: In the first month of the second year of Jiahe Spring, Sun Quan issued an edict saying, "I have begun to bear the fate of heaven with a shallow virtue. I am careful day and night, and I do not have leisure to sleep safely.

古文：思平世难，救济黎庶，上答神祗，下慰民望。
现代文：希望平定国家祸乱，救济百姓，上报神灵，对下抚慰百姓。
English: It is hoped that the national calamity will be calmed down, the people will be relieved, the gods will be reported, and the people will be soothed.

古文：是以眷眷，勤求俊杰，将与戮力，共定海内，苟在同心，与之偕老。
现代文：所以诚心寻求，勤勉地招揽杰出人才，将与他们齐心协力，共同平定天下。如能志向相同，我将和他共同存亡。
English: Therefore, I sincerely seek and diligently recruit outstanding talents, and will work together with them to pacify the world. If I can have the same ambition, I will coexist with him.

古文：今使持节督幽州领青州牧辽东太守燕王，久胁贼虏，隔在一方，虽乃心於国，其路靡缘。
现代文：现在派持符节的督领幽州军事兼任青州牧辽东太守、燕王公孙渊，长期被曹魏胁迫，远隔一方，虽然他忠心报国，但无缘入朝。
English: Now, the governor of Yuzhou Military, who holds the festival of symbols, concurrently serves as Qingzhou Mu Liaodong governor and Yan Wang Gong Sun Yuan. For a long time, he was coerced by Cao Wei and kept at a distance. Although he was loyal to the country, he was not able to enter the imperial court.

古文：今因天命，远遣二使，款诚显露，章表殷勤，朕之得此，何喜如之！
现代文：现在他顺应天命，从遥远之地派来二位使者，表达自己的忠心，奏表抒发忠诚，朕得到这些，还有什么喜事可以超过它呢?
English: Now, in accordance with his destiny, he has sent two emissaries from a faraway land to express his loyalty, to recite the pledge of allegiance. I have received this, and what greater joy can there be than this?

古文：虽汤遇伊尹，周获吕望，世祖未定而得河右，方之今日，岂复是过？
现代文：即使商汤得到伊尹，周文王得到吕望，光武皇帝未平天下就得到河右，和现在相比，难道能超越吗!
English: Even if Shang Tang got Yiyun, Zhou Wen Wang got Lvang, and Emperor Guangwu conquered the whole world, compared to now, can it be surpassed?

古文：普天一统，於是定矣。
现代文：天下统一，从现在已经奠定了。
English: The unification of the world has been laid from now on.

古文：书不云乎， 一人有庆，兆民赖之 。
现代文：《尚书》不是有言吗， 君主一人有了幸事，天下臣民也会仰赖于此 。
English: Isn't there a saying in "Shang Shu" that when a monarch has a good fortune, all the subjects in the world will rely on it.

古文：其大赦天下，与之更始，其明下州郡，咸使闻知。
现代文：应该大赦天下，给犯罪者改过自新的机会，明文下令各州郡，让全国人都得知。
English: It should grant amnesty to the whole world, give criminals a chance to reform, and explicitly order each state and county to let the whole country know.

古文：特下燕国，奉宣诏恩，令普天率土备闻斯庆。
现代文：特下诏书给燕国，让他们传扬皇恩，让普天之下都得知这一庆事。 
English: A special imperial decree was issued to the Yan Kingdom, asking them to spread the royal grace and let the whole world know about this celebration.

古文：三月，遣舒、综还，使太常张弥、执金吾许晏、将军贺达等将兵万人，金宝珍货，九锡备物，乘海授渊。
现代文：三月，孙权送宿舒、孙综返回辽东，并派太常张弥、执金吾许晏、将军贺达等率军万人，带上金银财宝奇珍物品，加上 九锡 之礼的全套用品，乘船航海送给公孙渊。
English: In March, Sun Quan sent Shu and Sun Zi back to Liaodong, and sent Zhang Ya, Taizang, Wu Huxuan, and General Heda, with an army of ten thousand soldiers, to bring gold, silver, treasures, and rare items, as well as a full set of gifts from Jiuxi, to sail to Gongsun Yuan.

古文：举朝大臣，自丞相雍已下皆谏，以为渊未可信，而宠待太厚，但可遣吏兵数百护送舒、综，权终不听。
现代文：满朝大臣从丞相顾雍以下全都劝谏孙权，认为公孙渊不可轻信，到他的恩宠礼遇太隆重，只需派遣几百官兵护送宿舒、孙琮回去即可，孙权最终没有听从建议。
English: All the ministers of the Manchurian dynasty, from the chancellor Gu Yong on down, advised Sun Quan not to trust Sun Yuan. They believed that Sun Yuan was too important to be taken for granted, and that it was enough to send a few hundred officers and soldiers to escort Su Shu and Sun Ye back home. In the end, Sun Quan did not follow their advice.

古文：渊果斩弥等，送其首于魏，没其兵资。
现代文：后来公孙渊果然杀害了张弥等人，将他们首级送到魏国，收缴了他们的兵马器物。
English: Later, Gongsun Yuan did indeed kill Zhang Mi and others, sent their heads to Wei, and confiscated their war horses.

古文：权大怒，欲自征渊，尚书仆射薛综等切谏乃止。
现代文：孙权大怒，想要亲自征讨公孙渊，尚书仆射薛综等极力谏阻，孙权才中止这个计划。
English: Sun Quan was furious and wanted to personally solicit the public Sun Yuan, Shang Shufu shot Xue Simi and others resisted as much as possible, Sun Quan only stopped this plan.

古文：是岁，权向合肥新城，遣将军全琮征六安，皆不克还。
现代文：当年，孙权向合肥新城出兵，派将军全琮征讨六安，都未攻克而回。
English: In that year, Sun Quan sent troops to Hefei New City and sent a general to conquer Lu'an. However, he did not conquer Lu'an and returned.

古文：三年春正月，诏曰： 兵久不辍，民困於役，岁或不登。
现代文：嘉禾三年春正月，孙权下诏： 战乱长久无休，百姓苦于徭役，年成有时不好。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Jiahe, Sun Quan issued an edict: The war has been raging for a long time, the people are suffering from the war, and the year is sometimes not good.

古文：其宽诸逋，勿复督课。 
现代文：应该放宽各种拖欠的租税，不要再督促课征。 
English: All kinds of tax arrears should be relaxed, and there should be no more urging to collect taxes.

古文：夏五月，权遣陆逊、诸葛瑾等屯江夏、沔口，孙韶、张承等向广陵、淮阳，权率大众围合肥新城。
现代文：夏五月，孙权派遣陆逊、诸葛瑾等在江夏、沔口驻守，派孙韶、张承等向广陵、淮阳出兵，孙权自己亲率大军围困合肥新城。
English: In the summer of May, Sun Quan dispatched Lu Xun and Zhuge Li to garrison in Jiangxia and Hekou, and sent Sun Yao and Zhang Cheng to send troops to Guangling and Huaiyang. Sun Quan himself led a large army to besiege Hefei New City.

古文：是时蜀相诸葛亮出武功，权谓魏明帝不能远出，而帝遣兵助司马宣王拒亮，自率水军东征。
现代文：这时，蜀丞相诸葛亮出兵武功，孙权认为魏明帝不可能远征南方，但魏明帝却派兵援助司马懿抵御诸葛亮的大军，自己亲率水军东征东吴。
English: At this time, Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, performed military feats. Sun Quan thought that it was impossible for Wei Mingdi to make an expedition to the south, but Wei Mingdi sent soldiers to help Sima Yi resist Zhuge Liang's large army, and led his own navy to the east of Dongwu.

古文：未至寿春，权退还，孙韶亦罢。
现代文：魏明帝还未到达寿春，孙权就率军撤回，孙韶也停止进兵。
English: Before Emperor Wei Ming reached Shuchun, Sun Quan led his army to withdraw, and Sun Yat-sen also stopped marching in.

古文：秋八月，以诸葛恪为丹杨太守，讨山越。
现代文：秋八月，孙权以诸葛恪为丹杨太守，征讨山越部族。
English: In the autumn and August, Sun Quan appointed Zhuge Ke as the Yang di-Pertuan Agong to subjugate the Shan Yue tribes.

古文：九月朔，陨霜伤谷。
现代文：九月初一，大霜冻坏稻谷。
English: On the first day of September, a heavy frost damaged the rice.

古文：冬十一月，太常潘濬平武陵蛮夷，事毕，还武昌。
现代文：冬十一月，太常潘濬平定武陵少数民族，战事结束，返回武昌。
English: In the winter of November, Pan Zheng of Taizhong conquered the ethnic minorities in Wuling, ended the war, and returned to Wuchang.

古文：诏复曲阿为云阳，丹徒为武进。
现代文：孙权下诏恢复曲阿县为云阳县，丹徒县为武进县。
English: Sun Quan issued an edict restoring Qua County to Yunyang County and Dantu County to Wujin County.

古文：庐陵贼李桓、罗厉等为乱。
现代文：庐陵贼寇李桓、罗厉等起兵作乱。
English: Li Huan, Luo Li, the robber of Fuling, and others started a riot.

古文：四年夏，遣吕岱讨桓等。
现代文：四年夏天，孙权派吕岱征讨李桓等人。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, Sun Quan sent Lv Ying to recruit Li Huan and others.

古文：秋七月，有雹。
现代文：七月，天下冰雹。
English: In July, the world is covered in hail.

古文：魏使以马求易珠玑、翡翠、玳瑁，权曰： 此皆孤所不用，而可得马，何苦而不听其交易？ 
现代文：魏朝使者用马来请求交换珠玑、翡翠、玳瑁，孙权说: 这些都是我用不到的，能用来换吗？为什么不允许他们交换呢？ 
English: An envoy of the Wei Dynasty used a horse to request the exchange of pearls, emeralds, and enamel. Sun Quan said, "I can't use these, can I exchange them? Why not allow them to exchange?

古文：五年春，铸大钱，一当五百。
现代文：五年春，朝廷铸大面额钱，以一当五百。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, the imperial court minted a large denomination of money, with a denomination of five hundred.

古文：诏使吏民输铜，计铜畀直。
现代文：孙权诏令官吏百姓运输铜器，计算铜壁价值。
English: Sun Quan ordered officials and commoners to transport copperware and calculate the value of the copper wall.

古文：设盗铸之科。
现代文：设置偷铸铜钱的律法。
English: To establish a law against the secret minting of copper money.

古文：二月，武昌言甘露降於礼宾殿。
现代文：二月，武昌上报有甘露在礼宾殿降临。
English: In February, Wuchang reported that there was nectar in the concierge hall.

古文：辅吴将军张昭卒。中郎将吾粲获李桓，将军唐咨获罗厉等。
现代文：辅吴将军张昭去世，中郎将吴璨抓获李桓，将军唐咨抓获罗厉等人。
English: Wu general Zhang Zhao died, Li Huan captured Wu Gan, General Tang Zhi captured Luo Li and others.

古文：自十月不雨，至於夏。
现代文：自十月以来，天不降雨，直到第二年夏天。
English: From October onwards, there is no rain until the following summer.

古文：冬十月，彗星见于东方。
现代文：十月冬，有彗星在东方出现。
English: In the winter of October, a comet appeared in the east.

古文：鄱阳贼彭旦等为乱。
现代文：鄱阳反贼彭旦等作乱。
English: Shenyang anti-thief Peng Dan and others started a riot.

古文：六年春正月，诏曰： 夫三年之丧，天下之达制，人情之极痛也；贤者割哀以从礼，不肖者勉而致之。
现代文：六年春正月，孙权下诏说: 三年的丧礼，是天下明显的制度，表示人情极度哀痛，贤能的人忍受哀痛，顺从礼节，不孝的人勉励自己，完成礼节。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, Sun Quan issued an edict saying: The three-year funeral is an obvious system in the world, indicating that human nature is extremely sad. The virtuous people endure the sadness and obey the etiquette, and the unfilial people encourage themselves and complete the etiquette.

古文：世治道泰，上下无事，君子不夺人情，故三年不逮孝子之门。
现代文：现在天下太平，上下无事，君子不夺人情，所以三年不到孝子门上办事。
English: Now the world is at peace, there is nothing going on up and down, and the gentleman does not take advantage of people's feelings. Therefore, it will take less than three years for the filial son to do business.

古文：至於有事，则杀礼以从宜，要绖而处事。
现代文：等到有事，则忍着割让礼仪以从权宜，守着礼节做事。
English: Wait until something happens, then patiently concede etiquette to expediency, and do things with etiquette.

古文：故圣人制法，有礼无时则不行。
现代文：所以圣人制定法，有礼制但不按时机就不能实行。
English: Therefore, when a sage enacts a law, there is a ritual, but it cannot be implemented at the right time.

古文：遭丧不奔非古也，盖随时之宜，以义断恩也。
现代文：有丧事不去奔丧，就不是古代礼制。应该随时权宜，用情义来断恩。
English: It is not an ancient etiquette not to go to the funeral when there is a funeral. It should be expedient at any time and use the situation to cut off grace.

古文：前故设科，长吏在官，当须交代，而故犯之，虽随纠坐，犹已废旷。
现代文：之前之所以设立律法，是官吏在任职上，应当有所交待，而却故意违犯，即使随时纠正，也会荒废很久。
English: Previously, the reason for the establishment of the law was that officials should be accountable in their duties, but deliberately violated it. Even if corrected at any time, it would be wasted for a long time.

古文：方事之殷，国家多难，凡在官司，宜各尽节，先公后私，而不恭承，甚非谓也。
现代文：现在正值多事之秋，国家多难，凡在官司部门，应该各尽其责，先公后私，而不过于奉承，实在不是靠说的。
English: Now is the time of the autumn of many things, the country is very difficult, everyone in the judicial department should do their duty, first the public and then the private, but it is nothing more than flattery, it is not reliable.

古文：中外群僚，其更平议，务令得中，详为节度。 顾谭议，以为奔丧立科，轻则不足以禁孝子之情，重则本非应死之罪，虽严刑益设，违夺必少。
现代文：朝内外的官员，应该提供评议，让结论得以持中，详细地做好调度。 顾谭商议，认为: 奔丧之事建立法度，轻则不足以禁止孝子的恩情，重责本来也不是该处死的大罪，即使增加严刑峻法，不遵守的人也一定很少。
English: Officials inside and outside the DPRK should provide comments so that the conclusion can be made and the detailed scheduling can be done well. Gu Tan deliberated and believed that: establishing a law for the matter of bereavement, light is not enough to prohibit the filial piety, and heavy responsibility is not a serious crime that should be executed. Even if the severe punishment is increased, there will be few people who do not comply.

古文：若偶有犯者，加其刑则恩所不忍，有减则法废不行。愚以为长吏在远，苟不告语，势不得知。
现代文：如果有偶然违反的，对其加以刑罚，则恩惠有所不忍，降低刑罚，则律法不能实行，我认为官吏们都在远处，如果不告知他们，他们一定不能知道。
English: If there is an occasional transgression, and it is punished, then there is no mercy, and if the punishment is lessened, then the law cannot be enforced. I think that the officials are far away, and if they are not told, they must not know.

古文：比选代之间，若有传者，必加大辟，则长吏无废职之负，孝子无犯重之刑。 
现代文：在改朝换代之间，如果律法得以传承，一定对其加以执行，那官吏就没有废去职位的负担，孝子也没有违反重刑的刑罚了。
English: Between the change of dynasty and the change of generation, if the law is passed down and must be enforced, the official will not have the burden of abolishing the post, and the filial son will not violate the severe punishment.

古文：将军胡综议，以为 丧纪之礼，虽有典制，苟无其时，所不得行。
现代文：将军胡综商议认为 丧葬之礼，虽然有仪典制度，但如果不和时宜，也不能实行。
English: General Hu Zongli deliberated that the funeral ceremony, although there is a ceremony system, but if it is not timely, it can not be implemented.

古文：方今戎事军国异容，而长吏遭丧，知有科禁，公敢干突，苟念闻忧不奔之耻，不计为臣犯禁之罪，此由科防本轻所致。
现代文：现在军事大国不同，而官吏遭遇丧事，知道有律法严禁，又怎么敢唐突，只想着得知丧事却没有奔赴的耻辱，不考虑为人臣子违反禁令的罪过，这是由于立法防范本来是轻度导致的。
English: Nowadays, military powers are different, and officials encounter funerals, knowing that there is a strict prohibition of the law, how dare they be abrupt, only thinking about the shame of knowing the funeral but not going there, and not considering the crime of violating the ban as a courtier. This is due to the fact that legislative prevention was originally light.

古文：忠节在国，孝道立家，出身为臣，焉得兼之？
现代文：忠义节操在国家，孝义道理立家，出生作为臣子，又怎么能兼而有之呢？
English: Loyalty and discipline in the country, filial piety to establish a family, born as a vassal, and how can it be both?

古文：故为忠臣不得为孝子。宜定科文，示以大辟，若故违犯，有罪无赦。
现代文：所以忠臣不能做孝子，应该制定律法条文，以死刑处置，如果有所违反，那就有罪名不可赦免。
English: Therefore, a loyal subject cannot be a filial son. A legal provision should be made to impose the death penalty. If there is any violation, there will be a crime that cannot be pardoned.

古文：以杀止杀，行之一人，其后必绝。 
现代文：用杀害人的办法来阻止杀人，在一个人的身上实行，那这之后一定会断绝这样的事。 
English: If you use the method of killing people to stop killing people, and carry it out on one person, then after that you will definitely stop doing such things.

古文：丞相雍奏从大辟。
现代文：丞相雍上奏赞同死刑。
English: The chancellor, Yong Shangso, endorsed the death penalty.

古文：其后吴令孟宗丧母奔赴，已而自拘於武昌以听刑。
现代文：这之后，吴县县令孟中母亲去世奔丧，不久，就将自己拘禁在武昌等待处罚。
English: After that, the Wu County magistrate mourned the death of Meng Zhong's mother, and soon detained himself in Wuchang to await punishment.

古文：陆逊陈其素行，因为之请，权乃减宗一等，后不得以为比，因此遂绝。
现代文：陆逊陈述他的言行，并为他求情，孙权就将他降罪一等处置，后来不得已为比，因此就断绝了祭祀。
English: When Lu Xun recounted his words and deeds and pleaded for his forgiveness, Sun Quan gave him a first-class punishment. Later, he had no choice but to break off the sacrificial rites.

古文：二月，陆逊讨彭旦等，其年，皆破之。
现代文：二月，陆逊征讨彭旦等人，这一年，将他们都攻破了。
English: In February, Lu Xun subdued Peng Dan and others, and this year, he broke them all.

古文：冬十月，遣卫将军全琮袭六安，不克。
现代文：十月，孙权派卫将军全琮攻袭六安，没有攻克。
English: In October, Sun Quan sent General Quanzhang to attack Lu'an, but failed to conquer it.

古文：诸葛恪平山越事毕，北屯庐江。
现代文：诸葛恪平定山越之事完毕，就往北驻守庐江。
English: After Zhuge Keqin had settled the matter of the mountain crossing, he went north to guard the Li River.

古文：赤乌元年春，铸当千大钱。
现代文：赤乌元年春天，朝廷铸造千大钱。
English: In the spring of the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu, the imperial court minted 1,000 taels of money.

古文：夏，吕岱讨庐陵贼，毕，还陆口。
现代文：夏天，吕岱征讨庐陵反贼，完毕后返回陆口。
English: In the summer, Lv Ying went to investigate the anti-thieves in Fuling, and returned to Lukou after the investigation.

古文：秋八月，武昌言麒麟见。
现代文：八月，武昌上报说有麒麟出现。
English: In August, Wuchang reported the appearance of a unicorn.

古文：有司奏言麒麟者太平之应，宜改年号。
现代文：有关官员上奏说，有麒麟出现是太平的征兆，应该更改年号。
English: Officials said in a statement that the appearance of the unicorn was a sign of peace and that the year should be changed.

古文：诏曰： 间者赤乌集於殿前，朕所亲见，若神灵以为嘉祥者，改年宜以赤乌为元。 
现代文：孙权下诏说: 过去红色的乌鸦在殿前聚集，是我亲眼看到的，如果神灵认为用它作为嘉奖祥瑞的做法，应该更改年号，应该改为赤乌。 
English: Sun Quan said: In the past, red crows gathered in front of the hall, I saw it with my own eyes. If the gods think that using it as a way to reward good luck, they should change the year and change it to red crows.

古文：群臣奏曰： 昔武王伐纣，有赤乌之祥，君臣观之，遂有天下，圣人书策载述最详者，以为近事既嘉，亲见又明也。 
现代文：朝臣们上奏说: 过去武王伐纣，有赤乌的征兆，君臣都能看到，于是占有天下，圣人的书册中记载最为详尽的，认为眼前的事最好，亲眼看到的又很明确。 
English: The courtiers reported: In the past, when King Wu made a great raid, there were signs of red mist, and the monarchs and courtiers could all see it, so they occupied the whole world. This is the most detailed record in the book of saints, and they thought that what they saw was the best, and what they saw with their own eyes was very clear.

古文：於是改年。
现代文：于是更改年号。
English: As a result, the year was changed.

古文：步夫人卒，追赠皇后。
现代文：步夫人去世后，追赠为皇后。
English: After the death of Mrs. Bu, she was posthumously crowned empress.

古文：初，权信任校事吕壹，壹性苛惨，用法深刻。
现代文：当初，孙权信任校事吕壹，吕壹性情严苛凶残，用法严苛。
English: At the beginning, Sun Quan trusted the school's affairs to Lu Yi, Lu Yi's temperament was harsh and cruel, and his usage was harsh.

古文：太子登数谏，权不纳，大臣由是莫敢言。
现代文：太子孙登多次劝谏，孙权都没有采纳，朝中大臣因此没有敢再进谏。
English: The prince's son, Sun Deng, repeatedly tried to persuade Sun Quan, but Sun Quan did not accept, so the minister did not dare to enter the palace again.

古文：后壹奸罪发露伏诛，权引咎责躬，乃使中书郎袁礼告谢诸大将，因问时事所当损益。
现代文：后来，吕壹奸邪之罪泄露，被诛杀，孙权引咎自责，就派中书郎袁礼向各将领谢罪，趁机问当时政事的损益得失。
English: Later, when Lu Yi's crime of treachery was revealed and he was beaten to death, Sun Quan blamed himself, and sent the Chinese scholar Yuan Li to thank the generals, taking the opportunity to ask about the gains and losses of the political affairs at that time.

古文：礼还，复有诏责数诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然、吕岱等曰： 袁礼还，云与子瑜、子山、义封、定公相见，并以时事当有所先后，各自以不掌民事，不肯便有所陈，悉推之伯言、承明。
现代文：礼节结束返回，孙权又有诏令责备诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然、吕岱等人说: 袁礼返回，说和子瑜、子山、义封、定公等人相见，并认为事情应当有所先后，他们都各自因不管理百姓事务，不肯有所言明，将事情都推到伯言、承明身上。
English: At the end of the ceremony, Sun Quan returned with a decree to reprimand Zhu Gejun, Bu Quan, Zhu Ran, Lv Quan and others, saying: Yuan Li returned and said that he had met with Ziyu, Ziyan, Yifu, Ding Gong and others, and believed that things should be done in sequence. They were all unwilling to say anything because they did not manage the affairs of the people, and pushed things onto Bo Yan and Cheng Ming.

古文：伯言、承明见礼，泣涕恳恻，辞旨辛苦，至乃怀执危怖，有不自安之心。
现代文：伯言、承明行礼之后流泪泣涕，言辞恳切，词义辛苦，心中对事务感到忧心，有不安之心。
English: After the bowing and prostration, they shed tears and weep, their words are earnest, the meaning of the words is hard, they are worried about the affairs in their hearts, and they are uneasy.

古文：闻此怅然，深自刻怪。
现代文：我得知这件事很是怅然，非常责怪自己，为什么呢？
English: I was shocked to hear about it and I blame myself a lot. Why?

古文：何者？夫惟圣人能无过行，明者能自见耳。
现代文：只有圣人能没有过错，明智的人能自省罢了。
English: Only a sage can be without fault, only a wise man can examine himself.

古文：人之举措，何能悉中，独当己有以伤拒众意，忽不自觉，故诸君有嫌难耳；不尔，何缘乃至於此乎？
现代文：人的言行举止又怎么能全部都不偏不倚，独自承担自己的过错而抗拒众人的意思，没有及时反应，所以各位有嫌难罢了。不是这样，又因为什么到这个地步呢。
English: How can people's words, deeds and manners all be unbiased, and how can they bear their own faults and resist the will of many people, and how can they not react in time, so you all have a hard time. This is not the case, and why has it come to this.

古文：自孤兴军五十年，所役赋凡百皆出於民。天下未定，孽类犹存，士民勤苦，诚所贯知。
现代文：自从我起兵以来五十年，所用的赋税徭役都出于百姓，天下还未安定，反贼尚且作乱，士兵百姓勤劳辛苦，实在是大家都知道的。
English: In the 50 years since I took up arms, the tax collectors were all from the people, the country was not yet stable, the anti-thieves were still rioting, and the soldiers and the people were working hard, as everyone knows.

古文：然劳百姓，事不得已耳。与诸君从事，自少至长，发有二色，以谓表里足以明露，公私分计，足用相保。
现代文：但是劳动百姓实在是不得已，跟诸君共事，从年少至年长，头发已经花白，认为我的心里足以表露出来，公私分明，足以互相守护。
English: But the working people really have no choice but to work with you, from young to old, their hair has turned white, and they think that my heart is enough to show, my private and public life are clear, and I am enough to protect each other.

古文：尽言直谏，所望诸君；拾遗补阙，孤亦望之。
现代文：所以，直言劝谏，都寄托在各位身上，查漏补缺也是我所希望的。
English: Therefore, I would like to express my sincere encouragement to all of you, and I hope that we will be able to find and fill the gaps.

古文：昔卫武公年过志壮，勤求辅弼，每独叹责。
现代文：过去，卫武公年过三十，勤于求取辅佐朝政之人，经常独自叹息。
English: In the past, those who were over thirty years old and diligent in seeking assistance from the imperial government often sighed alone.

古文：且布衣韦带，相与交结，分成好合，尚污垢不异。今日诸君与孤从事，虽君臣义存，犹谓骨肉不复是过。
现代文：而且布衣韦带，互相结交，两相交好，尚且污垢不能相同，现在各位和我共事，虽然君臣的恩义留存，但也说骨肉之间不再有这样的过错。
English: Moreover, the cloth and weave belt, make friends with each other, get along well with each other, and the dirt can not be the same, now you and I work together, although the gratitude of the monarchs and ministers remains, but also said that there is no longer such a fault between the flesh and blood.

古文：荣福喜戚，相与共之。
现代文：荣华富贵，功名利禄，互相共有。
English: Glory and wealth, fame and fortune, are shared by all.

古文：忠不匿情，智无遗计，事统是非，诸君岂得从容而已哉！同船济水，将谁与易？
现代文：忠诚不藏匿私情，出谋划策不留有后计，但是处理是非，各位怎么能从容而终呢，我们同舟共济，将谁换掉呢？
English: Loyalty does not hide private feelings, and there is no afterthought when making plans and proposals, but when dealing with right and wrong, how can you all take it easy? We are in the same boat, who will be replaced?

古文：齐桓诸侯之霸者耳，有善管子未尝不叹，有过未尝不谏，谏而不得，终谏不止。
现代文：齐桓公是诸侯的霸主罢了，有做的好的，管仲未尝不赞叹，有过错中未尝不劝谏，劝谏而不得，就一直劝谏不止。
English: Prince Qi Kuan is only the overlord of the princes. If he does something good, Guanzhong will be impressed. If he makes a mistake, Guanzhong will try to persuade him. If Guanzhong cannot persuade him, Guanzhong will continue to persuade him.

古文：今孤自省无桓公之德，而诸君谏诤未出於口，仍执嫌难。
现代文：现在我自我认为没有桓公的德行，而各位的谏言还未说出口，仍然互相责难。
English: Now I myself think that there is no virtue of Huan Gong, and everyone's criticism has not yet been expressed, and they still blame each other.

古文：以此言之，孤於齐桓良优，未知诸君於管子何如耳？
现代文：从这里来说，我比起桓公要优秀，不知各位相比于管仲怎么样呢？
English: From this point of view, I am superior to Huan Gong. I don't know how you compare to Guanzhong.

古文：久不相见，因事当笑。
现代文：长久不相见，因事当笑。
English: If you don't see each other for a long time, you can laugh about it.

古文：共定大业，整齐天下，当复有谁？
现代文：大家共同平定大业，整顿天下，还能有谁呢？
English: If we all work together to pacify the great cause and rectify the world, who else is there?

古文：凡百事要所当损益，乐闻异计，匡所不逮。 
现代文：凡是政事应当有所损益，我很乐于听到不同的建议，辅助我没有周全的地方。
English: Whenever there should be a loss or gain in politics, I am very happy to hear different suggestions, which help me not to be too thorough.

古文：二年春三月，遣使者羊衟、郑胄、将军孙怡之辽东，击魏守将张持、高虑等，虏得男女。
现代文：赤乌二年三月，孙权派使者羊衢、郑胄、将军孙仪到辽东，攻打魏朝守将张持、高虑等人，俘虏了男女百姓。
English: In March of the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Sun Quan sent the emissaries Yang Xi, Zheng Qi, and the general Sun Yi to Liaodong to attack the Wei dynasty guards Zhang Zhi and Gao Xian, and captured men and women.

古文：零陵言甘露降。
现代文：零陵上报说有甘露降临。
English: Zero mausoleum reported that there was nectar falling.

古文：夏五月，城沙羡。
现代文：同年五月，修建沙羡城。
English: In May of the same year, Shaanxi City was built.

古文：冬十月，将军蒋秘南讨夷贼。
现代文：将军蒋秘往南征讨少数民族反贼。
English: General Chiang Kai-shek went to the south to fight against ethnic minorities and bandits.

古文：秘所领都督廖式杀临贺太守严纲等，自称平南将军，与弟潜共攻零陵、桂阳，及摇动交州、苍梧、郁林诸郡，众数万人。
现代文：蒋秘所带领的督督廖式杀害林贺太守严纲等，自称平南将军，和他弟弟廖潜共同攻打零陵、桂阳郡，并振动了交州、苍梧、郁林各郡，部众达到数万人。
English: The governor Liao-style killing of Lin He Taishu Yan Gang, who called himself General Pingnan, and his brother Liao Qian jointly attacked the counties of Luling and Guiyang, and shook the counties of Jiaozhou, Cangwu and Yulin, with tens of thousands of followers.

古文：遣将军吕岱、唐咨讨之，岁馀皆破。
现代文：孙权派将军吕岱、唐咨征讨他们，一年多后，都将其攻破。
English: Sun Quan's generals Lv Ying and Tang Zhi inquired about them, and after more than a year, they were all defeated.

古文：三年春正月，诏曰： 盖君非民不立，民非谷不生。
现代文：赤乌三年正月，孙权下诏说: 君主没有百姓则不能成立，百姓没有粮食就不能生存。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Sun Quan issued an edict saying, "The monarchy cannot be established without the people, and the people cannot survive without grain."

古文：顷者以来，民多征役，岁又水旱，年谷有损，而吏或不良，侵夺民时，以致饥困。
现代文：不久以来百姓大多有征赋劳役，年岁又有水旱灾害，粮食有所损害，而官吏有的不好，侵占百姓的耕种时间，以至于百姓饥饿困顿。
English: Not long ago, most of the people were conscripted into forced labor, years of drought and floods caused damage to the grain, and some officials were bad, encroaching on the people's farming time, so that the people were starving.

古文：自今以来，督军郡守，其谨察非法，当农桑时，以役事扰民者，举正以闻。 
现代文：从今以后，督军郡守应该严谨考察非法行为，当属农忙之时，用劳役之事来烦扰百姓之人，都将他们明文正法，以使百姓知晓。 
English: From now on, the military governor and the county magistrate should strictly investigate illegal acts. When they are busy with farming, those who bother the people with labor service matters should be clearly legalized so that the people know.

古文：夏四月，大赦，诏诸郡县治城郭，起谯楼，穿堑发渠，以备盗贼。
现代文：夏四月，大赦天下，孙权诏令各郡县修整城墙，修建谯楼，开挖壕沟，挖建水渠，以防备盗贼。
English: In the summer of April, after the general amnesty, Sun Quan ordered all counties and counties to repair the city walls, build watchtowers, dig trenches, and dig canals to guard against thieves.

古文：冬十一月，民饥，诏开仓廪以赈贫穷。
现代文：冬十一月，百姓饥寒，孙权下诏打开官府仓库，以赈济贫苦百姓。
English: In the winter of November, when the people were hungry and cold, Sun Quan issued an edict to open the government warehouse to help the poor people.

古文：四年春正月，大雪，平地深三尺，鸟兽死者大半。
现代文：赤乌四年正月，天降大雪，雪深三尺，鸟兽大半死亡。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Red Wu, the sky fell heavy snow, the snow was three feet deep, and most of the birds and animals died.

古文：夏四月，遣卫将军全琮略淮南，决芍陂，烧安城邸阁，收其人民。
现代文：四月，孙权派卫将军全琮攻战淮南，攻克芍陂，烧毁安城底阁，收拢其中的百姓。
English: In April, Sun Quan sent the general Quanzhang to attack Huainan, conquer Quanzhang, burn down the Ancheng pavilion, and gather the people in it.

古文：威北将军诸葛恪攻六安。
现代文：威北将军诸葛恪攻打六安。
English: Zhuge, the general of the Northern Wei Dynasty, attacked Liu'an.

古文：琮与魏将王凌战于芍陂，中郎将秦晃等十馀人战死。
现代文：全琮与魏朝将领王凌在芍陂交战，中郎将秦晃等十多人战死。
English: Quanzhang and Wang Ling, the general of the Wei Dynasty, fought in Zhengzhou, and more than ten people including Zhong Lang and Qin Ao died in the battle.

古文：车骑将军朱然围樊，大将军诸葛瑾取柤中。
现代文：车骑将军朱然围困樊城，大将军诸葛瑾攻占柤中。
English: The cavalry general Zhu Ran besieged Lucheng, and the great general Zhu Gejun conquered Yuzhong.

古文：五月，太子登卒。
现代文：五月，太子孙登去世。
English: In May, Crown Prince Sunden passed away.

古文：是月，魏太傅司马宣王救樊。
现代文：同月，魏朝太傅司马宣王援救樊城。
English: In the same month, the Wei Dynasty Tai Fu Sima Xuan Wang came to the rescue of Handan City.

古文：六月，军还。
现代文：六月，大军返回。
English: In June, the large army returned.

古文：闰月，大将军瑾卒。
现代文：闰六月，大将军诸葛瑾去世。
English: In June, the great general Zhuge Liang passed away.

古文：秋八月，陆逊城邾。
现代文：八月，陆逊修建邾城。
English: In August, Lu Xun began to build Fucheng.

古文：五年春正月，立子和为太子，大赦，改禾兴为嘉兴。
现代文：赤乌五年正月，孙权儿子孙和为太子，大赦天下，改禾兴为嘉兴。
English: In the first month of the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Akihito, Sun Quan's son, Sun He, became the crown prince and was pardoned by the emperor. He changed his name from Hexing to Jiaxing.

古文：百官奏立皇后及四王，诏曰： 今天下未定，民物劳瘁，且有功者或未录，饥寒者尚未恤，猥割土壤以丰子弟，崇爵位以宠妃妾，孤甚不取。
现代文：朝臣奏请册立皇后及四王，孙权下诏说: 现在天下未定，百姓疲敝，况且有功之人有的还未封赏，饥寒之人尚未抚恤，如果割让土地使后代丰裕，尊崇爵位以显示妃妾的宠性，我认为不好。
English: At the request of the courtiers, the empress and four kings were appointed. Sun Quan issued an edict saying, "Nowadays, the world is undecided, the people are tired, moreover, some people with meritorious deeds have not yet been rewarded, and those who are hungry and cold have not yet been pardoned. If land is ceded to make future generations rich, and peerages are respected to show the favor of concubines, I think it is not good.

古文：其释此议。 
现代文：还是放下这个决议吧。 
English: Let's drop this resolution.

古文：三月，海盐县言黄龙见。
现代文：三月，海盐县上奏说有黄龙出现。
English: In March, Shangso in Haiyan County reported the appearance of a yellow dragon.

古文：夏四月，禁进献御，减太官膳。
现代文：夏四月，朝廷下令禁止奉献物品，减少太官的膳食。
English: In the summer of April, the imperial court ordered a ban on sacrificial items and a reduction in eunuchs' meals.

古文：秋七月，遣将军聂友、校尉陆凯以兵三万讨珠崖、儋耳。
现代文：七月，派将军聂友、校尉陆凯，率兵三万，征讨珠崖、儋耳。
English: In July, he sent General Shen You and Captain Lu Kai, leading 30,000 soldiers, to conquer Zhuya and Jiu'er.

古文：是岁大疫，有司又奏立后及诸王。
现代文：同年发生大瘟疫，相关官员又奏请册立皇后及诸王。
English: In the same year, the Great Plague occurred, and the relevant officials requested the registration of queens and kings.

古文：八月，立子霸为鲁王。
现代文：八月，孙权立儿子孙霸为鲁王。
English: In August, Sun Quan appointed his son Sun Ba as the King of Lu.

古文：六年春正月，新都言白虎见。
现代文：赤乌六年正月，新都县上奏有白虎出现。
English: In the first month of the sixth year of the Red Wu, a white tiger appeared in Shangso, Xindu County.

古文：诸葛恪征六安，破魏将谢顺营，收其民人。
现代文：诸葛恪征讨六安，攻破魏朝将领谢顺营，收编了其百姓。
English: Zhuge conquered Lu'an, defeated Wei Dynasty general Xie Shunying, and gathered together his people.

古文：冬十一月，丞相顾雍卒。
现代文：十一月，丞相顾雍去世。
English: In November, the chancellor Gu Yong passed away.

古文：十二月，扶南王范旃遣使献乐人及方物。
现代文：十二月，扶南王范旃派使者献上乐师及风俗物品。
English: In December, King Fan Rong of Funan sent an envoy to present musicians and customs.

古文：是岁，司马宣王率军入舒，诸葛恪自皖迁于柴桑。
现代文：同年，司马宣王率军进入舒地，诸葛恪从皖城迁到柴桑。
English: In the same year, Sima Xuanwang led the army into Shudi, and Zhuge Ke moved from Shicheng to Chaisang.

古文：七年春正月，以上大将军陆逊为丞相。
现代文：赤乌七年正月，孙权任命上大将军陆逊为丞相。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Wu, Sun Quan appointed General Lu Xun as prime minister.

古文：秋，宛陵言嘉禾生。
现代文：秋天，宛陵郡上奏有嘉禾生长。
English: In autumn, there was growth of Jiahe in Shangso, Wanling County.

古文：是岁，步骘、朱然等各上疏云： 自蜀还者，咸言欲背盟与魏交通，多作舟船，缮治城郭。
现代文：同年步騭、朱然等各自上奏说: 从蜀地投降之人，都说想要背弃盟约和魏朝勾结，建造了很多船只，修缮整治城墙。
English: In the same year, Bu Xuan, Zhu Ran and others each made a report, saying: The people who surrendered from Shu all said that they wanted to renege on the covenant and collude with the Wei Dynasty, built a lot of ships, and repaired and improved the city wall.

古文：又蒋琬守汉中，闻司马懿南向，不出兵乘虚以掎角之，反委汉中，还近成都。
现代文：又有蒋琬驻守汉中，得知司马懿向南出兵，如果不出兵，趁其虚弱以成犄角之势，反而将汉中之地委托给他，靠近成都。
English: There was also Chiang Kai-shek stationed in Hanzhong, who learned that Sima Yi had sent troops to the south. If he did not send troops, he would take advantage of his weakness to create a corner, but instead he entrusted the land of Hanzhong to him, close to Chengdu.

古文：事已彰灼，无所复疑，宜为之备。 
现代文：事情已经很明显了，不需要再怀疑，应该为之做好准备。 
English: It's already obvious, there's no need to doubt, and you should be prepared for it.

古文：权揆其不然，曰： 吾待蜀不薄，聘享盟誓，无所负之，何以致此？
现代文：孙权神色不在意，说: 我对待蜀地不薄，共同立下盟誓，没有违背的，为什么到这地步呢？
English: Sun Quan didn't seem to care and said, "I've been treating Shu Di fairly, and we've made an oath together and haven't broken it. Why has it come to this?

古文：又司马懿前来入舒，旬日便退，蜀在万里，何知缓急而便出兵乎？
现代文：又有司马懿之前进入舒城，十天之后就撤退了，蜀地在万里之外，又怎么能知道轻重缓急而立刻出兵呢？
English: Sima Yi also entered Shucheng before, and withdrew after ten days. Shu is thousands of miles away, so how can we know the priorities and immediately send troops?

古文：昔魏欲入汉川，此间始严，亦未举动，会闻魏还而止，蜀宁可复以此有疑邪？
现代文：过去魏国想要深入汉川，于是开始严整军队，还没有出发，又得知魏军返还就停止了，蜀国难道又有这样的疑虑吗？
English: In the past, Wei wanted to go deep into the Han River, so it began to tighten up the army. It had not yet set out, and when it learned that the Wei army had stopped returning, did Shu really have such doubts?

古文：又人家治国，舟船城郭，何得不护？
现代文：又有他国治国，船只城池，怎么能不守护呢？
English: There are other countries to govern the country, ships and castles, how can we not guard them?

古文：今此间治军，宁复欲以御蜀邪？
现代文：在这时候整顿军队，难道是想要以此抵御蜀军吗？
English: To reorganize the army at this time, is it to resist the Shu army?

古文：人言苦不可信，朕为诸君破家保之。 
现代文：他人之言，苦不可信，朕为你们倾尽全力守护它。 
English: Other people's words cannot be trusted. I will do my best to protect it for you.

古文：蜀竟自无谋，如权所筹。
现代文：蜀国最终没有这样的谋划，就像孙权所考虑的。
English: In the end, Shu did not have such a plan, as Sun Quan considered.

古文：八年春二月，丞相陆逊卒。
现代文：赤乌八年春二月，丞相陆逊去世。
English: In the spring and February of the eighth year of Emperor Akau's reign, Prime Minister Rokuson passed away.

古文：夏，雷霆犯宫门柱，又击南津大桥楹。
现代文：夏天天雷击中宫门的柱子，又击中南津大桥的桥楹。
English: In the summer, lightning struck the pillars of the palace gate and the piers of the Nanjin Bridge.

古文：茶陵县鸿水溢出，流漂居民二百馀家。
现代文：茶陵县有洪水溢出，流亡飘离的百姓有二百多家。
English: Floodwaters have overflowed in Chaling County, and more than 200 people have been driven into exile.

古文：秋七月，将军马茂等图逆，夷三族。
现代文：七月，将军马茂等人图谋叛逆，被夷灭三族。
English: In July, General Ma Mao and others plotted a rebellion, and the three tribes were annihilated.

古文：八月，大赦。遣校尉陈勋将屯田及作士三万人凿句容中道，自小其至云阳西城，通会市，作邸阁。
现代文：八月，大赦天下，派校尉陈勋率领屯田以及作士三万人将句容中道凿开，从小其到云阳西城，开通市场，修建邸阁。
English: In August, at the time of the general amnesty, he sent Lieutenant Chen Xunru to lead the army of 30,000 soldiers to dig a road through the middle of Jueng Rong, from the small town to the western city of Yunyang, to open a market and build a mansion.

古文：九年春二月，车骑将军朱然征魏柤中，斩获千馀。
现代文：赤乌九年春二月，车骑将军朱然征讨魏朝柤中，斩杀了一千多人。
English: In the spring and February of the ninth year of the Red Emperor Wu, General Zhu Ran, a chariot and cavalry general, went to the Wei Dynasty for a campaign, and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：夏四月，武昌言甘露降。
现代文：四月，武昌上奏有甘露降临。
English: In April, nectar came to Wuchang Shangso.

古文：秋九月，以骠骑将军步骘为丞相，车骑将军朱然为左大司马，卫将军全琮为右大司马，镇南将军吕岱为上大将军，威北将军诸葛恪为大将军。
现代文：九月，朝廷任命骠骑将军步騭为丞相，车骑将军朱然为左大司马，卫将军全琮为右大司马，镇南将军李代为上大将军，威北将军诸葛恪为大将军。
English: In September, the imperial court appointed the cavalry general Bu Xun as the prime minister, the cavalry general Zhu Ran as the left grand steward, the general of the guard Quan Xun as the right grand steward, the general of Zhenan Li Dai as the senior general, and the general of Weibei Zhu Ge Ke as the grand general.

古文：十年春正月，右大司马全琮卒。二月，权適南宫。
现代文：赤乌十年春正月，右大司马全琮去世，二月孙权将宫殿搬到南宫。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Wu, the Right Senior Secretary Ma Quanzhang died, and in February, Sun Quan moved the palace to the South Palace.

古文：三月，改作太初宫，诸将及州郡皆义作。
现代文：三月，南宫改为太初宫，各将领及州郡官吏都无偿参与。
English: In March, the Southern Palace was changed to the Imperial Palace, and all generals and state and county officials participated free of charge.

古文：夏五月，丞相步骘卒。
现代文：五月，丞相步騭去世。
English: In May, he passed away.

古文：冬十月，赦死罪。
现代文：十月，孙权下令赦免死刑的囚犯。
English: In October, Sun Quan ordered to pardon prisoners sentenced to death.

古文：十一年春正月，朱然城江陵。
现代文：赤乌十一年春正月，朱然修建江陵。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of the Spring, Zhu Ran began to build Gangneung.

古文：二月，地仍震。
现代文：二月，出现地震。
English: In February, there was an earthquake.

古文：三月，宫成。
现代文：三月宫殿建成。
English: The palace was completed in March.

古文：夏四月，雨雹，云阳言黄龙见。
现代文：四月，出现冰雹，云阳上奏说有黄龙出现。
English: In April, hailstorms occurred, and it was said that a yellow dragon appeared in the sky.

古文：五月，鄱阳言白虎仁。
现代文：五月，鄱阳上奏有白虎出现。
English: In May, a white tiger appeared in Shenyang.

古文：诏曰： 古者圣王积行累善，脩身行道，以有天下，故符瑞应之，所以表德也。
现代文：孙权下诏说: 过去，圣明的君主积累德行，修身行道，才坐拥天下，所以祥瑞响应，是为了表彰德行。
English: Sun Quan issued an edict saying, "In the past, it was the enlightened monarchs who gained the world's respect by accumulating virtue and cultivating virtue. Therefore, Xiang Rui's response was to commend virtue.

古文：朕以不明，何以臻兹？
现代文：我并不明智，怎么能得到这样的彰显呢？
English: I'm not clever, how can I get this exposure?

古文：书云 虽休勿休 ，公卿百司，其勉脩所职，以匡不逮。 
现代文：《尚书》中说虽休勿休，朝廷百官应该尽忠职守，以匡正我不到位的地方。 
English: "Shoshu" says that although I should not rest, the hundreds of officials of the Imperial Court should perform their duties faithfully to rectify where I am not in place.

古文：十二年春三月，左大司马朱然卒。
现代文：赤乌十二年春三月，左大司马朱然去世。
English: In March of the spring of the 12th year of the Red Emperor Wu, the Left Major Ma Zhuran passed away.

古文：四月，有两乌衔鹊堕东馆。
现代文：四月，有两只乌鸦衔着鸟雀，在东馆坠落。
English: In April, two crows carrying a sparrow fell to the ground in the East Wing.

古文：丙寅，骠骑将军朱据领丞相，燎鹊以祭。
现代文：骠骑将军朱据兼任丞相，将喜鹊焚烧，以祭祀天地。
English: Zhu Yan, the general of the imperial cavalry, who also served as chancellor, burned the magpies as a sacrifice to heaven and earth.

古文：十三年夏五月，日至，荧惑入南斗，秋七月，犯魁第二星而东。
现代文：赤乌十三年夏五月，日至时，荧惑星进入南斗星轨道，七月，进入魁星第二星随后东行。
English: In the summer of the thirteenth year of Akao, from May to October, the fluorescent planet entered the orbit of the Southern Dipper. In July, it entered the orbit of the second star of the Quasar and then moved eastward.

古文：八月，丹杨、句容及故鄣、宁国诸山崩，鸿水溢。
现代文：八月，丹阳、句容及故鄣、宁国各地都出现山崩洪水泛滥现象。
English: In August, landslides and floods occurred in Danyang, Jujong, and other parts of Guizhou and Ningguo.

古文：诏原逋责，给贷种食。
现代文：孙权下诏追究责任，并供应借贷粮食。
English: Sun Quan issued an edict to investigate the responsibility and supply grain on credit.

古文：废太子和，处故鄣。
现代文：废除太子孙和，让他居住在故鄣郡。
English: Abolish the Prince's Descendants and Grandchildren's Peace Treaty, and let him live in the late County of Zeng.

古文：鲁王霸赐死。
现代文：鲁王孙霸被赐死。
English: King of Lu, Sun Ba, was sentenced to death.

古文：冬十月，魏将文钦伪叛以诱朱异，权遣吕据就异以迎钦。
现代文：冬十月，魏朝将领文钦假装反叛以招诱朱异，孙权派吕据到朱异处迎接王钦。
English: In the winter of October, Wenqin, the general of the Wei Dynasty, pretended to rebel in order to lure Zhu Yi, and Sun Quan sent Lvzheng to Zhu Yi to meet Wang Qin.

古文：异等持重，钦不敢进。
现代文：朱异等人稳成持重，王钦不敢出兵。
English: Zhu Yixing and others held the balance of power, and Wang Qin did not dare to send troops.

古文：十一月，立子亮为太子。
现代文：十一月，立儿子孙亮为太子。
English: In November, he appointed his son Sun Liang as crown prince.

古文：遣军十万，作堂邑涂塘以淹北道。
现代文：派十万军马，修建堂邑涂塘以淹没北道。
English: Send a hundred thousand soldiers and horses to build a dongyi ditch to flood the North Road.

古文：十二月，魏大将军王昶围南郡，荆州刺史王基攻西陵，遣将军戴烈、陆凯往拒之，皆引还。
现代文：十二月，魏朝大将军王昶围攻南郡，荆州刺史王基攻打西陵，孙权派将军戴烈、陆凯前往抗击，随后都率军返回。
English: In December, the great general of the Wei Dynasty, Wang Qiong, besieged Nan County, and the great general of Jing Province, Wang Ji, attacked Xiling. Sun Quan sent the generals Dai Lie and Lu Kai to resist, and then they all led the army back.

古文：是岁，神人授书，告以改年、立后。
现代文：这一年，上天授书，表明应该改变年号，册立皇后。
English: In this year, Heaven bestowed the book, indicating that the year should be changed and the empress should be crowned.

古文：太元元年夏五月，立皇后潘氏，大赦，改年。
现代文：太元元年夏五月，册立皇后潘氏，大赦天下，改立年号。
English: In the summer and May of the first year of the Taiyuan era, the Empress Pan was enthroned, the country was amnestied, and the year of enthronement was changed.

古文：初临海罗阳县有神，自称王表。
现代文：当初，临海郡罗阳县有神仙，自称为王表。
English: At first, Luoyang County, Linhai County, had a holy man, who called himself Wang Table.

古文：周旋民间，语言饮食，与人无异，然不见其形。
现代文：在民间盘旋，言语饮食跟人没有区别，但是看不到他的形体。
English: In folk circles, words and food are no different from people, but you can't see his body.

古文：又有一婢，名纺绩。
现代文：又有一个婢女名叫纺绩。
English: There was also a maidservant whose name was Spinzi.

古文：是月，遣中书郎李崇赍辅国将军罗阳王印绶迎表。
现代文：这一月，孙权派中书郎李崇赉，辅国将军罗阳王带着印信绶带迎接王表。
English: This month, Sun Quan's middle school teacher, Li Chongyi, and the auxiliary general, Luo Yang Wang, took the seal ribbon to welcome Wang Watch.

古文：表随崇俱出，与崇及所在郡守令长谈论，崇等无以易。
现代文：王表跟随李崇赉一起出发，和李崇赉以及所在的郡守县令畅谈政事，李崇赉等人无所交换。
English: Wang Table set off together with Li Chongyao, and talked freely about politics with Li Chongyao and the county magistrate of the county in which he was located. Li Chongyao and others did not exchange anything.

古文：所历山川，辄遣婢与其神相闻。
现代文：他所看过的山川风物，都派婢女告知这神仙。
English: He sent his maidservants to tell the god about all the mountain and river scenery he had seen.

古文：秋七月，崇与表至，权於苍龙门外为立第舍，数使近臣赍酒食往。
现代文：秋七月，李崇和王表来到，孙权在苍龙门外为王表修建宅舍，多次派近臣带着酒食前往。
English: In the autumn and July, Li Chong and Wang Bo came. Sun Quan built a house for Wang Bo outside the Soryu Gate, and sent his close vassals with food and wine to visit him many times.

古文：表说水旱小事，往往有验。
现代文：王表上奏说水旱之类的小事往往都有应验。
English: Wang table predicts some small things such as droughts and floods. It is often very effective.

古文：秋八月朔，大风，江海涌溢，平地深八尺，吴高陵松柏斯拔，郡城南门飞落。
现代文：八月最后一天，出现大风，江海泛滥，水位在平地有八尺深，吴高陵的松柏被连根拔起，城的南门飞落。
English: On the last day of August, there was a strong wind, the river and sea flooded, the water level was eight feet deep on the flat land, the pine trees of Wu Gaoling were uprooted, and the south gate of the city fell down.

古文：冬十一月，大赦。
现代文：十一月冬，大赦天下。
English: In the winter of November, there is a general amnesty.

古文：权祭南郊还，寝疾。
现代文：孙权在南郊祭祀返回，后来病重。
English: Sun Quan returned from a religious service in the southern suburbs and later fell seriously ill.

古文：十二月，驿徵大将军恪，拜为太子太傅。
现代文：十二月，派驿使征召大将军诸葛恪，任命他为太子太傅。
English: In December, he sent an envoy to summon the great general Zhuge Ke, and appointed him as the prince's daifu.

古文：诏省徭役，减征赋，除民所患苦。
现代文：又下诏减免徭役，减少赋税，免除百姓所忧患的苦痛。
English: He also decreed the reduction and exemption of forced labor, the reduction of taxes, and the exemption of the suffering of the people.

古文：二年春正月，立故太子和为南阳王，居长沙；子奋为齐王，居武昌；子休为琅邪王，居虎林。
现代文：太元二年春正月，册立原太子孙和为南阳王，居住在长沙，儿子孙奋为齐王，居住武昌，儿子孙休为琅琊王，居住虎林。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taigen era, Prince Nanyang, who lived in Changsha, and his son, Prince Qi, who lived in Wuchang, and his son, Prince Sun Xiu, who lived in Hulun, were named as the descendants of the former crown prince.

古文：二月，大赦，改元为神凤。皇后潘氏薨。
现代文：二月，大赦天下，改年号为神凤，皇后潘氏去世。
English: In February, the world was amnestied, the year name was changed to Shen Feng, and Queen Pan died.

古文：诸将吏数诣王表请福，表亡去。
现代文：各将官吏役多次到王表处请求褔衹，王表离开。
English: Each of the generals and officials repeatedly went to Wang Biao's office to ask for permission, and Wang Biao left.

古文：夏四月，权薨，时年七十一，谥曰大皇帝。
现代文：四月，孙权去世，时年七十一岁，谥号为大皇帝。
English: In April, Sun Quan died at the age of seventy-one. He was nicknamed the Great Emperor.

古文：秋七月，葬蒋陵。
现代文：七月，葬在蒋陵。
English: In July, he was buried in Jiangling Mausoleum.

古文：评曰：孙权屈身忍辱，任才尚计，有勾践之奇，英人之杰矣。故能自擅江表，成鼎峙之业。
现代文：孙权忍辱负重，任用贤才，崇尚计谋，有勾践的奇才，英雄的杰出，所以能自己占据江东，形成鼎足之势。
English: Sun Quan bore the burden of humiliation, appointed sages, advocated stratagems, practiced prodigies, and outstanding heroes, so he was able to occupy the east of the Yangtze River and form a strong momentum.

古文：然性多嫌忌，果於杀戮，暨臻末年，弥以滋甚。
现代文：但是生性多嫌忌，对杀戮之事非常果敢，到了末年，这一情况更加严重。
English: But he had an innate aversion to killing, which became more acute towards the end of his life.

古文：至于谗说殄行，胤嗣废毙，岂所谓贻厥孙谋以燕翼子者哉？
现代文：至于听信谗言，不修养德行，废除杀害继承人，这难道就是孙权给将来作为江东和南京之主的子孙能否千秋万代的谋划么？
English: As for listening to advice, not cultivating virtue, and abolishing the killing of heirs, is this really Sun Quan's plan for the future generations as the master of Jiangdong and Nanjing?

古文：其后叶陵迟，遂致覆国，未必不由此也。
现代文：这样到了后来就已经迟了，以至于国家覆灭，未必不是因为这一缘故。
English: Thus, it was already too late by then, so that the country was destroyed, but not necessarily for this reason.

