古文：南蛮上南诏，或曰鹤拓，曰龙尾，曰苴咩，曰阳剑，本哀牢夷后，乌蛮别种也。夷语王为 诏 。
现代文：南诏，又名鹤拓、龙尾、苴咩、阳剑。原是哀牢夷的后代、乌蛮的支派。夷语称王为 诏 。
English: Nanzhao, also known as He Tuo, Longwei, Zou and Yang Jian. Originally, it was a descendant of the Miao and Yi, and a branch of the Wu and barbarians. The Yi language called the king the Zhao.

古文：其先渠帅有六，自号 六诏 ，曰蒙秀诏、越析诏、浪穹诏、睒诏、施浪诏、蒙舍诏。
现代文：其先祖有六大帅，自称 六诏 ，名叫蒙诏、越析诏、浪穹诏、目炎诏、施浪诏、蒙舍诏。
English: Its ancestors were the six great generals, who called themselves the six great generals, and were named Meng Yao, Yue Xi Yao, Lang Yu Yao, Me Yan Yao, Shi Lang Yao, and Meng She Yao.

古文：兵埒，不能相君，蜀诸葛亮讨定之。
现代文：各诏兵力相等，各有君长，但无统帅。三国时诸葛亮制伏了他们。
English: Each sultan had an equal number of soldiers, each had a regent, but no commander. Zhuge Liang conquered them when they were three countries.

古文：蒙舍诏在诸部南，故称南诏。
现代文：蒙舍诏在各诏之南，故称为南诏。
English: Monsieur Dahal is in the south of each Dahal, so it is called South Dahal.

古文：居永昌、姚州之间，铁桥之南，东距爨，东南属交趾，西摩伽陀，西北与吐蕃接，南女王，西南骠，北抵益州，东北际黔、巫。
现代文：其地介于永昌、姚州之间，铁桥之南。东与爨接壤，东南连接交趾，西面是摩伽陀，西北与吐蕃相连，南面是女王，西南是骠，北与益州相接，东北挨着黔、巫。
English: It is located between Yongchang and Yaozhou, south of the Iron Bridge. It is bordered by Kunming to the east, connected to Jiaozuo to the southeast, Mogadishu to the west, connected to Tubo to the northwest, Queen to the south, Kunming to the southwest, connected to Yizhou to the north, and adjacent to Kunming and Wuxi to the northeast.

古文：王都羊苴咩城，别都曰善阐府。
现代文：王都在羊苴咩城，另有别都叫善阐府。
English: All the kings are in Yangshuo City, and all the others are in Shanzhaifu.

古文：王坐东向，其臣有所陈，以状言而不称臣。
现代文：王的坐位面向东，其臣下有所陈述时写在状牒上而不称臣。
English: The king's seat faces east, and when his vassals make a statement, it is written in the official report without praising the vassal.

古文：王自称曰元，犹朕也；谓其下曰昶，犹卿、尔也。
现代文：王自称 元 ，就如称 朕 。对其属下则称 昶 ，有如称 卿、尔 一样。
English: If a king calls himself Yuan, it is the same as saying "I." If he calls his subordinates, it is the same as saying "Sir" or "Uncle."

古文：官曰坦绰、曰布燮、曰久赞，谓之清平官，所以决国事轻重，犹唐宰相也；曰酋望、曰正酋望、曰员外酋望、曰大军将、曰员外，犹试官也。幕爽主兵，琮爽主户籍，慈爽主礼，罚爽主刑，劝爽主官人，厥爽主工作，万爽主财用，引爽主客，禾爽主商贾，皆清平官、酋望、大军将兼之。爽，犹言省也。
现代文：官名坦绰、布燮、久赞的，称之为清平官，是决定国家大事的人，就像唐的宰相；官名酋望、正酋望、员外酋望、大军将、员外的，就像候补官；幕爽主管军事，琮爽主管户籍，慈爽主管礼仪，罚爽主管刑赏，劝爽主管官吏，厥爽主管工程，万爽主管财用，引爽主管外交，禾爽主管商贩，这些都由清平官、酋望、大军将兼任。 爽 就等于 省 。
English: The officials with the titles of Tanchao, Bu, and Jiuzan are called Qingping officials, and they are the people who decide national affairs, just like the prime ministers of the Tang Dynasty; the officials with the titles of chiefs, chiefs, chiefs, generals, and non-commissioned officers are like the alternate officials; the military is in charge of the curtain, the household registration is in charge of the family register, the etiquette is in charge of the etiquette, the punishment is in charge of the punishment, the officials are in charge of the reward, the project is in charge of the project, the finance is in charge of the finance, the diplomacy is in

古文：督爽，总三省也。
现代文：督爽，总管三省。
English: Du Shuang, the head of the three provinces.

古文：乞托主马，禄托主牛，巨托主仓廪，亦清平官、酋望、大军将兼之。
现代文：乞讠乇管马，禄讠乇管牛，巨讠乇管仓廪，也是清平官，由酋望、大军将兼任。
English: Beggars were in charge of horses, farmers were in charge of cattle, and giant clams were in charge of barns. They were also the officials of the Qing dynasty, and the chiefs and generals would also serve in this capacity.

古文：曰爽酋、曰弥勤、曰勤齐，掌赋税。
现代文：爽酋、弥勤、勤齐掌管赋税，兵犭需司掌管机密。
English: Shuang Hui, Ya Qin and Qin Qi were in charge of taxation, and the Military Supplies Department was in charge of secrets.

古文：曰兵獳司，掌机密。大府主将曰演习，副曰演览；中府主将曰缮裔，副曰缮览；下府主将曰澹酋，副曰澹览；小府主将曰幕捴，副曰幕览。府有陀酋，若管记；有陀西，若判官。
现代文：大府主将叫演习，副将叫演览；中府主将叫缮裔，副将叫缮览；下府主将叫澹酋，副将叫澹览；小府主将叫幕扌为，副将叫幕览。府有陀酋，有如管记；有陀西，有如判官。
English: The governor of a large province will call for a drill, the vice-governor will call for a review; the governor of a middle province will call for a review, and the vice-governor will call for a review; the governor of a lower province will call for a review, and the vice-governor will call for a review; the governor of a small province will call for a review, and the vice-governor will call for a review.

古文：大抵如此。
现代文：其官制大概如此。
English: This is probably the reason for its bureaucratic system.

古文：凡调发，下文书聚邑，必占其期。
现代文：凡有调遣征发、下文书、聚村落等事，必定要占卜吉日。
English: In all matters of dispatching and requisitioning, issuing documents, gathering villages, etc., it is necessary to predict the auspicious day.

古文：百家有总佐一，千家有治人官一，万家有都督一。
现代文：一百家设一名总佐，一千家设一名治人官，一万家设一名都督。
English: One hundred families set up a colonel-in-chief, one thousand families set up a magistrate, and ten thousand families set up a governor.

古文：凡田五亩曰双。上官授田四十双，上户三十双，以是而差。
现代文：五亩田叫 双 ，上官授田四十双，上户三十双，如此依次给田。
English: Five mu of farmland is called a pair, the superior officer grants forty pairs of farmland, and the upper households thirty pairs of farmland, and so on.

古文：壮者皆为战卒，有马为骑军。
现代文：青壮年都是战士，有马的则是骑兵。
English: The young and strong are warriors, those with horses are cavalry.

古文：人岁给韦衫裤。
现代文：每人每年一套皮衫裤。
English: One pair of leather trousers per person per year.

古文：以邑落远近分四军，以旗帜别四方，面一将统千人，四军置一将。
现代文：以村落的远近分辨为四军，以不同的旗帜分辨四方。面中一将统领千人，四军设一将。
English: The four armies are distinguished by the distance between the villages, and the four directions are distinguished by different flags. One general leads a thousand people, and one general is set up for the four armies.

古文：凡敌入境，以所入面将御之。
现代文：凡有敌入侵，以入侵所面的将领统兵抵御。
English: Whenever there is an enemy invasion, the generals and soldiers facing the invasion will resist.

古文：王亲兵曰硃弩佉苴。
现代文：王的亲兵叫朱弩亻去苴。
English: The king's soldiers ordered Zhu Xi to leave.

古文：佉苴，韦带也。
现代文：所谓亻去苴，就是皮带。
English: The so-called 去, that is, the belt.

古文：择乡兵为四军罗苴子，戴硃鞮鍪，负犀革铜盾而跣，走险如飞。
现代文：从乡兵中挑选精悍者为四军罗苴子，戴红色皮头盔，背犀牛皮镶铜的盾，然而赤足，走险路如飞。
English: The bravest were selected from the local soldiers to form the four-army group, wearing red leather helmets and rhinoceros-skin shields, but barefoot and ready to take on any danger.

古文：百人置罗苴子统一人。
现代文：一百人设罗苴子统一人。
English: One hundred people, including Luo Zizi, are united as one.

古文：望苴蛮者，在兰苍江西。
现代文：望苴蛮，在兰苍江西。
English: It is located in the west of the Lancang River.

古文：男女勇捷，不鞍而骑，善用矛剑，短甲蔽胸腹，鞮鍪皆插猫牛尾，驰突若神。
现代文：男女都矫健骁勇。骑马不用鞍，穿短甲护住胸腹，头盔上插牦牛尾，飞驰快速如神。
English: Both men and women are vigorous and brave. They ride without a saddle, wear short armor to protect their chest and abdomen, put a cow's tail on their helmets, and gallop as fast as gods.

古文：凡兵出，以望苴子前驱。
现代文：凡作战，都由望苴子做前锋。
English: In all battles, the vanguard is always made up of the watchmen.

古文：以清平子弟为羽仪。
现代文：以清平子弟做羽仪。
English: With Kiyohira's son as a feather.

古文：王左右有羽仪长八人，清平官见王不得佩剑，唯羽仪长佩之为亲信。
现代文：王的左右有羽仪长八人，清平官见王时不得佩剑，只有羽仪长可以佩剑表示是王的亲信。
English: On the king's right and left, there are eight feather chiefs. When the Qingping official sees the king, he is not allowed to wear a sword. Only the feather chief can wear a sword to show that he is the king's close friend.

古文：有六曹长，曹长有功补大军将。
现代文：又设六个曹长，曹长有功就补大军将。
English: There are also six Cao Chang, Cao Chang has the merit to make up for the great general.

古文：大军将十二，与清平官等列，日议事王所，出治军壁称节度，次补清平官。
现代文：大军将有十二人，与清平官同级，每日都要到王那里议事。如果出都治军，称之为节度，其次可补清平官。
English: The great army will have twelve members, who will be at the same level as the Qing officials, and will have to go to the king every day for deliberation. If they go to the capital to lead the army, it will be called a festival, and secondly, they can fill the Qing officials.

古文：有内算官，代王裁处；外算官，记王所处分，以付六曹。
现代文：还有内算官，代王处理事务；外算官，记载王所做决定安排，然后交付六曹。
English: There is also an internal auditor, who handles affairs on behalf of the king; an external auditor, who records the decisions and arrangements made by the king, and then hands them over to the six officials.

古文：外则有六节度，曰：弄栋、永昌、银生、剑川、柘东、丽水。
现代文：都城外有六个节度，称为弄栋、永昌、银生、剑川、柘东、丽水。
English: There are six festivals outside the capital, known as Nodong, Yongchang, Yin Sheng, Jianchuan, Shandong and Lishui.

古文：有二都督：会川、通海。
现代文：有两个都督：会川、通海。
English: There are two governors: Aikawa and Toka.

古文：有十睑，夷语睑若州，曰：云南睑、白厓睑亦曰勃弄睑、品澹睑、川睑、蒙舍睑、大厘睑亦曰史睑、苴咩睑亦曰阳睑、蒙秦睑、矣和睑、赵川睑。祁鲜山之西多瘴歊，地平，草冬不枯。
现代文：有十个睑，夷语中的 睑 有如 州 ：云南睑、白睑、品澹睑、川睑、蒙舍睑、大矨睑、苴咩睑、蒙秦睑、矣和睑、赵川睑。祁鲜山之西多瘴气，地势平坦，草木冬天不枯。
English: There are ten provinces in Yi language: Yunnan Province, Baiyun Province, Shanxi Province, Sichuan Province, Mengxue Province, Dalian Province, Yunnan Province, Mengqin Province, Yiwu Province, Zhao Sichuan Province. The western part of Qingshan Mountain is more humid, the terrain is flat, and the plants and trees do not wither in winter.

古文：自曲靖州至滇池，人水耕，食蚕以柘，蚕生阅二旬而茧，织锦缣精致。
现代文：从曲靖州到滇池，人们种水田，用柘叶养蚕，蚕二十天就能结茧，织出的锦绸极精致。
English: From Qujingzhou to Dianchi, people planted paddy fields and raised silkworms with cocoon leaves. The silkworms were able to produce cocoons in 20 days, and the brocade they wove was extremely delicate.

古文：大和、祁鲜而西，人不蚕，剖波罗树实，状若絮，纽缕而幅之。
现代文：大和、祁鲜以西，人们不养蚕，剖婆罗树的果实，里面有棉花一样的东西，纺织而成布。
English: To the west of Yamato and Kushimatsu, people do not raise silkworms, but cut the fruit of the borax tree, which contains something like cotton, and weave it into cloth.

古文：览睑井产盐最鲜白，惟王得食，取足辄灭灶。
现代文：览睑井产的盐最鲜白，只有王可以吃。王食用够了就灭灶不再煮。
English: The salt produced in Zhaojing is the freshest and the whitest, and only the king can eat it. When the king has eaten enough, he will turn off the stove and stop cooking.

古文：昆明城诸井皆产盐，不征，群蛮食之。
现代文：昆明城的各井都产盐，王不征用，当地人食用。
English: Every well in Kunming produces salt. The king does not requisition it, and the locals eat it.

古文：永昌之西，野桑生石上，其林上屈两向而下植，取以为弓，不筋漆而利，名曰瞑弓。
现代文：永昌之西，石缝里长野桑，其枝条上弯两弯而下直，取来做弓，不涂漆就强劲，称之为瞑弓。
English: West of Yongchang, Nagano mulberry grows in a stone crevice. Its branches are bent up and straight down, and are used to make bows. They are strong without being painted, and are called meditation bows.

古文：长川诸山，往往有金，或披沙得之。
现代文：长川各山，常常发现金子，有时扒开沙就可得。
English: In the mountains of Nagawa, gold is often found, and sometimes sand can be obtained by scraping sand.

古文：丽水多金麸。
现代文：丽水多产金屑。
English: Lishui is a prolific producer of gold dust.

古文：越睒之西，多荐草，产善马，世称越睒骏。
现代文：越目炎之西，多荐草，产好马，世称越目炎骏。
English: West of Yue Mei Yan, more recommended grass, produces good horses, world-renowned Yue Mei Yan grass.

古文：始生若羔，岁中纽莎縻之，饮以米潘，七年可御，日驰数百里。
现代文：刚出生时有如羊羔，年内用纽莎系住，喂以米汤。七年就可驾驭，每日能飞驰几百里。
English: At birth, it is like a lamb. During the year, it is tethered with a noosa and fed with rice soup. It can be driven for seven years and can fly several hundred miles a day.

古文：王出，建八旗，紫若青，白斿；雉翣二；有旄钺，紫囊之；翠盖。
现代文：王出来，建八旗，紫青色，白色流苏，雉尾大扇两把；还有牛尾装饰的大斧，裹以紫色，车盖作翠色。
English: The king came out and set up eight banners, purple and blue with white tassels, and two large fans at the ends of the pillars; and a large axe decorated with an ox's tail, wrapped in purple, with a green cover.

古文：王母曰信麽，亦曰九麽。
现代文：王的母亲叫信麽，也叫九麽。
English: Is the king's mother called Faith, or Nine?

古文：妃曰进武。
现代文：王妃叫进武。
English: The princess called Jinbu.

古文：信麽出，亦建八旗，绛斿。
现代文：信麽出宫，也建八旗，用绛色的流苏。
English: When a prince leaves the palace, he also sets up eight banners, trimmed with scarlet tassels.

古文：自曹长以降，系金佉苴。尚绛紫。
现代文：从曹长以下，系金皮带，衣绛紫色。
English: From Cao Chang on down, the belts are gold and the collars are purple.

古文：有功加锦，又有功加金波罗。
现代文：有功就加锦，再有功就加金波罗。
English: If there is merit, add brocade, and if there is merit, add gold.

古文：金波罗，虎皮也。
现代文：所谓金波罗，即虎皮。
English: The so-called gold polo, that is, tiger skin.

古文：功小者，衿背不袖，次止于衿。
现代文：功小的，穿有领背心，再次一等则只加一背心。
English: If the effort is small, wear a collared waistcoat, and if it is first class, add only a waistcoat.

古文：妇人不粉黛，以苏泽发。
现代文：妇女不施脂粉，用紫苏滋润头发。
English: Women do not apply fat powder, but moisturize their hair with perilla.

古文：贵者绫锦裙襦，上施锦一幅。以两股辫为鬟髻，耳缀珠贝、瑟瑟、虎魄。
现代文：富贵人家穿绸缎衣裙，肩再披锦一幅，头发编两股辫子盘成髻，耳朵戴珠贝、瑟瑟、琥珀做的耳环。
English: Wealthy people wear silk and satin dresses, with brocade draped over the shoulders, their hair braided into a double braid, and earrings made of pearls, emeralds, and amber.

古文：女、嫠妇与人乱，不禁，婚夕私相送。
现代文：不禁止姑娘、寡妇与男子交好。结婚晚上自己前往。
English: It is not forbidden for girls and widows to make friends with men. They can go there on their own on the evening of their wedding.

古文：已嫁有奸者，皆抵死。
现代文：婚后发生奸情，则要处死。
English: If adultery occurs after marriage, it is punishable by death.

古文：俗以寅为正，四时大抵与中国小差。
现代文：习俗以十二月为正月，四时与中国略有差异。
English: The custom regards December as the first month of the year, with the four o'clock rising slightly different from that in China.

古文：脍鱼寸，以胡瓜、椒、菼和之，号鹅阙。
现代文：切鱼寸长，用黄瓜、胡椒、茱萸调和，称之为鹅阙。
English: Cut the fish lengthwise, mix it with cucumber, pepper, and dogwood, and call it goose stew.

古文：吹瓢笙，笙四管。酒至客前，以笙推盏劝酹。
现代文：喜欢瓢笙，笙有四管，向客进酒，用笙推酒杯劝饮。
English: He likes the gong, the gong has four pipes, he pours wine to the guests, and pushes the wine glass with the gong to persuade them to drink.

古文：以缯帛及贝市易。
现代文：用布匹绸缎及贝壳做货币买卖。
English: They traded in cloth, silk and shells for money.

古文：贝者大若指，十六枚为一觅。
现代文：贝壳大如手指，十六枚称为一觅。
English: The shells are as big as fingers, and sixteen of them are called a ring.

古文：师行，人赍粮斗五升，以二千五百人为一营。
现代文：军队出发作战，每人带粮一斗五升，以二千五百人为一营。
English: The army set out for battle, each man bringing a five-liter bucket of grain, for a battalion of twenty-five hundred men.

古文：其法，前伤者养治，后伤者斩。
现代文：军中法令：前面受伤的，治病养伤；后背受伤的则斩。
English: The military decrees: those who are injured in the front should receive medical treatment; those who are injured in the back should be beheaded.

古文：犁田以一牛三夫，前挽、中压、后驱。
现代文：犁田时一头牛三个人为一套，前面的人拉，中间的人压犁，后面的人赶牛。
English: In Putian, a cow is a set of three people. The person in front pulls, the person in the middle pushes, and the person behind drives the cow.

古文：然专于农，无贵贱皆耕。
现代文：国家专事农业，不分贵贱都种田。
English: The state specializes in agriculture, and both rich and poor grow crops.

古文：不繇役，人岁输米二斗。
现代文：不派徭役，每人每年纳米二斗。
English: If you don't send a steward, each person will earn two nanometers per year.

古文：一艺者给田，二收乃税。
现代文：有技艺的人也给田，如有两项收入则纳税。
English: Skilled people also work in the fields, and if they have two incomes, they pay taxes.

古文：王蒙氏，父子以名相属。
现代文：王蒙氏，父子以名字相连结。
English: Wang Meng, father and son are connected by name.

古文：自舍尨以来，有谱次可考。
现代文：自舍聾以来，有谱牒可资考查。
English: Since the death of Xie Yao, there have been records that can be examined.

古文：舍尨生独逻，亦曰细奴逻，高宗时遣使者入朝，赐锦袍。
现代文：舍聾生独逻，也叫细奴逻，高宗时派使者入朝，得赐锦袍。
English: When Gao Zong sent an envoy to the imperial court, he was given a brocade robe.

古文：细奴逻生逻盛炎，逻盛炎生炎阁。
现代文：细奴逻生逻盛炎，逻盛炎生炎。
English: Ill-mannered logic begets ill-mannered logic, ill-mannered logic begets ill-mannered logic.

古文：武后时，盛炎身入朝，妻方娠，生盛逻皮，喜曰： 我又有子，虽死唐地足矣。 
现代文：武后时盛炎亲自入朝，妻子正怀孕，生盛逻皮。盛炎高兴地说： 我又有儿子了，即使死在唐地也够了。 
English: When the Empress Dowager, Sheng Yan, entered the court in person, her wife was pregnant and gave birth to Sheng Luo Pei. Sheng Yan said happily: I have a son again, even if I die in Tang, it is enough.

古文：炎阁立，死开元时。弟盛逻皮立，生皮逻阁，授特进，封台登郡王。
现代文：炎立，开元年间死，弟盛逻皮立，生皮逻阁，被授为特进，封台登郡王。
English: Yan Li, died in the first year of the year, his younger brother Sheng Luo Pi Li, Sheng Pi Luo Ge, was awarded the special promotion, and was crowned the county king.

古文：炎阁未有子时，以阁罗凤为嗣，及生子，还其宗，而名承阁，遂不改。
现代文：炎还没有生子时，以罗凤为嗣子，后来生了儿子，让罗凤回自己宗族，但不再改名。
English: When Flame had not yet given birth to a child, she chose Luo Feng as her heir. Later, she gave birth to a son, allowing Luo Feng to return to his family, but not to change his name.

古文：开元末，皮逻阁逐河蛮，取大和城，又袭大厘城守之，因城龙口，夷语山陂陀为 和 ，故谓 大和 ，以处阁罗凤。
现代文：开元末年，皮逻阁赶走河蛮，夺取了大和城，又袭取大矨城进军驻守，同时在龙口建城，夷语中山陂陀称为 和 ，所以称之为 大和 ，用以安顿罗凤。
English: At the end of the first year of the 21st century, Piloogu drove away the barbarians from the river, captured Yamato-jo Castle, and invaded and garrisoned Dafeng-jo Castle. At the same time, he built a city in Longkou, which was called "Wa" in the Yi language, so it was called "Yamato" to settle Luo Feng.

古文：天子诏赐皮逻阁名归义。
现代文：天子诏赐皮逻名归义。
English: The Son of Heaven has bestowed upon Pilo the name of righteousness.

古文：当是时，五诏微，归义独强，乃厚以利啖剑南节度使王昱，求合六诏为一。制可。
现代文：其时，五诏已衰微，独归义强盛。归义用厚利贿赂剑南节度使王昱，求合六诏为一，得到许可。
English: At that time, the Five Precepts had waned, and only the Four Precepts were strong. The Five Precepts used their great wealth to bribe the Jiannan Sect to allow Wang Qian to combine the Six Precepts into one, and he received permission.

古文：归义已并群蛮，遂破吐蕃，浸骄大。
现代文：归义并了众诏后，攻破吐蕃，日渐骄横起来。
English: After Guiyi was unified with Zhaozhao, it broke through Tuyu and gradually became arrogant.

古文：入朝，天子亦为加礼。
现代文：入朝时，天子也对他格外客气。
English: At the time of his accession to the imperial throne, the emperor was also exceptionally polite to him.

古文：又以破渳蛮功，驰遣中人册为云南王，赐锦袍、金钿带七事。
现代文：又因为破氵弭蛮有功，派中人前往册封为云南王，赐锦袍、金钅田带等七样物件。
English: In addition, because of the great merit of breaking the yakitori, he sent a middle-ranking person to be crowned as the king of Yunnan, and gave him seven items such as a brocade robe and a gold brocade belt.

古文：于是徙治大和城。
现代文：于是迁往大和城。
English: So they moved to Yamato city.

古文：天宝初，遣阁罗凤子凤迦异入宿卫，拜鸿胪卿，恩赐良异。
现代文：天宝初，派罗凤的儿子凤迦异入朝任宿卫，被委任为鸿胪卿，颇受恩宠，得赏赐甚丰。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, Feng Jiayi, the son of Emperor Luo Feng, entered the imperial court to serve as a night watchman and was appointed as the Lord of Hung Hom. He was highly favored and received a great reward.

古文：七载，归义死，阁罗凤立，袭王，以其子凤迦异为阳瓜州刺史。
现代文：开元七年，归义死，罗凤立，承袭云南王，任他的儿子凤迦异为阳瓜州刺史。
English: In the seventh year of the first century, after Gui Yi's death, Luo Fengli inherited the throne of Yunnan, and appointed his son Feng Jiayi as Yangguazhou's crown prince.

古文：初，安宁城有五盐井，人得煮鬻自给。玄宗诏特进何履光以兵定南诏境，取安宁城及井，复立马援铜柱，乃还。
现代文：当初，安宁城有五口盐井，人们可以煮盐出售为生，玄宗诏令特进何履光用兵控制南诏，夺取安宁城及盐井，又在马援竖立铜柱作为界记后回朝。
English: At first, there were five salt wells in Anning City, and people could make and sell salt to make a living. Emperor Xuanzong ordered a special advance to take control of Nanzhao with soldiers, seize Anning City and salt wells, and erect a copper pillar in Ma'an as a boundary record before returning to the imperial court.

古文：鲜于仲通领剑南节度使，卞忿少方略。
现代文：鲜于仲通担任剑南节度使，凶悍急躁而少谋略。
English: Fewer than Zhongtong served as the Jiannan Festival envoy, fierce and impatient but less strategic.

古文：故事，南诏尝与妻子谒都督，过云南，太守张虔陀私之，多所求丐，阁罗凤不应。
现代文：曾经有一次，南诏王与妻子谒见都督，经过云南，太守张虔陀对他们很好，不过向他们索贿甚多，罗凤不应。
English: Once upon a time, King Nanzhao and his wife had an audience with the governor-general of Yunnan. The governor-general of Yunnan, Zhang Qianda, was very kind to them, but he demanded a lot of bribes from them, which Luo Feng did not want.

古文：虔陀数诟靳之，阴表其罪。
现代文：虔陀就多次辱骂他，还秘密上书指责其罪行。
English: Khyentse repeatedly insulted him and secretly wrote a letter accusing him of crimes.

古文：由是忿怨，反，发兵攻虔陀，杀之，取姚州及小夷州凡三十二。
现代文：罗凤因之愤恨，起而反叛，发兵攻打虔陀，并杀了他。攻陷姚州及小夷州共三十二州。
English: Enraged, Luo Feng rebelled and sent an army to attack and kill Kenda, capturing Yaozhou and Xiaoyizhou, a total of thirty-two provinces.

古文：明年，仲通自将出戎、巂州，分二道进次曲州、靖州。
现代文：第二年，鲜于仲通亲自带兵从戎、州出发，分两路进军曲州、靖州。
English: In the second year, Mian Yu Zhongtong personally led the troops to set out from Eun and Zhou, and marched into Quzhou and Jingzhou in two directions.

古文：阁罗凤遣使者谢罪，愿还所虏，得自新，且城姚州；如不听，则归命吐蕃，恐云南非唐有。
现代文：罗凤派使者去仲通处谢罪，愿意归还掳掠所得，改进自新，在姚州建城。如不同意，那就去归顺吐蕃。那时，恐怕云南就不是唐的辖地了。
English: Luo Feng sent an envoy to the intermediary to apologize, willing to return the plundered income, improve and renovate, and build a city in Yaozhou. If you do not agree, then go to Shun Tubo. At that time, I am afraid that Yunnan will not be the jurisdiction of Tang.

古文：仲通怒，囚使者，进薄白厓城，大败引还。
现代文：仲通怒，囚禁了使者，进而逼近白城，结果大败撤军。
English: In anger, Zhongtong imprisoned the envoy, and then approached Baicheng. As a result, the army was defeated and withdrew.

古文：阁罗凤敛战胔，筑京观，遂北臣吐蕃，吐蕃以为弟。
现代文：罗凤收敛尸骸，筑大坟。于是北向对吐蕃称臣。吐蕃视他为弟弟。
English: Luo Feng collected the corpses and built a large grave. Therefore, the north side praised Tu Yu as a minister. Tu Yu regarded him as a younger brother.

古文：夷谓弟 钟 ，故称 赞普钟 ，给金印，号 东帝 。
现代文：夷语称弟为 钟 ，所以叫他为 赞普钟 。授给金印，号称 东帝 。
English: The Yi language called his younger brother Zhong, so he was called Zampu Zhong. He was awarded a gold seal and was known as the Eastern Emperor.

古文：揭碑国门，明不得已而叛，尝曰： 我上世世奉中国，累封赏，后嗣容归之。
现代文：罗凤在国门前竖碑，碑上表明是不得已才叛的。曾说 ：我祖上世代都臣服中国，多次得封赏，后辈也定归顺。
English: Luo Feng erected a monument in front of the gate of the country. The monument showed that he had no choice but to rebel. He once said: My ancestors in the previous generation were all submissive to China, they were awarded many times, and the younger generation will also be obedient.

古文：若唐使者至，可指碑澡祓吾罪也。 
现代文：假若唐廷有使者来，可指碑洗刷我的罪过。 
English: If Tang Ting had an emissary, he could wash away my sins with the help of the tablet.

古文：会杨国忠以剑南节度当国，乃调天下兵凡十万，使侍御史李宓讨之，辇饷者尚不在。
现代文：当时，杨国忠以剑南节度使的身份执政，调集了十万人马派侍御史李宓讨伐罗凤。运粮车马尚不计在内。
English: At that time, Yang Guozhong was in power as the envoy of the Jiannan Festival, and he mobilized one hundred thousand people to fight Luo Feng. This did not include the grain carts.

古文：涉海而疫死相踵于道，宓败于大和城，死者十八。
现代文：王师涉海沿途染疫而死的人一个接一个。李宓军在大和城溃败，死者约十分之八。
English: Wang Shi waded into the sea, and people who died of the plague along the way died one after another. Li Qiye's army was defeated in Yamato Castle, and about eight out of ten died.

古文：亦会安禄山反，阁罗凤因之取巂州会同军，据清溪关，以破越析，枭于赠，西而降寻传、骠诸国。
现代文：当时正遇上安禄山叛变，罗凤乘机攻取州会同军，占据清溪关，攻破越析，杀死于赠，进而西进，促寻传、骠等国投降。
English: At that time, he was confronted with the Anlu Mountain mutiny. Luo Feng took the opportunity to capture the Shouhui army, occupy the Qingxi Pass, break through the Yueyuan Pass, kill Yu Zhen, and then advance westward to promote the surrender of Xuchuan, Zou and other countries.

古文：寻传蛮者，俗无丝纩，跣履榛棘不苦也。
现代文：寻传蛮，当地没有丝棉等织物，赤脚走路，荆棘石块都不在乎。
English: There is no cotton or other fabric in the area, people walk barefoot, and they don't care about thorns and stones.

古文：射豪猪，生食其肉。
现代文：射杀豪猪后即割肉生吃。
English: After shooting the porcupine, the meat is cut and eaten raw.

古文：战，以竹笼头如兜鍪。
现代文：作战时，戴竹编的头盔。
English: During the battle, he wore a helmet made of bamboo.

古文：其西有裸蛮，亦曰野蛮，漫散山中，无君长，作槛舍以居。
现代文：寻传西边有裸蛮，也叫野蛮，散居在山中，没有头领，住房用木头搭盖。
English: It is said that in the west, there are naked barbarians, also known as savages, who live scattered in the mountains, have no leaders, and their houses are made of wood.

古文：男少女多，无田农，以木皮蔽形，妇或十或五共养一男子。
现代文：男少女多，不事耕种，用树皮遮体。妇女们或五个或十个共养一个男子。
English: There are many boys and girls, they do not do any farming, they cover themselves with tree bark. The women, five or ten of them, support one man.

古文：广德初，凤迦异筑柘东城，诸葛亮石刻故在，文曰： 碑即仆，蛮为汉奴。 
现代文：广德初年，凤迦异筑柘东城，当年诸葛亮的石刻还在，碑文是 ：碑倒了，蛮人就成为汉人的奴隶。 
English: In the first year of Guangde, Fengjiayi built the eastern city of Handan. At that time, the stone carvings of Zhuge Liang were still there. The inscription reads: "When the monument fell, the barbarians became the slaves of the Han people."

古文：夷畏誓，常以石搘捂。
现代文：夷人害怕誓言，所以常以石支撑维护此碑。
English: The Iroquois were afraid of oaths, so they often supported the monument with stones.

古文：大历十四年，阁罗凤卒，以凤迦异前死，立其孙异牟寻以嗣。
现代文：大历十四年，罗凤死。因其子凤迦异死在前，所以立孙子异牟寻为王。
English: In the fourteenth year of the lunar calendar, Luo Feng died. Because his son Feng Jia Yi died before him, he appointed his grandson Yi Mu Hui as king.

古文：异牟寻有智数，善抚众，略知书。母李，独锦蛮女也。
现代文：异牟寻聪慧能干，善于抚慰人民，粗识文字，母亲李氏，是独锦蛮的女儿。
English: Yi Muxing is intelligent and capable, good at soothing the people, and has a poor knowledge of words. Her mother, Ms. Li, is the daughter of Du Jinmang.

古文：独锦蛮亦乌蛮种，在秦藏川南。
现代文：独锦蛮也是乌蛮种，在秦藏川之南。
English: Dokin mara is also a mara species, in the south of the Qinzang River.

古文：天宝中，命其长为蹄州刺史。
现代文：天宝年间，曾授命其首领为蹄州刺史。
English: During the Tenpo era, its leader was ordered to become the leader of the Hooshu clan.

古文：世与南诏婚聘。
现代文：世代都与南诏婚嫁。
English: Generations have been married to Nanzhao.

古文：异牟寻立，悉众二十万入寇，与吐蕃并力。
现代文：异牟寻立，带领二十万人马与吐蕃会合，共同入寇。
English: Yimou searched for a place to stand and led 200,000 men and horses to rendezvous with Tubo, and together they invaded the country.

古文：一趋茂州，逾文川，扰灌口；一趋扶、文，掠方维、白坝；一侵黎、雅，叩邛郲关。令其下曰： 为我取蜀为东府，工伎悉送逻娑城，岁赋一缣。 
现代文：一路人马去茂州，越过文川，侵扰灌口；一路去扶、文，侵略方维、白坝；一路侵袭黎、雅，攻打邛束阝关，命令手下说： 替我攻下蜀州做东府，凡有技艺者都送逻娑城，每年给一匹缣。 
English: He marched all the way to Maozhou, crossed the Wen River, and invaded Gankou; he marched all the way to Fu, Wen, and invaded Fangwei, Baiba; he marched all the way to Li, Ya, and attacked Shucuan, and ordered his men to say, "Conquer Shuzhou for me and make it the eastern capital. All those who have the skills should send to Lousheng City, and they will be given a donkey every year."

古文：于是进陷城聚，人率走山。
现代文：于是兵士猛力向前，攻陷城寨，居民都逃进深山。
English: So the soldiers stormed forward, captured the castle, and the inhabitants fled into the mountains.

古文：德宗发禁卫及幽州军以援东川，与山南兵合，大败异牟寻众，斩首六千级，禽生捕伤甚众，颠踣厓峭且十万。
现代文：德宗派禁卫军及幽州军救援东川，与山南的兵会合，大败异牟寻的人马，斩首六千人，活捉的不计其数，坠落山崖摔死的也近十万。
English: The German Sectarian Guards and Yuzhou Army came to the rescue of Dongchuan, and met with the soldiers of Shannan. They defeated the people who were looking for differences, beheaded six thousand people, captured countless people alive, and nearly one hundred thousand people died falling down the cliff.

古文：异牟寻惧，更徙苴咩城，筑袤十五里，吐蕃封为日东王。
现代文：异牟寻害怕了，迁至苴咩城，筑城墙十五里。吐蕃封他为日东王。
English: Yimuhiro was afraid, so he moved to Yeongseong and built 15 miles of city walls. Tu Yeong sealed him as the King of the East.

古文：然吐蕃责赋重数，悉夺其险立营候，岁索兵助防，异牟寻稍苦之。
现代文：不过吐蕃要异牟寻缴纳的贡赋又多且重，并夺取所有的险要处建立他自己的城堡，每年都要求派兵助防。异牟寻渐渐不胜负担。
English: However, the tribute paid by Tubo to Isomucho was large and heavy, and he seized all the dangerous places to build his own castle, and every year he requested the dispatch of soldiers to defend it. Isomucho gradually became a heavy burden.

古文：故西泸令郑回者，唐官也，往巂州破，为所虏。阁罗凤重其惇儒，号 蛮利 ，俾教子弟，得棰搒，故国中无不惮。
现代文：原西泸令郑回，是唐的官，以前州被攻破时被俘，罗凤很敬重他的儒雅及学识，称他为 蛮利 ，让他教子弟读书。
English: Zheng Hui, the former governor of Xidi, was an official of the Tang Dynasty. He was captured when the state was invaded. Luo Feng respected his gentleness and knowledge. He called him "Barbarous Li" and let him teach his children to study.

古文：后以为清平官。
现代文：读书不好的孩子常受责打，所以国内没一个人不怕他。
English: Children who do not study well are often beaten, so no one in the country is not afraid of him.

古文：说异牟寻曰： 中国有礼义，少求责，非若吐蕃惏刻无极也。今弃之复归唐，无远戍劳，利莫大此。 
现代文：后来任清平官，他劝异牟寻说： 中国有礼义，对属国很少苛责索求，不像吐蕃那么贪婪刻薄，不如脱离他重归顺唐廷，就不再会有远戍之劳，得利没有再大的了。 
English: Later, when he was appointed Qing peace officer, he advised Dizimuhang saying, "China is polite and has few harsh demands on its vassal states. It is not as greedy and mean as Tubo. It would be better to leave him and return to the Tang Dynasty. There would be no more long-distance labor, and the profit would not be greater."

古文：异牟寻善之，稍谋内附，然未敢发。
现代文：异牟寻觉得对，渐生归附唐廷的念头，但还不敢贸然行事。
English: Yimuhang felt that it was right to gradually adhere to the idea of Tang Dynasty, but he did not dare to act rashly.

古文：亦会节度使韦皋抚诸蛮有威惠，诸蛮颇得异牟寻语，白于皋，时贞元四年也。
现代文：正遇节度使韦皋安抚各蛮，恩威并施。各蛮国知道异牟寻的心思的，告诉了韦皋，那时是贞元四年。
English: At the time of the festival, Wei Xuan appeased the barbarians and bestowed grace on them. The barbarian countries, who knew the spirit of seeking differences, told Wei Xuan that it was the fourth year of the Zhengyuan.

古文：皋乃遣谍者遗书，吐蕃疑之，因责大臣子为质，异牟寻愈怨。
现代文：皋派密探送信，吐蕃怀疑他有二心，于是索要大臣的儿子做人质。异牟寻越加怨恨。
English: He sent a spy to send a message, and Tu You suspected that he was double-minded, so he asked the minister's son to be a hostage.

古文：后五年，乃决策遣使者三人异道同趣成都，遗皋帛书曰：
现代文：五年后，下决心派三位使者分三条道路同去成都，送信给韦皋：异牟寻世代都是唐臣。
English: Five years later, he made up his mind to send three emissaries to Chengdu on three different routes to send a message to Wei Wei: All the generations of Yimuhang are Tang emperors.

古文：异牟寻世为唐臣，曩缘张虔陀志在吞侮，中使者至，不为澄雪，举部惶窘，得生异计。
现代文：过去由于张虔陀意欲侮辱吞并我们，朝中使者来到，不为我们主持公道，致使全部落均惶恐不安，才生出二心。
English: In the past, because Zhang Qiantu wanted to humiliate and annex us, the envoys of the DPRK and China came and did not preside over justice for us, causing everyone to be panicked and uneasy. Only then did the two hearts arise.

古文：鲜于仲通比年举兵，故自新无繇。
现代文：鲜于仲通每年发兵攻打，使我们无法改过自新。
English: It is rare for Zhongtong to send troops to attack every year, making it impossible for us to reform.

古文：代祖弃背，二蕃欺孤背约。
现代文：我的祖父去世，吐蕃欺我孤儿，背叛盟约。
English: My grandfather died, betraying my orphan, betraying the covenant.

古文：神川都督论讷舌使浪人利罗式眩惑部姓，发兵无时，今十二年。
现代文：神川都督论讷舌派浪人利罗式惑乱部落中人，不时出兵骚扰，至今已十二年。
English: It's been twelve years since the governor of Kamikawa has been haranguing members of the Naushika Ronin Lilo-style bewildered tribe by sending out troops from time to time.

古文：此一忍也。
现代文：这是已忍下的第一桩。
English: It's the first one I've had to endure.

古文：天祸蕃廷，降衅萧墙，太子弟兄流窜，近臣横污，皆尚结赞阴计，以行屠害，平日功臣，无一二在。
现代文：天降祸蕃廷，内部争斗不息，以致太子弟兄流窜他乡，近臣横行不义。这都是尚结赞的阴谋，残杀无辜，平日的功臣竟无一两个留下。
English: The court was plagued by calamities from the heavens, and the internal strife was incessant, to the extent that the prince's brothers were exiled to other provinces, and his close vassals committed injustices. These were all laudable plots to kill the innocent, and not one or two of the heroes of the day remained.

古文：讷舌等皆册封王；小国奏请，不令上达。
现代文：讷舌等皆册封为王，而小国的奏请，却不让上达。
English: The king is crowned by all, but the small country's petition is not allowed to be heard.

古文：此二忍也。
现代文：这是已忍之二。
English: This is the second time I've had to endure this.

古文：又遣讷舌逼城于鄙，弊邑不堪。
现代文：又派讷舌逼我们建都于郊，城市破败不堪。
English: They also forced us to build the capital in the suburbs, leaving the city in ruins.

古文：利罗式私取重赏，部落皆惊。
现代文：利罗式暗中收取重赏，部落震惊。
English: The tribe was shocked by Li Luo's surreptitious receipt of a large reward.

古文：此三忍也。
现代文：这是已忍之三。
English: This is the last straw.

古文：又利罗式骂使者曰： 灭子之将，非我其谁？
现代文：又利罗式骂使者说： 消灭你们的将领，不是我还有谁？
English: And mocking the messenger, he said, Who am I, and who are your princes, that I should destroy them?

古文：子所富当为我有。 
现代文：你所有的财富都应归我所有。 
English: All your wealth belongs to me.

古文：此四忍也。
现代文：这是已忍之四。
English: This is the fourth time it has happened.

古文：今吐蕃委利罗式甲士六十侍卫，因知怀恶不谬。
现代文：现今吐蕃委派利罗式带甲士六十人侍卫，可知其居心不良。
English: Nowadays, the Tubo Committee has dispatched sixty bodyguards with Leroy style armour, which shows that it is not well-intentioned.

古文：此一难忍也。
现代文：这是第一桩难于忍受的。
English: This is the first hurdle to overcome.

古文：吐蕃阴毒野心，辄怀搏噬。
现代文：吐蕃阴毒野心大，总想吞并我们。
English: Sputniks are insidiously ambitious and always want to annex us.

古文：有如媮生，实污辱先人，辜负部落。
现代文：我有如偷生，实在有辱祖先，辜负了部落。
English: It's as if I've been living a clandestine life, really dishonoring my ancestors and failing my tribe.

古文：此二难忍也。
现代文：这是难以忍受之二。
English: This is the second most unbearable thing.

古文：往退浑王为吐蕃所害，孤遗受欺；西山女王，见夺其位；拓拔首领，并蒙诛刈；仆固志忠，身亦丧亡。
现代文：过去退浑王被吐蕃所害，其子女受欺；西山女王，也被他夺位；拓拔的首领同时遭到诛杀；仆固忠心耿耿，也被害身亡。
English: In the past, the King of Tu-Hun was victimized by Tu-Hun, and his children were deceived; the Queen of Xishan was also usurped by him; the leader of Tu-Hun was killed at the same time; and the loyal servant was also killed.

古文：每虏一朝亦被此祸。
现代文：常会想到我哪一天也会遭此惨祸。
English: I often think that one day I will suffer the same fate.

古文：此三难忍也。
现代文：这是难以忍受之三。
English: This is the third most unbearable thing.

古文：往朝廷降使招抚，情心无二，诏函信节，皆送蕃廷。
现代文：以前朝廷派使者来招抚，我心我情没有他念，诏书信件符节等物，都送到蕃廷。
English: In the past, the imperial court sent emissaries to court, but my heart and my feelings were not read by him. The imperial edict, letters, symbols and other things were all sent to the imperial court.

古文：虽知中夏至仁，业为蕃臣，吞声无诉。此四难忍也。
现代文：虽知中国至仁，但我已是蕃臣，只得忍气吞声无处诉说，这是难以忍受之四。
English: Although I know that China is the most benevolent country, I am already a vassal, and I have to swallow my breath and have nowhere to tell. This is one of the most unbearable things.

古文：请加戍剑南、西山、泾原等州，安西镇守，扬兵四临，委回鹘诸国，所在侵掠，使吐蕃势分力散，不能为强，此西南隅不烦天兵，可以立功云。
现代文：我曾祖曾蒙先帝恩宠。后代都蒙承袭王位。人懂礼乐，均是受唐的影响教化。吐蕃欺诈隐瞒各种情况，心怀恶意相互怨恨。异牟寻愿意竭诚改变现状，归顺天子，请加强防守剑南、西山、泾原等州。镇守安西，以兵力向各方示威，委派回鹘各国就地骚扰，使吐蕃势力分散不能逞强。这样西南方就不必烦劳王师即能立功了。
English: My great-great-grandfather was favored by the previous emperor. The descendants have all inherited the throne. People understand ceremonial music, all of them have been educated by the influence of the Tang Dynasty. Tubo cheated, concealed various situations, and harbored malicious resentment towards each other. Dismissing those who are willing to wholeheartedly change the status quo and submit to the Son of Heaven, please strengthen the defense of Jian'nan, Xishan, and Yuyuan and other prefectures. Town guard Anxi, demonstrate with troops to all parties, and appoint Hui countries to harass in place, so that Tubo forces can not be dispersed. In this way, Southwest

古文：且赠皋黄金、丹砂。
现代文：同时赠皋黄金、丹砂。
English: At the same time, they were presented with tungsten gold and Tanzanite.

古文：皋护送使者京师，使者奏异牟寻请归天子，为唐籓辅。
现代文：韦皋护送使者到京师，使者奏报异牟寻请求归附天子，做唐的藩臣。
English: Wei Wei escorted the emissary to Beijing, and the emissary reported to the emperor that he was seeking to become a vassal of the emperor and a vassal of Tang.

古文：献金，示顺革；丹，赤心也。
现代文：献黄金以示归顺之意如金之坚；献丹以示赤胆忠心。
English: Offering gold to show submission is like the strength of gold; offering dan to show loyalty.

古文：德宗嘉之，赐以诏书，命皋遣谍往觇。
现代文：德宗嘉奖，赐给诏书，命韦皋派密探去侦察。
English: Emperor Dezong commended, issued an edict, and ordered Wei Jun to send spies to investigate.

古文：皋令其属崔佐时至羊苴咩城。时吐蕃使者多在，阴戒佐时衣牂柯使者服以入。
现代文：韦皋命其属将崔佐时到羊苴咩城，当时吐蕃有很多使者在那里，异牟寻私下要佐时穿柯使者的衣服入城。
English: Wei Yan ordered his subordinates to bring Cui Zuo to the city of Yangshuo. At that time, there were many emissaries from Tibet in Yangshuo. He secretly asked Cui Zuo to wear the clothes of the emissaries from Tibet to enter the city.

古文：佐时曰： 我乃唐使者，安得从小夷服？ 
现代文：佐时说 ：我是唐廷的使者，哪能改穿小夷的服装。 
English: Sasaki said, "I am an emissary of the Tang Dynasty, how can I change into the costume of a barbarian?"

古文：异牟寻夜迎之，设位陈燎，佐时即宣天子意。异牟寻内畏吐蕃，顾左右失色，流涕再拜受命。
现代文：异牟寻晚上去迎接，布置坐位，点燃燎火。佐时即时宣布天子的旨意，异牟寻畏惧吐蕃，左顾右盼胆战心惊，流泪拜谢接受了诏令。
English: In the evening, Isamu went to greet them, set up seats, and lit a bonfire. As soon as Sasaki announced the will of the Son of Heaven, Isamu was afraid to speak, afraid to look around, and tearfully accepted the edict.

古文：使其子阁劝及清平官与佐时盟点苍山，载书四：一藏神祠石室，一沈西洱水，一置祖庙，一以进天子。
现代文：派儿子劝及清平官与佐时在点苍山盟誓。写了四份盟约：一份藏在神祠石室，一份沉入西洱水，一份放置祖庙，一份进奉天子。
English: He sent his son to persuade and persuade the Qing and Ping officials to swear an oath with Sa Shi at the point of Cangshan. He wrote four covenants: one was hidden in the stone room of the shrine, one was sunk into the Xishuanshui, one was placed in the ancestral temple, and one was dedicated to the heavenly son.

古文：乃发兵攻吐蕃使者杀之，刻金契以献，遣曹长跼南罗、赵迦宽随佐时入朝。
现代文：于是发兵袭击杀死吐蕃的使者，刻金契献给唐廷。派曹长肁南罗、赵迦宽随崔佐时入朝。
English: So he sent troops to attack and kill the envoy from Tubo, and dedicated the Golden Book to the Tang Dynasty. He sent Cao Changjun Nanluo and Zhao Jiahuan to accompany Cui Zuo to the imperial court.

古文：初，吐蕃与回鹘战，杀伤甚，乃调南诏万人。
现代文：起先，吐蕃与回鹘交战，死伤甚多，于是征调南诏一万人。
English: At first, Tu Han and Hui Han fought, and there were many deaths and injuries, so ten thousand people from Nanzhao were conscripted.

古文：异牟寻欲袭吐蕃，阳示寡弱，以五千人行，许之。
现代文：异牟寻想袭击吐蕃，表面表现自己兵少且弱，只能派出五千人。吐蕃同意。
English: Yimuhang wanted to attack Tubo, ostensibly to show that his army was small and weak, and could only send five thousand men. Tubo agreed.

古文：即自将数万踵后，昼夜行，大破吐蕃于神川，遂断铁桥，溺死以万计，俘其五王。
现代文：异牟寻另外自己率领几万人跟随在那五千人之后。日夜兼行，在神川大破吐蕃军，砍断铁桥，淹死的人以万计。俘虏了吐蕃的五个王。
English: Yimuhang also led tens of thousands of people to follow the five thousand. He traveled both day and night, destroying the Tujia army in Jinchuan, cutting the iron bridge, and drowning tens of thousands of people. He captured the five kings of Tujia.

古文：乃遣弟凑罗栋、清平官尹仇宽等二十七人入献地图、方物，请复号南诏。
现代文：于是派弟弟凑罗栋、清平官尹仇宽等二十七人入朝献地图、土产。请求恢复南诏的名号。
English: Therefore, he sent 27 people including his younger brother, Zhan Luodong, and the Qing peace official, Yin Qiuquan, to the imperial court to present maps and local products, and to request the restoration of Nanzhao's name.

古文：帝赐赉有加，拜仇宽左散骑常侍，封高溪郡王。
现代文：皇帝给以厚赏，任尹仇宽为左散骑常侍，封高溪郡王。
English: The emperor gave him a rich reward, appointed Yin Qianqian as the left horseback riding attendant, and crowned him the king of Gaoxi County.

古文：明年夏六月，册异牟寻为南诏王。
现代文：第二年夏六月，册封异牟寻为南诏王。
English: In the summer of the second year, in June, he was given the title of King of Nanzhao.

古文：以祠部郎中袁滋持节领使，成都少尹庞颀副之，崔佐时为判官；俱文珍为宣慰使，刘幽岩为判官。
现代文：派祠部郎中袁滋为持节领使，成都少尹庞颀为副使，崔佐时为判官；派俱文珍为宣慰使，刘幽岩为判官。
English: He sent Yuan Zhi, the head of the ancestral hall department, as the leader of the festival, Chengdu Shao Yin Pangyao as the deputy envoy, and Cui Zuoxi as the judge; he sent Qiu Wenzhen as the consolation envoy, and Liu Yuyan as the judge.

古文：赐黄金印，文曰 贞元册南诏印 。
现代文：赐黄金印，上刻 贞元册南诏印 。
English: The gold seal is given, and the seal of the Southern Dynasties is engraved on it.

古文：滋至大和城，异牟寻遣兄蒙细罗勿等以良马六十迎之，金鍐玉珂，兵振鐸夹路陈。
现代文：袁滋到大和城，异牟寻派哥哥蒙细罗勿等带良马六十佩着金冠玉勒前往迎接，士兵们排列两旁摇铃欢迎。
English: Yuan Zi went to Yamato-jo, and Yimuhang sent his brother Monchiro to meet him with sixty fine horses wearing golden crowns, and soldiers lined up on both sides to welcome him with rattles.

古文：异牟寻金甲，蒙虎皮，执双鐸韒。
现代文：异牟寻穿金甲，蒙虎皮，手执双铎鞘。
English: Iimou is wearing gold armor and a tiger skin, holding a pair of scabbards in her hands.

古文：执矛千人卫，大象十二引于前，骑军、徒军以次列。
现代文：还有持矛的卫队千人。整个队伍由十二头大象前引，然后骑兵、步兵依次排列。
English: There is also a guard of a thousand men with spears. The whole procession is led by twelve elephants, and then the cavalry and infantry line up in turn.

古文：诘旦，授册，异牟寻率官属北面立，宣慰使东向，册使南向，乃读诏册。
现代文：第二天早上行授册礼。异牟寻率属官面朝北而立，宣慰使朝东，授册使面朝南，宣读诏书和册封令。
English: The next morning, the registration ceremony was held. The officials stood with their faces to the north, the consul to the east, and the registrar to the south, and read out the imperial rescript and the registration order.

古文：相者引异牟寻去位，跽受册印，稽首再拜；又受赐服备物，退曰： 开元、天宝中，曾祖及祖皆蒙册袭王，自此五十年。
现代文：傧相引导异牟寻离位上前直跪受册印，叩头再拜，又接受赏赐的服饰等物。礼成退下后说 ：开元天宝年间，曾祖父及祖父都蒙恩册封，继袭王位，至今已有五十年了。
English: Guan Xiang guided Yimou to leave the throne, kneel down to receive the seal of succession, bow down again, and accept the gifts of clothing and other items. After bowing down, Li Cheng said, "During the reign of Emperor Tenpo in the first century, my great-grandfather and grandfather were both graciously enthroned and succeeded to the throne, and it has been fifty years since then.

古文：贞元皇帝洗痕录功，复赐爵命，子子孙孙永为唐臣。 
现代文：贞元皇帝洗去我的耻辱，记载我的功劳，再赐我爵位官职。我子子孙孙永为唐臣。 
English: Emperor Zhenyuan washed away my shame, recorded my merits, and gave me a title of nobility and an official post. My children and grandchildren will always be Tang Dynasty vassals.

古文：因大会其下，享使者，出银平脱马头盘二，谓滋曰： 此天宝时先君以鸿胪少卿宿卫，皇帝所赐也。 
现代文：于是大会部下，宴请使者。取出两个银平脱马头盘，对袁滋说： 这是天宝时我的父亲任鸿胪少卿进宫宿卫时皇帝赐给的。 
English: Therefore, the subordinates of the General Assembly invited the envoys to a banquet. They took out two silver flat horseshoe head plates and said to Yuan Zi: This was given by the emperor when my father, Ren Hongtao Shaoqing, entered the palace as a palace guard.

古文：有笛工、歌女，皆垂白，示滋曰： 此先君归国时，皇帝赐胡部、龟兹音声二列，今丧亡略尽，唯二人故在。 
现代文：另有笛王、歌女两人均鬓发斑白。异牟寻指着他们对袁滋说 ：这是我父亲归国时皇帝赏赐胡部、龟兹两乐队。如今差不多都去世了，只有这两人还在。 
English: In addition, the flute king and the song girl were both white-haired. Yimuhong pointed to them and said to Yuan Zi: This is when my father returned to the country, the emperor awarded Hu Be and Gezi two bands. Now almost all of them have passed away, only these two are still alive.

古文：酒行，异牟寻坐，奉觞滋前，滋受觞曰： 南诏当深思祖考成业，抱忠竭诚，永为西南籓屏，使后嗣有以不绝也。 
现代文：饮酒中，异牟寻跪着向袁滋敬酒，滋接过酒杯说 ：南诏该常常想到祖宗所创之业，尽忠竭诚，永远做中国西南的屏障，使后代能绵绵不绝。 
English: While drinking, Yimouxing knelt down to toast Yuan Zi, who took the glass and said: Nanzhao should always think about the cause created by his ancestors, be loyal and sincere, and always be a barrier to southwest China, so that future generations can continue uninterrupted.

古文：异牟寻拜曰： 敢不承使者所命。 
现代文：异牟寻拜谢说： 多谢赐教，哪敢违背使者的命令。 
English: Ismucho said, "Thank you very much for your teaching. How dare you disobey the order of the messenger?"

古文：滋还，复遣清平官尹辅酋等七人谢天子，献鐸鞘、浪剑、郁刃、生金、瑟瑟、牛黄、虎珀、氎、纺丝、象、犀、越睒统伦马。
现代文：袁滋还朝，又派清平官尹辅酋等七人入朝答谢天子。献铎鞘、浪剑、郁刀、生金、瑟瑟、牛黄、琥珀、叠毛、纺丝、象、犀、越目炎统伦马等物。
English: Yuan Zi was still in power, and he also sent seven people, including the Qing peace officer Yin Yuehai, to the imperial court to thank the heavenly son. They offered a sheath, a wave sword, a sharp sword, raw gold, silk, cow yellow, amber, wool, spinning, elephant, rhinoceros horns, yakitori and other things.

古文：鐸鞘者，状如残刃，有孔傍达，出丽水，饰以金，所击无不洞，夷人尤宝，月以血祭之。
现代文：铎鞘，形状像残月，边上有孔，产自丽水，用金装饰。
English: Dragonfly sheath, shaped like a crescent moon, with holes on the edge, produced in Lishui, decorated with gold.

古文：郁刃，铸时以毒药并治，取迎跃如星者，凡十年乃成，淬以马血，以金犀饰镡首，伤人即死。
现代文：用它击物，没有不洞穿的。夷人十分喜爱它，每月都要用血祭祀。郁刀，铸造时就用毒药一同冶炼，取闪耀如星光的金属制造。要炼十年才能成功，用马血淬火，用金及犀尾装饰刀把，人被它割伤即死。
English: There is no way to hit an object with it without piercing it. The barbarians love it so much that blood sacrifices are made every month. Iku swords are made of metal that shines like a star and is smelted with poison when it is cast. It takes ten years to succeed in refining them, they are made of horse blood, and the handle is decorated with gold and rhinoceros tails. If you are cut by it, you will die.

古文：浪人所铸，故亦名浪剑，王所佩者，传七世矣。
现代文：是浪人所制，所以也叫浪剑。王所佩的一把，已传了七世了。
English: It was made by a ronin, which is why it is also called a naginata. The one worn by the king has been handed down for seven generations.

古文：异牟寻攻吐蕃，复取昆明城以食盐池。
现代文：异牟寻攻吐蕃，收复昆明城以得盐池食用。
English: Yimou was looking for a place to attack and recapture Kunming City so that it could be used as a salt pond.

古文：又破施蛮、顺蛮，并虏其王，置白厓城；因定磨些蛮，隶昆山西爨故地；破茫蛮，掠弄栋蛮、汉裳蛮，以实云南东北。
现代文：又击破施蛮、顺蛮，俘虏了他们的王，安置在白城；既而平定磨些蛮，收回昆山西爨原隶属地；击破茫蛮，夺取弄栋蛮、汉裳蛮，从而充实云南东北。
English: He also defeated Shi and Shun barbarians, captured their kings, and placed them in Baicheng; he also subdued some barbarians and recovered the former subordinate territory of Kunshan West Kunlun; he defeated the Huan barbarians and captured the Nodong barbarians and the Hanso barbarians, thus enriching the northeast of Yunnan.

古文：施蛮者，在铁桥西北，居大施睒、敛寻睒。
现代文：施蛮，在铁桥西北，居住大施目炎、敛寻目炎。
English: Shi Man, in the northwest of Tieqiao, lives in Daishimeyan and Huanzhongmeyan.

古文：男子衣缯布；女分发直额，为一髻垂后，跣而衣皮。
现代文：男子穿绸衣，女子从额中将头发分成两边，梳往后面挽一发髻，赤足而穿皮衣。
English: Men wear silk clothes, women part their hair from the middle of the forehead to the sides, comb it to the back and tie it in a bun, go barefoot and wear leather.

古文：顺蛮本与施蛮杂居剑、共诸川。
现代文：顺蛮，本来和施蛮杂居在剑、共诸川。
English: Shunbaran originally mixed with Shibaran in Jian and Zhuchuan.

古文：咩罗皮、鐸罗望既失邆川、浪穹，夺剑、共地，由是徙铁桥，在剑睒西北四百里，号剑羌。
现代文：咩罗皮、铎罗望先失去了川、浪穹，又丧失了剑、共等地。从此迁往铁桥，居住在剑目炎西北四百里，称为剑羌。
English: Erlopi and Erlowang first lost the river and the wave dome, and then lost the sword and the common land. From then on, they moved to Tieqiao and lived 400 miles northwest of Jianmeiyan, known as Jianye.

古文：磨蛮、些蛮与施、顺二蛮皆乌蛮种，居铁桥、大婆、小婆、三探览、昆池等川。
现代文：磨蛮、些蛮与施、顺二蛮都是乌蛮族人，居住铁桥、大婆、小婆、三探览、昆池等川。
English: The Moman, Someman, Shi and Shunman are all Uban tribesmen, living in Tieqiao, Daba, Xiaoba, Sanxuan, Kunchi and other rivers.

古文：土多牛羊，俗不泽，男女衣皮，俗好饮酒歌舞。
现代文：多养牛羊。不习惯洗衣，男女都穿皮衣。民俗爱好喝酒歌舞。
English: They raise a lot of cattle and sheep. They are not used to washing clothes, and both men and women wear fur coats. They love folk customs, drinking, singing and dancing.

古文：茫蛮本关南种，茫，其君号也，或呼茫诏。
现代文：茫蛮本是关南族人。茫，是他们首领的称号。
English: The Guannan people were originally known as the Huanan. Huanan was the title of their leader.

古文：永昌之南有茫天连、茫吐薅、大睒、茫昌、茫鲊、茫施，大抵皆其种。
现代文：有人称他们为茫诏。永昌之南有茫天连、茫吐薅、大目炎、茫昌、茫鱼乍、茫施，都是他们一族。
English: Some people call them "Wan Zhao." In the south of Yongchang, there are "Wan Tian Lian" (茫天连), "Wan Tuxi" (茫吐), "Da Meitan" (大目炎), "Wan Chang" (茫昌), "Wan Yu Zha" (茫魚乍) and "Wan Shi" (茫施). They are all one family.

古文：楼居，无城郭。
现代文：建楼房而居，不筑城墙。
English: Build houses, not walls.

古文：或漆齿，或金齿。
现代文：他们的牙齿或涂漆，或包金。
English: Their teeth are either painted or gold-plated.

古文：衣青布短裤，露骭，以缯布缭腰，出其馀垂后为饰。
现代文：穿黑布短裤，露着小腿，用绸子缠腰，在背后打结后垂下做装饰。
English: Wearing black cloth shorts, bare calves, with silk around the waist, tied at the back and hanging down to decorate.

古文：妇人披五色娑罗笼。
现代文：妇女披五彩的娑罗笼。
English: Women dressed in multicoloured sarees dance.

古文：象才如牛，养以耕。
现代文：象只有牛那么大，豢养了役使耕田。
English: They are as big as cows and are raised to work the fields.

古文：弄栋蛮，白蛮种也。
现代文：弄栋蛮，是白蛮种。
English: It's an albino cormorant.

古文：其部本居弄栋县鄙地，昔为褒州，有首领为刺史，误杀其参军，挈族北走。
现代文：其部落本住在弄栋县边远处，以前称为褒州，有首领曾任刺史职，只因误杀了参军，就带领全族北逃。
English: His tribe used to live in the remote outskirts of Loudon County, formerly known as Bozhou. One of the chiefs had served as a historian, but because he accidentally killed a member of the army, he led the whole tribe to flee north.

古文：后散居磨些江侧，故剑、共诸川亦有之。
现代文：后来散居在磨些江侧，所以剑、共各川都有他们的人。
English: Later, they dispersed to the side of some rivers, so there were people from all the rivers in Jian.

古文：汉裳蛮，本汉人部种，在铁桥。
现代文：汉裳蛮，原是汉人种，住铁桥一带。
English: Han Sōman, originally of Han ethnicity, lived in the vicinity of the Iron Bridge.

古文：惟以朝霞缠头，馀尚同汉服。
现代文：除开用朝霞锦缠头外，衣着与汉人同。
English: They wear the same clothes as the Han people, except that they wear Asaka brocade around their heads.

古文：十五年，异牟寻谋击吐蕃，以邆川、宁北等城当寇路，乃峭山深堑修战备，帝许出兵助力。
现代文：贞元十五年，异牟寻打算袭击吐蕃，由于川、宁北等城在出兵路上，于是凿山、挖堑、修整战具。皇帝同意出兵助战。
English: In the 15th year of Zhengyuan, Yimuhang planned to attack Tubo. Since the cities of Sichuan and Ningbei were on the way to send troops, he chiseled mountains, dug trenches, and repaired war equipment. The emperor agreed to send troops to help the war.

古文：又请以大臣子弟质于皋，皋辞。
现代文：又请求派大臣的子弟留居在韦皋处。
English: He also requested that the minister's son be sent to live in Weizhou.

古文：固请，乃尽舍成都，咸遣就学。
现代文：皋推辞，异牟寻再三要求，于是让这些子弟住在成都，派他们都进学校读书。
English: After repeated refusals and repeated requests from Yimou, he let these children live in Chengdu and sent them all to school.

古文：且言： 昆明、巂州与吐蕃接，不先加兵，为虏所胁，反为我患。 
现代文：异牟寻还说： 昆明、州与吐蕃连接，不先加兵，被吐蕃所挟持，就会成为我的祸患了。
English: Yimuhang also said, "Kunming, Zhoushan and Tubo are connected. If I don't add troops first, I will be held hostage by Tubo, and it will be my misfortune."

古文：请皋图之。
现代文：请韦皋攻取这两处。
English: Ask Wei Xuan to capture these two places.

古文：时唐兵比岁屯京西、朔方，大峙粮，欲南北并攻取故地。
现代文：当时，唐兵每年都屯守京西和朔方，大量屯积粮食，准备南北同时出击攻取原唐地。
English: At that time, Tang soldiers were stationed in the west of Beijing and the south of Shuo every year, accumulating a large amount of grain and preparing to attack the north and south at the same time to capture the original Tang territory.

古文：然南方转饷稽期，兵不悉集。
现代文：但是南方运粮误期，兵不能全部集中。
English: However, the shipment of grain from the south was late, and the soldiers could not all be concentrated.

古文：是夏，虏麦不熟，疫疠仍兴，赞普死，新君立。
现代文：这年夏天，虏麦不熟，传染病流行，吐蕃赞普死，新君立。
English: In the summer of that year, when jujube was unripe and infectious diseases were rampant, Tujie Zampu died and a new king was crowned.

古文：皋揣虏未敢动，乃劝异牟寻： 缓举万全，愈于速而无功。
现代文：韦皋估计吐蕃此时不敢动作，于是劝异牟寻： 延缓征战是万全之计。求速会反而无功。
English: Wei Wei estimated that Tu Wei did not dare to act at this time, so he tried to dissuade him: delaying the conscription was the best solution.

古文：今境上兵十倍往岁，且行营皆在巂州，扼西泸吐蕃路，昆明、弄栋可以无虞。 
现代文：如今边境上的兵力十倍于往昔，行营都在州，扼住了西泸吐蕃的要路，昆明、弄栋可以不担心。 
English: Nowadays, the number of troops on the border is ten times that of the past, and the camps are all in the state, choking the important road of Xidi-Tuwei. Kunming and Nodong can not worry.

古文：异牟寻请期它年。
现代文：异牟寻请求约定以后的时间。
English: The time after the request is agreed.

古文：吐蕃大臣以岁在辰，兵宜出，谋袭南诏，阅众治道，将以十月围巂州。
现代文：吐蕃大臣认为这年是龙年宜于出兵，计划袭击南诏。于是检阅士兵，修治道路，准备十月围州。
English: Minister Tubo thought that this year was the year of the dragon, so he planned to attack Nanzhao. So he reviewed the soldiers, repaired the roads, and prepared to besiege the state in October.

古文：军屯昆明凡八万，皆命一岁粮。
现代文：屯军昆明八万人，都带着一年的粮食。
English: Kunming's 80,000-strong garrison brought with them a year's supply of grain.

古文：赞普以舅攘鄀罗为都统，遣尚乞力、欺徐滥铄屯西贡川。
现代文：赞普派舅舅攘罗为都统，派尚乞力、欺徐滥铄屯扎西贡川。
English: Zampu sent his uncle Joro to unite the capital, and sent Shang Qili and Zhixu to occupy the Saigon River.

古文：异牟寻与皋相闻，皋命部将武免率弩士三千赴之，亢荣朝以万人屯黎州，韦良金以二万五千人屯巂州，约南诏有急，皆进军，过俄准添城者，南诏供馈。
现代文：异牟寻与韦皋听说后，皋命部将武免率弓箭手三千前去抗敌，派亢荣朝率一万人屯扎黎州，韦良金带二万五千人屯州。约定南诏若有急难，同时发兵。经过俄准添城的兵由南诏供应军饷。
English: After hearing about Yimuhang and Wei Zhao, the War Ministry dispatched 3,000 archers led by Wu Meng to fight the enemy, 10,000 soldiers led by Yu Rongtang to Zari Prefecture, and 25,000 soldiers led by Wei Liang to Jin Prefecture. It was agreed that Nan Zhao would send troops at the same time if there was an emergency. The soldiers who passed through Ruzhun Tiancheng would be supplied with military supplies from Nan Zhao.

古文：吐蕃引众五万自曩贡川分二军攻云南，一军自诺济城攻巂州。
现代文：吐蕃将五万人马从曩贡川分两路进攻云南。一路从诺济城攻州。
English: Tubo divided the 50,000-strong army into two lines to attack Yunnan from the Gong River, and attacked the province all the way from Nooji City.

古文：异牟寻畏东蛮、磨些难测，惧为吐蕃乡导，欲先击之。
现代文：异牟寻担心东蛮、磨些难于掌握，怕他们成为吐蕃的向导，想先打他们。
English: Yimuhou is worried about the Eastern Barbarians, and the grinders are difficult to control, and they are afraid that they will become the guides of the spitfire, and they want to beat them first.

古文：皋报： 巂州实往来道，捍蔽数州，虏百计窥之，故严兵以守，屯壁相望，粮械处处有之，东蛮庸敢怀贰乎？ 
现代文：韦皋回答： 州确实是往来要道，捍卫着好几州，虏人千方百计想夺取，所以严兵把守，各营垒联系呼应。粮食和兵器各处都要齐备，东蛮哪敢有二心呢？ 
English: Wei Wei replied: The state is indeed a major route, defending several states, and the invaders are trying their best to seize it, so the soldiers are strictly guarded, and the camps are in contact with each other. Grain and weapons must be prepared everywhere, how dare the Eastern barbarians have two hearts?

古文：异牟寻乃檄东、磨些诸蛮内粮城中，不者悉烧之。
现代文：异牟寻于是送文书给东、磨些诸蛮要他们把粮食运入城中，否则就全部烧掉。
English: Therefore, Isomucho sent a letter to Dong, and Murakami asked them to transport the grain into the city, otherwise they would burn it all.

古文：吐蕃颙城将杨万波约降，事泄，吐蕃以兵五千守，皋将击破之。
现代文：吐蕃城将杨万波来约投降，事情泄露，吐蕃派兵五千守城。韦皋准备出兵攻击，杨万波与笼官从内部拿下城来降。
English: Yang Wanbo was sent to negotiate the surrender of the city of Tubo, but the matter leaked out and Tubo sent five thousand soldiers to defend the city. Wei Wei was preparing to attack, and Yang Wanbo and the warden took down the city from the inside and came down.

古文：万波与笼官拔颙城以来，徙其人二千于宿川。
现代文：将他们的人马二千人迁往宿川。
English: They moved two thousand of their men to Shukukawa.

古文：皋将扶忠义又取末恭城，俘系牛羊千计。赞普大将既煎让律以兵距十贡川一舍而屯，国师马定德率种落出降。西贡节度监军野多输煎者，赞普乞立赞养子，当从先赞普殉，亦诣忠义降。
现代文：韦皋的将领扶忠义又攻取了末恭城，俘获牛羊以千计，赞普大将既煎让律带兵驻扎在距十贡川三十里外，国师马定德率部落出降，西贡节度监军野多输煎，是赞普乞立赞的养子，本该为已故赞普殉葬，也到忠义处投降。
English: Fu Zhongyi, the general of Weiwuying, also captured the city of Suigong and captured thousands of cattle and sheep. General Zampu not only ordered the soldiers to be stationed 30 miles away from the Shougong River, but also ordered the national teacher Ma Dingde to lead the tribe to surrender. The Saigon Festival Supervisor Noda Fu Rong, the adopted son of Zampu, who was supposed to be the deceased Zampu's funeral, also surrendered to Zhongyi.

古文：于是虏气衰，军不振。
现代文：于是吐蕃气势衰落，军心不振。
English: As a result, Tubo's momentum waned and his morale suffered.

古文：欺徐滥铄至铁桥，南诏毒其水，人多死，乃徙纳川，壁而待。
现代文：欺徐滥铄进军到铁桥，南诏在水中下毒，人大都毒死，于是移军纳川，坚壁固守而待。
English: Nanzhao poisoned the water, and most of the people were poisoned to death, so the army moved to Nachuan, and the strong wall stood firm.

古文：是年，虏霜雪早，兵无功还，期以明年。
现代文：这一年虏地霜雪早，出战无功而回，准备明年再起。
English: This year, frost and snow hit the ground early, and they returned to battle without success, preparing to start again next year.

古文：吐蕃苦唐、诏掎角，亦不敢图南诏。
现代文：吐蕃害怕唐与南诏成掎角，所以不敢窥视南诏。
English: Tubo was afraid that Tang and Nanzhao would quarrel, so he did not dare to look at Nanzhao.

古文：皋令免按兵巂州，节级镇守，虽南诏境亦所在屯戍。
现代文：韦皋命武免按兵州，严格负责镇守。即使在南诏境内也要屯守戍卫。
English: Wei Wei's orders were to be exempted from military service, and he was strictly responsible for guarding the town. Even in the territory of Nanzhao, he had to guard the town.

古文：吐蕃惩野战数北，乃屯三泸水，遣论妄热诱濒泸诸蛮，复城悉摄。
现代文：吐蕃接受多次野战失败的教训，于是屯兵三泸水，派论妄热诱劝泸水边的各蛮，再次建城悉摄。
English: Tubo accepted the lesson of multiple failures in field battles, so the garrison went to the three rivers to persuade the barbarians along the riverside to build the city again.

古文：悉摄，吐蕃险要也。
现代文：悉摄，是吐蕃的要塞。
English: Pictured here is the fortress of Tsum.

古文：蛮酋潜导南诏与皋部将杜毘罗狙击。
现代文：蛮酋长暗中挑拨南诏与韦皋的部将杜毗罗相攻击。
English: The barbarian chieftain secretly instigated Nanzhao and Wei Zheng's subordinates to attack Du Wei Luo.

古文：十七年春，夜绝泸破虏屯，斩五百级。
现代文：贞元十七年春，韦皋夜渡泸水击破虏营垒，斩首五百人。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of the Zhengyuan era, Wei Xuan and Wudu Xuan Shui broke through the enemy camp and beheaded five hundred people.

古文：虏保鹿危山，毘罗伏以待，又战，虏大奔。
现代文：虏保守鹿危山，毗罗埋伏着等待，再战，虏溃败。
English: Rui guarded Shuguishan, while Viro lay in wait, fought again, and Rui was defeated.

古文：于时，康、黑衣大食等兵及吐蕃大酋皆降，获甲二万首。
现代文：那时，康、黑衣大食等兵及吐蕃大酋都投降。俘获二万人。
English: At that time, Kang, the black-clad soldier and the great eater and the great chief of Tubo all surrendered. Twenty thousand people were captured.

古文：又合鬼主破虏于泸西。
现代文：又会合鬼主在泸西击破吐蕃。
English: The demon lords also gathered in the west of Shaanxi to smash the spitting dragonflies.

古文：吐蕃君长共计，不得巂州，患未艾，常为两头蛮挟唐为轻重，谓南诏也。
现代文：吐蕃的君长共同商量：不得州，祸患不止，常常被两头蛮挟唐而指轻说重。这是说的南诏。
English: The monarchs of Tubo discussed together: "No state, many disasters, often caught between the two sides of the Tang Dynasty, it is better to play it safe." This is said in the Nanzhao.

古文：会虏荐饥，方葬赞普，调敛烦。
现代文：其时虏连年饥荒，又要安葬赞普，对人民的赋敛繁重。
English: At that time, there was a famine year after year, and it was necessary to bury Zampu, which imposed a heavy burden on the people.

古文：至是，大料兵，率三户出一卒，虏法为大调集。
现代文：为此全面整顿军队。每三户出一兵，虏法称之为大调集。
English: To this end, the army was comprehensively reorganized. One soldier was sent from every three households, which was called a large mobilization.

古文：又闻唐兵三万入南诏，乃大惧，兵戍纳川、故洪、诺济、腊、聿赍五城，欲悉师出西山、剑山，收巂州以绝南诏。
现代文：又听说唐兵三万人进入南诏，甚为害怕，派兵镇守纳川、故洪、诺济、腊、聿赍五城。打算倾全部兵马出西山、剑山，攻取隽州以抵制南诏。
English: He also heard that 30,000 Tang soldiers had entered Nanzhao, and he was very afraid, so he sent soldiers to guard the five cities of Naxian, Guohong, Noji, La and Handan. He planned to pour all the soldiers out of Xishan and Jianshan to capture Ganzhou to resist Nanzhao.

古文：皋即上言： 京右诸屯宜明斥候，蚤敛田，邠、陇焚莱，可困虏入。 
现代文：韦皋上报说 ：京右各屯应设置侦察堡，庄稼早些收割，陇等地将草烧掉。这样可阻挡虏进入。 
English: Wei Wei reported that: All the towns on the right side of Beijing should set up reconnaissance forts, harvest the crops earlier, and burn the grass in the fields, etc. This will prevent the enemy from entering.

古文：皋遣将邢毘以兵万人屯南、北路，赵昱万人戍黎、雅州。
现代文：皋派将领邢毗率领一万人马屯守南、北路，派赵昱带一万人戍守黎、雅等州。
English: Zou sent general Zou Bi with 10,000 men to guard the southern and northern routes, and Zhao Zou with 10,000 men to guard the Lijiang, Ya and other provinces.

古文：异牟寻谓皋曰： 虏声取巂州，实窥云南，请武免督军进羊苴咩。若虏不出者，请以来年二月深入。 
现代文：异牟寻对韦皋说 ：虏声言要取州，其实是窥视云南，请武免督军进驻羊苴咩，如虏不出骚扰，请等到明年二月深入进剿。 
English: Yimuhang said to Wei Wei, "You claim that you want to take Yunnan Province, but in fact, you are peeping into Yunnan Province. Please ask the Wumen Viceroy's Army to enter Yunnan Province. If you cannot harass them, please wait until next February to enter Yunnan Province.

古文：时虏兵三万攻盐州，帝以虏多诈，疑继以大军，诏皋深钞贼鄙，分虏势。
现代文：当时，虏兵有三万攻打盐州。皇帝由于虏人多诈，怀疑后面有大军，就诏令韦皋深入掠取贼人边远处以分散虏人军势。
English: At that time, there were thirty thousand raiders attacking Yanzhou. The emperor, suspecting that there was a large army behind the raiders because of their treachery, ordered Wei Xuan to plunder far and wide to disperse the raiders' army.

古文：皋表： 贼精铠多置南屯，今向盐、夏非全军，欲掠河曲党项畜产耳 。
现代文：韦皋上表说 ：贼人的精兵大多在南屯，现在攻取盐、夏的并非全军。他们的目的只是想掠取河曲党项的畜产罢了。 
English: Wei Wei said on the table: Most of the elite soldiers of the thieves came from Nantun, and now they are not attacking salt and summer. Their purpose is just to plunder the livestock of the Hequ Party.

古文：俄闻虏破麟州，皋督诸将分道出，或自西山，或由平夷，或下陇陀和、石门，或径神川、纳川，与南诏会。
现代文：不久，听说虏兵攻陷麟州。韦皋指挥各将分路出击，有的出自西山，有的出自平夷，有的下陇陀河、石门，有的经神川、纳川，与南诏会合。
English: Not long after, it was reported that the invaders had captured Linzhou. Wei Wei, in command, ordered his generals to set out on separate routes, some from the West Mountain, some from Pingyi, some from the Lower Guda River and Shimen, and some via the Jinchuan River and the Na River, to join up with Nanzhao.

古文：是时，回鹘、太原、邠宁、泾原军猎其北，剑南东川、山南兵震其东，凤翔军当其西；蜀、南诏深入，克城七，焚堡百五十所，斩首万级，获铠械十五万。
现代文：这时，回鹘、太原、宁、泾原军袭击吐蕃北面，剑南东川、山南的兵敲震他的东面，凤翔军抵挡其西；蜀、南诏深入，攻克七城，烧毁堡垒一百五十所，杀敌上万，获兵械等十五万。
English: At this time, the Uighur, Taiyuan, Ning and Qianyuan armies attacked the northern side of Tubo, the soldiers of the Southern Jian Dongchuan and Shannan shook the eastern side, the Fengxiang army resisted the west; Shu and Nanzhao penetrated deep, conquered seven cities, burned 150 fortresses, killed tens of thousands of enemies, and obtained 150,000 weapons.

古文：围昆明、维州不能克，乃班师。
现代文：吐蕃兵围昆明、维州不能取胜，于是撤军。
English: When the soldiers of Tubo besieged Kunming, Victoria could not win, so they withdrew.

古文：振武、灵武兵破虏二万，泾原、凤翔军败虏原州。惟南诏攻其腹心，俘获最多。
现代文：振武、灵武兵击败虏兵二万，泾原、凤翔军在原州击退虏军，只有南诏攻其腹心，俘获最多。
English: Zhenwu and Lingwu soldiers defeated twenty thousand invaders, and the Lianyuan and Fengxiang armies repulsed the invaders in Wonju. Only Nanzhao attacked his subordinates and captured the most.

古文：帝遣中人尹偕尉异牟寻。而吐蕃盛屯昆明、神川、纳川自守。
现代文：皇帝派中人尹偕慰问异牟寻，吐蕃则用大量兵力屯扎昆明、神川、纳川坚守。
English: The emperor sent a middle-ranking official, Yin Qi, to offer condolences to Yimou, while Tubo sent a large number of troops to besiege Kunming, Kamikawa, and Nagawa.

古文：异牟寻比年献方物，天子礼之。
现代文：异牟寻每年贡献土产，天子以礼待之。
English: Iimuhiro contributes to the local production every year, and the emperor treats him with courtesy.

古文：南蛮中元和三年，异牟寻死，诏太常卿武少仪持节吊祭。
现代文：元和三年，异牟寻死，宪宗诏令太常卿武少仪持节前往吊唁。
English: In the third year of the Yuan and He died, and Emperor Xizong ordered Taizongqing Wu Shao Yi to go to offer condolences.

古文：子寻阁劝立，或谓梦凑，自称 膘信 ，夷语君也。改赐元和印章。
现代文：异牟寻子寻劝立，也叫梦凑，自称 骠信 。皇帝改赐 元和 的印章。
English: Mengqi, also known as Mengqi, calls himself "Mengxin." The emperor gave him the seal of Yuanhe.

古文：明年死，子劝龙晟立，淫肆不道，上下怨疾。
现代文：第二年即死，子劝龙晟立，骄奢淫逸，没有人君之道，上下都怨极。
English: The second year, he died. His son advised him to stand tall, to be proud, to be lascivious, to have no one to lord it over him, and everyone was extremely resentful.

古文：十一年，为弄栋节度王嵯巅所杀，立其弟劝利。
现代文：元和十一年被弄栋节度王嵯巅所杀，立其弟劝利为王。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan and He was killed by Wang Xizhong, the King of Festivals, and his younger brother, Xueli, was made king.

古文：诏少府少监李铣为册立吊祭使。
现代文：皇帝诏令少府少监李铣为册立吊祭使。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the minor prefect and minor inspector Li Xi to serve as the envoy for the hanging ceremony.

古文：劝利德嵯巅，赐氏蒙，封 大容 ，蛮谓兄为 容 。
现代文：劝利感嵯巅恩德，赐氏 蒙 ，封为 大容 。长庆三年，才赐印章。
English: Convince the sense of interest, instill the supreme grace, bestow the title of master, and seal the great volume. It took Changqing three years to bestow the seal.

古文：长庆三年，始赐印。是岁死，弟丰祐立。
现代文：这年劝利死，弟丰立。
English: This year, his younger brother Feng Li died.

古文：丰祐趫敢，善用其下，慕中国，不肯连父名。
现代文：丰敏捷果敢，善于驭使下属，仰慕中国，不肯连父名。
English: Feng is quick and daring, good at managing subordinates, admires China, and refuses to be called by his father's name.

古文：穆宗使京兆少尹韦审规持节临册。
现代文：穆宗派京兆少尹韦审规持节去行册封礼。
English: Mu Sect sent Jing Zhao Shao Yin Wei Xun Rong to hold the festival to perform the book-sealing ceremony.

古文：丰祐遣洪成酋、赵龙些、杨定奇入谢天子。
现代文：丰派洪成酋、赵龙些、杨定奇入朝拜谢天子。
English: Feng sent Hong Chenghuai, Zhao Longzhi and Yang Dingqi to pay homage to Xie Tianzi.

古文：于是，西川节度使杜元颖治无状，障候弛沓相蒙，时大和三年也。
现代文：大和三年，西川节度使杜元颖治政无方，障候关守松弛，不练军事。
English: In the 3rd year of the Yamato era, the Nishikawa festival made Du Yuanying unable to govern, unable to guard the gate, and unable to practice military affairs.

古文：嵯巅乃悉众掩邛、戎、巂三州，陷之。
现代文：嵯巅趁机倾巢出动，攻陷邛、戎、三州。
English: Yanping took advantage of the opportunity to launch a full-scale attack, capturing Yan, Eun and Sanshou.

古文：入成都，止西郛十日，慰赉居人，市不扰肆。
现代文：进入成都，在西郭停留十天，抚慰当地人民，也不侵扰市面。
English: Enter Chengdu, stay in Xiguo for ten days, soothe the local people, and do not disturb the market.

古文：将还，乃掠子女、工技数万引而南，人惧自杀者不胜计。
现代文：撤军回去时，才虏掠子女及工技人等几万带回南方，人们因害怕而自杀的不计其数。
English: When the retreating troops returned, they took tens of thousands of captives, including children and engineers, and brought them back to the south. Countless people committed suicide out of fear.

古文：救兵逐，嵯巅身自殿，至大度河，谓华人曰： 此吾南境，尔去国，当哭。 
现代文：救兵追来，嵯巅自己带兵殿后，到大渡河，对华人说： 这是我们的南部边境，你们离开自己的国家，该痛哭一场。 
English: After being chased by the rescuers, Zou Sheng himself led the soldiers to the Dadu River and said to the Chinese: This is our southern border, you should weep bitterly when you leave your country.

古文：众号恸，赴水死者十三。
现代文：众人号啕大哭，跳水自杀的约有三成。
English: People wailed loudly, and about 30 percent of those who committed suicide by diving drowned.

古文：南诏自是工文织，与中国埒。
现代文：南诏从此学会了纺织，与中国等同。
English: From then on, Nanzhao learned to weave textiles, which is the same as China.

古文：明年，上表请罪。比年使者来朝，开成、会昌间再至。
现代文：第二年，嵯巅上表请罪，年年派使者来朝拜天子，开成、会昌年间两次派使臣朝拜。
English: In the second year, Zou Sheng pleaded guilty and sent emissaries to worship the Son of Heaven every year, and sent envoys to worship the Son of Heaven twice in the years of Kaicheng and Huichang.

古文：大中时，李琢为安南经略使，苛墨自私，以斗盐易一牛。夷人不堪，结南诏将段酋迁陷安南都护府，号 白衣没命军 。
现代文：大中时，李琢任安南经略使，贪婪自私，用一斗盐要换一头牛，夷人不堪忍受，联络南诏大将段酋迁攻陷安南都护府，称为 白衣没命军 。
English: When he was in high school, Li Tuo served as Annan's errand boy. He was greedy and selfish. He wanted to exchange a bucket of salt for a cow, which was unbearable. He contacted Nanzhao General Duan Hui to invade and capture Annan's capital, Guofeng. They were called the White-Clothed Deadly Army.

古文：南诏发硃弩佉苴三千助守。
现代文：南诏调拨三千朱弩亻去苴助守。
English: Nanzhao dispatched three thousand Zhu Xi to assist him.

古文：然朝贡犹岁至，从者多。
现代文：不过朝贡还是每年都送至京师，随从者不少。
English: However, the tribute is still sent to the capital every year, and there are many followers.

古文：杜悰自西川入朝，表无多内蛮傔，丰祐怒，即慢言索质子。
现代文：杜从西川入朝，上表请不要多接纳蛮人侍从。丰怒，出言不逊，索要在成都学习的大臣子弟。
English: Du entered the imperial court from the West River, please do not accept more barbarian attendants from the above table. Feng Rong, the minister's son, demanded to study in Chengdu.

古文：会宣宗崩，使者告哀。
现代文：恰逢宣宗驾崩，使者前来告哀。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong passed away, the emissaries came to pay their respects.

古文：是时，丰祐亦死，坦绰酋龙立，恚朝廷不吊恤；又诏书乃赐故王，以草具进使者而遣。
现代文：这时丰也谢世，坦绰酋龙立，对朝廷不来吊唁慰问很不满意；懿宗下诏赐继袭王位，但酋龙招待使者甚菲薄。
English: At this time, Feng also gave thanks to the world, and was very dissatisfied with the fact that the imperial court did not come to offer condolences and condolences. Emperor Xizong issued an edict to succeed to the throne, but the emissary was invited by the chief dragon.

古文：遂僭称皇帝，建元建极，自号大礼国。
现代文：于是僭称皇帝，建年号为建极，自称为大礼国。
English: As a result, it pretended to be an emperor, changed its name from "建年号" to "建极" and called itself "大礼国."

古文：懿宗以其名近玄宗嫌讳，绝朝贡。
现代文：皇帝因他的名字音近玄宗的名字犯了讳很不高兴，从此南诏断了朝贡。
English: The emperor was displeased because his name sounded too close to that of Emperor Xuanzong, and Nanzhao cut off the imperial tribute.

古文：乃陷播州。
现代文：酋龙发兵攻陷播州。
English: Chulong sent troops to invade Banzhou.

古文：安南都护李鄠屯武州，咸通元年，为蛮所攻，弃州走。天子斥鄠，以王宽代之。
现代文：安南都护李屯兵武州，咸通元年，被蛮人攻击，弃城逃跑，天子斥责李，派王宽代他。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Annan, Li was attacked by barbarians, abandoned the city and fled. The emperor rebuked Li and sent Wang Guang to replace him.

古文：明年，攻邕管，经略使李弘源兵少不能拒，奔峦州。
现代文：第二年，酋龙攻击邕管，经略使李弘源兵少抵御不了，逃奔峦州。
English: In the second year, Chulong attacked Shiguan, and Li Hongyuan's small army was overwhelmed and fled to Zhangzhou.

古文：南诏亦引去。
现代文：南诏也退兵。
English: Nanzhao also left the army.

古文：诏殿中监段文楚为经略使，数改条约，众不悦，以胡怀玉代之。
现代文：皇帝诏令殿中监段文楚为经略使，多次修改条约，大家很不高兴，于是派胡怀玉人代替段。
English: Emperor Zhao decreed that the palace middle supervisor Duan Wenchu was the delegate, and the treaty was amended several times. Everyone was very unhappy, so they sent Hu Huaiyuan to replace Duan.

古文：南诏知边人困甚，剽掠无有，不入寇。
现代文：南诏知道边区人民很贫困，剽掠无所获，因之不去侵扰。
English: Nanzhao knew that the people in the border area were very poor, and there was nothing to be gained from plundering and pillaging, so he did not intrude.

古文：杜悰当国，为帝谋，遣使者吊祭示恩信，并诏骠信以名嫌，册命未可举，必易名乃得封。
现代文：其时杜执政，为皇帝打算：派使者去南诏吊唁丰之死，以示大国的恩德信誉，并下诏告诉骠信因名字涉讳不能行册封礼，必待骠信改名后才得行礼封王。
English: At that time, Du was in power, and he had a plan for the emperor: to send an envoy to Nanzhao to offer condolences on the death of Yu Feng, to show the great country's benevolence and credibility, and to tell Yu Xin that he could not perform the book sealing ceremony because his name was involved, and that he would have to wait for Yu Xin to change his name before he could perform the ceremony of sealing the king.

古文：帝乃命左司郎中孟穆持节往，会南诏陷巂州，穆不行。
现代文：皇帝于是命左司郎中孟穆持节前去，适逢南诏攻陷州，孟穆未成行。
English: The emperor then ordered his left-hand man, Meng Mu, to go to the festival, which coincided with Nanzhao's attack on Shengzhou, but Meng Mu did not make the trip.

古文：安南桃林人者，居林西原，七绾洞首领李由独主之，岁岁戍边。
现代文：安南桃林人，居住林西原，由七绾洞首领李由独管理，每年都派人戍边。
English: The Annam Taolin people, who live in Lin Xiyuan, are managed by the leader of Qizhaodong, Li Yudou, and send people to Fucheng every year.

古文：李琢之在安南也，奏罢防冬兵六千人，谓由独可当一队，遏蛮之入。
现代文：李琢在安南时，奏请皇帝撤冬防兵六千人，说是李由独可抵得一队人马，遏止蛮人的入侵。
English: When Li Taku was in Annan, he asked the emperor to withdraw six thousand winter soldiers, saying that Li Yudu alone could match a team of men and horses to stop the invasion of barbarians.

古文：蛮酋以女妻由独子，七绾洞举附蛮，王宽不能制。
现代文：蛮人酋长将女儿嫁给由独的儿子，七绾洞全族归附蛮人，王宽无法控制。
English: The chief of the barbarians married his daughter to the son of Yu Du, and the whole family of Qizhaodong was attached to the barbarians. Wang Guang could not control it.

古文：三年，以湖南观察使蔡袭代之，发诸道兵二万屯守，南诏怛畏不敢出。
现代文：咸通三年，派湖南观察使蔡袭代替，调各道的兵力二万人屯守，南诏惧怕不敢出。
English: In the third year of Hamdang Tong, Hunan observation was sent to replace Cai Wei, and the strength of 20,000 troops from each province was adjusted. Nanzhao was too afraid to come out.

古文：会诏左庶子蔡京经制岭南，忌袭功，有所欲，沮坏之，乃言： 南方自无虞，武夫幸功，多聚兵耗馈运，请还戍兵惜财用。 
现代文：这时，皇帝诏令左庶子蔡京经理节制岭南，他妒忌蔡袭的功劳，凡蔡袭要干什么，都设法阻扰。还说： 南方本来没事，武夫侥幸得功。聚兵多，耗费粮食，加重运输。请天子遣还戍兵节约费用。 
English: At this time, the emperor Zhao ordered his son-in-law Cai Jing, the manager of Lingnan, to control Lingnan. He was jealous of Cai Qi's achievements, and tried to obstruct everything Cai Qi wanted to do. He also said: There was nothing wrong with the south, and the warriors were lucky to get the credit. More soldiers were gathered, grain was consumed, and transportation was heavier. Please send the soldiers back to save costs.

古文：袭执不可，愿留五千兵，累表不报。
现代文：蔡袭坚持认为不可以，希望留兵五千人。多次上表均无回答。
English: Cai Wei insisted that it was not possible and hoped to keep five thousand soldiers. There was no answer to the above table for many times.

古文：即极陈南诏伺隙久，有十必死状。
现代文：于是竭力陈述南诏窥视已久，王师中有十种现象必会招致失败。
English: Therefore, he tried his best to state that Nanzhao had been watching for a long time, and that there were ten phenomena in Wang Shi that would inevitably lead to failure.

古文：朝廷昏肆，不省也。
现代文：然而朝廷昏聩，不明事理。
English: However, the imperial court was dazed and confused.

古文：京还奏，得意甚，复诏为宣慰安抚使。
现代文：蔡京回朝报告，甚中朝中之意，再诏任为宣慰安抚使。
English: Cai Jing reported back to the DPRK, and was reappointed as the Minister of Consolation and Pacification.

古文：即建析广州为岭南东道，邕州为西道，以龚、象、藤、岩为隶州。
现代文：同时分建广州为岭南东道，邕州为岭南西道，以龚、象、藤、岩划作隶属州。
English: At the same time, Guangzhou was set up as the host of Lingnan, and Bozhou as the west road of Lingnan, with Yunnan, Zhao, Wisteria and Yan as the subordinate prefectures.

古文：乃拜京西道节度使。
现代文：委任蔡京为西道节度使。
English: Cai Jing was appointed as the West Road Festival Commissioner.

古文：京褊忮贪克，峻条令，为砲熏刳斮法，下愁毒，为军中所逐，走藤州，矫制作攻讨使印，召乡兵比道军攻邕州，不克，众溃，贬死崖州。
现代文：蔡京心胸褊窄，又贪婪寡情，订了许多严峻刑法，还设立炮烙、熏炙、剖心等酷刑，下属均怨恨害怕。终于蔡京被军中驱逐，逃往藤州，又擅自矫令制造了攻讨使的印章，召集乡兵会同道军攻打邕州，不胜，众兵溃散。于是贬死于崖州。
English: Cai Jing was narrow-minded, greedy, and cold-hearted. He enacted many severe criminal laws, and also set up torture methods such as cannon-branding, smoking, and dissecting the heart, which made his subordinates resentful and afraid. Finally, Cai Jing was expelled from the army, fled to Fujishu, made the seal of the attack envoy without permission, and convened the townspeople's army to attack Zhangzhou, but failed to win, and the soldiers dispersed. So he died in Jiaozhou.

古文：以桂管观察使郑愚代节度。
现代文：委派桂管观察使郑愚代为节度。
English: The appointment of Gui Guan as an observer made Zheng You the ruler.

古文：南诏攻交州，进略安南，袭请救，发湖、荆、桂兵五千屯邕州。岭南韦宙奏： 南诏必袭邕管，不先防近而图远，恐捣虚绝粮道，且深入。 
现代文：南诏攻陷交州，进而侵略安南，蔡袭上表告急。于是调湖、荆、桂的兵五千人驻守邕州，岭南韦宙上奏： 南诏一定会去打邕管，不先防近而谋远，担心敌人会乘虚断粮道，且会深入。 
English: Nanzhao attacked and captured Jiaozhou, and then invaded Annan. Cai attacked the table and was in a hurry. Therefore, five thousand soldiers of the Lake, Jing and Gui were stationed in Zhangzhou, and Lingnanwei played in the air: Nanzhao will definitely go to the pipe, not to prevent the enemy from approaching, but to seek the distance, fearing that the enemy will take advantage of the false food channel, and will go deeper.

古文：乃诏袭按军海门，诏郑愚分兵御之。
现代文：于是诏令蔡袭在海门按军不动，令郑愚分兵抵御。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Cai Qi to halt his army at the sea gate and ordered Zheng Yu's detachment to resist.

古文：袭请济师，以山南东道兵千人赴之。
现代文：蔡袭请求援兵，派山南东道的兵一千人前往。
English: Cai Qi requested reinforcements and sent a thousand soldiers from Shannan Dongdao to the scene.

古文：南诏酋将杨思僭、麻光高以兵六千薄城而屯。
现代文：南诏的酋将成思僭、麻光高领兵六千人靠近城边驻扎。
English: The chieftain of Nanzhao, Cheng Siyu, and Ma Guanggao, who led 6,000 soldiers, were stationed near the city.

古文：四年正月，攻益急，袭录异牟寻盟言系矢上射入其营，不答。
现代文：咸通四年正月，南诏进攻紧迫，蔡袭将当年异牟寻的誓言系在箭上射入南诏军营。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Hamdang, Nanzhao's attack was urgent, and Cai Wei shot the oath of dissimulation into the Nanzhao military camp with an arrow.

古文：俄而城陷，袭阖宗死者七十人，幕府樊绰取袭印走度江。
现代文：没有回音。不久城被攻陷，袭全宗族七十人均死难，幕府樊绰拿了蔡袭的印章逃过江。
English: There was no response. Soon the city was captured and 70 members of the entire clan were killed. The shogun's messenger took the seal of the Tsai raid and fled across the river.

古文：荆南兵入东郛苦战，斩南诏二千级。是夜，蛮遂屠城。
现代文：荆南兵入东郛苦战，杀敌二千人。这一夜，蛮兵屠城。
English: The soldiers from Jingnan entered Donglu and fought hard, killing two thousand of the enemy. That night, the barbarians slaughtered the city.

古文：有诏诸军保岭南，更以秦州经略使高骈为安南都护。
现代文：皇帝诏令各军要确保岭南，又派秦州经略使高骈为安南都护。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered all armies to secure Lingnan, and also sent Qinzhou Jingli to send Gao Wei to protect Annan.

古文：帝见输发频，罢游幸，不奏乐，宰相杜悰以为非是，止之。
现代文：皇帝见调兵运粮艰难频繁，取消去外地游乐，宫内也不奏乐。宰相杜认为不必如此，于是取消决定。
English: The emperor saw that it was difficult and frequent to transfer troops and transport grain, so he cancelled the out-of-town entertainment and did not play music in the palace. Prime Minister Du did not think it was necessary, so he cancelled the decision.

古文：南诏稍逼邕州，郑愚自陈非将帅才，愿更择人。
现代文：南诏逐步逼近邕州，郑愚陈述自己不是将帅之才，请另派人。
English: As Nanzhao gradually approached Luzhou, Zheng Yu stated that he was not a good general, and asked for another person to be sent.

古文：会康承训自义成来朝，乃授岭南西道节度使，发荆、襄、洪、鄂兵万人从之。
现代文：正好康承训从义成来朝拜，于是任他为岭南西道节度使，调集荆、襄、洪、鄂的兵一万人受他统率。
English: It just so happened that Kang Chengxun came from Yicheng to pay homage, so he appointed him as the envoy of the Lingnan West Road Festival, and mobilized ten thousand soldiers from Jing, Xiang, Hong, and E to be led by him.

古文：承训辞兵寡，乃大兴诸道兵五万往。
现代文：承训以兵少为由请辞，乃广为调集各道的兵共五万人前往。
English: He resigned from the training on the grounds that the number of soldiers was small, but he mobilized a total of fifty thousand soldiers from various schools to go.

古文：六月，置行交州于海门，进为都护府，调山东兵万人益戍，以容管经略使张茵镇之。
现代文：六月，置行交州于海门镇，进而作为都护府。调山东的兵万人加强戍卫，派容管经略使张茵镇守。
English: In June, Jiaozhou was set up in Haimen Town, which then served as the capital's garrison. Tens of thousands of soldiers from Shandong were transferred to strengthen the defense, and Zhangyin Town was placed under the command of the governor.

古文：因命经略安南，茵逗留不敢进。
现代文：并命张茵全面治理安南，茵逗留不敢进军。
English: He also ordered Zhang Yin to comprehensively govern Annan. However, Yin did not dare to enter the army.

古文：安南之陷，将吏遗人多客伏溪洞，诏所在招还救恤之，免安南赋入二年。
现代文：安南沦陷，将吏中留下的都客居在伏溪洞。诏令所在地招回他们，救助他们，免安南的赋税两年。
English: After the fall of Annan, all the remaining officials lived in Fuxi Cave. The location of the edict called them back, rescued them, and exempted Annan from paying taxes for two years.

古文：韦宙请分兵屯容、藤披蛮势。
现代文：韦宙请求分兵屯驻容、藤，以分散蛮人势力。
English: Wei Zhou requested that a detachment of soldiers be stationed in Jiuzhou and Fujian to disperse the barbarian forces.

古文：五年，南诏回掠巂州以摇西南。西川节度使萧鄴率属蛮鬼主邀南诏大度河，败之。
现代文：咸通五年，南诏回头攻打州以威吓西南，西川节度使萧邺率属蛮鬼主的人马在大渡河拦截南诏，打败了他。
English: In the fifth year of Hamdang, Nanzhao turned back to attack the state to intimidate the southwest, and the West River Festival made Xiao Yao and the barbarian ghosts intercept Nanzhao in the Dadu River and defeated him.

古文：明年，复来攻。
现代文：第二年，南诏再次来攻。
English: The following year, Nanzhao attacked again.

古文：会刺史喻士珍贪狯，阴掠两林东蛮口缚卖之，以易蛮金，故开门降。
现代文：其时刺史喻士珍贪婪狡猾，暗中抢掠两林东蛮的人卖掉，换取蛮人的金子。
English: At that time, Zhang Shizhen, who was greedy and cunning, secretly looted two forests of Eastern barbarians and sold them in exchange for the barbarians' gold.

古文：南诏尽杀戍卒，而士珍遂臣于蛮。
现代文：所以南诏来攻时开门投降，向蛮人称臣，南诏将守兵全部杀死。
English: Therefore, when Nanzhao came to attack, he opened the door and surrendered, praising the barbarians, and Nanzhao killed all the guards.

古文：安南久屯，两河锐士死瘴毒者十七，宰相杨收议罢北军，以江西为镇南军，募强弩二万建节度，且地便近，易调发。
现代文：士兵在安南屯戍久了，两河的壮士死于瘴毒的几乎十分之七。宰相杨收建议撤回北军，以江西为镇南军，招募弓箭强手两万人设置节度，这样人地就近，容易调拨。
English: The soldiers have been stationed in Annan for a long time, and the strong men of the two rivers have died of poisoning almost seven-tenths of the time. Prime Minister Yang Jie suggested withdrawing the northern army, using Jiangxi as the southern army, recruiting 20,000 strong archers and setting a schedule, so that the manpower is close and easy to allocate.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：夏侯孜亦以张茵懦，不足事，悉以兵授高骈。
现代文：夏侯孜也因为张茵胆怯无用，把兵全部交给高骈。
English: Xia Houzé also handed over all of his soldiers to Gao Yao because Zhang Yin was too cowardly and useless.

古文：骈以选士五千度江，败林邑兵于邕州，击南诏龙州屯，蛮酋烧赀畜走。
现代文：高骈选五千精兵渡江，在邕州打败林邑的人马，袭击南诏的龙州屯，蛮人酋长烧毁财物牲畜逃走。
English: Gao Jun selected five thousand elite soldiers to cross the river, defeated Lin's men and horses in Zhangzhou, attacked Nanzhao's Longzhou Tun, and the barbarian chiefs burned their property and livestock and fled.

古文：酋龙遣杨缉思助酋迁共守安南，以范脆些为安南都统，赵诺眉为扶邪都统。
现代文：酋龙派杨缉思援助酋迁共守安南，派范月尼些为安南都统，赵诺眉为扶邪都统。
English: Chief Long sent Yang Jisi to assist the relocation of chiefs and jointly guard Annan, sent Fan Yue Ni to Annan, and Zhao Nuo Mei to Fuzha.

古文：七年六月，骈次交州，战数胜，士酣斗，斩其将张诠。李溠龙举众万人降，拔波风三壁。
现代文：咸通七年六月，高骈驻军交州，多次战胜，士兵越战越勇，杀死南诏将领张诠，李氵差龙带领全部人马约万人投降。于是攻破波风三面城垒。
English: In June of the 7th year of Hamdang, Gaozhu garrisoned in Jiaozhou, won many victories, the soldiers fought more bravely in Vietnam, killed the Nanzhao general Zhang Yan, and Li Yichalong led all about 10,000 people to surrender.

古文：缉思出战，败，还走城。
现代文：缉思出来迎战，被打败，逃回城内。
English: They came out to fight, were defeated, and fled back to the city.

古文：士乘之，超堞入，斩酋迁、脆些、诺眉，上首三万级，安南平。
现代文：王师追上来，翻墙入城，杀死酋迁、月尼些、诺眉。报战功杀敌三万人。安南从此平定。
English: Wang Shi caught up with him, climbed over the wall into the city, and killed Huanqian, Yue Nizhi, and Nuo Mei. He reported that he had killed 30,000 of the enemy. Annan was pacified from then on.

古文：初，酋龙遣清平官董成等十九人诣成都，节度使李福将廷见之，成辞曰： 皇帝奉天命改正朔，请以敌国礼见。 
现代文：当初，酋龙派清平官董成等十九人到成都，节度使李福准备用见使臣的礼仪接见他们，董成说： 我们皇帝奉天命改易年号，请用平等国礼仪相见。 
English: At first, the chief dragon sent nineteen people to Chengdu, including the Qing and Ping official, Dong Cheng. The ceremony made Li Fu prepare to receive them with the etiquette of an envoy. Dong Cheng said: Our emperor has been ordered by heaven to change the name of the year, please use the national etiquette of equality to meet.

古文：福不许。导译五返，日旰士倦，议不决。
现代文：李福不同意，翻译引见者五次往返，直至天晚人倦，商议仍无结果。
English: Li Fu did not agree, and the translator-introducer went back and forth five times until late in the day, when everyone was tired, and the discussion remained fruitless.

古文：福怒，命武士捽辱之，械系于馆。
现代文：李福恼怒，命武士揪打辱骂他们，还把董成捆绑起来，关在招待所。
English: Li Fu was angry and ordered the samurai to beat and abuse them. He also tied up Dong Cheng and locked him up in the guest house.

古文：俄而刘潼代福节度，即挺其系，表纵还。
现代文：后来刘潼代替李福为节度使，替董成释绑，奏请让他们回国。
English: Later, Liu Wei replaced Li Fu as the envoy of the festival, released the captives for Dong Cheng, and asked them to return to China.

古文：有诏召成等至京师，见别殿，赐物良厚，慰遣还国。
现代文：皇帝下诏召董成等去京师，在别殿接见他们，赐物丰厚，抚慰一番后让他们回国。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict summoning Dong Cheng and others to the capital, receiving them at the Great Hall of the People, showering them with gifts and consoling them, and then allowing them to return home.

古文：明年，酋龙使杨酋庆等来谢释囚。
现代文：第二年，酋龙派杨酋庆等来朝感谢释放董成等人。
English: The following year, Chiron sent Yang Huiqing and others to the DPRK to thank it for releasing Dong Cheng and others.

古文：初，李师望建言： 成都经扌忽蛮事，旷日不能决，请析邛、蜀、嘉、眉、黎、雅、巂七州为定边军，建节度制机事，近且速。 
现代文：起先，李师望建议： 成都治理经管蛮人政事，旷日持久又不能决断。不如在邛、蜀、嘉、眉、黎、雅、七州建立定边军，建置节度，裁决治理当地军政，既近且快。 
English: At first, Li Shifang suggested: Chengdu's governance and administration of barbarian politics is long-drawn-out and indecisive. It is better to establish a fixed-border army in the seven states of Min, Shu, Jiayu, Meizhou, Lijiang, and Ya, establish a military council, adjudicate and govern local military affairs, which is close and fast.

古文：天子谓然，即诏师望为节度使，治邛州。邛距成都才五舍，巂州最南，去邛乃千里，缓急首尾不相副，而师望利专制，讳不言。
现代文：天子认为对，即委任师望为节度使，治邛州，邛州距成都才一百五十里、州最南，离邛州有千里，若有缓急，首尾不能相助。但师望贪图专制一个方面的权势，对这种不利隐瞒不报。
English: Tianzi thought that it was right to appoint Shiwang as the festival envoy to govern Luzhou. Luzhou was only 150 miles away from Chengdu, the southernmost province, and thousands of miles away from Luzhou. If there was a delay, it would not be able to help. However, Shiwang coveted the power of one aspect of autocracy and did not report this disadvantage.

古文：裒积无厌，私贿以百万计。
现代文：在地方上竭力搜刮，索贿以百万计。
English: On the local level, they do their best to scrape by, demanding bribes in the millions.

古文：又欲激蛮怒，幸有功，乃杀酋庆等。
现代文：又想刺激蛮人出兵，他可克敌建功。于是杀了酋庆等人。
English: He also wanted to stimulate the barbarians to send troops, so he could prevent the enemy from winning. So he killed Chieh Qing and others.

古文：既而戍士怒，将醢师望以逞，会召还，以窦滂代之。
现代文：其行径激怒了戍士，准备把师望剁成肉酱。恰遇皇帝召回，另派窦滂代替。
English: His actions enraged the magicians, who were preparing to make mincemeat of him. Just as the emperor was about to recall him, Dou Xin was sent in his place.

古文：滂沓冒尤不法，诛责苛纤甚师望。
现代文：谁知窦滂更加贪赃枉法，苛责要求更甚于李师望。
English: Who knew that Dou Xuan was more greedy and demanding than Li Shifang?

古文：时蛮役未兴，而定边已困。
现代文：那时虽无蛮人的骚扰，但定边军已困顿不堪了。
English: At that time, although there was no harassment by barbarians, the Dingbian Army was in dire straits.

古文：酋龙怨杀其使，十年，乃入寇。
现代文：酋龙怨恨杀了他的使者，咸通十年，又发兵侵扰。
English: The chief dragon killed his messenger out of spite, Hamantong for ten years, and sent troops to harass.

古文：以军缀青溪关，密引众伐木开道，径雪岥，盛夏，卒冻死者二千人。
现代文：将军队开到青溪关，秘密带领人马伐木开路。在雪坡上辟路，虽是盛夏，仍有两千士卒冻死。
English: He led the army to Qingxi Pass and secretly led men and horses to cut down trees to make a road. Although it was the height of summer, two thousand soldiers froze to death while making a road on the snowy slope.

古文：出沐源，窥嘉州，破属蛮，遂次沐源。
现代文：酋龙领兵出沐源、跨嘉州，收服当地乌蛮，最后驻军沐源。
English: Chulong led the troops out of Muyuan and across Jiazhou, subdued the local barbarians, and finally garrisoned Muyuan.

古文：滂遣兗海兵五百往战，一军覆。
现代文：窦滂派兖海的兵五百人迎战，全军覆灭。
English: Dou Yu sent 500 soldiers from Bohai to fight, and the whole army was destroyed.

古文：酋龙乃身自将，督众五万侵巂州，攻青溪关。
现代文：酋龙亲自带兵五万侵扰州，攻打清溪关。
English: Chief Long personally led fifty thousand soldiers to invade the state and attack Qingxi Pass.

古文：屯将杜再荣绝大度河走，诸屯皆退保北涯。
现代文：屯将杜再荣退兵渡过大渡河，各戍营的人马也都退到河北岸。
English: General Du Zhairong retreated across the Dadu River, and the men and horses of each camp also retreated to the north bank of the river.

古文：蛮攻黎州，诡服汉衣，济江袭犍为，破之。
现代文：蛮兵攻打黎州，都换成了汉人的服装，渡江袭破犍为。
English: When the barbarians attacked Lizhou, they all changed into Han clothing, and when they crossed the river, they were in rags.

古文：裴回陵、荣间，焚庐舍，掠粮畜。
现代文：在陵、荣间徘徊，焚烧抢掠。接着进逼嘉州，刺史杨文心与南诏分别驻军在江的两岸。
English: They loitered around the mausoleum and the hall of fame, burning and looting. Next, they forced their way into Jiazhou, where Yang Wensin and Nanzhao stationed their troops on both sides of the river.

古文：薄嘉州，刺史杨忞与南诏夹江而军，士攒射，蛮不得进，阴自上游济，背击王师，杀忠武将颜庆师，忞走，嘉州陷。
现代文：杨文心的兵万箭齐发，蛮兵无法前进。于是暗中从上游渡江，从背后袭击王师，杀死忠武将领颜庆师，杨文心逃走，嘉州陷落。
English: Yang Wenshin's soldiers fired thousands of arrows, and the barbarians were unable to advance. Therefore, he secretly crossed the river from upstream and attacked Wang Shi from behind, killing the loyal general Yan Qing Shi. Yang Wenshin fled, and Jiazhou fell.

古文：明年正月，攻杜再荣，滂自勒兵战。
现代文：第二年正月，南诏又攻杜再荣，窦滂亲自指挥作战。
English: In the first month of the second year, Nanzhao attacked Duzhe Rong again, and Dou Yu personally commanded the battle.

古文：酋龙遣使者十辈请和，滂信之，语未半，蛮桴争岸，噪而进。
现代文：酋龙派使者十人求和，窦滂同意谈判。话没说一半，蛮兵的木筏靠岸，蛮兵鼓噪而进，窦滂不知该怎么办，准备自杀。
English: The chief dragon sent ten emissaries to sue for peace, and Dou Yu agreed to negotiate. Without saying a word, the barbarians' raft came ashore, the barbarians stormed in, and Dou Yu didn't know what to do and prepared to commit suicide.

古文：滂不知所为，将自杀，武宁将苗全绪止之，殊死战，蛮稍却，滂乃遁，全绪殿而行。
现代文：武宁将领由艹全绪阻止了他。奋力死战，蛮兵略退，窦滂得以逃走，全绪随后退却。
English: He was stopped by the general of the army of Ning Dynasty, Zhu Quanxu, who fought to the death, the barbarian soldiers retreated slightly, Dou Quanxu was able to escape, and Quanxu then retreated.

古文：黎州陷，人走匿山谷，蛮掠金帛不胜负。
现代文：黎州沦陷。
English: Lizhou fell.

古文：入自邛崃关，围雅州，遂击邛州。
现代文：当地居民逃避到山谷中。蛮兵入州，抢掠财物不胜负荷。接着蛮兵进入邛崃关，围攻雅州，袭击邛州。
English: The local residents fled to the valley. The barbarians entered the state and looted a huge amount of property. Then the barbarians entered Shaoguan, besieged Yazhou and attacked Zhangzhou.

古文：是冬，滂弃州，壁导江，储赀峙械皆亡矣。
现代文：这年冬，窦滂弃州固守导江，储备的粮食军械全都丢失了。
English: In the winter of that year, Dou Yu abandoned the state and held fast to Guojiang River, and all the grain and military equipment in reserve were lost.

古文：酋龙进攻成都，次眉州，坦绰杜元忠日夜教酋龙取全蜀。
现代文：酋龙进攻成都，到达眉州，坦绰杜元忠日夜教酋龙攻取全蜀。
English: The chief dragon attacked Chengdu and reached Meizhou. Du Yuanzhong taught the chief dragon day and night to conquer all of Shu.

古文：于是西川节度使庐耽遣其副王偃、中人张思广约和，蛮强之使南面拜，然卒不见酋龙而还。
现代文：这时西川节度使卢耽派其副使王偃及中人张思广与酋龙约和。蛮人强迫他们面南而拜，但终没见酋龙回。
English: At this time, Saikawa Seto asked Lu Tan to send his deputy envoy Wang Xuan and his middle man Zhang Sihang to make peace with Chiron. The barbarians forced them to face south and worship, but they never saw Chiron return.

古文：蛮次新津，耽复遣副谭奉祀好言申约，蛮留之。
现代文：蛮兵进驻新津，卢耽再派副使谭奉祀说好话约和。蛮人留下他。
English: The barbarians were stationed in Xinjin, and Lu Danzhe sent a deputy envoy, Tan Bongshi, to say good words about peace. The barbarians left him behind.

古文：耽畏援军未集，即飞请天子降大使通好，以纾其深入。
现代文：耽担心援军尚未集聚，飞书请天子派大使与南诏通好，以缓和他们深入侵扰。
English: Fearing that reinforcements had not yet gathered, he sent a letter asking the emperor to send an ambassador to make peace with the Nanzhao, in order to ease their further intrusion.

古文：懿宗驰遣太仆卿支详为和蛮使。
现代文：懿宗派太仆卿支详飞驰前往做和蛮使。
English: The eunuch-in-chief of the Jie sect, Shizhao, rushed to make peace with the barbarians.

古文：蛮本无谋，不能乘机会鼓行亟驱，但蚍结蝇营，忸卤剽小利，处处留屯，故蜀孺老得扶携悉入成都。
现代文：蛮人原本缺少心计，不会乘机会急速进军，只是临时性的结合，倾心于掳掠的小利，每到一处都停留驻扎，所以蜀地人民得从容扶老携幼避入成都。
English: Originally, the barbarians lacked forethought and would not take the opportunity to rapidly march into the city. It was only a temporary union. They were bent on plundering small profits and stopped and stationed in every place. Therefore, the people of Shu had to calmly help the elderly with their children to escape into Chengdu.

古文：阇里皆满，户所占地不得过一床，雨则冒箕盎自庇。
现代文：里巷都住满了人。每户所占用地面不过一床之大，下雨时各自戴斗笠用箕盆避雨。
English: The alleys are full of people. The floor space occupied by each household is no more than the size of a single bed. When it rains, each family wears a raincoat and uses a basin to shelter from the rain.

古文：城中井为竭，则共饮摩诃池，至争捽溺死者，或欻沙取滴饮之。
现代文：城中井水都用竭了，共去摩诃池饮水，以至于互相争斗，掉在水中淹死，还有人滤沙得点滴水饮用。
English: The wells in the city were all exhausted, and they all went to drink water from the Makun Pond, so much so that they fought with each other, fell into the water and drowned, and some people filtered sand to drink water.

古文：死不能具棺，即共坎瘗。
现代文：死者没有棺材，只好挖个大坑埋在一起。
English: There was no coffin for the dead, so they had to be buried together in a large pit.

古文：故泸州刺史杨庆复为耽治攻具、蔺石，置牢城兵，八将主之，树笓格，夜列炬照城，守具雄新。
现代文：前泸州刺史杨庆复为卢耽制备进攻的器械、守城的擂石，设置牢城兵，由八个大将主管，竖立密栅，晚上点火把照城。守城的兵械既锐且新。
English: Yang Qingfu, the former governor of Zhangzhou, prepared for Lu Dang the equipment for the attack, the flints for the defense of the city, set up the prison soldiers, supervised by eight generals, erected the barbed wire, and lit the city with torches at night. The defense equipment is sharp and new.

古文：又选悍士三千，号 突将 ，为长刀、巨挝斧，分左右番休，日隶于军，士心侈欲斗。
现代文：又挑选敢死队员三千人，称之为 突将 ，使用长刀、巨斧，分左右两班，轮番值守，白天隶属于军。
English: In addition, 3,000 death-defying soldiers were selected, called "surge leaders," using long swords and huge axes, divided into two groups, on duty in rotation, and subordinated to the army during the day.

古文：而酋龙自双流徐行，内欲报董成之辱，因绐耽请上介至军议事。
现代文：士兵都跃跃欲斗，而酋龙从双流慢慢而来。酋龙心里想报董成受辱之仇，于是假意请卢耽派使到军中议事。
English: The soldiers were eager to fight, while the chief dragon slowly came from the two streams. The chief dragon wanted to avenge the humiliation suffered by Dongcheng, so he pretended to ask Lu Tan to send an envoy to the army.

古文：耽遣节度副使柳槃往见杜元忠议和，元忠妄言： 帝见耽，请具车盖葆翣。 
现代文：耽派节度副使柳去见杜元忠议和。元忠傲慢地说： 约成后，我皇帝要见卢耽，请准备羽盖葆车。 
English: Thant sent the vice-minister of the Festival of Dedication, Liu, to Du Yuanzhong to discuss peace. Yuanzhong arrogantly said, "After the treaty is concluded, my emperor wants to see Lu Tan. Please prepare the feather-covered carriage."

古文：槃未能决，还。蛮以三百骑负幄幕来，大言曰： 供帐隋蜀王听事，为骠信行在。 
现代文：柳不能做主而还，蛮人以三百骑兵运了幄幕来，说以供敷张隋蜀王的用事厅，是我们骠信的行宫。
English: Liu could not be the master, but the barbarians brought the curtain with three hundred cavalrymen, saying that it was to be used as the office of the Sui and Shu king, and was the palace of our letter.

古文：耽不许，乃驰去。
现代文：卢耽不同意，这才走了。
English: Lu Tan did not agree, so he left.

古文：蛮稍前，傅外郛。
现代文：蛮军渐渐前进，靠近成都外城。
English: The barbarian army gradually advanced, approaching the outer city of Chengdu.

古文：于是游弈使王昼督援兵三千屯毘桥；窦滂亦以其军自导江来，将与大军掎角，然战不甚力，小不胜即保广汉。
现代文：这时，游弈使王昼指挥援兵三千屯扎毗桥；窦滂也领他的军队从导江来，准备与大军组成掎角之势，但战争中不很得力，遭到一些小挫败就退而保广汉。
English: At this time, Yu Yi made Wang Rong command three thousand tons of reinforcements to defend the bridge; Dou Yu also led his army from the Guodu River to prepare to form a corner with the large army, but he was not very effective in the war, and after some small setbacks, he retreated to protect Guanghan.

古文：自以失定边，觊成都陷，得薄其罪。
现代文：自从丧失定边军以来，窦滂就希望成都陷落，好减轻他的罪名。
English: Since the loss of the Sino-Japanese border troops, Dou Yu has been hoping for the fall of Chengdu in order to mitigate his crime.

古文：会有诏斥徙，军遂无功。
现代文：不久，有诏书斥责其罪，贬为康州司户，此次出战也就无功。
English: Soon, there was an imperial edict reprimanding his crime and relegating him to the position of Kanshu steward, and his participation in the war was fruitless.

古文：耽部将李自孝者，与刺史喻士珍善。
现代文：卢耽的部将李自孝与刺史喻士珍很要好。
English: Lu Tan's subordinate Li Zi Xiao and Zhang Shi Yu Shizhen are very good.

古文：士珍臣蛮，自孝阴与贼通，乃说耽城下莳苇稻，潴水颓城，举府不之觉。
现代文：士珍降了蛮人，自孝也暗中与南诏往来，于是劝说卢耽在城下种稻谷和芦苇，蓄水使城墙根泡酥。
English: Shizhen subdued the barbarians, and Zi Xiao also secretly communicated with Nanzhao, so he persuaded Lu Tan to grow rice and reeds under the city, and store water to make the city wall soak.

古文：蛮攻城，自孝守陴，树麾以自表。
现代文：其阴谋全府竟无人察觉。蛮兵攻城，自孝守在城陴处，树战旗做标记。
English: His plot went unnoticed by everyone in the capital. The barbarians attacked the city, and the self-sacrificers stayed at the battlements, with their battle flags as markers.

古文：麾所指，蛮辄攻之，为下所觉，耽杀自孝以徇。
现代文：战旗指到哪里，蛮兵就到哪里攻打。其做内应的举动被手下觉察，卢耽将他斩首示众。
English: Wherever the battle flag is pointed, the barbarians will attack. Lu Tan's subordinates noticed his actions, and he was beheaded in public.

古文：城左有民楼肆，蛮俯射城中，耽募勇士烧之，器械俱尽。
现代文：二月，蛮兵用云梯及冲车等从四面攻城。士兵们大声呐喊。
English: In February, the barbarians attacked the city from all sides with ladders and bulldozers. The soldiers shouted loudly.

古文：二月，蛮以云梁、鹅车四面攻，士叫呼，鹅车未至，陴者以巨索钩系，投膏炬，车焚，箱间蛮卒尽死。
现代文：冲车还没逼近城墙，守在矮墙处的兵用粗绳子套钩把车钩住然后投以火炬，车着火烧起来，车箱里的蛮兵全被烧死。
English: Before the vehicle approached the city wall, the soldiers guarding the low wall hooked the vehicle with a thick rope and then threw a torch. The vehicle caught fire and burned, and the barbarians in the box were all burned to death.

古文：耽遣李、张察率突将战城下，俘斩二千级。
现代文：卢耽派李王寿、张察率领突击队在城下迎战，杀死、俘获两千人。
English: Lu Tan sent Li Wang Shou and Zhang Cha to lead a commando to fight under the castle, killing and capturing two thousand people.

古文：蛮彻民鄣落为蓬笼如车，下设枕木，推而前，不及城丈，匿蛮其内以穴墉。
现代文：蛮人拆掉民房搭成车篷样的东西，下面装上枕木，推着前进，到了墙根，躲在下面的蛮兵就挖墙。
English: The barbarians tore down the houses and built something like a car canopy, put sleepers underneath, pushed forward, and when they reached the base of the wall, the barbarians hiding below dug into the wall.

古文：杨忞以坰贮粪沈泼蛮，蛮不能处；注以铁液，蓬笼皆火。
现代文：杨文心用瓦罐装了粪便泼他们，蛮兵无法安身。又化铁水浇下来，篷笼全都着火。
English: Yang Wenshin poured manure on them with a clay pot, so that the barbarians could not settle down. He also poured molten iron down, and the tents were all on fire.

古文：然南诏负众，益治器械，斧兵昼夜有声，将击锦楼，众失色。耽遣将出，三面苦战，蛮引却。
现代文：然而南诏仗着人多，加紧制造兵器，日夜不停，准备攻击锦楼。众人大惊失色，卢耽派将士出战，从三面苦战，蛮兵退却。
English: However, Nanzhao, relying on a large number of people, stepped up the production of weapons, day and night, preparing to attack Jinlu. Everyone was shocked, Lu Tan sent soldiers to fight, fought hard from three sides, and the barbarians retreated.

古文：蛮利夜晦，辄薄城，闻呼啸，众齐奋。
现代文：蛮兵又利用夜间天黑，逼近城边，一声呼啸，众兵齐攻。
English: The barbarians took advantage of the darkness of the night and approached the edge of the city. With a roar, all the soldiers attacked.

古文：城上施铁笼千炬，贼来不得隐，屯夫终夜哄，蛮不能侵。
现代文：城上设铁笼，火炬成千，蛮兵的行动照得一清二楚。守夜的人整夜巡查呐喊，蛮兵无法入侵。
English: There are iron cages on the castle, thousands of torches, and the actions of the barbarians are clearly illuminated. The night watchmen patrol and shout all night, and the barbarians cannot invade.

古文：支详遣谍与约好，且谓耽毋多杀以速蛮和。
现代文：支详派人与南诏相约谈和，且要卢耽不要多杀人以促成和谈。
English: He sent an envoy to Nanzhao to negotiate peace, and asked Lu Shan not to kill more people in order to promote peace talks.

古文：是时，传言救师至，城中合噪开门，士争出迎军，南诏搏战不解。日入，判官程克裕以北门兵二千乘之，蛮乃走。
现代文：这时，传说援兵到了，城内欢呼着打开城门，兵士们相争出来迎接。南诏与之交战，直至太阳下山，判官程克裕率领北门兵二千人压过来，蛮兵退走。
English: At this time, according to legend, reinforcements arrived, the gates of the city were opened to cheers, and soldiers came out to meet them. Nanzhao fought with them until the sun went down, when the judge Cheng Keyu led two thousand soldiers of the North Gate to push them over, and the barbarians retreated.

古文：耽犹遗之书，谢不得已交兵，且请和。
现代文：卢耽还派人送信，说这次交战实是不得已，对此表示歉意，仍求和谈。
English: Lu Tan also sent a message, saying that this battle was really a last resort, apologizing for this, and still seeking peace talks.

古文：士脱铠迎支详，详陈所赍，植二旗，署曰 赐云南币物 。
现代文：士兵们脱下铠甲迎接支详。支详陈列他所带来的东西，树旗两面，上写 赐云南钱物 。
English: The soldiers took off their armour to welcome Zhao Zhao. Zhao Zhao displayed what he had brought, a tree banner with the words "Give money to Yunnan" on both sides.

古文：谓蛮使者曰： 天子诏云南和解，而兵薄成都，奈何？
现代文：对南诏使者说 ：天子诏令云南和解，而你们兵逼成都，这是为什么？
English: He said to the emissary from Nanzhao, "God ordered the reconciliation of Yunnan, but your soldiers forced Chengdu. Why is that?"

古文：请退舍撤警以修好。 
现代文：请退兵三十里，撤除警戒以便和谈。 
English: Please pull back your troops 30 miles and lift the alert so that we can talk peace.

古文：或劝详： 蛮多诈，毋入死地。 
现代文：有人劝支详： 蛮人多不诚实，不要自蹈死地。 
English: Some people advised the supporters: "Most barbarians are dishonest, so don't beat yourself to death."

古文：详不行。
现代文：支详遂不去蛮营。
English: Therefore, the supporting details did not go to the camp.

古文：蛮复围成都，夜穿西北隅，犁旦乃觉，即颓茭火于壖，蛮皆死穴中。
现代文：蛮兵再度围困成都，夜里挖通西北角。次日早上发觉，就点燃干草丢下来，蛮兵都被烧死在洞中。
English: The barbarians besieged Chengdu again, digging through the northwest corner of the city at night. When they were discovered the next morning, they lit hay and threw it down. The barbarians were all burned to death in the cave.

古文：以铁絙曳云輣仆之，燎作，少选尽，益固守。
现代文：又用铁索把大兵车拽倒，大火烧起来，片刻烧尽，成都的守护更为加强。
English: He also used an iron rope to pull down the chariot, set it on fire and let it burn out for a while, strengthening the protection of Chengdu.

古文：是时，帝遣东川节度使颜庆复为大度河制置、剑南应接使，兵次新都，博野将曾元裕败蛮兵，斩二千级。
现代文：这时，皇帝派东川节度使颜庆复为大渡河制置、剑南应接使。兵马到达新都，博野守将曾元裕打败蛮兵，斩首两千人。
English: At this time, the emperor sent the Dongchuan Festival to Yan Qingfu to set up the Dadu River, and Jianan to receive the envoy. The soldiers and horses arrived in the new capital, and the Bono governor Zeng Yuanyu defeated the barbarians and beheaded 2,000 people.

古文：南诏骑数万晨压官军以骋，大将宋威以忠武兵战，斩首五千，获马四百尾。
现代文：南诏骑兵几万人早晨逼近官军。大将宋威指挥忠武的兵与之交战，杀敌五千人，获马四百匹。
English: Tens of thousands of Nanzhao cavalry approached the official army in the morning. General Song Wei commanded the loyal soldiers to fight with them, killing five thousand enemies and gaining four hundred horses.

古文：南诏退屯星宿山，威进戍沱江。
现代文：南诏退驻星宿山，宋威进驻沱江。
English: Nanzhao retreated to Xingshu Mountain, while Song Wei moved to Lijiang River.

古文：酋龙遣酋望至支详所请和，详曰： 今列城固守，北军望功，归语而主，审自度。 
现代文：北军正企望立功。
English: The Northern Army is hoping to do some good.

古文：耽遣锐将趣蛮壁烧攻具，杀二千人，为南诏所蹑，却而溃。
现代文：回去告诉你们主子，好好自己掂量掂量。 卢耽派精锐部队到蛮兵营垒烧毁兵器，杀死二千人。但被南诏追杀，败退。
English: Go back and tell your masters and judge for yourselves. Lu Tan sent elite troops to the barbarian camp to burn weapons and kill two thousand people, but he was chased by Nanzhao and defeated.

古文：蛮闻凤翔、山南军且来，乃迎战毘桥，不胜，趋沱江，为伏士所击，又败。
现代文：蛮兵听说凤翔、山南的兵马将到，于是在毗桥迎战，不胜。改去沱江，遭到伏军的袭击，又败。
English: The barbarian soldiers heard that Fengxiang and Shannan's soldiers and horses would arrive, so they met the battle at Biqiao and were defeated. Instead, they went to Lijiang River, were attacked by the ambush army, and were defeated again.

古文：城中出突将，夜火蛮营，酋龙、坦绰身督战。
现代文：城里开出敢死队，夜里纵火烧蛮营，酋龙、坦绰亲自督战。
English: Death squads were sent out from the city, the barbarian camps were set on fire at night, and the chieftain Long and Tanchiao personally supervised the battle.

古文：后三日，王师夺升迁梁，蛮大败，夜烧亭传，乘火所向，雨矢射王师。
现代文：三天后，王师夺取升迁梁，蛮兵大败，晚上纵火烧驿亭，乘火势，集中箭射王师。
English: Three days later, Wang Shi seized the promotion and transfer beam, defeated the barbarians, set fire to the pavilion in the evening, took advantage of the fire, and concentrated arrows to shoot Wang Shi.

古文：威疏军行，向矢所发丛射之。
现代文：宋威将队伍分散开来，向发箭来的方向密密射箭。
English: Song Wei dispersed the team and shot arrows closely in the direction from which the arrows came.

古文：两军不能决，各解去。
现代文：酋龙知道敌不过王师，趁夜撤军南逃。
English: Chief Long knew that he could not defeat Wang Shi, so he took advantage of the night to withdraw his army and flee south.

古文：酋龙知不敌，夜彻营南奔，至双流，江无梁，计穷，将赴水死，或止之曰： 今北军与成都兵合，若来追，我无类矣。
现代文：至双流，江上无桥，没办法，准备投水死。有人劝阻说 ：现在北军与成都的兵会合。如果他们追来，我们必死无疑。
English: At Shuangliu, there was no bridge over the river, there was no way, we were ready to throw ourselves into the water and die. Some people tried to dissuade us, saying, "The Northern Army is now meeting with the soldiers from Chengdu. If they chase us, we will undoubtedly die."

古文：不如伪和以纾急；不然，死未晚。 
现代文：不如假装议和，求得暂时缓解。如果不同意议和，那时再死也来得及。 
English: It is better to pretend to negotiate peace and seek temporary relief. If you do not agree to negotiate peace, then it is time to die.

古文：乃来请。
现代文：于是酋龙前来请和。
English: So the chief dragon came to make peace.

古文：三日梁成而济，即断梁，按队缓驱。
现代文：三天桥成，人马全过了河，当即砍断桥梁慢慢行军。
English: When the three-day bridge was completed, all the men and horses crossed the river, immediately cut off the bridge and slowly marched.

古文：黎州刺史严师本收散卒保邛州，酋龙惧，围二日去。
现代文：黎州刺史严师本聚集散兵保守邛州。酋龙胆怯了，围城两天后撤去。
English: Li Zhou was besieged by Yan Shibong, who gathered scattered soldiers to defend Zhangzhou. Hulong became timid and withdrew after two days of siege.

古文：蛮俘华民，必劓耳鼻已，纵之，既而居人刻木为耳鼻者什八。
现代文：蛮兵俘获了华人，必将他们的耳朵、鼻子割掉后放回。此后当地居民刻木做假鼻假耳的人十有七八。
English: When the barbarian soldiers captured the Chinese, they would cut off their ears and noses and put them back. Since then, 7 out of 10 local residents have carved wooden prosthetic noses and ears.

古文：庆复之来，众以其弟庆师死于蛮，必甘心。
现代文：颜庆复这次领兵来，大家以为由于他弟弟庆师死于蛮人之手，定会报仇的。
English: Yan Qingfu came to lead the troops this time. Everyone thought that since his younger brother, Qing Shi, had died at the hands of a barbarian, he would surely take revenge.

古文：及成都不破，以己功轻，乃按军广溪，纵残寇，人人切齿。
现代文：待到成都未被敌攻破，庆复认为自己功小，于是按军广汉，放了残敌，以致人人痛恨。
English: When Chengdu had not been breached by the enemy, Qingfu thought that his contribution was small, so he ordered his troops to attack the enemy and let them go, so that everyone hated him.

古文：初，成都无隍堑，乃教耽浚隍，广三丈，作战棚于埤，列左右屯营，营别五区。区卒五十，莳皁荚夹壕，后三年合拱。
现代文：当初，成都城没有堑壕，庆复教卢耽挖护城壕，宽三丈，设置鹿砦，筑左右营寨，营寨分为五区，每区五十人，堑壕两岸种皂荚树，三年后树梢合拢。
English: At the beginning, Chengdu City had no trenches. Qingfu Lu delayed digging trenches to protect the city. The trenches were three meters wide. Deer forts were set up. Campsites were built on both sides. The campsites were divided into five districts, with fifty people in each district. On both sides of the trenches, soap birch trees were planted. Three years later, the tops of the trees were closed.

古文：又为大■连弩。
现代文：又制造大旗、连发弓，以利守卫。
English: He also made a large banner and a long bow to help the guards.

古文：自是南诏惮之。
现代文：从此，南诏害怕。
English: From then on, Nanzhao was afraid.

古文：酋龙年少嗜杀戮，亲戚异己者皆斩，兵出无宁岁，诸国更雠忿，屡覆众，国耗虚。
现代文：酋龙年轻气盛，好杀戮，亲友中凡不同意他的观点的都被斩，常年出兵作战永无宁日，各附属国更是又恨又怕。战争中多次大败，国力耗虚了。
English: Chulong is young and vigorous, and good at killing. All of his relatives and friends who do not agree with his views are killed. He is always sending out troops to fight, and there is never a peaceful day. The subordinate countries hate and fear him. He has been defeated many times in the war, and his national strength has been depleted.

古文：蜀之役，男子十五以下悉发，妇耕以饷军。
现代文：攻蜀一仗，男子十五岁以上的都征入兵营了，妇女耕种以供军粮。
English: During the attack on Shu, all men over the age of fifteen were conscripted into military camps, and women were forced to work in the fields to provide food for the troops.

古文：十四年，坦绰复寇蜀，絙舟大度河以济，为刺史黄景复击却之。
现代文：咸通十四年，坦绰又来侵扰四川。把船绑在一起渡大渡河，被刺史黄景复击败。
English: In the 14th year of Hamdangdong, Tangpo again invaded Sichuan. He tied the boats together to cross the Dadu River and was defeated by Huang Jingfu.

古文：众循河而南，夜桴上流兵，夹攻濒水诸屯，景复败，走还黎州。蛮蹑追，为景复所败。
现代文：众人沿河南行，夜间在上流用木筏渡河，夹攻水边的各军营。景复败，逃回黎州，蛮人追击，则又被景复击败。
English: The people traveled along the south of the river, and at night they used rafts to cross the river at the upper stream, and attacked the military camps along the water's edge. King Fufu was defeated and fled back to Lishu, and the barbarians pursued and were defeated by King Fufu.

古文：会蛮踵来，还攻大度河，仆旗息鼓，请曰： 坦绰欲上书天子白冤事。 
现代文：谁知蛮兵接踵而来，还攻大渡河，但偃旗息鼓，要求说： 坦绰要上书天子陈述冤屈。 
English: Who knew that the barbarians would come one after the other and attack the Dadu River, but they called a halt and demanded: "You must write to the emperor to state your grievances.

古文：戍兵信之，不战。
现代文：卫兵相信了，不交战。
English: The guards believed him and did not fight.

古文：桥成而济，黎州陷。
现代文：搭桥让他们渡河，过河来即开战，黎州陷落。
English: He built a bridge for them to cross the river, and they went to war as soon as they crossed the river, and Li Prefecture fell.

古文：遂攻雅州，击定边军，卒溃入邛州。
现代文：进而攻击雅州，袭击定边军，败军退入邛州。
English: Then they attacked Yazhou, attacked the Dingbian Army, and the defeated army retreated to Ganzhou.

古文：成都大震，人亡入玉垒关，士乘城。
现代文：成都大惊，居民逃入玉垒关，兵士登城守卫。
English: Chengdu was shocked, residents fled into the Jade Fort, soldiers entered the city to guard it.

古文：坦绰遣使者王保城等四十人赍骠信书遗节度使牛丛，欲假道入朝，请憩蜀王故殿。
现代文：坦绰派使者王保城等四十人拿着骠信的信送给节度使牛丛，想借路入朝，请求在蜀王的旧殿中休息。
English: Forty people, including Wang Baocheng, the envoy sent by Tanchao, took the letter and sent it to Jiedu Jiu Cong. They wanted to use the road to enter the imperial court and asked to rest in the old palace of King Shu.

古文：丛欲许之，杨庆谏曰： 蛮无信，彼礼屈辞甘，诈我也。
现代文：牛丛准备允许，杨庆复劝阻说： 蛮人不讲信用。他们现在礼貌周全，好话多说，是骗我们。
English: Cows ready to allow, Yang Qingfu dissuaded: Barbarians do not trust. They are now polite and well-rounded, say more good words, is to deceive us.

古文：请斩其使，留二人还书。 
现代文：该杀了使者，只留两个人送信回去。 
English: It was time to kill the messenger and leave only two people to send it back.

古文：丛因责之曰： 诏王之祖，六诏最小夷也。
现代文：牛丛于是回信责备说： 诏王的祖先，是六诏中最小的一个。
English: Cowshed then replied with a letter of reproach, saying: The ancestor of King Zhao was the youngest of the six Zhao.

古文：天子录其勤，合六诏为一，俾附庸成都，名之以国，许子弟入太学，使习华风，今乃自绝王命。
现代文：天子念他们勤恳努力，合六诏为一，使之成为成都的附庸，称他们为 国 ，允许子弟进入太学，叫他们学习华人文化。如今却自绝于天子。
English: Tianzi read their diligent efforts, combined six edicts into one, made it a vassal of Chengdu, called them a country, allowed his children to enter Taiyue, and asked them to study Chinese culture. Now they have renounced Tianzi.

古文：且雀蛇犬马，犹能报德，王乃不如虫鸟乎？
现代文：再说雀蛇犬马还知道报恩报德，南诏王难道还不如虫鸟吗？
English: Besides, the finches, snakes, dogs, and horses also know how to repay kindness. Is the king of Nanzhao not as good as the insect bird?

古文：比成都以武备未修，故令尔突我疆埸。
现代文：以前成都由于战备不足，所以才使你们乘虚而入。
English: Previously, Chengdu was underprepared for war, which is why you were able to take advantage of the situation.

古文：然毘桥、沱江之败，积胔附城，不四年复来。
现代文：毗桥、沱江两战，尸体堆积如山。不到四年又来侵犯。
English: Bodies piled up like a mountain in the two wars of the Biqiao and the Li River. Less than four years later, they invaded again.

古文：今吾有十万众，舍其半未用。
现代文：今日我有十万人马，其中一半尚未动用。
English: Today I have a hundred thousand horses, half of which have not been used.

古文：以千人为军。十军为部，骁将主之。
现代文：以一千人组为一军，十军组为一部，骁将指挥。
English: With a thousand-man group as an army and a ten-army group as a part, he will be in command.

古文：凡部有强弩二百，镈斧辅之；劲弓二百，越银刀辅之；长戈二百，掇刀辅之；短矛二百，连锤辅之。
现代文：每部有强弓二百张，斧辅助；劲弓二百张，越银刀辅助；长戈二百条，掇刀辅助；短矛二百支，连锤辅助。
English: Each of them has 200 strong bows, with the help of axes; 200 strong bows, with the help of silver swords; 200 long spears, with the help of sickles; 200 short spears, with the help of hammers.

古文：又军四面，面有铁骑五百。悉收刍薪、米粟、牛马、犬豕，清野待尔。
现代文：城四面都驻军，涌一面安排铁骑五百，另将城外的柴草、粮食、车马、猪狗全部收清，一点不剩。
English: Troops were stationed on all four sides of the city, and 500 cavalrymen were arranged on the Chung side. In addition, firewood, grain, horses, and pigs outside the city were all collected, leaving nothing behind.

古文：吾又能以旁骑略尔樵采。
现代文：我还能派别的人马阻挠你们采樵摘果。
English: I can also send other people to prevent you from picking berries.

古文：我日出以一部与尔战，部别二番，日中而代；日昃一部至，以夜屯，月明则战，黑则休，夜半而代。
现代文：我每日出一部之兵力与你们作战。
English: Every day I send a part of my army to fight with you.

古文：凡我兵五日一杀敌，尔乃昼夜战，不十日，懵且死矣。
现代文：每部分两班，日中换班。太阳落山一部来守夜，有月亮就作战，没月亮就休息，半夜换班。
English: Each section has two shifts, which change during the day. When the sun sets, one section keeps vigil, fights when there is a moon, rests when there is no moon, and changes shifts at midnight.

古文：州县缮甲厉兵，掎角相从，皆蛮之深雠，虽女子能齽齘薄贼，况强夫烈士哉！
现代文：所有我的兵五天轮到作战一次，而你们的兵日夜都要作战。不出十天，你们就要疲累死了。周围的州县也都加强了战备，与我们成掎角相呼应。他们都是对蛮有深仇的人，即使是妇女也能用牙齿与你们作战，何况是壮汉武士呢。
English: All my soldiers take turns to fight once every five days, while your soldiers have to fight day and night. In less than ten days, you will die of exhaustion. The surrounding prefectures have also strengthened their combat readiness, echoing our battle cry. They are all people with deep hatreds. Even women can fight you with their teeth, let alone strong Han warriors.

古文：尔祖尝奴事西蕃，为尔仇家，今顾臣之，何恩雠之戾邪？
现代文：你们祖先曾做西蕃的奴隶，是你们的仇家，如今竟向他们称臣。你们怎么这样连恩仇都辨不清呢？
English: Your fathers were slaves of the Sihonites, who were your enemies: and ye are their servants this day: and how is it that ye do not discern between good and evil?

古文：蜀王故殿，先世之宝宫，非边夷所宜舍，神怒人愤，骠信且死！ 
现代文：蜀王的旧殿，是先世的宝宫，不是边夷人所能随便居住的。住进去会使神怒人恨，骠信会死的。 
English: The old palace of King Shu is the treasure palace of the past, and it is not for the barbarians to live in casually. If you live in it, you will make the gods angry and the people hate you, and you will die.

古文：丛犹火郊民室庐观阁，严兵为固守计。
现代文：牛丛还烧掉城郊的民房以及观、阁等可住人的地方，以便于严兵固守。
English: Cowshed also burned down private houses on the outskirts of the city as well as places where people could live, such as gazebos and pavilions, in order to make it easier for soldiers to hold out.

古文：坦绰至新津而还，回寇黔中，经略使秦匡谋惧，奔荆南。
现代文：坦绰到新津后返回，转去攻打黔中。经略使秦匡谋害怕，逃到荆南。
English: After going to Xinjin, Tanchiao returned and went to attack Yuzhong. He managed to scare Qin Kuangmo and fled to Jingnan.

古文：会僖宗立，遣金吾将军韩重持节往使。
现代文：此时僖宗即位，派金吾将军持节出使。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and sent General Kingo to dispatch an envoy.

古文：俄攻黎州，景复击走之。
现代文：不久，南诏又攻黎州，景复将他们打跑。
English: Soon after, Nanzhao attacked Lizhou again, and Jingfu routed them.

古文：乾符元年，劫略巂、雅间，破黎州，入邛崃关，掠成都，成都闭三日，蛮乃去。
现代文：乾符元年，在、雅之间袭击掳掠，攻破黎州，入邛崃关，袭击成都，成都闭关三天，蛮兵才退。
English: In the first year of the Qianfu era, the barbarians attacked and plundered between and Ya, broke through Lizhou, entered Shaoguan, and attacked Chengdu. Chengdu was closed for three days before the barbarians retreated.

古文：诏徙天平军高骈领西川节度使，乃奏： 蛮小丑，势易制。
现代文：皇帝下诏调天平军高骈为西川节度使。高骈上奏： 蛮人国小而落后，其势容易制服。
English: The emperor decreed that the balance of the Taira army should be adjusted and Gao Zheng was appointed as the envoy to the Nishikawa festival. Gao Zheng played up: The barbarian country is small and backward, and its potential is easy to subdue.

古文：而蜀道险，馆饷穷覂。
现代文：但蜀道险阻，粮食穷乏。
English: However, the Shu Road is dangerous and food is scarce.

古文：今左神策所发长武、河东兵多，用度繁广。
现代文：如今左神策所征调的长武、河东的兵多，军需开支甚大。
English: Today, the number of soldiers from Changwu and Hedong conscripted and transferred by Zuo Sheng is large, and the military expenditure is very large.

古文：且彼皆扼制羌戎，不可以弛备。 
现代文：况且他们都是扼制羌戎的力量，不可以放松。 
English: Moreover, they all have the power to restrain others, and cannot relax.

古文：诏乃罢长武等兵。
现代文：于是下令撤回长武等队伍。
English: He then ordered the withdrawal of Nagatake and other troops.

古文：骈至不淹月，阅精骑五千，逐蛮至大度河，夺铠马，执酋长五十斩之，收邛崃关，复取黎州，南诏遁还。
现代文：高骈到后不足一个月，挑选精锐骑兵五千人，驱逐蛮兵直到大渡河。夺得铠甲马匹，抓获斩杀酋长五十人，收复邛崃关，再克复黎州，南诏逃回。
English: Less than a month after Gao Yao arrived, he selected 5,000 elite cavalry and drove the barbarians to the Dadu River. He captured armored horses, captured and killed 50 chiefs, recovered Shaoguan, and then recovered Lizhou. Nanzhao fled back.

古文：骈召景复责大度河之败，斩以徇。
现代文：高骈召来景复，斥责他大渡河之败，将他斩首示众。
English: Gao Jiong summoned him, reprimanded him for the defeat at Dadu River, and beheaded him in public.

古文：戍望星、清溪等关。
现代文：派兵戍守望星、清溪等关。
English: Troops were sent to guard the Guan of Wangxing, Qingxi and so on.

古文：南诏惧，遣使者诣骈结好，而踵出兵寇边，骈斩其使。
现代文：南诏害怕了。派使者到高骈处要求和谈，但又接着出兵袭击边界。高骈斩杀使者。
English: Nanzhao was afraid. He sent an envoy to Gao Jun to ask for peace talks, but then sent troops to attack the border. Gao Jun killed the envoy.

古文：初，安南经略判官杜骧为蛮所俘，其妻，宗室女也，故酋龙使奉书丐和。
现代文：起先，安南经略判官杜骧被蛮人俘虏，其妻是帝宗室女，所以酋龙让她送信求和。
English: At first, Annan was captured by the barbarians, and his wife was the emperor's daughter-in-law, so the chief dragon asked her to send a summons.

古文：骈答曰： 我且将百万众至龙尾城问尔罪。 
现代文：骈回答 ：我将要带领百万人马到龙尾城问你的罪。 
English: The Grasshopper replied, "I will lead a million horses to Dragon's Tail to ask you about your sins."

古文：酋龙大震。
现代文：酋龙大为震恐。
English: Chulong was terrified.

古文：自南诏叛，天子数遣使至其境，酋龙不肯拜，使者遂绝。
现代文：自从南诏叛变，天子多次派使者到南诏境内，酋龙都不肯以臣礼拜，这才断了联系。
English: Since Nanzhao's rebellion, the Heavenly Son has repeatedly sent emissaries to the territory of Nanzhao, but the chiefs and dragons refused to worship with their subjects. This is when the connection was broken.

古文：骈以其俗尚浮屠法，故遣浮屠景仙摄使往，酋龙与其下迎谒且拜，乃定盟而还。
现代文：高骈因南诏信仰佛教，所以派僧人景仙代为使者前往。酋龙与其属下恭迎跪拜，于是订成了盟约。
English: Since Nanzhao believed in Buddhism, Gao Gan sent the monk Jingsendai as an emissary. Chulong and his subordinates bowed down to welcome him, and thus a covenant was made.

古文：遣清平官酋望赵宗政、质子三十入朝乞盟，请为兄弟若舅甥。
现代文：酋龙派清平官酋望赵宗政、质子三十人入朝求盟，请求成为兄弟或舅甥。
English: The chief dragon sent 30 Qingping officials, including the chief vassal Zhao Zongzheng and the proton, to the imperial court to ask for alliance and request to become brothers or nephews.

古文：诏拜景仙鸿胪卿、检校左散骑常侍。
现代文：皇帝诏任景仙为鸿胪卿、检校左散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Zhao appointed Jingxian as Hongyuqing, and he was the attendant of the left horseman of the inspection.

古文：骈结吐蕃尚延心、嗢末鲁耨月等为间，筑戎州马湖、沐源川、大度河三城，列屯拒险，料壮卒为平夷军，南诏气夺。
现代文：高骈又结交吐蕃的尚延心、末鲁耨月等以牵制南诏，在戎州筑马湖、沐源川、大渡河三城，修筑营垒屯兵扼守险要处，又精选壮士组成平夷军，南诏的气势偃息。
English: Gao Gan also made friends with Shang Yanxin and Mulu Xiyue of Tubo to contain Nanzhao. In the three cities of Lake Tsukuma, Muyuan River, and Dadu River in Wenzhou, he built barracks and garrisons to guard the critical points, and selected strong men formed the Pingyi Army. Nanzhao's momentum was resounding.

古文：酋龙恚，发疽死，伪谥景庄皇帝。
现代文：酋龙心郁闷，疽发而死，自谥为景庄皇帝。
English: Chulong was depressed and died of gangrene, claiming to be the emperor of Jingzhuang.

古文：子法嗣，改元贞明、承智、大同，自号大封人。
现代文：儿子法即位，改年号为贞明、承智、大同，自称大封人。
English: When his son Fa ascended the throne, he changed his name to Zhenming, Chengzhi, Datong, and called himself Daifu Ren.

古文：法年少，好畋猎酣逸，衣绛紫锦罽，镂金带。
现代文：法年轻，喜好游猎逸乐。穿绛紫锦绣披风，系缕金带。
English: Fa is young and likes to enjoy hunting. She wears a purple brocade embroidered cape with a gold belt.

古文：国事颛决大臣。
现代文：国事全交付大臣决策。
English: All state affairs are entrusted to the minister for decision-making.

古文：乾符四年，遣陀西段羌宝诣邕州节度使辛谠请修好，诏使者答报。
现代文：乾符四年，派陀西段王羌宝到邕州节度使辛谠处请求和好，皇帝诏派使者去作答。
English: In the fourth year of the Qianfu era, the western section of the Tao Dynasty, Wang Shibao, sent an envoy to Xinjiang to ask for reconciliation. The emperor sent an envoy to reply.

古文：未几，寇西川，骈奏请与和亲，右谏议大夫柳韬、吏部侍郎崔澹丑其事，上言： 远蛮畔逆，乃因浮屠诱致，入议和亲，垂笑后世。
现代文：但不久又骚扰四川。高骈奏请与之和亲。右谏议大夫柳韬、吏部侍郎崔澹认为有辱身份，上言： 远地蛮人叛逆无礼，只因僧人诱骗而来，竟然商议和亲，会让后代耻笑的。
English: However, he soon harassed Sichuan again. Takahata requested that Takahata make peace with his relative. Yuya Yanagi, the doctor of the Right Division, and Choi Yanagi, the chamberlain of the General Affairs Department, thought it was a disgrace to their status, and said, "The barbarians from far away are rebellious and impolite, and only came because they were tricked by the monks, and they even discussed making peace with their relative, which would make future generations laugh.

古文：骈职上将，谋乘谬，不可从。 
现代文：高骈位居上将，竟提出荒谬的计谋，不可听从。 
English: Takahata, who holds the rank of admiral, has come up with a preposterous plan that cannot be followed.

古文：遂寝。
现代文：此事就此搁下。
English: We'll leave it at that.

古文：蛮使者再入朝议和亲，而骈徙荆南，持前请不置。
现代文：南诏使者再度入朝请求和亲。此时高骈已调至荆南，不放弃以前的看法。
English: Nanzhao's envoys once again went to the North to ask for a reconciliation. At this time, Gao Jun had been transferred to Jingnan, but he did not give up his previous opinion.

古文：宰相郑畋、庐携争不决，皆赐罢。
现代文：宰相郑畋、卢携争论不决，一并罢职。
English: Prime Minister Zheng Rong and Lu Jie both resigned from their posts after the dispute could not be resolved.

古文：辛谠遣幕府徐云虔摄使者往觇。
现代文：辛谠派幕府徐云虔代任使者去南诏暗中察看。
English: Xin Yao sent the shogunate's envoy Xu Yunqian to secretly inspect Nanzhao.

古文：到善阐府，见骑数十，曳长矛，拥绛服少年，硃缯约发。
现代文：云虔到了善阐府，见几十个骑兵，拖着长矛，簇拥着一个绛衣少年，用红绸子束发。
English: When Yun Qian arrived at Zhenyaofu, he saw dozens of cavalrymen, dragging spears, surrounding a boy in a long robe and wearing a red silk headband.

古文：典客伽陀酋孙庆曰： 此骠信也。 
现代文：典客伽陀酋孙庆介绍说 ：这就是骠信。 
English: Sun Qing, a guest at the banquet, said, "This is the letter.

古文：问天子起居，下马揖客，取使者佩刀视之，自解左右钮以示。
现代文：法下马与来客相见，问候天子安好，取过使者的佩刀观看，自己解下左右的慈双羽给使者看。
English: He dismounted his horse to meet the guests, greeted the emperor, took the messenger's sword to look at it, and took off his left and right wings to show them to the messenger.

古文：乃除地剚三丈版，命左右驰射。
现代文：接着清扫地面，树立三丈高的墙板，命左右驰马射击。
English: Next, sweep the ground, erect a three-story-high wall board, and shoot at the gallop.

古文：每一人射，法束马逐以为乐，数十发止。
现代文：每一个人射，法策马追赶取乐。几十发后才止。
English: Everyone shoots, but it's fun to watch the horses chase each other. It only stops after a few dozen shots.

古文：引客就幄，侲子捧瓶盂，四女子侍乐饮，夜乃罢。
现代文：带客人进入帐幕，有马童捧瓶盂，四个女子奏乐侍饮，入夜才罢。
English: Take guests into the tent, there is a stable boy holding a bottle of wine, four women play music and serve drinks, and it's late at night.

古文：又遣问客《春秋》大义，送使者还。
现代文：又派人问客人《春秋》大义，友好地送使者回去。
English: They also sent someone to ask the guests about the significance of "Spring and Autumn," and sent the messenger back in a friendly manner.

古文：是时，骈徙节镇海，劾澹等沮议，帝蒙弱不能晓，下诏尉解。
现代文：这时，高骈调任统帅镇海，弹劾崔澹等破坏和议。皇帝年轻蒙昧，不了解历史渊源，下诏书慰解。
English: At this time, Gao Kun was transferred to the post of commander-in-chief of Zhenhai, and the impeachment of Cui Gan and other destructive peace talks. The emperor was young and ignorant, did not understand the historical origin, and issued an edict of consolation.

古文：西川节度使崔安潜上言： 蛮蓄鸟兽心，不识礼义，安可以贱隶尚贵主，失国家大体？
现代文：西川节度使崔安潜进言 ：南蛮蓄有鸟兽之心，不知礼义，怎么可以让卑贱者高攀贵主，以致有失国家大体？
English: Nishikawa Setsudo made Cui Anqian say: Nanban has the heart of a bird and beast, does not know the etiquette, how can the lowly be allowed to climb high, so that the country as a whole is lost?

古文：澹等议可用。
现代文：崔澹等人的看法可取。
English: The views of Cui Wei and others are commendable.

古文：臣请募义征子，率十户一保，愿发山东锐兵六千戍诸州，比五年，蛮可为奴。 
现代文：臣请求召募义兵，以十户为一保，再调发山东的精兵六千人卫戍各州。只要五年，蛮人即可为奴。 
English: The vassal asked for the recruitment of volunteers, with ten households as a guarantee, and then dispatched six thousand elite soldiers from Shandong to guard each state. As long as five years, the barbarians can be slaves.

古文：久之，帝手诏问安潜和亲事，答曰： 云南姚州譬一县，中国何资于彼而遣重使，加厚礼？
现代文：后来，皇帝诏问安潜和亲之事。安潜答： 云南姚州有如一个县。中国为什么要对他们派重使、加厚礼？
English: Later, Emperor Zhao inquired about Anqian and his relatives. Anqian replied: Yunnan Yaozhou is like a county. Why should China send a heavy envoy to them and give them a thicker gift?

古文：彼且妄谓朝廷畏怯无能为，脱有它请，陛下何以待之？
现代文：他们会因此以为朝廷害怕无能耐。如果他们又有别的要求，陛下将如何对待？
English: They will therefore think that the court is afraid of incompetence. If they have other requests, how will His Majesty treat them?

古文：且天宗近属，不可下小蛮夷。
现代文：况且天子宗属不可下嫁小蛮夷。
English: In addition, it is not allowed for a son of the emperor to marry a barbarian.

古文：有如蛮使者不复至，当遣谍人伺其隙，可以得志。 
现代文：如果蛮使不再来，可派侦察探察时机，可以降服他们。 
English: If the barbarians don't come again, we can send scouts to look for an opportunity to subdue them.

古文：南诏知蜀强，故袭安南，陷之，都护曾衮奔邕府，戍兵溃。
现代文：南诏知蜀强，攻陷安南，都护曾兖逃至邕府，卫戍兵溃败。
English: Nan Zhaozhi defeated Shu Qiang, invaded Annan, and the tutelary of the capital, Zeng Yao, fled to Shanfu. The guards were routed.

古文：会西川节度使陈敬瑄申和亲议，时庐携复辅政，与豆庐彖皆厚骈，乃谲说帝曰： 陛下初即位，遣韩重使南诏，将官属留蜀期年，费不赀，蛮不肯迎。
现代文：此时西川节度使陈敬蠧重提和亲之事。其时卢携重又执政，他与豆卢王彖都看重高骈，于是劝说皇帝 ：陛下初即位，派韩重出使南诏，将官属留蜀一年，费用不小，蛮人不肯迎接。
English: At this time, the West River Festival made Chen Jingyao re-raise the matter of reconciliation. At that time, Lu Jizhe was also in power, and he and the King of Doulu both valued Gao Yao, so he persuaded the emperor: His Majesty ascended the throne for the first time, sent Han Chong to send an envoy to Nanzhao, and kept the officials in Shu for one year. The cost was not small, and the barbarians refused to welcome him.

古文：及骈节度西川，招嗢末，缮甲训兵，蛮夷震动，遣赵宗政入献，见天子，附骠信再拜；云虔之使，骠信答拜。
现代文：及至高骈节度西川，招降末，打造军械，训练士兵。蛮夷为之震动，故而派赵宗政入朝献质，面朝天子，代骠信再拜；徐云虔之去南诏，骠信答拜。
English: At the height of the Western Zhou Dynasty, the Western Zhou Dynasty, at the end of the recruitment and surrender, built armaments and trained soldiers. The barbarians were shocked, so they sent Zhao Zongzheng to the North to make a pledge, face the Son of Heaven, and bow again on behalf of the Emperor; Xu Yunqian went to the Southern Zhou Dynasty, and bowed to the Emperor.

古文：其于礼不为少。
现代文：在礼节方面他们并无欠缺，宣宗皇帝收服三州七关。
English: In terms of etiquette, they did not lack, and Emperor Xuan Zong accepted seven customs from the three states.

古文：宣宗皇帝收三州七关，平江、岭以南，至大中十四年，内库赀积如山，户部延资充满，故宰相敏中领西川，库钱至三百万缗，诸道亦然。
现代文：平定江、岭以南，至大中十四年，内库物资堆积如山，户部财赋充满，前宰相敏中统辖西川，库钱蓄至三百万，其他各道亦如此。
English: To the south of the Pingding River and the Ling River, by the 14th year of high school, the materials in the warehouse were piled up like a mountain, the household wealth was full, the former Prime Minister Min Chung controlled the West River, and the warehouse money was up to three million, and the same was true for other provinces.

古文：咸通以来，蛮始叛命，再入安南、邕管，一破黔州，四盗西川，遂围庐耽，召兵东方，戍海门，天下骚动，十有五年，赋输不内京师者过半，中藏空虚，士死瘴厉，燎骨传灰，人不念家，亡命为盗，可为痛心！
现代文：咸通以来，南蛮才背叛，再入安南、邕管，一次攻破黔州，四次盗袭西川，于是围困卢耽，召兵东方，驻守海门，以致天下骚动十五年。赋税不缴纳京师的约有半数，中藏因之空虚，士兵死于瘴疠，骨灰飞扬，人不顾家，亡命为盗，实可痛心。
English: Since Hamdang, the Southern Barbarians have only betrayed, re-entered Annan and Shigang, once defeated Shanzhou, and four times raided West River, so they besieged Lutang, summoned soldiers to the East, and garrisoned Haimen, so that the world has been in turmoil for fifteen years. About half of the Beijing Division did not pay taxes, and because of the emptiness of Central Tibet, soldiers died of paralysis, ashes flew, people did not care about their homes, and their lives were stolen, which was really painful.

古文：前年留宗政等，南方无虞，及遣还，彼犹冀望。
现代文：前年留下宗政等人，南方不需担心；及至让他回去，他们仍存希望。
English: The previous year, Southern did not have to worry about the fact that they had to leave Tsuchimasa and the others behind; they still had hope that he would return.

古文：蒙法立三年，比兵不出要防，其蓄力以间我虞。
现代文：蒙法已立三年，治军不出要防，他们正蓄力以窥察我们的可乘之机。
English: It has been three years since the establishment of the Mongolian People's Republic, and there is nothing urgent to control. They are gathering strength to spy on us.

古文：今朝廷府库匮，甲兵少，牛丛有北兵七万，首尾奔冲不能救，况安南客戍单寡，涉冬寇祸可虞。
现代文：如今朝廷府库匮乏，甲少兵弱。牛丛虽有北兵七万，但南北首尾不易相救，况安南异地戍卫的兵力单薄，冬天寇乱可虑。
English: Today, the imperial treasury is in short supply, and the army is weak. Although there are 70,000 soldiers in the North, it is not easy to save the North and the South. Moreover, the strength of the guards in different places in the South is thin, and there may be chaos in the winter.

古文：诚命使者临报，纵未称臣，且伐其谋，外以縻服蛮夷，内得蜀休息也。 
现代文：如果派使者前去回报，即使未能使他称臣，也攻破了他欲侵犯的打算。此举外可以羁縻蛮夷，内可使蜀地休养生息。 
English: If you send an envoy to return the favor, even if you fail to make him a minister, you will have defeated his intention to encroach. In addition to this move, you can keep the barbarians at bay, and you can allow Shu to rest and recuperate.

古文：帝谓然，乃以宗室女为安化长公主许婚。
现代文：皇帝认为对，于是以宗室女作为安化长公主许婚。
English: The emperor thought it was right, so he married Anhua's eldest daughter.

古文：拜嗣曹王龟年宗正少卿，为云南使，大理司直徐云虔副之；内常侍刘光裕为云南内使，霍承锡副之。
现代文：派嗣曹王龟年为宗正少卿，任云南使，大理司直徐云虔为副使；内常侍刘光裕为云南内使，霍承锡为副使。
English: Zong Zheng Shaoqing, the heir of Cao Wangke, was appointed as the Yunnan envoy, and Dai Li Si Zhi Xu Yunqian as the vice-envoy; Liu Guangyu, the inner chamberlain, was the Yunnan envoy, and Huo Chengxi was the vice-envoy.

古文：及还，具言骠信诚款，以为敬瑄功，故进检校司空，赐一子官。
现代文：及至自南诏回来，盛称骠信的忠诚。皇帝因敬蠧有功，晋升为检校司空，还赐其一子官。
English: When he came back from Nanzhao, he was praised for his loyalty to Juxin. The emperor promoted him to the position of inspector of schools and gave him a subordinate post.

古文：法遣宰相赵隆眉、杨奇混、段义宗朝行在，迎公主。
现代文：法派遣宰相赵隆眉、杨奇混、段义宗到行宫朝见天子，迎接公主。
English: France dispatched Prime Ministers Zhao Longmei, Yang Qigong, and Duan Yizong to the imperial palace to meet the emperor and greet the princess.

古文：高骈自扬州上言： 三人者，南诏心腹也，宜止而鸩之，蛮可图也。 
现代文：高骈从扬州上言 ：这三人，是南诏的心腹，该把他们留下鸩杀之，蛮人就可控制了。 
English: Gao Gan said from Yangzhou, "These three are Nanzhao's henchmen. We should leave them to fight and kill, and then the barbarians can be controlled."

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：隆眉等皆死，自是谋臣尽矣，蛮益衰。
现代文：隆眉等都死后，南诏从此没有了谋臣，日渐衰微。
English: After the death of Longmei and others, Nanzhao no longer had any advisors and gradually declined.

古文：中和元年，复遣使者来迎主，献珍怪氈罽百床，帝以方议公主车服为解。
现代文：中和元年，又派使臣来迎公主，贡献珍怪及毡一百床。皇帝说正在商议公主用的车服，故而迟延。
English: In the middle of the year and in the first year of the year, he also sent an envoy to welcome the princess, contributing 100 rare and precious stones. The emperor said that he was discussing the princess's car clothes, so he delayed.

古文：后二年，又遣布燮杨奇朋友肱来迎，诏检校国子祭酒张谯为礼会五礼使，徐云虔副之，宗正少卿嗣虢王约为婚使。
现代文：二年后，又派布燮杨奇肱来迎亲，皇帝诏令检校国子祭酒张谯为礼会五礼使，徐云虔为副使，宗正少卿嗣虢王约为婚使。
English: Two years later, Yang Qichen, a clothier, was sent to welcome the relatives. The emperor issued an imperial edict to hold a school inspection of the National Children's Festival. Zhang Qichen was the ceremonial envoy, Xu Yunqian was the deputy envoy, and Zong Zheng Shaoqing Ziqian Wang was the wedding envoy.

古文：未行，而黄巢平，帝东还，乃归其使。
现代文：还未成行，黄巢乱平，皇帝东归，就先让使者归国。
English: Before the journey was completed, the Yellow Nest was flattened and the emperor returned to the East, so the envoy was allowed to return to the country first.

古文：法死，伪谥圣明文武皇帝。
现代文：法死，加谥为圣明文武皇帝。
English: According to the law of death, Jia Jiao is the Holy Emperor Mingwenwu.

古文：子舜化立，建元中兴。
现代文：其子舜化立，建年号中兴。
English: His son, Jianhua Li, was given the name Zhongxing in the founding year.

古文：遣使款黎州修好，昭宗不答。后中国乱，不复通。
现代文：派使者到黎州修好，昭宗不答，后来中国大乱，不再有往来。
English: He sent an envoy to Lizhou to patch things up, but Zhaozong did not reply. Later, China was in turmoil, and there was no more contact.

古文：先是，有时傍、矣川罗识二族，通号 八诏 。
现代文：起先，还有时傍、矣川罗识二族，通称为 八诏 。
English: In the beginning, there were two ethnic groups, the Jibo and the Yichuan Luo, commonly known as the Eight Imperial Edicts.

古文：时傍母，归义女也。
现代文：时傍的母亲是归义的女儿。
English: Shobai's mother is the daughter of a convert.

古文：其女复妻阁罗凤。
现代文：她的女儿又嫁给罗凤。
English: Her daughter also married Luo Feng.

古文：东距不述，行五日至。西北距文单，行六日至。
现代文：当初，咩罗皮一仗败，时傍迁入川州，诱收上浪人一千多人，势渐强，遭罗凤猜忌，把他们迁至白城。
English: At first, Luo Lopi was defeated in a battle, and then moved to Sichuan Province, where he enticed more than a thousand ronin, and gradually gained power. Luo Feng was suspicious and moved them to Baicheng.

古文：与赤土、堕和罗同俗。永徽中，献五色鹦鹉。扶南，在日南之南七千里，地卑洼，与环王同俗，有城郭宫室。
现代文：后来与矣川罗识到神川都督处求自立为诏，计谋泄露被杀，矣川罗识逃至神川，都督送他到罗些城。扶南，在日南之南七千里，地势低洼。与环王同习俗，有城郭宫室。
English: Later, with Ye Chuan Luo Xuan, he went to the Jinchuan governor to ask for self-reliance, but he was killed when his plan was leaked. Ye Chuan Luo Xuan fled to Jinchuan, and the governor sent him to Lozhi City. Funan, seven thousand miles south of Nichinan, is low-lying. It has the same customs as Huanwang, and has a castle palace.

古文：王姓古龙。
现代文：君王姓古龙。
English: The monarch's family name is Gu Long.

古文：居重观，栅城，楉叶以覆屋。
现代文：居于楼观内，竖栅为城，用木若叶盖屋顶。
English: It is located in the view of the building, the vertical grid is the city, and the roof is covered with wooden leaves.

古文：王出乘象。
现代文：君王出来乘象，人民肤色黑、发卷曲，裸体。
English: The king comes out riding an elephant, the people are dark-skinned, curly-haired and naked.

古文：其人黑身、鬈发，倮行，俗不为寇盗。
现代文：没有人当盗贼。田地种一年可收获三年。
English: No one is a thief. A field sown once can be harvested for three years.

古文：田一岁种，三岁获。国出刚金，状类紫石英，生水底石上，人没水取之，可以刻玉，扣以羖角，乃泮。
现代文：国内产刚金，有点像紫石英，生在水底石上，人潜入水底才能取到，可以用来刻玉，若用黑公羊角敲它，就会化掉。
English: Domestically produced corundum, a bit like purple quartz, is born on underwater rocks. People can only get it by diving to the bottom of the water. It can be used to carve jade. If you hit it with a black ram's horn, it will melt.

古文：人喜斗鸡及猪。
现代文：人民喜欢斗鸡及猪。
English: People like cockfights and pig fights.

古文：以金、珠、香为税。
现代文：以金、珠、香为赋税。
English: Gold, beads, and incense were used as taxes.

古文：治特牧城，俄为真腊所并，益南徙那弗那城。
现代文：有城叫特牧城，后来被真腊吞并，于是再向南迁到那弗那城。
English: There was a city called Temuco, which was later annexed by Genoa, and then moved south to the city of Nafona.

古文：武德、贞观时，再入朝，又献白头人二。
现代文：武德贞观时，两次入朝，又献白头人两个。
English: When Wu De Zhen Gu visited the imperial court twice, he also presented two white-headed people to the emperor.

古文：白头者，直扶南西，人皆素首，肤理如脂。居山穴，四面峭绝，人莫得至。与参半国接。
现代文：白头族，就在扶南西，所有的人都是白头发，肤如凝脂，住在山洞里，四面都是绝岩峭壁，人无法到达，与参半国相接。
English: The Paektu people, just to the west of Funan, are all white-haired, with skin like gelatin, living in caves, surrounded on all sides by sheer rock cliffs that are inaccessible to humans, and bordering on Shannan Province.

古文：真腊，一曰吉蔑，本扶南属国。
现代文：真腊，又叫吉蔑，原是扶南的属国。
English: Jinla, also known as Jizhi, was originally a vassal state of Funan.

古文：去京师二万七百里。
现代文：距京师二万零七百里。
English: It is 20,700 miles away from Beijing.

古文：东距车渠，西属骠，南濒海，北与道明接，东北抵驩州。
现代文：东接车渠，西连骠，南濒海，北与道明相接，东北抵州。
English: It is connected to the canal in the east, Lianyungang in the west, Binhai in the south, Daoming in the north, and Luzhou in the northeast.

古文：其王刹利伊金那，贞观初并扶南有其地。
现代文：其君王叫刹利伊金那。贞观初年吞并了扶南。
English: Its ruler was called Tsakhriliykhinna. In the first year, Zhenguan annexed Funan.

古文：户皆东向，坐上东。
现代文：国内房屋皆朝东，座位以东为上座。
English: Domestic houses are all east-facing, with the seat to the east being the upper seat.

古文：客至，屑槟榔、龙脑、香蛤以进。
现代文：有客来，用槟榔、龙脑、香蛤敬客。
English: When guests come, they serve them with betel nuts, tarragon, and champagne.

古文：不饮酒，比之淫。与妻饮房中，避尊属。
现代文：不饮酒，但可与妻在房中饮，避开尊长。
English: He does not drink alcohol, but he and his wife can drink in the room, avoiding the patriarch.

古文：有战象五千，良者饲以肉。
现代文：国有战象五千头，好的用肉喂养。
English: There are five thousand state-owned war elephants, which are well fed with meat.

古文：世与参半、骠通好，与环王乾陀洹数相攻。
现代文：世代与参半国、骠国通好，与环王、乾陀洹等国多次相攻。
English: For generations, it has been friendly with Shanshan Province and Yunnan Province, and has made repeated attacks on Huan Wang, Qian Dafu and other provinces.

古文：自武德至圣历，凡四来朝。
现代文：自武德到圣历年间，四次来朝。
English: He came to the DPRK four times during the period from the Martial Law to the Sacred Calendar.

古文：神龙后分为二半：北多山阜，号陆真腊半；南际海，饶陂泽，号水真腊半。
现代文：神龙以后分为两半，北半多山，称陆真腊半；南边临海，多水泽，称为水真腊半。
English: After Shenlong, it was divided into two halves. The northern half was mountainous and was called Lu Zhenla half; the southern side was close to the sea and had many lakes and rivers, and was called Shuizhenla half.

古文：水真腊，地八百里，王居婆罗提拔城。
现代文：水真腊，地方圆八百里，君王居婆罗提拔城。
English: Suizhenla, a place with a circumference of eight hundred li, the king's residence is Borobudur.

古文：陆真腊或曰文单，曰婆镂，地七百里，王号 靦屈 。
现代文：陆真腊，或叫文单、或叫婆缕，地方圆七百里，君王叫 肂屈 。
English: Lu Zhenla, or called Wenshan, or called Wanshan, has a circumference of seven hundred li, and the king is called Yingke.

古文：开元、天宝时，王子率其属二十六来朝，拜果毅都尉。
现代文：开元、天宝年间，王子率下属二十六人来朝，受任为果毅都尉。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Heian period and during the Tenpo era, twenty-six people under the leadership of the prince came to the DPRK and were appointed Captain Koga.

古文：大历中，副王婆弥及妻来朝，献驯象十一；擢婆弥试殿中监，赐名宾汉。
现代文：大历年间，副王婆弥及其妻来朝，献驯象十一头；诏令婆弥为试殿中监，赐名宾汉。
English: In the year of the great calendar, the vice-emperor Wang Bami and his wife came to the imperial court and presented eleven tamed elephants; the emperor made Bami the supervisor of the examination hall and gave him the name Binghan.

古文：是时，德宗初即位，珍禽奇兽悉纵之，蛮夷所献驯象畜苑中，元会充廷者凡三十二，悉放荆山之阳。
现代文：这时德宗初即位，珍禽奇兽全放生了，蛮夷所献的驯象畜养在苑中，元会时有三十二头充任廷卫，这时也全放到荆山之南。
English: At this time, Emperor Dezong ascended the throne for the first time, rare birds and animals were all released, and the tamed elephants donated by barbarians were kept in the garden. At the time of the founding meeting, thirty-two heads served as palace guards, and at this time they were all placed south of Mount Jing.

古文：及元和中，水真腊亦遣使入贡。
现代文：至元和中叶，水真腊也派使者来入贡。
English: At the time of Yuan and Zhongye, Shuizhenla also sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：文单西北属国曰参半，武德八年使者来。
现代文：陆真腊西北的属国叫参半，武德八年曾派使者来。
English: The vassal state in the north-west of Luzhenka is called Shanshan. Wu De sent an envoy here eight years ago.

古文：道明者，亦属国，无衣服，见衣服者共笑之。
现代文：道明，也是属国，国人无衣服，见穿衣服的就笑话他们。
English: It is clear that it is also a part of the country, the people of the country have no clothes, and when they see people wearing clothes, they laugh at them.

古文：无盐铁，以竹弩射鸟兽自给。
现代文：国内也无盐铁，用竹弓箭射杀鸟兽自给。
English: There is also no salt iron in the country, and it is self-sufficient to shoot birds and beasts with bamboo bows and arrows.

古文：诃陵，亦曰社婆，曰阇婆，在南海中。东距婆利，西堕婆登，南濒海，北真腊。
现代文：诃陵，也叫社婆，或称阇婆，位于南海中，东边是婆利，西边是堕婆登，南边濒海，北连真腊。
English: Fuling, also called Sheba, or Sheba, is located in the middle of the South China Sea. To the east is Bori, to the west is Pudong, to the south is the coast, and to the north is Lian Zhenla.

古文：木为城，虽大屋亦覆以栟榈。
现代文：以木筑城，即使是大房子也以木并榈叶做屋顶。
English: The city is built of wood, and even large houses are roofed with wood and palm leaves.

古文：象牙为床若席。
现代文：用象牙做床及席。
English: Make a bed and a seat of ivory.

古文：出玳瑁、黄白金、犀、象，国最富。
现代文：国中出产玳瑁、黄白金及犀、象等，国极富有。
English: The country is extremely rich in production of ivory, yellow and white gold, rhinoceros and elephant.

古文：有穴自涌盐。
现代文：有个洞穴能涌盐。
English: There is a cave where salt can gush out.

古文：以柳花、椰子为酒，饮之辄醉，宿昔坏。
现代文：用柳花、椰子酿酒，饮了就醉，隔夜酒就坏了。
English: Willow flowers and coconuts are used to make wine. If you drink it, you will get drunk. If you drink it overnight, the wine will go bad.

古文：有文字，知星历。
现代文：国有文字，懂天文历法。
English: State-owned characters, understand the astronomical calendar.

古文：食无匕筋。
现代文：进餐时不用匙或筷。
English: Do not use a spoon or chopsticks when eating.

古文：有毒女，与接辄苦疮，人死尸不腐。
现代文：有一种毒女，与之交合就得毒疮，死后尸体不腐烂。
English: There is a kind of poisonous woman. If you have sex with her, you will get poisonous sores. When you die, your body will not rot.

古文：王居阇婆城。
现代文：君王居住婆城。
English: The monarch resides in Patan.

古文：其祖吉延东迁于婆露伽斯城，旁小国二十八，莫不臣服。
现代文：其祖先吉延东迁到婆露伽斯城，附近小国有二十八个，没一个不臣服的。
English: His ancestors migrated from the east of Jiyan to the city of Borugas. There are twenty-eight small states in the vicinity, and none of them are not submissive.

古文：其官有三十二大夫，而大坐敢兄为最贵。
现代文：其官吏有三十二大夫，其中以大坐敢兄最为尊贵。
English: Its officials are thirty-two doctors, of whom the most distinguished is the elder brother.

古文：山上有郎卑野州，王常登以望海。
现代文：山上有郎卑野州，王常登山以望海。
English: In the mountains, there is Lophe County, and Wang often climbs to look out at the sea.

古文：夏至立八尺表，景在表南二尺四寸。
现代文：夏至日竖八尺表柱，日影在表南二尺四寸。
English: On the summer solstice, the sun is eight feet above the dial, and the sun's shadow is two feet four inches south of the dial.

古文：贞观中，与堕和罗、堕婆登皆遣使者入贡，太宗以玺诏优答。
现代文：贞观年间，与堕和罗、堕婆登皆遣使者入贡，太宗以玺诏厚待并做答礼。
English: During Zhenguan's reign, Emperor Taizong sent envoys to pay tribute to the fallen warlords and prostitutes, and Emperor Taizong treated the envoys with kindness and reciprocated.

古文：堕和罗丐良马，帝与之。
现代文：堕和罗求良马，皇帝就给了他。
English: The emperor gave him a fine horse.

古文：至上元间，国人推女子为王，号 悉莫 ，威令整肃，道不举遗。
现代文：到上元年间，国人推拥女子为王，号称 悉莫 。威令整肃，道不拾遗。
English: By the first year of the 21st century, the Chinese people had embraced the woman as the king, known as "Settimo."

古文：大食君闻之，赍金一囊置其郊，行者辄避，如是三年。
现代文：大食的国君听说后，拿了一袋黄金放在其郊外。过路人都避开不拾，一直放了三年没人碰它。
English: When the gluttonous sovereign heard about it, he took a bag of gold and placed it on the outskirts of the city. Passers-by couldn't avoid picking it up, and no one touched it for three years.

古文：太子过，以足躏金，悉莫怒，将斩之，群臣固请。
现代文：太子走过，用脚踩金子，悉莫知道后，怒欲斩太子。
English: The prince walked by, trod on the gold with his foot, and, without knowing it, angrily wanted to behead the prince.

古文：悉莫曰： 而罪实本于足，可断趾。 
现代文：群臣再三请求，悉莫说： 你的罪过起于脚，那就砍断脚趾。 
English: The courtiers pleaded with him again and again, but to no avail, saying, "If your sin is in your feet, cut off your toes."

古文：群臣复为请，乃斩指以徇。
现代文：群臣再次恳请，于是斩手指示众。
English: The courtiers once again implored him, and he immediately instructed the crowd.

古文：大食闻而畏之，不敢加兵。
现代文：大食听说后十分震惊，不敢侵略他们。
English: After hearing about the large meal, they were very shocked and did not dare to invade them.

古文：大历中，诃陵使者三至。
现代文：大历年间，诃陵使者三次入朝。
English: During the calendar year, the envoys from Fuling came to the imperial court three times.

古文：元和八年，献僧只奴四、五色鹦鹉、频伽鸟等。
现代文：元和八年，来献僧祗奴四人、五色鹦鹉、频伽鸟等。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, four monks and nuns, five-colored parrots, and starling birds were presented.

古文：宪宗拜内四门府左果毅。
现代文：宪宗委任其使者李珂内为四门府左果毅，诃内请让给其弟。
English: Kenzong appointed his emissary Li Kenei as Shimenfu Zuo Guo Yi, and asked that Kenei be given to his younger brother.

古文：贞观中，遣使以黄金函内表，并献方物。瞻博，或曰瞻婆。
现代文：直至大和年，两次朝贡。咸通年间，派使者献女子歌舞队。瞻博，或叫瞻婆。
English: Until the year of Yamato, there were two tributes to the emperor. During the Hamitsu era, an envoy was sent to present a women's song and dance team. Junbo, or Junba.

古文：北距兢伽河。
现代文：北靠兢伽河。
English: It is bordered to the north by the Jingga River.

古文：显庆中贡方物。
现代文：国内有很多野象成群地行动。
English: There are many wild elephants in the country that move in herds.

古文：室利佛逝，一曰尸利佛誓。
现代文：显庆年中，与婆岸、干支弗、舍跋若、磨腊四国一同派使者入朝。室利佛逝，又叫尸利佛誓。
English: In the middle of the year of the festival, he sent an envoy to the imperial court together with his mother-in-law, Gan Shifu, Shebara Ryo, and Mara Shikoku. Murari Buddha passed away, also known as the corpse of Li Buddha.

古文：过军徒弄山二千里，地东西千里，南北四千里而远。
现代文：越过军徒弄山二千里。幅员东西有一千里，南北有四千多里。
English: It is over two thousand miles from the foot of the mountain, one thousand miles from east to west, and more than four thousand miles from north to south.

古文：有城十四，以二国分总。西曰郎婆露斯。
现代文：有城十四座，以两国分统，西部称为郎婆露斯。
English: There are fourteen cities, divided into two countries, the western part is called Langba Luce.

古文：多金、汞砂、龙脑。
现代文：国内多金、汞砂、龙脑。
English: There is a lot of domestic gold, mercury sand, and tarragon.

古文：夏至立八尺表，影在表南二尺五寸。
现代文：夏至日竖八尺表柱，日影在表南二尺五寸。
English: On the summer solstice, the sun is eight feet above the dial, and the sun's shadow is two feet and five inches south of the dial.

古文：国多男子。
现代文：国内多男子。
English: More men than women in the country.

古文：有橐它，豹文而犀角，以乘且耕，名曰它牛豹。
现代文：有一种骆驼，有豹的花纹，犀牛的角，可以乘坐也可耕田，叫它驼牛豹。
English: There is a kind of camel with a leopard pattern and rhinoceros horn, which can be ridden and can also be used for farming. It is called camel cow leopard.

古文：又有兽类野豕，角如山羊，名曰雩，肉味美，以馈膳。
现代文：又有一种兽，样子像野猪，角像山羊，名叫雩，肉味美，用以做餐。
English: And there was another beast, which had the appearance of a wild boar, and the horns of which were like those of a goat, which was called a wild ass, and it was used for food: and the meat of it was choice.

古文：其王号 曷蜜多 。
现代文：君王称 曷蜜多 。
English: The king said, "There is more than enough honey."

古文：咸亨至开元间，数遣使者朝，表为边吏侵掠，有诏广州慰抚。
现代文：咸亨到开元间，多次派使者入朝，上表称被边吏侵掠。皇帝诏令广州派人去慰抚。
English: When Hamhung reached the beginning of the 1st century, he repeatedly sent envoys to the imperial court, and the above table says that he was plundered by border officials. The emperor ordered Guangzhou to send someone to comfort him.

古文：商贾往来所凑集，俗与堕罗钵底同。
现代文：皇帝授使者为折冲，任其君王为左威卫大将军，赐给紫袍、金钿带。
English: The emperor gave the envoy to Fuchong, appointed General Zuo Wei Wei as his sovereign, and gave him a purple robe and a gold sash.

古文：岁乘舶至广州，州必以闻。骠，古硃波也，自号突罗硃，阇婆国人曰徒里拙。
现代文：后来其王派儿子入朝贡献，诏命宴于曲江，宰相与之会面，册封为宾义王，委任为右金吾卫大将军，然后送他回国。骠国，就是古代的朱波，自称 突罗朱 ，婆国人叫他们为徒里拙。
English: Later, the king sent his son to the imperial court to make a contribution, the emperor ordered a banquet to be held in Qujiang, the prime minister met with him, he was awarded the title of King Binyi, he was appointed as the right King Wuwei general, and then he was sent back to his country.

古文：在永昌南二千里，去京师万四千里。
现代文：位于永昌南二千里，距京师一万四千里。
English: It is located 2,000 miles south of Yongchang and 14,000 miles from Beijing.

古文：东陆真腊，西接东天竺，西南堕和罗，南属海，北南诏。
现代文：东临陆真腊，西接东天竺，西南连堕和罗，南滨海，北挨南诏。
English: It is bordered to the east by Luzhenka, to the west by East Tianyao, to the southwest by Lianhe and Luo, to the south by Binhai, and to the north by Nanzhao.

古文：地长三千里，广五千里，东北袤长，属羊苴芋城。
现代文：地长三千里，宽五千里，东北广而长，属羊苴肅城。
English: Three thousand li in length, five thousand li in width, wide and long in the northeast, it belongs to the city of Yangshuo.

古文：凡部落二百九十八，以名见者三十二：曰万公，曰充惹，曰罗君潜，曰弥绰，曰道双，曰道甕，曰道勿，曰夜半，曰不恶夺，曰莫音，曰伽龙睒，曰阿梨吉，曰阿梨阇，曰阿梨忙，曰达磨，曰求潘，曰僧塔，曰提梨郎，曰望腾，曰担泊，曰禄乌，曰乏毛，曰僧迦，曰提追，曰阿末逻，曰逝越，曰腾陵，曰欧咩，曰砖罗婆提，曰禄羽，曰陋蛮，曰磨地勃。
现代文：城镇有九个：道林王、悉利移、三陀、弥诺道立、突、帝偈、达梨谋、乾唐、末浦。部落有二百九十八个，知名的有三十二个，万公、充惹、罗君潜、弥绰、道双、道瓮、道勿、夜半、不恶夺、莫音、伽龙目炎、阿梨吉、阿梨、阿梨忙、达磨、求潘、僧塔、提梨郎、望腾、扌詹泊、禄乌、乏毛、僧伽、提追、阿末逻、逝越、腾陵、欧咩、砖罗婆提、禄羽、陋蛮、磨地勃。
English: There are nine towns: Dorin Wang, Siliye, Sanda, Mino Dorit, Tu, Dige, Darimot, Qiantang, and Matsuura. There are 298 tribes and 32 famous ones, including Wankong, Chengya, Luo Junqian, Yachao, Daoshuang, Daozhuang, Daubei, Yuanzhong, Moin, Garonmeyan, Arijie, Arizhe, Arizhe, Dama, Kuipan, Sota, Tirirang, Banteng, Zhanpo, Luwu, Baogao, Sangha, Tiwei, Amuroo, Yue

古文：繇弥臣至坤朗，又有小昆仑部，王名茫悉越，俗与弥臣同。
现代文：由弥臣到坤朗，又有小昆仑部，君王名范悉越，习俗与弥臣同。
English: From Misen to Kunlun, there is also a small Kunlun section, the king's name Fan is more familiar, and the custom is the same as Misen.

古文：繇坤朗至禄羽，有大昆仑王国，王名思利泊婆难多珊那。
现代文：由坤朗到禄羽，有大昆仑王国，君王名思利泊婆难多珊那。
English: From Kunlun to Luoyang, there is a great Kunlun kingdom, and the king's name is Sili Po-ba.

古文：川原大于弥臣。
现代文：其川原大于弥臣。
English: His Kawahara is greater than his Yatomi.

古文：繇昆仑小王所居，半日行至磨地勃栅，海行五月至佛代国。
现代文：由昆仑小王所居，走半天可到磨地勃栅，海行五个月可到佛代国。
English: From Kunlun Xiao Wang's residence, it takes half a day to go to Moji Bogao, and five months by sea to go to Buddha's Country.

古文：有江，支流三百六十。
现代文：其国有江，支流三百六十。
English: It has 360 rivers and tributaries.

古文：其王名思利些弥他。
现代文：其君王名思利些弥他。
English: The name of its king, Sili, comes from him.

古文：有川名思利毘离芮。
现代文：还有川名思利毗离芮。
English: There is also Kawana Sili, which is adjacent to Iriomote.

古文：土多异香。
现代文：土有特殊的香味。
English: The soil has a special aroma.

古文：北有市，诸国估舶所凑，越海即阇婆也。
现代文：北边有集市，是各国商船凑集而成，越海就是婆了。
English: There is a market on the north side, which is made up of merchant ships from all over the world. Crossing the sea is a breeze.

古文：十五日行，逾二大山，一曰正迷，一曰射鞮，有国，其王名思利摩诃罗阇，俗与佛代同。
现代文：再走十五天，翻越两座大山：正迷、射，有个小国，君王名思利摩诃罗，习俗与佛代同。
English: Another fifteen days of walking, climbing over two large mountains: Zhengfan and Ya, there is a small country, the king's name is Sili Magoro, and the customs are the same as those of the Buddha era.

古文：经多茸补逻川至阇婆，八日行至婆贿伽庐，国土热，衢路植椰子、槟榔，仰不见日。
现代文：经过多茸补逻川到婆，走八天可到婆贿伽卢，该国土热性，大道上都种椰子、槟榔，仰头看不见太阳。
English: After crossing the Tochiku-Shirogawa River, it takes eight days to get to Bainigaru. The country is hot and humid, with coconut and betel nut trees on the main roads. You can't see the sun when you look up.

古文：王居以金为甓，厨覆银瓦，爨香木，堂饰明珠。
现代文：君王的居所以金为圆瓦，厨房也盖银瓦，烧饭燃香木，堂上用明珠装饰。
English: The residence of the monarch is made of round gold tiles, the kitchen is also covered with silver tiles, the cooking is done with incense wood, and the hall is decorated with pearls.

古文：有二池，以金为堤，舟楫皆饰金宝。
现代文：有两个池子，用金做堤岸，船及桨楫都用金银珠宝装饰。
English: There are two pools, the banks of which are made of gold, and the boats and oars are decorated with gold and silver jewelry.

古文：骠王姓困没长，名摩罗惹。其相名曰摩诃思那。
现代文：骠王姓困没长，名摩罗惹，其相名摩诃思那。
English: Shao Wang's family name was Duifeng, his given name was Moro Jia, and his photo name was Mao Sina.

古文：王出，舆以金绳床，远则乘象。嫔史数百人。青甓为圆城，周百六十里，有十二门，四隅作浮图，民皆居中，铅锡为瓦，荔支为材。
现代文：王出行，以金绳床做车，路远则乘象，有嫔妃随从等几百人，用青砖砌圆城，周长一百六十里，有十二门，四角均建佛塔，人民住在城中，用铅、锡做瓦，荔木为材。
English: When the king travels, he uses a golden rope bed to make a car, and when he travels far, he uses an elephant. He is accompanied by hundreds of attendants, and uses blue bricks to build a round city with a circumference of one hundred and sixty miles, twelve gates, and pagodas at all four corners. The people live in the city, using lead and tin to make tiles, and lychee wood as a material.

古文：俗恶杀。拜以手抱臂稽颡为恭。
现代文：民俗厌恶杀生，礼节中用手抱臂磕头为表恭。
English: Folk customs abhor the killing of living beings. In etiquette, it is polite to hold hands and bow one's head as a sign of respect.

古文：明天文，喜佛法。
现代文：懂得天文，喜欢佛法。
English: Knows astronomy, likes Buddhism.

古文：有百寺，琉璃为甓，错以金银，丹彩紫鑛涂地，覆以锦罽，王居亦如之。
现代文：有寺庙百座，用琉璃做圆瓦，以金银镶嵌，用丹彩紫矿涂地，再铺锦毡。王的居处也不过这样。
English: There are hundreds of temples, with glazed round tiles, inlaid with gold and silver, coated with Tanzai purple ore, and then covered with brocade. The king's residence is just like this.

古文：民七岁祝发止寺，至二十有不达其法，复为民。
现代文：人民七岁时剃发到寺庙里去学习，直到二十岁，如果仍不通达佛法的就再当老百姓。
English: When people are seven years old, they are sent to the temple to study until they are twenty years old, and if they still do not understand Buddhism, they will be ordinary people again.

古文：衣用白氎、朝霞，以蚕帛伤生不敢衣。戴金花冠、翠冒，络以杂珠。
现代文：制衣用白叠毛、朝霞。丝绸因要杀伤蚕的性命所以不穿，戴金花冠或翠帽，以杂色珠子串成璎珞做装饰。
English: White pile hair and morning glory are used for making clothes. Silk is not worn because it is necessary to kill silkworms, and a golden crown or a green hat is worn, decorated with multi-colored beads strung into a cocoon.

古文：王宫设金银二钟，寇至，焚香之，以占吉凶。
现代文：王宫中设金银两口钟，有敌人来，焚香击钟祝祷以卜吉凶。
English: In the royal palace, there are two bells made of gold and silver. When enemies come, they burn incense, strike the bells and pray for good luck.

古文：有巨白象，高百尺，讼者焚香跽象前，自思是非而退。
现代文：有巨大白象，身高百尺。如有诉讼的，就焚香跪在象前，自己检查是非后退去。
English: If there is a lawsuit, burn incense, kneel in front of the elephant, examine the rights and wrongs, and retreat.

古文：有灾疫，王亦焚香对象跽，自咎。
现代文：遇有灾疫，王也焚香对象跪拜自责。
English: In the event of a plague, the king would also burn incense to make the victims kneel and blame themselves.

古文：无桎梏，有罪者束五竹捶背，重者五、轻三，杀人则死。
现代文：国内不设桎梏，如有犯罪的就将五支竹子束在一起打脊背，重罪打五下，轻罪打三下，如犯杀人罪则要处死。
English: There are no shackles in the country. If there is a crime, they will tie five pieces of bamboo together and hit the spine, five strokes for felonies, three strokes for misdemeanors, and if they commit murder, they will be put to death.

古文：土宜菽、粟、稻、梁，蔗大若胫，无麻、麦。
现代文：土壤适宜种豆、粟、稻、粱，甘蔗粗如小腿，没有麻和麦。
English: The soil is suitable for growing beans, millet, rice and alfalfa. Sugar cane is as thick as a calf, and there is no hemp or wheat.

古文：以金银为钱，形如半月，号登伽佗，亦曰足弹陀。
现代文：用金银制钱，如半月形，称之为登伽佗，也叫足弹佗。
English: Using gold and silver to make money, such as the half-moon shape, it is called Dengga zhuang, also known as the foot spring zhuang.

古文：无膏油，以蜡杂香代炷。
现代文：国内不产膏油，用蜡夹杂香代替灯盏。
English: There is no domestic production of linseed oil, so the lanterns are replaced with wax and incense.

古文：与诸蛮市，以江猪、白氎、琉璃罂缶相易。
现代文：与别的蛮国交易时用江猪、白叠毛、琉璃罐钵交换。
English: When trading with other barbarian countries, they used to exchange river pigs, white wool, and glazed pottery.

古文：妇人当顶作高髻，饰银珠琲，衣青娑裙，披罗段；行持扇，贵家者傍至五六。
现代文：妇女在头顶上盘高髻，饰以银及珠宝，穿青娑裙，肩披罗缎。行走时手中持扇，尊贵人家则必五六人同行。
English: Women wear high wreaths on top of their heads, decorated with silver and jewels, wear lilac skirts, and drape shawls over their shoulders. When walking, they hold a fan in their hands. Five or six dignitaries must accompany them.

古文：近城有沙山不毛，地亦与波斯、婆罗门接，距西舍利城二十日行。
现代文：近城有沙山，不生草木，地域也与波斯、婆罗门相接，距西舍利城有二十天的路程。
English: Near the city there are sand hills, no vegetation, the area is also connected to Persia and Brahman, and it is a twenty-day journey from the West Sheri city.

古文：西舍利者，中天竺也。
现代文：西舍利，就是中天竺。
English: Xisheli, that is, Zhongtianbei.

古文：南诏以兵强地接，常羁制之。
现代文：南诏因为土地相连，又兵力强盛，所以常常控制他们。
English: Nanzhao, because of the land connection and the strength of the army, often controlled them.

古文：贞元中，王雍羌闻南诏归唐，有内附心，异牟寻遣使杨加明诣剑南西川节度使韦皋请献夷中歌曲，且令骠国进乐人。
现代文：贞元年间，骠王雍羌听说南诏附唐廷，也有内附之心，南诏王异牟寻派使者杨加明到剑南西川节度使韦皋处献夷中歌曲，同时令骠国献乐人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, King Yongzheng heard that Nanzhao had annexed the Tang Dynasty, and he also had a heart of annexation. Nanzhao King Yimuhang sent an envoy, Yang Kaming, to the Nishikawa Festival in southern Jian Province to make Wei Xuan present Chinese songs, and at the same time, he ordered the country to present musicians.

古文：于是皋作《南诏奉圣乐》，用正律黄钟之均。
现代文：于是韦皋做《南诏奉圣乐》，用正律黄锤之韵，曲中宫、徵一变，象征西南归顺。
English: Therefore, Wei Wei composed "Nanzhao Bong Sheng Le," using the rhyme of the regular yellow hammer, the palace in the middle of the song, to symbolize a change, symbolizing the southwest's surrender.

古文：宫、徵一变，象西南顺也；角、羽终变，象戎夷革心也。舞六成，工六十四人，赞引二人，序曲二十八叠，舞 南诏奉圣乐 字。
现代文：曲终时，角、羽变化，象征戎夷革心。舞共六段，乐工六十四人，赞引二人，序曲二十八叠，舞 南诏奉圣乐 等字。舞人十六，手执雉羽，四人一排。
English: At the end of the piece, the horns and feathers change, symbolizing the revolutionary spirit of the military. There are six sections of dance, 64 musicians, two praising, 28 stacks of overture, Nanzhao dance with sacred music and other words. There are 16 dancers, holding feathers in their hands, four in a row.

古文：舞人十六，执羽翟，以四为列。舞 南 字，歌《圣主无为化》；舞 诏 字，歌《南诏朝天乐》；舞 奉 字，歌《海宇修文化》；舞 圣 字，歌《雨露覃无外》；舞 乐 字，歌《辟土丁零塞》。
现代文：舞 南 字时，唱《圣主无为化》；舞 诏 字时，唱《南诏朝天乐》；舞 奉 字时，唱《海宇修文化》；舞 圣 字时，唱《雨露覃无外》；舞 乐 字时，唱《癖土丁零塞》。歌全都一章三叠。
English: When dancing Nan Zi, sing "Holy Lord of Inaction"; when dancing Zi Zi, sing "Nanzhao Morning Music"; when dancing Bong Zi, sing "Hai Yu Xiu Culture"; when dancing Holy Zi, sing "Raindrops Are Everywhere"; when dancing Zi Zi, sing "Habitual Soil Ding Zi Ce." The songs are all one chapter and three folds.

古文：皆一章三叠而成。舞者初定，执羽，箫、鼓等奏散序一叠，次奏第二叠，四行，赞引以序入。
现代文：舞者做好准备，持雉羽，箫、鼓等奏散序一叠，接奏第二叠，舞者排成四行，赞引按序而入。
English: Dancers get ready, holding koto feathers, gongs, drums, etc. and play a loose sequence, then a second sequence. Dancers line up in four rows, and the zangqian enters in order.

古文：将终，雷鼓作于四隅，舞者皆拜，金声作而起，执羽稽首，以象朝觐。
现代文：舞将终，四角擂响雷鼓，舞者都跪拜，金声响时起身，拿着羽叩头，象征朝觐。
English: At the end of the dance, the four-horned gong sounds the thunder drum, the dancers all kneel, and when the golden sound is heard, they stand up and bow their heads with feathers, symbolizing the Hajj.

古文：每拜跪，节以钲鼓。
现代文：每次跪拜，都用钲鼓奏出节拍。
English: Every time they kneel, they beat out a rhythm with gongs and drums.

古文：次奏拍序一叠，舞者分左右蹈舞，每四拍，揖羽稽首，拍终，舞者拜，复奏一叠，蹈舞抃揖，以合 南 字。
现代文：接着奏拍序一叠，舞者分左右而舞，每四拍就合掌执羽叩头，拍终，舞者跪拜。再奏一叠，踏舞拍子而揖，以合 南 字。
English: Next, a sequence of beats is played, the dancers dance around and around, clapping their hands and bowing their heads every four beats, and at the end of the beat, the dancers kneel. Then a set is played, the dance beats are danced, and the word "Nam" is written.

古文：字成遍终，舞者北面跪歌，导以丝竹。
现代文：字成舞终，舞者面朝北跪而歌，有丝竹导引。
English: At the end of the dance, the dancers kneel facing north and sing, guided by silk bamboo.

古文：歌已，俯伏，钲作，复揖舞。
现代文：歌毕，俯伏，钲响，再揖而舞。
English: The song ends, prostrations are made, a gong sounds, and then a dance ensues.

古文：馀字皆如之，唯 圣 字词末皆恭揖，以明奉圣。
现代文：其余的字都这样边舞边唱，只有 圣 字词末都要恭揖，表示奉圣。
English: The rest of the syllables are danced and sung in this way, except for the holy syllables, which are all given a respectful bow at the end to signify their consecration.

古文：每一字，曲三叠，名为五成。
现代文：每一字都有三叠曲子，称为五成。
English: Each character has a triple crescendo, known as the "fifty percent."

古文：次急奏一叠，四十八人分行罄折，象将臣御边也。
现代文：然后急奏一叠，四十八人分行弯腰，象征将士保卫边疆。
English: Then a rapid burst of music is played, and the forty-eight members of the detachment bend down, symbolizing the soldiers defending the frontier.

古文：字舞毕，舞者十六人为四列，又舞《辟四门》之舞。遽舞入遍两叠，与鼓吹合节，进舞三，退舞三，以象三才、三统。
现代文：各字舞毕，舞者十六人分成四列，又跳《辟四门》之舞，迅速旋舞两叠，与鼓吹合拍，进舞三，退舞三，象征天、地、人三才及天、地、人三统。
English: After each word was danced, the sixteen dancers were divided into four lines, and danced the dance of the "four doors," quickly twirling two stacks, in time with the drumming, entering the dance three times, and leaving the dance three times, symbolizing heaven, earth, and man, as well as heaven, earth, and man.

古文：舞终，皆稽首逡巡。
现代文：舞毕，都叩头踏碎步。
English: At the end of the dance, everyone bowed their heads and took a few steps.

古文：又一人舞《亿万寿》之舞，歌《天南滇越俗》四章，歌舞七叠六成而终。
现代文：又一人舞《亿万寿》之舞，唱《天南滇越俗》歌四章，歌舞七叠六段而终。
English: Another person danced the dance of "Billions of Years of Life" and sang the song of "Tiannan Zhe Yue Zhuang" with four chapters, and the song and dance ended with seven folds and six sections.

古文：七者，火之成数，象天子南面生成之恩。六者，坤数，象西南向化。
现代文： 七 ，是火的成数，象征天子南面生成之恩 ；六 ，是顺数，象征西南向化。
English: Seven is the number of fire, symbolizing the grace of the south-facing birth of the Son of Heaven; six is a sequential number, symbolizing the southwest direction.

古文：凡乐三十，工百九十六人，分四部：一、龟兹部，二、大鼓部，三、胡部，四、军乐部。
现代文：乐器共三十种，乐工一百九十六人，分为四部：龟兹部、大鼓部、胡部、军乐部。
English: There are a total of 30 musical instruments and 196 musicians. It is divided into four parts: the gyrfalcon section, the large drum section, the goose section and the military club.

古文：龟兹部，有羯鼓、揩鼓、腰鼓、鸡娄鼓、短笛、大小觱篥、拍板，皆八；长短箫、横笛、方响、大铜钹、贝，皆四。
现代文：龟兹部有羯鼓、揩鼓、腰鼓、鸡娄鼓、短笛、大小篥、拍板，每样八件；长短箫、横笛、方响、大铜钹、贝，每样四件。
English: There are eight pieces of cymbals, gongs, waist drums, chicken gongs, piccolos, large and small gongs, and clappers; four pieces of long and short gongs, flute, square bell, large bronze gong, and shell.

古文：凡工八十八人，分四列，属舞筵四隅，以合节鼓。
现代文：乐工共八十八人，分成四列，居舞筵的四角，用以合节鼓。
English: A total of eighty-eight musicians, divided into four rows, live in the four corners of the dance floor, and are used to play the koto.

古文：大鼓部，以四为列，凡二十四，居龟兹部前。
现代文：大鼓部，四个一列，共二十四个，居龟兹部前。
English: The large drum section, four in a row, a total of twenty-four, is in front of the turtle section.

古文：胡部，有筝、大小箜篌、五弦琵琶、笙、横笛、短笛、拍板，皆八；大小觱篥，皆四。
现代文：胡部，有筝、大小箜篌、五弦琵琶、笙、横笛、短笛、拍板，每样八件；大小篥，每样四件。
English: For the mouth, there are eight pieces of kite, large and small gong, five-stringed lute, gong, flute, piccolo, and clapper, and four pieces of large and small gong.

古文：工七十二人，分四列，属舞筵之隅，以导歌咏。
现代文：乐工七十二人，分四列，也在舞筵四角，用以导歌咏。
English: Seventy-two musicians, divided into four rows, also dance at the four corners of the podium, which is used to guide the singers.

古文：军乐部，金饶、金鐸，皆二；鼓、金钲，皆四。
现代文：军乐部，有金铙、金铎每样两件；肈鼓、金钲，每样四件。
English: Ministry of War, there are two pieces of gold cymbals and gold cymbals each; cymbals and gold cymbals, four pieces each.

古文：钲、鼓，金饰盖，垂流苏。
现代文：钲、鼓都用金饰盖，垂有流苏。
English: The cymbals and drums are covered with gold, with tassels hanging from the rim.

古文：工十二人，服南诏服，立《壁四门》舞筵四隅，节拜合乐。
现代文：乐工十二人，穿南诏服装，立在《辟四门》舞筵四角，指挥跪拜合拍合乐。
English: Twelve musicians, dressed in Nanzhao costumes, stand at the four corners of the dance hall in "Four Doors" and conduct the kneeling, clapping and music.

古文：又十六人，画半臂，执鼓，四人为列。
现代文：又十六人，半条手臂绘有图形，执肈鼓，四人一列。
English: Sixteen others, half of their arms painted with images, held gongs and drums, four abreast.

古文：舞人服南诏衣、绛裙襦、黑头囊、金佉苴、画皮鞾革，首饰袜额，冠金宝花鬘，襦上复加画半臂。
现代文：舞人穿南诏上衣，绛色裙襦，黑头囊，金亻去苴，花皮靴，头上饰以抹额，戴金宝花髟曼。
English: Dancers wear Nan Zhao jackets, navy blue skirts, black head wraps, gold hoops, flowered leather shoes, and their heads are decorated with a plastered forehead. They also wear gold flower brooches.

古文：执羽翟舞，俯伏，以象朝拜；裙襦画鸟兽草木，文以八彩杂华，以象庶物咸遂；羽葆四垂，以象天无不覆；正方布位，以象地无不载；分四列，以象四气；舞为五字，以象五行；秉羽翟，以象文德；节鼓，以象号令远布；振以鐸，明采诗之义；用龟兹等乐，以象远夷悦服。
现代文：襦上再加画半条手臂，执雉尾舞，俯伏，象征朝拜；裙襦上画鸟兽草木，饰以八彩杂花，象征万物繁茂；羽盖四垂，象征天无不覆；以正方形分布位置，象征地无不载；分成四列，象征四气；舞共五字，象征五行；执雉尾，象征文德；击鼓有节，象征号令远传；振铎，明示采诗之义；用龟兹等的音乐，象征远夷心悦诚服。
English: In addition, half an arm is drawn on the yoke, holding the yoke dance, bowing down, symbolizing worship; birds, animals and plants are drawn on the skirt yoke, decorated with eight-colored flowers, symbolizing the prosperity of all things; the feather cover is hanging down, symbolizing the heavens; with a square distribution position, symbolically carrying everything; divided into four columns, symbolizing the four airs; the dance is a total of five words, symbolizing the five elements; holding the yoke, symbolizing virtue; drumming has a section, symbolizing the call to pass on; vibrating, expressing the meaning of poetry; with music such as turtle, symbolizing

古文：钲鼓则古者振旅献捷之乐也。黄钟，君声，配运为土，明土德常盛。
现代文：钲鼓是古代征战报捷之乐。黄钟，是君主之声，配运以土，明示土德常盛。
English: The gong and drum are the music of ancient wars and victory. The yellow bell is the voice of the monarch, matched with the soil, indicating the prosperity of the soil and virtue.

古文：黄钟得《乾》初九，自为其宫，则林钟四律以正声应之，象大君南面提天统于上，乾道明也。
现代文：黄钟如得乾卦初九，则自为其宫，林钟四律以正声来应和，象征大君面南提天统于上，乾道昭明。
English: If the Yellow Bell gets the first nine points of the Qian Gua, it will be its own palace, and the Four Bells of the Forest will respond with positive tones, symbolizing that the emperor faces south, the heavens are unified above, and the dry way is clear.

古文：林钟得《坤》初六，其位西南，西南感至化于下，坤体顺也。
现代文：林钟如得坤卦初六，其位西南，西南感教化达于下，坤体表顺。
English: According to Lin Zhong, when he was in the sixth grade of elementary school, he was in the southwest, and the influence of the southwest made him reach the bottom, and his body was in good shape.

古文：太蔟得《乾》九二，是为人统，天地正而三才通，故次应以太蔟。
现代文：太蔟如得乾卦九二，就是人统，天地正而三才通，故依序以太蔟应和。
English: If you get to the 92nd chapter of the Chinese Zodiac, it means that humanity is unified, heaven and earth are in the right direction, and only three things can pass through. Therefore, in order, the ethereal forces should be harmonized.

古文：三才既通，南吕复以羽声应之。
现代文：三才既通，南吕再以羽声相应。
English: It was only after the third time that they were able to communicate, and Nan Lv then responded with a feather sound.

古文：南吕，酉，西方金也；羽，北方水也。
现代文：南吕，是酉，表西方、金；羽，北方、水。
English: South Lu, is the dragonfly, the table west, gold; feather, north, water.

古文：金、水悦而应乎时，以象西戎、北狄悦服。
现代文：金水谐和而时顺，象征西戎、北狄心悦诚服。
English: Gold and water are harmonious and timely, symbolizing Xi'erong and Beidichun.

古文：然后姑洗以角音终之。
现代文：最后姑洗以角音结束。
English: The final purification ends with a horn sound.

古文：姑，故也；洗，濯也。以象南诏背吐蕃归化，洗过日新。
现代文：姑，故也；洗，濯也，象征南诏背弃吐蕃而归顺，改过自新。
English: Therefore, the mother-in-law, washing, and washing also symbolize that Nanzhao renounced Tujia, surrendered, and reformed.

古文：皋以五宫异用，独唱殊音，复述《五均谱》，分金石之节奏：
现代文：韦皋因五宫异用，独唱殊音，再做《五均谱》，分别金石的节奏。
English: Because of the different use of the Five Palaces, Wei Zhen sang the special notes alone, and then did the "Five Equal Temperaments," respectively, the rhythm of the precious stones.

古文：一曰黄钟，宫之宫，军士歌《奉圣乐》者用之。
现代文：一、黄钟，是宫之宫，军士唱《奏圣乐》的人用。
English: 1. The yellow bell is the palace of the palace, used by the sergeant to sing "playing sacred music."

古文：舞人服南诏衣，秉翟俯伏拜抃，合 南诏奉圣乐 五字，倡词五，舞人乃易南方朝天之服，绛色，七节襦袖，节有青礻票排衿，以象鸟翼。
现代文：舞蹈者穿南诏衣，执雉尾俯伏跪拜击掌，合 南诏奉圣乐 五字，唱词五段，舞蹈者换南方朝天之服装，绛色，七节襦袖，每段有青色边口，有排扣襟，象征鸟翼。
English: Dancers wear Nan Zhaoji, hold the appendix, kneel down, kneel and high-five, sing the five words of Nan Zhaoji, sing the five verses of the hymn, and the dancers change into the clothing of Nan Nan Chaotian, navy blue, seven-knot cuffed sleeves, each section has a blue border, with a row of button collars, symbolizing bird wings.

古文：乐用龟兹、胡部，金钲、鼓、铙、贝、大鼓。
现代文：用龟兹乐。胡部，乐器用金钲、肈铙、饶、贝、大鼓。
English: Music is played with a gyrfalcon, a goose, and instruments such as the golden gong, gong, rao, gong, and large drum.

古文：二曰太蔟，商之宫，女子歌《奉圣乐》者用之。
现代文：二、太蔟，是商之宫，女子唱《奉圣乐》的人用。
English: Second, Taiko is a merchant's palace, used by women to sing "Bong Sheng Le."

古文：合以管弦。
现代文：合以管弦。
English: Combined with an orchestra.

古文：若奏庭下，则独舞一曲。
现代文：若在庭下奏乐，则独舞一曲。
English: If music is played in the courtyard, a solo dance is performed.

古文：乐用龟兹、鼓、笛各四部，与胡部等合作。
现代文：用龟兹乐，鼓、笛各四部，与胡部等合作。
English: It is performed to the music of the turtle, with four parts each of drums and flute, in collaboration with the horn section.

古文：琵琶、笙、箜篌，皆八；大小觱篥、筝、弦、五弦琵琶、长笛、短笛、方响，各四。
现代文：琵琶、笙、箜篌，每样八件；大小篥、筝、弦、五弦琵琶、长笛、短笛、方响，每样四件。
English: Pipa, gong, and cymbal, eight pieces each; large and small gongs, koto, strings, five-stringed pipa, flute, piccolo, and square bell, four pieces each.

古文：居龟兹部前。次贝一人，大鼓十二分左右，馀皆坐奏。
现代文：位于龟兹部前，其他贝一人、大鼓十二人分左右而立，其他人均坐着奏乐。
English: It is located in front of the harpsichord section. The other bells stand around one person and the large drums around twelve people, and the others all sit and play.

古文：三曰姑洗，角之宫，应古律林钟为徵宫，女子歌《奉圣乐》者用之。
现代文：三、姑洗，是角之宫，应古律林钟为徵宫，女子唱《奉圣乐》的人用。
English: Third, Guba is the palace of the horns. It is used by the women who sing "Bong Sheng Le" and by the women who sing "Bong Sheng Le" in response to the call of the bell in the ancient forest.

古文：舞者六十四人，饰罗彩襦袖，间以八采，曳云花履，首饰双凤、八卦、彩云、花鬘，执羽为拜抃之节。
现代文：舞蹈者六十四人，饰以罗彩襦袖，以八彩相间，拖云花鞋，头上饰有双凤、八卦、彩云、花髟曼，执鸟羽做跪拜击掌的节拍。
English: Sixty-four dancers, adorned with red and white embroidered sleeves, with eight colors, dragging cloud-shaped shoes, with double phoenixes, eight signs, colored clouds, and flowers on their heads, holding bird feathers to make the beat of kneeling and high-fiving.

古文：以林钟当地统，象岁功备、万物成也。
现代文：以林钟当地统，象征一年的劳作完成，万物皆成。
English: According to Lin, the bell symbolizes the completion of a year's work, and everything is accomplished.

古文：双凤，明律吕之和也。八卦，明还相为用也。彩云，象气也。花鬘，象冠也。
现代文：双凤，明示律吕之和，八卦，明示还相为用；彩云，象征气，花髟曼，象征帽子。
English: Double phoenix, symbolizing the law of harmony, eight signs, symbolizing the same; colorful clouds, symbolizing the wind, flowers, symbolizing the hat.

古文：合 奉圣乐 三字，唱词三，表天下怀圣也。
现代文：合 奉圣乐 三字，唱词三段，表示天下归顺。
English: Three syllables and three verses of the hymn are sung together, signifying the world's submission.

古文：小女子字舞，则碧色襦袖，象角音主木；首饰巽卦，应姑洗之气；以六人略后，象六合一心也。
现代文：小女子按字舞时，用碧色襦袖，象征角音，主木；头上饰巽卦，应和姑洗之气；六人略后，象征天下六合均同一心。
English: When a little girl dances according to the characters, she wears a blue satin sleeve, symbolizing the horn sound, the main wood; her head is decorated with a gourd, which should be the spirit of purification; after the six people are omitted, it symbolizes that the six nations of the world are all of one mind.

古文：乐用龟兹、胡部，其钲、、铙、鐸，皆覆以彩盖，饰以花趺，上陈锦绮，垂流苏。
现代文：用龟兹乐、胡部，钲、肈、铙、铎，都盖着彩盖，装饰着花座，上铺锦绮，垂流苏。
English: With tortoise and hare, beak, beak, beak, beak, beak, beak, all covered with colored lids, decorated with flower seats, topped with brocade, trailing tassels.

古文：按《瑞图》曰： 王者有道，则仪凤在鼓。 故羽葆鼓栖以凤凰，钲栖孔雀，铙、鐸集以翔鹭，钲、顶足又饰南方鸟兽，明泽及飞走翔伏。
现代文：按《瑞图》上说 王者有道，则仪凤在鼓 ，所以羽盖上、鼓上有凤凰，钲上栖孔雀，铙、铎上白鹭翔集，钲、肈顶脚又以南方鸟兽为饰，明示恩泽遍及飞禽走兽。
English: According to "Ruitu," the king has a way, then the phoenix is in the drum, so there is a phoenix on the feather cover and the drum, a peacock on the gong, a white dragonfly on the gong and the gong, and the top feet of the gong and the gong are decorated with southern birds and beasts, indicating that the grace is spread throughout the birds and beasts.

古文：钲、、铙、鐸，皆二人执击之。
现代文：钲、肈、铙、铎，都是二人拿着敲击的。
English: Cymbals, cymbals, cymbals, cymbals, all played by two people.

古文：贝及大鼓工伎之数，与军士《奉圣乐》同，而加鼓、笛四部。
现代文：贝及大鼓工伎的数量，与军士《奉圣乐》同，而加鼓、笛四部。
English: The number of bells and large drums is the same as that of "Bong Sheng Le," but there are four parts of drums and flutes.

古文：四曰林钟，徵之宫，敛拍单声，奏《奉圣乐》，丈夫一人独舞。乐用龟兹，鼓、笛每色四人。方响二，置龟兹部前。
现代文：四、林钟，是徵之宫，敛拍均单音，奏《奉圣乐》，一男子独舞，用龟兹乐，鼓、笛每一种四人，方响二人，位于龟兹部前。
English: Fourth, Lin Zhong, is the palace of symbolism, with a single beat, playing "Bong Sheng Le," a male solo dance, with tortoise music, four people of each kind of drum and flute, two square bells, located in front of the tortoise part.

古文：二隅有金钲，中植金鐸二、贝二、铃钹二、大鼓十二分左右。
现代文：两角落有金钲，中夹金铎二个、贝二个、铃钹二个、大鼓十二个分左右而立。
English: In the two corners there are gold cymbals, and in the middle there are two gold cymbals, two bells, two bells, and twelve large drums.

古文：五曰南吕，羽之宫，应古律黄钟为君之宫。
现代文：五、南宫，是羽之宫，应和古律黄钟为君之宫。
English: Fifth, the southern palace is the palace of feathers, and it should be the palace of you with the ancient yellow bell.

古文：乐用古黄钟方响一，大琵琶、五弦琵琶、大箜篌倍，黄钟觱篥、小觱篥、竽、笙、埙、篪、搊筝、轧筝、黄钟箫，笛倍。
现代文：乐器用古黄钟方响一个，大琵琶、五弦琵琶、大箜篌各二，黄钟篥、小篥、竽、笙、埙、扌刍肊筝、轧筝、黄钟箫、笛各二。
English: One ancient yellow bell is used for musical instruments, two each for the large lute, five-string lute and large gong, and two each for the yellow gong, small gong, gong, gong, gong, kite, gong, yellow gong and flute.

古文：笛、节鼓、拍板等工皆一人，坐奏之。
现代文：笛、节鼓、拍板等乐工各一人，坐着奏乐。
English: A flute, a rhythm drum, a clapperboard, and other musical instruments are played by one person at a time.

古文：丝竹缓作，一人独唱，歌工复通唱军士《奉圣乐》词。
现代文：丝作慢奏，一人独唱，歌工再合唱军士《奉圣乐》词。
English: Silk slow music, one solo singer, singer and choir sergeant "Bong Sheng Le" lyrics.

古文：雍羌亦遣弟悉利移城主舒难陀献其国乐，至成都，韦皋复谱次其声。
现代文：雍羌也派弟弟悉利移城主持舒难陀献国乐的事。到成都，韦皋将其乐声谱录下来。
English: Yong Xuan also sent his younger brother Xili to move to Chengdu to preside over Shunandao's dedication to the country. When he arrived in Chengdu, Wei Xuan recorded his music.

古文：以其舞容、乐器异常，乃图画以献。
现代文：因其舞姿、乐器都特别，于是画了图样入献。
English: Because of its dance style and musical instruments are special, so I drew a picture for the gift.

古文：工器二十有二，其音八：金、贝、丝、竹、匏、革、牙、角。
现代文：乐器有二十二种，其音有八种：金、贝、丝、竹、匏、革、牙、角。
English: There are twenty-two kinds of musical instruments and eight kinds of sounds: gold, cymbals, silk, bamboo, gongs, leather, teeth and horns.

古文：金二、贝一、丝七、竹二、匏二、革二、牙一、角二。
现代文：金二、贝一、丝七、竹二、匏二、革二、牙一、角二。
English: Two of gold, one of silver, seven of silk, two of bamboo, two of silk, two of leather, one of teeth, two of horns.

古文：铃钹四，制如龟兹部，周圆三寸，贯以韦，击磕应节。
现代文：铃钹四个，制作与龟兹部同，圆周三寸，用皮带贯穿，敲击以应节。
English: Four bells, made in the same way as the gongs, three inches in circumference, pierced with a leather strap, struck with a cymbal.

古文：铁板二，长三寸五分，博二寸五分，面平，背有柄，系以韦，与铃钹皆饰绦纷，以花氎缕为蕊。
现代文：铁板两个，长三寸五分，宽二寸五分，面上是平的，背面有柄，也用皮条系住，铃钹都饰以彩绸带，用花叠毛缕为蕊。
English: Two iron plates, three and a half inches long, two and a half inches wide, flat on the face, with a handle on the back, also tied with a leather strap, the bells are decorated with colored silk ribbons, with flowers and strands of hair as stamens.

古文：螺贝四，大者可受一升，饰绦纷。
现代文：螺贝四个，大的可装一升，用彩绸带装饰。
English: There are four screws, the largest of which can hold one litre, and are decorated with coloured silk ribbons.

古文：有凤首箜篌二：其一长二尺，腹广七寸，凤首及项长二尺五寸，面饰虺皮，弦一十有四，项有轸，凤首外向；其一顶有条，轸有鼍首。
现代文：有凤头箜篌两个，一个长二尺，腹大七寸，凤头及颈长二尺五寸，面上饰蛇皮，有十四根弦，颈上有转弦轴，凤头朝外；另一个顶上有细枝，转弦轴上有鼍头。
English: There are two phoenix heads, one is two feet long, the belly is seven inches large, the phoenix head and neck are two feet and five inches long, the face is decorated with snakeskin, there are fourteen strings, there is a string shaft on the neck, the phoenix head faces outward; the other has thin branches on the top, and there is a hook on the string shaft.

古文：筝二：其一形如鼍，长四尺，有四足，虚腹，以鼍皮饰背，面及仰肩如琴，广七寸，腹阔八寸，尾长尺馀，卷上虚中，施关以张九弦，左右一十八柱；其一面饰彩花，傅以虺皮为别。
现代文：筝两个，一个形状像鼍，长四尺，有四只脚，腹中空虚，用鼍皮装饰背面，正面及肩像琴，宽七寸，肚腹处阔八寸，尾长一尺多，卷成个空圈，加上关键时能张挂九根弦，左右共十八根柱；另一个正面饰以彩花，敷以蛇皮用以区别。
English: Two kites, one shaped like a cocoon, four feet long, with four feet, empty in the belly, the back is decorated with mink, the front and shoulders like a lute, seven inches wide, eight inches wide at the belly, the tail is more than a foot long, rolled into an empty circle, plus the key can hang nine strings, a total of eighteen columns on the left and right; the other front is decorated with colored flowers, covered with snakeskin to distinguish.

古文：有龙首琵琶一，如龟兹制，而项长二尺六寸馀，腹广六寸，二龙相向为首；有轸柱各三，弦随其数，两轸在项，一在颈，其覆形如师子。
现代文：有龙头琵琶一个，如龟兹制造的样子，但颈长二尺六寸多，腹宽六寸，头上两龙相向，有轴柱各三，弦随轴数，两轴都在后颈上，一轴在前颈，其俯伏的样子如同狮子。
English: There is a long-necked lute, as if made by a turtle, but the neck is more than two feet and six inches long, the belly is six inches wide, the two dragons face each other on the head, there are three shafts each, the strings follow the number of shafts, both shafts are on the back neck, one shaft is on the front neck, its prostrate appearance is like a lion.

古文：有云头琵琶一，形如前，面饰虺皮，四面有牙钉，以云为首，轸上有花象品字，三弦，覆手皆饰虺皮，刻捍拨为舞昆仑状而彩饰之。
现代文：还有云头琵琶一个，形状如前者，正面饰有蛇皮，四面有牙钉，以云状为头，轴上有花像品字，三根弦。覆手处都用蛇皮为饰。刻画成勇毅舞昆仑的状态。
English: There is also a cloud-headed pipa, shaped like the former, the front is decorated with snakeskin, there are toothpicks on all sides, with a cloud-shaped head, the shaft has a flower-like character, and three strings. The handle is decorated with snakeskin. It is carved into the state of Yongyi Dance Kunlun.

古文：有大匏琴二，覆以半匏，皆彩画之，上加铜瓯。
现代文：有大匏琴两个，用半个大匏覆盖，都画以彩画，上加铜瓯。
English: There are two large harps, covered with half a large cymbal, both painted in color, plus a gong.

古文：以竹为琴，作虺文横其上，长三尺馀，头曲如拱，长二寸，以绦系腹，穿瓯及匏本，可受二升。
现代文：用竹制琴，画蛇纹其上，长三尺多，头弯曲成拱形，长二寸，用绸带系腹，穿过瓯及匏根，可盛两升。
English: It is made of bamboo, with a serpentine pattern painted on it. It is more than three feet long, with an arched head that is two inches long. The belly is tied with a silk ribbon, which passes through the gills and roots. It can hold two liters.

古文：大弦应太蔟，次弦应姑洗。
现代文：大弦与太蔟应和，次弦与姑洗应和。
English: The major chord should be in harmony with the major third, and the minor third should be in harmony with the minor third.

古文：有独弦匏琴，以班竹为之，不加饰，刻木为虺首；张弦无轸，以弦系顶，有四柱如龟兹琵琶，弦应太蔟。
现代文：还有独弦匏琴，用斑竹制作，不加装饰，只以木刻一个蛇头；张弦，但无轴，将弦系在顶上，有四根柱像龟兹的琵琶，其弦声与太蔟应和。
English: There is also a one-stringed harp, made of variegated bamboo, without decoration, only with a snake head carved in wood; the strings are stretched, but there is no shaft, the strings are tied at the top, there are four columns like a turtle's lute, and its string sound is in harmony with the great gong.

古文：有小匏琴二，形如大匏琴，长二尺；大弦应南吕，次应应钟。
现代文：有两个小匏琴，形状如大匏琴，二尺长；大弦与南吕相应，次弦与应钟相应。
English: There are two small harps, shaped like a large harp, two feet long; the major chord corresponds to the southern lute, and the minor chord corresponds to the bell.

古文：有横笛二：一长尺馀，取其合律，去节无爪，以蜡实首，上加师子头，以牙为之，穴六以应黄钟商，备五音七声；又一，管唯加象首，律度与荀勖《笛谱》同，又与清商部钟声合。
现代文：有横笛两个；一个一尺多长，为使其合律，去节而无爪，用蜡填实头部，用牙刻狮子头加在上面，挖六个洞以应和黄钟商，备有五音七声；另一个，管子末端如象头，律度与荀日助的《笛谱》同，又与清商部钟声谐合。
English: There are two transverse flutes; one is more than a foot long, and in order to make it in tune, it is disjointed and has no claws, the head is filled with wax, a lion's head carved with teeth is added on top, six holes are dug to correspond to the Yellow Bell Merchant, and it is equipped with five tones and seven tones; the other, the end of the pipe is like an elephant's head, the rhythm is the same as the "Flute Spectrum" of Gong Rysu, and it is also in tune with the bell of the Qing Merchants' Department.

古文：有两头笛二，长二尺八寸，中隔一节，节左右开冲气穴，两端皆分洞体为笛量。
现代文：有两头笛两个，长二尺八寸，中间隔一节，节左右开冲气洞，两头都分洞体，长短为笛音量。
English: There are two flutes, two feet and eight inches long, with a rim in the middle and a hole punched around the rim. Both ends have a hole, and the length is the volume of the flute.

古文：左端应太蔟，管末三穴：一姑洗，二蕤宾，三夷则。
现代文：左头应和太蔟，管末端有三穴：一应姑洗，二应蕤宾，三应夷则。
English: The left end of the pipe should be connected to the nozzle. There are three holes at the end of the pipe: the first should be for washing, the second should be for drinking, and the third should be for burning.

古文：右端应林钟，管末三穴：一南吕，二应钟，三大吕。
现代文：右头应和林钟，管末端三洞：一应南吕，二应应钟，三应大吕。
English: The right end corresponds to Lin Zhong, and there are three holes at the end of the tube: one corresponds to Nan Lv, two correspond to Zhong, and three correspond to Dal Lv.

古文：下托指一穴，应清太蔟。
现代文：下托指处还有一洞，应和清太蔟。
English: There is also a hole at the bottom of the finger rest, which should match the chenille.

古文：两洞体七穴，共备黄钟、林钟两均。
现代文：两洞体共七个穴，共备黄钟、林钟两韵。
English: There are a total of seven holes in the two-hole body, with two rhymes of Huang Zhong and Lin Zhong.

古文：有大匏笙二，皆十六管，左右各八，形如凤翼，大管长四尺八寸五分，馀管参差相次，制如笙管，形亦类凤翼，竹为簧，穿匏达本。
现代文：有大匏笙两个，都有十六管，左右各八个，形状如凤翼，大管长四尺八寸五分，其余的挨个相差，制作像笙管，形状也像凤翅。以竹做簧，穿过匏直达底部。
English: There are two large cymbals, both with sixteen pipes, eight on each side, shaped like phoenix wings. The large pipe is four feet eight and a half inches long, and the rest vary from one to the other. They are made like cymbals, and are also shaped like phoenix wings. A bamboo spring is used to pass through the cymbals to reach the bottom.

古文：上古八音，皆以木漆代之，用金为簧，无匏音，唯骠国得古制。
现代文：上古八音，都以木漆代替，用金做簧，没有匏的声音。只有骠国有古制法。
English: In the ancient eight tones, wood lacquer was used instead, gold was used as a spring, and there was no gong sound. Only the gong had a state-owned ancient method.

古文：又有小匏笙二，制如大笙，律应林钟商。
现代文：又有小匏笙两个，制法如大笙，声律应和林钟商。
English: There are also two small gongs, the production method is like a large gong, and the vocal rhythm should be the same as Lin Zhong Shang.

古文：有三面鼓二，形如酒缸，高二尺，首广下锐，上博七寸，底博四寸，腹广不过首，冒以虺皮，束三为一，碧绦约之，下当地则不冒，四面画骠国工伎执笙鼓以为饰。
现代文：有三面鼓两个，形状如酒缸，高二尺，头大下尖，上宽七寸，底只宽四寸，腹部不比头部大，覆以蛇皮，将三面总束为一，用碧丝带系住。下面挨着地不蒙皮，四面画骠国的工伎正在为笙鼓装饰。
English: There are two three-sided drums, shaped like wine jars, two feet high, large and pointed, seven inches wide at the top, only four inches wide at the bottom, the abdomen is not larger than the head, covered with snakeskin, the three-sided bundle is one, tied with a blue silk ribbon. The bottom is next to the ground and is not covered with skin, and the country's geisha are decorating the gongs and drums.

古文：有小鼓四，制如腰鼓，长五寸，首广三寸五分，冒以虺皮，牙钉彩饰，无柄，摇之为乐节，引赞者皆执之。
现代文：有小鼓四个，制法如同腰鼓，长五寸，头宽三寸五分，蒙蛇皮，用牙钉彩饰，没有柄，摇动可为乐曲打节拍，引赞的人都拿它们。
English: There are four small drums, the construction is like a waist drum, the length is five inches, the width of the head is three inches and five minutes, covered with snakeskin, decorated with toothpicks, without a handle, shaking can beat the music, and people who are praised take them.

古文：有牙笙，穿匏达本，漆之，上植二象牙代管，双簧皆应姑洗。有三角笙，亦穿匏达本，漆之，上植三牛角，一簧应姑洗，馀应南吕，角锐在下，穿匏达本，柄觜皆直。
现代文：有牙笙，挖穿匏直到底，加漆，上竖两根象牙代管，双簧都与姑洗应和，有三角笙，也挖匏到底，加漆，上插三个牛角，一簧与姑洗应和，其余的与南吕应和。角尖的一头在下面，直插匏到底。柄和角都是直的。
English: There is a cog, dig through the crucible to the bottom, add paint, erect two ivory pipes on top, and the two springs are compatible with the purge, there is a triangular crucible, also dig the crucible to the bottom, add paint, insert three horns, the first spring is compatible with the purge, and the rest are compatible with the south ridge. The tip of the horn is below, straight to the bottom of the crucible. The handle and the horn are straight.

古文：有两角笙，亦穿匏达本，上植二牛角，簧应姑洗，匏以彩饰。
现代文：有两角笙，也穿匏到底，上插两牛角，其簧与姑洗应和，匏用彩色涂饰。
English: There are two-cornered gongs, also pierce the gong to the end, insert two bull horns, its spring should be in harmony with the gong, and the gong should be decorated with color.

古文：凡曲名十有二：一曰《佛印》，骠云《没驮弥》，国人及天竺歌以事王也。
现代文：曲调名有十二种：一、《佛印》，骠国称之为《没驮弥》，国人及天竺人唱这曲子侍奉君王。
English: There are twelve tuning names: First, "Buddha's Seal," which is called "Manzhimi" in the Kingdom of Wei. The people of the Kingdom of Wei and the people of the Kingdom of Heaven sing this tune to serve the king.

古文：二曰《讠赞娑罗花》，骠云《咙莽第》，国人以花为衣服，能净其身也。
现代文：二、《赞娑罗花》，骠国称之为《咙莽第》，国人以花为衣服，因能洁身。
English: Second, "Zan Jiao Luo Hua" is called "Gang Meng Di" in China. Chinese people use flowers as clothes because they can purify themselves.

古文：三曰《白鸽》，骠云《荅都》，美其飞止遂情也。
现代文：三、《白鸽》，骠国叫为《答都》，赞美它或飞或止都能顺己之情。
English: Thirdly, "White Dove" is called "Answer Capital" in Shandong Province. You can praise it whether it flies or not.

古文：四曰《白鹤游》，骠云《苏谩底哩》，谓翔则摩空，行则徐步也。
现代文：四、《白鹤游》，骠国称之为《苏谩底哩》，意思是飞就能翱翔空中，走则慢慢步行。
English: Fourth, the "White Crane Tour" is called "Su Qian Di Li" in China, which means that you can fly and soar in the air, and walk slowly.

古文：五曰《斗羊胜》，膘云《来乃》。
现代文：五、《斗羊胜》，骠国叫《来乃》。
English: Fifth, "Douyang Sheng" is called "Lai Nao" in Shandong Province.

古文：昔有人见二羊斗海岸，强者则见，弱者入山，时人谓之 来乃 。
现代文：以前有人看见两只羊在海岸相斗。后来强者可见，弱者进入山里，那时人称之为 来乃 。
English: Once upon a time, two sheep were seen fighting on the beach. Later, the stronger one was seen and the weaker one went into the mountains. At that time, people called it a fight.

古文：来乃者，胜势也。
现代文：来乃，意思是取胜之势。
English: Let's go, it means we have a chance to win.

古文：六曰《龙首独琴》，骠云《弥思弥》，此一弦而五音备，象王一德以畜万邦也。
现代文：六、《龙首独琴》，骠国称为《弥思弥》，此曲一弦而五音齐备，象征王以一德养育万邦。
English: Sixth, "Dragon's Head Solo Piano," known as "Mishima" in China, this piece is one string and five notes complete, symbolizing that the king nurtures all nations with one virtue.

古文：七曰《禅定》，骠云《掣览诗》，谓离俗寂静也。
现代文：七、《禅定》，骠国称为《掣览诗》，意思是离开俗境取得寂静。
English: Seventh, "Zen meditation" is called "Zen poetry" in Shandong Province, which means to leave the secular world to obtain silence.

古文：七曲唱舞，皆律应黄钟商。
现代文：七个曲子不论唱舞，其律皆与黄钟商应和。
English: Regardless of whether they are sung or danced, the rhythms of the seven pieces are all in harmony with the Yellow Bell Merchant.

古文：八曰《革蔗王》，骠云《遏思略》，谓佛教民如蔗之甘，皆悦其味也。
现代文：八、《甘蔗王》，骠国称为《遏思略》，意思说佛教民就像甘蔗之甜，都喜欢其味。
English: 8. "The King of Sugar Cane," known in Shan State as "Jian Siyu," meaning that the Buddhist people are like the sweetness of sugar cane, they all like its taste.

古文：九曰《孔雀王》，骠云《桃台》，谓毛采光华也。
现代文：九、《孔雀王》，骠国称为《桃台》，意思是孔雀的毛色美丽。
English: 9. "Peacock King" is called "Tao Tai" in China, which means the peacock has beautiful fur.

古文：十曰《野鹅》，谓飞止必双，徒侣毕会也。
现代文：十、《野鹅》，意思说或飞或息必定成双，徒侣们全部集会。
English: Ten, "Wild goose," meaning to say or fly or breath must be in pairs, couples all gather.

古文：十一曰《宴乐》，骠云《笼聪纲摩》，谓时康宴会嘉也。
现代文：十一、《宴乐》，骠国称为《咙聪网摩》，意思是时节安康，宴会欢乐。
English: 11. "Banquet," known as "hongcong netmo" in China, means that the season is healthy and the banquet is happy.

古文：十二曰《涤烦》，亦白《笙舞》，骠云《扈那》，谓时涤烦■，以此适情也。
现代文：十二、《涤烦》，也叫《笙舞》，骠国称为《扈那》，意思是荡涤烦闷，以此使心情闲适。
English: 12. "Dao Dui," also known as "Dao Dance," is called "Dao Na" in China, which means "wiping away the boredom" to make the mood leisurely.

古文：五曲律应黄钟两均：一黄钟商伊越调，一林钟商小植调。
现代文：这五个曲子，其律应黄钟两韵：一为黄钟商伊越调，一为林钟商小植调。
English: These five pieces are set to two rhymes by Huang Zhong: one by Huang Zhong Shang in Yue tuning, and one by Lin Zhong Shang in Xiao Zhe tuning.

古文：乐工皆昆仑，衣绛氎，朝霞为蔽膝，谓之瀼裓襔。
现代文：乐工都是昆仑人，穿绛叠毛，用朝霞做蔽膝叫作衤戒肍。
English: The musicians are all from Kunlun. They wear wigs and hair pieces, and use morning glories to cover their knees.

古文：两肩加朝霞，络腋。
现代文：两肩加朝霞，系在腋下。
English: Two shoulders plus morning glories, tied under the arms.

古文：足臂有金宝环钏。
现代文：臂和脚都有全宝环钏。
English: His arms and legs are all ring-shaped.

古文：冠金冠，左珥珰，绦贯花鬘，珥双簪，散以毳。
现代文：头戴金冠，左右垂珍玉，头上插花餯，耳旁有双簪，缀有细绒毛。
English: He wears a golden crown on his head, precious jewels hanging from his left and right, a garland of flowers on his head, double hoops around his ears, and is adorned with fine fluff.

古文：初奏乐，有赞者一人先导乐意，其舞容随曲。
现代文：始奏乐，有引赞一人先引导乐曲的旨意，舞步舞姿随曲而动。
English: At the beginning of the music, there is the intention of the lead singer to lead the music first, and the dance moves with the music.

古文：用人或二、或六、或四、或八、至十，皆珠冒，拜首稽首以终节。
现代文：用人或两个、或六个、或四个、或八个、或十个，都蒙以珠饰，跪拜叩头直至曲终。
English: One or two, or six, or four, or eight, or ten, all beaded, kneeled and bowed until the end of the song.

古文：其乐五译而至，德宗授舒难陀太仆卿，遣还。
现代文：其乐曲经五译而能通达，德宗委任舒难陀为太仆卿，送他回国。
English: After five translations of his music were completed, Emperor Dezong appointed Shu Nanda as the Great Servant and sent him back to China.

古文：南平獠，东距智州，南属渝州，西接南州，北涪州，户四千余。
现代文：开州刺史唐次撰述《骠国献乐颂》献给皇帝。大和六年，南诏掠夺骠民三千人，迁往柘东。南平獠，东接智州，南联渝州，西靠南州，北临涪州，人口有四千多户。
English: In the sixth year of the Yamato era, Nanzhao plundered 3,000 Min people and moved to the east of Min. Nanping County, which is connected to Zhizhou in the east, Lianyungang in the south, Nanzhou in the west, and Minzhou in the north, with a population of more than 4,000 households.

古文：多瘴疠。
现代文：地多瘴疠。
English: The ground is very muddy.

古文：山有毒草、沙虱、蝮虵。
现代文：山上有毒草、沙虱、蝮蛇。
English: There are poisonous weeds, sand flies and pythons in the mountains.

古文：人楼居，梯而上，名为干栏。
现代文：人建楼而居，架梯上楼，称之为干栏。
English: People build houses and live in them, and take ladders to go up the stairs, which is called "dry column."

古文：妇人横布二幅，穿中贯其首，号曰通裙。
现代文：妇女用两幅布中间挖个洞，从头上套下，称之为通裙。
English: Women use two pieces of cloth to dig a hole in the middle and put it over their heads, which is called a see-through skirt.

古文：美发髻，垂于后。
现代文：发髻很美，垂在脑后。
English: Her hair was beautifully coiffed and hung down the back of her head.

古文：竹筒三寸，斜穿其耳，贵者饰以珠珰。
现代文：用三寸长的竹筒斜穿过耳，尊贵者还用珠宝等装饰。
English: A three-inch-long bamboo tube is passed diagonally through the ear, and the dignitaries are also decorated with jewelry.

古文：俗女多男少，妇人任役。
现代文：民间女多男少，由妇人干劳役。
English: In folk culture, women are more numerous than men, and women do most of the labor.

古文：昏法，女先以货求男。贫者无以嫁，则卖为婢。
现代文：婚姻，女方先以财物求男，贫苦人家无财物嫁人，就卖为婢女。
English: When it comes to marriage, women first use their wealth to woo men, while poor people, who have nothing to marry with, are sold as maids.

古文：男子左衽，露发，徒跣。其王姓硃氏，号剑荔王。
现代文：男子衣左襟，不戴帽，赤脚，其王姓朱氏，号为剑荔王。
English: The man wears a left-collared shirt, does not wear a cap, and is barefoot. His royal family name is Zhu, and he goes by the name Jian Li Wang.

古文：贞观三年，遣使内款，以其地隶渝州。
现代文：贞观三年，派使者纳降款，朝廷即以其地隶属渝州。
English: Three years later, Zhenguan sent an envoy to collect the money, and the imperial court was subordinated to Yuzhou.

古文：有飞头獠者，头欲飞，周项有痕如缕，妻子共守之。及夜如病，头忽亡，比旦还。又有乌武獠，地多瘴毒，中者不能饮药，故自凿齿。
现代文：有称为飞头獠的，头将飞去，颈子周围有一条线一样的疤痕，其妻儿共同守护，到晚上就像病了一样，头忽然不见了，天亮头又回来了，还有乌武獠，那里多瘴毒，中毒的人牙齿紧闭，无法喝药，所以都将牙齿凿掉。
English: There is the so-called flying head louse, the head will fly away, there is a scar like a line around the neck, its wife and children are jointly guarded, at night it is as if it is sick, the head suddenly disappears, at dawn the head comes back, and there is the Wu Wu louse, there are many poisonous, poisoned people with teeth closed, unable to drink medicine, so all the teeth are chiseled off.

古文：有甯氏，世为南平渠帅。陈末，以其帅猛力为宁越太守。
现代文：有个宁氏，世代是南平的大帅，南北朝陈时末年，派其帅猛力任宁越太守。
English: There was a Ning clan, whose generation was the general of Nanping. When the Northern and Southern Dynasties were at their wits' end, they sent their general to forcefully appoint Ning Yue as the supreme governor.

古文：陈亡，自以为与陈叔宝同日而生，当代为天子，乃不入朝。
现代文：阵亡，宁氏自以为与陈叔宝同日生，该代他为天子。于是不入朝。
English: After his death in battle, Ning believed that he was born on the same day as Chen Shubao, and that he was the son of heaven. Therefore, he did not enter the imperial court.

古文：隋兵阻瘴，不能进。
现代文：隋兵被瘴毒所阻，不能进入其地。
English: The Sui soldiers were blocked by the poison and could not enter the area.

古文：猛力死，子长真袭刺史。
现代文：猛力死后，其子长真继任刺史。
English: After Mengli's death, his son Nagamasa became the successor of Sashi.

古文：及讨林邑，长真出兵攻其后，又率部落数千从征辽东，炀帝召为鸿胪卿，授安抚大使，遣还。
现代文：到隋兵讨伐林邑时，长真出兵攻其后，又带领部落几千人跟随讨伐辽东，炀帝召长真为鸿胪卿，委任他为安抚大使，送他回国。
English: When the Sui soldiers went to attack Linyi, Chang Zhen sent troops to attack it, and led thousands of tribes to follow the attack on Liaodong. Emperor Qian called Chang Zhen to be the Hongyeqing, appointed him as a pacification ambassador, and sent him back to China.

古文：又以其族人甯宣为合浦太守。
现代文：又委任其族人宁宣为合浦太守。
English: He also appointed a member of his tribe, Ning Xuan, as the governor of Hapu.

古文：隋乱，皆以地附萧铣。
现代文：隋乱，都以其地归附萧铣。
English: Sui and Tang dynasties, all their lands were annexed by Xiao Wei.

古文：长真，部越兵攻丘和于交阯者也，武德初，以宁越、郁林之地降，自是交、爱数州始通。
现代文：长真，即带越兵在交趾攻打丘和的人。武德初年，以宁越和郁林两地归降。从此，交、爱几州才相互交通。
English: Chang Zhen, that is, the person who led the soldiers of Yue to attack Yue and Wu in Jiaozuo. In the first year of Wu De, the two places of Ning Yue and Yulin surrendered. Since then, Jiaozuo and Ai Qizhou have only communicated with each other.

古文：高祖授长真钦州都督。
现代文：高祖委任长真为钦州都督。
English: Gaozhu appointed Changzheng as the governor of Qin.

古文：甯宣亦遣使请降，未报而卒。
现代文：宁宣也派使者来请降，但未等到回答就死了。
English: Ning Xuan also sent an envoy to request the surrender, but died before he could reply.

古文：以其子纯为廉州刺史，族人道明为南越州刺史。
现代文：就委任其儿子宁纯为廉州刺史，委任其族人道明为南越州刺史。
English: He appointed his son, Ning Chun, as the governor of Lianzhou, and his relative, Duong Meng, as the governor of South Vietnam.

古文：六年，长真献大珠，昆州刺史沈逊、融州刺史欧阳世普、象州刺史秦元览亦献筒布，高祖以道远劳人，皆不受。
现代文：武德六年，长真来献大珠，昆州刺史沈逊、融州刺史欧阳世普、象州刺史秦元览也来献筒布。高祖因路远人很辛苦，都不接受。
English: In the sixth year of Wu De, Chang Zhen came to donate large beads, Quanzhou embroiderer Shen Xun, Rongzhou embroiderer Ouyang Shifu, and Xiangzhou embroiderer Qin Yuanran also came to donate tubular cloth. Gao Zu did not accept because it was difficult for him to travel far.

古文：道明与高州首领冯暄、谈殿据南越州反，攻姜州，甯纯以兵援之。
现代文：道明与高州首领冯暄、谈殿盘踞南越州反叛，攻姜州，宁纯派兵援助。
English: Daoming and Gaozhou's leader, Feng Jun, discussed instigating a rebellion in South Vietnam and attacking Jiangzhou, and Ning Chun sent troops to help.

古文：八年，长真陷封山县，昌州刺史庞孝恭掎击暄等走之。
现代文：武德八年，长真攻陷封山县，昌州刺史庞孝恭从侧角袭击冯暄等，将他们赶走。
English: In the 8th year of Wude, Changzhen invaded Fengshan County, and Pang Xiaogong, the governor of Changzhou, attacked Feng Rong and others from a side angle and drove them away.

古文：明年，道明为州人所杀。
现代文：第二年，道明被州人所杀。
English: The next year, Domingos was killed by the statesmen.

古文：未几，长真死，子据袭刺史。
现代文：不久，长真死，其子据袭击刺史。
English: Soon after, Choshen died, and his son was said to have attacked Shishi.

古文：冯暄、谈殿阻兵相掠，群臣请击之，太宗不许，遣员外散骑常侍韦叔谐、员外散骑侍郎李公淹持节宣谕。暄等与溪洞首领皆降，南方遂定。
现代文：冯暄、谈殿阻住王师掠夺。群臣都要求派兵出击，太宗不同意，派员外散骑常侍韦叔谐、员外散骑侍郎李公淹持节去宣谕，冯暄等与溪洞头领都降服，南方于是安定下来。
English: The ministers all demanded that troops be sent out to attack, but Emperor Taizong did not agree. He sent the non-commissioned cavalry officer Wei Shujian and the non-commissioned cavalry officer Li Gong to proclaim the festival. Both Feng Yu and the leader of Xidong capitulated, and Nanfang settled down.

古文：大抵剑南诸獠，武德、贞观间数寇暴州县者不一。
现代文：剑南各獠在武德、贞观年间掠夺侵扰附近州县的次数不一。
English: In the years of Wude and Zhenguan, each county in Jian'nan invaded and plundered nearby counties and prefectures with varying frequency.

古文：巴州山獠王多馨叛，梁州都督庞玉枭其首，又破馀党符阳、白石二县獠。
现代文：巴州的山獠王多馨叛乱，梁州都督庞玉斩其首，又击破余党符阳、白石二县的山獠。
English: King Doxiang of Shanxi rebelled in Baizhou, the governor of Liangzhou, Pangyu, beheaded him, and defeated the remaining party members in Fuyang and Shanxi in Baishi County.

古文：其后眉州獠反，益州行台郭行方大破之。
现代文：后来眉州獠反叛，益州行台郭行方大破之。
English: Later, Meizhou revolted, and the Yizhou-Hangzhou-Hangzhou line was broken.

古文：未几，又破洪、雅二州獠，俘男女五千口。
现代文：不久，又击破洪、雅二州的獠人，俘获男女五千人。
English: Not long after, they also defeated the Shanshan people of Hong and Yajing, and captured five thousand men and women.

古文：是岁，益州獠亦反，都督窦轨请击之，太宗报曰： 獠依山险，当附以恩信。
现代文：这一年，益州獠也反，都督窦轨请求还击，太宗回答说： 獠依山地险，应该以恩信安抚。
English: This year, Yizhou Xuan also counterattacked, the governor Dou Liao requested a counterattack, and Taizong replied: Xuan Yixuan should be appeased with gratitude.

古文：胁之以兵威，岂为人父母意耶？ 
现代文：如以兵威震慑，这哪里是为人父母的旨意呢？ 
English: If military deterrence is used, where is the will of the parents?

古文：贞观七年，东、西玉洞獠反，以右屯卫大将军张士贵为龚州道行军总管平之。
现代文：贞观七年，东、西玉洞獠反，派右屯卫大将军张士贵为龚州道行军总管将叛獠讨平。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, East and West Yudong rebelled, and Zhang Shigui, the general of the Right Tun Guards, was sent as the general manager of the march on Luzhou Road to quell the rebellion.

古文：十二年，巫州獠叛，夔州都督齐善行击破之，俘男女三千余口。
现代文：贞观十二年，巫州獠反，夔州都督齐善行击破他们，俘获男女三千多人。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, Wuzhou rebelled, and the governor of Zhangzhou defeated them and captured more than three thousand men and women.

古文：钧州獠叛，桂州都督张宝德讨平之。
现代文：钧州獠反，由桂州都督张宝德讨平他们。
English: Zhangzhou rebelled, and the governor of Guizhou, Zhang Baode, fought them to a standstill.

古文：明州山獠又叛，交州都督李道彦击走之。
现代文：明州的山獠又叛，由交州都督李道彦将他们击走。
English: The mountain clans in Mingzhou rebelled again, and the governor of Jiaozhou, Li Daohan, drove them away.

古文：是岁，巴、洋、集、壁四州山獠叛，攻巴州，遣右武候将军上官怀仁破之于壁州，虏男女万馀，明年遂平。
现代文：这一年，巴、洋、集、壁四州的山獠叛，攻巴州，乃派右武侯将军上官怀仁在壁州将他们击败，俘获男女一万多人。第二年，叛乱平。
English: In that year, the Shanxi rebels in the four prefectures of Ba, Yang, Ji, and Bijie attacked Bijie, but were defeated in Bijie by Huairin, the commander-in-chief of the Right Military Hordes, who captured more than 10,000 men and women. The rebellion was put down the following year.

古文：十四年，罗、窦诸獠叛，以广州都督党仁弘为窦州道行军总管击之，虏男女七千馀人。
现代文：贞观十四年，罗、窦各獠叛，由广州都督党仁弘任窦州道行军总管击败他们，俘获男女七千多人。
English: In the 14th year of Zhenguan, Luo and Dou each rebelled, and the governor of Guangzhou, Party member Ren Hong, who was in charge of the march of Douzhou Road, defeated them and captured more than 7,000 men and women.

古文：太宗再伐高丽，为舡剑南，诸獠皆半役，雅、邛、眉三州獠不堪其扰，相率叛，诏发陇右、峡兵二万，以茂州都督张士贵为雅州道行军总管，与右卫将军梁建方平之。
现代文：太宗两次伐高丽，在剑南造船，各獠均派劳役，雅、邛、眉三州的獠不堪其扰，相继反叛，诏令发陇右、峡州的兵二万，以茂州都督张士贵任雅州道行军总管，与右卫将军梁建方共同平定之。
English: When Emperor Taizong twice besieged Goryeo and built a ship in Jian'nan, all provinces sent laborers. The provinces of Ya, Handan, and Meizhou rebelled against Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong ordered 20,000 soldiers from Handan and Xiaozhou to march to the capital of Maozhou, Zhang Shigui, to be the commander-in-chief of the march along the Yazhou Road. Emperor Taizong and the right guard general Liang Jianfang jointly suppressed the rebellion.

古文：高宗初，琰州獠叛，梓州都督谢万岁、充州刺史谢法兴、黔州都督李孟尝讨之。
现代文：高宗初年，琰州獠反，梓州都督谢万岁、充州刺史谢法兴、黔州都督李孟尝去讨伐。
English: In the first year of Gao Zong's reign, Zhangzhou rebelled, and Zizhou's governor Xie Ronglong, Chengzhou's governor Shishi Xie Faxing, and Zhangzhou's governor Li Mengyi went to fight.

古文：万岁、法兴入洞招慰，遇害。
现代文：谢万岁、谢法兴入洞招抚，遇害。
English: Xie Wanling and Xie Fa Xing went into a cave and were killed.

古文：显庆三年，罗、窦生獠酋领多胡桑率众内附。
现代文：显庆三年，罗、窦的生獠酋领多胡桑率众来归附。
English: In the third year of Xianqing, Luo and Dou's Zengqi chiefs led by Duosang led the crowd to annexation.

古文：上元末，纳州獠叛，寇故茂、都掌二县，杀吏民，焚廨舍，诏黔州都督发兵击之。
现代文：上元末年，纳州獠叛，侵扰故茂、都掌二县，杀吏民，烧官舍，诏令黔州都督发兵平乱。
English: At the end of the 19th century, Nanzhou rebelled, invaded two counties of the former Maozhou and Doushang, killed officials and people, burned government buildings, and ordered the governor of Doushou to send troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：大历二年，桂州山獠叛，陷州，刺史李良遁去。
现代文：大历二年，桂州的山獠反，攻陷桂州，刺史李良逃走。
English: In the second year of the great lunar calendar, the mountains of Guizhou revolted, Guizhou was invaded, and Li Liang fled.

古文：贞元中，嘉州绥山县婆笼川生獠首领甫枳兄弟诱生蛮为乱，剽居人，西川节度使韦皋斩之，招其首领勇于等出降。
现代文：贞元年间，嘉州绥山县婆龙川的生獠首领甫枳兄弟诱导生蛮为乱，剽掠居民，西川节度使韦皋斩杀甫枳兄弟，招抚生蛮首领勇于等出降。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, the brothers Fu Xi, the leaders of the barbarians in Bailong River, Lushan County, Jiazhou, induced the barbarians to riot, plundered the residents, and the West River Festival made Wei Wei kill the brothers of Fu Xi, and encouraged the leaders of the barbarians to surrender.

古文：或请增栅东凌界以守，皋不从，曰： 无戎而城，害所生也。 
现代文：有人请求在东凌加围栅栏做界而守，韦皋不同意，说 ：没有守卒而筑城，祸害将由此而生。 
English: Some people asked for a fence to be built in Dongling to protect the boundary, but Wei Wei did not agree, saying, "If you build a city without a guard, evil will come from it."

古文：獠亦自是不扰境。
现代文：獠也从此不再侵扰边境。
English: Since then, the baboons have stopped invading the border.

古文：戎、泸间有葛獠，居依山谷林菁，逾数百里。
现代文：戎、泸之间有葛獠，居地依山谷丛林，逾越几百里。
English: Between Ebisu and Shizuku, there is Kudara. The settlement is located in the valley of the jungle, more than a few hundred miles away.

古文：俗喜叛，州县抚视不至，必合党数千人，持排而战。
现代文：民俗好叛乱，州县注意不到，就会合几千人持木棍而战。
English: Folk customs are good for rebellion. If the prefectures and counties don't notice, several thousand people will gather and fight with wooden sticks.

古文：奉酋帅为王，号曰 婆能 ，出入前后植旗。
现代文：奉酋帅为王，称为 婆能 ，出入前后均树旗。
English: The chief is worshipped as the king, known as "Banon," and flags are displayed before and after entering and leaving.

古文：大中末，昌、泸二州刺史贪沓，以弱缯及羊强獠市，米麦一斛，得直不及半。
现代文：大中末年，昌、泸二州的刺史贪鄙，以次品缯及羊，强与獠人交易，一担半麦，换不到一半的价钱。
English: At the end of junior high school, the two states of Chang and Handan had a history of greed. They traded strawberries and sheep at a low price, and strawberries and strawberries at a high price. A half-barrel of wheat was exchanged for less than half the price.

古文：群獠诉曰： 当为贼取死耳！ 
现代文：群獠控诉说 ：他们当贼找死。 
English: According to the group's complaint, they were looking for death as thieves.

古文：刺史召二小吏榜之曰： 皆尔属为之，非吾过。 
现代文：刺史召两个小吏告诉说 ：都是你们干的，不是我的过错。 
English: He summoned two minor officials and told them, "You all did it, it's not my fault."

古文：獠相视大笑，遂叛。
现代文：獠人相视大笑，于是叛乱。
English: The three men burst into laughter, and a mutiny ensued.

古文：立酋长始艾为王，逾梓、潼，所过焚剽。刺史刘成师诱降其党，斩首领七十余人。
现代文：立酋长始艾为王，越过梓、潼，所过之处都纵火焚烧剽掠，刺史刘成师诱降其党徒，斩首领七十多人。
English: Chief Ai became the king. He crossed Zi and Ya, and wherever he passed, he set fire, burned and plundered. He assassinated Liu Chengshi, forced his followers to surrender, and beheaded more than 70 leaders.

古文：龙朔中，遣使与千支弗、磨腊同朝贡。西原蛮，居广、容之南，邕、桂之西。
现代文：其余的人逃到东川，节度使柳仲郢劝降他们。始艾叩头请罪，仲郢赦免并放他们回去。西原蛮，位于广、容之南，邕、桂之西。
English: The rest of the people fled to the East River, and the festival made Liu Zhongyu persuade them to surrender. Shi Ai bowed down and pleaded guilty, and Zhongyu pardoned them and let them go back. West Huanban, located in the south of Guang and Rong, west of Handan and Guilin.

古文：有甯氏者，相承为豪。
现代文：姓宁的，世代在此为豪强。
English: People with the surname Ning have been strong and courageous for generations.

古文：又有黄氏，居黄橙洞，其隶也。
现代文：姓黄的，居于黄橙洞，隶属于宁氏。
English: surnamed Huang, lives in Huangzhuangdong, belongs to the Ning clan.

古文：其地西接南诏。
现代文：西原蛮的地域西边与南诏连接。
English: The western part of the wild west region is connected to Nanzhao.

古文：天宝初，黄氏强，与韦氏、周氏、侬氏相脣齿，为寇害，据十馀州。
现代文：天宝初年，黄氏强，与韦氏、周氏、侬氏相依互为唇齿，常侵扰我边域，占据了十多个州。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, the Huang clan, together with the Wei clan, the Zhou clan and the Nong clan, often invaded our border areas and occupied more than ten states.

古文：韦氏、周氏耻不肯附，黄氏攻之，逐于海滨。
现代文：韦氏、周氏以寇为耻，不肯依附黄氏，黄氏出兵攻打，将他们赶到海滨。
English: The Wei and Zhou clans were ashamed of being pirates and refused to attach themselves to the Huang clan. The Huang clan sent troops to attack them and drove them to the seashore.

古文：至德初，首领黄乾曜、真崇郁与陆州、武阳、硃兰洞蛮皆叛，推武承斐、韦敬简为帅，僭号中越王，廖殿为桂南王，莫淳为拓南王，相支为南越王，梁奉为镇南王，罗诚为戎成王，莫浔为南海王，合众二十万，绵地数千里，署置官吏，攻桂管十八州。
现代文：至德初年，首领黄乾曜、真崇郁与陆州、武阳、朱兰的洞蛮都叛变，推举武承裴、韦敬简为帅，僭称为 中越王 ，廖殿为桂南王，莫淳为拓南王，相支为南越王，梁奉为镇南王，罗诚为戎成王，莫浔为南海王，合兵二十万，地域连绵几千里，设置了官吏，攻打桂管十八州。
English: In the first year of the German occupation, the chiefs Huang Qianyou, Zhen Chongyu and Luzhou, Wuyang and Zhu Lan's Dongman all mutinied, and promoted Wu Chengpei and Wei Jingjian as their commanders. They called themselves the King of Central Vietnam, Liao Dian as the King of Southern Guizhou, Mo Chun as the King of Southern Hunan, Si Zhi as the King of Southern Hunan, Liang Bong as the King of Southern Zhen, Luo Cheng as the King of Rongcheng, and Moran as the King of the South Sea. They had a total of 200,000 soldiers and thousands of miles of territory, and they

古文：所至焚庐舍，掠士女，更四岁不能平。
现代文：每到一地，均焚烧房屋，掠夺子女。历四年都不得平定。
English: In every place they went, they burned houses and plundered children. It took four years to subdue them.

古文：乾元初，遣中使慰晓诸首领，赐诏书赦其罪，约降。
现代文：乾元初年，派中使招抚晓谕各首领，赐诏书赦免其罪，约他们归附。
English: In the first year of the Qianyuan, the middle-ranking envoy of the faction sent an invitation to the leaders, gave them an edict to pardon their sins, and invited them to join the faction.

古文：于是西原、环、古等州首领方子弹、甘令晖、罗承韦、张九解、宋原五百余人请出兵讨承斐等，岁中战二百，斩黄乾曜、真郁崇、廖殿、莫淳、梁奉、罗诚、莫浔七人。
现代文：那时，西原、环、古等州首领方子弹、甘令晖、罗承韦、张九解、宋原五百多人请求出兵讨伐武承斐等人。一年中打了二百仗，斩杀了黄乾曜、真郁崇、廖殿、莫淳、梁奉、罗诚、莫浔等七人。
English: At that time, more than 500 people, including the heads of the Western Plains, Huan, and Gu states, such as Fang Zhiban, Gan Lingyao, Luo Chengwei, Zhang Jiu Ge, and Song Yuan, requested to send troops to fight against Wu Chengfei and others. They fought 200 battles in one year, and killed seven people, including Huang Qianyou, Zhenyu Chong, Liao Dian, Mo Chun, Liang Bong, Luo Cheng, and Mo Yao.

古文：承斐等以馀众面缚诣桂州降，尽释其缚，差赐布帛纵之。
现代文：武承斐等带领余众捆缚了到桂州请降，于是为他们松绑，分别赐给布帛放了他们。
English: Wu Chengfei and others led the rest of the people to Guizhou to ask for surrender, so they were released and given to Bu Xuan separately.

古文：其种落张侯、夏永与夷獠梁崇牵、覃问及西原酋长吴功曹复合兵内寇，陷道州，据城五十余日。
现代文：其部落中的张侯、夏永与夷獠的梁崇牵、覃问及西原的尊长吴功曹再度合兵侵扰内地，攻陷道州，盘踞了五十多天。
English: Zhang Hou and Xia Yong of his tribe joined forces with Liang Chongtui and Qian Qian of the barbarians, and Wu Gong Cao, the patriarch of the Western Plains, to invade the inland again, capture Doushou, and besiege it for more than fifty days.

古文：桂管经略使邢济击平之，执吴功曹等。
现代文：桂管经略使邢济平了叛乱，抓住吴功曹等人。
English: Gui Guan Jing slightly made Zhai Jizhi quell the rebellion and capture Wu Gong Cao and others.

古文：馀众复围道州，刺史元结固守不能下，进攻永州，陷邵州，留数日而去。
现代文：其他的人再次包围道州，但因刺史元结固守，不能攻陷。转而进攻永州，攻陷邵州，逗留了几天才去。
English: The others encircled Daozhou again, but were unable to capture it due to the stubborn defense of the stabbing history. Instead, they attacked Yongzhou, captured Shaozhou, and stayed for a few days before going.

古文：湖南团练使辛京杲遣将王国良戍武岗，嫉京杲贪暴，亦叛，有众千人，侵掠州县。发使招之，且服且叛。
现代文：湖南团练使辛京杲派大将王国良戍守武岗，王国良嫉恨辛京杲贪暴，也叛变，有兵众千把人，侵扰州县，朝廷派使者去招抚，结果时服时叛。
English: Hunan regimental drill made Xin Jinglian send general Wang Guoliang to guard the military post. Wang Guoliang was jealous of Xin Jinglian's corruption and also mutinied. Thousands of soldiers invaded counties and prefectures, and the imperial court sent envoys to entice them. As a result, they sometimes obeyed and sometimes rebelled.

古文：建中元年，城叙州以断西原，国良乃降。
现代文：建中元年，在叙州筑城堡以断绝西原的联系，王国良归顺。
English: In the first year of Jianzhong, he built a castle in Shuzhou to sever the connection with the Western Plains, and Wang Guoliang surrendered.

古文：贞元十年，黄洞首领黄少卿者，攻邕管，围经略使孙公器。请发岭南兵穷讨之，德宗不许，命中人招谕。
现代文：贞元十年，黄洞首领黄少卿攻邕管，包围经略使孙公器，孙公器奏请调发岭南兵来讨伐，德宗不许，派中人前往招抚谕降，不听。
English: In the tenth year of the Zhengyuan era, the leader of Huangdong, Huang Shaoqing, attacked and besieged Qianqian, and asked Sun Gongqi, Sun Gongqi's son, to send soldiers from Lingnan to fight, but Dezong did not allow it, and sent people from China to invite him to surrender, but he did not listen.

古文：不从，俄陷钦、横、浔、贵四州。
现代文：不久又攻陷钦、横、浔、贵四州。
English: Soon after, it invaded and occupied Qin, Yangtze, Min and Guizhou Provinces.

古文：少卿子昌沔趫勇，前后陷十三州，气益振。
现代文：黄少卿之子黄昌沔骁勇，前后共攻陷十三州，气焰更张。
English: The son of Huang Shaoqing, Huang Chang Rongyong, attacked and conquered thirteen states in total.

古文：乃以唐州刺史阳旻为容管招讨经略使，引师掩贼，一日六七战，皆破之，侵地悉复。
现代文：于是令唐州刺史阳任容管招讨经略使，率师杀贼，一日交战六七次，都将贼人打败，沦陷之地全部克复。
English: As a result, he ordered the Tang Zhou general Shiyang Ren Rongguan to recruit an economic envoy, lead an army to kill the thieves, fight six or seven times a day, defeat the thieves, and recover all the fallen lands.

古文：元和初，邕州擒其别帅黄承庆。
现代文：元和初年，邕州擒获其别帅黄承庆。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Wei dynasties, Bozhou won its most handsome Huang Chengqing.

古文：明年，少卿等归款，拜归顺州刺史。
现代文：第二年，黄少卿等归顺，委任他为归顺州刺史。
English: In the second year, Huang Shaoqing and others surrendered, and he was appointed as the governor of the surrendered state.

古文：弟少高为有州刺史。
现代文：其弟黄少高任有州刺史。
English: His younger brother, Huang Shao Gao Ren, has a state record.

古文：未几复叛。
现代文：不久，他们又叛变。
English: They soon mutinied again.

古文：又有黄少度、黄昌瓘二部，陷宾、蛮二州，据之。
现代文：又有黄少度、黄昌馞二部，攻陷并占有宾、峦二州。
English: In addition, Huang Shao Du and Huang Chang conquered and occupied Bin and Shan of the Second Division.

古文：十一年，攻钦、横二州，邕管经略使韦悦破走之，取宾、峦二州。
现代文：贞元十一年，攻钦、横二州，邕管经略使韦悦击败并赶走了他们，克复宾、峦二州。
English: In the eleventh year of the Zhengyuan era, Wei Yue defeated and drove them away by attacking Qin and encroaching on the two states, and Wei Yue defeated and drove out Qin and encroached on the two states.

古文：是岁，复屠岩州，桂管观察使裴行立轻其军弱，首请发兵尽诛叛者，徼幸有功，宪宗许之。
现代文：这一年，他们又屠掠岩州，桂管观察使裴行立轻视他们兵力不强，首先奏请发兵杀尽叛逆者，企图侥幸邀功，宪宗同意。
English: In the same year, they also pillaged and plundered Yanzhou. Gui Guan's observation caused Pei Xingli to despise their weak military strength. He first requested that they send troops to kill all the rebels in an attempt to win favor by chance. Xianzong agreed.

古文：行立兵出击，弥更二岁，妄奏斩获二万，罔天子为解。
现代文：裴行立派兵出击，迁延了两年，谎报斩杀俘获两万人。
English: Pei Xingli's soldiers attacked, delayed for two years, and falsely reported that they had killed and captured 20,000 people.

古文：自是邕、容两道杀伤疾疫死者十八以上。
现代文：从此以后，邕、容两道被杀伤染疾疫而死者十有八九。
English: Since then, the two provinces of Handan and Rongdao have been ravaged by plague, with death tolls in the tens of thousands.

古文：调费斗亡，繇行立、阳旻二人，当时莫不咎之。
现代文：征调财物、争战亡命全因裴行立、阳二人。当时没有一个人不责备他们。
English: The requisitioning of property, the fighting and the loss of life were all due to the two men, Pei Xingli and Yang. At that time, there was no one who did not blame them.

古文：及安南兵乱，杀都护李象古，擢唐州刺史桂仲武为都护，逗留不敢进，贬安州刺史，以行立代之。寻召还，卒。
现代文：待到安南兵乱，杀死都护李象古，皇帝提拔唐州刺史桂仲武为都护，但桂仲武逡巡不敢进军，乃贬为安州刺史，以裴行立代为都护，不久，将他召回，死。
English: After the Annan Rebellion, Li Xianggu, the protector of the capital, was killed, and the emperor promoted Guizhong Zhongwu, the governor of Tangzhou, to the position of the protector of the capital. However, Guizhong Zhongwu did not dare to march into the capital, but was relegated to the position of the governor of Anzhou, and Pei Xing was appointed as the protector of the capital. Soon, he was recalled and died.

古文：长庆初，以容管经略使留后严公素为经略使，复上表请讨黄氏。
现代文：长庆初年，任容管经略使留后严公素为经略使，再次上表请求讨伐黄氏。
English: In the first year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Yan Gongsu, who had been appointed to be the governor of Jingdezhen, once again made a request to fight the Huang clan.

古文：兵部侍郎韩愈建言： 黄贼皆洞獠，无城郭，依山险各治生业，急则屯聚畏死。
现代文：兵部侍郎韩愈建议说： 黄贼都是洞獠，没有城郭，都依山险而谋生。有急则聚在一起戒备。
English: Han Yu, an attendant of the military department, suggested: "The yellow thieves are all caves, without fortifications, they all rely on mountain hazards to make a living. In case of emergency, they gather together to be on the alert.

古文：前日邕管经略使德不能绥怀，威不能临制，侵诈系缚，以致憾恨。
现代文：以前邕管经略使不能绥怀以德，又不能威慑以兵，而是攻打欺诈，捆绑关押，以致怨恨丛生。
English: In the past, it was not possible to instill virtue, and it was not possible to deter soldiers, but to attack fraud, tie up and detain, resulting in resentment.

古文：夷性易动而难安，劫州县复私雠，贪小利不为大患。
现代文：夷人天性容易躁动而难安定，侵劫州县以报私仇，贪小利而不为大患。
English: The nature of the barbarians is easy to agitate but difficult to stabilize. They rob states and counties to avenge their personal vendettas. They are greedy for small profits but not a big problem.

古文：自行立、阳旻建征讨，生事诡赏，邕、容两管，日以凋弊，杀伤疾患，十室九空。
现代文：自从裴行立、阳建议征讨，生事邀赏，以致邕、容两管日见凋敝，战死及病死的甚多，以致十室九空。
English: Since Pei Xingli and Yang proposed to collect and discuss, things have happened and rewards have been offered, so that the Xing and Rong two-pronged system has withered away, and there have been many deaths from war and disease, so that the tenth room is empty.

古文：百姓怨嗟，如出一口；人神共嫉，二将继死。
现代文：百姓怨恨嗟叹，如出一口。因人神共嫉，两将相继死亡。
English: The people resented and lamented, as if out of a mouthful. Due to the mutual jealousy of man and god, the two will die one after another.

古文：今严公素非抚御之才，复寻往谬，诚恐岭南未有宁时。
现代文：如今严公素不是招抚御敌之才，再去蹈过去的覆辙，实在担心岭南不再有安宁的日子。
English: Today, strict adherence to the law is not enough to appease the enemy. If we repeat the mistakes of the past, I am really worried that there will be no more peaceful days in Lingnan.

古文：昨合邕、容为一道，邕与贼限一江，若经略使居之，兵镇所处，物力雄完，则敌人不敢轻犯；容州则隔阻已甚，以经略使居之，则邕州兵少情见，易启蛮心。
现代文：昨日合邕、容为一道，邕与贼人仅一江之隔，若经略使驻于此，兵镇所在，物力充足完备，敌人不敢轻易来犯；容州则阻隔甚远，如果经略使驻于此，则邕州兵少力单的情况显而易见，容易引起蛮人的觊觎。
English: Yesterday, Gyeongju and Yeongju were one and the same. Yeongju and Yeongju were only separated by a river. If Yeongju soldiers were stationed here, the military town was located, the material resources were sufficient and complete, and the enemy would not dare to easily attack; Yeongju was far away. If Yeongju soldiers were stationed here, it was obvious that Yeongju soldiers did not have enough strength, which would easily cause the barbarians' anger.

古文：请以经略使还邕州，容置刺史，便甚。
现代文：请要求经略使回邕州，容州另置刺史那就恰当了。
English: Please request that the article be moved back to Yanzhou. It would be appropriate for Yanzhou to have a separate article.

古文：又比发南兵，远乡羁旅，疾疫杀伤，续添续死，每发倍难。
现代文：又前时征发南兵，远道征战，疾疫流行，极易致死，甚至续添续死，再要征兵，倍加困难。
English: In the past, soldiers were conscripted and sent to the south, and it was very easy to cause death due to the long-distance campaign and the epidemic of diseases, and even more deaths. It is doubly difficult to conscript soldiers again.

古文：若募邕、容千人，以给行营，粮不增而兵便习，守则有威，攻则有利。
现代文：若招募邕、容当地人千人以充行营，那就粮饷可以不增加，士兵们又因服水土而力强，守则有威，攻则有利。
English: If you recruit a thousand soldiers and allow a thousand local people to fill the camp, then the grain supply can not be increased, and the soldiers are strong because of the soil and water, the code is powerful, and the attack is advantageous.

古文：自南讨损伤，岭南人希，贼之所处，洞垒荒僻。
现代文：自南讨以来，损伤严重，岭南人稀，贼人所居，都是荒僻的洞穴。
English: Since the Southern Expedition, the damage has been serious. Lingnan is sparsely populated, inhabited by thieves, and is a desolate cave.

古文：假如尽杀其人，得其地，在国计不为有益。容贷羁縻，比之禽兽，来则捍御，去则不追，未有亏损朝庭。
现代文：假如将他们杀尽，占有其地，从国家来看并没有什么好处，不如宽恕他们，笼络他们，比之于禽兽，来犯就捍御，逃跑了不去追，对朝廷没有亏损。
English: If you kill them all and occupy their land, there is no benefit from the country's point of view. It is better to forgive them and entice them. Compared to animals, they defend themselves against intruders, run away and do not chase, and there is no loss to the court.

古文：愿因改元大庆，普赦其罪，遣郎官、御史以天子意丁宁宣谕，必能喧叫听命。
现代文：希望能因改元大庆，普赦其罪，派郎官、御史去那里将天子的恩德反复宣谕，定能使他们欢呼听命。
English: I hope that because of the great anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, their sins will be completely forgiven, and I will send my vassals and officials there to repeatedly proclaim the benevolence of the Son of Heaven, which will surely make them cheer and obey orders.

古文：为选材用威信者，委以经略，处理得方，宜无侵叛事。 
现代文：为此，要选用有才略有威信者，委以经略重任，使其处理得当，定能再无侵叛之事。 
English: To this end, it is necessary to select a talented person with a little prestige and entrust him with a slightly heavy task, so that he can handle it properly, and there will be no more rebellion.

古文：不纳。
现代文：皇帝不采纳。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：初，邕管既废，人不谓宜。
现代文：当初，邕管废置，大家都认为不应该。
English: At first, everyone thought that the fistula should not be discarded.

古文：监察御史杜周士使安南，过邕州，刺史李元宗白状，周士从事五管，积三十年矣，亦知其不便。
现代文：监察御史杜周士出使安南，经过邕州，刺史李元宗说了当时情状。杜周士从事五管已有三十年了，也知道没有邕管是不行的。
English: The inspector, Du Zhoushi, was dispatched to Annan, passing through Ganzhou, and the inspector, Li Yuanzong, told the situation at that time. Du Zhoushi has been engaged in the five pipes for thirty years, and he also knows that it is not possible without the five pipes.

古文：严公素遣人盗其槁，周士愤死。
现代文：严公素派人将他为此事上书奏事的稿本偷走，杜周士气愤而死。
English: Yan Gongsu sent someone to steal the manuscript of his report on the matter, and Du Zhou died of indignation.

古文：公素劾元宗擅以罗阳县还黄少度，元宗惧，引兵一百持印章依少度。
现代文：严公素诬告李元宗擅自将罗阳县还给黄少度。李元宗害怕，乃领兵一百人带了印章去依附黄少度。
English: Yan Gongsu falsely accused Li Yuanzong of returning Luoyang County to Huang Shao-du without authorization. Li Yuanzong was afraid, but led a hundred soldiers with seals to adhere to Huang Shao-du.

古文：穆宗遣监察御史敬僚按之。
现代文：穆宗派监察御史敬僚去查访。
English: The inspector of Mu Sect and his respected colleagues went to investigate.

古文：僚尝为容州从事，与公素昵，傅致元宗罪，以母老，流驩州，众以为不直。
现代文：敬僚曾任容州从事，与严公素相好，于是罗致李元宗的罪状，只因李元宗的母亲年老才流放到州。众臣都认为此事不公正。
English: His respected colleague had been engaged in Yongzhou and was friendly with Yan Gongsu, so Luo brought charges against Li Yuanzong, only because Li Yuanzong's mother was too old to be exiled to Yongzhou. All the ministers thought the matter was unfair.

古文：黄贼更攻邕州，陷左江镇；攻钦州，陷千金镇。
现代文：黄贼再次攻打邕州，左江镇陷落；攻打钦州，千金镇陷落。
English: The Yellow Thieves attacked Bozhou again, and Zuojiang Town fell; they attacked Qinzhou again, and Qianjin Town fell.

古文：刺史杨屿奔石南栅，邕州刺史崔结击破之。
现代文：刺史杨屿逃奔石南栅，邕州刺史崔结将黄贼击破。
English: Zhang Shi Yang Yu fled to Shennan Lattice, and Zhangzhou Zhang Shi Cui Jie defeated the Yellow Thief.

古文：明年，又寇钦州，杀将吏。
现代文：第二年，黄贼又来犯钦州，杀将吏。
English: The following year, the Yellow Thieves again invaded Qinzhou and killed the generals.

古文：是岁，黄昌瓘遣其党陈少奇二十人归款请降，敬宗纳之。
现代文：这一年，黄昌馞派他的党羽陈少奇等二十人来请降，敬宗接纳了。
English: That year, Huang Changyu sent twenty of his followers, including Chen Shaoqi, to request the surrender, which was accepted by Jingzong.

古文：黄氏、侬氏据州十八，经略使至，遣一人诣治所，稍不得意，辄侵掠诸州。
现代文：黄氏、侬氏据有十八州，经略使到来，派了个人到他衙门，稍有不得意，就侵掠各州。
English: The Huang and Nong clans had control of 18 states. When the emissaries arrived, they sent individuals to their gates. Slightly disappointed, they invaded and plundered the states.

古文：横州当邕江官道，岭南节度使常以兵五百戍守，不能制。
现代文：横州正当邕江官道，岭南节度使经常派兵五百人戍防，无法制伏他们。
English: Because of the official road to the Lijiang River in Hengzhou, and the Lingnan Festival, 500 soldiers were often sent to defend, and they could not be subdued.

古文：大和中，经略使董昌龄遣子兰讨平峒穴，夷其种党，诸蛮畏服。
现代文：大和年间，经略使董昌龄派儿子董兰讨平峒穴，夷灭其种族及党羽，各蛮都害怕降服。
English: During the Yamato era, Jingli ordered Dong Changling to send his son, Dong Lan, to settle the dispute and exterminate his race and party members. All parties were afraid to surrender.

古文：有违命者，必严罚之。
现代文：如有违抗者，一定严厉惩戒。
English: If there are any violators, they will be severely punished.

古文：十八州岁输贡赋，道路清平。
现代文：于是十八州每年按例缴贡赋，道路恢复清平。
English: As a result, the 18 prefectures paid tribute as usual every year, and the roads were restored to normal.

古文：其后侬洞最强，结南诏为助。
现代文：其后人，侬洞最强，联结南诏。
English: Subsequent generations, Nongdong is the strongest, linking Nanzhao.

古文：懿宗与南诏约和，二洞数构败之。
现代文：懿宗与南诏的约和，二洞多次从中破坏。
English: The peace treaty between Emperor Taizong and Emperor Nanzhao was broken many times by the two dynasties.

古文：邕管节度使辛谠以从事徐云虔使南诏结和，赍美货啖二洞首领、太州刺史黄伯蕴、屯洞首领侬金意、员州首领侬金勒等与之通欢。
现代文：邕管节度使辛谠派从事徐云虔出使南诏结和，带了美货贿赂二洞首领，太州刺史黄伯蕴、屯洞首领侬金意、员州首领侬金勒等与徐云虔通欢。
English: The Xingguan Festival made the Hsinchu faction engage in Xu Yunqian's attempt to send an envoy to Nanzhao to make peace, and bribed the leaders of the two dungeons with fine goods. The leaders of Taizhou, Huang Bokun, Tundong, and Manchukuo, such as Nong Jin Yi and Nong Jin Le, were in love with Xu Yunqian.

古文：员州又有首领侬金澄、侬仲武与金勒袭黄洞首领黄伯善，伯善伏兵瀼水，鸡鸣，候其半济，击杀金澄、仲武，唯金勒遁免。
现代文：员州又有首领侬金澄、侬仲武与金勒一起袭击黄洞首领黄伯善。黄伯善派兵埋伏在氵襄水，鸡叫后，候侬金澄他们渡河刚一半时击杀了侬金澄、侬仲武，只有金勒逃跑了。
English: In the member state, leaders Nong Jincheng, Nong Zhongwu and Jinle jointly attacked Huangdong leader Huang Boxan. Huang Boxan sent soldiers to ambush in the Xiangshui River. After the rooster crowed, Nong Jincheng and Nong Zhongwu killed Nong Jincheng and Nong Zhongwu when they were halfway across the river. Only Jinle escaped.

古文：后欲兴兵报仇，辛谠遣人持牛酒音乐解和，并遗其母衣服。
现代文：后来金勒想兴兵报仇，辛谠派人拿了牛酒、音乐来调解，还送衣服给金勒的母亲。
English: Later, when Kinler wanted to take revenge, Hinzen sent someone to mediate with cow wine and music, and also sent clothes to Kinler's mother.

古文：母，贤者也，让其子曰： 节度使持物与獠母，非结好也，以汝为吾子。
现代文：他的母亲是个懂道理的人，责备儿子说： 节度使送东西给獠人之母，并不是与我结友，而是因为你是我的儿子。
English: His mother, a reasonable person, scolded her son, saying, "The reason you sent something to the mother of a deaf-mute is not to make friends with me, but because you are my son.

古文：前日兵败龛水，士卒略尽，不自悔，复欲动众，兵忿者必败，吾将囚为官老婢矣。 
现代文：前日你兵败氵襄水，士卒都死了，你不自悔恨，还要再兴师动众。兵有怨气的军队必败，我将要被囚为官中老婢了。 
English: The day before yesterday, your soldiers were defeated at the Battle of Xiangshui, and all your officers and men were killed. You have no remorse, and you want to stir up the troops again. An army with resentful soldiers will be defeated, and I will be imprisoned as a middle-ranking official.

古文：金勒感寤，为罢兵。
现代文：金勒醒悟，罢兵。
English: Kinler comes to his senses and resigns.

古文：赞曰：唐北禽颉利，西灭高昌、焉耆，东破高丽、百济，威制夷狄，方策所未有也。
现代文：评论：唐廷北擒颉利，西灭高昌、焉耆，东破高丽、百济，以军威控制夷狄。这是国策中并没有安排的。
English: Comment: It was not part of the state policy of Tang Ting to conquer Beiping in the north, Gaochang and Yancheng in the west, and Goryeo and Baekje in the east, and to control Yidi with military might.

古文：交州，汉之故封，其外濒海诸蛮，无广土坚城可以居守，故中国兵未尝至。
现代文：交州，是汉朝的旧封地，其外濒临海上诸蛮，地域狭小且无坚城可以屯守，所以中国的兵未曾到此。
English: Jiaozhou is an old fiefdom of the Han Dynasty. Outside of it, there are many barbarians on the sea. The area is small and there is no fortified city to garrison, so Chinese soldiers have never come here.

古文：及唐稍弱，西原、黄洞继为边害，垂百余年。
现代文：及唐朝渐弱，西原、黄洞相继成为边患，已近一百多年了。
English: As the Tang Dynasty waned, the Western Plains and the Yellow Cave successively became border areas. This has been the case for nearly a hundred years.

古文：及其亡也，以南诏。
现代文：他们最后的灭亡，是因为南诏。
English: Their final demise was due to Nanzhao.

古文：《诗》曰： 惠此中国，以绥四方。 
现代文：《诗》中说： 京都安定，安抚四方。 
English: In the poem, it says, "Kyoto is stable and appeases all sides."

古文：不以夷狄先诸夏也。
现代文：没有将夷狄置于华夏之前。
English: Did not put Yidi before Huaxia.

