古文：亦怜真班，西夏人。
现代文：亦怜真班，西夏人。
English: Also a member of the Real Madrid team, he is from the west of the country.

古文：父俺伯，以忠勤事世祖，为知枢密院事。
现代文：父名暗伯，效忠于世祖，任知枢密院事。
English: His father's name was Hinbo, and he was loyal to his ancestor and served as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：亦怜真班性刚正，动有礼法。
现代文：亦怜真班禀性刚正，举止有礼。
English: They are also very upright and polite.

古文：仁宗召见，令入宿卫。
现代文：仁宗召见，令入宿卫。
English: Invited by Ninsong, he was assigned to be a night watchman.

古文：延祐六年，超拜翰林侍讲学士、中奉大夫。
现代文：延六年，破格提升为翰林侍讲学士、中奉大夫。
English: Six years later, he was promoted to Hanlin Attendant Lecturer Bachelor and Zhongfeng Doctor.

古文：至治二年，调同知通政院事，擢虎符唐兀亲军都指挥使。
现代文：至治二年，调同知通政院事，升为虎符唐兀亲军都指挥使。
English: In the second year of his reign, he was transferred to Zhitong Academy of Political Science, and was promoted to commander of the troops of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：泰定初，迁资善大夫、典瑞院使。
现代文：泰定初年，迁升为资善大夫、典瑞院使。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was promoted to the post of Senior Physician of the Sui Dynasty and Envoy of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：天历二年，以选为太子家令，寻升资政大夫、同知枢密院事，擢侍御史，仍兼指挥使。
现代文：天历二年，选为太子家令，不久升资政大夫、同知枢密院事、侍御史仍兼指挥使。
English: In the second year of the calendar, he was chosen to be the prince's chief retainer, and soon he was promoted to the post of senior advisor, co-advisor to the Privy Council, and attendant to the Emperor, while still serving as the commanding officer.

古文：至顺初，拜翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫，迁功德使，指挥使如故。
现代文：至顺初年，拜翰林学士承旨、荣禄大夫，调任功德使兼指挥使。
English: In the first year of Shun, Bai Hanlin, a bachelor, was appointed as a meritorious envoy and commanding envoy.

古文：寻出为陕西行省平章政事，未行，复为翰林学士承旨。
现代文：其后出任陕西行省平章政事，尚未启程赴任，改为翰林学士承旨。
English: After that, he served as the political affairs of Pingzhang Province in Shaanxi Province, and has not yet left for the post, but has been changed to the Hanlin Scholar.

古文：元统、至元之间，伯颜为丞相，专权擅政，嫉其论事不阿，出为江南行台御史大夫。
现代文：元统、至元之间，伯颜为丞相，专权跋扈，恼恨亦怜真班不对他阿谀奉承，调他出朝为江南行台御史大夫。
English: Between the Yuan and Zi Yuan dynasties, Bo Yan was the prime minister, wielding absolute power, and both angered and pitied, Zhenban did not flatter him, and transferred him to the Southern Yangtze River to be the imperial historian.

古文：寻杀其子答里麻，而谪置海南。及伯颜败，乃得召还朝。
现代文：不久，又杀害其子答里麻，贬亦怜真班到海南，直到伯颜违法事败露后，才召还回朝。
English: Not long after, he killed his son, Tarima, and banished his son, Rizhenban, to Hainan. It was not until after Bo Yan's illegal activities were exposed that he was recalled to China.

古文：至正六年，拜光禄大夫、御史大夫，尽迁中外廉能之官置诸风宪，一时号称得人。
现代文：至元六年，拜光禄大夫、御史大夫。他将朝野内外一些廉能之官选为御史，故为当时人称赞不已。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Bai Guanglu was promoted to the position of doctor of medicine and doctor of history. He selected a number of incorruptible officials from both inside and outside the court as doctors of history, and was highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：迁宣政院使，出为甘肃行省平章政事，设法弭西羌之寇，民赖以安，立石颂之。
现代文：转为宣政院使，出任甘肃行省平章政事。在甘肃任职期间，平息西羌之入侵，使百姓生命财产得保安全，人民立碑歌颂他的政绩。
English: During his tenure in Gansu, he quelled the invasion of Xizang and ensured the safety of people's lives and property. The people erected a monument to praise his achievements.

古文：尝奏言： 风俗人心日趋于薄，请禁故吏不许弹劾所事官长。 太师马紥儿台与子丞相脱脱既谪居在外，时相欲倾之，嗾人告变，且扳台臣同上奏。亦怜真班曰： 凡为相者，孰无闲退之日？况脱脱父子在官无大咎过，奈何迫之于险？ 
现代文：召还回朝，为银青荣禄大夫、知枢密院事，管理太医院。不久加金紫光禄大夫，再任命为御史大夫、知经筵事兼宣忠斡罗思扈卫亲军指挥使。太师马札儿台与其子丞相脱脱已被贬谪在外，当时在朝执政宰相为右丞相的别儿怯不花，要进一步陷害他们，亦怜真班极力反对，认为父子二人在官时并无大过，为何要置他们于死地。
English: He was recalled back to the imperial court to manage the Imperial Hospital as the doctor of Yinqing Ronglu and the secretary of the Privy Council. He was soon promoted to the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and then appointed as the doctor of imperial history, the secretary of the Privy Council, and the commanding officer of the troops of Luo Siyuan. The grandmaster Mazar Tai and his son Zhuang Liang have been ousted from the imperial court. At that time, the ruling prime minister of the imperial court, who was the minister of the right, was not afraid to further frame them, and also pitifully opposed them, believing that the father and son had not done anything

古文：终不从。
现代文：但朝廷并未听从他的谏阻。
English: But the court did not listen to his objections.

古文：经筵进讲必详必慎，故每读译文，必被嘉纳。
现代文：他给皇帝讲经说史时详细缜密，故每读译经史都受到顺帝的称赞。
English: He was meticulous in detail when he lectured on the history of the sutras to the emperor, so every time he read the translated history of the sutras, he was praised by Emperor Shun.

古文：监察御史劾奏时相，帝不听，亦怜真班反复论奏不已，由是忤上意，出为江浙行省平章政事，迁拜湖广行省左丞相。复召知枢密院事。
现代文：监察御史弹劾当朝宰相，顺帝不听。亦怜真班也反复指出宰相的错误，因而得罪了皇帝，使他出京任江浙行省平章政事，后拜为湖广行省左丞相，又召回京任知枢密院事。
English: The inspector of imperial history impeached the prime minister of the time, but Emperor Shun did not listen to him. Also, Erizhenban repeatedly pointed out the prime minister's mistakes, thus offending the emperor, making him go to Beijing to serve as the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and later to serve as the governor of Hubei and Guangxi Province, and then to recall him to Beijing to serve as the governor of the Privy Council.

古文：十一年，颍、亳兵起，朝廷命将出师，多失律致败，数进言于时相，不见听，复出为江浙行省左丞相。
现代文：至正十一年，颍州、亳州一带人民起义，朝廷派兵镇压，因军纪不严，致遭失败。亦怜真班多次向执政宰相提出建议，均未被采纳，于是出京任江浙行省左丞相。
English: In the eleventh year of the Heian period, the people in and around Bozhou revolted, and the imperial court sent troops to suppress them, but they failed due to lax military discipline. Moreover, Erizhenban repeatedly made suggestions to the ruling prime minister, but they were not accepted, so he went to Beijing to serve as the acting minister of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：十二年，移江西行省左丞相。
现代文：十二年调任江西行省左丞相。
English: In 2012, he was transferred to the post of Minister of the Left for Jiangxi Province.

古文：于是妖寇由蕲、黄陷饶州，饶之属邑安仁与龙兴相接境，其民皆相挺为乱。
现代文：蕲州、黄州一带白莲教起义，攻陷饶州。饶州之安仁、龙兴两县人民响应。
English: Bailianism revolted in Bozhou and Huangzhou, and Raozhou was invaded. The people of Anren and Longxing in Raozhou responded.

古文：亦怜真班道出安仁，因驻兵招之，来者厚加赏赉，不从者命子哈蓝朵儿只与江西左丞火你赤等乘高纵火攻散之。
现代文：亦怜真班出兵安仁，招降义军，凡来降者给于重赏，不降者命其子哈蓝朵儿只与江西左丞火你赤等纵火攻散。
English: He also sent troops to Anren, called for the surrender of the rebel army, and gave a heavy reward to those who came to surrender, and those who did not surrender ordered his son, Hallandor, to set fire to break up with Jiangxi Zuoying and Youkai.

古文：余干久为盗区，亦闻风顺服。
现代文：余干久为义军根据地，这时也闻风降顺。
English: For a long time, Yu Gan was a base for the rebels, but then the tide turned.

古文：先是，江西行省平章政事道童以宽容为政，军民懈驰。
现代文：原先，江西行省平章政事道童实行宽容政策，使军民防御松懈。
English: Originally, Jiangxi Province and Pingzhang Province implemented a policy of tolerance, making the military and civilian defense lax.

古文：亦怜真班既至，风采一新，威声大振，所在群盗咸谋归款矣。
现代文：亦怜真班来江西后，风气一新，威声大振，有些起义军归附朝廷。
English: After the Yiren Zhenban came to Jiangxi, there was a new style and swagger, and some insurgents were attached to the imperial court.

古文：廉惠山海牙，字公亮，布鲁海牙之孙，希宪之从子也。
现代文：至正十四年八月，亦怜真班病逝。朝赠推忠佐运正宪秉义同德功臣，追封齐王，谥忠献。廉惠山海牙，字公亮，布鲁海牙之孙，廉希宪之侄。
English: In August of the 14th year of the Taisho era, Renzhenban died of illness. The Emperor presented the title of Qi Wang to the loyal and honorable vassal of Zheng Xian, the grandson of Bru Haig and the nephew of Renzhen Xian. Renzhen Shan Haig, the son of Bru Haig and the nephew of Renzhen Xian.

古文：辞曰： 吾大父事世祖，以通经号廉孟子。
现代文：其父阿鲁浑海牙曾任广德路达鲁花赤。廉惠山海牙年幼丧父，由母亲一人抚养，家境贫寒，但他并不以破衣粗食为耻。
English: His father, Aruhun Hague, was once a member of the Kuangde Lu Daru flower red. Cheap Huishan Hague lost his father at a young age, was raised by his mother alone, and his family was poor, but he was not ashamed to wear rags and eat rough food.

古文：今方设科取士，愿读书以科第进。 乃入国学积分。
现代文：二十岁时，大臣欲使他入宫禁宿卫，他推辞，一心想参加科举考试，于是入国学读书。
English: At the age of twenty, the minister wanted him to join the imperial guards, but he refused, wanting to take the imperial examinations, so he went to study in China.

古文：至治元年，登进士第，授承事郎、同知顺州事。
现代文：至治元年，考中了进士，授官承事郎、同知顺州事。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he passed the entrance examination, and was awarded the post of secretary.

古文：有弓匠提举马都剌者，怙势夺州民田，同列畏之。
现代文：在顺州，有弓匠提举马都刺，恃势强夺本州民田，同僚们也都怕他。
English: In Shunzhou, there is an archer who raises a horse and a thorn, who is strong enough to take over the Honshu people's field, and his colleagues are also afraid of him.

古文：惠山海牙至，即治其事。
现代文：廉惠山海牙到任后将此事按法处置。
English: After taking office, the Hague will deal with this matter in accordance with the law.

古文：在官期年，用荐者召入史馆，预修英宗、仁宗《实录》，寻拜监察御史。
现代文：在顺州任职一年，有人推荐他入史馆，参与修纂《英宗实录》和《显宗实录》。不久拜为监察御史。
English: After serving in Shunzhou for one year, he was recommended to join the History Museum, where he participated in the compilation of the "Eing Zong Record" and the "Heng Zong Record." He was soon appointed Inspector of History.

古文：时中书省有大臣贪猥狼籍，即抗章劾之，语同列曰： 傥以言责获罪，吾之职也。 
现代文：当时中书省有大臣贪婪无厌，廉惠山海牙上章弹劾，对同僚们说： 如果因弹劾而获罪，那也是我的职责所在。 
English: At that time, there was a minister in the Ministry of Literature who was greedy and insatiable, and he said to his colleagues: "If I am found guilty of impeachment, that is also my responsibility."

古文：既又劾奏明里董阿不当摄祭太庙。
现代文：其后又弹劾明里董阿不应兼理祭太庙的事。
English: After that, he also impeached Mingli Dong Ah for not being allowed to preside over the ceremony at the Grand Temple.

古文：迁都水监，疏会通河，堤滦、漆二水，又修京东闸。
现代文：任都水监时，廉惠山海牙疏通了会通河，修建滦、漆两河的堤坝及京东水闸。
English: When he was appointed as the water conservator of the capital, he dredged the Huitong River, built the dikes of the Min and Urushi rivers and the Jingdong sluice.

古文：历秘书丞、会福总管府治中，上疏言二月迎佛费财蠹俗，时论韪之。
现代文：任秘书丞及会福总管府治中时，上疏指出二月迎佛是费财败俗，当时舆论肯定他的正确批评。
English: When he was appointed secretary and chief administrator of the Confucius Institute in the middle of the prefectural government, Joso pointed out that it was expensive and vulgar to welcome the Buddha in February. At that time, public opinion affirmed his correct criticism.

古文：出佥淮东廉访司事，迁江浙行省左右司员外郎，既而历佥河东、河南、江西廉访司事，升江南行御史台经历。
现代文：以后又历任佥淮东廉访司事，江浙行省左右司员外郎，佥河东、河南、江西廉访司事，江南行御史台经历等职。
English: Since then, he has successively held the posts of  Huai Dong Lian Visitation Secretary, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Lian Visitation Secretary,  He Dong, Henan and Jiangxi Lian Visitation Secretary, and Jiangnan Provincial Historian.

古文：时山东盐法大坏，以选除都转运使，曾未期月，用课最，赏赉金币、上尊。
现代文：山东盐法受到破坏，特选他任都转运使，不到一月盐课都按规定征收上来。
English: The Shandong Salt Law was undermined. He was specially selected to be the transfer agent, and less than a month later, the salt charges were levied in accordance with the regulations.

古文：至正三年初，行郊礼，召拜侍仪使。
现代文：至正三年初，朝廷举行郊祭礼，召廉惠山海牙回京任侍仪使。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Taisho era, the imperial court held a suburb festival and summoned Ren Huishan from The Hague to return to Beijing to serve as an attendant.

古文：明年，预修辽、金、宋三史，迁崇文太监。自是累迁为河南行省右丞。
现代文：四年，参与修纂《辽史》、《金史》和《宋史》。随后调任崇文太监，多次出任河南行省右丞。
English: In four years, he participated in the compilation of "Liao History," "Golden History" and "Song History." Subsequently, he was transferred to the Chongwen Eunuch, and served as Henan Provincial U.S.S.R. several times.

古文：时有诏发民治决河，遍骚属郡，亟以不便上言，而时宰不用。
现代文：当时朝廷要征发民夫治理黄河河堤，骚扰各郡，廉惠山海牙上疏指出其弊端，但执政宰臣不采纳他的意见。
English: At that time, the imperial court wanted to recruit and dispatch people to manage the Yellow River embankment, harassing the counties. Ren Huishan pointed out its drawbacks in The Hague, but the ruling vice-minister did not accept his opinion.

古文：迁湖广行省右丞，以武昌失守连坐，既而事白，迁江西行省右丞。
现代文：调任湖广行省右丞，因武昌失守而受牵连获罪，后来把事情弄清楚了，调任江西行省右丞。
English: He was transferred to the position of Huguang Xingguo Yuanzheng, and was implicated and convicted for Wuchang's dereliction of duty. Later, he clarified the matter and was transferred to the position of Jiangxi Xingguo Yuanzheng.

古文：时所隶郡县多陷于贼，乃与平章政事、司徒道童协谋殚力，以定守御招捕之策，就除本道廉访使。未几，江西省治亦陷，惠山海牙遁往福建。
现代文：江西所属郡县多为义军所有，廉惠山海牙与平章政事、司徒道童协力商定守御和招安之策。为时不久，义军攻占江西行省衙门所在地，廉惠山海牙逃往福建。
English: Most of the counties and counties in Jiangxi belonged to the rebels, and Ren Huishan Hague worked with Pingzhang Zhengji and Sitou Daodong to agree on a defense and security strategy. Shortly after, the rebels captured the location of Jiangxi Xingguan Qimen, and Ren Huishan Hague fled to Fujian.

古文：久之，除佥江浙行枢密院事，改拜福建行省右丞，以兵镇延平、邵武，境内以宁。
现代文：很久以后，任命他为江浙行枢密院事，又改任福建行省右丞。廉惠山海牙分兵镇守延平、邵武。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and was also appointed as the provincial right-hand man of Fujian Province.

古文：居岁余，奉诏还治省事，总备御事，且督赋税由海道供京师，朝廷赖焉。迁行宣政院使。
现代文：在福建一年多，除统筹办理全省军事防御外，还将该省赋税由海道运至京师。调行宣政院使。
English: In Fujian for more than a year, in addition to the overall management of the province's military defense, the province's tax was also transported from the highway to Beijing.

古文：明年，拜翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史。
现代文：第二年，拜翰林学士承旨、知制诰兼修国史。
English: In the second year, Baikhanlin received his bachelor's degree, and also studied national history.

古文：卒，年七十有一。
现代文：年七十一岁而卒。
English: He died at the age of seventy-one.

古文：方揭晓，试官梦月中有花象，已而果符其名，人以为异。
现代文：月鲁不花字彦明，蒙古族人，姓逊都思氏。容貌魁伟，年少随父亲脱帖穆耳在江浙时，拜韩性先生为师，能下笔成文。
English: Yue Lu Fufu Zi Yanming, a Mongolian, surnamed Sun Du Si. He is good-looking. When he was young, he followed his father in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, and studied under Mr. Han Xing. He is able to write.

古文：遂登元统元年进士第，授将仕郎、台州路录事司达鲁花赤。
现代文：参加江浙行省乡试，中右榜第一。元统元年中进士，授官将仕郎、台州路录事司达鲁花赤。
English: He took part in the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial and Township Examination, and ranked first in the middle and right lists. He was promoted to the rank of junior general in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was awarded the title of general secretary and secretary of the Taizhou Road Record.

古文：县未有学，乃首建孔子庙，既又延儒士为之师，以教后进。
现代文：见该路各县无学校，他首建孔庙为学校，聘请儒士为师，教育后生。
English: Seeing that there were no schools in the counties along this road, he was the first to build a Confucian temple as a school, hire a Confucian scholar as a teacher, and educate future students.

古文：丁外艰。
现代文：父亲去世，他辞官服丧于家。
English: When his father died, he resigned from his post and died at home.

古文：至正元年，朝廷立行都水监，以选为其监经历。寻擢广东廉访司经历。
现代文：至正元年，朝廷设立行都水监，选月鲁不花为行都水监经历，不久升为广东廉访司经历。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, the imperial court set up the Gangdu Water Supervisor, and Zengyulun spent his experience as the Gangdu Water Supervisor, and soon rose to the Guangdong Bureau of Investigation.

古文：会廷议将治河决，以行都水监丞召之，比至，改集贤待制，除吏部员外郎。
现代文：朝廷议定治理黄河，召他回京任行都水监丞，但刚到又改任集贤待制，后委任为吏部员外郎。
English: The imperial court agreed on the management of the Yellow River and called him back to Beijing to serve as the water inspector of the capital, but just after he arrived, he was reassigned to the waiting list, and then appointed as the clerk's assistant.

古文：夫讨贼者必先粮饷，以我不汝扰，故命我复来，盖讨贼即所以安民耳。
现代文：月鲁不花在任吏部员外郎期间，奉命到江浙购买粟二十四万石。到江浙后，他按家产之贫富来定籴粟之多寡，这样不扰民而能把粟收买上来。
English: During his time as an official, he was ordered to go to Jiangsu and Zhejiang to buy 240,000 kilos of opium poppy. After arriving in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, he determined the amount of opium poppy according to the wealth of the family, so that he could buy up the poppy without disturbing the people.

古文：父老其谓何？ 众咸应曰： 公言是也。 不逾月，粮事以毕。丁母忧，中书遣赙且起复，不应。
现代文：后来因军饷不足，他再度奉命到江浙收买粮食，不到一月就完成了这次征粮任务。母亲去世，月鲁不花服丧在家，中书省派人送去钱财以助丧事，并起用他回朝为官，他因孝期未满，不肯出仕。
English: Later, due to the shortage of military pay, he was again ordered to go to Jiangsu and Zhejiang to buy grain, and he completed this grain collection task in less than a month. His mother passed away, and he did not spend the funeral at home. The Ministry of Education and Culture sent someone to send money to help with the funeral, and appointed him to return to the North as an official. He refused to serve because his period of filial piety had not expired.

古文：未几，太师、右丞相脱脱南征，辟从军事，督馈饷，馈饷用舒。
现代文：不久，太师、右丞相脱脱南征，召月鲁不花参与军务，负责督运粮饷。
English: Soon after, Taishi and Ujosho escaped from the Southern Conscription and summoned Yue Lu to take part in military affairs and was responsible for supervising the transportation of grain.

古文：升吏部郎中，寻拜监察御史。
现代文：升吏部郎中，不久拜监察御史。
English: He was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and soon became inspector-general of history.

古文：首上疏言： 郊庙礼甚缺，天子宜躬祀南郊，殷祭太室。 
现代文：上任后首先提出 天子应亲自至南郊祭天，常到太庙祭祖 。
English: After taking office, he first proposed that the Son of Heaven should personally go to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to Heaven, and often go to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices to ancestors.

古文：继又上疏言： 皇太子天下之本，当简老成重臣为辅导，以成其德。 帝皆嘉纳之。
现代文：又建议 任命老成重臣为太子辅导，以培育太子的德行 。这些意见都受到顺帝的嘉奖并加采纳。
English: He also suggested appointing a senior vassal as the prince's tutor to cultivate the prince's virtue. These opinions were commended and adopted by Emperor Shun.

古文：升吏部侍郎，铨选于江浙，时称其公允。
现代文：升吏部侍郎，去江浙选任官吏，当时人都称赞他大公无私。
English: He was promoted to the position of an attendant of the cadre department, and went to Jiangsu and Zhejiang to be elected as an official. At that time, people praised him for his selflessness.

古文：适朝廷有建议欲于河间、长芦置局造海船三百艘者，月鲁不花即为书具言其非便。言入中书，忤议者，迁工部侍郎。
现代文：朝廷有人建议在河间、长芦置局造海船三百艘，月鲁不花上书指出此事不妥，因而违反了中书省某人的主张而被调为工部侍郎。
English: Someone at the imperial court suggested building 300 seagoing ships in the Hema and Changlu shipbuilding bureaus, and Lu spent months writing a letter pointing out that this was inappropriate. As a result, he violated the proposal of a person in the Chinese Book Ministry and was transferred to the construction department.

古文：后分部彰德，道过河间，民遮拥拜谢曰： 微公言，吾民其毙矣。 
现代文：他视察彰德，路过河间时，百姓成群结队拦路拜谢他： 如果没有您说话，我等小民就没命了。 
English: He inspected Zhangde. When he was passing through the river, the people stopped in droves to thank him: If you hadn't spoken, I and other commoners would have died.

古文：会方重选守令，以保定密迩京畿，除保定路达鲁花赤。
现代文：朝廷遴选各地地方长官。因保定紧靠京畿，选月鲁不花为保定路达鲁花赤。
English: The imperial court selected local governors from all over the country. Since Baoding was close to Gyeonggi, the choice of the month Lu was chosen as the red flower of Baoding.

古文：陛辞，诏谕谆切。保定岁输粮数十万石于新乡，苦弗便。月鲁不花请输京仓以便之。
现代文：保定每年输送粮食数十万石于新乡，苦于运输不便，月鲁不花请求输往京城仓库。
English: Baoding transports hundreds of thousands of kilos of grain to Xinxiang every year, but due to the inconvenience of transportation, it does not take long for the grain to be transported to the Beijing warehouse.

古文：俄除吏部尚书。保定父老百数诣阙，言乞留监郡以抚吾民，遂以尚书仍知郡事。
现代文：不久任命他为吏部尚书，保定父老数百人到朝廷挽留，于是月鲁不花以尚书之职来主持保定路政务。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and hundreds of Baoding's elders and fathers came to the imperial court to stay. Therefore, Yue Lu did not use the post of secretary to preside over the government affairs of Baoding Road.

古文：会贼北渡河，日修城浚濠为战守具。
现代文：反元义军北渡黄河，月鲁不花在保定修城挖壕做御敌准备。
English: When the anti-Yuan rebels crossed the Yellow River to the north, they did not spend months and months digging trenches in Baoding to prepare for the enemy.

古文：廷议发五省八卫军出戍外镇，月鲁不花疏愿留其兵护本郡，遂兼统黑军数千人及团结西山八十二寨民义军，势大张。
现代文：朝廷计划征调五省八卫军队去戍守外镇，月鲁不花上疏请求留本郡兵马镇守本郡，获得批准。于是他统本郡兵马及黑军数千人，还团结西山八十二寨共同防卫，义军进攻不利，撤走。
English: The imperial court's plan to conscript eight guards from five provinces to defend the outlying towns was approved, and the request to keep the county's soldiers and horses in the town to defend the county was approved. Therefore, he unified the county's soldiers and horses and thousands of black troops, and also united the eighty-two villages in Xishan to defend together. The rebels were not good at attacking, and withdrew.

古文：贼再侵境，皆不利，遁去。升中奉大夫，锡上尊四、马百匹，僚佐增秩有差，别降宣敕俾赏有功者。召还为详定使。
现代文：朝廷升月鲁不花为中奉大夫，赐上尊四、马百匹，其他有功军佐均有赏赐。朝廷召他回京任详定使，保定百姓绘其像膜拜，表示怀念。
English: At the Imperial Court's enthronement ceremony, Lu Fuxin was made a middle-ranking military doctor, and was given four honorific titles and a hundred horses. Other meritorious military aides were also given awards. The Imperial Court called him back to Beijing to be appointed as a detailed envoy, and the people of Baoding painted his portrait to pay homage and express their nostalgia.

古文：保定民不忍其去，绘像以祀之。
现代文：月鲁不花离开保定仅一月，保定为义军攻陷。
English: He left Baoding for only one month, and Baoding fell to the rebels.

古文：去保定一月而城陷矣。朝廷以月鲁不花夙负民望，令入城招谕之，抵城，贼坚壁不出，民多窃出谒拜者。
现代文：朝廷因月鲁不花深孚民望，令他去保定招安反元义军，但未成功，只有一些百姓偷偷出城来拜谒他。
English: The imperial court ordered him to go to Baoding to recruit anti-Yuan rebels, but he did not succeed. Only a few people sneaked out of the city to pay him homage.

古文：改大都路达鲁花赤。
现代文：月鲁不花改任大都路达鲁花赤，又转任吏部尚书。
English: He was transferred to Dadu Road, Dahua Town, and Shangshu Town.

古文：入见帝宣文阁，有旨若曰： 朕以畿甸之民疲敝，特选尔抚吾民。
现代文：反元义军程思忠占据永平，其副将雷帖木儿不花伪降，被发觉而遭杀害，思忠坚守永平。
English: Cheng Sizhong, an anti-Yuan Rebellion soldier, occupied Yongping. His vice-commander, Lei Tiemu'er, did not fake his surrender, but was discovered and killed. Sizhong held fast to Yongping.

古文：尔毋峻威，毋弛法，或挟权以干汝于非法，其即以闻。 
现代文：月鲁不花不顾自己生命危险，奉诏去招降了义军。回京后转任翰林侍讲学士，很快又再任大都路达鲁花赤。
English: Despite the risk to his own life, Yue Lu obeyed the edict to recruit and surrender the rebels. After returning to Beijing, he was transferred to serve as a lecturer of Hanlin, and soon he was reappointed as the Metropolitan Lu Daruka.

古文：视事之初，帝及皇后、皇太子皆遣使赐之酒。有权臣以免役事来谒，月鲁不花面斥曰： 圣训在耳，不敢违。 
现代文：顺帝在宣文阁面谕他道 ：朕因知京畿地区百姓劳苦不堪，特选派你去安抚，你对百姓不要太严厉，也不要任他们违法，若有人恃权非法干预你的政务，立即报告朝廷。 到职后，果有权臣来要他免其应服劳役，月鲁不花当面斥责说： 有圣训在，我不敢违抗。 
English: Emperor Shun addressed him at the Great Hall of the People, saying, "I know that the people in the Gyeonggi region are overburdened with toil, so I have sent you as a special envoy to pacify them. You should not be too harsh on the people, nor should you allow them to break the law. If anyone usurps power and illegally interferes in your government affairs, report it to the imperial court immediately. After taking office, if a high-ranking official came to ask him to be exempted from labor service, Yue Lu did not take it personally and rebuked him, saying, "There is a hadith, and I dare not disobey it."

古文：转资善大夫，拜江南行御史台中丞。
现代文：后任资善大夫，拜江南行御史台中丞。
English: Later, he served as a good doctor, and became a middle-ranking official of the Southern Yangtze Dynasties.

古文：次子枢密院判官老安、侄百家奴捍敌，亦死之。同舟死事者八十余人。事闻，朝廷赠摅忠宣武正宪徇义功臣、银青荣禄大夫、辽阳等处行中书省平章政事、上柱国，谥忠肃。达礼麻识理达礼麻识理，字遵道，怯烈台氏。
现代文：朝廷闻讣，赠摅忠宣武正宪殉义功臣、银青荣禄大夫、辽阳等处行中书省平章政事、上柱国，谥忠肃。达礼麻识理，字遵道，姓怯烈台。
English: The imperial court heard about him and presented him with the titles of "Zhongzhong Xuanwu Zhengxian Zhiyi Gongshen," "Yinqing Ronglu Daifu" and "Liaoyang," etc. He was in charge of the political affairs of Pingzhang Province, Shangzhu Province, and Zhongzhong Su Province. He was literate and learned the language, followed the Tao, and had the surname of Qiu Rongtai.

古文：其先北方大族，六世祖始居开平。
现代文：其先祖为北方大族，自六世祖始居开平。
English: His ancestors were from the Great Northern Race, and he has lived in Kaiping since the sixth generation.

古文：父曰阿剌不花，江西行省参知政事，追封赵国公，谥襄惠。
现代文：父名阿剌不花，曾任江西行省参知政事，追封赵国公，谥襄惠。
English: His father's name was Aqianfuhua, and he served as the Jiangxi Provincial Councillor for Political Affairs, the successor of Zhao Guogong, and the successor of Zou Xianghui.

古文：达礼麻识理幼颖敏，从师授经史，过目辄领解。
现代文：达礼麻识理自幼聪敏，从师学经史，过目即能理解。
English: Darima has been clever since he was a child. He learned the history of scripture from his teacher and can understand it at a glance.

古文：至正五年，经筵选充译史，益自砥砺于学，搢绅先生皆以远大期之。
现代文：至正五年经筛选为译史，更加勤奋学习，士大夫们对他抱有很大希望。
English: In the fifth year of the Taisho era, he was selected as a translator of history and studied more diligently. Scholars and scholars had great hopes for him.

古文：转补御史台译史，遂除御史台照磨。
现代文：后转补御史台译史，又委任为御史台照磨。
English: Later, he was transferred to supplement the history of the translation of the History Channel, and was also appointed as the director of the History Channel.

古文：十五年，拜监察御史，出佥山北道肃政廉访司事，未行，留为詹事院长史。俄迁工部员外郎，复留为长史。
现代文：至正十五年，拜为监察御史，出任佥山北道肃政廉访司事，尚未启程又留任詹事院长史，很快又调任工部员外郎，但不久又留为长史。
English: By the fifteenth year of the Taisho era, Bae was appointed as the inspector of history, served as the secretary of the Lushan North-District Political Corruption Investigation Department, and had not yet left for the trip and remained as the president of history, and was soon transferred to the member of the Ministry of Industry and Trade, but soon remained as the long history.

古文：明年，除中议，寻升参议詹事院事。十七年，为太子家令。
现代文：至正十六年，升参议詹事院事。十七年，为太子家令。
English: In the 16th year of the Taisho era, he was promoted to Sangi Janzhiinji, and in the 17th year, he became a member of the Prince's household.

古文：十八年，历秘书太监、吏部侍郎、御史台经历、中书右司郎中。
现代文：十八年，历任秘书太监、吏部侍郎、御史台经历、中书右司郎中。
English: In the 18th year, the successive secretaries were eunuchs, servants of the cadres, experienced in the history department, and junior high school students of the right secretary of the middle school.

古文：十九年，除刑部尚书，提调南北兵马司巡绰事。
现代文：十九年，任刑部尚书，负责南北兵马司巡逻事。
English: In 1919, he was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Department, and was responsible for the patrols of the North and South Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：盗逼畿甸，人心大恐。达礼麻识理能镇之以静，民恃以为安。
现代文：反元义军逼近京畿地区，人心惶惶，达礼麻识理能沉着镇静，百姓也因此心安一些。
English: The anti-Yuan rebels were approaching the Gyeonggi region, and people were panicking. The Dalai Lama was able to remain calm, and the people were therefore more at ease.

古文：二十一年，由中书参议升中书参知政事、同知经筵事。
现代文：二十一年由中书参议升中书参知政事、同知经筵事。
English: In the 21st year, he was promoted from Chusho-sangyo to Chusho-sangyo, and from Chusho-sangyo to Chujo.

古文：二十三年冬，迁上都留守，兼开平府尹，加荣禄大夫，分司土岭，东镇三州，以督转输。
现代文：二十三年冬调任上都留守兼开平府尹，加荣禄大夫，分管土岭及东镇三州，监督运输。
English: In the winter transfer of the 23rd year, Yin and Garonglu, who were both concurrently in charge of Pingfu, were left in charge of Tuoling and Dongzhen Sanshou, supervising transportation.

古文：二十四年，朝廷以前中书平章政事塔失帖木儿来为留守。
现代文：至正二十四年，朝廷调前中书平章政事塔世帖木儿为上都留守。
English: Up to the 24th year of the Taishō era, the imperial court transferred the former chancellors Pingzhang Zongshi and Taisei Timur to Shangdu.

古文：时孛罗帖木儿拥兵京师，而皇太子出居于外，达礼麻识理与塔世帖木儿皆以忠义许国，相与结人心以观时变。
现代文：当时，孛罗帖木儿拥兵控制了京师，而皇太子居于外地。达礼麻识理与塔世帖木儿皆决心效忠于朝廷，共同团结各方面人士，注意时局的变化。
English: At that time, the supporters of Zoroaster Timur controlled the Beijing division, while the crown prince lived in a foreign country. Both Darius the Wise and Tashtemur were determined to be loyal to the imperial court, to unite people from all walks of life, and to pay attention to changes in the current situation.

古文：未几，改授塔世帖木儿为大司农。塔世帖木儿谓达礼麻识理曰： 我至京师则制于强臣，未易图也。 
现代文：不久，改授塔世帖木儿为大司农，塔世帖木儿对达礼麻识理说： 我到京师则受强臣孛罗帖木儿的制约，不容易有所作为。 
English: Soon after, Tashi Timur was promoted to the post of chief farmer. Tashi Timur said to Darima Zhili: "When I came to Beijing, I was constrained by the strong minister Zoro Timur, and it was not easy to make a difference.

古文：因留不行。
现代文：仍留上都不去京师任职。
English: Even if they stay, they will not go to Beijing to work.

古文：适脱吉儿以孛罗帖木儿命屯兵盖里泊，托腹心于宗王也速也不坚，授以金印，俾驻上都之东郊，而以留守善安集兵于瓦吉剌部落。
现代文：这时，脱吉儿因孛罗帖木儿屯兵于盖里泊，便托心腹至宗王也速也不坚，授以金印，使他屯驻于上都东郊，而以留守善安集兵于瓮吉剌部。
English: At this time, because of the arrival of Tamerlane's garrison in Gehrip, Dujeer trusted his heart to the Zongwang and gave him a gold seal, so that he would be stationed in the eastern suburbs of Shangdu, and stay in Shan'an to gather soldiers in the lower part of Gehrip.

古文：达礼麻识理遇之有礼，善安辞去。
现代文：达礼麻识理对善安待之以礼，善安辞去。
English: Darasama Sensei treated Zenan with courtesy, and Zenan resigned.

古文：孛罗帖木儿复调帖木儿、托忽速哥至上都，以守御为名，事益矛盾。
现代文：孛罗帖木儿以守御为名，再调帖木儿、托忽速哥至上都。
English: In the name of guarding the emperor, he transferred Timur and Toguryo to the capital.

古文：达礼麻识理与之周旋，略无几微见于外，而密遣前宗正紥鲁忽赤月鲁帖木儿潜通音问于罕哈哈剌海行枢密知院益老答儿，请亟调兵南行。又遣留守司照磨陈恭取兵兴州，访求在闲官吏之有才者，约束东西手八剌哈赤、虎贲司、纠集丁壮苗军，火铳什伍相联，一旦，布列铁幡竿山下，扬言四方勤王之师皆至，帖木儿等大骇，一夕东走，其所将兵尽溃。
现代文：达礼麻识理一面与孛罗帖木儿等周旋，一面密遣前宗正扎鲁忽赤月鲁帖木儿暗中与罕哈哈剌海行枢密知院益老答儿通好，请他尽快调兵南行；又遣留守司照磨陈恭调取兴州兵；还访求赋闲在家的官吏中之有才者，约束东西手八剌哈赤、虎贲司，纠集苗军，部署于铁幡竿山下，扬言四方勤王之师皆至。帖木儿等大为恐惧，连夜逃走，所部军队溃散。
English: On the one hand, Darius the Wise and the Wise negotiated with Zoroaster, and on the other hand, he secretly sent the former Zongzheng Zaru, the Red Moon, and Lu Thetmul to make a secret agreement with Hanhaha, the seafaring, privy councilor, to ask him to send troops to the south as soon as possible; he also sent the governor, Teruma Chengyong, to bring in the soldiers from Hing Province; he also visited the talented officials who were idle at home, restrained the east and west, and gathered the army of seedlings, and deployed them at the foot of the Tiehuangtang Mountain, threatening that all the

古文：已而秃坚帖木儿帅铁甲马步军蔽野而至，呼声动天。
现代文：达礼麻识理则加强防御。至正二十五年，皇太子在冀宁，命设立上都分省，任命塔世帖木儿为平章政事，达礼麻识理为右丞，授与他们有决断大权，以巩固元朝的根基。
English: By the 25th year of the Joseon Dynasty, the crown prince arrived in Jining and ordered the establishment of Shangdu Sub-provinces, appointing Ta Shetemur as the governor of Pingzhang Province and Dareima Zhelili as the right-hand man, granting them the power to make decisions in order to consolidate the foundation of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：达礼麻识理饬军士城守，申明逆顺之理以安人心，巡视城壁，昼夜不少息。
现代文：七月，孛罗帖木儿命秃坚帖木儿进军上都，并先遣利用少监帖里哥赤至上都广备军粮，远迎大军。
English: In July, Miao Luo Timur's son, Bald Jian Timur, marched into Shangdu, and made use of Shao Guan Timur's son, Red Supremacy, to prepare a large amount of grain for the army and welcome the large army.

古文：夜遣死士缒城而下，焚其攻具，而调副留守秃鲁迷失海牙引兵由小东门出，与之大战卧龙冈，败之。
现代文：秃坚帖木儿率领铁甲马步军进攻上都，喊杀声震天动地。达礼麻识理严令军士坚守，日夜巡逻，不敢稍有休息，调副留守秃鲁迷失海牙引兵由小东门出击，在卧龙冈大败秃坚帖木儿。
English: Bald Jian Timur led the Iron Armored Cavalry Infantry to attack Shangdu, and the shouts of murder shook the earth. Darima Zhili strictly ordered the sergeants to stand firm, patrolling day and night, not daring to have a little rest, and transferred the remaining guards to Bald Lu Lost Hague to lead the soldiers to attack from Xiaodongmen, and defeated Bald Jian Timur in Wolonggang.

古文：未几，孛罗帖木儿伏诛，秃坚帖木儿皆奔溃，而上都以安。
现代文：不久，孛罗帖木儿为朝廷诛杀，秃坚帖木儿的部队溃散，上都才安然无恙。
English: Soon after, Luo Timur fought and died for the imperial court, and Bald Guan Timur's troops were dispersed, leaving Shangdu unharmed.

古文：拜中书右丞，兼上都留守，提调虎贲司，加光禄大夫，赐黄金系腰，仍命提调东西手八剌哈赤。
现代文：达礼麻识理因功拜中书右丞，兼上都留守，领导虎贲司；加光禄大夫，赐黄金腰带，仍统领东西手八剌哈赤。
English: Due to his merits, Darima Satori was awarded the title of Chushujojo (中書右丞), and he stayed at the top to lead the Tiger Division; he was given a gold belt by Dr. Kaguroku, and still led the East and West Divisions of Hachihaka.

古文：既而上都分省罢，遥授中书平章政事、上都留守，位居第一，力辞不允。
现代文：其后废上都分省，授达礼麻识理中书平章政事、上都留守，位居第一。他力辞未准。
English: After that, Shangdu was abolished and divided into provinces. He was awarded the title of Reima Zhili Zhongshu Pingzhang Zhengji, and Shangdu was left behind, ranking first. He was not allowed to resign.

古文：明年，召为大宗正府也可紥鲁忽赤。
现代文：至正二十六年，召达礼麻识理回大都任大宗正府也可札鲁忽赤。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of the Taisho era, Dada Reima Satori was called back to the capital to serve as Daizong Seifu.

古文：迁翰林学士承旨。
现代文：二十七年，拜为太子詹事，转为翰林学士承旨。
English: In the 27th year, he changed his name from Prince Zhan Zhi to Hanlin Scholar Zheng Ji.

古文：秋，除知枢密院事、大抚军院事。
现代文：是年秋，任命为知枢密院事、大抚军院事。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he was appointed as a member of the Privy Council and a member of the Grand Council of the Armed Forces.

古文：吾其先殛之矣。 明旦，哈剌章入见帝，具以梦告，帝令以告皇太子。比出，则达礼麻识理已无疾而卒矣。
现代文：大抚军院之设立，本是对付扩廓帖木儿的，但内部不统一，事情难办，达礼麻识理到任后亦无事可做，后无疾而卒。
English: The establishment of the Dafu Military Academy was originally intended to deal with the expansion of Timur, but it was not unified internally, things were difficult to do, and there was nothing to do after Darima Satori took office, and he died without any illness.

