古文：魏舒，字阳元，任城樊人也。
现代文：魏舒，字阳元，任城樊人。
English: Wei Shu, Ziyang Yuan, Rencheng Xunren.

古文：少孤，为外家宁氏所养。
现代文：年幼时父亲死去，被外祖父宁氏家收养。
English: His father died when he was young, and he was adopted by his maternal grandfather, the Ning family.

古文：宁氏起宅，相宅者云： 当出贵甥。 
现代文：宁氏盖房，看宅地风水的人说： 将出贵甥。 
English: When the Ning family built a house, the feng shui expert said, "A great nephew will be born."

古文：外祖母以魏氏甥小而慧，意谓应之。
现代文：外祖母因为外孙魏氏年少而聪明，心中认为他应了风水先生的话。
English: Because her grandson Wei was young and clever, his grandmother thought that he was responding to the words of Mr. Feng Shui.

古文：舒曰： 当为外氏成此宅相。 
现代文：魏舒说： 我当为外公家证明这所宅院的吉相。 
English: Wei Shu said: I should prove the auspicious aspect of this house for my grandparent.

古文：久乃别居。
现代文：很久以后才另住他处。
English: It wasn't until much later that I moved to a different place.

古文：身长八尺二寸，姿望秀伟，饮酒石余，而迟钝质朴，不为乡亲所重。
现代文：身高八尺二寸，体形容貌秀美伟岸，能喝一石多酒，然而迟钝质朴，不被乡亲们看重。
English: He is eight feet two inches tall, has a beautiful body, can drink more than a stone of wine, but is dull and simple, and is not valued by the villagers.

古文：从叔父吏部郎衡，有名当世，亦不之知，使守水碓，每叹曰： 舒堪数百户长，我愿毕矣！ 
现代文：堂房叔父吏部郎魏衡，在当世有名，也不了解他，让他看守水力舂米的设施，并经常叹息说： 魏舒能胜任百户长，我就心满意足了! 
English: Dongfang's uncle, official Lang Weiheng, was famous in his day, but he didn't know him, so he let him guard the water-powered glutinous rice facilities, and often sighed and said: Wei Shun can be a competent head of a hundred households, I am satisfied!

古文：舒亦不以介意。
现代文：魏舒也不把这放在心上。
English: Wei Shu also did not take this to heart.

古文：不修常人之节，不为皎历之事，每欲容才长物，终不显人之短。
现代文：不注重常人的节操，不做矜持自高的事，经常想要包容才能崇尚人物。始终不揭露别人的短处。
English: They do not pay attention to the morality of ordinary people, do not do things that are self-righteous, often want to be tolerant in order to worship figures, and always do not expose the shortcomings of others.

古文：性好骑射，著韦衣。入山泽，以渔猎为事。
现代文：生性喜好骑马射箭，穿着苇衣，进入山泽，以捕鱼打猎为业。
English: His natural inclination is to ride a horse, shoot arrows, wear a yakitori, go into the mountains, and make fishing and hunting his profession.

古文：唯太原王乂谓舒曰： 卿终当为台辅，然今未能令妻子免饥寒，吾当助卿营之。 
现代文：衹有太原王义对魏舒说： 你最终将成为宰相，然而如今不能让妻子儿女免去饥寒，我应当帮你经营生计。 
English: Once, Taiyuan Wang Yi said to Wei Shu: You will eventually become the prime minister, but now you can't let your wife and children be free from hunger and cold. I should help you manage your livelihood.

古文：常振其匮乏，舒受而不辞。
现代文：时常赈济魏舒的不足，魏舒接受并不推辞。
English: He often makes allowances for Wei Shu's shortcomings, and Wei Shu accepts and does not refuse.

古文：舒尝诣野王，主人妻夜产，俄而闻车马之声，相问曰： 男也，女也？ 
现代文：魏舒曾经去野王，房主人的妻子夜裹生小孩，不一会儿听到车马的声音，车上人相问说： 是男孩还是女孩? 
English: Wei Shu once went to the wild king, the house owner's wife gave birth to a child in the night, and soon heard the sound of a carriage and horse. The people on the carriage asked each other: Is it a boy or a girl?

古文：曰： 男，书之，十五以兵死。 
现代文：回答说： 男孩，写下来，十五岁时死于利器。 
English: "Write it down, boy," he replied, "he died at the age of fifteen from a sharp instrument."

古文：复问： 寝者为谁？ 
现代文：又问： 屋裹睡的是谁? 
English: He also asked: Who is sleeping in the house?

古文：曰： 魏公舒。 
现代文：回答说： 魏公魏舒。 
English: He replied: Wei Gong Wei Shu.

古文：后十五载，诣主人，问所生兒何在，曰： 因条桑为斧伤而死。 
现代文：十五年以后，又去房主人那裹，问所生的儿子在哪裹，回答说： 因为砍桑枝被斧头砍伤而死。 
English: Fifteen years later he went to the owner of the house and asked him where his son was, to which he replied: "He was killed by an axe while he was cutting mulberry branches."

古文：舒自知当为公矣。
现代文：魏舒自己知道将会成为公。
English: Wei Shu knows that he will become a public figure.

古文：年四十余，郡上计掾察孝廉。
现代文：四十多岁时，郡中计掾访察孝廉。
English: When he was in his forties, he was visited by the county middle school teacher.

古文：宗党以舒无学业，劝令不就，可以为高耳。
现代文：宗族认为魏钟没有学业，劝他别去赴试，可以此表现高洁。
English: The clan thought that Wei Zhong did not study, and advised him not to go to the audition, so that he could perform nobly.

古文：舒曰： 若试而不中，其负在我，安可虚窃不就之高以为己荣乎！ 
现代文：魏舒说： 如果赴试而考不中，那责任在我，怎能以不赴试窃取高洁的虚名来作为自己的荣耀呢! 
English: Wei Shu said: If I go to the test and fail the test, then the responsibility is mine. How can I take it as my glory not to go to the test and steal the noble false name?

古文：于是自课。百日习一经，因而对策升第。
现代文：于是自学功课，百天学习一部《经》，因而对答策问并考中。
English: As a result, he did self-study, studying a part of the "Ching" for a hundred days, so he asked questions about the answers and passed the middle school examination.

古文：除渑池长，迁浚仪令，入为尚书郎。
现代文：授他渑池长，迁任浚仪令，入朝任尚书郎。
English: He was awarded the post of the chief of Suikei, transferred to the post of the chief of Junchi, and was appointed to the post of Shoshiro.

古文：时欲沙汰郎官。非其才者罢之。
现代文：当时要节选淘汰郎官，不称职的罢免。
English: At that time, it was necessary to select and eliminate officials who were incompetent.

古文：舒曰： 吾即其人也。 
现代文：魏舒说： 我就是该淘汰的人。 
English: Wei Shu said: I am the one who should be eliminated.

古文：襆被而出。
现代文：卷起被褥就走。
English: Roll up your bedding and go.

古文：同僚素无清论者咸有愧色，谈者称之。
现代文：同僚中一向没有高论的人都面有愧色，谈论此事的人称道魏舒。
English: Colleagues who have never been high-minded are ashamed, and those who talk about this are called Daowei Shu.

古文：累迁后将军钟毓长史，毓每与参佐射，舒常为画筹而已。
现代文：逐渐迁任后将军钟毓的长史，钟毓经常和部下射箭，魏舒常常为他筹划而已。
English: The long history of General Zhong Xi after he was gradually transferred, Zhong Xi often shot arrows with his subordinates, Wei Shu often planned for him.

古文：后遇朋人不足，以舒满数。
现代文：后来遇上友人不足，让魏舒凑数。
English: Later, when he was short of friends, he asked Wei Shu to make up the number.

古文：毓初不知其善射。
现代文：钟毓起初不知魏舒善于射箭。
English: At first, Zhong Qi did not know that Wei Shu was good at archery.

古文：舒容范闲雅，发无不中，举坐愕然。
现代文：魏舒射姿典雅，射出没有不中的，满座惊讶，没人比得上。
English: Wei Shu's shooting posture is elegant, there is nothing wrong with the shot, the whole audience is surprised, no one can match it.

古文：莫有敌者。毓叹而谢曰： 吾之不足以尽卿才，有如此射矣，岂一事哉！ 
现代文：钟毓感叹道歉说： 我没有充分发挥你的才能，有如此好的射艺，难道仅限于射箭这一件事吗! 
English: "I didn't give full play to your talent. With such a good shooting skill, is it limited to archery?

古文：转相国参军，封剧阳子。
现代文：转任相国参军，被封为剧阳子。
English: He was transferred to join the army in his home country and was given the title of yangzi of the theater.

古文：府朝碎务，未尝见是非；至于废兴大事，众人莫能断者，舒徐为筹之，多出众议之表。
现代文：在官府朝中细碎的事务上，未曾看出魏舒治政的好坏；至于关系到国家废兴的大事，众人没有能作出决断的，魏舒慢慢筹划它，往往超出众议之外。
English: In the detailed affairs of the government, the government and the people, it has not been seen whether Wei Shu is good or bad at governing the country; as for the important matters related to the country's revival, the people have not been able to make a decision, Wei Shu has been slowly planning it, often beyond the public discussion.

古文：文帝深器重之，每朝会坐罢，目送之曰： 魏舒堂堂，人之领袖也。 
现代文：文帝深深器重他，每逢朝会完毕，目送他说： 魏舒容貌堂堂，是众人的领袖。 
English: Emperor Wen held him in high esteem. After every imperial court meeting, he would see him off, saying, "Wei Shu is handsome and a leader of many people.

古文：迁宜阳、荥阳二郡太守，甚有声称。
现代文：迁任宜阳、荣阳两郡太守，很有好名声。
English: He was transferred to be the governor of Yiyang and Rongyang counties, and gained a good reputation.

古文：征拜散骑常侍。
现代文：征入朝中任散骑常侍。
English: He was conscripted into the Imperial Household Agency as a samurai.

古文：出为冀州刺史，在州三年，以简惠称。
现代文：出任冀州刺史，在冀州三年，有简明仁爱的名声。
English: He served as the chief historian of Jizhou for three years. He has a reputation for simplicity and benevolence.

古文：入为侍中。
现代文：入朝任侍中。
English: Entered the imperial court as a chamberlain.

古文：武帝以舒清素，特赐绢百匹。
现代文：武帝因为魏舒清廉朴素，特地赐绢百匹。
English: Emperor Wu specially bestowed a hundred yakitori on her because of Wei Shu's cleanliness and simplicity.

古文：迁尚书，以公事当免官，诏以赎论。
现代文：迁任尚书，因公事应当免去官职，韶书命令按赎过论处。
English: Shang Shu, who was transferred, should be relieved of his official duties due to official business, and the order to remove him should be dealt with according to the theory of redemption.

古文：舒三娶妻皆亡，是岁自表乞假还本郡葬妻，诏赐葬地一顷，钱五十万。
现代文：魏舒娶了三次妻都死了，逭年自己上表请假回本郡安葬妻子，下韶赐葬地一顷，钱五十万。
English: Wei Shu married three times, and all of his wives died. In the third year, he asked for leave to return to the county to bury his wife, and was granted one hectare of burial land and 500,000 yuan.

古文：太康初，拜右仆射。
现代文：太康初年，官拜右仆射。
English: In the first year of Taikang, officials worshiped the right-hand shot.

古文：舒与卫瓘、山涛、张华等以六合混一，宜用古典封禅东岳，前后累陈其事，帝谦让不许。
现代文：魏舒与卫罐、山渣、退趸等人认为天下统一，应按照古代典章在泰山封禅，前后多次陈述此事，皇帝谦让不同意。
English: Wei Shu, Wei Jian, Shan Jie, and Qi Jie believed that the world should be unified and should be sealed in Mount Tai in accordance with ancient regulations. They repeatedly stated this matter, but the emperor humbly disagreed.

古文：以舒为左仆射，领吏部。
现代文：任命魏舒为左仆射，兼管吏部。
English: He appointed Wei Shu as his left-hand man, also in charge of the personnel department.

古文：舒上言： 今选六宫，聘以玉帛，而旧使御府丞奉聘，宣成嘉礼，贽重使轻。
现代文：魏舒上书说： 如今挑选六宫，以玉帛行聘礼，而以往派御府丞奉送聘礼，完成喜庆礼仪，礼物重而使者轻。
English: Wei Shu said in the letter: Nowadays, the six palaces are selected and the betrothal gifts are made with jade ingots, while in the past, the empresses were sent to present the betrothal gifts to complete the festive etiquette. The gifts are heavy, but the messengers are light.

古文：以为拜三夫人宜使卿，九嫔使五官中郎将，美人、良人使谒者，于典制为弘。 
现代文：我认为拜三夫人应派遣卿，九嫔派遣五宫中郎将，美人、良人派遣谒者，这样在典章制度方面显得盛大。 
English: In my opinion, Lady Baisan should send a lord, the Nine Dwarfs should send a Fifth Prince, and the Beauties and Lovers should send a concubine. This would be grand in terms of the award system.

古文：有诏详之，众议异同，遂寝。
现代文：下韶书让详细论证此事，众人的意见不一，于是被搁置下来。
English: The lower court asked for a detailed argument on the matter, and the opinions of many people were different, so it was shelved.

古文：加右光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：加任右光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: He was also appointed as Uko Roku no daibu and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：及山涛薨，以舒领司徒，有顷即真。
现代文：等到山涛去世，让魏舒兼任司徒，不久正式就任。
English: After Shantao's death, Wei Shu was appointed to the post of chief disciple, and he officially assumed the post soon after.

古文：舒有威重德望，禄赐散之九族，家无余财。
现代文：委蜡有威望，俸禄赏赐分送给亲属，家中没有多余财物。
English: The committee has prestige, the salary is given to relatives, and there is no extra property in the family.

古文：陈留周震累为诸府所辟，辟书既下，公辄丧亡，佥号震为杀公掾，莫有辟者。
现代文：陈留人周震几次被多个官府征召，聘书下达以后，官府主人就死去，众人给周震一个外号叫杀公掾，没有征用他的人。
English: Zhou Zhen, a Chen resident, was called up several times by multiple government offices. After the letter of appointment was issued, the owner of the government office died, and everyone gave Zhou Zhen a nickname called "Kill the Public Servant," who did not commandeer him.

古文：舒乃命之，而竟无患，识者以此称其达命。
现代文：魏舒就任用他，而竟然没有灾患，有见识的人根据此事说魏舒通达知命。
English: Wei Shutong hired him, but there was no disaster. According to this, people with insight said that Wei Shutong gave his life.

古文：以年老，每称疾逊位。
现代文：因年老，常称病辞职。
English: Due to old age, often called illness, he resigned.

古文：中复暂起，署兗州中正，寻又称疾。
现代文：中间又短时间就职，代理兖州中正，不久又称病。
English: In the middle, he took office for a short period of time, acting for Zhangzhou Zhongzheng, and soon called in sick.

古文：尚书左丞郤诜与舒书曰： 公久疾小差，视事是也，唯上所念。
现代文：尚书左丞却说给魏舒写信说： 公久病稍好，治理政务就是了，这正是皇上所关心的。
English: Shang Shuzo, however, said that he would write to Wei Shu, saying: "Gongjiu's illness is a little better, so it's just a matter of administering government affairs, which is what the emperor is concerned about."

古文：何竟起讫还卧，曲身回法，甚失具瞻之望。
现代文：为什么重新就职后又卧病，委曲自身回避法度，很是失去了众人的厚望。
English: Why did he fall ill again after taking office, and why did he evade the law? He has lost the high hopes of many people.

古文：公少立巍巍，一旦弃之，可不惜哉！ 
现代文：公年少时建立了巍巍大业，一旦放弃，难道不可惜吗! 
English: When he was a young man, he established a great business, once he gave it up, wouldn't it be a shame!

古文：舒称疾如初。
现代文：魏舒和起初一样仍旧称病。
English: Wei Shu still complains of illness, as he did at the beginning.

古文：后以灾异逊位，帝不听。
现代文：后来因灾异请求辞官，皇帝不答应。
English: Later, the emperor did not agree to his request to resign due to a natural disaster.

古文：后因正旦朝罢还第，表送章绶。
现代文：此后趁正月初一朝会完毕回到宅第，上表送还印章绶带。
English: After that, he took advantage of the first day of the first month of the year to return to his residence after the meeting was over, and returned the seal ribbon to the table.

古文：帝手诏敦勉。而舒执意弥固，乃下诏曰： 司徒、剧阳子舒，体道弘粹，思量经远，忠肃居正，在公尽规。
现代文：皇帝下手韶敦促劝勉，而魏舒坚决坚持己意，于是下诏说： 司徒、剧阳子魏舒，行道宏大精粹，思量深远，忠敬正直，一心在公，尽力谋划。
English: The emperor urged and exhorted, while Wei Shu resolutely insisted on his own will, so he issued the following edict: "Stu, the playboy Wei Shu, has a grand essence, far-sighted, loyal and honest, dedicated to the public, and tries his best to plan.

古文：入管铨衡，官人允叙；出赞衮职，敷弘五教。
现代文：在朝中铨选官吏，任命官员公允有秩序；出任地方官，敷陈弘大五教。
English: In the imperial court, officials are elected, and officials are appointed in a fair and orderly manner; local officials are appointed according to the Five Teachings of Chen Hongda.

古文：惠训播流，德声茂著，可谓朝之俊乂者也。
现代文：美好的教诲流传四方，声望显著，可以说是朝中的俊杰人物。
English: His fine teachings were spread far and wide, and his reputation was remarkable. He could be said to be the most outstanding person in the imperial court.

古文：而屡执冲让，辞旨恳诚，申览反覆，省用怃然。
现代文：然而屡次表示谦让，言辞心意恳切真诚，我反复阅览，读来令人若有所失。
English: However, he repeatedly expressed his humility, his words were sincere and sincere, and I repeatedly read them, which made me feel a little lost.

古文：盖成人之美，先典所与，难违至情。
现代文：成就别人的美意，是先代典章所赞许的，难于违背他的诚心。
English: It is difficult to go against the sincerity of a person who is commended by the previous generation's regulations for fulfilling the good intentions of others.

古文：今听其所执，以剧阳子就第，位同三司，禄赐如前。
现代文：如今听从他的要求，以剧阳子身份回府第，位同三司，俸禄赏赐和以前相同。
English: Now, he has obeyed his request and returned to the prefecture as a yakuza actor, with the same rank as Sanji, and the same salary reward as before.

古文：几杖不朝，赐钱百万，床帐簟褥自副。
现代文：赐几案手杖，不必上朝，赐钱百万，床帐席褥自相配套。
English: Give a few cases of canes, do not have to go to the morning, give money millions, bedside tables and mattresses are self-supporting.

古文：以舍人四人为剧阳子舍人，置官骑十人。
现代文：用舍人四人做剧阳子舍人，设置官骑十人。
English: Four horsemen are used to make a yangzi horseman, and ten horsemen are set up.

古文：使光禄勋奉策，主者详案典礼，令皆如旧制。 
现代文：派光禄勋奉送策书，主持此事的人详细地按照典章礼节，需一切依照旧制。 
English: The person in charge of the matter should follow the regulations and etiquette in detail, and everything should be done according to the old system.

古文：于是赐安车驷马，门施行马。
现代文：于是赐安车驷马，门前设置鹿角木架。
English: As a result, a horse-drawn carriage was provided, and a deer antler stand was set up in front of the door.

古文：舒为事必先行而后言，逊位之际，莫有知者。
现代文：魏舒办事必定先做后说，辞职时，没有人知道。
English: Wei Shu said that when he resigned, no one knew.

古文：时论以为晋兴以来，三公能辞荣善终者，未之有也。
现代文：当时的议论认为晋开国以来，三公能辞职荣耀结局美好的，还没有别人。
English: At that time, it was said that since the founding of the People's Republic of China, there was no one else who was able to resign from the post of the three public officials with glory and a happy ending.

古文：司空卫瓘与舒书曰： 每与足下共论此事，日日未果，可谓瞻之在前，忽焉在后矣。 
现代文：司空卫罐给魏舒写信说： 常与你共同议论辞职的事，每次没有结果，可以说是看此事在前面，一下又落在了后面。 
English: Sikyong Wei Can wrote to Wei Shu: We often discussed the matter of resignation with you, but each time there was no result. It can be said that we saw the matter in front of us, but it suddenly fell behind.

古文：太熙元年薨，时年八十二。
现代文：太熙元年去世，时年八十二岁。
English: Tae Hee died in 1981, at the age of 82.

古文：帝甚伤悼，赗赙优厚，谥曰康。
现代文：皇帝很是哀悼，赠与安葬的财物优厚，谧号康。
English: The emperor was in great mourning, and gave him a rich burial gift, the name Kang.

古文：子混，字延广，清惠有才行，为太子舍人。
现代文：儿子魏混字延广，清静聪慧有才能，任太子舍人。
English: The son of Wei mixed-character Yan Guang, Qing Jing was clever and talented, and he was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：年二十七，先舒卒，朝野咸为舒悲惜。
现代文：二十七岁时，死在魏舒之前，朝廷内外都为魏舒悲伤痛惜。
English: At the age of twenty-seven, before the death of Wei Shu, both inside and outside the court were saddened and deplored for Wei Shu.

古文：舒每哀恸，退而叹曰： 吾不及庄生远矣，岂以无益自损乎！ 
现代文：魏舒常常悲痛，事后叹息说： 我比庄生差得远了，岂能用无益的悲痛来损伤自己呢! 
English: Wei Shu was often sad, and afterwards he sighed and said: I am far worse than Zhuang Sheng, how can I hurt myself with useless sorrow!

古文：于是终服不复哭。
现代文：于是一直到服丧完毕不再哭泣。
English: So I didn't cry again until the funeral was over.

古文：诏曰： 舒惟一子，薄命短折。
现代文：诏书说： 魏舒衹有一个儿子，薄命短寿。
English: The edict said: Wei Shuxuan had a son with a short life expectancy.

古文：舒告老之年，处穷独之苦，每念怛然，为之嗟悼。
现代文：魏舒告老逊位时，遭受困窘孤独的痛苦，每当想起此事就悲伤，为他感叹哀悼。
English: When Wei Shu abdicated, he suffered the pain of embarrassment and loneliness. Whenever he thought about it, he was sad and lamented for him.

古文：思所以散愁养气，可更增滋味品物。
现代文：思忖散愁养气的方法，可以进一步增加有滋味的物品。
English: The method of thinking about how to dispel worries and raise spirits can further increase the number of delicious items.

古文：仍给赐阳燧四望繐窗户皁轮车牛一乘，庶出入观望，或足散忧也。 
现代文：再赐给阳燧四望总窗户皂轮车牛一乘，希望出入观望，也许足以排遣忧愁。 
English: And give the impotent four-eyes-out-of-the-total-window soap-wheeled ox a ride, hoping to go in and out to watch, perhaps enough to dispel sadness.

古文：以庶孙融嗣。
现代文：让庶琢魏融继嗣。
English: Let his son-in-law Taku Wei Rong succeed him.

古文：又早卒，从孙晃嗣。
现代文：又死得早，侄孙魏晃继嗣。
English: He also died early, and his nephew Wei Akira became his successor.

古文：李憙，字季和，上党铜鞮人也。
现代文：李憙字季和，上党铜鞮人。
English: Li Xi, surnamed Jihe, was a member of the upper echelon of the Party.

古文：父牷，汉大鸿胪。
现代文：父亲李牷，是汉朝大鸿胪。
English: His father, Li Xi, was a Han dynasty great nobleman.

古文：憙少有高行，博学研精，与北海管宁以贤良征，不行。
现代文：李憙年轻时有好品行，广博地学习精深地研究，与北海人管宁以贤良被征召，不去。
English: When he was young, Li Yao had a good character, studied widely and deeply, and was conscripted with the North Sea people, preferring to be virtuous and not go.

古文：累辟三府，不就。
现代文：几次征入三府，不就任。
English: He was conscripted into the three prefectures several times, but never took office.

古文：宣帝复辟憙为太傅属，固辞疾，郡县扶舆上道，时憙母疾笃，乃窃逾泫氏城而徒还，遂遭母丧，论者嘉其志节。
现代文：宣帝又征召李悫任太傅属，以有病为藉口坚决推辞，郡县扶他登车上路。当时奎台的母亲病重，于是偷偷翻越泫氏城墙徒步回家，于是赶上母亲的丧事，议论此事的人赞美他的志气节操。
English: Emperor Xuan also conscripted Li Xuan to serve as Taifu's subordinate, but he firmly refused on the pretext that he was ill, and the county helped him get on the road. At that time, Kuidai's mother was seriously ill, so he secretly climbed over the city wall of the Xiong family on foot to get home, and then caught up with his mother's funeral. People who discussed this matter praised his determination and discipline.

古文：后为并州别驾，时骁骑将军秦朗过并州，州将毕轨敬焉。令乘车至阁。
现代文：后来任并州别驾，当时骁骑将军秦朗路过并州，州将毕轨对他恭敬，让他乘车到官署。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of the annexed prefecture. At that time, the cavalry general Qin Lang passed by the annexed prefecture. The prefectural governor paid him respect and let him take a ride to the government office.

古文：憙固谏以为不可，轨不得已从之。
现代文：李意坚决劝谏认为不能那样，毕轨不得已依从了他。
English: Li Yi resolutely advised Zou that he could not do that, and Zou reluctantly obeyed him.

古文：景帝辅政，命憙为大将军从事中郎，憙到，引见，谓憙曰： 昔先公辟君而君不应，今孤命君而君至，何也？ 
现代文：景帝辅佐朝政时，任命奎台为大将军从事中郎，李憙到任，被引见，景帝对李憙说： 过去先公征用你而你不答应，如今我任命你你就来了，为什么呢? 
English: When Emperor Jing's assistant was in charge of the government, he appointed Kuidai as the general to be the middle man. When Li Qiye took office and was introduced to him, Emperor Jing said to Li Qiye, "In the past, I requisitioned you and you did not agree. Now that I have appointed you, you have come. Why?

古文：对曰： 先君以礼见待，憙得以礼进退。
现代文：李憙回答说： 先君以礼对待我，我得以依照礼决定进仕或退身。
English: Li Yan replied: The Ancestor treated me with courtesy, and I was able to decide whether to serve or retire according to courtesy.

古文：明公以法见绳，憙畏法而至。 
现代文：明公用法来约束我，我畏惧法律就来了。 
English: When I feared the law, the law came for me.

古文：帝甚重之。
现代文：景帝很是器重他。
English: Emperor Jing was very fond of him.

古文：转司马，寻拜右长史。
现代文：转任司马，不久官拜右长史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Sima, and soon he was promoted to the post of Ujinaga.

古文：从讨毌丘俭还，迁御史中丞。
现代文：跟从讨伐丘俭回朝，迁任御史中丞。
English: He returned to the imperial court as a follower of the crusader Qujian and was transferred to the post of Goshi Chujo.

古文：当官正色，不惮强御，百僚震肃焉。
现代文：居官正直，不畏强暴权势，百官为此震肃。
English: Officials are honest, not afraid of violence and power, and hundreds of officials are shocked.

古文：荐乐安孙璞，亦以道德显，时人称为知人。
现代文：举荐乐安人孙璞，也因有道德而显赫，当时的人称赞他能识别人才。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the founder of the Le An dynasty, was also renowned for his morality. People at the time praised him for his ability to recognize talent.

古文：寻迁大司马，以公事免。
现代文：不久迁任大司马，因公事被免官。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of grand steward, but was dismissed for official business.

古文：司马伷为宁北将军，镇鄴，以憙为军司。
现代文：司马伯任宁北将军，镇守邺，以李患为军司。
English: Sima Bo was appointed as the general of Ningbei, the town guard was appointed as the town watchman, and Li Zi was appointed as the military governor.

古文：顷之，除凉州刺史，加扬威将军、假节，领护羌校尉，绥御华夷，甚有声绩。
现代文：不久，任命李悫为凉州刺史，加任扬威将军、假节，兼护羌校尉，安定华夏抵御蛮夷，很有声望业绩。
English: Soon, Li Qian was appointed as the chief historian of Liangzhou. He was also appointed as the Yangwei General, the False Festival, and the Colonel of the Guard of Liangzhou. He was responsible for the stable defense of Huaxia against the barbarians, which was a very prestigious achievement.

古文：羌虏犯塞，憙因其隙会，不及启闻，辄以便宜出军深入，遂大克获，以功重免谴，时人比之汉朝冯、甘焉。
现代文：羌人进犯边塞，李患趁着有机可乘时，来不及奏报，就适时出兵深入，于是取得大胜，因功劳大免遭谴责，当时的人把他比为汉朝的遁奎世、甘延寿。
English: The Xiongnu attacked the frontier post. Li Zi took advantage of the opportunity and sent troops deep into the frontier before it was time to report. As a result, he won a great victory and was not condemned for his great contribution. People at the time compared him to the Han Dynasty's Quixote and Gan Yanzhou.

古文：于是请还，许之。
现代文：于是请求回京，答应了他。
English: So I asked him to come back to Kyoto, and he agreed.

古文：居家月余，拜冀州刺史，累迁司隶校尉。
现代文：住在家中一个多月，官拜冀州刺史，逐渐升任司隶校尉。
English: He lived at home for more than a month, and gradually rose to the rank of captain in the Jizhou Province.

古文：及魏帝告禅于晋，憙以本官行司徒事，副太尉郑冲奉策。
现代文：等到魏皇帝向晋禅让时，李悫以本官代理司徒的职务，做太尉郑冲的副手奉持策书。
English: When Emperor Wei ceded to Emperor Jinzen, Li Qian took on the duties of acting as the secretary, and served as the deputy of Lieutenant Zheng Chong.

古文：泰始初，封祁侯。
现代文：泰始初年，被封为祁侯。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he was given the title of "magistrate."

古文：憙上言： 故立进令刘友、前尚书山涛、中山王睦、故尚书仆射武陔各占官三更稻田，请免涛、睦等官。
现代文：李憙上疏说： 过去的立进令刘友、前尚书山涛、中山王司马睦、已故的尚书仆射武陔各占公家三更稻田，请求免去山涛、司马睦等人官职。
English: Li Xuan Shangsu said: In the past, Liu You, the former Shangshu Shantao, Zhongshan Wang Sima Mutu, and the late Shangshu minion Sha Wuyi each occupied the rice fields of the public house, and requested that Shantao and Sima Mutu be removed from their official positions.

古文：陔已亡，请贬谥。 
现代文：武陔已经死了，请求贬损他的谧号。 
English: Takeshi is dead and asked for his nickname to be taken down.

古文：诏曰： 法者，天下取正，不避亲贵，然后行耳，吾岂将枉纵其间哉！
现代文：韶书说： 法律这种东西，天下以它为准绳，不回避皇亲贵族，逭之后才能实行，我怎能在其间放纵邪枉呢!
English: The imperial edict said: The law is something that the whole world takes as its yardstick. It does not avoid the imperial family and the nobility. It can only be implemented after the imperial edict. How can I indulge in wickedness in the midst of it?

古文：然案此事皆是友所作，侵剥百姓，以缪惑朝士。
现代文：然而考察此事都是刘友做的，侵犯剥削百姓，迷惑朝廷官员。
English: However, the investigation of this matter was all done by Liu You, violating and exploiting the people, and confusing the court officials.

古文：奸吏乃敢作此，其考竟友以惩邪佞。
现代文：奸臣居然敢做这样的事，当刑讯追究刘友来惩戒邪佞。
English: The treacherous vassal dared to do such a thing. Liu You should be prosecuted and punished.

古文：涛等不贰其过者，皆勿有所问。
现代文：山涛等人如不再出过失，都不再问罪。
English: If Shantao and others no longer make mistakes, they will no longer be guilty.

古文：《易》称 王臣蹇蹇，匪躬之故 。
现代文：《易经》说 王臣忠诚，是因为没有私心 。
English: "I Ching" says that Wang Chen is loyal because he is selfless.

古文：今憙亢志在公，当官而行，可谓 邦之司直 者矣。
现代文：如今李患坚持一心在公的志向，按照责任办事，可以说是 国家的司直 啊。
English: Nowadays, Li Zi adheres to the public-spiritedness and acts in accordance with his responsibilities, which can be said to be the country's integrity.

古文：光武有云： 贵戚且敛手以避二鲍 。
现代文：光武帝说过 皇亲国戚尚且收敛自己来回避二鲍，是否就是这样呢!
English: Emperor Guangwu said that the relatives of the emperor and the relatives of the country still restrain themselves to avoid the two baos, is this so!

古文：岂其然乎！其申敕群僚，各慎所司，宽宥之恩，不可数遇也。 
现代文：告诫众官吏，各自慎重对待自己的职务，宽大原宥的恩典，是不会多次遇上的。 
English: To admonish all officials to be prudent in their duties, the grace of pardon will not be met many times.

古文：憙为二代司隶，朝野称之。
现代文：李意任两代司隶，朝廷内外称赞他。
English: Li Yi appointed two generations of subordinates, and he was praised inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：以公事免。
现代文：因公事被免官。
English: He was removed from office for official business.

古文：其年，皇太子立，以憙为太子太傅。
现代文：那年，立了皇太子，任命李患为太子太傅。
English: That year, the crown prince was established and Li Zu was appointed as the crown prince's daifu.

古文：自魏明帝以后，久旷东宫，制度废阙，官司不具，詹事、左右率、庶子、中舍人诸官并未置，唯置卫率令典兵，二傅并摄众事。
现代文：自魏明帝以后，束宫长久空旷，制度荒废缺损，官员不完备，詹事、左右率、庶子、中舍人等官职都没设置，衹设置了卫率让他主管兵马，太傅、少傅共同代理众事。
English: Since the Wei Ming Dynasty, the Sok Palace has been empty for a long time, the system is wasteful and defective, the officials are incomplete, and there are no official positions such as Zhan Zhi, Left and Right Zhi, Bastard, Middle Zhe Ren, etc. However, the Wei Zhi has been set up to let him be in charge of soldiers and horses, and Taifu and Shao Fu jointly represent all affairs.

古文：憙在位累年，训道尽规。
现代文：李意在位多年，教训道义尽心谋划。
English: Li Yi has been on the throne for many years, and has devoted himself to the lessons of morality and justice.

古文：迁尚书仆射，拜特进、光禄大夫，以年老逊位。
现代文：迁任尚书仆射，授特进、光禄大夫，因年老退位。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shangshu butler, given the titles of special envoy and Guanglu doctor, and abdicated due to old age.

古文：诏曰： 光禄大夫、特进李憙，杖德居义，当升台司。毗亮朕躬，而以年尊致仕。
现代文：韶书说： 光禄大夫、特进李意，凭仗美德推行道义，应当官居台司，辅助光大皇家，然而因年高辞去官职。
English: The imperial edict said: Dr. Guanglu and Special Inspector Li Yiming, by virtue of virtue and promoting morality, should be the official residence secretary and assist the Guangda royal family, but they resigned from the official post due to their advanced age.

古文：虽优游无为，可以颐神，而虚心之望，能不怃然！
现代文：虽然悠闲无为，可以养神，然而虚心的名望，怎能不让人感慨!
English: Although idleness and inaction can raise one's spirits, how can one not be moved by the vanity of fame?

古文：其因光禄之号，改假金紫，置官骑十人，赐钱五十万，禄赐班礼，一如三司，门施行马。 
现代文：因袭光禄的称号，改授假金紫，设置官骑十人，赐钱五十万，俸禄赏赐等级礼仪，与三司相同，门前设置鹿角木栅。 
English: As a result of inheriting the title of Guanglu, he was awarded fake gold and purple, set up ten officials and horsemen, gave half a million in money, and awarded a grade of salary. The etiquette was the same as that of the three departments, and a deer horn wooden grate was set up in front of the door.

古文：初，憙为仆射时，凉州虏寇边，憙唱义遣军讨之。
现代文：当初，李患任仆射时，凉州敌人入侵边境，李意倡导起兵去讨伐。
English: At first, when Li Zhirong was shot, Liangzhou's enemies invaded the border, Li Yi advocated raising an army to fight.

古文：朝士谓出兵不易，虏未足为患，竟不从之。
现代文：朝廷官员认为出兵不易，敌人不足以造成祸患，最终不听从李意。
English: The court officials thought that it was not easy to send troops and that the enemy was not strong enough to cause a disaster, so they ultimately did not follow Li's wishes.

古文：后虏果大纵逸，凉州覆没，朝廷深悔焉。
现代文：后来敌人果然极端放肆，凉州覆没，朝廷深感后悔。
English: Later, the enemy was indeed extremely presumptuous, and Liangzhou was overrun, and the imperial court deeply regretted it.

古文：以憙清素贫俭，赐绢百匹。
现代文：因李患清廉朴素节俭，赐绢百匹。
English: Because Li suffered from chastity, simplicity and frugality, he was given a hundred horses.

古文：及齐王攸出镇，憙上疏谏争，辞甚恳切。
现代文：等到齐王司马攸出外镇守，李患上疏谏静，言辞很是恳切。
English: When the king of Qi, Sima You, went out to guard the town, Li suffered from drowsiness, and his words were very earnest.

古文：憙自历仕，虽清非异众，而家无储积，亲旧故人乃至分衣共食，未尝私以王官。
现代文：李意自从做官，虽然不是清廉得与众不同，然而家中没有积蓄，与亲朋好友甚至共享衣食，未曾利用朝廷官员身份谋私。
English: Since he became an official, Li Yi, although he is not exceptionally clean and honest, has no savings at home. He even shares food and clothing with his relatives and friends. He has never used his status as an official of the imperial court to seek personal gain.

古文：及卒，追赠太保，谥曰成。
现代文：等到死后，追赠太保，谧号成。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo and given a posthumous name.

古文：子赞嗣。
现代文：儿子李赞继嗣。
English: He is succeeded by his son, Li Zan.

古文：少子俭，字仲约，历左积弩将军、屯骑校尉。
现代文：小儿子李俭字仲约，历任左积弩将军、屯骑校尉。
English: The youngest son, Li Jian, was named Zhongyu, and successively held the positions of Zuojishan General and Tunjiai Lieutenant.

古文：俭子弘字世彦，少有清节，永嘉末，历给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
现代文：李俭的儿子李弘字世彦，年少时即有清廉的节操，永嘉末年，历任给事黄门侍郎、散骑常侍。
English: Li Jian's son, Li Hongzhi, a.k.a. Shihang, was a virtuous and honest person when he was young. At the end of Yongjia's life, he was appointed to the posts of Huangmen waiter and horseback riding attendant.

古文：刘寔，字子真，平原高唐人也。
现代文：刘写字子真，平原高唐人。
English: Liu is a true calligrapher, a plain high-ranking Chinese.

古文：汉济北惠王寿之后也，父广，斥丘令。
现代文：是汉朝济北惠王刘寿的后代，父亲刘广，是斥丘令。
English: He was a descendant of Liu Shou, the Jibei Hui King of the Han Dynasty, and his father, Liu Guang, was a member of the Kukai clan.

古文：寔少贫苦，卖牛衣以自给。
现代文：刘宜少年时贫苦，靠卖牛衣来养活自己。
English: When Liu Yi was a boy, he was poor and supported himself by selling cow clothes.

古文：然好学，手约绳，口诵书，博通古今。
现代文：然而他好学，手裹缠着绳子，口中还诵读着诗书，知识广博通晓古今。
English: However, he is eager to learn, with ropes wrapped around his hands and poetry books on his lips, he has a vast knowledge of ancient and modern times.

古文：清身洁己，行无瑕玷。
现代文：自身品德清洁，行为没有瑕玷。
English: One's own moral character is pure, and one's behavior is without blemish.

古文：郡察孝廉，州举秀才，皆不行。
现代文：郡中访察孝廉，州裹推举秀才，都不去。
English: The county middle school will not visit Xiaolian, and the state will not go to select the best talents.

古文：以计吏入洛，调为河南尹丞，迁尚书郎、廷尉正。
现代文：以计吏身份进洛阳，调任河南尹丞，迁任尚书郎、廷尉正。
English: He entered Luoyang as a tax collector, was transferred to Henan Yin Zheng, and was transferred to Shang Shuro and Ting Jizheng.

古文：后历吏部郎，参文帝相国军事，封循阳子。
现代文：后来历任吏部郎，参与文帝相国军事，被封为循阳子。
English: Later, successive ministers of the Ministry of Civil Affairs participated in the military of the State of Emperor Wen and were given the title of Chuyangzi.

古文：钟会、邓艾之伐蜀也，有客问寔曰： 二将其平蜀乎？ 
现代文：钟会、邓艾讨伐蜀国时，有客人问刘宫说： 两位将领能平定蜀国吗? 
English: When Zhong Hui and Deng Ai led the campaign against Shu, a guest asked Liu Gong, "Can the two generals conquer Shu?"

古文：寔曰： 破蜀必矣，而皆不还。 
现代文：刘宫说： 必定能击破蜀国，然而都回不来了。 
English: Liu Gong said, "I can definitely defeat Shu, but I can't come back."

古文：客问其故，笑而不答，竟如其言。
现代文：客人问其中的缘故，笑着不说，结局正如刘害所说的那样。
English: When the guests asked the reason for this, they laughed and did not say anything. The outcome was just as Liu Xiang had said.

古文：寔之先见，皆此类也。
现代文：刘窟的先见之明，都类此。
English: Liu Guo's foresight is like this.

古文：以世多进趣，廉逊道阙，乃著《崇让论》以矫之。
现代文：因为世上进取竞争过盛，廉洁谦逊的品德缺损，于是着《崇让论》来矫正世风。
English: Because aggressive competition is too prevalent in the world, the moral defect of honesty and modesty prevails, so "The Theory of Concession" is used to correct the world style.

古文：其辞曰：古之圣王之化天下，所以贵让者，欲以出贤才，息争竞也。
现代文：文章说：古代圣王在教化天下时，之所以要崇尚谦让，是因为想发现贤才，平息竞争。
English: The article said: When the ancient holy kings were enlightening the world, the reason why they wanted to advocate modesty was because they wanted to discover talents and quell competition.

古文：夫人情莫不欲已之贤也，故劝令让贤以自明贤也，岂假让不贤哉！
现代文：人的本性没有不希望自己贤明的，因而劝善让贤来表现自己的贤明，难道有藉着谦让来表现自己不贤的吗!
English: Is it not human nature not to want to be wise, and therefore to persuade the good to let the wise show their wisdom? Is it not through humility to show one's unworthiness?

古文：故让道兴，贤能之人不求而自出矣，至公之举自立矣，百官之副亦豫具矣。
现代文：因而谦让的品德兴盛，贤能的人不用搜求就自己出来了，极公正的举措自己就施行了，百官的副手也就预先齐备了。
English: Therefore, the virtue of humility flourishes, the virtuous people come out of themselves without searching, the extremely just measures are carried out by themselves, and the deputies of the officials are prepared in advance.

古文：一官缺，择众官所让最多者而用之，审之道也。
现代文：一个官职缺员，选取众官所推让得最多的那个人任用他，这是审慎的方法。
English: It is a prudent method, when there is a vacancy in an office, to appoint the person who obtains the most concessions from the officials.

古文：在朝之士相让于上，草庐之人咸皆化之，推贤让能之风从此生矣。
现代文：朝廷的官员在皇帝面前都谦让，平民百姓都受教化而模仿，推举贤人向贤能让位的风气从此就产生了。
English: The officials of the imperial court were all humble before the emperor, the common people were educated and imitated, and the culture of promoting the wise and giving way to the wise has since emerged.

古文：为一国所让，则一国士也；天下所共推，则天下士也。
现代文：一国的人推举他，他就是一国的能人；天下人都推举他，他就是天下的能人。
English: If the people of a country elect him, he is the capable person of the country; if the people of the world elect him, he is the capable person of the world.

古文：推让之风行，则贤与不肖灼然殊矣。
现代文：推让的风气盛行，那么贤与不贤就经纬分明了。
English: If the culture of concession prevails, then virtue and vice are clearly distinguished.

古文：此道之行，在上者无所用其心，因成清议，随之而已。
现代文：这种习气流行，在高位的人不用费心，因为有了公正的议论，听从就是了。
English: This habit is widespread, and people in high positions do not have to bother, because with a fair discussion, it is enough to obey.

古文：故曰，荡荡乎尧之为君，莫之能名。
现代文：因此说，尧作为君伟大啊，无法用语言来称颂。
English: Therefore, it is impossible to praise him with words.

古文：言天下自安矣，不见尧所以化之，故不能名也。
现代文：说的是天下自己就安定了，没看到尧是怎么教化的，因此无法用言辞形容。
English: What is said is that the world is stable on its own, without seeing how the world is educated, so it cannot be described with words.

古文：又曰，舜禹之有天下而不与焉，无为而化者其舜也欤。
现代文：又说，舜、禹拥有天下而不据为己有，不求有所作为而能实现教化的人恐怕就是舜吧。
English: He also said that those who possess the world but do not claim it as their own, and those who do not seek to make a difference but can achieve enlightenment, I am afraid that they are just clowns.

古文：贤人相让于朝，大才之人恆在大官，小人不争于野，天下无事矣。
现代文：贤人在朝廷上相谦让，有大才的人常居大官，平民在民间不相争夺，天下就平安了。
English: Wise men are humble and yield to each other in the imperial court, people with great talents often occupy high-ranking positions, and commoners do not compete with each other in the civilian world, and the world will be safe.

古文：以贤才化无事，至道兴矣。
现代文：用贤才来教化无事的百姓，最好的道就兴起了。
English: The best way is to use the talents of the sages to enlighten the people who have nothing to do.

古文：已仰其成，复何与焉！
现代文：自己衹要等待成功就行了，还有什么必要参与其间呢!
English: All you have to do is wait for success, there is no need to participate in it!

古文：故可以歌《南风》之诗，弹五弦之琴也。
现代文：因而可以歌吟《南风》的诗篇，弹奏五弦琴了。
English: As a result, I can sing the poem of "South Wind" and play the five-stringed fiddle.

古文：成此功者非有他，崇让之所致耳。
现代文：成就这种功业不是靠别的，是崇尚谦让造成的。
English: The accomplishment of such a feat is not dependent on anything else, but is caused by advocating modesty.

古文：孔子曰，能以礼让为国，则不难也。
现代文：孔子说，能用礼仪谦让治国，那么就不难了。
English: Confucius said that if you can govern the country with etiquette and modesty, it will not be difficult.

古文：在朝之人不务相让久矣，天下化之。
现代文：在朝廷裹的人不致力于谦让已经很久了，天下也因此变化。
English: It has been a long time since those in the imperial court have been committed to modesty, and the world has changed as a result.

古文：自魏代以来，登进辟命之士，及在职之吏，临见受叙，虽自辞不能，终莫肯让有胜己者。
现代文：自从魏以来，应征做官的人，及在职的官吏，在被委以官职时，虽然自己说自己无能，但终究没有人肯把职位让给胜过自己的人。
English: Since the Wei Dynasty, when they were appointed to a post, both the conscripts and the incumbent officials said that they were incompetent, but in the end, no one was willing to give up the post to someone who was better than themselves.

古文：夫推让之风息，争竞之心生。
现代文：推让的风气没了，竞争的心就产生了。
English: The culture of concession is gone, and the spirit of competition has arisen.

古文：孔子曰，上兴让则下不争，明让不兴下必争也。
现代文：孔子说，在上位的人崇尚推让，下面的人就不争夺，说明谦让不兴下面必定争夺。
English: Confucius said that the people at the top advocate concession, and the people below do not compete, indicating that if modesty is not popular, there must be competition below.

古文：推让之道兴，则贤能之人日见推举；争竞之心生，则贤能之人日见谤毁。
现代文：推让的风气兴起，那么贤能的人每天都被推举；竞争的心产生，那么贤能的人每天都被诋毁。
English: When there is a spirit of concession, the virtuous are daily exalted; when there is a spirit of competition, the virtuous are daily vilified.

古文：夫争者之欲自先，甚恶能者之先，不能无毁也。
现代文：竞争的人想要自己争先，很是憎恶贤能的人占了先，因而不能不诋毁。
English: Competitors want to be the first, and they hate it when good people are first, so they have to denigrate them.

古文：故孔墨不能免世之谤己，况不及孔墨者乎！
现代文：因此孔子、墨子不能避免世人诽谤自己，更何况不如孔、墨的人呢!
English: Therefore, Confucius and Mozi cannot avoid being slandered by the world, let alone those who are not as good as Confucius and Mozi!

古文：议者佥然言，世少高名之才，朝廷不有大才之人可以为大官者。
现代文：议论的人都说，世间少有名望高的人才，朝廷没有具备大才能可以做大官的人。
English: Commentators say that there are few famous and prestigious talents in the world, and the imperial court does not have people with great talent who can be high officials.

古文：山泽人小官吏亦复云，朝廷之士虽有大官名德，皆不及往时人也。
现代文：民间百姓及小官吏也说，朝廷的人虽有高官名望，但都不如以往的人。
English: Ordinary people and minor officials also said that although people in the imperial court have the prestige of high-ranking officials, they are not as good as people in the past.

古文：余以为此二言皆失之矣。
现代文：我认为这两种看法都不对。
English: I don't think either view is right.

古文：非时独乏贤也，时不贵让。
现代文：不是现今缺乏人才，而是现今不重视谦让。
English: It is not that there is a lack of talent today, but that modesty is not valued today.

古文：一人有先众之誉，毁必随之，名不得成使之然也。
现代文：一个人有了超出众人的声誉，诋毁必定跟着出现，是他的名声无法保全造成这种情况。
English: When a man gains a reputation that transcends all others, discredit is sure to follow. It is his reputation that cannot be saved that causes this.

古文：虽令稷契复存，亦不复能全其名矣。
现代文：即便是稷、契又来到人世，也不能保全他们的名声。
English: Even if Zou and Qi were to come back to life, their reputations would not be preserved.

古文：能否混杂，优劣不分，士无素定之价，官职有缺，主选之吏不知所用，但案官次而举之。
现代文：贤人庸才混杂，优劣不分，人没有平素确定的评价，官职有了缺员，主持选用的人不知用谁，衹是按官职次第来推举。
English: The wise and the mediocre are mixed, the good and the bad are indistinguishable, there is no constant evaluation of people, there is a vacancy in the official position, the person presiding over the selection does not know who to use, but is selected according to the official position.

古文：同才之人先用者，非势家之子，则必为有势者之所念也。
现代文：才能同等的人而先被任用的，不是有权势人家的子弟，就必定是被有权势的人所惦记的人。
English: If a man of equal talent is first appointed, he is not the son of a powerful family, but he must be someone who is coveted by the powerful.

古文：非能独贤，因其先用之资，而复迁之无已。
现代文：不能仅根据一个人的贤能，而是因为他曾先被任用的资本，于是又不断地被迁升。
English: Not by virtue of one's ability alone, but by virtue of the capital with which he was first appointed and from which he was constantly promoted.

古文：迁之无已，不胜其任之病发矣。
现代文：不断地迁升，不能胜任的毛病就出现了。
English: Constantly moving up, the problem of incompetence appeared.

古文：观在官之人，政绩无闻，自非势家之子，率多因资次而进也。
现代文：考察在官位的人，政绩没听到什么，自己又不是权势人家的子弟，一般是因为资历次第而得以进升的。
English: If you look at people in official positions, you won't hear much about their political achievements. They aren't the children of powerful people, and are generally promoted based on their seniority.

古文：向令天下贵让，士必由于见让而后名成，名成而官乃得用之。
现代文：假如使天下崇尚谦让，士人必定由于被推让然后才出名，有了名声官府才能任用他。
English: If modesty is to be revered throughout the world, then the scholar must first become famous by being promoted, and only then can he be appointed by the government.

古文：诸名行不立之人，在官无政绩之称，让之者必矣，官无因得而用之也。
现代文：那些名声行状没有树立起来的人，在官位没有政绩的名望，当然得让位给别人。官府没有理由任用他们。
English: Those who have not built up a reputation and demeanor, and do not have the reputation of political achievements in the official position, of course, have to give way to others. The government has no reason to appoint them.

古文：所以见用不息者，由让道废，因资用人之有失久矣。
现代文：他们之所以不断地被任用，是因为谦让的美德荒废了，凭资历用人的历史已经很长了。
English: They continue to be appointed because the virtue of humility is outmoded and there is a long history of employing people on the basis of their qualifications.

古文：故自汉魏以来，时开大举，令众官各举所知，唯才所任，不限阶次，如此者甚数矣。
现代文：因此从汉、魏以来，时常举行大规模的举荐活动，让众官吏各自推举他们所了解的人，仅根据才能任用，不限官阶次第，像这样的情况有多次了。
English: Therefore, since the Han and Wei dynasties, large-scale recommendation activities have been held from time to time, allowing all officials to nominate people they know. They are appointed only on the basis of ability, without regard to rank, and there have been many cases like this.

古文：其所举必有当者，不闻时有擢用，不知何谁最贤故也。
现代文：他们所推举的人必定有适合的，没听说时常有人被提拔任用，那是因为不知道谁最贤能。
English: The people they choose must be suitable. It is not unheard of that people are often promoted and appointed because it is not known who is the most capable.

古文：所举必有不当，而罪不加，不知何谁最不肖也。
现代文：所推举的人必定有不合适的，然而不加罪，那是因为不知道谁最不贤。
English: The person chosen must be unsuitable, but without adding guilt, because it is not known who is the least virtuous.

古文：所以不可得知，由当时之人莫肯相推，贤愚之名不别，令其如此。
现代文：不知道的原因，是由于当时的人没有肯相推让的，贤能与愚昧的名分没有区别，造成了上述情况。
English: The reason why I don't know is because people at that time were not willing to compromise, and there was no difference between the names of virtue and stupidity, which caused the above situation.

古文：举者知在上者察不能审，故敢漫举而进之。
现代文：推举别人的人知道在高位的人不能详细审察，因而敢于随便举进。
English: People who promote others know that people in high positions cannot be scrutinized in detail, so they dare to promote them at will.

古文：或举所贤，因及所念，一顿而至，人数猥多，各言所举者贤，加之高状，相似如一，难得而分矣。
现代文：有的推举贤能时，由于涉及到了他所喜爱的人，于是一时间纷纷来到，人数众多，各自说自己推举的人贤能，用夸大的言辞描述，被推举的人好像都一个样，难以区分。
English: Sometimes, when a person is to be promoted, because it involves someone he likes, they come one after another, in large numbers, each saying that the person they are promoting is a good person, describing them with exaggerated words, and the people promoted seem to be all the same, indistinguishable.

古文：参错相乱，真伪同贯，更复由此而甚。
现代文：参差错乱，真伪混杂，由此变得更为严重。
English: The jumble of truth and falsehood has become more serious.

古文：虽举者不能尽忠之罪，亦由上开听察之路滥，令其尔也。
现代文：虽然推举者有不能尽忠的罪名，也由于在上者听取推举考察人才的路开得太滥，才造成了这种局面。
English: Although the nominators are guilty of not being loyal, this situation has also been caused by the fact that the way for the nominators to listen to the nominees was too open.

古文：昔齐王好听竽声，必令三百人合吹而后听之，廪以数人之俸。
现代文：过去齐宣王爱听竽声，一定要三百人合吹才听，给每个吹竽者几个人的俸禄。
English: In the past, Qi Xuan Wang loved to listen to the sound of gongs, and it was necessary for three hundred people to blow together to listen, and he would give several people's salary to each boaster.

古文：南郭先生不知吹竽者也，以三百人合吹可以容其不知，因请为王吹竽，虚食数人之俸。
现代文：南郭先生是不会吹竽的人，因为三百人合吹可以容得下他不会，于是请求为王吹竽，白白享用几个人的俸禄。
English: Mr. Nanguo is not a braggart, because he can not tolerate three hundred people blowing together, so he asked to blow for the king and enjoy the salary of several people in vain.

古文：嗣王觉而改之，难彰先王之过。
现代文：齐湣王觉悟而改变了做法，仍难于显出先王的过错。
English: King Qishan became aware of this and changed his approach, but it is still difficult to point out the former king's mistakes.

古文：乃下令曰： 吾之好闻竽声有甚于先王，欲一一列而听之。 
现代文：于是下令说： 我比先王更爱听竽声，想令他们依次吹给我听。 
English: Then he gave the order: "I love to hear the toot of the horn more than my ancestors did, and I want them to blow it for me in turn."

古文：先生于此逃矣。
现代文：南郭先生于是逃走了。
English: Mr. Nankaku then fled.

古文：推贤之风不立，滥举之法不改，则南郭先生之徒盈于朝矣。
现代文：推举贤人的风气不树立，滥举的方法不改变，那么南郭先生一类人就会充斥朝廷。
English: If the tradition of nominating sages is not established and the method of abusively nominating them is not changed, then people like Mr. Nanko will fill the imperial court.

古文：才高守道之士日退，驰走有势之门日多矣。
现代文：才高守道的人逐渐减少，争权夺利有权势的家门逐渐增多。
English: The number of talented people who keep to the path is gradually decreasing, and the number of powerful families vying for power and profit is gradually increasing.

古文：虽国有典刑，弗能禁矣。
现代文：即便国家有典章刑法，也禁止不了。
English: Even if a country has a penal code, it cannot prohibit it.

古文：夫让道不兴之弊，非徒贤人在下位，不得时进也，国之良臣荷重任者，亦将以渐受罪退矣。
现代文：谦让之道不能兴起的弊病，不仅在于贤人处在低下的地位，不能按时迁升，国家良臣中担负重任的人，也将渐渐受到怪罪而退出官位。
English: The malady that the way of modesty cannot arise is not only that the sages are in a low position and cannot be promoted on time, but also that the people who bear heavy responsibilities among the national ministers will gradually be blamed and withdraw from the official position.

古文：何以知其然也？
现代文：怎么能知道是这样呢?
English: How do you know that's the case?

古文：孔子以为颜氏之子不贰过耳，明非圣人皆有过。
现代文：孔子认为颜氏的儿子不重复同一过失，说明不是圣人谁都会有过失。
English: Confucius believed that if Yan's son did not repeat the same mistake, it meant that anyone who was not a saint would make mistakes.

古文：宠贵之地欲之者多矣，恶贤能者塞其路，其过而毁之者亦多矣。
现代文：宠幸尊贵的地位想要得到的人多了，他们憎恶贤能的人挡其路，因而一旦别人有了过失就诋毁别人的人也多了。
English: There are more people who want to get favored and honored status, they hate the virtuous people to stand in their way, so there are more people who slander others once they are at fault.

古文：夫谤毁之生，非徒空设，必因人之微过而甚之者也。
现代文：诽谤诋毁的产生，并非凭空而来，必定是藉着别人细微的过失来进行夸张。
English: Slander and defamation do not come out of thin air, but must be exaggerated through the minor faults of others.

古文：毁谤之言数闻，在上者虽欲弗纳，不能不杖所闻，因事之来而微察之也，无以，其验至矣。
现代文：诽谤诋毁的话听了多次，在高位的人虽然不想相信，但不能不根据所听到的，藉着事情的发展来仔细观察，没多久，诋毁的话就应验了。
English: I heard the slanderous and defamatory words many times. Although the high-ranking people did not want to believe, they could not help but carefully observe the development of the matter based on what they heard. It did not take long for the defamatory words to come true.

古文：得其验，安得不理其罪。
现代文：有了验证，又怎么能不治罪呢。
English: With verification, how can there be no punishment?

古文：若知而纵之，王之威日衰，令之不行自此始矣。
现代文：如果知道了却又放纵，帝王的威望就渐渐衰落，有命令而得不到执行从此就开始了。
English: If you know but indulge, the emperor's prestige will gradually decline. If there is an order but it is not carried out, it will start from here.

古文：知而皆理之，受罪退者稍多，大臣有不自固之心。
现代文：知道了就全都治罪，受怪罪而退位的人渐渐增多，大臣就有了自身无保障的心。
English: When they found out, they punished everyone. The number of people who were blamed and abdicated gradually increased, and the minister had his own insecure heart.

古文：夫贤才不进，贵臣日疏，此有国者之深忧也。
现代文：贤才不能进升，重臣曰见疏远，这是统治国家的人深深的忧虑。
English: Those who rule the country are deeply worried about the fact that talented people can't advance, and senior ministers say they feel alienated.

古文：《诗》曰： 受禄不让，至于已斯亡。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 受到爵禄而不相让，导致自己灭亡。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: If one receives honor and does not share it, he will bring about his own destruction.

古文：不让之人忧亡不暇，而望其益国朝，不亦难乎！
现代文：不谦让的人担心灭亡都来不及，而指望他有益于国家朝廷。不也太难了吗!
English: The unyielding man fears that it is too late for him to perish, but hopes that he will be useful to the state court. Isn't that too difficult?

古文：窃以为改此俗甚易耳。
现代文：我私下认为改变这种陋俗不难。怎么知道呢?
English: Personally, I don't think it will be difficult to change this vulgarity. How do you know?

古文：何以知之？夫一时在官之人，虽杂有凡猥之才，其中贤明者亦多矣，岂可谓皆不知让贤为贵邪！
现代文：一时在官位的人，虽然夹杂有庸才，但其中贤明的人也很多，难道都不知道让贤是高贵品德吗!
English: Those who are temporarily in official positions, although there are mediocre talents, but there are also many wise people among them. Don't they know that being wise is a noble virtue?

古文：直以其时皆不让，习以成俗，故遂不为耳。
现代文：衹是因为当时都不让，习惯成自然，于是就不做罢了。
English: That's because they didn't allow it at the time, and it became natural to get used to it, so they just stopped doing it.

古文：人臣初除，皆通表上闻，名之谢章，所由来尚矣。
现代文：臣子刚被授职时，都向上进表，叫作谢章，这种做法由来久远了。
English: When a courtier has just been awarded a post, they all go up to the table, which is called a certificate of commendation. This practice has a long history.

古文：原谢章之本意，欲进贤能以谢国恩也。
现代文：原来谢章的本意，是推举贤能来感谢国恩的。
English: Originally, the intention of the thanksgiving chapter was to nominate a virtuous person to thank the country for its kindness.

古文：昔舜以禹为司空，禹拜稽首，让于稷契及咎繇。
现代文：过去舜让禹任司空，禹跪拜行稽首礼，让位于稷契及咎繇。
English: In the past, Yu was assigned to be the sky, Yu kneeled down to perform the head ceremony, and gave way to the contract and the blame.

古文：使益为虞官，让于硃虎、熊、罴。
现代文：让益任虞官。让位于朱虎、熊、熊。
English: Let Yick serve as a magistrate. Give way to Zhu Hu, Xiong Xiong.

古文：使伯夷典三礼，让于夔龙。
现代文：让伯夷主管三礼，让位于夔龙。
English: Let Bo Yi bow three times and give way to the dragon.

古文：唐虞之时，众官初除，莫不皆让也。
现代文：唐虞时代，众官在初受官职时，没有不谦让的。
English: In the Tang and Yu Dynasties, officials did not have to make any concessions when they first took office.

古文：谢章之义，盖取于此。
现代文：谢章的本义，大概就是从此而来。
English: The original meaning of Xie Zhang probably comes from here.

古文：《书》记之者，欲以永世作则。
现代文：《尚书》记录这些事，是要把它作为世世代代的典范。
English: "Shangshu" records these things in order to serve as a model for generations to come.

古文：季世所用，不贤不能让贤，虚谢见用之恩而已。
现代文：到了末世所行用的，不贤的人不能让贤，假意感谢被任用的恩典而已。
English: At the end of the world, those who are not virtuous will not be able to make others virtuous. They will only pretend to be grateful for the grace of being appointed.

古文：相承不变，习俗之失也。
现代文：如此相承不变，这是习俗的失误。
English: This continuity is a failure of custom.

古文：夫叙用之官得通章表者，其让贤推能乃通，其不能有所让徒费简纸者，皆绝不通。
现代文：被录用的官员要通报表章的，能让贤推能才上报，不能有所推让白白浪费简册纸张的，一律不向上报送。
English: If the officials to be recruited need to pass the report chapter, they can only report if they can get the superior to push them. If they cannot get the superior to push them and waste the brochure paper, they will not report to the superior.

古文：人臣初除，各思推贤能而让之矣，让之文付主者掌之。
现代文：做臣的刚被授职时，各自想推举贤能而让位于人，推让的文辞交给主事人掌管。
English: When the vassals were newly appointed, they each wanted to promote merit and give way to people, and the words of promotion were handed over to the person in charge.

古文：三司有缺，择三司所让最多者而用之。
现代文：三司有了缺员，挑选三司所推让得最多的人任用他。
English: If there is a vacancy in the Third Division, the person who has been pushed the most by the Third Division will be appointed.

古文：此为一公缺，三公已豫选之矣。
现代文：造就是一公缺员，三公已预先选好了。
English: There is only one vacancy at the moment, and the other three have been pre-selected.

古文：且主选之吏，不必任公而选三公，不如令三公自共选一公为详也。
现代文：再说主管选人的官员，不必担任着公而选三公，不如让三公自己共同挑选一公为好。
English: Moreover, the officials in charge of selecting people do not have to serve as the public and select the three kings. It is better to let the three kings themselves jointly select one king.

古文：四征缺，择四征所让最多而用之，此为一征缺，四征已豫选之矣，必详于停缺而令主者选四征也。
现代文：四征缺员，挑选四征所推让得最多的人任用他，造就是一征缺员，四征已预先选好了，必定比缺员以后让主事人挑选审慎。
English: There is a vacancy in the fourth conscription, and the person who gets the most from the fourth conscription will be selected and appointed. This is a vacancy in the first conscription. The fourth conscription has been pre-selected, and the person in charge must be more careful in selecting after the vacancy.

古文：尚书缺，择尚书所让最多者而用之，此为八尚书共选一尚书，详于临缺令主者选八尚书也。
现代文：尚书缺员，挑选尚书所推让得最多的人任用他，这是八个尚书共同选一个尚书，比临到缺员让主事人挑选八个尚书审慎。
English: If there is a vacancy for a secretary, the person who gets the most votes will be chosen to fill the vacancy. This means that eight secretaries will jointly choose one secretary. It is more prudent for the person in charge to choose eight secretaries when there is a vacancy.

古文：郡守缺，择众郡所让最多者而用之，详于任主者令选百郡守也。
现代文：郡守缺员，挑选众郡守所推让得最多的人任用他，比担任主管的人命令挑选百郡守审慎。
English: If there is a vacancy for a county magistrate, the person who obtains the most concessions from the county magistrate's office shall be selected and appointed, and the person in charge shall order the selection of the best 100 county magistrates to be prudent.

古文：夫以众官百郡之让，与主者共相比，不可同岁而论也。
现代文：拿众官百郡的推让，与主事人一人相比，是不可同而语的。
English: It is incommensurable to compare the pushing and shoving of hundreds of counties by all officials with one person in charge.

古文：虽复令三府参举官，本不委以举选之任，各不能以根其心也。
现代文：即便再让三府参与推举官吏，但本来没交给三府举用挑选的责任，各自不能把此事放在心上。
English: Even if the three prefectures are allowed to participate in the selection of officials, but they have not been given the responsibility of selecting officials, they can not take this matter to heart.

古文：其所用心者裁之不二三，但令主者案官次而举之，不用精也。
现代文：他们所用的心思算起来不到十分之二三，衹是让主事人按官阶次第来举进，不用精审。
English: They use less than two-thirds of one-tenth of one percent of their minds, but they let the person in charge promote them according to their official rank, without careful examination.

古文：贤愚皆让，百姓耳目尽为国耳目。
现代文：贤明愚钝都能谦让，那么百姓的耳目就全是国家的耳目。
English: If the wise and the stupid can both be humble, then the eyes and ears of the people will be the eyes and ears of the state.

古文：夫人情争则欲毁己所不知，让则竞推于胜己。
现代文：人的本性是竞争，就想诋毁比自己强的人，谦让则争着推举胜过自己的人。
English: It is human nature to be competitive, to want to denigrate those who are better than oneself, and to defer to those who are better than oneself.

古文：故世争则毁誉交错，优劣不分，难得而让也。
现代文：因而世上竞争则诋毁赞誉交错，优劣不分，难能谦让。
English: Therefore, the competition in the world is intertwined with slander and praise, and it is difficult to be humble.

古文：时让则贤智显出，能否之美历历相次，不可得而乱也。
现代文：世风谦让则贤人智者显露头角，贤与不贤则历历在目层次分明，不会错杂混乱。
English: If the world is modest, then the wise and the wise will emerge, and the wise and the unwise will be clear at the eye level, and there will be no confusion.

古文：当此时也，能退身修已者，让之者多矣。
现代文：在这种时候，能够退出官场修养自身的人，推让于他的人多了。
English: At this time, people who can withdraw from the officialdom and cultivate themselves are more likely to give in to him.

古文：虽欲守贫贱，不可得也。
现代文：即便想居于贫贱，也是不可能的。
English: Even if you want to live in poverty, it is impossible.

古文：驰骛进趣而欲人见让，犹却行而求前也。
现代文：拼命竞争而想让人谦让，如同倒着行走却想向前。
English: Competing hard and trying to be humble is like walking backwards and trying to go forward.

古文：夫如此，愚智咸知进身求通，非修之于己则无由矣。
现代文：像这样，愚人智者都知道想做官求通达，如果不自我修养就没有别的途径。
English: In this way, both fools and wise men know that if you want to be an official and seek enlightenment, there is no other way without self-cultivation.

古文：游外求者，于此相随而归矣。
现代文：在外游历求官的人，在此时就相追随着回乡了。
English: At this time, people who are traveling abroad to apply for a job will follow each other back to their hometown.

古文：浮声虚论，不禁而自息矣。
现代文：浮华空虚的言论，不用禁止就自然平息了。
English: Flamboyant and empty rhetoric will naturally subside without a ban.

古文：人人无所用其心，任众人之议，而天下自化矣。
现代文：人人不必用心计，任凭众人的议论，而天下自然就受到了教化。
English: Everyone does not have to be careful, let everyone talk, and the world will naturally be enlightened.

古文：不言之化行，巍巍之美于此著矣。
现代文：不用宣讲的教化流行，极美好的政治从此就显露出来了。
English: Without the indoctrination fad of propaganda, a far better politics has since emerged.

古文：让可以致此，岂可不务之哉！
现代文：谦让可以造成这般景象，怎能不努力实行呢!
English: Humility can create such a scene, how can we not work hard to implement it!

古文：《春秋传》曰： 范宣子之让，其下皆让。
现代文：《春秋传》说： 范宣子谦让，他下面的人就都谦让。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says: Fan Xuan Zi is the most humble, and the people below him are all humble.

古文：栾黡虽汰，弗敢违也。
现代文：乐餍虽然专横，也不敢违背。
English: Although he is domineering, Le Yao does not dare to disobey.

古文：晋国以平，数世赖之。 
现代文：晋国因此团结，几世都得到好处。 
English: As a result, Jin was united, and several generations benefited.

古文：上世之化也，君子尚能而让其下，小人力农以事其上，上下有礼，谗慝远黜，由不争也。
现代文：古代的教化，君子崇尚贤能而对下人谦让，小人努力务农来事奉上司，上下有礼，邪恶之人被疏远废黜，都是因为没有争夺。
English: The ancient enlightenment, the gentleman advocating virtue and being humble to subordinates, the villain working hard in agriculture to serve the boss, the superior and the inferior being polite, and the evil person being alienated and dethroned, are all because there is no competition.

古文：及其乱也，国家之弊，恆必由之。
现代文：等到末世动乱，国家的弊病，常常就是由于不知谦让。
English: Until the end of the world, the turmoil, the ills of the country, are often caused by not knowing how to be humble.

古文：笃论了了如此。
现代文：发自内心的议论就是这些。
English: That's what speaking from the heart is all about.

古文：在朝君子典选大官，能不以人废言，举而行之，各以让贤举能为先务，则群才猥出，能否殊别，盖世之功，莫大于此。
现代文：在朝廷的君子及主管选才的大官，能不因人废言，推行此道，各自以让贤举能为首先要做的事，那么就会有众多人才涌现，贤与不贤区别分明，超过世人的功业，没有比这更大的了。
English: If the courtiers in the imperial court and the great officials in charge of selecting talents can not be bullied by others and promote this way, and each of them can do the first thing to do, then there will be a large number of talents. The difference between the virtuous and the unvirtuous is clear, and it exceeds the achievements of the world. There is nothing greater than this.

古文：泰始初，进爵为伯，累迁少府。
现代文：初年，进升爵位为伯，渐次迁升为少府。
English: In the first year, he was promoted to the peerage of Bo, and gradually moved to Shofu.

古文：咸宁中为太常。转尚书。
现代文：年间任太常，转任尚书。
English: He held the position of Taizang for a year and was transferred to Shangshu.

古文：杜预之伐吴也，寔以本官行镇南军司。
现代文：拄勇伐呈时，刘宫以本官兼镇南军司。
English: At the time of the battle, Liu Gong acted as his own officer and the military commander of the south of the town.

古文：初，寔妻卢氏生子跻而卒，华氏将以女妻之。
现代文：当初，刘宫的妻子卢氏生下儿子刘跻就死了，刘宫将要把女儿嫁给。
English: At first, Liu Gong's wife, Lu Shi, gave birth to a son, Liu Ran, who died, and Liu Gong was going to marry off his daughter.

古文：寔弟智谏曰： 华家类贪，必破门户。 
现代文：劝他说： 大都贪婪，必定会破败家门。 
English: Persuade him: Most of them are greedy and will surely ruin the family.

古文：辞之不得，竟婚华氏而生子夏。
现代文：刘塞推辞不了，最终结婚并生了儿子刘夏。
English: Unable to refuse, Liu Xie eventually married and had a son, Liu Xia.

古文：寔竟坐夏受赂，免官。
现代文：刘宫终于因型夏受贿赂获罪，被免官。
English: Liu Gong was finally found guilty of accepting bribes and removed from office.

古文：顷之为大司农，又以夏罪免。
现代文：不久又任大司农，又因为刘夏犯罪被免官。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, but was dismissed because of Liu Xia's crime.

古文：寔每还州里，乡人载酒肉以候之。
现代文：每次回到家乡，乡人都用车拉着酒肉等候着他。
English: Every time he returns to his hometown, the villagers wait for him in their cars with wine and meat in tow.

古文：寔难逆其意，辄共啖而返其余。
现代文：型塞难于违背众人心意，就与大家一同吃喝然后退回剩余的食物。
English: It's hard to go against the crowd's wishes, so he eats and drinks with everyone and then returns the leftover food.

古文：或谓寔曰： 君行高一世，而诸子不能遵。
现代文：有人对刘写说： 君品行高洁一世，而几个儿子不能遵循。
English: Someone wrote to Liu: "You have lived a virtuous life, but your sons cannot follow in your footsteps.

古文：何不旦夕切磋，使知过而自改邪！ 
现代文：为什么不每天教诲，使他们知道过错而自行改正呢! 
English: Why not daily admonition, that they may know their faults and correct themselves?

古文：寔曰： 吾之所行，是所闻见，不相祖习，岂复教诲之所得乎！ 
现代文：刘塞说： 我所做的，是我所听到看到的，而不是世代传下来的，难道是反复教诲就能得到的吗! 
English: Liu Xie said: What I have done is what I have heard and seen, not what has been handed down from generation to generation. Is it something that can be acquired through repeated teachings?

古文：世以寔言为当。
现代文：世人认为刘写的话有道理。
English: The world thinks that what Liu wrote makes sense.

古文：后起为国子祭酒、散骑常侍。
现代文：后来被起用为国子祭酒、散骑常侍。
English: Later, he was appointed as Kuniko Matsuri sake and horseback riding attendant.

古文：愍怀太子初封广陵王，高选师友，以寔为师。
现代文：愍怀太子刚被封为广陵王时，大选师友，以刘窘为师。
English: When Prince Gong Huai was newly crowned as the Guangling King, he chose Liu Shizhen as his mentor.

古文：元康初，进爵为侯，累迁太子太保，加侍中、特进、右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，领冀州都督。
现代文：元康初年，进升爵位为侯，逐渐迁任太子太保，加任侍中、特进、右光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，兼冀州都督。
English: In the first year of Yuan Kang, he was promoted to the peerage of marquis, and was gradually transferred to the post of prince's eunuch, and was also appointed as a chamberlain, a special envoy, a doctor of the Uguanglu, a secretary of the three departments of the Kaifu ceremony, and a governor of Jizhou.

古文：九年，策拜司空，迁太保，转太傅。
现代文：元康九年，策封为司空，迁任太保，转任太傅。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan-Kang Dynasty, Zhefeng was promoted to the position of Siku, transferred to the position of Taibo, and then to Taifu.

古文：太安初，寔以老病逊位，赐安车驷马、钱百万，以侯就第。
现代文：太安初年，刘写因为年老有病辞官，赐他安车驷马、钱百万，以侯爵身份回府第。
English: In the first year of Taian, Liu wrote that because of his old age and illness, he would give him a carriage, a horse, and a million of money, and return to the capital as a marquis.

古文：及长沙成都之相攻也，寔为军人所掠，潜归乡里。
现代文：等到长沙王与成都王相攻打时，刘窘被军人劫掠，偷偷回到家乡。
English: When the King of Changsha and the King of Chengdu fought against each other, Liu Shieh was robbed by soldiers and secretly returned to his hometown.

古文：惠帝崩，寔赴山陵。
现代文：惠帝死，刘宫去了陵地。
English: Hui Di died, Liu Gong went to the cemetery.

古文：怀帝即位，复授太尉。
现代文：怀帝即位，又授他太尉。
English: Emperor Huai ascended to the throne and promoted him to the rank of first lieutenant.

古文：寔自陈年老，固辞，不许。
现代文：刘写自称年老坚决推辞，不被允许。
English: Liu is not allowed to write a self-proclaimed old man's resolute refusal.

古文：左丞刘坦上言曰： 夫堂高级远，主尊相贵。
现代文：左丞刘坦进言说： 厅堂高则台阶远，君主尊崇则宰相尊贵。
English: Zuoxing Liu Tan said: The hall is high and the steps are far away, the monarch is respected and the prime minister is respected.

古文：是以古之哲王莫不师其元臣，崇养老之教，训示四海，使少长有礼。
现代文：因此古代的圣明帝王没有不以元老大臣为师的，从而崇大养老的教化，训示四海，使得少长有礼。
English: Therefore, the ancient Emperor Shengming did not fail to take the minister of veterans as his teacher, thereby exalting the education of the elderly, instructing the four seas, and making the young and the old polite.

古文：七十致仕，亦所以优异旧德，厉廉高之风。
现代文：七十辞官，也是对以往德行的特殊待遇，是勉励廉洁高尚的作风。
English: Seventy dictionaries are also a special treatment for past virtues, encouraging a clean and noble style of work.

古文：太尉寔体清素之操，执不渝之洁，悬车告老，二十余年，浩然之志，老而弥笃。
现代文：太尉刘宜凭着清廉纯朴的节操，持有不变的高洁，收车告老，已有二十多年，正大的志向，越老越坚定。
English: Captain Liu Yi, by virtue of his clean and simple discipline, has maintained the same high cleanliness, and has been collecting cars for more than 20 years. He has a great ambition, and the older he gets, the more determined he is.

古文：可谓国之硕老，邦之宗模。
现代文：可以说是国家的年高望重之人，是国家的楷模。
English: It can be said that he is a highly respected person in the country and is a role model for the country.

古文：臣闻老者不以筋力为礼，寔年逾九十，命在日制，遂自扶舆，冒险而至，展哀山陵，致敬阙庭，大臣之节备矣。
现代文：我听说老年人不用气力符合礼，刘窟年遇九十，寿命受时制约，于是自己带病乘车，冒险出行，在帝陵展示悲哀，向朝廷致敬，大臣的节操已经完备了。
English: I have heard that the elderly do not have to use their strength to meet the etiquette. Liu Guo is in his nineties, and his life expectancy is subject to time constraints. Therefore, he took the car with his illness, ventured to travel, showed sadness in the imperial mausoleum, and paid tribute to the imperial court. The minister's discipline has been completed.

古文：圣诏殷勤，必使寔正位上台，光饪鼎实，断章敦喻，经涉二年。
现代文：圣上诏书诚恳，必定使刘窑登上台省正位，辅助帝业，断章摘句敦促晓谕，效力两年。
English: The sacred imperial edict is sincere, and it will certainly make Liu Ya ascend to the position of Taiwan Province, assist the imperial cause, and urge the interpretation of excerpts, with a validity of two years.

古文：而寔频上露板，辞旨恳诚。
现代文：然而刘写多次公开上书，言辞诚恳。
English: However, Liu wrote several open letters, and his words were sincere.

古文：臣以为古之养老，以不事为优，不以吏之为重，谓宜听寔所守。 
现代文：我认为古人养老，以不事君做官为优，把不向老人授官当作尊重，应该听从刘窟的意见。 
English: I think that ancient people should listen to Liu Gu's opinion that it is better not to give positions to the elderly, and that it is respectful not to give positions to the elderly.

古文：三年，诏曰： 昔虞任五臣，致垂拱之化，汉相萧何，兴宁一之誉，故能光隆于当时，垂裕于百代。
现代文：三年，诏书说： 过去虞任用五臣，达到了无为而治的教化，汉朝以萧何为相，得到了安定统一的美誉，因而能在当时兴盛，流传功业给后代。
English: In the third year, the imperial edict said: "In the past, the five ministers appointed by the state of Gu had reached the enlightenment of doing nothing, and the Han Dynasty, with Xiao He as its face, had gained a reputation for stability and unification, and thus was able to flourish at that time and pass on its achievements to future generations.

古文：朕绍天明命，临御万邦，所以崇显政道者，亦赖之于元臣庶尹，毕力股肱，以副至望。
现代文：我继承天命，统治万邦，若要崇大显赫的政治道德，也依赖于元老重臣百官之长，尽力辅佐，来符合我最大的愿望。
English: If I am to succeed to the Mandate of Heaven and rule over all nations, and if I am to uphold the lofty standards of political morality, then I must also rely on the elders, chiefs, and officials to do their best to assist me in fulfilling my greatest wish.

古文：而君年耆告老，确然难违。
现代文：然而君年高告老，实在难于违背。
English: However, as you get older, it's really hard to go against it.

古文：今听君以侯就第，位居三司之上，秩禄准旧，赐几杖不朝及宅一区。
现代文：如今听任君以侯爵身份回宅第，地位在三司之上，俸禄依旧，赐几案手杖不必上朝及宅第一所。
English: Today, he returns home as a marquis, his position is above the three departments, his salary is still the same, and he does not have to go to the palace and the first house for several cases.

古文：国之大政，将就谘于君，副朕意焉。 
现代文：国家大的政务，将上门向君咨询，以称我的心意。 
English: I will consult you on the government affairs of the National People's Congress to express my heart.

古文：岁余薨，时年九十一，谥曰元。
现代文：一年多后去世，时年九十一岁，谧号是五。
English: He died a little over a year later, at the age of ninety-one, and was given the number five.

古文：寔少贫窭，杖策徒行，每所憩止，不累主人，薪水之事，皆自营给。
现代文：刘写年少时贫穷，拄着棍子徒步行走，每逢到了休息的地方，不打扰主人，柴水一类事情都自己料理。
English: When Liu Shi was young and poor, he walked on foot with a stick. Whenever he found a place to rest, he did not disturb his master, and he cooked everything himself, such as firewood and water.

古文：及位望通显，每崇俭素，不尚华丽。
现代文：等到地位名望通达显赫，常崇尚俭约朴素，不追求华丽。
English: Wait until the status and fame reach the top, often advocating frugality and simplicity, not pursuing splendor.

古文：尝诣石崇家，如厕，见有绛纹帐，裀褥甚丽，两婢持香囊。
现代文：曾去石崇家，上厕所，看到有深红色花纹帐幕，垫褥很是华丽，两个奴婢手持香囊。
English: Once went to Shizong's house, went to the toilet, saw a crimson patterned tent curtain, the cushion was very gorgeous, two maidservants holding incense bags.

古文：寔便退，笑谓崇曰： 误入卿内。 
现代文：刘宫于是退出，笑着对石崇说： 我误入你的内室。 
English: Liu Gong then withdrew, smiled and said to Shi Chong: I mistakenly entered your inner room.

古文：崇曰： 是厕耳。 
现代文：石崇说： 那是厕所。 
English: Shi Chong said: That's a toilet.

古文：寔曰： 贫士未尝得此。 
现代文：刘宫说： 我清贫之人未曾享用过。 
English: Liu Gong said: I have never enjoyed anything like this when I was poor.

古文：乃更如他厕。
现代文：于是去了别的厕所。
English: So I went to another toilet.

古文：虽处荣宠，居无第宅，所得俸禄，赡恤亲故。
现代文：刘写虽然处于荣耀受宠的地位，但在居住上没有府第宅院，所得到的俸禄，用于赡养帮助亲属故旧。
English: Although Liu Pi was in a position of honor and favor, he did not have a prefectural residence to live in. The salary he received was used to support and help his relatives.

古文：虽礼教陵迟，而行己以正。
现代文：虽然礼教衰微，而他自己按正道行事。
English: Though manners are fading, he himself walks the straight and narrow.

古文：丧妻为庐杖之制，终丧不御内。
现代文：妻子死了，按苴杖居庐的制度办丧事，到丧事完毕都不与女子同床。
English: When his wife died, he conducted the funeral according to the system of using a cane and staying in bed. After the funeral, he did not share a bed with a woman.

古文：轻薄者笑之，寔不以介意。
现代文：轻薄的人笑话他，刘宫也不介意。
English: Liu Gong doesn't mind if people make fun of him.

古文：自少及老，笃学不倦，虽居职务，卷弗离手。
现代文：从小到老，好学不倦，虽然做官，书卷也不离手。
English: From childhood to old age, he was never tired of learning, and even though he was an official, he never let go of his books.

古文：尤精《三传》，辨正《公羊》，以为卫辄不应辞以王父命，祭仲失为臣之节，举此二端以明臣子之体，遂行于世。
现代文：尤其精通《三传》，辨正《公羊传》，认为卫辄不应因祖父之命而不服从，祭仲有失做臣的节操，举这两件事来说明做臣之礼，于是他的看法在世上流行。
English: In particular, he was well versed in the "Three Traditions" and corrected the "Ram Tradition," and believed that Wei Xuan should not disobey the order of his grandfather, and that there was a lack of discipline in being a minister. He cited these two things to illustrate the courtesy of being a minister, and his opinion became popular in the world.

古文：又撰《春秋条例》二十卷。
现代文：又撰写了《春秋条例》二十卷。
English: He also wrote 20 volumes of "Spring and Autumn Regulations."

古文：有二子，跻、夏。
现代文：有两个儿子，刘跻、刘夏。
English: They have two sons, Liu Lin and Liu Xia.

古文：跻字景云，官至散骑常侍。
现代文：刘跻字景云，官做到散骑常侍。
English: Liu Renzhong is a word cloud, and the official is a horseback riding samurai.

古文：夏以贪污弃放于世。
现代文：刘夏因为贪污被世人摒弃。
English: Liu Xia was abandoned by the world because of corruption.

古文：弟智，字子房，贞素有兄风。
现代文：刘写的弟弟刘智字子房，贞洁朴素有兄长的风范。
English: Liu Zi Zifu, the younger brother of Liu Zhi, is chaste and simple, with the demeanor of an older brother.

古文：少贫窭，每负薪自给，读诵不辍，竟以儒行称。
现代文：年少时家境贫困，常背柴供养自己，诵读书籍从不间断，最终因儒生的品行被称道。
English: When he was young, his family was poor, he often carried firewood to feed himself, and he read books incessantly. In the end, he was praised for his Confucian conduct.

古文：历中书黄门吏部郎，出为颍川太守。
现代文：历任中书黄门吏部郎，出任颖川太守。
English: He was successively the secretary of the Yellow Gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters and served as the governor of Yingchuan.

古文：平原管辂尝谓人曰： 吾与刘颍川兄弟语，使人神思清发，昏不假寐。
现代文：平原人管辖曾对人说： 我与刘颖川兄弟谈话，令人精神思路清新受启发，天黑了也不打瞌睡。
English: The governor of the Plain People once said to people: My conversation with the Liu Yingchuan brothers made people's spiritual thoughts fresh and inspired, and they did not doze off when it got dark.

古文：自此之外，殆白日欲寝矣。 
现代文：在谈话时间以外，恐怕白天也想睡觉。 
English: Outside of conversation time, I'm afraid I want to sleep during the day, too.

古文：入为秘书监，领南阳王师，加散骑常侍，迁侍中、尚书、太常。
现代文：入朝任秘书监，兼南阳王师，加任散骑常侍，迁任侍中、尚书、太常。
English: Entered the imperial court as the superintendent of secretaries, concurrently Nanyang Wang Shi, and was additionally appointed as the riding attendant, and was transferred to the positions of the attendant, the secretary, and the secretary.

古文：著《丧服释疑论》，多所辨明。
现代文：着《丧服释疑论》，辨析说明之处不少。
English: In "The Theory of the Interpretation and Doubt of Mourning Clothes," there are many points of analysis and explanation.

古文：太康末卒，谥曰成。
现代文：太康末年去世，谧号是成。
English: Taikang died at the end of the year, and his nickname was Cheng.

古文：高光，字宣茂，陈留圉城人，魏太尉柔之子也。
现代文：高光字宣茂，陈留圉城人，是魏太尉高柔的儿子。
English: Gaoguang's character, Xuanmao, a resident of Chenluo Town, was the son of Wei Taijun Gao Rong.

古文：光少习家业，明练刑理。
现代文：高光年少时通晓家业，熟悉刑法理论。
English: Gao Guang was familiar with the family business and the theory of criminal law when he was young.

古文：初以太子舍人累迁尚书郎，出为幽州刺史、颍州太守。
现代文：最初由太子舍人逐渐迁任尚书郎，出任幽州刺史、颖川太守。
English: At first, he was gradually transferred from the position of Prince-in-Waiting to the position of Sho Shuro, serving as the governor of Yuzhu and the governor of Yingkawa.

古文：是时武帝置黄沙狱，以典诏囚。
现代文：当时武帝设置黄沙狱，用法典告诫囚犯。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu set up the Yellow Sand Prison and used the code to admonish prisoners.

古文：以光历世明法，用为黄沙御史，秩与中丞同，迁廷尉。
现代文：因为高光历代明晓法律，任命他为黄沙御史，俸禄与中丞相同。迁任廷尉。
English: Because Gaoguang knew the law from generation to generation, he was appointed Huangsha Imperial Historian, with the same salary as that of a junior middle officer. He was transferred to the position of court lieutenant.

古文：元康中，拜尚书，典三公曹。
现代文：元康年间，官拜尚书，主管三公曹。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, officials paid homage to Shang Shu, the head of the Three Princes.

古文：时赵王伦篡逆，光于其际，守道全贞。
现代文：当时赵王司马伦篡权叛逆，高光在那段时间，坚守正道保全节操。
English: At that time, Zhao Wang Simarun usurped power and rebelled, Gao Guang, during that time, adhered to the right path of safeguarding the discipline.

古文：及伦赐死，齐王冏辅政，复以光为廷尉，迁尚书，加奉车都尉。
现代文：等到司马伦被赐死，齐王司马同辅佐朝政，又任命高光为廷尉，迁任尚书，加任奉车都尉。
English: When Sima Lun was put to death, King Sima of Qi appointed Gao Guang as a court lieutenant, transferred him to Shangshu, and appointed him as a lieutenant of Fengche.

古文：后从驾讨成都王颖有勋，封延陵县公，邑千八百户。
现代文：后来跟从皇帝讨伐成都王司马颖有功，被封为延陵县公，封邑一千八百户。
English: Later, Wang Sima Ying, who followed the emperor to fight against Chengdu, was awarded the title of the governor of Yanling County, with 1,800 fiefs.

古文：于时朝廷咸推光明于用法，故频典理官。
现代文：当时朝廷都推崇高光擅长用法，因此多次出任法律官员。
English: At that time, the imperial court praised Gao Guang for being good at usage, so he served as a legal official for many times.

古文：惠帝为张方所逼，幸长安，朝臣奔散，莫有从者，光独侍帝而西。
现代文：惠帝被张方逼迫，前往长安，朝廷大臣奔走离散，没有跟从的人，惟独高光侍奉皇帝西行。
English: Emperor Hui was forced by Zhang Fang to go to Chang'an. The ministers of the imperial court were scattered and did not follow, except for Gao Guang, who served the emperor westward.

古文：迁尚书左仆射，加散骑常侍。
现代文：迁任尚书左仆射，加任散骑常侍。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shoshu Zuopuchigusa, and was also appointed to the post of Sanzhishi no Tsunenobu.

古文：光兄诞为上官巳等所用，历徐、雍二州刺史。
现代文：高光的兄长高诞被上官巳等人任用，历任涂、壅两州刺史。
English: Gao Guang's elder brother Gao Xing was appointed by Shangguan Si and others, and successively painted and engraved the history of the two states.

古文：诞性任放无伦次，而决烈过人，与光异操。
现代文：直诞生性放纵没有规矩，而果断刚烈超过常人，与高光的品行不一样。
English: Straight-born sexual indulgence has no rules, and decisively strong-willed more than ordinary people, and high-lighted conduct is not the same.

古文：常谓光小节，恆轻侮之，光事诞愈谨。
现代文：高诞常说直光拘于小节，总是轾暧欺侮他，高光对待高诞更加恭谨。
English: Gao Guoxue often said that Zhaoguang was a stickler for detail and always bullied him. Gao Guoxue treated Gao Guoxue more respectfully.

古文：帝既还洛阳，时太弟新立，重选傅训，以光为少傅，加光禄大夫，常侍如故。
现代文：皇帝回盗屋后，时值皇太弟刚刚确立，慎重地挑选辅佐人才，任用高光为少傅，加任光禄大夫，常侍的职位依旧。
English: After the emperor returned to the robbers' house, the position of the crown prince's younger brother had just been established, and the assistant talents were carefully selected. Gao Guang was appointed as the junior minister, and Guanglu was appointed as the doctor. The position of the regular attendant was still the same.

古文：及怀帝即位，加光禄大夫金章紫绶，与傅祗并见推崇。
现代文：等到怀帝即位，加授光禄大夫金章紫绶，与傅祗一同受到推崇。
English: When Emperor Huai ascended to the throne, he was awarded the Gold Medal with Purple Ribbon and the Grand Cordon of the Chinese People's Liberation Army. He was highly respected together with Fu Xi.

古文：寻为尚书令，本官如故。
现代文：不久任尚书令，原有官职依旧。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Shang Shuling, and his original official position remained unchanged.

古文：以疾卒，赠司空、侍中。
现代文：因病去世，追赠司空、侍中。
English: He died of illness and was posthumously awarded the positions of tsukasa and chamberlain.

古文：属京洛倾覆，竟未加谥。
现代文：适逢塞洛被颠覆，竟然没有授他谧号。
English: When Sello was overthrown, they didn't even give him a nickname.

古文：子韬字子远，放佚无检。
现代文：子韬字子远，放纵不检点。
English: Don't be a slut. Don't be promiscuous.

古文：光为廷尉时，韬受货赇，有司奏案之，而光不知。
现代文：直韭任廷尉时，韬收受贿赂，有关官吏奏报此事，而高光不知道。
English: When Naosuke was a courtier, he accepted bribes. The relevant officials reported the matter, but Takamitsu did not know about it.

古文：时人虽非光不能防闲其子，以其用心有素，不以为累。
现代文：当时的人虽然批评高光不能防备自己的儿子，但因为他平素用心，就不以遣件事使高光受连累。
English: Although people at the time criticized Gao Guang for not being able to protect his son, because of his usual diligence, he did not involve Gao Guang in the matter.

古文：初，光诣长安留台，以韬兼右卫将军。
现代文：起初，高光到长安留在官署，让高韬兼任右卫将军。
English: At first, Gao Guang went to Chang'an to stay at the government office, and let Gao Yao also serve as the right guard general.

古文：韬与殿省小人交通，及光卒，仍于丧中往来不绝。
现代文：高韬与皇帝及公卿居所的小人勾结，等到高光去世时，仍在服丧中来往不断。
English: Gao Yao colluded with villains in the residences of emperors and nobles, and when Gao Guang died, he was still in mourning.

古文：时东海王越辅政，不朝观。
现代文：当时束海王司马越辅佐朝政，不朝见皇帝。
English: At that time, the Sokai King Sima Yue assisted the imperial government, but did not meet with the emperor.

古文：韬知人心有望，密与太傅参军姜赜、京兆杜概等谋讨越，事泄伏诛。
现代文：高韬知道人心埋怨，暗中与太傅参军姜迹、京兆杜毖等人谋划讨伐司马越，事情泄露被杀。
English: Gao Yao knew that the people were grumbling, and he secretly plotted with Tai Fu to join the army, Jiang Kuo, Jing Zhaoduo and others to fight against Ma Yue, and the matter was leaked and he was killed.

古文：史臣曰：下士竞而文，中庸静而质，不若进不足而退有余也。
现代文：史臣曰：下等才能的人竞争而有文采，中等才能的人清静而质朴，不如进不足而退有余。
English: Shichen said: people with lower talent compete and have literary talent, people with medium talent are quiet and simple, it is better to make insufficient progress and have more than enough.

古文：魏舒、刘寔发虑精华，结绶登槐，览止成务。
现代文：魏舒、刘寔思维精华，出仕为官，便成就大事。
English: Wei Shu and Liu Ye, the quintessence of thinking, served as officials and achieved great things.

古文：季和切问近对，当官正色。
现代文：季塑恳切发问据实应答，当官严正。
English: Ji Puxu earnestly asked questions and answered truthfully, and the officials were strict.

古文：诗云 贪人败类 ，岂刘夏之谓欤！
现代文：诗中的 贪人败类 ，难道说的是刘夏吗!
English: Is it Liu Xia who is the greedy scum in the poem?

古文：赞曰：舒言不矜，憙对千乘。
现代文：赞曰：魏舒言语不骄矜，李患敢与王侯作对。
English: Zang said: Wei Shu's words are not arrogant, Li Zi dares to oppose the prince.

古文：子真、宣茂，雅志难陵。
现代文：子真、宣茂，志气高洁，难于欺凌。
English: Zizhen and Xuanmao have high aspirations and are difficult to bully.

古文：进忠能举，退让攸兴。
现代文：能举进忠良，兴起退让。
English: Can promote loyalty, rise up and give way.

古文：皎皎瑚器，来光玉绳。
现代文：皎洁的瑚器，来光亮玉绳星。
English: To shine the jade rope star, the bright and clean heart-shaped vessel.

