古文：起屠维赤奋若，尽旃蒙大荒落，凡十七年。
现代文：起，止，共十七年
English: A total of seventeen years

古文：赧王下四十三年
现代文：周赧王四十三年
English: The 43rd year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：楚以左徒黄歇侍太子完为质于秦。
现代文：楚国派左徒黄歇侍奉在秦国做人质的太子芈完。
English: Huang Xie, a leftist of the Chu faction, ended up serving the crown prince, who was a hostage in Qin.

古文：秦置南阳郡。
现代文：秦国设置南阳郡。
English: Nanyang County was established in Qin.

古文：秦、魏、楚共伐燕。
现代文：秦国、魏国、楚国共同进攻燕国。
English: Qin, Wei and Chu jointly attacked Yan.

古文：燕惠王薨，子武成王立。
现代文：燕国燕惠王去世，其子即位为燕武成王。
English: King Yan Hui of the State of Yan died, and his son became King Yan Wucheng.

古文：赧王下四十四年
现代文：周赧王四十四年
English: In the forty-fourth year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：赵蔺相如伐齐，至平邑。
现代文：赵国派蔺相如进攻齐国，兵力一直抵达了平邑。
English: Zhao sent troops to attack Qi, and the troops reached Ping'e.

古文：赵田部吏赵奢收租税，平原君家不肯出。
现代文：赵国一个收田租的小官赵奢到平原君赵胜家去收租税，他的家人不肯交。
English: Zhao Shuang, a minor official of the State of Zhao who collected land rents, went to the home of the plainsman Zhao Sheng to collect taxes. His family refused to pay.

古文：赵奢以法治之，杀平原君用事者九人。
现代文：赵奢以法处置，杀死平原君家中管事人九名。
English: Zhao Shuang used the law to deal with the matter, and killed nine stewards in Pingyuan Jun's household.

古文：平原君怒，将杀之。赵奢曰： 君于赵为贵公子，今纵君家而不奉公，则法削，法削则国弱，国弱则诸侯加兵，是无赵也，君安得有此富乎？
现代文：平原君十分恼怒，想杀死赵奢，赵奢便说： 您在赵国是贵公子，如果纵容家人而不奉公守法，法纪就会削弱，法纪削弱国家也就衰弱，国家衰弱则各国来犯，赵国便不存在了。
English: Plain Jun was very angry and wanted to kill Zhao Shao. Zhao Shao said: You are a noble man in Zhao. If you indulge your family and do not obey the law, the law will be weakened. If the law is weakened, the country will be weakened. If the country is weakened, all countries will come to commit crimes, and Zhao will no longer exist.

古文：以君之贵，奉公如法则上下平，上下平则国强，国强则赵固，而君为贵戚，岂轻于天下邪！ 
现代文：您还到哪里找现在的富贵呢！以您的尊贵地位，带头奉公守法则上下一心，上下一心则国家强大，国家强大则赵家江山稳固，而您作为王族贵戚，难道会被各国轻视吗？ 
English: Where else can you find today's rich and famous! With your distinguished status, take the lead in obeying the law of public duty with the highest heart, with the highest heart, the country is strong, with the country strong, the Zhao family is stable, and as a member of the royal family, will you be despised by all countries?

古文：平原君以为贤，言之于王。
现代文：平原君认为赵奢很贤明，便介绍给赵王。
English: Plain Jun thought that Zhao Shuo was very wise, so he introduced him to Zhao Wang.

古文：王使治国赋，国赋大平，民富而府库实。
现代文：赵王派他管理国家赋税，于是国家赋税征收顺利，人民富庶而国库充实。
English: King Zhao sent him to manage the state tax, so the state tax collection was smooth, the people were rich and the treasury was enriched.

古文：赧王下四十五年
现代文：周赧王四十五年
English: The 45th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦伐赵，围阏与。
现代文：秦国进攻赵国，围困阏与城。
English: Qin attacked Zhao and besieged Yan and the city.

古文：赵王召廉颇、乐乘而问之曰： 可救否？ 
现代文：赵王召见廉颇、乐乘问道： 可以援救吗？ 
English: Zhao Wang summoned Renpo, and Le Rong asked: Can you help?

古文：皆曰： 道远险狭，难救。 
现代文：两人都说： 大陆遥远险峻，很难救。 
English: Both of them said: The continent is far away, steep and difficult to save.

古文：问赵奢，赵奢对曰： 道远险狭，譬犹两鼠斗于穴中，将勇者胜。 
现代文：再问赵奢，赵奢回答说： 道路遥远险峻，就好比两只老鼠在洞穴中咬斗，将是勇敢者取胜。 
English: Ask Zhao Lan again, Zhao Lan replied: The road is far and steep, just like two mice fighting in a cave. The brave one will win.

古文：王乃令赵奢将兵救之。
现代文：赵王于是令赵奢率领军队前去援救。
English: King Zhao then ordered Zhao Xiao to lead an army to the rescue.

古文：去邯郸三十里而止，令军中曰： 有以军事谏者死！ 
现代文：赵奢刚离开邯郸三十里就停止不前，下令军中说： 如有人谈及军事，一律处死！ 
English: As soon as Zhao Shuxia left the thirty-mile line, he stopped moving and ordered the army to say: If anyone talks about the military, they will all be executed!

古文：秦师军武安西，鼓噪勒兵，武安屋瓦尽振。
现代文：秦国军队驻扎在武安城西，列阵大喊大擂，武安城内的屋瓦都为之震动。
English: Qin troops stationed in the west of Wu'an City, lined up and shouted loudly, causing the roof tiles in Wu'an City to shake.

古文：赵军中候有一人言急救武安，赵奢立斩之。
现代文：赵军中一个军吏忍不住提议急救武安，被赵奢立即斩首。
English: A military official in Zhao's army couldn't help but offer first aid to Wu'an, and was immediately beheaded by Zhao.

古文：坚壁留二十八日不行，复益增垒。
现代文：赵奢军坚守二十八天不动，反倒增修营垒。
English: Zhao Liang's army held out for 28 days without moving, but on the contrary, increased the number of camps.

古文：秦间入赵军，赵奢善食而遣之。
现代文：秦国一个间谍潜入赵军，赵奢佯装不知，用好吃好喝招待他。
English: A spy from Qin sneaked into Zhao's army. Zhao disguised himself and invited him with delicious food and drink.

古文：间以报秦将，秦将大喜曰： 夫去国三十里而军不行，乃增垒，阏与非赵地也！ 
现代文：间谍回去报告秦军大将，秦军大将十分高兴地说： 援军离开国都三十里就按兵不动，还增修营垒，阏与一定不是赵国的了！ 
English: The spy went back to report to the general of the Qin army, and the general of the Qin army said with great pleasure: The reinforcements left the capital thirty miles away and did not move. They also built additional camps. This is definitely not Zhao's country!

古文：赵奢既已遣间，卷甲而趋，二日一夜而至，去阏与五十里而军，军垒成。
现代文：赵奢放走间谍以后，下令部队卷起盔甲悄声前进，一天一夜便到了离阏与五十里的地方，扎下营来，修起营垒。
English: After Zhao Shuang released the spies, he ordered the troops to roll up their armor and quietly advance. One day and one night, they arrived at a place fifty miles away from Handan, set up camp, and built a camp.

古文：秦师闻之，悉甲而往。
现代文：秦国军队听说后，披甲前往迎敌。
English: After hearing the news, the Qin army put on armor and went to meet the enemy.

古文：赵军士许历请以军事谏，赵奢进之。
现代文：赵奢军中有个军士许历要求提出军事建议，赵奢便召他进来。
English: One of Zhao Lan's soldiers, Sergeant Xu Li, asked for military advice, so Zhao Lan called him in.

古文：许历曰： 秦人不意赵至此，其来气盛，将军必厚集其陈以待之；不然，必败。 
现代文：许历说： 秦军没想到赵军会到这里，他们来势盛气凌人。赵将军你一定要集中兵力排出战阵对付，不然必败。 
English: Xu Liji said: The Qin army did not expect the Zhao army to come here, they came to dominate. General Zhao, you must concentrate your forces to deal with the battle, otherwise you will be defeated.

古文：赵奢曰： 请受教！ 
现代文：赵奢说： 我接受你的指教。 
English: Zhao Luxa said: I accept your advice.

古文：许历请刑，赵奢曰： 胥，后令邯郸。 
现代文：许历以自己违反了军纪，请处死刑，赵奢忙说： 且慢，现在是邯郸那次军令以后的事了。 
English: Xu Lich said that he had violated military discipline and asked for the death penalty. Zhao Shuxiao said: Wait a minute, now it's about what happened after that military order.

古文：许历复请谏曰： 先据北山上者胜，后至者败。 
现代文：许历便再次提出建议说： 先占领北山的人必胜，后到的必败。 
English: Xu Lian then made another suggestion, saying: Those who occupy the North Mountain first will win, and those who come later will lose.

古文：赵奢许诺，即发万人趋之。
现代文：赵奢点头称是，立即派出一万人前去北山，秦军后到，争夺北山无法攻上。
English: Zhao Shuang agreed and immediately sent ten thousand people to rush up the mountain to the north.

古文：秦师后至，争山不得上；赵奢纵兵击秦师，秦师大败，解阏与而还。
现代文：于是，赵奢指挥全军猛击秦国军队，秦军大败，撤去对阏与的包围，退兵而还。
English: As a result, Zhao Shuang commanded the whole army to strike hard at the Qin army, the Qin army was defeated, the encirclement of Yaoying was removed, and the troops withdrew and returned.

古文：赵王封奢为马服君，与廉、蔺同位；以许历为国尉。
现代文：赵王因此封赵奢为马服君，与廉颇、蔺相如同等地位；又任命许历为国尉。
English: As a result, King Zhao appointed Zhao Shao as Ma Fu Jun, with the same status as Ren Po and Yan Xiang; he also appointed Xu Li as a lieutenant.

古文：穰侯言客卿灶于秦王，使伐齐，取刚、寿以广其陶邑。
现代文：魏冉向秦王介绍名叫灶的客卿，派他率领军队进攻齐国，夺取刚、寿两地，用来扩大自己的陶邑封地。
English: Wei Ran introduced a guest lord named Zhao to the Qin king, and sent him to lead an army to attack Qi, seize the two provinces of Gang and Shou, and use them to expand his fiefdom of Tao.

古文：初，魏人范雎从中大夫须贾使于齐，齐襄王闻其辩口，私赐之金及牛、酒。
现代文：起初，魏国人范睢随从中大夫须贾出使齐国，齐襄王听说他能言善辩，私下赠给他金子及酒食。
English: At first, the Wei citizen Fan Jia followed the Chinese doctor Su Jia as an envoy to Qi. Hearing that he could speak well, the King of Qi Xiang privately gave him gold, wine and food.

古文：须贾以为雎以国阴事告齐也，归而告其相魏齐。
现代文：须贾以为范睢把魏国的秘密告诉了齐国，回国后便向魏国宰相魏齐告发。
English: Su Jia thought that Fan Qi had told the secret of Wei to Qi, and after returning to China, he reported to Wei Qi, the prime minister of Wei.

古文：魏齐怒，笞击范雎，折胁，摺齿。
现代文：魏齐十分震怒，下令鞭打范睢，折断了肋骨，打脱了牙齿。
English: Wei Qi was so furious that he ordered Fan Qi to be whipped, breaking his ribs and knocking out his teeth.

古文：雎佯死，卷以箦，置厕中，使客醉者更溺之，以惩后，令无妄言者。
现代文：范睢只好装死，被卷进竹席，抛到厕所，魏齐还派醉酒的宾客向他身上溺尿，以惩戒后人，不得妄言。
English: Fan Qi had to pretend to be dead, was rolled into a bamboo seat and thrown into the toilet. Wei Qi also sent drunk guests to urinate on him in order to discipline future generations not to speak falsely.

古文：范雎谓守者曰： 能出我，我必有厚谢。 
现代文：范睢悄悄对看守说： 你放出我，我必有重谢。 
English: Fan Qi said quietly to the guard: If you release me, I will be very grateful.

古文：守者乃请弃箦中死人。魏齐醉，曰： 可矣。 
现代文：看守于是去请示把席中死人扔掉，魏齐正喝醉了酒，便说： 可以。 
English: The guard then went to request that the dead person in the seat be thrown away. Wei Qi, who was drunk, said, "Yes."

古文：范雎得出。
现代文：范睢这才得以脱身。
English: As a result, Fan Ye was able to escape.

古文：魏齐悔，复召求之。
现代文：事后魏齐后悔，又派人去搜索范睢。
English: After the fact, Wei Qi regretted and sent someone to search for Fan Yu.

古文：魏人郑安平遂操范雎亡匿，更名姓曰张禄。
现代文：魏国人郑安平把范睢藏匿起来，改换姓名叫张禄。
English: Zheng Anping, a native of Wei, hid Fan Qi and changed his name to Zhang Lu.

古文：秦谒者王稽使于魏，范雎夜见王稽。
现代文：秦国任谒者之职的王稽出使魏国，范睢深夜前去求见。
English: Wang Jizhi, who held the post of Qin's official envoy, sent an envoy to Wei, and Fan Rong went to see him late at night.

古文：稽潜载与俱归，荐之于王，王见之于离宫。
现代文：王稽把他暗中装上使车，一起带回国，推荐给秦王。秦王决定在离宫召见范睢。
English: Wang Qi secretly loaded him onto a cart and brought him back to the country with him, recommending him to King Qin. King Qin decided to summon Fan Ye to meet him outside the palace.

古文：雎佯为不知永巷而入其中，王来而宦者怒逐之，曰： 王至。 
现代文：范睢假装不识道路走入宫中巷道。秦王乘轿舆前来，宦官怒声驱赶范睢说： 大王来了！ 
English: Pretending not to know the road, Fan Qi walked into the alleyway in the middle of the palace. The Qin king came in a sedan, and the eunuch drove Fan Qi away angrily, saying, "The great king is coming!"

古文：范雎谬曰： 秦安得王！秦独有太后、穰侯耳！ 
现代文：范睢故意胡说道： 秦国哪里有大王，秦国只有王太后和穰侯而已！ 
English: Fan Ye deliberately said to Hu: Where there is a great king in Qin, Qin only has a queen dowager and a prince!

古文：王微闻其言，乃屏左右，跽而请曰： 先生何以幸教寡人？ 
现代文：秦王略微听见了几句，便屏退左右随从，下跪请求说： 先生有什么指教我的？ 
English: King Qin slightly heard a few words, then he flinched from his attendant, knelt down and asked: What does the teacher have to teach me?

古文：对曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：范睢只说： 是的是的。 
English: Fan Ye only said, "Yes, yes, yes."

古文：如是者三。
现代文：如此三次。
English: This went back and forth several times.

古文：王曰： 先生卒不幸教寡人邪？ 
现代文：秦王又说： 先生到底不愿对我赐教吗？ 
English: Qin Wang also said: Is the teacher really unwilling to teach me?

古文：范雎曰： 非敢然也！
现代文：范睢才说： 我哪里敢呢！
English: Fan Qiancai said: How dare I!

古文：臣，羁旅之臣也，交疏于王；而所愿陈者皆匡君之事。处人骨肉之间，愿效愚忠而未知王之心也，此所以王三问而不敢对者也。
现代文：我是一个流亡在外的人，和大王没有什么交往，而想向您陈述的又都是纠正您失误的大事，关系到您骨肉亲人，我即使愿意一效愚忠却还不知大王的真心，所以大王三次下问我都不敢回答。
English: I am an exile, and have no connection with the Great King, and what I want to tell you is all about correcting your mistakes, and it concerns your flesh and blood relatives. Even if I were willing to be loyal, I still don't know the Great King's true heart, so the Great King doesn't dare to answer my questions three times.

古文：臣知今日言之于前，明日伏诛于后，然臣不敢避也。
现代文：我知道今天在您面前说出，明天就有处死的危险，但我还是不敢回避。
English: I know that if I speak in front of you today, there is a risk of death tomorrow, but I still dare not avoid it.

古文：且死者，人之所必不免也，苟可以少有补于秦而死，此臣之所大愿也。
现代文：死，是人人都无法免除的，如果我的死能对秦国有所裨益，就是我最大的愿望了。
English: Death is unavoidable for everyone. If my death can be of benefit to Qin, that is my greatest wish.

古文：独恐臣死之后，天下杜口裹足，莫肯乡秦耳！ 
现代文：我只怕我被处死之后，天下的贤士都闭口不言，裹足不前，不再投奔秦国了。 
English: I'm just afraid that after I'm executed, all the sages in the world will keep their mouths shut, their feet bound, and will no longer go to Qin.

古文：王跽曰： 先生，是何言也！
现代文：秦王又下跪说： 先生您这是什么话啊！
English: Qin Wang knelt down again and said, "Teacher, what are you saying?"

古文：今者寡人得见先生，是天以寡人溷先生，而存先王之宗庙也。
现代文：今天我能见到先生，是上天认为我混浊，为了保存秦国的祖业宗庙而把您赐给我的。
English: Today I can see you, sir. It was God who thought I was muddled and gave you to me in order to preserve the ancestral temple of Qin.

古文：事无大小，上及太后，下至大臣，愿先生悉以教寡人，无疑寡人也！ 
现代文：无论事情大小，上及王太后，下至大臣，希望您都一一对我指教，不要再怀疑我的真心了！ 
English: No matter how big or small the matter is, whether you are the king or the queen mother, or a minister, I hope you will all advise me one by one, and stop doubting my sincerity!

古文：范雎拜，王亦拜。
现代文：范睢于是下拜，秦王也急忙回拜。
English: Fan Ye then bowed down, and Qin Wang also hurriedly bowed back.

古文：范雎曰： 以秦国之大，士卒之勇，以治诸侯，譬若走韩卢而博蹇兔也。
现代文：范睢这才说道： 以秦国的强大，士卒的勇猛，对付各国，就好比用韩卢那样的猛犬去追击跛脚兔子。
English: Fan Ye then said: Using the strength of Qin and the bravery of its soldiers to deal with other countries is like using a ferocious dog like Han Lu to chase a lame rabbit.

古文：而闭关十五年，不敢窥兵于山东者，是穰侯为秦谋不忠，而大王之计亦有所失也。 
现代文：而秦国却坐守关外十五年，不敢派兵出击崤山以东，这是穰侯魏冉为秦国的谋划不忠心，但是大王您的方针也有所失误。 
English: On the other hand, Qin has been sitting outside the pass for fifteen years, not daring to send troops to attack the east of Shaoshan. This is because Wei Ran, the warlord, was not loyal to Qin's plan. However, the great king also made a mistake in his policy.

古文：王跽曰： 寡人愿闻失计！ 
现代文：秦王跪着说： 我想知道错在何处！ 
English: King Qin knelt down and said, "I want to know what's wrong!"

古文：然左右多窃听者，范雎未敢言内，先言外事，以观王之府仰。
现代文：但是左右随从有不少人在侧耳偷听，范睢不敢提及内政，便先说到外事，以看秦王兴趣的高低。
English: However, there were many attendants on both sides who were eavesdropping. Fan Yao did not dare to mention domestic affairs, so he first talked about foreign affairs to see the level of interest of King Qin.

古文：因进曰： 夫穰侯越韩、魏而攻齐刚、寿，非计也。
现代文：他于是说： 穰侯越过韩国、魏国去进攻齐国的刚、寿两地，不是好计划。
English: He then said, "It is not a good plan for Gonghou to attack the Gang and Shou regions of Qi by crossing Korea and Wei.

古文：齐湣王南攻楚，破军杀将，再辟地千里，而齐尺寸之地无得焉者，岂不欲得地哉？
现代文：当年齐王向南进攻楚国，破军杀将，开辟千里土地，而最后齐国连一尺一寸领土也未能得到，难道是他不想要地吗？
English: At that time, King Qi attacked Chu to the south, defeated the army and killed the general, opened up thousands of miles of land, but in the end, Qi was not able to get even one inch of territory. Did he not want land?

古文：形势不能有也。
现代文：实在是因为地理形势无法占有。
English: It's really because of geography.

古文：诸侯见齐之罢敝，起兵而伐齐，大破之，齐几于亡，以其伐楚而肥韩、魏也。
现代文：而各国看到齐国征战疲劳，便起兵攻打齐国，大破齐军，使齐国几乎灭亡。这个结局就是因为齐国攻打楚国而使好处落到韩、魏两国手中。
English: When the countries saw that Qi was tired from the war, they raised their armies to attack Qi, defeated the Qi army, and almost destroyed Qi. This outcome was because Qi attacked Chu, and the benefits fell into the hands of South Korea and Wei.

古文：今王不如远交而近攻，得寸则王之寸也，得尺亦王之尺也。
现代文：现在大王不如采取远交而近攻的方针，得一寸地就是您大王的一寸，得一尺地就是您大王的一尺。
English: Now, it is better for the emperor to adopt the policy of approaching the enemy from far away. Every inch gained is your emperor's inch, and every foot gained is your emperor's foot.

古文：今夫韩、魏，中国之处，而天下之枢也。
现代文：魏国、韩国，位于中原，是天下的中枢。
English: Wei, Korea, located in the Central Plains, is the center of the world.

古文：王若欲霸，必亲中国以为天下枢，以威楚、赵，楚强则附赵，赵强则附楚，楚、赵皆附，齐必惧矣，齐附则韩、魏因可虏也。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：大王如果想称霸，必须接近中原之地控制天下枢纽，以威逼楚国、赵国，楚国强就收附赵国，赵国强则收附楚国，楚国、赵国一旦归附您，齐国就惊慌失措了。齐国再归附，韩国、魏国便是秦国掌中之物了。 秦王说： 好。 
English: If the great king wants to dominate, he must get close to the Central Plains to control the world's hub, and use intimidation to force the Chu and Zhao kingdoms. If the Chu kingdom is strong, it will annex the Zhao kingdom, and if the Zhao kingdom is strong, it will annex the Chu kingdom. If the Chu and Zhao kingdoms are annexed to you, the Qi kingdom will panic. If the Qi kingdom is annexed again, Korea and Wei will be in the hands of the Qin kingdom. The Qin king said: Good.

古文：乃以范雎为客卿，与谋兵事。
现代文：于是以范睢为客卿，与他商议军事。
English: So he invited Fan Qi as a guest and discussed military affairs with him.

古文：赧王下四十六年
现代文：周赧王四十六年
English: The 46th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦中更胡伤攻赵阏与，不拔。
现代文：秦国任中更之职的胡伤率领军队进攻赵国阏与，未能攻克。
English: During the reign of Qin, Hu Yan, who had been relieved of his post, led the army to attack Zhao Guozhen and failed to conquer it.

古文：赧王下四十七年
现代文：周赧王四十七年
English: The 47th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦王用范雎之谋，使五大夫绾伐魏，拔怀。
现代文：秦王听从范睢的计策，派五大夫绾攻打魏国，攻取了怀地。
English: The King of Qin followed Fan Ye's strategy and sent the Five Generals to attack Wei, capturing Huaiji.

古文：赧王下四十八年
现代文：周赧王四十八年
English: The 48th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦悼太子质于魏而卒。
现代文：秦国太子悼到魏国做人质，死在了魏国。
English: The crown prince of Qin was mourned as a hostage in Wei and died in Wei.

古文：赧王下四十九年
现代文：周赧王四十九年
English: The 49th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦拔魏邢丘。
现代文：秦国攻克魏国邢丘。
English: Qin conquered Wei's Lushan.

古文：范雎日益亲，用事，因承间说王曰： 臣居山东时，闻齐之有孟尝君，不闻有王；闻秦有太后、穰侯，不闻有王。
现代文：秦王日益亲信范睢，使他掌权，范睢便趁机建议秦王道： 我在崤山之东居住时，只听说齐国有孟尝君，不知道有齐王；只听说秦国有王太后、穰侯魏冉，不知道有秦王。
English: As King Qin trusted Fan Yu more and more and put him in power, Fan Yu took the opportunity to advise King Qin: When I was living in the eastern part of Lushan, I only heard that there was a King Meng Yu in Qin, but I did not know there was a King Qi; I only heard that there was a Queen Dowager and a Prince Wei Ran in Qin, but I did not know there was a King Qin.

古文：夫擅国之谓王，能利害之谓王，制杀生之谓王。
现代文：所谓独掌国权称作王，决定国家利害称作王，控制生杀大权称作王。
English: The so-called sovereign power is called the king, the power to determine the national interest is called the king, and the power to control life and death is called the king.

古文：今太后擅行不顾，穰侯出使不报，华阳、泾阳等击断无讳，高陵进退不请，四贵备而国不危者，未之有也。
现代文：现在王太后擅自专行，不顾大王；穰侯出使外国也不报告大王；华阳君、泾阳君处事决断，无所忌讳；高陵君自由进退，也不请示大王。有这四种权贵而国家想不危亡，是不可能的。
English: At present, the Empress Dowager is acting on her own without regard to the Great King; the princes are sending envoys to foreign countries without reporting to the Great King; Huayangun and Puyangun have no scruples in making decisions; and Gaolingun advances and retreats freely without consulting the Great King. With these four kinds of dignitaries, it is impossible for the country not to be in danger.

古文：为此四贵者下，乃所谓无王也。
现代文：在这四种权贵的威势之下，可以说秦国并没有王。
English: The people are under the rule of these four kinds of magnates, that is, I have never heard of a king in Qin.

古文：穰侯使者操王之重，决制于诸侯，剖符于天下，征敌伐国，莫敢不听；战胜攻取则利归于陶，战败则结怨于百姓而祸归于社稷。
现代文：穰侯魏冉派使者控制大王的外交重权，决断与各国事务，出使遍天下，征讨敌国，无人敢不听从。如果战胜了，他就把所获利益全部收归自己的封地陶邑；如果战败了，他就把百姓的怨愤推到国家身上。
English: Zhou and Wei sent emissaries to control the king's diplomatic weight, decide on the affairs of various countries, and dispatched throughout the world to conquer enemy countries. No one dared to disobey. If he won, he would take all the profits back to his own fiefdoms and counties; if he was defeated, he would push the people's resentment onto the country.

古文：臣又闻之，木实繁者披其枝，披其枝者伤其心；大其都者危其国，尊其臣者卑其主。
现代文：我还听说过，果实太多会压折树的枝干，枝干折断会损伤树根，封地过于强大会威胁到国家，大臣过于尊显会使君主卑微。
English: I have also heard that too much fruit will crush the branches of the tree, broken branches will damage the roots of the tree, too strong a fiefdom will threaten the country, and a minister who is too dignified will humble the monarch.

古文：淖齿管齐，射王股，擢王筋，悬之于庙梁，宿昔而死。
现代文：当年淖齿管理齐国，用箭射齐王的大腿，抽去齐王的筋，把他吊在房梁上，过了一夜才折磨死。
English: At that time, he administered Qi with his sharp teeth. He shot Qi Wang's thigh with an arrow, pulled out Qi Wang's sinew, hung him on the beam of the house, and tortured him to death after one night.

古文：李兑管赵，囚主父于沙丘，百日而饿死。
现代文：李兑统治赵国，把赵主父关在沙丘宫里，一百天后活活饿死。
English: Li Dui ruled the State of Zhao, locked up Zhao Shifu in the Sand Dunes Palace, and starved him to death a hundred days later.

古文：今臣观四贵之用事，此亦淖齿、李兑之类也。
现代文：如今我看秦国四种权贵的所作所为，也正像淖齿、李兑一类。
English: Now I see that the behavior of the four powerful people of Qin is just like that of the cormorant and the antelope.

古文：夫三代之所以亡国者，君专授政于臣，纵酒弋猎。
现代文：夏、商、周三代最后亡国的原因，都是因为君王把专权转授给臣下，自己纵酒行猎；被授权者嫉贤妒能，欺下瞒上，以售其奸。
English: The reasons why Xia, Shang, and the three generations of the third generation finally lost their country were all because the monarch transferred the exclusive power to his vassals and went hunting and drinking himself; the authorized person was jealous and envious, deceived and concealed, and sold his spies.

古文：其所授者妒贤疾能，御下蔽上以成其私，不为主计，而主不觉悟，故失其国，今自有秩以上至诸大吏，下及王左右，无非相国之人者，见王独立于朝，臣窃为王恐，万世之后有秦国者，非王子孙也！ 
现代文：恐怕您去世后，拥有秦国的将不是大王您的子孙了！ 
English: I'm afraid that after your death, it won't be your descendants who will own Qin!

古文：王以为然。于是废太后，逐穰侯、高陵、华阳、泾阳君于关外，以范雎为丞相，封为应侯。
现代文：秦王听后深以为然，于是毅然废黜太后的专权，把穰侯魏冉、高陵君、华阳君、泾阳君驱逐到关外去；任用范睢为丞相，封为应侯。
English: After hearing this, King Qin was deeply convinced, so he resolutely abolished the exclusive power of the empress dowager and banished Wei Ran, Gao Lingjun, Huayangjun, and Suyangjun to the outside of the pass; he appointed Fan Yu as chancellor and gave him the title of vice-mayor.

古文：魏王使须贾聘于秦，应侯敝衣间步而往见之。
现代文：魏王派须贾出使秦国，应侯范睢身穿破衣、徒步前去见他。
English: The Wei king sent Su Jia as an envoy to Qin, and Hou Fan Rong went to meet him on foot, wearing torn clothes.

古文：须贾惊曰： 范叔固无恙乎！ 
现代文：须贾惊奇地问他： 范叔你还是很好啊！ 
English: Surprised, Suja asked him, "Uncle Fan, you're still fine!

古文：留坐饮食，取一绨袍赠之。
现代文：留下他用饭，又拿出一件丝棉袍送给他。
English: Leaving him to eat, she took out a silk cotton robe and gave it to him.

古文：遂为须贾御而至相府，曰： 我为君先入通于相君。 
现代文：范睢便为须贾驾车前去丞相府，说： 我先为你去向丞相通报。 
English: Fan Ye then drove to the prime minister's office for Suja and said, "I'll go and inform the prime minister for you first."

古文：须贾怪其久不出，问于门下，门下曰： 无范叔。乡者吾相张君也。 
现代文：很久未出，须贾感到奇怪，便问丞相府守门人，守门人回答说： 没有什么范叔，刚才进去的是我们丞相张先生。 
English: Not having been out for a long time, Suja felt strange and asked the gatekeeper of the prime minister's office. The gatekeeper replied: There is no Uncle Fan, it was our prime minister, Mr. Zhang, who just entered.

古文：须贾知见欺，乃膝行入谢罪。
现代文：须贾大惊失色，知道自己落入圈套，只好用膝盖匍匐跪行进去谢罪。
English: Su Jia was shocked and knew that he had fallen into a trap, so he had to kneel down on his knees to apologize.

古文：应侯坐，责让之，且曰： 尔所以得不死者，以绨袍恋恋尚有故人之意耳！ 
现代文：应侯坐在上面，怒斥他说： 你之所以还能不死，是我念你赠送丝袍还有一丝照顾故人的旧情！ 
English: Ying Hou sat on it and scolded him: "The reason why you still can't die is that I read you a silk robe as a gift and a trace of the old feeling of caring for the deceased!

古文：乃大供具，请诸侯宾客；坐须贾于堂下，置莝、豆其前而马食之，使归告魏王曰： 速斩魏齐头来！不然，且屠大梁！ 
现代文：于是大设酒宴，招待各国宾客，令须贾坐在堂下，放一盘黑豆、碎草之类的喂马饲料让他吃，然后命令他回国告诉魏王： 快快砍下魏齐的头送来，不然，我就杀尽魏都大梁城的人！ 
English: So they held a grand wine banquet, invited guests from all over the world, made Su Jia Wu sit under the hall, put a plate of black beans, broken grass and other horse feed for him to eat, and then ordered him to return home and tell Wei Wang: Quickly cut off Wei Qi's head and send it to me, otherwise, I will kill all the people in Daliang City, the capital of Wei!

古文：须贾还，以告魏齐。魏齐奔赵，匿于平原君家。
现代文：须贾回国，把这番话告诉魏齐，魏齐只好逃奔赵国，藏匿在平原君赵胜家里。
English: When Su Jia returned to China, he told Wei Qi about these words. Wei Qi had no choice but to flee Zhao Province and hide in the home of Pingyuan Jun Zhao Sheng.

古文：赵惠文王薨，子孝成王丹立；以平原君为相。
现代文：赵国赵惠文王去世，他的儿子赵丹即位为赵孝成王；任用赵胜为国相。
English: King Zhao Huiwen of Zhao died, and his son Zhao Dan ascended the throne as King Zhao Xiaocheng; he appointed Zhao Sheng as minister of state.

古文：赧王下五十年
现代文：周赧王五十年
English: Fifty years of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦宣太后薨。
现代文：秦国宣太后去世。
English: Empress Dowager Qin Guoxuan passed away.

古文：九月，穰侯出之陶。
现代文：九月，魏冉离开咸阳回到陶邑。
English: In September, Gong Hou left the imperial court and returned to Taodi.

古文：臣光曰：穰侯援立昭王，除其灾害，荐白起为将，南取鄢、郢，东属地于齐，使天下诸侯稽首而事秦。
现代文：臣司马光说：穰侯魏冉拥立秦昭王，为他除去隐患威胁；举荐白起为大将，向南攻取鄢、郢两城，向东开拓地界到齐国，使各国向秦国俯首称臣。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said: Zhou Hou Wei Ran supported the establishment of Qin Zhao Wang, and removed the hidden danger threat for him; recommended Bai to be a general, to conquer the two cities of Yao and Shun to the south, to open up the land boundary to Qi to the east, and to make all countries bow down to Qin.

古文：秦益强大者，穰侯之功也。
现代文：秦国能够更加强大，都是穰侯的功劳。
English: The fact that Qin can be more powerful is all due to the efforts of Qin Hou.

古文：虽其专恣骄贪足以贾祸，亦未至尽如范雎之言。
现代文：虽然他恣意专权、骄傲贪婪已足以惹祸上身，但也没有到范睢说的那种地步。
English: Although his arbitrary authority, pride and greed are enough to cause trouble, they have not reached the level that Fan Yu said.

古文：若雎者，亦非能为秦忠谋，直欲得穰侯之处，故搤其吭而夺之耳。
现代文：而范睢这个人，也并不能忠心为秦国谋划，就是想得到穰侯的位置，所以才扼住他的喉咙，予以抢夺。
English: And Fan Xuan, this person, could not loyally plan for the Qin State, that is, he wanted to get the position of vassal, so he strangled his throat and robbed him.

古文：遂使秦王绝母子之义，失舅甥之恩。
现代文：于是，使秦王断绝了母子间的情义，失去了舅甥间的恩爱。
English: As a result, King Qin severed the affection between mother and son and lost the affection between uncle and nephew.

古文：要之，雎真倾危之士哉！
现代文：总之，范睢真是个颠覆他人的能手！
English: In short, Fan Ye is really a master of subverting others!

古文：秦王以子安国君为太子。
现代文：秦王立儿子安国君为太子。
English: The Qin king made his son, An Guojun, the crown prince.

古文：秦伐赵，取三城。
现代文：秦国进攻赵国，夺取三座城市。
English: Qin attacked Zhao and captured three cities.

古文：赵王新立，太后用事，求救于齐。
现代文：因为赵王新即位，赵太后便执掌政事，派人向齐国求救。
English: Because Zhao Wangxin ascended to the throne, Empress Dowager Zhao took charge of government affairs and sent someone to Qi to ask for help.

古文：齐人曰： 必以长安君为质。 
现代文：齐国答复： 必须以赵公子长安君做人质。 
English: Qi Guo replied: We must take Zhao Gongzi and Chang Anjun as hostages.

古文：太后不可。齐师不出，大臣强谏。
现代文：赵太后不答应，于是齐国的救兵便不出发。
English: The Empress Dowager Zhao did not agree to this, so the rescuers from Qi did not set out.

古文：太后明谓左右曰： 复言长安君为质者，老妇必唾其面！ 
现代文：赵国大臣一再劝说赵太后，太后却公然对左右随从说： 谁再提让长安君去做人质的事，我老婆子就要往他脸上吐口水！ 
English: Minister Zhao repeatedly persuaded the Empress Dowager Zhao, but the Empress Dowager openly said to her attendants on both sides, "Whoever again brings up the idea of letting Chang'an Jun go as a hostage, my old man will spit in his face!"

古文：左师触龙愿见太后，太后盛气而胥之入。
现代文：左师触龙求见赵太后，太后气冲冲地等待他进来。
English: Zuo Shi Chulong asked to see Empress Zhao, and the Empress waited for him to come in.

古文：左师公徐趋而坐。自谢曰： 老臣病足，不得见久矣，窃自恕，而恐太后体之有所苦也，故愿望见太后。 
现代文：触龙却慢吞吞走过来坐下，道歉说： 老臣我腿脚不好，很久没有来看望太后了，常常以此自我宽恕。又担心太后的身体有什么不适，所以还是希望能见到太后。 
English: Touching the dragon, he slowly walked over and sat down, and apologized, saying, "Old minister, my legs and feet are not good. I have not visited the empress dowager for a long time, and I often forgive myself for this. I am also worried about the discomfort of the empress dowager, so I still hope to see the empress dowager."

古文：太后曰： 老妇恃辇而行。 
现代文：赵太后说： 老婆子我只能靠人推车来往了。 
English: Touching the dragon, he said, "Shouldn't your daily diet be reduced?" The Empress Dowager said, "Just drink some porridge."

古文：曰： 食得毋衰乎？ 曰： 恃粥耳。 太后不和之色稍解。
现代文：触龙又问： 饭量也减少了吧？ 太后说： 只喝粥而已。 这时，太后脸上的不悦之色已稍稍宽解。
English: Touching the dragon, he asked, "Has the amount of food also been reduced?" The empress dowager said, "I only drink porridge." At this time, the unhappy look on the empress dowager's face had eased slightly.

古文：左师公曰： 老臣贱息舒祺最少，不肖，而臣衰，窃怜爱之。愿得补黑衣之缺，以卫王宫，昧死以闻！ 太后曰： 诺。
现代文：触龙又说： 我的儿子舒祺，年岁最小，又不成器，而我因为年老，私下最怜爱他，想让他补个黑衣卫士的缺去护卫王宫，在此向您冒昧请求！ 太后说： 可以。
English: Touching the dragon, he said, "My son Shu Yan, who is the youngest in age, is not perfect, and because of my old age, I secretly love him the most. I would like him to make up for the lack of a black-clad guard to protect the royal palace. I hereby make a bold request to you!" The empress dowager said, "Yes."

古文：年几何矣？ 
现代文：他年龄多大了？ 
English: How old are you?

古文：对曰： 十五岁矣。
现代文：回答说： 十五岁了。
English: And he said, I am fifteen years old.

古文：虽少，愿及未填沟壑而托之。 太后曰： 丈夫亦爱少子乎？ 
现代文：虽然还年轻，可我想趁我这把老骨头还没入土为他做个安排。 太后说： 大丈夫也知道疼爱小儿子吗？ 
English: Although he is still young, I would like to make an arrangement for him while my old bones have not yet sunk into the ground.The mother-in-law said: Is it okay for a husband to love his little son?

古文：对曰： 甚于妇人。 
现代文：回答说： 比妇人还厉害呢！ 
English: And he said, More than a woman.

古文：太后笑曰： 妇人异甚。 
现代文：太后笑着说： 还是妇人更厉害！ 
English: The Empress Dowager smiled and said, "Women love more fiercely."

古文：对曰： 老臣窃以为媪之爱燕后贤于长安君。 
现代文：触龙却说： 我觉得，老太太您爱女儿燕后胜过爱儿子长安君。 
English: Chulong said: The old minister secretly thinks that you love Yan Hou more than you love Chang'an.

古文：太后曰： 君过矣！
现代文：太后说： 你错了！
English: The empress dowager said: You are mistaken!

古文：不若长安君之甚。 
现代文：我对燕后远不如对长安君。 
English: I'm not as good with Yan Hou as I am with Chang An Jun.

古文：左师公曰： 父母爱其子则为之计深远。
现代文：触龙又说： 父母疼爱孩子，就要为他们考虑深远。
English: Chulong also said, "If parents love their children, they must think deeply about them.

古文：媪之送燕后也，持其踵而泣，念其远也，亦哀之矣。
现代文：老太太您送燕后出嫁时，抓住她的脚后跟直掉眼泪，想到她要到遥远的燕国去，心情十分哀伤。
English: When you married the old lady after giving away the swallow, you grabbed her heel to wipe away her tears. The thought of her going to the distant swallow country was very sad.

古文：已行，非不思也，祭祀则祝之曰： 必勿使反！ 
现代文：待到燕后离去，您不是不想她，可一逢祭祀就祝愿说： 千万别让人把她退回来。 
English: If you wait until after the swallow has left, it is not that you do not want her, but you can make a wish at the time of the sacrifice, saying, "Don't let anyone send her back."

古文：岂非为之计长久，为子孙相继为王也哉？ 太后曰： 然。 
现代文：这难道不是为她长久打算，希望她的子孙能在燕国相继为王吗？ 太后点头说： 是的。 
English: Wasn't this her long-term plan, hoping that her children and grandchildren would succeed one another as kings of Yan? The Empress Dowager nodded and said, "Yes."

古文：左师公曰： 今三世以前，至于赵王之子孙为侯者，其继有在者乎？ 
现代文：触龙又说： 从现在起三代以前，赵王的子孙被封侯的，现在还有没有继承人在位的？ 
English: Chulong also said, "From now on, three generations ago, when the descendants of King Zhao were crowned as princes, are there still no heirs to the throne?

古文：曰： 无有。 
现代文：太后回答： 没有了。 
English: Wang Qie replied: No.

古文：曰： 此其近者祸及身，远者及其子孙。
现代文：触龙说： 这就是说，近的，灾祸殃及其身；远的，殃及其子孙。
English: Touching the dragon, he said, "That is to say, for those who are near, disaster will befall them; for those who are far away, disaster will befall their descendants."

古文：岂人主之子侯则不善哉？
现代文：难道说君王封侯的儿子都不成才？
English: Isn't it a bad thing that the monarch's descendants are all princes?

古文：位尊而无功，奉厚而无劳，而挟重器多也。
现代文：只是因为他们地位尊贵而无军功，俸禄丰厚而无劳苦，却享有国家的许多宝器。
English: It is because their positions are honorable but not meritorious, their salaries are generous but not meritorious, and they have too many valuable treasures.

古文：今媪尊长安君之位，而封之以膏腴之地，多与之重器，而不及今令有功于国。
现代文：如今老太太您提高小儿子长安君的地位，封给他良田美宅，赐给他许多宝器，却不让他趁现在为国家立功。
English: Now, old lady, you have raised the status of your youngest son, Chang Anjun, given him a good farm and a beautiful house, and given him many treasures, but you won't let him take advantage of the moment to do something for the country.

古文：一旦山陵崩，长安君何以自托于赵哉？ 
现代文：一旦您不在世上，长安君靠什么在赵国自立呢？ 
English: Once you are no longer in the world, what will Chang'an rely on to become self-sufficient in Zhao?

古文：太后曰： 诺，恣君之所使之！ 
现代文：太后恍然大悟说： 好吧，随你去安排他吧！ 
English: The empress dowager suddenly came to her senses and said: Well, arrange him as you please!

古文：于是为长安君约车百乘质于齐。
现代文：于是下令为长安君备齐一百乘车，去齐国做人质。
English: He then ordered that a hundred cars be prepared for Chang'an Jun to take him as a hostage to Qi.

古文：齐师乃出，秦师退。
现代文：齐国随即发兵，秦国军队便退回。
English: Qi immediately dispatched troops, and the Qin army retreated.

古文：齐安平君田单将赵师以伐燕，取中阳；又伐韩，取注人。
现代文：齐国安平君田单指挥赵国军队进攻燕国，夺取中阳；又攻打韩国，夺取注城。
English: Anping Juntian of Qi Province commanded the army of Zhao Province to attack Yan Province and capture Zhongyang; he also attacked South Korea and captured Shucheng.

古文：齐襄王薨，子建立。
现代文：齐国齐襄王去世，其子田建即位。
English: King Qizang of Qi died, and his son Tian Jian ascended the throne.

古文：建年少，国事皆决于君王后。
现代文：田建年幼，国事都由王太后决断。
English: Tian Jian was young, and all state affairs were decided by the empress dowager.

古文：赧王下五十一年
现代文：周赧王五十一年
English: The 51st year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦武安君伐韩，拔九城，斩首五万。
现代文：秦国武安君白起进攻韩国，攻克九座城，杀死五万人。
English: Wu Anjun of Qin attacked Korea in vain, conquering nine cities and killing fifty thousand people.

古文：田单为赵相。
现代文：田单任赵国国相。
English: Tian Shan became the Minister of State of Zhao.

古文：赧王下五十二年
现代文：周赧王五十二年
English: The 52nd year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦武安君伐韩，取南阳；攻太行道，绝之。
现代文：秦国武安君白起进攻韩国，夺取南阳；又攻打太行山道，予以切断。
English: Wu Anjun of Qin attacked South Korea and captured Nanyang; he also attacked the Taihang Mountain Road and cut it off.

古文：楚顷襄王疾病。
现代文：楚顷襄王病重。
English: Chuhao Xiangwang is seriously ill.

古文：黄歇言于应侯曰： 今楚王疾恐不起，秦不如归其太子。
现代文：黄歇对应侯范睢说： 现在楚王的病恐怕难以痊愈，秦国不如让楚太子回国。
English: Huang Xie said to Hou Fan Rong: I'm afraid that King Chu's illness will be difficult to recover from now. It would be better for the State of Qin to let Prince Chu return to China.

古文：太子得立，其事秦必重而德相国无穷，是亲与国而得储万乘也。
现代文：太子能够即位，一定会更加侍奉秦国，感戴相国您的无穷恩德，这样做既与邻国结好，又为秦国储存下一个有万乘兵车的帮手。
English: If the prince can become king, he will serve the Qin state with a certain amount of weight and be grateful to the country's benevolence will never be exhausted. This is not only a sign of a friendly and friendly country, but also retains an ally of a great power for the future.

古文：不归，则咸阳布衣耳。
现代文：如果不让太子回去，他只是咸阳城里一个普通老百姓而已。
English: If the crown prince is not allowed to return, he is just an ordinary citizen in Xianyang City.

古文：楚更立君，必不事秦，是失与国而绝万乘之和，非计也。 
现代文：楚国再立一个君王，肯定不会侍奉秦国，那么秦国就失去友邦又断送了与一个有万乘兵车大国间的和平。不是上策。 
English: If Chu establishes another king, he will definitely not serve Qin, and then Qin will lose its friends and break off peace with a great power with ten thousand chariots. Not the best strategy.

古文：应侯以告王。王曰： 令太子之傅先往问疾，反而后图之。 
现代文：应侯范睢把此话告诉秦王，秦王说： 让太子的老师先去看看楚王病的情况，回来再做商议。 
English: In response, Hou Fan Rong told this to King Qin. King Qin said: Let the prince's teacher first go to see the situation of King Chu's illness, and then come back for further discussion.

古文：黄歇与太子谋曰： 秦之留太子，欲以求利也。
现代文：黄歇与楚太子盘算道： 秦国留下太子，想以此来换取利益。
English: Huang Xie and Prince Chu made a plan: Qin left the crown prince behind, hoping to use him in exchange for benefits.

古文：今太子力未能有以利秦也，而阳文君子二人在中。王若卒大命，太子不在，阳文君子必立为后，太子不得奉宗庙矣。
现代文：现在太子的力量又做不到什么有利秦国的事。阳文君的两个儿子都在楚国，楚王一旦去世，太子不在国中，阳文君的儿子肯定会被立为继承人，那么太子就不能接替祖业了。
English: Yang Wenjun's two sons are both in the State of Chu. If the King of Chu dies and the prince is not in the country, Yang Wenjun's son will certainly be appointed as the heir, and the prince will not be able to succeed his ancestor.

古文：不如亡秦，与使者俱出。臣请止，以死当之！ 
现代文：太子不如与使者一起逃离秦国，我留在这里，以死来对付秦王。 
English: It would be better for the prince to flee Qin with the emissary. I will stay here and deal with Qin with death.

古文：太子因变服为楚使者御以出关；而黄歇守舍，常为太子谢病。
现代文：太子于是换上衣服扮作楚国使者的车夫混出关外；黄歇守在馆舍中，常常称太子生病谢绝来访。
English: Therefore, the prince changed his clothes and disguised himself as a coachman of the ambassador of the State of Chu to sneak out of the prison; Huang Xie stayed in the palace and often said that the prince was ill and declined to visit.

古文：度太子已远，乃自言于王曰： 楚太子已归，出远矣。
现代文：他估计太子已经走得很远，便自己去告诉秦王说： 楚国太子已经归国，走得很远了。
English: He estimated that the crown prince had already gone very far, so he went to tell King Qin himself and said: The crown prince of Chu has returned to the country, he has gone very far.

古文：歇愿赐死！ 
现代文：我黄歇情愿领受死罪。 
English: I, Huang Xie, am willing to accept the death penalty.

古文：王怒，欲听之。
现代文：秦王勃然大怒，想照此处理。
English: Qin Wang flew into a rage and wanted to deal with it accordingly.

古文：应侯曰： 歇为人臣，出身以徇其主，太子立，必用歇。
现代文：应侯范睢劝道： 黄歇作为臣下，献身以救他的主子，如果楚太子即位，一定会重用黄歇。
English: In response to Hou Fanyao's advice, Huang Xie, as a vassal, dedicated his life to save his master. If Prince Chu ascends to the throne, Huang Xie will certainly be reused.

古文：不如无罪而归之，以亲楚。 
现代文：我们不如赦免黄歇无罪放他回去，以与楚国结好。 
English: We might as well pardon Huang Xie and let him go back to make peace with Chu.

古文：王从之。
现代文：秦王听从了劝告，放走黄歇。
English: King Qin agreed to Wang Yao's request.

古文：黄歇至楚三月，秋，顷襄王薨，考烈王即位；以黄歇为相，封以淮北地，号曰春申君。
现代文：黄歇回到楚国三个月后的秋天，楚顷襄王去世，太子即位为楚考烈王；任命黄歇为国相，封给他淮河以北的领地，号称春申君。
English: In the autumn, three months after Huang He returned to the State of Chu, the King of Chu He Xiang died, and the prince ascended to the throne as the King of Chu Ka Lai; he appointed Huang He as the Minister of State, and granted him the territory north of the Huai River, known as Chun Shen Jun.

古文：赧王下五十三年
现代文：周赧王五十三年
English: The 53rd year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：楚人纳州于秦以平。
现代文：楚国把州陵献给秦国，以换取和平。
English: Chu offered the state mausoleum to Qin in exchange for peace.

古文：武安君伐韩，拔野王。
现代文：秦国武安君白起进攻韩国，攻克野王。
English: Wu Anjun of Qin attacked Korea and defeated the Wild King.

古文：上党路绝，上党守冯亭与其民谋曰： 郑道已绝，秦兵日进，韩不能应，不如以上党归赵。
现代文：上党与外界通道被切断。上党郡守冯亭与民间人士商议说： 去都城新郑的道路已经断绝，秦国军队每日推进，韩国又无法接应救援，不如以上党去归顺赵国。
English: Feng Ting, the county governor of Shangdang, discussed with the people and said: The road to the capital Xinzheng has been cut off, the Qin army is advancing daily, and South Korea is unable to respond to the rescue, it is better for the above party to surrender to Zhao.

古文：赵受我，秦必攻之；赵被秦兵，必亲韩。韩、赵为一，则可以当秦矣。 
现代文：赵国如果接受我们，秦国必定进攻他们；赵国面对秦兵，一定会与韩国亲善，韩、赵联为一体，就可以抵挡秦国了。 
English: If Zhao accepts us, Qin will definitely attack them; if Zhao faces Qin soldiers, Zhao will definitely be friendly with South Korea. If South Korea and Zhao unite as one, they can resist Qin.

古文：乃遣使者告于赵曰： 韩不能守上党，入之秦，其吏民皆安为赵，不乐为秦。
现代文：于是派使者去告诉赵国说： 我们韩国无法守住上党，想把它献给秦国，但郡中官员百姓都心向赵国，不愿做秦国的属下。
English: So they sent an envoy to tell Zhao Guo that: We, Korea, cannot hold on to the upper party and want to dedicate it to Qin Guo, but the officials and people in the county are all devoted to Zhao Guo and do not want to be subordinates of Qin Guo.

古文：有城市邑十七，愿再拜献之大王。 
现代文：我们现有大邑共十七个，愿意恭敬地献给赵王！ 
English: We currently have a total of seventeen grand townships, which we would like to respectfully dedicate to King Zhao!

古文：赵王以告平阳君豹，对曰： 圣人甚祸无故之利。 
现代文：赵王把此事告诉平阳君赵豹，赵豹说： 圣人认为接受无缘无故的利益不是好兆头。 
English: Zhao Wang told the matter to Pingyangjun Zhao Leopard, Zhao Leopard said: The sage thought that it was not a good omen to accept benefits for no reason.

古文：王曰： 人乐吾德，何谓无故？ 
现代文：赵王说： 别人仰慕我的恩德，怎么能说是无缘无故呢？ 
English: Zhao Wang said, "How can I say that others admire my benevolence without any reason?

古文：对曰： 秦蚕食韩地，中绝，不令相通，固自以为坐而受上党也。
现代文：回答说： 秦国蚕食吞并韩国土地，从中切断，不使他们相通，本来以为可坐待上党归降。
English: He replied: The Qin Dynasty encroached on and annexed Korean lands, cut them off from each other, and did not allow them to communicate with each other. Originally, they thought they could wait for the upper party to surrender.

古文：韩氏所以不入于秦者，欲嫁其祸于赵也。
现代文：韩国人之所以不把它献给秦国，就是想嫁祸于赵国。
English: The reason why Korea did not submit to Qin was to blame Zhao.

古文：秦服其劳而赵受其利，虽强大不能得之于弱小，弱小固能得之于强大乎！
现代文：秦国付出千辛万苦而赵国坐收其利，即使我们强大也不能这样从弱小手中夺取利益，何况我们本来就弱小无法与强大秦国相争。
English: Qin paid a lot of hardships while Zhao reaped the benefits. Even if we are strong, we cannot seize the benefits from the weak. Moreover, we are too weak to compete with the powerful Qin.

古文：岂得谓之非无故哉？
现代文：这难道还不是无缘无故吗？
English: Isn't this all for nothing?

古文：不如勿受。 
现代文：我们不应该接受上党。 
English: We shouldn't accept the party line.

古文：王以告平原君，平原君请受之。
现代文：赵王又把此事告诉平原君赵胜，赵胜却劝赵王接受。
English: Zhao Wang also told the matter to the plainsman Zhao Sheng, but Zhao Sheng persuaded Zhao Wang to accept.

古文：王乃使平原君往受地，以万户都三封其太守为华阳君，以千户都三封其县令为侯，吏民皆益爵三级。
现代文：赵王于是派赵胜前去接收，封原上党太守为华阳君，赐给他三个拥有万户百姓的城市做封地；又封县令为侯，赐给三个拥有千户百姓的城镇做封地。官员和地方人士都晋爵三级。
English: Zhao Wang then sent Zhao Sheng forward to receive it, and named Hua Yang Jun as the original party leader, and gave him three cities with ten thousand households as fiefs; and named the county magistrate as marquis, and gave him three towns with one thousand households as fiefs. Officials and local people were promoted to the third level.

古文：冯亭垂涕不见使者，曰： 吾不忍卖主地而食之也！ 
现代文：冯亭不愿见赵国使者，垂着泪说： 我实在不忍心出卖君主的土地还去享用它！ 
English: Feng Ting did not want to see the emissary of Zhao, and said with tears: I really can't bear to sell the monarch's land and still enjoy it!

古文：赧王下五十五年
现代文：周赧王五十五年
English: Fifty-five years of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦左庶长王龁攻上党，拔之。
现代文：秦国派左庶长王龁进攻上党，予以攻克。
English: The Qin State sent the left subordinate leader Wang Qi to attack the upper party and defeat it.

古文：上党民走赵。
现代文：上党百姓逃往赵国。
English: People who joined the party fled to Zhao.

古文：赵廉颇军于长平，以按据上党民。
现代文：赵国派廉颇率军驻守长平，接应上党逃来的百姓。
English: Zhao Guo sent Renpo to garrison Changping with his army to meet the people who fled to the party.

古文：王龁因伐赵。
现代文：王龁于是挥兵攻打赵国。
English: Wang Hui then attacked Zhao with his army.

古文：赵军战数不胜，亡一裨将、四尉。
现代文：赵军迎战，几战都不胜，一员副将和四名都尉阵亡。
English: Zhao's army went into battle and lost several battles. One vice-general and four captains were killed.

古文：赵王与楼昌、虞卿谋，楼昌请发重使为媾。
现代文：赵王与楼昌、虞卿商议，楼昌建议派地位高的使节与秦国媾和。
English: Zhao Wang discussed with Lou Chang and Yu Qing, and Lou Chang suggested sending a high-ranking envoy to make peace with Qin.

古文：虞卿曰： 今制媾者在秦，秦必欲破王之军矣，虽往请媾，秦将不听。
现代文：虞卿反对说： 和与不和，控制权在秦国；秦国现在已下决心要大破赵军。我们即使去求和，秦国也不会同意。
English: Yuqing objected, saying: Peace and discord, control is in Qin; Qin has now made up its mind to defeat Zhao's army. Even if we were to sue for peace, Qin would not agree.

古文：不如发使以重宝附楚、魏，楚、魏受之，则秦疑天下之合纵，媾乃可成也。 
现代文：我们不如派出使者用贵重珍宝拉拢楚国、魏国。楚国、魏国一接受，秦国就会疑心各国重新结成了抗秦阵线，那时媾和才可成功。 
English: We might as well send an emissary to woo Chu and Wei with valuable treasures. As soon as Chu and Wei accept, Qin will suspect that all countries have re-formed an anti-Qin front. Only then will the peace be successful.

古文：王不听，使郑硃媾于秦，秦受之。
现代文：赵王不听虞卿的意见，仍派郑朱赴秦国求和。
English: Zhao Wang did not listen to Yuqing's advice and still sent Zheng Zhu to Qin to sue for peace.

古文：王谓虞卿曰： 秦内郑硃矣。 
现代文：秦国接待了郑朱。赵王便对虞卿说： 秦国接纳郑朱了。 
English: Qin State received Zheng Zhu. Zhao Wang then said to Yu Qing: Qin State has accepted Zheng Zhu.

古文：对曰： 王必不得媾而军破矣。
现代文：虞卿说： 大王肯定见不到和谈成功而赵军就被击破了。
English: Yu Jing said: The great king will certainly not see the success of the peace talks and the Zhao Army will be defeated.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：天下之贺战胜者皆在秦矣。夫郑硃，贵人也，秦王、应侯必显重之以示天下。天下见王之媾于秦，必不救王。秦知天下之不救王，则媾不可得成矣。 
现代文：各国都派使者赴秦国祝贺胜利，郑朱是赵国地位很高的人，秦王、应侯肯定会把郑朱来求和的事向各国宣扬，各国看到赵王派人去求和，便不会再出兵援救赵国；秦国知道赵国孤立无援，就愈发不肯讲和了。 
English: All countries have sent envoys to Qin to congratulate the victory. Zheng Zhu is a high-ranking person in Zhao. The Qin king and Ying Hou will certainly promote Zheng Zhu's request for peace to all countries. When countries see that King Zhao has sent people to ask for peace, they will no longer send troops to rescue Zhao. When Qin knows that Zhao is isolated and helpless, they are increasingly unwilling to talk about peace.

古文：既而秦果显郑硃而不与赵媾。
现代文：不久，秦国果然大肆宣扬郑朱来使，而不与赵国进行和谈。
English: Soon after, the Qin state indeed trumpeted the arrival of Zheng Zhu as an envoy, but did not engage in peace talks with the Zhao state.

古文：秦数败赵兵，廉颇坚壁不出。
现代文：赵兵屡次被秦军打败，廉颇便下令坚守营垒，拒不出战。
English: Zhao Bing was repeatedly defeated by the Qin army, and then ordered to hold the camp and refuse to fight.

古文：赵王以颇失亡多而更怯不战，怒，数让之。
现代文：赵王以为廉颇损兵折将后更加胆怯，不敢迎敌，非常气愤并多次斥责他。
English: Zhao Wang thought that Liang was more timid after losing so many soldiers, and did not dare to face the enemy. He was very angry and rebuked him many times.

古文：应侯又使人行千金于赵为反间，曰： 秦之所畏，独畏马服君之子赵括为将耳！
现代文：应侯范睢又派人用千金去赵国施行反间计，散布说： 秦国害怕的，只是马服君赵奢的儿子赵括做大将。
English: At the request of Hou Fanqi, he also sent people with thousands of gold to Zhao to carry out countermeasures, spreading the rumor that: What Qin is afraid of is that Ma Fu Jun's son, Zhao Shuang, will be the general.

古文：廉颇易与，且降矣！ 
现代文：廉颇好对付，而且他也快投降了！ 
English: He's pretty easy to deal with, and he's about to surrender!

古文：赵王遂以赵括代颇将。
现代文：赵王中计，便用赵括代替廉颇为大将。
English: In Zhao Wang's calculation, he used Zhao Bracket to replace Lian Bo as the general.

古文：蔺相如曰： 王以名使括，若胶柱鼓瑟耳。
现代文：蔺相如劝阻说： 大王因为赵括有些名气就重用他，这是粘住调弦的琴柱再弹琴呀！
English: Gong Xiangru dissuaded him, saying, "The great king reused Zhao Kuang because he had some fame. This is like sticking the tuning peg and then playing the piano!"

古文：括徒能读其父书传，不知合变也。 
现代文：赵括只知道死读他父亲的兵书，不知道随机应变。 
English: Zhao Kuang can only read the books left by his father and does not know how to be flexible.

古文：王不听。
现代文：赵王仍是不听。
English: Xiang Wang still did not listen.

古文：初，赵括自少时学兵法，以天下莫能当；尝与其父奢言兵事，奢不能难，然不谓善。
现代文：起初，赵括从小学习兵法时，就自以为天下没有人比得上他。他曾与父亲赵奢讨论兵法，赵奢也难不倒他，但终究不说他有才干。
English: At first, when Zhao Kuan was learning the art of war from a young age, he thought that no one in the world was better than him. He had discussed the art of war with his father Zhao Cao, and Zhao Cao could not beat him, but in the end he did not say that he had talent.

古文：括母问其故，奢曰： 兵，死地也，而括易言之。
现代文：赵括的母亲询问原因，赵奢说： 带兵打仗，就是出生入死，而赵括谈论起来却很随便。
English: Zhao Guan's mother asked why. Zhao Gao said, "To lead soldiers into battle is to be born into death, but Zhao Guan is very casual when talking about it.

古文：使赵不将括则已；若必将之，破赵军者必括也。 
现代文：赵国不用他为大将也还罢了，如果任用他，灭亡赵军的必定是赵括。 
English: Zhao Guo didn't need him as a general. If he had been appointed, it would have been Zhao Kuang who would have destroyed the Zhao army.

古文：及括将行，其母上书，言括不可使。王曰： 何以？ 
现代文：待到赵括将要出发，他的母亲急忙上书，指出赵括不能重用。赵王问： 为什么？ 
English: When Zhao Bang was about to leave, his mother hurriedly wrote a letter, pointing out that Zhao Bang could not be reused. Zhao Wang asked: Why?

古文：对曰： 始妾事其父，时为将，身所奉饭而进食者以十数，所友者以百数，王及宗室所赏赐者，尽以与军吏士大夫；受命之日，不问家事。
现代文：回答说： 当年我侍奉赵括的父亲，他做大将时，亲自去捧着饭碗招待的有几十位，他的朋友有几百人。大王及宗室王族给他的赏赐，他全部分发给将士。他自接受命令之日起，就不再理睬家事。
English: He replied, "Back then, I served Zhao Kuan's father. When he was a general, he personally went to hold the rice bowl to invite dozens of people, and his friends were several hundred people. The rewards given to him by the great king and the royal family, he distributed in full to the soldiers. From the day he received the order, he no longer paid attention to household chores.

古文：今括一旦为将，东乡而朝，军吏无敢仰视之者；王所赐金帛，归藏于家，而日视便利田宅可买者买之。
现代文：而赵括刚刚做了大将，就向东高坐，接受拜见，大小军官没人敢抬头正脸看他。大王赏给他的金银绸缎，全部拿回家藏起来，每天忙于察看有什么良田美宅可买的就买下。
English: As soon as Zhao Kuang was made a general, he sat in the east high school and received visits. No officer of any rank dared to look up at him. He took all the gold, silver, silk and enamel that the king had given him home and hid it. Every day, he was busy looking at what beautiful houses could be bought and bought them.

古文：王以为如其父，父子异心，愿王勿遣！ 
现代文：大王您以为他像父亲，其实他们父子用心完全不同。
English: Your Majesty, you think he is like a father, but in fact, the intentions of father and son are completely different.

古文：王曰： 母置之，吾已决矣！ 
现代文：请大王千万不要派他去。 赵王却说： 老太太你不用管，我已经决定了。 
English: He begged the king not to send him, but Zhao Wang said, "You don't have to worry about the old lady, I've already decided.

古文：母因曰： 即如有不称，妾请无随坐。 
现代文：赵括母亲便说： 万一赵括出了什么差错，我请求不要连累我治罪。 
English: Zhao Guan's mother then said: "In case Zhao Guan makes any mistakes, I ask that you not implicate me in the crime.

古文：赵王许之。
现代文：赵王同意了赵母的请求。
English: Zhao Wang agreed to Zhao Ma's request.

古文：秦王闻括已为赵将，乃阴使武安君为上将军，而王龁为裨将，令军中： 有敢泄武安君将者斩！ 
现代文：秦王听说赵括已经上任为大将，便暗中派武安君白起为上将军，改王龁为副将，下令军中： 谁敢泄露白起为上将军的消息，格杀勿论！ 
English: When the Qin king heard that Zhao Kuang had been appointed general, he secretly sent Wu Anjun Baiqi to be the general, and changed Wang Qi to be the vice-general, and ordered the army: "Whoever dares to leak the news of Baiqi as the general, must be killed!"

古文：赵括至军，悉更约束，易置军吏，出兵击秦师。
现代文：赵括到了赵军中，全部推翻原来的规定，调换军官，下令出兵攻击秦军。
English: Zhao Guanzhong arrived in the Zhao Army, overturned all the original regulations, replaced the officers, and ordered the troops to attack the Qin Army.

古文：武安君佯败而走，张二奇兵以劫之。
现代文：白起佯装战败退走，预先布置下两支奇兵准备截击。
English: Bai pretended to be defeated and retreated, pre-arranging two strange soldiers to prepare for an interception.

古文：赵括乘胜追造秦壁，壁坚拒不得入；奇兵二万五千人绝赵军之后，又五千骑绝赵壁间。赵军分而为二，粮道绝。
现代文：赵括乘胜追击，直达秦军营垒，秦军坚守，无法攻克。这时，秦军一支二万五千人的奇兵已切断了赵军的后路，另一支五千人的骑兵堵截住赵军返回营垒的通道，赵军被一分为二，粮道也断绝。
English: Zhao Biao pursued the Qin camp, and the Qin army stood firm and could not be defeated. At this time, a twenty-five-thousand-strong army of the Qin army had cut off the Zhao army's rear path, and another five-thousand-strong cavalry blocked the Zhao army's return to the camp. The Zhao army was divided into two and the food supply was cut off.

古文：武安君出轻兵击之，赵战不利，因筑壁坚守以待救至。
现代文：武安君白起便下令精锐轻军前去袭击，赵军迎战失利，只好坚筑营垒等待救兵。
English: Wu Anjun ordered the elite light army to attack, but the Zhao army was defeated and had to fortify the camp and wait for the rescue.

古文：秦王闻赵食道绝，自如河内发民年十五以上悉诣长平，遮绝赵救兵及粮食。
现代文：秦王听说赵军运粮通道已经切断，亲自到河内征发十五岁以上的百姓全部调往长平，阻断赵国救兵及运粮。
English: When King Qin heard that the Zhao army's supply route had been cut off, he personally went to Hanoi to recruit and dispatch all civilians over the age of fifteen to Changping, blocking the Zhao army's rescue and supply routes.

古文：齐人、楚人救赵。
现代文：齐国、楚国援救赵国。
English: The states of Qi and Chu came to the rescue of Zhao.

古文：赵人乏食，请粟于齐，齐王弗许。
现代文：赵军缺乏粮食，向齐国请求接济，齐王不给。
English: The Zhao army was short of food, and requested aid from the state of Qi, but the king of Qi refused to give it.

古文：周子曰： 夫赵之于齐、楚，扞蔽也，犹齿之有脣也，脣亡则齿寒；今日亡赵，明日患及齐、楚矣。
现代文：周子说： 赵国对于齐国、楚国来说，是一道屏障，就像牙齿外面的嘴唇，唇亡则齿寒。今天赵国灭亡了，明天灾祸就会降临齐国、楚国。
English: Zhou Zi said: Zhao is a barrier for Qi and Chu, just like the lips on the outside of the teeth, and the coldness of the teeth is the death of the lips. Today, Zhao is destroyed, and tomorrow the disaster will come to Qi and Chu.

古文：救赵之务，宜若奉漏甕沃焦釜然。
现代文：援救赵国这件事，应该像捧着漏瓦罐去浇烧焦了的铁锅那样，刻不容缓。
English: The matter of rescuing Zhao Guo should be as urgent as holding a leaking crock pot to pour a scorched iron pot.

古文：且救赵，高义也；却秦师，显名也；义救亡国，威却强秦。
现代文：何况援救赵国是高尚的道义；抵抗秦军，是显示威名的好事。必须主持正义援救亡国，显示兵威击退强秦。
English: Moreover, rescuing Zhao is a noble moral act; resisting the Qin army is a good deed that shows prestige. It is necessary to preside over justice and rescue the lost country, and show military might to repel the strong Qin.

古文：不务为此而爱粟，为国计者过矣！ 
现代文：不致力于此事反而爱惜粮食，这样为国家决策是个大错！ 
English: It is a big mistake for a national decision-maker not to be committed to this matter, but to cherish grain instead!

古文：齐王弗听。
现代文：齐王仍是不听。
English: King Qi did not listen to his advice.

古文：九月，赵军食绝四十六日，皆内阴相杀食。
现代文：九月，赵军已断粮四十六天，士兵们都在内部暗中残杀，互相吞吃。
English: In September, the Zhao army had been without food for forty-six days, and the soldiers were secretly killing and devouring each other.

古文：急来攻秦垒，欲出为四队，四，五复之，不能出。
现代文：赵括穷急，便下令进攻秦军营垒，想派出四支队伍，轮番进攻，到第五次，仍无法突围。
English: Zhao Quan was in a hurry, so he ordered an attack on the Qin camp. He wanted to send four teams to attack in turn, but on the fifth time, they still could not break through.

古文：赵括自出锐卒搏战，秦人射杀之。
现代文：赵括亲自率领精兵上前肉搏，被秦兵射死。
English: Zhao Kuo personally led the elite soldiers to advance in hand-to-hand combat and was shot dead by the Qin soldiers.

古文：赵师大败，卒四十万人皆降。
现代文：赵军于是全线崩溃，四十万士兵全部投降。
English: As a result, Zhao's entire army collapsed, and all 400,000 soldiers surrendered.

古文：武安君曰： 秦已拔上党，上党民不乐为秦而归赵。
现代文：白起说： 当初秦军已攻克上党，上党百姓却不愿归秦而去投奔赵国。
English: Bai Qi said: At first, the Qin army had defeated the Shang, but the Shang people did not want to return to Qin and fled to Zhao.

古文：赵卒反覆，非尽杀之，恐为乱。 
现代文：赵国士兵反复无常，不全部杀掉，恐怕会有后乱。 
English: The soldiers of the State of Zhao are capricious. If they don't kill them all, I'm afraid there will be chaos.

古文：乃挟诈而尽坑杀之，遗其小者二百四十人归赵。前后斩首虏四十五万人，赵人大震。
现代文：于是使用奸计把赵国降兵全部活埋，只放出二百四十个年岁小的回到赵国，前后共杀死四十五万人，赵国大为震惊。
English: As a result, he used a trick to bury alive all the soldiers who had been demoted from Zhao, and only released 240 minors to return to Zhao, killing a total of 450,000 people. Zhao Guoda was shocked.

古文：赧王下五十六年
现代文：周赧王五十六年
English: In the 56th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：十月，武安君分军为三，王龁攻赵武安、皮牢，拔之。
现代文：十月，武安君白起把军队分为三支；王龁率军进攻赵国武安、皮牢，予以攻克。
English: In October, Wu'an Jun Bai divided the army into three branches; Wang Xi led the army to attack Wu'an and Pidong in Zhao Province and defeated them.

古文：司马梗北定太原，尽有上党地。
现代文：司马梗向北平定太原，占据了上党。
English: Sima stalked north to Pingding Taiyuan and occupied the upper party.

古文：韩、魏恐，使苏代厚币说应侯曰： 武安君即围邯郸乎？ 
现代文：韩国、魏国派苏代用丰厚金银去劝说应侯范睢： 白起是否立即就要围攻邯郸？ 范睢说： 是的。 
English: South Korea, Wei sent the Soviet delegate with abundant gold and silver to persuade Ying Hou Fan Qi: Is it necessary to besiege Qi immediately? Fan Qi said: Yes.

古文：曰： 然。 苏代曰： 赵亡则秦王王矣。武安君为三公，君能为之下乎？
现代文：苏代劝道： 赵国一灭亡，秦王便可以称王天下了；那时武安君白起将列入三公高位，您能甘心在他之下吗？
English: Su Dai advised, "As soon as the Zhao Kingdom perishes, the Qin King will be able to call himself the King of Heaven and Earth. At that time, Wu Anjun will be included in the Three Great Kings. Can you be content to be under him?

古文：虽无欲为之下，固不得已矣。
现代文：即使不愿意屈居其下，也不得不如此了。
English: Even if you don't want to be relegated, the reality is that you have to give in.

古文：秦尝攻韩，围邢丘，困上党，上党之民皆反为赵，天下不乐为秦民之日久矣。
现代文：秦国曾攻打韩国，围攻邢丘，困死上党，上党的百姓反而都去投奔赵国，天下人都不愿意做秦国的臣民，由来已久。
English: The Qin army once attacked Korea, besieged the execution mound, and trapped the Shang party. The people of the Shang party all turned to the Zhao state. The days when the people of the world were not willing to be the subjects of Qin have long passed.

古文：今亡赵，北地入燕，东地入齐，南地入韩、魏，则君之所得民无几何人矣。
现代文：现在把赵国灭亡了，北部地区的人逃到燕国，东部地区的人奔往齐国，南部地区的人流入韩国、魏国，你们能掌控的百姓就没有几个了。
English: Now that the State of Zhao has perished, the people in the northern region have fled to the State of Yan, the people in the eastern region have rushed to the State of Qi, and the people in the southern region have flowed into South Korea and the State of Wei, there are only a few people you can control.

古文：不如因而割之，无以为武安君功也。 
现代文：你们不如乘势割去赵国的一些领土，就此罢手，不要让白起独享大功。 
English: You might as well take advantage of the situation to cut off some of the territories of Zhao, and stop there. Don't let Baiqi enjoy the credit alone.

古文：应侯言于秦王曰： 秦兵劳，请许韩、赵之割地以和，且休士卒。 
现代文：范睢动心，便向秦王建议： 秦兵已经疲惫不堪，请允许韩国、赵国割地求和，让将士们暂时休息一下。 
English: Fan Ye was so moved that he suggested to the Qin king: The Qin soldiers are exhausted, please allow South Korea and Zhao to make peace and let the soldiers take a break.

古文：王听之，割韩垣雍、赵六城以和。
现代文：秦王听从了他的劝告，同意割韩国的垣雍、赵国的六座城后讲和。
English: The King of Qin listened to the opinion of Ying Hou, cut off Korea's Waki Yong and the six cities of Zhao, and then made peace.

古文：正月，皆罢兵。
现代文：正月，双方都停战罢兵。
English: On New Year's Day, the two sides stopped fighting.

古文：武安君由是与应侯有隙。
现代文：白起从此与范睢产生矛盾。
English: Baiqi has been in conflict with Fan Yu ever since.

古文：赵王将使赵郝约事于秦，割六县。
现代文：赵王准备派赵郝赴秦国订立和约，允以割让六个县。
English: King Zhao was preparing to send Zhao Wei to Qin to conclude a peace treaty and agree to cede six counties.

古文：虞卿谓赵王曰： 秦之攻王也，倦而归乎？
现代文：虞卿对赵王说： 秦国进攻赵国，是因为疲倦了自行撤退呢？
English: Yuqing said to Zhao Wang: Your Majesty, you see, Qin attacked the Great King, but withdrew because they were exhausted?

古文：王以其力尚能进，爱王而弗攻乎？ 
现代文：还是余力尚能进攻，由于钟爱大王而不再进兵了呢？ 
English: Or is it able to attack, but does not attack out of pity for the great king?

古文：王曰： 秦不遗馀力矣，必以倦而归也。 
现代文：赵王说： 秦国想灭掉赵国已是不遗余力，现在当然是因为疲倦了才退去。 
English: Zhao Wang said, "Qin State has spared no effort to eliminate Zhao State. Now, of course, they are retreating because they are tired.

古文：虞卿曰： 秦以其力攻其所不能取，倦而归，王又以其力之所不能取以送之，是助秦自攻也。
现代文：虞卿说： 秦国用全部力量来进攻它不能得手的赵国，疲倦了才退去；那么大王您又把它力所不能夺取的地盘献上，实际上帮助秦国来进攻自己。
English: Yuqing said: Qin State used all its strength to attack the land that it could not capture. As a result, it fought back exhausted. However, the great king also gave the land that Qin State's military strength could not capture to Qin State for free. This is tantamount to helping Qin State attack itself.

古文：来年秦攻王，王无救矣。 
现代文：明年秦国再来攻打赵国，大王您就没救了。 
English: Next year, Qin will attack Zhao again, and you, the great king, will be no more.

古文：赵王计未定，楼缓至赵，赵王与之计之。
现代文：赵王尚未拿定主意，楼缓来到了赵国，赵王便与他商议。
English: Zhao Wang had not yet made up his mind, so he came to Zhao Guo. Zhao Wang then discussed the matter with him.

古文：楼缓曰： 虞卿得其一，不得其二。
现代文：楼缓说： 虞卿只知其一，不知其二。
English: Lou said slowly: Yu Ching only knows one thing, I don't know the other.

古文：秦、赵构难而天下皆说，何也？
现代文：秦国、赵国互相征战，各国都很高兴，为什么呢？
English: Qin and Zhao fought against each other, and all countries were happy. Why?

古文：曰： 吾且因强而乘弱矣。 
现代文：他们会说： 我们可借着强国去获益于弱国。 
English: They will say: We can use the strong to benefit the weak.

古文：今赵不如亟割地为和以疑天下，慰秦之心。
现代文：现在赵国不如马上割地给秦国，一方面安慰了秦国，一方面使各国疑心秦、赵之间已达成默契，不敢再算计赵国。
English: Now it is better for Zhao to immediately give land to Qin. On the one hand, it will comfort Qin, on the other hand, it will make all countries suspicious. Qin and Zhao have reached a tacit understanding, and they dare not count Zhao.

古文：不然，天下将因秦之怒，乘赵之敝，瓜分之，赵且亡，何秦之图乎！ 
现代文：不然的话，各国将借着秦国的怒气，趁着赵国的疲惫不堪，群起而瓜分。赵国就要灭亡，还谈得上什么对付秦国！ 
English: Otherwise, all countries will use the anger of Qin to take advantage of the exhaustion of Zhao, and divide it up. Zhao is about to perish, and what can be said against Qin!

古文：虞卿闻之，复见曰： 危哉楼子之计，是愈疑天下，而何慰秦之心哉？
现代文：虞卿听说这番话，又来见赵王说： 楼缓的计策太危险了！这样做更会使天下猜疑赵国，又哪里能安慰秦国的贪心呢！
English: When Emperor Yu heard these words, he came to see King Zhao again and said, "The delaying tactic is too dangerous! Doing this will make the world suspicious of Zhao, and what can console the greed of Qin!

古文：独不言其示天下弱乎？
现代文：他为什么只字不提这样做是向天下暴露了赵国的怯懦？
English: Why did he not say that by doing so he was showing the princes of the world that Zhao was weak and could be deceived?

古文：且臣言勿与者，非固忽与而已也。秦索六城于王，而王以六城赂齐。
现代文：再说，我建议不割地给秦国，并非主张绝对不能割地；秦国向您索要六座城，大王却可以拿这六个城去贿赂齐国。
English: Furthermore, my suggestion of giving land to Qin without dividing it is not a claim that land cannot be divided; Qin asks you for six cities, but the great king can use these six cities to bribe Qi.

古文：齐，秦之深仇也，其听王不待辞之毕也。则是王失之于齐而取偿于秦，而示天下有能为也。
现代文：齐国是秦国的世代仇家，齐王一定不会等到赵国使臣告辞就答应出兵，于是大王您虽然割地给了齐国，却可以从进攻秦国得到补偿，而且向天下显示赵国尚有所作为。
English: Qi was a generation-old enemy of Qin, and King Qi would not wait for the departure of Zhao's envoys before agreeing to send troops. Therefore, although you gave land to Qi, you could get compensation from attacking Qin, and show the world that Zhao still had something to offer.

古文：王以此发声，兵未窥于境，臣见秦之重赂至赵而反媾于王也。
现代文：大王如果以此先发制人，那么大兵还未开到边境，就会看到秦国派出使臣带着丰厚礼物，反而来向您讲和。
English: If the great king preempts with this, then the soldiers have not yet reached the border, you will see Qin send envoys with rich gifts, but come to talk peace to you.

古文：从秦为媾，韩、魏闻之，必尽重王。是王一举而结三国之亲而与秦易道也。 赵王曰： 善。 
现代文：那时再答应秦国的讲和要求，韩国、魏国知道了，一定会对赵国刮目相看，于是大王您一举而与三国结下友好，和秦国交涉也就主动了。 赵王说： 对。 
English: At that time, you also agreed to Qin's request for peace, and when Korea and Wei found out about it, they must have been impressed by Zhao. Therefore, you, the great king, made friendship with the three countries in one fell swoop, and took the initiative to negotiate with Qin. Zhao Wang said: That's right.

古文：使虞卿东见齐王，与之谋秦。
现代文：便派虞卿赴东方去见齐王，与他商议联合对付秦国。
English: He then sent Yu Jing to the East to meet with King Qi to discuss a joint attack on Qin.

古文：虞卿未返，秦使者已在赵矣。
现代文：虞卿尚未回国，秦国果然已经派使者来到赵国了。
English: Before Yuqing returned to Qi, Qin's envoys were already in Zhao.

古文：楼缓闻之，亡去。
现代文：楼缓见此情形，只好逃离赵国。
English: When Lou was informed of the news, he immediately ran away.

古文：赵王封虞卿以一城。
现代文：赵王封给虞卿一座城市。
English: Zhao Wangfeng gave Yuqing a city.

古文：秦之始伐赵也，魏王问于诸大夫，皆以为秦伐赵，于魏便。
现代文：秦国攻打赵国之初，魏王征求群臣对此事的对策，大家都认为秦国进攻赵国，是对魏国有利的事。
English: At the beginning of Qin's attack on Zhao, the Wei king asked his ministers for a countermeasure. Everyone agreed that Qin's attack on Zhao was beneficial to Wei.

古文：孔斌曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：孔斌却质问： 为什么这样说？ 
English: However, Kong Bin questioned: Why do you say this?

古文：曰： 胜赵，则吾因而服焉；不胜赵，则可承敝而击之。 子顺曰： 不然。
现代文：回答是： 秦国战胜赵国，我们也顺势向它屈服；如果秦国打不赢赵国，我们就趁它疲惫不堪时予以一击。 孔斌反驳说： 不对。
English: The answer was: If Qin defeats Zhao, we will succumb to it; if Qin fails to defeat Zhao, we will take advantage of its exhaustion to strike a blow.

古文：秦自孝公以来，战未尝屈，今又属其良将，何敝之承？ 
现代文：秦国自从秦孝公以来，就没有打过败仗，现在又重用良将白起，哪里有疲惫可让我们趁？ 
English: Since the time of Qin Xiaogong, Qin has never lost a battle, and now it is reusing good generals in vain. Where can we take advantage of fatigue?

古文：大夫曰： 纵其胜赵，于我何损？
现代文：有个大夫说： 即使秦国战胜赵国，对我们魏国又有什么坏处呢？
English: A doctor said: Even if Qin defeated Zhao, what would be the harm to Wei?

古文：邻之羞，国之福也。 
现代文：邻国的羞辱难堪，正是我国的幸运福气啊！ 
English: The humiliation and embarrassment of a neighboring country is precisely our country's good fortune!

古文：子顺曰： 秦，贪暴之国也，胜赵，必复他求，吾恐于时魏受其师也。
现代文：孔斌又反驳道： 秦国，是个贪婪暴掠的国家，一旦打败了赵国，一定会把矛头转向其他国家。
English: Kong Bin also retorted, "Qin is a greedy and predatory country. Once it defeats Zhao, it will definitely turn its attention to other countries.

古文：先人有言：燕雀处屋，子母相哺，呴呴焉相乐也，自以为安矣。
现代文：我担心那时魏国就将面临秦军的攻击了。古人说过：燕雀筑窝在屋檐下，母鸟哺育小鸟，叽叽喳喳地都很快乐，自己以为很安适。
English: I am afraid that at that time, Wei will face the attack of the Qin army. The ancients said: the chaffinch builds a nest under the eaves, the mother bird feeds the baby birds, the chaffinches are very happy, and they think they are very comfortable.

古文：灶突炎上，栋宇将焚，燕雀颜不变，不知祸之将及己也。
现代文：灶上烟筒忽然窜起火苗，高大的房屋即将被焚，而燕雀面不改色，不知道灾祸就要降临。
English: A chimney on the stove suddenly bursts into flames, a tall house is about to be set on fire, but the bird's face does not change color, unaware that disaster is about to strike.

古文：今子不悟赵破患将及己，可以人而同于燕雀乎！ 
现代文：现在你不明白，赵国一旦灭亡，灾难就会降临魏国的形势，难道人和燕雀一样吗？ 
English: Now, don't you understand that once the State of Zhao perishes, a disaster will befall the State of Wei? Are people the same as sparrows?

古文：子顺者，孔子六世孙也。
现代文：孔斌，是孔子的第六世后人。
English: Kong Bin is the sixth generation descendant of Confucius.

古文：初，魏王闻子顺贤，遣使者奉黄金束帛，聘以为相。
现代文：当初，魏王听说孔斌贤明，便派使者携带黄金绸缎，聘请他为相。
English: At first, the Wei king heard that Kong Binxianming was wise, so he sent an envoy to bring gold silk brocade and hired him as a pharaoh.

古文：子顺谓使者曰： 若王能信用吾道，吾道固为治世也，虽蔬食饮水，吾犹为之。
现代文：孔斌说： 如果大王能够采纳我的方针政策，可以为大王安邦治世，即使让我吃蔬菜，喝凉水，我也愿意。
English: Kong Bin said: If the great king can adopt my principles and policies, it will be possible for the great king to reign peacefully. Even if I have to eat vegetables and drink cold water, I am willing.

古文：若徒欲制服吾身，委以重禄，吾犹一夫耳，魏王奚少于一夫？ 
现代文：如果只是让我穿上一身贵服，供以丰厚俸禄，那我就是一个普通老百姓，魏王哪里会缺少一个老百姓呢！ 
English: If they just put me in expensive clothes and offered me a rich salary, then I would be an ordinary commoner. Where would the Wei king be without a commoner?

古文：使者固请，子顺乃之魏；魏王郊迎以为相。
现代文：使者再三延请，孔斌才前往魏国，魏王亲自出城迎接，拜他为相。
English: The envoy repeatedly delayed his request, and it was only then that Kong Bin went to Wei. The Wei king himself came out of the city to meet him and pay homage to him.

古文：子顺改嬖宠之官以事贤才，夺无任之禄以赐有功。
现代文：孔斌便撤换了一批靠关系受宠的官员，代之以贤良人才；剥夺去不干事者的俸禄，转赐给有功之臣。
English: Kong Bin then removed and replaced a group of officials who were favored by their connections, replacing them with virtuous people; he deprived those who were not officials of their salaries and gave them to meritorious ministers.

古文：诸丧职秩者咸不悦，乃造谤言。
现代文：那些失去职位的人都不甘心，于是制造出谣言。
English: Those who lost their jobs were not happy and started rumours.

古文：文咨以告子顺。
现代文：文咨把这些话告诉了孔斌。
English: Wen Zhe told these words to Kong Bin.

古文：子顺曰： 民之不可与虑始久矣！
现代文：孔斌说： 从来不能与老百姓共商创业大事！
English: Kong Bin said: You can never discuss business matters with the common people!

古文：古之善为政者，其初不能无谤。
现代文：古代善于治理政事的人，起初时都免不了被诽谤。
English: In ancient times, those who were good at governing were always slandered at first.

古文：子产相郑，三年而后谤止；吾先君之相鲁，三月而后谤止。
现代文：子产在郑国做相，三年以后流言蜚语才停止。我的祖先孔子在鲁国做相，也是三个月以后诽谤才终止的。
English: Confucius was born in Zheng and became famous for three years before the rumors stopped. My ancestor, Confucius, was born in Lu and became famous for three months before the rumors stopped.

古文：今吾为政日新，虽不能及贤，庸知谤乎！ 
现代文：现在我每日改革政事，虽然赶不上前代圣贤，难道还考虑诽谤之言！ 
English: Now that I am reforming government affairs every day, although I cannot keep up with the previous sages, do I still consider slanderous words!

古文：文咨曰： 未识先君之谤何也？ 
现代文：文咨问： 不知道当年对尊祖上有什么诽谤？ 
English: Question: I don't know what kind of slander there was against your great-grandfather back then.

古文：子顺曰： 先君相鲁，人诵之曰： 麛裘而芾，投之无戾；芾而麛裘，投之无邮。 
现代文：孔斌说： 先祖在鲁国任相，有人唱道： 穿鹿皮袍的权贵，抓起他来没有罪；权贵穿着鹿皮袍，抓起他来都叫好。 
English: Kong Bin said, "My ancestors were ministers in the State of Lu. Some people sang, "If a dignitary wearing a deerskin robe catches him, there is no crime; if a dignitary wearing a deerskin robe catches him, everyone cheers."

古文：及三月，政化既成，民又诵曰： 裘衣章甫，实获我所；章甫裘衣，惠我无私。  
现代文：等到三个月以后，风气教化逐渐调养成型，百姓们又唱道： 穿皮衣，戴殷帽，我们的心事他想到；戴殷帽，穿皮衣，一心为民不为己。  
English: After waiting for three months, the culture and education gradually developed and took shape, and the people sang again: Wearing a fur coat and a cowboy hat, he thought about our concerns; wearing a cowboy hat and a leather coat, he was devoted to the people and not to himself.

古文：文咨喜曰： 乃今知先生不异乎圣贤矣。 
现代文：文咨高兴地赞叹说： 我今天才知道先生您与古圣贤相比也不差。 
English: Wen Zhe was delighted and said with admiration: I only learned today that you, sir, are not bad compared to the ancient sages.

古文：子顺相魏凡九月，陈大计辄不用，乃喟然曰： 言不见用，是吾言之不当也。言不当于主，居人之官，食人之禄，是尸利素餐，吾罪深矣！ 
现代文：孔斌在魏国任相共九个月，每次提出重大的建议都不被魏王采用，于是喟然长叹： 建议不被采纳，是我的建议有不合适的地方，建议不合君主的心意，我再做他的官，享用他的俸禄，是不做事白吃饭，我的罪过也太大了！ 
English: Kong Bin served in Wei for a total of nine months. Every time he put forward a major proposal, it was not adopted by the Wei king, so he sighed: The proposal was not adopted, my proposal was inappropriate, the proposal was not in line with the monarch's wishes, I was his official again, enjoyed his salary, did not do anything for free, and my sin was too great!

古文：退而以病致仕。
现代文：说完便称病辞去职务。
English: After saying this, he called in sick and resigned from his post.

古文：人谓子顺曰： 王不用子，子其行乎？ 答曰： 行将何之？
现代文：有人对孔斌说： 魏王不用你，你为什么不到别处去呢？ 
English: Someone said to Kong Bin, "The Wei King doesn't need you, why don't you go somewhere else?"

古文：山东之国，将并于秦。
现代文：孔斌回答： 到哪里去呢？
English: Kong Bin answered: Where to go?

古文：秦为不义，义所不入。 
现代文：崤山以东的各个国家都将被秦国吞并；秦国的行为不仁义，我绝对不会去那里。 
English: Every country east of Mount Lushan will be swallowed up by the State of Qin; the behavior of the State of Qin is not benevolent, I will definitely not go there.

古文：遂寝于家。
现代文：于是在家休养。
English: So he recuperated at home.

古文：新垣固请子顺曰： 贤者所在，必兴化致治。
现代文：新垣固问孔斌： 圣贤所到之处，必定是振兴教化、修明政治。
English: Aragaki firmly asked Confucius: Wherever sages go, it must be to revitalize enlightenment and reform politics.

古文：今子相魏，未闻异政而即自退，意者志不得乎，何去之速也？ 
现代文：而你在魏国做相，没听说干出什么特殊的政绩就自行引退了，猜想你是不是不得志？否则为什么那么快就辞官呢？ 
English: However, you made your appearance in Wei, and retired on your own without hearing what special political achievements you had made. Do you think that you were disappointed? Otherwise, why did you resign so quickly?

古文：子顺曰； 以无异政，所以自退也。
现代文：孔斌说： 正因为没有特殊的政绩，所以自己引退了。
English: Kong Bin said: It is precisely because there is no special political achievement, so he retired.

古文：且死病无良医。
现代文：而且在不治之症面前，显不出好医生的本领。
English: Moreover, in the face of an incurable disease, the ability of a good doctor does not appear.

古文：今秦有吞食天下之心，以义事之，固不获安；救亡不暇，何化之兴！
现代文：现在秦国有吞并天下之心，用仁义之道去事奉它，自然是得不到什么安全；所以，当今拯救危亡都来不及，还侈谈什么振兴教化！
English: Now that the Qin State has swallowed up the heart of the world and serves it with the way of benevolence and righteousness, it is natural that it will not get any security; therefore, it is too late to save the dying today, and what kind of revitalization and enlightenment!

古文：昔伊挚在夏，吕望在商，而二国不治，岂伊、吕之不欲哉？
现代文：当年伊尹曾做过夏朝的官，吕望曾做过商朝的官，但这两个王朝最终无法救药，难道是伊尹、吕望不愿意吗？
English: At that time, Yi Yin had served as an official of the Xia Dynasty, and Lvang had served as an official of the Shang Dynasty, but these two dynasties could not be saved in the end. Was it because Yi Yin and Lvang were unwilling?

古文：势不可也。
现代文：实在是因为大势已经无可挽回了。
English: Because the situation does not allow it.

古文：当今山东之国敝而不振，三晋割地以求安，二周折而入秦，燕、齐、楚已屈服矣。
现代文：现在崤山以东各国都疲惫不堪、萎靡不振，韩、赵、魏三国争相割地以求偷安，二周折腰归顺秦国，燕国、齐国、楚国也屈服了。
English: Now all the countries east of Lushan are exhausted and languishing. The three countries of Han, Zhao, and Wei are competing with each other in order to steal peace, and they have surrendered to Shunqin, Yan, Qi, and Chu.

古文：以此观之，不出二十年，天下其尽为秦乎！ 
现代文：由此预见，不出二十年，天下就将都归秦国所有了！ 
English: Therefore, it is predicted that in less than twenty years, the whole world will belong to Qin!

古文：秦王欲为应侯必报其仇，闻魏齐在平原君所，乃为好言诱平原君至秦而执之。遣使谓赵王曰： 不得齐首，吾不出王弟于关！ 
现代文：秦王想为应侯范睢报仇雪恨，听说魏齐逃到了赵国平原君赵胜家，便用花言巧语诱骗赵胜到秦国，把他扣留起来，并且派出使臣对赵王说： 不得到魏齐的人头，我决不放你的弟弟赵胜出关。 
English: The Qin king wanted to avenge the death of his vassal Fan Hui. He heard that Wei Qi had fled to the home of the plains prince Zhao Sheng in the state of Zhao. He used flattery to lure Zhao Sheng to the state of Qin and detain him. He also sent an envoy to Zhao Wang saying, "If I don't get Wei Qi's head, I will never let your brother Zhao Sheng leave the country."

古文：魏齐穷，抵虞卿，虞卿弃相印，与魏齐偕亡。
现代文：魏齐无可奈何，走投无路，只好去找虞卿，虞卿舍弃了相印，与魏齐一起逃走。
English: Wei Qi had no choice but to go to Yu Qing. Yu Qing gave up the seal and fled with Wei Qi.

古文：至魏，欲因信陵君以走楚。
现代文：到了魏国，他们想借助信陵君魏无忌，逃到楚国去。
English: When they arrived in Wei, they wanted to escape to Chu with the help of Xinlingjun Wei.

古文：信陵君意难见之，魏齐怒，自杀。
现代文：信陵君十分为难，没有立即与他们见面。魏齐非常悲愤，便自杀了。
English: Xinlingjun was very embarrassed and did not immediately meet with them. Wei Qi was very sad and angry, so he committed suicide.

古文：赵王卒取其首以与秦，秦乃归平原君。
现代文：赵王于是取到魏齐的人头去献给秦国，秦王才下令放回平原君。
English: King Zhao then took Wei Qi's head to offer it to the Qin state, and the Qin king ordered it to be returned to Pingyuan.

古文：九月，五大夫王陵将兵复伐赵，武安君病，不任行。
现代文：九月，秦国又派五大夫王陵再次率军征伐赵国。武安君白起因患病，不能前去。
English: In September, the State of Qin again sent the Five Great Kings to lead an army to conquer the State of Zhao. Due to illness, Wu'an Junbai was unable to go.

古文：赧王下五十七年
现代文：周赧王五十七年
English: In the 57th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：正月，王陵攻邯郸，少利，益发卒佐陵；陵亡五校。
现代文：正月，王陵进攻邯郸，几次失利，秦王便征发更多的兵丁去支援王陵；王陵损失了五校，仍不能胜。
English: In the first month of the year, the royal mausoleum was attacked, and after several defeats, King Qin sent more soldiers to support the royal mausoleum. The royal mausoleum lost five schools, but still could not win.

古文：武安君病愈，王欲使代之。
现代文：这时武安君白起病愈，秦王想派他去替代王陵。
English: At this time, King Wu Anjun Bai became ill and King Qin wanted to send him to replace the royal tomb.

古文：武安君曰： 邯郸实未易攻也；且诸侯之救日至。
现代文：白起却说： 邯郸实在是不容易攻下的，而且诸侯救兵一天便可到达。
English: Baiqi, however, said: "It is really not easy to capture Handan, and the relief troops from the provinces can arrive in one day.

古文：彼诸侯怨秦之日久矣，秦虽胜于长平，士卒死者过半，国内空，远绝河山而争人国都，赵应其内，诸侯攻其外，破秦军必矣。 
现代文：那些国家对秦国的怨恨已经积蓄很久了。秦国虽然在长平一战大获全胜，但自己士兵也死亡过半，国内空虚，再长途跋涉去远攻别人的国都，这时如果赵国在内抵抗，各国在外围进攻，秦军必然打败。 
English: The resentment of those countries towards the Qin State has been accumulating for a long time. Although the Qin State won a complete victory in the First War of Changping, more than half of its soldiers also died, the country was empty, and they had to travel long distances to attack other countries' capitals. At this time, if Zhao resisted from within and the countries attacked from the periphery, the Qin Army would inevitably be defeated.

古文：王自命不行，乃使应侯请之。
现代文：秦王见亲自下命令不行，又让应侯范睢去劝说白起。
English: The Qin king saw that it was not possible to give orders in person, and let Ying Hou Fan Jun go to persuade Bai Qi.

古文：武安君终辞疾，不肯行；乃以王龁代王陵。
现代文：白起始终以病坚决推辞，不肯前去，于是秦王只得派王龁去代替王陵。
English: Baiqi always refused to go due to his illness, so King Qin had to send Wang Qian to replace the king's tomb.

古文：赵王使平原君求救于楚，平原君约其门下食客文武备具者二十人与之俱，得十九人，馀无可取者。
现代文：赵王派平原君赵胜到楚国去求救，赵胜准备挑选门下食客中文武双全的二十个人一起前往，但只挑出十九个，剩下的都不足取。
English: King Zhao sent the prince of the plains, Zhao Sheng, to Chu to ask for help. Zhao Sheng was going to select twenty of his guests, all Chinese warriors, to go with him, but he only picked out nineteen, and the rest were not enough.

古文：毛遂自荐于平原君。
现代文：这时有个叫毛遂的人向赵胜自我推荐。
English: At this time, a man named Mao Sui recommended himself to Zhao Sheng.

古文：平原君曰： 夫贤士之处世也，譬若锥之处囊中，其末立见。
现代文：赵胜说： 贤良人才为人处世，好比锥子在口袋中，锥尖立即能露出来。
English: Mr. Hirahara said: Talented sages live in the world, just like a cone placed in a pocket, its sharp point will be revealed immediately.

古文：今先生处胜之门下三年于此矣，左右未有所称诵，胜未有所闻，是先生无所有也。先生不能，先生留！ 
现代文：如今先生来到我赵胜门下已经三年，我左右的人没有谁称赞过你，我也未听说过你的作为，说明先生没有什么长处，先生不能干，先生留下吧！ 
English: Now it's been three years since you came to my Zhao Sheng, no one around me has praised you, and I haven't heard of your deeds, which shows that you don't have any strengths, you can't do it, you should stay!

古文：毛遂曰： 臣乃今日请处囊中耳！
现代文：毛遂说道： 我不过今天才请你把我放到口袋里而已！
English: Then Mao said, "I only asked you to put me in your pocket today!"

古文：使遂蚤得处囊中，乃颖脱而出，非特其末见而已。 
现代文：如果早把我放进去，我早就脱颖而出了，岂止是露出个锥尖呢！ 
English: If I had been put in a pocket long ago, the whole cone would have been exposed, not just the tip.

古文：平原君乃与之俱，十九人相与目笑之。
现代文：平原君赵胜于是让毛遂一同赴楚，另外十九个人都相视嘲笑他。
English: The plainsman Zhao Sheng then asked Mao Sui to go to Chu together, and the other nineteen people looked at each other and laughed at him.

古文：平原君至楚，与楚王言合纵之利害，日出而言之，日中不决。
现代文：赵胜到了楚国，向楚王阐述联合抗秦的必要性，从太阳升起时开始谈，一直谈到中午，楚王仍是犹疑不决。
English: When Zhao Sheng arrived in the State of Chu, he explained to King Chu the necessity of a joint anti-Qin campaign. The discussion began at sunrise and continued until noon. King Chu was still undecided.

古文：毛遂按剑历阶而上，谓平原君曰： 从之利害，两言而决耳！
现代文：毛遂于是手按宝剑顺着台阶走上去，对平原君说： 联合抗秦的重要性， 利 、 害 两个字可以说清楚，作出决定！
English: Mao then walked up the steps with his sword in his hand and said to Plains: The importance of the joint anti-Qin, benefit, harm Two words can be said clearly, make a decision!

古文：今日出而言，日中不决，何也？ 
现代文：现在从日出时谈起，到中午还不能决断，是什么原因？ 
English: What is the reason for starting talks at sunrise and not being able to reach a decision by midday?

古文：楚王怒叱曰： 胡不下！
现代文：楚王怒斥毛遂道： 还不赶快滚下去，我和你的主人说话，你算是什么东西？ 
English: King Chu angrily rebuked Mao and said, "If you don't hurry up and roll down, I'm talking to your master. What are you?

古文：毛遂按剑而前曰： 王之所以叱遂者，以楚国之众也。
现代文：毛遂按着剑又上前几步说： 大王你之所以斥责我，是仗着楚国人多势众。
English: Mao then clenched the hilt of his sword and walked forward, saying, "The Great King dares to scold me, but he is relying on the overwhelming power of the people of Chu.

古文：今十步之内，王不得恃楚国之众也！
现代文：现在咱们相距在十步以内，你不可能依仗楚国人多势众了！
English: Now that we are within ten paces of each other, you can't rely on the overwhelming majority of people in Chu!

古文：王之命悬于遂手。
现代文：你的性命在我的手中。
English: Your life is in my hands.

古文：吾君在前。
现代文：在我的主人面前，你为什么呵斥我？
English: Why did you scold me in front of my master?

古文：叱者何也？且遂闻汤以七十里之地王天下，文王以百里之壤而臣诸侯，岂其士卒多哉？
现代文：我毛遂听说商朝开国的汤王以七十里地方为开端，终于称王天下；周朝创业的周文王仅凭着一百里土地，使诸侯臣服。他们难道是仗着兵多将广、人多势众吗？
English: I heard that Tang Wang, the founder of the Shang Dynasty, started with a seventy-mile area and eventually became king of the world; Zhou Wen Wang, who started the Zhou Dynasty, subjugated the princes with only a hundred miles of land. Did they rely on a large number of soldiers and a large number of people?

古文：诚能据其势而奋其威也。
现代文：只不过是顺应历史大势、振奋扬威而已。
English: It's just a matter of following the general trend of history and being uplifted.

古文：今楚地方五千里，持戟百万，此霸王之资也。
现代文：现在楚国有五千里广阔土地，持戟战士一百万，这是称王称霸的资本呀！
English: Today, the territory of the State of Chu is five thousand miles in length and breadth, with a million soldiers. This is the capital with which to compete for supremacy.

古文：以楚之强，天下弗能当。
现代文：以楚国的强大，各国都难以抵挡。
English: With the strength of Chu, it is difficult for any country to resist.

古文：白起，小竖子耳，率数万之众，兴师以与楚战，一战而举鄢、郢，再战而烧夷陵，三战而辱王之先人，此百世之怨而赵之所羞，而王弗知恶焉。
现代文：白起，不过是个小人物，带着几万兵，兴师动众与楚国作战，一战就夺去鄢、郢两城，再战便火烧夷陵，三战已将楚国宗庙平毁，侮辱楚王祖先。这是百世难解的仇怨，连赵国都替你羞愧，而大王却不以为难堪。
English: Baiqi was just a petty person. He led tens of thousands of soldiers and rallied the army to fight against the State of Chu. In the first battle, he took the two cities of Zhai and Zhai. In the second battle, he burned the mausoleum. In the third battle, he destroyed the ancestral temple of the State of Chu and insulted the ancestors of the King of Chu. This is a centuries-old grudge. Even the State of Zhao is ashamed of you, but the great king does not think it is embarrassing.

古文：合纵者为楚，非为赵也。
现代文：现在提倡联合抗秦，实在是为了楚国，不是为赵国啊！
English: Now advocating a joint anti-Qin, it is really for Chu, not for Zhao!

古文：吾君在前，叱者何也？ 
现代文：我的主人在面前，你还喝斥我什么？ 
English: My master is right in front of me. Why are you scolding me like this?

古文：楚王曰： 唯唯，诚若先生之言，谨奉社稷以从。 
现代文：楚王只好说： 是的是的，正像先生指教的那样，我愿意以全国的力量与你们合作。 
English: King Chu had no choice but to say: Yes, yes, just as my master instructed, I am willing to cooperate with you with the strength of the whole country.

古文：毛遂曰： 从定乎？ 
现代文：毛遂便说： 联合之事确定了吗？ 
English: Mao then pressed further and asked: Is the alliance contract finalized?

古文：楚王曰： 定矣。 
现代文：楚王说： 确定了。 
English: King Chu replied, "It is definite.

古文：毛遂谓楚王之左右曰： 取鸡、狗、马之血来！ 
现代文：毛遂便对楚王左右随从说： 取鸡、狗、马的血来！ 
English: Mao then said to the attendants around King Chu: "Take the blood of chickens, dogs, and horses!"

古文：毛遂奉铜盘而跪进之楚王曰： 王当歃血以定从，次者吾君，次者遂。 
现代文：毛遂举起铜盘跪着上前对楚王说： 请大王歃血宣誓订立同盟，其次是我的主人，再次是我毛遂。 
English: Mao Sui held up the bronze plate, knelt down and said to King Chu, "Ask the great king to swear an oath of alliance, followed by my master, and then me, Mao Sui."

古文：遂定从于殿上。
现代文：于是在大殿上订立了抗秦同盟。
English: Therefore, an anti-Qin alliance was formed in the Great Hall.

古文：毛遂左手持盘血则右手招十九人曰： 公相与歃此血于堂下！
现代文：这时毛遂又左手持铜盘右手对随行的十九人招呼说： 你们也在堂下一起歃血宣誓吧！
English: At this time, Mao finally held a bronze plate in his left hand and greeted the nineteen people accompanying him with his right hand, saying, "You should also make a blood oath together in front of the court!"

古文：公等录录，所谓因人成事者也。 
现代文：你们跟来跟去，还是靠着别人才办成了事情。 
English: You come and go, depending on others to get things done.

古文：平原君已定从而归，至于赵，曰： 胜不敢复相天下士矣！
现代文：平原君赵胜与楚国订立盟约后回到赵国，叹息说： 从今后我不敢再说能识别天下人才了！ 
English: After the plainsman Zhao Sheng signed a treaty with Chu, he returned to Zhao and said with a sigh: From now on, I dare not say that I can identify the world's talents!

古文：遂以毛遂为上客。
现代文：于是奉毛遂为上等宾客。
English: As a result, Feng Mao ended up being the highest-ranking guest.

古文：于是楚王使春申君将兵救赵，魏王亦使将军晋鄙将兵十万救赵。
现代文：订立同盟后，楚王便派春申君黄歇率军救赵，魏王也令大将晋鄙统兵十万来救赵。
English: After the conclusion of the alliance, King Chu sent Chunshenjun Huang Xie to lead the army to rescue Zhao, and King Wei also ordered General Jin to lead 100,000 soldiers to rescue Zhao.

古文：秦王使谓魏王曰： 吾攻赵，旦暮且下，诸侯敢救之者，吾已拔赵，必移兵先击之！ 
现代文：秦王派人对魏王说： 我攻打赵国，早晚就会攻下，各国中谁敢来救赵国，我灭了赵国以后，必定调动大军先进攻它！ 
English: The king of Qin sent a man to the king of Wei, saying: I will attack the state of Zhao, and sooner or later I will conquer it. Whichever country dares to come to the rescue of the state of Zhao, after I destroy the state of Zhao, I will certainly mobilize a large army to attack it first!

古文：魏王恐，遣人止晋鄙，留兵壁鄴，名为救赵，实挟两端。
现代文：魏王惧怕，派人去让晋鄙停止前进，屯兵邺城坚守，名义上说是来救赵，实际上脚踩两边。
English: The Wei king was afraid and sent someone to stop the advance of the Jin army and keep the garrison in the city, nominally to save Zhao, but in fact to tread on both sides.

古文：又使将军新垣衍间入邯郸，因平原君说赵王，欲共尊秦为帝，以却其兵。
现代文：魏王又派将军新垣衍潜入邯郸，通过平原君去劝说赵王，打算共同尊秦王为帝，以使他罢兵。
English: The Wei king also sent the general Niigaki Yan to sneak into Yunnan and persuade the Zhao king through the plains king, intending to jointly honor the Qin king as the emperor, so that he would withdraw his troops.

古文：齐人鲁仲连在邯郸，闻之，往见新垣衍曰： 彼秦者，弃礼义而上首功之国也。
现代文：齐国人士鲁仲连正在邯郸，听说此事，便来见新垣衍说： 那个秦国，是鄙弃礼义伦常而崇尚杀人立功的国家。
English: Lu Zhonglian, a person from the State of Qi, heard about this and came to see Aragaki Yan. He said, "That Qin State is a country that despises etiquette and honors killing.

古文：彼即肆然而为帝于天下，则连有蹈东海而死耳，不愿为之民也！
现代文：如果它能公然称帝于天下各国，我鲁仲连只有去跳东海而死，绝不做秦国的臣民！
English: If it could openly proclaim itself as the emperor of all countries in the world, I, Lu Zhonglian, would only have to jump into the East Sea and die, and would never be a subject of Qin!

古文：且梁未睹秦称帝之害故耳，吾将使秦王烹醢梁王！ 
现代文：况且，魏国还没有看到秦王称帝以后给它带来的危害，我将让秦王把魏王煮成肉酱。 
English: Moreover, Wei has not yet seen the harm brought to it by Qin after he became emperor. I will let Qin cook Wei into meat sauce.

古文：新垣衍怏然不悦，曰： 先生恶能使秦王烹醢梁王？ 
现代文：新垣衍怏怏不快地问鲁仲连： 你哪儿能让秦王把魏王煮成肉酱呢？ 
English: Aragaki Yanqi asked Lu Zhonglian angrily: Where can you get the Qin King to boil the Wei King into meat sauce?

古文：鲁仲连曰： 固也，吾将言之。
现代文：鲁仲连说： 确实如此，听我慢慢说来。
English: Lu Zhonglian said, "It's true, listen to me slowly.

古文：昔者九侯、鄂侯、文王，纣之三公也。
现代文：当年九侯、鄂侯、文王，是商纣王朝廷里的三公。
English: In the past, Jiuhou, Ehou, and Wenwang were the three princes of Yinzhou.

古文：九侯有子而好，献之于纣，纣以为恶，醢九侯；鄂侯争之强，辩之疾，故脯鄂侯；文王闻之，喟然而叹，故拘之牖里之库百日，欲令之死。
现代文：九侯有个女儿，容貌姣好，将她献给纣王，纣王厌恶她，就把九侯剁成肉酱。鄂侯极力为九侯辩护，疾声呼冤，所以被纣王做成肉干；周文王听说了，只是喟然长叹，也被关押在牖里的仓库达一百天，想让他死。
English: The nine princes had a daughter who was beautiful, and they offered her to the king of the Jurchens. The king of the Jurchens detested her, so he turned the nine princes into mincemeat. The E princes tried their best to defend the nine princes, and cried out for justice, so they were made into mincemeat by the king of the Jurchens. When King Zhou Wen heard about this, he just sighed. He was also imprisoned in a warehouse in Jurchens for a hundred days, and they wanted him to die.

古文：今秦，万乘之国也；梁，亦万乘之国也。俱据万乘之国，各有称王之名，奈何睹其一战而胜，欲从而帝之，卒就脯醢之地乎！
现代文：现在的秦国，是拥有万乘兵车的大国，魏国，也是同样的大国；都据有雄厚的国家实力，各自有称王的名位，为什么看到秦国打胜了一次战役，就想听从它的指挥，尊秦王为帝，从而使自己落到被人宰割做成肉酱的地步呢！
English: Today's Qin is a big country with thousands of chariots, and Wei is also a big country; both have strong national strength, and each has the title of king. Why is it that when Qin wins a battle, it wants to obey its command and honor King Qin as emperor, thus bringing itself to the point of being slaughtered and made into meat sauce!

古文：且秦无已而帝，则将行其天子之礼以号令于天下，则且变易诸侯之大臣，彼将夺其所不肖而与其所贤，夺其所憎而与其所爱，彼又将使其子女谗妾为诸侯妃姬，处梁之宫，梁王安得晏然而已乎！
现代文：如果秦王未被制止而称帝，就将施行天子的礼仪，号令于天下各国，并且将更换各国君主的大臣。他将剥夺他所看不起的人职位，转授给他所器重的人；他将剥夺他所憎恨的人职位，转授给他所宠爱的人；他又将使秦国的女子和惯说坏话的妾姬，指令婚配给各国君主。设想这些人在大梁宫殿中，魏王还能泰然处之吗？
English: If Emperor Qin were to ascend to the throne without being stopped, he would enforce the etiquette of the Son of Heaven, issue orders to all the countries of the world, and replace the ministers of the monarchs of all countries. He would deprive the people he despised of their positions and transfer them to the people he valued; he would deprive the people he hated of their positions and transfer them to the people he loved; he would also order the women of Qin and the evil-speaking concubines to marry the monarchs of all countries. Imagine these people in the Great Beam Palace, can King Wei still be at ease?

古文：而将军又何以得故宠乎！ 
现代文：而将军你又有什么办法能保住在君主面前的旧日恩宠呢？ 
English: And, General, what can you do to retain your former favour with the sovereign?

古文：新垣衍起，再拜曰： 吾乃今知先生天下之士也！
现代文：新垣衍听完心惊，离座再次拜谢说： 我今天才知道先生是天下高士啊！
English: After listening, Arakaki Yan was shocked and left the room to thank him again, saying, "I only found out today that you are a world-class scholar!"

古文：吾请出，不敢复言帝秦矣！ 
现代文：我这就告辞回国，不敢再提尊秦为帝的话了。 
English: I just left to return to my country, and I didn't dare to mention the words of revering Qin as the emperor.

古文：燕武成王薨，子孝王立。
现代文：燕国燕武成王去世，其子即位为燕孝王。
English: King Yan Wucheng of the State of Yan died, and his son ascended the throne as King Yan Xiao.

古文：初魏公子无忌仁而下士，致食客三千人。
现代文：当初，魏国公子魏无忌为人仁义而礼贤下士，收养食客三千人。
English: At the beginning, Wei, the prince of Wei, was a benevolent and courteous corporal, adopting three thousand diners.

古文：魏有隐士曰侯嬴，年七十，家贫，为大梁夷门监者。
现代文：魏国有个隐士名叫侯嬴，已经七十岁，家中贫穷，在魏都大梁任夷门守门官吏。
English: In Wei, there was a hermit named Hou Yu, already seventy years old, from a poor family, who was the gatekeeper of the east gate of Dalian City.

古文：公子置酒大会宾客，坐定，公子从车骑虚左自迎侯生。
现代文：一次，公子魏无忌设置盛大酒宴，招待宾客，来客已经坐定，魏无忌却吩咐备齐车马，空着左边位置，亲自去接侯嬴。
English: On one occasion, Wei Muxi set up a grand wine banquet and invited guests. The guests were already seated, but Wei Muxi ordered to prepare a carriage and horses. He left the left seat empty and went to pick up Hou Yi in person.

古文：侯生摄敝衣冠，直上载公子上坐不让，公子执辔愈恭。
现代文：侯嬴穿戴旧衣破帽，跳上车子，昂然上坐，也不谦让。魏无忌亲自驾车，更加恭敬。
English: Dressed in old clothes and a tattered hat, Hou Yi jumped on the car and proudly got in. Wei did not hesitate to drive the car himself and was even more respectful.

古文：侯生又谓公子曰： 臣有客在市屠中，愿枉车骑过之。 
现代文：半途，侯嬴又对魏无忌说： 我有个朋友在集市上当屠户，请让车子绕到他那里去一下。 
English: Halfway through, Hou Yi said to Wei Wu Boi: I have a friend who is a butcher at the market, please let the car go around to him.

古文：公子引车入市，侯生下见其客硃亥，睥睨，故久立，与其客语，微察公子，公子色愈和；乃谢客就车，至公子家。
现代文：魏无忌指挥车子进了集市，侯嬴下车见到朋友朱亥，故意久久地站在那里与他谈话；同时微微斜视魏无忌，只见他态度仍然十分谦和，于是告辞朋友登车，到了魏无忌府第。
English: Wei Muxi directed the car into the bazaar. Hou Yi got off the car to see his friend Zhu Hai, and deliberately stood there for a long time to talk to him. At the same time, he looked at Wei Muxi with a slight squint, only to see that his attitude was still very humble, so he said goodbye to his friend and boarded the car, and arrived at Wei Muxi's house.

古文：公子引侯生坐上坐，遍赞宾客，宾客皆惊。
现代文：魏无忌引侯嬴坐在上座，向各位宾客介绍称赞他，宾客们都很惊讶。
English: Wei had no choice but to invite Hou Yi to sit in the upper seat, introducing and praising him to the guests. The guests were very surprised.

古文：及秦围赵，赵平原君之夫人，公子无忌之姊也，平原君使者冠盖相属于魏，让公子曰： 胜所以自附于婚姻者，以公子之高义，能急人之困也。
现代文：这时秦兵围困赵国首都邯郸，赵国平原君赵胜的夫人，是魏无忌的姐姐。赵胜派到魏国求救的使者车马接连不断，指责魏无忌说： 赵胜我之所以与您联成姻亲，就是仰慕您的高尚道义，能够急人之危。
English: At this time, Qin soldiers besieged the capital of Zhao Province, Handan. The wife of Zhao Province's plain ruler, Zhao Sheng, was Wei Mujie's sister. Envoys sent by Zhao Sheng to Wei Province for help kept coming, accusing Wei Mujie and saying: Zhao Sheng, the reason why I have become your in-law is that I admire your high morals and can be in a critical situation.

古文：今邯郸旦暮降秦而魏救不至，纵公子轻胜弃之，独不怜公子姊邪？ 
现代文：现在邯郸早晚要落入秦国手中而魏国援兵裹足不前，即使您看不起我赵胜鄙弃我，难道也不可怜您的姐姐吗？ 
English: Now that she will sooner or later fall into the hands of Qin, and Wei reinforcements are not advancing, even if you despise me and Zhao Sheng despise me, shouldn't you pity your sister?

古文：公子患之，数请魏王敕晋鄙令救赵，及宾客辩士游说万端，王终不听。
现代文：魏无忌十分焦急，多次请魏王命令大将晋鄙进兵救赵，又派门下能说善辩的宾客百般游说，然而魏王始终不为所动。
English: Wei Muxi was very anxious. He repeatedly asked Wei Wang to order the general to march into the army to save Zhao, and sent his guests who could speak well to lobby in various ways. However, Wei Wang remained unmoved.

古文：公子乃属宾客，约车骑百馀乘，欲赴斗以死于赵；过夷门，见侯生。
现代文：魏无忌只好聚集门下宾客百余乘车马，准备赴赵国以死相拼。他路过夷门，去见侯嬴。
English: Wei had no choice but to gather more than a hundred guests under his door to ride horses and prepare to go to Zhao to fight to the death. He passed Yimen and went to see Hou Yi.

古文：侯生曰： 公子勉之矣，老臣不能从！ 
现代文：侯嬴只淡淡地说： 公子您好自为之吧，我老了不能前去！ 
English: Hou Yao only said faintly: My lord, you are free to do as you please, I am too old to go!

古文：公子去，行数里，心不快，复还见侯生。
现代文：魏无忌离开后，走了数里，心中闷闷不快，又转回去见侯嬴。
English: After Wei left, he walked for several miles, feeling stuffy and unhappy, and then turned back to see Hou Yu.

古文：侯生笑曰： 臣固知公子之还也！
现代文：侯嬴笑着说： 我早就知道公子会回来！
English: Hou Yao said with a smile: I already knew that he would come back!

古文：今公子无他端而欲赴秦军，譬如以肉投馁虎，何功之有！ 
现代文：如今您没有别的办法而亲身去迎战秦军，好比用肉去投打饿虎，能有什么结果！ 
English: Now you have no other choice but to fight the Qin army in person, just like using meat to fight a hungry tiger, what can be the result!

古文：公子再拜问计。
现代文：魏无忌于是下车再拜请教计策。
English: Wei had no choice but to get out of the car and ask for advice.

古文：侯嬴屏人曰： 吾闻晋鄙兵符在王卧内，而如姬最幸，力能窃之。
现代文：侯嬴屏退左右随从悄声说道： 我听说晋鄙的调兵兵符在魏王卧室里，他最宠爱的如姬，有办法偷出来。
English: Hou Xuanping retreated to the right and left, and his attendant whispered: I heard that Jin's transfer of troops was in Wei Wang's bedroom, and his favorite Ruki had a way to steal it.

古文：尝闻公子为如姬报其父仇，如姬欲为公子死无所辞，公子诚一开口，则得虎符，夺晋鄙之兵，北救赵，西却秦，此五伯之功也。 
现代文：曾听说公子您为如姬报过杀父之仇，如姬表示愿意为您办事，万死不辞。公子只要一开口，就可以得到调兵的虎符，夺去晋鄙的兵权，北上救赵，西抗强秦，建立五霸的功业了。 
English: I once heard that you had avenged your father's murder for Rukhee, and Rukhee said that she was willing to do anything for you, even die. As long as he opened his mouth, he could get the tigress of troop transfer, take away the military power of Jinshan, go north to save Zhao, resist strong Qin in the west, and establish the Five Dynasties.

古文：公子如其言，果得兵符。
现代文：魏无忌照他的办法去做，果然拿到了兵符。
English: Wei did as he was told and got the military insignia.

古文：公子行，侯生曰： 将在外，君令有所不受。
现代文：临行前，侯嬴又说： 大将出征在外，君王的命令可以不接受。
English: Before leaving, Hou Yi also said, "The general is away on a military expedition, and the king's order may not be accepted.

古文：有如晋鄙合符而不授兵，复请之，则事危矣。
现代文：假如晋鄙以此合验兵符后仍不交出兵权，再向魏王请示，那事情就危险了。
English: If Jinnah did not surrender his military power after this military examination, and then asked the king of Wei for instructions, the situation would be dangerous.

古文：臣客硃亥，其人力士，可与俱。
现代文：我的朋友朱亥，是个勇猛力士，可以与您一齐去。
English: My friend Zhu Hai, a brave wrestler, can go with you.

古文：晋鄙若听，大善；不听，可使击之！ 
现代文：晋鄙如果听从，最好不过。如果不听从，可以让朱亥打死他！ 
English: If Jinmei listens, it's best. If he doesn't listen, let Zhuhai beat him to death!

古文：于是公子请硃亥与俱。
现代文：于是魏无忌又邀请朱亥前去。
English: So Wei had no choice but to invite Zhu Hai again.

古文：至鄴，晋鄙合符，疑之，举手视公子曰： 吾拥十万之众屯于境上，国之重任。今单车来代之，何如哉？ 
现代文：到了邺城，晋鄙合验兵符后，仍很怀疑，摆手看着魏无忌说： 我率领十万大军在边境驻扎，而你只孤身单车前来替代我，是怎么回事呢？ 
English: When he arrived in Lucheng, after the military examination, he was still very suspicious. He waved his hand and looked at Wei Wu Boi and said: I led a hundred thousand troops stationed at the border, and you only came to replace me on a bicycle. What's going on?

古文：硃亥袖四十斤铁椎，椎杀晋鄙，公子遂勒兵下令军中曰： 父子俱在军中者，父归；兄弟俱在军中者，兄归；独子无兄弟者，归养。 
现代文：朱亥立即从袖中掣出四十斤重的铁锥，打死晋鄙，魏无忌便部署军队，下令说： 父子两人都在军队中的，父亲可以回去！兄弟两人都在军队中的，哥哥可以回去！独子一个没有兄弟的，可以回去奉养父母！ 
English: Zhu Hai immediately pulled out a forty-pound iron cone from his sleeve and killed Jin Mei. Wei then deployed the army and ordered: Both father and son are in the army, the father can go back! Both brothers are in the army, the brother can go back! An only son without a brother can go back to support his parents!

古文：得选兵八万人，将之而进。
现代文：于是选定八万士兵，挥军前进。
English: So he selected eighty thousand soldiers and led the army forward.

古文：王龁久围邯郸不拔，诸侯来救，战数不利。
现代文：王龁围困邯郸已久，不能攻克，与各国救兵几次作战，也均失利。
English: Wang Yao has been besieged for a long time, unable to conquer, and has fought several times with the rescue troops of various countries, but all of them have been defeated.

古文：武安君闻之曰： 王不听吾计，今何如矣？ 
现代文：武安君白起听说后说： 大王不听我的建议，现在怎么办？ 
English: After hearing this, Wu Anjun Bai said: The great king did not listen to my advice, what should we do now?

古文：王闻之，怒，强起武安君。武安君称病笃，不肯起。
现代文：秦王听到此话，恼羞成怒，强令武安君前去统兵，白起又称病重，不肯起身。
English: When King Qin heard this, his irritation turned to anger, and he forced Wu'an to go and lead the troops. Baiqi, who was said to be seriously ill, refused to get up.

古文：赧王下五十八年
现代文：周赧王五十八年
English: The 58th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：十月，免武安君为士伍，迁之阴密。
现代文：十月，秦王免除白起官爵，贬为士兵，把他迁到阴密。
English: In October, King Qin exempted Baiqi from being a peer, demoted him to a soldier, and transferred him to Yiming.

古文：十二月，益发卒军汾城旁。
现代文：十二月，秦王调动更多士兵驻扎在汾城旁。
English: In December, the conscription was expanded, and the troops were stationed next to Lucheng.

古文：武安君病，未行，诸侯攻王龁，龁数却，使者日至，王乃使人遣武安君，不得留咸阳中。
现代文：被贬为士兵的白起因病，未能出征。各国援军向王龁进攻，王几次败退，告急使者往返于秦国，秦王羞恼，于是派人驱赶白起，不让他再滞留在咸阳城中。
English: Bai, who was demoted to a soldier, fell ill and was unable to go to war. Reinforcements from various countries attacked Wang Qian. Wang was defeated several times and retreated. The envoys were rushed back and forth to Qin. The Qin king was embarrassed and sent someone to drive Bai Qian away and prevent him from staying in Xianyang City.

古文：武安君出咸阳西门十里，至杜邮。
现代文：白起起身出了咸阳西门十里，到达杜邮。
English: Bai got up and walked ten miles from Xianyang Ximen to Du Post.

古文：王与应侯群臣谋曰： 白起之迁，意尚怏怏有馀言。 
现代文：秦王又与应侯范睢等群臣议论说： 白起迁走时，怏怏不服，还有别的怨言。 
English: Qin Wang also discussed with the group of courtiers including Ying Hou Fan Qi and said: When Bai Qi moved away, he was not satisfied, and there were other complaints.

古文：王乃使使者赐之剑，武安君遂自杀。
现代文：秦王便派使者前去赐给他宝剑示意自裁，白起于是自杀。
English: King Qin then sent an emissary to give him a sword as a gesture of self-condemnation, whereupon he committed suicide.

古文：秦人怜之，乡邑皆祭祀焉。
现代文：秦国人可怜他，城乡都祭祀他的灵位。
English: The people of Qin took pity on him, and both urban and rural areas offered sacrifices to his shrine.

古文：魏公子无忌大破秦师于邯郸下，王龁解邯郸围走。
现代文：魏无忌率领援军在邯郸城下大破秦军，王龁撤除邯郸围军退走。
English: Wei had no choice but to lead the reinforcements to defeat the Qin army at the foot of Zou Castle, and Wang Yao withdrew the besieging army and retreated.

古文：郑安平为赵所困，将二万人降赵，应侯由是得罪。
现代文：另一秦将郑安平被赵军包围，率领二万人投降赵国，重用郑安平的范睢因此也被秦王治罪。
English: Another Qin general, Zheng Anping, was besieged by Zhao's army and led 20,000 men to surrender to Zhao. As a result, he was punished by the Qin king for reusing Zheng Anping's banner.

古文：公子无忌既存赵，遂不敢归魏，与宾客留居赵，使将将其军还魏。
现代文：魏无忌救下赵国以后，也不敢再回魏国，与门下宾客留在赵国居住，派将军指挥军队回国。
English: After Wei inevitably saved Zhao, he did not dare to return to Wei again. He stayed in Zhao with his guests and sent a general to command the army back to China.

古文：赵王与平原君计，以五城封公子。
现代文：赵王与平原君赵胜商议，用五个城来赐封魏无忌。
English: King Zhao conferred with the prince of the plain, Zhao Sheng, and decided to use five cities to seal Wei.

古文：赵王扫除自迎，执主人之礼，引公子就西阶。
现代文：赵王布置打扫，亲自前去迎接魏无忌，以主人的礼节对待，引他由西面台阶登上大殿。
English: Zhao Wang arranged the cleaning, personally went to meet Wei Mubi, treated him with the owner's etiquette, and led him from the west steps to the main hall.

古文：公子侧行辞让，从东阶上，自言罪过，以负于魏，无功于赵。
现代文：魏无忌侧着身子辞让，从降一等级的东面台阶走上，自己口中说着罪过罪过，已经辜负了魏国，又对赵国没有什么功劳。
English: Wei reluctantly relented and climbed up the east steps from the first level down, saying in his own words that he had sinned, that he had failed Wei, and that he had done Zhao no good.

古文：赵王与公子饮至暮，口不忍献五城，以公子退让也。赵王以鄗为公子汤沐邑。
现代文：赵王与魏无忌一直饮酒到天黑，因为魏无忌过于谦让，赵王始终不好意思说出送给他五个城的事。最后，赵王把城送给魏无忌，做为汤沐邑。
English: Zhao Wang and Wei Wuyi continued to drink until dark, because Wei Wuyi was too modest, Zhao Wang was always embarrassed to say that he was given five cities. Finally, Zhao Wang gave the city to Wei Wuyi as a souvenir.

古文：魏亦复以信陵奉公子。
现代文：后来，魏国也仍把魏无忌的原封地信陵送还给他。
English: Later, the State of Wei also returned Wei Mugu's original fief to him.

古文：公子闻赵有处士毛公隐于博徒，薛公隐于卖浆家，欲见之。两人不肯见，公子乃间步从之游。
现代文：魏无忌听说赵国有个高士毛公隐居在赌徒之中，还有个薛公隐居在卖酒人家，想与他们见面，两人不肯见，魏无忌便徒步前去拜访，同他们出游。
English: Wei Wuyi heard that there was a high-ranking official in Zhao Province, Mao Gong, who lived in seclusion among gamblers. There was also a high-ranking official, Xue Gong, who lived in seclusion in the home of a wine seller. He wanted to meet with them, but the two refused to see each other. Wei Wuyi went on foot to visit and travel with them.

古文：平原君闻而非之。
现代文：平原君赵胜听说后，不以为然。
English: After hearing the news, Plainsman Zhao Sheng was not impressed.

古文：公子曰； 吾闻平原君之贤，故背魏而救赵。
现代文：魏无忌便说： 我听说平原君是个贤德之人，才背弃魏国前去援救赵国。
English: Wei Wubi then said: I heard that Pingyuan Jun was a virtuous man, and only then did he turn his back on Wei and go to the rescue of Zhao.

古文：今平原君所与游，徒豪举耳，不求士也。
现代文：现在看他与一些人结交出游，只不过是阔绰的举动，不是为访求人才。
English: Now that he has made friends with some people, it is just a lavish move, not a talent search.

古文：以无忌从此两人游，尚恐其不我欲也，平原君乃以为羞乎？ 
现代文：我魏无忌跟着毛、薛二位出游，心里还直怕他们不愿意接纳我，平原君竟然认为这是羞耻！ 
English: I did not hesitate to travel with Mao and Xue, but I was afraid that they would not accept me. Mr. Pingyuan thought it was a shame!

古文：为装欲去。
现代文：于是整备行装，想离开赵国。
English: So he packed his things and wanted to leave Zhao.

古文：平原君免冠谢，乃止。
现代文：赵胜急忙前去摘下帽子谢罪，魏无忌才留下。
English: Zhao Sheng hurried forward to take off his hat and apologize. Wei had no choice but to stay.

古文：平原君欲封鲁连，使者三返，终不肯受。
现代文：平原君又想封赏鲁仲连，使者三次前往，他都不肯接受。
English: Hirahara also wanted to reward Lu Zhonglian, and the envoy went three times, but he refused to accept.

古文：又以千金为鲁连寿，鲁连笑曰： 所贵于天下之士者，为人排患释难解纷乱而无取也。
现代文：赵胜又送去千金为鲁仲连祝寿，鲁仲连笑着说： 天下名士最看重的是，为别人排除困难、解决纠纷而无所要求。
English: Zhao Sheng also sent thousands of gold to congratulate Lu Zhonglian on his birthday. Lu Zhonglian said with a smile: The most important thing for celebrities in the world is to eliminate difficulties and resolve disputes for others without any requirements.

古文：即有取者，是商贾之事也，而连不忍为也！ 遂辞平原君而去，终身不复见。
现代文：如果有所谋取，那就是商人的行为了！ 于是告别平原君赵胜而离去，终身不再来见他。
English: If there is anything to be gained, it is the actions of a businessman! So he bids farewell to the plainsman Zhao Sheng and leaves, never to see him again.

古文：秦太子之妃曰华阳夫人，无子；夏姬生子异人。
现代文：秦国太子的夫人名叫华阳夫人，没有儿子；另一个夏姬生有儿子嬴异人。
English: The wife of the Crown Prince of Qin was called Lady Huayang and had no son; another, Lady Xia Ji, had a son who was a stranger.

古文：异人质于赵；秦数伐赵，赵人不礼之。
现代文：异人在赵国作人质，秦国几次攻打赵国，赵国人因此对他很不友善。
English: The stranger was a hostage in Zhao, and Qin attacked Zhao several times. As a result, the people of Zhao were very unfriendly to him.

古文：异人以庶孽孙质于诸侯，车乘进用不饶，居处困不得意。
现代文：异人又因为是秦王的庶孙，在国外作人质，车马及日常供给都不充盈，生活窘困，郁郁不得志。
English: Because he is the great-great-grandson of King Qin, he is a hostage in a foreign country. His car, horse and daily supplies are not plentiful. His life is miserable and he is depressed.

古文：阳翟大贾吕不韦适邯郸，见之，曰： 此奇货可居！ 
现代文：阳翟有个大商人吕不韦去邯郸，见到嬴异人，说： 这是可以屯积起来卖好价钱的奇货呀！ 
English: There was once a great merchant named Lü Buwei who went to Shandong and, on seeing a strange man, said, "This is a rare commodity that can be amassed and sold at a good price!"

古文：乃往见异人，说曰： 吾能大子之门。 
现代文：于是前去拜见异人，说： 我可以提高你的门第！ 
English: So he went to the stranger and said, "May I lift up your door?"

古文：异人笑曰： 且自大君之门！ 
现代文：异人笑着说： 你先提高自己的门第吧！ 
English: The stranger smiled and said: First, improve your own family!

古文：不韦曰： 子不知也，吾门待子门而大。 
现代文：吕不韦说： 你不知道，我的门第要靠你的门第来提高。 
English: Lü Buwei said, "You don't know, my rank depends on your rank to be promoted."

古文：异人心知所谓，乃引与坐，深语。
现代文：异人心中知道他有所指，便邀他一起坐下深谈。
English: Knowing in her heart that he had something to say, she invited him to sit down and talk.

古文：不韦曰： 秦王老矣。
现代文：吕不韦说： 秦王老了。
English: Lü Buwei said, "Qin Wang is getting old.

古文：太子爱华阳夫人，夫人无子。
现代文：太子宠爱华阳夫人，而华阳夫人却没有儿子。
English: The prince loves Mrs. Hua Yang, but Mrs. Hua Yang does not have a son.

古文：子之兄弟二十馀人，子傒有承国之业，士仓又辅之。
现代文：你兄弟二十余人中，子是长子，有继承秦国的条件，又有士仓辅佐他。
English: Among your twenty-odd brothers, your son is the eldest son, has the conditions to inherit the Qin State, and has Shikura to assist him.

古文：子居中，不甚见幸，久质诸侯。
现代文：你排行居中，不太受重视，长久在外做人质。
English: You're middle of the pack, underappreciated, a long-term hostage.

古文：太子即位，子不得争为嗣矣。 
现代文：如果太子即位做秦王，你很难争得继承人的地位。 
English: If the crown prince ascends to the throne as King Qin, it will be difficult for you to compete for the position of heir.

古文：异人曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：异人说： 那怎么办呢？ 
English: The stranger said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：不韦曰： 能立适嗣者，独华阳夫人耳。
现代文：吕不韦说： 能够确立嫡子继承人的，只有华阳夫人。
English: Lu Buwei said: Only Mrs. Huayang can establish the heir of the legitimate son.

古文：不韦虽贫，请以千金为子西游，立子为嗣， 异人曰： 必如君策，请得分秦国与君共之。 
现代文：我吕不韦虽然不算富，也愿意拿出千金为你到西边去游说，让她立你为继承人。 异人说： 如果能实现你说的计划，我愿意分割秦国与你共享。 
English: Although I am not rich, I am willing to spend a lot of money to go to the west to lobby for you and let her appoint you as the heir.The stranger said: If I can realize your plan, I am willing to divide Qin and share it with you.

古文：不韦乃以五百金与异人，令结宾客。
现代文：吕不韦于是拿出五百金给异人，让他广交天下宾客，又有五百金置买奇宝珍玩，自己携带前去秦国。
English: Lu Buwei then took out five hundred gold coins to give to the stranger, so that he could make friends with guests from all over the world, and another five hundred gold coins to buy treasures to play with, and carry them to Qin.

古文：复以五百金买奇物玩好，自奉而西，见华阳夫人之姊，而以奇物献于夫人，因誉子异人之贤，宾客遍天下，常日夜泣思太子及夫人，曰： 异人也以夫人为天！ 
现代文：他见到华阳夫人的姐姐，通过她把珍宝献给华阳夫人，趁机称赞异人贤明，宾客遍天下，常常日夜哭着思念太子和华阳夫人，说： 异人把夫人当做自己的上天！ 
English: He saw Mrs. Huayang's sister, and through her he offered the treasure to Mrs. Huayang, taking advantage of the opportunity to praise the other person's wisdom. Guests all over the world, often crying day and night thinking about the prince and Mrs. Huayang, said: The other person regards his wife as his own heaven!

古文：夫人大喜。不韦因使其姊说夫人曰： 夫以色事人者，色衰则爱驰。
现代文：华阳夫人听了大喜，吕不韦又通过她姐姐劝说华阳夫人： 靠容貌侍奉别人，年老色衰则恩爱松弛。
English: Mrs. Huayang was overjoyed to hear this, and Lü Buwei persuaded Mrs. Huayang through her sister: Serve others by your looks, and if you are old and weak, your love will be flabby.

古文：今夫人爱而无子，不以繁华时蚤自结于诸子中贤孝者，举以为适，即色衰爱驰，虽欲开一言，尚可得乎！
现代文：现在夫人虽受到宠爱却没有儿子，不趁着年华正盛自己早些在各个儿子中选一个贤良孝顺的，推举他为嫡子，等到年老恩爱淡漠时，即便想说一句话，也做不到了。
English: Now, although his wife is favored, she has no son. Instead of taking advantage of the fact that Hua Zhengsheng himself had chosen a virtuous and dutiful son from among his sons earlier, he chose him as his legitimate son. When the old man's love fades, even if you want to say a word, you can't.

古文：今子异人贤，而自知中子不得为适，夫人诚以此时拔之，是子异人无国而有国，夫人无子而有子也，则终身有宠于秦矣。 
现代文：现在异人贤明，又知道自己排行居中，做不了嫡子，夫人如果这时候提拔他，异人就从无国变成了有国，夫人也从无子变成了有子，便会终身在秦国得到宠幸。 
English: Now the stranger is wise, and knows that he is in the middle, and cannot be the legitimate son. If his wife promotes him at this time, the stranger will change from having no country to having a country, and his wife will also change from having no son to having a son, and will be favored for life in Qin.

古文：夫人以为然，承间言于太子曰： 子异人绝贤，来往者皆称誉之。 
现代文：华阳夫人认为说的很对，抓住机会便对太子说： 儿子异人绝顶贤明，来来往往的人都称誉他。 
English: Mrs. Huayang thought that what he said was very right, and seized the opportunity to say to the prince: My son is extremely wise, and people who come and go praise him.

古文：因泣曰： 妾不幸无子，愿得子异人立以为嗣，以托妾身！ 
现代文：又哭道： 我不幸没有生儿子，想把异人立为自己的儿子，使后半辈子有个依靠！ 
English: She cried again, "I was unlucky not to have a son, and I want to raise a stranger as my own son, so that I will have someone to rely on for the rest of my life!"

古文：太子许之，与夫人刻玉符，约以为嗣，因厚馈遗异人，而请吕不韦傅之。
现代文：太子答应了她，与华阳夫人刻下玉符，约定异人为继承人，于是送给异人丰厚财物，并请吕不韦辅佐他。
English: The prince consented to her, engraved a jade seal with Lady Huayang, and agreed that the stranger would be the heir, so he gave the stranger rich possessions, and asked Lü Bu Wei to assist him.

古文：异人名誉盛于诸侯。
现代文：异人的名望声誉从此在各国盛传。
English: Since then, his fame and reputation have spread all over the world.

古文：吕不韦娶邯郸姬绝美者与居，知其有娠，异人从不韦饮，见而请之，不韦佯怒，既而献之，孕期年而生子政，异人遂以为夫人。
现代文：吕不韦娶了一位邯郸美女中最美的，与他同居，知道她已怀孕。一次，异人与吕不韦饮酒，见到这位女子，便想要来。吕不韦假装动怒，不久又将她献给异人。这位女子怀孕一年后生下儿子，名叫嬴政，异人便把她立为正室夫人。
English: Lu Buwei married one of the most beautiful women and lived with her, knowing that she was pregnant. Once, a stranger drank alcohol with Lu Buwei, and when he saw the woman, he wanted to come. Lu Buwei pretended to be angry, and soon gave her to the stranger. A year after the woman became pregnant, she gave birth to a son, named Yu Zheng, and the stranger made her his lawful wife.

古文：邯郸之围，赵人欲杀之，异人与不韦行金六百斤予守者，脱亡赴秦军，遂得归。
现代文：邯郸被秦兵围困时，赵国人想杀死异人，异人与吕不韦用六百金送给看守，脱身逃到秦军中，于是得以回国。
English: When Zhai was besieged by Qin soldiers, the people of Zhao wanted to kill the stranger. The stranger and Lü Buwei gave six hundred gold to the guards, escaped to the Qin army, and were able to return to the country.

古文：异人楚服而见华阳夫人，夫人曰： 吾楚人也，当自子之。 
现代文：异人身穿楚国服装前去见华阳夫人，夫人说： 我是楚人啊！我把你当作亲生儿子。 
English: A stranger dressed in a costume from the state of Chu went to see Mrs. Huayang. Mrs. Huayang said, "I'm from the state of Chu! I consider you my own son."

古文：因更其名曰楚。
现代文：于是把他的名字改为楚。
English: So he changed his name to Chu.

古文：赧王下五十九年
现代文：周赧王五十九年
English: The 59th year of King Zhou Enlai

古文：秦将军摎伐韩，取阳城、负黍，斩首四万。
现代文：秦国将军摎攻打韩国，夺取了阳城、负黍，杀死韩军四万人。
English: The general of Qin attacked Korea, captured Yangcheng and Zheshan, and killed 40,000 Korean soldiers.

古文：伐赵，取二十馀县，斩首虏九万。
现代文：又攻打赵国，夺取了二十几个县，杀死俘虏九万人。
English: He also attacked Zhao Province, captured more than 20 counties, and killed 90,000 prisoners.

古文：赧王恐，倍秦，与诸侯约从，将天下锐师出伊阙攻秦，令无得通阳城。
现代文：周赧王十分惊恐，背弃了秦国，与各国联合抗秦，派出各国精锐部队出伊阙进攻秦国，使秦国不能通行到阳城。
English: King Zhou Enlai was very alarmed. He abandoned Qin, and united with other countries to fight against Qin. He sent elite troops from various countries to attack Qin from Yili, so that Qin could not travel to Yangcheng.

古文：秦王使将军摎攻西周，赧王入秦，顿首受罪，尽献其邑三十六，口三万。
现代文：秦王派将军摎进攻西周，周赧王跑到秦国，叩首领罪，献出了全部三十六个城邑和三万人口。
English: The king of Qin sent the general Zhou to attack West Zhou, and the king of Zhou went to Qin, condemned the warlord, and gave up all thirty-six towns and thirty thousand people.

古文：秦受其献，归赧王于周。
现代文：秦王接受了他的进献，放周赧王回到东周。
English: King Qin accepted his offering and sent King Zhou Xuan back to East Zhou.

古文：是岁，赧王崩。
现代文：当年，周赧王驾崩。
English: In that year, King Zhou Enlai passed away.

