古文：禽子再拜再拜曰： 敢问古人有善攻者，穴土而入，缚柱施火，以坏吾城，城坏，或中人为之奈何？ 
现代文：译文禽滑厘行了两次再拜礼之后说： 请问古代有善于攻城的人，挖地下隧道到城墙下，绕隧道里的支柱放火，隧道塌顶，以这种方法塌毁城墙，城墙毁坏，城中人该如何对付呢？ 
English: After performing two prostrations, he said, "I would like to ask: In ancient times, there were people who were good at attacking the city. They dug underground tunnels under the city walls, set fire to the pillars in the tunnels, and collapsed the tunnel roof. In this way, they collapsed the city walls. The city walls were destroyed. How should the people in the city deal with this?

古文：子墨子曰：问穴土之守邪？
现代文：墨子回答说：你问的是对付用打隧道来攻城的防守方法吗？
English: Mozi replied, "Are you asking about the defensive method against attacking the city by tunneling?"

古文：备穴者城内为高楼，以谨候望适人。
现代文：对付打隧道的攻城方法是要在城内修建高楼，用来密切观察敌情。
English: The method of attacking the city by tunneling was to build a tall building inside the city, which was used to closely observe the enemy situation.

古文：适人为变筑垣聚土非常者，若彭有水浊非常者，此穴土也。
现代文：敌方有变，修筑掩体墙而积聚土石就不同于一般情形，如果四周有平常不同的浑浊泥水，这便是敌人在挖隧道。
English: The enemy has changed, and building a bunker wall and accumulating earth and stone is different from the general situation. If there is usually different muddy muddy water around, this is the enemy digging a tunnel.

古文：急堑城内，穴其土直之。穿井城内，五步一井，傅城足。
现代文：应赶快在城内对着敌人隧道方向挖沟和隧道以防范它。假若还不能准确判断敌人挖隧道的方位，就在城内挖井，每隔五步挖一井，要靠近城墙墙基。
English: It is necessary to quickly dig a trench and tunnel in the direction of the enemy's tunnel in the city to prevent it. If it is not yet possible to accurately determine the position of the enemy's tunnel, dig a well in the city, dig a well every five steps, and close to the city wall wall base.

古文：高地，丈五尺，下地，得泉三尺而止。
现代文：地势高的地方掘深五尺，地势低的地方，打到出水，有三尺深就够了。
English: Where the terrain is high, dig five feet deep, and where the terrain is low, it is enough to dig three feet deep until the water comes out.

古文：令陶者为罂，容四十斗以上，固顺之以薄■革，置井中，使聪耳者伏罂而听之，审知穴之所在，凿穴迎之。
现代文：命令陶匠烧制肚大口小的坛子，大小能容纳四十斗以上，用薄皮革蒙紧坛口放入井内，派听觉灵敏的人伏在坛口上静听传自地下的声音，确切地弄清楚敌方隧道的方位，然后挖隧道与之相抗。
English: He ordered the potter to make a pot with a large mouth and a small mouth, the size of which could hold more than forty buckets, covered the mouth of the jar with thin leather and put it into the well, and sent a person with sensitive hearing to lie on the mouth of the jar to listen to the sounds coming from the underground, to find out exactly the position of the enemy's tunnel, and then dig a tunnel to counter it.

古文：令陶者为月明，长二尺五寸六围，中判之，合而施之穴中，偃一，覆一。
现代文：命令陶器匠烧制瓦管，每根长二尺五寸，大六围，从中剖开为两块，合起来安装在隧道里，两块上下合成圆柱。
English: He ordered a potter to fire clay pipes, each two feet and five inches long and six feet in circumference, cut into two pieces, put together and installed in the tunnel, and the two pieces were combined into a cylinder.

古文：柱之外善周涂，其傅柱者勿烧。
现代文：在圆柱的外面妥善地用泥涂好缝隙，那些已合成圆柱的暂不要点火。
English: Properly plaster the outside of the cylinder with mud to create a gap. Do not ignite any cylinders that have already been formed.

古文：柱者勿烧。柱善涂其窦际，勿令泄。
现代文：圆柱连成长管后还要在接口处四面涂泥，以免漏烟。
English: After the cylinder is connected to the growth tube, it is necessary to apply mud on all four sides at the interface to avoid smoke leakage.

古文：两旁皆如此，与穴俱前。
现代文：在隧道的两边都安装这样的瓦管，随隧道而延伸，瓦管还要紧贴地面。
English: On both sides of the tunnel, such tiles are installed, extending along the tunnel, and the tiles should be close to the ground.

古文：下迫地，置康若灰其中，勿满。
现代文：在瓦管中备有糠头和炭末，不能装满堵死，但要沿管道一路装去，不可中断，同时要调放均匀。
English: In the earthenware pipe, there are straw and carbon powder, which can not be filled and blocked, but it should be loaded all the way along the pipeline, it should not be interrupted, and it should be adjusted evenly.

古文：灰康长五窦，左右俱杂，相如也。穴内口为灶令如窑，令容七八员艾，左右窦皆如此，灶用四橐。
现代文：隧道口砌灶，须使灶的形状与烧陶器的窑差不多，使它能装下七八把艾草团，两边的瓦管道口都是如此。灶装备四个皮风箱。
English: For the tunnel kiln, the shape of the kiln had to be similar to that of a pottery kiln, so that it could hold seven or eight bunches of wormwood. This was the case for both sides of the tile duct. The kiln was equipped with four leather bellows.

古文：穴且遇，以颉皋冲之，疾鼓橐熏之，必令明习橐事者，勿令离灶口。
现代文：敌我双方隧道将要相接时，就用叫 颉皋 的武器冲破士层，立即鼓励风箱，以烟熏敌。一定要派能极其熟练地操作风箱者掌用风箱，不能让其离开灶口。
English: When the tunnels of the two sides of the enemy and ours are about to meet, they will use the weapon called  to break through the enemy layer, immediately encourage the bellows to smoke the enemy. It is necessary to send those who can operate the bellows very skillfully to hold the bellows and not let it leave the stove.

古文：连版，以穴高下，广陕为度，令穴者与版俱前，凿其版令容矛，参分其疏数，令可以救窦。
现代文：拼连木板，以隧道的高度和宽度为标准，命令打隧道的兵士带着拼板向前，在拼板上打有孔眼，大小能使长矛通过，还须疏密相间，以便能用它抢救敌人对瓦管的破坏。
English: With the height and width of the tunnel as the standard, the soldiers in charge of digging the tunnel were ordered to carry the planks forward. The planks had holes punched in them, the size of which would allow a spear to pass through, and they had to be closely spaced so that it could be used to salvage the enemy's damage to the earthen tube.

古文：穴则遇，以版当之，以矛救窦，勿令塞窦；窦则塞，引版而却，过一窦而塞之，凿其窦，通其烟，烟通，疾鼓橐以熏之。
现代文：敌我双方隧道一旦打通，就用拼板阻挡敌人，从孔中伸出长矛抢救瓦管，不让管道堵塞；假若管道被堵，就拉着拼板退后一节瓦管阻挡敌人，凿开被堵的瓦管，使烟气畅通，烟一通，就加速鼓动风箱熏敌。
English: Once the tunnel between the enemy and us is opened, we will use the puzzle board to block the enemy. A spear will be extended from the hole to rescue the tile tube and prevent the pipe from being blocked. If the pipe is blocked, we will pull the puzzle board back to block the enemy with a tile tube. We will open the blocked tile tube to make the smoke flow smoothly. Once the smoke passes, we will accelerate the fan box to smoke the enemy.

古文：从穴内听穴之左右，急绝其前，勿令得行。
现代文：同时在隧道内还要注意仔细审听左右两边传来的声响，一旦发现情况，立即设法断绝阻挡敌人向前。
English: At the same time, in the tunnel, attention should also be paid to carefully listening to the sounds coming from both sides, and once the situation is found, immediately try to break off and block the enemy from moving forward.

古文：若集客穴，塞之以柴，涂，令无可烧版也。
现代文：如若冲到敌方隧道，就用涂了泥的木柴堵住敌人，不让敌人烧我拼板。
English: If I rush to the enemy's tunnel, I will block the enemy with muddy firewood to prevent the enemy from burning my jigsaw puzzle.

古文：然则穴土之攻败矣。
现代文：这样一来，敌人用打隧道的方法来攻城就失败了。
English: In this way, the enemy failed to attack the city by tunneling.

古文：寇至吾城，急非常也，谨备穴。
现代文：如果敌人已兵临城下，军情紧急已非同寻常，要谨防敌人挖隧道攻城。
English: If the enemy has troops under the city, the military emergency has become extraordinary, beware of the enemy digging tunnels to attack the city.

古文：穴疑有，应寇，急穴。
现代文：敌人一有挖隧道的迹象，就应赶紧打隧道来与之相对抗。
English: As soon as the enemy shows signs of digging a tunnel, they should quickly dig a tunnel to counter it.

古文：穴未得，慎毋追。凡杀以穴攻者，二十步一置穴，穴高十尺，凿十尺，凿如前，步下三尺，十步拥穴，左右横行，高广各十尺。
现代文：如敌人隧道的方位还没有确切弄清，我方隧道就要慎挖，不要盲目往前打。凡是对付以隧道进攻的敌人，须每隔二十步挖一隧道，隧道高十尺、宽十尺。向前开挖时，每步向下低三尺，深入十步就向两边横向开挖支道，名叫 拥穴 ，高和宽也分别为十尺。
English: If the location of the enemy's tunnel has not yet been ascertained, we should dig the tunnel carefully and not blindly advance. When dealing with an enemy attacking through a tunnel, it is necessary to dig a tunnel every twenty steps, the tunnel is ten feet high and ten feet wide. When digging forward, it is three feet lower every step down, and when it is ten steps deeper, it is necessary to dig a branch road on both sides, called a hole, and the height and width are also ten feet.

古文：杀，俚两罂，深平城，置板其上，■板以井听。
现代文：打败敌人隧道攻城，埋下两个坛子，深度使坛口与地面平齐，坛口上盖上木板，用来听取地下传来的声响。
English: Defeated the enemy's tunnel siege, buried two jars, the depth of which made the mouth of the jar level with the ground, and covered the mouth of the jar with a wooden board to listen to the sounds coming from underground.

古文：五步一密，用■若松为穴户，户穴有两蒺藜，皆长极其户，户为环，垒石外■，高七尺，加堞其上。
现代文：察听敌人打隧道用的井，每五步挖一个。每条隧道口都装有用枱和松两种木材做成的隧道门，门内安上两个蒺藜，蒺藜的长度与门的高度一致。门上装上铁环。门外用石头垒成围墙，高七尺，围墙上加砌锯齿状矫墙，围墙内不要修建阶梯和垒石块，用吊梯上下出入。
English: Each tunnel entrance is equipped with a tunnel door made of two types of wood, oak and pine. Two hoops are installed inside the door, the length of the hoop is the same as the height of the door. An iron ring is installed on the door. A stone wall is built outside the door, seven feet high, and a jagged wall is added to the wall. Do not build stairs and foundation stones inside the wall, use a lift to go up and down.

古文：勿为陛与石，以县陛上下出入，具炉橐，橐以牛皮，炉有两缻，以桥鼓之，百十每亦熏四十什，然炭杜之，满炉而盖之，毋令气出。
现代文：筑炉灶和装设风箱，风箱用牛皮制做，用杠杆鼓动。炉中置备有煤，重四十斤；用燃烧着的木炭给煤助燃，装满炉灶就盖好盖子，不让烟气外泄。
English: Build a stove and install a bellows. The bellows are made of cowhide and are moved by a lever. The stove is stocked with coal, which weighs forty pounds. The burning charcoal is used to help the coal burn. When the stove is full, the lid is closed to prevent the smoke from escaping.

古文：适人疾近五百穴，穴高若下，不至吾穴，即以伯凿而求通之。
现代文：敌人隧道快要同我接通时，根据敌方隧道与我隧道上下方位的情况，分别向上或向下开挖以求开通。
English: When the enemy tunnel is about to connect with me, according to the situation of the enemy tunnel and the up and down position of my tunnel, respectively, dig up or down to open.

古文：穴中与适人遇，则皆圉而毋逐，且战北，以须炉火之然也，即去而入壅穴。
现代文：在隧道中与敌人相遇，只抵抗而不要驱赶敌人，甚至还可以假装败退，等待炉火燃烧，炉火一燃，就立即离开敌人进入壅穴中。
English: Encounter the enemy in the tunnel, only resist and do not drive away the enemy. You can even pretend to retreat and wait for the fire to burn. Once the fire is lit, immediately leave the enemy and enter the pit.

古文：杀，有鼠■，为之户及关籥独顺，得往来行其中。
现代文：在隧道中建构 ■穴 ，设置门和关锁的机关，要让狗能够在其中往来行走。
English: Construct a hole in the tunnel, set up a door and a locking mechanism, and allow the dog to walk in and out.

古文：穴垒之中各一狗，狗吠即有人也。
现代文：每个隧道中放一条狗，狗叫就说明有人。
English: Put a dog in each tunnel. If the dog barks, it means someone is there.

古文：斩艾与柴长尺，乃置窑灶中，先垒窑壁，迎穴为连。
现代文：在炉灶中，放置砍切成一尺一段的艾草与木柴。先垒石砌成灶壁，对着隧道把木板拼接好。
English: In the stove, there are pieces of mugwort and firewood cut into one-foot sections. The foundation stone is built into the stove wall, and the wooden boards are spliced against the tunnel.

古文：凿井傅城足，三丈一，视外之广陕而为凿井，慎勿失。
现代文：在城墙下掘井三四口，把蒙了皮的坛子装入井内，将耳朵贴在坛口静听地下传来的声响。
English: Dig three or four wells under the city wall, put a jar covered with skin into the well, put your ear to the mouth of the jar and listen to the sounds coming from underground.

古文：城卑穴高从穴难。
现代文：确切弄清了敌人隧道的方位后，就从城内打隧道与之相对。
English: After ascertaining the exact location of the enemy's tunnel, they dug a tunnel from inside the city to confront it.

古文：凿井城上，为三四井，内新■井中，伏而听之。审之知穴之所在，穴而迎之。穴且遇，为颉皋，必以坚材为夫，以利斧施之，命有力者三人用颉皋冲之，灌以不洁十余石。
现代文：敌我两方隧道快要接通时，一定要用坚硬的材料做成冲杆，以成颉皋，冲杆上装有锋刺的斧头，命令三个勇猛有力的人使用颉皋冲击敌方隧道土层，一旦打通，就将十几担糠、屎之类不干不净的东西灌入敌方隧道。
English: When the tunnels of the two sides are about to be connected, it is necessary to use a hard material to make a punch to make a punch. The punch is equipped with a sharp-edged axe, and three brave and powerful people are ordered to use the punch to impact the soil layer of the enemy tunnel. Once it is opened, more than a dozen loads of straw, feces and other unclean things will be poured into the enemy tunnel.

古文：趣伏此井中，置艾其上，七分，盆盖井口，毋令烟上泄，旁其橐口，疾鼓之。
现代文：把人员紧急埋伏在隧道井中，在上面堆放七八捆艾草，用大盆盖上井口，不要叫烟火上冒旁出，在旁边装有风箱，迅疾地向敌方隧道鼓烟。
English: Ambush the personnel urgently in the tunnel well, pile seven or eight bundles of wormwood on top of it, cover the wellhead with a large basin, do not let the fireworks come out from the side, and install a bellows next to it to rapidly blow smoke into the enemy tunnel.

古文：以车轮辒。束樵，染麻索涂中以束之。
现代文：用车轮扎成 轒辒 ，用木头连成一体，将麻索浸湿涂上泥捆扎车轮。
English: The wheels were used to tie the cords together, the wood was used to join them together, and the twine was wet and coated with mud to tie the wheels together.

古文：铁锁，县正当寇穴口。
现代文：用铁链将轒辒悬挂在敌人进攻的隧道口。
English: The anchor is suspended from a chain at the mouth of the tunnel where the enemy is attacking.

古文：铁锁长三丈，端环，一端钩。
现代文：铁链长三丈，一端结成环，一端安上挂钩。
English: The chain is three meters long, with a loop at one end and a hook at the other.

古文：■穴高七尺五寸，广柱间也尺，二尺一柱，柱下傅舄，二柱共一员十一。
现代文：■穴高七尺五寸，支柱与支柱之间的横向宽度为七尺，纵向长度为二尺。支柱下面垫上垫块，两个支柱上端共一个顶板，名叫 负土 。
English: ■The hole is seven feet five inches high, the transverse width between the pillars is seven feet, and the longitudinal length is two feet. A pad is placed under the pillar, and there is a top plate at the upper end of the two pillars, called the negative soil.

古文：两柱同质，横员士。
现代文：下面也都一样垫上垫块，顶板 负土 要横着安放。
English: Underneath, padding blocks should be placed in the same way, and the top board and the soil should be placed horizontally.

古文：柱大二围半，必固其员士，无柱与柱交者。
现代文：支柱二围半粗，一定要将顶板装牢，柱与柱不要相交。
English: The pillar is semi-thick on both sides, the top plate must be firmly mounted, and the pillar should not intersect with the pillar.

古文：穴二窑，皆为穴月屋，为置吏、舍人各一人，必置水。
现代文：每条隧道口设两个灶，灶上都要盖上瓦顶，安排小吏和帮人各一人掌管，一定要备足了水。
English: Two stoves are set up at the entrance of each tunnel. A tile roof should be put on the stove, and one person should be in charge of each minor official and helper. Be sure to have enough water.

古文：塞穴门，以车两走为蒀，涂其上，以穴高下广陕为度，令人穴中四五尺，维置之。
现代文：阻塞隧道口的方法，是采用两个车轮扎成轒辒涂上泥，按照隧道的宽窄情形，让它在隧道中四五尺处的地方用绳索悬挂起来。
English: The method of blocking the tunnel mouth is to use two wheels tied into a hoop and coated with mud. According to the width and narrowness of the tunnel, let it be suspended by a rope at a place four or five feet in the tunnel.

古文：当穴者客争伏门，转而塞之。
现代文：当攻打隧道的敌人抢入我方伏门时，就转动悬挂轒辒的辘轳，放下轒辒堵住敌人。
English: When the enemy attacking the tunnel breaks into our side of the gate, it will turn the hanging anchor and put down the anchor to block the enemy.

古文：为窑容三员艾者，令其突入伏。伏傅突一旁，以二橐守之勿离。
现代文：砌筑能容下三大团艾草的炉灶，使敌方的突击队员进入我方伏击圈，我方隐伏在突门一边，守住风箱不可离开。
English: The masonry can hold three regiments of wormwood stoves, so that the enemy's commandos enter our ambush circle. We are hiding on the side of the doorway, guarding the bellows and must not leave.

古文：穴矛以铁，长四尺半，大如铁服说，即刃之二矛。
现代文：隧道中使用的短矛用铁铸造，长四尺半，大小与 铁服说 相同， 铁服说 就是古代兵器中的 酋矛 和 夷矛 两种矛。
English: The short spears used in the tunnels are made of cast iron. They are four and a half feet long, the same size as the "tiefu" (铁服說), which are two types of spears used in ancient weaponry, the "chi" (酋长矛) and the "i" (夷矛).

古文：内去窦尺，邪凿之，上穴当心，其矛长七尺。
现代文：在离隧道口一尺处掘进时，要倾斜着，向下打到地心，所用矛长七尺。
English: When digging at one foot from the tunnel mouth, it is necessary to tilt and hit down to the center of the earth. The spear used is seven feet long.

古文：穴中为环利率，穴二。
现代文：隧道中装置环索供上下牵引，每条隧道安装两种这样的环索。
English: The tunnels are equipped with cable loops for up-and-down traction, with two such loops installed in each tunnel.

古文：凿井城上，俟其身井且通，居版上，而凿其一偏，已而移版，凿一徧。
现代文：在城下掘井，等到井快要穿通时，就站到版上，向旁边斜凿，凿完就移动坐版开凿另一边。
English: When digging a well under the city, when the well is about to be penetrated, stand on the plate, chisel diagonally to the side, and after chiseling, move the plate to the other side.

古文：颉皋为两夫，而旁貍其植，而数钩其两端。
现代文：颉皋做成两端，旁边栽立柱，把钩子安装在两头。
English: Make two ends of the raft, plant a column next to it, and install the hooks at both ends.

古文：诸作穴者五十人，男女相半。
现代文：打隧道者每队五十人，男女各半。
English: Each team of tunnelers is made up of fifty people, half men and half women.

古文：五十人。攻内为传士之口，受六参，约枲绳以牛其下，可提而与投。
现代文：打隧道要用能装土石六竹箕的传运工具，用绳子兜住底部，可以提起将土倒出去。
English: When digging a tunnel, it is necessary to use a conveying tool that can hold the soil and rock, and use a rope to hold the bottom. The soil can be lifted and poured out.

古文：已则穴七人守退垒之中，为大庑一，藏穴具其中。
现代文：隧道工程中止后，每条隧道里凿有供休养的洞垒，由七人在其中守护。建大屋一间，专藏打隧道的各种工具。
English: After the suspension of the tunnel project, each tunnel was dug with a hole for recuperation, guarded by seven people. A large house was built to store all kinds of tools for tunneling.

古文：难穴，取城外池唇木月散之什，斩其穴，深到泉，难近穴，为铁，金与扶林长四尺，财自足。
现代文：为阻止敌人打隧道，先捡取护城河边的木石瓦砾撒散在城墙外，城内开挖壕沟，深度打到冒出地下水。在快要接通敌方隧道时阻击敌人，要制造铁斧，斧头连同斧柄共长四尺，不过不必多造，只要够用即可。
English: In order to prevent the enemy from digging tunnels, they first picked up the wood and stone rubble on the edge of the moat and scattered it outside the city wall, dug a trench inside the city, and dug it so deep that groundwater came out. To stop the enemy when they were about to connect the enemy's tunnel, they had to make an iron axe. The axe and the axe handle were a total of four feet long, but there was no need to make more, as long as there was enough to use.

古文：客即穴，亦穴而应之。
现代文：如果敌人挖隧道，我就以相对的隧道应战敌人。
English: If the enemy digs a tunnel, I will challenge the enemy with the opposite tunnel.

古文：为铁钩钜长四尺者，财自足，穴彻，以钩客穴者。
现代文：还要制作长四尺的铁钩巨，也不要多造，够用即可。
English: It is also necessary to make a four-foot-long iron hook. Do not make more, just enough.

古文：为短矛、短驽、矢，财自足，穴彻以斗。
现代文：隧道与敌方接通时，用这种武器钩打敌方兵士。短矛、短戟、短弓、短箭也不必多造，够用就行了。
English: When the tunnel is connected to the enemy, use this weapon to hook the enemy soldiers. Short spears, short crossbows, short bows, short arrows do not have to be made more, they are enough.

古文：以金剑为难，长五尺，为銎、木杘；杘有虑枚，以左客穴。
现代文：敌我隧道一接通，打隧道的人就可以拿它们与敌人战斗。在隧道里还可以使用一种叫 金剑 的武器，因在隧道中使用，只长五尺，要有装柄的孔眼，用木做柄，木柄上手握的部位刻上浅槽与齿纹。
English: As soon as the enemy-to-enemy tunnel is connected, the tunneler can use them to fight with the enemy. In the tunnel, a weapon called the golden sword can also be used. Because it is used in the tunnel, it is only five feet long, with holes for the handle, made of wood, and shallow grooves and teeth are carved on the part of the wooden handle.

古文：戒持罂，容三十斗以上，貍穴中，丈一，以听穴者声。
现代文：再备制一些容量在三十斗以上的大瓦坛，埋放在井洞中，每三丈一个，用来听取敌人挖隧道的声音。
English: They also prepared large earthenware jars with a capacity of more than thirty doos, and buried them in the well, one every three joists, to listen for the sound of the enemy digging a tunnel.

古文：为穴，高八尺，广，善为傅置。具全、牛交槀皮及■，卫穴二，盖陈靃及艾，穴彻熏之。
现代文：挖掘隧道，高宽各八尺，妥善立好支柱，安置好炉灶、牛皮风箱以及瓦钵等物，每条隧道都备有两套。
English: Tunnels, eight feet high and eight feet wide, were excavated, pillars were properly erected, and stoves, cowhide bellows, and corrugated boxes were placed. There were two sets for each tunnel.

古文：斧金为斫，杘长三尺，卫穴四。
现代文：灶中装满藿香、艾草等，敌我隧道一通，立刻烧烟薰敌。用金属制作斧子，木柄三尺长，每条隧道备上四把。
English: The stove is filled with fennel, wormwood, etc. The enemy and I tunnel together, immediately burning smoke to incense the enemy. Axes are made of metal, the wooden handle is three feet long, and four are prepared for each tunnel.

古文：为垒，卫穴四十，属四。
现代文：制备盛土用的竹笼，每条隧道要备四十个，锄头之类四把。
English: To prepare bamboo cages for embankment, forty cages should be prepared for each tunnel, and four shovels should be prepared.

古文：为斤、斧、锯、凿、■，财自足。
现代文：配备斧头、锯子、凿子、大锄等工具，数量只求够用不需多。
English: Equipped with axes, saws, chisels, large hoes and other tools, the quantity is just enough to be used.

古文：为铁校，卫穴四。
现代文：配备大剪刀，每个隧道四把。
English: Equipped with large scissors, four in each tunnel.

古文：为中橹，高十丈半，广四尺。
现代文：制做中等大小的盾牌，高十尺半，宽四尺。
English: He made a shield of medium size, ten and a half feet high and four feet wide.

古文：为横穴八橹盖。
现代文：制备横放在隧道中阻敌的大拼板。
English: Prepare a large jigsaw puzzle placed horizontally in the tunnel to stop the enemy.

古文：具槀枲，财自足，以烛穴中。盖持■，客即熏，以救目。
现代文：再预备禾杆，麻梗，不必贪多，够用即可，用来照明。
English: Then prepare straw, hemp stalks, do not have to be greedy, enough to use, used for lighting.

古文：救目分方■穴，以益盛■置穴中，文盆毋少四斗。即熏，以自临上及以沺目。 
现代文：还要配备一种名叫 醯 的酒，敌人攻来用烟薰，这种酒用来救护自己兵士的眼睛。
English: They also had to be equipped with a kind of liquor called gin, which the enemy used to smoke, and this liquor was used to save the eyes of their soldiers.

