古文：谓应侯曰： 君禽马服乎? 
现代文：有人对应侯说： 听说您已经擒住马服君赵括了吗？ 应侯说； 是的。 
English: Someone said to Hou, "Did you hear that you have captured the horse-suit master Zhao Kuang?" Hou said, "Yes."

古文：曰： 然。  又即围邯郸乎? 
现代文：这人又问道： 又将立即围攻邯郸吗？ 
English: The man then asked: Will there be another immediate siege of Hando?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：应侯说： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文： 赵亡，秦王王矣，武安君为三公。
现代文：这个人接着说： 如果赵国灭亡，秦昭王就将称霸天下了。
English: This person went on to say: If Zhao State perishes, Qin Zhao Wang will dominate the world.

古文：武安君所以为秦战胜攻取者七十余城，南亡鄢郢、汉中，禽马服之军，不亡一甲，虽周吕望之功，亦不过此矣。
现代文：武安君白起也将要做丞相或太尉一类的大官了。武安君为秦国转战南北攻取了七十多座城池，在南边占领了鄢城、郢城、汉中一带，又消灭了马服君赵括的军队，竟没有损失一兵一卒，即使是周公、召公、吕望的功劳，也超不过这些了。
English: Wu Anjun will also become a high-ranking official such as chancellor or lieutenant general. Wu Anjun conquered more than seventy cities and villages for Qin in the north-south war, occupied the areas of Lucheng, Lucheng and Hanzhong in the south, and destroyed the army of Ma Fu Jun Zhao Kuan. In fact, he did not lose a single soldier. Even the merits of Zhou Gong, Zhao Gong and Lü Wang are nothing more than this.

古文：赵亡，秦王王，武安君为三公，君能为之下乎?
现代文：如果赵国灭亡了，秦王称霸了，武安君自起成了三公，您难道能做他的下属吗？
English: If the State of Zhao perished, the King of Qin became the ruler, and Wu'an became the Third Prince, would you be able to be his subordinate?

古文：虽欲无为之下，固不得之矣。
现代文：即使您心里不想做他的下属，也肯定是不行的了。
English: Even if you don't want to be his subordinate, you certainly can't.

古文：秦尝攻韩邢，困于上党，上党之民皆返为赵。
现代文：秦军曾经攻韩黩陉，被围困在上党，上党的老百姓全部回到赵国。
English: The Qin army once attacked Han Wei and was besieged in Shangdang. The people of Shangdang all returned to Zhao.

古文：天下之民，不乐为秦民之日固久矣。
现代文：天下的百姓，不愿做泰国国民的日子已经很久了。
English: People around the world have been reluctant to become Thai citizens for a long time.

古文：今攻赵，北地入燕，东地入齐，南地入楚、魏，则秦所得不一几何。
现代文：如果现在秦军进攻赵国，北边的土地将归入燕国，东边的土地将归入齐国，南边的土地将归入楚国、魏国，那么秦国所得到的土地就没有多少了。
English: If the Qin army now attacks Zhao, the land to the north will be included in Yan, the land to the east will be included in Qi, and the land to the south will be included in Chu and Wei, so the land gained by Qin will not be much.

古文：故不如因而割之，因以为武安功。 
现代文：因此您不如趁势让赵国割让土地讲和，也算替武安君建立一点功劳。 
English: Therefore, you might as well take advantage of the situation to let Zhao cede land to make peace, and also build a little credit for Wu'an.

