古文：达奚武字成兴，代人也。
现代文：达奚武字成兴，是代郡人。
English: Dafeng Wuzi Chengxing is a county resident.

古文：祖眷，魏怀荒镇将。
现代文：祖父达奚眷，是北魏怀荒镇的镇将。
English: His grandfather was a retainer of the Northern Wei Dynasty and a town marshal of Huaiwu Town.

古文：父长，汧城镇将。
现代文：父亲达奚长，是沂城的镇将。
English: His father, Datong Chang, was the town marshal of Handan.

古文：武少倜傥，好驰射，为贺拔岳所知。
现代文：达奚武年轻的时候洒脱不羁，喜欢驰马射箭，被贺拔岳赏识。
English: When he was young, Dabangwu was free and uninhibited. He liked horse riding and archery, which was appreciated by He Baturu.

古文：岳征关右，引为别将，武遂委心事之。
现代文：贺拔岳出征关西，举荐他为别将，他就倾心事奉贺拔岳。
English: Mt. He Batur set out for Kansai. He was recommended as a second-in-command, and he devoted himself to serving Mt. He Batur.

古文：以战功拜羽林监、子都督。
现代文：因有战功，朝廷任命达奚武为羽林监、子都督。
English: Due to his war exploits, the imperial court appointed Dagongwu as the forest inspector and the son of the governor.

古文：及岳为侯莫陈悦所害，武与赵贵收岳尸归平凉，同翊戴太祖。
现代文：直到贺拔岳被侯莫陈悦杀害，达奚武和赵贵收殓贺拔岳的尸体回到平凉，共同辅佐拥戴太祖。
English: Until He Batyue was killed by Hou Mo Chen Yue, Dajinwu and Zhao Gui collected He Batyue's body and returned to Pingliang, jointly assisting Emperor Daizong.

古文：从平悦，除中散大夫、都督，封须昌县伯，邑三百户。
现代文：达奚武跟随太祖平定侯莫陈悦，朝廷授任他为中散大夫、都督，封为须昌县伯，封地三百户。
English: Dabongwu followed the great-grandfather Pingding Hou Mo Chen Yue to the top, and the imperial court appointed him as Zhongshan doctor and governor, and he was appointed as Suchang County magistrate, with a fief of 300 households.

古文：魏孝武入关，授直寝，转大丞相府中兵参军。
现代文：魏孝武帝入关，任命他为直寝，后改任大丞相府中兵参军。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu entered the customs, appointed him as a direct sleeper, and later changed his post to the grand secretary of the prime minister's office to join the army.

古文：大统初，出为东秦州刺史，加散骑常侍，进爵为公。
现代文：大统初年，出任为束秦州刺史，加授散骑常侍，提升爵位为公。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he served as a member of the Qin State History Committee, was awarded the Distinguished Cavalryman, and received a knighthood.

古文：齐神武与窦泰、高敖曹三道来侵，太祖欲并兵击窦泰，诸将多异议，唯武及苏绰与太祖意同，遂擒之。
现代文：齐神武帝和窦泰、高敖曹分三路前来侵袭，太祖想集中兵力攻击实泰，各将领多有不同意见，衹有达奚武和苏绰跟太祖意见相同，终于生擒实泰。
English: Emperor Qishenwu, Dou Tai and Gao Bing Cao came to invade from three directions. Emperor Taizu wanted to concentrate his forces to attack Shitai, but the generals had different opinions. Some generals, such as Daguangwu and Su Qiao, had the same opinion as Emperor Taizu, and finally Emperor Shitai was born.

古文：齐神武乃退。
现代文：齐神武帝于是退兵。
English: Emperor Qishenwu then withdrew from the army.

古文：太祖进图弘农，遣武从两骑觇候动静，武与其候骑遇，即便交战，斩六级，获三人而反。
现代文：太祖继续进兵谋取弘农，派遣达奚武率两骑兵侦察对方的动静，达奚武跟敌军的侦察骑兵相遇，立即就交战，斩敌首六级，俘获三人而回。
English: The great-grandfather continued to go into the army to seek out Hongnong, sending two cavalrymen led by Dagong Wu to scout the movements of the other side. Dagong Wu met with the enemy's scout cavalrymen, immediately engaged in battle, cut off the enemy's head at the sixth level, captured three people and returned.

古文：齐神武趣沙苑，太祖复遣武觇之。
现代文：齐神武帝奔赴沙苑，太祖再派达奚武观察动静。
English: Emperor Qishenwu rushed to Shayuan, and the great-grandfather sent Dabongwu to observe the movement.

古文：武从三骑，皆衣敌人衣服。
现代文：达奚武带领三个骑兵，都穿着敌人衣服。
English: Daguangwu led three horsemen, all dressed in enemy clothes.

古文：至日暮，去营百步，下马潜听，得其军号。
现代文：到傍晚，离敌营一百步，下马偷听，知道他们的军中号令。
English: In the evening, when he was a hundred paces from the enemy's camp, he dismounted and eavesdropped to learn their battle cry.

古文：因上马历营，若警夜者，有不如法者，往往挞之。
现代文：于是上马经过各军营，好像夜间警戒一样，遇到有不遵守法令的士兵，总是鞭打他们。
English: So he rode through the barracks, like a night watchman, and when he met soldiers who did not obey the law, he always whipped them.

古文：具知敌之情状，以告太祖。
现代文：这样，达奚武全都了解敌军的情况，并禀告太祖。
English: In this way, all of them learned about the situation of the enemy army and reported it to the ancestor.

古文：太祖深嘉焉。
现代文：太祖对他大加赞赏。
English: His grandfather was full of praise for him.

古文：遂从破之。
现代文：接着他又跟从太祖打败了齐军。
English: Then he followed his great-grandfather in defeating the Qi army.

古文：除大都督，进爵高阳郡公，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：达奚武被任命为大都督，进封爵位为高阳郡公，又授职车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Dagongwu was appointed as the grand governor, knighted as the governor of Goyang County, and given the posts of general of cavalry and secretary of the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：四年，太祖援洛阳，武率骑一千为前锋。
现代文：大统四年，太祖援救洛阳，达奚武率领一千骑兵作前锋。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, Taizu came to the rescue of Luoyang, and Dabengwu led a thousand cavalry as a forward.

古文：至谷城，与李弼破莫多娄贷文。
现代文：到了谷城，和李弼一起打败了莫多娄贷文。
English: When he arrived in Guicheng, he and Li Yan together defeated Modo Yan Credit.

古文：进至河桥，武又力战，斩其司徒高敖曹。
现代文：进军到河桥，达奚武又努力奋战，斩杀敌军司徒高敖曹。
English: Marching into the river bridge, Dabengwu fought hard and killed the enemy army, Sittu Gao Rong Cao.

古文：迁侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：达奚武升任侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Dagongwu was promoted to the position of chamberlain, cavalry general, and the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：出为北雍州刺史。
现代文：出任北雍州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of North Yongzhou.

古文：复战邙山，时大军不利，齐神武乘胜进至陕。
现代文：后来又在邙山作战，当时大军形势不利，齐神武帝乘胜进军到陕地。
English: Later, he fought in Lushan. At that time, the situation of the large army was unfavorable, and Emperor Qishenwu marched into Shaanxi with victory.

古文：武率兵御之，乃退。
现代文：达奚武率领军队抵挡，齐军才撤退。
English: Dadongwu led the army to resist, and the Qi army retreated.

古文：久之，进位大将军。
现代文：过了很久，达奚武升任大将军。
English: After a long time, Dajinwu was promoted to general.

古文：十七年，诏武率兵三万，经略汉川。
现代文：大统十七年，皇上下韶命令达奚武率领军队三万，筹划谋取汉。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Great Reunification, the Emperor issued an order to Dabi Wu to lead an army of thirty thousand and plan to take Han.

古文：梁将杨贤以武兴降，梁深以白马降，武分兵守其城。
现代文：梁朝将领杨贤献上武兴县归降，梁深献上白马城投降，达奚武分兵把守那些城池。
English: Yang Xian, the general of the Liang Dynasty, offered the surrender of Wuxing County, Liang Sheng offered the surrender of Baima City, and the Darongwu detachment guarded those cities.

古文：梁梁州刺史、宜丰侯萧循固守南郑，武围之数旬，循乃请服，武为解围。
现代文：梁朝梁州刺史、宜丰侯萧循固守南郑，达奚武包围他几十天，萧循才请求降服，达奚武给他解围。
English: Liang Dynasty, Liang State, and Yifeng Hou, Xiao Cun, stubbornly defended Nan Zheng. Dadu Wu encircled him for dozens of days. It was only when Xiao Cun asked for surrender that Dadu Wu relieved him of the siege.

古文：会梁武陵王萧纪遣其将杨干运等将兵万余人救循，循于是更据城不出。
现代文：正好梁朝武陵王萧纪派遣他的将领杨干运等率领军队一万多入救援萧循，萧循这时更据守城池不肯出来。
English: Just at that time, Liang Dynasty's King of Wuling, Xiao Ji, sent his general Yang Gan Yun and other generals to lead more than ten thousand troops to rescue Xiao Xun. At that time, Xiao Xun refused to come out of the castle.

古文：恐援军之至，表里受敌，乃简精骑三千，逆击干运于白马，大破之。干运退走。
现代文：达奚武恐怕敌人援军到来，内外遭受敌方攻击，就挑选精锐骑兵三千，在白马城迎击杨干运，大胜敌军。干运退兵败逃。
English: Fearing the arrival of enemy reinforcements and being attacked by the enemy both at home and abroad, Dadu Wu selected three thousand elite cavalry to meet Yang Gangyun in Baima City and defeated the enemy. Yang Gangyun retreated and fled.

古文：武乃陈蜀军俘级于城下。
现代文：达奚武就把俘获的蜀军人员和所斩的首级排列在城下。
English: Daduangwu arranged the captured Shu army personnel and the decapitated heads under the castle.

古文：循知援军被破，乃降，率所部男女三万口入朝，自剑以北悉平。
现代文：萧循知道援军被打败，才投降，率领所统辖的男女三万人入朝，自剑阁以北全都平定。
English: When Xiao Xun knew that the reinforcements were defeated, he surrendered and led the 30,000 men and women under his command into the imperial court. From Jiange to the north, they were all subdued.

古文：明年，武振旅还京师。
现代文：第二年，达奚武整顿军队班师回京城。
English: In the second year, the Dabou rectification army team returned to Beijing.

古文：朝议初欲以武为柱国，武谓人曰： 我作柱国，不应在元子孝前。 固辞不受。
现代文：朝廷最初想选任达奚武为柱国，达奚武对人说： 我担任柱国，不应该在元子孝之前。 坚决推辞不肯接受。
English: At first, the imperial court wanted to appoint Dajinwu as a pillar state, but Dajinwu said to the people, "I should not serve as a pillar state before Mototsukotaka.

古文：以大将军出镇玉壁。
现代文：后来以大将军的身份外出镇守玉壁。
English: Later, he went out as a general to guard the town of Tamakabe.

古文：武乃量地形胜，立乐昌、胡营、新城三防。
现代文：达奚武就衡量当地形势险要，设立乐昌、胡营和新城三处防区。
English: Dabangwu measured the urgency of the local situation and set up three defense zones in Lechang, Huying and Xincheng.

古文：齐将高苟子以千骑攻新城，武邀击之，悉虏其众。
现代文：齐将高苟子率领一千骑兵进攻新城，达奚武半路迎击，全部俘获敌军将士。
English: Qi sent Gaogangzi to lead a thousand cavalry to attack the new city, and Daduwu counterattacked halfway, capturing all the enemy soldiers.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜柱国、大司寇。
现代文：茎闵帝即位，任命达奚武为柱国、大司寇。
English: Emperor Juxuan ascended to the throne and appointed Daguangwu as a pillar state and grand secretary.

古文：齐北豫州刺史司马消难举州来附，诏武与杨忠迎消难以归。
现代文：齐朝北豫州刺史司马消难率全州前来归附，皇上下诏命令达奚武和杨忠前去迎接司马消难回来。
English: The Qidong dynasty in northern Yuzhou sent Sima Qishan to lead the whole state to annexation, and the emperor ordered Dadu Wu and Yang Zhong to go to welcome Sima Qishan back.

古文：武成初，转大宗伯，进封郑国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，改任大宗伯，进封爵位为郑国公，封地万户。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was reappointed as the grand patriarch and given the title of Zheng Guogong, increasing the number of households in the fief.

古文：齐将斛律敦侵汾、绛，武以万骑御之，敦退。
现代文：齐将斛律敦入侵汾、绛两地，达奚武率领一万骑兵抵挡齐军，斛律敦退兵。
English: Qi sent Pei Lu-tung to invade the two provinces of Ya and Shun. Dajin Wu led ten thousand cavalry to resist the Qi army, and Pei Lu-tung retreated.

古文：武筑柏壁城，留开府权严、薛羽生守之。
现代文：达奚武修筑柏壁城，留下开府权严、薛羽生把守。
English: Daguangwu rebuilt the city with cypress walls, leaving the power of the capital strictly in the hands of Xue Yusheng.

古文：保定三年，迁太保。
现代文：保定三年，达奚武升任太保。
English: In the third year of Baoding, Dabongwu was promoted to Taibo.

古文：其年，大军东伐。
现代文：当年，大军束征。
English: That year, a large army was conscripted.

古文：随公杨忠引突厥自北道，武以三万骑自东道，期会晋阳。
现代文：随公杨忠带领突厥从北路，达奚武率领三万骑兵从东路进军，约定时间会合晋阳。
English: With Gong Yang Zhong leading the Turks from the North Road, and Dagongwu leading 30,000 cavalrymen from the East Road, they marched into Jinyang at the appointed time.

古文：武至平阳，后期不进，而忠已还，武尚未知。
现代文：达奚武到达平阳，超过了约定时间而不再进军，杨忠已经回师，但达奚武还不知道。
English: Dajinwu arrived in Pingyang, but he did not march into the city after the agreed time. Yang Zhong had already returned to his division, but Dajinwu did not know it yet.

古文：齐将斛律明月遗武书曰： 鸿鹤已翔于寥廓，罗者犹视于沮泽也。 武览书，乃班师。
现代文：齐将斛律明月送信给达奚武说： 鸿雁野鹤已经在天空飞翔，摆开罗网捕鸟的人还在看着沼泽。 达奚武看了信，就带领军队回去了。
English: Qi sent Bailu Mingyue to Dahongwu, saying: "The wild goose and the wild crane are already flying in the sky, and the bird catcher with the Cairo net is still looking at the swamp. Dahongwu read the letter and led the army back.

古文：出为同州刺史。
现代文：后来出任同州刺史。
English: Later, the imperial court was transferred to the same state.

古文：明年，从晋公护东伐。
现代文：第二年，跟从晋公宇文护束征。
English: In the second year, he followed Jin Gong to recruit Umenosuke.

古文：时尉迟迥围洛阳，为敌所败。
现代文：当时尉迟迥包围洛阳，被敌军打败。
English: At that time, the army besieged Luoyang and was defeated by the enemy.

古文：武与齐王宪于邙山御之。
现代文：达奚武和齐王宇文宪在邙山抵抗。
English: Daguangwu and Qi King Yuwenxian resisted in Lushan.

古文：至夜，收军。
现代文：到晚上，双方收兵。
English: By nightfall, both sides had withdrawn.

古文：宪欲待明更战，武欲还，固争未决。
现代文：宇文宪想等天亮再战，达奚武想回师，两人固执己见而争论不休，不能决定。
English: Yu Wenxian wanted to wait until dawn to fight again, Dajinwu wanted to return to the division, the two men were stubborn and argued endlessly, unable to decide.

古文：武曰： 洛阳军散，人情骇动。
现代文：达奚武说： 洛阳军队涣散，人心惊骇。
English: Dadongwu said, "Luoyang's army was scattered, and people were shocked.

古文：若不因夜速还，明日欲归不得。
现代文：如果不趁着夜色赶快回去，明天再想回去也不行了。
English: If you don't hurry back before nightfall, you won't be able to go back tomorrow.

古文：武在军旅久矣，备见形势。
现代文：我在军中已很久了，完全能预见事情发展的状况。
English: I have been in the army for a long time and I can fully foresee how things will develop.

古文：大王少年未经事，岂可将数营士众，一旦弃之乎。 宪从之，遂全军而返。
现代文：大王年轻，没有经历过大事，哪能把几营士兵，一下子就扔掉呢? 宇文宪听从了他的话，于是全军返回。
English: The great king was young and had not experienced any major events, so how could he throw away several battalions of soldiers at once? Uwen Hsien obeyed his words, and the whole army returned.

古文：天和三年，转太傅。
现代文：天和三年，达奚武改任太傅。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to taifu.

古文：武贱时，奢侈好华饰。
现代文：达奚武地位低下的时候，生活奢侈，喜欢华丽的饰物。
English: When his military status was low, he lived a luxurious life and loved ornate ornaments.

古文：及居重位，不持威仪，行常单马，左右止一两人而已。
现代文：身居高位以后，却不再讲究威仪，出行时常单人匹马，随从也祇是一两人罢了。
English: After holding a high position, they no longer care about dignity, often travel alone, and their entourage is just one or two people.

古文：外门不施戟,恒昼掩一扉。
现代文：外门不设置戈戟仪仗，常常在白天虚掩一门扇。
English: The outer door is not decorated with a gable, and is often left open during the day.

古文：或谓武曰： 公位冠群后，功名盖世，出入仪卫，须称具瞻，何轻率若是？ 武曰： 子之言，非吾心也。
现代文：有人对达奚武说： 您位居众官之首，功名盖世，出入的仪仗卫士，必须跟宰辅重臣的地位相称，为何却如此轻率? 达奚武说： 你所说的话，并非我的心曲。
English: Some people said to Dahongwu: You are at the head of all officials, your achievements are world-renowned, and the guards of honor who enter and leave must be commensurate with the status of the chief minister, why are you so imprudent? Dahongwu said: What you said is not my heart.

古文：吾在布衣，岂望富贵，不可顿忘畴昔。
现代文：我当初还是平民的时候，哪敢奢望富贵，现在可不能立刻忘掉从前的日子。
English: When I was a commoner, I didn't dare to hope for riches, but now I can't immediately forget the old days.

古文：且天下未平，国恩未报，安可过事威容乎。 言者惭而退。
现代文：况且天下没有平定，国家的恩典没有报答，哪能过分树立威严的仪容。 说话的人羞惭地退下。
English: Moreover, since there is no peace in the world, and the grace of the state has not been repaid, how can one display too much dignity?

古文：武之在同州也，时属天旱，高祖敕武祀华岳，岳庙旧在山下，常所祷祈。
现代文：达奚武在同州的时候，恰巧遇上天旱，高祖命令他祭祀华岳，岳庙原在山下，是人们通常祈祷的地方。
English: When Dagongwu was in Tongzhou, he happened to encounter a drought. Gao Zu ordered him to offer sacrifices to Mount Hua. The mountain temple was originally at the bottom of the mountain and was a place where people usually prayed.

古文：武谓僚属曰： 吾备位三公，不能燮理阴阳，遂使盛农之月，久绝甘雨，天子劳心，百姓惶惧。
现代文：达奚武对下属官员说： 我空占三公之位，不能调理阴阳，终使农事繁忙的日子，久无甘雨，天子费心，百姓惶恐。
English: Daguangwu said to the subordinate officials: I occupy the position of the three kings in the sky, can not adjust the yin and yang, and finally make the days of agricultural work busy, there is no rain for a long time, the son of heaven is worried, and the people are frightened.

古文：忝寄既重，忧责实深。
现代文：愧对朝廷寄予的厚望，深知责任重大。
English: I am ashamed of the high hopes I placed in the Imperial Court, and I am well aware of the great responsibility.

古文：不可同于众人，在常祀之所，必须登峰展诚，寻其灵奥。 岳既高峻，千仞壁立，岩路崄绝，人迹罕通。
现代文：因此不能跟众人一样，在通常祭祀的地方，而必须登上峰顶，展示诚，探寻灵妙。 山岳高大险峻，千仞高的山崖像墙壁一样陡立，山路险要非常，人迹罕至。
English: Therefore, it is not possible to go to the usual places of worship like everyone else, but it is necessary to climb to the peak, show sincerity, and explore ingenuity.The mountains are tall and precipitous, and the thousand-meter-high cliffs are as steep as walls.The mountain roads are very dangerous, and there are few trails.

古文：武年踰六十，唯将数人，攀藤援枝，然后得上。
现代文：达奚武年过六十，衹带几人，攀藤拉枝，然后才登上。
English: He was in his sixties at the time of his death, and he took a few people with him to climb the vine and pull the branches, and then he climbed up.

古文：于是稽首祈请，陈百姓恳诚。
现代文：于是叩头祈祷，陈述百姓恳切的诚意。
English: So they prostrated themselves and prayed, declaring the earnest sincerity of the people.

古文：晚不得还，即于岳上藉草而宿。
现代文：当时天色已晚，不能回去，就在山上垫草而睡。
English: Unable to descend the mountain at night, they slept on the grass at the top of the mountain.

古文：梦见一白衣人来，执武手曰： 快辛苦，甚相嘉尚。 武遂惊觉，益用祗肃。
现代文：达奚武梦见一个白衣人前来，握着他的手说： 好辛劳，很值得嘉奖。 达奚武就惊醒了，因此更加恭敬。
English: In his dream, Dabangwu saw a man in a white robe come to him, shake his hand and say, "What hard work you have done, you deserve a reward." Dabangwu was startled and became even more respectful.

古文：至旦，云雾四起，俄而澍雨，远近沾洽。
现代文：到天亮，云雾四起，不久就下起及时雨，远近土地都湿润了。
English: In the early morning, clouds and fog rose in the mountains, and heavy rain soon fell. People far and near were drenched.

古文：高祖闻之,玺书劳武曰： 公年尊德重，弼谐朕躬。
现代文：高祖听说这件事，下玺书慰劳达奚武说： 您年高德重，辅佐寡人。
English: When Gaozu heard about this, he wrote a letter of condolence to Laoda Xingwu, saying, "You are a man of great virtue, and you have few assistants.

古文：比以阴阳愆序，时雨不降，命公求祈，止言庙所。
现代文：近因阴阳错乱失序，时雨不降，寡人命令您祈求，衹说在岳庙便可。
English: Recently, due to the disorder of yin and yang, when the rain does not fall, some people order you to pray, and say that you can pray at the Yue Temple.

古文：不谓公不惮危险，遂乃远陟高峰。
现代文：不料您不惧危险，竟然远登高峰。
English: But you're not afraid of danger, and you've climbed to the top of the mountain.

古文：但神道聪明，无幽不烛，感公至诚，甘泽斯应。
现代文：不过神灵聪明，幽暗之处无不照亮，上天深感您的诚意，随即降下甘雨。
English: However, the gods are clever, the dark places are all illuminated, the heavens are deeply moved by your sincerity, and then the sweet rain falls.

古文：闻之嘉赏，无忘于怀。
现代文：寡人听说这种情况深表嘉赏，心中永志不忘。
English: Many people have heard that this situation is deeply appreciated and will never forget it.

古文：今赐公杂彩百疋，公其善思嘉猷，匡朕不逮。
现代文：现赐您各色绸缎一百匹，望您能更好地考虑治国良谋，辅助寡人力不能及之处。
English: Now I am giving you one hundred silk brocades of all colors, hoping that you can better consider the good policy of governing the country and assist where there is not enough manpower.

古文：念坐而论道之义，勿复更烦筋力也。 武性贪吝，其为大司寇也，在库有万钉金带，当时宝之，武因入库，乃取以归。
现代文：念及坐而论道之义，不再劳烦您的体力了。 达奚武品性贪婪吝啬，他任大司寇的时候，在仓库里有万钉金带，当时人们很珍爱它，达奚武就走进仓库，竟取回家。
English: If you think about sitting and talking about the righteousness of the way, it will no longer bother your physical strength. Dabangwu is greedy and stingy. When he was the chief secretary, there was a gold belt with thousands of nails in the warehouse. At that time, people treasured it. Dabangwu went into the warehouse and took it home.

古文：主者白晋公护，以武勋，不彰其过，因而赐之。
现代文：主管的人禀告晋公宇文护，因为达奚武有功劳，就不揭露他的过错，顺势把金带赐给他。
English: The person in charge accused Jin Gong Yu Wengu, because Dajinwu had merit, he would not reveal his fault, and gave him the gold belt.

古文：时论深鄙焉。
现代文：当时的舆论都很看不起他。
English: Public opinion at the time looked down on him.

古文：五年十月，薨，年六十七。
现代文：天和五年十月，达奚武去世，终年六十七岁。
English: On October 5th, Dajinwu passed away at the age of 67.

古文：赠太傅、十五州诸军事、同州刺史。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太傅、十五州诸军事、同州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Taifu, military commander of the 15 prefectures, and prefect of the same prefecture.

古文：谥曰桓。
现代文：谧号叫桓。
English: 号桓.

古文：子震嗣。
现代文：他的儿子达奚震继承了爵位。
English: His son, Daguizhen, inherited the title.

古文：震字猛略。
现代文：达奚震字猛略。
English: The word "shock" was abruptly omitted.

古文：少骁勇，便骑射，走及奔马，膂力过人。
现代文：年轻时十分勇猛，熟悉骑马射箭，跑起来能追上奔马，体力超过一般人。
English: When he was young, he was very brave. He was familiar with horse riding and archery. When he ran, he could catch up with a galloping horse. His physical strength exceeded that of the average person.

古文：大统初，起家员外散骑常侍。
现代文：大统初年，从家中被征召出来，授任员外散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was called out of his home and assigned to be a non-commissioned officer.

古文：太祖尝于渭北校猎，时有兔过太祖前，震与诸将竞射之，马倒而坠，震足不倾踬，因步走射之，一发中兔。
现代文：太祖曾经在渭水北岸打猎，当时有兔子从太祖面前跑过，达奚震和各将领竞相射箭，突然，达奚震骑的马仆倒，使他掉下来，但他并没有摔倒，接着就边跑边射，一箭射中兔子。
English: The great-grandfather used to hunt on the north shore of Surabaya. At that time, a rabbit ran in front of the great-grandfather. Dag Ying Zhen and the generals competed in archery. Suddenly, Dag Ying Zhen's horse fell, causing him to fall, but he did not fall, and then he ran and shot, hitting the rabbit with an arrow.

古文：顾马纔起,遂回身腾上。
现代文：他回头看见马刚起来，就回身跳上马背。
English: When he looked back, he saw that the horse had just stood up, so he turned around and jumped on its back.

古文：太祖喜曰： 非此父不生此子！ 
现代文：太祖高兴地说： 不是这样的父亲就不会生这样的儿子! 
English: The great-grandfather said happily: "A father like that wouldn't have given birth to a son like that!"

古文：赐武杂彩一百段。
现代文：就赐给达奚武各色绸缎一百段。
English: and gave him a hundred pieces of silk of all kinds.

古文：十六年，封昌邑县公，一千户。
现代文：大统十六年，封爵昌邑县公，封地一千户。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was made a peer of Changyi County, and his fiefdom grew to 1,000 households.

古文：累迁抚军将军、银青光禄大夫、通直散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：后来多次升迁任抚军将军、银青光禄大夫、通直散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: Later, he was promoted several times to the position of general of the army, doctor of the silver Qing Guanglu, attendant of the horseback riding, general of the chariot riding, the three divisions of the ceremony, and the attendant of the horseback riding.

古文：世宗初，拜仪同、右中大夫，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，改封普宁县公。
现代文：世宗初年，授任仪同、司右中大夫，加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，后改封普宁县公。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was awarded the title of Iitong, the title of Siyu Zhongdafu, as well as the title of General of Horse Cavalry, the title of Kaifu Iitong and the title of Sisiyu, and later he was appointed the governor of Puning County.

古文：武初，进爵广平郡公，除华州刺史。
现代文：武成初年，进封爵位为广平郡公，授任华州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was awarded the title of Guangping County, and was appointed as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：震虽生自膏腴，少习武艺，然导民训俗，颇有治方。
现代文：达奚震虽然生自富贵人家，年轻时练习武艺，然而能引导民众教化百姓，很有治国的方略。
English: Although he was born into a rich and noble family and practiced martial arts when he was young, he was able to guide the people and enlighten the people, which is a good strategy for governing the country.

古文：秩满还朝，为百姓所恋。
现代文：任职期满返回朝廷，为百姓所留恋。
English: At the end of his term of office, he returned to the imperial court, leaving a lasting impression on the people.

古文：保定四年，大军东讨，诸将皆奔退，震与敌交战，军遂独全。
现代文：保定四年，大军束征，各将领都败逃撤退，达奚震和敌人交战，惟独他的军队最终能保全。
English: Baoding for four years, the great army conscripted, the generals were defeated, fled and retreated, Dafu Zhen fought with the enemy, but only his army could ultimately be preserved.

古文：天和元年，进位大将军，率众征稽胡，破之。
现代文：天和元年，升任大将军，率领兵众征讨稽胡，打败他们。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the rank of general, and led the soldiers to enlist the Qihu and defeat them.

古文：六年，拜柱国。
现代文：天和六年，授任柱国。
English: Ten days and six years, awarded the pillar country.

古文：建德初，袭爵郑国公，出为金州总管、十一州九防诸军事、金州刺史。
现代文：建德初年，承袭封爵为郑国公，出任金州总管、十一州九防诸军事、金州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he inherited the title of Zheng Guogong, and served as the general manager of Jinzhou, the military of the eleven states and nine defense zones, and the historian of Jinzhou.

古文：四年，从高祖东伐，为前三军总管。
现代文：建德四年，跟随高祖东征，担任前三军总管。
English: Jiande four years, followed Gao Zu eastward, served as the former commander of the three armies.

古文：五年，又从东伐，率步骑一万守统军川，攻克义宁、乌苏二镇，破并州。
现代文：建德五年，又跟从束征，率领步兵骑兵一万人把守统军川，攻下义宁、乌苏两镇，打败了并州敌军。
English: In Jiande's fifth year, he followed Sokzheng and led 10,000 infantry and cavalry to defend the United Army River, captured Yining and Wusu towns, and defeated the enemy army in Anhui Province.

古文：进位上柱国。
现代文：官位提升为上柱国。
English: The official rank was raised to Shangzhuang.

古文：仍从平邺，赐妾二人、女乐一部及珍玩等，拜大宗伯。
现代文：接着又平定邺地，朝廷赐给他妾两人、歌舞伎一班以及珍贵的玩赏物等东西，授任大宗伯。
English: Next, he pacified the country, and the imperial court gave him two concubines, a Kabuki troupe, and precious playthings, and so on, and appointed him grand patriarch.

古文：震父尝为此职，时论荣之。
现代文：达奚震的父亲曾经担任这职务，为当时的舆论所称誉。
English: His father once held this position and was praised by the public opinion at that time.

古文：宣政中，出为原州总管、三州二镇诸军事、原州刺史。
现代文：宣政年间，出任原州总管、三州二镇诸军事、原州刺史。
English: During the years of the proclamation of the Constitution, he served as the director of Wonju, the military commander of the three states and two towns, and the historian of Wonju.

古文：寻罢归。
现代文：不久被免职回家。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties and sent home.

古文：隋开皇初，薨于家。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，达奚震在家中去世。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Gaozhen died at home.

古文：震弟惎，车骑将军、渭南县子。
现代文：达奚震的弟弟达奚惹，曾任车骑将军，封爵渭南县子。
English: The younger brother of Daju Zhen, Daju Jia, was once a cavalry general, and was knighted as the highest-ranking person in Yinan County.

古文：大象末，为益州刺史，与王谦据蜀起兵。寻败，被诛。
现代文：大象末年，任益州刺史，和王谦盘据蜀地起兵，不久兵败被杀。
English: In the last years of the elephant, Ren Yizhou stabbed history, and Wang Qianpan raised an army according to Shu, and was soon defeated and killed.

古文：侯莫陈顺，太保、梁国公崇之兄也。
现代文：侯莫陈顺是太保、梁国公侯莫陈崇的哥哥。
English: Hou Mo Chen Shun was the elder brother of Mo Chen Chong, the Prince of Liang Province.

古文：少豪侠，有志度。
现代文：年轻的时候性情豪爽有义气，气度不凡。
English: When he was young, he had a great disposition, a strong sense of loyalty, and an extraordinary demeanor.

古文：初事尔朱荣为统军，后从贺拔胜镇井陉。
现代文：最初侍奉尔朱荣任统军，后来跟随贺拔胜镇守井陉。
English: At first, he served Er Zhu Rong as the commander of the unified army, and later he followed He Baxian as the commander of the town.

古文：武泰初，讨葛荣，平邢杲，征韩娄，皆有功。
现代文：武泰初年，讨伐葛荣，平定邢呆，出征韩娄，都有战功。
English: In the first year of Wu Tai, he fought against Ge Rong, pacified Diao Ding, and went to fight in the Korean War, all of which are war exploits.

古文：拜轻车将军、羽林监。
现代文：朝廷授任轻车将军、羽林监。
English: He was awarded the title of General of Light Vehicles and Inspector of Forestry by the Imperial Court.

古文：又从破元颢，进宁朔将军、越骑校尉。
现代文：接着又打败元颢，升任宁朔将军、越骑校尉。
English: He then defeated Yuan Shao and was promoted to Ningshuo general and Yue cavalry captain.

古文：普泰元年，除持节、征西将军，封木门县子，邑三百户。
现代文：普泰元年，授任持节、征西将军，封号木门县子，封地三百户。
English: In the first year of Putai, he was awarded the title of Jisai, the general of the Western Conquest, and was given the title of the son of Kimen County, with a fiefdom of 300 households.

古文：寻加散骑常侍、千牛备身、卫将军、合内大都督。
现代文：不久加授散骑常侍、千牛备身、卫将军、合内大都督。
English: He was soon given the titles of Zanzai-no-zenshi, Chibushi-no-boshi, Wei-no-shogun, and Heuchi-no-daitoku.

古文：从魏孝武入关。
现代文：侯莫陈顺跟从魏孝武帝进关。
English: Hou Mo Chen Shun followed Emperor Wei Xiaowu into the pass.

古文：顺与太祖同里闬，素相友善，且其弟崇先在关中，太祖见之甚欢。乃进爵彭城郡公，邑一千户。
现代文：他和太祖同乡，一向友好，而且他的弟弟侯莫陈崇先在关中，太祖看见他很高兴，就提升爵位为彭城郡公，封地一千户。
English: He and his great-grandfather were from the same village and had always been friendly. Moreover, his younger brother Hou Mo Chen Chongxian was in Guanzhong. Seeing that he was happy, the great-grandfather raised his title to Pengcheng County Governor, with a fief of one thousand households.

古文：大统元年，拜卫尉卿，授仪同三司。
现代文：大统元年，拜授卫尉卿，任仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was awarded the title of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards.

古文：及梁仚定围逼河州，以顺为大都督，与赵贵讨破之，即行河州事。
现代文：到了梁仑定围逼河州的时候，朝廷任命侯莫陈顺为大都督，和趟贵前去讨伐并打败他，即兼摄河州的职务。
English: When Liang Lunding besieged and besieged Hezhou, the imperial court appointed Hou Mo Chen Shun as the great governor, and he went to fight and defeat him, that is, he also served as the governor of Hezhou.

古文：后从太祖破沙苑，以功增邑千户。
现代文：后来跟随太祖攻破沙苑，因为战功增加封地一千户。
English: Later, he followed his great-great-grandfather in conquering Shayuan, and because of his war exploits, his fief increased by a thousand households.

古文：四年，魏文帝东讨，与太尉王盟、仆射周惠达等留镇长安。
现代文：大统四年，魏文帝柬征，侯莫陈顺和太尉王盟、仆射周惠达等人留守垦台。
English: In the fourth year of the Great Reunification, Wei Wen, Emperor Kam Rong, Hou Mo, Chen Shun, Lieutenant Wang Meng, Footman Zhou Huida and others stayed in Xingtai.

古文：时赵青雀反，盟及惠达奉魏太子出次渭北。
现代文：当时赵直垄谋反，王盟和赵惠达扶助魏太子出走，驻扎在渭北。
English: At that time, Zhao Zhirong plotted a rebellion, and Wang Meng and Zhao Huida helped Wei Taishi to escape and were stationed in the north of Shandong.

古文：顺于渭桥与贼战，频破之，贼不敢出。
现代文：侯莫陈顺在渭桥和贼军作战，多次打败他们，贼军不敢出战。
English: Hou Mo Chen Shun fought against the Kleptocratic Army in Fenqiao and defeated them many times. The Kleptocratic Army did not dare to go to war.

古文：魏文帝还，亲执顺手曰： 渭桥之战，卿有殊力。 
现代文：魏文帝回来，亲自握着侯莫陈顺的手说： 渭桥之战，您有突出的功劳。 
English: When Emperor Weiwen returned, he personally shook the hand of Hou Mo Chen Shun and said, "You have made outstanding contributions in the Battle of Lianqiao.

古文：便解所服金镂玉梁带赐之。
现代文：文帝就解下所佩金镂玉梁带赐给他。
English: Emperor Wen gave him a gold brooch with a jade strap.

古文：南岐州氐苻安寿自号太白王，攻破武都，州郡骚动。
现代文：南岐州氐人苻安寿自称太白王，攻下武都，州郡都不安宁。
English: Nanqizhou's 人安寿 claimed to be the white king, captured Wudu, and disturbed the peace of the state and county.

古文：复以顺为大都督，往讨之。
现代文：朝廷再任侯莫陈顺为大都督，前往征讨。
English: The imperial court reappointed Hou Mo Chen Shun as the grand governor and went to collect.

古文：而贼屯兵要险，军不得进。
现代文：贼军驻扎在险要的地方，朝廷大军不能前进。
English: The rebel army was stationed in a critical place, and the imperial army could not advance.

古文：顺乃设反间，离其腹心；立信赏，诱其徒属。
现代文：侯莫陈顺就设下反问计，离间苻安寿的亲信；立下信守诺言的赏赐，引诱他的部下。
English: Hou Mo Chen Shun set up a counter-questioning scheme to alienate the close friends of Yan Anshou; set up a reward for keeping promises, and lured his subordinates.

古文：安寿知势穷迫，遂率部落一千家，赴军款附。
现代文：苻安寿知道形势窘迫，就带领部落一千家，投奔朝廷大军诚心归附。
English: Knowing that the situation was dire, Gong Anshou led a thousand clans to join the imperial army.

古文：时顺弟崇又封彭城郡公，封顺河间郡公。
现代文：当时侯莫陈顺的弟弟侯莫陈崇又封为彭城郡公，于是封侯莫陈顺为河间郡公。
English: At that time, Hou Mo Chen Shun's younger brother, Hou Mo Chen Chong, was also made the Pengcheng County magistrate. Therefore, Hou Mo Chen Shun was made the Hema County magistrate.

古文：明年，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、行西夏州事、安平郡公。
现代文：第二年，加任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、兼代西夏州的职务，封安平郡公。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the commander of the cavalry, the third secretary of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees, and the governor of Anping County.

古文：十六年，拜大将军，出为荆州总管、山南道五十二州诸军事、荆州刺史。
现代文：大统十六年，拜授大将军，外任为荆州总管、山南道五十二州诸军事、荆州刺史。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was awarded the title of general, and was appointed as the chief administrator of Jingzhou, the military of the 52 states of Shannan Province, and the chief historian of Jingzhou.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜少师，进位柱国。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，拜授少师，官位进升柱国。
English: Emperor Xiaoyan ascended to the throne, conferred the title of Junior Teacher, and was promoted to the highest official rank in the pillar country.

古文：其年薨。
现代文：那一年，侯莫陈顺去世。
English: That year, Hou Mo Chen Shun passed away.

古文：豆卢宁字永安，昌黎徒何人。
现代文：亘卢宁字永安，昌黎徒何人。
English: How many people are there in Wawlooning and Yongan, and how many in Changli?

古文：其先本姓慕容氏，前燕之支庶也。
现代文：他的祖先本来姓摹容，是前燕的旁支。
English: His ancestor's family name was originally Zhaorong, which was a branch of Zengyan.

古文：高祖胜，以燕。
现代文：高祖慕容胜，在燕地。
English: Gao Zu Murong Sheng, in Yan Di.

古文：皇始初，归魏，授长乐郡守，赐姓豆卢氏，或云避难改焉。
现代文：因在皇始初年归顺北魏，任艮乐郡守，皇上赐姓亘卢，有人则说是因避难而改姓的。
English: Because he surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty in the first year of the reign of the emperor, he was appointed as the county governor of Guile County, and the emperor gave him the surname of Walu. Some people said that he changed his surname because of refuge.

古文：父长，柔玄镇将，有威重，见称于时。
现代文：父亲豆卢匡，是苤直军镇的镇将，有威严，被时人称颂。
English: His father, Doulu Kuang, was the town marshal of Xizhi Military Town. He was dignified and was praised by the people of the time.

古文：武成初，以宁着勋，追赠柱国大将军、少保、涪陵郡公。
现代文：亘递初年，因为豆卢宁显著的功勋，朝廷追赠豆卢长为柱国大将军、少保、涪陵郡公。
English: In the first year of Watanabe's reign, the Imperial Court posthumously awarded the title of General of the Pillar of State, Junior Protector, and Governor of Fuling County to Doushuning because of his outstanding achievements.

古文：宁少骁果，有志气，身长八尺，美容仪，善骑射。
现代文：豆卢宁年轻时勇猛果敢，有志气，身高八尺，容貌俊美，擅长骑马射箭。
English: When he was young, Dou Luning was brave and courageous, ambitious, eight feet tall, handsome, and good at riding and archery.

古文：永安中，以别将随尔朱天光入关，加授都督。
现代文：永安年间，凭藉别将的身份跟随尔朱天光入关，加任都督。
English: During the Yongan era, he followed Er Zhu Tianguang into the customs by virtue of his status as a general, and was appointed governor.

古文：又以破万俟丑奴功，赐爵灵寿县男。
现代文：又因为打败万俟丑奴的功劳，赐给爵位灵寿县男。
English: In addition, because of the merit of defeating Manju Ugly Slave, a peerage was given to a man from Lingshou County.

古文：尝与梁仚定遇于平凉川，相与肄射。
现代文：他曾经跟梁仑定在芒速儿相遇，两人一起练习射箭。
English: He once met Liang Lunding in Manzhouli, and the two practiced archery together.

古文：乃于百步悬莎草以射之，七发五中。
现代文：亘卢宁就在百步之外悬挂莎草向它射去，一共射出七箭，中了五箭。
English: Wan Luning shot at it from a hundred paces away with a hanging sedge. He shot a total of seven arrows and hit five arrows.

古文：定服其能，赠遗甚厚。
现代文：梁仑定佩服他的才能，赠送给他丰厚的财物。
English: Liang Lunding admired his talent and gave him rich gifts.

古文：天光败后，侯莫陈悦反，太祖讨悦，宁与李弼率众归太祖。
现代文：尔朱天光战败后，侯莫陈坦谋反，越巳征讨侯莫陈悦，亘卢宁和奎迩率领众人归顺左担。
English: After the defeat of Zhu Tianguang, Hou Mochentan plotted a rebellion, and Hou Mochentan Yue led the people to surrender to the left.

古文：魏孝武西迁，以奉迎勋，封河阳县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，以奉迎之功，封豆卢宁为河脚，封地五百户。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west and, thanks to Feng Ying's efforts, the fief of Dou Luning became the foothills of the river, with 500 households in the fief.

古文：大统元年，除前将军，进爵为侯，增邑三百户。
现代文：大统元年，授任前将军，提升爵位为侯，增加封地三百户。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as a former general, promoted to the peerage as a marquis, and increased the number of fiefs by 300.

古文：迁显州刺史、显州大中正。
现代文：后升任显州刺史、题业大中正。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Henzhou chief historian, and became the head of the Department of History at the university.

古文：寻拜抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，进爵为公，增邑五百户。
现代文：不久授任抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，提升爵位为公，增加封地五百户。
English: He was soon appointed as the general of the army and the doctor of silver and light, promoted to the nobility, and his fief increased to 500 households.

古文：授镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：授任镇束将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of General Zhenzuk and Doctor Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：从太祖擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，除武卫大将军，兼大都督。
现代文：豆卢宁跟随太祖生擒窦壶，光复呈递，攻破主呸，朝廷又授任他为武卫大将军，兼任大都督。
English: Dou Luning followed his great-great-grandfather in producing the jug, Guang Fu presented it, and broke the main jar. The imperial court also appointed him as the Grand Marshal of the Imperial Guard, and concurrently as the Grand Governor.

古文：寻进车骑大将军、仪同三司，增邑八百户。
现代文：不久升任车骑大将军、仪同三司，增加封地八百户。
English: He was soon promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonial, and his fief increased to 800 households.

古文：拜北华州刺史，在州未几，以廉平著称。加散骑常侍。
现代文：又拜任北华州刺史，在北华州任职没多久，就以清廉公平著称，又加任散骑常侍。
English: He was also appointed to the post of North China State Historian, and after serving in North China State for a short time, he was known for his integrity and fairness, and he was also appointed as a strolling equerry.

古文：七年，从于谨破稽胡帅刘平伏于上郡。
现代文：大统七年，跟从于谨在上郡打败了稽胡统帅刘平伏。
English: In the seventh year of the Great Reunification, Liu Pingfu, who followed Yu Zhen, defeated Ji Hu, the commander-in-chief, in Shang County.

古文：及梁仚定反，以宁为军司，监陇右诸军事。
现代文：到梁仑定谋反的时候，朝廷任命亘卢空为军司，监察胧右诸军事。
English: When Liang Lun decided to rebel, the imperial court appointed Wang Lukuo as the military commander to supervise the military affairs.

古文：贼平，进位侍中、使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：贼军叛乱平定以后，他的官位提升为侍中、使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: After the rebellion of the Kleptocratic Army was suppressed, his official rank was promoted to attendant, envoy, cavalry general, Kaifu ceremony and three divisions.

古文：九年，从太祖迎高仲密，与东魏战于邙山，迁左卫将军，进爵范阳郡公，增邑四百户。
现代文：大统九年，跟从太祖往迎高仲密，跟塞垫在坐山作战，又升任左卫将军，提升爵位为范阳郡公，增加封地四百户。
English: In the ninth year of the Great Reunification, he followed his great-great-grandfather to Yinggao Zhongmi, fought with Jie Mat in Zhishan, and was promoted to General of the Left Division, promoted to the peerage of Fanyang County, and increased the fief by 400 households.

古文：十六年，拜大将军。
现代文：大统十六年，拜授大将军。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court awarded him the rank of general.

古文：羌帅傍乞铁及郑五丑等反叛，宁率众讨平之。
现代文：羌入主帅傍乞铁忽和郑五丑等人反叛，亘卢宁率领众将前往讨伐，平定了叛乱。
English: Wai Luning led the crowd to go on a crusade and quelled the rebellion.

古文：魏恭帝二年，改封武阳郡公，迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：魏苤童二年，改封为武阳郡公，升任尚书右仆射。
English: In the second year of Wei Xing Tong, he was given the title of Wuyang County official, and was promoted to the post of Shangshu right-hand man.

古文：梁将王琳遣其将侯方儿、潘纯陀寇江陵，宁与蔡佑、郑永等讨之，方儿等遁走。
现代文：銮朝将领王琳派遣他的部将侯方儿、潘纯堕侵犯辽堕，亘卢空和基茧、塑丞等人征讨，堡左旦等人逃跑。
English: Wang Lin, the general of the Han Dynasty, sent his subordinates Hou Fang'er and Pan Chunpiao to invade Liaopiao, while Wu Lukuo, Ji Yao and Pu Zhi Rong and others went to fight, and Bao Zadan and others fled.

古文：三年，武兴氐及固氐魏大王等，相应反叛，宁复讨平之。
现代文：茎壶三年，亘退的压人和里道的压人魏大王等人互相呼应，合谋反叛，豆卢宁再去征讨，平息了叛乱。
English: For three years, the retreating oppressors and the oppressors of the Li Dao, such as Wei Da Wang, echoed each other and conspired to rebel. Zhu Luning went to fight again and quelled the rebellion.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，授柱国大将军。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，授任豆卢宁为柱国大将军。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne and appointed Doushuning as the great general of the pillar country.

古文：武成初，出为同州刺史。
现代文：武成初年，出任同州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he served as the governor of the same province.

古文：复督诸军讨稽胡郝阿保、刘桑德等，破之。
现代文：他再监督指挥各路军马讨伐稽胡的郝阿保、刘桑德等人，打败了他们。
English: He then supervised and commanded the various armies and horses to fight against Hu's followers, such as Zhao Bao and Liu Sande, and defeated them.

古文：军还，迁大司寇，进封楚国公，邑万户，别食盐亭县一千户，收其租赋。
现代文：豆卢宁大军回师，升任大司寇，爵位提升为楚国公，封地一万户，另加盐亭瑟封地一千户，收取那裹的租税。
English: Zhu Luning's army returned to the division, and he was promoted to the position of grand secretary of the Kuo, and his title was elevated to the Duke of Chu, with 10,000 fiefs, and another 1,000 fiefs in Yan Tingsi, and he collected that amount of taxes.

古文：保定四年，授岐州刺史。
现代文：保定四年，他任蛙业刺史。
English: In Baoding for four years, he served as the frog industry stabbing history.

古文：属大兵东讨，宁舆疾从军。
现代文：恰巧大军束征，豆卢宁抱病登车跟从大军出征。
English: Coincidentally, the large army was conscripted, and Doushuning, who was ill, boarded a train to go to war with the large army.

古文：五年，薨于同州，时年六十六。
现代文：保定五年，在同州去世，终年六十六岁。
English: Baoding five years, died in the same state, 66 years old.

古文：赠太保、同鄜等十州诸军事、同州刺史。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太保、同少鄘州等十州诸军事、同州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Taiho, the same title as Shosho, the same title as Jishu, and the same title as Jishu.

古文：谥曰昭。
现代文：谧号为昭。
English: His nickname was Akira.

古文：初宁未有子，养弟永恩子绩。
现代文：当初亘卢空还没有儿子，就收养弟弟豆卢永墨的儿子亘卢勉。
English: At first, Wang Lukuo did not have a son, so he adopted his younger brother Zhu Lu Yongmo's son, Wang Lu Tsun.

古文：及生子赞，亲属皆请赞为嗣。
现代文：等到生了儿子豆卢赞，亲属都来请求让豆卢赞作为继承人。
English: When his son, Douluzan, was born, relatives came to request that Douluzan be made his heir.

古文：宁曰： 兄弟之子，犹子也，吾何择焉。 遂以绩为世子。世以此称之。
现代文：亘卢宁说： 兄弟的儿子，就好像自己亲生的儿子一样，我还挑选什么呢? 于是把亘卢绩当作自己的嫡长子，世人因此都称赞他。
English: Waw Runeen said: My brother's son is just like my own son, what should I choose? So he took Waw Runeen as his eldest son, and the world praised him for it.

古文：及宁薨，绩袭爵，少历显位，大象末，上柱国、利州总管。
现代文：到豆卢宁去世，豆卢绩承袭了爵位，年轻时历任显贵的职位，大象末年，任上柱国、型州总管。
English: When Dulu Ning passed away, Dulu Jing inherited the title of nobility. In his youth, he held various prominent positions. In his later years, he served as the head of the pillar country and the type state.

古文：赞以宁勋，建德初，赐爵华阳县侯。
现代文：亘尘盏因为亘鹧的功勋，在建德初年赐爵位华阳县侯。
English: Because of his meritorious service, Watanabe was given the title of Lord of Huayang County in the first year of Jiande.

古文：累迁开府仪同大将军、进爵武阳郡公。
现代文：后来多次升迁任开府仪同大将军，提升爵位为武阳郡公。
English: Later, he was promoted several times to the post of Kaifu Yi Tong General, and promoted to the peerage of Wuyang County.

古文：永恩少有识度，为时辈所称。
现代文：豆卢永恩年轻时有见识，气度不凡，被当时的名人称道。
English: When he was young, Doulu Yongen was insightful and had an extraordinary demeanor. He was praised by celebrities at the time.

古文：初随宁事侯莫陈悦，后与宁俱归太祖，授殄寇将军。
现代文：起初追随豆卢宁为侯莫陈悦效力，后来和豆卢宁一起归顺太祖，授任殄寇将军。
English: At first, he followed Dou Luning to work for Hou Mo Chen Yue, and later, together with Dou Luning, he submitted to the great ancestor and was awarded the title of general of the Xingkou.

古文：以迎魏孝武功，封新兴县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：因为恭迎魏孝武帝的功劳，封爵位新兴县伯，封地五百户。
English: Because of the meritorious service of welcoming Emperor Wei Xiaowu, there were 500 new counties and fiefdoms with the title of nobility.

古文：屡逢征讨，皆有功，拜龙骧将军、中散大夫。
现代文：多次遇到出兵征讨，他都有战功，授任龙骧将军、中散大夫。
English: He was repeatedly conscripted into the army, and he was awarded the titles of Longjing General and Zhongshan Doctor.

古文：大统八年，除直寝、右亲信都督，寻转都督，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：大统八年，授任直寝、右亲信都督，不久转任都督，加任通直散骑常侍。
English: In the eighth year of unification, he was appointed as the governor of Dotonbori and Ujikinshin, and soon he was transferred to the governor of Dotonbori, and he was also appointed as a regular attendant of Dotonbori.

古文：十六年，拜使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：大统十六年，授任使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was assigned to the Third Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the General of Chariots and Cavalry, and the General of Ceremonies.

古文：魏废帝元年，进位骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：魏废帝元年，官位提升为骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was promoted to the official rank of General of the Horse Cavalry, Kaifu Yi and the Third Division.

古文：二年，出为成州刺史。
现代文：废帝二年，出任成州刺史。
English: In the second year after the emperor was deposed, he served as the chief historian of Chengdu.

古文：魏恭帝元年，进爵龙县侯。
现代文：魏恭帝元年。提升爵位为龙支县侯。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was promoted to the peerage as the lord of Longzhi County.

古文：三年，大将军、安政公史宁随突厥可汗入吐谷浑，令永恩率骑五千镇河、鄯二州，以为边防。
现代文：恭帝三年，大将军、安政公史宁追随突厥可汗进入吐谷浑，朝廷命令豆卢永恩率领骑兵五千镇守河、鄯两州，作为边境防卫。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Gong, the great general, An Zheng Gong Shining, followed the Turkic khan into Tuyugun. The court ordered Dou Lu Yong'en to lead the cavalry to guard the five thousand towns along the river and the two provinces as border defense.

古文：孝闵帝践祚，授鄯州刺史，改封沃野县公，增邑一千户。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，授任豆卢永恩为鄯州刺史，改封爵位为沃野县公，增加封地一千户。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, appointed Doulu Yongen as the governor of Zhangzhou, changed his title to the governor of Wano County, and increased the number of fiefs by one thousand.

古文：寻转陇右总管府长史。
现代文：不久转任陇右总管府长史。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shizuo Chief Administrator.

古文：武成元年，迁都督利沙文三州诸军事、利州刺史。
现代文：武成元年，升任都督利沙文三州诸军事、利州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he was promoted to the position of the military governor of Lishawen and the military governor of Sanzhou and the military governor of Lishu.

古文：时文州蛮叛，永恩率兵击破之。
现代文：当时文州的蛮人反叛，永恩率领军队迎击并打败了叛军。
English: At that time, the barbarians of Wenzhou rebelled, and Yong En led the army to meet and defeat the rebels.

古文：保定元年，入为司会中大夫。
现代文：保定元年，召入任司会中大夫。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was called to the post of secretary and junior doctor.

古文：二年，复出为陇右总管府长史。
现代文：保定二年，再出任陇右总管府长史。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was reappointed as the chief administrator of Shinu.

古文：宁以佐命元勋封楚国公，请以先封武阳郡三千户益沃野之封，诏许焉。
现代文：豆卢宁因为辅佐皇上创业立下大功，封爵为楚国公，永恩请求把早先所封武阳郡三千户增益沃野的封地，皇上颁下诏令答应他的请求。
English: Doushuning was knighted as the Duke of Chu for his great contribution in assisting the emperor in starting a business. Yong En requested that the fief of 3,000 households in Wuyang County be given to him, and the emperor issued a decree to grant his request.

古文：又增邑并前四千五百户。
现代文：又增加封地合并以前所封的一共四千五百户。
English: A total of 4,500 households that had been fiefdoms before the merger were also added.

古文：寻卒官，年四十八。
现代文：不久，豆卢永恩在任上去世，终年四十八岁。
English: Soon after, Doulu Yongen died in office at the age of forty-eight.

古文：赠少保、幽冀等五州诸军事、幽州刺史。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为少保、幽州冀州等五州诸军事、幽州刺史。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the titles of Shobo, Yuzhou, Jizhou and other five states of military, and Yuzhou, Shishi.

古文：谥曰敬。
现代文：谧号为敬。
English: His nickname is Zeng.

古文：子通嗣。
现代文：他的儿子豆卢通继承他的爵位。
English: His son, Dom Luton, succeeded him in the peerage.

古文：宇文贵字永贵，其先昌黎大棘人也。徙居夏州。
现代文：宇文贵字永贵，他的祖先是昌黎大棘人，后来迁居夏州。
English: Uwen Gui's last name is Yong Gui. His ancestor was a great thorn in the side of Changli, and later moved to Xiazhou.

古文：父莫豆干。
现代文：父亲莫豆干。
English: My father doesn't eat beans.

古文：保定中，以贵着勋，追赠柱国大将军、少傅、夏州刺史、安平郡公。
现代文：保定年间，由于宇文贵的显著功勋，朝廷追赠他父亲为柱国大将军、少傅、夏州刺史、安平郡公。
English: During the Baoding period, due to the remarkable merits of Uwengui, the imperial court posthumously awarded his father the titles of General of the Pillar of State, Young Master of the Forbidden City, Prince of Xiazhou and Prince of Anping County.

古文：贵母初孕贵，梦有老人抱一儿授之曰： 赐尔是子，俾寿且贵。 
现代文：宇文贵的母亲刚怀孕时，梦见有一老人抱着一个婴儿交给她说： 把逭孩子赐给你，让你长寿又富贵。 
English: When Wu Wengui's mother was newly pregnant, she dreamed that an old man was holding a baby and handing it to her, saying, "I will give you this child so that you will live a long and prosperous life."

古文：及生，形类所梦，故以永贵字之。
现代文：到儿子出生的时候，样子跟梦见的婴儿相似，因此用永贵作为他的字。
English: After he was born, he looked very similar to the child in his dream, so he was given the name Yonggui.

古文：贵少从师受学，尝辍书叹曰： 男儿当提剑汗马以取公侯，何能如先生为博士也！ 正光末，破六汗拔陵围夏州，刺史源子雍婴城固守，以贵为统军救之。前后数十战，军中咸服其勇。
现代文：宇文贵少年时跟从老师求学，曾经放下书本，叹了一气说： 男子汉应该提剑劳苦征战来博取公侯，哪能像先生一样当博士呢? 正光末年，破六汗拔陵包围夏州，刺史源子雍环城固守，任命宇文贵为统军去救援，前后几十战，军中将士都佩服他的勇猛。
English: When he was a boy, Uwengui followed his teacher to study. He once put down his books and said with a sigh: "A man should raise his sword and fight a hard war to win a prince. How can he be a doctor like his teacher?" In the last years of the Ming Dynasty, after the Six Dynasties, the Han Dynasty besieged Xiazhou and the Yuan Dynasty besieged Yonghuan City. Uwengui was appointed as a member of the unified army to rescue the city. During and after dozens of wars, the generals all admired his bravery.

古文：后送子雍还，贼帅叱干麒麟、薛崇礼等处处屯聚，出兵邀截，贵每奋击，辄破之。
现代文：后来送源子雍回军，贼军主帅叱干麒麟、薛崇礼等人处处聚集人马，出兵拦截，宇文贵每次都奋勇出击，总是打败敌军。
English: Later, he sent Yuan Zi Yong back to the army, and the commander of the Kleptocratic Army, Zi Gan Qilin, Xue Chongli, and others gathered people and horses everywhere and sent troops to intercept. Yu Wengui bravely attacked every time and always defeated the enemy army.

古文：除武骑常侍。
现代文：朝廷授任他为武骑常侍。
English: The Imperial Court appointed him as a samurai equestrian.

古文：又从子雍讨葛荣，军败奔邺，为荣所围。
现代文：后来宇文贵又跟从源子雍征讨葛荣，大军战败逃奔邺地，被葛荣包围。
English: Later, Yu Wengui followed Yuan Zi Yong to fight against Ge Rong. The large army was defeated and fled to Shantou, where it was surrounded by Ge Rong.

古文：贼屡来攻，贵每缒而出战，贼莫敢当其锋。
现代文：贼兵多次前来攻打，宇文贵每次都用绳子拴住吊下城去出战，贼兵没有谁敢抵挡他的锐气。
English: The bandits came to attack many times. Every time, Uwen Gui tied a rope around the suspended city and went to fight. None of the bandits dared to resist his spirit.

古文：然凶徒寔繁，围久不解。
现代文：然而凶恶的暴徒实在太多了，围困了很久都不能解围。
English: However, there were too many vicious thugs, and the siege could not be broken for a long time.

古文：贵乃于地道潜出，北见尔朱荣，陈贼兵势，荣深纳之。
现代文：宇文贵就从地道偷偷地走出，往北求见尔朱荣，陈述贼军兵力的情势，尔朱荣充分采纳了他的建议。
English: Yu Wengui sneaked out of the tunnel, went north to see Er Zhu Rong, and reported the situation of the invading army. Er Zhu Rong fully accepted his suggestion.

古文：因从荣擒葛荣于滏口，加别将。
现代文：于是宇义贵跟从尔朱荣在滏口生擒葛荣，朝廷加任宇文贵为别将。
English: As a result, Uyigai followed Le Zhu Rong to give birth to Ge Rong in Hekou, and the imperial court appointed Uwengai as the second general.

古文：又从元天穆平邢杲，转都督。
现代文：后来他又跟从元天穆平定了邢呆的叛乱，改任都督。
English: He also followed Yuan Tianmu in suppressing Dingwu and was transferred to the post of governor-general.

古文：元颢入洛，贵率乡兵从尔朱荣焚河桥，力战有功。加征虏将军，封革融县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，宇文贵率领地方武装跟随尔朱荣焚烧河桥，奋力作战立下战功，朝廷加任他为征虏将军，封爵革融县侯，封地一千户。
English: When Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, Yu Wengui led the local armed forces to follow Er Zhu Rong to burn the river bridge, and fought hard to win the war. The court appointed him as a conscript general, knighted him as the prince of Ge Rong County, and granted him a fief of one thousand households.

古文：除郢州刺史，入为武卫将军、内大都督。
现代文：后来授任郢州刺史，召入任武卫将军、合内大都督。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and was called to serve as the general of Wuwei and the grand governor of Inner Mongolia.

古文：从魏孝武西迁，进爵化政郡公。
现代文：宇文贵跟从魏孝武帝西迁，进爵为化政郡公。
English: He moved to the Kansai region with Emperor Xiaowu and was raised to the peerage as the lord of Kasei County.

古文：大统初，迁右卫将军。
现代文：大统初年，升任右卫将军。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to General of the Right Division.

古文：贵善骑射，有将率才。
现代文：宇文贵善于骑马射箭，有将帅才能。
English: Uwen Gui is good at riding horses and archery, and has the ability to be a great general.

古文：太祖又以宗室，甚亲委之。
现代文：太祖又因为宇文贵是帝王的宗族。很亲近器重他。
English: The great-grandfather was also very close to Emperor Uwengui because he was a member of his family.

古文：三年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司。与独孤信入洛阳。
现代文：大统三年，他升任车骑大将军、仪同三司后来和独孤信进入洛阳。
English: In the third year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to the General of Chariot and Cavalry, and later entered Luoyang together with Du Guoxin.

古文：东魏颍州史贺若统据颍川来降，东魏遣其将尧雄、赵育、是云宝率众二万攻颍。
现代文：束魏颖州长史贺若统占据颖!前来投降，束魏派遣它的将领尧雄、趟育和是云实率领士兵二万攻打颖川。
English: The governor of Sokowei Ying, Shi Hera, came to surrender, and Sokowei dispatched its generals, Shao Xiong, Wai Yu and Ye Yunshi, to lead twenty thousand soldiers to attack Yingchuan.

古文：贵自洛阳率步骑二千救之，军次阳翟。
现代文：宇文贵从洛阳率领步兵骑兵二千前往援救，军队驻扎在阳翟。
English: Wu Wengui led 2,000 infantry and cavalry from Luoyang to the rescue, and the army was stationed in Yangtze River.

古文：雄等已度马桥，去颍川三十里，东魏行台任祥又率众四万余，与雄合。
现代文：尧雄等人已经越过马桥，离颖三十里，束魏行台任祥又率领士兵四万多，跟尧雄会合。
English: Shao Xiong and others had already crossed Maqiao, thirty miles from Yingying, and Ren Xiang, who led more than forty thousand soldiers, met with Shao Xiong.

古文：诸将咸以彼众我寡,不可争锋。
现代文：各将领都认为敌众我寡，不能跟他们争胜。
English: All the generals thought that they were outnumbered and could not win against them.

古文：贵曰： 兵机倚伏，固不可以常理论。
现代文：宇文贵说： 用兵的机谋，祸福相因，互相依存，互相转化，本来就不能用通常的道理来分析。
English: Wu Wengui said: the strategy of using soldiers, the cause of misfortune and good fortune, mutual dependence, mutual transformation, originally cannot be analyzed with the usual reason.

古文：古人能以寡制众者，皆由预睹成败，决必然之策耳。
现代文：古人能够以少量的兵力制服强大的敌人，都是由于能预见成败，从而决定必然的策略。
English: The ancients were able to subdue a powerful enemy with a small number of troops because they could foresee success or failure, thus determining the inevitable strategy.

古文：吾虽闇于成事，然谓进与贺若合势，为计之上者。
现代文：我虽然愚昧，不懂得成就大事，但认为进军与贺若统会合，是上策。
English: Although I am ignorant and do not know how to achieve great things, I think that it is the best policy to march into the meeting with Herao.

古文：请为诸军说之。
现代文：请让我为各位说明一下。
English: Let me spell it out for you.

古文：尧雄等必以为颍川孤危，势非其敌，又谓吾寡弱独进，若悉力以攻颍，必指掌可破。
现代文：尧雄等人一定以为颖川孤立无援，危急万分，以其情势一定不是他们的对手，又认为我们兵少势弱单独冒进，如果全力攻打颖川，一定指曰可破。
English: Shao Xiong and others must have thought that Yingchuan was isolated and in a critical situation, and that it was not their rival due to its situation. They also thought that our soldiers were too few and weak to advance alone, and that if they attacked Yingchuan with all their strength, they would be able to defeat it.

古文：既陷颍川，便与任祥军合，同恶相济，为害更甚。
现代文：攻陷颖之后，就跟任祥军队会合，一起作恶互相接济，造成的危害就更厉害。
English: After the capture of Yingying, he met with Ren Xiang's army to commit evil together and help each other, and the harm caused was even more severe.

古文：吾今屯兵阳翟，便是入其数内。
现代文：我们现在驻军在阳翟，就是落入他们预料之中。
English: We are now stationed in Impotence, that is, falling into their expectations.

古文：若贺若一陷，吾辈坐此何为。
现代文：如果贺若统一被攻陷，我们一班人坐在这裹还干什么。
English: If Hera Unification is invaded, what will our group of people do sitting here?

古文：进据颍川，有城可守。
现代文：进军占据颖川，有城可守。
English: Marching to occupy Yingchuan, there is a castle to defend.

古文：雄见吾入城，出其不意，进则狐疑，退则不可。
现代文：尧雄看见我们进城，出乎他们意料之外，这样他们进军则犹豫不决，退兵则不行。
English: When Shao Xiong saw us enter the city, he took them by surprise. As a result, they were hesitant to march into the city, but not to retreat.

古文：然后与诸军尽力击之，何往不克。
现代文：然后我们和各路军马尽力攻击他们，何往而不胜。
English: Then we attacked them with all our horses and chariots, but we could not overcome them.

古文：愿勿疑也。 遂入颍川。
现代文：希望大家不要再疑虑了。 于是宇文贵带领兵马进入颖。
English: I hope everyone will no longer have any doubts. Therefore, Umengui led the soldiers and horses into Ying.

古文：雄等稍前，贵率千人背城为陈，与雄合战，贵马中流矢，乃短兵步斗。
现代文：尧雄等人逐渐前进，宇文贵率领一千人背对城墙摆开阵势，跟尧雄交战，宇文贵的战马被乱箭射中，就拿着短兵器徒步格斗。
English: Shao Xiong and others gradually advanced, and Wu Wengui led a thousand people to take up positions with their backs to the city wall and engage in battle with Shao Xiong. Wu Wengui's horse was shot by random arrows, and he fought on foot with a short weapon.

古文：士众用命。
现代文：众将士奋勇效命。
English: The soldiers fought bravely for their lives.

古文：雄大败轻走，赵育于陈降，获其辎重，俘万余人，尽放令还。
现代文：尧雄大败，迅速逃跑，趟育在阵中投降，宇文贵缴获敌军的兵器粮草等物品，俘虏一万多人，全部释放让他们回去。
English: Shao Xiong suffered a crushing defeat and quickly fled, while Wu Yu surrendered in the middle of the battle. Wu Wengui seized the enemy's weapons, grain, grass and other goods, captured more than 10,000 people, and released them all to go back.

古文：任祥闻雄败，遂不敢进。
现代文：任祥听说尧雄战败，终于不敢前进。
English: When Ren Xiang heard that Shao Xiong had been defeated, he finally dared not advance.

古文：寻而仪同怡峰率骑五百赴贵，贵乘胜逼祥。
现代文：不久，仪同三司怡峰率领骑兵五百赶赴宇文贵，字文贵乘胜进逼任祥。
English: Soon after, Yi Tong and San Si Yi Feng led 500 cavalrymen to rush to Wu Wengui, forcing Ren Xiang to take advantage of the victory.

古文：祥退保宛陵，追及之。
现代文：任祥退兵力保宛陵，宇文贵追上他们。
English: Ren Xiang withdrew his forces to protect Wanling, and Uwen Gui caught up with them.

古文：会日暝，结陈相持。
现代文：正好天黑了，双方摆开阵势互相对峙。
English: Just as it was getting dark, the two sides squared off against each other.

古文：明旦合战，俘斩甚多。
现代文：第二天早上两军交战，宇文贵俘获和杀死敌军很多。
English: The next morning, the two armies clashed, and Wu Wengui captured and killed many of the enemy troops.

古文：祥军既败，是云宝亦降。
现代文：任祥军队已经大败，是云宝也投降了。
English: Ren Xiang's army has been defeated, and Yun Bao has also surrendered.

古文：师还。
现代文：字文贵大军回师。
English: The troops then withdrew.

古文：魏文帝在天游园，以金卮置侯上，命公卿射中者，即以赐之。
现代文：魏文帝在天游园，把金酒杯放在箭靶上，发布命令说，各位官员如能射中的，就把金杯赐给他。
English: Emperor Wei placed a golden goblet of wine on an arrow target at Tianyuan Park and issued an order saying that if officials could hit the target, they should give him the golden goblet.

古文：贵一发而中。
现代文：宇文贵一箭就射中。
English: Uwengui hit the target with a single arrow.

古文：帝笑曰： 由基之妙，正当尔耳。 进侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：文帝笑着说： 养山基射术的神妙，仅和你相当罢了。 进升字文贵为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Wen said with a smile, "The magic of raising the mountain base shooting is only comparable to you. Jin Shouji Wengui is a chamberlain, a cavalry general, and the Keifu ceremony with three divisions.

古文：历夏岐二州刺史。
现代文：宇文贵历任夏、岐二州刺史。
English: Uwengui is the only person in history to have ruled both summer and winter.

古文：十六年，迁中外府左长史，进位大将军。
现代文：大统十六年，升任中外府左长史，又提升官位为大将军。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, he was transferred to the post of Chugai-fu Zuochangshi and promoted to the rank of general.

古文：宕昌王梁弥定为宗人獠甘所逐，来奔。
现代文：宕昌王梁弥定被同族人獠甘赶走，前来投奔西魏。
English: Liang Yading, the king of the Tang and Chang dynasties, was expelled by his compatriots, the Qigang, and fled to the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：又有羌酋傍乞铁匆因梁仚定反后，据有渠株川，拥种类数千家，与渭州民郑五丑扇惑诸羌同反，凭险置栅者十余所。
现代文：又有羌族首领傍乞铁忽在梁命定反叛后，趁机占据渠株川，拥有部族几千家，跟渭州人郑五丑一起煽动诱惑各羌族部落共同谋反，依靠险要的地势设置栅栏十多处。
English: There was also a leader of the Yao people, who took advantage of the opportunity to occupy Quzhu River after Liang ordered a rebellion, owned several thousand tribal houses, incited and tempted the various Yao tribes to rebel together with Zheng Wugou, a native of Zhangzhou, and set up fences in more than ten places depending on the critical situation.

古文：太祖令贵与豆卢宁、史宁讨之。
现代文：太祖命令宇文贵和豆卢宁、史宁征讨他们。
English: The great-grandfather ordered Uwen Gui and Doushuning and Shining to fight them.

古文：贵等擒斩铁匆及五丑。
现代文：宇文贵等人生擒并斩杀傍乞铁忽及郑五丑。
English: Yu Wengui and others were killed and the beggars were killed, and Zheng Wugou was killed.

古文：史宁又别击獠甘，破之，乃纳弥定。
现代文：史宁又另外出击獠甘，并且打败他，这才收容了梁弥定。
English: Shi Ning made another attack on He Gang, and defeated him, only then did he contain Liang Yading.

古文：并于渠株川置岷州。
现代文：又在渠株川设置岷州。
English: It also set up a camp at Quzhou in Quzhou River.

古文：朝廷美其功，遂于粟阪立碑，以纪其绩。
现代文：朝廷赞美宇文贵的战功，就在粟坂立碑，来记载他的功绩。
English: The imperial court praised Umengui's war exploits and erected a monument in Awasaka to record his achievements.

古文：魏废帝初，出为岐州刺史。
现代文：魏废帝初年，宇文贵出任岐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the fall of the Wei Dynasty, Wu Wengui served as the governor of Qizhou.

古文：二年，授大都督、兴西盖等六州诸军事、兴州刺史。
现代文：废帝二年，授任大都督、兴西盖等六州诸军事、兴州刺史。
English: In the second year of the dethronement of the emperor, he was appointed as the grand governor, Xingxi Gai and other six states of the military, Xingzhou stabbing history.

古文：先是兴州氐反，自贵至州，人情稍定。
现代文：在此之前兴州氐人曾经谋反，自从宇文贵来到兴州，人们的心情才逐渐安定。
English: Before this, the people of Xingzhou had plotted a rebellion, but since Yu Wengui came to Xingzhou, the people's mood has gradually stabilized.

古文：贵表请于梁州置屯田，数州丰足。
现代文：字文贵呈上奏章请求在梁州让士兵垦荒种地，结果几个州粮食都十分充足。
English: Zi Wen Gui submitted a petition requesting soldiers to plow wasteland and plant crops in Liangzhou, and as a result, grain was plentiful in several states.

古文：三年，诏贵代尉迟迥镇蜀。
现代文：废帝三年，皇上下韶令宇文贵代替尉迟迥镇守蜀地。
English: Three years after the dethronement of the emperor, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Uwengui to take over the defense of Shunde in place of his subordinate.

古文：时隆州人开府李光赐反于盐亭，与其党帛玉成、寇食堂、谯淹、蒲皓、马术等攻围隆州。
现代文：当时隆州人开府李光赐在盐亭反叛，跟他的党羽帛玉成、寇食堂、谯淹、蒲皓、马术等人围攻隆州。
English: At that time, the governor of Longzhou, Li Guangzhi, rebelled in Yan Ting, and besieged Longzhou with his followers, including Yu Yucheng, Kuo Shokudang, Yan Yan, Pu Pu, and Equestrian.

古文：州人李祏亦聚众反，开府张遁举兵应之。
现代文：隆州人李柘也聚众谋反，开府张遁起兵呼应。
English: Longzhou resident Li Wei also gathered a crowd to plot a rebellion, and Kaifu Zhang Wei raised an army in response.

古文：贵乃命开府叱奴兴救隆州，又令开府成亚击祏及遁。
现代文：字文贵就命令开府叱奴兴援救隆州，又命令开府成亚攻打李柘和张遁。
English: Zi Wengui ordered the Kaifu scold Xing to rescue Longzhou, and also ordered the Kaifu Chengya to attack Li Xi and Zhang Xi.

古文：势蹙遂降，执送京师。
现代文：叛军形势窘迫于是投降，字文贵拘捕李柘、张遁押送京师。
English: As the rebels were in a difficult situation, they surrendered, and Zhiwengui arrested Li Xi and Zhang Xi and sent them to the capital.

古文：除都督益潼等八州诸军事、益州刺史，就加小司徒。
现代文：朝廷授任宇文贵都督益州潼州等八州诸军事、益州刺史，加授小司徒。
English: The imperial court appointed Umengui as the military governor of eight prefectures including Yizhou, Zhangzhou, and Yizhou, and awarded him the title of Shosetsu.

古文：先是蜀人多劫盗，贵乃召任侠杰健者，署为游军二十四部，令其督捕，由是颇息。
现代文：在此以前蜀人有很多强盗，宇文贵就召集能见义勇为、才能出众、身强力壮的人，布置为游军二十四部，命令他们督促缉捕，从此以后大为安定。
English: Prior to this, there were many robbers in Shu, and Wu Wengui gathered people who were capable of bravery, talent, and physical strength, and arranged them into twenty-four detachments, and ordered them to supervise and arrest. From then on, it was very stable.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，进位柱国，拜御正中大夫。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，提升宇文贵的官位为柱国，拜授御正中大夫。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, promoted the official rank of Umengui to the pillar state, and conferred the title of Imperial Junior High School Doctor.

古文：武成初，与贺兰祥讨吐谷浑。
现代文：武成初年，宇文贵和贺兰祥讨伐吐谷浑。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, he and Helan Xiang went to Tujugun together.

古文：军还，进封许国公，邑万户。
现代文：大军回师以后，提升爵位为许国公，封地一万户。
English: After the return of the large army, he was promoted to the peerage of Xu Guogong, and his fiefdom increased to 10,000 households.

古文：旧爵回封一子。
现代文：原来的爵位改封给他的一个儿子。
English: The original title was given to one of his sons.

古文：迁大司空，治小冢宰，历大司徒，迁太保。
现代文：后来又升任大司空，主管小冢宰，历任大司徒，又升任太保。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of Daishi-kuro, in charge of the small yakitori, successive Daishi-to, and promoted to the position of Taibo.

古文：贵好音乐，耽弈碁，留连不倦。
现代文：宇文贵喜欢音乐，沉迷于下棋，留连忘返不知疲倦。
English: Uwengui likes music, is addicted to playing chess, and never gets tired of playing.

古文：然好施爱士，时人颇以此称之。
现代文：然而乐善好施，爱惜士人，因此当时人们都很称颂他。
English: He was also fond of giving alms and loved to read, for which he was praised.

古文：保定之末，使突厥迎皇后。
现代文：保定末年，出使突厥迎皇后。
English: In the last years of Baoding, a Turkish envoy was sent to welcome the empress.

古文：天和二年，还至张掖，薨。
现代文：天和二年，回到张掖，在那裹去世。
English: Two years later, he returned to Zhangye, where he died.

古文：赠太傅，谥曰穆。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为太傅，谧号是穆。
English: The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Taifu, and his posthumous name was Mu.

古文：子善嗣。
现代文：宇文贵的儿子宇文善继承了他的爵位。
English: Uwengui's son, Uwenzan, succeeded to his title.

古文：历位开府仪同三司、大将军、柱国、洛州刺史。
现代文：历任开府仪同三司、大将军、柱国、洛州刺史。
English: Successive Kaifu ceremony with the three divisions, the general, the pillar country, and the history of Luozhou.

古文：以罪免，寻复本官，除大宗伯。
现代文：后来因有罪被免官，不久又恢复本职，授任大宗伯。
English: He was later removed from office for his guilt, but soon resumed his duties and was awarded the title of grand patriarch.

古文：大象末，进位上柱国。
现代文：大象末年，提升官位为上柱国。
English: In the last years of the elephant's life, it was promoted to the status of a pillar state.

古文：善弟忻，少以父军功赐爵化政郡公。
现代文：宇文善的弟弟宇尘匠，年轻时因为父亲的军功被朝廷封赐爵位化苏登公。
English: Uwensan's younger brother, Utsubotsuko, was given a title of nobility by the imperial court when he was young because of his father's military service.

古文：骁勇绝伦，有将帅才略。
现代文：他勇猛无比，有将帅的才能智谋。
English: His bravery is unmatched, and he has a great ability to strategize.

古文：大象末，位至上柱国，进封英国公。
现代文：大象末年，官至上柱国，进爵位为英国公。
English: At the end of the elephant's life, he was the highest-ranking official in the pillar country, and he was knighted as a British prince.

古文：忻弟恺，少好学，颇解属文，杂艺多通，尤精巧思。
现代文：宇文忻的弟弟宇文恺，年少好学，很擅长写文章，各种技艺大都通晓，特别精通巧妙的设计。
English: Uwen Yao's younger brother, Uwen Yao, is eager to learn at a young age, is very good at writing articles, is mostly familiar with various skills, and is particularly proficient in clever design.

古文：亦以父军功赐爵双泉县伯。
现代文：他也由于父亲的军功被朝廷赐予爵位双泉县伯。
English: He was also given the title of Count of Shuangquan County by the imperial court due to his father's military service.

古文：寻袭祖爵安平郡公。
现代文：不久又承袭祖父的爵位为安平郡公。
English: Soon after, he succeeded his grandfather's title as Anping County Governor.

古文：起家右侍上士，稍迁御正中大夫。
现代文：后来朝廷把他从家中征召出来授任为右侍上士，逐渐升任御正中大夫。
English: Later, the Imperial Court called him from his home and appointed him as the Right Attendant Staff Sergeant, and he was gradually promoted to the post of Imperial Chief Physician.

古文：保定中，位至上开府。
现代文：保定年间，官至上开府。
English: During the Baoding period, officials were given priority in the establishment of the government.

古文：是云宝、赵育既至，初并拜车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：是云宝和赵育归顺西魏以后，起初一同被朝廷授任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: It was Yun Bao and Zhao Yu who, after returning to the Western Wei Dynasty, were at first jointly appointed by the imperial court as the General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：宝后累迁至大将军、都督凉甘瓜州诸军、凉州刺史，赐爵洞城郡公。
现代文：是云实后来多次升迁任大将军、都督凉州甘州瓜州诸军、凉少刺史，赐予爵位洞城郡公。
English: It was Yunshi who was later promoted several times to the rank of general, the military governor of Liangzhou, Gansu, Guazhou, and Liangshan, and awarded the title of Dongcheng County.

古文：世宗时，吐谷浑侵逼凉州，宝与战不利，遂殁于阵。
现代文：世宗在位时，吐谷浑侵犯并逼近凉州，是云宝跟他们交战而失利，最终战死在阵中。
English: When Sejong was on the throne, the Tugukhun invaded and approached Liangzhou. It was Yun Bao who lost the battle with them and eventually died in the battle.

古文：杨忠，弘农华阴人也。
现代文：杨忠是弘农华阴人，小名奴奴。
English: Yang Zhong is a Hongnonghua Yin person, a minor slave.

古文：小名奴奴。
现代文：高祖杨元寿在北魏初期任武!
English: The great-great-grandfather Yang Yuan Shou served in the military in the early days of the Northern Wei Dynasty!

古文：高祖元寿，魏初，为武川镇司马，因家于神武树颓焉。祖烈，龙骧将军、太原郡守。父祯，以军功除建远将军。
现代文：镇司马，于是在神武郡树颓县安家。祖父杨烈，曾任龙骧将军、太原郡守。父亲杨祯，因有军功被朝廷授任建远将军。
English: Zhen Sima, so he settled in Shuxuan County, Shenwu County. His grandfather, Yang Lie, was once the general of Longyan and the governor of Taiyuan County. His father, Yang Jie, was awarded the title of General Jianyuan by the imperial court for his military service.

古文：属魏末丧乱，避地中山，结义徒以讨鲜于修礼，遂死之。
现代文：适逢魏末政局动乱，为躲避灾祸迁居中山，聚合义兵，以讨伐鲜于脩礼，最终战死。
English: At the time of the political turmoil at the end of the Wei Dynasty, in order to avoid the disaster, he moved to Zhongshan, gathered the volunteers, and fought against the Xian and the Xili, and eventually died in battle.

古文：保定中，以忠勋，追赠柱国大将军，少保、兴城郡公。
现代文：保定年间，因为杨忠的功勋，被朝廷追赠柱国大将军、少保、兴城郡公。
English: During the Baoding period, because of Yang Zhong's meritorious service, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Pillar of State, Minor Protector, and Xingcheng County Governor by the Imperial Court.

古文：忠美髭髯，身长七尺八寸，状貌瑰伟，武艺绝伦，识量沉深，有将帅之略。
现代文：杨忠胡子长得很好看，身高七尺八寸，容貌俊美，身材魁梧，武艺无人可以相比，见识精深，度量极大，有将帅的才略。
English: Yang Zhong's beard is very good-looking, he is seven feet and eight inches tall, he is handsome, he is tall, his martial arts are incomparable, his insight is profound, he is extremely meticulous, and he has the talent of a great general.

古文：年十八，客游泰山。会梁兵攻郡，陷之，遂被执至江左。
现代文：十八岁时，出外游览泰山，恰逢梁朝军队进攻州郡，攻下城池，杨忠就被捉拿到江东。
English: At the age of eighteen, when he went out to visit Mount Tai, it coincided with the Liang Dynasty army attacking the prefectures and capturing the cities, and Yang Zhong was caught and taken to the East River.

古文：在梁五年，从北海王颢入洛，除直合将军。
现代文：在梁朝五年，杨忠跟从北海王元颢进入洛阳，被授任直合将军。
English: In the fifth year of the Liang Dynasty, Yang Zhong entered Luoyang from the North Sea Wang Yuanxuan and was awarded the title of Zhihe General.

古文：颢败，尔朱度律召为帐下统军。
现代文：元颢兵败，尔朱度律召唤杨忠任帐下统军。
English: After the defeat of Yuan Shao's army, Er Zhu Duru summoned Yang Zhong to lead the army.

古文：及尔朱兆以轻骑自并州入洛阳，忠时预焉。
现代文：到了尔朱兆率领轻骑从并州进入洛阳，杨忠当时也参预了此事。
English: When Er Zhu Zhao led the light cavalry from the annexed state into Luoyang, Yang Zhong also participated in the matter.

古文：赐爵昌县伯，拜都督，又别封小黄县伯。
现代文：后来朝廷赐予爵位昌县伯，授任都督，又另封小黄县伯。
English: Later, the imperial court bestowed the title of peer of Chang County, appointed him as the governor of the capital, and also appointed Xiao Huang County.

古文：从独孤信破梁下溠戍，平南阳，并有功。
现代文：杨忠又跟从独孤信攻破梁朝的下湲戍，平定了南阳，都立了战功。
English: Yang Zhong also followed Du Guoxin to break through the lower jaw of the Liang Dynasty, pacified the Nanyang, and made war exploits.

古文：及齐神武举兵内侮，忠时随信在洛，遂从魏孝武西迁，进爵为侯。
现代文：到齐神武帝起兵侵犯的时候，杨忠追随独孤信在洛阳，于是跟从魏孝武帝往西迁移，被进封为侯爵。
English: At the time of Emperor Qishenwu's invasion, Yang Zhong followed Du Guoxin in Luoyang, so he followed Emperor Wei Xiaowu to the west and was made a marquis.

古文：仍从平潼关，破回洛城。
现代文：跟着又平定潼关，攻克回洛城。
English: After that, they conquered Shiguan and returned to Los Angeles.

古文：除安西将军、银青光禄大夫。
现代文：朝廷任命杨忠为安西将军、银青光禄大夫。
English: The imperial court appointed Yang Zhong as Anxi general and Yin Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：东魏荆州刺史辛纂据穰城，忠从独孤信讨之，纂战败退走。
现代文：东魏荆州刺史辛纂占据穣城，杨忠跟从独孤信前往征讨，辛纂战败逃跑。
English: In the Eastern Wei Dynasty, Jingzhou's Zhang Shishi and Xin Cao occupied Lucheng. Yang Zhong followed Du Guoxin to go and fight, but Xin Cao was defeated and fled.

古文：信令忠与都督康洛儿、元长生为前驱,驰至其城，叱门者曰： 今大军已至，城中有应，尔等求活，何不避走！ 门者尽散。
现代文：独孤信命令杨忠和都督康洛儿、元长生作为前驱，驱马直奔穣城，大声呵斥守门的人说： 现在朝廷大军已到，城中也有内应，你们如果还要活命，为什么不赶快躲避逃跑! 守门的士兵全都四散奔逃。
English: Du Guoxin ordered Yang Zhong and the governor, Kang Lore, and Yuan Chang Sheng, to lead the way, driving their horses straight to Lushan. They shouted at the people guarding the gate, saying, "Now that the imperial army has arrived, and there are also people inside the city, if you still want to live, why don't you quickly escape!" The soldiers guarding the gate all scattered and fled.

古文：忠与洛儿、长生乘城而入，弯弓大呼，纂兵卫百余人莫之敢御，斩纂以徇，城中慑服。
现代文：杨忠和康洛儿、元长生登城而进，拉弓大叫，辛纂的卫兵一百多人，没有谁敢抵挡，结果杀死辛纂示众，城裹上下人等全都畏惧降服。
English: Yang Zhong, Kang Lore and Yuan Chang Sheng marched into the city, shouting and drawing their bows. There were more than a hundred guards of Xincao, and no one dared to resist. As a result, Xincao was killed, and everyone in the city was afraid and surrendered.

古文：居半岁，以东魏之逼，与信奔梁。梁武帝深奇之，以为德主帅、关外侯。
现代文：过了半年，由于束魏军队逼近，和独孤信一起投奔凿塑梁亘宣童很赏识他，任命他为文德主帅、关外侯。
English: After half a year, as the Shu and Wei armies were approaching, Wat Xuan Tong appreciated him very much and appointed him as the Wende coach and Guan Wai Hou.

古文：大统三年，与信俱归阙。
现代文：大统三年，杨忠和独孤信一起回到朝廷。
English: Three years after unification, Yang Zhong and Du Guoxin returned to the imperial court together.

古文：太祖召居帐下。
现代文：太担召见他们，让他们留在帐下。
English: Too afraid to call them in, let them stay on the books.

古文：尝从太祖狩于龙门，忠独当一猛兽，左挟其腰，右拔其舌。
现代文：杨忠曾经跟从太担到垄盟打猎，独自面对一头猛兽，左手夹住它的腰，右手拔它的舌头。
English: Yang Zhong used to hunt from Taitang to Lianmeng, facing a fierce beast alone, clamping its waist with his left hand and pulling out its tongue with his right hand.

古文：太祖壮之。
现代文：太祖赞赏他的勇猛。
English: His great-grandfather praised his bravery.

古文：北台谓猛兽为 揜于 ，因以字之。
现代文：北朝把猛兽叫做 抢于 ，于是把 揖于 作为杨墨的表字。
English: The Northern Dynasty called the ferocious beast 抢于, and therefore used 于 as the ideogram for Yangmo.

古文：从擒窦泰，破沙苑。
现代文：随从叁趄作战，生擒宣台，攻破丝苞。
English: Follow the dragon to fight, grow the dragon to proclaim the platform, and break the silk cocoon.

古文：迁征西将军、金紫光禄大夫，进爵襄城县公。
现代文：朝廷升任他为征西将军、金紫光禄大夫，提升爵位为襄城县公。
English: The imperial court promoted him to general of the Western Conquest, doctor of the Golden Purple Light, and promoted him to the rank of Xiangcheng County official.

古文：河桥之役，忠与壮士五人力战守桥，敌人遂不敢进。
现代文：河桥一战，杨忠和五位壮士奋力作战守住桥梁，敌人最终不敢前进。
English: In the first battle of the river bridge, Yang Zhong and five strong men fought hard to defend the bridge, and the enemy finally dared not advance.

古文：以功除左光禄大夫、云州刺史，兼大都督。
现代文：因为立了战功，朝廷授任他为左光禄大夫、云州刺史，兼任大都督。
English: Because of his war exploits, the imperial court appointed him as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, the historian of Yunnan, and the grand governor.

古文：又与李远破黑水稽胡，并与怡峰解玉壁围，转洛州刺史。
现代文：又和李远打败了黑水一带的稽胡，并且和：险峰一起解除玉壁之围，朝廷改任他为洛州刺史。
English: In addition, he and Li Yuan defeated Ji Hu in the Blackwater area, and together with: Jianfeng lifted the siege of the Jade Wall, and the imperial court appointed him to write the history of Luozhou.

古文：邙山之战，先登陷陈。
现代文：主业一战，女蝗最先冲入敌阵。
English: In the main battle, female locusts were the first to rush into the enemy lines.

古文：除大都督，进车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
现代文：因此被授任大都督，又升任车骑大将军、仪同三司、散骑常侍。
English: As a result, he was awarded the title of Grand Governor, and was also promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and Equestrian Ordinary.

古文：追封母盖氏为北海郡君。
现代文：朝廷又追封杨忠的母亲盖氏为北海郡星。
English: The imperial court also posthumously awarded Yang Zhong's mother, Ms. Gai, the title of Beihai County Star.

古文：寻除都督朔燕显蔚四州诸军事、朔州刺史，加侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久授任女眯都督塑薤面菌诸军事、塑业刺史，加授侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Soon after, she was awarded the title of "Duchess of the Military and Plastic Industry," as well as the titles of "Junior Chamberlain," "Major General of Cavalry," and "Commander of Ceremonies of Kaifu."

古文：及东魏围颍川，蛮帅柱清据险为乱，忠率兵讨平之。
现代文：塞魏包围题川时，蛮夷主帅旦挂遣凭藉险要发动叛乱，握蛊率领军队前往征讨并平息了叛乱。
English: When the Northern Wei Dynasty besieged Qichuan, the barbarian commander, Dang Xuanqiao, wanted to launch a rebellion by taking advantage of the danger, and led the army to conquer and quell the rebellion.

古文：时侯景渡江，梁武丧败，其西义阳郡守马伯符以下溠城降。
现代文：当时侯景渡辽，梁武兵败受到重创，梁朝西义阳郡郡守昼值萤献上工巡归降。
English: At that time, Hou Jing traveled to Liao, Liang Wu suffered a heavy defeat, and Liang Chaoxi, the county governor of Yiyang County, went on a work tour at noon.

古文：朝廷因之，将经略汉、沔，乃授忠都督三荆二襄二广南雍平信随江二郢淅十五州诸军事，镇穰城。
现代文：朝廷趁此机会，将要筹划谋取还、迺丞一带，于是授任扰盅都督三荆二塞二庐、直座、垩、信、堕、辽、二郢和逝五州诸军事，镇守穣城。
English: The imperial court took advantage of this opportunity and planned to take back and recover the area around Fucheng. Therefore, they appointed Fucheng as the governor of three counties, two counties, two counties, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province, one province.

古文：以伯符为乡导，攻梁齐兴郡及昌州，皆克之。
现代文：又用马俭筵作向导，攻打凿朝齐兴郡和昌州，都攻下来了。
English: He also used Ma Jianlian as a guide to attack and chisel the morning of Qixing County and Changzhou, both of which were attacked.

古文：梁雍州刺史、岳阳王萧察虽称藩附，而尚有贰心。
现代文：銮塑壅业刺史、昼区王芦登虽声称作为藩属归附，但还怀有二心。
English: Although Wang Ruden, the head of the city's plastics and rubber industry, claims to be a member of the domain, he still has two minds.

古文：忠自樊城观兵于汉滨，易旗递进，实骑二千，察登楼望之，以为三万也，惧而服焉。
现代文：杨忠从樊城到汉水边上炫耀兵力，行进时让队伍改变旗号依次前进，实际上衹有骑兵两千，但萧察登上城楼眺望，以为有三万，心中畏惧而愿意降服。
English: Yang Zhong marched from Lucheng to the edge of the Han River to show off his forces. When marching, he had the troops change their banners and advance in order. In fact, there were only two thousand cavalry, but Xiao Cao climbed the tower to look around and thought there were thirty thousand. He was afraid and willing to surrender.

古文：梁司州刺史柳仲礼留其长史马岫守安陆，自率兵骑一万寇襄阳。
现代文：凿翅州刺史翅倥礼留下他的长史马岫把守堂陆，自己率领步兵骑兵一万侵犯襄阳。
English: He chiseled the Yingzhou, stabbed the Shih, and left his long stirrup to guard the hall. He himself led 10,000 infantry and cavalry to invade Xiangyang.

古文：初，梁竟陵郡守孙暠以其郡来附，太祖命大都督符贵往镇之。
现代文：起初。凿朝竟陵郡太守噩星献上他在任的郡城前来归附，太祖命令大都督符贵前往镇守该城。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Qianlong ordered the governor of Jingshuling County to present his county seat to the emperor for annexation, and the great-grandfather ordered the grand duke Fu Gui to go to the town to defend the city.

古文：及仲礼至，暠乃执贵以降。
现代文：等柳仲礼来到，孙嵩就捉住符贵投降梁朝。
English: When Liu Zhongli arrived, Sun Song captured Fu Gui and surrendered to Liang.

古文：仲礼又进遣其将王叔孙与暠同守。
现代文：柳仲礼又推荐派遣他的部将王叔孙跟孙万一同把守。
English: Liu Zhongli also recommended sending his general, Wang Shusun, to guard it together with Sun Wan.

古文：太祖怒，乃令忠帅众南伐。
现代文：太祖很生气，于是命令杨忠率领军队南征。
English: The great-grandfather was very angry, so he ordered Yang Zhong to lead the army to the south.

古文：攻梁随郡，克之，获其守将桓和。
现代文：大军攻打梁朝随郡，把它攻下来，俘获守将桓和。
English: A large army attacked Liang Chaozhu County, took it down, and captured the garrison general Huan He.

古文：所过城戍，望风请服。
现代文：杨忠军队所经过城堡的梁朝将士，看见对方的气势都请求归降。
English: All the cities and farmlands we passed through looked to the wind for help.

古文：忠乃进围安陆。
现代文：杨忠于是进军包围安陆。
English: Yang Zhong then marched to encircle Anlu.

古文：仲礼闻随郡陷，恐安陆不守，遂驰归赴援。
现代文：柳仲礼听说随郡被攻占，恐怕安陆不能守住，就急速赶回去援救。
English: When Liu Zhongli heard that Su County had been occupied, he feared that Anlu could not be held, so he hurried back to help.

古文：诸将恐仲礼至则安陆难下，请急攻之。
现代文：各将领担心柳仲礼来到则安陆难以攻下，向杨忠请求加紧攻打。
English: The generals were worried that it would be difficult to capture Anlu after the arrival of Liu Zhongli, and requested that the attack be accelerated.

古文：忠曰： 攻守势殊，未可卒拔。
现代文：杨忠说： 攻和守的情势完全不同，不能一下子就能攻取。
English: Yang Zhong said: The offensive and defensive situations are completely different, and it is not possible to attack all at once.

古文：若引日劳师，表里受敌，非计也。
现代文：如果拖延时日使军队疲劳，内外受敌，并非好的计策。
English: It is not a good strategy if the delay makes the army fatigued and exposed to enemies at home and abroad.

古文：南人多习水军，不闲野战。
现代文：南方人大都是熟习水战的军队，不擅长野战。
English: Most of the Nanfang people are troops who are familiar with water warfare, and are not good at field warfare.

古文：仲礼回师在近路，吾出其不意，以奇兵袭之，彼怠我奋，一举必克，则安陆不攻自拔，诸城可传檄而定也。 于是选骑二千，衔枚夜进，遇仲礼于淙头。
现代文：柳仲礼在近路回师，我出其不意，用奇兵偷袭他们，敌军疲怠，我军奋勇，一次行动就必定能取胜，那么安陆不用强攻自然就能拿下来，各座城池也能传布一道檄文就平定了。 于是杨忠挑选骑兵两千，衔枚连夜进发，在淙头跟柳仲礼相遇。
English: When Liu Zhongli was on his way back to his division, I took him by surprise and attacked them by surprise. The enemy army was exhausted, and our army was brave. A single action would surely win. Then, without a strong attack, Anlu would naturally be able to take it down. Each city could also spread a proclamation and it would be settled. So Yang Zhong selected two thousand cavalrymen and marched in overnight. He met Liu Zhongli in Shantou.

古文：忠亲自陷陈，擒仲礼，悉俘其众。
现代文：杨忠亲自冲入敌阵，生擒柳仲礼，全数俘获敌军士兵。
English: Yang Zhong personally rushed into the enemy's line, and captured all the enemy soldiers.

古文：马岫以安陆降，王叔孙斩孙暠，以竟陵降，皆如忠所策。
现代文：马岫献上安陆投降，王叔孙杀死孙嵩，献上竟陵投降，战事的进展都和杨忠所谋划的一样。
English: Ma Xi offered up An Lu to surrender, Wang Shusun killed Sun Song, and offered up Gong Ling to surrender. The progress of the war was the same as that planned by Yang Zhong.

古文：梁元帝遣使送子方略为质，并送载书，请魏以石城为限，梁以安陆为界。
现代文：梁元帝派遣使者送儿子方略作为人质，并送上盟书，请求西魏以石城作为界限，梁朝以安陆作为边界。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan dispatched an envoy to send his son Fang Liang as a hostage, and sent a letter of alliance, requesting the West Wei Dynasty to use Shicheng as the boundary, and the Liang Dynasty to use Anlu as the boundary.

古文：乃旋师。进爵陈留郡公。
现代文：杨忠于是回师，被进封爵位为陈留郡公。
English: As a result, Yang Zhong returned to his master and was ennobled to the peerage of Chen Liu County.

古文：十七年，梁元帝逼其兄邵陵王纶。
现代文：大统十七年，梁元帝逼迫他的哥哥邵陵王萧纶。
English: In the 17th year of the Great Reunification, Emperor Liang Yuan persecuted his brother Shao Ling Wang Xiao Yao.

古文：纶北度，与其前西陵郡守羊思达要随、陆土豪段珍宝、夏侯珍洽，合谋送质于齐，欲来寇掠。
现代文：萧纶往北渡江，跟前西陵郡太守羊思达邀约随郡、安陆两地有钱有势的段珍宝、夏侯珍洽，共同策划以送人质到齐为名，想来侵犯抢掠。
English: Xiao Yao went to Beidu River and invited Yang Sida, the former governor of Xiling County, to invite Duan Zhenbao and Xia Hou Zhen, who were rich and powerful in Suixian County and Anlu, to jointly plan to invade and loot in the name of sending hostages to Qi.

古文：汝南城主李素，纶故吏也，开门纳焉。
现代文：汝亩城主奎塞是芦捡原来的下属官员，当时就打开城门让他们进城。
English: The lord of the city, Kuise, who was originally a subordinate official of Lusi, opened the gate for them to enter the city at that time.

古文：梁元帝密报太祖，太祖乃遣忠督众讨之。
现代文：梁元帝秘密地报告太祖，太祖就派遣杨忠统领军马前往征讨。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan secretly reported to Emperor Taizu, and Emperor Taizu dispatched Yang Zhongtong to lead the army to conquer.

古文：诘旦陵城，日昃而克。
现代文：第二天早上登上城头，到太阳西斜的时候就攻下城池。
English: The next morning, they climbed to the top of the castle, and when the sun went down, they captured the castle.

古文：擒萧纶，数其罪而杀之；并获其安乐侯昉，亦杀之。
现代文：他们生擒蓝捡，历数他的罪过，然后把他杀掉；又俘获安乐尽萧嘘，也把他杀掉。
English: They plucked him up, counted his sins, and killed him; they took him and killed him.

古文：初，忠之擒柳仲礼，遇之甚厚。
现代文：起初，损忠活捉柳仲礼的时候，待他很好。
English: At first, when he caught Liu Zhongli alive, he treated him well.

古文：仲礼至京师，乃谮忠于太祖，言其在军大取金宝珍玩等。
现代文：柳仲礼到了京师，却在太祖面前诬陷扰盅，说他在军中大肆掠夺金银财宝珍贵古玩。
English: When Liu Zhongli arrived in Beijing, he was falsely accused of being a troublemaker in front of his grandfather, saying that he had plundered gold, silver, treasure and precious antiques in the army.

古文：太祖欲覆按之，惜其功高，乃出忠。
现代文：太祖想审查核实此事，但又因为他的功劳大而爱惜他。
English: The great-grandfather wanted to examine and verify the matter, but he also cherished him because of his great merit.

古文：忠忿恚，悔不杀仲礼。
现代文：于是释放了他。杨忠很愤怒，后悔当初没有杀掉柳仲礼。
English: So he released him. Yang Zhong was very angry and regretted not killing Liu Zhongli in the first place.

古文：故至此获纶等，并加戮焉。
现代文：因此到这次俘获萧纶等人，都一起把他们处死。
English: As a result, Xiao Yao and the others who were captured this time were all executed together.

古文：忠间岁再举，尽定汉东之地。
现代文：隔了一年杨忠再次起兵，全部平定汉束一带的地方。
English: One year later, Yang Zhong once again raised an army and completely pacified the area around Han Sok.

古文：宽以御众，甚得新附之心。
现代文：他用宽缓的措施治理百姓，很合刚归附者的心意。
English: He used lenient measures to govern the people, which was very much in line with the intentions of those who had just joined the party.

古文：魏恭帝初，赐姓普六如氏，行同州事。
现代文：魏恭帝初年，皇上赏赐杨忠姓普六如氏，让他兼摄同州的官职。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, the emperor rewarded Yang Zhong, surnamed Pu Rongru, by allowing him to hold the official post of Tongzhou.

古文：及于谨伐江陵，忠为前军，屯江津，遏其走路。
现代文：到了于谨讨伐江陵的时候，杨忠作前军，驻守在长江渡口，阻拦敌军逃跑的去路。
English: When the time came to attack the Yangtze River, Yang Zhong was the vanguard, stationed at the Yangtze River ferry, blocking the enemy's escape route.

古文：梁人束刃于象鼻以战，忠射之，二象反走。
现代文：梁朝人马把刀剑捆在象鼻上来跟魏军交战。杨忠用箭射他们，有两头象回头就跑。
English: The Liang Dynasty soldiers tied swords to the trunks of elephants to fight against the Wei army. Yang Zhong shot them with arrows, and two elephants turned and ran away.

古文：及江陵平，朝廷立萧察为梁，令忠镇穰城以为掎角之势。
现代文：到江陵平定，朝廷把萧察立为梁主，又命令杨忠镇守穣城作为分兵牵制互为支援的形势。
English: When Gangneung was pacified, the imperial court appointed Xiao Zhaoru as the leader, and ordered Yang Zhongzhen to guard Lucheng as a detachment to control the situation of mutual support.

古文：别讨沔曲诸蛮，皆克之。
现代文：后来杨忠又另外带兵讨伐沔曲一带各部蛮夷，都战胜了他们。
English: Later, Yang Zhong also led another army to fight the barbarians in all parts of the area around the bend, and defeated them.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，入为小宗伯。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，杨忠被召入任小宗伯。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and Yang Zhong was appointed to the post of minor patriarch.

古文：齐人寇东境，忠出镇蒲阪。
现代文：齐朝军队侵犯北周束部边境，杨忠出兵镇守蒲坂。
English: The Qidong army invaded the northern Zhou Sokbu border, and Yang Zhong sent troops to defend Busaka.

古文：及司马消难请降，忠与柱国达奚武援之。
现代文：司马消难请求投降，杨忠和柱国达奚武前去援救他。
English: Sima Qianlu requested to surrender, Yang Zhong and Zhu Guo Da Rongwu went to rescue him.

古文：于是共率骑士五千，人兼马一疋，从间道驰入齐境五百里。
现代文：于是他们一共率领骑士五千，每人兼有一匹副马，从偏僻的小路长驱直入齐朝境内五百里。
English: So they led a total of five thousand knights, each with a second horse, and drove 500 miles straight into Qi territory from a remote path.

古文：前后遣三使报消难而皆不反命。
现代文：杨忠前后一共派遣三个使者告知司马消难但都不覆命。
English: Yang Zhong sent a total of three emissaries to inform Sima of the disaster, but none of them died.

古文：去豫州三十里，武疑有变，欲还。
现代文：离北豫州还有二十里，达奚武怀疑有变，想回师。
English: Twenty miles away from North Yuzhou, Dajinwu suspected that something had changed and wanted to return to his teacher.

古文：忠曰： 有进死，无退生。 
现代文：杨忠说： 衹有前进死，没有后退生。 
English: Yang Zhong said: "There is no forward death, no backward death.

古文：独以千骑夜趋城下，四面峭绝，徒闻击柝之声。
现代文：他独自率领一千骑兵连夜急赴城下，城墙很高很陡，衹听到打更的声音。
English: He alone led a thousand cavalry to rush down the city overnight. The city wall is very high and steep, and the sound of beating can be heard.

古文：武亲来，麾数百骑以西。
现代文：达奚武亲自来到，指挥几百骑兵向西进兵。
English: Daguangwu himself came and commanded several hundred cavalry to march westward.

古文：忠勒余骑不动，候门开而入，乃驰遣召武。
现代文：杨忠统率其余人马不动，等候城门打开才进去，接着就派人骑马召唤达奚武。
English: Yang Zhongdong and the rest of the people did not move, waiting for the gate to open before entering, and then sent a man on horseback to summon Daren Wu.

古文：时齐镇城伏敬远勒甲士二千人据东陴，举烽严警。
现代文：当时齐朝守将伏敬远统率甲士两千人据守东面的城墙，点起烽火严密警戒。
English: At that time, the Qi Dynasty's general Fuxing Yuanzhong led two thousand soldiers to defend the eastern city wall, lit bonfires and kept a close watch.

古文：武惮之，不欲保城，乃多取财帛，以消难及其属先归。
现代文：达奚武害怕，不想保城，就拿了很多钱财绸缎，率领着司马消难和他的部属先回去。
English: Afraid and not wanting to defend the city, Daduwu took a lot of money and silk and led Sima Qidan and his subordinates back first.

古文：忠以三千骑为殿，到洛南，皆解鞍而卧。
现代文：杨忠率领三千骑兵作为殿后，到了洛水南岸，都解下马鞍睡觉。
English: Yang Zhong led three thousand cavalrymen as the rear of the palace, and when they arrived at the south bank of Luoshui, they all took off their saddles to sleep.

古文：齐众来追，至于洛北。忠谓将士曰： 但饱食，今在死地，贼必不敢渡水当吾锋。 齐兵阳若渡水，忠驰将击之，齐兵不敢逼，遂徐引而还。
现代文：齐军追赶，到了洛水北岸杨忠对将士说： 衹管吃饱饭，现在处于死地，贼军必定不敢渡河阻挡我们的先头部队。 齐军假装要渡河，杨忠赶马准备迎击，齐军不敢进逼，北周军队于是慢慢退兵回去。
English: The Qi army chased after them, and when they reached the north bank of the Luoshui River, Yang Zhong said to his soldiers: "You have had enough to eat, and now you are in a dead-end situation. The thief army must not dare to cross the river to block our leading troops." The Qi army pretended to cross the river, Yang Zhong rode his horse to prepare to counterattack, the Qi army did not dare to advance, and the North Zhou army then slowly withdrew.

古文：武叹曰： 达奚武自是天下健儿，今日服矣！ 进位柱国大将军。
现代文：达奚武叹了一口气说： 我达奚武自认为是天下的勇士，今天才敬服了! 后来朝廷提升杨忠的官位为柱国大将军。
English: Dabowu sighed and said, "I, Dabowu, thought I was the bravest man in the world, but today I am awed!" Later, the imperial court promoted Yang Zhong to the rank of General of the Pillar of the State.

古文：武成元年，进封随国公，邑万户，别食竟陵县一千户，收其租赋。
现代文：武成元年，进封爵位为随国公，封地一万户，另有竞陵县封地一千户，收取那裹的租税。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, the highest-ranking nobles to be promoted to the nobility were suigong, with 10,000 households in their fiefs and another 1,000 households in their fiefs in Jingling County receiving that amount of tax.

古文：寻治御正中大夫。
现代文：不久就任御正中大夫。
English: He was soon appointed to the post of junior high school doctor.

古文：保定二年，迁大司空。
现代文：保定二年，杨忠升任大司空。
English: In the second year of Baoding, Yang Zhong was promoted to the position of Senior Air Traffic Controller.

古文：时朝议将与突厥伐齐，公卿咸曰： 齐氏地半天下，国富兵强。
现代文：当时朝廷商议准备跟突厥一起讨伐齐朝。公卿都说： 齐朝土地占了天下一半，国家富有军队强大。
English: At that time, the imperial court was discussing preparations to fight the Qidong together with the Turks. The nobles all said: The Qidong occupied half of the world's land, the country was rich and the army was strong.

古文：若从漠北入并州，极为险阻，且大将斛律明月未易可当。
现代文：如果从漠北进入并州，十分险阻，况且大将斛律明月并不容易抵挡。
English: If you enter the merged state from the north of the desert, it is very dangerous, and it is not easy to resist the general Zhaolou Mingyue.

古文：今欲探其巢窟，非十万不可。 忠独曰： 师克在和不在众，万骑足矣。
现代文：现在想探取他们的巢穴，非十万兵不可。 杨忠却说： 军队能取胜在于和谐同心而不在于人多，一万骑兵足够了。
English: Now, if we want to explore their lair, we must have 100,000 soldiers, but Yang Zhong said, "An army can win if it is harmonious and united, not if it has many people. Ten thousand cavalrymen are enough."

古文：明月竖子，亦何能为。 三年，乃以忠为元帅，大将军杨纂、李穆、王杰、尔朱敏及开府元寿、田弘、慕容延等十余人皆隶焉。
现代文：斛律明月逭小子，又有什么能耐。 保定三年，朝廷任命杨忠为元帅，大将军杨纂、李穆、王杰、尔朱敏和开府元寿、田弘、慕容延等十几人都隶属于杨忠。
English: In the third year of Baoding, the imperial court appointed Yang Zhong as a marshal, and more than a dozen generals, including Yang Sadan, Li Mu, Wang Jie, Er Zhumin, Kaifu Yuan Shou, Tian Hong and Murong Yan, were subordinate to Yang Zhong.

古文：又令达奚武帅步骑三万，自南道而进，期会晋阳。
现代文：又命令达奚武率领步兵骑兵三万，从南路进发，约定日期在晋阳会合。
English: He also ordered Dabongwu to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to advance from the south road and meet at Jinyang on the agreed date.

古文：忠乃留敏据什贲，游兵河上。
现代文：杨忠就留下尔朱敏据守什贲，在黄河边布置流动出击的军队。
English: Yang Zhong left Er Zhumin to defend Shifang and deployed mobile attack troops along the Yellow River.

古文：忠出武川，过故宅，祭先人，飨将士，席卷二十余镇。
现代文：杨忠从武!
English: Yang Zhong joins the military!

古文：齐人守陉岭之隘，忠纵奇兵奋击，大破之。
现代文：出发，经过旧居，拜祭了祖先，用酒食款待将士，然后经过一番奋战，席卷二十多镇。齐朝军队把守着陉岭的要隘，杨忠出奇兵奋勇攻打，大败敌军。
English: He set off, passed his former residence, paid tribute to his ancestors, and wined and dined the soldiers. Then, after a hard-fought battle, he swept through more than 20 towns. The Qidong army guarded the narrow pass in the Jiaoling Mountains. Yang Zhong fought bravely and defeated the enemy army.

古文：又留杨纂屯灵丘为后拒。
现代文：他又留下杨纂驻守灵丘，在后面抗击敌军。
English: He also left Yang Zang stationed at Lingqiu to fight the enemy forces in the rear.

古文：突厥木汗可汗控头可汗、步可汗等，以十万骑来会。
现代文：突厥木汗可汗前往告知地头可汗、步离可汗等人，率领十万骑兵前来会合。
English: Turk Mughan Khan went to inform the local khan, step away from the khan and others, and led a hundred thousand cavalry to come to the meeting.

古文：四年正月朔，攻晋阳。
现代文：保定四年正月初一，大军进攻晋阳。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year, Jinyang was attacked.

古文：是时大雪数旬，风寒惨烈，齐人乃悉其精锐，鼓噪而出。
现代文：这时人雪下了几十天，寒风猛烈，齐军于是尽其所有精锐部队，擂鼓呐喊冲出来。
English: At this time, it had been snowing for dozens of days and the cold wind was fierce, so the Qi army rushed out with all its elite troops, beating drums and shouting.

古文：突厥震骇，引上西山不肯战。
现代文：突厥军队十分震惊，退上西山不肯交战。
English: The Turkish army was so shocked that it retreated to the western mountains and refused to fight.

古文：众皆失色。
现代文：众将都大惊失色。
English: The generals have all been discredited.

古文：忠令其众曰： 事势在天，无以众寡为意。 乃率七百人步战，死者十四五。
现代文：杨忠命令他的部下说： 事情成败的情势全在于天意，不要把人数多少放在心上。 于是杨忠率领七百人步战，战死的有十分之四五。
English: Yang Zhong ordered his subordinates to say, "Whether things succeed or fail depends entirely on the will of heaven, so don't pay attention to the number of people." So Yang Zhong led seven hundred people to fight on foot, and four-fifths of them died in the battle.

古文：以武后期不至，乃班师。
现代文：因为达奚武过了约定的期限还没到，于是班师。
English: Because Dajinwu has passed the agreed deadline and has not yet arrived, so the class teacher.

古文：齐人亦不敢逼。
现代文：齐军也不敢追逼。
English: The Qi army also did not dare to advance.

古文：突厥于是纵兵大掠，自晋阳至城七百余里，人畜无孑遗，俘斩甚众。
现代文：突厥于是放任士兵大肆抢掠，从晋阳到平城七百多里，人畜都没有留下来的，俘获和杀死的都很多。
English: As a result, the Turks allowed their soldiers to plunder and pillage on a large scale. From Jinyang to Pingcheng, more than seven hundred miles, there were no people or animals left, and many were captured and killed.

古文：高祖遣使迎劳忠于夏州。
现代文：高祖派遣使者到夏州迎接并慰劳圭蝗。
English: Gaozu sent an envoy to Xiazhou to meet and comfort Gui Locust.

古文：及至京师，厚加宴赐。
现代文：到了京师，又隆重地宴请大加赏赐。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, he was rewarded with a grand banquet.

古文：高祖将以忠为太傅，晋公护以其不附己，难之，乃拜总管泾灵云盐显六州诸军事、泾州刺史。
现代文：高祖打算任命杨忠为太傅，晋公宇文护认为握墨不依附自己，反对此事，高祖于是授任扰盅总管迳豳灵云盐题六州诸军事、迳州刺史。
English: Gaozu planned to appoint Yang Zhong as Taifu, but Jin Gongyu Wenyou opposed the move, saying that he did not want to be dependent on himself. Gaozu then appointed Zhaojun as the general manager of the Six-State Military and the Six-State History.

古文：是岁，大军又东伐，晋公护出洛阳，令忠出沃野以应接突厥。
现代文：这年，大军又束征，晋公宇文护出洛阳，命令圭蛆出翅以便接应空题。
English: In the same year, the army was conscripted again, and Jin Gong and Uwen escorted out of Luoyang, and ordered Gui Xuan to fly out to meet the challenge.

古文：时军粮既少，诸将忧之，而计无所出。
现代文：当时军粮已经很少，各将领都很担心，但又想不出好计策。
English: At that time, military food was already scarce, and the generals were very worried, but they could not come up with a good strategy.

古文：忠曰： 当权以济事耳。 
现代文：杨忠说： 应当随机应变来成就大事。 
English: Yang Zhong said: It is necessary to make random contingencies to achieve great things.

古文：乃招诱稽胡诸首领，咸令在坐。
现代文：于是招集诱导彊塑各首领，让他们全部在座。
English: So they summoned and induced the leaders of the Kuomintang and the Kuomintang to come, so that they were all present.

古文：使王杰盛军容，鸣鼓而至。
现代文：然后使王杰整肃军容，擂鼓来到。
English: Then he ordered Wang Jie to straighten up his military appearance, and the drums began to beat.

古文：忠阳怪而问之。
现代文：杨忠假装感到奇怪就问他。
English: Yang Zhong asked him, pretending to be puzzled.

古文：杰曰： 大冢宰已平洛阳，天子闻银、夏之间生胡扰动，故使杰就公讨之。 又令突厥使者驰至而告曰： 可汗更入并州，留兵马十余万在长城下，故遣问公，若有稽胡不服，欲来共公破之。 坐者皆惧，忠慰喻而遣之。
现代文：王杰说： 大冢宰已经平定了洛阳，天子听说银、夏之间生胡扰乱，因此让我前来您这裹征讨。 杨忠又命令突厥使者飞马来到禀告说： 可汗再入并州，留下兵马十多万在长城下面，因此派我来间您，如果有稽胡不服，想来和您一起打败他们。 在座的人都很害怕，杨忠安慰晓谕他们，然后送他们回去。
English: Wang Jie said, "The grand vizier has already pacified Luoyang, and the heavenly son has heard that there is a disturbance between the Yin and the Xia, so let me come to you to collect." Yang Zhong also ordered the Turkic messenger Pegasus to come to the obituary and said, "The Khan re-entered the annexed state, leaving more than one hundred thousand soldiers and horses under the Great Wall, so he sent me to you. If there is any objection, I want to come and defeat them with you. The people here are very afraid, Yang Zhong consoled them, and then sent them back.

古文：于是诸胡相率归命，馈输填积。
现代文：于是各稽胡首领相继归顺，运送给朝廷的粮食堆积如山。
English: As a result, the leaders of each qihu surrendered one after another, and the grain delivered to the imperial court piled up like a mountain.

古文：属晋公护先退，忠亦罢兵还镇。
现代文：适逢晋公宇文护先退兵，杨忠也就停战回师镇守。
English: When Jin Gong and U Wengu retired first, Yang Zhong also ended the war and returned to the garrison.

古文：又以政绩可称，诏赐钱三十万、布五百疋、谷二千斛。
现代文：又因为他的政绩值得称颂，所以皇上下诏书赏赐钱币三十万、衣料五百匹、粮食两千斛。
English: Also, because his political achievements were praiseworthy, the emperor rewarded him with 300,000 coins, 500 horses of clothing, and 2,000 shekels of grain.

古文：天和三年，以疾还京。
现代文：天和三年，杨忠因为生病回到京师。
English: Three years ago, Yang Zhong returned to the Beijing division due to illness.

古文：高祖及晋公护屡临视焉。
现代文：高祖和晋公宇文护多次亲临看望。
English: Gao Zu and Jin Gongwu Wenguo have visited in person many times.

古文：寻薨，年六十二，赠太保、同朔等十三州诸军事、同州刺史，本官如故。
现代文：不久病逝，终年六十二岁，朝廷追赠他为太保、同朔等十三州诸军事、同州刺史，原任官职也照旧保留。
English: He died of illness not long after, at the age of sixty-two. The Imperial Court posthumously awarded him the titles of Taibo, Tongshuo, and other military titles of the thirteen prefectures, as well as the title of prefect of the same prefecture. He also retained his original official position.

古文：谥曰桓。
现代文：谧号是桓。
English: 号桓.

古文：子坚嗣。
现代文：杨忠的儿子杨坚继承他的爵位。
English: Yang Zhong's son, Yang Jian, succeeded to his title.

古文：弟整，建德中，开府、陈留郡公，从高祖平齐，殁于并州。
现代文：杨忠的弟弟杨整，建德年间任开府，封爵陈留郡公，他跟从高祖平定齐军，死在并州。
English: Yang Zhong's younger brother, Yang Jie, was the governor of Jiande during the Jiande era, and was given the title of Count Chen Liu. He followed Gao Zu to pacify the Qi army, and died in Bianzhou.

古文：以整死王事，诏其子智积袭其官爵。
现代文：由于杨整为朝廷国事而死，皇上下韶令他的儿子杨智积承袭他的官爵。
English: Since Yang Zhengyi died for the state affairs of the imperial court, the emperor ordered his son Yang Zhizhu to inherit his title.

古文：整弟，大象末，大宗伯、竟陵县公。
现代文：杨整的弟弟杨慧，大象末年任大宗伯，封爵竞陵县公。
English: Yang Hui, the younger brother of Yang Zhengyi, was the grand patriarch in the elephant's later years, and was knighted as the ruler of Jingling County.

古文：弟嵩，以忠勋，赐爵兴城郡公，早卒。
现代文：杨慧的弟弟杨嵩，因为杨忠的功勋，朝廷赐爵兴城郡公，他早年就去世了。
English: Yang Hui's younger brother, Yang Song, was given the title of Prince of Xingcheng County by the imperial court for his services to Yang Zhong. He died at an early age.

古文：嵩弟达，亦以忠勋，爵周郡公。
现代文：杨嵩的弟弟杨达，也由于杨忠的功勋，封爵周郡公。
English: Yang Song's younger brother, Yang Da, was also knighted as Zhou County Grand Duke for his services to Yang Zhong.

古文：王雄字胡布头，太原人也。
现代文：王雄字胡布头，是太原人。
English: Wang Xiong, nicknamed "Hubutou," is from Taiyuan.

古文：父仑以雄着勋，追赠柱国大将军、少傅、安康郡公。
现代文：父亲王仑因为王雄的显著功勋，被朝廷追赠为柱国大将军、少傅、安康郡公。
English: Because of Wang Xiong's outstanding merits, his father, Wang Lun, was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Pillar of the State, Young Master of the Forbidden City, and Prince of Ankang County by the Imperial Court.

古文：雄仪貌魁梧，少有谋略。
现代文：王雄身材魁梧，年轻时就有谋略。
English: Wang Xiong is a big man, and he had a strategy when he was young.

古文：永安末，从贺拔岳入关，除征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：永安末年，他跟从贺拔岳进关，被朝廷授任为征西将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: In the last years of the Yongan era, he followed in the footsteps of He Baturu and was appointed by the imperial court as the general of the Western Expedition and the doctor of the Golden Purple Light.

古文：魏孝武西迁，授都督，封临贞县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：魏孝武帝西迁，授任王雄为都督，封爵临贞县伯，封地五百户。
English: Emperor Wei Xiaowu moved to the west, appointed Wang Xiong as the governor of the capital, made him a peer of Linzhen County, and granted him 500 fiefs.

古文：大统初，进爵为公，增邑二百户。
现代文：大统初年，进升爵位为公，增加封地二百产。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, promotion to a peerage was made public, and 200 fiefs were increased.

古文：拜武卫将军，加骠骑将军，增邑八百户，进大都督。
现代文：又授任为武卫将军，加任骠骑将军，增加封地八百户，升任为大都督。
English: He was also awarded the title of General of the Horse Guards and the additional title of General of the Horse Cavalry, his fiefdom was increased by 800 households, and he was promoted to the position of Grand Governor.

古文：寻拜仪同三司，增邑三百户。
现代文：不久又授任仪同三司，增加封邑三百户。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title and three divisions, and the number of fiefs increased to 300.

古文：迁开府仪同三司，加侍中，出为岐州刺史。
现代文：升任开府仪同三司，加任侍中，出任岐州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the third secretary of the Kaifu Ritsuryo, and was also appointed as an attendant, and served as the secretary of the history of Kishu.

古文：进爵武威郡公，进位大将军，行同州事。
现代文：进升爵位为武威郡公，官位提升为大将军，兼摄同州的官职。
English: He was promoted to the nobility of Wuwei County, promoted to the rank of general, and received the official post of the same state.

古文：十七年，雄率军出子午谷，围梁上津、魏兴。
现代文：大统十七年，王雄率领军队出子午谷，包围銮塑上淫和魏兴。
English: In the 17th year of the Great Reunification of China, Wang Xiong led the army out of Zibo Valley to encircle Shengzhuang and Weixing.

古文：明年，克之，以其地为东梁州。
现代文：第二年攻克这两处，把那裹的土地划为东梁州。
English: In the second year, they conquered these two places and divided the land around them into Dongliang Prefecture.

古文：寻而复叛，又令雄讨之。
现代文：不久两地又反叛，朝廷又命令王雄前去征讨。
English: Soon after, the two regions rebelled again, and the imperial court ordered Wang Xiong to go to the front to fight.

古文：魏恭帝元年，赐姓可频氏。
现代文：魏恭帝元年，赐王雄姓可频氏。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wei Gong, Wang Xiong was given the surname of Kofang.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，授少傅，增邑二千户，进位柱国大将军。
现代文：孝闵帝即位，授任王雄为少傅，增加封地二千户，官位提升为柱国大将军。
English: Emperor Xiaojun ascended to the throne, and appointed Wang Xiong as Shao Fu, increased the number of fiefs by two thousand, and raised his official rank to General of the Column.

古文：武成初，进封庸国公，邑万户。
现代文：武成初年，进升爵位为庸国公，封地一万户。
English: In the first year of Wu Cheng, he was promoted to the peerage of Yong Guogong, and his fief was increased to 10,000 households.

古文：寻出为泾州总管诸军事、泾州刺史。
现代文：不久王雄出任泾州总管诸军事、泾州刺史。
English: Wang Xiong was soon appointed as the chief administrator of the military and the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：保定四年，从晋公护东征。
现代文：保定四年，王雄跟从晋公宇文护束征。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, Wang Xiong followed Jin Gong Uwen Shuo.

古文：雄在涂遇病，乃自力而进。
现代文：王雄在半路得病，仍尽自己的力量前进。
English: Wang Xiong fell ill in the middle of the journey, but still did his best to advance.

古文：至邙山，与齐将斛律明月接战。
现代文：到了邙山，王雄跟齐将斛律明月交战。
English: When they arrived at Lushan, Wang Xiong and his followers fought against Baolut Mingyue.

古文：雄驰马冲之，杀三人，明月退走，雄追之。
现代文：王雄驰马冲击，杀死三人，斛律明月后退败逃，王雄追他。
English: Wang Xiong hit the horse, killed three people, and fled after the bright moon. Wang Xiong chased him.

古文：明月左右皆散，矢又尽，惟余一奴一矢在焉。
现代文：斛律明月的侍从都四散而逃，箭又快射完，祇剩下一个奴仆和一支箭在身旁。
English: Peliu Mingyue's attendants all scattered and fled, and the arrows were soon exhausted, leaving only one servant and one arrow at his side.

古文：雄按矛不及明月者丈余，曰： 惜尔不杀得，但任尔见天子。 明月乃射雄，中额，抱马退走，至营而薨。
现代文：王雄手抚长矛准备刺杀，但还差一丈多刺不到斛律明月，王雄说： 可惜不能杀掉你，不过还是要活捉你去见天子。 斛律蛆月就用最后一支箭射向王雄，刚好射中他的前额，王雄抱马往回跑，到了军营不久就死了。
English: Wang Xiong held a spear in his hand and prepared to stab him, but he was still a yard short of stabbing Baolu Mingyue. Wang Xiong said, "Unfortunately, I can't kill you, but I still want to catch you alive and take you to see the Son of God." Baolu Mingyue shot Wang Xiong with the last arrow, just hitting his forehead. Wang Xiong ran back with his horse and died soon after arriving at the military camp.

古文：时年五十八。
现代文：当时王雄五十八岁。
English: At that time, Wang Xiong was 58 years old.

古文：赠使持节、太保、同华等二十州诸军事、同州刺史，谥曰忠。
现代文：朝廷追赠他为使持节、太保、回萎等二十州诸军事、回业刺史，谧号为盅。
English: Wu Wenguo was beaten to death, and his posthumous name was changed to Zhuangzhuang. Wang Qian, the Chinese character for forgiveness, was from Taiyuan. His father, Wang Xiong, was awarded the title of General of Zhuang Province and the title of Duke of Wuwei County for his achievements. After his death, his posthumous name was Zhong.

古文：子谦嗣，自有传。
现代文：玉雄的儿子王谦继承了父亲的爵位，自己另外有传。
English: Tamakio's son, Wang Qian, inherited his father's title, but he also had a separate lineage.

古文：史臣曰：太祖接丧乱之际，乘战争之余，发迹平凉，抚征关右。
现代文：史臣曰：太祖处在时局动乱的时期，利用战争的余波，在平凉起家立功扬名，安抚征伐潼关以西一带地方。
English: Shichen said: Taizu was in a time of turmoil, taking advantage of the aftermath of the war, making a name for himself in the calm, and pacifying the areas west of Shaoguan.

古文：于时外虞孔炽，内难方殷，羽檄交驰，戎轩屡驾。
现代文：在当时外患很猖獗，内难正盛，军事文书交相飞驰，兵车屡屡出动。
English: At that time, external troubles were rampant, internal difficulties were rampant, military documents were exchanged at a rapid pace, and military vehicles were repeatedly dispatched.

古文：终能荡清逋孽，克固鸿基。
现代文：他最终能够清除流窜的妖孽，巩固伟大的王业。
English: He would finally be able to cleanse the world of the evil sorcerers and solidify his great royal legacy.

古文：虽禀筭于庙谟，实责成于将帅。
现代文：虽然有赖于庙堂的运筹谋划，实际上督责成功在于将帅。
English: Although it depends on the operational planning of the temple, in fact, the success of supervision lies in the commander.

古文：达奚武等并兼资勇略，会风云。
现代文：达聂武等兼具勇敢和谋略，熟习布阵。
English: Dagongwu and others have both bravery and strategy, and are familiar with the formation.

古文：或效绩中权，或立功方面，均分休戚，同济艰难。
现代文：有的在朝廷中枢效劳，有的任一方军政要职而立功，大家均等分担欢乐忧愁，在艰难时曰同心救助朝廷。
English: Some of them served at the center of the imperial court, some of them served in important military and political positions, and all of them shared the joys and sorrows equally. In difficult times, they all helped the imperial court.

古文：可谓国之爪牙，朝之御侮者也。
现代文：他们真可以称得上是国家的勇猛卫士，朝廷抵御外侮的猛将。
English: They can truly be called the brave defenders of the country, the fierce warriors of the imperial court against foreign insults.

古文：而武协规太祖，得隽小，周瑜赤壁之谋，贾诩乌巢之策，何能以尚。
现代文：而达罢迭协助叁担，在尘迩斩获敌军猛将，即使是且瑜在壶壁之战的计谋，贾谢在乌巢一役的良策，哪能超过他呢。
English: However, even if it is the stratagem of Qi Yu in the Battle of Hulunbi and the good strategy of Jia Xie in the Battle of Wuzhong, how can it surpass him?

古文：一言兴邦，斯近之矣。
现代文：一句话就可以使国家兴盛，这些人的事迹与这说法已很接近了。
English: The story of these people is very close to the saying that a single word can make a country prosperous.

