古文：常山愍王承乾字高明，生承乾殿，即以命之。
现代文：常山愍王李承乾字高明，因为出生在承乾殿，就给他取了这个名字。
English: Li Chengxian, the king of Changshan, was nicknamed Gao Ming. He was given this name because he was born in Chengxian Hall.

古文：武德三年，始王常山郡，与长沙、宜都二王同封。俄徙中山。
现代文：武德三年，开始封为常山郡王，与长沙王、宜都王同时受封，不久改封为中山王。
English: In the third year of Wude, he began to be named the county king of Changshan. He was simultaneously named the king of Changsha and the king of Yidu, and was soon renamed the king of Zhongshan.

古文：太宗即位，立为皇太子。
现代文：太宗即位后，被册封为皇太子。
English: After Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, he was named crown prince.

古文：甫八岁，特敏惠，帝爱之。
现代文：他才八岁，就显得特别聪慧，太宗很喜欢他。
English: He is only eight years old, but he seems to be very intelligent. Taizong likes him very much.

古文：在谅暗，使裁决庶政，有大体，后每行幸，则令监国。
现代文：居丧期间，让他处理各种政务，都能合乎基本原则，以后太宗每逢出外巡视，就派他留守国都，代管国政。
English: During the mourning period, let him deal with various government affairs, which can be in line with the basic principles. From now on, whenever Taizong went on inspection, he would send him to stay in the capital to take charge of state affairs.

古文：及长，好声色慢游，然惧帝，秘其迹。
现代文：长大成人后，喜欢音乐美色和游山玩水，但是害怕太宗得知，总是隐瞒自己的行踪。
English: When he became an adult, he liked music, beauty, and hiking, but he was afraid that Taizong would find out, so he always concealed his whereabouts.

古文：临朝，言谆谆必忠孝，退乃与群不逞狎慢。
现代文：每逢上朝，满口忠孝，说得非常恳切，退朝后便与一群不逞之徒戏耍。
English: Every time the emperor ascended to the throne, he was full of words of loyalty and filial piety, and spoke very earnestly. After his abdication, he played with a group of incompetents.

古文：左右或进谏，危坐敛容，痛自咎，饰非辩给，谏者拜答不暇，故人人以为贤而莫之察。
现代文：左右如有劝谏，他就严肃端坐，痛切自责，掩饰错误，多方辩解，使劝谏者拜服答话都来不及，所以人人都认为他有贤德而不知其底细。
English: If he is admonished, he sits down gravely, reproaches himself bitterly, conceals his mistakes, defends himself in many ways, and makes the admonisher too late to answer, so everyone thinks he is virtuous without knowing the details.

古文：后过恶寝闻，宫臣若孔颖达、令狐德棻、于志宁、张玄素、赵弘智、王仁表、崔知机等皆天下选，每规争承乾，帝必厚赐金帛，欲以厉其心。
现代文：后来他的恶行渐渐为人所知，太子属官孔颖达、令狐德、于志宁、张玄素、赵弘智、王仁表、崔知机等人都是从全国选拔的能臣，他们常常规劝承乾，太宗闻知后总是厚赐金帛，想勉励他学好。
English: Later, his evil deeds gradually became known to the people. The princes' subordinate officers, Kong Yingda, Ling Xude, Yu Zhining, Zhang Xuansu, Zhao Hongzhi, Wang Renshou, Cui Zhiqui, and others were all capable ministers selected from all over the country. They often tried to persuade him, and the emperor always gave him a gold ingot to encourage him to study well.

古文：承乾慠不悛，往往遣人阴图害之。
现代文：承乾却傲慢而不知改悔，还常常派人谋害他们。
English: He was arrogant and unrepentant, and often sent people to kill them.

古文：时魏王泰有美名，帝爱重。
现代文：当时魏王李泰有好名声，很受太宗喜爱和重视。
English: At that time, Wei King Li Tai had a good reputation and was very loved and valued by Taizong.

古文：而承乾病足，不良行，且惧废，与泰交恶。
现代文：而承乾脚上有毛病，行走不便，又害怕被废黜，便与李泰结仇。
English: However, Chien-Chien had a problem with his feet, walking was inconvenient, and he was afraid of being dethroned, so he became enemies with Li Tai.

古文：泰亦谋夺长，各树党。
现代文：李泰也图谋夺取太子之位，二人便各树党羽。
English: Li Tai also plotted to seize the position of crown prince, and the two men went their separate ways.

古文：东宫有俳儿，善姿首，承乾嬖爱，帝闻震怒，收儿杀之，坐死者数人。
现代文：东宫有个优伶，长得很漂亮，承乾特别宠爱他。太宗知道后很恼怒，把这个优伶抓起来杀了，受牵连被处死的有好几个人。
English: In the East Palace, there was a handsome eunuch, who was very beautiful, and he was a special favorite of Emperor Chengxian. When Emperor Taizong learned of this, he was very angry, arrested and killed this handsome eunuch, and several people were implicated and executed.

古文：承乾意为泰告，望甚。
现代文：承乾认为是李泰告密所致，非常怨恨。
English: Cheng Qian thought it was caused by Li Tai's whistle-blowing, and was very resentful.

古文：内念儿不已，筑室图其象，赠官树碑，为起冢苑中，朝夕祭。
现代文：他心里非常怀念这个优伶，建房挂上他的画像，还封赠官爵树立碑文，在宫苑中建起坟墓，早晚祭奠。
English: In his heart, he greatly missed this great man. He hung his picture on the wall of his house, bestowed a title of nobility on him, erected an inscription, and built a tomb in the palace garden, which is dedicated to him in the morning and evening.

古文：承乾至其处裴回，涕数行下，愈怨怼，称疾不朝，累数月。
现代文：承乾在那里徘徊彷徨，流下几行眼泪，更加怨恨，借口生病，几个月不上朝。
English: Chengxian wandered there, shed a few tears, became more resentful, used illness as an excuse, and did not go to the imperial court for several months.

古文：又使户奴数十百人习音声，学胡人椎髻，剪彩为舞衣，寻橦跳剑，鼓鞞声通昼夜不绝。
现代文：承乾还派宫奴数十上百人学习音乐歌曲，学胡人模样梳椎形发髻，剪裁彩绸做舞衣，爬竿舞剑，击鼓声日夜不停。
English: Cheng Qian also sent dozens and hundreds of palace servants to study musical songs, comb their hair in the shape of a bearded man, cut colored silk to make dance clothes, climb poles to dance with swords, and play drums day and night.

古文：造大铜炉、六熟鼎，招亡奴盗取人牛马，亲视烹燖，召所幸厮养共食之。
现代文：又铸造大铜炉、六熟鼎，招集逃亡奴仆去偷人家牛马，亲自看他们煺毛烹煮，并召集所喜欢的奴仆一起来吃。
English: He also cast a large copper furnace and six jujube woks, summoned runaway slaves to steal people's cattle and horses, personally watched their bristles cook, and summoned favorite slaves to eat together.

古文：又好突厥言及所服，选貌类胡者，被以羊裘，辫发，五人建一落，张氈舍，造五狼头纛，分戟为阵，系幡旗，设穹庐自居，使诸部敛羊以烹，抽佩刀割肉相啗。
现代文：他喜欢突厥语言与服饰，挑选相貌像胡人的，让他们穿上羊皮袄，打上辫子，五人为一部落，张设毡房，制造五狼头大旗，分列阵势，悬挂旌旗，并设置穹庐自居，命各部落把羊交来烹煮，各人抽出佩刀割肉共吃。
English: He liked the Turkic language and clothing. He chose people who looked like the Hu people, put them in sheepskin coats, tied them up with ropes. Five people were a tribe, set up a shepherd's hut, made five wolf-headed flags, lined up, hoisted the wolf flag, and set up a dome for themselves. He ordered each tribe to cook the sheep, and each person drew a sword to cut the meat and eat it together.

古文：承乾身作可汗死。使众号哭剺面，奔马环临之。
现代文：承乾装扮作突厥可汗死了，让众人号哭，用刀划脸表示悲哀，骑马在他周围奔跑。
English: He dressed up as a Turkic khan and died, causing the crowd to cry, slash their faces with knives to show their grief, and ride around him on horses.

古文：忽复起曰： 使我有天下，将数万骑到金城，然后解发，委身思摩，当一设，顾不快邪！ 
现代文：他突然站起来说： 如让我拥有天下，率领数万骑兵前往金城，然后披散头发，托身于思摩，当一个部落首领，那多畅快啊！ 
English: He suddenly stood up and said: "If you let me own the world, lead tens of thousands of cavalry to Jincheng, and then wear my hair loose, lean on Sima, and be a tribal leader, how pleasant it would be!

古文：左右私相语，以为妖。
现代文：随从之人窃窃私语，认为他中了魔。
English: His followers whisper that he is possessed.

古文：又襞氈为铠，列丹帜，勒部阵，与汉王元昌分统，大呼击刺为乐。
现代文：他又把毡子折叠成铠甲，排列红旗，率领其众列成阵势，与汉王李元昌分别统领，大声呼叫，击刺为乐。
English: He also folded the dice into armor, arranged the red flags, led his people into a formation, and led them separately from the Han King Li Yuanchang, shouting loudly and stabbing for fun.

古文：不用命者，披树抶之，或至死，轻者辄腐之。
现代文：对不听命令的就用杖抽打，有的被打死，轻的也皮开肉绽。
English: Those who disobeyed the order were beaten with a cane, some were beaten to death, and some had their flesh torn open.

古文：尝曰： 我作天子，当肆吾欲；有谏者，我杀之，杀五百人，岂不定？ 
现代文：他曾说： 我当了皇帝，就要随心所欲。谁要劝谏，我就杀死他，杀到五百人，难道还压不下来？ 
English: He once said: "Now that I am emperor, I will do whatever I want. If anyone tries to dissuade me, I will kill him. If I kill five hundred people, will I not be able to suppress them?

古文：又召壮士左卫副率封师进、刺客张师政、纥干承基等谋杀魏王泰，不克，遂与元昌、侯君集、李安俨、赵节、杜荷镵臂血■之，谋以兵入西宫。
现代文：承乾又召集壮士左卫副率封师进、刺客张师政、纥干承基等人谋杀魏王李泰，没能成功，便与李元昌、侯君集、李安俨、赵节、杜荷刺臂歃血为盟，阴谋带兵闯入西宫。
English: Cheng Jian also called up the strongman Zuo Wei and his deputy Fong Shijin, the assassin Zhang Shizheng, and Gan Chengji to murder the Wei king Li Tai. When they were unsuccessful, they made an alliance with Li Yuanchang, Hou Junji, Li Antao, Zhao Jie, and Du He and conspired to break into the Western Palace.

古文：贞观十七年，齐王祐反齐州，承乾谓承基等： 我宫西墙，去大内正可二十步棘耳，岂与齐州等？ 
现代文：贞观十七年，齐王李反于齐州，承乾对纥干承基等人说： 我们东宫的西墙，离皇宫只隔二十步篱笆，哪能与齐州相比？ 
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, King Li of Qi rebelled against Qizhou, and Chengjian said to Zhengjian Chengji and others: The west wall of our East Palace is only twenty steps away from the palace. How can it be compared to Qizhou?

古文：会承基连齐王事系狱当死，即上变。
现代文：时逢承基因齐王事被拘捕将处死，就将承乾之事报告了朝廷。
English: At that time, when Prince Cheng Jian Qi was arrested and about to be executed, he reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：帝诏长孙无忌、房玄龄、萧瑀、李勣、孙伏伽、岑文本、马周、褚遂良杂治，废为庶人，徙黔州。
现代文：太宗下诏让长孙无忌、房玄龄、萧蠫、李责力、孙伏伽、岑文本、马周、褚遂良共同审理，废承乾为庶人，流放到黔州。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict that the eldest grandson Mujie, Fang Xuanling, Xiao Yao, Li Wei Li, Sun Fu Jia, Zou Wenwen, Ma Zhou, and Zou Suiliang should be tried together, and that Wuzhong Qian should be treated as a commoner and exiled to Zhangzhou.

古文：收恤甥侄，慈爱过人，家无留储，公卿合赙乃克葬。
现代文：贞观十九年死在那里，太宗为此中止朝会，用国公的礼节予以安葬。
English: Zhenguan died there in the 19th year, and Emperor Taizong suspended the imperial court assembly for this reason, and he was buried with the courtesy of a courtier.

古文：璄，神龙初封归政郡王，历宗正卿，坐千里事，贬南州司马。濮恭王泰字惠褒。始王宜都，徙封卫，继怀王后。
现代文：承乾之子李象出任怀州别驾，李厥出任鄂州别驾。开元年间，李象之子李适之出任宰相，玄宗赐还了承乾的始封王号，封赠李象为越州都督、郇国公。濮恭王李泰字惠褒，始封宜都王，后改封卫王，以奉祀怀王元霸。
English: During the first year of the year, Li Xiang's son, Li Shizhi, became the prime minister, and Xuanzong also gave Li Xiang the title of the first vassal king, granting Li Xiang the title of the governor of Yuezhou and the prince of Yunnan. The king of Gongyang, Li Tai, was given the title of the first vassal king of Yindu, and later the title of the first vassal king of Yindu, and later the title of the first vassal king of Wei, to worship the king of Huai, Yuanba.

古文：又徙封越，为扬州大都督。
现代文：又改封越王，并任扬州大都督。
English: He was also renamed Yue Wang and appointed Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：再迁雍州牧、左武候大将军。
现代文：后改任雍州牧、左武侯大将军。
English: Later, he was appointed as the grand general of Yongzhou and Zuowu.

古文：改王魏。
现代文：又改封为魏王。
English: He also changed his title to Wei Wang.

古文：帝以泰好士，善属文，诏即府置文学馆，得自引学士。
现代文：太宗见李泰好养士，会写文章，下诏在他府中设置文学馆，可以自置学士。
English: Emperor Taizong saw that Li Tai was a good nurse and could write articles, and issued an edict to set up a literature museum in his palace, and he could have his own bachelor's degree.

古文：又以泰大腰腹，听乘小舆至朝。
现代文：又因李泰腰腹甚大，允许他坐小轿上朝。
English: In addition, because Li Tai's waist is very large, he is allowed to take a sedan to the morning.

古文：司马苏勖劝泰延宾客著书，如古贤王。
现代文：司马苏勖劝李泰延请宾客著书，像古贤王那样。
English: Sima Suzhen advised Li Taiyan to invite guests to write books, like the ancient wise men.

古文：泰乃奏撰《括地志》，于是引著作郎萧德言、秘书郎顾胤、记室参军蒋亚卿、功曹参军谢偃等撰次。
现代文：李泰便上奏皇帝编纂《括地志》，于是引用著作郎萧德言、秘书郎顾胤、记室参军蒋亚卿、功曹参军谢偃等人编集。
English: Li Tai then appealed to the emperor to compile the "Bridging History," and then cited the works of Lang Xiao Deyan, secretary Lang Guyin, secretary Jiang Yaxing, Gong Cao, and others to compile the collection.

古文：卫尉供帐，光禄给食，士有文学者多与，而贵游子弟更相因藉，门若市然。
现代文：由卫尉供设帷帐，光禄供给膳食，有才学的士人多参与了这项工作，那些贵族子弟也来这里，搞得门庭若市。
English: The guards provided the curtains, and Guanglu provided the food. Many talented scholars took part in this work. The sons of the aristocracy also came here and made a splash.

古文：泰悟其过，欲速成，乃分道计州，繙缉疏录，凡五百五十篇，历四期成。
现代文：这时李泰才感到事情做错，想迅速编成，便分道计州分类集录，共成五百五十五篇，经过整整四年才完成。
English: At this time, Li Tai felt that he had done something wrong and wanted to compile it quickly, so he went his separate way and compiled the State Classification Catalogue, a total of five hundred and fifty-five articles, which took a full four years to complete.

古文：诏藏秘阁，所赐万段。
现代文：下诏将此书藏于秘阁，并赐予丝帛万段。
English: The emperor decreed that the book be kept in a secret cabinet and that it be given 10,000 copies.

古文：后帝幸泰延康坊第，曲赦长安死罪，免坊人一年租，府僚以差赐帛。
现代文：之后太宗临幸李泰延康坊的居宅，为之宽赦长安的死囚，蠲免了坊内居民一年的租税，王府僚属都分别赐予丝帛多寡不一。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong visited the residence of Li Tai Yan Kangfang, for which he pardoned the death-row prisoners of Chang'an, exempted the residents of the village from paying taxes for one year, and gave the members of the royal court various amounts of money.

古文：又泰月禀过皇太子远甚，谏议大夫褚遂良谏曰： 圣人尊嫡卑庶，谓之储君，故用物不会，与王共之，庶子不得为比，所以塞嫌萌，杜祸源。
现代文：此外，李泰每月的供给超过皇太子甚多，谏议大夫褚遂良进谏道： 圣人尊崇嫡嗣，看轻庶子，称太子为储君，故用物不计多寡，与皇帝相似，庶子不得攀比，这是为了堵塞嫌隙，杜绝祸源。
English: In addition, Li Tai's monthly supply was much more than that of the crown prince, and the doctor Sui Liang suggested that the sage respected the heir and looked down on the illegitimate son, calling the prince the crown prince. Therefore, it did not matter how much or how little it was used, it was similar to the emperor, and the illegitimate son should not be comparable. This was to plug the gap and eliminate the source of evil.

古文：先王法制，本诸人情，知有国家者必有嫡庶，庶子虽爱，不得过嫡子。
现代文：先王制法，必以人情为本，知有国家就有嫡庶之分，庶子虽受宠爱，用物不得超过嫡子。
English: The former king's system of law must be based on human feelings. It is known that there are countries that have a legitimate son. Although the illegitimate son is favored, he may not use more than the legitimate son.

古文：如当亲者疏，当尊者卑，则私恩害公，惑志乱国。
现代文：如果该亲者反被疏远，该尊者反被轻视，就会使私恩危害公义，迷惑人心，搅乱国家。
English: If, on the other hand, the relative is alienated, and the venerable person is despised, it will cause the personal favor to endanger justice, confuse people's hearts, and disrupt the country.

古文：今魏王禀料过东宫，议者以为非是。
现代文：现在魏王的供给物品超过了东宫，论者都认为不妥。
English: Now that the Wei king's supply of goods exceeds that of the East Palace, the commentators all think it is not appropriate.

古文：昔汉窦太后爱梁王，封四十余城。
现代文：从前西汉窦太后喜爱梁王，封给他四十余城。
English: The empress dowager of the Western Han Dynasty once loved Liang Wang and granted him more than forty cities.

古文：王筑苑三百里，治宫室，为复道，费财巨万，出警人跸，一不得意，遂发病死。
现代文：梁王修筑苑囿三百里，修建宫室，架起复道，耗费资财巨万，出行有警戒，返回要清道，一不得志，就发病而死。
English: Liang Wang built three hundred miles of gardens, built a palace, erected a multi-lane road, spent a huge amount of money, traveled with caution, returned to clear the road, and died of illness as soon as he was discouraged.

古文：宣帝亦骄淮阳王，几至于败，辅以退让之臣，乃克免。
现代文：汉宣帝也骄纵淮阳王，几乎害了他。后靠知书识礼之臣的辅佐，才没酿成大祸。
English: Emperor Han Xuan was also proud of King Huaiyang, and almost killed him. It was only later, with the help of a scholarly and courteous vassal, that the disaster was averted.

古文：今魏王新出閤，且当示以节俭，自可在后月加岁增。
现代文：现在魏王离开内廷不久，应当示意他注意节俭，当然以后还可增加供应。
English: Now that Wei Wang has not long left the Inner Court, he should be told to be thrifty. Of course, he can increase the supply in the future.

古文：又宜择师傅，教以谦俭，勉以文学，就成德器，此所谓圣人之教，不肃而成也。 
现代文：还应选择师傅，敦促他谦虚俭朴，勉励他学好经典，使他成为有德之人，这就是所谓圣人的教导不严厉而可获得成功。 
English: He should also choose a teacher, urge him to be modest and frugal, encourage him to study the classics well, and make him a virtuous person. This is the so-called sage's teaching is not strict and can be successful.

古文：帝又敕泰入居武德殿，侍中魏徵亦言： 王为陛下爱子，欲安全之，则不当使居嫌疑之地。
现代文：太宗又下诏让李泰入居武德殿，侍中魏征也劝谏道： 魏王是您的爱子，想保全他，就不应让他居于易生嫌疑的地方。
English: Emperor Taizong also issued an edict to allow Li Tai to live in the Wude Hall, and the chamberlain Wei Zheng also advised him: Wei Wang is your beloved son, and if you want to protect him, you should not let him live in a place where he is susceptible to suspicion.

古文：今武德殿在东宫之西，昔海陵居之矣，论者为不可。
现代文：武德殿在东宫的西边，过去海陵住在那里，论者都认为不妥。
English: Wude Hall is on the west side of the East Palace, where Haering lived in the past, and the commentators all think it is inappropriate.

古文：虽时与事异，人之多言，尚或可畏。
现代文：虽然现在时间与情况不同以往，但人们的议论很多，这也令人害怕。
English: Although it's a different time and situation, there's a lot of talk, which is scary.

古文：又王之心亦弗遑舍，愿罢之，成王以宠为惧之美。 
现代文：同时魏王心里也不安稳，希望收回成命，以成全魏王以宠为惧的美德。 
English: At the same time, the king of Wei was not stable in his heart, hoping to take back his life and fulfill the virtue that the king of Wei was afraid of being favored.

古文：帝悟，乃止。
现代文：太宗醒悟过来，中止了这个决定。
English: Taizong came to his senses and cancelled the decision.

古文：时皇太子承乾病蹇，泰以计倾之，乃引驸马都尉柴令武、房遗爱等布腹心，而韦挺、杜楚客相继摄府事。二人者，为泰要结中朝臣，津介赂遗，群臣更附为朋党。
现代文：当时皇太子承乾腿脚不便，李泰设计排挤他，于是招引驸马都尉柴令武、房遗爱等人充当心腹，而韦挺、杜楚客又相继辅佐他代行府事，这两人为李泰邀结中官朝臣，拉扰联系，贿赂馈赠，群臣为此攀附结党。
English: At that time, the crown prince was inconvenient, and Li Tai planned to oust him. Therefore, he invited the generals Chai Lingwu and Fang Youai to act as confidants, while Wei Ting and Du Chu Ke successively assisted him in carrying out the affairs of the government. These two were invited by Li Tai to unite the middle-ranking officials and courtiers, disturb the contacts, bribe and give gifts, and the ministers joined the party for this reason.

古文：承乾惧，阴遣人称泰府典签诣玄武门上封，帝省之，书言泰罪，帝怒，即遣捕诘，不获。
现代文：承乾感到害怕，暗地派人自称魏王府典签前往玄武门送上密封的奏章，太宗察看其书，见其中揭露李泰的罪状，因而大怒，立即派人拘捕上书人诘问，却没抓到。
English: Cheng Jian felt scared and secretly sent someone who claimed to be Wei Wangfu's signature to go to the Xuanwu Gate to send a sealed record. Taizong inspected his book and saw that it revealed Li Tai's guilt, so he was furious and immediately sent someone to arrest and interrogate the sender, but he did not catch him.

古文：既而太子败，帝阴许立泰，岑文本、刘洎请遂立泰为太子。
现代文：不久太子事败，太宗私下答应立李泰为太子，岑文本、刘洎便请求立李泰为太子。
English: Soon after the crown prince was defeated, Emperor Taizong privately agreed to appoint Li Tai as crown prince, and Liu Bei then requested the appointment of Li Tai as crown prince.

古文：长孙无忌固欲立晋王，帝以太原石文有 治万吉 ，复欲从无忌。
现代文：长孙无忌本来想立晋王李治，太宗又因太原石上有 治万吉 之文，又想听从无忌的意见。
English: Mu Mu's eldest grandson originally wanted to set up the Jin king Li Zhi, but Emperor Taizong also wanted to listen to Mu Mu's opinion because there was a text on the Taiyuan Stone that said it was good to rule the world.

古文：泰微知之，因语晋王： 尔善元昌，得无及乎？ 
现代文：李泰稍知其情，便对晋王说： 你同元昌的关系很好，不会牵连到你吗？ 
English: Li Tai knew his feelings a little and said to Jin Wang: Your relationship with Yuanchang is very good. Won't you be implicated?

古文：王忧甚，帝怪之，以故对，帝怃然悟。
现代文：晋王非常担忧，太宗见此感到奇怪，晋王回答了原因，太宗方才明白李泰的用意。
English: Jin Wang was very worried, Taizong was surprised to see this, Jin Wang answered the reason, and Taizong understood Li Tai's intention.

古文：会召承乾谴勒，承乾曰： 臣贵为太子，尚何求？
现代文：适逢召见承乾予以训斥，承乾说： 我贵为太子，还有什么希求呢？
English: At the right time, he summoned Heung-Chan to reprimand him. Heung-Chan said, "I am honored to be the crown prince, what more could I ask for?

古文：但为泰所图，与朝臣谋自安尔。
现代文：只是被李泰暗算，想与朝臣谋自全罢了。
English: It's just that he was plotted against by Li Tai, who wanted to seek self-fulfillment with the courtier.

古文：无状之人，遂教臣为不轨事。
现代文：那些无法无天的人，教我做些越轨之事。
English: Those who are lawless, teach me to do something deviant.

古文：若泰为太子，正使其得计耳。 
现代文：如果李泰立为太子，正好让其阴谋得逞。 
English: If Li Tai Li becomes the crown prince, it is just right to let his plot succeed.

古文：帝曰： 是也，有如立泰，则副君可诡求而得。
现代文：太宗说： 对呀，假如立泰为太子，那么储君之位就可用诡计求得。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "That's right. If Rittai is crown prince, then the position of crown prince can be obtained by trickery.

古文：使泰也立，承乾、治俱死；治也立，泰、承乾可无它。 
现代文：如果立泰，承乾和治都会被害；如果立治，泰和承乾都可保全。 
English: If Tai is established, both Cheng Chien and Ji will be damaged; if Ji is established, both Tai and Cheng Chien can be preserved.

古文：即幽泰将作监，解雍州牧、相州都督、左武候大将军，降王东莱。
现代文：便把李泰幽禁在将作监，并解除他雍州牧、相州都督、左武侯大将军之职，降封为东莱王。
English: He then confined Li Tai to serve as a warden, and relieved him of his posts as Yongzhou governor, Xiangzhou governor, and Zuowu grand marshal, and demoted his title to King of Donglai.

古文：因诏： 自今太子不道、籓王窥望者，两弃之，著为令。 
现代文：为此下诏说： 今后凡是太子无道、藩王阴谋夺位者，双方都要废黜。
English: For this reason, the following edict was issued: In the future, both sides will dethrone any prince who has no moral compass or who has been enthroned through the machinations of a feudal lord.

古文：然帝犹谓无忌曰： 公劝我立雉奴，雉奴仁懦，得无为宗社忧，奈何？ 
现代文：把这记入律令中去。 但太宗还是对长孙无忌说 ：您劝我立雉奴，雉奴仁懦，使我不得不为宗庙社稷担忧，怎么办呢？ 
English: But Emperor Taizong still said to his eldest grandson, "What should I do if you advise me to appoint a vassal, and the vassal is not benevolent, so that I have to worry about the family temple society?"

古文：雉奴，高宗小字。
现代文：一一一雉奴，是高宗的小名。
English: He is a minor name of Gaozong.

古文：泰寻改王顺阳，居均州之郧乡。
现代文：李泰不久又改封顺阳王，住在均州郧乡。
English: Li Tai soon changed his title to Shunyang Wang and lived in Yongxiang, Junzhou.

古文：帝尝持泰表语左右曰： 泰文辞可喜，岂非才士？
现代文：太宗曾拿着李泰的奏章对左右说 ：泰的文辞令人喜欢，难道不是有才之士？
English: Emperor Taizong once held Li Tai's music score and said to the right and left: Tai's words are pleasing, isn't he a talented person?

古文：我心念泰无已时，但为社稷计，遣居外，使两相完也。 
现代文：我心中无时不在怀念他，但为了国家的长远利益，只能让他远居外地，好让双方都能保全。 
English: I miss him in my heart all the time, but for the sake of the long-term interests of the country, I can only let him live far away, so that both sides can be protected.

古文：二十一年进王濮。
现代文：贞观二十一年进封为濮王。
English: In the twenty-first year of Zhenguan's reign, he was crowned the King of Shanshan.

古文：高宗即位，诏泰开府置僚属，车服羞膳异等。
现代文：高宗即位后，下诏让李泰开建府署设置僚属，车服膳食都超过常等。
English: After Gao Zong ascended to the throne, he issued an edict to Li Tai to set up a subordinate in the construction department, and the meals in the carriage were more than usual.

古文：薨郧乡，年三十五，赠太尉、雍州牧。
现代文：后来逝世于郧乡，时年仅三十五岁。赠予太尉、雍州牧。
English: Later, he passed away in Handan Township, at the age of only thirty-five. He was given the titles of captain and Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：二子：欣、徽。
现代文：他有两个儿子：李欣和李徽。
English: He has two sons: Li Xin and Li Hui.

古文：欣嗣王，武后时为酷吏所陷，贬昭州别驾，薨。
现代文：李欣承袭为王，武后时被酷吏陷害，贬为昭州别驾，死。
English: Li Xin succeeded as king, and when she became empress, she was framed by cruel officials, relegated to Zhaozhou Beidou, and died.

古文：子峤，神龙初得嗣王。
现代文：欣子李峤，神龙初年得以承袭为王。
English: In the first year of Shenlong, Jinzi Li Yao succeeded to the throne.

古文：开元中为国子祭酒，以罪贬邓州别驾，薨。
现代文：开元年间担任国子祭酒，因罪被贬为邓州别驾，死。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, it served as the national son's sacrificial liquor, and was relegated to the status of a special vehicle of Dengzhou for the crime, and died.

古文：徽封新安郡王。
现代文：李徽被封为新安郡王。
English: Li Hui was named the King of Xin'an County.

古文：庶人祐字赞。
现代文：庶人李祐字赞。
English: The commoner Li Yuzi was full of praise.

古文：武德八年，王宜阳，进王楚，又王燕，已乃封齐，领齐州都督。
现代文：武德八年，封为宜阳王，进封楚王，又改为燕王，最后封为齐王，领齐州都督。
English: In the eighth year of Wude, he was given the title of King of Yiyang, then King of Chu, then King of Yan, and finally King of Qi with the title of Governor of Qi Province.

古文：贞观十一年始归国。
现代文：贞观十一年到达封地。
English: Zhenguan arrived at the fief in the eleventh year.

古文：以明年入朝，以疾留京师。
现代文：第二年入朝，因病留居京师。
English: In the second year after his accession to the throne, he stayed in Kyoto due to illness.

古文：其舅尚乘直长阴弘智，憸人也，说祐曰： 王兄弟多，即上万岁后，何以自全？
现代文：其舅父尚乘直长阴弘智，是奸邪小人，对李祐说： 你兄弟很多，皇上逝世后，你怎样保全自己？
English: His uncle, who was still riding on the coattails of Zhi Changyin and Hongzhi, was a traitorous villain. He said to Li Yu: You have many brothers. After the emperor's death, how will you protect yourself?

古文：要须得士自助。 
现代文：非得才智之士相助不可。 
English: We must have the help of talented people.

古文：乃引客燕弘亮谒祐，祐悦，赐金帛，使募剑客。
现代文：随即引荐宾客燕弘信拜谒李祐，李祐很高兴，赏给他金银丝帛，派他招募剑客。
English: He then introduced his guest, Yan Hongxin, to Li Yu. Li Yu was very pleased and rewarded him with gold and silver silk brooches and sent him to recruit swordsmen.

古文：十五年还州。
现代文：贞观十五年返回齐州。
English: Zhenguan returned to Qizhou after 15 years.

古文：初，帝用王府长史、司马，必取骨鲠敢言者，有过失辄闻。
现代文：起初，太宗委派王府长史、司马时，必择耿直敢言的人充任，亲王如有过失，都能及时上言。
English: At first, when the Emperor's Grand Council of Elders appointed Wangfuchangshi and Sima, they had to choose someone who could speak frankly. If the prince was at fault, he could speak up in time.

古文：而祐溺群小，好弋猎，长史薛大鼎屡谏不听，帝以辅王无状，免之，更用权万纪。
现代文：可李祐陷入群小之中，喜好田猎。长史薛大鼎屡谏而不听，太宗认为他辅佐齐王没有成效，免去其职，另选权万纪担任。
English: However, Li Yu fell into a small group and liked to go hunting in the fields. Chang Shi Xue Dading repeatedly rebuked him, but he did not listen. Taizong thought that his assistance to King Qi was not effective, so he removed him from his post and chose another official, Quan Wan Ji.

古文：万纪性刚急，以法绳祐。
现代文：万纪性情刚烈急躁，用律令约束李祐。
English: The universal discipline temperament is rigid and impetuous, and Li Yu is constrained by the ritsuryo.

古文：有昝君谟、梁猛虎者，骑射得幸，万纪斥之，祐私引与狎昵。
现代文：有名叫昝君谟、梁猛虎的两个人，因为善于骑射受李祐宠幸。万纪对他们加以斥责，李祐却私下跟他们戏耍。
English: There were two people named Zou Junmo and Liang Yangtze Tiger, who were favored by Li You because they were good at riding and shooting. Wan Ji reprimanded them, but Li You played with them in private.

古文：帝数以书让祐，万纪恐并获罪，即说祐曰： 王，上爱子，上欲王改悔，故数教责王。
现代文：太宗多次写信责备李祐，万纪害怕一并受罚，便规劝李祐说： 王啊，你是皇上的爱子，皇上想让你悔改，所以多次责备你。
English: Emperor Taizong repeatedly wrote letters to reproach Li Yu. Wan Ji was afraid of being punished together, so he advised Li Yu to say: "O king, you are the emperor's beloved son. The emperor wants you to repent, so he has repeatedly reproached you.

古文：诚能饬躬引咎，万纪请入朝言之，上意宜解。 
现代文：如能恭敬谨慎，引咎自责，我愿入朝上奏，皇上的不满情绪是会消除的。 
English: If I can be respectful and prudent, and not blame myself, I would like to enter the imperial court, and the emperor's dissatisfaction will be eliminated.

古文：祐因上书谢罪。
现代文：李祐于是上书皇上认错。
English: Li Yu then sent a letter to the emperor admitting his mistake.

古文：万纪见帝，言祐且自新，帝悦，厚赐万纪，而仍谯戒祐。
现代文：万纪拜见太宗，说李祐将会改过自新，太宗很高兴，重赏了万纪，而仍责备和告诫李祐。
English: Wan Ji paid a visit to Taizong and said that Li Yu would be reformed. Taizong was very pleased and rewarded Wan Ji, but still rebuked and admonished Li Yu.

古文：祐闻万纪见劳，而己蒙责，以为卖己，益不平。
现代文：李祐得知万纪受赏，自己却遭受斥责，认为万纪出卖了自己，更加心怀不平。
English: When Li Yu learned that Wanji had won the award, but he had been reprimanded, he thought that Wanji had betrayed him, and he was even more upset.

古文：会万纪又以疑贰系君谟等，制祐不出国门，悉暴祐罪于朝，祐不胜忿。
现代文：适逢万纪又因疑虑拘捕了昝君谟等人，并不准李祐离开齐州州城，还把李祐的罪行上报朝廷，李祐非常忿怒。
English: At the right time, Wan Ji arrested Zou Junmo and others because of doubts, and did not allow Li Yu to leave the city of Qizhou. He also reported Li Yu's crime to the imperial court. Li Yu was very angry.

古文：有诏刑部尚书刘德威临讯，颇实，帝召祐、万纪还京师。
现代文：有诏书派刑部尚书刘德威亲临审讯，查出实情。太宗便召李祐、权万纪回长安。
English: An imperial edict sent Liu Dewei, the head of the Criminal Law Department, to personally attend the trial and find out the truth. Emperor Taizong then summoned Li Yu and Quan Wanji back to Chang'an.

古文：祐与燕弘亮等谋，射杀万纪，支解之。
现代文：李祐与燕弘亮等人秘谋，射杀了万纪，肢解了他的尸体。
English: Li Yu and Yan Hongliang and others conspired to shoot Wan Ji and dismember his body.

古文：左右劝祐遂发兵，乃募城中男子年十五以上悉发，私署左右上柱国，光禄大夫，开府仪同三司，托东、托西等王，斥库赀行赏，驱人筑堞浚隍，缮甲兵。
现代文：左右便劝李祐就此发兵，于是招募城中十五岁以上的男子悉数入伍，私自委任左右上柱国，光禄大夫，开府仪同三司，托东、托西等王，拿出府库资财行赏，驱赶百姓修筑城墙，疏浚护城河，修缮铠甲和兵器。
English: Therefore, he recruited all the men over the age of fifteen in the city to enlist in the army, and personally appointed the left and right upper pillar countries, Guanglu doctors, Kaifu Yi and three departments, Todong, Tosi and other kings, took out the prefectural treasury resources and rewards, and drove the people to build the city wall, dredge the moat, and repair armor and weapons.

古文：人恶之，皆夜缒亡去。
现代文：人们都讨厌他，多在夜里缒绳出城，逃往其他地方。
English: People hated him and fled the city, mostly at night, to other places.

古文：诏兵部尚书李勣与刘德威发便道兵讨之。
现代文：太宗下诏兵部尚书李责力与刘德威调集沿途兵马前去征讨。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict to the military department of Shangshu, Li Rongli and Liu Dewei mobilized soldiers and horses along the way to go to investigate.

古文：祐日夜引弘亮等五人对其妃宴乐。
现代文：李祐却日夜领着燕弘亮等五人和他的妃子一道饮酒作乐。
English: Day and night, Li Yu led five people including Yan Hongliang and his concubine to drink alcohol and make music.

古文：语官军，则弘亮妄言： 王毋忧，右手持酒啗，左手刀拂之。 
现代文：谈起官军，弘亮狂妄地说： 大王不必担心，我右手拿着酒喝，左手持刀砍死他们。 
English: Speaking of the imperial army, Hong Liang said arrogantly: "Your Majesty need not worry. I will drink wine with my right hand and cut them to death with my left hand.

古文：祐信爱弘亮，闻之喜。
现代文：李祐宠信燕弘亮，听了很高兴。
English: Li Yujiaxin Yan Hongliang, I was very pleased to hear.

古文：帝手敕祐曰： 吾常戒汝勿近小人，正为此耳。
现代文：这时太宗下手谕李祐说 ：我常常告诫你不要接近小人，正是防止今日之事。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizong ordered Li Yu to say, "I have often warned you not to get close to villains, and it is precisely to prevent what happened today."

古文：往吾子，今国仇，我上惭皇天，下愧后土。 
现代文：过去你是我的儿子，今天却是国家的仇敌。我上惭皇天，下愧后土啊！ 
English: In the past you were my son, but today you are an enemy of the state. I am ashamed, Emperor!

古文：题毕，涕而遣。
现代文：写完之后，挥泪派人送去。
English: After he finished writing, he sent someone away in tears.

古文：祐檄诸县，县辄以闻。
现代文：李祐发檄文号召各县，各县却将此情上奏朝廷。
English: Li You sent a letter to all counties, but each county reported the situation to the imperial court.

古文：祐穷蹙，上表曰： 臣，帝子也，为万纪谗构，上天降灵，罪人斯得。
现代文：李祐已到穷途末路，只好上表说： 我是皇上之子，遭权万纪谗言陷害，上天降下威灵，让他得到惩罚。
English: Li Yu was at his wit's end and had no choice but to declare: "I am the emperor's son, I have been framed by the all-powerful and all-disciplined, and the heavens have sent down a great spirit to punish me."

古文：臣狂失心，惝怳惊悸，左右无兵，即欲颠走，所以颇仗械以自卫护。 
现代文：我丧心病狂，惊恐慌张，左右又无兵马，就想仓猝而逃，所以倚仗兵器保护自己。 
English: I was distraught, panicking, and there were no soldiers around, so I wanted to run away in a hurry, so I relied on weapons to protect myself.

古文：时勣未至，而青、淄等州兵已集。
现代文：这时李责力的大军还未开到，青、淄等州的兵马业已齐集。
English: At this time, Li Ruili's large army had not yet arrived, and the soldiers and horses from Qing, Shandong and other states had already gathered.

古文：或劝祐虏子女走豆子为盗，计未决，兵曹杜行敏夜勒兵凿垣入，祐与弘亮等闭门拒，至日中，行敏呼曰： 吾为国讨贼，不速降，且焚。 
现代文：有人劝李祐掳掠男女奔往豆子耺为盗，一时计议未定。兵曹杜行敏就趁夜色率兵挖开城墙攻入城内。李祐和燕弘亮闭门抵御，到太阳当顶之时，杜行敏大声喊道： 我为国家讨伐叛贼，如不赶快投降，就要用火来烧！ 
English: Some people advised Li Yu to kidnap and plunder men and women who were rushing to steal beans and bean paste, but the timing was undecided. Petty Officer Du Xingmin took advantage of the darkness to lead soldiers to dig through the city wall and enter the city. Li Yu and Yan Hongliang closed their doors to resist, and when the sun was at its peak, Du Xingmin shouted loudly: I am fighting the traitors for the country, if I don't surrender soon, I will burn them with fire!

古文：士积薪，祐乃出，执送京师。
现代文：军士堆满了柴草，李祐才开门出降，被押送至京师。
English: The sergeant was covered with firewood and grass before Li You opened the door to surrender and was escorted to the Beijing Division.

古文：赐死内侍省，贬为庶人，葬以国公礼。
现代文：逼令自杀于内侍省，将他贬为庶人，但仍用国公礼安葬。
English: He forced him to commit suicide in the Ministry of the Interior, reduced him to a commoner, but was still buried with full state honours.

古文：诏齐州给复一年，擢行敏巴州刺史，封南阳郡公。
现代文：又下诏免除齐州一年徭役，提升杜行敏为巴州刺史，封为南阳郡公。
English: The edict also exempted Du Xingmin from serving as the magistrate of Qizhou for one year, promoted him to be the magistrate of Bazhou and made him the magistrate of Nanyang County.

古文：祐喜养斗鸭，方未反，狸齚鸭四十余，绝其头去。
现代文：李祐喜爱饲养斗鸭，在他未叛之时，野猫咬死斗鸭四十多只，并叼走其头。
English: Li Yu liked to keep fighting ducks. When he was not rebelling, wild cats bit more than forty ducks to death and carried off their heads.

古文：及败，牵连诛死者凡四十余人。
现代文：事败后，受牵连被杀者正好四十多人。
English: After the case was lost, more than forty people were implicated and killed.

古文：祐之乱，州人罗石头数祐罪，以刀直前刺祐，不克，杀之。
现代文：李祐叛乱时，齐州人罗石头声讨其罪，持刀向前刺杀李祐，因没成功而被杀。
English: When Li Yu rebelled, the Qizhou man Luo Shiwen condemned his crime, stabbed Li Yu with a knife, and was killed because he did not succeed.

古文：诏赠亳州刺史。
现代文：这时下诏封赠罗为亳州刺史。
English: At this time, Luo was awarded the imperial seal and became the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：祐尝引骑徇邑聚，野人高君状曰； 上亲平寇难，土地甲兵不胜计。
现代文：李祐曾率骑兵到村邑巡略，村民高君状对他说： 皇上亲自扫平寇乱，土地甲兵不可胜数。
English: Li Yu once led a cavalry patrol to a village, and the villagers said to him in the form of Gao Jun: The emperor personally swept away the banditry, and there are countless land armored soldiers.

古文：开元十二年，复封胤。
现代文：现在你率数千人作乱，如同只手摇撼泰山，怎么对得起你的父皇？ 
English: Now you are leading thousands of people to create turmoil, as if shaking Mount Tai with one hand. How can you do justice to your father, the emperor?

古文：薨，子戢嗣，位左卫率府中郎将。
现代文：李祐打他并把他抓了起来，但对他的话也感到羞愧，不好意思杀他。
English: Li You beat him up and caught him, but was too ashamed of his words to kill him.

古文：子皋嗣。
现代文：事后下诏提拔高为榆社县令。
English: After the fact, Gao was promoted to the county magistrate of Jinsha County.

古文：皋字子兰，少补左司御兵曹参军。
现代文：李皋字子兰，少补左司御兵曹参军。
English: Li Xi, Zilan, Shao Zi, Zuo Cao, join the army.

古文：天宝十一载嗣王。
现代文：天宝十一年袭封为曹王。
English: In the eleventh year of Tianbao, he was crowned Cao Wang.

古文：事母太妃郑以孝闻。
现代文：他侍奉其母郑太妃以孝闻名。
English: He served his mother, Empress Dowager Zheng, and was known for his filial piety.

古文：安禄山反，奉母逃民间，间走蜀，谒玄宗，由都水使者迁左领军将军。
现代文：安禄山叛乱时，他侍奉母亲逃往民间，乘便跑到蜀郡，拜见玄宗，由都水使者迁任左领军将军。
English: During the An Lushan Rebellion, he served his mother and fled to the people. He took a bus to Shu County, met with Xuanzong, and was transferred from the messenger of the capital to the general of the left leading army.

古文：上元初旱歉，皋禄不足养，请补外，不许，乃故抵轻法，贬温州长史，俄摄州事。
现代文：肃宗上元初年因天旱歉收，李皋的俸禄不够养家，请求补任外地，没有得到批准。于是故犯轻法，被贬为温州长史，不久代管州事。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign in the Yuan Dynasty, due to poor harvest caused by drought, Li Xi's salary was not enough to support his family, and he requested to be appointed to a post outside the province, but was not approved. Therefore, he committed a minor offense and was relegated to Wen Guo's history, and soon he was in charge of state affairs.

古文：州大饥，发官廪数十万石赈饿者，僚史叩庭请先以闻，皋曰： 人日不再食且死，可俟命后发哉？
现代文：该州发生饥荒，他拿出官仓粮食数十万石赈济灾民。僚属佐吏都登庭叩请他先报告朝廷，李皋说： 人一天不吃两顿饭就可能饿死，怎能等朝廷下令后再发放呢？
English: There was a famine in the state, and he took out hundreds of thousands of koku of grain from the official storehouse to help the victims. His colleagues and subordinate officials all went to court to ask him to report to the court first. Li Wei said: People may starve to death if they don't eat two meals a day, how can they wait for the court to issue an order?

古文：苟杀我而活众，其利大矣！ 
现代文：如果杀了我而让众人得活，那么好处就太大了！ 
English: If you kill me and let everyone else live, then the benefits are too great!

古文：既贷，乃自劾，优诏开许，就进少府监。
现代文：他将粮食发放后，便上表请罪，朝廷下诏表示宽免认可。李皋随即进职为少府监。
English: After he distributed the grain, he pleaded guilty on the table, and the Imperial Court issued an edict of pardon and recognition. Li Xi was immediately promoted to the position of Junior Prefectural Inspector.

古文：时殿中侍御史李钧与其弟京兆法曹参军锷宦既遂，不肯还乡，母穷不自给。
现代文：当时殿中侍御史李钧与其弟京兆府法曹参军李锷求官成功，却不肯回到家里，其母穷得不能养活自己。
English: At that time, the palace's chambermaid, Li Yao, and his brother, the legal officer of Jingzhao Prefecture, Li Yao, who joined the army, successfully applied for the post, but refused to return home. His mother was too poor to support herself.

古文：皋行县见之，叹曰： 入则孝，出则悌，有余力则学。
现代文：李皋巡县见到她，感叹地说 ：到家里就讲孝道，出门就尊敬兄长，还有余力就求学问道。
English: When Li Bingjun County saw her, he said with a sigh, "When I get home, I'll preach filial piety, when I go out, I'll respect my elder brother, and when I still have time, I'll ask her about studying."

古文：若二子者可与事君乎哉？ 
现代文：能和这两人一道侍奉君主吗？ 
English: Can I serve the monarch with these two?

古文：举劾之，并锢死。
现代文：便提出弹劾，使他们受到终生禁锢的处分。
English: They were impeached and sentenced to life imprisonment.

古文：召还，未得见，即上书言治道，诏授衡州刺史，为观察使谩劾，贬潮州。
现代文：召还进京后，还没朝见皇上，就上书谈治国之道，于是下诏授任衡州刺州。因被观察使诬枉弹劾，而被贬为潮州刺史。
English: After being summoned back to Beijing, he wrote a letter about the way of governing the country before meeting the emperor, and then he was awarded the post of Hengzhou Jizhou. Because he was observed to make a false impeachment, he was relegated to Chaozhou Jizhou history.

古文：会杨炎起道州为宰相，知皋直，复用为衡州刺史。
现代文：适逢杨炎从道州起用为宰相，知道李皋耿直，仍用他担任衡州刺史。
English: At the right time, Yang Yan was appointed as the prime minister from Daozhou, and he still used him as the chief historian of Hengzhou.

古文：初，御史覆讯，皋惧忧其母，出则囚服，入乃衣冠，貌言如平常。
现代文：这事发生之时，御史审查讯问，李皋怕母亲担忧，出门就穿囚服，回家就换常服，脸色言语一如平常。
English: At the time of this incident, during the examination and interrogation by the court historian, Li Yiming was afraid of his mother's concern, and he wore prison clothes when he went out, and changed into his regular clothes when he came home. His face was expressionless as usual.

古文：及为潮，以迁入告。至是复位，乃言其实。
现代文：贬为潮州刺史时，就以调任相告，直至恢复原职，才将实情告诉母亲。
English: When he was demoted to the position of Chaozhou chief historian, he informed his mother that he had been transferred to a different post. It was not until he was reinstated that he told his mother the truth.

古文：建中元年，进拜湖南观察使。
现代文：德宗建中元年，晋升为湖南观察使。
English: In the first year of Dezong Jianzhong, he was promoted to Hunan Observation Envoy.

古文：前帅辛京杲贪虐，使部将王国良戍武冈，赖其富，即劾以死，国良恐，据县反，敛荆、黔、洪、桂兵讨之，再岁不能下。
现代文：前任主帅辛京杲贪婪残暴，派武将王国良戍守武冈，靠他致富后，就弹劾他有死罪。王国良害怕，就占据武冈县城造反。辛京杲调集荆、黔、桂诸州兵马征讨他，两年都未攻下。
English: The previous head coach, Xin Jingyao, was greedy and cruel. He sent the military commander Wang Guoliang to guard Wuoka. After he became rich, he impeached him for the death penalty. Wang Guoliang was afraid and occupied the county seat of Wuoka to rebel. Xin Jingyao mobilized soldiers and horses from Jing, Guizhou and Guizhou to fight against him. He was not defeated for two years.

古文：皋至，遗书曰： 观将军非敢大逆者，特逃谗抗死尔！
现代文：李皋到任后，写信去说： 我看将军并非大逆不道之人，只不过逃避谗言以免死罪而已！
English: After Li Xi took office, he wrote a letter saying: I think the general is not a traitor, but he just avoids criticism to avoid the death penalty!

古文：将军遇我，可以降，我固为京杲诬者，幸蒙雪，何忍以兵加将军哉？
现代文：将军遇到我，可以归降。我也受过京杲诬陷，所幸得到洗雪。怎能忍心动兵加害将军呢？
English: If the general meets me, he can surrender. I have also been framed by the imperial court, but fortunately I was exonerated. How can I bear to mobilize troops to harm the general?

古文：以为不然，我以阵术破将军阵，以攻法屠将军城，非将军所度也。 
现代文：如果不以为然，我将用破阵法破将军之阵，用攻城法杀进将军之城，结果就不是将军预料得到的了。 
English: If not, I will use the method of breaking the line to break the general's line, and use the method of attacking the city to enter the general's city, and the result will not be what the general expected.

古文：国良得书，喜且畏，因请降，然内尚首鼠。
现代文：国良得信，又喜又怕，想趁此投降，又心怀疑虑。
English: Guoliang was believed, he was both happy and afraid, he wanted to use this opportunity to surrender, but he was also full of doubts.

古文：皋即日单骑称使者造国良垒，贼延使者入，皋大呼其军曰： 有识曹王者乎？
现代文：李皋当天单人独骑自称使者来到国良营垒前，贼军请使者入内，李皋便对其众喊道 ：有认识曹王的吗？
English: On the same day, Li Gan rode alone, claiming to be an emissary, and came to Guoliang Camp. The bandits invited the emissary inside, and Li Gan shouted to the crowd: Do you know Cao Wang?

古文：乃我也。
现代文：我就是曹王。
English: I am Cao Wang.

古文：来受良降，良今安在？ 
现代文：我来接受国良投降，国良在哪里？ 
English: I have come to accept Kuniyoshi's surrender. Where is Kuniyoshi?

古文：一军愕眙，不敢动，国良迎拜，叩头请罪。
现代文：全军目瞪口呆，不敢妄动，国良出来迎拜，叩头请罪。
English: The whole army was dumbfounded and did not dare to move. Guoliang came out to bow and beg for forgiveness.

古文：皋执手，约为昆弟，则尽焚攻守具，散其兵。
现代文：李皋握着他的手约为兄弟，便烧尽攻守器械，遣散人马。
English: Li Yao held his hand as if they were brothers, then he burned all the offensive and defensive equipment and dismissed the troops.

古文：有诏赦之，赐名惟新。
现代文：朝廷下诏赦免其罪，还给他赐名 惟新 。
English: The imperial court issued an edict to pardon his crime, and he was given the name "Werexin."

古文：明年，持母丧至江陵。
现代文：第二年，李皋扶着母亲的灵柩到达江陵。
English: The following year, Li Yan arrived at Jiangling with his mother's coffin.

古文：会梁崇义反，夺为左卫大将军，复观察湖南。
现代文：时逢梁崇义反叛，被朝廷夺情授职为左卫大将军，重任湖南观察使。
English: At the time of Liang Chongyi's rebellion, he was appointed by the imperial court as the General of the Left Guards and given the important post of Hunan Observer.

古文：李希烈反，迁江西节度使。
现代文：李希烈反叛，他任江西节度使。
English: Li Xilei rebelled, and he was appointed as the Jiangxi governor.

古文：受命日，不宿家，至豫章，大令将吏曰： 有功未申与怀器谋不发者，皆自言。 
现代文：受命之日，他未回家住宿，就前往豫章，对部将属官发布重要的命令说： 有功劳未能申述、有谋略得不到发挥的人，都可毛遂自荐。 
English: On the day of receiving the order, he did not go home to stay, but went to Yuzhang to issue an important order to the subordinate officers: Those who have merits that cannot be reported, and those who have strategies that cannot be exerted, can finally recommend themselves.

古文：得裨校伊慎、李伯潜、刘旻，悉补大将。
现代文：从而选出裨将校官伊慎、李伯潜、刘，都委任为大将。
English: As a result, school officials Ishen, Li Boqian, and Liu were elected and appointed as generals.

古文：擢王锷为中军，以马彝、许孟容为幕府。
现代文：还提拔王锷为中军，任用马彝、许孟容为幕府。
English: He also promoted Wang Qian to the Central Army, and appointed Ma Qian and Xu Meng Rong to the Shogunate.

古文：治战舰，裒兵二万，以士二千五百委慎等教之。
现代文：修造战舰，募集兵士二万，将其中二千五百人交付伊慎等人训练。
English: He built warships, recruited twenty thousand soldiers, and sent twenty-five hundred of them to Ishin and others for training.

古文：自将五百人，教以秦兵团力法，联其赏罚，弛张如一，乃约以五百人击慎卒二千五百，莫能当其锋，即尽以教之。
现代文：自率五百人，用秦兵团力法加以训练，将赏罚联结在一起，松紧如一。于是约定用这五百人攻击伊慎之兵二千五百人，结果无人能阻挡其攻势。
English: He led five hundred men and trained them using the Qin Army method, linking rewards and punishments as tightly as one. Therefore, it was agreed that these five hundred men would be used to attack Ishin's two thousand five hundred soldiers. As a result, no one could stop his offensive.

古文：初，慎尝从希烈平襄州，至是，希烈惧为皋用，即反间，德宗信之，将诛慎，皋请赦之，使自效。
现代文：便尽用其法训练新兵。起初，伊慎曾随从李希烈平定襄州，到这时，李希烈怕他被李皋重用，就行使反间计。德宗听信谗言，准备杀掉伊慎，李皋奏请赦免他，使他在军前效力。
English: At first, Ishin had accompanied Li Xilai in his campaign to subdue Xiangzhou. By this time, Li Xilai was afraid that he would be used as a pawn by Li Qiye, so he resorted to a countermeasure. Dezong listened to his advice and prepared to kill Ishin. Li Qiye then asked to pardon him so that he could serve in the army.

古文：会与贼夹江阵，皋勉慎立功，以所乘马及其铠赐之，使将先锋，斩贼数百级，乃免。
现代文：适逢贼兵夹江列阵，李皋勉励伊慎趁此立功，并把自己所乘马及兵器铠甲赐给他，让他充作先锋，斩贼兵首级数百，才免于此难。
English: When the bandits and soldiers were lined up along the river, Li Yu encouraged Ishen to take advantage of the opportunity and gave him his horse and armor, so that he could act as a vanguard and cut off the heads of hundreds of bandits and soldiers.

古文：贼栅蔡山不可攻，皋声言西取蕲，引兵舰循崖溯江上。
现代文：贼兵在蔡山树起栅垒难以攻打，李皋扬言将西取蕲州，率领兵舰沿着江岸溯流而上。
English: It was difficult for the robber soldiers to attack Cai Shan Shuxing Fort, so Li Gan threatened to take Bozhou to the west and led the warships upstream along the riverbank.

古文：贼闻，以羸师保栅，悉军行江北，与皋直。
现代文：贼兵闻知，便留羸弱的兵士保护栅垒，其余兵马全都从江北向西开进，以抵挡李皋。
English: When the robber soldiers heard of this, they left the weak soldiers to protect the barrier, and the rest of the soldiers and horses all marched westward from the north of the river to resist Li Yan.

古文：西去蔡山三百里，皋遣步士悉登舟，顺流下，攻蔡山，拔之。
现代文：当军队远离蔡山三百里时，李皋下令步兵全都上船，顺流而下，径攻蔡山，拿了下来，隔了一天，叛军救兵赶到，也被打得大败。
English: When the army was three hundred miles away from Cai Mountain, Li Qiye ordered all the infantry to board the ship, go down the river, attack Cai Mountain, and take it down. A day later, the rebel rescuers arrived and were also defeated.

古文：间一日，贼救至，遂大败，乃取蕲州，降其将李良，平黄州，兵益振。会舒王为元帅，授皋前军兵马使。
现代文：随后攻取蕲州，招降其守将李良，接着平定黄州，兵威更盛。适逢舒王就任兵马大元帅，任命李皋为前军兵马使。
English: Subsequently, he conquered Bozhou, recruited its garrison commander Li Liang, and then subdued Huangzhou, and his military power increased. At the same time, Shu Wang was appointed as the grand marshal of the Terracotta Army, and appointed Li Yu as the former military envoy.

古文：俄而天子狩奉天，盐铁使包佶为陈少游所窘，以运艚溯江，次蕲口，希烈使杜少诚将步骑三万将绝江道，皋遣伊慎兵七千御于永安，走之。
现代文：不久天子巡狩奉天，盐铁使包佶被陈少游困迫，便将运输船沿江而上，行至蕲口时，李希烈派杜少诚率领步骑三万准备截断江道。李皋派遣伊慎率兵七千人抵御于永安，把贼军赶跑。
English: Soon after, Tianzi went on a hunting trip to Fengtian, and Yan Tie was forced by Chen Shaoyou to besiege Baodi, so he sailed the transport ship up the river. When he reached the mouth of the river, Li Xilei sent Du Shaocheng to lead 30,000 horsemen to prepare to cut off the river. Li Xi sent Yishan to lead 7,000 soldiers to resist Yongan and drive the thief army away.

古文：以功进工部尚书。
现代文：李皋因功晋升为工部尚书。
English: Li Jun was promoted to Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry for his merits.

古文：帝驻梁州，皋之贡助相望。
现代文：德宗驻驾梁州时，李皋的贡品和资助源源不断。
English: When Dezong was stationed in Diliangzhou, Li Gan's tributes and subsidies continued to flow.

古文：以天子处外，乃不敢居城府，出屯西塞山大洲，徙郡县为军市。
现代文：因天子住在京外，他也不敢住进城中府第，便出屯于西塞山前大洲上，将郡县衙门迁往军中，设置市场。
English: Because Tianzi lived outside of Beijing, he did not dare to live in the central part of the city, so he settled on the continent in front of the Xise Mountain, moved the county gate to the middle of the army, and set up a market.

古文：改户部尚书。
现代文：不久改任为户部尚书。
English: He was soon reassigned to the household of Shosho.

古文：又遣伊慎、王锷攻安州，未下，希烈遣刘戒虚以步骑八千援之，皋命李伯潜迎击于应山，俘之，遂下安州，斩伪刺史王嘉祥。
现代文：他又派伊慎、王锷进攻安州，没有攻下，李希烈派刘戒虚率步骑八千援助安州，李皋命令李伯潜迎击于应山，俘获刘戒虚，于是攻下安州，杀掉伪刺史王嘉祥。
English: He also sent Yishen and Wang Qian to attack Anzhou, but failed to capture it. Li Xili sent Liu Jiahu to ride eight thousand to aid Anzhou. Li Qian ordered Li Boqian to counterattack at Yingshan, capture Liu Jiahu, and then capture Anzhou and kill the fake assassin Shi Wang Jiaxiang.

古文：希烈别遣兵援隋州，皋破之厉乡，因下平静、白雁关，贼遂不敢南略。
现代文：李希烈另派兵援救随州，李皋在厉乡打败他们，趁势攻下平靖关与白雁关，贼兵于是不敢南下掠夺。
English: Li Xili also sent soldiers to rescue Suizhou. Li Gan defeated them in Lixiang and took advantage of the situation to attack Pingjing Pass and Baiyan Pass. The robber soldiers did not dare to go south to plunder.

古文：迁荆南节度使，赐实封三百户。
现代文：后迁任荆南节度使，朝廷赐予实封三百户。
English: After the relocation, he was appointed Jingnan Festival Envoy, and the imperial court granted him the real estate of more than 300 households.

古文：凡战大小三十二，取州五、县二十，斩首三万三千，禽生万六千，未尝败。
现代文：他总共指挥大小战役三十二次，攻取州城五座、县城二十座，斩首三万三千级，生擒一万六千人，从未打过败仗。
English: He commanded a total of thirty-two large and small battles, captured five state capitals and twenty county capitals, beheaded thirty-three thousand people, and captured sixteen thousand people, and never fought a losing battle.

古文：师所过，不敢伐桑枣、践禾稼。
现代文：军队所行之处，不敢砍伐桑枣、践踏庄稼。
English: Wherever the army goes, they dare not cut down mulberry trees or trample on crops.

古文：朝廷仰食江淮，而西道出九江，至大别，皆与贼接，皋转战数千里，饷路遂通，江汉倚皋为固。
现代文：朝廷全靠江淮一带供应粮食，而运粮的西路出九江，到达汉阳龟山，都与贼兵相接。李皋转战数千里，打通运粮的通道，江汉一带全靠李皋保持安定局面。
English: The imperial court relied entirely on the Huai and Huai rivers to supply grain, while the western route for transporting grain from the Jiujiang River to the Hanyang Turtle Mountain was connected to the robber soldiers. Li Qian traveled thousands of miles to open the channel for transporting grain, and the Han River area relied entirely on Li Qian to maintain a stable situation.

古文：淮西平，乃请护丧归东都，帝走中人赗吊。
现代文：淮西平定后，便奏请护丧返归东都，德宗派遣宦官前往赠送财物助葬。
English: After the subjugation of Huaxi, he asked for a funeral escort to return to the eastern capital, and Emperor Dezong sent eunuchs to the capital to present money and goods to help with the funeral.

古文：讫葬来朝，还就镇。
现代文：安葬完毕，他就进京朝见，随后还镇荆南。
English: After the funeral, he went to Beijing to see the emperor, and then went to Jingnan.

古文：初，江陵东北傍汉有古鄣，不治，岁辄溢。
现代文：起初，江陵县东北靠汉江处有古堤，年久失修，每年漫顶。
English: At first, there was an old dike in the northeast of Gangneung County along the Han River. It had fallen into disrepair and was filled to the brim every year.

古文：皋修塞之，得其下良田五千顷。
现代文：李皋修复堤防堵塞缺口，获得堤内良田五千顷。
English: Li Gan repaired the levee blockage gap and obtained five thousand hectares of good fields within the levee.

古文：规江南废洲为庐舍，构二桥跨江，而流人自占者二千余家。
现代文：还在江南废洲上修建房舍，建起两道桥梁跨越江面，自愿占田定居的流民就有两千多家。
English: In addition, houses were built on the wasteland south of the Yangtze River, and two bridges were built to cross the river. There are more than two thousand displaced people who have voluntarily settled in Zhantian.

古文：繇荆抵乐乡二百里，其间墟聚凡数十，不井饮，皋始命凿井以便人。
现代文：由荆州到乐乡二百里，其间集镇村庄共数十座，都不用井水，至李皋才命人凿井以方便百姓。
English: From Jingzhou to Le Township, there are 200 miles, among which there are dozens of market towns and villages, all of which do not use well water. It was not until Li Qian ordered people to dig wells to facilitate the people.

古文：贞元初，吴少诚擅蔡，故徙皋镇山南东道，割隋、汝以益军，练兵峙粮，市回鹘马以益战骑，岁时大畋以教士，少诚畏之。
现代文：贞元初年，吴少诚在蔡州独断专行，故调李皋镇守山南东道，划割随州、汝州以增补军需，练兵储粮，购买回鹘马以增加战骑，按时举行大规模畋猎以训练兵卒。吴少诚很怕他。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan era, Wu Shaocheng arbitrarily ruled in Caizhou, so he transferred Li Yuzhen to guard the southern part of the mountain, divided Suizhou and Ruzhou to supplement military supplies, trained soldiers to store grain, purchased horses to increase cavalry, and held large-scale hunting on time to train soldiers. Wu Shaocheng was very afraid of him.

古文：皋性勤俭，能知人疾苦。
现代文：李皋性爱勤俭，能了解人民的疾苦。
English: Li Yan loves diligence and thrift, and is able to understand the sufferings of the people.

古文：参听微隐，尽得吏下短长，其赏罚必信。
现代文：他考察听取各方隐情，尽知下属长短之处，赏罚都能兑现。
English: He investigates and listens to the hidden feelings of all parties, knows the strengths and weaknesses of subordinates, and can reward and punish.

古文：所至常平物估，豪举不得擅其利。
现代文：所到之处常常平抑物价，不让富豪独占其利。
English: Everywhere they go, they often keep prices stable and do not allow the rich to monopolize their profits.

古文：教为战舰，挟二轮蹈之，鼓水疾进，驶于阵马。
现代文：他教工匠建造战船，夹船安上两只轮子来踩动它，鼓水疾进，驶行超过战马。
English: He taught the craftsmen to build a warship, put two wheels on the ship to push it, and the water rushed in, driving faster than the warhorse.

古文：有所造作，皆用省而利长。
现代文：有所造作，都考虑用料省而好处多。
English: If there is a fabrication, it is considered to save materials and have more benefits.

古文：以物遗人，必自视衡量，库帛皆印署，以杜吏谩。
现代文：送人以物，必定亲自察看多少，府库布帛全都盖上大印，以杜绝官吏的欺瞒。
English: Send people and things, must personally inspect how much, prefectures and cities all stamped with a large seal, in order to prevent officials from deception.

古文：扶凤马彝未知名，皋识之，卒以正直称。
现代文：扶风人马彝未知名时，李皋就发现了他，结果他以正直见称。
English: When he was not well-known, Li Yao discovered him, and he became known for his honesty.

古文：张柬之有园圃在襄阳，皋尝宴集，将市取之。
现代文：张柬之在襄阳有处园圃，李皋曾宴请属官，准备把它买过来。
English: Zhang Kamzhi had a garden in Yangyang, and Li Qiye had invited officials to a banquet and was preparing to buy it.

古文：彝曰： 汉阳有中兴功，今遗业当百世共保，奈何使其子孙鬻乎？ 
现代文：马彝说： 汉阳郡公有中兴本朝之功，现在的遗产应当百世共保，怎能让其子孙卖掉呢？ 
English: Ma Wei said: Hanyang County is the public property of ZTE, and the present heritage should be preserved for all time. How can his descendants sell it?

古文：皋谢曰： 主吏失词，以为君羞，微君安得闻此言？ 
现代文：李皋认错说： 主管官员说错了话，使先生感到羞愧。
English: Admitting his mistake, Li Yao said: "The official in charge said the wrong thing, which made me feel ashamed.

古文：卒年六十，赠尚书右仆射，谥曰成。
现代文：去世时年六十岁，追赠尚书右仆射，谥为 成 。
English: He was sixty years old at the time of his death, and was posthumously awarded the title of Shangshu Yuhubei and the title of Zheng.

古文：皋尝自创意为欹器，以飖木上出五觚，下锐圆，为盂形，所容二豆，少则水弱，多则强，中则水器力均，虽动摇，乃不覆云。
现代文：李皋曾创造过一种欹器，用漆过的木头上端做五道棱角，下端尖而圆，像盂的形状，可容水八升，水少则势弱，水多则势强，水适中则其器受力均衡，即使摇动它，也不会翻转过来。
English: Li Wei once created a kind of bowl. The lacquered wood has five edges and corners at the end, and the lower end is pointed and round, like the shape of a bowl. It can hold eight liters of water. Less water is weak, more water is strong, and when the water is moderate, the force on the bowl is balanced. Even if you shake it, it will not turn over.

