古文：任城威王彰，字子文。
现代文：任城威王曹彰，字子文。
English: Ren Chengwei Wang Cao Chang, Chinese characters.

古文：少善射御，膂力过人，手格猛兽，不避险阻。
现代文：年少时就擅长骑射，臂力超过常人，能徒手和猛兽搏斗，不怕艰难险阻。
English: When he was young, he was good at riding and shooting, his arm strength exceeded that of an ordinary person, he could fight with wild beasts with his bare hands, and he was not afraid of difficulties and obstacles.

古文：数从征伐，志意慷慨。
现代文：多次跟随太祖征讨，意志激昂奋发。
English: He has followed his great-grandfather's conquest many times, and his will is ardent.

古文：太祖尝抑之曰： 汝不念读书慕圣道，而好乘汗马击剑，此一夫之用，何足贵也！ 
现代文：太祖曾经告诫他说： 你不想着读书，仰慕圣贤的道义，却喜欢骑马射箭，这只是一个人的作用而已，有什么珍贵的！ 
English: The great-grandfather once admonished him: You don't want to read, admire the morality of the sages, but you like to ride horses and shoot arrows. This is just a person's role, what is precious!

古文：课彰读诗、书，彰谓左右曰： 丈夫一为卫、霍，将十万骑驰沙漠，驱戎狄，立功建号耳，何能作博士邪？ 
现代文：就督促曹彰学习《诗经》、《尚书》。曹彰对左右说： 大丈夫一旦成为卫青、霍去病那样的将军，统率十万将士在沙漠上驰骋，驱逐外邦，建立战功和名号罢了，怎么能做博士呢？ 
English: He urged Cao Chang to study the "Book of Songs" and "Song of Songs." Cao Chang said to the left and right: "Once a good husband becomes a general like Wei Qing and Huo Dexia, leading a hundred thousand soldiers to gallop in the desert, expel foreigners, and establish military exploits and reputation, how can he be a doctor?

古文：太祖尝问诸子所好，使各言其志。
现代文：太祖曾经问他的儿子们爱好什么，让他们各自说自己的志向。
English: The great-grandfather used to ask his sons what their hobbies were and let them each say what they wanted to do.

古文：彰曰： 好为将。 
现代文：曹彰说： 希望能做将军。 
English: Cao Zhang said: I hope I can be a general.

古文：太祖曰： 为将柰何？ 
现代文：太祖问： 怎么做将军？ 
English: The great-grandfather asked: How to be a general?

古文：对曰： 被坚执锐，临难不顾，为士卒先；赏必行，罚必信。 太祖大笑。
现代文：他回答说： 穿上铠甲，手拿兵器，面对危险也不回头，作为将士的表率；有功比赏，有过必罚。 太祖大笑。
English: He replied, "Put on the armor, take up the weapons, and do not turn back in the face of danger, as the leader of the soldiers; there is a reward for merit, and there is a punishment."

古文：建安二十一年，封鄢陵侯。
现代文：建安二十一年，曹彰被封鄢陵侯的爵位。
English: In the 21st year of Jian'an, Cao Zhang was awarded the title of Marquis of Fuling.

古文：二十三年，代郡乌丸反，以彰为北中郎将，行骁骑将军。
现代文：建安二十三年，代郡的乌丸反叛，太祖以曹彰为北中郎将，兼任骁骑将军。
English: In the 23rd year of Jian'an, Wu Maru rebelled on behalf of the county, and Cao Chang was appointed as the general of the north and the general of the cavalry.

古文：临发，太祖戒彰曰： 居家为父子，受事为君臣，动以王法从事，尔其戒之！ 
现代文：即将出发时，太祖告诫曹彰说： 我们在家中是父子，现在委派任务，我们就是君臣，你的言行举止都应该按照律法，你应该慎重啊！ 
English: When they were about to leave, the great-grandfather admonished Cao Zhang, saying, "In our family, we are father and son. Now we are delegating tasks. We are lords and vassals. Your words and deeds should be in accordance with the law. You should be careful!"

古文：彰北征，入涿郡界，叛胡数千骑卒至。
现代文：曹彰率军北征进入涿郡的境内，几千名反叛的胡人骑兵突然来到。
English: Cao Zhang led the Northern Expedition into the territory of Yixian County, and several thousand rebel Hu horsemen suddenly arrived.

古文：时兵马未集，唯有步卒千人，骑数百匹。
现代文：当时曹军的兵马还没有集结，只有一千步兵和几百骑兵。
English: At that time, the soldiers and horses of Cao's army had not yet been assembled, only a thousand infantry and a few hundred cavalry.

古文：用田豫计，固守要隙，虏乃退散。
现代文：曹彰采纳田豫的计策，坚守险要地区，敌军才溃散撤退。
English: Cao Akira adopted Tian Yu's strategy and held on to the critical area, and the enemy army broke up and retreated.

古文：彰追之，身自搏战，射胡骑，应弦而倒者前后相属。
现代文：曹彰追击，亲自上阵奋力作战，用箭射杀敌军骑兵，被射中倒地的敌军接连不断。
English: Cao Zhang gave chase, personally went into battle and fought hard, shot the enemy cavalry with arrows, and shot down the enemy troops one after another.

古文：战过半日，彰铠中数箭，意气益厉，乘胜逐北，至于桑乾，去代二百馀里。
现代文：两军交战半天的时间，曹彰铠甲上被射了几支箭，但气势更加雄壮，乘胜追击溃逃的敌军，追到桑干河，距离代郡有二百多里。
English: The two armies fought for half a day. Several arrows were shot at Cao Zhang's armor, but he was more powerful. Taking advantage of the victory, he chased the fleeing enemy army to the Sanggan River, more than two hundred miles away from Dayi County.

古文：长史诸将皆以为新涉远，士马疲顿，又受节度，不得过代，不可深进，违令轻敌。
现代文：军中的长史和将领们都认为不对刚刚从远处赶来，人马疲敝，又受到限制不能超过代郡，不能深入，不能违背命令轻视敌军。
English: The long history of the army and the generals all thought that it was not right to have just arrived from afar, exhausted, and restricted not to exceed the county, not to go deep, and not to disregard the enemy's orders.

古文：彰曰： 率师而行，唯利所在，何节度乎？
现代文：曹彰说： 率军前进，只是追求利益的所在，该受到什么限制呢？
English: Cao Zhang said: "Leading the army forward is just the pursuit of interests, what restrictions should it be subject to?

古文：胡走未远，追之必破。
现代文：敌军还未走远，我们追击他们一定能攻破。
English: The enemy troops have not gone far, and we will surely be able to break through them if we pursue them.

古文：从令纵敌，非良将也。 
现代文：只依从命令而让敌人逃走，这不是良将。 
English: It is not a good general who only obeys orders and lets the enemy escape.

古文：遂上马，令军中： 后出者斩。 
现代文：于是翻身上马，号令大军： 落后的人，斩。 
English: So he turned on his horse and shouted to the army: "Those who are lagging behind, behead them!"

古文：一日一夜与虏相及，击，大破之，斩首获生以千数。
现代文：行进了一天一夜，追上敌军，进攻，击溃了敌军，斩杀和俘虏的数以千计。
English: They marched for a day and a night, caught up with the enemy, attacked, defeated the enemy, killed and captured thousands.

古文：彰乃倍常科大赐将士，将士无不悦喜。
现代文：曹彰就加倍赏赐将士，将士没有不高兴的。
English: Cao Chang doubled the reward for the soldiers, and the soldiers were not displeased.

古文：时鲜卑大人轲比能将数万骑观望强弱，见彰力战，所向皆破，乃请服。
现代文：当时鲜卑族的首领轲比能率领几万人马观望双方强弱，看到曹彰奋力作战，势不可挡，就前来请求归降。
English: At that time, the leader of the Xianbei tribe, Zou Bineng, led tens of thousands of people to watch the strong and weak sides. When he saw Cao Zhang fighting hard, he was unstoppable and came to ask for surrender.

古文：北方悉平。
现代文：北方地区都平定了。
English: The northern regions have all been pacified.

古文：时太祖在长安，召彰诣行在所。
现代文：当时太祖在长安，将曹彰召到他的住处。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was in Chang'an and summoned Cao Zhang to his residence.

古文：彰自代过邺，太子谓彰曰： 卿新有功，今西见上，宜勿自伐，应对常若不足者。 彰到，如太子言，归功诸将。
现代文：曹彰从代郡经过邺城，太子曹丕对曹彰说： 您新建军功，现在往西面见主上，应该不要自我夸耀，回答问题时要好像自己做得不够。 曹彰面见太祖，像太子告诫他的那样做，将功劳都归于将领们。
English: Cao Chang passed through Lucheng from Dayi County, and Prince Cao Pi said to Cao Chang, "You have built up your military power, and now you are going west to see the Lord. You should not boast of yourself, and when answering questions, you should answer as if you have not done enough. When Cao Chang met the Great Ancestor, he did as the prince told him, and gave all the credit to the generals.

古文：太祖喜，持彰须曰： 黄须儿竟大奇也！ 
现代文：太祖很高兴，捋着曹彰的胡子说： 这个黄须儿竟然这么有奇能！ 
English: The great-grandfather was very happy, stroking Cao Chang's beard and saying, "This yellow whisker actually has such miraculous powers!"

古文：太祖东还，以彰行越骑将军，留长安。
现代文：太祖往东回到长安，让曹彰行使越骑将军职权，并留在长安。
English: The great-grandfather went back to Chang'an in the east, let Cao Chang exercise the authority of the general of the cavalry, and stayed in Chang'an.

古文：太祖至洛阳，得疾，驿召彰，未至，太祖崩。
现代文：太祖到了洛阳，生了病，通过驿站召见曹彰，曹彰还没有到，太祖就去世了。
English: The great-grandfather arrived in Luoyang, fell ill, and was summoned to see Cao Zhang through the post station. Cao Zhang had not yet arrived, and the great-grandfather passed away.

古文：文帝即王位，彰与诸侯就国。
现代文：文帝继位为魏王，曹彰和诸侯们到自己的封国。
English: Emperor Wen was succeeded by King Wei, and Cao Chang and the princes moved to their own fiefdoms.

古文：诏曰： 先王之道，庸勋亲亲，并建母弟，开国承家，故能藩屏大宗，御侮厌难。
现代文：文帝下诏说： 先王之道，用功勋来使亲人和睦，并分封自己的母亲和兄弟，建立邦国传承嘉爷，所以能捍卫宗族，抵御外敌，预防灾难。
English: Emperor Wen issued an imperial edict, saying, "Following the example of the previous king, he used his merits to make peace with his relatives, appointed his mother and brothers as vassals, and established a state to pass down to his grandson. As a result, he was able to defend his clan, resist foreign enemies, and prevent disasters.

古文：彰前受命北伐，清定朔土，厥功茂焉。
现代文：曹彰之前接受委派率军北征，肃清平定北方国土，有盛大的功绩。
English: Cao Zhang was previously appointed to lead the Northern Expedition to clean up and pacify the northern land, and he has made great achievements.

古文：增邑五千，并前万户。 
现代文：现在下令给他增加五千户封邑，加上之前的一共一万户。 
English: Now he ordered to give him an additional five thousand fiefs, adding to the previous total of ten thousand.

古文：黄初二年，进爵为公。
现代文：黄初二年，曹彰被进封爵位为公。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Cao Zhang was given a title of nobility.

古文：三年，立为任城王。
现代文：黄初三年，他被封为任城王。
English: In the first three years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, he was named the king of the city.

古文：四年，朝京都，疾薨于邸，谥曰威。
现代文：黄初四年，曹彰到京城朝拜，因生病在府邸中去世，谥号为威。
English: In the first four years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Cao Zhang went to the capital to pay homage. Due to illness, he passed away in his residence.

古文：至葬，赐銮辂、龙旂，虎贲百人，如汉东平王故事。
现代文：到他下葬的时候，文帝恩赐銮辂龙旗、虎贲勇士一百人，跟汉朝东平王的旧例一样。
English: At the time of his burial, Emperor Wen gave him a dragon banner and a hundred tiger warriors, just like the old example of Dongping Wang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：子楷嗣，徙封中牟。
现代文：他的儿子曹楷继承爵位，将他转封在中牟县。
English: His son Cao Kai inherited the title and transferred him to Zhongmou County.

古文：五年，改封任城县。
现代文：黄初五年，曹楷被改封到任城县。
English: In the fifth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Cao Kai was transferred to Rencheng County.

古文：太和六年，复改封任城国，食五县二千五百户。
现代文：太和六年，又改封为任城国，食邑五个县二千五百户。
English: In the sixth year of Taihei, it was renamed Rencheng, with 2,500 households in five counties.

古文：青龙三年，楷坐私遣官属诣中尚方作禁物，削县二千户。
现代文：青龙三年，曹楷因为派属官到中尚方官署制造禁物而被治罪，被削去两千户食邑。
English: In the third year of Qinglong, Cao Kai was punished for sending a subordinate official to the Zhong Shangfang government office to manufacture prohibited items, and was stripped of two thousand households.

古文：正始七年，徙封济南，三千户。
现代文：正始七年，朝廷将他改封到济南，食邑三千户。
English: In the first seven years of his reign, the imperial court moved him to Jinan, which had 3,000 households.

古文：正元、景元初，连增邑，凡四千四百户。
现代文：正元、景元初年，朝廷连续两次给他增加食邑，共四千四百户。
English: In the first year of the reigns of Shogen and Kagemoto, the imperial court twice increased the number of shokuhaku to a total of 4,400.

古文：陈思王植字子建。
现代文：陈思王曹植字子建。
English: Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi Zhizi Jian.

古文：年十岁馀，诵读诗、论及辞赋数十万言，善属文。
现代文：十几岁的时候就通读了《诗经》、《尚书》还有辞赋文章等几十万字，善于写作。
English: When he was a teenager, he read through hundreds of thousands of words of "Shijing," "Shangshu" and dictation articles, and was good at writing.

古文：太祖尝视其文，谓植曰： 汝倩人邪？ 
现代文：太祖曾经看他写的文章，对他谁： 你是雇请别人写的吗？ 
English: My great-grandfather once read an article he had written, to which he replied: Did you hire someone else to write it?

古文：植跪曰： 言出为论，下笔成章，顾当面试，柰何倩人？ 
现代文：曹植跪下回答说： 言语说出口就是观点，用笔写下来就是文章，只要当面测试就知道真假，怎么会请人代写？ 
English: Cao Zhi knelt down and replied, "Speaking out is an opinion, writing it down with a pen is an article. As long as you test it in person, you will know whether it is true or false. How can you ask someone to write it for you?

古文：时邺铜爵台新城，太祖悉将诸子登台，使各为赋。
现代文：当时邺城的铜雀台刚刚建成，太祖将儿子们都带到台上，让他们各自写一篇赋。
English: At that time, the Bronze Sparrow Stage in Lucheng had just been built, and the great-grandfather brought his sons to the stage and asked them to each write a fu.

古文：植援笔立成，可观，太祖甚异之。
现代文：曹植拿过笔立刻就完成了，还值得观看，太祖对他的才能感到惊异。
English: Cao Zhi took the pen and immediately finished it. It was worth watching. Taizu was amazed by his talent.

古文：性简易，不治威仪。
现代文：曹植生性简单朴素，不在意威严的仪容。
English: Cao Shuxue's nature is simple and plain, and he doesn't care about his majestic appearance.

古文：舆马服饰，不尚华丽。
现代文：车马服饰，也不追求华丽。
English: They don't go for flashy clothes, either.

古文：每进见难问，应声而对，特见宠爱。
现代文：每次面见太祖，太祖的疑难问题，他都能立刻回答，所以特别被太祖宠爱。
English: Every time he met the great-grandfather, he was able to answer the great-grandfather's difficult questions immediately, so he was especially loved by the great-grandfather.

古文：建安十六年，封平原侯。
现代文：建安十六年曹植被封为平原侯。
English: In 16th year of Jian'an, Cao Zhi was given the title of Pingyuan marquis.

古文：十九年，徙封临菑侯。
现代文：十九年，改封为临菑侯。
English: In 1919, his title was changed to Linyi Hou.

古文：太祖征孙权，使植留守邺，戒之曰： 吾昔为顿邱令，年二十三。
现代文：太祖征讨孙权，让曹植留守邺城，告诫他说： 我过去做顿丘县令的时候二十三岁。
English: The great-grandfather solicited Sun Quan to let Cao Zhi remain in charge of Lucheng, admonishing him, "I was 23 years old when I was the county magistrate of Dongqiu County.

古文：思此时所行，无悔於今。今汝年亦二十三矣，可不勉与！ 
现代文：想起那时候的所作所为，现在也没有后悔。你今年也二十三岁了，不能不勤勉啊！ 
English: When I think about what I did back then, I don't regret it now. You are 23 years old this year, you have to be diligent!

古文：植既以才见异，而丁仪、丁廙、杨脩等为之羽翼。
现代文：曹植以文才被人称奇，丁仪、丁訥、杨修等人都在他身边辅佐。
English: Cao Zhi was famous for his literary talent. Ding Yi, Ding Yao, Yang Xiu and others were his close assistants.

古文：太祖狐疑，几为太子者数矣。
现代文：太祖心中犹疑，有几次几乎要将他立为太子。
English: The great-grandfather hesitated in his heart, and several times almost wanted to make him crown prince.

古文：而植任性而行，不自彫励，饮酒不节。
现代文：但曹植做事任性，不掩饰自己，饮酒没有节制。
English: However, Cao Zhi is headstrong in doing things, does not disguise himself, and drinks alcohol without restraint.

古文：文帝御之以术，矫情自饰，宫人左右，并为之说，故遂定为嗣。
现代文：文帝曹丕用权谋来对抗他，并善于掩饰自己，太祖身边的侍从也为他说话，所以太祖将他定为太子人选。
English: Emperor Cao Pi used his power to oppose him and was good at disguising himself. The attendants around the great-grandfather also spoke for him, so the great-grandfather selected him as the candidate for the crown prince.

古文：二十二年，增置邑五千，并前万户。
现代文：建安二十三年，太祖为曹植增加食邑五千户，加上以前一共一万户。
English: In the 23rd year of Jian'an, Taizu added 5,000 households to Cao Zhi, adding to the previous total of 10,000 households.

古文：植尝乘车行驰道中，开司马门出。太祖大怒，公车令坐死。
现代文：曹植曾经乘着车在道路中间快速行使，打开司马门出了宫城，太祖大怒，公车令因此被处死。
English: Cao Zhi once drove a car at high speed in the middle of the road, opened the Sima Gate and left Miyagi. Grandfather was furious, so he was sentenced to death.

古文：由是重诸侯科禁，而植宠日衰。
现代文：从此太祖增加对诸侯的禁令，对曹植的宠爱也渐渐减少。
English: From then on, Emperor Taizu increased the ban on lords, and Cao Zhi's favor gradually decreased.

古文：太祖既虑终始之变，以杨脩颇有才策，而又袁氏之甥也，於是以罪诛脩。
现代文：太祖考虑到曹植的势力可能会导致以后的变数，又因为杨脩有智谋才干，又是袁氏的外甥，就寻找罪名将他杀了。
English: Taking into consideration that Cao Zhi's influence might lead to future changes, and because Yang Hui had the ability to think strategically and was Yuan's nephew, the great-grandfather looked for a reason to kill him.

古文：植益内不自安。
现代文：曹植心中更加不安。
English: Cao Zhi felt even more uneasy.

古文：二十四年，曹仁为关羽所围。
现代文：建安二十四年，曹仁被关羽包围。
English: In the 24th year of Jianan, Cao Ren was surrounded by Guan Yu.

古文：太祖以植为南中郎将，行征虏将军，欲遣救仁，呼有所敕戒。
现代文：太祖任命曹植为南中郎将，行使征虏将军职权。想要派他援救曹仁，并将他叫来有话告诫。
English: The great-great-grandfather appointed Cao Zhi as the Southern Vice Admiral, exercising the authority of a conscript general. He wanted to send him to rescue Cao Ren, and called him to give him a word of warning.

古文：植醉不能受命，於是悔而罢之。
现代文：但曹植大醉，不能接受任命，太祖就后悔了，打消了委派的念头。
English: However, Cao Zhi was very drunk and could not accept the appointment, so the great-grandfather regretted it and dismissed the idea of appointing him.

古文：文帝即王位，诛丁仪、丁廙并其男口。
现代文：文帝继位为魏王后，诛杀了丁仪、丁廙以及家中的男丁。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne as the Queen of Wei, and killed Ding Yi, Ding Yao, and the male members of the family.

古文：植与诸侯并就国。
现代文：曹植和诸侯们一同前往封地。
English: Cao Zhi and the princes went to the fief together.

古文：黄初二年，监国谒者灌均希指，奏 植醉酒悖慢，劫胁使者 。
现代文：黄初二年，监国谒者灌均迎合曹丕的想法，上奏说 曹植喝醉了酒，狂悖傲慢，挟持威胁使者 。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the supervisors of the imperial edict all catered to Cao Zhe's idea, and the report said that Cao Zhe was drunk, arrogant, and threatened the envoy.

古文：有司请治罪，帝以太后故，贬爵安乡侯。
现代文：有关部门请求治曹植的罪，文帝因为太后的原因，将曹植的爵位贬为安乡侯。
English: Relevant departments requested that Cao Zhi's crime be punished, and Emperor Wen, for the empress dowager's reasons, reduced Cao Zhi's title to Anxianghou.

古文：其年改封鄄城侯。
现代文：在那一年，又改封为鄄城侯。
English: In that year, he changed his title to Shicheng Hou.

古文：三年，立为鄄城王，邑二千五百户。
现代文：黄初三年，立曹植为鄄城王，食邑二千五百户。
English: In the first three years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Cao Zhi was made the king of Shicheng, and 2,500 households in the food village were established.

古文：四年，徙封雍丘王。
现代文：黄初四年，曹植被转封为雍丘王。
English: In the first four years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Cao Zhejing was transferred to the throne of Yongqiu.

古文：其年，朝京都。
现代文：同年，曹植到京城朝拜。
English: In the same year, Cao Zhi went to worship in Beijing.

古文：上疏曰：
现代文：上疏说：
English: Shang Zuo said:

古文：臣自抱衅归藩，刻肌刻骨，追思罪戾，昼分而食，夜分而寝。
现代文： 臣自从因罪返回封地，痛心疾首，反省自己的罪过，每天到中午才吃饭，半夜才就寝。
English: Since returning to his fief due to his crime, the vassal has been heartbroken and remorseful, reflecting on his sins. He doesn't eat until noon every day and doesn't go to bed until midnight.

古文：诚以天罔不可重离，圣恩难可再恃。
现代文：实在是因为天意不能担当帝王，君王的圣恩不能再倚仗。
English: It's really because providence can't take on the role of emperor, and the king's divine grace can no longer be relied upon.

古文：窃感相鼠之篇，无礼遄死之义，形影相吊，五情愧赧。
现代文：我私下有感于《诗经》中的《相鼠》篇，因为自己的无礼而想迅速死去，形单影只，五脏都怀着羞愧。
English: I was privately impressed by the "Companion Rat" passage in the "Song of Songs." Because of my own rudeness, I wanted to die quickly. I was all alone, and all my organs were filled with shame.

古文：以罪弃生，则违古贤 夕改 之劝，忍活苟全，则犯诗人 胡颜 之讥。
现代文：但如果因为罪行而死去，就违背了古代圣贤 迅速改过 的劝诫，如果强忍着苟且偷生，又违犯了《诗经》中 极度羞愧 的讥讽。
English: But if he died for a crime, he violated the exhortation of the ancient sages to mend his ways quickly, and if he forced himself to live a life of deception, he violated the irony of extreme shame in the Book of Songs.

古文：伏惟陛下德象天地，恩隆父母，施畅春风，泽如时雨。
现代文：我恭敬地想到陛下的德行堪比天地，恩德比父母盛大，施惠恩典让人如沐春风，也像及时的雨露。
English: I respectfully think that His Majesty's virtue is comparable to heaven and earth, his parents are grand, and his grace is like spring breeze and timely rain.

古文：是以不别荆棘者，庆云之惠也；七子均养者，尸鸠之仁也；舍罪责功者，明君之举也；矜愚爱能者，慈父之恩也：是以愚臣徘徊於恩泽而不能自弃者也。
现代文：所以不躲避困难，是君主的恩惠；所有的人都能恩养，是您对臣民的恩惠；不责罚罪行而赏赐功劳，是圣明君主的行为；怜悯愚人爱惜人才，是慈父的恩德；所以我在您的恩惠中徘徊而不能死去。 
English: Therefore, it is the grace of the sovereign not to avoid difficulties; it is Your grace to Your subjects that all people can be nurtured; it is the act of a holy monarch not to punish crimes but to reward merits; it is the grace of a merciful father to pity the foolish and cherish the talented; therefore, I linger in Your grace and cannot die.

古文：前奉诏书，臣等绝朝，心离志绝，自分黄耇无复执珪之望。
现代文： 之前奉您的诏书，臣等离开朝廷，断绝心愿志向，一直到年老都不再有在朝为官的愿望。
English: In accordance with your imperial edict, your vassals have left the imperial court, renounced their heart's desire, and no longer have the desire to serve in the imperial court until old age.

古文：不图圣诏猥垂齿召，至止之日，驰心辇毂。
现代文：不期盼君王的诏书的再次征召，一直去世为止，都不再记挂京都。
English: He did not expect to be called up again by the Emperor's edict, and he did not remember Kyoto until his death.

古文：僻处西馆，未奉阙廷，踊跃之怀，瞻望反仄。
现代文：居住在偏僻的宅邸中，没有能侍奉朝廷，心中踊跃的情感，一直动荡不安。
English: Living in a remote mansion, not being able to serve the imperial court, and with emotions running high in his heart, he has always been restless.

古文：谨拜表献诗二篇，其辞曰： 於穆显考，时惟武皇，受命于天，宁济四方。
现代文：请允许我上表献上两篇诗，言辞为： 对于尊敬的先父，在当时是武皇，顺应天命，安定天下。
English: Please allow me to present two poems on the table, the words are: For the respected forefather, at that time it was Emperor Wu, conform to the fate of heaven, and stabilize the world.

古文：朱旗所拂，九土披攘，玄化滂流，荒服来王。
现代文：战旗所到的地方，天下都表示臣服，圣明的教化广布天下，边远地区的部落也前来臣服。
English: Wherever the battle flag reached, the whole world showed its submission. The enlightenment of the Holy Light spread all over the world, and the tribes in remote areas also came to submit.

古文：超商越周，与唐比踪。
现代文：功绩超过商朝周朝，能和唐尧比肩。
English: His achievements surpass those of Shang and Zhou dynasties, and can be compared to those of Tang Dynasty.

古文：笃生我皇，奕世载聪，武则肃烈，文则时雍，受禅炎汉，临君万邦。
现代文：我皇自出生就得天独厚，时代累积智慧，军事上刚烈肃穆，文德上能治理天下，接受汉朝的禅位，登上皇位君临天下。
English: Since his birth, our emperor has been endowed with unique qualities, accumulated wisdom over the ages, been militarily courageous and austere, and has been able to govern the world in a civilized manner. He has accepted the Han Dynasty's position of Zen, and ascended the throne to become the ruler of the world.

古文：万邦既化，率由旧则；广命懿亲，以藩王国。
现代文：天下百姓受到教化，大多都沿用原来的制度；广泛任命近亲，以护卫国家。
English: The people of the world have been educated, and most of them continue to use the original system; close relatives are widely appointed to guard the country.

古文：帝曰尔侯，君兹青土，奄有海滨，方周于鲁，车服有辉，旗章有叙，济济隽乂，我弼我辅。
现代文：帝称为尔侯，分封到东边国土，覆盖到海边地区，围绕鲁地，车舆礼服熠熠生辉，旗帜有叙，贤才众多，努力辅佐。
English: The emperor is known as the prince, the eastern land is divided, the coastal area is covered, and the Ludian area is surrounded. The chariot dress is shining, the flag is flying, there are many talents, and they are working hard to assist.

古文：伊予小子，恃宠骄盈，举挂时网，动乱国经。
现代文：也有一些人，倚仗恩宠骄横霸道，毁坏法令，扰乱国家纲纪。
English: There are also some people who, relying on grace and favor, are arrogant and domineering, destroy laws and regulations, and disrupt national discipline.

古文：作藩作屏，先轨是堕，傲我皇使，犯我朝仪。
现代文：做为国家屏障，先王的法度被丢弃，面对朝廷的使者傲慢无礼，抵触我朝礼节。
English: As a national barrier, the former king's law was discarded, and the emissaries of the imperial court were arrogant and disrespectful, which contradicted my morning etiquette.

古文：国有典刑，我削我绌，将寘于理，元凶是率。
现代文：国家有明确的律法，将这些人按照情理贬黜，尤其是为首作乱的人。
English: The country has clear laws to deal with these people in a reasonable manner, especially the ringleaders.

古文：明明天子，时笃同类，不忍我刑，暴之朝肆，违彼执宪，哀予小子。
现代文：明察的天子，对同类人明察忠实，不忍心加诸刑罚，让他的错误暴露在朝廷和天下中，就违背法令，哀叹这些人。
English: The all-seeing Son of Heaven, who is all-seeing and faithful to his fellow men, could not bear to inflict punishment and expose his error to the imperial court and the world, so he violated the law and mourned for these people.

古文：改封兖邑，于河之滨，股肱弗置，有君无臣，荒淫之阙，谁弼予身？
现代文：就将他改封到衮邑，在黄河边上，不安排重要大臣，只有主君没有臣下，那在荒淫的生活中，谁能辅佐自己呢？
English: He was transferred to the county of Zou, on the edge of the Yellow River. There were no important ministers, only the lord had no vassals. Who could support himself in a life of debauchery?

古文：茕茕仆夫，于彼冀方，嗟予小子，乃罹斯殃。
现代文：独自一个人，在中原地区，而这样的人，就遭遇这样的灾殃。
English: Alone, in the Central Plains region, and such a person encounters such a calamity.

古文：赫赫天子，恩不遗物，冠我玄冕，要我朱绂。
现代文：显赫的天子，施恩不会遗漏什么，给我加以冠冕，任命我为官。
English: O illustrious son of heaven, bestow on me a crown, and set me on a throne.

古文：朱绂光大，使我荣华，剖符授玉，王爵是加。
现代文：官职显扬，使我享受荣名富贵，分开符节授予我玉佩，再加上王爵封号。
English: The high-ranking official position has allowed me to enjoy fame and wealth. Separately, I was awarded a jade badge, plus the title of prince.

古文：仰齿金玺，俯执圣策，皇恩过隆，祗承怵惕。
现代文：对上能触碰到金玺，往下能手持陛下诏书，皇恩浩荡，让我心中不安。
English: On the other hand, I can touch the golden scepter on the top, and I can hold His Majesty's edict in my hand on the bottom, and I am overwhelmed with gratitude, which makes me feel uneasy.

古文：咨我小子，顽凶是婴，逝惭陵墓，存愧阙廷。
现代文：我这样的人，愚陋不灵，就算去世了，在陵墓中也对朝廷怀有愧疚。
English: People like me, who are stupid and ineffectual, even if they die, will still feel guilty about the imperial court in the mausoleum.

古文：匪敢傲德，实恩是恃，威灵改加，足以没齿。
现代文：不敢傲慢骄矜，倚仗这样的恩德，足以终身回报。
English: Don't dare to be arrogant, relying on such benevolence is enough to be rewarded for life.

古文：昊天罔极，性命不图，常惧颠沛，抱罪黄垆。
现代文：苍天没有穷尽，性命不能谋划，只是经常担心颠沛流离，最后背负罪过到黄泉之下。
English: The sky is not exhausted, life can not be planned, but often worry about being displaced, and finally bear the sin and go to hell.

古文：愿蒙矢石，建旗东岳，庶立豪氂，微功自赎。
现代文：希望能走上战场，在东岳竖立战旗，建立微小的功劳，用以自赎。
English: I hope that I can go to the battlefield, erect a battle flag in Dongyue, and establish a small merit for self-redemption.

古文：危躯授命，知足免戾，甘赴江、湘，奋戈吴、越。
现代文：以弱小的身躯接受任命，甘愿奔赴长江、湘江之间，在吴越之地奋力作战。
English: He accepted the appointment with a weak body and was willing to go to the Yangtze River and the Hunan River to fight in the land of Wu Yue.

古文：天启其衷，得会京畿，迟奉圣颜，如渴如饥。
现代文：上天得知我的忠心，最后得以在京师会面，想要侍奉圣上的想法非常迫切。
English: Heaven knew of my loyalty, and finally we were able to meet in Beijing. The idea of serving the Holy Father was very urgent.

古文：心之云慕，怆矣其悲，天高听卑，皇肯照微！ 又曰： 肃承明诏，应会皇都，星陈夙驾，秣马脂车。
现代文：心中所期望的，实在是很悲伤啊，天帝虽高高在上，却能听到下面人世间的言语，希望陛下也能了解微小的心愿！ 又说： 我收到圣明的诏书，要我到京城去，我就日夜准备，喂饱马﹐给车轴涂好油脂。
English: What he hoped for in his heart was really very sad. Although the heavenly emperor is on high, he can hear the words of the human world below. I hope that his majesty can also understand the small wishes! He also said: I received the imperial decree of the Holy Light, asking me to go to Beijing. I prepared day and night, fed the horses, and greased the axles.

古文：命彼掌徒，肃我征旅，朝发鸾台，夕宿兰渚。
现代文：又命令那些掌管徒役的人，肃清道路上的麻烦，早上从宫殿出发，晚上在美好的地方住宿。
English: He also ordered those in charge of the servants to clear the road of trouble, to leave the palace in the morning, and to stay in a good place at night.

古文：芒芒原隰，祁祁士女，经彼公田，乐我稷黍。
现代文：原野茫茫，仕女娴静，经过公田，为庄稼长势而开心。
English: The wilderness is vast, the lady is quiet, passing through the public fields, happy for the growth of crops.

古文：爰有樛木，重阴匪息；虽有糇粮，饥不遑食。
现代文：于是有樛木，生长在阴暗的地方；虽然有干粮，但不足以抵挡饥饿。
English: So there are hazel trees, growing in a gloomy place; although there is dry food, it is not enough to fend off hunger.

古文：望城不过，面邑匪游，仆夫警策，平路是由。
现代文：望着远处的城邑，但没有经过，面对着县邑，没有游览，驾车的人告诫说，平坦的路是经过这里。
English: Looking at the distant towns, but did not pass, facing the county town, did not visit, motorists cautioned that the flat road is through here.

古文：玄驷蔼蔼，扬镳氵剽沫；流风翼衡，轻云承盖。
现代文：马匹们努力前行，扬起马蹄奔走；微风经过，流云覆盖在头顶。
English: The horses strained forward, hooves kicking up as they ran; a breeze passed and a drifting cloud hung overhead.

古文：涉涧之滨，缘山之隈，遵彼河浒，黄阪是阶。西济关谷，或降或升；騑骖倦路，再寝再兴。
现代文：跋涉过涧水边远，顺着山脚行走，沿着河岸，将高坡当做台阶；往西渡过关隘峡谷，有升有降；马匹对赶路很疲倦，只好一再休息又出发。
English: They trudged through the outskirts of Surabaya, walking along the foot of the mountain, along the riverbank, using the high slope as a step; they crossed the Guan Gorge to the west, with ups and downs; the horses were very tired from the rush, so they had to rest and set off again and again.

古文：将朝圣皇，匪敢晏宁；弭节长骛，指日遄征。
现代文：即将要朝见圣主，不敢闲适安然地前往；驾车向远方疾驰，迎着太阳赶路。
English: He is about to go to see the morning glory of the Lord, but he does not dare to go there leisurely and peacefully; he drives far away, rushing to catch up with the sun.

古文：前驱举燧，后乘抗旌；轮不辍运，鸾无废声。
现代文：前面的人举着火把，后面的人举着旌旗；车轮没有停止运转，车上的响铃没有停止响动。
English: The people in front held torches, the people behind held banners; the wheels did not stop running, the bell on the car did not stop ringing.

古文：爰暨帝室，税此西墉；嘉诏未赐，朝觐莫从。
现代文：这样一直到皇城中，暂住在西边的馆舍中；但没有的诏书还没到来，想要朝见，也没有可以跟随的人。
English: In this way, they made it all the way to the imperial city, where they temporarily lived in a mansion on the west side; however, the imperial edict had not yet arrived, and there was no one to accompany them if they wanted to see the emperor.

古文：仰瞻城阈，俯惟阙廷；长怀永慕，忧心如酲。 
现代文：仰望着宫殿，心中想着朝廷；怀着永远的仰慕，心中忧虑就像长醉不醒一样。 
English: Looking up at the palace, thinking of the court in my heart; with eternal admiration, worries in my heart are like being drunk.

古文：帝嘉其辞义，优诏答勉之。
现代文：文帝赞赏他的文辞，颁发嘉奖的诏书回复并勉励他。
English: Emperor Wen appreciated his words, and the imperial edict awarding the prize responded and encouraged him.

古文：六年，帝东征，还过雍丘，幸植宫，增户五百。
现代文：黄初六年，文帝东征，返回的时候经过雍丘，亲临曹植的官署，给他增加食邑五百户。
English: In the sixth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen went on an eastward expedition. When he returned, he passed through Yongqiu and visited Cao Zhi's government office in person, giving him an additional 500 households.

古文：太和元年，徙封浚仪。
现代文：太和元年，将曹植转封到浚仪。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, Cao Zhi was transferred to Dong Yi.

古文：二年，复还雍丘。
现代文：太和二年，曹植又回到雍丘。
English: Two years later, Cao Zhi returned to Yongqiu.

古文：植常自愤怨，抱利器而无所施，上疏求自试曰：
现代文：曹植经常自己愤怒抱怨，认为自己拥有才华却没有办法施展，就上疏希望能举荐自己，说：
English: Cao Zhi often complained angrily to himself, thinking that he had talent but no way to display it, so he hoped to recommend himself, saying:

古文：臣闻士之生世，入则事父，出则事君；事父尚於荣亲，事君贵於兴国。
现代文： 我听说士人存在于世间，在家要侍奉父亲，在外要侍奉君主；侍奉父亲就推崇使家族荣耀，侍奉君主贵在能使国家兴盛。
English: I have heard that a gentleman exists in the world. At home, he should serve his father, and outside, he should serve the monarch. Serving the father brings honor to the family, and serving the monarch brings prosperity to the country.

古文：故慈父不能爱无益之子，仁君不能畜无用之臣。
现代文：所以慈爱的父亲不能爱护没有益处的儿子，仁德的君主不能培育没有用处的臣子。
English: Therefore, a loving father cannot love a useless son, and a benevolent ruler cannot nurture a useless vassal.

古文：夫论德而授官者，成功之君也；量能而受爵者，毕命之臣也。
现代文：能依据品德授予官职的，是成功的君主；考量才能而接受爵位的，是能完成使命的臣子。
English: A successful monarch is one who can appoint officials according to their moral character; a courtier who can fulfill his mission is one who can accept a knighthood considering his talent.

古文：故君无虚授，臣无虚受；虚授谓之谬举，虚受谓之尸禄，诗之 素餐 所由作也。
现代文：所以君王没有随意授官的，臣子也不会随意接受任命；随意授予官职就叫做谬举，任意接受任命叫做尸禄。《诗经》中 素餐 的话就是由此而来。
English: Therefore, if the king did not arbitrarily assign officials, the courtiers would not arbitrarily accept appointments; arbitrarily awarding official positions is called fallacy, arbitrarily accepting appointments is called corpse. The words "vegetarian meal" in the "Book of Songs" come from this.

古文：昔二虢不辞两国之任，其德厚也；旦、奭不让燕、鲁之封，其功大也。
现代文：过去虢仲、虢叔不推辞两国的任命，因为他们品德贵重；周公旦、召公、奭没有推辞燕、鲁之地的封赏，是因为它们有很大的功绩。
English: In the past, Zhou Zhong and Zhou Shu did not refuse the appointment of the two countries, because they were of high moral character; Zhou Gongdan, Zhao Gong and Zhou did not refuse the reward of Yan and Lu, because they had great merits.

古文：今臣蒙国重恩，三世于今矣。
现代文：现在臣蒙受国家厚恩，到现在已经三代了。
English: Now, three generations of vassals have benefited from the country's generosity.

古文：正值陛下升平之际，沐浴圣泽，潜润德教，可谓厚幸矣。
现代文：现在正是陛下政治太平的时候，我沐浴圣主的恩德，慢慢被圣德教化润泽，可以说是很幸运的。
English: Now is the time of His Majesty's political peace, I am bathing in the grace of the Lord, and I am slowly being enlightened by holiness. I can say that I am very lucky.

古文：而窃位东藩，爵在上列，身被轻暖，口厌百味，目极华靡，耳倦丝竹者，爵重禄厚之所致也。
现代文：而我现在在东面的封地，爵位属于上等，身上披着轻暖的衣服，口中被各种美味满足，眼中看到的都是华丽奢靡的东西，耳中听倦了丝竹管弦的声音，这些都是爵位高贵俸禄厚重所导致的。
English: But I am now in the eastern fiefdom, the title belongs to the upper class, the body is covered with light and warm clothes, the mouth is satisfied with various delicacies, the eyes see all the gorgeous and luxurious things, and the ears are tired of the sound of the silk bamboo orchestra, all of which are caused by the high salary of the title.

古文：退念古之授爵禄者，有异於此，皆以功勤济国，辅主惠民。
现代文：转而想到古时候授予爵位的做法，都和这样的情况不同，都是因为立了功劳，勤勉于国家政事，辅佐君主，惠及百姓。
English: Instead, I thought of the practice of awarding peerages in ancient times, which was different from this situation, because they were awarded for merit, diligence in state affairs, assisting the monarch, and benefiting the people.

古文：今臣无德可述，无功可纪，若此终年无益国朝，将挂风人 彼其 之讥。
现代文：现在臣没有德行可以称述，没有功劳可以记录，如果长年对国家朝廷没有帮助，那就要应了诗人 彼其之子 的讥刺。
English: Now the minister has no virtue to boast of, no merit to record, and if he has not been helpful to the national court for many years, then he will have to respond to the mockery of the poet His Son.

古文：是以上惭玄冕，俯愧朱绂。
现代文：所以对上对冠冕有所羞愧，对下也对官服心怀愧疚。 
English: Therefore, the upper class is ashamed of the crown, and the lower class is ashamed of the official uniform.

古文：方今天下一统，九州晏如，而顾西有违命之蜀，东有不臣之吴，使边境未得脱甲，谋士未得高枕者，诚欲混同宇内以致太和也。
现代文： 现在天下统一，国家安定，只是西面还有违背天命的蜀国，东面有不愿意臣服的吴国，使得边境的将士还不能脱下铠甲，谋士还不能高枕无忧，是因为他们想要统一国家以达到太平的局面。
English: Now the world is unified and the country is stable, but in the west there is Shu Province, which is against the destiny of heaven, and in the east there is Wu Province, which does not want to submit, so that the soldiers at the border can not take off their armor, and the advisers can not sleep well, because they want to unify the country to achieve a peaceful situation.

古文：故启灭有扈而夏功昭，成克商、奄而周德著。
现代文：所以启消灭了有扈氏而彰显夏朝的功绩；周成王攻克了商朝、奄国而使得周朝的德行显著。
English: Therefore, Qi eliminated the Youyi clan and highlighted the merits of the Xia Dynasty; Zhou Cheng Wang conquered the Shang Dynasty and Amakuni, making the virtues of the Zhou Dynasty remarkable.

古文：今陛下以圣明统世，将欲卒文、武之功，继成、康之隆，简贤授能，以方叔、召虎之臣镇御四境，为国爪牙者，可谓当矣。
现代文：现在陛下以圣明的德行治理国家，将要完成像文王、武王那样的功绩，延续成王、康王的兴盛，选拔贤才任命能人，用方叔、召虎那样的臣子镇守四方，作为国家的利器，可以说是根恰当了。
English: Now that His Majesty is governing the country with the virtue of wisdom and prudence, He will accomplish the feats of King Wen and King Wu, continue the prosperity of King Cheng and King Kang, select and appoint capable people, and use courtiers such as Uncle Fang and Summoning Tiger to guard the four directions. As a sharp tool of the country, it can be said to be appropriate.

古文：然而高鸟未挂於轻缴，渊鱼未县於钩饵者，恐钓射之术或未尽也。
现代文：但高飞的鸟还没有被挂在箭绳上，深水中的鱼还没有被挂在钩饵上，这恐怕是垂钓或射猎的技艺还不足够。
English: But high-flying birds have not yet been hung on arrows, and deep-water fish have not been hung on hooks, which is probably not enough for fishing or shooting skills.

古文：昔耿弇不俟光武，亟击张步，言不以贼遗於君父。
现代文：过去耿弇没有等待汉光武帝到来，就率兵攻打张步，说不把贼人留给君父。
English: In the past, Geng Biao did not wait for the arrival of Emperor Han Guangwu, he led the troops to attack Zhang Bu, saying that he would not leave the thieves to his father.

古文：故车右伏剑於鸣毂，雍门刎首於齐境，若此二士，岂恶生而尚死哉？
现代文：所以车右因为左边车轮发出声响而拔剑自刎，雍门因为越军进攻而在齐国境内自杀，像这两位士人，难道是厌恶活着而崇尚死亡吗？
English: So the driver of the right-hand car pulled out his sword and killed himself because the left-hand wheel made a noise, and Yongmen committed suicide in Qi territory because the Vietnamese army attacked. Like these two scholars, is it aversion to living and advocating death?

古文：诚忿其慢主而陵君也。
现代文：实在是对那些轻慢、侮辱君主的行为感到愤懑啊。
English: I really feel indignant at those contemptuous and insulting actions of the monarch.

古文：夫君之宠臣，欲以除患兴利；臣之事君，必以杀身靖乱，以功报主也。
现代文：君王宠信臣下，是想要让他们消除祸患兴办有利的事；臣下侍奉君主，一定要献出生命平定战乱，以功劳回报君主。
English: The king favors his vassals, because he wants them to eliminate evil and do good; the vassals serve the monarch, and must give their lives to quell the war, and repay the monarch with merit.

古文：昔贾谊弱冠，求试属国，请系单于之颈而制其命；终军以妙年使越，欲得长缨缨其王，羁致北阙。
现代文：过去贾谊二十岁的时候，请求到属国去治理，希望能捆住单于的脖颈以控制他的性命；终军在十八岁的时候出使越国，想要用长缨牵着南越王来朝拜汉帝。
English: In the past, when Jia Yi was 20 years old, he requested to go to his country to govern it, hoping to tie the neck of Shan Yu to control his life; the final army was sent to Vietnam at the age of 18, wanting to lead the king of South Vietnam to worship the Han Emperor with a long scepter.

古文：此二臣，岂好为夸主而耀世哉？
现代文：这两位臣子，怎么会是想要宣扬功绩而在世人面前炫耀呢？
English: How could these two courtiers want to show off their achievements in front of the world?

古文：志或郁结，欲逞其才力，输能於明君也。
现代文：只是有时候志向郁结，想要施展自己的才能，奉献给圣明的君主。
English: It's just that sometimes you get a bit disheartened, and you want to use your talents and dedicate them to the Holy Monarch.

古文：昔汉武为霍去病治第，辞曰： 匈奴未灭，臣无以家为！ 
现代文：过去汉武帝为霍去病修建宅邸，霍去病推辞说： 匈奴还没有消灭，臣没有安家的地方！ 
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu built a mansion for Huo Jia, but Huo Jia declined, saying, "The Xiongnu have not yet been exterminated, and there is no place for me to live!"

古文：夫忧国忘家，捐躯济难，忠臣之志也。
现代文：忧虑国家忘记自己家庭，奉献生命拯救国难，是忠臣的志向。
English: It is the aspiration of a loyal subject to worry that the country will forget his family and to sacrifice his life to save the country from disaster.

古文：今臣居外，非不厚也，而寝不安席，食不遑味者，伏以二方未克为念。
现代文：现在臣居住在外地，不是待遇不优厚，但却不能安睡，食不知味，是因为吴国、蜀国还没有攻克的啊。 
English: Now the minister lives in a foreign country, not because the treatment is not generous, but because he can't sleep peacefully, and the food is not delicious, because Wu and Shu have not yet been conquered.

古文：伏见先武皇帝武臣宿将，年耆即世者有闻矣。
现代文： 看到先武皇帝的武臣旧将，听说有些已经年老去世。
English: When I saw the former generals who were vassals of Emperor Senmu, I heard that some of them had died of old age.

古文：虽贤不乏世，宿将旧卒，犹习战陈，窃不自量，志在效命，庶立毛发之功，以报所受之恩。
现代文：虽然世上不缺少贤人，但从前的将士，依然对排兵布阵和熟悉，臣私下不自量力，志向在于报效国家，或许能立下微小的功劳，以回报蒙受的恩德。
English: Although there is no shortage of wise men in the world, former soldiers are still familiar with the formation of troops. Privately, vassals are not self-sufficient, their ambition is to serve the country, and they may be able to do a little work to return the favor.

古文：若使陛下出不世之诏，效臣锥刀之用，使得西属大将军，当一校之队，若东属大司马，统偏舟之任，必乘危蹈险，骋舟奋骊，突刃触锋，为士卒先。
现代文：如果陛下能破例下诏，让臣奉献出锥刀的用处，成为隶属与西边大将军的一名士兵小校，如果是隶属东面的大司马，只担任统率一只小船的职位，也一定不畏艰险，乘船疾行，骑马奔走，冲锋陷阵，做为将士的先锋。
English: If His Majesty could, by way of exception, issue an edict that a vassal should devote himself to the use of the javelin, and become a soldier-colonel subordinate to the general on the western side, or if he were a great steed subordinate to the general on the eastern side, and only held the position of commanding a small boat, he would certainly not be afraid of difficulties, he would speed along by boat, run along on horseback, charge into battle, and be the vanguard of the soldiers.

古文：虽未能禽权馘亮，庶将虏其雄率，歼其丑类，必效须臾之捷，以灭终身之愧，使名挂史笔，事列朝策。
现代文：即使没有能擒获孙权，割取诸葛亮的耳朵，也要能俘虏他们的将帅，歼灭敌军，一定要用迅速的胜利来消除终身的羞愧，使得自己能名垂青史，事迹被记录在朝廷的策书中。
English: Even if they couldn't capture Sun Quan and cut off Zhuge Liang's ear, they should be able to capture their general and annihilate the enemy army. They must use a quick victory to eliminate the lifelong shame and make themselves famous in history. Their deeds are recorded in the strategy book of the imperial court.

古文：虽身分蜀境，首县吴阙，犹生之年也。
现代文：即使在蜀国被杀，或者在吴国身首异处，也像得到了新生。
English: Even if they were killed in Shu, or had their heads chopped off in Wu, it was as if they were reborn.

古文：如微才弗试，没世无闻，徒荣其躯而丰其体，生无益於事，死无损於数，虚荷上位而忝重禄，禽息鸟视，终於白首，此徒圈牢之养物，非臣之所志也。
现代文：如果微小的才能没有得到试用，在默默无闻中死去，白白地荣耀自身，养肥身体，或者对国家之事没有什么用处，死后也对自然规律没有什么改变，白白占据高位且享受丰厚的俸禄，每天像鸟兽一般的觅食，只享受爵禄却没有贡献，这样一直到老去，这只不过是被圈养的动物，不是臣的志向。
English: If one's small talents are not put to the test, if one dies in obscurity, if one glorifies oneself in vain, if one fattens one's body, or if one is of little use to the state, and if after death there is no change in the laws of nature, if one occupies a high position in vain and enjoys a rich salary, if one forages for food every day like a bird or a beast, enjoying only a knighthood but making no contribution, and so on until one is old, this is just a captive animal, not a minister's ambition.

古文：流闻东军失备，师徒小衄，辍食弃餐，奋袂攘衽，抚剑东顾，而心已驰於吴会矣。
现代文：有流言传说东征的部队缺少防备，军队有了小的损伤，将士们废寝忘食，摩拳擦掌，抓着剑往东望，而心已经奔向吴会。 
English: There is a rumor that the troops of the Eastern Expedition lack of preparation, the army has a small injury, the soldiers have forgotten to eat and sleep, rubbing their fists, clutching their swords and looking eastward, while their hearts have rushed to the Wu Association.

古文：臣昔从先武皇帝南极赤岸，东临沧海，西望玉门，北出玄塞，伏见所以行军用兵之势，可谓神妙矣。
现代文： 臣过去跟随先武皇帝往南一直到达赤岸，往东靠近沧海，往西望到玉门关，往北一直出到长城以外，看到他行军用兵的计策，真可以说是神机妙算。
English: In the past, the vassal followed Emperor Xianwu all the way south to the Red Bank, east to the Canghai Sea, west to the Yumen Pass, and north to beyond the Great Wall. Seeing him carry out the strategy of the soldiers, it can truly be said to be a miraculous calculation.

古文：故兵者不可豫言，临难而制变者也。
现代文：所以用兵之事不能事先预言，应该是面对紧急情况时随机应变。
English: Therefore, the use of troops cannot be predicted in advance, but should be a random contingency in the face of emergencies.

古文：志欲自效於明时，立功於圣世。
现代文：我的志向是希望能在贤明的时代奉献自己，在圣明的世道中建立功绩。
English: My aspiration is to be able to dedicate myself in the era of wisdom and to establish merit in the path of wisdom.

古文：每览史籍，观古忠臣义士，出一朝之命，以徇国家之难，身虽屠裂，而功铭著於鼎锺，名称垂於竹帛，未尝不拊心而叹息也。
现代文：每次阅读史册，看到古代忠臣义士，背负朝廷使命，舍身于国家危难之中，即使身体被杀害，但功绩被铭刻在钟鼎上，名字被写进史书中为人称颂，没有不抚着胸口感叹的。
English: Every time you read the annals of history, you see the ancient loyal subjects, shouldering the mission of the imperial court, sacrificing themselves in the midst of the national crisis. Even if the body is killed, the achievements are inscribed on the bell, and the name is written into the annals to be praised. There is no one who does not touch the chest and sigh.

古文：臣闻明主使臣，不废有罪。
现代文：臣听说圣明的君主任用臣下，不排斥有罪之人。
English: The vassal heard that the ruler of Shengming used his vassals and did not expel the guilty.

古文：故奔北败军之将用，秦、鲁以成其功；绝缨盗马之臣赦，楚、赵以济其难。
现代文：所以任用战败溃逃的将军孟明视、曹沫，秦国、鲁国最后能成就功业；赦免调戏美人、偷窃马匹的人，楚国、赵国才能度过危难。
English: Therefore, the appointment of the defeated and routed generals Meng Mingzhi and Cao Moru, the Qin and Lu states can finally accomplish the work; the amnesty of the beautiful actress and the horse thief, the Chu and Zhao states can overcome the crisis.

古文：臣窃感先帝早崩，威王弃世，臣独何人，以堪长久！
现代文：臣私下感慨先帝英年早逝，任城威王去世，臣是什么样的人，能活得长久！
English: The vassal privately lamented the previous emperor's untimely death, the death of King Ren Zhengwei, what kind of person is the vassal, can he live long!

古文：常恐先朝露，填沟壑，坟土未乾，而身名并灭。
现代文：经常担心自己早年去世，填埋在沟壑之中，坟墓的土还没有干，而自己的身和名声都消失了。
English: He often worried that he had died at an early age, buried in a ravine, the soil of the grave had not yet dried, and his body and reputation had disappeared.

古文：臣闻骐骥长鸣，则伯乐照其能；卢狗悲号，则韩国知其才。
现代文：臣听说良马长鸣，那伯乐就能分辨他的才能；良狗哀鸣，韩国就知道它的奇才。
English: When a vassal hears that a good horse is neighing, he can tell his talent by listening to its neighing; when a good dog whines, Korea knows its prodigy.

古文：是以效之齐、楚之路，以逞千里之任；试之狡兔之捷，以验搏噬之用。
现代文：所以让良马在齐、楚之间的道路上效力，以展示它行走千里的力量；用敏捷的兔子来试验良狗搏斗撕咬的能力。
English: So let the good horse work on the road between Qi and Chu to show its power to walk thousands of miles; use the agile rabbit to test the ability of a good dog to fight and bite.

古文：今臣志狗马之微功，窃自惟度，终无伯乐、韩国之举，是以於邑而窃自痛者也。
现代文：现在臣希望能建立良马良狗那样微小的功劳，但暗中自我衡量，一直没有像伯乐、韩国那样的人举荐，所以自己在封地暗自痛惜。 
English: Now the minister hopes to establish a good horse good dog as a tiny merit, but secretly self-measuring, there has been no recommendation from people like Bo Le and South Korea, so he secretly pities himself in the fiefdom.

古文：夫临搏而企竦，闻乐而窃抃者，或有赏音而识道也。
现代文： 那些看着搏戏而踮起脚跟，听到音乐就暗中拍手的人，也许是能赏识音乐或者了解搏戏之道的。
English: Those who stomp their feet when they see a fight, and clap their hands when they hear music, may be able to appreciate music or understand the way of fighting.

古文：昔毛遂，赵之陪隶，犹假锥囊之喻，以寤主立功，何况巍巍大魏多士之朝，而无慷慨死难之臣乎！
现代文：过去的毛遂，是赵国的陪隶，仍然借着锥和囊的比喻，以使得主君醒悟而立下功劳，更何况泱泱大魏有很多人才，难道没有慷慨赴死以救国难的人吗？
English: In the past, Mao Sui was an attendant of Zhao Guo, and he still used the metaphor of the cone and the bag to make his master wake up and make a contribution. What's more, there were many talented people in the Wei Dynasty. Wasn't there a generous person who died to save the country?

古文：夫自衒自媒者，士女之丑行也。
现代文：那些自我夸耀的，是成年人的丑恶行径。
English: Those self-aggrandizing, adult misdeeds.

古文：干时求进者，道家之明忌也。
现代文：合于时世而求为官的，是道家很明确的忌讳。
English: It is a clear taboo in Taoism to seek a position of authority in accordance with the times.

古文：而臣敢陈闻於陛下者，诚与国分形同气，忧患共之者也。
现代文：而臣之所以敢向陛下陈述所想，实在是因为和国家一体相连，患难与共。
English: And the reason why the minister dared to state his thoughts to His Majesty is really because he is connected to the country as a whole and shares the hardships.

古文：冀以尘雾之微补益山海，荧烛末光增辉日月，是以敢冒其丑而献其忠。
现代文：希望能用我像尘雾那样微小的能力来增加山海之壮，以萤火虫和蜡烛那样微弱的光芒为日月增光，所以才敢冒着羞耻而展现自己的忠诚。 
English: I hope that I can use my tiny ability like dust and fog to increase the strength of the mountains and seas, and add a faint glow like fireflies and candles to the sun and moon, so I dare to show my loyalty with shame.

古文：三年，徙封东阿。
现代文：太和三年，明帝将曹植转封为东阿王。
English: In the 3rd year of the Taihe era, Emperor Ming converted Cao Zhi into the King of Donga.

古文：五年，复上疏求存问亲戚，因致其意曰：
现代文：太和五年，曹植又上疏请求问候族中亲人，趁机表达心意说：
English: In the fifth year of the Taihe era, Cao Zhi again asked Shang Shou to greet relatives in the tribe, and took the opportunity to express his thoughts:

古文：臣闻天称其高者，以无不覆；地称其广者，以无不载；日月称其明者，以无不照；江海称其大者，以无不容。
现代文： 臣听说天被称为很高，是因为它没有什么不囊括；地被称为很广阔，是因为它没有什么不承载；日月被称为很明亮，是因为它们没有什么不照耀；江海被称为博大，是因为它们没有什么不包容。
English: The minister heard that the sky is called high because it does not contain anything; the earth is called very broad because it does not carry anything; the sun and moon are called very bright because they do not shine anything; the rivers and seas are called vast because they do not contain anything.

古文：故孔子曰： 大哉尧之为君！
现代文：所以孔子说： 尧作为君主很伟大啊！
English: That is why Confucius said, "It is great to be a monarch!"

古文：惟天为大，惟尧则之。 
现代文：只有天伟大崇高,只有尧能够把天作为准则学习。 
English: Only heaven is great and lofty, and only a baboon can study heaven as a standard.

古文：夫天德之於万物，可谓弘广矣。
现代文：天的恩德对于万物来说，可以说是很宏大了。
English: The benevolence of heaven for all things can be said to be very grand.

古文：盖尧之为教，先亲后疏，自近及远。
现代文：大概尧帝推行教化，是先亲后疏，由近及远。
English: It is likely that Emperor Xuan implemented the indoctrination, starting with the close relatives and then the distant ones.

古文：其传曰： 克明峻德，以亲九族；九族既睦，平章百姓。 
现代文：他的《帝典》说： 发扬才智美德，使家族亲密和睦。家族和睦以后，又辨明百官的善恶。 
English: His "Imperial Code" says: "Promote talent, wisdom and virtue, and make the family close and harmonious. After the family is harmonious, it will also distinguish the good and evil of the officials."

古文：及周之文王亦崇厥化，其诗曰： 刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，以御于家邦。 
现代文：等到周文王也推行这样的教化，《诗经》中说： 先给妻子做榜样，再给兄弟好影响，凭这治家和安邦。 
English: When King Zhou Wen also implemented this kind of enlightenment, it was said in the "Book of Songs": First, set an example for your wife, and then have a good influence on your brothers.

古文：是以雍雍穆穆。
现代文：所以国家和谐融洽，《诗经》的作者也称赞他们。
English: Therefore, the country is harmonious and harmonious, and the author of the "Song of Songs" also praised them.

古文：风人咏之。昔周公吊管、蔡之不咸，广封懿亲以藩屏王室，传曰： 周之宗盟，异姓为后。 
现代文：过去周公怜悯管叔、蔡叔之间关系不和，就分封很多近亲为亲王以护卫王室，史传中说： 周的宗盟,除了同姓外还有异姓,异姓列在同姓之后。 
English: In the past, Zhou Gong took pity on the discord between Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai, and assigned many close relatives as princes to guard the royal family. According to history: Zhou's family alliance, in addition to the same surname, there are different surnames, and the different surnames are listed after the same surname.

古文：诚骨肉之恩爽而不离，亲亲之义实在敦固，未有义而后其君，仁而遗其亲者也。
现代文：实在是因为骨肉亲情不可分割，亲人之间的恩义非常稳固，没有追求道义却将君主放在后面，讲求仁爱而遗弃自己的亲人的。 
English: In fact, it is because the flesh-and-blood kinship is indivisible, the gratitude between relatives is very stable, and there is no pursuit of morality but to put the monarch behind, to talk about asking for benevolence and abandon their relatives.

古文：不敢过望交气类，脩人事，叙人伦。近且婚媾不通，兄弟乖绝，吉凶之问塞，庆吊之礼废，恩纪之违，甚於路人，隔阂之异，殊於胡越。
现代文： 陛下继承唐尧敬肃的德行，体察周文王恭谨的仁爱，和谐后宫妃嫔，恩德惠及宗族，公卿百官们，可以轮流休息。处理政事，在朝堂山商议，下层的建议可以呈上到内廷中，亲属邻里的联系通畅，庆贺慰问的感情能够抒发，实在能称得上是用宽容自己的心去治理别人，推广恩惠了。至于臣，已经断绝后代的联系，被禁锢在这清明的时代，兄弟之间背离，好坏的消息隔绝，庆祝慰问的礼仪废弛，兄弟恩情的背离，比普通路人还有严重，隔阂的程度，超出了胡人、越人之间。
English: His majesty inherits the dignified moral conduct of Tang Zhou, appreciates the respectful benevolence of King Zhouwen, harmonizes the concubines of the harem, the benevolence and benevolence of the clan, and the nobles and dignitaries can take turns to rest. Deal with political affairs, discuss in the Choudang Mountain, the suggestions of the lower level can be submitted to the Inner Court, the connections between relatives and neighbors are smooth, and the feelings of celebration and condolence can be expressed. It can really be said that it is to use the tolerance of one's own heart to govern others and promote grace. As for the vassals, they have broken

古文：今臣以一切之制，永无朝觐之望，至於注心皇极，结情紫闼，神明知之矣。
现代文：现在臣因为这些制度，永远没有了朝见的希望，以至于专注等待陛下诏书，将热情都凝聚在宫廷中，神明都能感知。
English: Now, because of these systems, vassals have no hope of ever seeing the imperial court, so much so that they concentrate on waiting for His Majesty's imperial edict and concentrate their enthusiasm in the court, and the gods can sense it.

古文：然天实为之，谓之何哉！
现代文：但天意如此，还能说什么呢？
English: But if it is God's will, what can I say?

古文：退唯诸王常有戚戚具尔之心，愿陛下沛然垂诏，使诸国庆问，四节得展，以叙骨肉之欢恩。全怡怡之笃义。
现代文：退一步想，众位王侯应该常常有这样的心意，希望陛下迅速办法诏令，让诸侯国间庆祝慰问，四时的礼节都能彰显，以叙述骨肉之间的欢乐恩情，成全兄弟间顺从坚固的情谊。
English: If you step back and think about it, the princes should often have this kind of intention. I hope that His Majesty will quickly issue a royal decree, so that the princes and countries can celebrate condolences, and the four-hour etiquette can be highlighted, to describe the joy and grace between the flesh and blood, and to perfect the obedient and firm friendship between brothers.

古文：妃妾之家，膏沐之遗，岁得再通，齐义於贵宗，等惠於百司，如此，则古人之所叹，风雅之所咏，复存於圣世矣。
现代文：后妃妾室的家中互相赠送脂膏等，每年联络两次，对贵族宗亲采用同等道义，对文武百官施以同等恩惠，这样，古人所赞叹的，《诗经》风雅中所歌咏的状况，会再次出现在现在圣明的时代中了。 
English: The families of concubines and concubines give each other gifts of fat paste, etc. They contact each other twice a year, apply the same morality to aristocratic ancestors, and grant the same favors to civil and military officials. In this way, the situation that the ancients admired in the style of "Song of Songs" will reappear in the present era of Shenming.

古文：臣伏自惟省，无锥刀之用。
现代文： 臣自我反省，发现自己连锥刀那样的用处都没有。
English: After self-reflection, the minister found that he did not even have the same usefulness as a cone knife.

古文：及观陛下之所拔授，若以臣为异姓，窃自料度，不后於朝士矣。
现代文：等到看到陛下所提拔任命的官员，好像将臣当做异姓，自己暗中估计，臣没有落后于朝中官员。
English: When I saw that the officials promoted and appointed by His Majesty seemed to treat the minister as a different surname, I secretly estimated that the minister did not lag behind the officials of the DPRK and China.

古文：若得辞远游，戴武弁，解朱组，佩青绂，驸马、奉车，趣得一号，安宅京室，执鞭珥笔，出从华盖，入侍辇毂，承答圣问，拾遗左右，乃臣丹诚之至愿，不离於梦想者也。
现代文：如果可以停止远游，戴上武官帽，脱下华丽的服饰，佩上青丝带，驸马都尉或者奉车都尉，快速得到一个封号，安居王室，手执马鞭，在帽冠旁插上毛笔，出行时就跟随陛下车驾，回来就在陛下身边侍奉，回答陛下的问题，在旁边拾遗补阙，这是我诚挚的愿望，一直没有消失的梦想。
English: If I can stop traveling, put on the military attache's cap, take off the gorgeous clothes, put on the blue ribbon, the captain of the horse or the captain of the carriage, quickly get a seal number, live safely in the royal family, hold the horse whip, insert a brush next to the crown of the hat, follow His Majesty's car when traveling, return to serve at His Majesty's side, answer His Majesty's questions, and pick up leftovers next to him, this is my sincere wish, a dream that has not disappeared.

古文：远慕鹿鸣君臣之宴，中咏常棣匪他之诫，下思伐木友生之义，终怀蓼莪罔极之哀；每四节之会，块然独处，左右惟仆隶，所对惟妻子，高谈无所与陈，发义无所与展，未尝不闻乐而拊心，临觞而叹息也。
现代文：我远远地追慕《鹿鸣》中描述的君臣的宴会；中间咏叹《常棣》诗中对于兄弟不是外人的高洁；往下思考《伐木》诗中 朋友 的涵义，最后有感于《蓼莪》诗中对于父母去世的哀痛。每到四时的集会，我都孑然一身，身边只有仆从，所面对的只有妻子孩子，想要高谈阔论但没有谈论对象，想要发表意见但没有人可以延续，每次听到音乐都抚着心口，面对着酒杯长叹。
English: I admired from afar the banquet of the princes and ministers described in "Deersong"; in the middle, I lamented the nobility of the brothers who were not outsiders in the poem "Changshu"; I thought about the meaning of friends in the poem "Lumbering"; and finally, I was moved by the sorrow of the death of my parents in the poem "Dragonfly." Every meeting at four o'clock, I was all alone, with only servants around me, facing only my wife and children. I wanted to talk about it but did not talk about the object. I wanted to express my opinion but no one could continue. Every time I heard music, I caressed my heart and

古文：臣伏以为犬马之诚不能动人，譬人之诚不能动天。
现代文：臣认为犬马的诚心不能打动人，就好像人的诚心不能撼动天。
English: The minister thought that the sincerity of dogs and horses could not move people, just as the sincerity of people could not shake the heavens.

古文：崩城、陨霜，臣初信之，以臣心况，徒虚语耳。
现代文：杞梁妻哭倒长城、邹衍使夏天降霜的故事，臣刚开始时很相信，但用我的心来比较，这些事也只是虚妄之言罢了。
English: In the beginning, the minister believed in the stories about the Great Wall being brought down by the tears of his wife, and the summer frost being brought down by the ploughing of the reeds. However, in my heart, these stories were nothing but lies.

古文：若葵藿之倾叶，太阳虽不为之回光，然向之者诚也。
现代文：就像向日葵转动自己的枝叶，太阳虽然没有为它们回转光线，但他们朝向太阳的心是很真诚的。
English: Just as sunflowers rotate their leaves and branches, although the sun does not rotate the light for them, their hearts toward the sun are very sincere.

古文：窃自比於葵藿，若降天地之施，垂三光之明者，实在陛下。
现代文：我私下将自己比作向日葵，但像天地一样降下恩泽，像日、月、星辰那样普照光明的，实际上在于陛下。 
English: Privately, I liken myself to a sunflower, but it is actually Your Majesty to whom I bestow favors like heaven and earth, like the sun, the moon, and the stars.

古文：臣闻文子曰： 不为福始，不为祸先。 
现代文： 臣听说文子说： 不做造福的先驱者，也不做制造祸患的第一个人。 
English: The vassal heard Fumiko say, "Don't be the first to do good, and don't be the first to do harm."

古文：今之否隔，友于同忧，而臣独倡言者，窃不愿於圣世使有不蒙施之物。有不蒙施之物，必有惨毒之怀，故柏舟有 天只 之怨，谷风有 弃予 之叹。
现代文：现在道路闭塞不通，兄弟们都同样忧虑，但只有我公开说出来，是因为我私心不愿意在这样圣明的时代却还有没有受到恩惠的东西。如果有这样的东西，一定会有人心怀怨恨，所以《柏舟》诗中有 天啊 的怨言，《谷风》中有 抛弃了我 的悲叹。
English: Now that the roads are blocked, the brothers are equally worried, but I am the only one to say it openly, because I selfishly do not want to have something that has not been blessed in such a holy age. If there is such a thing, there will be people with resentment, so in the poem "Boat," there is a complaint about God, and in "The Valley Wind," there is a lament about abandoning me.

古文：故伊尹耻其君不为尧舜，孟子曰： 不以舜之所以事尧事其君者，不敬其君者也。 
现代文：所以伊尹对于他的主君不效法尧舜而感到羞耻。孟子说： 不按照舜侍奉尧的态度和方法来侍奉君主，便是对君主的不敬。 
English: Therefore, Yi Yin felt ashamed that his master did not follow his example. Mencius said: If you do not serve the monarch according to the attitude and method of serving the monarch, it is disrespectful to the monarch.

古文：臣之愚蔽，固非虞、伊，至於欲使陛下崇光被时雍之美，宣缉熙章明之德者，是臣慺慺之诚，窃所独守，实怀鹤立企伫之心。
现代文：臣是愚陋蒙昧的，本来就不是虞舜、伊尹这样的人，但至于想要让陛下推崇普遍和煦的美德，宣扬积累光明的品德，这是臣恭谨的诚意，自己所坚守的，实在是怀着急切盼望等待的想法。
English: The minister is stupid and ignorant, and is not originally a person like Gu Ying, Yi Yin, but as for wanting His Majesty to extol the universal and noble virtues, and to propagate the virtue of accumulating light, this is the sincere intention of the minister, and what he adheres to is really the idea of waiting with eager hope.

古文：敢复陈闻者，冀陛下傥发天聪而垂神听也。
现代文：之所以敢再次陈述这些话让您知道，是希望陛下能发扬天生的智慧而用英明的听察力了解这些话。 
English: I dare to repeat these words to you in the hope that Your Majesty, with your innate wisdom, will be able to listen to these words with discernment.

古文：诏报曰： 盖教化所由，各有隆弊，非皆善始而恶终也，事使之然。
现代文：明帝下诏回复说： 大概教化所推崇的方式，各自有兴衰的过程，不是都有好的开始但有坏的结果，是时势导致这样的。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict in reply, saying: Presumably, the methods advocated by the Enlightenment have their own rise and fall, and not all of them have a good start but a bad result. It is the current situation that has led to this.

古文：故夫忠厚仁极草木，则行苇之诗作；恩泽衰薄，不亲九族，则角弓之章刺。
现代文：所以之心惠及草木，就有人写出《行苇》的诗作；恩惠衰微薄弱，不亲近自己的族人，就会有《角弓》这样的讽刺篇章。
English: Therefore, when the heart benefits the plants and trees, some people will write poems such as "Walking on the Grass"; when the benefits are weak and weak, and they are not close to their own people, there will be a satirical chapter such as "Square Bow."

古文：今令诸国兄弟，情理简怠，妃妾之家，膏沐疏略，朕纵不能敦而睦之，王援古喻义备悉矣，何言精诚不足以感通哉？
现代文：现在让各封国的兄弟间的情谊淡薄，后妃的家庭忽略脂膏等物品的赠送，朕即使不能和他们亲近和睦，但你引用旧事要表达的道理也明确了，怎么还说真心诚意不能被感知呢？
English: Now, let the fraternity between the brothers of the various fiefdoms be weak, and let the empress's family ignore the gift of items such as grease. Even if I can't be close to them, but the reason you want to express by quoting old things is also clear. How can you say that sincerity can't be perceived?

古文：夫明贵贱，崇亲亲，礼贤良，顺少长，国之纲纪，本无禁固诸国通问之诏也，矫枉过正，下吏惧谴，以至於此耳。
现代文：明辨贵贱次序，崇尚亲人间的和睦，礼待贤能人士，顺应长幼次序，是国家的纲纪，本来没有禁止各诸侯国之间互相连通的诏书，纠正过度了，下层官吏担心被处罚，才到了现在的地步。
English: Clearly distinguishing the order of nobility and lowliness, advocating the harmony between relatives, treating people of virtue with courtesy, and conforming to the order of the eldest and youngest, are the national discipline. Originally, there was no edict prohibiting the interconnection between the various states. The correction was excessive, and the lower-level officials were worried about being punished, only to the present point.

古文：已敕有司，如王所诉。 
现代文：已经下令有关部门，像你所陈述的那样做。 
English: The relevant authorities have been ordered to do as you have stated.

古文：植复上疏陈审举之义，曰：
现代文：曹植再次尚书陈述审察举荐的要义，说：
English: Cao Zhe re-examined the main points of the written statement, said:

古文：臣闻天地协气而万物生，君臣合德而庶政成；五帝之世非皆智，三季之末非皆愚，用与不用，知与不知也。
现代文： 臣听说天地之间气息相融就能使万物生长，君臣志同道合才能使政务平顺；五帝的时代不是都是智者，夏商周三代末世时不是都是愚人，只是任不任用，了解不了解的区别。
English: The minister heard that the harmony of the atmosphere between heaven and earth can make all things grow, and the like-mindedness of monarchs and ministers can make government affairs smooth; the era of the Five Emperors was not all wise, and the era of Xia Shangri-La in the last days was not all stupid, but the difference between appointment and non-appointment, understanding and not understanding.

古文：既时有举贤之名，而无得贤之实，必各援其类而进矣。谚曰： 相门有相，将门有将。 
现代文：当时已经有了推举贤才的名声，但没有任用贤才的事实。谚语说： 宰相门中出宰相，将军门中出将军。 
English: At that time, there was already a reputation for the selection of talents, but there was no fact of the appointment of talents. A proverb says: From the prime minister's gate comes the prime minister, from the general's gate comes the general.

古文：夫相者，文德昭者也；将者，武功烈者也。
现代文：宰相，是文才品德都显著的人；将军，是功绩卓著的人。
English: The prime minister is a man of remarkable literary talent and moral character; the general is a man of outstanding achievements.

古文：文德昭，则可以匡国朝，致雍熙，稷、契、夔、龙是也；武功烈，则所以征不庭，威四夷，南仲、方叔是矣。
现代文：文才品德显著，才能匡扶社稷，使国家达到太平融洽，就像稷、契、夔、龙这样的人；功绩显赫，才能征讨不服从的反贼，威震四海，就像南仲、方叔这样。
English: People with outstanding literary talent and moral character can help the society and the country achieve peace and harmony, just like Yu, Ji, Zou and Long; people with outstanding achievements can win over disobedient anti-thieves and shake the world, just like Nanzhong and Fangzhu.

古文：昔伊尹之为媵臣，至贱也，吕尚之处屠钓，至陋也，及其见举於汤武、周文，诚道合志同，玄谟神通，岂复假近习之荐，因左右之介哉。
现代文：过去伊尹是陪嫁的努力，是最低贱的，姜子牙处在屠夫渔民之中，是最卑陋的，等到他们被举荐给汤武、文王，实在是君臣志同道合，神机妙算，那里还需要亲近之人的举荐，依靠身边侍从的介绍呢。
English: In the past, Yi Yin's efforts to accompany the bride were the lowest of the low, and Jiang Zi Ya was among the butchers and fishermen, the lowest of the low. Until they were recommended to Tang Wu and King Wen, they were really like-minded monarchs and ministers, and it was a wonderful calculation. They still needed the recommendation of someone close to them, and relied on the introduction of the attendants around them.

古文：书曰： 有不世之君，必能用不世之臣；用不世之臣，必能立不世之功。 
现代文：《尚书》中说： 有非凡的君主，一定能任用非凡的臣子；任用非凡的臣子，一定能建立非凡的功勋。 
English: "Shangshu" said: If there is an extraordinary monarch, he will surely be able to appoint extraordinary courtiers; if he appoints extraordinary courtiers, he will surely be able to establish extraordinary merits.

古文：殷周二王是矣。
现代文：殷周的两位君王就是这样。
English: The two emperors of Yin and Zhou were like this.

古文：若夫龌龊近步，遵常守故，安足为陛下言哉？
现代文：像那些品行卑劣，止步不前，因循守旧的事情，怎么值得向陛下言说呢？
English: How is it worth while to speak to his majesty of things that are base, stagnant, and old-fashioned?

古文：故阴阳不和，三光不畅，官旷无人，庶政不整者，三司之责也。
现代文：所以阴阳没有调和，日、月、星辰的光辉不能普照，官位缺少人才，政务不能政治，都是三司的责任。
English: Therefore, yin and yang are not harmonized, the sun, the moon and the stars cannot shine everywhere, officials lack talent, and government affairs cannot be politicized, all of which are the responsibilities of the three departments.

古文：疆埸骚动，方隅内侵，没军丧众，干戈不息者，边将之忧也。
现代文：边疆骚乱，国土遭受侵扰，军队战败损失将士，战争不能停息的状况，是边疆将士的忧虑。
English: The unrest on the frontier, the invasion of the homeland, the defeat of the army and the loss of soldiers, and the situation that the war cannot be stopped are the worries of the soldiers on the frontier.

古文：岂可虚荷国宠而不称其任哉？
现代文：怎么能白白蒙受国家恩宠却不能恪尽职守呢？
English: How is it possible to receive the grace of the state in vain, but not be able to fulfill one's duties?

古文：故任益隆者负益重，位益高者责益深，书称 无旷庶官 ，诗有 职思其忧 ，此其义也。
现代文：所以职位越高背负的责任就越重，权位越高的人承担的职责就越深，《尚书》中说 不要让官位有空缺 ，《诗经》中说 在官位上考虑职分内的事情 ，说的就是这个道理。 
English: Therefore, the higher the position, the heavier the responsibility, and the higher the position of power, the deeper the responsibility of the person. "Shang Shu" said, "Do not let the official position be vacant," "Shijing" said, "Consider the things within the official position," and this is the reason.

古文：陛下体天真之淑圣，登神机以继统，冀闻康哉之歌，偃武行文之美。
现代文： 陛下怀着天生的圣明贤达，登上皇位继承大统，希望听到《康哉》那样的太平歌曲，看到偃武推行文治教化的美德。
English: His Majesty, with his innate wisdom and wisdom, ascended the throne to inherit the throne, hoping to hear the Taiping song like "Kangya" and see the virtue of the martial arts to promote the education of literature.

古文：而数年以来，水旱不时，民困衣食，师徒之发，岁岁增调，加东有覆败之军，西有殪没之将，至使蚌蛤浮翔於淮、泗，鼲鼬讙哗於林木。
现代文：但几年以来，不时发生水旱灾害，百姓对服饰食品都很缺乏，军队的征发年年增多，加上东面有覆灭的部队，西面有中箭身亡的将领，甚至有蚌蛤在淮河、泗水一带浮动，黄鼠鼬兽在树枝上喧哗。
English: However, over the past few years, floods and droughts have occurred from time to time, the people are very short of clothing and food, the army's conscription and dispatch have increased year by year, and there are destroyed troops in the east, generals killed by arrows in the west, and even dragonflies floating in the Huai River and Surabaya, and weasels and beasts making noise on the branches.

古文：臣每念之，未尝不辍食而挥餐，临觞而搤腕矣。
现代文：臣每次想到这些情况，没有不食不知味，面对酒杯愤恨不已的。
English: Every time the minister thought of these circumstances, he did not eat without knowing the taste, and he was indignant in the face of the wine glass.

古文：昔汉文发代，疑朝有变，宋昌曰： 内有朱虚、东牟之亲，外有齐、楚、淮南、琅邪，此则磐石之宗，愿王勿疑。 
现代文：过去汉文帝从代郡兴盛，担心朝廷会有变故，宋昌说： 朝中有朱虚侯刘章、东牟侯那样的亲人，外面有齐、楚、淮南、琅邪四个封王，这些都是像磐石一样坚固的宗亲，希望您不要再担忧。 
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen prospered from Daigun, and was worried that there would be changes in the imperial court, Song Chang said: In the morning, there are relatives such as Zhu Xuchang, Liu Zhang and Dong Mou, and outside there are four crowned kings, Qi, Chu, Huainan and Yuya. These are rock-solid ancestors, I hope you don't worry anymore.

古文：臣伏惟陛下远览姬文二虢之援，中虑周成召、毕之辅，下存宋昌磐石之固。
现代文：臣诚挚地希望陛下能远看虢仲、虢叔对周文王的援助，中间考虑召公、毕公对周成王的辅佐，往下留存像宋昌所说的磐石一样坚固的情谊。
English: The minister sincerely hoped that His Majesty could look far and wide for the assistance of Gongzhong and Gongzhuang to King Zhou Wen, and consider calling Gong and Bi Gong to assist King Zhou Cheng in the middle, and retain the solid friendship like the rock mentioned by Song Chang.

古文：昔骐骥之於吴阪，可谓困矣，及其伯乐相之，孙邮御之，形体不劳而坐取千里。
现代文：过去良马在吴阪之间，可以称得上是被困住了，等到伯乐发现了它，孙邮驾驭着它，身体没有感到劳累就到了千里之外。
English: In the past, the good horse was trapped between Wuxi and Shanghai. When Bo Le found it and Sun Yat-sen drove it, the body did not feel tired and went thousands of miles away.

古文：盖伯乐善御马，明君善御臣；伯乐驰千里，明君致太平；诚任贤使能之明效也。
现代文：大概伯乐擅长驾驭良马，英明的君主善于管理群臣；伯乐能骑马到达千里之外，英明的君主也能依靠大臣治理太平盛世；实在是任用贤才所达到的显著效果。
English: Probably, Bo Le is good at driving a good horse, and a wise monarch is good at managing a group of ministers; Bo Le can ride a horse to reach thousands of miles away, and a wise monarch can rely on ministers to govern a peaceful and prosperous world; it is really a remarkable effect achieved by appointing sages.

古文：若朝司惟良，万机内理，武将行师，方难克弭。
现代文：如果朝中官员都是良臣，使朝中所有政务都得到处理，武将率军出征，面对危难都能平定。
English: If the officials of the DPRK and China are all good ministers, so that all the government affairs of the DPRK and China are handled, and the general leads the army to go to war, they can be pacified in the face of danger.

古文：陛下可得雍容都城，何事劳动銮驾，暴露於边境哉？
现代文：陛下就能在京城中从容不迫，有什么事需要劳动陛下亲自到边境地区去呢？ 
English: His Majesty can take it easy in the capital, so what is the need for His Majesty to go to the border area in person?

古文：臣闻羊质虎皮，见草则悦，见豺则战，忘其皮之虎也。
现代文： 臣听说披着虎皮的羊，看见草就高兴，看到豺狼就会颤抖，是因为忘了它披着虎皮。
English: The minister heard about the sheep wearing tiger skins, was happy to see the grass, and trembled when he saw the jackal, because he forgot that it was wearing tiger skins.

古文：今置将不良，有似於此。
现代文：现在安排的将领不合适，就像这件事一样。
English: The generals currently in place are not fit for purpose, just like this one.

古文：故语曰： 患为之者不知，知之者不得为也。 
现代文：所以俗语说： 担心做事的人不了解，了解的人不能做。 
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: Those who worry about doing things do not understand them, and those who understand them cannot do them.

古文：昔乐毅奔赵，心不忘燕；廉颇在楚，思为赵将。
现代文：过去乐毅奔向赵国，心中没有忘记燕国；廉颇身在楚国，还想着做赵国的将领。
English: In the past, Le Yi ran to Zhao Province, but did not forget Yan Province in his heart; Ren was in Chu Province, but still wanted to be the general of Zhao Province.

古文：臣生乎乱，长乎军，又数承教于武皇帝，伏见行师用兵之要，不必取孙、吴而闇与之合。
现代文：臣生在乱世中，在军队中成长，又多次受到武皇帝的教诲，了解行军用兵的要旨，不需要孙子、吴起的兵书就能合乎他们的谋略。
English: The subject was born in a turbulent world, grew up in the army, and was repeatedly taught by Emperor Wu to understand the essence of military soldiers. It is not necessary to have a military book from his grandson, Wu Zhi, to conform to their strategy.

古文：窃揆之於心，常愿得一奉朝觐，排金门，蹈玉陛，列有职之臣，赐须臾之问，使臣得一散所怀，摅舒蕴积，死不恨矣。
现代文：臣私下在心中忖度，经常希望能得到一次朝见的机会，排列在金马门旁边，脚踏着玉阶，位列有职务的大臣中间，赐给我得以问候的权利，让我能施展抱负，派遣心中积聚的情感，就算是死也没有遗憾了。 
English: Privately, my vassals pondered in their hearts, often hoping to get a chance to see the emperor. They lined up next to the Golden Horse Gate, stepped on the Jade Steps, and ranked among the ministers with duties. They gave me the right to greet, so that I could fulfill my ambitions and send the emotions accumulated in my heart. Even if I die, I have no regrets.

古文：被鸿胪所下发士息书，期会甚急。
现代文： 臣看到鸿胪颁发的征发士兵之子的告示，要求集合的时间很紧急。
English: The vassal saw the notice of conscripting soldiers' sons issued by Hongtao, and the time required to assemble was very urgent.

古文：又闻豹尾已建，戎轩骛驾，陛下将复劳玉躬，扰挂神思。
现代文：又得知战旗已经竖立，兵车疾速行驶，陛下将要劳烦自己的贵体，忧劳伤神。
English: He also learned that the battle flag had already been raised and the troop cars were speeding along. His Majesty was about to strain his precious body and his soul.

古文：臣诚竦息，不遑宁处。
现代文：臣实在心中惶恐，没有办法安定。
English: The vassal was really panicking, and there was no way to stabilize the situation.

古文：愿得策马执鞭，首当尘露，撮风后之奇，接孙、吴之要，追慕卜商起予左右，效命先驱，毕命轮毂，虽无大益，冀有小补。
现代文：希望能骑马扬鞭，首先冒着尘土露水，手持风后的奇经，拿着孙子、吴起的兵书要旨，追慕子夏启发孔子的风范，在军前效力，在战车前完成使命，虽然没有什么大的用处，但希望能有小小的弥补。
English: I hope that I can ride a horse and swing a whip, first of all, braving the dust and dew, holding the Qigong after the wind, holding the essence of the military book of my grandson, Wu Zhi, following the example of Confucius inspired by Zixia, serving in front of the army, and completing the mission in front of the chariot. Although there is no great use, I hope to make up for it a little.

古文：然天高听远，情不上通，徒独望青云而拊心，仰高天而叹息耳。
现代文：但天高距离远，我的心意不能上达天听，只能独自仰望天空，抚着胸口叹息。
English: But the sky is far away, my heart can't reach the sky to listen, I can only look up at the sky alone, caress my chest and sigh.

古文：屈平曰： 国有骥而不知乘，焉皇皇而更索！ 
现代文：屈平说： 国家有良马不知道驾驭，为什么又着急地寻求呢！ 
English: Qu Ping said: The country has a good horse, but it does not know how to ride it, so why is it in a hurry to seek it?

古文：昔管、蔡放诛，周、召作弼；叔鱼陷刑，叔向匡国。
现代文：过去管叔、蔡叔被流放处死，周公、召公做为辅佐；叔鱼陷入刑罚中，叔向却匡扶社稷。
English: In the past, Uncle Guan and Uncle Cai were exiled and executed, Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong served as assistants; Uncle Yu fell into punishment, but Uncle Xiang supported the community.

古文：三监之衅，臣自当之；二南之辅，求必不远。
现代文：监视三地的争端，臣自会承担；《二南》诗中所写的辅佐，要寻求的话一定不会很远。
English: To monitor the disputes between the three places, the minister will undertake; the help written in the poem "Two Souths" will not be far away if you are looking for it.

古文：华宗贵族，藩王之中，必有应斯举者。
现代文：宗亲贵族、各地藩王之中，一定会有响应这个举动的。
English: Among the aristocrats and local lords, there will certainly be a response to this move.

古文：故传曰： 无周公之亲，不得行周公之事。 
现代文：所以史传中说： 不是周公的亲人，不能做周公的事。 
English: So the legend says: If you are not Zhou Gong's relative, you cannot do Zhou Gong's things.

古文：唯陛下少留意焉。
现代文：希望陛下稍稍留意这些。 
English: I hope His Majesty will take some notice of this.

古文：近者汉氏广建藩王，丰则连城数十，约则飨食祖祭而已，未若姬周之树国，五等之品制之。
现代文： 近代的汉朝广泛地分封藩王，封地多的有几十座城池的封邑，封地少的只能享用祭祀祖宗的供品，不像周朝分封诸侯国时建立的五等爵位制度。
English: Unlike the five-class peerage system established by the Zhou Dynasty when it divided up the principalities, the modern Han Dynasty widely divided up the fiefs of the lords of the domains. The fiefs with more fiefs included dozens of fiefdoms, while the fiefs with fewer fiefs could only enjoy the offerings of the ancestors.

古文：若扶苏之谏始皇，淳于越之难周青臣，可谓知时变矣。
现代文：像扶苏劝谏秦始皇，淳于越责问周青臣，可以说是了解时事的变化。
English: It can be said that understanding the changes in current affairs is like Fuso's advice to Emperor Qin and Junyue's questioning of Zhou Qingcheng.

古文：夫能使天下倾耳注目者，当权者是矣，故谋能移主，威能慑下。
现代文：能让天下百姓都认真听，仔细看的，只有掌权的人，所以谋略能改变主君的想法，威势能震慑属下。
English: Only those in power can make the people of the world listen carefully and look carefully, so the strategy can change the master's mind and the power can deter the subordinates.

古文：豪右执政，不在亲戚；权之所在，虽疏必重，势之所去，虽亲必轻，盖取齐者田族，非吕宗也。
现代文：豪门大族掌握政权，权力不在亲人手中；权位在的地方，即使关系疏远也要重用，局势要求要贬黜的，即使是亲人也要看轻。夺取齐国的是田氏，不是吕尚的宗族。
English: The big families hold the power, the power is not in the hands of relatives; where the power is, even if the relationship is distant, it should be reused, and if the situation requires it to be belittled, even relatives should be looked down upon. It was the Tian clan that seized Qi, not Lushang's clan.

古文：分晋者赵、魏，非姬姓也。
现代文：瓜分晋国的是赵国、魏国，不是姬氏族人。
English: It was Zhao and Wei that divided Jin, not the Ji clan.

古文：唯陛下察之。
现代文：希望陛下明察这件事。
English: May His Majesty see this.

古文：苟吉专其位，凶离其患者，异姓之臣也。
现代文：如果在太平的时候独占官职，动乱的时候远离职守，就是外姓臣子。
English: If you monopolize the official position in times of peace, and stay away from duties in times of turmoil, you are a foreign minister.

古文：欲国之安，祈家之贵，存共其荣，没同其祸者，公族之臣也。
现代文：想要国家安定，祈祷家族富贵，活着共同享受荣名，死后共同承担祸患的，是自家宗族的臣子。
English: It is the vassals of one's own clan who want the country to be stable, pray for the family to be rich, live together to enjoy the glory, and bear the misfortune together after death.

古文：今反公族疏而异姓亲，臣窃惑焉。
现代文：现在反而疏远自家宗族的大臣而亲近外姓官员，臣私下感到疑惑。 
English: Now, on the other hand, he is distancing himself from the ministers of his own family and getting closer to officials with foreign surnames. Privately, the minister feels doubtful.

古文：臣闻孟子曰： 君子穷则独善其身，达则兼善天下。 
现代文： 臣听孟子说： 品德高尚的人穷困的时候会修养好自己，显达的时候就帮助天下人。 
English: The minister listened to Mencius, who said: A person of high moral character will cultivate himself when he is poor, and help the world when he is advanced.

古文：今臣与陛下践冰履炭，登山浮涧，寒温燥湿，高下共之，岂得离陛下哉？
现代文：现在臣和陛下踏在冰山，踩着火炭，登上山巅，渡过深水，冷暖燥湿，无论高低都在一起，怎么能离开陛下呢？
English: Now the minister and His Majesty have stepped on the iceberg, stepped on the coals, climbed to the top of the mountain, crossed deep water, hot and cold, wet and dry, no matter how high or low they are together, how can they leave His Majesty?

古文：不胜愤懑，拜表陈情。
现代文：臣不能承受心中的愤懑，上表陈述心情。
English: The vassal could not bear the indignation in his heart, and the above table shows his mood.

古文：若有不合，乞且藏之书府，不便灭弃，臣死之后，事或可思。
现代文：如果有不恰当的地方，请求暂时收在书府中，不要毁弃，臣去世之后，这些事或许值得思考。
English: If there is anything inappropriate, it is requested that it be temporarily stored in the library and not destroyed. After the death of the minister, these things may be worth thinking about.

古文：若有豪釐少挂圣意者，乞出之朝堂，使夫博古之士，纠臣表之不合义者。
现代文：如果有丝毫触犯到陛下的想法，请求在朝堂山表述，让那些知识渊博的官员，指出臣这篇奏表中不合乎道义的地方。
English: If there is any thought that offends His Majesty in the slightest, I request that it be expressed in the Chodo-san, and let those knowledgeable officials point out the immoral parts of this report.

古文：如是，则臣愿足矣。
现代文：如果能像这样，那臣的心愿就满足了。 
English: If it can be like this, the minister's wish will be satisfied.

古文：帝辄优文答报。
现代文：明帝就写下褒奖的内容回复他。
English: Emperor Ming replied to him by writing down the content of the award.

古文：其年冬，诏诸王朝六年正月。
现代文：这年冬天，明帝诏令各封王在太和六年正月朝见。
English: In the winter of that year, Emperor Ming decreed that all feudal lords should meet in the morning of the first month of the sixth year of the Taihe reign.

古文：其二月，以陈四县封植为陈王，邑三千五百户。
现代文：这年二月，将陈郡的四个县分给曹植，封他为陈王，食邑三千五百户。
English: In February of this year, the four counties of Chen County were assigned to Cao Zhi, and he was named the King of Chen, with 3,500 households.

古文：植每欲求别见独谈，论及时政，幸冀试用，终不能得。
现代文：曹植经常想另外和明帝会面交谈，谈论时政，希望能有幸被试用，但一直都没能做到。
English: Cao Zhi often wanted to meet and talk with Emperor Ming separately, to talk about current affairs, hoping to have the honor of being tested, but he has never been able to do it.

古文：既还，怅然绝望。
现代文：曹植返回封地后，怅然绝望。
English: After Cao Zhi returned to his fief, he was in utter despair.

古文：时法制，待藩国既自峻迫，寮属皆贾竖下才，兵人给其残老，大数不过二百人。
现代文：当时的法度，对待藩国是很严厉的，属官都是商人或才能低劣的人，士兵也都是老弱残兵，总数也不超过两百人。
English: At that time, the laws were very strict towards the domain. The subordinate officials were all merchants or people with inferior talent, and the soldiers were also old and weak remnants, with a total of no more than two hundred people.

古文：又植以前过，事事复减半，十一年中而三徙都，常汲汲无欢，遂发疾薨，时年四十一。
现代文：又因为曹植以前的过失，各种分配又减少一半，十一年之间换了三次封地，经常郁郁寡欢，于是生病去世，当时他四十一岁。
English: In addition, because of Cao Zhi's previous mistakes, various allocations were reduced by half, and he changed fiefs three times in eleven years. He was often depressed and unhappy, so he died of illness when he was forty-one years old.

古文：遗令薄葬。
现代文：临终前嘱咐要简单下葬。
English: Before his death, he ordered a simple burial.

古文：以小子志，保家之主也，欲立之。
现代文：他觉得小儿子曹志是保住家业的人，就想将他立为继承人。
English: He thought that his youngest son Cao Zhi was the one who could save the family business, so he wanted to make him the heir.

古文：初，植登鱼山，临东阿，喟然有终焉之心，遂营为墓。
现代文：当初，曹志攀登鱼山，靠近东阿，感叹着产生了在那里终老的想法，就修建了坟墓。
English: At first, Cao Zhi climbed Fish Mountain, near Dong'a, lamented the idea of dying there, and built a tomb.

古文：子志嗣，徙封济北王。
现代文：他的儿子曹志继承爵位，被改封为济北王。
English: His son Cao Zhi inherited the title and was renamed King of Jibei.

古文：景初中诏曰： 陈思王昔虽有过失，既克己慎行，以补前阙，且自少至终，篇籍不离於手，诚难能也。
现代文：景初年间，明帝下诏时候： 陈思王过去虽然有过错，但他约束自己，谨言慎行，以弥补之前的过失，并且他从年少到终年，篇章典籍不离手，实在是很难得。
English: In the early years of the Jing Dynasty, when Emperor Ming issued an edict: Although Chen Si Wanglong had made mistakes in the past, he restrained himself, spoke and acted cautiously to make up for his previous mistakes, and he did not let go of the classics from his youth to the end of the year. It is really hard to get.

古文：其收黄初中诸奏植罪状，公卿已下议尚书、秘书、中书三府、大鸿胪者皆削除之。
现代文：现在下令手机黄初年间那些上奏曹志罪状的，公卿已经讨论过，然后保存在尚书、秘书、中书三府和大鸿胪的相关文件，都全部销毁。
English: He now ordered the destruction of all the relevant documents of Cao Zhi's indictment, which had been discussed by the nobles and then kept in the Shangshu, the Secretary, the Zhongshu Three Prefectures and the Dahongwu, during the early years of Huang He.

古文：撰录植前后所著赋颂诗铭杂论凡百馀篇，副藏内外。 
现代文：记录曹植先后所著写的赋、颂、诗、铭、杂论一共一百多篇，将副本收藏在朝廷内外。 
English: Records that Cao Zhi successively wrote more than one hundred fus, odes, poems, epitaphs, and miscellaneous essays, and collected copies inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：志累增邑，并前九百九十户。
现代文：曹志几次被增加食邑，加上之前的一个九百九十户。
English: Cao Zhi has been expanded several times, adding a total of 990 households.

古文：萧怀王熊，早薨。
现代文：萧怀王曹熊，早年去世。
English: Xiao Huai Wang Cao Xiong, died at an early age.

古文：黄初二追封谥萧怀公。
现代文：黄初二年被追封谥号为萧怀公。
English: In the first two years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, his posthumous name was changed to Xiao Huai Gong.

古文：太和三年，又追封爵为王。
现代文：太和三年，又追封他的爵位为王。
English: Three years later, he was crowned king.

古文：青龙二年，子哀王炳嗣，食邑二千五百户。
现代文：青龙二年，他的儿子哀王曹炳继承爵位，食邑二千五百户。
English: In the 2nd year of Qinglong, his son, A Wang Cao Pi, inherited the title of nobility, and 2,500 households in the county were affected.

古文：六年薨，无子，国除。
现代文：青龙六年，曹炳去世，没有子嗣，封国被削除。
English: In the sixth year of Qinglong, Cao Pi died without an heir, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：评曰：任城武艺壮猛，有将领之气。陈思文才富艳，足以自通后叶，然不能克让远防，终致携隙。
现代文：评曰：任城王曹彰武艺勇猛，有做将领的风范，陈思王文才华丽，足以连通后代，但不能谦让防备，最终导致嫌隙。
English: The review said: Rencheng Wang Cao Zhang is brave in martial arts and has the demeanor of a general. Chen Si Wang Wen Cai is gorgeous, enough to connect future generations, but he cannot be humble and cautious, which ultimately leads to a rift.

古文：传曰 楚则失之矣，而齐亦未为得也 ，其此之谓欤！
现代文：史传中说 楚国确实是失去了，但齐国也没有得到 ，说的就是这样的情况啊！
English: According to historical legend, the State of Chu was indeed lost, but the State of Qi was not gained, and this is what happened!

