古文：齐僖公生公子诸儿、公子纠、公子小白。使鲍叔傅小白，鲍叔辞，称疾不出。
现代文：齐僖公生有公子诸儿、纠与小白。僖公委派鲍叔辅佐小白，鲍叔不愿干，称病不出。
English: Qiqian Gong Sheng had many sons and daughters, and he had a quarrel with Xiao Bai. The Qiqian Public Committee sent Bao Shu to assist Xiao Bai, but Bao Shu did not want to do it, saying that he was ill.

古文：管仲与召忽往见之，曰： 何故不出？ 
现代文：管仲和召忽去看望鲍叔，说： 为什么不出来干事呢？ 
English: Guan Zhonghe was summoned to visit Uncle Bao and said: Why doesn't the officer come out?

古文：鲍叔曰： 先人有言曰： 知子莫若父，知臣莫若君。 
现代文：鲍叔说： 先人讲过；知子莫若父，知臣莫若君。
English: Uncle Bao said, "The ancients said, 'A wise son is like a wise father, and a wise minister is like a wise minister.'

古文：今君知臣不肖也，是以使贱臣傅小白也。
现代文：现在国君知道我不行，才让我辅佐小白，我是想不干了。 
English: Now that the sovereign knows I can't do it, he's asked me to assist Xiao Bai. I don't want to do it anymore.

古文：贱臣知弃矣。 召忽曰： 子固辞，无出，吾权任子以死亡，必免子。 
现代文：召忽说： 您若是坚决不干，就不要出来，我暂且保证说您要死了，就一定把您免掉。 
English: Zhao Hu said, "If you resolutely refuse to do it, then don't come out. I'll give you a temporary assurance that if you die, I'll definitely spare you."

古文：鲍叔曰： 子如是，何不免之有乎？ 
现代文：鲍叔说： 您能这样做，哪还有不免我的道理呢？ 
English: Uncle Bao said, "If you can do this, what is the reason for me to do so?"

古文：管仲曰： 不可。
现代文：管仲说： 不行。
English: Guanzhong said, "No."

古文：持社稷宗庙者，不让事，不广闲。
现代文：主持国家大事的人，不应该推辞工作，不应该贪图空闲。
English: Those who preside over national affairs should not refuse to work and should not covet leisure.

古文：将有国者未可知也。
现代文：将来继承君位的，还不知道是谁。
English: The future heir to the throne is still unknown.

古文：子其出乎。 
现代文：您还是出来干吧。 
English: Why don't you get out there and do it.

古文：召忽曰： 不可。
现代文：召忽说： 不行。
English: Zhao Hu said: No.

古文：吾三人者之于齐国也，譬之犹鼎之有足也，去一焉，则必不立矣。吾观小白，必不为后矣。 
现代文：我们三人对齐国来说，好比鼎的三足，去其一，立不起来。我看小白一定当不上继承君位的人。 
English: As far as Qi Guo is concerned, the three of us are like the three legs of a tripod. If one of us falls, the other cannot get up. I don't think Xiao Bai can be the person to inherit the throne.

古文：管仲曰， 不然也。夫国人憎恶纠之母，以及纠之身，而怜小白之无母也。
现代文：管仲说： 不对，全国人都厌恶公子纠的母亲，以至厌恶公子纠本人，而同情小白没有母亲。
English: Guanzhong said, "That's not right. The whole nation loathes the mother of Guanzhong, and even loathes Guanzhong himself, but sympathizes with Xiaobai who has no mother."

古文：诸儿长而贱，事未可知也。
现代文：诸儿虽然居长，但品质卑贱，前途如何还说不定。
English: Although the children are dominant, their quality is low, and their future is uncertain.

古文：夫所以定齐国者，非此二公子者，将无已也。
现代文：看来统治齐国的，除了纠和小白两公子，将无人承担。
English: It seems that no one will take on the responsibility of ruling Qi, except for Guo and Xiao Bai.

古文：小白之为人无小智，惕而有大虑，非夷吾莫容小白。
现代文：小白的为人，没有小聪明，性急但有远虑，不是我管夷吾，无人理解小白。
English: Xiao Bai is a person, no small cleverness, impatient but far-sighted, not me, no one understands Xiao Bai.

古文：天下不幸降祸加殃于齐，纠虽得立，事将不济，非子定社稷，其将谁也？ 
现代文：不幸上天降祸加灾于齐国，纠虽得立为君，也将一事无成，不是您鲍叔来安定国家，还有谁呢？ 
English: It is unfortunate that the heavens have brought disaster to Qi. Even if you were to become the ruler, you would accomplish nothing. It is not you, Uncle Bao, who will stabilize the country. Who else is there?

古文：召忽曰： 百岁之后：吾君卜世，犯吾君命，而废吾所立，夺吾纠也，虽得天下，吾不生也。况御我齐国之政也，受君令而不改，奉所立而不济，是吾义也。 
现代文：召忽说： 百年以后，国君下世，如有违犯君命废弃我之所立，夺去纠的君位，就是得了天下，我也不愿活着；何况，参与了我们齐国的政务，接受君令而不改，奉我所立而不使废除，这是我义不容辞的任务。 
English: Zhao Hui said, "A hundred years from now, when a sovereign passes away, if anyone disobeys the sovereign's order, abandons what I have established, and usurps the corrected sovereign's throne, I would not want to live even if I won the world. Moreover, I have participated in the government affairs of our Qi country, accepted the sovereign's order without changing it, and followed what I have established without abolishing it. This is my duty.

古文：管仲曰： 夷吾之为君臣也，将承君命，奉社稷，以持宗庙，岂死一纠哉？
现代文：管仲说： 我作为人君的臣子，是受君命奉国家以主持宗庙的，岂能为纠个人而牺牲？
English: Guanzhong said, "As a vassal of the emperor, who was ordered by the emperor to serve the country and preside over the ancestral temple, can I sacrifice myself for the sake of the individual?

古文：夷吾之所死者，社稷破，宗庙灭，祭祀绝，则夷吾死之；非此三者，则夷吾生。
现代文：我要为之牺牲的是：国家破、宗庙灭、祭祀绝，只有这样，我才去死。不是这三件事，我就要活下来。
English: What I want to sacrifice for is: the destruction of the country, the destruction of the ancestral temple, and the end of sacrifice. Only in this way can I die. If not for these three things, I want to survive.

古文：夷吾生，则齐国利；夷吾死，则齐国不利。 鲍叔曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：我活对齐国有利，我死对齐国不利。 鲍叔说： 那么我应该怎么办？ 
English: I live aligned with the country's advantage, I die aligned with the country's disadvantage. Uncle Bao said: So what should I do?

古文：管子曰： 子出奉令则可。 
现代文：管仲说： 您去接受命令就是了。 
English: Guanzhong said, "All you have to do is accept the order."

古文：鲍叔许诺。乃出奉令，邀傅小白。
现代文：鲍叔许诺，便出来接受任命，辅佐小白。
English: Uncle Bao promised, so he came out to accept the appointment and assisted Xiao Bai.

古文：鲍叔谓管仲曰： 何行？ 
现代文：鲍叔问管仲说： 怎样作工作呢？ 
English: Uncle Bao asked Guanzhong, "How do you do your work?"

古文：管仲曰； 为人臣者，不尽力于君则不亲信，不亲信则言不听，言不听则社稷不定。
现代文：管仲说： 为人臣的，对君主不竭尽心力就不能得到亲信，君主不亲信则说话不灵，说话不灵则国家不能安定。
English: Guanzhong said: As a vassal, if you don't make every effort for the monarch, you can't gain the monarch's trust. If the monarch doesn't trust you, you won't speak well. If you don't speak well, the country won't be stable.

古文：大事君者无二心。 
现代文：总之，事奉君主不可存有二心。 
English: In short, there can be no ambiguity in the service of the sovereign.

古文：鲍叔许诺。
现代文：鲍叔许诺了。
English: Uncle Bao promised.

古文：僖公之母弟夷仲年生公孙无知，有宠于僖公，衣服礼秩如適。
现代文：齐僖公的同母弟夷仲年生有公孙无知，得齐僖公的宠爱，衣服、礼数和世子一样待遇。
English: His half-brother, Yizhong, who was born to the same mother as Qi Rongguo, was the favorite of Qi Rongguo, and received the same clothing, number of courtesies, and treatment as the heir.

古文：僖公卒，以诸儿长，得为君，是为襄公。
现代文：僖公死后，因诸儿最长，立为国君，这就是齐襄公。
English: After the death of Qigong, because he was the eldest son, he became the king of the country. This is Qixiang.

古文：襄公立后，绌无知，无知怒。
现代文：齐襄公立后，废除无知的特殊地位，无知很恼怒。
English: After Qixiang was made public, the special status of ignorance was abolished, and ignorance was very angry.

古文：公令连称、管至父戍葵丘曰： 瓜时而往，及瓜时而来。 
现代文：齐襄公曾派连称、管至父两人到葵丘去戊守，命令说： 瓜熟的时候派你们去，明年瓜熟的时候回来。 
English: Prince Qixiang once sent a company of soldiers, including his father, to Kwai Chung to guard Wu, and ordered: "I will send you when the melons are ripe, and you will come back next year when the melons are ripe."

古文：期戍，公问不至，请代，不许，故二人因公孙无知以作乱。
现代文：驻守了一周年，齐襄公的通知还不到，两人请求接替，襄公不允许。他们便依靠公孙无知起来造反。
English: On the first anniversary of the garrison, the notice of Qi Xiangong did not arrive, the two requested a replacement, but Xiangong did not allow it. They relied on the ignorance of their sons and grandsons to rebel.

古文：鲁桓公夫人文姜，齐女也。
现代文：鲁桓公的夫人文姜，是齐国的姑娘。
English: Lu Kuan Gong's wife, Wen Jiang, is a girl from Qi.

古文：公将如齐，与夫人皆行。
现代文：鲁桓公将去齐国，准备与夫人同行。
English: Prince Lu Huan is going to Qi Province to accompany his wife.

古文：申俞谏曰： 不可，女有家，男有室，无相渎也，谓之有礼。 
现代文：申俞谏止说： 这不好。女有夫家，男有妻室，双方不相混乱，这是一种礼。 
English: Shen Yujie said, "This is not good. A woman has a husband, a man has a wife, and the two sides are not confused. This is a kind of ritual.

古文：公不听，遂以文姜会齐侯于泺。
现代文：鲁桓公不听，还是带着文姜与齐侯在烁水之地相会。
English: Lu Kuan Gong did not listen, but he still took Wen Jiang to meet Qi Hou in the land of sparkling water.

古文：文姜通于齐侯，桓公闻，责文姜。
现代文：文姜私通于齐侯，鲁桓公知道了，责备文姜。
English: Wen Jiang had illicit relations with Qi Hou. Lu Huan Gong found out and rebuked Wen Jiang.

古文：文姜告齐侯，齐侯怒，飨公，使公子彭生乘鲁侯胁之，公薨于车。
现代文：文姜告诉了齐侯，齐侯发怒，在宴请桓公的时候，使公子彭生扶之上车拉断其肋骨，鲁桓公死在车上了。
English: Wen Jiang told Qi Hou, Qi Hou was angry, and at the time of inviting Huan Gong to the banquet, he made his son Peng Sheng support him on the cart and broke his ribs, and Lu Huan Gong died on the cart.

古文：竖曼曰： 贤者死忠以振疑，百姓寓焉；智者究理而长虑，身得免焉。
现代文：齐国大夫竖曼说： 贤者死于忠诚以消除人的疑惑，百姓就安定了；智者深究事理而考虑长远，自身就免祸了。
English: Qigong doctor Zhimen said: "The wise die of loyalty to eliminate people's doubts, and the people are stable; the wise investigate matters deeply and consider the long-term, and they themselves are spared.

古文：今彭生二于君，无尽言。而谀行以戏我君，使我君失亲戚之礼命，又力成吾君之祸，以构二国之怨，彭生其得免乎？
现代文：彭生作为公子，仅次于国君，不忠谏而阿谀逢迎以戏弄国君，使国君失了亲戚之礼；现在又为国君闯了大祸，使两国结怨，彭生岂能免罪呢？
English: Peng Sheng, as a prince, is second only to the sovereign. He was unfaithful to his wife, and his mistress used to tease the sovereign, causing the sovereign to lose the respect of his relatives. Now he has caused a great disaster for the sovereign, causing the two countries to have a grudge. Can Peng Sheng be exonerated?

古文：祸理属焉。
现代文：祸败的原因，归于彭生。
English: The cause of the disaster is attributed to Peng Sheng.

古文：夫君以怒遂祸，不畏恶亲闻容，昏生无丑也。
现代文：君上您因怒而造祸，不顾交恶于亲戚之国，宽容了昏恶的彭生，就是无耻。
English: Your Excellency, it is shameless of you to create a calamity out of anger, disregard the country of your relatives, and tolerate the evil-minded Peng Sheng.

古文：岂及彭生而能止之哉？
现代文：那就不仅彭生一个人所能了事的了。
English: Then it's not just Peng Sheng alone who can do something.

古文：鲁若有诛，必以彭生为说。 
现代文：鲁国若兴兵问罪，也一定用彭生作理由。 
English: If Peng Sheng were to be charged with treason, he would certainly use Peng Sheng as a reason.

古文：二月，鲁人告齐曰： 寡君畏君之威，不敢宁居，来修旧好。
现代文：二月，鲁国果然通知齐国说： 我们的国君由于敬畏您的威望，不敢耽在家里，而到齐国修好。
English: In February, the State of Lu indeed notified the State of Qi, saying, "Our sovereign, fearing your prestige, did not dare to stay at home, but went to the State of Qi to mend fences.

古文：礼成而不反，无所归死，请以彭生除之。 
现代文：完成了外交之礼但没有生还，无所归咎，请用彭生来解除这个怨恨。 
English: Having completed the diplomatic salute but not survived, there is nothing to blame, please use Peng Sheng to relieve this resentment.

古文：齐人为杀彭生，以谢于鲁。
现代文：齐国于是就杀了彭生，以谢罪于鲁国。
English: Qi then killed Peng Sheng and blamed Lu for the crime.

古文：五月，襄公田于贝丘、见豕彘。
现代文：五月，齐襄公在贝丘打猎，见到一只野猪。
English: In May, Prince Qixiang went hunting in Beqiu and saw a wild boar.

古文：从者曰： 公子彭生也。 
现代文：侍从们说： 这是公子彭生。 
English: The attendants said: This is Prince Peng Sheng.

古文：公怒曰： 公子彭生安敢见！ 
现代文：齐襄公发怒说： 彭生怎么敢来见我？ 
English: Qi Xiangong said angrily: How dare Peng Sheng come to see me?

古文：射之，豕人立而啼。
现代文：用箭射它，这只野猪像人一样站着英叫起来。
English: Shoot it with an arrow, and the boar stands up like a man and squawks.

古文：公惧，坠于车下，伤足亡屦。
现代文：襄公害怕，从车上掉下来，伤了脚又丢了鞋。
English: Frightened, Mr. Xiang fell off the bus, injuring his foot and losing his shoe.

古文：反，诛屦于徒人费，不得也，鞭之见血。
现代文：回来向一个名叫费的侍从人员要鞋，没有找到，用鞭子打费血。
English: He came back and asked an attendant named Fei for a pair of shoes. When he couldn't find them, he beat Fei bloody with a whip.

古文：费走而出，遇贼于门，胁而束之，费袒而示之背，贼信之，使费先入，伏公而出，斗死于门中。
现代文：费跑出来，在大门遇到造反的叛贼，被捆绑起来。费脱掉衣服让他们看打伤的背，叛贼相信了他，让费进去捉齐襄公。费把齐襄公藏了起来而再出，与叛贼战死在门里。
English: Fei ran out, met the rebel traitors at the gate, and was tied up. Fei took off his clothes and let them see his injured back. The traitors believed him and let Fei go in to catch Qixiang. Fei hid Qixiang and came out again, and died fighting with the traitors in the gate.

古文：石之纷如死于阶下。
现代文：石之纷如也死在阶下。
English: The piles of stones are also buried under the steps.

古文：孟阳代君寝于床，贼杀之。曰： 非君也，不类。 
现代文：孟阳冒充齐襄公躺在他的床上，叛贼把他杀死以后说： 不是国君，相貌不像。 
English: Mengyang pretended to be Prince Qixiang lying on his bed. After the traitors killed him, he said, "I'm not the king, I don't look like him."

古文：见公之足于户下，遂杀公，而立公孙无知也。
现代文：这时忽然在门下面发现齐襄公的脚，于是杀了齐襄公而拥立公孙无知为国君。
English: At this time, Qixiang's foot was suddenly found under the door, so he killed Qixiang and set up his grandson, Ignorance, as the king.

古文：鲍叔牙奉公子小白奔莒，管夷吾、召忽奉公子纠奔鲁。
现代文：鲍叔牙事奉公子小白逃奔到莒国，管夷吾和召忽事奉公子纠逃奔到鲁国。
English: Bao Shuga's servant, Xiao Bai, ran away to Shandong Province, while Guan Yiwu and his servant, Zhao Hui, ran away to Lu Province.

古文：九年，公孙无知虐于雍廪，雍廪杀无知也。
现代文：鲁庄公九年，齐国的公孙无知因为虐待雍凛，雍凛杀了公孙无知。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Lu Zhuang, Gongsun Wushu of Qi killed Gongsun Wushu because he mistreated Yongrin.

古文：桓公自莒先入，鲁人伐齐，纳公子纠。战于乾时，管仲射桓公中钩，鲁师败绩，桓公贱位。
现代文：齐桓公从苔地先回到齐国。鲁国这时也动兵伐齐，要纳公子纠为君，双方在乾时那地方作战，管仲箭射桓公，仅中带钩。鲁军打了败仗，齐桓公即位为君了。
English: Prince Qi Huan returned to Qi from the mossy land first. At this time, Lu also mobilized troops to fight, and wanted to accept the prince as the prince. The two sides fought in the dry time, and shot arrows at the prince, only with a hook in the middle. The Russian army was defeated, and Prince Qi Huan ascended to the throne.

古文：于是劫鲁，使鲁杀公子纠。
现代文：于是齐国要胁鲁国，要鲁国杀公子纠。
English: As a result, the State of Qi wanted to conquer the State of Lu, and the State of Lu wanted to kill the prince.

古文：桓公问于鲍叔曰： 将何以定社稷？ 
现代文：齐桓公问鲍叔说： 将怎样安定国家？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong asked Uncle Bao: How will the country be stabilized?

古文：鲍叔曰： 得管仲与召忽，则社稷定矣。 
现代文：鲍叔说： 得到管仲和召忽，国家就安定了。 
English: Uncle Bao said, "Once we get the intercession and appeal, the country will be stable."

古文：公曰： 夷吾与召忽，吾贼也。 
现代文：齐桓公说： 管仲和召忽是我的仇人呵。 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: Guanzhong and Zhao Huo are my enemies.

古文：鲍叔乃告公其故图。
现代文：鲍叔便把他们三人从前的谋划告诉了桓公。
English: Uncle Bao then told Huan Gong about the three of them's previous plan.

古文：公曰： 然则可得乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那么，能得到他们么？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "So, can we get them?"

古文：鲍叔曰： 若亟召，则可得也；不亟，不可得也。
现代文：鲍叔说： 要快快召回，就能得到，不快就得不到。
English: Uncle Bao said: If you want to recall quickly, you can get it, but if you are not happy, you cannot get it.

古文：夫鲁施伯知夷吾为人之有慧也，其谋必将令鲁致政于夷吾、夷吾受之，则彼知能弱齐矣；夷吾不受，彼知其将反于齐也，必将杀之。 
现代文：因为鲁国的施伯知道管仲的才干，他会献计让鲁国把大政交给管仲。管仲如果接受，鲁国就知道如何削弱齐国了；管仲如不接受，鲁国知道他将回齐国，就一定把他杀掉。 
English: Because the ruler of Lu knew of Guanzhong's ability, he would devise a plan to have Lu hand over power to Guanzhong. If Guanzhong accepted, Lu would know how to weaken Qi; if Guanzhong did not accept, Lu would know that he would return to Qi and would definitely kill him.

古文：公曰： 然则夷吾将受鲁之政乎？
现代文：齐桓公说： 那么，管仲将接受鲁国政务么？
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: So, will Guan Zhong accept the government affairs of Lu?

古文：其否也？ 
现代文：还是不肯接受呢？ 
English: Or refuse to accept it?

古文：鲍叔对曰： 不受。
现代文：鲍叔回答： 不会接受。
English: Uncle Bao replied: I won't accept it.

古文：夫夷吾之不死纠也，为欲定齐国之社稷也，今受鲁之政，是弱齐也。
现代文：管仲不为公子纠而死，就是为安定齐国，若接受鲁国政务，就是削弱齐国了。
English: If Guanzhong does not die for the sake of the prince, it is for the stability of Qi. If he accepts the government affairs of Lu, it is to weaken Qi.

古文：夷吾之事君无二心，虽知死，必不受也。 
现代文：管仲对齐国没有二心，虽明知要死，也肯定不会接受的。 
English: Guanzhong Alignment has no second thoughts, and although it knows it will die, it will certainly not accept it.

古文：公曰： 其于我也，曾若是乎？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 他对于我，也肯这样么？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: Is he willing to do the same for me?

古文：鲍叔对曰： 非为君也，为先君也。
现代文：鲍叔回答说； 不是为了您，而是为了齐国先代的君主。
English: Uncle Bao replied: Not for you, but for the previous monarchs of Qi.

古文：其于君不如亲纠也，纠之不死，而况君乎？
现代文：他对您当然不如对公子纠更亲，对公子纠他都不肯死难，何况您呢？
English: Of course, he is not as close to you as he is to his son-in-law, and he is not willing to die for his son-in-law, let alone you?

古文：君若欲定齐之社稷，则亟迎之。 
现代文：您若想安定齐国，就快把他接回来。 
English: If you want to stabilize the country, take him back immediately.

古文：公曰： 恐不及，奈何？ 
现代文：齐桓公说： 恐怕时间来不及了，怎么办？ 
English: Qi Kuan Gong said: I'm afraid it's too late, what should I do?

古文：鲍叔曰： 夫施伯之为人也，敏而多畏。公若先反，恐注怨焉，必不杀也。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：鲍叔说： 施伯的为人，聪敏然而伯事，您若及早去要，他害怕得罪齐国，一定不会杀的。 桓公说； 好。 
English: Uncle Bao said: Shi Bo is a clever man, but he is not good at things. If you go to him early, he will not kill you for fear of offending Qi Guo. Huan Gong said: Good.

古文：施伯进对鲁君曰： 管仲有急，其事不济，今在鲁，君其致鲁之政焉。
现代文：鲁君施伯果然去对鲁君说： 管仲是有智谋的，只是事业未成，现在鲁国，您应把鲁国大政委托给他。
English: Lu Jun Shi Bo really went to Lu Jun and said: Guanzhong is resourceful, but the cause has not been accomplished. Now, Lu, you should entrust the great power of Lu to him.

古文：若受之，则齐可弱也；若不受，则杀之。
现代文：他若接受，就可以削弱齐国；若不接受，就杀掉他。
English: If he accepts, he can weaken Qi; if he doesn't accept, kill him.

古文：杀之，以悦于齐也，与同怒，尚贤于已。 君曰： 诺。 
现代文：杀他来向齐国讨好，表示与齐同怒，比不杀更友好。 鲁君说： 好。 
English: Killing him to curry favor with Qi, to show that he shares Qi's anger, is more friendly than not killing him. Lu Jun said: Good.

古文：鲁未及致政，而齐之使至，曰： 夷吾与召忽也，寡人之贼也，今在鲁，寡人愿生得之。
现代文：鲁国还未及任用管仲从政，齐桓公的使臣就到了，说： 管仲和召忽，是我的叛贼，现在鲁国，我想要活着得到他们。
English: Before Lu could appoint Guanzhong to politics, the envoys of Qi Huan arrived and said: Guanzhong and Zhao Hui are my traitors. Now, Lu, I want to get them alive.

古文：若不得也，是君与寡人贼比也。 
现代文：如得不到，那就是鲁君您和我的叛贼站在一起了。 
English: If not, then Lu Jun, you and my traitor are standing together.

古文：鲁君问施伯，施伯曰： 君与之。
现代文：鲁国问施伯，施伯说： 您可以交还给他。
English: Lu Guo asked Shi Bo, and Shi Bo said, "You can return it to him."

古文：臣闻齐君惕而亟骄，虽得贤，庸必能用之乎？
现代文：我听说齐君性急而极为骄傲，虽得贤才，就一定能使用么？
English: I've heard that Qi Jun is impatient and extremely proud. Even though he has talent, will he be able to use it?

古文：及齐君之能用之也，管子之事济也。
现代文：如果齐君真的使用了，管子的事业就成了。
English: If Qi Jun really used it, the pipe's career would be over.

古文：夫管仲天下之大圣也，今彼反齐、天下皆乡之，岂独鲁乎！
现代文：管仲是天下的圣人，现在回齐国执政，天下都将归顺他，岂独鲁国！
English: Guanzhong is the saint of the world. Now that he is back in power in Qi, the whole world will submit to him. Won't it just be Lu!

古文：今若杀之，此鲍叔之友也，鲍叔因此以作难，君必不能待也，不如与之。 
现代文：现在若杀了他，他可是鲍叔的好友，鲍叔借此与鲁国作对，您一定受不了，还不如交还齐国。 
English: If you kill him now, he is a good friend of Uncle Bao, and Uncle Bao is using this to oppose the State of Lu. You will not be able to bear it. You might as well hand back the State of Qi.

古文：鲁君乃遂束缚管仲与召忽。管仲谓召忽曰： 子惧乎？ 
现代文：鲁君便把管仲、召忽捆起来准备起行。管仲对召忽说： 您害怕么？ 
English: Lu Jun then tied up Guanzhong and Zhao Hui and prepared to set off. Guanzhong said to Zhao Hui: Are you afraid?

古文：召忽曰： 何惧乎？
现代文：召忽说： 怕什么？
English: Zhao Hu said: What are you afraid of?

古文：吾不蚤死，将胥有所定也；今既定矣，令子相齐之左，必令忽相齐之右。
现代文：我不早死，是等待国家平定。现在既然平定了，让您当齐国的左相，也一定让我当齐国的右相。
English: If I do not die early, it is because I am waiting for the country to be pacified. Now that it has been pacified, let you be the left minister of Qi, and let me be the right minister of Qi.

古文：虽然，杀君而用吾身，是再辱我也。
现代文：但是，杀我君而用我身，是再一次对我的侮辱。
English: But to kill me and use me is another insult to me.

古文：子为生臣，忽为死臣。
现代文：您作生臣，我作死臣好了。
English: You be the living vassal, I'll be the dead one.

古文：忽也知得万乘之政而死，公子纠可谓有死臣矣。
现代文：我召忽既已明知将得万乘大国的政务而自死，公子纠可说有死事的忠臣了。
English: Now that I have summoned you, knowing that you will take advantage of the government affairs of a great country and die of your own accord, you can say that you are a loyal subject with a fatal problem.

古文：子生而霸诸侯，公子纠可谓有生臣矣。
现代文：您活着称霸诸侯，公子纠可说有生臣了。
English: You live to dominate the lords, so you can say that you have a vassal.

古文：死者成行，生者成名，名不两立，行不虚至。
现代文：死者完成德行，生者完成功名，生名与死名不能兼顾，德行也不能虚得。
English: The dead have accomplished virtue, the living have accomplished fame. Both fame in life and fame in death cannot be taken into account, and virtue cannot be obtained in vain.

古文：子其勉之，死生有分矣。 
现代文：您努力吧，死生在我们两人是各尽其分了。 
English: You do your best. The two of us will do our best.

古文：乃行，入齐境，自刎而死。
现代文：于是上路而行，一进入齐境，召忽就自则而死了。
English: So he went on his way, and as soon as he entered Qi Jie, he died of his own accord.

古文：管仲遂入。
现代文：管仲也便回到齐国。
English: Guanzhong also returned to Qi.

古文：君子闻之曰： 召忽之死也，贤其生也：管仲之生也，贤其死也。 
现代文：君子们听到都说： 召忽的死，比活着更贤；管仲的生，比殉死更贤。 
English: When the nobles heard this, they all said, "A quick death is more virtuous than a long life; a well-ordered life is more virtuous than a martyr's death."

古文：或曰：明年，襄公逐小白，小白走莒。
现代文：另有一种说法是：齐襄公即位第二年，驱逐小白，小白逃入莒国。
English: Another saying is that in the second year of Qixiang's accession to the throne, Xiao Bai was expelled and fled to Shandong.

古文：三年，襄公薨，公子纠践位。
现代文：襄公在位十二年而死，公子纠即位。
English: Prince Xiang died twelve years into his reign, and Prince Gui ascended the throne.

古文：国人召小白。
现代文：国人召小白回国。
English: The Chinese called Xiao Bai back to China.

古文：鲍叔曰： 胡不行矣？ 
现代文：鲍叔说： 还不回去么？ 
English: Uncle Bao said, "Aren't you going back?

古文：小白曰： 不可。
现代文：小白说： 不行。
English: Xiao Bai said, "No."

古文：夫管仲知，召忽强武，虽国人召我，我犹不得入也。 
现代文：管仲有智，召忽强武，尽管国人召我，我也是进不去的。 
English: Guanzhong has wisdom, Zhaohong strong military, although the people of my country call me, I can't get in.

古文：鲍叔曰： 管仲得行其知于国，国可谓乱乎？
现代文：鲍叔说： 如果管仲的智谋确实发挥出来了，齐国为什么还会乱？
English: Uncle Bao said, "If Guanzhong's wit and strategy really worked, why would there be chaos in Qi?"

古文：召忽强武，岂能独图我哉？ 
现代文：召忽虽然强武，岂能单独对付我们呢？ 
English: Even though Zhao Hui is strong, can he deal with us alone?

古文：小白曰： 夫虽不得行其知，岂且不有焉乎？召忽虽不得众，其及岂不足以图我哉？ 
现代文：小白说： 管仲虽然不得行其智，但毕竟不是没有智；召忽虽不得国人支持，他的党羽还是可以图害我们的。 
English: Xiao Bai said: Although Guanzhong is not allowed to practice his wisdom, he is not without wisdom after all; although Zhao Hui is not supported by the Chinese people, his party can still try to harm us.

古文：鲍叔对曰： 夫国之乱也，智人不得作内事，朋友不能相合摎，而国乃可图也。 
现代文：鲍叔回答说： 国家一乱，智者无法搞好内政，朋友无法搞好团结，国家是可以夺到手的。 
English: Uncle Bao replied: When the country is in chaos, the wise cannot do a good job in domestic affairs, friends cannot do a good job in unity, and the country can be taken over.

古文：乃命车驾，鲍叔御小白乘而出于莒。
现代文：于是命令车驾出发，鲍叔赶车，小白乘坐而离开苔国。
English: So he ordered the driver to set off, Uncle Bao to catch the car, and Xiao Bai to take the ride and leave the moss country.

古文：小白曰： 夫二人者奉君令，吾不可以试也。 
现代文：小白说： 管仲和召忽两人是奉君令行事的，我还是不可冒险。 
English: Xiao Bai said, "Both Guan Zhong and Zhao Huo are acting under the orders of the emperor. I still can't take the risk.

古文：乃将下，鲍叔履其足曰： 事之济也，在此时；事若不济，老臣死之，公于犹之免也。 
现代文：说着就要下车。鲍叔用靴子挡住小白的脚说： 事如成功，就在此时；事如不成，就由我牺牲生命，您还是可以不死的。 
English: As he spoke, he was about to get off the bus. Uncle Bao used his boots to block Xiao Bai's feet and said, "If things are successful, it will be at this time; if things are not successful, I will sacrifice my life. You can still not die."

古文：乃行。
现代文：于是继续前进。
English: So they went on.

古文：至于邑郊，鲍叔令车二十乘先，十乘后。
现代文：到了城郊，鲍叔命令二十辆兵车在前，十辆在后。
English: When they arrived at the outskirts of the city, Uncle Bao ordered twenty chariots to go in front and ten behind.

古文：鲍叔乃告小白曰： 夫国之疑二三子，莫忍老臣。
现代文：鲍叔对小白说： 他们怀疑我们这些从人，但并不认识我。
English: Uncle Bao said to Xiao Bai: They suspect us followers, but they don't know me.

古文：事之未济也，老臣是以塞道。 鲍叔乃誓曰： 事之济也，听我令；事之不济也，免公子者为上，死者为下，吾以五乘之实距路。 
现代文：如果事情不成，我便在前面阻塞道路。 接着鲍叔对众宣誓说： 事情成功，都听我的命令；事情如果不成，能使公子免祸者为上，死者为下，我用五辆兵车的车徒器械拦路。 
English: If things don't work out, I'll block the road ahead.Then Uncle Bao swore to the crowd: If things work out, everyone will follow my orders; if things don't work out, I'll block the road with five chariots of soldiers.

古文：鲍叔乃为前驱，遂入国，逐公子纠。管仲射小白，中钩。
现代文：于是，鲍叔充当前驱，就进入齐国，驱逐了公子纠，管仲箭射小白，仅中带钩。
English: As a result, Uncle Bao, acting as the forerunner, entered Qi Province, expelled Gongzi Guo, and managed to shoot Xiao Bai, but only with a hook in the middle.

古文：管仲与公子纠、召忽遂走鲁。
现代文：管仲与公子纠、召忽就逃往鲁国去了。
English: When Guanzhong and the prince quarreled, Guanzhong fled to the State of Lu.

古文：桓公践位，鲁伐齐，纳公子纠而不能。
现代文：齐桓公即位以后，鲁国曾攻伐齐国，想立公子纠而没有办到。
English: After the enthronement of King Qi Kuan, the State of Lu invaded the State of Qi and tried to establish a prince, but failed to do so.

古文：桓公二年践位，召管仲。管仲至，公问曰： 社稷可定乎？ 
现代文：桓公元年，召见管仲，管仲到后，桓公问： 国家能够安定么？ 
English: In the year of King Kan, he summoned Guanzhong. After Guanzhong arrived, King Kan asked: Can the country be stable?

古文：管仲对曰： 君霸王，社稷定；君不霸王，社稷不定。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 您能建立霸业，国家就能安定；建立不了霸业，国家就不能安定。 
English: Guanzhong replied: If you can establish hegemony, the country will be stable; if you cannot establish hegemony, the country will not be stable.

古文：公曰： 吾不敢至于此其大也，定社稷而已。 管仲又请，君曰： 不能。 
现代文：桓公说： 我不敢有那么大的雄心，只求国家安定就成了。 管仲再请，桓公还说： 不能。 
English: "I don't dare to have such a big ambition," said Lord Huan, "I just want to see the country stable."

古文：管仲辞于君曰： 君免臣于死，臣之幸也；然臣之不死纠也，为欲定社稷也。
现代文：管仲向桓公告辞说： 君免我于死，是我的幸运。但是我之所以不死于公子纠，是为了要把国家真正安定下来。
English: Guan Zhong announced his resignation to Huan and said, "It is my good fortune that you have spared me from death, but the reason why I did not die in a noble cause was to truly stabilize the country."

古文：社稷不定，臣禄齐国之政而不死纠也，臣不敢。 
现代文：国家不真正安定，要我掌握齐国政事而不死节于公子纠，我是不敢接受的。 
English: The country is not really stable, and I dare not accept that I should be in charge of the country's political affairs and not be tied to the prince.

古文：乃走出，至门，公召管仲。
现代文：于是走出，到大门，桓公又召管仲回来。
English: So he went out, to the gate, and Kanko called Kanenaka back.

古文：管仲反，公汗出曰： 勿已，其勉霸乎。 
现代文：管仲回来后，桓公流着汗说： 你一定要坚持，那就勉力图霸吧。
English: After Guanzhong came back, Kan Gong said with perspiration: You must persist, then try your best to dominate.

古文：管仲再拜稽首而起曰： 今日君成霸，臣贪承命，趋立于相位。 
现代文：管仲再拜稽首起来以后说： 今天您同意完成霸业，我就可以秉承君命立于相位了。 
English: After he bowed his head again, Guan Zhong said: Today, you have agreed to complete the hegemony, I can stand in the position of upholding the king's order.

古文：乃令五官行事。
现代文：于是便发布命令使五官开始办理政事。
English: As a result, an order was issued for the five officials to begin handling government affairs.

古文：异日，公告管仲曰： 欲以诸侯之间无事也，小修兵革。 管仲曰： 不可。
现代文：过了一些时候，桓公对管仲说： 我想乘此诸侯间没有战事的时候，稍微加强一下军备。 管仲说： 不行。
English: After some time had passed, Prince Kan said to Guanzhong, "I would like to take advantage of the fact that there is no war between the lords to strengthen our armaments a little." Guanzhong said, "No."

古文：百姓病，公先与百姓，而藏其兵。与其厚于兵，不如厚于人。
现代文：百姓生活困难，您应该先亲百姓而收敛军备，与其厚于军队，不如厚于人民。
English: The people's life is difficult. You should first concern yourself with the people and reduce armaments. It is better to be thicker than the people than thicker than the army.

古文：齐国之社稷未定，公未始于人而始于兵，外不亲于诸侯，内不亲于民。 公曰： 诺。 
现代文：齐国的国家尚未安定，您不把人民生活放在首位而先扩充军备，那就将外不亲于诸侯，内不亲于百姓。 桓公说： 好。 
English: The country of Qi was not yet stable, and if you did not put the people's lives first and expanded your armaments first, then you would not be close to the princes on the outside, and not close to the people on the inside.

古文：政未能有行也。
现代文：这件政事没有能够实行。
English: This policy has not been implemented.

古文：二年，桓公弥乱，又告管仲曰： 欲缮兵。 
现代文：桓公二年，国愈乱，又对管仲说： 我想加强军备。 
English: In the second year of King Kan, as the country became more and more chaotic, he said to Guanzhong, "I want to strengthen our armaments."

古文：管仲又曰： 不可。 
现代文：管仲又说： 不行。 
English: Guan Zhong also said, "It's impossible.

古文：公不听，果为兵。
现代文：桓公不听，果然修治军备。
English: Kan didn't listen, and the armament was repaired.

古文：桓公与宋夫人饮船中。夫人荡船而惧公。
现代文：桓公曾与宋夫人在船中饮酒，宋夫人摇荡船只吓唬桓公 。
English: Lord Huan had been drinking with Lady Song on the boat, and Lady Song had rocked the boat to scare Lord Huan.

古文：公怒，出之，宋受而嫁之蔡侯。
现代文：桓公发怒，休了宋夫人，宋国则把宋夫人再嫁给蔡侯。
English: Huan Gong got angry and dismissed Mrs. Song, while Song Guo remarried Mrs. Song to Cai Hou.

古文：明年，公怒告管仲曰： 欲伐宋。 
现代文：第二年，桓公怒对管仲说： 我想伐宋。 
English: In the second year, Kuan Gong angrily said to Guanzhong, "I want to go to Song Dynasty."

古文：管仲曰： 不可。臣闻内政不修，外举事不济。 
现代文：管仲说： 不可以，我认为内政不修，对外用兵不会成功。 
English: Guanzhong said, "No, I don't think it's possible. If we don't improve our domestic affairs, the use of troops abroad won't be successful."

古文：公不听，果伐宋。
现代文：桓公不听，果然起兵伐宋。
English: Kan didn't listen, and he did indeed raise an army to fight Song.

古文：诸侯兴兵而救宋，大败齐师。
现代文：各诸侯兴兵救宋，把齐军打得大败。
English: All the princes and nobles raised their armies to save Song and defeated the Qi army.

古文：公怒，归告管仲曰： 请修兵革。
现代文：桓公发怒了，回来对管仲说； 请你加强军备。
English: Huan Gong got angry and came back and said to Guanzhong, "Please strengthen your armament."

古文：吾士不练，吾兵不实，诸侯故敢救吾仇。
现代文：我的战士没有训练，兵力又不充实，所以各国诸侯敢救我们的敌国。
English: My soldiers are untrained and understrength, so princes of all countries dare to save our enemy country.

古文：内修兵革！ 
现代文：必须在国内加强军备！ 
English: We must strengthen armaments at home!

古文：管仲曰： 不可，齐国危矣。
现代文：管仲说： 不可以，这样齐国就危险了。
English: Guanzhong said, "No, that would put Qi in danger."

古文：内夺民用，士劝于勇，外乱之本也。
现代文：国内夺取民用，鼓励兵士打仗，这是乱国的根源。
English: Seizing civilian property within the country and encouraging soldiers to fight is the root cause of chaos.

古文：外犯诸侯，民多怨也。
现代文：国外侵犯诸侯，各国人民多怨。
English: Foreign countries encroach on local lords, and the people of all countries are resentful.

古文：为义之士，不入齐国，安得无危？ 
现代文：行义之士，不肯到齐国来，国家还能没有危险？ 
English: If a righteous person does not want to come to Qi, is there any danger to the country?

古文：鲍叔曰： 公必用夷吾之言。 
现代文：鲍叔也说： 您一定要听纳夷吾的意见。 
English: Uncle Bao also said: You must listen to the opinion of Naiguo.

古文：公不听，乃令四封之内修兵。
现代文：桓公不听，命令全部封地之内加强军备。
English: Emperor Kan did not listen and ordered to strengthen the armament in all the fiefs.

古文：关市之征侈之，公乃遂用以勇授禄。
现代文：增加了关税和市场税，桓公便用来按作战勇敢颁发禄赏。
English: Tariffs and market taxes were increased, and Kan Gong was used to award prizes for bravery in battle.

古文：鲍叔谓管仲曰： 异日者，公许子霸，今国弥乱，子将何如？ 
现代文：鲍叔对管仲说： 从前，桓公曾同意您兴举霸业，现在国家愈乱，您将怎么办？ 
English: Uncle Bao said to Guanzhong, "Once upon a time, King Huan agreed with you to promote hegemony, but now the country is getting more and more chaotic. What will you do?

古文：管仲曰： 吾君惕，其智多诲，姑少胥其自及也。 
现代文：管仲说： 我们的国君性急，其见解多有悔改，姑且等他自己觉悟吧。 
English: Guanzhong said, "Our sovereign is impatient, and his opinions are often contrite. Let him come to his senses."

古文：鲍叔曰： 比其自及也，国无阙亡乎？ 
现代文：鲍叔说： 等他自己觉悟，国家不就受损失了么？ 
English: Uncle Bao said, "When he comes to his senses, won't the country suffer a loss?"

古文：管仲曰： 未也。
现代文：管仲说： 不会。
English: Guan Zhong said, "No."

古文：国中之政，夷吾尚微为焉， 乱乎尚可以待。
现代文：国家政事，我还在暗中办理着，混乱一些还有时间挽救。
English: I am still dealing with national politics in secret, and there is still time to save some chaos.

古文：外诸侯之佐，既无有吾二人者，未有敢犯我者。 
现代文：国外诸侯的大臣，既没有赶得上我们二人的，便无人敢来侵犯我国。 
English: The ministers of foreign princes have not yet caught up with the two of us, so no one dares to invade our country.

古文：明年，朝之争禄相刺，裚领而刎颈者不绝。
现代文：到下一年，朝廷里争夺禄位，互相残杀，折颈断头的事不断发生。
English: By the next year, the imperial court was rife with jockeying for positions, mutual killings, and beheadings.

古文：鲍叔谓管仲曰： 国死者众矣，毋乃害乎？ 
现代文：鲍叔对管仲说： 国家死的人多了，这不是坏事么？ 
English: Uncle Bao said to Guanzhong: The country has more deaths, isn't that a bad thing?

古文：管仲曰： 安得已然，此皆其贪民也。夷吾之所患者，诸侯之为义者莫肯入齐，齐之为义者莫肯仕。
现代文：管仲说： 怎么能是？那些人都是贪民，我所忧虑的，各诸候国的义士不肯入齐，齐国的义士不肯作官。
English: Guanzhong said, "How can it be? Those people are greedy. What worries me is that the righteous people of all countries will not come together, and the righteous people of Qi will not serve as officials.

古文：此夷吾之所患也。
现代文：这才是我的忧患所在。
English: That's what I'm worried about.

古文：若夫死者，吾安用而爱之？ 
现代文：象那样一些死者，我何必加以爱惜？ 
English: Why should I cherish the dead like that?

古文：公又内修兵。
现代文：桓公又在国内加强军备。
English: Emperor Kan also strengthened the country's military.

古文：三年，桓公将伐鲁，曰： 鲁与寡人近，于是其救宋也疾，寡人且诛焉。 
现代文：桓公三年，桓公将伐鲁国，说： 鲁国同我本来接近，所以他出兵救宋也快，我要讨伐他。 
English: In the third year of the reign of King Kuan, King Kuan led the war against Lu and said: Lu and I were originally close, so he was quick to send troops to save Song, and I want to fight him.

古文：管仲曰： 不可。
现代文：管仲说： 不可以。
English: Guanzhong said, "No."

古文：臣闻有土之君，不勤于兵，不忌于辱，不辅其过，则社稷安。勤于兵，忌于辱，辅其过，则社稷危。 
现代文：我听说有土之君，不勤于战争，不忌恨小辱，不重复过错，国家就能安定；勤于战争，忌恨小辱，重复过错，国家就是要危险的。 
English: I have heard that if there is a prince of the soil who is not diligent in war, does not hate humiliation, and does not repeat mistakes, the country can be stable; if he is diligent in war, hates humiliation, and repeats mistakes, the country is dangerous.

古文：公不听。兴师伐鲁，造于长勺。
现代文：桓公不听，兴兵伐鲁，兵到了长勺。
English: Kan didn't listen, and the soldiers were forced to retreat. The soldiers ended up in Nagaspo.

古文：鲁庄公兴师逆之，大败之。
现代文：鲁庄公出兵抵抗，大败齐军。
English: Luzhongong sent troops to resist and defeated the Qi army.

古文：桓公曰： 吾兵犹尚少，吾参围之，安能圉我！ 
现代文：桓公说： 我的兵还是太少，我若以三倍的兵力包围它，它还怎能阻挡我？ 
English: Lord Huan said, "My troops are still too few. If I surround it with three times as many troops, how can it stop me?"

古文：四年，修兵，同甲十万，车五千乘。
现代文：四年，桓公继续修治军备，齐整的甲士有十万人，兵车有五千乘。
English: In the fourth year, Emperor Kan continued to improve the armament. There were 100,000 fully equipped soldiers and 5,000 chariots.

古文：谓管仲曰： 吾士既练，吾兵既多，寡人欲服鲁。 
现代文：桓公对管仲说： 我的战士已经训练，军队已经增多，我要征服鲁国了。 
English: Prince Kan said to Guanzhong, "My soldiers have been trained, the army has increased, I am going to conquer Lu."

古文：管仲喟然叹曰： 齐国危矣。君不竞于德而竞于兵。
现代文：管仲深深叹惜说： 齐国危险了，因为您不努力于德政而努力于甲兵。
English: Guanzhong sighed deeply and said, "Qi Province is in danger, because you do not work hard on German politics, but work hard on A soldiers."

古文：天下之国带甲十万者不鲜矣，吾欲发小兵以服大兵。内失吾众，诸侯设备，吾人设诈，国欲无危，得已乎？ 
现代文：天下各国拥兵十万的不少，我们要发动小的兵力征服大的兵力，国内脱离民众，国外诸侯戒备，我们自己也只好行诈，国家想不危险能办到么？ 
English: There are not a few hundred thousand soldiers in all the countries of the world. We have to mobilize a small force to conquer a large force. We have to get rid of the people at home, and the foreign princes have to be on the alert. We have no choice but to cheat. Can the country do it without danger?

古文：公不听，果伐鲁。
现代文：桓公不听，果然伐鲁。
English: Kan didn't listen, and the felling went ahead.

古文：鲁不敢战，去国五十里而为之关。
现代文：鲁国不敢迎战，只在离国都五十里处，设关防守。
English: Lu did not dare to fight, and only set up a defense post 50 miles from the capital.

古文：鲁请比于关内，以从于齐，齐亦毋复侵鲁。
现代文：鲁国请求以关内侯的依次，服从齐国，要求齐国也不再侵略鲁国。
English: The State of Lu requested that Guan Nei Hou, in turn, obey the State of Qi, and requested that the State of Qi no longer invade the State of Lu.

古文：桓公许诺。
现代文：桓公许诺了。
English: Lord Kan promised.

古文：鲁人请盟曰： 鲁小国也，固不带剑，今而带剑，是交兵闻于诸侯，君不如已。
现代文：鲁国约请会盟说： 鲁是小国，当然不带兵器，若带兵器开会，就是以战争状态传闻于各国诸侯，您还不如作罢。
English: Lu invited the League to a meeting and said: Lu is a small country, of course, it does not bring weapons. If you bring weapons to a meeting, it is rumored to be a state of war among the princes of all countries. You might as well give it up.

古文：请去兵。 
现代文：这次会盟请都免带兵器。 
English: This time, please do not bring any weapons.

古文：桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：桓公说： 可以。 
English: Kaneko said, "Yes."

古文：乃令从者毋以兵。管仲曰： 不可。
现代文：使命令随员不带兵器。管仲说： 不行。
English: He ordered the attendants not to carry weapons. Guanzhong said, "No."

古文：诸侯加忌于君，君如是以退可。
现代文：各诸侯国对您都很忌恨，您还是就此告退为好。
English: All the vassal states loathe you, so you might as well resign.

古文：君果弱鲁君，诸侯又加贪于君，后有事，小国弥坚，大国设备，非齐国之利也。 
现代文：您真的借盟会削弱了鲁国，各诸侯国又会把 贪 名加在您头上，以后的事，小国愈加顽抗，大国也组织防备，对齐国都不利。 
English: If you really make an alliance, you will weaken the Russian Empire, and the various vassal states will put the name of greed on your head. In the future, small countries will become more and more stubborn, and large countries will also organize their defenses. It is not good for countries to be aligned.

古文：桓公不听。
现代文：桓公不听。
English: Kan didn't listen.

古文：管仲又谏曰： 君必不去鲁，胡不用兵？
现代文：管仲又谏止说： 您切不可去。鲁国人怎么能不带兵器？
English: Guanzhong also said, "You must not go. How can the Lu people go without weapons?"

古文：曹刿之为人也，坚强以忌，不可以约取也。 
现代文：曹判的为人，坚强而狠毒，不是能用盟约来解决问题的。 
English: Cao Zhan's personality, strong and vicious, is not able to use the covenant to solve the problem.

古文：桓公不听，果与之遇。
现代文：桓公不听，果然与鲁国相会。
English: However, Emperor Kan did not listen, and as expected, he met with Lu.

古文：庄公自怀剑，曹刿亦怀剑，践坛，庄公抽剑其怀曰： 鲁之境去国五十里，亦无不死而已。 
现代文：鲁庄公怀中带剑，曹判也怀中带剑。上台后，庄公从怀里抽出剑来说： 鲁国边境，离国都只五十里了，也不过一死而已。 
English: Lu Zhuang Gong carried a sword in his arms, and Cao Zhan also carried a sword in his arms. After taking office, Zhuang Gong pulled out a sword from his arms and said: The border of Lu, only fifty miles away from the country, is just a death.

古文：左揕桓公，右自承曰： 均之死也，戮死于君前。 
现代文：左手举剑对着桓公、右手比着自己说： 一同死了吧，我死在您的面前。 
English: With his left hand, he raised his sword and said to Lord Huan, and with his right hand, he said to himself, "Let's die together, I'll die in front of you."

古文：管仲走君，曹刿抽剑当两阶之间，曰： 二君将改图，无有进者！ 
现代文：管仲跑向桓公，曹判抽举剑站在两个台阶之间说： 两位国君将改变原来计划，谁也不可进前。 
English: Guanzhong ran to Huan Gong, Cao Zhan drew his sword and stood between the two steps and said: The two sovereigns will change the original plan, and no one can advance.

古文：管仲曰： 君与地，以汶为竟。 
现代文：管仲说： 君上请把土地归还给鲁国，以汶水为界好了。 
English: Guanzhong said: Your Excellency, please return the land to the State of Lu, and let the boundary be the Wenshui River.

古文：桓公许诺，以汶为竟而归。
现代文：桓公许诺了，确定以汶水为界而回国。
English: King Kan promised, and decided to return to the country with the border at Wenshui.

古文：桓公归而修于政，不修于兵革，自圉，辟人，以过，弭师。
现代文：桓公这次回来便努力整顿政治而不再增加军备，自守边境，不过问他人，停止过激行动并息兵罢战了。
English: When Emperor Huan returned this time, he tried to rectify politics without increasing armaments, defended the border, but asked others to stop excessive actions and the soldiers went on strike.

古文：五年，宋伐杞。
现代文：桓公五年，宋国伐记国。
English: In the 5th year of King Kan, Song felled Ji Province.

古文：桓公谓管仲与鲍叔曰， 夫宋，寡人固欲伐之，无若诸侯何？
现代文：桓公对管仲和鲍叔说： 宋，本来是我要讨伐的，无奈各国诸侯要救他。
English: Prince Kan said to Guan Zhong and Uncle Bao: Song, I originally wanted to fight him, but the lords of various countries wanted to save him.

古文：夫杞，明王之后也。
现代文：杞国是伟大君主的后代。
English: This country is the descendant of a great monarch.

古文：今宋伐之，予欲救之，其可乎？ 管仲对曰： 不可。
现代文：目前宋国伐他，我想去救，能行么？ 管仲说： 不行。
English: At present, the Song Dynasty is attacking him. I want to save him. Can I do that? Guanzhong said, "No."

古文：臣闻内政之不修，外举义不信。
现代文：我认为自己内政不修，向外举兵行义就无人信服。
English: I believe that if we do not improve our internal affairs, no one will be convinced if we send troops abroad to do good.

古文：君将外举义，以行先之，则诸侯可令附。 
现代文：您现在将要对外举兵行义，以实行先外后内的办法，对各国诸侯来说可以使之亲附么？ 
English: You are now going to raise an army abroad to carry out righteousness, in order to implement the method of first outside and then inside, for the princes of all countries, can you make it intimate?

古文：桓公曰： 于此不救，后无以伐宋。 
现代文：桓公说： 此时不救，以后将没有理由伐宋了。 
English: Kanko said, "If we don't help at this time, there will be no reason to attack Song in the future."

古文：管仲曰： 诸侯之君，不贪于土。贪于土必勤于兵、勤于兵必病于民，民病则多诈。
现代文：管仲说： 一个诸侯国的君主，不应该贪得土地，贪地必然勤于动兵，勤动兵必然困乏人民，人民困乏则君主只好多行欺诈了。
English: Guanzhong said: A prince of a vassal state should not be greedy for land. To be greedy, he must be diligent in mobilizing troops. To be diligent in mobilizing troops, the people must be impoverished. If the people are impoverished, the prince has no choice but to commit more frauds.

古文：夫诈密而后动者胜，诈则不信于民。
现代文：欺诈如行得机密而后动兵，是可以打胜敌人的；但对民行诈就不能取得人民信任。
English: If the deception is carried out secretly and then the army is mobilized, it is possible to defeat the enemy; but it is impossible to gain the trust of the people with the deception of the people.

古文：夫不信于民则乱，内动则危于身。
现代文：不信于民则必然动乱，国内一动乱则危及自身。
English: If they don't believe in the people, there will inevitably be turmoil, and domestic turmoil will endanger themselves.

古文：是以古之人闻先王之道者，不竞于兵。 
现代文：所以古人懂得先王之道的，总是不在军事上互相竞争。 
English: Therefore, the ancients knew the way of the ancients, and always did not compete with each other militarily.

古文：桓公曰： 然则奚若？ 
现代文：桓公说： 那么该怎么办呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：管仲对曰： 以臣则不而，令人以重币使之。使之而不可，君受而封之。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 依我之见，不如派人以重礼去宋国交涉，交涉不成，您就收留杞君并加封赐。 
English: Guanzhong replied: In my opinion, it would be better to send someone to Song to negotiate with heavy gifts. If the negotiation fails, you can take in and give the prince a title.

古文：桓公问鲍叔曰： 奚若？ 
现代文：桓公问鲍叔说： 怎么样？
English: Huan Gong asked Uncle Bao and said, "How is it?

古文：鲍叔曰： 公行夷吾之言。 
现代文：鲍叔说； 您可按夷吾的意见行事。 
English: Uncle Pao said, "You can act according to my opinion."

古文：公乃命曹孙宿使于宋。
现代文：桓公便派遣曹孙宿出使宋国。
English: King Kan then sent Cao Sunjuku as an envoy to Song.

古文：宋不听，果伐杞。
现代文：宋国不听，果然伐杞。
English: Song did not listen, and the felling went ahead.

古文：桓公筑缘陵以封之，予车百乘，甲一千。
现代文：桓公便修筑缘陵之城封赐给记君，还送予兵车百乘，甲士千人。
English: Kankong gave Ji Kun the castle fief of building a mausoleum, and also gave him 100 chariots and 1,000 soldiers.

古文：明年，狄人伐邢，邢君出致于齐，桓公筑夷仪以封之，予车百乘，卒干人。
现代文：翌年，狄国伐邢，邢国国君逃到齐国，桓公又修筑夷仪之城封赐邢君，也送兵车百乘，甲士干人。
English: The following year, Di's country was raided, and the prince of the state of Qi fled to the state of Qi. King Kan also built a castle for the prince of the state of Qi and gave it to the prince of the state of Qi. He also sent a hundred chariots and soldiers.

古文：明年，狄人伐卫，卫君出致于虚，桓公且封之，隰朋、宾胥无谏曰： 不可。
现代文：再一年，狄国伐卫，卫国国君逃到虚地，桓公还准备加以封赐。隰朋、宾胥无两人谏止说： 不行。
English: In the following year, Di Guofan and Wei Guo Guojun fled to the wasteland, and Kuan Guo was still preparing to give him the title.

古文：三国所以亡者，绝以小。
现代文：三个国家之所以亡，只因为小。
English: Three countries died because they were too small.

古文：今君封亡国，国尽若何？ 
现代文：现在您只求封赐亡国，国土用尽怎么办？ 
English: Now you only ask for the grant of a dying country, how about the exhaustion of the land?

古文：桓公问管仲曰： 奚若？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 怎么样？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "How's it going?

古文：管仲曰： 君有行之名，安得有其实。
现代文：管仲说： 您有了行义之名，便可赢得实际好处。
English: Guanzhong said: If you have the name of righteousness, you can win practical benefits.

古文：君其行也。 
现代文：您还应该照样干下去。 
English: You should still do it.

古文：公又间鲍叔，鲍叔曰： 君行夷吾之言。 
现代文：桓公又问鲍叔，鲍叔说： 您可按夷吾的意见行事。 
English: Prince Kan also asked Uncle Bao, and Uncle Bao said: You can act according to my opinion.

古文：桓公筑楚丘以封之，与车三百乘，甲五千。
现代文：桓公便修筑楚丘之城进行封赐，送予兵车五百乘，甲士五干人。
English: King Kan then built the castle of Chu Qiu to confer the title, and sent 500 chariots and 500 warriors.

古文：既以封卫，明年，桓公问管仲：将何行？管仲对曰： 公内修政而劝民，可以信于诸侯矣。 
现代文：封赐了卫国以后，过一年，桓公问管仲还应做什么事情，管仲回答说： 您在国内修明政治而劝勉人民，就可以取信于各国诸侯了。 
English: A year after he was awarded the title of "Patron of the Fatherland," Huan Gong asked Guanzhong what he should do next. Guanzhong replied, "If you clarify politics in your country and encourage the people, you can win the trust of the princes of various countries."

古文：君许诺。
现代文：桓公同意。
English: Prince Kan agreed.

古文：乃轻税，弛关市之征，为赋禄之制，既已，管仲又请曰： 问病。
现代文：于是减轻赋税，放宽关卡市场的征税，建立赋税与禄赏制度。实行了这些以后，管仲又请求说： 要实行间病制度。
English: As a result, the tax was reduced, the tax on the checkpoint market was relaxed, and a tax and reward system was established. After these were implemented, Guanzhong also requested: To implement the intermittent illness system.

古文：臣愿赏而无罚，五年，诸侯可令傅。 公曰， 诺。 
现代文：我希望对国内外有赏而无罚，行之五年，便可使各国诸侯亲附。 桓公说： 好。 
English: I hope that there will be reward and no punishment at home and abroad, and that after five years of practice, it will be possible to make the princes of various countries attached.

古文：既行之，管仲又请曰： 诸侯之礼，令齐以豹皮往，小侯以鹿皮报；齐以马往，小侯以犬报。 
现代文：实行以后，管仲又请求说： 在与各诸侯国的礼问当中，我们齐国以豹皮送给小国，让小国以鹿皮回报；我们齐国以马送给小国，让小国以狗回报。 
English: After the implementation, Guanzhong also requested: "In the course of polite inquiries with various vassal states, we, Qi Guo, sent leopard skins to small countries, and let small countries return deer skins; we, Qi Guo, sent horses to small countries, and let small countries return dogs.

古文：桓公许诺，行之。
现代文：桓公也同意并实行了。
English: Prince Kan also agreed and implemented it.

古文：管仲又请赏于国以及诸侯，君曰： 诺。 
现代文：管仲又请求在国内外实行奖赏措施。桓公说 好 。
English: Guanzhong also requested the implementation of reward measures at home and abroad. Huan Gong said yes.

古文：行之。
现代文：也实行了。
English: This has also been implemented.

古文：管仲赏于国中，君赏于诸侯。
现代文：管仲负责在国中行赏，桓公则对各国诸侯行赏。
English: Guanzhong was in charge of awarding prizes within the country, while Kan Gong was in charge of awarding prizes to the lords of various countries.

古文：诸侯之君有行事善者，以重币贺之；从列士以下有善者，衣裳贺之；凡诸侯之臣有谏其君而善者，以玺问之、以信其言。
现代文：凡诸侯国的君主有做好事情的，就以重礼祝贺他；国内列士以下有做好事情的，就送衣裳祝贺他；凡各诸侯国的大臣有谏诤君主而意见正确的，就送玺去慰问他，以赞许他的意见正确。
English: If any prince of a principality has done a good deed, he should be congratulated with a heavy salute; if anyone in the country has done a good deed, he should be congratulated with a gift of clothes; if any minister of a principality has a good opinion of the prince, he should be consoled with a gift of clothes and praised for his good opinion.

古文：公既行之，又问管仲曰： 何行？ 
现代文：桓公实行了这些措施以后，又问管仲说： 还做什么？ 
English: After Emperor Kan implemented these measures, he asked Guanzhong, "What else should we do?"

古文：管仲曰： 隰朋聪明捷给，可令为东国。
现代文：管仲说： 隰朋聪明敏捷，可任命管理东方各国的事务。
English: Guanzhong said: "He is smart and agile, and can be appointed to manage the affairs of Eastern countries.

古文：宾胥无坚强以良，可以为西士。
现代文：宾胥无坚强而纯良，可任命管理西方各国的事务。
English: No one is so strong and pure that he can be appointed to manage the affairs of Western countries.

古文：卫国之教，危傅以利。
现代文：卫国的政教，诡薄而好利。
English: The politics and religion of defending the country are devious and opportunistic.

古文：公子开方之为人也，慧以给，不能久而乐始，可游于卫。
现代文：公子开方的为人，聪慧而敏捷，不能持久而喜欢创始，可以出使卫国。
English: He is a clever and quick-witted person who likes to start things, but cannot last long. He can be sent out to defend the country.

古文：鲁邑之教，好迩而训于礼。
现代文：鲁国的政教，好六艺而守礼。
English: Lu's politics and religion, good at the six arts, and respectful.

古文：季友之为人也，恭以精，博于粮，多小信，可游于鲁。
现代文：季友的为人，恭谨而精纯，搏闻而知礼，多行小信，可以出使鲁国。
English: Ji You is a person who is respectful and pure, who hears and knows how to be polite, and who has many small letters. He can be sent to Lu.

古文：楚国之教，巧文以利，不好立大义，而好立小信。
现代文：楚国的政教，机巧文饰而好利，不好立大义而好立小信。
English: The politics and religion of the Chu Kingdom were cleverly decorated and profitable. It was not good to establish a great principle, but it was good to establish a small letter.

古文：蒙孙博于教，而文巧于辞，不好立大义，而好结小信，可游于楚。
现代文：蒙孙这个人，博于政教而巧于辞令，不好立大义，而好结小信，可以出使楚国。
English: Mengsun was a man who was well versed in politics and religion and was skillful in giving orders. He was not good at establishing great principles, but was good at writing small letters. He could dispatch envoys to the State of Chu.

古文：小侯既服，大侯既附，夫如是，则始可以施政矣。 
现代文：小国诸侯既已服从，大国诸侯既已亲附，能做到这一步，就可以开始向他们施加政令了。 桓公说： 好。 
English: Once the small country lords have obeyed, and the big country lords have attached themselves, if they can achieve this step, they can begin to impose government orders on them.

古文：君曰： 诺。 乃游公子开方于卫，游季友于鲁，游蒙孙于楚。
现代文：于是派遣公子开方到卫国，派遣季友到鲁国，派遣蒙孙到楚国出使。
English: So he dispatched Koji Kaifang to Heiguo, Kiyotomo to Lu, and Mengsun to Chu.

古文：五年，诸侯附。
现代文：五年，各国诸侯都亲附了。
English: In five years, lords from all over the world came to visit.

古文：狄人伐，桓公告诸侯曰： 请救伐。
现代文：狄国又在搞军事征伐，桓公通告各国诸侯说： 请出兵救助被伐的国家。
English: Di's country was also engaging in military conquest, and Huan Gong announced to the princes of various countries: "Please send troops to rescue the countries that have been conquered."

古文：诸侯许诺，大侯车二百乘，卒二千人；小侯车百乘，卒于人。 
现代文：如各国诸侯同意，大国出兵车二百乘，士卒二千；小国出兵车百乘，士卒一千。 
English: If the princes of various countries agree, the big country will send 200 troop cars and 2,000 soldiers; the small country will send 100 troop cars and 1,000 soldiers.

古文：诸侯皆许诺。
现代文：各国诸侯都许诺了。
English: Princes and lords from all over the world have promised to do so.

古文：齐车千乘，卒先致缘陵，战于后。
现代文：齐国出了一千乘兵车，士卒提前到了缘陵，但会战则在全体都到达以后。
English: Qi dispatched a thousand chariots, and the soldiers arrived at the imperial mausoleum ahead of time, but the battle took place after everyone arrived.

古文：故败狄。
现代文：所以打败了狄军。
English: So they defeated the Di army.

古文：其车甲与货，小侯受之，大侯近者，以其县分之，不践其国。
现代文：狄国的车甲与物资，由各小诸侯国受领；大诸侯国就近的，分得狄国的县，但不许践踏它的都城。
English: The cart armour and materials of Di were received by the small principalities. The counties of Di, which were close to the large principalities, were divided, but they were not allowed to trample on the capital city.

古文：北州侯莫来，桓公遇南州侯于召陵，曰： 狄为无道，犯天子令，以伐小国；以天子之故，敬天之命，令以救伐。
现代文：北州诸侯没有到，桓公在召陵遇到南州诸侯说： 狄国无道，违犯天子之命而擅自征伐小国，我们由于天子的原故，敬顺天命，而下令援救被伐之国。
English: When the princes of the North did not arrive, King Huan met the princes of the South in the mausoleum and said: "This country has no way, violating the order of the Son of Heaven and arbitrarily conquering a small country. For the sake of the Son of Heaven, we obeyed the order of Heaven and ordered the rescue of the country that was cut down."

古文：北州侯莫至，上不听天子令，下无礼诸侯，寡人请诛于北州之侯。 
现代文：但北州之侯不到，上不听天子之令，下无礼于各诸侯，我提请大家惩罚北州之侯。 
English: However, if the prince of Hokushu does not come, if the emperor does not listen to the order of the son of heaven, and if the emperor is disrespectful to all the princes, I would like to ask everyone to punish the prince of Hokushu.

古文：诸侯许诺。
现代文：各诸侯都同意。
English: All the lords agreed.

古文：桓公乃北伐令支，下凫之山，斩孤竹，遇山戎，顾问管仲曰： 将何行？ 
现代文：桓公于是北伐令支国，打下凫之山，取孤竹国，拦阻山戎。看着管仲发问说： 还要做些什么？ 
English: Therefore, King Kan ordered the Northern Expedition to subdue the Shikoku region, to conquer the Shizan Mountains, to take the Lone Bamboo region, and to block the Shanyu Mountains. Looking at Guanzhong, he asked, "What else is there to do?"

古文：管仲对曰： 君教诸侯为民聚食，诸侯之兵不足者，君助之发。
现代文：管仲回答说： 您可教各诸侯国为人民积聚粮食，至于各诸侯国的军备不足，您就发兵相助。
English: Guanzhong replied, "You can teach the principalities to accumulate grain for the people. As for the lack of armaments in the principalities, you can send troops to help.

古文：如此，则始可以加政矣。 
现代文：这样，就可以对他们施加政令了。 
English: In this way, it will be possible to impose a decree on them.

古文：桓公乃告诸侯，必足三年之食，安以其余修兵革。兵革不足，以引其事告齐，齐助之发。
现代文：桓公便告示各诸候国，一定要备足三年的民食，用余力修治军队，军备不足，就把情况报告齐国，齐国发兵相助。
English: Huan Gong then announced to each of the waiting countries that they must prepare enough food for three years, use their spare energy to repair the army, and if the armament was insufficient, they would report the situation to Qi Guo, and Qi Guo would send troops to help.

古文：既行之，公又问管仲曰： 何行？ 
现代文：这件事办了以后，桓公又问管仲说： 还做什么？ 
English: After the matter was settled, King Kan asked Guanzhong again, "What else do you want to do?"

古文：管仲对曰： 君会其君臣父子，则可以加政矣。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 您考察他们君臣父子的关系，就可以施加政令了。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "If you examine the relationship between their father and son, you will be able to impose a decree."

古文：公曰： 会之道奈何？ 
现代文：桓公问： 考察的办法如何？ 
English: Huan Gong asked: What is the method of investigation?

古文：曰： 诸侯毋专立妾以为妻，毋专杀大臣，无国劳毋专予禄；士庶人毋专弃妻，毋曲堤，毋贮粟，毋禁材。
现代文：回答说： 诸侯们不准擅自立妾为妻，不准擅自诛杀大臣，没有为国立功不准擅加禄赏。士与庶人不准擅自弃绝妻室，不准到处修筑堤坝，不准囤集粮食，不准乱取山泽的木材。
English: He replied: Princes are not allowed to take concubines as wives without permission, they are not allowed to kill ministers without permission, they are not allowed to award bonuses without national merit, nobles and commoners are not allowed to abandon their wives without permission, they are not allowed to build dykes everywhere, they are not allowed to collect grain, and they are not allowed to take wood from mountains and lakes without permission.

古文：行此卒岁，则始可以罚矣。 
现代文：行之一年，不服从的，就可以给予处罚。 
English: If they do not obey within one year, they can be punished.

古文：君乃布之于诸侯，诸侯许诺，受而行之。
现代文：桓公便把这些公布于诸侯，各国诸侯都同意，接受而实行。
English: King Kan then announced these to the lords, and the lords of all countries agreed, accepted, and implemented them.

古文：卒岁，吴人伐穀，桓公告诸侯未遍，诸侯之师竭至，以待桓公。
现代文：行一年，吴国征伐齐国的谷城，桓公并没有普遍通告诸候，而各诸候国的军队都全部赶到，等待桓公。
English: One year went by, when the State of Wu was conquering the Valley City of the State of Qi. Emperor Kuan did not generally announce the arrival of the armies, but the armies of the various countries arrived in full force, waiting for Emperor Kuan.

古文：桓公以车千乘会诸侯于竟，都师未至，吴人逃。
现代文：桓公以兵车干乘在国境接会诸侯；齐国的军队还没有开到，吴兵就逃出了。
English: Huan Gong took a troop train to meet the princes at the border; the army of Qi had not yet arrived, and the Wu soldiers fled.

古文：诸侯皆罢。
现代文：各诸侯国也同时罢兵。
English: All the vassal states also went on strike at the same time.

古文：桓公归，问管仲曰： 将何行？ 
现代文：桓公回来问管仲说： 还做什么事情？ 
English: Prince Kan came back and asked Guanzhong, "What else do you want to do?"

古文：管仲曰： 可以加政矣。 
现代文：管仲说； 可以对各国诸侯施加政令了。 
English: Guanzhong said, it is now possible to impose government decrees on the princes of various countries.

古文：曰： 从今以往二年，嫡子不闻孝，不闻爱其弟，不闻敬老国良，三者无一焉，可诛也。
现代文：还说： 从今以后二年中，诸侯的世子不孝父母，不友爱兄弟，不敬国之良臣，三者无一，可以诛伐。
English: He also said: In the next two years, the sons of princes who are not filial to their parents, who are not friendly to their brothers, and who do not respect the good ministers of the country, can be killed.

古文：诸侯之臣及国事，三年不闻善，可罚也。
现代文：诸侯的大臣办理国事，三年不闻有善政，可以处罚。
English: If the ministers of the lords handle state affairs and there is no good governance for three years, they may be punished.

古文：君有过，大夫不谏；士庶人有善，而大夫不进，可罚也。
现代文：国君有过，大夫不谏止，士庶人有好的表现，大夫不举荐，可以处罚。
English: The sovereign has had, the doctor does not stop, the commoner has a good performance, the doctor does not recommend, can be punished.

古文：士庶人闻之吏贤、孝、悌，可赏也。 
现代文：士庶人等，在官吏的了解中， 贤而孝悌的，可以赏赐。 
English: Commoners, such as judges, who are virtuous and filial in the understanding of officials, can be rewarded.

古文：桓公受而行之，近侯莫不请事，兵车之会六，乘车之会三，飨国四十有二年。
现代文：桓公接受并实行了这些建议，邻近齐国的诸侯没有不请求事奉的，有兵车的集会有六次，和平友好的乘车集会有三次，享国达四十二年。
English: King Huan accepted and implemented these suggestions, and there were no lords in the neighboring states of Qi who did not request to serve. There were six gatherings of military vehicles and three peaceful and friendly gatherings by car, which lasted for forty-two years.

古文：桓公践位十九年，弛关市之征，五十而取一。
现代文：桓公即位十九年，放宽了关、市的征税，只取五十分之一的税收。
English: In the 19th year of King Kan's reign, the customs and city taxes were relaxed, and only one-fiftieth of the tax was collected.

古文：赋禄以粟，案田而税。
现代文：收农赋用粮食数量计算，按土地肥瘠分别征收。
English: Calculated according to the amount of grain appropriated by farmers, it will be levied separately according to the land fertility.

古文：二岁而税一，上年什取三，中年什取二，下年什取一；岁饥不税，岁饥弛而税。
现代文：两年收税一次，丰年收十分之三，中年收十分之二，下等年成收十分之一，荒年不收，待年景饥荒情况缓解后再收。
English: The tax is collected once every two years, with three-tenths of the tax collected in a good year, two-tenths of the tax collected in a middle year, one-tenth of the tax collected in a bad year, and no tax collected in a bad year. The tax is collected again after the famine situation has eased.

古文：桓公使鲍叔识君臣之有善者，晏子识不仕与耕者之有善者；高子识工贾之有善者，国子为李，隰朋为东国，宾胥无为西土，弗郑为宅。
现代文：桓公委派鲍叔考察官吏当中表现好的人，委派曼子考察非官吏和种田者当中表现好的人，委派高子考察工匠和商人当中表现好的人，委派国子管理讼狱，隔朋管理东方各国的事务，宾胥无管理西方各国的事务，弗郑管理住宅。
English: The Kuan Public Affairs Committee sent Uncle Bao to investigate those who performed well among officials, Man Zi to investigate those who performed well among non-officials and farmers, Gao Zi to investigate those who performed well among craftsmen and merchants, Guo Zi to manage the prison, Zi Peng to manage the affairs of the Eastern countries, Bin Zi Wu to manage the affairs of the Western countries, and Fu Zheng to manage the residence.

古文：凡仕者近宫，不仕与耕者近门，工贾近市。
现代文：凡是当官的住进宫庭，不当官与种田的住近城门，工匠与商人住近市场。
English: All officials lived in the palace courtyard, non-officials and farmers lived near the city gate, and craftsmen and merchants lived near the market.

古文：三十里置遽，委焉，有司职之。
现代文：每三十里路设置驿站，贮备一些食品，立官管理。
English: Every thirty miles, a post was set up to store some foodstuffs, and an official was appointed to manage it.

古文：从诸侯欲通，吏从行者，令一人为负以车；若宿者，令人养其马，食其委。
现代文：凡诸侯各国与齐国交涉办事，对从行官吏，派一个人用车替他负载行装；若是住宿，派人替他喂马并以所备食品招待。
English: If a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal of a vassal.

古文：客与有司别契，至国八契费。
现代文：来客与管理者各执契券，客至本国要交契费。
English: Visitors and managers each receive a voucher, and visitors to their home country must pay a fee.

古文：义数而不当，有罪。
现代文：待客礼仪与收费数目如有不当，管理者有罪。
English: If the hospitality etiquette and the number of charges are improper, the manager is guilty.

古文：凡庶人欲通，乡吏不通，七日，囚，出欲通，吏不通，五日，囚。
现代文：凡庶人要与本乡交涉办事，官吏扣压不办者，过七天要处以囚禁。士有事要向上交涉，官吏扣压者，过五天要处以囚禁。
English: All commoners who want to negotiate with their hometowns, but the officials refuse to do so, will be sentenced to seven days in prison. The officials who want to negotiate with their hometowns, but the officials refuse to negotiate, will be sentenced to five days in prison.

古文：贵人子欲通，吏不通，二日，囚。
现代文：贵人之子要向上交涉办事，官吏扣压者，过三天就要囚禁。
English: Your son will have to negotiate his way to the top, and if the officials try to suppress him, he will be imprisoned in three days.

古文：凡具吏进诸侯士而有善，观其能之大小以为之赏，有过无罪。
现代文：凡县吏引荐其他诸侯国来到齐国做事的士人，引荐得好，看所荐对象能力的大小，给予赏赐。引荐有过，不予罪罚。
English: If any prefectural officials introduce scholars from other provinces to work in Qi, they will be rewarded if the introduction is good, according to the ability of the recommended object. If there is any introduction, there will be no punishment.

古文：令鲍叔进大夫，劝国家，得之成而不悔，为上举。
现代文：派鲍叔管理大夫的选拔，对于劝勉国事，有功无过的，举为上等。
English: Uncle Bao was sent to manage the selection of doctors, and he was promoted to the highest rank for his contribution to the promotion of national affairs.

古文：从政治为次。野为原，又多不发，起讼不骄，次之。
现代文：从政，治绩属第二位；田野土地又多不荒废，办案严肃不骄的，属于其次。
English: In politics, the performance of governance is the second; the field land is not wasted, and the case handling is serious and not arrogant, belongs to the second.

古文：劝国家，得之成而悔；从政虽治而不能，野原又多发；起讼骄，行此三者为下。
现代文：劝勉国事，有功而亦有过；从政，虽有治绩而无能力，野原又多荒废，办案骄傲轻忽，行此三者，属于下等。
English: In advising on state affairs, one is meritorious and accomplished; in politics, one has achievements but no ability, the fields are often desolate, the handling of cases is proud and careless, and doing these three things is inferior.

古文：令晏子进贵人之子，出不仕，处不华，而友有少长，为上举；得二，为次；得一，为下。
现代文：派曼子管理贵人之子的选拔，对于外出不邪僻，居处不奢华，能友爱青年和长辈的，举为上等；具备上述两个条件的，属于其次；具备一条的，属于下等。
English: For those who are not eccentric in their outings, do not live in luxurious residences, and are able to befriend the young and the elderly, they will be promoted to a higher level; those who meet the above two conditions will be promoted to a lower level; those who meet one of the two conditions will be promoted to a lower level.

古文：士处靖，敬老与贵，交不失礼，行此三者，为上举；得二，为次；得一，为下。
现代文：士，立身谦恭，敬重老人、官长，交游不失礼节，行此三者，举为上等；具备上述两个条件，属于其次；具有一条，属于下等。
English: A scholar should be modest and courteous, respect the elderly and government officials, and be courteous in social intercourse. If he does these three things, he will be promoted to the next level; if he has the above two conditions, he will be promoted to the next level; if he has one condition, he will be promoted to the next level.

古文：耕者农农用力，应于父兄，事贤多，行此三者，为上举；得二，为次；得一，为下。
现代文：种田者，非常出力，顺于父兄，而且多服其劳，有此三者举为上等；有两条的，属于次等；具有一条，属于下等。
English: If a farmer is very productive, obedient to his father and brother, and does more work for them, these three are superior; if he has two, he is inferior; if he has one, he is inferior.

古文：令高子进工贾，应于父兄，筝长养老，承事敬，行此三者，为上举；得二者，为次；得一者，为下。
现代文：派高子管理工匠、商人的选拔，顺于父兄，事长养老，接受任务能严肃对待，有此三条，举为上等；有两条的，属于次等；只有一条，属于下等。
English: To send a high-ranking person to manage the selection of craftsmen and merchants, to be obedient to one's father and brother, to take care of the elderly, and to be able to take the task seriously, there are three, which are superior; two, which are inferior; and only one, which is inferior.

古文：令国子以情断狱。
现代文：还委派国子按情节判断刑狱。
English: He also appointed Kuniko to judge the prison sentence according to the circumstances.

古文：三大夫既已选举，使县行之。
现代文：三位大夫的选拔举荐工作做完以后，命令县去执行。
English: After the selection and recommendation work of the three doctors was completed, the county was ordered to implement it.

古文：管仲进而举言，上而见之于君，以卒年君举。
现代文：管仲要进一步与被选拔举荐的人谈话，然后上报与国君见面，终年如此，由国君举用。
English: Guanzhong should further talk with the person who has been selected and recommended, and then report to meet with the sovereign, this is the case all year round, and the sovereign will use it.

古文：管仲告鲍叔曰： 劝国家，不得成而悔，从政不治不能、野原又多而发，讼骄，凡三者，有罪元赦。 
现代文：管仲告知鲍叔说： 劝勉国事，无功而有过；为政无治绩而无能力，野原又多荒废，办案骄傲轻忽，凡有此三条缺点的，有罪无赦。 
English: Guanzhong told Uncle Bao, "If you exhort the state affairs, you have no merit, but you have done; if you are in politics, you have no merit, but you have no ability; if you are in the fields, you are often desolate; if you are proud of handling cases, you are often careless; if you have these three shortcomings, you will be guilty without pardon.

古文：告晏子曰： 贵人子处华，下交，好饮食，行此三者，有罪无赦。
现代文：告知曼子说： 贵人之子，居处奢华，压制朋友，嗜好酒食，行此三者，有罪无赦。
English: He told Mengzi, "Son of a noble family, if you live in a luxurious house, oppress your friends, and indulge in eating and drinking, you are guilty of all three.

古文：士出入无常，不敬老而营富，行此三者，有罪无赦。
现代文：士，出入无常规，不敬老人，并且营利谋富，行此三者，有罪无赦。
English: There is no forgiveness for those who do any of the following three things: going out and coming in without following the rules, disrespecting the elderly, and making a profit.

古文：耕者出入不应于父兄，用力不农，不事贤，行此三者，有罪无赦。 
现代文：种田者，出入不顺于父兄，用力不勤，有事不服其劳，行此三者，也是有罪无赦。 
English: The farmer who does not obey his father and brother when going out and coming in, who does not work hard, and who does not accept his work when there is something to do, is also guilty.

古文：告国子曰： 工贾出入不应父兄，承事不敬，而违老治危，行此三者，有罪无赦，凡于父兄无过，州里称之，吏进之，君用之。
现代文：告知高子说： 工匠、商人，出入不顺于父兄者，接受任务不严肃对待，而遗弃老人行事诡诈，行此三者，有罪无赦。凡是对父兄无过，州里称赞的人，官吏应该举荐，国君即行任用。
English: He told Gao Zi: "Craftsmen, merchants, those who are not obedient to their parents and brothers, do not take their tasks seriously, and abandon the elderly to act deceitfully, are all guilty of these three things. Anyone who has no fault with his parents and brothers, is praised by the state, should be recommended by officials, and will be appointed by the sovereign.

古文：有善无赏，有过无罚。
现代文：做得好也无赏，有过也无罚。
English: There is no reward for doing a good job, and there is no penalty for doing a bad job.

古文：吏不进，廉意。
现代文：但官吏应荐不荐，则废除其职务。
English: However, if a government official is recommended or not recommended, his or her post will be abolished.

古文：于父兄无过，于州里莫称，吏进之，君用之。善，为上赏；不善，吏有罚。 
现代文：对父兄虽然无过，但州里无人称赞的，官吏举荐，国君也可使用，好的给上等赏，不好的则官吏受罚。 
English: Although there is no fault with the father and brother, but no one in the state praises, the officials recommend, the sovereign can also use, the good ones will be rewarded, and the bad ones will be punished.

古文：君谓国子： 凡贵贱之义，入与父俱，出与师俱，上与君俱。
现代文：桓公也告知国子说：凡贯彻贵贱的准则，在家里应该与父亲共同履行，出家与师长共同履行，到上面与国君共同履行。
English: Prince Kan also told Kuniko, "If you want to carry out the principles of nobility and lowliness, you should carry them out together with your father at home, with your teacher when you become a monk, and with the sovereign when you rise to the top."

古文：凡三者，遇贼不死，不知贼，则无赦。
现代文：这三件大事，受到损害而不能以死捍卫，或者有损害而不知道的，则不赦其罪。
English: If these three great things are damaged and cannot be defended with death, or if there is damage and you do not know about it, you will not be forgiven.

古文：断狱，情与义易，义与禄易，易禄可无敛，有可无赦。 
现代文：判断刑狱的人，使人情与义理通融，使义理与禄位通融，使有禄位者可以不加检束，这也是罪在不赦的。
English: It is also an unpardonable sin for the person who judges the punishment of imprisonment to make human feelings and justice compatible, to make justice and reward compatible, and to make it possible for those with reward to not be punished.

