古文：瓚妻，庄帝妹也，后封襄城长公主，故特赠瓚冀州刺史。子茂，字祖昂，袭祖爵。郦道元，字善长，范阳人也。
现代文：郦道元，字善长，范阳人。
English: Shao Dogen, Zi Zenzhong, Fan Yangren.

古文：青州刺史范之子。
现代文：青州刺史郦范之子。
English: He is the son of the Qingzhou poet Shi Xuanfan.

古文：太和中，为尚书主客郎。
现代文：太和年间，任尚书主客郎。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Taiwa, he was appointed as the chief clerk.

古文：御史中尉李彪以道元秉法清勤，引为治书侍御史。
现代文：御史中尉李彪因郦道元秉公执法，清廉勤勉，推荐他为治书侍御史。
English: Li Biao, the lieutenant of the imperial historian, recommended him to be the secretary of the imperial historian because of his honesty, integrity and diligence.

古文：累迁辅国将军、东荆州刺史。
现代文：历任辅国将军、东荆州刺史。
English: Successive generals of the Auxiliary Provinces, East Jingzhou stabbed history.

古文：威猛为治，蛮民诣阙讼其刻峻，坐免官。
现代文：郦道元为政严厉威猛，当地的人向朝廷控告他苛刻严峻，以致定罪而免去官职。
English: Shantou Yuan was a stern and powerful ruler. Local people complained to the imperial court that he was harsh and severe, resulting in his conviction and removal from office.

古文：久之，行河南尹，寻即真。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，郦道元代理河南尹，不久转为正式职务。
English: After a long period of time, Gong Dogen, the agent of Henan Yin, was soon transferred to an official position.

古文：肃宗以沃野、怀朔、薄骨律、武川、抚冥、柔玄、怀荒、御夷诸镇并改为州，其郡县戍名令准古城邑。
现代文：肃宗把沃野、怀朔、薄骨律、武川、抚冥、柔玄、怀荒、御夷各镇一齐改为州，它们的县郡边地城镇令都以古城邑之名为准。
English: Su Zong changed the towns of Wo No, Huai Shuo, Weak Bone Law, Wu Chuan, Fushun, Jiu Xuan, Huai Ao and Gi to prefectures, and their county and town ordinances were based on the names of ancient cities and towns.

古文：诏道元持节兼黄门侍郎，与都督李崇筹宜置立，裁减去留，储兵积粟，以为边备。
现代文：朝廷诏令任郦道元为持节兼黄门侍郎，与都督李崇一道筹办各州郡县设置的具体事宜，裁减人员并确定其去留，储备兵器广积粮草，以充实边防军备。
English: The Imperial Court issued an imperial edict appointing Gong Dogen as Jisai and Huangmen Jiro, and he and the governor Li Chong worked together to prepare the specific matters for the establishment of counties in each state, reduce personnel and determine where they would stay, and stockpile a wide range of weapons to replenish border defense armaments.

古文：未几，除安南将军、御史中尉。
现代文：没过多久，郦道元升任安南将军、御史中尉。
English: It didn't take long before Shing Dogen was promoted to General Annan and Lieutenant Goshi.

古文：道元素有严猛之称。
现代文：郦道元素有严厉威猛之称。
English: The path element is said to be stern and fierce.

古文：司州牧、汝南王悦嬖近左右丘念，常与卧起。
现代文：司州牧、汝南王元悦宠爱他的侍官丘念，经常同他一道寝卧。
English: Sishu Maki and Runan Wangyue were very fond of their retainer, Qunian, and often slept with him.

古文：及选州官，多由于念。
现代文：到了选任州官的时候，大多按照丘念的意思行事。
English: The re-election of state officials is also mostly decided by the hill.

古文：念匿于悦第，时还其家，道元收念付狱。
现代文：丘念隐匿在汝南王元悦的府第，有一次当他回到自己家中时，郦道元就将他逮捕收监。
English: Yuchen hid in the mansion of the king of Yunnan, Yuan Yue. Once, when he returned to his home, Shing Dogen arrested and imprisoned him.

古文：悦启灵太后请全之，敕赦之。
现代文：汝南王元悦奏请灵太后要求保全丘念，于是朝廷下令把他赦免了。
English: King Yuan Yuesong of the Southern Kingdom asked the Empress Dowager to request the preservation of Qiu Nian, so the court ordered him to be pardoned.

古文：道元遂尽其命，因以劾悦。
现代文：郦道元尽忠职守，向朝廷弹劾元悦。
English: Gong Dogen immediately ended Qiu Nian's life and used the incident to impeach Yue.

古文：是时雍州刺史萧宝夤反状稍露，悦等讽朝廷遣为关右大使，遂为宝夤所害，死于阴盘驿亭。
现代文：那时，雍州刺史萧宝夤已显露出反叛朝廷的苗头，汝南王元悦等人借故劝说朝廷，派郦道元任关右大使，于是，郦道元就被萧宝夤抓住，在阴盘驿亭遇害。
English: At that time, Xiao Baojun, the Yangzhou poet, had already revealed the seeds of rebellion against the imperial court. King Yuan Rong and others took advantage of the situation to persuade the imperial court to appoint Xing Dogen as ambassador to Guan Yu. As a result, Xing Dogen was caught by Xiao Baojun and killed in Yinpan Pavilion.

古文：道元好学，历览奇书。
现代文：郦道元一生好学，博览各种奇书。
English: Gong Dogen was an avid learner all his life and read all kinds of strange books.

古文：撰注《水经》四十卷、《本志》十三篇，又为《七聘》及诸文，皆行于世。
现代文：他为《水经》作注，撰成《水经注》共四十卷、《本志》十三篇，又写成《七聘》及其他文章，都流行于世。
English: He annotated the "Shui Jing" and compiled a total of forty volumes of "Shui Jing Annotation," thirteen articles of "Honshi," and also wrote "Seven Appointments" and other articles, all of which are popular in the world.

古文：然兄弟不能笃穆，又多嫌忌，时论薄之。
现代文：然而他与兄弟之间不能和睦相处，又喜欢怀疑猜忌，因而当时的舆论都轻视他。
English: However, he could not get along with his brothers, and he was suspicious and suspicious, so the public opinion at that time despised him.

