古文：河上公刘根李仲甫李意期王兴赵瞿王遥
现代文：河上公刘根李仲甫李意期王兴赵瞿王遥
English: Liu Gen, Li Zhongfu, Li Yizhi, Wang Xing, Zhao Xuan, Wang Yao

古文：河上公
现代文：河上公
English: Mr. Kawakami

古文：河上公者，莫知其姓字，汉文帝时，公结草为庵于河之滨。
现代文：有个不知姓名的人，汉文帝时在河边盖了间草房住，所以人们都叫他 河上公 。
English: There was an unnamed man who built a grass hut and lived by the river during the reign of Emperor Hanwen, so people called him the River King.

古文：帝读老子经，颇好之，敕诸王及大臣皆诵之。
现代文：当时汉文帝非常喜欢读老子的《道德经》，并命令王侯大臣们都要诵读。
English: At that time, Emperor Hanwen liked to read Laozi's "Moral Classic" very much, and ordered the princes and ministers to recite it.

古文：有所不解数事，时人莫能道之。
现代文：但《道德经》中有些地方弄不懂，当时谁也讲不明白。
English: However, there were some parts of the Tao Te Ching that no one could understand at the time.

古文：闻时皆称河上公解老子经义旨，乃使赍所不决之事以问。
现代文：后来文帝听说人们都说河上公非常理解老子经典中的深奥涵义，就派人拿着那几个不懂的问题找河上公请教。
English: Later, Emperor Wen heard that people all said that He Shangguo understood the profound meaning of the Laozi Classic very well, so he sent someone to ask He Shangguo for advice with the few questions he did not understand.

古文：公曰： 道尊德贵，非可遥问也。 
现代文：河上公对文帝派的使者说： 研究老子的经典是件十分严肃认真的事，怎么可以隔着很远的地方间接地研究呢？ 
English: Kawakami said to the emissary of the Emperor Wen faction: Studying the classics of Lao Tzu is a very serious matter. How can it be studied indirectly from far away?

古文：帝即幸其庵，躬问之。
现代文：于是文帝驾临河上公的草房，亲自向河上公求教。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen came to the grass hut of Kawakami Gong and personally asked Kawakami Gong for advice.

古文：帝曰： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。
现代文：文帝说： 《诗经》上说，普天之下都是君王的国土，国界之内都是君王的臣民。
English: Emperor Wen said: "The Book of Songs says that under the whole heaven is the king's land, and within the national borders are the king's subjects.

古文：域中 四大 ，王居其一。
现代文：老子也说过： 道大、天大、地大、王亦大。 这就是说，君王也是 四大 之一。
English: Lao Tzu also said: The Tao is great, the heaven is great, the earth is great, and the king is also great, which means that the king is also one of the four greats.

古文：子虽有道，犹朕民也，不能自屈，何乃高乎？ 
现代文：你虽然懂得道学，但你也是我的臣民嘛，为什么不能尊重我，却这么高傲呢？ 
English: Although you understand Taoism, you are also my subject. Why can't you respect me, yet you are so arrogant?

古文：公即抚掌坐跃，冉冉在虚空中，去地数丈，俯仰而答曰： 余上不至天，中不累人，下不居地，何民臣之有？ 
现代文：河上公就拍着手坐着慢慢腾空而起，离地有好几丈，低头看着仰视他的汉文帝说， 我上不着天下不着地，中间又不牵累人世的事，怎么能算你的臣民呢？ 
English: Kawakami sat and clapped his hands, slowly rising into the air, several feet above the ground. Looking down at Emperor Hanwen, who was looking up at him, he said, "I can't go up to the world without landing, and I can't get involved in worldly affairs, so how can I be counted as your subject?"

古文：帝乃下车稽首曰： 朕以不德，忝统先业，才小任大，忧于不堪。
现代文：文帝这才下了车向河上公跪拜说： 我实在是无德无才，勉强继承了帝业当了皇帝，能力太小而责任大，常常担心不能胜任。
English: It was only then that Emperor Wen got out of the car and knelt down before the general on the river and said, "I am really without virtue or talent. I barely inherited the empire and became emperor. My ability is too small and my responsibility is too great. I often worry that I am not up to the job.

古文：虽治世事而心敬道，直以暗昧，多所不了，唯愿道君有以教之。 
现代文：河上公就把两卷经书授给汉文帝，并对文帝说： 回去后好好研究这两卷书，道德经中的疑难问题就都解决了，我今天就不再多说什么了。
English: Prince Kawakami gave the two volumes of scriptures to Emperor Wen of Han, and said to Emperor Wen: "When you return, study these two volumes well, and the difficult questions in the Tao Te Ching will all be solved. I won't say anything more today."

古文：公乃授素书二卷与帝曰： 熟研之，此经所疑皆了，不事多四矣，勿以示非其人。 
现代文：我这两卷注解道经的著作，写了已经一千七百多年了，只传了三个人，算上你才四个人，希望千万不要把它给不相干的人看！ 
English: My two volumes of commentary on the Tao Te Ching have been written for more than seventeen hundred years, and have only been passed down by three people, including you, only four people. I hope you will not show it to anyone who is not related to you!

古文：言毕，失其所在。须臾，云雾晦冥，天地泯合。
现代文：说罢就突然不见了，只见云雾蒸腾，天地一片迷茫。
English: As soon as he said it, he suddenly disappeared, leaving only clouds and mist, and the world in confusion.

古文：帝甚贵之。
现代文：文帝后来十分珍视那两卷经书。
English: Later, Emperor Wen treasured the two scrolls.

古文：论者以为文帝好老子之言，世不能尽通，故神人特下教之。
现代文：有些人论述说，因为文帝喜欢研究老子的学说，然而不能都弄通，所以上天特派了河上公下凡来传授。
English: Some people argue that because Emperor Wen liked to study the teachings of Lao Tzu, but could not figure them all out, so Heaven specially sent He Shangguo to teach them.

古文：而恐汉文心未至信，故示神变。
现代文：又怕文帝不能坚信。才显圣变化给文帝看。
English: Moreover, Emperor Wen was afraid that he could not firmly believe in it. Only Emperor Wen could see the changes.

古文：所谓圣人无常心，以百姓心为心耶。
现代文：所谓圣人的心是永远和百姓的心相通的。
English: The heart of the so-called saint is always connected with the heart of the people.

古文：刘根
现代文：刘根
English: Liu Gen

古文：刘根者，字君安，京兆长安人也。少明五经。
现代文：刘根字君安，是京城长安人，年轻时就精通诗、书、礼、易、春秋这 五经 。
English: Liu Genzhi Jun'an is from Chang'an, Beijing. When he was young, he was proficient in poetry, calligraphy, etiquette, Yi, and the Five Classics of Spring and Autumn.

古文：以汉孝成皇帝绥和二年，举孝廉，除郎中。
现代文：汉孝帝绥和二年，刘根被举荐为孝廉，被任命为郎中。
English: In the second year of Emperor Han Xiao's reign, Liu Gen was recommended as a filial son and was appointed as a roju.

古文：后弃世学道，入嵩高山石室，峥嵘峻绝之上，直下五千余丈。
现代文：后来刘根辞去官职进山学道，在河南的嵩山里住进一个石洞，石洞在悬崖绝壁上，有五千多丈高。
English: Later, Liu Gen resigned from his official position to study mountaineering, and lived in a stone cave in the Songshan Mountains in Henan Province. The stone cave is on a cliff and is more than five thousand meters high.

古文：冬夏不衣，身毛长一二尺，其颜色如十四五岁人，深目，多须鬓，皆黄，长三四寸。
现代文：刘根冬夏都不穿衣服，身上长出一二尺长的毛，面貌像十四五岁的人，眼眶很深，脸上有三四寸长的黄胡须。
English: Liu Gen does not wear clothes in winter or summer. He has a foot or two of hair growing on his body. He looks like a 145-year-old. His eyelids are very deep, and he has a three-to-four-inch long yellow beard on his face.

古文：每与坐，或时忽然变著高冠玄衣，人不觉换之时。
现代文：有时他和人对面坐着，忽然就变成穿黑袍戴高帽的装束，也不见他换过衣服。
English: Sometimes he would be sitting across from someone and suddenly he would change into a black robe and a top hat, and he never changed his clothes.

古文：衡府君自说，先祖与根同岁者，至王莽时，频使使者请根，根不肯往。
现代文：据衡太守自己说，他的先祖和刘根同岁的人，在西汉王莽时，多次派人请刘根，刘根不肯前去。
English: According to Heng Taizhong himself, his ancestors, who were the same age as Liu Gen, repeatedly sent people to ask Liu Gen to go to the Western Han Dynasty, but Liu Gen refused to go.

古文：衡府君使府掾王珍问起居，根不答。
现代文：衡太守派他的副官王珍去向刘根问候致意，刘根没有答话。
English: Emperor Heng sent his aide-de-camp Wang Zhen to greet Liu Gen, but Liu Gen did not reply.

古文：再令功曾赵公，往山达敬，根唯言谢府君，更无他言。
现代文：太守又派姓赵的公曹去向刘根表达敬意，刘根谢谢太守，再也没别的话了。
English: The governor also sent his son-in-law, surnamed Zhao, to pay his respects to Liu Gen. Liu Gen thanked the governor, and nothing more was said.

古文：后颖川太守高府君到官，郡民大疫，死者过半，太守家大小悉得病。
现代文：后来陕西颖川太守高府君到任后，郡里发生了瘟疫，老百姓病死了一多半，高太守家大小都得了瘟疫。
English: Later, after Gaofu, the governor of Yingchuan in Shaanxi Province, took office, a plague occurred in the county, more than half of the people died of the disease, and the governor of Gaofu and his family all got the plague.

古文：高府君复遣珍往求根，请消除疫气之术。
现代文：高太守又派了王珍到山里去求刘根，请他传授消除瘟疫的方术。
English: The high eunuch also sent Wang Zhen to the mountains to beg Liu Gen, asking him to teach the way to eliminate the plague.

古文：珍叩头述府君之言，根教言于太岁宫气上，掘地深三尺，以沙着其中，及酒沃之。
现代文：王珍向刘根磕头后说了太守的请求，刘根就告诉王珍，回去后让太守在太岁方位之下的宫气的地方，掘地三尺，把沙子填进去，然后洒上酒。
English: After Wang Zhen bowed to Liu Gen and said the request of the Emperor, Liu Gen told Wang Zhen that after returning, he should let the Emperor dig three feet into the ground in the place of the palace atmosphere below the position of the Emperor, fill it with sand, and then sprinkle it with wine.

古文：君依言，病者悉愈，疫气寻绝，每用有效。
现代文：太守按照刘根的办法作了，果然得瘟疫的都好了，从此瘟疫也断绝了，后来只要一闹瘟疫，刘根的方法都好使。
English: The governor-general followed Liu Gen's method, and those who had the plague were all cured. From then on, the plague was eradicated. Later, as long as there was a plague, Liu Gen's method could be used.

古文：后太守张府君，以根为妖，遣吏召根，拟戮之。
现代文：后来有位张太守认为刘根是妖道，派人召见刘根，打算杀掉他。
English: Later, one of the Zhang Emperors thought that Liu Gen was a demon, and sent someone to summon Liu Gen, intending to kill him.

古文：一府共谏君府，君府不解。
现代文：太守府的人们都劝阻，但张太守不听。
English: People in the governor's office tried to dissuade him, but Zhang didn't listen.

古文：如是诸吏达根，欲令根去，根不听。
现代文：于是有些官员偷偷告诉刘根让他躲避，刘根不听。
English: As a result, some officials secretly told Liu Gen to let him escape, but Liu Gen did not listen.

古文：府君使至，请根。
现代文：张太守派的人找到刘根，请他到太守府去。
English: Zhang Taishou's followers found Liu Gen and asked him to go to Taishoufu.

古文：根曰： 张府君欲吾何为耶？
现代文：刘根问道： 张太守想找我作什么呢？
English: Liu Gen asked: What does Zhang Taimou want me to do?

古文：间当至耳。
现代文：看来我得走一趟了。
English: Looks like I'll have to make a trip.

古文：若不去，恐诸君招咎，谓卿等不敢来呼我也。 
现代文：如果不去，恐怕会牵累各位，太守会说你们不敢来叫我去见他呢。 
English: If you don't go, I'm afraid you'll get involved, and the daimyō will say that you don't dare to ask me to see him.

古文：根是日至府，时宾客满座，府君使五十余人，持刀杖绳索而立，根颜色不怍。
现代文：刘根当天就到了太守府，当时府中宾客满堂，张太守派了五十多人持着刀棍绳子站在堂上，但刘根一点也没在意。
English: Liu Gen arrived at the Governor-General's residence on the same day. At that time, the residence was full of guests. Zhang Taimou sent more than fifty people to stand on the hall holding swords, sticks and ropes, but Liu Gen did not care at all.

古文：府君烈声问根曰： 若有何道术也？ 
现代文：张太守厉声问刘根道： 你有什么道术吗？ 
English: Zhang Taishou asked Liu Geng in a sharp voice: Do you have any martial arts?

古文：答曰： 唯唯。 
现代文：刘根说： 是，是。 
English: Liu Gen said: Yes, yes.

古文：府君曰： 能召鬼乎？ 
现代文：太守问： 你能把鬼召来吗？ 
English: The abbess asked, "Can you summon a ghost?"

古文：曰： 能。 
现代文：刘根说能召来。
English: Liu Gen said he could summon him.

古文：府君曰： 既能，即可捉鬼至厅前，不尔，当大戳。 
现代文：太守说： 既然能，你就给我捉一个来，不然，我就宰了你！ 
English: The abbot said: If you can, then catch one for me, otherwise I will kill you!

古文：根曰： 召鬼至易见耳。 
现代文：刘根说： 召个鬼来不是小事一段嘛。 
English: Liu Gen said, "It's no small thing to summon a ghost.

古文：借笔砚及奏按，鎗鎗然作铜铁之声，闻于外。
现代文：说罢借了笔砚和批阅公文的桌子，只听得大厅中响起了铮铮的铜铁撞击声，一直传到外面。
English: Saying that, I borrowed a pen and a table for approving official documents, only to hear the sound of clanging copper and iron in the hall, all the way to the outside.

古文：又长啸，啸音非常清亮，闻者莫不肃然，众客震悚。
现代文：刘根又大声呼啸，声音非常清亮，听的人都十分惊恐，宾客们都听得不敢出声。
English: Liu Gen also whistled loudly, the sound was very clear, the listeners were very frightened, and the guests were too afraid to speak out.

古文：须臾，厅上南壁忽开数丈，见兵甲四五百人。
现代文：顷刻间只见大厅的南墙突然裂开了好几丈，涌进来四五百名穿甲戴盔的士兵。
English: In an instant, the southern wall of the hall suddenly cracked several stories, and four or five hundred armored and helmeted soldiers poured in.

古文：传呼赤衣兵数十人，赍刀剑，将一车，直从坏壁中入来，又坏壁复如故。
现代文：刘根又传呼来四五十个穿红衣的兵，带着刀剑，推着一辆车，从坏了的墙进了大厅，然后那面墙又恢复了原状。
English: Liu Gen called for another forty or fifty soldiers in red, carrying swords and pushing a cart, and they entered the hall through the broken wall, and then the wall was restored to its original state.

古文：根敕下车上鬼，其赤衣便乃发车上披。
现代文：刘根就命令车上的鬼下车，红衣兵就打开车上的布帘子。
English: Liu Gen ordered the ghosts on the car to get off, and the soldiers in red opened the curtains on the car.

古文：见下有一老翁老姥，大绳反缚囚之，悬头厅前。
现代文：见帘子下有一对老头老婆，都是五花大绑，被红衣兵推在大厅前。
English: Underneath the curtain, I saw an old man and his wife, both heavily bound, being pushed in front of the hall by soldiers in red.

古文：府君熟视之，乃其亡父母也。
现代文：张太守定睛细看，没想到竟是自己死去的父母！
English: Zhang Taizhu looked closely, and did not expect that it was her own dead parents!

古文：府君惊愕流涕，不知所措。
现代文：这时张太守又惊又怕，痛哭流涕，不知该怎么办才好。
English: At this time, Zhang Taizhong was shocked and afraid, crying bitterly, and did not know what to do.

古文：鬼乃责府君曰： 我生之时，汝官未达，不得汝禄养。
现代文：他的父母就斥责说： 我们活着的时候，你官小薪俸薄，没有很好的供养我们。
English: His parents scolded: "When we were alive, you were a low-paid official and did not provide well for us.

古文：我死，汝何为犯神仙尊官，使我被收，困辱如此，汝何面目立于人间？ 
现代文：我们已经死了，你为什么还要触怒神仙，使我们被抓到这里。遭受这样的羞辱，你这当儿子的还有什么脸面活在人世啊？ 
English: We are already dead, why do you want to anger the gods and get us caught here. What kind of face does your son have to suffer such humiliation?

古文：府君下阶叩头，向根伏罪受死，请求放赦先人。
现代文：张太守赶快下了庭阶磕头，向刘根认罪受死，只求赦免他的父母。
English: Zhang Dazhong quickly stepped down from the court steps and bowed his head. He confessed his guilt to Liu Gen and died, asking only that his parents be pardoned.

古文：根敕五百兵将囚出，散遣之。车出去南壁开，后车过，壁复如故。
现代文：于是刘根命令那五百名兵士把两个老人带出去放回阴间，拉着两个老人从南面墙上出去，车过去后，墙又恢复原状。
English: So Liu Gen ordered the five hundred soldiers to take the two old men out and put them back into the underworld. He pulled the two old men out from the south wall. After the car passed, the wall returned to its original state.

古文：既失车所在。
现代文：即不知车到哪里去了，刘根也不见了。
English: I didn't even know where the car had gone, and Liu Gen was gone.

古文：根亦隐去，府君惆怅恍惚，状若发狂，妻登时死，良久乃苏。
现代文：张太守这时仍是精神恍惚，几乎要发疯，他的老婆当时立刻就昏死了，过了很久才又活了过来。
English: Zhang Taizhou was still in a daze, almost going mad. His wife immediately fainted, and it took a long time for her to come back to life.

古文：云 见府君家先捉者，大怒，言汝何故犯神仙尊官，使我见收，今当来杀汝。 
现代文：她说： 我刚刚看见刘根捉来的两位老人，他们非常生气，责怪我们冒犯了神界仙官，使他们被抓。他们要杀掉我。 
English: She said, "I just saw two old men who were caught by Liu Gen, and they were very angry, blaming us for offending the celestial magistrates and getting them arrested. They want to kill me."

古文：其后一月，府君夫妇男皆卒。
现代文：过了一个月，张太守夫妇和他们的儿子都死了。
English: A month later, the Zhangs and their son were dead.

古文：府掾王珍，数得见。数承颜色欢然时，伏地叩头，请问根学仙时本末。
现代文：府椽王珍曾见过刘根好几次，有时看刘根高兴的时候，就趴在地上磕头，请刘根说他学道成仙的经过。
English: Wang Zhen had met Liu Gen several times. Sometimes, when he saw Liu Gen happy, he would kneel on the ground and bow his head, asking Liu Gen to tell him the story of how he learned the Tao and became immortal.

古文：根曰： 吾昔入山精思，无所不到。
现代文：刘根说， 当年我进山学道，没有不去的地方。
English: Liu Gen said, "When I entered the Mountain School, there was no place I couldn't go.

古文：后如华阴山，见一人乘白鹿车，从者十余人，左右玉女四人，执采旋之节，皆年十五六。
现代文：后来我进了华阴山，遇见一个人乘着白鹿车，带着十几名侍从，左右有四个玉女，执着彩色的旌杖，都是十五六岁。
English: Later, when I entered Huayin Mountain, I met a man riding a white deer cart, with more than a dozen attendants, and four beautiful women on his right and left, holding colorful canes, all of whom were 15 or 16 years old.

古文：余载拜稽首，求乞一言。
现代文：我赶快向神仙叩头施礼，求他点化我一下。
English: I quickly bowed to the god and begged him to enlighten me.

古文：神人乃告余曰： 尔闻有韩众否？ 
现代文：神人就对我说： 你听说过韩众吗？ 
English: The man of God said to me, "Have you ever heard of the Korean people?"

古文：答曰： 实闻有之。 
现代文：我说听说过。神人说： 我就是韩众。 
English: I said I had heard about it. The man of God said, "I am the Korean people."

古文：神人曰： 我是也。 余乃自陈曰： 某少好道，而不遇明师。
现代文：我就对神人说： 我从小就爱好学道，但一直没遇到明师指点。
English: I said to the man of God, "I've loved learning the Tao since I was a child, but I've never met a master to guide me.

古文：颇习方书，按而为之，多不验，岂根命相不应度世也？
现代文：我读了不少论道的爷，也按照书上的指点去做，但都不灵验，常暗想是不是我刘根命中不该得道呢？
English: I read a lot of books on Taoism, and also followed the instructions in the books, but they were all ineffective. I often wondered if I was destined to become a Taoist.

古文：有幸今日得遇大神，是根宿昔梦想之愿，愿见哀怜，赐其要诀？
现代文：今天我有幸遇到了大仙，这是我一辈子的梦想，望大仙可怜伐的一份诚心，赐给我修道的秘诀吧！ 
English: Today, I was fortunate enough to meet the Great Immortal. This has been my dream for my entire life. May the Great Immortal bless me with a sincere heart, and give me the secret of spiritual practice!

古文：神未肯告余，余乃流涕自抟，重请。
现代文：但那大仙并不告诉我什么，我就专心致志地，哭着再三恳求，大仙这时才说： 你坐下。
English: But the Great Spirit didn't tell me anything. I concentrated on getting up, cried and begged repeatedly. It was only then that the Great Spirit said, "Sit down."

古文：神人曰： 坐，吾将告汝，汝有仙骨，故得见吾耳。汝今髓不满，血不暖，气少脑减，筋息肉沮，故服药行气，不得其力。
现代文：我告诉你吧，因为你有仙骨，所以才能遇见伐。但现在你仙骨中的骨髓还不饱满，血不够热，精气不盛头脑迟钝，筋松肉懈，所以就算服了仙药也借不上力。
English: I'll tell you, because you have a sacrum, that's why you can meet the dragon. But right now, the bone marrow in your sacrum isn't full, your blood isn't hot enough, your spirit isn't strong, your mind is dull, and your muscles and tendons are weak, so even if you take a miracle cure, you won't be able to draw strength from it.

古文：必欲长生，且先治病，十二年，乃可服仙药耳。
现代文：你真想求长生之道，得先治病，十二年以后就可以服用仙药了。
English: If you really want to seek the way of eternal life, you must first cure the disease, and after twelve years you can take the elixir.

古文：夫仙道有升天蹑云者，有游行五岳者，有服食不死者。
现代文：在各种成仙得道的人中，有的能升天登云，有的能巡行五岳，有的能服仙药不死，有的能把肉身留在人间灵魂升天。
English: Among all kinds of people who have become immortals, some can ascend to the heavens, some can travel around the five mountains, some can take immortality medicine, and some can leave their bodies on earth and ascend to the heavens.

古文：有尸解而仙者。凡修仙道，要在服药，药有上下，仙有数品。
现代文：凡是修仙得道的，最重要的是服用仙药，药有上下，仙也有好几等。
English: When cultivating the way of the immortals, the most important thing is to take the immortals' medicine. The medicine has ups and downs, and there are several immortals.

古文：不知房中之事，及行气导引并神药者，亦不能仙也。
现代文：不知道节制房事，不懂得运气导引修行和服用仙药的方法，也成不了仙。
English: If you don't know the temperance room, don't know the methods of luck-guiding practice and taking immortality medicine, you can't become a fairy.

古文：药之上者，有九转还丹、太乙金液、服之皆立登天，不积日月矣。
现代文：仙药中的上品有 九转还丹 、 太乙金液 ，服用后可以立刻升天，不用日积月累的修炼。
English: The highest grade of the heavenly medicine is nine-turned-back-to-earth, Taiei gold liquid. After taking it, you can immediately ascend to heaven, without the need for time-consuming cultivation.

古文：其次，有云母、雄黄之属，虽不即乘云驾龙，亦可役使鬼神，变化长生。
现代文：其次的药有云母、雄黄之类，服用这类药，虽然不能乘龙驾云，也能够驱使鬼神，变化自身，长生不老。
English: The second type of medicine is mica and hypericum. Taking these medicines, although you can't ride a dragon, you can drive ghosts and gods, change yourself, and live forever.

古文：次乃草木诸药，能治百病，补虚驻颜，断谷益气，不能使人不死也。
现代文：再其次的就是各种草木药，能够疗百病，弥补虚弱使人青春长驻，不吃五谷而养精益气，但不能使人长生不死。
English: The next most important are various herbal medicines, which can cure all kinds of diseases, make up for weakness, and make people stay young. They can also make people live longer without eating grains, but they cannot make people live forever.

古文：上可数百岁，下即全其所禀而已。不足久赖也。 
现代文：长服草药顶多能使人活几百岁，其码也能保你活够你的寿数。所以要想得道不能依赖服草药。 
English: Taking herbs for a long time can make people live a few hundred years at most, and it can also keep you alive enough for your lifespan. So you can't rely on taking herbs if you want to be healthy.

古文：余顿首曰： 今日蒙教，乃天也。 
现代文：我就向大仙说： 今天蒙您的指点，真是天意啊！ 
English: So I said to the Great Spirit: It is truly God's will that I receive your guidance today!

古文：神人曰： 必欲长生，先去三尸。
现代文：大仙说： 要想长生，首先要除掉在人身体中作祟兴妖的色欲、爱欲、贪欲这三尸。
English: The Great Immortal said, "If you want to live forever, you must first get rid of the three dead bodies of lust, love, and greed that haunt the human body.

古文：三尸去，即志意定，嗜欲除也。 
现代文：除掉三尸以后，修道的意志才能坚定，人世的欲念才能除尽 。
English: After removing the three corpses, the will to practice the Dharma can be strengthened, and worldly desires can be eliminated.

古文：乃以神方五篇见授，云： 伏尸常以月望晦朔上天，白人罪过，司命夺人算，使人不寿。
现代文：大仙说罢授给我五篇神药仙方并告诫我说： 伏尸常会在初一十五的夜里上天控告人的罪过，司命星神常常夺去人的寿数，使人短命。
English: The Great Immortal said to me, "Give me the five articles of the Divine Medicine and the Divine Recipe," and warned me, "The Bodhisattva will often ascend to heaven on the night of the 15th day of the 1st lunar month to accuse people of their sins, and the Death Star God often takes away people's life span and makes people short-lived.

古文：人身中神，欲得人生，而尸欲得人死，人死则神散，无形之中而成鬼。
现代文：人身体里的神想让人活，而人身体里的三尸要让人死，人一死，身体里的神就散去了，无形中就成了鬼。
English: The god in the human body wants to let people live, while the three corpses in the human body want to let people die. As soon as a person dies, the god in the body disperses and becomes a ghost.

古文：祭祀之则歆飨，故欲人死也。
现代文：凡是祭祀的东西都让鬼享用了，所以鬼愿意让人死，好能得到供祀的食物。
English: Everything that is sacrificed is used by the ghosts, so the ghosts are willing to let people die so that they can get the food to be sacrificed.

古文：梦与恶人斗争，此乃尸与神相战也。 
现代文：如果梦见和坏人搏斗，那么是人体中的神灵和三尸在搏斗。 
English: If you dream of fighting with the bad guys, then it is the gods in the human body that are fighting with the three corpses.

古文：余乃从其言，合服之，遂以得仙。 
现代文：我就依照大仙的教导服用仙药，所以才能成仙。 
English: I took the medicine according to the teachings of the Great Immortal, and that is how I became an Immortal.

古文：珍又每见根书符了，有所呼召，似人来取。
现代文：王珍又常常看见刘根写下一道符之后，对空召唤，好像有人来把符取走。
English: Wang Zhen often saw Liu Gen write a symbol and then call out to the sky, as if someone was coming to take the symbol away.

古文：或数闻推问，有人答对，及闻鞭挞之声，而悉不见其形，及地上时时有血，莫测其端也。
现代文：有时又听见刘根审案，和人对话问答，或者听见鞭打的声音，但看不见有人出现，但见地上时时有血迹，不知道是怎么回事。
English: Sometimes I also heard Liu Gen adjudicating cases, talking to people and asking questions, or heard the sound of whipping, but I couldn't see anyone appear, but I saw blood on the ground all the time, and I didn't know what was going on.

古文：根乃教珍守一行气存神，坐三纲六纪，谢过上名之法。
现代文：后来刘根教给王珍专一运气守神的方法，坚守三纲五纪的规范，以及谢过上名的方法。
English: Later, Liu Gen taught Wang Zhenzhuo the method of keeping God by luck, adhering to the norms of the Three Courses and Five Disciplines, and the method of giving thanks for being named.

古文：根后入鸡头山仙去。
现代文：刘根后来进入鸡头山成仙而去。
English: Liu Gen later entered the Jitou Mountain and went to Chengxian.

古文：李仲甫
现代文：李仲甫
English: Li Zhongfu

古文：李仲甫者。丰邑中益里人也。
现代文：李仲甫是丰邑中益里人。
English: Li Zhongfu is from Zhongyili, Fengyi.

古文：少学道于王君，服水丹有效，兼行遁甲，能步诀隐形，年百余岁，转少。
现代文：少年时就跟王君学道，服用水丹很有效，会遁地入土行走的方术，还会推算的秘诀和隐身法，活到一百多岁后变得十分年轻。
English: When he was a boy, he studied with Wang Jun. He was very effective at taking the water elixir. He knew the technique of walking into the ground, as well as the secret of calculation and the method of invisibility. He became very young after living for more than a hundred years.

古文：初隐百日，一年复见形，后遂长隐，但闻其声，与人对话，饮食如常，但不可见。
现代文：起初能隐身一百日，一年后就现形，后来修炼得能长期隐身，和人对话、饮食都和平常人一样，但别人只能听见他的声音，看不见他本人。
English: At first, he was able to remain invisible for a hundred days, but after a year he became visible. Later, he cultivated to be able to remain invisible for a long time. He conversed with people and ate like an ordinary person, but others could only hear his voice and could not see him.

古文：有书生姓张，从学隐形术，仲甫言卿性褊急，未中教。
现代文：有个姓张的书生跟李仲甫学隐身术，李仲甫嫌他性子太急，不教给他。
English: There was a student surnamed Zhang who studied stealth with Li Zhongfu. Li Zhongfu thought he was too hasty and would not teach him.

古文：然守之不止，费用数十万，以供酒食，殊无所得。
现代文：但张生死缠着李仲甫，花钱好几十万供奉李仲甫酒食，但什么也没学到。
English: However, Zhang pestered Li Zhongfu with his life and death, spending hundreds of thousands of money to offer wine and food to Li Zhongfu, but learned nothing.

古文：张患之，乃怀匕首往。
现代文：张生怀恨在心，就怀揣匕首想杀李仲甫。
English: Holding a grudge, Zhang Sheng took a dagger and wanted to kill Li Zhongfu.

古文：先与仲甫语毕，因依其声所在，腾足而上，拔匕首，左右刺斫。仲甫已在床上，笑曰： 天下乃有汝辈愚人，道学未得，而欲杀之。
现代文：他先是和隐身的李仲甫谈话，顺着李仲甫出声的位置，跳起来用匕首又刺又砍，一看，李仲甫却好好地躺在床上笑着说， 天下竟有你这样的混蛋，道没学成就要杀老师。
English: First, he had a conversation with the invisible Li Zhongfu. He followed the place where Li Zhongfu uttered his voice, jumped up and stabbed and slashed with a dagger. At first glance, Li Zhongfu was lying in bed with a smile and said, There are actually bastards like you in the world, who want to kill teachers without learning.

古文：我宁得杀耶？
现代文：你能杀得了我吗？
English: Can you kill me?

古文：我真能死汝。
现代文：我可真能让你死。
English: I can really make you die.

古文：但恕其顽愚，不足间耳。 
现代文：但念你愚蠢顽劣，不和你一般见识。 
English: But I think you're stupid and evil, and I don't share your common sense.

古文：使人取一犬来，置书生前曰： 视我能杀犬否。 
现代文：说罢叫人牵来一只狗在张生面前说： 你看我能不能杀了这只狗。 
English: After that, someone brought a dog in front of Zhang Sheng and said: "See if I can kill this dog."

古文：犬适至，头已堕地，腹已破。
现代文：狗刚牵来，狗头就落了地，肚子也被破开了。
English: As soon as the dog was brought in, its head fell to the ground and its stomach was ripped open.

古文：乃叱书生曰： 我能使卿如犬行矣。 书生下地叩头乃止，遂赦之。
现代文：李仲甫斥责张生说： 我能让你像这条狗一样下场！ 张生不断磕头求饶，李仲甫才放了他。
English: Li Zhongfu scolded Zhang Sheng, saying, "I can make you end up like this dog!" Zhang Sheng kept scratching his head and begging for mercy, but Li Zhongfu let him go.

古文：仲甫有相识人，居相去五百余里，常以张罗自业。
现代文：李仲甫有个认识的人，住在离他五百里远的地方，以张网捕鸟为业。
English: Li Zhongfu has an acquaintance who lives 500 miles away from him and makes a living trapping birds with a net.

古文：一旦张罗，得一鸟，视之乃仲甫也，语毕别去。
现代文：有一天这人张网捕住了一只鸟，一看鸟却变成了李仲甫，和他谈了一阵话告别去了。
English: One day, the man caught a bird in his net. At first glance, the bird turned out to be Li Zhongfu. He talked to him for a while and said goodbye.

古文：是日，仲甫已复至家。
现代文：五百多里地的路程当天仲甫就到了家。
English: After a journey of more than five hundred miles, Zhongfu arrived home the same day.

古文：在民间三百余年，后入西岳山去，不复还也。
现代文：仲甫在民间三百多年，后来进了西岳山，再也没回来。
English: Zhongfu has been in the folk for more than three hundred years. Later, he went to Xiyue Mountain and never came back.

古文：李意期
现代文：李意期
English: Li Yijie

古文：李意期者，本蜀人，传世见之，汉文帝时人也。
现代文：李意期是四川人，生在汉文帝时，但后世好几代人都看见过他。
English: Li Yizhi was a Sichuanese who was born during the reign of Emperor Hanwen, but generations of people have seen him since.

古文：无妻息。
现代文：他没有妻子儿女。
English: He has no wife or children.

古文：人欲远行速至者，意期以符与之，并丹书两腋下，则千里皆不尽日而还。
现代文：谁走远路又想快到，意期就写一道符给他，并在他腋下写几个朱砂字，这人就可以日行千里，不到一天就赶回来。
English: If you want to go far and arrive soon, write a note to him and write a few crayon words under his arm. This person can travel thousands of miles a day and come back in less than a day.

古文：或说四方国土，宫观市鄽，人未曾见，闻说者意不解。
现代文：有时李意期给人讲述四方外国的奇闻轶事，说哪里的城市宫殿街道，由于听的人没去过外国，就有点听不明白。
English: Sometimes Li Yizhong tells people about the strange anecdotes of foreign countries in the four directions, saying that the streets of the city palace in which, because the listener has not been to a foreign country, is a bit hard to understand.

古文：意期则为撮土作之，但盈寸，其中物皆是，须臾消灭。
现代文：李意期就用手捏了土作成异国城市宫殿的模型，虽然只有一寸大小，但模型里的一切都像真的一样，片刻间就消失了。
English: Li Zhiqi used his hands to pinch the soil to make a model of the palace of an exotic city. Although only one inch in size, everything in the model was like the real thing, and it disappeared in an instant.

古文：或行不知所之，一年许复还。
现代文：人们常常不知道李意期去了哪里，一年多就又回来了。
English: People often don't know where Li Yizhi went, and he came back more than a year later.

古文：于是乞食得物，即度于贫人。
现代文：他常常在街上乞讨食物和东西，转手就给了穷人。
English: He often begged for food and goods on the streets and then gave them to the poor.

古文：于城都角中，作土窟居之，冬夏单衣。
现代文：他在城墙脚下挖了个洞住在里面，冬夏都是一身单衣。
English: He dug a hole at the foot of the city wall and lived in it, wearing a singlet in winter and summer.

古文：饮少酒，食脯及枣栗。
现代文：平时只喝一点酒，吃些干肉和枣子、果子。
English: Usually, I only drink a little wine and eat some dried meat, dates and fruit.

古文：刘玄德欲伐吴，报关羽之死，使迎意期。意期到，甚敬之，问其伐吴吉凶。
现代文：三国时，刘备为了替关羽报仇，打算攻打东吴，就派人把李意期接来，待以厚礼，向他请教攻打东吴能胜还是能败。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Liu Bei, in order to avenge Guan Yu's death, planned to attack Dongwu, so he sent someone to pick up Li Yizhong and asked him for advice on whether he could win or lose by attacking Dongwu.

古文：意期不答，而求纸，画作兵马器杖十数万，乃一一裂坏之，曰：咄。
现代文：李意期不回答，只是要了一张纸，在纸上画了武器兵马十几万，把纸撕碎，然后轻蔑地哼了一声。
English: Li did not reply, but asked for a piece of paper, on which he drew a hundred thousand soldiers and horses with weapons, tore the paper, and then snorted contemptuously.

古文：玄德念怒，遂卒于永安宫。
现代文：他接着又画了一个很大的人，把这张画挖土埋入地下，就扬长而去了。
English: He went on to draw a large man, dug the picture into the ground and left.

古文：意期少言，人有所问，略不对答。
现代文：刘备当时很不高兴，后来果然被东吴打败，十几万人只逃回几百人，武器辎重丢得精光。
English: Liu Bei was very unhappy at the time. Later, he was defeated by the Eastern Wu, and only a few hundred of the more than one hundred thousand fled back. All the heavy weapons were lost.

古文：蜀人有忧患，往问之，凶吉自有常候，但占其颜色。
现代文：刘备也又气又恼死在永安宫。李意期很少说话，别人问什么，他从不回答。四川当地人有什么忧患的事去问他，只要看他的表情就能预知吉凶。
English: Liu Bei was also angry and annoyed and died in the Yongan Palace. Li Yizhong rarely spoke, and he never answered what others asked. Local people in Sichuan would ask him what troubles they had, and just by looking at his expression, they could predict good or bad luck.

古文：若欢悦则善，惨戚则恶。
现代文：如果李意期神色愉快就是吉，面色愁闷就是凶。
English: If Li Yi looks happy, it is good luck, if he looks sad, it is bad luck.

古文：后入琅琊山中，不复见出也。
现代文：后来他进了琅琊山，再也没见他出来。
English: Later, he went into Shaoshan and was never seen again.

古文：王兴
现代文：王兴
English: Wang Xing

古文：王兴者，阳城人也，居壶谷中，乃凡民也。不知书、无学道意。
现代文：王兴是阳城人，住在壶谷，是个普通老百姓，不认字，也没有学道的想法。
English: Wang Xing is from Yangcheng and lives in Juggu. He is an ordinary citizen, does not know how to read, and has no idea of learning the Tao.

古文：汉武上嵩山，登大愚石室，起道宫，使董仲舒、东方朔等，斋洁思神。
现代文：汉武帝进了河南嵩山学道，登上大愚石窟，修建了道宫，让董仲舒、东方朔吃素沐浴，静修思神。
English: Emperor Hanwu entered the Songshan Mountain in Henan Province to study Taoism, ascended the Great Stupid Grottoes, built the Taoist Palace, and let Dong Zhongshu and Dongfang Shuo eat vegetarian food, bathe, and meditate.

古文：至夜，忽见有仙人，长二丈，耳出头巅，垂下至肩。
现代文：这天夜里，忽然来了个神仙，身材有两丈高，两只耳朵上面高过头顶下面垂到肩上。
English: That night, a fairy suddenly appeared. He was twice as tall, and his two ears were higher than the top of his head and hung down to his shoulders.

古文：武帝礼而问之，仙人曰： 吾九嶷之神也，闻中岳石上菖蒲，一寸九节，可以服之长生，故来采耳。 
现代文：汉武帝施礼后问是哪路尊神，仙人说： 我是九巅山神，听说中岳嵩山的岩石上生长一种一寸九节的菖蒲，服后可以长生，所以来采一些。 
English: After saluting, Emperor Hanwu asked which way to worship God, and the hermit said, "I am the god of the nine peaks. I heard that there is a kind of one-inch-nine-knot iris growing on the rock of Zhongyue Mountain. It can live forever after it is harvested, so I came to pick some."

古文：忽然失神人所在。
现代文：说完就忽然不见了。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：帝顾侍臣曰： 彼非复学道服食者，必中岳之神以喻朕耳。 
现代文：武帝对身边的侍臣说， 那位神仙绝不是为学道来采药的，肯定是嵩山神暗示我呢。 
English: Emperor Wu said to the attendants around him, "That god is definitely not collecting medicine for learning Taoism. It must be the god of Songshan who is hinting at me."

古文：为之采菖蒲服之。
现代文：于是武帝让人采了菖蒲服用。
English: So Emperor Wu had people pick and take the sarsaparilla.

古文：经二年，帝觉闷不快，遂止。
现代文：服了两年，觉得气闷不痛快，就停服了。
English: After serving for two years, I felt stuffy and unhappy, so I stopped serving.

古文：时从官多服，然莫能持久。
现代文：当时跟随汉武帝的人也都服用菖蒲，但都没坚持下去。
English: At that time, people who followed Emperor Hanwu also took calamus, but they did not stick to it.

古文：唯王兴闻仙人教武帝服菖蒲，乃采服之不息，遂得长生。
现代文：只有王兴听说神仙教武帝服用菖蒲后，就坚持服用，终于得到长生。
English: Only Wang Xing, who heard that the immortals had taught Emperor Wu to take calamus, insisted on taking it and finally gained eternal life.

古文：邻里老少，皆云世世见之。竟不知所之。
现代文：乡亲们世代都见他活着，后来不知去了什么地方。
English: The villagers have seen him alive for generations, and they don't know where he went afterwards.

古文：赵瞿
现代文：赵瞿
English: Zhao Wei

古文：赵瞿者，字子荣，上党人也。
现代文：赵瞿字子荣，是山西上党人。
English: Zhao Yu Zirong is a member of the Shanxi Shangdang Party.

古文：得癞病，重，垂死。
现代文：他得了很重的癞病，快要死了。
English: He had a bad case of rickets and was dying.

古文：或告其家云： 当及生弃之，若死于家，则世世子孙相蛀耳。 
现代文：有人对他的家人说， 趁还有口气，把他弄到外面去吧，如果死在家里，怕后代子孙都会因传染而得癞病。 
English: His family was told to get him out of the house while he still had breath, as if he died at home, future generations would be plagued by the infection.

古文：家人为作一年粮，送置山中，恐虎狼害之，从外以木寨之。
现代文：家里人就给他准备了一年的粮食，把他送到山里的石洞里，怕被虎狼伤害，就用木栅把他围了起来。
English: The family prepared a year's supply of grain for him and sent him to a stone cave in the mountains. Afraid of being harmed by the tigers and wolves, they surrounded him with a wooden fence.

古文：瞿悲伤自恨，昼夜啼泣。
现代文：赵瞿十分悲痛，昼夜哭泣。
English: Zhao Yao was very sad and cried day and night.

古文：如此百余日，夜中，忽见石室前有三人，问瞿何人。
现代文：过了一百多天后，有天夜里石洞前忽然来了三个人，问他是什么人。
English: After more than a hundred days, one night three people suddenly came to the cave and asked him who he was.

古文：瞿度深山穷林之中，非人所行之处，必是神灵。
现代文：赵瞿暗想，这深山老林里平常人是不会来的，一定是神仙。
English: Zhao Yao secretly thought that ordinary people would not come to this deep mountain and old forest, it must be the gods.

古文：乃自陈乞，叩头哀求。
现代文：就诉说了自己的悲惨处境，哀求神仙帮助。
English: He complained about his miserable situation and begged the gods for help.

古文：其人行诸寨中，有如云气，了无所碍。问瞿 必欲病愈，当服药，能否？ 
现代文：三个人就像云似地飘进石洞，洞外的栅栏一点也不碍事。他们说： 你一定想把病治好吧，让你服点药行不行？ 
English: The three of them drifted into the cave like a cloud, and the fence outside the cave didn't bother them at all. They said, "You must want to cure your illness. Can you take some medicine?"

古文：瞿曰： 无状多罪，婴此恶疾，已见竦弃，死在旦夕。
现代文：赵瞿说： 我必是今生罪孽深重，才得了这么重的病，甚至连家人都抛弃了我，早晚必死无疑了。
English: Zhao Wei said, "I must have been very sinful in this life to get such a serious illness. Even my family has abandoned me. I will surely die sooner or later."

古文：若刖足割鼻而可活，犹所甚愿，况服药岂不能也。 神人乃以松子松柏脂各五升赐之，告瞿曰： 此不但愈病，当长生耳。
现代文：只要能治好我的病，就是砍掉我的腿，割掉我的鼻子我也心甘，何况是服药呢。 仙人就给了他松子和松、柏脂各五升，并告诉赵瞿说： 吃了这药不但可以治好病，还能长生不老。
English: As long as it can cure my illness, I am willing to have my leg chopped off and my nose cut off, not to mention taking medicine.The fairy godmother gave him five liters of pine nuts, pine and tar each, and told Zhao Yao: "If you eat this medicine, you can not only cure your illness, but also live forever."

古文：服半可愈，愈即勿废。 
现代文：吃一半病就能好，病好后还要继续吃。 
English: If you eat half of it, you will get better. If you get better, you should continue to eat it.

古文：瞿服之未尽，病愈，身体强健乃归家，家人谓是鬼。具说其由，乃喜。
现代文：赵瞿还没吃完，病果然好了，身体也十分健壮，就回了家。家人以为他是鬼，后来听了他讲述了神仙赐药的经过，家里人大喜。
English: Before Zhao Yao had finished eating, his illness was cured and his body was very strong, so he returned home. His family thought he was a ghost. Later, when they heard him describe the process of being given medicine by the gods, they were overjoyed.

古文：遂更服之二年，颜色转少，肌肤光泽，走如飞鸟。
现代文：赵瞿又继续服了两年药，变得十分年轻，皮肤也变得十分有光泽，走起路来像飞鸟般轻捷。
English: Zhao Yao continued to take the medicine for another two years. He became very young, his skin became very shiny, and he walked as light as a bird.

古文：年七十余，食雉兔，皆嚼其骨，能负重，更不疲极。
现代文：到了七十岁时，吃山鸡野兔连骨头都能嚼碎，还能背负很重的东西也不累。
English: At the age of seventy, he can chew the bones of a pheasant and a hare, and can carry heavy things without getting tired.

古文：年百七十，夜卧，忽见屋间光有如镜者，以问左右，云不见。
现代文：活到一百七十岁时，有天夜里睡下后忽然看见屋里有个东西像镜子般发光，问别人，谁也没看见。
English: When he was one hundred and seventy years old, he fell asleep one night and suddenly saw something in the room that shone like a mirror. He asked others, but no one saw it.

古文：后一日，一室内尽明，能夜书文。
现代文：过了一天，就发现夜间全屋通明，能看得见写字。
English: After a day, I found that the whole house was bright at night, and I could see and write.

古文：再见面上有二人，长三尺，乃美女也，甚端正，但小耳，戏其鼻上。
现代文：又发现脸上有两个小人有三寸高，是非常端庄的美女，只是太小了，在他鼻子上戏耍。
English: He also found two three-inch-tall figures on his face, very demure beauties, but too small, playing on his nose.

古文：如此二女稍长大，至如人，不复在面上，出在前侧，常闻琴瑟之声，欣然欢乐。
现代文：后来两个美女渐渐长大，和正常人一样了，不再在他鼻子上玩，而是在他身边，常常弹琴鼓瑟给他听，使他非常快活。
English: Later, the two beauties gradually grew up and became like normal people, no longer playing on his nose, but around him, often playing the piano and drums for him, making him very happy.

古文：在人间三百余年，常如童子颜色，入山不知所之。
现代文：赵瞿在人间呆了三百多年，仍然面如少年，后来进山，不知去了什么地方。
English: Zhao Wei stayed on earth for more than three hundred years, still looking like a boy. Later, he went into the mountains and I don't know where he went.

古文：王遥
现代文：王遥
English: Wang Yao

古文：王遥者，字伯辽，鄱阳人也，有妻无子。
现代文：王遥字伯辽，湖北鄱阳人，有妻子但没有儿女。
English: Wang Yaozhi Berliao, from Shenyang, Hubei Province, has a wife but no children.

古文：颇能治病，病无不愈者。
现代文：他很会治病，经他医治没有不痊愈的。
English: He was very good at curing the sick, and no one was left unhealed by his treatment.

古文：亦不祭祀，不用符水针药，其行治病，但以八尺布帕，敷坐于地，不饮不食，须臾病愈，便起去。
现代文：他治病不用符咒神水，也不祭祀鬼神，治病时只用八尺长的大手巾铺在地上坐着，也不吃也不喝，不一会儿得病的人就好了，他起身就走。
English: He does not use charms, spells or holy water to cure the sick, nor does he offer sacrifices to ghosts and gods. When curing the sick, he just sits on the ground with an eight-foot-long large handkerchief, neither eating nor drinking. Soon the sick person will be well, and he will get up and leave.

古文：其有邪魅作祸者，遥画地作狱，因召呼之，皆见其形，入在狱中，或狐狸鼍蛇之类，乃斩而燔烧之，病者即愈。
现代文：谁家要有鬼怪作妖，告诉了他，他就画出一块地来作监狱，并招呼鬼怪，鬼怪立刻应召而至，现了原形进入他画的狱中，都是些狐狸、乌龟、蛇之类，把它们斩杀之后再烧掉，病人就好了。
English: If someone wanted to have a ghost as a demon and told him about it, he would draw a piece of land to make a prison and call the ghost. The ghost would immediately come to the call and enter the prison he drew in its original form. They were all foxes, turtles, snakes and the like. After killing them, they would be burned, and the patient would be fine.

古文：遥有竹箧，长数寸，有一弟子姓钱，随遥数十年，未尝见遥开之。
现代文：王遥有一对几寸长的小竹箱子，他有位姓钱的弟子跟了他几十年也没见他打开过竹箱。
English: Wang Yao has a pair of small bamboo boxes a few inches long. He has a disciple named Qian who has followed him for decades and has never seen him open the bamboo boxes.

古文：一夜，大雨晦暝，遥使钱以九节杖担此箧，将钱出，冒雨而行，遥及弟子衣皆不湿。
现代文：有天夜里下起大雨，天昏地暗，王遥让钱某用九节杖担着小竹箱随他冒雨出行，他和弟子的衣服都没有被雨淋湿。
English: One night, it rained heavily and the sky was dark. Wang Yao asked Qian Mou to travel with him in the rain, carrying a small bamboo box with a nine-knot staff. Neither he nor his disciple's clothes were wet by the rain.

古文：所行道非所曾经，又常有两炬火导前。
现代文：他们走的是从未走过的路，前面有两个火把照着引路。
English: They are walking a path they have never walked before, with two torches shining in front of them to guide their way.

古文：约行三十里许，登小山，入石室，室中有二人。
现代文：走了约三十多里，登上一座小山，进入一个石洞，洞里已有了两个人。
English: They walked for more than thirty miles, climbed a hill, and entered a stone cave. There were already two people in the cave.

古文：遥既至，取弟子所担箧发之，中有五舌竹簧三枚。
现代文：王遥进洞后，就打开弟子挑的小竹箱，里面是三枝五个簧片的竹笙。
English: After Wang Yao entered the cave, he opened a small bamboo box picked by his disciple. Inside was a bamboo flute with three branches and five reeds.

古文：遥自鼓一枚，以二枚与室中二人，并坐鼓之。
现代文：王遥自己拿了一枝吹起来，其余两枝让石洞里的那两个人吹。
English: Wang Yao himself took one branch and blew it up, leaving the other two branches for the two people in the cave to blow.

古文：良久，遥辞去，收三簧，皆纳箧中，使钱担之。
现代文：吹了半天，王遥把笙都收起来装进竹箱，仍旧让钱某挑着和他一齐出山洞。
English: After blowing for half a day, Wang Yao put away the shovels and put them in a bamboo box, but still let Qian Mou lead him out of the cave.

古文：室中二人送出，语遥曰： 卿当早来，何为久在俗间。 
现代文：那两个人送出来说： 希望你快点回来，不要在人间长久停留。 
English: The two sent out a message saying, "I hope you come back soon, and don't stay too long on earth.

古文：遥答曰： 我如是当来也。 
现代文：王遥说： 我会回来的。 
English: Wang Yao said, "I will come back."

古文：遥还家百日，天复雨，遥夜忽大治装。
现代文：王遥回家住了一百天，这天又下起雨来，王遥就在夜里收拾行装。
English: Wang Yao went home to live for a hundred days. It rained again that day, and Wang Yao packed up and left in the night.

古文：遥先有葛单衣及葛布巾，已五十余年未尝着，此夜皆取着之。
现代文：他原来有一套葛布衣和头巾，已经五十多年没穿了，这时都拿出来穿在身上。
English: He used to have a cape and a headscarf, which he hadn't worn for more than fifty years, and he took them out and put them on.

古文：其妻即问曰： 欲舍我去乎？ 
现代文：他的妻子问他： 你要抛下我去吗？ 
English: His wife asked him, "Are you going to leave me?"

古文：遥曰： 暂行耳。 
现代文：王遥说： 我不会走多长时间。 
English: Wang Yao said, "I won't walk for long.

古文：妻曰： 当将钱去不？ 
现代文：妻子又问： 带你的弟子钱生吗？ 
English: His wife also asked, "Are you taking your disciple Qian Sheng with you?"

古文：遥曰： 独去耳。 
现代文：王遥说： 我自己走。 
English: Wang Yao said, "I'll go by myself."

古文：遥曰： 如是还耳。 因自担箧而去之，遂不复还。
现代文：妻子哭着求他别走，他说很快就回来，就自己挑着小竹箱走了，一走就再也没回来。
English: His wife cried and begged him not to go. He said he would be back soon, so he picked up a small bamboo box and left. Once he left, he never returned.

古文：后三十余年，弟子见遥在马蹄山中，颜色更少，盖地仙也。
现代文：三十多年后，他的弟子看见他在马蹄山里，容貌更年轻了，已经成了一位人间的神仙。
English: More than thirty years later, his disciple saw him in the Horseshoe Mountains, looking even younger, having become an earthly immortal.

