古文：起上章涒滩，尽昭阳大渊献，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。
English: A total of four years.

古文：高祖武皇帝永初元年
现代文：宋武帝永初元年
English: Emperor Songwu in the first year of Yong

古文：春，正月，己亥，魏主还宫。
现代文：春季，正月，乙亥，北魏国主拓跋嗣回宫。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the second month of the year of the boar, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, returned to the palace.

古文：秦王炽磐立其子暮末为太子，仍领抚军大将军、都督中外诸军事，大赦，改元建弘。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐封他的儿子乞伏暮末为太子，仍然兼任抚军大将军，总掌全国内外的军事，宣布大赦，改年号为建弘。
English: The King of Western Qin begged for his son to be crowned as the crown prince, and he was still concurrently the general of the army, in charge of the military at home and abroad, declared an amnesty, and changed the year name to Jianhong.

古文：宋王欲受禅而难于发言，乃集朝臣宴饮，从容言曰： 桓玄篡位，鼎命已移。
现代文：东晋宋王刘裕希望晋恭帝司马德文能以禅让的形式把帝位传给自己，却难于启齿，于是，他召集手下朝臣饮酒欢宴。在筵席上，刘裕若无其事地说： 当年桓玄篡位，晋国大权旁落。
English: Eastern Jin Dynasty Song King Liu Yu hoped that the Jin Emperor Sima Dewen could pass the imperial throne to himself in the form of a zen concession, but it was difficult to open his mouth, so he gathered his courtiers for a drinking party. At the banquet, Liu Yu said matter-of-factly: That year, Huan Xuan usurped the throne, and the power of Jin fell by the wayside.

古文：我首唱大义，兴复帝室，南征北伐，平定四海，功成业著，遂荷九锡。
现代文：是我首先提倡大义，复兴皇帝宗室，南征北讨，平定了天下，可谓大功告成，业绩卓著，于是承蒙皇上恩赐而有九锡之尊。
English: I was the first to advocate the Great Righteousness, the revival of the imperial family, the Southern Expedition and the Northern Expedition, and the pacification of the world, which can be described as a great achievement and outstanding performance, so I received the gift of the emperor and have the respect of Jiuxi.

古文：今年将衰暮，崇极如此，物忌盛，非可久安；今欲奉还爵位，归老京师。 
现代文：如今我的年纪也快老了，地位又如此尊崇，无以复加，天下的事最忌讳装得太满而盈溢出来，那样就不可以得到长久的安宁了，现在我要将爵位奉还皇上，回到京师颐养天年。 
English: Now that I am getting old, and my position is so respected that it cannot be overstated, the most taboo things in the world are too full and overflowing, so I can't get long-term peace. Now I want to return my title to the emperor and return to Beijing to grow old.

古文：群臣惟盛称功德，莫谕其意。日晚，坐散。
现代文：群臣不理解他的真正含意，只是一味盛称他的功德。这日天色已晚，群臣散去。
English: The courtiers did not understand his true meaning, but only praised his merits. It was late in the day, and the courtiers dispersed.

古文：中书令傅亮还外，乃悟，而宫门已闭，亮叩扉请见，王即开门见之。
现代文：中书令傅亮走出宫门，方才悟出宋王一席话的真实用意，但是宫门已经关闭，傅亮便叩门请求见宋王，宋王即令开门召见他。
English: Fu Liang was ordered to leave the palace gate by the imperial edict, and only then did he realize the true intention of Song Wang's speech. However, the palace gate was already closed, so Fu Liang knocked on the door and asked to see Song Wang. Song Wang immediately opened the door and summoned him.

古文：亮入，但曰： 臣暂宜还者。 
现代文：傅亮入宫，只说： 我应该暂且返回京师。 
English: Fu Liang entered the palace and only said: I should temporarily return to the capital.

古文：王解其意，无复他言，真云： 须几人自送？ 
现代文：宋王刘裕明白他的用意，也不再多说别的，直接问： 你需要多少人护送？ 
English: Song Wang Liu Yu understood his intention and didn't say anything else. He asked directly: How many people do you need to escort you?

古文：亮曰： 数十人可也。 
现代文：傅亮回答说： 数十人就足够了。 
English: Fu Liang replied, "A few dozen people are enough."

古文：即时奉辞。
现代文：随即与宋王刘裕辞别。
English: He then bid farewell to Song King Liu Yu.

古文：亮出，已夜，见长星竟天，拊髀叹曰： 我常不信天文，今姑验矣。 
现代文：傅亮出宫时已是半夜时分，只见彗星划过夜空，傅亮拍腿叹曰： 我过去常常不信天象，今天看来天象开始应验了。 
English: When Fu Liang came out of the palace, it was already midnight. He saw a comet streaking across the night sky. Fu Liang patted his leg and sighed, "I used to not believe in celestial objects. Today, it seems that celestial objects are beginning to come true."

古文：亮至建康，夏，四月，征王入辅。
现代文：傅亮来到京师建康，当时正值初夏四月，晋恭帝征召刘裕入京辅弼。
English: Fu Liang came to Beijing to study Jiankang. At that time, it was early summer in April, and Emperor Jinguang summoned Liu Yu to enter the Beijing Auxiliary Palace.

古文：王留子义康为都督豫、司、雍、并四州诸军事、豫州刺史，镇寿阳。
现代文：宋王刘裕让他的儿子刘义康留守，都督豫、司、雍、并四州诸军事，豫州刺史，坐镇寿阳。
English: Song King Liu Yu let his son Liu Yikang stay behind, and he was in charge of the military in the four prefectures of Du, Si, Yong, and Shizhou, and he was in charge of the military in the prefecture of Yuzhou and the town of Shouyang.

古文：义康尚幼，以相国参军南阳刘湛为长史，决府、州事。
现代文：刘义康年纪还很幼小，刘裕于是任用相国参军南阳人刘湛为长史，帮助决策和处理府、州日常军政事务。
English: Liu Yikang was still very young, so Liu Yu appointed Liu Zhan, a native of Nanyang who had served in the Chinese army, to help make decisions and handle the daily military and political affairs of the prefecture and the state.

古文：湛自弱年即有宰物之情，常自比管、葛，博涉书史，不为文章，不喜谈议，王甚重之。
现代文：刘湛自幼就有做宰辅的远大志向，常常以管仲、诸葛亮自比，他博览书史，却不喜做文章，不爱空发议论，因此刘裕特别器重他的才干。
English: Liu Zhan had the lofty ambition to be a chief aide since childhood. He often compared himself to Guanzhong and Zhuge Liang. He was well-versed in the history of books, but he did not like to write articles, and did not like to make empty discussions. Therefore, Liu Yu particularly valued his talent.

古文：五月，乙酉，魏更谥宣武帝曰道武帝。
现代文：五月，乙酉，北魏变更宣武帝拓跋的谥号，改称道武帝。
English: In May, the Northern Wei Dynasty changed the title of Emperor Tuoba to Emperor Daowu.

古文：魏淮南公司马国璠、池阳子司马道赐谋外叛，司马文思告之。
现代文：北魏淮南公司马国、池阳子司马道赐阴谋反叛，司马文思告发了他们。
English: The Northern Wei Huainan Company's Ma Guo and Chiyangzi Sima Daozu plotted to rebel, and Sima Wensi denounced them.

古文：庚戌，魏主杀国璠、道赐，赐文思爵郁林公。
现代文：庚戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣杀司马国与司马道赐，赐封司马文思为郁林公。
English: Geng Zheng, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, sent his son Tuoba to kill Sima Guo and Sima Dao, and gave Sima Wensi the title of Duke of Yulin.

古文：国璠等连引平城豪桀，坐族诛者数十人，章安侯封懿之子玄之当坐。
现代文：司马国一伙的阴谋牵连了平城的大户豪强，全族被诛的就有数十人，章安侯封懿的儿子封玄之也应斩首。
English: The conspiracy of Sima Guo's group implicated the big families of Pingcheng, and dozens of people from the whole family were arrested. The son of Zhang An Hou Fong Yao, Fong Xuan Zhi, should also be beheaded.

古文：魏主以玄之燕朝旧族，欲宥其一子。
现代文：北魏国主念及封玄之是燕朝旧族，想要宽宥他的一个儿子。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to pardon one of his sons, who belonged to the Yan Dynasty.

古文：玄之曰： 弟子磨奴早孤，乞全其命。 
现代文：封玄之说： 我的侄儿封磨奴幼年丧父，乞求您留他一命。 
English: Fong Xianzhi said: My nephew Fong Maunu lost his father at a young age and begged you to spare his life.

古文：乃杀玄之四子而宥磨奴。
现代文：北魏国主于是杀掉了封玄之的四个儿子而饶恕了封磨奴。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign then killed the four sons of Fong Xuan Zhi and forgave Fong Ma Niu.

古文：六月，壬戌，王至建康。
现代文：六月，壬戌，宋王刘裕来到建康。
English: In June, Song King Liu Yu came to Jiankang.

古文：傅亮讽晋恭帝禅位于宋，具诏草呈帝，使书之。
现代文：傅亮用委婉的语言暗示晋恭帝将帝位禅让给宋王，并且草拟了退位诏书呈给晋恭帝，让他亲自抄写一遍。
English: Fu Liang used euphemistic language to insinuate that Emperor Jinguang would abdicate the throne to King Song, and drafted an abdication edict to present to Emperor Jinguang, asking him to copy it himself.

古文：帝欣然操笔，谓左右曰： 桓玄之时，晋氏已无天下，重为刘公所延，将二十载；今日之事，本所甘心。 
现代文：晋恭帝欣然提笔，并对左右侍臣说： 桓玄之乱的时候，晋朝已失掉天下，后来幸赖刘公才得以延续将近二十年；今日禅位给他，是我甘心所为。 
English: Emperor Jinguang gladly raised his pen and said to the attendants on his right and left: "At the time of the Huan Xuan Rebellion, the Jin Dynasty had already lost the world. Later, it was thanks to Liu Gongcai that it was able to continue for nearly twenty years; today, I am willing to give him the position of Zen.

古文：遂书赤纸为诏。
现代文：于是将傅亮呈来的草稿作为正式诏书抄写在红纸上。
English: Therefore, the draft submitted by Fu Liang was copied onto red paper as an official edict.

古文：甲子，帝逊于琅邪第，百官拜辞，秘书监徐广流涕哀恸。
现代文：甲子，晋恭帝司马德文让位，回到了琅邪旧邸，百官叩拜辞别，秘书监徐广痛哭流涕，不胜哀恸。
English: Emperor Jingu and Emperor Ma Dewen abdicated and returned to his former residence, where hundreds of officials bowed their heads in farewell, and the secretary and warden, Xu Guang, wept bitterly, overwhelmed with grief.

古文：丁卯，王为坛于南郊，即皇帝位。
现代文：丁卯，宋王刘裕在南郊设坛，即帝位。
English: Dingwu, Song King Liu Yu set up the altar in the southern suburbs, that is, the imperial throne.

古文：礼毕，自石头备法驾入建康宫。
现代文：典礼结束后，刘裕乘皇帝的车驾从石头进入建康宫。
English: After the ceremony, Liu Yu took the emperor's car to drive from the stone into Jiankang Palace.

古文：徐广又悲感流涕，侍中谢晦谓之曰： 徐公得无小过！ 
现代文：徐广又悲痛不已。侍中谢晦对他说： 徐公如此未免有点过分了吧！ 
English: Xu Guang was grief-stricken again. Waiter Xie Hui said to him: "It's a bit excessive for Xu Guang to be so sad!

古文：广曰： 君为宋朝佐命，身是晋室遗老，悲观之事，固不可同。 
现代文：徐广说： 您是宋朝佐命大臣，我是晋室遗老，悲欢之情，当然是各不相同。 
English: Xu Guang said: You are the minister of the Song Dynasty, I am the heir of the Jin Dynasty. Of course, the feelings of sorrow and joy are different.

古文：广，邈之弟也。
现代文：徐广是徐邈的弟弟。
English: Xu Guang is Xu Yao's younger brother.

古文：帝临太极殿，大赦，改元。
现代文：刘宋武帝刘裕登太极殿，大赦天下，改年号为永初。
English: Emperor Liu Songwu, Liu Yuden Taiji Hall, was pardoned by the world, and the year was changed to Yongchu.

古文：其犯乡论清议，一皆荡涤，与之更始。
现代文：刘裕宣布，凡是行为不道德，受过舆论抨击的人，一律清除罪名，使之改过自新。
English: Liu Yu announced that all those who have acted immorally and have been criticized by public opinion will be cleared of charges and rehabilitated.

古文：裴子野论曰：昔重华受终，四凶流放；武王克殷，顽民迁洛。
现代文：裴子野论曰：当年虞舜姚重华接受国家大任，流放共工、兜、三苗、鲧等四凶；武王征服殷商，将顽劣的遗民迁到洛阳。
English: Peizhino said: In that year, Gu Gu Yao Chonghua accepted the state's great responsibility and exiled four villains such as the co-worker, the helper, the three seedlings and the baboon; King Wu conquered the Yin merchants and moved the bad remnants to Luoyang.

古文：天下之恶一也，乡论清议，除之，过矣！
现代文：天下的罪恶何时都是相同的，而刘裕一概免除触犯众怒的人的罪名，是做得太过分了！
English: The evils of the world are always the same, and Liu Yu has gone too far in absolving everyone who has offended the public.

古文：奉晋恭帝为零陵王，优崇之礼，皆仿晋初故事，即宫于故秣陵县，使冠军将军刘遵考将兵防卫。
现代文：刘宋武帝封晋恭帝为零陵王；他对待晋室的优崇之礼，一律仿照晋初优待魏室的先例。随即又在故秣陵县为晋恭帝兴建王宫，派遣冠军将军刘遵考率兵保卫。
English: Emperor Liu Songwu made Emperor Jinxiong the king of Jilin; he treated Emperor Jinxiong's wife with the same high respect as Emperor Jinxiong had treated Emperor Wei's wife. He then built a palace for Emperor Jinxiong in the former Jilin County and sent the champion general Liu Zunka to lead the troops to protect it.

古文：降褚后为王妃。
现代文：又将晋恭帝的皇后褚灵媛降为王妃。
English: He also demoted Emperor Jingu's empress, Yulingyuan, to the rank of princess.

古文：庚午，以司空道怜为太尉，封长沙王。
现代文：庚午，刘宋武帝提升司空刘道怜为太尉，封他为长沙王。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, he appointed Sikyong Dorei as the first lieutenant and appointed him as the king of Changsha.

古文：追封司徒道规为临川王，以道怜子义庆袭其爵。
现代文：追封司徒刘道规为临川王，并以刘道怜的儿子刘义庆继承刘道规的爵位。
English: He crowned Liu Daojian as the King of Linchuan, and appointed Liu Daorai's son, Liu Yiqing, to succeed Liu Daojian.

古文：其馀功臣徐羡之等，增位进爵各有差。
现代文：其余的功臣徐羡之等等，也分别加官增禄或进升爵位。
English: The rest of the meritorious heroes, such as Xu Enzhi, were also promoted to higher ranks or knighthoods.

古文：追封刘穆之为南康郡公，王镇恶为龙阳县候。
现代文：刘宋武帝又追封刘穆之为南康郡公，王镇恶为龙阳县侯。
English: Emperor Liu Songwu also posthumously made Liu Mu the governor of Nankang County, and Wang Zhenxiong the governor of Longyang County.

古文：上海叹念穆之，曰： 穆之不死，当助我治天下。
现代文：刘裕常常想念刘穆之，叹息着说： 刘穆之如果不死，一定能帮助我治理天下。
English: Liu Yu often thought of Liu Mu Zhi, and said with a sigh: "If Liu Mu Zhi does not die, he will surely help me govern the world."

古文：可谓 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁 ！ 
现代文：真可谓是 好人散去，国家遭殃 ！ 
English: It really is a case of the good people leaving and the country suffering!

古文：又曰： 穆之死，人轻易我。 
现代文：又说： 刘穆之一死，人们将很容易对付我了。 
English: He also said, "If Liu Muyi dies, people will easily deal with me."

古文：立皇子桂阳公义真为庐陵王，彭城公义隆为宜都王，义康为彭城王。
现代文：刘宋武帝又封皇子桂阳公刘义真为庐陵王、彭城公刘义隆为宜都王，刘义康为彭城王。
English: Emperor Liu Songwu also made the prince of Guiyang, Liu Yizhen, the king of Fuling, the prince of Pengcheng, Liu Yilong, the king of Yidu, and Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng.

古文：己卯，改《泰始历》为《永初历》。
现代文：己卯，取消《泰始历》，改用《永初历》。
English: Therefore, the "Thai New Year's Calendar" was cancelled and replaced with the "Eternal New Year's Calendar."

古文：魏主如翳犊山，遂至冯滷池。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣前往翳犊山，又西去冯卤池。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, went to Shaoshan, and went west to Fengluochi.

古文：闻上受禅，驿召崔浩告之曰： 卿往年之言验矣，朕于今日始信天道。 
现代文：他闻知刘裕接受禅让，用驿车征召崔浩，对他说： 你当年的预言全部都应验了，我到今日才开始相信天道。 
English: When he heard that Liu Yu had accepted Zen's offer, he summoned Cui Hao with a carriage and said to him, "All of your predictions from last year have come true. I only began to believe in the heavenly way today.

古文：秋，七月，丁酉，魏主如五原。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁酉，北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达五原。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ding Xi, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Wuhan.

古文：甲辰，诏以凉公歆为都督高昌等七郡诸军事、征西将军、酒泉公；秦王炽磐为安西大将军。
现代文：甲辰，刘裕下诏，任命西凉公李歆为都督高昌等七郡诸军事、征西大将军，进封他为酒泉公。又任命西秦王乞伏炽磐为安西大将军。
English: At the time of Jia Chen, Liu Yu issued an edict, appointing the West Liang King Li Jiao as the military commander of the seven counties including the capital Gaochang, and the general of the Western Expedition. He was appointed as the lord of Jiuquan. He also appointed the West Qin King Qibao as the general of Anxi.

古文：交州刺史杜慧度击林邑，大破之，所杀过半。
现代文：刘宋交州刺史杜慧度进攻林邑，大破林邑军，斩杀敌人过半。
English: Liu Song Jiaozhou stabbed Shi Duhui to attack Linyi, defeated Linyi's army, and killed more than half of the enemy.

古文：林邑乞降，前后为所钞掠者皆遣还。
现代文：林邑请求投降，并将前后入寇所抢劫掳掠的人口和财产全部归还。
English: Linyi requested to surrender and return all the people and property that had been robbed and plundered by the invaders.

古文：慧度在交州，为政纤密，一如治家，吏民畏而爱之，城门夜开，道不拾遗。
现代文：杜慧度在交州任职，处理公务，细密谨慎，仿佛管理自己的家事，官吏和百姓对他都十分敬畏；城门夜不关闭，路不拾遗。
English: Du Huidu served in Jiaozhou, handled official duties, meticulous and prudent, as if managing his own family affairs. Officials and people were very much in awe of him; the city gate was not closed at night, and the road was not picked up.

古文：丁未，魏主如云中。
现代文：己未，北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达云中。
English: Before long, Tuoba Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Yunzhong.

古文：河西王蒙逊欲伐凉，先引兵攻秦浩亹；既至，潜师还屯川岩。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊准备进攻西凉，于是，他设计先在东方进攻西秦的浩，大军一到浩，立即秘密回师，驻军川岩。
English: The Western King of the North Lianghe River, Qiaoqiao Mengxun, was preparing to attack the West Lianghe River. Therefore, he planned to attack the Western Qin's Ho in the East first. Once the army arrived in Ho, it immediately returned to the division in secret and garrisoned in Chuanyan.

古文：凉公歆欲乘虚袭张掖；宋繇、张体顺切谏，不听。
现代文：西凉公李歆得到沮渠蒙逊进攻浩的消息，便想要乘北凉西部防务空虚，进攻张掖。右长史宋繇、左长史张体顺恳切地劝阻他，李歆不听。
English: When the Xiliang ruler Li Qian received the news that the Mengson invasion was imminent, he wanted to take advantage of the lack of defenses in the western part of the Northern Liang and attack Zhang Qian. The right-hand ruler Song Qian and the left-hand ruler Zhang Ti tried to dissuade him, but Li Qian would not listen.

古文：太后尹氏谓歆曰： 汝新造之国。地狭民希，自守犹惧不足，何暇伐人！
现代文：李歆的母亲、太后尹氏警告李歆说： 你的王国是一个新建的国家，地狭民少，自卫还怕力量不够，哪有余力去讨伐别人！
English: Li Yu's mother, the Empress Dowager Yin, warned Li Yu: "Your kingdom is a newly built country, with a small land area and few people. I'm afraid you don't have enough strength to defend yourself. You don't have enough strength to fight others!"

古文：先王临终，殷勤戒汝：深慎用兵，保境宁民，以俟天时。
现代文：先王临死时，一再叮咛你，对于军事行动千万要慎重，要保境安民，等待良机。
English: When the late king was dying, he repeatedly admonished you to be cautious about military operations, to protect the border and the people, and to wait for a good opportunity.

古文：言犹在耳，奈何弃之！
现代文：言犹在耳，为什么就抛在一边？
English: The words are still ringing in our ears, so why do we brush them aside?

古文：蒙逊善用兵，非汝之敌，数年以来，常有兼并之志。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊善于用兵，你不是他的对手，何况他多年来一直有吞并我们的野心。
English: You are no match for the military prowess of Desmond Tutu, who has harboured ambitions of annexing us for years.

古文：汝国虽小，足为善政，修德养民，静以待之。
现代文：你的王国虽然很小，但足以施行善政，修德养民，冷静地休养生息以等待时机。
English: Your kingdom, though small, is large enough for good government, for the cultivation of virtue, and for calm repose while waiting for opportunity.

古文：彼若昏暴，民将归汝；若其休明，汝将事之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊如果昏庸暴虐，人民自会归附于你；他如果英明有德政，你应该事奉于他。
English: If the despot is stupid and tyrannical, the people will come to you; if he is wise and virtuous, you should serve him.

古文：岂得轻为举动，侥冀非望！
现代文：怎么可以轻举妄动，去讨伐别人，只图侥幸成功。
English: How can you act rashly, go to fight others, and only try to succeed by chance.

古文：以吾观之，非但丧师，殆将亡国！ 
现代文：依我看来，你此番举动，不但会全军覆没，还将亡国！ 
English: In my opinion, with this move of yours, you will not only annihilate the entire army, but also ruin the country!

古文：亦不听。
现代文：李歆还是不接受。
English: I can't listen to it either.

古文：宋繇叹曰： 今兹大事去矣！ 
现代文：宋繇叹息说： 到如此地步，大势去矣！ 
English: Song Tao sighed and said: So far, so good!

古文：歆将步骑三万东出。
现代文：李歆率领步、骑兵三万人自都城酒泉向东进发。
English: Li Yu led the way, and 30,000 cavalrymen set out from the capital city of Jiuquan to the east.

古文：蒙逊闻之，曰： 歆已入吾术中，然闻吾旋师，必不敢前。 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊闻知大喜，说： 李歆已经中了我的圈套，但是如果他听说我回军埋伏，一定不敢继续前进。 
English: Dejected, Monsoon was overjoyed to hear this and said, "Li Qian has already fallen into my trap, but if he hears that I have returned to the army to lay an ambush, he will not dare to continue his advance."

古文：乃露布西境，云已克浩亹，将进攻黄谷。
现代文：于是沮渠蒙逊下令在西部边境，遍传攻克浩的消息，并扬言大军还要进攻黄谷。
English: As a result, the frustrated Mengxun ordered the news of the attack on Kehoe to be spread all over the western border, and threatened that the army would also attack Huanggu.

古文：歆闻之，喜，进入都渎涧，蒙逊引兵击之，战于怀城，歆大败。
现代文：李歆得到这个消息，大喜，立即率大军开进都渎涧，沮渠蒙逊率军进攻，两支军队在怀城决战，结果李歆率领的西凉军大败。
English: Li Yu got the news and was overjoyed. He immediately led a large army to enter Dufu, which was attacked by the army led by Mengxun. The two armies fought a decisive battle in Huaicheng. As a result, the Xiliang army led by Li Yu was defeated.

古文：或劝歆还保酒泉，歆曰： 吾违老母之言以取败，不杀此胡，何面目复见我母！ 
现代文：有人劝李歆退军保卫都城酒泉。李歆说： 我违背母亲的教训才遭到如此挫败，不杀掉这个胡蛮，我有何面目再见老母。 
English: Some people advised Li Qiye to withdraw from the army to defend the capital city of Jiuquan. Li Qiye said: I violated my mother's teachings to suffer such a defeat. If I don't kill this brute, what kind of face will I have when I see my mother again?

古文：遂勒兵战于蓼泉，为蒙逊所杀。
现代文：于是率领又手下的将士在蓼泉与蒙逊军队展开第二次会战，西凉军大败，李歆被沮渠蒙逊杀掉。
English: Therefore, he led his soldiers to fight against the Monsoon army for the second time in Luquan. The Xiliang army was defeated, and Li Rong was killed by the frustrated Monsoon.

古文：歆弟酒泉太守翻、新城太守预、领羽林右监密、左将军眺、右将军亮西奔敦煌。
现代文：李歆的弟弟酒泉太守李翻、新城太守李预、领羽林军右监李密、左将军李眺、右将军李亮，向西逃往敦煌。
English: Li Lan's younger brothers, Jiuquan's grand marshal Li Tong, Xincheng's grand marshal Li Yuan, the leader of the Wu Lin Army's right supervisor Li Mi, left general Li Zhan, and right general Li Liang, fled westward to Dunhuang.

古文：蒙逊入酒泉，禁侵掠，土民安堵。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊于是进入酒泉，他严明纪律，禁止士兵抢劫，人民生活安定。
English: Despondent, Mengxun then entered Jiuquan. He imposed strict discipline, forbade soldiers from robbing, and people's lives were stable.

古文：以宋繇为吏部郎中，委之选举；凉之旧臣有才望者，咸礼而且之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊任命宋繇为吏部郎中，掌管全国官员的任免和升迁调补。西凉旧有臣僚中有才干和声望的，都以礼对待他们并延聘任官。
English: Despondent, Mengxun appointed Song Hao as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, in charge of the appointment and dismissal of national officials and the promotion and transfer of officials. Xiliang treated the talented and prestigious former ministers with courtesy and appointed them as officials.

古文：以其子牧犍为洒泉太守。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊任命他的儿子沮渠牧犍为酒泉太守。
English: Deshu Mengxun appointed his son Deshu Muxun as Jiuquan governor.

古文：敦煌太守李恂，翻之弟也，与翻等弃敦煌奔北山。
现代文：西凉敦煌太守李恂，是李翻的弟弟，这时也与李翻等一道放弃敦煌，逃往北山。
English: Xiliang Dunhuang's grand marshal Li Qian, Li Qian's younger brother, also abandoned Dunhuang together with Li Qian and others and fled to Beishan.

古文：蒙逊以索嗣之子元绪行敦煌太守。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊任命索嗣的儿子索元绪代理敦煌太守。
English: Despondent, Mengxun appointed Suo's son, Suo Yuanxu, as acting governor of Dunhuang.

古文：蒙逊还姑臧，见凉太后尹氏而劳之，尹氏曰： 李氏为胡所灭，知复何言！ 
现代文：沮渠蒙逊返回都城姑臧，见到西凉国尹太后，极尽安抚慰问。尹太后说： 李氏家族为胡人所灭，还有什么可说。 
English: Dejected, Mengxun returned to the capital, Gucheng, and met the Empress Dowager Yin of Xiliang, who tried her best to comfort and console him. Empress Dowager Yin said, "The Li family was destroyed by the Hu people. What else can I say?"

古文：或谓尹氏曰： 今母子之命在人掌握，奈何傲之！
现代文：有人对尹太后说： 而今，你们母子的性命都握在别人手中，怎么可以如此傲慢！
English: Someone said to the Empress Dowager Yin: Now that the lives of your mother and son are in the hands of others, how can you be so arrogant!

古文：且国亡子死，曾无忧色，何也？ 
现代文：况且国家灭亡，儿子被杀，你却连一点忧色都没有，为什么？ 
English: Moreover, the country has perished, your son has been killed, but you are not even a little sad, why?

古文：尹氏曰： 存亡死生，皆有天命，奈何更如凡人，为儿女子之悲乎！
现代文：尹太后说： 存亡生死，都是上天的旨意，为什么要象普通人那样，作小儿女般的悲恸？
English: The Empress Dowager Yin said, "It is the will of Heaven to survive, live and die. Why should I mourn like a child, like an ordinary person?

古文：吾老妇人，国亡家破，岂可复惜馀生，为人臣妆乎！
现代文：我已经是个老太婆了，如今国破家亡，怎么可以爱惜余生，为人家臣妾呢！
English: I'm already an old woman, and now the country has fallen apart, how can I spare the rest of my life and be a vassal and a concubine!

古文：惟速死为幸耳。 
现代文：我只求快快死掉，就是万幸了。 
English: All I ask is that I die soon. That would be a blessing.

古文：蒙逊嘉而赦之，娶其女为牧犍妇。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊嘉许她的言行，赦免了她，并娶她的女儿做自己儿子沮渠牧犍的妻子。
English: Deshu Mengxun appreciated her words and deeds, pardoned her, and married her daughter to be the wife of his son Deshu Muxun.

古文：八月，辛未，追谥妃臧氏为敬皇后。
现代文：八月，辛未，刘裕追赠妃臧爱亲谥号敬皇后。
English: In August, Xin Wei and Liu Yu presented the honorary title of "Princess and Beloved" to the empress.

古文：癸酉，立王太子义符为皇太子。
现代文：癸酉，立王太子刘义符为皇太子。
English: Therefore, the crown prince Liu Yifu was appointed as the crown prince.

古文：闰月，壬午，诏晋帝诸陵悉署守卫。
现代文：闰月，壬午，刘裕下诏：东晋历代皇帝陵墓，都设置守卫。
English: Leap month, Renpo, Liu Yu's edict: the mausoleums of the emperors of the Eastern Jin Dynasty have all been guarded.

古文：九月，秦振武将军王基等袭河西王蒙逊胡园戍，俘二千馀人而还。
现代文：九月，西秦振武将军王基等在胡园戍地方袭击了北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊的部队，俘获二千余人而回。
English: In September, Western Qin Emperor Zhenwu's general Wang Ji and others attacked the troops of Western Qin Emperor Qianlong of the Beiliang River in Huyuan County, capturing more than two thousand people and returning.

古文：李恂在敦煌在惠政。索元绪粗险好杀，大失人和。
现代文：西凉敦煌太守李恂在任时，对百姓有德政，深得民心，而北凉新派的太守索元绪粗暴凶狠、阴险嗜杀，大失人心。
English: When Li Qian, the governor of Dunhuang in West Liang, was in office, he had a virtuous policy for the people and won the hearts of the people, while the governor of Soguanxing in North Liang, a new school, was rude, fierce, sinister and murderous, and lost the hearts of the people.

古文：郡人宋承、张弘信招恂。
现代文：敦煌人宋承、张弘秘密写信给前太守李恂，请他回来主政。
English: Song Cheng and Zhang Hong, both from Dunhuang, secretly wrote to the former grand marshal Li Xi, asking him to come back and preside over the government.

古文：冬，恂帅数十骑入敦煌，元绪东奔凉兴。
现代文：这年冬季，李恂率领骑兵数十人进入敦煌，索元绪向东逃往凉兴。
English: In the winter of that year, Li Yu led dozens of cavalrymen into Dunhuang, and Suo Yuanxu fled eastward to Liangxing.

古文：承等推恂为冠军将军、凉州刺史，改元永建。
现代文：宋承等推举李恂为冠军将军、凉州刺史，改年号为永建。
English: Song Cheng and others elected Li Jun as the champion general, Liangzhou stabbed history, and changed the year name to Yongjian.

古文：河西王蒙逊遣世子政德攻敦煌，恂闭城不战。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊派遣世子沮渠政德进攻敦煌，李恂等紧闭城门，不出来应战。
English: Beilianghe Xi Wang Dequan Mengxun sent his son Dequan Zhengde to attack Dunhuang, and Li Xuan and others closed the city gate and did not come out to fight.

古文：十二月，丁亥，可城羌酋狄温子帅三千馀家降魏。
现代文：十二月，丁亥，夏国所属杏城羌族部落酋长狄温子，率三千余家背叛夏国，投奔北魏。
English: In December, Dinghai, Diwanzi, the chief of the Ancheng Yi tribe belonging to Xia, led more than three thousand families to betray Xia and join the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：是岁，魏姚夫人卒，追谥昭哀皇后。
现代文：本年，北魏姚夫人去世。追赠谥号昭哀皇后。
English: This year, Mrs. Northern Wei Yao passed away. She was posthumously awarded the title of Empress Zhao Ying.

古文：高祖武皇帝永初二年
现代文：永初二年
English: In the second year of the Edo period

古文：春，正月，辛酉，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：春季，正月，辛酉，刘宋武帝到南郊圜丘，祭祀天神，大赦天下。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Hsinchu, Emperor Liu Songwu went to the southern suburb of Shaoqiu to offer sacrifices to Tenjin and grant amnesty to the world.

古文：裴子野论曰：夫郊祀天地，修岁事也。赦彼有罪，夫何为哉！
现代文：裴子野论曰：在南郊祭祀天神地神，是每年例行的典礼；刘裕却赦免有罪的人，不知他的用心何在！
English: Peizhino said: "In the southern suburbs, it is an annual ritual to offer sacrifices to the gods of heaven and earth. Liu Yu, however, pardoned the guilty. I don't know what his intentions were!

古文：以扬州刺史庐陵王义真为司徒，尚书仆射徐羡之为尚书令、扬州刺史，中书令傅亮为尚书仆射。
现代文：刘宋武帝任命扬州刺史庐陵王刘义真为司徒，尚书仆射徐羡之为尚书令、扬州刺史，中书令傅亮为尚书仆射。
English: Emperor Liu Songwu appointed Liu Yizhen, Yangzhou's scribe and king of the imperial mausoleum, as his tutor, and his scribe's servant Xu En as his scribe and Yangzhou's scribe, and Fu Liang, China's scribe, as his scribe's servant.

古文：辛未，魏主行如公阳。
现代文：辛未，北魏国主拓跋嗣一行前往公阳。
English: Xinwei, Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi and his party went to Gongyang.

古文：河西王蒙逊帅众二万攻李恂于敦煌。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊亲自率兵二万人攻打西凉李恂所据守的敦煌。
English: Mengxun, the Western King of the Beiliang River, personally led 20,000 soldiers to attack Dunhuang, which was defended by Li Yan of the Western Liang.

古文：秦王炽磐遣征北将军木弈干、辅国将军元基攻上邽，遇霖雨而还。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣征北将军乞伏木弈干、辅国将军乞伏元基攻打夏国所属的上，遇到连绵大雨，班师回朝。
English: The Western Qin Emperor Qibao sent the Northern Expeditionary General Qibao Muyi and the Auxiliary General Qibao Yuanji to attack Xia Province, but they encountered continuous heavy rain and returned to the North.

古文：三月，甲子，魏阳平王熙卒。
现代文：三月，甲子，北魏阳平王拓跋熙去世。
English: In March, Jia Zi, Northern Wei Yang Ping Wang Tuoba Xi passed away.

古文：魏主发代者六千人筑苑，东包白登，周三十馀里。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣征调代郡百姓六千人兴筑御花园，东面包括白登，周围三十余里。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent 6,000 people to build the imperial garden on behalf of the county. The eastern side includes Baidu, and the surrounding area is more than 30 miles.

古文：河西王蒙逊筑堤壅水以灌敦煌；李恂乞降，不许。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊兴筑长堤，采用水攻的方法，把敦煌城围困起来；李恂请求投降，沮渠蒙逊拒绝。
English: The Western King of the Beiliang River, Qiaoqiao Mengxun, built a long dike and besieged Dunhuang City by means of water attack; Li Qiao requested to surrender, but Qiaoqiao Mengxun refused.

古文：恂将宋承等举城降。恂自杀。
现代文：李恂手下的大将宋承等再次背叛，举献城池投降了沮渠蒙逊，李恂自杀。
English: The general Song Cheng, who was under the command of Li Hongzhi, betrayed him again, surrendered the city, and Li Hongzhi committed suicide.

古文：蒙逊屠其城，获恂弟子宝，囚于姑臧。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊下令屠城，生擒了李恂的侄儿李宝，送到姑臧囚禁起来。
English: Despondent, Mengxun ordered the slaughter of the city, took Li Yao's nephew Li Bao alive, and sent him to Gu Yao to be imprisoned.

古文：于是西域诸国皆诣蒙逊称臣朝贡。
现代文：于是，西域各国纷纷请求归附北凉，自称臣属，遣使朝贡。
English: As a result, countries in the western region requested to be annexed to the Northern Liang, claimed to be vassals, and sent tributes.

古文：夏，四月，己卯朔，诏所在淫祠自蒋子文以下皆除之；其先贤及以勋德立祠者，不在此例。
现代文：夏季，四月，己卯朔，刘宋武帝下诏：所有不正规的祠庙，包括蒋子文以下的祠庙，一律撤除。但是祭祀先辈圣贤，以及有功勋、有德望的先辈宗祠，仍可保留。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Liu Songwu issued an edict: all irregular ancestral temples, including those of Jiang Ziwen and below, were to be abolished. However, ancestral shrines dedicated to ancestors and sages, as well as ancestral shrines of ancestors with meritorious deeds and good reputations, could still be retained.

古文：吐谷浑王阿柴遣使降秦，秦王炽磐以阿柴为征西大将军、开府仪同三司、安州牧、白兰王。
现代文：吐谷浑王慕容阿柴派遣使臣向西秦投降。西秦国王乞伏炽磐任命慕容阿柴为征西大将军、开府仪同三司、安州牧、白兰王。
English: Murong Achai, the King of Tugu Hun, sent envoys to surrender to the Western Qin. The Western Qin king begged for the appointment of Murong Achai as the General of the Western Conquest, the Kefu Yi and the Three Departments, the Anzhou Pastoral, and the White Lantern King.

古文：六月，乙酉，魏主北巡至蟠羊山。秋，七月，西巡至河。
现代文：六月，乙酉，北魏国主拓跋嗣向北巡视，抵达蟠羊山；秋季，七月，拓跋嗣又向西巡视，抵达黄河。
English: In June, Tuoba Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went on a tour to the north and arrived at Qiangyang Mountain; in the autumn, in July, Tuoba Zi went on a tour to the west and arrived at the Yellow River.

古文：河西王蒙逊遣右卫将军沮渠鄯善、建节将军沮渠苟生帅众七千伐秦。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊派遣右卫将军沮渠鄯善、建节将军沮渠苟生率军七千人攻打西秦。
English: Mengxun, the Western King of the Beiliang River, dispatched the Right Guard General Deqiu Shuxen and the Jianjie General Deqiu Guosheng to lead an army of seven thousand to attack the Western Qin.

古文：秦王炽磐遣征北将军木弈干等师步骑五千拒之，败鄯善等于五涧，虏苟生，斩首二千而还。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣征北将军乞伏木弈干等率领步、骑兵五千人抵抗北凉军队的进攻，在五涧大败沮渠鄯善的军队，生擒沮渠苟生，斩首二千人，班师告捷。
English: The Western Qin King Qibuxiao sent the Northern Expeditionary General Qibuxiao Muyi Gan and others to lead the way. Five thousand cavalry resisted the attack of the Northern Liang army. In the Five Dynasties, the good army was defeated, the bad army was defeated, and two thousand people were beheaded. The class teacher was successful.

古文：初，帝以毒酒一甖授前琅邪郎中令张伟，使鸩零陵王，伟叹曰： 鸩君以求生，不如死！ 
现代文：当初，刘宋武帝曾把一瓦罐毒酒交给前琅邪郎中令张伟，让他毒死东晋废帝、改封为零陵王的司马德文，张伟叹息说： 毒杀君王而求活命，不如一死 。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Liu Songwu once gave a one-watt can of poisoned wine to the former warlord Zhang Wei, who asked him to poison Sima Dewen, the deposed emperor of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, who was renamed King of the Tombs. Zhang Wei sighed and said, "It is better to die than to poison the king and live."

古文：乃于道自饮而卒。
现代文：于是就在路上自饮而亡。
English: So he drank himself to death on the road.

古文：伟，邵之兄也。
现代文：张伟是张的哥哥。
English: Zhang Wei is Zhang's brother.

古文：太常褚秀之、侍中褚淡之，皆王之妃兄也。王每生男，帝辄令秀之兄弟方便杀之。
现代文：太常褚秀之、侍中褚淡之，二人都是零陵王的王妃褚灵秀的哥哥，司马德文的妻妾中，每每有人生下男孩，刘裕便命褚秀之兄弟趁便扼杀。
English: Both of them were brothers of the Ziling King's princess, Zilingxiu. When any of Sima Dewen's wives and concubines gave birth to a boy, Liu Yu would kill Zilingxiu's brother.

古文：王自逊位，深虑祸及，与褚妃共处一室，自煮食于床前，饮食所资，皆出褚妃，故宋人莫得伺其隙。
现代文：司马德文逊位后，他深恐自己也不免毒手，就与褚妃同住一室，在床前煮饭烧汤，饮食等所需用的都由褚妃亲手操办。所以刘裕的人一时没有机会下手。
English: After Sima Devonson's enthronement, he was deeply afraid that he would not be spared from the evil hand, so he lived in the same room with the concubine, cooked rice and soup in front of the bed, and the food and other necessities were handled by the concubine herself. Therefore, Liu Yu's people did not have a chance to start.

古文：九月，帝令淡之与兄右卫将军叔度往视妃，妃出就别室相见。
现代文：九月，刘宋武帝命令褚淡之与其兄右卫将军褚叔度前往探视他们的妹妹褚妃。
English: In September, Emperor Liu Songwu ordered Nie Tan Zhi and his brother, the right guard general Nie Xiu Du, to visit their sister, Nie Hui.

古文：兵人逾垣而入，进药于王。
现代文：褚妃出来到另一间房子与二兄相见。伏兵翻墙而入，把毒药递给零陵王司马德文。
English: Gongfei went out to another house to meet with the second brother. The ambushed soldiers broke through the wall and handed the poison to the tomb of King Sima Dewen.

古文：王不肯饮，曰： 佛教，自杀者不复得人身。 
现代文：司马德文不肯饮服，说： 佛教的教义，自杀而死的，再世投胎时，将不能得到人身。 
English: Sima Dewen refused to drink and said, "According to the Buddhist doctrine, if you die by suicide, you will not be able to receive a human body when you are reincarnated.

古文：兵人以被掩杀之。
现代文：士卒一拥而上，用被蒙住司马德文的头，将他闷死。
English: The officers swarmed onto him and used the head of the blindfolded Sima Devin to choke him to death.

古文：帝帅百官临于朝堂三日。
现代文：刘裕率领文武百官亲临朝堂哭泣哀悼三天。
English: Liu Yu led hundreds of military and civilian officials to come to the Imperial Palace to weep and mourn for three days.

古文：庚戌，魏主还宫。
现代文：庚戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣回宫。
English: Geng Zheng, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to the palace.

古文：冬，十月，己亥，诏以河西王蒙逊为镇军大将军、开府仪同三司、凉州刺史。
现代文：冬季，十月，己亥，刘宋武帝下诏，任命北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊为镇军大将军、开府仪同三司、凉州刺史。
English: In winter, October, Ji Hai, Liu Songwu Emperor issued an edict, appointing Beilianghe Xi Wang Dequ Mengxun as the general of the town army, Kaifu Yi Tong Three Division, and Liangzhou Shishi.

古文：己亥，魏主如代。
现代文：己亥，北魏国主拓跋嗣前往代郡。
English: Ji Hai, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Daigun.

古文：十一月，辛亥，葬晋恭帝于冲平陵，帝帅百官瞻送。
现代文：十一月，辛亥，刘宋将晋恭帝司马德文安葬于冲平陵，刘宋武帝亲自率领文武百官护送灵柩。
English: In November, Xinhai, Liu Song buried the Emperor of the Jin Dynasty, Sima Dewen, in Chongping Mausoleum. Liu Songwu personally led hundreds of officials to escort the coffin.

古文：十二月，丙申，魏主西巡，至云中。
现代文：十二月，丙申，北魏国主拓跋嗣视察西部边防，抵达云中。
English: In December, Bishen Tuoba, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, inspected the western border and arrived in Yunzhong.

古文：秦王炽磐遣征西将军孔子等帅骑二万击契汗秃真于罗种。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐派遣征西将军乞伏孔子等率领骑兵二万人，袭击匈奴部落酋长契汗秃真据守的罗川。
English: The king of Western Qin, Qibao, dispatched the western conquering general, Qibao Confucius, and others, leading 20,000 cavalry, to attack Luochuan, which was defended by the Hun tribal chieftain, Qikhan Baldzan.

古文：河西王蒙逊所署晋昌太守唐契据郡叛，蒙逊遣世子政德讨之。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊所属的晋昌太守唐契据郡叛变，沮渠蒙逊派遣其世子沮渠政德讨伐叛军。
English: The western king of the Beiliang River, Deshu Mengxun, who belonged to the governor of Jinchang, Tang Qiji County, rebelled. Deshu Mengxun sent his son, Deshu Zhengde, to fight against the rebels.

古文：契，瑶之子也。
现代文：唐契是唐瑶的儿子。
English: Tang Qi was the son of Tang Yao.

古文：上之为宋公也，谢瞻为宋台中书侍郎，其弟晦为右卫将军。
现代文：刘宋武帝刘裕还是东晋的宋公时，谢瞻为宋国的中书侍郎，他的弟弟谢晦为右卫将军。
English: When Emperor Liu Yu of the Eastern Jin Dynasty was still Emperor Song of the Eastern Jin Dynasty, Xie Zhan was the secretary of the Song Dynasty, and his brother Xie Hui was the right guard general.

古文：时晦权遇已重，自彭城还都迎家，兵客辐凑，门巷填咽。
现代文：当时谢晦的权势和地位已经很重，他自彭城回京迎接家属，宾客们从四面八方涌来，车马盈门堵塞巷口。
English: At that time, Xie Hui's power and status were already very strong. He returned to Beijing from Pengcheng to welcome his family members. Guests came from all over, and cars and horses jammed the street.

古文：瞻在家，惊骇，谓晦曰： 汝名位未多，而人归趣乃尔！
现代文：谢瞻在家看到如此情形不胜惊骇，对谢晦说： 你的声望和职位并不很高，人们却如此奉承你！
English: Xie Zhan was shocked to see such a situation at home, and said to Xie Hui: Your reputation and position are not very high, but people flatter you so much!

古文：吾家素以恬退为业，不愿干豫时事，交游不过亲朋。
现代文：你们谢家一向淡泊权利，不愿干预朝政，交游的人不是亲戚便是朋友。
English: You Xie family have always been indifferent to the right to stay, unwilling to interfere in the politics of the court, and the people you travel with are either relatives or friends.

古文：而汝遂势倾朝野，此岂门户之福邪！ 
现代文：而你却权倾朝野，这哪里是家门之福！ 
English: And yet you have thrown your power to the winds. What a blessing for the family!

古文：乃以篱隔门庭曰： 吾不忍见此。 
现代文：于是，他用篱笆把两家门庭隔开说： 我不忍心见到这种场面。 
English: So he put up a fence to separate the two courtyards and said: "I can't bear to see this.

古文：乃还彭城，言于宋公曰： 臣本素士，父祖位不过二千石。弟年始三十，志用凡近，荣冠台府，位任显密。
现代文：等到回到彭城，谢瞻对宋公刘裕说： 我本出身于清贫之家，祖、父的官禄不过二千石，我的弟弟谢晦年方三十，志向平庸，才能不高，却荣居高位，地位格外尊崇，掌理机要。
English: When he returned to Pengcheng, Xie Zhan said to Song Gong Liu Yu: I originally came from a poor family, my father's and grandfather's official salary was only two thousand koku, my brother Xie Yingfang was thirty years old, his ambition was mediocre, his talent was not high, but he was in a high position, his status was particularly respected, and he needed to be in charge.

古文：福过灾生，其应无远；特乞降黜，以保衰门。 
现代文：享福太过，灾难必生，应验不远，请求您贬降谢晦的官阶，以保存我们衰微的家门！ 
English: Happiness is too much, disaster is inevitable, fulfillment is not far away, I ask you to demote Xie Yue's official rank to save our fading family!

古文：前后屡陈之。
现代文：此后又多次向刘裕陈请。
English: After that, he repeatedly asked Liu Yuchen for help.

古文：晦或以朝廷密事语瞻，瞻故向亲旧陈说，用为戏笑，以绝其言。
现代文：谢晦有时把朝廷中的机密告诉谢瞻，谢瞻就故意传给亲戚朋友，作为取笑的谈资，目的在于使谢晦闭口。
English: Xie Hui sometimes told Xie Zhan the secrets of the imperial court, and Xie Zhan deliberately passed them on to relatives and friends as a source of ridicule, with the aim of silencing Xie Hui.

古文：及上即位，晦以佐命功，位任益重，瞻愈忧惧。
现代文：宋公刘裕即位后，谢晦因有辅助开国的功劳，官位更高，责任愈重，谢瞻也为此更加忧惧。
English: After the enthronement of Song Emperor Liu Yu, Xie Yu, because of his contribution to the founding of the country, had a higher official rank and heavier responsibilities. Xie Zhan was more worried about this.

古文：是岁，瞻为豫章太守，遇病不疗。
现代文：这年，谢瞻担任豫章太守，患病不治。
English: In this year, Xie Zhan served as the governor of Yuzhang and died of illness.

古文：临终，遗晦书曰： 吾得启体幸全，亦何所恨！
现代文：临终前，他留一封遗嘱给谢晦，说： 我幸能保全一身，还有什么恨事？
English: Before his death, he left a will to Xie Yu, saying: I am fortunate to be able to save myself, what else is there to hate?

古文：弟思自勉励，为国为家。 
现代文：你要自思勉励，为国为家。 
English: You have to think for yourself and work hard for your country and family.

古文：高祖武皇帝永初三年
现代文：永初三年
English: The first three years of the Edo period

古文：春，正月，甲辰朔，魏主自云中西巡，至屋窦城。
现代文：春季正月，甲辰朔，北魏国主拓跋嗣从云中出发继续向西巡视，抵达屋窦城。
English: In the first month of spring, at the stroke of midnight, Tuoba Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, set out from Yunzhong to continue his inspection to the west and arrived at Yadou City.

古文：癸丑，以徐羡之为司空、录尚书事，刺史如故；江州刺史王弘为卫将军、开府仪同三司；中领军谢晦为领军将军兼散骑常侍，入直殿省，总统宿卫。
现代文：癸丑，刘宋武帝任命徐羡之为司空、录尚书事，继续兼任扬州刺史。任命江州刺史王弘为卫将军、开府仪同三司；中领军谢晦为领军将军兼散骑常侍，入宫值班，总管宫廷安全保卫事务。
English: At the same time, Emperor Liu Songwu appointed Xu Xian as the Secretary of the Air Force, recorded the records, and continued to serve as the Yangzhou Military Historian. He appointed the Jiangzhou Military Historian Wang Hong as the General of the Guards and the three officers of the Kaifu Rites and Decrees; the middle leader Xie Yu was the leading general and the cavalryman, and was on duty when entering the palace, and was in charge of the palace security affairs.

古文：徐羡之起自布衣，又无术学，直以志力局度。一旦居廓庙，朝野推服，咸谓有宰臣之望。
现代文：徐羡之由平民起家，又没有学问，但有很大的志向和气度，一旦居于高位，掌理国家大权，朝野上下，都推崇佩服，都认为他有宰相的声望。
English: Xu Enzhi came from a commoner and had no education, but he had great ambition and dignity. Once he was in a high position, he was in charge of the country's power, and people from all walks of life respected and admired him. They all thought he had the prestige of a prime minister.

古文：沈密寡言，不以忧喜见色。颇工弈棋，观戏常若未解，当世倍以此推之。
现代文：徐羡之平时沉默寡言，喜怒不形于色，精于奕棋，但观看别人对局，又好像什么都不懂，当时的人因此加倍推崇他。
English: Xu Enzhi was usually taciturn, indifferent to joy and anger, and good at chess, but when he watched others play, he didn't seem to understand anything, so people at the time doubly respected him.

古文：傅亮、蔡廓常言： 徐公晓万事，安异同。 
现代文：傅亮、蔡廓常说： 徐公通晓万事，善于调解纠纷。 
English: Fu Liang and Cai Kuo often said: Xu Gong is knowledgeable about everything and is good at mediating disputes.

古文：尝与傅亮、谢晦宴聚，亮、晦才学辩博，羡之风度详整，时然后言。
现代文：徐羡之曾经与傅亮、谢晦酒筵欢聚，傅亮、谢晦才学渊博，善于辞辩，徐羡之风度庄重严肃，在适当的时候才发言。
English: Xu Enzhi had a convivial get-together with Fu Liang and Xie Yao. Fu Liang and Xie Yao were well-educated and good at debate, while Xu Enzhi had a dignified and serious demeanor and only spoke at the appropriate time.

古文：郑鲜之叹曰： 观徐、傅言论，不复以学问为长。 
现代文：奉常官郑鲜之曾叹息地说： 观察徐羡之、傅亮的言论，已经不再是以学问见长了。 
English: Zheng Xianzhi, a magistrate, once said with a sigh: Observing the remarks of Xu Xianzhi and Fu Liang is no longer a matter of learning.

古文：秦征西将军孔子等大破契汗秃真，获男女二万口，牛羊五十馀万头。
现代文：西秦征西将军乞伏孔子等大破匈奴部落酋长契汗秃真的军队，俘获男女共二万人，牛羊五十余万头。
English: The Western Qin general Zeng Xi entreated Confucius and others to defeat the army of the Hun tribal chieftain Che Khan Bal Zhen, capturing a total of twenty thousand men and women, and more than half a million cattle and sheep.

古文：秃真帅骑数千西走，其别部树奚帅户五千降秦。
现代文：契汗秃真仅率数千人向西逃走。另外一支匈奴部落酋长契汗树奚，率领五千户人家投降了西秦。
English: Chekhan Baldzan alone led thousands of people to flee to the west. Another Hun tribal chieftain, Chekhan Shuang, led five thousand families to surrender to the Western Qin.

古文：二月，丁丑，诏分豫州淮以东为南豫州，治历阳，以彭城王义康为刺史。
现代文：二月，丁丑，刘宋武帝下诏，分割豫州淮河以东土地为南豫州，州治设在历阳，任命彭城王刘义康为南豫州刺史。
English: In February, Emperor Dingwu and Liu Songwu issued an edict to divide the land east of the Huaihe River in Henan Province into South Henan Province, with the provincial government located in Liyang. Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was appointed as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：又分荆州十郡置湘州，治临湘，以左卫将军张邵为刺史。
现代文：又分割荆州十个郡，建立湘州，州治设在临湘，任命左卫将军张为湘州刺史。
English: He also divided Jingzhou into ten counties, established Hunan Province, and set up the provincial government in Linxiang. He appointed General Zhang to be the chief historian of Hunan Province.

古文：丙戌，魏主还宫。
现代文：丙戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣回宫。
English: Pu Yi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to the palace.

古文：三月，上不豫，太尉长沙王道怜、司空徐羡之、尚书仆射傅亮、领军将军谢晦、护军将军檀道济并入侍医药。
现代文：三月，刘宋武帝病重，太尉长沙王刘道怜、司空徐羡之、尚书仆射傅亮、领军将军谢晦、护军将军檀道济一道进宫，侍侯刘裕治疗服药。
English: In March, Emperor Liu Songwu was gravely ill. Liu Daorai, the Prince of Changsha, Liu Daorai, the Empress Dowager, Xu Enzhi, the Empress Dowager, Shang Shufu Liang, General Xie Hui, the leader of the army, and General Dang Daoji, the protector of the army, entered the palace together, and Liu Yu, the attendant, took medicine for treatment.

古文：群臣请祈祷神祇，上不许，唯使侍中谢方明以疾告宗庙而已。
现代文：朝中大臣们请求向神灵祈祷，刘裕不许，只派侍中谢方明到宗庙焚香，把病情向祖先报告。
English: The ministers of the two Koreas requested to pray to the gods, but Liu Yu did not allow it. He only sent the aide-de-camp, Xie Fangming, to the ancestral temple to burn incense and report the illness to the ancestors.

古文：上性不信奇怪，微时多符瑞，及贵，史官审以所闻，上拒而不答。
现代文：刘裕一向不信神怪，当他还是一个平民的时候，曾有许多祥兆，等到后来大贵，史官们向他查证传闻，刘裕都拒而不答。
English: Liu Yu always did not believe in gods and monsters. When he was still a commoner, there were many auspicious signs. Later, when he became a great nobleman, historians checked rumors with him, but Liu Yu refused to answer.

古文：檀道济出为镇北将军、南兗州刺史，镇广陵，悉监淮南诸军。
现代文：檀道济出任镇北将军、南兖州刺史，镇守广陵，兼领淮南各路军队。
English: Dang Daoji served as the general of Zhenbei, the chief historian of Nanluozhou, the town guard of Guangling, and the leader of all the armies of Huainan.

古文：皇太子多狎群小，谢晦言于上曰： 陛下春秋既高，宜思存万世，神器至重，不可使负荷非才。 
现代文：皇太子刘义符常和一些奸佞小人厮混，谢晦曾对刘宋武帝说： 陛下年事已高，应考虑如何使大业万世长存，帝位至关重要，不能交给没有才能的人。 
English: Crown Prince Liu Yifu often mingled with some crooks and villains. Xie Yu once said to Emperor Liu Songwu: Your Majesty is very old, you should consider how to make your great cause last forever. The imperial throne is very important and cannot be handed over to someone without talent.

古文：上曰： 庐陵何如？ 
现代文：刘裕问道： 你看庐陵王刘义真如何？ 
English: Liu Yu asked: What do you think of Liu Yizhen, the King of Fuling?

古文：晦曰： 臣请观焉。 
现代文：谢晦说： 且容我观察观察！ 
English: Xie Yu said: And let me observe observe!

古文：出造庐陵王义真，义真盛欲与谈，晦不甚答。
现代文：出宫后即去拜访庐陵王刘义真。刘义真盛情款待谢晦，并想要与他长谈，谢晦支吾其辞，不愿答话。
English: After leaving the palace, he went to visit Liu Yizhen, the king of Fuling. Liu Yizhen treated Xie Yu with great hospitality and wanted to have a long talk with him. Xie Yu hesitated and did not want to answer.

古文：还曰： 德轻于才，非人主也。 
现代文：回宫对宋武帝刘裕说： 德行低于才能，不是人主呵。 
English: Huigong said to Liu Yu, the Emperor of Song, "Virtue is inferior to talent, it is not the master.

古文：丁未，出义真为都督南豫、豫、雍、司、秦、并六州诸军事、车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史。
现代文：丁未，刘裕命刘义真出任都督南豫、豫、雍、司、秦、并六州诸军事及车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史。
English: Ding Wei, Liu Yu, and Liu Yizhen were appointed as the governors of Nanyu, Yu, Yong, Si, and Qin, as well as the military and cavalry generals of the six states, the governor of Kaifu and the three departments, and the governor of South Yuzhou.

古文：是后，大州率加都督，多者或至五十州，不可复详载矣。
现代文：从此以后，大州州牧官职之上又加都督之职便成定例，有的都督所辖，最多达到五十个州，已无法详细列出。
English: Since then, it has become customary to add the post of governor-general on top of the post of grand-governor-general. Some governors-general have jurisdiction over up to fifty states, which cannot be listed in detail.

古文：帝疾瘳，己未，大赦。
现代文：刘宋武帝大病稍愈，己未，大赦天下。
English: Emperor Liu Songwu has recovered slightly from his serious illness and has been pardoned.

古文：秦、雍流民南入梁州；庚申，遣使送绢万匹，且漕荆、雍之谷以赈之。
现代文：秦州、雍州逃难的流民南下进入了刘宋所辖的梁州；庚申，刘宋武帝派遣使臣送一万匹绢，并且将荆州、雍州二处的谷米漕运到梁州，赈济那里的流民。
English: The refugees from Qinzhou and Yongzhou fled south and entered Liangzhou, which was under the jurisdiction of Liu Song. In Genshin, Emperor Liu Songwu sent an envoy to send ten thousand donkeys, and transported grain and rice from two places in Jingzhou and Yongzhou to Liangzhou to help the refugees there.

古文：刁逵之诛也，其子弥亡命。
现代文：当初，刁逵伏诛，他的儿子刁弥逃亡。
English: At first, his son Jimi ran away.

古文：辛酉，弥帅数十人入京口城，太尉留府司马陆仲元击斩之。
现代文：辛酉，刁弥率领数十人攻入京口，太尉留府司马陆仲元迎击，并斩杀了刁弥。
English: Soon after, Kimiya led dozens of people to storm into Kyoguchi, where he was met by the Taijo (lieutenant) who stayed behind as the prefectural governor, Malu Nakamoto, and killed Kimiya.

古文：乙丑，魏河南王曜卒。
现代文：乙丑，北魏河南王拓跋曜去世。
English: Second Ugly, Northern Wei and Henan Wang Tuoba passed away on Saturday.

古文：夏，四月，甲戌，魏立皇子焘为太平王，拜相国，加大将军；丕为乐平王，弥为安定王，范为乐安王，健为永昌王，崇为建宁王，俊为新兴王。
现代文：夏季四月，甲戌，北魏国主拓跋嗣封皇子拓跋焘为太平王，拜授相国，加授大将军；封皇子拓跋丕为乐平王、拓跋弥为安定王、拓跋范为乐安王、拓跋健为永昌王、拓跋崇为建宁王、拓跋俊为新兴王。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Jiajing of the Northern Wei Dynasty made Emperor Tuoba's heir, Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba, the King of Taiping, conferred the title of "Father of the Nation" and "Grand General"; Emperor Tuoba's sons Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Leping, Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's son Emperor Tuoba's

古文：乙亥，诏封仇池公杨盛为武都王。
现代文：乙亥，刘宋武帝下诏封仇池公杨盛为武都王。
English: Eihei, Emperor Liu Songwu issued an edict to crown Prince Yang Sheng as the King of Wudu.

古文：秦王炽磐以折冲将军乞伏是辰为西胡校尉。筑列浑城于汁罗以镇之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐，任命折冲将军乞伏是辰为西胡校尉，并在汁罗兴筑列浑城对胡人加以镇抚。
English: The King of Western Qin besieged Blazing Rock, appointed General Orichon to be the captain of Western Hu, and built the city of Hun in Ju Luo to pacify the Hu people.

古文：五月，帝疾甚，召太子诫之曰： 檀道济虽有干略，而无远志，非如兄韶有难御之气也。
现代文：五月，刘宋武帝病重，他把太子刘义符召到床前，告诫他说： 檀道济虽有才干，精于谋略，却无野心，不像他的哥哥檀道韶，有一种难以驾御的气质。
English: In May, Emperor Liu Songwu was gravely ill. He summoned Prince Liu Yifu to his bedside and admonished him, "Though he has talent and is good at strategizing, he has no ambition. Unlike his brother, he has a temperament that is difficult to control.

古文：徐羡之、傅亮，当无异图。
现代文：徐羡之、傅亮，当不会有其他企图。
English: Xu Enzhi, Fu Liang, when there will be no other attempts.

古文：谢晦数从征伐，颇识机变，若有同异，必此人也。 
现代文：谢晦多次随我南北征战，善于随机应变，将来如果有问题，一定是他。 
English: Xie Yao has followed me to the battlefield many times, and is more familiar with the power changes. If there is someone who does not obey, it must be this person.

古文：又为手诏曰： 后世若有幼主，朝事一委宰相，母后不烦临朝。 
现代文：然后，刘裕又亲笔写下遗诏： 后世如果出现年幼的君主，朝中政事一概委托给宰相，皇太后用不着临朝主政。 
English: Then, Liu Yu personally wrote down the last will and testament: In the future, if there is a young monarch, the political affairs of the dynasty will be entrusted to the prime minister, and the empress dowager will not have to preside over the dynasty.

古文：司空徐羡之、中书令傅亮、领军将军谢晦、镇北将军檀道济同被顾命。
现代文：司空徐羡之、中书令傅亮、领军将军谢晦、镇北将军檀道济，共同接受遗命。
English: Siku Xu Enzhi, Zhongshu Ling Fu Liang, the leading general Xie Yu, and Zhenbei General Dang Daoji jointly accepted the will.

古文：癸亥，帝殂于西殿。
现代文：癸亥，刘宋武帝刘裕在西殿去世。
English: Emperor Wu of Song and Emperor Wu of Liu died in the West Hall.

古文：帝清简寡欲，严整有法度，被服居处，俭于布素，游宴甚稀，嫔御至少。
现代文：刘裕生前清心寡欲，生活简朴，起居有常，严整有度。衣服和住所都很朴素，游览欢宴也次数很少，后宫嫔妃也不多。
English: When Liu Yu was alive, his heart was pure and his desires were few. His life was simple, he lived a regular life, and he was very neat and tidy. His clothes and residence were very simple, the number of tours and banquets were few, and there were not many concubines in his harem.

古文：尝得后秦高祖从女，有盛宠，颇以废事；谢晦微谏，即时遣出。
现代文：他曾经获得后秦文桓帝姚兴的侄女，对她倍加宠爱，并因此耽误了政事。谢晦稍加劝谏，他立即把姚妃遣送出宫。
English: He had once obtained the niece of Yao Xing, the Emperor Qin Wenhuan, and was doubly fond of her, and thus delayed the political affairs. With a little persuasion, he immediately sent Yao Fei out of the palace.

古文：财帛皆在外府，内无私藏。
现代文：刘裕的财产全放在国库，宫内没有私藏。
English: Their belongings are all outside the prefecture, and there is not a single private collection inside.

古文：岭南尝献入筒细布，一端八丈，帝恶其精丽劳人，即付有司弹太守，以布还之，并制岭南禁作此布。
现代文：岭南曾经进贡过一种筒装细布，一筒竟能容纳八丈。刘裕嫌它过于精美华丽，耗费人力，于是他命令有关部门弹劾岭南太守，把进贡的细布还给当地，并且亲自下令禁止岭南织做这种细布。
English: Lingnan once paid tribute to a kind of tubular fabric, one can actually hold eight jars. Liu Yu disliked it because it was too exquisite and gorgeous, consuming manpower, so he ordered the relevant departments to impeach the governor of Lingnan, return the tribute fabric to the local area, and personally ordered to prohibit Lingnan weaving to make this fabric.

古文：公主出适，遣送不过二十万，无锦绣之物。
现代文：公主出嫁，嫁妆不过二十万，另外再也没有锦绣等精品。
English: The princess marries, the dowry is only two hundred thousand, and there are no more exquisite items such as brocade.

古文：内外奉禁，莫敢为侈靡。
现代文：宫内宫外，都严奉禁约，没有人敢奢侈浪费。
English: Both inside and outside the palace are strictly forbidden, and no one dares to be extravagant.

古文：太子即皇帝位，年十七，大赦，尊皇太后曰太皇太后，立妃司马氏为皇后。
现代文：皇太子刘义符即皇帝位，年仅十七岁，下令大赦，尊皇太后萧文寿为太皇太后；封太子妃司马茂英为皇后。
English: Crown Prince Liu Yifu, who was only seventeen years old when he ascended to the throne, ordered an amnesty. His wife, Empress Dowager Xiao Wenshou, was named Empress Dowager; the wife of the crown prince, Sima Maoying, was named Empress.

古文：后，晋恭帝女海盐公主也。
现代文：司马茂英是晋恭帝的女儿海盐公主。
English: Sima Maoying was the daughter of Emperor Jinguang and Princess Haiyan.

古文：魏主服寒食散，频年药发，灾异屡见，颇以自忧。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣，一直服用寒食散，一连几年，药性发作，天上变异与地上灾难也屡屡出现，他自己深感忧虑。
English: Tuoba Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, had been taking cold medicine for several years in a row. He was deeply worried about the occurrence of drug-induced seizures, as well as the frequent occurrence of heavenly mutations and earthly disasters.

古文：遣中使密问白马公崔浩曰： 属者日食赵、代之分。朕疾弥年不愈，恐一旦不讳，诸子并少，将若之何？
现代文：于是派宦官秘密询问白马公崔浩说： 最近，赵、代地区多次发生日食，而朕的病又多年不愈，我担心如果我一旦去世，皇子们还都年幼，那该如何是好？
English: So they sent an eunuch to secretly inquire about Baima Gong Cui Hao and said: Recently, there have been many solar eclipses in the Zhao and Dai regions, and my illness has not healed for many years. I am worried that if I die, the princes are still young, so what should I do?

古文：其为我思身后之计。 
现代文：请你为我考虑考虑身后的办法。 
English: Please think about what you can do for me.

古文：浩曰： 陛下春秋富盛，行就平愈；必不得已，请陈瞽言。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 陛下正值壮年，您的病很快就会痊愈。如果您一定要听听我的意见，那我就说几句不一定合适的话。
English: Cui Hao replied, "Your Majesty is in the prime of life, and your illness will soon be cured. If you must listen to my opinion, then I will say a few words that may not be appropriate.

古文：自圣代龙兴，不崇储贰，是以永兴之始，社稷几危。
现代文：自从我们魏国创立以来，一向不注重选立储君。所以永兴初年发生的宫廷巨变，国家几乎倾覆。
English: Since the founding of our state of Wei, we have never paid attention to the selection of the crown prince. Therefore, the great change in the court that occurred in the first year of Yongxing almost toppled the country.

古文：今宜早建东宫。选贤公卿以为师傅，左右信臣以为宾友；入总万机，出抚戎政。
现代文：现在我们亟待要做的就是早早建东宫立太子，遴选贤明的公卿做太子的师傅，让您左右亲信的大臣作他的宾客和朋友；让太子在京师时主持朝政，出京时则统率军队安抚百姓，讨伐敌人。
English: What we urgently need to do now is to establish the crown prince of the Eastern Palace at an early date, select a wise courtier to be the prince's teacher, and let your trusted ministers be his guests and friends; let the prince preside over the government when he is in Beijing, and lead the army to pacify the people and fight the enemy when he is out of Beijing.

古文：如此，则陛下可以优游无为，颐神养寿。
现代文：如果这样，陛下您就可以身心悠闲，不必亲自处理政事，在宫中颐养天年。
English: If so, Your Majesty, you can relax your mind and body, do not have to deal with political affairs in person, and enjoy your golden years in the palace.

古文：万岁之后。国有成主，民有所归，奸宄息望，祸无自生矣。
现代文：陛下百年之后，国家有确定的君主，百姓亦有所归附，奸佞之徒不敢再生其他企图，灾祸也无从出现。
English: Your Majesty, after a hundred years, the country has a certain monarch, and the people have also acceded, and the traitors dare not make other attempts, and the disaster cannot appear.

古文：皇子焘年将周星，明睿温和，立子以长，礼之大经，若必待成人然后择之，倒错天伦，则召乱之道也。 
现代文：皇子拓跋焘，年将十二岁，聪明睿智，性情温和，以长子立为太子，是礼制的最高原则，如果一定要等到他们长大成人，再在他们中间选择太子，那就很可能废长立幼，使天伦倒错，从而召致天下大乱。 
English: Prince Tuobao, who will be twelve years old, is clever, wise, and gentle. It is the highest principle of etiquette to appoint the eldest son as the prince. If it is necessary to wait until they become adults and then choose the prince among them, it is likely to waste the elder and the younger, make the heavenly family wrong, and thus cause great chaos in the world.

古文：魏主复以问南平公长孙嵩。
现代文：北魏国主又就立太子的问题征询南平公长孙嵩的意见。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign also sought the opinion of Sun Song, Prince of Nanping, on the issue of establishing a crown prince.

古文：对曰： 立长则顺，置贤则人服；焘长且贤，天所命也。 
现代文：长孙嵩回答说： 立长为储君，名正言顺，选贤为太子，则人心信服。拓跋焘既是长子又很贤能，这是上天的旨意。 
English: The eldest grandson, Song, replied, "If you choose a prince, the people will be convinced. It is God's will that Tuobao is both the eldest son and very capable.

古文：帝从之，立太平王焘为皇太子，使之居正殿临朝，为国副主。以长孙嵩及山阳公奚斤、北新公安同为左辅，坐东厢，西面；崔浩与太尉穆观、散骑常侍代人丘堆为右弼，坐西厢，东面；百官总己以焉 帝避居西宫，时隐而窥之，听其决断，大悦，谓会议臣曰： 嵩宿德旧臣，历事四世，功存社稷；斤辩捷智谋，名闻遐迩；同晓解俗情，明练于事；观达于政要，识吾旨趣；浩博闻强识，精察天人；霍虽无大用，然在公专谨。
现代文：北魏国主同意他的意见，于是，下诏立太平王拓跋焘为皇太子，并让他坐在正殿，处理朝中大事，作为国家的副主，北魏国主又任命长孙嵩及山阳公奚斤、北新公安同等为左辅官，座位设在东厢，面向西方；命白马公崔浩，太尉穆观，散骑常侍代郡人丘堆为右辅官，座位设在西厢，面向东方，共同辅弼太子。百官则居于左右辅官之下，听候差遣。拓跋嗣则避居西宫，但亦不时悄悄出来，从旁窥视，观察太子和辅臣如何裁断政事。他听后非常高兴，对左右侍臣们说： 长孙嵩是德高望重的老臣。曾经事奉过四代皇帝，功在国家；奚斤足智多谋，能言善辩，远近闻名；安同通晓世情，了解民间疾苦，处事明达干练；穆观深通政务，能领悟我的旨意；崔浩博闻强记，精于观察天象和民情；丘堆虽无大才，但他专心为公，谨慎处世。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty agreed with his opinion. Therefore, he issued the following edict to make Taiping King Tuobao the crown prince, and let him sit in the main hall to deal with the major events between the North and the Middle East. As the deputy ruler of the country, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty also appointed Chosun Song, Sanyang Gong, and Northern New Public Security to be the left assistant officers, with seats in the east compartment, facing west; and ordered Bai Ma Gong Cui Hao, Taifu Mu Guan, and Zang Jie, who often served as the deputy of the county people, to be the right assistant officers, with seats in

古文：以此六人辅相太子，吾与汝曹巡行四境，伐叛柔服，足以得志于天下矣。 
现代文：用这样六个人来辅佐太子，我跟你们只要巡视四方边境，对叛逆加以讨伐，对臣服者加以安抚，就足以称霸天下了。
English: With such six people to assist the crown prince, I and you only need to patrol the four borders, crack down on the rebels, and pacify the subjects, and it will be enough to dominate the world.

古文：嵩实姓拔拔，斤姓达奚，观姓丘穆陵，堆姓丘敦。
现代文：公孙嵩本姓 拔拔 ，奚斤姓 达奚 ，穆观姓 丘穆陵 ，丘堆姓 丘敦 。
English: Gongsun Song's family name was Baibab, Gongjin's family name was Dajun, Muqun's family name was Qumuling, and Qudun's family name was Qudong.

古文：是时，魏之群臣出于代北者，姓多重复，及高祖迁洛，始皆改之。旧史患其烦杂难知，故皆从后姓以就简易，今从之。
现代文：当时，北魏的文武官员，凡出身于代郡以北的，仍保持多音节的复姓，等到孝文帝拓跋宏迁都洛阳以后，才开始改为单姓，旧史书嫌恶复姓繁复难记，所以在叙述改姓前的事时，也采用改姓后的姓，以求简易。本书也采用这个做法。
English: At that time, the civil and military officials of the Northern Wei Dynasty, all of whom were born in the north of Dai County, still maintained the multi-syllable compound surname. It was not until Emperor Xiaowen moved the capital to Luoyang that they began to change to a single surname. The old history books disliked the complicated and difficult to remember compound surname, so when describing the events before the change of surname, they also used the surname after the change of surname, in order to be simple. This book also uses this approach.

古文：魏主又以典东西部刘絜、门下奏事代人古弼、直郎徒河卢鲁元忠谨恭勤，使之给侍东宫，分典机要，宣纳辞令。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣又因为典东西部官刘，门下奏事代郡人古弼、直郎徒河人卢鲁元等人忠心谨慎，节俭勤劳，分派他们为东宫官属，分别负责掌管机要，传达政令和报告。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, also because of the loyalty, prudence, frugality and hard work of Liu, the East and West Division of the Eastern and Western Divisions, Gu Zi, the county representative of the Song Dynasty, and Lu Luyuan, the Jiro of the Tuxhe Dynasty, he assigned them to be the official subordinates of the East Palace, respectively responsible for controlling the machine, conveying decrees and reports.

古文：太子聪明，有大度。群臣时奏所疑，帝曰： 此非我所知，当决之汝曹国主也。 
现代文：太子拓跋焘聪明，胸襟开阔，文武百官有时就疑难问题请示拓跋嗣，拓跋嗣就说： 这个我不知道，去让你们的国主决定吧！ 
English: Prince Tuoba was clever and open-minded. Sometimes, the military and civilian officials would ask Tuoba for advice on difficult issues. Tuoba would say, "I don't know, let your sovereign decide!"

古文：六月，壬申，以尚书仆射傅亮为中书监、尚书令，以领军将军谢晦领中书令，侍中谢方明为丹阳尹。
现代文：六月，壬申，刘宋任命尚书仆射傅亮为中书监、尚书令，领军将军谢晦为中书令，侍中谢方明为丹杨尹。
English: In June, in Jinshin, Liu Song appointed Shang Shufu's servant Sha Fu Liang as the Central Supervisor of Books and Shang Shuling, the leading general Xie Yu as the Central Supervisor of Books, and the attendant Xie Fangming as Tanyang Yin.

古文：方明善治郡，所至有能名；承代前人，不易其政，必宜改者，则以渐移变，使无迹可寻。
现代文：谢方明善于治理地方，凡是他任过职的地方，都盛赞他的才能。他继续前任的工作，不改其方针政策，如果有非改不可的，他就逐渐地加以改变，使人看不出更改的痕迹。
English: Xie Fang is very good at governing the place. Wherever he has served, people have praised his talent. He continues the work of his predecessor, does not change his principles and policies, and if there is something that must be changed, he will gradually change it, so that people can not see the traces of change.

古文：戊子，长沙景王道怜卒。
现代文：戊子，长沙景王刘道怜去世。
English: Wu Zi, the King of Changsha Jing, Liu Dao Rong passed away.

古文：魏建义将军刁雍寇青州，州兵击破之。
现代文：北魏建义将军刁雍进犯刘宋的青州，青州守兵击退了敌人的进攻。
English: Northern Wei Jianyi General Gong Yong invaded Liu Song's Qingzhou, Qingzhou guards repelled the enemy's attack.

古文：雍收散卒。走保大乡山。
现代文：刁雍于是收集残兵，逃入大乡山自保。
English: So Gong Yong gathered the remaining soldiers and fled to Daxiang Mountain for self-protection.

古文：秋，七月，己酉，葬武皇帝于初宁陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：秋季七月，己酉，刘宋在初宁陵安葬了武帝刘裕，庙号高祖。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Gaozong and Emperor Liu Song buried Emperor Liu Yu, known as Gaozhu, in the Early Ning Mausoleum.

古文：河西王蒙逊遣前将军沮渠成都帅众一万，耀兵岭南，遂屯五涧。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊派遣前将军沮渠成都，率军一万人，到岭南显示武力，然后大军屯驻在五涧。
English: Beilianghe Xi Wang Dequan Mengxun sent the former general Dequan to Chengdu, led an army of ten thousand, to Lingnan to show force, and then stationed a large army in Wuxi.

古文：九月，秦王炽磐遣征北将军出连虔等骑六千击之。
现代文：九月，西秦王乞伏炽磐，派遣征北将军出连虔等，率领骑兵六千人袭击沮渠成都的部队。
English: In September, the King of Western Qin besieged the fiery rock and dispatched the general of the Northern Expeditionary Army to attack the troops of Chengdu at the head of six thousand cavalry.

古文：初，魏主闻高祖克长安，大惧，遣使请和，自是每岁交聘不绝。
现代文：最初，北魏国主拓跋嗣听到东晋的太尉刘裕克复长安的消息，大为恐惧，立即派遣使臣请和。从此以后，两国使臣每年互访，来往不断。
English: At first, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, was very frightened when he heard the news of the return of the Eastern Jin's Lieutenant Liu Yuk to Chang'an, and immediately sent an envoy to invite him. Since then, the envoys of the two countries have exchanged visits every year and have been in constant contact.

古文：及高祖殂，殿中将军沈范等奉使在魏，还，及河，魏主遣人追执之，议发兵取洛阳、虎牢、滑台。
现代文：刘裕去世的时候，刘宋使臣殿中将军沈正出使北魏，告辞返国，刚到黄河，北魏国主便派人追赶，生擒而回。北魏还打算发兵攻取黄河南岸的洛阳、虎牢和滑台。
English: At the time of Liu Yu's death, Liu Song's envoy, General Shen Zheng, sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty to bid farewell and return to the country. As soon as he arrived at the Yellow River, the Northern Wei sovereign sent someone to chase him and returned alive. The Northern Wei Dynasty also planned to send troops to capture Luoyang, the Tiger's Lair and the Slide on the south bank of the Yellow River.

古文：崔浩谏曰： 陛下不以刘裕欻起，纳其使贡，裕亦敬事陛下。
现代文：白马公崔浩劝阻说： 当初陛下您没有因为刘裕骤然得势，而接纳他派遣的使臣和礼物，而刘裕对陛下也十分恭敬。
English: Bai Ma Gong Cui Hao dissuaded: At first, Your Majesty did not accept the envoys and gifts sent by Liu Yu because of his sudden rise to power, and Liu Yu was also very respectful to Your Majesty.

古文：不幸今死，遽乘丧伐之，虽得之，不足为美。
现代文：不幸他现在去世了，我们却乘人家遭丧而兴兵讨伐，即使得手也不是光彩的事。
English: Unfortunately, he has now passed away, but we have taken advantage of the loss of others and raised an army to fight. Even if we succeed, it is not a glorious thing.

古文：且国家今日亦未能一举取江南也，而徒有伐丧之名，窃为陛下不取。
现代文：更何况以我们国家眼下的实力，也不可一举夺取江南，却只落得个伐丧的恶名，我自以为陛下不该这样做。
English: What's more, with our country's current strength, we can't seize the south of the Yangtze River in one fell swoop, but we'll only get a bad reputation for losing. I don't think His Majesty should do this.

古文：臣谓宜遣人吊祭，存其孤弱，恤其凶灾，使义声布于天下，则江南不攻自服矣。
现代文：在我看来，我们应该派使节前往吊丧，抚慰孤儿寡妇，同情他们的不幸，从而使我们仁义的名声，传播天下，这样一来，长江以南的江山，不攻自服了。
English: In my opinion, we should send envoys to the funeral, comfort the orphans and widows, sympathize with their misfortune, and thus spread the reputation of our benevolence and righteousness to the world. In this way, the country south of the Yangtze River will not attack itself.

古文：况裕新死，党与未离，兵临其境，必相帅拒战，功不可必。
现代文：况且如今刘裕刚刚去世，其党羽还不曾离析，一旦大军压境，他们势必会同心协力抵抗，我们不一定能成功。
English: Moreover, now that Liu Yu has just passed away, his followers have not yet been separated. Once the army oppresses the border, they are bound to resist together. We may not succeed.

古文：不如缓之，待其强臣争权，变难必起，然后命将出帅，可以兵不疲劳，坐收淮北也。 
现代文：不如稍稍延缓，等待他们的权臣争权内讧，变故和灾难必然发生，然后我们再调兵遣将，军士还不曾疲劳，即可坐收淮北的大片土地。 
English: It would be better to delay a little and wait for their powerful vassals to fight for power, and for changes and disasters to inevitably occur. Then we will send in more soldiers, and the soldiers will not be tired, and we can seize a large area of land in Huaibei.

古文：魏主曰： 刘裕乘姚兴之死而灭之，今我乘裕丧而伐之，何为不可！ 
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣问道： 当年刘裕乘姚兴之死，一举灭掉了秦国。如今我要乘刘裕之死，讨伐刘宋，有什么不可以？ 
English: Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi asked: Back then, Liu Yu took advantage of Yao Xing's death to wipe out Qin. Now I want to take advantage of Liu Yu's death to fight Liu Song. What's wrong with that?

古文：浩曰： 不然。
现代文：崔浩说： 那不一样。
English: Cui Hao said: That's different.

古文：姚兴死，诸子交争，故裕乘衅伐之。
现代文：姚兴死后，他的儿子们拼命内争，刘裕才得以乘机讨伐。
English: After Yao Xing's death, his sons desperately fought among themselves, and Liu Yu was able to take advantage of the opportunity.

古文：今江南无衅，不可比也。 
现代文：现在，江南的刘宋无机可乘，所以不可同日而语呀！ 
English: Now, Liu Song from the south of the Yangtze River has no opportunity to take advantage of it, so he can't speak the same language!

古文：魏主不从，假司空奚斤节，加晋兵大将军、行扬州刺史，使督宋兵将军、交州刺史周几、吴兵将军、广州刺史公孙表同入寇。
现代文：北魏国主拒不接受崔浩的意见，授司空奚斤以符节，命他加授晋兵大将军、代理扬州刺史等官职，率领宋兵将军、交州刺史周几，吴兵将军、广州刺史公孙表等，一起向刘宋进攻。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign refused to accept Cui Hao's opinion, and awarded Jiuyong Jianjin with the insignia, and ordered him to add the official posts of Jin soldier general and acting Yangzhou chief historian, and led Song soldier general, Jiaozhou chief historian Zhou Qi, Wu soldier general, Guangzhou chief historian Gongsun Bo, etc. to attack Liu Song.

古文：乙巳，魏主如灅南宫，遂如广宁。
现代文：乙巳，北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达南宫，又前往广宁。
English: At this time, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, arrived at the Southern Palace and went to Guangning.

古文：辛亥，魏人筑平城外郭，周围三十二里。
现代文：辛亥，北魏在平城兴筑外城，周围三十二里。
English: In Xinhai, the Northern Wei Dynasty built an outer city in Pingcheng, with a circumference of thirty-two miles.

古文：魏主如乔山，遂东如幽州。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达乔山，再东行到达幽州。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, arrived at Qiaoshan, and then traveled east to Yuzhou.

古文：冬，十月，甲戌，还宫。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲戌，回宫。
English: Winter, October, Armor, Return to the Palace.

古文：魏军将发，公卿集议于监国之前，以先攻城与先略地。
现代文：北魏南征的大军将要出发，朝中的公卿显官在太子拓跋焘的殿前，举行会议，讨论应先攻城池还是先占领土地？
English: The armies of the Northern Wei and Southern Expedition were about to set out. The court nobles and dignitaries of the dynasty held a meeting in front of Prince Tuobao's palace to discuss whether to attack the city first or occupy the land first.

古文：奚斤欲先攻城，崔浩曰： 南人长于守城，昔苻氏攻襄阳，经年不拔。
现代文：奚斤认为应先攻取城池，崔浩反对，说： 南方人擅长守城。从前苻氏进攻襄阳，一年有余，不能破城。
English: Rui Jin thought that they should capture the city first, but Cui Hao objected, saying: Nanfang people are good at defending the city. In the past, the Rui clan attacked Yangyang for more than a year, but could not break the city.

古文：今以大兵坐攻小城，若不时克，挫伤军势，敌得徐严而来，我怠彼锐，此危道也。
现代文：现在，我们以大军攻小城，如果不立即攻克，必定会挫伤军力，敌人就会慢慢的增援，我军疲劳而敌人气势正盛，这是十分危险的办法。
English: Now, we are attacking a small city with a large army. If we do not immediately conquer it, we will certainly weaken our military strength, and the enemy will slowly reinforce. Our army is fatigued and the enemy is in full swing. This is a very dangerous method.

古文：不如分军抡地，至淮为限，列置守宰，收敛租谷，则洛阳、滑台、虎牢更在军北，绝望南救，必沿河东走；不则为囿中之物，何忧其不获也！ 
现代文：我们不如分别派兵，夺取土地，以淮河为界限，依次委派地方官，征收田赋租金，把洛阳、滑台、虎牢远隔在我们大军的后方。当他们对南方的救援感到绝望的时候，必定会沿黄河往东走；即使不走，他们也已经是我们苑中的猎物，还用担心不能擒获？ 
English: It would be better for us to send troops separately, seize land, set the Huai River as the boundary, appoint local officials in turn, collect land rent, and keep Luoyang, Zhidi, and Hougu far away from the rear of our army. When they are desperate for rescue in the south, they will certainly go east along the Yellow River; even if they do not go, they are already the prey in our garden, and they still have to worry about not being captured?

古文：公孙表固请攻城，魏主从之。
现代文：吴军将军公孙表却仍然坚持先行攻城，拓跋嗣应许了公孙表的请求。
English: However, Gongsun Bo, the general of the Wu Army, still insisted on attacking the city first, and Tuoba Zi promised to comply with Gongsun Bo's request.

古文：于是奚斤等帅步骑二万，济河，营于滑台之东。
现代文：于是，北魏的奚斤统率步、骑兵二万人，渡过了黄河，在滑台之东安营扎寨。
English: As a result, the Northern Wei army of 20,000 horsemen crossed the Yellow River and encamped in the east of the slide.

古文：时司州刺史毛德祖戍虎牢，东郡太守王景度告急于德祖，德祖遣司马翟广等将步骑三千救之。
现代文：这时，刘宋的司州刺史毛德祖镇守虎牢，东郡太守王景度向毛德祖紧急求救。于是，毛德祖派遣司马翟广等率领步、骑兵三千前去救援。
English: At this time, Liu Song's governor of Shizhou, Mao Dezhu, was guarding the tiger prison, and the governor of Dong County, Wang Jingdu, urgently appealed to Mao Dezhu for help. Therefore, Mao Dezhu sent Sima Bingguang and other leaders and 3,000 cavalrymen to rescue.

古文：先是，司马楚之聚众在陈留之境，闻魏兵济河，遣使迎降。
现代文：在此之前，司马楚之在陈留境内招兵买马，集结力量。他听说北魏大军渡过黄河的消息，立即派遣使臣前往迎降。
English: Prior to this, Sima Chuzhi recruited soldiers and horses in Chenliu territory and gathered forces. He heard the news that the Northern Wei army had crossed the Yellow River and immediately dispatched envoys to meet the surrender.

古文：魏以楚之为征南将军、荆州刺史，使侵扰北境。
现代文：于是，北魏便任命司马楚之为征南将军、荆州刺史，命他侵略并骚扰刘宋的北部边境。
English: As a result, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Sima Chu to be the general of the Southern Expedition, Jingzhou stabbing history, and ordered him to invade and harass the northern border of Liu Song.

古文：德祖遣长社令王法政将五百人戍邵陵，将军刘怜将二百骑戍雍丘以备之。
现代文：毛德祖派遣长社县令王法政，率领五百人守卫邵陵，将军刘怜率领二百骑兵驻防雍丘，准备迎击敌人。
English: Mao Tse-tung dispatched Changsha County's Ling Wang Fa Zheng, leading five hundred people to guard Shao Ling, General Liu Er led two hundred cavalry stationed in Yongqiu, ready to meet the enemy.

古文：楚之引兵袭怜，不克。
现代文：司马楚之率军突袭刘怜，不能攻克。
English: The army led by Sima Chu made a surprise attack on Liu Bei, but failed to conquer him.

古文：会台送军资，怜出迎之，酸枣民王玉驰以告魏。
现代文：这时，正赶上刘宋朝廷为守军送来军用物资，刘怜出城迎接，酸枣县的居民王玉飞奔告诉了北魏军队。
English: At this time, just in time to catch up with Liu Song, the imperial court sent military supplies to the defenders, Liu Lei went out of the city to meet them, and Wang Yufeben, a resident of Yaju County, told the Northern Wei army.

古文：丁酉，魏尚书滑稽引兵袭仓垣，兵吏悉逾城走，陈留太守冯翊严稜诣斤降。
现代文：丁酉，北魏尚书滑稽率兵袭击仓垣，守兵和官吏全都翻城逃走，陈留太守冯翊人严棱向奚斤投降。
English: Ding Jun, Northern Wei Shang Shu's comedian-led troops attacked Cangyuan, the guards and officials all fled across the city, and Chen Liu's governor, Feng Xuanren, surrendered to Xujin.

古文：魏以王玉为陈留太守，给兵守仓垣。
现代文：北魏任命王玉为陈留太守，拨给他军队，镇守仓垣。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Wang Yu as Chen Liu Taishou and assigned him the army and the town guard of Kuragaki.

古文：奚斤等攻滑台，不拔，求益兵。
现代文：奚斤等率兵围攻滑台，不能攻破，请求增兵。
English: Xing Jin and other soldiers besieged the slide, could not break through, and asked for more troops.

古文：魏主怒，切责之；壬辰，自将诸国兵五万馀人南出天关，逾恒岭，为斤等声援。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣闻之大怒，严厉斥责了奚斤。壬辰，拓跋嗣亲自率领各部落联军五万余人南下，出天关，越过恒岭，声援奚斤。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, was furious and severely reprimanded Zhang Jian. In response, Tuoba Zi personally led more than 50,000 allied tribes to the south, out of Tianguan and over the Hengling Mountains, to support Zhang Jian.

古文：秦出连虔与河西沮渠成都战，禽之。
现代文：西秦征北将军出连虔，与河西沮渠成都交战，生擒沮渠成都。
English: The Western Qin general Zheng Bei marched out against Lian Qian and fought with Chengdu in the west of Hebei Province. Chengdu was captured.

古文：十一月，魏太子焘将兵出屯塞上，使安定王弥与安同居守。
现代文：十一月，北魏国太子拓跋焘率军出京，在塞上屯聚军队，命令安定王拓跋弥和北新公安同留守京师。
English: In November, Prince Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty led his army out of Beijing and gathered troops on the island. He ordered Wang Tuoba and the Northern Xin Public Security Bureau to stay in Beijing together.

古文：庚戌，奚斤等急攻滑台，拔之。
现代文：庚戌，北魏大将奚斤等猛攻滑台。终于攻克。
English: Geng Zheng, Northern Wei general Zou Jin and others stormed the slide. Finally conquered.

古文：王景度出走；景度司马阳瓚为魏所执，不降而死。
现代文：刘宋守将东郡太守王景度逃走。王景度手下的司马阳瓒被北魏兵擒获，不降被杀。
English: Liu Songshu led Wang Jingdu, the grand marshal of Dong County, to escape. Wang Jingdu's subordinate Sima Yangjun was captured by Northern Wei soldiers and was killed without surrender.

古文：魏主以成皋侯苟儿为兗州刺史，镇滑台。
现代文：拓跋嗣任命成皋侯苟儿为兖州刺史，镇守滑台。
English: Tuoba Zi appointed Chengyonguoguo as the governor of Zhangzhou and the town guard.

古文：斤等进击翟广等于土楼，破之，乘胜进逼虎牢；毛德祖与战，屡破之。
现代文：奚斤等进攻翟广所驻守的土楼，很快攻破翟广军队，乘胜进逼虎牢。镇守虎牢的刘宋司州刺史毛德祖反攻，多次击败北魏军。
English: Shujin and others attacked the earthen buildings garrisoned by Shuguang, quickly defeated the Shuguang army, and took advantage of the victory to enter the tiger's prison. Liu Song, Shizhou, Mao Dezu, who guarded the tiger's prison, counterattacked and repeatedly defeated the Northern Wei Army.

古文：魏主别遣黑槊将军于栗磾将三千人屯河阳，谋取金墉，德祖遣振威将军窦晃等缘河拒之。
现代文：拓跋嗣又另派黑将军于栗率领三千人屯驻河阳，打算夺取金墉。毛德祖派遣振威将军窦晃等沿黄河南岸布防抵抗。
English: Tuoba Zi also sent another black general, Yu Li, to garrison Hebei with 3,000 men, intending to capture Jinyang. Mao Zedong sent Zhenwei's general, Dou Huan, and others to put up resistance along the south bank of the Yellow River.

古文：十二月，丙戌，魏主至冀州，遣楚兵将军、徐州刺史叔孙建将兵自平原济河，徇青、兗。
现代文：十二月，丙戌，拓跋嗣抵达冀州，派遣楚兵将军、徐州刺史叔孙建率兵，从平原渡过黄河，夺取青州、兖州。
English: In December, Puyi and Tuoba arrived in Jizhou and dispatched General Chu and Xuzhou's uncle Sun Jian to cross the Yellow River from the plain and capture Qingzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：豫州刺史刘粹遣治中高道瑾将步骑五百据项城，徐州刺史王仲德将兵屯湖陆。
现代文：刘宋豫州刺史刘粹派遣总管内务的治中高道瑾率领步、骑兵五百人据守项城，徐州刺史王仲德率兵屯驻湖陆。
English: Liu Song and Liu Zi, the governor of Yuzhou, dispatched Jizhong Gao Daojun, the head of the General Administration of Internal Affairs, to lead the way. Five hundred cavalrymen guarded Xiangcheng, and the governor of Xuzhou, Wang Zhongde, led the troops stationed in Hulun.

古文：于栗磾济河，与奚斤并力攻窦晃等，破之。
现代文：北魏大将于栗渡过黄河，与奚斤合兵进攻窦晃，大破窦晃的军队。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty Grand Master Li Guo crossed the Yellow River and attacked Dou Kuan with the soldiers of He Jian. Dou Kuan's army was completely destroyed.

古文：魏主遣中领军代人娥清、期思侯柔然闾大肥将兵七千人会周几、叔孙建南渡河，军于碻磝。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣派遣中领军代郡人娥清、期思侯柔然人闾大肥率兵七千人，会同周几、叔孙建等，南渡黄河，驻扎在。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, dispatched the middle leader of the army on behalf of the county, Ren Zhaoqing, Zhixi Rouran, Zou Da Hui, and led seven thousand soldiers, together with Zhou Qi, Uncle Sun Jian and others, to the south of the Yellow River and stationed there.

古文：癸未，兗州刺史徐琰弃尹卯南走，于是泰山、高平、金乡等郡皆没于魏。
现代文：癸未，刘宋兖州刺史徐琰放弃尹卯城向南逃走。于是，泰山、高平、金乡等郡全部陷入北魏之手。
English: Before long, Liu Song, Zhang Zhou and Xu Xi abandoned Yinwu City and fled south. As a result, Taishan, Gaoping, Jinxiang and other counties all fell into the hands of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：叔孙建等东入青州，司马爱之、季之先聚众于济东，皆降于魏。
现代文：北魏楚兵将军叔孙建等向东攻入青州。东晋逃亡的皇族司马爱之、司马季之等，原先便在济水之东集结部众，这时也都投降了北魏。
English: Uncle Sun Jian, the Northern Wei general of Chu soldiers, and others invaded Qingzhou from the east. Sima Aizhi and Sima Ji, members of the imperial family who fled from the Eastern Jin Dynasty, originally gathered their followers in the east of Jishui, but they also surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：戊子，魏兵逼虎牢，青州刺史东莞竺夔镇东阳城，遣使告急。
现代文：戊子，北魏军逼进虎牢。刘宋青州刺史东莞人竺夔当时正在镇守东阳城，立即派人告急求救。
English: Wu Zi, the Northern Wei army forced into the tiger's prison. Liu Song Qingzhou stabbed the Dongguan people, who were guarding Dongyang City at the time, and immediately sent someone to call for emergency help.

古文：己丑，诏南兗州刺史檀道济监征讨诸军事，与王仲德共救之。
现代文：己丑，刘宋下诏，命令南兖州刺史檀道济督察征讨诸军事，会同徐州刺史王仲德一起前去救援。
English: As a result, Liu Song issued an edict, ordering the inspector of the Southern Yunnan Province to recruit soldiers and go to the rescue together with the inspector of the Xuzhou Province, Wang Zhongde.

古文：庐陵王义真遣龙骧将军沈叔狸将三千人就刘粹，量宜赴援。
现代文：庐陵王刘义真派遣龙骧将军沈叔率兵三千人，奔赴豫州刺史刘粹的驻地，察看时机前去救援。
English: Liu Yizhen, the King of Fuling, dispatched General Longyu Shenzhu with 3,000 soldiers to the residence of Liu Qi, the Prince of Yuzhou, to see if it was time to go to the rescue.

古文：秦王炽磐征秦州牧昙达为左丞相、征东大将军。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐，召回秦州牧乞伏昙达，任命他为左丞相、征东大将军。
English: The king of Western Qin called back Muqibuddin from Qinzhou and appointed him as the minister of the left and the general of the eastern expedition.

古文：营阳王
现代文：营阳王
English: Yingyang Wang

古文：高祖武皇帝景平元年
现代文：景平元年
English: in the first year of Jingping

古文：春，正月，己亥朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：春季，正月，己亥朔，刘宋大赦天下，改年号为景平。
English: Spring, the first month, Ji Hai Shuo, Liu Song pardoned the world, and changed the year to Jingping.

古文：辛丑，帝礼南郊。
现代文：辛丑，刘宋少帝刘义符到南郊祭祀天神。
English: Xinxiu, Liu Song and the young emperor Liu Yifu went to the southern suburbs to worship Tenjin.

古文：魏于栗磾攻金墉，癸卯，河南太守王涓之弃城走。
现代文：北魏于栗进攻金墉。癸卯，宋河南太守王涓之弃城逃走。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty attacked Jincheng in Yugur, while the Song and Henan Daju Wang Xizhi abandoned the city and fled.

古文：魏主以栗磾为豫州刺史，镇洛阳。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣任命于栗为豫州刺史，镇守洛阳。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, appointed Yu Li as the governor of Henan Province and the town guard of Luoyang.

古文：魏主南巡垣岳，丙辰，至鄴。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣南巡到北岳恒山。丙辰，抵达邺城。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, went on a southern inspection tour to the Hengshan Mountains in Beidake. He arrived in Lucheng.

古文：己未，诏征豫章太守蔡廓为吏部尚书。
现代文：己未，刘宋下诏，征召豫章太守蔡廓为吏部尚书。
English: At the same time, Liu Song issued an edict to conscript Yuzhang Daju Cai Guo into the cadre.

古文：廓谓傅亮曰： 选事若悉以见付，不论；不然，不能拜也。 
现代文：蔡廓对尚书令傅亮说： 官员的任免和升迁调补的权力，如果全部交给我，我就接受，否则，我将不接受任命。 
English: Cai Guo said to Shang Shuling Fu Liang: If the power of appointment and removal of officials and promotion and transfer are all given to me, I will accept it, otherwise, I will not accept the appointment.

古文：亮以语录尚书徐羡之，羡之曰： 黄、散以下悉以委蔡，吾徒不复措怀；自此以上，故宜共参同异。 
现代文：傅亮把这番话转达给录事尚书徐羡之。徐羡之说： 黄门侍郎、散骑常侍以下的任免，全权委托蔡廓，我们不再参与意见。但这些官职以上的人选，还应该由我们共同研究，统一意见。 
English: Fu Liang conveyed these words to Xu Enzhi, the recorder of records. Xu Enzhi said: The appointment and dismissal of the Huangmen waiter, the horseback riding attendant, and below, are fully entrusted to Cai Kuo, and we will no longer participate in the opinions. However, these candidates above the official position should also be studied by us together to unify the opinions.

古文：廓曰： 我不能为涂干木署纸尾！ 
现代文：蔡廓说： 我不能在徐干木签署过的黄纸尾上署名！ 
English: Cai Guo said: I can't sign on the end of the yellow paper signed by Xu Gangmu!

古文：遂不拜。
现代文：拒绝受官。
English: As a result, he did not take office.

古文：干木，羡之小字也。
现代文：干木，是徐羡之的小名。
English: "Dry wood" is a small character of Xu Enzhi.

古文：选案黄纸，录尚书与吏部沿书连名，教训廓云然。
现代文：他难道不知道吏部尚书和录尚书事是两位一体，不能有所偏重吗？
English: Doesn't he know that book-keeping and record-keeping are two parts of the same thing, and should not be given preferential treatment?

古文：沈约论曰： 蔡廓固辞铨衡，耻为志屈；岂不知选、录同体，义无偏断乎！良以主暗时难，不欲居通塞之任。远矣哉！
现代文：实际上他是鉴于当时君主昏庸，时势艰难，而不愿一人担当可以疏通人才也可以阻塞人才的渠道的责任而已，见识实在远大啊！
English: In fact, he was in view of the fact that the monarch at that time was dull and the situation was difficult, and he did not want to take on the responsibility of a person who could unclog the channels of talent or block talent. The insight is really far-reaching!

古文：庚申，檀道济军于彭城。
现代文：庚申，刘宋檀道济的大军驻扎在彭城。
English: Goshun, Liu Songdang and Tao Zi's large army were stationed in Pengcheng.

古文：魏叔孙建入临淄，所向城邑皆溃。
现代文：北魏叔孙建攻入临淄，他的大军所到，刘宋城池全部崩溃。
English: Northern Wei's Uncle Sun Jian invaded Linyi, his large army arrived, and Liu Song's city collapsed.

古文：竺夔聚民保东阳城，其不入城者，使各依据山险，芟夷禾稼。魏军至，无所得食。
现代文：刘宋青州刺史竺夔召集百姓，于东阳城固守城垣。凡是不愿入城的居民，也令他们分别依据险要的山势，把田野里的庄稼全部割掉，使北魏军来到后，无法就地取得粮食。
English: Liu Song, the governor of Qingzhou, summoned the people to defend the city walls of Dongyang City. All the residents who did not want to enter the city were also ordered to cut all the crops in the fields according to the dangerous mountain situation, so that the Northern Wei Army could not obtain grain on the spot after arriving.

古文：济南太守垣苗帅众依夔。
现代文：济南太守垣苗率众投靠了竺夔。
English: Jinan's supreme warden, Gaki Miao, led the masses to support the Jurchens.

古文：刁雍见魏主于鄴，魏主曰： 叔孙建等入青州，民皆藏避，攻城不下。
现代文：北魏刁雍前往邺城晋见北魏国主拓跋嗣，拓跋嗣说： 叔孙建等进入青州地区，老百姓纷纷躲藏，而城又久攻不下。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Gong Yong went to Shicheng Jin to see the Northern Wei sovereign Tuoba Zi. Tuoba Zi said: Uncle Sun Jian and others entered the Qingzhou area, the common people hid, and the city could not be conquered for a long time.

古文：彼素服卿威信，今遣卿助之。 
现代文：你在青州一向有威信，现在我派你前去助阵。 
English: You have always had prestige in Qingzhou, and now I am sending you to help.

古文：乃以雍为青州刺史，给雍骑，使行募兵以取青州。
现代文：于是，任命刁雍为青州刺史，拨付给他马匹，命他一路招募士卒来攻取青州。
English: As a result, he appointed Gong Yong as the historian of Qingzhou, allocated horses to him, and ordered him to recruit soldiers all the way to capture Qingzhou.

古文：魏兵济河向青州者凡六万骑，刁雍募兵得五千人，抚慰士民，皆送租供军。
现代文：北魏南征军渡过黄河，奔赴青州的骑兵共有六万，刁雍一路募兵又集结五千人，他对境内的绅士平民；竭力安抚慰劳，当地人都愿为刁雍的军队提供粮草。
English: The Northern Wei Southern Expeditionary Army crossed the Yellow River, and a total of sixty thousand cavalrymen rushed to Qingzhou, and five thousand people were recruited all the way to Fenyong. He tried his best to appease the gentry and civilians in the territory, and the local people were willing to provide grain and grass for the army of Fenyong.

古文：柔然寇魏边。
现代文：柔然汗国南下侵略北魏的边境。
English: The Mongolian Khanate went south to invade the borders of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：二月，戊辰，魏筑长城，自赤城西至五原，延袤二千馀里，备置戍卒，以备柔然。
现代文：二月，戊辰，北魏兴筑长城，从赤城往西直到五原，连绵二千余里，同时在边境各要塞配备戍卒，以抵御柔然。
English: In February, the Northern Wei Dynasty began to build the Great Wall, stretching more than two thousand miles from Akagi in the west to Wuhuan, and at the same time, each fortress on the border was equipped with soldiers to resist the gentleness.

古文：丁丑，太皇太后萧氏殂。
现代文：丁丑，刘宋太皇太后萧氏去世。
English: Ding Yuxiu, Liu Song, and Empress Dowager Xiao passed away.

古文：河西王蒙逊及吐谷浑王阿柴皆遣使入贡。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊和吐谷浑王慕容阿柴都派遣使臣向刘宋进贡。
English: Meng Song, the Western King of the Lianghe, and Murong Achai, the Hun King of the Tuyun, both sent envoys to pay tribute to Liu Song.

古文：庚辰，诏以蒙逊为都督凉、秦、河、沙四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、凉州牧、河西王；以阿柴为督塞表诸军事、安西将军、沙州刺史、浇河公。
现代文：庚辰，刘宋下诏，任命沮渠蒙逊为都督凉、秦、河、沙四州诸军事及骠骑大将军、凉州牧、河西王；任命慕容阿柴为督塞表诸军事、安西将军、沙州刺史、浇河公。
English: Geng Chen, Liu Song issued an edict, appointing Deqiu Mengxun as the military governor of Liang, Qin, He, and Shaxu four states and the cavalry general, Liangzhou Mu, and Hexi Wang; appointing Murong Achai as the military governor, Anxi general, Shazhou Zhishi, and Gehe Gong.

古文：三月，壬子，葬孝懿皇后于兴宁陵。
现代文：三月，壬子，刘宋在兴宁陵安葬孝懿皇后。
English: In March, Liu Song buried the Empress Xiaojun in Xingning Mausoleum in Renzi.

古文：魏奚斤、公孙表等共攻虎牢，魏主自鄴遣兵助之。
现代文：北魏大将奚斤、公孙表等合兵进攻虎牢，北魏国主拓跋嗣从邺城遣兵助战。
English: The Northern Wei generals Shujin and Gongsun He and other soldiers attacked the Tiger's Stronghold, and the head of the Northern Wei state, Tuoba Zi, sent soldiers from Shicheng to help.

古文：毛德祖于城内穴地入七丈，分为六道，出魏围外；募敢死之士四百人，使参军范道基等帅之，从穴中出，掩袭其后。
现代文：刘宋司州刺史毛德祖，在虎牢城内挖掘地道，深达七丈，分为六道，直通魏军的包围圈外。同时又招募敢死勇士四百人，由参军范道基率领，从地道爬出去袭击敌人的后背，北魏军队不胜惊慌。
English: Liu Song Shizhou, the ancestor of Mao Zedong, dug a tunnel in the Tiger's Stronghold that was seven stories deep and divided into six paths, leading directly outside the encirclement of the Wei army. At the same time, he recruited four hundred death-defying warriors, led by Fan Daoji, who joined the army, and climbed out of the tunnel to attack the enemy's back. The Northern Wei army was overwhelmed with panic.

古文：魏军惊忧，斩首数百级，焚其攻具而还。
现代文：范道基斩杀敌人数百，然后焚毁了敌人攻城的器械，返回城中。
English: Fan Daoji killed hundreds of enemies, then burned the enemy's siege equipment and returned to the city.

古文：魏兵虽退散，随复更合，攻之益急。
现代文：北魏兵虽然暂时溃散，很快又集结到一起，更猛烈地进攻虎牢城。
English: Although the Northern Wei soldiers were temporarily dispersed, they quickly regrouped and attacked the Tiger Fortress even more fiercely.

古文：奚斤自虎牢将步骑三千，攻颍川太守李元德等于许昌，魏以颍川人庚龙为颍川太守，戍许昌。
现代文：奚斤从虎牢统率步、骑兵三千人，在许昌攻打颍川太守李元德，李元德放弃守城败退逃走。北魏任命颍川人庾龙为颍川太守，据守许昌。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Xinglong, a native of Xichuan, as the grand marshal of Xichang, and Xichang was held by him.

古文：毛德祖出兵与公孙表大战，从朝至晡，杀魏兵数百。
现代文：毛德祖率兵出城与北魏公孙表大战，从早晨到傍晚，斩杀魏兵数百人。
English: Mao Tse-tung led his troops out of the city to fight against the Northern Wei Gongsun table war, from morning to evening, killing hundreds of Wei soldiers.

古文：会奚斤自许昌还，合击德祖，大破之，亡甲士一千馀人，复婴城自守。
现代文：正巧奚斤从许昌得胜而回，二人合击毛德祖，毛德祖大败，损失士卒一千多人，只好固守城池坚持守御。
English: It just so happened that He Jian returned from Xu Chang victorious. The two of them jointly attacked Mao Zedong. Mao Zedong suffered a crushing defeat and lost more than a thousand soldiers. They had no choice but to hold fast to the castle and persist in defending it.

古文：魏主又遣万馀人从白沙渡河，屯濮阳南。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣又派出一万余人，从白沙渡黄河南下，屯驻濮阳南。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, also sent more than 10,000 people from Baisha to the south of the Yellow River to settle in the south of Fenyang.

古文：朝议以项城去魏不远，非轻军所抗，使刘粹召高道瑾还寿阳；若沈叔狸已进，亦宜且追。
现代文：刘宋朝臣们经讨论一致认为，项城距北魏南征军很近，守军力量薄弱，难以抵御魏军的攻击。于是命令豫州刺史刘粹，召回项城守将高道瑾，退守寿阳。如果龙骧将军沈叔已经开进悬壶，也一并撤退。
English: After discussion, Liu Song's courtiers agreed that Xiangcheng was very close to the Northern Wei Southern Expeditionary Force, and the defense force was weak and it was difficult to resist the attack of the Wei army. Therefore, he ordered Liu Zi, the governor of Yuzhou, to recall the Xiangcheng city guard, Gao Daojun, and retreat to Shouyang. If the Longjing general, Shen Shou, had already entered the hanging pot, he would also retreat together.

古文：粹奏： 虏攻虎牢，未复南向，若遽摄军舍项城，则淮西诸郡无所凭依。沈叔狸已顿肥口，又不宜遽退。 
现代文：刘粹上疏力争说： 敌人正集中力量进攻虎牢，尚未南下，如果我们轻率地放弃项城，淮河以西各郡就失去依靠；沈叔的军队已进驻肥口，也不应立即撤退。 
English: Liu Ziyang spared no effort to argue: The enemy is concentrating its forces on attacking Hougou, and has not yet gone south. If we abandon Xiangcheng rashly, the counties west of the Huaihe River will lose their reliance; Uncle Shen's army has been stationed in Heikou, and should not retreat immediately.

古文：时李元德帅散卒二百至项，刘粹使助高道瑾戍守，请宥其奔败之罪，朝议并许之。
现代文：当时，颍川刺史李元德，率领残兵败将二百人逃回项城，刘粹命令他帮助高道瑾严守项城，并请示朝廷宽免了李元德许昌战败之罪，朝议对此并予赞许。
English: At that time, Lu Chuan stabbed Li Yuande, led the remnants of the defeated troops to escape two hundred people back to Xiangcheng, Liu Zi ordered him to help Gao Daojun strictly defend Xiangcheng, and asked the court to pardon Li Yuande Xuchang's defeat, and the court approved this.

古文：乙己，魏主畋于韩陵山，遂如汲郡，至枋头。
现代文：乙巳，北魏国主拓跋嗣到韩陵山狩猎，然后抵达汲郡，又前往枋头。
English: Once upon a time, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, went hunting in Hanling Mountain, then arrived in Ku County, and then went to Shantou.

古文：初，毛德祖在北，与公孙表有旧。
现代文：当初，毛德祖在北方时，与公孙表有旧谊。
English: At first, Mao Zedzu had an old friendship with Gongsun watch when he was in the north.

古文：表有权略，德祖患之，乃与交通音问；密遣人说奚斤，云表与之连谋。
现代文：公孙表每次接到毛德祖的信，都呈给奚斤看，奚斤却更加怀疑，于是就把毛德祖和公孙表的事报告了拓跋嗣。
English: Every time the Gongsun table received a letter from Mao Tse-tung, it was presented to Yao Jin. However, Yao Jin was more skeptical, so he reported the matter of Mao Tse-tung and the Gongsun table to Tuo Bazi.

古文：每答表书，多所治定；表以书示斤，斤疑之，以告魏主。先是，表与太史令王亮少同营署，好轻侮亮；亮奏 表置军虎牢东，不得便地，故令贼不时灭。 
现代文：从前，公孙表与太史令王亮同在一个官署做事，公孙表一向看不起王亮，经常轻蔑地侮辱王亮。现在，王亮乘机上奏拓跋嗣说： 公孙表把军营安扎在虎牢之东，方向不利，有意使敌人不致立时覆灭。 
English: In the past, Gongsun Watch and Taishi ordered Wang Liang to work together in a government office. Gongsun Watch always looked down on Wang Liang and often scornfully insulted Wang Liang. Now, Wang Liang took the opportunity to say: Gongsun Watch placed the military camp Anzha in the east of the tiger's stronghold, in an unfavorable direction, deliberately so that the enemy would not be destroyed immediately.

古文：魏主素好术数，以为然，积前后仇，使人夜就帐中缢杀之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣一向迷信巫术，认为果然如此，又勾起多年的积忿，于是，派人深夜入公孙表的军帐，把公孙表绞死。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Sui, had always been superstitious about witchcraft. He thought that this was indeed the case, and aroused years of accumulated anger. Therefore, he sent someone to enter Gongsun's military account late at night and hanged Gongsun.

古文：乙卯。魏主济自灵昌津，遂如东郡、陈留。
现代文：乙卯，北魏国主拓跋嗣从灵昌津渡黄河南下，前往东郡、陈留。
English: Second, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, traveled from Lingchangjin to the south of the Yellow River and went to Donggun and Chenliu.

古文：叔孙建将三万骑逼东阳城，城中文武才一千五百人，竺夔、垣苗悉力固守，时出奇兵击魏，破之。
现代文：北魏叔孙建率领三万骑兵进逼东阳城，城中文武官兵才一千五百人。竺夔、垣苗全力固守，而且不时出奇兵袭击魏军，击败了北魏的进攻。
English: Sun Jian, the uncle of the Northern Wei Dynasty, led 30,000 cavalry into Dongyang City, and there were only 1,500 Chinese military officers and soldiers in the city. Zhai and Qimiao defended themselves with all their strength, and from time to time, the soldiers attacked the Wei Army, and defeated the attack of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏步骑绕城列陈十馀里，大治攻具。
现代文：于是北魏步、骑兵绕城排列，阵地纵深十多里，大规模地兴造功城武器。
English: As a result, the Northern Wei marched and cavalry lined up around the city, with positions more than ten miles deep, and built Gongcheng weapons on a large scale.

古文：夔作四重堑，魏人填其三重，为童车以攻城，夔遣人从地道中出，以大麻糸亘挽之令折。
现代文：竺夔组织挖掘的四道堑濠，魏军填平了三道，并制造车撞击城墙。竺夔派人从地道中出击，用粗绳把撞车拉翻，使它摧折。
English: The Wei army filled three of the four tunnels dug by the Wei organization, and made a car crash into the city wall. The Wei sent people to attack from the tunnel, pull the crashed car over with a thick rope, and break it.

古文：魏人复作长围，长攻逾急。
现代文：魏军又组成大的包围圈，攻势越发凶猛。
English: The Wei army also formed a large encirclement, and the offensive became more and more fierce.

古文：历时浸久，城转堕坏，战士多死伤，馀众困乏，旦暮且陷。
现代文：时间一久，东阳城城墙纷纷崩溃，战士死伤惨重，剩下的残兵，又困又乏，东阳城陷落在即。
English: After a long time, the walls of Dongyang City collapsed one after another, soldiers were killed and seriously injured, and the remaining soldiers were exhausted and exhausted. Dongyang City was about to fall.

古文：檀道济至彭城，以司、青二州并急，而所领兵少，不足分赴；青州道近，竺夔兵弱，乃与王仲德兼行先救之。
现代文：这时，刘宋镇北将军檀道济率军抵达彭城，因司州、青州同时告急，所率军队人数太少，不能分兵救援。因距青州的东阳城道路较近，竺夔兵力又弱，檀道济便与徐州刺史王仲德日夜兼程，赶赴东阳城救援。
English: At this time, Liu Songzhen Bei general Dang Daoji and his army arrived in Pengcheng, but the number of troops led by Dang Daoji was too small to rescue because Sizhou and Qingzhou were in an emergency at the same time. Because the Dongyang City road from Qingzhou was closer and the army was weak, Dang Daoji and the Xuzhou general Wang Zhongde traveled day and night to rescue Dongyang City.

古文：甲子，刘粹遣李元德袭许昌，斩庾龙。
现代文：甲子，刘宋豫州刺史刘粹，派颍川太守李元德，袭击许昌，斩杀北魏委任的颍川太守庾龙。
English: Gao Zi, Liu Song of Yuzhou, and Liu Zi, sent Li Yuande, the governor of Beichuan, to attack Xu Chang and kill the governor of Beichuan appointed by the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：元德因留绥抚，并上租粮。
现代文：李元德于是留驻许昌，安抚百姓，缴上征收的租赋。
English: Li Yuande then stayed behind in Xu Chang, and at the same time supplied grain to the army.

古文：魏主至盟津。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达盟津。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, arrived in Meituan.

古文：于栗磾造浮桥于冶阪津。乙丑，魏主引兵北济，西如河内。
现代文：黑将军于栗在冶阪津搭建黄河浮桥。乙丑，拓跋嗣率军北渡黄河，向西前往河内。
English: General Kuroi built a pontoon bridge across the Yellow River at Yasaka-tsu in Yaguri, and then led his army north across the Yellow River to Hanoi.

古文：娥清、周几、闾大肥徇地至湖陆、高平，民屯聚而射之。
现代文：中领军娥清、宋兵将军周几、期思侯闾大肥，带兵攻略土地，他们先后到达湖陆、高平，当地的居民聚集在城堡中，发箭射击。
English: The central leader of the army, General Zhou Qian, and the Song general, General Zhou Qi, planned to capture the land with soldiers. They arrived at Hulun and Gaoping successively. Local residents gathered in the castle and fired arrows.

古文：清等尽攻破高平诸县，灭数千家，虏掠万馀口；兗州刺史郑顺之戍湖陆，以兵少不敢出。
现代文：娥清等大怒，连续攻破高平各县，屠杀数千家，掠获一万余人。当时，刘宋兖州刺史郑顺之驻守湖陆，因手下兵少，不敢出击。
English: E Qing and others were so enraged that they continuously broke through the counties of Gaoping, slaughtered thousands of families, and captured more than 10,000 people. At that time, Liu Song and Zhangzhou assassin Zheng Shun were stationed in Hulun. Due to the small number of soldiers, they did not dare to attack.

古文：魏主又遣并州刺史伊楼拔助奚斤攻虎牢。毛德祖随方抗拒，颇杀魏兵，而将士稍零落。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣又派遣并州刺史伊楼拔帮助奚斤进攻虎牢；刘宋守将毛德祖随机应变，顽强抵抗，斩杀很多魏兵，而自己的将士也日渐减少。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, also dispatched the concubine of the state, Shi Louba, to help Shujin attack the tiger's stronghold; Liu Song Shou sent Mao Zedzu to make random contingencies, stubbornly resist, and kill many Wei soldiers, while his own soldiers were also decreasing.

古文：夏，四月，丁卯，魏主如成皋，绝虎牢汲河之路。
现代文：夏季四月，丁卯，北魏国主拓跋嗣到达成皋，切断了虎牢到黄河汲水的道路。
English: In the summer of April, Ting Wu, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, traveled to Chengdu and cut off the road for the tigers to draw water from the Yellow River.

古文：停三日，自督众攻城，竟不能下，遂如洛阳观《石经》。
现代文：停留了三日，然后亲自督战，攻打虎牢城，仍然没有攻下。于是他又绕道前往洛阳观看《石经》。
English: He stayed for three days, and then personally supervised the battle, attacked the Tiger Fortress, but still did not capture it. So he took a detour to Luoyang to watch "The Stone Sutra."

古文：遣使祀嵩高。
现代文：派遣使臣祭祀嵩山。
English: Dispatching envoys to offer sacrifices to Mount Takeshi.

古文：叔孙建攻东阳，堕其北城三十许步。刁雍请速入，建不许，遂不克。
现代文：北魏楚兵将军叔孙建正在攻打东阳城，东阳城的北城坍塌三十余步，北魏青州刺史刁雍请示从此缺口冲进城去，叔孙建不同意，于是东阳城仍攻取不下。
English: Uncle Sun Jian, the Northern Wei general of Chu soldiers, was attacking Dongyang City. The northern part of Dongyang City collapsed more than 30 paces away. The Northern Wei general of Qingzhou, Shishi Shanyong, requested permission to rush into the city from this gap. Uncle Sun Jian did not agree, so Dongyang City could not be captured.

古文：及闻檀道济等将至，雍又谓建曰： 贼畏官军突骑，以锁连车为函陈。
现代文：等到他们听说檀道济的援军即将到来，刁雍又对叔孙建说： 竺夔等畏惧我们骑兵的突击，所以把车辆锁在一起，构筑方阵。
English: When they heard that Tang Daoji's reinforcements were about to arrive, Gong Yong said to his uncle Sun Jian: "You are afraid of our cavalry's assault, so lock the vehicles together and form a phalanx.

古文：大岘已南，处处狭隘，车不得方轨。雍请将所募兵五千据险以邀之，破之必矣。 
现代文：大岘山以南，道路狭窄，车辆不能并行，我请您允许我带领我所募集的五千士卒，据守险要，阻击宋兵，定能取胜。 
English: To the south of Dafeng Mountain, the road is narrow and vehicles cannot travel in parallel. I ask you to allow me to lead the five thousand soldiers I have recruited. According to the defense risk, I will block the Song soldiers and I will be able to win.

古文：时天暑，魏军多疫。
现代文：当时正值大暑，天气炎热，魏军士卒很多都染上了瘟疫。
English: At that time, it was very hot, the weather was hot, and many Wei sergeants and corporals were infected with the plague.

古文：建曰： 兵人疫病过半，若相持不休，兵自死尽，何须复战！
现代文：叔孙建说： 部队中一半以上的士卒都染上了疫病，如果僵持下去，士卒会死光，哪里需要敌人再战？
English: Uncle Sun Jian said: More than half of the soldiers in the army are infected with the plague. If the deadlock continues, the soldiers will die. Where is the need for the enemy to fight again?

古文：今全军而返，计之上也。 
现代文：现在保存实力，安全撤退是上策。 
English: Preserving strength now and withdrawing safely is the best policy.

古文：己巳，道济军于临朐。
现代文：己巳，刘宋征北将军檀道济驻军临朐。
English: At that time, Liu Song, the general of the Northern Expedition, went to Linyi to garrison troops.

古文：壬申建等烧营及器械而遁 道济至东阳，粮尽，不能追。
现代文：壬申，叔孙建等焚烧大营及各种军械，撤退。檀道济大军抵达东阳，军饷不济，不能追击北魏逃军。
English: Jinshin, his uncle Sun Jian and others burned the large camp and all kinds of military equipment and retreated. Dangdozhi's large army arrived in Dongyang, and the army did not have enough money to pursue the Northern Wei escapees.

古文：竺夔以东阳城坏，不可守，移镇不其城。
现代文：青州刺史竺夔因东阳城破坏较重，不能再守，于是移兵不其城镇守。
English: Due to the heavy damage to Dongyang City, Qingzhou Zhisheng could no longer defend it, so the soldiers were transferred to defend other towns.

古文：叔孙建自东阳趋滑台，道济分遣王促德向尹卯。
现代文：叔孙建率部从东阳前往滑台，刘宋大将檀道济派遣王仲德向尹卯挺进。
English: Uncle Sun Jian led the troops from Dongyang to Slidai, and General Liu Song sent Wang Zhongde to advance on Yinwu.

古文：道济停军湖陆，仲德未至尹卯，闻魏兵已远，还就道济。
现代文：檀道济则驻军湖陆。王仲德还没有到尹卯，听说魏兵已逃得很远，于是不再追赶，回军与檀道济会合。
English: As Wang Zhongde had not yet arrived at Yinwu, he heard that the Wei soldiers had fled far away, so he stopped chasing them and rejoined the returning troops with Dandooji.

古文：刁雍遂留镇尹卯，招集谯、梁、彭、沛民五千馀家，置二十七营以领之。
现代文：而北魏的青州刺史刁雍留下驻守尹卯，招募谯郡、梁郡、彭城郡、沛郡等地百姓五千余家，设立二十七个营寨由刁雍统一指挥。
English: However, the Northern Wei's Qingzhou commander Shiyong stayed behind to garrison Yinwu, recruited more than 5,000 people from the counties of Zou, Liang, Pengcheng, and Pei, and set up 27 camps under the unified command of Shiyong.

古文：蛮王梅安帅渠帅数十人入贡于魏。
现代文：中原蛮族首领梅安率领手下将帅数十人，向北魏进贡。
English: The leader of the Central Plains barbarians, Mei An, led dozens of his subordinates to pay tribute to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：初，诸蛮本居江、淮之间，其后种落滋蔓，布于数州，东连寿春，西通巴、蜀，北接汝、颍，往往有之。
现代文：最初，各个蛮族部落本来居住在淮河、长江之间地带，后来部落人口增长很快，使蛮族人的势力遍布数州，东连寿春，西达巴、蜀，北到汝水、颍水，到处都有。
English: At first, the various barbarian tribes originally lived in the area between the Huaihe River and the Yangtze River. Later, the tribal population grew rapidly, so that the barbarians' influence spread to several states, including Donglian Shuchun, Xidaba, and Shu, and north to Rushui and Surabaya.

古文：在魏世不甚为患；及晋，稍益繁昌，渐为寇暴。
现代文：在曹魏时期，为患还不太大；到了晋朝，蛮族更加繁盛，于是渐渐变成强大的强盗势力。
English: In the Cao Wei period, the danger was not too great; in the Jin Dynasty, the barbarians were more prosperous, so they gradually became a powerful robber force.

古文：及刘、石乱中原，诸蛮无所忌惮，渐复北徙，伊阙以南，满于山谷矣。
现代文：等到刘曜、石勒等南侵大乱中原时，这些蛮族部落更加肆无忌惮，又逐渐向北迁徙，于是，伊阙以南的地区，山间谷底遍布的全是蛮人。
English: By the time Liu You, Shiller and others invaded the Central Plains, these barbarian tribes were even more unscrupulous and gradually migrated northward. As a result, the area south of Ili was full of barbarians at the bottom of the mountain valley.

古文：河西世子政德攻晋昌，克之。
现代文：河西世子沮渠政德攻击唐契据守的晋昌，随即攻克。
English: The heir to the throne of the Western Han Dynasty, frustrated with politics and morality, attacked Jinchang, which was held by the Tang Dynasty, and immediately conquered it.

古文：唐契及弟和、甥李宝同奔伊吾，招集遗民，归附者至二千馀家，臣于柔然；柔然以契为伊吾王。
现代文：唐契跟他的弟弟唐和、外甥李宝一道逃往伊吾，招收逃亡的遗民，归附他们的有二千余家，向柔然汗国称臣。柔然汗国封唐契为伊吾王。
English: Together with his brother Tang He and nephew Li Bao, Tang Qi fled to Igu. He recruited the survivors who had fled, and more than two thousand families were attached to them, and they became subjects of the Juran Khanate. The Juran Khanate made Tang Qi the king of Igu.

古文：秦王炽磐谓其群臣曰： 今宋虽奄有江南，夏人雄据关中，皆不足与也。
现代文：西秦王乞伏炽磐，对他的文武百官说： 现在宋虽然拥有江南，夏国雄据关中，都没有什么了不起。
English: The king of Western Qin prostrated himself before the blazing mountain and said to his hundred civil and military officials: Although Song now owns the south of the Yangtze River, Xia Guoxiong is still in the middle of the pass, which is nothing remarkable.

古文：独魏主奕世英武，贤能为用，且谶云 恒代之北当有真人 ，吾将举国而事之。 
现代文：唯独魏主，世代英明威武，能任用贤才，而且谶书说： 恒山及代郡之北，一定有真龙天子， 我将统率全国官民，事奉魏主。 
English: Only Lord Wei, the wisest and most powerful of his generation, was able to appoint wise men. Moreover, the imperial edict said: "In Hengshan and the north of Dai County, there must be a true dragon god. I will lead the officials and people of the whole country and serve Lord Wei."

古文：乃遣尚书郎漠者阿胡等入见于魏，贡黄金二百斤，并陈伐夏方略。
现代文：于是，乞伏炽磐派遣尚书郎莫者阿胡等人，前往北魏朝见，进贡黄金二百斤，并呈献讨伐夏国方略。
English: As a result, Begging Blazing Rock dispatched Shang Shulangmo and others, including Ahu, to visit the Northern Wei Dynasty, pay a tribute of two hundred kilos of gold, and present a strategy for fighting the Xia.

古文：闰月，丁未，魏主如河内，登太行，至高都。
现代文：闰月，丁未，北魏国主拓跋嗣抵达河内，登太行山。又到达高都。
English: In the leap month, Ding Wei, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Hanoi, climbed Mount Taihang, and arrived in Gaodu.

古文：叔孙建自滑台西就奚斤，共入虎牢。
现代文：北魏将军叔孙建从滑台向西增援，与大将奚斤合兵一处，攻打虎牢城。
English: The Northern Wei general Sun Jian's uncle reinforces from the slide to the west, and joins forces with the general Xing Jin to attack the Tiger's Stronghold.

古文：虎牢被围二百日，无日不战，劲兵战死殆尽，而魏增兵转多。
现代文：虎牢被围困已有二百多天，没有一天不在作战，守城的精锐士卒几乎全部战死，而北魏围城军却越增越多。
English: The Tiger's Lair had been besieged for more than two hundred days, and not a day had passed without fighting. Almost all of the elite soldiers who defended the city died in battle, while the Northern Wei siege army increased more and more.

古文：魏人毁其外城，毛德祖于其内更筑三重城以拒之，魏人又毁其二重。
现代文：北魏军已摧毁了虎牢的外城。刘宋守将毛德祖又构筑了三层内城用来抵御，北魏再摧毁其中二城。
English: The Northern Wei Army had already destroyed the outer city of the Tiger's Lair. Liu Song Shou ordered Mao Zedzu to build another three-story inner city to defend against it, and the Northern Wei then destroyed two of the cities.

古文：德祖唯保一城，昼夜相拒，将士眼皆生创。
现代文：毛德祖只保持最后一城，日夜奋战，守城的将士不能睡眠，眼睛都长疮。
English: Mao Tse-tung only held the last city, and fought day and night. The soldiers who defended the city could not sleep, and their eyes were covered with sores.

古文：德祖抚之以恩，终无离心。
现代文：毛德祖与士卒们恩义相结，始终团结一心。
English: Mao Tse-tung is indebted to the soldiers and has always been united with them.

古文：时檀道济军湖陆，刘粹军项城，沈叔狸军高桥，皆畏魏兵强，不敢进。
现代文：这时，檀道济驻军湖陆，豫州刺史刘粹驻军项城，龙骧将军沈叔驻军高桥，都畏惧北魏兵强势盛，不敢前来救援。
English: At this time, Tang Daoji stationed troops in Hulun, Yu Zhou Zhishi Liu Qi stationed troops in Xiangcheng, Longtao General Shen Shu stationed troops in Gaoqiao, all were afraid of the strong strength of the Northern Wei soldiers and dared not come to the rescue.

古文：丁巳，魏人作地道以泄虎牢城中井，井深四十丈，山势峻峭，不可得防；城中人马渴乏，被创者不复出血，重以饥疫，魏仍急攻之，己未，城陷。
现代文：丁巳，北魏军挖地道，宣泄虎牢城里的井水，井深四十丈，山势高峻陡峭，守军无法阻止魏军挖掘。城中开始缺水，人马干渴倦乏，受伤的人已流不出鲜血，再加上饥饿和瘟疫，守军难以坚持下去。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Army dug a tunnel and drained the well water in the Tiger Stronghold. The well was forty meters deep and the mountain was high and steep. The defenders could not stop the Wei Army from digging. The city began to lack water, the people were thirsty and tired, the injured people could not shed blood, and combined with hunger and plague, the defenders could not hold out.

古文：将士欲扶德祖出走。
现代文：北魏军仍然发动急迫的强攻。己未，城破。
English: The Northern Wei Army still launched an urgent strong attack. However, the city was not breached.

古文：德祖曰： 我誓与此城俱毙，义不使城亡而身存也！ 
现代文：将士们想要保护毛德祖突围，毛德祖说： 我发誓与此城一同毁灭，大义所在，我不能使城陷而我仍然生存。 
English: The soldiers wanted to protect Mao Zedzu from breaking out of the encirclement. Mao Zedzu said, "I swear to destroy this city together with it. Great justice lies in this. I cannot make the city fall while I still live."

古文：魏主命将士； 得德祖者，必生致之。 
现代文：拓跋嗣传令攻城将士： 碰上毛德祖，必须生擒。 
English: Tuoba Zi sent an order to the siege soldiers: If you meet Mao Tse-tung, you must grow a beard.

古文：将军代人豆代田执德祖以献。
现代文：北魏将军、代郡人豆代田俘虏了毛德祖，呈献给拓跋嗣。
English: The Northern Wei general and the representative of the county, Doudai Tian, captured Mao Dezu and presented him to Tuoba Zi.

古文：将佐在城中者，皆为魏所虏，唯参军范道基将二百人突围南还。
现代文：刘宋将领在虎牢城中的，也都被魏军生擒，唯独参军范道基率领二百人突围，返回江南。
English: Liu Song's generals in the Tiger's Stronghold were all captured alive by the Wei army, but only Fan Daoji, who joined the army, led 200 men to break out and return to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：魏士座卒疫死者亦什二三。
现代文：北魏南征士卒死于瘟疫的，也有十分之二三。
English: Of the Northern Wei and Southern Wei enlisted soldiers who died of the plague, there were also two or three out of ten.

古文：奚斤等悉定司、兗、豫诸郡县，置守宰以抚之。
现代文：北魏大将奚斤等完全占领了刘宋的司州、兖州、豫州所属各郡县，设置地方官安抚治理。
English: Northern Wei generals such as He Jin completely occupied the counties and counties belonging to Liu Song's Sizhou, Ganzhou, and Yuzhou, and set up local officials to pacify and govern.

古文：魏主命周几镇河南，河南人安之。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣命将军周几镇守河南，河南人安于北魏的统治。
English: The head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, General Tuoba Zi, guarded several towns in Henan, and the people of Henan were comfortable under the rule of the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：徐羡之、傅亮、谢晦以亡失境土，上表自劾；诏勿问。
现代文：刘宋司空徐羡之、尚书令傅亮、领军将军谢晦因为前方战败，丧失国土，上疏自请处分。下诏，不作追究。
English: Liu Song, the commander-in-chief of the Kuomintang, Xu Enzhi, Shang Shuling, Fu Liang, and Xie Hui, the leading general of the army, lost their lands due to the defeat of the front, and were punished by Shang Zuo. The following edict is not to be investigated.

古文：徐羡之兄子吴郡太守珮之颇豫政事，与侍中王韶之、程道惠、中书舍人邢安泰、潘盛结为党友。
现代文：徐羡之的侄儿、吴郡太守徐佩之经常干预朝廷政事，与侍中王韶之、程道惠，中书舍人邢安泰、潘盛，结成党羽。
English: Xu Enzhi's nephew, Wu County Governor Xu Peizhi, often intervened in the political affairs of the imperial court, and formed a party with the attendants Wang Xizhi and Cheng Daohui, and the Chinese scholars Yan Antai and Pan Sheng.

古文：时谢晦久病，不堪见客，珮之等疑其诈疾，有异图，乃称羡之意以告傅亮，欲令亮作诏诛之。
现代文：当时谢晦一直患病，不能接见宾客。徐佩之怀疑谢晦装病，另有阴谋，于是他声称这是徐羡之的想法，把它告诉了傅亮，想要让傅亮草拟诏书，诛杀谢晦。
English: At that time, Xie Hui had been ill and couldn't receive guests. Xu Peizhu suspected that Xie Hui was faking his illness and that there was another plot, so he claimed that this was Xu Enzhi's idea and told it to Fu Liang. He wanted Fu Liang to draft an edict to kill Xie Hui.

古文：亮曰： 我等三人同受顾命，岂可自相诛戮！
现代文：傅亮说： 我们三人共同接受先帝遗诏，怎么可以自相残杀！
English: Fu Liang said: We three jointly accepted the last emperor's will, how can we kill each other!

古文：诸君果行此事，亮当角巾步出掖门耳。 
现代文：你们一定要这样做，我只好换上平民衣服，徒步走出宫城侧门！ 
English: You must do this, I have to change into civilian clothes and walk out of the Miyagi side gate!

古文：珮之等乃止。
现代文：徐佩之一伙才罢休。
English: It took one of Xu Pei's colleagues to call it quits.

古文：五月，魏主还平城。
现代文：五月，北魏国主拓跋嗣返回平城。
English: In May, the ruler of Northern Wei, Tuoba Zi, returned to Pingcheng.

古文：六月，己亥，魏宜都文成王穆观卒。
现代文：六月，己亥，北魏宜都文成王穆观去世。
English: In June, Ji Hai, Northern Wei Yi Du Wencheng Wang Mu Guan passed away.

古文：丙辰，魏主北巡，至参合陂。
现代文：丙辰，北魏国主向北视察，抵达参合陂。
English: Xing Chen, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, inspected the north and arrived at Shenghe.

古文：秋，七月，癸酉，尊帝母张夫人为皇太后。
现代文：秋季七月，刘宋少帝尊母亲张夫人为皇太后。
English: In the autumn of July, Lady Zhang, the revered mother of the Young Emperor Liu Song, became the empress dowager.

古文：魏主如三会屋侯泉。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋嗣到达三会屋侯泉。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuoba Zi, arrived at the Sanhui House in Houquan.

古文：八月，辛丑，如马邑，观源。
现代文：八月，辛丑，又抵达马邑，察看水源头。
English: In August, Xin Ug, he arrived in Ma'eup again to inspect the water source.

古文：柔然寇河西，河西王蒙逊命世子政德击之。
现代文：柔然汗国攻击河西，北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊命令他的世子沮渠政德迎战。
English: Juran Khanate attacked Hexi, Beiliang Hexi King Deqiu Mengxun ordered his descendant Deqiu Zhengde to fight.

古文：政德轻骑进战，为柔然所杀，蒙逊立次子兴为世子。
现代文：沮渠政德率轻骑兵进攻，为柔然所杀。沮渠蒙逊立其次子沮渠兴为世子。
English: Depuqiu Zhengde led the light cavalry to attack and was killed by Zhu Ran. Depuqiu Mengsong became the second son of Depuqiu Xing.

古文：九月，乙亥，魏主还宫，召奚斤还平城，留兵守虎牢；使娥清、周几镇枋头；以司马楚之所将户口置汝南、南阳、南顿、新蔡四郡，以益豫州。
现代文：九月，乙亥，北魏国主拓跋嗣回宫。召奚斤返回平城，留下军队镇守虎牢。同时命中领军娥清、将军周几镇守枋头；以司马楚之率领的部众设置汝南、南阳、南顿、新蔡四郡，来增加豫州的管辖范围。
English: In September, Emperor Tuoba, the ruler of Northern Wei, returned to the imperial palace. He called the imperial army to return to Pingcheng, leaving the army to guard the Tiger's Stronghold. At the same time, the leader of the army, E Qing, and the general Zhou Ji Zhen guarded Shantou; the troops led by Sima Chu set up four counties in Runan, Nanyang, Nantong and Xin Cai to increase the jurisdiction of Yuzhou.

古文：冬，十月，癸卯，魏人广西宫外垣，周二十里。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸卯，北魏扩建平城西宫外墙，周围长二十里。
English: In winter, October, July and August, the Northern Wei Dynasty expanded the outer wall of the West Palace of Pingcheng, with a circumference of twenty miles.

古文：秃发傉檀之死也，河西王蒙逊遣人诱其故太子虎台，许以番禾、西安二郡处之，且借之兵，使伐秦，报其父仇，复取故地。
现代文：当初，南凉景王秃发檀被毒死后，北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊派人引诱南凉太子秃发虎台，承诺把番禾、西安二郡借给他，并借给他军队，让他去讨伐西秦，为父报仇，光复故土。
English: At the beginning, after the death of the Southern Liangjing King Bald Tangerine by poisoning, the Western Lianghe King Despondent Meng Song sent someone to lure the Southern Liang Prince Bald Tangerine, promising to lend him Pango, Xi'an two counties, and lend him an army, so that he could fight the Western Qin, avenge his father, and return to his native land.

古文：后密与虎台谋曰： 秦本我之仇雠，虽以婚姻待之，盖时宜耳。
现代文：秃发虎台暗地里答应下来了，后来消息泄漏，只好作罢。西秦王乞伏炽磐的王后，是秃发虎台的妹妹，所以乞伏炽磐对待秃发虎台仍跟从前一样。
English: Bald Tigress secretly agreed to it, but later the news leaked out, so he had to give up. The queen of West Qin's King Beggar was Bald Tigress's sister, so Beggar treated Bald Tigress the same way as before.

古文：先王之薨，又非天命。遗令不治者，欲全济子孙故也。
现代文：但是秃发王后却与其兄秃发虎台秘密策划说： 秦国本是我们的世仇，虽然结成了姻亲，也不过是一时权宜之计。
English: However, the Bald Queen secretly plotted with her brother Bald Tiger to say, "Qin State was originally our sworn enemy, although we became in-laws, it was just a temporary expedient.

古文：为人子者，岂可臣妾于仇雠而不思报复乎！ 乃与武卫将军越质洛城谋弑炽磐。
现代文：先王的死，不是寿终天年，临死吩咐不要治疗，于是，他们与武卫将军越质洛城共同策划谋杀乞伏炽磐。
English: The death of the former king was not the end of his life, and on his deathbed he ordered that no treatment be given. Therefore, together with General Wuwei, they plotted the murder of Yue Qiao Luo Cheng.

古文：后妹为炽磐左夫人，有宠，知其谋而告之，炽磐杀后及虎台等十馀人。
现代文：秃发王后的妹妹是乞伏炽磐的左夫人，她知道了秃发王后的阴谋后，报告了乞伏炽磐，乞伏炽磐于是斩杀秃发王后、秃发虎台等十余人。
English: The Bald Queen's younger sister was Lady Zuo of the Beggar's Rock. After she learned of the Bald Queen's plot, she reported it to the Beggar's Rock. The Beggar's Rock then killed the Bald Queen, Bald Tiger and more than ten others.

古文：十一月，魏周几寇许昌，许昌溃，颍川太守李元德奔项。
现代文：十一月，北魏将军周几进攻许昌，许昌城崩溃，刘宋颍川太守李元德逃奔项城。
English: In November, the Northern Wei general Zhou Qi attacked Xu Chang, the city of Xu Chang collapsed, and Liu Song Yuchuan's governor Li Yuande fled Xiangcheng.

古文：戊辰，魏人围汝阳，汝阳太守王公度亦奔项。
现代文：戊辰，北魏军围攻汝阳，刘宋汝阳太守王公度也逃到项城。
English: When the Northern Wei Army besieged Ruyang in the era of Wu Chen, Liu Song Ruyang's father-in-law Wang Gongdu also fled to Xiangcheng.

古文：刘粹遣其将姚耸夫等将兵助守项城。
现代文：于是，刘宋豫州刺史刘粹派遣将领姚耸天等率兵增援，固守项城。
English: As a result, Liu Song of Yuzhou and Liu Zi of Zhishu dispatched general Yao Shentian and other reinforcements to defend Xiangcheng.

古文：魏人夷许昌城，毁钟城，以立封疆而还。
现代文：北魏军夷平了许昌城，毁坏了钟城的城墙，确定魏宋新的边界，然后便回去了。
English: The Northern Wei army razed the city of Xu Chang, destroyed the city wall of the bell city, determined the new border of the Wei and Song dynasties, and then went back.

古文：己巳，魏太宗殂。
现代文：己巳，北魏国主拓跋嗣去世。
English: In the meantime, Tuoba Zi, the ruler of Northern Wei, passed away.

古文：壬申，世祖即位，大赦。
现代文：壬申，太子拓跋焘登极，大赦天下。
English: Jinshin, Prince Takubaku ascended to the throne, and the world was at his mercy.

古文：十二月，庚子，魏葬明元帝于金陵。庙号太宗。
现代文：十二月，庚子，北魏在金陵安葬了明元帝拓跋嗣，庙号太宗。
English: In December, Geng Zi and the Northern Wei Dynasty buried Emperor Tuoba of the Ming Dynasty in Jinling. The temple's name was Taizong.

古文：魏主追尊其母杜贵嫔为密皇后。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘追尊其母杜贵嫔为密皇后。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed his mother, Du Guizhen, as empress.

古文：自司徒长孙嵩以下普增爵位。
现代文：自司徒长孙嵩以下普遍擢升爵位。
English: The knighthoods were generally promoted from the head monk Sun Song downwards.

古文：以襄城公卢鲁元为中书监，会稽公刘为尚书令，司卫监尉眷、散骑侍郎刘库仁等八人分典四部。
现代文：任命襄城公卢鲁元为中书监，会稽公刘为尚书令，司卫监尉眷、散骑侍郎刘库仁等八人分别掌管东、西、南、北四部。
English: Lu Luyuan, the lord of Xiangcheng, was appointed as the middle book supervisor, Liu Weishang, the auditor of the association, Liu Ku-Ren, the lieutenant of the superintendent of public security, and Liu Ku-Ren, the horseman, were appointed to be in charge of the east, west, south and north four departments respectively.

古文：眷，古真之弟子也。
现代文：尉眷是尉古真的侄儿。
English: He is the nephew of Guzheng.

古文：以河内镇将代人罗结为侍中，外都大官，总三十六曹事。
现代文：北魏任命河内镇将代郡人罗结为侍中、外都大官，总管三十六个部门的事务。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Luo Jie, the deputy county official of Hanoi Town, as the vice-governor, the foreign capital official, and the general manager of 36 departments.

古文：结时年一百七，精爽不衰，魏主以其忠悫，亲任之，使兼长秋卿，监典后宫，出入卧内；年一百一十，乃听归老，朝廷每有大事，遣骑访焉；又十年乃卒。
现代文：罗结当时已有一百零七岁，精力旺盛，拓跋焘认为他忠诚憨直，十分尊敬信任他。
English: At that time, Luo Jie was 107 years old and full of vigor. Tuobao believed that he was loyal and upright, and had great respect and trust in him.

古文：左光禄大夫崔浩研精经术，练习制度，凡朝廷礼仪，军国书诏，无不关掌。
现代文：又过了十年他才去世。北魏左光禄大夫崔浩精通儒家经典，对于朝廷制度和各级机构的功能，尤其熟悉。因此，凡是朝廷礼仪典章、军国诏令，全由他负责。
English: It took another ten years for him to die. Northern Wei Zuoguanglu doctor Cui Hao was well versed in Confucian classics, and was particularly familiar with the imperial system and the functions of institutions at all levels. Therefore, he was responsible for all imperial etiquette and military orders.

古文：浩不好老、庄之书，曰： 此矫诬之说，不近人情。
现代文：崔浩不喜欢老子、庄子的著作，说： 这些都是虚妄、矫情的学说，和人情世态不大切近。
English: Cui Hao did not like the works of Lao Zi and Zhuang Zi, saying: These are all false and pretentious doctrines, which are not in line with the human condition.

古文：老聃习礼，仲尼所师，岂肯为败法之书以乱先王之治乎！ 
现代文：老聃研究礼仪，是孔丘尊为老师的人，怎么竟然写出败坏礼教的著作，而搞乱先古圣王的治世之道呢！ 
English: How could a scholar of etiquette, a man revered by Confucius as a teacher, write a book that corrupts etiquette and disturbs the reign of an ancient holy king?

古文：尤不信佛法，曰： 何为事此胡神！ 
现代文：崔浩尤其不信佛教，说： 为什么要崇拜这个胡人的神！ 
English: Cui Hao, in particular, did not believe in Buddhism, saying: "Why should we worship this god of the Hu people!

古文：及世祖即位，左右多毁之。帝不得已，命浩以公归第。
现代文：拓跋焘即位后，他的左右亲信大臣常常攻击崔浩；拓跋焘不得已，只好命崔浩保留公爵，返回私宅。
English: After Tuobaobao's accession to the throne, his right and left trusted ministers often attacked Cui Hao; Tuobaobao had no choice but to order Cui Hao to retain the duke and return to his private home.

古文：然素知其贤，每有疑议，辄召问之。
现代文：但是，因为他素知崔浩的贤明智慧，朝廷凡是发生争议，出现疑难问题，拓跋焘总是要召见他，听取他的意见。
English: However, because he was well aware of Cui Hao's wisdom, whenever there was a dispute or problem in the imperial court, Tuobao would always summon him and listen to his opinion.

古文：浩纤妍洁白如美妇人，常自谓才比张良，而稽古过之。
现代文：崔浩肌肤洁白细腻，如同美妇，常自以为才干可与张良相比，而考辨古制方面更超过张良。
English: Cui Hao's skin is white and delicate, like that of a beautiful woman. He often thinks that his talent can be compared to Zhang Liang, and he even surpasses Zhang Liang in the ancient system.

古文：既归第，因修服食养性之术。
现代文：返回私宅后，崔浩又研究修身养性的方法。
English: After returning to his private home, Cui Hao continued to study methods of self-cultivation.

古文：初，嵩山道士寇谦之，赞之弟也，修张道陵之术，自言尝遇老子降，命谦之继道陵为天师，授以辟谷轻身之术及《科戒》二十卷，使之清整道教。
现代文：最初，嵩山道士寇谦之，即寇赞之的弟弟，修炼张道陵的法术，自称曾经见过老子降临人世，老子命令他继承张道陵的法统，担任天师，并传授他不进饮食和飞腾升空的法术，以及符咒《科戒》二十卷，命他重新清理整顿道教。
English: At first, the Songshan Taoist priest Kou Qianzhi, the younger brother of Kou Zanzhi, practiced the magic of Zhang Daoling, claiming that he had seen Lao Zi come to the world. Lao Zi ordered him to inherit the law of Zhang Daoling, to serve as a heavenly teacher, and to teach him the magic of not eating and flying into the sky, as well as the twenty volumes of the magic spell "Scientific Precepts," and ordered him to clean up and rectify Taoism.

古文：又遇神人李谱文，云老子之玄孙也，授以《图箓真经》六十馀卷，使之辅佐北方太平真君；出天宫静轮之法，其中数篇，李君之手笔也。
现代文：后来，又遇见了神人李谱文，据说是老子的玄孙，授以《图真经》六十余卷，命他辅佐北方太平真君。又传授天宫静轮之法，其中有几篇还是出自李谱文的手笔。
English: Later, he also met the godman Li Fuwen, said to be the great-great-grandson of Lao Zi, who gave him more than sixty volumes of the "Tu Zhen Jing" and ordered him to assist the Northern Taiping Zhenjun. He also taught the method of the Heavenly Palace Chakra, several of which were written by Li Fuwen.

古文：谦之奉其书献于魏主。
现代文：寇谦之把这本书呈献给北魏国主拓跋焘。
English: Ko Qianzhi dedicated this book to the Northern Wei sovereign Tuobao.

古文：朝野多未之信，崔浩独师事之，从受其术，且上书赞明其事曰： 臣闻圣王受命，必有天应。
现代文：朝野上下很多人都不相信。唯独崔浩把寇谦之当作老师尊奉，追随他学习法术，并且上疏皇帝赞扬寇谦之说： 臣曾经听说，圣明的君王接受天命，上天必定有祥瑞相应。
English: Many people in and out of court did not believe it. However, Cui Hao revered Kou Qian Zhuang as a teacher and followed him to learn magic, and the Shang Dynasty emperor praised Kou Qian Zhuang saying: "A minister once heard that the king of Shengming accepted the destiny of heaven, and heaven must have a corresponding auspiciousness.

古文：《河图》、《洛书》皆寄言于虫兽之文，未若今日人神接对，手笑粲然，辞旨深妙，自古无比。
现代文：《河图》、《洛书》都是象虫子一样的古文字，不象今天，人神面对，手书笔迹十分清晰，辞意深奥奇妙，自古以来，无与伦比。
English: "The River Map" and "The Book of Luo" are both ancient characters that resemble insects. Unlike today, when man faces God, the handwriting is very clear, the meaning is profound and wondrous, and it has been unparalleled since ancient times.

古文：岂可以世俗常虑而忽上灵之命！
现代文：怎么可以因世俗的顾虑，忽视上天的旨意！
English: How can worldly concerns cause us to ignore God's will?

古文：臣窃惧之。 
现代文：臣感到恐惧。 
English: The minister was horrified.

古文：帝欣然，使谒都奉玉帛、牲牢祭嵩岳，迎致谦之弟子在山中者，以崇奉天师，显扬新法，宣布天下。
现代文：拓跋焘大喜，命令谒者携带璧玉、绸缎、猪牛羊祭祀嵩山，并迎接寇谦之在山中修炼的弟子到平城，表示崇奉天师，宣场道法，遍告天下周知。
English: Tuoba was overjoyed and ordered his followers to bring jade, silk, pigs, cattle, and sheep to sacrifice to Mount Song. He also welcomed the disciples of Kuo Qian who had been cultivating in the mountains to Pingcheng, saying that they would worship the heavenly teacher, propagate the Taoism, and spread it to the whole world.

古文：起天师道场于平城之东南，重坛五层，给道士百二十人衣食，每月设厨会数千人。
现代文：于是，在平城东南建立天师道场，设坛，坛高五层，朝廷供经道士一百二十人衣股饮食，每月道场设置厨房，供给膳食，与会的有数千人。
English: As a result, Tianshi Dojo was established in the southeast of Pingcheng. An altar was set up, five stories high. The imperial court provided food and clothing for one hundred and twenty Taoists. A kitchen was set up in the dojo every month, and meals were provided. Thousands of people attended the meetings.

古文：臣光曰：老、庄之书，大指欲同死生，轻去就。
现代文：臣司马光曰：老子、庄子的著作，主要是要人们超脱生死，把生与死一样看待，轻视人世的来去进退。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The works of Lao Zi and Zhuang Zi are mainly to help people transcend life and death, treat life and death equally, and despise the coming and going of the human world.

古文：而为神仙者，服饵修炼以求轻举，炼草石为金银，其为术正相戾矣。
现代文：而要成仙的人，靠吞服丹药，常加修炼以求飞腾升天，烧炼草木石以求变成黄金白银。
English: But those who want to become immortals rely on swallowing herbal medicine, often cultivating in order to soar into the sky, and burning herbs and stones in order to turn into gold and silver.

古文：是以刘歆《七略》叙道家为诸子，神仙为方技。
现代文：这方法跟老庄的基本思想恰恰相反。所以刘歆著《七略》，把道家归入《诸子略》，神仙归入《方技略》。
English: This method is exactly the opposite of the fundamental thought of Lao Zhuang. Therefore, Liu Zhen wrote the "Seven Abbreviations" and classified Taoists into the "Sons and Daughters Abbreviations" and Immortals into the "Fangzhi Abbreviations."

古文：其后复有符水、禁咒之术，至谦之遂合而为一；至今循之，其讹甚矣！
现代文：此后又有符水、咒语等等法术。到寇谦之将以上种种合而为一，一直因循至今，这是一个大错误啊！
English: After that, there were water spells, incantations, and other spells. It was a big mistake for Kuo Qianzhi to combine all of the above into one, which has been followed to this day!

古文：崔浩不喜佛、老之书而信谦之之言，其故何哉！
现代文：崔浩不崇信佛教，不喜读老子的著作，却相信寇谦之的话，这是什么缘故呢！
English: Cui Hao does not believe in Buddhism, does not like to read Lao Zi's works, but believes in the words of Kou Qian, what is the reason for this!

古文：昔臧文仲祀爰居，孔子以为不智；如谦之者，其为爰居亦大矣。 《诗》三百，一言以蔽之，曰思无邪。 
现代文：过去臧文仲祭祀爱居鸟，孔丘认为他不明智。至于寇谦之，比起爰居鸟，则大得多了！ 《诗经》三百首，一言以蔽之，就是思无邪。 
English: In the past, Confucius thought that it was unwise for Sun Wenzhong to offer sacrifices to the bird of paradise. As for Kuo Qianzhi, he was much greater than the bird of paradise! The 300 poems of the Book of Songs, in a word, are innocent.

古文：君子之于择术，可不慎哉！
现代文：君子对于思想和学说的选择，不能不谨慎啊！
English: A gentleman cannot but be prudent in his choice of thought and doctrine!

