古文：萧敌烈，字涅鲁衮，宰相挞烈四世孙。
现代文：萧敌烈，字涅鲁衮，宰相挞烈四世孙。
English: Xiao Jirei, also known as Nehru, is the fourth-generation grandson of Prime Minister Jirei.

古文：识度弘远，为乡里推重。
现代文：识见与器度广大深远，为乡里所推许尊重。
English: His insight and ability are broad and far-reaching, and he is respected in the village.

古文：始为牛群敞史。
现代文：初时担任牛群敞史。
English: At first, he worked as a cowherd.

古文：帝闻其贤，召入侍，迁国舅详稳。
现代文：圣宗得知他贤能，征召入宫侍卫，迁国舅详稳。
English: When the Holy Sect learned of his virtues, they conscripted him into the palace bodyguard, and he was moved to a more stable position.

古文：统和二十八年，帝谓群臣曰： 高丽康肇弑其君诵，立诵族兄询而相之，大逆也。
现代文：统和二十八年，皇上对群臣说 ：高丽康肇杀害其国君王诵，立诵的族兄王询为帝而自己任宰相，此乃大逆不道。
English: In the 28th year of the Heian period, the emperor said to his courtiers, "It is a great treachery for Goryeo Kangzha to kill the king of his country, King Choe, and to make Choe's elder brother, King Choe, the emperor and himself the prime minister.

古文：宜发兵问其罪。 
现代文：应当派兵问罪。 
English: Troops should be sent to investigate.

古文：群臣皆曰可。
现代文：群臣都说好。
English: The ministers are all in favour.

古文：敌烈谏曰： 国家连年征讨，士卒抏敝。
现代文：敌烈劝谏说： 国家连年征讨，士卒疲困。
English: He said: The country has been collecting taxes for years, and the soldiers are exhausted.

古文：况陛下在谅阴，年谷不登，创痍未复。
现代文：何况陛下正在居丧；年成不好粮食欠收，创伤至今没有平复。
English: What's more, His Majesty is now in the midst of his death; the poor harvest has not yet healed the wounds.

古文：岛夷小国，城垒完固，胜不为武，万一失利，恐贻后悔。
现代文：高丽乃是岛夷小国，城池修缮得很坚固。胜之不足以显示我国威风，万一失利，恐怕将来后悔。
English: Goryeo is a small island country with a well-maintained castle. A victory is not enough to show our power. If we lose, I am afraid we will regret it in the future.

古文：不如遣一介之使，往问其故。
现代文：不如派一介之使者，前往责问其缘故。
English: It would be better to send an envoy to inquire about his whereabouts.

古文：彼若伏罪则已；不然，俟服除岁丰，举兵未晚。 
现代文：他如果认罪就罢了；不然的话，等到您服丧期满，年成也好了，再发兵也不为晚。 
English: If he pleads guilty, that's all; otherwise, by the time your mourning period is over, the year will be over, and it won't be too late to send troops.

古文：时令已下，言虽不行，识者韪之。
现代文：当时军令已经下达，上奏的言论虽然没有被采纳，但有识者还是认为他说得很对。
English: At that time, the military order had already been issued, and although the above-mentioned remarks were not adopted, people with insight still thought that he was right.

古文：明年，同知左夷离毕事。
现代文：次年，为同知左夷离毕事。
English: The following year, he was forced to leave because of his friend, Zuai.

古文：改右夷离毕。
现代文：改任右夷离毕。
English: He was transferred to the position of Ui and left the position.

古文：开泰初，率兵巡西边。
现代文：开泰初，率兵巡行西部边境。
English: At the beginning of the Thai War of Independence, he led troops on a patrol along the western border.

古文：时夷离堇部下闸撒狘扑里、失室、勃葛率部民遁，敌烈追擒之，令复业，迁国舅详稳。
现代文：当时夷离堇部下闸撒笰扑里、失室、勃葛率领部民逃遁，敌烈追击擒获之，让他们恢复旧业。不久敌烈迁任国舅详稳。
English: At that time, he abandoned his subordinates and fled the palace, lost his office, and led his subordinates to flee the palace. The enemy pursued and captured him, and allowed them to resume their old business. Soon, the enemy moved to Guozhu and stabilized.

古文：从枢密使耶律世良伐高丽。
现代文：随从枢密使耶律世良讨伐高丽。
English: He fought against Goryeo with the imperial envoy, Yerushalayim.

古文：上闻，以手诏褒奖，赐内厩马。
现代文：回国，加同政事门下平章事，拜为上京留守。
English: After returning to China, he was involved in a political scandal and left for Beijing.

古文：重熙中，迁四捷军详稳，谢事归乡里。
现代文：敌烈为人宽厚，通晓为政之要领，朝臣们都认为他有辅佐帝王创业治国的才能。
English: He was a generous person and knew the essentials of politics. The courtiers all believed that he had the talent to assist the emperor in starting a business and governing the country.

古文：数岁，起为昭德军节度使，寻改国舅详稳，卒。耶律盆奴，字胡独堇，惕隐涅鲁古之孙。
现代文：汉人行宫都部署王继忠举荐他才能可任枢密使，皇上怀疑王是其党人从而作罢。任中京留守，不久去世。耶律盆奴，字胡独堇，惕隐涅鲁古的孙子。
English: Wang Jizhong was dispatched by the Han emperor to the imperial court to recommend him for appointment as a privy councilor, but the emperor suspected that Wang was a member of his party and dismissed him. He stayed in Beijing and died soon after. Yerubonnu, nicknamed Hu Duxuan, was the grandson of Emperor Qianling.

古文：景宗时，为乌古部详稳，政尚严急，民苦之。
现代文：景宗时，任乌古部详稳，为政崇尚严酷，百姓很痛苦。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jingzong, Ren Wukubo was meticulous and stable, his policies were harsh, and the people suffered a great deal.

古文：有司以闻，诏曰： 盆奴任方面寄，以细故究问，恐损威望。 
现代文：有司将情况上奏，皇上下诏说： 盆奴身为方面要员，因为小错而追究寻罪，恐怕有损威望。 
English: A magistrate reported the situation to the emperor, who issued an imperial edict saying, "As Bonnu is an important person in the region, I'm afraid it would damage his prestige to be investigated for a minor mistake.

古文：寻迁马群太保。
现代文：不久迁任马群太保。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Maqun Taibo.

古文：统和十六年，隐实燕军之不任事者，汰之。
现代文：统和十六年，审核燕军之中不称职者，淘汰剔除之。
English: In the 16th year of the unification of the country, the incompetents among the Yan army were audited and eliminated.

古文：二十八年，驾征高丽，盆奴为先锋。
现代文：二十八年，皇上亲征高丽，盆奴担任先锋。
English: In the 28th year, the emperor personally led the conquest of Korea, with Bonnu as the vanguard.

古文：至铜州，高丽将康肇分兵为三以抗我军：一营于州西，据三水之会，肇居其中；一营近州之山；一附城而营。
现代文：到铜州，高丽将领康肇兵分三路以抵抗我军：一路设营于铜州城西面，据守三水交会之处，康肇就在其中；一路设营于州城附近的山上；一路依傍州城而安营。
English: To Cangzhou, the Koryo general led the Kangzha soldiers in three ways to resist our army: one way was to set up camp in the west of Cangzhou City, where the junction of the three rivers was located, and Kangzha was in it; one way was to set up camp in the mountains near Cangzhou City; one way was to camp near Cangzhou City.

古文：盆奴率耶律弘古击破三水营，擒肇，李玄蕴等军望风溃。
现代文：盆奴率领耶律弘古击破三水营，擒获康肇，李玄蕴等人所部军队望风溃逃。
English: Bonnu led by Yerut Honggu broke through the Sanshui camp, captured Kang Zhao, Li Xuanjun and other people joined the army and fled.

古文：会大军至，斩三万余级，追至开京，破敌于西岭。
现代文：适逢我大军到来，斩首三万余级。追至开京，击破敌军于西岭。
English: When our army arrived, they decapitated more than 30,000 troops. They chased them to Kaiging and defeated the enemy army in Xiling.

古文：高丽王询闻边城不守，遁去。
现代文：王询听说边城失守，逃走了。
English: When Wang En heard that the border town was lost, he fled.

古文：盆奴入开京，焚其王宫，乃抚慰其民人。
现代文：盆奴进入开京，焚烧其王宫，然后安抚存恤百姓。
English: Bonnu entered Kaikyo, burned its royal palace, and then pacified the people.

古文：上嘉其功，迁北院大王，薨。
现代文：皇上嘉奖其功劳，迁为北院大王，不久去世。
English: The Emperor commended his service and transferred him to the Northern Court, where he died soon after.

古文：萧排押，字韩隐，国舅少父房之后。
现代文：萧排押，字韩隐，国舅少父房的后代。
English: Xiao Pai, the character Han Yin, is the offspring of Guo's younger paternal uncle.

古文：多智略，能骑射。
现代文：富于智慧谋略，擅长骑马射箭。
English: Rich in wisdom and strategy, good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：统和初，为左皮室详稳，讨阻卜有功。
现代文：统和初，任左皮室详稳，讨伐阻卜立有战功。
English: At the beginning of the unification, Ren's left-hand room was well-ordered and stable, and he made great achievements in the fight against obstruction.

古文：四年，破宋将曹彬、米信兵于望都。
现代文：四年，击破宋将曹彬、米信兵马于望都。
English: In four years, Cao Bin, the Song general, and Yixin Terracotta Warriors and Horses were defeated in the capital of Wangdu.

古文：凡军事有疑，每预参决。
现代文：凡遇军事有疑问处，他每每参加决断。
English: Whenever there is a military question, he always takes part in the decision-making.

古文：寻总永兴宫分糺及舍利、拽剌、二皮室等军，与枢密使耶律斜轸收复山西所陷城邑。
现代文：不久总管永兴宫分纠及舍利、拽剌、二皮室等军，与枢密使耶律斜轸收复山西失陷的城邑。
English: Soon, the general manager Yongxing Gong divided his forces into the armies of Sheli, Draguo and Erkimuro, and the imperial envoy, Yeludobong, to recover the lost cities in Shanxi.

古文：是冬，攻宋，隶先锋，围满城，率所部先登，拔之，改南京统军使。
现代文：这年冬天，进攻宋，排押隶属于先锋军，包围满城，率领部下先行登城，攻下满城，改任南京统军使。
English: In the winter of that year, he attacked the Song Dynasty, and his platoon was part of the vanguard army. He encircled the city, led his subordinates to the city first, captured the city, and was appointed as the envoy of the Nanjing unified army.

古文：尚卫国公主，拜驸马都尉，加同政事门下平章事。
现代文：娶卫国公主，拜驸马都尉，升任同政事门下平章事。
English: He married the princess of the country, Captain Baima, and was promoted to the position of Tong Zhengji, a subordinate of Ping Zhangji.

古文：十三年，历北、南院宣徽使。
现代文：十三年，历任北、南院宣徽使。
English: For 13 years, he served as the chief envoy of the North and South Imperial Courts.

古文：条上时政得失及赋役法，上嘉纳焉。
现代文：逐条上奏时政之得失，以及征收赋役之法，皇上嘉许并采纳之。
English: The Emperor commended and adopted the article-by-article report on the merits and demerits of the current government, as well as the law on the imposition of forced labor.

古文：十五年，加政事令，迁东京留守。
现代文：十五年，升任政事令，迁东京留守。
English: After 15 years, he was promoted to the position of government official and moved to Tokyo.

古文：二十二年，复攻宋，将渤海军，下德清军。
现代文：二十二年，又攻宋，率渤海军，攻下德清军。
English: Twenty-two years later, he attacked Song, led the navy, and defeated the German Qing Army.

古文：后萧挞凛卒，专任南面事。
现代文：萧挞凛去世，排押专任南面事。
English: Xiao Yulin passed away, and was assigned full-time to the south.

古文：宋和议成，为北府宰相。
现代文：与宋和议达成后，任北府宰相。
English: After the conclusion of the peace treaty with Song, he served as the prime minister of the northern prefecture.

古文：圣宗征高丽，将兵由北道进，至开京西岭，破敌兵，斩数千级。
现代文：圣宗征讨高丽，排押率兵由北路进军，到开京西岭，击败敌军，斩首数千级。
English: Shengzong led his troops to march from the North Road to the West Ridge of Kaijing, defeating the enemy army and beheading thousands of soldiers.

古文：高丽王询惧，奔平州。
现代文：王询恐惧，逃奔平州。
English: Fearing for his life, Wang En fled to Pingzhou.

古文：排押入开京，大掠而还。
现代文：排押进入开京，大肆抢掠而回。
English: The platoon entered Kaikyo and returned with a large amount of loot.

古文：帝嘉之，封兰陵郡王。
现代文：皇上嘉许他，封为兰陵郡王。
English: The emperor commended him and made him the king of Lanling County.

古文：开泰二年，以宰相知西南面招讨使。
现代文：开泰二年，以宰相身份知西南面招讨使。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Taejo, he invited envoys to the southwestern part of Korea in his capacity as prime minister.

古文：五年，进王东平。
现代文：五年，进位为东平王。
English: Five years later, he was promoted to King Dongping.

古文：排押为政宽裕而善断，诸部畏爱，民以殷富，时议多之。
现代文：排押为政宽容而善于决断，诸部敬畏爱戴，百姓因此而富足，时论赞许他。
English: He is tolerant and good at making decisions, respected and loved by all departments, and the people are rich because of this, and he is praised by the times.

古文：七年，再伐高丽，至开京，敌奔溃，纵兵俘掠而还。
现代文：七年，再次讨伐高丽，到开京，敌人奔逃溃散，排押放纵士兵俘掳抢掠而回。
English: In the seventh year, they once again attacked Goryeo, and when they reached Beijing, the enemy fled and dispersed, and the soldiers who had been detained and indulged were taken prisoner, robbed and plundered, and returned.

古文：渡茶、陀二河，敌夹射，排押委甲仗走，坐是免官。
现代文：渡茶、陀二河，敌人夹岸射击，排押抛弃甲仗逃跑，因此而被免官。
English: He was dismissed from his post for crossing the Tea River and the Dadi River, shooting at the enemy from both sides of the river, abandoning the line of battle and fleeing.

古文：太平三年，复王豳，薨。
现代文：太平三年，复位为豳王，逝世。
English: In the third year of the Taiping era, he was restored to the throne as the King of Xing and passed away.

古文：弟恒德。
现代文：弟萧恒德。
English: His younger brother, Xiao Hengde.

古文：恒德，字逊宁。
现代文：萧恒德，字逊宁。
English: Xiao Hengde, character Sunning.

古文：有胆略而善谋。
现代文：富于胆略而善于谋划。
English: Bold and scheming.

古文：统和元年，尚越国公主，拜驸马都尉，迁南面林牙。
现代文：统和元年，娶越国公主，拜为驸马都尉，迁南面林牙。
English: In the first year of Unification, he married a princess from Yue Province, was given the title of "Horse Captain," and moved south to Linza.

古文：从宣徽使耶律阿没里征高丽还，改北面林牙。
现代文：随从宣徽使耶律阿没里征讨高丽回国，改任北面林牙。
English: Accompanied by Xuan Hui, he sent Ye Luo Anli to enlist Koryo to return to the country, and was reassigned to Beimen Lin Ya.

古文：会宋将曹彬、米信侵燕，耶律休哥与恒德议军事，多见信用，为东京留守。
现代文：适逢宋将曹彬、米信侵犯燕地，耶律休哥与恒德商议军事，他的许多建议均被采纳，任东京留守。
English: At the same time that Song general Cao Bin and Yixin invaded Yan's territory, Yelu Xiu Ge and Heng De discussed military affairs. Many of his suggestions were adopted, and he stayed in Tokyo.

古文：六年，上攻宋，围沙堆，恒德独当一面。
现代文：六年，皇上进攻宋，包围沙堆，恒德独挡一面。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor attacked Song, encircled the sand heap, and Hengde alone blocked it.

古文：城上矢石如雨，恒德意气自若，督将士夺其陴。
现代文：城上箭矢飞石如雨，恒德神色自若，督促将士们夺占城墙。
English: It was raining arrows and stones on the city. Hengde looked confident and urged the soldiers to occupy the city wall.

古文：城陷，中流矢，太后亲临视，赐药。
现代文：城被攻陷，恒德身中流矢，太后亲自前往探视，赐给医药。
English: The city was captured, and Hengde was devastated. The empress dowager personally visited the city to give medicine.

古文：攻长城口，复先登，太后益多其功。
现代文：进攻长城口时，恒德又率先登城，太后更加嘉赏其功绩。
English: When attacking the mouth of the Great Wall, Hengde was the first to enter the city, and the empress dowager was even more appreciative of his achievements.

古文：时高丽未附，恒德受诏，率兵拔其边城。
现代文：当时高丽未曾归附，恒德接受诏令，率兵攻下其边城。
English: At that time, Korea had not yet been annexed, and Hengde accepted the imperial edict and led troops to capture its border city.

古文：王始惧，上表请降。
现代文：高丽王治恐惧，上表请降。
English: The king of Goryeo is ruled by fear. Please lower your watch.

古文：十二年八月，赐启圣竭力功臣。
现代文：十二年八月，赐号为启圣竭力功臣。
English: In August of the same year, he was given the posthumous title of "Kaiseki Joriki Koson."

古文：从都部署和朔奴讨兀惹，未战，兀惹请降。
现代文：随从都部署和朔奴讨伐兀惹，还未接战，兀惹请求投降。
English: All his followers were deployed with Shuo Niu to fight against the Jiao Jiao, but they did not engage in battle, and the Jiao Jiao requested surrender.

古文：恒德利其俘获，不许。
现代文：恒德贪图通过作战来缴获财物擒获俘虏，不接受投降。
English: Hengde was eager to seize property and prisoners through combat, and refused to surrender.

古文：兀惹死战，城不能拔。
现代文：兀惹拼死作战，城池无法伐下。
English: They fought tooth and nail, but could not take the castle.

古文：和朔奴议欲引退，恒德曰： 以彼倔强，吾奉诏来讨，无功而还，诸部谓我何！
现代文：和朔奴商议想要撤退，恒德说： 正因为敌方倔强不屈，我们奉诏令前来讨伐，如果无功而回，诸部怎么看我们呢？
English: Discussing with Shuo Nu about withdrawing, Heng De said: It is precisely because the enemy is stubborn and unyielding that we have come to fight according to the imperial edict. If we return without success, how will the various ministries view us?

古文：若深入多获，犹胜徒返。 
现代文：如果再进军深入多缴获些，还强似空手而回。 
English: If we go deeper and capture more, it's more likely that we'll return empty-handed.

古文：和朔奴不得已，进击东南诸部，至高丽北鄙。
现代文：和朔奴不得已，进军攻击东南诸部，到达高丽北部边境。
English: As a last resort, Hoshokuni marched to attack the southeastern provinces and reached the northern border of Korea.

古文：比还，道远粮绝，士马死伤者众，坐是削功臣号。
现代文：待到回国时，路远粮尽，人员马匹死伤惨重，因此恒德被削去功臣名号。
English: By the time he returned to China, his supplies had run out and his men and horses had suffered heavy casualties. As a result, Hengde was stripped of his title as a meritorious subject.

古文：十四年，为行军都部署，伐蒲卢毛朵部。还，公主疾，太后遣宫人贤释侍之，恒德私焉。
现代文：十四年，任行军都部署，讨伐蒲卢毛朵部，公主生了病，太后派宫人贤释侍奉她，恒德偷偷与贤释私通。
English: In the 14th year, all the marching troops were deployed to fight against Bulu Mao Du, the princess fell ill, the empress sent a courtier to serve her, Heng De secretly had an affair with Xian Xie.

古文：公主恚而薨，太后怒，赐死。
现代文：公主愤恨而逝，太后发怒，将他赐死。
English: The princess died of indignation, and the empress dowager was furious and had him put to death.

古文：后追封兰陵郡王。
现代文：后来追封为兰陵郡王。
English: Later, he was posthumously crowned Lanling County King.

古文：子匹敌。
现代文：子萧匹敌。
English: Xiao Xiao is his equal.

古文：匹敌，字苏隐，一名昌裔。
现代文：萧匹敌，字苏隐，又名昌裔。
English: Xiao Biqi, surnamed Suyin, also known as Chang Zi.

古文：生未月，父母俱死，育于禁掖。
现代文：出生未满月，父母双亡，养于禁宫之中。
English: Born before the full moon, his parents both died, and he was raised in the Forbidden City.

古文：既长，尚秦晋王公主，拜驸马都尉，为殿前副点检。
现代文：成年之后，娶秦晋王公主，拜为驸马都尉，任殿前副点检。
English: After he came of age, he married Princess Qin Jin Wang, and was given the title of Lieutenant of the Horse and Deputy Inspector of the Palace.

古文：统和八年，改北面林牙。
现代文：统和八年，改任北面林牙。
English: In the eighth year of unification, he was transferred to Beimen Linya.

古文：太平四年，迁殿前都点检，出为国舅详稳。
现代文：太平四年，迁任殿前都点检，出京任为国舅详稳。
English: In the fourth year of the Taiping era, he was inspected before he was transferred to the palace, and he was appointed to Beijing as the uncle of the country.

古文：九年，渤海大延琳叛，劫掠邻部，与南京留守萧孝穆往讨。
现代文：九年，渤海大延琳反叛，抢劫掳掠邻近部族，萧匹敌与南京留守萧孝穆前往讨伐。
English: In the ninth year, the Bohai Great Yanlin rebelled, robbed and plundered neighboring tribes, and Xiao Biqi and Xiao Xiaomu, who stayed in Nanjing, went to fight.

古文：孝穆欲全城降，乃筑重城围之，数月，城中人阴来纳款，遂擒延琳，东京平，以功封兰陵郡王。
现代文：孝穆想要令全城投降，于是修筑重城包围之，几个月后，城中人暗里前来归顺，于是活捉了延琳，东京平定，匹敌因功封为兰陵郡王。
English: Xiaomu wanted to make the whole city surrender, so he built a heavy city to encircle it. A few months later, people in the city secretly came to surrender, so he captured Yanlin alive, pacified Tokyo, and became the king of Lanling County.

古文：十一年，圣宗不豫。
现代文：十一年，圣宗病重。
English: In the eleventh year, Seongjong fell seriously ill.

古文：先是，钦哀与仁德皇后有隙，以匹敌尝为后所爱，忌之。
现代文：在此之前，钦哀与仁德皇后不和，因为匹敌曾经为仁德皇后所喜爱，钦哀后十分忌恨他。
English: Prior to this, Kinyi had been at odds with Empress Rende, as Kinyi had once been loved by Empress Rende, but Kinyi came to detest him intensely.

古文：时护卫冯家奴上变，诬后弟浞卜与匹敌谋逆，以皇后摄政，徐议当立者。
现代文：当时护卫冯家奴向朝廷告发谋反，诬陷皇后弟弟浞卜与萧匹敌谋反，请皇后摄理国政，慢慢再商议该立之人。
English: At that time, the escort Feng Jianu reported to the imperial court that there was a plot to rebel, falsely accusing the queen's brother Zou Bu and Xiao Bi of plotting against each other, and asked the queen to take charge of state affairs and slowly discuss the person to be appointed.

古文：公主窃闻其谋，谓匹敌曰： 尔将无罪被戮。
现代文：公主暗中探知其谋划，对匹敌说： 你将要无罪被杀。
English: The princess spied his plan and said to her rival, "You will be killed without guilt."

古文：与其死，何若奔女直国以全其生！ 
现代文：与其死，何如逃奔女真国以保全性命！ 
English: Instead of dying, how about running away to save your life!

古文：匹敌曰： 朝廷讵肯以飞语害忠良？宁死弗适他国。 
现代文：匹敌说 ：朝廷怎会因为诽谤的话就杀害忠良呢，我宁死也不愿逃奔到外国。 
English: The rival said, "How could the court kill Tadayoshi because of slanderous words? I would rather die than flee to a foreign country."

古文：及钦哀摄政，杀之。
现代文：及至钦哀摄政，杀了他。
English: and killed the regent.

古文：耶律资忠，字沃衍，小字札剌，系出仲父房。
现代文：耶律资忠，字沃衍，乳名札剌，出自仲父房一系。
English: Yerut Zizhong, whose family name was Woyan and whose maiden name was Fudan, was from the same line as Zhong's father.

古文：兄国留善属文，圣宗重之。
现代文：兄长国留因擅长写文章，深得圣宗看重。
English: His elder brother, Guoliu, was highly regarded by the Holy Sect because he was good at writing articles.

古文：时妻弟之妻阿古与奴通，将奔女直国，国留追及奴，杀之，阿古自经。
现代文：当时国留妻弟的妻子阿古与奴仆私通，将要逃奔女真国，国留追及奴仆，杀掉了他，阿古自缢而死。
English: At that time, Ago, the wife of Kunimatsu's brother-in-law, was having an affair with his manservant and was about to flee to Nijima Province. Kunimatsu chased after the manservant and killed him. Ago hanged himself and died.

古文：阿古母有宠于太后，事闻，太后怒，将杀之。
现代文：阿古的母亲受太后宠爱，将事情告诉太后，太后发怒，将要杀国留。
English: Agu's mother was favored by the empress dowager and told the empress dowager about the matter. The empress dowager became angry and was about to kill the emperor.

古文：帝度不能救，遣人诀别，问以后事。
现代文：皇上自忖不能相救，派人诀别，问他后事。
English: The emperor thought he could not save himself, so he sent someone to say goodbye and ask him what had happened.

古文：国留谢曰： 陛下悯臣无辜，恩漏九泉，死且不朽！ 
现代文：国留致谢说： 陛下怜悯我无罪，恩泽渗入九泉，我虽死也可以不朽了！ 
English: He left the country to express his gratitude, saying, "Your Majesty, your mercy has absolved me of my sin. Your grace has permeated all the springs. Even though I am dead, I can become immortal!"

古文：既死，人多冤之。
现代文：死之后，人们多替他感到冤屈。
English: After his death, people mostly felt a sense of grievance on his behalf.

古文：在狱著《兔赋》、《寤寐歌》，为世所称。
现代文：国留在狱中写有《冤赋》、《寤寐歌》，为世人所称道。
English: Guo remained in prison and wrote "Wrongful Imprisonment" and "Sleeping Song," which were praised by the world.

古文：资忠博学，工辞章，年四十未仕。
现代文：资忠博学，擅长文辞，四十岁尚未出来做官。
English: Talented, erudite, and good at rhetoric, he has yet to become an official at the age of forty.

古文：圣宗知其贤，召补宿卫。
现代文：圣宗得知他贤能，征召补为宿卫。
English: When the Holy Sect learned of his ability, they conscripted him as a reserve guard.

古文：数问以古今治乱，资忠对无隐。
现代文：多次向他咨询古今治乱之事，资忠应对之间，毫无隐讳规避之处。
English: He has been consulted many times about the past, present and future, and there is no hidden evasion between the loyal response.

古文：开泰中，授中丞，眷遇日隆。
现代文：开泰年间，授为中丞，优待日益隆盛。
English: During the reign of Emperor Keitai, he was awarded the title of chujo (middle-ranking officer) and received increasingly favorable treatment.

古文：初，高丽内属，取女直六部地以赐。
现代文：当初，高丽内附，取女真六部之地赐之。
English: At first, Koryo added, it was given the right to take six parts of Nyoshin.

古文：至是，贡献不时至，诏资忠往问故。
现代文：到这时，高丽进贡不再按时送到，皇上诏令资忠回来。前往责问其缘故。
English: At this time, Goryeo's tribute was no longer delivered on time, and the emperor ordered Kazuchika to return. He went to find out why.

古文：高丽无归地意。
现代文：高丽没有归还土地之意。
English: Goryeo has no intention of returning the land.

古文：由是权贵数短于上，出为上京副留守。
现代文：从此权贵多次在皇上面前说他坏话，出贬为上京副留守。
English: Since then, the powerful and influential have repeatedly spoken ill of him in front of the emperor, and he has been relegated to the position of an assistant to the emperor in Kyoto.

古文：三年，再使高丽，留弗遣。
现代文：三年，再次出使高丽，被扣留没有放回。
English: Three years later, he was sent to Korea again, but was detained and not allowed to return.

古文：资忠每怀君亲，辄有著述，号《西亭集》。
现代文：资忠每当怀念君王双亲之时，便将心情记述下来，号为《西亭集》。
English: Whenever Zizhong missed his royal parents, he would write down his feelings, which was called the "West Pavilion Collection."

古文：帝与群臣宴，时一记忆曰： 资忠亦有此乐乎？ 
现代文：皇上与群臣宴饮，时不时会记起他来，说 ：资忠也有这种快乐吗？ 
English: When the Emperor was feasting with his courtiers, he would remember him from time to time and say, "Does the loyal retainers also have this kind of happiness?"

古文：九年，高丽上表谢罪，始送资忠还。
现代文：九年，高丽上表谢罪，方才送资忠回来。
English: In the ninth year, Goryeo made an expression of thanks for the crime, and it was only then that Zhaozhong returned.

古文：帝郊迎，同载以归，命大臣宴劳，留禁中数日。
现代文：皇上到郊外迎接，与他同车回京，命令大臣宴饮劳问，留于禁中数日。
English: The emperor went to the suburbs to meet him, returned to Beijing with him in the same car, ordered the minister to banquet and interrogate, and stay in the forbidden middle school for a few days.

古文：谓曰： 朕将屈卿为枢密，何如？ 
现代文：对他说： 我将委屈你担任枢密，如何？ 
English: I said to him, "How about I make you a privy counsellor?"

古文：资忠对曰： 臣不才，不敢奉诏。 
现代文：资忠回答说： 我没有此才，不敢奉诏。 
English: Shizuchu replied, "I don't have the talent, and I don't dare to carry out the edict."

古文：乃以为林牙，知惕隐事。
现代文：于是皇上任他为林牙，知惕隐事。
English: Therefore, the emperor appointed him as Lin Zha, to guard against secret affairs.

古文：初，资忠在高丽也，弟昭为著帐郎君，坐罪没家产。
现代文：当初，资忠在高丽时，其弟耶律昭为著帐郎君，因犯罪被抄没家产。
English: At the beginning, when Kazuchika was in Korea, his younger brother, Yerutsho, was made a ward of the state and had his property confiscated for committing a crime.

古文：至是，乃复横帐，且还旧产，诏以外戚女妻之。
现代文：到这时，便恢复其隶籍横帐的身份，并且归还旧产，诏令将外戚女嫁给他。
English: At this time, he restored his status as a subordinate, and returned the old property, and ordered his relative to marry him.

古文：是时，枢密使萧合卓、少师萧把哥有宠，资忠不背俯附，诋之。
现代文：这时，枢密使萧合卓、少师萧把哥受宠，资忠不能屈身阿附，二人诋毁他。
English: At this time, the confidential envoy Xiao He Zhuo and the minor teacher Xiao Zhuo were favored by the brother, and Zizhong could not bow down to him, and the two slandered him.

古文：帝怒，夺官。
现代文：皇上发怒，夺去其官职。
English: The emperor was furious and deprived him of his official position.

古文：数岁，出知来远城事，历保安、昭德二军节度使。
现代文：几年后，出贬为知来远城事，历任保安、昭德二军节度使。
English: A few years later, he was demoted to the position of Chilaiyuancheng, and successively served as a security guard and the second military commander of the Second Army of Zhao De.

古文：圣宗崩，表请会葬。既至，伏梓宫大恸曰： 臣幸遇圣明，横被构谮，不获尽犬马报。 
现代文：圣宗崩逝，资忠上表请求会葬，到京之后，伏于棺木上大声痛哭说： 臣有幸遭遇圣明之主，无端遭到谗言陷害，没有能尽犬马之报效。 
English: After the death of the Holy Father, Zizhong requested a funeral, and after arriving in Beijing, he lay down on the coffin and cried loudly and bitterly, saying: I was fortunate to encounter the Lord of the Holy Light, I was framed for no reason, and I could not do my best.

古文：气绝而苏，兴宗命医治疾。
现代文：言及此，死而复苏，兴宗命医者为他治病。
English: Mentioning this, he was revived from the dead, and the doctor of Xing Zongming treated him.

古文：久之，言国舅侍中无忧国心，陛下不当复用唐景福旧号，于是用事者恶之，遣归镇，卒。
现代文：过了很久，资忠又说国舅侍中没有忧国之心，陛下不该用唐景福旧号，于是当政者厌恶他，打发他回到镇所，不久去世。
English: After a long time, Zizhong also said that the uncle of the country did not have the heart to worry about the country, and that his majesty should not use the old name of Tang Jingfu, so the politician loathed him, sent him back to the town hall, and died soon.

古文：弟昭，有传。
现代文：弟耶律昭，有传。
English: His younger brother, Ye Li Zhao, is also said to have played the role.

古文：耶律瑶质，字拔里堇，积庆宫人。
现代文：耶律瑶质，字拔里堇，积庆宫人。
English: Yerutong quality, word-pulling, Zheqing palace people.

古文：父侯古，室韦部节度使。
现代文：父侯古，室韦部节度使。
English: His father, Hou Gu, was the regent of the Murowe Department.

古文：瑶质笃学廉介，有经世志。
现代文：瑶质笃好读书，清廉耿介，有整顿乾坤之志向。
English: He is good at reading, clean and honest, and has the ambition to rectify things.

古文：统和十年，累迁至积庆宫使。
现代文：统和十年，累迁至积庆宫使。
English: After 10 years of unification, the envoys moved to Jieqing Palace.

古文：圣宗尝谕瑶质曰： 闻卿正直，是以进用。
现代文：圣宗曾经晓谕瑶质说 ：我听说你为人正直，所以选拔和任用你。
English: The Holy Father once said to him: "I have heard that you are an honest man, so I have chosen and appointed you.

古文：国有利害，尔言宜无所隐。 
现代文：什么事于国家有利或有害，你尽管直言，不要有所隐讳。 
English: Whether it is beneficial or harmful to the country, you should speak frankly and not be secretive.

古文：由是所陈多见嘉纳。
现代文：因此所陈奏之事大多受到嘉许和采纳。
English: As a result, most of what was presented was appreciated and adopted.

古文：上征高丽，破康肇军于铜州，瑶质之力为多。
现代文：皇上征讨高丽，攻破康肇军于铜州时，得力于瑶质之功甚多。
English: When the emperor conquered Goryeo and defeated Kangjao's army in Tongzhou, he owed a great deal to the quality of the enamel.

古文：王询乞降，群臣议皆谓宜纳。
现代文：王询请降，群臣商议都认为应该受降。
English: Wang Enquan asked for a surrender, and all the courtiers agreed that it should be accepted.

古文：瑶质曰： 王询始一战而败，遽求纳款，此诈耳，纳之恐堕其奸计。
现代文：瑶质说 ：王询刚刚交战一次失败，便赶紧请求降服，此乃是诈降；纳降，恐怕正堕入其奸计之中。
English: Gongye said: Wang En just lost a battle, so he hurriedly asked for surrender, which is a fraudulent surrender; accepting the surrender, I am afraid, is falling into his treachery.

古文：待其势穷力屈，纳之未晚。 
现代文：待等他势穷力屈，再纳降也不为晚。 
English: Wait for him to give in, and then it is not too late to accept the reduction.

古文：已而询果遁，清野无所获。
现代文：不久王询果然逃走，临走时坚壁清野，我军无所获。
English: Soon after, Wang En ran away. When he left, there was a solid wall and a clear field, and our army did not find anything.

古文：其众阻险而垒，攻之不下，瑶质以计降之。
现代文：其众依仗险阻修筑工事，攻之不下，瑶质用计让他们投降。
English: The crowd relied on the dangerous obstacles of the construction work, which could not be attacked, so they were forced to surrender.

古文：擢拜四蕃部详稳。
现代文：提升拜为四蕃部详稳。
English: Lift up your heads and pray for the stability of the four jaws.

古文：时招讨使耶律颇的为总官，瑶质耻居其下，上表曰： 臣先朝旧臣，今既垂老，乞还新命，觊得常侍左右。 
现代文：当时招讨使耶律颇的任总管，瑶质耻于官位居其下，上表说： 臣乃先朝旧臣，现在既已年老，请求让我归还新被任命之职，所望只是能够常时陪侍于皇上左右。 
English: At that time, Yeruppo was invited to serve as the chief steward, and the highest-ranking official was below him, and the above table said: The minister is the former minister of the previous court, and now he is old, he asked me to return the newly appointed position, and all he wanted was to be able to accompany the emperor at all times.

古文：帝曰： 朕不使汝久处是任。 
现代文：皇上说 ：朕必定不会让你长期呆在这个位子上。 
English: The emperor said, "I certainly won't let you stay in this position for long."

古文：且命无隶招讨，得专奏事到部。
现代文：并且下令瑶质不再隶属于招讨，得以自行上奏折到部省。
English: He also ordered that the company no longer be affiliated with the solicitation, and that it be allowed to report to the ministry on its own.

古文：戢暴怀善，政绩显著。卒于官。
现代文：瑶质制止残暴，心怀仁善，政绩显著，卒于任上。
English: He was known for his ability to stop brutality, his benevolence, and his remarkable political achievements. He died in office.

