古文：道宗六寿昌元年春正月己亥，如混同江。
现代文：寿隆元年春正月初二，到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month of spring in the first year of Shulong, he went to the Mudongjiang River.

古文：庚戌，西南面招讨司奏拔思母来侵，萧阿鲁带等击破之。
现代文：十三日，西南面招讨司奏称拔思母前来侵犯，萧阿鲁带等击破之。
English: On the thirteenth day, the southwestern side of the Zhaotong Division said that the battalion came to encroach, and Xiao Aru and others broke it.

古文：乙卯，振奉圣州贫民。
现代文：十八日，赈济奉圣州贫民。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the poor people of Fong Shengzhou were given alms.

古文：二月戊辰，赐左、右二皮室贫民钱。
现代文：二月初二，赐钱给左、右二皮室贫民。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month, money was given to the poor on the left and right.

古文：癸酉，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：初七，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，驻跸鱼儿泺。
现代文：初九，歇驾于鱼儿泊。
English: At nine o'clock in the morning, rest at the fish pond.

古文：三月丙午，赐东北路贫民绢。
现代文：三月十一日，赐给东北路贫民绢帛。
English: On March 11th, the Northeast Road Poor People's Fund was established.

古文：夏四月丁卯，斡特剌奏讨耶睹刮捷。
现代文：夏四月初二，斡特剌奏上攻讨耶睹刮之捷报。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, a special envoy was dispatched to deal with the situation.

古文：乙亥，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：初十，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚寅，录西北路有功将士。
现代文：二十五日，给西北路有功将士授予官职。
English: On the 25th, a meritorious officer of Northwest Road was awarded an official post.

古文：五月乙未朔，左夷离毕耶律吐朵为惕隐，南京宣徽使耶律特末为北院大王。
现代文：五月初一，以左夷离毕耶律吐朵为惕隐，以南京宣徽使耶律特末为北院大王。
English: On the first day of May, with Zuo Yi's separation from Biyeru Tudo as a precautionary measure, Nanjing Xuan Hui made Ye Ryutmai the Great King of the Northern Court.

古文：癸卯，赠阵亡者官。
现代文：初九，赠给阵亡将士官职。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the dead general was given the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：丁巳，驻跸特礼岭。
现代文：二十三日，歇驾于特礼岭。
English: On the 23rd, it stopped at Trellis Ridge.

古文：六月己巳，以知奚六部大王事回里不为本部大王，权参知政事赵孝严为汉人行宫都部署，围场都管撒八以讨阻卜功，加镇国大将军。
现代文：六月初五，以知奚六部大王事回里不为本部大王，以权参知政事赵孝严为汉人行宫都部署；围场都管撒八因为征讨阻卜之功，加号镇国大将军。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：癸巳，阻卜长秃里底及图木葛来贡。
现代文：二十九日，阻卜首领秃里底及图木葛送来贡品。
English: On the 29th, tributes were brought by the leaders of the resistance, Baldridi and Tumkhe.

古文：秋七月庚子，阻卜长猛达斯等来贡。
现代文：秋七月初七，阻卜首领猛达斯等人前来进贡。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month of autumn, the leader of the resistance, Meng Das, and others came to pay tribute.

古文：癸卯，猎沙岭。
现代文：初十，出猎于沙岭。
English: At the age of ten, he went hunting in the sand dunes.

古文：癸丑，颇里八部来附，进方物。
现代文：二十日，颇里八部前来归附，进献土产。
English: On the 20th, eight provinces came to annex the region and donate local produce.

古文：甲寅，斡特剌奏磨古斯捷。
现代文：二十一日，斡特剌奏上讨磨古斯捷报。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, a special message was sent to discuss the Guset Newspaper.

古文：九月甲寅，祠木叶山。
现代文：九月二十二日，祭祀木叶山。
English: On September 22nd, the worship of Mujiyama ended.

古文：丙辰，诏西京炮人、弩人教西北路汉军。
现代文：二十四日，诏令西京炮人、弩人教习西北路汉军。
English: On the 24th, he ordered the gunners and masons of the Western Capital to teach the Chinese troops the Northwest Road.

古文：冬十月甲子，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月初二，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the sun sets over Gansu.

古文：甲戌，以北面林牙耶律大悲奴为右夷离毕。
现代文：十二日，以北面林牙耶律大悲奴为右夷离毕。
English: On the twelfth day, he left the north face of the forest for the right heathen.

古文：癸未，以参知政事王师儒为枢密副使，汉人行宫都部署赵孝严参知政事。
现代文：二十一日，以参知政事王师儒为枢密副使，以汉人行宫都部署赵孝严为参知政事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Shiru, a member of the Council of State and Political Affairs, was appointed as a Privy Vice-Envoy, and Zhao Xiaoyan was appointed as a member of the Council of State and Political Affairs.

古文：壬辰，录讨阻卜有功将士。
现代文：三十日，给征讨阻卜有功的将士授予官职。
English: On the 30th, officials were awarded to soldiers who had contributed to the prevention of conscription.

古文：十一月丙申，女直遣使进马。
现代文：十一月初四，女真派使者进献马匹。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month, Jurchen sent an envoy to present the horses.

古文：己亥，以都统斡特剌为西北路招讨使，封漆水郡王。
现代文：初七，以都统斡特剌为西北路招讨使，封漆水郡王。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he was appointed as the Northwest Road recruiting envoy by the special envoy of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：甲辰，夏国进贝多叶佛经。
现代文：十二日，夏国进献贝多叶佛经。
English: On the 12th, Xia Guojin presented the Bedo Leaf Sutra.

古文：庚申，高丽王昱疾，命其叔颙权知国事。
现代文：二十八日，高丽王王昱染疾，下令由其叔父王临时主持国事。
English: On the 28th, King Goryeo fell ill and ordered his uncle to temporarily preside over state affairs.

古文：十二月癸亥朔，以知北院枢密使事耶律阿思为北院枢密使。
现代文：十二月初一，以知北院枢密使事耶律阿思为北院枢密使。
English: On the first day of December, Yerut As, the privy envoy of the Northern Yuan, was appointed as the privy envoy of the Northern Yuan.

古文：是年，放进士陈衡甫等百三十人。
现代文：这一年，放榜录进士陈衡甫等一百三十人。
English: This year, one hundred and thirty people, including Chen Hengfu, who entered the list, were released.

古文：二年春正月甲午，如春水。
现代文：二年春正月初三，到春水。
English: On the third day of the first month of the second year of spring, to the spring water.

古文：癸卯，西南面招讨司讨拔思母，破之。
现代文：十二日，西南面招讨司讨伐拔思母，击破之。
English: On the twelfth day, the southwestern side invited the division to fight the battle of Sima, and broke it.

古文：乙卯，驻跸瑟尼思。
现代文：二十四日，歇驾于瑟尼思。
English: On the 24th, he stopped at Senis.

古文：辛酉，市牛给乌古、敌烈、隈乌古部贫民。
现代文：三十日，卖耕牛给乌古、敌烈、隈乌古部贫民。
English: On the 30th, he sold farmed cattle to the poor people of Ugu, Heilei, and Kuma-Ugu.

古文：二月癸亥，振达麻里别古部。
现代文：二月初二，赈济达麻里别古部。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month.

古文：夏四月己卯，振西北边军。
现代文：夏四月二十日，赈济西北边军。
English: On the 20th day of the 4th month of summer, the Northwest Frontier Army of Shaanxi Province marched into the city.

古文：六月辛酉，驻跸撒里乃。
现代文：六月初三，歇驾于撒里乃。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, the sun sets over Sarina.

古文：秋七月甲午，阻卜来贡。
现代文：秋七月初七，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the year, the dragons came to pay tribute.

古文：丙午，猎赤山。
现代文：十九日，出猎于赤山。
English: On the 19th, they went hunting in Akayama.

古文：八月乙丑，颇里八部进马。
现代文：八月初八，颇里八部进献马匹。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month.

古文：九月丙午，徙乌古敌烈部于乌纳水，以扼北边之冲。
现代文：九月二十日，迁乌古敌烈部到乌纳水，以扼守北边要冲。
English: On September 20th, the Wu ancient enemy's stronghold was moved to Unashui, in order to guard the north side.

古文：冬十月戊辰，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月十二日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 12th day of October in winter, he stopped in Goseidian.

古文：庚辰，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：二十四日，高丽派使者前来进贡。
English: On the 24th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：十二月己未，斡特剌讨梅里急，破之。
现代文：十二月初三，斡特剌讨伐梅里急，击破之。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, a special task force was dispatched to fight against the Meri express and defeat it.

古文：壬戌，南府宰相耶律铎鲁斡致仕。
现代文：初六，南府宰相耶律铎鲁斡辞官。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the Minister-Counsellor of the Southern Prefecture, Ye Rui Lu, arrived.

古文：癸亥，萧挞不也为北府宰相，耶律大悲奴殿前都点检。
现代文：初七，萧挞不也为北府宰相，耶律大悲奴为殿前都点检。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Xiao Qianfu was also the prime minister of Beifu, and Yerut Dabi was the front of the hall.

古文：乙亥，夏国献宋俘。
现代文：十九日，夏国进献宋国俘虏。
English: On the 19th, Xia Province presented the captives of Song Province.

古文：三年春正月丁亥，如春水。
现代文：三年春正月初二，皇上到春水。
English: On the second day of the first month of the third year of spring, the emperor went to Chunshui.

古文：壬寅，乌古部节度使耶律陈家奴以功加尚书右仆射。
现代文：十七日，乌古部节度使耶律陈家奴因功升任尚书右仆射。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the Ugube Festival promoted Yerut Chen Jianu to the post of Shangshu Righteous Servant.

古文：癸卯，驻跸双山。
现代文：十八日，歇驾于双山。
English: On the 18th, it stopped in Shuangshan.

古文：二月丙辰朔，南京水，遣使振之。
现代文：二月初一，南京发生水灾，派使者赈济之。
English: On the first day of February, a flood occurred in Nanjing, and an envoy was sent to help.

古文：闰月丙午，阻卜长猛撒葛、粘八葛长秃骨撒、梅里急长忽鲁八等请复旧地，贡方物，从之。
现代文：闰二月二十一日，阻卜首领猛撒葛、粘八葛酋长秃骨撒、梅里急酋长忽鲁八等人请求回归故地，贡献土产，答应其请求。
English: On the 21st day of the second month of the leap year, the leader of the block, Meng Zagru, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader of the sticky eight, the leader

古文：三月辛酉，燕国王延禧生子。
现代文：三月初七，燕国王延禧得子。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month, King Yan's son, Yan Xizhi, was born.

古文：癸亥，赐名挞鲁。
现代文：初九，赐名为挞鲁。
English: At the age of nine, he was given the name Jiro.

古文：妃之父长哥迁左监门卫上将军，仍赐官属钱。
现代文：皇妃之父长哥升任左监门卫上将军，又赐给他属吏和钱。
English: The eldest brother, the father of the empress, was promoted to General of the Left Guard, and he was also given officials and money.

古文：是春，高丽王昱薨。
现代文：这年春，高丽王王昱逝世。
English: In the spring of this year, the king of Goryeo, Wang Ye, passed away.

古文：夏四月，南府宰相赵廷睦出知兴中府事，参知政事牛温舒兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：夏四月，南府宰相赵延睦出京任兴中府知府，参知政事牛温舒兼任同知枢密院事。
English: In the summer of April, Zhao Yanmu, the chancellor of Nanfu, went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Xingzhongfu, and Niu Wenshu, the political advisor to the governor, also served as the privy councilor of Tongzhi.

古文：五月癸亥，斡特剌讨阻卜，破之。
现代文：五月初十，斡特剌讨伐阻卜，攻破之。
English: On the 10th day of the 5th month of the year, the special task force was dispatched to fight the obstruction and break through it.

古文：己巳，驻跸撒里乃。
现代文：十六日，歇驾于撒里乃。
English: On the sixteenth day, he rested in Sarina.

古文：六月甲申，诏罢诸路驰驿贡新。
现代文：六月初二，诏令诸路乘驿马疾行进贡新熟稻米。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the emperor ordered all roads to be ridden by horses to pay tribute to newly-matured rice.

古文：丙戌，诏每冬驻跸之所，宰相以下构宅，毋役其民。
现代文：初四，诏令每年冬天歇驾之处，宰相以下官员建造房屋，不得役使当地百姓。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict decreed that officials from the prime minister on down were not allowed to help the local people by building houses in the places where the carriage stopped every winter.

古文：辛丑，夏人来告宋城要地，遣使之宋，谕与夏和。
现代文：十九日，夏人前来告知宋国在要塞筑城，派使者前往宋国，晓谕宋人与夏国讲和。
English: On the 19th, the Xia people came to inform the Song that they were building a fortress, and sent an envoy to the Song to tell the Song to make peace with the Xia.

古文：庚戌，以契丹行宫都部署耶律吾也为南院大王。
现代文：二十八日，以契丹行宫都部署耶律吾也为南院大王。
English: On the 28th, with Khitan's visit to the palace, it was decided that Jeru was also the king of the Southern Court.

古文：秋七月壬子朔，猎黑岭。
现代文：秋七月初一，出猎于黑岭。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, I went hunting in Heiling.

古文：八月己亥，蒲卢毛朵部长率其民来归。
现代文：八月十八日，蒲卢毛朵部酋长率领其百姓前来归附。
English: On the 18th of August, the chief of Bulu Maudot led his people to return.

古文：乙巳，彗星见西方。
现代文：二十四日，彗星出现于西方。
English: On the 24th, the comet appeared in the west.

古文：九月壬申，驻跸藕丝淀。丁丑，以武定军节度使梁援为汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：九月二十二日，歇驾于藕丝淀，二十七日，以武定军节度使梁援为汉人行宫都部署。
English: On September 22nd, he rested in Gushidian, and on the 27th, with the Wuding Army Festival, Liang Yuan was deployed to the Han People's Palace.

古文：戊寅，斡特剌奏讨梅里急捷。
现代文：二十八日，斡特剌奏称攻讨梅里急告捷。
English: On the 28th, the special envoy said that the attack on Meili was a success.

古文：己卯，五国部长来贡。
现代文：二十九日，五国部酋长前来进贡。
English: On the 29th, the chiefs of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月庚戌，以西北路招讨使斡特剌为南府宰相。
现代文：冬十月三十日，以西北路招讨使斡特剌为南府宰相。
English: In winter, on October 30th, he used the Northwest Road to solicit envoys and special envoys to become the prime minister of Nanfu.

古文：十一月乙卯，蒲卢毛朵部来贡。
现代文：十一月初五，蒲卢毛朵部前来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the 11th month, the Bulu Mao Dou Department came to pay tribute.

古文：戊午，以安车召医巫闾山僧志达。
现代文：初八，用安车前去征召医巫闾山僧人志达。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he used an ambulance to go and recruit the monk Zhida from Mount Lushan.

古文：己未，以中京留守韩资让知枢密院事，同知南院枢密使事萧药师奴知右夷离毕。
现代文：初九，以中京留守韩资让为知枢密院事，以同知南院枢密使事萧药师奴为知右夷离毕。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, he left Chukyo with Han Zizhen, who stayed behind in Chukyo, as the Privy Councilor, and with Xiao Yakushi, the Privy Councilor of Southern Chikyo, as the Privy Councilor.

古文：丁丑，西北路统军司奏讨梅里急捷。
现代文：二十七日，西北路统军司奏称攻讨梅里急告捷。
English: On the 27th, the Northwest Road Union Army Division reported that the attack on Meri Express was successful.

古文：四年春正月壬子，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：四年春正月初三，到鱼儿泊。
English: On the third day of the first month of the fourth year of spring, I went to stay with the fishes.

古文：己巳，徙阻卜等贫民于山前。
现代文：二十日，迁阻卜等部贫民居于山前。
English: On the 20th, the poor people in the resettlement and other departments moved to live in front of the mountain.

古文：辛未，宋遣使来馈锦绮。
现代文：二十二日，宋国派使者前来馈赠锦绮。
English: On the 22nd, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to present brocade.

古文：三月庚午，幸春州。
现代文：三月二十一日，临幸春州。
English: March 21st, Linxing Chunzhou.

古文：丙子，有司奏黄河清。
现代文：二十七日，有司奏称黄河水清。
English: On the 27th, there was a report that the Yellow River was clear.

古文：夏四月辛丑，以雨，罢猎。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，因为天雨，停止狩猎。
English: On the 23rd of April in the summer, because of the rain, hunting was stopped.

古文：五月癸酉，那也奏北边捷。
现代文：五月二十六日，那也奏上北边捷报。
English: On May 26th, this was also reported by the Beibei Jiebo.

古文：甲戌，驻跸撒里乃。
现代文：二十七日，歇驾于撒里乃。
English: On the 27th, he rested at Sarina.

古文：六月戊寅朔，夏国为宋所攻，遣使求援。
现代文：六月初一，夏国遭宋攻击，派使者求援。
English: On the first day of June, Xia was attacked by Song and sent an envoy to ask for help.

古文：丁亥，以辽兴军节度使涅里为惕隐，前知惕隐事耶律郭三为南京统军使。
现代文：初十，以辽兴军节度使涅里为惕隐，以前知惕隐事耶律郭三为南京统军使。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the Liao Xing Army's festival made Nieri a secret, and previously, the secret of the secret of the secret of the secret of the secret of the secret of the secret of the secret of the secret of the secret.

古文：甲午，以参知政事牛温舒兼知中京留守事。
现代文：十七日，以参知政事牛温舒兼任知中京留守事。
English: On the 17th, Niu Wenshu, who had been appointed to the post of senator, was also appointed to the post of Chuzhongjing.

古文：秋七月戊午，如黑岭。
现代文：秋七月十二日，到黑岭。
English: On the 12th of July in autumn, I went to Heiling.

古文：冬十月乙亥朔，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：冬十月初一，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the first day of October in winter, it rests in Goseidian.

古文：己卯，以南府宰相斡特剌兼契丹行宫都部署，以傅导燕国王延禧。
现代文：初五，以南府宰相斡特剌兼任契丹行宫都部署，以辅导燕国王延禧。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the special envoy of the Southern Provincial Prime Minister concurrently served as the palace escort of Khitan and was deployed to guide King Yan Yan.

古文：十一月乙巳朔，知右夷离毕事萧药师奴、枢密直学士耶律俨使宋，讽与夏和。
现代文：十一月初一，知右夷离毕事萧药师奴、枢密直学士耶律俨出使宋国，劝谕宋人与夏讲和。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Zhiyu left Biji Xiao, a pharmacist, and Ya Lujun, a scholar of privy council, sent an envoy to Song to persuade the Song people to make peace with Xia.

古文：辛酉，夏复遣使求援。
现代文：十七日，夏国再度派使者求援。
English: On the 17th, Xia Guo again sent an envoy to the emperor to ask for help.

古文：十二月壬辰，为燕国王延禧行再生礼，曲赦三百里内囚。
现代文：十二月十八日，为燕国王延禧举行再生礼，特赦京都周围三百里以内囚犯。
English: On December 18, a rebirth ceremony was held for King Yan Yan, and prisoners within 300 miles of Kyoto were pardoned.

古文：五年春正月乙巳，如鱼儿泺。
现代文：五年春正月初二，到鱼儿泊。
English: On the second day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, I went to stay with fish.

古文：己酉，诏夏国王李乾顺伐拔思母等部。
现代文：初六，诏令夏国王李乾顺攻讨拔思母等部。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Li Qianshun, the king of Xia, issued an edict to attack and subjugate Baxi and other provinces.

古文：夏五月壬戌，药师奴等使宋回，奏宋罢兵。
现代文：夏五月二十日，萧药师奴等人出使宋国回朝，奏称宋人撤兵。
English: On the 20th day of the 5th month of the summer, Xiao Yakushi and others sent an envoy from Song to return to the North, and reported that the Song people had withdrawn.

古文：癸亥，谒乾陵。
现代文：二十一日，拜谒乾陵。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Qianling Mausoleum was built.

古文：戊辰，以南府宰相斡特剌兼西北路招讨使，禁军都统。
现代文：二十六日，以南府宰相斡特剌兼任西北路招讨使、禁军都统。
English: On the 26th, Nanfu's vice-premier concurrently served as the special envoy of the northwest road to recruit and ban the army in the capital.

古文：己巳，驻跸沿柳湖。
现代文：二十七日，歇驾于沿柳湖。
English: On the 27th, they stopped along Liuhe Lake.

古文：六月甲申，以奚六部大王回离保为契丹行宫都部署，知右夷离毕事萧药师奴南面林牙，兼知契丹行宫都部署事。
现代文：六月十三日，以奚六部大王回离保为契丹行宫都部署，以知右夷离毕事萧药师奴为南面林牙，兼知契丹行宫都部署事。
English: On June 13th, with the return of the great king of the Six Provinces and the departure of Bao as the deployment of the Qidam Palace, with the departure of Shi Yuyi and the departure of Xiao Yakushi to the south of Lin Ya, and the deployment of the Qidam Palace.

古文：乙未，五国部长来朝。
现代文：二十四日，五国部首领前来朝觐。
English: On the 24th, the heads of the five ministries came to the imperial court.

古文：戊戌，阻卜来贡。
现代文：二十七日，阻卜前来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Dabo came to pay tribute.

古文：己亥，以兴圣宫使耶律郝家奴为右夷离毕。
现代文：二十八日，以兴圣宫使耶律郝家奴为右夷离毕。
English: On the 28th, he used the holy palace of Xing to force the slave of the Yeluo family to leave for the right.

古文：秋七月壬寅朔，惕德长秃的等来贡。
现代文：秋七月初一，惕德酋长秃的等人前来进贡。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Tiide chief Baldi and others came to pay tribute.

古文：辛亥，如大牢古山。
现代文：初十，皇上到大牢古山。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor went to Dajiao Gushan.

古文：闰九月丙子，驻跸独卢金。
现代文：闰九月初七，歇驾于独卢金。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the sun sets in Lukin, Germany.

古文：冬十月己亥朔，高丽王颙遣使乞封册。
现代文：冬十月初一，高丽王王派使者请求封册。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the King of Goryeo sent an envoy to request the seal.

古文：丁巳，斡特剌奏讨耶睹刮捷。
现代文：十九日，斡特剌奏称攻讨耶睹刮告捷。
English: On the 19th, the special envoy said that the crackdown was successful.

古文：丙寅，以同知南京留守事萧得里底知北院枢密使事。
现代文：二十八日，以同知南京留守事萧得里底为知北院枢密使事。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Delidi, who stayed in Nanjing with Tongzhi, was appointed as the privy envoy of Chihokuin.

古文：丁卯，宋遣郭知章、曹平来聘。
现代文：二十九日，宋朝派遣郭知章、曹平来访。
English: On the 29th, the Song Dynasty sent Guo Zhizhang and Cao Ping to visit.

古文：戌辰，振辽州饥，仍免租赋一年。
现代文：三十日，赈济辽州饥荒，又免去当地租赋一年。
English: On the 30th, Liaozhou famine in Fujian Province, and the local rent was exempted for one year.

古文：十一月甲戌，振南、北二糺。
现代文：十一月初六，赈济南、北二纠。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, there will be two rectifications in Jinan and Beibei.

古文：乙酉，夏国以宋罢兵，遣使来谢。
现代文：初七，夏国因为宋撤兵，派使者前来致谢。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Xia Guo sent an envoy to thank Song for withdrawing troops.

古文：十二月甲子，以参知政事赵孝严为汉人行宫都部署，汉人行宫都部署梁援为辽兴军节度使。
现代文：十二月二十七日，以参知政事赵孝严为汉人行宫都部署，以汉人行宫都部署梁援为辽兴军节度使。
English: On December 27th, Zhao Xiaoyan, a senator and politician, was deployed as the Han people's envoy, and Liang Yuan was deployed as the Liaoxing Army's envoy to the festival.

古文：六年春正月癸酉，南院大王耶律吾也薨。
现代文：六年春正月初六，南院大王耶律吾也逝世。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 6th year of the Spring, the great king of the Southern Court, Ye Rugu, also passed away.

古文：壬午，以太师致仕秃开起为奚六部大王。
现代文：十五日，起用太师、辞官归田的秃开担任奚六部大王。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Grand Master and Dictator Keita, Baldakira, was appointed as the King of the Six Provinces.

古文：丁亥，如春水。
现代文：二十日，皇上到春水。
English: On the 20th, the emperor went to Chunshui.

古文：辛卯，斡特剌执磨古斯来献。
现代文：二十四日，斡特剌拘执磨古斯前来进献。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the special envoy of the Chinese Communist Party, Ma Guosi, came to make a presentation.

古文：丙申，诏问民疾苦。
现代文：二十九日，诏令问讯百姓疾苦。
English: On the 29th, a decree was issued to inquire about the hardships of the people.

古文：二月丁未，以乌古部节度使陈家奴为南院大王。
现代文：二月初十，以乌古部节度使陈家奴为南院大王。
English: On the 10th day of the 2nd month of the year, Chen Jia Nong was made the great king of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：己酉，磔磨古斯于市。
现代文：十二日，将磨古斯陈尸于市。
English: On the 12th, the corpse of Măgureș was taken to the city.

古文：癸丑，出绢赐五院贫民。
现代文：十六日，发放绢帛赐给五院贫民。
English: On the 16th, the distribution of money was given to the poor in the five wards.

古文：辛酉，宋遣使告宋主煦殂，弟佶嗣位，即日遣使吊祭。
现代文：二十四日，宋朝派遣使者报告宋主赵煦崩殂，煦弟赵佶即位。当天即派遣使者前往吊唁祭祀。
English: On the 24th, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to report the death of the Song Emperor Zhao Bei and the enthronement of his brother Zhao Bei. On the same day, the envoy was sent to the condolence offering.

古文：三月甲申，驰朔州山林之禁。
现代文：三月十七日，解除对朔州山林的禁令。
English: On March 17th, the ban on the Shuozhou Mountain Forest was lifted.

古文：夏四月丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。初七，到炭山。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, a solar eclipse. On the seventh day of the first month, I went to Su Mountain.

古文：癸卯，如炭山。五月壬午，乌古部讨茶紥剌，破之。乙酉，汉人行宫都部署赵孝严薨。丙戌，驻跸纳葛泺。
现代文：五月十六日，乌古部讨伐茶扎剌，击破之。十九日，汉人行宫都部署赵孝严逝世。二十日，歇驾于纳葛泊。
English: On the 16th of May, the Ugu Department launched a crusade against the tea plantation and defeated it. On the 19th, Zhao Xiaoyan died in the Han People's Palace. On the 20th, he died in Nagpur.

古文：辛卯，宋遣使馈先帝遗物。
现代文：二十五日，宋国派遣使者前来馈赠其先帝遗物。
English: On the 25th, the Song Dynasty sent an envoy to present relics of its former emperor.

古文：乙未，以东京留守何鲁扫古为惕隐，南院宣徽使萧常哥为汉人行宫都部署。
现代文：二十九日，以东京留守何鲁扫古为惕隐，以南院宣徽使萧常哥为汉人行宫都部署。
English: On the 29th, with Horu Saiko remaining in Tokyo as a precautionary measure, the Southern Court issued a proclamation to deploy Xiao Changge as the Han people's marching palace.

古文：六月庚子，遣使贺宋主。
现代文：六月初五，派使者祝贺宋主登基。
English: On the fifth day of the sixth month, he sent an envoy to congratulate Emperor Song on his accession to the throne.

古文：辛丑，以有司案牍书宋帝嗣位为 登宝位 ，诏夺宰相郑颛以下官，出颛知兴中府事，韩资让为崇义军节度使，御史中丞韩君义为广顺军节度使。
现代文：初六，因有司查出贺文簿书中将宋帝 嗣位 写作 登宝位 ，下诏褫夺宰相郑颛以下官员之职位，出贬郑颛为兴中府知府，韩资让为崇义军节度使，御史中丞韩君义为广顺军节度使。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because some scholars found out that the Emperor Song's succession to the throne was written as "Celebration of the Emperor" in the congratulatory book, the following edict was issued to seize the positions of officials below the Prime Minister Zheng Yi, and Zheng Yi was appointed as the governor of Xingzhongfu, Han Ziyang was appointed as the festival envoy of the Chongyi Army, and Han Junyi was appointed as the festival envoy of the Guangshun Army.

古文：癸丑，阻卜长来贡。
现代文：十八日，阻卜首领前来进贡。
English: On the 18th, the leader of the sabotage came to pay tribute.

古文：戊午，遣使决五京滞狱。
现代文：二十三日，派使者审理五京积压案件。
English: On the 23rd, an envoy was sent to examine the backlog of cases in Beijing.

古文：己未，以辽兴军节度使梁援为枢密副使。
现代文：二十四日，以辽兴军节度使梁援为枢密副使。
English: On the 24th, the Liao Xing Army sent Liang Yuan as a vice-envoy.

古文：秋七月庚午，如沙岭。
现代文：秋七月初五，到沙岭。
English: Autumn On the fifth day of the seventh month, to Sha Ling.

古文：壬申，耶睹刮诸部寇西北路。
现代文：初七，耶睹刮部劫掠西北路。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Yezhin Scraping Department plundered the Northwest Road.

古文：八月，斡特剌以兵击败之，使来献捷。
现代文：八月，斡特剌率兵击败耶睹刮，派使者前来献俘。
English: In August, the special envoy led the troops to defeat Yejian and sent an envoy to offer the captives.

古文：九月癸未，望祠木叶山。
现代文：九月二十日，遥祭木叶山。
English: September 20th, the remote festival leaves Mujiyama.

古文：戊子，驻跸藕丝淀。
现代文：二十五日，歇驾于藕丝淀。
English: On the 25th, he rested in Jinshidian.

古文：冬十月壬寅，以枢密副使王师儒监修国史。
现代文：冬十月初九，以枢密副使王师儒为监修国史。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of the winter, Wang Shiru, a vice-minister of the Privy Council, was appointed to supervise the study of national history.

古文：癸卯，五国诸部长来贡。
现代文：初十，五国诸部首领前来进贡。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the leaders of the five provinces came to pay tribute.

古文：甲寅，以平州饥，复其租赋一年。
现代文：二十一日，因平州发生饥荒，免除当地租税一年。
English: On the 21st, due to the famine in Pingzhou, the local tax was exempted for one year.

古文：十一月壬申，以天德军民田世荣三世同居，诏官之，令一子三班院祗候。
现代文：十一月初十，因天德军百姓田世荣三代同居，诏令授给他官职，并下令让其一子为三班院祗候。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, because the third generation of Tian Shirong, a commoner of the German army, lived together, he was given an official post by the imperial edict, and ordered to let his son wait for the Sanbanin.

古文：丙子，诏医巫闾山僧志达设坛于内殿。
现代文：十四日，征召医巫闾山僧人志达在内殿设坛。
English: On the 14th, Shida, a doctor and a monk from Wushan Mountain, was summoned to set up a altar in the inner hall.

古文：戊子，夏国王李韩顺遣使请尚公主。
现代文：二十六日，夏国王李乾顺派使者请求皇上下嫁公主。
English: On the 26th, the king of Xia, Li Qianshun, sent an envoy to ask the emperor to marry the princess.

古文：十二月乙未，女直遣使来贡。
现代文：十二月初三，女真派使者前来进贡。
English: On the third day of the twelfth month, Jurchen sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己亥，以知右夷离毕事郝家奴为北面林牙。
现代文：初七，以知右夷离毕事郝家奴为北面林牙。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the north side of the forest is the north side of the forest.

古文：辛亥，诏燕国王延禧拟注大将军以下官。
现代文：十九日，诏令由燕国王延禧拟名注册并授任大将军以下官职人选。
English: On the 19th, a royal decree was issued by King Yan for the registration of names and the appointment of candidates for posts below the rank of general.

古文：庚申，铁骊来贡。
现代文：二十八日，铁骊前来进贡。
English: On the 28th, the shovel came to pay tribute.

古文：宋遣使来谢。
现代文：宋国派使者前来致谢。
English: The Song Dynasty sent an envoy to thank him.

古文：帝不豫。
现代文：皇上染病。
English: The Emperor fell ill.

古文：是岁，封高丽王颙为三韩国公。
现代文：这一年，封高丽王王长子王俣为三韩国公。
English: In the same year, Wang Mata, the eldest son of King Goryeo, was named the third Korean prince.

古文：放进士康秉俭等八十七人。
现代文：放榜录进士康秉俭等八十七人。
English: Eighty-seven people, including Kang Bingjian, who entered the list, were released.

古文：七年春正月壬戌朔，力疾御清风殿受百官及诸国使贺。
现代文：七年春正月初一，皇上勉强支撑病体御临清风殿接受百官及各国使者朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of spring, the emperor reluctantly supported the illness and went to the Qingfeng Hall to receive morning greetings from hundreds of officials and emissaries from various countries.

古文：是夜，白气如练，自天而绛。黑云起于西北，疾飞有声。
现代文：当天夜里，有白气如练带，从天而降，黑云起于西北，急速飘飞并发出声响。
English: On the night of the same day, there was white gas falling from the sky like a training belt, and black clouds rose in the northwest, flying rapidly and making noise.

古文：北有青赤黑白气，相杂而落。
现代文：北方有青赤黑白四色气，互相杂混而降落。
English: In the north, there are four colors of blue, red, black and white, which are mixed together and fall.

古文：癸亥，如混同江。
现代文：初二，皇上到混同江。
English: On the second day of the first month, the emperor arrived at the Mudong River.

古文：甲戌，上崩于行宫，年七十。遗诏燕国王延禧嗣位。
现代文：十三日，皇上在行宫崩逝，年七十岁，遗诏由燕国王延禧即位。
English: On the 13th, the emperor passed away at the age of 70, and King Yan Yan ascended the throne.

古文：六月庚子，上尊谥仁圣大孝文皇帝，庙号道宗。
现代文：六月十一日，奉上尊谥曰仁圣大孝文皇帝，庙号道宗。
English: On June 11th, the temple was named after Emperor Ren Sheng Da Xiaowen, the founder of the Taoist sect.

