古文：陶侃母湛氏，豫章新淦人。初侃父丹聘为妾，生侃。
现代文：原文陶侃的母亲湛氏是豫章新淦人，早年被陶侃的父亲纳为妾，生下陶侃。
English: The original text: Tao Kan's mother, Ms. Zhan, was a native of Yuzhang, Xinjiang. In the early years, she was taken as a concubine by Tao Kan's father, and gave birth to Tao Kan.

古文：而陶氏贫贱，湛每纺绩赀给之，使交结胜己。
现代文：陶家穷困，湛氏每天辛勤地纺织供给陶侃日常所需，让他结交才识高的朋友。
English: The potters were poor, and Mr. Zhan worked hard every day to supply the daily needs of Tao Kan with textiles, allowing him to make friends with high caliber.

古文：侃少为浔阳县吏，尝监鱼梁，以一封鲊遗母，湛还鲊，以书责侃曰： 尔为吏，以官物遗我，非唯不能益我，乃以增吾忧矣。 
现代文：陶侃年轻的时候当过浔阳县衙的小吏，曾经掌管鱼市的交易。有一次他派人送给母亲一条腌鱼，湛氏将腌鱼退回，并且写信责备陶侃说： 你身为官吏，假公济私把鱼拿来送给我，这不但不能让我高兴，反而会增加我的忧愁。 
English: When he was young, Tao Kan worked as a petty official in Shiyang County and was in charge of the fish market. Once, he sent someone to give his mother a catfish. Mr. Zhan returned the catfish and wrote a letter to rebuke Tao Kan, saying, "You, as an official, brought the fish to me under false pretenses. This will not only fail to make me happy, but will increase my sadness.

古文：鄱阳范逵素知名，举孝廉，投侃宿。
现代文：鄱阳的范逵以孝闻名，被举为孝廉。
English: Fan Jie of Shenyang is famous for his filial piety, and has been honored as a filial pious person.

古文：时冰雪积日，侃室如悬磬，而逵仆马甚多，湛语侃曰： 汝但出外留客，吾自为计。 
现代文：一次他投宿在陶侃家，正好遇到连日冰雪，陶侃家中空无一物，而范逵随行仆从和马匹很多，湛氏对陶侃说： 你只管到外面请客人留下来，我自有打算。 
English: Once, when he stayed at Tao Kan's house, he happened to encounter snow and ice for days on end. Tao Kan's house was empty, and Fan Ye was accompanied by many servants and horses. Mr. Zhan said to Tao Kan: You just go outside and invite guests to stay. I have my own plan.

古文：湛头发委地，下为二髲，卖得数斛米。斫诸屋柱，悉割半为薪，剉卧荐④以为马草，遂具精馔，从者俱给，逵闻叹曰： 非此母不生此子。 
现代文：湛氏剪下自己的长发，做成两套假发，卖出去后买回来几斗米，再将细屋柱砍下作为柴薪，然后将睡觉用的草垫一割为二，作为马匹的粮草，就这样准备了丰盛的馔食，周全地招待了范逵主仆。范逵后来知道了这件事，感慨地说： 没有湛氏这样的母亲，是生不出陶侃这样的儿子的。 
English: Mr. Zhan cut off his long hair, made two sets of wigs, sold them and bought back a few buckets of rice, then cut down the small house pillar as firewood, and then cut the sleeping straw mat into two, as a horse's grain. In this way, he prepared a rich nibble and thoroughly invited Fan Yu's master and servant. Fan Yu later learned about this matter and said with emotion: Without a mother like Mr. Zhan, there is no way to have a son like Tao Kan.

古文：至洛阳，大为延誉，侃遂通显。
现代文：到了洛阳之后，他对陶侃大加赞赏，极力推荐陶侃，后来陶侃终于出人头地。
English: After arriving in Luoyang, he greatly appreciated Tao Kan, strongly recommended Tao Kan, and later Tao Kan finally became popular.

