古文：巫师舒礼女巫秦氏杨林来俊臣唐武后阿来雍文智彭君卿何婆来婆
现代文：巫师舒礼女巫秦氏杨林来俊臣唐武后阿来雍文智彭君卿何婆来婆
English: The sorcerer Shu Li, the witch Qin Yang Lin, the handsome retainer Tang Wu's queen, the noblewoman Yong Wen Zhi Peng, and the noblewoman He Bao Bao

古文：曾勤阿马婆白行简许至雍韦觐高骈
现代文：曾勤阿马婆白行简许至雍韦觐高骈
English: Zengqin Amababai's brief visit to Yongwe

古文：厌咒厌盗法雍益坚宋居士
现代文：厌咒厌盗法雍益坚宋居士
English: Averse to swearing, averse to stealing, Yong Yik Jian, a layman of the Song Dynasty

古文：巫师舒礼
现代文：巫师舒礼
English: Sorcerer Shurei

古文：巴丘县有巫师舒礼，晋永昌元年病死，土地神将送诣太山。
现代文：巴丘县有个巫师姓舒名礼，于晋代永昌元年病故，土地神把他送往泰山。
English: There was a sorcerer in Bachu County with the surname Shumei, who died of illness in the first year of the Jin Dynasty, and the land god sent him to Mount Tai.

古文：俗常谓巫师为道人。
现代文：俗人们平时认为巫师就是道士。
English: Ordinary people usually think that wizards are Taoists.

古文：初过冥司福舍前，土地神问门吏：此云何所？
现代文：刚刚来到阴曹地府的福舍前，土地神向守门的小吏问道：这里是干什么的？
English: Just before coming to the Blessed House of Yin Cao Di Fu, the land god asked the gatekeeper: What are you doing here?

古文：门吏曰：道人舍也。
现代文：守门的小吏回答：道士住的房子。
English: The gatekeeper replied, "The house where the Taoist lives is empty."

古文：土地神曰：舒礼即道人。
现代文：土地神说：这位舒礼就是道士。
English: The land god said: This Shurei is a Taoist.

古文：便以相付。
现代文：守门的小吏便准许他进去。
English: The porter let him in.

古文：礼入门，见千百间屋，皆悬帘置榻。男女异处，有念诵者，吹唱者，自然饮食，快乐不可言。
现代文：舒礼一进门，就看见千百间屋子都悬挂着竹帘摆满了床铺，男女均分开来，有念诵经文的，有唱赞偈的，无拘无束地吃呀喝呀，那快乐劲儿简直妙不可言。
English: As soon as Shurei entered the door, he saw thousands of rooms all hung with bamboo curtains and filled with beds, both men and women separated, some chanting scriptures, some singing hymns, eating and drinking without restraint, the joyous energy is simply wonderful.

古文：礼名已送太山，而身不至。
现代文：舒礼的名字已送到泰山，而身子还没到。
English: Shurei's name has been sent to Mount Tai, but his body has yet to arrive.

古文：忽见一人，八手四眼，提金杵逐礼，礼怖走出。
现代文：忽然看见一个八只手四只眼睛的人，捉着金杵前来驱赶舒礼，舒礼吓得急忙走出来。
English: Suddenly, he saw a man with eight hands and four eyes, who came to drive Shulei away by holding a golden scepter. Shulei was so scared that she hurried out.

古文：神已在门外，遂执礼送太山。
现代文：这时，一住神仙已等在门外，随即带着舒礼送往泰山。
English: At this time, a resident deity was already waiting outside the door, and then he was sent to Mount Tai with Shurei.

古文：太山府君问礼：卿在世间何所为？
现代文：阴间的泰山府君问舒礼：你在人世间是干什么的？
English: Taishanfukun in the underworld asked Shurei: What are you doing in the human world?

古文：礼曰：事三万六千神，为人解除祠祀。
现代文：舒礼回答说：我侍奉三万六千位神仙，为人们解除祠祀之苦。
English: Shurei replied, "I serve 36,000 gods and goddesses, and relieve people from the suffering of shrines and temples.

古文：府君曰：汝佞神杀生，其罪应重。
现代文：府君说：你用花言巧语蒙骗神仙而且杀生，这罪应当重判。
English: The prefect said, "Your crime of deceiving the gods with rhetoric and killing sentient beings deserves a heavy sentence.

古文：付吏牵去。
现代文：于是，把他交给一小吏牵走了。
English: As a result, he was handed over to a petty officer who took him away.

古文：礼见一物，牛头人身，持铁叉。
现代文：舒礼看见一个怪物，牛头人身，持着一把铁叉。
English: Shurei saw a monster, a bull-headed man, holding a fork.

古文：捉礼投铁床上。
现代文：这怪物将舒礼一把捉住，扔到一张烧红的铁床上。
English: The monster grabbed Shulei and threw her onto a red-hot iron bed.

古文：身体燋烂，求死不得。
现代文：舒礼的身体烤得焦烂，且又求死不得。
English: Shurei's body was burnt to a crisp and she wanted to die.

古文：经累宿，备极冤楚。
现代文：一连过了几夜，他受尽冤屈和折磨。
English: For several nights in a row, he was wronged and tormented.

古文：府君主者，知礼寿未尽，命放归。
现代文：府君又向上问主宰他命运的人，方知舒礼阳寿未尽，应该放他回去。
English: The prefect also asked the person who presided over his fate, if he knew that Shuleyang's life was not over, should he be allowed to go back.

古文：仍诫曰：勿复杀生淫祀。
现代文：临行之前，府君又告诫他说：你不要再杀生，更不要再在祭祀的时候放纵胡为了。
English: Before leaving, the prefect also warned him: "Don't kill any more animals, and don't indulge in immorality during the ritual.

古文：礼既活，不复作巫师。
现代文：舒礼当即活转过来。从此，他再也不作巫师了。
English: Shurei was instantly brought back to life and never worked as a sorcerer again.

古文：女巫秦氏
现代文：女巫秦氏
English: The Witch of the Qin

古文：义熙五年，宋武帝北讨鲜卑，大胜，进围广固。
现代文：东晋义熙五年，宋武帝刘裕带兵北伐鲜卑，获得重大胜利，进而围攻广固。
English: In the fifth year of the Eastern Jin Dynasty Yixi, Emperor Liu Yu of the Song Dynasty led the army to the north and won a major victory, and then besieged Guanggu.

古文：军中将佐，乃遣使奉牲荐币，谒岱岳庙。
现代文：部队里的军官派人奉上牺牲献上纸钱，来拜谒泰安的岱岳庙。
English: The officers in the army sent people to offer sacrifices and paper money to pay homage to the Yuyue Temple in Xingtai'an.

古文：有女巫秦氏，奉高人，同县索氏之寡妻也。
现代文：这里有一个女巫秦氏，奉高县人，本县索某的寡妻。
English: There is a witch here from the Qin clan, a resident of Fenggao County, the widowed wife of Suo of this county.

古文：能降灵宣教，言无虚唱，使使者设祷，因访克捷之期。
现代文：她说自己能够显灵于世，且从无虚言，使得拜谒岱岳庙的兵士们迫不及待地设坛祈祷。他们向秦氏询问攻克广固的日期。
English: She said that she was able to show her spirit to the world and never lied, which made the soldiers of Baiyue Temple eager to set up an altar to pray. They asked the Qin clan for the date of conquering Guanggu.

古文：秦氏乃称神教曰：天授英辅，神魔所拟。
现代文：秦氏自称神告诉她说：苍天授命于英才来辅佐皇帝，这一切都是神魔所拟定的。
English: Qin's self-proclaimed god told her: Heaven has given orders to the talented to assist the emperor. All of this was devised by the gods and demons.

古文：有征无战，蕞尔小虏，不足制也。
现代文：此次围攻广固，定是有征无战。再说，一块弹丸之地，要想制服它是轻而易举的。
English: This time, the siege is wide and firm, and there will be no war. Moreover, it is easy to subdue a land of bullets.

古文：到来年二月五日，当尅。
现代文：明年的二月五日，你们一定能把广固攻克。
English: On February 5 next year, you will surely be able to conquer Guanggu.

古文：如期而三齐定焉。
现代文：果然，广固如期攻克，三齐之地终于平定下来。
English: Sure enough, Guanggu conquered as scheduled, and the land of Sanqi was finally settled down.

古文：杨林
现代文：杨林
English: Yanglin District

古文：宋世，焦湖庙有一柏枕，或云玉枕。枕有小坼。
现代文：宋代，焦湖庙有一个柏树枕头，有人叫它玉枕，枕上有裂缝。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Jiao Hu Temple had a cypress pillow, some people called it a jade pillow, and the pillow had a crack.

古文：时单父县人杨林为贾客，至庙祈求，庙巫谓曰：君欲好婚否？
现代文：当时，单父县人杨林做了商人，来庙里祈祷。庙里的巫师对他说：你想结婚成家吗？
English: At that time, Yang Lin, a single father from the county, became a businessman and came to pray in the temple. The sorcerer in the temple said to him: Do you want to get married and start a family?

古文：林曰：幸甚。
现代文：杨林说：如果能这样，那可就太好了！
English: Yang Lin said, "If it can be like this, that would be great!

古文：巫即遣林近枕边。
现代文：巫师立即让他来到柏枕旁，并从那裂缝中走了进去。
English: The sorcerer immediately made him come to the cedar pillow, and he went in through the crack.

古文：因入坼中，遂见朱楼琼室。
现代文：杨林走着走着，随即看见一座镶金铺玉的红楼，赵太尉正坐在里面。
English: Yang Lin walked and walked, and then saw a red building inlaid with gold and jade. Lieutenant Zhao was sitting inside.

古文：有赵太尉在其中，即嫁女与林。
现代文：太尉见了杨林，便把女儿嫁给了他。
English: When the captain saw Yang Lin, he married his daughter to him.

古文：生六子，皆为秘书郎。
现代文：他和妻子生了六个儿子，都成了秘书郎。
English: He and his wife had six sons, all of whom became secretaries.

古文：历数十年，并无思归之志。
现代文：一直过了好几十年，杨林并没有要出去的想法。
English: For decades, Yang Lin had no intention of going out.

古文：忽如梦觉，犹在枕旁。
现代文：一天，他忽然如梦方醒，原来自己还站在枕头边呢。
English: One day, he suddenly woke up as if from a dream, only to find himself still standing next to his pillow.

古文：林怆然久之。
现代文：他凄怆不已，怅然若失。
English: He's amazing, he's amazing.

古文：来俊臣
现代文：来俊臣
English: Come on, Toshitomi

古文：唐载初年中，来俊臣罗织，告故庶人贤二子夜遣巫祈祷星月，咒诅不道。
现代文：唐高宗载初年间，来俊臣罗织罪名，诬告一位平民的两个儿子，说他们派巫师在晚上祈祷星月，诅咒皇上，大逆不道。
English: In the first year of Tang Gao Zongzai's reign, he falsely accused the two sons of a commoner, saying that they had sent a sorcerer to pray to the moon and stars at night and curse the emperor.

古文：栲楚酸痛，奴婢妄证，二子自诬，并鞭杀之。
现代文：于是，他们遭到严刑拷打，疼痛难忍。奴婢作假证，他二人也屈打成招，最后，被皮鞭活活抽死了。
English: As a result, they were subjected to severe torture and excruciating pain. The slave and the maid gave false testimony, and the two of them were beaten into submission. Finally, they were whipped to death.

古文：朝野伤痛。
现代文：为此，朝野上下一片悲伤。
English: For this reason, there was a lot of sadness in the morning and evening.

古文：浮休子张鷟曰：下里庸人，多信厌祷；小儿妇女，甚重符书。
现代文：浮休子张鷟说：穷乡僻壤的庸人们，才相信用诅咒他人来取胜；妇女和小孩儿，才把巫术和符书看得那么重要。
English: "It's only in the poor and remote areas that the philistines believe in cursing others to win; it's only women and children who think sorcery and runes are so important," said Zhang Xuan, the daughter of a vagrant.

古文：蕴匿崇奸，构虚成实。
现代文：心底藏着奸邪的恶念，把假的弄成真的，这是因为你的残暴、乖戾所至。
English: For the wickedness of thine heart covereth thee, and thou makest falsehood to be truth; because of thy violence and thy wickedness.

古文：塪土用血，诚伊戾之故为；掘地埋桐，乃江充之擅造也。
现代文：掘地埋桐，是江充伪造的啊。
English: Digging up the ground and burying the paulownia was faked by Jiang Cheng.

古文：唐武后
现代文：唐武后
English: Empress Dowager Tang

古文：唐武后将如洛，至阌乡东，骑忽不进。
现代文：唐代武则天皇后去洛阳，到阌乡县东边，她的马忽然不向前走了。
English: Empress Dowager Wu Zetian of the Tang Dynasty went to Luoyang, and when she arrived at the eastern edge of Xiangxiang County, her horse suddenly stopped moving.

古文：召巫者问之，巫言：晋龙骧将军王濬云： 臣墓在道南，每为采樵者所苦。闻大驾至，故来求哀。
现代文：武后召来巫师问其原因，巫师说：晋代的龙骧将军王濬说，我的坟就在道的南侧，常常受砍柴人践踏，苦不堪言，今天听说皇后大驾光临，故来诉苦并请求垂怜。
English: Wu Wu summoned a sorcerer to ask the reason. The sorcerer said, "The Dragon Emperor of the Jin Dynasty, General Wang Qian, said that my grave is on the south side of the road. It is often trampled by woodcutters, and it is unbearable. Today, I heard that the empress was coming, so I came to complain and ask for mercy."

古文：后敕，去墓百步，禁耕植。
现代文：于是，武后当即就下了一道敕令：此墓百步之内，严禁耕植。
English: As a result, Empress Wu immediately issued a royal decree: within a hundred paces of this tomb, it is strictly forbidden to cultivate.

古文：今荆棘森然。
现代文：如今，那里已长满荆棘，森然成林。
English: Today, it is full of thorns and has become a forest.

古文：阿来
现代文：阿来
English: Come on

古文：唐韦庶人之全盛日，好厌祷，并将昏镜以照人，令其迷乱。
现代文：唐代，被废为庶人的韦氏在过得最红火的时候，喜欢用巫术祈祷，并常用一面昏镜照人，使之神情迷乱。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, when the Wei clan, which had been abolished as commoners, was at its most prosperous, they liked to use magic to pray, and often used a dazzling mirror to illuminate people, making them look confused.

古文：与崇仁坊邪俗师婆阿来，专行厌魅。
现代文：他与崇仁坊邪恶的老巫婆阿来一道，专搞装神弄鬼那一套。
English: Together with the wicked old sorceress Alai of Chongrenfang, he specializes in pretending to be a god and playing with ghosts.

古文：平王诛之。后往往于殿上掘得巫盅，逆韦之辈为之也。
现代文：平王将他杀死后，经常在殿前挖出盅虫，这是韦氏的同伙干的呀。
English: After Ping Wang killed him, he often dug up maggots in front of the palace, which was done by Wei's accomplices.

古文：雍文智
现代文：雍文智
English: Yongwen Zhi

古文：唐韦庶人葬其父韦贞，号酆王。
现代文：唐代被废为庶人的韦氏为其父韦贞出殡，说他父将到阴间的酆都城作大王。
English: The Wei clan, which was abolished as a commoner in the Tang Dynasty, held a funeral for his father Wei Zhen, saying that his father would go to the underworld and become the great king of the capital city.

古文：葬毕，葬官人赂见鬼师雍文智。
现代文：葬后，管丧事的小官给巫师送了贿赂。
English: After the funeral, the petty official in charge of the funeral gave the sorcerer a bribe.

古文：诈宣酆王教曰：当作官人，甚太艰苦，宜与赏，著绿者与绯。
现代文：让巫师雍文智假借酆三韦贞之口说：管丧事的小官太清苦，应该给他些赏钱，穿绿衣的人给穿上绯衣。
English: Let the sorcerer Yong Wen Zhi pretend to borrow the mouth of Gong San Wei Zhen and say: the minor official in charge of the funeral is too pure and bitter, he should be given some reward money, and the person wearing the green dress should put on the blue dress.

古文：韦庶人悲恸，欲依鬼教与之。
现代文：韦某听见父亲的话很悲痛，就打算照此办理，给那位管丧事的小官一些赏钱。
English: Wei Mou was very sad to hear his father's words, so he planned to follow suit and give the minor official in charge of the funeral some reward money.

古文：未处分间，有告文智诈受贿赂，验遂斩之。
现代文：正欲办此事时，有人告发说巫师雍文智受贿敲诈，官府查实以后，就把雍文智杀了。
English: Just as he was about to do this, someone reported that the sorcerer Yong Wenzhi had accepted bribes and extortion. After the government verified this, they killed Yong Wenzhi.

古文：彭君卿
现代文：彭君卿
English: Lord Pang

古文：唐中宗之时，有见鬼师彭君卿，被御史所辱。
现代文：唐中宗年间，有一个能与鬼交往的巫师叫彭君卿，因为受到御史的污辱他怀恨在心。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there was a sorcerer named Peng Junqing who was able to communicate with ghosts. Because he was insulted by the emperor, he held a grudge.

古文：他日，对百官总集，诈宣孝和敕曰：御史不存检校，去却巾带。
现代文：两天之后，正当文武百官聚会上朝时，彭君卿就假装已死的孝和皇帝的灵魂附体，传旨说：御史行为不检点，应该给他摘去官帽和玉带的处分！
English: Two days later, just as it was time to start the morning at the gathering of 100 civil and military officials, Peng Junqing pretended to be a dead filial son and the soul of the emperor, and sent a message saying: "Your Majesty's behavior is improper, and he should be punished by removing his official hat and jade belt!"

古文：即去之。
现代文：于是就照办了。
English: So it was done.

古文：曰：有敕与一顿杖。
现代文：彭君卿又说：朕命责打御史一顿板子！
English: Peng Junqing also said, "I am determined to beat you to a pulp!"

古文：大使曰：御史不奉正敕，不合决杖。
现代文：执刑的官员说：御史没有当今皇帝的圣旨，是不该受杖刑的。
English: The official who carried out the sentence said: "Goshi did not have the sacred will of the current emperor and should not be punished with a cane.

古文：君卿曰：若不合，有敕且放却。
现代文：彭说：不该打吗？那朕就传旨把他放了吧。
English: Peng said, "Shouldn't we fight? Then I'll send word and let him go."

古文：御史裹头，仍舞蹈拜谢而去。
现代文：御史居然裹上头巾，拜谢皇上的不打板子之恩高兴而去。
English: He wrapped his head in a turban, thanked the emperor for his kindness, and left happily.

古文：观者骇之。
现代文：文武官员均莫名其妙，吓得够呛。
English: The civil and military officials were all inexplicably terrified.

古文：何婆
现代文：何婆
English: What a crock

古文：唐浮休子张鷟，为德州平昌令。
现代文：唐代浮休子张鷟任德州平昌县令。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Zhang Rong was appointed as the governor of Pyeongchang County, Texas.

古文：大旱，郡符下令，以师婆师僧祈之。
现代文：有一年大旱，郡里下令，让巫婆巫师们向天祈祷。
English: One year, during a drought, the county ordered the witches and wizards to pray to the heavens.

古文：二十余日无效。浮休子乃推土龙倒，其夜雨足。
现代文：结果，二十多天没有见效，张鷟就把土龙推倒，当天夜里雨便下足了。
English: As a result, after more than twenty days of ineffectiveness, Zhang Ye pushed down the soil dragon, and it rained heavily that night.

古文：江淮南好神鬼，多邪俗，病即祀之，无医人。
现代文：江淮以南，人们大多信鬼神，巫术盛行，有病便祭祀，没有医生。
English: South of the Yangtze River and Huai River, people mostly believe in ghosts and gods, witchcraft is prevalent, if you are sick, you will be sacrificed, and there are no doctors.

古文：浮休子曾于江南洪州停数日，遂闻土人何婆，善琵琶卜。与同行人郭司法质焉。
现代文：张鷟曾在江南洪州停留数日，听说当地人何婆，善于用琵琶占卜，他便与同行人郭司法一起找何婆询问。
English: Zhang Ye had stayed in Hongzhou, south of the Yangtze River, for a few days. He heard that a local woman, He Bao, was good at divination with a lute, so he and his companion, Guo Zhengyi, went to inquire about her.

古文：其何婆，士女填门，饷遗满道，颜色充悦，心气殊高。
现代文：那何婆家，前来问卜的人熙熙攘攘，送来的东西填满了院子，脸上充满喜悦之色，心气很高。
English: The house was bustling with people who came to ask questions, and the yard was filled with the things they brought. Their faces were full of joy, and their spirits were high.

古文：郭再拜下钱，问其品秩。
现代文：郭司法向何婆一拜再拜，送上银钱。
English: Guo Zhengyi bowed down to Ms. He again and again and gave her money.

古文：何婆乃调弦柱，和声气曰：个丈夫富贵，今年得一品，时年得二品，后来得三品，更后年得四品。
现代文：何婆询问他的官职，然后调好琵琶弦儿，边唱边说地：看你颇有富贵相，今年得一品，明年得二品，后年得三品，大后年得四品郭司法赶紧说：何婆错了！
English: She asked him about his official position, then tuned the strings of the pipa and sang while saying, "Look, you are quite rich and noble. This year you will get one prize, next year you will get two prizes, the year after that you will get three prizes, and the year after that you will get four prizes." Guo Jiushi quickly said, "What a mistake!

古文：郭曰：何婆错，品少者官高，品多者官小。
现代文：品少的官职高，品多的官职小。
English: A low-quality official position is high, while a high-quality official position is low.

古文：何婆曰：今年减一品，明年减二品，后年减三品，更后年减四品，忽更得五六年，总没品。
现代文：何婆忙纠正说：今年减一品，明年减二品，后年减三品，大后年减四品这样一改，五六年之后便一品不剩了。
English: Mother-in-law He was busy correcting her, saying, "This year we will reduce one item, next year we will reduce two items, the year after that we will reduce three items, and the year after that we will reduce four items. After fifty-six years, there will be no items left."

古文：郭大骂而起。
现代文：郭司法大骂一声站了起来。
English: Guo Zhengyi stood up with a loud curse.

古文：来婆
现代文：来婆
English: Come on in

古文：唐崇仁坊阿来婆，弹琵琶卜，朱紫填门。
现代文：唐代长安城崇仁坊有位阿来婆，善于用弹琵琶来卜卦，人们送来的各种丝绢填满院子。
English: In Chongrenfang, Chang'an City in the Tang Dynasty, there was an alaibah who was good at playing the lute to tell fortunes, and the various silk cocoons sent by people filled the courtyard.

古文：浮休子张鷟，曾往观之，见一将军，紫袍玉带，甚伟。下一匹细绫，请一局卜。
现代文：浮休子张鷟曾前去观看。这时，只见一位紫袍玉带的将军，非常高大，带来一匹细绫，正在请阿来婆用琵琶卜卦。
English: At that time, only a very tall general in a purple robe and jade belt was seen, who had brought a fine horse and was asking A-Lai-Bao to recite the Nyingma with a lute.

古文：来婆鸣弦柱，烧香，合眼而唱：东告东方朔，西告西方朔，南告南方朔，北告北方朔，上告上方朔，下告下方朔。
现代文：来婆烧上香，弹起弦子，闭眼而唱道：东告东方朔，西告西方朔，南告南方朔，北告北方朔，上告上方朔，下告下方朔。
English: She burned incense, strummed the strings, closed her eyes and sang: East to east, west to west, south to south, north to north, up to up, down to down.

古文：将军顶礼既，告请甚多，必望细看，以决疑惑。
现代文：将军顶礼膜拜完毕，又诉说出自己的许多心愿，希望她仔细瞅瞅，以解除疑惑。
English: After the general had bowed his head in reverence, he told her many of his wishes, hoping that she would recite them carefully in order to dispel her doubts.

古文：遂即随意支配。
现代文：这时，他把那匹细绫送给来婆，让她随意支配。
English: At this time, he gave the pigeon to his mistress and let her rule it as she pleased.

古文：曾勤
现代文：曾勤
English: Zeng Qin

古文：唐曾勤任魏州馆陶县尉，敕捕妖书人王直。
现代文：唐代，曾勤任魏州馆陶县尉。皇帝颁布敕令，迅速将做妖书的王直捉拿归案。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, he served as a lieutenant of the Wei State Museum of Tao County. The emperor issued a royal decree to quickly arrest Wang Zhulong, who was a demon hunter.

古文：县界藏失。
现代文：王直在馆陶县界躲藏起来，不见踪迹。
English: Wang Zhi went into hiding in Zhuntao County and disappeared without a trace.

古文：刺史蒋钦绪奏请：一百日捉不获，与中下考。
现代文：刺史蒋钦绪奏请皇帝道：一百天之内捉不到王直，就在曾勤的考绩栏上划个中下。
English: Zhang Shi Jiang Qingsuo asked the emperor to say: If Wang Zhi can't be caught within a hundred days, then Zeng Qin's performance should be marked down.

古文：其时限已过半。
现代文：当时，期限已过半。
English: At that time, the deadline was already half over.

古文：有巫云：少府必无事，不用过忧。
现代文：有巫师说：曾县尉必定无事，不用担忧。
English: A sorcerer said, "Lieutenant Zeng must be fine, don't worry."

古文：后遇按察史边冲寂奏，奉敕却夺刺史曾勤俸。
现代文：后来，按察史边冲寂奉旨撤销曾勤的俸禄。
English: Later, according to the order of the inspector of history, Bian Chongjia revoked Zengqin's salary.

古文：会十一月二十二日，巡陵恩赦，遂得无事。
现代文：碰巧十一月二十二日那天，得到大赦，才算无事。
English: As it happened, the amnesty was only granted on 22 November.

古文：其时遣人分捕王直不得。又有日者云：至某月某日，必获王直，反缚送来。
现代文：这时，派人分头追捕王直一无所获，又有占日卜筮的人说：到某月某日，一定能捉到王直，而且会反绑捆双手送来。
English: At this time, people were sent to chase Wang Zhi separately, but nothing was found. There was also a person who divined the date and said: "By a certain month, a certain day, Wang Zhi will definitely be caught, and he will be sent back with his hands tied."

古文：果有人于相州界，捉得别一王直。以月日反缚送到。
现代文：果然，有人在相州地界抓到了另一个叫王直的人，在巫师说的那天反捆双手送了来。
English: Sure enough, someone caught another person named Wang Zhi at the border of the Xiangzhou region, and on the day the sorcerer said, they sent him back with his hands tied.

古文：推问逗留，不是畜妖书者，遂却放之。
现代文：经过一段拘留审查，他不是那位妖书生，随即便将他放了。
English: After a period of detention review, he was not the student, and he was released.

古文：阿马婆
现代文：阿马婆
English: Amabha

古文：唐玄宗东封，次华阴，见岳神数里迎谒。
现代文：唐玄宗东行去泰山封禅，第二天来到华阴县，看见华山之神从几里外前来迎拜。
English: Tang Xuan Zong traveled east to Mount Tai to practice Zen. The next day, he came to Huayin County and saw the god of Mount Huashan coming from several miles away to pay homage.

古文：帝问左右，左右莫见。遂召诸巫，问神安在。
现代文：唐玄宗问手下人，手下人都说没有看见；随即又召来各位巫师，问神在哪里。
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked his subordinates, and they all said that they did not see it; then he called all the wizards and asked where God was.

古文：独老巫阿马婆奏云：在路左，朱鬓紫衣，迎候陛下。
现代文：惟独有老巫阿马婆奏道：神在路的左侧，红头发紫衣服，正在迎候陛下。
English: But only the old sorceress Amabha sang: God is on the left side of the road, with red hair and purple clothes, waiting for His Majesty.

古文：帝顾笑之，仍敕阿马婆，敕神先归。
现代文：玄宗看看她笑了，因而下敕命给她，让她请神先回去。
English: When Xuanzong saw her smile, he gave his life to her and told her to ask God to go back first.

古文：帝至庙，见神橐鞬，俯伏殿庭东南大柏之下。又召阿马婆问之，对如帝所见。
现代文：玄宗皇帝来到庙前，看见华山之神身背装弓箭和衣甲的筒器，俯伏在殿庭东南的大柏树下，又召来阿马婆问之。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong came to the front of the temple, he saw the god of Huashan with a bow and arrow on his back and a barrel of armor, prostrating himself under a large cypress tree in the southeast of the hall, and summoned Amaba to ask him.

古文：帝加礼敬，命阿马婆致意而旋。
现代文：阿马婆证实了皇帝之所见，玄宗便对她礼敬起来，并让她向神致意，然后下山而去。
English: Ama confirmed the emperor's vision, and Emperor Xuanzong bowed to her and asked her to pay homage to the gods before descending the mountain.

古文：寻诏先诸岳封为金天王，帝自书制碑文，以宠异之。
现代文：随即，玄宗下诏书给诸岳之神，赐封华山之神为金天王，并亲自书写碑文，以示宠爱。
English: Thereupon, Emperor Xuanzong issued an edict to the gods of the mountains, giving the god of Huashan the title of the Golden King, and personally wrote an inscription to show his favor.

古文：其碑高五十余尺，阔丈余，厚四五尺，天下碑莫大也。
现代文：这座碑高五十多尺，宽一丈多，厚四五尺，天下的碑再也没有比它大的了。
English: This monument is more than fifty feet high, more than a foot wide, and four or five feet thick. No other monument in the world is larger than it.

古文：其阴刻扈从太子王公已下官名。制作状丽，镌琢精巧，无比伦。
现代文：它的背面刻上扈从太子王公以下官名，真是精雕细琢，制作壮美，无与伦比。
English: Its back is engraved with the names of officials from the crown prince to the prince. It is a truly exquisite carving, superbly made, and incomparable.

古文：白行简
现代文：白行简
English: Bai Xingyan

古文：唐郎中白行简，太和初，因大醉，梦二人引出春明门。至一新冢间，天将晓而回。
现代文：唐代，有位郎中叫白行简。太和初年，因酒醉入睡，梦见两个人把他引出春明门，来到一座新坟前，天快亮的时候才回来。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a concubine called Bai Xingjian. In the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager, he fell asleep drunk and dreamed that two people led him out of the Spring Gate to a new tomb, and only returned when it was nearly dawn.

古文：至城门，店有鬻饼饤饦者。
现代文：走到城门口。看见饭店里在卖粥和汤饼。
English: I walked to the gate of the city and saw a restaurant selling congee and soup cakes.

古文：行简馁甚，方告二使者次。
现代文：白行简饿得很，告诉那两个人停下。
English: Bai Xingjian was very hungry and told the two men to stop.

古文：忽见店妇抱婴儿，使者便持一小土块与行简，令击小儿。
现代文：忽然，只见老板娘抱着婴儿走出来。那两个人拿一小土块给白行简，让他打婴儿。
English: Suddenly, the boss's daughter came out with the baby in her arms. The two men took a small clod of earth and gave it to Bai Xingjian to hit the baby.

古文：行简如其言掷之，小儿便惊啼闷绝。
现代文：白行简按照他们说的，将小土块掷向婴儿，那孩子惊叫一声便背过气去。
English: Bai Xingjian, as they say, threw a small clod of earth at the baby, and the child screamed and ran away.

古文：店妇曰：孩儿中恶。
现代文：老板娘说：不好，这孩子中了邪！
English: The boss's daughter said: "It's not good, this child has an evil spirit!"

古文：令人召得一女巫至。
现代文：她让人召来一个女巫。
English: She had a witch summoned.

古文：焚香，弹琵琶召请曰：无他故，小魍魉为患耳。
现代文：那女巫来到之后，先烧香，又弹琵琶召请神灵，最后说道：没有别的原因，只是小鬼作怪。
English: When the witch arrived, she first burned incense, then played the lute to summon the gods, and finally said: "There's no other reason, it's just a child's trick."

古文：都三人，一是生魂，求酒食耳，不为祟。可速作饤饦，取酒。
现代文：共三个人，其中一个是活人，想来要酒饭，不是为作怪害人，应该快做汤饼，取酒来。
English: A total of three people, one of whom is a living person, want to come to ask for wine and rice, not to do harm to others, they should quickly make soup cakes and fetch wine.

古文：逡巡陈设。巫者拜谒，二人与行简就坐，食饱而起。小儿复如故。
现代文：顷刻陈设完毕，女巫让行简和那二人就坐，先行拜谒。行简等酒足饭饱起来后，小孩病好如初。
English: After setting up the table in an instant, the witch let Xing Jian and the other two sit down and prostrate themselves first. After Xing Jian had had enough to eat and drink, the child was as well as ever.

古文：行简既寤，甚恶之，后逾旬而卒。
现代文：行简当即醒来，甚感厌恶，过几十天后便死了。
English: Xing Jian immediately woke up, felt very disgusted, and died dozens of days later.

古文：许至雍
现代文：许至雍
English: Xu Zhiyong

古文：许至雍妻某氏，仪容淡雅。早岁亡没，至雍颇感叹。
现代文：许至雍的妻子某氏，长得素净宜人，早年亡故，使至雍颇为伤感。
English: Xu Zhiyong's wife, Ms. A, was pure and pleasant, and died at an early age, which made Zhiyong quite sad.

古文：每风景闲夜，笙歌尽席，未尝不叹泣悲嗟。
现代文：每当风清月明而又无事可做的时候，每当笙停歌罢筵席散尽的时候，他都要怆然饮泣、悲叹不已。
English: Whenever the weather is fine and there is nothing to do, whenever the music stops and the banquet is over, he bursts into tears and wails.

古文：至雍八月十五日夜于庭前抚琴玩月。
现代文：八月十五日晚上，许至雍于庭前抚琴赏月，不知不觉过了很长时间。
English: On the evening of August 15th, Xu Ziyong played the harp in front of the court and admired the moon. Before I knew it, a long time had passed.

古文：已久，忽觉帘屏间有人行，吁嗟数声。
现代文：忽然，他发觉帘屏后面有人走动，并且长吁短叹。
English: Suddenly, he noticed someone walking behind the curtain screen and gave a long sigh.

古文：至雍问曰：谁人至此？必有异也。
现代文：许至雍问道：什么人来到这里，想必有何目的？
English: Xu Zhiyong asked: Who came here, and for what purpose?

古文：良久，闻有人语云：乃是亡妻。
现代文：好久，才听见有人说话，原来竟是亡妻！
English: It was a long time before I heard anyone speak, and it turned out to be my dead wife!

古文：云：若欲得相见，遇赵十四。莫惜三贯六百钱。
现代文：亡妻说：如果你想与我相见，遇到赵十四，不要可惜三贯六百钱。
English: The deceased wife said: "If you want to meet me and meet Zhao XIV, don't be sorry for the three hundred and six hundred yuan."

古文：至雍惊起问之。乃无所见。
现代文：许至雍吃了一惊，爬起来正想问她，结果连个人影也没有见到。
English: Xu Zhiyong was taken aback, he got up and was about to ask her, but he didn't even see a figure.

古文：自此常记其言。则不知赵十四是何人也。
现代文：从此，许至雍便经常想起妻子说的那句话，却不知道赵十四是个什么人。
English: From then on, Xu Ziyong often thought of the sentence his wife said, but did not know who Zhao XIV was.

古文：后数年，至雍闲游苏州。
现代文：数年之后，许至雍到苏州游玩。
English: A few years later, Xu Zhiyong went to Suzhou to play.

古文：时方春，见少年十余辈，皆妇人装，乘画舡，将谒吴太伯庙。
现代文：当时正是春天，他看见十几个少年全穿着女人的衣服，乘坐画船，将去拜谒周太王之子吴太伯庙。
English: It was spring, and he saw more than a dozen boys, all dressed in women's clothing, taking a boat to visit the temple of Wu Tai Bo, the son of King Zhou.

古文：许君因问曰：彼何人也？
现代文：许至雍问道：他们是什么人，为何穿这样的服装？
English: Xu Zhiyong asked: Who are they, why do they wear such clothes?

古文：而衣裾若是。人曰：此州有男巫赵十四者，言事多中为土人所敬伏，皆赵生之下辈也。
现代文：对方回答说：这个州里有位男巫叫赵十四，说的事情大都是准确的，为当地人所敬仰所崇拜。这些人都是赵十四的晚辈呵。
English: The other replied, "There is a sorcerer in this state named Zhao XIV, who says things that are mostly accurate, and is revered and worshipped by the locals. These people are all Zhao XIV's descendants."

古文：许生问曰：赵生之术，所长者何也？
现代文：许至雍问道：这位赵十四的法术，最拿手的是什么？
English: Xu Zhiyong asked: What is the most skillful spell of this Zhao XIV?

古文：曰：能善致人之魂耳。
现代文：对方说道：他最善于招人的灵魂。
English: The other said, "He's the best at winning people's souls."

古文：许生乃知符其妻之说也。
现代文：这时，许致雍才知道这正符合妻子在梦中说过的话。
English: At this time, Xu Zhiyong knew that this was in line with what his wife had said in the dream.

古文：明日早，诣赵十四，具陈恳切之意。
现代文：第二天早晨，许至雍去见赵十四，表白心中恳切之情。
English: The next morning, Xu Zhiyong went to see Zhao XIV to express his sincere feelings.

古文：赵生曰：某之所致者，生魂耳。今召死魂，又今生人见之，某久不为，不知召得否？
现代文：赵十四说道：我平时所招的，那是生人之魂；今天要我招死人之魂，又要让生人看见，这种事情，我可是好久不干了呵，不知道招来招不来？
English: Zhao XIV said: What I usually summon is the soul of a living person; today I want to summon the soul of a dead person, and I want the living person to see it. I haven't done this kind of thing for a long time. I don't know if I can summon it.

古文：知郎君有重念之意，又神理已有所白，某安得不为召之？
现代文：我知道，你向来很重情义，又在神明面前有所表白，我怎能不为你招之？
English: For I know that thou hast always been very religious, and hast offered strange fire before the gods: and why should I not for thy sake summon them?

古文：乃计其所费之直，果三贯六百耳。
现代文：言罢，他算计了一下所需要的费用，果然是三贯六百钱？
English: Come to think of it, he calculated the cost required, and it turned out to be three times six hundred dollars?

古文：遂择良日，于其内，洒扫焚香，施床几于西壁下，于檐外结坛场，致酒脯。
现代文：随即，赵十四便选择良辰吉日，在许至雍的屋子里洒扫焚香，把床铺几案放到西墙下，于屋檐外面结坛场，摆上酒肉。
English: Immediately afterwards, Zhao XIV chose a good time and a good day, sprinkled incense in Xu Zhiyong's house, put several beds under the west wall, made a altar outside the eaves, and put wine and meat on it.

古文：呼啸舞拜，弹胡琴。
现代文：接着，赵十四吼叫着，舞蹈着，一边弹胡琴，一边拜仙。
English: Next, Zhao XIV shouted and danced, playing the huqin and worshipping the immortals.

古文：至夕。令许君处于堂内东隅，赵生乃于檐下垂帘卧，不语。
现代文：到了晚上，他让许至雍站在堂内东边的角落里，自己则放下帘子躺下来，一句话也不说。
English: In the evening, he asked Xu Zhiyong to stand in the corner on the east side of the hall, and he put down the curtain and lay down without saying a word.

古文：至三更，忽闻庭际有人行声，赵生乃问曰：莫是许秀才夫人否？
现代文：直到三更天，忽然叫见庭内有人话说声，赵十四便问：你莫非是许秀才的夫人？
English: Until three days later, when he suddenly heard someone talking in the court, Zhao XIV asked: Aren't you the wife of Xu Xiucai?

古文：闻吁嗟数四，应云：是。
现代文：只听叹了几次气，答应了一声道：是的。
English: I just sighed a few times and said yes.

古文：赵生曰：以秀才诚意恳切，故敢相迎，夫人无怪也。
现代文：赵十四说：由于秀才诚意恳切，我才敢前来相迎，夫人不要责怪呀。
English: Zhao XIV said, "I only dared to come to greet you because you are sincere and earnest. Don't blame me, madam.

古文：请夫人入堂中。逡巡，似有人谒帘，见许生之妻。
现代文：请夫人入堂顷刻，像是有人揭开帘子，果然是许至雍的妻子。
English: He asked his wife to enter the hall for a moment, as if someone had opened the curtains, and sure enough, it was Xu Zhiyong's wife.

古文：淡服薄妆，拜赵生，徐入堂内，西向而坐。
现代文：她淡服薄妆，拜见赵十四，然后徐步走进堂内，面朝西而坐。
English: She wore light makeup, met Zhao XIV, and then slowly walked into the hall and sat facing west.

古文：许生涕泗呜咽：君行若此，无枉横否？妻曰：此皆命也，安有枉横。
现代文：许至雍泪流满面，呜呜咽咽地说你来到这里，是不是受了什么冤屈和强横？
English: With tears streaming down his face, Xu Zu said with a whimper, "You came here, did you suffer any grievances and tyranny?"

古文：因问儿女家人及亲旧闾里等事，往复数十句。
现代文：妻子说：这都是命呵，怎么谈得上冤屈和强横呢？接着，她又问及儿女家人亲戚邻居的一些事情，反反复复说了几十句话。
English: The wife said: "This is all life, how can we talk about grievances and tyranny?" Next, she also asked about some things of her children, family members, relatives and neighbors, and repeated dozens of words.

古文：许生又问：人间尚佛经，呼为功德，此诚有否？
现代文：许至雍又问道：人间崇尚佛经，并称之为 功德 ，你们那里也有么？
English: Xu Zhiyong also asked: Do people in the world also worship Buddhist scriptures and call them "merits"?

古文：妻曰：皆有也。
现代文：妻子说：都有呵。
English: My wife said, "All of them."

古文：又问：冥间所重何物？
现代文：许至雍又问阴间最看重的是什么东西。
English: Xu Zhiyong also asked what was the most important thing in the underworld.

古文：春秋奠享无不得，然最重者，浆水粥也。
现代文：妻子回答说：春秋祭奠的东西没有得不到的，然而最重要的则是稀粥呵！
English: His wife replied, "There is nothing that can't be obtained at the Spring and Autumn Festival, but the most important thing is gruel!"

古文：赵生致之。
现代文：赵十四招招手，一会儿就有人把稀粥送来了。
English: Zhao XIV beckoned, and in a moment someone brought the thin gruel.

古文：须臾粥至，向口如食，收之，复如故。许生又曰：要功德否？
现代文：许妻接过碗。便把粥倒进嘴里吃起来。一连吃了好几碗。许至雍又问道：你要不要佛经？
English: Xu Zhiyong took the bowl. He then poured the porridge into his mouth and began to eat. He ate several bowls in succession. Xu Zhiyong then asked: "Do you want the Buddhist scriptures?"

古文：妻云：某平生无恶，岂有罪乎？
现代文：妻子说：我平生没做什么坏事，难道会有罪吗？
English: My wife said, "I have never done anything bad in my life, so how can I be guilty?"

古文：足下前与为者，亦已尽得。
现代文：你前些日子送给我的，也已经全部得到了。
English: You gave me some days ago, and I have received all of it.

古文：良久，赵生曰：夫人可去矣，恐多时即有谴谪。
现代文：良久，赵十四说：夫人可以回去了，时间长了恐怕要受到责备的。
English: For a long time, Zhao XIV said: My wife can go back, I'm afraid I have to be reproached for taking so long.

古文：妻乃出，许生相随泣涕曰：愿惠一物，可以为记。
现代文：于是，妻子走出房门，许至雍相随泣涕着说：希望你留给我一物，可作纪念。
English: As a result, his wife walked out of the door, and Xu Ziyong said with tears: "I hope you will leave me something as a souvenir."

古文：妻泣曰：幽冥唯有泪可以传于人代。
现代文：妻子哭泣着说：阴间只有泪水可以送给亲人。
English: The wife cried and said: "In the underworld, only tears can be given to relatives.

古文：君有衣服，可投一事于地。许生脱一汗衫，置之于地。
现代文：你有衣服，可扔一件在地上许至雍脱下一件汗衫，放在地上。
English: If you have clothes, you can throw one on the ground and then take off a sweatshirt and put it on the ground.

古文：其妻取之，于庭树前悬一树枝，以汗衫蔽其面，大哭。
现代文：许妻拿过汗衫，又悬挂在庭树前面一根树枝，然后用汗衫蒙住脸大哭起来。
English: His wife-to-be took his sweatshirt, hung it on a branch in front of a tree in the garden, then covered her face with the sweatshirt and burst into tears.

古文：良久，挥手却许生，挂汗衫树枝间，若乘空而去。
现代文：良久，她挥手让许至雍走开，自己把汗衫挂在树枝间，然后乘空而去。
English: For a long time, she waved her hand to let Xu Zhiyong walk away, hung her sweatshirt between the branches, and then took off.

古文：许生取汗衫视之，泪痕皆血也。
现代文：许至雍取过汗衫看去，那上面的泪痕全是血呵。
English: When she looked at the sweatshirt, the tear stains on it were all blood.

古文：许生痛悼，数日不食。
现代文：许至雍痛悼亡妻，一连几天都没有吃东西。
English: Xu Zhiyong mourned his dead wife with great pain and did not eat for several days.

古文：卢求著幽居苏州，识赵生，赵生名何，苏州人皆传其事。
现代文：这时，有个叫卢求著的人来苏州幽居，认识了赵十四，赵十四的名字叫何，苏州人至今还传说着这件事。
English: At this time, a man named Lu Kuo Zhuang came to live in Suzhou and got to know Zhao XIV. What was Zhao XIV's name? Suzhou people still talk about this story.

古文：韦觐
现代文：韦觐
English: Wei Xuan

古文：唐太仆卿书觐欲求夏州节度使。
现代文：唐代，有位太仆卿叫韦觐，想当夏州的节度使。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a servant of the emperor named Wei Zhuang who wanted to be the regent of Xiazhou.

古文：有巫者知其所希，忽诣韦曰：某善祷祝星辰，凡求官职者，必能应之。
现代文：有个巫师知道他追求的是什么，忽然有一天登上门来对他说：我这个人善于向星辰祝告祈福，凡是求官职的，没有不灵验的。
English: A certain sorcerer, who knew what he was after, suddenly appeared at his door one day and said to him: "I am a man who is good at wishing on the stars.

古文：韦不知其诳诈，令择日。
现代文：韦觐不知道他这是诳骗敲诈自己，便让他选择良辰吉日。
English: Wei Wei did not know that he was cheating and blackmailing himself, so he asked him to choose a good day.

古文：夜深，於中庭备酒果香灯等。
现代文：这天深夜，韦觐让家人在中庭摆上香和蜡烛以及酒和水果等。
English: Late that night, Wei Wei asked his family to set up incense and candles, as well as wine and fruit, in the courtyard.

古文：巫者乘醉而至，请书自书官阶一道，虔启于醮席。
现代文：巫师乘着酒劲儿赶到中庭，让韦觐自己写上一道要升的官衔，虔诚的摆到祭坛上。
English: The sorcerer rushed to the atrium on the strength of the wine, and asked Wei Wei to write down the official title he wanted to be promoted to, and reverently placed it on the altar.

古文：既得手书官衔，仰天大叫曰：韦觐有异志，令我祭天。
现代文：巫师抓过那道写好的官衔，仰天大叫道：韦觐有野心，让我祭天！
English: The sorcerer grabbed the official title that had been written down, and shouted to the heavens: Wei Wei has ambition, let me sacrifice to the heavens!

古文：韦合族拜曰：乞山人无以此言，百口之幸也。
现代文：韦觐见势不好，带领全家人跪倒于地，拜道：求仙人不要说这种话，便是我们全家老少一百多口人之大幸！
English: When Wei Wei saw that the situation was not good, he led the whole family to kneel down on the ground and prayed: "Please tell the genie not to say such things, it is a great blessing for our whole family of more than a hundred people!

古文：凡所玩用财物，尽与之。
现代文：结果，韦觐把家里的古玩财物，全都送给了巫师。
English: As a result, Wei Wei gave all of his family's antiques and possessions to the sorcerer.

古文：时崔侃充京尹。
现代文：当时，崔侃任京兆尹。
English: At that time, Cui Kan held the post of Beijing Zhaoyun.

古文：有府囚叛狱，谓巫者是其一辈。
现代文：有一个官府的囚犯从狱中逃出来，说那个巫师是他的同伙。
English: A government prisoner escaped from prison and said the sorcerer was his partner.

古文：里胥诘其衣装忽异？
现代文：里胥找到那个巫师，盘问他最近的服装怎么忽然变样了？
English: Lily found the wizard and asked him why his latest costume had suddenly changed.

古文：巫情窘，乃云：太仆卿韦觐，曾令我祭天。我欲陈告，而以家财求我。
现代文：巫师一阵惊窘，便说：太仆卿韦觐，曾经让我为他祭天，我想告发，结果，他便用家中的财产求我千真万确，这可不是我偷的呀！
English: The sorcerer was taken aback for a moment, and then said, "Your servant, Wei Yuan, once asked me to sacrifice to the gods for him. I wanted to denounce him, but as a result, he used his family's property to ask me for the truth. I didn't steal it!"

古文：非窃盗也？
现代文：这件事，应当向上申奏才对。
English: This matter should be reported to the higher authorities.

古文：既当申奏，宣宗皇帝召觐至殿前，获明冤状。复召宰臣论曰：韦觐城南上族，轩盖承家。
现代文：宣宗皇帝把韦觐召到殿前，经再三查问，才弄清其中冤情，然后又召宰相的大臣们说道：韦觐是城南的贵族，世代相传都是作官的。
English: Emperor Xuanzong summoned Wei Wei to the front of the palace. After repeated inquiries, he was able to clarify the grievances. Then he summoned the prime minister's ministers and said: Wei Wei is an aristocrat from the south of the city, and has been an official for generations.

古文：昨为求官，遂招诬谤。无令酷吏加之罪俧。
现代文：昨天为了求官遭到诬谤，不要让酷吏加罪于他。
English: Yesterday, he was slandered for running for office. Don't let the cruel officials add to his guilt.

古文：其师巫便付京兆处死，韦贬潘州司马。
现代文：不久，那巫师被押赴京城处死，韦觐被贬为潘州司马。
English: Soon after, the sorcerer was taken to Beijing to be executed, and Wei Wei was demoted to the rank of Panzhou Sima.

古文：高骈
现代文：高骈
English: Takatsuki

古文：唐高骈尝诲诸子曰：汝曹善自为谋。
现代文：唐代有位高骈，他曾教导自己的孩子们说：你们要自谋生路，好自为之。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a high-ranking official who taught his children: "You must earn your own living, so that you can do it yourself."

古文：吾必不学俗物，死入四板片中，以累于汝矣。
现代文：我呢，不想学芸芸俗辈，死后还要躺入那四块板中，再麻烦你们。
English: As for me, I don't want to be a scholar and layman, and when I die, I want to lie down in those four boards and trouble you again.

古文：及遭毕师铎之难，与诸甥侄同坎而瘗焉。唯骈以旧毡苞之，果符所言。
现代文：及遭毕师铎之难，便和各位侄子外甥一起埋在同一个墓穴里，只有高骈的尸体用旧毡子包裹着，果然与先前的话相符。
English: He was buried in the same grave as all of his nephews and nieces. Only Gao Yao's body was wrapped in an old pair of pliers, which is consistent with his previous words.

古文：后吕用之伏诛，有军人发其中堂，得一石函。内有桐人一枚，长三尺许，身披桎，口贯长钉，背上琉骈乡贯甲子官品姓名，为厌胜之事。
现代文：后来，妖人吕用之伏法，兵卒在他的屋里挖出一个石匣，内有一个桐木人，三尺多长，戴着脚镣子，嘴里钉着钉子，背上写着高骈的藉贯生日姓名职务等，这是用巫术诅咒人用的。
English: Later, the soldiers dug up a stone box in Lv's house using the method of the sorcerer Lv. Inside, there was a Paulownia man, more than three feet long, wearing leg braces, with nails in his mouth, and with his birthday, name, position, etc. written on his back. This was used to curse people with witchcraft.

古文：以是骈每为用之所制，如有助焉。
现代文：以往，高骈每次被吕用之所控制，看来这东西是起了作用的。
English: In the past, whenever Gao Gan was controlled by Lv Yizhi, it seemed to work.

古文：厌咒厌盗法
现代文：厌咒厌盗法
English: Law against swearing, law against stealing

古文：厌盗法，七日以鼠九枚，置笼中，埋于地，秤九百斤土覆坎，深各二尺五寸，筑之令坚固，杂五行书曰：亭部地上土涂灶，水火盗贼不经；涂屋四角，鼠不食蚕；涂仓廪，
现代文：这是一种制服盗窃的方法。
English: It's a form of identity theft.

古文：雍益坚
现代文：雍益坚
English: Yong Yijian

古文：唐雍益坚云：主夜神咒，持之有功德，夜行及寐，可已恐怖恶梦。
现代文：唐代的宋居士说：掷骰子时念这样一句咒语：伊帝弥帝，弥揭罗帝。
English: The Tang Dynasty's Song Jiu Shi said: When throwing dice, recite the following mantra: Yidimi, Mijiro.

古文：咒曰：婆珊婆演底。
现代文：伏身念上十万遍，随着一声欢呼你就会赢。
English: Fall on your face and chant it a hundred thousand times, and with a cheer you will win.

