古文：皇甫枚陈璠豫章中官邵元休何四郎青州客周元枢朱延寿秦进忠望江李令张飞庙祝僧彦翛建康乐人黄延让张瑗婺源军人妻陈德遇广陵吏人
现代文：皇甫枚陈璠豫章中官邵元休何四郎青州客周元枢朱延寿秦进忠望江李令张飞庙祝僧彦翛建康乐人黄延让张瑗婺源军人妻陈德遇广陵吏人
English: The emperor's father-in-law, Chen Bingyuzhang, the lieutenant general, Shao Yuanxiu, He Shiro, the Qingzhou guest, Zhou Yuanzhu, Zhu Yanshou, Qin Jin, Zhong Wangjiang, Li Ling, Zhang Fei, the temple blessing monk, Yan Jiankang, the musician, Huang Yan, the military wife of Zhang Xiyuan, Chen De, the Guangling official

古文：皇甫枚
现代文：皇甫枚
English: Kofu-mochi

古文：光启中，僖宗在梁州。
现代文：唐僖宗光启年间，僖宗巡幸陕西梁州。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, Emperor Gaozong visited Liangzhou in Shaanxi Province.

古文：秋九月，皇甫枚将赴调行在。与所亲裴宜城者偕行。
现代文：秋天九月时，皇甫枚奉调去僖宗的行宫，和他的好友裴宜城一同上路。
English: In the autumn of September, Emperor Fuhai was transferred to the imperial palace of Emperor Taizong, and he and his friend Pei Yicheng went on the road together.

古文：十月，自相州西抵高平县。县西南四十里，登山越玉溪。
现代文：十月时人们从河南相州到了山东高平县，走到县西南四十里，翻过山又越过玉溪。
English: In October, people went from Xiangzhou, Henan Province, to Gaoping County, Shandong Province. They walked forty miles southwest of the county, climbed over the mountains and crossed the Yuxi River.

古文：其日行旅稍稀，烟云昼晦，日昃风劲。惑于多歧，上一长坂。
现代文：这天路上的行人很少，大白天烟雾笼罩了天空，日色无光风刮得很猛，他们在岔道口上迷了路。
English: On this day, there were very few pedestrians on the road. During the day, smoke covered the sky, and the sunless wind was blowing very hard. They lost their way at the fork.

古文：下视有茅屋数间，槿篱疏散，其中有喧语声，乃延望之。
现代文：他们登上一道高坡后，看见坡下有几间草房，草房外围稀疏的篱笆，还能听到有喧哗的人声，就站在坡上仔细看。
English: After ascending a high slope, they saw several grass houses at the bottom of the slope, sparse fences around the grass houses, and could also hear the noisy voices of people. They stood on the slope to take a closer look.

古文：少顷，有村妇出自西厢之北，著黄故衣，蓬头败屦。
现代文：不一会儿，有个村妇从西屋出来往北走，穿着黄色的旧衣服和一双破鞋，蓬头散发的样子。
English: Soon, a village woman came out of the west house and walked north, wearing yellow old clothes and a pair of broken shoes, her hair unkempt.

古文：连呼之不顾，但俯首而复入。
现代文：皇甫枚连喊了几声，那妇女也不理，低着头又回屋去了。
English: The abbot called out several times, but the woman ignored him, bowed her head, and went back into the house.

古文：乃循坂东南下，得及其居，至则荆扉横葛，萦带其上，茨棘罗生于其庭，略无人踪，如涉一二年者矣。
现代文：皇甫枚和裴生就顺山坡而下来到草屋前，却见柴门上长满了藤萝，院子里是一片野草荆棘，根本没有人影，好像已经一两年没有住人了。
English: The Empress Dowager and Pei Sheng went down the hillside to the grass hut, but saw that the gate was covered with wisteria, and the yard was covered with wild grass and thorns. There was no one at all, as if there had been no one living there for a year or two.

古文：枚与裴生，愕立久之。复登坂长望，见官道有人行，乃策蹇驴赴之。至则邮吏将往端氏县者也，乃与俱焉。是夜宿端氏。
现代文：皇甫枚和裴生惊讶地在院外站了半天，又回到高坡上远望，看见大道上有行人，就用鞭子催着驴追上去，原来是往端氏县送信的邮差，于是就结伙一块走。当天夜晚，他们就在端氏县住下了。
English: The Empress Dowager and Pei Sheng stood outside the hospital for half a day in surprise. They went back to the high slope to look far and wide. When they saw pedestrians on the avenue, they used a whip to drive the donkey to chase them. It turned out to be a postman sending a letter to Danshi County, so they walked together. That night, they stayed in Danshi County.

古文：陈璠
现代文：陈璠
English: Chen Yao

古文：陈璠者，沛中之走卒也，与故徐帅时浦，少结军中兄弟之好。
现代文：江苏沛县有个当兵的名叫陈璠，和过去的徐州节度使时浦在军中结交为好友。
English: There is a soldier in Pei County, Jiangsu Province, named Chen Yu, who became good friends with the past Xuzhou Festival Emissary Shi Pu in the army.

古文：及浦为支辟所任，璠亦累迁右职。
现代文：后来支辟启用时浦，时浦也就不断提拔陈璠。
English: Later, the branch was opened by Shi Pu, and Shi Pu continued to promote Chen Qi.

古文：黄巢之乱，支辟简劲卒五千人，命浦总之而西，璠为次将。
现代文：黄巢造反时，支辟挑选了五千精兵让时浦率领西去迎战，陈璠被任命为时浦的副将。
English: When Huang Chao rebelled, the tribune selected five thousand elite soldiers to let Shi Pu lead the west to fight, and Chen Xi was appointed as the vice-general of Shi Pu.

古文：浦自许昌趋洛下，璠以千人反平阴。
现代文：时浦从许昌直奔洛邑后，陈璠却带着一千人在平阴县造反。
English: However, after Shi Pu went straight to Luoyang from Xu Chang, Chen Qi led a thousand people to rebel in Pingyin County.

古文：浦乃矫称支命，追兵回。于是引师与璠合，屠平阴，掠圃田而下。
现代文：时浦听说后，就假传支辟的军令带着队伍追赶陈璠，与陈璠的队伍会合在一起，在平阴、圃田一带杀戮抢掠，然后直逼沛县。
English: After hearing about the rumor, Shi Pu chased Chen Qi with a troop of soldiers on the basis of the false rumor, met with Chen Qi's troop, killed and looted in Pingyin and Putian areas, and then drove straight into Pei County.

古文：及沛，支虑其变，郊劳及解甲，盛设厚赂之。
现代文：支辟怕陈璠、时浦搞兵变，在城郊犒赏他们的部队，趁机解除了他们的武装，并用重金收买他们。
English: Fearing that Chen Xi and Shi Pu would stage a mutiny, the governor rewarded their troops on the outskirts of the city, took the opportunity to disarm them, and bribed them with large sums of money.

古文：乃令所亲讽支曰：军前不安，民望见追，且请公解印，以厌众心。
现代文：陈璠、时浦让他们的亲信去劝告支辟说：军心不稳，民心所向，希望你交出统帅大印以满足众望。
English: Chen Qi and Shi Pu sent their close confidants to advise Zi Bi, saying, "The military spirit is not stable, and the people's hearts are inclined. I hope you will hand over the general's seal to meet the expectations of the people."

古文：支力不能制，乃率其孥，出居大彭馆。
现代文：支辟没有办法，只好带着家人离开军营住进了大彭的馆舍。
English: There was no way to support him, so he had no choice but to take his family and leave the military camp to live in a guesthouse in Dapeng.

古文：浦自称留后。
现代文：时浦自称为留后官，接过了兵权。
English: Shiura called himself a "retained officer" and took over the military power.

古文：璠谓浦曰：支尚书惠及沛人，若不杀之，将贻后悔。
现代文：这时陈璠对时浦说，支辟对沛县老百姓有恩，如果不杀掉他，会给我们留下后患。
English: At this time, Chen Yao said to Shi Pu, "Zhibi has been kind to the people of Pei County. If you don't kill him, you will leave us with a legacy."

古文：浦不可，璠固请，与浦往复十余翻，浦怒曰：自看自看。
现代文：时浦不同意杀支辟，陈璠一再请求，和时浦争论了十几次，时浦生气的说，你自己看着办吧！
English: Shi Pu did not agree to kill Shih Bi, Chen Yao repeatedly requested, and argued with Shi Pu more than a dozen times. Shi Pu said angrily, "You can handle it yourself!"

古文：璠乃诈为浦命，谓之曰：请支行李归阙下。
现代文：陈璠就假传时浦的军令对支辟说，请你作为军使到京城去一趟。
English: Chen Zhe said to Zhi Bi about the fake military order of Shi Pu, please go to Beijing as a military envoy.

古文：支以为诚也，翌日遂发。
现代文：支辟信以为真，第二天就出发了。
English: Believing it to be true, they set out the next day.

古文：璠伏甲于七里亭，至则无少长皆杀之。沛人莫不流涕。
现代文：陈璠在七里亭埋伏了人马，支辟来到后，不分老少都被陈璠杀掉，沛县人听说后都悲痛得哭了。
English: Chen Yao ambushed people and horses in Qili Ting. After the reinforcements arrived, Chen Yao killed everyone, young and old. Peixian people cried with grief when they heard about it.

古文：其后浦受朝命，乃表璠为宿州太守。
现代文：后来时浦接受了朝廷的任命，就上表请求将陈璠任命为宿州太守。
English: Later, Shiura accepted the appointment of the imperial court and appointed Chen Xi as the governor of Suzhou at the request of the above table.

古文：璠性惨酷喜杀，复厚敛淫刑，百姓嗟怨。五年中，赀贿山积。
现代文：陈璠在宿州期间，仍然惨酷暴虐，滥施刑罚，横征暴敛，百姓们怨声载道，五年的工夫陈璠贪赃受贿的财物堆积为山。
English: During his stay in Cangzhou, Chen Qi was still cruelly brutal, meted out punishment indiscriminately, collected taxes arbitrarily, and the people complained loudly. After five years of hard work, Chen Qi's corrupt and bribe-taking property accumulated into a mountain.

古文：浦恶之，乃命都将张友代璠。
现代文：时浦十分痛恨陈璠，就派都将张友取代陈璠。
English: Shippou hated Chen Yao very much, so he sent Zhang You to replace Chen Yao.

古文：璠怒，不受命。
现代文：陈璠大怒，拒不接受时浦的命令。
English: Chen Xi flew into a rage and refused to accept Shi Pu's order.

古文：友至，处别第，以俟璠出。
现代文：张友到宿州后，先住在另外的地方，等待陈璠先出动。
English: After Zhang You arrived in Suzhou, he first lived in another place, waiting for Chen Yao to leave first.

古文：璠夜率麾下五百人围友，迟明，友自领骁果百余人突之。
现代文：果然，陈璠带着手下五百人围困张友，黎明时分，张友亲自带一百多精兵冲出了包围。
English: Sure enough, Chen Yu and his five hundred men besieged Zhang You. At dawn, Zhang You personally rushed out of the siege with more than one hundred elite soldiers.

古文：璠溃，与十余人骑走出数十里，从骑皆亡。
现代文：陈璠被张友击溃后，带着十几个人马逃出去几十里地，这时随从们都各自逃亡，陈璠只好扔掉战马换了便衣在乡间讨饭。
English: After Chen Qi was defeated by Zhang You, he took a dozen people and horses and fled tens of miles away. At this time, his followers all fled separately. Chen Qi had to throw away his war horse and changed to plain clothes to beg for food in the countryside.

古文：璠弃马微服乞食于野，野人有识之者，执以送。友絷之，驰白浦，浦命斩之于郡。
现代文：乡下人中有人认出了陈璠，把他扭送给张友，张友又押着他去见时浦，时浦下令，让把陈璠带到郡里斩首。
English: One of the villagers recognized Chen Qi and handed him over to Zhang You. Zhang You then took him to see Shi Pu. Shi Pu ordered that Chen Qi be taken to the county and beheaded.

古文：璠本粗悍木朴，不知书，临刑，忽索笔赋诗曰：积玉堆金官又崇，祸来倏忽变成空。
现代文：陈璠本是一名凶悍愚昧的武夫，没读过书，临斩前忽然要了一支笔写下一首诗：积玉堆金官又崇，福来倏忽变成空。
English: Chen Yimeng was a fierce and ignorant warrior. He had never read a book. Before he was beheaded, he suddenly asked for a pen to write down a poem: "A heap of jade and gold is both respected and revered, but a treasure chest suddenly becomes empty."

古文：五年荣贵今何在？
现代文：五年荣贵今何在？
English: Five years on, where is Ronggui now?

古文：不异南柯一梦中。
现代文：不异南柯一梦中！
English: No different from Nanko in a dream!

古文：时以为鬼代作也。
现代文：当时的人都认为这首诗是鬼替他作的。
English: At the time, people thought the poem had been written for him by a ghost.

古文：豫章中官
现代文：豫章中官
English: Lieutenant Commander Yuanzhang

古文：天复甲子岁，豫率居人近市者，夜恒闻街中若数十人语声，向市而去，就视则无人。
现代文：唐昭宗天复甲子那年，江西豫章城中临街住的人们夜里常听到街上有几十个人说话的声音，一面说着一面向街里走去，如果开门往街上看，却一个人也看不见。
English: In the year of Emperor Zhaozong's accession to the throne, people living in the streets of Yuzhang City in Jiangxi Province often heard the voices of dozens of people talking in the streets at night. While talking, they walked towards the streets. If they opened the door and looked at the streets, they would not see a single person.

古文：如是累夜，人家惴恐，夜不能寤。
现代文：这样过了好几夜，居民都很惊恐，夜里都不敢睡觉。
English: After several nights like this, the residents were terrified and did not dare to sleep at night.

古文：顷之，诏尽诛阉官，豫章所杀，凡五十余。
现代文：过了不久，就听说皇帝下诏杀尽太监。豫章城中就有五十多太监被杀。
English: Not long after, it was reported that the emperor had issued an edict to kill all eunuchs. More than fifty eunuchs were killed in the city of Yuzhang.

古文：驱之向市，骤语喧噪，如先所闻。
现代文：当把这些太监绑赴刑场时，只听到他们大声喧哗吵闹，就象以前每晚听到的声音那样。
English: When these eunuchs were bound for the place of execution, all that was heard from them was a loud noise, like the noises heard every night before.

古文：邵元休
现代文：邵元休
English: Shao Yuanhui

古文：汉左司员外郎邵元休，当天复年中，尚未冠，居兖州廨宅。
现代文：五代十国时的南汉朝中左司员外郎邵元休，在唐昭宗天复年时还没有成年，住在山东兖州自己的府宅里，宅里只有奶妈和仆人婢女。
English: Shao Yuanxiu, the fifth generation of the Southern Han Dynasty's left-hand steward of the Ten Kingdoms, was not yet an adult at the time of Tang Zhaozong's accession to the throne. He lived in his own mansion in Luzhou, Shandong Province, with only a wet nurse and servants.

古文：宅内惟乳母婢仆，堂之西序，最南是书斋。
现代文：堂屋西面，最南是书房。
English: On the west side of the hall, the southernmost is the study.

古文：时夜向分，举家灭烛熟寐，书斋内灯亦灭。
现代文：一天夜里，全家都熄灯睡了，书房里灯也灭了，邵元休枕在书上小睡。
English: One night, the whole family turned off the lights and went to sleep. The lights in the study were also turned off, and Shao Yuanju's pillow was napping on a book.

古文：邵枕书假寐，闻堂之西，窸窣若妇人履声，经于堂阶。先至东序，皆女仆之寝室也。
现代文：这时忽然听见堂屋西面有女人的脚步声，经过堂屋的台阶，先走到东廓的一排房里，那里是女仆们的住处。
English: At this time, the footsteps of a woman were suddenly heard on the west side of the hall. After passing through the steps of the hall, she went first to a row of rooms in the east wing, where the maids lived.

古文：每至一房门，即住少时。
现代文：那脚步声每到一间房门口都停顿一下。
English: The footsteps paused at each doorway.

古文：遂闻至南廊，有阁子门，不启键，乃推门而入。即闻轰然，若扑破磁器声。
现代文：后来就听到脚步走到南廊，那里有扇阁子门没有上锁，就听推门走近，接着就轰然一响，好像是打破磁器的声音，脚步声又往西而来进了书房。
English: Later, I heard footsteps walking to the south corridor, where there was a sliding door that was not locked. I heard the door being pushed closer, and then there was a bang, as if it was the sound of breaking porcelain, and the footsteps came west into the study.

古文：遂西入书斋，窗外微月，见一物，形状极伟。不辨其面目，长六七尺，如以青黑帛蒙首而入。
现代文：这时窗外月色迷蒙。只见一个十分高大的东西，看不清面目，有六七尺，好像是用青黑布蒙着头走了进来，站在门边。
English: At this time, the moonlight was fading outside the window. I saw a very tall, invisible, sixty-seven-foot-tall figure, who seemed to have covered his head with a blue-black cloth, walk in and stand by the door.

古文：立于门扉之下，邵不惧，厉声叱之，仍间数声，都不酬答，遂却出。
现代文：邵元休并不害怕，先是厉声叱骂，接着又问了好几声，那东西都不回答，但退了出去，快得像一溜风。
English: Shao Yuanxiu was not afraid. At first, he scolded him harshly, and then asked him several questions. He did not answer any of them, but he left the room as quickly as the wind.

古文：其势如风，邵欲扪枕击之，则已去矣。
现代文：邵元休抄起枕头砸它，已经不见踪影。
English: Shao Yuanhui picked up a pillow and smashed it, and has disappeared.

古文：又闻行往堂西，其声遂绝。
现代文：过了一阵，又听见脚步声往西面走去，渐渐听不见了。
English: After a while, I heard the sound of footsteps walking to the west, and I gradually lost my hearing.

古文：迟明，验其南房内，则茶床之上，一白磁器，已坠地破矣。
现代文：天亮后察看南房内，见茶桌上的一件磁器已经摔碎在地上。
English: After dawn, I looked into the south room and saw that a piece of porcelain on the tea table had fallen to the ground.

古文：后问人云，常有兵马留后居是宅，女卒，权于堂西作殡宫。
现代文：后来一打听，有人说曾经有位任兵马留后官的人住过这个府宅，他的女儿死在这里时，曾在堂西停尸殡敛。
English: Later, on inquiry, it was said that a person who had served as an attendant to the soldiers and horses had once lived in this mansion, and when his daughter died here, he was at the Dongxi mortuary to bury her.

古文：仍访左右，有近邻识其女者，云，体貌颇长，盖其魄也。
现代文：向邻居们打听，有位近邻认得那驰去的女子，说她身材很高。
English: After checking with neighbors, one neighbor recognized the woman who ran away and said she was tall.

古文：何四郎
现代文：何四郎
English: Koshiro

古文：梁时，西京中州市有何四郎者，以鬻妆粉自业。
现代文：梁代时，西京洛邑的中州街市上有个卖胭粉的人叫何四郎。
English: In Liang's time, there was a man named He Shiro who sold oyster flour in the Zhongzhou Street Market in Luoyang, West Beijing.

古文：尝于一日五更初，街鼓未鸣时，闻百步之外，有人极叫何四郎者，几数声而罢。自是率以为常。
现代文：有一天五更刚过街鼓没响时，他听到百步以外有人大声喊何四郎，喊了几声就不喊了，从此就经常这样。
English: One day, when he was just crossing the street and the drums were not sounding, he heard someone shouting "He Shiro" a hundred paces away. After a few shouts, he stopped shouting, and it has been like this ever since.

古文：约半月后，忽晨兴开肆毕，有一人若官僚之仆者，直前揖之云：官令召汝。
现代文：半个月后，有天何四郎刚刚开业，有一个像大官仆役模样的人一直走到他面前作了个揖说，官家让我召你去一趟。
English: Half a month later, on a day when He Shiro had just opened, a man who looked like a servant of a high-ranking official came up to him and said, "The officials asked me to call you."

古文：何意府尹之宅有取，未就路，仆又促之。
现代文：何四郎以为是府尹的家宅里找他勒索化妆品，就没动地方。
English: He Shiro thought it was Fu Yin's home looking for him to extort cosmetics, so he didn't move.

古文：何方束带，仆又不容。俄以衣牵之北行，达于东西之衢。何乃欲回归，仆执之尤急。
现代文：那仆役又催他，何四郎打算穿好衣服系好腰带，仆役都等不得，扯起他的衣服就往北而去。走到东西大街上，何四郎挣着想回去，那仆役却紧紧抓住他使他无法挣脱。
English: The servant urged him again. Koshiro wanted to get dressed and fasten his belt. The servant couldn't wait. He tore up his clothes and headed north. When he reached East-West Street, Koshiro wanted to go back, but the servant held him tightly so that he couldn't break free.

古文：何乃愈疑，将非人耶？
现代文：何四郎心里十分疑惑，心想这家伙会不会是鬼呢？
English: Koshiro was very doubtful in his heart, wondering if this guy could be a ghost.

古文：尝闻所著鞋履，以之规地自围，亦可御其邪魅。
现代文：他曾听人说，如果用自己的鞋印把自己围起来就可以驱邪防鬼。
English: He once heard someone say that if you surround yourself with your own shoe prints, you can drive away evil spirits.

古文：某虽亟为之，即被掷之于屋。
现代文：这时他就非常想这样作，可是那仆役却把他的鞋给脱下扔到房上去，他想作也作不成。
English: At this point he really wanted to do it, but the servant took off his shoes and threw them into the room, and he couldn't do it.

古文：知其无能为也，且讶且行，情甚恍惚，遂正北抵徽安门。又西北约五七里，则昏冥矣。
现代文：何四郎又惊又怕地跟着走，神情忧忧忽忽身不由己，就见到了正北的徽安门，出城门又走了五七里时，天已黑了。
English: Shocked and afraid, He Shiro followed, his face sad and worried, but he couldn't help but see the Hui'an Gate just to the north. When he walked another 57 miles out of the city gate, it was already dark.

古文：忽有朱门峻宇，若王者之府署。
现代文：忽见前面是一座红门大院，非常气派，看样子是王侯的府署。
English: Suddenly, I saw in front of me a large courtyard with a red gate. It was very grand and looked like a prince's residence.

古文：至更深，延入。烈炬荧煌，供帐华丽。唯妇人辈款接殷勤，云：是故将相之第，幼女方择良匹。实慕英贤，可就吉席。
现代文：到半夜时，那仆役才领他进去，只见里面灯火辉煌，绸幕锦帐，有很多女人走来走去迎接款待客人，仆役说，这是以前将相的府宅，今天是府上小女儿订亲的喜日，府上一直仰慕你的聪明英俊，现在请你到贵宾席入座吧！
English: At midnight, the servant led him inside. Inside, the lights were brilliant, the curtains were silk, and there were many women walking around to greet and entertain the guests. The servant said, "This used to be the house of the shogun. Today is the auspicious day of the betrothal of the younger daughter of the shogun. The shogun has always admired your cleverness and handsomeness. Now, please take a seat at the VIP table."

古文：何既睹妖冶，情亦惑之，婉淑之姿，亦绝代矣。
现代文：何四郎见那位小姐十分娇艳，堪称是绝代佳人，心里还真有些动情了。
English: When He Shiro saw that the young lady was very pretty and could be called a great beauty, he was really moved.

古文：比晓，则卧于丘塚之间，寂无人迹。
现代文：这时天亮了，何四郎忽然发现自己正躺在一个乱坟堆里，四周没有一点人迹，就远望着徽安门往回走。
English: At this time, when it was dawn, He Shiro suddenly found himself lying in a chaotic heap of graves, without a trace of people around him. He looked far and wide at the Hui'an Gate and walked back.

古文：遂望徽安门而返，草莽翳密，堕于荒井之中。又经一夕，饥渴难状，以衣襟承露而饮之。
现代文：然而坟地里野草茂密，何四郎失足掉近荒井里，在里面又呆了一天，饥渴难忍，只好用衣襟接了露水喝。
English: However, the weeds in the graveyard were thick, and Koshiro lost his footing and fell into a barren well, where he stayed for another day. He was so hungry and thirsty that he had to drink dew from his coat.

古文：有樵者见而问之，遂报其家，缒而出之，数日方愈。
现代文：正好有个打柴的路过发现了，何四郎让他给家里捎信，家人赶来，用绳子把他从荒井里拽上来，过了好几天身体才复原。
English: He was discovered by a passer-by who was collecting firewood. He asked him to take a letter home. His family arrived and pulled him out of the barren well with a rope. It took several days for his body to recover.

古文：青州客
现代文：青州客
English: Guests from Qingzhou

古文：朱梁时，青州有贾客泛海遇风，飘至一处，远望有山川城郭，海师曰：自顷遭风者，未尝至此。吾闻鬼国在是，得非此耶？
现代文：五代朱梁时，山东青州有个商人坐船在海上遇到了风暴，漂流到一个海岛边上。远看岛上有山川城郭，船上的海师说，以前也遇到过风暴，但从来没见过这个岛子，我听说鬼国就在这个岛上。
English: In the fifth generation of Zhu Liang, a merchant in Qingzhou, Shandong encountered a storm at sea and drifted to the edge of an island. Looking at the island from afar, there were mountains and rivers. The seaman on the ship said that he had encountered storms before, but had never seen this island. I heard that the ghost country was on this island.

古文：顷之，舟至岸，因登岸。向城而去。
现代文：不一会，船靠了岸，他们登岸奔城郭而走。
English: In a little while the boat came to the shore, and they went ashore and ran to the city.

古文：其庐舍田亩，不殊中国。见人皆揖之，而人皆不见已。
现代文：看岛上的田园房舍，和中国没有什么两样，岛上的人相见也互相作揖，但他们都看不见这伙刚上岸的人。
English: Looking at the idyllic houses on the island, which are no different from those in China, the people on the island also make fun of each other when they see each other, but they cannot see this group of people who have just come ashore.

古文：至城，有守门者，揖之，亦不应。
现代文：到了城门前，大家向守门的人行礼，守城门的人也不理。
English: When they arrived in front of the city gate, everyone bowed to the gatekeepers, and the gatekeepers ignored them.

古文：入城，屋室人物甚殷。遂至王宫，正值大宴，君臣侍宴者数十，其衣冠器用丝竹陈设之类，多类中国。
现代文：他们进城以后，见街道房宇很繁华，接着进了王宫，王宫里正在摆着宴会，几十个大臣和侍从有好几十人。看他们的衣帽穿戴和乐器陈设，也很像中国。
English: After they entered the city, they saw that the streets and buildings were very prosperous, and then they entered the royal palace, where a banquet was being held, with dozens of ministers and attendants. Looking at their clothes and hats and musical instruments, it was also very similar to China.

古文：客因升殿，俯逼王坐以窥之。
现代文：客人们登上大殿，坐在国王的旁边仔细观察。
English: The guests went up to the main hall and sat down next to the king to watch him carefully.

古文：俄而王有疾，左右扶还，亟召巫者视之。巫至，有阳地人至此，阳气逼人，故王病。
现代文：不一会儿，国王生了病，左右把他扶下去，急忙找来巫师，巫师说，有阳间人来到这里，他们身上的阳气逼人，才使得大王生了病。
English: Soon after, the king fell ill. They helped him down and hurried to find a sorcerer. The sorcerer said that the king had fallen ill because some yang people had come here, and the yang in their bodies was too strong.

古文：其人偶来尔，无心为祟，以饮食车马谢遣之，可矣。
现代文：他们是偶然来到这里，并不是成心来作怪，只要给他们一些饮食东西之类送他们走就行了。
English: They came here by chance, they didn't do it on purpose, just give them something to eat and send them on their way.

古文：即具酒食，设座于别室，巫及其君臣，皆来祀祝。
现代文：于是国王命令摆设酒饭，在另外一个厅堂里设了座位，巫师和大臣们都来祭祀祝祷，商人们就大吃起来。
English: Then the king gave orders for food and drink to be served, and seats were set up in another hall, and the magicians and ministers came to offer sacrifices and prayers, and the merchants ate heartily.

古文：客据按而食。俄有仆夫驭马而至，客亦乘马而归。至岸登舟，国人竟不见己。
现代文：不一会儿一名仆役牵着一些马来，商人们就骑上马来到海岸，上船出发，岛上的人竟谁也看不见他们。
English: Soon a servant arrived with some horses, and the merchants mounted their horses and rode to the shore, where they boarded a boat and set out. No one on the island could see them.

古文：复遇便风得归。时贺德俭为青州节度，与魏博节度杨师厚有亲，因遣此客使魏，其为师厚言之。
现代文：这伙人乘着顺风回到青州，当时贺德俭任青州节度使，他和魏愽节度使杨师厚是亲戚，就派这些商客去了魏愽，向杨师厚报告他们在海上去过鬼国的事。
English: This group of people took advantage of the tailwind to return to Qingzhou. At that time, He Deqian served as the ambassador of the Qingzhou Festival, and he and the Weiqi Festival made Yang Shihou a relative. He sent these merchants to Weiqi to report to Yang Shihou that they had gone to a ghost country by sea.

古文：魏人范宣古，亲闻其事，为余言。
现代文：魏愽人范宣古曾亲自听到这件事，然后又告诉了我。
English: Fan Xuangu, a person from Weizhou, heard about this personally and then told me.

古文：周元枢
现代文：周元枢
English: Zhou Yuanzu

古文：周元枢者，睢阳人，为平卢掌书记。
现代文：河南睢阳人周元枢在平卢军府当掌书记，寄居在临淄县的官舍里。
English: Zhou Yuanzhu, a native of Shiyang, Henan Province, served as the secretary of the Pinglu Military Government and lived in a government house in Linyi County.

古文：寄居临淄官舍，一夕将寝，忽有车马辎重甚众，扣门使报曰：李司空候谒。
现代文：一天晚上他刚要就寝，忽然来了一队车马，车上装载着很多东西，使者敲门说李司空来拜见。
English: One night, just as he was about to go to bed, a caravan of horses and carriages suddenly arrived. The car was loaded with many things. The messenger knocked on the door and said that Li Sikuang had come to see him.

古文：元枢念亲知辈皆无此人，因自思，必乡曲之旧，吾不及知矣。即出见之，延坐，请问其所从来，曰：吾亦新家至此，未有所止，求居此宅矣。
现代文：周元枢暗想自己亲友中没有李司空这个人，大概是地方上的故旧友人，就出门迎见，并请到堂上就坐，询问李司空从何处来，李司空说，我是刚刚搬家到此地，还没有找到住处，希望你能允许我住到你宅府里。
English: Zhou Yuanzhu secretly thought that there was no Li Sikuang among his relatives and friends, probably an old friend in the local area, so he went out to meet him, and invited him to sit in the hall and ask where Li Sikuang was from. Li Sikuang said, I have just moved to this place and have not yet found a place to live. I hope you can allow me to live in your house.

古文：元枢惊曰：何至是？
现代文：周元枢很惊讶地说：你怎么能提出这样的要求呢？
English: Zhou Yuanzhu was surprised and said, "How can you make such a request?"

古文：对曰：此吾之旧宅也。
现代文：李司空说：因为这是我的旧宅呀！
English: Li Siku said: Because this is my old house!

古文：元枢曰：吾从官至此，相传云，书寄之公署也。君何时居此？
现代文：元枢说，我到这里作官以后就听说这个宅子一直是书记官的公署，你什么时候在这里住过？
English: Yuan Zu said, "After I came here to work as an official, I heard that this house has always been the registrar's office. When did you live here?"

古文：曰：隋开皇中尝居之。
现代文：回答说，隋朝开皇年间我就在这里住过。
English: He replied that I had lived here during the reign of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：元枢曰：若尔，君定是鬼耶？
现代文：周元枢说，如果真像你说的这样，你肯定是鬼了。
English: Zhou Yuanzhu said, "If it is as you say, you must be a ghost."

古文：曰：然。
现代文：回答说，是的。
English: The general said yes.

古文：地府许我立庙于此，故请君移去尔。
现代文：冥府答应给我在这里建庙，所以我请你搬出去吧。
English: Hades promised to build me a temple here, so I invite you to move out.

古文：元枢不可，曰：人不当与鬼相接，岂吾将死，故君得凌我耶？
现代文：元枢不答应，说：人怎么能和鬼交接办事呢？难道说我要死去你才这样欺侮我呢？
English: Yuan Zu did not agree and said, "How can a person work hand in hand with a ghost? Are you bullying me like this just because I want to die?"

古文：虽然，理不当以此宅授君。
现代文：就算真是这样，我也不会把这住宅交给你的。
English: Even if that were true, I wouldn't give you the house.

古文：吾虽死，必与君讼。
现代文：就是我真的死了，到了阴间我也要和你打官司！
English: Even if I am really dead, I will sue you in the underworld!

古文：因召妻子曰：我死，必多置纸笔于棺中，将与李君对讼。
现代文：接着他叫来妻子说，如果我死了，你要在我的棺材里多放些纸和笔，我要和这位李先生打官司。
English: Then he called his wife and said, "If I die, you have to put more paper and pens in my coffin. I'm going to sue this Mr. Li."

古文：即具酒与之饮，相酬数百杯，词色愈厉。
现代文：然后就摆了酒和李司空对饮，两人喝了有好几百杯，周元枢的言词越来越严厉。
English: After that, he and Li Sikuo had a drinking game. The two drank several hundred glasses, and Zhou Yuanzhu's words became more and more severe.

古文：客将去，复留之。
现代文：李司空告辞时，元枢还客气地挽留他。
English: When Li Siku was leaving, Yuan Zuo politely held him back.

古文：良久，一苍头来云；夫人传语司空，周书记木石人也，安可与之论难？
现代文：过了一会，李司空的一位老仆人来对他说，夫人让我来告诉老爷，周元枢木石心肠，你怎么能和他论什么高低而自找难堪呢？
English: After a while, one of Li Shikong's old servants came to him and said, "Madam, let me tell you, Zhou Yuan's heart is made of stone. How can you discuss anything with him and embarrass yourself?"

古文：自取困哉！客于是辞谢而去。送之出门，倏忽不见。元枢竟无恙。
现代文：李司空赶快告辞而去，周元枢把他送出大门，转眼之间李司空就消失了，元枢什么灾祸也没有，平平安安。
English: Li Sikuang quickly said goodbye and left. Zhou Yuanhu sent him out of the gate. In a blink of an eye, Li Sikuang disappeared. There was no disaster for Yuanhu. He was safe and sound.

古文：朱延寿
现代文：朱延寿
English: Zhu Yanshou

古文：天祐丙子岁，浙西军士周交作乱，杀大将秦进忠、张胤，凡十余人。
现代文：元末天佑丙子年间，浙西军士周交造反，杀了大将秦进忠张胤等十多人。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, during the reign of Heaven's Blessing, Zhou Jiao, a military sergeant from western Zhejiang Province, rebelled and killed more than ten people, including the general Qin Jinzhong Zhangyin.

古文：进忠少时，尝怒一小奴，刃贯心，杀而并埋之。
现代文：秦进忠少年时虽一时发怒杀了一个小仆人，用刀穿透了他的心，杀死就埋葬了。
English: When Qin Jinzhong was a boy, he killed a small servant in a fit of rage, stabbed him through the heart with a knife, and buried the body.

古文：末年，恒见此奴捧心而立，始于百步之外，稍稍而近。
现代文：秦进忠晚年时，常常看见那小仆人捧着自己的心，开始在百步之外，越来越近。
English: When Qin Jinzhong was in his later years, he often saw that little servant holding his heart, starting from a hundred paces away and getting closer and closer.

古文：其日将出，乃在马前，左右皆见之。
现代文：这天秦进忠要外出，一看那小仆人又捧着心站在马前。周围的人都看见了。
English: On this day, Qin Jinzhong was about to go out, when he saw the little servant standing in front of the horse with his heart in his hands. Everyone around him saw it.

古文：而入府，又遇乱兵，伤胃而卒。
现代文：等他到了府衙，就遇见了叛军，被刺伤了胃死去。
English: When he arrived at the capital, he met the rebels and was stabbed in the stomach and died.

古文：张胤前月余，每闻呼其姓名，声甚清越。
现代文：张胤死前一个多月，也总听见有人喊自己的名字，声音非常清朗，也是越来越近。
English: More than a month before Zhang Yan's death, he always heard someone calling his name. The voice was very clear and getting closer and closer.

古文：亦稍稍而近。其日若在对面，入府皆毙矣。
现代文：到张胤被杀的那天，他听到有人就像在他面前喊他的名子，等他一追出府衙，就被乱兵杀了。
English: On the day Zhang Yan was killed, he heard someone calling his name in front of him, and as soon as he was chased out of the capital, he was killed by the soldiers.

古文：望江李令
现代文：望江李令
English: WANGJIANG Li Ling

古文：望江李令者，罢秩居舒州。
现代文：安徽望江县令李某，任满后住在舒州。
English: Li Mou, the governor of Wangjiang County, Anhui Province, lived in Shuzhou after his term of office.

古文：有二子，甚聪慧。
现代文：他有两个儿子，十分聪明。
English: He has two sons who are very clever.

古文：令尝饮酒暮归，去家数百步，见二子来迎，即共禽而殴之。令惊大怒，大呼，而远方人绝，竟无知者。且行且殴，将至家，二子皆却走而去。
现代文：有一次李某在外喝了酒晚上回家，离家几百步时，看见两个儿子来接他，走到跟前后，两个儿子突然抓住他狠揍起来，李某又惊又怒地大喊起来，但周围没有人，两个儿子一边走一边打，到了家门口，两个儿子都逃走了。
English: On one occasion, Li went home after drinking wine in the evening. When he was a few hundred steps away from home, he saw his two sons come to pick him up. When he walked up to them, the two sons suddenly grabbed him and beat him up. Li was shocked and shouted angrily, but there was no one around. The two sons walked and beat each other. When they reached the door of the house, both sons fled.

古文：及入门，二子复迎于堂下，问之，皆云未尝出门。
现代文：进门以后，李某看见两个儿子都在家里，问他们，他们说根本没出门。
English: After entering the door, Li Mou saw that his two sons were at home and asked them. They said that they did not go out at all.

古文：后月余，令复饮酒于所亲家，因具白其事，请留宿，不敢归。
现代文：一个多月后，李某又到亲友家喝酒，并向亲友说了上次挨打的事，说不敢回家请求住下。
English: More than a month later, Li Mou went to the home of a relative and friend to drink again, and told the relative and friend about the last time he was beaten, saying that he did not dare to go home and asked to stay.

古文：而其子恐其及暮归，复为所殴，即俱往迎之。及中途，见其父，怒曰：何故暮出？
现代文：这时他的两个儿子怕父亲回来晚了再挨打，就出门迎接，半路上遇见了父亲，父亲大怒说，谁让你们晚上出来！
English: At this time, his two sons were afraid that their father would come back late and be beaten again, so they went out to meet him. Halfway there, they met their father, who angrily said, "Who let you come out at night!

古文：即使从者击之，困而获免。
现代文：说罢让随从的人打两个儿子，两个儿子费了很大劲才逃脱了。
English: He said that he would not allow his attendants to beat his two sons. The two sons managed to escape with great difficulty.

古文：明日令归，益骇其事，不数月。
现代文：第二天李某回家后听儿子们说了这事，心里更加害怕。过了不几个月，李某父子就都死了。
English: The next day, after Li went home and listened to his sons talk about it, he was even more scared. A few months later, both Li and his son died.

古文：父子皆卒，郡人云，舒有山鬼，善为此厉。盖黎丘之徒也。
现代文：郡里的人说，舒州有一种山鬼专门兴妖作怪，和古代那种专门假装别人的儿子而害人的黎丘鬼，用的是同样的伎俩手段。
English: People in the county said that there is a kind of mountain ghost in Shuzhou that specializes in creating monsters, and it uses the same tricks as the ancient Litchu ghost, which specialized in pretending to be someone else's son and harming people.

古文：张飞庙祝
现代文：张飞庙祝
English: Zhang Fei Temple Congratulation

古文：梓州去城十余里，有张飞庙，庙中有土偶，为卫士。
现代文：离四川梓州城十几里的地方有一座张飞庙，庙里有一个土塑的偶像，是个卫士。
English: A dozen miles from Zizhou City, Sichuan, there is a Zhang Fei Temple. There is an earthen idol in the temple, which is a guardian.

古文：一夕感庙祝之妻，经年，遂生一女。其发如朱，眉目手足，皆如土偶之状。
现代文：一天晚上，这个土偶卫士化成人形，和庙祝的妻子同了床。一年后，庙祝妻子生了个女儿，红头发，眉眼手脚都像那个土偶。
English: One night, the guardian of the clay figurine turned into a man and slept with Miao Zhuo's wife. A year later, Miao Zhuo's wife gave birth to a daughter with red hair, eyebrows, hands and feet like the clay figurine.

古文：至于长大，人皆畏之。
现代文：这女孩长大以后，人们都很怕她。
English: When the girl grows up, people are afraid of her.

古文：凡莅职梓州者，谒庙，则呼出验之，或遗之钱帛，至今犹存。
现代文：凡是到梓州上任作官的人，参拜张飞庙时都要把那红发女孩叫来看看，并给她些钱。
English: Anyone who comes to Zizhou to take up a post as an official, when visiting the Zhangfei Temple, should call the red-haired girl to see and give her some money.

古文：僧彦翛
现代文：现在这个女孩还活着。僧彦翛
English: Now this girl is still alive.

古文：草书僧文英大师彦翛，始在洛都。
现代文：擅长草书的文英大师彦翛是一位和尚，起初住在洛阳。
English: The master of Chinese calligraphy, Yan Xun, was a monk who initially lived in Luoyang.

古文：明宗世子秦王从荣，复厚遇之。后有故，南居江陵西湖曾口寺。
现代文：后唐明宗的世子秦王从荣，对彦翛也十分优厚，后来彦翛因故南迁到江陵西湖的曾口寺。
English: Later, Qin Wang Congrong, the heir of the Tang and Ming dynasties, was also very kind to Yan Xuan. Later, Yan Xuan moved south to Zengkou Temple on the West Lake of Gangneung.

古文：一日恍惚，忽见秦王拥二十骑诣寺，访彦翛。
现代文：有一天，彦翛在精神恍惚中忽然看到秦王带着二十多骑士来到寺庙见他。
English: One day, Yan Xuan, in a trance, suddenly saw King Qin with more than twenty knights come to the temple to see him.

古文：彦翛问大王何以此来，恰来对，倏而不见。
现代文：彦翛就问秦王为什么到这儿来，秦王还没回答，就突然不见了。
English: Hikone asked Qin Wang why he had come here. Qin Wang did not answer, and suddenly disappeared.

古文：彦翛方访于人，不旬日，秦王遇害。
现代文：彦翛正打算向别人打听，不几天，就传来了秦王遇害的消息。
English: Hikone was planning to ask someone else, and a few days later, the news of Qin Wang's murder came.

古文：建康乐人
现代文：建康乐人
English: Jiankang Musicians

古文：建康有乐人，日晚如市，见二仆夫云：陆判官召。
现代文：建康有位乐师晚间上街，遇见两个仆役对他说：陆判官叫你去一趟。
English: In Jiankang, a musician went to the street in the evening. He met two servants who said to him: "The magistrate is calling you.

古文：随之而去。至大宅，陈设甚严。宾客十余人，皆善酒，惟饮酒而不设食，酒亦不及乐人。
现代文：乐师跟着来到一个很大的府宅，里面非常庄严华美，有十几个宾客正在喝酒，看样子都挺能喝，而且光有酒没有饭菜佐酒。
English: The musician then came to a large mansion, which was very stately and beautiful, with more than a dozen guests drinking, all of whom seemed to be able to drink, and there was only wine without food and wine.

古文：向曙而散，乐人困甚，因卧门外床上。
现代文：这些人见到乐师，也不让乐师喝酒，天亮时，人们散去，乐师又困又乏，就躺在一个床上睡去。
English: When these people saw the musician, they did not allow him to drink. At dawn, the people dispersed, and the musician, tired and weary, lay down on a bed to sleep.

古文：既寤，乃在草间，旁有大冢。问其里人，云，相传陆判官之冢。不知何时人也。
现代文：等醒来时，发现自己躺在草丛中，旁边有座大塚，问当地人，他们说，相传那是陆判官的坟，至于陆判官是什么时候的人，就不得而知了。
English: When he woke up, he found himself lying in the grass with a large mound next to him. When he asked the locals, they said that it was rumoured to be the grave of the land judge. As to when the land judge lived, it is unknown.

古文：黄延让
现代文：黄延让
English: Huang Yanjan

古文：建康吏黄延让尝饮酒于亲家，迨夜而散。
现代文：建康官员黄延让有一次到亲友家喝酒，天晚时回家。
English: Jiankang official Huang Yanzhen once went to a friend's house for a drink and returned home late at night.

古文：不甚醉，恍然而身浮。飘飘而行，不能自制。
现代文：他并没喝醉，却觉得身子非常轻地飘了起来，在空中飞行，自己也控制不住。
English: He wasn't drunk, but he felt himself floating very lightly, flying through the air, and he couldn't control himself.

古文：行可十数里，至一大宅，寂然无人。堂前有一小房，房中有床，延让困甚，因寝床上。
现代文：飞行了十几里后，来到一个大府宅，宅里没有人，堂前有一间小房，房子里有张床，他就躺在床上睡去。
English: After flying more than ten miles, he came to a big mansion. There was no one in the mansion. There was a small room in front of the hall, and there was a bed in the house. He lay down on the bed and went to sleep.

古文：及寤，乃在蒋山前草间。逾重城复堑矣。
现代文：醒来一看，自己躺在蒋山草丛中，逾过道道城墙，又掉进深沟。
English: When he woke up, he found himself lying in the Jiangshan grass, overpassing the city wall and falling into a deep ditch.

古文：因恍惚得疾，岁余乃愈。
现代文：后来他就精神恍惚地得了病，一年多病才痊愈。
English: Later, he fell into a trance and became ill. It took him more than a year to recover.

古文：张瑗
现代文：张瑗
English: Zhang Ye

古文：江南内臣张瑗日暮过建康新桥，忽见一美人，袒衣猖獗而走。瑗甚讶，谛视之，妇人忽尔回头，化为旋风扑瑗。瑗马倒伤面，月余乃复。
现代文：江南有个宦官张瑗，有一天黄昏时路过建康新桥时，忽然看见一个美人敞着衣服疯狂地奔走，十分惊讶，他站下仔细再看时，那美女忽然化成一股旋风扑向张瑗，张瑗的马被旋风刮倒，张瑗的脸也受了伤，一个多月后伤才好。
English: There was a eunuch in the south of the Yangtze River, Zhang Xuan. One day, when he was passing Jiankang New Bridge at dusk, he suddenly saw a beautiful woman running wildly with her clothes open. He was very surprised. When he stood down to take a closer look, the beautiful woman suddenly turned into a whirlwind and pounced on Zhang Xuan. Zhang Xuan's horse was knocked down by the whirlwind, and Zhang Xuan's face was also injured. The injury only got better after more than a month.

古文：初马既起，乃提一足，跛行而归。自是每过此桥，马辄提一足而行，竟无他怪。
现代文：那匹马受伤后爬起来就抬起一只蹄子跛着走回去，从此马只要一走上建康桥，就会抬起一只蹄子跛着走，一直倒也没有发生其他怪事。
English: After the horse was injured, it got up and walked back with one hoof raised. From then on, as soon as the horse walked onto Jiankang Bridge, it would walk with one hoof raised. No other strange things have happened.

古文：婺源军人妻
现代文：婺源军人妻
English: Military Wives of Xinyuan

古文：丁酉岁，婺源建威军人妻死更娶。
现代文：丁酉年时，婺源建威军中有个军人，妻子死后又娶了一房。
English: In the year of Ding Xi, there was a soldier in the army of Yuyuan Jianwei. After his wife's death, he married another woman.

古文：其后妻虐遇前妻之子过甚，夫不能制。
现代文：后妻对待前房的儿女虐待十分厉害，军人管不了她。
English: The second wife mistreated the children in the front room so badly that the soldiers couldn't control her.

古文：一日，忽见亡妻自门而入，大怒后妻曰：人谁无死，孰无母子之情，乃虐我儿女如是耶？
现代文：有一天，忽然看见亡妻走进门来，对后妻大怒地说，人谁能不死，谁没有母子之情，你为什么这样虐待我的儿女？
English: One day, he suddenly saw his deceased wife walk through the door and angrily said to his second wife, "Who can live without dying, who doesn't have the feelings of a mother and child? Why are you abusing my children like this?"

古文：吾比诉与地下所司，今与我假十日，使我诲汝。
现代文：我已经向阴司控告了你，阴司给了我十天假，叫我来劝导并警告你。
English: I have accused you to the jinni, and the jinni has given me ten days' leave and asked me to advise and warn you.

古文：汝遂不改，必能杀君。
现代文：你若再不改过，就会杀了你！
English: If you don't change your ways, I'll kill you!

古文：夫妻皆恐惧再拜，即为其酒食。
现代文：军人和后妻吓得跪在地上一再叩头，并为她备办了酒食。
English: Terrified, the soldier and his wife kneeled on the ground, bowed repeatedly, and prepared food and drink for her.

古文：遍召亲党邻里，问讯叙话如常。他人但闻其声，唯夫见之。
现代文：前妻让军人把乡亲邻居都请来，她和大家问好谈话，和平常一样，大家看不见她，只有军人能见到她的形象。
English: The ex-wife asked the soldiers to invite all the villagers and neighbors, she greeted and talked with everyone, as usual, everyone could not see her, only the soldiers could see her image.

古文：及夜，为设榻别室，夫欲从之宿，不可。
现代文：到了夜晚，军人为前妻安排在另一个房间，并要和她一起过夜，她没有答应。
English: At night, the soldier arranged for his ex-wife in another room and wanted to spend the night with her, but she did not agree.

古文：满十日，将去，复责励其后妻，言甚切至。
现代文：过了十天，前妻假期满了要回阴间，临走时又一次告诫后妻，言辞十分恳切。
English: After ten days, the former wife's vacation was over and she wanted to return to the underworld. Before leaving, she warned the second wife again, her words were very earnest.

古文：举家亲族共送至墓，去墓百余步，曰：诸人可止矣。
现代文：军人全家的亲戚族人都来送她回墓地，离墓地几百步时，前妻说，大家不要再往前走了。
English: When she was a few hundred steps away from the cemetery, her ex-wife said, "Don't go any further.

古文：复殷勤辞诀而去。
现代文：然后和大家真诚地道谢诀别。
English: Then he said goodbye to everyone with sincere thanks.

古文：将及柏林中，诸人皆见之，衣服容色如平生，及墓乃没。
现代文：众人见她走到柏树林时现了一下原形，衣服、容貌和活着时候完全一样，走到坟墓跟前就消失了。
English: When she went to the cypress grove, she appeared in her original form, with the same clothes and face as when she was alive. When she got to the grave, she disappeared.

古文：建威军使汪延昌言如是。
现代文：建威军中的军使汪延昌曾详细讲述过这件事。
English: Wang Yanchang, a military envoy in Jianwei's army, once recounted this incident in detail.

古文：陈德遇
现代文：陈德遇
English: Chen Deyun

古文：辛亥岁，江南伪右藏库官陈居让字德遇，直宿库中，其妻在家，五更初，忽梦二吏，手把文书，自门而入。问：此陈德遇家耶？
现代文：辛亥年时，江南叛军的右藏库官陈居让字德遇在仓库里值宿，他的妻子在家里。五更时，陈妻忽然梦见两个官员手里拿着文书走近大门问，这是陈德遇家吗？
English: In the year of Xinhai, Chen Jiazhang, the right-hand librarian of the south river rebel army, was on duty in the warehouse, and his wife was at home. During the five-day period, Chen's wife suddenly dreamed that two officials approached the gate with documents in their hands and asked, is this Chen De's homecoming?

古文：曰：然。
现代文：陈妻说是。
English: The general said yes.

古文：德遇何在？曰：在库中。
现代文：又问陈德遇在哪儿，陈妻说在仓库里。
English: He also asked Chen De where the encounter took place. Chen's wife said it was in a warehouse.

古文：吏将去，妻追呼之曰：家夫字德遇耳，有主衣库官陈德遇者，家近在东曲。
现代文：两名官员转身要走，陈妻忙追着说：我丈夫叫陈居让，德遇是他的字。有个管衣库的官，名叫陈德遇。他家住在东巷里。
English: The two officials turned to leave, and Chen's wife chased after them, saying, "My husband's name is Chen Jujang, and his family name is Deyun. There is an official in charge of the clothing warehouse named Chen Deyun. His family lives in Dongxiang."

古文：二吏相视而嘻曰：几误矣。
现代文：两个官员相视一笑说：差点弄错了。
English: The two officials smiled at each other and said, "We almost made a mistake."

古文：遂去。
现代文：说罢就走了。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：迩日，德遇晨起如厕，自云有疾，还卧，良久遂卒。
现代文：第二天，那个名子叫陈德遇的人早起上厕所，觉得有病，回到屋里又睡下，过了半天就死了。
English: The next day, the man, whose name was Chen Deyu, got up early to go to the toilet, felt sick, went back inside and went back to sleep. Half a day later, he died.

古文：二人并居治城之西。
现代文：这两个姓陈的人都住在县城的西面。
English: Both surnamed Chen live in the west of the county seat.

古文：广陵吏人
现代文：广陵吏人
English: Guangling official resigns

