古文：起屠维作噩，尽昭阳赤奋若，凡五年。
现代文：起屠维作噩，尽昭阳赤奋若，一共五年。
English: Since then, Tu Wei has been working hard, and it has been five years in total.

古文：文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝上之下
现代文：文宗元圣昭献孝皇帝上之下
English: The Emperor Wenzong, the Emperor Shenzhao and the Emperor Xianxiao

古文：太和三年己酉，公元八二九年
现代文：唐文宗太和三年春季正月，亓志绍与成德兵联合掠夺贝州。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of Tang Wenzong's reign and the third year of Tang Wenzong's reign, Zou Zhishao and Chengde soldiers jointly plundered Beizhou.

古文：春，正月，亓志绍与成德合兵掠贝州。义成行营兵三千人先屯齐州，使之禹城，中道溃叛，横海节度使李祐讨诛之。
现代文：义成参予讨伐李同捷的行营兵三千人屯驻在齐州，后来奉命调防禹城，途中溃乱叛变，被新任横海节度使李诛杀。
English: Yicheng participated in the crusade against Li Tongjie with three thousand camped soldiers stationed in Qizhou. Later, he was ordered to defend Yucheng. On the way, he crushed the rebellion and was killed by the new Henghai governor Li Xi.

古文：李听、史唐合兵击亓志绍，破之。志绍将其众五千奔镇州。
现代文：李听和史唐率军联合进攻亓志绍，打败他的军队，亓志绍率五千人逃往镇州。
English: Li Huan and Shi Tang led a joint attack on Zou Zhishao and defeated his army. Zou Zhishao led five thousand people to flee to Zhenzhou.

古文：李载义奏攻沧州长芦，拔之。
现代文：李载义奏称攻占横海沧州长芦镇。
English: Li Zaiyi made a speech saying that he would capture the governor of Henghai and Cangzhou, Lucheng.

古文：甲辰，昭义奏亓志绍馀众万五千人诣本道降，置之洛州。
现代文：甲辰，昭义奏报：亓志绍余众一万五千人来本道请降，已安置在洛州。
English: Jia Chen, Zhaoyi Report: Fifteen thousand people from Zhangzhi and Shaoxing have come to this province to ask to be demoted and have been resettled in Lozhou.

古文：二月，横海节度使李祐帅诸道行营兵击李同捷，破之，进攻德州。
现代文：二月，新任横海节度使李率诸道行营兵击败李同捷，接着，进攻德州。
English: In February, the newly-appointed Henghai Jiedu defeated Li Tongjie and then attacked Texas.

古文：武宁捉生兵马使石雄，勇敢，爱士卒。
现代文：武宁捉生兵马使石雄作战勇敢，爱护士卒。
English: Wu Ning's capture of the soldiers and horses made Shi Xiong fight bravely and love nurses.

古文：王智兴残虐，军中欲逐智兴而立雄。
现代文：节度使王智兴对部下残虐无道，军中打算驱逐王智兴，然后拥立石雄为节度使。
English: Wang Zhixing was cruelly cruel to his subordinates, and the army planned to expel Wang Zhixing, and then set up Shi Xiong as the commander.

古文：智兴知之，因雄立功，奏请除刺史。
现代文：王智兴得知，于是乘石雄在前线作战立功的机会，奏请朝廷任命他为刺史。
English: When Wang Zhixing learned of this, he took advantage of Shi Xiong's opportunity to perform meritorious service in front-line combat and petitioned the imperial court to appoint him as chief historian.

古文：丙辰，以雄为壁州剌史。
现代文：丙辰，朝廷任命石雄为壁州刺史。
English: Hsin-Chen, the imperial court appointed Shi Xiong as the chief historian of Bishu.

古文：史宪诚闻沧景将平而惧，其子唐劝之入朝。
现代文：史宪诚听说沧景即将平定的消息，十分恐惧。
English: Shi Xiancheng was very afraid when he heard the news that Cangjing was about to be pacified.

古文：丙寅，宪诚使唐奉表请入朝，且请以所管听命。
现代文：他的儿子史唐趁机劝他前往京城朝拜，归顺朝廷。
English: His son, Shi Tang, took the opportunity to persuade him to go to the capital to pay homage and submit to the imperial court.

古文：石雄既去武宁，王智兴悉杀军中与雄善者百馀人。夏，四月，戊午，智兴奏雄摇动军情，请诛之。
现代文：丙寅，史宪诚让史唐携带上奏朝廷的表章前往长安，请求朝廷批准自己入朝参拜，同时，请求以自己管辖的魏博六州听从朝廷诏令。石雄离开武宁后，王智兴杀军中平日和石雄关系密切的将士一百多人。夏季，四月，戊午，王智兴奏称，石雄煽动军情，请朝廷把他杀掉。
English: After Shi Xiong left Wu Ning, Wang Zhixing killed more than a hundred soldiers in the army who had close ties with Ping Rong and Shi Xiong. In the summer, in April, at noon, Wang Zhixing reported that Shi Xiong had incited the military situation and asked the court to kill him.

古文：上知雄无罪，免死，长流白州。
现代文：文宗知道石雄被王智兴诬陷而无罪，于是，下令免死，流放到白州。
English: Wenzong knew that Shi Xiong had been framed by Wang Zhixing and was not guilty, so he ordered him to be spared death and exiled to Baizhou.

古文：戊辰，李载义奏攻沧州，破其罗城。
现代文：戊辰，李载义奏报进攻李同捷的治所沧州，已攻破外城。
English: In Boshen, Li Zaiyi reported that the attack on Li Tongjie's administrative center, Cangzhou, had broken through the outer city.

古文：李祐拔德州，城中将卒三千馀人奔镇州。
现代文：李率军攻拔德州，城中将士三千人逃奔镇州。
English: Li led the army to attack Texas, and three thousand soldiers in the city fled to Zhenzhou.

古文：李同捷与祐书请降，祐并奏其书，谏议大夫柏耆受诏宣慰行营，好张大声势以威制诸将，诸将已恶之矣。
现代文：李同捷写书给李，请求投降。
English: Li Tongjie wrote a letter to Li, asking him to surrender.

古文：及李同捷请降于祐，祐遣大将万洪代守沧州。
现代文：等到李同捷向李请降，李派遣大将万洪代理自己镇守沧州。
English: When Li Tongjie asked Li to step down, Li sent General Wanhong to act as his deputy to defend Cangzhou.

古文：耆疑同捷之诈，自将数百骑驰入沧州，以事诛洪，取同捷及其家属诣京师。
现代文：柏耆怀疑李同捷请降有诈，于是，率几百名骑兵赴沧州，寻找借口诛杀万洪，然后，把李同捷和他的家属一并带往京城。
English: He suspected that Li Tongjie's request to abdicate was fraudulent, so he led several hundred cavalrymen to Cangzhou to find an excuse to kill Wanhong, and then took Li Tongjie and his family to Beijing.

古文：乙亥，至将陵，或言王庭凑欲以奇兵篡同捷，乃斩同捷，传首，沧景悉平。
现代文：乙亥，柏耆走到德州将陵县，有人对他说，王庭凑策划出奇兵夺取李同捷。于是，柏耆斩李同捷，把他的首级送往京城。至此，沧景全部平定。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Baodi went to Zhuling County, Dezhou, and someone told him that Wang Ting had concocted a plan to capture Li Tongjie. Therefore, Baodi beheaded Li Tongjie and sent his head to Beijing. At this point, all the vicissitudes were smoothed out.

古文：五月，庚寅，加李载义同平章事。
现代文：五月，庚寅，唐文宗加封李载义同平章事的职务。
English: In May, Geng Yin and Tang Wenzong were appointed to the posts of Li Zaiyi and Tong Ping.

古文：诸道兵攻李同捷，三年，仅能下之。
现代文：朝廷征发诸道兵马围攻李同捷，用了三年之久，才迫使他投降。
English: The imperial court sent soldiers and horses from various provinces to besiege Li Tongjie, and it took three years to force him to surrender.

古文：而柏耆径入城，取为己功。
现代文：而柏耆径直进入沧州城，抓获李同捷作为自己的功劳。
English: However, Baojun went straight to Cangzhou City and captured Li Tongjie as his own achievement.

古文：诸将疾之，争上表论列。
现代文：诸将都憎恨他，争相上奏予以抨击。
English: Generals all hated him and rushed to denounce him.

古文：辛卯，贬耆为循州司户。
现代文：辛卯，朝廷贬柏耆为循州司户。
English: Soon after, the imperial court demoted Baekhyun to the position of provincial governor.

古文：李祐寻薨。
现代文：不久，李去世。
English: Soon after, Li passed away.

古文：壬寅，摄魏博副使史唐奏改名孝章。
现代文：壬寅，暂代魏博节度副使史唐奏称，改名为史孝章。
English: Ren Yin, temporarily acting as Wei Bo's vice-envoy to the Qing Dynasty, was renamed Shi Xiaozhang.

古文：六月，丙辰，诏： 镇州四面行营各归本道休息，但务保境，勿相往来。惟庭凑效顺，为达章表，馀皆勿受。 
现代文：六月，丙辰，唐文宗下诏： 镇州四面行营各道兵马，各自返回本道休整，只求保卫边境安全，而不要互相有所往来，只有当王庭凑表示愿意归顺朝廷时，才可为他转达上奏朝廷的奏折，其余一概不要接受。 
English: In June, the Tang Emperor Wenzong issued the following edict: The soldiers and horses of each province should return to their own provinces to rest, and only seek to protect the border security, but should not have any dealings with each other. Only when Wang Tianzhong expressed his willingness to submit to the imperial court, could he deliver the report to the imperial court, and the rest should not be accepted.

古文：辛酉，以史宪诚为兼侍中、河中节度使；以李听兼魏博节度使；分相、卫、澶三州，以史孝章为节度使。
现代文：辛酉，唐文宗任命魏博节度使史宪诚兼任侍中、河中节度使；任命义成节度使李听兼魏博节度使。同时下令把魏博管辖的相、卫、澶三州分割出来，任命史孝章为节度使。
English: At Xin'an, Tang Wenzong appointed Wei Bo Jiedu to make Shi Xiancheng concurrently serve as Jizhong and He Zhong Jiedu; appointed Yicheng Jiedu to make Li Xuan concurrently serve as Wei Bo Jiedu. At the same time, he ordered the separation of the three states governed by Wei Bo, namely, Xiang, Wei and He, and appointed Shi Xiaozhang as Jiedu.

古文：初，李祐闻柏耆杀万洪，大惊，疾遂剧。
现代文：当初，李听到柏耆擅杀万洪的消息后，大为吃惊，病情更加严重。
English: At first, Li was very surprised when he heard the news that Baodi had killed Wanhong without permission, and his condition became even more serious.

古文：上曰： 祐若死，是耆杀之也！ 
现代文：文宗得知后说： 李如果病死，就是柏耆把他害死的。 
English: After learning of this, Wenzong said, "If Li died of illness, it was because of Baodi.

古文：癸酉，赐耆自尽。
现代文：癸酉，命柏耆自杀。
English: Oh, my God, he's killed himself.

古文：河东节度使李程奏得王庭凑书，请纳景州；又奏亓志绍自缢。
现代文：河东节度使李程奏称收到王庭凑给朝廷的书信，请求把景州交还朝廷。李程又奏报说，亓志绍已经自杀。
English: The Hedong Festival made Li Cheng report that he had received a letter from Wang Ting to the imperial court, requesting that Jingzhou be returned to the imperial court. Li Cheng also reported that Zou Zhishao had committed suicide.

古文：上遣中使赐史宪诚旌节，癸酉，至魏州。
现代文：唐文宗派遣宦官授予史宪诚河中节度使的旌节。癸酉，宦官抵达魏州。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty sent an eunuch to confer the title of imperial eunuch on Shi Xiancheng, the envoy of the emperor in the middle of the Wei River. The eunuch arrived in Wei Province.

古文：时李听自贝州还军馆陶，迁延未进，宪诚竭府库以治行，将士怒。
现代文：这时，李听率军从贝州返回，走到魏州以北的馆陶县时，犹豫而不再前进。史宪诚竭尽魏博库存的财物为自己治办行装。
English: At this time, Li He listened to the army returning from Bozhou and hesitated to advance when he went to Guntao County, north of Weizhou. Shi Xiancheng exhausted Weibo's inventory of property for his own administration.

古文：甲戌，军乱，杀宪诚，奉牙内都知兵马使灵武何进滔知留后。
现代文：甲戌，将士哗变，杀死史宪诚，拥立牙内都知兵马使、灵武人何进滔代理留后。
English: Armor, soldiers mutiny, kill Shi Xiancheng, support the establishment of the Inner Duchy, the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the spirit warrior He Jintao stay behind.

古文：李听进至魏州，进滔拒之，不得入。
现代文：李听率军抵达魏州城下，遭到何进滔的抵抗，不能入城。
English: Li He's army arrived at the foot of the Weizhou castle, but was met with fierce resistance and was unable to enter the city.

古文：秋，七月，进滔出兵击李听。听不为备，大败，溃走，昼夜兼行，趣浅口，失亡过半，辎重兵械尽弃之。
现代文：秋季，七月，何进滔出兵攻击李听，李听毫无准备，大败而逃，昼夜兼行，直奔馆陶县浅口镇，士卒损失逃亡过半，辎重兵器全都丢弃。
English: In the autumn, in July, He Jintao sent troops to attack Li He, Li He was unprepared, defeated and fled, both day and night, straight to Asakuchi Town, Guantao County, more than half of the soldiers fled, and all heavy weapons were discarded.

古文：昭义兵救之，听仅而得免，归于滑台。
现代文：昭义出兵救援，李听才得以逃免，回到义成的治所滑台。
English: Akiyoshi dispatched troops for rescue, and Li Huan was able to escape and return to Yicheng's detention center.

古文：河北久用兵，馈运不给，朝廷厌苦之。
现代文：自从太和元年朝廷出兵讨伐横海李同捷以来，长期在河北地区用兵伐叛，军需运输一直难以为继，朝廷对此十分厌烦苦恼，不愿再生事端。
English: Since the imperial court dispatched troops to fight against the cross-sea Li Tong Jie in the first year of the Tahei era, it has long used troops to fight against the rebels in Hebei region, and the transportation of military supplies has been unsustainable. The imperial court is very tired and distressed about this and is unwilling to reproduce the incident.

古文：八月，壬子，以进滔为魏博节度使，复以相、卫、澶三州归之。
现代文：于是，八月，壬子，任命何进滔为魏博节度使，并将相、卫、澶三州重新归还魏博管辖。
English: As a result, in August, Ren Zi appointed He Jintao as the Wei Bo festival envoy, and returned the three states of Fang, Wei, and Qi back to the jurisdiction of Wei Bo.

古文：沧州承丧乱之馀，骸骨蔽地，城空野旷，户口存者什无三四，癸丑，以卫尉卿殷侑为齐、德、沧、景节度使。
现代文：横海的治所沧州在经过多年战乱以后，骸骨遍地，城野空旷，户口流失，现存人口不到原来的十分之三四。癸丑，唐文宗任命卫尉卿殷侑为齐、德、沧、景节度使。
English: After many years of war and turmoil, Cangzhou, the administrative center of Henghai, was full of skeletons, the city and countryside were empty, the household registration was lost, and the existing population was less than three-fourths of the original. At the same time, Tang Wenzong appointed Weiweiqing Yin to be the ambassador of Qi, De, Cang and Jing.

古文：侑至镇，与士卒同甘苦，招抚百姓，劝之耕桑，流散者稍稍复业。
现代文：殷侑赴任后，与士卒同甘共苦，招抚百姓，鼓励耕田植桑，流散的百姓渐渐回乡复业。
English: After he took office, Yin Xi shared the joys and hardships with his subordinates, encouraged the people to cultivate fields and plant mulberry trees, and the scattered people gradually returned to their hometowns to resume their work.

古文：先是，本军三万人皆仰给度支，侑至一年，租税自能赡其半；二年，请悉罢度支给赐；三年之后，户口滋殖，仓廪充盈。
现代文：此前，本军三万人的军需都由朝廷度支供给，殷侑任职一年后，依靠当地租税收入，已能供给一半军需；两年以后，全部自给，请求度支停止供给；三年以后，户口大大增加，仓库充盈。
English: Previously, the military needs of the army's thirty thousand people were all supplied by the imperial budget. After one year of Yin Xi's tenure, relying on local tax revenues, he was able to supply half of the military needs; after two years, all self-sufficiency, requesting the budget to stop supplying; after three years, the household registration greatly increased, and the warehouse was full.

古文：王庭氵奏因邻道微露请服之意。
现代文：王庭凑通过邻近的藩镇透露出愿意归顺朝廷的意图。
English: Wang Tingchu revealed his intention to surrender to the imperial court through a nearby town.

古文：壬申，赦庭氵奏及将士，复其官爵。
现代文：壬申，唐文宗下诏，赦免王庭凑和成德将士的罪行，恢复他们的职务和爵位。
English: In Jinshin, Tang Wenzong issued an edict, pardoning the crimes of Wang Tianzhu and Chengde and restoring their posts and titles.

古文：征浙西观察使李德裕为兵部侍郎，裴度荐以为相。
现代文：唐文宗征召任命浙西道观察使李德裕为兵部侍郎。裴度推荐李德裕为宰相。
English: Tang Wenzong conscripted and appointed Li Deyu as the attendant of the military department for the observation of the western Zhejiang Province. Pei Du recommended Li Deyu as the prime minister.

古文：会吏部侍郎李宗闵有宦官之助，甲戌，以宗闵同平章事。
现代文：这时，吏部侍郎李宗闵得到宦官的帮助，甲戌，文宗任命李宗闵为同平章事。
English: At this time, the eunuch helped Li Zongyao, the steward of the cadre department, to appoint Li Zongyao as Tongping Zhangji.

古文：上性俭素、九月，辛巳，命中尉以下毋得衣纱縠绫罗。
现代文：唐文宗生性节俭朴素。九月，辛巳，命令神策护军中尉以下官员不得穿纱绫罗之类的高级丝织品。
English: Tang Wenzong was frugal and simple by nature. In September, Xin Si ordered officials below the rank of Lieutenant of the Divine Protection Corps not to wear high-grade silk fabrics such as satin.

古文：听朝之暇，惟以书史自娱，声乐游畋未尝留意。
现代文：文宗在处理朝政以外的闲暇时间，仅仅以读书观史为乐，对于女色、音乐和外出打猎从来不曾留意。
English: When dealing with leisure time outside the realm of court politics, Wenzong only enjoyed reading and watching history. He never paid attention to women, music, or hunting.

古文：附马韦处仁尝着夹罗巾，上谓曰： 朕慕卿门地清素，故有选尚。
现代文：一次，驸马韦处仁头戴夹罗巾，文宗对他说： 朕羡慕你家门第清高素雅，所以，挑选你做驸马。
English: On one occasion, Wenzong said to him, "I admire the purity and elegance of your family, so I have chosen you to be my steed.

古文：如此巾服，听其他贵戚为之，卿不须尔。 
现代文：像这样贵重的头巾，让那些达官贵戚去戴，你最好不要戴。 
English: You'd better not wear such a precious headscarf, let those dignitaries and relatives wear it.

古文：壬辰，以李德裕为义成节度使。
现代文：壬辰，唐文宗任命李德裕为义成节度使。
English: In Imjin, Tang Wenzong appointed Li Deyu as the envoy of Yicheng Festival.

古文：李宗闵恶其逼己，故出之。
现代文：宰相李宗闵忌恨李德裕可能威胁自己的地位，所以建议文宗任命他外出赴任。
English: The prime minister, Li Zonglian, was afraid that Li Deyu might threaten his position, so he suggested that Wenzong appoint him to go abroad to take up the post.

古文：冬，十月，丙辰，以李听为太子少师。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙辰，唐文宗任命李听为太子少师。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Xianchen of Tang Dynasty appointed Li He as the prince's apprentice.

古文：路隋言于上曰： 宰相任重，不宜兼金谷琐碎之务，如杨国忠、元载、皇甫镈皆奸臣，所为不足法也。 
现代文：宰相路隋对文宗说： 宰相责任重大，不适合兼管钱、谷之类的琐碎事务。过去，杨国忠、元载、皇甫身为宰相，而兼管财政，但他们都是奸臣，所以，不足以效法。 
English: The prime minister, Lu Sui, said to Wenzong: The prime minister's responsibility is great, and it is not suitable to manage trivial affairs such as money and grain. In the past, Yang Guozhong, Yuan Zai, and Huang Fu were prime ministers and also managed finances, but they were treacherous ministers, so it is not enough to follow suit.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：文宗认为有理。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：于是裴度辞度支，上许之。
现代文：这时，宰相裴度请求辞去兼任的度支使的职务，于是，文宗批准。
English: At this time, Prime Minister Pei Du requested to resign from the post of Du's special envoy, which he also held, and this was approved by Emperor Wenzong.

古文：十一月，甲午，上祀圆丘。赦天下。
现代文：十一月，甲午，唐文宗亲赴圜丘祭天，宣诏大赦天下。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of November, Tang Wenzong personally went to Shengqiu to celebrate the Day of Heaven, and proclaimed a general amnesty to the world.

古文：四方毋得献奇巧之物，其纤丽布帛皆禁之，焚其机杼。
现代文：禁止各地进献奇技淫巧之物，凡是细密华美的布帛一律禁止生产，织造这类物品的纺织机一律焚烧。
English: It is forbidden in all parts of the country to offer objects of fantastic skill, the production of all fine and beautiful cloth is prohibited, and all weaving machines that weave such items are burned.

古文：丙申，西川节度使杜元颖奏南诏入寇。
现代文：丙申，剑南西川节度使杜元颖奏报：南诏国侵犯边境。
English: Hsin, the Jian Nan West River Festival made Du Yuanying report: Nanzhao State violated the border.

古文：元颖以旧相，文雅自高，不晓军事，专务蓄积，减削士卒衣粮。
现代文：杜元颖认为自己过去曾担任宰相，文才高雅，因而自诩清高。他不懂军事，却专门积蓄财产，减削士卒的衣食供给。
English: Du Yuanying thought that he had served as a prime minister in the past, and he was an elegant man of letters, so he prided himself on his clearness. He did not understand the military, but he specialized in accumulating property and reducing the supply of clothing and food for soldiers.

古文：西南戍边之卒，衣食不足，皆入蛮境钞盗以自给，蛮人反以衣食资之。
现代文：西南戍边的士卒衣食不足，纷纷到南诏国境内去掠夺偷盗，以便自给。
English: In order to feed themselves, the peasants in the southwestern region of Lijiang were short of food and clothing, so they went to Nanzao to plunder and steal.

古文：由是蜀中虚实动静，蛮皆知之。
现代文：南诏国反而赠送他们衣物和粮食，于是，西川的动静虚实，南诏国都能知晓。
English: On the contrary, Nanzhao gave them clothes and food, so Nanzhao knew the truth and falsehood of the West River.

古文：南诏自嵯颠谋大举入寇，边州屡以告，元颖不之信。
现代文：南诏国自从嵯颠执掌朝政，就密谋大举侵犯西川，西南的边防州郡多次向杜元颖反映，杜元颖一概不信。
English: Nanzhao State had been plotting to invade the West River on a large scale ever since Gao Bing took charge of the imperial government. The border counties in the southwest repeatedly reported to Du Yuanying, but Du Yuanying did not believe them.

古文：嵯颠兵至，边城一无备御。
现代文：这时，嵯颠率兵来临，边防的城池毫无防备。
English: At this time, the soldiers came, and the border city was defenseless.

古文：蛮以蜀卒为乡导，袭陷巂、戎二州。
现代文：南诏军队以西川的降卒为向导，袭击并攻陷了、戎二州。
English: Nanzhao's army, with Nishikawa's soldiers as guides, attacked and captured Ebisunishu.

古文：甲辰，元颖遣兵与战于邛州南，蜀兵大败，蛮遂陷邛州。
现代文：甲辰，杜元颖派兵和南诏军队在邛州以南交战，西川兵大败。南诏乘胜攻占邛州。
English: Jia Chen, Du Yuanying sent troops and the Nanzhao army to fight in the south of Luzhou, and the West River soldiers were defeated. Nanzhao took advantage of the victory to occupy Luzhou.

古文：武宁节度使王智兴入朝。
现代文：武宁节度使王智兴来京城朝拜。
English: The Wu Ning Festival made Wang Zhixing come to the capital to worship.

古文：诏发东川、兴元、荆南兵以救西川。
现代文：唐文宗下诏，征发剑南东川、兴元、荆南三道的兵马前往西川救援。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang issued an edict to send soldiers and horses from the three provinces of Dongchuan, Xingyuan and Jingnan to the West River for rescue.

古文：十二月，丁未朔，又发鄂岳、襄邓、陈许等兵继之。
现代文：十二月，丁未朔，又征发鄂岳、襄邓、陈许等道兵再住增援。
English: In December, Ding Weishuo also conscripted and dispatched Taoist soldiers such as E Yue, Xiang Deng, and Chen Xu to resettle and reinforce.

古文：以王智兴为忠武节度使。
现代文：唐文宗任命王智兴为忠武节度使。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Zhixing as a loyal military envoy.

古文：己酉，以东川节度使郭钊为西川节度使，兼权东川节度事。
现代文：己酉，唐文宗任命剑南东川节度使郭钊为剑南西川节度使，并代理东川节度使。
English: Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Guo Jian as the Jianan Dongchuan Sect Emissary, and Guo Jian as the Jianan Xichuan Sect Emissary, and acted as the Dongchuan Sect Emissary.

古文：嵯颠自邛州引兵径抵成都。庚戌，陷其外郭。
现代文：嵯颠从邛州出兵，径直抵达成都城下，庚戌，攻陷成都外城。
English: Zou Bing sent troops from Bozhou and arrived directly at the capital city, Gengqi, and captured the outer city of Chengdu.

古文：杜元颖帅众保牙城以拒之，欲遁去者数四。
现代文：杜元颖率领将士退守牙城，抵抗南诏军队。
English: Du Yuanying led the generals to retreat to the defense of Fangcheng and resist the Nanzhao army.

古文：壬子，贬元颖为邵州刺史。
现代文：杜元颖几次想离城逃亡。壬子，唐文宗贬杜元颖为邵州刺史。
English: Du Yuanying tried to escape from the city several times. Ren Zi, Tang Wenzong denounced Du Yuanying as a traitor to Shao Zhou.

古文：己未，以右领军大将军董重质为神策、诸道西川行营节度使，又发太原、凤翔兵赴西川。
现代文：己未，唐文宗任命右领军大将军董重质为神策军及诸道西川行营节度使。同时，征发太原、凤翔两道兵增援西川。
English: In the meantime, Tang Wenzong appointed the right leader of the army, General Dong Chong Chiao, as the envoy of God's Providence Army and the troops marching to the West River. At the same time, Taiyuan and Fengxiang soldiers were conscripted to reinforce the West River.

古文：南诏寇东川，入梓州西郭。
现代文：这时，南诏军队又侵犯东川，进入东川节度使驻地梓州的西城。
English: At this time, the Nanzhao army invaded Dongchuan again and entered the West City of Zizhou, where the Dongchuan Section was stationed.

古文：郭钊兵寡弱不能战，以书责嵯颠。嵯颠复书曰： 杜元颖侵扰我，故兴兵报之耳。 
现代文：郭钊兵力寡弱，无力坚守，于是写信责备嵯颠入侵，嵯颠回信说： 杜元颖侵扰我国，所以，我国兴兵报复。 
English: Guo Gan's army was weak and unable to hold out, so he wrote a letter to rebuke Zou Bing's invasion. Zou Bing wrote back, "Du Yuanying is invading our country, so our country's soldiers are taking revenge.

古文：与钊修好而退。
现代文：嵯颠和郭钊休兵和好，率兵退去。
English: Gao Bing and Guo Xihui made peace and led the troops to retreat.

古文：蛮留成都西郭十日，其始慰抚蜀人，市肆立堵。
现代文：南诏军队驻留成都西城十天。开始时，还安抚西川人民，因而集市安然。
English: Nanzhao troops stayed in Chengdu Xicheng for ten days. At the beginning, they also pacified the people of Xichuan, so the market was safe.

古文：将行，乃大掠子女、百工数万人及珍货而去。
现代文：临走时，方才大肆掠夺妇女和各种工匠几万人，以及各种珍宝奇货，然后退去。
English: When they were about to leave, they plundered tens of thousands of women and craftsmen of all kinds, as well as all kinds of treasures and goods, and then left.

古文：蜀人恐惧，往往赴江，流尸塞江而下。
现代文：西川百姓大为恐惧，往往跳江而逃，尸首沿江漂流而下。
English: The people of Nishikawa were so terrified that they often jumped into the river to escape, and the bodies drifted down the river.

古文：嵯颠自为军殿，及大度水，嵯颠谓蜀人曰： 此南吾境也，听汝哭别乡国。 
现代文：嵯颠亲自率军断后，走到大渡河时，他对俘掠来的西川人说： 从这里往南，就进入我国的境内了。现在，允许你们哭别故乡。 
English: When he reached the Dadu River after personally leading the army, he said to the captured Nishikawa people: "From here to the south, you have entered the territory of our country. Now, you are allowed to cry goodbye to your hometown."

古文：众皆恸哭，赴水死者以千计。
现代文：西川人都大声痛哭，投河而死者有千人。
English: The people of Nishikawa cried loudly and bitterly. A thousand people died after falling into the river.

古文：自是南诏工巧埒于蜀中。
现代文：从此以后，南诏国工匠的技术水平可以和西川媲美。
English: Since then, the technical level of craftsmen in Nanzhao can be compared to that of Nishikawa.

古文：嵯颠遣使上表，称： 蛮比修职贡，岂敢犯边，正以杜元颖不恤军士，怨苦元颖，竞为乡导，祈我此行以诛虐帅。
现代文：嵯颠派遣使者来朝上表，说： 我国近年来一直向贵国称臣纳贡，岂敢擅自侵犯边境，只是由于杜元颖不爱护士卒，士卒痛恨他，才争相做我的向导，请求我出兵诛杀杜元颖。
English: Gong Bing sent an envoy to the top table in the morning, saying: Our country has been paying tribute to your country in recent years, how dare you encroach on the border without authorization. It is only because Du Yuanying does not love the nurse, and the soldier hates him, that they are vying to be my guide and ask me to send troops to kill Du Yuanying.

古文：诛之不遂，无以慰蜀士之心，愿陛下诛之。 
现代文：不料此行未能把他诛杀，我已无法安抚西川士卒，实现自己的诺言，希望陛下把他杀掉。 
English: Unexpectedly, this trip failed to kill him, I was no longer able to appease Saikawa Shizuku, fulfill my promise, and hope that His Majesty will kill him.

古文：丁卯，再贬元颖循州司马。
现代文：丁卯，唐文宗再次贬杜元颖为循州司马。
English: Dingwu, Tang Wenzong once again relegated Du Yuanying to the position of Shuzhou Sima.

古文：诏董重质及诸道兵皆引还。
现代文：同时下诏，命董重质和诸道增援西川的兵马都退回。
English: At the same time, it was decreed that the heavy infantry and cavalry sent to reinforce Saikawa would be returned.

古文：郭钊至成都，与南诏立约，不相侵扰。
现代文：新任西川节度使郭钊抵达成都后，和南诏国签订友好条约，规定两国互不侵扰。
English: After the new Saikawa governor, Guo Wei, arrived in the capital, he signed a friendship treaty with Nanzhao, stipulating that the two countries would not interfere with each other.

古文：诏遣中使以国信赐嵯颠。
现代文：于是，文宗又下诏，命宦官携带朝廷信件前往南诏国，递交嵯颠。
English: As a result, Emperor Wenzong issued another edict, ordering eunuchs to carry letters from the imperial court to Nanzhao and submit them to the emperor.

古文：太和四年庚戌，公元八三零年春，正月，辛巳，武昌节度使牛僧孺入朝。戊子，立子永为鲁王。
现代文：太和四年春季正月，辛巳，武昌节度使牛僧孺来京城朝拜。戊子，唐文宗立儿子李永为鲁王。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 4th year of the Taihe era, the Wuchang Festival brought the Cow Monk Xuan to worship in the capital. Wu Zi, the son of Tang Wensong, became the King of Lu.

古文：李宗闵引荐牛僧孺。
现代文：宰相李宗闵向文宗推荐牛僧孺。
English: Premier Li Zongyao recommended Niu Zengyao to Wen Zong.

古文：辛卯，以僧孺为兵部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：辛卯，文宗任命牛僧孺为兵部尚书、同平章事。
English: Sincerely, Wenzong appointed Niu Sangyu to be the secretary of the military department and the secretary of the same level.

古文：于是二人相与排摈李德裕之党，稍稍逐之。
现代文：于是，二人一起排挤李德裕的党羽，逐渐把他们从朝廷中贬逐出去。
English: As a result, the two of them together ousted the followers of Li Deyu and gradually drove them out of the imperial court.

古文：南诏之寇成都也，诏山南西道发兵救之，兴元兵少，节度使李绛募兵千人赴之，未至，蛮退而还。
现代文：南诏国当初侵犯成都的时候，朝廷诏命山南西道派兵前往增援。山南西道节度使驻地兴元府的兵力太少，于是，节度使李绛招募新兵一千人前往，尚未到达西川，南诏兵已经退走，新兵于是返回兴元。
English: When Nanzhao initially invaded Chengdu, the imperial court ordered Shannan Xi Dao to send troops to reinforce. The festival of Shannan Xi Dao made the troops stationed in Xingyuanfu too few, so the festival made Li Jun recruit a thousand new soldiers to go. Before reaching Xichuan, the Nanzhao soldiers had retreated, and the new soldiers then returned to Xingyuan.

古文：兴元兵有常额，诏新募兵悉罢之。
现代文：兴元府的兵力编制历来有严格规定，因此朝廷诏命新招募的兵士一律遣返。
English: The military establishment of the Xingyuan government has always had strict rules, so the imperial court ordered all newly recruited soldiers to be repatriated.

古文：二月，乙卯，绛悉召新军，谕以诏旨而遣之，仍赐以廪麦，皆怏怏而退。
现代文：二月，乙卯，李绛召集新兵，传达朝廷的诏令，然后，每人赏赐麦子，命令他们回家。
English: In February, Emperor Wu of Liang summoned the new soldiers, conveyed the imperial edict, and then ordered them to go home with a reward of wheat each.

古文：往辞监军，监军杨叔元素恶绛不奉己，以赐物薄激之。
现代文：新兵闷闷不乐而退，前去向监军杨叔元辞别。杨叔元向来恨李绛不阿谀奉迎自己，就借口说赏赐的东西太少，故意激怒新兵对李绛不满。
English: The new soldiers sullenly retreated and went to bid farewell to the guard Yang Shuyuan. Yang Shuyuan had always hated Li Qiye for not showing him respect, and he used the excuse that the reward was too small to deliberately provoke the new soldiers to be dissatisfied with Li Qiye.

古文：众怒，大噪，掠库兵，趋使牙。
现代文：新兵果然被激怒，顿时哗变，掠抢库存的兵器后，直向节度使衙门冲去。
English: The new soldiers were really enraged, suddenly mutinied, and after looting the stockpile of weapons, they rushed straight to the fortress to storm the gate.

古文：绛方与僚佐宴，不为备，走登北城。
现代文：这时，李绛正和自己的幕僚在一起饮酒宴乐，毫无防备，于是慌忙向北城跑去。
English: At this time, Li Yao was drinking and feasting with his staff, unprepared, so he hurriedly ran to Beicheng.

古文：或劝缒而出，绛曰： 吾为元帅，岂可逃去！ 
现代文：有人劝李绛从城上缒下逃走，李绛说： 我是节度使，岂能逃走！ 
English: Some people advised Li Yao to escape from the castle. Li Yao said, "I am the commander, how can I escape?

古文：麾推官赵存约令去。
现代文：命令推官赵存约赶快走。
English: He ordered his deputy, Zhao Cun Rong, to leave immediately.

古文：存约曰： 存约受明公知，何可苟免！ 
现代文：赵存约说： 我以往得到您的赏识和重用，岂可现在自己苟且偷生！ 
English: Zhao Cunxiao said: I have received your appreciation and re-use in the past, how can I now steal my own life!

古文：牙将王景延与贼力战死，绛、存约及观察判官薛齐皆为乱兵所害，贼遂屠绛家。
现代文：牙将王景延和乱兵拼力厮杀而死。李绛、赵存约和观察判官薛齐都被乱兵杀害。接着，乱兵屠杀了李绛的全家。
English: The commander Wang Jingyan and the rioters fought to the death. Li Xi, Zhao Cunyu and the observer judge Xue Qi were all killed by the rioters. Then, the rioters slaughtered Li Xi's entire family.

古文：戊午，叔元奏绛收新军募直以致乱。
现代文：戊午，杨叔元上奏朝廷说，李绛擅自收取招募新兵用的财物，因而导致新兵哗变。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Yang Shiyuan reported to the imperial court that Li Qiye had illegally collected property for the purpose of recruiting new soldiers, which led to the mutiny of the new soldiers.

古文：庚申，以尚书右丞温造为山南西道节度使。
现代文：庚申，唐文宗任命尚书右丞温造为山南西道节度使。
English: Emperor Gaoshen and Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Shangshu Rongcheng and Wen Zong as the festival envoys of Shannan West Road.

古文：是时，三省官上疏共论李绛之冤。谏议大夫忆敏行具孙叔元激怒乱兵，上始悟。
现代文：这时，中书省、门下省、尚书省的官员联名上疏，申诉李绛冤枉，谏议大夫孔敏行把杨叔元如何激怒新兵作乱的事实经过呈奏文宗，文宗这才明白李绛被害的事实真相。
English: At this time, officials from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology jointly filed a complaint against Li Qian, accusing him of wrongdoing, and persuading Dr. Kong Minxing to present the facts of how Yang Shuyuan angered the recruits to create a disturbance to Wenzong. Only then did Wenzong understand the truth of Li Qian's injury.

古文：三月，乙亥朔，以刑部尚书柳公绰为河东节度使。
现代文：三月，乙亥朔，唐文宗任命刑部尚书柳公绰为河东节度使。
English: In March, Emperor Wenzong of Tang appointed Shang Shuliu Gongpo of the Criminal Division as the envoy to the Hedong Festival.

古文：先是，回鹘入贡及互市，所过恐其为变，常严兵迎送防卫之。
现代文：以前，回鹘国派人来唐贡奉特产或进行商品交易时，凡是他们经过的地方，都担心回纥兵变作乱，因而，常常在迎来送往时，严阵以待，以防不测。
English: In the past, when the Uyghurs sent people to Tanggong to obtain special products or conduct commodity trading, they were worried that the Uyghur soldiers would make trouble wherever they passed. Therefore, they often waited in a tight line when they were welcomed and sent to Tanggong, in case anything happened.

古文：公绰至镇，回鹘遣梅录李畅以马万匹互市，公绰但遣牙将单骑迎劳于境，至则大辟牙门，受其礼谒。
现代文：柳公绰上任后，回鹘国派遣梅李畅带马一万匹前来交易，柳公绰只派一名牙将骑马到边境上去迎接。李畅到达太原后，柳公绰命令大开节度使衙门，接受李畅的拜谒。
English: After Liu Gongchao took office, Huizhou Province sent Mei Li Chang with 10,000 horses to come and trade. Liu Gongchao sent only one horseman to the border to meet Li Chang. After Li Chang arrived in Taiyuan, Liu Gongchao ordered the gate to be opened wide to accept Li Chang's courtesies.

古文：畅感泣，戒其下，在路不敢驰猎，无所侵扰。
现代文：李畅被柳公绰的信任所感动，潸然泪下，告诫他的部下，不得在沿途驰猎，侵扰百姓。
English: Li Chang, moved by Liu Gongqiao's trust, burst into tears and warned his subordinates not to hunt along the road and disturb the people.

古文：陉北沙陀素骁勇，为九姓、六州胡所畏伏。
现代文：结果，回鹘此行交易一无侵扰。居住在河东陉岭以北的沙陀部落，向来以骁勇著称，九姓回鹘和六州胡都被沙陀的骁勇所折服。
English: As a result, there was no interference with Hui Xuan's trading on this trip. The Shado tribe, which lives north of the Shoreng Mountains in Hedong, has always been famous for its bravery. The nine surnames Hui Xuan and the six states Hu have been impressed by Shado's bravery.

古文：公绰奏以其酋长硃邪执宜为阴山都督、代北行营招抚使，使居云、朔塞下，捍御北边。
现代文：柳公绰奏请朝廷任命沙陀酋长朱邪执宜为阴山都督、代北行营招抚使，批准他们迁居到云州、朔州的边塞之间，以便保卫河东的北方边境。
English: Liu Gongpiao asked the imperial court to appoint Shato chief Zhu Yaxing as the governor of Yinshan and the envoy of the Northern Expeditionary Force, and to approve their relocation to Yunnan and Shuozhou between the border fortresses in order to protect the northern border of Hedong.

古文：执宜与诸酋长入谒，公绰与之宴。
现代文：朱邪执宜和沙陀的诸位酋长前来太原拜访柳公绰，柳公绰设宴招待。
English: Zhu Yixing and the chiefs of Shado came to Taiyuan to visit Liu Gongpo, and Liu Gongpo held a banquet for them.

古文：执宜神彩严整，进退有礼。公绰谓僚佐曰： 执宜外严而内宽，言徐而理当，福禄人也。 
现代文：朱邪执宜神色严肃，见人彬彬有礼，柳公绰对幕僚说： 执宜看起来外表严肃，实际上内心对人宽容；说话虽然缓慢但却言之成理，真是一个有福相的人啊！ 
English: Zhu Yuxingyi looked serious, but he was polite and courteous. Liu Gongqiao said to the staff: "Yuxingyi looks serious on the outside, but he is actually tolerant of people on the inside; although he speaks slowly, he speaks the truth. He is truly a blessed person!"

古文：执宜母妻入见，公绰使夫人与之饮酒，馈遗之。
现代文：执宜的母亲和妻子前来拜见，柳公绰让自己的夫人和她们一起喝酒，然后，赠送礼物。
English: Shouyi's mother and wife came to see him, and Liu Gongpo invited his wife to have a drink with them, after which he gave her a gift.

古文：执宜感恩，为之尽力。
现代文：执宜感谢柳公绰的赏识和信任，表示愿意尽力效劳。
English: Xingyi thanked Liu Gongqiao for his appreciation and trust, and expressed his willingness to do his best.

古文：塞下旧有废府十一，执宜修之，使其部落三千人分守之，自是杂虏不敢犯塞。
现代文：云州和朔州有过去残留作废的营栅十一个，执宜派人加以修建，命令他的部落兵三千人分别镇守。从此以后，在边境上游牧的退浑、回鹘、鞑靼、奚、室韦等蛮族部落不敢再轻易侵犯。
English: Yunnan and Shuozhou had eleven camp fences left over from the past, which had been abandoned. Xu Rongyi sent people to build them and ordered his three thousand tribal soldiers to guard the towns separately. From then on, the nomadic barbarian tribes on the border, such as the Fugu, Uighur, Tatar, Qiang, and Murway, no longer dared to easily encroach.

古文：温造行至褒城，遇兴元都将卫志忠征蛮归，造密与之谋诛乱者，以其兵八百人为牙队，五百人为前军，入府，分守诸门。
现代文：温造赶赴山南西道上任，走到褒城时，遇到兴元都将卫志忠刚刚讨伐蛮人回来。温造和卫志忠秘密商议诛讨新兵哗变者的方案。于是，以卫志忠所率领的八百人作为自己的亲兵，另外五百人作为前锋，到达兴元后，进入节度使衙门，分兵把守各门。
English: Unzo hurried to Shannan West Road to take office, and when he reached Baocheng, he met Xingyuan, who had just returned from fighting barbarians. Unzo and Weizhizhong secretly discussed a plan to deal with the new soldiers who had mutinied. Therefore, with the eight hundred people led by Weizhizhong as his own soldiers, and the other five hundred people as forwards, after arriving in Xingyuan, he entered the festival to make the gate, and the soldiers guarded each gate.

古文：己卯，造视事，飨将士于牙门，造曰： 吾欲问新军去留之意，宜悉使来前。 
现代文：己卯，温造开始办公，在衙门用酒肉犒劳将士，他对部下说： 我想问一问新兵是愿走还是愿留，请把他们全部找来。 
English: When Wen Zong started to work, he used wine and meat to feed the soldiers at the gate. He said to his subordinates: I want to ask the new soldiers whether they want to go or stay. Please find them all.

古文：既劳问，命坐，行酒。
现代文：温造慰劳新兵后，命大家都坐下，然后开始喝酒。
English: After warmly consoling the new recruits, he ordered everyone to sit down and then began to drink.

古文：志忠密以牙兵围之，既合，唱 杀！ 
现代文：这时，卫志忠秘密地布置亲兵包围新兵，包围圈刚刚完成，卫志忠大喊一声 杀！ 
English: At this time, Wei Zhizhong secretly arranged his own soldiers to surround the new soldiers. The encirclement had just been completed, and Wei Zhizhong shouted, "Kill!

古文：新军八百馀人皆死。
现代文：顿时，新兵八百多人全被杀死。
English: All of a sudden, more than eight hundred new soldiers were killed.

古文：杨叔元起，拥造靴求生，造命囚之。
现代文：监军杨叔元急忙起身，抱住温造的靴子请求免死，温造下令把他拘捕。
English: Yang Shuyuan, the supervisor of the troops, got up in a hurry, hugged Wen Zong's boots and asked to be spared from death. Wen Zong ordered to arrest him.

古文：其手杀绛者，斩之百段，馀皆斩首，投尸汉水，以百首祭李绛，三十首祭死事者，具事以闻。
现代文：当时亲手杀死李绛的凶手，被斩成一百段，其余的新兵，都被斩首，尸体全被投到汉江中。温造命用一百个新兵的首级祭奠李绛，三十个首级祭奠其他死者，然后，把以上情况向朝廷报告。
English: At that time, the murderer who killed Li Xuan with his own hands was chopped into a hundred pieces, and the rest of the recruits were beheaded, and the bodies were all thrown into the Han River. Wen Zomei used the heads of a hundred recruits to pay tribute to Li Xuan, and thirty heads to pay tribute to the other dead, and then reported the above situation to the imperial court.

古文：己丑，流杨叔元于康州。
现代文：己丑，唐文宗下令，将杨叔元流放到康州。
English: As a result, Tang Wenzong ordered that Yang Shuyuan be exiled to Kangzhou.

古文：癸卯，加淮南节度使段文昌同平章事、为荆南节度使。
现代文：癸卯，唐文宗加封淮南节度使段文昌同平章事的职务，任荆南节度使。
English: At the same time, Tang Wenzong added the posts of Huainan Festival Envoy Duan Wenchang and Jingnan Festival Envoy.

古文：奚寇幽州。夏，四月，丁未，卢龙节度使李载义击破之。
现代文：奚族进犯幽州，夏季，四月，丁未，卢龙节度使李载义打败奚族。
English: The Yao people invaded Yuzhou, and Li Zaiyi defeated the Yao people in the summer, April, Ding Wei, and Lulong Festival.

古文：辛酉，擒其王茹羯以献。
现代文：辛酉，李载义活捉奚王茹羯奉献朝廷。
English: Xin Xuan and Li Zaiyi captured the king of Jiuyue and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：裴度以高年多疾，恳辞机政。
现代文：裴度以自己年老多病，恳请唐文宗批准自己辞去宰相职务。
English: Pei Du took advantage of his old age and illness to implore Tang Wenzong to approve his resignation as prime minister.

古文：六月，丁未，以度为司徒、平章军国重事，俟疾损，三五日一入中书。
现代文：六月，丁未，文宗任命裴度为司徒、平章军国重事，等病情减轻后，可三天或五天到中书门下办公一次。
English: In June, Ting Wei and Wenzong appointed Pei Du as a disciple and Ping Zhang as a major military state, and after the illness was alleviated, they could work under Zhongshumen for three days or five days.

古文：上患宦官强盛，宪宗、敬宗弑逆之党犹有在左右者。
现代文：唐文宗忧虑宦官势力过于强盛，这时，杀害唐宪宗、唐敬宗的凶手，仍有人在文宗左右侍从。
English: Tang Wenzong was worried that the power of eunuchs was too strong. At that time, the murderers of Tang Xianzong and Tang Jingzong still had followers around Wenzong.

古文：中尉王守澄尤为专横，招权纳贿，上不能制。
现代文：神策军中尉王守澄尤其专横跋扈，招权纳贿，文宗无法驾驭。
English: Wang Shoucheng, a lieutenant of the Shenzhe Army, was particularly domineering and greedy. He solicited power and accepted bribes, and Wenzong was unable to control him.

古文：尝密与翰林学士宋申锡言之，申锡请渐除其逼。
现代文：一次，文宗秘密地对翰林学士宋申锡谈及宦官专权的问题，宋申锡认为应当逐渐翦除宦官势力。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Wenzong secretly discussed the issue of the eunuch's monopoly power with Song Shensi, a scholar of Hanlin. Song Shensi believed that the eunuch's power should be gradually eliminated.

古文：上以申锡沉厚忠谨，可倚以事，擢为尚书右丞。
现代文：文宗认为宋申锡性情深沉宽厚，忠正谨慎，可以信任依靠，和他密议诛除宦官。于是，提拔宋申锡为尚书右丞。
English: Wenzong believed that Song Shensi had a deep and generous disposition, was loyal and prudent, and could be trusted and relied on, and he and Wenzong secretly discussed the removal of eunuchs. Therefore, he promoted Song Shensi to Shang Shuyuan.

古文：秋，七月，癸未，以申锡同平章事。
现代文：七月，癸未，任命宋申锡为同平章事。
English: In July, Gong Wei appointed Song Shenxi as Tongping Zhengji.

古文：初，裴度征淮西，奏李宗闵为观察判官，由是渐获进用。
现代文：当初，裴度率军征讨淮西吴元济叛乱时，奏请李宗闵为幕府的观察判官，由此李宗闵逐渐被提拔任用。
English: At first, when Pei Du led the army to subdue the rebellion of Wu Yuanji in Huaixi, he asked Li Zongyao to be the shogunate's observation judge, and thus Li Zongyao was gradually promoted and appointed.

古文：至是，怨度荐李德裕，因其谢病，九月，壬午，以度兼侍中，充山南东道节度使。
现代文：这时，李宗闵怨恨裴度向朝廷推荐李德裕，于是，趁裴度因病提出辞职的机会，建议文宗批准并将裴度外放到藩镇任职。九月，壬午，文宗任命裴度兼任侍中，充任山南东道节度使。
English: At this time, Li Zongyu resented Pei Du for recommending Li Deyu to the imperial court, so he took the opportunity of Pei Du's resignation due to illness to recommend that Wenzong approve and transfer Pei Du to a position outside the domain. In September, at noon, Wenzong appointed Pei Du to also serve as an attendant and act as the Shannan host festival envoy.

古文：西川节度使郭钊以疾求代，冬，十月，戊申，以义成节度使李德裕为西川节度使。
现代文：剑南西川节度使郭钊由于身体有病，请求辞职。冬季，十月，戊申，唐文宗任命义成节度使李德裕为剑南西川节度使。
English: In winter, October, Boushen, Tang Wenzong appointed Yicheng Jiedu to make Li Deyu the Jianan Jiedu envoy.

古文：蜀自南诏入寇，一方残弊，郭钊多病，未暇完补。
现代文：西川自从遭南诏国侵掠以后，残破凋敝。郭钊由于身体多病，因而未暇修补。
English: Since Nishikawa was invaded and plundered by the Southern Shogunate, it has been left in ruins. Guo Gan was too ill to repair it in time.

古文：德裕至镇，作筹边楼，图蜀地形，南入南诏，西达吐蕃。
现代文：李德裕上任后，修建筹边楼，派人绘制西川的地形图，南到南诏国，西到吐蕃国。
English: After Li Deyu took office, he built a gazebo and sent people to draw a topographical map of the West River, south to Nanzhao Province and west to Tubo Province.

古文：日召老于军旅、习边事者，虽走卒蛮夷无所间，访以山川、城邑、道路险易广狭远近，未逾月，皆若身尝涉历。
现代文：他又每天召集那些长期在军队中供职，熟悉边防情况的将士，即使是士卒或夷人、蛮人也不放过，向他们仔细询问山川、城市、道路的险易、宽窄和远近情况。不到一个月，就了如指掌，如身历其境一般。
English: Every day, he also called up soldiers who had served in the army for a long time and were familiar with the situation of border defense, even if they were soldiers or barbarians, and carefully asked them about the dangers, narrowness, and proximity of mountains, rivers, cities, and roads. In less than a month, he knew everything, as if he had experienced the situation.

古文：上命德裕修塞清溪关以断南诏入寇之路，或无土，则以石垒之。
现代文：唐文宗命令李德裕派人堵塞清溪关，以断绝南诏国入侵西川的通道，如果没有土的话，就用石头垒。
English: Tang Wenzong ordered Li Deyu to send people to block the Qingxi Pass in order to cut off the passage of Nanzhao invading the West River. If there was no soil, they would use stones.

古文：德裕上言： 通蛮细路至多，不可塞，惟重兵镇守，可保无虞。
现代文：李德裕上言说： 西川通住南诏国的小路很多，所以，不能阻塞清溪关，只能派重兵镇守，才可万无一失。
English: Li Deyu said at the top: There are many small roads in Nishikawa that lead to Nanzhao Province. Therefore, it is not possible to block Qingxi Pass, but only to send heavy troops to guard the town, in order to be foolproof.

古文：但黎、雅以来得万人，成都得二万人，精加训练，则蛮不敢动矣。
现代文：同时，只要从黎州，雅州召募一万人，成都召募二万人，加强训练则南诏必然不敢轻举妄动。
English: At the same time, as long as ten thousand people are recruited from Lizhou and Yazhou, and twenty thousand people are recruited from Chengdu, Nanzhao will certainly not dare to act rashly.

古文：边兵又不宜多，须力可临制。
现代文：边防戍兵不宜太多，关键在于能够驾驭，听从指挥。
English: It is not advisable to have too many border guards. The key is to be able to control them and follow their orders.

古文：崔旰之杀郭英乂，张朏之逐张延赏，皆镇兵也。 
现代文：过去，崔旰杀节度使郭英义，张驱逐节度使张延赏，所依靠的都是边防戍兵。 
English: In the past, Cui Xuan killed Guo Yingyi, Zhang expelled Zhang Yanbo, and relied on border guards.

古文：时北兵皆归本道，惟河中、陈许三千人在成都，有诏来年三月亦归，蜀人朏惧。
现代文：这时，北方各道援救西川的兵马大多已返回本道，只有河中、陈许三千人仍留在成都，朝廷下诏，命令他们在次年三月也一并撤回。
English: At this time, most of the soldiers and horses from the northern provinces that had come to the aid of the West River had returned to their home provinces. Only three thousand soldiers from Hechu and Chen Xu remained in Chengdu, and the imperial court issued an edict ordering them to withdraw together in March of the following year.

古文：德裕奏乞郑滑五百人、陈许千人以镇蜀。
现代文：于是，西川人都恐惧不安，担心各道兵马撤走后，南诏国再乘虚进犯。
English: As a result, the people of Nishikawa were afraid and uneasy, fearing that after the withdrawal of soldiers and horses from each province, Nanzhao State would make another false attack.

古文：且言： 蜀兵脆弱，新为蛮寇所困，皆破胆，不堪征戌。
现代文：李德裕上奏朝廷，请求留郑滑五百人，陈许一千人，继续镇守西川，并且说： 西川兵士本性懦弱，最近，又刚刚被南诏打败，都胆战心惊，不堪再用于征战戍防。
English: Li Deyu appealed to the imperial court, requesting that five hundred Zhenglu soldiers and one thousand Chen Xu soldiers remain in Zhenglu to continue to guard Xichuan, and said: Xichuan soldiers are cowardly by nature. Recently, they have just been defeated by Nanzhao. They are afraid of war, and cannot be used to fight again.

古文：若北兵尽归，则与杜元颖时无异，蜀不可保。
现代文：如果北方各道救援西川的兵马都撤走，那就和杜元颖但任西川节度使时，边防空虚一样，西川肯定难以保全。
English: If all the soldiers and horses in the north to rescue the West River are withdrawn, it will be difficult to preserve the West River, just as when Du Yuanying was in charge of the West River Festival, the border defense was empty.

古文：恐议者云蜀经蛮寇以来，已自增兵，向者蛮寇已逼，元颖始捕市人为兵，得三千馀人，徒有其数，实不可用。
现代文：我担心朝廷有人可能说，西川自从遭受南诏侵犯以后，本道已经增加兵力。其实，前不久直到南诏已经逼近时，杜元颖才开始招募成都市民为兵，总共得三千多人，徒有其数，实际上毫无战斗经验。
English: I'm worried that someone in the imperial court might say that since Saikawa was invaded by Nanzhao, this province has increased its military strength. In fact, not long ago, when Nanzhao was already approaching, Du Yuanying began to recruit Chengdu civilians as soldiers, a total of more than three thousand people, just a few, in fact, no combat experience.

古文：郭钊募北兵仅得百馀人，臣复召募得二百馀人，此外皆元颖旧兵也。
现代文：郭钊仅在东川招募了一百多人，我又招募二百多人，此外都是杜元颖的原有兵力。
English: Guo Gan only recruited more than a hundred people in Dongchuan, and I recruited more than two hundred people, and the rest were Du Yuanying's original troops.

古文：恐议者又闻一夫当关之说，以为清溪可塞。
现代文：我还担心朝廷中有人听信蜀道险阻，一夫当关，万夫莫开，就认为只要堵塞清溪关，就可以阻挡南诏国的侵扰了。
English: I am also worried that some people in the imperial court believe that the Shu Road is dangerous and obstructed, that one man should be in charge of the gate, and that no one should open it, and think that as long as the Qinghe Pass is blocked, the intrusion of Nanzhao can be blocked.

古文：臣访之蜀中老将，清溪之旁，大路有三，自馀小径无数，皆东蛮临时为之开通，若言可塞，则是欺罔朝廷。
现代文：我曾访询过西川的老将，得知在清溪关的旁边，还有三条大路，小路不计其数，这都是东蛮为南诏国临时开通的道路。如果认为只要堵塞清溪关，就能阻挡南诏国的侵扰，那就是欺骗朝廷。
English: I once interviewed a veteran of the West River and learned that next to the Qingxi Pass, there are three major roads and countless small roads, all of which are roads that were temporarily opened by the Eastern Barbarians for the Southern Zhao State. If you think that just blocking the Qingxi Pass can stop the invasion of the Southern Zhao State, it is deceiving the court.

古文：要须大度水北更筑一城，迤逦接黎州，以大兵守之方可。
现代文：关键是应当在大渡河以北另外修建一个城堡，和黎州连绵相接，用重兵屯守，才可能抵挡南诏国的侵犯。
English: The key is to build another castle north of the Dadu River, adjacent to Lizhou, and garrison it with heavy troops to resist the encroachment of Nanzhao.

古文：况闻南诏以所掠蜀人二千及金帛赂遗吐蕃，若使二虏知蜀虚实，连兵入寇，诚可深忧。
现代文：况且我听说南诏国把他们俘掠的二千西川人和大批金钱财宝用来贿赂吐蕃，如果他们知道西川的虚实，两国联合入侵，国家的安危就很值得忧虑了。
English: Moreover, I heard that Nanzhao State used the two thousand Saigawa people and a large amount of money and treasure they captured to bribe the Tujia. If they knew the truth about Saigawa and the two countries jointly invaded, the security of the country would be very worrying.

古文：其朝臣建言者，盖由祸不在身，望人责一状，留入堂案，他日败事，不可令臣独当国宪。 
现代文：现在，朝廷有些人轻率地提出建议，都是由于他们不负责任的缘故。希望朝廷责令他们把自己的建议写成状子，留在政事堂存档，一旦将来出了问题，有案可查，不能找我一个人担当罪责。 
English: Now, some people in the imperial court are rashly making suggestions, all because of their irresponsibility. I hope that the imperial court will order them to write down their suggestions and keep them on file at the government building. In the event that something goes wrong in the future, there will be a case to investigate, and I cannot be held responsible alone.

古文：朝廷皆从其请。
现代文：朝廷全部批准了他的请求。
English: The court granted his request in full.

古文：德裕乃练士卒，葺堡鄣，积粮储以备边，蜀人粗安。
现代文：于是，李德裕训练士卒，修补城堡边障，积储军粮，以便加强边防。西川人民初步安定下来。
English: As a result, Li Deyu trained soldiers, repaired the castle's border barriers, and stockpiled military rations in order to strengthen the border defense. The people of Xichuan initially settled down.

古文：是岁，勃海宣王仁秀卒，子新德早死，孙彝震立，改元咸和。
现代文：这一年，勃海国宣王大仁秀去世，他的儿子大新德早年死亡，于是，他的孙子大彝震被立为国王，改年号为咸和。
English: In the same year, King Dairenxiu of Xuanwu of Bohai died, and his son Daxinde died at an early age. As a result, his grandson Daxin Zhen was made king, and the year name was changed to Xianhe.

古文：太和五年辛亥，公元八三一年春，正月，丁巳，赐沧、齐、德节度名义昌军。
现代文：太和五年春季，正月，丁巳，唐文宗赐沧、齐、德节度使名为义昌军节度使。
English: In the spring of the 5th year of the Taihe era, the first month of the year, Ding Si, the Tang Wenzong Emperor granted the Cang, Qi and De festivals and named them the Yichang Army Festival.

古文：庚申，卢龙监军奏李载义与敕使宴于球场后院，副兵马使杨志诚与其徒呼噪作乱，载义与子正元奔易州。
现代文：庚申，卢龙监军奏报：节度使李载义在球场后院设宴接待朝廷派来的敕使，副兵马使杨志诚乘机和他的党羽喧哗作乱，李载义和他的儿子李正元逃奔易州。
English: Geng Shen, the military inspector of Lulong, reported: The festival made Li Zaiyi host a banquet in the backyard of the stadium to receive the envoys sent by the imperial court, the deputy soldiers and horses made Yang Zhicheng and his party take the opportunity to make noise, and Li Zaiyi and his son Li Zhengyuan fled to Yizhou.

古文：志诚又杀莫州刺史张庆初。
现代文：杨志诚又擅自杀死莫州刺史张庆初。
English: Yang Zhicheng also killed himself without permission.

古文：上召宰相谋之，牛僧孺曰： 范阳自安、史以来，非国所有，刘总暂献其地，朝廷费钱八十万缗而无丝毫所获。
现代文：唐文宗召集宰相商议对策，牛僧孺说： 幽州自从安禄山、史思明以来，一直割据跋扈，实际上已不属于朝廷管辖了。穆宗皇帝在位时，幽州节度使刘总曾经归顺朝廷，然而，朝廷花费了八十万缗钱，却一无所获。
English: Tang Wenzong summoned the prime minister to discuss countermeasures, and Niu Sengyu said: Yuzhou has been cut off since Anlu Mountain and Shi Siming, and in fact no longer belongs to the jurisdiction of the imperial court. When Emperor Mu Zong was on the throne, the Yuzhou Festival made Liu Zong submit to the imperial court. However, the imperial court spent 800,000 baht, but gained nothing.

古文：今日志诚得之，犹前日载义得之也。因而抚之，使捍北狄，不必计其逆顺。 
现代文：所以，今天杨志诚夺取幽州，和上次李载义夺取一样，不如借此机会安抚杨志诚，让他保卫北方边境，防备奚、契丹的侵扰，而不必计较他们对朝廷的态度。 
English: Therefore, it is better to take this opportunity to appease Yang Zhicheng and let him defend the northern border and guard against the intrusion of the Mongols and Khitans, without having to consider their attitude towards the imperial court.

古文：上从之。
现代文：文宗采纳了牛僧孺的意见。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：载义自易州赴京师，上以载义有平沧景之功，且事朝廷恭顺，二月，壬辰，以载义为太保，同平章事如故。以杨志诚为卢龙留后。
现代文：李载义从易州奔赴京城，文宗考虑到他曾出兵参予平定横海李同捷叛乱，立有战功，而且一直对朝廷恭敬顺服，二月，壬辰，任命李载义为太保，仍兼任同平章事的职务；任命杨志诚为卢龙留后。
English: Li Zaiyi rushed from Yizhou to Beijing. Considering that he had dispatched troops to participate in the suppression of the cross-sea Li Tongjie rebellion, and had distinguished himself in battle, and had always been respectful and obedient to the imperial court, in February, Renchen, appointed Li Zaiyi as Taibo, still serving concurrently as Tongping's official; appointed Yang Zhicheng as Lulong to stay behind.

古文：臣光曰： 昔者圣人顺天理，察人情，知齐民之莫能相治也，故置师长以正之；知群臣之莫能相使也，故建诸侯以制之；知列国之莫能相服也，故立天子以统之。
现代文：臣司马光曰：过去，圣人顺应天理，体察民情，知道天下的百姓不能相互治理，所以，设置官吏进行统治；知道群臣百官之间不能相互指使，所以建置诸侯加以控制；知道诸侯国之间不能相互顺服，所以设立天子进行统辖。
English: Sima Guang said: In the past, sages followed the principles of heaven and considered the people's conditions. They knew that the people of the world could not govern each other, so they set up officials to rule. They knew that the hundreds of officials could not command each other, so they set up lords to control them. They knew that the lords could not obey each other, so they set up gods to govern.

古文：天子之于万国，能褒善而黜恶，抑强而辅弱，抚服而惩违，禁暴而诛乱，然后发号施令，而四海之内莫不率从也。
现代文：天子对于天下的诸侯各国来说，能够表彰善良而贬斥邪恶，抑制强暴而扶持弱小，禁止暴虐而诛讨叛乱，然后发号施令，天下各地无不顺从。
English: For the princes and states of the world, the Son of Heaven can commend the good and disparage the evil, restrain violence and support the weak, prohibit tyranny and encourage rebellion, and then issue orders, and all parts of the world will obey.

古文：《诗》云： 勉勉我王，纲纪四方。 
现代文：所以，《诗经》说： 我们圣明的天子，之所以勤勉不懈，都是为了治理好国家。 
English: Therefore, "The Book of Songs" says: Our holy heavenly son, the reason why he is diligent and tireless is to govern the country well.

古文：载义籓屏大臣，有功于国，无罪而志诚逐之，此天子所宜治也。
现代文：李载义是堂堂的节度使，对国家曾立有战功，无罪而被杨志诚无端驱逐，这种不轨行为，作为天子，应当严惩不贷。
English: Li Zaiyi was a great military commander, who had made war achievements for the country. He was not guilty and was expelled by Yang Zhicheng for no reason. This kind of misconduct, as a son of heaven, should be severely punished.

古文：若一无所问，因以其土田爵位授之，则是将帅之废置杀生皆出于士卒之手，天子虽在上，奚为哉！
现代文：如果坐视不问，反而将幽州节度使的职务授予他，那么，藩镇将帅的废立生杀大权就都出于士卒的手，天子虽然高高在上，又有什么用呢！
English: If you sit back and do not ask, but instead give him the post of Yuzhou Festival Envoy, then the power to abolish the life and death of the hanzhong commander will come from the hands of the soldiers, although the heavenly son is high above, what use is it!

古文：国家之有方镇，岂专利其财赋而已乎！
现代文：国家设置藩镇，难道就是让他们擅自据有当地的财赋吗？
English: If the state sets up han towns, is it to allow them to take advantage of local resources?

古文：如僧孺之言，姑息偷安之术耳，岂宰相佐天子御天下之道哉！
现代文：像牛僧孺这样的处置办法，不过是姑息藩镇，以求苟且偷安罢了，怎能说是作为国家的宰相而辅佐天子治理天下的正道呢？
English: Such a disposition as that of the cow-monk-herd is nothing more than appeasing the feudal lords and towns in order to seek and steal their peace. How can it be said to be the right way to govern the world as the prime minister of the country and to assist the Son of Heaven?

古文：新罗王彦升卒，子景徽立。
现代文：新罗国王金彦升去世，他的儿子金景徽被立为国王。
English: The King of Silla, Kim Yan Seong, died and his son, Kim Kyong Hui, was made king.

古文：上与宋申锡谋诛宦官，申锡引吏部侍郎王璠为京兆尹，以密旨谕之。
现代文：唐文宗和宰相宋申锡密谋诛除宦官，宋申锡推荐吏部侍郎王为京兆尹，把文宗打算诛除宦官的意图透露给他。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang and Prime Minister Song Shensi conspired to remove the eunuchs. Song Shensi recommended that the king's personal attendant should be Jing Zhaoyun, and revealed to him Wenzong's intention to remove the eunuchs.

古文：璠泄其谋，郑注、王守澄知之，阴为之备。
现代文：王泄露了文宗的意图，郑注、王守澄得知后，暗地里进行防备。
English: Wang leaked Wenzong's intention, and after Zheng Zhu and Wang Shoucheng learned of it, they secretly made preparations.

古文：上弟漳王凑贤，有人望，注令神策都虞候豆卢著诬告申锡谋立漳王。戊戌，守澄奏之，上以为信然，甚怒。
现代文：文宗的弟弟漳王李凑德才兼备，很有声望。郑注令神策军都虞候豆卢著诬告宋申锡阴谋拥立漳王，戊戌，王守澄把豆卢著的诬告奏报文宗，文宗信以为真，大为恼怒。
English: Wenzong's younger brother, Shao Wang Li Bin, was both talented and highly respected. Zheng Shou ordered the military commander of the capital, Zhu Lu, to falsely accuse Song Shensi of plotting to install Shao Wang. Wang Shuzhen reported the false accusation of Zhu Lu to Wenzong. Wenzong believed it to be true and was very angry.

古文：守澄欲即遣二百骑屠申锡家，飞龙使马存亮固争曰： 如此，则京城自乱矣！
现代文：王守澄随即要派二百个骑兵去屠杀宋申锡全家，飞龙使马存亮一再劝阻说： 如果这样，京城肯定大乱！
English: Wang Shoucheng immediately wanted to send two hundred cavalrymen to massacre Song Shenxi's entire family, but was repeatedly dissuaded by Ma Cunliang, who said: "If this happens, there will definitely be chaos in the capital!"

古文：宜召他相与议其事。 
现代文：最好召集宰相一起商议这件事。 
English: It would be best to call the Prime Minister together to discuss the matter.

古文：守澄乃止。
现代文：王守澄这才作罢。
English: Wang Shoucheng finally gave up.

古文：是日，旬休，遣中使悉召宰相至中书东门。
现代文：这天，正值宰相休假，文宗派宦官召集全体宰相到中书省东门。
English: On this day, when the chancellor was on vacation, the eunuchs of the Wen sect summoned all the chancellors to the east gate of Zhongshu.

古文：中使曰： 所召无宋公名。 
现代文：宰相到齐后，宦官说： 皇上召集的名单中没有宋申锡。 
English: After the prime ministers arrived, the eunuch said: There is no Song Shensi in the list of the emperor's convocation.

古文：申锡知获罪，望延英，以笏叩额而退。
现代文：宋申锡明白自己被人诬告，于是，遥望延英殿，手执笏板磕头后退下。
English: Song Shenxi understood that he was being falsely accused, so he looked at Yan Ying Dian from a distance, holding a chopstick, and retreated.

古文：宰相至延英，上示以守澄所奏，相顾愕眙。
现代文：宰相到延英殿后，文宗拿出王守澄的奏折让宰相看，宰相们大吃一惊，面面相觑。
English: After the prime minister arrived at Yan Ying Palace, Wenzong took out Wang Shoucheng's transcript and showed it to the prime minister. The prime ministers were taken aback and looked at each other.

古文：上命守澄捕豆卢著所告十六宅宫市品官晏敬则及申锡亲事王师文等，于禁中鞫之；师文亡命。
现代文：文宗命令王守澄派人逮捕豆卢著所诬告的管理十六宅官晏敬则、宋申锡的亲信侍从王师文等人，押到宫中由宦官审讯。
English: Emperor Wenzong ordered Wang Shoucheng to send someone to arrest the sixteen mansion officials who were falsely accused in Doulu's book, such as the administrator, Zou Jingze, and Song Shensi's trusted attendant, Wang Shifeng, and they were taken to the palace to be interrogated by eunuchs.

古文：三月，庚子，申锡罢为右庶子。
现代文：王师文得知消息后逃亡。三月，庚子，宋申锡被罢免宰相职务，担任太子右庶子。
English: Wang Shiwen fled after learning the news. In March, Geng Zi and Song Shensi were removed from the post of prime minister and became the prince's second son-in-law.

古文：自宰相大臣无敢显言其冤者，独京兆尹崔琯、大理卿王正雅连上疏请出内狱付外廷核实，由是狱稍缓。
现代文：从宰相到大臣百官，几乎没有人敢上书为宋申锡辩冤，只有京兆尹崔、大理卿王正雅接连上疏，请求将宫中审讯的结果交付御史台复核。
English: From the prime minister to ministers, almost no one dared to write a letter to defend Song Shinxi's rights and wrongs. Only Jing Zhaoyun Cui and Daliqing Wang Zhengya successively sent letters to request that the results of the trial in the palace be submitted to the History Channel for review.

古文：正雅，翊之子也。
现代文：于是，宦官对此案的审理才稍微放缓。王正雅是王的儿子。
English: As a result, the eunuch's trial of this case slowed down a bit. Wang Zhengyia is Wang's son.

古文：晏敬则等自诬服，称申锡遣王师文达意于王，豫结异日之知。
现代文：晏敬则等人承认豆卢著所诬告的都是事实，并声称确是宋申锡派王师文向漳王转达他的意向，将来拥立漳王为皇帝。
English: Yu Jingzhe and others admitted that all the false accusations made by Zhu Lu's book were true, and claimed that it was indeed Song Shinxi who sent Wang Shiwen to convey his intention to Yu Wang, and in the future to establish Yu Wang as emperor.

古文：狱成，壬寅，上悉召师保以下及台省府寺大臣面询之。
现代文：审讯结束后，壬寅，文宗召集太子太师、太子太保以下官员，以及御史台，中书、门下、尚书三省，大理寺的大臣当面询问审讯的情况。
English: After the trial was over, Ren Yin and Wenzong called together officials from the Prince's Daishi and the Prince's Taibo, as well as ministers from the Imperial History Channel, the three provinces of Zhongshu, Menzhu and Shangshu, and Dali Temple to inquire about the status of the trial in person.

古文：午际，左常侍崔玄亮、给事中李固言、谏议大夫王质、补阙卢钧、舒元褒、蒋系、裴休、韦温等复请对于延英，乞以狱事付外覆按。
现代文：快到中午时，左常侍崔玄亮、给事中李固言、谏议大夫王质、补阙卢钧、舒元褒、蒋系、裴休、韦温等人再次请求在延英殿面见文宗，乞请将审讯结果交御史台复审。
English: Close to noon, Zuo's personal attendant, Cui Xuanliang, the person in charge of the case, Li Guoyan, the king's counselor, Zhuo Lu, Shu Yuanbo, Jiang Jie, Pei Xiu, Wei Wen, and others once again requested to see Wenzong face-to-face at the Yan Ying Palace, and asked that the results of the trial be submitted to the History Channel for review.

古文：上曰： 吾已与大臣议之矣。 
现代文：文宗说： 我已经和朝廷大臣商议过了。 
English: Wenzong said: I have already discussed this with the Minister of the Imperial Court.

古文：屡遣之出，不退。
现代文：接着，多次下令这几个人退出，崔玄亮等人不退。
English: Then, he repeatedly ordered these people to withdraw, but Cui Xuanliang and others did not retreat.

古文：玄亮叩头流涕曰： 杀一匹夫，犹不可不重慎，况宰相乎！ 
现代文：崔玄亮一边磕头，一边哭着说： 杀掉一个百姓都不能不慎重，何况宰相呢！ 
English: Cui Xuanliang shook his head and wept as he said, "You can't kill a commoner without caution, let alone the prime minister!"

古文：上意稍解，曰： 当更与宰相议之。 
现代文：文宗的怒气逐渐缓解，说： 我打算再和宰相商议。 
English: Wenzong's anger gradually eased, saying: I plan to consult with the prime minister again.

古文：乃复召宰相入。
现代文：于是，再次召集宰相来延英殿。
English: As a result, the prime minister was once again summoned to Nobuhide Palace.

古文：牛僧孺曰： 人臣不过宰相，今申锡已为宰相，假使如所谋，复欲何求！
现代文：宰相们到后，牛僧孺说： 做臣下的地位再高也不过是宰相，现在，宋申锡已经担任了宰相。假如他真的想拥立漳王而谋反，那么，他又能得到什么呢！
English: After the chancellors arrived, Niu Sangyu said: "The highest position to be a vassal is to be a chancellor. Now, Song Shensi has become a chancellor. If he really wants to support and rebel against King Gong, then what can he gain?

古文：申锡殆不至此！ 
现代文：我认为宋申锡决不会傻到这种地步！ 
English: I think Song Shensi would never be so stupid!

古文：郑注恐覆案诈觉，乃劝守澄请止行贬黜。
现代文：郑注恐怕复审使他们的骗局揭穿，于是，劝王守澄奏请文宗尽快结案处理。
English: Zheng Zhu was afraid that the re-examination would expose their scam, so he urged Wang Shoucheng to ask Wenzong to close the case as soon as possible.

古文：癸卯，贬漳王凑为巢县公，宋申锡为开州司马。
现代文：癸卯，唐文宗贬漳王李凑为巢县公，宋申锡为开州司马。
English: At the same time, Tang Wenzong demoted Wang Liqin to Chaoxian Gong, and Song Shenxi to Kaizhou Sima.

古文：存亮即日请致仕。玄亮，磁州人；质，通五世孙；系，乂之子；元褒，江州人也。
现代文：飞龙使马存亮知宋申锡被冤枉，而自己无法为他辩冤，同时憎恨王守澄专横跋扈，于是，当日请求退休。崔玄亮是磁州人；王质是王通的第五代子孙；蒋系是蒋的儿子；舒元褒是江州人。
English: Fei Long made Ma Cunliang know that Song Shensi was wronged, and he could not defend him. At the same time, he hated Wang Shoucheng's tyranny, so he asked to retire on the same day. Cui Xuanliang was from Magizhou; Wang Qiu was the fifth generation of Wang Tong's descendants; Jiang Jie was the son of Jiang; Shu Yuanbo was from Jiangzhou.

古文：晏敬则等坐死用及流窜者数十百人，申锡竟卒于贬所。
现代文：晏敬则等近百人因此案牵连而被判处死刑或被流放。
English: Hao Jing and nearly 100 others were implicated in the case and sentenced to death or exiled.

古文：夏，四月，己丑，以李载义为山南西道节度使，杨志诚为幽州节度使。
现代文：宋申锡最后死在被贬之地。夏季四月，己丑，唐文宗任命李载义为山南西道节度使，杨志诚为幽州节度使。
English: Song Shensi finally died in the place where he was dethroned. In the summer of April, he was ugly, Tang Wenzong appointed Li Zaiyi as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, and Yang Zhicheng as the festival envoy of Yuzhou.

古文：五月，辛丑，上以太庙两室破漏，逾月不葺，罚将作监、度支判官、宗正卿俸；亟命中使帅工徒，辍禁中营缮之材以葺之。
现代文：五月，辛丑唐文宗鉴于太庙有两间房屋破损而漏雨，一年多还没有修补，于是，下令罚将作监、度支判官、宗正卿的俸禄，紧急下令暂停宫中的修建，由宦官率领工匠，用宫中修建的材料修补太庙。
English: In May, in view of the fact that two houses in the imperial temple had been damaged by rain and had not been repaired for more than a year, Emperor Xinwu of Tang Wenzong ordered the punishment of the overseer, the magistrate of the imperial court, and the salary of Zong Zhengqing, urgently ordered the suspension of construction in the palace, and the eunuchs led the craftsmen to repair the imperial temple with the materials built in the palace.

古文：左补阙韦温谏，以为： 国家置百官，各有所司，苟为堕旷，宜黜其人，更择能者代之。
现代文：左补阙韦温劝阻文宗说： 国家设置百官，各负其责，如果他们有人失职，应当撤职，另选有才能的官员予以替代。
English: Zou Weiwen, the Left Complement, dissuaded Wenzong, saying, "The state has set up a hundred officials, each of whom bears his own responsibility. If any of them fail in their duties, they should be removed from office, and talented officials should be selected to replace them.

古文：今旷官者止于罚俸，而忧轸所切即委内臣，是以宗庙为陛下所私，而百官皆为虚设也。 
现代文：但是，陛下对失职的官员仅仅罚俸禄而己，而太庙漏雨却委任宦官去进行修补，这样做，就是把太庙当作陛下的私产，百官都徒为虚设而已了。 
English: However, His Majesty only imposed a fine on officials who failed to perform their duties, while he appointed eunuchs to repair the leaks in the Great Temple. In doing so, he treated the Great Temple as His Majesty's private property, and all the officials were nothing more than empty vessels.

古文：上善其言，即追止中使，命有司葺之。
现代文：文宗认为韦温言之成理，随即命人追回宦官，仍命有关部门负责修补太庙。
English: Wen Zong thought that Wei Wen's words were reasonable, and immediately ordered someone to recover the eunuch, and still ordered the relevant departments to be responsible for repairing the ancient temple.

古文：丙辰，西川节度使李德裕奏遣使诣南诏索所掠百姓，得四千人而还。
现代文：丙辰，西川节度使李德裕奏报：本道派遣使者到南诏国，索要南诏国掠夺的西川百姓，总计四千人返回。
English: According to Li Deyu, the Xichuan Festival was the reason for sending an envoy to Nanzhao to demand the return of a total of 4,000 Nishikawa people who had been plundered by Nanzhao.

古文：秋，八月，戊寅，以陕虢观察使崔郾为鄂岳观察使。
现代文：秋季八月，戊寅，唐文宗任命陕虢观察使崔郾为鄂岳观察使。
English: In the autumn of August, Wu Yin and Tang Wenzong appointed the Shaanxi and Yunnan Observation Envoy Cui Wei as the E Mountain Observation Envoy.

古文：鄂岳地囊山带江，处百越、巴、蜀、荆、汉之会，土多群盗，剽行舟，无老幼必尽杀乃已。
现代文：鄂岳含有众山，长江从这里流过，该地处于百越、巴、蜀、荆汉等地的交界，多有盗贼，剽掠行人舟船，不管老人儿童，一旦抓住就全部杀死。
English: Mt. E contains many mountains. The Yangtze River flows through it. The area is located at the junction of Baiyue, Ba, Shu, Jinghan and other places. There are many thieves, robbing pedestrians and boats. Regardless of whether they are old or children, once they are caught, they will all be killed.

古文：郾至，训卒治兵，作蒙冲追讨，岁中，悉诛之。
现代文：崔郾上任后，训练士卒，制造兵器和战船，分兵追击讨伐，不到一年，就全部讨灭。
English: After Cui Rong took office, he trained soldiers, manufactured weapons and warships, and sent troops to pursue the crusade. In less than a year, they were all destroyed.

古文：郾在陕，以宽仁为治，或经月不笞一人，乃至鄂，严峻刑罚。
现代文：崔郾在陕虢时，为政宽厚仁慈，有时一个月都不鞭打惩罚一人。但到鄂岳后，却严刑峻法。
English: When Cui Gan was in Shaanxi Province, he was lenient and benevolent, sometimes not whipping a person for a month. However, after he came to Yueyang, he imposed severe punishments.

古文：或问其故，郾曰： 陕土瘠民贫，吾抚之不暇，尚恐其惊；鄂地险民杂，夷俗慓狡为奸，非用威刑，不能致治。
现代文：有人问他是什么原因，崔郾说： 陕虢土地贫，百姓穷困，我整天安抚都来不及，惟恐惊扰百姓；鄂岳却不大相同，这里地势险要，民族杂居，夷族风俗崇尚剽掠狡诈，不用重刑，就难以治理。
English: When someone asked him what the reason was, Cui Yao said: Shaanxi and Yunnan are land-poor and the people are impoverished. It would take me all day to pacify them, but I'm afraid of alarming the people. However, Mount E is not the same. The terrain here is precarious, there is a mixture of ethnic groups, and the customs of the barbarians advocate plunder and cunning. It is difficult to govern without heavy punishment.

古文：政贵知变，盖谓此也。 
现代文：为政贵在通变，说的就是这个意思。 
English: This is what it means to say that politicians are changing.

古文：西川节度使李德裕奏： 蜀兵羸疾老弱者，从来终身不简，臣命立五尺五寸之度，简去四千四百馀人，复简募少壮者千人以慰其心。
现代文：西川节度使李德裕上奏： 西川对老弱病残的士卒，从来终身不进行精简。现在，我下令按照五尺五寸的标准，淘汰四千四百多人，同时，从淘汰的士卒家属中招募年轻身壮者一千人，以便安抚他们。
English: The Nishikawa festival made Li Deyu play up: Nishikawa never streamlined the old, weak and sick soldiers for life. Now, I ordered to eliminate more than 4,400 people according to the standard of five feet and five inches, and at the same time, recruit 1,000 young and able-bodied people from the families of the eliminated soldiers in order to appease them.

古文：所募北兵已得千五百人，与土兵参居，转相训习，日益精练。
现代文：又在北方各道招募兵士一千五百人，和西川士卒掺杂在一起，进行训练，日益精强。
English: In addition, 1,500 soldiers were recruited in various provinces in the north, mixed with Nishikawa soldiers, and trained, becoming increasingly strong.

古文：又，蜀工所作兵器，徒务华饰不堪用。
现代文：另外，西川工匠制造的兵器，只讲究装饰而不堪使用。
English: In addition, the weapons made by Nishikawa craftsmen are only decorative and not usable.

古文：臣今取工于别道以治之，无不坚利。 
现代文：现在，我在其他藩镇招募工匠制造，兵器无不坚韧锋利。 
English: Now, I recruit craftsmen in other towns to make weapons that are tough and sharp.

古文：九月，吐蕃维州副使悉怛谋请降，尽帅其众奔成都。
现代文：九月，吐蕃国维州副使悉怛谋请求投降唐朝，率领他的全部人马奔赴成都。
English: In September, the vice-envoy of the State of Victoria of the State of Tubo requested the surrender of the Tang Dynasty, and led all his men to rush to Chengdu.

古文：德裕遣行维州刺史虞藏俭将兵入据其城。
现代文：于是，李德裕派遣代理维州刺史虞藏俭率兵进入维州城防守。
English: As a result, Li Deyu dispatched the agent of Wuzhou Zhishi Yu Zangjian to lead the troops into the defense of Wuzhou City.

古文：庚申，具奏其状，且言 欲遣生羌三千，烧十三桥，捣西戎腹心，可洗久耻，是韦皋没身恨不能致者也！ 
现代文：庚申，李德裕将以上情况奏报朝廷，并且说： 我打算派遣三千没有开化的羌族人，焚烧十三桥，随后出兵直捣吐蕃的腹心之地，洗刷安史之乱以来吐蕃侵占我边防疆域的耻辱，这是西川前节度使韦皋终身努力而未能达到的目标。 
English: Goshun, Li Deyu reported the above situation to the imperial court, and said: I intend to send three thousand uncivilized Yi people to burn the 13 bridges, and then send troops to the heartland of Tuobao, to wash away the shame of Tuobao's encroachment on our border defense territory since the Anshi Rebellion. This is the goal that Xi Chuan Qian made Wei Bao work hard all his life and failed to achieve.

古文：事下尚书省，集百官议，皆请如德裕策。
现代文：文宗将李德裕的奏折交付尚书省，召集百官商议，百官都请求批准李德裕的建议。
English: Wenzong submitted Li Deyu's report to the Ministry of Education and Culture, and convened 100 officials to discuss it. All of them requested approval of Li Deyu's proposal.

古文：牛僧孺曰： 吐蕃之境，四面各万里，失一维州，未能损其势。
现代文：宰相牛僧孺说： 吐蕃疆域广阔，四面边境各达一万里，失去一个维州，无损于它的国力。
English: Prime Minister Niu Son Hui said: "Tu Han has a vast territory, with 10,000-mile borders on all four sides. The loss of one Victorian state will not impair its national strength.

古文：比来修好，约罢戍兵，中国御戎，守信为上。
现代文：近年来唐与吐蕃和好，双方约定共同罢减边防戍守兵力。朝廷对戎夷族的政策，一贯以信义为上。
English: In recent years, Tang and Tubo have made peace, and the two sides agreed to jointly reduce the border defense and garrison forces. The imperial court's policy towards the Emishi has always been based on faith.

古文：彼若来责曰： 何事失信？ 
现代文：如果批准李德裕的建议，那么，吐蕃国就会派人来责问朝廷说： 为什么要失信？ 
English: If Li Deyu's suggestion is approved, then Tubo will send someone to ask the imperial court: "Why did you betray your trust?"

古文：养马蔚茹川，上平凉阪，万骑缀回中，怒气直辞，不三日至咸阳桥。
现代文：同时，他们在原州的蔚茹川蓄养战马，出兵直上平凉原，然后，用一万骑兵布置在回中，怒气冲冲，不到三天就会抵达咸阳桥头。
English: At the same time, they stocked horses in Ulu River in Wonju, sent troops straight to the plains, and then, with ten thousand cavalry deployed in Huizhong, they were furious and arrived at the Xianyang bridgehead in less than three days.

古文：此时西南数千里外，得百维州何所用之！
现代文：这时，京城长安危急，即使在西川收复一百个维州，又有什么用呢！
English: At this time, the long-term safety of the capital was in danger. Even if a hundred crowns were recovered in Saikawa, what good would it do?

古文：徒弃诚信，有害无利。
现代文：按照李德裕的建议，只能使我国丢弃诚信，有百害而无一利。
English: According to Li Deyu's suggestion, it can only make our country discard its integrity, which will bring a lot of harms but no benefits.

古文：此匹夫所不为，况天子乎！ 
现代文：即使一般百姓也不会这样做，况且陛下作为天子呢！ 
English: Even ordinary people wouldn't do that, let alone His Majesty as the Son of Heaven!

古文：上以为然，诏德裕以其城归吐蕃，执悉怛谋及所与偕来者悉归之。
现代文：文宗认为僧孺言之有理，下诏命令李德裕将维州归还吐蕃国，同时把悉怛谋和随同他一起降唐的人员全部逮捕送还。
English: Wen Zong thought that the monk's words were reasonable, and ordered Li Deyu to return Wizhou to the State of Tubo, and at the same time to arrest and send back Siyi Yimou and all the people who accompanied him to Tang.

古文：吐蕃尽诛之于境上，极其惨酷。
现代文：吐蕃国把悉怛谋等人在边境上全部斩首，手段极为残酷。
English: The state of Tubo beheaded all of Siyu and his followers on the border, using extremely cruel methods.

古文：德裕由是怨僧孺益深。
现代文：李德裕由此更加憎恨牛僧孺。
English: As a result, Li Deyu hated Niu Sangyu even more.

古文：冬，十月，戊寅，李德裕奏南诏寇巂州，陷三县。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊寅，李德裕奏报：南诏国出兵侵犯州，攻陷三个县城。
English: In winter, in October, Wu Yin and Li Deyu reported that Nanzhao sent troops to invade the state and captured three county seats.

古文：太和六年壬子，公元八三二年
现代文：太和六年春季，正月，壬子，唐文宗下诏，鉴于各地水旱灾害严重，凡监狱中关押的罪犯，一律予以减刑。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the Taihe era, in the first month of the year, Emperor Wenzong of Tang issued an edict that, in view of the serious flood and drought disasters in various regions, all criminals detained in prisons would have their sentences reduced.

古文：春，正月，壬子，诏以水旱降系囚。群臣上尊号曰太和文武至德皇帝。
现代文：群臣为文宗上尊号，称为太和文武至德皇帝。
English: The group of courtiers were given the honorific title of Emperor Wenzong, and were referred to as Emperor Taiwa and Emperor Wenwu.

古文：右补阙韦温上疏，以为： 今水旱为灾，恐非崇饰徽称之时。 
现代文：右补阙韦温上疏认为： 现在，各地水旱灾害严重，恐怕不是推崇美饰陛下美好名声的时候。 
English: The Right Rev. Wei Wen Shangsuo thought: Now, with serious floods and droughts in various regions, it is probably not the time to praise the beautiful reputation of His Majesty the Emperor.

古文：上善之，辞不受。
现代文：文宗称赞韦温的规劝，辞去尊号而不受。
English: Wen Zong praised Wei Wen's exhortation and resigned his honorary title.

古文：三月，辛丑，以武宁节度使王智兴兼侍中，充忠武节度使；以邠宁节度使李听为武宁节度使。
现代文：三月，辛丑，唐文宗任命武宁节度使王智兴兼任侍中，充任忠武节度使；宁节度使李听为武宁节度使。
English: In March, Xinwu, Tang Wenzong appointed Wang Zhixing, the military governor of Wu Ning, to serve as an aide-de-camp and the military governor of Zhongwu; the military governor of Ning appointed Li Xuan as the military governor of Wu Ning.

古文：回鹘昭礼可汗为其下所杀，从子胡特勒立。
现代文：回鹘国昭礼可汗被部下杀死，可汗的侄子胡特勒被立为可汗。
English: Zhaolai Khan of Yunnan was killed by his subordinates, and Khan's nephew Khutler was installed as Khan.

古文：李听之前镇武宁也，有苍头为牙将。
现代文：李听在以前担任武宁节度使时，提拔自己的一个家奴为牙将。
English: Li He had promoted one of his own servants to the post of commander-in-chief of the armed forces when he served as the commander-in-chief of the armed forces.

古文：至是，听先遣亲吏至徐州慰劳将士，苍头不欲听复来，说军士杀其亲吏，脔食之。
现代文：这时，李听接到任命后，先派自己的一个亲信官吏到徐州去慰劳将士。李听的家奴不愿让李听再到武宁来担任节度使，于是，游说军士杀死李听的亲信官吏，接着，残酷地把尸体切成碎块吃掉。
English: At this time, after Li He was appointed, he first sent one of his trusted officials to Xuzhou to comfort the laborers. Li He's family slave did not want Li He to come to Wu Ning again to serve as a festival envoy, so he lobbied the sergeant to kill Li He's trusted official, and then brutally cut the body into pieces and ate it.

古文：听惧，以疾固辞。辛酉，以前忠武节度使高瑀为武陵节度使。
现代文：李听得知后大为恐惧，借口自己身体有病，再三请求辞去武宁节度使的职务。辛酉，唐文宗任命前忠武节度使高为武宁节度使。
English: When Li heard of this, he was greatly alarmed and, on the pretext that he was ill, repeatedly asked Gao to resign from his post as the military governor of Wu Ning. Xin Yao and Tang Wenzong appointed Gao, the former loyal military governor of Wu Ning, as the military governor of Wu Ning.

古文：夏，五月，甲辰，李德裕奏修邛崃关及移巂州理台登城。
现代文：夏季，五月，甲辰，李德裕奏报，本道修补邛崃关，同时把州刺史的驻地移到台登城。
English: In the summer, in May, Ji Chen, Li Deyu's son, repaired the pass, and at the same time moved the residence of the prefectural chief historian to Taitung City.

古文：秋，七月，原王逵薨。
现代文：秋季，七月，原王李逵去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, the original King Lihong passed away.

古文：冬，十月，甲子，立鲁王永为太子。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲子，唐文宗立鲁王李永为皇太子。
English: In winter, in October, the Tang Emperor Wenzong made Li Yong, King of Lu, the crown prince.

古文：初，上以晋王普，敬宗长子，性谨愿，欲以为嗣。会薨，上痛惜之，故久不议建储，至是始行之。
现代文：最初，文宗鉴于晋王李普是唐敬宗的长子，性情诚实，打算立为皇太子，不巧李普去世，文宗十分痛惜，所以很长时间没有考虑此事。
English: At first, Wenzong did not think about it for a long time, as he regretted the death of Jin Wang Lipu, the eldest son of Tang Jingzong, who was honest and planned to become the crown prince.

古文：十一月，乙卯，以荆南节度使段文昌为西川节度使。
现代文：直到这时，才决定册立。十一月，乙卯，唐文宗任命荆南节度使段文昌为剑南西川节度使。
English: It was not until this time that it was decided to register. In November, Tang Wenzong appointed Jingnan Festival Envoy Duan Wenchang as Jianan West River Festival Envoy.

古文：西川监军王践言入知枢密，数为上言： 缚送悉怛谋以快虏心，绝后来降者，非计也。 
现代文：这时西川监军王践言入朝担任枢密使，多次上言说： 朝廷命令西川把吐蕃降将悉怛谋捆绑送还，使吐蕃人心大快，以后无人再敢来降。
English: At this time, the Nishikawa overseer, Wang Jianyan, entered the imperial court to serve as a confidential envoy, and repeatedly said: The court ordered Nishikawa to send back all the captured soldiers in a bundle, so that the hearts of the people of Tubo would be quickened, and no one would dare to come down again.

古文：上亦悔之，尤中书侍郎、同平章事牛僧孺失策。
现代文：这种处置办法实在有害。 文宗也感到后悔，埋怨中书侍郎、同平章事牛僧孺失策。
English: This way of dealing with the matter was really harmful.Wen Zong also felt regret, and he complained that Zhongshuizhirong and Tongping Zhang had made a mistake.

古文：附李德裕者因言 僧孺与德裕有隙，害其功。 
现代文：依附李德裕的官员于是乘机上言说： 牛僧孺和李德裕有矛盾，所以，他故意阻碍李德裕立功。 
English: The official who was attached to Li Deyu then took the opportunity to say, "Cowherd Zang and Li Deyu had a conflict, so he deliberately hindered Li Deyu from making meritorious contributions."

古文：上益疏之。
现代文：于是文宗更加疏远牛僧孺。
English: As a result, Wenzong became even more estranged from Niu Sangyu.

古文：僧孺内不自安，会上御延英，谓宰相曰： 天下何时当太平，卿等亦有意于此乎！ 
现代文：牛僧孺内心十分不安。这天，文宗亲临延英殿，对宰相说： 天下什么时候能够太平，你们是否也有意向这方面努力？ 
English: On this day, Emperor Wenzong himself came to the Yan Ying Palace and said to the Prime Minister: When will the world be peaceful? Do you also intend to make efforts in this regard?

古文：僧孺对曰： 太平无象。
现代文：牛僧孺回答说： 太平没有固定的标准。
English: The cow monk replied, "There is no fixed standard for Taiping.

古文：今四夷不至交侵，百姓不至流散，虽非至理，亦谓小康。
现代文：现在，周边夷蛮族不至于来侵犯，百姓不至于流离失所，虽非天下大治，也可谓小康了。
English: Now, the surrounding barbarians will not invade, and the people will not be displaced. Although it is not the rule of the world, it can be said to be well-off.

古文：陛下若别求太平，非臣等所及。 
现代文：陛下如果还不满足，在此之外追求什么太平，那就不是我们所能考虑到的了。 
English: Your Majesty, if you are looking for peace, it is not within the power of your ministers.

古文：退，谓同列曰： 主上责望如此，吾曹岂得久居此地乎！ 
现代文：退朝后，他对同僚说： 皇上对我们如此责备抱怨，我们岂能久居宰相的职位！ 
English: After retiring from the imperial court, he said to his colleagues: "Since the emperor has been criticizing and complaining about us so much, how can we hold the post of prime minister for long?"

古文：因累表请罢。十二月，乙丑，以僧孺同平章事，充淮南节度使。
现代文：士卒驱逐杀害主帅，抗拒朝廷命令而自立为节度使，却未能严加斥责。
English: The officers expelled and killed the coach, resisted the order of the court and stood up for the discipline, but failed to severely reprimand.

古文：臣光曰：君明臣忠，上令下从，俊良在位，佞邪黜远，礼修乐举，刑清政平，奸宄消伏，兵革偃戢，诸侯顺附，四夷怀服，时和年丰，家给人足，此太平之象也。
现代文：战乱连年不断，征税天天紧急。
English: War has been raging for years on end, and taxation is becoming more urgent every day.

古文：于斯之时，阍寺专权，胁君于内，弗能远也；籓镇阻兵，陵慢于外，弗能制也；士卒杀逐主帅，拒命自立，弗能诘也；军旅岁兴，赋敛日急，骨血纵横于原野，杼轴空竭于里闾，而僧孺谓之太平，不亦诬乎！
现代文：原野中横遍男人的尸骨和鲜血，村庄里不见女人的踪影。
English: The bones and blood of men are strewn across the fields, and there is no trace of women in the village.

古文：当文宗求治之时，僧孺任居承弼，进则偷安取容以窃位，退则欺君诬世以盗名，罪孰大焉！
现代文：牛僧孺却认为这就是天下太平，难道不是在公然欺骗吗！当唐文宗孜孜不倦地励精图治的时候，牛僧孺身为宰相，被擢拔时苟且偷安、阿谀奉迎以便窃取宰相的职位，辞职时又欺骗皇上，诬蔑时事以便盗取名声，他的罪行实在是太大了！
English: When Tang Wenzong worked tirelessly and diligently to rule the country, Niu Sengyu was the prime minister. He was promoted at the right time, but he stole the position of prime minister by stealing the peace, and he deceived the emperor when he resigned, and he slandered the current affairs in order to steal the reputation. His crime was too great!

古文：珍王诚薨。
现代文：珍王李诚去世。
English: Zhenwang Licheng passed away.

古文：乙亥，昭义节度使刘从谏入朝。
现代文：乙亥，昭义节度使刘从谏来京城朝拜。
English: The Eighth Chinese Year of the Boar and the Spring Festival of Zhao Yi brought Liu Zonglu to Beijing to pay homage.

古文：丁未，以前西川节度使李德裕为兵部尚书。
现代文：丁未，唐文宗任命前剑南西川节度使李德裕为兵部尚书。
English: The appointment of the former Nishikawa Setsudo made Li Deyu a military officer.

古文：初，李宗闵与德裕有隙，及德裕还自西川，上注意甚厚，朝夕且为相，宗闵百方沮之不能。
现代文：当初，李宗闵和李德裕有矛盾，这时，李德裕从西川调来朝廷任职，文宗对他寄予很大希望，急于任命他为宰相，李宗闵千方百计阻止而未果。
English: At first, there was a conflict between Li Zongyao and Li Deyu. At that time, Li Deyu was transferred from Xichuan to serve in the imperial court. Wenzong had high hopes for him and was eager to appoint him as prime minister. Li Zongyao tried his best to prevent this, but failed.

古文：京兆尹杜悰，宗闵党也，尝诣宗闵，见其有忧色，曰： 得非以大戎乎？ 
现代文：京兆尹杜是李宗闵的党羽，一次，往见李宗闵，发现他面有忧色，就问： 是不是忧虑兵部尚书李德裕即将被拜为宰相？ 
English: Jing Zhao Yin Du was a member of Li Zongyao's party. Once, when he saw Li Zongyao, he found his face sad and asked: "Are you worried that Li Deyu, the secretary of the military department, is about to be worshiped as the prime minister?"

古文：宗闵曰： 然。
现代文：李宗闵说： 是，但又有什么办法能够阻止他呢？ 
English: Li Zongyao said: Yes, but how can we stop him?

古文：何以相救？ 悰曰： 悰有一策，可平宿憾，恐公不能用。 宗闵曰： 何如？ 
现代文：杜说： 我有一计，可以消除您以往对他的仇恨，只是恐怕您不能采纳。 李宗闵说： 什么计策？ 
English: Du said: I have a plan that can eliminate your hatred for him in the past, but I'm afraid you can't adopt it.Li Zongyao said: What strategy?

古文：悰曰： 德裕有文学而不由科第，常用此为慊慊，若使之知举，必喜矣。 
现代文：杜说： 德裕擅长文学，但没有经过科举考试而获得进士的出身，常常为此而感到不快。如果能让他掌管科举考试，肯定会喜出望外。 
English: Du said: Deyu is good at literature, but he did not pass the entrance examination and was born as a scholar. He often felt uncomfortable because of this. If he could be in charge of the entrance examination, he would certainly be overjoyed.

古文：宗闵默然有间，曰： 更思其次。 
现代文：李宗闵沉默了一会儿，说： 是否再考虑其他的办法。 
English: Li Zongyao paused for a moment and said, "Should we consider other methods?"

古文：悰曰： 不则用为御史大夫。 
现代文：杜说： 如果您不愿意让他掌管科举考试，那么，就任命他为御史大夫。 
English: Du said: If you don't want him to be in charge of the imperial examinations, then appoint him as imperial historian.

古文：宗闵曰： 此则可矣。 
现代文：李宗闵说： 这条计策可以。 
English: Li Zongyao said: This strategy can work.

古文：悰再三与约，乃诣德裕。
现代文：于是，杜再三和李宗闵约定，不得泄露消息，然后，去见李德裕。
English: As a result, Du repeatedly agreed with Li Zongyao not to divulge the news, and then went to see Li Deyu.

古文：德裕迎揖曰： 公何为访此寂寥？ 
现代文：李德裕作揖欢迎杜，说： 您为什么事情来到我这个被人遗忘的地方？ 
English: Li Deyu welcomed Du and said: "Why did you come to this forgotten place?

古文：悰曰： 靖安相公令悰达意。 
现代文：杜说： 靖安相公李宗闵让我来转达他关于安排您职位的意向。 
English: Du said, "Jing'an's chief minister, Li Zongyao, asked me to convey his intention of arranging your position.

古文：即以大夫之命告之。
现代文：随即把将要任命李德裕为御史大夫的意向透露给李德裕。
English: He then revealed to Li Deyu his intention to appoint Li Deyu as the Grand Historian.

古文：德裕惊喜泣下，曰： 此大门官，小子何足以当之！ 
现代文：李德裕听后惊喜不已，不由得流下泪来，说： 御史大夫是朝廷举行大礼时在宫门纠察百官班列的重要职务，作为晚辈，我怎敢担当！ 
English: After hearing this, Li Deyu was so surprised that he could not help but shed tears. He said, "Dr. Goshi is an important position to picket the procession of hundreds of officials at the palace gate when the imperial court holds a grand ceremony. As a younger generation, how dare I take on this responsibility!

古文：寄谢重沓。
现代文：连连请他转达对李宗闵的感谢。
English: He repeatedly asked him to convey his thanks to Li Zongyao.

古文：宗闵复与给事中杨虞卿谋之，事遂中止。
现代文：李宗闵又和给事中杨虞卿进行商议，结果，停止了这项计划。
English: Li Zongyao also discussed the matter with Yang Yuqing, and as a result, the plan was stopped.

古文：虞卿，汝士之从弟也。
现代文：杨虞卿是杨汝士的堂弟。
English: Yang Yuqing is Yang Rushi's cousin.

古文：太和七年癸丑，公元八三三年春，正月，甲午，加昭义节度使刘从谏同平章事，遣归镇。
现代文：太和七年春季，正月，甲午，唐文帝赐昭义节度使刘从谏兼任同平章事的荣誉职务，让他返回本镇。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, in the first month, in the afternoon of the first day of the first month, Emperor Wen of the Tang Dynasty gave the Shouyi Festival to Liu Conglu, who also served as the honorary post of Tongping, and let him return to the town.

古文：初，从谏以忠义自任，入朝，欲请他镇。
现代文：最初，刘从谏以忠义为己任，来京城朝拜文宗，本来打算请求朝廷把自己调到其它藩镇。
English: At first, Liu Conglu took loyalty as his duty and came to Beijing to pay homage to Emperor Wenzong. Originally, he planned to ask the imperial court to transfer him to other towns in the domain.

古文：既至，见朝廷事柄不一，又士大夫多请托，心轻朝廷，故归而益骄。
现代文：但抵达京城后，发现朝廷政出多门，事权不一，士大夫大多通过行贿走门路才能做官升迁，于是，从心底里轻视朝廷。回到昭义后，更加骄横跋扈。
English: However, after arriving in Kyoto, he discovered that there were many branches of the imperial government with different powers, and most of the shidafu were able to rise through the ranks by paying bribes. As a result, he despised the imperial court from the bottom of his heart. After returning to Shōyō, he became even more arrogant.

古文：徐州承王智兴之后，士卒骄悖，节度使高瑀不能制，上以为忧。
现代文：武宁在王智兴担任节度使以后，士卒骄横无礼，新任节度使高无法控制，文宗十分担忧。
English: After Wang Zhixing took up the post of the festival commissioner, the soldiers became arrogant and rude. The newly appointed festival commissioner could not control Gao, and Wenzong was very worried.

古文：甲寅，以岭南节度使崔珙为武宁节度使。
现代文：甲寅，任命岭南节度使崔珙为武宁节度使。
English: A Yin, appointed the Lingnan Festival Envoy Cui Wei as the Wu Ning Festival Envoy.

古文：珙至镇，宽猛适宜，徐人安之。
现代文：崔珙上任后，处理问题宽严适宜，因此，武宁人心逐渐安定。
English: After Cui Rong took office, it was appropriate to deal with the problem in a lenient and strict manner. Therefore, the people of Wu Ning gradually became stable.

古文：珙，琯之弟也。
现代文：崔珙是京兆尹崔的弟弟。
English: Cui Wei is the younger brother of Jing Zhaoyun Cui.

古文：二月，癸亥，加卢龙节度使、检校工部尚书杨志诚检校吏部尚书。
现代文：二月，癸亥，唐文宗任命卢龙节度使、检校工部尚书杨志诚为检校吏部尚书。
English: In February, Emperor Qianhai and Tang Wenzong appointed Lulong Jiedu Envoy and Yang Zhicheng, inspector of the inspection department, as inspector of the inspection department.

古文：进奏官徐迪诣宰相言： 军中不识朝廷之制，唯知尚书改仆射为迁，不知工部改吏部为美，敕使往，恐不得出。 
现代文：幽州驻京城的进奏官徐迪面见宰相说： 军中将士不懂朝廷的制度，只知道由尚书改为仆射是升官，不知道工部尚书改为吏部尚书也是升官，如果朝廷派往幽州宣布任命书的敕使到达那里，恐怕就会被拘留。 
English: Xu Di, Yuzhou's envoy stationed in Beijing, met with the prime minister and said, "Lieutenant generals do not understand the system of the imperial court. They only know that it is a promotion if they change from Shangshu to Fuxia. They do not know that it is also a promotion if they change from Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry to Shangshu of the Ministry of Personnel. If the courier sent by the imperial court to Yuzhou to announce the appointment letter arrives there, I am afraid he will be detained."

古文：辞气甚慢，宰相不以为意。
现代文：徐迪言辞蛮横无礼，宰相却毫不责怪。
English: Xu Di's words were quite rude, but the prime minister did not blame him.

古文：丙戌，以兵部尚书李德裕同平章事。
现代文：丙戌，唐文宗任命兵部尚书李德裕为同平章事。
English: On the other hand, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Deyu of the Ministry of Military Affairs to the same rank.

古文：德裕入谢，上与之论朋党事，对曰： 方今朝士三分之一为朋党。 
现代文：李德裕前来拜谢，文宗和他讨论朋党的问题，李德裕说： 现今朝廷中有三分之一的人都参予了朋党活动。 
English: Li Deyu came to thank him. Wenzong and he discussed the issue of cronyism. Li Deyu said, "Nowadays, one-third of the people in the imperial court have participated in crony activities.

古文：时给事中杨虞卿与从兄中书舍人汝士、弟户部郎中汉公、中书舍人张元夫、给事中萧澣等善交结，依附权要，上干执政，下挠有司，为士人求官及科第，无不如志，上闻而恶之，故与德裕言首及之。
现代文：这时，给事中杨虞卿和他的堂兄中书舍人杨汝士，他弟弟户部郎中杨汉公，中书舍人张元夫、给事中萧浣等人相互交结，关系亲密。他们依附于朝廷中的权贵，在上层攀附宰相，在下层干扰有关部门，为读书人求取官职和科举考试中榜及第，无不达到目的。文宗得知后十分憎恨，所以和李德裕先说起这方面的事。
English: At this time, Yang Yuqing and his cousin Yang Rushi, who was in charge of the middle school, his brother Yang Han Gong, who was in charge of the middle school, Zhang Yuanfu, who was in charge of the middle school, and Xiao Yao, who was in charge of the middle school, had a close relationship with each other. They clung to the dignitaries in the imperial court, clung to the prime minister at the upper level, interfered with the relevant departments at the lower level, and sought the official position and the first place in the imperial examinations for the readers, all of which achieved the goal. After learning about Wenzong, he hated it very much, so he

古文：德裕因得以排其所不悦者。
现代文：此后，李德裕因此而得以排挤他所不喜欢的人。
English: Since then, Li Deyu has been able to exclude people he does not like.

古文：初，左散骑常侍张仲方尝驳李吉甫谥，及德裕为相，仲方称疾不出。
现代文：当初，左散骑常侍张仲方曾经驳斥过朝廷礼官给李德裕父亲李吉甫拟定的谥号太优，这时，李德裕被任命为宰相，张仲方于是借口身体有病，请假而不上朝。
English: At first, Zhang Zhongfang, the left rider's attendant, had refuted the imperial etiquette officer's nickname for Li Deyu's father, Li Jifu, which was too good. At that time, Li Deyu was appointed as the prime minister. Zhang Zhongfang then took a leave of absence on the pretext of being ill and did not go to the imperial court.

古文：三月，壬辰，以仲方为宾客分司。
现代文：三月，壬辰，朝廷任命张仲方为太子宾客、分司东都。
English: In March, in Imjin, the imperial court appointed Zhang Zhongfang as the prince's guest and deputy governor of Dongdu.

古文：杨志诚怒不得仆射，留官告使魏宝义并春衣使焦奉鸾、送奚、契丹使尹士恭。
现代文：杨志诚由于没有得到仆射的职务而大怒，于是，拘留了朝廷派来的官告使魏宝义，春衣使焦奉鸾，送奚、契丹使尹士恭。
English: Yang Zhicheng was furious because he did not get the position of the courier, so he detained Wei Baoyi, the official complaint envoy sent by the imperial court, Chunyi, the official complaint envoy sent by the imperial court, Jiao Fengyao, Xiangyao, and Qidan, the official complaint envoy sent by the imperial court, Yin Shigong.

古文：甲午，遣牙将王文颖来谢恩并让官。
现代文：甲午，杨志诚派遣牙将王文颖来京城拜谢并辞让朝廷所授予的吏部尚书的职务。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, Yang Zhicheng sent the dental officer Wang Wenying to the capital to offer his thanks and to resign from the post of secretary of the personnel department, which had been granted by the imperial court.

古文：丙申，复以告身并批答赐之，文颖不受而去。和王绮薨。
现代文：丙申，文宗再次将吏部尚书的任命书和对杨志诚辞职的批答授予王文颖，王文颖拒不接受，离开京城返还幽州。和王李绮去世。
English: According to Hsin, Wenzong once again gave Wang Wenying the letter of appointment to the cadre department and the reply to Yang Zhicheng's resignation. Wang Wenying refused to accept it and left Beijing to return to Yuzhou. And Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：庚戌，以杨虞卿为常州刺史，张元夫为汝州刺史。
现代文：庚戌，朝廷任命杨虞卿为常州刺史，张元夫为汝州刺史。
English: The imperial court appointed Yang Yuqing as the prefect of Changzhou and Zhang Yuanfu as the prefect of Ruzhou.

古文：它日，上复言及朋党，李宗闵曰： 臣素知之，故虞卿辈臣皆不与美官。 
现代文：过了几天，文宗又谈起朋党的问题，李宗闵说： 朝廷中究竟谁朋比为党，我历来清楚。所以，现在杨虞卿等人都不授予好的官位。 
English: A few days later, Emperor Wenzong also talked about the issue of cronyism. Li Zongyao said, "I have always known who in the imperial court is a crony and who is a party member. Therefore, now Yang Yuqing and others do not grant good official positions.

古文：李德裕曰： 给、舍非美官而何！ 
现代文：李德裕说： 他们在这以前担任的给事中、中书舍人的职务难道不够好吗？
English: Li Deyu said, "Isn't it enough for them to have held the position of the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China?

古文：宗闵失色。
现代文：这又是谁给他们授予的职务？
English: Li Zongyao is losing face.

古文：丁巳，以萧浣为郑州刺史。
现代文：谁在朋比为党！ 李宗闵听出李德裕是讥讽自己，大惊失色。丁巳，萧浣被任命为郑州刺史。
English: Who is the party in Pengpi! Li Zongyao was shocked to hear that Li Deyu was mocking himself. Meanwhile, Xiao Yao was appointed as Zhengzhou chief historian.

古文：夏，四月，丙戌，册回鹘新可汗为爱登里啰汩没密施合句禄毘伽彰信可汗。
现代文：夏季四月，丙戍，唐文宗册立回纥国新立可汗胡特勒为登爱里汨没密施合句禄毗伽彰信可汗。
English: In the summer of April, the Tang and Han dynasties established a new khan in the state of Huizhou, Hutter, who was a close follower of Deng Ai, Lu Guiqi, and Changxin khan.

古文：六月，乙巳，以山南西道节度使李载义为河东节度使。
现代文：六月，乙巳，唐文宗任命山南西道节度使李载义为河东节度使。
English: In June, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Zaiyi, the festival envoy of the Western Shandong Province, as the new festival envoy of the Eastern Shandong Province.

古文：先是，回鹘每入贡，所过暴掠，州县不敢诘，但严兵防卫而已。
现代文：以前，回鹘国每次派人来唐朝贡奉，凡是经过的地方，纵兵残暴掠夺，州县官吏不敢责问，只是布置兵力，加强防守而己。
English: In the past, whenever the Uighur Empire sent people to pay tribute to the Tang Dynasty, wherever they passed, the soldiers brutally plundered, and the state and county officials did not dare to ask questions, but only deployed troops and strengthened their defenses.

古文：载义至镇，回鹘使者李畅入贡，载义谓之曰： 可汗遣将军入贡，以固舅甥之好，非遣将军陵践上国也。
现代文：李载义上任后，适逢回鹘使者李畅前来贡奉。李载义对他说： 可汗派您来朝廷进贡，目的是巩固两国的舅甥关系，不是派您来践踏我国百姓的。
English: After Li Zaiyi took office, Li Chang, the emissary of the Hui Dynasty, came to pay tribute. Li Zaiyi said to him: The khan sent you to pay tribute to the imperial court in order to consolidate the uncle-nephew relationship between the two countries, not to trample on our people.

古文：将军不戢部曲，使为侵盗。
现代文：如果您不约束士兵，放纵他们掠夺百姓，那么，我只好出兵诛杀他们。
English: If you do not restrain your soldiers and allow them to plunder the people, then I will have to go out and kill them.

古文：载义亦得杀之，勿谓中国之法可忽也。 
现代文：你们不要认为大唐的法律可以随便轻视而不遵守。 
English: You should not think that the laws of Datang can be casually disregarded and not complied with.

古文：于是悉罢防卫兵，但使二卒守其门。
现代文：于是，下令全部撤除州县的防卫兵马，只派两个士兵把守城门。
English: As a result, he ordered the removal of all state and county guards and sent only two soldiers to guard the city gate.

古文：畅畏服，不敢犯令。
现代文：李畅畏惧而顺服，不敢再违犯唐朝法令。
English: Li Chang obeyed in fear and did not dare to violate the Tang Dynasty law again.

古文：壬申，以工部尚书郑覃为御史大夫。
现代文：壬申，唐文宗任命工部尚书郑覃为御史大夫。
English: In Jinshin, Tang Wenzong appointed the head of the engineering department, Shangshu Zhengqi, as the imperial historian.

古文：初，李宗闵恶覃在禁中数言事，奏罢其侍讲。
现代文：当初，宰相李宗闵憎恨郑覃在宫中经常对文宗议论朝政得失，因此，奏请文宗罢免郑覃的翰林侍讲学士职务。
English: At first, the prime minister, Li Zongxi, resented the fact that Zheng Yao often discussed the merits and demerits of the imperial government with Wenzong in the palace. Therefore, he requested Wenzong to remove Zheng Yao from the post of Hanlin attendant and lecturer.

古文：上从容谓宰相曰： 殷侑经术颇似郑覃。 
现代文：一次，文宗不慌不忙地对宰相说： 殷侑精通经学，水平类似郑覃。 
English: On one occasion, Wenzong calmly said to the prime minister: Yin Qi is proficient in the study of the classics, similar to Zheng Qi.

古文：宗闵对曰： 覃、侑经术诚可尚，然论议不足听。 
现代文：李宗闵说： 郑覃、殷侑的经学水平的确很高，但议论朝政却不足以听取。 
English: Li Zonglu said: Zheng Rong and Yin Rong's academic level is indeed very high, but it is not enough to listen to discussions about the government.

古文：李德裕曰： 覃、侑议论，他人不欲闻，惟陛下欲闻之。 
现代文：李德裕反驳说： 郑覃、殷侑议政，别人不愿听，但陛下却想听。 
English: Li Deyu retorted, "Zheng Xuan and Yin Xuan are discussing politics. Others do not want to listen, but Your Majesty wants to listen.

古文：后旬日，宣出，除覃御史大夫。
现代文：后来，过了十来天，朝廷宣布文宗的诏令，任命郑覃为御史大夫。
English: Later, after more than ten days, the imperial court announced the edict of Emperor Wenzong and appointed Zheng Qi as the imperial historian.

古文：宗闵谓枢密使崔潭峻曰： 事一切宣出，安用中书！ 
现代文：李宗闵对枢密使崔潭峻说： 现在，朝廷对官员的任命都由皇上直接决定，还要中书门下干什么！ 
English: Li Zongyao said to the confidential envoy Cui Tanjun: Now that the appointment of officials by the imperial court is decided directly by the emperor, what else should the Chinese government do?

古文：谭峻曰： 八年天子，听其自行事亦可矣！ 
现代文：潭峻说： 皇上即位已经八年多了，应当让他自己决定！ 
English: Tanjun said: It has been more than eight years since the Emperor ascended the throne, he should be allowed to decide for himself!

古文：宗闵愀然而止。
现代文：李宗闵听后神色忧惧，不再说了。
English: After hearing this, Li Zongyao looked worried and stopped talking.

古文：乙亥，以中书侍郎、同平章事李宗闵同平章事、充山南西道节度使。
现代文：乙亥，唐文宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事李宗闵以同平章事的头衔，充任山南西道节度使。
English: Yi Hai and Tang Wenzong appointed Li Zongya, a middle-ranking official, to serve as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road, with the title of Tongping official.

古文：秋，七月，壬寅，以右仆射王涯同平章事、兼度支、盐铁转运使。
现代文：秋季，七月，壬寅，唐文宗任命右仆射王涯为同平章事，兼度支、盐铁转运使。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed his right-hand man, Sha Wangya, to be the Tongping Zhengji, concurrently the Dodu branch and the Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy.

古文：宣武节度使杨元卿有疾，朝廷议除代，李德裕请徙刘从谏于宣武，因拔出上党，不使与山东连结。
现代文：宣武节度使杨元卿身体患病，朝廷商议由其他人前往替代，李德裕请求任命昭义节度使刘从谏为宣武节度使，这样，就可以把刘从谏从昭义调出，以免他和崤山以东的割据藩镇相互交结。
English: The Xuanwu Festival caused Yang Yuanqing to fall ill, and the imperial court discussed replacing him with someone else. Li Deyu requested that the Shouyi Festival appoint Liu Conglu as the Xuanwu Festival envoy. In this way, Liu Conglu could be transferred out of Shouyi, so that he would not have to cross the border with the divided Han towns east of Shaoshan.

古文：上以为未可。
现代文：文宗认为不可。
English: Wenzong thought it was impossible.

古文：癸丑，以左仆射李程为宣武节度使。
现代文：癸丑，任命左仆射李程为宣武节度使。
English: He appointed his left-hand man, Li Cheng, as the envoy to the Xuanwu Festival.

古文：上患近世文士不通经术，李德裕请依杨绾议，进士试论议，不试诗赋。
现代文：唐文宗对近年来的文人学士不精通经学感到十分忧虑。李德裕请求按照唐代宗时宰相杨绾的建议，在科举考试时，进士科只考策论，不再考诗赋。
English: Tang Wenzong was very worried about the fact that recent literati bachelors were not proficient in the study of classics. Li Deyu requested that, in accordance with the suggestion of Yang Jie, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, when taking the examination, only the theory of policy should be examined, and no longer the poetry should be examined.

古文：德裕又言： 昔玄宗以临淄王定内难，自是疑忌宗室，不令出阁。
现代文：李德裕又说： 过去，玄宗在当临淄王的时候，平定宫内的变乱，因此，即位以后，怀疑猜忌皇族子弟，不让他们出宫担任中央和地方的职务。
English: Li Deyu also said: In the past, Xuanzong, when he was the king of Linyi, quelled the turmoil in the palace. Therefore, after he ascended the throne, he was suspicious of the royal children and did not allow them to leave the palace to hold central and local positions.

古文：天下议皆以为幽闭骨肉，亏伤人伦。向使天宝之末、建中这初，宗室散处方州，虽未能安定王室，尚可各全其生。
现代文：于是，天下人都议论说，这样做是囚禁自己的亲生骨肉，损害儒家关于父子有亲的伦理准则，假如在天宝末年的安史之乱和建中初年的朱叛乱时，皇族子弟都散处各州做官，虽然他们不一定能够帮助朝廷平定叛乱，但是至少可以各自保全自己的性命。
English: As a result, people all over the world argued that to do so was to imprison one's own flesh and blood, and to undermine the Confucian ethical code concerning the relationship between father and son. If, during the Anshi Rebellion at the end of the Tenpo era and the Zhu Rebellion at the beginning of the Jianming era, the sons and daughters of the imperial family were scattered throughout the states to work as officials, although they might not be able to help the imperial court to quell the rebellion, they could at least save their own lives.

古文：所以悉为安禄山、硃泚所鱼肉者，由聚于一宫故也。
现代文：结果都被安禄山、朱杀害，原因在于都居住在十六宅宫。
English: As a result, both An Lushan and Zhu were killed, the reason being that they both lived in the Sixteen Mansions.

古文：陛下诚因册太子，制书听宗室年高属疏者出阁，且除诸州上佐，使携其男女出外婚嫁。
现代文：陛下实在应当利用册立皇太子的机会，下诏让皇族子弟中年纪已大而且亲属关系疏远者出宫，任命为各州的僚佐，让他们携带自己的子女，出宫后各自结婚成家。
English: His Majesty really should take advantage of the opportunity presented by the enthronement of the Crown Prince and issue an edict to let the middle-aged and older members of the royal family who are distantly related leave the palace, appoint them as aides-de-camp in each state, let them bring their children with them, and let them each marry and start a family after leaving the palace.

古文：此则百年弊法，一旦因陛下去之，海内孰不欣悦！ 
现代文：这样，从玄宗以来沿袭了近百年的弊法，就会由陛下断然革除，那么，天下无论什么人都会感到欢欣喜悦的！ 
English: In this way, the evil law that has been followed for nearly a hundred years since Xuanzong will be eliminated by His Majesty, then, no matter who in the world will feel joy!

古文：上曰： 兹事朕久知其不可，方今诸王岂无贤才，无所施耳！ 
现代文：文宗说： 这件事朕很久以来就知道不好，当今十六宅宫诸王中岂能没有德才兼备的人，只是还没有下决心革除罢了！ 
English: Wenzong said, "I've known about this for a long time. Of all the kings of the Sixteen Mansions, how can there be no one who is both virtuous and talented? They just haven't made up their minds to get rid of them yet!"

古文：八月，庚寅，册命太子，因下制：诸王自今以次出阁，授紧、望州刺史、上佐；十六宅县主，以时出适；进士停试诗赋。
现代文：八月，庚寅，唐文宗正式册立皇太子，于是下制：十六宅宫诸王从今以后按照辈份高低逐渐出宫，授予紧和望一级的州刺史、僚佐，十六宅宫的县主，也根据她们的年龄大小，出宫嫁人；进士科停考诗赋。
English: In August, Geng Yin and Tang Wenzong officially registered the crown prince, so the following system was established: from now on, the kings of the Sixteen Mansions Palace will gradually leave the palace in accordance with their seniority, and will be awarded to the first-class state magistrate, the deputy magistrate, and the county head of the Sixteen Mansions Palace, and also according to their age, they will leave the palace to marry; and the poetry test will be suspended.

古文：诸王出阁，竟以议所除官不决而罢。
现代文：诸王出宫的事，竟由于朝廷在商议任命他们职务时，意见不一，议而不决而中止。
English: The matter of the kings leaving the palace was actually suspended due to the fact that when the imperial court was discussing the appointment of their positions, there were different opinions and the discussion was inconclusive.

古文：壬寅，加幽州节度使杨志诚检校右仆射，仍别遣使慰谕之。
现代文：壬寅，唐文宗任命幽州节度使杨志诚为检校右仆射，同时，另外派人出使幽州加以安抚。
English: At the same time, Tang Wenzong appointed Yang Zhicheng as his right-hand man for the inspection of the school, and sent another person to Yuzhou to appease him.

古文：杜牧愤河朔三镇之桀骜，而朝廷议者专事姑息，乃作书，名曰《罪言》，大略以为： 国家自天宝盗起，河北百馀城不得尺寸，人望之若回鹘、吐蕃，无敢窥者。
现代文：杜牧对河朔的幽州、成德、魏博三个藩镇割据跋扈和桀傲不驯而感到愤怒，而朝廷商议对策时，以姑息迁就作为唯一对策。于是，他撰写一篇文章，名叫《罪言》，大意认为： 国家从天宝末年安史之乱以后，对河朔三镇的一百多座城池，一直不能收复一尺一寸，人们看待那里，就好像是回鹘国、吐蕃国一样，没有人敢窥测并希望收复。
English: Du Mu was outraged that the three towns of Yuzhou, Chengde and Weibo in Hexuo had been divided into strongholds and were arrogant and unruly, and when the imperial court discussed countermeasures, appeasement was the only countermeasure. Therefore, he wrote an article called "Sins" to the effect that: Since the Anshi Rebellion at the end of the Tenpo era, the state has not been able to recover a single inch of the more than one hundred cities and towns in the three towns of Hexuo. People look at them as if they were like Hubei and Tubo, and no one dares to speculate and hope to recover.

古文：齐、梁、蔡被其风流，因亦为寇。
现代文：淄青、宣武、淮西也受他们恶习的影响，对抗朝廷而割据叛乱。
English: Gongqing, Xuanwu and Huaxi were also influenced by their vices and rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：未尝五年间不战，焦焦然七十馀年矣。
现代文：从那时到现在，兵慌马乱七十多年，没有哪五年之间不发生一次战争的。
English: From then until now, there have been more than 70 years of military turmoil, and there has not been a single war in the past five years.

古文：今上策莫如先自治，中策莫如取魏，最下策为浪战，不计地势，不审攻守是也。 
现代文：现在，朝廷要想收复河朔三镇，上策是首先整顿内部，中策不如首先出兵攻取魏博，最为下策的是轻率出兵讨伐，既不顾地势是否有利，也不慎重地制定攻守方略。 
English: Now, if the imperial court wants to recover the three towns of Hexuo, the best strategy is to first rectify the inside, the middle strategy is to first send troops to capture Weibo, and the lowest strategy is to rashly send troops to fight, regardless of whether the terrain is favorable or not, and not carefully formulate an attack and defense strategy.

古文：又伤府兵废坏，作《原十六卫》，以为： 国家始踵隋制，开十六卫，自今观之，设官言无谓者，其十六卫乎！
现代文：杜牧又为府兵制的废除而感伤，于是，撰写《原十六卫》，认为： 国家在建国初沿袭隋朝的府兵制度，建置十六卫，统帅府兵。但就现今的制度而言，设官任职却毫无意义，不正是十六卫吗！
English: Dumu was also saddened by the abolition of the prefectural military system, so he wrote "The Original Sixteen Guards" and thought: At the beginning of the founding of the country, the state followed the prefectural military system of the Sui Dynasty and established the Sixteen Guards and the commander of the prefectural military. However, as far as the current system is concerned, the appointment of officials is meaningless, isn't it the Sixteen Guards!

古文：本原事迹，其实天下之大命也。
现代文：就府兵制的本来意义说，其实，它是国家的安身立命之本。
English: In terms of the original meaning of the prefectural military system, in fact, it is the foundation of the country's stability.

古文：贞观中，内以十六卫蓄养武臣，外开折冲、果毅府五百七十四，以储兵伍；有事则戎臣提兵居外，无事则放兵居内。
现代文：贞观年间，唐太宗在朝廷设置十六卫，用来蓄养武将；各地设置折冲、果毅府五百七十四个，用来训练储备士卒。边防发生战争，则武将统兵出征；天下太平无事，则武将交出兵权，列居朝廷。
English: During the Zhenguan era, Emperor Taizong of Tang set up the Sixteen Guards in the imperial court to train generals; and the Five Hundred and Seventy-Four Armies in Guoyi Prefecture and the Five Hundred and Seventy-Four Armies in various regions to train reserve soldiers. If there was a war on the border, the generals would go to the front; if there was no war, the generals would surrender their military power and stay at the imperial court.

古文：其居内也，富贵恩泽以奉养其身，所部之兵散舍诸府。
现代文：武将列居朝廷时，国家授予他们的俸禄和官爵足以奉养家眷，他们统帅的兵马也就散归各折冲、果毅府。
English: When military commanders lived in the imperial court, the state granted them a salary and official rank sufficient to support their families, and the soldiers and horses they commanded were dispersed to various fuchong and guoyifu.

古文：上府不越千二百人，三时耕稼，一时治武，籍藏将府，伍散田亩，力解势破，人人自爱，虽有蚩尤为帅，亦不可使为乱耳。
现代文：折冲、果毅府分为三等，上等不超过一千二百人，春、夏、秋三季士卒从事农耕，冬季进行训练。这样，士卒的兵籍由折冲、果毅府掌管，平时散居于农田之间，力量分散，必然人人珍重自爱。这时，即使让蚩尤当统帅，也不可能让他们跟随叛乱。
English: Fuchong and Guoyi Prefecture were divided into three classes, with the highest class consisting of no more than 1,200 people. In the spring, summer and autumn, the soldiers engaged in farming and were trained in the winter. In this way, the soldiers of the soldiers were controlled by Fuchong and Guoyi Prefecture. In peacetime, they were scattered among the farmlands, and their strength was dispersed. Everyone must cherish self-love. At this time, even if they let Qiu You be the commander, it would be impossible for them to follow the rebellion.

古文：及其居外也，缘部之兵被檄乃来，斧钺在前，爵赏在后，飘暴交捽，岂暇异略！虽有蚩尤为帅，亦无能为叛也。
现代文：武将统兵出征时，他们统辖的兵马根据朝廷的诏令征发而来，士卒一方面惧怕朝廷军法的惩罚，另一方面又受朝廷爵赏的激励，两方面相互制约影响，这时，即使蚩尤做统帅，也不可能率领他们叛乱。
English: When the generals led the troops, the soldiers and horses under their command were conscripted and dispatched in accordance with the imperial edict of the court. On the one hand, the soldiers feared the punishment of the court's military law, on the other hand, they were encouraged by the court's peerage, and the two aspects influenced each other. At this time, even if he was the commander, he could not lead them to rebel.

古文：自贞观至于开元百三十年间，戎臣兵伍未始逆篡，此大圣人所以能柄统轻重，制鄣表里，圣算神术也。
现代文：从贞观到开元的一百三十年间，武将士卒没有发生过叛乱，这正是大圣太宗能够恰当地运用皇权，平衡内外军事力量的轻重分布，使之相互制约，以至圣明地计划和神奇地指挥的结果。
English: During the one hundred and thirty years from the Zhenguan to the founding of the Republic, there were no rebellions among the warriors. This is precisely the result of the great Saint Taizong's ability to properly use imperial power, balance the weight distribution of domestic and foreign military forces, make them mutually constrained, and most sacredly plan and magically command.

古文：至于开元末，愚儒奏章曰： 天下文胜矣，请罢府兵。 
现代文：到了开元末年，愚腐的儒生们在给玄宗的奏章中说： 现在天下太平，偃武修文，请求罢废府兵。 
English: By the end of the first year of the 21st century, the foolish Confucian students said in their report to Xuanzong: Now the world is at peace, encourage martial arts, and request that the government soldiers be dismissed.

古文：武夫奏章曰： 天下力强矣，请搏四夷。 
现代文：武将们的奏章说： 现在国家兵强马壮，请求讨伐四周的夷族，开拓疆域。 
English: The military commanders' report said: Now that the national army is strong and powerful, we request you to fight the surrounding barbarians and expand the territory.

古文：于是府兵内铲，边兵外作，戎臣兵伍，湍奔矢往，内无一人矣。
现代文：于是，废除府兵，扩充边兵，朝廷的武将和士卒，都大批地奔赴边防，内地空无一兵。
English: As a result, the abolition of the army, the expansion of the border soldiers, the imperial generals and soldiers, all rushed to the border defense in large numbers, and there was no soldier in the interior.

古文：尾大中干，成燕偏重，而天下掀然，根萌烬燃，七圣旰食，求欲除之且不能也。
现代文：这样，导致尾大不掉，外重内轻的局面，安禄山因此而拥重兵于幽州。一旦他发动叛乱，朝廷无力讨伐，疲于奔命，从唐肃宗到敬宗，皇上个个为此而昼夜焦虑。这时，再想讨除却毫无可能了。
English: As a result of this, the situation in which 尾大 could not be ousted, and the outside was more important than the inside, An Lushan therefore kept heavy troops in Yuzhou. Once he launched a rebellion, the imperial court was powerless to fight it, exhausted from running for their lives. From Tang Su Zong to Keizong, the emperors were anxious day and night. At this time, it was impossible to get rid of him.

古文：由此观之，戎臣兵伍，岂可一日使出落铃键哉！
现代文：由此可见，对于武将和士卒，岂能有一天让他们脱离朝廷的控制！
English: From this it can be seen that for warriors and soldiers, how can they one day be freed from the control of the imperial court!

古文：然为国者不能无兵，居外则叛，居内则篡。
现代文：然而，国家不能没有军队，而军队又最容易在出征时发动叛乱，在朝廷被人利用来篡夺皇位。
English: However, a country cannot do without an army, and the army is most likely to start a rebellion when it is sent out on a campaign, and to be used by someone in the imperial court to usurp the throne.

古文：使外不叛，内不篡，古今已还，法术最长，其置府立卫乎！
现代文：如何防止这一点？从古到今，最好的办法，不正是建立府兵制吗！
English: How to prevent this? From ancient times to the present, the best way is to establish a prefectural military system!

古文：近代已来，于其将也，弊复为甚，率皆市儿辈多赍金玉、负倚幽阴、折券交货所能致也。
现代文：近年以来，朝廷任命节度使，弊端更为严重，无论是商人平民，只要用重金贿赂当权的宦官，就能得到委任。
English: In recent years, the appointment of eunuchs by the imperial court has made the drawbacks more serious. Whether they are businessmen or civilians, as long as they bribe the eunuchs in power with heavy money, they can be appointed.

古文：绝不识父兄礼义之教，复无慷慨感概之气。
现代文：他们既不懂父兄孝悌的儒家伦理，又没有为国慷慨赴难的气概。
English: They do not understand the Confucian ethics of filial piety, nor do they have the courage to generously go through hardships for the country.

古文：百城千里，一朝得之，其强杰愎勃者则挠削法制，不使缚己，斩族忠良，不使违己，力壹势便，罔不为寇。
现代文：一旦贿赂打通关节，拥有上百个城池，周长一千里的地方，立刻唾手而得。他们中间，那些桀傲不驯、刚愎自用的节将，肆意扰乱朝廷法制，为了自己不受任何约束，不惜残酷屠害忠正贤良的幕僚；为了不违背自己的意愿，随意称兵作乱，对抗朝廷。
English: Once bribery has penetrated the joints, places with hundreds of citadels and a perimeter of a thousand miles are immediately up for grabs. Among them, those arrogant, unruly, and self-serving generals wantonly disrupt the legal system of the imperial court, and for the sake of not being subject to any constraints, brutally slaughter the loyal, upright, and virtuous staff officers. In order not to go against their own wishes, they call up troops at will to create turmoil and oppose the imperial court.

古文：其阴泥巧狡者，亦能家算口敛，委于邪幸，由卿市公，去郡得都，四履所治，指为别馆。
现代文：另有一些阴险狡诈的节将，则对百姓重税盘剥，然后，委任自己的亲信，用重金交结朝廷权贵。于是，他们的职务便不断升迁，或者由卿大夫而迁任国公，或者由一般的州郡迁升到重要的都市。他们在管辖的区域，俨然像住在自家的别墅一样逍遥自在。
English: There are also some insidious and cunning generals, who impose heavy taxes on the people, and then appoint their cronies to bribe the imperial dignitaries with heavy money. As a result, their positions are constantly promoted, or they are transferred from the doctor to the prince, or from the general state to the important city. They are in the area under their jurisdiction, as if they are living in their own villa.

古文：或一夫不幸而寿，则戛割生人，略币天下。
现代文：如果他们中有一人不幸而长寿不死，那么，百姓就会被任意宰割，毒害于天下。
English: If one of them is unlucky and lives a long life, then the people will be arbitrarily slaughtered and poisoned.

古文：是以天下兵乱不息，齐人干耗，靡不由是矣。
现代文：所以，我认为，天下至今战乱不息，百姓穷困潦倒，都是由于这个缘故。
English: Therefore, I believe that it is because of this that the world is still plagued by war and the people are impoverished.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：鸣呼！
English: Alas!

古文：文皇帝十六卫之旨，其谁原而复之乎！ 又作《战论》，以为： 河北视天下，犹珠玑也；天下视河北，犹四支也。
现代文：当年文皇帝设置府兵制的深远意义，现在究竟谁能真正理解并重新恢复呢！ 杜牧又撰写了《战论》一文，认为： 河北对于天下来说。就像珠宝一样重要；而天下对河北来说，就像人的四肢一样，相互联系而密不可分。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen set up the far-reaching significance of the prefectural military system, but who can really understand and restore it now! Dumu also wrote an article "On War," arguing that: Hebei is as important to the world as jewelry; and the world is to Hebei, like human limbs, interconnected and inseparable.

古文：河北气俗浑厚，果于战耕，加以土息健马，便于驰敌，是以出则胜，处则饶，不窥天下之产，自可封殖。
现代文：河北人的风俗淳厚朴实，擅长作战和农耕，加上那里牧草茂盛，适合繁息战马，地势平坦，便于骑兵作战。所以，河北藩镇只要出征作战，往往大获全胜；而平时农耕，则富饶无比，不必贪图天下其他地方的物产，就可自给自足。
English: The Hebei people's customs are simple and unpretentious, and they are good at fighting and farming. In addition, the pastures there are lush, suitable for breeding war horses, and the terrain is flat, making it easy for cavalry to fight. Therefore, as long as Hebei towns go out to fight, they often win a complete victory; while in peacetime, farming is incomparably rich, and they can be self-sufficient without having to covet the products of other places in the world.

古文：亦犹大农之家，不待珠玑然后以为富也。
现代文：这就像一个农家大户，虽无珠宝，但仍然富足。
English: It's like a big farming family, without jewels, but still rich.

古文：国家无河北，则精甲、锐卒、利刀、良弓、健马无有也，是一支，兵去矣。
现代文：国家没有河北，就失去精良的盔甲、精锐的士卒、锋利的刀剑、优良的弓箭和矫健的马匹，对于国家来说，这是第一肢，失去了兵力。
English: Without Hebei, the country will lose its fine armor, elite soldiers, sharp swords, fine bows and arrows and agile horses. For the country, this is the first limb, and it has lost its military strength.

古文：河东、盟津、滑台、大梁、彭城、东平，尽宿厚兵以塞虏冲，不可它使，是二支，兵去矣。
现代文：国家在与河北邻接的河东、河阳、义成、宣武、武宁、天平六个藩镇中，屯防重兵，专门用来防遏河北藩镇的叛乱，而不能调作它用，对于国家来说，这是第二肢，又失去了兵力。
English: The state has stationed heavy troops in six hanzhongs adjacent to Hebei, including Hedong, Heyang, Yicheng, Xuanwu, Wu Ning and Tianping, specifically to prevent the rebellion of Hebei hanzhong, but cannot be used for other purposes. For the state, this is a second limb, and it has lost its strength.

古文：六镇之师，厥数三亿，低首仰给，横拱不为，则沿淮已北，循河之南，东尽海，西叩洛，赤地尽取，才能应费，是三支，财去矣。
现代文：上述六个藩镇的兵力，总计三十万人，士卒无所作为，只待朝廷衣食供给。这样，从淮河以北，黄河以南，东到大海，西至洛阳，民脂民膏搜刮干净，也才勉强供给，对于国家来说，这是第三肢，失去了财力。
English: The military forces of the above-mentioned six provinces and towns totaled 300,000 people, but the officials did nothing, only waiting for the imperial court to provide food and clothing. Thus, from the north of the Huai River, south of the Yellow River, east to the sea, west to Luoyang, the people's fat and cream were scraped clean, and they were barely supplied. For the country, this was the third limb, and they lost financial resources.

古文：咸阳西北，戎夷大屯，尽铲吴、越、荆、楚之饶以啖兵戍，是四支，财去矣。
现代文：与此同时，国家在咸阳的西北边防，也同样屯守重兵，防备吐蕃的侵扰，吴、越、荆、楚等地的赋税，全都被调往供给军饷，对于国家来说，这是第四肢，又失去了财力。
English: At the same time, the country's northwest border defense in Xianyang was also heavily garrisoned, guarding against the intrusion of Tu Wei. The taxes of Wu, Yue, Jing, Chu and other places were all transferred to supply military supplies. For the country, this was the fourth limb, and it lost its financial resources.

古文：天下四支尽解，头腹兀然，其能以是久为安乎！
现代文：国家的四肢全被解除，仅仅留下头和身子，难道靠这两者还能继续维持生命吗？
English: Have all the limbs of the state been amputated, leaving only the head and the body? Can these two continue to sustain life?

古文：今者诚能治其五败，则一战可定，四支可生。
现代文：现在，如果朝廷能下决心根治五个方面的弊政，那么，必能一次出战而大获全胜，安定全国，重新恢复国家业已失去的四肢。
English: Now, if the imperial court can make up its mind to fundamentally cure the five aspects of maladministration, then it will be able to go to war once and win a complete victory, stabilize the whole country, and restore the lost limbs of the country.

古文：夫天下无事之时，殿寄大臣偷安奉私，战士离落，兵甲钝弊，是不蒐练之过，其败一也。
现代文：当天下太平无事的时候，宰相大臣苟且偷安，贪求私利，而士卒流离失所，兵器朽钝。
English: When the world is at peace, the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance are anxious to steal security and seek personal gain, while the soldiers are displaced and the weapons are dull.

古文：百人荷戈，仰食县官，则挟千夫之名，大将小裨，操其馀赢，以虏壮为幸，以师老为娱，是执兵者常少，糜食常多，此不责实料食之过，其败二也。
现代文：这是朝廷不重视军事训练的过失，也是导致官军出征败北的第一个原因；官军中一百个人作战，但领取军饷的花名册上却有一千个人的姓名，无论大将小将，都公然贪污军饷，吃士兵的空额。为了营私舞弊，他们总是为敌人的强大而高兴，而以官军的失败为娱乐。
English: This is the fault of the imperial court for not attaching importance to military training, and it is also the first reason that led to the defeat of the official army in the north; one hundred people in the official army fought, but there were one thousand names on the roster for receiving military pay. No matter whether they were generals or junior generals, they openly embezzled military pay and ate soldiers' vacancies. In order to engage in selfish fraud, they were always happy for the enemy's strength, and used the defeat of the official army as entertainment.

古文：战小胜则张皇其功，奔走献状以邀上赏，或一日再赐，或一月累封，凯还未歌，书品已崇，爵命极矣，田宫广矣，金缯溢矣，子孙官矣，焉肯搜奇出死，勤于我矣！
现代文：所以，现在军中真正能作战的士卒很少，而虚耗军饷的士卒却很多。这是朝廷不核实军饷供给情况的过失，也是导致军队出征败北的第二个原因；军队出战稍获小胜便虚张声势，向朝廷奔走相告，虚报战功，请求厚赏。
English: This is the fault of the imperial court for not verifying the supply of military pay, and it is also the second reason that led to the defeat of the army in the north; when the army won a small victory in the war, it bluffed and rushed to the imperial court to report, falsely report the war service, and request a large reward.

古文：此厚赏之过，其败三也。
现代文：朝廷对将士有时一天之内再次颁赏，有时一月之间多次封爵。
English: The imperial court sometimes awards awards to soldiers within a day, and sometimes knights them several times in a month.

古文：多丧兵士，颠翻大都，则跳身而来，刺邦而去。
现代文：因而，官军尚未凯旋班师，而军将的官品已经很高，他们朝思暮想的高官厚禄和田地住宅、金银财宝，甚至子孙的官爵都得到满足，谁还再肯出生入死为朝廷效力！
English: As a result, the official army has not yet triumphantly returned, and the official rank of the generals is already very high. Their daydreams of high-ranking officials and field residences, gold and silver treasures, and even descendants of officials have been satisfied. Who would be willing to work for the imperial court from birth to death!

古文：回视刀锯，气色甚安，一岁未更，旋已立于坛墀之上矣，此轻罚之过，其败四也。
现代文：这是朝廷赏赐太滥的过失，也是军队出征败北的第三条原因；军将出征失利后，死伤大批士卒，丢失重要的城市，但一旦逃回京城，却仅仅贬为州刺史了事。他们在国法军法面前，毫不在意，神色自若，不到一年半载，往往又官复原职。
English: This is the fault of the imperial court for awarding too much, and it is also the third reason for the defeat of the army in the north; after the defeat of the military expedition, a large number of soldiers were killed and injured, and an important city was lost, but once they fled back to Beijing, they were only relegated to the history of the state. They did not care at all in front of the French Military Law, they looked confident, and less than a year and a half later, they were often reinstated.

古文：大将兵柄不得专，恩臣、敕使迭来挥之，堂然将陈，殷然将鼓，一则曰必为偃月，一则曰必为鱼丽，三军万夫，环旋翔羊愰骇之间，虏骑乘之，遂取吾之鼓旗，此不专任责成之过，其败五也。
现代文：这是朝廷惩罚太轻的过失，也是军队出征败北的第四条原因；军队出征时，大将不能集中兵权，朝廷出使前线的宦官和监军却来往指挥，有的亲自率领兵马，有的亲自擂鼓督战，有的说应当摆偃月阵，有的说应当布鱼丽阵，常常争吵不息。三军将士不知所措，往往在徘徊慌乱的时候，被敌军骑兵乘机冲击，大败而归。这是朝廷不能集中兵权的过失，也是军队出征败北的第五条原因。
English: This is the fault of the imperial court for not punishing too lightly, and it is also the fourth reason for the army's defeat in the northern expedition. When the army went to war, the general could not concentrate the military power, but the eunuchs and supervisors of the front line sent by the imperial court went back and forth to command, some personally led the soldiers and horses, some personally led the drums and drums, and some said that it should be the moon formation, and some said that it should be the fish formation, and they often quarreled endlessly. The three soldiers were at a loss, and often when they were confused, they were attacked by the enemy cavalry and were defeated. This

古文：今者诚欲调持干戈，洒扫垢污，以为万世安，而乃踵前非，是不可为也。 
现代文：现在，如果朝廷想征调兵马洗刷过去的耻辱，但又仍然沿袭过去的这些弊政，那就如同南辕而北辙，根本不可能达到预期目的。 
English: Now, if the imperial court wants to conscript soldiers and horses to wash away the shame of the past, but still follow these bad policies of the past, then it is like the opposite, it is impossible to achieve the desired goal.

古文：又作《守论》，以为： 今之议者咸曰：夫倔强之徒，吾以良将劲兵为衔策，高位美爵充饱其肠，安而不挠，外而不拘，亦犹豢扰虎狼而不指其心，则忿气不萌。
现代文：杜牧又撰写《守论》一文，认为： 现今上奏朝廷的官员都说： 对藩镇骄横跋扈的武夫悍将，朝廷应当用精兵良将威慑他们，高官厚禄奉养他们，使他们既安心而不敢犯法，既有行动自由而不致于拘谨。就像驯养虎狼一样，只要不违背它们的天性，就不会咆哮伤人。
English: Dumu also wrote an article entitled "On Guarding the Law," and held that: The officials who are now reporting to the imperial court are all saying: The imperial court should use elite soldiers and generals to deter the arrogant warriors of the provinces and towns, and high-ranking officials should pay them high salaries to make them feel at ease and not dare to break the law, and have freedom of action without being constrained. Just like taming tigers and wolves, as long as they do not violate their nature, they will not roar and hurt people.

古文：此大历、贞元所以守邦也，亦何必疾战，焚煎吾民，然后以为快也！
现代文：这是代宗大历和德宗贞元年间朝廷安抚藩镇，保持国家稳定的基本方针。因此，又何必一定要通过战争来解决问题，使百姓受尽煎熬而后快呢！ 
English: This was the basic policy of the imperial court to pacify the towns and maintain the stability of the country during the reigns of Daizong Dalian and Dezong Zhengyuan. Therefore, why is it necessary to solve the problem through war, make the people suffer and then hurry!

古文：愚曰：大历、贞元之间，适以此为祸也。
现代文：我认为，大历、贞元年间，朝廷正是由于奉行这种方针而深受其害。
English: In my opinion, it was precisely because of this policy that the imperial court suffered so much during the Tai Lai and Zhengyuan eras.

古文：当是之时，有城数十，千百卒夫，则朝廷别待之，贷以法度。
现代文：当时，凡是管辖几十个城池，拥有几千个士卒的节将大吏，朝廷就对他们另眼相看，甚至不惜枉法而加以宽容。
English: At that time, the imperial court looked with a different eye at the generals who governed dozens of cities and had thousands of subordinates, and even indulged them at the cost of the law.

古文：于是乎阔视大言，自树一家，破制削法，角为尊奢，天子养威而不问，有司守恬而不呵。
现代文：于是，这些人自命不凡，口出大言，培植私党而自成体系，违法乱纪而妄自称尊。天子顾忌自己的尊严，视而不问，有关部门为了保持安宁，也不加斥责，反而把高官厚禄无功授予他们。
English: As a result, these people are pretentious, talk big, cultivate their own party and become a self-contained system, break the law and discipline and arrogantly claim to be respected. The Son of Heaven is concerned about their dignity and ignores them. In order to maintain peace, the relevant departments do not reprimand them, but instead award them high-ranking officials.

古文：王侯通爵，越禄受之；觐聘不来，几杖扶之；逆息虏胤，皇子嫔之；装缘采饰，无不备之。
现代文：他们不主动来朝参拜皇上，朝廷反而赐给几杖，加以安慰。尤其是对长期割据的河北三镇，不加讨伐，反而把公主嫁给他们的子孙，嫁妆竭尽豪华，无所不备。
English: They did not take the initiative to visit the emperor, but the court gave them a few sticks to comfort them. Especially for the three towns in Hebei that had been separated for a long time, they did not fight, but married the princess to their grandchildren. The dowry was luxurious and all-encompassing.

古文：是以地益广，兵益强，僭拟益甚，侈心益昌。于是土田名器，分划殆尽，而贼夫贪心，未及畔岸，遂有淫名越号，或帝或王，盟诅自立，恬淡不畏，走兵四略以饱其志者也。
现代文：朝廷对藩镇节将如此姑息迁就，所以，他们的领地日益广大，兵力日益强盛，专横跋扈日益严重，骄奢淫逸日益滋长，国家的土地和爵位、法制几乎都被他们分割破坏，但他们仍然贪心不足，认为没有达到目的。于是，公然超越自己应有的名份，李希烈、朱先后称帝，朱滔、王武俊、田悦、李纳相继称王。随后，互相结盟而独立，对朝廷毫无惧色，出兵四处侵掠以满足他们的贪欲。
English: The imperial court was so tolerant and accommodating to the Han and Zhen dynasties. As a result, their territories became more and more vast, their military forces more and more powerful, their tyranny more and more severe, and their arrogance and debauchery more and more proliferated. The country's land, titles, and legal system were almost all divided and destroyed by them, but they were still greedy and thought that they had not achieved their goal. Therefore, they openly surpassed their rightful titles, and Li Xili and Zhu were proclaimed emperor, and Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun, Tian Yue, and Lin Na were proclaimed king. Subsequently, they allied with each other and became

古文：是以赵、魏、燕、齐卓起大唱，梁、蔡、吴、蜀蹑而和之；其馀混冫项轩嚣，欲相效者，往往而是。
现代文：这样，由成德、魏博、幽州、淄青首先发难，宣武、淮西、浙西、西川随而响应叛乱，其余混水摸鱼，喧嚣钻营，企图效法的藩镇节将，处处都是。
English: In this way, Chengde, Weibo, Yuzhou, and Jiaqing were the first to face difficulties, followed by Xuanwu, Huaxi, West Zhejiang, and Xichuan in response to the rebellion, and the rest were all over the place, fishing in troubled waters, noisy drilling camps, and attempting to emulate the Han town festival.

古文：运遭孝武，宵旰不忘，前英后杰，夕思朝议，故能大者诛锄，小者惠来。
现代文：幸好宪宗励精图治，重用德才兼备的将相大臣，废寝忘食，朝夕商议平叛大计，所以能够诛除首恶，降服随从。
English: Fortunately, Kenzong was able to eliminate the chief evil and subdue the followers by diligently governing, making heavy use of the ability of the Shosho-daijin, who was both virtuous and talented, losing sleep and forgetting to eat, and discussing the grand plan of suppressing the rebellion in the morning and evening.

古文：不然，周、秦之郊，几为猎哉！
现代文：不然的话，京城长安到东都洛阳一带，几乎也要遭到掠夺！
English: Otherwise, from the capital Chang'an to the eastern capital Luoyang, almost everything will be plundered!

古文：大抵生人油然多欲，欲而不得则怒，怒则争乱随之，是以教笞于家，刑罚于国，征伐于天下，此所以裁其欲而塞其争也。
现代文：人从生下来的一开始就有欲望，欲望得不到满足就会恼怒，恼怒则战乱纷争随之而来。所以，家庭必须有教育和惩罚，国家必须有法律和刑罚，天子治理国家，就应当征伐天下。这些措施和手段，都是为了制裁人类的欲望，阻止战乱纷争而产生的。
English: People have desires from the moment they are born. If their desires are not satisfied, they will become angry. If their anger is not satisfied, war and strife will ensue. Therefore, the family must have education and punishment, the country must have laws and punishments, and the Son of Heaven should rule the country and conquer the world. These measures and means are all created to sanction human desires and prevent war and strife.

古文：大历、贞元之间，尽反此道，提区区之有而塞无涯之争，是以首尾指支，几不能相运掉也。
现代文：然而，大历、贞元年间，朝廷完全背离了这些原则，幻想用朝廷有限的官爵去满足藩镇无限的欲望，遏止战乱纷争，结果，反受其害，几乎遭到灭顶之灾。
English: However, in the years of the Tai Li and Zhen Yuan, the imperial court completely deviated from these principles, fantasizing about using the limited official titles of the imperial court to satisfy the unlimited desires of the provinces and towns, and to stop wars and disputes. As a result, it suffered the opposite, and was almost completely destroyed.

古文：今者不知非此，而反用以为经。
现代文：现在，朝廷中一些人不仅不对此进行抨击，反而奉若经典。
English: Now, instead of criticizing it, some people in the imperial court are treating it as a classic.

古文：愚见为盗者非止于河北而已，呜呼！
现代文：我认为这样下去，恐怕割据跋扈的藩镇就不仅仅限于河北了。鸣呼！
English: I think that if things continue like this, I'm afraid the divided towns will not be limited to Hebei. Cheer up!

古文：大历、贞元守邦之术，永戒之哉！ 
现代文：朝廷在大历、贞元年间对藩镇姑息迁就的治国方针，应当永远引以为戒！ 
English: The imperial court's policy of governing the country during the Taali and Zhenyuan dynasties, of appeasing and accommodating the towns, should forever be a warning!

古文：又注《孙子》，为之序，以为： 兵者，刑也；刑者，政事也；为夫子之徒，实仲由、冉有之事也。
现代文：杜牧又给《孙子》一书作注释，并撰写了序言，认为： 军队就是刑法，刑法也就是治理国家的主要手段。在孔夫子的弟子中，只有仲由和冉有真正理解他的这种思想。
English: Dumu also commented on the book "Grandchild" and wrote a preface, saying: The army is the criminal law, and the criminal law is the main means of governing the country. Among the disciples of Confucius, only Zhongyu and Ran truly understand his thought.

古文：不知自何代何人分为二道曰文、武，离而俱行，因使缙绅之士不敢言兵，或耻言之；苟有言者，世以为粗暴异人，人不比数。呜呼！
现代文：但是，不知道从什么时候，从什么人开始，把这本来同一的事物区分为文、武两个方面。于是，二者截然分离，并行不悖。文官不敢再谈论军事，甚至以谈论军事为耻，如果有人谈论，大家则把他视为粗人，不愿再和他接近。呜呼！
English: However, I don't know when and by whom this distinction was made between the military and civilian aspects of what is essentially the same thing. As a result, the two are completely separate and go hand in hand. Civilians no longer dare to talk about the military, and are even ashamed to talk about it. If someone does talk about it, everyone regards him as a boor and doesn't want to get close to him again. Alas!

古文：亡失根本，斯最为甚！
现代文：现今朝廷最大的弊端，莫过于此！
English: The biggest drawback of today's imperial court is none other than this!

古文：《礼》曰： 四郊多垒，此卿大夫之辱也。 
现代文：《礼记》中说： 敌人包围都城，在四郊扎营结寨，这是卿大夫的耻辱。 
English: "Li Ji" said: The enemy encircled the capital and encamped in the four suburbs, which was a disgrace to the noble doctor.

古文：历观自古，树立其国，灭亡其国，未始不由兵也。
现代文：古往今来，凡是创建一个国家，灭亡一个国家，没有不依仗军队而成功的。
English: From ancient times to the present, whenever a country has been created or destroyed, it has not succeeded without relying on the military.

古文：主兵者必圣贤、材能、多闻博识之士乃能有功，议于廊庙之上，兵形已成，然后付之于将。
现代文：指挥军队的人，必须具备高度的智慧、优秀的品德、杰出的才能，并且博闻强识，才能在战争中运用自如，有所建树。所以，有关军事问题，首先应当在朝廷充分讨论，决定战略方针，然后再命将帅出征执行。
English: The person who commands the army must have a high degree of wisdom, excellent moral character, outstanding talent, and a wealth of knowledge in order to be able to use it freely and constructively in the war. Therefore, relevant military issues should first be fully discussed in the imperial court, decide the strategic direction, and then order the commander to go to war.

古文：汉祖言 指踪者人也，获兔者犬也 ，此其是也。
现代文：这就像汉高祖说的那样 牵狗的是人，而捉兔的是狗 。
English: It's just like Henkel's ancestor said: It's the man who leads the dog, but it's the dog who catches the rabbit.

古文：彼为相者曰： 兵非吾事，吾不当知。 
现代文：现在，有些宰相说： 军事不关我的事，我不必懂得。 
English: Now, some prime ministers say: "The military is none of my business, I don't need to understand it."

古文：君子曰： 勿居其位可也！ 
现代文：那么，君子就应当说： 你不懂军事，就不要担任宰相！ 
English: Then, a gentleman should say: If you don't understand military affairs, don't serve as prime minister!

古文：前邠宁行军司马郑注，依倚王守澄，权势熏灼，上深恶之。
现代文：前宁行军司马郑注依赖右神策军中尉王守澄，权势熏天，唐文宗十分憎恨他。
English: Ma Zhengzhu, the commander of the Maenning Marching Army, relied on Wang Shoucheng, the lieutenant of the Right Divine Providence Army. He was very powerful, and Tang Wenzong hated him very much.

古文：九月，丙寅，侍御史李款阁内奏弹注： 内通敕使，外连朝士，两地往来，卜射财贿，昼伏夜动，干窃化权，人不敢言，道路以目。
现代文：九月，丙寅，侍御史李款在紫宸殿弹劾郑注说： 郑注在宫中交结宦官，在南衙交结百官，两地往来奔走，收取贿赂，窥测动向，窃取大权，人们都敢怒而不敢言。
English: In September, Zhengzhu was impeached at the Palace of the Grand Empress Dowager Shi Liqin, who said: "Zhengzhu married eunuchs in the palace, married hundreds of officials in Nanshan, and ran back and forth between the two places, taking bribes, spying on the trend, and stealing great power. People are afraid to speak out in anger.

古文：请付法司。 
现代文：请求朝廷批准把他交付御史台审查治罪。 
English: Please deliver to the magistrate's office.

古文：旬日之间，章数十上。
现代文：在十多天的时间里，他接连几十次上书弹劾郑注。
English: Over a period of more than ten days, he wrote to impeach Zheng Zhu dozens of times in succession.

古文：守澄匿注于右军，左军中尉韦元素、枢密使杨承和、王践言皆恶注。
现代文：王守澄把郑注藏在右神策军中。左神策中尉韦元素、枢密使杨承和、王践言也都憎恨郑注。
English: Wang Shoucheng hid Zheng Zhun in the Right Divination Army, and Left Divination Lieutenant Wei Ye, Privy Emissary Yang Chenghe, and Wang Shuhan also hated Zheng Zhun.

古文：左军将李弘楚说元素曰：郑注奸猾无双，卵鷇不除，使成羽翼，必为国患。
现代文：这时，左神策军将李弘楚劝韦元素说： 郑注阴险狡诈，举世无双。如果不乘他尚在卵翼的时候及时除去，等到羽毛丰满时，必定成为国家的心腹大患。
English: At this time, Zuo Sheng's strategist, Li Hongzhu, advised Wei element to say: Zhengzhu is insidious and cunning, unparalleled in the world. If he is not removed in time while he is still in the egg wing, when the feathers are plump, he will surely become the country's henchman.

古文：今因御史所劾匿军中，弘楚请以中尉意，诈为有疾，召使治之，来则中尉延与坐，弘楚侍侧，伺中尉举目，擒出杖杀之。
现代文：现在，他被侍御史李款弹劾，躲藏在右神策军中。我请求让我以您的名义去见他，借口说您身体有病，请他前来诊断。来后您请他坐下来谈话，我站在旁边侍候，看到您用眼睛向我示意，我就把他抓出去杀掉。
English: Now, he has been impeached by the Attendant of History, Li Xian, and is hiding in the Right Divine Providence Army. I request that I go to see him in your name, on the pretext that you are physically ill, and ask him to come and diagnose. After you come, you ask him to sit down and talk, I stand by and wait, and when I see you gesture to me with your eyes, I will catch him out and kill him.

古文：中尉因见上叩头请罪，具言其奸，杨、王必助中尉进言。
现代文：然后，您面见皇上，叩头请罪，把他以往的罪行一一向皇上汇报。
English: Then, you met with the emperor, bowed down and pleaded guilty, and reported his past crimes to the emperor.

古文：况中尉有翼戴之功，岂以除奸而获罪乎！ 
现代文：届时，枢密使杨承和、王践言肯定会帮助您说话。况且您对皇上有拥立的功劳，怎么会因为除去一个奸人而被怪罪！ 
English: At that time, the confidential envoys Yang Chenghe and Wang Jianyan will certainly help you speak. Moreover, you have the merit of supporting the emperor, how can you be blamed for removing a traitor!

古文：元素以为然，召之。
现代文：韦元素认为很有道理，就派李弘楚去召唤郑注。
English: Wei element thought it was reasonable, so he sent Li Hongchu to summon Zheng Zhu.

古文：注至，蠖屈鼠伏，佞辞泉涌。
现代文：郑注来后，对韦元素点头哈腰，毕恭毕敬，接着，夸夸其谈，奸邪的言辞像泉水一样，源源不断。
English: After Zheng Zhu came, he nodded to Wei element and bowed his head, bowed respectfully, and then talked boastfully. The words of treachery and evil were like spring water, flowing incessantly.

古文：元素不觉执手款曲，谛听忘倦。
现代文：韦元素听得入了迷，不知不觉亲切地拉住他的手，聚精会神，不觉疲倦。
English: Wei Ye was so captivated by what he heard that he unconsciously and lovingly took hold of his hand. He was so concentrated that he did not feel tired.

古文：弘楚诇伺往复再三，元素不顾，以金帛厚遗注而遣之。
现代文：李弘楚在旁边多次暗示韦元韦应该动手，韦元素根本不理。随后，赠送郑注大批金银钱帛，送他回去。
English: Li Hongzhu repeatedly hinted that Wei Yuanwei should do something, ignoring Wei element at all. Subsequently, he presented Zheng Zhu with a large number of gold and silver coins to send him back.

古文：弘楚怒曰： 中尉失今日之断，必不免它日之祸矣！ 
现代文：李弘楚大怒，说： 您失去今天诛杀他的机会，将来必然难免遭受他的陷害。 
English: Li Hongzhu was furious and said, "If you lose the opportunity to kill him today, you will inevitably be trapped by him in the future."

古文：因解军职去。
现代文：于是，辞职而去。
English: So he resigned and left.

古文：顷之，疽发背卒。
现代文：不久，背部长疮去世。
English: He died shortly afterwards from a back ulcer.

古文：王涯之为相，注有力焉，且畏王守澄，遂寝李款之奏。
现代文：当初王涯升任宰相时，郑注曾在幕后为他活动。这时，王涯惧怕王守澄的权势，因而把李款弹劾郑注的奏章压下来，不在朝廷讨论。
English: At that time, Wang Lai was afraid of Wang Shoucheng's power, so he suppressed Li Jian's impeachment of Zheng Jian and did not discuss it in the imperial court.

古文：守澄言注于上而释之，寻奏为侍御史，充右神策判官，朝野骇叹。
现代文：王守澄又在文宗的面前为郑注辩护，于是，文宗赦免了郑注。不久，王守澄又奏请朝廷任命郑注为侍御史，充任右神策军判官。朝廷内外无不惊讶感叹。
English: Wang Shoucheng also defended Zhengzhu in front of Wenzong, so Wenzong pardoned Zhengzhu. Soon, Wang Shoucheng also petitioned the court to appoint Zhengzhu as an attendant to the emperor, acting as the judge of the Right Divine Policy Army. Both inside and outside the court, everyone was surprised and lamented.

古文：甲寅，以前忠武节度使王智兴为河中节度使。
现代文：甲寅，唐文宗任命前忠武节度使王智兴为河中节度使。
English: Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Zhixing, a former loyal military envoy, as the envoy to the mid-Hebei Festival.

古文：群臣以上即位八年，未受尊号。冬，十二月，甲午，上尊号曰太和文武仁圣皇帝。
现代文：群臣考虑到文宗已即位八年了，尚未接受尊号，冬季，十二月，甲午，百官为文宗上尊号，称为太和文武仁圣皇帝。
English: Considering that it had been eight years since the enthronement of Emperor Wenzong, the courtiers had not yet accepted the honorific title. In winter, December, and the morning of the 1st day of the 1st lunar month, all the officials were given the honorific title of Emperor Wenzong, and were called the Great Emperor and the Holy Emperor Wenzong.

古文：会有五坊中使薛季稜自同、华还言闾阎凋弊。
现代文：这时，五坊使薛季棱从同州、华州出使回京，向文宗汇报说百姓穷困。
English: At this time, Wufang sent Xue Jiren from Tongzhou and Huazhou back to Beijing to report to Wenzong that the people were poor.

古文：上叹曰： 关中小稔，百姓尚尔，况江、淮比年大水，其人如何！
现代文：文宗感叹地说： 关中今年收成不错，百姓尚且如此，何况江、淮地区近年连连水灾，百姓生活可想而知！
English: Wen Zong said with a sigh: Guanzhong has a good harvest this year, and the people are still the same, not to mention the floods in the Jiang and Huai regions in recent years, the people's lives can be imagined!

古文：吾无术以救之，敢崇虚名乎！ 
现代文：我既然没有办法救济百姓，怎么敢接受尊号的虚名呢！ 
English: Since I have no way to relieve the people, how dare I accept the false name of the honorary title!

古文：因以通天带赏季稜。
现代文：于是，把自己的通天犀带赏给薛季棱。
English: As a result, he rewarded Xue Jiren with his own rhinoceros.

古文：群臣凡四上表，竟不受。
现代文：群臣百官四次为文宗上尊号，文宗最后仍不接受。
English: Hundreds of officials and courtiers conferred the honorific title on Wenzong four times, but Wenzong still did not accept it.

古文：庚子，上始得风疾，不能言。
现代文：庚子，唐文宗中风后不能说话。
English: Geng Zi, Tang Wenzong unable to speak after stroke.

古文：于是王守澄荐昭义行军司马郑注善医。
现代文：王守澄向文宗推荐说，昭义行军司马郑注擅长医术。
English: Wang Shuzhen recommended to Wenzong that Zhengzhu Ma, the secretary of the Shouyi Campaign, was good at medicine.

古文：上征注至京师，饮其药，颇有验，遂有庞。
现代文：文宗召郑注来京城，吃了他开的药后，很有效果。
English: Wen Zong called Zheng Zhu to Beijing, and after taking the medicine he prescribed, it was very effective.

