古文：刘綎李应祥陈璘邓子龙马孔英
现代文：江秉谦，字兆豫，安徽歙县人。万历三十八年进士，授职鄞县知县。
English: Jiang Bingqian, also known as Zhaoyuan, was born in Jixian County, Anhui Province. He entered the priesthood in the 38th year of Wanli, and was awarded the title of Jixian Zhixian.

古文：刘綎，字省吾，都督显子。勇敢有父风，用荫为指挥使。
现代文：因为廉洁能干被征用，打算任命他为御史，长时间任命没有下达，因为父母的葬礼回家。光宗即位，任命才下达。
English: Because of his integrity and ability, he was expropriated, and it was planned to appoint him as imperial historian, but the appointment was not issued for a long time, because his parents' funerals were back home.

古文：万历初，从显讨九丝蛮。
现代文：进入官府，从容不迫地讨论事情。
English: Enter the government office and discuss things calmly.

古文：先登，擒其酋阿大。
现代文：天启元年首先陈奏君臣无私为国奉献的道理，规劝极为恳切。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, Chen first preached the principle of selfless dedication to the country, exhorting very earnestly.

古文：以功迁云南迤东守备，改南京小教场坐营。十年冬，缅甸犯永昌、腾越，巡抚刘世曾请济师。明年春，擢綎游击将军，署腾冲守备事。
现代文：户部尚书李汝华建议兴修屯田，请求专门派遣御史，三年一考核，如果开垦屯田的收入能够达到每年银饷的数额，就提拔为京卿。
English: Li Ruhua, the head of the Household Ministry, proposed to build a military garrison, and requested that a special envoy be sent to the imperial court. If the income from the construction of the military garrison could reach the annual amount of silver ingots, he would be promoted to the Beijing court.

古文：缅甸去云南远，自其酋莽瑞体以兵服诸番，势遂强，数扰边境。
现代文：江秉谦极力驳斥他的荒谬，进而说李汝华空占着职位，不干事情，应该尽快罢免他。
English: Jiang Bingqian strenuously refuted his absurdity, and then said that Li Ruhuakun occupied a position and did nothing, and he should be dismissed as soon as possible.

古文：江西人岳凤者，商陇川，骁桀多智，为宣抚多士宁记室，士宁妻以妹。
现代文：李汝华上疏辩解，江秉谦再次弹劾他。沈阳失陷后，很多人都怀念熊廷弼，唯有给事中郭巩追究熊廷弼丧师误国的罪行，请求皇帝一起处罚阁臣刘一火景。
English: After the fall of Shenyang, many people missed Xiong Tingtao. However, Guo Gong investigated Xiong Tingtao for the crime of betraying the country and asked the emperor to punish Liu Yiguo, a cabinet minister, as well.

古文：凤诱士宁往见瑞体，潜与子曩乌鸩杀之，并杀其妻子，夺金牌印符，受瑞体伪命，代士宁为宣抚。
现代文：江秉谦愤怒，极力称赞熊廷弼保卫边疆的功劳，并且说： 现在对熊廷弼已经调查清楚了，议论他的人还拿私人的感情来掩盖天下的公论，宁愿毁坏国家的边疆，而不忘发泄胸中的私愤。 
English: Enraged, Jiang Bingqian praised Xiong Tingtao's efforts to defend the frontier, and said: Now that the investigation of Xiong Tingtao has been clarified, the people who talk about him still use private feelings to cover up the world's public opinion, preferring to destroy the country's frontier, but not forgetting to vent their private anger.

古文：瑞体死，子应里嗣。
现代文：疏章交给朝廷讨论。
English: The draft was submitted to the Imperial Court for discussion.

古文：凤结耿马贼罕虔、南甸土舍刀落参、芒市土舍放正堂，与应里从父猛别、弟阿瓦等，各率象兵数十万攻雷弄、盏达、干崖、南甸、木邦、老姚、思甸诸处，杀掠无算。
现代文：正好辽阳又失陷了。
English: It just so happened that Liaoyang fell again.

古文：窥腾越、永昌、大理、蒙化、景东、镇沅、元江。
现代文：熊廷弼不久被起用为经略。判处郭巩妄议罪剥夺他的官职，由此跟江秉谦结下仇怨。
English: Xiong Tingyao was soon appointed as a strategist. Guo Gongrui was sentenced to be deprived of his official position, thus creating a grudge with Jiang Bingqian.

古文：已，陷顺宁，破盏达，又令曩乌引缅兵突猛淋。
现代文：熊廷弼坐镇山海关后，主张派使者宣谕朝鲜出兵作为牵制敌人的力量。
English: After sitting in the Zhenshan Customs, Xiong Tingya advocated sending an envoy to announce that North Korea would send troops as a force to contain the enemy.

古文：指挥吴继勋等战死。邓川土官知州何钰，凤僚婿也，使使招之，凤絷献应里。
现代文：副使梁之垣请求出使，熊廷弼很高兴，请求朝廷付二十万两银子作为军费。
English: Deputy envoy Liang Zhiguan requested to send an envoy. Xiong Tingtao was pleased and asked the imperial court to pay 200,000 taels of silver as military expenses.

古文：当是时，车里、八百、孟养、木邦、孟艮、孟密、蛮莫皆以兵助贼，贼势益盛。
现代文：兵部尚书张鹤鸣不给，江秉谦上疏争论。张鹤鸣愤怒了，极力诋毁江秉谦与熊廷弼朋比为党。江秉谦上疏辩解，皇帝不怪罪他。
English: Zhang Huanming, who was in charge of the military department, refused to give Zhang Huanming the letter, and Jiang Bingqian got into an argument. Zhang Huanming got angry and tried his best to discredit Jiang Bingqian and Xiong Tingyu as a party. Jiang Bingqian defended against the argument, and the emperor did not blame him.

古文：黔国公沐昌祚闻警，移驻洱海，巡抚刘世曾亦移楚雄。
现代文：张鹤鸣既已压制熊廷弼，专门庇护巡抚王化贞，很多朝臣依附他。
English: Zhang Zhenming had already suppressed Xiong Tingtao and specially protected the governor Wang Huazhen. Many courtiers followed him.

古文：大征汉土军数万，令参政赵睿壁蒙化，副使胡心得壁腾冲，陆通霄壁赵州，佥事杨际熙壁永昌，与监军副使傅宠、江忻督参将胡大宾等分道进击。大小十余战，积级千六百有奇，猛别、落参皆殪。
现代文：皇帝因为经略跟巡抚关系不融洽，下诏让廷臣讨论。江秉谦说： 陛下再次起用熊廷弼，委以重任，说： 战场上的事不受宫廷限制。 
English: Jiang Bingqian said: His Majesty has once again appointed Xiong Tingtao and entrusted him with important responsibilities, saying: Matters on the battlefield are not subject to palace restrictions.

古文：参将邓子龙击斩罕虔于姚关。
现代文：数月以来，熊廷弼不能够有所举动。
English: For months, Xiong Tingyao has been unable to make a move.

古文：应里趣凤东寇姚关，北据湾甸、芒市。
现代文：求救的呼喊每天都听到，辩解驳斥的信函一件接着一件。于是有人就说： 经略、巡抚意见不合，王化贞主张进攻，熊廷弼主张防守。 
English: Cries for help are heard every day, letters of justification and refutation come one after another, and then someone says: the strategy and the governor disagree, Wang Huazhen advocates attack, and Xiong Tingtao advocates defense.

古文：会綎至军，军大振。
现代文：熊廷弼并非一味防守，只是认为防守稳定了然后才能进攻。
English: Xiong Tingyao is not a defensive player. He only thinks that the defense is stable before he can attack.

古文：凤惧，乃令妻子及部曲来降，綎责令献金牌印符及蛮莫、孟密地。
现代文：王化贞锐意进攻，即使取得了胜利，能够不做好防守的准备吗？万一不能获胜，又将如何防守呢？
English: Wang Huazhen is determined to attack, even if he wins, can he not prepare for defense? In case he does not win, how will he defend?

古文：乃以送凤妻子还陇川为名，分兵趋沙木笼山，据其险，而己驰入陇川境。
现代文：这其中的利害关系，是人所共知的。于是或者没有什么话不听从的，或者是没有计策不放弃的。
English: The interests involved are well known to everyone, so there is no reason not to obey, or not to give up without a strategy.

古文：凤度四面皆兵，遂诣军门降。
现代文：难道真的不懂攻守的道理，只不过是想加深熊廷弼、王化贞的矛盾罢了。
English: Do they really not understand the principle of attack and defense, but just want to deepen the contradiction between Xiong Tingtao and Wang Huazhen?

古文：綎复率兵进缅，缅将先遁，留少兵陇川。
现代文：陛下既然命令熊廷弼指挥管辖三方面的军队，那么三方面军队的前进进攻退却防守应当一切听从熊廷弼的指挥。
English: Since His Majesty has ordered Xiong Tingkun to command and govern the three-sided army, then the advance, attack, retreat and defense of the three-sided army should all obey Xiong Tingkun's command.

古文：綎攻之，凤子曩乌亦降。
现代文：王化贞想前进，就让熊廷弼跟着他前进；想后退，就让熊廷弼跟随他后退。
English: If Wang Huazhen wanted to advance, he would let Xiong Tingtao advance with him; if he wanted to retreat, he would let Xiong Tingtao retreat with him.

古文：綎乃携凤父子往攻蛮莫，乘胜掩击。
现代文：王化贞一会儿前进一会儿后退，就使得熊廷弼前进了不知道怎样进攻，后退了不知道拿什么来防守。
English: Wang Huazhen advanced and retreated at the same time, which made Xiong Tingtao advance without knowing how to attack and retreat without knowing how to defend.

古文：贼窘，缚缅人及象马来献，蛮莫平。
现代文：这是王化贞有指挥管辖熊廷弼的权力，而熊廷弼不曾有指挥管辖三方面军队的权力。
English: This is because Wang Huazhen had the power to command and control Xiong Tingtao, while Xiong Tingtao did not have the power to command and control the three armies.

古文：遂招抚孟养贼，贼将乘象走，追获之。复移师围孟琏，生擒其魁。
现代文：所以今天的事情，不是经略、巡抚之间不和，而是喜欢或讨厌经略、巡抚的人们不合；不是进攻或防守的议论不合，而是左右支配经略、巡抚的议论不合。请求皇上专门询问熊廷弼，做一些实际的战争准备工作。 
English: Therefore, today's matter is not a discord between strategists and governors, but a discord between people who like or dislike strategists and governors; not a discord between offensive or defensive discussions, but a discord between the discussion of strategists and governors. I request the emperor to specially inquire about Xiong Tingtao and do some practical war preparations.

古文：云南平，献俘于朝。帝为告谢郊庙，受百官贺。
现代文：最后嘲笑首辅叶向高模棱两可，势必对两方面都有所牵制，怎么能够要求取得成功。辞语极为恳切。
English: Finally, he ridiculed the ambiguity of the first and second leaves, which is bound to have a deterrent effect on both sides. How can you ask for success? The words are extremely earnest.

古文：大学士申时行以下，悉进官荫子。
现代文：后来朝廷议论将要撤换熊廷弼，而王化贞已放弃广宁逃跑了。
English: Later, the imperial court discussed replacing Xiong Tingyu, but Wang Huazhen had already abandoned Guangning and fled.

古文：綎亦进副总兵，予世荫。乃改孟密安抚司为宣抚，增设安抚二，曰蛮莫，曰耿马，长官司二，曰孟琏，曰孟养；千户所二，一居姚关，一居猛淋。
现代文：江秉谦更加愤怒，认为职方郎耿如杞附和张鹤鸣，极力帮助王化贞排挤熊廷弼，导致国土失陷，接连上疏攻击他。并且援引世宗斩杀丁汝夔的事例，乞求赶快将张鹤鸣依法惩处。皇帝以为张鹤鸣刚巡视边防，不能随便诋毁他，剥夺江秉谦半年的俸禄，对耿如杞不过问。江秉谦又上疏说： 张鹤鸣一旦进入政府要害部门，刚开始只不过是鲁莽而没有远见卓识，到后来就凶狠而隐含杀机。
English: Jiang Bingqian was even more enraged. He thought that Geng Rurong and Zhang Rumin, both officials, had tried their best to help Wang Huazhen oust Xiong Tingtao, which led to the fall of the country, and Shang So attacked him one after another. He also cited the case of Shizong's killing of Ding Ruren, and begged that Zhang Rumin be punished according to the law. The emperor thought that Zhang Rumin had just inspected the border defense, and could not discredit him casually. He deprived Jiang Bingqian of half a year's salary, and did not ask about Geng Rumin. Jiang Bingqian also

古文：皆名之曰 镇安 。命綎以副总兵署临元参将，移镇蛮莫。
现代文：明知西部军事情报不准确，作战计划与实际状况难以符合，却在那里自我欺骗又欺骗朝廷。哪里有机会？
English: Knowing that Western military intelligence was inaccurate and that it was difficult to match battle plans with the actual situation, they deceived themselves and the imperial court. Where was the opportunity?

古文：初，凤降本以计诱，而巡抚世曾称阵擒，遂行献俘礼，叙功及阁部。
现代文：却说机会可以利用。
English: But he said the opportunity could be used.

古文：未几，缅人复大举寇孟密。
现代文：什么时候渡河？却说渡河一定能取得胜利。
English: When will you cross the river? But you said that crossing the river will definitely lead to victory.

古文：孟密兵战败，贼遂围五章。把总高国春率五百人援，破贼数万，连摧六营，为西南战功第一，进官，世荫副千户。
现代文：既想赶经略出关，又不肯把指挥管辖的权力交给经略，既想把熊廷弼安排在广宁，又不曾将王化贞派往别处。
English: Both wanted to get rid of Jingli, but refused to give the power of command and jurisdiction to Jingli; both wanted to place Xiong Tingyao in Guangning, but never sent Wang Huazhen to another place.

古文：綎亦优叙。
现代文：破坏国家领土的罪行，可以置之不理吗？
English: Can the crime of destroying a country's territory be ignored?

古文：蛮莫设安抚，以土官思顺有功，特授之。
现代文：况且王化贞先抛弃防地又先逃跑，还说他功过各占一半。
English: Moreover, Wang Huazhen abandoned the defensive first and fled first, and he also said that his contribution was half.

古文：綎纳其重贿，又纵部将谢世禄等淫虐，思顺大怨。
现代文：仅凭这一句话，纵使将张鹤鸣一寸寸地斩杀，也不足以抵消他欺君误国的罪责，却还敢张口定别人的罪案吗！ 
English: With this sentence alone, even if Zhang Zhenming is killed inch by inch, it is not enough to offset his guilt of deceiving the king and misleading the country, but how dare he open his mouth to judge others' crimes!

古文：綎，将家子。父显部曲多健儿，綎拥以自雄。征缅之役，勒兵金沙江，筑将台于王骥故址，威名甚盛。
现代文：正在这个时候，大学士沈翭暗中勾结宦官刘朝、奶母客氏，召募士兵进入禁中，在宫内操练士兵。
English: It was at this time that the university scholar Shen Yao secretly colluded with the eunuchs Liu Zhao and Niu Mu Ke to recruit soldiers to enter the Forbidden City and train soldiers in the palace.

古文：然性贪，御下无法。
现代文：给事中惠世扬、周朝瑞等十二人一连两次上疏极力攻击。
English: During the incident, twelve people including Hui Shiyang and Zhou Chao Rui attacked Shang So twice in a row.

古文：兵还至腾冲，甲而噪，焚民居。
现代文：江秉谦参与其中，并诋毁刘朝和客氏。
English: Jiang Bingqian participated in it and slandered the Liu dynasty and the Kake clan.

古文：綎在蛮莫，闻之驰至，犒以金钱，始定。
现代文：朝廷内外都很怨恨。于是假借弹劾张鹤鸣的奏疏，把江秉谦调往外地。不久，郭巩被召回，巴结魏忠贤，极力败坏江秉谦。
English: There was a lot of resentment both inside and outside the imperial court. Therefore, under the pretext of impeaching Zhang Heming, Jiang Bingqian was transferred to a foreign country. Soon, Guo Gong was recalled, and he tried his best to corrupt Jiang Bingqian in favor of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：思顺恐祸及，叛归莽酋。
现代文：这年冬天，皇子降生，被贬谪的言官除了江秉谦外全部被召回。
English: In the winter of that year, the prince was born, and all the officials who had been disparaged were recalled except for Jiang Bingqian.

古文：诏革綎任，以游击候调。
现代文：在家居住四年，听说魏忠贤更加扰乱朝政，忧愤而死。
English: After living at home for four years, he heard that Wei Zhongxian had further disturbed the imperial government and died of grief and anger.

古文：无何，罗雄变起。罗雄者，曲靖属州也，者氏世为知州。
现代文：过了几个月，魏忠贤的党徒御史卓迈追究江秉谦保护熊廷弼，于是剥夺了他的官籍。崇祯初年，恢复了他的官籍。侯震旸，字得一，嘉定人。
English: A few months later, Wei Zhongxian's henchman Zhuo Mai pursued Jiang Bingqian to protect Xiong Tingyao, and stripped him of his official registration. In the first year of Chongyao, he restored his official registration. Hou Zhenyao, one word, Jiading people.

古文：嘉靖时，者浚嗣职，杀营长而夺其妻，生子继荣。
现代文：祖父侯尧封是一位监察御史。冒犯了大学士张居正，被调往外地。
English: His grandfather, Hou Yufeng, was an inspector of imperial history. He offended university scholar Zhang Jizheng and was transferred to another province.

古文：浚年老无他子，继荣得袭职，遂弑浚。
现代文：做官一直做到福建右参政，有廉洁正直的名声。
English: As an official, he has always been a right-wing politician in Fujian and has a reputation for integrity.

古文：妖僧王道、张道以继荣有异相，奉为主。
现代文：侯震旸考中万历三十八年进士，授职行人。天启初年，提拔吏科给事。这时，乳母奉圣夫人客氏正被皇帝宠幸。
English: In the 38th year of the Wanli calendar, Hou Zhenxuan passed the middle school entrance examination, and was promoted to a clerk. In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted to a clerk. At this time, the nanny, Lady Feng Sheng, was favored by the emperor.

古文：用符术练丁甲，煽聚徒党，独外弟隆有义不从。
现代文：跟魏忠贤及大学士沈翭内外勾结，气焰极为嚣张。
English: He colluded with Wei Zhongxian and the university scholar Shen Qi inside and outside, and was extremely arrogant.

古文：十三年冬，继荣分党四剽，广西师宗、陆凉诸府州咸被患。
现代文：被送出宫后，熹宗皇帝流泪思念她，从早到晚不吃饭，于是下诏重新让客氏进宫。侯震旸上疏说： 宫闱禁地，一群奸邪小人在里面耀武扬威，内外勾结，借机作乱，有些实在不忍心说。
English: After being sent out of the palace, Emperor Taizong shed tears thinking about her and did not eat from morning to night, so he issued an edict to let the Kaku clan re-enter the palace. Hou Zhenxuan Shangsuo said: The palace is a forbidden place, a group of treacherous villains are showing off inside, colluding inside and outside, taking the opportunity to make trouble, some really can't bear to say.

古文：巡抚刘世曾檄调汉土军，属监司程正谊、郑璧等分御之。
现代文：王圣被宠幸就煽动江京、李闰扰乱朝政，赵娆被宠幸就造成曹节、王甫的事变。小小的村妇，值得皇上如此亲昵吗？ 皇帝还不觉醒。
English: Wang Sheng, who was favored, instigated Jiangjing and Li Yue to disrupt the imperial government, and Zhao Wei, who was favored, caused the incidents of Cao Jie and Wang Fu. Is a small village woman worthy of being so intimate with the emperor? The emperor has not yet awakened.

古文：会綎解官至沾益，世曾喜，令与裨将刘绍桂、万鏊分道讨。
现代文：正好辽东战事危急，经略熊廷弼、巡抚王化贞有矛盾。兵部尚书张鹤鸣袒护王化贞，议论这事的人于是想把熊廷弼调往别处，跟王化贞分守不同的地区。
English: Just as the war in Liaodong was in a critical situation, there was a conflict between the military governor Xiong Tingyu and the governor Wang Huazhen. The military department had written a book to protect Wang Huazhen, and the people who discussed this matter wanted to transfer Xiong Tingyu to another place, to guard a different area from Wang Huazhen.

古文：綎直捣继荣寨，拔之，获其妻妾数人，继荣逸去。綎连克三砦，斩王道、张道，追亡至阿拜江。
现代文：侯震旸预料他们一定会失败，上疏说： 事情到了这种地步，陛下应该派使者问经略，如果还能认真训练，那么进退的快慢不受宫廷管制，即使撤销巡抚，一切权力交给经略，也不是不可以的。
English: Hou Zhenyao expected that they would fail. Shang Zuo said, "Things have come to such a pass that His Majesty should send an envoy to inquire about the strategist. If serious training can be done, then the speed of advance and retreat will not be controlled by the palace. Even if the governor is revoked and all power is given to the strategist, it is not impossible.

古文：隆有义部卒斩继荣首以献，贼尽平。
现代文：如果不是这样的话，那么就督促逐条陈奏，听凭朝臣讨论安排，把收拾残局的职责专门交给王化贞。这是一种说法。
English: If this is not the case, then Wang Huazhen should be given the responsibility of cleaning up the mess. This is one way of putting it.

古文：时首功止五十余级，而抚降者万余人，论者称其不妄杀。
现代文：不然就把熊廷弼调到密云，另外委任经略。张鹤鸣一向慷慨激昂，与其等战争失败一同受罚，不如让他挺身报国。
English: Otherwise, he would transfer Xiong Tingtao to Miyun and appoint another strategist. Zhang Homing has always been impassioned, and it would be better for him to stand up for the country than to be punished for the defeat of the war.

古文：初，綎破继荣，有论其私财物者，功不录。
现代文：这又是一种说法。不然就把经略的职位授给王化贞，选择一位深沉有谋略的人代替他出任巡抚，来帮助他。
English: This is another way of saying that otherwise they would have given Wang Huazhen the post of strategist and chosen a deep and strategic person to replace him as governor to help him.

古文：世曾为辨诬，乃赐白金。寻用为广西参将，移四川。
现代文：这又是一种说法，不然就把熊廷弼调往登州、莱州，完成他的三方布置防御的策略，跟王化贞互成掎角之势。这又是一种说法。假若还拖延犹豫不决，一定会耽误国家大事的。 
English: This is another way of saying that otherwise Xiong Tingtao would be transferred to Dangzhou and Laizhou to complete his strategy of arranging defense on three sides, and Wang Huazhen would come into conflict with him. This is another way of saying. If there is still delay and indecision, it will definitely delay national affairs.

古文：二十年召授五军三营参将。
现代文：奏疏上报，正好有圣旨集体讨论，而大清兵已经攻破广宁了。
English: When the report was submitted, there happened to be a collective discussion of the sacred will, and the Qing soldiers had already broken through Guangning.

古文：会朝鲜用师，綎请率川兵五千赴援，诏以副总兵从征。至则倭已弃王京遁，綎趋尚州乌岭。
现代文：王化贞、熊廷弼相继进入山海关以内，还多次得到皇帝降旨安慰，要求他们戴罪立功。
English: Wang Huazhen and Xiong Tingtao successively entered the Shanhaiguan, and were also repeatedly consoled by the emperor, who asked them to bear the crime and do their duty.

古文：岭亘七十里，峭壁通一线，倭拒险。
现代文：侯震旸极感愤闷，再次上疏说： 微臣的预言不幸应验了，为今天打算，应依法从事而不能感情从事。
English: Hou Zhenyao was extremely indignant and once again said: Weichen's prophecy has unfortunately come true. For today's plan, it should be carried out according to the law and not emotionally.

古文：别将查大受、祖承训等间道逾槐山，出乌岭后。
现代文：河西没有失败之前，整个朝廷十分之七的人都爱惜王化贞，现在不能爱惜王化贞了。河西失败之后，整个朝廷十分之九都在宽免熊廷弼，现在也不能宽免熊廷弼了。
English: Before the defeat of Hexi, seven-tenths of the entire imperial court loved Wang Huazhen, but now they cannot love Wang Huazhen. After the defeat of Hexi, nine-tenths of the entire imperial court pardoned Xiong Dingyao, and now they cannot pardon Xiong Dingyao.

古文：倭大惊，遂移驻釜山浦。
现代文：鞭策巡抚的，说应该责令他回到广宁，将西部防线联成一体。
English: The instigator of the inspector said that he should be ordered to return to Guangning to connect the western defense line into one.

古文：綎及承训等进屯大邱、忠州，以金罗水兵布釜山海口，朝鲜略定。
现代文：然而军营粮草已经用完，他能够赤手空拳效法包胥吗？鞭策经略的，说应该仍旧要求他防守山海关。
English: However, the military camp has run out of grain and grass, can he use his bare hands to imitate the method of wrapping straw? The strategist said that he should still be required to defend Shanhaiguan.

古文：未几，倭遣小西飞纳款，遂犯咸安、晋州，逼全罗。
现代文：然而所谓防守，将如同熊廷弼前面建议的三十万兵数十万饷，来为以后打算吗？
English: However, will the so-called defense, as suggested by Xiong Tingkun earlier, consist of three hundred thousand soldiers and hundreds of thousands of soldiers, to be planned for the future?

古文：提督李如松急遣李平胡、查大受屯南原，祖承训、李宁屯咸阳，綎屯陕川，扼之。
现代文：抑或只是命令他率领残兵开到关外，姑且表示还没有杀死吧！凡此种种，没有一个是可行的。
English: Or just order him to lead the remaining soldiers out of the customs house, even if it means he hasn't killed them yet! None of this is feasible.

古文：倭果分犯，请将并有斩获。
现代文：到现在还不判决逃臣的罪行，国家残破的疆土将怎样保护啊。 
English: Up to now, the crime of fleeing vassals has not been adjudicated, how will the country's ruined territory be protected?

古文：倭乃从釜山移西生浦，送王子归朝鲜。
现代文：到后来惩办失败的罪犯，大约和侯震旸的奏疏所说的一致。
English: Later, the punishment of criminals who failed was roughly the same as that mentioned in Hou Zhenyao's report.

古文：帝命撤如松大军还，止留綎及游击吴惟忠合七千六百人，分扼要口。
现代文：不久，弹劾大学士沈翭勾结奉圣夫人及各太监为朋党，一一揭发他陷害王安的情形。魏忠贤当天传旨将侯震旸流放。
English: Soon after, the impeached scholar Shen Qi colluded with Lady Feng Sheng and the eunuchs as his friends and allies to expose the circumstances of his framing of Wang An. On the same day, Wei Zhongxian sent an order to exile Hou Zhenqi.

古文：总督顾养谦力主尽撤，綎、惟忠亦先后还。
现代文：侯震旸向皇帝辞行，又呈上田赋、河渠二道建议。
English: Hou Zhenyao submitted his resignation to the emperor, and also proposed to build a rice field and a canal.

古文：属播酋杨应龙作乱，擢綎四川总兵官。
现代文：因被流放的臣子不应当建议，又降二级官回家。
English: A courtier who was exiled should not be advised to return home after being demoted to the second rank.

古文：綎戍朝鲜二年，劳甚，觊勘功优叙，乃贿御史宋兴祖。
现代文：侯震旸在官八个月，上奏一共数十次。崇祯初年，征召恢复他官职，侯震旸已经死了。
English: After eight months in office, Hou Zhenxuan had been promoted dozens of times. In the first year of Chongzhen, he was conscripted to resume his official position, but Hou Zhenxuan had already died.

古文：兴祖以闻，法当褫。
现代文：凭借他儿子主事官侯峒曾的请求，特地追赠他为太常少卿。
English: At the request of his son, the leading official Hou Xizeng, he was specially posthumously awarded the title of Taizang Shaoqing.

古文：部议綎功多，请尽革云南所加功级，以副总兵镇四川。
现代文：刘綎，字省吾，都督刘显的儿子。勇敢有家父的遗风，受荫封为指挥使。
English: Liu Xuan, also known as Shouwu, was the son of the governor Liu Xian. He had the courage to follow in his father's footsteps, and was given the title of commander.

古文：寻以应龙输款，而青海寇数扰边，特设临兆总兵官，移綎任之。
现代文：万历初年，跟着父亲刘显讨伐九丝蛮。刘綎第一个登上城楼，抓获蛮人首领阿大。因为军功，提升为云南以东守备，改任南京小教场坐营。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he followed his father, Liu Xian, to fight against the nine barbarians. Liu Yao was the first to climb the city tower and captured the barbarian leader, Ada. Because of his military service, he was promoted to guard the east of Yunnan and was reassigned to camp at the Nanjing Elementary School.

古文：二十四年三月，火落赤、真相、昆都鲁、歹成、他卜囊等掠番窥内地。
现代文：万历十年冬天，缅甸侵犯永昌、腾越，巡抚刘世曾请求增加兵力。第二年春天，提拔刘綎为游击将军，负责腾冲一带的防务。
English: In the winter of the tenth year of Wanli, Myanmar invaded Yongchang and Tengyue. The governor Liu Shiguo had requested an increase in troops. In the spring of the following year, Liu Ye was promoted to a guerrilla general, responsible for the defense of the Tengchong area.

古文：綎部将周国柱等击之莽剌川脑，斩首百三十有奇，获马牛杂畜二万计。帝为告郊庙宣捷。
现代文：缅甸距离云南遥远。自从他们的首领莽瑞体用武力征服周边各少数民族后，势力日益强大，多次骚扰边境。江西人岳凤，在陇川一带经商，为人凶猛残暴，足智多谋，做了宣抚多士宁的书记官。
English: Myanmar is far away from Yunnan. Since their leader Meng Rui conquered the surrounding ethnic minorities by force, they have become increasingly powerful and have repeatedly harassed the border. Yue Feng, a native of Jiangxi, has been doing business in the area of Luochuan. He is a ferocious and cruel man, resourceful, and has served as the secretary of Xuanfu and Shining.

古文：綎等进秩予荫有差。
现代文：多士宁把妹妹许配给他做妻子。
English: Doshnin betrothed his sister to him as his wife.

古文：明年五月，朝鲜再用师。诏綎充御倭总兵官，提督汉土兵赴讨。
现代文：岳凤哄骗多士宁前去会见莽瑞体，偷偷地跟儿子岳曩乌一起用毒酒把多士宁毒死了，然后杀了他的妻子和儿子，夺走了金牌印符，接受莽瑞体的命令，代替多士宁当上了宣抚。莽瑞体死后，他的儿子莽应里继位。
English: Yue Feng tricked Doshining into going to meet Meng Rui, and secretly poisoned him with poisoned wine together with his son Yue Xiu, then killed his wife and son, took away the gold medal seal, accepted the order of Meng Rui, and replaced Doshining. After the death of Meng Rui, his son Meng Yingli succeeded to the throne.

古文：又明年二月抵朝鲜，则杨镐、李如梅已败。经略邢玠乃分军为三，中董一元，东麻贵，西则綎，而陈璘专将水兵。
现代文：岳凤联合耿马的强盗罕虔、南甸土舍刀落参、芒市土舍放正堂，跟莽应里的伯父莽猛别、弟弟阿瓦等人一起，各率象兵数十万人攻打雷弄、盏达、干崖、南甸、木邦、老姚、思旬等地，烧杀抢掠，不计其数。
English: Yue Feng, together with Gengma's robber Han Qian, Nandian's local house of the sword Lobsang, Mang City's local house of the hall, together with Meng Yingli's uncle Meng Mengbei, brother Ava, and others, each led hundreds of thousands of soldiers to attack Lei Rong, Fengtai, Dry Cliff, Nandian, Mubang, Lao Yao, Shishun and other places, burning and looting, countless.

古文：綎营水源。倭亦分三路，西行长据顺天，壕砦深固。
现代文：窥视腾越、永昌、大理、蒙化、景东、镇沅、元江。不久，攻陷顺宁，击破盏达，又命令曩乌带领缅甸兵突击猛淋，指挥吴继勋等人战死。
English: He peered into Tengyue, Yongchang, Dali, Menghua, Jingdong, Zhenyao, and Yuanjiang. Soon, he captured Shuning, broke through Janda, and ordered Zhou Wu to lead the Burmese soldiers in a surprise attack, commanding Wu Jixun and others to die in battle.

古文：綎欲诱执之，遣使请与期会。使者三反，綎皆单骑俟道中。
现代文：邓川土官知州何钰是岳凤的连襟，派出使者招抚，岳凤将他抓住献给应里。
English: The local official of Dengchuan, Zhizhou He Xuan, was Yue Feng's brother-in-law. He sent an envoy to invite Yue Feng, and Yue Feng grabbed him and offered him to Yingli.

古文：行长觇知之，乃信，期以八月朔定约。
现代文：这时，车里、八百、孟养、木邦、孟艮、孟密、蛮莫都派兵帮助敌军，敌人的势力更加强盛。
English: At this time, Che Li, Ba Bao, Meng Yao, Mubang, Meng Yao, Meng Mi, and Meng Mo all sent troops to help the enemy, and the enemy's forces became even more powerful.

古文：至期，綎部卒泄其谋，行长大惊，逸去。
现代文：黔国公沐昌祚听到这一紧急情况，迁移到洱海驻扎，巡抚刘世曾也移居楚雄。
English: Upon hearing of the emergency, the governor of Shan State, Mu Changyu, relocated to the Bohai Sea, and the governor, Liu Shizeng, also moved to Chuxiong.

古文：綎进攻失利。监军参政王士琦怒，缚其中军。綎惧，力战破之，贼退不敢出。
现代文：大规模召募汉人和当地土著几万人当兵，命令参政赵睿驻兵蒙化，副使胡心得驻兵腾冲，陆通霄驻兵赵州，佥事杨际熙驻兵永昌，跟监军副使傅宠、姜忻监督参将胡大宾等人分路出击。
English: On a large scale, tens of thousands of Han Chinese and local indigenous people were recruited as soldiers, and Zhao Rui, a politician, was ordered to station troops in Menghua. Vice Minister Hu Xinde stationed troops in Tengchong, Lu Tongxiao stationed troops in Zhaozhou, An Zhi Yang stationed troops in Yongchang, and he and Vice Minister of Supervision Fu Ji, and Jiang Wei supervised and participated in General Hu Dabin and others.

古文：诸将三道进，綎挑战破之，驱贼入大城。已，贼闻平秀吉死，将遁。
现代文：大小十多次战斗，斩首一千六百多，莽猛别、刀落参都被射死了。参将邓子龙在姚关杀死罕虔。
English: There were more than a dozen battles, more than 1,600 beheadings, and both the reckless and the sword-throwing samurai were shot dead. The samurai general Deng Zilong killed Han Qian in Yaoguan.

古文：綎夜半攻夺栗林、曳桥，斩获多。
现代文：莽应里催促岳凤向东侵略姚关，北边占领湾甸、芒市。正好刘綎赶到部队，军威大振。
English: He recklessly urged Yue Feng to invade Yaoguan in the east and occupy Baytian and Mang City in the north. Just as Liu Bei arrived at the troops, the military power was greatly shaken.

古文：石曼子引舟师救，陈璘邀击之海中。
现代文：岳凤害怕了，于是命令妻子、儿子和部属来投降。
English: Yue Feng was afraid, so he ordered his wife, son and subordinates to surrender.

古文：行长遂弃顺天，乘小艘遁。
现代文：刘綎要求他献出金牌印符以及蛮莫、孟密的地盘。
English: Liu Wei asked him to give up his gold medal and seal, as well as the land of Shangmo and Mengmi.

古文：班师，进綎都督同知，世荫千户。
现代文：于是以护送岳凤的妻儿回陇川为借口，派兵直奔沙木笼山，占据险要地形，而自己快马进入陇川境内。
English: Therefore, on the pretext of escorting Yue Feng's wife and children back to the Lugu River, he sent soldiers straight to the Shamu Keg Mountain, occupied the critical terrain, and then entered the territory of the Lugu River.

古文：遂移师征杨应龙。
现代文：岳凤考虑到四面都是刘綎的部队，于是亲赴军营投降。
English: Yue Feng considered that Liu Ye's troops were on all sides, so he went to the military camp to surrender.

古文：会四川总兵官万鏊罢，即以綎代之。
现代文：刘綎又率部队进军缅甸，缅甸将领先逃走了，只留有少量部队驻守陇川。刘綎攻击他们，岳凤的儿子曩乌也投降了。
English: Liu Bei also led troops to march into Burma, and Burma fled ahead of them, leaving only a small number of troops stationed in Luochuan. Liu Bei attacked them, and Yue Feng's son, Zhou Wu, also surrendered.

古文：时兵分八道，川居其四。
现代文：刘綎于是带着岳凤父子前往攻打蛮莫，乘胜追击。
English: Liu Wei then took Yue Feng and his son to attack the barbarians, taking advantage of the pursuit.

古文：川东又分为二，以綦江道最要，令綎当之。
现代文：敌人处境困难，绑着缅甸人和大象、马来献俘，蛮莫平定。
English: The enemy is in a difficult situation, tying up Burmese and elephants and horses to sacrifice prisoners, and cannot be pacified.

古文：应龙熟綎才，颇惧，益兵守要害。
现代文：于是招抚孟养的强盗，强盗将要骑着大象逃跑，追击俘虏了他们。
English: So Meng Yang's bandits, who were going to escape on an elephant, chased and captured them.

古文：二十八年正月，诸将克丁山、铜鼓、严村，遂直捣楠木、山羊、简台三峒。
现代文：又转移部队围攻孟琏，活捉了敌人的头目。云南平定，到朝廷进献俘虏。皇帝到郊庙报告祖宗，感谢保佑这次战役的胜利，并接受百官的朝贺。从大学士申时行以下，都被加封官职，荫庇后代。
English: He also transferred troops to besiege Mengye, and captured the enemy leader alive. Yunnan was pacified, and the captives were presented to the imperial court. The emperor went to the suburban temple to report to his ancestors, thank them for the victory of this battle, and receive the greetings of hundreds of officials. From the university judge Shin Shigyo and below, they were all sealed with official positions to protect future generations.

古文：峒绝险，贼将穆照等众数万连营，诸将惮之。
现代文：刘綎也提升为副总兵，给予世世代代做官的权利。
English: Liu Wei was also promoted to vice-commander-in-chief, giving him the right to be an official for generations to come.

古文：綎分兵攻其三面，大战于李汉坝，生擒其魁，余贼奔入峒。乘势克三关，直捣峒前，焚之，贼多死。
现代文：于是将孟密的安抚司改为宣抚，增设蛮莫、耿马二个安抚；长官司有二，即孟琏和孟养；千户所也有二个，一个驻守在姚关，一个驻守在猛淋。都称为 镇安 。
English: As a result, Mengmi's pacification department was changed to a proclamation department, and two pacification departments were added, namely Mengmo and Gengma; there were two chief officials, namely Meng Yao and Meng Yao; there were also two thousand households, one stationed in Yaoguan and one stationed in Mengliao. All of them were called Zhenan.

古文：尽克三峒，擒穆照及贼魁吴尚华。
现代文：命令刘綎以副总兵的身份代理临元参将，迁到蛮莫驻扎。
English: Liu Wei was ordered to act as deputy commander of the Linyuan general staff as a vice-commander-in-chief and to move to Banmo.

古文：是日，綎督战，左持金，右挺剑，大呼曰： 用命者赏，不用命者齿剑！ 斗死者四十人，遂大捷。
现代文：当初，岳凤投降本来是想用计谋诱惑敌人，而巡抚刘世曾布置军队抓获了他，于是举行进献俘虏的礼仪，叙述功劳征召到内阁。没过多久，缅甸人又大举进犯孟密。
English: At first, Yue Feng's surrender was originally intended to use trickery to tempt the enemy, but the governor Liu Shih had arranged an army to capture him, so he held a ceremony to present the prisoner, described the merits and was called to the cabinet. It did not take long for the Burmese to attack Meng Mi in a big way.

古文：应龙乃遣子朝栋、惟栋及其党杨珠统锐卒数万，由松坎、鱼渡、罗古池三道并进。
现代文：孟密的部队战败，敌人进而包围了五章。把总高国春率领五百人增援，打败敌人数万人，接连摧毁六座敌营，为西南第一战功。
English: Meng Mi's troops were defeated, and the enemy then encircled the five chapters. The general Gao Guochun led five hundred reinforcements, defeated tens of thousands of enemies, and successively destroyed six enemy battalions, which was the first military achievement in Southwest China.

古文：綎伏万人罗古，待松坎贼；以万人伏营外，待鱼渡贼；而别以一军策应。贼果至，伏尽起。
现代文：提升官阶，世世代代做副千户。
English: They have been promoted to higher ranks and have served as vice-chiefs for generations.

古文：綎率部下转战，斩首数百，追奔五十里。
现代文：刘綎也被破格提拔。蛮莫设置安抚使，因为工官思顺有功，特地把这个官职授予他。
English: Liu Wei was also promoted in an unprecedented manner. There was no way to set up a pacifying envoy, because the engineer thought it was a meritorious deed and specially awarded him this official post.

古文：贼聚守石虎关，綎亦掘堑守。
现代文：刘綎接受他的一大笔贿赂，又放纵部将谢世禄等人奸淫暴虐，思顺非常怨恨他。
English: Liu Yao accepted a large bribe from him, and indulged in the rape and abuse of Minister Xie Shilou and others. Sishun resented him very much.

古文：初，綎闻征播命，逗遛，多设难以要朝廷。
现代文：刘綎出自将门，他父亲刘显的部下很多强健贤能之人，刘綎继承这份遗产，自以为很有力量。
English: Liu Xuan comes from a family of generals. His father Liu Xian's subordinates were many strong and capable people. Liu Xuan inherited this legacy and thought he was very powerful.

古文：言官交劾，议调南京右府佥书。
现代文：出征缅甸战役，统兵金沙江畔，把将台修筑在王骥的旧址上，的确很有威名。
English: It is indeed very prestigious to go to fight in the Burma Campaign, to lead the troops along the Jinsha River, and to build the headquarters on the former site of Wang Hui.

古文：綎至是闻之，即辞任。
现代文：然而他为人贪财，驾御部下又不得法。
English: However, he was greedy for money and his subordinates did not obey the law.

古文：总督李化龙以平播非綎不可，固留之，力荐于朝。
现代文：部队回到腾冲时，穿着铠甲大声喧哗，焚烧老百姓的房屋。
English: When the troops returned to Tengchong, they dressed in armor, made a lot of noise, and burned people's houses.

古文：綎乃复受事，逾夜郎旧城，攻克贼滴泪、三坡、瓦窑坪、石虎诸隘，直抵娄山关。
现代文：刘綎在蛮莫听到这消息立即飞马赶到，用金钱犒赏士兵，这才安定下来。思顺害怕祸及自己，叛变投靠了莽姓土匪头子。
English: Upon hearing this news, Liu Bei immediately arrived on a flying horse to reward the soldiers with money, and only then did he settle down. Shishun, fearing for his own safety, defected to a bandit leader with the surname Meng.

古文：娄山万峰插天，丛箐中一径才数尺，贼设木关十三座，排栅置深坑，百险俱备。
现代文：下诏解除刘綎职务，以游击的身份听候调遣。不久，罗雄发生事变，罗雄是曲靖的下属州，者氏世世代代为罗雄知州。
English: The following edict relieved Liu Xuan of his duties, and he was dispatched to Luoxiang as a guerrilla fighter. Soon, an incident occurred in Luoxiang. Luoxiang was a subordinate prefecture of Qujing, and it had been known as Luoxiang Prefecture for generations.

古文：綎分奇兵为左右路，间道趋关后，而自督大军仰攻，夺其关，追至永安庄，两路军亦会。
现代文：嘉靖年间，者浚继承职位，杀了营长，把他的妻子据为己有，生有一个儿子名叫继荣。
English: During the Jiajing era, he killed the battalion commander to inherit the post, took his wife as his own, and had a son named Ji Rong.

古文：綎老将持重，虑贼冲突，联诸营：一据娄山关为老营，一据白石口为腰营，一据永安庄为前营。
现代文：者浚年纪大了没有其他儿子，继荣得以继承他的职位，于是杀死者浚。妖邪的和尚王道、张道认为继荣相貌不同于一般人，把他奉为主子。
English: When Ji Rong was old and had no other sons, Ji Rong was able to inherit his position, so he killed Ji Rong. The evil monks Wang Dao and Zhang Dao thought that Ji Rong's appearance was different from that of ordinary people, and treated him as their master.

古文：都指挥王芬者，勇而寡谋，每战辄请为前锋，连胜有轻敌心，独营松门垭之冲，距大营数里。
现代文：用符术训练士兵。煽动纠集了一帮党徒，唯独表弟隆有义没有听从他。万历十三年冬天，继荣派他的党徒四出抢劫，广西师宗、陆凉各府州都受到侵扰。
English: He instigated and gathered a group of party members, but his cousin Long Youyi did not listen to him. In the winter of the 13th year of the Wanli era, Jirong sent his party members to rob everywhere, and Shizong in Guangxi and all prefectures in Lulang were harassed.

古文：贼方有乌江之胜，谋再夺娄山。
现代文：巡抚刘世曾发布檄文调集汉人和当地土著军队，交给监司程正谊、郑璧等人分道防御。
English: The governor Liu Shih had issued an imperial edict to mobilize the Han Chinese and the local indigenous troops, and handed over to the supervisors Cheng Zhengyi, Zheng Bi and others to split the defense.

古文：适穆照遣使泄芬孤军状，贼乃袭杀芬，守备陈大刚、天全招讨杨愈亦死，失亡士卒二千人。
现代文：正好刘綎解除官职到沾益，刘世曾很高兴，命令他跟裨将刘绍桂、万鏊分路讨伐敌人。刘綎直捣继荣的军营，攻取它，抓获他的妻妾多人，继荣逃走。
English: Just as Liu Xuan's dismissal from his official post came to fruition, Liu Shizeng was pleased and ordered him to help Liu Shao Gui and Wan Xuan to fight the enemy. Liu Xuan directly attacked Jirong's military camp, captured it, captured many of his wives and concubines, and Jirong fled.

古文：綎闻，亲率骑卒往救，部将周以德、周敦吉分两翼夹攻，贼始大奔，追至养马城而还。
现代文：刘綎接连攻克三座敌营，斩杀王道、张道，追击逃亡的敌人直到阿拜江。隆有义的部下斩杀继荣，献上他的首级，叛乱完全被平定。
English: Liu Bei conquered three enemy camps in succession, killed Wang Dao and Zhang Dao, and pursued the fleeing enemy to the Abai River. Long Yu Rong's subordinates killed Sui Rong and presented his head, and the rebellion was completely suppressed.

古文：是日，应龙几被获，乃不敢窥娄山。
现代文：这时斩首的仅仅五十多人，而投降的却有一万多人，有人称赞他没有随便滥杀无辜。
English: At this time, only more than fifty people were beheaded, but more than ten thousand people surrendered. Some people praised him for not killing innocents indiscriminately.

古文：綎惩前失，劄近关坚壁，且请济师。
现代文：当初，刘綎消灭继荣时，有人说他私藏财宝，不记他的功劳。
English: At first, when Liu Bei eliminated Jirong, some people said that he had hidden treasure and did not remember his merits.

古文：逾十余日，克后水囤，营于冠子山。
现代文：刘世曾为他辩白，于是赏赐给他白金。
English: Liu Shih had defended him, so he rewarded him with platinum.

古文：寻会马孔英、吴广诸军，逼海龙囤下，与诸将共平贼，綎功为多。
现代文：刘綎总结前面失败的教训，在靠近关前设置栅栏，坚壁清野，并且请求增派部队支援。过了十多天，攻克后水囤，在冠军山安营扎寨。不久与马孔英、吴广各路军会合，进军直逼海龙囤下，跟各位将领共同平定叛乱，刘綎战功最多。
English: Liu Bei summed up the lessons of the previous failure, set up a fence near the pass, a strong wall to clear the field, and requested additional troops for support. After more than ten days, after conquering Shuiyan, he camped in Champion Mountain. Soon he met with Ma Kong Ying and Wu Guang's armies, marched straight under the sea dragon, and worked with the generals to quell the rebellion. Liu Bei had the most war achievements.

古文：初，李化龙荐綎，言官谓綎尝纳应龙贿，宜夺官从军。
现代文：当初，李化龙推荐刘綎，言官以为刘綎曾接受杨应龙贿赂，应当剥夺他的官职让他随军出征。
English: At first, Li Hualong recommended Liu Ye, and the spokesman thought that Liu Ye had accepted Yang Yinglong's bribe and should be deprived of his official position and let him go with the army.

古文：部议谪为事官，戴罪办贼。
现代文：部议贬职为事官，带罪杀贼立功。
English: He was demoted to the position of an official by the ministry, and was awarded a medal for killing a thief.

古文：綎德化龙，使使赍玉带一、黄金百、白金千投化龙家，为化龙父所叱。
现代文：刘綎感激李化龙，派使者携带玉带一条、黄金百两、白金百两到李化龙家，被李化龙的父亲呵斥赶跑了。
English: Liu Bei was grateful to Li Huilong and sent an envoy to Li Huilong's home with a jade belt, one hundred taels of gold, and one hundred taels of platinum. Li Huilong's father yelled at him and chased him away.

古文：投巡按御史崔景荣家，亦如之。
现代文：到巡抚御史崔景荣家，也遭到同样对待。
English: The same treatment was meted out to the family of the procurator general, Cui Jingrong.

古文：化龙、景荣并奏其事，诏革綎任，永不收录，没其物于官。
现代文：李化龙、崔景荣一起上报了这件事，下诏革除刘綎的职务，永不录用，没收他的财产充入官府。
English: Li Hualong and Cui Jing Rong reported the matter together, and the next step was to remove Liu Wei from his post, never hire him, and confiscate his property and charge it to the government office.

古文：已，录平播功，进左都督，世荫指挥使。
现代文：不久，记载他平定播州的军功，提升左都督，世代荫封指挥使。
English: Soon, his military exploits of pacifying Banzhou were recorded, he was promoted to the left governor, and became a generational shadow envoy.

古文：三十六年，云南阿克反，起綎讨贼总兵官。
现代文：万历三十六年，云南阿克叛乱，起用刘綎为讨贼总兵官。
English: In the 36th year of Wanli, the Ake Rebellion in Yunnan broke out, and Liu Ye was appointed as the chief officer of the anti-thief force.

古文：未至，贼已平，寝前命。
现代文：未到任，叛乱已经平定了，取消了原来的任命。
English: Before he took office, the rebellion had been quelled, and the original appointment was cancelled.

古文：四十年，四川建昌倮乱，命綎为总兵官讨之。
现代文：万历四十年四川建昌保人叛乱，命令刘綎为总兵官讨伐。
English: After forty years of Sichuan Jianchang guarantor rebellion, Liu Ye was ordered to be the general officer of the crusade.

古文：偕参政王之机分八道督诸将攻，而己居中节制，克桐槽、沈渣、阿都、厦卜、越北诸砦，大小五十六战，斩馘三千三百有奇，诸倮巢穴一空。
现代文：同参政王之机一起分兵八路监督各将攻打，而自己在中路指挥协调作战。攻克桐槽、沈渣、阿都、厦卜、越北各据点，经过大小五十六次战斗，斩首三千三百多人，各倮人根据地全被扫荡一空。
English: Together with Sangzhen Wangzhi, he divided his troops into eight lines to supervise the attack of each side, while he himself commanded and coordinated the battle in the middle. He conquered the strongholds of Tongtang, Shenjia, Aba, Xiab, and Yuebei. After fifty-six battles, he beheaded more than 3,300 people, and all the bases were swept away.

古文：綎为将，数被黜抑，性骄恣如故。
现代文：刘綎作为军事将领，多次被废黜压制，性情还是像原来一样骄横放纵。
English: As a military general, Liu Bei was deposed and suppressed many times, but his disposition was still arrogant and indulgent as before.

古文：尝拳殴马湖知府詹淑，淑改调，綎夺禄半年。
现代文：曾经拳打马湖知府詹淑。詹淑改任调走，刘綎也被剥夺了半年的俸禄。
English: He once boxed Zhan Shu of Mahu prefecture. Zhan Shu was transferred to another post, and Liu Wei was also deprived of half a year's salary.

古文：久之，以军政拾遗罢归。
现代文：很久之后，以军政纠察被罢免回家。
English: After a long time, he was sent home on a military and political picket.

古文：四十六年，帝念辽警，召为左府佥书。明年二月，经略杨镐令綎及杜松、李如柏、马林四路出师。
现代文：万历四十六年，皇帝惦念辽阳情况紧急，征召刘綎为左府佥书，第二年二月，经略杨镐命令刘綎和杜松、李如柏、马林兵分四路出击。
English: In the 46th year of the Wanli era, Emperor Qianlong, thinking that Liaoyang was in an urgent situation, conscripted Liu Bei to serve as the governor of Zuofu. In February of the following year, Emperor Qianlong ordered Liu Bei and Jun Song, Li Rubei, and Marin to attack in four directions.

古文：綎兵四万，由宽佃，副使康应乾监之，游击乔一琦别监朝鲜军并进。
现代文：刘綎统兵四万，由宽佃副使康应乾监军，游击乔一琦另外监督朝鲜士兵一同前进。
English: Liu Bei was in charge of 40,000 soldiers, with the vice-commander Kang Yingqian supervising the troops, and the guerrilla Qiao Yijun supervising the Korean soldiers.

古文：綎镇蜀久，好用蜀兵。
现代文：刘綎镇守四川时间较长，喜欢用四川兵。
English: Liu Tongzhen has been guarding Sichuan for a long time and likes to use Sichuan soldiers.

古文：久待未至，遂行。
现代文：等了很长时间没有来后，于是出发了。
English: After waiting a long time for him to come, they set off.

古文：而所分道独险远，重冈叠岭，马不成列。
现代文：刘綎这一路行军路线危险而遥远，重峦叠嶂，骑兵不能布成阵势。
English: Liu Bei's march along this route was dangerous and far away. The cavalry could not form a formation because of the overlapping lines.

古文：次深河，连克牛毛、马家二砦。
现代文：驻扎深河，连克牛毛、马家二座敌营。
English: Stationed in Shenhe, Lianke Niu Mao and Ma Jia are two enemy camps.

古文：大清兵五百守董鄂路，闻綎军至，逆战。
现代文：大清五百士兵防守董鄂路。听说刘綎部队到来，迎战。
English: Five hundred soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty defended Dong E Road. I heard that Liu Ye's troops arrived to meet the battle.

古文：綎纵兵围数重，大清兵众寡不敌，失二裨将，伤五十人，余溃围出。
现代文：刘綎派兵重重包围大清兵，大清兵寡不敌众，损失二名副将，五十人受伤，其余的人突围溃逃。
English: Liu Bei sent troops to encircle the Qing soldiers, and the Qing soldiers were outnumbered, losing two vice generals, fifty people were injured, and the rest of the people broke out and fled.

古文：綎已深入三百里，杜松军覆犹不知。
现代文：刘綎已孤军深入三百里，杜松全军覆没刘綎还不知道。
English: Liu Wei has been alone for three hundred miles. Juniper has covered the entire army, but Liu Wei still doesn't know.

古文：复整众进，遇大清兵，綎引军登阿布达里冈，将布阵，大清兵亦登冈，出其上，而别以一军趋綎西。
现代文：又整顿军队向前进发，遭遇大清兵。刘綎率领军队登上阿布达里冈，准备布置战阵，大清兵也登上山冈，位置还在刘綎军之上，而另外派一支军队直奔刘綎军的西边。
English: The rectification army also advanced and encountered the Great Qing Army. Liu Bei led the army up the Abu Darigang to prepare for the battle. The Great Qing Army also climbed the mountain, still above Liu Bei's army, and sent another army straight to the west of Liu Bei's army.

古文：冈上军自高驰下，奋击綎军，綎殊死战。
现代文：山冈上的大清兵自上而下冲击，奋勇攻击刘綎的军队，刘綎殊死苦战。
English: The Qing soldiers on the hillside attacked from above, bravely attacking Liu Bei's army. Liu Bei fought to the death.

古文：趋綎西者复从旁夹击，綎军不能支。大清兵乘势追击，遇綎后二营军。
现代文：刘綎西边的大清兵又从旁边夹击，刘綎军队支持不住，大清兵乘势追击，同刘綎后续部队二营军队遭遇。
English: The Qing soldiers on the west side of Liu Bei also attacked from the side, Liu Bei's army could not support, the Qing soldiers took advantage of the situation to pursue, and encountered the second battalion of Liu Bei's follow-up force.

古文：未及陈，复为大清兵所乘，大溃，綎战死。
现代文：来不及布阵，就被大清兵追杀，大败，刘綎也战死了。
English: When he was too late to set up a battle line, he was chased and killed by the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty. He was defeated, and Liu Bei also died in the battle.

古文：养子刘招孙者，最骁勇，突围，手格杀数人，亦死。
现代文：刘綎的养子刘招孙，最是骁勇。冲出敌围，徒手杀死几个敌人，也死了。
English: Liu Zhaosun, Liu Yao's adopted son, was the bravest. He broke out of the enemy encirclement and killed several enemies with his bare hands. He also died.

古文：士卒脱者无几。
现代文：士兵突围活命的没有多少人。
English: Few soldiers managed to escape alive.

古文：时应乾及朝鲜军营富察之野，大清遂移师邀之。
现代文：当时康应乾和朝鲜军队在富察郊外安营扎寨，大清于是调遣军队在半路拦截。
English: At that time, Kang Ying Qian and the North Korean army were encamped on the outskirts of Fucha, and the Great Qing dispatched troops to intercept them halfway.

古文：应乾兵及朝鲜兵列械将战，狂风骤起，扬沙石。
现代文：康应乾军和朝鲜军队排列好武器准备战斗，突然刮起了狂风，飞沙走石。
English: The Kangye dry army and the North Korean army lined up their weapons to prepare for battle. Suddenly, a strong wind blew and the sand flew.

古文：应乾发火器，反击己营，大乱。
现代文：康应乾点燃火炮，反而击中了自己的兵营，军队大乱。
English: Kang Ying dryly ignited the artillery, but instead hit his own barracks, and the army was in chaos.

古文：大清兵趋击，大破之，掩杀几尽，应乾以数百骑免。
现代文：大清兵乘机追击，大败康应乾及朝鲜兵，将他们赶杀殆尽。康应乾带着几百名骑兵逃脱。
English: The Qing soldiers took advantage of the opportunity to pursue and defeated Kang Ying Qian and the Korean soldiers, driving them out. Kang Ying Qian escaped with several hundred cavalrymen.

古文：一琦亦为大清兵所破，走入朝鲜营。
现代文：乔一琦部也被大清兵打败，逃往朝鲜兵营。
English: Qiao Yibe was also defeated by the Qing soldiers and fled to the North Korean barracks.

古文：朝鲜都元帅姜弘立、副元帅金景瑞惧，率众降，一琦投崖死。
现代文：朝鲜都元帅姜弘立、副元帅金景瑞害怕，带着部队投降了，乔一琦跳崖自杀。
English: Marshal Jiang Hongli and Vice-Marshal Jin Jingrui were afraid of the North Korean capital and surrendered with their troops. Qiao committed suicide by jumping off a cliff.

古文：杨镐闻杜松、马林师败，驰召綎及李如柏还。
现代文：杨镐听说杜松、马林的部队失败，快马召刘綎和李如柏撤军。
English: Yang Xuan heard that the troops of Juniper and Marin had failed, and quickly summoned Liu Xuan and Li Rubei to withdraw.

古文：骑未至，綎已覆，独如柏全。
现代文：骑使还没有赶到，刘綎已经覆灭了。唯独李如柏的部队得以全部生还。
English: Before the cavalry arrived, Liu Bei had already been overthrown. Only Li Rubei's troops were able to survive.

古文：事闻，帝遣中使祭阵亡将士，恤綎家。
现代文：事情上报，皇帝派中使祭奠阵亡将士，抚恤刘綎的家属。
English: When the matter was reported to the emperor, he sent a middle-ranking envoy to pay tribute to the fallen soldiers and support Liu Bei's family members.

古文：綎于诸将中最骁勇。
现代文：刘綎在众多将领中最为骁勇。
English: Liu Bei was the bravest of all the generals.

古文：平缅寇，平罗雄，平朝鲜倭，平播酋，平倮，大小数百战，威名震海内。
现代文：平定缅甸，平定罗雄，平定朝鲜倭寇，平定播州土著叛乱，平定倮人，大大小小数百次战斗，威名响震海内。
English: It has subdued Myanmar, subdued Luoxiong, subdued the Korean wokou, subdued the Banzhou indigenous rebellion, and subdued the Xiongnu people. Hundreds of battles, large and small, have been fought, and its reputation has reverberated throughout the sea.

古文：綎死，举朝大悚，边事日难为矣。
现代文：刘綎死后，满朝廷的人都很恐惧，边防事务一天比一天难办了。
English: After Liu Bei's death, the whole court was filled with fear, and the border affairs became more and more difficult to manage.

古文：綎所用镔铁刀百二十斤，马上轮转如飞，天下称 刘大刀 。
现代文：刘綎使用的镔铁刀重达一百二十斤，他骑在马上舞动如飞，天下人称 刘大刀 。
English: The hammered iron knife used by Liu Yao weighs one hundred and twenty pounds. He rides a horse and dances like a bird. People all over the world call him Liu Dao.

古文：天启初，赠少保，世荫指挥佥事，立祠曰 表忠 。
现代文：天启初年，赠少保，世世代代荫封为指挥佥事，建立 表忠 祠堂。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was given the title of Shōhō, and for generations he was known as the conductor Anecdote, and the Omotechū Shrine was established.

古文：一琦，字伯珪，上海人。李应祥，湖广九溪卫人。
现代文：李应祥，湖广九溪卫人。
English: Li Yingxiang, the guardian of Lake Guangxi and Jiuxi.

古文：以武生从军，积功至广西思恩参将。
现代文：凭借武生身份随军作战，累积战功做到广西思恩参将。
English: By virtue of his status as a samurai, he fought with the army and accumulated military service to become a general in Guangxi Province.

古文：万历七年，巡抚张任大征十寨，应祥与有功。
现代文：万历七年，巡抚张任征伐十座敌营，其中有李应祥的一份功劳。
English: After seven years, the governor Zhang Ren conquered ten enemy camps, one of which was Li Yingxiang's achievement.

古文：即其地设三镇，筑城列戍。应祥方职营建，会擢松潘副总兵，当事者奏留之，以新秩莅旧任。
现代文：就在原地设置三个镇，修筑城池驻兵防守，李应祥正负责营建事务，正好提拔为松潘副总兵，主持修城的官员上疏挽留他，以新官阶上旧任。
English: Li Yingxiang, who was in charge of construction, was promoted to deputy general of Songpan, and the officials who presided over the construction of the city kept him and promoted him to a new rank.

古文：从总兵王尚文大破马平贼韦王明，寻以署都督佥事，入为五军营副将。
现代文：跟着总兵王尚文大败马平匪徒韦王明。不久代理都督佥事，进入朝廷担任五军营副将。
English: With the defeat of Ma Ping bandit Wei Wangming, the general soldier Wang Shangwen soon became the acting governor and entered the imperial court as the vice-general of the Five Military Camps.

古文：十三年，改南京左府佥事，出为四川总兵官。
现代文：万历十三年改任南京左府佥事，出任四川总兵官。
English: In the thirteenth year of Wanli, he was reassigned to Nanjing Zuofu Anji and served as the chief military officer of Sichuan.

古文：松、茂诸番列砦四十八，岁为吏民患。
现代文：松潘、茂州各少数民族建立四十八座山寨，每年都是当地官民的一大祸害。
English: The establishment of forty-eight cottage villages by the ethnic minorities in Songpan and Maozhou is a major disaster for the local government and people every year.

古文：王廷瞻抚蜀时，尝遣副将吴子忠击破丢骨、人荒、没舌三砦，诸酋乃降。
现代文：王廷瞻巡抚四川时，曾派副将吴子忠击破丢骨、人荒、没舌三座山寨，各土著首领于是投降。
English: When Wang Tingzhu was the governor of Sichuan, he sent his vice-commander Wu Zizhong to break the three villages that had lost their bones, people, and tongues. The indigenous leaders then surrendered.

古文：故事，诸番岁有赏赉，番恃强要索无已。
现代文：按过去惯例，各土著每年都有赏赐，土著依靠武力要挟勒索没有止境。
English: According to the past practice, all indigenous people are rewarded every year, and there is no end to the indigenous people's use of force and blackmail.

古文：其来堡也，有下马、上马、解渴、过堡酒及热衣气力偏手钱；戍军更番，亦奉以钱，曰新班、架梁、放狗、屣草、挂彩。
现代文：进入寨堡的，要交纳下马钱、上马钱、解渴钱、过堡酒钱和热衣气力偏手钱；驻军轮换驻防，也要交钱，叫作新班钱、架梁钱、放狗钱、踩草钱、挂彩钱。
English: Those who enter the castle must pay the dismounting fee, the mounting fee, the thirst-quenching fee, the alcohol fee for passing the castle and the hot clothing fee; the rotation of the garrison must also pay money, which is called the new shift fee, the beam fee, the dog fee, the grass fee, and the hanging fee.

古文：廷瞻一切除之，西陲稍靖。
现代文：王廷瞻将它们全部废除，西部边疆才稍稍平定。
English: Wang Tingzhang abolished them all, and the western frontier was only slightly pacified.

古文：仅六七年，势复猖獗。
现代文：仅仅过了六七年，土著势力又重新猖獗起来。
English: Only sixty-seven years later, the indigenous forces were rampant again.

古文：是年夏，杨柳番出攻普安堡，犯归水崖、石门坎，遂入金瓶堡，杀守将。
现代文：这一年夏天，杨柳土著出击普安堡，侵犯归水崖、石门坎，于是进入金瓶堡，杀死守堡将领。
English: In the summer of that year, the poplar indigenous people attacked Pu'an Fort, encroached on the Guizhou cliff and the stone gate, and then entered the Golden Bottle Fort and killed the general of the fort.

古文：巡抚雒遵属应祥讨之。
现代文：巡抚雒遵交给李应祥征讨他们。
English: Magistrate Zong Zong ordered Li Yingxiang to round them up.

古文：提卒三千入茂州，克一岩。
现代文：李应祥带领三千士兵进入茂州，攻克一座山岩。
English: Li Yingxiang led three thousand soldiers into Maozhou and conquered a mountain rock.

古文：番恃险，剽如故。
现代文：土著依靠险要地形，照样抢劫。
English: The natives, relying on the precarious terrain, continue to loot.

古文：无何，遵罢，徐元泰代。
现代文：不久，雒遵罢官，徐元泰代替他。
English: Soon after, Zou Zun was dismissed and replaced by Xu Yuantai.

古文：檄谕之，使三反，番不应。
现代文：传布檄文告知，使者来回有三次，土著不答理。
English: The messenger went back and forth three times, but the natives did not reply.

古文：窥蒲江关，断归水崖、黄土坎道，筑墙五哨沟，绝东南声援。
现代文：土著窥探蒲江关，阻断归水崖、黄土坎的道路，在五哨构筑城墙，断绝东南方的声援。
English: The aborigines spied on the Pu River Pass, cut off the roads leading to the water cliff and the loess ditch, built the city wall at the Five Sentinels, and cut off the solidarity from the southeast.

古文：见官军少，相顾笑曰： 如此磨子兵，奈我何？ 
现代文：看到政府兵力薄弱，互相笑着说： 这般磨子兵，能把我们怎样！ 
English: When they saw that the government's forces were weak, they smiled at each other and said, "How can such a miller defeat us!"

古文：磨子者，谓屡旋转而数不增也。
现代文：所谓磨子，意思是说多次旋转运动但数量不增加。
English: The so-called mill, which means that the number of rotational movements is not increased.

古文：其冬突平夷堡，掠良民，刳其肠，绕二牛角，牛奔，肠寸裂。
现代文：这年冬天，土著突袭平夷堡，抢劫平民百姓，剖开他们的肚子，将肠子绕在二个牛角上，牛一跪，肠子就一寸一寸地断裂。
English: This winter, the aborigines raided the Fort of Pingyi, robbed the common people, cut open their stomachs, wrapped the intestines around the two horns of the cow, and when the cow knelt, the intestines were broken inch by inch.

古文：明年正月，遂围蒲江关，炮毁雉堞。
现代文：第二年正月，包围蒲江关，用土炮摧毁城墙。
English: In the first month of the second year, they encircled Pujiang Pass and destroyed the city wall with cannons.

古文：守将朱文达出，斩数十人。
现代文：守将朱文达出城迎战，杀死几十人。
English: The garrison commander Zhu Wenda left the city to fight, killing dozens of people.

古文：贼稍解，东南路始通。
现代文：匪徒慢慢离去，通往东南方的道路才开始打通。
English: The bandits slowly left, and the road to the southeast began to open.

古文：元泰决计大征。
现代文：徐文泰决定大规模征讨。
English: Xu Wentai decided to carry out a large-scale collection.

古文：诸路兵悉集，乃命游击周于德将播州兵为前锋，游击边之垣将酉阳兵为后拒，故总兵郭成将叙、马兵扼其吭，参将朱文达将平茶兵击其胁，而应祥居中节制，参议王凤监之。
现代文：各路兵力全部汇合后，命令游击周于德统帅播州兵充当前锋，游击边之垣统帅酉阳兵作为后卫，原总兵郭成统帅叙、马兵扼守要害地带，参将朱文达统帅平茶兵攻击两侧，而让李应祥在中间协调作战，参将王凤监军。
English: After all the forces from all directions had converged, he ordered the guerrilla commander Zhou Yude to lead the Banzhou soldiers to act as the front line, the guerrilla commander Bianugaki to lead the Shenyang soldiers as the rear guard, the former general Guo Cheng to lead the Syrian and horse soldiers to guard the key areas, the general Zhu Wenda to lead the Pingcha soldiers to attack both sides, and let Li Yingxiang coordinate the battle in the middle, and the general Wang Feng to supervise the army.

古文：应祥令军中各树赤、白帜一，良民陷贼者徒手立赤帜下，熟番不附贼者徒手立白帜下，即免罪。
现代文：李应祥下令在宫中树立红旗、白旗各一面。陷入匪徒阵中的平民百姓只要空手站在红旗下面，不依附于匪徒的土著只要空手站在白旗下面，就可以免除罪责。
English: Li Yingxiang ordered to set up a red flag and a white flag on each side in the palace. Civilians caught in the bandits' ranks could be absolved of guilt as long as they stood under the red flag with empty hands, and indigenous people who did not adhere to the bandits could stand under the white flag with empty hands.

古文：番虽多，遇急不相救。
现代文：土著人虽多，到了危急的时候却不能互相营救。
English: Although there are many indigenous people, they cannot rescue each other in times of crisis.

古文：国师喇嘛者，狡猾，联姻青海酋丙兔与湾仲、占柯等，刻木连大小诸姓，歃血诅盟。
现代文：有位国师喇嘛，很狡猾，跟青海土著首领丙兔、湾仲、占柯等人结成亲家，将大小各姓连在一起刻在木板上，歃血为盟。
English: There was a very cunning Chinese scholar lama, who formed a family with the Qinghai aboriginal chiefs, such as Cunhu, Wanzhong, and Zhan Ke, and engraved their surnames together on a wooden board. They were blood allies.

古文：至是，邀湾仲、占柯先犯归化以尝官军。
现代文：到这时，邀请湾仲、占柯先侵犯归化攻打政府军。
English: At this time, he invited Wan Zhong and Zhan Ke to invade and attack the government troops.

古文：于德诱擒喇嘛、湾仲，守备曹希彬复击斩占柯。
现代文：周于德用计谋抓获喇嘛、湾仲，守备曹希彬又杀死占柯。
English: Zhou Yude used stratagems to capture Lama and Wan Zhong, guard Cao Xibin and kill Zhan Ke.

古文：丢骨、人荒、没舌三砦最强，于德皆攻克，复连破卜洞王诸砦。文达、成、之垣亦各拔数砦，与于德军合，遂攻破蜈蚣、茹儿诸巢。
现代文：丢骨、人荒、没舌三座寨堡最顽强，周于德将它们都攻克了，又接连击破卜洞王等寨堡，朱文达、郭成、边之垣也各自攻破几座寨堡，跟周于德的部队汇合，于是占领蜈蚣、茹儿等敌军巢穴。
English: Zhou Yude conquered them all, and successively defeated Bu Dongwang and other fortresses. Zhu Wenta, Guo Cheng and Bian Nongaki also broke through several fortresses, and merged with Zhou Yude's troops, thus occupying the enemy's nests such as Zou and Zhul.

古文：嘉靖初，之垣祖轮以指挥讨茹儿贼，被杀，漆其头为饮器。
现代文：嘉靖初年，边之垣的祖父边轮当指挥时讨伐茹儿的强盗，被强盗杀害，强盗把边轮的头骨上漆当作喝水饮酒的工具。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, when Bian Nougaki's grandfather, Bian Rong, was in command, he was killed by a bandit who was fighting against a bandit. The bandit painted Bian Rong's skull as a tool for drinking water.

古文：及是六十年，之垣乃得之，以还葬焉。
现代文：到这时已有六十年，边之垣才得到它，把它拿回去埋葬了。
English: By this time, it had been sixty years since Henozaki got hold of it, took it back and buried it.

古文：贼屡北，窘，悉弃辎重饵官军。
现代文：匪徒屡次失败，处境困难，全都抛弃辎重引诱政府军。
English: The bandits repeatedly failed and were in a difficult situation, so they all abandoned their heavy baggage to lure the government troops.

古文：官军不顾，斩关入，贼多死，河东平。
现代文：政府军不上当，杀敌入关，匪徒多战死。
English: The government army did not take the bait, killed the enemy and entered the pass, and many bandits died in the battle.

古文：寻渡河而西，连破西坡、西革、歪地、乾沟、树底诸巢。
现代文：河东平定，不久渡河向西进军，接连攻克西坡、西革、歪地、乾沟、树底各敌据点。
English: The east side of the river was pacified, and soon they crossed the river and marched westward, successively conquering the enemy strongholds of the western slope, the western slope, the crooked land, the dry ditch and the tree bottom.

古文：有小粟谷者，首乱，觇大军西，不设备。
现代文：有一个名叫小粟谷的，首先叛乱。侦察大部队西行，不做防备。
English: The first to rebel was a man named Owaridani, who led a large reconnaissance force westward without taking precautions.

古文：郭成夜袭之，大获。
现代文：郭成在晚上偷袭它，大获全胜。
English: Guo Cheng made a surprise attack on it in the evening and won a complete victory.

古文：牛尾砦尤险恶，将士三路夹攻，火其栅，斩酋合儿结父子。河西亦平。
现代文：牛尾砦形势尤其险恶，官兵分三路夹攻，放火烧毁栅栏，杀死敌匪头子合儿结父子，河西也平定了。
English: The situation at Fort Oxtail was particularly perilous. The officers and soldiers launched a three-pronged attack, set fire to the fence, killed the leader of the enemy bandits and his son, and the west of the river was also pacified.

古文：诸军得所积稞粟，留十日，尽焚其砦，以六月班师。
现代文：各部军队缴获匪徒搜集的粮食，停留了十天，将所有的寨堡都放火烧了，在六月份凯旋回师。
English: The troops of various departments seized the grain collected by the bandits, stayed for ten days, set fire to all the fortifications, and returned to the division in June.

古文：其逃穷谷者，求偏头结赛乞降，应祥令埋奴设誓，然后许之。
现代文：那些逃入深山老林的，请求偏头结赛投降，李应祥命令他们埋奴发誓，然后同意了。
English: Those who fled into the deep mountains and old forests requested to surrender, and Li Yingxiang ordered them to swear to bury their slaves, and then agreed.

古文：埋奴者，番人反接其奴，献军前，呼天而誓，即牵至要路，掘坎埋之，露其首，凡埋二十三人。
现代文：所谓 埋奴 ，是指当地土著返回接来奴隶，把他们送到军队前面，指天发誓，立即把他们牵到大路上，挖坑埋葬，将头留在外面，一共埋了二十三个人。
English: The so-called burying of slaves refers to the local indigenous people returning to pick up slaves, bringing them to the front of the army, swearing by heaven, immediately taking them to the highway, digging a pit to bury, leaving the head outside, and burying a total of 23 people.

古文：偏头结赛雅善天竺僧，僧言岁在鸡犬，番有厄。
现代文：偏头结赛一向跟天竺僧人很好。僧人说鸡狗之年，土著有灾难，偏头结赛相信他的话，预先躲到深山里去。
English: The monk said that it was the year of the rooster and the dog, and that there would be a disaster for the natives. The monk believed him and hid in the mountains in advance.

古文：偏头信之，预匿山谷中，逸贼以为神，迹而拜求之，故偏头为之请。
现代文：逃亡的匪徒把他当作神一样，跟着他，请求他收容，所以偏头结赛请求投降。
English: The fleeing bandits treated him like a god, followed him and asked him to take them in, so he ended the game with a request to surrender.

古文：是役也，焚碉房千六百有奇，生擒贼魁三十余人，俘馘以千余计。
现代文：这一仗，焚毁碉堡一千六百多座，活捉匪徒头目三十多人，俘虏数以千计。
English: During this battle, more than 1,600 bunkers were burned, more than 30 bandit leaders were captured alive, and thousands of prisoners were taken.

古文：自是群番震惊，不敢为患，边人树碑记绩焉。
现代文：从此之后，各土著少数民族受到极大的震动，不敢再为非作歹，边疆人民树立石碑记载了这次功绩。
English: Since then, the various indigenous ethnic minorities have been greatly shaken and no longer dare to do evil, and the people of the frontier have set up a stone monument to record this achievement.

古文：建昌、越巂诸卫，番倮杂居。
现代文：建昌、越各卫所，各少数民族与汉人杂居。
English: In Jianchang and Yueyang, ethnic minorities and Han people live together.

古文：建昌逆酋曰安守，曰五咱，曰王大咱，与越巂邛部黑骨夷并起为乱。
现代文：建昌叛匪头目有安宁、五咱、王大咱等人，跟越邛部黑骨夷一起发作叛乱。
English: The leaders of the Jianchang rebels, including Anning, Wu Zi, Wang Dazhe and others, rebelled together with the black-skinned people of Yueyang.

古文：巡抚徐元泰议讨，征兵万八千。
现代文：巡抚徐元泰准备讨伐，征兵一万八千人。
English: The governor Xu Yuantai prepared for the crusade, recruiting 18,000 soldiers.

古文：仍以文达、之垣分将，应祥统之，副使周光镐监其军。
现代文：仍然让朱文达、边之垣分别带领，由李应祥统帅，副使周光镐监督。
English: He still let Zhu Wenda and Bianzongaki lead separately, supervised by General Li Yingxiang and Deputy Envoy Zhou Guangyao.

古文：十一月，光镐先渡泸，黑骨与大咱已据相岭，焚三峡桥；五咱等亦寇礼州、德昌二所。
现代文：十一月，周光镐先渡过泸江，黑骨夷和王大咱已经占据相岭，焚烧了三峡桥，五咱等人也侵犯礼州、德昌二所。
English: In November, Zhou Guangyao crossed the Minjiang River first, while Heihe and Wang Dazhe occupied the Xiangling Mountains and burned the Three Gorges Bridge. Heihe and others also invaded the two cities of Leizhou and Dechang.

古文：时征兵未集，光镐先设疑，以尝相岭贼，贼果退据桐槽。
现代文：这时征兵还没有集中，周光镐先布置疑阵，来试探相岭的匪徒，匪徒果然退到桐槽据守。
English: At this time, the recruitment of soldiers had not yet been concentrated. Zhou Guangxun first arranged a doubtful array to test the bandits in Xiangling. The bandits finally retreated to Tongcuo to defend themselves.

古文：桐槽者，大咱巢穴也。
现代文：桐槽是王大咱的大本营。
English: Tong trough is the base camp of Wang Dazhe.

古文：已而诸道兵尽抵越巂，应祥令文达攻五咱，之垣攻大咱，姑置黑骨夷弗问。
现代文：不久各路兵都抵达越。李应祥命令朱文达攻击五咱，边之垣攻击王大咱，暂且将黑骨夷放到一边不做处理。
English: Soon all the soldiers arrived in Yue. Li Yingxiang ordered Zhu Wenta to attack the five, and Bianjing to attack Wang Dazhe, and temporarily put Heihe Yi aside without dealing with it.

古文：夜半走三百里抵礼州，贼半渡，文达击败之，遂渡河捣其巢。
现代文：半夜疾行军三百里直达礼州。匪徒渡河渡到一半，朱文达打败了他们，于是渡过河直捣敌人的老巢。
English: In the middle of the night, the army marched three hundred miles straight to Leshou. The bandits crossed the river halfway, Zhu Wenda defeated them, and then crossed the river to attack the enemy's nest.

古文：之垣亦屡破桐槽，大咱亡入山峪中。
现代文：边之垣也多次攻陷桐槽，王大咱逃入山谷中。
English: The edge of the wall was also repeatedly attacked by the Tong trough, and Wang Dazhe escaped into the valley.

古文：无何，五咱据磨旗山挑战。
现代文：不久，五咱占领磨旗山向政府军挑战。
English: Before long, five of us occupied Mount Maqi and challenged the government troops.

古文：官军夹击，贼退保毛牛山。
现代文：政府军从两边夹击，匪徒撤退到毛牛山设防。
English: The government forces clamped down from both sides, and the bandits retreated to Mao Niu Shan to fortify.

古文：山延袤六七百里，连大小西番界，文达兵大破之。五咱西遁，与安守合，结砦西溪。
现代文：毛牛山延绵广大六七百里，连接很多土著部落，朱文达部大败毛牛山匪徒，五咱向西逃跑，跟安守汇合，在西溪构筑防御工事。
English: Mao Niu Shan stretches for a vast six or seven hundred miles, connecting many indigenous tribes. Zhu Wenda defeated the Mao Niu Shan bandits, five of them fled westward, converged with Anshu, and built fortifications in Xixi.

古文：会所征盐井剌马兵三千至，狰狞跳跃，类非人形，诸番所深畏。
现代文：正好征集的三千盐井马剌兵赶到，面目狰狞，跳跃前进，形象不同于一般人，各土著非常害怕他们。
English: The three thousand soldiers of the Yanjing Horse Guards, who had just been conscripted, arrived, looking haggard, leaping forward, their appearance different from that of ordinary people, and the indigenous people were very afraid of them.

古文：应祥侦贼将劫营，乃潜移己营，而令剌马兵屯其处。
现代文：李应祥侦探到匪徒将要来劫营，于是悄悄地将自己的军营迁走，而让马剌兵驻扎在自己兵营的原处。
English: Detective Li Yingxiang found that the bandits were about to rob the camp, so he quietly moved his camp and let the horse soldiers stay in the original place of his camp.

古文：夜分贼来袭，剌马起击之，伏尸狼籍。
现代文：到了晚上匪徒来偷袭。马剌兵奋起还击，匪徒死伤遍地。
English: In the evening, the bandits made a sneak attack. The horse soldiers fought back, and the bandits were killed and injured everywhere.

古文：诸将遂进攻西溪，逐北至磨砦七板番，连兵图五咱，而令裨将田中科营麦达，逼安守。
现代文：各将领于是进攻西溪，北面到达磨砦七板番。各路兵汇合在一起准备攻打五咱，而命令副将田中科在麦达扎营，威胁安守。
English: The generals then attacked Xixi, and to the north arrived at the mill fortress Qiban. All the soldiers gathered together to prepare to attack the five, and ordered the deputy general Tanakako to camp in Meda, threatening the security.

古文：会谍者报守谋袭中科，应祥夜饮材官高逢胜三巨觥，令率敢死士三百疾趋七十里，抵麦达而伏。守夜至，遇伏被擒。
现代文：正好有间谍报告安守计划袭击田中科，李应祥跟材官高逢胜喝了三大杯酒，命令他率领三百人的敢死队疾行军七十里，抵达麦达设下埋伏，安守晚上到来，遇埋伏被活捉了。
English: Just as there was a spy report that Anshu was planning to attack Tanaka, Li Yingxiang drank three glasses of wine with Gao Fengsheng, a high-ranking official, and ordered him to lead a death squad of three hundred people to march seventy miles, arriving in Meda to set up an ambush. Anshu arrived in the evening and was caught alive in an ambush.

古文：守为群寇魁，守殪，西南邛笮、苴兰、靡莫诸酋皆震怖。
现代文：安守是众匪徒的首领，安守死，西南邛笮、苴兰、靡莫各土著首领都感到震动害怕。
English: Anshu is the leader of all the bandits, Anshu died, and the indigenous leaders of Southwest Yunnan, Yilan, and Midemo all felt shocked and afraid.

古文：商山四堡番乞降于之垣，大小七板番乞降于文达，各埋奴道左，呼号顿首，誓世世不敢叛。
现代文：商山四堡的土著向边之垣乞求投降，大小七板番向朱文达乞求投降。各自在路旁埋奴，呼号叩头，发誓世世代代不敢叛乱。
English: The aborigines of the four castles of the Shangshan Mountains begged for the surrender of the Border Wall, and the Big and Small Banners begged for the surrender of Zhu Wenda. They buried their slaves on the side of the road, bowed their heads, and swore that they would not dare to rebel for generations.

古文：五咱势穷，走昌州，亦为裨将王言所获。
现代文：五咱势单力薄，逃往昌州，也被副将王言抓获了。
English: Five of us, acting alone, fled to Changzhou, and were also captured by Vice Admiral Wang Yan.

古文：土木安四儿者，居连昌城中，潜剽掠于外。
现代文：土木安四儿，居住在连昌城中，偷偷地到城外抢劫骚扰，到这时得知灾祸要降临了。
English: The four sons of civil engineer An, who lived in Lianchang City, secretly went outside the city to rob and harass. At this time, they learned that the disaster was about to happen.

古文：至是知祸及，率党数百人走据虚郎沟。
现代文：率领党徒几百人逃到虚郎沟，把那里作为据点。
English: He led several hundred party members to flee to Chi Lang Gou and used it as a stronghold.

古文：诸军既灭五咱，应祥遣之北，示将讨黑骨者，四儿遂弛备。
现代文：各军消灭五咱后，李应祥把军队派往北边，装出将要讨伐黑骨夷的样子，安四儿于是放松了警惕。
English: After the five armies were eliminated, Li Yingxiang sent the army to the north, pretending to be going to fight against the Black Bones, and An Si'er then relaxed his vigilance.

古文：将士忽还军袭之，获四儿。
现代文：李应祥忽然挥军回头袭击他，抓获了安四儿。
English: Li Yingxiang suddenly turned around and attacked him, and captured An Si'er.

古文：复讨大咱。
现代文：又讨伐王大咱。
English: It's time to fight against Wang Dazhi again.

古文：初，大咱败，匿所亲普雄酋姑咱所。大军至，姑咱惧，密告裨将王之翰，之翰搜得大咱；而黑夷酋阿弓等七人在大孤山，亦先为之翰所擒。
现代文：当初，王大咱失败，躲藏到他的朋友普雄土著首领姑咱的住处，李应祥大军到来，姑咱害怕了，秘密告诉了副将王之翰，王之翰搜查到了王大咱，而黑夷的土著首领阿弓等七个人住在大孤山，在此之前也被王之翰抓获了。
English: At first, Wang Dazhe failed and hid in the residence of his friend Pu Xiong, an indigenous leader. Li Yingxiang's army arrived, and the aunt was afraid and secretly told the vice-general Wang Zhihang. Wang Zhihang searched Wang Dazhe, and seven people, including the indigenous leader of Heyi, lived in the Great Lonely Mountain, and were also captured by Wang Zhihang before that.

古文：于是建昌、越巂诸番尽平。
现代文：到这时建昌、越各土著都平定了。
English: By this time, the Jianchang and Yue tribes had been subdued.

古文：上首功二千有奇，抚降者三千余人。时万历十五年七月也。
现代文：献首级二千多兵，招降三千多人。这时是万历十五年七月。
English: At this time, it was July in the 15th year of Wanli, and more than 2,000 soldiers had offered their heads and more than 3,000 had been recruited.

古文：邛部属夷腻乃者，地近马湖。
现代文：土著部落腻乃属于邛部，邻近马湖。
English: The Aboriginal tribe of Utena belongs to the Shan State, near Lake Ma.

古文：其酋撒假与外兄安兴、木瓜夷白禄、雷坡贼杨九乍等，数侵掠内地。
现代文：它的首领撒假跟他的表兄安兴、木瓜部落的白禄、雷坡的强盗杨九乍等人，多次侵犯抢劫内地。
English: Its leader, Sahui, together with his cousin Anxing, Bai Lu of the Papaya tribe, and the robber Yang Jiu Cha of Lei Po, repeatedly invaded and robbed the inland.

古文：巡抚曾省吾议讨之。
现代文：巡抚曾省吾准备讨伐他们。
English: The governor had warned us to prepare to fight them.

古文：会有都蛮之役，不果。
现代文：正好都蛮战役，没有实行。
English: It just so happened that both campaigns were brutal and did not come to fruition.

古文：乃建六堡，益戍兵千二百人，而诸蛮鸱张如故。
现代文：于是修建六座碉堡，增加防守兵力一千二百人，而各土著仍像过去一样猖狂。
English: So six bunkers were built, and the garrison was increased by twelve hundred men, while the natives continued to be as violent as ever.

古文：及建、越兴师，又藏纳叛人。
现代文：等到建昌、越打仗时，各土著又窝藏叛匪。
English: When Jianchang and Yue fought a war, the aborigines again harbored rebels.

古文：元泰乃令都指挥李献忠等分剿。
现代文：徐元泰于是命令都指挥李献忠等人分兵围剿。
English: Xu Yuantai then ordered to command Li Xianzhong and other soldiers to surround the castle.

古文：贼诈降，诱执献忠等三将，杀士卒数千人，势益猖獗。
现代文：匪徒假装投降，诱惑抓住李献忠等三位将领，杀死士兵数千人，势力更加猖獗。
English: The bandits pretended to surrender, lured three generals, including Li Xianzhong, and killed thousands of soldiers. The forces became even more rampant.

古文：应祥等师旋，元泰益征播州、酉阳诸土兵，合五万人，令应祥督文达、之垣及周于德诸将三道入，故总兵郭成亦从征。
现代文：李应祥等人回师凯旋，徐元泰更加征发播州、酉阳等地的土著兵，一共五万人，命令李应祥统帅朱文达、边之垣和周于德各将领分三路进入，原总兵郭成也随军出征。
English: Li Yingxiang and others returned to the division in triumph, and Xu Yuantai further conscripted and dispatched indigenous soldiers from Banzhou, Fenyang and other places, a total of 50,000 people, and ordered Li Yingxiang's generals Zhu Wenda, Bianugaki and Zhou Yude to enter in three ways, and the former general Guo Cheng also went to war with the army.

古文：十一月，于德首败白禄兵，追至马蝗山，悬索以登，贼溃。
现代文：十月，周于德首先打败白禄兵，追到马蝗山，攀登索梯上山，匪徒溃败。
English: In October, Zhou Yude first defeated the Pailu soldiers, chased them to the Horse Locust Mountain, climbed the cable ladder up the mountain, and the bandits were defeated.

古文：乘势攻木瓜夷，射杀白禄。
现代文：乘胜攻击木瓜部，射死白禄。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, he attacked the papaya section and shot Bai Luo dead.

古文：追至利济山，雪深数尺，于德先登，复大败贼，毁其巢。
现代文：追赶到利济山，雪有几尺深。周于德首先登山，再次大败匪徒，放火焚烧了敌据点。
English: They chased them to Liji Mountain, where the snow was several feet deep. Zhou Yude climbed the mountain first, defeated the bandits again, and set fire to the enemy stronghold.

古文：初，撒假与九乍率万人据山，播州兵击走之。
现代文：当初，撒假跟陈九乍率领一万人占据山头，播州兵把他们打跑了。
English: At first, Sahui and Chen Jiu Cha led ten thousand people to occupy the hilltop, and the soldiers of the State Council beat them away.

古文：至是，文达复破之大田坝，合于德兵追逐，所向皆捷。
现代文：到这时，朱文达又一次在大田坝打败他们，汇合周于德部追击，所到之处都取得胜利。
English: By this time, Zhu Wenda had once again defeated them in Datangba, joined Zhou in the German pursuit, and achieved victory everywhere he went.

古文：游击万鏊蹑击撒假于鼠囤，获其妻子。
现代文：游击万鏊在鼠囤偷袭撒假，抓获了他的妻子、儿子。
English: The guerrillas attacked and ambushed him in Neusiedl, and captured his wife and son.

古文：郭成复至三宝山大战，生擒撒假。
现代文：郭成又在三宝山跟撒假大战，活捉了他。
English: Guo Cheng also fought with Sahui in Sanbao Mountain and captured him alive.

古文：安兴据巢守，文达、鏊分道入，获其母妻。
现代文：安兴据守大本营，朱文达、万鏊分兵进击，抓获了他的母亲、妻子。
English: Anxing defended the base camp, Zhu Wenda and Wanlu detachments attacked and captured his mother and wife.

古文：安兴掷金于途，以缓追者，遂得脱。
现代文：安兴在逃跑途中丢一些金子，减缓追赶他的人的速度，于是才得以逃脱。
English: Anxing dropped some gold on his way to escape, slowing down his pursuers, and only then was he able to escape.

古文：已，诸军深入，竟获之。
现代文：不久，各路大军深入进剿，最终抓获了他。
English: Before long, the various armies advanced deep into the forest and finally captured him.

古文：他夷倮畏威降者二千余人，悉献还土田，愿修职贡，兵乃罢。
现代文：其他土著部落害怕而投降的有二千多人。全部都交出了田地，愿意向朝廷进贡，于是罢兵。
English: More than two thousand people from other indigenous tribes were afraid and surrendered. They all gave up their fields, were willing to pay tribute to the imperial court, and then went on strike.

古文：凡斩首一千六百九十余，俘获七百三十有奇，以其地置屏山县。
现代文：一共斩首一千六百九十，俘虏七百三十多人，在这个地方设置屏山县。
English: A total of sixteen hundred and ninety people were beheaded, more than seven hundred and thirty people were captured, and Pingshan County was set up in this place.

古文：论功，应祥屡加都督同知，元泰亦至兵部尚书。
现代文：按军功，李应祥累积加官到都督同知，徐元泰也做到兵部尚书。
English: According to military merit, Li Yingxiang accumulated additional officers to the same level as the governor, and Xu Yuantai also achieved the highest rank in the military.

古文：当是时，蜀中剧寇尽平，应祥威名甚著。
现代文：这时，四川一带厉害的盗匪都已平定，李应祥威名远扬。
English: At this time, the powerful bandits in Sichuan had been subdued, and Li Yingxiang became famous.

古文：御史傅霈按部，诘应祥冒饟。
现代文：御史傅霈巡检部属，责备李应祥冒领军饷。
English: An official from the inspection department of the Gu Shi Fu Jun accused Li Yingxiang of leading the army.

古文：应祥贿以千金，为所奏，罢职。
现代文：李应祥贿赂他八千两银子，被他上报了，罢了李应祥的官。
English: Li Yingxiang bribed him with 8,000 taels of silver. He reported him to the authorities, and Li Yingxiang was no longer an official.

古文：兵部举应祥佥书南京右府，给事中薛三才持不可。
现代文：兵部推荐李应祥做南京右府佥书，给事中薛三才坚持不同意。
English: Li Yingxiang was recommended by the Ministry of Military Affairs to write the official document of the right-wing government of Nanjing, but Xue Sancai did not agree.

古文：二十八年大征播州。
现代文：万历二十八年大规模征伐播州。
English: In the 28th year of Wanli, there was a large-scale logging in Banzhou.

古文：贵州总兵官童元镇逗遛，总督李化龙劾之，荐应祥代。
现代文：贵州总兵官董元镇停留不前，总督李化龙弹劾他，推荐李应祥代替他。
English: Guizhou's military commander-in-chief, Dong Yuanzhen, did not move forward. Governor Li Hualong impeached him and recommended Li Yingxiang to replace him.

古文：时分兵八道，贵州分乌江、兴隆二道。
现代文：这时军队分为八道，贵州分为乌江、兴隆二道。
English: At this time, the army was divided into eight provinces, and Guizhou was divided into two provinces, Wujiang and Xinglong.

古文：诏元镇充为事官，由乌江入，应祥由兴隆入，诸道克二月望进兵。
现代文：下诏董元镇充当事官由乌江道进入，李应祥由兴隆道进入，各道限定在二月十五日进兵。
English: According to the following edict, Dong Yuan Zhen as the party official entered from Wujiang Road, Li Yingxiang entered from Xinglong Road, and each road was limited to entering the army on February 15.

古文：应祥未受事，副将陈寅等已连克数囤，拒贼四牌高囤下，别遣兵从间道直捣龙水囤。
现代文：李应祥还没有上任，副将陈寅等人已连克数座敌营，将匪徒赶到四牌高囤下面，另外派小分队从小路直捣龙水囤。
English: Li Yingxiang has not yet taken office, Vice-General Chen Yin and others have already lynched several enemy camps, driven the bandits to the bottom of the four-card high roller, and sent a small detachment to directly attack the dragon and water roller from the side road.

古文：他将蔡兆吉又自乾坪抵箐冈，过四牌。
现代文：其他将领蔡兆吉又从乾坪抵达箐冈，经过四牌。
English: Other generals, Cai Zhaojie, arrived in Shaoshan from Gyeongpyeong, passing through four gates.

古文：贼首谢朝俸营其地，四面峭壁深箐，前二关。
现代文：强盗头子谢朝俸经营他的根据地，四面都是丛林峭壁，前面有二道关隘。
English: The robber chief Xie Chaopeng runs his base, surrounded on all sides by jungle cliffs and fronted by two passes.

古文：贼从高鼓噪，官军殊死战，俘朝俸妻子，乘势抵河畔。会乌江败书闻，敛兵不进者旬日。
现代文：强盗们从高处往下呐喊冲击，政府军拼死作战，俘虏了谢朝俸的老婆孩子，乘胜利之势进抵河畔，正好碰到乌江失败的书信到达，收拾部队原地待命有十来天。
English: The bandits shouted from the heights to attack, the government army fought to the death, captured the wife and children of Xie Chaobun, took advantage of the victory and arrived at the riverbank, just as the failed letter arrived at the Wujiang River, and the troops were on standby for ten days.

古文：及应祥受任，益趣诸将急渡。寅等乃取他道渡河，而潜为浮桥以济师。
现代文：等到李应祥上任，便催促各将领快速渡河，陈寅等人于是一边从其他途径渡河，一边却偷偷地架设浮桥渡过大部队。
English: When Li Yingxiang took office, he urged the generals to cross the river quickly. Chen Yin and others crossed the river by other means, but secretly built a pontoon bridge to cross the large army.

古文：诸军渡，贼失险，乞降者相继，应祥悉受之。
现代文：各军渡河后，匪徒失去可以凭借的天险，纷纷乞求投降，李应祥全都接受了。
English: After the armies crossed the river, the bandits lost the natural danger they could rely on and begged for surrender one after another. Li Yingxiang accepted all of them.

古文：贼所恃止黄滩一关，壁立，众死守。
现代文：匪徒所凭借的只有黄滩关，它像墙壁一样陡直，众匪徒在那里死守。
English: The only thing the bandits can rely on is Huangtan Pass. It is as steep and straight as a wall, and the bandits hold out there.

古文：会贼徒石胜俸等率万余人降，告曰： 去黄滩三十里有三关，入播门户也，先袭破之，则黄滩孤难守。 
现代文：正好匪徒石胜俸等率领一万多人投降，告诉说： 离黄滩三十里有三个关隘，是进入播州的门户，先攻取这三关，那么黄滩就孤立难守了。 
English: Just then, the bandit Shi Shengfeng and others led more than ten thousand people to surrender, telling them: There are three passes within thirty miles of the Yellow Beach, which is the gateway to Banzhou. If you capture these three passes first, then the Yellow Beach will be difficult to defend alone.

古文：应祥然其计，令偕陈寅率精卒四千夜抵关下。
现代文：李应祥同意了这个计划，命令陈寅率领精兵四千人在夜晚抵达关下。
English: Li Yingxiang agreed to the plan and ordered Chen Yin to lead 4,000 elite soldiers to the pass at night.

古文：胜俸以数十骑诱开门，歼其戍卒。
现代文：石胜俸带着几十个骑兵引诱匪徒开门，然后歼灭了守门匪徒。
English: Shi Shengfeng led dozens of cavalry to lure the bandits to open the gate, and then annihilated the gate-keeping bandits.

古文：黄滩贼惧。
现代文：黄滩的匪徒们害怕了。
English: The Yellow Beach gangsters are scared.

古文：寅督诸将渡河攻关前，胜俸由坟林暗渡袭关后，贼乃大败。
现代文：陈寅统领各位将领渡河猛攻关前，石胜俸从坟林暗渡偷袭关后，匪徒于是大败。
English: Chen Yin led the generals to storm the pass before the river, and after Shi Shengfeng sneaked across from the cemetery to attack the pass, the bandits were defeated.

古文：应祥直抵海龙囤，合诸道兵共灭杨应龙。
现代文：李应祥直达海龙囤，联合各路部队一起消灭了杨应龙。
English: Li Yingxiang went straight to Hailonglu, and together with the troops from all directions, eliminated Yang Yinglong.

古文：播既平，还镇铜仁。
现代文：播州平定后，回师镇守铜仁。
English: After the pacification of Banshu, he returned to Shizhen to defend Tongren.

古文：明年，改镇四川。播遗贼吴洪、卢文秀等恶有司法严，而遵义知县萧鸣世失众心。
现代文：第二年改派镇守四川，播州匪徒的余党吴洪、卢文秀等人讨厌有关部门法令太严，而遵义知县萧鸣世又不得人心。
English: The following year, he was reassigned as the town guard of Sichuan. The remaining members of the Banzhou bandits, Wu Hong, Lu Wenxiu and others, hated the strictness of the relevant department's laws, and Xiao Mingshi of Zunyichi County was also unpopular.

古文：洪等遂称应龙有子，聚众为乱。
现代文：吴洪等人于是宣称杨应龙还有儿子在世，聚集众人叛乱。
English: Wu Hong and others then claimed that Yang Yinglong still had a son alive, and gathered people to rebel.

古文：应祥偕副使傅光宅捕之，尽获。
现代文：李应祥随同副使傅光宅一起搜捕他们，将他们全部抓获。
English: Li Yingxiang, together with Vice Envoy Fu Guangzhu, searched for them and captured them all.

古文：及是，逮至京，下吏，罪当死。法司援前岑溪功，谪戍烟瘴。
现代文：李应祥不久死于任上。因为平定播州有功，赠左都督，世代荫封为千户。
English: Li Yingxiang died soon after taking office. Because of his contribution to the suppression of Banzhou, he was given the title of left-wing governor, and a thousand households were sealed for generations.

古文：遇赦，广西巡抚戴耀为请，部议不许，竟卒于戍所。
现代文：李应祥作为将领，有勇有谋，所到之处都捷报频传。
English: As a general, Li Yingxiang was courageous and resourceful. He was reported to be successful everywhere he went.

古文：陈璘，字朝爵，广东翁源人。
现代文：平定四川三大盗匪，李应祥居功最多。陈璘，字朝爵，广东翁源人。
English: Li Yingxiang made the greatest contribution to the suppression of the three major bandits in Sichuan. Chen Zhen, Zhaozhe, Guangdong Wengyuan.

古文：嘉靖末，为指挥佥事。
现代文：嘉靖末年，担任指挥佥事。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he served as the conductor of the orchestra.

古文：从讨英德贼有功，进广东守备。
现代文：随军讨伐英德强盗立下战功，提升为广东守备。
English: Accompanying the army to fight against the British and German bandits, he made great achievements in the war and was promoted to the Guangdong garrison.

古文：与平大盗赖元爵及岭东残寇。
现代文：参加平定大强盗赖元爵和岭东的残匪。
English: Participate in the suppression of the great robber Lai Yuanjie and the remnants of Lingdong.

古文：万历初，讨平高要贼邓胜龙，又平揭阳贼及山贼钟月泉，屡进署都指挥佥事，佥书广东都司。
现代文：万历初年，征讨平定高要土匪邓胜龙，又平定揭阳土匪和山匪钟月泉，多次提升到代理都指挥佥事，佥书广东都司。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he subdued the high-ranking bandit Deng Shenglong, the Jieyang bandit and the mountain bandit Zhong Yuequan, and was promoted to the deputy commander of the Anecdote many times. He was appointed the Guangdong Provincial Secretary.

古文：官军攻诸良宝，副将李成立战败。总督殷正茂请假璘参将，自将一军。
现代文：政府军攻打诸良宝，副将李成立战败，总督殷正茂请求临时授予陈璘参将职，让他自己统帅一支部队。
English: The government army attacked Zhu Liangbao, Vice-General Li Jianzhong was defeated, and Governor Yin Zhengmao requested to temporarily grant Chen Yuxin the position of general and let him command a unit.

古文：贼平，授肇庆游击将军，徙高州参将。
现代文：土匪平定后，授予肇庆游击将军，调任高州参将。
English: After the bandits were subdued, Zhao Qing was awarded the title of guerrilla general and transferred to the post of Gaozhou general.

古文：总督凌云翼将大征罗旁，先下令雕剿。
现代文：总督凌云翼将要大规模地征伐罗旁，先下令实行围剿。
English: Governor Ling Yunyi is going to conquer Luoban on a large scale, and first ordered the implementation of the encirclement.

古文：璘所破凡九十巢。
现代文：陈璘一共扫荡九十个敌据点。
English: Chen Xi swept a total of ninety enemy strongholds.

古文：已，分十道大征。
现代文：不久，兵分十路大规模征讨。
English: Soon, a large-scale conscription of ten divisions of soldiers began.

古文：璘从信宜入，会诸军，覆灭之，以其地置罗定州及东安、西宁二县。
现代文：陈璘从信宜进入，会合各路军，消灭了敌人，在当地设置罗定州和东安、西宁二个县。
English: Chen Xi entered from Xinyi, rallied all the armies, eliminated the enemy, and set up two counties in the area, namely, Luoding and Dong'an, and Xining.

古文：即迁璘副总兵，署东安参将事。
现代文：随即提升陈璘为副总兵，代理东安参将事宜。
English: Subsequently, Chen Yu was promoted to deputy commander-in-chief, acting as Dongan's representative.

古文：未几，余孽杀吏民，责璘戴罪办贼。
现代文：不久，残匪杀死官民。责令陈璘带罪杀贼。
English: Not long after, the remaining bandits killed officials and civilians. Chen Xi was ordered to take part in the crime of killing the thieves.

古文：璘会他将朱文达攻破石牛、青水诸巢，斩捕三百六十余人，授俸如故。
现代文：陈璘会合其他将领朱文达等攻占石牛、青水各据点，捕获斩首三百六十多人，照原样给予他俸禄。
English: Chen Xi rallied other generals, such as Zhu Wenda, to capture the strongholds of Shiniu and Qingshui, captured and beheaded more than 360 people, and gave him his salary as it was.

古文：时东安初定，璘大兴土木，营寺庙，役部卒，且勒其出赀。
现代文：这时东安刚刚安定，陈璘大兴土木，营建寺庙，役使他的部下，并且勒索他们出钱。
English: At this time, Dong'an had just been stabilized, and Chen Xi began to build temples and do civil engineering. He also forced his subordinates to work for him and extorted money from them.

古文：卒咸怒，因事倡乱，掠州县，为巡按御史罗应鹤所劾，诏夺璘官。
现代文：士兵们都被激怒了，于是发生暴乱，抢劫州县，被巡抚御史罗应鹤揭发了，下诏剥夺了陈璘的官职。
English: Enraged, the soldiers rioted, looted counties and prefectures, and were denounced by the governor, Shiro Yinghe, who stripped Chen Xi of his official position.

古文：既而获贼，乃除罪，改狼山副总兵。
现代文：不久抓住了匪徒，于是解除了对他的处罚，改任狼山副总兵。
English: The gangster was soon caught, and the punishment against him was lifted, and he was reassigned to the post of vice-commander-in-chief of Wolf Mountain.

古文：璘有谋略，善将兵，然所至贪黩，复被劾褫官。
现代文：陈璘很有谋略，善于用兵打仗，然而所到之处都很贪财，又一次被弹劾剥夺了官职。
English: Chen Xi was very strategic and good at using soldiers to fight wars, but he was greedy for money everywhere he went. He was once again impeached and stripped of his official position.

古文：废久之，朝士多惜其才，不敢荐。
现代文：废除很久了，朝廷中很多人爱惜他的才干，却不敢举荐他。
English: It has been abolished for a long time, and many people in the imperial court cherish his talent, but dare not recommend him.

古文：二十年，朝鲜用兵，以璘熟倭情，命添注神机七营参将，至则改神枢右副将。无何，擢署都督佥事，充副总兵官，协守蓟镇。
现代文：万历二十年，朝鲜打仗，因为陈璘熟悉倭寇的情况，命令提为神机七营参将。没多久，提拔代理都督佥事，充任副总兵官，协同防守蓟镇。
English: In the 20th year of the Wanli era, North Korea was at war. Because Chen Qi was familiar with the situation of the wokou, he ordered him to be promoted to the general of the 7th battalion. Not long after, he was promoted to the deputy governor of Anji, served as the deputy chief military officer, and cooperated in the defense of Shanzhen.

古文：明年正月诏以本官统蓟、辽、保定、山东军，御倭防海。
现代文：第二年正月下诏以本官统领蓟镇、辽阳、保定、山东各军。抵抗倭寇保卫海防。
English: In the first month of the second year, he issued an edict that he would take command of the armies of Shanzhen, Liaoyang, Baoding, and Shandong. He resisted the Japanese pirates and defended the coastal defense.

古文：会有封贡之议，暂休兵，改璘协守漳、潮。
现代文：正好朝廷议论封日本为王接受朝贡的事情，暂且休兵，改派陈璘协助防守漳州、潮州。
English: Just as the imperial court was discussing the matter of making Japan the king and accepting the tribute, it temporarily suspended the army and reassigned Chen Xi to assist in the defense of Zhangzhou and Chaozhou.

古文：坐贿石星，为所奏，复罢归。
现代文：贿赂石星，被他揭发了，又被罢官回家。
English: He was exposed for bribing Shi Xing, and was dismissed from his post and sent home.

古文：二十五年，封事败，起璘故官，统广东兵五千援朝鲜。
现代文：万历二十五年，封日本为王的事情失败，起用陈璘，恢复他的官职，统帅五千广东兵支援朝鲜。
English: In the 25th year of Wanli, after the attempt to make Japan the king failed, Chen Qi was appointed and resumed his official position, commanding 5,000 Guangdong soldiers to support North Korea.

古文：明年二月，擢御倭总兵官，与麻贵、刘綎并将。
现代文：第二年二月提拔为御倭总兵官，跟麻贵、刘纟廷一起统帅部队。
English: In February of the following year, he was promoted to General of the Imperial Japanese Army, commanding the troops together with Magui and Liu Bingding.

古文：部卒次山海关鼓噪，璘被责。
现代文：他的部下驻扎在山海关时大声喧哗，陈璘受到谴责。
English: When his subordinates were stationed at Shanhaiguan, they made a lot of noise, and Chen Qi was reprimanded.

古文：寻令提督水军，与贵、綎及董一元分道进，副将陈蚕、邓子龙，游击马文焕、季金、张良相等皆属焉，兵万三千余人，战舰数百，分布忠清、全罗、庆尚诸海口。
现代文：不久命令他提督水军，跟麻贵、刘纟廷以及董一元分路前进，副将陈蚕、邓子龙，游击马文焕、季金、张良相等人跟着他们。士兵一万三千多人，战舰数百艘，分布在忠清、全罗、庆尚各海口。
English: He soon ordered the admiral of the navy to advance with Magui, Liu Bingding and Dong Yiyuan, and vice-commanders Chen Sil, Deng Zilong, guerrillas Ma Wenhuan, Ji Jin, Zhang Liangxiang and others followed them. More than 13,000 soldiers and hundreds of warships were distributed in the coasts of Chungcheong, Jeolla and Gyeongsang.

古文：初，贼泛海出没，官军乏舟，故得志。
现代文：当初，敌人泛海出没，政府军缺乏战船，所以让敌人得志猖狂。
English: At first, the enemy infested the sea, and the government army lacked warships, so let the enemy go wild.

古文：及见璘舟师，惧不敢往来海中。
现代文：等到看见陈璘的水军，倭寇害怕不敢到海上行走。
English: When they saw Chen Qi's navy, the wako were afraid to go to sea.

古文：会平秀吉死，贼将遁，璘急遣子龙偕朝鲜将李舜臣邀之。
现代文：正好平秀吉死了，敌人将要逃跑，陈璘急忙派遣邓子龙会同朝鲜将领李舜臣在丰道上截击敌人。
English: Just as Heping Hideyoshi died and the enemy was about to flee, Chen Xi hurriedly dispatched Deng Zilong and North Korean general Ri Son Son to intercept the enemy on the Fengtao.

古文：子龙战没，蚕、金等军至，邀击之，倭无斗志，官军焚其舟。
现代文：邓子龙战死，陈蚕、季金等率军赶到，拦腰打击敌人，倭寇丧失斗志，政府军放火烧了敌战船。
English: Deng Zilong was killed in the battle, Chen Silkworm, Ji Jin and other leaders of the army arrived, stopped and attacked the enemy, the wokou lost their fighting spirit, and the government army set fire to the enemy warship.

古文：贼大败，脱登岸者又为陆兵所歼，焚溺死者万计。
现代文：倭寇大败，逃脱登上岸的又被陆军歼灭，烧死溺死的数以万计。
English: The wako were soundly defeated, and those who managed to get ashore were annihilated by the army, and tens of thousands of them were burned to death or drowned.

古文：时綎方攻行长，驱入顺天大城。
现代文：这时刘纟廷正攻打行长，把他赶进顺天城中。
English: At this time, Liu Bingding was attacking the governor and drove him into the city of Shuntian.

古文：璘以舟师夹击，复焚其舟百余。石曼子西援行长，璘邀之半洋，击杀之，歼其徒三百余。
现代文：陈璘派水军夹攻，又焚烧了敌人一百多条船，石曼子从西边支援行长，陈璘在中途海面上将他截住，消灭了他，歼灭敌人三百多人。
English: Chen Zhe sent the navy to attack and burned more than a hundred enemy ships. Shi Manzi supported the governor from the west. Chen Zhe intercepted him in the middle of the sea, eliminated him, and destroyed more than three hundred enemies.

古文：贼退保锦山，官军挑之不出。
现代文：敌人退到锦山防守，政府军挑战，敌不出战。
English: The enemy retreated to the defense of Jinshan, the government forces challenged, and the enemy did not fight.

古文：已，渡匿乙山。
现代文：不久，渡海躲藏到乙山。
English: Soon after, he crossed the sea and hid in Mount E.

古文：崖深道险，将士不敢进。
现代文：这里悬崖深邃，道路险恶，官兵不敢前进。
English: Here, the cliffs are deep, the roads are treacherous, and officers and soldiers dare not advance.

古文：璘夜潜入，围其岩洞。
现代文：陈璘率部队在晚上偷偷地摸进去，包围了岩洞。
English: Chen Jun and his troops sneaked in at night and surrounded the cave.

古文：比明，炮发，倭大惊，奔后山，凭高以拒。
现代文：等到天亮，发炮，倭寇大惊失色，逃往后山，居高临下，负隅顽抗。
English: Wait until dawn, the cannons are fired, the wako are shocked, lose their color, flee to the back of the mountain, stand tall, and stubbornly resist.

古文：将士殊死攻，贼遁走。
现代文：众将士奋勇作战，敌人逃跑了。
English: The soldiers fought bravely, and the enemy fled.

古文：璘分道追击，贼无脱者。
现代文：陈璘分兵追击，将敌人一网打尽。
English: Chen Yao's detachment chased after the enemy and killed them all.

古文：论功，璘为首，綎次之，贵又次之。
现代文：论功劳，陈璘第一，刘纟廷第二，麻贵第三。
English: In terms of merit, Chen Xi ranked first, Liu Bingting second, and Magui third.

古文：进璘都督同知，世荫指挥佥事。
现代文：提升陈璘为都督同知，世代荫封指挥佥事。
English: Anecdote about the promotion of Chen Xi to the post of governor-general, which has been passed down through the generations.

古文：师甫旋，会有征播之役。
现代文：军队回来，碰上征伐播州的战役。
English: When the troops returned, they encountered the campaign of conquering and spreading the state.

古文：命璘为湖广总兵官，由偏桥进，副将陈良玭由龙泉，受璘节制。
现代文：任命陈璘为湖广总兵官，由偏桥进军，副将陈良笿由龙泉进军，归陈璘指挥。
English: Chen Qi was appointed as the general officer of Hukang and marched from the bridge. Vice Admiral Chen Liangqi marched from Longquan and was commanded by Chen Qi.

古文：二十八年二月，军次白泥，杨应龙子朝栋率众二万渡乌江迎战。
现代文：万历二十八年二月，军队驻扎在白泥，杨应龙的儿子杨朝栋率领二万士兵渡过乌江迎战。
English: In February of the 28th year of Wanli, the army was stationed in Baidi. Yang Chaodong, the son of Yang Yinglong, led 20,000 soldiers across the Wujiang River to meet the war.

古文：璘前御之，而分两翼蹑其后。
现代文：陈璘在前面迎战敌人，而另分两支部队从两边包抄到敌军后面。
English: Chen Xuan faced the enemy in the front, while two other troops encircled the enemy from both sides.

古文：贼少挫，追奔至龙溪山，贼合四牌贼共拒。
现代文：匪徒受到小挫折，逃跑到龙溪山，与四牌的匪徒会合共同抵抗。
English: The bandits suffered a small setback, fled to Longxi Mountain, and met with the four-card bandits to jointly resist.

古文：四牌在江外，与江内七牌皆五司遗种、九股恶苗，素助贼。
现代文：四牌在乌江之外，与乌江之内的七牌都是五司的后裔，九股凶恶的苗民一向帮助匪徒。
English: The four cards outside the Wujiang River and the seven cards inside the Wujiang River are all descendants of the Five Divisions, and the nine groups of vicious Miao people have always helped the bandits.

古文：璘广招抚，乃进军龙溪。
现代文：陈璘广泛地招降安抚，于是进军龙溪。
English: Chen Xuan extensively invited submission and appeasement, and then marched into Longxi.

古文：侦知贼有伏，令游击陈策用火器击之，贼据险，矢石雨下。
现代文：侦察得知敌人有埋伏，命令游击陈策用火器攻打。匪徒们占据天险，箭头火石像下雨一般。
English: Reconnaissance learned that the enemy had an ambush, and ordered the guerrilla Chen Zhe to attack with firearms. The bandits occupied the natural hazard, and the arrows were flinty like rain.

古文：璘先登，斩小校退者以徇，把总吴应龙等陷阵，贼大溃，退四牌保儿囤。
现代文：陈璘首先登山，杀死后退的小校示众。把总吴应龙等人冲入敌阵，匪徒大败而逃，撤退到四牌保儿囤。
English: Chen Yao first climbed the mountain, killed the retreating small school demonstrators. The general Wu Yinglong and others rushed into the enemy lines, the bandits were defeated and fled, and retreated to the four-card Bao Er.

古文：璘二裨将逼之，中伏。
现代文：陈璘的二个副将迫近，中了埋伏。
English: Chen Xuan's two lieutenants approached and were ambushed.

古文：璘募死士从应龙等奋击，贼复溃，奔据囤巅，夜由山后遁。
现代文：陈璘招募敢死队跟随吴应龙等人猛攻，匪徒又一次失败逃跑，龟缩在山顶，晚上由山后逃走。
English: Chen Yao recruited death squads to follow Wu Yinglong and others in the onslaught. The bandits once again failed to escape, cowering at the top of the mountain and fleeing from the back of the mountain in the evening.

古文：黎明追及于袁家渡，复败之。四牌之贼遂尽。
现代文：天亮后追赶到袁家渡，再次打败敌人，四牌的匪徒于是全部被消灭了。
English: After dawn, they chased Yuan Jia Du and defeated the enemy again, and the four-card bandits were all eliminated.

古文：三月望，诸军为浮桥渡江。知贼将张佑、谢朝俸、石胜俸等营七牌野猪山，璘即夜发抵苦练坪。
现代文：三月十五日，各军架浮桥渡江，得知强盗头子张佑、谢朝俸、石胜俸等人在七牌野猪山安营，陈璘立即连夜进军抵达苦练坪。
English: On March 15th, each army set up a pontoon bridge to cross the river, and learned that the bandit leaders Zhang You, Xie Chaopeng, Shi Shengpeng and others were camped in the seven wild boar mountains. Chen Xi immediately marched overnight and arrived at Ku Lianping.

古文：前锋与战，后军至，夹击之，贼败逃深箐，官军遂入苦菜关。
现代文：前锋跟敌人交战，后续部队到达，前后夹击。强盗逃进老林中，政府军于是进入苦菜关。
English: The forward battled with the enemy, the follow-up troops arrived and clashed back and forth. The bandits fled into the old forest, and the government army entered the bitter cabbage pass.

古文：会童元镇乌江师败，璘惧，请退师，总督李化龙不可。
现代文：碰上童元镇在乌江战败，陈璘害怕了，请求撤退，总督李化龙不同意。
English: When Tongyuan Town was defeated in the Wujiang River, Chen Yao was afraid and asked to withdraw, but Governor Li Hualong did not agree.

古文：璘乃进营楠木桥，次湄潭。
现代文：陈璘于是进军楠木桥，驻扎湄潭。
English: Chen Xi then marched into Nanmu Bridge and stationed in Meitan.

古文：贼悉聚青蛇、长坎、玛瑙、保子四囤，地皆绝险，而青蛇尤甚。
现代文：匪徒全都聚集在青蛇、长坎、玛瑙、保子四座囤子里，地势都很险要，而青蛇囤为最。
English: The bandits all gathered in the four villages of Qingzhe, Changkan, Onyx, and Baozi. The terrain was very dangerous, and Qingzhe was the most dangerous.

古文：璘议，同日攻则兵力弱，止攻一囤，则三囤必相助，乃先攻三囤，次及青蛇。
现代文：陈璘商议，同一天进攻四囤则兵力不够，只攻击一囤，那么其余三囤一定来增援。于是先攻击三囤，然后进攻青蛇囤。
English: Chen Yao deliberated that if they attacked four counties on the same day, they would not have enough troops. If they only attacked one county, then the remaining three counties would definitely come to reinforce. Therefore, they attacked three counties first, and then attacked Qinghe County.

古文：良玭师亦来会，令伏囤后，别以一军守板角关，防贼逸。
现代文：陈良笿部也来会师，让他到囤后埋伏，另外派一支部队把守板角关，防止敌人逃跑。
English: Chen Liang's subordinate also came to join the division, let him ambush after the battle, and sent another unit to guard the corner gate to prevent the enemy from escaping.

古文：璘督诸将力攻三日，贼死伤无算，三囤遂下。青蛇四面陡绝，璘围其三面，购死士从玛瑙后附葛至山背举炮，贼惶骇，诸军进攻，焚其茅屋。
现代文：陈璘统领各将大力攻击了三天，敌人死伤无数，三囤于是被攻占，青蛇囤四面都是悬崖绝壁，陈璘包围了三面，用重金收买不怕死的人从玛瑙后面爬着树藤到山后放炮。匪徒惊慌失措，各路大军进攻，放火焚烧茅屋。
English: Chen Pi led the generals in a vigorous attack for three days. The enemy suffered countless deaths and injuries. Sanpi was then captured. Qinghepi was surrounded by cliffs on all sides. Chen Pi surrounded the three sides, and used heavy money to bribe people who were not afraid of death to climb trees and vines from behind the agate to the back of the mountain to fire cannons. The bandits panicked, and large armies attacked from all directions, setting fire to huts.

古文：贼退入囤内，木石交下。
现代文：匪徒退进囤内，木头石块纷纷落下。
English: The bandits retreated into the moat, and the wooden blocks fell one after another.

古文：将士冒死上，毁大栅二重，前后击之，贼大败，斩首一千九百有奇，七牌之贼亦尽。
现代文：将士冒死冲锋，摧毁了两重大栅栏，前后夹击。匪徒大败，斩首一千九百多人，七牌的匪徒也被消灭了。
English: The soldiers made a death-defying charge, destroyed two major fences, and fought back and forth. The bandits were defeated, and more than nineteen hundred people were beheaded. The seven-card bandits were also eliminated.

古文：乃分兵六道，攻克大小三渡关，乘胜抵海龙囤下。
现代文：于是分兵六路，攻克大小三渡关，乘胜直达海龙囤下。
English: As a result, the detachment of soldiers went six ways, conquered the three passages of large and small, and took advantage of the victory to reach the bottom of the sea dragon.

古文：诸将俱攻囤前，独水西安疆臣攻其后，相持四十余日。
现代文：各将都攻击海龙囤前面，唯独水西安疆臣在后面攻击。战局四十多天相持不下。
English: All generals attacked the front of Hailongyi, except for the minister of water Xi'an Jiangxi Province, who attacked the rear. The war situation lasted for more than forty days.

古文：其下受贼重贿，多与通，且潜以火药遗贼，故贼不备。
现代文：部下接受匪徒的重礼贿赂，很多人与他们勾结，还偷偷地把火药送给匪徒，所以匪徒事前不做防备。
English: Their subordinates accepted heavy gifts and bribes from the bandits, and many people colluded with them. They also secretly sent gunpowder to the bandits, so the bandits did not take precautions in advance.

古文：其后璘知之，与监军者谋，令疆臣退一舍，璘移其处，置铁牌百余，距囤丈许，贼强弩无所施，又为箛板于栅前，贼每夜出劫，为钉伤，不敢复出。
现代文：后来陈璘知道了，跟监军商量，让安疆臣后撤三十里。陈璘也把部队转移到别处，在距离囤子一丈多远的地方安置一百多个铁牌，匪徒强劲的弓箭也就失去了作用。又用竹子削成箭板安放在栅栏前面，匪徒每天晚上出来抢劫，被竹箭板钉伤，不敢再出来了。
English: Later, Chen Yao learned of this and, in consultation with the supervisors of the troops, ordered An Jiangcheng to retreat thirty miles. Chen Yao also moved the troops to another place, and placed more than a hundred iron plaques at a distance of more than a yard from the raft, so that the strong bows and arrows of the bandits would no longer be effective. He also cut bamboo into arrow boards and placed them in front of the fence. The bandits came out to rob every night, and were injured by the bamboo arrow boards, so they did not dare to come out again.

古文：应龙势穷，相聚哭。
现代文：杨应龙到了山穷水尽的地步，聚集在一起哭泣。
English: Yang Yinglong came to the point of exhaustion, gathered together to cry.

古文：化龙初有令，诸将分日攻。
现代文：李化龙当初下令，让各将分开时间轮番进攻。
English: Li Hualong initially ordered that each team attack in turn at different times.

古文：六月六日，璘与吴广当进兵。
现代文：六月六日，轮到陈璘和吴广进攻，陈璘在晚上四更时分让士兵含竹木片上山。
English: On June 6th, it was the turn of Chen Yu and Wu Guang to attack. At four o'clock in the evening, Chen Yu sent soldiers up the mountain with bamboo and wood.

古文：璘夜四更衔枚上，贼鼾睡，斩其守关者，树白帜，鸣炮，贼大惊溃散，应龙自焚。
现代文：匪徒正在熟睡，杀死守关的匪徒，树起白旗，鸣放大炮。匪徒十分惊慌，四处逃散，杨应龙放火自焚。
English: The bandits were sleeping soundly. They killed the guard, raised a white flag and fired a large cannon. The bandits panicked and fled in all directions. Yang Yinglong set fire to himself.

古文：广军亦至，贼尽平。
现代文：吴广的军队也到了，匪徒全部被消灭。
English: Wu Guang's army also arrived, and all the bandits were wiped out.

古文：遂移师讨皮林。
现代文：于是转移军队征讨皮林。
English: As a result, the army was transferred to fight against Pirin.

古文：皮林在湖、贵交，与九股苗相接。
现代文：皮林在湖广、贵州交界，跟九股苗接壤。
English: Pirin is located at the junction of Huguang and Guizhou, bordering Jiuquan Miao.

古文：有吴国佐者，洪州司特峒寨苗也，桀黠无赖，其从父大荣以叛诛，国佐收其妾。
现代文：有一个叫吴国佐的，是洪州司特峒寨的苗民，凶暴狡猾，是个无赖。他的叔父大荣因叛乱被杀，吴国佐收容了他的小老婆。
English: There was a man named Wu Guo Zuo, a member of the Miao people of Hongzhou Shitei Village, who was vicious, cunning, and a scoundrel. His uncle Dairong was killed in a rebellion, and Wu Guo Zuo took in his younger wife.

古文：黎平府持之急，遂反，自称 天皇上将 ，其党石纂太称 太保 ，合攻上黄堡，诱败参将黄冲霄，追至永从县，杀守备张世忠，炙而啖之，掠屯堡七十余，焚五开南城，陷永从，围中潮所。
现代文：黎平府把他逼得紧了，于是造反，自称 天皇上将 。他的党徒石纂太称为 太保 。联合攻击上黄堡，引诱参将黄冲霄并打败了他，把他追赶到永从县，杀死守备张世忠，把他烤着吃了。抢劫了七十多个屯堡，焚烧了五开南城，攻陷永从县城，包围了中潮所。
English: Li Pingfu pushed him hard, so he rebelled and called himself Emperor Admiral. His party members called themselves Taibo. They jointly attacked Shanghuang Fort, lured the commander Huang Chongxiao and defeated him, chased him to Yongjong County, killed the guard Zhang Shizhong, and roasted and ate him. They robbed more than seventy forts, burned Wukai South Town, invaded Yongjong County Town, and surrounded Zhongchaosho.

古文：时方征播州，未暇讨。
现代文：这时正在征伐播州，抽不出时间来讨伐他们。
English: At this time, the conquest of Banzhou was underway, and there was no time to fight them.

古文：既平播，偏沅巡抚江铎命璘与良玭合兵讨之，良玭失利。
现代文：播州平定后，偏沅巡抚江铎命令陈璘和陈良笿联合兵力征讨他们，陈良王比失败。
English: After the pacification of Banzhou, the partisan governor of Jiangxi ordered Chen Yao and Chen Liangyao to join forces to fight against them, but Chen Liang Wangbi failed.

古文：明年，铎移驻靖州，命璘率副将李遇文等七道进，璘擒苗酋银贡等。
现代文：第二年，江铎移驻靖州，命令陈璘率领副将李遇文等人分七路进军。陈璘抓获苗民首领银贡等人。
English: The next year, Jiang Yu moved to Jingzhou and ordered Chen Yu to lead Vice Admiral Li Yuwen and others to march in seven directions. Chen Yu captured the leader of the Miao people, Yin Gong, and others.

古文：游击宋大斌攻破特峒，焚之。
现代文：游击宋大斌攻破特峒，放火烧了它。
English: The guerrilla Song Dabin broke through the special palanquin and set fire to it.

古文：国佐逃天浦四十八寨，复入古州毛洞，追获之。
现代文：吴国佐逃到天浦四十八寨，又进入古州毛洞，追击并抓获了他。
English: Wu Guoza fled to the forty-eighth village of Tianpu, and then entered Guzhou Mao Dong, pursued and captured him.

古文：石纂太逃广西上岩山，指挥徐时达诱缚之。
现代文：石纂太逃到广西上岩山，指挥徐时达诱惑并抓获了他。
English: Shi Juntai fled to Shangyan Mountain in Guangxi, directed Xu Shida's seduction and captured him.

古文：贼党杨永禄率众万余屯白冲。游击沈弘猷等夹攻，生擒永禄。诸苗悉平。
现代文：叛党杨永禄率领一万多党羽屯兵白冲，游击沈弘猷等人夹攻，活捉杨永禄，各苗民都平定了。
English: The rebel Yang Yonglu led more than ten thousand party troops to Bai Chong, the guerrilla Shen Hongyi and others attacked, captured Yang Yonglu alive, and all Miao people were leveled.

古文：征播时，璘投贿李化龙家。
现代文：征伐播州时，陈璘派使者到李化龙家行贿。
English: During the conquest of Banzhou, Chen Xi sent an envoy to Li Huilong's home to offer bribes.

古文：会刘綎使为化龙父所麾，璘使走。
现代文：正好碰到刘纟廷的使者被李化龙的父亲赶出来了。
English: Li Huilong's father chased away the messenger who happened to meet Liu Bingding.

古文：化龙疏于朝，綎获罪，璘独免。
现代文：陈璘的使者赶快跑掉了。李化龙向朝廷上疏，刘纟廷获罪，陈璘无罪。
English: Chen Xi's emissary quickly ran away. Li Hualong fled to the imperial court, Liu Xiating was found guilty, and Chen Xi was acquitted.

古文：后兵部尚书田乐推璘镇贵州，给事中洪瞻祖遂劾璘营求。
现代文：后来兵部尚书田乐推举陈璘镇守贵州，给事中洪赡祖于是揭发陈璘投机钻营。
English: Later, the Minister of Military Affairs, Shang Shuda Le, promoted Chen Qi to the town guard of Guizhou, and then exposed Chen Qi's speculative drilling camp.

古文：帝以璘东西积战功，卒如乐议。
现代文：皇帝因为陈璘东征西讨屡立战功，最终同意了田乐的建议。
English: The emperor finally agreed to Tian Le's suggestion because of Chen Xi's repeated achievements in the East-West Expedition.

古文：贵东西二路苗：曰仲家苗，盘踞贵龙、平新间，为诸苗巨魁；在水硍山介铜仁、思石者曰山苗，红苗之羽翼也。
现代文：贵州东西二路的苗民叫仲家苗，盘距在贵龙、平新之间，是各苗民最大的团伙；在铜仁、思石之交的水臺山居住的叫山苗，是红苗的有力帮手。
English: The Miao people of Guizhou's East-West 2nd Road are called Zhongjia Miao. The distance between Guilong and Pingxin is the largest group of Miao people. The Miao people who live in Shuitaishan, the intersection of Tongren and Shishi, are called Mountain Miao. They are the powerful helpers of Red Miao.

古文：自平播后，贵州物力大屈，苗益生心，剽掠无虚日。
现代文：自从平定播州后，贵州的人力物力都非常贫乏，苗民逐渐有了反叛的企图，抢劫掠夺没有一天停止过。
English: Since the suppression of Banshu, the manpower and material resources of Guizhou have been very poor. The Miao people have gradually attempted to rebel, and the looting and plundering have not stopped for a day.

古文：三十三年冬，巡抚郭子章请于朝。
现代文：万历三十二年冬天，巡抚郭子章向朝廷请求出兵。
English: In the winter of the 32nd year of Wanli, the governor Guo Zizhang sent a request to the imperial court to send troops.

古文：明年四月，令璘军万人攻水硍，游击刘岳督宣慰安疆臣兵万人攻西路，并克之。乃令璘移新添，独攻东路，复克之。
现代文：第二年四月命令陈璘率部一万人攻打水臺，游击刘岳率领宣慰使安疆臣部一万人进攻西路，全都攻克了，于是命令陈璘移师到新添，单独进攻东路，又攻克了。
English: In April of the following year, he ordered Chen Xi to lead ten thousand people to attack Shui Tai, and the guerrilla Liu Yue led the propaganda to persuade ten thousand people of the Anjiang vassal to attack the west road, and they were all defeated. Therefore, he ordered Chen Xi to move his division to Xintian and attack the east road alone, and they were defeated again.

古文：生获酋十二人，斩首三千余级，招降者万三千余人，部内遂靖。
现代文：活捉苗民头目十二人，斩首三千多，投降的一万三千多人，辖区内从此安宁了。
English: Twelve leaders of the Miao people were captured alive, more than three thousand were beheaded, and more than thirteen thousand surrendered. From then on, there was peace in the jurisdiction area.

古文：初，广之顿二郎也，有言其受贿养寇者，诏谪充为事官。
现代文：改派镇守广东，死在官任上。先因为平定播州有功，加封左都督，世代荫封指挥使。
English: He was reassigned to guard the town of Guangdong, and died in office. First, because of his contribution to the pacification of Banshu, he was given the title of Zuo governor, and then the title of commander-in-chief for generations.

古文：后论功赠都督同知，世荫千户。
现代文：死后，又因为平定苗民有功，追赠太子太保，再次荫封为百户。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Crown Prince Taibo for his achievements in pacifying the Miao people, and was once again awarded the title of the hundred households.

古文：邓子龙，丰城人。
现代文：邓子龙，江西丰城人。
English: Deng Zilong, from Fengcheng, Jiangxi Province.

古文：貌魁梧，骁捷绝伦。
现代文：身材魁梧，勇猛敏捷，无与伦比。
English: He's big, he's strong, he's fast, he's tough.

古文：嘉靖中，江西贼起，掠樟树镇。
现代文：嘉靖年间，江西强盗造反，抢劫樟树镇。
English: During the Jiajing period, the Jiangxi bandits rebelled and robbed Yingshu Town.

古文：子龙应有司募，破平之。
现代文：邓子龙应有关官署的招募，讨平了他们。
English: Deng Zilong responded to the recruitment of the relevant government departments and leveled them.

古文：累功授广东把总。
现代文：立下战功，授职广东把总。
English: For his distinguished war service, he was awarded the post of General of Guangdong Province.

古文：万历初，从大帅张元勋讨平巨盗赖元爵。
现代文：万历年间，跟着大帅张元勋讨平巨盗赖元爵。
English: During the Wanli years, he followed the great general Zhang Yuanxun to defeat the great thief Lai Yuanxuan.

古文：已，从平陈金莺、罗绍清。
现代文：此后，跟着讨平了陈金莺、罗绍清。
English: After that, Chen Jinqi and Luo Shaoqing followed suit.

古文：贼魁黄高晖逸，子龙入山生获之。
现代文：土匪头子黄高晖逃跑，邓子龙追到山中活捉了他。
English: The leader of the bandits, Huang Gaoqi, fled, and Deng Zilong chased him into the mountains and captured him alive.

古文：迁铜鼓石守备。
现代文：提升为铜鼓石守备。
English: Promoted to Bronze Drum Stone Guard.

古文：寻擢署都指挥佥事，掌浙江都司。
现代文：不久提拔代理都指挥佥事，掌管浙江都司。
English: He was soon promoted to acting commander of Dujiangyan, in charge of Zhejiang Dujiangyan.

古文：被论当夺职，帝以子龙犯轻，会麻阳苗金道侣等作乱，擢参将讨之。
现代文：被人议论应当剥夺官职，皇帝以邓子龙的罪行较轻，正好麻阳苗民金道侣等人造反，于是提拔他为参将去征讨。
English: It was said that he should be deprived of his official position. The emperor took Deng Zilong's crime as a minor one, just as Miao Min, Jin Doulu and others rebelled, so he promoted him to be a general.

古文：大破贼，解散其党。
现代文：邓子龙大败敌人，解散苗民团伙。
English: Deng Zilong defeated the enemy and disbanded the Miao gang.

古文：五开卫卒胡若卢等火监司行署，挞逐守备及黎平守。
现代文：五开卫的士兵胡若卢等人放火烧了监司行署，鞭打赶走了守备以及黎平守备。
English: The soldiers of the Fifth Guards, Hu Ruolu and others, set fire to the Superintendent's Office, and whipped away the guards and Li Ping's guards.

古文：靖州、铜鼓、龙里诸苗咸响应为乱。
现代文：靖州、铜鼓、龙里各苗民都响应他叛乱了。
English: The Miao people in Jingzhou, Tongdrum and Longli all rebelled in response to him.

古文：子龙火其东门以致贼，而潜兵入北门，贼遂灭。
现代文：邓子龙放火烧东门引诱敌人，而悄悄派兵进入北门，强盗于是被消灭。
English: Deng Zilong set fire to the east gate to lure the enemy, and quietly sent troops into the north gate, and the robbers were eliminated.

古文：十一年闰二月，缅甸犯云南。
现代文：万历十一年闰二月，缅甸进犯云南。
English: In February of the eleventh lunar month, Myanmar invaded Yunnan.

古文：诏移子龙永昌。
现代文：下诏将邓子龙调往永昌。
English: Deng Zilong will be transferred to Yongchang.

古文：木邦部耿马奸人罕虔与岳凤同为逆，说缅酋莽应里内侵，虔从掠千崖、南甸。
现代文：木邦部落耿马奸邪的罕虔和岳凤都是叛党，说服缅甸首领莽应里侵犯内地，罕虔参与抢劫干崖、南甸。
English: The two traitors of the Muping tribe, Gengma and Yuefeng, were both rebels. They persuaded the leader of Myanmar to invade the mainland, and participated in the robbery of the Dry Cliff and Nandian.

古文：已，引渡查理江，直犯姚关，湾甸土知州景宗真及弟宗材助之。
现代文：此后，引渡查理江，直接攻打姚关。湾甸土知州景宗真和他的弟弟景宗材协助他。
English: After that, he handed over the Charli River and directly attacked Yao Guan. Bay Dian Tujizhou Jing Zongzhen and his brother Jing Zongzai assisted him.

古文：子龙急战攀枝树下，阵斩宗真、虔，生获宗材。虔子招罕、招色奔三尖山，令叔罕老率蒲人药弩手五百阻要害，子龙饵蒲人以金，尽知贼间道。
现代文：邓子龙在攀枝树和敌人急战。战斗中杀死景宗真、罕虔，活捉景宗材，罕虔的儿子招罕、招色逃到三尖山，叫他的叔叔罕老率领一千五百名蒲人药弓手到关隘险要处阻击。邓子龙拿银子引诱蒲人，详细地得知通往敌人的小路。
English: Deng Zilong fought a fierce battle with the enemy in PanzhiShu. During the battle, he killed Jing Zongzhen and Han Gui, and captured Jing Zongzai alive. Han Gui's son, Zhaohan, fled to the Three-Pointed Mountain, and asked his uncle, Han Lao, to lead 1,500 Pu medicine archers to the critical point of the pass. Deng Zilong took the silver to lure the Pu people, and learned in detail the path leading to the enemy.

古文：乃命裨将邓勇等提北胜、蒗渠诸番兵，直捣贼巢，而预伏兵山后夹击。
现代文：于是命令偏将邓勇等人率领北胜、蒗渠各番兵，直捣敌人的老巢，而预先在山后设下伏兵夹击。
English: Therefore, he ordered Deng Yong and others to lead the troops of Beisheng and Fengtu to directly attack the enemy's lair, and set up an ambush behind the mountain in advance.

古文：夜半上，生擒招罕、招色、罕老及其党百三十余人，斩首五百余级，尖山巢空，乃抚流移数千人。
现代文：上半夜，活捉招罕、招色、罕老以及同党一百三十多人，斩首五百多级，尖山空虚，于是招抚流民数千人迁入。
English: In the first half of the night, more than 130 people, including Zhaohan, Zhengfei, and Zhanlao, as well as their fellow party members, were captured alive, more than 500 were beheaded, and Jianshan was empty. As a result, thousands of Zhaofang refugees moved in.

古文：会刘綎亦俘岳凤以献。
现代文：正好刘纟廷也进献俘虏岳凤。
English: It was just right that Liu Bingding also went to present the captive Yue Feng.

古文：帝悦，进子龙副总兵，予世荫。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，晋升邓子龙为副总兵，给予世代荫封。
English: The emperor was very pleased and promoted Deng Zilong to vice-commander-in-chief of the army, giving him a generational title.

古文：无何，缅人复寇猛密，把总高国春大破之。
现代文：不久，缅甸人又进犯猛密，把总高国春大败他们。
English: Soon after, the Burmese launched a fierce attack and defeated them.

古文：子龙以犄角功，亦优叙。
现代文：邓子龙因助防有功，也被从优升级。
English: Deng Zilong was also upgraded from excellent for his contribution to prevention.

古文：自是，蛮人先附缅者，多来附。
现代文：从此以后，先前依附缅甸的蛮人，很多都来归附。
English: Since then, many of the barbarians who had previously attached themselves to Myanmar have come to attach themselves.

古文：永昌、腾冲夙号乐土，自岳、罕猖乱，始议募兵，所募多亡命，乃立腾冲、姚安两营。
现代文：永昌、腾冲过去号称乐土。自从岳凤、罕虔叛乱以后，才开始召募士兵，召募的多是一些亡命之徒，于是建立腾冲、姚安二个兵营。
English: Yongchang and Tengchong used to be known as the land of happiness. It was only after the rebellion of Yue Feng and Han Qian that soldiers began to be recruited. Most of the recruits were outlaws, so two military camps were established in Tengchong and Yao'an.

古文：刘綎将腾军，子龙将姚军，不相能，两军斗。
现代文：刘纟廷负责腾冲营，邓子龙负责姚安营，互不买账，两军发生冲突。
English: Liu Bingding was in charge of the Tengchong camp, and Deng Zilong was in charge of the Yao'an camp. The two armies did not buy into each other, and a conflict occurred.

古文：帝以两将皆有功，置不问。
现代文：皇帝因为两位将领都有战功，放在一边不去管它。
English: Because both generals had distinguished themselves in the war, the emperor put aside the matter and did not care about it.

古文：既而綎罢，刘天俸代；天俸逮，遂以子龙兼统之。
现代文：不久刘纟廷被罢免，刘天俸代替他。刘天俸被逮捕，于是让邓子龙兼管。
English: Soon after, Liu Xingting was ousted and replaced by Liu Tianfeng. Liu Tianfeng was arrested, leaving Deng Zilong in charge.

古文：子龙抑腾兵，每工作，辄虐用之，而右姚兵。
现代文：邓子龙压制腾冲兵，每逢做工劳动，就虐待他们，而袒护姚安兵。
English: Deng Zilong suppressed the Tengchong soldiers, abused them whenever they worked, and protected the Yaoan soldiers.

古文：及用师陇川，子龙故为低昂，椎牛飨士，姚兵倍腾兵，腾兵大不堪，欲散去。
现代文：等到陇川打仗，邓子龙故意制造人为的不平等，杀牛犒劳士兵，姚安兵是腾冲兵的二倍。腾冲兵不堪忍受，都想开小差当逃兵。
English: By the time of the Luchuan War, Deng Zilong had deliberately created artificial inequalities, killing soldiers who worked hard, and Yao An soldiers were twice as many as Tengchong soldiers. Tengchong soldiers were unbearable, and they all wanted to run away as deserters.

古文：副使姜忻令他将辖之，乃定。
现代文：副使姜忻让其他将领管理他们，才安定下来。
English: It was only after the vice-envoy, Jiang Yu, let other generals manage them that they settled down.

古文：而姚兵久骄，因索饷作乱，由永昌、大理抵会城，所过剽掠。诸兵夹击之，斩八十四级，俘四百余人，乱始靖。
现代文：而姚安长期骄横，因索要军饷不成而造反，由永昌、大理直达省城，所到之处烧杀抢劫，各路兵夹击他们，斩首八十四级，俘虏四百多人，才把叛乱镇压下去。
English: However, Yao An was arrogant for a long time. He rebelled because he couldn't get the military pay. From Yongchang and Dali, he went straight to the provincial capital. Everywhere he went, he burned, killed and robbed. Soldiers from all directions clamped down on them, beheaded eighty-four people, and captured more than four hundred people, before suppressing the rebellion.

古文：子龙坐褫官下吏。
现代文：邓子龙因此被剥夺官职入狱。
English: As a result, Deng Zilong was stripped of his official position and sent to prison.

古文：十八年，孟养贼思箇叛。
现代文：万历十八年，孟养强盗思个叛乱。
English: In the 18th year of Wanli, Meng Yao bandits staged a rebellion.

古文：子龙方对簿，巡抚吴定请令立功自赎，帝许之。
现代文：邓子龙正被审问，巡抚吴定请求让他立功赎罪，皇帝同意了。
English: While Deng Zilong was being interrogated, the governor Wu Ding requested that Deng Zilong should make meritorious deeds to atone for his sins. The emperor agreed.

古文：命未至，定已与黔国公沐昌祚遣将却之。
现代文：任命还未下达，吴定已经和黔国公沐昌祚派将领打退了敌人。
English: The appointment had not yet been issued, and Wu Ding had already driven back the enemy with the general of the Kuomintang Mu Changtao faction.

古文：无何，丁改十寨贼普应春、霸生等作乱，势张甚。
现代文：不久，丁改十寨的强盗普应春、霸生等人叛乱，势力很强盛。
English: Soon after, the robbers Pu Yingchun and Ba Sheng of Ding Zhaozhai rebelled, and their forces were very strong.

古文：定大征汉土军，令子龙军其右，游击杨威军其左，大破之，斩首一千二百级，招降六千六百人。
现代文：吴定大量征召汉族和土著人当兵，命令邓子龙统帅右路，游击杨威统帅左路军，大败强盗，斩首一千二百级，招降六千六百人。
English: Wu Ding conscripted a large number of Han Chinese and aborigines as soldiers, ordered Deng Zilong to be the commander of the right road, and the guerrilla Yang Wei to be the commander of the left road army, defeated the bandits, beheaded twelve hundred people, and recruited six thousand six hundred people.

古文：帝为告谢郊庙，宣捷受贺，复子龙副总兵，署金山参将事。
现代文：皇帝为此到郊庙告谢。论功行赏，恢复邓子龙副总兵的官职，代理金山参将事宜。
English: The emperor went to the suburb temple to express his thanks for this. He discussed the reward for meritorious service, the restoration of Deng Zilong's official position as vice-commander-in-chief, and the matter of acting for Jinshan Sangjun.

古文：先是，猛广土官思仁烝其嫂甘线姑，欲妻之，弗克。
现代文：在这之前，猛广土官思仁跟他的嫂子甘线姑通奸，想娶她做妻子，没有成功。
English: Prior to this, Mengguang magistrate Shiren had committed adultery with his sister-in-law, Guan Lin, and tried unsuccessfully to marry her.

古文：偕其党丙测叛归缅，数导入寇。
现代文：跟他的同伙丙测一起叛逃缅甸，多次引导缅甸进犯内地。
English: He defected to Myanmar together with his accomplice Xing Biao, and led Myanmar to invade the mainland many times.

古文：二十年攻孟养，犯蛮莫，土同知思纪奔等练山。
现代文：二十年进攻孟养，进犯蛮莫。土同知思纪逃往等练山。
English: After 20 years of attacking Mengyeong, there was no way to advance. The local people fled to the mountains.

古文：子龙击败之，乃去。
现代文：邓子龙打败了他们才离开。
English: Deng Zilong defeated them and left.

古文：子龙寻被劾罢归。
现代文：邓子龙不久被人弹劾罢官回家。
English: Deng Zilong was soon impeached and sent home.

古文：二十六年，朝鲜用师。
现代文：万历二十六年，朝鲜战争爆发。
English: Twenty-six years ago, the Korean War broke out.

古文：诏以故官领水军，从陈璘东征。
现代文：下诏邓子龙以原官职率领水军，跟着陈瞞东征。
English: Deng Zilong issued the following edict to lead the navy with his former official position, followed by Chen Xie's eastward expedition.

古文：倭将渡海遁，璘遣子龙偕朝鲜统制使李舜臣督水军千人，驾三巨舰为前锋，邀之釜山南海。
现代文：倭寇准备渡海逃跑，陈瞞派遣邓子龙随同朝鲜统制使李舜臣率领水军千人，驾驶三艘巨舰为前锋，在釜山以南海面上迎击敌人。
English: As the wokou prepared to cross the sea to escape, Chen Zhe sent Deng Zilong to accompany him to North Korea, and ordered Li Yucheng to lead a thousand-man naval force and drive three huge ships as the vanguard to meet the enemy on the sea south of Busan.

古文：子龙素慷慨，年逾七十，意气弥厉，欲得首功，急携壮士二百人跃上朝鲜舟，直前奋击，贼死伤无算。
现代文：邓子龙向来激昂慷慨，年龄虽已七十，更为意气风发，想立头功，迅速率领二百名壮士跳上朝鲜船，勇往直前打击敌人，敌人死伤无数。
English: Deng Zilong was always impassioned and generous. Although he was seventy years old, he was more spirited and wanted to make a breakthrough. He quickly led two hundred strong men to jump onto the Korean ship and bravely advance to strike the enemy. The enemy suffered countless deaths and injuries.

古文：他舟误掷火器入子龙舟，舟中火，贼乘之，子龙战死。
现代文：别的船将火器误投到了邓子龙的船中。船起火，敌人乘机反扑，邓子龙战死。
English: Another ship mistakenly threw a firearm into Deng Zilong's ship. The ship caught fire, the enemy took the opportunity to counterattack, and Deng Zilong was killed.

古文：舜臣赴救，亦死。
现代文：李舜臣赶来救援，也战死了。
English: Li Yingcheng came to the rescue, but also died in the battle.

古文：事闻，赠都督佥事，世荫一子，庙祀朝鲜。
现代文：消息传来，追赠都督佥事，荫封一个儿子做官，朝鲜修庙纪念他。
English: News came that he would be posthumously awarded the title of viceroy, that he would have a son crowned as an official, and that North Korea would build a temple in his memory.

