古文：谢举，字言扬，中书令览之弟也。
现代文：谢举字言扬，是中书令谢览之弟。
English: Xie Xizhang is the younger brother of Zhongshu Ling Xie Chan.

古文：幼好学，能清言，与览齐名。
现代文：幼年好学，能谈玄理，舆谢览齐名。
English: Eager to learn at an early age, able to talk about metaphysics, and well-known by the public.

古文：举年十四，尝赠沈约五言诗，为约称赏。
现代文：谢皋年十四，曾赠选曲五言诗，受到这曲的称赞。
English: In the 14th year of Xie Er's reign, he presented a selection of five-character poems to the Choir, which was highly praised.

古文：世人为之语曰： 王有养、炬，谢有览、举。 
现代文：世人因此说： 姓王的有养、炬，姓谢的有览、举。 
English: Therefore, people in the world say: the surname Wang has the characters of "养" and "炬," and the surname Xie has the characters of "览" and "举."

古文：养、炬，王筠、王泰小字也。
现代文：养、炬是王筠、王泰的小名。
English: Yang and Jiao are the diminutive names of Wang Yao and Wang Tai.

古文：起家秘书郎，迁太子舍人，轻车功曹史，秘书丞，司空从事中郎，太子庶子，家令，掌东宫管记，深为昭明太子赏接。
现代文：谢举初任秘书郎，后迁太子舍人，轻车功曹史，秘书丞，司空从事中郎，太子庶子，家令，掌东宫管记，深得昭明太子的赏识。
English: Xie Ji, the first secretary, later moved to the prince's concubine, the light car, the secretary, the secretary, the secretary engaged in the middle, the prince's illegitimate child, the housekeeper, the head of the East Palace Guan Ji, won the appreciation of the prince.

古文：秘书监任昉出为新安郡，别举诗云： 讵念耋嗟人，方深老夫托。 
现代文：秘书监任防出任新安郡太守之时，以诗向谢举告别说： 如果想念老年人，便深记老夫的寄托。 
English: When the Secretary Supervisor of Defense was appointed as the governor of Xin'an County, he bid farewell to Xie with a poem: If you miss the elderly, you will deeply remember the old man's trust.

古文：其属意如此。
现代文：他被人重视就像这样。
English: That's how important he is.

古文：尝侍宴华林园，高祖访举于览，览对曰： 识艺过臣甚远，惟饮酒不及于臣。 
现代文：曾经在侍宴，高祖向谢举咨询谢里，谢举对答： 识艺超过臣甚远，惟饮酒不如臣。 
English: Once at a banquet, Gao Zu asked Xie Jiu for advice. Xie Jiu replied: I am far more knowledgeable than you, but my drinking is not as good as yours.

古文：高祖大悦。
现代文：高祖大悦。
English: Gaozu Daye.

古文：转太子中庶子，犹掌管记。
现代文：转任太子中庶子，仍掌管记。
English: He was transferred to the position of the prince's younger illegitimate son, but was still in charge of the diary.

古文：天监十一年，迁侍中。
现代文：天监十一年，迁侍中。
English: In the eleventh year of the tenjō, he was in the middle of the relocation.

古文：十四年，出为宁远将军、豫章内史，为政和理，甚得民心。
现代文：十四年，出任宁远将军、豫章内史，施政宽和，甚得民心。
English: For fourteen years, he served as the general of Ningyuan, the internal history of Yuzhang, and the policy of peace, and won the hearts of the people.

古文：十八年，复入为侍中，领步兵校尉。
现代文：十八年，入朝任侍中，领步兵校尉。
English: In 18 years, he entered the imperial court as a chamberlain, leading infantry lieutenant.

古文：普通元年，出为贞毅将军、太尉临川王长史。
现代文：普通元年，出任贞毅将军、太尉临川王长史。
English: In the first year of the common era, he served as General Zhen Yi and Lieutenant Linchuan Wang Changshi.

古文：四年，入为左民尚书。
现代文：四年，入朝任左民尚书。
English: Four years later, Shosho Sadamin was appointed to the imperial court.

古文：其年迁掌吏部，寻以公事免。
现代文：同年迁任吏部尚书，不久因公事被免职。
English: In the same year, he was transferred to the office of the secretary, and was soon removed from office for official business.

古文：五年，起为太子中庶子，领右军将军。
现代文：五年，起用任太子中庶子，领右军将军。
English: Five years later, the prince's middle child and son-in-law was appointed to lead the right wing army.

古文：六年，复为左民尚书，领步兵校尉。
现代文：六年，再任左民尚书，领步兵校尉。
English: Six years later, he was reappointed as Zuomin Shangshu, leading infantry lieutenant.

古文：俄徙为吏部尚书，寻加侍中。
现代文：不久迁任吏部尚书，接着又加任侍中。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of secretary, and then to the position of chamberlain.

古文：出为仁威将军、晋陵太守。
现代文：出任仁威将军、晋陵太守。
English: He was appointed as the General of Jinwei and the Governor of Jinling.

古文：在郡清静，百姓化其德，境内肃然。
现代文：在郡政清刑简，百姓受其德政感化，境内肃然。
English: In the county government, the punishment is simple, the people are influenced by its German politics, and the territory is solemn.

古文：罢郡还，吏民诣阙请立碑，诏许之。
现代文：被罢郡守回京城，吏民赴朝廷请求为他立碑，下韶允许。
English: The ousted governor returned to the capital, and officials and citizens went to the imperial court to request that a monument be erected in his honor, which was granted.

古文：大通二年，入为侍中、五兵尚书，未拜，迁掌吏部，侍中如故。
现代文：太逼二年，入任侍中、五兵尚书，未就职，迁任吏部尚书，侍中照旧。
English: Two years too late, he was appointed to the position of a chamberlain and five soldiers, but before taking office, he was transferred to the position of an officer, and remained a chamberlain.

古文：举祖庄，宋世再典选，至举又三为此职，前代未有也。
现代文：谢举祖父谢庄，在奉伐两次掌管官吏的选举，至谢举三次任此职，这在前代是没有的。
English: Xie Qiu's grandfather, Xie Zhuang, was elected as the official in charge of the election twice in Fenghua, and Xie Qiu was appointed to this position three times, which was not the case in the previous generation.

古文：举少博涉多通，尤长玄理及释氏义。
现代文：谢举年轻时博览群书而能融会贯通，尤其擅长老、庄玄理和佛理。
English: When he was young, Xie Ji was well-versed in books and was able to integrate and penetrate them. He was particularly good at Lao, Zhuang and Buddhist philosophy.

古文：为晋陵郡时，常与义僧递讲经论，征士何胤自虎丘山赴之。
现代文：任晋陵郡太守时，常舆义僧轮换讲解佛经，征士何胤从虎丘山赶来听讲。
English: When he was appointed as the governor of Jinling County, the ordinary monks took turns to explain the Buddhist scriptures, and the conscript He Yin came from Mount Huqiu to listen to the lecture.

古文：其盛如此。
现代文：盛况竟然如此。
English: It was such a grand occasion.

古文：先是，北渡人卢广有儒术，为国子博士，于学发讲，仆射徐勉以下毕至。
现代文：在此之前，渡长江而来之人卢广精通儒学，是国子博士，讲解经学时仆射徐勉以下的人都去听讲。
English: Prior to this, Lu Guang, who came across the Yangtze River, was well-versed in Confucianism and was a doctor of Confucianism. When he gave a lecture on the study of Confucianism, people below the level of Zhu Yao and Xu Zhen went to listen.

古文：举造坐，屡折广，辞理通迈。广深叹服，仍以所执麈尾荐之，以况重席焉。
现代文：谢举席地而坐，多次指出卢广的错误，辞理超俗，卢广深为叹服，就将所执麈尾赠给他，赐予他珍贵的座席。
English: He thanked Lu Guang and sat on the floor, pointing out Lu Guang's mistakes many times. Lu Guang was deeply impressed by Lu Guang's speech, so he presented him with the Shao he held and gave him a precious seat.

古文：四年，加侍中。
现代文：四年，加任侍中。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to the position of Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：五年，迁尚书右仆射，侍中如故。
现代文：五年，任尚书右仆射，侍中照旧。
English: Five years later, he was appointed as the right-hand man of Shangshu, and continued to serve as a chamberlain.

古文：大同三年，以疾陈解，徙为右光禄大夫，给亲信二十人。
现代文：大同三年，因病陈请辞职，转任右光禄大夫，给亲信二十人。
English: In the third year of Datong, due to illness, Chen was asked to resign and was transferred to the post of Uguanglu doctor, giving rise to twenty cronies.

古文：其年，出为云麾将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：当年，出任云麾将军、吴郡太守。
English: In that year, he served as the general of Yunnan Province and the governor of Wu County.

古文：先是，何敬容居郡有美绩，世称为何吴郡。及举为政，声迹略相比。
现代文：先前，何敬容任郡守有政縯，人称 何吴郡 ，及谢举当政，声誉大致相等。
English: Previously, He Jing Rong served as county governor of Yuzheng County, known as He Wu County, and Xie Rong served as governor, with roughly the same reputation.

古文：六年，入为侍中、中书监，未拜，迁太子詹事、翊左将军，侍中如故。
现代文：六年，入任侍中、中书监，未就职，迁任太子詹事、翊左将军，侍中照旧。
English: In the sixth year, he was appointed to Samurai Junior High School and Junior High School Librarian, but before taking office, he was transferred to Prince Zhan Zhi and General Xie Zuo, and remained a Samurai Junior High School student.

古文：举父綍，齐世终此官，累表乞改授，敕不许，久之方就职。
现代文：谢举父谢满，在齐代以此官而终，谢举多次上表乞求改任，未获准，过了很久方去任职。
English: Xie Jiu's father, Xie Man, ended up as an official in the Qi Dynasty. Xie Jiu repeatedly went to the table to beg for a change of post, but was not allowed. It took him a long time to take up the post.

古文：九年，迁尚书仆射，侍中、将军如故。
现代文：九年，迁任尚书仆射，侍申、将军照旧。
English: Nine years later, he was transferred to the position of Shosho, but retained his position as Sho, Shinshin, and Shogun.

古文：举虽居端揆，未尝肯预时务，多因疾陈解。敕辄赐假，并手敕处方，加给上药。
现代文：谢举虽居宰相位，不愿意参预时务，多次藉有病请求解职，皇上则赐给他假期，并亲笔开处方，并赐给皇上用药。
English: Although Xie Jiu held the position of prime minister, he did not want to participate in pre-scheduled duties, and repeatedly requested to be relieved of his duties due to illness. The emperor gave him a vacation, and personally wrote a prescription and gave the emperor medicine.

古文：其恩遇如此。
现代文：他竟如此受到皇帝的恩遇。
English: This is how generous Gaozu was to him.

古文：其年，以本官参掌选事。
现代文：遣年，以本官参预铨选事。
English: In the previous year, the election was held with the participation of local officials.

古文：太清二年，迁尚书令，侍中、将军如故。
现代文：太清二年，迁任尚书令，侍中、将军照旧。
English: In the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of Shang Shuling, but remained a chamberlain and a general.

古文：是岁，侯景寇京师，举卒于围内。
现代文：这年，侯景侵犯京师，谢举死在围城内。
English: That year, Hou Jing invaded Beijing, and Xie Zhuo died in the besieged city.

古文：诏赠侍中、中卫将军、开府仪同三司，侍中、尚书令如故。
现代文：韶令追赠侍中、中卫将军、开府仪同三司，侍中、尚书令照旧。
English: The imperial edict posthumously bestowed the title of Samurai Junior Officer, General of the Middle Guards, and Keifu Rites to the three officials, while the titles of Samurai Junior Officer and Imperial Secretary remained unchanged.

古文：文集乱中并亡逸。
现代文：文集在战乱中全部丢失了。
English: The entire collection was lost during the war.

古文：二子禧，嘏，并少知名。
现代文：二子谢禧、谢嘏，均少年成名。
English: His two sons, Xie Xiyi and Xie Yao, both became famous as teenagers.

古文：嘏，太清中，历太子中庶子，出为建安太守。
现代文：谢嘏，太清年间，历任太子中庶子，出任建室太守。
English: Xie Yao, an illegitimate child of successive crown princes during the Qing Dynasty, served as the crown prince.

古文：何敬容，字国礼，庐江人也。
现代文：何敬容字国礼，庐江人。
English: What respect for the national anthem, people of the Minjiang River.

古文：祖攸之，宋太常卿；父昌珝，齐吏部尚书；并有名前代。
现代文：祖父攸之，任宋朝太常卿；父昌珝，任齐朝吏部尚书：均闻名于当时。
English: Yuanzhi's grandfather Yuanzhi was appointed as the Song Dynasty's Tai Changqing; his father Changyu was appointed as the Qi Dynasty's Li Bu Shangshu: both were famous at the time.

古文：敬容以名家子，弱冠选尚齐武帝女长城公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：何敬容以名门之后，刚成年就娶尚齐武帝女长城公主为妻，授驸马都尉。
English: After He Jingrong became a member of a prestigious family, he married the Great Wall Princess, a daughter of Emperor Shang Qiwu, as soon as he was an adult, and was awarded the title of Captain of Horse.

古文：天监初，为秘书郎，历太子舍人，尚书殿中郎，太子洗马，中书舍人，秘书丞，迁扬州治中。
现代文：天监初年，任秘书郎，历任太子舍人，尚书殿中郎，太子洗马，中书舍人，秘书丞，迁任扬州治中。
English: In the first year of the heavenly overseer, he was the secretary, successively the prince's attendant, the middle son of the prince, the prince of the horse, the middle school attendant, the secretary, and moved to Yangzhou.

古文：出为建安内史，清公有美绩，民吏称之。
现代文：出任建安内史，清廉公正有政縯，民吏都称赞他。
English: He was appointed to the position of Jian'an Inner Historian. He was clean, honest, and fair, and the people all praised him.

古文：还除黄门郎，累迁太子中庶子，散骑常侍，侍中，司徒左长史。
现代文：回京授黄门郎，累迁太子中庶子，散骑常侍，侍中，司徒左长史。
English: Returning to Beijing, he was given the title of Huangmenro, the illegitimate son of the crown prince, a knight-errant, a chamberlain, and the role of Szuzu Changshi.

古文：普通二年，复为侍中，领羽林监，俄又领本州大中正。
现代文：普通二年，再任侍中，领羽林监，不久又领本州大中正。
English: Two years later, he was reappointed as an attendant, leading the feather forest inspector, and soon led the Honshu University junior high school.

古文：顷之，守吏部尚书，铨序明审，号为称职。
现代文：随即又署理吏部尚书，选拔官吏审慎严明，号为称职。
English: Subsequently, the acting secretary of the Personnel Department, Shang Shu, selected officials carefully and rigorously, calling them competent.

古文：四年，出为招远将军、吴郡太守，为政勤恤民隐，辨讼如神，视事四年，治为天下第一。
现代文：四年，出任招远将军、县璺太守，为政能体察民情，断案如神，任职四年，政绩为天下第一。
English: For four years, he served as Zhaoyuan general and county magistrate, and he was able to understand the people's conditions for politics, and he was able to solve cases like a god. He served for four years, and his political performance was the best in the world.

古文：吏民诣阙请树碑，诏许之。
现代文：吏民到朝廷请求为他树碑，得到允许。
English: Officials and citizens went to the imperial court to request that a monument be erected in his honor, and were granted permission.

古文：大通二年，征为中书令，未拜，复为吏部尚书，领右军将军，俄加侍中。
现代文：左通二年，入朝任中书令，未就职，仍任吏部尚书，领右军将军，不久加任侍中。
English: In the second year of Zuo Tong, he entered the imperial court as the middle secretary, but before taking office, he was still the secretary of the personnel department, led the right army general, and soon became a chamberlain.

古文：中大通元年，改太子中庶子。
现代文：中大通元年，改任太子中庶子。
English: In the first year of his junior high school career, he was reappointed as the junior prince's illegitimate son.

古文：敬容身长八尺，白皙美须眉。
现代文：何敬容身高八尺，肤色白皙有美须眉。
English: He Jing is eight feet tall, with a fair complexion and beautiful eyebrows.

古文：性矜庄，衣冠尤事鲜丽，每公庭就列，容止出人。
现代文：持重端庄，衣冠尤为鲜丽，每在朝堂之际，其仪容必出入之上。
English: Dignified and dignified, with a particularly beautiful crown. Whenever he is in the morning hall, his appearance is always on top.

古文：三年，迁尚书右仆射，参掌选事，侍中如故。
现代文：三年，迁任尚书右仆射，参掌选事，侍中照旧。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the position of Shangshu's right-hand man, Shao, and participated in the selection of officials, while remaining a chamberlain.

古文：时仆射徐勉参掌机密，以疾陈解，因举敬容自代，故有此授焉。
现代文：当时仆射徐勉参掌机密，因病请求辞职，便推举敬容继任，所以授敬容此职务。
English: At that time, his subordinate, Xu Mian, was in charge of confidential information. When he requested to resign due to illness, Jing Rong was elected as his successor. Therefore, Jing Rong was awarded this position.

古文：五年，迁左仆射，加宣惠将军，置佐史，侍中、参掌如故。
现代文：五年，迁左仆射，加任宣惠将军，设置佐史，侍中、参掌照旧。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the Left Footman Division, and was appointed to the additional post of General of Propaganda and Benevolence, and was assigned to the position of Sasifu, but remained a member of the Chamberlain's staff and a member of the Council of Elders.

古文：大同三年正月，硃雀门灾，高祖谓群臣曰： 此门制卑狭，我始欲构，遂遭天火。 
现代文：大同三年正月，朱雀门失火，高担对群臣说： 此门太小，我正想重建，遂遭天火。 
English: In the first month of the third year of the Datong era, the Suzaku Gate caught fire. Gaotan said to his ministers, "This gate is too small. I wanted to rebuild it, but it was destroyed by fire.

古文：并相顾未有答。
现代文：群臣相视而不答。
English: The ministers looked at each other and did not answer.

古文：敬容独曰： 此所谓陛下 先天而天不违 。 时以为名对。
现代文：何敬容说： 此所谓陛下 先于天而天不违， 当时人认为这是名对。
English: He Jing Rong said, "This so-called majesty is ahead of the world, but it is not contrary to the world. At that time, people thought it was a name match.

古文：俄迁中权将军、丹阳尹，侍中、参掌、佐史如故。
现代文：不久迁任中权将军、丹阳尹，侍中、参掌、佐史照旧。
English: He was soon transferred to the posts of General Zhong Quan, Danyang Yin, Chamberlain, Counselor, and Secretary as before.

古文：五年，入为尚书令，侍中、将军、参掌、佐史如故。
现代文：五年，入任尚书令，侍中、将军、参掌、佐史照旧。
English: Five years later, he was appointed to the post of Shoshorei, and continued to serve as a chamberlain, general, sansho, and sashi.

古文：敬容久处台阁，详悉旧事，且聪明识治，勤于簿领，诘朝理事，日旰不休。
现代文：何敬容久处朝廷，熟知往事，而且聪明干练，熟悉政务，勤于文书，清晨办事，夜以继日。
English: He Jingrong has been in the imperial court for a long time, familiar with the past, and smart and capable, familiar with government affairs, diligent in paperwork, early in the morning, night and day.

古文：自晋、宋以来，宰相皆文义自逸，敬容独勤庶务，为世所嗤鄙。
现代文：自晋、宋以来，宰相均以文辞自娱，衹有敬容勤于政务，被世人鄙视。
English: Since the Jin and Song dynasties, prime ministers have amused themselves with literature, and have been respected and diligent in government affairs. They have been despised by the world.

古文：时萧琛子巡者，颇有轻薄才，因制卦名离合等诗以嘲之，敬容处之如初，亦不屑也。
现代文：当时萧琛之子萧巡。很有轻薄之才，就作卦名诗舆离合诗嘲笑他，敬查若无其事，不屑舆他计较。
English: At that time, Xiao Jun, the son of Xiao Yao, was very talented in frivolity, so he mocked him by composing the famous poem of Gua. If there was nothing to investigate, he disdained to meddle in his affairs.

古文：十一年，坐妾弟费慧明为导仓丞，夜盗官米，为禁司所执，送领军府。
现代文：十一年，因妾弟费慧明任导仓丞，夜盗官米获罪，被禁司执捕送到领军府。
English: In the eleventh year, because his concubine brother Fei Huiming was appointed as the commander of the warehouse, he was convicted of stealing official rice at night, and was arrested and sent to the military headquarters.

古文：时河东王誉为领军将军，敬容以书解慧明，誉即封书以奏。
现代文：当时河东王誉任领军将军，敬容写信为慧明开脱，誉即将信上奏。
English: At that time, the king of Hedong, Ying Rong, was appointed as the leading general, and Jing Rong wrote a letter to excuse Huiming. Ying Rong was about to write the letter.

古文：高祖大怒，付南司推劾。御史中丞张绾奏敬容挟私罔上，合弃市刑，诏特免职。
现代文：高祖大怒，交御史审决，御史中丞张绾上奏敬容挟私欺骗皇帝，应当陈尸街头示众，韶令特许免职作罢。
English: Gao Zu flew into a rage, and the court of imperial history adjudicated that the imperial historian, Zhang Xuan, had lied to the emperor, and should be publicly dissected in the streets, and that he should be dismissed from his post.

古文：初，天监中，有沙门释宝志者，尝遇敬容，谓曰： 君后必贵，然终是何败何耳 。
现代文：当初，天监年间，有僧人释实志，曾遇敬容，对他说： 君后必富贵，但最终是何败何罢了。 
English: At first, during the time of the celestial prison, there was a monk named Shishizuru, who once met a respected person and said to him: You will be rich and noble, but in the end it will be a failure.

古文：及敬容为宰相，谓何姓当为其祸，故抑没宗族，无仕进者，至是竟为河东所败。
现代文：当敬容任宰相后，以为姓何的人为害于己，因此压制同宗，使之不能作官，到此方知为河东王所败。
English: When Jingrong was appointed prime minister, he thought that people with the surname Ho were harmful to him, so he suppressed the same clan so that they could not serve as officials. To this point, he was defeated by the king of Hedong.

古文：中大同元年三月，高祖幸同泰寺讲《金字三慧经》，敬容请预听，敕许之。
现代文：中大同元年三月，高祖到同泰寺讲《金字三慧经》，敬容请求听讲，得到允许。
English: In March of the same year, Gao Zu went to the Dongtai Temple to give a lecture on the "Golden Three Wisdom Scriptures." He requested to be allowed to listen to the lecture, which was granted.

古文：又有敕听朔望问讯。
现代文：又允许他初一、十五向皇帝问候。
English: He was also allowed to greet the emperor on the first and fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：寻起为金紫光禄大夫，未拜，又加侍中。
现代文：不久起用为金紫光禄大夫，未就职，又加任侍中。
English: He was soon promoted to Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and before taking office, he was also appointed as a chamberlain.

古文：敬容旧时宾客门生喧哗如昔，冀其复用。
现代文：敬容往日的宾客门生又像往日一样得意，希望他再被重用。
English: Respectful of the guests of the past, the protégé is as good as ever, and I hope he will be used again.

古文：会稽谢郁致书戒之曰： 草莱之人，闻诸道路，君侯已得瞻望朝夕，出入禁门，醉尉将不敢呵，灰然不无其渐，甚休，甚休！
现代文：会稽人谢郁致书告诫说：我这个草野之人已经听说，您得以朝夕瞻仰君主出入禁门，醉尉不敢呵斥，死灰复燃总是有它逐渐燃起的根源，真应停止，真应停止!
English: The auditor of the association, Xie Yu, wrote a letter of admonition, saying: I, a man of the countryside, have already heard that you can watch the monarch enter and leave the forbidden door in the morning and evening, the drunkard does not dare to shout, the resurgence always has the root cause of its gradual ignition, it really should stop, it really should stop!

古文：敢贺于前，又将吊也。
现代文：所以我先向您祝贺，又将要吊念您。
English: So I'll start by congratulating you, and then I'll end by thinking of you.

古文：昔流言裁作，公旦东奔；燕书始来，子孟不入。
现代文：昔日流言一起，周公旦便逃往东方；燕国的书信刚到，子孟便不再入境。
English: According to an old rumor, Zhou Gongdan fled to the East; as soon as Yan Guo's letter arrived, Zi Meng no longer entered the country.

古文：夫圣贤被虚过以自斥，未有婴时衅而求亲者也。
现代文：圣贤受到不实指责时应先自责，不曾因受到时人仇恨去求救。
English: When saints and sages are falsely accused, they should first blame themselves, and never ask for help because of the hatred of the people at the time.

古文：且曝鳃之鳞，不念杯杓之水；云霄之翼，岂顾笼樊之粮。
现代文：而且在龙门曝鳃的鱼，不会留恋杯中之水；在天际飞翔的鸟，岂会留恋鸟笼之粮。
English: Moreover, the fish exposed in the gantry will not miss the water in the cup; the bird flying in the sky will not miss the food in the cage.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：所托已盛也。
现代文：因为它的依托已盛大了。
English: Because its support has grown tremendously.

古文：昔君侯纳言加首，鸣玉在腰，回豊貂以步文昌，耸高蝉而趋武帐，可谓盛矣。
现代文：过去您头戴 纳言 的帧巾，腰间佩带鸣玉，穿着珍贵的紫貂皮衣步入文昌署，戴着用蝉纹装饰的高帽直趋武帐，可谓气派呀。
English: In the past, you used to wear the frame scarf of Nagan on your head, the ring of beads around your waist, walk into the Wenchang District Office wearing a precious indigo fur coat, and wear a tall hat decorated with cicada stripes, all the way to the military account, which can be described as grandeur.

古文：不以此时荐才拔士，少报圣主之恩；今卒如爰丝之说，受责见过，方复欲更窥朝廷，觖望万分，窃不为左右取也。
现代文：不以此时推荐才士，稍报圣主之恩；今正像袁盎所说因过受责，却还企求朝廷，埋怨朝廷，我认为您不该采取这种做法。
English: I don't think you should take this approach, instead of recommending talents at this time and reporting the grace of the Lord. Right now, as Yuan Ang said, you are still trying to seek the imperial court and complain to the imperial court because you have been blamed.

古文：昔窦婴、杨恽亦得罪明时，不能谢绝宾客，犹交党援，卒无后福，终益前祸。
现代文：昔日宝婴、杨埂得罪明主，他们不能谢绝宾客，还结交朋党，最终没有得到福禄，反而更加重了祸患。
English: Once upon a time, Baojing and Yang Hui sinned against the Lord. They could not refuse the guests, but also made friends with the Party. In the end, they did not receive any benefit, but rather, they aggravated the evil.

古文：仆之所吊，实在于斯。
现代文：我为您忧虑的正是这一点。
English: That's why I'm worried about you.

古文：人人所以颇犹有踵君侯之门者，未必皆感惠怀仁，有灌夫、任安之义，乃戒翟公之大署，冀君侯之复用也。
现代文：人们所以还遣样跟随在您的门下，未必都是感怀您的仁惠，有灌夫、任安那样的情义，而是有戒于翟公在门上大书的感慨世态炎凉那样的话，希望您重新得到重用。
English: That's why people still send their samples to follow you. They may not all be moved by your benevolence, with feelings like "Ganfu" and "Ren'an," but they are wary of the feeling of "Shigong" in the big book on the door. If the world is hot and cold, I hope you will be reused.

古文：夫在思过之日，而挟复用之意，未可为智者说矣。
现代文：在思过之曰，而怀有被再重用的心念，不可成为智者的主张。
English: After thinking about it, and cherishing the thought of being reused, can not become a wise man's proposition.

古文：君侯宜杜门念失，无有所通，筑茅茨于钟阜，聊优游以卒岁，见可怜之意，著待终之情。复仲尼能改之言，惟子贡更也之譬，少戢言于众口，微自救于竹帛，所谓 失之东隅，收之桑榆 。
现代文：您应当闭门思过，不要与人交往，在钟阜修筑茅屋，悠闲自得地度日，颢见可怜的意念，表露等待终了的情怀，三思孔子关于改过的言论，考虑子贡关于改过的譬喻，让众人不再说您的坏话，在书册史乘中得到自救，逭就是所说 失之束隅，收之桑榆 。
English: You should think behind closed doors, do not socialize with others, build a thatched cottage in Zhongfu, spend your days in leisurely self-sufficiency, see the pitiful thoughts, reveal the feelings of waiting for the end, think twice about Confucius's speech about the reformed, consider the parable of Zigong about the reformed, so that people will no longer speak ill of you, and get self-help in the history of the book.

古文：如此，令明主闻知，尚有冀也。
现代文：如此。让明主闻知，还是有希望的。
English: That's right. There is still hope for getting the message across.

古文：仆东皋鄙人，入穴幸无衔窭，耻天下之士不为执事道之，故披肝胆，示情素，君侯岂能鉴焉。 
现代文：我是田野之人，虽穴居所幸我不怨恨贫穷简陋，耻于天下之士不替您说明道理，因此披肝沥胆，表示情素，君侯当能明察。
English: I am a man of the field. Although I live in a cave, fortunately, I do not resent the poor and humble. Shame on the world for not explaining the truth to you. Therefore, I wear my heart on my sleeve to show affection. Princes should be able to see this.

古文：太清元年，迁太子詹事，侍中如故。
现代文：太清元年，迁任太子詹事，侍中照旧。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of Prince Zhanji, and continued to serve as a chamberlain.

古文：二年，侯景袭京师，敬容自府移家台内。
现代文：二年，侯景袭击京师，敬容从家中移住官署。
English: In the second year, Hou Jing attacked the Beijing Division, and Jing Rong moved from his home to the government office.

古文：初，景于涡阳退败，未得审实，传者乃云其将暴显反，景身与众并没，朝廷以为忧。
现代文：当初，侯景在涡阳退败，朝廷未得到确实消息，传言的人就说侯景的部将反叛，侯景基本人与众人都已死，朝廷以此事忧虑。
English: At first, Hou Jing was defeated in the whirlwind, and the imperial court did not get any real news. The rumor-mongers said that Hou Jing's ministers had rebelled, and that all of Hou Jing's subordinates and people had died. The imperial court was worried about this.

古文：敬容寻见东宫，太宗谓曰： 淮北始更有信，侯景定得身免，不如所传。 
现代文：敬容不久被太子召见，太宗对他说： 淮北始有消息，侯景定能免死，不像传言那样。 
English: Soon after he was summoned by the crown prince, Taizong said to him, "There is a rumor in Huaibei that Hou Jingding can avoid death, unlike the rumor.

古文：敬容对曰： 得景遂死，深是朝廷之福。 
现代文：敬容对答说： 侯景若能死去，实在是朝廷的福气。 
English: Keirong replied: If Houjing could die, it would be a blessing for the imperial court.

古文：太宗失色，问其故。
现代文：太宗听了脸面失色，问他原故。
English: Hearing this, Taizong's face darkened and he asked why.

古文：敬容曰： 景翻覆叛臣，终当乱国。 
现代文：敬容说： 侯景是翻覆叛臣，最终要乱国的。 
English: Jing Rong said, "Hou Jing is a subversive and traitor, and he will eventually bring chaos to the country."

古文：是年，太宗频于玄圃自讲《老》、《庄》二书，学士吴孜时寄詹事府，每日入听。
现代文：逭年，太宗多次在玄圃自讲《老》、《庄》二书，学士昱茎当时寄居詹事府，每天去听讲。
English: In the year of the Rooster, Taizong read two books, "Old" and "Township" in the garden of the emperor for many times. At that time, Gao Bingzhu was living in Zhanshi Prefecture, and he went to listen to the lecture every day.

古文：敬容谓孜曰： 昔晋代丧乱，颇由祖尚玄虚，胡贼殄覆中夏。
现代文：堑容对县茎说： 昔日置曲之衰落正是由于崇尚玄学所致，以至于使胡人占领中原。
English: Hao Rong said to Guanzhu: The decline of the old-fashioned music was caused by the advocation of metaphysics, so much so that the Hu people occupied the Central Plains.

古文：今东宫复袭此，殆非人事，其将为戎乎？ 
现代文：今太子仍然崇尚圭、蓝，恐非正道，难道我们又要有战乱之祸吗? 
English: Now the crown prince still advocates "Kei, Lan" and "Fear not the right path," do we have to have the disaster of war again?

古文：俄而侯景难作，其言有征也。
现代文：不久猛叛乱，他说的话应验了。
English: Soon there was a violent uprising, and his words came true.

古文：三年正月，敬容卒于围内，诏赠仁威将军，本官并如故。
现代文：三年正月，堑窖在受围困的京城去世，韶令追赠仁威将军，原来担任的官职照旧。
English: In the first month of the third year, Gong Jiao died in the besieged capital, and the imperial order posthumously presented General Ren Wei, the official position he originally held.

古文：何氏自晋司空充、宋司空尚之，世奉佛法，并建立塔寺；至敬容又舍宅东为伽蓝，趋势者因助财造构，敬容并不拒，故此寺堂宇校饰，颇为宏丽。时轻薄者因呼为 众造寺 焉。
现代文：何氏志从晋司空充、宋司空尚以来，世代信佛，并建立塔寺；至敬容又舍弃住宅在束部建立佛寺，趋势者为他捐钱建造，敬容并不拒绝，因而佛寺堂宇修饰十分宏丽，当时轻薄人称佛寺为 众造寺 。
English: Ho Shizhi believed in Buddhism for generations and built pagodas and temples from the time of Jinshi Kuanzhong and Song Dynasty Kuanzhong. He was so respected that he gave up his residence to build a Buddhist temple in Sokube. People would donate money to build it for him, and he did not refuse. As a result, the Buddhist temple hall was very magnificently decorated. At that time, people called Buddhist temples "publicly built temples."

古文：及敬容免职出宅，止有常用器物及囊衣而已，竟无余财货，时亦以此称之。
现代文：到敬容被免职离开住宅时，衹有常用器物及袋中衣物而已，竟没有多余的财货，当时人又因此而称赞他。
English: When Jing Rong was dismissed from his post and left home, he had nothing more than the usual utensils and the clothes in his bag, but no extra goods. People praised him for this at the time.

古文：子，秘书丞，早卒。
现代文：子名墼，任秘书丞，早卒。
English: His son, Naosuke, was appointed secretary, and graduated early.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：魏正始及晋之中朝，时俗尚于玄虚，贵为放诞，尚书丞郎以上，簿领文案，不复经怀，皆成于令史。
现代文：陈吏部尚书姚察日：从魏之正盘以及酉置，以玄虚为高，以放诞为贵，尚书丞郎以上官吏，不理文案，全由令史办理。
English: On the day of the inspection of the official department of Shang Shujiao: from Wei's main board and setting aside, the mystery is high, the birth is precious, the officials above Shang Shujiao, regardless of the copy, are all handled by the order history.

古文：逮乎江左，此道弥扇，惟卞壸以台阁之务，颇欲综理，阮孚谓之曰： 卿常无闲暇，不乃劳乎？ 
现代文：到了江左，此风更盛，衹有卞壸将台阁的政务，极想综理，医孚对他说： 卿如此之忙，不是很辛苦吗? 
English: When he arrived at Jiangzuo, this trend was more prevalent, and many people wanted to take over the cabinet's government affairs and wanted to make an overall analysis. Yifu said to him: Sir, you are so busy, isn't it very hard?

古文：宋世王敬弘身居端右，未尝省牒，风流相尚，其流遂远。
现代文：宋世王敬弘身为尚书省长官，却不看公文，崇尚风流，影响深远。
English: King Song Shi Wang Jinghong was the governor of Shangshu Province, but he did not look at official documents, he advocated elegance, and his influence was far-reaching.

古文：望白署空，是称清贵；恪勤匪懈，终滞鄙俗。
现代文：做官的衹署文牍不问政务，称为清贵；而恭谨勤恳不懈怠的人，却终身滞留在鄙俗的职位上。
English: Those officials who do not care about government affairs are called noble; while those who are respectful, diligent and tireless remain in vulgar positions for life.

古文：小人道长，抑此之由。
现代文：这样在朝的人不讲纲常法度，下面的人不能尽职尽责。小人得势或许是这个原由。
English: In this way, those at the top do not follow the rules and regulations, and those at the bottom cannot perform their duties. Perhaps this is the reason why villains gain power.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼!
English: Alas!

古文：伤风败俗，曾莫之悟。
现代文：伤风败俗，却不醒悟。
English: It's immoral, but they don't realize it.

古文：永嘉不竞，戎马生郊，宜其然矣。何国礼之识治，见讥薄俗，惜哉！
现代文：西晋衰落，战乱频仍，这是势所必然。何敬容有所预感，却被讥笑，可惜呀。
English: The Western Jin Dynasty was in decline, and frequent wars continued, which was inevitable. It was a pity that He Jing Rong had a premonition, but was ridiculed.

