古文：○太宗二二年春正月丙辰，以德恭为左武卫大将军、判济州，封定安侯；德隆为右武卫大将军、判沂州，封长宁侯。
现代文：雍熙二年春正月十一日，任命赵德恭为左武卫大将军判济州，封为安定侯；赵德隆为右武卫大将军判沂州，封为长宁侯。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the second year of the Spring of the Yongxi Dynasty, Zhao Deqong was appointed as the left guard general and was assigned to Jeju, with the title of stable marquis; Zhao Delong was appointed as the right guard general and was assigned to Bozhou, with the title of Changning marquis.

古文：右补阙刘蒙叟通判济州，起居舍人韩俭通判沂州。
现代文：右补网刘蒙雯通判济州，起居舍人韩俭通判沂州。
English: Right Supplement Network Liu Mengwen Tong awarded Jeju, and Han Jian Tong, who lives in Jeju, awarded Bozhou.

古文：乙丑，赐德恭、德隆常奉外支钱三百万。
现代文：二十日，赐给赵德恭、赵德隆常奉外支钱三百万络。
English: On the 20th, he gave Zhao Deqong and Zhao Delong three million rupees for their foreign service.

古文：二月戊寅，权交州留后黎桓遣使来贡。
现代文：二月初三，代理交州留后黎桓遣使来进贡。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Li Huan, the acting governor of Jiaozhou, sent an envoy to collect tribute.

古文：乙未，夏州李继迁诱杀汝州团练使曹光实。
现代文：二十日，夏州李继迁诱杀汝州团练使曹光实。
English: On the 20th, Caozhou Li Jijian lured and killed Ruzhou group training envoy Cao Guangshi.

古文：己亥，占城遣使来贡。
现代文：二十四日，占城国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 24th, the state of Zhancheng sent an envoy to collect the tribute.

古文：三月己未，亲试礼部举人。
现代文：三月十五日，太宗亲自考试礼部举人。
English: On March 15th, Emperor Taizong personally led the ceremonial examination.

古文：江南民饥，许渡江自占。
现代文：江南百姓饥荒，允许他们渡江自占。
English: The people in the south of the Yangtze River were starving, so they were allowed to cross the river at their own expense.

古文：夏四月乙亥朔，遣使行江南诸州，振饥民及察官吏能否。
现代文：夏四月初一，派遣使臣巡视江南各少，贩济饥民，考察官吏能否。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, envoys were dispatched to inspect the southern part of the Yangtze River to see if officials were capable of selling food to the hungry.

古文：戊寅，遣忠武军节度使潘美复屯三交口。
现代文：初四，派遣忠武军节度使潘美再次驻屯三交口。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the loyal troops were dispatched to the festival to make Pan Mei once again stationed at the three intersections.

古文：己卯，诏以帝所生官舍作启圣院。
现代文：初五，诏令以太宗出生的官舍修建启圣院。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the edict ordered the construction of Kai Sheng Yuan in the official residence where the Tai Sect was born.

古文：己丑，殿前承旨王著坐监资州兵为奸赃，弃市。
现代文：十五日，殿前承旨王著因监资州军时行为奸赃获罪，被斩杀于闹市。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the former Prince Zongzhi Wang was found guilty of treason for acting as a supervisor of the state army, and was beheaded in the city.

古文：庚子，甘露降后苑。
现代文：二十六日，后苑降甘露。
English: On the 26th, nectar fell in the backyard.

古文：辛丑，夏州行营破西蕃息利族，斩其代州刺史折罗遇并弟埋乞，又破保、洗两族，降五十余族。
现代文：二十七日，夏州行营攻破西蕃息利族，斩杀其代州刺史折罗遇和弟弟埋乞，又攻破保、洗两族，五十多族投降。
English: On the 27th, the Xiazhou Campaign broke through the Xishuo and Xili clans, killed their acting state chief Shiro and buried his younger brother, broke through the Bao and Shu clans, and more than 50 clans surrendered.

古文：五月甲子，幸城南观麦，赐田夫布帛。
现代文：五月二十日，太宗到城南观麦，赐给田夫布帛。
English: On May 20th, Emperor Taizong went to the south of the city to inspect the wheat, and gave Tianfu Buyeo.

古文：天长军蝝生。
现代文：天长军出现没长翅膀的小蝗虫。
English: Small locusts without long wings appear in the army of heaven.

古文：六月甲戌朔，河西行营言，获岌罗赋等十四族，焚千余帐。
现代文：六月初一，河西行营报告说，俘获岌罗赋等十四族，焚烧一千多帐。
English: On the first day of June, the Hexi expedition reported that they had captured fourteen tribes, including the Pre-Raphaelites, and burned more than a thousand tents.

古文：戊子，复禁盐、榷酤。
现代文：十五日，又禁盐、榷酣。
English: On the fifteenth day, salt and yeast were also prohibited.

古文：秋七月庚申，诏诸道转运使及长吏，宜乘丰储廪以防水旱。
现代文：秋七月十七日，诏令各道转运使和长官，应该趁丰年多储藏粮食以防水早灾害。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, the emperor issued an edict to the envoys and officials in charge of transportation in each province that they should take advantage of the good years to store more grain to prevent early disasters.

古文：八月癸酉朔，遣使按问两浙、荆湖、福建、江南东西路、淮南诸州刑狱，仍察官吏勤惰以闻。
现代文：八月初一，派遣使臣视察、考核两浙、荆湖、福建、江南东西路、淮南各州刑狱，并且考察官吏的勤政和懈惰，报告朝廷。
English: On the first day of August, envoys were dispatched to inspect and evaluate the penal prisons in Zhejiang, Jinghu, Fujian, Jiangnan East-West Road, and Huainan, and to investigate the diligence and laziness of officials and report to the imperial court.

古文：癸巳，西南奉化王子以慈来贡。
现代文：二十一日，西南夷奉化王子以慈来进贡。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Prince of Southwest Yixian, Fenghua, came to pay tribute.

古文：是月，瀛、莫二州大水。
现代文：这个月，赢、莫二州发生大水。
English: This month, there was a big flood in Yingzhou and Moji.

古文：九月丙午，以岁无兵凶，除十恶、官吏犯赃、谋故劫杀外，死罪减降，流以下释之，及蠲江、浙诸州民逋租。
现代文：九月初五，因没有战争，除十恶、官吏犯赃、故意劫杀外，死罪以下减降，流刑以下释放，并免除江、浙各州百姓拖欠租税。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, since there was no war, in addition to the ten evils, official misconduct, and intentional robbery and murder, the death penalty was reduced to less than the death penalty, the exile was released, and the people in Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces were exempted from tax arrears.

古文：庚戌，重九，赐近臣饮于李昉第，召诸王、节度使宴射苑中。
现代文：初九，重阳节，在李意家赐给近臣聚饮，召诸王、节度使在苑中宴饮射箭。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Chung Yeung Festival, Li Yi's family invited all the kings and dignitaries to a banquet in the courtyard.

古文：是夕，楚王宫火。
现代文：这天晚上，楚王宫发生火灾。
English: That evening, a fire broke out in the palace of King Chu.

古文：辛亥，废楚王元佐为庶人、均州安置。
现代文：初十，废楚王赵元佐为庶人，均州安置。
English: In the early 10th century, the former King of Chu, Zhao Yuan Cao, became a commoner and was resettled in Junzhou.

古文：丁巳，群臣请留元佐养疾京师，许之。
现代文：十六日，大臣们请求留赵元佐在京城养病，太宗答应了。
English: On the 16th, the ministers requested that Zhao Yuanzuo stay in Beijing to recuperate, and Emperor Taizong agreed.

古文：己未，西南蕃王遣使来贡。
现代文：十八日，西南蕃王派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 18th, the King of Southwest Shandong sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己巳，禁海贾。
现代文：二十八日，严禁海贾。
English: On the 28th, Haija is strictly prohibited.

古文：闰月癸未，太白入南斗。
现代文：闰九月十二日，太白星进人南斗。
English: On September 12th, Taibai Xing entered Nandou.

古文：甲申，幸天驷监，赐从臣马。
现代文：十三日，太宗到天驯监，赐给从臣马匹。
English: On the thirteenth day, Emperor Taizong went to the Heavenly Coachman to give horses to his vassals.

古文：乙未，禁邕管杀人祭鬼及僧人置妻孥。
现代文：二十四日，禁止琶管杀人祭鬼和僧人置妻子儿女。
English: On the 24th, it was forbidden for lutes to play murderous ghosts and for monks to have wives and children.

古文：己亥，均州献一角兽。
现代文：二十八日，坊州贡献一角兽。
English: On the 28th, Fangzhou contributed a unicorn.

古文：冬十月辛丑朔，虑囚。
现代文：冬十月初一，讯察记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the information inspection records the criminal status of prisoners.

古文：丙午，以天竺僧天息灾、施护、法天并为朝请大夫、试鸿胪少卿。
现代文：初六，任命天竺僧天息灾、施护、法天并为朝请大夫、试鸿肪少卿。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he appointed the celestial monks, Tian Sibi, Shifu, Faten, and invited the doctor, Qi Hong, to the court.

古文：己酉，汴河主粮胥吏坐夺漕军口粮，断腕徇于河畔三日，斩之。
现代文：初九，汁河主粮青吏因剥夺槽运军卒的口粮获罪，断腕后，在河畔示众三天，然后斩杀。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 1st year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16

古文：甲寅，黎邛部蛮王子来贡。
现代文：十四日，黎邓部蛮王子来进贡。
English: On the 14th, Prince Lai Teng Bu came to pay tribute.

古文：十一月壬午，狩于近郊，以所获献太庙，著为令。
现代文：十一月十二日，在近郊狩猎，用所获猎物献给太庙，著为令。
English: On November 12th, he hunted in the suburbs and dedicated the prey to the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊子，祷雪。
现代文：十八日，祈祷降雪。
English: On the 18th, we prayed for snow.

古文：辛卯，诏在官丁父母忧者并放离任。
现代文：二十一日，诏令在位官员遭父母丧者都允许离位服丧。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the imperial edict allowed the incumbent officials who had lost their parents to leave the position to attend the funeral.

古文：十二月庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：癸卯，南康军言，雪降三尺，大江冰合，可胜重载。
现代文：初四，南康军报告说，降雪厚达三尺，大江冰冻，可以载重。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the Nankang Army reported that the snowfall was up to three feet thick, and the river was frozen, so it could carry heavy loads.

古文：丁未，遣中使赐缘边戍卒襦裤。
现代文：初八，派遣中使赐给缘边戍卒衣裤。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the middle envoy was sent to give Yuan Bian the trousers.

古文：丙辰，门下侍郎兼刑部尚书、平章事宋琪罢守本官。
现代文：十七日，门下侍郎兼刑部尚书、平章事宋琪罢守本官。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Shang Shu, Ping Zhangji, and Song Qi, who were under the tutelage of the master and the head of the criminal investigation department, resigned from their posts.

古文：三年春正月辛未，右武卫大将军、长宁侯德隆薨，以其弟德彝嗣侯，仍知沂州。
现代文：雍熙三年春正月初二，右武卫大将军、长宁侯赵德隆逝世，任命他的弟弟赵德彝袭封长宁侯，仍知沂州。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second month of the third year of the Spring of the Yongxi Dynasty, Zhao Delong, General of the Right Division of Wuwei and Changning Hou, passed away, and appointed his brother Zhao Deyu to succeed Changning Hou. He still knew Zhangzhou.

古文：庚辰，夜漏一刻，北方有赤气如城，至明不散。
现代文：十一日，夜漏一刻，北方有红气到达城边，至天亮不散。
English: On the 11th day, at one minute past midnight, a red wind from the north reached the edge of the city and did not dissipate until dawn.

古文：己丑，知雄州贺令图等请伐契丹，取燕、蓟故地。
现代文：二十日，雄州知州贺令图等请求攻打契丹，夺取燕蓟故地。
English: On the 20th, Xiongzhou, Chizhou, He Lingtu and others requested to attack Khitan and seize the old place of Yanqi.

古文：庚寅，北伐，以天平军节度使曹彬为幽州道行营前军马步水陆都部署，河阳三城节度使崔彦进副之；侍卫马军都指挥使、彰化军节度使米信为西北道都部署，沙州观察使杜彦圭副之，以其众出雄州；侍卫步军都指挥使、静难军节度使田重进为定州路都部署，出飞狐。
现代文：二十一日，北伐，任命天平军节度使曹彬为幽州道行营前军马步军水陆都部署，河阳三城节度使崔彦进为副；侍卫马军都指挥使、彰化军节度使米信为西北道都部署，沙州观察使杜彦圭为副，率领军队出雄州；侍卫步军都指挥使、静难军节度使田重进为定州路都部署，率兵出飞狐。
English: On the 21st day of the Northern Expedition, the Tianping Army Festival appointed Cao Bin to be the commander of the Yuzhou Road marching army, the horse-walking army, and the land and sea capital deployment; the Heyang Three Cities Festival appointed Cui Yanjin to be the deputy commander; the Horse Guards Army Festival appointed the commander of the Horse Guards Army; the Changhua Army Festival appointed the Yixin to be the commander of the Northwest Road; the Shazhou Observing Army appointed Du Yan Gui as the deputy commander and led the army out of Xiongzhou; the Foot Guards Army Festival appointed the commander of the Horse Guards Army; the Jingnan Army Festival appointed the Tian Chong

古文：戊戌，参知政事李至罢为礼部侍郎。
现代文：二十九日，参知政事李至罢为礼部侍郎。
English: On the 29th, Li Zhi Bao, the political secretary of the party secretary, was appointed as the attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：二月壬子，以检校太师、忠武军节度使潘美为云、应、朔等州都部署，云州观察使杨业副之，出雁门。
现代文：二月十三日，任命检校太师、忠武军节度使潘美为云、应、朔等州都部署，云州观察使杨业为副将，率兵出雁门。
English: On February 13th, the appointment of the inspector general and the loyal military commander led to the deployment of Pan Mei to Yunnan, Ying, Shuo and other provinces, and the observation of Yunnan led to Yang Ye as vice-general, leading the troops out of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：三月癸酉，曹彬与契丹兵战固安南，克其城。
现代文：三月初五，曹彬与契丹军在固安南交战，攻克其城。
English: On the fifth day of March, Cao Bin and the Khitan army fought in the south of Gu'an and conquered the city.

古文：丁丑，田重进战飞狐北，又破之。
现代文：初九，田重进在飞狐作战，又攻破契丹军。
English: At the beginning of ninth grade, Tian Chongjin fought in the Flying Fox and defeated the Khitan army.

古文：潘美自西陉入，与契丹兵遇，追至寰州，执其刺史赵彦辛，辛以城降。
现代文：潘美从西阻进人，与契丹军相遇，追至寰州，攻破契丹军，契丹刺史赵彦辛献城投降。
English: Pan Mei blocked the enemy from the west, met the Khitan army, chased it to Zhangzhou, defeated the Khitan army, and the Khitan leader Zhao Yansin surrendered the city.

古文：辛巳，曹彬克涿州。
现代文：十三日，曹彬攻克琢州。
English: On the 13th, Cao Bin conquered Takuzhou.

古文：潘美围朔州，其节度副使赵希赞以城降。
现代文：潘美围攻朔州，契丹节度副使赵希赞以城来投降。
English: When Pan Mei besieged and attacked Shuozhou, Zhao Xizan, the deputy envoy of the Khitan festival, came to the city to surrender.

古文：癸未，田重进战飞狐北，获其西南面招安使大鹏翼、康州刺史马頵、马军指挥使何万通。
现代文：十五日，田重进在飞狐北作战，俘获契丹西南面招安使大鹏翼、康州刺史酮页、马军指挥使何万通。
English: On the fifteenth day, Tian Chongjin fought in the north of the flying fox, and captured the southwestern side of the Khitan, recruiting the peace envoy Dapeng Ying, the Kangzhou stabbing page, and the tens of thousands of the commanding envoy of the horse army.

古文：乙酉，曹彬败契丹于涿州南，杀其相贺斯。
现代文：十七日，曹彬在琢州南打败契丹军，杀死其相贺斯。
English: On the 17th, Cao Bin defeated the Khitan army in the south of Takuzhou and killed his comrade, Heth.

古文：丁亥，潘美师至应州，其节度副使艾正、观察判官宋雄以城降。
现代文：十九日，潘美军队进至应州，契丹节度副使艾正、观察判官宋雄以城来投降。
English: On the 19th, the Pan-American army entered Yingzhou, and the deputy envoy of the Khitan festival, Ai Zheng, and the observation judge, Song Xiong, came to the city to surrender.

古文：司门员外郎王延范与秘书丞陆坦、戎城县主簿田辩、术士刘昂坐谋不轨，弃市。
现代文：司门员外郎王延范与秘书承陆坦、戎城县主簿田辩、术士刘昂，因谋不轨被斩杀于闹市。
English: The gatekeeper, Wang Yanfan, and the secretary, Cheng Lu Tan, the chief bookkeeper of Ebisucho County, Tian Bo, and the sorcerer, Liu Ang, were beheaded in the downtown area for plotting.

古文：庚寅，武宁军节度使、同平章事、岐国公陈洪进卒。
现代文：二十二日，武宁军节度使、同平章事、岐国公陈洪进逝世。
English: On the 22nd, Chen Hongjin, Wu Ning's military festival envoy, Tong Ping Zhangji, and Qiguo, passed away.

古文：辛卯，田重进攻飞狐，其守将吕行德、张继从、刘知进等举城降，以其县为飞狐军。
现代文：二十三日，田重进攻飞狐，契丹守将吕行德、张继从、刘知进等举城投降，以其县为飞狐军。
English: On the 23rd, Tian Chong attacked the Flying Fox, and the Khitan guardsmen, including Lv Xingde, Zhang Jizong, and Liu Zhijin, surrendered en masse, taking their counties as the Flying Fox army.

古文：占城国遣使来贡。
现代文：占城国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: Zhancheng sent envoys to collect the tribute.

古文：丙申，进围灵丘，其守将穆超以城降。
现代文：二十八日，进围灵丘，其守将穆超以城投降。
English: On the 28th, they besieged Lingqiu, and its garrison surrendered to Mu Chao Yicheng.

古文：夏四月辛丑，潘美克云州。
现代文：夏四月初三，潘美攻克云州。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of summer, Panmei conquered Yunnan Province.

古文：田重进战飞狐北，破其众。
现代文：田重进战飞狐北，攻破契丹军。
English: Tian Chong went to fight in the north and defeated the Khitan army.

古文：壬寅，曹彬、米信战新城东北，又破之。
现代文：初四，曹彬、米信在新城东北作战，又攻破契丹军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Cao Bin and Yixin fought in the northeast of Xincheng and defeated the Khitan army.

古文：己酉，田重进再战飞狐北，再破之，杀二将。
现代文：十一日，田重进又战飞狐北，再次攻破契丹军，杀死三将。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Tian Chongjin once again flew north to defeat the Khitan army, killing three generals.

古文：乙卯，重进至蔚州，其牙校李存璋、许彦钦杀大将萧啜理，执其监城使、同州节度使耿绍忠以城降。
现代文：十七日，田重进至蔚州，契丹牙校李存璋、许彦钦杀死大将萧嚷理，活捉监城使、同州节度使耿绍忠，以城投降。
English: On the 17th, Tian Chong marched to Ulshu. Li Cunxu and Xu Yanqin of the Qidan School of Dentistry killed the general Xiao Ranli, captured alive the city inspector and the governor of Ulshu, Geng Shaozhong, and surrendered the city.

古文：五月庚午，曹彬之师大败于岐沟关，收众夜渡拒马河，退屯易州，知幽州行府事刘保勋死之。
现代文：五月初三，曹彬军队在岐沟关大败，收拾败军连夜渡过拒马河，退屯易州。知幽州行府事刘保勋战死。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Cao Bin's army suffered a crushing defeat at Jigou Pass. The defeated army was defeated and retreated to Yizhou. Liu Baoxun, the governor of Chiyuzhou, was killed in the battle.

古文：丙子，召曹彬、崔彦进、米信归阙，命田重进屯定州，潘美还代州。
现代文：初九，太宗召曹彬、崔彦进、米信归朝廷，命令田重进驻屯定州，潘美回到代州。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Emperor Taizong summoned Cao Bin, Cui Yanjin, and Meixin to return to the imperial court, ordered Tian Chongjin to be stationed in Dingzhou, and Pan Mei to return to Daizhou.

古文：徙云、应、寰、朔吏民及吐浑部族，分置河东、京西。
现代文：迁徙云、应、寰、朔四州吏民及吐浑部族，分别安置在河东、京西。
English: The migratory Yun, Ying, Yao, Shuo and Tu Hun tribes were resettled in Hedong and West Beijing, respectively.

古文：会契丹十万众复陷寰州，杨业护送迁民遇之，苦战力尽，为所禽，守节而死。
现代文：遇上契丹十万军队攻陷寰州，杨业护送迁徙百姓时遇到契丹军，苦战力尽，被契丹军俘虏，不屈守节而死。
English: When the Khitan army of 100,000 troops invaded and occupied Zhangzhou, Yang Ye met the Khitan army when he was escorting migrating people. He fought hard, was captured by the Khitan army, and died defending the festival.

古文：六月戊戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：甲辰，以御史中丞辛仲甫为参知政事。
现代文：初七，任命御史中承辛仲甫为参知政事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the new year, Choson Sin Chung-ho was appointed to be a member of the Council of State.

古文：秋七月庚午，贬曹彬为右骁卫上将军，崔彦进为右武卫上将军，米信为右屯卫上将军，杜彦圭为均州团练使。
现代文：秋七月初三，贬曹彬为右晓卫上将军，崔彦进为右武卫上将军，米信为右屯卫上将军，杜彦圭为均州团练使。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Cao Bin was demoted to General of the Right Xiao Wei, Cui Yanjin to General of the Right Wu Wei, Yixin to General of the Right Tunwei, and Du Yan Gui to Junzhou Regimental Trainee.

古文：应群臣、列校死事及陷敌者，录其子孙。
现代文：在战争中，大臣、列校为国捐躯和身陷敌国者，录用他们的子孙。
English: In the war, ministers, generals and those who died for the country and were trapped in an enemy country, hired their children and grandchildren.

古文：壬午，徙山后降民至河南府、许汝等州。
现代文：十五日，迁徙山后降民到河南府、许州、汝州等地。
English: On the fifteenth day, the people migrated to Henan Province, Xuzhou, Ruzhou and other places.

古文：丁亥，以签署枢密院事张齐贤为给事中、知代州。
现代文：二十日，任命签署枢密院事张齐贤为给事中，知代州。
English: On the 20th, the appointment and signing of the Privy Council Zhang Qixian as the leader of Zhizhong and Zhidaozhou.

古文：癸巳，阶州福津县有大山飞来，自龙帝峡壅江水逆流，坏民田数百里。
现代文：二十六日，阶州福津县有大山飞来，从龙帝峡堵塞江水逆流，毁坏数百里民田。
English: On the 26th, a large mountain flew into Fuzin County, Chaozhou, blocking the backflow of river water from Longdi Gorge and destroying hundreds of miles of farmland.

古文：甲午，诏改陈王元祐为元僖，韩王元休为元侃，冀王元隽为元份。
现代文：二十七日，诏令改陈王赵元为赵元嘻，韩王赵元休为赵元侃，冀王赵元隽为赵元份。
English: On the 27th, the imperial decree changed Chen Wang Zhao Yuan to Zhao Yuan He, Han Wang Zhao Yuan Xiu to Zhao Yuan Kan, and Ji Wang Zhao Yuan Jie to Zhao Yuan Ben.

古文：八月丁酉朔，以王沔、张宏并为枢密副使。
现代文：八月初一，任命王洒、张宏为枢密副使。
English: On the first day of August, Wang San and Zhang Hong were appointed as Privy Vice-Envoys.

古文：丁未，大雨，遣使祷岳渎，至夕雨止。
现代文：十一日，降大雨，派遣使臣祈祷岳读，到晚上停止降雨。
English: On the 11th day, heavy rain fell, and envoys were dispatched to pray for Yue Yue. By the evening, the rain had stopped.

古文：剑州民饥，遣使振之，因督捕诸州盗贼。
现代文：剑州民饥荒，派遣使臣贩济，于是督捕各州盗贼。
English: When the people of Jianzhou were starving, he dispatched envoys to sell grain, and then ordered the arrest of thieves in every province.

古文：辛亥，降潘美为检校太保，赠杨业太尉、大同军节度使。
现代文：十五日，潘美降为检校太保，赠杨业为太尉、大同军节度使。
English: On the 15th, Pan Mei was demoted to the rank of school inspector, and Yang Ye was promoted to the rank of captain and given the post of commander of the Datong Army.

古文：九月丙寅朔，减两京诸州系囚流以下一等，杖罪释之。
现代文：九月初一，两京各州判处流刑以下的关押囚犯减罪一等，杖刑囚犯释放。
English: On the first day of September, the states of the two capitals commuted the first-degree crimes of prisoners sentenced to less than exile, and released prisoners sentenced to caning.

古文：赐所徙寰、应、蔚等州民米，升、宣等十四州雍熙二年官所振贷并蠲之。
现代文：赐给所迁徙寰、应、蔚等州百姓米，升州、宣州等十四州雍熙二年官府所贩贷的粮食一律免除。
English: The rice given to the people of the migrated states such as Shan, Ying and Wei, and the grain sold by the government in the second year of Yongxi in 14 states such as Shengzhou and Xuanzhou, are all exempted.

古文：戊寅，赐北征军士阵亡者家三月粮。
现代文：十三日，赐给北征契丹军士阵亡者家属三个月的粮食。
English: On the 13th, three months of grain was given to the families of the deceased soldiers of the Northern Expedition of Khitan.

古文：冬十月甲辰，以陈王元僖为开封尹。
现代文：冬十月初九，任命陈王赵元嘻为开封府尹。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, Chen Wang Zhao Yuan Rong was appointed as the new governor of Kaifeng.

古文：壬子，高丽国王遣使来贡。
现代文：十七日，高丽国王派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 17th, King Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：庚申，诏以权静海军留后黎桓为本军节度。
现代文：二十五日，诏令任命暂代静海军留后黎桓为本军节度使。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict appointed Lai Huan, who had temporarily replaced Jing Junhui, as the military's chief of staff.

古文：十一月丙戌，幸建隆观、相国寺祈雪。
现代文：十一月二十二日，到建隆观、相国寺祈祷降雪。
English: On November 22nd, they went to Jianlong Temple and Shokoku Temple to pray for snowfall.

古文：十二月乙未朔，大雨雪，宴群臣玉华殿。
现代文：十二月初一，降大雪，在玉华殿宴请大臣。
English: On the first day of December, heavy snow fell, and the minister was invited to a banquet at the Jade Palace.

古文：己亥，定州田重进入契丹界，攻下岐沟关。
现代文：初五，定州田重进进人契丹境内，攻下岐沟关。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Dingzhou Tian re-entered the territory of the Khitan people, and conquered Qigou Pass.

古文：壬寅，契丹败刘廷让军于君子馆，执先锋将贺令图，高阳关部署杨重进死之。
现代文：初八，契丹军在君子馆打败刘廷让军，俘虏先锋将领贺令图，高阳关部署杨重进战死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Khitan army defeated Liu Tingzang's army in the Gentleman's Pavilion, captured the pioneer general He Lingtu, and deployed Yang Chongjin to Gaoyang Pass, where he died in battle.

古文：壬子，建房州为保康军，以右卫上将军刘继元为节度使。
现代文：十八日，建房州为保康军，任命右卫上将军刘继元为节度使。
English: On the 18th, Jianfang Prefecture was designated as a military garrison, and Liu Jiyuan, General of the Right Division, was appointed as the envoy to the festival.

古文：代州副部署卢汉赟败契丹于土镫堡，斩获甚众，杀监军舍利二人。
现代文：代州副部署卢汉贾在土橙堡打败契丹军，斩杀和俘获甚多，杀监军舍利二人。
English: On behalf of the state, Vice-Delegate Lu Hanjia defeated the Khitan army in the Turkish Orange Fort, killed and captured many, and killed two soldiers.

古文：是岁，寿州大水，濮州蝗。
现代文：这一年，寿州发大水，攫州出现蝗灾。
English: In this year, Shoushu had a big flood, and there was a locust plague in Zhangzhou.

古文：四年春正月甲子朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁拜表称贺。
现代文：雍熙四年春正月初一，不接受朝贺，大臣们到间门上表称庆祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Yongxi Dynasty, morning greetings were not accepted, and the ministers went to the door to say congratulations.

古文：己卯，遣使按问西川、岭南、江浙等路刑狱。
现代文：十六日，派遣使臣察访西川、岭南、江浙等路刑狱。
English: On the 16th, envoys were dispatched to inspect prisons in Xichuan, Lingnan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces.

古文：丙戌，诏： 应行营将士战败溃散者并释不问，缘边城堡备御有劳可纪者所在以闻。
现代文：二十三日，下诏： 行营将士战败溃散者都释放不予追究，沿边城堡防备抵御有功劳可纪者所在各地报告朝廷。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: Those who were defeated and dispersed from the camp would be released without being investigated, and those who had distinguished themselves in defense and resistance along the castle would be reported to the imperial court.

古文：瘗暴骸，死事者廪给其家，录死事文武官子孙。蠲河北雍熙三年以前逋租，敌所蹂践者给复三年，军所过二年，余一年。 
现代文：掩埋露骨，为国捐躯者由官府仓凛供给其家粮食，录用为国捐躯文武官员的子孙；免除河北雍熙三年以前拖欠租税，被敌军践踏庄稼者免除三年赋税，军队所过之地免除二年赋税，其他地区免除一年赋税。 
English: Those who buried their bones and sacrificed their lives for the country were provided with grain for their families from government warehouses, and the sons and daughters of cultural and military officials who sacrificed their lives for the country were employed; the tax arrears of Yongxi in Hebei three years ago were exempted, the farmers who were trampled by the enemy army were exempted from tax for three years, the land where the army passed was exempted from tax for two years, and other regions were exempted from tax for one year.

古文：二月丙申，以汉南国王钱俶为武胜军节度使，徙封南阳国王。
现代文：二月初三，任命汉南国王钱为武胜军节度使，徙封南阳国王。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, King Qian of Hannan was appointed as the envoy of the festival of the victorious army, and the king of Nanyang was exiled.

古文：丁酉，缮治河北诸州、军城隍。
现代文：初四，修缮治理河北各州军城陛。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the repair and management of military cities in all provinces of Hebei began.

古文：甲寅，钱俶改封许王。
现代文：二十一日，钱改封许王。
English: On the 21st, the money was transferred to Xu Wang.

古文：三月庚辰，诏申严考绩。
现代文：三月十八日，诏令申严考绩。
English: On March 18th, the Emperor issued a decree to impose strict performance evaluation.

古文：夏四月癸巳朔，以御史中丞赵昌言为右谏议大夫、枢密副使。
现代文：夏四月初一，任命御史中承赵昌言为右谏议大夫、枢密副使。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhao Changyan, the successor of Gu Shih, was appointed as the right-hand man of the right-hand man, and the vice-secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：乙未，诏诸州郡暑月五日一涤囹圄，给饮浆，病者令医治，小罪即决之。
现代文：初三，下诏，各州郡暑天每五天清洗一次监狱，供给饮料，病患者令其医治，小罪立即处理。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that prisons in all prefectures and counties should be cleaned once every five days in the summer, beverages should be provided, sick people should be treated, and minor crimes should be dealt with immediately.

古文：丁未，幸金明池观水嬉，遂习射琼林苑，登楼，掷金钱缯彩于楼下，纵民取之。
现代文：十五日，太宗到金明池观赏水嬉，于是在琼林苑练习射箭，登上高楼，向楼下投掷金钱丝织物，让百姓拾取。
English: On the 15th, Taizong went to the Jinming Pond to watch the water frolic, so he practiced archery in Qionglin Garden, climbed a tall building, and threw money silk fabric downstairs for the people to pick up.

古文：并水陆发运为一司。
现代文：合并水陆发运司为一司。
English: Merge the Surface Shipping Division into a single division.

古文：五月丙寅，遣使市诸道民马。
现代文：五月初五，派遣使臣购买各道民马。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month, the envoys were dispatched to purchase the horses of the people in each province.

古文：庚辰，改殿前司日骑为捧日，骁猛为拱辰，雄勇为神勇，上铁林为殿前司虎翼，腰弩为神射，侍卫步军司铁林为侍卫司虎翼。
现代文：十九日，改殿前司日骑为捧日，晓猛为拱辰，雄勇为神勇，上铁林为殿前司虎翼，腰弩为神射，侍卫步军司铁林为侍卫司虎翼。
English: On the 19th, the day before the palace was changed to the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse, the day of the horse.

古文：丁亥，诏诸州送医术人校业太医署。
现代文：二十六日，诏令各州送精通医术的人在太医署比赛技艺。
English: On the 26th, the prefectural government ordered all prefectures to send people who are proficient in medicine to the Taiyuan Medical Bureau to compete.

古文：赐诸将阵图。
现代文：赐给各将领阵图。
English: Give each general a map.

古文：六月丁酉，以右骁卫上将军刘廷让为雄州都部署。
现代文：六月初六，任命右晓卫上将军刘廷让为雄州都部署。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：戊戌，以彰国军节度使、驸马都尉王承衍为贝、冀都部署，郭守文及郢州团练使田钦祚并为北面排阵使。
现代文：初七，任命彰国军节度使、驹马都尉王承衍为贝、冀都部署，郭守文和即州团练使田钦柞为北面排阵使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he appointed Wang Chengyan, the military envoy of the National Day of the People's Republic of China, and Guo Shouwen, and Tian Qinqi, the military envoy of the State Rehearsal Corps, to be deployed in Bei and Hebei.

古文：庚子，定国军节度使崔翰复为高阳关兵马都部署。
现代文：初九，定国军节度使崔翰又被任命为高阳关兵马都部署。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Dingguo Army Festival caused Cui Han to be appointed as the commander of Gaoyang Pass.

古文：是月，鄜州献马，前足如牛。
现代文：这个月，州贡献马，前足如牛。
English: This month, the state contributed a horse with front legs like a cow.

古文：秋七月丙寅，幸讲武池观鱼。
现代文：秋七月初五，太宗到讲武池观赏鱼。
English: On the fifth day of the seventh month of autumn, Taizong went to Keowu Pond to watch the fish.

古文：是月，置三班院。
现代文：这个月，设三班院。
English: This month, three hospitals will be set up.

古文：八月庚子，免诸州吏所逋京仓米二十六万七千石。
现代文：八月初十，免除各州吏所拖欠京仓米二十六万七千石。
English: At the beginning of August, officials in all prefectures were exempted from the arrears of 267,000 koku of rice stored in Kyoto warehouses.

古文：九月癸亥，校医术人，优者为翰林学生。
现代文：九月初三，考校医术人，优秀者为翰林学生。
English: On the third day of the ninth month, the medical examiners of the school came, and the outstanding students were Hanlin students.

古文：冬十月丙午，流雄州都部署刘廷让于商州。
现代文：冬十月十七日，雄州都部署刘廷让流放到商州。
English: In the winter of October 17th, Xiongzhou deployed Liu Tingzang to be exiled to Shangzhou.

古文：壬子，左仆射致仕沈伦薨。
现代文：二十三日，以左仆射退休的沈伦逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Shen Lun, who retired as a left-hander, passed away.

古文：十一月庚辰，诏以实数给百官奉。
现代文：十一月二十一日，诏令以实数给文武百官棒禄。
English: On November 21st, the imperial edict increased the stipend to one hundred civil and military officials in real terms.

古文：十二月壬寅，幸建隆观、相国寺祈雪。
现代文：十二月十四日，到建隆观、相国寺祈祷降雪。
English: On December 14th, I went to Jianlong Temple and Shokoku Temple to pray for snowfall.

古文：庚戌，畋近郊。
现代文：二十二日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 22nd, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：丁巳，大雨雪。
现代文：二十九日，降大雪。
English: On the 29th, heavy snow fell.

古文：端拱元年春正月己未朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁拜表称贺。
现代文：端拱元年春正月初一，不接受拜贺，大臣们到阎门上表称庆祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：乙亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：十七日，太宗亲耕籍田。
English: On the day of the second year of the Heian period, Emperor Wu personally cultivated his ancestral fields.

古文：还，御丹凤楼，大赦，改元。除十恶、官吏犯赃至杀人者不赦外，民年七十以上赐爵一级。
现代文：回来到丹凤楼，大赦，改元，除十恶、官吏贪赃至杀人者不赦外，百姓七十岁以上赐爵一级。
English: When he came back to Danfenglou, he amnestied and changed the era, except for the ten evils, the official's greed and the murderer, the people over seventy years old were given a first-class knighthood.

古文：癸未，幸玉津园习射。
现代文：二十五日，到玉津园练习射箭。
English: On the 26th, I went to Tamatsu Park to practice archery.

古文：乙酉，禁用酷刑。
现代文：二十七日，禁止使用酷刑。
English: On the 27th, the use of torture was banned.

古文：是月，澶州黄河清。
现代文：这个月，擅州段黄河清澈见底。
English: This month, the Xuzhou section of the Yellow River was crystal clear.

古文：二月乙未，改左、右补阙为左、右司谏，左、右拾遗为左、右正言。丙申，禁诸州献珍禽奇兽。
现代文：二月初八，改左右补网为左右司谏，左右拾遗为左右正言。初九，禁止各州贡献珍禽奇兽。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the year, the left and right supplementary nets were changed to the left and right priests, and the left and right gleanings were changed to the right and left sermons. On the ninth day of the first month, it was forbidden for each state to contribute rare birds and animals.

古文：己亥，诏瀛州民为敌所侵暴者赐三年租，复其役五年。
现代文：十二日，诏令赢州民为契丹所侵暴者免除三年租税，免除摇役五年。
English: On the 12th, the prefectural government ordered the people of Yingzhou to exempt those who suffered violence from the Khitan from three years of taxes and five years of forced labor.

古文：庚子，以籍田，开封尹、陈王元僖进封许王，元侃襄王，元份越王，钱俶邓王，中书门下平章事李昉为尚书右仆射，参知政事吕蒙正同中书门下平章事，枢密使王显加检校太傅，给事中、许国公赵普守太保兼侍中，参加政事辛仲甫加户部侍郎，枢密副使赵昌言加工部侍郎，枢密副使王沔为参知政事，御史中丞张宏为枢密副使，余内外并加恩。
现代文：十三日，因籍田礼，开封尹、陈王赵元嘻进封许王，赵元侃进封襄王，赵元份进封越王，钱进封邓王，中书门下平章事李意为尚书右仆射，参知政事吕蒙正同中书门下平章事，枢密使王显加检校太傅，给事中许国公赵普守太保兼侍中，参知政事辛仲甫加户部侍郎，枢密副使赵昌言加工部侍郎，枢密副使王洒为参知政事，御史中承张宏为枢密副使，其余内外官都加恩赏。
English: On the 13th day, due to the registration of Tianli, Kaifeng Yin, Chen Wang, Zhao Yuanhipi were assigned to Xu Wang, Zhao Yuankan were assigned to Xiang Wang, Zhao Yuanfen were assigned to Yue Wang, Qian was assigned to Deng Wang, the Chinese scholar and politician Li Yi was assigned to Shang Shu's right hand, the Chinese scholar and politician Lv Mengzheng was assigned to the Chinese scholar and politician Lv Mengzheng, the Chinese envoy Wang Xianjia was assigned to the inspector of schools, the Chinese prince and statesman Zhao Fuzhou was assigned to the governor of the state Zhao Fuzhou

古文：甲辰，升建州为建宁军节度。
现代文：十七日，升建州为建宁军节度。
English: On the 17th, Jianning Army Day was celebrated in Jianning County.

古文：庚戌，以子元偓为左卫上将军、徐国公，元偁为右卫上将军、泾国公。
现代文：二十三日，任命儿子赵元侵为左卫上将军、徐国公，赵元翱为右卫上将军、径国公。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed his son, Zhao Yuanwu, as the Left Division's senior general, Xu Guogong, and Zhao Yuanxuan as the Right Division's senior general, Jie Guogong.

古文：三月甲戌，贬枢密副使赵昌言为崇信军行军司马。
现代文：三月十七日，贬枢密副使赵昌言为崇信军行军司马。
English: On March 17th, Zhao Changyan, the deputy envoy of the Privy Council, was appointed as the marshal of the march of the Chongxin Army.

古文：乙亥，郑州团练使侯莫陈利用坐不法，配商州禁锢，寻赐死。
现代文：十八日，郑州团练使侯莫陈利用因不法获罪，流配商州禁锢，不久赐死。
English: On the 18th, the Zhengzhou group exercise made Hou Mo Chen take advantage of being illegally convicted, exiled to Shangzhou, and was soon sentenced to death.

古文：癸未，幸玉津园习射。
现代文：二十六日，到玉津园练习射箭。
English: On the 26th, I went to Tamatsu Park to practice archery.

古文：废水陆发运司。
现代文：废除水陆发运司。
English: The Surface Transportation Division was abolished.

古文：夏四月丁亥，赐京城高年帛。
现代文：夏四月初一，赐给京城年纪大者帛。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the senior citizens of the capital city were given a badge.

古文：己丑，加高丽国王治、静海军节度使黎桓并检校太尉。
现代文：初三，加给高丽国王治、静海军节度使黎桓检校太尉衔。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was promoted to the rank of captain of the King of Korea and the Jing Navy.

古文：五月辛酉，置秘阁于崇文院。
现代文：五月初五，在崇文院设置秘阁。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, a secret pavilion was set up at Chongwen Academy.

古文：辛未，感德军节度使李继捧赐姓赵氏，名保忠。
现代文：十五日，感德军节度使李继捧赐姓赵氏，名保忠。
English: On the fifteenth day, the German military festival made Li Jitong give the surname Zhao and the name Baozhong.

古文：壬申，以保忠为定难军节度使。
现代文：十六日，任命赵保忠为定难军节度使。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Baozhong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Dingan Army.

古文：闰五月辛卯，以洺州防御使刘福为高阳关兵马都部署，濮州防御使杨赞为贝州兵马都部署。
现代文：闰五月初六，任命洛州防御使刘福为高阳关兵马都部署，攫州防御使杨赞为贝州兵马都部署。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the leap year, the appointment of the defense of Luozhou led to the deployment of Liu Fu as the Goyang Pass Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the defense of Zhangzhou led to the deployment of Yang Zan as the Beizhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：乙未，赐诸州高年爵公士。
现代文：初十，赐各州高年爵公士。
English: At the beginning of the 10th year of the Heian period, all prefectures were granted the title of nobility.

古文：丁酉，交州黎桓遣使来贡。
现代文：十二日，交州黎桓遣使来进贡。
English: On the 12th, Jiaozhou Li Huan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：壬寅，亲试礼部进士及下第举人。
现代文：十七日，太宗亲自考试礼部进士及下第举人。
English: On the 17th, Taizong personally conducted the examination for the promotion of the etiquette department and selected the next person.

古文：六月丙辰朔，右领军卫大将军陈廷山谋反，伏诛。
现代文：六月初一，右领军卫大将军陈廷山谋反被处以死刑。
English: On the first day of June, Chen Tingshan, the right-wing leading general of the National Guard, was sentenced to death for plotting to rebel.

古文：丁丑，改湖南节度为武安军节度。
现代文：二十二日，改湖南节度为武安军节度。
English: On the 22nd, the Hunan Festival was changed to the Wu'an Army Festival.

古文：亲试进士、诸科举人。
现代文：太宗亲自考试进士各科举人。
English: Taizong personally examined and promoted students in each subject.

古文：秋七月丙午，除西川诸州盐禁。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，除西川各州盐禁。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, salt was banned in all prefectures except Nishikawa.

古文：辛亥，忠武军节度使潘美知镇州。
现代文：二十七日，忠武军节度使潘美知镇州。
English: On the 27th, the loyal troops made Panmichi Zhenzhou.

古文：八月乙卯，寿星见丙地。
现代文：八月初一，寿星出现在丙地。
English: On the first day of August, the birthday star appeared in C.

古文：甲子，以宣徽南院使郭守文为镇州路都部署。
现代文：初十，任命宣徽南院使郭守文为镇州路都部署。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Guo Shouwen was appointed by the Southern Court of Xuanhui to be deployed as the capital of Zhenzhou Road.

古文：戊寅，太师、邓王钱俶薨，追封秦国王，谥忠懿。
现代文：二十四日，太师、邓王钱逝世，追封为秦国王，溢号忠爵。
English: On the 24th, the Grand Master, Deng Wangqian, died and was posthumously crowned King of Qin and given the title of Duke.

古文：庚辰，幸太学，命博士李觉讲《易》，赐帛，遂幸玉津园习射。
现代文：二十六日，太宗到太学，命令博士李觉讲解易》，赐给帛；于是到玉津园练习射箭。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong came to Taishu and ordered Dr. Li Jue to "teach and explain" and gave him a crossbow; he then went to the Jade Garden to practice archery.

古文：是月，凤凰集广州清远县廨合欢树，树下生芝三茎。
现代文：这个月，凤凰集结广州清远县癖合欢树，树下生出三根芝草。
English: This month, phoenixes gathered in Guangzhou's Qingyuan County. Three grasses sprouted under the trees.

古文：九月乙酉朔，以侍卫马军都指挥使李继隆为定州都部署。
现代文：九月初一，任命侍卫马军都指挥使李继隆为定州都部署。
English: On the first day of September, Li Jilong was appointed as the commander of the palace guards and the horse army and was deployed to the capital of Dingzhou.

古文：冬十月壬午，以侍卫步军都指挥使戴兴为澶州都部署。
现代文：冬十月二十九日，任命侍卫步军都指挥使戴兴为擅州都部署。
English: In winter, on October 29th, Dai Xing was appointed as the commander of the bodyguard and marching troops and deployed to the capital of Gansu Province.

古文：癸未，诏罢游猎，五方所畜鹰犬并放之，诸州毋以为献。
现代文：三十日，诏令废除游猎，各处所畜鹰犬都释放，各州不要进献。
English: On the 30th, the imperial edict abolished hunting. All domestic eagle dogs were released everywhere, and all states were not allowed to participate.

古文：十一月甲申朔，高丽王遣使来贡。
现代文：十一月初一，高丽王派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the first day of November, King Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，郭守文破契丹于唐河。
现代文：初六，郭守文在唐河打败契丹军。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Guo Shouwen defeated the Khitan army in Tanghe.

古文：十二月辛未，以夏州蕃落使李继迁为银州刺史，充洛苑使。
现代文：十二月十八日，任命夏州蕃落使李继迁为银州刺史，担任洛苑使。
English: On December 18th, Li Jiquan, who was appointed as the governor of Yinzhou by the governor of Xiazhou, served as the envoy to Luoyuan.

古文：二年春正月癸未朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁拜表称贺。
现代文：端拱二年春正月初一，不接受拜贺，大臣们到间门上表称庆祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the second year of the arch, no greetings were accepted, and the ministers went to the door to say congratulations.

古文：壬辰，以涪州观察使柴禹锡为澶州兵马部署。
现代文：初十，任命涪州观察使柴禹锡为擅州兵马部署。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the appointment of the Zhangzhou observation made Chai Yuxi the leader of the deployment of soldiers and horses in Zhangzhou.

古文：癸巳，诏议北伐。
现代文：十一日，诏令商议北伐。
English: On the 11th, the imperial edict was issued to discuss the Northern Expedition.

古文：二月壬子朔，令河北东、西路招置营田。
现代文：二月初一，命令河北东、西路招置营田。
English: On the first day of February, it ordered the construction of campgrounds in the east and west of Hebei Province.

古文：癸丑，诏录将校官吏功及死事使臣、官吏子孙，士卒廪给其家三月。
现代文：初二，诏令录用将校官吏有功和为国捐躯使臣、官吏的子孙，士卒由官府供给其家三个月的粮食。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict was issued to recruit officers and officials who had distinguished themselves and died for the country, envoys, and the descendants of officials, and the government provided their families with food for three months.

古文：平塞、天威、平定、威虏、静戎、保塞、宁边等军，祁、易、保、定、镇、邢、赵等州民，除雍熙四年正月丙戌诏给复外，更给复二年；霸、代、洺、雄、莫、深等州，平虏、岢岚军，更给复一年。
现代文：平塞、天威、平定、威虏、静戎、保塞、宁边等军，祁、易、保、定、镇、邢、赵等州百姓，除雍熙四年正月二十三日诏免除赋役外，另外再免除二年赋役；霸、代、洛、雄、莫、深等州，平虏、奇岚军，免除一年的赋役。
English: The armies of Pingxie, Tianwei, Pingding, Wairu, Jie Rong, Bosei, and Ningbian, and the people of the provinces of Ya, Yi, Bao, Ding, Zhen, Handan, and Zhao, in addition to being exempted from military service on the 23rd day of the first month of the fourth year of the Yongxi Dynasty, were also exempted from military service for another two years; and the armies of Ba, Dai, Luo, Xiong, Mo, and Shen, as well as the armies of Pingru and Qichen, were exempted from military service for one year.

古文：戊午，罢乘传银牌，复给枢密院牒。
现代文：初七，废除乘传银牌，重新给枢密院碟。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, abolish the silver medal for merit and reintroduce the Privy Council plate.

古文：以太仓粟贷京畿饥民。
现代文：用太仓粟贷给京瓷饥民。
English: Kyocera lends money to the hungry with the help of soybeans from its warehouse.

古文：癸亥，作方田。
现代文：十二日，作方田。
English: On the 12th, the field was ready.

古文：戊辰，以国子监为国子学。
现代文：十七日，以国子监为国子学。
English: On the 17th, the education of the Imperial Prince was taken over by the Imperial Prince Supervisor.

古文：三月辛卯，命高琼为并、代都部署。
现代文：三月初十，命令高琼为并代都部署。
English: On the tenth day of March, Gao Qiong was ordered to deploy to the capital.

古文：壬寅，亲试礼部举人。
现代文：二十一日，太宗亲自考试礼部举人。
English: On the twenty-first day, Taizong himself held a ceremonial examination.

古文：夏四月丁巳，置富顺监。
现代文：夏四月初七，设置富顺监。
English: On the seventh day of the fourth month of the summer, Fushun Supervision was set up.

古文：辛未，幸赵普第视疾。
现代文：二十一日，到赵普府邸探视病情。
English: On the 21st, he visited Zhao Pu's residence to check on his condition.

古文：五月戊戌，以旱虑囚，遣使决诸道狱。
现代文：五月十九日，因早灾讯察记录囚犯罪状，派遣使臣到各道处理案件。
English: On May 19th, due to the early disaster, the state of the prisoners was investigated and recorded, and envoys were dispatched to each province to deal with the cases.

古文：是夕，雨。
现代文：这天晚上，降雨。
English: That night, it rained.

古文：秋七月甲申，以知代州张齐贤为刑部侍郎、枢密副使，盐铁使张逊为宣徽北院使、签署枢密院事。
现代文：秋七月初六，任命代州知州张齐贤为刑部侍郎、枢密副使，盐铁使张逊为宣徽北院使、签书枢密院事。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zhang Qixian of Dazhou and Chizhou was appointed as the attendant of the criminal department and the deputy of the privy council, and Zhang Xun of Yan Tie was appointed as the envoy of the Northern Yuan of Xuanhui and the secretary of the privy council.

古文：戊子，有彗出东井，上避正殿，减常膳。
现代文：初十，有彗星出现在东井，太宗不上正殿，减少饮食。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a comet appeared in the east well, and Taizong did not go to the main hall and reduced his diet.

古文：辛丑，契丹犯威虏军，崇仪使尹继伦击破之，杀其相皮室，大将于越遁去。
现代文：二十三日，契丹侵犯威虏军，崇仪使尹继伦打败契丹军，杀其相皮室，大将于越逃跑。
English: On the 23rd, the Khitan invaded the Viharu army, and Chongyi ordered Yin Jilun to defeat the Khitan army and kill its consort, and the general fled to Yue.

古文：八月丙辰，大赦，是夕，彗不见。
现代文：八月初八，大赦，这天晚上彗星没有出现。
English: On the eighth day of the eighth month of August, there was a general amnesty, and the comet did not appear that evening.

古文：癸亥，诏作开宝寺舍利塔成。
现代文：十五日，诏作开宝寺舍利成功。
English: On the 15th, the construction of the Kaiboji Temple was successfully completed.

古文：九月壬午，邛部川、山后百蛮来贡。
现代文：九月初四，邓部川、山后百蛮来进贡。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Dengbe River and Shanhou Hyakuman came to pay tribute.

古文：冬十月辛未，以定难军节度使赵保忠同平章事。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，任命定难军节度使赵保忠同平章事。
English: In the winter of October 23rd, Zhao Baozhong was appointed as the commander of the Dingan Army.

古文：以岁旱、彗星谪见，诏曰： 朕以身为牺牲，焚于烈火，亦未足以答谢天谴。
现代文：因天早，彗星出现，下诏说： 肤捐弃生命，焚于烈火，也未足以答谢天的谴责。
English: Because the comet appeared early in the morning, the emperor said: "Even if you give up your life and burn in the fire, it is not enough to answer the condemnation of heaven.

古文：当与卿等审刑政之阙失、稼穑之艰难，恤物安人，以祈玄祐。 
现代文：应当与大臣们审刑政缺失、稼墙艰难，恤物安人，祈求上天保佑。 
English: It is necessary to discuss with the ministers the lack of criminal justice, the difficulties in raising funds, and to pray for the safety of the people and the blessing of heaven.

古文：十二月辛亥，置三司都磨勘官。
现代文：十二月初四，设置三司都磨勘官。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the three departments were set up.

古文：丙辰，大雨雪。
现代文：初九，降大雪。
English: On the morning of the 9th, heavy snow fell.

古文：庚申，诏令四方所上表祗称皇帝。
现代文：十三日，诏令各地所上表只称皇帝。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, the imperial edict decreed that only the emperor would be referred to in the above table.

古文：群臣请复尊号，不许。
现代文：大臣们请求恢复尊号，太宗不许。
English: The ministers requested that the honorific title be restored, but Emperor Taizong would not allow it.

古文：辛酉，上法天崇道文武皇帝，诏去 文武 二字，余许之。
现代文：十四日，上法天崇道文武皇帝，诏令去掉 文武 二字，其余答应。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Wenwu of Shang Fa Tian Chong Dao issued a decree to remove the word "Wenwu," and the rest agreed.

古文：三佛齐国遣使来贡。
现代文：三佛齐国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: The Three Buddhas of Qi dispatched envoys to bring tribute.

古文：淳化元年春正月戊寅朔，减京畿系囚流罪以下一等。
现代文：淳化元年春正月初一，京瓷关押囚犯中流刑以下罪犯减罪一等。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：改元，内外文武官并加勋阶爵邑，中书舍人、大将军以上各赐一子官。
现代文：改元，内外文武官员都加勋阶爵邑，中书舍人、大将军以上各赐给他们儿子一人官职。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty reformation, the civil and military officials both at home and abroad were given the title of nobility, and one official post was given to each of their sons above the rank of middle school teacher and general.

古文：赐鳏寡孤独钱，除逋负。
现代文：赐给鳄寡孤独者钱，废除拖欠的钱物。
English: Give money to the destitute and the lonely, cancel arrears of money and goods.

古文：受尊号，改乾明节为寿宁节。
现代文：接受尊号，改乾明节为寿宁节。
English: Accepted the honorific, and changed Qianming Festival to Shuning Festival.

古文：戊子，诏作清心殿。
现代文：十一日，诏令修造清心殿。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Qingxin Hall was repaired by imperial decree.

古文：二月丁未朔，除江南、两浙、淮西、岭南诸州渔禁。
现代文：二月初一，除去江南、两浙、淮西、岭南各州渔禁。
English: On the first day of February, the fishing ban was removed from Jiangnan, Zhejiang, Huaxi and Lingnan provinces.

古文：己酉，改大明殿为含光殿。
现代文：初三，改大明殿为含光殿。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the Daimyo-den was changed to the Hikari-den.

古文：三月丙子朔。乙未，幸西京留守赵普第视疾。
现代文：三月二十日，太宗到西京留后赵普家探视病情。
English: On March 20, after Taizong stayed in West Beijing, Zhao Pu's family visited him to check on his condition.

古文：夏四月庚戌，遣中使诣五岳祷雨，虑囚，遣使分决诸道狱。
现代文：夏四月初五，派遣中使到五岳祈祷降雨，讯察记录囚犯罪状，派遣使臣处理各道狱案。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, envoys were dispatched to pray for rain in Wudu, investigate and record the criminal status of prisoners, and dispatch envoys to deal with prison cases in various provinces.

古文：甲寅，诏尚书省四品、两省五品以上举转运使及知州、通判。
现代文：初九，诏令尚书省四品、两省五品以上官员举荐转运使和知州、通判。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the officials of four provinces and two provinces with five or more products to recommend the transfer of the envoy to Wazhizhou and pass the judgment.

古文：五溪蛮田汉权来附。
现代文：五溪蛮田汉权来归附。
English: The Wuxi barbarian fields were annexed by the Han.

古文：戊午，建婺州为保宁军节度。
现代文：十三日，建姿州为保宁军节度。
English: On the 13th, Jianzhizhou was the site of the Boryeong Army Festival.

古文：丙寅，命殿前副都指挥使戴兴为镇州都部署。
现代文：二十一日，命令殿前副都指挥使戴兴为镇州都部署。
English: On the 21st, he ordered the former deputy commander of the palace to send Dai Xing to deploy for Zhenzhou.

古文：五月甲午，给致仕官半奉。
现代文：五月二十日，发给退休官员一半的棒禄。
English: On May 20th, half of the bonus was paid to retired officials.

古文：辛卯，置详覆、推勘官。
现代文：辛卯日，设置详覆、推勘官。
English: On the second day, the setting of the detailed review and the recommendation officer began.

古文：六月丙午，罢中元、下元张灯。
现代文：六月初三，废罢上元、下元张灯。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, the lanterns at the top and bottom of the lanterns will be abolished.

古文：庚午，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：秋七月丁丑，太白复见。
现代文：秋七月初四，太白星又出现。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month of autumn, the white star appeared again.

古文：是月，吉、洪、江、蕲、河阳、陇城大水。
现代文：这个月，吉、洪、江、薪、河阳、陇城发大水。
English: This month, the cities of Ji, Hong, Jiang, Qi, Heyang and Lucheng were hit by floods.

古文：开封、陈留、封丘、酸枣、鄢陵旱，赐今年田租之半，开封特给复一年。
现代文：开封、陈留、封丘、酸枣、焉阵陵早灾，免除今年田租的一半，开封特地免除一年的赋役。
English: Kaifeng, Chenluo, Fengqiu, Jujube, Yanjianling early disaster, exempt from half of this year's field rent, Kaifeng specially exempt from one year's military service.

古文：京师贵籴，遣使开廪减价分粜。
现代文：京城贵来，派遣使臣开仓减价分桌。
English: Jingcheng Guilai, dispatched envoys to open a warehouse price reduction table.

古文：八月乙巳，毁左藏库金银器皿。
现代文：八月初三，毁掉左藏库金银器皿。
English: On the third day of the eighth month, he destroyed all the gold and silverware in the left storeroom.

古文：己巳，禁川峡、岭南、湖南杀人祀鬼，州县察捕，募告者赏之。
现代文：二十七日，禁止川峡、岭南、湖南杀人祀鬼，州县核察捕捉，有人告发，予以奖赏。
English: On the 27th, it was forbidden to worship ghosts in Sichuan Gorge, Lingnan, and Hunan, and the state and county nuclear inspection and capture, and some people were reported and rewarded.

古文：庚午，西南蕃主使其子龙汉兴来贡。
现代文：二十八日，西南蕃主派他的儿子来进贡。
English: On the 28th, the lord of Nanxi Province sent his son to bring tribute.

古文：是月，京兆长安八县旱，赐今年租十之六。
现代文：这个月，京兆长安八个县早灾，免除今年租税的十分之六。
English: This month, eight counties in Beijing-Shanghai-Chang'an were hit by early disasters, exempting six-tenths of this year's taxes.

古文：蠲舒州宿松等三处鱼池税。
现代文：免除舒州宿松等三处鱼池税。
English: Shuzhou Shukusong and three other fishponds will be exempted from the tax.

古文：九月辛巳，荧惑入太微垣。
现代文：九月初九，荧惑星进人太微垣。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the fluorescent planets entered the sky.

古文：大宴崇政殿。
现代文：太宗在崇政殿大宴。
English: Emperor Taizong's grand banquet at Soejongjeon.

古文：禁川峡民父母在出为赘婿。
现代文：禁止川峡百姓父母在世出为赘婿。
English: It is forbidden for the parents of the people of Sichuan Gorge to become the son-in-law in the world.

古文：是月，蠲沧、单、汝三州今年租十之六。
现代文：这个月，免除沧、单、汝三州今年租税的十分之六。
English: This month, six-tenths of this year's taxes in the three states of Cang, Shan and You will be exempted.

古文：冬十月甲辰，交州黎桓遣使来贡。
现代文：冬十月初二，交州黎桓派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Lai Huan of Jiaozhou sent an envoy to collect tribute.

古文：乙巳，荧惑陵左执法。
现代文：初三，荧惑星侵犯左执法星。
English: On the third day of the third month, the fluorescent planet encroached on the left enforcement star.

古文：乙丑，知白州蒋元振、知须城县姚益恭并以清干闻，下诏褒谕，赐粟帛。
现代文：二十三日，白州知州蒋元振、须城知县姚益恭都以清干闻名，下诏予以表扬，并赐给粟帛。
English: On the 23rd, Jiang Yuanzhen of Baizhou Zhizhou and Yao Yikong of Shucheng Zhizhou, both of whom are famous for their cleanliness, were commended by the emperor and given the poppy seeds.

古文：是月，以乾郑二州、河南寿安等十四县旱，州蠲今年租十之四，县蠲其税。
现代文：这个月，因乾、郑二州、河南寿安等十四县发生早灾，州免除今年租税的十分之四，县免除租税。
English: This month, due to the early disasters that occurred in 14 counties such as Quian, Zheng Erzhou, and Henan Shouan, the state exempted four-tenths of this year's tax, and the county exempted tax.

古文：十一月戊戌，太白昼见。
现代文：十一月二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On November 27th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：是月，蠲大名府管内今年租十之七。
现代文：这个月，免除大名府管辖区内今年租税的十分之七。
English: This month, seven-tenths of this year's tax in the daimyo prefectural jurisdiction will be exempted.

古文：十二月乙巳，占城遣使来贡。
现代文：十二月初四，占城国派人来进贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the state of Zhancheng sent people to pay tribute.

古文：乙卯，高丽国遣使来贡。
现代文：十四日，高丽国派人来进贡。
English: On the 14th, Korea sent people to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，诏中外所上书疏及面奏制可者，并下中书、枢密、三司中覆颁行。
现代文：二十日，诏令中外所上书疏和面奏有可行者，都下中书省、枢密院、三司中覆颁行。
English: On the 20th, the Imperial Rescript issued by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Privy Council, and the three departments was implemented.

古文：是岁，洪、吉、江、蕲诸州水，河阳大水。
现代文：这一年，洪、吉、江、薪各州水灾，河阳发大水。
English: In this year, floods occurred in Hong, Ji, Jiang, and Qi provinces, and there was heavy water in Heyang.

古文：曹、单二州有蝗，不为灾。
现代文：曹、单二州有蝗虫，没有形成灾害。
English: There are locusts in two prefectures of Cao and Shan, but no disasters have occurred.

古文：开封、大名管内及许、沧、单、汝、乾、郑等州，寿安、长安、天兴等二十七县旱。
现代文：开封、大名府管辖区内和许、沧、单、汝、乾、郑等州，寿安、长安、天兴等二十七县早灾。
English: In the jurisdiction of Kaifeng and Daming Prefecture, there were early disasters in 27 counties including He Xu, Cang, Shan, Ru, Qian and Zheng, Shou'an, Chang'an and Tianxing.

古文：深冀二州、文登牟平两县饥。
现代文：深和冀二州、文登和牟平两县饥荒。
English: Two counties, Shennhe and Jizhou, and two counties, Wendeng and Muping, suffered from famine.

古文：二年春正月壬申朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁拜表称贺。
现代文：淳化二年春正月初一，不接受拜贺，大臣们到间门上表称庆祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Chunhua, no greetings were accepted, and the ministers went to each other's homes to express their congratulations.

古文：丙子，遣商州团练使翟守素帅兵援赵保忠于夏州。
现代文：初五，派遣商州团练使翟守素率兵前往夏州救援赵保忠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Zou Shou-su, the commander of the Shanzhou Rehearsal Corps, led the troops to rescue Zhao Baozhong from Xiazhou.

古文：乙酉，置内殿崇班、左右侍禁，改殿前承旨为三班奉职。
现代文：十四日，设置内殿崇班、左右侍禁，改殿前承旨为三班奉职。
English: On the 14th, the inner hall's high class and the left and right attendants were set up, and the order before changing the hall was for three classes to perform duties.

古文：丙戌，荧惑犯房。
现代文：十五日，荧惑星侵犯房星。
English: On the 15th, the fluorescent planet invaded the house star.

古文：己丑，诏陕西诸州长吏设法招诱流亡，复业者计口贷粟，仍给复二年。
现代文：十八日，诏令陕西各州长官设法招诱流亡，复业者计口贷粮，并且免除二年赋役。
English: On the 18th, the governor of Shaanxi ordered all governors to try to lure them into exile, and those who returned to work were given rations and exempted from two years of military service.

古文：二月癸丑，尽易宫殿彩绘以赭垩。
现代文：二月十二日，宫殿彩绘全部改用黑色粉刷。
English: On February 12th, all the palace paintings were changed to black.

古文：监察御史祖吉坐知晋州日为奸赃，弃市。
现代文：监察御史祖吉因任晋州知州期间贪赃获罪，被斩杀于闹市。
English: The inspector, Shizuji, was found guilty of corruption during his tenure as governor of Jinzhou and was beheaded in the city.

古文：乙丑，斩夔州乱卒谢荣等百余人于市。
现代文：二十四日，斩杀夔州乱卒谢荣等一百多人于闹市。
English: On the 24th, more than a hundred people, including Xie Rong, the instigator of the Bozhou riot, were killed in downtown.

古文：闰月辛未朔，日有食之。戊寅，祷雨。
现代文：闰二月初一，日食，初八，祈祷降雨。
English: The first day of leap February, the solar eclipse, the first day of spring, praying for rain.

古文：丁亥，诏内外诸军，除木枪、弓弩矢外不得蓄他兵器。
现代文：十七日，诏令内外诸军，除木枪、弓弩矢外不得蓄储其他兵器。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered all armies at home and abroad not to stockpile weapons other than wooden guns and bows and arrows.

古文：己丑，诏京城蒲博者，开封府捕之，犯者斩。
现代文：十九日，下诏：在京城聚众赌博者由开封府捕获，违犯者斩杀。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Gamblers who gathered in the capital to gamble would be arrested by Kaifeng Prefecture, and violators would be killed.

古文：命近臣兼差遣院流内铨。
现代文：命令近臣兼差遣院流内锉。
English: He ordered his close vassal to be sent to the Inner Palace as a concubine.

古文：是月，河水溢，鄄城县蝗，汴河决。
现代文：这个月，黄河溢出河道，哪城县蝗灾，汁河决口。
English: This month, the Yellow River overflowed its channel, causing locust plagues in some cities and counties, and the Juhe River burst its banks.

古文：三月乙卯，幸金明池，御龙舟，遂幸琼林苑宴射。
现代文：三月十六日，到金明池登上龙舟，于是到琼林苑设宴射箭。
English: On March 16th, they boarded a dragon boat at Jinming Pond, and then went to Qionglin Garden to have a banquet and play archery.

古文：己巳，以岁蝗旱祷雨弗应，手诏宰相吕蒙正等： 朕将自焚，以答天谴。 
现代文：三十日，因蝗灾早灾祈祷降雨没有应验，太宗下手诏对宰相说： 肤将自焚，以谢天的谴责。 
English: On the 30th day, due to the locust plague and early disaster, the prayer for rain did not come true. Taizong issued a decree to the prime minister saying: "I will burn myself to thank God for the condemnation."

古文：翌日而雨，蝗尽死。
现代文：第二天降雨，蝗虫全部死了。
English: The next day it rained and all the locusts died.

古文：夏四月庚午，罢端州贡砚。
现代文：夏四月初一，废罢端州进贡砚台。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the state tribute ring was abolished.

古文：辛巳，以张齐贤、陈恕并参知政事，张逊兼枢密副使，温仲舒、寇准并为枢密副使。
现代文：十二日，任命张齐贤、陈恕都为参知政事，张逊兼枢密副使，温仲舒、寇准都为枢密副使。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Qixian and Chen Shuzhu were both appointed to the post of party secretary, Zhang Xun was also appointed to the post of vice minister of the privy council, and Wen Zhongshu and Kou Jun were both appointed to the post of vice minister of the privy council.

古文：是月，河水溢，虞乡等七县民饥。
现代文：这个月，黄河水溢出河道，虞乡等七县百姓饥荒。
English: This month, the Yellow River overflowed its course, and people in seven counties, including Yu Township, suffered from famine.

古文：五月己亥朔，诏减两京诸州系囚流以下一等，杖罪释之。
现代文：五月初一，诏令减轻两京各州关押囚犯流刑以下罪刑一等，杖罪释放。
English: On the first day of May, the imperial edict reduced the punishment of the first degree of the crime below the exile of the prisoners in the two Beijing states, and released the cane crime.

古文：庚子，置诸路提点刑狱官。
现代文：初二，设置各路提点刑狱官。
English: On the second day of the new school year, prison officers will be posted at various points along the route.

古文：丙辰，左正言谢泌以敢言擢右司谏，赐金紫，钱三十万。
现代文：十八日，左正言谢泌因敢于言论升为右司谏，赐给金紫和三十万络钱。
English: On the 18th day, Zuo Zhengyang Xie Jiu was promoted to Zuo Jiao for daring to speak out, and was given gold and 300,000 rupees.

古文：六月甲戌，忠武军节度使、同平章事潘美卒。
现代文：六月初七，忠武军节度使、同平章事潘美去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, Tongping Zhangji Panmei, the loyal military's festival envoy, died.

古文：命张永德为并、代都部署。
现代文：命令张永德为并、代州都部署。
English: He ordered Zhang Yongde to be deployed to and from Daizhou.

古文：乙酉，以汴水决浚仪县，帝亲督卫士塞之。
现代文：十八日，因汁水在浚义县决口，太宗亲自督促卫士堵塞。
English: On the 18th, because of the rush of water at the mouth of Junyi County, Emperor Taizong personally urged the guards to block it.

古文：庚寅，禁陕西缘边诸州阑出生口。
现代文：二十三日，禁止陕西沿边各州没经允许擅自放出牲口。
English: On the 23rd, the states along the border of Shaanxi were prohibited from releasing livestock without permission.

古文：是月，楚丘、鄄城、淄川三县蝗，河水、汴水溢。
现代文：这个月，楚丘、哪城、淄川三县蝗灾，黄河、汁水溢出河道。
English: This month, locusts infested the three counties of Chuqiu, Nancheng and Beichuan, and the Yellow River overflowed its course.

古文：秋七月己亥，诏陕西缘边诸州饥民鬻男女入近界部落者，官赎之。
现代文：秋七月初二，诏令陕西沿边各州，饥民卖男女进人邻近部落者官府替他们赎回。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the emperor issued an edict to the states along the border of Shaanxi that the starving people should sell their men and women to the neighboring tribes, and the government should redeem them.

古文：李继迁奉表请降，以为银州观察使，赐国姓，改名保吉。
现代文：李继迁奉表请降，任命为银州观察使，赐给赵姓，改名保吉。
English: Li Jiquan was asked to step down and was appointed as Yinzhou Observation Envoy. He was given the surname Zhao and changed his name to Baoji.

古文：是月，乾宁军蝗，许、雄、嘉三州大水。
现代文：这个月，乾宁军蝗灾，许、雄、嘉三州发大水。
English: This month, the Qianning army locust plague, Xu, Xiong, Jiasanzhou flood.

古文：八月己卯，置审刑院。
现代文：八月十三日，设置审刑院。
English: On August 13th, the Criminal Court was established.

古文：己丑，雅州言登辽山崩。
现代文：二十三日，雅州报告说登辽山崩裂。
English: On the 23rd, Yazhou reported that Dengliao Mountain had collapsed.

古文：九月丁酉朔，户部侍郎、参知政事王沔，给事中、参知政事陈恕并罢守本官。
现代文：九月初一，户部侍郎、参知政事王洒，给事中、参知政事陈恕，都罢免守本官。
English: On the first day of September, the Household Attendant and the Councillor of the Council of State, Wang Shen, were both dismissed from their posts.

古文：己亥，中书侍郎兼户部尚书、平章事吕蒙正罢为吏部尚书，以右仆射李昉、参知政事张齐贤并平章事，翰林学士贾黄中、李沆并为给事中、参知政事。
现代文：初三，中书侍郎兼户部尚书、平章事吕蒙正罢为吏部尚书，任命右仆射李意、参知政事张齐贤都为平章事，翰林学士贾黄中、李杭都为给事中、参知政事。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Lu Mengzheng, the chancellor of the chancellery and the chancellor of the household, and Lv Mengzheng, the chancellor of the chancellery, were appointed as the chancellors of the chancellery, and the right-hand man, Sha Liyi, and the political advisor, Zhang Qixian, were appointed as the chancellors of the chancellery, and the scholars Jia Huangzhong and Li Hang were appointed as the chancellors and the political advisors.

古文：帝飞白书 玉堂之署 四字，以赐翰林承旨苏易简。
现代文：太宗飞白书 玉堂之署 四字，赐给翰林承旨苏易简。
English: Taizongfei's white paper, the edict of the Jade Hall, is four words long, and is given to Hanlin Shongzhi Su Yizhen.

古文：壬寅，邛部川蛮来贡。
现代文：初六，邓部川蛮来进贡。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Dengbe Kawamaru came to pay tribute.

古文：癸卯，罢枢密使王显为崇信军节度使。
现代文：初七，罢枢密使王显为崇信军节度使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Wang Xian, the envoy of the Imperial Court, was appointed as the envoy of the Chongxin Army.

古文：甲辰，以张逊知枢密院事，温仲舒、寇准同知院事。
现代文：初八，任命张逊知枢密院事，温仲舒和寇准为同知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Zhang Song was appointed to the Privy Council, and Wen Zhongshu and Kou Jun were appointed to the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：十一月丙申朔，复百官次对。
现代文：十一月初一，恢复文武百官依次回答皇帝的提问。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the civil and military officials resumed to answer the emperor's questions one by one.

古文：乙巳，罢京城内外力役土功。
现代文：初十，罢除京城内外力役土功。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the internal and external forces of the capital were abolished.

古文：己酉，幸建隆观、相国寺祈雪。
现代文：十四日，到建隆观、相国寺祈祷降雪。
English: On the 14th, they went to Jianlong Temple and Shokoku Temple to pray for snowfall.

古文：十二月丙寅朔，行入阁仪。
现代文：十二月初一，举行人阎仪式。
English: On the first day of December, a memorial ceremony was held.

古文：乙亥，赐秦州童子谭孺卿本科出身。
现代文：初十，赐给秦州童子谭孺卿本科出身。
English: Junior high school tenth, given to Qinzhou boy Tan Yuxing from undergraduate school.

古文：癸未，保康军节度使刘继元卒，追封彭城郡王。
现代文：十八日，保康军节度使刘继元逝世，追封为彭城郡王。
English: On the 18th day of the month, Liu Jiyuan passed away, and was enthroned as the King of Pengcheng County.

古文：大雨，无冰。
现代文：大雨无冰。
English: Heavy rain and no ice.

古文：是岁，女真表请伐契丹，诏不许，自是遂属契丹。
现代文：这一年，女真上表请伐契丹，诏令不许，从此遂隶属契丹。
English: In the same year, Nyanzhen petitioned the Empress Dowager to invite the Khitan, but the Empress Dowager did not allow it, and from then on, Nyanzhen belonged to the Khitan.

古文：大名、河中，绛、濮、陕、曹、济、同、淄、单、德、徐、晋、辉、磁、博、汝、兖、虢、汾、郑、亳、庆、许、齐、滨、棣、沂、贝、卫、青、霸等州旱。
现代文：大名、河中府，绛、攫、陕、曹、济、同、淄、单、德、徐、晋、辉、磁、博、汝、充、貌、汾、郑、毫、庆、许、齐、滨、棣、沂、贝、卫、青、霸等州早灾。
English: Daimyo, Hechu, Gansu, Shandong, Shaanxi, Cao, Jie, Tong, Shantou, Shan, De, Xu, Jin, Huizhou, Hebei, Bo, Ru, Chong, Guan, Zheng, Miao, Qing, Xu, Qi, Bin, Yunnan, Shandong, Bei, Wei, Qing, Ba and other prefectures were affected by the early disaster.

古文：三年春正月癸卯，大雨雪。
现代文：淳化三年春正月初八，降大雪。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the third year of the chunhua year, heavy snow fell.

古文：乙巳，诏常参官举可任升朝官者。
现代文：初十，诏令常参官举荐可以担任升朝官者。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the imperial edict decreed that those who were recommended by a senior officer could be promoted to the imperial court.

古文：丙午，诏宰相、侍从举可任转运使者。
现代文：十一日，诏令宰相、侍从举荐可以担任转运使者。
English: On the 11th, it was decreed that the prime minister and his attendants could serve as couriers.

古文：二月乙丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：三月乙未朔，以赵普为太师，封魏国公。
现代文：三月初一，任命赵普为太师，封为魏国公。
English: On the first day of March, Zhao Pu was appointed Grand Master and named the Prince of Wei.

古文：戊戌，亲试礼部举人。
现代文：初四，太宗亲自考试礼部举人。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Taizong personally selected students for the etiquette examination.

古文：辛丑，亲试诸科举人。
现代文：初七，太宗亲自考试各科举人。
English: On the seventh day of junior high school, Taizong personally gave exams to students in each subject.

古文：戊午，以高丽宾贡进士四十人并为秘书省秘书郎，遣还。
现代文：二十四日，以高丽宾贡进士四十人并为秘书省秘书郎，遣回高丽。
English: On the 24th, forty people were sent back to Goryeo with the name of Goryeo Bingong Jinzhi and the title of Secretary of the Secretary of the Secretary of the Ministry.

古文：庚申，帝幸金明池观水戏，纵京城观者，赐高年白金器皿。
现代文：二十六日，太宗到金明池观赏水嬉游戏，允许京城百姓观赏，赐给年岁大者白金器皿。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Taizong went to Jinming Pond to watch the water play game, allowing the people of Beijing to watch, and giving a platinum plate to the old man.

古文：夏四月丁丑，诏江南、两浙、荆湖吏民之配岭南者还本郡禁锢。
现代文：夏四月十四日，诏令江南、两浙、荆湖吏民配放岭南者遣还本郡禁锢。
English: On the 14th day of the 4th month of the summer, it was decreed that the officials and citizens of Jiangnan, Zhuozhe and Jinghu should be sent back to this county for imprisonment.

古文：癸未，上作《刑政》、《稼穑》诗赐近臣。
现代文：二十日，太宗作《刑政》、《稼穑》赐给近臣。
English: On the 20th, Taizong's works "Criminal Law" and "Making Money" were given to his close vassals.

古文：五月甲午朔，御文德殿，百官入阁。
现代文：五月初一，太宗到文德殿，文武百官人阁。
English: On the first day of May, Emperor Taizong went to the Emperor's Mansion, and the civil and military dignitaries gathered there.

古文：壬寅，诏御史府所断徒罪以上狱具，令尚书丞郎、两省给舍一人虑问。
现代文：初九，诏令御史府所断徒罪以上案情证据具备者，令尚书、承郎两省给舍一人讯察记录审问。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the imperial edict ordered the two provinces of Shangshu and Chenglang to send one person to investigate and record the interrogation of those who had evidence of the facts of the case.

古文：丁未，户部郎中田锡、通判殿中丞郭渭坐稽留刑狱，并责州团练副使，不签署州事。
现代文：十四日，户部郎中田锡、通判殿中承郭渭因稽留刑狱获罪，都被贬责为州团练副使，不管州事。
English: On the 14th, the head of the Household Division, Nakata Sato, and the head of the Court of Final Appeal, Guo Yao, were both sentenced to prison for dereliction of duty. They were both relegated to the position of deputy envoy of the state regimental drill team, regardless of state affairs.

古文：戊申，诏太医署良医视京城病者，赐钱五十万具药，中黄门一人按视之。
现代文：十五日，下诏：太医署良医给京城病者治病，赐给五十万络钱购置药品，中黄门一人核察管理该事。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued: A good doctor from the Taiyuan Medical Bureau will treat the sick in Beijing, and will be given 500,000 rupees to purchase medicines. A person from Zhonghuangmen will inspect and manage the matter.

古文：己酉，以旱，遣使分行诸路决狱。
现代文：十六日，因早灾派遣使臣分别到各路处理狱案。
English: On the 16th, due to the early disaster, envoys were dispatched to deal with the prison case separately.

古文：是夕，雨。
现代文：这天晚上，降雨。
English: That night, it rained.

古文：辛亥，置理检司。
现代文：十八日，设置理检司。
English: On the 18th, the Sanitary Inspection Department was established.

古文：甲寅，诏作秘阁。
现代文：二十一日，诏令修建秘阁。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the imperial edict ordered the construction of a secret pavilion.

古文：六月丁丑，大风，昼晦，京师疫解。
现代文：六月十五日，起大风，白天阴晦，京师疫解。
English: On June 15th, a strong wind blew, the day was cloudy, and the epidemic was solved in Beijing.

古文：戊寅，虑囚。
现代文：十六日，讯察记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 25th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：甲申，飞蝗自东北来，蔽天，经西南而去。
现代文：二十二日，飞蝗从东北方向来，遮蔽天空，历经西南而去。
English: On the 22nd, the flying locusts came from the northeast, obscured the sky, and passed through the southwest.

古文：是夕，大雨，蝗尽死。
现代文：这天晚上，降大雨，蝗虫全部死掉。
English: That night, it rained heavily and all the locusts died.

古文：庚寅，以殿前都虞候王昭远为并、代兵马都部署。
现代文：二十八日，任命殿前都虞候王昭远为并、代州兵马都部署。
English: On the 28th, Wang Zhaoyuan, the former prefectural governor, was appointed to take charge of the unification and the deployment of troops and horses.

古文：辛卯，置常平仓。
现代文：二十九日，设置常平仓。
English: On the 29th, the regular closing of warehouses was set up.

古文：秋七月己酉，太师、魏国公赵普薨，追封真定王。
现代文：秋七月十八日，太师、魏国公赵普逝世，追封为真定王。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhao Pu, Grand Master and Wei Guogong, died and was posthumously crowned as King Zhending.

古文：是月，许、汝、兖、单、沧、蔡、齐、贝八州蝗，洛水溢。
现代文：这个月，许、汝、充、单、沧、蔡、济、贝等八州蝗灾，洛水溢出河道。
English: This month, Xu, Ru, Chong, Shan, Cang, Cai, Jie, Bei and other eight states suffered locust plagues, and the Luo River overflowed.

古文：八月戊辰，以秘阁成，赐近臣宴。
现代文：八月初七，因秘阁修成赐近臣宴饮。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, a banquet was given to the vassals for the completion of the secret pavilion.

古文：壬申，召终南山隐士种放，不至。
现代文：十一日，召终南山隐士种放，不到朝廷。
English: On the 11th day, the Nanshan hermit was summoned to be released, but he did not come to the imperial court.

古文：庚辰，阇婆国遣使来贡。
现代文：庚辰日，婆国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, the motherland sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：丁丑，释岭南东、西路罚作荷校者。
现代文：十六日，释放岭南东西路罚作以枷加颈者。
English: On the 16th, those who were punished with shackles and necklaces on the East-West Road of Lingnan were released.

古文：九月丙申，遣官祈晴京城诸寺观。
现代文：九月初六，派遣官员到京城各寺观祈祷天晴。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, officials were dispatched to all the temples in the capital to watch and pray for a fine day.

古文：甲寅，幸天驷监，赐从臣马。
现代文：二十四日，到天驯监，赐给从臣马匹。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the emperor granted horses to his vassals.

古文：乙卯，群臣上尊号曰法天崇道明圣仁孝文武皇帝，凡五表，终不许。
现代文：二十五日，大臣们上尊号为法天崇道明圣仁孝文武皇帝，共五次上表，最终还是没有允准。
English: On the 25th, the ministers presented the title of Faten Chong Dao Ming Sheng Ren Xiao Wenwu Emperor five times, but in the end it was not approved.

古文：冬十月辛酉朔，折御卿进白花鹰，放之，诏勿复献。
现代文：冬十月初一，折御卿进贡白花鹰，释放，诏令不要再进献。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the white eagle brought as a tribute by Orimikyo was released, and it was ordered not to be brought again.

古文：戊寅，始置京朝、幕职、州县官考课，并校三班殿最。
现代文：十八日，开始设置京朝官、幕职官、州县官考课，并考核比较三班好坏。
English: On the 18th, the examination courses for imperial officials, shogunate officials, and prefectural and county officials began to be set up, and the examination compared the three classes.

古文：戊子，高丽、西南蕃皆遣使来贡。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国、西南蕃都派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 28th, Koryo Province and Seinan Province both sent envoys to collect tribute.

古文：十一月己亥，许王元僖薨。
现代文：十一月初十，许王赵元嘻逝世。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, Xu Wang Zhao Yuanhui passed away.

古文：甲申，虑囚，降徒流以下一等，释杖罪。
现代文：甲申日，讯察记录囚犯罪状，徒、流刑以下减轻一等，杖罪释放。
English: On the third day of the third month, the investigation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, and the sentence of imprisonment or exile was reduced to the first class, and the cane crime was released.

古文：赵保忠贡鹘，号 海东青 ，还之。
现代文：赵保忠进贡鹊，号 海东青 ，归还给他。
English: Zhao Baozhong's tribute money, the number of Haidongqing, was returned to him.

古文：己未，禁两浙诸州巫师。
现代文：三十日，禁止两浙各州巫师。
English: On the 30th, sorcerers from two Zhejiang provinces were banned.

古文：置三司主辖收支官。
现代文：设置三司主管收支官。
English: Set up a revenue and expenditure officer in charge of the three departments.

古文：是月，蔡州建安大火。
现代文：这个月，蔡州建安发生大火。
English: This month, a large fire broke out in Jian'an, Caizhou.

古文：十二月丁卯，大雨雪。
现代文：十二月初八，降大雪。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month, heavy snow fell.

古文：己卯，占城国王杨陀排遣使来贡。
现代文：二十日，占城国王杨陀排派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 20th, King Yang of Zhancheng sent envoys to collect tribute.

古文：是月，雄州言大火。
现代文：这个月，雄州报告说发生大火灾。
English: This month, Yungju reported a major fire.

古文：是岁，润州丹徒县饥，死者三百户。
现代文：这一年，润州丹徒县饥荒，死者三百户。
English: In that year, the famine in Dantu County, Renzhou, claimed the lives of 300 families.

古文：四年春正月庚寅朔，享太室，群臣诣斋宫拜表称贺。
现代文：淳化四年春正月初一，祭享太室，大臣们到斋宫上表称贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Chunhua Spring, the imperial family was celebrated, and the ministers came to the palace to offer their congratulations.

古文：辛卯，祀天地于圜丘，以宣祖、太祖配，大赦。
现代文：初二，在圆丘祭祀天地，配以宣祖、太祖，大赦。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, heaven and earth are sacrificed on the round mound, accompanied by the proclamation of ancestors, ancestors, and amnesty.

古文：乙未，大雨雪。
现代文：初六，降大雪。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, heavy snow fell.

古文：高丽国遣使来贡。
现代文：高丽国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: Goryeo dispatched envoys to pay tribute.

古文：乙巳，藏才西族首领罗妹以良马来献。
现代文：十六日，藏才西族首领罗妹进献良马。
English: On the 16th, the Tibetan leader Luo Meixin presented a fine horse.

古文：二月己未朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：壬戌，召赐京城高年帛，百岁者一人加赐涂金带。
现代文：初四，召赐京城高年者帛，百岁者每人加赐涂金带。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, the senior citizens of the capital city will be called upon to wear gold bracelets, and the centenarians will each be given a gold band.

古文：是日，雨雪，大寒，再遣中使赐孤老贫穷人千钱、米炭。
现代文：这一天，降雪骤寒，又派遣中使赐给孤老贫穷者每人千钱、米炭。
English: On this day, snow fell and it was bitterly cold. An envoy was dispatched to give each of the orphans, the elderly and the poor one thousand coins and rice charcoal.

古文：置昭宣使。
现代文：设置昭宣使。
English: A special envoy has been set up.

古文：癸亥，废沿江榷货八务。
现代文：初五，废罢沿江榷货八务。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the strike of goods along the Yangtze River was abolished.

古文：乙丑，加高丽国王王治检校太师，静海军节度使黎桓封交止郡王。
现代文：初七，加高丽国王治检校太师衔，静海军节度使黎桓封为交趾郡王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the king of Goryeo was elevated to the rank of grandmaster, and the Jing naval festival made Li Huanfeng the king of Jiaozi County.

古文：己卯，诏以江、浙、淮、陕饥，遣使巡抚。
现代文：二十一日，下诏因江、浙、淮、陕饥荒，派遣使臣巡视抚恤。
English: On the 21st, due to the famine in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Huai and Shaanxi, it was decided to send envoys to inspect the pensions.

古文：诏分遣近臣巡抚诸道，有可惠民者得便宜行事，吏罢软、苛刻者上之，诏令有未便者附传以闻。
现代文：下诏：分遣近臣巡视抚恤各道，有可以给百姓带来实惠的事情可以不上奏自行处置，官吏软弱无能、苛刻百姓者报告朝廷，诏令有不切合实际的随时让邮传报告朝廷。
English: The following edict: to dispatch courtiers to inspect the various provinces for subsidies; if there is something that can bring real benefits to the people, it can be dealt with without reporting; if the officials are weak and incompetent, and the people are harsh, they should report to the imperial court; if the edict is impractical, they should report to the imperial court by post at any time.

古文：丙戌，置审官院、考课院。
现代文：二十八日，设置审官院、考课院。
English: On the 28th, the Court of Examiners and the College of Examiners were established.

古文：永康军青城县民王小波聚徒为寇，杀眉州彭山县令齐元振。
现代文：永康军青城县百姓王小波聚众为盗寇，杀死眉州彭山县令齐元振。
English: Wang Xiaobo, a citizen of Qingcheng County of the Yongkang Army, gathered a crowd of robbers and killed Qi Yuanzhen, the commander of Pengshan County of Meizhou.

古文：是月，商州大雨雪。
现代文：这个月，商州降大雪。
English: This month, heavy snow fell in Shangzhou.

古文：三月壬子，诏权停贡举。
现代文：三月二十四日，诏令暂停贡举。
English: On March 24, the imperial edict suspended the tribute.

古文：四月己卯，诸司奉行公事不得辄称圣旨。
现代文：四月二十一日，各部门奉行公事不要动不动就称圣旨。
English: On April 21st, all departments should adhere to the "sacred will" in the performance of official duties.

古文：五月戊申，罢盐铁、户部、度支等使，置三司使。
现代文：五月二十一日，废罢盐铁、户部、度支等使，设置三司使。
English: On May 21, the envoys of the Ministry of Salt and Iron, the Ministry of Households, and the Ministry of Education and Culture were abolished, and the Three Departments of Envoys were established.

古文：六月戊午朔，诏中丞己下皆亲临鞫狱。
现代文：六月初一，诏令中承以下官员都亲临审讯狱案。
English: On the first day of June, the following officials came to hear the prison case in person.

古文：丙寅，吏部侍郎、平章事张齐贤罢为尚书左丞。
现代文：初九，吏部侍郎、平章事张齐贤罢为尚书左承。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month of the first year of his reign, Zhang Qixian, a chamberlain of the cadre and a member of the Taira clan, became the heir of Shang Shulzu.

古文：壬申，宣徽北院使、知枢密院事张逊贬右领军卫将军，右谏议大夫、同知院事寇准罢守本官。
现代文：十五日，宣徽北院使、知枢密院事张逊被贬为右领军卫将军，右谏议大夫、同知院事寇准罢守本官。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Xun, the envoy of the Northern Yuan of Xuanhui and the leading official of the Privy Council, was demoted to the right-hand leader of the army, the general of the guard, the right-hand senate doctor, and the governor of the same council.

古文：以涪州观察使柴禹锡为宣徽北院使、知枢密院事，枢密直学士吕端参知政事，刘昌言同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命涪州观察使柴禹锡为宣徽北院使、知枢密院事，枢密直学士吕端参知政事，刘昌言同知枢密院事。
English: The appointment of Zhangzhou observation made Chai Yuxi the envoy of Xuanhui North Academy, the secretary of the Privy Council, the secretary of the Privy Council, the secretary of the Privy Council, the secretary of the Privy Council, the secretary of the Privy Council, the secretary of the Privy Council, the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：戊寅，初复给事中封驳。
现代文：二十一日，开始恢复给事中封驳。
English: On the twenty-first day, the case was resumed.

古文：七月丁酉，大雨。
现代文：七月十一日，降大雨。
English: On July 11, it rained heavily.

古文：戊戌，复沿江务，置诸路茶盐制置使。
现代文：十二日，恢复沿江榷货务，设置各路茶盐制置使。
English: On the 12th, the goods service along the Yangtze River was resumed, and the tea salt production and placement offices were set up.

古文：八月丙辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse.

古文：癸酉，以向敏中、张咏始同知银台、通进司，视章奏案牍以稽出入。
现代文：十八日，任命向敏中、张咏开始同知银台、通进司，负责章奏案犊的进呈和发布。
English: On the 18th, Xiang Minzhong and Zhang Jun were appointed as Tongzhi Yintai and Tongjin Division, responsible for the submission and release of the report.

古文：九月丙申，诏诸杂除禁锢人，州县有阙，得次补以责效，能自新勤干者具闻再叙。
现代文：九月十一日，下诏解除禁锢官员，州县有缺得以依次补官责成自效，能改过自新勤政干练者上报朝廷，等候录用。
English: On September 11, the imperial edict released officials from confinement, allowing prefectures and counties to fill their vacancies in turn. Those who had been diligent in politics since the New Year were able to report to the imperial court and wait to be hired.

古文：乙巳，以给事中封驳隶银台、通进司。
现代文：二十日，以给事中封驳司隶银台、通进司。
English: On the 20th, it was decided to ban Shi Li, Yintai and Tong Jin from the case.

古文：丙午，命侍从举任才堪五千户以上县令者二人。
现代文：二十一日，命令侍从官举荐才能可以担任五千户以上县令者二人。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, it was ordered that in order to be able to serve as county magistrate for more than five thousand households, two people had to be recommended by a courtier.

古文：自七月雨，至是不止。
现代文：从七月降雨，至此不止。
English: It's been raining since July and it hasn't stopped.

古文：是月，河水溢，坏澶州。江溢，陷涪州。
现代文：这个月，黄河水溢出河道，毁坏擅州；长江水溢出河道，陷落涪州。
English: This month, water from the Yellow River overflowed its course and destroyed Gansu; water from the Yangtze River overflowed its course and fell on Ganzhou.

古文：诏溺死者给敛具，澶人千钱涪人铁钱三千，仍发廪以振。
现代文：下诏：溺死者供给埋葬用具，擅州每人千钱，涪州每人铁钱三千，并且发仓凛贩济。
English: The following edict was issued: Drowned people should be provided with burial utensils, one thousand coins per person in Gwangju, three thousand iron coins per person in Gyeongju, and financial assistance should be provided.

古文：冬十月壬戌，罢诸路提点刑狱司。
现代文：冬十月初八，废除各路提点刑狱司。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, the penal officers were abolished.

古文：庚午，始分天下州县为十道，两京为左右计，各署判官领之，置三司使二员。
现代文：十六日，开始分天下州县为十道，两京为左右计，分别委任判官领管，设置三司使二员。
English: On the 16th, it was decided to divide the country into ten provinces, ten prefectures and ten counties, and the two capitals into the left and right sectors. Judges were separately appointed to take charge of the administration, and two members of the Third Division were set up.

古文：辛未，右仆射、平章事李昉，给事中、参知政事贾黄中、李沆，左谏议大夫、同知枢密院事温仲舒并罢守本官。
现代文：十七日右仆射、平章事李意，给事中、参知政事贾黄中、李杭，左谏议大夫、同知枢密院事温仲舒，都罢守本官。
English: On the seventeenth day, the right-hand servant, Sha, and the right-hand man, Pingzhang, resigned from their posts, and the middle-ranking officials, Jia Huangzhong and Li Hang, both of whom were advisors to the governor-general, and the left-hand man, Zuoying, both of whom were advisors to the Privy Council, and Wen Zhongshu, both of whom were advisors to the Privy Council, resigned from their posts.

古文：以吏部尚书吕蒙正平章事，翰林学士苏易简为给事中参知政事；枢密都承旨赵镕为宣徽北院使，枢密直学士向敏中为右谏议大夫，并同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命吏部尚书吕蒙正为平章事，翰林学士苏易简为给事中、参知政事，枢密都承旨赵为宣徽北院使，枢密直学士向敏中为右谏议大夫，并为同知枢密院事。
English: Appointed officials, Shangshu Lv Mengzheng as Pingzhang, Hanlin Baccalaureate Su Yijian as Baizhong and Sangzhi, Zhao Zongzhi as Xuanhu North Academy, and Xiangmin Zhong, Baccalaureate Zongzhi, as Zuoying, and Tongzhi Baccalaureate.

古文：丁丑，以右谏议大夫赵昌言为给事中、参知政事。
现代文：二十三日，任命右谏议大夫赵昌言为给事中、参知政事。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Changyan, a doctor of right-wing politics, was appointed as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：辛巳，遣使按行畿县，民田被水者蠲其租。
现代文：二十七日，派遣使臣视察京城近郊各县，民田遭水灾者免除租税。
English: On the 27th, envoys were dispatched to inspect the counties in the suburbs of Beijing. People whose fields had been flooded were exempt from paying taxes.

古文：是月，河决澶州，西北流入御河。
现代文：这个月，黄河在擅州决口，西北流进御河。
English: This month, the Yellow River entered the Ohe River in the northwest at the junction of the two rivers.

古文：闰月辛卯，幸水硙观鱼。
现代文：闰十月初七，到水观鱼。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th lunar month, go to the water to watch fish.

古文：己酉，置三司总计度使。
现代文：二十五日，设置三司总计度使。
English: On the 25th, the Third Division of the General Accounting Office was set up.

古文：十一月丁巳，万安州献六眸龟。
现代文：十一月初四，万安州进献六眸龟。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Wan'an offered six-eyed turtles.

古文：癸酉，还陇西州所献白鹰。
现代文：二十日，归还陇西州所进献的白鹰。
English: On the 20th, the white eagle donated by Shaanxi Province was returned.

古文：十二月辛丑，大雨雪。
现代文：十二月十八日，降大雪。
English: On the 18th of December, heavy snow fell.

古文：戊申，西川都巡检使张与王小波战江原县，死之。
现代文：二十五日，西川都巡检使张巳与王小波在江原县作战，战死。
English: On the 25th, Zhang Mi, the inspector of Nishikawa, fought with Wang Xiaobo in Gangwon County and was killed.

古文：小波中流矢死，众推其党李顺为帅。
现代文：王小波中流矢而死，大家推其党李顺为首领。
English: Wang Xiaobo died in the middle of the current, and everyone pushed his party, Li Shun, to be the leader.

古文：五年春正月甲寅朔，不受朝，群臣诣阁拜表称贺。
现代文：淳化五年正月初一，太宗不接受拜贺，大臣们到阁门上表称庆祝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Chunhua, Taizong did not accept congratulations, and the ministers went to the attic door to express congratulations.

古文：戊午，李顺陷汉州，已未，陷彭州。
现代文：初五，李顺攻陷汉州。初六，攻陷彭州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Li Shun invaded Hanzhou. On the sixth day of the first month, he invaded Pengzhou.

古文：乙丑，虑囚，流罪以下释之。
现代文：十二日，讯察记录囚犯罪状，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 12th, the investigation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, and he was released after being exiled.

古文：己巳，李顺陷成都，知府郭载奔梓州，顺入据之，贼兵四出攻劫州县。
现代文：十六日，李顺攻成都，知府郭载逃奔梓少，李顺进居成都，贼兵四出攻掠州县。
English: On the 16th, Li Shun led his troops to attack Chengdu. Guo Zhaojie, the governor of the prefecture, fled to the capital, while Li Shun stayed in Chengdu.

古文：遣使振宋、亳、陈、颍州饥民，别遣决诸路刑狱，应因饥劫藏粟，诛为首者，余减死。
现代文：派遣使臣贩济宋、毫、陈、颖州饥民，另外派使臣到各路处理狱案，那些因饥饿抢劫仓库粮食，只诛杀为首者，其余人不处死刑。
English: Envoys will be sent to help the starving people in Song, Miao, Chen and Yingzhou. Envoys will also be sent to various regions to deal with prison cases. Those who rob warehouses of grain due to hunger will only be killed at the top, and the rest will not be sentenced to death.

古文：癸酉，以侍卫马军都指挥使李继隆为河西行营都部署，讨李继迁。
现代文：二十日，任命侍卫马军都指挥使李继隆为河西行营都部署，讨伐李继迁。
English: On the 20th, he appointed Li Jilong as the commander of the bodyguards of the horse army and deployed them to the west of Hexi to fight against Li Jilong's relocation.

古文：甲戌，命昭宣使王继恩为两川招安使，讨李顺。
现代文：二十一日，命令昭宣使王继恩为两川招安使，讨伐李顺。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhaoxuan ordered Wang Jien to recruit peace envoys for the two rivers to fight against Lishun.

古文：诏诸州能出粟贷饥民者赐爵。
现代文：诏令各州能出粟贩济饥民者赐给爵位。
English: The edict ordered the states to give peerages to those who could sell poppies to feed the hungry.

古文：辛巳，诏除两京诸州淳化三年逋负。
现代文：二十八日，诏令免除两京各州淳化三年拖欠的钱物。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict exempted the cities of Beijing and the prefectures of Chunhua from the three-year arrears of money and goods.

古文：二月乙未，李顺分攻剑州，都监西京作坊副使上官正、成都监军供奉官宿翰合击，大破之，斩馘殆尽。
现代文：二月十三日，李顺分兵进攻剑州，都监西京作坊副使上官正、成都监军供奉官宿翰联合攻击，大败李顺，斩杀殆尽。
English: On February 13th, Li Shun's detachment attacked Jianzhou. The superintendent of the Xijing workshop, the vice-envoy of the superintendent, and the Chengdu inspector of the army, the official Shukhan, jointly attacked, defeated Li Shun and killed him.

古文：丙午，幸南御庄观稼。
现代文：二十四日，到南御庄观看庄稼。
English: On the 24th, I went to Minami-Misho to look at the crops.

古文：己酉，以益王元杰为淮南、镇江等军节度使，徙封吴王。
现代文：二十七日，任命益王赵元杰为淮南、镇江等军节度使，改封为吴王。
English: On the 27th, Yi Wang Zhao Yuanjie was appointed as the military envoy of Huainan and Zhenjiang, and changed his title to Wu Wang.

古文：辛亥，诏除剑南东西川、峡路诸州主吏民卒淳化五年以前逋负。
现代文：二十九日，诏令废除剑南东西川、峡路各州主吏民卒淳化五年以前拖欠的钱物。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict abolished the money and goods that had been delinquent for five years from Junhua, the leading official of the provinces of Jian'nan, Dongxi River and Qiaoluo.

古文：三月乙亥，赵保忠为赵保吉所袭，奔还夏州，指挥使赵光嗣执之以献，李继隆帅师入夏州。
现代文：三月二十三日，赵保忠被赵保吉袭击，奔还夏州，指挥使赵光嗣捉拿献给朝廷。李继隆率军进人夏州。
English: On March 23, Zhao Baozhong was attacked by Zhao Baoji and rushed back to Xiazhou. The commander ordered Zhao Guangzhi to capture and present it to the imperial court. Li Jilong led the army into Xiazhou.

古文：交止郡王黎桓遣使来贡。
现代文：交趾郡王黎桓派遣使臣来进贡。
English: King Lai Huan of Jiaozi County sent an envoy to collect the tribute.

古文：夏四月壬午朔，诏除天下主吏逋负。
现代文：夏四月初一，诏令废除全国主吏拖欠的钱物。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the imperial edict abolished the arrears of money and goods owed by officials across the country.

古文：甲申，削赵保吉所赐姓名。
现代文：初三，削夺赐给赵保吉的姓名。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the name given to Zhao Baoji was removed.

古文：丙戌，置起居院，初复起居注。
现代文：初五，设置起居院，开始恢复起居注。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, residents' homes were set up, and residents' lives began to be restored.

古文：以国子学复为国子监。
现代文：国子学恢复为国子监。
English: Kokushigaku was reinstated as Kokushikan.

古文：辛卯，虑囚。
现代文：初十，讯察和记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the status of prisoners was surveyed and recorded.

古文：大食国王遣使来贡。
现代文：大食国王派遣使臣来进贡。
English: The gluttonous king sent envoys to collect tribute.

古文：戊戌，赦诸州，除十恶、故劫杀、官吏犯正赃外，降死罪以下囚。
现代文：十七日，赦免各州，除十恶、故意劫杀、官吏贪赃外，减轻死罪囚犯的罪刑。
English: On the 17th, he pardoned all the states and commuted the sentences of death row prisoners, except for the ten evils, intentional robbery and murder, and official corruption.

古文：己亥，王继恩帅师过绵州，贼溃走，追杀及溺死者甚众。
现代文：十八日，王继恩率军经过绵州，贼溃走，追杀和溺死者很多。
English: On the 18th, Wang Jiong led the army through Mianzhou. Thieves were routed, and many people were chased and drowned.

古文：庚子，复绵州。
现代文：十九日，收复绵州。
English: On the 19th, Mianzhou was recaptured.

古文：内殿崇班曹习破贼于老溪，复阆州。
现代文：内殿崇班曹习在老溪攻破盗贼，收复间州。
English: Naiden Chongban Cao Xi defeated the thieves in Laoxi and recovered the interstate.

古文：绵州巡检使胡正远帅兵进击，复巴州。
现代文：绵州巡检使胡正远率军进攻，收复巴州。
English: The inspection of Mianzhou made Hu Zhengyuan lead the army to attack and recover Bazhou.

古文：壬寅，西川行营击贼于研口砦，破之，复剑州。
现代文：二十一日，西川行营在研口寨进攻盗贼，打败盗贼，收得剑州。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xichuan Xingying attacked the thieves in Yankouzhai, defeated the thieves, and won back Jianzhou.

古文：癸卯，大雨。
现代文：二十二日，降大雨。
English: On the 22nd, it rained heavily.

古文：五月丁巳，西川行营破贼十万众，斩首三万级，复成都，获贼李顺。
现代文：五月初六，西川行营破贼十万人，斩杀三万人，收复成都，俘获贼首李顺。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, 100,000 people marched to the West River to smash the bandits, 30,000 people were killed, Chengdu was recaptured, and the bandits' leader, Li Shun, was captured.

古文：其党张余复攻陷嘉、戎、泸、渝，涪、忠、万、开八州，开州监军秦传序死之。
现代文：其党张徐又攻陷嘉、戎、沪、渝、涪、忠、万、开八州，开州监军秦传序战死。
English: His party Zhang Xu also invaded and occupied Jiayu, Rongwu, Shanghai, Chongqing, Handan, Zhongshan, Wanzhou, and Kaizhou eight provinces, and Qin Chuanzhong, the governor of Kaizhou, died in the battle.

古文：丙寅，河西行营送赵保忠至阙下，释其罪，授右千牛卫上将军，封宥罪侯。
现代文：十五日，河西行营将赵保忠送到朝廷，释放其罪，授为右千牛卫上将军，封为肴罪侯。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Hexi expedition sent Zhao Baozhong to the imperial court, absolved him of his crime, and awarded him the title of Right Qian Niu Wei Shang General and the title of Cuisine Sin Marquis.

古文：己巳，以知梓州张雍、都巡检使卢斌尝坚守却贼，斌进击解阆州围，遂平蓬州，雍加给事中，斌领成州刺史。
现代文：十八日，因梓州知州张雍、都巡检使卢斌曾经坚守击退盗贼，卢斌出击解间州之围，于是平定蓬州，张雍加官给事中，卢斌领成都刺史。
English: On the 18th day, because Zizhou Zhizhou Zhang Yong and Chengdu inspection envoy Lu Bin had insisted on repelling the thieves, Lu Bin set out to solve the inter-state siege, and then pacified Pengzhou. Zhang Yong was in charge of the matter, and Lu Bin led Chengdu to make history.

古文：以少府监雷有终为谏议大夫、知成都府。
现代文：任命少府监雷有终为谏议大夫、成都知府。
English: The appointment of a minor prefectural supervisor of lightning has finally become a doctor of consultation and Chengdu prefecture.

古文：庚午，贼攻夔州，峡路都大巡检白继赟、夔州巡检使解守颙大败其众于西津口，斩首二万级，获舟千余艘。
现代文：十九日，贼兵进攻夔州，峡路都大巡检白继贾、夔州巡检使解守氰在西津口大败贼众，斩杀二万人，缴获舟船一千多艘。
English: On the 19th, the bandits attacked Zhangzhou. Bai Jijia, the Grand Inspector of Gorges and Roads, and Zhangzhou's inspector, Xie Shouyan, defeated the bandits in West Tsingkou, killing 20,000 people and capturing more than 1,000 boats.

古文：辛未，降成都府为益州。
现代文：二十日，成都府降为益州。
English: On the 20th, Chengdu Prefecture was downgraded to Yizhou.

古文：壬申，右仆射李昉以司空致仕。
现代文：二十一日，右仆射李意以司空衔退休。
English: On the 21st, his right-hand man, Sha Li, announced his retirement with the rank of flight attendant.

古文：甲戌，诏利州、兴元府、洋州西县民并给复一年。
现代文：二十三日，诏令利州、兴元府、洋州、西县百姓一律免除赋役一年。
English: On the 23rd, the Emperor decreed that the people of Lizhou, Xingyuanfu, Yangzhou and Xi County would all be exempted from forced labor for one year.

古文：丙子，磔李顺党八人于凤翔市。
现代文：二十五日，在凤翔闹市将李顺党羽八人碎尸。
English: On the 25th, eight members of the Li Shun faction were dismembered in Fengxiang Town.

古文：庚辰，初伏，帝亲书绫扇赐近臣。
现代文：二十九日，初伏，太宗亲书绩扇赐给近臣。
English: On the 29th day of the first lunar month, Emperor Taizong's relatives gave a fan to a close retainer.

古文：六月辛卯，诏赦李顺胁从诖误。
现代文：六月初十，诏令赦免被李顺胁从连累者。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month, the imperial edict pardoned those who had been coerced by Li Shun.

古文：是月，都城大疫，分遣医官煮药给病者。
现代文：这个月，都城发生大疫，分别派遣医官煮药供给病者服用。
English: This month, a major epidemic occurred in the capital, and medical officers were dispatched to boil medicine and supply it to the sick.

古文：贼攻施州，指挥使黄希逊击走之。
现代文：盗贼进攻施州，指挥使黄希逊击退。
English: Thieves attack Shizhou, commander Huang Xisong repels them.

古文：戊戌，峡路行营破贼于广安军，又破贼张罕二万众于嘉陵江口，又破于合州西方溪，俘斩甚众。
现代文：十七日，峡路行营在广安军击破盗贼，又在嘉陵江口击败盗贼张罕二万人，又在合州西方溪击破盗贼，俘获斩杀无数。
English: On the 17th, the Qiao Road encampment defeated the thieves in the Guang'an Army, defeated the thieves of Zhang Han 20,000 people at the mouth of the Jialing River, and defeated the thieves in the West Creek of Hezhou, capturing and killing countless people.

古文：戊申，以侍卫步军都指挥使高琼为镇州都部署。
现代文：二十七日，任命侍卫步军都指挥使高琼为镇州都部署。
English: On the 27th, Gao Qiong was appointed as the commander of the bodyguards and marching troops and was deployed to Zhenzhou.

古文：贼攻陵州，知州张旦击破之。
现代文：盗贼进攻陵州，知州张旦打败盗贼。
English: Thieves attacked Lingzhou, and Zhangdan of Chizhou defeated the thieves.

古文：高丽遣使，以契丹来侵乞师。
现代文：高丽因契丹进攻派遣使臣来请求援助。
English: As a result of the Khitan attack, Korea sent envoys to request assistance.

古文：秋七月辛亥朔，贼攻眉州，知州李简等坚守逾月，贼引去。
现代文：秋七月初一，盗贼进攻眉州，知州李简等坚守一个多月，盗贼退走。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the thieves attacked Meizhou, Chizhou Li Jian and others held out for more than a month, and the thieves retreated.

古文：癸亥，置江、淮、两浙发运使。
现代文：十三日，设置江淮和两浙转运使。
English: On the 13th, Jianghuai and two Zhejiang transshipment envoys were set up.

古文：丙寅，除两浙诸州民钱俶日逋负。
现代文：十六日，废除两浙各州百姓钱统治期间拖欠的钱物。
English: On the 16th, the money and goods that were in arrears during the reign of the people's money in the two Zhejiang states were abolished.

古文：甲戌，置威塞军。
现代文：二十四日，设置威塞军。
English: On the 24th, the Army of the Weser was set up.

古文：乙亥，李继迁遣使来贡。
现代文：二十五日，李继迁派人来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Li Jiqian sent someone to collect the tribute.

古文：八月甲申，诏有司讲求大射仪注。
现代文：八月五日，诏令有关部门讲求大射仪注。
English: On August 5th, the relevant departments were ordered to request large projectile launchers.

古文：癸巳，以内班为黄门。
现代文：十四日，以内班为黄门。
English: On the 14th, the yellow gate will be in the inner class.

古文：甲午，置宣政使，以宦者昭宣使王继恩为之。
现代文：十五日，设置宣政使，任命宦者昭宣使王继恩担任。
English: On the 15th, the Xuancheng envoy was set up, and Wang Jien, who had been appointed as Xuancheng envoy, was appointed.

古文：乙未，诏释剑南、峡路诸州亡命。
现代文：十六日，诏令释放剑南、峡路各州亡命之徒。
English: On the 16th, the Emperor issued a decree to release the fugitives from the states of Jianan and Qiaoluo.

古文：戊戌，以通远军复为环州，置清远军。
现代文：十九日，通远军恢复为环州，设置清远军。
English: On the 19th, the Tongyuan Army was restored to Huanzhou, and the Qingyuan Army was set up.

古文：庚子，大雨。
现代文：二十一日，降大雨。
English: On the 21st, it rained heavily.

古文：贝州言骁捷卒劫库兵为乱，推都虞候赵咸雍为帅，转运使王嗣宗率屯兵击败之，擒咸雍，磔于市。
现代文：贝州报告说晓捷卒劫库兵叛乱，推选都虞候赵咸雍为首领，转运使王嗣宗率领屯兵打败叛兵，俘虏赵咸雍，在闹市碎尸。
English: Bei Zhou reported that Xiao Jie led the rebels to kidnap and plunder the soldiers of the Kuban, elected the governor Zhao Xianyong as the leader, transferred Wang Shizong to lead the troops to defeat the rebels, captured Zhao Xianyong, and dismembered his body in the bustling city.

古文：辛丑，诏遣知益州张咏赴部，得便宜从事。
现代文：二十二日，诏令益州知州张咏赴部，可以不上奏自行决断有关事宜。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict ordered Zhang Ye of Yizhou Zhizhou to go to the ministry, and he could decide the relevant matters on his own without reporting.

古文：癸卯，以参知政事赵昌言为西川、峡路招安马步军都部署，寻诏昌言驻凤翔，遣内侍押班卫绍钦往行营指挥军事。
现代文：二十四日，任命参知政事赵昌言为西川、峡路招安马步军都部署，不久诏令赵昌言驻屯凤翔，派内侍押班卫绍钦前往行营指挥军事。
English: On the 24th, Zhao Changyan, the political advisor to the governor, was appointed as the leader of the west river and the gorge road to recruit the Anma marching army. Soon, Zhao Changyan was ordered to stay in Fengxiang, and sent the attendant of the guard, Shaoqin, to the camp to command the military.

古文：峡路行营破贼帅张余，复云安军。
现代文：峡路行营攻破贼众首领张徐，收复云安军。
English: The battalion marched along the gorge road to defeat the leader of the thieves, Zhang Xu, and recapture the Yun'an Army.

古文：李继迁使其弟奉表待罪。
现代文：李继迁派他的弟弟上表待罪。
English: Li Jiqian sent his younger brother to stand trial.

古文：九月庚戌朔，户部尚书辛仲甫以太子少保致仕。
现代文：九月初一，户部尚书辛仲甫以太子少保职衔退休。
English: On the first day of September, the head of the household, Shang Shuxin Zhongfu, retired with the title of minor.

古文：甲寅，赐三司钱百万，募能言司事之利便者，量事赏之，尽则再给以备赏。
现代文：初五，赐给三司钱百万络，募召能洞悉司事利害者，量情奖赏，用完后再赐给奖赏费用。
English: On the fifth day of the lunar new year, the three departments will be given one million rupees, and the interested parties who can understand the affairs of the departments will be recruited, and the reward will be given according to the amount. After the reward is used up, the reward fee will be given.

古文：己未，罢诸州榷酤。
现代文：初十，废罢各州榷酣。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the state governments abolished the tax.

古文：改黄门院为内侍省，以黄门班院为内侍省内侍班院，入内黄门班院为内侍省入内侍班院。
现代文：改黄门院为内侍省，以黄门班院为内侍省内侍班院，人内黄门班院为内侍省人内侍班院。
English: Huangmen Academy was changed to Naishi Province, Huangmen Pan Academy to Naishi Province Naishi Pan Academy, and Renai Huangmen Pan Academy to Naishi Province Renai Naishi Pan Academy.

古文：辛酉，遣使分行宋、亳、陈、颍、泗、寿、邓、蔡等州按行民田，被水及种莳不及者并蠲其租。
现代文：十二日，派遣使臣分别前往宋、毫、陈、颖、泅、寿、邓、蔡等州视察民田，遭水灾和种植不及时者都免收租税。
English: On the 12th, envoys were dispatched to Song, Miao, Chen, Ying, Handan, Shou, Deng, Cai and other provinces to inspect people's fields. Those who suffered from floods and planting delays were exempt from tax.

古文：壬申，以襄王元侃为开封尹，改封寿王。
现代文：二十三日，任命襄王赵元侃为开封尹，改封寿王。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Yang Wang Zhao Yuan Kan as Kaifeng Yin and changed it to Shou Wang.

古文：大赦，除十恶、故谋劫斗杀、官吏犯正赃外，诸官先犯赃罪配隶禁锢者放还。
现代文：大赦，除十恶、故意劫斗杀、官吏贪赃外，各官从前犯赃被配隶禁锢者放还。
English: Amnesty, in addition to the ten evils, intentional robbery and murder, and official corruption, all officials who had previously committed crimes and were imprisoned with their subordinates were released.

古文：乙亥，以左谏议大夫寇准参知政事。
现代文：二十六日，任命左谏议大夫寇准参知政事。
English: On the 26th, he appointed Zuo Jianbing Dafu Ko, a vice-governor.

古文：丁丑，以蜀部渐平，下诏罪己。
现代文：二十八日，因蜀境逐渐平定，下诏罪己。
English: On the 28th, due to the gradual pacification of Shu territory, he issued the following edict.

古文：戊寅，西川行营言卫绍钦破贼于学射山，别将杨琼复蜀州，曹习等又破贼于安国镇，诛其帅马太保。
现代文：二十九日，西川行营报告说卫绍钦在学射山打败盗贼，副将杨琼收复蜀州，曹翰等又在安国镇打败盗贼，诛杀统帅马太保。
English: On the 29th, the Nishikawa camp reported that Wei Shaoqin defeated the thieves in learning to shoot mountains, Vice-General Yang Qiong recovered Shuzhou, Cao Han and others defeated the thieves in Anguo Town and killed Commander Matabao.

古文：冬十月庚辰，诏释殿前司逃军亲属之禁锢者。
现代文：冬十月初二，诏令释放殿前司逃军亲属被禁锢者。
English: On the second day of the second month of October in winter, a decree was issued to release the relatives of the former secretary of the palace who had fled the army.

古文：西川行营指挥使张嶙杀其将王文寿以叛，遣使招抚其众，遂共斩嶙首以降。
现代文：西川行营指挥使张嶙杀其将王文寿后叛乱，派人招抚其众，于是共斩张嶙投降。
English: The Nishikawa camp commander ordered Zhang Xuan to kill his general Wang Wenshou after the rebellion, and sent someone to incite his people, so Zhang Xuan surrendered.

古文：乙未，杨琼等复邛州。
现代文：十七日，杨琼等收复邓州。
English: On the 17th, Yang Qiong and others recovered Dengzhou.

古文：乙巳，改青州平卢军为镇海军，杭州镇海军为宁海军。
现代文：二十七日，改青州平虏军为镇海军，杭州镇海军为宁海军。
English: On the 27th, the Qingzhou Pingru Army was changed to the Town Navy, and the Hangzhou Town Navy was changed to the Ning Navy.

古文：十一月庚戌，遣使谕李继迁，赐以器币、茶药、衣服。
现代文：十一月初二，派遣使臣告谕李继迁，赐给器币、茶药、衣服。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, an envoy was sent to tell Li Jiqian, and he was given coins, tea medicines, and clothes.

古文：丙辰，赐近臣飞白书。
现代文：初八，赐给近臣飞白书。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he gave his close vassal Fei Bai Shu.

古文：庚申，诏江南西路及荆湖南北路、岭南溪洞接连及蕃商、外国使诱子女出境者捕之。
现代文：十二日，下诏：江南西路和荆南北路、岭南溪洞接连，及蕃商、外国使诱子女出境者捕获。
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued: Jiangnan West Road, Jing Nanbei Road, and Lingnan Xidong were connected, and the traffickers and foreign agents who lured the children out of the country were captured.

古文：癸亥，贼攻眉州，崇仪使宿翰等击败之，斩其伪中书令吴蕴。
现代文：十五日，盗贼进攻眉少，崇仪使宿翰等打败盗贼，斩杀伪中书令吴蕴。
English: On the fifteenth day, the thieves attacked the eyebrows, and Chongyi sent Shukhan and others to defeat the thieves and kill the pseudo-Chinese calligrapher Wu Yun.

古文：丙寅，幸国子监，赐直讲孙奭绯鱼，因幸武成王庙，复幸国子监，令奭讲《尚书》，赐以束帛。
现代文：十八日，到国子监，赐直讲孙绊鱼，于是到武成王庙，又到国子监，命令孙讲解《尚书，赐给束帛。
English: On the 18th day, he went to the provincial overseer and ordered Sun Zhizhong to teach him the stumbling block fish. He then went to the King Wucheng Temple and the provincial overseer and ordered Sun to explain the book "Shang Shu, Given to Zucao."

古文：大寒，赐禁卫诸军缗钱有差。
现代文：大寒，赐给禁卫各军络钱不等。
English: The cold weather made the soldiers of the imperial guard earn a lot of money.

古文：十二月戊寅朔，日当食，云阴不见。
现代文：十二月初一，日当食，云阴蔽而没有出现。
English: On the first day of December, when the sun was eclipsed, it was covered by clouds and did not appear.

古文：辛巳，命枢密直学土张鉴、西京作坊副使冯守规安抚西川。
现代文：初四，命令枢密直学士张鉴、西京作坊副使冯守规安抚西川。
English: On the fourth day of junior high school, he ordered Zhang Jian, a Privy Councilor, and Feng Shoujun, the vice-commander of the Xijing Workshop, to pacify Xichuan.

古文：丙戌，命诸王畋近郊。
现代文：初九，命令诸王在近郊打猎。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, he ordered all the kings to go hunting in the suburbs.

古文：弛忠、靖二州刑徒。
现代文：宽放忠、靖二州刑徒。
English: Prisoners in two prefectures will be released.

古文：庚寅，宿翰等引兵趋嘉州，伪知州王文操以城降。
现代文：十三日，宿翰等率兵前往嘉州，伪知州王文操投降。
English: On the 13th, Shukhan and other soldiers went to Jiazhou, and the pseudo Zhizhou Wang Wenqiu surrendered.

古文：乙未，秘书丞张枢坐知荣州降贼，弃市。
现代文：十八日，秘书承张枢因知荣州投降盗贼获罪，斩杀于闹市。
English: On the 18th, Secretary Zheng Zhanghuan was found guilty of knowing the surrender of thieves in Rongzhou, and was beheaded in the downtown.

古文：辛丑，以三司两京、十道复归三部，各置使一员，每部置判官、推官、都监，分勾院为三。
现代文：二十四日，以三司两京、十道重归三部，各置使一员，每部设置判官、推官、都监，分勾院为三。
English: On the 24th, the three bureaus of the two capitals and the ten provinces were reorganized into three bureaus, each with an envoy, each with a judge, a magistrate, and a city supervisor, and subdivided into three bureaus.

古文：至道元年正月戊申朔，改元，赦京畿系囚，流罪以下递降一等，杖罪释之。
现代文：至道元年正月初一，改元，赦免京瓷关押囚犯，流罪以下依次递减一等，杖罪以下释放。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of

古文：蠲诸州逋租，蠲陕西诸州去年秋税之半。
现代文：免除各州拖欠租税，免除陕西各州去年秋税的一半。
English: exempt the states from tax arrears, and exempt the Shaanxi states from half of last year's autumn tax.

古文：丙辰，诏作上清宫成。
现代文：初九，诏令修建上清宫成功。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 18th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 20th year of the 20

古文：丁巳，凉州吐蕃当专以良马来献。
现代文：初十，凉州吐蕃当尊来进献良马。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Liangzhou Tujia Dangtong came to present good horses.

古文：戊午，占城国王杨陀排遣使来贡。
现代文：十一日，占城国王杨陀排派人来进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the king of Zhancheng, Yang Tuo Pai, sent people to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，上御乾元门观灯。
现代文：十四日，太宗到乾元门观灯。
English: On the 14th, Taizong went to Qianyuanmen to watch the lanterns.

古文：癸亥，契丹大将韩德威诱党项勒浪、嵬族自振武犯边，永安节度使折御卿邀击，败之于子河氵义，勒浪等乘乱反击德威，遂杀其将突厥大尉、司徒、舍利等，获吐浑首领一人，德威仅以身免。
现代文：十六日，契丹大将韩德威诱使党项勒浪、鬼族从振武侵犯边境，永安节度使折御卿阻击，在子河汉打败他们，勒浪等乘乱反击韩德威，于是杀其将领突厥太尉、司徒、舍利等，俘获吐浑首领一人，韩德威只身逃命。
English: On the 16th, the Khitan general Han Dewi induced the party clique Lelang and the ghost tribe to invade the border from Zhenwu, and the Yongan Festival made the Orgyongqing block the attack, defeated them in Zihehan, and Lelang and others counterattacked Han Dewi by taking advantage of the chaos, and then killed his generals Turku Taifu, Szeto, and Sheri, captured one of the leaders of Tuhun, and Han Dewi fled for his life.

古文：戊辰，以翰林学士钱若水为右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事，枢密副使刘昌言罢为给事中。
现代文：二十一日，任命翰林学士钱若水为右谏议大夫、同知枢密院事，枢密副使刘昌言罢为给事中。
English: On the 21st, Qian Ruoshui, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as the doctor of right-hand speech, the privy councilor of Tongzhi, and Liu Changyan, the vice-secretary of the privy council, was in the process of being appointed.

古文：以宣祖旧第作洞真宫成。
现代文：以宣祖旧第作洞真宫成。
English: Based on the old tale of Emperor Xuanzu by Dong Zhen Gongcheng.

古文：甲戌，李继迁遣使以良马、橐驼来贡。
现代文：二十七日，李继迁派人来贡献良马、真驼。
English: On the 27th, Li Jiqian sent people to contribute good horses and real camels.

古文：二月甲申，命宰相祷雨。
现代文：二月初八，命令宰相祈祷降雨。
English: On the eighth day of the second month, the prime minister was ordered to pray for rain.

古文：令川峡诸州瘗暴骸。
现代文：命令川峡各州掩埋暴露尸体。
English: ordered the states of the Sichuan Gorge to bury and exhume the bodies.

古文：戊戌，以旱虑囚，减流罪以下。
现代文：二十二日，因早灾讯察记录囚犯罪状，流罪以下减刑。
English: On the 22nd, due to the early disaster investigation, the criminal status of the prisoner was recorded, and the sentence was reduced from exile to exile.

古文：丙午，雨。
现代文：三十日，降雨。
English: On the 30th, it rained.

古文：嘉州函贼帅张余首送西川行营，余党悉平。
现代文：嘉州函送贼盗张徐首级到西川行营，至此余党全部平定。
English: Jiazhou Hanzhong sent the head of the thief Zhang Xu to the Nishikawa encampment, and the rest of the party was completely subdued.

古文：蠲襄、唐、均、汝、随、邓、归、峡等州去年逋租。
现代文：免除襄、唐、均、汝、随、邓、归、峡等州去年拖欠租税。
English: exempt Xiang, Tang, Jun, Ru, Su, Deng, Gui, Xia and other provinces from tax arrears last year.

古文：振亳州、房州、光化军饥，遣使贷之。
现代文：贩济毫州、房州、光化军饥民，派人贷粮给饥民。
English: He sold grain to the starving people in Mianzhou, Fangzhou, and Guanghua, and sent grain to the starving people on credit.

古文：三月庚申，诏求直言。
现代文：三月十四日，诏求直言。
English: On the 14th of March, the emperor asked for a direct speech.

古文：辛酉，以会州观察使、知清远军田绍斌为灵州兵马都部署。
现代文：十五日，任命会州观察使、知清远军田绍斌为灵州兵马都部署。
English: On the 15th, he appointed the observation envoy to Lingzhou, Zhiqing Yuanjun Tian Shaobin, to deploy the Lingzhou Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：己巳，废邵武军归化县金坑。
现代文：二十三日，废罢邵武军归化县金坑。
English: On the 23rd, the Shaowu Army abandoned Jinkeng, Nahua County.

古文：夏四月癸未，吏部尚书、平章事吕蒙正罢为右仆射，以参知政事吕端为户部侍郎、平章事。
现代文：夏四月初七，吏部尚书、平章事吕蒙正罢为右仆射，任命参知政事吕端为户部侍郎、平章事。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, the officials, Shangshu and Pingzhangji, Lv Mengzheng, were appointed as the right-hand servants, and the political advisor, Lv Duan, was appointed as the household attendant and Pingzhangji.

古文：宣徽北院使、知枢密院事柴禹锡罢为镇宁军节度使，参知政事苏易简为礼部侍郎，以翰林学士张洎为给事中、参知政事。
现代文：宣徽北院使、知枢密院事柴禹锡罢为镇宁军节度使，参知政事苏易简为礼部侍郎，任命翰林学士张泊为给事中、参知政事。
English: The envoy of the Northern Yuan of the State Council of Hubei Province and the secretary of the Privy Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, Chai Yuxi, was appointed as the envoy of the Zanning Military Festival, the political advisor of the State Council, Su Yijian, was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the scholar of Hanlin, Zhang Po, was appointed as the political advisor of the State Council.

古文：甲申，以宣徽北院使、同知枢密院事赵镕知枢密院事。
现代文：初八，任命宣徽北院使、同知枢密院事赵溶知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he appointed Tongzhi Privy Councillor Zhao Rongzhi Privy Councillor as the envoy of the Northern Yuan of Xuanhui.

古文：乙酉，契丹犯雄州，知州何承矩击败之，斩其铁林大将一人。
现代文：初九，契丹侵犯雄州，知州何承矩击败契丹，斩杀铁林大将一人。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Khitan invaded Xiongzhou, and Chizhou He Chengmong defeated Khitan and killed General Tie Lin.

古文：辛丑，遣使分决诸路刑狱，劫贼止诛首恶，降流罪以下一等。
现代文：二十五日，派人分赴各路处理狱案，劫盗只诛杀首恶，流罪以下减刑一等。
English: On the 25th, people were dispatched to deal with the prison case in various ways. The robbery was only the first evil to be killed, and the sentence was reduced to the first class below the banishment.

古文：壬寅，虑囚。
现代文：二十六日，讯察记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 17th, the investigation recorded the prisoner's charges.

古文：甲辰，大雨，雷电。
现代文：二十八日，降大雨，雷电交加。
English: On the 28th, there was heavy rain and lightning.

古文：开宝皇后宋氏崩。
现代文：开宝皇后宋氏逝世。
English: The Queen of Kepo, the Song Dynasty, has passed away.

古文：六月乙酉，购求图书。
现代文：六月初十，购求图书。
English: On the tenth day of the sixth month, the purchase of books began.

古文：丙戌，遣使谕李继迁，授以鄜州节度使，继迁不奉诏。
现代文：十一日，派人告谕李继迁，授他为州节度使，李继迁不奉诏命。
English: On the 11th day of the month, someone was sent to tell Li Jiquan that he was to be appointed as the state festival envoy, but Li Jiquan did not follow the imperial order.

古文：丁亥，以银州左都押衙张浦为银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书、郑州刺史兼御史大夫，充本州团练使。
现代文：十二日，任命银州左都押衙张浦为银青光禄大夫、检校工部尚书、郑州刺史、兼御史大夫，担任本州团练使。
English: On the 12th, Zhang Pu, the leader of the Left Capital of Yinzhou, was appointed as the doctor of Yinqing Guanglu, the inspector of the school inspection department, the historian of Zhengzhou, and the doctor of history, and served as the training envoy of the local group.

古文：己亥，许士庶工商服紫。
现代文：二十四日，允许士庶工商服紫。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, junior samurai were allowed to wear purple.

古文：是月，大热，民有暍死者。
现代文：这个月，酷热，百姓有中暑而死的。
English: This month, the heat was so intense that people died of heatstroke.

古文：秋七月丙寅，除陈、许等九州及光化军今年夏税。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，废除陈、许等九州和光化军今年夏税。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the summer tax of Chen, Xu and other Kyushu and Guanghua troops was abolished.

古文：八月壬辰，诏立寿王元侃为皇太子，改名恒，兼判开封府。
现代文：八月十八日，诏令立寿王赵元侃为皇太子，改名为恒，兼判开封府。
English: On August 18th, Zhao Yuan Kan, the ruler of Shou, was proclaimed crown prince, his name was changed to Heng, and he was also given the right to open a provincial capital.

古文：大赦，文武常参官子为父后见任官者，赐勋一转。
现代文：大赦，文武常参官子为父后，现任官者，赐勋转一官。
English: There will be an amnesty, and the son of a civil and military officer who is the father of a civil and military officer who is the current civil servant will be given an award and transferred to another civil servant.

古文：癸巳，以尚书左丞李至、礼部侍郎李沆并兼太子宾客。
现代文：十九日，任命尚书左承李至、礼部侍郎李杭都兼太子宾客。
English: On the 19th, Li Zhi, the heir of Shangshu Zuo, and Li Hangdu, the attendant of the ceremonial department, were appointed as the guests of the prince.

古文：癸卯，禁西北缘边诸州民与内属戎人昏娶。
现代文：二十九日，禁止西北沿边各州百姓与内属戎人婚娶。
English: On the 29th, the people of the states along the northwest border were prohibited from marrying their subordinate Edo people.

古文：九月丙午，西南蕃牂牁诸蛮来贡，诏封西南蕃主龙汉尧为归化王。
现代文：九月初三，西南蕃粳各蛮来进贡，诏令封西南蕃主龙汉尧为归化王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, the barbarians from the southwestern Yunnan Province came to pay tribute, and issued a decree to make the lord of the southwestern Yunnan Province, Long Han Yi, the naturalized king.

古文：丁卯，御朝元殿册皇太子。
现代文：二十四日，到朝元殿册封皇太子。
English: On the 24th, he went to the Asamoto Palace to be crowned crown prince.

古文：庚午，清远军言李继迁入寇，率兵击走之。
现代文：二十七日，清远军报告说，李继迁来犯，率兵击退了他们。
English: On the 27th, the Qingyuan Army reported that Li Jiji led his troops to repel the invaders.

古文：冬十月甲戌朔，皇太子让宫僚称臣，许之。
现代文：冬十月初一，皇太子让宫僚称臣，太宗答应了。
English: On the first day of October in the winter, the crown prince asked a courtier to be his vassal, and Taizong agreed.

古文：乙丑，陕西转运使郑文宝坐挠边，责授蓝田县令。
现代文：乙丑日，陕西转运使郑文宝因扰乱边界获罪，责降为蓝山县令。
English: On the second day of the second lunar month, Zheng Wenbao, a Shaanxi transshipment envoy, was found guilty of disturbing the border and was demoted to the Lanshan County.

古文：十一月己未，阅武使殿。
现代文：十一月十七日，阅武便殿。
English: On the 17th of November, the military parade came to an end.

古文：是月，以峰州团练使上官正、右谏议大夫雷有终并为西川招安使，召王继恩归阙。
现代文：这个月，任命峰州团练使上官正、右谏议大夫雷有终并为西川招安使，召王继恩回到朝廷。
English: This month, the appointment of Fengzhou Rehearsal Envoy, Shangguan Zhao, and the appointment of Right Speech and Debate Doctor, Lei, came to an end, and the Peace Envoy was recruited for Saikawa, and Wang Jiong was called back to the imperial court.

古文：十二月甲戌，群臣奉表加上尊号曰法天崇道上圣至仁皇帝，凡五上，不许。
现代文：十二月初二，大臣们奉表加上尊号为法天崇道上圣至仁皇帝，共五次奉上，太宗没应允。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the ministers were presented with a form with the honorific title of Emperor Faten Chongdo, the most holy and benevolent emperor, a total of five times. Emperor Taizong did not agree.

古文：契丹犯边，折御卿率兵御之，卒于师。
现代文：契丹侵犯边界，被折御卿击退，折御卿战死。
English: Khitan invaded the border, was repulsed by Orimikyo, and Orimikyo died in battle.

古文：斩马步军都军头孙赞于军中。
现代文：斩马步军都军头孙赞于军中。
English: The head of the army, Sun Zan, was in the middle of the army.

古文：庚辰，新浑仪成。
现代文：初八，新浑仪制成。
English: Hatsuhachi, made from shinhun ornaments.

古文：二年春正月辛亥，祀天地于圜丘，大赦，中外文武加恩。
现代文：至道二年春正月初十，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦，中外文武官员加恩晋爵。
English: By the tenth day of the first month of the second year of the spring of the Tao, in the round mound, the heavens and the earth were sacrificed, the amnesty was granted, and the Chinese and foreign civil and military officials, including Gaen Jinzhe, were promoted.

古文：丁卯，废诸州司理判官。
现代文：二十六日，废罢各州司理判官。
English: On the 26th, the judges of the states were abolished.

古文：二月壬申朔，司空致仕李昉薨。
现代文：二月初一，以司空退休的李意逝世。
English: On the first day of February, Li Yi, who retired as a flight attendant, passed away.

古文：戊寅，以越王元份为杭州大都督兼领越州，吴王元杰为扬州大都督兼领寿州。
现代文：初七，任命赵王赵元份为杭州大都督兼领越州，吴王赵元杰为扬州大都督兼领寿州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he appointed Zhao Wang Zhao Yuanfen as the governor of Hangzhou and leader of Yuezhou, and Wu Wang Zhao Yuanjie as the governor of Yangzhou and leader of Shoushou.

古文：己卯，以徐国公元偓为洪州都督、镇南军节度使，泾国公元偁为鄂州都督、武清军节度使。
现代文：初八，任命徐国公赵元侵为洪州都督、镇南军节度使，径国公赵元翱为鄂州都督、武清军节度使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Xu Guogong Zhao Yuanwu was appointed as the governor of Hongzhou and the commander of the Southern Zhenjun Army, and Qi Guogong Zhao Yuanwu was appointed as the governor of Ezhou and the commander of the Wuqing Army.

古文：庚辰，以御史中丞李昌龄为给事中、参知政事。
现代文：初九，任命御史中承李昌龄为给事中、参知政事。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, he appointed Li Changling, the heir to the throne in the history, to be a member of the government.

古文：辛巳，以吕蒙正为左仆射，宋琪为右仆射。
现代文：初十，任命吕蒙正为左仆射，宋琪为右仆射。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Lv Mengzheng was appointed as the left minion and Song Qi as the right minion.

古文：乙未，定任子官制。
现代文：二十四日，制定任子官制。
English: On the 24th, the appointment system was established.

古文：三月丙寅，以京师旱，遣中使祷雨。
现代文：三月二十六日，因京师早灾，派中使祈祷降雨。
English: On March 26th, due to the early disaster of the Beijing Division, the middle of the faction prayed for rain.

古文：戊辰，命宰臣祀郊庙、社稷祷雨。
现代文：二十八日，命宰臣祭祀郊庙、社翟，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 28th, he ordered his vassals to offer sacrifices at suburban temples and shrines, and to pray for rain.

古文：夏四月甲戌，命侍卫马军都指挥李继隆为环、庆等州都部署，殿前都虞候范廷召副之，讨李继迁。
现代文：夏四月初四，命令侍卫马军都指挥使李继隆为环、庆等州都部署，殿前都虞候范廷召为副手，讨伐李继迁。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：癸未，雨。
现代文：十三日，降雨。
English: In the afternoon, it rained.

古文：五月癸卯，李继迁寇灵州。
现代文：五月初四，李继迁攻打灵州。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Li Jiquan attacked Lingzhou.

古文：六月戊戌，黔州言蛮寇盐井，巡检使王惟节战死。
现代文：六月二十九日，黔州报告说蛮人攻打盐井，巡检使王惟节战死。
English: On June 29, Zhangzhou reported that the barbarians attacked the salt mine, and the patrol sent Wang Wei Jie to his death.

古文：是月，亳州蝗。
现代文：这个月，毫州蝗灾。
English: This month, the locust plague began in the city of Milli County.

古文：秋七月己亥朔，命殿前都指挥使王超为夏、绥、麟、府州都部署。
现代文：秋七月初一，命令殿前都指挥使王超为夏、绥、麟、府州都部署。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, he ordered the commander in front of the palace to deploy Wang Chao to Xia, Kunming, Lin and Fuzhou.

古文：庚子，诏作寿宁观成。
现代文：初二，诏令修造寿宁观成功。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, it was decreed to renovate the Shuning outlook, which was a success.

古文：丙寅，给事中、参知政事寇准罢守本官。
现代文：二十八日，给事中、参知政事寇准罢守本官。
English: On the 28th, in the middle of the case, the co-chairs of the political affairs committee agreed to stay away from the official.

古文：戊辰，蠲峡路诸州民去年逋租。
现代文：三十日，免除峡路各州百姓去年拖欠租税。
English: On the 30th, the people of all provinces in the Gorges were exempted from tax arrears last year.

古文：是月，汴水决谷熟县，许、宿、齐三州蝗抱草死。
现代文：这个月，汁水在熟县决口，许、宿、齐三州蝗虫抱草而死。
English: This month, in Ju County, Hsu, Shukou and Qi three prefectures, the locusts clung to the grass and died.

古文：闰月庚寅，诏江、浙、福建民负人钱没入男女者还其家，敢匿者有罪。
现代文：闰七月二十二日，诏令江、浙、福建百姓欠人钱以男女为人质者归还本家，敢藏匿者以罪论处。
English: On July 22nd, the emperor ordered the people of Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Fujian to return to their homes if they owed money to anyone and take men and women as hostages. Those who dared to hide would be punished.

古文：八月辛丑，密州言蝗不为灾。
现代文：八月初三，密州报告说蝗虫没有形成灾害。
English: At the beginning of August 3rd, Mizhou reported that the locusts did not cause any disasters.

古文：九月戊寅，右仆射宋琪薨。
现代文：九月十一日，右仆射宋琪逝世。
English: On September 11, his right-hand man Song Qi passed away.

古文：诏川峡诸州民家先藏兵器者，限百日悉送官，匿不以闻者斩。
现代文：诏令川峡各州百姓家里先前藏有兵器者，限定百日之内全部送交官府，藏匿不交者斩首。
English: The edict ordered the people of all the states in the Sichuan Gorge who had previously hidden weapons in their homes to hand them over to the government within 100 days, and those who did not hand them over would be beheaded.

古文：己卯，夏州、延州行营言破李继迁于乌白池，获未幕军主、吃啰指挥使等二十七人，继迁遁。
现代文：十二日，夏州、延州行营报告说在乌白池打败李继迁，俘获未幕军主、吃罗指挥使等二十七人，李继迁逃跑。
English: On the 12th, the report of the campaign in Xiazhou and Yanzhou said that Li Jiquan was defeated in Wubai Pond, and 27 people, including the commander of the army and the commander of Zhao Luo, were captured. Li Jiquan fled.

古文：甲申，会州观察使、环庆副都部署田绍斌贬右监门卫率府副率、虢州安置。
现代文：十七日，会州观察使、环庆副都部署田绍斌贬为右监门卫率府副率，安置貌州。
English: On the 17th, Tian Shaobin, the observation envoy of Huizhou and the deputy of Huanqing, was demoted to the vice-head of the Right Supervisor and the deputy head of the Gate Guard, and was placed in Ganzhou.

古文：丙戌，秦、晋诸州地昼夜十二震。
现代文：十九日，秦、晋各州地昼夜十二震。
English: On the 19th, there were 12 earthquakes in Qin and Jin provinces, day and night.

古文：丙申，诏废衢州冶。
现代文：二十九日，下诏废除设在瞥州的冶炼机构。
English: On the 29th, the next edict abolished the smelting institution in Biaozhou.

古文：冬十月己未，诏以池州新铸钱监为永丰监。
现代文：冬十月二十二日，诏令以池州新铸钱监为永丰监。
English: On the 22nd day of winter in October, a decree was issued appointing Chizhou's newly minted money supervisor as Yongfeng supervisor.

古文：十一月丁卯朔，增司天新历为一百二十甲子。
现代文：十一月初一，增司天新历为一百二十甲子。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Zengshi Tian new calendar was one hundred and twenty kanzi.

古文：戊寅，置签署提点枢密、宣徽院诸房公事。
现代文：十二日，设置签署提点枢密、宣徽院诸房公事。
English: On the 12th, it was set up and signed by the Privy Council and the various chambers of the Xuanhui Academy.

古文：辛卯，许州群盗劫郾城县居民，巡检李昌习斗死，都巡检使王正袭击之，获贼首宋斌及余党，皆斩于市。
现代文：二十五日，许州群盗劫哪城县居民，巡检李昌习斗死，都巡检使王正袭击打退盗贼，俘获贼首宋斌及其余党，都在闹市斩杀。
English: On the 25th, the residents of Decheng County were robbed by a group of bandits from Huzhou. The patrol leader Li Changxi was killed in the fighting. The patrol leader Wang Zheng attacked and drove back the bandits, captured the bandit leader Song Bin and the rest of the gang, and they were all beheaded in the bustling city.

古文：甲午，禁淮南通行盐税。
现代文：二十八日，禁止淮南通行盐税。
English: On the 28th, Huainan's salt tax was banned.

古文：十二月，命宰相以下百官诣诸寺观祷雪。
现代文：十二月，命令宰相以下文武百官到寺观祈祷降雪。
English: In December, he ordered the prime minister and hundreds of civil and military officials to go to the temple to pray for snow.

古文：甲寅，雨雪。
现代文：十八月，降雪。
English: Snowfall in August.

古文：大有年。是岁，处州稻再熟。
现代文：这一年大丰收，处州稻再熟。
English: This year, there was a bumper harvest, and the Guanzhou rice ripened again.

古文：三年春正月丙子，以户部侍郎温仲舒、礼部侍郎王化基并参知政事，给事中李惟清同知枢密院事，参知政事张洎罢为刑部侍郎。
现代文：至道三年春正月十一日，任命户部侍郎温仲舒、礼部侍郎王化基并为参知政事，给事中李惟清同知枢密院事，参知政事张泊罢为刑部侍郎。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the third year of the lunar calendar, Wen Zhongshu, the Household Attendant, and Wang Huaji, the Ceremonial Attendant, were appointed as the councillors of state, and Li Weiqing, the councillor of the Privy Council, and Zhang Po, the councillor of state, were appointed as the councillors of justice.

古文：乙酉，孝章皇后陪葬永昌陵。
现代文：二十日，孝章皇后陪葬永昌陵。
English: On the 20th, Empress Xiaozhang accompanied Yongchang Mausoleum.

古文：辛卯，以侍卫马步军都虞候傅潜为延州路都部署，殿前都虞候王昭远为灵州路都部署。
现代文：二十六日，任命侍卫马步军都虞候傅潜为延州路都部署，殿前都虞候王昭远为灵州路都部署。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Zhu Yuhuo Fu Qian was appointed as the commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards for the deployment of the capital of Yanzhou Road, and Wang Zhaoyuan, the commander of the palace front, was deployed for the deployment of the capital of Lingzhou Road.

古文：二月丙申朔，灵州行营破李继迁。
现代文：二月初一，灵州行营攻破李继迁。
English: On the first day of February, the Lingshou encampment defeated Li Jiqian.

古文：辛丑，帝不豫。
现代文：初六，太宗不适。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, Taizong felt unwell.

古文：甲辰，降京畿死罪囚，流以下释之。
现代文：初九，京瓷死罪囚犯减刑，流放之刑以下释放。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the death sentence of a Kyocera prisoner was commuted, and he was released after serving his sentence of banishment.

古文：壬戌，大食、宾同陇国并来贡。
现代文：二十七日，大食、宾同陇国都来进贡。
English: On the 27th, the king and his guests and the whole country came to pay tribute.

古文：三月丁卯，占城国来贡。
现代文：三月初三，占城国来进贡。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Zhancheng Province came to pay tribute.

古文：壬辰，不视朝。
现代文：二十八日，太宗不上朝处理政事。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Taizong did not go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：癸巳，追班于万岁殿，宣诏令皇太子柩前即位。
现代文：二十九日，在万岁殿，颁布太宗遗诏，令皇太子灵前即位。
English: On the 29th, in Wanzai-den, Emperor Taizong's last will and testament was promulgated, and the crown prince was enthroned before his death.

古文：是日崩，年五十九。在位二十二年，殡于殿之西阶。
现代文：这天，太宗逝世，终年五十九岁，在位二十二年，殡于殿之西阶。
English: On this day, Emperor Taizong died at the age of fifty-nine, after twenty-two years on the throne, and was buried on the west steps of the palace.

古文：群臣上尊谥曰神功圣德文武皇帝，庙号太宗。
现代文：大臣们上尊溢为神功圣德文武皇帝，庙号太宗。
English: The ministers were filled with reverence for the divine power of the Holy German Emperor, the Emperor Taizong.

古文：十月己酉，葬永熙陵。
现代文：十月十八日，葬于永熙陵。
English: He was buried in Yongxi Mausoleum on October 18.

古文：赞曰：帝沈谋英断，慨然有削平天下之志。
现代文：评论说：太宗深沉多谋，英明果断，慷慨有平定统一天下的远大志向。
English: Comment: Taizong is profound and resourceful, wise and decisive, generous and has the lofty ambition of pacifying and unifying the world.

古文：既即大位，陈洪进、钱俶相继纳土。
现代文：即帝位以来，陈洪进、钱相继献纳土地。
English: Namely, since the imperial throne, Chen Hongjin and Qian have successively donated land.

古文：未几，取太原，伐契丹，继有交州、西夏之役。
现代文：时间不长，攻取太原，讨伐契丹，接着又有攻击交州和西夏之役。
English: The time was not long, the capture of Taiyuan, the crusade against the Khitan, followed by attacks on Jiaozhou and the Western Xia.

古文：干戈不息，天灾方行，俘馘日至，而民不知兵；水旱螟蝗，殆遍天下，而民不思乱。
现代文：战争不断，天灾正盛行，每天都有俘虏送来，而百姓不知道有战争；水灾、早灾、螟灾、蝗灾几乎遍及天下，而百姓不想造反。
English: Wars are incessant, natural disasters are rampant, captives are brought in every day, but the people do not know there is a war; floods, blizzards, locust plagues, and locust plagues are almost all over the world, but the people do not want to rebel.

古文：其故何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：帝以慈俭为宝，服浣濯之衣，毁奇巧之器，却女乐之献，悟畋游之非。
现代文：太宗以慈悲节俭为法宝，穿一再洗过的衣服，捣毁珍奇巧妙的玩物，拒绝进献的美女音乐，认识到出猎游玩的坏处。
English: Taizong used compassion and frugality as his magic weapon, wearing clothes that had been washed over and over again, destroying rare and ingenious toys, refusing to listen to beautiful music, and recognizing the drawbacks of hunting.

古文：绝远物，抑符瑞，闵农事，考治功。
现代文：杜绝物欲，抑制符瑞，关心农业，考核政绩。
English: Eliminate materialism, restrain fructification, care about agriculture, and evaluate government performance.

古文：讲学以求多闻，不罪狂悖以劝谏士，哀矜恻怛，勤以自励，日晏忘食。至于欲自焚以答天谴，欲尽除天下之赋以纾民力，卒有五兵不试、禾稼荐登之效。
现代文：讲究学问以求博学多闻，不惩罚悖逆言行来鼓励劝谏之言，哀怜体恤百姓的疾苦，勤勉自励，往往为处理政事而忙到天晚忘了吃饭，以至要自焚来抵销上天的惩罚，要除去全国所有的赋役来使民力得到宽缓，最终获得不动刀兵、庄稼连续丰收的功效。
English: He paid attention to learning in order to be learned and knowledgeable, encouraged the words of exhortation without punishing the words and deeds of disobedience, pitied and sympathized with the sufferings of the people, and diligently encouraged himself. He was often so busy with dealing with political affairs that he forgot to eat at night, so that he had to burn himself to offset the punishment of heaven. He had to remove all the forced labor throughout the country to ease the people's power, and finally obtained the effect of immobilizing the sword soldiers and the continuous harvest of crops.

古文：是以青、齐耆耋之叟，愿率子弟治道请登禅者，接踵而至。
现代文：因此，青州、齐州的年长者，愿意率领子弟平整道路请太宗登泰山封禅的情况接踵而至。
English: As a result, more and more elderly people from Qingzhou and Qizhou were willing to lead their children to pave the way and invite Taizong to ascend Mount Tai for meditation.

古文：君子曰： 得乎丘民而为天子 ，帝之谓乎？
现代文：君子说： 获得百姓的拥护方能当好天子。 
English: The gentleman said: The one who gains the support of the people can be a good son of heaven.

古文：故帝之功德，炳焕史牒，号称贤君。
现代文：大概说的就是太宗皇帝吧！所以太宗的功德，彪炳史册，号称贤君。
English: It is probably the Emperor Taizong! Therefore, the merits of Taizong are recorded in the history books, and he is known as a wise man.

古文：若夫太祖之崩不逾年而改元，涪陵县公之贬死，武功王之自杀，宋后之不成丧，则后世不能无议焉。
现代文：要不是那太祖逝世不过一年而改元，涪陵县公之贬死，武功王之自杀，宋后之不成丧，那么后世对太宗就没有可讥议的了。
English: If it were not for the fact that Emperor Taizong died only a year after the change of the Yuan Dynasty, the death of the Prince of Fuling County, the suicide of the King of Wu Gong, and the death of the Queen of Song, then later generations would have nothing to ridicule Emperor Taizong.

