古文：恩幸夫君子小人，类物之称。
现代文：君子和小人是分别人们品行的常用名称。
English: Nobleman and villain are common names for people's character respectively.

古文：蹈道则为君子，违之则为小人。
现代文：遵循道的就是君子，违反道的就是小人。
English: He who follows the Tao is a gentleman, but he who goes against the Tao is a villain.

古文：屠钓，卑事也；版筑，贱役也，太公起为周师，傅说去为殷相。
现代文：杀猪钓鱼是卑下的职业，夹板筑墙是低贱的事情，但是姜太公在渭水垂钓，被周文王起用为国师，傅说离开夹板筑墙，而成为殷相。
English: Pig-killing fishing is a lowly occupation, and splint wall-building is a lowly thing, but Jiang Taigong was fishing in Surabaya and was appointed by King Zhou Wen as a national teacher. Fu said that he would leave the splint wall-building and become a Yin Xiang.

古文：非论公侯之世，鼎食之资，明扬幽仄，唯才是与。
现代文：殷周时代并不讲究有没有公侯的家世，是不是豪贵的出身，发现了人才，即使他们沉埋在草泽，也要起用。
English: Yin Zhou's era did not pay attention to whether there was a duke's family history, whether it was a noble birth, discovered talents, even if they were buried in the grass, they should be used.

古文：逮于二汉，兹道未革，胡广累世农夫，伯始致位公相；黄宪牛医之子，叔度名重京师。
现代文：到了两汉，这种惟才是举的传统没有改变，胡广世代农夫，凭能力位到公相。黄宪是牛医的儿子，因才气名重京城。
English: In the Han Dynasty, this tradition remained unchanged. Hu Guang, a farmer for generations, rose to the position of minister of public affairs by virtue of his ability. Huang Xian, the son of a cow doctor, was famous for his talent.

古文：且任子居朝，咸有职业，虽七叶珥貂，见崇西汉，而侍中身奉奏事，又分掌御服。东方朔为黄门侍郎，执戟殿下。
现代文：况且那些因袭父辈的职位而高居朝廷，都是有职司的人，即使七世冠插貂尾，在西汉名位显贵，然而像侍中这种官职既要向皇帝奏请大事，又兼管理皇帝的车马和服饰，像东方朔就仅做了个黄门侍郎，手执长戟，站在殿下。
English: Moreover, those who ascended to the imperial court by inheriting the positions of their fathers were all people with official positions. Even if the seventh generation was crowned with an appendix and held a prominent position in the Western Han Dynasty, an official position such as an attendant not only had to report to the emperor on major events, but also manage the emperor's chariots and horses and clothing. Like Dongfang Shuo, he only became a Yellow Gate attendant, holding a long scepter and standing in the royal court.

古文：郡县掾史，并出豪家，负戈宿卫，皆由势族，非若晚代，分为二途者也。
现代文：郡县的掾史，都出自豪门大家，扛着戈负守卫之责的，都由有权势的家族充当，不像后来世族寒门所处地位贵贱有别。
English: In the history of counties and counties, everyone was proud, and those who shouldered the responsibility of guarding the gate were all powerful families. Unlike later, the status of the cold gate of the world was different.

古文：汉末丧乱，魏武始基，军中仓卒，权立九品。盖以论人才优劣，非为世族高卑。
现代文：汉末天下大乱，魏武帝初创基业时，军中事务急促，权且设立九品，用来品评人才的优劣，而不是确定世族地位的高低。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, when the world was in turmoil and Emperor Weiwu was at the beginning of the foundation, the military affairs were urgent, and the nine grades were set up to evaluate the talents, rather than to determine the status of the clan.

古文：因此相沿，遂为成法。
现代文：由此相沿，就成为定形的法则。
English: From this, contiguity becomes the law of shaping.

古文：自魏至晋，莫之能改，州都郡正，以才品人，而举世人才，升降盖寡。
现代文：从魏到晋，没有人能改变，州都的郡正，以才能来品评人，因而全社会的人才，升降的情况就很少。
English: From Wei to Jin, no one can change. The county magistrate of the state capital uses talent to evaluate people, so the talent of the whole society is rarely promoted and demoted.

古文：徒以冯藉世资，用相陵驾，都正俗士，斟酌时宜，品目少多，随事俯仰，刘毅所云 下品无高门，上品无贱族 者也。
现代文：如果仅仅因为凭借世族资望，而高出居上，那么都镇中的庸俗之士，就会斟酌当时的需要，随时确定品目的多少，这正如刘毅所说： 下品无高门，上品无贱族。 
English: If people rise to the top merely by virtue of their family's prestige, then the vulgar people in the capital will determine the number of items at any time according to the needs of the time. As Liu Yi said: There is no high gate for inferior products, and there is no low class for superior products.

古文：岁月迁讹，斯风渐笃，凡厥衣冠，莫非二品，自此以还，遂成卑庶。
现代文：岁月流逝，这种风气渐渐严重，凡是士大夫，没有不是二品的，从此以后，于是就成为卑庶之族。
English: As the years went by, this custom gradually became more and more serious. From then on, there were no second-class magistrates who were not second-class, and they became a low-class family.

古文：周、汉之道，以智役愚，台隶参差，用成等级；魏晋以来，以贵役贱，士庶之科，较然有辨。
现代文：周汉的用人制度是用智慧奴役愚昧，奴仆成群，而分成等级；魏晋以来，以富贵统治贫贱，士庶的品级，明显有别。
English: The employment system of the Zhou and Han dynasties used wisdom to enslave ignorance, and divided slaves into groups according to rank. Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, the rich ruled the poor, and there was a clear difference in the rank of commoners.

古文：夫人君南面，九重奥绝，陪奉朝夕，义隔卿士，阶闼之任，宜有司存。
现代文：人主向南面而坐，宫殿幽深难通，如果早晚奉陪人主，难免与卿士之义不合，所以在宫中陪奉人君的责任，应由主管部门承担。
English: The lord sits to the south, the palace is deep and difficult to get through. If you accompany the lord in the morning and evening, it will inevitably be inconsistent with the noblemen's righteousness. Therefore, the responsibility of accompanying the lord in the palace should be borne by the competent department.

古文：既而恩以幸生，信由恩固，无可惮之姿，有易亲之色。
现代文：这样，人君的恩泽因为有了宠幸者而产生，人君对被宠幸者的信任也由人君的恩泽而牢固，人君对被宠者没有令人可怕的态度，而有容易亲近的颜色。
English: In this way, people's favor arises from having a favored one, and people's trust in the favored one is also solidified by people's favor. People do not have a terrible attitude towards the favored one, but have a color that is easy to approach.

古文：孝建、泰始，主威独运，官置百司，权不外假，而刑政纠杂，理难遍通，耳目所寄，事归近习。
现代文：孝建、泰始开始，人主独自运用权威，设置各种官僚机构，权柄牢牢握在手里，但是刑罚政令错综复杂，人主很难全面通晓，所依托的对象，就是那些亲近之臣。
English: At the beginning of the Xiao Jian and Tai Shi, the ruler independently exercised authority, set up various bureaucratic agencies, and firmly held power in his hands. However, the penal decrees were intricate and complicated, and it was difficult for the ruler to fully understand them. The objects he relied on were those close subjects.

古文：赏罚之要，是谓国权，出内王命，由其掌握，于是方途结轨，辐凑同奔。
现代文：奖赏和惩罚，是国家的权威。出自宫中的王命，一旦由亲近之臣掌握，于是那些趋炎附势之徒就都会车水马龙成群结队地去巴结。
English: Reward and punishment are the authority of the state. Once the king's order from the palace is in the hands of a close vassal, those with influence will flock in droves to curry favor.

古文：人主谓其身卑位薄，以为权不得重。
现代文：人主以为他们的身份卑贱，职权低下，权力不会很重。
English: People think that their status is lowly, their authority is low, and their power is not very heavy.

古文：曾不知鼠凭社贵，狐藉虎威，外无逼主之嫌，内有专用之功，势倾天下，未之或悟。
现代文：竟然不知道鼠凭社贵，狐假虎威，在外没有逼迫人主的嫌疑，对内却有独断专行的功效，权势使天下人倾倒，却没有人明白这个道理。
English: They don't even know that the rat relies on social nobility, the fox on the power of the tiger, there is no suspicion of persecuting the master outside, but it has the effect of arbitrariness inside, and the power makes the world fall, but no one understands this truth.

古文：挟朋树党，政以贿成，鈇钺创磐，构于筵笫之曲，服冕乘轩，出乎言笑之下。南金北毳，来悉方艚，素缣丹魄，至皆兼两，西京许、史，盖不足云，晋朝王、庾，未或能比。
现代文：他们仗恃朋党的势力培植党羽，政绩因贿赂而成，各种大小刑戮，在筵第的隐曲之所构成，穿戴贵族衣帽，乘坐贵族车马，也都出在言笑之中，南方的黄金北方的兽毛，送来时都是两船并行，精制的白绢贵重的丹魄，收到的都是两者得兼，西京的许、史两家，自不必说，就是晋朝王导、庾亮，也没有人能比得上。
English: They relied on the influence of their friends to cultivate the party's feathers. Their political achievements were made through bribery. Various large and small tortures took place in the hidden corners of Xindi. They wore aristocratic clothes and hats, and rode in aristocratic cars and horses. They also appeared in jokes. The gold from the south and the animal hair from the north were sent by two ships in parallel. The refined egrets and the precious tempranillo were received by both. The Xu and Shi families in Xijing, needless to say, are the kings and queens of the Jin Dynasty. No one can match them.

古文：及太宗晚运，虑经盛衰，权幸之徒，慑惮宗戚，欲使幼主孤立，永窃国权，构造同异，兴树祸隙，帝弟宗王，相继屠劋。
现代文：到了太宗晚年，他们的计划实施已屡经成功和失败，终于认识到：受人主宠幸的人害怕宗戚。他们想使年幼的人主孤立，长久地掌握国家大权，于是就构陷异己，挑拨离间，因此御弟宗王，相继被杀。
English: In Taizong's later years, after many successes and failures in the implementation of their plan, they finally realized that those who were favored by the lord were afraid of the relatives. They wanted to isolate the young lord and hold the power of the country for a long time, so they set up dissidents and sowed discord, so the younger brother, King Zong, was killed one after another.

古文：民忘宋德，虽非一途，宝祚夙倾，实由于此。
现代文：百姓忘记刘宋王朝的恩德，虽然不是一种原因，但是国家很快地灭亡，的确是由于这个原因。唉！
English: Although it is not a reason for the people to forget the benevolence of the Liu Song Dynasty, the country's rapid demise is indeed due to this reason. Alas!

古文：呜呼！《汉书》有《恩泽侯表》，又有《佞幸传》。今采其名，列以为《恩幸篇》云。
现代文：《汉书》有《恩泽侯表》，又有《佞幸传》，现采摘它们的书名，以《恩幸篇》来列入本书。
English: In the "Hanshu," there is the "Enze Hou Watch" and the "Heng Xing Biography." Now, their titles are selected and included in this book as the "Enze Hou Chapter."

古文：戴法兴，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：戴法兴，会稽山阴人，小时候家庭贫困。
English: Dai Faxing is a member of the Shanshin Association.

古文：家贫，父硕子，贩珝为业。法兴二兄延寿、延兴并修立，延寿善书，法兴好学。山阴有陈载者，家富，有钱三千万，乡人咸云： 戴硕子三兒，敌陈载三千万钱。 
现代文：他的父亲戴硕子，以贩卖布匹为业，法兴的两个哥哥延寿、延兴都学有所成，延寿会写字，法兴好学，山阴县有个叫陈载的人，家中富有，有钱三千万，乡民们都说： 戴硕子三个儿子，抵得上陈载三千万钱。 
English: His father, Dai Shuo Zi, was in the business of selling cloth. His two older brothers, Yan Shou and Yan Xing, both achieved academic success. Yan Shou could write, while Fa Xing was good at studying. In Shanyin County, there was a man named Chen Zai. His family was rich and had 30 million yuan in wealth. The villagers all said, "Dai Shuo Zi's three sons are worth 30 million yuan of Chen Zai's money."

古文：法兴少卖葛于山阴市，后为吏传署，入为尚书仓部令史。大将军彭城王义康于尚书中觅了了令史，得法兴等五人，以法兴为记室令史。义康败，仍为世祖征虏、抚军记室掾。
现代文：法兴少年时代在山阴集市上卖葛布，以后当传送署签的小官，再进而做尚书仓部令史，大将军彭城王刘义康想找一个非常精明能干的令史，得到法兴等五个人，用法兴当记室令史，刘义康被废除爵位后，还是当世祖征虏、抚军记室掾。
English: When he was a boy, Fa Xing sold georgette cloth at the Shanyin Bazaar. Later, he worked as a minor official of the Telecommunication Bureau, and then became the chief historian of the Book Depository Department. General Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, wanted to find a very astute and capable chief historian, and obtained five people such as Fa Xing. He used Fa Xing as the chief historian of the office. After Liu Yikang's title was abolished, he was still the ancestor of conscription and the chief historian of the army.

古文：上为江州，仍补南中郎典签。
现代文：世祖当江州刺史，法兴补任南中郎典签。
English: The founder of Jiangzhou, Fa Xing, was appointed as the vice-regent of the Southern Middle Kingdom.

古文：上于巴口建义，法兴与典签戴明宝、蔡闲俱转参军督护。
现代文：世祖在巴口起义，法兴和典签、戴明室、蔡闲等人转任参军督护。
English: The founder of the world revolted in Bakou, and Fa Xing and Dian Xing, Deming Muro, Cai Xian and others were transferred to join the army to supervise the uprising.

古文：上即位，并为南台侍御史，同兼中书通事舍人。法兴等专管内务，权重当时。孝建元年，加建武将军、南鲁郡太守，解舍人，侍太子于东宫。
现代文：世祖称帝，他们都当南台侍御史，同时兼任中书通事舍人，法兴等人专管宫内事务，在当时权力非常大，孝建元年法兴加号建武将军、南鲁郡太守，解除舍人的职务，在东宫侍候太子。
English: When the founder of the dynasty was crowned emperor, they both served as the imperial historian of Nantai and concurrently served as the secretary of the Central Government, while Fa Xing and others were in charge of the affairs of the imperial court. At that time, their power was very great. In the first year of Xiao Jian Yuan, Fa Xing, together with General Jianwu and the governor of Nanlu County, relieved the secretary of his duties and waited for the prince in the East Palace.

古文：大明二年，三典签并以南下预密谋，封法兴吴昌县男，明宝湘乡县男，闲高昌县男，食邑各三百户。闲时已卒，追加爵封。
现代文：大明二年三个典签都因为曾参与起义，封法兴吴昌县男，明宝湘乡县男，闲高昌县男，各食邑三百户，蔡闲当时已死去，追加封爵。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, all three were knighted because they had participated in the uprising, including Fa Xing Wuchang County Man, Ming Bao Xiangxiang County Man, Li Gaochang County Man, and 300 households in each food village. Cai Li had died at that time, and was additionally knighted.

古文：法兴转员外散骑侍郎，给事中，太子旅贲中郎将，太守如故。
现代文：法兴接着转任员外散骑侍郎，给事中，太子旅贲中郎将，太守还照旧。
English: Hoxing was then transferred to the position of Zanki Jiro (chamberlain), and in the middle of the matter, the crown prince became the chancellor, while the daimyō remained the same.

古文：世祖亲览朝政，不任大臣，而腹心耳目，不得无所委寄。法兴颇知古今，素见亲待，虽出侍东宫，而意任隆密。
现代文：世祖总揽朝政，不信任大臣，自然，心腹耳目的人士不得不有所委托，法兴知道一些古今历史，一向被当成亲信，虽然出外侍候太子，但是受到的信用反而特别充分。
English: The founder of the world always took care of the politics of the dynasty, and did not trust the ministers. Naturally, the confidants had to be entrusted. Fa Xing knew some ancient and modern history, and had always been regarded as a close confidant. Although he went abroad to wait for the prince, he received a lot of credit.

古文：鲁郡巢尚之，人士之末，元嘉中，侍始兴王浚读书，亦涉猎文史，为上所知。孝建初，补东海国侍郎，仍兼中书通事舍人。凡选授迁转诛赏大处分，上皆与法兴、尚之参怀，内外诸杂事，多委明宝。
现代文：鲁郡巢尚之是个末流人物，元嘉年中，和始兴王刘浚做伴读，也了解一些文史知识，被世祖欣赏，在孝建初年，补任东海国的侍郎。同时兼任中书通事舍人，凡是选择任命转官升迁，屠杀赏赐这些大事，世祖都让戴法兴、巢尚之参考。
English: Lu County's Nest Shangzhi was a low-class person. In the middle of the Yuan Jiayuan, he read with Liu Jun, the King of Shixing, and also understood some literary and historical knowledge, which was appreciated by the ancestors. In the first year of Xiao Jian, he served as a waiter in the East China Sea country. At the same time, he also served as a book expert. Whenever he chose to appoint, transfer, and promote, and the massacre rewarded these events, the ancestors let Dai Faxing and Nest Shangzhi be a reference.

古文：上性严暴，睚眦之间，动至罪戮，尚之每临事解释，多得全免，殿省甚赖之。
现代文：宫内外的其他杂事都委托给戴明宝，世祖为人严厉而暴躁，别人一点小怨恨往往遭到杀身之祸。巢尚之遇到这种情况时总是尽量地开脱别人，保全了一些人。宫殿省相当依靠他。
English: Daimingbao was entrusted with all the other miscellaneous matters both inside and outside the palace. The founder of the dynasty was a stern and hot-tempered man, and he often killed people for the slightest grudge. When confronted with such a situation, he always tried his best to free others and save some people. The palace government relied heavily on him.

古文：而法兴、明宝大通人事，多纳货贿，凡所荐达，言无不行，天下辐凑，门外成市，家产并累千金。
现代文：但是法兴、明宝和外界交往很多，收受很多贿赂，凡是他推荐而显达的无不言听计从，天下人士都到他的门庭，门口几乎成了集市，家产都积到一千多斤黄金，戴明宝尤其骄傲放纵。
English: However, Faxing and Mingbao were deeply involved in personnel relations and widely accepted bribes. No one who was recommended by them was not appointed, so people from all over the world gathered. Outside their doors, it was as lively as a market, and their family assets accumulated huge amounts of money.

古文：明宝骄纵尤甚，长子敬为扬州从事，与上争买御物。
现代文：他长子戴敬当扬州从事。
English: His eldest son, Dai Jing, is engaged in mining in Yangzhou.

古文：六宫尝出行，敬盛服骑马于车左右，驰骤去来。上大怒，赐敬死，系明宝尚方，寻被原释，委任如初。
现代文：敢和皇上抢着买东西。世祖六宫里面的人有次外游，戴敬穿着华丽的衣服，骑着高头大马，在宫车两边招摇过市，驰来驰去，世祖看见非常愤怒，赏赐戴敬自杀，把明宝关到尚方监，不久又被原释放还，还是和当初一样受信任。
English: Dare to compete with the emperor to buy things. The people in the Sixth Palace of the Ancestors had a second outing. Dai Jing wore gorgeous clothes, rode a tall horse, swaggered through the city on both sides of the palace car, and ran around. The Ancestors saw that he was very angry, rewarded Dai Jing with suicide, locked up the treasure to Shang Fang, and was soon released again. He was still as trusted as he was at the beginning.

古文：世祖崩，前废帝即位，法兴迁越骑校尉。
现代文：世祖去世，前废帝即位。法兴升官越骑校尉。
English: The founder died and the former emperor ascended to the throne. Fa Xing was promoted to the rank of yueji captain.

古文：时太宰江夏王义恭录尚书事，任同总己，而法兴、尚之执权日久，威行内外，义恭积相畏服，至是慑惮尤甚。
现代文：当时太宰江夏王义恭录尚书事，几乎权力等于皇帝，但法兴、尚之一直执掌大权，权威震撼宫庭内外，义恭一向害怕他们，到这时尤其害怕。
English: At that time, Liu Yigong, the Dazaifu of Jiangxia, was in charge of the affairs of Shangshu Province and held the position of regent. However, Fa Xing and Shang had been in power for a long time, and their power was popular both inside and outside the court. Yigong had always been afraid of them, and he was even more afraid now.

古文：废帝未亲万机，凡诏敕施为，悉决法兴之手；尚书中事无大小，专断之。
现代文：废帝还未亲掌朝廷权力，凡是诏出敕令施行的政策，都由法兴决定，尚书省中事无大小，法兴一人专管。
English: The dethroned emperor had not yet personally assumed the power of the imperial court. All the policies to be implemented by imperial edict were decided by Fa Xing. In Shangshu Province, no matter how big or small, Fa Xing was in sole charge.

古文：颜师伯、义恭守空名而已。
现代文：颜师伯、刘义恭只是填填名字而已，废帝年龄大了起来，凶恶的形象逐渐养成，想有所作为。
English: Yan Shibiao and Liu Yigong are just filling in their names. The old emperor is getting older, and his evil image is gradually developing. They want to make a difference.

古文：废帝年已渐长，凶志转成，欲有所为，法兴每相禁制，每谓帝曰： 官所为如此，欲作营阳耶？ 
现代文：戴法兴每次都加以约束。
English: Dai Faxing restrained him every time.

古文：帝意稍不能平。
现代文：总是对废帝说： 皇帝这样作，难道是想作营阳王吗？ 
English: The deposed emperor became more and more dissatisfied.

古文：所爱幸阉人华愿儿有盛宠，赐与金帛无算，法兴常加裁减，愿兒甚恨之。帝常使愿兒出入市里，察听风谣，而道路之言，谓法兴为真天子，帝为赝天子。愿儿因此告帝曰： 外间云宫中有两天子，官是一人，戴法兴是一人。官在深宫中，人物不相接；法兴与太宰、颜、柳一体，吸习往来，门客恆有数百，内外士庶，莫不畏服之。法兴是孝武左右，复久在宫闱，今将他人作一家，深恐此坐席非复官许。 
现代文：废帝稍稍有些恼火，他喜爱的阉人华愿儿，极受废帝宠爱，赐给他的金银布帛数不清，法兴常常扣除一些，华愿儿非常恨法兴，废帝有次叫华愿儿出入市集中察听谣言风语，而市人说法兴是真正的天子，废帝是假天子，华愿儿因此告诉废帝说： 外面说宫中有两个天子。皇上是一个，戴法兴也是一个，皇帝在深宫之内，不与外界相接，戴法兴和太宰刘义恭，颜师伯，柳元景是一条裤子，往来密切。门客常有几百内外人士，无不害怕他，法兴是孝武帝心腹，又一直在宫中，如今他也是一个皇帝，我非常害怕这个宝座不是皇帝的。 
English: Emperor Gaozong was slightly annoyed. His favorite, the eunuch Hua Jian'er, was extremely favored by Emperor Gaozong. There were countless gold and silver cloths given to him. Fa Xing often deducted some. Emperor Gaozong hated Fa Xing very much. Emperor Gaozong once asked Hua Jian'er to go out to the market to listen to rumors and gossip. The people of the city said that Xing was the true son of heaven, and Emperor Gaozong was the false son of heaven. Therefore, Emperor Gaozong told Emperor Gaozong: It is said that there are two sons of heaven in the palace. The emperor is one, and Dai

古文：帝遂发怒，免法兴官，遣还田里，仍复徙付远郡，寻又于家赐死，时年五十二。
现代文：废帝于是勃然大怒，免除法兴的官职，叫他回到故乡，又再把他迁到远方的郡里，不久又赏赐他自杀，当时五十二岁。
English: The deposed emperor then flew into a rage, relieved Fa Xing of his official position, ordered him to return to his hometown, and then moved him to a distant county. Soon after, he ordered him to commit suicide, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：法兴临死，封闭库藏，使家人谨录钥牡。死一宿，又杀其二子，截法兴棺，焚之，籍没财物。法兴能为文章，颇行于世。
现代文：法兴临死时封闭自己的宝库，叫家人仔细地保存钥匙，他死一天后，废帝又杀他的二个儿子，截断法兴的棺材，焚烧他的尸体，没收他全部财产，法兴颇能写文章，社会上流传很广。
English: When Fa Xing was on the verge of death, he sealed his treasure house and asked his family to carefully preserve the keys. One day after his death, the emperor killed his two sons, cut off Fa Xing's coffin, burned his body, and confiscated all of his property. Fa Xing was quite capable of writing articles, which were widely circulated in society.

古文：死后，帝敕巢尚之曰： 吾纂承洪基，君临万国，推心勋旧，著于遐迩。不谓戴法兴恃遇负恩，专作威福，冒宪黩货，号令自由，积衅累愆，遂至于此。
现代文：法兴死后，废帝给巢尚之的敕书说： 我继承大业，君统万国，对功臣推心置腹，远近人都知道，没想到戴法兴倚仗宠待，背负皇恩，作威作福，犯法贪污，生杀予夺，恶贯满盈，到这步田地。
English: After the death of Fa Xing, the imperial edict issued by the deposed emperor to his nephew Shang Zhi said: "I have inherited a great cause, a monarch of all countries, and I have put my heart and soul into the meritorious soldiers. People far and near all know this. I did not expect to have to rely on Fa Xing, to be favored by him, to carry the royal favor, to be arrogant, to be blessed by him, to break the law, to be corrupt, to kill for the sake of killing, to be full of evil, and to come to this.

古文：吾今日亲览万机，留心庶事，卿等宜竭诚尽力，以副所期。 
现代文：你们对于本职工作忠诚勤勉，我都知道，但是道听途说，纷纷纭纭，不只人心恐惧，而且天象反常，我委托的本意大大的违背了，我今天亲自掌管大权，留心杂事。你们应该竭心尽智，以让我满意。 
English: I know that you are loyal and diligent in your work, but rumor has it that not only is there fear in the hearts of the people, but also that the weather is abnormal. The intention I entrusted to you has been greatly violated. Today, I am personally in charge of power and pay attention to miscellaneous matters. You should do your best to satisfy me.

古文：尚之时为新安王子鸾抚军中兵参军、淮陵太守。乃解舍人，转为抚军谘议参军，太守如故。
现代文：巢尚之当时当新安王刘子鸾抚军中兵参军，淮陵太守，于是免除舍人职务，转任抚军谘议参军，太守照旧。
English: At that time, when the soldiers of the Xin'an King Liu Zixun's army joined the army, Huairing was the governor, so he was relieved of his duties, transferred to advise the army to join the army, and continued to be the governor.

古文：太宗泰始二年，诏曰： 故越骑校尉吴昌县开国男戴法兴，昔从孝武，诚勤左右，入定社稷，预誓河山。
现代文：太宗泰始二年，诏书说： 已故越骑校尉吴昌县开国男戴法兴，当年跟从孝武帝，在身边勤劳服务，参与安定国家大事，和孝武帝有山河的誓言，永不废除他的官爵。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the imperial edict said: The late Yue cavalry captain Dai Faxing, the founding father of Wuchang County, followed Emperor Xiaowu, served diligently at his side, participated in stable national affairs, and swore by mountains and rivers to Emperor Xiaowu that he would never abolish his official title.

古文：及出侍东储，竭尽心力，婴害凶悖，朕甚愍之。可追复削注，还其封爵。 
现代文：到外侍候东宫太子，竭尽心力，却被凶狂之人杀害，我很同情他，可以追认恢复他被削除的职位，还给他封爵。 
English: He went out to wait for the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court, tried his best, but was killed by a madman. I sympathize with him very much, and I can confirm that he was reinstated in his position and given a knighthood.

古文：有司奏以法兴孙灵珍袭封。
现代文：有关人员又上奏用他的孙子戴灵珍继封。
English: The officials concerned also used his grandson Dai Lingzhen to succeed him.

古文：又诏曰： 法兴小人，专权豪姿，虽虐主所害，义由国讨，不宜复贪人之封，封爵可停。 
现代文：皇帝又下诏书说： 法兴毕竟是个小人，专权不忌，虽然被暴君残害，也应该受到国法的制裁，不应再贪心国家的爵位，封爵可以停止。 
English: The emperor also issued an edict saying, "Fa Xing is, after all, a villain, despotism is not to be feared, although he was brutalized by a tyrant, he should also be sanctioned by state law, he should no longer covet the state's knighthood, and the knighthood can be stopped.

古文：太宗初，复以尚之兼中书通事舍人、南清河太守。
现代文：太宗初年明帝再以巢尚之兼任中书通事舍人，南清河太守。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Emperor Ming gave him the concurrent post of secretary of the Central Government, and he became the governor of South Qinghe.

古文：二年，迁中书侍郎，太守如故。
现代文：二年，迁中书侍郎，太守照旧。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the position of secretary, but remained as the dean.

古文：三年北伐，与虏战，军败见杀。
现代文：还未拜官，改任前军将军，太守照旧。
English: He had not yet assumed his official duties, but was appointed as the general of the former army, and continued to serve as the emperor.

古文：追赠左军将军，太守如故。李道兒，临淮人。
现代文：在东宫侍候太子，晋安王刘子勋被平定后，作为军人守卫辖地，封爵邵陵县男，食邑四百户，他坚决辞退不接收。
English: He waited for the crown prince in the East Palace, and after Liu Zixun, the king of Jinan, was subdued, he served as a soldier to guard the territory under his jurisdiction, was knighted as the man of Shaoling County, and received food from 400 households. He resolutely refused to accept it.

古文：本为湘东王师，稍至湘东国学官令。
现代文：再转任黄门侍郎，出外当新安太守，在任上病逝。李道儿，临淮人。本来是湘东王的老师，又升到湘东国学官令。
English: Then he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, went abroad as the new governor of An, and died of illness while in office. Li Dao'er, a native of Linhuai, was originally a teacher of the King of Hunan, and was promoted to the position of the official of the Hunan Provincial Education Bureau.

古文：太宗即位，稍进至员外散骑侍郎，淮陵太守。
现代文：太宗做皇帝，李道儿又升到员外散骑常侍郎，淮陵太守。
English: Emperor Taizong became emperor, and Li Dauer was promoted to the position of non-commissioned officer, errand boy, and the governor of Huairing.

古文：泰始二年，兼中书通事舍人，转给事中。
现代文：泰始二年，兼任中书通事舍人，转任给事中。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, he also served as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and was transferred to the Central Committee.

古文：四年，病卒。
现代文：四年因病逝世。
English: He died of illness four years later.

古文：王道隆，吴兴乌程人。
现代文：王道隆，吴兴乌程人。
English: Wang Daolong, Wu Xing from Wucheng.

古文：兄道迄，涉学善书，形貌又美，吴兴太守王韶之谓人曰： 有子弟如王道迄，无所少。 
现代文：他的哥哥王道迄，读了一些书，会书法，外表又很俊俏。吴兴太守王韶之对人说： 如有兄弟儿子像王道迄这样的，就什么也不缺少。 
English: His elder brother, Wang Daodu, read some books, knew calligraphy, and was very handsome. Wu Xing's father-in-law, Wang Xizhi, said to people: If there is a brother or son like Wang Daodu, there is nothing lacking.

古文：始兴王浚以为世子师。
现代文：始兴王刘浚用他当世子的老师。
English: Shi Xing Wang Liu Jun used him as his son's teacher.

古文：以书补中书令史。
现代文：又因为会写字补任中书令史。
English: Also, because he could write, he was appointed to fill in the history of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：道隆亦知书，为主书书吏，渐至主书。
现代文：王道隆也读过一些书，当主书书吏，逐渐升到主书。
English: Wang Daolong also read some books, when he was the chief librarian, he gradually rose to the chief librarian.

古文：世祖使传命，失旨，遣出，不听复入六门。
现代文：世祖叫他传达命令，不符合皇帝心意，被放出来，不允许再到六省门内。
English: The ancestor told him to convey the order, which did not meet the emperor's intention, and he was released and not allowed to enter the six provinces again.

古文：太宗镇彭城，以补典签，署内监。
现代文：太宗镇守彭城时，用他补任典签，署官内监。
English: When Taizong Zhen was in charge of Pengcheng, he used him to supplement the appointment of the signature, the officer's supervisor.

古文：及即位，为南台侍御史，稍至员外散骑侍郎，南兰陵太守。
现代文：到太宗即位时，当南台侍御史，逐渐升到员外散骑侍郎，南兰陵太守。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong's enthronement, when he was the Nantai attendant of history, he gradually rose to the rank of non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, and became the governor of Nanlianling.

古文：泰始二年，兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：泰始二年兼任中书通事舍人。
English: In the first two years of this year, he also served as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：以破晋陵功，增邑百户，并前六百户。
现代文：因为攻破晋陵的功劳，增加封邑一百户，和以前共六百户。
English: Because of the achievement of breaking through the Jin Mausoleum, one hundred households of fiefs were added, and a total of six hundred households were added.

古文：五年，出侍东宫，复兼中书通事舍人。
现代文：五年，出外侍候太子，再兼中书通事舍人。
English: For five years, she waited for the crown prince when he was out of town, and then worked as a secretary.

古文：后废帝即位，自太子翊军校尉迁右军将军，太守、兼舍人如故。
现代文：后废帝即位，王道隆从太子翊军校尉升到右军将军、太守，兼舍人照旧。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended to the throne, Wang Daolong was promoted from the prince's lieutenant to the general of the right army and the governor general, and he continued to be the leader.

古文：道隆为太宗所委，过于佃夫，和谨自保，不妄毁伤人。执权既久，家产丰积，豪丽虽不及佃夫，而精整过之。
现代文：王道隆被太宗委任，超过阮佃夫。王道隆为人温和谨慎，明哲保身，不轻易说别人的坏话，掌权很久，家产丰厚，奢侈豪华虽然赶不上阮佃夫，但是精致整齐倒超过了他。
English: Wang Daolong was appointed by Emperor Taizong and surpassed Nguyn Ánh. Wang Daolong was a gentle and prudent person, he knew how to protect himself, did not easily speak ill of others, held power for a long time, had a rich family, and although he could not match Nguyn Ánh's luxury and luxury, he surpassed him in refinement and neatness.

古文：元徽二年，太尉桂阳王休范奄至新亭，佃夫留守殿内，而道隆领羽林精兵向硃雀门。
现代文：元徽二年，太尉桂阳王刘休范的部队突然攻到新亭，阮佃夫留守内殿，而王道隆带着羽林精兵进向朱雀门。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the troops of Lieutenant Guiyang Wang Liu Xiufan suddenly attacked Xinting, Ruan Yifu stayed in the inner hall, while Wang Daolong marched to Suzakmen with the elite soldiers of Ulin.

古文：时贼已至航南，道隆忽召镇军将军刘勔于石头，勔至，命开航，道隆怒曰： 贼至但当急击，宁可开航自弱邪！ 
现代文：当时叛军已到秦淮渡的南岸，王道隆忽然在石头召镇军将军刘面力。刘面力一到，便命令打秦淮航，王道隆大怒说： 敌人到了只管打，怎么能打通航渡削弱自己呢？ 
English: At that time, the rebels had reached the south bank of Qin Huai Du, Wang Daolong suddenly summoned the town army general Liu Mianli on the stone. As soon as Liu Mianli arrived, he ordered to fight Qin Huai Du. Wang Daolong said angrily: When the enemy arrives, they can only fight, how can they fight through the waterway to weaken themselves?

古文：勔不敢复言。
现代文：刘面力不敢再说话。
English: Liu Mianli did not dare to speak again.

古文：催勔进战，勔度航便败，贼乘胜径进，道隆弃众走向台，所乘马连耸跼不肯前，遂为贼兵及，见杀。
现代文：王道隆又催促刘面力进攻，刘面力渡过航桥便败退了。叛军乘胜前进，王道隆丢下兵众逃向宫城，但他的马突然站在那里不肯走，于是被叛军赶上，被杀了。
English: Wang Daolong also urged Liu Mianli to attack, Liu Mianli crossed the bridge and retreated. The rebels advanced with victory, Wang Daolong left the soldiers and fled to Miyagi, but his horse suddenly stood there and refused to go, so he was caught by the rebels and was killed.

古文：事平，车驾临哭，赠辅国将军、益州刺史。
现代文：刘休范被平定后，皇帝大驾莅临哭送，王道隆被追认为辅国将军，益州刺史。
English: After Liu Xiufan was subdued, the emperor came to see him off with great pomp and ceremony, and Wang Daolong was regarded as a general of an auxiliary state, and made history in Yizhou.

古文：子法贞嗣。
现代文：他的儿子王法贞继承他的爵位。
English: His son Wang Fuzhen succeeded to his title.

古文：齐受禅，国除。
现代文：齐朝建立，官爵被取消。
English: The State of Qi was established, and the title of nobility was abolished.

