古文：曰：二有一乎？
现代文：限定的概念还能说是未相与限定时的某一个概念吗？
English: Can the concept of limitation also be said to be a certain concept when it does not coincide with limitation?

古文：曰：二无一。曰：二有右乎？
现代文：限定的概念已经不能再说是未相与限定时原来的某一个概念了。
English: The concept of limitation can no longer be said to be the same as the original concept of limitation.

古文：曰：二无右。
现代文：概括的类概念能说是原来被概括的一个种概念吗？
English: Can the generalized class concept be said to be a kind of concept that was originally generalized?

古文：曰：二有左乎？
现代文：概括的类概念已经不能再说是原来被概括的一个种概念了。
English: The generalized class concept can no longer be said to be a kind of concept that was originally generalized.

古文：曰：二无左。
现代文：概括的类概念能说是原来被概括的另一个种概念吗？
English: Can the generalized class concept be said to be another kind of concept that was originally generalized?

古文：曰：右可谓二乎？曰：不可。
现代文：概括的类概念也不能再说是原来被概括的另一个种概念了。
English: The generalized class concept can no longer be said to be another kind of concept that was originally generalized.

古文：曰：左可谓二乎？
现代文：一个被概括的种概念能说是概括的类概念吗？也不行。
English: Can a generalized species concept be said to be a generalized class concept?

古文：曰：左与右可谓二乎？
现代文：另一个被概括的种概念能说是概括的类概念吗？
English: Can another generalized species concept be said to be a generalized class concept?

古文：曰：可。曰：谓变非变，可乎？
现代文：一个被概括的种概念与另一个被概括的种概念可以概括称为一个类概念吗？可以。
English: Can a generalized species concept and another generalized species concept be summarized as a class concept?

古文：曰：右有与，可谓变乎？曰：变奚？
现代文：能够说概念的限定或概括而引起的概念类属变化时，是概念的外延有变化而概念的内涵没有根本的变化吗？
English: When it can be said that the change of the concept category caused by the limitation or generalization of the concept, is the extension of the concept changed and the connotation of the concept has no fundamental change?

古文：曰：右。曰：右苟变，安可谓右？曰：苟不变，安可谓变？
现代文：所以，这一配色的结果，既不能归并于青色，也不能归并于白色，哪里会有黄色混在其中呢？
English: Therefore, the result of this color scheme can neither be classified as blue nor white, where can yellow be mixed in?

古文：曰：二苟无左，又无右，二者左与右，奈何？曰：羊合牛非马，牛合羊非鸡。
现代文：黄色中正独立而不与青、白两色混淆。这是正确怎地分类。 如果分类依照一个统一的标准，便能使分类正确 ，这如同一国之中， 君主明正，号令统一，君臣职守分明 ，国家便能强盛长存那样。
English: Yellow and green are independent and not to be confused with blue and white. This is the correct way to classify. If the classification is based on a unified standard, it can make the classification correct, just as in the same country, the monarch is clear, the orders are unified, the monarchs and ministers have clear duties, and the country can be strong and long-lasting.

古文：曰：何哉？曰：羊与牛唯异，羊有齿，牛无齿，而牛之非羊也、羊之非牛也，未可。
现代文：羊与牛有区别，羊有门牙上齿，牛无门牙上齿，因而便说牛与羊毫无共同之处，羊与牛亦毫无共同之处，这是不对的。
English: There is a difference between a sheep and a cow. A sheep has an upper incisor and a cow has no upper incisor. Therefore, it is wrong to say that a cow has nothing in common with a sheep and a sheep has nothing in common with a cow.

古文：是不俱有而或类焉。
现代文：它们虽有 种差 的区别，但却是同类的家畜。
English: Although they have species differences, they are domestic animals of the same kind.

古文：羊有角，牛有角，牛之而羊也，未可。是俱有而类之不同也。
现代文：羊有角，牛亦有角，因而便说牛就是羊，羊就是羊，这也是不对的，它们虽有共同的本质，属性却是不同的种。
English: It is not correct to say that a cow is a sheep and a sheep is a sheep because a sheep has horns and a cow has horns. Although they have the same essence, their attributes are different.

古文：羊牛有角，马无角，马有尾，羊牛无尾，故曰羊合牛非马也。
现代文：偶蹄家畜有角，奇蹄家畜无角；奇蹄家畜有鬃毛长尾，偶蹄家畜无鬃毛长尾，以此作为分类的根据，把家畜分为偶蹄家畜与奇蹄家畜，偶蹄家畜不是奇蹄家畜，偶蹄家畜自然不包括着奇蹄家畜。
English: Even-toed domestic animals have horns, odd-toed domestic animals do not have horns; odd-toed domestic animals have bristles and long tails, even-toed domestic animals do not have bristles and long tails. As a basis for classification, domestic animals are divided into even-toed domestic animals and odd-toed domestic animals. Even-toed domestic animals are not odd-toed domestic animals, and odd-toed domestic animals naturally do not include domestic animals with odd hooves.

古文：非马者，无马也。无马者，羊不二，牛不二，而羊牛二，是而羊而牛非马，可也。
现代文：偶蹄家畜所以不包括着奇蹄家畜，因为羊是种概念，牛是种概念，而偶蹄家畜却是类概念，因此如果把羊与牛概括为偶蹄家畜与奇蹄家畜划分开来，这是对的。
English: Even-toed livestock does not include odd-toed livestock, because sheep is a species concept, cattle is a species concept, and even-toed livestock is a genus concept. Therefore, it is correct to divide sheep and cattle into even-toed livestock and odd-toed livestock.

古文：若举而以是，犹类之不同，若左右，犹是举。
现代文：这样的逻辑分类，由于它们类的不同，如同把一物分为左右两半那样的明显而正确。
English: Such a logical classification, because of the difference in their classes, is as obvious and correct as dividing an object into left and right halves.

古文：牛羊有毛，鸡有羽。
现代文：偶蹄家畜有毛，家禽有羽。
English: Domestic animals with cloven hooves have hair, poultry have feathers.

古文：谓鸡足一，数足二，二而一故三；谓牛羊足一，数足四，四而一故五。
现代文：鸡足的本质称为 一 ，鸡足的现象称为 二 ，把鸡足的本质与现象统一起来称为 三 ；偶蹄家畜之足的本质称为 一 ，偶蹄家畜之足从现象称为 四 ，把偶蹄家畜之足的本质与现象统一起来称为 五 。
English: The essence of the chicken foot is called one, the phenomenon of the chicken foot is called two, and the essence of the chicken foot and the phenomenon are unified as three; the essence of the cloven-hoofed livestock foot is called one, the cloven-hoofed livestock foot from the phenomenon is called four, and the essence and phenomenon of the cloven-hoofed livestock foot are unified as five.

古文：牛羊足五，鸡足三，故曰牛合羊非鸡。
现代文：如果以禽与兽的分类根据把动物分为偶蹄家畜与家禽，这一分类的根据是错误的，与越类而分 ，因而是错误的分类。
English: If animals are divided into domestic animals and poultry according to the classification of birds and beasts, the basis of this classification is wrong, and it is separated from the cross-class, so it is a wrong classification.

古文：非有以非鸡也。与马以鸡宁马。材不材，其无以类，审矣！
现代文：与其以鸡代替马来与偶蹄家畜分类，毋宁以马来与偶蹄家畜分类由于牛羊都是于类相近又可供祭祀的材料，而鸡与牛羊于类相去太远又不是供祭祀的材料，牛羊与鸡之间谈不上分类的问题，这是很清楚的。
English: Rather than using chickens to classify horses and cloven-hoofed livestock, it is better to use horses to classify cloven-hoofed livestock. Since cattle and sheep are both close to each other and can be used as sacrificial materials, while chickens and cattle and sheep are too far apart from each other and are not sacrificial materials, there is no classification between cattle and sheep and chickens. This is very clear.

古文：举是乱名，是谓狂举。
现代文：这样的逻辑分类是越类而分、概念混乱，是错误的逻辑分类。
English: This kind of logical classification is out-of-the-box, confusing concepts, and is a wrong logical classification.

古文：曰：他辩。
现代文：从别的事例来讨论分类的规则罢。
English: Let us discuss the rules of classification from other examples.

古文：曰：青以白非黄，白以青非碧。
现代文：以青为底色再涂上白色来与黄色分别，以白为底色再涂上青色来与碧色分别。
English: Use blue as the base color and then apply white to separate from yellow, use white as the base color and then apply blue to separate from cyan.

古文：曰：青白不相与而相与，反对也；不相邻而相邻，不害其方也。
现代文：这是什么意思？青附着于白色并且染污了白色，白本来足以胜青却反而被青染污而不胜了。
English: What does this mean? The blue adheres to the white and stains the white. The white was enough to defeat the blue, but it was stained by the blue and did not win.

古文：不害其方也。不害其方者，反而对，各当其所，若左右不骊。
现代文：这是木逆胜金，青逆胜白变成近碧之色，以近碧之色来与碧色分辨，就无法分清了，所以 白以青非碧 是错误的分类。
English: This is the wood against the gold, the blue against the white into the near-blue, and the near-blue to distinguish it from the blue, it can not be distinguished, so the white to the blue is the wrong classification.

古文：故一于青不可，一于白不可，恶乎其有黄矣哉？
现代文：青与白不相容而又使之相配，两色不绝对相胜而必相争胜以各显其色，争胜的结果呈青而微白，其色近碧。
English: Blue and white are not compatible, but they are compatible. The two colors do not absolutely compete with each other, but they must compete with each other to show their colors. The result of the competition is blue and whitish, and its color is near-blue.

古文：黄其正矣，是正举也。
现代文：与其以 白以青非碧 的分类，毋宁以 青以白非黄 的分类， 青以白非黄 如同 羊合牛非马 的分类那样，它们都是以类相从， 遵守了分类规则 。 白以青非碧 如同 牛合羊非鸡 的分类那样，它们都是逻辑混乱。
English: Rather than classifying white as blue-black, it is better to classify blue as white-not-yellow, and blue as white-not-yellow, as in the classification of sheep, cattle, and horses, they are all in the same category and comply with the classification rules.

古文：其有君臣之于国焉，故强寿矣！而且青骊乎白而白不胜也。
现代文：名实混乱则君臣交争而号令不一，号令不一则是非不明，是非不明则政治昏暗。
English: When there is confusion over names and facts, there is conflict between princes and ministers and conflicting orders; when there is conflicting orders, it is unclear what is right and wrong; and when it is unclear what is right and wrong, there is political darkness.

古文：白足之胜矣而不胜，是木贼金也。
现代文：这是违反 不两明 的逻辑基本规律。
English: This is a violation of the fundamental laws of logic.

古文：木贼金者碧，碧则非正举矣。青白不相与而相与，不相胜则两明也。
现代文：违反了逻辑基本规律，便会 名实不相应，明不符实，实不应名， 邪恶充斥而是非淆乱。
English: Violation of the basic laws of logic will result in name and reality not corresponding, obviousness not corresponding to reality, reality not deserving a name, and evil abounding, but not confusion.

古文：两明而道丧，其无有以正焉。
现代文：违反 不两明 的逻辑基本规律，必将治道沦丧，这就没有办法来端正名实以便统一天下了。
English: Violation of the basic laws of logic, which are not ambiguous, will inevitably lead to the demise of governance, and there will be no way to rectify the facts in order to unify the country.

