古文：成汤既没，太甲元年，伊尹作《伊训》、《肆命》、《徂后》。
现代文：成汤去世以后，后来太甲继承了帝位，这一年伊尹作《伊训》、《肆命》、《徂后》教导太甲。
English: After the death of Cheng Tang, Tai Jia later succeeded to the throne. This year, Yi Yin taught Tai Jia by writing "Yi Xun," "Wanton Life" and "The Empress Dowager."

古文：惟元祀十有二月乙丑，伊尹祠于先王。
现代文：太甲元年十二月乙丑日，伊尹在祖庙祭祀先王，侍奉嗣王恭敬地拜见先祖。
English: In December of the first year of Taiga, on the day of the second Ugly Goat, Yi Yin worshiped the ancestor king in the ancestral temple, and served the successor king to respectfully meet the ancestors.

古文：奉嗣王祗见厥祖，侯、甸群后咸在，百官总已以听冢宰。
现代文：各诸侯都在祭祀行列，朝廷内百官也都听从百官之长的命令。
English: All the lords were in the sacrificial procession, and the centurions in the imperial court also obeyed the orders of the centurion.

古文：伊尹乃明言烈祖之成德，以训于王。
现代文：伊尹于是明白地叙述成汤的大德，来教导太甲。伊尹说： 啊！
English: Yi Yin then clearly described Cheng Tang's great virtue to teach Tai Jia. Yi Yin said: Ah!

古文：曰： 呜呼！古有夏先后，方懋厥德，罔有天灾。山川鬼神，亦莫不宁，暨鸟兽鱼鳖咸若。
现代文：从前夏代的君主，当他勉力施行德政的时候，这里就没有发生天灾，山川的鬼神也没有不安宁的，连同鸟兽鱼鳖各种动物的生长都很顺遂。
English: When the monarch of the former Xia Dynasty tried his best to carry out a virtuous government, there was no natural disaster here, and the ghosts and gods of the mountains and rivers were not restless, and the growth of birds, beasts, fish, and all kinds of animals was very smooth.

古文：于其子孙弗率，皇天降灾，假手于我有命，造攻自鸣条，朕哉自亳。
现代文：到了他的子孙后代，不遵循先人的德政，于是上天降下灾祸，借我们先王之手，让奉行征讨夏朝的命令他。上天有命：先从夏桀讨伐；我们的先祖成汤就从亳都执行。
English: When it came to his descendants, they did not follow the German politics of their forefathers, so Heaven sent down a calamity. With the help of our first king, let him carry out the order to recruit the Xia Dynasty. Heaven has a mandate: first from the Xia Dynasty; our ancestors Cheng Tang carried out from the Shidu Dynasty.

古文：惟我商王，布昭圣武，代虐以宽，兆民允怀。
现代文：只有我商王宣明德威，用宽厚代替暴虐，所以天下百姓相信我、怀念我。
English: Only I, the merchant king Xuanming Dewei, replaced tyranny with benevolence, so people all over the world believe in me and miss me.

古文：今王嗣厥德，罔不在初，立爱惟亲，立敬惟长，始于家邦，终于四海。
现代文：现在我王嗣行成汤的美德，一定要从心在开始培养自身德行！行爱于亲人，行敬于长上，从家和国开始，最终推广到天下。啊！
English: Now that I am the heir to the virtue of making soup, I must cultivate my own virtue from the heart! I must love my relatives and respect my superiors, starting from my home and country and eventually spreading to the world. Ah!

古文：呜呼！先王肇修人纪，从谏弗咈，先民时若。居上克明，为下克忠，与人不求备，检身若不及，以至于有万邦，兹惟艰哉！
现代文：先王努力讲求做人的纲纪，听从谏言而不违反，顺从前贤的活；处在上位能够明察，为臣下能够尽忠；结交人不求全责备，检点自己好像来不及一样。因此达到拥有万国，这是很难的呀！
English: The previous king tried hard to adhere to the principles of being a human being, to listen to advice without violating it, and to follow the work of former sages; to be able to see clearly when he was in a higher position, and to be able to be loyal to his subjects; to make friends without seeking full blame, and to check himself as if it were too late. Therefore, it is difficult to achieve the possession of all nations!

古文：敷求哲人，俾辅于尔后嗣，制官刑，儆于有位。
现代文：又普求贤智，使他们辅助你们后嗣；还制订《官刑》来警戒百官。
English: And that ye seek after wisdom to make them rulers over your seed, and that ye establish the law of chastity to be observed by all rulers.

古文：曰： 敢有恒舞于宫，酣歌于室，时谓巫风，敢有殉于货色，恒于游畋，时谓淫风。
现代文：《官刑》上说：敢有经常在宫中舞蹈、在房中饮酒酣歌的，这叫做巫风。敢有贪求财货女色、经常游乐田猎的，这叫做淫风。
English: "The Official Punishment" says, "If you dare to have a woman who dances frequently in the palace and drinks alcohol and sings in the room, this is called witchcraft. If you dare to have a woman who is greedy for money and often goes hunting, this is called lewdness."

古文：敢有侮圣言，逆忠直，远耆德，比顽童，时谓乱风。
现代文：敢有轻视圣人教训、拒绝忠直谏戒、疏远年老有德、亲近顽愚童稚的，这叫做乱风。
English: Those who dare to despise the teachings of sages, reject the precepts of loyalty and uprightness, alienate the old and virtuous, and get close to the foolish and childish are called turbulent winds.

古文：惟兹三风十愆，卿士有一于身，家必丧；邦君有一于身，国必亡。
现代文：这些三风十过，卿士身上有一种，他的家一定会丧失；国君身上有一种，他的国一定会灭亡。
English: There is one thing in the nobleman that his house will certainly be lost, and another thing in the sovereign that his country will surely perish.

古文：臣下不匡，其刑墨，具训于蒙士。 
现代文：臣下不匡正君主，要受到墨刑。这些对于下士也要详细教导。啊！
English: If a vassal does not uphold the dignity of the monarch, he will be punished by being inked. Corporals should be taught these things in detail. Ah!

古文：呜呼！嗣王祗厥身，念哉！
现代文：嗣王当以这些教导警戒自身，念念不忘呀！
English: Heir-kings should guard themselves with these teachings and never forget them!

古文：圣谟洋洋，嘉言孔彰。
现代文：圣谟美好，嘉训很明啊！
English: The Holy Spirit is beautiful, and His teaching is very clear!

古文：惟上帝不常，作善降之百祥，作不善降之百殃。
现代文：上天的眷顾不常在一家，作善事的，就赐给百福；做恶事就会降下灾难。
English: The providence of heaven is not always in a family. If you do good, you will be blessed. If you do evil, you will be cursed.

古文：尔惟德罔小，万邦惟庆；尔惟不德罔大，坠厥宗。 
现代文：修德不论多小，只要做了，天下的人都会感到庆幸；你行不善，即使不大，也会使国家覆灭。 
English: No matter how small the virtue is, as long as it is done, people all over the world will feel happy; if you do not do well, even if it is small, it will cause the country to collapse.

