古文：○神宗三三年春正月乙丑朔，以大行太皇太后在殡，不视朝。
现代文：元丰三年春正月初一，因大行太皇太后装在灵枢里，不上朝听政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Yuanfeng, because of the great line, the great empress dowager was installed in the spiritual center, and did not go to the court to listen to politics.

古文：癸酉，升许州为颍昌府。
现代文：初九，升许州为颖昌府。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Xuzhou was elevated to Yingchang Prefecture.

古文：丙子，降颍昌囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十二日，颖昌府囚犯减刑一等，徒刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 12th, the prisoners of Yingchang Prefecture received a first-class reduction of sentence, and all prisoners were released.

古文：戊寅，上太皇太后谥曰慈圣光献。
现代文：十四日，尊太皇太后溢号为慈圣光献。
English: On the 14th, Her Imperial Highness, the Empress Dowager, gave her posthumous name as a dedication to the Divine Light.

古文：戊子，诏审刑院、刑部断议官失入者，岁具数罚之。
现代文：二十四日，下诏审刑院、刑部断定审议官员判案错误或罪轻罚重的人，每年统计数量多少，予以处罚。
English: On the 24th, the Sentencing and Punishment Court and the Criminal Law Department issued a decree to determine the number of people who are punished each year if the reviewing officer makes an error in judging the case or the crime is minor and the punishment is severe.

古文：己丑，高丽国遣使来贡。
现代文：二十五日，高丽国派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 25th, Goryeo dispatched envoys to pay tribute.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：辛卯，于阗国大首领阿令颠颡温等来贡。
现代文：二十七日，于闻国大首领阿令颠颗温等人来进贡。
English: On the 27th, the head of Yuwen National University, Aling Boji Wen and others came to pay tribute.

古文：癸巳，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十九日，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the 29th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：二月丙午，以翰林学士章惇参知政事。
现代文：二月十二日，任命翰林学士章参知政事。
English: On February 12th, Hanlin Baozhang was appointed as the vice-governor.

古文：丙辰，始御崇政殿视朝。
现代文：二十二日，开始到崇政殿听政。
English: On the 22nd, he began to go to the Su Zheng Palace to listen to the government.

古文：丁巳，命辅臣祷雨。
现代文：二十三日，命令辅臣祈祷降雨。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered his aides to pray for rain.

古文：三月乙丑，工部侍郎、同平章事吴充罢为观文殿大学士、西太一宫使。
现代文：三月初二，工部侍郎同平章事吴充罢为观文殿大学士、西太一宫使。
English: On the second day of March, Tongping Zhangji Wu, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, became a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and an envoy of Emperor Taizong of the West.

古文：癸酉，葬慈圣光献皇后于永昭陵。
现代文：初十，把慈圣光献皇后葬在永昭陵。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month, he dedicated the Divine Light to the Empress and buried it in the Yongshao Mausoleum.

古文：丙子，南丹州入贡，以刺史印赐之。
现代文：十三日，南丹州来进贡，赐给刺史印。
English: On the 13th, South Danzhou came to pay tribute and give the stamp of history to Tsuru.

古文：乙酉，祔慈圣光献皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：二十二日，在太庙附祭慈圣光献皇后神主。
English: On the 22nd, the Divine Light Offering to the Empress was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：戊子，降两京、河阳囚罪一等，民缘山陵役者，蠲其赋。
现代文：二十五日，两京、河阳囚犯减刑一等，百姓为山陵服役的人，免除税赋。
English: On the 25th, prisoners in Beijing and Heyang had their sentences reduced to the first class, and the people who served the mountains and mausoleums were exempted from taxes.

古文：己丑，以慈圣光献皇后弟昭德军节度使曹佾为司徒兼中书令，改护国军节度使，余亲属加恩有差。
现代文：二十六日，任命慈圣光献皇后弟弟、昭德军节度使曹情为司徒兼中书令，改为护国军节度使，其余亲属都得到不等的恩惠。
English: On the 26th, Cixing Guangxian, the younger brother of the empress, and Zhao Dejun, the military commander of the festival, appointed Cao Rong as an attendant and the secretary, and changed it to the military commander of the National Guard, and the rest of the relatives all received different favors.

古文：夏四月乙未，观文殿大学士吴充薨。
现代文：夏四月初二，观文殿大学士吴充逝世。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, Wu Chong, a scholar at Guanwenden University, passed away.

古文：丁酉，封宗晖为濮阳郡王，濮安懿王子孙皆进官一等。
现代文：初四，封宗晖为攫阳郡王，攫安靓王子孙都加官一等。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Feng Zongyi became the king of Shenyang County, and his grandsons, the princes of Shenyang and Anhui, were promoted to the first grade.

古文：己亥，辽遣耶律永芳等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣耶律永芳等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Yong Fang and others to congratulate the same day.

古文：乙巳，以泸州夷乞弟侵扰，诏边将讨之。
现代文：十二日，因沪州夷乞弟侵扰边境，下诏边将征讨。
English: On the 12th, due to the invasion of the border by the beggars from Huzhou, the border guard was summoned.

古文：戊申，乞弟寇戎州，兵官王宣等战殁。
现代文：十五日，乞弟攻打戎州，兵官王宣等人战死。
English: On the fifteenth day, Beggar Brother attacked Eonshu, and the military officer Wang Xuan and others were killed in the battle.

古文：甲寅，罢群牧行司，复置提举买马监牧司。
现代文：二十一日，罢除群牧行司，重新设置提举买马监牧司。
English: On the twenty-first day, the herd herding manager was dismissed, and the horse-buying supervisor was re-appointed.

古文：乙卯，令御史分案诸路监司。
现代文：二十二日，命令御史分别考核各路监司。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered the governor to examine the supervisors of each road separately.

古文：庚申，诏御史台六察以纠劾多寡为殿最，任满取旨升黜。
现代文：二十七日，下诏御史台六察以纠正弹勃官员过失多少为等级，予以区分，任满作为升降的依据。
English: On the 27th day of the month, the Sixth Inspection of the General Office of the Supreme People's Procuratorate of the People's Republic of China was held, in which the degree of correction of the fault of the officials who fired the shots was classified, and the term of office was used as the basis for promotion and demotion.

古文：辛酉，增国子监岁赐钱六千缗。
现代文：二十八日，增加每年对国子监的赐钱六千络。
English: On the 28th, the annual grant of money to the State Children's Supervisor was increased to 6,000 rupees.

古文：五月乙丑，诏自今三伏内，五日一御前殿。
现代文：五月初三，下诏：从今以后三伏天内，五天到一次朝廷，处理政事。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, the following edict was issued: From now on, within three days, five days, go to the imperial court once to deal with political affairs.

古文：辛巳，以颍昌进士刘堂上《制盗十策》，授徐州萧县尉。
现代文：十九日，因颖昌进士刘堂呈上制盗十策，授给他徐州萧县县尉的官职。
English: On the 19th, Liu Tang, a disciple of Ying Chang Jin, presented ten measures to prevent theft, and he was awarded the official post of Xuzhou Xiao County Lieutenant.

古文：甲申，复命韩存宝经制泸夷。
现代文：二十二日，重新命令韩存宝全权处理沪夷事务。
English: On the 22nd, Han Cunbao was re-ordered to deal with the affairs of Shanghai and Yiwu with full powers.

古文：诏改都大提举导洛通汴司为都提举汴河堤岸司。
现代文：下诏改都大提举导洛通汁司为都提举汁河堤岸司。
English: The following edict changed the name of the Lotong River Embankment to the Lutong River Embankment.

古文：是月，青州临朐、益都石化为面。
现代文：这个月，青州临胸、益都石变为面。
English: This month, Qingzhou Lin chest, Yidu stone into a face.

古文：六月甲午，日有五色云。
现代文：六月初三，太阳下出现五种色彩的云。
English: On the third day of the sixth month, clouds of five colors appeared under the sun.

古文：戊戌，诏省宗室教授，存十三员。
现代文：初七，下诏精简宗室教授，保留十分之三的人员。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, the next edict was to streamline the family professor, retaining three-tenths of the staff.

古文：丙午，诏中书详定官制。
现代文：十五日，下诏中书省详细制定官制。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, the Ministry of Education and Culture formulated the official system in detail.

古文：罢兵部勾当公事官。
现代文：罢除兵部勾当公事官员。
English: He was removed from his post as a public affairs official.

古文：诏河北、河东、陕西路各选文武官一员提举义勇保甲。
现代文：下诏河北、河东、陕西各推选文武官员一人提举义勇保甲。
English: The following decreed that Hebei, Hedong and Shaanxi should each nominate one civil and military official to nominate a volunteer.

古文：壬子，诏罢中书门下省主判官，归其事于中书。
现代文：二十一日，下诏罢除中书门下省主判官，其管理事务归于中书省。
English: On the 21st, the provincial chief adjudicator of the Chinese Calligraphy Division was dismissed, and its management affairs were transferred to the Chinese Calligraphy Department.

古文：是月，安州、临江军产芝及连理麦。
现代文：这个月，安州、临江军出现芝草及枝杆交错的麦。
English: This month, the troops of Anzhou and Linjiang River encountered wheat interlaced with turfgrass and branches.

古文：秋七月庚午，河决澶州。
现代文：秋七月初九，黄河在擅州决口。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Yellow River is at the junction with the Zhouzhou River.

古文：甲戌，诏自今遇大礼罢上尊号。
现代文：十三日，下诏从今以后遇到大礼的日子罢免献尊号。
English: On the thirteenth day, the following edict decreed that from now on, the day of the grand ceremony would be removed from the dedication ceremony.

古文：癸未，彗出太微垣。
现代文：二十二日，彗星出现在太微垣。
English: On the 22nd, the comet appeared in Taibugaki.

古文：丙戌，避殿减膳，诏求直言。
现代文：二十五日，不上殿听政并减少饮食。下诏鼓励上书直言。
English: On the 25th, he did not go to the palace to listen to politics and reduced his diet.

古文：丁亥，罢群神从祀明堂。
现代文：二十六日，罢除群神从祀明堂。
English: On the 26th, the group of deities was removed from the main hall.

古文：戊子，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the day of the phoenix, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：八月乙巳，罢省、寺、监官领空名者。
现代文：八月十五日，罢除省、寺、监官员领空名的人。
English: On August 15th, officials of provinces, temples, and supervisors of airspace were dismissed.

古文：癸丑，遣王存等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：二十三日，派遣王存等人祝贺辽主生辰、正旦。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Cun and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday.

古文：戊午，彗不见。
现代文：二十八日，彗星没有出现。
English: On the 28th, the comet did not reappear.

古文：九月壬戌，增宣祖定州东安坟地二十顷及守园户。
现代文：九月初三，增加宣祖定州东安坟地二十顷及守园户。
English: On the 3rd day of the 9th month, the 20 hectares of Dong'an Cemetery in Xuanzu, Dingzhou, and the guardian households were added.

古文：丙寅，御殿复膳。
现代文：初七，上殿听政并恢复饮食。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the upper court listened to the government and resumed eating.

古文：乙亥，正官名。
现代文：十六日，统一官名。
English: On the 16th, the official names were unified.

古文：以开府仪同三司易中书令、侍中、同平章事，特进易左、右仆射，自是以下至承务郎易秘书省校书郎、正字、将作监主簿有差，检校仆射以下及阶散宪衔并罢，详在《职官志》。
现代文：以开府仪同三司易中书令、侍中、同平章事，特进易左右仆射，从这以下至承务郎易秘书省校书郎、正字、将作监主簿不等，检校仆射以下及阶散宪衔一律罢除，详细的情况记载在职官志里。
English: According to the Kaifu ceremony, the junior secretary, the attendant, and the secretary of the same rank were removed, and the special advance was made to the left and right of the subordinate, and from this level down to the secretary of the provincial school, the secretary of the provincial school, the secretary of the provincial school, the secretary of the provincial school, the secretary of the provincial school, and the supervisor of the provincial school, the subordinate of the provincial school, the subordinate of the provincial school, and the subordinate of the provincial school were all removed, and the detailed situation was recorded in the official records.

古文：辛巳，大飨明堂，以英宗配，赦天下。
现代文：二十二日，在明堂举行大规模祭祀活动，并配享英宗，大赦全国。
English: On the 22nd, a large-scale sacrificial event was held in Myeongdong, and Yingzong was distributed, and the whole country was amnestied.

古文：癸未，薛向、孙固并为枢密副使。
现代文：二十五日，薛向、孙固一起为枢密副使。
English: On the 25th, Xue Xiang and Sun Gu were appointed as Privy Vice-Envoys.

古文：乙酉，诏即景灵宫作十一殿，以时王礼祠祖宗。
现代文：二十七日，诏令在景灵宫做十一殿，用时王礼祭祀祖宗。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed to build the 11th hall in the Jingling Palace, and to use the time-honored ritual to worship the ancestors.

古文：以王安石为特进，改封荆国公。
现代文：以王安石为特进，改封荆国公。
English: With Wang Anshi as a special envoy, he was renamed Jing Guogong.

古文：丙戌，进封岐王颢为雍王，嘉王頵为曹王，并为司空。
现代文：二十八日，进封岐王颖为雍王，嘉臼页为曹王，并为司空。
English: On the 28th, Wang Ying of Jinhui was the Yong Wang, Jia Ushe was the Cao Wang, and he was the Siku.

古文：文彦博为太尉。
现代文：文彦博为太尉。
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi became a second lieutenant.

古文：封曹佾为济阳郡王，宗旦为华阴郡王。
现代文：封曹情为济阳郡王，宗旦为华阴郡王。
English: Fong Cao Rong was the king of Jiyang County, and Sotan was the king of Huayin County.

古文：冯京为枢密使。
现代文：冯京为枢密使。
English: Feng Jing is a Privy Counsellor.

古文：薛向罢知颍州。
现代文：薛向罢为颖州知州。
English: Xue Xiang became Yingzhou Chizhou.

古文：丁亥，以吕公著为枢密副使。
现代文：二十九日，任命吕公著为枢密副使。
English: On the 29th, Lu Gongzhu was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：闰九月乙卯，加文彦博河东、永兴军节度使，以富弼为司徒。
现代文：闰九月二十六日，加文彦博河东、永兴军节度使，任命富弼为司徒。
English: On the 26th day of the 9th month of the leap year, Ga Wenyan Bo Hedong, the Yongxing Army festival envoy, appointed Fusheng as a scholar.

古文：十一月己丑朔，日当食，云阴不见。
现代文：十一月初一，应为日食，因阴云密布没有出现。
English: On the first day of November, there was supposed to be a solar eclipse, but it didn't happen because of the thick clouds.

古文：十二月甲辰，辽遣萧伟等来贺正旦。
现代文：十二月甲辰日，辽朝派遣萧伟等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the first day of December, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Wei and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：四年春正月乙未，命步军都虞候林广代韩存宝经制泸夷。
现代文：元丰四年春正月初七，命令步军都虞候林广代替韩存宝全权经理沪夷事务。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Yuanfeng, he ordered Lin Guang, the governor of the capital, to replace Han Cunbao, the plenipotentiary manager of Hui affairs.

古文：庚子，诏试进士加律义。
现代文：十二日，下诏考试进士加试律义。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the next prefectural exam for new recruits will include a test on the principles of justice.

古文：辛亥，于阗来贡。
现代文：二十三日，于闻来进贡。
English: On the 23rd, Yu Wen came to pay tribute.

古文：冯京罢知河阳。
现代文：冯京罢为河阳知府。
English: Fengjing is now the prefectural capital of Hebei.

古文：孙固知枢密院，龙图阁直学士韩缜同知枢密院事。
现代文：孙固知枢密院，龙图阁直学士韩填同知枢密院事。
English: Sun Guzhi Privy Councillor, Longtu Ge Zhi Bao Han Filling Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：二月辛未，置秦州铸钱监。
现代文：二月十四日，设置秦州铸钱监。
English: On February 14th, the Qin State Money Supervisor was set up.

古文：己卯，分东南团结诸军为十三将。
现代文：二十二日，分东南团结各军为十三将。
English: On the 22nd, the Southeast Unity Army was divided into 13 commands.

古文：三月乙未，诏在京官毋举辟执政有服亲。
现代文：三月初八，下诏在京城任职的官员不得推举与执政有亲属关系的人。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, it was decreed that officials serving in Beijing were not allowed to nominate relatives of those in power.

古文：癸卯，章惇罢知蔡州。
现代文：十六日，章罢为蔡州知州。
English: On the 16th, the chapter was changed to Caizhou Chizhou.

古文：甲辰，以翰林学士张璪参知政事。
现代文：十七日，任命翰林学士张为参知政事。
English: On the 17th, Hanlin Scholar Zhang was appointed to the post of co-governor.

古文：乙巳，命官阅九军营阵法于京城南。戊申，大阅。
现代文：十八日，命令官员在京城南检阅九军营阵法。二十一日，大规模检阅军队。
English: On the 18th, officials were ordered to inspect the nine military camps in the south of Beijing, and on the 21st, a large-scale inspection of the army was carried out.

古文：丙辰，董毡遣使来贡。
现代文：二十九日，董毡派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 29th, Dong Xuan sent an envoy to collect the tribute.

古文：夏四月癸亥，辽遣耶律祐等来贺同天节。
现代文：夏四月初六，辽朝派遣耶律等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu and others to congratulate the festival on the same day.

古文：御延和殿阅试保甲。
现代文：到延和殿检阅考试保甲。
English: Go to Yanwa-den to pass the examination and get a bronze medal.

古文：己巳，诏罢南郊合祭天地，自今亲祀北郊，如南郊仪，有故不行，则以上公摄事。
现代文：十二日，下诏免除南郊合祭天地，从今以后皇帝亲临北郊祭祀，礼仪如同南郊，因故不能亲自去就由地位最高的公卿代理。
English: On the twelfth day of the month, the emperor issued an edict exempting the southern suburbs from the festival of heaven and earth. From now on, the emperor would personally visit the northern suburbs for the sacrifice. The etiquette was the same as the southern suburbs. If he could not go in person for some reason, he would be represented by the highest-ranking nobles.

古文：壬申，虑囚。山阴县主簿余行之谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十五日，讯察全国囚犯罪状，山阴县主簿余行之策划叛乱被处以死刑。
English: On the 15th, after investigating the criminal status of prisoners across the country, Shanyin County's leader Yu Xing was sentenced to death for plotting a rebellion.

古文：乙酉，河决澶州小吴埽。
现代文：二十八日，黄河在擅州小吴塌决口。
English: On the 28th, the Yellow River burst its banks in the small town of Wuxia, Gansu Province.

古文：五月丁酉，诏河东路提点刑狱刘定专振被水民。
现代文：五月十一日，下诏河东路提点刑狱刘定专管贩济遭受水灾的饥民。
English: On May 11th, Liu Ding, who was in charge of selling food to the flood-stricken and starving people, was taken to the detention center on Haedong Road.

古文：戊申，封晋程婴为成信侯，公孙杵臼为忠智侯，立庙于绛州。
现代文：二十二日，封晋程婴为成信侯、公孙柞臼为忠智侯，在绛州立庙。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, the enthronement ceremony for Chengxin Hou and Zhongzhi Hou was held at the State Temple in Handan.

古文：六月戊午，河北诸郡蝗生。
现代文：六月初三，河北各郡出现蝗虫。
English: On the third day of June, locusts appeared in all counties of Hebei Province.

古文：癸未，命提点开封府界诸县公事杨景略、提举开封府界常平等事王得臣督诸县捕蝗。
现代文：二十八日，命令提点开封府界诸县公事杨景略、提举开封府界常平等事王得臣督促各县捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the 28th, Yang Jingliao was ordered to point out the public affairs of counties in Kaifeng prefecture, and Wang Deshong was ordered to urge counties to catch locusts.

古文：秋七月己丑，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month of autumn, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚寅，西边守臣言夏人囚其主秉常，诏陕西、河东路讨之。
现代文：初五，西部边境守臣报告说夏人囚禁夏主秉常，下诏陕西、河东路征讨西夏。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the western border guards reported that the Xia people had imprisoned Xia Lord Bingzhang, and the next order was to go to Shaanxi and Hedong Road to recruit Western Xia.

古文：甲午，鄜延、泾原、环庆、熙河、麟府路各赐金银带、锦袄、银器、鞍辔、象笏。
现代文：初九，延、径原、环庆、熙河、麟府路各自赐给金银带、绵袄、银器、鞍髻、象易等物品。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Yan, Qianyuan, Huanqing, Heihe and Linfu Road each gave gold and silver belts, silk scarves, silverware, saddles, elephants and other items.

古文：甲辰，韩存宝坐逗留无功伏诛。
现代文：十九日，韩存宝因经理沪夷逗留无功被处以死刑。
English: On the 19th, Han Cunbao was sentenced to death for his ineffectual stay as manager of Huji.

古文：丁未，大军进攻米脂砦。
现代文：二十二日，发动军队进攻米脂寨。
English: On the 22nd, the army launched an attack on Mizhi Village.

古文：己酉，诏曾巩充史馆修撰，专典史事。
现代文：二十四日，下诏曾巩任史馆修撰，专门负责修史工作。
English: On the 24th, Zeng Gong was assigned to the History Museum to be in charge of the history work.

古文：诏内外官司举官悉罢。
现代文：下诏内外官司推举官员全部罢除。
English: The following edict calls for the removal of all officials in charge of internal and external legal affairs.

古文：令大理卿崔台符同尚书吏部，审官东西、三班院议选格。
现代文：命令大理卿崔台符同尚书吏部，审官东西、三班院一起商议选举的有关规定和标准。
English: He ordered Daliqing Cui Taifu to discuss the relevant regulations and standards for the election with the Shang Shuli Department, the East and West Adjudicators, and the Three Courts.

古文：八月乙卯朔，罢中书堂选，悉归有司。
现代文：八月初一，罢除中书堂选举，相关事务全部归于有关部门。
English: On the first day of August, the election of the Central Library was cancelled, and all related affairs were assigned to the relevant departments.

古文：丙辰，诏蠲河北东路灾伤州军今年夏料役钱。
现代文：初二，下诏免除河北东路受灾州军今年夏料役钱。
English: On the second day of the new year, the following edict exempted the state troops affected by the disaster on the East Road of Hebei Province from the summer allowance.

古文：辛酉，夏人寇临川堡，诏董毡会兵伐之。
现代文：初七，夏军攻打临川堡，下诏董毡发兵与宋军共同征伐夏军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Xia army attacked the Linchuan Fort, and the next day, Dong Xi sent soldiers to jointly conquer the Xia army with the Song army.

古文：以金州刺史燕达为武康军节度使。
现代文：任命金州刺史燕达为武康军节度使。
English: Jinzhou Zhi Shi Yanda was appointed as the military envoy of the Wu Kang Army.

古文：己巳，复置滑州。
现代文：十五日，重新设置滑州。
English: On the 15th, it was re-established in Nanzhou.

古文：丁丑，熙河经制李宪败夏人于西市新城，获酋首三人、首领二十余人。
现代文：二十三日，熙河经制李宪在西市新城打败夏军，俘获酋长三人、首领二十多人。
English: On the 23rd, Li Xian, the governor of Xihe, defeated the Xia army in Xicheng, capturing three chiefs and more than twenty leaders.

古文：庚辰，又袭破于女遮谷，斩获甚众。
现代文：二十六日，又在女遮谷袭击打败夏军，斩杀、俘获夏军无数。
English: On the 26th, they attacked and defeated the Xia army in Nijia Valley, killing and capturing countless Xia soldiers.

古文：辛巳，司马光、赵彦若上所修《百官公卿年表》十卷，《宗室世表》三卷。
现代文：二十七日，司马光、赵彦若呈上所修佰官公卿妻十卷，涂室世奋三卷。
English: On the 27th, Sima Guang and Zhao Yanruo presented the ten volumes of the wives of the eunuchs and court nobles, and the three volumes of the scribes and scholars.

古文：九月乙酉，董毡遣使来贡，且言已遣首领洛施军笃乔阿公等将兵三万会击夏
现代文：九月初二，董毡遣使臣来进贡，并报告说已经派遣首领洛施军笃乔阿公等人率三万士兵会合宋军攻打夏国。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, Dong Xuan sent envoys to pay tribute, and reported that he had dispatched the leader of the Luo Shi Army, Duke Qiao Agong, and others to lead 30,000 soldiers to join the Song Army to attack Xia.

古文：己未，拂菻国来贡。庚申，熙河兵至女遮谷，与夏人遇，战败之。乙丑，泾原兵至磨哆隘，遇夏人，与其统军梁大王战，败之，追奔二十里，斩大首领没啰卧沙、监军使梁格鬼等十五级，获首领统军侄讫多埋等二十二人。己巳，入银州。
现代文：十二日，径原兵到了磨哆隘，遇到夏军，与其军事首领梁大王交战，把他打败，追赶了二十里路，斩杀了他们的大首领没锣卧沙、监军使梁格鬼等十五颗首级，俘获了首领统军的侄子讫多埋等二十二人。十六日，进军到银州。
English: On the 12th, the Chiwara soldiers arrived at the Maoju Pass, encountered the Xia army, fought with their military leader, Liang Da Wang, defeated him, chased him for twenty miles, killed fifteen heads of their great leader, Mianzhuo Sha, supervising army commander, Liang Ge Ge, and captured twenty-two people, including the nephew of the leader of the united army, Xing Duo Buried. On the 16th, they marched into Yinzhou.

古文：庚午，环庆行营经略使高遵裕复清远军。
现代文：十七日，环庆行营经略使高遵裕收复清远军。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Gao Zunyu was sent to recover the Qingyuan army.

古文：种谔遣曲珍等领兵通黑水安定堡，路遇夏人，与战，破之，斩获甚众。
现代文：种愕派遣曲珍等人领兵打通黑水安定堡路，遇到夏军，双方交战，打败了夏军，斩杀并俘获敌人很多。
English: With great consternation, he dispatched Qu Zhen and others to lead the troops to open the Black Water Stability Fort Road, encountered the Xia Army, the two sides fought, defeated the Xia Army, and killed and captured many enemies.

古文：癸酉，复韦州。
现代文：二十日，收复韦州。
English: On the 20th, we recovered Weizhou.

古文：乙亥，李宪败夏人于屈吴山。
现代文：二十二日，李宪在屈吴山打败夏军。
English: On the 22nd, Li Xian defeated the Xia army at Quwushan.

古文：丁丑，曲珍与夏人战于蒲桃山，败之。
现代文：二十四日，曲珍和夏军在蒲桃山交战，打败夏军。
English: On the 24th, Qu Zhen and Xia Jun fought in Putao Mountain and defeated Xia Jun.

古文：戊寅，种谔入夏州。诏诸将存抚降人。
现代文：二十五日，种愕率军进人夏州，命令各位将领慰问抚恤投降的人。
English: On the 25th, he marched into Xiazhou at the head of an army, and ordered his generals to give condolences to those who had surrendered.

古文：辛巳，史馆修撰曾巩乞收采名臣高士事迹遗文，诏从之。
现代文：二十八日，史馆修撰请求收集采编名臣高士事迹遗文，神宗下诏批准了这个请求。
English: On the 28th, the History Museum requested to collect and compile the remaining documents of the deeds of famous dignitaries, and Emperor Shenzong approved this request.

古文：泾原节制王中正入宥州。
现代文：径原节制王中正率军进到肴州。
English: Radial temperance Wang Zhongzheng led the army into Shanazhou.

古文：十一月癸未朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of November, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，诸军合攻灵州，种谔败夏人于黑水。
现代文：初五，各军联合攻打灵州，种愕在黑水打败夏军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the armies jointly attacked Lingzhou and defeated the Xia army in Heishui.

古文：己丑，李宪败夏人于啰逋川。
现代文：初七，李宪在缪通川打败夏军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Li Xian defeated Xia Jun at Miao Tong River.

古文：辛卯，种谔降横河平人户，破石堡城，斩获甚众。
现代文：初九，种愕降服横河平民户，攻破石堡城，斩杀并俘获很多夏国士兵。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, they surprised and defeated the civilians of Yokogawa, broke through the stone castle, and killed and captured many soldiers of Xia.

古文：辛丑，师还。
现代文：十九日，种愕率军班师。
English: On the 19th, the first class of military cadets graduated.

古文：癸卯，种谔至夏州索家平，兵众三万人，以无食而溃。
现代文：二十一日，种愕到夏州索家平，兵士共三万人，因无粮援而溃败。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the army reached Xiazhou Sojiaping, with a total of 30,000 soldiers, and was defeated due to lack of food aid.

古文：丙午，高遵裕以师还，夏人来追，遂溃。
现代文：二十四日，高遵裕率军班师，夏军赶来追击，于是溃败。
English: On the 24th, Gao Zunyu led an army squadron, and Xia's army came to pursue, and was defeated.

古文：十二月辛未，林广破乞弟于纳江。
现代文：十二月十九日，林广在纳江攻破乞弟。
English: On December 19th, Lin Guang defeated his younger brother in Najiang.

古文：乙亥，慈圣光献皇后禫祭，宰臣王珪等上表请听乐，不许，自是五表，乃从之。
现代文：二十三日，慈圣光献皇后丧祭满，脱去丧服，宰臣巨盖等上表请恢复听乐，神宗不许，又五次上表，神宗才同意听乐。
English: On the 23rd, Cixing Guang offered the full funeral sacrifice for the empress, took off his mourning clothes, and asked the upper table to resume listening to music, but Shenzong did not allow it. After five more times, Shenzong agreed to listen to music.

古文：戊寅，辽遣萧福全等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣萧福全等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Fuquan and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：五年春正月癸未朔，不受朝。
现代文：元丰五年正月初一，不接受大臣朝拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of Yuanfeng, he did not accept the minister's morning worship.

古文：丙申，御宣德门观灯。
现代文：十四日，到宣德门观灯。
English: On the 14th, I went to Xuande Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：己亥，白虹贯日。
现代文：十七日，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the 17th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：庚子，责授高遵裕郢州团练副使、本州安置。
现代文：十八日，高遵裕受到处罚，降为郑州团练副使，本州安置。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zunyu was punished, reduced to the vice-envoy of Zhengzhou regimental drill, and resettled in Honshu.

古文：乙巳，作新浑仪、浮漏。
现代文：二十三日，制作新浑仪、浮漏。
English: On the 23rd, the new mud instrument and floating drain were made.

古文：辛亥，诏再议西讨，以熙河经制李宪为泾原、熙河兰会安抚制置使，李浩权安抚副使。
现代文：二十九日，下诏再次讨论西征，任命熙河经制李宪为径原、熙河兰会安抚制置使，李浩代理安抚副使。
English: On the 29th day of the following month, the Western Expedition was discussed again, and Li Xian, the secretary of the Xihe Consistory, was appointed as the deputy prime minister, and Li Hao, the acting deputy secretary of the Xihe Consistory, was appointed as the deputy secretary of the Xihe Consistory.

古文：二月癸丑朔，颁三省、枢密、六曹条制。
现代文：二月初一，颁布三省、枢密院、六曹条例制度。
English: On the first day of February, the three provinces, the privy council and the six regulations system were promulgated.

古文：诏鄜延军士病不能归者，赐其家绢十匹。
现代文：下诏延军队士兵患病不能归还的人，赐给他们家庭十匹绢。
English: The following edict extended to soldiers of the army who were ill and could not be returned, giving them a family of ten horses.

古文：丙辰，以乞弟平，班师。
现代文：初四，因平定乞弟班师。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he was kicked out of his class for begging.

古文：辛酉，诏：董毡首领结邻死，其朝辞物给其子董讷支蔺毡，增赐绢百匹。
现代文：初九，下诏：董毡首领结邻去世，他的朝贡物品赐给他的儿子董呐支蔺毡，并另增加赏赐一百匹绢。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: "Dong Nanzhong, the leader of the Dong Nanzhong died, and his tribute goods were given to his son Dong Nanzhong, and an additional reward of one hundred horses was given."

古文：癸亥，华阴郡王宗旦薨。
现代文：十一日，华阴郡王宗旦逝世。
English: On the 11th day, King Sotan of Huayin County passed away.

古文：丁卯，封武昌军节度观察留后宗惠为江夏郡王。
现代文：十五日，封武昌军节度观察留后宗惠为江夏郡王。
English: On the 15th, Zong Hui became the king of Jiangxia County after the Wuchang Army stayed to observe the festival.

古文：癸酉，以出师，赦梓州路，减囚罪一等，民缘军事役者蠲其赋。
现代文：二十一日，因出兵赦免梓州路，囚犯减刑一等，百姓因兴兵服役的人免除赋税。
English: On the 21st, Zizhou Road was pardoned for sending troops, prisoners were given first-class sentence reductions, and people were exempted from paying taxes for those who volunteered to serve in the military.

古文：封董毡为武威郡王。
现代文：封董毡为武威郡王。
English: He was named the King of Wuwei County.

古文：丙子，渤泥来贡。
现代文：二十四日，渤泥来进贡。
English: On the 24th, tributes began to pour in.

古文：三月壬辰，亲策进士。
现代文：三月十一日，亲自策试进士。
English: On March 11th, he made his own plans to try to become a priest.

古文：甲午，策武举。
现代文：十三日，策试武举。
English: On the 13th, the strategic military exercise began.

古文：己亥，以日当食，避殿减膳，赦天下，降死罪一等，流以下原之。
现代文：十八日，因日食，不上殿听政并减少饮食，赦免全国，死刑罪犯减刑一等，流刑以下免予用刑。
English: On the 18th, due to the solar eclipse, he did not go to the palace to listen to politics and reduced his diet, pardoned the whole country, commuted the first-class sentence of death-penalty offenders, and exempted from the penalty below the banishment.

古文：诏杭州岁修吴越王坟庙。
现代文：下诏杭州每年修缮吴越王坟庙。
English: According to the following edict, Hangzhou will renovate the tomb temple of King Wu of Yue every year.

古文：壬寅，鄜延路副总管曲珍败夏人于金汤。
现代文：二十一日，延路副总管曲珍在金汤打败夏军。
English: On the 21st, Qu Zhen, the deputy head of Yanlu, defeated Xia Jun in Jintang.

古文：乙巳，赐进士、诸科出身千四百二十八人。
现代文：二十四日，赐进士、诸科出身一千四百二十八人。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, one thousand four hundred and twenty-eight people from all walks of life were promoted.

古文：丙午，雨土。
现代文：二十五日，降土。
English: On the seventeenth day, the descent began.

古文：夏四月壬子朔，日食不见。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食没有出现。
English: On the first day of summer in April, there was no eclipse.

古文：甲寅，御殿复膳。
现代文：初三，上殿听政并恢复饮食。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he went to the palace to listen to the government and resumed his diet.

古文：丁巳，辽遣耶律永端等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣耶律永端等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Yong Duan and others to congratulate the same day.

古文：己未，沈括奏遣曲珍将兵绥德城，应援讨葭芦寨左右见聚羌落，诏从之。
现代文：初八，沈括上奏请求派遣曲珍率军进人绥德城，以便援助征讨霞芦寨附近刚刚聚集的羌人部落，下诏批准上奏。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Shen Kuo requested that Qu Zhen lead an army into the city of Shunde, so that he could help recruit the tribes of the Qiang people who had just gathered near Xia Ruzhai. The emperor approved the request.

古文：乙丑，以直龙图阁徐禧知制诰、权御史中丞。
现代文：十四日，任命直龙图阁徐禧为知制浩、代理御史中承。
English: On the 14th, Jialong Tuge Xu Xie was appointed as the deputy chief secretary of the Central Military Commission.

古文：癸酉，官制成。
现代文：二十二日，元丰官制确定。
English: On the 22nd, the Yuanfeng official system was established.

古文：以王珪为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，蔡确为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：任命巨盖为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，蔡确为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: Kougai was appointed as Sho Sho's left-hand servant and footman, and Tsai Ji was appointed as Sho Sho's right-hand servant and junior footman.

古文：甲戌，太中大夫章惇为门下侍郎，张璪为中书侍郎，翰林学士薄宗孟为尚书左丞，翰林学士王安礼为尚书右丞。
现代文：二十三日，任命太中大夫章为门下侍郎，张为中书侍郎，翰林学士蒲宗孟为尚书左承，翰林学士王安礼为尚书右承。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed the Grand Master of the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences Zhang as the attendant of his disciple, Zhang as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the Hanlin Scholar Buzong Meng as the left successor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the Hanlin Scholar Wang Anli as the right successor of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：录唐段秀实后，复其家。
现代文：录用唐朝段秀实后代，免除他后代家庭赋役。
English: The descendants of Tang Dynasty Duan Xiusi were hired, and his descendants were exempted from family service.

古文：丁丑，同知枢密院吕公著罢知定州。
现代文：二十六日，同知枢密院吕公著罢为定州知州。
English: On the 26th, the Tongzhi Privy Council of Lvgong made Dingzhou Chizhou.

古文：五月辛已朔，行官制。
现代文：五月初一，颁行新官制。
English: On the first day of May, the new official system was promulgated.

古文：丁亥，赏蛮将士有差。
现代文：初七，赏赐平定蛮夷的士兵、将领不等的财物和官职。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the soldiers and generals who subdued the barbarians were rewarded with various properties and official positions.

古文：癸巳，丰州卒张世矩等作乱，伏诛。
现代文：十三日，丰州士兵张世矩等人叛乱被处以死刑。
English: On the 13th, Fuzhou soldier Zhang Shikang and other rebels were sentenced to death.

古文：其党王安以母老，诏特原之。
现代文：他们的同伙王安因母亲年岁大，下诏特地免刑。
English: Their accomplice, Wang An, was specifically exempted from punishment because his mother was elderly.

古文：作尚书省。
现代文：修建尚书省。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture was established.

古文：戊戌，诏两省官人举可任御史者各二人。
现代文：十八日，下诏两省官员举荐可以担任御史职务的人各二名。
English: On the 18th, the officials of the two provinces were asked to recommend two people each who could serve as imperial historian.

古文：甲辰，遣给事中徐禧治鄜延边事。
现代文：二十四日，派遣给事中徐禧治理延边境事务。
English: On the 24th, Xu Jizhe was dispatched to handle the extended border affairs.

古文：六月辛亥朔，环庆经略司遣将与夏人战，破之，斩其统军嵬名妹精嵬、副统军讹勃遇。
现代文：六月初一，环庆经略司派遣军队与西夏军交战，打败夏军，斩杀夏军统军鬼名妹精鬼、副统军讹勃遇。
English: On the first day of June, the Huanqing Economic Strategy Division sent troops to fight with the Western Xia Army, defeated the Xia Army, and killed the ghost of the Xia Army's unified army, the ghost of the deputy unified army.

古文：甲寅，王珪上《两朝史》。戊午，诏修《两朝宝训》。
现代文：初四，巨盖进呈两朝史。初八，下诏修撰两朝宝切卜。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Jugei Jin presented the history of the two dynasties. On the eighth day of the first month, he revised the two dynasties' treasure, Chebu.

古文：诏以成都路供给泸州边事，曲赦，免二税。
现代文：下诏因成都路供给沪州边事粮晌，特赦本路，并免除二税。
English: The following edict amnestied Chengdu Road for supplying grain to the Huzhou border and exempted it from the second tax.

古文：甲子，改翰林医官院为医官局。
现代文：十四日，改翰林医官院为医官局。
English: On the 14th, the Hanlin Medical College was renamed the Medical Bureau.

古文：壬申，交阯献驯犀二。
现代文：二十二日，交趾进献二头驯犀。
English: On the 22nd, Koji presented two trained rhinoceroses.

古文：癸酉，豫章郡王宗谔薨。
现代文：二十三日，豫章郡王宗愕逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Zong of Yuzhang County passed away.

古文：戊寅，曲珍等败夏人于明堂川。
现代文：二十八日，曲珍等人在明堂川打败夏军。
English: On the 28th, Qu Zhen and others defeated Xia's army in the Myeongdong River.

古文：作天源河。
现代文：修筑天源河。
English: Rebuild Tianyuan River.

古文：秋七月辛巳，广西经略司言知宜州王奇与贼战，败绩。
现代文：秋七月初二，广西经略司报告说，宜州知州王奇与贼交战，失败。
English: On the second day of the second month of autumn, the Guangxi Economic Strategy Department reported that Yizhou Chizhou Wang Qi fought with thieves and failed.

古文：壬午，诏罢大理寺官赴中书省谳案。
现代文：初三，下诏罢除大理寺官员到中书省复审案件。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, officials of Dali Temple were dismissed and sent to the Ministry of Education to review the case.

古文：戊子，诏御史中丞舒亶举任言事或察官十人。
现代文：初九，下诏御史中承舒推举担任言事官或察官的人才十人。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the 1st year of the 3rd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14

古文：辛卯，诏尚书考功员外郎蔡京编手诏。
现代文：十二日，下诏尚书考功员外郎蔡京编撰神宗亲自写的诏书。
English: On the 12th day of the following month, the imperial edict written by Shinso himself was compiled by Gairo Cai Jing, a member of the imperial examination committee.

古文：庚子，以蔡京为起居郎，仍同详定官制。
现代文：二十一日，任命蔡京作为起居郎，仍然同详定官制。
English: On the twenty-first day, Cai Jing was appointed as kijiro, still with the same detailed official system.

古文：丁未，垂拱殿宴修史官。
现代文：二十八日，在垂拱殿宴请修史官。
English: On the 28th, he invited the historian to a banquet at the Hanging Arch.

古文：己酉，始建雩坛，祀上帝，以太宗配。
现代文：三十日，开始修建零坛祭祀上天，以太宗配祭。
English: On the 30th, the construction of the altar of sacrifice to the heavens, the Ethereal Sect Festival, began.

古文：八月庚戌朔，封御侍武氏为才人。
现代文：八月初一，封御侍臣武氏为才人。
English: On the first day of August, Takeuji, a high-ranking vassal of the shogunate, was appointed as a talented person.

古文：壬子，进封均国公佣为延安郡王。
现代文：初三，进封均国公墉为延安郡王。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Jinfei Jinguo Gongye became the king of Yan'an County.

古文：以昭容朱氏为贤妃。
现代文：封昭容朱氏为贤妃。
English: She was given the title of Zhao Rong Zhu as a virtuous empress.

古文：庚申，帝有疾。
现代文：十一日，神宗患病。
English: On the 11th day, Shinso fell ill.

古文：诏岁以四孟月朝献景灵宫。
现代文：下诏每年四季的头一个月祭祀景灵宫。
English: According to the following edict, the first month of the four seasons each year is dedicated to the Jingling Palace.

古文：辛未，遣韩忠彦等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：二十二日，派遣韩忠彦等人祝贺辽主生辰、正旦。
English: On the 22nd, Han Tadahiko and others were dispatched to congratulate Liao on his birthday.

古文：凤州团练使种谔以行军迂道，降授文州刺史。
现代文：凤州团练使种愕因行军迟缓，被降官授为文州刺史。
English: The leader of the Fengzhou Rehearsal Team was demoted from the rank of general to the rank of lieutenant colonel due to his slow marching.

古文：壬申，诏罢增减幕职、州县官奉。
现代文：二十三日，下诏罢除增减幕职、州县官棒禄。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict revoked the increase and decrease of the shogunate post and the state and county official baton.

古文：甲戌，城永乐。
现代文：二十五日，修筑永乐城。
English: On the 25th, Yongle City was built.

古文：戊寅，河决原武。
现代文：二十九日，黄河在原武决口。
English: On the 29th, the Yellow River was at the mouth of the Genwu River.

古文：九月丁亥，夏人三十万众寇永乐，曲珍战不利，裨将寇伟等死之，夏人遂围城。
现代文：九月初九，西夏三十万军队攻打永乐城，边境将领曲珍与夏军交战，未能获胜，副将寇伟等为此战死，西夏军队随即包围了永乐城。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, 300,000 troops of the Western Xia attacked Yongle City. The border general Qu Zhen fought with the Xia army and failed to win. Vice-general Kou Wei and others died in the battle. The Western Xia army immediately surrounded Yongle City.

古文：己丑，帝以疾愈，降京畿囚罪一等，徒以下释之。
现代文：十一日，神宗因病情痊愈，减轻京瓷囚犯罪刑一等，徒刑以下全部释放。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shinso recovered from his illness, and the criminal punishment of Kyocera prisoners was reduced to the first degree, and all prisoners were released.

古文：壬辰，遣使行视畿县民被水患者。
现代文：十四日，派遣使臣巡行视察京城郊县百姓遭受水灾的人。
English: On the 14th, envoys were sent to inspect the flood victims in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：乙未，诏张世矩等将兵救永乐砦。
现代文：十七日，下诏张世矩等人率军援救永乐城寨。
English: On the 17th, Zhang Shichang and others led the army to rescue Yongle Castle.

古文：戊戌，永乐陷，给事中徐禧、内侍李舜举、陕西转运判官李稷死之。
现代文：二十日，永乐城陷没，给事中徐禧、内侍李舜举、陕西转运判官李翟在战斗中阵亡。
English: On the 20th, Yongle Castle was captured, and Xu Xiyi, the chambermaid Li Qiju, and the Shaanxi transportation judge Li Qian were killed in the battle.

古文：己亥，诏客省、引进、四方馆、东西上阁门各置使、副等职。
现代文：二十一日，下诏客省、引进、四方馆、东西上阁门分别设置使和副使等官职。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the posts of envoy and deputy envoy were set up respectively for the following provinces: Zhaoqi Province, Introduction, Sifang Pavilion, and East-West Upper Gate.

古文：庚子，安化蛮寇宜州，知州王奇死之，诏赠忠州防御使。
现代文：二十二日，安化蛮攻打宜州，知州王奇战死，下诏赠官忠州防御使。
English: On the 22nd, Anhua brutally attacked Yizhou, Chizhou Wang Qi was killed in the battle, and the following edict was issued to the official Zhongzhou defense envoy.

古文：辛丑，赏董毡将士有差。
现代文：二十三日，给予董毡将士不等的奖赏。
English: On the 23rd, various awards were given to Dong Hao.

古文：癸卯，滑州河水溢。
现代文：二十五日，滑州黄河水溢出河道。
English: On the 25th, water from the Yellow River overflowed its course in the city of Laozhou.

古文：冬十月辛亥，洛口、广武大河溢。
现代文：冬十月初四，黄河水在洛口、广武溢出河道。
English: On the fourth day of winter in early October, the Yellow River overflowed its channels in Lokou and Guangwu.

古文：甲寅，知延州沈括以措置乖方，责授均州团练副使、随州安置；鄜延路副都总管曲珍以城陷败走，降授皇城使。
现代文：初七，延州知州沈括因措置不当，受到处罚，降为均州团练副使、随州安置；延路副总管曲珍因永乐城陷没退撤，降授为皇城使。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yanzhou Zhizhou Shen Guo was punished for improper measures, and was reduced to the vice-envoy of the Junzhou group training and resettled with the state; Yanlu vice-governor Qu Zhen withdrew because Yongle Castle had fallen, and was downgraded to the imperial city envoy.

古文：丙辰，修定景灵宫仪。
现代文：初九，修定景灵宫礼仪。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the etiquette of Jingling Palace was revised.

古文：乙丑，诏赠永乐死事臣徐禧金紫光禄大夫、吏部尚书，李舜举昭化军节度使，并赐谥忠愍，李稷朝奉大夫、工部侍郎，入内高品张禹勤皇城使，各推恩赐赠有差。
现代文：十八日，下诏赠给在永乐之战中战死的臣僚徐禧为金紫光禄大夫、吏部尚书；赠李舜举为昭化军节度使，并赐给溢号忠憨；赠李翟为朝奉大夫、工部侍郎；贝曾人内高品张禹勤为皇城使，并分别施给恩惠，得到不等的赐赠。
English: On the 18th, the following imperial rescript was presented to the ministers who died in the battle of Yongle: Xu Xiyi was the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and the official of the Ministry of Public Administration; Li Xizhi was the festival envoy of the Shao Huai Army and was given the honorary title of loyal envoy; Li Xizhi was the doctor of the Imperial Court and the waiter of the Ministry of Industry; Zhang Yuqin, a high-ranking person in the Pei Zeng Dynasty, was the imperial envoy and was given favors separately and received unequal gifts.

古文：癸酉，贬知太原府、资政殿大学士吕惠卿知单州。
现代文：二十六日，贬太原知府、资政殿大学士吕惠卿为单州知州。
English: On the 26th, the former governor of Taiyuan Province and a member of the Imperial House of Councillors, Lü Huiqing, was demoted to the status of a single prefectural governor.

古文：十一月戊寅朔，罢御史察诸路。
现代文：十一月初一，罢除御史视察各路。
English: On the first day of November, the ousted governor inspected all roads.

古文：壬午，景灵宫成，告迁祖宗神御。
现代文：初五，修成景灵宫，祭迁祖宗神主。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Jingling Palace was built, and the ancestors of the gods were relocated.

古文：癸未，初行酌献礼。
现代文：初六，首次颁行酌献礼。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, the first drink offering ceremony was held.

古文：乙酉，以奉安神御赦天下，官与享大臣子若孙一人。
现代文：初八，因神主迁庙赦免全国，大臣的儿子或孙子一人可得到官职和享受有关待遇。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, because of the Lord's move of the temple, the whole country was pardoned, and only one son or grandson of the minister could receive an official post and enjoy the relevant treatment.

古文：庚寅，紫宸殿宴侍祠官。
现代文：十三日，在紫哀殿宴请侍祠官。
English: On the 13th, a banquet was held at the Purple Shrine for the retainers of the ancestral shrine.

古文：十二月丁巳，新乐成。
现代文：十二月十一日，新乐制成。
English: On December 11th, the new music was made.

古文：以贤妃周氏为德妃。
现代文：任命贤妃周氏为德妃。
English: Appointed the virtuous empress Zhou as the virtuous empress.

古文：辛酉，塞原武决河。
现代文：十五日，堵塞原武黄河决口。
English: On the 15th, the mouth of the original Wuhong River was blocked.

古文：丙寅，休日御延和殿，引进对官十人。
现代文：二十日，休息时间到延和殿，接见进对官十人。
English: On the 20th, during the break, I went to Yanhe Hall and met with ten officials.

古文：辛未，西南龙蕃来贡。
现代文：二十五日，西南龙蕃来进贡。
English: On the 29th, Southwest Longyan paid tribute.

古文：壬申，辽遣耶律仪等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣耶律仪等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Yi and others to congratulate the new spring.

古文：丙子，录永乐死事将皇城使寇伟等十三人及东上阁门副使景思谊等九十人，赠赐有差。
现代文：三十日，录用永乐之战战死将领皇城使寇伟等十三人及东上阎门副使景思谊等九十人，分别得到不等的赠赐。
English: On the 30th, 13 generals who died in the Battle of Yongle, such as Imperial Envoy Kou Wei, and 90 people, such as Vice-Envoy Jing Siyi of Dongshan Yamen, were awarded various gifts.

古文：六年春正月丁丑朔，御大庆殿受朝，始用新乐。
现代文：元丰六年春正月初一，到大庆殿接受朝拜，开始用新乐。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of Yuanfeng, he went to Daqing Hall to receive worship and began to use new music.

古文：仪鸾司彻幕屋坏，毁玉辂。
现代文：仪莺司彻幕屋倒塌，损坏玉格。
English: The curtain wall of the ceremonial hall collapsed, damaging the jade lattice.

古文：甲申，白虹贯日。
现代文：初八，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：丁亥，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十一日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：己丑，层檀入贡。
现代文：十三日，层檀来进贡。
English: On the 13th, tributes began to pour in.

古文：庚寅，御宣德门观灯。
现代文：十四日，到宣德门观灯。
English: On the 14th, I went to Xuande Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：癸巳，诏御史六察罢上下半年更易法。
现代文：十七日，下诏御史六察罢除上下半年更换法。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, the next imperial edict was issued to abolish the six-month inspection period and replace it with a six-month inspection period.

古文：乙未，诏修周、汉以来陵庙。
现代文：十九日，下诏修缮周、汉以来陵庙。
English: On the 19th, it was announced that the mausoleum would be repaired for the first time since the Han Dynasty.

古文：乙巳，御崇政殿阅武士。
现代文：二十九日，到崇政殿检阅武士。
English: On the 29th, they went to the Imperial Palace to inspect the samurai.

古文：丙午，封楚三闾大夫屈平为忠洁侯。
现代文：三十日，封楚国三间大夫屈原为忠洁侯。
English: On the 30th, Qu Yuan, the third doctor of the state of Fuchu, was named as a chujie marquis.

古文：二月丁未，夏人数十万众攻兰州，钤辖王文郁率死士七百余人击走之。
现代文：二月初一，夏军数十万人进攻兰州，铃辖王文郁率领敢死战士七百多人打退夏军。
English: On the first day of February, hundreds of thousands of Xia's army attacked Lanzhou, and Wang Wenyu led more than 700 soldiers to fight back Xia's army.

古文：丙辰，以夏人犯兰州，贬熙河经略使李宪为经略安抚都总管，以王文郁为西上阁门使、知兰州，副使李浩为四方馆使。
现代文：初十，因夏军进犯兰州，熙河经略使李宪被贬为经略安抚都总管，任命王文郁为西上闯门使、兰州知州，副使李浩为四方馆使。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, due to the invasion of Lanzhou by the Xia army, Li Xian was demoted to the general manager of the pacification of the capital, appointed Wang Wenyu as the western gatekeeper, Lanzhou Zhizhou, and the deputy envoy Li Hao as the four-party envoy.

古文：甲子，诏供备库使高遵治、西京左藏库副使张寿各降一官。
现代文：十八日，下诏供备库使高遵治、西京左藏库副使张寿分别降官一级。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zunzhi, the second-highest official for the preparation of the repository, and Zhang Shou, the deputy of the West Beijing Zuo repository, were demoted by one rank.

古文：三月辛卯，夏人寇兰州，副总管李浩以卫城有功，复陇州团练使。
现代文：三月十六日，夏军攻打兰州，副总管李浩因保卫兰州城有功，恢复陇州团练使。
English: On March 16th, the Xia Army attacked Lanzhou, and Li Hao, the vice-commander-in-chief, resumed his duties as the Bozhou regimental drill sergeant due to his meritorious service in defending the city of Lanzhou.

古文：乙未，休日御延和殿，引进对官八人。
现代文：二十日，假日到延和殿，召见进对官八人。
English: On the 20th, a holiday, I went to Yanhe Hall and summoned eight officials.

古文：丙申，河东将薛义败夏人于葭芦西岭。
现代文：二十一日，河东将领薛义在霞芦西岭打败夏军。
English: On the twenty-first day, the general of Hedong, Xue Yi, defeated the Xia army in Xiling, Xialu.

古文：戊戌，以检校太尉、上柱国、太原郡开国公王拱辰为武安军节度使。
现代文：二十三日，任命检校太尉、上柱国、太原郡开国公王拱辰为武安军节度使。
English: On the 23rd, Gong Chen, a lieutenant of the inspection, Shangzhu Province, and the founding prince of Taiyuan County, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Wu'an Army.

古文：麟、府州将郭忠诏等败夏人于乜离抑部，诏行赏有差。
现代文：麟州、府州将领郭忠诏等人在包离抑部打败夏军，下诏给予不等的奖赏。
English: Linshou and Fuzhou generals Guo Zhongzhao and others defeated Xia's army in the separation and suppression sector, and Xia Zhao gave them different rewards.

古文：己亥，河东将高永翼败夏人于真卿流部。
现代文：二十四日，河东将领高永翼在真卿流部打败夏军。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the general Gao Yongyi of Hedong defeated the Xia army in the Zhenqing stream.

古文：夏四月己酉，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：夏四月初四，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4

古文：辛亥，辽遣萧固等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣萧固等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Gu and others to congratulate the same day.

古文：甲子，礼部郎中林希上《两朝宝训》。
现代文：十九日，礼部郎中林希进呈两朝宝训》。
English: On the 19th, Lin Xi, vice-chairman of the Rectification Department, presented the Two Dynasties' Treasure Sermon.

古文：李浩败夏人于巴义溪。
现代文：李浩在巴义溪打败夏军。二十六日，降土。
English: Li Hao defeated the Xia army at Bayi Creek. On the 26th, the troops landed.

古文：辛未，雨土。壬申，御迩英阁，蔡卞进讲《周礼》。
现代文：二十七日，到迩英阁，蔡卞进讲凋字巨。五月初一，于闻来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Cai Yujin spoke Wu Zi Jiu at Yu Ying Ge. On the first day of May, Yu Wenlai paid tribute.

古文：五月丙子朔，于阗入贡。甲申，以时暑，趣决开封、大理狱。
现代文：初九，因盛夏酷暑催促处决开封大理狱。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, due to the heat of the summer, the execution of Kaifeng Dali Prison was urged.

古文：庚寅，以旱，虑囚。
现代文：十五日，因早灾讯察全国囚犯罪状。
English: On the 15th, due to the early disaster, the status of prisoners across the country was investigated.

古文：甲午，夏人寇兰州，右侍禁韦定死之。
现代文：十九日，夏军攻打兰州，右侍禁韦定在战斗中阵亡。
English: On the 19th, Xia's army attacked Lanzhou, and Wei Ding, the right-hand man, was killed in the battle.

古文：癸卯，诏赐资州孝子支渐粟帛。
现代文：二十八日，下诏赐给资州孝子支渐粟帛。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued to the filial sons and daughters of Zhizhou.

古文：是月，夏人寇麟州，知州訾虎败之。
现代文：这个月，夏军攻打麟州，知州警虎率军打败夏军。
English: This month, the Xia army attacked Linzhou, and the Chizhou police tiger led the army to defeat the Xia army.

古文：六月乙巳朔，诏御史台六察各置御史一员。
现代文：六月初一，下诏御史台六察分别设置御史一名。
English: On the first day of June, the next imperial edict set up an imperial historian at each of the six historical observatories.

古文：癸丑，诏御史中丞、两省官各举可任言事或监察御史五人。
现代文：初九，下诏御史中承、两省官员各自推举可以担任言事官或监察御史的人五人。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, in the middle of the imperial edict, the officials of the two provinces will each nominate five people who can serve as speech officers or supervise the imperial edict.

古文：闰月乙亥朔，夏主秉常请修贡，许之。
现代文：闰六月初一，夏主秉常请求恢复进贡，神宗允许。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, Emperor Xia asked Emperor Bingzang to restore the tribute, which Emperor Shenzong allowed.

古文：戊寅，诏陕西、河东毋辄出兵。
现代文：初四，下诏陕西、河东不要轻率出兵。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Shaanxi and Hedong should not rashly send troops.

古文：丙戌，诏内外文武各举应武举一人。
现代文：十二日，下诏朝廷内外文武百官各自推举一人应试武举。汁水溢出河道。
English: On the 12th, it was decreed that one person from each of the hundreds of civil and military officials inside and outside the imperial court should try martial arts. Juice and water overflowed into the river.

古文：汴水溢。丙申，太师、守司徒、韩国公富弼薨，谥文忠。
现代文：二十二日，太师、守司徒、韩国公富弼逝世，溢号文忠。
English: On the 22nd, Taishi, Shou Sito, and Korea's King Fumimaro passed away, and so did Munetada.

古文：秋七月乙卯，祔孝惠、孝章、淑德、章怀皇后于庙。
现代文：秋七月十二日，在太庙附祭孝惠、孝章、淑德、章怀皇后。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of autumn, in the temple's festival, the empresses Xiao Hui, Xiao Zhang, Shu De, and Zhang Huai appeared.

古文：丙辰，以四后祔庙，降京畿囚罪一等，流以下原之。
现代文：十三日，因四皇后附祭太庙，京瓷囚犯减刑一等，流刑以下予以赦免。
English: On the 13th, due to the Four Empresses Memorial Temple, the Kyocera prisoners received a first-class commutation of sentence, and were pardoned from exile.

古文：孙固罢知河阳。
现代文：孙固罢为河阳知府。
English: Sun Gu is now the governor of Hebei Province.

古文：以同知枢密院韩缜知枢密院，户部尚书安焘同知枢密院。
现代文：任命同知枢密院韩填知枢密院，户部尚书安煮同知枢密院。
English: Appointed Tongzhi Privy Council Han filled the Tongzhi Privy Council, and Hube Shangshuang boiled the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：戊午，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十五日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the fifteenth day, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：八月丙子，赐升祔陪祠官宴于尚书省。
现代文：八月初三，在尚书省赐给升撇陪祠官员酒席。
English: On the 3rd day of the 8th lunar month, a banquet was given to the officials of Shengqiao Ancestral Temple in Shangshu.

古文：己卯，太白昼见。
现代文：初六，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 23rd, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：乙酉，遣蔡京等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：十二日，派遣蔡京等人祝贺辽主生辰、正旦。
English: On the 12th, Cai Jing and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday.

古文：辛卯，蒲宗孟罢，王安礼为尚书左丞，吏部尚书李清臣为尚书右丞。
现代文：十八日，蒲宗孟罢官，王安礼为尚书左承，吏部尚书李清臣担任尚书右承。
English: On the 18th, Pu Zongmeng resigned, Wang Anli became the left successor of Shang Shuxu, and Li Qingchen, the right successor of Shang Shuxu, became the head of the personnel department.

古文：九月癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月一日，日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十月癸酉朔，秉常遣使上表，请复修职贡，乞还旧疆。
现代文：冬十月初一，秉常派遣使臣上表，请求恢复进贡的职责，并表示要归还旧有的疆土。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Bingzhang sent envoys to the court to request the resumption of the duty of paying tribute, and said that he wanted to return to the old territory.

古文：戊子，封孟轲为邹国公。
现代文：十六日，封孟柯为邹国公。
English: On the 16th, Meng Ke was named the Duke of Shan.

古文：癸巳，会稽郡王世清薨。
现代文：二十一日，会稽郡王世清逝世。
English: On the 21st, the county auditor Wang Shixing passed away.

古文：庚子，尚书省成。
现代文：二十八日，尚书省修成。
English: On the 28th, Shangshu Province was completed.

古文：辛丑，封马援为忠显王。
现代文：二十九日，封马援为忠显王。
English: On the 29th, the title of "Ma Yuan" was conferred on King Zhongxian.

古文：十二月癸卯，加上仁宗谥曰体天法道极功全德神文圣武睿哲明孝皇帝，英宗曰体乾应历隆功盛德宪文肃武睿神宣孝皇帝。
现代文：十一月初二，增加奉上仁宗溢号为体天法道极功全德神文圣武睿哲明孝皇帝，英宗溢号为体乾应历隆功盛德宪文肃武睿神宣孝皇帝。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the names of Emperor Shangrenzong and Emperor Yingzong were added. Shangrenzong's name was changed to "Emperor Shangrenzong" and Emperor Yingzong's name was changed to "Emperor Shangrenzong."

古文：甲辰，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：初三，朝奉景灵宫。
English: On the third day of the school year, the morning service is held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：乙巳，朝享太庙。
现代文：初四，朝拜祭享太庙。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the morning worship festival is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：丙午，祀昊天上帝于圜丘，赦天下。
现代文：初五，在圆形高坛祭祀昊天上帝，赦免全国。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the god Haotian is worshipped at a round altar, and the whole country is pardoned.

古文：甲寅，文彦博以太师致仕。
现代文：十三日，文彦博以太师头衔退休。
English: On the 13th, Fumihiko Bo retired with the title of ether master.

古文：乙卯，以观文殿大学士韩绛为建雄军节度使。
现代文：十四日，任命观文殿大学士韩绛为建雄军节度使。
English: On the 14th, Han Zheng, a scholar from Guanwenden University, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Jianxiong Army.

古文：庚申，幸尚书省，官执政五服内未仕者一人，进尚书以下官一等。
现代文：十九日，到尚书省，执政官员五服之内的亲属没有做官的给予一人出仕做官，尚书以下官员分别升官一级。
English: On the 19th, in Shangshu Province, the relatives of the ruling officials within the five services who did not serve as officials were given one person to serve as an official, and the officials below Shangshu were promoted to the first level.

古文：七年春正月丙午，封洺州防御使世准为安定郡王。
现代文：元丰七年正月初六，封洛州防御使世准为安定郡王。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the seventh year of Yuanfeng, the defense of Fengluo County made Shizun the stable county king.

古文：癸丑，夏人寇兰州，李宪等击走之。
现代文：十三日，夏军攻打兰州，李宪等人率兵打退夏军。
English: On the 13th, the Xia army attacked Lanzhou, and Li Xian and others led the troops to beat back the Xia army.

古文：甲寅，以贤妃朱氏为德妃。
现代文：十四日，以贤妃朱氏为德妃。
English: On the 14th, the virtuous empress Zhu was crowned as Empress of Germany.

古文：二月甲戌，太师文彦博入觐，置酒垂拱殿。
现代文：二月初五，太师文彦博到朝廷朝见神宗，神宗在垂拱殿设酒席招待。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month, Grand Master Fumihiko visited the Imperial Court to meet with Shinso, who invited him to a banquet in the main hall.

古文：癸未，进封濮阳郡王宗晖为嗣濮王，封宗晟为高密郡王，宗绰为建安郡王，宗隐为安康郡王，宗瑗为汉东郡王，宗愈为华原郡王。
现代文：十四日，进封攫阳郡王宗晖为嗣攫王，封宗晨为高密郡王，宗绰为建安郡王，宗隐为安康郡王，宗缓为汉东郡王，宗愈为华原郡王。
English: On the 14th, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya, Wang Zongya,

古文：三月辛丑，赐文彦博宴于琼林苑，帝制诗以赐之。
现代文：三月初二，在琼林苑赐宴文彦博，神宗作诗赐给文彦博。
English: On the second day of March, at Qionglin Garden, a banquet was given to Wen Yanbo, and Shen Zong gave him a poem to write.

古文：庚申，御崇政殿大阅。
现代文：二十一日，到崇政殿举行大规模阅兵仪式。
English: On the 21st, a large-scale military parade ceremony was held at the Suisho-den.

古文：壬戌，诏赐鬼章写经纸，还其所献马。
现代文：二十三日，下诏赐给鬼章写经纸，还给他献给朝廷的马匹。
English: On the twenty-third day, the emperor gave the ghost chapter to write scriptures, and gave him horses dedicated to the imperial court.

古文：癸亥，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十四日，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the 24th, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：夏四月辛未，大食国来贡。
现代文：夏四月初二，大食国来进贡。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, the great food country came to pay tribute.

古文：乙亥，辽遣萧浃等来贺同天节。
现代文：初六，辽朝派遣萧侠等人来祝贺同天节。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the Liao Dynasty sent Xiao Xiao and others to congratulate the festival.

古文：丁丑，赐饶州童子朱天锡五经出身。
现代文：初八，赐给饶州童子朱天锡五经出身。
English: Hatsuhachi, given to Raozhou boy Zhu Tianxi from the Five Classics.

古文：丙戌，景灵宫天元殿门生芝草六本。
现代文：十七日，景灵宫天元殿门生出六株芝草。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, six seedlings of turfgrass sprouted from the gate of the Tengen Hall of the Jingling Palace.

古文：壬辰，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：二十三日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 23rd, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：癸巳，夏人寇延州安塞堡，将官吕真败之。
现代文：二十四日，夏军攻打延州安塞堡，将官吕真打败夏军。
English: On the 24th, Xia's army attacked Yanzhou Ansai Fort, and General Lü Zhen defeated Xia's army.

古文：五月壬子，虑囚，降死罪一等，杖以下释之。
现代文：五月十四日，讯察全国囚犯罪状，死刑罪犯减刑一等，杖刑以下全部释放。
English: On May 14th, the status of prisoners across the country was surveyed, and the death penalty convicts were commuted to the first class, and all of them were released from the cane.

古文：辛酉，白虹贯日。
现代文：二十三日，一道白色虹横贯天空。
English: On the 23rd, a white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：壬戌，以孟轲配食文宣王，封荀况、杨雄、韩愈为伯，并从祀。
现代文：二十四日，以孟柯配享文宣王，封荀况、扬雄、韩愈为伯爵，一起从祀孔庙。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Meng Ke was matched with King Huanwen Xuan, and Meng Ke, Yang Xiong, and Han Yu were made count, and together they began to worship the Confucius Temple.

古文：诏诸路帅臣、监司等举大使臣为将领。
现代文：下诏各路帅臣、监司等官员推举大使臣为将领。
English: The following edict was issued to all officers, supervisors, and other officials to nominate ambassadors as generals.

古文：六月丙子，夏人寇德顺军，巡检王友死之。
现代文：六月初八，夏军攻打德顺军，巡检王友战死。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of June, the Xia Army attacked the Deshun Army, and Wang You, a patrol inspector, died in the battle.

古文：辛卯，江夏郡王宗惠薨。
现代文：二十三日，江夏郡王宗惠逝世。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Zonghui of Jiangxia County passed away.

古文：秋七月甲辰，伊、洛溢，河决元城。
现代文：秋七月初七，伊水、洛水溢出河道，黄河在元城决口。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7

古文：丙午，遣使振恤，赐溺死者家钱。
现代文：初九，派遣使臣贩济抚恤，赐给淹死的人家庭钱。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he sent his envoys and merchants to collect alms, and gave money to the families of those who had drowned.

古文：壬子，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十五日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the fifteenth day, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：甲寅，王安礼罢。
现代文：十七日，王安礼罢职。
English: On the 17th, Wang Anli resigned.

古文：八月庚午，诏王光祖遣人招谕乞弟，许出降免罪补官。是岁，乞弟死。
现代文：八月初三，下诏王光祖派遣人招谕乞弟，允许他投降，投降后免罪补官，这一年乞弟去世。
English: On the third day of the first month of August, Wang Guangzu sent an envoy to invite his younger brother to surrender. After surrendering, he was pardoned and became a vice-premier. In the same year, his younger brother died.

古文：辛巳，遣陈睦等贺辽主生辰、正旦。
现代文：十四日，派遣陈睦等人祝贺辽主生辰、正旦。
English: On the 14th, Chen Mutsu and others were sent to congratulate Liao on his birthday.

古文：九月壬寅，西南龙蕃来贡。
现代文：九月初五，西南龙蕃来进贡。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of September, tributes came from as far away as Yongkang in southwest China.

古文：乙巳，三佛齐来贡。
现代文：初八，三佛齐来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the three Buddhas came to pay tribute.

古文：乙丑，夏人围定西城，熙河将秦贵败之。
现代文：二十八日，夏军围攻定西城，熙河将领秦贵打败夏军。
English: On the 28th, the Xia army besieged and attacked the West City, and Qin Gui, the general of the He River, defeated the Xia army.

古文：冬十月乙亥，夏人寇熙河。
现代文：冬十月初九，夏军攻打熙河。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the summer army attacked Heihe.

古文：庚辰，饶州童子朱天申对于睿思殿，赐五经出身。
现代文：十四日，饶州童子朱天申在睿思殿接受召对，赐给他五经出身。
English: On the 14th, Zhu Tianshin, a boy from Raozhou, accepted the summons at the Ruisi Temple and was given the Five Classics.

古文：辛巳，朝献景灵宫。
现代文：十五日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the fifteenth day, the ceremony was held at Jingling Palace.

古文：戊子，诏分画交阯界，以六县二峒赐之。
现代文：二十二日，下诏划分与交趾的疆界，赐给交趾六县二酮。
English: On the 22nd, the next edict divided the border with Jiaozuo, and granted Jiaozuo six counties.

古文：乙未，夏人寇静边砦，泾原将彭孙败之。
现代文：二十九日，夏军攻打静边寨，径原将领彭孙打败夏军。
English: On the 29th, Xia's army attacked Jing's outpost, and the former general Peng Sun defeated Xia's army.

古文：十一月丁酉朔，寇清边砦，队将白玉、李贵死之。
现代文：十一月初一，夏军攻打清边寨，队将白玉、李贵战死。
English: On the first day of November, the Xia army attacked the Qing border village, and the team leader Bai Yu and Li Gui died in the battle.

古文：甲辰，夏国主秉常遣使来贡。
现代文：初八，夏国主秉常派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Emperor Xia sent an envoy to bring tribute.

古文：乙卯，太白昼见。
现代文：十九日，太白星白天出现。
English: Uh-oh, Taibai Star appears during the day.

古文：十二月戊辰，端明殿学士司马光上《资治通鉴》，以光为资政殿学士，降诏奖谕。
现代文：十二月初三，端明殿学士司马光进呈溃治通鉴，任命司马光为资政殿学士，下诏予以奖赏。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Sima Guang, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, submitted a comprehensive report on the collapse of the government, appointed Sima Guang as a scholar of the Capital and Political Affairs Palace, and awarded him.

古文：庚寅，诏门下、中书外省官同举言事御史。
现代文：二十五日，下诏门下、中书外省官共同推举言事御史。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, provincial officials under the auspices of the Emperor and outside the Chinese Academy of Sciences jointly proposed the speech.

古文：辛卯，辽遣耶律襄等来贺正旦。
现代文：二十六日，辽朝派遣耶律襄等人来祝贺新春。
English: On the 26th, the Liao Dynasty sent Ye Lu Xiang and others to congratulate the New Year.

古文：是岁，河东饥。河北水，坏洺州庐舍，蠲其税。
现代文：这一年，河东饥荒，河北水灾，毁坏洛州百姓房屋，免除这些地区的赋税。
English: In this year, the famine in Hedong and the flood in Hebei destroyed the houses of the people in Lozhou, exempting these areas from taxation.

古文：八年春正月戊戌，帝不豫。
现代文：元丰八年春正月初三，神宗染病。
English: On the third day of the first month of the eighth year of the Yuanfeng Spring, Shenzong fell ill.

古文：甲辰，赦天下。
现代文：初九，赦免全国。
English: On the 22nd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：乙巳，使辅臣代祷景灵宫。
现代文：初十，命令辅臣代替祈祷景灵宫。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he ordered his aides to pray at the Jingling Palace instead.

古文：乙卯，分遣群臣祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十日，分别派遣大臣祈祷天地、宗庙、社翟。
English: On the 20th, ministers were dispatched to pray for heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the shrine.

古文：二月辛巳，开宝寺贡院火。
现代文：二月十七日，开宝寺贡院发生火灾。
English: On February 17th, a fire broke out in the tribute hall of Kaiboji Temple.

古文：丁亥，命礼部锁试别所。
现代文：二十三日，命令礼部在另外的地方举行锁院考试。
English: On the 23rd, the Ministry of Ceremonies was ordered to hold the lock-up examination in another place.

古文：癸巳，上疾甚，迁御福宁殿，三省、枢密院入见，请立皇太子及请皇太后权同听政，许之。
现代文：二十九日，神宗病情加重，迁到福宁殿，三省、枢密院官员进殿朝见，请求立皇太子及请求皇太后暂时代理处理国政，神宗同意请求。
English: On the 29th, Shintsune's condition worsened, and he was moved to the Fukuning Palace. Officials from the three provinces and the Privy Council came to the palace to see the emperor, requesting that a crown prince be appointed and requesting that the empress dowager temporarily take charge of state affairs. Shintsune agreed to the request.

古文：三月甲午朔，立延安郡王佣为皇太子，赐名煦，皇太后权同处分军国事。
现代文：三月初一，立延安郡王墉为皇太子，赐名煦，皇太后暂时代理处理国家军政大事。
English: On the first day of March, Wang Yao of Yan'an County was appointed crown prince and given the title of empress dowager, and the empress dowager temporarily took charge of the country's military and political affairs.

古文：乙未，赦天下，遣官告于天地、宗庙、社稷、诸陵。
现代文：初二，赦免全国，派遣官员向天地、宗庙、社翟、诸陵通报情况。
English: On the second day of the new year, he pardoned the whole country and dispatched officials to report the situation to heaven and earth, ancestral temples, shrines, and tombs.

古文：丁酉，皇太后命吏部尚书曾孝宽为册立皇太子礼仪使。
现代文：初四，皇太后任命吏部尚书曾孝宽为册立皇太子礼仪使。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the empress dowager appointed the clerk, Shangshu Zeng Xiaokuan, as the crown prince's etiquette envoy.

古文：戊戌，上崩于福宁殿，年三十有八。
现代文：初五，神宗在福宁殿逝世，终年三十八岁。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Shinso died at Fukuning-den at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：皇太子即皇帝位，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后，德妃朱氏为皇太妃。
现代文：皇太子即皇帝位，尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后，德妃朱氏为皇太妃。
English: The crown prince is the emperor, the revered empress dowager is the grand empress dowager, the empress is the empress dowager, and the German princess Zhu is the crown princess.

古文：太皇太后权同处分军国事。
现代文：太皇太后代理处理国家军政大事。
English: The empress dowager handles the country's military and political affairs on his behalf.

古文：九月己亥，上大行皇帝谥曰英文烈武圣孝皇帝，庙号神宗。
现代文：九月初八，敬上大行皇帝溢号为英文烈武圣孝皇帝，庙号神宗。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, Emperor Jing Shangdaizhong's posthumous name was changed to the English name Emperor Liwu Shengxiao, and his temple name was changed to Shenzong.

古文：十月乙酉，葬于永裕陵。
现代文：十月二十四日，神宗葬在永裕陵。
English: On October 24, Shinso was buried in Yongyu Mausoleum.

古文：赞曰：帝天性孝友，其入事两宫，必侍立终日，虽寒暑不变。
现代文：评论说：神宗天性孝顺友善，他侍奉英宗和皇太后，一定是站立终日，即使是盛夏酷暑或三九严寒，也是如此。
English: "Shinzong was naturally filial, obedient, and friendly. He served Emperor Yingzong and the Empress Dowager, and he must have stood all day long, even in the heat of the summer or the cold of the winter," the commentary said.

古文：尝与岐、嘉二王读书东宫，侍讲王陶讲谕经史，辄相率拜之，由是中外翕然称贤。
现代文：曾经与岐王、嘉王在东宫读书学习，侍讲王陶讲论经史，神宗带着二王一起拜见王陶，因此朝廷内外纷纷称赞，说他言行一致，是个贤才。
English: He had studied with King Qi and King Jia in the East Palace, and Wang Tao, a courtier, had lectured on the history of scripture. Shensong took the two kings to see Wang Tao, and was praised inside and outside the court, saying that he was consistent in his words and deeds, and was a wise man.

古文：其即位也，小心谦抑，敬畏辅相，求直言，察民隐，恤孤独，养耆老，振匮乏。
现代文：神宗即皇帝位以后，小心谦恭，尊重宰相大臣；诏求直言劝谏，考察民间疾苦，抚恤丧失父母的孩子，奉养年纪高迈的老人，救济贫困家庭。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Shenzong, they should be careful and courteous, respect the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance, ask for frank advice, investigate the hardships of the people, support children who have lost their parents, support the elderly, and provide relief to poor families.

古文：不治宫室，不事游幸，历精图治，将大有为。
现代文：不大兴土木兴修宫室，不嗜好游山玩水。励精图治，将大有一番作为。
English: Not a big fan of civil engineering, not a fan of renovating the palace, not a fan of hiking in the mountains and playing in the water.

古文：未几，王安石入相。
现代文：时间不长，王安石人朝为相。
English: The time was not long, and Wang Anshi became the new prime minister.

古文：安石为人，悻悻自信，知祖宗志吞幽蓟、灵武，而数败兵，帝奋然将雪数世之耻，未有所当，遂以偏见曲学起而乘之。
现代文：王安石为人，疾恶如仇，十分自信，知道先帝祖宗立志吞并统一燕云和灵武，但屡次兵败，神宗奋然打算洗雪几代的耻辱，但没有相当的措施振兴国势，于是让偏狭的见解和邪曲的学说占了上风，控制了朝廷。
English: Wang Anshi was a very confident person. He knew that Emperor Anzong had set his heart on annexing Yan Yun and Lingwu, but had been defeated many times. Emperor Shenzong was determined to wash away the shame of several generations, but did not have adequate measures to revitalize the national situation. As a result, he allowed narrow-minded opinions and evil doctrines to prevail and control the imperial court.

古文：青苗、保甲、均输、市易、水利之法既立，而天下汹汹骚动，恸哭流涕者接踵而至。
现代文：青苗法、保甲法、均输法、市易法、农田水利法相继施行，这些新法制定出台以后，天下骚动不安，痛哭流涕陈述新法弊端的人接踵而至。
English: The Law on Young Seedlings, the Law on Quality Assurance, the Law on Uniform Transmission, the Law on Municipalities, and the Law on Farmland and Water Conservancy were successively implemented. After these new laws were enacted, the whole world was disturbed, and people came one after another, weeping and wailing, to describe the drawbacks of the new law.

古文：帝终不觉悟，方断然废逐元老，摈斥谏士，行之不疑。卒致祖宗之良法美意，变坏几尽。
现代文：但是神宗始终不觉悟，并断然废罢驱逐元老重臣，排斥敢于直谏的人，继续毫不怀疑地推行新法，最终导致祖宗治国的良法美意几乎全部被损坏和改变。
English: However, Shenzong never wised up, and categorically abolished the dismissal and expulsion of elders and senior ministers, excluded those who dared to make a direct attack, and continued to promote the new law without any doubt, which ultimately led to the destruction and change of almost all of the good laws and ideals of the ancestor's reign.

古文：自是邪佞日进，人心日离，祸乱日起。惜哉！
现代文：从此以后，奸邪之徒天天进升，百姓的心却一天天远离朝廷，祸乱每天都有出现，可惜呀！
English: Since then, the traitors have been rising day by day, but the people's hearts have been drifting away from the imperial court day by day, and disasters have occurred every day. What a pity!

