古文：永州浯溪，唐人留题颇多，其一云： 太仆卿分司东都韦瓘，大中二年过此。
现代文：在永州浯溪的石间，唐代人留下的题名石刻很多，其中有一条写道： 太仆卿分司东都韦瓘，宣宗太中二年路过这里。
English: There are many inscribed stone carvings left by the Tang Dynasty people among the stones of Yongzhou's Lixi River. One of them reads: "Daihokuqing Branch Dongdu Weiwu, Xuanzong Taizhong passed by here two years ago."

古文：余大和中以中书舍人谪宦康州，逮今十六年。
现代文：我于文宗大和年间以中书舍人的身份被贬请到康州作官，至今已十六年。
English: It has been sixteen years since I was demoted to an official post in the state of Kansas as a Chinese scholar during the years of Wenzong University and Wenzong University.

古文：去冬罢楚州刺史，今年二月有桂林之命，才经数月，又蒙除替，行次灵州，闻改此官，分司优闲，诚为忝幸。 
现代文：去年冬天在楚州刺史任上被罢官，今年二月又接到赴桂林作官的任命，在桂林才刚几个月，又蒙朝廷授职改任，行路停在灵川时，得到通知又改任此官，分司是个待遇优厚又悠闲的职务，确实令我感到有幸。 
English: Last winter, I was dismissed from the post of chief historian in Chuzhou. In February of this year, I received an appointment to Guilin. I had only been in Guilin for a few months when I was appointed and reassigned by the imperial court. When I stopped in Lingchuan on my way, I was notified and reassigned to this post. Sub-secretary is a well-paid and leisurely position, which really made me feel fortunate.

古文：按《新唐书》： 瓘仕累中书舍人，与李德裕善，李宗闵恶之，德裕罢相，贬为明州长史，终桂管观察使。 
现代文：按《新唐书》记载： 韦瓘接连任中书舍人，他与宰相李德裕十分友好，所以监察御史李宗闵很憎恶他，德裕罢相后，他被贬为明州长史，死于桂林观察使任上。 
English: According to the "New Tang Dynasty" records: Wei Wei was re-elected as the second-in-command of the Chinese Academy of Letters. He was very friendly with the Prime Minister Li Deyu, so the Inspector General of History Li Zongyu hated him very much. After Deyu resigned, he was demoted to the Governor General of History and died on the post of Guilin Observation Envoy.

古文：以题名证之，乃自中书谪康州，又不终于桂，史之误如此。
现代文：现在用石上题名来证实，韦瓘是从中书舍人被贬请到康州，又不是死于桂林，正史的错误竟到这种地步。
English: Now, with the inscription on the stone, it is confirmed that Wei Wei was a scholar from the Middle Kingdom who was demoted to Kansas, but did not die in Guilin. The mistake of the official history has reached such a level.

古文：瓘所称十六年前，正当大和七年，是时，德裕方在相位，八年十一月始罢，然则瓘之去国，果不知坐何事也。
现代文：韦瓘所说的十六年前，正相当于大和七年，这时，李德裕正在宰相位上，到大和八年十一月才罢相，既然如此，韦瓘的离开京都，真不知道是因为什么事情啊！
English: Sixteen years ago, which corresponds to the seventh year of the Taisho era, Li Deyu was the prime minister at the time and did not step down until November of the eighth year of the Taisho era. Given this, I really don't know why Wei Wei left Kyoto.

