古文：邓艾伐蜀，刘禅既降，又敕姜维使降于钟会，将士咸怒，拔刀斫石。
现代文：曹魏大将邓艾攻打蜀汉，后主刘禅投降后命令姜维向魏将钟会投降，将士们无不切齿痛恨，以致拔刀斫石。
English: Cao Wei's general Deng Ai attacked Shu Han, and after the surrender of his successor Liu Zen, he ordered Jiang Wei to surrender to Wei's general Zhong Hui. The generals all hated him bitterly, so much so that they drew their swords.

古文：魏围燕于中山既久，城中将士皆思出战，至数千人，相率请于燕主，慕容隆言之尤力，为慕容麟沮之而罢。
现代文：十六国时期，魏国长期围困燕国的中山郡，城中的将士们都渴望出战，纷纷向燕王请战，慕容隆求战心尤切，结果都被慕容麟所拒绝，只得作罢。
English: During the period of the Sixteen Kingdoms, Zhongshan County of Yan Province was besieged by Wei for a long time. The soldiers in the city were eager to go to war, and they asked Yan Wang for battle, and Muronglong was particularly eager to fight. As a result, they were all rejected by Muronglin, and had to give up.

古文：契丹伐晋连年，晋拒之，每战必胜。
现代文：五代时，契丹人连年攻打后晋，晋人奋起抵抗，每战必胜。
English: During the Five Dynasties, the Khitan attacked the Later Jin for years on end, and the Jin people rose up to resist, winning every battle.

古文：其后，杜重威阴谋欲降，命将士出陈于外，士皆踊跃，以为出战，既令解甲，士皆恸哭，声振原野。
现代文：后来，元帅杜重威阳谋降敌，命将士们出营列阵，晋军士气高昂，决心与敌人决一死战，及至下令放下武器投降，军士皆恸哭不止，声振原野。
English: Later, Marshal Du Chongwei Yang plotted the enemy's surrender, ordered the soldiers to march out of the battalion, the Jin soldiers had high morale and were determined to fight the enemy to the death, and ordered them to lay down their weapons and surrender. The soldiers were crying incessantly, their voices echoing in the wilderness.

古文：予顷修《靖康实录》，窃痛一时之祸，以堂堂大邦，中外之兵数十万，曾不能北向发一矢、获一胡，端坐都城，束手就毙！
现代文：我在编纂《靖康实录》时，私下里对靖康之难感到万分痛心，大宋朝作为一个堂堂大国，拥兵数十万，竟然不能向北方的金国发一箭，俘获一个敌兵，却只是端坐都城，束手待毙！
English: When I was compiling the "Jingkang Record," I secretly felt very sad about the difficulties of Jingkang. The Great Song Dynasty, as a great power, supported hundreds of thousands of soldiers, and could not even send an arrow to the northern kingdom of Jin and capture an enemy soldier, but just sat in the capital and waited for death!

古文：虎旅云屯，不闻有如蜀、燕、晋之愤哭者。
现代文：数十万精兵强将云集京师，眼巴巴地看着自己的祖国惨遭蹂躏，以致国破家灭，没有谁听说过他们之中有人因此而象蜀、燕、晋的将士那样痛哭流涕的。
English: No one has ever heard of any of them weeping bitterly like the soldiers of Shu, Yan and Jin as hundreds of thousands of elite soldiers gathered in Beijing to watch their motherland being brutally ravaged, resulting in the ruin of the country.

古文：近读《朱新仲诗集》，有《记昔行》一篇，正叙此时事。
现代文：不久前，我读《朱新仲诗集》时，看到其中《记昔行》一诗，正是叙述此事的。
English: Not long ago, when I was reading Zhu Xinzhong's Collected Poems, I saw that one of the poems, "Remembering the Past," described this very thing.

古文：其中云： 老种愤死不得战，汝霖疽发何由痊？ 
现代文：诗中说： 老种愤死不得战，汝霖疽发何由痊？ 
English: It says in the poem: An old man cannot fight if he is angry to death. How can you get rid of gangrene?

古文：乃知忠义之士，世未尝无之，特时运使然耳。
现代文：乃知忠义之士，并不是没有，只是大宋朝的时运不济罢了。
English: It's not that there are no known loyal people, it's just that the timing of the Great Song Dynasty was not good.

