古文：耶律沙，字安隐。其先尝相遥辇氏。
现代文：耶律沙，字安隐，其先祖曾担任遥辇氏之国相。
English: Yerusha, also known as Anyin, whose ancestors once served as the minister of state of the Yaogan clan.

古文：应历间，累官南府宰相。
现代文：应历年间，累官至南府宰相。
English: Over the years, he rose through the ranks to become the prime minister of Minamifu.

古文：景宗即位，总领南面边事。
现代文：景宗即位，耶律沙总领南面边事。
English: The enthronement of King Gyeongjong and the general leadership of King Yerusha are on the south side.

古文：保宁间，宋攻河东，沙将兵救之，有功，加守太保。
现代文：保宁年间，宋军攻打河东，耶律沙率兵相救，有功，被升为守太保。
English: During the Boryeong era, the Song Army attacked Hedong, and Yelusa led the troops to help, and was promoted to guard Taibo.

古文：乾亨初，宋复北侵，沙将兵由间道至白马岭，阻大涧遇敌。
现代文：乾亨初，宋军再度北侵，耶律沙率兵抄小路到白马岭，隔着大涧遭遇敌军。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qianheng, the Song army once again invaded the north. Ye Liusha and his soldiers followed a small road to Baima Ridge, and encountered the enemy across the Dalian Mountains.

古文：沙与诸将欲待后军至而战，冀王敌烈、监军耶律抹只等以为急击之便，沙不能夺。
现代文：耶律沙与众将想等待后军到来再交战，冀王敌烈、监军耶律抹只等人认为赶紧攻打敌人更好一些，耶律沙不能定夺。
English: Jerusha and the generals wanted to wait for the rearguard to arrive and then engage in battle. The Hebei King's enemy soldiers, the supervisors of Jerusha's army, and others thought that it would be better to attack the enemy as soon as possible. Jerusha could not win.

古文：敌烈等以先锋渡涧，未半，为宋人所击，兵溃。
现代文：敌烈等人率领先头部队渡涉涧水，未至河心，遭宋人攻击，全军溃败。
English: The enemy soldiers and others led the leading troops to cross the Surabaya River, but they did not reach the center of the river. They were attacked by the Song people, and the whole army was defeated.

古文：敌烈及其子蛙哥、沙之子德里、令稳都敏、详稳唐筈等五将俱没。
现代文：敌烈及其子蛙哥、耶律沙之子德里、令稳都敏、详稳唐薚等五将均战死。
English: The five generals, including the enemy and his son Frog Brother, Deri, the son of Jerusha, Ling Dang Du Min, and Jiao Dang Tang Yao, all died in the battle.

古文：会北院大王耶律斜轸兵至，万矢俱发，敌军始退。
现代文：适逢北院大王耶律斜轸兵到，万箭齐发，敌军这才退去。
English: It was just in time for the arrival of the soldiers of the Northern Court Great King Jerud, and the enemy army retreated only after a thousand arrows were fired.

古文：沙将趋太原，会汉驸马都尉卢俊来奔，言太原已陷，遂勒兵还。
现代文：耶律沙将要赶往太原，刚好北汉驸马都尉卢俊前来投奔，说太原已经陷落，耶律沙便整顿兵马回国。
English: When Yerusha was about to rush to Taiyuan, Lu Jun, a lieutenant of the Northern Han Dynasty cavalry, came running to him, saying that Taiyuan had fallen, and Yerusha returned to his country with his troops in good order.

古文：宋乘锐侵燕，沙与战于高梁河，稍却；遇耶律休哥及斜轸等邀击，败宋军。
现代文：宋军乘着一股锐气侵入燕地，耶律沙与之交战于高梁河，在部队稍事退却时，遇到耶律休哥及斜轸等人前来拦腰攻击敌军，击败了宋军。
English: The Song army invaded Yan's land with a surge of energy. Yelu Sha fought with them at Gaoliang River. When the troops retreated a little, they encountered Yelu Xiu Ge and Xie Yao and others who came to attack the enemy and defeated the Song army.

古文：宋主宵遁，至涿州，微服乘驴车，间道而走。
现代文：宋主乘夜逃走，到涿州，穿着微服，乘驴车，抄小路逃跑。
English: Mr. Song fled by night to Luzhou, wearing a micro-suit, riding a donkey cart, and taking a back road to escape.

古文：上以功释前过。
现代文：景宗因为耶律沙此次立有战功，释免了其前战之过错。
English: Because of his meritorious service, Jingzong was released from his previous military defeat.

古文：是年，复从韩匡嗣伐宋，败绩，帝欲诛之，以皇后营救得免。
现代文：这一年，又随从韩匡嗣攻打宋国，失利，皇上想杀他，因为皇后营救得以免死。
English: In the same year, he followed Han Kuanzhe to attack Song, but failed. The emperor wanted to kill him because he was able to save the empress from death.

古文：睿智皇后称制，召赐几杖，以优其老。
现代文：睿智皇后临朝称制，召见他赐给几、杖，以示优待其年老。
English: The wise and sagacious empress praised the emperor for his restraint, and summoned him to give her a pair of scissors and a cane to show that he would treat her well in her old age.

古文：复从伐宋，败刘廷让、李敬源之军，赐赉优渥。
现代文：后又随从讨伐宋，击败刘廷让、李敬源之军，得到的赏赐十分优厚。
English: Later, he followed the crusade against the Song Dynasty and defeated the armies of Liu Tingzhang and Li Jingyuan. The reward he received was very generous.

古文：统和六年卒。
现代文：统和六年去世。
English: He died six years later.

古文：耶律抹只，字留隐，仲父隋国王之后。
现代文：耶律抹只，字留隐，仲父隋国王之后。
English: After the Sui king, Yelu's stepfather, the word "Yelu" was omitted.

古文：初以皇族入侍。
现代文：初时因系皇族得以入宫侍候皇上。
English: At first, members of the imperial family were allowed to enter the palace to wait on the emperor.

古文：景宗即位，为林牙，以干给称。
现代文：景宗即位，任林牙，以干练敏捷著称。
English: Jingzong ascended to the throne, Ren Linza, known for his skill and agility.

古文：保宁间，迁枢密副使。
现代文：保宁年间，迁任枢密副使。
English: During the Boryeong era, he was transferred to the post of Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：乾亨元年春，宋攻河东，南府宰相耶律沙为都统，将兵往援，抹只临其军。
现代文：乾亨元年春，宋军攻打河东，南府宰相耶律沙任都统，率兵前往援救，抹只为监军。
English: In the spring of Qianheng in the first year of the Heian period, the Song army attacked the east of the river, and the chancellor of Nanfu, Yerusha, led the soldiers to the rescue, and Maku was only the supervisor of the army.

古文：及白马岭之败，仅以身免。
现代文：及至白马岭兵败，仅仅逃得性命。
English: He was defeated at Whitehorse Ridge and barely escaped with his life.

古文：宋乘锐攻燕，将奚兵翊休哥击败之。
现代文：宋军乘着锐气进攻燕地，抹只率领奚兵帮助耶律休哥击败宋。
English: The Song army attacked Yan's land with vigor, and Maduo led the soldiers to help Yelu Xiu Ge defeat Song.

古文：上以功释前过。
现代文：景宗因他此次立功释免他前次兵败之过。
English: Because of his meritorious service, Jingzong was released from his previous military defeat.

古文：是年冬，从都统韩匡嗣伐宋，战于满城，为宋将所绐，诸军奔溃；独抹只部伍不乱，徐整旗鼓而归。
现代文：这年冬天，随从都统韩匡嗣讨伐宋，与宋军接战于满城，为宋军所欺诳，诸军奔逃溃散；只有抹只队伍不乱，慢慢地整顿旗鼓回撤。
English: In the winter of that year, Han Kuanzhe, a follower of Du Tong, led a crusade against the Song Dynasty. He fought against the Song Dynasty army in Mancheng. The Song Dynasty army bullied him, and the armies fled and dispersed. Only the army of Mazu was not disorganized, and it was slowly reorganized and withdrew.

古文：玺书褒谕，改南海军节度使。
现代文：皇上下诏加以褒奖，改任南海军节度使。
English: He was commended by the Emperor's edict and was appointed as the Southern Naval Commander.

古文：乾亨二年，拜枢密副使。
现代文：乾亨二年，拜为枢密副使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Qianheng, Bai became a vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：统和初，为东京留守。
现代文：统和初，任东京留守。
English: At the beginning of the unification, he was absent from Tokyo.

古文：宋将曹彬、米信等侵边，抹只引兵至南京，先缮守御备。
现代文：宋将曹彬、米信等人侵犯边境，抹只率兵到南京，先行修治守备防御。
English: Song ordered Cao Bin, Yixin and others to invade the border, and Maduo led the troops to Nanjing to repair and prepare the defenses first.

古文：及车驾临幸，抹只与耶律休哥逆战于涿之东，克之，迁开远军节度使。
现代文：待到圣宗前来，抹只与耶律休哥迎战宋军于涿州之东，战败敌军，因功迁为开远军节度使。
English: When he came to Seongjong, he fought against the Song army in the east of Bozhou with Yelu Xiu Ge, defeated the enemy army, and became the festival envoy of the Kaiyuan army.

古文：故事，州民岁输税，斗粟折钱五，抹只表请折钱六，部民便之。统和末卒。
现代文：按旧例，州民每年都要纳税，一斗粟折算为五个钱，抹只上表请求折算为六个钱，所部百姓大得其便利，统和末年去世。
English: According to the old practice, the people of the state had to pay taxes every year. A bucket of millet was converted into five money, and the request for the above table was converted into six money. The people of Shobu were so convenient that they passed away at the end of the year.

古文：萧干，小字项烈，字婆典，北府宰相敌鲁之子。
现代文：萧干，乳名项烈，字婆典，北府宰相萧敌鲁之子。
English: Xiao Gan, the son of Xiao Jilu, the prime minister of Beifu.

古文：性质直。
现代文：生性朴实正直。
English: His nature is simple and honest.

古文：初，察割之乱，其党胡古只与干善，使人召之。
现代文：当初，察割之乱发生时，察割党人胡古只与萧干交好，派人召见他。
English: At first, when the Cheka Rebellion broke out, the Cheka member Hu Gu only befriended Xiao Gan and sent someone to summon him.

古文：干曰： 吾岂能从逆臣！ 
现代文：萧干说： 我怎能附从叛逆之臣！ 
English: Xiao Gan said, "How can I follow a traitorous minister!"

古文：缚其人送寿安王。
现代文：将胡古只捆绑送到寿安王处。
English: Hu Gu was sent to King Shouan's residence in shackles.

古文：贼平，上嘉其忠，拜群牧都林牙。
现代文：贼乱平定，皇上嘉赏其忠心，拜为群牧都林牙。
English: The bandits were subdued, and the emperor commended their loyalty and worshiped Lin Fang as the herd herdsman.

古文：复以伐乌古功，迁北府宰相，改突吕不部节度使。
现代文：又因为讨伐乌古之功，迁为北府宰相，改任为突吕不部节度使。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of the prime minister of the northern prefecture and appointed as the special envoy of the governor of Tulu-Fubu because of his contribution to the fight against Ugu.

古文：乾亨初，宋伐河东，乘胜侵燕，诏干拒之，战于高梁河。
现代文：乾亨初，宋攻讨河东，乘胜侵犯燕地，诏令萧干拒战，萧干与宋军接战于高梁河。
English: At the beginning of the Qian and Heng Dynasties, the Song Dynasty attacked and besieged the eastern part of Hebei Province and invaded Yan's territory. The emperor ordered Xiao Gan to refuse to fight, and Xiao Gan and the Song Dynasty army fought in the Gaoliang River.

古文：耶律沙退走，干与耶律休哥等并力战败之，上手敕慰劳。
现代文：耶律沙逃走，萧干与耶律休哥等人合力击败敌军，景宗亲下敕令加以慰劳。
English: Yerusha fled, Xiao Gan and Yerushuo and others worked together to defeat the enemy army, and King Gyeongjong personally gave the order to come and comfort them.

古文：自是每征伐必参决军事。
现代文：从此每逢征战必定让他参预决策军事。
English: From now on, every time he goes to war, he must be allowed to participate in military decision-making.

古文：加政事令。
现代文：升任政事令。
English: Promoted by Cabinet Order.

古文：二年，宋兵围瓦桥，夜袭我营，干及耶律匀骨战却之。
现代文：二年，宋军包围了瓦桥，乘夜偷袭我军军营，萧干及耶律匀骨战退了敌军。
English: In the second year, the Song army encircled the tile bridge and attacked our army camp at night. Xiao Gan and Ye Lu fought back the enemy army.

古文：时皇后以父呼干。
现代文：当时皇后称呼萧干为父。
English: At that time, the empress called Xiao Gan her father.

古文：及后为皇太后称制，干数条奏便宜，多见听用。
现代文：及至皇后成为皇太后临朝称制，萧干多次逐条上奏利国合宜之事，大多被采纳。
English: When the empress became the empress dowager after the imperial proclamation, Xiao did many things that were appropriate for the country, and most of them were adopted.

古文：统和四年卒。
现代文：统和四年去世。
English: died four years later.

古文：侄讨古。
现代文：侄儿萧讨古。
English: His nephew, Xiao Tonggu.

古文：讨古，字括宁，性忠简。
现代文：萧讨古，字括宁，生性忠诚简朴。
English: Xiao is old-fashioned, his words are concise, and his nature is simple and loyal.

古文：应历初，始入侍。
现代文：应历初，开始入宫侍卫穆宗皇上。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, Emperor Muzong's bodyguards began to enter the palace.

古文：会冀王敌烈、宣徽使海思谋反，讨古与耶律阿列密告于上，上嘉其忠，诏尚朴谨公主。
现代文：适逢冀王敌烈、宣徽使海思谋反，萧讨古与耶律阿列向皇上密告，皇上嘉赏其忠心，诏令将朴谨公主嫁给他。
English: At the time of the rebellion of the enemies of King Ji and the rebellion of Hai Si caused by the proclamation of the imperial seal, Xiao Tonggu and Yelu Alie tipped off the emperor, and the emperor commended his loyalty and ordered Princess Park Chun to marry him.

古文：保宁末，为南京统军使。
现代文：保宁末，任南京统军使。
English: At the end of the Boryeong era, he served as the envoy of the Nanjing unified army.

古文：乾亨初，宋侵燕，讨古与北院大王奚底拒之，不克，军溃。
现代文：乾亨初，宋国侵犯燕地，讨古与北院大王奚底拒战，失利，军队溃败。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qianheng, the Song Dynasty invaded Yan's territory, and tried to resist the war with the Northern Court King Loudi, but failed, and the army was defeated.

古文：讨古等不敢复战，退屯清河。
现代文：讨古等人不敢再战，退驻于清河。
English: Torko and others did not dare to fight again and withdrew to Qinghe.

古文：帝闻其败，遣使责之曰： 卿等不严侦候，用兵无法，遇敌即败，奚以将为！ 
现代文：景宗听说他兵败，派使者责备他说： 你们这些人不严加侦察敌情，用兵没有法度，一遇敌军便败退，又何必当什么将领呢！ 
English: When Emperor Jingzong heard that he had been defeated, he sent an envoy to rebuke him: "You people do not strictly investigate the enemy's situation, you have no discipline in the use of troops, and you retreat as soon as you encounter the enemy's army. Why do you need to be a general?

古文：讨古惧。顷之，援兵至，讨古奋力以败宋军。
现代文：讨古闻言十分恐惧，不久，援兵到，讨古奋力作战，击败宋军。
English: He was very afraid, and soon, reinforcements arrived, and he fought hard to defeat the Song army.

古文：上释其罪，降为南京侍卫亲军都指挥使。
现代文：皇上释免其罪，降为南京侍卫亲军都指挥使。
English: The emperor absolved him of his crime and demoted him to the position of commander-in-chief of the Nanjing Imperial Guards.

古文：四年卒。
现代文：四年去世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：耶律善补，字瑶升，孟父楚国王之后。
现代文：耶律善补，字瑶升，孟父楚国王之后。
English: Yelu Zenshu, the character of soaring, after the king of Meng father Chu.

古文：纯谨有才智。
现代文：纯正谨慎，富有才智。
English: Pure and prudent, full of wisdom.

古文：景宗即位，授千牛卫大将军，迁大同军节度使。
现代文：景宗即位，授职为千牛卫大将军，迁任大同军节度使。
English: King Gyeongjong ascended the throne, was given the post of General of the Sengyu Garrison, and was transferred to the post of Grand Marshal of the Taedong Army.

古文：及伐宋，韩匡嗣与耶律沙将兵由东路进，善补以南京统军使由西路进。
现代文：及至讨伐宋国，韩匡嗣与耶律沙率兵由东路进发，善补任南京统军使由西路进军。
English: When it came to fighting the Song Dynasty, Han Kuang-tsi and Yerusha led the troops to advance from the east, and the envoy of the Nanjing United Army advanced from the west.

古文：善补闻匡嗣失利，敛兵还。
现代文：善补得知匡嗣作战失利，便收兵回国。
English: When Zhengyu learned that Kuanzhi had lost the battle, he withdrew his troops and returned to China.

古文：乾亨末，与宋军战于满城，为伏兵所围，斜轸救之获免。
现代文：乾亨末年，与宋军交战于满城，为伏兵所包围，斜轸救之，得以免死。
English: At the end of Qianheng's life, he was at war with the Song army in Mancheng. He was surrounded by ambushed soldiers and was saved by a crossbow. He was able to avoid death.

古文：以失备，大杖决之。
现代文：因为疏于防备，被判决处以大杖之刑。
English: For lack of precaution, he was sentenced to a cane.

古文：统和初，为惕隐。
现代文：统和初，任惕隐。
English: At the beginning of unification, Ren Tiyin was born.

古文：会宋来侵，善补为都元帅逆之，不敢战，故岭西州郡多陷，罢惕隐。
现代文：适逢宋军来犯，善补被任为都元帅迎战，但他不敢交战，因此岭西州郡大多失陷，他也被免去惕隐之职。
English: When the Song Army invaded, Shan Fu was appointed as the capital's marshal to face the war, but he did not dare to fight. As a result, most of Lingxi County was lost, and he was also relieved of his duties.

古文：以其叔安端有匡辅世宗功，上愍之，征善补为南府宰相，迁南院大王。
现代文：因为其叔安端有扶助世宗之功，圣宗皇上怜悯他，征召善补为南府宰相，迁任南院大王。
English: Because his uncle Anduan had the merit of supporting Shizong, Emperor Shengzong took pity on him and conscripted Zenshu to be the prime minister of Nanfu, and he was transferred to the position of Nanyin Daowang.

古文：会再举伐宋，欲攻魏府，召众集议。
现代文：适逢再度兴兵伐宋，皇上想要进攻魏府，召集众将协同商议。
English: The Emperor wanted to attack the Wei government at a time when the Song Dynasty was rising anew, and summoned the generals to discuss the matter.

古文：将士以魏城无备，皆言可攻。
现代文：将士们认为魏城没有防备，都说可以进攻。
English: The generals thought that Weicheng was unprepared and said that they could attack.

古文：善补曰： 攻固易，然城大叵量，若克其城，士卒贪俘掠，势必不可遏。
现代文：善补说： 进攻固然容易，然而城池太大无法查点，士卒贪图抢掠，势必不可遏止。
English: Zenshu said: Although it is easy to attack, the castle is too big to check the points, and the soldiers are eager to loot. It is inevitable to stop them.

古文：且傍多巨镇，各出援兵，内有重敌，何以当之？ 
现代文：况且附近多有大镇，若魏城遭到攻击必然会纷纷出动援兵，魏城内又有强兵把守，我军如何抵挡呢？ 
English: Moreover, there are many large towns nearby. If Weicheng is attacked, reinforcements will inevitably come out one after another. Weicheng is also guarded by strong soldiers. How will our army resist?

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上便就此作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：善补性懦，守静。
现代文：善补生性懦弱，保守清静，无所企求。
English: Good at compensating for cowardice, conservative and quiet, without pretensions.

古文：凡征讨，惮攻战，急还，以故战多不利。
现代文：每逢征讨，怯于攻城，总是忙于撤回，因此作战大多不能取胜。
English: Whenever there is a campaign, they are afraid to attack the city and are always busy withdrawing, so most of the battles cannot be won.

古文：年七十四卒。
现代文：年七十四岁去世。
English: He died at the age of 74.

古文：耶律海里，字留隐，令稳拔里得之长子。
现代文：耶律海里，字留隐，令稳拔里得长子。
English: In the Sea of Yerushalayim, the word "remain" was hidden, so that the eldest son would be born in a stable.

古文：察割之乱，其母的鲁与焉。
现代文：察割之乱时，其母的鲁参与其事。
English: At the time of the Cheka Rebellion, his mother, Lu, was involved.

古文：遣人召海里，海里拒之。
现代文：派人征召海里，遭海里拒绝。
English: Send a man to recruit the sea, and the sea rejects him.

古文：乱平，的鲁以子故获免。
现代文：叛乱被平定之后，的鲁因为儿子之故得以释免。
English: After the rebellion was put down, Toru was released because of his son.

古文：海里俭素，不喜声利，以射猎自娱。
现代文：海里俭省朴素，不喜好名利，以射箭打猎自我娱乐。
English: They are frugal and simple at sea, dislike fame and fortune, and amuse themselves with archery and hunting.

古文：虽居闲，人敬之若贵官然。
现代文：尽管身居闲位，人们敬重他就好像他是个贵官一般。
English: Despite his unofficial position, people respected him as if he were a dignitary.

古文：保宁初，拜彰国军节度使，迁惕隐。
现代文：保宁初，拜为彰国军节度使，迁为惕隐。
English: At the beginning of Boryeong, it was dedicated to the military festival of the Korean People's Army.

古文：秩满，称疾不仕。
现代文：任期满，称病不再出任官职。
English: At the end of his term of office, he claimed to be ill and resigned from his post.

古文：久之，复为南院大王。
现代文：很久以后，又担任了南院大王。
English: A long time later, he served as the Great King of the Southern Court.

古文：及曹彬、米信等来侵，海里有却敌功，赐资忠保义匡国功臣。
现代文：及至曹彬、米信等人来犯，海里立有退敌之功，赐为资忠保义匡国功臣。
English: When Cao Bin, Yixin and others came to attack, Hai Li stood up and repulsed the enemy. He was awarded as a meritorious vassal for his loyalty and loyalty to the country.

古文：帝屡亲征，海里在南院十余年，镇以宽静，户口增给，时议重之。
现代文：圣宗皇上多次亲征，海里在南院十多年，以宽大安静加以镇抚，户口增殖、百姓充裕，一时舆论都推重他。
English: Emperor Taizong personally led many expeditions, and the sea raged in the Southern Yuan for more than ten years. He pacified it with generosity and tranquility. Households proliferated, and the people were plentiful. For a time, public opinion was in favor of him.

古文：封漆水郡王，迁上京留守，薨。
现代文：封漆水郡王，迁为上京留守，不久逝世。
English: King of Fushimizu County, moved to stay in Kyoto, and died soon after.

古文：诏以家贫，给葬具。
现代文：因为家中贫穷，诏令官府拨给葬具。
English: Due to the family's poverty, the government allocated the money for funeral paraphernalia.

