古文：太公封于齐，五月而报政。
现代文：原文姜太公吕尚被周王封于齐后，过个五个月就来向周王报告说政事安排好了。
English: The original text: After Jiang Taigong Lushang was anointed by King Zhou, he came to report to King Zhou after five months that the political affairs had been arranged.

古文：周公曰： 何族也？ 
现代文：当时周公摄政，问他道： 怎么会这么快？ 
English: Zhou Gong, the regent at the time, asked him: How did it happen so quickly?

古文：曰： 吾简其君臣，礼从其俗。 
现代文：姜太公说： 我只是简化了他们君臣上下之礼仪，又不改变他们的风俗和习惯，所以政治局面很快得到安定。 
English: Jiang Taigong said: I just simplified the etiquette of their monarchs and ministers, without changing their customs and habits, so the political situation was quickly stabilized.

古文：伯禽至鲁，三年而报政。
现代文：而周公的儿子伯禽到鲁国去，三年才来报告说政事安排好了。
English: However, Zhou Gong's son Baoji went to Lu, and it took him three years to report that the government affairs were arranged.

古文：周公曰： 何迟也？ 
现代文：周公问他： 为什么这么迟呢？ 
English: Zhou Gong said: Why is it so late?

古文：曰： 变其俗，革其礼，丧三年而后除之。 
现代文：伯禽答道： 我改变了他们的风俗，革除了他们的礼仪，让他亲丧三年而后才能除掉孝服。 
English: The bird replied, "I changed their customs, abolished their etiquette, and made him mourn for three years before removing his filial piety."

古文：周公曰： 后世其北面事齐乎？
现代文：周公说： 这样下去，鲁国的后代们会北面事齐、向齐称臣了吧？
English: Zhou Gong said, "Going on like this, the descendants of Lu will be all over the country, praising the emperor, right?"

古文：夫政不简不易，民不能近；平易近民，民必归之。 
现代文：国政如果烦琐而不简要，尊严而不平易，百姓就不能和其君主亲近；君主如果平易近民，百姓就会归附他。 
English: If the affairs of state are cumbersome but not simple, if they are dignified but not easy, the people cannot be close to their monarch; if the monarch is approachable, the people will be drawn to him.

古文：周公问太公何以治齐，曰： 尊贤而尚功。 
现代文：周公问太公用什么办法治理齐国，太公说道： 尊重贤圣之人而推崇有功绩之人。 
English: Zhou Gong asked Tai Gong how to govern Qi. Tai Gong said, "Respect those who are virtuous and respect those who have merits."

古文：周公曰： 后世必有篡弑之臣。 
现代文：周公说： 那么齐国后世必有篡权弑君之臣！ 
English: Zhou Gong said: Then the future generations of Qi will certainly usurp the power of Shijun's vassals!

古文：太公问周公何以治鲁，曰： 尊贤而尚亲。 
现代文：太公又反问周公用什么办法治理鲁国，周公说： 尊重贤圣之人并且尊崇公族亲属。 
English: The grand duke also asked Zhou Gong what methods he would use to govern Lu. Zhou Gong said, "Respect the wise and the holy, and respect the relatives of commoners."

古文：太公曰： 后寝弱矣。 
现代文：太公说： 那么，公室的势力就会渐渐衰弱了！ 
English: The father-in-law said, "Then the power of the government office will gradually weaken!"

古文：二公能断齐、鲁之敝于数百年之后，而不能预为之维；非不欲维也，治道可为者止此耳。
现代文：评译周公、太公能推断出数百年后齐国与鲁国的弊端，而不能预加防护，不是他们不想防护，而是为政所能做的，只有如此而已。
English: Commenting on the translation, Zhou Gong and Tai Gong could deduce the drawbacks of Qi and Lu after hundreds of years, but could not add protection in advance. It was not that they did not want to protect, but what they could do for the government. That was all.

古文：虽帝王之法，固未有久而不敝者也；敝而更之，亦俟乎后之人而已。故孔子有 变齐、变鲁 之说。
现代文：即使是古代圣明君主的治理办法，也从来没有长时间而不出现弊端的。有了弊端要改正它，就只有等待后来人了。所以孔子有 改变齐国，改变鲁国 的说法。
English: Even the governance methods of the ancient Ming and Qing dynasties were never without their drawbacks for a long time. If there were drawbacks, it would only be necessary to wait for later generations to correct them. Therefore, Confucius said, "Change Qi, change Lu."

古文：陆葵日曰： 使夫子之志行，则姬、吕之言不验。 
现代文：陆葵说： 假使孔夫子的志愿实现了，那么周公、太公的话就无法被现实所验证了。 
English: Lu Aoi said: If Confucius's will is realized, then the words of Zhou Gong and Tai Gong cannot be verified by reality.

古文：夫使孔子果行其志，亦不过变今之齐、鲁，为昔之齐、鲁，未必有加于二公也。
现代文：但就算孔子的志向果真实现，也不过是改变当时的齐、鲁成为以前的齐、鲁，而未必就能超过周公和太公。
English: But even if Confucius's aspiration were to come true, it would only change the Qi and Lu of that time into the Qi and Lu of the past, and would not necessarily be able to surpass Zhou Gong and Tai Gong.

古文：二公之孙子，苟能日儆惧于二公之言，又岂俟孔子出而始议变乎？
现代文：周公、太公的子孙，如果时时刻刻都能警戒二公的预言，又哪里需要等到孔子出现后才议论变革的事呢？
English: If the descendants of Zhou Gong and Tai Gong can always be alerted to the prophecies of the two princes, why do they need to wait until Confucius appears before discussing the matter of change?

