古文：秦后子来仕，其车千乘。
现代文：秦后子来晋国做官，随从的车子有一千辆。
English: Qin Hou Zi came to Jin Province to work as an official, and he was accompanied by a thousand cars.

古文：楚公子干来仕，其车五乘。
现代文：楚国的公子干来晋国做官，随从的车子仅有五辆。
English: A prince from the state of Chu came to work as an official in the state of Jin. He was accompanied by only five cars.

古文：叔向为太傅，实赋禄，韩宣子问二公子之禄焉，对曰： 大国之卿，一旅之田，上大夫，一卒之田。
现代文：叔向任太傅，掌管俸禄，韩宣子问起这二位公子俸禄的情况，叔向回答说： 大国的卿，可以享受五百顷田赋的俸禄，上大夫可以享受一百顷田赋的俸禄。
English: Uncle Xiang was appointed as Taifu, in charge of the stipend, and Han Xuanzi asked him about the status of the two princes' stipend. Uncle Xiang replied: "A great country lord can enjoy a stipend of five hundred hectares of land, and a senior doctor can enjoy a stipend of one hundred hectares of land."

古文：夫二公子者，上大夫也，皆一卒可也。 
现代文：两位公子都是上大夫，享受一百顷田赋的俸禄就可以了。 
English: Both princes are senior doctors, so they can enjoy the salary of one hundred hectares of farmland.

古文：宣子曰： 秦公子富，若之何其钧之？ 
现代文：宣子说： 秦公子富有，为什么两人都授与同等的俸禄？ 
English: Xuan Zi said: Qin Gongzi is rich, why are both of them awarded the same salary?

古文：对曰： 夫爵以建事，禄以食爵，德以赋之，功庸以称之，若之何以富赋禄也！
现代文：叔向回答说： 按照职务设立爵位，按爵位的高低享受俸禄，根据德行的高下给予俸禄，使功德与俸禄相称，怎么能因为富有而给以厚禄呢？
English: My uncle replied, "A knighthood is established according to one's position, a salary is given according to the level of the knighthood, a salary is given according to the level of one's virtue, so that one's merits are commensurate with one's salary. How can a rich reward be given because one is rich?

古文：夫绛之富商，韦藩木楗以过于朝，唯其功庸少也，而能金玉其车，文错其服，能行诸侯之贿，而无寻尺之禄，无大绩于民故也。
现代文：国都绛城的富商，只能乘坐用皮革遮蔽木制的车子，来往于闹市，只因为他们没什么功劳，然而凭他们的财富足以用黄金宝玉来装饰车子，穿上刺绣花纹的衣服，用丰厚的礼物与诸侯交往，但这些人并不能得到半点的俸禄，就是因为他们对人民没什么大的功劳。
English: The rich merchants of the national capital, Handan, can only travel to and from the busy city in wooden cars covered with leather, just because they have little merit. However, their wealth is enough to decorate the car with gold jewels, wear embroidered clothes, and use rich gifts to interact with the princes. But these people can not get half a point of salary, just because they have little merit to the people.

古文：且秦、楚匹也，若之何其回于富也。 
现代文：况且秦国、楚国是地位相等的国家，怎么能因为富有而加以偏袒呢？ 
English: Moreover, Qin and Chu are countries of equal status. How can they be favored because they are rich?

古文：乃均其禄。
现代文：于是授与两位公子相同的俸禄。
English: As a result, the same salary was awarded to both princes.

