古文：三十有二年春，王正月。
现代文：三十二年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of thirty-two, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏四月己丑，郑伯捷卒。
现代文：夏季四月己丑日，郑伯捷去世。
English: In the summer, on April Fool's Day, Zheng Bo Jie passed away.

古文：卫人侵狄。
现代文：卫国入侵狄国。
English: The motherland invaded the fatherland.

古文：秋，卫人及狄盟。
现代文：秋季，卫国人与狄国结盟。
English: In the autumn, the defenders of the country allied with Di.

古文：冬十有二月己卯，晋侯重耳卒。
现代文：冬季十二月己卯日，晋侯重耳去世。
English: In the winter of December, Jin Hou Jiu Er passed away.

古文：三十二年春，楚鬥章请平于晋，晋阳处父报之。
现代文：三十二年春，楚国鬥章请求与晋国媾和，晋国的阳处父回报。
English: In the spring of thirty-two years ago, the Chu State Fighting Insignia requested to make peace with the Jin State, and the Yang Prefecture of the Jin State reciprocated.

古文：晋、楚始通。
现代文：晋国、楚国从此开始正式交往。
English: Since then, Jin Province and Chu Province have begun formal exchanges.

古文：夏，狄有乱。
现代文：夏，狄国发生动乱。
English: In the summer, there was turmoil in Di.

古文：卫人侵狄，狄请平焉。
现代文：卫国人侵犯狄国，狄国请求媾和。
English: The defenders invaded Di, and Di sued for peace.

古文：秋，卫人及狄盟。
现代文：秋，卫国人与狄国结盟。
English: In the autumn, the defenders of the country allied with Di.

古文：冬，晋文公卒。
现代文：冬，晋文公去世。
English: In winter, Emperor Jinwen passed away.

古文：庚辰，将殡于曲沃，出绛，柩有声如牛。
现代文：庚辰日，将在曲沃殡葬。离开绛城，棺柩中有声音像牛叫。
English: On the day of Geng Chen, he will be buried in Quwo. When he leaves Shicheng, there will be a sound like a cow mooing in the coffin.

古文：卜偃使大夫拜。曰： 君命大事。将有西师过轶我，击之，必大捷焉。 
现代文：卜偃让大夫跪拜，说： 君主命令大事，将有西边的军队超越国境袭我，攻击他们，必能大捷。 
English: Bu Wei made the doctor kneel down and said, "The sovereign has ordered a great thing. There will be an army from the west that will cross the border and attack me. If you attack them, you will surely succeed."

古文：杞子自郑使告于秦，曰： 郑人使我掌其北门之管，若潜师以来，国可得也。 
现代文：杞子从郑国派人告诉秦国，说： 郑国人让我掌管他们北门的钥匙，如果你们偷偷前来，郑国就可以得到了。 
English: Xunzi sent someone from Zheng to tell Qin, saying, "The people of Zheng have given me the key to their north gate. If you come secretly, Zheng can get it."

古文：穆公访诸蹇叔，蹇叔曰： 劳师以袭远，非所闻也。
现代文：秦穆公拜访蹇叔，蹇叔说： 疲劳的军队远袭，我没有听说过。
English: Qin Mu Gong paid a visit to Uncle Zou. Uncle Zou said, "I have never heard of a tired army attacking far away.

古文：师劳力竭，远主备之，无乃不可乎！
现代文：军队劳累力量用尽，远方的主人有准备，恐怕不行吧。
English: I'm afraid it won't work, as the army is exhausted and the faraway masters are prepared.

古文：师之所为，郑必知之。
现代文：我们军队一动，郑国必然知晓。
English: As soon as our army moves, Zheng Guo is bound to know.

古文：勤而无所，必有悖心。
现代文：费力不讨好，士兵必然有抵触情绪。
English: Effort does not please, soldiers are bound to have conflicting emotions.

古文：且行千里，其谁不知？ 
现代文：而且行动千里，有谁不知？ 
English: And the action is thousands of miles away, who does not know?

古文：公辞焉。
现代文：秦穆公不接受意见。
English: Dedication did not reply.

古文：召孟明、西乞、白乙，使出师于东门之外。
现代文：召孟明、西乞、白乙，让他们从东门外出兵。
English: Call Meng Ming, Xigai, Bai Yi, let them go out from the east gate.

古文：蹇叔哭之，曰： 孟子，吾见师之出而不见其入也。 
现代文：蹇叔哭着送行，说： 孟先生，我看到军队出去而看不到回来了。 
English: Uncle Zou wept as he saw them off and said, "Mr. Meng, I saw the troops go out, but I didn't see them come back.

古文：公使谓之曰： 尔何知。
现代文：秦穆公派人告诉他说： 你怎么知道？
English: Qin Mu Gong sent someone to tell him: How do you know?

古文：中寿，尔墓之木拱矣。 
现代文：如果你中年死去，你坟墓上的树木已经合抱了。 
English: If you die in middle age, the tree on your grave has already been snatched with both hands.

古文：蹇叔之子与师，哭而送之，曰： 晋人御师必于殽。
现代文：蹇叔的儿子随从军队，蹇叔哭着送他，说： 晋国人必定在殽山抵御我们。
English: Uncle Zou's son was with the army. Uncle Zou sent him away crying, saying, "The people of Jin will surely resist us on Shaoshan."

古文：殽有二陵焉：其南陵，夏后皋之墓也；其北陵，文王之所辟风雨也。
现代文：殽山有两座坟陵，它的南陵，是夏后皋的陵墓，它的北陵，是周文王躲避风雨之地。
English: There are two tombs in Lushan. Its south tomb is the tomb of Xiao Houyi, and its north tomb is the place where King Zhou Wen sheltered from the storm.

古文：必死是间，余收尔骨焉。 
现代文：你必定死在两座陵墓之间，我会去那里收你的尸骨。 
English: You will certainly die between two mausoleums, and I will go there to collect your bones.

古文：秦师遂东。
现代文：秦国军队于是向东出发。
English: As a result, Qin's army went to the east.

