古文：柳子厚《复杜温夫书》云： 生用助字，不当律令，所谓乎、欤、耶、哉、夫也者，疑辞也。
现代文：柳宗元在《复杜温夫书》中说： 生在写文章时，使用助字，不应当受到约束，人们常用的所谓乎、欤、耶、哉、夫等、是疑问字，表示疑问的意思。
English: Liu Zongyuan said in "Fu Duwenf Shu": When writing an article, the use of auxiliary characters should not be constrained. The so-called commonly used words such as "乎," "," "耶," "哉" and "夫" are interrogative characters, expressing the meaning of doubt.

古文：矣、耳、焉也者，决辞也。
现代文：所谓矣、耳、焉等，是判断字，表示判断的意思。
English: The so-called 矣, 耳, 焉, etc. are judgment words, indicating the meaning of judgment.

古文：今生则一之，宜考前闻人所使用，与吾言类且异，精思之则益也。 
现代文：而今，生则认为这些字所表达的意思是一样的，仔细查考前人对这些字的使用，与我上面所说的是不同的，从此进行认真的思考分析是有益的。 
English: Nowadays, however, students think that the meaning expressed by these words is the same. A careful examination of the use of these words by predecessors is different from what I said above, and it is useful to carry out serious thinking and analysis from now on.

古文：予读《孟子》百里奚一章曰： 曾不知以食牛干秦缪公之为污也，可谓智乎？
现代文：我在读《孟子》一书时，见到关于百里奚的一段记载，说万章问道：有人说百里奚把自己卖给秦国养牲畜的人的所得来干求秦穆公，这话可信吗？其回答是： 他竟不知道用饲养牛的方法来干求秦穆公是 为污也，可谓智乎？ 
English: When I was reading the book "Mencius," I saw a passage about Bai Lijuan. Wan Zhang asked: Is it credible that someone said that Bai Lijuan sold his income to people who raised livestock in Qin to solicit Qin Mu Gong? His answer was: He actually did not know that using the method of raising cattle to solicit Qin Mu Gong was dirty, can it be said to be clever?

古文：不可谏而不谏，可谓不智乎？
现代文：他预见到虞公不可以劝阻，便不去劝阻， 可谓不智乎？ 
English: He foresaw that Yu Gong could not be dissuaded, so he did not try to dissuade him.

古文：知虞公之将亡而先去之，不可谓不智也。
现代文：他又预知到虞公将要灭亡，因而早早离开， 不可谓不智也？ 
English: He also foresaw the impending demise of Prince Yugo, and left early. Isn't that also unwise?

古文：时举于秦，知缪公之可与有行也而相之，可谓不智乎？ 
现代文：当他在秦国被推举出来的时侯，便知道秦穆公是一位可以帮助而有作为的君主， 可谓不智乎 ？ 
English: When he was elected in the State of Qin, he knew that Qin Mu Gong was a monarch who could help and do something. Isn't that wise?

古文：味其所用助字，开阖变化，使人之意飞动，此难以为温夫辈言也。
现代文：仔细辨别所使用的助字，开合变化，使人思绪飞动，这段话对温夫之辈来说是非常难的。
English: It is very difficult for the younger generation to distinguish carefully between the auxiliary words used, the opening and closing changes, and the thought-provoking words.

