古文：曰若稽古，曰昭天之道，熙地之载，揆民之任，夷德之用。
现代文：这属于稽考典籍。说：昭明天道，广大帝业，量力用民，常施文德。
English: This belongs to the examination classics. It says: Zhaomei's way, the vast imperial industry, the use of people's strength, and the frequent practice of virtue.

古文：总之以咸，殷，等之以□禁，成之以□和，咸康于民，卿格维时，监于列辟。
现代文：以和顺殷民为目标，以九禁聱齐文德，以五和成就文德。使百姓全都安康，使卿士行为端正，鉴视于前代列位君王。
English: With the goal of "harmony and harmony" for the people, with the "nine prohibitions" to achieve "virtue," and with the "five harmonies" to achieve "virtue," so that the people are all healthy, so that the noblemen and women behave properly, and compare with the previous kings.

古文：敬惟三事，永有休哉。
现代文：认真地思考 三事 ，就有永久的美善了。
English: If you seriously think about these three things, there will be eternal good.

古文：三事：一倡德，三和乱，三终齐。
现代文：三事是：一，昌大文德；二，平和纷乱；三，终其成功。
English: The three things are: First, magnanimous and virtuous; second, peaceful and chaotic; third, ultimately successful.

古文：德有七伦，乱有五遂，齐有五备。
现代文：昌大文德有七伦，平乱有五遂，成功有五备。
English: There are seven virtues of Chang Da Wen De, five virtues of pacifying chaos, and five virtues of success.

古文：五备：一同往路以揆远迩，三明要丑友德以众尔庸，三明辟章远以肃民教，四明义倡尔众教之以服，五要全文德、不畏强宠。
现代文：五备是：一，共同行路，要量度远近；二，明辨善恶，友爱文德，以加多你的功劳；三，明示法纪告晓远方，以严肃民教；四，彰明礼义倡导众人，教他们实行；五，相约敬重文德，不畏强权。
English: The five preparations are as follows: First, to travel together, you must measure the distance; second, to clearly distinguish between good and evil, to be kind and moral, and to add to your merit; third, to clearly tell the law and discipline to the far away places, and to be serious about folk religion; fourth, to advocate and teach the people to practice courtesy and righteousness; fifth, to respect and value morality, and not to be afraid of power.

古文：五遂：一道其通以决其雍，二绝□无赦不疑，三挫锐无赦不危，四闲兵无用不害，五复尊离群不敌。
现代文：五遂是：一，通畅道路，打开壅塞；二，除去谄谀，不宽恕坏人，就不迷惑；三，挫其锐气不加宽恕，就没有危险；四，操练军队而不使用，就没有祸害；五，恢复尊卑，离散乱党，就没有敌对了。
English: The five points are as follows: First, clear the road and remove the obstacles; second, remove the shackles, do not forgive the bad people, and do not confuse them; third, discourage the bad people and do not forgive them, and there will be no danger; fourth, train the army and do not use it, and there will be no harm; fifth, restore the dignity of the party and disperse the party, and there will be no hostility.

古文：七伦：一毁城寡守不路，三通道不战，三小国不凶不伐，四正维昌静不疑，五睦忍宁于百姓，六禁害求济民，七一德训民，民乃章。
现代文：七伦是：一，城墙残缺少防守的，不进入其境；二，通衢大道上不作战；三，小国没有罪恶不讨伐；四，国泰民安的，不怀疑；五，和睦忍让使百姓安宁；六，禁绝祸害以救济百姓；七，纯洁道德训教百姓，百姓就会明德。
English: The seven principles are: First, do not enter the territory of a city wall that lacks defense; Second, do not fight on the highway; Third, do not attack a small country if there is no crime; Fourth, do not doubt if the country is safe and the people are safe; Fifth, let peace and tolerance keep the people calm; Sixth, ban evil and harm to help the people; Seventh, teach the people pure morality, and the people will be wise.

古文：钦哉！
现代文：敬重啊敬重!
English: Admiration!

古文：钦哉，余夙夜求之无射。
现代文：我早晚探求它都不会厌倦。
English: I never get tired of exploring it.

