古文：柴禹锡，字玄圭，大名人。少时，有客见之曰： 子质不凡，若辅以经术，必致将相。 禹锡由是留心问学。
现代文：柴禹锡字玄圭，大名人。年轻时，有位客人看见他后说： 你气质不凡，如果辅以经术，一定官至将相。 禹锡从此留心学问。
English: When he was young, a guest saw him and said, "Your temperament is extraordinary. If you supplement it with scripture, you'll be a great general." From then on, Yu Xi paid attention to learning.

古文：时太宗居晋邸，以善应对，获给事焉。
现代文：当时太宗居晋王府，因为他善于应对，得到给事一职。
English: At that time, Taizong lived in the Jin royal palace, and because he was good at coping, he was given a post.

古文：太平兴国初，授供奉官。
现代文：太平兴国初年，授任供奉官。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Restoration, he was appointed as a tributary official.

古文：三年，改翰林副使，迁如京使，仍掌翰林司。
现代文：太平兴国三年，改任翰林副使，升如京使，仍然掌管翰林司。
English: In the third year of Taiping Xingguo, he was reappointed as the vice-envoy of Hanlin and promoted to the Beijing envoy, still in charge of the Hanlin Division.

古文：每夜直，上以藩府旧僚，多召访外事。
现代文：每次值夜班，太宗因为他是自己当藩王时的旧臣，常常召他访问外事。
English: Every time he was on duty at night, Taizong often called him to visit foreign affairs because he was his former vassal when he was the king of the domain.

古文：迁宣徽北院使，赐第宝积坊。
现代文：升宣徽北院使，在宝积坊赐给住宅。
English: Sheng Xuan Hui, the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty, was given a residence in Baozhifang.

古文：告秦王廷美阴谋，擢枢密副使。
现代文：告发秦王廷美的阴谋，被提升为枢密副使。
English: He denounced the conspiracy of Qin Wang Tingmei and was promoted to Privy Vice-Envoy.

古文：逾年，转南院使。
现代文：过了一年，转任南院使。
English: A year later, he was transferred to the Southern Courier.

古文：服劳既久，益加勤敏。
现代文：任职既久，越发勤敏。
English: He has been in office for a long time and has become more and more diligent.

古文：雍熙中，议广宫城。
现代文：雍熙年间，朝廷讨论增扩宫城。
English: During the reign of Yongxi, the imperial court discussed expanding the palace city.

古文：禹锡有别业在表识中，请以易官邸，上因是薄之。
现代文：禹锡有产业在护城范围内，他请求用住宅交换官邸，皇上因此看不起他。
English: Yuxi had property within the scope of the city's defense, and he asked to exchange his residence for the official residence, so the emperor looked down on him.

古文：又与宰相宋琪厚善。
现代文：他又与宰相宋琪相善。
English: He is also on good terms with Prime Minister Song Qi.

古文：会广州徐休复密奏转运王延范不轨状，且言倚附大臣，无敢动摇者。
现代文：正好广州徐休复密奏转运使王延范不法之状，并且说他倚附大臣，无人敢处理他。
English: It was precisely the transfer of the Guangzhou Xu Xiu complex that made Wang Yanfan illegal, and he said that he relied on the minister, and no one dared to deal with him.

古文：上因访琪及禹锡曰： 延范何如人？ 延范与琪妻为疏属，甚言其忠勤，禹锡亦傍赞之。
现代文：皇上趁咨问宋琪及禹锡时问道 ：延范这个人怎么样？ 延范与宋琪的妻子是远亲，宋琪极言延范的忠勤，禹锡也从旁称赞延范。
English: Taking the opportunity to question Song Qi and Yu Xi, the emperor asked: What about this person Yan Fan? Yan Fan and Song Qi's wife are distant relatives. Song Qi spoke highly of Yan Fan's loyalty, and Yu Xi also praised Yan Fan from the side.

古文：上意其交通，滋不悦。
现代文：皇上怀疑他们勾结，因此不高兴。
English: The Emperor suspected them of collusion and was not happy.

古文：禹锡又为琪请卢多逊故第，上益恶其朋比。
现代文：禹锡又替宋琪请索卢多逊旧宅，皇上越是厌恶他们朋比结党。
English: Yu Xi also invited Soludosun's old house on behalf of Song Qi, the more the emperor detested their friends and allies.

古文：坐琪以诙谐罢相，不欲显言之也。
现代文：宋琪以诙谐罢相，皇上不想明说他的过错。
English: Song Qi made a witty retraction, but the emperor did not want to admit his mistake.

古文：下诏切责禹锡，以骁卫大将军出知沧州。
现代文：下诏严厉斥责禹锡，以骁卫大将军身份出知沧州。
English: The following edict severely reprimanded Yu Xi, and he was banished from Cangzhou as a general of the National Guard.

古文：在任勤于政治，部民诣滨州列状以闻。
现代文：在任勤于政事，州里百姓到滨州列举他的政状上报皇上。
English: During his tenure, he was diligent in politics, and the people of the state went to Binzhou to enumerate his political achievements and report to the emperor.

古文：改涪州观察使，徙澶、镇二州驻泊部署，俄知潞州，州民乞留三载，诏奖之。徙知永兴军府，再召为宣徽北院使、知枢密院事。
现代文：改任涪州观察使，改任澶、镇二州驻泊部署。不久，任知潞州，州民请求让他留任三年，朝廷下令褒奖他，改任知永兴军府，再次召入朝任宣徽北院使、知枢密院事。
English: He was appointed as the observation envoy of Zhangzhou, and stationed in Zhangzhou and two towns in Zhangzhou. Soon, he was appointed as the envoy of Zhiyang and Zhangzhou, the people of the state requested him to stay for three years, and the imperial court ordered him to be commended. He was appointed as the envoy of Zhiyongxing Military Government, and was once again summoned to the imperial court to serve as the envoy of Xuanhui North Courtyard and the envoy of Zhiyang Privy Council.

古文：至道初，制受镇宁军节度、知泾州。
现代文：至道初年，授任镇宁军节度，知泾州。
English: In the first year of the Tao, he was awarded the Zhenning Army Festival, Zhisheng.

古文：入谢日，上谓曰： 由宣徽罢者不过防御使尔，今委卿旌节，兼之重镇，可谓优异矣。 禹锡流涕哽咽而已。
现代文：入宫谢恩那天，皇上对他说： 由宣徽使罢任者不超过防御使，现在委任你为节度，加上又是重镇，可说是优待异常了。 禹锡感激得哭泣流涕说不出话来。
English: On the day of his entry into the palace, the emperor said to him: "From the announcement of the emblem, the person who resigned did not exceed the defense envoy, now you are appointed as the governor, plus it is a major town, it can be said that the preferential treatment is abnormal.

古文：咸平中，移知贝州。
现代文：咸平年间，移任知贝州。
English: During the Xianping era, he was transferred to Zhibe Prefecture.

古文：是岁，契丹兵奄至城下，禹锡内严备御，寇寻引去。
现代文：这年，契丹部队攻至城下，禹锡内部加强备御，敌人不久退去。
English: In that year, the Khitan forces reached the outskirts of the city. Yuxi strengthened its internal defenses, and the enemy soon retreated.

古文：明年，徙陕州。
现代文：第二年，徙任知陕州。
English: The following year, he was transferred to Chizhou, Shaanxi Province.

古文：景德初，子宗庆选尚，召禹锡归阙，令公主就第谒见，行舅姑礼，固辞不许。
现代文：景德初年，他的儿子宗庆被选中与公主结婚，真宗召禹锡归京，令公主到他家拜见他，行公公媳妇之礼，禹锡坚决谢绝不同意。
English: In the first year of Jingde, his son Zongqing was selected to marry the princess. Zhenzong called Yu Xi to return to Beijing and ordered the princess to visit him at his home and perform the ceremony of the bride and bridegroom. Yu Xi firmly disagreed.

古文：顷之，还镇。
现代文：不久，回到任地。
English: He soon returned to his post.

古文：未几，卒，年六十二，赠太尉。
现代文：不久，去世，终年六十二岁。追赠太尉。
English: He died soon after, at the age of sixty-two. He was posthumously awarded the rank of captain.

古文：子宗亮，太子中允；宗庆，永清军节度。
现代文：他的儿子宗亮，任太子中允；宗庆，任永清军节度。
English: His son, Zong Liang, was appointed as the crown prince, and Zong Qing was appointed as the commander of the Yongqing Army.

