古文：张简栖薛夔计真刘元鼎张立本姚坤尹瑗韦氏子
现代文：张简栖薛夔计真刘元鼎张立本姚坤尹瑗韦氏子
English: Zhang Jianqi, Xue Qi, Zhenzhen, Liu Yuanding, Zhang Liben, Yao Kun, Yin Qi, Wei Shi,

古文：张简牺
现代文：张简牺
English: Zhang Jianwu

古文：南阳张简栖，唐贞元末，于徐泗间以放鹰为事。
现代文：南阳人张简栖，唐代贞元年末，在徐泗之间放鹰玩。
English: At the end of the first year of the Zhengyuan era of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Jianqi, a native of Nanyang, was playing with an eagle between Xu Xi.

古文：是日初晴，鹰击拿不中，腾冲入云路。
现代文：这一天天刚晴，鹰捉拿不到东西，振翅飞上云霄之中。
English: It was a fine day, and the eagle couldn't catch anything, so it flapped its wings and flew up into the sky.

古文：简栖望其踪，与徒从分头逐觅。
现代文：张简牺盯着鹰的踪迹，和同伴们分头追赶寻找。
English: Zhang Jian's daughter stared at the eagle's trail, and she and her companions split up to chase and search.

古文：俄至夜，可一更，不觉至一古墟之中。
现代文：不久天黑了，大约一更天，不知不觉走到一个古墓之中。
English: Soon it got dark, about one in the morning, and I unknowingly walked into an ancient tomb.

古文：忽有火烛之光，迫而前，乃一冢穴中光明耳。
现代文：忽然有烛光出现，逼近前一看，是从一个坟穴中露出的光亮。
English: Suddenly, a candlelight appeared, and when I looked closer, it was the light from a grave.

古文：前觇之，见狐凭几，寻读册子。
现代文：上前仔细看，看见一个狐狸靠着桌子，认真地在读一本小册子。
English: Look closely and you'll see a fox leaning over a table, intently reading a brochure.

古文：其旁有群鼠，益汤茶，送果栗，皆人拱手。
现代文：它身边有一群老鼠添茶水，送果品，都象人一样拱手行礼。
English: There is a group of mice around it, adding tea, giving fruit, and bowing like humans.

古文：简栖怒呵之，狐惊走，收拾册子，入深黑穴中藏。
现代文：张简栖生气地呵斥它，狐狸受惊要跑掉，收拾起册子，跑到深黑的洞中藏了起来。
English: Zhang Jianqi angrily shouted at him. The fox was scared and wanted to run away. He gathered up the booklet and ran to hide in a dark hole.

古文：简栖以鹰竿挑得一册子，乃归。
现代文：张简栖用鹰竿挑到一本小册子，就回家了。
English: Zhang Jianqi picked up a booklet with an eagle's beak and went home.

古文：至四更，宅外闻人叫索册子声，出觅即无所见。
现代文：到四更天，听到屋外有人喊叫索要小册子的声音，出去找却什么也看不见。
English: Four days later, she heard someone outside shouting for a brochure, but when she went out to look for it, she couldn't see anything.

古文：至明，皆失所在。自此夜夜来索不已。
现代文：到了天亮，声音全都没有了，从此天天晚上不停地来索要。
English: By dawn, there was no sound at all, and from then on they kept coming every night to ask for it.

古文：简栖深以为异，因携册子入郭，欲以示人。
现代文：张简栖深深地奇怪这件事，于是携带着小册子到城里去，想把小册子给人们看看。
English: Zhang Jianqi was deeply puzzled by this, so he took the pamphlet to the city and wanted to show it to people.

古文：往去郭可三四里，忽逢一知己，相揖，问所往。
现代文：在离城大约三四里的地方，忽然遇上一个熟人，互相行礼，问去哪里。
English: At a place about three or four miles from the city, they suddenly met an acquaintance, bowed to each other and asked where to go.

古文：简栖乃取册子，话狐状，前人亦惊笑，接得册子，便鞭马疾去。
现代文：张简栖就取出小册子，述说遇见狐狸的情况，那人也又惊奇又好笑，接过小册子，就打着马快速离开。
English: Zhang Jianqi took out the booklet and told the story of how he met the fox. The man was surprised and amused. He took the booklet and quickly left on his horse.

古文：回顾简栖曰： 谢以册子相还。 
现代文：并回过头看着张简栖说： 谢谢你把小册子还给我。 
English: And he looked back at Zhang Jianqi and said: Thank you for returning the brochure to me.

古文：简栖逐之转急，其人变为狐，马变为獐，不可及。
现代文：张简栖于是急忙地追赶他。那人变成狐狸，马变成獐子，就追不上了。
English: Zhang Jianqi then hurriedly chased after him. The man turned into a fox and the horse into a mule, so he couldn't catch up.

古文：回车入郭，访此宅知己，元在不出，方知狐来夺之。
现代文：回过头进入城郭，访问住在这里的熟人，朋友在家没出门，才知是狐狸来夺书。
English: I looked back and entered the castle, visited acquaintances who lived here, my friend didn't go out at home, and only then did I know that the fox had come to take the book.

古文：其册子装束，一如人者，纸墨亦同，皆狐书，不可识。
现代文：那书册的装订，与人装订得一样，纸和墨也相同。都是狐狸文字，不认识。
English: The binding of the book is the same as that of a human being, and the paper and ink are the same. It's all Fox's handwriting, I don't recognize it.

古文：简栖犹录得头边三数行，以示人。
现代文：张简栖还记得头三行文字，就录下来给人看。
English: Zhang Jianqi still remembered the first three lines of the text, and recorded it for others to see.

古文：薛夔
现代文：薛夔
English: Xue Ying

古文：贞元末，骁卫将军薛夔寓居永宁龙兴观之北。
现代文：唐朝贞元的末年，骁卫将军薛夔寄居在永宁县龙兴观的北面。
English: In the last years of Emperor Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, General Xue Bing lived in Yongning County, north of Longxing.

古文：多妖狐，夜则纵横，逢人不忌。夔举家惊恐，莫知所如。
现代文：住处有很多妖狐，夜里纵横乱窜，遇人也不怕，薛夔全家人都很害怕，不知道怎么办好。
English: There are many monsters and foxes in their home. They run amok at night and are not afraid of people. Xue Yao's whole family is very scared and don't know what to do.

古文：或谓曰： 妖狐最惮猎犬，西邻李太尉第中，鹰犬颇多，何不假其骏异者，向夕以待之？ 
现代文：有的人对他说： 妖狐最怕猎犬，西面的邻居李太尉家中，鹰犬很多，何不借来其中最优秀的，到了晚上让狗防备狐狸。 
English: Some people said to him, "Foxes are most afraid of hunting dogs. There are many eagle-dogs in Lieutenant Li's home, our neighbor to the west. Why don't you borrow the best of them and let the dogs guard against foxes at night."

古文：夔深以为然。即诣西邻子弟具述其事，李氏喜闻，羁三犬以付焉。
现代文：薛夔深深地认为是对的，就去拜见西邻的子弟并详细说了他家的事，李氏子弟听了大喜，拴了三条狗交给他。
English: Xue Yao deeply believed that he was right, so he went to visit the son of his western neighbor and told him in detail about his family. The son of the Li family was overjoyed and gave him three dogs.

古文：是夕月明，夔纵犬，与家人辈密觇之。
现代文：这天晚上有月亮，薛夔放开狗，和家里的人注视观察着狗。
English: On this night, there was a moon. Xue Yao let go of the dog, and the family members watched and observed the dog.

古文：见三犬皆被羁靮，三狐跨之，奔走庭中，东西南北，靡不如意。
现代文：就见三只狗全被拴上了缰绳，三只狐狸骑着它们，在院子里奔跑，往东往西往南往北，都随心所欲。
English: He saw three dogs, all on leashes, and three foxes riding them, running around the yard, going east, west, south, and north, as they pleased.

古文：及晓，三犬困殆，寝而不食。
现代文：等到天亮，三条狗又困又累，睡了也不吃食。
English: By dawn, the three dogs were sleepy and tired. They slept and didn't eat.

古文：才暝，复为乘跨，广庭蹴踘，犬稍留滞，鞭策备至。
现代文：天刚黑，又被狐狸骑着在庭院中击球玩乐，在宽敞的院子里跑来跑去，狗稍有停留，就马上用鞭子抽打薛。
English: It was just after dark, and the fox was riding him in the courtyard to hit the ball and have fun, running around in the spacious yard. The dog stopped for a moment and immediately whipped Xue.

古文：夔无奈何，竟徙焉。
现代文：夔无可奈何，最终还是搬了家。
English: There was nothing he could do, so he eventually moved.

古文：计真
现代文：计真
English: Fake news

古文：唐元和中，有计真家侨青齐间。
现代文：唐代元和年间，有个叫计真的人客居在青州和齐州之间。
English: In the first and second years of the Tang Dynasty, a man named Ji Zhen lived as a guest between Qingzhou and Qizhou.

古文：尝西游长安，至陕，真与陕从事善，是日将告去，从事留饮酒，至暮方与别。
现代文：曾经向西到长安游玩，到了陕州，计真和陕州的一个幕僚很友好。这一天准备向幕僚告别，幕僚留他喝酒，至天黑才与他分别。
English: He once traveled west to Chang'an, and when he arrived in Shaanxi Province, he was very friendly with a staff member from Shaanxi Province. On this day, he was preparing to say goodbye to the staff member. The staff member let him drink, and only separated from him when it was dark.

古文：及行未十里，遂兀然堕马，而二仆驱其衣囊前去矣。
现代文：行不到十里路，就不知不觉地掉下马去，而两个仆人带着衣囊走到前边去了。
English: Before he had gone ten leagues, he unknowingly fell off his horse, and two servants went ahead of him with a bag of clothes.

古文：及真醉寤，已曛黑。
现代文：等到计真酒醒时，已经天黑了马也自己走了。
English: By the time he woke up, it was already dark and the horse had left on its own.

古文：马亦先去，因顾道左小径有马溺，即往寻之。
现代文：因为看见道北小路上有马尿，就前去寻找，不觉走了几里路。
English: Because he saw horse urine on the small road to the north of the road, he went to look for it and inadvertently walked several miles.

古文：不觉数里，忽见朱门甚高，槐柳森然。
现代文：忽然看见高高的红色大门，槐树柳树长得很茂盛。
English: Suddenly I saw a tall red gate, and the eucalyptus and willow trees were growing very luxuriantly.

古文：真既亡仆马，怅然，遂叩其门，已扃键。
现代文：计真已经丢失了仆人和马匹，心里很不高兴，就去敲那红门，门已经上锁。
English: Ji Zhen had lost his servants and horses, and he was very unhappy. He went to knock on the red door, but it was locked.

古文：有小童出视，真即问曰： 此谁氏居？ 
现代文：有个僮仆出来看望，计真就问道： 这里是谁的住宅？ 
English: When a servant came to visit, Ji Zhen asked: Whose house is this?

古文：曰： 李外郎别墅。 
现代文：回答说： 是李外郎的别墅。 
English: He replied, "It's Li Weiro's villa."

古文：真请入谒，僮遽以告之。
现代文：计真请求进去拜见，僮仆急忙地去通报。
English: He asked me to come in and see him, and I hurried to inform him.

古文：顷之，令人请客入，息于宾馆。
现代文：不久，让人请客人进去，安置在客房里。
English: Before long, guests were being ushered in and settled into their rooms.

古文：即引入门，其左有宾位甚清敞。所设屏障，皆古山水及名画图经籍，茵榻之类，率洁而不华。
现代文：就领计真进门，北面有个宾客住处很是清洁敞亮，安设的屏障，都是古代山水和名画以及典籍、被褥和床等，大都清洁而不奢华。
English: As soon as I entered the door, there was a guest residence on the north side that was very clean and spacious. The barriers were all ancient landscapes and famous paintings, as well as classics, bedding and beds. Most of them were clean but not luxurious.

古文：真坐久之，小僮出曰： 主君且至。 
现代文：计真坐了很久，小僮出来说： 主人就要到了。 
English: Ji Zhen sat for a long time, Xiao Yao came out and said: The master is about to arrive.

古文：俄有一丈夫，年约五十，朱绂银章，仪状甚伟，与生相见，揖让而坐。
现代文：一会儿有一男子，年龄大约五十，穿着红色朝服带着银色的花纹，仪表很雄伟，与计真相见，行礼让坐。
English: A moment later, a man in his fifties, wearing a red kimono with silver patterns and a majestic appearance, politely declines to sit down.

古文：生因具述从事故人，留饮酒，道中沈醉，不觉曛黑。
现代文：计真因而详细说了陕州幕僚是老朋友，留自己喝酒，路上醉倒了，不知不觉天就黑了，仆人和马匹都失散了，想在这里借住一宿可以吗？
English: He said in detail that the Shaanxi staff member was an old friend, so he kept drinking and got drunk on the road. Before he knew it, it was dark, and the servants and horses were separated. Would you like to stay here for a night?

古文：仆马俱失，愿寓此一夕可乎，李曰： 但虑此卑隘，不可安贵客，宁有间耶？ 
现代文：李外郎说： 我只是顾虑这里简陋，狭窄，不能安置贵客，难道还讨厌你吗？ 
English: Li Wei Lang said, "I'm just worried that this place is simple, cramped, and can't accommodate distinguished guests. Do you still hate it?"

古文：真愧谢之。李又曰： 某尝从事于蜀，寻以疾罢去。
现代文：计真惭愧地向他道歉，李外郎又说： 我曾在蜀州做过幕僚，不久因病离职，现在就在这里退休了。 
English: Ge Zhen shamefully apologized to him, Li Wei Lang also said: I once worked as a staff member in Shuzhou, soon left due to illness, and now I am retired here.

古文：今则归休于是矣。 因与议，语甚敏博，真颇慕之。
现代文：因而和他谈起来，说的东西渊博而聪敏，计真很羡慕他。
English: Therefore, when talking with him, he said something profound and intelligent, and I really envy him.

古文：又命家僮访真仆马，俄而皆至，即舍之。既而设馔共食，食竟，饮酒数杯而寐。
现代文：李外郎又命令僮仆去寻找计真的仆人和马匹，不久都找到了，就让计真住在这里，接着摆酒席一起吃饭，吃完饭，又喝了几杯酒就睡了。
English: Li Wei Lang also ordered his servants to look for Ji Zhen's servants and horses. They soon found them, so they let Ji Zhen live here. They then set up a banquet table and ate together. After eating, they drank a few more glasses of wine and went to sleep.

古文：明日，真晨起告去，李曰： 愿更得一日侍欢笑。 
现代文：第二天，计真早起告诉他要离开，李外郎说： 希望再呆一天在一起快乐快乐。 
English: The next day, Ji Zhen got up early to tell him to leave, Li Wei Lang said: I hope to stay together for another day, happy happy.

古文：生感其意，即留，明日乃别。
现代文：计真对他的心意很感动，就留下了，第二天就告别了。
English: Ji Zhen was very moved by his thoughts, so he stayed and said goodbye the next day.

古文：及至京师，居月余，有欵其门者，自称进士独孤沼。
现代文：等到了京城，住了一个多月，有人敲门，自己介绍说是进士独孤沼，计真坐下与他谈话，很聪明而且善辩。
English: When he arrived in the capital, where he stayed for more than a month, someone knocked on his door and introduced himself as Jin Shi Du Guonmo. Ji Zhen sat down and had a conversation with him. He was very intelligent and eloquent.

古文：且欲与君为姻好，故令某奉谒，话此意。君以为何如？ 
现代文：并对计真说： 我家住在陕州，昨天向西走，路过李外郎家，他谈起并不停地赞美你，还打算把女儿嫁给你，所以让我来会面并告诉你，你以为怎么样？ 
English: And he said to Ji Zhen: My family lives in Shaanxi Province. Yesterday, when I was walking west, I passed Li Wei Lang's house. He talked about and praised you incessantly, and also planned to marry his daughter to you. So let me meet you and tell you what you think.

古文：喜而诺之。沼曰： 某今还陕，君东归，当更访外郎，且谢其意也。 遂别去。
现代文：计真高兴地答应了他，独孤沼说： 我现在要回陕州去，你向东方往家走时，应当去拜访李外郎，并且感谢他的心意。 就分别了。
English: Ge Zhen happily agreed with him, and Du Guonuma said: I want to go back to Shaanxi now. When you go home to the east, you should visit Li Wei Lang and thank him for his kindness. They parted.

古文：后旬月，生还诣外郎别墅，李见真至，大喜。生即话独孤沼之言，因谢之。李遂留生，卜日就礼。
现代文：一个月后，计真回去时拜访了李外郎的别墅，李外郎看见计真来到，非常高兴，计真就说了独孤沼的话，顺便向他道了谢，李外郎就留计真住下，找了好日子举行了婚礼。
English: A month later, when Ji Zhen returned, he visited Li Wei Lang's villa. Li Wei Lang saw Ji Zhen coming and was very happy. Ji Zhen said the words of the lonely swamp and thanked him in passing. Li Wei Lang stayed with Ji Zhen and found a good day to hold a wedding.

古文：妻色甚姝，且聪敏柔婉。生留旬月，乃挈妻孥归青齐。自是李君音耗不绝。
现代文：妻子的面貌很美，而且聪明温柔，计真住了一个月，才带着妻子回到青州和齐州一带的家，从此李外郎的信息不间断地传来。
English: His wife's face was very beautiful, and she was smart and gentle. Ji Zhen stayed for a month, and then he took his wife back to his home in Qingzhou and Qizhou. From then on, Li Wei Lang's messages came incessantly.

古文：生奉道，每晨起，阅《黄庭内景经》。李氏常止之曰： 君好道，宁如秦皇汉武乎？
现代文：计真信奉道教，每天早晨起来，都阅读《黄庭内景经》，李氏常常制止他说： 你喜好道教，难道能比上秦皇汉武吗？
English: Gezhen was a believer in Taoism. Every morning, he would get up and read the "Huangting Naijingjing." Mr. Li often stopped him and said, "You like Taoism. Can you compare it to the Qin and Han dynasties?"

古文：求仙之力，又孰若秦皇汉武乎？
现代文：追求成仙之道的力量，又比得上秦皇汉武吗？
English: Is the power of pursuing the path to immortality comparable to that of the Qin and Han dynasties?

古文：彼二人贵为天子，富有四海，竭天下之财以学神仙，尚崩于沙丘，葬于茂陵。况君一布衣，而乃惑于求仙耶？ 
现代文：他们两个人是尊贵的天子，占有全天下，竭尽天下的财力来学习成仙之道，尚且一个死在沙丘，一个埋在茂陵，何况你只是一个平凡的百姓，却要被求仙的事所迷惑吗？ 
English: The two of them are the noble sons of heaven, possessing the whole world, exhausting the financial resources of the world to learn the way to immortality, yet one died in the sand dunes, one buried in the marshes, and you are just an ordinary people, but do you want to be confused by the matter of seeking immortality?

古文：真叱之，乃终卷。意其知道者，亦不疑为他类也。
现代文：计真呵叱她乱说话，就看完了全书，还以为妻子是个懂得求仙之道的人，也不怀疑她是别的种类。
English: After reading the whole book, he thought that his wife was a person who knew how to seek immortality, and he did not doubt that she was a different kind.

古文：后岁余，真挈家调选，至陕郊，李君留其女，而遣生来京师。明年秋，授兖州参军，李氏随之官。
现代文：一年多后，计真带着家属到京城听候选举做官，到了陕州郊外，李外郎留下女儿，让计真来京师，第二年秋天，选举任命他做兖州参军，李氏跟随他去上任。
English: More than a year later, Ji Zhen took his family members to Beijing to wait for the election to become an official. When he arrived at the outskirts of Shaanxi Province, Li Wei Lang left his daughter and asked Ji Zhen to come to Beijing. In the autumn of the following year, the election appointed him to join the army in Zhangzhou, and Mr. Li followed him to take office.

古文：数年罢秩，归齐鲁。
现代文：几年后被免去职务，回到家乡。
English: A few years later he was relieved of his duties and returned to his hometown.

古文：又十余年，李有七子二女，才质姿貌，皆居众人先。
现代文：又过了十多年，李氏共生了七个儿子二个女儿，资质和面貌，都超过一般人。
English: More than a decade later, the Li family had seven sons and two daughters, all of whom were more talented and better looking than the average person.

古文：而李容色端丽，无殊少年时。
现代文：李氏虽然年纪已大，可是仍然端庄美丽，与少年时比较没有差别。
English: Although Ms. Li is old, she is still dignified and beautiful, no different from when she was a teenager.

古文：生益钟念之。
现代文：计真更加喜受她。
English: I like her even more now.

古文：无何，被疾且甚，生奔走医巫，无所不至，终不愈。
现代文：没多久，她得了很重的病，计真东奔西走求医生找巫师，什么办法都想了，始终没治好。
English: Not long after, she fell seriously ill. She ran around looking for a doctor and a sorcerer, trying everything she could think of, but she was still not cured.

古文：一旦屏人握生手，呜咽流涕自言曰： 妾自知死至，然忍羞以心曲告君，幸君宽罪宥戾，使得尽言。 
现代文：一天早晨屏退了其他人，握着计真的手，呜咽流泪说： 我自己知道死期到了，还是要忍着羞耻把心里话告诉你，希望你能宽恕我的罪过，让我把话说完。 
English: One morning, he turned away from the others, clasped the hands of his wife, sobbed and shed tears, and said, "I know that my time to die has come, but I still have to endure the shame of telling you my heartfelt words. I hope you can forgive my sins and let me finish my words."

古文：已歔欷不自胜，生亦为之泣，固慰之。
现代文：说着已经抽咽着承受不了了。
English: I couldn't take it anymore.

古文：乃曰： 一言诚自知受责于君，顾九稚子犹在，以为君累，尚感一发口。且妾非人间人，天命当与君偶，得以狐狸贱质，奉箕帚二十年，未尝纤芥获罪，权以他类贻君忧。
现代文：计真也为她哭泣，并安慰她，她就说： 说一句话实在是自己知道会受到你的责备，再看看九个小孩子还在，会成为你的累赘，还觉得应该开口说实话，况且我不是人类，命中注定应当做你的妻子，才能用狐狸的卑贱身子，侍候你二十年，不曾犯一丝一毫的过错，因而没有由于是别的种类而给你带来忧愁。
English: Just as I was weeping for her and consoling her, she said: "To say a word is to know that I will be reproached by you, and to look at the nine children who are still alive and will become a burden to you, and to feel that I should open my mouth and tell the truth. Moreover, I am not a human being, I am destined to be your wife, so that I can serve you for twenty years in the humble body of a fox, without ever making the slightest mistake, and thus not bring you sorrow because I am a different species.

古文：一女子血诚，自谓竭尽。
现代文：用一个女人的血一样的赤诚，可以说已经竭尽全力奉献了。
English: With a woman's blood-like sincerity, it can be said that he has made every effort to contribute.

古文：今日求去，不敢以妖幻余气托君。念稚弱满眼，皆世间人为嗣续，及某气尽，愿少念弱子心，无以枯骨为仇，得全支体，埋之土中，乃百生之赐也。 
现代文：现在我要离开你，不敢把妖幻般的剩余的气息托付给你，再一想稚子弱女就在眼前，都是世上的人们为了沿续种族而生育的，等我咽了气，希望你稍稍想到孩子们那稚弱的心灵，不要把我的尸骨当做仇敌，能够保全尸体，把它埋进土里去，就是对我的百世的恩赐了。 
English: Now I'm going to leave you, I dare not entrust you with the remaining ghostly breath, just think about the weakling and weakling right in front of you, all the people in the world are born in order to continue the race. When I catch my breath, I hope you think a little about the weak minds of the children. Don't treat my bones as an enemy. Being able to preserve the body and bury it in the ground is a gift to me for a lifetime.

古文：言终又悲恸，泪百行下。生惊恍伤感，咽不能语。
现代文：说完又悲痛起来，眼泪纷纷落下，计真心中精神恍惚十分伤感，哽咽着说不出话，相对着哭了很久。
English: After saying this, she was sad again, tears fell one after another, and she was really sad in a trance, choking and speechless, and she cried for a long time.

古文：相对泣良久，以被蒙首，背壁卧，食顷无声。生遂发被，见一狐死被中。
现代文：李氏用被子蒙住头，背靠墙壁躺着，大约一顿饭的时间，没有声音，计真掀开被，就见一只狐狸死在被子里。
English: Mr. Li covered his head with a quilt and lay with his back against the wall. About the time of a meal, there was no sound. When he tried to lift the quilt, he saw a fox dead in the quilt.

古文：生特感悼之，为之敛葬之制，皆如人礼讫。
现代文：计真特别感伤悼念她，为她举行收敛埋葬的仪式，全都象人的礼节一样。
English: Ji Zhen particularly sentimental to mourn her, for her to hold a funeral ceremony, all like human etiquette.

古文：生径至陕，访李氏居，墟墓荆棘，阒无所见，惆怅还家。
现代文：计真一直地到了陕州，访问李外郎的住处，废弃的墓地，荆棘丛生，静静地什么也没有，心情惆怅地回到家里。
English: Ji Zhen went all the way to Shaanxi, visited Li Wei Lang's residence, abandoned cemeteries, thorny thickets, quietly nothing, and returned home in a bad mood.

古文：居岁余，七子二女，相次而卒。视其骸，皆人也，而终无恶心。
现代文：过了一年多，七个儿子二个女儿一个接一个地死了，看他们的尸体，都是人，计真始终没有厌恶之心。
English: More than a year later, seven sons and two daughters died one after another. Looking at their corpses, all of them human, Ji Zhen never felt disgusted.

古文：刘元鼎
现代文：刘元鼎
English: Liu Yuanding

古文：旧说，野狐名紫狐，夜击尾火出，将为怪，必戴髑髅拜北斗，髑髅不坠，则化为人矣。
现代文：过去传说，野狐又叫紫狐，夜间甩尾巴出火星，将要兴妖作怪，一定要头戴死人头骨对着北斗星叩头，死人头骨不掉下来，就变成人了。
English: In the past, there was a legend that the wild fox, also known as the purple fox, would fling its tail out of the planet Mars at night and become a monster. It was necessary to wear a dead man's skull on its head and bow to the Big Dipper. If the dead man's skull did not fall off, it would turn into a man.

古文：刘元鼎为蔡州，蔡州新破，食场狐暴。刘遣吏主捕，日于球场纵犬，逐之为乐。经年所杀百数。
现代文：刘元鼎做蔡州刺史时，蔡州刚被攻占下来，狐狸特别多，刘元鼎派遣官吏负责捕捉，天天在球场一带放开猎犬，以追逐狐狸为乐趣，一年杀了有一百多只。
English: When Liu Yuanding was making history in Caizhou, Caizhou had just been conquered, and there were a lot of foxes. Liu Yuanding dispatched officials to catch them. Every day, he released hunting dogs around the stadium to chase foxes for fun, and killed more than a hundred foxes a year.

古文：后获一疥狐。纵五六犬，皆不敢逐，狐亦不走。
现代文：后追出一只满身是疥的狐狸，放出五六只猎犬，都不敢去追，狐狸也不跑。
English: He then chased out a fox covered in lice and released five or six hounds. None of them dared to chase it, and the fox did not run away.

古文：刘大异之，令访大将家猎狗及监军亦自夸巨犬至，皆弭环守之。
现代文：刘元鼎特别惊奇，命令人去访求大将军家的猎狗以及监军也自夸的大猎狗，狗来了，全都围成一圈守着狐狸。
English: Liu Yuanding was particularly surprised. He ordered the hunting dogs to visit the general's home and the big hunting dogs that the supervisors also boasted about. The dogs came, all of them gathered in a circle to guard the fox.

古文：狐良久缓迹，直上设厅，穿台盘，出厅后，及城墙，俄失所在。
现代文：狐狸很久以后才慢慢移动，一直走上设厅，穿过台盘，走出后厅，走到城墙时，忽然失去了踪迹。
English: It was a long time before the fox moved slowly, all the way up the hall, across the table, out of the back hall, and when he reached the city wall, he suddenly lost track.

古文：刘自是不复命捕。
现代文：刘元鼎从此不再下令捕捉狐狸。
English: From now on, Liu Yuanding will no longer order the capture of foxes.

古文：道术中有天狐别行法，言天狐九尾，金色，役于日月宫，有符有醮日，可以洞达阴阳。
现代文：道术中有所谓 天狐别行法 ，说是天狐长了九条尾巴，金色的毛，在日宫和月宫里服役，有符箓，能祈神免灾，能够洞察通晓阴阳变化。
English: In Taoism, there is the so-called "Heavenly Fox, Don't Practice," which says that the Heavenly Fox has nine tails, golden hair, serves in the Sun Palace and the Moon Palace, has charms, can pray to God to avoid disasters, and can understand the changes of yin and yang.

古文：张立本
现代文：张立本
English: Zhang Libon

古文：唐丞相牛僧孺在中书，草场官张立本有一女，为妖物所魅。
现代文：唐代丞相牛僧孺在中书任职时，草场官张立本有一个女儿，被妖物迷惑。
English: When the Tang Dynasty chancellor Niu Zengqi was in charge of Chinese literature, the grassland official Zhang Liben had a daughter who was bewitched by a monster.

古文：其妖来时，女即浓妆盛服，于闺中，如与人语笑。
现代文：那妖物来时，女儿就浓妆打扮穿着漂亮衣服，在闺房中，象是和人在说笑。
English: When the monster came, the daughter was dressed in heavy make-up and beautiful clothes. In the boudoir, she seemed to be joking with someone.

古文：其去，即狂呼号泣不已。久每自称高侍郎。
现代文：妖物离去时，就狂呼乱叫哭泣不已，时间一长常常自称是高侍郎。
English: When the monster leaves, he screams and cries uncontrollably, and for a long time he often claims to be a high attendant.

古文：一日，忽吟一首云： 危冠广袖楚宫妆，独步闲厅逐夜凉。自把玉簪敲砌竹，清歌一曲月如霜。 
现代文：有一天，忽然作了一首诗说： 高高的帽子长长的袖子完全是楚国宫廷的打扮，独自一人悠闲地走在厅前，追逐夜间凉爽的空气，自己一个人用玉簪敲着竹子，敲出节拍，唱完一首清新的歌曲，月光象霜一样洒在大地上 。
English: One day, he suddenly composed a poem, saying: "The tall hat and long sleeves are entirely the dress of the court of the State of Chu. I walked leisurely alone in front of the hall, chasing the cool night air. I struck the bamboo with a jade hammer, struck the beat, and sang a fresh song. The moonlight sprinkled the earth like frost.

古文：立本乃随口抄之。
现代文：张立本就随着她口中念的抄写下来。
English: Zhang Li Ben copied it down as she read it.

古文：立本与僧法舟为友，至其宅，遂示其诗云。某女少不曾读书，不知因何而能。
现代文：张立本与法舟和尚是好朋友，到了他的住处，就拿出那诗给法舟和尚看并说： 我女儿从小不曾读过书，不知为什么能写诗了。 
English: Zhang Libon was a good friend of Fazhou Monk. When he arrived at his residence, he took out the poem and showed it to Fazhou Monk, saying, "My daughter has never read a book since she was a child. I don't know why she can write poetry."

古文：舟乃与立本两粒丹，令其女服之，不旬日而疾自愈。
现代文：法舟和尚给张立本两粒丹药，让他女儿吃下去，不到十天病自己就好了。
English: The Dharma boat monk gave Zhang Libin two pills of herbal medicine, let his daughter eat it, and within ten days he was well.

古文：某女说云，宅后有竹丛，与高锴侍郎墓近，其中有野狐窟穴，因被其魅。
现代文：他女儿说，房后有片竹林，与高锴侍郎的坟墓很近，其中有个野狐狸洞穴，因而被狐狸迷惑了。
English: His daughter said that there was a bamboo grove behind the house, very close to the grave of Takahata's servant, in which there was a wild fox cave, and she was confused by the fox.

古文：服丹之后，不闻其疾再发矣。
现代文：服了丹药之后，没听说她的病再发作。
English: I haven't heard of her relapsing after taking the medicine.

古文：姚坤
现代文：姚坤
English: Yao Kun

古文：太和中，有处士姚坤不求荣达，常以钓渔自适。居于东洛万安山南，以琴尊自怡。
现代文：唐文宗太和年间，有个隐士叫姚坤，不追求荣耀和显贵，常常以钓鱼来寻求舒适，住在东洛万安山的南边，以弹琴和喝酒自得其乐。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Tang Wenzong, there was a hermit named Yao Kun, who did not pursue glory and nobility, but often sought comfort by fishing. He lived on the south side of Dongluo Wan'an Mountain and enjoyed playing the piano and drinking.

古文：其侧有猎人，常以网取狐兔为业。
现代文：他的邻居有个猎人，常常捉些狐狸和兔子来谋生。
English: His neighbour is a hunter who often catches foxes and rabbits for a living.

古文：坤性仁，恒收赎而放之，如此活者数百。
现代文：姚坤性情仁爱，经常收买下来再放了它们，这样活下来的有几百只。
English: Yao Kun has a benevolent nature and often buys them and then releases them. There are hundreds of cranes that have survived this way.

古文：坤旧有庄，质于嵩岭菩提寺，坤持其价而赎之。
现代文：姚坤从前有座庄园。典卖给嵩岭的菩提寺，姚坤就靠这些钱来赎买狐兔。
English: Yao Kun used to have a manor house. It was sold to the family temple in Songling, and Yao Kun used the money to buy Fox Rabbit.

古文：其知庄僧惠沼行凶，率常于閴处凿井深数丈，投以黄精数百斤，求人试服，观其变化。
现代文：那个管理庄子的和尚惠沼做事凶狠，曾在空旷处挖井深几十丈，扔进几百斤黄精，找人试着吃，观察那人的变化。
English: The monk Huinuma, who managed the village, did things ferociously. He once dug a well several tens of meters deep in an open space, threw in several hundred pounds of yellow essence, found someone to try to eat, and observed the changes in that person.

古文：乃饮坤大醉，投于井中。以磑石咽其井。坤及醒，无计跃出，但饥茹黄精而已。
现代文：于是想办法把姚灌醉了，扔到井里，用石磨塞住井口，等姚坤醒过来，没有办法出去，只是饿了就吃黄精罢了。
English: So he tried to get Yao drunk, threw him into a well, plugged the well with a stone mill, and waited for Yao Kun to wake up. There was no way to get out, so he just ate Huang Jing when he was hungry.

古文：如此数日夜，忽有人于井口召坤姓名，谓坤曰： 我狐也，感君活我子孙不少，故来教君。
现代文：这样过了好几天，忽然有人在井口召唤姚坤的姓名，对姚坤说： 我是狐狸，感谢你救活了不少我的子孙，所以来教你出去办法。
English: After several days of this, someone suddenly called Yao Kun's name at the wellhead and said to Yao Kun: I am a fox, thank you for saving many of my children and grandchildren, so I will teach you how to get out.

古文：我狐之通天者，初穴于塚，因上窍，乃窥天汉星辰，有所慕焉。恨身不能奋飞，遂凝盼注神。忽然不觉飞出，蹑虚驾云，登天汉，见仙官而礼之。
现代文：我是一只能通天的狐狸，最初的时候在荒坟的洞穴里住，因为上面有个小孔，能看见天河的星星，我心向往之，恨的是身子不能飞上天去，于是凝神注视星星，忽然不知不觉中飞了出去凭空驾云，飞上天河，看见了仙官就向他行礼。
English: I am a fox who can only see the sky. At first, I lived in a cave of a barren grave, because there was a small hole above, where I could see the stars of the Milky Way. My heart yearned for it, but I hated that my body could not fly into the sky. So I stared at the stars, and suddenly, without knowing it, I flew out of the sky, flew into the Milky Way, and when I saw a genie, I bowed to him.

古文：君但能澄神泯虑，注盼玄虚，如此精确，不三旬而自飞出。虽窍之至微，无所碍矣。 坤曰： 汝何据耶？ 
现代文：你只要能澄清精神消除杂念，专心致志地想那玄妙虚无的道理，象这样精微准确地去做，不用三十天自然就会飞出来，即使孔洞极小，也没有妨碍。 姚坤说： 你根据什么呢？ 
English: As long as you can clear your mind, eliminate distractions, and concentrate on thinking about the mysterious principle of nothingness, if you do it delicately and accurately like this, it will naturally fly out in less than 30 days, and even if the hole is very small, it will not be hindered.

古文：狐曰： 君不闻《西升经》云： 神能飞形，亦能移山。 
现代文：狐狸说： 你没听《西升经》里说： 精神能使形体飞起来，也能移动大山。 
English: The fox said, "Didn't you hear what it said in the Book of the West Ascendant: The spirit can make the body fly, and can also move mountains.

古文：君其努力。 
现代文：你好好地努力吧。 
English: Keep up the good work.

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：说完就离开了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：坤信其说，依而行之。约一月，忽能跳出于磑孔中。
现代文：姚坤相信它的说法，照着去做，大约一个月，忽然能从石磨的孔洞中跳出来。
English: Yao Kun believed what it said and followed it. About a month later, he was suddenly able to jump out of the hole in the stone mill.

古文：遂见僧，大骇，视其井依然。
现代文：就去见那管理庄园的和尚，和尚大吃一惊，看那井象原来一样，和尚对姚坤很礼貌并询问是怎么回事。
English: He went to see the monk who managed the manor. The monk was very surprised to see the well as it was. The monk was very polite to Yao Kun and asked what was going on.

古文：僧礼坤诘其事，坤告曰： 但于中饵黄精一月，身轻如神，自能飞出，窍所不碍。 
现代文：姚坤说： 只是在里面吃了一个月的黄精，就身体轻飘飘地象神仙一样，自然就能飞出来，小孔洞也没什么妨碍。 
English: Yao Kun said, "Just by eating the astragalus for a month inside, the body will float like a fairy, and it will naturally fly out, and the small holes will not be a hindrance.

古文：僧然之，遣弟子，以索坠下，约弟子一月后来窥。
现代文：和尚相信了他，让弟子用绳子把自己送到井底，和弟子约定一个月以后来看他。
English: The monk believed him and let the disciple use a rope to drag himself to the bottom of the well. He agreed with the disciple to see him a month later.

古文：弟子如其言，月余来窥，僧已毙于井耳。
现代文：弟子们照他说的做，一个多月后来看他，和尚死在井里了。
English: The disciples did as he said, and more than a month later, when they went to see him, the monk had died in the well.

古文：坤归旬日，有女子自称夭桃，诣坤。云是富家女，误为年少诱出，失踪不可复返，愿持箕帚。
现代文：姚坤回家十多天，有个女子自称叫夭桃，来见姚坤，说是富人家的女儿，不小心被少年引诱出来，少年失去了踪迹自己不能再回家，愿意嫁给他。
English: More than ten days after Yao Kun returned home, a woman calling herself Xiao Tao came to see Yao Kun, saying that she was the daughter of a rich family and had been accidentally lured out by the boy. The boy lost track of himself and could no longer return home. She was willing to marry him.

古文：坤见其妖丽冶容，至于篇什书札俱能精至，坤亦念之。
现代文：姚坤看她容貌姿态艳丽美好，甚至于书籍文章，都能理解其精妙要害，姚坤很喜欢她。
English: Yao Kun likes her very much. Her appearance and posture are beautiful, and even in books and articles, he can understand her subtle essence.

古文：后坤应制，挈夭桃入京。
现代文：后来姚坤去应考，带着夭桃进京城。
English: Later, Yao Kun went to take the exam and went to Beijing with Xiao Tao.

古文：至盘豆馆，夭桃不乐，取笔题竹简，为诗一首曰： 铅华久御向人间，欲舍铅华更惨颜。纵有青丘今夜月，无因重照旧云鬟。 
现代文：到了盘豆馆，夭桃不高兴，拿过笔在竹简上写了一首诗说： 很久以来到这人间来涂脂抹粉，想舍弃脂粉只会使面容更加凄惨，纵使现在仍在仙府青丘之中，沐浴在这月光之下，我已经不是从前那个梳着高耸发髻的人了。 
English: When she arrived at the bean curd restaurant, she was not happy. She took a pen and wrote a poem on a piece of bamboo, saying, "I have been coming to this world for a long time to apply grease and powder. If I want to give up the grease powder, it will only make my face look more miserable. Even though I am still in the middle of the green hills of Xianfu, bathed in this moonlight, I am no longer the person with the towering hair.

古文：吟讽久之，坤亦矍然。
现代文：然后久久地吟咏，姚坤也好象突然地觉悟了什么。
English: Then, after chanting for a long time, Yao Kun also seemed to suddenly realize something.

古文：忽有曹牧遣人执良犬，将献裴度。
现代文：忽然有个叫曹牧的人派人牵着一只良种狗，准备献给裴度，进入馆里来。
English: Suddenly, a man named Cao Mu sent someone to lead a well-bred dog, ready to be dedicated to Pei Du, into the hall.

古文：入馆，犬见夭桃，怒目掣锁，蹲步上阶，夭桃亦化为狐，跳上犬背抉其目。大惊，腾号出馆，望荆山而窜。
现代文：狗一看见夭桃，愤怒地挣开锁链，一耸身跳上台阶，夭桃也变成狐狸，跳上狗背掏狗的眼睛，狗非常害怕，跳着叫着跑出馆门，朝着荆山奔窜。
English: As soon as the dog saw the young peach, it angrily broke free of its chain and leapt onto the steps. The young peach also turned into a fox and leapt onto the dog's back to gouge out the dog's eyes. The dog was very scared and ran out of the pavilion door, jumping and yelping as it ran towards Mount Jing.

古文：坤大骇，逐之行数里，犬已毙，狐即不知所之。
现代文：姚坤很害怕，追赶了几里地，狗已经死了，狐狸也不知去了哪里。
English: Yao Kun was very scared and chased it for several miles. The dog was already dead and the fox did not know where it had gone.

古文：坤惆怅悲惜，尽日不能前进。
现代文：姚坤心情低沉悲伤惋惜，太阳落山了也没走一步。
English: Yao Kun was in a low, sad and regretful mood. When the sun went down, he didn't take a single step.

古文：及夜，有老人挈美酝诣坤，云是旧相识。既饮，坤终莫能达相识之由。
现代文：到了夜里，有个老人带着美酒来见姚坤，说是老相识，喝完酒，姚坤也不清楚相识的原因。
English: In the evening, an old man came to see Yao Kun with fine wine, saying that he was an old acquaintance. After drinking the wine, Yao Kun did not know the reason for the acquaintance.

古文：老人饮罢，长揖而去，云： 报君亦足矣，吾孙亦无恙。 
现代文：老人喝完酒，做了个长揖离开了，并说： 也足够报答你的恩情了，我的孙女也没有事。 
English: The old man finished his drink, made a long bow and left, saying: "It's enough to repay your kindness, my granddaughter is fine.

古文：遂不见，坤方悟狐也，后寂无闻矣。
现代文：就不见了，姚坤才知道是狐狸。以后就没有消息了。
English: It disappeared, and only then did Yao Kun know that it was a fox. After that, there was no news.

古文：尹瑗
现代文：尹瑗
English: Yin Qi

古文：尹瑗者，尝举进士不中第，为太原晋阳尉。
现代文：尹瑗，曾经考进士，没考中，做了太原晋阳县尉。
English: Yin Qi, who had passed the entrance examination, but not the middle school examination, became the Taiyuan Jinyang County Lieutenant.

古文：既罢秩，退居郊野，以文墨自适。
现代文：辞官后，退休住在郊外，每天舞文弄墨很安适。
English: After leaving the government, he retired and lived in the suburbs, where he felt at ease writing poetry every day.

古文：忽一日。有白衣丈夫来谒，自称吴兴朱氏子， 早岁嗜学，窃闻明公以文业自负，愿质疑于执事，无见拒。 
现代文：忽然有一天，有个穿白衣的男子来求见，自称是吴兴人，姓朱，早年就爱好学习，私下听说明公你在文章学业上很自负，愿意向你学习，不要被你拒绝。
English: Suddenly, one day, a man in a white coat came to see me. He claimed to be Wu Xingren, surnamed Zhu. In his early years, he loved to study. Privately, he was told by a professor that you were very arrogant in your writing and studies. He was willing to learn from you and not be rejected by you.

古文：瑗即延入与语，且征其说。
现代文：尹瑗就请他进屋并与他谈起来。而且征询他的看法。
English: Yin Qi invited him into the house and began to talk with him, and asked for his opinion.

古文：云： 家侨岚川，早岁与御史王君皆至北门，今者寓迹于王氏别业累年。 
现代文：他自己说： 早年时与王御史都在禁卫军北衙做事，现在寄居在王御史别墅多年了。 
English: He said: In the early years, he and Wang Yushi both worked at the North Tower of the Imperial Guard, and now he has been living in Wang Yushi's villa for many years.

古文：自此每四日辄一来，甚敏辩纵横，词意典雅。
现代文：从此每隔四天就来一次，机敏辩析随心所欲，语言典雅，尹瑗很喜爱他。
English: From then on, he would come once every four days. He was an astute debater who could say whatever he wanted, and his language was elegant. Yin Jun loved him very much.

古文：瑗深爱之，瑗因谓曰： 吾子机辩玄奥，可以从郡国之游，为公侯高客，何乃自取沈滞，隐迹丛莽？ 
现代文：尹瑗因而对他说： 你说话善于机辩，道理深奥，应当到郡国去游说，做公侯家的贵客，为什么自甘沉没消极，寄身于山野树丛之中呢？ 
English: Therefore, Yin Qi said to him: You are good at witty speech and profound reason, you should go to the county to lobby and be a distinguished guest of the prince's family, why did you sink into passivity and stay in the mountains and forests?

古文：生曰： 余非不愿谒公侯，且惧旦夕有不虞之祸。 
现代文：朱生说： 我不是不愿意拜见公侯，只是害怕一早一晚之间就遇上想不到的灾祸。 
English: Zhu Sheng said: I am not unwilling to meet the prince, but I am afraid of encountering unexpected disasters from morning to night.

古文：瑗曰： 何为发不祥之言乎？ 
现代文：尹瑗说： 为什么说这种不吉祥的话呢？ 
English: Yin Qi said, "Why do you say such unlucky words?

古文：朱曰： 某自今岁来，梦卜有穷尽之兆。 
现代文：朱生说： 我从今年以来，做梦占卜都有走投无路的兆头。 
English: Zhu Sheng said: Since this year, all my dreams and divinations have shown signs of running out of road.

古文：瑗即以词慰谕之，生颇有愧色。
现代文：尹瑗就用话劝解安慰他。朱生显出惭愧的样子。
English: Yin Xi used words to persuade and comfort him. Zhu Sheng looked ashamed.

古文：后至重阳日，有人以浓酝一瓶遗瑗，朱生亦至，因以酒饮之。
现代文：后来到了重阳节这一天，有人送给尹瑗一瓶浓醇的好酒，朱生也来了，于是倒酒给他喝。
English: Later, on the day of the Double Ninth Festival, someone gave Yin Qi a bottle of strong wine. Zhu Sheng also came, so he poured wine for him to drink.

古文：初词以疾，不敢饮，已而又曰： 佳节相遇，岂敢不尽主人之欢耶？ 
现代文：朱生开始说因有病不敢喝酒，不一会又说： 在佳节相遇，怎敢不使主人尽情地欢乐呢？ 
English: Zhu Sheng began to say that he did not dare to drink because of his illness, and after a while he said: When we meet at the festival, how dare we not make our host happy?

古文：即引满而饮。食顷，大醉告去，未行数十步，忽仆于地，化为一老狐，酩酊不能动矣，瑗即杀之。
现代文：就倒了满杯酒喝了，一顿饭的功夫，喝得大醉告别回家，还没走上几十步路，忽然跌倒在地，变成一只老狐狸，醉得不能动弹了。尹瑗就杀了狐狸，接着去王御史的别墅拜访。
English: He poured a full glass of wine and drank it. After a meal, he got very drunk and said goodbye to his home. Before he had walked dozens of steps, he suddenly fell to the ground and turned into an old fox. He was too drunk to move. Yin Yao killed the fox and then went to visit Wang Yushi's villa.

古文：因访王御史别墅，有老农谓瑗曰： 王御史并之裨将，往岁戍于岚川，为狐媚病而卒，已累年矣。墓于村北数十步。 
现代文：有个老农对尹瑗说： 王御史和他的副将，前些年在岚川戍守时，得了狐媚病死了，已经多年了，坟地在村北几十步远的地方。 
English: An old farmer said to Yin Qi: Wang Youshi and his vice-commander, a few years ago, when they were guarding Luchuan, got foxy disease and died. It has been many years, and the graveyard is dozens of steps away in the north of the village.

古文：即命家僮寻御史墓，果有穴。
现代文：尹瑗就命僮仆去寻找王御史的坟墓，果然有个洞穴。
English: Yin Xi ordered his servants to search for Wang's tomb, and sure enough, there was a cave.

古文：瑗后为御史，窃话其事。
现代文：尹瑗后来做了御史。私下里说了这件事。
English: Yin Xi later made a memoir. He talked about it in private.

古文：时唐太和初也。
现代文：当时是唐代太和年间的初年。
English: It was the beginning of the Taihe year in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：韦氏子
现代文：韦氏子
English: Wei's son grows up

古文：杜陵韦氏子家于韩城，有别墅在邑北十余里。
现代文：杜陵的韦氏子家住在韩城，有座别墅在城北十多里处。
English: The Wei family in Duling lives in Hancheng, and has a villa more than ten miles north of the city.

古文：家甚贫，今为里胥所辱，将讼于官，幸吾子纸笔书其事，妾得以执诣邑，冀雪其耻。 
现代文：唐文宗开成十年的秋天从城里出来去别墅游玩，天快黑了，看见一个妇女穿着白色衣服，带了一只瓢，从北面走来，那妇女对韦氏子说： 我住在城北的乡里有几年了，家里很穷，现在被里胥侮辱了，准备到官府去告状。希望你用纸笔写下这件事，我就能拿着它到城里，报仇雪耻。 
English: In the autumn of the tenth year of Tang Wenzong's reign, he went out of the city to visit a villa. It was getting dark, and he saw a woman dressed in white, carrying a donkey, coming from the north. The woman said to Wei's son: I have lived in the countryside north of the city for several years, my family is very poor, and now I have been insulted by the donkey, and I am preparing to go to the government office to sue. I hope you will write down this matter with a pen and paper, so that I can take it to the city and avenge the shame.

古文：韦诺之。妇人即揖韦坐田野，衣中出一酒卮曰： 瓢中有酒，愿与吾子尽醉。 
现代文：韦氏子答应了她，那妇女给韦氏子作个揖就坐在地上。从衣服里拿一个酒杯说： 瓢中有酒，愿意与你一起喝到一醉方休。 
English: Ms. Wei agreed, and the woman sat down on the floor, making a cocoon for Ms. Wei. She took a wine glass from her clothes and said, "There is wine in the cocoon. I'd like to drink until I'm drunk with you."

古文：于是注酒一饮韦，韦方举卮，会有猎骑从西来，引数犬。
现代文：于是倒了一杯酒给韦氏子喝。韦氏子正要举起酒杯时，正好有骑马打猎的人从西面走来，带着几条狗。
English: So he poured a glass of wine for Wei's son to drink. Just as Wei's son was about to raise his glass, a hunter on horseback came from the west, with several dogs.

古文：妇人望见，即东走数十步，化为一狐。
现代文：那妇女远远看见，就向东走了几十步，变成一只狐狸。
English: The woman saw it from a distance and took a few dozen steps to the east, where she turned into a fox.

古文：韦大恐，视手中卮，乃一髑髅，酒若牛溺之状。
现代文：韦氏子很害怕，看手中的酒杯，竟是一个人头骨，酒就象是牛尿的样子。
English: Wei's son was very scared. Looking at the wine glass in his hand, it turned out to be a human skull, and the wine looked like cow urine.

古文：韦因病热，月余方瘳。
现代文：韦氏子因此得了热病，一个多月才好。
English: As a result, Wei's son developed a fever, which lasted for more than a month.

