古文：百丈泓杨询美从子高邮人王忠政史无畏张应天公坛申文纬法门寺陈绚彭城佛寺欧阳氏庐山卖油者李诚茅山牛番禺村女江西村妪甘露寺南康县
现代文：百丈泓杨询美从子高邮人王忠政史无畏张应天公坛申文纬法门寺陈绚彭城佛寺欧阳氏庐山卖油者李诚茅山牛番禺村女江西村妪甘露寺南康县
English: Baizhang Gong, Yang Zhenmei's disciple, the high-ranking postman Wang Zhongzheng, the fearless Zhang Yingtian, the public altar Shen Wenwei, the Famen Temple Chen Hua Pengcheng, the Buddhist Temple Ouyang Clan, the oil seller Li Cheng, the mountain Niu Panyu, the village of Meijiang, the west village of Jiangxi, the Ganlu Temple, Nankang County

古文：百丈泓
现代文：百丈泓
English: Baizhangyuan

古文：唐河东郡东南百余里，有积水，谓之百丈泓。
现代文：唐朝河东郡东南方向二百余里处，有个水池，叫百丈泓。
English: More than 200 miles southeast of Hedong County in the Tang Dynasty, there is a pool called Baizhang Pool.

古文：清澈，纤毫必鉴。
现代文：池水清彻透明，极细小的东西也能看得清清楚楚。
English: The water is so clear and transparent that even the tiniest things can be seen clearly.

古文：在驿路之左，槐柳环拥，烟影如束，途出于此者，乃为憩驾之所。
现代文：百丈泓位于驿道旁边，周围有槐树和柳树簇拥环绕着，烟波与树影交相辉映。路过这里的人，便把此地当做歇脚的优美处所。
English: Beside the causeway, surrounded by eucalyptus and willow trees, the smoke waves and shadows of the trees reflect each other, and passers-by see it as a beautiful place to rest.

古文：大和五年夏，有徐生自洛阳抵河东，至此水。
现代文：唐文宗太和五年夏天，有个徐生从洛阳去河东，走到百丈泓水边时，感到十分困乏，于是停下来暂时休息。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Tang Wenzong, a certain Xu Sheng, who was traveling from Luoyang to Hedong, felt very tired when he reached the water's edge of Baizhang Reservoir, so he stopped to rest for a while.

古文：困殆既甚，因而暂息，且吟且望。将午，忽闻水中有细声，若蝇蚋之噪。
现代文：他一边吟诵诗句一边观望景色，将近中午时，忽然听到水中有细微的声响，好象苍蝇蚊子在喧闹。
English: He was reciting verses and watching the scenery when, around noon, he suddenly heard a faint sound in the water, like the buzzing of mosquitoes.

古文：俄而纤光发，其音稍响，轰若击毂，其光如索而曳焉。
现代文：不一会儿，又见细微的光亮从池水放出，水里的声音也渐渐大了起来，轰轰隆隆犹如车轮撞击的声音，那光线也象一条绳索被牵动着一样。
English: After a while, I saw a faint light emanating from the pool, and the sound in the water gradually grew louder. The roar was like the sound of wheels crashing, and the light was also like a rope being pulled.

古文：生始异之。
现代文：徐生开始惊异起来。
English: Xu Sheng began to be surprised.

古文：声久益繁，遂有雷自波间起，震光为电，接云气。
现代文：过了好长时间，声音越来越繁杂，便有雷声从波浪间响起来，雷声发出闪电与云气相接。
English: After a long time, the sound became more and more complicated, and thunder began to sound from between the waves. The thunder emitted lightning and connected with the clouds.

古文：至旅次，遽话其事。答曰： 此百丈泓也。
现代文：徐生赶到旅店后，急忙向别人讲起这件事，那人回答： 这个水池就是百丈泓。
English: When Xu Sheng arrived at the hotel, he hurriedly told someone about the incident, and the person replied: This pool is Baizhang cormorant.

古文：岁旱，未尝不指期而雨。
现代文：大旱年头，没有不指望向百丈泓求雨的。
English: During the years of great drought, no one could fail to hope for rain from Baizhang.

古文：今旱且甚，吾师命属官祷焉。 
现代文：如今旱情特别严重，我的老师正让下属向百丈泓祈雨呢。 
English: Now that the drought is particularly severe, my teacher is asking his subordinates to pray for rain.

古文：巫者曰： 某日当有甚雨。 
现代文：一位施行法术求雨的巫师说： 某日一定有大雨。 
English: A sorcerer who was casting a spell for rain said, "One day there will be heavy rain.

古文：果是日矣。
现代文：结果正是这一天。
English: It turned out to be that very day.

古文：杨询美从子
现代文：杨询美从子
English: Yang Yingmei's eldest son

古文：唐御史杨询美，居广陵郡。从子数人皆幼，始从师学。
现代文：唐朝御史杨询美，住在广陵郡，几个侄儿年龄都小，刚刚开始跟随教师学习。
English: Yang Zhenmei, a Tang Dynasty empress, lives in Guangling County. Several of her nephews are young and have just begun to study with teachers.

古文：尝一夕风雨，雷电震耀。诸子俱出户望，且笑且詈曰： 我闻雷有鬼，不知鬼安在，愿得而杀之，可乎？ 
现代文：有一天傍晚，风雨大作，雷鸣电闪，几个孩子都到屋外观望，边笑边骂道： 我听说打雷时有鬼，不知鬼究竟在哪里。我愿意捉到后杀掉它，可以吗？ 
English: One evening, there was a storm, thunder and lightning, and several children went outside to watch, laughing and cursing: I heard that there is a ghost when it thunders, I don't know where the ghost is. I would like to catch it and kill it, is that okay?

古文：既而雷声愈震，林木倾靡。忽一声轰然，若在于庑。诸子惊甚，即驰入户，负壁而立，不敢辄动。
现代文：他说完后，雷声更大了，树木都倒在地上，忽然一声轰鸣，好像发生在堂屋的游廊，孩子们十分吃惊，立即跑进屋内，背告墙壁站着，不敢随便行动。
English: After he finished speaking, the thunder got louder, the trees all fell to the ground, and suddenly there was a roar, as if it happened in the hallway. The children were very surprised and immediately ran into the house and stood against the wall, not daring to move around.

古文：复闻雷声，若大呵地吼，庐舍摇动。诸子益惧。
现代文：又听到一声雷鸣，宛如天呼地吼，房屋震得直晃动，孩子们更加害怕起来。
English: There was another clap of thunder, like a thunderclap. The house shook violently, and the children became even more frightened.

古文：近食顷，雷电方息，天月清霁。
现代文：将近一顿饭的时间，雷鸣电闪才停息了，天空晴朗，月光皎洁。
English: It was nearly time for dinner before the thunder and lightning stopped. The sky was clear and the moon was shining brightly.

古文：庭有大古槐，击拔其根而劈之。
现代文：院子里有一棵挺大的老槐树，被连根拔起而劈为两半。
English: In the yard there is a rather large old elm tree, which was uprooted and split in half.

古文：诸子觉两髀痛不可忍，具告询美。
现代文：孩子们都觉得两条大腿疼痛难忍，都来告诉询美。
English: The children all felt unbearable pain in both thighs, and they all came to tell Xunmei.

古文：命家僮执烛视之，诸髀咸有赤文，横布十数，状类杖痕。似雷鬼之所为也。高邮人
现代文：询美让家僮拿来蜡烛照着察看，只见每人的大腿上全有红色条纹，条纹横向排列着，有十几条之多，好象是棍子抽打的痕迹，大概是雷鬼干的吧！高邮人
English: Qianmei asked the housekeeper to bring a candle and looked at it. She saw red stripes all over everyone's thighs. The stripes were arranged horizontally, and there were more than a dozen of them. They looked like the marks of beating with a stick. It was probably done by a reggae musician!

古文：唐进士郑翬家在高邮，亲表卢氏庄近水。邻人数家，共杀一白蛇。未久，忽大震雷，雨发，数家陷溺无遗。卢宅当中，唯一家无恙。
现代文：唐朝有个进士叫郑翬，家住高邮，表亲卢氏住的村庄靠近河水，几家邻居一起杀死了一条白蛇，没过多久，忽然有大雷雨降临，河水暴涨，这几家邻居全被淹没了，没有一家幸免。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a noble called Zheng Qi, who lived in Gaoyou, a village close to the river where his cousin Lu lived. Several neighbors killed a white snake together. Not long after, a heavy thunderstorm suddenly fell and the river surged. These neighbors were all flooded, and no one was spared.

古文：王忠政唐泗州门监王忠政云，开城中，曾死十二日却活。
现代文：卢家的房子处在他们中间，却只有他一家安然无恙。王忠政唐朝泗州城的守门官王忠政说，在开成年间，他曾死了十二天又复活了。
English: Lu's house was among them, but only his family was safe and sound. Wang Zhongzheng, the gatekeeper of the Tang Dynasty's Zhangzhou City, said that he had died for twelve days and was resurrected in the first year of his reign.

古文：始见一人，碧衣赤帻，引臂登云曰， 天召汝行，汝隶于左落队。 
现代文：当时，他先是看见一个人，穿绿衣服戴红头巾，拉着他的胳膊飞上云端，并说： 天帝召唤你跟我走，你隶属于左落队。 
English: At that time, he first saw a person, wearing green clothes and a red headscarf, pull his arm and fly up to the clouds, and said: God calls you to follow me, you belong to the left-behind team.

古文：其左右落队，各有五万甲马，簇于云头。
现代文：那左、右两个落队，各有五万披着铠甲的马匹，聚集在云端。
English: The two left-behind teams, left and right, each with fifty thousand armored horses, gathered at the edge of the cloud.

古文：偏向下，重楼深室，囊柜之内，纤细悉见。
现代文：俯身向下，只见下面有重重楼阁和深宅大院，屋内口袋和箱柜里的东西无论多么细小，都能看得见。
English: If you lean down, you can see the buildings and mansions below, and you can see the things in the pockets and boxes, no matter how small they are.

古文：更异者，见米粒长数尺。
现代文：更为奇异的是，看到米拉有几尺长。
English: Even more bizarrely, Mira is seen to be several feet long.

古文：凡两队，一队于小项瓶子，贮人间水。一队所贮如马牙硝，谓之乾雨。
现代文：这两队中，一队在短脖瓶子里装入人间的水，另一队所装的东西好象马牙硝，把它称为干雨。
English: Of the two teams, one team filled a short-necked bottle with water from the human world, while the other team filled it with something that looked like horse's teeth and called it dry rain.

古文：皆在前，风车为殿。
现代文：这两队都排在前面，而风车排在最后。
English: Both teams came out on top, with the windmill coming in last.

古文：每雷震，多为捉龙。
现代文：每次发生雷震，大多是为了捉龙。
English: Every time a thunderstorm occurs, it is mostly to catch a dragon.

古文：龙有过者，谪作蛇鱼，数满千，则能沦山。
现代文：龙有过错的，被贬为蛇或鱼，被贬的数目达到一千时，就能把山淹没。
English: If the dragon is at fault, it is reduced to a snake or a fish, and when the number of reductions reaches one thousand, it can drown the mountain.

古文：行雨时，先下一黄旗，次下四方旗，乃随龙所在。或霆或雷，或雨或雹，若吾伤一物，则刑以铁杖。
现代文：在行雨的时候，先落下一面黄旗，然后是四面方形旗，要依龙所在的位置而确定：或者施暴雷或者普通的雷，或者下雨或者下冰雹。如果我们伤害了一样东西，天帝就用铁棒来惩罚。
English: When it rains, a yellow flag falls first, followed by four square flags, depending on the location of the dragon: either violent thunder or ordinary thunder, or rain or hail. If we hurt one thing, the emperor will punish with an iron rod.

古文：忠政役十一日，始服汤三瓯，不复饥困。
现代文：忠政在那里服了十一天役。刚去时喝了三小杯汤。便不再饥饿困乏。
English: Tadamasa served there for eleven days. When he first arrived, he drank three small cups of soup. He was no longer hungry or thirsty.

古文：以母老哀求，得归。
现代文：他以母亲年迈需要服侍为由哀求放他回来，这才得以回家。
English: He was only able to return home after pleading for his release on the grounds that his mother was too old to work.

古文：史无畏
现代文：史无畏
English: History without fear

古文：唐史无畏，曹州人也，与张从真为友。
现代文：唐代有个叫史无畏的，是曹州人，与张从真是朋友。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Shi Muguang, a native of Caozhou, who was a true friend of Zhang Cong.

古文：无畏止耕垅亩，衣食窘困。
现代文：无畏只能种田，生活窘迫困顿。
English: The fearless can only farm, and their lives are full of hardships.

古文：从真家富，乃谓曰： 弟勤苦田园，日夕区区。
现代文：从真家里很富有，便对无畏说： 贤弟勤劳辛苦地种田，从早到晚忙忙碌碌收获却很少。
English: He was very rich in his real family, so he said to Dauntless, "The young apprentice has worked hard and diligently in the fields, he has been busy from morning till night, but he has harvested very little.

古文：奉假千缗货易，他日但归吾本。 
现代文：我借给你一千串钱去做生意，日后只还我本钱就可以。 
English: I lend you a thousand bundles of money to start a business, and in the future you can only pay me back the principal.

古文：无畏忻然赍缗，父子江淮射利，不数岁，已富。
现代文：无畏高兴地拿了这些钱，父子一起到江淮一带做生意赚钱，没有几年便已富裕起来。
English: Fearlessly and happily took the money, father and son went to the Jianghuai area to do business and make money together, and became rich in just a few years.

古文：从真继遭焚热，及罹劫盗，生计一空。遂诣无畏曰： 今日之困，不思弟千缗之报，可相济三二百乎。 
现代文：从真家在遭受火灾之后，又遇到强盗抢劫，财产荡然一空，生活毫无着落，他便到无畏那里去说： 今天我有困难，不想要你那一千串钱的回报，你可以接济我二三百串吗？ 
English: After his real home was destroyed by fire, he encountered robberies and looting, his property was completely emptied, and his life had no stability. He went to Fearless and said, "Today I'm in trouble. I don't want the return of your thousand bundles of money. Can you help me with two or three hundred bundles?"

古文：闻从真言，辄为拒扜，报曰： 若言有负，但执券来。 
现代文：无畏听了从真的话，当即拒绝了，答复他道： 如果说我欠你钱，请拿凭据来！ 
English: Dauntless listened to the true words and immediately refused, replying to him, "If you say I owe you money, please bring proof!

古文：从真恨怨填臆，乃归。
现代文：从真怨恨满腹，只好回去了。
English: I was so full of resentment that I had to go back.

古文：庭中焚香，泣泪诅之，言词慷慨，闻者战慓。
现代文：他在院里烧起香，边哭泣边诅咒无畏，言辞激昂慷慨，听到的人都浑身战抖。
English: He burned incense in the courtyard, weeping and cursing the fearless, and his words were so impassioned and generous that everyone who heard them trembled.

古文：午后，东西有片黑云骤起，须臾，霪雨雷电兼至。
现代文：中午过后，东西两面有大片乌云骤然升起，不大一会儿便有暴雨雷电一起来到。
English: After noon, a large area of dark clouds suddenly rose on both the east and west sides, and a thunderstorm and lightning came together in a short time.

古文：霹雳一震，无畏遽变为牛，朱书腹下云： 负心人史无畏。 
现代文：霹雳一声巨雷响过，无畏顿时变成一头牛，腹部有红色字迹写道： 负心人史无畏。 
English: A loud thunder clap sounded, and Dauntless suddenly turned into a cow, with red writing on its abdomen: "Fearless in the face of adversity."

古文：经旬而卒。
现代文：过了十天便死了。
English: He died ten days later.

古文：刺史图其事而奉奏焉。
现代文：刺史知道后，将这件事情记录下来上表报告给皇帝。
English: When Sashihi found out, he recorded the incident and reported it to the emperor.

古文：张应
现代文：张应
English: Zhang Ying

古文：唐张应，自荥阳被命至河内郡。
现代文：唐代有个人叫张应，奉命从荥阳到河内郡。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, a man named Zhang Ying was ordered to travel from Shenyang to Hanoi County.

古文：涉九鼎渡，所乘小驷惊逸。
现代文：从九鼎渡涉水过河时，所骑的小马受惊跑了。
English: When wading across the river from Jiudingdu, the pony he was riding was frightened and ran away.

古文：及北岸，视后足有物萦绕，状如大螾，绛色。
现代文：到了北岸，看见马腿上有东西缠绕着，形状象只大蚯蚓，深红色。
English: When I got to the north bank, I saw something wrapped around the horse's leg, shaped like a big clam, dark red.

古文：乃抽佩刀，断于地，辄复相续，坚缩如白色角栉，红影若缕，横络之。
现代文：他就拔出佩刀，把它砍断在地上，断了之后它又自行连接起来，紧紧地蜷缩着好象一枚白色的牛角梳子，上面有红色花纹，好象丝线一样横向缠绕着，他便捡起来放到口袋里。
English: He drew out his saber, cut it on the ground, and when it was broken, it reattached itself and curled up tightly, like a white horn comb, with a red pattern on it, winding horizontally like a silk thread. He picked it up and put it in his pocket.

古文：遂置诸囊中。事毕而还，复渡河，至平阴。
现代文：办完事情往回走时，又渡过那条河，到了平阴。
English: When we finished our work and headed back, we crossed the river again and arrived at Pingyin.

古文：天景歊蒸，憩于园井，就之盥濯。
现代文：岁时，天气晴朗，烈日当空，地上的热气直往上冒。
English: When I was a child, the weather was fine, the sun was blazing in the sky, and the heat on the ground was rising straight up.

古文：因与园叟话之，取角栉置盆水上。
现代文：他便在茶园的水井旁边休息，到井前洗洗手脸，顺便与园内的老头说起这件事，并拿出白色兽骨梳子放在盆里水上。
English: He rested next to the well in the tea garden, went to the well to wash his hands and face, talked to the old man in the garden about it, and took out a white animal bone comb and placed it on the water in the basin.

古文：忽然黑气勃兴，浓云四合，狂电震霆，雨雹交下。
现代文：忽然黑气勃然兴起，浓云从四面合拢过来，电闪雷鸣，暴雨与冰雹倾泻而下，过一顿饭的功夫才雨过天晴。
English: Suddenly a black atmosphere arose, thick clouds closed in from all sides, lightning and thunder, torrential rain and hail poured down, and it took more than one meal for the rain to clear.

古文：食顷方霁，盆涸而栉已亡。
现代文：此时，盆里的水干了，那个白色梳子也已经无影无踪。
English: At this time, the water in the basin has dried up, and the white comb has disappeared.

古文：天公坛
现代文：天公坛
English: Tian Gong Tan

古文：巴蜀间，于高山顶或洁地，建天公坛。祈水旱。盖开元中上帝所降仪法，以示人也。
现代文：巴蜀境内，常常看到在高山顶上或者干净的地方建有天公坛，用以祈祷解除水旱之灾，这大概是开元年间天帝所降下的礼仪办法，用来昭示人们的。
English: In the territory of Bashu, it is often seen that a heavenly altar is built on the top of a high mountain or in a clean place to pray for the relief of floods and droughts. This is probably a ceremonial method descended by the heavenly emperor in the first year of the year, used to show people.

古文：其坛或羊牛所犯，及预斋者饮酒食肉，多为震死。
现代文：那天公坛如果有牛羊去触犯，以及有原先吃素的人又喝酒吃肉的，多数被雷击死。
English: On that day, if there were cattle and sheep in the public square to offend, as well as people who were originally vegetarians and drank wine and ate meat, most of them were killed by lightning.

古文：新繁人王荛，因往别业，村民烹豚待之。
现代文：新繁有个人叫王荛，因为要离家到他的别墅去，本村人便煮了猪肉款待他。
English: In Xinxiang, there was a man named Wang Xuan, because he wanted to leave home to go to his villa, the villagers cooked pork to treat him.

古文：有一自天公斋回，乃即席食肉。王谓曰： 尔不惧雷霆耶？ 
现代文：有个人从天公坛斋戒回来，便坐到桌前吃肉，王荛对他说： 你不怕遭雷击？ 
English: A man came back from fasting at the Temple of Heaven and sat down at the table to eat meat. Wang Yao said to him, "Aren't you afraid of being struck by lightning?

古文：曰： 我与雷为兄弟，何惧之有？ 
现代文：答道： 我和雷公是兄弟，有什么可怕的！ 
English: He replied: I and Lei Gong are brothers, what's so terrible about that!

古文：王异之，乃诘其所谓。曰： 我受雷公箓，与雷同职。 
现代文：王感到奇怪，便追问他原因，他说： 我接受了雷公箓，与雷公的职位相同。 
English: Wang was puzzled and asked him why. He said: I accepted Lei Gongye, the same position as Lei Gong.

古文：因取其箓验之，果如其说。
现代文：于是拿出他的雷公箓让人检验，果然象他说的那样。
English: So he took out his thunderbolt to have it tested, and it turned out to be just as he said.

古文：仍有数卷，或画壮夫，以拳扡地为井，号拳扡井。或画一士负薪枿，号一谷柴。或以七手撮山箕之，号七山箕。
现代文：除了画着他之外，还有好几卷，有的画着强壮的男子用拳把平地扠成一口井，号称 拳扠井 ；有的画着壮士背负着柴禾，号称 一谷柴 ；有的则用七只手撮起山来颠簸，号称 七山箕 。
English: In addition to the painting of him, there are also several volumes, some depicting a strong man using his fists to dig a well on a flat ground, known as "Boxing Well"; some depict a strong man carrying firewood on his back, known as "One Valley of Firewood"; some use seven hands to shake the mountain, known as "Seven Mountains of Firewood."

古文：江陵东村李道士舍，亦有此箓。
现代文：江陵东村的李道士家，也有这样的箓。
English: In the home of Li Daoshi in the East Village of Gangneung, there is also such a cocoon.

古文：或云，三洞法箕外，有一百二法，为天师子嗣师所禁。唯许救物，苟邪用，必上帝考责阴诛也。
现代文：有人说：三洞法箓之外，还有一百零二法，为天师的后代所严加看管，只允许用来拯救生灵，如果用于不正当的事情，必定受到天帝严厉拷问责罚乃至暗中杀戮。
English: Some people say: In addition to the Three-Hole Law, there are 102 other laws, which are strictly supervised by the descendants of the heavenly teacher. They are only allowed to be used to save sentient beings. If they are used for illegal activities, they will certainly be severely punished by the heavenly emperor and even secretly killed.

古文：申文纬
现代文：申文纬
English: Shen Wenwei

古文：尉氏尉申文纬，尝话，顷以事至洛城南玉泉寺。
现代文：尉氏县的县尉申文纬，曾经说过，不久前他因有事到洛阳城南的玉泉寺。
English: Shen Wenwei, the county magistrate of Guozhi County, once said that not long ago he went to Yuquan Temple in the south of Luoyang City for some reason.

古文：时盛夏，寺左有池，大旱，村人祈祷，未尝不应。
现代文：当时正是盛夏，寺的旁边有个水池，大早时节，村里人前来祈祷求雨，没有不应验的。
English: It was the height of summer, and there was a pond next to the temple. Early in the morning, villagers came to pray for rain.

古文：池之阳有龙庙，时文纬俯池而观，有物如败花，叶大如盖，因以瓦砾掷之。
现代文：水池的北面有座龙王庙。这时，文纬哈腰对着池水观看，见里面有个东西好象残败的花，大叶子犹如伞盖，他便投掷瓦片去打它。
English: There was a dragon king temple on the north side of the pool. At that time, Wen WeiHao looked at the water of the pool and saw that there was something like a ruined flower inside, with large leaves like an umbrella cover. He threw tiles to hit it.

古文：僧曰： 切不可，恐致风雷之怒。 
现代文：旁边有个僧人说： 切切不可如此，这样会招致风雷发怒的。 
English: Beside him, a monk said, "This must not be done. It will cause a storm of anger."

古文：申亦不以介意。
现代文：申文纬也没把此事放在心上。
English: Shen Wenwei also did not take this matter to heart.

古文：逡巡，白雾自水面起，才及山趾。
现代文：不一会儿，白茫茫的雾气从池水中升起，刚刚弥漫到山脚。
English: In a moment, a white mist rose from the pond water and just permeated to the foot of the mountain.

古文：寺在山上，石路七盘。
现代文：玉泉寺座落在山上，有石头铺成的路盘绕七匝才到山下。
English: Gyokusen-ji Temple is located on a mountain, and there is a stone-paved road that winds around seven ridges before reaching the foot of the mountain.

古文：大雨，霆雷震击，比至平地，已数尺，溪壑暴涨。驴乘洎仆夫，随流漂荡，莫能植足。
现代文：这时大雨滂沱，电闪雷鸣。等他走到山下时，大水已有数尺深，河流沟壑都已涨满，驴车及车夫都泡在水里随着水流漂荡，不能站稳脚跟。
English: By the time he reached the foot of the mountain, the water was already several feet deep, the river gullies were full, and the donkey carts and drivers were soaking in the water and drifting with the current, unable to gain a foothold.

古文：昼日如暮，霆震不已。
现代文：大白天就象黄昏一样迷蒙昏暗，暴雷一直响个不停。
English: The broad daylight was as dim as twilight, and thunderstorms continued to rumble.

古文：申之口吻皆黑，怖惧非常。
现代文：申文纬非常恐怖惧怕，嘴唇全都变成了黑色。
English: Shen Wenwei was so terrified that her lips turned black.

古文：俄至一村，寻亦开霁。
现代文：他很快来到一个村庄，过了一会儿天也晴了。
English: He soon came to a village, and after a while the sky cleared.

古文：果中伤寒病，将晓有微汗，比明无恙。
现代文：他果然受了寒，将近拂晓时出了少许汗，等到天亮已全好了。
English: He did indeed catch a chill, and by dawn he was sweating a little, and by dawn he was all better.

古文：岂龙之怒，几为所毙也。
现代文：难道是龙发怒了？差点为此葬送了性命！
English: Did the dragon get angry? It almost cost him his life!

古文：法门寺
现代文：法门寺
English: Homon-ji Temple

古文：长安西法门寺，乃中国伽蓝之胜境也，如来中指节在焉。
现代文：座落在长安西边的法门寺，乃是中国佛寺建筑的佼佼者，如来佛中指的一节就供奉在这里。
English: Located on the west side of Chang'an, Famen Temple is a leader in Chinese Buddhist temple architecture. A section of the middle finger of the Buddha is enshrined here.

古文：照临之内，奉佛之人，罔不归敬。
现代文：在很大的范围之内，凡是信奉佛教的人，无不归从崇敬。
English: To a large extent, anyone who believes in Buddhism is bound to be revered.

古文：殿宇之盛，寰海无伦。
现代文：宫殿堂舍之宏伟，四海之内无与伦比。
English: The grandeur of the palace hall is unparalleled in the world.

古文：僖、昭播迁后，为贼盗毁之。
现代文：唐僖宗、唐昭宗流离在外，寺庙为盗贼破坏。
English: The Tang Shizong and Tang Zhaozong were displaced, and the temples were destroyed by thieves.

古文：中原荡栉，人力既殚，不能复构，最须者材之与石。
现代文：由于中原一带被洗劫一空，人力也已耗尽，所以不能重新修建。其中最为需要的物资便是木材与石头。
English: Since the Central Plains area has been looted and the manpower has been exhausted, it cannot be rebuilt. Among the most needed materials are wood and stone.

古文：忽一夕，风雷骤起，暴澍连宵。
现代文：忽然有一天晚上，风雷顿时出现，暴雨下了一宿。
English: All of a sudden, one evening, the wind suddenly picked up and it rained heavily for the rest of the night.

古文：平晓，诸僧窥望，见寺前良材巨石，阜堆山积，亘十余里，首尾不断，有如人力置之。
现代文：天亮时，僧人们都从屋内向外观望，只见寺庙前面的优质木材与大块石头堆积如山，绵延十多里，首尾相接，连续不断，就象用人工搬放在那里的。
English: At dawn, the monks all looked out from inside the building to see a mountain of high-quality wood and large stones piled up in front of the temple, stretching for more than ten miles, end to end, continuously, as if they had been placed there by hand.

古文：于是鸠集民匠，复构精蓝，至于貌备。
现代文：于是纠集民工匠人，重新修造精美的寺院，达到外观上十分完备的程度。
English: As a result, craftsmen were gathered to rebuild the exquisite temple, achieving a very complete appearance.

古文：人谓鬼神送来，愈更钦其圣力。
现代文：人们说这些木材和石料是鬼神送来的，便更加敬佩佛教的神圣力量。
English: People say that these wood and stone materials were sent by ghosts and gods, and they admire the sacred power of Buddhism even more.

古文：育王化塔之事，岂虚也哉。
现代文：由此看来，阿育王化佛塔的事，怎能是假的呢？
English: From this point of view, how can the story of Ashoka turning the pagoda into a pagoda be false?

古文：陈绚
现代文：陈绚
English: Chen Hua

古文：伪蜀王氏彭王傅陈绚，常为邛州临溪令。
现代文：前蜀彭王的师傅陈绚，曾经任过邛州临溪县令。
English: Chen Hua, the former master of Shu Peng Wang, once served as the county magistrate of Linxi County, Ganzhou.

古文：县署编竹为藩而涂之，署久，泥忽陊落，唯露其竹。
现代文：县衙里将竹子编成的篱障涂上泥巴作为墙。时间久了，泥巴脱落，里面的竹子露了出来。
English: The county magistrate painted a bamboo fence with mud as a wall. After a long time, the mud fell off, revealing the bamboo inside.

古文：侍婢秉炬而照，一物蟠于竹节中，文彩烂然，小虵也。
现代文：婢女拿着蜡烛去照时，见有个东西盘曲在竹节里面，身上的花纹色彩斑烂，是一条小蛇。
English: When the maid took a candle and shined it, she saw something coiled up inside the bamboo, its body covered in colorful patterns. It was a small snake.

古文：俄而雷声隐隐，绚疑其乖龙，惧罹震厄，乃易衣炷香，抗声祈于雷曰： 苟取龙，幸无急遽。 
现代文：不一会儿，有雷声隐隐作响。陈绚怀疑这小蛇是孽龙，担心遭受雷震的灾难，便更衣焚香，大声对雷祈祷道： 如果要抓龙，请不要过分急躁。 
English: Chen Hua suspected that the small snake was an evil dragon, and fearing the disaster of a thunderstorm, she changed her clothes, burned incense, and prayed loudly to the thunder: "If you want to catch a dragon, please don't be too impatient."

古文：虽狂电若昼，自初夜迨四更，隐隐不发。既发一声，俄然开霁。
现代文：虽有闪电照耀亮如白昼，但从天黑直到四更，雷却始终闷声闷气而不发作，后来响过一声，天即顿然转晴。
English: Although there was lightning shining bright as day, from dusk until four o'clock, the thunder was always muffled and did not occur. Later, there was a sound, and the sky suddenly turned clear.

古文：向物已失，人无震惊，有若雷神佑乎恳祷。
现代文：原来那条小蛇已经消失，人们也没有受到雷震的惊吓，好象雷神因陈绚的诚恳祈祷而保佑了他们。
English: It turned out that the small snake had disappeared, and the people were not frightened by the thunder, as if the thunder god had blessed them because of Chen Hua's sincere prayer.

古文：彭城佛寺
现代文：彭城佛寺
English: Pengcheng Buddhist Temple

古文：国某杨汀自言，天祐初，在彭城，避暑于佛寺。
现代文：京城有个叫杨汀的人自己讲，天祐年间，他在彭城的一座佛寺里避暑。
English: There is a man in Beijing named Yang Ting who said that during the Tianyu era, he spent the summer at a Buddhist temple in Pengcheng.

古文：雨雹方甚，忽闻大声震地。
现代文：雨和冰雹下得正急，忽听巨大的声响震动大地。
English: It was raining and hailing hard, and suddenly I heard a loud noise that shook the ground.

古文：走视门外，乃下一大雹于街中，其高广与寺楼等，入地可丈余。
现代文：走到门外察看，原来下了个大冰雹落在街当中，雹子的高度与宽度，跟寺庙的塔楼相等，砸进地里有一丈多。
English: When I went outside to investigate, I found that a large hailstone had fallen in the middle of the street. The height and width of the hailstone were equal to the tower of the temple, and there was a lot of it falling into the ground.

古文：顷之雨止，则炎风赫日。
现代文：很快雨便停了，接着是烈日炎炎热风阵阵。
English: Soon the rain stopped, followed by the scorching sun and hot wind.

古文：经月，雹乃消尽。
现代文：过了一个月，这个大冰雹才完全溶化。
English: It took a month for the large hailstone to completely melt.

古文：欧阳氏
现代文：欧阳氏
English: Ouyang Clan

古文：广陵孔目吏欧阳某者，居决定寺之前。
现代文：广陵孔目吏欧阳某，住在决定寺的前面。
English: Guangling Kongmo official Ouyang lives in front of the Decision Temple.

古文：其妻少遇乱，失其父母。
现代文：他妻子少年时遇到变乱，与父母失散了。
English: His wife's parents separated when she was a teenager in the wake of the Troubles.

古文：至是有老父诣门，使白其妻，我汝父也。
现代文：如今有个老大爷来到他家门前，让人告诉他妻子，说：我是你父亲。
English: Now an old man came to the door of his house and told his wife: "I am your father."

古文：妻见其贫陋，不悦，拒绝之。
现代文：妻子见他穷困肮脏，很不高兴，拒绝了他。
English: When his wife saw that he was poor and dirty, she was very unhappy and rejected him.

古文：父又言其名字及中外亲族甚悉，妻竟不听。
现代文：老父又说出他的名字和家里家外亲属的情况，他对这些是那样熟悉，妻子竟然不听。
English: The old man also told his name and the situation of relatives outside the family, which he was so familiar with that his wife did not listen.

古文：又曰： 吾自远来，今无所归矣。
现代文：老父又说： 我从远处来，现已无处投奔了！
English: The old man also said, "I came from far away, and now I have nowhere to go!"

古文：若尔，权寄门下信宿可乎？ 
现代文：若不行，暂且寄居在门下住上两夜可以吗？ 
English: If not, is it okay to temporarily live under the door for two nights?

古文：妻又不从。
现代文：妻子又不答应。
English: Again, his wife did not agree.

古文：其夫劝之，又不可。
现代文：丈夫劝说她，还是不同意。
English: Her husband persuaded her, but she still did not agree.

古文：父乃去曰： 吾将讼尔矣。 
现代文：老父便告辞： 我要去告你状了！ 
English: The old man said, "I'm going to sue you!"

古文：左右以为公讼耳，亦不介意。
现代文：大家以为是去公堂诉讼罢了，也不把此事放在心上。
English: Everyone thought it was just a matter of going to court, and did not take the matter to heart.

古文：明日午，暴风雨从南方来，有震霆入欧阳氏之居，牵其妻至中庭，击杀之。
现代文：第二天中午，从南面来了暴风雨，有暴雷进入欧阳氏的房间，把他妻子拉到院子中间击死了。
English: At noon the next day, a storm came from the south, and a thunderstorm entered Mr. Ouyang's room, pulling his wife into the middle of the yard and killing her.

古文：大水平地数尺，邻里皆震荡不自持。
现代文：平地上的大水有几尺深。邻居都被震得站立不稳。
English: The floodwaters were several feet deep on flat ground, and neighbors were jolted to their feet.

古文：后数日，欧阳之人至后土庙，神座前得一书，即老父讼女文也。
现代文：几天后，欧阳家的人到后土庙里去，在神像前捡到一纸文书，这就是老父亲控告女儿的状子。
English: A few days later, members of the Ouyang family went to the Houdu Temple and found a piece of paper in front of the statue of God. This was the old father's complaint against his daughter.

古文：庐山卖油者
现代文：庐山卖油者
English: Lushan Oil Seller

古文：庐山卖油者，养其母甚孝谨，为暴雷震死。
现代文：庐山有个卖油的，奉养自己母亲特别孝敬特别用心，后被雷击死了。
English: In Lushan, there was an oil salesman who was very devoted to his mother and died after being struck by lightning.

古文：其母自以无罪，日号泣于九天使者之祠，愿知其故。
现代文：他母亲认为儿子无罪，每天都到九天使者的祠庙前哭号，想要知道儿子死的缘故。
English: His mother believes that her son is not guilty and cries every day in front of the Nine Angel's Shrine, wanting to know the cause of her son's death.

古文：一夕，梦朱衣人告曰： 汝子恒以鱼膏杂油中，以图厚利。
现代文：一天晚上，梦见个穿红衣服的人告诉她道： 你儿子经常把鱼油掺在豆油里卖，以图多挣钱。
English: One night, she had a dream in which a man dressed in red told her: "Your son often sells fish oil mixed with soybean oil in order to make more money.

古文：且庙中斋醮，恒用此油。腥气薰蒸，灵仙不降。
现代文：况且寺庙的斋饭和祭祀时也都用这种油，腥气薰得神灵不降临了。
English: Moreover, this oil was also used for the temple's meals and sacrifices, and the aura was so strong that the gods did not descend.

古文：震死宜矣。 
现代文：震死他是应该的。 
English: He should be stunned to death.

古文：母知其事，遂止。
现代文：母亲知道这些事后，就再不去哭号了。
English: When my mother found out what had happened, she didn't cry anymore.

古文：李诚
现代文：李诚
English: Li Cheng

古文：江南军使苏建雄，有别墅，在毗陵，恒使傔人李诚来往检视。
现代文：江南军使苏建雄有一处别墅在毗陵，常常派遣侍从李诚往返检查巡视。
English: The Southern Jiangsu Army sent a villa to Su Jianxiong in Viling, and often sent Li Cheng's attendants to inspect and inspect.

古文：乙卯岁六月，诚自墅中回，至句容县西。
现代文：乙卯年六月，李诚从别墅往回返，走到勾容县西边。
English: In June of the second year of Wu, Li Cheng went back and forth from the villa and walked to the west of Guorong County.

古文：时盛暑赫日，持伞自覆。
现代文：时值盛夏烈日，他便撑起伞来遮蔽阳光。
English: It was a scorching summer's day, so he put up an umbrella to shade himself from the sun.

古文：忽值大风，飞石拔木，卷其伞盖而去，唯持伞柄。
现代文：突然起了阵大风，刮起了石头，拔起了树木，把他的伞盖也卷跑了，李诚只好拿着刮剩的伞柄赶路。
English: Suddenly, a gust of wind arose, blowing up stones, uprooting trees, and rolling up his umbrella cover. Li Cheng had to hurry with the remaining umbrella handle.

古文：行数十步，云雨大至，方忧濡湿，忽有飘席至其所，因取覆之。
现代文：走了几十步，来了大雨，正担心被雨水淋湿，忽有一块席子飘到跟前，于是取来遮在身上。
English: After walking a few dozen steps, it started to rain heavily, and I was worried about getting wet from the rain. Suddenly, a piece of mat floated up to me, so I took it to cover myself.

古文：俄而雷震地，道傍数家之中，卷一家屋室，向东北而去。
现代文：不一会儿又有雷声震动大地，道旁几户人家之中，有一家的房屋被卷走，直向东北而去。
English: A short while later, another thunder shook the earth, and one of several houses on the side of the road was swept away, straight to the northeast.

古文：顷之遂霁，其居荡然，无复遗者。老幼十余，皆聚桑林中，一无所伤。
现代文：很快便雨过天晴了。那家的房子荡然无存，什么也没留下，老老小小十余口人，全聚集在桑树林里，没有一人受伤。
English: The rain soon passed. The house of that family was completely destroyed, nothing was left. More than ten people, old and young, all gathered in the mulberry forest. No one was injured.

古文：舍前有足迹，长三尺。
现代文：在房舍前面有脚印，有三尺长。
English: There were footprints in front of the house, about three feet long.

古文：诚又西行数里，遇一人，求买所覆席，即与之。
现代文：李诚又往西走了几里，遇到一个人，恳求着要买他遮身的席子，李诚立即给了他。
English: Li Cheng walked a few miles to the west and met a man who begged him to buy him a seat to cover himself. Li Cheng immediately gave it to him.

古文：又里余。复遇一人，求买所持伞柄。诚乃异之，曰： 此物无用，尔何为者而买之。 
现代文：又走了一里多地，又遇到一个人，此人恳求着要买他手里拿的伞柄，李诚感到奇怪，问他道： 这件东西并无用处，你买了它去干什么？ 
English: After walking for more than a mile, he met another person. This person was begging to buy the umbrella handle he was holding. Li Cheng felt strange and asked him: This thing is useless. What did you buy it for?

古文：其人但求乞甚切，终不言其故。
现代文：此人只是很恳切地求他，始终不说买伞柄的原因。
English: The man only begged him very earnestly, never mentioning the reason for buying the umbrella handle.

古文：随行数百步，与之乃去。
现代文：他跟着李诚走了几百步，把伞柄给了他这才离去。
English: He walked a few hundred steps with Li Cheng and gave him the umbrella handle before leaving.

古文：茅山牛
现代文：茅山牛
English: Mao Shan beef

古文：庚寅岁，茅山有村中儿牧牛。洗所著汗衫，暴于草上而假寐。
现代文：庚寅年，茅山上有个乡村小孩在放牛，他把自己穿的汗衫洗完后晒在草地上，便躺下来闭目休息。
English: In the year of the Goat, there was a village child on Maoyan who was herding cattle. After washing the sweatshirt he was wearing, he lay down on the grass and closed his eyes to rest.

古文：及寤失之，唯一邻儿在傍。以为窃去，因相喧竞。
现代文：等到醒来时汗衫不见了，当时只有一个邻居的小孩在旁边，以为是他偷去了，于是两人争吵起来。
English: When he woke up, the sweatshirt was gone, but a neighbor's child was nearby and thought he had stolen it, so the two got into an argument.

古文：邻儿父见之，怒曰： 生儿为盗，将安用之。 
现代文：邻居小孩的父亲见了，愤怒地说： 生养了儿子成为盗贼，要他有什么用！ 
English: When the father of the neighbor's child saw this, he angrily said, "What use is a son who was born and raised to be a thief?

古文：即投水中。
现代文：说完就把他扔到河里。
English: Then he threw him into the river.

古文：邻儿匍匐出水，呼天称冤者数四。
现代文：这个小孩从水里爬了出来，连连呼天喊地说冤枉。
English: The child crawled out of the water, screaming that he had been wronged.

古文：复欲投之，俄而雷雨暴至，震死其牛，汗衫自牛口中呕出，儿乃得免。
现代文：他父亲又要把他往水里扔，转眼间雷雨突然降临，击死了那头牛，汗衫从牛嘴里吐了出来，邻居的小孩才得以免除责罚。
English: His father was about to throw him into the water again when a sudden thunderstorm came and killed the cow, spitting the shirt out of its mouth and sparing the neighbor's child.

古文：番禺村女
现代文：番禺村女
English: Panyu village women

古文：庚申岁，番禺村中有老姥，与其女饷田。
现代文：庚申年，番禺村里有个老妇人，与她女儿一起去田里送饭，突然云雨到来，天色昏暗。
English: In the year of the Goat, there was an old woman in Panyu village who went to the fields with her daughter to bring food. Suddenly, clouds and rain came, and the sky was dark.

古文：忽云雨晦冥，及霁，乃失其女。
现代文：等雨过天晴时，她女儿不见了。
English: When the rain cleared, her daughter was gone.

古文：姥号哭求访，邻里相与寻之，不能得。
现代文：老人家连哭带喊四处寻访，邻居们也都帮她寻找，结果没有找到。
English: The old woman's family searched everywhere with tearful cries, and the neighbors also helped her to look for her, but they did not find her.

古文：后月余，复云雨昼晦，及霁，而庭中陈列筵席，有鹿脯乾鱼，果实酒醢，甚丰洁。
现代文：一个多月后，又来了云雨使白天变得非常昏暗。等到雨过天明，发现院子里摆放着筵席，有鹿肉、干鱼、水果、酒肉之类，十分丰盛洁净。
English: More than a month later, clouds and rain came again, making the day very dark. When the rain passed, it was found that there was a banquet in the courtyard, with venison, dried fish, fruits, wine and meat, very rich and clean.

古文：其女盛服而至。
现代文：她女儿身穿盛装走了过来，老人家又惊又喜上去抱住了她。
English: Her daughter came in all dressed up, and the old man jumped up and hugged her in surprise and delight.

古文：姥惊喜持之，女自言为雷师所娶，将至一石室中，亲族甚众。婚姻之礼，一同人间。
现代文：女儿自己说被雷师娶为妻子，她被领到一所石头屋里，亲属特别多，婚礼与人间完全相同。
English: The daughter herself said that she was married by Master Lei. She was taken to a stone house, with a large number of relatives. The wedding ceremony was exactly the same as on earth.

古文：今使归返回，他日不可再归矣。姥问： 雷朗可得见耶？ 曰： 不可。 
现代文：现在让回家与家人见见面，往后就不能再回来了。老人问道： 雷郎可以见见吗？ 女儿答道： 不可。 
English: Now let him go home to meet his family, he can't come back later. The old man asked: Can I see Lei Lang? The daughter replied: No.

古文：留数宿，一夕复风雨晦冥，遂不复见。
现代文：在家住了几宿后，一天晚上又来了风雨，天色非常昏暗，女儿便再也看不到了。
English: After staying at home for a few nights, one night the wind and rain came again, the sky was very dark, and she could no longer see her daughter.

古文：江西村妪
现代文：江西村妪
English: Jiangxi Village Inn

古文：江西村中霆震，一老妇为电火所烧，一臂尽伤。
现代文：江西村中发生雷震，一位老妇被电火烧伤一只胳膊。
English: An old woman in a village in Jiangxi Province was electrocuted and suffered a burn to her arm after a thunderstorm.

古文：既而空中有呼曰： 误矣。 即坠一瓶，瓶有药如膏。曰： 以此傅之，即差。 
现代文：事后空中有呼喊声道 错了 ，马上降下一个瓶子，内有药物呈膏状，空中的声音又喊道： 用此药敷伤，立即痊愈。 
English: After the incident, there was a shout in the air: "Wrong, immediately drop a bottle containing a drug in the form of a paste. The voice in the air also shouted: "Use this medicine to apply to the wound, and it will heal immediately."

古文：如其言，随傅而愈。
现代文：照着说的去用药，敷上之后立即痊愈了。
English: I took the medicine as I was told, and I recovered immediately after applying it.

古文：家人共议，此神药也，将取藏之。
现代文：家里人共同议论，以为这是神药，要把它拿来收藏着。
English: Members of the family discussed it together, thinking that it was a miracle cure and that it should be kept in a collection.

古文：数人共举其瓶，不能动。
现代文：几个人一起去拿这个瓶子，却拿不起来。
English: Several people went to pick up the bottle, but were unable to do so.

古文：顷之，复有雷雨，收之而去。
现代文：不一会儿，又有雷雨到来，收起瓶子离去了。
English: After a while, another thunderstorm came, and they put the bottle away and left.

古文：又有村人震死，既而空中呼曰： 误矣。
现代文：又有个村里人被雷震死，紧接着听见空中喊道： 错了！
English: Another villager was killed by a lightning strike, and immediately afterwards he was heard shouting into the air: "Wrong!

古文：可取蚯蚓烂捣，覆脐中，当差。 
现代文：可拿蚯蚓来捣烂了，覆盖在肚脐上，就会好的。 
English: You can mash it with a pestle and cover it with the navel, and it will be fine.

古文：如言傅之，遂苏。
现代文：照着说的敷上后，那人便苏醒了。
English: After applying the compress as instructed, the man woke up.

古文：甘露寺
现代文：甘露寺
English: Kanro-ji Temple

古文：道士范可保，夏月独游浙西甘露寺。
现代文：有个道士叫范可保，这一年五月独自一人去游览浙西的甘露寺。
English: In May of this year, a Taoist named Fan Kebao went on a solo tour of the Kanlu Temple in western Zhejiang.

古文：出殿后门，将登北轩。忽有人衣故褐衣，自其傍入，肩帔相拂。
现代文：他从大殿后门出来，要上北面的小屋，忽然有个身穿破旧褐色衣服的人从他身旁进了屋，两人肩上的服饰互相擦了一下。
English: He came out of the back door of the main hall to go up to the hut on the north side, and suddenly a man in shabby brown clothes entered the house next to him, and the clothes on their shoulders rubbed against each other.

古文：范素好洁，衣服新，心不悦。
现代文：范可保一向爱洁净，衣服又很新鲜，所以心里不高兴。
English: Fan Kebao has always loved cleanliness, and her clothes are very fresh, so she is not happy.

古文：俄而牵一黄狗，又驾肩而出。
现代文：不大一会儿，那人牵着一条黄狗，又擦着肩头走出去了。
English: After a short while, the man took a yellow dog and walked out, rubbing his shoulders.

古文：范怒形于色，褐衣回顾张目，其光如电。范始畏惧。
现代文：范可保顿时怒形于色，穿褐衣的那人回过头来瞪着眼看他，目光炯炯如闪电，范可保开始惧怕起来。
English: Fan Kebao was furious. The man in brown turned around and stared at him, his eyes flashing like lightning. Fan Kebao began to be afraid.

古文：顷之，山下人至曰： 向山下霹雳取龙。不知之乎？ 
现代文：过了一会儿，山下人来到这里说： 刚才山下有霹雳震响在捉拿龙，你不知道吗？ 
English: After a while, people from down the mountain came here and said, "Didn't you know that just now there was a thunderclap down the mountain to catch the dragon?

古文：范故不闻也。
现代文：范可保可从来没听说过。
English: Never heard of Fan Ke Bao Ke.

古文：南康县
现代文：南康县
English: Nankang County

古文：辛酉五月四日，有使过南康，县令胡侃置酒于县南莲花馆水轩。
现代文：辛酉年五月四日，有个使者路过南康县，县令胡侃在县衙南边莲花馆水亭摆酒席招待。
English: On the 4th of May in the year of Yin and Yang, an envoy passed through Nankang County. The county magistrate, Hu Kan, held a banquet at the water pavilion of the Lotus Museum on the southern edge of the county.

古文：忽有暴风吹沙从南来，因手掩目。
现代文：忽有暴风卷着沙土从南面刮来，他们便用手捂住眼睛。
English: They covered their eyes with their hands as a sandstorm rolled in from the south.

古文：闻盘中器物，蔌蔌有声，若有物过。
现代文：听见盘中的器物发出沙沙的响声，好象有东西爬过。
English: I heard the utensils in the dish rustle, as if something had crawled over them.

古文：良久开目，见食器微仄，其银酒杯与杯之舟，皆挟长如东西形。壁旁大桐树，亦拔出墙外。
现代文：过了好久他们才睁开眼睛，看到饮食用的器皿微微倾斜，其中银酒杯与托酒杯的盘子，都被夹成东西长的形状；墙壁旁边的大桐树，也被拔出来扔到墙外。
English: It was a long time before they opened their eyes and saw that the utensils used for eating and drinking were slightly tilted. Among them, the silver wine glass and the tray for the wine glass were all clamped into an elongated shape; the large paulownia tree next to the wall was also pulled out and thrown outside the wall.

古文：时一里外皆此风雨，常遥闻馆中迅雷，而馆中初不闻也，胡亦无恙。
现代文：当时一里之外的地方也都有这场风雨，人们曾远远地听到莲花馆内迅雷的响声，而在馆中的人当时却没有听见，胡侃也平安无事。
English: At that time, the storm was also felt a mile away. People had heard the sound of thunder in the Lotus Pavilion from far away, but the people in the pavilion did not hear it at that time, and Hu Kan was safe.

