古文：起重光作噩，尽强圉单阏，凡七年。
现代文：起，止，一共七年
English: A total of seven years

古文：孝灵皇帝中光和四年
现代文：汉灵帝光和四年
English: Hanling Emperor Guangwu and four years

古文：春，正月，初置騄骥厩丞，领受郡国调马。
现代文：春季，正月，首次设立骥厩丞，负责接收和饲养从各郡、国征发来的马匹。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, for the first time, a stablemaster was set up, responsible for receiving and rearing horses sent from various counties and provinces.

古文：豪右辜榷，马一匹至二百万。
现代文：由于各地豪强垄断马匹交易，马价涨到一匹值二百万钱。
English: Powerful families monopolize, and the price of a horse is as high as two million.

古文：夏，四月，庚子，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚子，大赦天下。
English: Summer, April, Geng Zi, amnesty to the world.

古文：交趾乌浒蛮久为乱，牧守不能禁。
现代文：交趾地区的乌浒蛮人作乱，历时已久，州郡长官不能制服。
English: The state and county magistrates are unable to subdue the long-standing disturbance caused by the savages in the Kota area.

古文：交趾人梁龙等复反，攻破郡县。
现代文：交趾人梁龙等又起来反叛，攻破了东汉政权所置的郡、县。
English: Liang Long, a confidant, rebelled again and broke through the counties and counties set up by the Eastern Han regime.

古文：诏拜兰陵令会稽硃俊为交趾刺史，击斩梁龙，降者数万人，旬月尽定；以功封都亭侯，征为谏议大夫。
现代文：灵帝下诏任命兰陵令会稽人朱俊为交趾刺史。朱俊领兵击败了叛军，梁龙被斩，数万人投降，不过一个月，便全部平定了当地的叛乱。朱俊因功被封为都亭侯，并征召入朝担任谏议大夫。
English: Under Emperor Lingzhao, the auditor of the Lanling Ruling Council, Zhu Jun, was appointed as a courtier. Zhu Jun led the troops to defeat the rebels, Liang Long was beheaded, and tens of thousands of people surrendered. However, within a month, all local rebellions were quelled. Zhu Jun was named the prince of the capital for his service, and was conscripted into the imperial court to serve as a doctor of the imperial court.

古文：六月，庚辰，雨雹如鸡子。
现代文：六月，庚辰，天上降下大如鸡蛋的冰雹。
English: In June, Geng Chen, hailstones as big as eggs fell from the sky.

古文：秋，九月，庚寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，九月，庚寅，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in September, in the middle of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：太尉刘宽免；卫尉许彧为太尉。
现代文：太尉刘宽被免职，任命卫尉许为太尉。
English: Captain Liu Kuan was relieved of his duties, and Guards Lieutenant Xu was appointed captain.

古文：闰月，辛酉，北宫东掖庭永巷署灾。
现代文：闰九月，辛酉，洛阳北宫东掖庭永巷署发生火灾。
English: In September, a fire broke out in Luoyang Beigu Dongxuan Tingyong Lane Police Station.

古文：司徒杨赐罢。
现代文：司徒杨赐被免职。
English: Shtu Yang was dismissed.

古文：冬，十月，太常陈耽为司徒。
现代文：冬季，十月，任命太常陈耽为司徒。
English: In the winter, October, the appointment of too often Chen Tan as a disciple.

古文：鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：鲜卑族侵犯幽州与并州。
English: A fresh-faced bandit raids a town and takes control of two states.

古文：檀石槐死，子和连代立。
现代文：鲜卑族首领檀石槐去世，他的儿子和连继任首领。
English: The leader of the Xianbei tribe, Dan Shijie, passed away, and his son and successor became the leader.

古文：和连才力不及父而贪淫，后出攻北地，北地人射杀之。
现代文：和连不仅才干和能力不如他的父亲，而且贪财好色，后来在进攻北地时，被北地人射死。
English: Not only was he not as talented and capable as his father, but he was also greedy and lecherous. Later, when attacking the North, he was shot dead by the Northmen.

古文：其子骞曼尚幼，兄子魁头立。
现代文：由于他的儿子骞曼年龄尚小，便由他哥哥的儿子魁头担任首领。
English: Since his son, Taiman, was still young, his brother's son, Qui Tou, became the leader.

古文：后骞曼长大，与魁头争国，众遂离散。
现代文：后来骞曼长大，与魁头争夺首领的地位，致使部众离散。
English: Later, when the painter became an adult, he competed with Banpaku for the country, and the group split and dispersed.

古文：魁头死，弟步度根立。
现代文：魁头去世后，他的弟弟步度根继任首领。
English: After the death of the Empress Dowager, his younger brother Budugen succeeded to the throne.

古文：是岁，帝作列肆于后宫，使诸采女贩卖，更相盗窃争斗；帝著商贾服，从之饮宴为乐。
现代文：这一年，灵帝在后宫修建了许多商业店铺，让宫女们行商贩卖。于是，后宫中相互盗窃和争斗的事情屡有发生。灵帝穿上商人的服装，与行商的宫女们一起饮酒作乐。
English: In this year, Emperor Lingdi built many commercial stores in the harem, and let the courtesans peddle. As a result, there were frequent thefts and fights in the harem. Emperor Lingdi put on a merchant's costume and drank alcohol with the courtesans.

古文：又于西园弄狗，著进贤冠，带绶。
现代文：灵帝又在西园玩狗，狗的头上戴着文官的帽子，身上披着绶带。
English: He also played with a dog in the West Park, making the dog wear a civil servant's crown of merit and dangling a ribbon.

古文：又驾四驴，帝躬自操辔，驱驰周旋；京师转相仿效，驴价遂与马齐。
现代文：他还手执缰绳，亲自驾驶着四头驴拉的车子，在园内来回奔驰。京城洛阳的人竞相仿效，致使驴的售价与马价相等。
English: He also took the reins and personally drove the cart pulled by four donkeys, driving back and forth in the park. People in Luoyang, Beijing, competed to follow suit, resulting in the price of donkeys being equal to the price of horses.

古文：帝好为私稸，收天下之珍货，每郡国贡献，先输中署，名为 导行费 。
现代文：灵帝还喜好积蓄私房钱，收集天下的各种奇珍异宝。每次各郡、国向朝廷进贡，都要先精选出一部分珍品，送交管理皇帝私人财物的中署，叫做 导行费 。
English: Emperor Lingdi also liked to accumulate private money and collect all kinds of rare treasures from all over the world. Every time counties and countries paid tribute to the imperial court, they had to first select a part of the treasures and send them to the central department that managed the emperor's private property, called the escort fee.

古文：中常侍吕强上疏谏曰： 天下之财，莫不生之阴阳，归之陛下，岂有公私！
现代文：中常侍吕强上书规劝说： 普天之下的财富，无不生于阴阳，都归陛下所有，难道有公私之分！
English: Lu Qiang, the chief aide to the emperor, wrote to the emperor to persuade him: The wealth under the whole world, all of which is born in the yin and yang, all belongs to His Majesty. Is there a distinction between public and private?

古文：而今中尚方敛诸郡之宝，中御府积天下之缯，西园引司农之藏，中厩聚太仆之马；而所输之府，辄有导行之财，调广民困，费多献少，奸吏因其利，百姓受其敝。
现代文：而现在，中尚方广敛各郡的珍宝，中御府堆满天下出产的丝织品，西园里收藏着理应由大司农管理的钱物，骥厩中则饲养着本该归太仆管理的马匹。而各地向朝廷交纳贡品时，都要送上导行费。这样，征调数量增加，人民贫困，花费增多，贡品却少。贪官污吏从中取利，黎民百姓深受其苦。
English: Now, however, the Chinese imperial court has amassed the treasures of the counties, the central imperial palace is piled high with silk fabrics produced all over the world, the west garden houses the money and goods that should have been managed by the chief farmer, and the stables are stocked with horses that should have been managed by the eunuch. And when the tributes are paid to the imperial court, the guide fees must be paid. In this way, the number of requisitions and transfers increases, the people are impoverished, the expenses increase, but the tributes are less. Corrupt officials profit from it, and the people of Li suffer from it.

古文：又，阿媚之臣，好献其私，容谄姑息，自此而进。
现代文：更有一些阿谀献媚的臣子，喜欢进献私人财物，陛下对他们姑息纵容，这种不良之风因此越来越盛。
English: Moreover, there are some flattering courtiers who like to donate private property, and His Majesty indulges them, so this bad trend is becoming more and more popular.

古文：旧典：选举委任三府，尚书受奏御而已；受试任用，责以成功，功无可察，然后付之尚书举劾，请下廷尉覆案虚实，行其罪罚。
现代文：依照以往制度，选拔官员的事情应由三府负责，尚书只负责将三府的奏章转呈给陛下。被选拔者通过考核，加以委任，并责求他们拿出政绩。没有政绩者时，才交付尚书进行弹劾，提请转到给廷尉核查虚实，加以处罚。
English: According to the previous system, the selection of officials should be the responsibility of the three prefectures, and Shang Shu was only responsible for forwarding the records of the three prefectures to His Majesty. Those who were selected passed the assessment, were appointed, and were asked to show their political achievements. If there were no political achievements, they were handed over to Shang Shu for impeachment, and the request was transferred to the court lieutenant to verify the facts and impose punishment.

古文：于是三公每有所选，参议掾属，咨其行状，度其器能；然犹有旷职废官，荒秽不治。
现代文：因此，三公在选拔人才时，都要与僚属仔细评议，了解这些人的品行，评估他们的才干。
English: Therefore, when selecting talents, the three princes should carefully discuss with their colleagues, understand the character of these people, and evaluate their talents.

古文：今但任尚书，或有诏用，如是，三公得免选举之负，尚书亦复不坐，责赏无归，岂肯空自劳苦乎！ 
现代文：尽管如此严格，仍然有些官员不能胜任，使政务荒废。如今只由尚书负责选拔官员，或由陛下颁下诏书，直接任用，这样，三公就免除了选拔不当的责任，尚书也不再因此获罪。奖惩都得不到，难道谁还肯自己白白地辛劳吗？ 
English: In spite of this strictness, there are still some officials who are incompetent and make government affairs wasteful. Nowadays, only Shang Shu is responsible for selecting officials, or His Majesty issues an edict and directly appoints them. In this way, the three princes are exempted from the responsibility of improper selection, and Shang Shu is no longer guilty. Rewards and punishments are not available, is there anyone who is willing to work hard for nothing?

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：奏章呈上，灵帝未加理睬。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：何皇后性强忌，后宫王美人生皇子协，后鸩杀美人。
现代文：何皇后嫉妒心非常重，后宫王美人生下皇子刘协，何皇后就用毒药把王美人杀死。
English: Queen He was very jealous. When the harem princess Wang Mei gave birth to the prince Liu Xie, Queen He killed Wang Mei Ren with poison.

古文：帝大怒，欲废后；诸中官固请，得止。
现代文：灵帝大怒，要废掉何皇后，宦官们竭力为她求情，才使灵帝打消这个想法。
English: The Holy Spirit was furious and wanted to abolish Queen Ho. The eunuchs tried their best to intercede for her, but the Holy Spirit put an end to this idea.

古文：大长秋华容侯曹节卒；中常侍赵忠代领大长秋。
现代文：大长秋、华容侯曹节去世，由中常侍赵忠代理大长秋的职务。
English: Da Changqiu and Hua Ronghou passed away on Cao Jie's birthday, and Vice Admiral Zhao Zhong took over Da Changqiu's duties.

古文：孝灵皇帝中光和五年春，正月，辛未，赦天下。
现代文：光和五年春季，正月，辛未，大赦天下。
English: Light and five years of spring, the first month, Xinwei, amnesty to the world.

古文：诏公卿以谣言举刺史、二千石为民蠹害者。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命令公卿根据流传的民谣，检举为害百姓的刺史和郡守。
English: Emperor Ling issued an edict, ordering the court nobles to prosecute the assassin and the county magistrate who harmed the people according to the popular folk song.

古文：太尉许彧、司空张济承望内官，受取货赂，其宦者子弟、宾客，虽贪污秽浊，皆不敢问，而虚纠边远小郡清修有惠化者二十六人，吏民诣阙陈诉。
现代文：太尉许和司空张济投靠有权势的宦官，收受贿赂，对那些担任刺史、郡守的宦官子弟或宾客，尽管他们贪赃枉法、声名狼藉，全不敢过问，却毫无根据地检举了地处边远小郡，清廉而颇有政绩的官员二十六人。这些官员的部属及治下的百姓，到洛阳皇宫门前为他们申诉。
English: Captain Xu and Constable Zhang Ji took bribes from the powerful eunuchs who served as judges and county governors. Although they were corrupt and infamous, they did not dare to cross-examine the eunuchs' children or guests. However, they falsely accused twenty-six officials from small, remote counties who were clean and had a good political record. The subordinates of these officials and the people under their rule went to the front of the Luoyang Imperial Palace to appeal for them.

古文：司徒陈耽上言： 公卿所举，率党其私，所谓放鸱枭而囚鸾凤。 
现代文：司徒陈耽上书说： 这次公卿的检举行动，大都包庇各自的私党，正是所谓是放走鸱枭那样的恶鸟，而将凤凰囚禁起来。 
English: Chen Tan, the magistrate, said in his letter, "This time, most of the actions of the nobles in the prosecution are to cover up their own private parties. It is precisely the so-called release of evil birds like the dragonfly and the imprisonment of the phoenix.

古文：帝以让彧、济，由是诸坐谣言征者，悉拜议郎。
现代文：灵帝为此责备了许、张济，并将那些因所谓民谣而被征召问罪的官员，全都任命为议郎。
English: Lingdi reproached Xu and Zhang Jie for this, and appointed all those officials who were summoned for questioning because of the so-called folk songs as mediators.

古文：二月，大疫。
现代文：二月，瘟疫到处流行。
English: In February, a major epidemic broke out.

古文：三月，司徒陈耽免。
现代文：三月，司徒陈耽被免职。
English: In March, Szeto Chen was relieved of his duties.

古文：夏，四月，旱。
现代文：夏季，四月，发生旱灾。
English: Early summer, April, drought.

古文：以太常袁隗为司徒。
现代文：任命太常袁隗为司徒。
English: Appointed Yuan Qi, the first secretary of the CPC Central Committee, as the secretary.

古文：五月，庚申，永乐宫署灾。
现代文：五月，庚申，永乐宫署发生火灾。
English: In May, a fire broke out at the Yongle Palace Station in Goshun.

古文：秋，七月，有星孛于太微。
现代文：秋季，七月，有异星出现于太微星旁。
English: In the autumn, in July, a strange star appeared next to the faint star.

古文：板楯蛮寇乱巴郡，连年讨之，不能克。
现代文：板蛮人在巴郡作乱，官军连年征讨，未能平定。
English: The Pan barbarians rioted in Ba County, and the government army was unable to subdue them.

古文：帝欲大发兵，以问益州计吏汉中程包，对曰： 板楯七姓，自秦世立功，复其租赋。
现代文：灵帝打算出动大军，为此询问益州派入朝中汇报情况的计吏汉中人程包。程包回答说： 板族中有七个大姓，自秦时，他们就建立过功勋，因此得到免除田租赋税的优待。
English: Lingdi was planning to dispatch a large army, so he asked Cheng Bao, a member of the Han court who was sent to Yizhou to report on the situation. Cheng Bao replied: There are seven great surnames among the Ban people. Since the Qin Dynasty, they have made great achievements, so they have been exempted from land rent tax.

古文：其人勇猛善战。
现代文：他们全都骁勇善战。
English: They all fought bravely.

古文：昔永初中，羌入汉川，郡县破坏，得板楯救之，羌死败殆尽，羌人号为神兵，传语种辈，勿复南行。
现代文：从前在永初年间，羌族人攻入汉川，郡、县政权全被破坏，得到板人的援救，羌人才被打败，死伤殆尽。羌人称板人为神兵，并相互告诫，不要再向南进入这一地区。
English: Once upon a time, in the Yongchu years, the Yi people invaded Hanchuan, the county and county government were all destroyed, and they were rescued by the Pan people. The Yi people were defeated and killed and wounded. The Pan people called the Pan people divine soldiers, and warned each other not to go south into this area.

古文：至建和二年，羌复大入，实赖板楯连摧破之。
现代文：到了建和二年，羌人又大举入侵，全靠板人，才连续击败了羌人。
English: In the second year after the establishment of the First Sino-Japanese War, the Jurchens made another large-scale invasion. It was only thanks to the Jurchens that they were able to continuously defeat the Jurchens.

古文：前车骑将军冯绲南征武陵，亦倚板楯以成其功。
现代文：前车骑将军冯绲南征武陵，也是依靠板人，才得以成功。
English: The expedition to Wuling led by the general Feng Xuannan also depended on the board man to succeed.

古文：近益州郡乱，太守李颙亦以板楯讨而平之。
现代文：最近益州郡发生叛乱，太守李也是用板人平定了叛乱。
English: Recently, there was a rebellion in Yizhou County, and the Emperor Li also used soldiers to quell the rebellion.

古文：忠功如此，本无恶心。
现代文：板人如此忠心耿耿，屡建功勋，原本没有反抗朝廷的意思。
English: Itabuchi was so loyal and meritorious that he had no intention of doing evil.

古文：长吏乡亭更赋至重，仆役棰楚，过于奴虏。
现代文：可是，地方官府向板人征收的赋税极重，役使他们，残酷地鞭打，超过对待奴隶。
English: However, the local government levied extremely heavy taxes on the Pan people, and the officials whipped them cruelly, treating them worse than slaves.

古文：亦有嫁妻卖子，或乃至自刭割，虽陈冤州郡，而牧守不为通理，阙庭悠远，不能自闻，含怨呼天，无所叩诉。
现代文：还有人为交纳赋税被迫卖妻卖子，甚至有人因不堪忍受而刎颈自杀。尽管他们曾到州、郡官府去陈诉冤情，但州、郡长官既不处理，又不向上奏报。路途遥遥，无法到京城直接向陛下喊冤，满含怨气地向苍天呼喊，仍是投诉无门。
English: There are also people who are forced to sell their wives and children in order to pay taxes, and there are even people who are so unbearable that they commit suicide by strangling themselves. Although they have gone to the state and county government offices to complain about their grievances, the state and county governors neither deal with them nor report them to the government. They are too far away to go to the capital to complain directly to His Majesty, and they can only complain to the heavens. There is still no way to complain.

古文：故邑落相聚以致叛戾，非有谋主僭号以图不轨。
现代文：于是，各部落便聚集起来进行反抗。他们完全是迫于无奈，并无建立政权闹独立的野心。
English: As a result, the tribes gathered to resist. They were completely forced to do so, and they had no ambition to establish a regime or to become independent.

古文：今但选明能牧守，自然安集，不烦征伐也。 
现代文：如今，只要任命清廉能干的官员去担任州、郡长官，动乱自然就会平定，无须调军征伐。 
English: Now we have to relocate the wise and talented county magistrates, who are naturally stable and do not need to be recruited.

古文：帝从其言，选用太守曹谦，遣宣诏赦之，即时皆降。
现代文：灵帝听从了程包的建议，任命曹谦担任巴郡太守，宣布皇帝赦免他们叛乱行为的诏书，板人立刻全部投降了。
English: Lingdi listened to Cheng Bao's suggestion, appointed Cao Qian as the governor of Bashu County, and announced that the emperor pardoned their act of rebellion. The Panmen immediately surrendered.

古文：八月，起四百尺观于阿亭道。
现代文：八月，在阿亭道建造起高达四百尺的楼台。
English: In August, it was observed from a height of 400 meters on Ating Road.

古文：冬，十月，太尉许彧罢；以太常杨赐为太尉。
现代文：冬季，十月，太尉许被免职，任命太常杨赐为太尉。
English: In the winter, in October, Taijun Xu was relieved of his duties, and Taijun Yang was appointed as Taijun.

古文：帝校猎上林苑，历函谷关，遂狩于广成苑。
现代文：灵帝在上林苑打猎，后又经函谷关，到广成苑进行狩猎。
English: Lingdi hunted in Shanglinyuan, and then went to Guangchengyuan via Hanzhongguan.

古文：十二月，还，幸太学。
现代文：十二月，回到京城洛阳，到太学进行巡视。
English: In December, he returned to Beijing and inspected Taigaku.

古文：桓典为侍御史，宦官畏之。
现代文：桓典担任侍御史，宦官们都很怕他。
English: The eunuchs were afraid of him.

古文：典常乘骢马，京师为之语曰： 行行且止，避骢马御史！ 
现代文：桓典常骑一匹青白杂色的马，京城洛阳因此传言说： 走走停停，避开骑杂色马的御史。 
English: Huan Dian often rode a blue-and-white horse of mixed color. Therefore, a rumor spread in Luoyang, the capital city, saying, "Walk around and avoid riding a horse of mixed color."

古文：典，焉之孙也。
现代文：桓典是桓焉的孙子。
English: Kanden is the grandson of Kanen.

古文：孝灵皇帝中光和六年春，三月，辛未，赦天下。夏，大旱。
现代文：光和六年春季，三月，辛未，大赦天下。夏季，出现严重旱灾。
English: Light and six years of spring, March, Xinwei, amnesty to the world. In the summer, there was a serious drought.

古文：爵号皇后母为舞阳君。
现代文：封何皇后的母亲为舞阳君。
English: The mother of Empress Fong Ho is Mai Yangjun.

古文：秋，金城河水溢出二十馀里。
现代文：秋季，金城郡境内的黄河水暴涨，泛滥两岸二十余里。
English: In autumn, the Yellow River in Jincheng County surged, flooding more than 20 miles on both sides.

古文：五原山岸崩。
现代文：五原郡境内发生山崩。
English: The coast of the Wuhara Mountains is cracking.

古文：初，巨鹿张角奉事黄、老，以妖术教授，号 太平道。 
现代文：最初，钜鹿人张角信奉黄帝、老子，以法术和咒语等传授门徒，号称 太平道 。
English: In the beginning, Zhang Jiao, a native of Elk, believed in the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, and taught his disciples with spells and incantations. It was known as the Taiping Dao.

古文：咒符水以疗病，令病者跪拜首过，或时病愈，众共神而信之。
现代文：他用念过咒语的符水治病，先让病人下跪，说出自己所犯的错误，然后喝下府水。
English: He used the charmed water to cure the sick. First, he made the patients kneel down, tell them about the mistakes they had made, and then drink the water.

古文：角分遣弟子周行四方，转相诳诱，十馀年间，徒众数十万，自青、徐、幽、冀、荆、扬、兗、豫八州之人，莫不毕应。
现代文：有些病人竟然就此痊愈，于是，人们将他信奉如神明。张角派他的弟子走遍四方，不断诳骗引诱，十余年的时间，信徒多达数十万，青州、徐州、幽州、冀州、荆州、扬州、兖州和豫州等八州之人，无不响应。
English: Some patients were actually cured, so people worshipped him like a god. Zhang Jiao sent his disciples to travel all over the country, constantly deceiving and enticing, more than ten years, up to hundreds of thousands of believers, people in eight states including Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yuzhou, Jizhou, Jingzhou, Yangzhou, Zhangzhou and Yuzhou, all responded.

古文：或弃卖财产、流移奔赴，填塞道路，未至病死者亦以万数。
现代文：有的信徒卖掉自己的家产，前往投奔张角，他们塞满道路，尚未到达而死在途中的也数以万计。
English: Some believers sold their belongings and fled to Zhangjiajie. They filled the roads, and tens of thousands died on the way.

古文：郡县不解其意，反言角以善道教化，为民所归。
现代文：郡、县的官员不了解张角的真实意图，反而讲张角教民向善，因而为百姓所拥戴。
English: County and prefectural officials do not understand Zhang Jiao's true intentions, but on the contrary, they say that Zhang Jiao teaches the people to be good and is therefore supported by the people.

古文：太尉杨赐时为司徒，上书言： 角诳曜百姓，遭赦不悔，稍益滋蔓。
现代文：太尉杨赐当时正担任司徒，他上书说： 张角欺骗百姓，虽受到免除罪责的赦令，仍不思悔改，反而逐渐蔓延扩张。
English: At that time, Second Lieutenant Yang Qi was working as a steward, and he wrote: Zhang Jiao deceived the people, and although he was pardoned from criminal responsibility, he still did not repent, but gradually spread and expanded.

古文：今若下州郡捕讨，恐更骚扰，速成其患。
现代文：现在，如果命州、郡进行镇压，恐怕会加重局势的混乱，促使其提前叛乱。
English: Now, if the state and counties are ordered to suppress, it will probably aggravate the chaos of the situation and prompt them to rebel in advance.

古文：宜切敕刺史、二千石，简别流民，各护归本郡，以孤弱其党，然后诛其渠帅，可不劳而定。 
现代文：应该命令刺史、郡守清查流民，将他们分别护送回本郡，以削弱张角党徒的力量，然后再诛杀那些首领。这样，不必劳师动众，就可以平息事态。 
English: They should order the chief historian and the county magistrate to investigate the fugitives and escort them back to the county separately, so as to weaken the power of Zhang Ke's followers, and then kill the leaders. In this way, the situation can be calmed down without having to work hard to move the masses.

古文：会赐去位，事遂留中。
现代文：恰在此时，杨赐去职，他的奏章遂留在皇宫，未能实行。
English: Just at this time, Yang gave up his post, and his report was left in the palace and could not be implemented.

古文：司徒掾刘陶复上疏申赐前议，言： 角等阴谋益甚，四方私言，云角等窃入京师，觇视朝政。
现代文：马徒掾刘陶再次上书，重提杨赐的这项建议，说： 张角等人正在加紧策划阴谋，四方秘密传言说： 张角等偷偷潜入京城洛阳，窥探朝廷的动静。 
English: Liu Tao, Ma Tuo's disciple, wrote again, reiterating the suggestion made by Yang Di, saying, "Zhang Jiao and others are intensifying their plotting. There is a rumor that Zhang Jiao and others have secretly sneaked into Luoyang, Beijing, to spy on the activities of the imperial court.

古文：鸟声兽心，私共鸣呼。
现代文：其在各地的党徒暗地里遥相呼应。
English: It is echoed secretly by Party members everywhere.

古文：州郡忌讳，不欲闻之，但更相告语，莫肯公文。
现代文：州郡官员怕如实呈报会受到朝廷的处分，不愿上奏，只是私下相互间通知，不肯用公文的形式来通报。
English: The prefectures and counties are afraid and do not want to report to the imperial court. However, you sue me, I sue you, they refuse to make it public in writing.

古文：宜下明诏，重募角等，赏以国土，有敢回避，与之同罪。 
现代文：为此，建议陛下公开颁发诏书，悬重赏捉拿张角等人，以封侯作为奖赏。官员中若有胆怯回避者，与张角等人同罪论处。 
English: For this reason, it is recommended that His Majesty publicly issue an imperial edict with a heavy reward for the capture of Zhang Jiao and others, with the award of a fiefdom. If there are officials who are afraid to evade, they will be punished with the same crime as Zhang Jiao and others.

古文：帝殊不为意，方诏陶次第春秋条例。
现代文：灵帝对这件事很不在意，反而下诏让刘陶整理《春秋条例》。
English: Ling Di did not care about this matter, but ordered Liu Tao to sort out the "Spring and Autumn Regulations."

古文：角遂置三十六方，方犹将军也。
现代文：张角设置三十六个方，方，犹如将军。
English: Zhang Jiao set up thirty-six square, square, like a general.

古文：大方万馀人，小方六七千，各立渠帅。
现代文：大方统率一万余人，小方统率六七千人，各立首领。
English: The large faction led more than ten thousand people, the small faction led sixty-seven thousand people, each with its own leader.

古文：讹言： 苍天已死，黄天当立，岁在甲子，天下大吉。 
现代文：他宣称： 苍天已死，黄天当立，岁在甲子，天下大吉。 
English: He declared: "The sky is dead, the yellow sky is on the rise, the year is in the middle of the year, the world is great.

古文：以白土书京城寺门及州郡官府，皆作 甲子 字。
现代文：并用白土在京城洛阳各官署及各州、郡官府的大门上都写上 甲子 二字。
English: The characters "甲子" (Koshi) were written in white clay on the temple gate of the capital city and the prefectural government office.

古文：大方马元义等先收荆、扬数万人，期会发于鄴。
现代文：他们计划，由大方马元义等先集结荆州、扬州的党徒数万人，按期会合，在邺城起事。
English: They planned to first gather tens of thousands of party members from Jingzhou and Yangzhou, led by the generous Ma Yuanyi, to meet on schedule and rise up in Lucheng.

古文：元义数往来京师，以中常侍封谞、徐奉等为内应，约以三月五日内外俱起。
现代文：马元义多次前往京城洛阳，以中常侍封、徐奉等人为内应，约定于次年的三月五日，京城内外同时发动。
English: Ma Yuanyi made several trips to Luoyang, the capital city, with Zhong Chang Zifu, Xu Feng and others as his assistants. It was scheduled to be launched simultaneously in and outside the capital city on March 5 of the following year.

古文：孝灵皇帝中中平元年
现代文：中平元年
English: in the first year of Zhongping

古文：春，角弟子济南唐周上书告之。
现代文：春季，张角的弟子济南人唐周上书告密。
English: In the spring, Zhang Jiao's disciple Tang Zhou from Jinan wrote a letter to inform the authorities.

古文：于是收马元义，车裂于雒阳。
现代文：于是，朝廷逮捕了马元义，在洛阳用车裂的酷刑将他处死。
English: As a result, the imperial court arrested Ma Yuanyi and put him to death in Luoyang with the torture of chariot splitting.

古文：诏三公、司隶案验宫省直卫及百姓有事角道者，诛杀千馀人；下冀州逐捕角等。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命令三公和司隶校尉调查皇宫及朝廷官员、禁军将士和普通百姓中信奉张角 太平教 者，处死了一千余人。同时还下令让冀州的官员捉拿张角等人。
English: Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, ordering the three princes and Captain Sili to investigate the palace and court officials, soldiers of the Imperial Army and ordinary people who believed in Zhang Jiao's Taiping religion, and executed more than a thousand people. At the same time, he also ordered officials in Jizhou to arrest Zhang Jiao and others.

古文：角等知事已露，晨夜驰敕诸方，一时俱起，皆著黄巾以为标帜，故时人谓之 黄巾贼 。
现代文：张角等得知计划已经泄露，便派人昼夜兼程赶往各地，通知各方首领，一时间各方全都起兵，他们个个头戴黄巾作为标志，因此当时人称他们为 黄巾贼 。
English: When Zhang Jiao and others learned that the plan had been leaked, they sent people to rush to various places day and night to inform the leaders of all parties. At one time, all parties raised an army, and they all wore a yellow scarf as a symbol. Therefore, they were called yellow scarf thieves at that time.

古文：二月，角自称天公将军，角弟宝称地公将军，宝弟梁称人公将军，所在燔烧官府，劫略聚邑，州郡失据，长吏多逃亡；旬月之间，天下响应，京师震动。
现代文：二月，张角自称天公将军，他弟弟张宝称地公将军，张梁称人公将军。他们焚烧当地官府，劫掠城镇。州郡官员无力抵抗，大多弃职逃跑。不过一个月的时间，天下纷纷响应，京城洛阳为之震动。
English: In February, Zhang Kuan claimed to be the general of heaven, his brother Zhang Baolu claimed to be the general of earth, and Zhang Liang claimed to be the general of humanity. They burned local government offices and looted towns. State and county officials were powerless to resist, and most of them abandoned their posts and fled. However, within a month, the whole world responded, and the capital Luoyang was shaken.

古文：安平、甘陵人各执其王应贼。
现代文：安平国和甘陵国的人民分别生擒了安平王和甘陵王，响应黄巾军。
English: The people of Anping Province and Ganling Province separately captured the Anping King and the Ganling King, and responded to the Yellow Turban Army.

古文：三月，戊申，以河南尹何进为大将军，封慎侯，率左右羽林、五营营士屯都亭，修理器械，以镇京师；置函谷、太谷、广成、伊阙、轘辕、旋门、孟津、小平津八关都尉。
现代文：三月，戊申，任命河南尹何进为大将军，并封他为慎侯。何进统率左、右羽林军以及屯骑、步兵、越骑、长水、射声等五营将士，驻扎在都亭，整修军械，守卫京城洛阳。还设置了函谷关、太谷关、广成关、伊阙关、辕关、旋门关、孟津关、小平津关等八关都尉。
English: In March, Yin Hejin of Henan Province was appointed as the grand general by Wushin, and he was given the title of shenhou. Hejin led the left and right Uebayashi army and five battalions of cavalry, infantry, yue cavalry, Changshui, and shooting soldiers, stationed in the capital, renovated military equipment, and guarded the capital Luoyang. He also set up eight capital lieutenants such as Hanyu Pass, Taiyuan Pass, Guangcheng Pass, Ili Pass, Shaoguan Pass, Swing Gate Pass, Mengjin Pass, and Xiaopingjin Pass.

古文：帝召群臣会议。
现代文：灵帝召集群臣商议对策。
English: Emperor Ling convened a group of courtiers to discuss countermeasures.

古文：北地太守皇甫嵩以为宜解党禁，益出中藏钱、西园厩马以班军士。
现代文：北地郡太守皇甫嵩认为，应该解除禁止党人作官的禁令，并拿出皇帝私人所有的中藏府钱财以及西园骥厩中的良马，赏赐给出征的将士。
English: Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：嵩，规之兄子也。
现代文：皇甫嵩是皇甫规哥哥的儿子。
English: Emperor Fusang was the son of Emperor Fuxi's elder brother.

古文：上问计于中常侍吕强，对曰： 党锢久积，人情怨愤，若不赦宥，轻与张角合谋，为变滋大，悔之无救。
现代文：灵帝询问中常侍吕强的意见，吕强说： 对党人的禁令时间已经很长了，人心怨恨愤怒，若不予以赦免，他们将轻举妄动，与张角联合起来，叛乱之势便会更趋扩大，到那时，后悔就来不及了。
English: Ling Di asked the opinion of Lu Qiang, the general secretary of the CPC Central Committee. Lu Qiang said: The ban on the party members has been in place for a long time. People are resentful and angry. If they are not pardoned, they will act rashly and unite with Zhang Ke. The rebellion will become more widespread. At that time, it will be too late to regret.

古文：今请先诛左右贪浊者，大赦党人，料简刺史、二千石能否，则盗无不平矣。 
现代文：现在，请先将陛下左右贪赃枉法的官员处死，大赦所有的党人，并考察各地刺史、郡守的能力。如果这样做，叛乱就不会不平息了。 
English: Now, please first execute the corrupt officials around His Majesty, grant amnesty to all party members, and investigate the ability of local governments to assassinate history and county governors. If you do this, the rebellion will not be quelled.

古文：帝惧而从之。
现代文：灵帝对黄巾军的势力感到害怕，接受了吕强的建议。
English: Lingdi was afraid of the influence of the Yellow Turban Army and accepted Lü Qiang's suggestion.

古文：壬子，赦天下党人，还诸徙者；唯张角不赦。
现代文：壬子，大赦天下党人，已经被流放到边疆地区的党人及其家属都可以重返故乡，唯有张角不在赦免范围之内。
English: Renzi, the amnesty of the world's party members, and the party members and their families who have been exiled to the frontier areas can all return to their hometowns. Only Zhang Jiao is not within the scope of the amnesty.

古文：发天下精兵，遗北中郎将卢植讨张角，左中郎将皇甫嵩、右中郎将硃俊讨颍川黄巾。
现代文：与此同时，征调全国各地的精兵，派遣北中郎将卢植征讨张角，左中郎将皇甫嵩、右中郎将朱俊征讨在颍川地区活动的黄巾军。
English: At the same time, elite soldiers from all over the country were conscripted and dispatched, including the Northern Middle Brother, Lu Zhi, to fight Zhang Ke, the Left Middle Brother, Wang Fusong, and the Right Middle Brother, Zhu Jun, to fight the Yellow Turban Army, which was active in the Li River area.

古文：是时中常侍赵忠、张让、夏恽、郭胜、段珪、宋典等皆封侯贵宠，上常言： 张常侍是我公，赵常侍是我母。 
现代文：当时，中常侍赵忠、张让、夏恽、郭胜、段、宋典等都被封为侯爵，身份贵宠。灵帝常说： 张常侍是我父亲，赵常侍是我母亲。 
English: At that time, the middle attendants Zhao Zhong, Zhang Zhan, Xia Xuan, Guo Sheng, Duan, Song Dian, etc. were all made marquesses, and they were cherished. Lingdi often said: Zhang attendant is my father, Zhao attendant is my mother.

古文：由是宦官无所惮畏，并起第宅，拟则宫室。
现代文：于是，宦官无所忌惮，纷纷大兴土木，仿照皇宫的式样修建宅第。
English: As a result, the eunuchs had no scruples, and one after another, they began to build houses in imitation of the style of the imperial palace.

古文：上尝欲登永安候台，宦官恐望见其居处，乃使中大人尚但谏曰： 天子不当登高，登高则百姓虚散。 
现代文：一次，灵帝曾想登上永安宫的望台，观看皇宫周围的景致。宦官们生怕灵帝看到自己的宅第，便让中大人尚但劝阻灵帝，说： 天子不应当登高，登高则会使人民流散。 
English: Once, Emperor Lingdi wanted to go up to the observation deck of Yongan Palace to see the scenery around the palace. The eunuchs were afraid that Emperor Lingdi would see their homestead, so they asked the middle-aged man to dissuade Emperor Lingdi, saying, "The Son of Heaven should not go up high, as going up high would cause the people to scatter."

古文：上自是不敢复升台榭。
现代文：灵帝从此不再敢登较高的楼台亭榭。
English: From then on, Ling Di no longer dared to climb the higher balcony.

古文：及封谞、徐奉事发，上诘责诸常侍曰： 汝曹常言党人欲为不轨，皆令禁锢，或有伏诛者。
现代文：及至封、徐奉为张角做内应的事情败露，灵帝斥责诸位常侍说： 你们常说党人图谋不轨，将他们全都禁锢起来，有人甚至遭到诛杀。
English: When it was revealed that Fong and Xu Feng had acted for Zhang Qiao, Emperor Ling rebuked the attendants and said, "You often say that the Party members are plotting evil, so you have all of them imprisoned, and some have even been beaten to death.

古文：今党人更为国用，汝曹反与张角通，为可斩未？ 
现代文：现在党人倒是在为国家出力，你们反与张角勾结，该不该处斩？ 
English: Now the party members are working hard for the country. You, on the other hand, are colluding with Zhang Jiao. Should you be punished?

古文：皆叩头曰： 此王甫、侯览所为也！ 
现代文：宦官们都叩头说： 这些都是王甫、侯览干的。 
English: The eunuchs all prostrated themselves and said, "All this was done by Wang Fu and Hou Shan."

古文：于是诸常侍人人求退，各自征还宗亲、子弟在州郡者。
现代文：于是，诸位常侍都收敛退避，各自将他们在外担任州、郡官员的亲属及子弟召回。
English: As a result, all the regular attendants retreated, each of them calling back their relatives and children who served as state and county officials.

古文：赵忠、夏恽等遂共谮吕强，云与党人共议朝廷，数读霍光传。强兄弟所在并皆贪秽。
现代文：于是，赵忠、夏恽等人一同向灵帝诬告吕强，说： 吕强与党人一起议论朝廷，经常阅读《霍光传》，他的兄弟全都在官位上贪脏枉法。 
English: As a result, Zhao Zhong, Xia Yao and others together falsely accused Lv Qiang to Ling Di, saying: Lv Qiang discussed the imperial court with party members, often read "Hoguang Biography," and his brothers were all corrupt in their official positions.

古文：帝使中黄门持兵召强。
现代文：灵帝听后，令中黄门带着兵器召吕强入宫。
English: After listening to Lingdi, he ordered Zhonghuangmen to call Lv Qiang into the palace with weapons.

古文：强闻帝召，怒曰： 吾死，乱起矣！
现代文：吕强得知灵帝召他的用意后，忿忿地说： 我死之后，必有大乱。
English: After Lyu Qiang learned of Lingdi's intention to summon him, he said angrily: "After my death, there will surely be great turmoil."

古文：丈夫欲尽忠国家，岂能对狱吏乎！ 
现代文：大丈夫要为报国尽忠，怎能去面对狱吏呢！ 
English: If a doctor is loyal to the country, can he obey the orders of the prison warden?

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：便自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：忠、恽复谮曰： 强见召，未知所问而就外自屏，有奸明审。 
现代文：赵忠、夏恽等再次诬陷说： 吕强被召，还不知道要问他什么事，就在外自杀了，这说明他确实有罪。 
English: Zhao Zhong, Xia Yao and others made another false accusation, saying, "Lyu Qiang was summoned, but before he knew what to ask, he committed suicide outside, which shows that he was indeed guilty.

古文：遂收捕其宗亲，没入财产。
现代文：于是，灵帝下令逮捕吕强的亲属，将财产没收。
English: As a result, Lingdi ordered the arrest of Lu Qiang's relatives and confiscated their property.

古文：侍中河内向栩上便宜，讥刺左右。
现代文：侍中、河内人向栩向灵帝上书，抨击宦官。
English: The middle-ranking samurai and the people of Hanoi sent a letter to Emperor Chu Xiang, criticizing the eunuchs.

古文：张让诬栩与张角同心，欲为内应，收送黄门北寺狱，杀之。
现代文：张让便诬告向栩与张角同心，要做张角的内应。于是向栩被捕，送交黄门北寺监狱处死。
English: Zhang Jang then falsely accused Xiang Tuo of being in cahoots with Zhang Jiao, in order to get a response from Zhang Jiao. As a result, Xiang Tuo was arrested and sent to Huangmen North Temple Prison to be executed.

古文：郎中中山张钧上书曰： 窃惟张角所以能兴兵作乱，万民所以乐附之者，其源皆由十常侍多放父兄、子弟、婚亲、宾客典据州郡，辜榷财利，侵掠百姓，百姓之冤，无所告诉，故谋议不轨，聚为盗贼。
现代文：郎中、中山人张钧上书说： 我认为，张角所以能够兴兵作乱，百姓所以乐于归附张角，原因都在于十常侍多放任自己的父兄、子弟、亲戚及其投靠者充任州郡长官，搜刮财富，掠夺百姓。百姓有冤无处申诉，这才打算与朝廷对抗，聚集起来成为盗贼。
English: Zhang Xuan, the son-in-law and a native of Zhongshan, wrote: "I believe that the reason why Zhang Jiao was able to raise an army to create turmoil, and the reason why the people were willing to follow Zhang Jiao, was because the ten regular attendants mostly allowed their fathers, brothers, children, relatives, and their supporters to serve as prefects of counties and prefectures, to scavenge wealth, and to plunder the people. The people had grievances and nowhere to appeal, so they decided to confront the imperial court, and gathered together to become thieves.

古文：宜斩十常侍，县头南郊，以谢百姓，遣使者布告天下，可不须师旅而大寇自消。 
现代文：应该斩杀十常侍，将他们的头悬挂在京城南郊，向百姓谢罪，并派使者向全国宣布此事。这样，可以不出动军队镇压，庞大的寇盗集团就会自行解散。 
English: They should have beheaded the ten regular attendants, hung their heads in the southern suburbs of Beijing, apologized to the people, and sent an envoy to announce the matter to the whole country. In this way, the army could not be mobilized to suppress, and the huge robber group would dissolve on its own.

古文：帝以钧章示诸常侍，皆免冠徒跣顿首，乞自致雒阳诏狱，并出家财以助军费。
现代文：灵帝将张钧的奏章交诸常侍看，这些人全都吓得摘下帽子，除去鞋袜，下跪叩头，请求灵帝允许他们到洛阳专门审理皇帝亲自交办案件的诏狱去投案自首，并将家产献出，用以补助军费。
English: Emperor Ling gave Zhang Xuan's music to the attendants, and all of them were so scared that they took off their hats, removed their shoes and socks, knelt down and bowed, and asked Emperor Ling to allow them to go to Luoyang to surrender to the imperial prison, which was specially assigned to handle the case by the emperor himself, and to donate their family property to subsidize military expenses.

古文：有诏，皆冠履视事如故。
现代文：灵帝下诏，令诸常侍全都穿戴起表示官位的衣帽鞋袜，继续担任原职。
English: Emperor Lingde issued an edict, ordering all the regular attendants to put on their official hats, shoes, and socks, and continue to serve in their original positions.

古文：帝怒钧曰： 此真狂子也！
现代文：他对张钧上奏一事发怒说： 这真是个狂人！
English: He was angry about Zhang Ye's performance and said, "This is really a madman!

古文：十常侍固常有一人善者不！ 
现代文：难道十常侍中本不该有一个好人！ 
English: Wasn't there supposed to be a good man among the ten regular attendants?

古文：御史承旨，遂诬奏钧学黄巾道，收掠，死狱中。
现代文：御史顺承灵帝的心意，诬奏张钧信奉黄巾道，遂将他逮捕入狱，拷打致死。
English: Obedient to Emperor Lingdi's wishes, Gu Shi falsely accused Zhang Xuan of practising the Yellow Turban Cult, and then arrested him and sent him to prison, where he was tortured to death.

古文：庚子，南阳黄巾张曼成攻杀太守褚贡。
现代文：庚子，南阳郡的黄巾军将领张曼成进攻并杀死太守褚贡。
English: Geng Zi, the general of the Yellow Turban Army of Nanyang County, Zhang Mancheng, attacked and killed the Emperor Shigong.

古文：帝问太尉杨赐以黄巾事，赐所对切直，帝不悦。
现代文：灵帝询问太尉杨赐有关黄巾军的情况，杨赐的回答恳切直率，灵帝感到不快。
English: Ling Di asked the captain Yang Qi about the situation of the Yellow Turban Army. Yang Qi's answer was sincere and straightforward, which made Ling Di feel uncomfortable.

古文：夏，四月，赐坐寇贼免。
现代文：夏季，四月，杨赐因未能平息黄巾叛乱而被免职。
English: In the summer, in April, Yang Jie was dismissed for failing to quell the Yellow Turban Rebellion.

古文：以太仆弘农邓盛为太尉。
现代文：任命太仆、弘农人邓盛为太尉。
English: He appointed Deng Sheng, a courtier and a Hongnong person, as the first lieutenant.

古文：已而帝阅录故事，得赐与刘陶所上张角奏，乃封赐为临晋侯，陶为中陵乡侯。
现代文：过了一些时候，灵帝翻阅过去的奏章，发现了杨赐与刘陶所上的有关张角的奏章。于是，封杨赐为临晋侯，刘陶为中陵乡侯。
English: After some time, Emperor Lingdi looked through the past records and found the records of Yang Zi and Liu Tao about Zhang Ang. Therefore, Yang Zi was appointed as the governor of Linjin, and Liu Tao was appointed as the governor of Zhongling.

古文：司空张济罢；以大司农张温为司空。
现代文：司空张济被免职。任命大司农张温为司空。
English: Zhang Jie was removed from the position of Secretary of the Air Force, and Zhang Wen, Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, was appointed as Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：皇甫嵩、硃俊合将四万馀人，共讨颍川，嵩、俊各统一军。俊与贼波才战，败；嵩进保长社。
现代文：皇甫嵩、朱俊率军四万人，一同讨伐颍川郡的黄巾军。皇甫嵩和朱俊各率一支军队，朱俊与黄巾军将领波才交战，被击败。皇甫嵩率军进驻长社，固守县城。
English: Emperor Fusang and Zhu Jun led an army of 40,000 men to fight against the Yellow Turban Army in Luochuan County. Emperor Fusang and Zhu Jun each led an army, and Zhu Jun fought with the Yellow Turban Army's general Bo Cai and was defeated. Emperor Fusang led an army into Changsha and firmly defended the county seat.

古文：汝南黄巾败太守赵谦于邵陵。
现代文：汝南郡的黄巾军在邵陵击败太守赵谦所率的官军。
English: Runan Huanghan defeated the imperial governor Zhao Qian in Shaoling.

古文：广阳黄巾杀幽州刺吏郭勋及太守刘卫。
现代文：广阳郡的黄巾军杀幽州刺史郭勋及太守刘卫。
English: The Yellow Turban Army of Guangyang County killed Yuzhou assassin Guo Xun and grand marshal Liu Wei.

古文：波才围皇甫嵩于长社。
现代文：波才率黄巾军将皇甫嵩围困在长社县城。
English: The Yellow Turban Army led by Bocai besieged Huangfusong in the county seat of Changsha.

古文：嵩兵少，军中皆恐。
现代文：皇甫嵩兵少，军中都感到恐慌。
English: Emperor Fusang had few soldiers, and the army was in a panic.

古文：贼依草结营，会大风，嵩约敕军士皆束苣乘城，使锐士间出围外，纵火大呼，城上举燎应之，嵩从城中鼓噪而出，奔击贼陈，贼惊乱，奔走。
现代文：黄巾军的营寨所设之处荒草遍野，适逢狂风大作，皇甫嵩让士兵们全都手持成束苇草上城。另命一批勇士，偷偷地越过包围圈，放火烧草并高声呐喊。与此同时，城上的军士也一齐点燃火把，与之呼应。皇甫嵩率军从城中擂鼓呐喊而出，直捣敌阵。黄巾军大惊，溃散奔逃。
English: Wild grass covered the place where the camp of the Yellow Turban Army was set up, coinciding with a violent wind. Emperor Fusang let the soldiers all carry bundles of reeds up to the city. He ordered another group of warriors to secretly cross the encirclement, set fire to the grass and shout loudly. At the same time, the sergeants on the city also lit torches together, echoing it. Emperor Fusang and his army came out of the city beating drums and shouting, and directly attacked the enemy line. The Yellow Turban Army was shocked and scattered and fled.

古文：会骑都尉沛国曹操将兵适至，五月，嵩、操与硃俊合军，更与贼战，大破之，斩首数万级。
现代文：这时，恰好骑都尉、沛国人曹操率兵赶到。五月，皇甫嵩、曹操与朱俊会师，再次出战，大败黄巾军，斩杀数万人。
English: At this time, Cao Cao, the captain of the cavalry, arrived with his soldiers. In May, Emperor Fusang, Cao Cao and Zhu Jun joined the division, went to war again, defeated the Yellow Turban Army, and killed tens of thousands of people.

古文：封嵩都乡侯。
现代文：灵帝封皇甫嵩为都乡侯。
English: Emperor Ling named Emperor Fusong as the capital township.

古文：操父嵩，为中常侍曹腾养子，不能审其生出本末，或云夏侯氏子也。
现代文：曹操的父亲曹嵩，是中常侍曹腾的养子，他原来的姓氏已无法确定，据传为夏侯氏。
English: Cao Cao's father, Cao Song, was the adopted son of Cao Teng, the middle-ranking attendant of Cao Cao. His original surname has not been determined, but is rumored to be Xia Hou.

古文：操少机警，有权数，而任侠放荡，不治行业。
现代文：曹操自小为人机警，有谋略，善权术，并喜欢行侠仗义，行为放荡，不经营家产事业。
English: Cao Cao has been a smart policeman since he was a child. He has a strategy and is good at power. He also likes to be a knight, indulges in debauchery, and does not run a family business.

古文：世人未之奇也，唯太尉桥玄及南阳何颙异焉。
现代文：因此，当时人认为他并无什么过人之处。唯有太尉桥玄和南阳人何对他另眼相看。
English: Therefore, at that time, people thought that there was nothing exceptional about him. Only Taifu Qiao Xuan and Nanyang people looked at him differently.

古文：玄谓操曰： 天下将乱，非命世之才，不能济也。能安之者，其在君乎！ 
现代文：何看到曹操后叹息说： 汉朝就要灭亡，能够重新安定天下的，一定是此人。 
English: After seeing Cao Cao, He sighed and said, "The Han Dynasty is about to perish. It must be this man who can re-stabilize the world."

古文：颙见操，叹曰： 汉家将亡，安天下者，必此人也。 
现代文：桥玄向曹操建议说： 你在世上尚无名气，可以与许子将结交。 
English: Qiao Xuan suggested to Cao Cao: You are not famous in the world yet, you can make friends with Xu Ziming.

古文：玄谓操曰： 君未有名，可交许子将。 
现代文：许子将就是许训的侄子许劭。许劭善于待人接物，能够辨别人的品行和能力，与他的堂兄许靖都有很高的名望。
English: Xu Ziguang is the nephew of Xu Xun. Xu Ziguang is good at dealing with people, able to distinguish the character and ability of others, and has a high reputation with his cousin Xu Jing.

古文：子将者，训之从子劭也，好人伦，多所赏识，与从兄靖俱有高名，好共覈论乡党人物，每月辄更其品题，故汝南俗有月旦评焉。
现代文：两人喜欢一起评论本地的知名人士，并根据这些人士的所作所为，逐月更改评语和排列顺序。为此，汝南人称之为 月旦评 。
English: The two of them like to comment on local celebrities together, and change the comments and the order of the comments month by month according to the actions of these people. For this reason, the people of Runan call it the monthly review.

古文：尝为郡功曹，府中闻之，莫不改操饰行。曹操往造劭而问之曰： 我何如人？ 
现代文：许劭曾经担任过郡府中管理人事的功曹，府中官员听说了他的名望，无不改变、修饰自己的操行，以求得到一个较好的评语，曹操前去拜访许劭，询问他对自己的评价，说： 我是一个什么样的人呢？ 
English: Xu Yao had once served as a leading figure in the management of personnel affairs in the county government. Officials in the government heard of his fame and invariably changed and modified their behavior in order to get a better evaluation. Cao Cao went to visit Xu Yao and asked him about his evaluation of himself, saying: What kind of person am I?

古文：劭鄙其为人，不答。
现代文：许劭鄙视曹操的为人，故闭口不答。
English: Xu Yao despised Cao Cao as a person, so he kept his mouth shut.

古文：操乃劫之，劭曰： 子，治世之能臣，乱世之奸雄。 
现代文：曹操于是加以威胁，许劭才说： 你在天下太平时可以成为一个能臣，在天下大乱时则会成为一个奸雄。 
English: Cao Cao then threatened him, saying: "You can be a capable minister when the world is at peace, but you will become a villain when the world is in turmoil.

古文：操大喜而去。
现代文：曹操听后，大喜而去。
English: After hearing this, Cao Cao was overjoyed and left.

古文：硃俊之击黄巾也，其护军司马北地傅燮上疏曰： 臣闻天下之祸不由于外，皆兴于内。
现代文：朱俊进攻黄巾军时，他的护军司马、北地人傅燮上书说： 我听说，天下的灾祸不是来源于外部，而全是起因于内部。
English: When Zhu Jun attacked the Yellow Turban Army, his bodyguards Sima and Hokkien Fu Yao wrote: I have heard that the world's disasters do not come from the outside, but are all caused from within.

古文：是故虞舜先除四凶，然后用十六相，明恶人不去，则善人无由进也。
现代文：正因如此，虞舜先除去四凶，然后才任用十六位贤能之士铺佐自己治理天下。
English: It is for this reason that the magistrate first eliminated the four evil spirits, and then appointed sixteen virtuous people to help him govern the world.

古文：今张角起于赵、魏，黄巾乱于六州，此皆衅发萧墙而祸延四海者也。
现代文：这说明，恶人不除，善人就不可能取得权力。如今张角在赵、魏之地起兵，黄巾军在六州作乱，这场大乱的根源是在宫廷之内，蔓延到四海。
English: This shows that if the wicked are not removed, it is impossible for the good to gain power. Today, Zhang Jiao has raised an army in the land of Zhao and Wei, and the Yellow Turban Army has rioted in six states. The root of this chaos is within the court and has spread to the four seas.

古文：臣受戎任，奉辞伐罪，始到颍川，战无不克。
现代文：我受陛下的委任，奏命率军讨伐叛乱。从颍川开始，一直是战无不胜。
English: I was appointed by His Majesty to lead the army to fight against the rebellion. From the beginning of Shukawa, I have always been invincible.

古文：黄巾虽盛，不足为庙堂忧也。
现代文：黄巾军势力虽大，并不足以使陛下担忧。
English: Although the yellow scarf was popular, the lack of it worried the imperial court.

古文：臣之所惧，在于治水不自其源，末流弥增其广耳。
现代文：我所恐惧的是，如果治理洪水不从源头治起，下游势必泛滥得更加严重。
English: What I am worried about is that water control does not start from the source, so that the downstream becomes wider and wider.

古文：陛下仁德宽容，多所不忍，故阉竖弄权，忠臣不进。
现代文：陛下仁爱宽容，对许多不对的事情不忍处理，因此宦官们控制了朝政大权，忠臣不能得到重用。
English: The emperor is benevolent and tolerant, and punishes bad people with a soft hand. Therefore, eunuchs play with power, and loyal subjects cannot enter the left and right.

古文：诚使张角枭夷，黄巾变服，臣之所忧，甫益深耳。
现代文：即使真将张角砍头处死，平息了黄巾叛乱，我的忧虑会更深。为什么呢？
English: I am even more worried about the real elimination of Zhang Qiao and the surrender of the yellow scarf.

古文：何者？夫邪正之人不宜共国，亦犹冰炭不可同器。
现代文：这是因为，邪恶小人与正人君子不能在朝廷共存，如同寒冰与炽炭不能放入一个容器一样。
English: This is because the villainous villain and the righteous gentleman cannot coexist in the imperial court, just as ice and hot coals cannot be placed in the same container.

古文：彼知正人之功显而危亡之兆见，皆将巧辞饰说，共长虚伪。
现代文：那些邪恶之辈明白，正直之士的成功，预示着他们行将灭亡，因此必然要花言巧语，共同弄虚作假。
English: The wicked know that the success of honest men is their downfall, so they must lie and cheat together.

古文：夫孝子疑于屡至，市虎成于三夫，若不详察真伪，忠臣将复有杜邮之戮矣！
现代文：传播假消息的人多了，即使是曾参那样的孝子也难免遭受怀疑；市中明明没有老虎，但只要有三个人说有，人们就会相信。假如陛下不能详细辨察真伪，那么忠臣就会再次像秦国名将白起那样含冤而死了！
English: There are many people who spread false information, and even a filial son like Zeng Zang will inevitably be suspected; there is clearly no tiger in the city, but as long as three people say there is, people will believe. If Your Majesty cannot distinguish the true from the false in detail, then the loyal subject will once again die unjustly like Qin Guozhong Baiqi!

古文：陛下宜思虞舜四罪之举，速行谗佞之诛，则善人思进，奸凶自息。 
现代文：陛下应该深思虞舜对四凶的处理，尽速诛杀那些善进谗言的佞臣，这样，善人就会愿意为朝廷尽力，叛乱自会平息。 
English: His Majesty should think deeply about how to deal with the four villains, and kill those courtiers who are good at nagging as soon as possible. In this way, good people will be willing to do their best for the imperial court, and the rebellion will subside.

古文：赵忠见其疏而恶之。
现代文：赵忠看到这份奏章，感到厌恶。
English: When Zhao Zhong saw the score, he was disgusted.

古文：燮击黄巾，功多当封，忠谮诉之。
现代文：傅燮征讨黄巾军立下很多战功，应得到封爵的赏赐，赵忠便向灵帝讲傅燮的坏话。
English: Zhao Zhong spoke ill of Fu Xi to the Holy Spirit, saying that Fu Xi's many war exploits should be rewarded with a knighthood.

古文：帝识燮言，得不加罪，竟亦不封。
现代文：灵帝记得傅燮奏章所言，没有对傅燮加罪，但到底也没有封他。
English: Ling Di remembered Fu Rong's words and did not add any crime to Fu Rong, but he did not seal him in the end.

古文：张曼成屯宛下百馀日。
现代文：黄巾将领张曼成驻军宛城城下一百多天。
English: The Yellow Turban General Zhang Mancheng led the garrison to the city for more than a hundred days.

古文：六月，南阳太守秦颉击曼成，斩之。
现代文：六月，阳太守秦颉进攻黄巾军，斩杀张曼成。
English: In June, Yang Daju Qin Yu attacked the Yellow Turban Army and killed Zhang Mancheng.

古文：交趾土多珍货，前后刺史多无清行，财计盈给，辄求迁代，故吏民怨叛，执刺史及合浦太守来达，自称柱天将军。
现代文：交趾地区盛产珍珠等宝物，先后担任刺史的官员多无清谦行为，算计财物搜刮够了，便要求调任，因此下层官吏及百姓因愤恨而起来反抗，俘虏刺史及合浦太守来达，其首领自称为 柱天将军 。
English: The Jiaozuo area was rich in pearls and other treasures. The officials who had successively served as Jishi were often not clean and humble. When they had collected enough wealth and property, they asked to be transferred. As a result, the lower-level officials and the people rose up in resentment. The captives Jishi and Hepu Taishou arrived, and their leader called himself General Zhutian.

古文：三府选京令东郡贾琮为交趾刺史。
现代文：三府选用京县县令、东郡人贾琮任交趾刺史。
English: The three prefectures selected the county magistrate of Beijing County and the person from Dong County, Jia Ren, to make history.

古文：琮到部，讯其反状，咸言 赋敛过重，百姓莫不空单。
现代文：贾琮到任后，调查叛乱的原因，人们都说： 官府征收的赋税太重，百姓无不被搜刮一空。
English: After Jia Jun took office and investigated the reasons for the rebellion, people all said: The taxes levied by the government are too heavy, and the people are all being ripped off.

古文：京师遥远，告冤无所，民不聊生，故聚为盗贼。 
现代文：京城洛阳过于遥远，无处诉冤。民不聊生，只好聚在一起做盗贼。 
English: The capital Luoyang is too far away, and there is nowhere to sue for grievances. People don't want to live, so they have to get together to be thieves.

古文：琮即移书告示，各使安其资业，招抚荒散，蠲复徭役，诛斩渠帅为大害者，简选良吏试守诸县，岁间荡定，百姓以安。
现代文：贾琮便发布文告，让百姓自安居生产，招抚流亡在外的饥民返乡，免除徭役，将为害大的盗贼首领斩杀，选派清廉干练的官吏担任属下各县的代理县长。一年之间，叛乱全被平定，百姓得以安居。
English: Jia Wangzong immediately handed over a written notice, so that the people could each secure their own business, invite those who had fled the wasteland and dispersed, exempt them from forced labor, and select good officials to try to defend the counties. Within one year, the entire territory would be settled, and the people would be safe.

古文：巷路为之歌曰： 贾父来晚，使我先反；今见清平，吏不敢饭！ 
现代文：大街小巷的人们歌颂贾琮： 贾父来得晚，使我先造反；如今见清平，吏不敢派饭！ 
English: People in the streets and alleys sing the praises of Jia Jia: Jia's father came late, so I rebelled first; now everything is peaceful, and officials don't dare to send food!

古文：皇甫嵩、硃俊乘胜进讨汝南、陈国黄巾，追波才于阳翟，击彭脱于西华，并破之，馀贼降散，三郡悉平。
现代文：皇甫嵩、朱俊乘胜进攻在汝南郡和陈国的黄巾军，在阳翟追击黄巾将领波才，在西华攻打黄巾军另一将领彭脱，都取得了胜利。
English: Wang Fusong and Zhu Jun successfully attacked the Yellow Turban Army in Runan County and Chen Province, pursued the Yellow Turban General Bocai in Yangtze River, and attacked the Yellow Turban Army's other General Peng De in West China, all of which achieved victory.

古文：嵩乃上言其状，以功归俊，于是进封俊西乡侯，迁镇贼中郎将。
现代文：黄巾军的剩余部众或者投降，或者逃散，三郡的叛乱被全部平定。皇甫嵩上书报告作战情况，将功劳归于朱俊。于是朝廷进封朱俊为西乡侯，提升为镇贼中郎将。
English: The remaining members of the Yellow Turban Army either surrendered or fled, and the rebellion in the three counties was completely quelled. The Emperor issued a report on the state of the war, attributing the credit to Zhu Jun. Therefore, the court assigned Zhu Jun to the West Township and promoted him to the town thief.

古文：诏嵩讨东郡，俊讨南阳。
现代文：灵帝下诏，命令皇甫嵩讨伐东郡的黄巾军，朱俊计伐南阳的黄巾军。
English: Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, ordering Emperor Fusang to defeat the Yellow Turban Army in Dong County, and Zhu Jun to defeat the Yellow Turban Army in Nanyang.

古文：北中郎将卢植连战破张角，斩获万馀人，角等走保广宗。
现代文：北中郎将卢植率军连续战败张角，斩杀和俘虏黄巾军一万余人，张角等退保广宗县城。
English: The army led by North Chung Lang and Lu Zhi defeated Zhang Jiao, killed and captured more than ten thousand Yellow Turban soldiers, and Zhang Jiao and others withdrew to Guangzong County.

古文：植筑围凿堑，造作云梯，垂当拔之。
现代文：卢值率军将广宗城包围，修筑长墙，挖掘壕沟，制造攻城用的云梯，马上就要攻下广宗城。
English: The army led by Lu Zheng surrounded Guangzong City, built a long wall, dug a trench, and made a ladder for attacking the city. Guangzong City was about to be conquered.

古文：帝遣小黄门左丰视军，或劝植以赂送丰，植不肯。
现代文：恰在此时，灵帝派小黄门左丰到卢植军中视察。有人劝卢植贿赂左丰，卢植不肯。
English: Just at this time, Emperor Ling sent Xiao Huangmen Zuofeng to inspect Lu Zhi's army. Some people advised Lu Zhi to bribe Zuofeng, but Lu Zhi refused.

古文：丰还，言于帝曰： 广宗贼易破耳，卢中郎固垒息军，以待天诛。 
现代文：左丰回到洛阳，对灵帝说： 据守广宗的贼寇很容易攻破，然而卢植只是让军队躲在营垒里休息，等待上天诛杀张角。 
English: Zuo Feng returned to Luoyang and said to Ling Di: According to Guo Guangzong, the bandits are easy to break through, but Lu Zhi just let the army hide in the camp and rest, waiting for God to kill Zhang Qiao.

古文：帝怒，槛车征植，减死一等；遣东中郎将陇西董卓代之。
现代文：灵帝大怒，派人用囚车将卢植押解回洛阳，判处比死罪轻一等的处分。派东中郎将、陇西人董卓代替卢植任职。
English: Ling Di was furious and sent someone to take Lu Zhi back to Luoyang in a prisoner's wagon, sentencing him to a punishment less severe than the death penalty. He sent Dong Zhong Lang and Dong Zhuo, a native of Shaanxi, to replace Lu Zhi.

古文：巴郡张脩以妖术为人疗病，其法略与张角同，令病家出五斗米，号 五斗米师 。
现代文：巴郡人张用法术为人治病，所用方法大致与张角相同。他治病时，让病家出五斗米，因此号为 五斗米师 。
English: Zhang, a native of Ba County, used magic to cure people. The method he used was roughly the same as that of Zhang Ang. When he cured a patient, he made the patient produce five barrels of rice, hence his nickname, the five-barrel rice master.

古文：秋，七月，脩聚众反，寇郡县；时人谓之 米贼 。
现代文：秋季，七月，张聚众起来造反，攻打郡、县，当时人称他们为 米贼 。
English: In the autumn, in July, Zhang rallied the people to rebel and attack counties and counties. At that time, they were called rice thieves.

古文：八月，皇甫嵩与黄巾战于苍亭，获其帅卜已。
现代文：八月，皇甫嵩与黄巾军在苍亭大战，俘虏黄巾军将领卜巳。
English: In August, Emperor Fusong and the Yellow Turban Army fought in the Battle of Cangting, and captured the Yellow Turban Army general Bu Si.

古文：董卓攻张角无功，抵罪。
现代文：董卓进攻张角，未能取胜，受到处分。
English: Dong Zhuo attacked Zhang Qiao, failed to win, and was punished.

古文：己已，诏嵩讨角。
现代文：乙巳，灵帝下诏，命皇甫嵩率军征讨张角。
English: At this time, Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, ordering Emperor Fusang to lead an army to conquer Zhangjiajie.

古文：九月，安平王续坐不道，诛，国除。
现代文：九月，安平王刘续被指控为大逆不道，处死，封国撤销。
English: In September, Anping King Liu Zhi was accused of high treason and executed, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：初，续为黄巾所虏，国人赎之得还，朝廷议复其国。
现代文：当初，刘续被黄巾军所俘，安平国人将他赎回。朝廷进行讨论，打算恢复他的封国。
English: At first, Liu Cui was captured by the Yellow Turban Army, and the Anping people ransomed him. The imperial court held discussions and planned to restore his fiefdom.

古文：议郎李燮曰： 续守籓不称，损辱圣朝，不宜复国。 
现代文：议郎李燮提出： 刘续身为一个藩王，不仅没有尽到职责，损害了朝廷的声誉，不该让他恢复封国。 
English: Advocate Li Wei said: Liu Cui Rong, as a feudal lord, not only failed to perform his duties, but also damaged the reputation of the imperial court. He should not be allowed to restore the feudal state.

古文：朝廷不从。
现代文：朝廷没有听从李燮的意见。
English: The court did not follow his advice.

古文：燮坐谤毁宗室，输作左校，未满岁，王坐诛，乃复拜议郎。
现代文：李燮被指控为诽谤宗室，送到左校去服苦役。不到一年，安平王刘续因罪被处死，李燮才被释放，重新任议郎。
English: Li Yan was accused of slandering his father's family and sent to the Zuo School to serve hard labor. Less than a year later, Anping King Liu Zong was executed for the crime, and Li Yan was only released and reappointed as Heirong.

古文：京师为之语曰： 父不肯立帝，子不肯立王。 
现代文：京城洛阳人将此事与其父李固不肯立质帝、桓帝事联系在一起，称颂说： 父不肯立帝，子不肯立王。 
English: The people of Luoyang, the capital, associated this event with the unwillingness of his father, Li Gu, to enthrone Emperor Quixote and Emperor Huan, and eulogized him saying, "The father was unwilling to enthrone the emperor, and the son was unwilling to enthrone the king."

古文：冬，十月，皇甫嵩与张角弟梁战于广宗，梁众精勇，嵩不能克。
现代文：冬季，十月，皇甫嵩与张角的弟弟张梁交战于广宗，张梁率领的黄巾军骁勇善战，皇甫嵩未能取胜。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Fusang and Zhang Jiao's younger brother Zhang Liang fought in Guangzong. The Yellow Turban Army led by Zhang Liang fought bravely and well, but Emperor Fusang could not win.

古文：明日，乃闭营休士以观其变，知贼意稍懈，乃潜夜勒兵，鸡鸣，驰赴其陈，战至晡时，大破之，斩梁，获首三万级，赴河死者五万许人。
现代文：第二天，皇甫嵩关闭营门，让士兵休息，以观察敌军的变化。看到黄巾军情绪逐渐松懈，便趁夜部署军队，清晨鸡鸣之时，疾驰冲向敌阵。交战至傍晚时，黄巾军大败，张梁被斩首，黄巾军三万多人被杀，约五万人被逼落河中淹死。
English: The next day, Emperor Fusong closed the gate of the camp and let the soldiers rest to observe the changes of the enemy army. Seeing the Yellow Turban Army's mood gradually slackening, he took advantage of the night to deploy the army, and in the early morning, when the rooster crowed, he rushed to the enemy line. In the battle until the evening, the Yellow Turban Army was defeated, Zhang Liang was beheaded, more than 30,000 Yellow Turban Army were killed, and about 50,000 people were forced to drown in the river.

古文：角先已病死，剖棺戮尸，传首京师。
现代文：张角在此之前已经病故，他的棺材被剖开，乱刀碎尸，头颅被送到洛阳。
English: Zhang Ang had already passed away before this. His coffin was opened, his body was hacked to pieces, and his head was sent to Luoyang.

古文：十一月，嵩复攻角弟宝于下曲阳，斩之，斩获十馀万人。
现代文：十一月，皇甫嵩又在下曲阳进攻张角的弟弟张宝，张宝被斩杀，黄巾军被杀、被俘共十余万人。
English: In November, Emperor Fusong attacked Zhang Jiao's younger brother Zhang Bao in Lower Quyang. Zhang Bao was killed, and the Yellow Turbans were killed and captured, totaling more than 100,000 people.

古文：即拜嵩为左车骑将军领冀州牧，封槐里侯。
现代文：灵帝闻讯大喜，立即任命皇甫嵩为左车骑将军，兼冀州牧，并封为槐里侯。
English: When Emperor Ling heard the news, he was overjoyed and immediately appointed Emperor Fusong as the left chariot cavalry general, as well as the governor of Jizhou, and crowned him as the prince of Baili.

古文：嵩能温恤士卒，每军行顿止，须营幔修立，然后就舍，军士皆食，尔乃尝饭，故所向有功。
现代文：皇甫嵩能够体恤士兵，每次行军休息时，总是等到营帐全部修好，他才去休息，士兵全都吃上饭，他才去吃。所以能够所向无敌，建立功勋。
English: Emperor Fusong was able to sympathize with the soldiers. Every time he went on a march and took a rest, he always waited until the camp was completely repaired before he went to rest, and the soldiers all had dinner before he went to eat. Therefore, he was able to become invincible and build up merits.

古文：北地先零羌及枹罕、河关群盗反，共立湟中义从胡北宫伯玉、李文侯为将军，杀护羌校尉泠征。
现代文：北地郡羌族的先零部落及罕、河关两地的盗贼起来反抗，共同拥立湟中的义勇首领胡人北宫伯玉和李文侯为将军，杀死护羌校尉泠征。
English: Thieves from the first zero tribe of the Yao people in Beidai County and from Han and Heguan rebelled and jointly supported the brave leaders of the Yao people, the Hu people Beigu Boyu and Li Wenhou, as generals, and killed the guard of the Yao lieutenant, Yao Zheng.

古文：金城人边章、韩遂素著名西州，群盗诱而劫之，使专任军政，杀金城太守陈懿，攻烧州郡。
现代文：金城人边章、韩遂在西州素有盛名，起事者将其诱骗来，武力胁迫他们主持军政事务，杀死金城太守陈懿，攻打焚烧州郡官府。
English: Jincheng people Bianzhang and Han Sui were well-known in Xizhou. The rioters lured them and forced them by force to preside over military and political affairs, killed Jincheng Daju Chen Wei, and attacked and burned the county government office.

古文：初，武威太守倚恃权贵，恣行贪暴，凉州从事武都苏正和案致其罪。
现代文：起初，武威郡的太守依仗权贵的势力，为所欲为，贪污残暴。凉州从事、武都人苏正和调查并举发了他的罪行。
English: At first, Wuwei County's grand marshal relied on the power of the rich and powerful to do as he pleased and was corrupt and cruel. Liangzhou engaged Wudu man Su Zhenghe to investigate and report his crimes.

古文：刺史梁鹄惧，欲杀正和以免其负，访于汉阳长史敦煌盖勋。
现代文：凉州刺史梁鹄感到害怕，想杀死苏正和，以免牵连自己，于是去征求汉阳郡长史、敦煌人盖勋的意见。
English: Liang Zhou wanted to kill Su Zhenghe to avoid implicating himself, so he went to solicit the opinions of Hanyang County Chief Historian and Dunhuang resident Gaishun.

古文：勋素与正和有仇，或劝勋因此报之，勋曰： 谋事杀良，非忠也；乘人之危，非仁也。 
现代文：盖勋一向与苏正和有仇，有人劝盖勋乘此机会进行报复，盖勋说： 借刺史向我征求意见的机会谋害人才，是不忠；乘人之危，是不仁。 
English: Gai Xun had always had a grudge against the Soviet Union. Some people urged Gai Xun to take advantage of this opportunity to take revenge. Gai Xun said, "It is disloyal to take advantage of the opportunity to solicit opinions from me to assassinate talented people; it is unkind to take advantage of human danger."

古文：乃谏鹄曰： 夫绁食鹰隼，欲其鸷也。鸷而亨之，将何用哉！ 
现代文：他劝阻梁鹄说： 人们养猎鹰，是要用它捕捉猎物，如因猎鹰捕捉了猎物而将它煮杀，那么养它还有什么用呢？
English: He dissuaded Liang Qi, saying: People keep falcons to catch prey with it. If the falcon catches the prey and cooks it, then what is the use of keeping it?

古文：鹄乃止。
现代文：梁鹄便打消了杀苏正和的念头。
English: Liang Wei then dispelled the idea of killing Su Zhenghe.

古文：正和诣勋求谢，勋不见，曰： 吾为梁使君谋，不为苏正和也。 
现代文：苏正和听说此事后，前去拜访盖勋，向他致谢。盖勋避而不见，说： 我是为梁使君着想，并不是为了苏正和。 
English: After Su Zhenghe heard about this, he went to visit Gai Xun to thank him. Gai Xun avoided him and said, "I'm thinking about Liang Shijun, not about Su Zhenghe."

古文：怨之如初。
现代文：他对苏正和的仇恨丝毫未减，一如当初。
English: They still hate Su Zhenghe as in the past.

古文：后刺史左昌盗军谷数万，勋谏之。昌怒，使勋与从事辛曾、孔常别屯阿阳以拒贼，欲因军事罪之；而勋数有战功。
现代文：后来，刺史左昌偷盗军粮数万石，盖勋进行劝阻，左昌大怒，遂让盖勋与从事辛曾、孔常率军另驻阿阳抵抗盗贼，想借口盖勋作战不力而加罪于他。
English: Later, Zuchang, who had been accused of stealing tens of thousands of koku of military rations, tried to dissuade Gai Xun, but Zuchang was furious and ordered Gai Xun to join Xin Zeng and Kong Chang in resisting the thieves. He wanted to use the excuse that Gai Xun was not strong enough in battle to add to his guilt.

古文：及北宫伯玉之攻金城也，勋劝昌救之，昌不从。
现代文：然而盖勋屡立战功，左昌无计可施。及至北宫伯玉攻打金城，盖勋劝左昌发兵援救，左昌没有听从他的意见。
English: However, Gai Xun repeatedly distinguished himself in battle, and Zuo Chang had nothing to do. As far as the Northern Palace and the attack on Jincheng, Gai Xun advised Zuo Chang to send troops to rescue, but Zuo Chang did not listen to his advice.

古文：陈懿既死，边章等进围昌于冀。
现代文：陈懿死后，边章等进军，在冀县包围左昌。
English: After Chen Xuan's death, Bian Zhang and others marched to encircle Zuochang in Ji County.

古文：昌召勋等自救，辛曾等疑不肯赴，勋怒曰： 昔庄贾后期，穰苴奋剑。今之从事，岂重于古之监军乎！ 
现代文：左昌召盖勋等去救援，辛曾等人迟疑，不肯出兵。盖勋大怒说： 从前庄贾身为监军而延误军期，被司马穰苴处死，今天的从事难道比古时的监军还要尊贵吗？ 
English: Zuo Chang called Gai Xun and others to rescue, Xin Zeng and others hesitated and refused to send troops. Gai Xun said angrily: In the past, Zhuo Jia delayed his military service as a supervisor and was executed by Sima Ye, is today's occupation more honorable than the supervision of troops in ancient times?

古文：曾等惧而从之。
现代文：辛曾等感到害怕，便听从他的主张，出兵援救。
English: Xin Zeng and others were afraid and had to listen to Gaishun.

古文：勋至冀，诮让章等以背叛之罪。皆曰： 左使君若早从君言，以兵临我，庶可自改；今罪已重，不得降也。 
现代文：盖勋到达冀县后，用背叛的罪名斥责边章等人，边章等人都说： 假如左刺史早些听从您的意见，出兵对付我们，或许我们还能改过自新。如今罪过已重，不能归降了。 
English: After Gai Xun arrived in Ji County, he rebuked Bian Zhang and others with the accusation of betrayal. Bian Zhang and others all said: If Zuo Zhishi had listened to your advice earlier and sent troops to deal with us, perhaps we could have reformed. Now the crime is too serious to return.

古文：乃解围去。
现代文：于是，撤除对冀县的包围离去。
English: As a result, the encirclement of Jixian County was lifted.

古文：叛羌围校尉夏育于畜官，勋与州郡合兵救育，至狐槃，为羌所败。
现代文：叛乱的羌族人将护羌校尉夏育围困在官府畜牧场。盖勋与州、郡联合出兵去救夏育。援军行进到狐，被羌族人打败。
English: The rebellious Yi people besieged the guarding Yi captain Xia Yu in the government livestock farm. Gai Xun and the state and county jointly sent troops to rescue Xia Yu. The reinforcements marched to the fox and were defeated by the Yi people.

古文：勋馀众不及百人，身被三创，坚坐不动，指木表曰： 尸我于此！ 
现代文：盖勋手下所剩不足一百人，身上三处负伤，但仍稳坐不动。他指着路边的木牌说： 就将我的尸体放在这里。 
English: Gai Xun, who had less than a hundred men left, was still sitting motionless with three wounds on his body. He pointed to a wooden sign on the side of the road and said, "Just put my body here."

古文：句就种羌滇吾以兵扞众曰： 盖长史贤人，汝曹杀之者为负天。 
现代文：句就部落的羌人首领滇吾手执武器不许众人杀死盖勋，并说： 盖长史是一位贤人，你们如果将他杀死，就会得罪上天。 
English: The leader of the Xiongnu people of the Xiongnu tribe held his weapon in his hand and forbade everyone to kill Gai Xun, and said: Gai Changshi is a wise man, if you kill him, you will offend heaven.

古文：勋仰骂曰： 死反虏，汝何如，促来杀我！ 
现代文：盖勋仰天大骂道： 该死的反叛羌人，你知道什么，赶快来杀我！ 
English: Gaishun cursed at the heavens: "Damn rebel, you know what, come and kill me!

古文：众相视而惊。
现代文：羌人都大吃一惊，面面相觑。
English: Soldiers, look at me, I'm looking at you, stunned.

古文：滇吾下马与勋，勋不肯上，遂为羌所执。
现代文：滇吾下马让盖勋骑，盖勋不肯上马，于是被羌人俘虏。
English: I dismounted to let Gai Xun ride, Gai Xun refused to get on the horse, so he was taken prisoner.

古文：羌服其义勇，不敢加害，送还汉阳。
现代文：羌人钦佩他的仁义与勇敢，不敢加害，便将他送回汉阳。
English: The Xing people admired his benevolence and bravery, and did not dare to harm him, so they sent him back to Hanyang.

古文：后刺史杨雍表勋领汉阳太守。
现代文：后来，凉州刺史的杨雍上表保举盖勋兼任汉阳太守。
English: Later, Yang Yong, the historical figure of Liangzhou, was awarded the Medal of Honor and concurrently served as the Governor of Hanyang.

古文：张曼成馀党更以赵弘为帅，众复盛，至十馀万，据宛城。
现代文：黄巾将领张曼成被杀后，所余部众又拥立赵弘为统师，人数再度扩大，达到十余万，攻占了宛城。
English: After Zhang Mancheng, the general of the Yellow Turban, was killed, the remaining members supported Zhao Hong as the general, and the number of people expanded again, reaching more than one hundred thousand, and conquered Wancheng.

古文：硃俊与荆州刺史徐璆等合兵围之，自六月至八月不拔。
现代文：朱俊与荆州刺史徐等率军联合将宛城包围起来。从六月攻至八月，一直未能攻克。
English: Zhu Jun and Jingzhou Zhang Shixu led a joint army to encircle Wancheng. From June to August, they were unable to conquer it.

古文：有司奏征俊，司空张温上疏曰： 昔秦用白起，燕任乐毅，皆旷年历载，乃能克敌。
现代文：有关部门要求将朱俊调回。司空张温上书说： 从前秦国任用白起，燕国任用乐毅，都是经过长年艰苦奋战，才能战胜敌人。
English: The relevant departments requested that Zhu Jun be transferred back. Zhang Wen, Secretary of the Air Force, said in a letter: From the appointment of Bai in the former Qin State to the appointment of Le Yi in the Yan State, it took many years of hard work to defeat the enemy.

古文：俊讨颍川已有功效，引师南指，方略已设；临军易将，兵家所忌，宜假日月，责其成功。 
现代文：在征讨颍川黄巾时便已建立战功，挥师南下，已经确定作战计划；在战争之中更换统帅，是兵家的禁忌。应该再给一些时间，让他取得成功。 
English: By the time of the conquest of the Yellow Turban of the Li River, he had already established his war exploits, sent his division south, and had already determined his battle plan; changing commanders in the midst of war is a taboo for soldiers. He should be given some more time to succeed.

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：灵帝这才作罢。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：俊击弘，斩之。
现代文：不久，朱俊发动进攻，将赵弘斩杀。
English: Soon after, Zhu Jun launched an attack and killed Zhao Hong.

古文：贼帅韩忠复据宛拒俊，俊鸣鼓攻其西南，贼悉众赴之；俊自将精卒掩其东北，乘城而入。
现代文：黄巾将领韩忠再次占据宛城抗拒朱俊。朱俊让士兵们敲着军鼓进攻宛城西南角，黄巾军全都赶赴该处抵御。朱俊却亲率精兵袭击宛城的东北角，登上城墙而入。
English: Han Zhong, the Yellow Turban general, once again occupied Wancheng to resist Zhu Jun. Zhu Jun ordered the soldiers to attack the southwest corner of Wancheng by beating drums, and all the Yellow Turban troops rushed to defend the area. However, Zhu Jun personally led the elite soldiers to attack the northeast corner of Wancheng and climbed the city wall to enter.

古文：忠乃退保小城，惶惧乞降。
现代文：韩忠退守小城，惊慌失措，要求投降。
English: Han Zhong had no choice but to retreat to a small town, and in panic, he asked for a surrender.

古文：诸将皆欲听之，俊曰： 兵固有形同而势异者。昔秦、项之际，民无定主，故赏附以劝来耳。
现代文：诸将都愿意接受，但朱俊说： 在军事上，本有形式相同而实质不同的情况，从前秦末项羽争霸的时候，人民没有确定的君主，因此要奖赏归附者，以鼓励人们前来归顺。
English: All generals are willing to accept, but Zhu Jun said: In the military, there are situations where the form is the same but the substance is different. From the time of the pre-Qin and late Xiang Yu hegemony, the people did not have a certain monarch, so it is necessary to reward the adherents to encourage people to come to submit.

古文：今海内一统，唯黄巾造逆。纳降无以劝善，讨之足以惩恶。
现代文：如今天下统一，只有黄巾军起来造反，如果接受了他们的投降，就无法鼓励那些守法的百姓；而严厉镇压，就能惩罚罪犯。
English: If unification were to take place today, only the Yellow Turbans would rebel, and if their surrender were accepted, it would not be possible to encourage those law-abiding people; while severe repression would punish the criminals.

古文：今若受之，更开逆意，贼利则进战，钝则乞降，纵敌长寇，非良计也。 
现代文：现在如果接受他们的投降，就会进一步助长叛军的势头，他们在有利时起兵进攻，不利时则请求投降。这是放纵敌人的作法，不是上策。 
English: Surrendering now will further promote the idea of creating turmoil. If it is advantageous for the thief, he will go to war, if it is disadvantageous, he will beg for surrender. It is not a good idea to indulge the enemy and promote turmoil.

古文：因急攻，连战不克。
现代文：朱俊连续发起猛攻，未能攻克。
English: Due to the sudden attack, the battle was not won.

古文：俊登土山望之，顾谓司马张超曰： 吾知之矣。
现代文：他登上土山，观察黄巾军的情况，回头对司马张超说： 我知道原因了。
English: He climbed up the hill to observe the situation of the Yellow Turban Army, and turned back to Sima Zhang Chao and said: I know the reason.

古文：贼今外围周固，内营逼急，乞降不受，欲出不得，所以死战也。
现代文：现在叛军被严密围住，内部形势危急，他们求降不成，突围又无路可走，因而死战。
English: The outer perimeter of the bandits is solid, the inner camp is pressing, they cannot surrender, and they cannot come out, so they fight to the death.

古文：万人一心，犹不可当，况十万乎！
现代文：万人一心，已是势不可挡，更何况十万人一心呢！
English: One man with one heart is not enough, let alone a hundred thousand!

古文：不如彻围，并兵入城，忠见围解，势必自出。自出则意散，易破之道也。 
现代文：不如撤除包围圈，集中兵力攻城。韩忠见到包围解除了，势必自己出来求生，自己出城定会各寻生路，斗志全消。
English: It would be better to remove the encirclement and attack the city with concentrated forces. When Han Zhong saw that the encirclement had been lifted, he was bound to go out to survive on his own. If he went out of the city, he would have to look for a way to survive, and his fighting spirit would be completely destroyed.

古文：既而解围，忠果出战，俊因击，大破之，斩首万馀级。
现代文：这是破敌的最好办法。 于是朱俊解除包围，韩忠果然出战，朱俊乘势攻击，大破黄巾军，杀死一万余人。
English: This was the best way to defeat the enemy, so Zhu Jun lifted the siege, Han Zhong went to war, and Zhu Jun took advantage of the situation to attack and defeated the Yellow Turbans, killing more than ten thousand people.

古文：南阳太守秦颉杀忠，馀众复奉孙夏为帅，还屯宛。
现代文：南阳太守秦颉杀死韩忠，剩下的黄巾军又推举孙夏为统帅，再次占领宛城。
English: The Nanyang governor Qin Hui killed Han Zhong, and the remaining Yellow Turban Army elected Sun Xia as commander-in-chief to occupy Wancheng again.

古文：俊急攻之，司马孙坚率众先登；癸巳，拔宛城。
现代文：朱俊发起猛攻，司马孙坚率领部下首先登上城墙。癸巳，攻下宛城。
English: Zhu Jun launched a fierce attack, Sima Sun Jian led his subordinates to climb the city wall first.

古文：孙夏走，俊追至西鄂精山，复破之，斩万馀级。
现代文：孙夏逃走，朱俊追至西鄂县的精山，再次击溃黄巾军，斩杀一万余人。
English: Sun Xia fled, and Zhu Jun chased him to Jingshan in Xi'an County, where he once again defeated the Yellow Turbans and killed more than ten thousand people.

古文：于是黄巾破散，其馀州郡所诛，一郡数千人。
现代文：黄巾军溃不成军。其他州、郡诛杀的黄巾余众，每郡数千人。
English: The Yellow Turban Army was routed and could not form an army. In other states and counties, there were thousands of Yellow Turban survivors, thousands in each county.

古文：十二月，己巳，赦天下，改元。
现代文：十二月，己巳，大赦天下，改年号为中平元年。
English: In December, he was granted amnesty and the year was changed to the first year of Zhongping.

古文：豫州刺史太原王允破黄巾，得张让宾客书，与黄巾交通，上之。
现代文：豫州刺史太原人王允打败黄巾军，从收缴物品中查出宦官首领张让门下的宾客与黄巾军往来联系的书信，便将这些信件上报朝廷。
English: Wang Yun, a native of Taiyuan in Yuzhou Province, defeated the Yellow Turban Army, and found the correspondence between the guests of the eunuch leader Zhang Zhan and the Yellow Turban Army from the confiscated items, and reported these letters to the imperial court.

古文：上责怒让；让叩头陈谢，竟亦不能罪也。
现代文：灵帝知道后大发雷霆，斥责张让。张让叩头请罪，灵帝竟也不再追究。
English: After learning of this, Ling Di flew into a rage and rebuked Zhang Zhan. Zhang Zhan kowtowed and pleaded guilty, but Ling Di did not pursue the matter any further.

古文：让由是以事中允，遂传下狱，会赦，还为刺史；旬日间，复以它罪被捕。
现代文：于是张让寻机诬告王允，遂将王允逮捕入狱。恰巧赶上大赦，王允得以恢复原职。可是在十天之内又以别的罪名被捕。
English: As a result, Zhang Zhang took the opportunity to falsely accuse Wang Yun, and Wang Yun was arrested and jailed. Coincidentally, Wang Yun was able to resume his original position just in time for the amnesty. However, he was arrested again on other charges within ten days.

古文：杨赐不欲使更楚辱，遣客谢之曰： 君以张让之事，故一月再征，凶慝难量，幸为深计！ 
现代文：杨赐不愿让王允再遭受拷打的痛苦和羞辱，派人对王允说： 因为你揭发了张让，所以会一月之内再次被捕。张让凶恶无比，阴险难测，希望你好好考虑一下，是否还要再受折辱。 
English: Yang Jie did not want to let Wang Yun suffer the pain and humiliation of torture again, so he sent a person to Wang Yun saying: Because you exposed Zhang Zhang, you will be arrested again within a month. Zhang Zhang is extremely vicious, insidious and unpredictable, I hope you will carefully consider whether you will be humiliated again.

古文：诸从事好气决者，共流涕奉药而进之。
现代文：王允属下那些年轻气盛的从事们，泪流满面，一同将毒药进奉给王允。
English: Wang Yun's young and energetic workers, with tears streaming down their faces, offered the poison to Wang Yun.

古文：允厉声曰： 吾为人臣，获罪于君，当伏大辟以谢天下，岂有乳药求死乎！ 
现代文：王允厉声说道： 我身为一个臣子，得罪了君王，理应由司法机构正式处死，以公告天下，怎么能服毒自杀呢！ 
English: Wang Yun said in a strong voice: I am a subject, I have committed the emperor's crime, I should serve the capital punishment to thank the world, can I drink medicine to die?

古文：投杯而起，出就槛车。
现代文：于是摔掉药杯，奋然起身，出门登上囚车。
English: Pour a cup, get up, and walk to the prison van.

古文：既至廷尉，大将军进与杨赐、袁隗共上疏请之，得减死论。
现代文：他被押解到廷尉以后，大将军何进与杨赐、袁隗一起上书营救，王允才得以免死，被判处减死一等之罪。
English: After he was escorted to the palace, General He Jin, together with Yang Zhi and Yuan Qi, sent a letter to rescue him. Wang Yun was spared from death and was sentenced to a first-class crime of death.

古文：孝灵皇帝中中平二年
现代文：中平二年
English: Zhongping 2nd Year of the Horse

古文：春，正月，大疫。
现代文：春季，正月，瘟疫到处流行。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, the plague is everywhere.

古文：二月，己酉，南宫云台灾。
现代文：二月，巳酉，洛阳南宫的云台发生火灾。
English: In February, a fire broke out in Yuntai of the Southern Palace in Luoyang.

古文：庚戌，乐城门灾。
现代文：庚戌，皇宫的乐城门又发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out again at the Lecheng Gate of the Imperial Palace.

古文：中常侍张让、赵忠说帝敛天下田，畮十钱，以修宫室、铸铜人。
现代文：中常侍张让、赵忠劝说灵帝对全国的耕地加收田税，每亩十钱，用以修建宫殿，铸造铜人。
English: Zhang Zhan and Zhao Zhong, the middle-ranking attendants, persuaded Ling Di to increase the field tax on cultivated land across the country to ten yuan per mu, which was used to build palaces and cast bronze figures.

古文：乐安太守陆康上疏谏曰： 昔鲁宣税畮而蝝灾自生。
现代文：乐安郡太守陆康止书劝阻，说： 从前春秋时，鲁宣公按亩征收田税，因而蝗虫的幼虫大量孵出，造成灾害；鲁哀公想要增加百姓的赋税，孔子认为这种作法不对。
English: Lu Kangzhi, the governor of Le'an County, wrote a letter of dissuasion, saying: In the previous spring and autumn, Lu Xuanqong levied land tax per mu, so the larvae of locusts hatched in large numbers, causing disasters; Lu Aigong wanted to increase the tax of the people, Confucius thought that this practice was wrong.

古文：哀公增赋而孔子非之，岂有聚夺民物以营无用之铜人，捐舍圣戒，自蹈亡王之法哉！ 
现代文：怎么能强行搜刮人民的财物去修造无用的铜人？又怎么能将圣人的告诫弃之脑后，自己去效仿亡国君主的作法呢？ 
English: How could they forcibly seize the people's property to build a useless bronze statue? And how could they ignore the admonition of the saints and follow the example of the fallen monarch?

古文：内幸谮康援引亡国以譬圣明，大不敬，槛车征诣廷尉。
现代文：宦官们攻击陆康援引亡国的例子，来比喻圣明的皇帝，是犯了亵渎皇帝的 大不敬 的罪过。遂用囚车将陆康押送到廷尉监狱。
English: The eunuchs accused Lu Kang of committing the crime of blasphemy against the emperor by using the example of the death of the country as a metaphor for the Holy Emperor, and sent Lu Kang to the lieutenant prison in a prison van.

古文：侍御史刘岱表陈解释，得免归田里。
现代文：侍御史刘岱上书为他辩解，陆康才未被处死，放逐还乡。
English: Lu Kangcai was not put to death, but was banished back to his hometown.

古文：康，续之孙也。
现代文：陆康是陆续的孙子。
English: Lu Kang is the grandson of successively.

古文：又诏发州郡材木文石，部送京师。
现代文：灵帝又下诏让各州、郡向朝廷进献木材及纹理美观的石料，分批送往京城洛阳。
English: Emperor Lingdi also issued an edict that all prefectures and counties should donate wood and beautifully textured stone to the imperial court, which would be sent in batches to the capital Luoyang.

古文：黄门常侍辄令谴呵不中者，因强折贱买，仅得本贾十分之一，因复货之，宦官复不为即受，材木遂至腐积，宫室连年不成。
现代文：宦官们在验收时，百般挑剔，对认为不合格的，强迫州、郡官贱卖，价格仅为原价的十分之一。各州、郡不能完成定额，于是重新购买木材，而宦官们仍是百般挑剔，不肯立即接收，致使运来的木材都堆积在一起朽坏了，宫殿则连年未能修成。
English: The eunuchs were extremely picky when it came to acceptance, and forced the prefectural and county officials to sell off what they deemed to be unsuitable timber at a tenth of the original price. The prefectural and county governments were unable to meet the quota, so they had to purchase new timber, but the eunuchs were still extremely picky and refused to accept the timber immediately. As a result, the timber that had been shipped piled up and rotted, and the palace was unable to be repaired for years.

古文：刺史、太守复增私调，百姓呼嗟。
现代文：各地的刺史、太守更乘机私自增加百姓赋税，从中贪污，人民怨叹哀鸣。
English: Sashihi and Taishou also increased the number of requisitions on their own, and the people cried and sighed in anguish.

古文：又令西园驺分道督趣，恐动州郡，多受赇赂。
现代文：灵帝又命令西园的皇家卫士分别到各州、郡去督促，这些人恐吓惊拢州郡官府，收受大量贿赂。
English: Lingdi also ordered the royal guards of the West Park to go to the states and counties to urge them. These people intimidated and alarmed the state and county government offices and received a large amount of bribes.

古文：刺史、二千石及茂才、孝廉迁除皆至西园谐价，然后得去，其守清者乞不之官，皆迫遣之。
现代文：刺史、二千石官员以及茂才、孝廉在升迁和赴任时，都要交纳 助军 和 修宫 钱。大郡的太守，通常要交二三千万钱，其余的依官职等级不同而有差别。
English: In the promotion and appointment of officials such as Sashi, officials of 2,000 koku, Mochizai, and Xiaolian, they all had to pay money to help the army and repair the palace. The governor of a large county usually had to pay twenty to thirty million yuan, and the rest varied according to the rank of the official.

古文：时巨鹿太守河内司马直新除，以有清名，减责三百万。
现代文：凡是新委任的官员，都要先去西园议定应交纳的钱数，然后方能赴任。有些清廉之士，请求辞职不去的，也都被逼迫上任、交钱。
English: All newly appointed officials had to go to Xiyuan to agree on the amount of money to be paid before they could take office. Some corrupt officials who asked to resign were also forced to take office and pay money.

古文：直被诏，怅然曰： 为民父母而反割剥百姓以称时求，吾不忍也。 
现代文：当时，河内人司马直刚刚被任命为钜鹿太守，因他平素有清谦之称，故将他应交的数额减少三百万。司马直接到诏书后，怅然长叹，说： 身为百姓的父母官，却要剥削百姓去迎合当前这种弊政，我于心不忍。 
English: At that time, Sima Zhi, a native of Hanoi, had just been appointed as the governor of Elk Province, and because he was known for his modesty, he reduced the amount he had to pay by three million. Directly after receiving the edict, Sima Zhi sighed and said, "As the people's parent official, I can't bear to exploit the people to meet the current maladministration.

古文：辞疾，不听。
现代文：遂借口有病而辞职，但是未获批准。
English: He then resigned on the pretext of illness, but his resignation was not approved.

古文：行至孟津，上书极陈当世之失，即吞药自杀。
现代文：在赴任途中，他走到孟津，上书极为详细直率地陈述了当时的各种弊政，然后服毒自杀。
English: On his way to the post, he went to Mengjin, wrote a very detailed and forthright account of the various maladministrations at the time, and then committed suicide by taking poison.

古文：书奏，帝为暂绝修宫钱。
现代文：他的奏章呈上后，灵帝受到震动，暂时停止征收修宫钱。
English: After the book was published, the emperor temporarily suspended the collection of palace repair money for this reason.

古文：以硃俊为右车骑将军。
现代文：任命朱俊为右车骑将军。
English: Zhu Jun was appointed as the right-hand cavalry general.

古文：自张角之乱，所在盗贼并起，博陵张牛角、常山褚飞燕及黄龙、左校、于氐根、张白骑、刘石、左髭文八、平汉大计、司隶缘城、雷公、浮云、白雀、杨凤、于毒、五鹿、李大目、白绕、眭固、苦蝤之徒，不可胜数，大者二三万，小者六七千人。
现代文：自从张角举事之后，各地盗贼纷纷起事。有博陵人张牛角、常山人褚飞燕以及黄龙、左校、于氐根、张白骑、刘石、左髭文八、平汉大计、司隶缘城、雷公、浮云、白雀、杨凤、于毒、五鹿、李大目，白绕、眭固、苦蝤等，简直举不胜举。这些队伍大的有二三万人，小的有六七千人。
English: Since Zhang Qiao's action, thieves from all over the country have risen up. There are people from Boling named Zhang Niu Qiao, people from Changshan named Zou Feiyan, as well as Huanglong, Zuo Yao, Yu Xinggen, Zhang Baiji, Liu Shi, Zuohui Wenba, Pinghan Da Jie, Shili Yuancheng, Lei Gong, Uguyun, Bai Zhai, Yang Feng, Yu Ying, Wu Lu, Li Da Mue, Bai Yu, Zeng Gu, Qiu Yao, and so on, which are almost too numerous to mention. There are twenty-three thousand people in these large teams, and sixty

古文：张牛角、褚飞燕合军攻瘿陶，牛角中流矢且死，令其众奉飞燕为帅，改姓张。
现代文：张牛角和褚飞燕联合进攻瘿陶，张牛角被流箭射中，临死之前，命令他的部下尊奉褚飞燕为统帅，同时让褚飞燕改姓张。
English: Zhang Niu Jiao and Zou Feiyan jointly attacked Baotou. Zhang Niu Jiao was shot by a stray arrow. Before he died, he ordered his subordinates to honor Zou Feiyan as commander-in-chief, and let Zou Feiyan change his surname to Zhang.

古文：飞燕名燕，轻勇走趫捷，故军中号曰 飞燕 。
现代文：褚飞燕原名为褚燕，因他身轻如燕，又骁勇善战，故此军中都称他为 飞燕 。
English: Zou Feiyan was originally named Zou Yan. Because he was as light as a swallow, but also brave and good at fighting, he was called Zou Feiyan in this army.

古文：山谷寇贼多附之，部众寝广，殆至百万，号 黑山贼 ，河北诸郡县并被其害，朝廷不能讨。
现代文：张燕接管了张牛角的队伍之后，山区的叛匪纷纷归附到他麾下，部众渐多，达到近百万人，号称 黑山贼 。黄河以北的各郡、县都受到侵扰，朝廷却无力派兵围剿。
English: After Zhang Yan took over Zhang Niu Kok's army, the rebels in the mountainous areas joined him one after another, and their number gradually increased to nearly one million, known as the Black Mountain bandits. Counties and counties north of the Yellow River were harassed, but the imperial court was unable to send troops to encircle them.

古文：燕乃遣使至京师，奏书乞降；遂拜燕平难中郎将，使领河北诸山谷事，岁得举孝廉、计吏。
现代文：于是，张燕派使者到京城洛阳，上书朝廷请求归降。灵帝于是任命张燕为平难中郎将，使他管理黄河以北山区的行政及治安事务，每年可以向朝廷推荐孝廉，并派遣计吏到洛阳去汇报。
English: As a result, Zhang Yan sent an envoy to the capital Luoyang and petitioned the imperial court to return to Luoyang. Emperor Lingdi then appointed Zhang Yan as the general of Pingnan, so that he could manage the administrative and security affairs of the mountainous area north of the Yellow River. He could recommend Xiaolian to the imperial court every year, and send an accountant to Luoyang to report.

古文：司徒袁隗免。
现代文：司徒袁隗被免职。
English: Sidu Yuanjun was removed from office.

古文：三月，以廷尉崔烈为司徒。
现代文：三月，任命廷尉崔烈为司徒。
English: In March, he appointed the imperial lieutenant Cui Lei as the tutor.

古文：烈，寔之从兄也。
现代文：崔烈是崔的堂兄。
English: Choe Ryong is Choe's cousin.

古文：是时，三公往往因常侍、阿保入钱西园而得之，段颖、张温等虽有功勤名誉，然皆行输货财，乃登公位。
现代文：当时，官员往往通过宦官或者灵帝幼时的乳母，向西园进献财物后，才能出任三公。段、张温等人虽然立有军功或是很有声望，但也都是先进献钱物，然后才能登上三公之位。
English: At that time, officials often used eunuchs or the nanny of the Emperor Lingdi when he was a child to donate money to the West Garden before they could serve as the three princes. Although Duan, Zhang Wen and others had military merits or were very prestigious, they were also advanced donations before they could ascend to the position of the three princes.

古文：烈因傅母入钱五百万，故得为司徒。
现代文：崔烈通过灵帝的乳母进献五百万钱，因此当上司徒。
English: Cui Rong donated five million yuan through Lingdi's nanny, so he became the chief disciple.

古文：及拜日，天子临轩，百僚毕会，帝顾谓亲幸者曰： 悔不小靳，可至千万！ 
现代文：到正式任命那天，灵帝亲自出席，百官都来参加。灵帝对左右的亲信说： 真后悔没有稍吝惜一些，否则可以要到一千万。 
English: On the day of the official appointment, Emperor Lingdi himself was present, and all the dignitaries came to attend. Emperor Lingdi said to his close confidants: I really regret that I did not spare a little, otherwise I could have asked for ten million.

古文：程夫人于傍应曰： 崔公，冀州名士，岂肯买官！
现代文：乳母程夫人在旁边接着说： 崔烈是冀州的名士，怎么肯用钱来买官！
English: Next to her, the nanny, Mrs. Cheng, continued: "Cui Lie is a celebrity in Jizhou, how dare he use money to buy an official!

古文：赖我得是，反不知姝邪！ 
现代文：多亏了我，他才肯出这么多，您反而不满意吗！ 
English: It's thanks to me that he's willing to give so much, and you're not happy about it!

古文：烈由是声誉顿衰。
现代文：因此，崔烈的声望顿时大为下跌。
English: As a result, Choe Ryong Il's popularity has plummeted.

古文：北宫伯玉等寇三辅，诏左车骑将军皇甫嵩镇长安以讨之。
现代文：北宫伯玉等进攻三辅地区，灵帝下诏，命左车骑将军皇甫嵩镇守长安，指挥大军进行讨伐。
English: When the Northern Palace and others attacked the Sanfu area, Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, ordering the left chariot and cavalry general, Emperor Fusong, to defend Chang'an and command the army to fight.

古文：时凉州兵乱不解，征发天下役赋无已，崔烈以为宜弃凉州。
现代文：当时，凉州地区不断有人起兵造反，官府为了筹措进行征讨的军费，不断加征赋税。司徒崔烈认为应该放弃凉州。
English: At that time, people in the Liangzhou area were constantly rebelling against the government, and the government was constantly raising taxes in order to finance the military expenses that were being collected. Cui Liang believed that Liangzhou should be abandoned.

古文：诏会公卿百官议之，议郎傅燮厉言曰： 斩司徒，天下乃安！ 
现代文：灵帝下诏让公卿百官商议这件事，议郎傅燮正颜厉色地说道： 斩了司徒，天下才能安定！ 
English: Emperor Lingdi issued an edict to let the nobles and officials discuss the matter, and the negotiator, Fu Yanzheng, said with a strong face: "The world can only be stable with the execution of the scholar!"

古文：尚书奏燮廷辱大臣。
现代文：尚书弹劾傅燮在宫殿上公开侮辱大臣有罪。
English: Shang Shu impeached Fu Jun and found him guilty of publicly insulting a minister in the palace.

古文：帝以问燮，对曰： 樊哙以冒顿悖逆，愤激思奋，未失人臣之节，季布犹曰 哙可斩也 。
现代文：灵帝命傅燮陈述理由，傅燮回答说： 以前樊哙因为匈奴冒顿单于冒犯中国，出于忠义激愤，要求出兵征讨，并没有失去人臣礼节，而季布还说： 樊哙应该处死。 
English: Lingdi ordered Fu Xi to state his reasons. Fu Xi replied, "In the past, because the Xiongnu dared to offend China, out of loyalty and indignation, I did not lose the etiquette of a vassal, and Qibu also said, "He should be put to death."

古文：今凉州天下要冲，国家籓卫。
现代文：如今凉州是天下的交通要道，并负有守护国家西边门户的重任。
English: Now, Liangzhou is the world's hot spot, the country's Pinghan.

古文：高祖初兴，使郦商别定陇石；世宗拓境，列置四郡，议者以为断匈奴右臂。
现代文：高祖刚刚平定天下时，就让郦商去占领陇右；武帝开拓疆土，设立了武威、张掖、酒泉、敦煌四郡，当时舆论认为这是切断了匈奴的右臂。
English: When Gaozu had just pacified the world, he let the Xiongnu merchants occupy the right bank of the Yangtze River; Emperor Wu explored the territory and set up four counties of Wuwei, Zhangye, Jiuquan and Dunhuang. At that time, the public opinion thought that this was cutting off the right arm of the Xiongnu.

古文：今牧御失和，使一州叛逆；烈为宰相，不念为国思所以弭之之策，乃欲割弃一方万里之土，臣窃惑之！
现代文：现在，地方官员治理失当，致使全州起来造反，崔烈身为宰相，不为国家考虑如何平定叛乱的策略，反而要舍弃这块广袤万里的国土，我感到困感不解！
English: Now, local officials' mismanagement has caused the entire prefecture to rebel, and Choe Ryol, as prime minister, is not thinking about how to quell the rebellion for the country, but instead wants to abandon this vast land. I feel puzzled!

古文：若使左衽之虏得居此地，士劲甲坚，因以为乱，此天下之至虑，社稷之深忧也。
现代文：如果胡人得以居住此地，兵强马壮，铠甲坚实，据以作乱，这就是天下最大的忧虑，甚至会危及政权的稳固。
English: If the Khuriks get hold of this place, with their strong soldiers and sophisticated weapons, and therefore start a riot, it will be a great disaster for the world and a deep worry for the country!

古文：若烈不知，是极蔽也；知而故言，是不忠也。 
现代文：假如崔烈不懂这一点，说明他极端愚蠢；如果他懂得而故意提此建议，则是不忠。 
English: If Choe Ryong does not understand this, it means he is extremely stupid; if he does understand and deliberately makes this suggestion, it means he is disloyal.

古文：帝善而从之。
现代文：灵帝同意并听从了傅燮的意见。
English: Emperor Wen thought he was right and accepted his suggestion.

古文：夏，四月，庚戌，大雨雹。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚戌天降大雹。
English: In the summer, in April, the moon is full and the sky is overcast.

古文：五月，太慰邓盛罢；以太仆河南张延为太尉。
现代文：五月，太尉邓盛被免职。任命太仆、河南人张延为太尉。
English: In May, First Lieutenant Deng Sheng was relieved of his duties, and Zhang Yan, a Henan native, was appointed Second Lieutenant.

古文：六月，以讨张角功，封中常侍张让等十二人为列侯。
现代文：六月，灵帝以讨伐张角有功的名义，封中常侍张让等十二人为列侯。
English: In June, Emperor Lingdi, in the name of his successful crusade against Zhang Jiao, made twelve people, including Zhang Zhan, his personal attendant, into vassals.

古文：秋，七月，三辅螟。
现代文：秋季，七月，三辅地区螟虫成灾。
English: In the autumn, in July, aphids infested the Misho area.

古文：皇甫嵩之讨张角也，过鄴，见中常侍赵忠舍宅逾制，奏没入之。
现代文：皇甫嵩征讨张角时，途经邺城，看到中常侍赵忠建造的住宅超过法定的规格，就上奏朝廷建议将赵忠的宅第予以没收。
English: During the discussion of Zhangjiajie, Emperor Fuxiong, passing through Lucheng, saw that the residence built by the Vice-Regent Zhao Zhong exceeded the statutory specifications, and proposed to the Imperial Court to confiscate Zhao Zhong's residence.

古文：又中常侍张让私求钱五千万，嵩不与。
现代文：此外，中常侍张让曾私下向皇甫嵩索取五千万钱贿赂，被皇甫嵩久战不胜，没有战功，浪费了大批军用物资。
English: In addition, the Vice-Chamberlain Zhang Zhan once privately solicited a bribe of 50 million yuan from the Emperor Fusong, and was defeated by the Emperor Fusong for a long time, with no war merit, and wasted a large number of military supplies.

古文：二人由是奏嵩连战无功，功费者多，征嵩还，收左军骑将车印绶，削户六千。
现代文：于是，灵帝便将皇甫嵩召回洛阳，收回他左车骑将军的印信绶带，并把他的封邑削减六千户。
English: As a result, Emperor Lingdi summoned Emperor Fusong back to Luoyang, took back the seal ribbon of his left chariot riding general, and reduced his fief by six thousand households.

古文：八月，以司空张温为车骑将军，执金吾袁滂为副，以讨北宫伯玉；拜中郎将董卓为破虏将军，与荡寇将军周慎并统于温。
现代文：八月，任命司空张温为车骑将军，执金吾袁滂作他的副手，率军征讨北宫伯玉。并任命中郎将董卓为破虏将军，与荡寇将军周慎一起归张温指挥。
English: In August, he appointed Zhang Wen, the Secretary of the Air Force, as the cavalry general, and Zhou Yuanzhong as his deputy to lead the army to conquer the Northern Palace. He also appointed Zhong Lang to take Dong Zhuo as the general to defeat the bandits, and together with Zhou Shen, the general of the bandits, he was under the command of Zhang Wen.

古文：九月，以特进杨赐为司空。
现代文：九月，任命特进杨赐为司空。
English: In September, Yang Jie, a special envoy to China, was appointed as the company's CEO.

古文：冬，十月，庚寅，临晋文烈侯杨赐薨。
现代文：冬季，十月，庚寅，临晋侯杨赐去世，被谥为 文烈 。
English: In the winter, in October, Geng Yin, Lin Jin Hou Yang Jie passed away, and was named Wen Rong.

古文：以光禄大夫许相为司空。
现代文：任命光禄大夫许相为司空。
English: He appointed Dr. Guanglu Xu Xiang as his successor.

古文：相，训之子也。
现代文：许相是许训的儿子。
English: Xu Xiang is the son of Xu Xun.

古文：谏议大夫刘陶上言： 天下前遇张角之乱，后遭边章之寇，今西羌逆类已攻河东，恐遂转盛，豕突上京。
现代文：谏议大夫刘陶上书说： 天下先有张角之乱，后有边章之乱。如今西边的羌族叛军已在攻打河东郡，恐怕要越闹越大，威胁到京城洛阳的安全。
English: Liu Tao, a doctor of Chinese medicine, said in a letter: First, there was the Zhangjiajie Rebellion, and then there was the Bianzhang Rebellion. Now that the western rebels of the Yi ethnic group have attacked Hedong County, I am afraid that they will make more and more trouble, threatening the safety of the capital Luoyang.

古文：民有百走退死之心，而无一前斗生之计，西寇浸前，车骑孤危，假令失利，其败不救。
现代文：百姓们只有许多撤退逃生的念头，而没有一点前进奋战以求生存的打算。西面的叛军日渐逼进，车骑将军张温孤军无援，假如疆场失利，败局将不可收拾。
English: The people only have many thoughts of retreating and escaping, but have no intention of advancing and fighting for survival. The rebels in the west are gradually advancing, and the cavalry general Zhang Wen's lone army is helpless. If the battlefield is lost, the defeat will be irreparable.

古文：臣自知言数见厌，而言不自裁者，以为国安则臣蒙其庆，国危则臣亦先亡也。
现代文：我深知这样反复上书，必将招致陛下的厌烦，但是仍然不克制自己，要继续向陛下进言，是因为我知道，国家平安，我也将从中受益；国家危险，我则会先行毁灭。
English: I know myself that I have said too much to be annoying, but I still keep saying, because the country is peaceful, I will be happy, the country is in crisis, I will die first.

古文：谨复陈当今要急八事。 
现代文：现在，我再次陈述目前急待处理的八件事情。 
English: I would now like to reiterate the eight urgent matters that need to be dealt with immediately.

古文：大较言天下大乱，皆由宦官。
现代文：这八件要事的主旨，是指出天下之所以大乱，都是因宦官引起。
English: The main point of these eight important matters is to point out that the reason for the great turmoil in the world is caused by the eunuchs.

古文：宦官共谗陶曰： 前张角事发，诏书示以威恩，自此以来，各各改悔。
现代文：于是宦官们一齐向灵帝诬陷刘陶，说： 以前，张角反叛之后，陛下发布诏书，威恩并施。从那以后，叛乱者都已改悔。
English: So the eunuchs all together slandered Liu Tao to Emperor Lingdi, saying: In the past, after Zhang Qiao rebelled, His Majesty issued an edict, and it was carried out. Since then, the rebels have all repented.

古文：今者四方安静，而陶疾害圣政，专言妖孽。
现代文：现在四方安宁，而刘陶对陛下圣明的政治不满，专门揭露妖孽一类的黑暗面。
English: Now there is peace in all directions, but Liu Tao is dissatisfied with the politics of His Majesty the Emperor, and he specifically exposes the dark side such as witchcraft.

古文：州郡不上，陶何缘知？
现代文：刘陶所言之事，州、郡并没有上报，他又是怎么知道的？
English: The state and county did not report what Liu Tao said. How did he know?

古文：疑陶与贼通情。 
现代文：我们怀疑刘陶与贼人有联系。 
English: We suspect that Liu Tao is in contact with the thief.

古文：于是收陶下黄门北寺狱，掠按日急。
现代文：灵帝于是下令逮捕刘陶，送交宦官控制的黄门北寺监狱，严型拷问，日益迫急。
English: Lingdi then ordered the arrest of Liu Tao and sent him to the Huangmen North Temple Prison controlled by eunuchs, where he was subjected to severe interrogation, which became increasingly urgent.

古文：陶谓使者曰： 臣恨不与伊、吕同畴，而以三仁为辈。
现代文：刘陶对代表皇帝审讯的使臣说： 我恨自己不能像伊尹、吕尚那样为明主出力，却与商朝末年的微子、箕子、比干三位仁人同一命运。
English: Liu Tao said to the envoy representing the emperor's trial: I hate that I can't do as much as Yi Yin and Lushang for the Ming Lord, but I have the same fate as the three benevolent people of the end of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：今上杀忠謇之臣，下有憔悴之民，亦在不久，后悔何及！ 
现代文：如今上面滥杀忠良正直的臣子，下面的百姓则憔悴不堪，这个政权也不会支持很久了，将来后悔也来不及了！ 
English: Now, the upper echelons are indiscriminately killing loyal and honest subjects, while the people below are suffering unbearable hardships. This regime will not be supported for long, and it will be too late to regret it in the future!

古文：遂闭气而死。
现代文：于是，闭住气自杀身亡。
English: As a result, he held his breath and committed suicide.

古文：前司徒陈耽为人忠正，宦官怨之，亦诬陷，死狱中。
现代文：前任司徒陈耽为人忠正，宦官们很怨恨他，也加以诬陷，使他死在狱中。
English: The eunuchs held a grudge against the former magistrate, Chen Tan, who was loyal and upright, and they framed him, causing him to die in prison.

古文：张温将诸郡兵步骑十馀万屯美阳，边章、韩遂亦进兵美阳，温与战，辄不利。
现代文：张温统率诸郡的步、骑兵十余万驻扎在美阳。边章、韩遂也进军美阳，张温与他们交战失利。
English: Zhang Wen led the troops of the counties, and more than one hundred thousand cavalry were stationed in Meiyang. Bianzhang and Han also marched into Meiyang, and Zhang Wen lost the battle with them.

古文：十一月，董卓与右扶风鲍鸿等并兵攻章、遂，大破之，章、遂走榆中。
现代文：十一月，董卓与右扶风鲍鸿等合兵进攻边章、韩遂，大破他们统领的西羌军。
English: In November, Dong Zhuo and Baohong of the Right Fufeng Army attacked Bianzhang and Han Sui, and defeated the Xidi Army led by them.

古文：温遣周慎将三万人追之。
现代文：边章、韩遂败退榆中。张温派周慎率领三万人追剿边章、韩遂。
English: Bianzhang and Han Sui were defeated and forced to retreat. Zhang Wen sent Zhou Sheng to lead 30,000 men in pursuit of Bianzhang and Han Sui.

古文：参军事孙坚说慎曰： 贼城中无谷，当外转粮食，坚愿得万人断其运道，将军以大兵继后，贼必困乏而不敢战，走入羌中，并力讨之，则凉州可定也！ 
现代文：参军事孙坚向周慎建议说： 叛军据守的城中缺少粮食，将从外面运入。我愿充领一万人，截断敌军的运粮道，将军统大军跟在后面接应，叛军必然会因疲惫饥饿而不敢应战，退回羌人腹地。到那时，再合力围剿他们，就可以平定凉州。 
English: Sun Jian, a military officer, suggested to Zhou Sheng: "The rebel-held city is short of grain, which will be brought in from outside. I am willing to take 10,000 people, cut off the enemy's grain transportation route, and the general's army will follow behind. The rebels will inevitably be too tired and hungry to fight, and return to the hinterland of the Han people. At that time, if we work together to encircle them, we can pacify Liangzhou.

古文：慎不从，引军围榆中城，而章、遂分屯葵园峡，反断慎运道，慎惧，弃车重而退。
现代文：周慎没有听从他的建议，率军将榆中城团团围住。而边章、韩遂分兵驻守葵园峡，反而将官军的运粮道路截断。周慎感到恐慌，丢弃辎重撤军。
English: Zhou Shen did not listen to his advice and led his army to encircle the central city of Handan. While the troops of Bianzhang and Han Sui were stationed in the Kwai Yuen Gorge, they cut off the official army's grain transportation route. Zhou Shen panicked and abandoned his army.

古文：温又使董卓将兵三万讨先零羌，羌、胡围卓于望垣北，粮食乏绝，乃于所度水中伪立焉以捕鱼，而潜从焉下过军。
现代文：张温又派董卓率领三万人去讨伐羌族的先零部落。羌人与胡人在望垣以北将董卓团团围住。董卓军中缺粮，于是便在打算渡河的地方筑起堤堰，假装要捕鱼充饥。然后，在堤堰的掩护之下，悄然撤退。
English: Zhang Wen also sent Dong Zhuo with 30,000 men to fight the Shanzhi tribe of the Yao people. The Yao people and the Hu people surrounded Dong Zhuo's troops to the north of Wangqi. There was a shortage of grain in Dong Zhuo's army, so he built a dike at the place where he planned to cross the river, pretending to catch fish to relieve hunger. Then, under the cover of the dike, he quietly retreated.

古文：比贼追之，决水已深，不得度，遂还屯扶风。
现代文：等到羌人发觉而追击时，董卓早将堤堰决开，河水已深，致使羌人无法过河追赶。于是董卓回师，驻扎扶风。
English: By the time the eunuchs discovered and chased him, Dong Zhuo had already broken the dike, and the river was already deep, making it impossible for the eunuchs to cross the river and chase him. So Dong Zhuo returned to his division and stationed at Fufeng.

古文：张温以诏书召卓，卓良久乃诣温；温责让卓，卓应对不顺。
现代文：张温以皇帝的诏书征召董卓，董卓拖延很久才前去晋见张温。张温责备董卓，而董卓应答时毫不恭顺。
English: Zhang Wen summoned Dong Zhuo with the emperor's edict. Dong Zhuo delayed for a long time before going to meet Zhang Wen. Zhang Wen rebuked Dong Zhuo, and Dong Zhuo was not submissive when answering.

古文：孙坚前耳语谓温曰： 卓不怖罪而鸱张大语，宜以召不时至，陈军法斩之。 
现代文：孙坚上前附在张温的耳边悄声说道： 董卓不怕获罪，反而气焰嚣张，口气很大，应该按照军法 受召不及时到达 一条，申明法令，予以处斩。 
English: Sun Jian leaned forward and whispered in Zhang Wen's ear: "Dong Zhuo is not afraid of being found guilty. On the contrary, he is arrogant and has a loud voice. He should be summoned in accordance with military law. If he does not arrive in time, declare the decree and be punished.

古文：温曰： 卓素著威名于河、陇之间，今日杀之，西行无依。 
现代文：张温回答说： 董卓在黄河、陇山之间一向有威望，今天将他杀死，西征将没有依靠。 
English: Zhang Wen replied, "Dong Zhuo has always had prestige between the Yellow River and Lushan. If you kill him today, there will be no support for the Western Expedition."

古文：坚曰： 明公亲率王师，威震天下，何赖于卓！
现代文：孙坚说： 将军亲自统率皇家大军，威震天下，何必依赖于董卓！
English: Sun Jian said, "The general personally leads the royal army, which is tremendously powerful. Why should we rely on Dong Zhuo?"

古文：观卓所言，不假明公，轻上无礼，一罪也；章、遂跋扈经年，当以时进讨，而卓云未可，沮军疑众，二罪也；卓受任无功，应召稽留，而轩昂自高，三罪也。
现代文：观察董卓的言谈举止，对您不尊重，轻视长官，举止无礼，是第一条罪状；连章、韩遂叛乱一年多，应及时征讨，而董卓却说不可，动摇军心，是第二条罪状；董卓接受委派，无功而回，长官征召时又迟迟不到，而且态度倨傲自大，是第三条罪状。
English: Observing Dong Zhuo's speech and demeanor, disrespecting you, despising officers, and behaving rudely is the first charge; Lianzhang, Han Sui rebellion for more than a year, should be collected in a timely manner, but Dong Zhuo said not to, shake the military spirit, is the second charge; Dong Zhuo accepted the appointment, returned without success, and was late for the recruitment of officers, and his attitude was arrogant, is the third charge.

古文：古之名将仗钺临众，未有不断斩以成功者也。
现代文：古代的名将受命统军出征，没有不靠断然诛杀以成功的。
English: The great generals of ancient times were ordered to lead their armies into battle, but they did not succeed without a decisive battle.

古文：今明公垂意于卓，不即加诛，亏损威刑，于是在矣。 
现代文：如果将军对董卓加意拉拢，不立即诛杀，那么，损害统帅威严和军中法规的过失，就在您的身上。 
English: If the general coaxed Dong Zhuo and did not immediately kill him, then the fault of damaging the commander's dignity and military regulations is on you.

古文：温不忍发，乃曰： 君且还，卓将疑人。 
现代文：张温不忍心动手，便说： 你先回去，时间一长，董卓会起疑心的。 
English: Zhang Wen didn't have the heart to do it, so he said: You go back first. If it takes a long time, Dong Zhuo will get suspicious.

古文：坚遂出。
现代文：孙坚于是告辞而出。
English: Sun Jian then tendered his resignation.

古文：是岁，帝造万金堂于西园，引司农金钱、缯帛牣积堂中，复藏寄小黄门、常侍家钱各数千万，又于河间买田宅，起第观。
现代文：本年，灵帝在西园修造万金堂，把大司农所管国库中的金钱及绸缎等都搬到万金堂中，堆得满满的。灵帝还把钱寄存在小黄门、中常侍家中，每家各存数千万。并在他当皇帝之前的封地河间购买田地，修建住宅。
English: This year, Emperor Lingdi built a golden hall in the west garden, and moved all the money and silk and silk in the treasury of the Grand Secretary of the Agricultural Bureau, which was in charge of the national treasury, to the golden hall, which was full to the brim. Emperor Lingdi also deposited money in Xiaohuangmen and Zhongzheng's servants' homes, each of which saved tens of millions. He also purchased fields and built houses in Hema, the fief before he became emperor.

古文：孝灵皇帝中中平三年
现代文：中平三年
English: Zhongping three years

古文：春，二月，江夏兵赵慈反，杀南阳太守秦颉。
现代文：春季，二月，江夏郡的兵士赵慈聚众造反，杀死南阳郡太守秦颉。
English: In the spring, in February, Zhao Ci, a soldier from Jiangxia County, rallied the people to rebel and killed Qin Yu, the governor of Nanyang County.

古文：庚戌，赦天下。
现代文：庚戌，大赦天下。
English: Geng Yao, amnesty to the world.

古文：太尉张延罢。
现代文：太尉张延被免职。
English: First Lieutenant Zhang Yan was relieved of duty.

古文：遣使者持节就长安拜张温为太尉。
现代文：灵帝派遣使者持符节到长安，任命张温为太尉。
English: Emperor Lingdi sent an emissary to Chang'an to hold the festival and appointed Zhang Wen as the first lieutenant.

古文：三公在外始于温。
现代文：在京城以外任命三公，由张温开始。
English: The Three Princes were appointed outside the capital, starting with Zhang Wen.

古文：以中常侍赵忠为车骑将军。
现代文：任命中常侍赵忠为车骑将军。
English: Zhao Zhong, a member of the Central Standing Committee, was appointed as the general of the cavalry.

古文：帝使忠论讨黄巾之功，执金吾甄举谓忠曰： 傅南容前在东军，有功不侯，天下失望。
现代文：灵帝命赵忠评定讨伐黄巾军的功劳。执金吾甄举对赵忠说： 傅燮先前在征伐东方的黄巾军时，立有大功，但是未被封侯，天下人感到失望。
English: Emperor Ling ordered Zhao Zhong to evaluate the merits of the crusade against the Yellow Turban Army. He said to Zhao Zhong: Fu Xi had previously made great contributions in the conquest of the Yellow Turban Army in the East, but he was not knighted, and the world was disappointed.

古文：今将军亲当重任，宜进贤理屈，以副众心。 
现代文：如今将军亲负这项重任，应该推举贤人，审理冤情，以满足众人之心。 
English: Now it is the general's own responsibility to promote the wise and to settle grievances, so as to meet everyone's wishes.

古文：忠纳其言，遣弟城门校尉延致殷勤于傅燮。
现代文：赵忠采纳了甄举的意见，派他的弟弟城门校尉赵延去向傅燮致意。
English: Zhao Zhong accepted the opinion of the screening and sent his younger brother, Shingmen Lieutenant Zhao Yan, to pay his respects to Fu Xi.

古文：延谓燮曰： 南容少答我常侍，万户侯不足得也！ 
现代文：赵延对傅燮说： 只要你肯稍稍接受我哥哥的友情，封万户侯则不在话下。 
English: Zhao Yan said to Fu Yao: As long as you are willing to accept my brother's friendship a little bit, then the fief of Wanhu Hou is not out of the question.

古文：燮正色拒之曰： 有功不论，命也。傅燮岂求私赏哉！ 
现代文：傅燮正色地拒绝他说： 有功而未得到封赏，是我的命运不好，我岂能乞求私人的恩惠！ 
English: Fu Yao bluntly refused him, saying, "It is not a good fate for me to be awarded for meritorious service and not receive a reward. How can I beg for personal favors?"

古文：忠愈怀恨，然惮其名，不敢害，出为汉阳太守。
现代文：赵忠知道后，越发怀恨，然而顾忌傅燮的名望，不敢公开加以迫害，便任命他为汉阳郡太守，离开了京城。
English: After Zhao Zhong learned of this, he became more and more resentful. However, he was wary of Fu Gan's reputation and did not dare to openly persecute him, so he appointed him as the governor of Hanyang County and left Beijing.

古文：帝使钩盾令宋典缮修南宫玉堂，又使掖庭令毕岚铸四铜人，又铸四钟，皆受二千斛。
现代文：灵帝让钩盾令宋典在南宫里修建玉堂殿。并让掖庭令毕岚铸造四个铜人，再铸四口铜钟，容量都为两千斛。
English: Emperor Lingdi ordered Song Dynasty to build the Jade Hall in the South Palace. He also ordered Gong Dynasty to cast four bronze men and four bronze bells, each with a capacity of two thousand baht.

古文：又铸天禄、虾蟆吐水于平门外桥东，转水入宫。
现代文：又铸造一种名为 天禄 的兽及吐水的蛤蟆，在平门外的桥东吐水，将水输入皇宫之内。
English: They also cast a beast called Tenroku and a dragonfly that spits water. It spits water on the east side of the bridge outside the gate, and then brings the water into the palace.

古文：又作翻车、渴乌，施于桥西，用洒南北郊路，以为可省百姓洒道之费。
现代文：又作翻车和渴乌，放在桥西，用来浇洒城外南北大道，认为可以节省百姓洒水泼道的费用。
English: They also made overturned cars and black carbon, which were placed on the west side of the bridge and used to sprinkle the north-south avenue outside the city, believing that it would save the people the cost of sprinkling the road.

古文：五月，壬辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：五月，壬辰晦，出现日食。
English: In May, at the end of Imjin, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：六月，荆州刺史王敏讨赵慈，斩之。
现代文：六月，荆州刺史王敏讨伐赵慈，将他斩杀。
English: In June, Jingzhou assassin Wang Min attacked Zhao Ci and killed him.

古文：车骑将军赵忠罢。
现代文：车骑将军赵忠被免职。
English: Chariot and cavalry general Zhao Zhong was dismissed.

古文：冬，十月，武陵蛮反，郡兵讨破之。
现代文：冬季，十月，武陵蛮族反叛，武陵郡的军队将他们镇压下去。
English: In the winter, in October, the Wuling barbarians rebelled, and the army of Wuling County suppressed them.

古文：前太尉张廷为宦官所谮，下狱死。
现代文：前任太尉张延遭宦官们诬陷，被逮捕，死在狱中。
English: The previous captain Zhang Yan was framed by eunuchs, arrested, and died in prison.

古文：十二月，鲜卑寇幽、并二州。
现代文：十二月，鲜卑族侵掠幽州与并州。
English: In December, the Xianbei Cossacks raided and occupied two states.

古文：征张温还京师。
现代文：征召张温回京城洛阳。
English: Zhang Wen was called up to return to Beijing Luoyang.

古文：孝灵皇帝中中平四年春，正月，己卯，赦天下。
现代文：中平四年春季，正月，己卯，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Heian period, in the first month of the year, the emperor abdicated and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：二月，荥阳贼杀中矣令。
现代文：二月，荥阳盗贼杀死中牟县令。
English: In February, thieves in Shenyang killed a county magistrate in Zhongmou County.

古文：三月，河南尹何苗讨荥阳贼，破之；拜苗为车骑将军。
现代文：三月，河南尹何苗统军讨伐荥阳盗贼，将他们镇压下去。灵帝任命何苗为车骑将军。
English: In March, Yin He Miao of Henan unified the army to fight against the thieves of Fenyang and suppress them. Lingdi appointed He Miao as the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：韩遂杀边章及北宫伯玉、李文侯，拥兵十馀万，进围陇西，太守李相如叛，与遂连和。
现代文：韩遂杀死边章及北宫伯玉、李文侯，吞并了他们的部队，指挥着十余万大军行动包围了陇西郡。陇西郡太守李相如叛变朝廷，与韩遂联合在一起。
English: Han Sui killed Bianzhang and Bei Gong Bo Yu and Li Wenhong, absorbed their troops, and commanded more than 100,000 troops to encircle Shaanxi County. The governor of Shaanxi County, Li Xiangru, rebelled against the imperial court and united with Han Sui.

古文：凉州刺史耿鄙率六郡兵讨遂。
现代文：凉州刺史耿鄙率领属下六郡的军队讨伐韩遂。
English: Liangzhou assassin Geng Yan led the troops of the six counties under him to fight against Han Sui.

古文：鄙任治中程球，球通奸利，士民怨之。
现代文：汉阳太守傅燮对秋鄙说： 您到职的时间不长。人民还没有很好地受到教化。
English: Fu Xi, the governor of Hanyang, said to Qiu Mian: You have only been in office for a short time. The people have not been well educated.

古文：汉阳太守傅燮谓鄙曰： 使君统政日浅，民未知教。
现代文：贼军听说官军即将征讨，必然会万众一心。边疆地区士兵人多骁勇善战，锋锐难当。
English: When the bandit army hears that the government army is about to invade, they will inevitably unite as one. The soldiers in the frontier areas are more courageous and good at fighting, and it is difficult to be sharp.

古文：贼闻大军将至，必万人一心，边兵多勇，其锋难当；而新合之众，上下未和，万一内变，虽悔无及。
现代文：而我军则是由六郡的军队新近组合而成，上下尚未和睦，万一发生内乱，尽管后悔也来不及了。
English: On the other hand, our army is newly formed from the armies of six counties, and there is still no harmony between the upper and lower ranks. In the event of civil unrest, it will be too late to regret.

古文：不若息军养德，明赏必罚，贼得宽挺，必谓我怯，群恶争势，其离可必。
现代文：不如让军队修整一下，培养统帅的威信，做到赏罚分明。贼军看到形势缓和，必然认为我军胆怯，他们之间就会争权夺利，必然离心离德。
English: It would be better to let the army refine itself, cultivate the commander's prestige, and make rewards and punishments clear. When the thief army sees the situation easing, it will inevitably think that our army is timid, and they will compete for power and profit, and they will inevitably depart from virtue.

古文：然后率已教之民，讨成离之贼，其功可坐而待也。 
现代文：然后，您率领已经教化好的民众，去征伐已然分崩离析的贼军，大功可以坐着等待完成！
English: Then, you lead the people who have been educated to fight the already disintegrated thief army. You can sit back and wait for the great work to be completed!

古文：鄙不从。
现代文：耿鄙不听从。
English: Geng didn't listen.

古文：夏，四月，鄙行至狄道，州别驾反应贼，先杀程球，次害鄙，贼遂进围汉阳。城中兵少粮尽，燮犹固守。
现代文：夏季，四月，耿鄙大军行进到狄道，凉州别驾叛变，响应贼军，先杀程球，后杀耿鄙。贼军因而进兵包围了汉阳郡，城中兵少，粮尽，但傅燮仍然坚守。
English: In the summer, in April, Genghis Khan's army marched to Dido. Liangzhou, do not drive the mutiny, respond to the thief army, first kill the ball, then kill Genghis Khan. As a result, the thief army surrounded Hanyang County. There were few soldiers in the city and food was exhausted, but Fu Xi still held fast.

古文：时北地胡骑数千随贼攻郡，皆夙怀燮恩，共于城外叩头，求送燮归乡里。
现代文：当时，有数千名北地郡的胡人骑兵跟随贼军攻打郡城，他们都怀念傅燮的恩德，一齐在城外叩头，请求护送傅燮返回家乡北地郡。
English: At that time, there were thousands of Wu cavalrymen from Beidai County who followed the bandits to attack the county seat. They all remembered Fu Xi's kindness, bowed down together outside the city, and asked to escort Fu Xi back to his hometown in Beidai County.

古文：燮子幹，年十三，言于燮曰： 国家昏乱，遂令大人不容于朝。
现代文：傅燮的儿子傅干只有十三岁，对父亲说： 皇上昏庸糊涂，致使您在朝中无法容身。
English: Fu Han's son Fu Gan Ram, only thirteen years old, said to his father: "Your Majesty is so dim-witted that you cannot be accommodated in the court.

古文：今后不足以自守，宜听羌、胡之请，还乡里，徐俟有道而辅之。 
现代文：如今部下兵少，无法坚守。应该听从羌、胡人的请求，回归故乡，将来等到有圣明的天子出来，再去辅佐。 
English: Nowadays, the number of subordinate soldiers is small, and it is impossible to hold out. We should listen to the requests of the Xiong and Hu people, return to our hometown, and wait until the heavenly son of the holy light comes out in the future, and then go to assist.

古文：言未终，燮慨然叹曰： 汝知吾必死邪！
现代文：傅干的话没有说完，傅燮十分感慨，叹息道： 你知道我必须会死吗！
English: Fu Gan didn't finish his words, Fu Yao was very moved and sighed, "Do you know that I have to die!"

古文：圣达节，次守节。
现代文：只有圣人能通达权变，其次则是坚守节操。
English: Only a sage is able to achieve the transformation of power, and the second is to adhere to the discipline.

古文：殷纣暴虐，伯夷不食周粟而死。
现代文：从前商纣王暴虐，忠臣伯夷仍然严守臣节，不吃周朝的粮食而饿死。
English: Once upon a time, the mercantile king Shao was tyrannical, but his loyal vassal Bo Yi still strictly observed the Vassal Day, refusing to eat the grain of the Zhou Dynasty and starving to death.

古文：再遭世乱，不能养浩然之志，食禄，又欲避其难乎！
现代文：我生逢乱世，不能居家静养浩然之气。已经接受了朝廷的傣禄，还想逃避危险吗！
English: I was born into a turbulent world, and I can't stay at home and nurture a grandiose spirit. I've already accepted the imperial stipend, and I still want to escape the danger!

古文：吾行何之，必死于此！
现代文：我往哪里走？一定要死在这里。
English: Where am I going? I have to die here.

古文：汝有才智，勉之勉之！
现代文：你有才智，要好好努力！
English: You have talent, work hard!

古文：主簿杨会，吾之程婴也。 
现代文：主簿杨会就是我的程婴，他会尽力照顾你的。 
English: The main bookkeeper, Yang Hui, is my Cheng baby, you can trust him.

古文：狄道人王国使故酒泉太守黄衍说燮曰： 天下已非复汉有，府君宁有意为吾属帅乎？ 
现代文：狄道人王国派前酒泉太守黄衍前来劝说傅燮道： 汉朝已不再能统治天下了，您愿意做我们的首领吗？ 
English: The kingdom of the Dido people sent the former Jiuquan Daju Huang Yan to persuade Fu Xuan: The Han Dynasty can no longer rule the world, are you willing to be our leader?

古文：燮按剑叱衍曰： 若剖符之臣，反为贼说邪！ 
现代文：傅燮按剑叱责黄衍说： 你身为国家正式任命的太守，反倒为叛军做说客吗？ 
English: Fu Xi pointed his sword at Huang Yan and scolded him, saying, "You are the officially appointed governor of the country, but you are a lobbyist for the rebels?

古文：遂麾左右进兵，临陈战殁。
现代文：于是，傅燮率领左右冲向贼军，临阵战死。
English: As a result, Fu Yao led the left and right to rush to the thief army, and died in the battle.

古文：耿鄙司马扶风马腾亦拥兵反，与韩遂合，共推王国为主，寇掠三辅。
现代文：耿鄙属下的司马扶风人马腾也率军造反，与韩遂联盟，共同推举王国为首领，攻击抢掠三辅地区。
English: Geng Yao's subordinate Sima Fu Fengren Ma Teng also led the army to rebel, and together with the Han Sui alliance, jointly elected the kingdom as the leader, attacked and plundered the Sanfu area.

古文：太尉张温以寇贼未平，免；以司徒崔烈为太尉。
现代文：太尉张温因为没能平定叛乱，被免职。任命司徒崔烈为太尉。
English: Captain Zhang Wen was removed from his post for failing to quell the rebellion, and Szu Cui Lie was appointed captain.

古文：五月，以司空许相为司徒；光禄勋沛国丁宫为司空。
现代文：五月，任命司空许相为司徒，光禄勋、沛国人丁宫为司空。
English: In May, he appointed Sikyong Xu Xiang as his disciple, and Guang Rukun and Pei Guoren Ding Gong as Sikyong.

古文：初，张温发幽州乌桓突骑三千以讨凉州，故中山相渔阳张纯请将之，温不听，而使涿令辽西公孙瓚将之。
现代文：当初，张温征发幽州乌桓族的三千名骑兵去征讨凉州贼军，前中山国相、渔阳人张纯请求统领这些乌桓骑兵，张温不肯，而让涿县县令，辽西人公孙瓒统领。
English: At first, Zhang Wen conscripted and sent 3,000 cavalrymen of the Yuzhou Wuhuan tribe to fight against the Liangzhou thief army. Zhang Chun, the former minister of Zhongshan Province and a fisherman from Yangzhou, requested to command these Wuhuan cavalrymen. Zhang Wen refused, and let Gongsun Qian, the county magistrate and a native of western Liaoning Province, lead the troops.

古文：军到蓟中，乌桓以牢禀逋县，多叛还本国。
现代文：部队到蓟县时，乌桓骑兵因为粮饷拖欠不发，多数人叛逃，返回乌桓部落。
English: When the troops arrived in Lixian County, the Wuhuan cavalry could not be sent because of the grain and rice arrears, and most of them defected and returned to the Wuhuan tribe.

古文：张纯忿不得将，乃与同郡故泰山太守张举及乌桓大人丘力居等连盟，劫略蓟中，杀护乌桓校尉公綦稠、右北平太守刘政、辽东太守阳终等，众至十馀万，屯肥如。
现代文：张纯因为没有让他统领乌桓兵而怀恨在心，便与同郡人、前泰山郡太守张举和乌桓部落首领丘力居等联盟，抢劫蓟县，并杀死护乌桓校尉公綦稠、右北平郡太守刘政，辽东郡太守阳终等人，部众多达十余万，驻扎在肥如县。
English: Zhang Chun held a grudge because he did not let him command the Wuhuan soldiers, so he allied with fellow county people, the former Taishan County Governor Zhang Jue and the Wuhuan tribal leader Qiu Liju, and robbed Min County, and killed the Wuhuan Lieutenant Colonel Gong Yuxiao, the Right Beiping County Governor Liu Zheng, the Liaodong County Governor Yang Zhou and others, with more than 100,000 troops stationed in Hiryu County.

古文：举称天子，纯称弥天将军、安定王，移收州郡，云举当代汉，告天子避位，敕公卿奉迎。
现代文：张举称皇帝，张纯称弥天将军、安定王。他们发布公文通告各州、郡，宣称张举将取代东汉政权，要求灵帝退位，命公卿奉迎张举。
English: Zhang Jiu claimed to be the emperor, and Zhang Chun claimed to be the general of Yatian and the king of stability. They issued official notices to all states and counties, declaring that Zhang Jiu would replace the East Han regime, demanding that Emperor Ling abdicate, and ordering the nobles to welcome Zhang Jiu.

古文：冬，十月，长沙贼区星自称将军，众万馀人；诏以议郎孙坚为长沙太守，讨击平之，封坚乌程侯。
现代文：冬季，十月，长沙盗贼区星自称将军，部众有一万多人。灵帝下诏，任命议郎孙坚为长沙太守，将他们镇压下去。孙坚被封为乌程侯。
English: In winter, in October, the thief of Changsha, Guxing, claimed to be a general, with more than 10,000 followers. Emperor Lingdi issued an edict, appointing Sun Jian as the governor of Changsha to suppress them. Sun Jian was named the governor of Wucheng.

古文：十一月，太尉崔烈罢；以大司农曹嵩为太尉。
现代文：十一月，太尉崔烈被免职。任命大司农曹嵩为太尉。
English: In November, First Lieutenant Cui Lei was relieved of his duties, and Major General Nong Cao Song was appointed First Lieutenant.

古文：十二月，屠各胡反。
现代文：十二月，匈奴屠各胡部落反叛。
English: In December, the Xiongnu rebelled.

古文：是岁，卖关内侯，直五百万钱。
现代文：本年，售卖关内侯，价格为五百万钱。
English: This year, Guan Nei Hou was sold at a price of five million yuan.

古文：前大丘长陈寔卒，海内赴吊者三万余人。
现代文：前任太丘县县长陈去世。全国各地前去参加吊丧活动的有三万余人。
English: Chen, the former governor of Taiyuan County, passed away. More than 30,000 people from all over the country went to participate in the funeral activities.

古文：寔在乡闾，平心率物，其有争论，辄求判正，晓譬曲直，退无怨者，至乃叹曰： 宁为刑罚所加，不为陈君所短！ 
现代文：陈在乡里，公平正直地统率民众。百姓发生争执，都要请他裁决，他把是非曲直讲解得十分清楚，事过之后没有抱怨的。甚至有人叹息说： 宁可接受型罚，也不愿被陈先生责备！ 
English: In the countryside, Chen led the people fairly and honestly. Whenever there was a dispute, the people would ask him to adjudicate. He explained the rights and wrongs very clearly and did not complain afterwards. Some people even sighed and said, "I would rather accept the punishment than be scolded by Mr. Chen!"

古文：杨赐、陈耽，每拜公卿，群僚毕贺，辄叹寔大位未登，愧于先之。
现代文：杨赐和陈耽，每当被任命为公、卿等高级职务，文武百官都来祝贺时，总叹息陈未能出任高官，对自己先任要职而感到惭愧。
English: Yang Qi and Chen Tan, whenever they were appointed to high-ranking positions such as prince and nobleman, and hundreds of civil and military officials came to congratulate them, they always lamented that Chen could not serve as a high-ranking official, and felt ashamed of being the first to hold an important position.

