古文：汪世显汪世显，字仲明，巩昌盐川人。
现代文：汪世显，字仲明，巩昌盐川人，本为旺古族。
English: Wang Shixian, also known as Zhongming, Gongchang and Yanchuan, was originally from the Wanggu ethnic group.

古文：系出旺古族。仕金，屡立战功，官至镇远军节度使，巩昌便宜总帅。
现代文：曾为金朝屡立战功，官至镇远军节度使、巩昌便宜总帅。
English: He had repeatedly distinguished himself in war for the Kim dynasty. He was a high-ranking official and the commander-in-chief of the Zhenyuan Army, as well as the general of the Gongchang Army.

古文：金平，郡县望风款附，世显独城守，及皇子阔端驻兵城下，始率众降。
现代文：金亡，各郡县相继投诚蒙古，而汪世显独守城不降，直到皇子阔端兵临城下，他才率众出降。
English: After the death of Jin, all counties and counties successively surrendered to Mongolia, while Wang Shixian alone defended the city and did not surrender. He did not lead the people to surrender until the prince Kuo Duan's soldiers came under the city.

古文：皇子曰：吾征四方，所至皆下，汝独固守，何也？ 
现代文：皇子问他 ：吾征讨四方，攻无不克，而你独固守为何？ 
English: The prince asked him, "Why do I have to fight in four directions and conquer everything, while you have to keep to yourself?

古文：对曰： 臣不敢背主失节耳。 
现代文：世显说： 臣不敢背主失节。 
English: Worldly wisdom says: A vassal dare not disobey his lord.

古文：又问曰： 金亡已久，汝不降，果谁为耶？ 
现代文：又问： 金亡已久，你不降是为了谁？ 
English: He also asked, "Kim has been dead for a long time, for whose sake are you not stepping down?

古文：对曰： 大军迭至，莫知适从，惟殿下仁武不杀，窃意必能保全阖城军民，是以降也。 
现代文：世显回答说： 大军不断地来，我莫知所从，而殿下仁慈，不滥杀，我以为向你投降能保住全城军民的生命。 
English: Shixian replied, "I didn't know which way to go, but your highness is kind and doesn't kill indiscriminately. I thought that surrendering to you would save the lives of the entire army and people of the city."

古文：皇子大悦，承制锡世显章服，官从其旧。即从南征，断嘉陵，捣大安。
现代文：皇子大喜，仍令他官居原职。世显投归蒙古后，即随大军南征，攻陷嘉陵、大安。
English: The prince was overjoyed and still kept him in his original post. After Shih-hsien returned to Mongolia, he followed the large army to the south and conquered Jialing and Da'an.

古文：田、杨诸蛮结阵迎敌，世显以轻骑驰挠之。
现代文：田、杨诸蛮族联合抵抗，宋之曹将军暗中与他们互为应援。
English: Tian, Yang and other barbarians jointly resisted, and General Song Zi Cao secretly supported them.

古文：宋曹将军潜兵相为掎角，世显单骑突之，杀数十人。黎明，大军四合，杀其主将，入武信，遂进逼资、普。
现代文：世显单骑冲入敌阵中，杀数十人。第二天清晨，蒙古大军四面包围，杀敌主帅，攻入武信，接着进逼资、普。
English: In the early morning of the next day, the Mongolian army surrounded the four sides, killed the enemy's commander, invaded Wuxin, and then forced the capital, Pu.

古文：军葭萌，宋将依山为栅，世显以数骑往夺之，乘胜定资州，略嘉定、峨眉。进次开州。
现代文：蒙军至葭萌，宋军依山为寨，为世显所攻破，蒙军乘胜占据资州、嘉定、峨嵋，进抵开州。
English: The Mongolian army reached Qimeng, the Song army encamped in Yishan and was defeated by Shixian, the Mongolian army took advantage of the victory to occupy Zhizhou, Jiading, Emei, and advanced to Keshu.

古文：时方泥潦，由间道攀缘以达。
现代文：大雨后，道路泥泞难行，蒙军从小路攀援才到达。
English: After the heavy rain, the road was muddy and difficult to travel, and the Mongolian army had to climb from the side road to reach the aid.

古文：宋军屯万州南岸，世显即水北造船以疑之，夜从上游鼓革舟袭破之，宋师大扰。追奔至夔峡，过巫山，与宋援军遇，斩首三千余级。
现代文：宋军屯驻万州南岸，世显则在北岸造船以迷惑敌军，夜间却从上游乘皮革船而下，大破宋军，追至夔峡，过巫山，与宋援军相遇，斩首三千余级。
English: The Song army was stationed on the south coast of Wanzhou, while Shixian was building ships on the north coast to confuse the enemy army. At night, however, he took a leather boat from upstream and went down, defeated the Song army, chased it to Minxia, crossed Wushan, and met the Song reinforcements, beheading more than three thousand troops.

古文：明年，师还攻重庆，会大暑，乃罢归。
现代文：第二年，蒙军进攻重庆，因盛夏炎热，罢兵回师。
English: In the second year, the Mongolian army attacked Chongqing, but due to the heat of the summer, the soldiers returned to their division.

古文：觐太宗，锡金符，易其名曰中山，且历数其功，世显拜谢曰： 此皆圣明福德所致，臣何预焉！ 
现代文：世显朝见太宗，赐金符，为他改名为中山，历数其战功。世显拜谢道 ：这都是皇上圣明福德所致，臣何功之有！ 
English: Shixian visited Emperor Taizong, gave him a gold medallion, renamed him Zhongshan, and recounted his war exploits. Shixian gave thanks and said, "This is all due to the Emperor Saint Mingford, what a great achievement!"

古文：辛丑，蜀帅陈隆之贻书请战，声言有众百万，皇子集诸将议之，咸谓隆之可生擒也。
现代文：太宗十三年，宋蜀帅陈隆之下书来挑战，声言他有军百万。皇子召集诸将商议，都说可生擒陈隆之。
English: In the thirteenth year of Emperor Taizong, Song Shu Shuai Chen Long wrote a letter to challenge him, claiming that he had a million soldiers. The prince summoned the generals to discuss, and they all said that Chen Long could be killed.

古文：世显曰： 顾临敌何如，无庸夸辞为！ 
现代文：世显则认为 ：临敌后再看形势如何，不要事先夸口！ 
English: Shixian, on the other hand, believed that: after facing the enemy, see how the situation is, don't boast in advance!

古文：军薄成都，隆之战屡却，坚壁不出。
现代文：大军逼进成都，陈隆之屡战屡败，回军城中，坚守不出。
English: The large army forced its way into Chengdu. Chen Longzhi was repeatedly defeated in repeated battles and returned to the city, unable to hold out.

古文：其部曲田显约夜降，隆之觉之，世显曰： 事急矣！ 亟梯城入救显，得与从者七十余人出。获隆之，斩之。
现代文：其部属田显约定夜间开门投降，被隆之发觉。世显知道事情紧急，登梯入城救出田显及其随从七十余人，还擒斩了陈隆之。
English: His subordinate Tian Xian agreed to open the door at night and surrender, which was discovered by Takashi. Shixian knew that the matter was urgent, climbed the stairs into the city to rescue Tian Xian and his more than seventy followers, and also beheaded Chen Long.

古文：世显复简精锐五百人捣汉州，州兵三千出战，城闭，尽没。
现代文：世显又选精兵五百人直捣汉州，连攻三日未下，大军来又攻三日才克。
English: Shixian also selected five hundred elite soldiers to directly attack Hanzhou, and attacked for three days. The large army came and attacked for three days.

古文：谥贞肃。二子：嗣昌，武略将军、成都总军副万户；寿昌，资德大夫、江南行御史台中丞。
现代文：太宗皇后二年春，皇子论功按制度拜世显便宜总帅，秦、巩等二十余州事皆听他裁决，赐虎符、锦衣、玉带。这时，世显已病重，皇子遣医诊治，无效，年四十九岁卒。中统三年，追封陇西公，谥义武。
English: In the spring of the second year of the reign of Empress Taizong, the prince, according to the system of meritorious service, paid tribute to Shixian, the commander-in-chief, and more than 20 state affairs, such as Qin and Gong, all listened to his ruling, and gave him tiger charms, brocade clothes, and a jade belt. At this time, Shixian was already seriously ill, and the prince sent a doctor to diagnose and treat him, but it was not effective, and he died at the age of 49. In the third year of the unification of China, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shixi Gong and given the title of

古文：史天泽
现代文：延七年，加封陇右王。
English: Seven years later, he was given the additional title of "King of the Right."

古文：史天泽，字润甫，秉直季子也。
现代文：史天泽，字润甫，史秉直之第三子。
English: Shi Tianze, also known as Runfu, was the third son of Shi Bingzhong.

古文：即倾赀装，易甲仗，南还，行次满城，得士马甚众。
现代文：身长八尺，声如洪钟，善骑射，勇力超群，随其兄史天倪镇守真定。
English: He was eight feet tall, had a voice like Hong Zhong, was a good horseman and archer, and had great courage. He followed his brother Shi Tian Ni to guard Zhending.

古文：天泽摄行军事，遣监军李伯祐诣国王孛鲁言状，且乞济师。
现代文：太祖二十年，送母亲回北京时，其兄天倪在真定为武仙所害，帅府幕僚王缙、王守道忙把天泽从燕追回。天泽回来后，代行元帅之权，同时遣监军李伯去向国王孛鲁报告武仙反叛的情况，请派兵援助。
English: In the 20th year of Taizu's reign, when he was taking his mother back to Beijing, his brother Tian Ni was determined to have been harmed by Wuxian. The general staff of the General Headquarters, Wang Qian and Wang Shoudao, hurried to recover Tian Ze from Yan. After Tian Ze's return, he acted as marshal, and at the same time sent Li Bo to report the situation of Wuxian's rebellion to King Jiu Lu, asking him to send troops to help.

古文：天泽时为帐前军总领，孛鲁承制命绍兄职为都元帅。俾笑乃将蒙古军三千人援之，合势进攻卢奴。
现代文：天泽原为帐前军总领，孛鲁按照制度命他继承兄职为都元帅，派笑乃领蒙古军三千人去支援，合力进攻卢奴。
English: Tian Ze was originally the commander-in-chief of the front army, and according to the system, Zhao Lu ordered him to succeed his brother as the capital marshal, and sent 3,000 people from the Mongolian army to support and jointly attack Lunu.

古文：仙骁将葛铁枪者，拥众万人来拒战，天泽迎击之，身先士卒，勇气百倍。
现代文：武仙的骁将葛铁枪，带领万人来抵抗。天泽迎战，身先士卒，勇气百倍。
English: Wu Xian's crossbow will Ge Tiegun, leading ten thousand people to resist. Tian Ze meets the battle, leading the way, courage is a hundred times better.

古文：贼退阻泒河，乘夜而遁，天泽追及之，生擒葛铁枪，余众悉溃，获其兵甲辎重，军威大振。
现代文：贼退至氵瓜河，乘夜逃走。天泽追击，生擒葛铁枪，其余兵将都溃散。天泽缴获兵器辎重，军威大振。
English: The thieves retreated to the Xinggua River and fled by night. Tianze pursued them, and the remaining soldiers were scattered. Tianze captured a large number of weapons, and his military power was greatly enhanced.

古文：遂下中山，略无极，拔赵州，进军野头。
现代文：接着攻下中山、无极、赵州，进军野头。
English: Next, they captured Zhongshan, Wuji, Zhaozhou, and marched into Notou.

古文：会天泽兄天安亦提兵来赴，击仙败之，仙奔双门，遂复真定。
现代文：天泽之兄天安也提兵来战，击败武仙。
English: Tian Ze's brother Tian An also sent troops to fight and defeated Wu Xian.

古文：未几，宋大名总管彭义斌阴与仙合，欲取真定，天泽同笑乃扼诸赞皇，仙不得进。
现代文：武仙逃往双门。天泽等收复真定。不久，宋之大名总管彭义斌暗中与武仙勾结，欲夺取真定，天泽同笑乃扼守赞皇，武仙不得进。
English: Wuxian fled to Shuangmen. Tianze and others recovered Zhending. Soon, Peng Yibin, the general manager of the Song Dynasty, secretly colluded with Wuxian and wanted to seize Zhending. Tianze laughed and kept praising the emperor, and Wuxian was not allowed to enter.

古文：义斌势蹙，焚山自守，天泽遣锐卒五十，摧锋而入，自以铁骑继其后，缚义斌斩之。
现代文：义斌势穷，只能焚山自守，无力支援武仙。天泽遣锐卒五十人打前锋，他自己率铁骑继其后，擒义斌斩之。
English: Yibin was powerless, he could only defend himself, he was powerless to support Wu Xian. Tian Ze sent fifty soldiers to fight in the front, he himself led the cavalry to follow, and Yu Yibin killed him.

古文：未几，仙复令谍者，结死士于城中大历寺为内应，夜斩关而入，据其城。
现代文：又不久，武仙派人去真定城中联络一些人为内应，夜间斩关而入，占据真定。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wu sent someone to the city of Zhending to contact some people for internal correspondence. They entered the city at night and occupied Zhending.

古文：天泽引步卒数十，逾城东出，至藁城，求援于董俊。
现代文：天泽带领步兵数十人从城东越墙而出，奔至藁城，求援于董俊。
English: Tianze led dozens of infantrymen from the east of the city over the wall and ran to Lucheng to seek help from Dong Jun.

古文：俊授以锐卒数百，夜赴真定，而笑乃兵亦至，捕叛者三百余人，仙从数骑，走保西山抱犊寨。
现代文：俊当即给他锐卒数百人连夜赴真定，笑乃军也来了，共同进讨，捕获叛军三百余人。武仙率数骑退守西山抱犊寨。
English: Shun immediately sent hundreds of his soldiers to go to Zhending overnight, and Shona's army also came, marching forward together and capturing more than three hundred rebels.

古文：笑乃怒，忿民之从贼，驱万余人将杀之，天泽曰： 彼皆吾民，但为贼所胁耳，杀之何罪！ 
现代文：笑乃恼怒百姓随武仙反叛，准备屠杀万余人。天泽劝阻道 ：他们是我们的臣民，只是受贼人的胁迫而已，有何罪杀他们？ 
English: The laughter is the anger of the people who have rebelled with the samurai and are preparing to slaughter more than ten thousand people. Amazawa dissuades: They are our subjects, but they are only being coerced by the thieves. What is the crime of killing them?

古文：力争得释。
现代文：经力争才释放了这些百姓。
English: It took a lot of effort to free these people.

古文：乃缮城壁，立楼橹，为不可犯之计，招集流散，存恤困穷。
现代文：乃修城墙，建城楼，以防敌人侵犯；还招集流散人民，抚恤贫困百姓。
English: Instead, they built walls and towers to prevent the enemy from encroaching. They also gathered up the scattered people and raised up the poor people.

古文：以抱犊诸寨，仙之巢穴，不即剪覆，终遗后患，急攻下之，仙乃遁去。
现代文：因为抱犊诸寨是武仙的巢穴，不拔除将为后患，便着力攻破，武仙逃走。
English: Because the walled enclosing villages are the nests of martial artists, if they are not uprooted, they will be a hindrance. Therefore, they worked hard to break through, and the martial artists fled.

古文：继又取蚁尖、马武等寨，而相、卫亦降。
现代文：接着又攻破蚁尖、马武等寨，相州、卫州也相继投降。
English: Next, they broke through Ant-Tip, Mabu and other villages, and Sangju and Weizhou also surrendered one after another.

古文：己丑，太宗即位，议立三万户，分统汉兵。
现代文：太宗即位，立三万户以分别统领汉兵。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, and 30,000 households were set up to lead the Han soldiers.

古文：天泽适入觐，命为真定、河间、大名、东平、济南五路万户。
现代文：这时，天泽正入朝拜见皇帝，便命他为真定、河间、大名、东平、济南五路万户。
English: At this time, Tian Ze was entering the imperial court to pay homage to the emperor, and he ordered him to serve all households in the five provinces of Zhending, Hema, Daming, Dongping, and Jinan.

古文：庚寅冬，武仙复屯兵于卫，天泽合诸军围之。
现代文：太宗二年，武仙又屯兵于卫州，天泽与诸军合力围攻。
English: In the second year of Taizong, Emperor Wuxian again stationed troops in Weizhou, and Tianze joined forces with other armies to lay siege.

古文：金将完颜合达以众十万来援，战不利，诸将皆北，天泽独以千人绕出其后，败一都尉军，与大军合攻之，仙逸去，遂复卫州。
现代文：金将完颜合达率十万大军来援武仙，蒙军战败。天泽独率千人绕到敌军后面，击败一都尉军，再与大军合攻，武仙败走，卫州收复。
English: Kim Jong-un led a hundred thousand troops to come to the aid of Wuxian, and the Mongolian army was defeated. Tian Ze alone led a thousand people to go around the back of the enemy army, defeated a captain's army, and then attacked with a large army. Wuxian was defeated, and Weizhou was recovered.

古文：壬辰春，太宗由白坡渡河，诏天泽以兵由孟津会河南，至则睿宗已破合达军于三峰山。乃命略地京东，招降太康、柘县、瓦冈、睢州，追斩金将完颜庆山奴于阳邑。
现代文：四年春，太宗由白坡渡过黄河，诏令天泽由孟津会师河南。天泽军到达时，睿宗已破合达军于三峰山，于是命天泽攻占京东地方，招降太康、柘县、瓦冈、睢州，斩金将完颜庆山奴于阳邑。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, Taizong crossed the Yellow River from Baipo, and ordered Tianze from Mengjin to join the division in Henan. When Tianze's army arrived, Ruizong had already defeated the army in Sanfeng Mountain, so he ordered Tianze to conquer the eastern part of Beijing, recruit Taikang, Jixian, Wagang, and Zhangzhou, and cut off the gold from Yanqing Mountain and Yuyang.

古文：夏，帝北还，留睿宗总兵围汴。
现代文：这年夏季，太宗北还，留睿宗总领兵马围攻汴梁。
English: In the summer of that year, Taizong Bei and Rui Zong, the commander-in-chief, besieged Yanliang.

古文：癸巳春，金主突围而出，令完颜白撒自黄龙冈来袭新卫。
现代文：太宗五年，金哀宗由汴梁突围而出，令完颜白撒自黄冈袭击新卫。
English: In the fifth year of Taizong, Jin Aizong broke out of the encirclement of Zhaoliang and attacked Xinwei from Huanggang.

古文：天泽率轻骑驰赴之，比至，围已合，天泽奋戈突至城下，呼守者曰： 汝等勉力，援兵且至。 
现代文：天泽率轻骑去支援，到达时新卫已处于围困之中。天泽奋戈杀至城下，高声对守城的人说： 你们尽力防守，援兵将要到了。 
English: Tianze led a light cavalry to support, arriving when Xinwei was already under siege. Tianze fought his way to the bottom of the city and said loudly to the defenders of the city: Do your best to defend, reinforcements will arrive.

古文：复跃出，其众皆披靡，遂与大军夹击之，白撒等败走蒲城，天泽尾其后，白撒等兵尚八万，俘斩殆尽。
现代文：大军到后，与天泽军夹击，白撒等败走蒲城，天泽追击，白撒所率八万军或战死，或被俘，所剩无几。
English: After the arrival of the large army, they clashed with the Tianze army, and Baisa and others were defeated and fled the city of Pucheng. Tianze chased them, and the eighty thousand army led by Baisa was either killed in battle or captured. There were only a few left.

古文：金主以单舸东走归德，天泽追至归德，与诸军会。
现代文：金哀宗乘单舟逃往归德。天泽追至归德，与诸军会合。
English: Jin Aizong fled to Guidong by canoe. He chased Tian Ze to Guidong and rallied with the troops.

古文：新卫达鲁花赤撒吉思不花欲薄城背水而营，天泽曰： 此岂驻兵之地乎！彼若来犯，则进退失据矣。 
现代文：新卫达鲁花赤撒吉思不花欲近城背水扎营，天泽指出 ：此处不是驻军之地，若敌来犯，则无退军之路。 
English: The New Guard Darukas and Red Sagis were eager to encamp near the backwaters of the city, and Amazawa pointed out: This is not a place for garrisoning troops, and if the enemy comes, there is no way to retreat.

古文：不听，会天泽以事之汴，比还，撒吉思不花全军皆没。
现代文：不听。天泽有事去汴京，回来时，撒吉思不花已全军覆没。
English: He didn't listen. Tian Ze had to go to Beijing on business, and when he came back, the whole army had been wiped out.

古文：金主迁蔡，帝命元帅倴盏率大军围之。
现代文：金哀宗迁都蔡州，太宗命元帅亻奔盏率大军包围。
English: Emperor Jin's capital was moved to Caizhou, and Emperor Taizong's army was encircled by Marshal Nie Peng's army.

古文：天泽当其北面，结筏潜渡汝水，血战连日。
现代文：天泽军在北面，造筏潜渡汝水，血战数日。
English: Tianze's army was in the north, successfully sneaked across the river and fought a bloody battle for several days.

古文：又请以中户为军，上下户为民，著为定籍，境内以宁。金亡，移军伐宋。
现代文：六年正月，攻克蔡州，金哀宗自缢，天泽回到真定。金亡之后，大军转而伐宋。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, after conquering Caizhou, Jin Aizong committed suicide, and Tianze returned to Zhending. After the death of Jin, the army turned to Song.

古文：乙未，从皇子曲出攻枣阳，天泽先登，拔之。
现代文：七年，天泽随皇子曲出攻枣阳，首先破城而入。
English: In the seventh year, Emperor Taizawa, accompanied by Prince Qu, attacked Zaoyang, breaking into the city first.

古文：及攻襄阳，宋兵以舟数千陈于峭石滩，天泽挟二舟载死士，直前捣之，覆溺者万计。
现代文：攻襄阳，宋兵以数千只船列阵于峭石滩，天泽率勇士乘二舟直捣敌阵，敌军溺死者数以万计。
English: Attacking Xiangyang, Song soldiers lined up with thousands of ships on the craggy beach, Tianze led the warriors to directly attack the enemy by two boats, and the enemy drowned tens of thousands of people.

古文：师次复州，宋兵以舟三千锁湖面为栅，天泽曰： 栅破，则复自溃。 
现代文：九年，随宗王口温不花围攻光州，天泽军先破外城，再破内城。大军至复州，宋兵用三千只船封锁湖面，并在湖中立栅。天泽认为： 如果栅破，则复州宋军自溃。 
English: In the ninth year, following the dictum of King Zong, he laid siege to Gwangju. Tian Ze's army broke through the outer city first, and then broke through the inner city. The large army reached Fuzhou, and the Song soldiers blocked the lake surface with three thousand ships and set up a barricade on the lake. Tian Ze thought: If the barricade breaks, then the Fuzhou Song Army will self-destruct.

古文：亲执桴鼓，督勇士四十人攻其栅，不逾时，栅破，复人惧，请降。
现代文：他亲自击鼓，督促四十勇士攻破敌栅，复州宋军惧，开城投降。
English: He personally beat the drum, urged forty warriors to break through the enemy fence, the Fuzhou Song Army was afraid, and Kaesong surrendered.

古文：进攻寿春，天泽独当一面，宋兵夜出斫营，天泽手击杀数人，麾下兵继至，悉驱其兵入淮水死，乘胜而南，所向辄克。壬子，入觐，宪宗赐卫州五城为分邑。
现代文：在进攻寿春战斗中，天泽独当一面。宋军夜间来偷营，被天泽击败，均溺死于淮水。天泽乘胜南进，攻无不克。宪宗二年，天泽入朝拜见皇帝，宪宗赐卫州五城，其赋税收入为他所有。
English: In the attack on the Shuchun battle, Tianze was the only one. The Song army came to steal the camp at night, was defeated by Tianze, and both drowned in Huai Shui. Tianze took advantage of the victory to advance southward, attacking everything. In the second year of Emperor Xianzong, Tianze entered the court to meet the emperor, and Emperor Xianzong gave him five cities in Weizhou, and his tax revenue was all his.

古文：世祖时在藩邸，极知汉地不治，河南尤甚，请以天泽为经略使。
现代文：世祖当时在王府，深知汉地治理得不好，河南尤甚，奏请任天泽为经略使。
English: At that time, Shizu was in the royal palace. He was well aware that the Han Dynasty was not well governed, especially Henan Province. He requested that Tianze be appointed as the special envoy for economic affairs.

古文：至则兴利除害，政无不举，诛郡邑长贰之尤贪横者二人，境内大治。阿蓝答儿钩较诸路财赋，锻炼罗织，无所不至，天泽以勋旧独见优容，天泽曰： 我为经略使，今不我责，而罪余人，我何安乎！ 
现代文：天泽到任后，兴利除害，诛杀郡中贪横官吏二人，境内大治。阿蓝答儿搜括诸路财赋，无所不至，甚至罗织罪名，陷人入狱，而天泽因是功臣，特予优待。天泽说 ：我是经略使，不先谴责我，而治别人的罪，我心如何能安！ 
English: After Tian Ze came to office, Xing Li eliminated the harm, killed two corrupt officials in the county, and greatly improved the territory. Alangdara collected all kinds of wealth, did everything possible, even fabricated charges, and put people in prison, and Tian Ze was given special treatment because he was a hero. Tian Ze said: I am an economic envoy, how can my heart be at peace without first condemning me and punishing others?

古文：由是得释者甚众。戊午秋，从宪宗伐宋，由西蜀以入。
现代文：这话使阿蓝答儿明白自己的错误，许多被监禁的人得以释放。宪宗八年秋，随宪宗伐宋，由西蜀进军。
English: These words made Alangdara understand his mistake, and many prisoners were released. In the autumn of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, he marched from West Shu with Emperor Xianzong to Song.

古文：己未夏，驻合州之钓鱼山，军中大疫，方议班师，宋将吕文德以艨艟千余，溯嘉陵江而上，北军迎战不利。
现代文：九年夏，驻合州之钓鱼山，军中瘟疫流行，正计划班师，宋将吕文德率艨艟千余，溯嘉陵江而上。蒙古军迎战不利。
English: In the summer of the ninth year, stationed in the Diaoyu Mountains in Hezhou, the plague was prevalent in the army, and the squadron was being planned. Song general Lü Wende led more than a thousand soldiers up the Jialing River. The Mongolian army was unfavorable to the war.

古文：帝命天泽御之，乃分军为两翼，跨江注射，亲率舟师顺流纵击，三战三捷，夺其战舰百余艘，追至重庆而还。
现代文：宪宗命天泽抵御。天泽兵出两翼，由两岸向敌船齐射，箭如雨注。他自己亲率水军顺流而下，三战三捷，夺敌舰百余艘，直追到重庆而还。
English: Xianzong ordered Tianze to resist. Tianze's soldiers came out with two wings and fired at the enemy ships from both banks, arrows raining down. He himself led the navy down the river, fought three battles, captured more than a hundred enemy ships, and chased them straight to Chongqing and survived.

古文：中统元年，世祖即位，首召天泽，问以治国安民之道，即具疏以对，大略谓： 朝廷当先立省部以正纪纲，设监司以督诸路，沛恩泽以安反侧，退贪残以任贤能，颁奉秩以养廉，禁贿赂以防奸，庶能上下丕应，内外休息。 
现代文：中统元年，世祖即位，首先召天泽问治国安民之道。天泽上疏回答，大略是 ：朝廷当先立中书省和六部以正纪纲，设监司以监督各路，施恩泽使人民不反叛元朝，除去贪官污吏，任用贤能之人，颁布官吏俸禄以养廉，严禁贿赂以防奸，望能上下相应，内外休息。 
English: In the first year of the Middle Kingdom, when the patriarch ascended the throne, he first summoned Emperor Tianze to inquire about the way to keep the country and the people safe. Emperor Tianze replied, roughly: The imperial court should first establish the Ministry of Education and the six ministries with a correct disciplinary system, set up supervisors to supervise all roads, grant grace so that the people do not rebel against the Yuan Dynasty, remove corrupt officials, appoint capable people, issue officials' salaries to maintain corruption, strictly prohibit bribery to prevent adultery, and hope that the upper and lower levels can rest accordingly, both inside and outside.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：世祖赞赏并采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：继命往鄂渚撤江上军，还，授河南等路宣抚使，俄兼江淮诸翼军马经略使。
现代文：接着命他往鄂渚撤回江上军。回京后又授为河南路宣抚使，很快又令他兼任江淮诸翼军马经略使。
English: Next, he was ordered to withdraw his troops from the upper reaches of the Yangtze River to Hunan. After returning to Beijing, he was awarded the post of Henan Road Propaganda Envoy, and soon he was also made the deputy envoy of the horse-drawn carriages of the Jianghuai and Zhuye armies.

古文：二年夏五月，拜中书右丞相。
现代文：中统二年五月，拜中书右丞相。
English: In May of the second year of the unification of China, he became the Minister of the Right of the Central Government.

古文：天泽既秉政，凡前所言治国安民之术，无不次第举行。
现代文：天泽执政后，凡前所列举的那些治国安民之术，无不相继推行。
English: After the reign of Emperor Tenze, all of the above-mentioned methods of governing the country and ensuring the safety of the people were implemented one after another.

古文：又定省规十条，以正庶务。
现代文：又定省规十条，为中书省的政务树立了准则。
English: In addition, ten provincial regulations were established, which set up a guideline for the government affairs of China's book province.

古文：宪宗初年，括户余百万，至是，诸色占役者太半，天泽悉奏罢之。秋九月，扈从世祖亲征阿里不哥，次昔木土之地，诏丞相線真将右军，天泽将左军，合势蹙之，阿里不哥败走。
现代文：九月，扈从世祖亲征阿里不哥，至昔木土之地，诏令丞相纟泉真领右军，天泽率领左军，合力夹攻，阿里不哥败走。
English: In September, Emperor Go-Shirakawa issued an imperial edict ordering the prime minister, Emperor Go-Izumizane, to lead the right-wing army, and Emperor Tenze to lead the left-wing army, and the two armies jointly attacked, and Emperor Go-Shirakawa was defeated.

古文：三年春，李璮阴结宋人，以益都叛，遂据济南，诏亲王哈必赤总兵讨之，凶势甚盛。
现代文：中统三年春，李王暗中勾结宋军，据益都反叛，占领济南。朝廷诏令亲王哈必赤统兵讨伐。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Middle Reunification, King Li secretly colluded with the Song army, which led to the rebellion and occupation of Jinan. The imperial court ordered Prince Hapi to fight against the Red Army.

古文：继命天泽往，天泽闻璮入济南，笑曰： 豕突入苙，无能为也。 
现代文：因叛军气势汹汹，继命天泽前往。天泽闻王入济南，哈哈大笑说 ：猪闯入栏内，成不了气候。 
English: Because the rebels were so powerful, he was ordered to go to Tianze. When Tianze Wengwang entered Jinan, he laughed out loud and said, "The pigs broke into the corral, so we can't have good weather."

古文：至则进说于哈必赤曰： 璮多谲而兵精，不宜力角，当以岁月毙之。 
现代文：到山东后向哈必赤建议： 王多诈而兵又精，不能与他硬拼，只要拖延时间，不攻自毙。 
English: After arriving in Shandong, he suggested to Habichai: Wang is deceitful and skillful, and it is not possible to fight with him. As long as he delays, he will not be able to defeat him.

古文：乃深沟高垒，绝其奔轶。
现代文：于是在济南城周围深挖沟，高筑垒，不让他跑掉，包围四个月之久。
English: So they dug a deep trench around the city of Jinan and built a high barrier to prevent him from escaping and surrounded him for four months.

古文：凡四月，城中食尽，军溃出降，生擒璮，斩于军门，诛同恶者数十人，余悉纵归。
现代文：城中食尽，叛军开门投降，生擒李王，斩于军门，诛其同案犯数十人，其余释放归家。
English: The city was exhausted, the rebels opened the door and surrendered. Li Wang was captured alive, beheaded at the military gate, dozens of his accomplices were executed, and the rest were released and returned home.

古文：明日，引军东行，未至益都，城中人已开门迎降。
现代文：第二天，蒙古军东行，未到益都，益都人已开门迎降了。
English: The next day, the Mongol army headed east, but before they reached Yidu, the people of Yidu had already opened the door to welcome them.

古文：初，天泽将行，帝临轩授诏，责以专征，俾诸将皆听节度。
现代文：在天泽受命去山东征讨李王时，世祖在殿前平台上对天泽面授诏令，令他专门负责征讨之事，诸将都由他指挥调遣。
English: When Tenzawa was ordered to go to Shandong to fight against King Li, the ancestor issued a decree to Tenzawa on the platform in front of the hall, ordering him to be specifically responsible for the campaign. All generals were commanded and dispatched by him.

古文：天泽未尝以诏示人，及还，帝慰劳之，悉归功于诸将，其慎密谦退如此。
现代文：天泽在山东从未把皇帝亲授的诏书示人。平叛回来后，世祖慰劳他，他把这次平叛功劳归于诸将，可见其为人谨慎谦逊。
English: In Shandong, Tianze never showed the imperial edict personally issued by the emperor. After returning from the rebellion, the ancestor consoled him, and he attributed this rebellion to the generals, which shows that he was cautious and humble.

古文：天泽在宪宗时尝奏： 臣始摄先兄天倪军民之职，天倪有二子，一子管民政，一子掌兵权，臣复入叨寄遇，一门之内，处三要职，分所当辞，臣可退休矣。 
现代文：天泽在宪宗时就曾奏请辞职，他说 ：臣开始是代理兄天倪军政之职。天倪有二子，一子管民政，一子掌兵权，臣复入朝受皇上恩宠，一门之内居三要职，本应辞职，故臣请求退休。 
English: At the time of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Tianze had asked him to resign. He said: "From the beginning, I was acting as the brother of Emperor Tian Ni in military and political affairs. Emperor Tian Ni has two sons, one son is in charge of civil affairs, one son is in charge of the military, Emperor Tian Zeng reinstated me into the imperial court by the grace of the emperor, I hold three important positions within one family, I should have resigned, the late Emperor Tian Ni asked me to retire.

古文：帝曰： 卿奕世忠勤，有劳于国，一门三职，何愧何嫌！ 
现代文：宪宗说： 卿家世代忠勤，有功劳于国家，一门三职，当之无愧。 不许。
English: Gensong said, "The Kyo family has been loyal and diligent for generations, and has made contributions to the country. They deserve to be promoted to one of the three positions.

古文：竟不许。至是，言者或谓李璮之变，由诸侯权太重。天泽遂奏： 兵民之权，不可并于一门，行之请自臣家始。 
现代文：此时，有人说李王之变是由于诸侯之权太重。天泽又上书奏称 ：军政之权不可集中在某一家，请自臣开始实行。 
English: At this time, some people said that the change of King Li was due to the power of the princes being too heavy. Amazawa also sent a letter saying: the power of military government must not be concentrated in a particular family, and asked his vassals to begin implementing it.

古文：于是史氏子侄，即日解兵符者十七人。
现代文：于是史氏之子侄当即解兵权者十七人。
English: As a result, 17 of Shih's sons and nephews were immediately given the right to leave the military.

古文：至元元年，加光禄大夫，右丞相如故。
现代文：至元元年，加天泽光禄大夫，仍为右丞相。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Ga Tianze Guanglu became a doctor and was still the minister of the right.

古文：三年，皇太子燕王领中书省，兼判枢密院事，以天泽为辅国上将军、枢密副使。
现代文：三年，皇太子管领中书省兼判枢密院事，任天泽为辅国上将军、枢密副使。
English: In the third year, the crown prince was put in charge of the Central Literature Department and the Privy Council, and Tian Ze was appointed as an assistant admiral and vice-minister of the privy council.

古文：四年，复授光禄大夫，改中书左丞相。
现代文：四年，再授光禄大夫，改任中书左丞相。
English: Four years later, he was awarded the title of Guanglu Daifu (Doctor of Letters) again, and was reappointed to the post of Chushu Zuojo (Minister of the Left).

古文：六年，帝以宋未附，议攻襄阳，诏天泽与驸马忽剌出往经画之，赐白金百锭、楮币万缗。
现代文：六年，世祖因宋未归附，计划攻取襄阳，诏令天泽与驸马忽剌出到襄阳去调查形势，规划战略，赐他白金百锭，纸币万缗。
English: In the sixth year, because the Song Dynasty was not annexed, the founder planned to capture Yangyang. He ordered Tianze and Xi Ma to go to Yangyang to investigate the situation and plan the strategy, and gave him a hundred yuan of platinum and ten thousand yuan of banknotes.

古文：至则相要害，立城堡，以绝其声援，为必取之计。
现代文：他们到襄阳后，勘察要害之地，建立城堡以断绝敌军的援兵，作为必定能攻取襄阳的战略步骤。
English: After they arrived in Xiangyang, they surveyed the key areas and built a castle to cut off the enemy's reinforcements, as a strategic step that would certainly be able to capture Xiangyang.

古文：七年，以疾还燕。
现代文：七年，因病还燕。
English: Seven years later, he was forced to retire due to illness.

古文：八年，进开府仪同三司、平章军国重事，仍敕右丞相安童谕旨曰： 两省、院、台，或一月、一旬，遇大事，卿可商量，小事不烦卿也。 
现代文：八年，晋升开府仪同三司、平章军国重事。世祖规定：中书尚书两省、枢密院、御史台，一月或一旬内，遇大事须与天泽商议，小事则不必烦他。
English: In the eighth year, he was promoted to hold the ceremony of opening the prefectural government with the three departments and the military affairs of the military state. The founder stipulated: the two provinces, the Privy Council, and the Imperial Historian's Office should be consulted with Tian Ze in the event of a major event within one month or one month, and they should not bother him with minor matters.

古文：十年春，与平章阿术等进攻樊城，拔之，襄阳降。
现代文：十年春，天泽与平章阿术等攻克樊城，襄阳降。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, Tianze and Pingzhang Ahshu conquered Shicheng, and Xiangyang fell.

古文：勿以小疾阻行为忧，可且北发，善自调护。 
现代文：十一年，诏令天泽与丞相伯颜总领大军自襄阳水陆并进伐宋。
English: In the eleventh year of the Joseon Dynasty, Emperor Taejo ordered Emperor Taejo and Prime Minister Baoyan to lead an army from Xiangyang to invade the Song Dynasty.

古文：还至真定，帝又遣其子杠与尚医驰视，赐以药饵。
现代文：天泽至郢州病发，还至襄阳，帝遣侍臣赐葡萄酒慰问，并劝他北归养病，因而回到真定。帝又遣天泽之子史杠与管理医药的官去看望，送药。
English: Tianze went to Zhangzhou when he fell ill, and also went to Xiangyang. The emperor sent an attendant to offer wine to console Tianze, and advised him to return north to recover from his illness, so he returned to Zhending. The emperor also sent Tianze's son Shi Li and the official in charge of medicine to visit and send medicine.

古文：天泽因附奏曰： 臣大限有终，死不足惜，但愿天兵渡江，慎勿杀掠。 
现代文：天泽上书说： 臣天年有限，死不足惜，但愿天兵渡江，慎勿杀掠。 
English: Tian Ze wrote: "O subject, you only have a limited number of years, death is not to be regretted. I hope Heaven's soldiers will cross the river, and be careful not to kill and plunder."

古文：语不及它。以十二年二月七日薨，年七十四。
现代文：于十二年二月七日与世长辞，享年七十四岁。
English: He passed away on February 7, 2012, at the age of 74.

古文：讣闻，帝震悼，遣近臣赙以白金二千五百两，赠太尉，谥忠武。
现代文：讣报朝廷，世祖哀悼，遣近臣赐安葬费白金二千五百两，赠太尉，谥忠武。
English: He reported to the imperial court, mourned the death of his ancestor, sent his close vassals to pay 2,500 taels of platinum for his funeral expenses, and presented him with the title of captain and the honorary title of Zhongwu.

古文：后累赠太师，进封镇阳王，立庙。
现代文：后累赠太师，进封镇阳王，立庙祭奠。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of grandmaster, the town of Zhenyangwang was annexed, and a temple was built to commemorate him.

古文：天泽平居，未尝自矜其能，及临大节、论大事，毅然以天下之重自任。
现代文：天泽平时不曾自夸其能，而遇大事则毅然以安天下为己任。
English: Tian Ze did not boast of his ability in ordinary times, but in the event of a major event, he resolutely took it upon himself to keep the world safe.

古文：年四十，始折节读书，尤熟于《资治通鉴》，立论多出人意表。
现代文：四十岁才改变原来的志向，攻读书史，尤熟悉《资治通鉴》，其立论多出人意料之外。
English: At the age of forty, he changed his original aspiration and studied the history of reading. He was particularly familiar with the "Capitalism General Study," and his theories were more than unexpected.

古文：拜相之日，门庭悄然。
现代文：拜相之日，门庭悄然无声。
English: On the day of the visitation, the courtyard was silent.

古文：或劝以权自张，天泽举唐韦澳告周墀之语曰： 愿相公无权。
现代文：有人劝他以权谋私，天泽举唐韦澳告诫周墀的话 ：原相公无权。
English: Some people advised him to use power for personal gain, and Tian Ze held up Tang Wei Ao to warn Zhou Qi: the original emperor had no power.

古文：爵禄刑赏，天子之柄，何以权为！ 
现代文：爵、禄、刑、赏是天子之权，你要权干什么？ 
English: Peerage, reward, punishment, and reward are the right of the Son of Heaven. What do you want the right to do?

古文：因以谢之，言者惭服。
现代文：劝他的人听了这话自觉惭愧，对天泽敬服。
English: The people who advised him were self-consciously ashamed when they heard this, and paid tribute to Tenzawa.

古文：当金末，名士流寓失所，悉为治其生理而宾礼之，后多致显达。
现代文：金末，名士到处流亡，无处为家。天泽为他们安置生活，以礼待之。这些人后来多成达官贵人。
English: At the end of the Heian period, celebrities were exiled everywhere and had no place to call home. Amaterasu arranged a life for them and treated them with courtesy. Many of these people later became dignitaries.

古文：破归德，释李大节不杀，而送至真定，署为参谋。
现代文：攻破归德时，释放李大节不杀，并且把他送到真定任参谋。
English: When he returned to Germany, he released Li Datang without killing him, and sent him to Zhending as a staff officer.

古文：卫为食邑，命王昌龄治之，旧人多不平，而莫能间，其知人之明、用人之专如此。
现代文：皇帝把卫州赐与他征收其赋税为己有，他命王昌龄去管理。该州原来的官员内心不服，但也不能使他改变其任命，可见其知人之明、用人之专。
English: The emperor gave the state of Weizhou to him to collect its taxes as his own, and he ordered Wang Changling to manage it. The original official of the state was not satisfied with his heart, but he could not make him change his appointment, which shows that he knew the people and employed them exclusively.

古文：是以出入将相五十年，上不疑而下无怨，人以比于郭子仪、曹彬云。
现代文：他出为将，入为相五十年，上不疑，下不怨，人们把他比作郭子仪、曹彬。
English: He has been in and out of the limelight for 50 years, and people compare him to Guo Zi Yi and Cao Bin.

