古文：◎世祖八十七年春正月癸卯朔，高丽国王王睶遣其佥议中赞金方庆来贺，兼奉岁贡。
现代文：至元十七年春，正月初一，高丽国王王贝春派遣该国佥议中赞金方庆前来恭贺新年，兼奉上每年例行的贡品。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, King Baechun of Goryeo sent the country's highest-ranking official, Kim Fangqing, to congratulate the new year and also presented the annual tribute.

古文：丙午，命万户綦公直戍别失八里，赐钞一万二千五百锭。
现代文：初四，命令万户綦公直戍守别十八里，赐给钱钞一万二千五百锭。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he ordered all households to keep eighteen li, and gave them money and banknotes of 12,500 baht.

古文：辛亥，磁州、永平县水，给钞贷之。
现代文：初九，磁州、永平县发生水灾。借贷钱钞给该地。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, floods occurred in Magizhou and Yongping County. Loans of money and banknotes were made to this area.

古文：丙辰，立迁转官员法：凡无过者授见阙，物故及过犯者选人补之，满代者令还家以俟。
现代文：十四日，制定升迁、调动官员的法令：凡是没有犯过失的，授予现已空缺的职务；去世或犯有过失的，选派别的官员补充该员职务；任职期满的，令其回家候补。
English: On the 14th, a decree on the promotion and transfer of officials was formulated: for those who have not committed any mistakes, they will be awarded the currently vacant positions; for those who have died or committed mistakes, other officials will be selected to supplement the position of the member; for those whose term of office has expired, they will be sent home as a substitute.

古文：又定诸路差税课程，增益者即上报，隐漏者罪之，不须履亩增税，以摇百姓。
现代文：又规定各路的差役、赋税的条款，凡增加条款的必须立即上报，增加了而隐瞒不报的处以罪罚；不须丈量田亩以增加租税，免使百姓不安定。
English: It also stipulates the terms of dispatched labor and taxation of each road, and those who increase the terms must immediately report, and those who increase but conceal and do not report will be punished with a crime; it is not necessary to measure fields and mu to increase taxes, so as not to make the people unstable.

古文：诏括江淮铜及铜钱铜器。
现代文：下诏收聚江淮的铜和铜钱、铜器。
English: The next edict is to collect the copper, copper money and copperware from Jianghuai.

古文：辛酉，以海贼贺文达所掠良妇百三十余人还其家。
现代文：十九日，把海盗贺文达所抢劫的良家妇女一百三十余人送回她们家中。
English: On the 19th, more than 130 women from good families who were robbed by the pirate He Wenda were sent back to their homes.

古文：广西廉州海贼霍公明、郑仲龙等伏诛。
现代文：广西廉州的海盗霍公明、郑仲龙等被处死。
English: Pirates Huo Gongming and Zheng Zhonglong from Lianzhou, Guangxi, were executed.

古文：甲子，敕泉州行省所辖州郡山寨未即归附者率兵拔之，已拔复叛者屠之。
现代文：二十二日，敕令泉州行中书省，在其所管辖的州郡中，那些尚未归附的山寨，即率军将其攻占；已经攻占之后又重新叛变的屠城。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor ordered Quanzhou to march to Zhongshu Province. In the prefectures and counties under its jurisdiction, those villages that had not yet been annexed would be captured by the army; the slaughterhouse that had been captured and then rebelled again.

古文：以总管张瑄、千户罗璧收宋二王有功，升瑄沿海招讨使，虎符；璧管军总管，金符。
现代文：因为总管张王宣、千户罗璧降伏亡宋的二王有功，提升张王宣为沿海招讨使，佩戴虎符；提升罗璧为管军总管，佩戴金符。
English: Because Zhang Wang Xuan and Qianhu Luo Bi, the general managers, contributed to the surrender of the two kings of the late Song Dynasty, Zhang Wang Xuan was promoted to the coastal recruiting envoy, wearing a tiger badge; Luo Bi was promoted to the general manager of the army, wearing a gold badge.

古文：丁卯，畋近郊。
现代文：二十五日，皇帝在京师的近郊狩猎。
English: On the 25th, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：诏毋以侍卫军供工匠役。
现代文：诏令不得派近卫军承担工匠的差使。
English: The Imperial Edict decreed that the Imperial Guard could not be sent to take on the task of dispatching craftsmen.

古文：戊辰，敕相威检核阿里海牙、忽都帖木儿等所俘丁三万二千余人，并放为民。
现代文：二十六日，敕令相威查核阿里海牙、忽都帖木儿等人所俘获的丁口三万二千余人，全部遣放他们为民。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict was issued to investigate the more than 32,000 people in Dingkou who had been captured by Ali Hague, Khudu Timur and others, and all of them were deported.

古文：置行中书省于福州。
现代文：在福州设置行中书省。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture was established in Fuzhou.

古文：改德庆路为总管府。
现代文：把德庆府改为德庆路总管府。
English: Change Deqing Prefecture to Deqing Road General Administration.

古文：赐开滦河五卫军钞。
现代文：赐给开凿滦河的五卫军钱钞。
English: The money was given to the Fifth Guards Army for digging the Minhe River.

古文：二月乙亥，张易言： 高和尚有秘术，能役鬼为兵，遥制敌人。 
现代文：二月初三，张易上奏说： 高和尚有秘密的法术，能够差遣鬼魂当兵，老远就能制服敌人。 
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, Zhang Yi said: "The high monk still has secret magic, and can send ghosts as soldiers, and can subdue the enemy from afar.

古文：命和礼霍孙将兵与高和尚同赴北边。
现代文：皇帝命令和礼霍孙率军和高和尚一起前往北部边疆。
English: The emperor ordered the army led by Lihosun and Gao Monk to go to the northern frontier.

古文：丙子，立北京道二驿。
现代文：在北京道建立两处驿站。
English: Set up two stations on Beijing Road.

古文：丁丑，答里不罕以云南行省军攻定昌路，擒总管谷纳，杀之。
现代文：初五，答里不罕率领云南行省的军队进攻定昌路，擒获总管谷纳，将其杀死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Tali led the troops of Yunnan Province to attack Dingchang Road, captured the general manager, Gu Na, and killed him.

古文：诏令答里不罕还，以阿答代之。
现代文：皇帝下诏，令答里不罕返回，以阿答去代替他。
English: The emperor issued an edict, ordering Tari not to return, and replacing him with Ata.

古文：敕非远方归附人毋入会同馆。
现代文：敕令：不是从远方归附的人不得进入会同馆住宿。
English: Royal Decree: People who are not affiliated from afar are not allowed to enter the association's accommodation.

古文：诏纳速剌丁将精兵万人征缅国。
现代文：下诏：令纳速剌丁率领精兵一万人征伐缅国。
English: The following edict was issued: Let Nahao Ding lead ten thousand elite soldiers to invade Burma.

古文：乙酉，赏纳速剌丁所部征金齿功银五千三百二十两。
现代文：十三日，赏给纳速剌丁部下征讨金齿国有功的人员五千三百二十两银子。
English: On the 13th, 5,322 pieces of silver were awarded to the personnel of the Golden Tooth National Merit Award who were recruited by the subordinates of Naso Ding.

古文：己丑，命梅国宾袭其父应春泸州安抚使职。
现代文：十七日，命令梅国宾承袭他父亲梅应春泸州安抚使的职务。
English: On the 17th, he ordered Mei Guobin to succeed his father, Mei Yingchun, as the Peace Envoy to Bozhou.

古文：泸州尝叛，应春为前重庆制置使张珏所杀。
现代文：泸州曾经背叛，梅应春被前重庆制置使张珏杀害。
English: Zhangzhou once betrayed, Mei Yingchun was killed by the former Chongqing system setter Zhang Ye.

古文：国宾诣阙诉冤，诏以珏畀国宾，使复其父仇。
现代文：梅国宾前往朝廷申诉冤情，皇上下诏把张珏交给梅国宾，让他为父亲报仇。
English: Mei Guobin went to the imperial court to complain about the grievance, and the emperor gave Zhang Ye to Mei Guobin to avenge his father.

古文：珏时在京兆，闻之自经死。
现代文：张珏当时正在京兆，听到这件事便自缢而死。
English: Zhang Ye was in Beijing at the time, and when he heard about this, he hanged himself.

古文：国宾请赎还泸州军民之为俘者，从之。
现代文：梅国宾请赎回泸州被俘获的军民。皇帝允从。
English: Mei Guobin asked to redeem the captured soldiers and civilians in Ganzhou. The emperor agreed.

古文：日本国杀国使杜世忠等，征东元帅忻都、洪茶丘请自率兵往讨，廷议姑少缓之。
现代文：日本国杀害朝廷派去的使臣杜世忠等，征东元帅忻都、洪茶丘请求亲自率军前去讨伐，朝廷的大臣们议论的结果，暂时延缓一段时间。
English: Japan killed the envoy sent by the imperial court, Du Shizhong, and others, and the marshals of the Eastern Expedition, Xitou and Hong Cha-ku, requested to personally lead the army to go to the crusade. As a result of the discussion of the ministers of the imperial court, it was temporarily delayed for some time.

古文：丙申，诏谕真人祁志诚等焚毁《道藏》伪妄经文及板。
现代文：二十四日，下诏命道士祁志诚烧毁伪造而妄称为《道藏》的经文及刻板。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued an edict ordering the Taoist Zou Zhicheng to burn the falsified and falsely called "Tao Zang" scriptures and tablets.

古文：庚子，阿里海牙及纳速剌丁招缅国及洞蛮降臣，诏就军前定录其功以闻。
现代文：二十八日，阿里海牙和纳速剌丁招降缅国以及溪洞蛮部的降臣。下诏：令其就近在军前核定，并录下他们的功劳奏闻朝廷。
English: On the 28th, Ali Haiga and Nakhon Ratchasima recruited the surrendered vassals of Burma and the barbarians of Kheidong, and issued the following edict: they were to be brought to the front for approval, and their services were to be recorded and reported to the imperial court.

古文：江淮行省左丞夏贵请老，从之，仍官其子孙。
现代文：江淮行中书省左丞夏贵请求告老还乡，皇帝同意了他的请求，仍旧封他的子孙为官。
English: At the request of Zuoxing Xia Gui, the governor of Shandong Province, the emperor agreed to his request to return to his hometown. He still appointed his sons and grandsons as officials.

古文：合剌所部和州等城为叛兵所掠者，赐钞给之，仍免其民差役三年。
现代文：和剌所管辖的和州等城，凡是遭到叛军抢劫的，赐给他们钱钞，并免征该地百姓的差役三年。
English: He gave money and banknotes to the rebels who had been robbed in the cities and prefectures under his jurisdiction, and exempted the people of those cities and prefectures from forced labor for three years.

古文：发侍卫军三千浚通州运粮河。
现代文：调拨三千名侍卫军去疏浚通州运粮的河道。
English: Three thousand bodyguards were assigned to dredge the river channel for transporting grain in Tongzhou.

古文：畏吾户居河西界者，令其屯田。
现代文：居住在河西境内的畏兀儿族民户，命他们屯田。
English: The local households of the Diao children ethnic group living in the territory of Hexi ordered them to set up farmlands.

古文：辛丑，以广中民不聊生，召右丞塔出、左丞吕师夔廷诘坏民之由，命也的迷失、贾居贞行宣慰司往抚之。
现代文：二十九日，因为广州境内民不聊生，征召右丞塔出、左丞吕师夔来当廷质询百姓生活困苦的原因。派也的迷失、贾居贞代理宣慰司使前去安抚当地百姓。
English: On the 29th, because the people in Guangzhou did not want to live longer, the right-hand pagoda and the left-hand pagoda were summoned to come to the court to inquire about the reasons for the hardships of the people's lives. The pagoda was lost, and Jia Juzhen, acting as a consoler, went to appease the local people.

古文：师夔至，廷辩无验，复令还省治事。
现代文：吕师夔来到后，当廷辩论的情况不能够证实，重新命他回到行省处理政务。
English: After Lv Shijun arrived, the situation of the court debate could not be confirmed, and he was ordered to return to the province to deal with government affairs.

古文：诏王相府于诸奥鲁市马二万六千三百匹。
现代文：诏令亲王的相府在各个辎重营买马二万六千三百匹。
English: The imperial edict ordered the prince's chancellery to buy 26,300 horses in various camps.

古文：遣使代祀岳渎。
现代文：派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎。
English: Envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the Five Sacred Mountains and the Four Sacred Mountains.

古文：赐诸王阿八合、那木干所部，及征日本行省阿剌罕、范文虎等西锦衣、银钞、币帛各有差。
现代文：赐给诸侯王阿八合、那不干的部众，以及征战日本的行省长官阿剌罕、范文虎等西锦衣、钱钞、绢帛，数额各不相同。
English: Various amounts of Western brocade clothing, banknotes, and money were given to the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals.

古文：又赐四川贫民及兀剌带等马牛羊价钞。
现代文：又赐给四川的贫民以及兀剌带等马、牛、羊、钱钞。
English: He also gave horses, cattle, sheep, and banknotes to the poor in Sichuan, as well as umbilical cords.

古文：三月癸卯，命福建王积翁入领省事，中书省臣以为不可，改户部尚书。
现代文：三月初二，命福建的王积翁入朝掌管中书省事务，中书省大臣认为不行，便改任他为户部尚书。
English: On the second day of March, Wang Jiong of Fujian was appointed to take charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy. The Minister of the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy did not think it was possible, so he was appointed as the Minister of Calligraphy and Calligraphy.

古文：甲辰，车驾幸上都。
现代文：初三，皇帝临幸上都。
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor arrived at the capital.

古文：思、播州军侵镇远、黄平界，命李德辉等往视之。
现代文：思州、播州的军队侵犯镇远、黄平的地界，皇帝命李德辉等人前往视察。
English: The armies of Shizhou and Banzhou encroached on the territorial boundaries of Zhenyuan and Huangping, and the emperor ordered Li Dehui and others to go to Zhou to inspect.

古文：罢通政院官不胜任者。
现代文：把通政院不能胜任的官员撤职。
English: Remove incompetent officials from the State Council.

古文：丙午，敕东西两川发蒙古、汉军戍鱼通、黎、雅。
现代文：初五，敕令东川和西川调遣蒙古军、汉军戍守鱼通、黎州、雅州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor ordered Dongchuan and Xichuan to dispatch Mongolian and Han troops to defend Yutong, Lishu and Yashu.

古文：乙卯，立都功德使司，从二品，掌奏帝师所统僧人并吐番军民等事。
现代文：十四日，建立都功德使司，秩禄为从二品，掌管帝师统辖下的僧人以及吐蕃军民的事务，向皇帝上奏。
English: On the 14th, the Department of Merit and Virtue Envoys was established, with the rank of second grade, to administer the affairs of the monks under the supervision of the emperor and the military and civilians of Tubo, and report to the emperor.

古文：己未，诏讨罗氏鬼国，命以蒙古军六千，哈剌章军一万，西川药剌海、万家奴军万人，阿里海牙军万人，三道并进。
现代文：十八日，下诏讨伐罗氏鬼国，命令派蒙古军六千名、哈剌章军一万名，西川的药剌海、万家奴军一万名、阿里海牙军一万名、三路并进。
English: On the 18th, he issued an edict to fight against the ghost country of the Luo clan, and ordered to send 6,000 Mongolian troops, 10,000 troops from Harbin and Zhang, 10,000 troops from the West River, 10,000 troops from the Wanjia Army, and 10,000 troops from the Ali-Hague Army.

古文：癸亥，高邮等处饥，赈粟九千四百石。
现代文：二十二日，高邮等地发生饥荒，赈济饥民九千四百石粮食。
English: On the 22nd, famine occurred in Gaoyou and other places, and 9,400 kilos of grain were provided to the hungry.

古文：辛未，立畏吾境内交钞提举司。
现代文：三十日，在畏兀儿境内建立交钞提举司。
English: On the 30th, a banknote-handling office was established in the territory of Dangun.

古文：给月脱古思八部屯田牛具。
现代文：供给脱古思八部屯田以耕牛和农具。
English: Supplying the eight out-of-the-ordinary farmlands with oxen and farm tools.

古文：赐忙古带等羊马及皇子南木合下羊马价。
现代文：赐给忙古带等人羊、马及皇子南木合部下羊马价钱钞。
English: He gave sheep, horses, and money to Emperor Shaku and Emperor Nanko.

古文：夏四月壬申朔，中书省臣言： 唆都军士扰民，故南剑等路民复叛。
现代文：夏季，四月初一，中书省大臣上奏说 ：唆都部下的士兵骚扰百姓，所以南剑等路的百姓重新叛变。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, the Minister of the Ministry of Chinese Literature made a report saying that soldiers under the command of the capital had harassed the people, so the people of Nanjian and other roads rebelled again.

古文：及忙古带往招徕之，民始获安。 
现代文：直到忙古带前去招抚他们，百姓才得到安定。 
English: It wasn't until Hegu came forward to placate them that the people were stabilized.

古文：诏以忙古带仍行省福州。
现代文：下诏：令忙古带仍然掌管福州行省。
English: The following edict was issued: Lingshe Ancient Belt is still in charge of Fuzhou Province.

古文：癸酉，南康杜可用叛，命史弼讨擒之。
现代文：初二，南康杜可用叛变，命史弼前去讨伐，擒获了他。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Nankangdu could use the mutiny to go to the front to fight and capture him.

古文：定杭州宣慰司官四员，以游显、管如德、忽都虎、刘宣充之。
现代文：确定杭州宣慰司的四名官员派游显、管如德、忽都虎、刘宣充任。
English: It was determined that four officials of the Hangzhou Xuanliao Division would be assigned to Youxian, Guanrude, Huaduhu and Liu Xuanchong.

古文：丙子，隆兴路杨门站复为怀安县。
现代文：初五，隆兴路的杨门站恢复为怀安县。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Yangmen Station on Longxing Road was restored to Huai'an County.

古文：庚辰，四川宣慰使也罕的斤请赐海青符，命以二符给之。
现代文：初九，四川宣慰使也罕的斤请求赐给海东青符牌，皇帝命令以两面海东青符牌赐给他。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered to give him the two-faced East China Sea youth badge.

古文：壬午，史弼入朝。
现代文：十一日，史弼入朝。
English: On the 11th, Shih entered the imperial court.

古文：乙酉，以宋太常乐付太常寺。改泗州灵壁县仍隶宿州。
现代文：十四日，把亡宋的太常乐交给太常寺，把泗州的灵壁县仍旧改属于宿州。
English: On the 14th, the Tai Changle of the late Song Dynasty was handed over to the Tai Chang Temple, and the Lingbi County of Luzhou was still changed to Suizhou.

古文：丁亥，立杭州路金玉总管府。
现代文：十六日，设立杭州路金玉总管府。
English: On the 16th, the General Administration Office of Hangzhou Jinyu Road was established.

古文：甲午，敕军户贫乏者还民籍。
现代文：二十三日，敕命贫困的军户复原为民户。
English: On the 23rd, desperately poor military households were reinstated as private households.

古文：丙申，以罗佐山道梗，敕阿里海牙发军千人戍守。
现代文：二十五日，因为罗佐山道路阻塞，敕令阿里海牙派一千名士兵戍守。
English: On the 25th, because the road to Mount Rozo was blocked, the emperor ordered Ali Haiga to send a thousand soldiers to guard it.

古文：以隆兴、泉州、福建置三省不便，命廷臣集议以闻。
现代文：因为隆兴、泉州、福建设立三个行省不便，命令廷臣集体商议办法，然后向皇帝奏闻。
English: Because of the inconvenience of the three provinces of Longxing, Quanzhou and Fuzhou, he ordered the courtiers to collectively discuss the measures, and then report to the emperor.

古文：己亥，诸王只必帖木儿请各投下设官，不从。
现代文：二十八日，诸侯王只必帖木儿请求在各投下军设置官员，皇上未予允从。
English: On the 28th, the princes asked Timur to set up officials in each army, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：庚子，岁星犯轩辕大星。
现代文：二十九日，木星干犯轩辕座大星。
English: On the 29th, Jupiter trespassed on the great star of Virgo.

古文：敕权停百官俸。
现代文：敕命暂时停止发给百官俸禄。
English: He ordered to temporarily suspend the payment of salaries to centurions.

古文：宁海、益都等四郡霜，真定七郡虫，皆损桑。
现代文：宁海、益都等四郡发生霜冻，真定等七郡发生虫灾，均损害蚕桑。
English: Frost occurred in four counties including Ninghai and Yidu, and insect infestation occurred in seven counties including Zhending, all of which damaged silkworms.

古文：五月辛丑朔，枢密院调兵六百守居庸南、北口。
现代文：五月初一，枢密院调遣六百名士兵戍守居庸关的南、北口。
English: On the first day of May, the Privy Council dispatched six hundred soldiers to guard the south and north gates of Juyongguan.

古文：甲辰，作行宫于察罕脑儿。
现代文：初四，在察罕脑儿建立行宫。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he built a guesthouse in Cahanmeng.

古文：丙午，升沙州为路。
现代文：初六，把沙州升格为路。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Shazhou was upgraded to a road.

古文：癸丑，括沙州户丁，定常赋，其富户余田令所戍汉军耕种。
现代文：十三日，统计沙州的民户和男丁数目，确定常规的赋税，那些富户的多余田亩令戍守的汉军士兵耕种。
English: On the 13th, the number of households and men in Shazhou was counted, the regular tax was determined, and those surplus acres of rich households were ordered to be cultivated by the soldiers of the Chinese army.

古文：诏云南行省发四川军万人，命药剌海领之，与前所遣将同征缅国。
现代文：诏令云南行中书省，调遣四川军的一万名士卒，命药剌海率领，和先前派出的将领一起征伐缅国。
English: He ordered Yunnan to go to Zhongshu Province, dispatched ten thousand soldiers of the Sichuan Army, led by the vital medicine Erhai, and together with the previously sent generals to conquer Myanmar.

古文：高丽国王王睶以民饥，乞贷粮万石，从之。
现代文：高丽国王王贝春因为百姓饥饿缺食，请求借贷一万石粮食，皇帝允从。
English: King Baechun of Goryeo requested a loan of ten thousand koku of grain because the people were starving and short of food, and the emperor complied.

古文：福建行省移泉州。
现代文：把福建行中书省的治所迁到泉州。
English: The provincial office of Fujian Province was moved to Quanzhou.

古文：甲寅，汀、漳叛贼廖得胜等伏诛。
现代文：十四日，汀州、漳州的叛贼廖得胜等人被处死。
English: On the 14th, the traitors Liao Desheng and others from Tingzhou and Zhangzhou were executed.

古文：造船三千艘，敕耽罗发材木给之。
现代文：为了建造三千艘船，敕令耽罗调拨木材供造船之用。
English: In order to build three thousand ships, Emperor Taenro allocated timber for shipbuilding.

古文：庚申，赐诸王别乞帖木儿银印。
现代文：二十日，赐给诸侯王别乞帖木儿银印。
English: On the 20th day of the month, he gave the princes a silver seal.

古文：辛酉，赐国师掌教所印。
现代文：二十一日，赐给国师掌教所印信。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, a sealed letter was given to the State Teachers' Training Institute.

古文：赏伯颜将士战功银二万八千七百五十两。
现代文：赐给伯颜部下的将士战功银二万八千七百五十两。
English: Twenty-eight thousand seven hundred and fifty-two pieces of war-winning silver were given to the soldiers under Bo Yan.

古文：真定、咸平、忻州、涟、海、邳、宿诸州郡蝗。
现代文：真定、咸平、忻州、涟州、海州、邳州、宿州各州郡发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues occurred in the counties of Jinding, Hamping, Luzhou, Luzhou, Haizhou, Luzhou and Suzhou.

古文：六月辛未朔，以忽都带儿牧籍阑遗人民牛畜，拨荒地令屯田。
现代文：六月初一，命忽都带儿把流落无主的百姓和牛畜聚拢，登记入册，拨给荒地令他们屯田。
English: On the first day of June, all the people, cattle and animals who had been left without an owner were gathered together, registered and allocated to wasteland to be turned into farmland.

古文：壬申，复招谕占城国。
现代文：初二，再次招降占城国。
English: On the second day of junior high school, they recruited and relegated Shogoku again.

古文：丁丑，唆都部下顾总管聚党于海道劫夺商货，范文虎招降之，复议置于法，命文虎等集议处之。
现代文：初七，唆都的部下顾总管聚集党羽在海路上抢劫商旅的货物，范文虎招降了他们，再次商议依法处置的事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Gu Shugang's subordinates gathered to rob the goods of merchants and travelers on the sea road. Fan Wenhu invited them to discuss the matter of legal disposal again.

古文：阿答海等请罢江南所立税课提举司，阿合马力争，诏御史台选官检核，具实以闻。
现代文：皇帝敕令范文虎等集中大家的意见处理这件事。阿答海等人请求撤销江南所设置的税课提举司，阿合马力争保留，皇帝诏令御史台选派官员去检查核实情况，列具事实上奏朝廷。
English: The emperor ordered Fan Wenhu and others to gather everyone's opinions to deal with this matter. Atahai and others requested the revocation of the tax collection division set up in the south of the Yangtze River, and Aahama fought to retain it. The emperor ordered the Imperial History Station to send officials to check and verify the situation and report the facts to the imperial court.

古文：阿合马请立大宗正府。
现代文：阿合马请求设立大宗正府。
English: Ahma requested the establishment of Taizong Zhengfu.

古文：罢上都奥鲁官，以留守司兼管奥鲁事。
现代文：撤销上都的辎重营官员，命留守司兼管辎重营事务。
English: Revoke Shangdu's heavy battalion officials, and leave the stationmaster in charge of heavy battalion affairs.

古文：安西王薨，罢其王相府。
现代文：安西王去世，撤销他的亲王相府。
English: When King Anxi died, he abolished the Office of the Crown Prince.

古文：遣吕告蛮部安抚使王阿济同万户昝坤招谕罗氏鬼国。
现代文：派遣吕告蛮部的安抚使王阿济同万户昝坤招降罗氏鬼国。
English: Sending Lu to pacify the barbarians made Wang Aji and Wanhu Xikun invite Luo's ghost country to surrender.

古文：壬辰，召范文虎议征日本。
现代文：二十二日，召见范文虎，商议讨伐日本的事。
English: On the 22nd, Fan Wenhu was summoned to discuss the campaign against Japan.

古文：戊戌，高丽王王睶遣其将军朴义来贡方物。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国王王贝春派遣他的将军朴义前来进贡当地特产。
English: On the 28th, the King of Goryeo, King Baechun, sent his general, Pak Yi, to pay tribute with local specialties.

古文：江淮等处颁行钞法，废宋铜钱。
现代文：江淮等地颁布并实行钞法，废除亡宋的铜钱。
English: The Banknote Law was promulgated and implemented in Jianghuai and other places, abolishing the copper money of the late Song Dynasty.

古文：遣不鲁合答等检核江淮行省阿里伯、燕帖木儿钱谷。
现代文：派遣不鲁合答等检查核实江淮行中书省阿里伯、燕帖木儿的钱粮。
English: Dispatching inspectors to check and verify that the money grain of Jianghuai, Zhongshuo, Ali Bo and Yanzhimuer is in good condition.

古文：改泗州隶淮安路。
现代文：把泗州改属于淮安路。
English: Renaming Luzhou as Huai'an Road.

古文：赐忽烈秃、忽不剌等将士力战者银钞、及给折可察儿等军士羊马价钞各有差。
现代文：赐给忽烈秃、忽不剌等奋力作战的将士钱钞，并赐给折可察儿等士兵羊马价钱钞，数额不等。
English: The soldiers who fought hard, such as Ku Rong, Ku Rong, and Ku Rong, were given money notes, and the soldiers who fought hard, such as Er Kachaer, were given money notes, the amount of which varied.

古文：秋七月辛丑，广东宣慰使帖木儿不花言： 诸军官宜一例迁转。
现代文：秋季，七月初二，广东宣慰使帖木儿不花上奏说 ：所有的军官都应当按同一标准升迁。
English: In the autumn, on the second day of the first month of July, Guangdong Xuan comforted Timur and said: All officers should be promoted according to the same standard.

古文：江淮郡县，首乱者诛，没其家。
现代文：把江淮郡县带头作乱的人处死，没收其家产。
English: The person who led the riots in Jianghuai County was put to death and his family property was confiscated.

古文：官豪隐庇佃民，不供徭役，宜别立籍。各万户军交参重役，宜发还元翼。 
现代文：官吏豪绅隐瞒、包庇他们的佃户，不让他们服徭役，应当让这些佃户另立户籍，各万户的军队轮流参加了重大的战役，应当遣送他们回到原来的军营。 
English: If high-ranking officials conceal and shield their tenants, and do not allow them to serve in the military, these tenants should be allowed to establish a separate household registration, and the army of each million households should take turns to participate in major battles, and they should be sent back to the original military camp.

古文：诏中书省、枢密院、翰林院集议以闻。
现代文：诏令中书省、枢密院、翰林院集体商议这些事情，再奏闻皇帝。
English: In the imperial edict, the Ministry of Education, the Privy Council, and the Hanlin Academy collectively discussed these matters, and then reported them to the emperor.

古文：敕思州安抚司还旧治。
现代文：敕令思州安抚司把治所迁回原来的地方。
English: He ordered the Shizhou Pacification Department to move the office back to its original location.

古文：戊申，太阴犯房距星。
现代文：初九，太阴星掩蔽房宿的距星。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, a very dark star covered the distant star of the inn.

古文：以高丽国初置驿，站民乏食，命给粮一岁，仍禁使臣往来，勿求索饮食。
现代文：因为高丽国初设置驿站，站户缺少粮食，命令供给他们一年粮食，并禁止往来的使臣向他们索要饮食。
English: Because at the beginning of Goryeo, there was a post, and the post holders were short of food, he ordered to provide them with food for a year, and forbade the envoys to ask them for food.

古文：己酉，立行省于京兆，以前安西相李德辉为参知政事，兼领钱谷事。
现代文：初十，在京兆府设立行中书省，任命前安西王府丞相李德辉任参知政事，兼管钱粮事务。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, the Ministry of Education and Culture was established in Jingzhao Prefecture, and Li Dehui, the former minister of Anxi Prefecture, was appointed as a political advisor to the governor, concurrently in charge of money and grain affairs.

古文：徙泉州行省于隆兴。
现代文：把泉州行中书省迁往隆兴。
English: Relocate the Quanzhou line of the Ministry of Education to Longxing.

古文：以秃古灭军劫食火拙畏吾城禾，民饥，命官给驿马之费，仍免其赋税三年。
现代文：因为秃古灭的军队抢吃火拙畏吾城的庄稼，百姓饥饿缺食，命令当地官府供给驿马的费用，并免除百姓们三年赋税。
English: Because the army of Bald Gu Zi snatched the crops of the fire-prone city, the people were starving and short of food, ordered the local government to provide the cost of horses, and exempted the people from paying taxes for three years.

古文：太阴犯南斗。
现代文：太阴星干犯南斗天区。
English: Too cloudy stars cause the Southern Celestial Divide.

古文：甲寅，发卫兵八百治沙岭桥，敕毋践民田。
现代文：十五日，调遣八百名侍卫军士兵修治沙岭桥，敕令他们不得践踏民田。
English: On the 15th, 800 soldiers of the Imperial Guard were dispatched to repair the Sha Ling Bridge, and they were ordered not to trample on people's fields.

古文：戊午，从阿合马言，以参知政事郝祯、耿仁并为中书左丞；用姚演言，开胶东河及收集逃民屯田涟、海。
现代文：十九日，依照阿合马的意见，任命参知政事郝祯、耿仁均担任中书左丞。采纳姚演的意见，开凿胶东河，并聚集逃亡的百姓在涟州、海州屯田。
English: On the 19th, in accordance with the opinion of Ahma, he appointed the co-chairs of the Political Affairs Commission and Geng Ren to serve as the Vice-President of the Central Government. Adopting the opinion of Yao Yun, he dug the Jiaodong River and gathered the fleeing people in Luzhou and Haizhou Tunden.

古文：甲子，遣安南国王子倪还。
现代文：二十五日，遣发安南国的王子陈倪返国。
English: On the 25th, Chen Ni, the prince of Annan, returned to China.

古文：括蒙古军成丁者。
现代文：登记长成为丁壮的蒙古军士卒。
English: The registrar became Ding Zhuang's Mongolian non-commissioned officer.

古文：敕亦来等率万人入罗氏鬼国，如其不附，则入讨之。
现代文：敕命亦来等人率领一万名士卒进入罗氏鬼国国境，如果不归降，就入城讨伐。
English: He also led ten thousand soldiers into the border of Luo's ghost country, and if they did not surrender, they would enter the city to fight.

古文：乙丑，罢江南财赋总管府。
现代文：二十六日，撤销江南财赋税总管府。
English: On the 26th, the Jiangnan General Administration of Finance and Taxation was abolished.

古文：丁卯，并大都盐运司入河间为一，仍减汰冗员。
现代文：二十八日，把大都府盐运司并入河间路，成为一体，并裁减、淘汰冗员。
English: On the 28th, the Salt Transportation Division of Datufu was merged into the Kawanishi Road, becoming a single entity, and redundancies were reduced and eliminated.

古文：割建康民二万户种稻，岁输酿米三万石，官为运至京师。
现代文：划出建康的百姓二万户种植水稻，每年交纳酿酒的米三万石，由官府替他们运往京师。
English: Twenty thousand households in Jiankang were set aside to grow rice, and 30,000 koku of rice for brewing sake was delivered to Beijing by the government on their behalf.

古文：戊辰，诏括前愿从军者及张世杰溃军，使征日本。
现代文：二十九日，下诏登记先前自愿从军的人以及张世杰溃散的军队，命他们征讨日本。
English: On the 29th, he issued an edict to register those who had previously volunteered to join the army, as well as Zhang Shijie's scattered troops, and ordered them to invade Japan.

古文：命范文虎等招集避罪附宋蒙古、回回等军。
现代文：命范文虎等人招聚因为避罪而依附宋朝的蒙古、回回等族士兵。
English: On the orders of Fan Wenhu and others, soldiers from the Mongolian, Hui and Hui ethnic groups, who had adhered to the Song Dynasty to avoid crime, were recruited.

古文：己巳，遣中使咬难历江南名山访求高士，且命持香币诣信州龙虎山、临江阁皂山、建康三茅山，皆设醮。
现代文：三十日，派遣宦官咬难游历江南以访求隐士，并且命他带着香烛钱前往信州龙虎山、临江阁皂山、建康三茅山，均设置醮坛。
English: On the 30th, the eunuchs were sent to the south of the Yangtze River to visit the hermit, and he was ordered to take the incense money to Shinshu Longhu Mountain, Linjiang Pavilion Soap Mountain, and Jiankang Sanmao Mountain, all of which were set up.

古文：赐阿赤黑等及怯薛都等战功银钞，赐招收散毛等洞官吏衣段。
现代文：赐予阿赤黑及怯薛都等立下战功的人钱钞。赐给招降散毛等溪洞蛮部的官员衣料。
English: He gave money and banknotes to A Chieh Hei and Qiu Xue Du, who had distinguished themselves in the war, and clothing to the officials of the barbarian part of Xidong, such as Zhan Mao.

古文：八月庚午朔，萧简等十人历河南五路，擅招阑遗户，事觉，谪其为首者从军自效，余皆杖之。
现代文：八月初一，萧简等十人历经河南行省的五个路。
English: On the first day of August, Xiao Jian and ten others went through five roads in Henan Province.

古文：乙亥，改蒙古侍卫总管府为蒙古侍卫亲军都指挥使司。
现代文：擅自招聚流落无主的汉奴。事情被察觉，为首的被贬职到军中效力，其余的人都被处以杖刑。初六，把蒙古侍卫总管府改为蒙古侍卫亲军都指挥使司。
English: The matter was discovered, and the leader was demoted to serve in the army, while the rest of the people were punished with the cane. On the sixth day of the first month, the Mongolian General Administration of the Imperial Guard was changed to the Mongolian Imperial Guard Commanding the Imperial Guard.

古文：丙子，太阴犯心东星。
现代文：初七，太阴星干犯心宿天区东星。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the great Yin star causes the criminal's heart to stay in the eastern star.

古文：丁丑，唆都请招三佛齐等八国，不从。
现代文：初八，唆都请求招降三佛斋等八国，皇上未予允从。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the emperor did not grant the request of eight countries including the three Buddhist temples.

古文：镇守南剑路万户吕宗海窃兵亡去，诏追捕之。
现代文：镇守南剑路的万户吕宗海偷偷带兵逃走。皇帝下诏追捕他。
English: The town guard of Nanjian Road, Wanyu Lvzonghai, secretly fled with his soldiers. The emperor issued an edict to hunt him down.

古文：戊寅，占城、马八儿国皆遣使奉表称臣，贡宝物犀象。
现代文：初九，占城、马八儿国均派遣使臣奉上表章称臣，贡献宝物、犀牛、驯象。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, both Zhancheng and Ma Bailong countries sent envoys to present the medal to honor the envoys, and contributed treasures, rhinoceroses, and tamed elephants.

古文：以前所括愿从军者为军，付茶忽领之征日本。
现代文：把先前所收聚、自愿从军的人组织成军，交付给茶忽统领，征伐日本。
English: The people who had previously been gathered and volunteered to join the army were organized into an army and handed over to Cha Kuo to lead the conquest of Japan.

古文：丁亥，许衡致仕，官其子师可为怀孟路总管，以便侍养。
现代文：十八日，许衡离任退休，授予他的儿子许师可怀孟路总管之职，以便奉养他。
English: On the 18th, Xu Heng retired from his post and appointed his son Xu Shikai as the general manager of Meng Road in order to support him.

古文：纳碧玉盏六、白玉盏十五于太庙。
现代文：向太庙敬献六只碧玉盏、十五只白玉盏。
English: Six jasper and fifteen white jade marbles will be presented to the Imperial Temple.

古文：癸巳，赐西平王所部粮。
现代文：二十四日，赐给西平王的部下粮食。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, grain was given to King Siping's men.

古文：戊戌，高丽王王睶来朝，且言将益兵三万征日本。
现代文：二十九日，高丽国王王贝春前来朝见，并说准备增兵三万征伐日本。
English: On the 29th, King Baechun of Goryeo came to see the emperor and said that he was ready to increase the number of troops by 30,000 to conquer Japan.

古文：以范文虎、忻都、洪茶丘为中书右丞，李庭、张拔突为参知政事，并行中书省事。
现代文：任命范文虎、忻都、洪茶丘为中书右丞，李庭、张拔突为参知政事，共同掌管中书省事务。
English: Appointed Fan Wenhu, Xindu and Hong Chaqiu as the Vice-Chairmen of the Central Commission for the Promotion of Chinese Literature, and Li Ting and Zhang Badu as the Vice-Chairmen of the Central Commission for the Promotion of Chinese Literature, jointly in charge of the affairs of the Central Commission for the Promotion of Chinese Literature.

古文：赐阔里吉思等钞，迷里兀合等羊马，怯鲁怜等牛羊马价，及东宫位下怯怜口等粟帛。
现代文：赐予阔里吉思等人钱钞，迷里兀合等人羊马，怯鲁怜等人牛、羊、马、钱钞，并赐给太子名位下的侍卫等粮食、绢帛。
English: He gave money to Korigis and others, sheep and horses to Shuri and others, and cattle, sheep, horses, and money to Shuru and others. He also gave food and money to the bodyguards under the title of the prince.

古文：大都、北京、怀孟、保定、南京、许州、平阳旱，濮州、东平、济宁、磁州水。
现代文：大都、北京、怀孟、保定、南京、许州、平阳发生旱灾，濮州、东平、济宁、磁州发生水灾。
English: Droughts occurred in most of Beijing, Huai Meng, Baoding, Nanjing, Huzhou and Pingyang, and floods occurred in Zhangzhou, Dongping, Jining, and Changzhou.

古文：九月壬子，车驾至自上都。
现代文：九月十三日，皇帝的车驾从上都抵达京师。
English: On September 13th, the emperor's carriage arrived in Beijing from Shangdu.

古文：壬戌，也罕的斤进征斡端。
现代文：二十三日，也罕的斤进军征伐斡端。
English: On the twenty-third day, Yan Jin marched into the battlefield.

古文：癸亥，命沿途廪食和林回军。
现代文：二十四日，命令沿途由和林供给饮食的军队返回。
English: On the 24th, the army, which had been supplied with food along the way by Warim, was ordered to return.

古文：甲子，太阴掩右执法，并犯岁星。
现代文：二十五日，太阴星遮蔽右执法星并干犯木星。
English: On the 25th, the eclipsing planet occulted the right planet and interfered with Jupiter.

古文：乙丑，守库军盗库钞，八剌合赤分其赃，纵盗遁去，诏诛之。
现代文：二十六日，守卫府库的士兵偷窃库钱，库吏分取了其中赃款，放纵盗贼逃走，下诏将其处死。
English: On the 26th, soldiers guarding the treasury stole money from the treasury. The treasurer took some of the stolen money, allowed the thieves to escape, and sentenced them to death.

古文：丁卯，罗氏鬼国主阿察及阿里降，安西王相李德辉遣人偕入觐。
现代文：二十八日，罗氏鬼国国王阿察以及阿里投降，安西王的丞相李德辉派人和他们一起入朝觐见。
English: On the 28th, Luo's ghost kings Acha and Ali surrendered, and Anxi's chancellor Li Dehui sent someone to join them at the imperial court.

古文：赐八剌合赤等羊马价二万八千三锭，及秃浑下贫民粮三月。
现代文：赐给八剌合赤等人羊马价二万八千零三锭，以及秃浑部下的贫民三个月粮食。
English: He gave 28,000 three-month rupees worth of mutton and horse meat to eight-year-olds, and three months' worth of grain to the poor in the Hubei Province.

古文：冬十月庚午，塔剌不罕军与贼力战者，命给田赏之。
现代文：冬季，十月初二，塔剌不罕军中和贼军奋力作战的将士，命令赐予田亩以奖赏他们。
English: In the winter, on the second day of October, the commander of the Tangfu Han Army ordered to reward the soldiers who fought hard against the invaders by giving them a field mu.

古文：癸酉，加高丽国王王睶开府仪同三司、中书左丞相、行中书省事。
现代文：初五，加授高丽国王王贝春开府仪同三司、中书左丞相，掌管行中书省事务。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he was awarded the honorary title of King Baechun of Goryeo, and the title of the Third Secretary and the Left Junior Secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters. He was in charge of the affairs of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：甲戌，遣使括开元等路军三千征日本。
现代文：初六，派遣使臣聚集开元等路的三千名士兵征伐日本。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he sent envoys to gather 3,000 soldiers from Kaigen and other provinces to invade Japan.

古文：丙子，赐云南王忽哥赤印。
现代文：初八，赐予云南王忽哥赤印信。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a red seal letter was given to King Kuko of Yunnan.

古文：丁丑，以湖南兵万人伐亦奚不薛，亦奚不薛降。
现代文：初九，派湖南的士兵一万人征伐亦奚不薛，亦奚不薛投降。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, 10,000 soldiers from Hunan were sent to invade Yixing, and Yixing surrendered.

古文：戊寅，发兵十万，命范文虎将之。
现代文：初十，派出十万名士兵，命范文虎率领。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he sent out 100,000 soldiers, led by Fan Wenhu.

古文：赐右丞洪茶丘所将征日本新附军钞及甲。
现代文：赐给右丞洪茶丘所率领的征伐日本的新附军士兵钱钞和甲仗。
English: To the soldiers of the New Annexed Army, who led the conquest of Japan under the command of U.S. Army Major General Hong Cha-koo, he gave money, banknotes, and war medals.

古文：辛巳，立营田提举司，从五品，俾置司柳林，割诸色户千三百五十五隶之，官给牛种农具。
现代文：十三日，设立营田提举司，秩禄为从五品，把司署设置在柳林，拨出各类民户一千三百五十五户隶属于该司，由官府供给他们耕牛、种子和农具。
English: On the 13th, the Yingtian Raising Division was set up, with the rank of the division rising to five grades, and the division office was set up in Liulin. A total of 1,355 households of various types were allocated to the division, and the government provided them with cattle, seeds and farm tools.

古文：壬午，诏立陕西四川等处行中书省，以不花为右丞，李德辉、汪惟正并左丞。
现代文：十四日，下诏设立陕西、四川等地行中书省，任命不花为右丞，李德辉、汪惟正为左丞。
English: On the 14th, the following edict established the Central Book Ministry in Shaanxi, Sichuan and other places, appointing Nian Hua as the right-hand man, Li Dehui and Wang Weizheng as the left-hand man.

古文：时德辉已卒。
现代文：当时李德辉已经去世。
English: At that time, Li Dehui had already passed away.

古文：甲申，诏龙虎山天师张宗演赴阙。
现代文：十六日，下诏：命龙虎山天师张宗演前来朝廷。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: The Dragon and Tiger Mountain Heavenly Teacher Zhang Zongyuan was ordered to come to the imperial court.

古文：己丑，命都实穷黄河源。
现代文：二十一日，命令郭实穷究黄河的发源地。
English: On the twenty-first day, Guo Si was ordered to thoroughly investigate the source of the Yellow River.

古文：辛卯，以汉军屯田沙、甘。
现代文：二十三日，派汉军在沙州、甘州屯田。
English: On the 23rd, Han troops were sent to Tonden in Shazhou and Ganzhou.

古文：壬辰，亦奚不薛病，遣其从子入觐。
现代文：二十四日，亦奚不薛患疾，派遣他的侄子入朝觐见。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Yixing sent his nephew to the imperial court to see him, as Yixing was ill.

古文：帝曰： 亦奚不薛不禀命，辄以职授其从子，无人臣礼。
现代文：皇帝说 ：亦奚不薛没有禀告朝廷，就把他的职位授予他的侄儿，缺乏作为人臣的规矩。
English: The emperor said: "Yi Xunxue did not inform the court, he awarded his position to his nephew, lacking the rules as a vassal.

古文：宜令亦奚不薛出，乃还军。 
现代文：应当令亦奚不薛离位，朝廷才能退兵。 
English: The Imperial Court should order the abdication of Yixing Nuxue before withdrawing the troops.

古文：癸巳，诏谕和州诸城招集流移之民。
现代文：二十五日，下诏：令属于和州的各城招聚流离失所的百姓。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: All cities belonging to He Prefecture were ordered to gather up the displaced people.

古文：丙申，命在官者，任事一月，后月乃给俸，或废事者斥之。
现代文：二十八日，命令任职的官员先任职一个月，第二个月才能发给官俸，有荒于职守的，则将其驱逐不用。
English: On the 28th, officials were ordered to serve for one month first, and then they would be paid for the second month. If they did not perform their duties, they would be expelled.

古文：遣使谕瓜哇国及交趾国。
现代文：派遣使臣招降爪哇国及安南国。
English: Sending envoys to recruit Java and Annam.

古文：始制象轿。给怯烈等粮。赐火察家贫乏者。
现代文：开始制作象轿，供给怯烈等部粮食，赏赐火察部族中贫穷的人。
English: They began to make elephant carriages, provide food for the poor and the destitute, and reward the poor among the Huocha tribe.

古文：十一月己亥朔，翰林学士承旨和礼霍孙等言： 俱蓝、马八、阇婆、交趾等国俱遣使进表，乞答诏。 
现代文：十一月初一，翰林学士承旨和礼霍孙等人上奏说： 俱蓝、马八、婆、交趾等国都派遣使臣来进奉表章，请皇上赐予答复的诏书。 
English: On the first day of the first month of November, Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi and Li Huosun and others delivered a report saying: Gu Lan, Ma Ba, Ba, Koji and other countries have sent envoys to present the seal and ask the emperor to give a reply to the imperial rescript.

古文：从之，仍赐交趾使人职名及弓矢鞍勒。
现代文：皇帝允从。于是赐给交趾使臣职衔、名分，以及弓箭、马鞍、嚼勒。
English: The emperor agreed, and gave Koji the title of envoy, title, as well as the bow and arrow, saddle, and bridle.

古文：降诏招谕瓜哇国。
现代文：颁发诏书招降爪哇国。
English: An imperial edict was issued calling for the surrender of Java.

古文：乙巳，置泉府司，掌领御位下及皇太子、皇太后、诸王出纳金银事。
现代文：初七，设置泉府司，掌管御前和皇太子、皇太后、诸侯王收支金银的事项。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month, the Izumi prefectural governor was set up to be in charge of the gold and silver income and expenditure of the emperor, the crown prince, the empress dowager, and the princes.

古文：敕别置局院以处童匠，有贫乏者，给以钞币。
现代文：敕令另外设立局院安置尚未成年的工匠，有贫穷的，赐予他们钱钞。
English: The imperial edict also set up a bureau to resettle underage artisans, some of whom were poor, and give them banknotes.

古文：诏： 有罪配役者，量其程远近；犯罪当死者，详加审谳。 
现代文：凡是犯罪发配到外地服役的，应当斟酌发配的路程远近；犯罪当处死的，应当详细审查其案卷。
English: Where a criminal is assigned to serve in a foreign country, the distance of the assignment should be considered. If the criminal is to be executed, the case file should be examined in detail.

古文：戊申，中书省臣议： 流通钞法，凡赏赐宜多给币帛，课程宜多收钞。 
现代文：初十，中书省大臣建议 ：为了流通钞法，凡是赏赐，应该多赏给绢帛；征收赋税，则应当多收钞币。 
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Minister of the Ministry of Education and Culture suggested: In order to improve the circulation of banknotes, all rewards should be rewarded more; when tax is levied, more banknotes should be collected.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝批示说： 可以。 
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：庚戌，命和礼霍孙拣汰交趾国使，除可留者，余皆放还。
现代文：十二日，命令和礼霍孙挑选、淘汰交趾国使臣，除了可以留下的之外，其余的都遣放回国。
English: On the 12th, Huo Sun issued an order to select and eliminate the envoys of friendly countries. Except for those who could stay, the rest were sent back to China.

古文：辛亥，敕缓营建工役。
现代文：十三日，敕令暂缓营建工程。
English: On the 13th, the royal decree suspended the construction project.

古文：壬子，诏谕俱蓝国使来归附。
现代文：十四日，下诏招降俱蓝国，令其前来归附。
English: On the 14th, he issued an imperial edict calling for the surrender of the Blue Country and ordering it to come and be annexed.

古文：甲寅，太原路坚州进嘉禾六茎。
现代文：十六日，太原路的坚州进献嘉禾六株。
English: On the 16th, Jianzhou of Taiyuan Road donated six plants of Jiahe.

古文：壬戌，诏江淮行中书省招巧匠。
现代文：二十四日，诏令江淮行中书省招聚能工巧匠。
English: On the 24th, Jianghuai issued an edict to recruit skilled craftsmen in the province.

古文：甲子，诏颁《授时历》。
现代文：二十六日，下诏颁布《授时历》。
English: On the 26th, the "Giving Calendar" was promulgated.

古文：丁卯，诏以末甘孙民贫，除仓站税课外，免其役三年。
现代文：二十九日，诏令：因为末甘孙地方的百姓贫穷，除了仓站的捐税之外，免征其徭役三年。
English: On the 29th, it was decreed that because the people of the late Gansu region were poor, they would be exempted from taxes for three years, except for taxes on warehouses.

古文：复遣宣慰使教化、孟庆元等持诏谕占城国主，令其子弟或大臣入朝。
现代文：再次派遣宣慰使教化、孟庆元等持诏书晓谕占城国王，令他的子弟或大臣入朝觐见。
English: Once again, emissaries such as Xuancheng, Xuehua and Meng Qingyuan were dispatched with imperial edicts to tell the king of the city of Zhancheng to allow his sons or ministers to enter the imperial court.

古文：诏江南、江北、陕西、河间、山东诸盐场增拨灶户，赐将作院吕合剌工匠银、钞、币帛。
现代文：诏令江南、江北、陕西、河间、山东各盐场增拨煮盐的灶户。赐给将作院吕合剌工匠以钱钞、绢帛。
English: The edict ordered the salt farms in the south of the Yangtze River, the north of the Yangtze River, Shaanxi Province, Hama Province and Shandong Province to allocate more boiling salt cookers.

古文：十二月庚午，以江淮行省平章政事阿里伯、左丞燕铁木儿擅易命官八百员，自分左右司官，铸银、铜印，复违命不散防守军，敕诛之。
现代文：十二月初二，因为江淮行中书省平章政事阿里伯、左丞燕铁木儿擅自改变对八百名官员的任命，自行区分左、右司官员，私铸银印、铜印，又违反命令不遣散防守军，敕命将他们处死。
English: On the 2nd day of the 12th month, because of the Jianghuai Province, the Central Book Province, the Pingzhang Province, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political affairs, the political

古文：辛未，以熟券军还襄阳屯田。
现代文：初三，命熟券军返回襄阳屯田。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the army of lucky ticket holders returned to Tongtian, Yangyang.

古文：高丽国王王睶领兵万人、水手万五千人、战船九百艘、粮一十万石，出征日本，给右丞洪茶丘等战具、高丽国铠甲战袄。
现代文：高丽国王王贝春率军一万人、水手一万五千人、战船九百艘、粮食十万石，出征日本。供给右丞洪茶丘等人战具、供给高丽国铠甲、战袄。
English: King Baechun of Goryeo led an army of ten thousand soldiers, fifteen thousand sailors, nine hundred warships, and one hundred thousand koku of grain to go to Japan. He supplied war equipment to Ujo Hongchaku and others, and armour and war helmets to Goryeo.

古文：谕诸道征日本兵取道高丽，毋扰其民。
现代文：谕令各路征伐日本的军队取道高丽，不得骚扰该国的百姓。
English: The edict ordered all the armies that were going to conquer Japan to take the road to Korea and not to harass the people of the country.

古文：以高丽中赞金方庆为征日本都元帅，密直司副使朴球、金周鼎为管高丽国征日本军万户，并赐虎符。
现代文：任命高丽中赞金方庆为征伐日本都元帅，任命密直司副使朴球、金周鼎为高丽国征伐日本的管军万户，均赐给虎符。
English: The Koryo Chuzan Kim Fang Ching was appointed as the commander-in-chief for the conquest of Japan, the vice-commander-in-chief for the conquest of Japan, the vice-commander-in-chief for the conquest of Japan, the vice-commander-in-chief for the conquest of Japan, the vice-commander-in-chief for the conquest of Japan, the vice-commander-in-chief for the conquest of Japan, and the vice-commander-in-chief for the conquest of Japan.

古文：癸酉，以高丽国王王睶为中书右丞相。
现代文：初五，任命高丽国王王贝春为中书右丞相。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the king of Goryeo, King Baechun, was appointed as the Minister of Central Affairs.

古文：甲戌，复授征日本军官元佩虎符。
现代文：初六，再次授予征伐日本的军官元佩虎符。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the junior high school year, an officer who fought in the conquest of Japan was once again awarded the Genpei tiger emblem.

古文：丁丑，用忽辛言，以民当站役，十户为率，官给一马，死则买马补之。
现代文：初九，采纳忽辛的意见，以民户充当驿站站户的差役，十户为一组，由官府供给一匹马，马死则买马补上。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, adopting the opinion of Hu Xin, a group of ten households were provided with a horse by the government, and if the horse died, a horse was bought to replace it.

古文：戊寅，以奉使木剌由国速剌蛮等为招讨使，佩金符。
现代文：初十，任命奉派出使木剌由国的速剌蛮等为招讨使，佩戴虎符。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Mokko was appointed as the envoy to invite Mokko from the country, wearing a tiger emblem.

古文：己卯，罗氏鬼国土寇为患，思、播道路不通，发兵千人与洞蛮开道。
现代文：十一日，罗氏鬼国的土寇为患，思州、播州的道路不通，派遣一千名士兵向溪洞的蛮部开路。
English: On the 11th day of the month, due to the Turkish invaders in Luo's ghost country, the roads in Shizhou and Banzhou were impassable, and a thousand soldiers were dispatched to open the road to the wild part of Rua Cave.

古文：甲申，甘州增置站户，诏于诸王户籍内签之。
现代文：十六日，甘州增设驿站的站户，下诏在诸侯王的册籍内签征民户为站户。
English: On the 16th, the station house of the newly-established post station in Ganzhou was issued, and the following edict was signed in the register of the princes and queens to recruit residents as station house.

古文：乙酉，敕民避役窜名匠户者复为民。
现代文：十七日，敕令为逃避徭役而改换姓名，隐藏在匠户中的百姓重新恢复为民户。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict changed the names to escape the forced labor, and the people hidden in the craftsmen's households were reinstated as private households.

古文：淮西宣慰使昂吉儿请以军士屯田，阿塔海等以发民兵非便，宜募民愿耕者耕之，且免其租三年，从之。
现代文：淮西宣慰使昂吉儿请求派军士屯田。阿塔海等认为派民兵屯田不便，应当召募愿意从事农耕的百姓耕种屯田，并且免征他们三年租税。
English: Atahai and others thought that it was inconvenient to send militiamen to occupy the land, and that they should recruit people who were willing to engage in farming to cultivate the land, and exempt them from paying taxes for three years.

古文：丁亥，复诏管民官兼管诸军奥鲁。
现代文：皇上允从。十九日，再次下诏：令管民官兼管各军的辎重营。
English: The emperor complied. On the 19th, he issued another edict: to have a civilian official in charge of the heavy artillery battalions of each army.

古文：戊子，以征也可不薛军千五百复还塔海，戍八番、罗甸。
现代文：二十日，派遣征伐也可不薛的军队一千五百人重新返回塔海。戍守八番、罗甸。
English: On the 20th day, the army of 1,500 men sent to the conquest returned to Takai. They guarded Hachiban and Rodian.

古文：壬辰，陈桂龙据漳州反，唆都率兵讨之，桂龙亡入畲洞。
现代文：二十四日，陈桂龙占据漳州谋反，唆都率军去讨伐他，陈桂龙逃入畲洞。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Chen Guilong occupied Bozhou to plot a rebellion, and ordered the capital to lead the army to fight him. Chen Guilong fled to Shandong.

古文：甲午，大都重建太庙成，自旧庙奉迁神主于祏室，遂行大享之礼。
现代文：二十六日，大都重建的太庙完工，从旧太庙奉迁先皇的神位到礻石室，于是举行盛大的敬献祭品的典礼。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, most of the reconstructed Imperial Temple was completed, and the throne of the first emperor was moved from the old Imperial Temple to the flint room, whereupon a grand ceremony of offering sacrifices was held.

古文：置镇北庭都护府于畏吾境，以脱脱木儿等领其事。
现代文：在畏兀儿境内设置镇守北庭的都护府，派脱脱木儿等执掌都护府事务。
English: In the territory of Diao'er, the town guard of the north yard of the capital protection office was set up, and the deputies of Diao'er were in charge of the affairs of the capital protection office.

古文：丙申，辽东路所益兵以妻子易马，敕以合输赋税赎还之。
现代文：二十八日，辽东路所增募的士兵用妻儿交换马匹以应征，敕令用应该交纳的赋税赎回他们的妻子。
English: On the 28th, the soldiers recruited from Liaodong Road exchanged their wives and children for horses to enlist, and were ordered to redeem their wives with the taxes they should pay.

古文：敕镂板印造帝师八合思八新译《戒本》五百部，颁降诸路僧人。
现代文：敕令刻版印制帝师八合思巴新翻译的《戒本》五百部，颁发给各路的僧侣。
English: Five hundred copies of the newly-translated "Precepts" of the Eight Hierarchs were printed and issued to monks from all walks of life.

古文：左丞相阿术巡历西边，至别十八里以疾卒。
现代文：左丞相阿术到西部巡行，到达别十八里时因病而去世。
English: Zuojo Minister Ah Ju went on a tour to the west, and died of illness when he reached 18 li from the west.

古文：敕擅据江南逃亡民田者有罪。
现代文：敕令：擅自占有江南逃亡百姓田亩者有罪。
English: Royal edict: Those who illegally occupy the fields and mu of the Jiangnan fugitive peasants are guilty.

古文：修桐柏山淮渎祠。
现代文：在桐柏山修建淮渎祠。
English: The Huaijiao Shrine will be built on Tongbai Mountain.

古文：以三茅山上清四十三代宗师许道杞祈祷有验，命别主道教。
现代文：因为三茅山的上清观第四十三代宗师许道杞祈祷有灵验，命他另立道教。
English: Because the prayers of Xu Daojun, the 43rd patriarch of the Shangqing sect of Buddhism in Sanmaishan, were effective, he was ordered to establish a separate Taoism.

古文：安南国来贡驯象。
现代文：安南国前来进贡驯象。
English: Annam came to pay tribute to train elephants.

古文：赐蛮洞主银钞衣物有差。
现代文：赐给蛮洞的洞主们钱钞、衣物、数额各不相等。
English: The money, clothes and amounts given to the cave owners of the caves are not equal.

古文：赈巩昌、常德等路饥民，仍免其徭役。
现代文：赈济巩昌、常德等路的饥民，并免除他们的徭役。
English: He helped the starving people in Gongchang, Changde and other areas, and exempted them from forced labor.

古文：改拱卫司为都指挥司；升尚舍监秩三品；立太仓提举司，秩五品。
现代文：把拱卫司改为都指挥司。把尚舍监的秩禄提升为正三品。设立太仓提举司，秩禄为正五品。
English: The Arch Guard Division was changed to the Metropolitan Command Division. The rank of the Superintendent was raised to Senior Third Rank. The Taicang Promotion Division was established, and the rank was raised to Senior Fifth Rank.

古文：改建宁、雷州、封州、廉州、化州、高州为路，以肇庆路隶广南西道，迁峡州路于江北旧治。
现代文：把建宁、雷州、封州、廉州、化州、高州改为路。把肇庆路隶属于广南西道。把峡州路迁移到江北原来的治所。
English: Jianning, Leizhou, Fenzhou, Lianzhou, Huazhou and Gaozhou were transformed into roads, Zhaoqing Road was subordinated to the West Guangnan Road, and Xiaozhou Road was transferred to the original jurisdiction of Jiangbei.

古文：复置鄣县，隶巩昌路。
现代文：重新设置鄣县，隶属于巩昌路。
English: Re-established Min County, subordinated to Gongchang Road.

古文：宿州灵壁县复隶归德。
现代文：宿州的灵壁县重新隶属于归德府。
English: Lingbi County of Chofu Prefecture is re-subordinated to Gudefu.

古文：是岁，断死罪一百二人。
现代文：这一年，判处死刑的罪犯共一百零二人。
English: A total of 102 criminals were sentenced to death this year.

古文：十八年春正月戊戌朔，高丽国王王睶遣其签议中赞金方庆来贺，兼奉岁币。
现代文：至元十八年春，正月初一，高丽国王王贝春派遣他的佥议中赞金方庆前来恭贺新年，兼奉献每年常例的钞币。
English: In the spring of the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, King Baechun of Goryeo sent his envoy Jin Fangqing to congratulate the New Year, and also offered the usual annual banknotes.

古文：辛丑，召阿剌罕、范文虎、囊加带同赴阙受训谕，以拔都、张珪、李庭留后。
现代文：初四，征召阿剌罕、范文虎、囊加带一同前来朝廷接受皇上的训谕，命令拔都、张王圭、李庭作为留后。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he summoned Ah Yuhan, Fan Wenhu, and Zou Jia to come to the imperial court with him to accept the emperor's edict, and ordered Ba Du, Zhang Wang Gui, and Li Ting to stay behind.

古文：命忻都、洪茶丘军陆行抵日本，兵甲则舟运之，所过州县给其粮食。
现代文：命令忻都、洪茶丘的军队从陆路前去日本，武器甲仗则用舟船运输，所经过的州县由官府供应粮食。
English: He ordered the troops of Xindu and Hongchaoka to go to Japan by land, the weapons and armour were transported by boat, and the provinces and counties they passed through were supplied with grain by the government.

古文：用范文虎言，益以汉军万人。
现代文：采纳范文虎的意见，增加汉军一万人。
English: He adopted Fan Wenhu's opinion and increased the number of Chinese troops by 10,000.

古文：文虎又请马二千给秃失忽思军及回回炮匠。
现代文：范文虎又请给秃失忽思的军队及回回族的炮匠二千匹马。
English: Fan Wenhu also gave two thousand horses to the army and the Hui-Hui gunners.

古文：帝曰： 战船安用此？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：战船上哪里用得着这些？ 
English: The emperor said, "What is the use of these things on a warship?"

古文：皆不从。
现代文：均未予同意。
English: None of them gave their consent.

古文：癸卯，发钞及金银付孛罗，以给贫民。
现代文：初六，调发钱钞和金银交给孛罗，以分发给贫民。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, he sent money and silver and gold to Jiro to distribute to the poor.

古文：丁未，畋于近郊。
现代文：初十，皇帝在京师近郊行猎。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：敕江南州郡兼用蒙古、回回人。
现代文：敕令江南的各州郡兼用蒙古人、回回人。
English: In the south of the Yangtze River, Mongols and Hui Hui people were used in various counties.

古文：凡诸王位下合设达鲁花赤，并令赴阙，仍诏谕诸王阿只吉等知之。
现代文：凡是诸侯王职位之下都应当设置监印官，令他们全部前来朝廷，并诏令诸侯王阿只吉等人知道。
English: An inspector of seals should be set up under every position of a vassal king, so that they all come to the imperial court, and so that vassal king Atukichi and others know about it.

古文：己酉，改黄州阳罗堡复隶鄂州。
现代文：十二日，把黄州的阳逻堡重新改属于鄂州。
English: On the 12th, the Yangluo Fort in Huangzhou was re-assigned to Ezhou.

古文：辛亥，遣使代祀岳渎后土。
现代文：十四日，派遣使臣代表皇帝祭祀五岳、四渎和后土大神。
English: On the 14th, envoys were dispatched on behalf of the emperor to offer sacrifices to the Five Mountains, the Four Deities, and the Great Spirit of the Hometown.

古文：壬子，高丽王王睶遣使言日本犯其边境，乞兵追之，诏以戍金州隘口军五百付之。
现代文：十五日，高丽国王王贝春派遣使臣上奏说日本侵犯他的边境，请求派兵追赶。下诏把戍守金州隘口的五百名士兵交付给他。
English: On the 15th, the King of Goryeo, King Baechun, sent an envoy to report that Japan had violated his border and requested that troops be sent to pursue them. He then ordered the 500 soldiers guarding the Jinju Pass to be handed over to him.

古文：丙辰，车驾幸漷州。
现代文：十九日，皇帝的车驾临幸氵郭州。
English: On the 19th, the emperor's car drove to Guozhou.

古文：改符宝局为典瑞监，收天下诸司职印。
现代文：把符宝局改为典瑞监，收取天下各司的职官印信。
English: The Treasure Trove Bureau was changed to the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, and official letters from various departments around the world were received.

古文：丁巳，制以六祖李全祐嗣五祖李居寿祭斗。
现代文：二十日，决定以六祖李全继承五祖李居寿祭祀北斗星。
English: On the 20th, it was decided that the 6th ancestor Li Quan would succeed the 5th ancestor Li Jiu Shou in the sacrifice to the Big Dipper.

古文：癸亥，邵武民高日新据龙楼寨为乱，擒之。
现代文：二十六日，邵武的平民高日新占据龙楼寨作乱，将其擒获。
English: On the 26th, Gao Rixin, a civilian from Shaowu, occupied Longlouzhai and caused a disturbance, and was captured.

古文：赏忻都等战功，赐征日本诸军钞。
现代文：奖赏忻都等人的战功。赐予征伐日本的各军钱钞。
English: The war exploits of Shintō and others were rewarded. Money and banknotes were given to the armies that conquered Japan.

古文：二月戊辰，发侍卫军四千完正殿。
现代文：二月初二，调发四千名侍卫军完成正殿的修建。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：赐征日本善射军及高丽火长水军钞四千锭。
现代文：赐给征伐日本的善射军以及高丽的火长水军四千锭钱钞。
English: A 4,000-baht banknote was given to the good-shooting army that conquered Japan and to the fire-breathing navy of Goryeo.

古文：辛未，车驾幸柳林。
现代文：初五，皇帝的车驾临幸柳林。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the emperor's chariot arrived at the Fortunate Willow Forest.

古文：高丽王王睶以尚主，乞改宣命益驸马二字。
现代文：高丽国王因娶公主为妃，请求把宣布的任命书改加 驸马 二字。
English: The King of Goryeo requested that the letter of appointment be amended to include the word "Horse" because he was marrying a princess.

古文：制曰： 可。 
现代文：皇帝批示 可以 。
English: The Emperor's order said: Let's play.

古文：乙亥，敕以耽罗新造船付洪茶丘出征。
现代文：初九，敕令把耽罗新建造的战船交付给洪茶丘出征。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the imperial command delivered the newly built warship of Tan Luo to Hong Cha Kuo to go to war.

古文：诏以刑徒减死者付忻都为军。
现代文：诏令把减免了死罪的囚徒交给忻都当兵。
English: The imperial edict ordered the prisoners who had been pardoned from the death penalty to serve as soldiers in Shidu.

古文：扬州火，发米七百八十三石赈被灾之家。
现代文：扬州发生火灾，发放七百八十三石粮米赈济受灾的家庭。
English: A fire broke out in Yangzhou, and 783 kilos of grain and rice were distributed to help families affected by the disaster.

古文：诏谕范文虎等以征日本之意，仍申严军律。立上都留守司。
现代文：下诏把征伐日本的意图晓谕范文虎等；并申令严明军纪。建立上都留守司。
English: He issued an edict to inform Fan Wenhu and others of the intention to conquer Japan, and ordered strict military discipline.

古文：升叙州为路，隶安西省。
现代文：把叙州升格为路，隶属于安西行省。
English: upgrade Xuzhou to a road, subordinate to Anxi Province.

古文：移潭州省治鄂州，徙湖南宣慰司于潭州。
现代文：把潭州行省的治所迁移到鄂州。把湖南宣慰司迁移到潭州。
English: To relocate the administrative center of Tanzhou Province to Ezhou. To relocate the Hunan Consolation Division to Tanzhou.

古文：乙酉，改畏吾断事官为北庭都护府，升从二品。
现代文：十九日，把畏兀儿的断事官署升格为北庭都护府，秩禄升为从二品。
English: On the 19th, the office of the official adjudicator was upgraded to the Beibei Prefecture, and Chichiroku was upgraded to the second grade.

古文：丙戌，征日本国军启行。
现代文：二十日，征伐日本国的军队启行。
English: On the 20th, the army for the conquest of Japan set out.

古文：浙东饥，发粟千二百七十余石赈之。
现代文：浙东发生饥荒，调发粮食一千二百七十余石赈济饥民。
English: Famine occurred in eastern Zhejiang, and more than 1,270 kilos of grain were allocated to feed the hungry.

古文：己丑，发肃州等处军民凿渠溉田。
现代文：二十三日，派遣肃州等地的军民开凿水渠以灌溉农田。
English: On the 23rd, soldiers and civilians from Suizhou and other places were dispatched to dig canals to irrigate farmland.

古文：给征日本军衣甲、弓矢、海青符。
现代文：供给征伐日本的军队衣甲、弓箭、海东青符牌。
English: Armor, bows and arrows, and the East China Sea youth badge were supplied to the army that conquered Japan.

古文：敕通政院官浑都与郭汉杰整治水驿，自叙州至荆南凡十九站，增户二千一百、船二百十二艘。
现代文：敕命通政院官员浑都和郭汉杰整顿水道驿站，从叙州到荆南共十九处水驿，增加二千一百个站户、二百一十二艘船。
English: Guo Hanjie, an official of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and Hundu, an official of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, rectified the waterway stations. From Suzhou to Jingnan, there were a total of 19 water stations, with an increase of 2,100 stations and 212 boats.

古文：诏谕乌琐纳空等毋扰罗氏鬼国，违者令国主阿利具以名闻。
现代文：下诏：令乌琐、纳空等不得扰害罗氏鬼国，违令者令国王阿利开具姓名上奏朝廷。
English: The following edict was issued: It was ordered that Uzho, Nako, etc. should not disturb the Luo's ghost country, and those who violated the order were ordered by King Ali to submit their names to the imperial court.

古文：福建省左丞蒲寿庚言： 诏造海船二百艘，今成者五十，民实艰苦。 
现代文：福建行省左丞蒲寿庚上奏说 ：皇上下令建造二百艘海船，现在建成了五十艘，百姓确实很艰苦。 
English: Pu Shou Geng, the governor of Fujian Province, said in his report: The emperor ordered the construction of two hundred ships, and now fifty ships have been built. The people are indeed very hard.

古文：诏止之。
现代文：下诏停止建造。
English: The order was given to stop construction.

古文：乙未，贞懿顺圣昭天睿文光应皇后弘吉剌氏崩。
现代文：二十九日，贞懿顺圣昭天睿文光应皇后弘吉剌氏逝世。
English: On the 29th, Zhengyi Shun, Zhaotian Rui and Wenguang Ying, empresses of the Hongji clan, passed away.

古文：丙申，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月初一，皇帝的车驾返回皇宫。
English: On the first day of March, the emperor's carriage returned to the imperial palace.

古文：诏三茅山三十八代宗师蒋宗瑛赴阙。
现代文：诏令三茅山第三十八代宗师蒋宗瑛前来朝廷。
English: The emperor ordered Jiang Zongying, the 38th patriarch of Sanmaishan, to come to the imperial court.

古文：遣丹八八合赤等诣东海及济源庙修佛事。
现代文：派遣丹八八合赤等前往东海及济源寺举行佛事。
English: Dispatching Danhachihachiai and others to the East Sea and Jiyuan Temple to hold Buddhist services.

古文：以中书右丞、行江东道宣慰使阿剌罕为中书左丞相，行中书省事，江西道宣慰使兼招讨使也的迷失参知政事，行中书省事。
现代文：任命中书左丞、署理江东道宣慰使阿剌罕为中书左丞相，执掌中书省事务；任命江西道宣慰使兼招讨使也的迷失为参知政事，执掌中书省事务。
English: Appointed the Vice-Minister of the Left of the CPC Central Committee and the Acting Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, appointed the Vice-Minister of the Left of the CPC Central Committee and the Acting Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, appointed the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China and the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, appointed the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China and the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, appointed the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China and the Acting Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China

古文：以辽阳、懿、盖、北京、大定诸州旱，免今年租税之半。
现代文：因为辽阳、懿州、盖州、北京、大定等州发生旱灾，免征今年租税的一半。
English: Because of droughts in Liaoyang, Zhangzhou, Gaizhou, Beijing, Dading and other provinces, half of this year's tax is exempted.

古文：三月戊戌，许衡卒。
现代文：初三，许衡去世。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Xu Heng passed away.

古文：己亥，敕黄平棣安西行省，镇远隶潭州行省，各遣兵戍守。
现代文：初四，敕令把黄平隶属于安西行中书省，把镇远隶属于潭州行中书省，各派兵戍守。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial command subordinated Huangping to Anxi Province, and Zhenyuan to Tanzhou Province, and sent soldiers to guard them.

古文：甲辰，命天师张宗演即宫中奏赤章于天七昼夜。
现代文：初九，命天师张宗演在宫中向天焚化红色符，共七天七夜。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Zhang Zongyuan, the god of fate, burned red symbols to the sky in the palace for a total of seven days and nights.

古文：丙午，车驾幸上都。
现代文：十一日，皇帝的车驾临幸上都。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor's carriage drove to Shangdu.

古文：丙辰，升军器监为三品。
现代文：二十一日，把军器监的秩禄提升为三品。
English: On the twenty-first day, the rank of the munitions inspector was raised to three products.

古文：辛酉，立登闻鼓院，许有冤者挝鼓以闻。
现代文：二十六日，设立登闻鼓院，允许有冤情的人击鼓让朝廷知道。
English: On the 26th, the Dengwen Drum Academy was established, allowing people with grievances to play the drums to let the imperial court know.

古文：夏四月辛未，益云南军征合剌章。
现代文：夏季，四月初六，增加云南的军队以讨伐合剌章。
English: In the summer, on the 6th day of the 4th month, Yunnan's army was increased to fight against Yizhang.

古文：癸酉，复颁中外官吏俸。
现代文：初八，重新颁布朝内外官员的秩禄。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the year, the ranks of officials at home and abroad were reissued.

古文：辛巳，通、泰二州饥，发粟二万一千六百石赈之。
现代文：十六日，通州、泰州两州发生饥荒，调发二万一千六百石粮食赈济饥民。
English: On the 16th, famine occurred in the two prefectures of Tongzhou and Taizhou, and 21,600 kilos of grain were sent to help the starving people.

古文：戊子，置蒙古汉人新附军总管。
现代文：二十三日，设置蒙古人、汉人新附军总管。
English: On the 23rd, Mongolians and Han Chinese were appointed as the newly-added military commanders.

古文：甲午，命太原五户丝就输太原。
现代文：二十九日，命太原五类匠户的丝税银就近交纳给太原。
English: On the 29th, Taiyuan ordered the five types of artisan households to pay the silk tax to Taiyuan.

古文：自太和岭至别十八里置新驿三十。
现代文：从太和岭到别十八里设置三十个新驿站。
English: Thirty new stations will be set up from Taiheiling to Beixiaoli.

古文：赐征日本河西军等钞。
现代文：赐给征伐日本的河西军等钱钞。
English: He gave money and banknotes to the Hexi Army, which fought against Japan.

古文：五月癸卯，禁西北边回回诸人越境为商。
现代文：五月初九，禁止西北边境的回回等族人越过边境经商。
English: On May 9, the Hui and other ethnic groups in the northwest border were prohibited from doing business across the border.

古文：甲辰，遣使赈瓜、沙州饥。
现代文：初十，派使臣赈济瓜州、沙州的饥民。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he sent envoys to help the starving people in Guazhou and Shazhou.

古文：戊申，罢霍州畏兀按察司。
现代文：十四日，撤销霍州的畏兀儿按察司。
English: On the 14th, the inspection department of Huozhou was revoked.

古文：己酉，禁甘肃瓜、沙等州为酒。
现代文：十五日，禁止甘肃的瓜州、沙州等地造酒。
English: On the 15th, alcohol production in Guazhou, Shazhou and other places in Gansu was banned.

古文：壬子，免耽罗国今岁入贡白苎。
现代文：十八日，免除耽罗国今年进贡白麻布。
English: On the 18th, white linen was exempted from this year's tribute.

古文：丙辰，以乌蒙阿谋宣抚司隶云南行省。
现代文：二十二日，把乌蒙阿谋宣抚司隶属于云南行中书省。
English: On the 22nd, he subordinated the Umong Amo Proclamation Office to the Yunnan Province.

古文：岁星犯右执法。
现代文：木星干犯右执法星。
English: Jupiter is the planet of law enforcement.

古文：庚申，严鬻人之禁，乏食者量加赈贷。
现代文：二十六日，严格禁止贩卖人口，缺食的人酌量增加赈济、借贷。
English: On the 26th, human trafficking was strictly prohibited, and those who were short of food were given more money and loans.

古文：壬戌，诏括契丹户。
现代文：二十八日，下诏登记契丹族的户籍。
English: On the 28th, the registration of the household registration of the Qidan nationality was completed.

古文：敕耽罗国达鲁花赤塔儿赤，禁高丽全罗等处田猎扰民者。
现代文：敕令耽罗国镇守官塔儿赤，禁止高丽、全罗等地的人狩猎扰害百姓。
English: He ordered the governor of Tanro Town, Tarek, to prohibit people from hunting in Goryeo, Jeolla and other places from disturbing the people.

古文：六月丙寅，敕赛典赤、火尼赤分管乌木、拔都怯儿等八处民户。
现代文：六月初二，敕令赛典赤、火尼赤分管乌木、拔都怯儿等八处的民户。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, eight private households, including Ebony, Badu Qiu'er and others, were divided into Saiten Aka and Honi Aka.

古文：谦州织工百四十二户贫甚，以粟给之，其所鬻妻子官与赎还。
现代文：谦州的一百四十二户织工十分贫困，赐给他们粮食，他们所卖掉的妻子儿女，由官府为他们赎回。
English: One hundred and forty-two families of weavers in Qianzhou were very poor. They were given food. Their wives and children, whom they had sold, were redeemed for them by the government.

古文：以太原新附军五千屯田甘州。
现代文：命太原的五千名新附军士兵在甘州屯田。
English: The five thousand soldiers of the New Annexed Army who were ordered to Taiyuan are in Tonden, Ganzhou.

古文：丁丑，以按察司所劾羡余粮四万八千石饷军。
现代文：十三日，把按察司所查究出的羡余粮四万八千石充作军饷。
English: On the 13th, the surplus grain of 48,000 koku, which was ascertained by the inspector, was used as military pay.

古文：己卯，以顺庆路隶四川东道宣慰司。
现代文：十五日，把顺庆路隶属于四川东道宣慰司。
English: On the 15th, Shunqing Road was subordinated to the Sichuan Host and Consolation Division.

古文：安西等处军站，凡和顾和买，与民均役。
现代文：安西等处的兵站，凡是雇用民夫、征购物品，和百姓同样服徭役。
English: The military depots in Anxi and other places usually hire civilian workers, purchase goods, and serve the same duties as the common people.

古文：增陕西营田粮十万石，以充常费。
现代文：增收陕西的屯田粮十万石，以充日常的经费。
English: An additional 100,000 koku will be collected from the farmlands in Shaanxi to cover daily expenses.

古文：壬午，命耽罗戍力田以自给。
现代文：十八日，命耽罗的守军种田以自给自足。
English: On the 18th, the self-sufficient defenders were able to grow their own crops.

古文：日本行省臣遣使来言： 大军驻巨济岛，至对马岛获岛人，言太宰府西六十里旧有戍军已调出战，宜乘虚捣之。 
现代文：征讨日本的行中书省大臣，派遣信使回来上奏说 ：大军驻扎在巨济岛，到对马岛去捕获的岛民说 ：太宰府以西六十里原有的守军已经调出去作战。 应当乘对方空虚而入。 
English: During the campaign to conquer Japan, the Minister of the Ministry of Literature sent a messenger back to report that a large army was stationed on Koji Island, and the islanders who went to capture Tsushima said that the original defenders sixty miles west of Dazaifu had been transferred to fight, and that they should take advantage of the other side's emptiness to enter.

古文：诏曰： 军事卿等当自权衡之。 
现代文：诏令说： 军事方面的问题，应当由你们自己权衡利弊进行处置。 
English: The edict said: "Military issues should be handled by yourselves after weighing the pros and cons.

古文：癸未，命中书省会计姚演所领涟、海屯田官给之资与岁入之数，便则行之，否则罢去。
现代文：十九日，命中书省会计官姚演所管辖的涟州、海州屯田官需付出的钱和每年租税的数目，合算就办理，不合算就取消。
English: On the 19th, the amount of money and the annual tax to be paid by the officials of Tongtian in Zhangzhou and Haizhou, which are under the jurisdiction of Yao Yuan, the accounting officer of Shuzhou Province, will be processed if it is cost-effective, and will be canceled if it is not.

古文：丁亥，放乞赤所招猎户七千为民。
现代文：二十三日，把乞赤所招收的七千名猎户遣放为民。
English: On the twenty-third day, the seven thousand hunters recruited by the beggar were deported to the people.

古文：庚寅，以阿剌罕有疾，诏阿塔海统率军马征日本。
现代文：二十六日，因为阿剌罕患病，诏令阿塔海统率兵马征伐日本。
English: On the 26th, because Ayhan was ill, he ordered Atahito to lead the troops and horses to invade Japan.

古文：壬辰，高丽国王王睶言，本国置驿四十，民畜凋弊，敕并为二十站，仍给马价八百锭。
现代文：二十八日，高丽国王王贝春上奏说： 本国共设置四十个驿站，百姓和牲口都疲惫、困苦不堪。 敕令合并为二十个驿站，并赐给马价钱八百锭。
English: On the 28th, King Baechun of Goryeo made the following report: Forty stables were set up in the country, and the people and animals were exhausted and in great distress. The government consolidated them into twenty stables, and gave the horses a price of 800 baht.

古文：奉使木剌由国苫思丁至占城船坏，使人来言，乞给舟粮及益兵，诏给米一千四百余石。
现代文：奉命出使木剌由国的苫思丁，到达占城时船坏了，派人来上奏，请求供给船和粮食，并增派士兵。下诏供给粮米一千四百余石。
English: He was ordered to send a wooden raft from the country's Juxiding, but when he arrived at the city, the boat was broken, and he sent someone to play, requesting the supply of ships and grain, and to send more soldiers. He ordered the supply of grain and rice of more than fourteen hundred stone.

古文：以中书左丞忽都帖木儿为中书右丞，行中书省事；御史中丞、行御史台事忽剌出为中书左丞，行尚书省事。
现代文：任命中书左丞忽都帖木儿为中书右丞，执掌中书省事务；任御史中丞、署理御史台事忽剌出为中书左丞，执掌尚书省事务。
English: Appointed Chushiso-sojo, Chudo Tetsumu'er was appointed Chushiso-sojo, in charge of Chushosho affairs; appointed Goshi-sojo, acting Goshidai, he was appointed Chushiso-sojo, in charge of Shoshosho affairs.

古文：赐皇子南木合所部工匠羊马价钞。
现代文：赐给皇子南木合部下的工匠羊马价钱钞。
English: He gave the craftsman Yang Ma Xian money to the prince.

古文：秋七月甲午朔，命万户綦公直分宣慰使刘恩所将屯肃州汉兵千人，入别十八里，以尝过西川兵百人为向导。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，命令万户綦公直分拨宣慰使刘恩所率领、屯驻在肃州的汉军一千人，以曾经走过西川的一百名士兵为向导，进入别十八里。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, he ordered all households to directly allocate a thousand soldiers from the Han army led by Liu En and stationed in Suizhou, with one hundred soldiers who had walked through the West River as a guide, to enter the eighteen miles.

古文：丁酉，敕甘州置和中所，以给兵粮。
现代文：初四，敕令在甘州设置和中所，以供应军粮。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the imperial command issued an order to set up and supply military grain in Ganzhou.

古文：京兆四川分置行省于河西。
现代文：京兆、四川分别在河西设置行中书省。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture was set up in the cities of Jingzhao and Sichuan in the west of the river.

古文：己亥，阿剌罕卒。
现代文：初六，阿剌罕去世。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, Ajhan passed away.

古文：庚子，括回回炮手散居他郡者，悉令赴南京屯田。
现代文：初七，聚集散居在其他州郡的回回族炮手，命令他们全部前往南京屯田。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Hui-Hui gunners who lived in other prefectures and counties gathered and ordered them all to go to Nanjing Tunden.

古文：癸卯，太阴犯房距星。
现代文：十日，太阴星干犯房宿天区的距星。
English: On the 10th day, the Great Yin star trespassed into the house of the distant star in the celestial region.

古文：庚戌，以忻都戍大和岭所将蒙古军还，复令汉军戍守。
现代文：十七日，把忻都所率领，戍守大和岭的蒙古军调回，重新命令汉军前去戍守。
English: On the 17th, the Mongolian army, which had been garrisoning Yamato-Ridge and was led by Kedu, was sent back, and the Chinese army was ordered to go and garrison the area again.

古文：以松州知州仆散秃哥前后射虎万计，赐号万虎将军。
现代文：由于松州知州仆散秃哥先后射死过数以万计的老虎，赐给他 万虎将军 的封号。
English: Due to the tens of thousands of tigers that Songzhou, Zhizhou's vassal, Zhao Ge, had shot dead, he was given the title of "General of Ten Thousand Tigers."

古文：赐贵赤合八儿秃所招和、真、滁等户二千八百二十，俾自领之。
现代文：把贵赤合八儿秃所招收的和州、真州、滁州等地民户二千八百二十户赐给他，让他自己管辖这些民户。
English: He was given the 2,820 households in He Prefecture, Zhen Prefecture, Zhang Prefecture, and other places that had been enrolled by Guizhachihachiro Balding, and he was allowed to administer these households himself.

古文：辛酉，唆都征占城，赐驼蓬以辟瘴毒。
现代文：二十八日，唆都征伐占城，皇帝赐给他驼毛帐篷以躲避瘴疠毒气。
English: On the 28th, when the capital was conquered and occupied, the emperor gave him a camel-hair tent to escape the poisonous gas.

古文：占城国来贡象犀。
现代文：占城国前来进贡驯象和犀牛。
English: Tribute elephants and rhinoceroses came to Zhancheng.

古文：命天师张宗演等即寿宁宫奏赤章于天，凡五昼夜。
现代文：命令天师张宗演等就在寿宁宫向天焚化赤色符，共五天五夜。
English: He ordered the celestial teacher Zhang Zongyuan and others to burn red symbols to the heavens at Shuning Palace for a total of five days and five nights.

古文：八月甲子朔，招讨使方文言择守令、崇祀典、戢奸吏、禁盗贼、治军旅、奖忠义六事，诏廷臣及诸老议举行之。
现代文：八月初一，招讨使方文上奏谈及选择守官、尊崇祭典、惩罚奸吏、禁止盗贼、整顿军旅、奖赏忠义等六个方面的事，诏令廷臣及诸元老商议实行。
English: On the first day of August, the imperial envoy was summoned to make a written report on six aspects, including the selection of officials, the celebration of festivals, the punishment of traitors, the prohibition of thieves, the rectification of the army, and the reward of loyalty, and the imperial edict was discussed and implemented by courtiers and elders.

古文：丙寅，荧惑犯诸侯西第三星。
现代文：初三，荧惑星干犯诸侯星座的西面第三星。
English: On the third day of the first month, the third star in the western part of the Princes' Constellation is invaded by a fluorescent planet.

古文：庚午，忙古带为中书右丞，行中书省事。
现代文：初七，忙古带任中书右丞，掌管中书省事务。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, he was appointed as the vice-president of the Chinese Academy of Letters and was in charge of the affairs of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：辛未，敕隆兴行省参政刘合拔儿秃，凡金谷造作专领之。
现代文：初八，敕令隆兴行省的参政刘合拔儿秃，凡是铁器、谷物的制作由他专管。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Liu Heber Bald, a politician from the province of Guilinglongxing, was put in charge of the production of ironware and grain.

古文：乙亥，甘州凡诸投下户，依民例应站役。
现代文：十二日，甘州所有的各投下户，依照民户的先例，应征到驿站担当差役。
English: On the 12th, all the cast-off households in Ganzhou, in accordance with the precedent of private households, were conscripted to work as station attendants.

古文：申严大都总管府、兵马司、左右巡院敛民之禁。
现代文：申令严禁大都总管府、兵马司、左右巡院聚敛民财。
English: It is strictly forbidden for the General Administration of the Metropolis, the Department of the Army and the Cavalry, and the Left and Right Patrol Houses to accumulate people's wealth.

古文：庚寅，以阿剌罕既卒，命阿塔海等分戍三海口，令阿塔海就招海中馀寇。
现代文：二十七日，因为阿剌罕已经去世，命令阿塔海等分头戍守三处海口。命令阿塔海就地招降海盗的全部。
English: On the 27th, because Ahan had already died, he ordered Atahai and the other commanders to guard the three entrances to the sea. He ordered Atahai to recruit all the pirates on the spot.

古文：高丽国王王睶遣其密直司使韩康来贺圣诞节。
现代文：高丽国王王贝春派遣他的密直司使韩康前来恭贺皇帝的圣诞佳节。
English: King Baechun of Goryeo sent his confidential secretary Han Kang to congratulate the emperor on Christmas.

古文：壬辰，以开元等路六驿饥，命给币帛万二千匹，其鬻妻子者官为赎之。
现代文：二十九日，因为开元等处的六处驿站饥饿乏食，命令赐给绢帛一万二千匹，那些卖掉妻子儿女的，由官府为他们赎回。
English: On the 29th, because the six mule stations in Kaiyuan and other places were starving and short of food, the order was given to twelve thousand mules. Those who sold their wives and children were redeemed by the government.

古文：诏征日本军回，所在官为给粮。
现代文：下诏：命征伐日本的军队返回，由所在地的官府供给他们粮食。
English: The following edict was issued: The troops ordered to conquer Japan were to return, and the local government was to provide them with grain.

古文：忻都、洪茶丘、范文虎、李庭、金方庆诸军，船为风涛所激，大失利，余军回至高丽境，十存一二。
现代文：忻都、洪茶丘、范文虎、李庭、金方庆各军的战船受到风浪的冲击，大为失利，余下的军队回到高丽境内，只剩下十之一二。
English: The warships of Yeongdu, Hong Cha Kuk, Fan Wen Ho, Li Ting, and Kim Fang Ching's armies were hit by the storm and waves, and suffered a great defeat. The remaining troops returned to the territory of Korea, with only two out of ten remaining.

古文：设醮于上都寿宁宫。
现代文：在上都宁寿宫设置醮坛。
English: A gong altar was set up in the Shangdu Ning Shou Palace.

古文：赐欢只兀部及灭乞里等羊马价，及众家奴等助军羊马钞。赐常河部军贫乏者，给过西川军粮。
现代文：赐给欢只兀部，以及灭乞里等人羊马钞。赏赐贫困的常河部军卒，供给通过西川的军队粮草。
English: He bestowed sheep and horse money to Huanjiaube and Zhaigeli, rewarded the impoverished soldiers of Changhe, and supplied grain and grass to the troops passing through the West River.

古文：海南诸国来贡象犀方物。
现代文：海南各国前来进贡驯象、犀牛等地方特产。
English: Hainan countries come to pay tribute to local specialties such as tamed elephants and rhinoceroses.

古文：给怯薛丹粮，拘其所占田为屯田。
现代文：赐给护卫军军官粮食，收聚他们所占有的民田，作为屯田。
English: He gave grain to the officers of the escorting army, and collected the people's fields they had occupied to use as garrisons.

古文：闰月癸巳朔，荧惑犯司怪南第二星。
现代文：闰八月初一，荧惑星干犯司怪星座南面第二星。
English: On the first day of the leap month of August, the second star in the south of the strange constellation is a fluorescent planet.

古文：阿塔海乞以戍三海口军击福建贼陈吊眼，诏以重劳不从。
现代文：阿塔海请求派戍守三海口的军队去攻击福建贼寇陈吊眼。皇帝下诏：因为费力太大而不予允从。
English: Atahai requested that troops be sent to defend Sanhaikou to attack the Fujian bandits. The emperor issued an edict: because the effort was too great, he would not grant permission.

古文：敕守缙山道侍卫军还京师。
现代文：敕令戍守缙山道的侍卫军返回京师。
English: He ordered the bodyguards who were guarding the Lushan Road to return to the capital.

古文：壬辰，瓜州屯田进瑞麦一茎五穗。
现代文：初十，瓜州的屯田部进献一株长出五支穗的瑞麦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Guazhou provincial government presented a sprouting five-branched Ruimai.

古文：丙午，车驾至自上都。
现代文：十四日，皇帝的车驾从上都来到京师。
English: On the 14th, the emperor's carriage drove from Shangdu to Beijing.

古文：庚戌，太阴犯昴。
现代文：十八日，太阴星干犯昴宿天区。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the great Yin star overtook the pagoda.

古文：丁巳，命播州每岁亲贡方物，改思州宣抚司为宣慰司，兼管内安抚使。
现代文：二十五日，命令播州知州每年亲自前来贡奉地方特产。把思州宣抚司改为宣慰司，宣慰使兼任辖区内的安抚使。
English: On the 25th, he ordered Banzhou and Zhizhou to personally come every year to pay tribute to local special products. He changed the Shizhou Relief Division to the Relief Division, and the Relief Division also served as the Pacification Division in the area under its jurisdiction.

古文：升高丽签议府为从三品。
现代文：把高丽佥议府的秩禄升格为从三品。
English: The Chitsuroku of the Goryeo Constituent Assembly was upgraded to Sanbon.

古文：敕中书省减执政及诸司冗员。
现代文：敕令中书省裁减执政及各司署的冗员。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to reduce the number of administrative and administrative staff.

古文：遣兀良合带运沙城等粮六千石入和林。
现代文：派遣兀良合带运送沙城等地的粮食六千石到和林。
English: Aira was dispatched to transport 6,000 koku of grain from Shacheng and other places to Warim.

古文：括江南户口税课。
现代文：统计江南户口的赋税。
English: Jiangnan hukou tax statistics.

古文：庚申，安南国贡方物。
现代文：二十八日，安南国进贡地方特产。
English: On the 28th, Annan Province paid tribute to local special products.

古文：江西行省荐举兵官，命罢之。
现代文：江西行中书省推荐军官，命令他们停止举荐。
English: Jiangxi Province recommended officers and ordered them to stop recommending.

古文：壬戌，诏谕斡端等三城官民及忽都带儿，括不阑奚人口。
现代文：三十日，下诏：令斡端等三城的官吏以及忽都带儿，统计逃亡驱口的数目。
English: On the 30th, the following edict was issued: Officials in the three cities, including the capital, were ordered to count the number of escape exits.

古文：两淮转运使阿剌瓦丁坐盗官钞二万一千五百锭，盗取和买马三百四十四匹，朝廷宣命格而弗颁，又以官员所佩符擅与家奴往来贸易等事，伏诛。
现代文：两淮转运使阿剌瓦丁因盗用官钱二万一千五百锭，盗取买来的马匹三百四十匹而获罪，朝廷命令处以杖刑而不予公开宣布；阿剌瓦丁又因为把官员所佩戴的牌符擅自赏给家奴互相买卖等事，被处以死刑。
English: After two years of transportation, Ahwading was found guilty of embezzling twenty-one thousand five hundred taels of official money and stealing three hundred and forty horses he had bought. The court ordered him to be punished with a cane and not to make a public announcement; Ahwading was also sentenced to death for arbitrarily awarding the badges worn by officials to family slaves and trading them with each other.

古文：赐谦州屯田军人钞币、衣裘等物，及给农具渔具。
现代文：赐给在谦州屯田的军人钱钞、衣裘等物，并供给他们农具和渔具。
English: The soldiers in Tongtian, Qianzhou, were given money, banknotes, clothing and other items, as well as agricultural and fishing tools.

古文：偿站匠等助军羊马价。
现代文：偿还站户等资助军队的羊马价。
English: Reimburse station owners and others who subsidize the army for the price of sheep and horses.

古文：九月癸亥朔，畋于近郊。
现代文：九月初一，皇帝在京师的近郊狩猎。
English: On the first day of September, the emperor went hunting in the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：甲子，增大都巡兵千人。
现代文：初二，增加大都巡逻的士兵一千人。
English: On the second day of the new school year, the number of soldiers on patrol in most cities will be increased by one thousand.

古文：给钞赈上都饥民。
现代文：发给钱钞以赈济上都的饥民。
English: Banknotes were distributed to help feed the hungry in Shangdu.

古文：癸酉，商贾市舶物货已经泉州抽分者，诸处贸易，止令输税。
现代文：十一日，商贾从海船上购进的货物已经在泉州抽取了分例钱的，到各处贸易只令其交纳商税。
English: On the 11th day of the month, merchants who purchased goods from seagoing vessels in Quanzhou were required to pay commercial tax.

古文：益耽罗戍兵，仍命高丽国给战具。
现代文：增加耽罗地方的守军，并命令高丽国供给他们战具。
English: He increased the number of defenders in the Tamro region and ordered the Koryo Kingdom to supply them with military equipment.

古文：庚辰，还宫。
现代文：十八日，皇帝返回皇宫。
English: On the 18th, the emperor returned to the imperial palace.

古文：辛巳，大都立蒙古站屯田，编户岁输包银者及真定等路阑遗户，并令屯田，其在真定者与免皮货。
现代文：十九日，大都设立蒙古屯田的机构，每年交纳包税银的百姓，以及真定等路流离无主的民户，都令他们屯田，那些定居在真定的民户，给予免征皮货钱的优待。
English: On the 19th, most of them set up Mongolian tunden institutions, and the people who paid taxes and silver every year, as well as the displaced and ownerless households in Zhending and other roads, all made them tunden, and those who settled in Zhending were given preferential treatment of exempting goods and money.

古文：癸未，京兆等路岁办课额，自一万九千锭增至五万四千锭，阿合马尚以为未实，欲核之。
现代文：二十一日，京兆等路每年经办的赋税数额，从一万九千锭增加到五万四千锭，阿合马还认为不确实，想要进行核实。
English: On the 21st, the amount of taxes handled by the Beijing-Shanghai Expressway and other roads increased from 19,000 baht to 54,000 baht annually. Aemma also thought it was not accurate and wanted to verify it.

古文：帝曰： 阿合马何知。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：阿合马知道什么？ 
English: The emperor said: What does the horse know?

古文：事遂止。
现代文：事情就被制止了。
English: The matter was put to rest.

古文：大都、新安县民复和顾和买。
现代文：大都、新安县的百姓又重新被雇佣、被征税。
English: Most of the people in Xin'an County were re-employed and taxed.

古文：甲申，太阴犯轩辕大星。
现代文：二十二日，太阴星干犯轩辕星座的大星。
English: On the twenty-second day, the great star of the constellation of the Great Yin committed a crime.

古文：壬辰，占城国来贡方物。
现代文：三十日，占城国前来进贡地方特产。
English: On the 30th, local special products from Zhancheng Province came to pay tribute.

古文：赐修大都城侍卫军钞币帛有差，赏北征军银钞。
现代文：赏赐修筑大都城墙的侍卫军钱钞，数额各不相等。赏赐北征军钱钞。
English: The guards who built most of the city's walls were rewarded with banknotes of varying amounts. The Northern Expeditionary Army was rewarded with banknotes.

古文：赐怯怜口及四斡耳朵下与范文虎所部将士羊马、衣服、币帛有差。
现代文：赐给侍卫军士卒以及四处行宫属下的士兵，和范文虎部下的将士羊马、衣服、绢帛等，数额各不相等。
English: He gave the guards, sergeants, and soldiers who were subordinate to the palace everywhere, and the soldiers, soldiers, horses, clothes, bags, etc. under Fan Wenhu, the amount of each was not equal.

古文：冬十月乙未，享于太庙，贞懿顺圣昭天睿文光应皇后祔。
现代文：冬季，十月初三，向太庙贡献祭品，附祭贞懿顺圣昭天睿文光应皇后。
English: In winter, on the third day of the first month of October, offerings are made to the Great Temple, and the queen of Zhenxun, Zhao Tianrui and Wen Guangying is enshrined.

古文：丙申，募民淮西屯田。
现代文：初四，招募百姓到淮西屯田。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, recruited people to Huaxi Tunden.

古文：己亥，议封安南王号，易所赐安南国畏吾字虎符，以国字书之；仍降诏谕安南国，立日烜之叔遗爱为安南国王。
现代文：初七，商议晋封安南国王尊号，把赐给安南国用畏兀儿文字书写的虎符，调换成用蒙古文字书写的。颁发诏书晓谕安南国，立陈日火亘的叔父陈遗爱为安南国王。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they discussed the conferment of the honorary title of King Annan, and exchanged the tiger emblem given to Annan, which was written in the Dreyfus script, for one written in the Mongolian script. They issued an edict instructing Annan to make Chen's long-suffering uncle Chen Ziyi the King of Annan.

古文：庚子，溪洞新附官镇安州岑从毅，纵兵杀掠，迫死知州李显祖，召从毅入觐。
现代文：初八，溪洞新归附的官员，镇安州岑从毅放纵士兵杀人抢劫，逼死知州李显祖，皇帝征召岑从毅入朝觐见。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the newly annexed officials of Xidong, Zhen'anzhou Zang Cong Yi indulged soldiers in murder and robbery, forced the death of Zhizhou Li Xianzu, and the emperor conscripted Zang Cong Yi into the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，赐征日本将校衣装、币帛、靴帽等物有差。
现代文：初十，赏赐征伐日本的将校衣服、绢帛、靴帽等物，数额各不相同。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, officers who had fought in the conquest of Japan were given clothing, bags, boots, hats, and other items, in varying amounts.

古文：乙巳，命安西王府协济户及南山隘口军，于安西、延安、凤翔、六盘等处屯田。
现代文：十三日，命令安西王府的协济户以及南山隘口的守军在安西、延安、凤翔、六盘等处屯田。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the Xieji households of the Anxi royal palace and the defenders of the Nanshan Pass to occupy the fields in Anxi, Yan'an, Fengxiang, and Liupan.

古文：河西置织毛段匠提举司。
现代文：河西设置织毛段匹提举司。
English: Hexi has set up a weaving section with a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：丁未，安南国置宣慰司，以北京路达鲁花赤孛颜帖木儿参知政事，行安南国宣慰使，都元帅、佩虎符柴椿、忽哥儿副之。
现代文：十五日，安南国设置宣慰司，任命北京路镇守官孛颜帖木儿为参知政事，署理安南国宣慰使；任命都元帅、佩戴虎符的柴椿、忽哥儿为副使。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Annan set up a consolation division and appointed the Beijing Road Town Warden Yan Yan Timur as the political advisor and the acting consolation envoy of Annan; appointed the Marshal of the Capital, Chai Tsiming, who wore a tiger emblem, and Hu Ge'er as the deputy envoy.

古文：给钞万锭，付河西行省以备经费。
现代文：付给河西行中书省钱钞一万锭作为经费。
English: The cost of the trip to Hexi amounted to 10,000 baht in scrip banknotes.

古文：己酉，张易等言： 参校道书，惟《道德经》系老子亲著，余皆后人伪撰，宜悉焚毁。 
现代文：十七日，张易等上奏说： 用道家的书籍互相参校，只有《道德经》是老子亲手所著，其余的都是后人伪造，应当全部烧毁。 
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhang Yi et al. made a report saying, "Let's use Taoist books to attend school together. Only the Tao Te Ching was written by Lao Zi himself. The rest were forged by later generations and should all be burned."

古文：从之，仍诏谕天下。
现代文：皇帝允从，并下诏晓谕天下。
English: The emperor agreed and issued an edict to the whole world.

古文：给隆兴行省海青符。
现代文：赐给隆兴行中书省海东青符牌。
English: Long Xing was given the East China Sea Youth Badge of the People's Republic of China.

古文：命失里咱牙信合八剌麻合迭瓦为占城郡王，加荣禄大夫，赐虎符。
现代文：任命失里咱牙信合八剌麻合迭瓦为占城郡王，加授荣禄大夫，赐给虎符。
English: He was appointed the king of Zhancheng County, awarded the title of honorary doctor, and given the tiger emblem.

古文：立行中书省占城。以唆都为右丞，刘深为左丞，兵部侍郎也里迷失参知政事。
现代文：在占城设立行中书省府衙，任命唆都为右丞，刘深为左丞，兵部侍郎也黑迷失为参知政事。
English: In Zhancheng, the Central Government Office of the People's Republic of China was established, and the vice-governors were appointed as the vice-governors, Liu Sheng as the vice-governors, and the attendants of the military department were also appointed as the vice-governors.

古文：庚戌，敕以海船百艘，新旧军及水手合万人，期以明年正月征海外诸番，仍谕占城郡王给军食。
现代文：十八日，敕命用海船一百艘，新军和旧军的士卒以及水手共一万人，以明年正月为期征伐海外各番国，并谕令占城郡王供给军粮。
English: On the 18th day of the month, he ordered the dispatch of a hundred ships, with a total of ten thousand soldiers and sailors from the new army and the old army, to conquer all overseas countries in the first month of the next year, and ordered the king of Zhancheng County to supply military grain.

古文：以安南国王陈遗爱入安南，发新附军千人卫送。
现代文：令安南国王陈遗爱返回安南，派遣一千名新附军侍卫、护送。
English: Let Annan King Chen Youai return to Annan and send a thousand new attached troops to guard and escort him.

古文：诏谕干不昔国来归附。
现代文：下诏：谕令干不昔国前来归附。
English: The following edict was issued: The imperial edict was issued for the country to come forward and be annexed.

古文：壬子，用和礼霍孙言，于扬州、隆兴、鄂州、泉州四省，置蒙古提举学校官各二员。
现代文：二十日，采纳和礼霍孙的意见，在扬州、隆兴、鄂州、泉州四省设置蒙古提举、学校官各二名。
English: On the 20th, adopting the opinion of He Lihuosun, the four provinces of Yangzhou, Longxing, Ezhou and Quanzhou set up two Mongolian officials and two school officials each.

古文：以翰林学士承旨撒里蛮兼领会同馆、集贤院事，以平章政事、枢密副使张易兼领秘书监、太史院、司天台事，以翰林学士承旨和礼霍孙守司徒。
现代文：派翰林学士承旨撒里蛮兼管会同馆、集贤院的事务；派平章政事、枢密院副使张易兼管秘书监、太史院、司天台事务。命翰林学士承旨和礼霍孙暂署司徒。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Sariban was assigned to manage the affairs of the association, the museum, and the scholars' academy; Pingzhang Political Affairs and Zhang Yi, the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, were assigned to supervise the secretary, the Institute of World History, and the administration of the Tiantai affairs; Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi and Li Huosun were assigned to temporarily supervise the scholars.

古文：改大都南阳真定等处屯田孛兰奚总管府为农政院。
现代文：把大都、南阳、真定等地的屯田汉奴总管府改为农政院。
English: The Tonden Hannu General Administration Office in Datu, Nanyang, and Jinding was changed to the Agricultural Policy Research Institute.

古文：癸丑，皇太子至自北边。
现代文：二十一日，皇太子从北部边境抵达京师。
English: On the 21st, the crown prince arrived in Beijing from the northern border.

古文：丙辰，以兀良合带言，上都南四站人畜困乏，赐钞给之。
现代文：二十四日，根据兀良合带的上奏，上都以南的四处驿站人畜困乏，赐予他们钱钞。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, according to the upbeat of the eulogy, the four stations south of Shangdu were destitute of people and animals, and gave them money.

古文：庚申，籍西川户。
现代文：二十八日，登记西川的民户入籍。
English: On the 28th, residents of Nishikawa were registered for naturalization.

古文：辛酉，邵武叛人高日新降。
现代文：二十九日，邵武的叛贼高日新投降。
English: On the 29th, Shao Wu's traitor Gao Rongxin surrendered.

古文：给征日本回侍卫新附军冬衣。
现代文：赐给征伐日本回国的新附侍卫军冬衣。
English: Winter coats were given to newly enlisted soldiers returning from the conquest of Japan.

古文：赐刘天锡等银币，胜兀剌等羊马钞，诸王阿只吉等马牛羊，各有差。
现代文：赐给刘天锡等人银币，赐给胜兀剌等人羊马价钱钞，赐给诸侯王阿只吉等马、牛、羊，数额不等。
English: Silver coins were given to Liu Tianxi and others, bills of exchange for sheep and horses were given to Sheng Yao and others, and horses, cattle, and sheep were given to princes such as Aduji and others, in varying amounts.

古文：十一月癸亥朔，诏谕探马礼，令归附。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏晓谕探马礼，命他归附。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued, ordering him to pay homage.

古文：甲子，敕诛陈吊眼首恶者，余并收其兵仗，系送京师。
现代文：初二，敕令将首恶者陈吊眼处死，其余的人全部没收兵器甲仗，拘系押往京师。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the imperial order was issued to execute the chief villain, Chen Hangyan, and the rest of the people were all confiscated weapons and sent to the Beijing Division for detention.

古文：己巳，敕军器监给兵仗付高丽沿海等郡。
现代文：初七，敕令军器监把武器甲仗付给高丽沿海等州郡。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Minister of Ordnance ordered the Ordnance Inspector to send a batch of weapons to the coastal counties of Goryeo.

古文：奉使占城孟庆元、孙胜夫并为广州宣慰使，兼领出征调度。
现代文：奉命出使占城的孟庆元、孙胜夫并任广州宣慰使，兼管出征调度的事务。
English: Meng Qingyuan and Sun Shengfu, who were ordered to send envoys to Zhangcheng, also served as envoys to Guangzhou, and were also in charge of the dispatch of the expedition.

古文：高丽国、金州等处置镇边万户府，以控制日本。
现代文：在高丽国、金州等处设置镇边万户府，以监控、制约日本。
English: In Goryeo, Jinju and other places, townships were set up to monitor and restrict Japan.

古文：高日新及其弟鼎新等至阙，以日新两为叛首，授山北路民职。
现代文：高日新和他的弟弟高鼎新等人来到宫阙，因为高日新两次当了叛军首领，授予他山北路管民官的职务。
English: Gao Rixin and his brother Gao Dingxin and others came to Gonglu, because Gao Rixin twice became the leader of the rebel army and was awarded the post of Shanbei Road administrator.

古文：文庆之属，遣还泉州。
现代文：文庆的部属遣发回泉州。
English: Wenqing's subordinates were sent back to Quanzhou.

古文：赐有功将校二百二十三员银十万两及币帛、弓矢、鞍勒有差。
现代文：赐给有功的二百二十三名将校白银十万两，以及数额不等的绢帛、弓矢、鞍勒等。
English: Two hundred and twenty-three meritorious officers were awarded 100,000 taels of silver, as well as varying amounts of crossbows, bows and arrows, saddles, etc.

古文：诏安南国王给占城行省军食。
现代文：诏令安南国王供给占城行省军粮。
English: He ordered King Annan to supply the besieging army with grain.

古文：高丽国王请完滨海城，防日本，不允。
现代文：高丽国王请求修整海滨地区的城垣，以防备日本，皇帝不准。
English: The King of Goryeo requested that the castle walls along the coast be repaired to protect against Japan, but the Emperor did not allow this.

古文：辛未，给诸王阿只吉粮六千石。
现代文：初九，赐给诸侯王阿只吉粮米六千石。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, he gave 6,000 koku of grain and rice to the vassal king, Ahudokichi.

古文：甲戌，太阴犯五车次南星。
现代文：十二日，太阴星干犯五车星座的次南星。
English: On the 12th, the Great Yin star became the second south star of the five-chariot constellation.

古文：乙亥，召法师刘道真，问祠太乙法。
现代文：十三日，征召法师刘道真，询问祭祀太乙的程式。
English: On the 13th, Liu Daozhen, a sorcerer, was called in to inquire about the ritual ritual.

古文：丁丑，太阴犯鬼。
现代文：十五日，太阴星干犯鬼宿天区。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the Great Yin Star committed the crime of haunting the sky.

古文：壬午，诏谕瓜哇国主，使亲来觐。
现代文：二十日，下诏晓谕爪哇国王，命他亲自前来觐见。
English: On the 20th, he issued an edict to the king of Java, ordering him to come and see him in person.

古文：昌州及盖里泊民饥，给钞赈之。
现代文：昌州及盖里泊的百姓饥饿乏食，赐给钱钞赈济他们。
English: The people of Changzhou and Gehripo were starving and short of food, so he gave them money and banknotes to help them.

古文：丙戌，给钞二万锭付和林贸易。
现代文：二十四日，付给和林二万锭钱钞以进行贸易。
English: On the 24th, he paid Warin 20,000 baht to trade.

古文：敕征日本回军后至者分戍沿海。
现代文：敕令征伐日本回师而后返回的军队分别戍守沿海。
English: The imperial command ordered the troops to invade and conquer Japan, and the troops that returned later guarded the coast separately.

古文：丁亥，太阴掩心东星。
现代文：二十五日，太阴星遮蔽心宿的东星。
English: On the 25th, the eclipsing star occluded the East Star.

古文：给扬州行省新附军将校钞，人二锭。
现代文：赐给扬州行中书省的新附军将校钱钞，每人二锭。
English: Yangzhou, the capital of Shandong Province, was given money and banknotes to the officers of the newly-annexed army, two baht each.

古文：己酉，赐安南国出征新附军钞。赐礼部尚书留梦炎及出使马八国俺都剌等钞各有差。
现代文：二十七日，赐给安南国出征的新附军钱钞，赐给礼部尚书留梦炎以及出使马八国俺都剌等地的使臣数额不等的钱钞。
English: On the 27th, the new attached military banknotes were given to Annan who went to war, to the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and to the envoys from the eight Malay states and Tudor and other places with varying amounts of banknotes.

古文：十二月甲午，以瓮吉剌带为中书右丞相。
现代文：十二月初三，任命瓮吉剌带为中书右丞相。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Gong Jizhe was appointed to the post of the Vice-Minister of the Central Government.

古文：己亥，罢日本行中书省。
现代文：初八，撤销征伐日本的行中书省。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the year, the Ministry of Education and Culture revoked the order to invade Japan.

古文：丙午，太阴犯轩辕大星。
现代文：十五日，太阴星干犯轩辕座大星。
English: On the 15th, the Great Star of the Zodiac, the Great Star of the Zodiac, the Great Star of the Zodiac.

古文：丁未，议选侍卫军万人练习，以备扈从。
现代文：十六日，决定挑选一万名侍卫军进行训练，以备扈从皇帝。
English: On the 16th, it was decided to select 10,000 bodyguards for training to prepare them to follow the emperor.

古文：升太常寺为正三品。
现代文：把太常寺的秩禄升格为正三品。
English: He upgraded the chitsuroku of Taijo-ji Temple to Shosanbon.

古文：辛亥，命西川行省给万家奴所部兵仗。
现代文：二十日，命令西川行中书省供给万家奴部下的士卒武器甲仗。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to go to West River and supply the soldiers of the Wanjia slaves with weapons.

古文：癸丑，敕免益都、淄莱、宁海开河夫今年租赋，仍给其佣直。
现代文：二十二日，敕令免征益都、淄莱、宁海开河民工今年的租赋，并付给他们工钱。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict exempted the migrant workers in Dadu, Palai, and Ninghai Kaihe from rent collection this year, and paid them their wages.

古文：乙卯，以诸王札忽儿所占文安县地给付屯田。
现代文：二十四日，把诸侯王札忽儿所占有的文安县土地交付屯田。
English: On the 24th, the land of Wen'an County, which was occupied by the vassal Wang Zakhuer, was handed over to Tonden.

古文：丙辰，调新附军屯田。
现代文：二十五日，调遣新附军前去屯田。
English: On the 25th, the New Annexed Army was dispatched to Tonden.

古文：获福州叛贼林天成，戮于市。
现代文：捕获福州叛贼林天成，处死于市井中。
English: Lin Tiancheng, who captured the Fuzhou traitor, died in the middle of the street.

古文：免福州路今年税二分，十八年以前租税并免征。
现代文：福州路今年的赋税免征两成，至元十八年以前的租税全部免征。
English: Fuzhou Road this year's tax exemption is 20%, and all taxes before the 18th century are exempted.

古文：以汉州德阳县隶成都府。
现代文：把汉州德阳县隶属于成都路。
English: to subordinate Deyang County of Hanzhou to Chengdu Road.

古文：改漳州为府。
现代文：把漳州改为路。
English: Change the name of Bozhou to Chongming Road.

古文：赐礼部尚书谢昌元钞。
现代文：赐给礼部尚书谢昌元钱钞。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies was presented with the Shangshu Xiechang Yuan banknote.

古文：赏捏古伯战功银有差。
现代文：赏赐在捏古伯立下战功的人银两，数额各不相同。
English: The amount of silver that was awarded to those who distinguished themselves in the war under Kuopio was different.

古文：偿阿只吉等助军马价。
现代文：偿付阿只吉等人资助军马的价钱。
English: to pay back the price of the war horses that Ayakichi and others had financed.

古文：赐塔剌海籍没户五十。
现代文：赐给塔剌海抄没家产的民户五十户。
English: It was given to 50 families who had lost their property in the Taunghaecho earthquake.

古文：是岁，保定路清苑县水，平阳路松山县旱，高唐、夏津、武城等县蟊害稼，并免今年租，计三万六千八百四十石。
现代文：这一年，保定路清苑县发生水灾，平阳路松山县发生旱灾，高唐、夏津、武城等县的蟊贼虫伤害庄稼，均免征今年的田租，总数为三万六千八百四十石。
English: This year, floods occurred in Qingyuan County on Baoding Road, droughts occurred in Matsuyama County on Pingyang Road, and crop-damaging insect pests in Gaotang, Xiajin, Wucheng and other counties were exempt from this year's field rent, with a total of 36,840 koku.

古文：断死罪二十二人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共二十二人。
English: A total of 22 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

