古文：魄问于魂曰： 道何以为体？ 
现代文：魄问魂说： 道以什么作为自己的本体？ 
English: I asked my soul, "What does Tao take as its essence?"

古文：曰： 以无有为体。 
现代文：魂回答： 以 无 作为自己的本体。 
English: The soul replied: "To have nothing as one's own being."

古文：魄曰： 无有有形乎？ 
现代文：魄又问：  无 有形体吗？ 
English: The ghost asked again: Is there no corporeal body?

古文：魂曰： 无有。 
现代文：魂说： 没有。 
English: The soul said, "No."

古文： 何得而闻也？ 
现代文：魄又问：  无 既然没有形体，那么你又是怎么知道的？ 
English: Zappa asked again: Since there is no form, how do you know?

古文：魂曰： 吾直有所遇之耳！
现代文：魂回答： 我只是从我所遭遇中知道而已。
English: The soul replied: I only know from what happened to me.

古文：视之无形，听之无声，谓之幽冥。
现代文：那就是，看它时没有形状，听它时没有声响，真可谓幽冥。
English: That is, there is no shape when looking at it, no sound when listening to it, it is really dark.

古文：幽冥者，所以喻道，而非道也。 
现代文：幽冥，只是用来比喻道，它本身不是道。 
English: Darkness is only used as a metaphor for the Tao, it is not the Tao itself.

古文：魄曰： 吾闻得之矣！乃内视而自反也。 
现代文：魄又说： 听你一说，我明白了 道 是让精神内视照察而返归本原的。 
English: Zappa also said, "Listening to you, I understand that the way is to let the spirit look inside and return to the original.

古文：魂曰： 凡得道者，形不可得而见，名不可得而扬。
现代文：魂又接着说： 凡得道者，其形体就不能见到，名称就不能言说。
English: The soul went on to say, "Whoever attains the Way, his form cannot be seen, and his name cannot be spoken.

古文：今汝已有形名矣，何道之所能乎！ 
现代文：现在你已经有了形体和名称，所以哪里还能得道？ 
English: Now that you have the form and the name, where can you gain the way?

古文：魄曰： 言者，独何为者？ 
现代文：魄于是说： 那么，你在说话，又怎么能说没有形体？ 
English: Then the ghost said: Well, since you are talking, how can you say that there is no body?

古文： 吾将反吾宗矣。 
现代文：魂回答： 我就要返归我的本原了。 
English: The soul replied, "I am about to return to my original state."

古文：魄反顾，魂忽然不见，反而自存，亦以沦于无形矣。
现代文：这时魄回头四顾，果然魂一下子不见了，消失得无影无踪，魄又转身察看自身，也隐没在无形之中了。
English: At this time, the ghost looked back and forth, and sure enough, the soul suddenly disappeared, disappearing without a trace. The ghost turned around to look at itself, and disappeared into the invisible.

古文：人不小学，不大迷；不小慧，不大愚。人莫鉴于沫雨，而鉴于澄水者，以其休止不荡也。
现代文：人如果不仅仅只具有小觉悟，并还能大彻大悟，就不会有大的迷惑和糊涂；人如果不仅仅只具有小聪明，并还具有大智慧，就不会干出大的蠢事。人是不能用混浊起沫的雨水照形的，而只能用清澈的河水当镜的，这是因为清澈河水静止而不荡漾。
English: If a person has not only a little awareness, but also a great understanding, there will be no great confusion and confusion; if a person has not only a little cleverness, but also a great wisdom, he will not do great stupid things. A person cannot use the muddy foaming rainwater to illuminate the shape, but can only use the clear river water as a mirror, because the clear river water is still and does not ripple.

古文：詹公之钓，千岁之鲤不能避；曾子攀柩车，引輴者为之止也；老母行歌而动申喜，精之至也。
现代文：詹何垂钓的技术，能使千年的鲤鱼精都无法逃脱；曾子攀伏在亲人的柩车上悲痛万分，使拉灵车的人都感动得停止了脚步；行乞的老母亲在街上行唱悲歌，触动了离散多年的申喜，使母子相见，这都是精诚所至的缘故。
English: Zhan He's fishing technique can make even a thousand-year-old eel spirit unable to escape; Zeng Zi's grief-stricken clinging to a relative's carriage has moved the people in the hearse to stop their steps; the beggar's old mother's singing of tragic songs in the street has touched the happiness of those who have been separated for many years, and made the mother and son meet each other. All of this is due to the sincerity.

古文：瓠巴鼓瑟，而淫鱼出听；伯牙鼓琴，驷马仰秣；介子歌龙蛇，而文君垂泣。
现代文：瓠巴奏瑟，使得江中的游鱼引颈倾听；伯牙鼓琴，使得驷马仰头嘶笑；介子推唱龙蛇之歌，使晋文公重耳为之流泪。
English: The dulcimer played a melody that made the fish in the river crane their necks to listen; the bugle made the horse laugh; and the gecko sang the song of the dragon and snake, bringing tears to the ears of Prince Jinwen.

古文：故玉在山而草木润，渊生珠而岸不枯；蚓无筋骨之强，爪牙之利，上食晞堁，下饮黄泉，用心一也。
现代文：所以出产玉的山中，草木必定滋润茂盛，出产珍珠的深渊，岸边草木必定不易枯萎。蚯蚓虽然没有强健的筋骨和锋利的爪牙，但却能上食干土、下饮黄泉，这是因为它用心专一的缘故。
English: Therefore, in the mountain that produces jade, the plants must be moist and lush, in the abyss that produces pearls, the plants on the shore must not wither easily. Although the dragonfly does not have strong bones and sharp claws, it can eat dry soil and drink the hell, this is because of its single-mindedness.

古文：清之为明，杯水见眸子；浊之为暗，河水不见太山。
现代文：清水透明，只须一杯清水就能照见到你的眼睛；浊水浑暗，就是有黄河那么大的水域也照映不出泰山来。
English: Clear water is transparent, you only need a glass of clear water to see your eyes; turbid water is dark, even the waters as large as the Yellow River cannot reflect Mount Tai.

古文：视目者眩，听雷者聋，人无为则治，有为则伤。
现代文：望太阳使人眼花，听响雷使人耳鸣。人无为则太平无事，有为则易受伤害。
English: Looking at the sun makes people's eyes dazzle, listening to thunder makes people's ears ring. If you do nothing, you are peaceful, if you do something, you are vulnerable.

古文：无为而治者，载无也，为者，不能有也；不能无为者，不能有为也。
现代文：无为而治的人，思想上信奉 无 ，行动上施 无为 。有为者就不能没有好憎情欲，有好憎情欲就不能恬澹静漠，有所作为。
English: Those who do nothing, believe in nothing in their thoughts and do nothing in their actions. Those who do something cannot do without a good hateful desire, and those who have a good hateful desire cannot be silent and do something.

古文：人无言而神，有言者则伤。无言而神者载无，有言则伤其神。
现代文：人闭口少言就能保全精神，爱说话者就容易损伤精神；人闭口少言保全精神而信奉 无 ，爱说话会损伤精神而无法达到 道 的境界。
English: A person who keeps his mouth shut and speaks little can preserve his spirit, while a person who loves to talk can easily damage his spirit; a person who keeps his mouth shut and speaks little preserves his spirit and believes in nothing, while a person who loves to talk can damage his spirit and cannot reach the realm of Tao.

古文：之神者，鼻之所以息，耳之所以听，终女以其无用者为用矣。
现代文：鼻子之所以能呼吸，耳朵之所以能听音，是在于凭借着它们空空的又似乎无用的洞孔来发挥作用的。
English: The nose is able to breathe, the ears are able to hear, thanks to their empty and seemingly useless holes.

古文：物莫不因其所有而用其所无，以为不信，视籁与竿。
现代文：天下事物无不凭借着其中的空洞 无用 来发挥作用的，如果认为这种说法不真实，请看看籁和竽是怎样凭着这 管 的中空洞孔来发音的吧！
English: If you think it's not true that all things in the world function by virtue of the emptiness and uselessness within them, take a look at how  and  are pronounced by virtue of the hollow holes in this tube!

古文：念虑者不得卧，止念虑，则有为其所止矣。
现代文：思念忧虑者是难以入睡的；要想不思念忧虑，就得想法来抑止它。
English: It is difficult to fall asleep thinking about worries; if you don't want to think about worries, you have to stop thinking about them.

古文：两者俱忘，则至德纯矣。
现代文：如果这两者都抛开，去掉所有思念忧虑，那么就可达到纯粹的精神道德境界。
English: If both of these are put aside, and all thoughts and worries are removed, then a pure spiritual and moral realm can be achieved.

古文：圣人终身言治，所用者非其言也，用所以言也。
现代文：圣人一辈子都在谈论治国修身平天下，但他实际上运用的并不是他说的那些言论，而是运用他说这些话时所依据的思想和精神。
English: The sage spent his entire life talking about governing the country and improving the world, but what he actually applied was not the words he said, but the thought and spirit on which he said them.

古文：歌者有诗，然使人善之者，非其诗也。
现代文：歌唱的人有诗句作歌诗，然而使人感到动听的并不是这些诗句而是那动人美妙的旋律。
English: Singers have verses to make a song, but it's not the verses that make people feel good, it's the beautiful melody.

古文：鹦鹉能言，而不可使长。是何则？
现代文：鹦鹉能说些简单的话语，但是不能让它讲有关教令法典方面的话，这是为什么呢？
English: Why is it that a parrot can say some simple words, but you can't get it to say something about the Code of Canon Law?

古文：行其所言，而不得其所以言。
现代文：这是因为鹦鹉只能学舌效仿些人说的话，而它自己不具备语言的功能，也就不能达人意。
English: This is because the parrot can only learn the tongue to imitate what some people say, and it does not have the function of language itself, so it cannot meet people's expectations.

古文：故循迹者，非能生迹者也。
现代文：所以只会循着人家脚印走路的人是不能走出自己的路来的。
English: Therefore, those who only walk in the footsteps of others cannot get out of their own way.

古文：神蛇能断而复续，而不能使人勿断也。
现代文：神蛇能够在被砍断后重新再生复活，但是不能使人不再砍断它。
English: The divine serpent can regenerate and resurrect itself after being cut, but it cannot make people stop cutting it.

古文：神龟能见梦元王，而不能自出渔者之笼。
现代文：神龟能在宋元王的梦中显灵而不被捉获，但是它却不能逃出渔人的笼子。
English: The tortoise was able to appear in King Songyuan's dream without being caught, but it could not escape from the fisherman's cage.

古文：四方皆道之门户牖向也，在所从窥之。
现代文：四面八方都有 道 的门和窗，就看你从哪个门窗中去观照 道 体。
English: There are doors and windows of the Tao in all directions, and it depends on which door or window you use to observe the Tao.

古文：故钓可以教骑，骑可以教御，御可以教刺舟。
现代文：所以善于垂钓者可用钓鱼原理教人骑马，善于骑马者可用骑术教人御术，善于驾御者可用御术教人撑船。
English: Therefore, those who are good at fishing can use the principle of fishing to teach people how to ride a horse, those who are good at riding a horse can teach people how to ride a horse, and those who are good at driving a car can teach people how to paddle a boat.

古文：越人学远射，参天而发，适在五步之内，不易仪也。
现代文：越人学习远射技艺，仰头望着天空发射，箭只落在五步之内的地方，这是因为他不懂射术的缘故。
English: The Yue people learn long-range shooting skills, looking up at the sky and firing, and the arrows only fall within five steps, this is because he does not know shooting.

古文：世已变矣，而守其故，譬犹越人之射也。
现代文：世道已经变化，如还守着老一套的东西，这就好比越人学射术。
English: The world has changed. If you still stick to the same things, it's like learning archery.

古文：月望，日夺其光，阴不可以乘阳也。日出，星不见，不能与之争光也。
现代文：月半时节月亮圆满，和太阳东西相望成直线，地球处处其中，太阳无法给月亮光亮，这时属阴的月亮驾御不了这属阳的、发光的太阳。太阳出来，这星星就隐匿不见，这是因为不能和太阳争光。
English: At the time of the half moon, the moon is full, and it is in a straight line with the sun from east to west, and the earth is everywhere in it. The sun cannot give the moon light. At this time, the moon, which belongs to the shade, cannot control the sun, which belongs to the sun and shines. When the sun comes out, the star disappears, because it cannot compete with the sun.

古文：故未不可以强于本，指不可以大于臂。
现代文：所以枝末是不可以强过根本的，手指是不可以粗过臂膀的。
English: Therefore, the end of the branch should not be stronger than the root, and the fingers should not be thicker than the arm.

古文：下轻上重，其覆必易。
现代文：下轻上重，必然要倾覆。
English: Light weight on the bottom, heavy weight on the top, it's bound to tip over.

古文：一渊不两鲛。
现代文：一个深渊中是不能同时有两条蛟龙的。
English: You can't have two dragons in the same pit.

古文：水定则清正，动则失平。
现代文：水静止时就清澈平稳，流动起来就失去平和。
English: When the water is still, it is clear and smooth, but when it starts to flow, it loses its peace.

古文：故惟不动，则所以无不动也。
现代文：所以唯有不动，就能无所不动。
English: Therefore, the only way to be able to do anything is to not move.

古文：江河所以能长百谷者，能下之也。夫惟能下之，是以能上之。
现代文：江河之水之所以能成为百谷之长，是因为它能处低洼之处，唯有能处低洼处，所以能为 上 。
English: The reason why the water of a river can be the longest of the hundred valleys is because it can go through low-lying areas. It can only go through low-lying areas, so it can go up.

古文：天下莫相憎于胶漆，而莫相爱于冰炭。
现代文：天下没有比胶和漆更不能相容的了，没有比冰和炭更相爱的了。
English: There is nothing in the world more incompatible than glue and paint, and nothing more in love than ice and charcoal.

古文：胶漆相贼，冰炭相息也。
现代文：胶漆互相败坏而冰炭互相生息。
English: The glue and paint corrode each other and the ice and charcoal feed on each other.

古文：墙之坏，愈其立也；冰之泮，愈其凝也，以其反宗。
现代文：墙壁倒塌，比它立着更长久、自在；冰块溶解，比它凝固时更好，为什么？
English: A wall collapses, longer and more easily than it stands; an ice cube melts, better than it solidifies, why?

古文：泰山之容，巍巍然高，去之千里，不见捶垛，远之故也。
现代文：这是因为都返归根本的缘故。泰山的容貌和形状，巍巍高耸，但离它千里之远望去，泰山不过是个小土堆，这是因为距离间隔得远的缘故。
English: This is because they all return to the fundamental reason. The appearance and shape of Mount Tai is towering, but when viewed from thousands of miles away, Mount Tai is just a small mound, this is because the distance is far apart.

古文：秋豪之未，沦于不测。
现代文：秋毫之末这样细微的东西，能够深入到无法测量的小空间。
English: Something so minute can penetrate into immeasurably small spaces.

古文：是故小不可以为内者，大不可以为外矣。
现代文：所以事物小可以小到没有内部极限、大可以大到没有外部边界。
English: Therefore, things can be small enough to have no internal limit, and large enough to have no external boundary.

古文：兰生幽谷，不为莫服而不芳。舟在江海，不为莫乘而不浮。君子行义，不为莫知而止休。
现代文：兰草生长在幽深的山谷中，并不因为无人佩戴它而变得不芳香；小船停泊在江河上，并不因为无人乘坐它而不漂浮；君子行义，并不因为无人知道而停止下来。
English: An orchid growing in a deep valley does not lose its fragrance because no one wears it; a boat moored on a river does not float because no one rides it; a gentleman does not stop doing good because no one knows about it.

古文：夫玉润泽而有光，其声舒扬，涣乎其有似也。无内无外，不匿瑕秽。近之而濡，望之而隧。
现代文：美玉润泽有光彩，发出的声音都舒缓柔和，鲜明光亮与君子的秉性相似；无论内外，都不藏匿瑕疵污垢；靠近它则显得湿润，远望它则显得深沉。
English: The beauty gemstone is lustrous, the sound it emits is soothing and soft, and its bright shine is similar to the disposition of a gentleman; both inside and outside, it does not hide blemishes and dirt; when it is close to it, it appears moist, and when it is far away, it appears deep.

古文：夫照镜见眸子，微察秋豪，明照晦冥。
现代文：照镜能看得到眼珠子，秋毫之末能够明察，光明能够照亮黑暗。
English: The lens can see the eyeballs, the end of autumn can be clearly observed, and the light can illuminate the darkness.

古文：故和氏之壁，随侯之珠，出于山渊之精，君子服之，顺祥以安宁，侯王宝之，为天下正。
现代文：所以和氏之璧、隋侯之珠，由高山深渊的精纯之气孕育而成，君子佩戴它，和顺吉祥而安宁。侯王珍视它们，作为天下公正的象征。
English: Therefore, the pearl of the Sui and Wang dynasties, the gem of the Sui and Wang dynasties, is bred from the pure air of the high mountains and abysses. Gentlemen wear it, and it is auspicious and peaceful. Princes cherish them as a symbol of justice in the world.

古文：陈成子恒之劫子渊捷也，子罕之辞其所不欲而得其所欲，孔子之见黏蝉者，自公胜之倒杖策也，卫姬之请罪于桓公，子见子夏曰： 何肥也 ，魏文侯见之反被裘而负刍也，儿说之为宋王解闭结也，此皆微吵可以观论者。
现代文：陈成子桓胁迫子渊捷，子渊捷不屈从；子罕辞让他所不想要的宝玉，因而获得廉洁不贪的美名；孔子见到佝偻人粘蝉的技术，悟出精诚专一的道理；白公胜倒柱鞭杖穿刺了腮帮而无知觉；卫姬向齐桓公请罪救卫国；曾子见到子夏就问： 为什么长得这么胖 ；魏文侯看到过路人反穿皮衣而悟出毛依附皮的道理；兒说为宋王解开闭结的死结。这些事情都很微妙，但可以通过观察而弄清其中的道理。
English: Chen Chengzihuan coerced Ziyuan Jie, Ziyuan Jie did not give in; Ziyuan Jie gave him the precious stones he did not want, thus gaining a reputation for integrity and greed; Confucius saw the skill of the sticky cicada and realized the principle of sincerity and single-mindedness; Bai Gongsheng upside-down whip pierced the shackles and was unconscious; Wei Ji pleaded with Qi Huan Gong to save the country; Zeng Zi saw Zixia and asked: Why is it so fat?; Wei Wen Hou saw passers-by wear fur coats and realized the principle of hair adhering to the skin

古文：人有嫁其子而教之曰： 尔行矣，慎无为善。 曰： 不为善，将为不善邪？ 
现代文：有人出嫁女儿时告诫女儿说： 你要出嫁了，到婆家后千万不要轻易做善事。 女儿问道： 不做善事，那么要做不善的事吗？ 
English: When someone was marrying off his daughter, he admonished his daughter saying, "When you get married, don't do good things when you go to your mother-in-law's house." The daughter asked, "If you don't do good things, do you want to do bad things?"

古文：应之曰： 善且由弗为，况不善乎！ 
现代文：父亲回答： 善事尚且不可做，更何况不善的事呢？ 
English: The father replied, "It is impossible to do good, and how much more so to do evil?

古文：此全其天器者。
现代文：这位父亲讲的是保全自己因顺自然天性的道理。
English: The father was talking about preserving oneself by following one's natural instincts.

古文：拘囹圄者以日为修，当死市者，以日为短。
现代文：囚禁在监牢里的人觉得时间长，判死刑而将要处死的人感到时间短。
English: He that is shut up in prison hath long time; he that is condemned, and goeth to death, hath but a short time.

古文：日之修短有度也，有所在而短，有所在而修也，则中不平也。
现代文：每日的时间是有一定标准的，处在一定境况下的人感到短，处在另一定境况下的人觉得长，这是由于心情不稳定的缘故。
English: Daily time has a certain standard, people in a certain situation feel short, people in another situation feel long, this is due to mood instability.

古文：故以不平为平者，其平不平也。
现代文：所以用不平稳的心态去看平正的事情，他所感觉到的自以为正确的公正印象，实际上是不正确和不公正的。
English: Therefore, he sees the right things with an unbalanced state of mind, and the impression of justice that he feels is correct is actually incorrect and unfair.

古文：嫁女于病消者，夫死则后难复处也。故沮舍之下不可以坐，倚墙之傍，不可以立。
现代文：嫁给患消渴症男人的女子，丈夫死后其女子的日子就不好过：一是，傍人以为其女子为妨夫，不敢娶她；二是，该女子因丈夫患消渴症而死，会以为天下男子皆患消渴症而不敢复嫁。
English: A woman who marries a man with thirst-quenching disease will have a hard time after her husband's death: on the one hand, bystanders will think that her woman is a spoiler and will not dare to marry her; on the other hand, the woman who dies because her husband suffers from thirst-quenching disease will think that all men in the world suffer from thirst-quenching disease and will not dare to remarry.

古文：执狱牢者无病，罪当死者肥泽，刑者多寿，心无累也。
现代文：所以破毁的房屋下面坐不得，倾斜将倒的墙边站不得。执掌牢狱的人不易得病，已判死刑的人反而养得肥胖红润，接受宫刑的人长寿，这是因为到了此时他们反而没了任何杂念和情欲的拖累了。
English: Therefore, it is not possible to sit under a ruined house, and it is not possible to stand next to a wall that is about to fall down. The people in charge of the prison are not prone to illness, but those who have been sentenced to death have grown fat and ruddy, and those who have received palace punishment have a long life, because at this time they have lost any distracting thoughts and the drag of lust.

古文：良医者，常治无病之病，故无病。圣人者，常治无患之患，故无患也。
现代文：良医总能够医治尚未显露症状的疾病，所以受治疗的人不易得病；圣人总能够及时治理隐患，所以社会不易爆发灾祸。
English: A good doctor can always cure a disease that has not yet revealed symptoms, so the treated person is not easy to get sick; a saint can always treat hidden dangers in a timely manner, so the society is not prone to disaster.

古文：夫至巧不用剑，善闭者不用关健。淳于髠之告失火者，此其类。
现代文：最高明的工匠是不用钩绳度量的，善于锁门的人是不用门闩的，淳于髡告诉邻居提防失火，就是属于这一类情况。
English: The most skillful craftsmen do not use hooks to measure, those who are good at locking doors do not use latches, and those who tell their neighbors to beware of fire are in this category.

古文：以清入浊必困辱，以浊入清必覆倾。
现代文：德行清纯者陷进污浊物欲之中必定会受到困扰和侮辱，污浊的物欲侵入德行清纯者内心，清纯者必定遭覆灭。
English: A virtuous and pure person who falls into the clutches of filthy desires is sure to be troubled and humiliated. Filthy desires invade the heart of a virtuous and pure person, and the pure person is sure to be destroyed.

古文：君子之于善也，犹采薪者见一芥掇之，见青葱则拔之。
现代文：君子对于行善是一丝不苟，看到地上一棵小草便拾起，见到一棵青草也连根拔起。
English: A gentleman is meticulous about doing good deeds. When he sees a small grass on the ground, he picks it up, and when he sees a green grass, he uproots it.

古文：天二气则成虹，地二气则泄藏，人二气则成病。
现代文：天上阴阳二气冲突便生成虹，地上阴阳相干犯就影响冬藏，人体内邪气侵犯正气则生病。
English: When yin and yang collide in the sky, a rainbow is formed. When yin and yang collide on the ground, winter storage is affected. When evil spirits invade righteous spirits in the human body, people fall ill.

古文：阴阳不能且冬且夏；月不知昼，日不知夜。
现代文：阴气只可盛于冬天而不可盛于夏天，阳气只能旺于夏天则不可旺于冬天。月亮不知白昼，太阳不知黑夜。
English: Yin can only flourish in winter but not in summer, yang can only flourish in summer but not in winter. The moon does not know the day, the sun does not know the night.

古文：善射者发不失的，善于射矣，而不善所射。善钓者无所失，善于钓矣，而不善所钓。故有所善，则不善矣。
现代文：善于射箭的人发必中目标，这对于射技来说是好的，但对被射中的对象来说则是不好的；善于钓鱼的人总有收获，这对于钓术来说是好的，但对被钓上的鱼儿来说则是灾难。所以事物总是有所善，有所不善，有其正面也必有其负面。
English: A good archer must hit the target, which is good for shooting, but bad for the target; a good fisherman always gains, which is good for fishing, but disastrous for the fish caught. So things are always good and bad, and there must be a positive and a negative.

古文：钟之与磐也，近之则钟音充，远之则磐音章。
现代文：钟和磬相比较，近处听钟音洪亮，远处听则磬声清扬。
English: Compared to bells and gongs, the sound of bells is loud when heard close by, while the sound of gongs is clear when heard far away.

古文：物固有近不若远，远不若近者。
现代文：所以事物总是存在着近不如远或远不及近的现象。
English: Therefore, there is always a phenomenon that things are not as close as they are far away or far from being close.

古文：今曰稻生于水，而不能生于湍懒之流；紫芝生于山，而不能生于盘石之上；慈石能引铁，及其于铜，则不行也。
现代文：现在人们说稻必须长在水田里，但是稻却不能长在湍急的水流中；紫芝生长在高山上，但是紫芝却不能生在石头上；磁石能吸铁，但磁石却不能吸铜。
English: Now people say that rice must grow in paddy fields, but rice can't grow in rushing water; purple grass grows on high mountains, but purple grass can't grow on stones; magnets can absorb iron, but magnets can't absorb copper.

古文：水广者鱼大。山高者木修。广其地而薄其德，譬犹晦人为器也，谍挺其土而不益厚，破乃愈疾。
现代文：水深而广的鱼长得大，山高林深的树木长得长；但一心想扩大领地却削弱了他的美德，这就像陶工制陶器，揉土持坯使之变薄，越薄越破得快。
English: The fish in the deep and wide waters grows large, and the trees in the deep forests grow tall; but his virtue is weakened by his single-minded desire to expand his territory. This is like a potter making pottery, kneading the clay to make it thin, and the thinner it is, the faster it breaks.

古文：圣人不先风吹，不先雷毁，不得已而动，故无累。
现代文：圣人不事先站在风口召风吹，也不事先呆在雷易击的地方等雷击，圣人不得不动时才顺物而动，所以没有负累和灾祸。
English: The sage does not stand at the mouth of the wind in advance to call for the wind to blow, nor does he stay in a lightning-prone place to wait for a lightning strike. The sage only moves when he has to, so there is no burden and disaster.

古文：月盛衰于上，则蠃蛖应于下，同气相动，不可以为远。
现代文：月亮在天空上发生圆缺朔望的变化，下界的螺蚌就会相应地变化，这是因为它们同气相动的缘故，这种同气相动不会因为相隔天地之远而不发生。
English: When the moon's apparent size changes in the sky, the cone of the lower world will change accordingly. This is because they move in the same direction, and this kind of movement does not happen because of the distance between heaven and earth.

古文：执弹而招鸟，挥税而呼狗，欲致之，顾反走。
现代文：拿着弹弓要鸟儿飞过来，挥动着短棍来唤狗，本想要靠近它们，但反而是吓跑了它们。
English: He held a slingshot for the birds to fly over, waved a short stick to call the dogs, wanted to get close to them, but instead scared them away.

古文：故鱼不可以无饵钓也，兽不可以虚气召也。
现代文：所以钓鱼没有鱼饵是不行的，捕兽不可以用空的猎具来捕捉。
English: Therefore, it is not possible to fish without bait, and it is not possible to catch animals with empty hunting tools.

古文：剥牛皮，鞟以为鼓，正三军之众，然为牛计者，不若服于轭也。
现代文：剥下牛皮加工成皮革做成鼓，用鼓可以指挥三军将士，但站在牛的角度来看，不如让它套上轭头来服劳役。
English: Peel off the cowhide and process it into leather to make a drum. You can use the drum to command the soldiers of the three armies, but from the perspective of the cow, it is better to have it put on a hoe to perform labor.

古文：狐白之裘，天子被之而坐庙堂，然为狐计者，不若走于泽。
现代文：狐狸腋下的白毛做成皮衣，可供天子作礼服穿上坐在朝廷上，但替狐狸着想，不如让它自由奔跑在草泽上。
English: The white hair under the fox's armpits is made into a fur coat, which can be worn by the emperor as a dress to sit in the court, but for the sake of the fox, it is better to let it run freely on the grass.

古文：亡羊而得牛，则莫不利失也；断指而免头，则莫不利为也。
现代文：丢失了羊而得到了牛，那么就没有人不愿意丢失东西的了。断了手指而能保全性命，那么就没有人不愿意这样做的。
English: If you lose a sheep and get a cow, no one wants to lose anything; if you break a finger and save a life, no one wants to do that.

古文：故人之情，于利之中则争取大焉，于害之中则争取小焉。
现代文：所以人之常情是，总是在利益之中争取最大的利益，而对危害总力求降到最低限度。
English: Therefore, it is common for people to always strive for the greatest benefit in the interests, and always strive to minimize the harm.

古文：将军不敢骑白马，亡者不敢夜揭炬，保者不敢畜噬狗。
现代文：将军不敢骑目标明显易召攻击的白马，逃亡的人夜里不敢举火把，酒家不敢豢养凶猛的恶狗。
English: Generals do not dare to ride white horses, which are obviously vulnerable to attack, fugitives do not dare to carry torches at night, and taverns do not dare to keep ferocious dogs.

古文：鸡知将旦，鹤知夜半，而不免于鼎俎。
现代文：公鸡知道报晓，仙鹤知道半夜鸣叫，但都免不了成为鼎锅砧俎上的佳肴。
English: The rooster knows to announce the dawn, the crane knows to chirp in the middle of the night, but they all inevitably become delicacies on the top of the pot.

古文：山有猛兽，林木为之不斩；园有螫虫，藜藿为之不采。
现代文：山中有猛兽，林木因此不易被砍伐；园中有螫虫，藜藿因此不被采摘。
English: There are wild beasts in the mountains, so the trees are not easy to be cut down; there are aphids in the garden, so the aphids are not picked.

古文：为儒而踞里闾，为墨而朝吹竽，欲灭迹而走雪中，拯溺者而欲无儒，是非所行而行所非。
现代文：身为儒生却在街市胡闹，称为是墨家弟子却到朝歌去当吹竽手；想不留下脚迹却在雪地上行走，想要拯救溺水者却又不想沾湿衣服，这叫作做的事情不是自己所想做的，而想做的事情又往往顾虑重重做不了。
English: As a Confucian scholar, he plays pranks in the street market; as a disciple of the Mohist school, he goes to the morning song to blow his trumpet; he wants to leave no footprints, but walks on the snow; he wants to save a drowning person, but does not want to get his clothes wet. This is called doing things that are not what you want to do, and the things you want to do are often difficult to do.

古文：今夫暗饮者，非尝不遗饮也，使之自以平，则虽愚无失矣。
现代文：现在那些在黑暗中饮酒的人没有不将酒溢出的，假若他能将此持平，那么即使是愚笨的人也不会有失误。
English: Now those who drink in the dark do not drink without spilling the wine, if he can keep it flat, then even a stupid person will not make a mistake.

古文：是故不同于和而可以成事者，天下无之矣。
现代文：所以，不能将一切保持平和的人，却能做成大事，这在天下还没听说过。
English: Therefore, people who can't keep everything peaceful, but can do great things, haven't been heard of in the world.

古文：求美则不得美，不求美则美矣；求丑则不得丑，求不丑则有丑矣；不求美又不求丑，则无美无丑矣，是谓玄同。
现代文：人不美却要追求美是得不到美的，人美不用追求美自然是美的；人不丑却要丑化是丑化不了的，人丑却要说不丑还是丑的；不刻意追求美也不刻意追求丑，那么就无所谓美和丑，这才叫做与天道和合。
English: People who are not beautiful but want to pursue beauty cannot get beauty; people who are beautiful do not need to pursue beauty and are naturally beautiful; people who are not ugly but want to become ugly cannot become ugly; people who are ugly want to say that they are not ugly or are ugly; people who do not deliberately pursue beauty do not deliberately pursue ugliness, then there is no such thing as beauty and ugliness. This is called harmony with the heavenly way.

古文：申徒狄负石自沉于渊，而溺者不可以为抗；弦高诞而存郑，诞不可以为常。
现代文：申徒狄背上石头自己沉入深渊，但不能认为凡是自溺的行为都是高尚的；弦高靠欺骗而保存了郑国，同样不能认为凡欺骗的事都是合理的。
English: Shentu Di put a stone on his back and sank into the abyss himself, but it cannot be considered that all self-drowning behavior is noble; Zheng Gao preserved Zheng Guo by deception, and it also cannot be considered that all deception is reasonable.

古文：事有一应，而不可循行。
现代文：事情有时适用于一时但不能照此滥用。
English: Things sometimes work for a while, but they can't be abused.

古文：人有多言者，犹百舌之声；人有少言者，犹不脂之户也。
现代文：有人非常饶舌，就像百舌鸟那样，这又有什么用呢？有些人沉默少言，就像转动灵活的门枢，开关不出声。
English: Some people are very talkative, like a hundred-tongued bird, what is the use? Some people are silent, like turning a flexible door knob, the switch is silent.

古文：六畜生多耳目者不详，谶书著之。
现代文：六畜生下来多长了耳朵和眼睛，是不祥的征兆，这在预测吉凶的谶书中有记载。
English: Six animals were born with extra ears and eyes, an ominous sign, which is recorded in the book of fortune-telling.

古文：百人抗浮，不若一人挈而趋。
现代文：上百号人同举一只瓢，不如一个人拿着它走得快。
English: It is better for a hundred men to carry a plough than one man to walk fast with it.

古文：物固有众而不若少者，引车者二六而后之。
现代文：事物本来就有多反而不如少来得好的情形。两部分人拉车，其中拉车的人多反而落在拉车的人少的后面。
English: Things would have been better with more rather than fewer people. Two groups of people pulled the wagon, but most of the people pulling the wagon fell behind the few people pulling the wagon.

古文：事固有相待而成者，两人俱溺，不能相拯，一人处陆则可能。
现代文：事物本来就存在着相对立而相成的情形。两个都不会游水的人一起溺水，就不能互相救助；只有其中一人在岸上，才有办法救助落水者。
English: Two people who can't swim drowning together, they can't save each other; only one of them is on the shore, there is a way to rescue the drowning person.

古文：故同不可相治，必待异而后成。
现代文：所以同道同类的难以治理，一定要异道异类才能相治成功。
English: Therefore, it is difficult to govern the same way and the same kind, and it is necessary to succeed in governing the different way and the different kind.

古文：千年之松，下有获菩，上有兔丝；上有丛蓍，下有伏龟；圣人从外知内，以见知隐也。
现代文：千年的古松，其地下根部必生有茯苓，地表上必长有兔丝草；地上长有丛生的蓍草，地下必藏伏着神龟；圣人就能从外表推知内里，根据显象推知隐情。
English: A thousand-year-old pine, its underground roots will grow bamboo shoots, and on the surface will grow rabbit silk grass; the ground will grow clumps of rushes, and the underground will hide the tortoise; the sage will be able to deduce the inside from the outside, and deduce the hidden feelings according to the appearance.

古文：喜武非侠也，喜文非儒也，好方非医也，好马非驺也，知音非瞽也，知味非庖也，此有一概而未主名也。
现代文：喜欢武术的人并不一定是侠士，爱弄墨舞文的并不一定就是儒生；爱好医方的人并不一定是医生，喜欢马匹的人并不一定就是御手；懂得音律的人并不一定是乐官，会调味的人并不一定就是厨师。
English: A person who likes martial arts is not necessarily a knight, a person who likes to play with ink and dance is not necessarily a Confucian; a person who likes medicine is not necessarily a doctor, a person who likes horses is not necessarily a doctor; a person who understands music is not necessarily a musician, and a person who knows how to season food is not necessarily a chef.

古文：被甲者，非为十步之内也，百步之外，则争深浅，深则达五藏，浅则至肤而止矣。
现代文：这些人都只是知道一些相关的知识和技能，并不具备那一行当的专业知识。射披戴盔甲者的水平，在近距离之间是难以区分出来的，只有在百步开外才能比试出射手的高低水平：高水平的射手能射穿铠甲深入内脏，水平低的射手只伤及他人皮毛。
English: These people only know some of the relevant knowledge and skills, and do not have the expertise in that line of work. It is difficult to distinguish the level of shooters wearing armor at close range, and only at a hundred paces can they compare the level of shooters: high-level shooters can shoot through armor deep into the guts, low-level shooters only hurt other people's fur.

古文：死生相去，不可为道里。
现代文：这 生 和 死 的差别，是无法用里程来计算的。
English: It's the difference between life and death, and it can't be measured in miles.

古文：楚王亡其猿，而林木为之残；宋君亡其珠，池鱼为之殚；故泽失火而林忧。
现代文：楚庄王养的猿猴走失了，逃进树林里，楚庄王为了寻找这猿猴，将这片树林砍伐得乱七八糟；宋国君的珍珠掉进了池塘里，宋国君为寻找珍珠，搅得池塘里的鱼不得安生。所以沼泽地失火，附近的林子就会担忧。
English: An ape raised by the king of Chu Zhuang lost his way and fled into the forest. In order to find this ape, the king of Chu Zhuang cut down the forest to chaos. Song Guojun's pearl fell into the pond. In order to find the pearl, Song Guojun stirred up the fish in the pond. Therefore, if the marshland caught fire, the nearby forests would be worried.

古文：上求材，臣残木；上求鱼，臣于谷：上求揖，而下致船；上言若丝，下言若纶。上有一善，下有二誉；上有三衰，下有九杀。
现代文：君主要木料，下属的臣子就滥伐树木；君主要叫鲜鱼，下属的臣子就放干河水来捉鱼；君主找船桨，下属的臣子就早早地送上了船；君主说话像细丝，下属臣子的话就像丝绳；君主有一优点，下属的臣子就竭尽全力赞美。这真是 上之所好，下尤甚焉 ，故曰 上有三衰，下有九杀 。
English: The monarch provides timber, and the subordinate vassals cut down the trees; the monarch calls for fresh fish, and the subordinate vassals release the dry river water to catch the fish; the monarch looks for the oars, and the subordinate vassals send them on the boat early; the monarch speaks like silk, and the words of the subordinate vassals are like silk ropes; the monarch has an advantage, and the subordinate vassals praise it with all their might. This is really good for the top, and especially for the bottom, so it is said that the top has three failures, and the bottom has nine kills.

古文：大夫种知所以强越，而不知所以存身；苌弘知周之所存，而不知身所以亡；知远而不知近。
现代文：越国大夫文种懂得怎样使越国强盛，但却不懂怎样保全自己；苌弘知道怎样保存周朝，但却不知道自己是怎样丧身的。这真是只知远大的事，不知身边细小的事。
English: Dr. Wenzong of Yue knew how to make Yue powerful, but he did not know how to preserve himself; Zou Hong knew how to preserve the Zhou Dynasty, but he did not know how he lost his life. This is really only knowing the big things, not knowing the small things around him.

古文：畏马之辟也不敢骑，惧车之覆也不敢乘，是以虚祸距公利也。
现代文：因为害怕马惊狂奔而不敢骑马，又因为害怕车要颠覆而不敢乘车，这些都是用虚无的可能的祸患来拒绝这种公认的骑马乘车的便利。
English: To refuse to ride a horse for fear that the horse will run amok, or to ride in a car for fear that the car will overturn, is to deny the acknowledged convenience of riding in a car by invoking a nonexistent possible evil.

古文：不孝弟者或署父母，生子者所不能任其必孝也，然犹养而长之。
现代文：不孝的子女有的会打骂父母，生育他们的父母没法一定保证子女尽孝道，但尽管这样，还是将他们育养长大。
English: Some children who are not filial will scold their parents. The parents who gave birth to them cannot guarantee that their children will be filial, but despite this, they will still raise them.

古文：范氏之败，有窃其钟，负而走者，然有声，惧人闻之，遽掩其耳。
现代文：范氏被打败之时，有人偷了他家的钟，背着就走，但钟却发出声，这窃贼怕人听到，竟捂着自己的耳朵。
English: When Mr. Fan was defeated, someone stole his family's clock and walked away with it on his back. However, the clock emitted a sound, and the thief covered his ears for fear of being overheard.

古文：憎人闻之可也，自掩其耳，悖矣。升之不能大于石也，升在石之中；夜之不能修其岁也，夜在岁之中；仁义之不能大于道德也，仁义在道德之包。
现代文：怕别人听到钟声，这是可以理解的；但捂着自己的耳朵以为钟声不存在，则是相当荒谬和愚蠢的。 升 之所以不比 石 大，是因为 升 包含在石之中；夜不能比年长，是因为夜包含在年之中；仁义的作用不比道与德大，是在于道与德是主宰包括仁义在内的一切事物。
English: It is understandable to be afraid of others hearing the bell, but it is quite absurd and foolish to cover one's ears and think that the bell does not exist. The reason why ascension is not greater than stone is because ascension is contained in stone; the night cannot be longer than the year, because night is contained in the year; the role of righteousness is not greater than the way and virtue, because the way and virtue are the masters of all things, including righteousness.

古文：先针而后缕，可以成帷；先缕而后针，不可以成衣。
现代文：先针后线，才能缝制帷帐；先线后针，就别想能缝成衣服。
English: Needle and thread, to be able to sew curtains; needle and thread, do not want to be able to sew clothes.

古文：针成幕，蔂成城。
现代文：一针一针缝下去才能缝成帷帐；一筐一筐垒起来才能筑成城墙。
English: Needle by needle can be sewn into a curtain; basket by basket can be built into a wall.

古文：事之成败，必由小生，言有渐也。
现代文：事情的成败，都必须从小处开始，这就是说的量之积累而导致事物渐变的过程。
English: The success or failure of things must start from a small place, which is the process of gradual change of things caused by the accumulation of quantity.

古文：染者先青而后黑则可，先黑而后青则不可。工人下漆而上丹则可，下丹而上漆则不可。
现代文：染织物时先染成蓝色后再改染成黑色是可以的，但如果已染成了黑色再要改染成蓝色便不可能了；漆匠在底色上漆上黑漆，然后再漆上红色是可以的；但如果底色漆红色，然后再漆上黑漆，这红色就被掩盖了。
English: When dyeing fabric, it is possible to dye blue first and then change to black, but if it has been dyed black, it is impossible to change to blue; lacquerers can paint black on the base color and then paint red; but if the base color is painted red and then painted black, the red is covered up.

古文：万事由此，所先后上下，不可不审。
现代文：万事均是如此，它们都有一个先后、上下的次序，不能不搞清楚。
English: This is true of all things. They all have a sequential, ascending and descending order, which must be clearly understood.

古文：水浊而鱼，形劳则神乱。
现代文：水浑浊则鱼群便露嘴出水面，形体劳累则精神迷乱。
English: If the water is murky, the fish will come out of the water, and if the body is tired, the spirit will be confused.

古文：故国有贤君，折冲万里。
现代文：所以国家有贤君，就能决战胜于万里之外的敌人。
English: Therefore, if a country has a wise ruler, it will be able to win a decisive victory over an enemy thousands of miles away.

古文：因媒而嫁，而不因媒而成，因人而交，不因人而亲。
现代文：靠媒人说亲而嫁娶，但嫁娶并不完全靠媒人来促成的；靠人介绍而与他人交往，但不完全靠介绍人才与他人结交亲密的。
English: a person who marries a person through a matchmaker, but the marriage is not entirely facilitated by the matchmaker; a person who communicates with others through introductions, but does not fully get intimate with others through introductions.

古文：行合趋同，千里相从；行不合趋不同，对门不通。海水虽大，不受胔芥。
现代文：志趣性格相合，就是远隔千里也能亲密无间；志趣性格不相同，就是住在门对门也不来往、沟通；海水虽大，却还是不容纳丁点腐肉。
English: Even if they are thousands of miles apart, they can still be intimate if they have the same interests and personalities. If they have different interests and personalities, even if they live next door to each other, they will not visit or communicate. Although the sea is large, it still does not hold a speck of rotting flesh.

古文：日月不应非其气，君子不容非其类也。
现代文：日月不与不同气的事物感应，君子不容忍不同类的人。
English: The sun and the moon do not respond to things that are different, and the gentleman does not tolerate different types of people.

古文：人不爱倕之手，而爱己之指；不爱江、汉之珠，而爱己之钩。
现代文：人们不珍惜工倕灵巧的手而爱惜自己的手指；不珍惜江河里的珍珠而爱惜自己身上的玉钩。
English: People do not cherish the dexterous hand, but cherish their fingers; do not cherish the pearl in the river, but cherish the jade hook on their body.

古文：以束薪为鬼，以火烟为气。
现代文：有人将户外成束的柴火当作鬼，把野地里的火烟当作妖气。
English: Some people regard the bundles of firewood in the open air as ghosts, and the smoke from fires in the fields as evil spirits.

古文：以束薪为鬼，朅而走；以火烟为气，杀豚烹狗。
现代文：把束柴误以为鬼而吓得逃跑；把火烟误以为妖气，杀猪宰狗来祈福禳灾。
English: He mistook a bundle of firewood for a ghost and ran away in fright; he mistook fire and smoke for evil spirits and killed a pig and slaughtered a dog to pray for good luck and good fortune.

古文：先事如此，不如其后。
现代文：不等弄清真相就做出这种事情，不如慢慢将事情弄明白。
English: Don't wait to find out the truth before doing something like this. It's better to figure things out slowly.

古文：巧者善度，知者善豫。
现代文：灵巧的人善于度量，聪明的人善于预见和预防。
English: Clever people are good at measuring, and clever people are good at predicting and preventing.

古文：羿死桃部，不给射；庆忌死剑锋，不给搏。
现代文：羿死于桃木杖下而来不及拔箭自卫，庆忌死于刀剑之下而来不及与刺客搏斗。
English: It is better to die under a cane than to draw an arrow in self-defense. It is better to die under a sword than to fight an assassin.

古文：灭非者户告之曰： 我实不与我谀乱。 
现代文：被人误解而遭人非议的人挨家挨户对人表白说： 我实际上没有参与干坏事。 
English: People who have been misunderstood and criticized go from house to house and tell people, "I didn't actually take part in the bad things."

古文：谤乃愈起。止言以言，止事以事，譬犹扬堁而弭尘，抱薪而救火。
现代文：他自己越想表白清楚，却越发引起人们的非议。用言论来制止别人的说三道四，用事端来平息事端，这就好像扬起尘土来平息尘土、抱着柴草去救火一样，只会越发坏事。
English: The more he wants to make himself clear, the more he arouses people's criticism. Using words to stop others' gossip, and using incidents to quell incidents, is like lifting up dust to quell dust, and holding firewood to put out fire. It will only lead to more bad things.

古文：流言雪污，譬犹以涅拭素也。
现代文：用流言去消除洗刷污蔑，就好比将黑泥擦在白绢上。
English: Using gossip to wash away slander is like rubbing black mud on chalk.

古文：矢之于十步贯兕甲，于三百步不能入鲁缟；骐骥一日千里，其出致释驾而僵。
现代文：箭在十步之内能射穿犀牛皮制成的铠甲，但在三百步开外就连细绢都无法射透；骐骥日行千里，但当它年老力衰之后，卸下套就倒地不起了。
English: An arrow can pierce the armor made of rhinoceros hide in ten steps, but it cannot pierce even a thin cocoon beyond three hundred steps; a cocoon can travel thousands of miles in a day, but when it is old and weak, it will not fall to the ground when it is removed.

古文：大家攻小家则为暴，大国并小国则为贤。
现代文：大的家族攻打小的家族，这叫做行暴虐；但大的国家兼并无道的小国，这叫做贤明。
English: When a large family attacks a small family, it is called tyranny; but when a large state annexes a small and defenseless country, it is called wisdom.

古文：小马非大马之类，小知非大知之类也。
现代文：小马和大马属同类，但小聪明和大智慧就不可同日而言了。
English: Ponies and draught horses belong to the same genus, but small cleverness and great wisdom cannot be spoken of on the same day.

古文：被羊裘而赁，固其事也；貂裘而负笼，甚可怪也。
现代文：穿着粗羊皮衣做苦工，似乎合于情理；但穿着名贵的貂皮大衣去背运土筐，就显得非常奇怪、不好理解了。
English: To toil in a coarse sheepskin seems reasonable; but to carry a basket of earth in an expensive ermine coat is very strange and hard to understand.

古文：以洁白为污辱，譬犹沐浴而抒溷，薰燧而负彘。
现代文：用洁白的手去做污秽的活，就好像沐浴干净之后又去清扫猪圈，又像刚薰过香气之后去扛猪。
English: To do dirty work with clean hands is like taking a bath and then cleaning the sty, or carrying the pig after it has been perfumed.

古文：治疽不择善恶丑肉而并割之，农夫不察苗莠而并耘之，岂不虚哉。
现代文：治疗毒疮不分好肉烂肉一起剜掉，农夫不分禾苗杂草一起锄掉，这样做哪还会有实际的收获？
English: The treatment of poisonous sores does not distinguish between good meat and rotten meat, and the farmer does not distinguish between seedlings and weeds, so how can there be any actual harvest?

古文：坏塘以取龟，同屋而求狸，掘室而求鼠，割唇而治龋：桀、跖之徒，君子不与。
现代文：毁坏池塘来捕取龟鳖，掀掉房顶来捕捉狸猫，掘开内室来捕捉老鼠，割开嘴唇来治疗牙齿，不论是桀跖这样的凶暴者、还是谦谦君子都不会做这种蠢事的。
English: Destroying a pond to catch turtles and toads, tearing off the roof of a house to catch foxes and cats, digging out an inner chamber to catch mice, and cutting one's lips to cure one's teeth - neither a ferocious toad nor a modest gentleman would do such a foolish thing.

古文：杀戎马而求狐狸，援两鳖而失灵龟，断右臂而争一毛，折镆邪而争锥刀。用智如此，岂足高乎！
现代文：累死战马而求得狐狸，为救两只鳖而丢失了神龟，折断右臂而去争夺一根毫毛，损坏了莫邪宝剑而去争夺一把小刀，像这样的 智慧 ，是不值得推崇的。
English: It is not admirable to gain a fox by exhausting a horse, to lose a tortoise by saving two toads, to fight for a hair by breaking one's right arm, or to fight for a knife by breaking a sword.

古文：宁百刺以针，无一刺以刀；宁一引重，无久持经；宁一月饥，无一旬饿。万人之，愈于一人之隧。
现代文：宁愿被小针刺一百下，也不愿被刀砍一下子；宁可提一下子重物，也不可长时间拿着轻东西；宁可一个月天天吃不饱，也不可连着十天挨饿；一万人跌倒，也比一个人从高处坠入好。
English: It is better to be pricked a hundred times with a needle than cut with a knife; it is better to lift a heavy object than to hold a light one for a long time; it is better not to eat enough for a month than to starve for ten days; it is better for ten thousand people to fall than for one person to fall from a great height.

古文：有誉人之力俭者，春至旦，不中员呈，犹谪之。
现代文：有人称赞别人做事力求俭省。有一次这人家里舂谷，舂了整个晚上都没完成定额指标，这人于是就责骂舂谷的人。
English: Someone praised someone else for doing things and trying to be frugal. Once, this person's home was in Shibuya, and he stayed up all night and did not complete the quota target. This person then scolded the people of Shibuya.

古文：察之，乃其母也。
现代文：被称赞的人就去打听了一下，原来舂谷者却是这人的母亲。
English: The praised person went to inquire about it, but it turned out that the person who had eaten the rice was the person's mother.

古文：故小人之誉人，反为损。
现代文：所以口是心非的小人称赞别人，反而是在损坏别人的名誉。
English: Therefore, the duplicitous villain praises others, but is damaging the reputation of others.

古文：东家母死，其子哭之不哀。
现代文：东家的母亲去世了，儿子虽是哭泣但不显悲伤。
English: The mother of the host family passed away. Although the son was crying, he didn't seem sad.

古文：西家子见之，归谓其母曰： 社何爱速死，吾必悲哭社。 
现代文：西家的儿子看到这种情况，回家对母亲说： 母亲，你为什么舍不得快点死？你死了，我一定会很悲伤地哭你的。 
English: When Xi Jia's son saw this, he came home and said to his mother, "Mother, why are you so reluctant to die soon? If you die, I will surely cry for you with great sadness."

古文：夫欲其母之死者，虽死亦不能悲哭矣。谓学不暇者，虽暇亦不能学矣。
现代文：想要母亲早些死的人，母亲就是死了，也不会伤心痛哭的；说没有时间读书学习的人，即使给他时间他也不会好好学习的。
English: If you want your mother to die earlier, your mother is dead, you won't be sad and cry; if you say you don't have time to read and study, even if you give him time, he won't study well.

古文：见窾木浮而知为舟，见飞蓬转而知为车，见鸟迹而知著书。以类取之。
现代文：人看到中间掏空的木头能浮在水面而明白了造船的原理，人看到了飞蓬随风转动而知道了造车的原理，人看到鸟的足迹而知道创造文字以著书，这些创造发明都是用类推的大法而取得的。
English: Man saw that hollowed-out wood could float on the surface of the water and understood the principle of shipbuilding; man saw that a flying canopy rotated with the wind and learned the principle of building a car; man saw the footprints of birds and knew how to create words to write a book. These inventions were all made by analogy.

古文：以非义为义，以非礼为礼，譬犹裸走而追狂人，盗财而予乞者，窃简而写法律，蹲踞而诵《诗》《书》。
现代文：把不义当作义，把非礼当作礼，这就好像赤身裸体跑着去追赶疯子，又好像偷窃财物再去施舍给乞丐，还好像偷来竹简书写法律，还如同傲横无礼者诵读《诗》《书》。
English: Treating injustice as righteousness and impropriety as propriety is like running naked to chase a madman, like stealing property to give to beggars, like stealing bamboo slips to write laws, and like arrogant people reciting poems and books.

古文：割而舍之，镇邪不断肉；执而不释，马牦截玉。
现代文：割一下就停下来，即使是莫邪宝剑也无法割下肉来；执著而不放弃，就是马尾也能截断玉石。
English: If you cut it, it will stop. Even the most powerful sword cannot cut flesh. If you persevere and do not give up, even a horse's tail can cut jade.

古文：圣人无止，无以岁贤昔，日愈昨也。
现代文：圣人的修养无止境，使今年胜过往年，今日超过昨天。
English: There is no end to the cultivation of saints, so that this year is better than previous years, and today is better than yesterday.

古文：马之似鹿者千金，天下无千金之鹿；玉待礛诸而成器，有千金之壁而无锱锤之礛诸。
现代文：长得像鹿样的马价值千金，但是天下没有价值千金的鹿；玉靠诸琢磨后才能做成玉器，但是没有价值锱锤的而只有价值千金的玉璧。
English: A horse that looks like a deer is worth a lot of money, but there is no deer worth a lot of money in the world; jade can be made into jade after grinding, but there is no jade worth hammering, but only jade worth a lot of money.

古文：受光于隙照一隅，受光于牖照北壁，受光于户照室中无遗物，况受光于宇宙乎？
现代文：从缝隙里透射出的一束阳光能照亮一个角落，从窗户中照进的一片阳光能照亮整个北面墙壁，从门里照进的阳光能照亮整间房间中的所有东西，更何况从整个天地发射出的阳光呢？
English: A ray of sunlight shining through a crack can illuminate a corner, a ray of sunlight shining through a window can illuminate the entire north wall, a ray of sunlight shining through a door can illuminate everything in the entire room, let alone a ray of sunlight emitted from the entire world?

古文：天下莫不藉明于其前矣！
现代文：天下没有什么物件不是靠这种阳光照亮的。
English: There is no object in the world that is not illuminated by this kind of sunlight.

古文：由此观之，所受者小则所见者浅，所受者大则所照者博。
现代文：由此看来，接受阳光少的就照得浅些，接受阳光多的就照得广些。
English: From this point of view, if it receives less sunlight, it shines more shallowly, and if it receives more sunlight, it shines more widely.

古文：江出岷山，河出昆仑，济出王屋，颖出少室，汉出，分流舛驰，注于东海，所行则异，嶓冢，分流舛驰，注于东海，所行则异，所归则一。
现代文：长江发源于岷山，黄河发源于昆仑山，济水发源于王屋山，颍水发源于少室山，汉水发源于睝冢山，它们分别奔腾流泻注入东海，它们所经过的地方、路线各不相同，所最终的归宿却是相同的。
English: The Yangtze River originates from Shaoshan, the Yellow River originates from Kunlun Mountain, the Jishui originates from Wangya Mountain, the Shaoshui originates from Shomuro Mountain, and the Han Water originates from Shaoshan. They flow into the East Sea separately. The places and routes they pass through are different, but the final destination is the same.

古文：通于学者若车轴，转毂之中，不运于己，与之致千里，终而复始，转无穷之源。
现代文：精通学习的人像车轴，安放在车毂中随轮子的转动而运行，他自己不动，却能和车轮车毂一块到达千里之外，终而复始，运转在无穷无尽的地方。
English: A well-learned person is like an axle, placed in the hub and running with the rotation of the wheel. He himself does not move, but he can reach thousands of miles away with the wheel and the hub, starting and ending, running in an endless place.

古文：不通于学者若迷惑，告之以东西南北，所居聆聆，背而不得，不知凡要。
现代文：不懂学习的人就像迷路客，人家告诉他东西南北时好像明白一切，但一转位置方向又分辨不出东西南北了，因为他不能掌握辨别方向的要领。
English: A person who does not know how to study is like a lost traveler. When someone tells him east-west and north-south, he seems to understand everything, but as soon as he changes the position and direction, he cannot distinguish between east-west and north-south, because he cannot grasp the essentials of distinguishing the direction.

古文：寒不能生寒，热不能生热，不寒不热，能生寒热。
现代文：寒本身不能产生寒，热也本身不能产生热，不寒不热的东西才能产生寒和热。
English: Cold itself cannot produce cold, heat itself cannot produce heat, and only things that are neither cold nor hot can produce cold and heat.

古文：故有形出于无形，未有天地能生天地者也，至深微广大矣！
现代文：所以有形生于无形，未有天地时的混沌状态才能产生出天地来，这真是深奥微妙、广大无比。
English: Therefore, the tangible is born from the intangible, and the chaotic state when there is no heaven and earth can produce heaven and earth. This is really a profound, subtle, and incomparably vast phenomenon.

古文：雨之集无能沾，待其止而能有濡；矢之发无能贯，待其止而能有穿。
现代文：雨在降落的时候是不会沾湿物体的，只有等它接触物体停止运动时才会湿润；箭发射过程中是不穿透物体的，只有等它触及物体，穿透物体时它的运动才告结束。
English: When the rain falls, it does not wet the object. It only gets wet when it touches the object and stops moving. When the arrow is fired, it does not penetrate the object. It only touches the object and when it penetrates the object, its movement ends.

古文：唯止能止众止。
现代文：只有静止不动才能够制约万物。
English: Only still water can bring everything else to a standstill.

古文：因高而为台，就下而为池，各就其势，不敢更为。
现代文：利用高地修建高台，顺随洼地开掘池塘，各自依顺地势特点，不能违背因地制宜的原则而随心所欲。
English: Use highlands to build plateaus, follow the depressions to excavate ponds, each according to the characteristics of the terrain, can not violate the principle of local conditions and do whatever you want.

古文：圣人用物，若用朱丝约刍狗若为土龙以求雨。刍狗待之而求福，土龙待之而得食。
现代文：圣人利用外物，就像用红丝带束系 刍狗 来祭祀神灵，就像做成土龙来求雨；刍狗被用来向神灵求福佑，土龙被用来向天帝求保佑，能风调雨顺，五谷丰登。
English: The saints used foreign objects, such as a hyena tied with a red ribbon to worship the gods, and a clay dragon to pray for rain; the hyena was used to pray for blessings from the gods, and the clay dragon was used to pray for blessings from the heavenly emperor. They could adjust the wind and the rain, and make the grain plentiful.

古文：鲁人身善制冠，妻善织履，往徙于越而大困穷。
现代文：有个鲁国人自己会制作帽子，而他的妻子又会编织鞋子，他们搬迁到越国去谋生，结果陷入困境。
English: A Lu man who makes his own hats and his wife who knits shoes moved to Yue to make a living and ended up in trouble.

古文：以其所修而游不用之乡，譬若树荷山上，而畜火井中。
现代文：这是因为他们的特长不能在那个地区得以发挥，所以导致生活窘迫，这就好比在山上种荷花，在井里保存火种一样。
English: This is because their specialty cannot be developed in that area, so it leads to hardship, which is like planting lotus in the mountains and preserving fire in the well.

古文：操钓上山，揭斧入渊，欲得所求，难也。方车而蹠越，乘桴而入胡，欲无穷，不可得也。
现代文：拿着钓鱼工具上山，扛着斧说山训头入水潭，却要想得到鱼或柴，这是件困难的事；同样，驾着大车到越国，乘着筏到塞北，要想不走上绝路是不可能的。
English: It is difficult to go up the mountain with fishing tools and carry an axe to get fish or firewood, but it is impossible to get fish or firewood without going on a dead-end road. Similarly, it is impossible to drive a truck to Vietnam and take a raft to the north of Thailand.

古文：楚王有白蝯，王自射之，则搏矢而熙。使养由基射之，始调弓矫矢，未发而蝯拥柱号矣。
现代文：楚王养了只白猿，他准备亲自射猿来取乐，但还没等楚王动手，这白猿已夺过箭和楚王嬉戏起来了；假若由神射手养由基来射这白猿，可能在养由基张弓搭箭、瞄准白猿而还没发射之前，这白猿就已经抱着柱子悲号起来了，这是由于养由基的非常专业且熟练的射箭架势将白猿吓住了。
English: King Chu raised a white monkey. He was going to personally shoot the monkey for fun, but before King Chu started, the white monkey had already won the arrows and began to play with King Chu. If the archer had raised Yuki to shoot the white monkey, it is possible that the white monkey had already held the pillar of mourning before Yuki raised his bow and arrows and aimed at the white monkey. This is because Yuki's very professional and skilled archery posture scared the white monkey.

古文：有先中中者也。呙氏之壁，夏后之璜，揖让而进之，以合欢，夜以投人，则为怨；时与不时。
现代文：和氏之璧、夏后氏的玉璜，恭恭敬敬献给人家，人家会非常高兴；但如果在夜里黑暗中将璧和玉璜掷抛给人家，人家就会受到惊吓而产生怨恨。这些就是合时和不合时而产生的不同结果。
English: The gem of the He clan and the jade scepter of the Xiaowo clan are respectfully offered to people, and people will be very happy; but if you throw the gem and the jade scepter to people in the dark of the night, people will be frightened and resentful. These are the different results of the right time and the wrong time.

古文：画西施之面，美而不可说；规孟贲之目，大而不可畏；君形者亡焉。
现代文：画出的西施面容，虽然美丽但不动人；画出的孟贲眼睛，虽然大但没有神，这是因为这画仅仅是形似而无神韵的缘故。
English: The painted Xi Shi's face, although beautiful, is not attractive; the painted Meng Yao's eyes, although large, are not divine, this is because the painting is only a likeness and has no charm.

古文：人有昆弟相分者，无量，而众称义焉。
现代文：有一家子，弟兄们分家，因为家中财产多得无法计算，众兄弟因此不计较分多分少，人们也因此称赞他们讲信义。
English: There was once a family in which the brothers were divided, because the wealth of the family was incalculable, so that the brothers did not share equally, and for this reason they were praised for their faithfulness.

古文：夫惟无量，故不可得而量也。
现代文：这是因为财产多得无法估计、没有限量，所以才不去计较每人所分得的多少。
English: This is because there is an immeasurable and unlimited amount of wealth, so it does not matter how much each person has.

古文：登高使人欲望，临深使人欲窥，处使然也。
现代文：登上高处使人情不自禁地眺望，面临深渊使人不由自主地探望，这是由人所处的地位环境所决定的。
English: Climbing to a high place makes people involuntarily look out, and facing the abyss makes people involuntarily visit, which is determined by the status and environment in which people live.

古文：射者使人端，钓者使人恭，事使然也。
现代文：同样，射箭要端正身体，钓鱼要态度恭谨，这是由人所做的什么事情决定的。
English: In the same way, archery requires a neat body, and fishing requires a respectful attitude, which is determined by what people do.

古文：曰杀罢牛可以赎良马之死，莫之为也。
现代文：说杀死老弱的牛可以赎良马一死，那肯定没人会做这样的事。
English: To say that the killing of a weak cow can redeem the death of a good horse, then surely no one would do such a thing.

古文：杀牛，必亡之数。以必亡赎不必死，未能行之者矣。
现代文：决定杀牛，是因为这牛是该杀；而拿必定要死的去换赎不一定会死的，这是没有人会这样做的。
English: The decision to kill a cow is made because the cow should be killed; and to redeem a cow that must die is not necessarily to die, which no one would do.

古文：季孙氏劫公家，孔子说之，先顺其所为而后与之入政，曰： 举在与直，如何而不得？
现代文：季孙氏胁迫鲁定公，把持了国家政权，孔子做出高兴的样子先顺从季孙氏的所作所为，然后再找机会劝说季孙氏，要季孙氏将国政归还给鲁定公。
English: The Kishon clan coerced Luding and took control of the state power. Confucius made a happy appearance, first obeying the actions of the Kishon clan, and then looking for an opportunity to persuade the Kishon clan to return state affairs to Luding.

古文：举直与枉，勿与遂往。 此所谓同污而异涂者。
现代文：后来有人评介这件事： 将奸邪之徒举荐给正直的人，奸邪之徒打着正直者的招牌，什么好处捞不到？
English: Later, someone commented on the matter: What good is it to recommend a traitor to an honest man, and a traitor to an honest man?

古文：众曲不容直，众枉不容正，故人众则食狼，狼众则食人。
现代文：把正直之人举荐给奸邪之徒，正直者终究不会跟随下去的。 
English: If you recommend an honest person to a traitor, the honest person will not follow.

古文：欲为邪者，必相明正，欲为曲者必相达直。
现代文：这就叫做从不同的途径和邪恶同流合污。邪恶的势力坐大以后就容不得正直者的立足。
English: This is called going along with evil from different paths. Once the evil forces become powerful, they will not tolerate honest people's foothold.

古文：公道不立，私欲得容者，自古及今，未尝闻也。此以善托其丑。
现代文：公正之道树立不起来，却能防范私欲的事，这是从古到今都没听说过的事，这是由于奸邪之徒总是用伪装的善良来掩饰他的邪恶行径。
English: The way of righteousness cannot be established, but the way of covetousness shall not be known from that day for the evildoer always disguises his wickedness with the guise of good.

古文：众议成林，无翼而飞，三人成市虎，一里能挠椎。夫游没者，不求沐浴，已自足其中矣。
现代文：众人的流言蜚语可以使平地成林，可以无翅而高飞；经过三个人的流言蜚语的传播，就足以使人相信街市上真有虎在行走，一村子人的流言蜚语的传播，就足以使人相信真有人能将铁椎头扭弯。会游泳潜水的人是不求在澡盆里洗澡的，因为江河池塘已足以满足洗浴的要求了。
English: Many people's gossip can make the flat land into a forest, and the crane can fly without wings; after the spread of three people's gossip, it is enough to make people believe that there is a real tiger walking on the street market, and the spread of a village's gossip is enough to make people believe that there is a real person who can bend the iron spine. People who can swim and dive do not want to take a bath in the bathtub, because the river pond is enough to meet the bathing requirements.

古文：故食草之兽不疾易获，水居之虫，不疾易水。行小变而不失常。
现代文：所以以草为主食的动物是不担忧生活沼泽的改变的，生活在水中的动物是不担忧水域改变的，因为稍微的小变化是不会影响它们的生活习性的。
English: Therefore, animals that eat grass as their staple food are not worried about changes in the marshes, and animals that live in the water are not worried about changes in the water, because slight changes will not affect their living habits.

古文：信有非礼而失礼：尾生死其梁柱之下，此信之非也；孔氏不丧出母，此礼之失者。
现代文：信用有时候会出现差错，礼仪有时候会出现偏差。尾生为了履行信约而淹死在桥下，这就是错用信用导致的后果；子思儿子不为被子思休弃的母亲守孝，这就是礼仪出现偏差的事例。
English: Trust can sometimes be misplaced, and etiquette can sometimes be out of kilter. In order to fulfill his promise, Osei drowned himself under a bridge, which is the result of misusing trust; a mother who does not abandon her son out of consideration for her son, is an example of a deviation in etiquette.

古文：曾子立孝，不过胜母之阎；墨子非乐，不入朝歌之邑；曾子立廉，不饮盗泉；所谓养志者也。
现代文：曾子坚持孝道，不肯路过胜母里的门口；墨子主张 非乐 ，不肯进入朝歌的城市；孔子保持廉洁，口渴也不喝 盗泉 的水；他们这些人都是注重培养崇高志向的人。
English: Zeng Zi insisted on filial piety and refused to pass through the door of Sheng Mu Li; Mo Zi advocated non-pleasure and refused to enter the city of morning song; Confucius remained clean and did not drink the water of the stolen spring when he was thirsty; these people are all people who pay attention to cultivating lofty aspirations.

古文：纣为象著而箕子唏，鲁以偶人葬而孔子叹，故圣人见霜而知冰。
现代文：纣王用了象牙筷子，箕子由此叹息；鲁国用了木俑陪葬，孔子由此感叹。所以圣人是看到了秋霜便知道了冰天雪地的冬天将来临。
English: King Yao used ivory chopsticks, which made the cripple sigh; Lu used wooden shovels to accompany the burial, which made Confucius sigh. Therefore, the sage saw the autumn frost and knew that the winter of ice and snow would come.

古文：有鸟将来，张罗而待之，得鸟者，罗之一目也；今为一目之罗，则无时得鸟矣。
现代文：鸟儿将要飞来，张开的罗网正等着它，鸟儿入网被捉拿，只是绊着一个网眼；但如果只编织一个网眼的网，那就不可能捕捉到鸟。
English: A bird is about to fly, an open net is waiting for it, the bird is caught in the net, it is only caught in one mesh; but if you weave a net with only one mesh, it is impossible to catch the bird.

古文：今被甲者，以备矢之至，若使人必知所集，则悬一札而已矣。
现代文：现在人披戴铠甲，是为了防备箭射过来伤身体；假若能事先晓得箭会射中那个部位，那么只需在那个部位上挂一片铠甲就可以了。
English: Nowadays, armor is worn to prevent an arrow from hitting the body; if it is known in advance that the arrow will hit that part, then it is enough to hang a piece of armor on that part.

古文：事或不可前规，物或不可虑卒然不戒而至，故圣人畜道以待时。
现代文：然而，很多事情是不能事先知道的，很多事物是不能预测的，往往是突然间没有防备的时候来临的，所以圣人是长时间修养好 道 以等待时机的到来。
English: However, many things cannot be known in advance, many things cannot be predicted, and they often come suddenly and without warning. Therefore, sages have cultivated a good path for a long time to wait for the time to come.

古文：髠屯犁牛，既以，决鼻而羁，生子而牺，尸祝斋戒以沉诸河，河伯岂羞其所从出，辞而不享哉！
现代文：丑陋的杂色牛，既无犄角、又无尾巴，穿上鼻子羁系着它，等它一旦生下牛犊就拿去作牺牲，尸祝斋戒以后，就将牛犊沉入河中。水神河伯哪里会嫌它是头丑陋的杂色牛所产而拒绝享祀呢？
English: An ugly, hornless, tailless, mixed-coloured cow is tied by the nose and sacrificed as soon as she gives birth to a calf. After the corpse has been blessed and fasted, the calf is sunk into the river. How could the god of water, Hebei, think that it was produced by an ugly, mixed-coloured cow and refuse to worship it?

古文：得万人之兵，不如闻一言之当。得隋侯之珠，不若得事之所由。得呙氏之壁，不若得事之所适。
现代文：得到上万人的军队，不如听到一句高明计划的话；得到隋侯之珠，不如懂得隋侯之珠是怎样产生的；得到和氏之璧，不如明白处事适宜的方法。
English: To get an army of tens of thousands of people, it is better to hear the words of a brilliant plan; to get the Pearl of the Sui Dynasty, it is better to understand how the Pearl of the Sui Dynasty was created; to get the essence of the Warlord, it is better to understand the appropriate way to deal with things.

古文：撰良马者，非以逐狐狸，将以射麋鹿。砥利剑者，非以斩缟衣，将以断兕犀。
现代文：选择良马的目的，不是为了骑上它去猎取狐狸之类的小动物，而是要骑着它追射麋鹿；磨砺宝剑的动机，不是用它来斩割白绢衣裳，而是要用它来斩杀凶猛的犀牛。
English: The purpose of choosing a good horse is not to ride it to hunt small animals such as foxes, but to ride it to shoot elk; the motive for sharpening a sword is not to use it to cut off egrets' clothes, but to use it to kill a fierce rhinoceros.

古文：故 高山仰止，景行行止 ，向者其人。
现代文：所以伟大人物受人敬仰，崇高品德被人效仿，人们向往的就是这种人品。
English: Therefore, great figures are admired by people, and lofty virtues are emulated by people. It is this kind of character that people yearn for.

古文：见弹而求鸮炙见卵而求晨夜，见磨而求成布，虽其理哉，亦不病暮。
现代文：看到弹弓，就马上想到能弹射下鸮鸟烤肉吃；看到鸡蛋，就马上想得到报晓的公鸡；看到粗麻就马上想到织成的布，虽然所想的事合乎情理，也终会实现，但未免太性急了些。
English: When I see a slingshot, I immediately think of being able to catapult an ostrich to roast meat; when I see an egg, I immediately think of getting a rooster to announce the dawn; when I see coarse flax, I immediately think of woven cloth. Although what I think of is reasonable and will eventually be realized, it may be too hasty.

古文：象解其牙，不憎人之利之也，死而弃其招箦，不怨人取之。
现代文：大象被取下象牙，但它不会憎恨人们贪得象牙之利；人死后抛弃的床垫木，不会有谁会去埋怨拾捡的人。
English: The elephant is stripped of its ivory, but it will not hate the people who are greedy for the profit of ivory; the mattress wood abandoned after death, there will be no one who will complain about the person who picked it up.

古文：人能以所不利利人，则可。
现代文：人能够牺牲自己的某些利益来满足他人的某些利益，这是可以的。
English: It is possible for people to sacrifice some of their own interests to satisfy some of the interests of others.

古文：狂者东走，逐者亦东走，东走则同，所以东走则异。
现代文：疯子向东狂奔，追赶的人也顺着这方向穷追，大家都往东跑是相同的，但他们向东跑的原因却截然不同。
English: The madman is running eastwards, and the pursuers are also running in the same direction. Everyone is running eastwards in the same way, but their reasons for running eastwards are completely different.

古文：溺者入水，拯之者亦入水，入水则同，所以入水者则异。
现代文：溺水的人是掉在水里，救他的人也跳入水中，大家都在水里是一样的，但他们入水的原因却完全不同。
English: The drowning man fell into the water, and the man who saved him also jumped into the water. Everyone is the same in the water, but their reasons for going into the water are completely different.

古文：故圣人同死生，愚人亦同死生，圣人之同死生通于分理，愚人之同死生不知利害所在。
现代文：所以圣人将生死看成一样，蠢人也把生死看得差不多。但圣人将生死看成一样是因为圣人悟出了生死分定的道理；而蠢人将生死看得差不多是因为蠢人不懂生、死和利、害的关系所在。
English: Therefore, a sage sees life and death as the same, and a stupid person sees life and death as similar. However, a sage sees life and death as the same because a sage has realized the principle of the determination of life and death; while a stupid person sees life and death as similar because a stupid person does not understand the relationship between life, death, and benefit and harm.

古文：徐偃王以仁义亡国，国亡者非必仁义；比干以忠靡其体；被诛者非必忠也。
现代文：徐偃王因为推行仁义而亡国，但导致亡国的并不都是因为推行仁义；比干因为赤胆忠心而遭纣王杀害，但被杀害的并不都是因为赤胆忠心。
English: King Xu Rong lost his country because of his pursuit of benevolence and righteousness, but not all those who led to the country's downfall did so because of their pursuit of benevolence and righteousness; King Bi Gan was killed by King Yao because of his red-bile loyalty, but not all those who were killed were killed because of their red-bile loyalty.

古文：故寒颤，惧者亦颤，此同名而异实。
现代文：所以就颤抖来讲，寒冷也会颤抖、畏惧也会颤抖，这名称相同，但颤抖的实质相异。
English: Therefore, as far as shivering is concerned, cold can also shiver, fear can also shiver, the name is the same, but the essence of shivering is different.

古文：明月之珠出于蛖蜃。周之简圭生于垢石，大蔡神龟，出于沟壑。
现代文：明月之珠，出自蚌蛤；周朝的美玉，生自丑石；大蔡的神龟，出自深谷水沟。
English: The pearl of the bright moon, from the dragonfly; the beautiful jewel of the Zhou Dynasty, born from the ugly stone; the divine turtle of the Great Cai, from the deep valley ditch.

古文：万乘之主，冠锱锤之冠，履百金之车。
现代文：万乘大国的君主，戴的是很轻的皇冠，乘坐的是价值百金的车子。
English: The monarch of a great country, wearing a very light crown, rides in a car worth a hundred gold.

古文：牛皮为贱，正三军之众。
现代文：牛皮算得低贱了，但却可以做成战鼓整肃指挥三军。
English: Cowhide is considered cheap, but it can be made into a war drum to purify and command the three armies.

古文：欲学歌讴者，必行徵羽乐风；欲美和者，必先始于《阳阿》《采菱》；此皆学其所不学，而欲至其所欲学者。
现代文：想学习歌唱技术的人，一定得先学五音音律和音乐的教化作用；想演奏好高雅和谐的乐曲，一定得先从《阳阿》《采菱》这样的乐曲练起。这些都是通过先学习那些不起眼的基本知识和技能来获得想要学到手的高超水平。
English: If you want to learn singing techniques, you must first learn the five-note rhythm and the edifying effect of music; if you want to play elegant and harmonious music, you must first practice from music such as "Yang Ah" and "Cherry Picking." These are all by first learning the humble basic knowledge and skills to obtain the superb level you want to learn.

古文：燿蝉者务在明其火；钓鱼者务在芳其饵。
现代文：夜间捕捉蝉，务必将火把烧得通明；河中钓鱼，务必将鱼饵调得芳香。
English: When catching cicadas at night, be sure to burn the torch brightly; when fishing in the river, be sure to adjust the bait to be fragrant.

古文：明其火者，所以耀而致之也；芳其饵者，所以诱而利之了。
现代文：将火把烧得通明，是要借火光来招引蝉自投罗网；将鱼饵调得芳香，是要借鱼饵引鱼上钩。
English: To burn the torch brightly is to use the light of the fire to lure the cicada into the net; to make the bait fragrant is to use the bait to lure the fish onto the hook.

古文：欲致鱼者先通水，欲致鸟者先树木。
现代文：要想引来鱼群，先得疏通河道；要想引鸟安家，先得种植树木。
English: If you want to attract fish, you must first dredge the river. If you want to attract birds, you must first plant trees.

古文：水积而鱼聚，木茂而鸟集。
现代文：只有水得到积蓄，鱼儿才会来聚集；只有树木茂盛，鸟儿才会来安家。
English: Only when water is stored will fish come to gather; only when trees flourish will birds come to make their homes.

古文：好戈者先具缴与矰，好鱼者先具署与罛，未有无其具而得其利。
现代文：所以喜欢弋射的人总先将生丝和矰箭准备好，喜欢捕鱼的人总先将大小渔网准备好。还没有过不准备好器具就获得收益的事情呢！
English: Therefore, people who like to shoot always prepare raw silk and crossbow arrows first, and people who like to fish always prepare large and small fishing nets first. There has never been a time when you can make a profit without preparing the equipment!

古文：遗人马而解其羁，遗人车而税其轙。所爱者少，而所亡者多，故里人谚曰： 烹牛而不盐，败所为也。 
现代文：送给人家马却又解下它的马笼头，送给人家车子却又拆下穿缰绳的环子，这正是车和马都送掉了，又何必舍不得这类笼头和缰绳的小东西呢？所以乡里人有这样的谚语： 烹制牛肉却不舍得放盐，这等于是糟蹋了这牛肉。 
English: If you give someone a horse and they take off the bridle, or if you give someone a carriage and you take off the bridle ring, then you have given away both the carriage and the horse. Why should you begrudge such a small thing as a bridle and a bridle? That is why the villagers have a saying: If you cook beef and are not willing to put salt on it, then you have ruined the beef.

古文：桀有得事，尧有遗道，嫫母有所美，西施有所丑。
现代文：夏桀虽然是个暴君，但也做过些有益的事情；尧帝尽管圣明，但也有失误之处；嫫母面貌尽管丑陋，但品行却贞正；西施尽管容仪光艳，但品行未必贞正。
English: Although Xia Yao was a tyrant, he also did some beneficial things; although Emperor Gong was a saint, he also made mistakes; although his mother's face was ugly, her behavior was chaste; although Xi Shi had a bright appearance, his behavior was not necessarily chaste.

古文：故亡国之法有可随者，治国之俗有可非者。
现代文：所以被灭掉的国家，其中也有好的东西值得仿效；而政治清明的国家，其中也有些风俗习惯值得批评。
English: Therefore, among the countries that have been eliminated, there are also good things worth emulating; and among the countries with clear politics, there are also some customs and habits worth criticizing.

古文：琬琰之玉，在洿泥之中，虽廉者弗释；弊箄甑瓾，在茵之上，虽贪者不搏。
现代文：琬琰美玉，却处在污泥之中，但清廉的人见了也不会放弃；破旧的竹席甑带，就是放在华贵的毡褥上，贪婪的人见了也不会去夺取。
English: Precious gems, however, are in the mud, but honest people will not give up when they see them; worn-out bamboo mats and ribbons are placed on expensive rattan, but greedy people will not see them and seize them.

古文：美之所在，虽污辱，世不能贱；恶之所在，虽高隆，世不能贵。
现代文：美德存在，即使处在低贱的地位，但世人也不能贬低美德的价值；恶行满身，即使处在高贵的地位，但世人也不会尊重他。
English: Virtue exists, even in a lowly position, but the world cannot depreciate the value of virtue; evil deeds are covered, even in a high position, but the world will not respect him.

古文：春贷秋赋民皆欣；春赋秋货众皆怨；得失同，喜怒为别，其时异也。
现代文：青黄不接的春季放贷给农民，到秋季再收赋税，这样百姓就拥护、高兴；反过来春季青黄不接的时候却要征收赋税，而到秋天再放贷，这样百姓没有一个不怨恨的。这放贷和收税数量相同，但引起百姓的喜怒却相反，这是因为时节不同的缘故。
English: Lending money to farmers in the spring when they do not receive it, and collecting taxes in the fall, so that the people support and are happy; on the other hand, when they do not receive it in the spring, they have to collect taxes, and lend money in the fall, so that the people do not resent it. This lending and tax collection amount is the same, but it causes the people's joy and anger is the opposite, this is because of the different seasons.

古文：为鱼德者，非挚而入渊；为蝯赐者，非负而缘木，纵之其所而已。貂裘而杂，不若狐裘而粹，故人莫恶于无常行。
现代文：如要对鱼讲仁德，不是捕到鱼之后再放入河水中；如要对猿猴讲恩赐，也不是抓到以后再放它归山林；而是从一开始就不必捕捉它们，让它们各处该处的地方就行了。
English: If you want to be kind to a fish, you don't catch it and put it back in the river. If you want to be kind to a monkey, you don't catch it and put it back in the forest. Instead, you don't have to catch them in the first place, just let them be everywhere.

古文：有相马而失马者，然良马犹在相之中。
现代文：毛色驳杂的貂裘还不如皮色纯一的狐裘，所以一个人没有比不具备坚定纯粹的行为节操更令人讨厌的。
English: A mixed-colored fox is not as good as a pure-colored fox, so there is nothing more annoying than a person who does not have a firm and pure behavioral discipline.

古文：今人放烧，或操火往益之，或接水往救之，两者皆未有功，而怨德相去亦远矣。
现代文：有相马的，却不能识别出良马来，但是良马并不因此就不存在于这群被鉴别的马中。现在如果有户人家失火，有的是拿着易燃的东西去助长火势，有的却是传递水桶去救火，尽管这两种人都没有达到各自的目的，但受火烧的人家对这两种人的憎恨和感激之情却有天壤之别。
English: Now, if there is a fire in a house, some people will take flammable things to fuel the fire, while others will pass buckets to extinguish the fire. Although both of these people have failed to achieve their respective goals, the hatred and gratitude of the victims of the fire to these two people are vastly different.

古文：郢人有买屋栋者，求大三围之木，而入予车毂，跪而度之，巨虽可，而修不足。
现代文：楚国郢都有个人买房栋梁，想找一根 三围 粗的木料，有人卖给他一根车轴，他跪在地上量了量，粗细差不多，但长度不够。
English: There are people in all the provinces of Chu who want to buy a beam for their house. They want to find a piece of wood that is three times as thick. Someone sells him a car axle. He kneels on the ground and measures it. The thickness is almost the same, but the length is not enough.

古文：蘧伯玉以德化，公孙鞅以刑罪，所极一也。
现代文：蘧伯玉用道德感化了邻国不来侵犯，公孙鞅实行刑法治理秦国最后获罪被杀，他们治理好国家的结果是一样的，但实施的方法和各人的下场却又是不一样的。
English: Zou Bo-yu used morality to inspire neighboring countries not to invade, Gongsun Zou implemented criminal law to govern Qin and was eventually convicted and killed. The result of their good governance is the same, but the method of implementation and the fate of each person are different.

古文：病者寝席，医之用针石，巫之用糈籍，所救钧也。
现代文：病人卧床不起，医生用针石治疗，巫婆用精米、草垫来赶疫鬼、求神保佑，他们的方法各异，而想拯救对象则是相同的。
English: The patients are bedridden, the doctors treat them with needles and stones, the witches use polished rice and grass mats to chase away the pestilence and pray for God's blessing. Their methods are different, but the object they want to save is the same.

古文：貍头愈鼠，鸡头已瘘，虻散积血，斵木愈龋，此类之推者也。
现代文：狸猫的头可以治理好鼠瘘病，芡可以治疗好瘘病，牛虻能消散淤血，啄木鸟能治疗龋齿，这些都可以按照种类来推知。
English: The head of the civet cat can cure rat-bite disease, the beak can cure beak-bite disease, the ox-beak can dissipate congestion, and the woodpecker can cure dental caries, all of which can be inferred according to the species.

古文：膏之杀鳖，鹊矢中蝟，烂灰生蝇，漆见蟹而不于，此类之不推者也。
现代文：油膏能杀死鳖，喜鹊屎可以杀死刺猬，腐烂的垃圾堆能生出苍蝇来，油漆碰到螃蟹便不会干燥，这是不能按照种类来推知的。
English: Ointment can kill slugs, magpie droppings can kill hedgehogs, rotting rubbish dumps can produce flies, paint won't dry if it touches crabs, it's impossible to tell from the species.

古文：推与不推，若非而是，若是而非，孰能通其微！
现代文：有些事情可以推究其中的原因，有些事情则不能推究其中的原因，好像对又好像不对，好像不对又好像对，谁能通晓这其中的奥妙呢？
English: Some things can be reasoned out, and some things cannot be reasoned out. It seems to be right and it seems to be wrong, it seems to be wrong and it seems to be right. Who can understand the mystery of this?

古文：天下无粹白狐，而有粹白之裘，掇之众白也。
现代文：天下没有纯白的狐狸，但有纯白的狐皮衣，这是选用了众多狐狸腋下白皮毛缝制而成的。
English: There is no pure white fox in the world, but there are pure white fox fur coats, which are sewn from the white fur under the armpits of many foxes.

古文：善学者，若齐王之食鸡，必食其蹠数十而后足。
现代文：善于学习的人就像齐王食鸡，一定要吃上数十只鸡脚掌才能满足。
English: A person who is good at learning is like a chicken eater, who must eat dozens of chicken feet to be satisfied.

古文：刀便剃毛，至伐大木。非斧不克。
现代文：利刀便于剃毛发，至于伐木，就非用斧头不能成功。
English: A sharp knife makes it easy to shave hair. As for cutting wood, you can't succeed without an axe.

古文：物固有以克适成不逮者。
现代文：事物本来就存在着某些长处又恰好成为另一方面的短处的情况。
English: Things inherently have certain strengths that just happen to be weaknesses in another area.

古文：视方寸于牛，不知其大于羊；总视其体，乃知其大相去之远。
现代文：如果从一寸见方的洞眼里看牛，就不知道它比羊大；总起来观察牛的全体，才知道牛的大小和羊相差甚远。
English: If you look at a cow through a one-inch-square hole, you won't know it's bigger than a sheep; but if you look at the whole cow, you'll know that the size of a cow is far different from a sheep.

古文：孕妇见兔而子缺唇，见麋而子四目。
现代文：孕妇看了兔子，生下的孩子是缺嘴唇，看了麋，生下的孩子是四只眼睛。
English: A pregnant woman looked at a rabbit and gave birth to a child with no lips; she looked at a toad and gave birth to a child with four eyes.

古文：小马大目，不可谓大马；大马之目眇，可谓之眇马；物固有似然而似不然者。
现代文：大马眼睛小，可以说是小眼睛马。事物本来就存在着好像是这么回事又不像这么回事的情形。
English: Dama eyes small, can be said to be small eyes horse. Things inherently exist as if this is the case and not as if this is the case.

古文：故决指而身死，或断臂而顾活，类不可必推。
现代文：所以有时候断一根指头倒导致死亡，而断了一条手臂倒能活下来，这说明事物不能按照这种类比推导的。
English: So sometimes a broken finger can lead to death, but a broken arm can survive, which shows that things cannot be deduced from this analogy.

古文：厉利剑者必以柔抵，击钟磐者必以濡木，毂强必以弱辐，两坚不能相和，两强不能相服。
现代文：磨砺利剑一定要用细软的磨刀石，敲击钟磬一定要用柔软的木棒，车毂坚硬一定要用柔软的辐条。两个都是坚硬的东西就不能互相协调好，双方都强大就会互相不服帖。
English: The sharp sword must be sharpened with a soft sharpening stone, the bell must be struck with a soft wooden stick, and the hard wheel must be used with a soft spoke. Two hard things cannot be coordinated with each other, and if both sides are strong, they will not accept each other.

古文：故梧桐断角，马牦截玉。
现代文：所以木质疏松的梧桐树倒可以击断兽角，纤细的马尾倒可以截断玉石。
English: Therefore, the woody loose sycamore can break the horns, and the slender horse tail can cut off the jade.

古文：媒但者，非学谩也，但成而生不信。立懂者，非学斗争也，慬立而生不让。
现代文：媒人会说假话并不是受过专门的撒谎训练，但说假话一旦养成习性就会产生不诚实；培养勇敢精神并不是要学会争斗本领，但勇敢性格一旦形成就不会谦虚礼让。
English: A matchmaker who tells lies is not specially trained to lie, but telling lies will produce dishonesty once it becomes a habit; cultivating a courageous spirit is not to learn fighting skills, but once a courageous character is formed, it will not be modest and courteous.

古文：故君子不入狱，为其伤恩也；不入市，为其侳廉也；积不可不慎者也。
现代文：所以，君子不肯在监狱里面谋事做，因为管牢狱的事情会伤害到君子仁爱之心；同样君子不肯到街市里去做买卖，因为经商买卖会伤害到君子的廉洁品德。行为的积累是不能不审慎的。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not want to do business in prison, because the management of prison affairs will hurt the gentleman's benevolence; likewise, a gentleman does not want to go to the street market to do business, because doing business will hurt the gentleman's integrity. The accumulation of behavior cannot be imprudent.

古文：走不以手，缚手走不能疾；飞不以尾，屈尾飞不能远；物之用者必待不用者。
现代文：奔跑不需要用手，但是将两手绑起来就跑不快；飞行不需要用尾，但是将尾巴卷屈起来就飞不远。
English: Running does not require the use of hands, but if both hands are tied, it is not easy to run; flying does not require the use of the tail, but if the tail is curled up, it will not fly far.

古文：故使之见者，乃不见者也；使鼓鸣者，乃不鸣者也。
现代文：这说明事物产生功能的部分一定得依赖于不产生功能的部分。所以使你看见的是本身看不见的，使鼓鸣响的是本身不会鸣响的。
English: This shows that the part of the thing that produces the function must depend on the part that does not produce the function. So what makes you see is itself invisible, and what makes the drum sound is itself inaudible.

古文：尝一脔肉，知一镌之味；悬羽与炭，而知燥湿之气；以小明大。
现代文：尝一小块肉，就可知道一锅肉的滋味；悬挂羽毛和木炭，就可知道空气的湿度：这是通过小来知道大的事例。
English: Taste a small piece of meat, you can know the taste of a pot of meat; hanging feathers and charcoal, you can know the humidity of the air: this is a case of knowing the big through the small.

古文：见一叶落，而知岁之将暮；睹瓶中之冰，而知天下之寒；以近论远。
现代文：看见一片叶子凋落，就可知道一年快到冬天了；看见瓶中的水结冰，就知道天气已经很冷了：这是以近来推知远的事例。
English: To see a leaf fall is to know that the year is drawing to a close; to see water freeze in a bottle is to know that the weather is already cold: this is an example of extrapolating from the recent past.

古文：三人比肩，不能外出户；一人相随，可以通天下。
现代文：三人肩并着肩，是不能走出门的；其中一人跟在两人身后，就可以畅通无阻。
English: Three people standing shoulder to shoulder can't get out of the door; if one of them follows the other two, they can pass through unhindered.

古文：足蹍地而为迹，暴行而为影，此易而难。
现代文：脚踩着地则出现足迹，在太阳下行走就形成身影，留下足迹和出现身影是容易的，而要使脚印正、影子不斜则是困难的。
English: Footprints appear when the foot is on the ground, and shadows appear when walking under the sun. It is easy to leave footprints and shadows, but it is difficult to make the footprints straight and the shadows not slanted.

古文：庄王诛里史，孙叔敖冠浣衣。文公弃荏席，后霉黑，咎犯辞归。
现代文：楚庄王诛杀了佞臣里史，孙叔敖便刷净帽子、洗净衣裳准备复职上任；晋文公抛弃旧垫席，怠慢那些跟随他流亡过的、脸色黑瘦的人，咎犯见了便辞官隐退。
English: The king of Chuzhuang killed his most trusted vassal Li Shi, and Sun Shuxuan brushed off his hat and washed his clothes in preparation for his return to office; the prince of Jin abandoned the old seat and neglected those who had followed him in exile, who were thin and dark-skinned. When he saw the culprit, he resigned and went into seclusion.

古文：故桑叶落而长年悲也。
现代文：所以桑叶凋落会引发那些长者悲叹时光的流逝。
English: So the fall of the mulberry leaves triggers those elders to lament the passing of time.

古文：鼎错日用而不足贵，周鼎不爨而不可贱，物固有以不用而为有用者。
现代文：小小的鼎锅因每天使用而不被人珍贵，周王室内的大鼎从来不用来煮饭做菜却被人重视，看成是传国宝鼎。事物本来就存在着以不用而来实现它的有用的情况。
English: Small ding pots are not prized by people because they are used every day, but the large ding pot in Zhou Wang's room has never been used for cooking, but it is valued by people and regarded as a national treasure. Things inherently exist to achieve their usefulness without being used.

古文：地平则水不流，重钩则衡不倾，物之尤必有所感，物固有以不用为大用者。
现代文：地势平坦则水不流，重量均等则不倾斜，物体一旦失去平衡就必定会有反应，也必定会被感应，事物本来就存在着以不用而被派大用场的情况。
English: If the terrain is flat, the water will not flow, if the weight is equal, it will not tilt. Once the object loses its balance, it will definitely react and will definitely be sensed. Things already exist when they are not used and are put to great use.

古文：先倮而浴则可，以浴而倮则不可；先祭而后飨则可，先飨而后祭则不可；物之先后各有所宜也。
现代文：先脱衣服然后洗澡是合乎情理的，但穿着衣服洗澡然后再脱衣服是违背常理的；先祭祀神祖然后吃祭品是合常规的，但先吃掉祭品然后再去祭祀祖宗神灵是不合常规的：事物总有一个先后次序、适当规矩。
English: It is reasonable to undress first and then take a bath, but it is contrary to common sense to take a bath with clothes on and then undress again; it is customary to sacrifice the ancestors first and then eat the offerings, but it is not customary to eat the offerings first and then sacrifice the ancestral deities: there is always a sequence of things, a proper rule.

古文：祭之日而言狗生，取妇夕而言衰麻，置酒之日而言上家，度江、河而言阳侯之波。
现代文：严肃的祭祀之日却以恶语伤人，娶媳妇的美好良宵却说披麻戴孝之事，设宴喜庆之时却议论上坟的事，渡江涉水之时却说水神显灵：这些都是说话不分时宜的表现。
English: On the day of a serious religious service, they use bad language to hurt people; on a beautiful night to marry their daughter-in-law, they talk about wearing filial piety; at a festive banquet, they talk about going to the grave; when wading across the river, they talk about the appearance of the spirit of the water god: these are all manifestations of the fact that they do not know when to speak.

古文：或曰知其且赦也而多杀人，或曰知其且赦也而多活人，其望赦同，所利害异。
现代文：有的说：朝廷将要大赦，赶快多杀些死囚犯人；有的说：朝廷将要大赦，这下能赦免不少死囚犯人了。
English: Some said: the imperial court is going to grant amnesty, so let's kill more death row prisoners as soon as possible; others said: the imperial court is going to grant amnesty, so now we can pardon a lot of death row prisoners.

古文：故或吹火而然，或吹火而灭。所以吹者异也。
现代文：这希望赦免是相同的，但是这希望赦免当中所包含着各自的害人利人之心却是不相同的。
English: The hope of pardon is the same, but the harm and benefit contained in the hope of pardon are different.

古文：烹牛以飨其里，而骂其东家母，德不报而身见殆。
现代文：这就好像有时吹火是越吹越旺，有时吹火却将火都吹灭，这是因为他们吹火的目的和方法不一样所导致的。
English: It is as if sometimes the fire-breathing is more vigorous, and sometimes the fire-breathing extinguishes the fire, which is caused by their different purposes and methods of fire-breathing.

古文：文王污膺，鲍申伛背，以成楚国之治。裨谌出郭而知，以成子产之事。
现代文：宰牛烹牛来宴请左右邻居，可是同时又辱骂东邻的母亲，这正是所施恩德都没来得及被报答，却又得罪了人家，这种做法本身就是一种危险的做法。楚文王塌胸，鲍申驼背，但就是这样丑陋的长相却将国家治理得有条有理。
English: It is a dangerous practice to slaughter and cook oxen to entertain the neighbors to the left and right, but at the same time abuse the mother of the neighbor to the east. This is exactly the kind of kindness that has not been repaid in time, but has offended others. King Chuwen has a flat chest and a hunched back, but such an ugly appearance governs the country in an orderly manner.

古文：朱儒问径天高于修人，修人曰： 不知。 
现代文：裨谌在城里无法施展才智，子产将他带出城外共商国家大事，倒成就了他们的大事。侏儒向高个子请教天有多高，高个子说： 我不知道。 
English: The dwarf asked the tall man how high the sky was, and the tall man said, "I don't know."

古文：曰： 子虽不知，犹近之于我。 
现代文：侏儒说： 你虽然不知道天有多高，但总还是比我离天要近得多啊！ 
English: The dwarf said: Although you do not know how high the sky is, you are still much closer to it than I am!

古文：故凡问事必于近者。
现代文：所以凡要请教问题，一定要找熟悉这问题的人。
English: So if you want to ask questions, be sure to find someone who is familiar with the issue.

古文：寇难至，躄者告盲者，盲者负而走，两人皆活，得其所能也。
现代文：战乱开始，兵寇将至，跛子将此消息告诉了瞎子，于是瞎子背着跛子逃跑，两人都幸免于难，这是因为他们二人取长补短，各自发挥自己的特长。
English: At the beginning of the war, the soldiers and robbers were approaching. The cripple told the blind man the news, so the blind man ran away with the cripple on his back. Both of them survived the ordeal, because they complemented each other's strengths and played to their own strengths.

古文：故使盲者语，使躄者走，失其所也。
现代文：反过来是由瞎子将此消息告诉跛子，跛子背着瞎子逃跑，那么就无法各自发挥特长。
English: If, on the other hand, it is the blind man who tells the cripple the news, and the cripple runs away with the blind man on his back, then they will not be able to play to their strengths.

古文：郢人有鬻其母，为请于买者曰： 此母老矣，幸善食之而勿苦。 
现代文：楚都郢城有人要将母亲卖出，他对买主说： 这位老母亲年迈了，请你好好奉养她，别让她受苦。 
English: In Chu Tudun City, someone wanted to sell his mother. He said to the buyer: This old mother is old. Please take good care of her and don't let her suffer.

古文：此行大不义，而欲为小义者。
现代文：这真是干了如此忤逆不孝的坏事却还装出假慈悲来宽慰自己的良心。
English: It's really done such a treacherous and unfilial evil thing, but it also pretended to be compassionate to ease its conscience.

古文：介虫之动以固，贞虫之动以毒螫，熊羆动以攫搏，兄牛之动以抵触，物莫措其所修而用其短也。
现代文：甲壳类动物凭借坚固的甲壳活动生存，细腰蜂等动物依靠毒螫活动生存，熊罴以蛮力来攫取食物，犀牛靠角抵来活动保存自己：这物类没有放弃自己的长处而用其短处的。
English: Crustaceans survive by means of robust crustacean activity, animals such as the wasp rely on the activity of the toadstool to survive, bear cubs use brute force to grab food, and rhinoceroses use horns to move and preserve themselves: this species did not give up its strengths and used its weaknesses.

古文：治国者若耨田，去害苗者而已。
现代文：治理国家如同田间除草，要除去危害禾苗的杂草就是了。
English: Governing a country is like weeding a field. All that is needed is to remove the weeds that are harming the seedlings.

古文：今沐者堕发，而犹为之不止，以所去者少，所利者多。
现代文：尽管洗头会掉不少头发，但人们仍然经常洗头，保持清洁，因为这样还是损失的少，获得好处的地方多。
English: Despite the fact that a lot of hair falls out when you wash your hair, people still wash their hair regularly and keep it clean, because this way they lose less and gain more benefits.

古文：砥石不利而可以利金，擏不正而可以正弓。
现代文：磨刀石本身不锋利，但它能使刀磨快；檠本身不端正，但它能矫正弓弩。
English: The sharpening stone itself is not sharp, but it can sharpen the knife; the beak itself is not correct, but it can correct the beak.

古文：物固有不正而可以正，不利而可以利。
现代文：所以有不少事物是自身不正却能矫正别的事物，自身不锋利却能使其他事物锋利。
English: Therefore, there are many things that are not sharp but can make other things sharp.

古文：力贵齐，知贵捷。
现代文：用力贵在突发迅猛，智慧贵在敏捷。
English: Effort is valuable in sudden rapidity, wisdom is valuable in agility.

古文：得之同，返为上；胜之同，迟为下。
现代文：两者强调的都是以迅速为上；要取胜的道理也一样，迟缓为下。
English: In both cases, the emphasis is on getting to the top quickly; the way to win is the same, slow down.

古文：所以贵镇邪者，以其应物而断割也；靡勿释，牛车绝辚。
现代文：人们之所以珍贵莫邪宝剑，因为它一接触物体就能使物体断裂；就是牛车如不停地摩擦门槛也能将门槛压断。
English: The reason why people treasure the sword is because it can break objects as soon as it touches them; even ox carts can break the threshold if they keep rubbing it.

古文：为孔子之穷于陈、蔡而废六艺，则惑；为医之不能自治其病，病而不就药，则勃矣。
现代文：因为孔子曾在陈蔡遭受困厄，就不信孔子，废弃孔子传授的六艺，那就糊涂了。因为医生不能治好自己的疾病，就不看病，不服药，那就荒谬了。
English: Because Confucius suffered hardships in Chen Cai, it would be foolish to disbelieve Confucius and abandon the six arts taught by Confucius. Because doctors cannot cure their own diseases, they do not see a doctor and do not take medicine, which is absurd.

