古文：卫青字仲卿。
现代文：卫青，字仲卿。
English: Wei Qing, also known as Zhongqing.

古文：其父郑季，河东平阳人也，以县吏给事侯家。
现代文：他的父亲郑季，是河东平阳人，担任县吏，在平阳侯家裹当差。
English: His father, Zheng Ji, was from Pingyang in the east of the river and worked as a county official.

古文：平阳侯曹寿尚武帝姊阳信长公主。
现代文：平阳侯曹寿娶了漠武帝的姐姐阳信长公主。
English: Pingyang marquis Cao Shou married Emperor Mengwu's sister, Princess Yangxin.

古文：季与主家僮卫媪通，生青。
现代文：郑季与主人家奴婢卫媪私通，生卫青。
English: Zheng Ji and his master's manservant and maidservant Wei Wei had a private relationship, and Wei Qing was born.

古文：青有同母兄卫长君及姊子夫，子夫自平阳公主家得幸武帝，故青冒姓为卫氏。
现代文：卫青有同胞哥哥卫长君及姐姐卫子夫，卫子夫在平阳公主家得到武帝宠幸，所以卫青冒姓卫氏。
English: Wei Qing had a compatriot brother Wei Changjun and a sister Wei Zifu. Wei Zifu was favored by Emperor Wu in the Pingyang Princess family, so Wei Qing assumed the surname Wei.

古文：卫媪长女君孺，次女少皃，次女则子夫。
现代文：卫媪长女君孺，次女少儿，三女就是卫子夫。
English: The eldest daughter, Junko, the second daughter, Shiori, and the third daughter are the guards.

古文：子夫男弟步广，皆冒卫氏。
现代文：卫子夫的弟弟步广，都冒姓卫氏。
English: Wei Zifu's younger brother, Bu Guang, both assumed the surname Wei.

古文：青为侯家人，少时归其父，父使牧羊。
现代文：卫青算做平阳侯家里人，小时候回到他父亲家中。
English: Wei Qing, a member of the Pingyang family, returned to his father's home as a child.

古文：民母之子皆奴畜之，不以为兄弟数。
现代文：他父亲让他放羊，嫡母的儿子们都把他当做奴仆看待，不算入兄弟之数。
English: His father made him a shepherd, and his mother's sons treated him as a servant, and did not count him among their brothers.

古文：青尝从人至甘泉居室，有一钳徒相青曰： 贵人也，官至封侯。 
现代文：卫青曾经跟着人去到甘泉宫囚犯居室，有个受钳刑的犯人给他相面说： 你是贵人，做官可到封侯。 
English: Wei Qing once followed someone to the prisoner's room of Ganquan Palace. A prisoner who had been flogged said to him, "You are a noble, you can become a vassal as an official.

古文：青笑曰： 人奴之生，得无笞骂即足矣，安得封侯事乎！ 
现代文：卫青笑着说： 奴婢生的儿子，能不挨打受骂就已经很满足了，怎么会有封侯那样好的事情呢！ 
English: Wei Qing said with a smile: The son of a slave is already satisfied if he can not be beaten and scolded, how can there be such a good thing as a feudal lord!

古文：青壮，为侯家骑，从平阳主。
现代文：卫青长大后，当平阳侯家的骑士，随从平阳公主。
English: After Wei Qing grew up, he became a cavalryman of the Pingyang family, and often followed the Pingyang princess.

古文：建元二年春，青姊子夫得入宫幸上。
现代文：建元二年春天，卫青的姐姐卫子夫入宫得到皇上宠爱。
English: In the spring of the second year of the reign of Emperor Wu of Han, Wei Qing's sister, Wei Zifu, entered the imperial palace and was favored by Emperor Wu.

古文：皇后，大长公主女也，无子，妒。
现代文：陈皇后是大长公主的女儿，没生儿子，嫉妒别人。
English: Empress Chen is the daughter of the eldest princess, has no son, and is jealous of others.

古文：大长公主闻卫子夫幸，有身，妒之，乃使人捕青。
现代文：大长公主听说卫子夫得宠并已怀孕，嫉妒她，便派人抓卫青。
English: When the eldest princess heard that Emperor Wu favored Wei Zifu and that she was pregnant, she was very jealous of her and sent someone to arrest Wei Qing.

古文：青时给事建章，未知名。
现代文：卫青当时在建章宫当差，还不出名。
English: At that time, Wei Qing served in the construction of the Zhang Palace and was not yet famous.

古文：大长公主执囚青，欲杀之。
现代文：大长公主抓到卫青，把他关押起来，想要杀掉他。
English: The eldest princess arrested and imprisoned Wei Qing and tried to kill him.

古文：其友骑郎公孙敖与壮士往篡之，故得不死。
现代文：卫青的朋友骑郎公孙敖和壮士前去把他抢出来，卫青因此避免一死。
English: Wei Qing's friend, the horseman Gongsun Yao, and a strong man went to snatch him out, and Wei Qing thus avoided death.

古文：上闻，乃召青为建章监，侍中。
现代文：皇上听说此事，便召见卫青，让他做建章宫监，任侍中。
English: When the emperor heard about this, he summoned Wei Qing and asked him to be the palace overseer for the construction of the palace and to serve as an attendant.

古文：及母昆弟贵，赏赐数日间累千金。
现代文：到他的同母兄弟都显贵时，几天里赏赐达千金之多。
English: When his brothers-in-law were all prominent, he rewarded them with thousands of dollars in a few days.

古文：君孺为太仆公孙贺妻。
现代文：君孺嫁给了太仆公孙贺作妻子。
English: Junya married the servant of the Emperor, the grandson of the Emperor, He Zuo.

古文：少皃故与陈掌通，上召贵掌。
现代文：卫少儿原先跟陈掌私通，皇上召见陈掌让他当官。
English: Wei Shao'er had previously had an affair with Chen Shao, and the emperor summoned Chen Shao to make him an official.

古文：公孙敖由此益显。
现代文：公孙敖由此更加显贵。
English: As a result, Gongsun Yao became even more prominent.

古文：子夫为夫人。
现代文：卫子夫作了皇帝夫人。
English: The tutelary deity became Emperor Wu's wife.

古文：青为太中大夫。
现代文：卫青当上了太中大夫。
English: Wei Qing became the Grand Physician.

古文：元光六年，拜为车骑将军，击匈奴，出上谷；公孙贺为轻车将军，出云中；太中大夫公孙敖为骑将军，出代郡；卫尉李广为骁骑将军，出雁门：军各万骑。
现代文：元光六年，卫青担任车骑将军，攻打匈奴，出兵上谷郡；公孙贺担任轻车将军，出云中郡；太中大夫公孙敖担任骑将军，出代郡；卫尉李广担任骁骑将军，出雁门郡。
English: In the six years of Yuan Guang, Wei Qing served as a chariot and cavalry general, attacked the Xiongnu, and dispatched troops to Shanggu County; Gong Sun He served as a light chariot general, and went to Yunzhong County; Taizhong Doctor Gong Sun Qi served as a cavalry general, and went to represent the county; Guards Lieutenant Li Guang served as a horse and rider general, and went to Yanmen County.

古文：青至龙城，斩首虏数百。
现代文：每路军队各有一骑兵。卫青进军到笼城，歼灭敌军几百人。
English: Each army had one cavalryman. Wei Qing marched to Ke Cheng and annihilated several hundred enemy soldiers.

古文：骑将军敖亡七千骑，卫尉广为虏所得，得脱归，皆当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：骑将军公孙敖损失七千骑兵，卫尉李广被敌人活捉，幸得逃回。他们两个都判为死刑，赎罪作了平民。
English: The cavalry general Gong Sun Qian lost seven thousand cavalrymen, and the guard lieutenant Li Guang was captured alive by the enemy and fortunately escaped. Both of them were sentenced to death and atoned for their sins by becoming civilians.

古文：贺亦无功。
现代文：公孙贺也无战功。
English: Gongsun He did not deserve any credit either.

古文：唯青赐爵关内侯。
现代文：衹有卫青赐爵关内侯。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Guanai.

古文：是后匈奴仍侵犯边。
现代文：此后，匈奴继续侵犯边界。
English: Since then, the Huns have continued to violate the border.

古文：语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：事情记载在《匈奴传》。
English: The incident is recorded in the "History of the Huns."

古文：元朔元年春，卫夫人有男，立为皇后。
现代文：元朔元年春天，卫夫人生了儿子，被立为皇后。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Empress Dowager gave birth to a baby boy and was enthroned as empress.

古文：其秋，青复将三万骑出雁门，李息出代郡。
现代文：这年秋天，卫青又率领三万骑兵攻打匈奴，出兵雁门关，李息出兵代郡。
English: In the autumn of that year, Wei Qing again led 30,000 cavalry to attack the Xiongnu, and sent troops to Ganmen Pass, while Li Xi sent troops to represent the county.

古文：青斩首虏数千。
现代文：卫青歼灭敌军几千人。
English: Wei Qing annihilated several thousand enemy troops.

古文：明年，青复出云中，西至高阙，遂至于陇西，捕首虏数千，畜百余万，走白羊、楼烦王。
现代文：第二年，卫青又出兵云中郡，西到高阙，直到陇西，歼灭敌军几千人，获牲口百余万头，赶跑了白羊王和楼烦王。
English: In the second year, Wei Qing also sent troops to Yunzhong County, west to Gaocheng, and as far as Shaanxi, annihilated several thousand enemy troops, obtained more than one million heads of livestock, and drove away the King of Aries and the King of Rou.

古文：遂取河南地为朔方郡。
现代文：汉朝就把河南地区设为朔方郡。
English: The Han Dynasty set up the Henan region as Shuofang County.

古文：以三千八百户封青为长平侯。
现代文：划三千八百户封卫青为长平侯。
English: Thirty-eight hundred households of Fengwei youth were designated as Changping villages.

古文：青校尉苏建为平陵侯，张次公为岸头侯。
现代文：卫青部下校尉苏建被封为平陵侯，张次公封为岸头侯。
English: Captain Su Jian of the Ministry of Youth and Sports was given the title of the Prince of Pingling, and Zhang Zikong was given the title of the Prince of Kishi.

古文：使建筑朔方城。
现代文：派苏建筑朔方城。
English: Paisus builds a square city.

古文：上曰： 匈奴逆天理，乱人伦，暴长虐老，以盗窃为务，行诈诸蛮夷，造谋籍兵，数为边害。故兴师遗将，以征厥罪。
现代文：天子说： 匈奴违背天理，悖乱人伦，欺凌尊长，虐待老人，以盗窃为职业，欺诈各部蛮夷，策划阴谋，仗恃武力，屡次侵害边境，所以朝廷派兵遣将，征讨它的罪恶。
English: Tianzi said: The Xiongnu violated the principles of heaven, disrupted human relations, bullied the elders, abused the elderly, stole as a profession, cheated the barbarians, plotted conspiracies, fought with force, and repeatedly violated the border. Therefore, the imperial court sent soldiers to collect its evil.

古文：《诗》不云乎？ 薄伐猃允，至于太原 ； 出车彭彭，城彼朔方 。
现代文：《诗经》裹不是说过吗， 攻伐狈狁，达到太原 ； 战车隆隆在那北方筑城 。
English: Isn't it said in the Book of Songs, "Strike the hail and come to Taiyuan; the chariot rumbles and builds a city in the north."

古文：今年骑将军青度西河至高阙，获首二千三百级，车辎畜产毕收为卤，已封为列侯，遂西定河南地，案榆溪旧塞，绝梓领，梁北河，讨薄泥，破符离，斩轻锐之卒，捕伏听者三千一十七级。
现代文：现在车骑将军卫青渡过西河，直到高阙，歼灭敌军二千三百人，把他们的物资牲都缴获为战利品，已受封为列侯，于是西进平定河南地区，巡行榆溪旧塞，横越梓岭，架桥北河，讨平蒲泥，打败符离，斩杀精锐敌兵，捕获隐蔽伏听之兵三千零一十七人。
English: Now General Wei Qing crossed the West River by carriage and horse until he reached Gaocheng, annihilated 2300 enemy soldiers, captured all their supplies and animals as spoils of war, and was made a vassal. He then marched west to pacify the Henan region, marched through the old fortress of Shuxi, crossed the Zi Mountains, and bridged the North River, leveled the mud, defeated the Fu Li, killed the elite enemy soldiers, and captured 3017 hidden soldiers.

古文：执讯获丑，驱马牛羊百有余万，全甲兵而还，益封青三千八百户。 
现代文：捉问俘虏，知敌所在，俘获卒众，赶回马牛羊一百多万头，全师而还。增封卫青食邑三千八百户。 
English: They interrogated the captives to find out the location of the enemy, captured the pawns, drove back more than one million horses, cattle and sheep, and returned the entire division.

古文：其后匈奴比岁入代郡、雁门、定襄、上郡、朔方，所杀略甚众。
现代文：以后，匈奴连年侵入代郡、雁门、定襄、上郡、朔方，杀掠甚多。
English: After that, the Xiongnu invaded Daigun, Ganmen, Dingxiang, Shanggun, and Shuo Fang year after year, killing and plundering a lot.

古文：语在《匈奴传》。
现代文：事情记载在《匈奴传》。
English: The incident is recorded in the "History of the Huns."

古文：元朔五年春，令青将三万骑出高阙，卫尉苏建为游击将军，左内史李沮为强弩将军，太仆公孙贺为骑将军，代相李蔡为轻车将军，皆领属车骑将军，俱出朔方。
现代文：元朔五年春天，汉朝命令车骑将军卫青统率三万骑兵出高阙，卫尉苏建担任游击将军，左内史李沮担任强弩将军，太仆公孙贺担任骑将军，代国相李蔡担任轻车将军，都归车骑将军节制，都出兵朔方。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Yuan Shao, the Han Dynasty ordered the cavalry general Wei Qing Tong to lead 30,000 cavalry out of Gaojun, the guard officer Su Jian as the guerrilla general, the left inner history Li De as the strong general, the servant Gong Sun He as the cavalry general, and the acting minister of state Li Cai as the light vehicle general. All returned to the restraint of the cavalry general and all sent troops to the Shuo side.

古文：大行李息、岸头侯张次公为将军，俱出右北平。
现代文：大行令李息、岸头侯张次公担任将军，都出兵右北平郡。
English: Li Xixi, the grand marshal, and Zhang Zigong, the marquis of Guitou, served as generals, and both sent troops to Ping County, North Hebei.

古文：匈奴右贤王当青等兵，以为汉兵不能至此，饮醉，汉兵夜至，围右贤王。右贤王惊，夜逃，独与其爱妾一人骑数百驰，溃围北去。
现代文：匈奴右贤王面对卫青等部，以为汉军不能到他那裹，喝醉了酒。汉兵夜间赶到，包围了右贤王，右贤王惊恐，连夜逃走，仅带着他的一个爱妾和几百个精壮骑兵飞跑，冲破汉军包围圈北去。
English: The Hun king Uxian, drunk with wine, thought that the Chinese army could not get to him. The Chinese soldiers arrived at night and surrounded Uxian. Uxian was terrified and fled in the night, taking only one of his concubines and several hundred strong cavalrymen with him. He broke through the encirclement of the Chinese army and went north.

古文：汉轻骑校尉郭成等追数百里，弗得，得右贤裨王十余人，众男女万五千余人，畜数十百万，于是引兵而还。
现代文：汉朝轻骑校尉郭成等追了几百里，没有追上，俘虏右贤王属下小王十多人、男女人众一万五千多人、牲口数十上百万头。于是卫青率军回来。
English: Guo Cheng, the light cavalry captain of the Han Dynasty, chased them for several hundred miles, but did not catch up with them. He captured more than ten Xiaowang, more than fifteen thousand men and women, and tens of millions of heads of livestock belonging to King Uxian. So Wei Qing led the army back.

古文：至塞，天子使使者持大将军印，即军中拜青为大将军，诸将皆以兵属，立号而归。
现代文：军到边塞，天子派使者捧着大将军印，就在军中任命车骑将军卫青担任大将军，诸将都把部队归大将军统率，大将军建立官号而归。
English: When the army arrived at the border fortress, the Son of Heaven sent an envoy holding the seal of the great general. He appointed the cavalry general Wei Qing as the great general in the army. All the generals put the troops under the command of the great general. The great general established the official title and returned.

古文：上曰： 大将军青躬率戎士，师大捷，获匈奴王十有余人，益封青八千七百户。 
现代文：天子说： 大将军卫青亲率战士征战，出师大捷，捉获匈奴王十余人，增封卫青食邑八千七百户。 
English: Tianzi said: General Wei Qingchen led the soldiers to fight, the division achieved great success, captured more than ten Hun kings, and increased the territory of Wei Qingcheng by 8,700 households.

古文：而封青子伉为宜春侯，子不疑为阴安侯，子登为发干侯。
现代文：又封卫青的儿子卫伉为宜春侯、卫不疑为阴安侯、卫登为发干侯。
English: He also made Wei Qing's son Wei Xuan the lord of Yichun, Wei Doubtless the lord of Yinan, and Wei Deng the lord of Fagan.

古文：青固谢曰： 臣幸得待罪行间，赖陛下神灵，军大捷，皆诸校力战之功也。
现代文：卫青坚决推辞说： 我有幸能够在部队裹任职，仰赖陛下神圣威灵，我军大捷，都是各位校尉力战的功劳。
English: Wei Qing firmly said: I am fortunate to be able to serve in the army. I rely on His Majesty's sacred will. Our army's great victory is all the merit of the captains' hard work.

古文：陛下幸已益封臣青，臣青子在襁褓中，未有勤劳，上幸裂地封为三侯，非臣待罪行间所以劝士力战之意也。
现代文：陛下已经垂恩增封我的食邑，而我的儿子们还是小娃娃没有功劳，又蒙皇上裂地封为三个列侯，这不是罪臣在部队裹勉励将士努力作战的本意。
English: Your Majesty has graciously granted me the additional title of shokui, while my sons are still small dolls without merit, and they have been awarded the title of three feudal lords by the Emperor. This is not the intention of the sinner in the army to encourage the soldiers to fight hard.

古文：伉等三人何敢受封！ 
现代文：卫伉等兄弟三人怎么敢领受封爵！ 
English: How dare Wei Wei and the other three accept the award.

古文：上曰： 我非忘诸校功也，今固且图之。 
现代文：天子说： 我不是忘记了各位校尉的功劳，现在本要办这件事的。 
English: Tenshi said, "I haven't forgotten the merits of the captains, I was going to do this now.

古文：乃诏御史曰： 护军都尉公孙敖三从大将军击匈奴，常护军傅校获王，封敖为合骑侯。
现代文：于是命令御史道： 护军都尉公孙敖三次跟随大将军出击匈奴，经常调节各部，团结将校，俘获匈奴王，封公孙敖为合骑侯。
English: So he ordered the commander of the imperial guard: the captain of the imperial guard, Gongsun Yao, three times followed the general to attack the Xiongnu, constantly adjusted the departments, united the officers, captured the Xiongnu king, and appointed Gongsun Yao as the co-regent.

古文：都尉韩说从大军出浑，至匈奴右贤王庭，为戏下搏战获王，封说为龙额侯。
现代文：都尉韩说跟随大军出资浑，打到匈奴右贤王王庭，迫近敌人帅旗之下搏斗拼杀，俘获小王，封韩说为龙额侯。
English: Han, the captain, said that he would follow the great army and fight to the right of the Xiongnu, fight and fight under the banner of the enemy, capture Xiao Wang, and Han said that he would be the Dragon Prince.

古文：骑将军贺从大将军获王，封贺为南窌侯。
现代文：骑将军公孙贺跟随大将军俘获匈奴王，封公孙贺为南峁侯。
English: The cavalry general Gongsun He followed the great general to capture the Hun king and crowned Gongsun He as the Southern Eunuch.

古文：轻车将军李蔡再从大将军获王，封蔡为乐安侯。
现代文：轻车将军李蔡两次跟随大将军俘获匈奴王，封李蔡为乐安侯。
English: Li Cai, the general of light vehicles, twice captured the king of the Xiongnu following the general, and Li Cai was given the title of Prince of Le'an.

古文：校尉李朔、赵不虞、公孙戎奴各三从大将军获王，封朔为陟轵侯，不虞为随成侯，戎奴为从平侯。
现代文：校尉李朔、赵不虞、公孙戎奴各三次跟随大将军，都曾俘获匈奴王，封李朔为陟轵侯，封赵不虞为随成侯，封公孙戎奴为从平侯。
English: Lieutenants Li Shuo, Zhao Bouguo, and Gongsun Rongnu each followed the general three times. All of them had captured the Hun king, and Li Shuo was awarded the title of prince, Zhao Bouguo was awarded the title of prince, and Gongsun Rongnu was awarded the title of prince.

古文：将军李沮、李息及校尉豆如意、中郎将绾皆有功，赐爵关内侯。沮、息、如意食邑各三百户。 
现代文：将军李沮、李息和校尉豆如意、中郎将绾都有战功，赐封关内侯爵位，李沮、李息、如意食邑各三百户。 
English: The generals Li De, Li Xixi, the lieutenant Doudou Ruyi, and the middle-ranking general Zou Qi were all awarded the title of marquis of Guanzhong, and Li De, Li Xixi, and Ruyi each had 300 households in the food village.

古文：其秋，匈奴入代，杀都尉。
现代文：遣年秋天，匈奴侵入代郡，杀死都尉。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the Huns invaded the county and killed the captain.

古文：明年春，大将军青出定襄，合骑侯敖为中将军，太仆贺为左将军，翕侯赵信为前将军，卫尉苏建为右将军，郎中令李广为后将军，左内史李沮为强弩将军，咸属大将军，斩首数千级而还。
现代文：第二年春天，大将军卫青出定襄郡，合骑侯公孙敖担任中将军，太仆公孙贺担任左将军。翕侯赵信担任前将军，卫尉苏建担任右将军，郎中令李广担任后将军，左内史李沮担任强弩将军，都归大将军统率，歼灭敌军几千人而还。
English: In the spring of the next year, the general Wei Qing left Dingxiang County, and the co-rider Hou Gong Sun Jie served as the middle general, and the eunuch Gong Sun He served as the left general. The eunuch Hou Zhao Xin served as the former general, the guard lieutenant Su Jian served as the right general, the lieutenant general Li Guang served as the rear general, and the left internal historian Li De as the strong general. All of them were under the command of the general, and they annihilated thousands of enemy troops and survived.

古文：月余，悉复出定襄，斩首虏万余人。
现代文：一个多月后，全都再出定襄郡攻打匈奴，一共歼灭敌军一万多人。
English: More than a month later, they all went to Dingxiang County to attack the Xiongnu, annihilating a total of more than 10,000 enemy troops.

古文：苏建、赵信并军三千余骑，独逢单于兵，与战一日余，汉兵且尽。
现代文：右将军苏建和前将军赵信两军合并计有骑兵三千多人，独遇单于大军，跟他们交战一天多，汉军将尽。
English: The two armies of the right-hand general, Su Jian, and the former general, Zhao Xin, had a combined total of more than three thousand cavalry. It was a unique encounter with a large army, and after fighting with them for more than one day, the Chinese army was exhausted.

古文：信故胡人，降为翕侯，见急，匈奴诱之，遂将其余骑可八百奔降单于。
现代文：前将军赵信原来是匈奴人，投降汉朝后被封为翕侯，这时他看到情况危急，匈奴又来引诱他，便率领他的残余骑兵约八百人奔降单于。
English: The former general Zhao Xin was originally a Hun, and after surrendering to the Han Dynasty, he was made a prefect. When he saw that the situation was critical, the Huns came to tempt him again, and he led his remaining cavalry of about eight hundred men to surrender to the Han.

古文：苏建尽亡其军，独以身得亡去，自归青。
现代文：右将军苏建全军覆灭，只有他逃脱回到大将军大营。
English: The entire army of the Right General Su Jian was annihilated, and only he escaped to return to the general's camp.

古文：青问其罪正闳、长史安、议郎周霸等： 建当云何？ 
现代文：大将军就苏建所犯罪行询问军正闳、长史安和议郎周霸等人说： 苏建该当何罪？ 
English: The general inquired about the crimes committed by the Soviet Construction Research Institute and asked Army General Zheng Qi, General Chang Shi'an, General Zhou Ba and others: What is the crime of Soviet construction?

古文：霸曰： 自大将军出，未尝斩裨将，今建弃军，可斩，以明将军之威。 
现代文：周霸说： 从大将军出兵以来，还没有杀过副将，现在苏建丢弃部队，可以杀掉他，以显示将军的威严。 
English: Zhou Ba said: Since the general has sent troops, he has not killed the vice-general. Now that the Soviet Union has abandoned the troops, he can be killed to show the majesty of the general.

古文：闳、安曰： 不然。
现代文：闳和安说： 不对！
English: Both Zou and An said, "This can't be done."

古文：兵法 小敌之坚，大敌之禽也。 今建以数千当单于数万，力战一日余，士皆不敢有二心。
现代文：兵法说： 小部队战斗力再强，也要被强大的敌人打败，现在苏建拿几千人抵挡单于几万人，力战一天多，士兵都不敢有二心。
English: The law of war says: no matter how strong the combat effectiveness of a small unit is, it must also be defeated by a powerful enemy. Now the Soviet Union is taking thousands of people to resist tens of thousands of people alone, fighting for more than one day. Soldiers dare not have second thoughts.

古文：自归而斩之，是示后无反意也。不当斩。 
现代文：他自己回来请罪却要杀他，这种做法等于告诉后来者作战失败后不要再回来。苏建不当杀。 
English: He himself came back to plead guilty, but they wanted to kill him. This is tantamount to telling those who came later not to come back after losing the battle. The Soviets did not deserve to be killed.

古文：青曰： 青幸得以肺附待罪行间，不患无威，而霸说我以明威，甚失臣意。
现代文：大将军说： 我有幸以皇上的亲戚在军队里任职，不怕没有威信。而周霸却拿树立威信劝我，很失为臣之意。
English: The general said, "I have the honor of serving in the army as a relative of the emperor, and I am not afraid of losing my prestige. However, Zhou Ba used his prestige to persuade me, and I was very disappointed.

古文：且使臣职虽当斩将，以臣之尊宠而不敢自擅专诛于境外，其归天子，天子自裁之，于以风为人臣不敢专权，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：即使为臣有权斩将，但以位高受宠的大臣而不敢擅权专杀于国境之外，而回去向天子汇报，让天子自己去处理，以此表明做臣子的不敢专权，不也是很好吗？ 
English: Even if a vassal has the power to kill, wouldn't it be nice to be a highly favored minister and not dare to arbitrarily kill outside the borders, but go back and report to the Son of Heaven, and let the Son of Heaven deal with it himself, thereby showing that a vassal does not dare to have absolute power?

古文：官吏皆曰 善 。
现代文：军官们都说 好 。
English: The officers all said yes.

古文：遂囚建行在所。
现代文：于是把苏建装进囚车，送到皇帝的巡行所在处。
English: So they loaded Su Jian into a prison wagon and sent him to the place where the emperor's procession was.

古文：是岁也，霍去病始侯。
现代文：这一年，霍去病开始封侯。
English: In the same year, Huo became ill and was confined to the palace.

古文：霍去病，大将军青姊少皃子也。
现代文：霍去病，是大将军卫青姐姐卫少皃的儿子。
English: He is the son of General Wei Qing's sister, Wei Shaoqi.

古文：其父霍仲孺先与少皃通，生去病。
现代文：他的父亲霍仲孺以前与卫少儿私通，生霍去病。
English: His father, Huo Zhongyao, used to have sexual intercourse with Wei Shaoer, and Huo was born and became ill.

古文：及卫皇后尊，少皃更为詹事陈掌妻。
现代文：到了卫皇后尊宠之时，卫少儿嫁与詹事陈掌为妻。
English: When it came to the time of Queen Wei's favor, Wei Shiao'er married Zhan Zhi Chen Shao.

古文：去病以皇后姊子，年十八为侍中。
现代文：霍去病因是皇后的姐姐的儿子，十八岁便为侍中。
English: The son of the queen's sister, he became a chamberlain at the age of eighteen.

古文：善骑射，再从大将军。
现代文：因他善于骑马射箭，两次跟随大将军卫青出征匈奴。
English: Because he was good at riding and archery, he twice followed the general Wei Qing to the Huns.

古文：大将军受诏，予壮士，为票姚校尉，与轻勇骑八百直弃大军数百里赴利，斩捕首虏过当。
现代文：大将军根据皇帝的命令，拨给他一批精壮士卒，让他担任票姚校尉。他带领八百名轻骑勇士远离卫青所率的大军几百里，去夺取战功，捕杀敌人极多。
English: According to the emperor's order, the general assigned him a group of elite soldiers and let him serve as the captain of the ticket Yao. He led eight hundred light cavalry warriors hundreds of miles away from the army led by Wei Qing, to win the war and kill a lot of enemies.

古文：于是上曰： 票姚校尉去病斩首捕虏二千二十八级，得相国、当户，斩单于大父行籍若侯产，捕季父罗姑比，再冠军，以二千五百户封去病为冠军侯。
现代文：这时武帝说： 票姚校尉霍去病歼敌二千零二十八人，活捉相国、当户，杀死单于祖父辈的藉若侯产，生擒单于叔父罗姑等人，功劳两次勇冠全军，以二千五百户封霍去病为冠军侯。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu said: "Colonel Yao Huo went off sick and wiped out 2,028 enemy soldiers, captured his fatherland and the head of his household alive, killed his grandfathers' sons-in-law, fathered his uncle Luo Gu and others, won the national championship twice, and became the champion of 2,500 households.

古文：上谷太守郝贤四从大将军，捕首虏千三百级，封贤为终利侯。
现代文：上谷太守郝贤四次跟随大将军出征，捕杀敌人一千三百，封他为终利侯。
English: Kamitani Taishu Shoken went to war four times with the general, captured and killed 1,300 enemies, and was given the title of Lord of the Last Resort.

古文：骑干孟已有功，赐爵关内侯，邑二百户。 
现代文：骑士孟已也有战功，赐给爵位为关内侯，封食邑二百户。 
English: Knight Meng has also been awarded the title of Lord of Guanai and 200 households in Guanai have been granted the title of Lord of Guanai.

古文：是岁失两将军，亡翕侯，功不多，故青不益封。
现代文：这一年，汉朝损失苏建、趟信所率的两支部队，翕侯赵信投降匈奴，军功不多，所以卫青没能增封。
English: In that year, the Han Dynasty lost two troops led by Su Jian and Wai Xin, and Zhao Xin surrendered to the Xiongnu. He did not have much military merit, so Yu Weiqing was not able to increase the seal.

古文：苏建至，上弗诛，赎为庶人。
现代文：右将军苏建回到朝廷，天子没有杀他，衹是让他花钱赎罪为民。
English: The right general, Su Jian, returned to the imperial court. Heaven did not kill him, but let him spend money to atone for the people.

古文：青赐千金。
现代文：天子赐给卫青千金。
English: The Son of God gave Wei Qing a lot of money.

古文：是时王夫人方幸于上，甯乘说青曰： 将军所以功未甚多，身食万户，三子皆为侯者，以皇后故也。
现代文：此时王夫人正受武帝的宠爱，宁乘劝卫青说： 将军之所以功劳不是很大而能享受万户封邑，三个儿子都封为列侯，是因为有卫皇后的缘故。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Wang was being favored by Emperor Wu, and Ning took the lead in persuading Wei Qing, saying, "The reason why the general's merit is not great and he can enjoy the fiefdoms of ten thousand households, and his three sons are all made princes, is because of Empress Wei.

古文：今王夫人幸而家族未富贵，愿将军奉所赐千金为王夫人亲寿。 
现代文：现在王夫人受皇上宠幸而她的亲属却没有富贵，希望你能将皇上赐你的千金献给王夫人的母亲作为寿礼。 
English: Now that Mrs. Wang is favored by the emperor and her relatives are not rich, I hope you can give the money given to you by the emperor to Mrs. Wang's mother as a birthday gift.

古文：青以五百金为王夫人亲寿。
现代文：于是卫青便用五百金为王夫人的母亲祝寿。
English: So Wei Qing used five hundred gold to celebrate the birthday of Mrs. Wang's mother.

古文：上闻，问青，青以实对。上乃拜甯乘为东海都尉。
现代文：武帝听说了这件事，便询问卫青，卫青照实说了，武帝就任命宁乘为束海郡都尉。
English: Emperor Wu heard about this and asked Wei Qing about it. Wei Qing told the truth, and Emperor Wu appointed Ning Xuan as the captain of Sokhai County.

古文：校尉张骞从大将军，以尝使大夏，留匈奴中久，道军，知善水草处，军得以无饥渴，因前使绝国功，封骞为博望侯。
现代文：校尉张骞跟随大将军卫青出征，因为他曾经出使大夏，在匈奴中居住了很久，这时担任部队的向导，知道哪些地方的水草肥美，所以部队没有遭受饥渴，又因为以前他曾出使远方异国有功，武帝就封他为博望侯。
English: Captain Zhang Jun followed General Wei Qing to go to war, because he had been sent to Daxia and lived in the Huns for a long time. At that time, he served as a guide for the troops and knew where the water and grass were fertile, so the troops did not suffer from hunger and thirst. And because he had been sent to distant foreign countries before, Emperor Wu named him Bohang Hou.

古文：去病侯三岁，元狩二年春为票骑将军，将万骑出陇西，有功。
现代文：霍去病封侯的第三年，即元狩二年的春天，被任命为骠骑将军，率领一万名骑兵从陇西出发进击匈奴，立有战功。
English: In the third year of Huo's illness, that is, in the spring of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as a cavalry general and led ten thousand cavalrymen to attack the Xiongnu from Shaanxi, which was a great achievement.

古文：上曰： 票骑将军率戎士逾乌盭，讨脩濮，涉狐奴，历五王国，辎重人众摄詟者弗取，几获单于子。
现代文：武帝下令说： 骠骑将军率领士卒越过乌整，讨伐匈奴邀濮部，渡过狐奴河，经历五个匈奴王国，辎重多，人马众，对降服者宽赦，几乎捉到匈奴单于的儿子。
English: Emperor Wu gave the order: "General Zou and his cavalry crossed the Wuching River, fought against the Xiongnu, invited the Xibe, crossed the Fox River, went through five Xiongnu kingdoms, with a lot of weight, a lot of people, forgave those who surrendered, and almost caught the son of the Xiongnu alone.

古文：转战六日，过焉支山千有余里，合短兵，鏖皋兰下，杀折兰王，斩卢侯王，锐悍者诛，全甲获丑，执浑邪王子及相国、都尉，捷首虏八千九百六十级，收休屠祭天金人，师率减什七，益封去病二千二百户。 
现代文：辗转战斗六天，越过焉支山一千余里，和敌人短兵相接，苦战于皋兰山下，杀折兰王，砍卢侯王，诛杀顽抗的敌人，其他全部捉获。俘虏浑邪王的儿子和相国、都尉，共杀敌和俘虏八千九百六十人，缴获休屠王的祭天金人。他的士卒伤亡约有十分之七。加封霍去病食邑二千二百户。 
English: He fought for six days, crossed more than a thousand miles of Yanzhishan, met the enemy's short-ranged soldiers, fought hard at the foot of the Qilian Mountains, killed the king of Qilian, cut down the prince of Lu, fought and killed the stubborn enemy, and captured all the others. He captured the son of King Hunzha and his consort, the captain, killed a total of 8,960 enemies and prisoners, and captured the golden statue of King Xiutu. About seven out of ten of his soldiers were killed or wounded. He went to 2,200 households in Guofeng County to feed the sick.

古文：其夏，去病与合骑侯敖俱出北地，异道。
现代文：这年夏天，霍去病与合骑侯公孙敖一齐从北地郡分两路出兵。
English: In the summer of that year, Huo Gao fell ill, and together with his co-rider, Hou Gongsun Rong, he sent troops from Beidai County in two directions.

古文：博望侯张赛、郎中令李广俱出右北平，异道。
现代文：博望侯张骞、郎中令李广则一齐从右北平郡也分两路出兵。
English: Zhang Ye, the lord of Bohang, and Li Guang, his second-in-command, also sent troops from Beiping County in two directions.

古文：广将四千骑先至，骞将万骑后。
现代文：李广率四千骑兵先到目的地，张骞率领一万人马后到。
English: Li Guang led four thousand cavalry to the destination first, and Zhang Ye led ten thousand horses to arrive later.

古文：匈奴左贤王将数万骑围广，广与战二日，死者过半，所杀亦过当。
现代文：匈奴左贤王带领数万骑兵包围了李广部，李广与敌人激战两天，伤亡过半，杀死的敌人则更多一些。
English: King Zuoxian of the Xiongnu led tens of thousands of cavalry to encircle Li Guangbu. Li Guang and the enemy fought fiercely for two days, with more than half of the casualties and more of the enemy killed.

古文：骞至，匈奴引兵去。
现代文：直到张骞部赶到，匈奴才退走。
English: It was not until Zhang Xibe arrived that the Huns retreated.

古文：骞坐行留，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：张骞因为部队行动迟缓，应当斩首，赎罪为民。
English: Zhang Ye should be beheaded to atone for his troops' slowness to act.

古文：而去病出北地，遂深入，合骑侯失道，不相得。去病至祁连山，捕首虏甚多。
现代文：霍去病从北地出发后，深入匈奴地区，合骑侯公孙敖因走错了路缓，没能够与霍去病会师，霍去病率军到达祁连山，捕杀敌人很多。
English: After Huo Dexia set out from the north, he went deep into the Xiongnu region. Because he took the wrong road, he and his cavalry partner, Hou Gongsun, could not meet Huo Dexia's division. Huo Dexia led the army to Qilian Mountain and killed many enemies.

古文：上曰： 票骑将军涉钧耆，济居延，遂臻小月氏，攻祁连山，扬武乎鱳得，得单于单桓、酋涂王，及相国、都尉以众降下者二千五百人，可谓能舍服知成而止矣。
现代文：武帝下令说： 骠骑将军渡钩耆河和居延泽，到达小月氏，攻占祁连山，扬武于鲽得，俘虏单于手下的单桓王、酋涂王，还有相国、都尉率领部众投降的，共有二千五百人，真是可谓能宽大降服者，功成而知止的人。
English: Emperor Wu gave the following order: "General Zou rode to Duhu and Yanze, reached the Xiao Yue clan, conquered the Qilian Mountains, led the troops to Xindu, captured King Zhanhanhan and King Hui Tuo, who were under his command, as well as his brother-in-laws, captains, and other subordinates, and surrendered a total of 2,500 people. These are truly people who can surrender graciously, and those who know the end of their achievements.

古文：捷首虏三万二百，获五王，王母、单于阏氏、王子五十九人，相国、将军、当户、都尉六十三人，师大率减什三，益封去病五千四百户。
现代文：这次报捷斩首和俘虏三万零二百人，俘虏五个匈奴王以及王母、单于阙氏、王子等五十九人，相国、将军、当户、都尉六十三人。霍去病的士卒大约伤亡十分之三。加封霍去病五千四百户。
English: This time, Zhang Jie beheaded and captured 30,200 people, and captured five Xiongnu kings and queens, 59 people such as the queen mother, the Shan Yuxuan clan, and princes, and 63 people such as relatives, generals, heads of households, and captains. About three-tenths of the casualties were soldiers who fell ill. 5,400 households fell ill.

古文：赐校尉从至小月氏者爵左庶长。
现代文：赐予跟随到小月氏作战的校尉们以左庶长的爵位。
English: The captains who went to fight with the Kogetsu clan were given the title of Sasabe no choja.

古文：鹰击司马破奴再从票骑将军斩脩濮王，捕稽且王，右千骑将得王、王母各一人，王子以下四十一人，捕虏三千三百三十人，前行捕虏千四百人，封破奴为从票侯。
现代文：鹰击司马赵破奴两次跟随骠骑将军杀邀濮王，俘获稽且王，右千骑将捉得匈奴王、王母各一人，王子以下四，一一人，俘敌三千三百三十人，上次捕敌一千四百人，封趟破奴为从票侯。
English: Zhao Banu, the eagle-striking horse, twice followed the cavalry general to kill and invite the horse king, and captured the horse king. The right thousand cavalry will capture the Hun king and the queen mother, one each, and the prince four, one person. He captured 3,330 enemies, and the last time he captured 1,400 enemies. Banu was sealed as a clerk.

古文：校尉高不识从票骑将军捕呼于耆王王子以下十一人，捕虏千七百六十八人，封不识为宜冠侯。
现代文：校尉高不识跟随骠骑将军俘获呼于耆王王子以下十一人，俘敌一千七百六十八人，封高不识为宜冠侯。
English: The school captain Gao Wukong followed the cavalry general and captured eleven people below the prince of the king of Qi, captured 1768 people, and named Gao Wukong as the crown prince of Yi.

古文：校尉仆多有功，封为煇渠侯。 
现代文：校尉仆多因立战功，封为辉渠侯。 
English: Many of the school's lieutenants had distinguished military service, and were awarded the title of "渠侯."

古文：合骑侯敖坐行留不与票骑将军会，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：合骑侯公孙敖因行军滞留未能够与骠骑将军会师，应当斩首，赎罪为民。
English: The co-rider, Hou Gongson, who was unable to join the general's cavalry because he was delayed in the march, should be beheaded to atone for the people.

古文：诸宿将所将士马兵亦不如去病，去病所将常选，然亦敢深入，常与壮骑先其大军，军亦有天幸，未尝困绝也。
现代文：许多老将率领的兵马也不如霍去病。霍去病率领的士卒常常选拔骁勇善战的人补充，他自己也敢深入敌区，常和精壮士卒奔驰在大军的前面。他的部队也是有天幸，从没遭遇过很大的危险。
English: The soldiers and horses led by many veterans were not as good as those led by Huo Dexia. The soldiers led by Huo Dexia often selected brave and good fighters to supplement them. He also dared to go deep into the enemy area, and often galloped in front of the army with the best soldiers and horses. His troops were also lucky to have never encountered great danger.

古文：然而诸宿将常留落不耦。
现代文：可是那些老将却常常落在后面，不能得到良好的战机。
English: But those veterans are often left behind, unable to get good aircraft.

古文：由此去病日以亲贵，比大将军。
现代文：从此霍去病日益受到武帝的宠爱而显贵，地位与大将军卫青相等。
English: From then on, he was increasingly favored and distinguished by Emperor Wu, and his status was equal to that of General Wei Qing.

古文：其后，单于怒浑邪王居西方数为汉所破，亡数万人，以票骑之兵也，欲召诛浑邪王。
现代文：这次战斗后，单于对浑邪王驻守西面而多次被汉军所败十分愤怒，浑邪王损失了几万士卒，都是遭到骠骑将军的打击，他想把浑邪王召来杀掉。
English: After this battle, he was very angry with the Chinese army for repeatedly defeating King Hunjia, who was stationed in the west. King Hunjia lost tens of thousands of soldiers, all of whom were attacked by the cavalry general. He wanted to summon King Hunjia to kill him.

古文：浑邪王与休屠王等谋欲降汉，使人先要道边。
现代文：浑邪王就和休屠王等商量投降汉朝，派先约汉方代表在边境上商谈。
English: King Hunjia negotiated with King Xiu Tuo and others to surrender to the Han Dynasty, and sent representatives from the Han side to negotiate on the border.

古文：是时，大行李息将城河上，得浑邪王使，即驰传以闻。
现代文：这时大行令李息正准备在黄河岸边修筑城堡，俘获浑邪王使者，立刻派人乘传车报告皇上。
English: At this time, Li Xi, the commander-in-chief, was preparing to build a castle on the bank of the Yellow River, captured the emissary of the evil king, and immediately sent a messenger to report to the emperor.

古文：上恐其以诈降而袭边，乃令去病将兵往迎之。
现代文：武帝担心匈奴是用诈降的手段乘机偷袭边境，就命令霍去病率军前去迎接。
English: Emperor Wu was worried that the Xiongnu would take advantage of the opportunity to attack the border by means of deception, so he ordered Huo to lead the army to meet him.

古文：去病既渡河，与浑邪众相望。浑邪裨王将见汉军而多欲不降者，颇遁去。
现代文：霍去病的部队渡过黄河，与浑邪王的军队遥遥相望，浑邪王下属的裨王、裨将看到汉军，很多人又不想投降，纷纷逃跑。
English: Huo's ill-equipped troops crossed the Yellow River and came face to face with King Hun's army. The subordinates of King Hun saw the Chinese army, and many people did not want to surrender and ran away.

古文：去病乃驰入，得与浑邪王相见，斩其欲亡者八千人，遂独遗浑邪王乘传先诣行在所，尽将其众渡河，降者数万人，号称十万。
现代文：霍去病立即飞马冲入匈奴军营，与浑邪王相见，杀死要逃的八千人，让浑邪王单独乘驿车先到皇帝巡行的住处，又率浑邪王的部众渡过黄河。投降的匈奴人有数万，号称十万。
English: Huo De immediately rushed into the Hun army camp on a winged horse, met the Hun King, killed eight thousand people who wanted to escape, let the Hun King alone take a carriage to the residence of the emperor's parade, and led the Hun King's subordinates across the Yellow River. There are tens of thousands of Huns who have surrendered, known as one hundred thousand.

古文：既至长安，天子所以赏赐数十巨万。
现代文：他们到了长安，天子用来作为赏赐的钱财货物价值数十万。
English: When they arrived in Chang'an, the son of heaven gave them hundreds of thousands of dollars worth of goods and money as a reward.

古文：封浑邪王万户，为漯阴侯。
现代文：封给浑邪王一万户的食邑，封漯阴侯。
English: Ten thousand households of Hunzao were designated as Hunyin villages.

古文：封其裨王呼毒尼为下摩侯，雁疪为煇渠侯，禽黎为河綦侯，大当户调虽为常乐侯。
现代文：封他的裨王呼毒尼为下摩侯，雁疵为辉渠侯，禽黎为河綦侯，大当户调虽为常乐侯。
English: He was given the titles of Shimo-Makou (下摩侯), Ganki (雁疵) (辉渠侯), Irori (禽黎) (河侯), and Joraku-Makou (常乐侯) (大当户调).

古文：于是上嘉去病之功，曰： 票骑将军去病率师征匈奴，西域王浑邪王及厥众萌咸奔于率，以军粮接食，并将控弦万有余人，诛獟悍，捷者虏八千余级，降异国之王三十二。
现代文：这时武帝表彰霍去病的功劳，说： 骠骑将军霍去病率领部队征伐匈奴，西部地区的浑邪王部及其臣民都来投降，去病用军粮援助他们，并率领射手万余人，诛杀那些骁悍凶恶的敌人，杀敌八千多，降服异国之王三十二人。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu commended Huo Dexia's achievements, saying: "General Huo Dexia led the troops to conquer the Xiongnu, and the Hun kingdoms and their subjects in the western region all surrendered. He went to help them with military food, and led more than 10,000 archers to fight and kill those fierce and vicious enemies, killing more than 8,000 enemies and surrendering 32 kings of foreign countries.

古文：战士不离伤，十万之众毕怀集服。
现代文：我军战士没受损伤，却使十万人诚心归服。
English: Our soldiers were not injured, but they made 100,000 people sincerely submit.

古文：仍兴之劳，爰及河塞，庶几亡患，以千七百户益封票骑将军。
现代文：由于骠骑将军屡次作战的功劳，使得黄河上的边塞地区几乎无忧患。用一千七百户加封骠骑将军。
English: Due to the merits of the general's repeated battles, the border area on the Yellow River is almost trouble-free. With seventeen hundred households, the general was sealed.

古文：减陇西、北地、上郡戍卒之半，以宽天下繇役。 
现代文：裁减陇西、北地、上郡守边士卒的一半，以减轻天下人民的徭役负担。 
English: Reduce the number of border guards in Shaanxi, Hubei and Shangguan by half, so as to reduce the burden of border guards on the people of the world.

古文：乃分处降者干边五郡故塞外，而皆在河南，因其故俗为属国。
现代文：于是把投降的匈奴人分别安置在西北边五郡的关塞以外黄河以南的地方，让他们保持自己的风俗习惯，作为汉朝的属国。
English: As a result, the Huns who had surrendered were resettled separately in places south of the Yellow River outside the five counties of Guan Sai in the northwest, so that they could maintain their own customs and habits as a vassal state of the Han Dynasty.

古文：其明年，匈奴入右北平、定襄、杀略汉千余人。
现代文：明年，匈奴入侵右北平和定襄郡，杀死和掳掠汉朝一千余人。
English: The next year, the Huns invaded Pingping and Dingxiang County in North Hebei Province, killing and kidnapping more than a thousand people from the Han Dynasty.

古文：其明年，上与诸将议曰： 翕侯赵信为单于画计，常以为汉兵不能度幕轻留，今大发卒，其势必得所欲。 
现代文：第二年，武帝和诸将商议说： 翕侯赵信为单于出谋划策，总认为汉朝的士卒不能横穿沙漠轻易停留，现在我们发大军出征，一定会取得胜利。 
English: In the second year, Emperor Wu and the generals discussed and said: Zhaohong Zhaoxin always thought that the Han Dynasty soldiers could not cross the desert and stay there easily. Now that we have sent a large army to fight, we will surely win.

古文：是岁元狩四年也。
现代文：这一年是元狩四年。
English: This year is the fourth year of Genkari.

古文：春，上令大将军青、票骑将军去病各五万骑，步兵转者踵军数十万，而敢力战深入之士皆属去病。
现代文：春天，武帝派大将军卫青、骠骑将军霍去病各率领五万骑兵，另有步兵和运输部队紧随其后有数十万人，那些敢于死战不怕深入敌阵的士卒都属于霍去病。
English: In the spring, Emperor Wu sent the general Wei Qing and the cavalry general Huo Cao to the disease, each leading fifty thousand cavalry, followed by hundreds of thousands of infantry and transport troops. Those soldiers who dared to fight to the death and were not afraid to go deep into the enemy lines all belonged to Huo Cao.

古文：去病始为出定襄，当单于。
现代文：霍去病开始准备从定襄出发，直指单于部。
English: Huo Deguang began to prepare to set off from Dingxiang, pointing directly at Shan Yu.

古文：捕虏，虏言单于东，乃更令去病出代郡，令青出定襄。
现代文：后来捉到俘虏，俘虏说单于在束面，于是皇帝改令霍去病从代郡出发，令卫青从定襄出发。
English: Later, a prisoner was captured. The prisoner said that Shan Yu was in Sokoumen, so the emperor ordered Huo De from Dai County and Wei Qing from Dingxiang.

古文：郎中令李广为前将军，太仆公孙贺为左将军，主爵赵食其为右将军，平阳侯襄为后将军，皆属大将军。
现代文：郎中令李广为前将军，太仆公孙贺为左将军，主爵趟食其为右将军，平阳侯曹襄为后将军，都属大将军卫青指挥。
English: His second-in-command, Li Guang, was the former general, his manservant, Gongsun He, was the left-hand general, his master, Wanzhi, was the right-hand general, and his vassal, Pingyang Hou Cao Xiang, was the rear general. All of them were under the command of Grand General Wei Qing.

古文：赵信为单于谋曰： 汉兵即度幕，人马罢，匈奴可坐收虏耳。 
现代文：赵信为单于出计谋说： 汉朝军队就是度过大漠，兵马也很疲乏了，我们可以坐收俘虏。 
English: Zhao Xin said: "The Han Dynasty army just went through the desert, and the soldiers and horses were very tired. We can take prisoners.

古文：乃悉远北其辎重，皆以精兵待幕北。
现代文：于是单于把辎重都运送到北方很远的地方，衹将精兵布署在沙漠北面等待汉军。
English: As a result, they transported all of their baggage to the far north, and arranged all of their elite soldiers to wait for the Chinese army north of the desert.

古文：而适直青军出塞千余里，见单于兵陈而待，于是青令武刚车自环为营，而纵五千骑往当匈奴，匈奴亦纵万骑。
现代文：这时恰好卫青的部队出塞一千多里，看到单于率军在等待汉军，卫青即命士兵用武刚车环绕布成阵营，派出五千骑兵前去冲击匈奴军，匈奴也派一万余骑兵来攻。
English: At this time, Wei Qing's troops happened to be more than a thousand miles away, and when they saw that the army led by Shan Yu was waiting for the Chinese army, Wei Qing's soldiers immediately surrounded the camp with armed vehicles and sent five thousand cavalrymen to attack the Hun army, and the Hun also sent more than ten thousand cavalrymen to attack.

古文：会日且入，而大风起，沙砾击面，两军不相见，汉益纵左右翼绕单于。
现代文：这时正是日落时分，刮起大风，沙砾扑面，两军互相看不见，汉军派出左右两侧部队包抄单子。
English: At this time, it was sunset, a strong wind was blowing, sand and gravel were falling on the ground, the two armies could not see each other, and the Han army sent troops from both sides to encircle the lanes.

古文：单于视汉兵多，而士马尚强，战而匈奴不利，薄莫，单于遂乘六骡，壮骑可数百，直冒汉围西北驰去。
现代文：单于看见漠兵众多，而且兵强马壮，打下去对匈奴不利，便趁着黄昏乘着六匹骡拉的车，带着几百名精壮骑兵冲破汉军的包围向西北逃去。
English: Just because he saw a large number of desert soldiers, and the soldiers were strong and strong, and it would be unfavorable for the Huns to fight on, he took advantage of the dusk to take a six-horse carriage and take several hundred strong cavalry to break through the encirclement of the Chinese army and flee to the northwest.

古文：昏，汉匈奴相纷挐，杀伤大当。
现代文：这时天已昏黑，汉军和匈奴军相互混战，双方伤亡相当。
English: At this time, it was already dark, the Han army and the Hun army were fighting each other, and the casualties on both sides were comparable.

古文：汉军左校捕虏，言单于未昏而去，汉军因发轻骑夜追之，青因随其后。
现代文：汉军的左校捉到俘虏，供说单于已经在天未黑时逃离。汉军于是派轻骑兵连夜追击，卫青紧随在后面。
English: The left-hand officer of the Chinese army captured the prisoner, and confessed that he had fled before dark. The Chinese army then sent light cavalry to chase him overnight, and Wei Qing followed closely behind.

古文：匈奴兵亦散走。
现代文：匈奴兵四散逃跑。
English: The Hun soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：会明，行二百余里，不得单于，颇捕斩首虏万余级，遂至窴颜山赵信城，得匈奴积粟食军。
现代文：在天亮时，汉军追了二百多里，没有追上单于，捕杀敌人一万多，到达寅颜山赵信城，获得匈奴积蓄的军粮，用来供给部队食用。
English: At dawn, the Chinese army chased the cranes for more than two hundred miles, but did not catch up with Zanyu, killed more than ten thousand enemies, reached the Yinyan Mountain Zhaoxin City, and obtained the military grain accumulated by the Xiongnu to supply the troops with food.

古文：军留一日而还，悉烧其城余粟以归。
现代文：大军在这裹停留了一天才返回，行前将剩余的粮食全部烧毁。
English: The large army stayed here for a day before returning, burning all the remaining grain before leaving.

古文：青之与单于会也，而前将军广、右将军食其军别从东道，或失道。
现代文：在卫青与单于会战的时候，前将军李广、右将军趟食其的部队另外从东面进军，有时走错了道路。
English: At the time of the battle between Wei Qing and Shan Yu, the former general Li Guang and the right general marched their troops separately from the east, sometimes taking the wrong path.

古文：大将军引还，过幕南，乃相逢。
现代文：在大将军卫青率军回来，到大漠以南，才碰到他们。
English: When General Wei Qing returned with his army, he did not encounter them until he was south of the desert.

古文：青欲使使归报，令长史簿责广，广自杀。
现代文：卫青要派人到朝廷报告情况，令长史根据文书所列罪状去责问李广，李广自杀。
English: Wei Qing wanted to send someone to the imperial court to report the situation, and ordered Changshi to interrogate Li Guang according to the charges listed in the document. Li Guang committed suicide.

古文：食其赎为庶人。
现代文：赵食其赎罪为民。
English: Zhao Shikai's atonement for the people.

古文：青军入塞，凡斩首虏万九千级。
现代文：卫青回到边塞以内。卫青共杀敌一万九千多人。
English: Wei Qing returned to the border fortress. Wei Qing killed more than 19,000 enemies.

古文：是时，匈奴众失单于十余日，右谷蠡王自立为单于。
现代文：这时匈奴部众找不到单于已经有十多天了，右谷蠡王就自立为单于。
English: At this time, the Xiongnu group could not find the lone wolf for more than ten days, and Yuya Shao Wang became independent.

古文：单于后得其众，右王乃去单于之号。
现代文：单于后来找到他的部众，右谷蠡王才去掉单于的称号。
English: It was only when he later found his followers that the king of the Right Valley was stripped of his title.

古文：去病骑兵车重与大将军军等，而亡裨将。
现代文：霍去病所率领的骑兵和辎重与大将军卫青的相等，而没有副将。
English: The cavalry led by Huo Qidong and Zou Chong are equal to those of General Wei Qing, but there is no vice-general.

古文：悉以李敢等为大校，当裨将，出代、右北平二千余里，直左方兵，所斩捕功已多于青。
现代文：全都任用李敢等人为大校，当作副将。他从代和右北平郡出击两千余里，直指匈奴左贤王的军队，斩杀和俘虏敌人的功劳超过卫青。
English: All of them appointed Li Gang and others as senior colonels and as vice generals. He attacked more than two thousand miles from Daihe Right Beiping County, straight to the army of the Hun king Zuoxian, and his achievements in killing and capturing the enemy exceeded Wei Qing.

古文：既皆还，上曰： 票骑将军去病率师躬将所获荤允之士，约轻赍，绝大幕，涉获单于章渠，以诛北车耆，转击左大将双，获旗鼓，历度难侯，济弓卢，获屯头王、韩王等三人，将军、相国、当户、都尉八十三人，封狼居胥山，禅于姑衍，登临翰海，执讯获丑七万有四百四十三级，师率减什二，取食于敌，卓行殊远而粮不绝。
现代文：出征回来以后，皇上说： 骠骑将军霍去病率军出征，亲自带领俘获的匈奴兵，少带器物，深入大漠，过河活捉单于大臣章渠，诛杀北车耆王，又转攻左大将双，缴获敌人的军旗战鼓。又越过难侯山，渡过弓卢水，抓获屯头王、韩王等三人，将军、相国、当户、都尉等八十三人。在狼居胥山祭天，在姑衍山祭地。登山眺望翰海。抓获俘虏七万零四百四十三人，自己的士卒大约伤亡十分之二。又向敌人夺取军粮，行军极远而粮草不断。
English: After returning from the expedition, the emperor said: General Huo went to the expedition with the army, personally led the captured Xiongnu soldiers, took few objects, went deep into the desert, crossed the river to catch the single in the ministerial chapter canal, killed the king of the north chariot, and then attacked the double of the left general, captured the enemy's flag and war drum. He also crossed the Nanhou Mountain, crossed the bow Lu water, and captured three people such as the king of Tuntou and the king of Han, and eighty-three people such as the general, the country, the head of the household, and the lieutenant. In the wolf village, the Lushan

古文：以五千八百户益封票骑将军。
现代文：以五千八百户加封骠骑将军。
English: With five thousand eight hundred households and the seal of the general.

古文：右北平太守路博德属票骑将军，会兴城，不失期，从至梼余山，斩首捕虏二千八百级，封博德为邳离侯。
现代文：右北平太守路博德作为骠骑将军的部下，在兴城会师，不误期，跟从骠骑将军打到梼余山，斩敌捕虏二千八百人。封路博德为邳离侯。
English: As a subordinate of the cavalry general, the right north pingtao governor Lu Bode joined the division in Xingcheng, and in no time, he followed the cavalry general to the Shanyu Mountain, killing and capturing 2,800 people.

古文：北地都尉卫山从票骑将军获王，封王为义阳侯。
现代文：北地都尉卫山跟从骠骑将军活捉匈奴王，封卫山为义阳侯。
English: The northern governor, Wei Shan, followed the general on horseback to capture the Xiongnu king alive. Feng Wei Shan was the prince of Yiyang.

古文：故归义侯因淳王复陆友、楼剸王伊即靬皆从票骑将军有功，封复陆支为杜侯，伊即靬为众利侯。
现代文：原来的归义侯因淳王复陆支、楼剥王伊即轩跟从骠骑将军作战有功，封复陆支为杜侯，伊即轩为众利侯。
English: The original attribution of Houin Jun Wang Fu to Lu branch and Lou Pei Wang Yi Jie Xuan to the general of the cavalry was successful in the war, and Fu Jie Lu branch was given the title of Du Hou, and Yi Jie Xuan was given the title of Zhe Li Hou.

古文：从票侯破奴、昌武侯安稽从票骑有功，益封各三百户。
现代文：从票侯赵破奴、昌武侯赵安稽跟从骠骑将军立有战功，各加封三百户。
English: Zhao Banu, Changwu and Zhao Anqi, both of whom had distinguished themselves in battle, were awarded 300 additional households each.

古文：渔阳太守解、校尉敢皆获鼓旗，赐爵关内侯，解食邑三百户，敢二百户。
现代文：渔阳太守解、校尉李敢都缴获敌人旗鼓，赐给爵位关内侯，解的食邑为二百户，李敢的食邑二百户。
English: Yuyang Taisho and Li Gang, both captains of the school, were captured by the enemy and given the title of Guan Nei Hou. There were 200 households in the food village of Yuyang Taisho and 200 households in the food village of Li Gang.

古文：校尉自为爵左庶长。 
现代文：赐校尉徐自为爵左庶长。 
English: Lieutenant Colonel Xu Zi was given the title of "Left Deputy Commander."

古文：军吏卒为官，赏赐甚多。
现代文：霍去病部队的官兵升官和受赏的很多。
English: In addition, there are many officials and awardees of the minor officials under the command of General Huo Jia.

古文：而青不得益封，吏卒无封者。
现代文：而卫青没有得到加封，手下的官兵也没有受封的。
English: However, Wei Qing did not receive the additional seal, and his officers and soldiers did not receive the seal.

古文：唯西河太守常惠、云中太守遂成受赏，遂成秩诸侯相，赐食邑二百户，黄金百斤，惠爵关内侯。
现代文：衹有西河郡太守常惠、云中郡太守遂成受到奖赏。遂成的职位同于诸侯王国的相，赐给食邑二百户，黄金一百斤。赐给常惠爵关内侯。
English: There were rewards for the governor of Saihe County, Chang Hui, and the governor of Yunnan County, Suicheng. The positions achieved were the same as those of the princely kingdoms, and were given to 200 households in food villages and 100 jin of gold. It was given to the governor of Guanai, Chang Hui.

古文：两军之出塞，塞阅官及私马凡十四万匹，而后入塞者不满三万匹。
现代文：卫青、霍去病两支部队出征塞外时，边塞官吏检阅官马和私人的马共有十四万匹，而战后回到塞内的马不足三万匹。
English: When Wei Qing and Huo Gao fell ill and the two armies went to fight outside Tibet, the border officials inspected a total of 140,000 official horses and private horses, but less than 30,000 horses returned to Tibet after the war.

古文：乃置大司马位，大将军、票骑将军皆为大司马。
现代文：朝廷就设置大司马的职位，让卫青和霍去病都为大司马。
English: The imperial court set up the position of grand steward, so that Wei Qing and Huo Qidang were both grand stewards.

古文：定令，令票骑将军秩禄与大将军等。
现代文：制定这个法令，使骠骑将军的秩禄与大将军相等。
English: Enact this decree to make the rank of general equestrian equal to that of grand general.

古文：自是后，青日衰而去病日益贵。
现代文：从此以后，卫青的权势曰益衰落而霍去病则益显贵。
English: Since then, Wei Qing's power has been on the wane, while Huo Jia's has been on the rise.

古文：青故人门下多去，事去病，辄得官爵，唯独任安不肯去。
现代文：卫青的许多旧朋友和门下宾客多数去投靠霍去病，也多能得到官爵，衹有任安不肯离去。
English: Many of Wei Qing's old friends and guests under his tutelage went to rely on Huo to get rid of the disease, and most of them could get a peerage. Only Ren An refused to leave.

古文：去病为人少言不泄，有气敢往。
现代文：霍去病为人沉默寡言，有勇气，敢做敢为。
English: Huo Jia is a taciturn, courageous and daring person.

古文：上尝欲教之吴、孙兵法，对曰： 顾方略何如耳，不至学古兵法。 
现代文：武帝曾经要他学习吴起、孙武的兵法，他回答说： 打仗衹看谋略，不必学习古代的兵法。 
English: Emperor Wu once asked him to learn the military methods of Wu Qiming and Sun Wu. He replied, "In war, you have to look at the strategy, you don't have to learn the ancient military methods.

古文：上为治第，令视之，对曰： 匈奴不灭，无以家为也。 
现代文：武帝替他修建了一座宅第，让他去看看，他回答说： 匈奴不消灭，就无以为家。 
English: Emperor Wu built a mansion for him and asked him to see it. He replied, "If the Xiongnu are not exterminated, there will be no home for us."

古文：由此上益重爱之。
现代文：因此汉武帝更加重视和宠爱他。
English: From then on, Emperor Wu put more emphasis on and loved riding General Huo to go to the hospital.

古文：然少而侍中，贵不省士。
现代文：但是霍去病很小就在皇帝身边任侍中，贵宠惯了，不大关心士兵。
English: However, he became ill at an early age and served as an attendant at the emperor's side. He was used to being pampered and did not care much about the soldiers.

古文：其从军，上为遣太官赍数十乘，既还，重车余弃粱肉，而士有饥者。
现代文：他率领部队出征时，皇帝还要专门派太官为他带数十车生活用品，回来时丢掉剩余的米和肉，而士兵却有挨饿的。
English: When he led the troops to go to war, the emperor also specially sent eunuchs to take dozens of carts of daily necessities for him. When he returned, he threw away the remaining rice and meat, but the soldiers were starving.

古文：其在塞外，卒乏粮，或不能自振，而去病尚穿域躢鞠也。
现代文：在塞外作战时，士兵们缺乏军粮，有的人饿得爬不起来，而霍去病却还要开辟场地，踢球玩乐。
English: When fighting outside of Serbia, the soldiers lacked military food, some were too hungry to get up, and when they were sick, they still had to open up the field and play football.

古文：事多此类。
现代文：此类事情很多。
English: That's pretty much what he does.

古文：青仁，喜士退让，以和柔自媚于上，然于天下未有称也。
现代文：大将军卫青为人仁慈，热爱士兵，谦和礼让，靠和善柔顺来讨好皇上，但天下却没有称赞他的人。
English: General Wei Qing was a benevolent person, loved soldiers, was humble and courteous, and relied on kindness and gentleness to please the emperor, but there was no one in the world who praised him.

古文：去病自四年军后三岁，元狩六年薨。
现代文：霍去病自元狩四年出兵以后的第三年，即元狩六年去世。
English: He fell ill and died in the third year of the fourth year of his military service, that is, the sixth year of his military service.

古文：上悼之，发属国玄甲，军陈自长安至茂陵，为冢象祁连山。
现代文：武帝很悲伤，调发附属国穿黑衣的士兵，从长安列队直到茂陵。在茂陵园为他修筑坟墓，形状像祁连山。
English: Emperor Wu was very sad, and dispatched the black-clad soldiers of the subordinate countries from Chang'an to line up until Muryang. In Muryangyuan, they built a tomb for him, shaped like Mount Qilian.

古文：谥之并武与广地日景桓侯。
现代文：并为他定谧号，合并 武 和 广地 两层意义称为景桓侯。
English: And he was given a posthumous name, combining the two meanings of Wu and Guangdi, known as Jinghuan Hou.

古文：子嬗嗣。嬗字子侯，上爱之，幸其壮而将之。
现代文：他的儿子霍嬗袭爵位，霍嬗字子侯，武帝喜爱他，希望他长大后再做将军。
English: Emperor Wu loved his son, Hou Xuan, who inherited the title of nobility, and hoped that he would become a general when he grew up.

古文：为奉车都尉，从封泰山而薨。
现代文：霍嬗后来任奉车都尉，在随皇上去祭泰山时死去。
English: Later, he was appointed lieutenant of the imperial carriage, and died when he went to Mount Tai with the emperor.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：因为霍嬗没有儿子，封国被废除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：自去病死后，青长子宜春侯伉坐法失侯。
现代文：霍去病死后，卫青长子宜春侯卫伉因犯法免去了侯位。
English: After Huo De's death from illness, Wei Qing's eldest son, Yichun Hou Wei Xuan, was relieved of his position as lord of the manor for breaking the law.

古文：后五岁，伉弟二人，阴安侯不疑、发干侯登，皆坐酎金失侯。
现代文：五年后，卫伉的两个弟弟，阴安侯卫不疑、发干侯卫登二人都因进献祭祀黄金缺少份量而丢了侯位。
English: Five years later, Wei Wei's two younger brothers, Yinan Hou Wei Doubtless and Fangan Hou Wei Deng, both lost their positions due to the lack of weight in the sacrificial gold.

古文：后二岁，冠军侯国绝。
现代文：二年后，冠军侯霍去病的封国断绝了继承人。
English: Two years later, champion Hou Huo fell ill and was forced to abdicate.

古文：后四年，元封五年，青薨，谥曰烈侯。
现代文：四年后，元封五年，卫青去世，谧号烈侯。
English: Four years later, in the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wei Qing died, and his posthumous name was Lü Hou.

古文：子伉嗣，六年坐法免。
现代文：长子卫伉继承侯位，六年后犯法免侯。
English: The eldest son, Wei Xuan, succeeded to the position of marquess, and six years later he was pardoned for breaking the law.

古文：自青围单于后十四岁而卒，竟不复击匈奴者，以汉马少，又方南诛两越，东伐朝鲜，击羌、西南夷，以故久不伐胡。
现代文：自卫青围歼单于后十四年而去世，这期间之所以没有再击匈奴，是由于汉朝军马少，又加上南伐两越，束讨朝鲜，西击羌，征西南夷，因此长期不击匈奴。
English: In self-defence, Qing Wai Jichan died fourteen years later. The reason why he did not attack the Huns again during this period was due to the small number of troops of the Han Dynasty, coupled with the Southern Expedition, the encirclement of Korea, the Western Attack, and the conquest of the Southwestern Yi, so he did not attack the Huns for a long time.

古文：初，青既尊贵，而平阳侯曹寿有恶疾就国，长公主问： 列侯谁贤者？ 
现代文：当初，卫青显贵以后，平阳侯曹寿患恶疾回到封国，长公主问： 列侯当中谁最贤能？ 
English: At the beginning, after Wei Qing Xiangui, Pingyang marquis Cao Shou suffered from a bad disease and returned to the feudal state. The eldest princess asked: Who is the most virtuous among the feudal lords?

古文：左右皆言大将军。
现代文：左右人等都说大将军卫青。
English: People on both sides say that General Wei Qing is the best.

古文：主笑曰： 此出吾家，常骑从我，奈何？ 
现代文：公主笑着说： 他从我家长大，常常骑马跟随我，他又怎么样呢？ 
English: The princess smiled and said, "He grew up in my family and used to follow me on horseback.

古文：左右曰： 于今尊贵无比。 
现代文：左右人说： 现在可尊贵无比了。 
English: The man on the right and the man on the left said, "Nowadays, respectability is incomparable."

古文：于是长公主风白皇后，皇后言之，上乃诏青尚平阳主。与主合葬，起冢象卢山云。
现代文：于是长公主便向皇后讲了自己的意思，皇后又如实转告，皇上便下令让卫青娶了长公主，死后又合葬一处，修起的坟像庐山一样。
English: As a result, the eldest princess told the queen what she wanted, and the queen told the truth, and the emperor ordered Wei Qing to marry the eldest princess, and after her death, they were buried together in one place, and the grave was built like a mountain.

古文：最大将军青凡七出击匈奴，斩捕首虏五万余级。
现代文：大将军卫青总计七次出击匈奴，斩杀、俘获敌五万余人。
English: General Wei Qing made a total of seven sorties against the Xiongnu, killing and capturing more than 50,000 of the enemy.

古文：一与单于战，收河南地，置朔方郡。
现代文：与匈奴一战，便收复河套以南的地区，设置了朔方郡。
English: After the first battle with the Xiongnu, the area south of Hetao was recovered and Shuofang County was established.

古文：再益封，凡万六千三百户；封三子为侯，侯千三百户，并之二万二百户。
现代文：再增加封赏，共计一万六千三百户；封三子为侯，每人一千三百户，共二万零二百户。
English: The number of bounties was further increased to a total of 16,300 households; the three sons of a bounty hunter had 1,300 households each, for a total of 20,200 households.

古文：其裨将及校尉侯者九人，为特将者十五人，李广、张骞、公孙贺、李蔡、曹襄、韩说、苏建皆自有传。
现代文：副将及校尉封侯者九人，特别派遣的将军十五人，李广、张骞、公孙贺、李蔡、曹襄、韩说、苏建都自有传。
English: There were nine vice-commanders and lieutenant-colonels, and 15 specially dispatched generals, including Li Guang, Zhang Ye, Gongsun He, Li Cai, Cao Xiang, Han Xiao, and Su Jiandu.

古文：李息，郁郅人也，事景帝。
现代文：李息，郁郅人，事奉景帝。
English: Li Xi, a person from Ikuhata, served Emperor Jing.

古文：至武帝立八岁，为材官将军，军马邑；后六岁，为将军，出代；后三岁，为将军，从大将军出朔方：皆无功。
现代文：到武帝继位八年，升任材官将军，驻军区旦；六年后，升任将军，率军从卫逊出击包抠；三年后，以将军身份随大将军出击塑立，都没有战功。
English: Eight years after Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the rank of general officer and garrisoned in the district of Dan; six years later, he was promoted to general and led the army to attack Baojun from Wesson; three years later, he was promoted to general and accompanied the great general to attack Puxi.

古文：凡三为将军，其后常为大行。
现代文：共三次担任将军职务，后来常常担任外交官员。
English: He served as a general three times, and later often served as a diplomatic official.

古文：公孙敖，义渠人，以郎事景帝。
现代文：公孙敖，义渠人，以郎官身份事奉景帝。
English: Gongsun Qian, a person from Yichuan, served Emperor Jing as a vassal.

古文：至武帝立十二岁，为骑将军，出代，亡卒七千人，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：到武帝继位十二年时，任骑将军，从代郡出兵，因兵卒战死七千人，应依法斩首，赎罪后当了百姓。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Wu's succession to the throne, he was appointed cavalry general and dispatched troops from Dai County. Seven thousand soldiers died in the battle. He should be beheaded according to law. After atonement, he became a commoner.

古文：后五岁，以校尉从大将军，封合骑侯。
现代文：五年后，又以校尉身份随从大将军，封为合骑侯。
English: Five years later, he followed the general with the rank of captain and was appointed as his equerry.

古文：后一岁，以中将军从大将军再出定襄，无功。
现代文：一年后，以中将军身份随从大将军再次出击定襄，没有战功。
English: A year later, in his capacity as a middle general, he accompanied the great general to attack Dingxiang again, but achieved no military success.

古文：后二岁，以将军出北地，后票骑期，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：二年后，以将军身份出击北地，落在骠骑将军后面，贻误战机，应当处斩，赎罪后为平民。
English: Two years later, he attacked the North as a general, fell behind the general of the cavalry, missed the fighter plane, should be beheaded, and became a civilian after atonement.

古文：后二岁，以校尉从大将军，无功。
现代文：二年后，以校尉身份随从大将军，无功。
English: Two years later, he followed the general as a lieutenant, but to no avail.

古文：后十四岁，以因杅将军筑受降城。
现代文：十四年以后，以因杆将军之职修筑受降城。
English: Fourteen years later, he took up the post of Inchi general to rebuild the defeated city.

古文：七岁，复以因杅将军再出击匈奴，至余吾，亡士多，下吏，当斩，诈死，亡居民间五、六岁。
现代文：七年后，又以因杆将军身份再次出击匈奴，到达余吾，因士卒伤亡过重，交官吏审判，当斩，装死逃跑，躲藏民间达五六年。
English: Seven years later, he made another sortie against the Xiongnu as General Yingjiao and reached Yuwu. Due to the heavy casualties of officers and men, he was brought to trial by officials, he was beheaded, he pretended to be dead and ran away, and he hid from the people for 56 years.

古文：后觉，复系。
现代文：发现后，又被关押。
English: He was detained again after the discovery.

古文：坐妻为巫蛊，族。
现代文：因妻子犯巫蛊罪受牵连，灭族。
English: His entire family was killed because of his wife's involvement in witchcraft.

古文：凡四为将军。
现代文：共四次任将军职务。
English: He held the post of general four times in total.

古文：李沮，云中人，事景帝。
现代文：李沮，云中人，事奉景帝。
English: Li De, a man in the clouds, serves Emperor Jing.

古文：武帝立十七岁，以左内史为强弩将军。
现代文：武帝继位十七年，以左内史官职担任强弩将军。
English: In the seventeenth year of Emperor Wu's succession to the throne, he assumed the post of General Qiang Xuan with the post of Left Inner History Officer.

古文：后一岁，复为强弩将军。
现代文：一年后，又任强弩将军。
English: A year later, he was reappointed as General Qiang Yu.

古文：张次公，河东人，以校尉从大将军，封岸头侯。
现代文：张次公，河东人，以校尉职务随从大将军，封为岸头侯。
English: Zhang Zigong, a native of the eastern part of the river, followed the general as a lieutenant and became the governor of the bank.

古文：其后太后崩，为将军，军北军。
现代文：其后太后去世，任将军，驻军北军。
English: After that, the empress dowager died, and he became a general, garrisoning the Northern army.

古文：后一岁，复从大将军。
现代文：一年后，又随从大将军。
English: A year later, he followed the general.

古文：凡再为将军，后坐法失侯。
现代文：共两次任将军，后犯法失去侯位。
English: He served as a general twice in total, and lost his position after breaking the law.

古文：赵信，以匈奴相国降，为侯，武帝立十八岁，为前将军，与匈奴战，败，降匈奴。
现代文：赵信，以匈奴的相国身份降选，封为侯。亘造继位十八年，任前将军，与包躯交战时，战败，又投降鲤躯。
English: Zhao Xin, with the status of the sister country of the Xiongnu, was relegated to the position of marquis. After eighteen years of succession, when he was a former general, he was defeated in a battle with Bao Tiao and surrendered to Bao Tiao.

古文：赵食其，礻殳祤人。
现代文：赵食其，礻殳祤人。
English: Zhao Shouqi, the star of the film.

古文：武帝立十八年，以主爵都尉从大将军，斩首六百六十级。
现代文：武帝继位十八年，以主爵都尉之职随从大将军，杀敌六百六十人。
English: In the 18th year of Emperor Wu's succession to the throne, he followed the general with the post of lord lieutenant and killed 660 enemies.

古文：元狩三年，赐爵关内侯，黄金百斤。
现代文：元狩三年，赐关内侯爵位，黄金百斤。
English: In the third year of the Genkari, he was given the title of Marquis of Kwanai and 100 kilos of gold.

古文：明年，为右将军，从大将军出定襄，迷失道，当斩，赎为庶人。
现代文：第二年，任右将军，随从大将军出击宣塞，迷失道路，应当处斩，赎罪为平民。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the right general, followed by the general to attack and declare a blockade, lost his way, should be executed, and atoned for the civilians.

古文：郭昌，云中人，以校尉从大将军。
现代文：郭昌，云中人，以校尉随从大将军。
English: Guo Chang, a native of Yunzhong, followed the general as a lieutenant.

古文：元封四年，以太中大夫为拔胡将军，屯朔方。
现代文：元封四年，以太中大夫为拔胡将军，屯驻朔方。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he assumed the identity of the ethereal middle-aged doctor and became General Prabhu, garrisoning the Shuo side.

古文：还击昆明，无功，夺印。
现代文：撤军后又出击垦塱，无功，夺去军权。
English: After the withdrawal of troops, they launched a counterattack, but to no avail, seizing military power.

古文：荀彘，太原广武人，以御见，侍中，用校尉数从大将军。
现代文：荀彘，太原广武人，因善于驾车，任侍中，多次以校尉职务随从大将军。
English: , Taiyuan Guangwu person, because he was good at driving, he served as an attendant, and many times he followed the general as a lieutenant.

古文：元封三年，为左将军击朝鲜，无功，坐捕楼船将军诛。
现代文：五堑三年，升任左将军率军击皇瞪，无功，因扣押楼船将军罪被处死。
English: Fifty-three years later, he was promoted to General Zuo and led the army to defeat the emperor, but to no avail. He was executed for the crime of seizing the general.

古文：最票骑将军去病凡六出击匈奴，其四出以将军，斩首虏十一万余级。
现代文：骠骑将军霍去病总计六次出击匈奴，其中有四次以将军官衔出征，斩杀、俘获敌十一万余人。
English: In total, the cavalry general Huo Deguang made six sorties against the Xiongnu, of which four were dispatched with the rank of general, killing and capturing more than 110,000 enemy soldiers.

古文：浑邪王以众降数万，开河西酒泉之地，西方益少胡寇。
现代文：浑邪王率众数万人降汉，开拓河西酒泉地区，西方匈奴入侵更加减少。
English: King Hunjia led tens of thousands of people to the Han Dynasty and opened up the Jiuquan region of Hexi Province, further reducing the invasion of the Western Huns.

古文：四益封，凡万七千七百户。
现代文：去病四次受到封赏，总计一万七千七百户。
English: A total of 17,700 households were rewarded for going to the doctor four times.

古文：其校尉吏有功侯者六人，为将军者二人。
现代文：部下校尉军官有功封侯的有六人，升为将军的二人。
English: There are six subordinate lieutenant officers with meritorious awards, and two have been promoted to general.

古文：路博德，西河平州人，以右北平太守从票骑将军，封邳离侯。
现代文：路博德，西河平州人，以右北平太守官职随从骠骑将军，封邳离侯。
English: Lubo De, a native of Pingzhou in the West River, followed the general on horseback with the title of right Beiping Taishou official, and left the court.

古文：票骑死后，博德以卫尉为伏波将军，伐破南越，益封。
现代文：骠骑将军死后，博德从卫尉官职升任为伏波将军，击败直垫，增加封赏。
English: After the death of General Zhi Jia, Bode was promoted from the position of lieutenant to General Fubo, defeating Zhiming and increasing the reward.

古文：其后坐法失侯。
现代文：其后犯法失侯位。
English: He was later stripped of his title for breaking the law.

古文：为强弩都尉，屯居延，卒。
现代文：后任强弩都尉，驻屯昼延，死在任所。
English: He later served as a lieutenant of Qiangye, and was stationed in Zhiyan. He died at his post.

古文：赵破奴，太原人。
现代文：趟破奴，太原人。
English: Go to hell, Taiyuan people.

古文：尝亡入匈奴，已而归汉，为票骑将军司马。
现代文：曾逃亡到匈奴，不久又返回汉朝，任骠骑将军司马。
English: He once fled to the Xiongnu, and soon returned to the Han Dynasty, where he served as the cavalry general Sima.

古文：出北地，封从票侯，坐酎金失侯。
现代文：出击北地，封从票侯，因献祭祀用的酎金斤两不足罪失侯位。
English: He set out for the north, was given the title of zheng ke, and was deprived of the title of marquis for the crime of not having enough gold coins to buy two cups of liquor for a sacrificial offering.

古文：后一岁，为匈河将军，攻胡至匈河水，无功。
现代文：一年后，任匈河将军，出击匈奴至匈河水，无功。
English: A year later, the General of the Hun, attacked the Huns to the waters of the Hun, to no avail.

古文：后一岁，击虏楼兰王，后为浞野侯。
现代文：一年后，俘获楼兰王，封为浞野侯。
English: A year later, he captured King Loulan and made him the Marquis of Shenyang.

古文：后六岁，以浚稽将军将二万骑击匈奴左王。
现代文：六年后，以浚稽将军率军二万出击匈奴左王。
English: Six years later, he led an army of twenty thousand to attack the Hun king Zuo Wang.

古文：左王与战，兵八万骑围破奴，破奴为虏所得，遂没其军。
现代文：左王与他交战，以八万骑包围赵破奴，破奴被俘，全军覆没。
English: Zuo Wang fought with him and encircled Zhao Banu with eighty thousand horsemen. Banu was captured and the whole army was wiped out.

古文：居匈奴中十岁，复与其太子安国亡入汉。
现代文：居匈奴十年，又与其太子安国逃回汉朝。
English: He lived in Xiongnu for ten years, and then fled back to the Han Dynasty with his eldest son, Anguo.

古文：后坐巫蛊，族。
现代文：后犯巫蛊罪，减族。
English: After committing the crime of witchcraft and sorcery, the tribe was reduced.

古文：自卫氏兴，大将军青首封，其后支属五人为侯。
现代文：从卫氏兴起，大将军卫青首先受封为侯，后来子孙有五人为侯。
English: From the rise of the Wei clan, the general Wei Qing was the first to be given the title of marquess, and later five of his descendants were marquesses.

古文：凡二十四岁而五侯皆夺国。
现代文：二十四年后五侯都失去封国。
English: Twenty-four years later, all five counties lost their fiefdoms.

古文：征和中，戾太子败，卫氏遂灭。
现代文：延翅年间，卢太王失败，眯遂即灭亡。
English: During Yan Ying's reign, King Lu Tai failed, and was eventually overthrown.

古文：而霍去病弟光贵盛，自有传。
现代文：而霍去病弟昼光显贵，另外有传。
English: However, Ho Go's sick brother, Daylight, was a prominent person, and there is another legend about him.

古文：赞曰：苏建尝说责： 大将军至尊重，而天下之贤士大夫无称焉，愿将军观古名将所招选者，勉之哉！ 
现代文：赞曰：基建曾经责备街贵说： 大将军十分尊贵，而天下贤能的士大夫没有人称赞您，愿将军观察古代名将招选贤士的办法，多加勉励自己！ 
English: Praise: the infrastructure once reproached the street, saying: the great general is very honorable, but no one praises you, the world's most capable magistrate. May the general observe the ancient method of recruiting famous magistrates, and encourage himself more!

古文：青谢曰： 自魏其、武安之厚宾客，天子常切齿。
现代文：卫青答谢说： 白魏其侯窦婴、武安侯田纷招募了众多宾客之后，皇上常常有切齿之恨。
English: Wei Qing said in reply: After recruiting a large number of guests in the Wei and White dynasties, the emperor often had a grudge.

古文：彼亲待士大夫，招贤黜不肖者，人主之柄也。
现代文：这种厚待士大夫、招徕贤者而槟弃不贤之人的做法，是入主的权力。
English: This kind of benevolent treatment of scholars and doctors, the practice of inviting the wise and punishing the unwise, is the power of the Lord.

古文：人臣奉法遵职而已，何与招士！ 
现代文：人臣奉公守法尽职而已，何必去招士！ 
English: The government officials are just doing their duty by obeying the law, so why do they need to recruit new members?

古文：票骑亦方此意，为将如此。
现代文：骠骑将军也仿照此意审慎约束自己，卫、霍两将军的为将之道就是如此。
English: General Zou Jian also carefully restrained himself according to this intention, and this was the way of the two generals Wei and Huo.

