古文：高祖上高祖文皇帝，姓杨氏，讳坚，弘农郡华阴人也。
现代文：高祖文皇帝姓杨名坚，是弘农郡华阴人。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwen, surnamed Yang Mingjian, was from Huayin, Hongnong County.

古文：汉太尉震八代孙铉，仕燕为北平太守。
现代文：高祖的远祖是曾在汉朝做过太尉的杨震，杨震的八代子孙叫杨铉，曾在燕做过北平太守。
English: Gao Zu's distant ancestor was Yang Zhen, who had been a captain in the Han Dynasty. Yang Zhen's eight-generation descendants are called Yang Yu, who had been the governor of Beiping in Yan.

古文：铉生元寿，后魏代为武川镇司马，子孙因家焉。
现代文：杨铉生杨元寿，杨元寿在北魏做武川镇司马，子孙因而就在那里居住。
English: Yang Yu was born Yang Yuan Shou, Yang Yuan Shou was the mayor of Wuchuan Town in the Northern Wei Dynasty, and his children and grandchildren lived there.

古文：元寿生太原太守惠嘏，嘏生平原太守烈，烈生宁远将军祯，祯生忠，忠即皇考也。
现代文：杨元寿生太原太守杨惠嘏，杨惠嘏生平原太守杨烈，杨烈生宁远将军杨祯，杨祯生杨忠，杨忠就是高祖的父亲。
English: Yang Yuan Shou was the son of the Taiyuan governor Yang Huijun, Yang Huijun was the son of the Pingyuan governor Yang Lie, Yang Lie was the son of the Ningyuan general Yang Hui, Yang Hui was the son of Yang Zhong, Yang Zhong was the father of Gao Zu.

古文：皇考从周太祖起义关西，赐姓普六茹氏，位至柱国、大司空、隋国公。
现代文：杨忠跟从周太祖在关西起兵，周太祖赐他姓普六茹，官位升到柱国、大司空、隋国公。
English: Yang Zhong followed Zhou Taizhu in raising an army in Kansai. Zhou Taizhu gave him the surname Proru, and his official rank was promoted to Zhu Guo, Daishi Kuo, and Sui Guogong.

古文：薨，赠太保，谥曰桓。
现代文：杨忠死后追封为太保，谥号 桓 。
English: After Yang Zhong's death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo, and his posthumous name was Kan.

古文：皇妣吕氏，以大统七年六月癸丑夜生高祖于冯翊般若寺，紫气充庭。
现代文：高祖的母亲吕氏，在大统七年六月十三日夜，在冯翊般若寺生下高祖，当时，紫气弥漫厅堂。
English: Gaozu's mother, Lv Shih, gave birth to Gaozu on the evening of June 13th, in the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, at the Fengye Hanya Temple. At that time, the hall was filled with a purple atmosphere.

古文：有尼来自河东，谓皇妣曰： 此兒所从来甚异，不可于俗间处之。 
现代文：有一个从河东来的尼姑对高祖的母亲说： 这个孩子的来历很特别，不可在凡俗中喂养。 
English: A nun from Hedong said to Gaozu's mother: "This child's background is very special, and he should not be fed in the ordinary way.

古文：尼将高祖舍于别馆，躬自抚养。
现代文：尼姑将高祖安置在客馆，亲自抚养。
English: The nun placed Gao Zu in a guesthouse and raised him by herself.

古文：皇妣尝抱高祖，忽见头上角出，遍体鳞起。
现代文：高祖的母亲曾抱着高祖，忽然看见高祖头上长出角来，浑身出现鳞片。
English: Gaozu's mother once held Gaozu in her arms and suddenly saw horns growing out of his head and scales appearing all over his body.

古文：皇妣大骇，坠高祖于地。
现代文：高祖的母亲十分害怕，以致让高祖掉在地上。
English: Gaozu's mother was so scared that she let Gaozu fall to the ground.

古文：尼自外入见曰： 已惊我兒，致令晚得天下。 
现代文：尼姑外出归来见此情景说： 已经惊骇我儿，致使他迟作国君。 
English: When the nun came back from her trip and saw this scene, she said, "I'm shocked that he's late to become the king."

古文：为人龙颔，额上有五柱入顶，目光外射，有文在手曰 王 。
现代文：高祖龙颜堂堂，额上有五根像柱子的印记连着头顶，目光外射，掌上有 王 字的纹理。
English: Gao Zu looks like a dragon. On his forehead, there are five imprints like pillars connected to the top of his head. His eyes look outwards, and his palms have the texture of the Chinese character for king.

古文：长上短下，沈深严重。
现代文：身材上长下短，深沉而威严。
English: Tall and short, deep and majestic.

古文：初入太学，虽至亲昵不敢狎也。
现代文：初入太学，即使是至亲也只能和他亲昵而不敢轻忽他。
English: At the beginning of the school year, even the closest relatives can only be intimate with him and dare not neglect him.

古文：年十四，京兆尹薛善辟为功曹。
现代文：高祖十四岁时，京兆尹薛善征召他为功曹。
English: At the age of fourteen, he was appointed as a gong cao by Emperor Jingzhao.

古文：十五，以太祖勋授散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司，封成纪县公。
现代文：十五岁时，凭父亲的功勋被授散骑常侍、车骑大将军、仪同三司之职，封为成纪县公。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was awarded the posts of cavalry equerry, general of chariot and cavalry, and the three departments of ceremony and etiquette for his father's meritorious service, and was appointed as the public official of Chengji County.

古文：十六，迁骠骑大将军，加开府。
现代文：十六岁时，升骠骑大将军，加授开府。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was promoted to General of the Horse Cavalry, and sent to the capital.

古文：周太祖见而叹曰： 此兒风骨，不似代间人。 
现代文：周太祖看见高祖后赞叹地说： 这个孩子的模样气质，不像是世上的凡人！ 
English: After seeing Gao Zu, Zhou Taizu said with admiration: This child's appearance and temperament are unlike that of an ordinary person in the world!

古文：明帝即位，授右小宫伯，进封大兴郡公。
现代文：周明帝继位，授高祖为右小宫伯，加封大兴郡公。
English: Zhou Mingdi succeeded to the throne, and Gao Zu was awarded the title of U Xiao Gong Bo (右小宮伯) and the title of Daxing County Grand Duke.

古文：帝尝遣善相者赵昭视之，昭诡对曰： 不过作柱国耳。 
现代文：周明帝曾派善于相面的赵昭为高祖看相，赵昭对周明帝假装说： 不过是做柱国的面相罢了。 
English: Zhou Mingdi once appointed Zhao Zhao, who was good at facial expressions, as Gao Zu's facial expression. Zhao Zhao pretended to say to Zhou Mingdi: It's just a facial expression of the pillar country.

古文：既而阴谓高祖曰： 公当为天下君，必大诛杀而后定。
现代文：不久私下对高祖说： 您将要做天下的君主，但一定要大开杀戒之后才能安定天下。
English: Soon after, he privately said to Gaozu, "You are going to be the ruler of the world, but you have to kill a lot of people before the world can be stable."

古文：善记鄙言。 
现代文：请好好地记住我的话。 
English: Please remember my words well.

古文：武帝即位，迁左小宫伯。
现代文：周武帝即位，高祖改任左小宫伯。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu ascended to the throne, and Gao Zu was appointed as Zuo Xiaogong Bo.

古文：出为隋州刺史，进位大将军。
现代文：离京出任隋州刺史，升大将军。
English: He left Beijing to serve as the governor of Suizhou Province and was promoted to general.

古文：后征还，遇皇妣寝疾三年，昼夜不离左右，代称纯孝。
现代文：后来武帝征召他回京城，遇上母亲卧病，三年之中，高祖昼夜服侍，不离左右，世人称他为孝子。
English: Later, Emperor Wu summoned him back to Beijing when his mother fell ill. For three years, Gaozu served her day and night, never leaving her side. The world called him a filial son.

古文：宇文护执政，尤忌高祖，屡将害焉，大将军侯伏、侯寿等匡护得免。
现代文：宇文护执政，特别忌恨高祖，屡次想陷害他，因大将军侯伏、侯寿等救助才免于被害。
English: Uwen Rong, who was in power, was particularly jealous of Gaozu and repeatedly tried to frame him. He was only saved from harm by the help of grand generals Hou Fu and Hou Shou.

古文：其后袭爵隋国公。
现代文：其后高祖承袭隋国公的爵位。
English: After that, Gao Zu inherited the title of Sui Guogong.

古文：武帝聘高祖长女为皇太子妃，益加礼重。
现代文：周武帝聘高祖长女为皇太子妃以后，对高祖更加尊重。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wu appointed Gao Zu's eldest daughter as crown princess, he respected Gao Zu even more.

古文：齐王宪言于帝曰： 普六茹坚相貌非常，臣每见之，不觉自失。
现代文：齐王宇文宪对周武帝说： 普六茹坚相貌不同一般，我每次见他，都觉得不知所措。
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian said to Zhou Wudi: Pu Rujian's appearance is different from the average, every time I see him, I feel overwhelmed.

古文：恐非人下，请早除之。 
现代文：恐怕他不会居于人下，请早除掉他。 
English: I'm afraid not as a minister, please get rid of him as soon as possible.

古文：帝曰： 此止可为将耳。 
现代文：周武帝说： 他只不过可作一个将军罢了。 
English: Zhou Wudi said: He can only be a general.

古文：内史王轨骤言于帝曰： 皇太子非社稷主，普六茹坚貌有反相。 
现代文：内史王轨多次对周武帝说： 皇太子非社稷主，普六茹坚有反叛的相貌。 
English: Inner history Wang Luo repeatedly said to Zhou Wudi: The crown prince is not the leader of the socialists, and Pu Liujujian has the appearance of a rebel.

古文：帝不悦，曰： 必天命有在，将若之何！ 
现代文：周武帝不高兴，说： 如果一定是天命，将怎么办？ 
English: Emperor Wu was very unhappy to hear this, and said, "This is determined by fate, so what should we do?

古文：高祖甚惧，深自晦匿。
现代文：高祖十分害怕，只得深深地隐藏自己的本来面目。
English: Gaozu was so scared that he had to hide his true identity.

古文：建德中，率水军三万，破齐师于河桥。
现代文：周武帝建德年间，高祖率领水军三万，在河桥攻破北齐的军队。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhouwu, Gaozu led a naval force of 30,000 to defeat the Northern Qi army at Heqiao.

古文：明年，从帝平齐，进位柱国。
现代文：第二年，跟周武帝平定北齐，进位柱国。
English: In the second year, he and Emperor Zhou Wu leveled the North and advanced to the pillar country.

古文：与宇文宪破齐任城王高湝于冀州，除定州总管。
现代文：又与宇文宪在冀州攻破北齐任城王高湝，拜授为定州总管。
English: In addition, he and Yu Wenzhen defeated the Northern Qi in Jizhou to become the king of the city, Gao Wei, and was awarded the title of the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：先是，定州城西门久闭不行，齐文宣帝时，或请开之，以便行路。
现代文：在此之前，定州城西门久闭不开。齐文宣帝时，有人请求打开城门，以便于行路。
English: Prior to this, the West Gate of Dingzhou City had been closed for a long time. When Qi Wen was proclaimed emperor, someone asked for the gate to be opened to make the journey easier.

古文：帝不许，曰： 当有圣人来启之。 
现代文：齐文宣帝不答应，说： 将会有圣人来打开它。 
English: Qiwen Xuandi did not agree, saying: There will be a saint to open it.

古文：及高祖至而开焉，莫不惊异。
现代文：等到高祖到城下时，城门便开了，人们无不惊奇。
English: When Gao Zu arrived at the foot of the city, the city gate opened, surprising everyone.

古文：寻转亳州总管。
现代文：不久，高祖调任亳州总管。
English: Soon after, Gao Zu was transferred to the post of general manager of Zhangzhou.

古文：宣帝即位，以后父征拜上柱国、大司马。
现代文：周宣帝即位，高祖凭皇后之父的身份征拜为上柱国、大司马。
English: Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended the throne, and Gao Zu, in his capacity as the father of the empress, was summoned to serve as Shangzhu Guo and Da Sima.

古文：大象初，迁大后丞、右司武，俄转大前疑。
现代文：大象初年，升为大后丞、右司武，不久调任大前疑。
English: In the first year of the elephant, he was promoted to Daigo-jo and Utsubo, and was soon transferred to Daizen-suspicion.

古文：每巡幸，恆委居守。
现代文：皇帝每次巡幸，总是委托高祖留守京师。
English: Every time the emperor went on a tour, he always entrusted Gao Zu to stay in Beijing.

古文：时帝为《刑经圣制》，其法深刻。
现代文：当时周宣帝制定《刑经圣制》，其法律非常苛刻。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhou Xuan established the "Sacred System of the Criminal Law," and its laws were very harsh.

古文：高祖以法令滋章，非兴化之道，切谏，不纳。
现代文：高祖认为法令苛刻更容易滋长犯罪，不利于教化，恳切地劝谏，皇帝不采纳。
English: Gaozu believed that the harshness of the law was more likely to breed crime and was not conducive to enlightenment. He earnestly advised the emperor not to adopt it.

古文：高祖位望益隆，帝颇以为忌。
现代文：高祖的官职和威望越来越高，皇帝很猜忌。
English: Gaozu's official position and prestige are getting higher and higher, and the emperor is very suspicious.

古文：帝有四幸姬，并为皇后，诸家争宠，数相毁谮。
现代文：皇帝有四个宠幸的妃子，都是皇后，四家争宠，多次相互诽谤诬陷。
English: The emperor had four favorite concubines, all of whom were empresses. The four families competed for favors and repeatedly slandered and framed each other.

古文：帝每忿怒，谓后曰： 必族灭尔家！ 因召高祖，命左右曰： 若色动，即杀之。 
现代文：皇帝常怒气冲冲地对高祖的女儿说： 一定要杀尽你们九族！ 于是召见高祖，对左右侍卫说： 假如普六茹坚变了脸色，就杀死他。 
English: The emperor often said angrily to Gaozu's daughter, "You must kill all of your nine tribes!" Then he summoned Gaozu and said to the attendants on his right and left, "If Pluijuan changes his face, kill him."

古文：高祖既至，容色自若，乃止。
现代文：高祖来后，镇定自若，于是作罢。
English: After Gaozu arrived, he was calm and collected, so he stopped.

古文：大象二年五月，以高祖为扬州总管，将发，暴有足疾，不果行。
现代文：大象二年五月，任命高祖为扬州总管。将要去赴任，突然脚病发作，没有成行。
English: In May of the second year of the elephant, Gaozu was appointed Yangzhou chief steward. He was about to take up the post when he suddenly developed a foot ailment and was unable to travel.

古文：乙未，帝崩。
现代文：十一日，周宣帝去世。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Zhou Xuan died.

古文：时静帝幼冲，未能亲理政事。
现代文：周静帝即位时，年龄幼小，不能亲理朝政。
English: When Emperor Zhou Jing ascended the throne, he was too young to take part in imperial politics.

古文：内史上大夫郑译、御正大夫刘昉以高祖皇后之父，众望所归，遂矫诏引高祖入总朝政，都督内外诸军事。
现代文：内史上大夫郑译、御正大夫刘日方以为高祖是皇后之父，是众望所归，于是假造诏书，召高祖入朝总理朝政，统领朝廷内外的军队。
English: Dr. Zheng, a doctor of internal history, and Dr. Liu, a doctor of imperial justice, thought that Gaozu was the father of the empress and was the object of everyone's hopes, so they forged an imperial edict and called Gaozu to join the government as the prime minister of the dynasty and to command the army inside and outside the court.

古文：周氏诸王在籓者，高祖悉恐其生变，称赵王招将嫁女于突厥为词以征之。
现代文：宇文氏在藩国的国王，高祖担心他们谋反，于是以赵王宇文招将把女儿嫁给突厥为借口，征召诸王入京。
English: Gaozu, the king of the Uwen clan in the domain, was worried that they would rebel, so he used the excuse that Zhao Wang Uwenzhu would marry his daughter to a Turk to summon the kings to Beijing.

古文：丁未，发丧。
现代文：二十三日，为周宣帝发丧。
English: On the 23rd, a funeral was held for Zhou Xuandi.

古文：庚戌，周帝拜高祖假黄钺、左大丞相，百官总己而听焉。
现代文：二十六日，周静帝拜高祖为假黄钺、左大丞相，文武百官汇集在高祖门下，听从调遣。
English: On the 26th, Zhou Jingdi made Gao Zu the pseudo Huang Qi and Zuo Daijo minister, and hundreds of civil and military officials gathered at Gao Zu's gate to listen to the dispatch.

古文：以正阳宫为丞相府，以郑译为长史，刘昉为司马，具置僚佐。
现代文：以正阳宫为丞相府，以郑译为长史，刘日方为司马，大小官员一一设置。
English: With Zhengyang Palace as the chancellor's office, Zheng Yue as the long history, Liu Yifang as the secretary, officials of all ranks were set up.

古文：宣帝时，刑政苛酷，群心崩骇，莫有固志。
现代文：在周宣帝时，刑罚残酷，百姓害怕，人民没有为朝廷出力的想法。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhou Xuan, the punishment was cruel, the people were afraid, and the people did not have the idea of making efforts for the imperial court.

古文：至是，高祖大崇惠政，法令清简，躬履节俭，天下悦之。
现代文：到现在，高祖大力推崇仁政，法令清正简明，他自己也很节俭，因而天下老百姓都很高兴。
English: Up to now, Gao Zu has vigorously promoted benevolent politics, the laws are clear and concise, and he is also very frugal, so the people all over the world are very happy.

古文：六月，赵王招、陈王纯、越王盛、代王达、滕王逌并至于长安。
现代文：六月，赵王宇文招、陈王宇文纯、越王宇文盛、代王宇文达、滕王宇文荄都到达京城长安。
English: In June, Zhao Wang Yuwenzhao, Chen Wang Yuwenjun, Yue Wang Yuwensheng, Dai Wang Yuwenda and Teng Wang Yuwenjun all arrived in Beijing Chang'an.

古文：相州总管尉迟迥自以重臣宿将，志不能平，遂举兵东夏。
现代文：相州总管尉迟迥自以为是重臣老将，不服气，于是在东夏起兵谋反。
English: The chief lieutenant of Sengzhou, Leshan, thought that he was a senior veteran, but he was not convinced, so he started a rebellion in the eastern summer.

古文：赵、魏之士，从者若流，旬日之间，众至十余万。
现代文：赵魏之士从者如流，十天之间，就聚集了十多万人。
English: Zhao Wei's followers streamed in, and within ten days, more than a hundred thousand people had gathered.

古文：又宇文胄以荥州，石愻以建州，席毗以沛郡，毗弟叉罗以兗州，皆应于迥。
现代文：而宇文胄在荥州，石荄孙心在建州，席毗在沛郡，席毗弟叉罗在兖州，都纷纷响应尉迟迥。
English: However, Yu Wenzhong in Zhangzhou, Shijiazhuang Sunxin in Jianzhou, Shibui in Pei County and Shibidi in Zhangzhou all responded to the order.

古文：迥遣子质于陈请援。
现代文：尉迟迥将儿子送到陈朝作人质，请求陈朝出兵援助。
English: He sent his son to Chen Dynasty as a hostage and asked Chen Dynasty to send troops to help him.

古文：高祖命上柱国、郧国公韦孝宽讨之。
现代文：高祖命令上柱国、郧国公韦孝宽征讨他们。
English: Gaozhu ordered Wei Xiaokuan, the ruler of Shangzhu and Shandong, to go and fight them.

古文：雍州牧毕王贤及赵、陈等五王，以天下之望归于高祖，因谋作乱。
现代文：雍州牧毕王宇文贤和赵、陈等五王，因民心归向高祖，因而谋划造反作乱。
English: The five kings of Yongzhou, including King Mu Bi, King Yu Wenxian, Zhao and Chen, plotted to rebel and create turmoil because the people's hearts had turned to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖执贤斩之，寝赵王等之罪，因诏五王剑履上殿，入朝不趋，用安其心。
现代文：高祖抓住并杀死了宇文贤，不追究赵王等人的罪过。于是下诏书，让五王佩剑上殿，入朝不小步快走，以安定他们的心。
English: Gaozhu caught and killed Wu Wenxian, and did not investigate the sins of Zhao Wang and others. Therefore, he issued an edict to let the five kings enter the palace with their swords and enter the palace at a fast pace to stabilize their hearts.

古文：七月，陈将陈纪、萧摩诃等寇广陵，吴州总管于顗转击破之。
现代文：七月，陈朝将领陈纪、萧摩诃等侵犯广陵，吴州总管于岂页打败了他们。
English: In July, Chen Dynasty generals Chen Ji, Xiao Maqun and others invaded Guangling, and Wuzhou Governor Yu Qizhe defeated them.

古文：广陵人杜乔生聚众反，刺史元义讨平之。
现代文：广陵人杜乔生聚众谋反，刺史元义平息了他。
English: Guangling man Du Qiao Sheng gathered a crowd to plot a rebellion, and stabbed Shi Yuan Yi to quell him.

古文：韦孝宽破尉迟迥于相州，传首阙下，余党悉平。
现代文：韦孝宽在相州打败尉迟迥，把尉迟迥的首级传到京师，其余党羽全部铲平。
English: Wei Xiaokuan defeated Fei Xizhao in Xiangzhou, brought Fei Xizhao's head to the capital, and wiped out the rest of the party.

古文：初，迥之乱也，郧州总管司马消难据州响应，淮南州县多同之。
现代文：起初，尉迟迥作乱时，郧州总管司马消难据州响应，淮南的州县也大多应和。
English: At first, when there was a disturbance, the chief administrator of Zhangzhou, Sima Qian, responded according to the state, and most of the states and counties in Huainan also responded.

古文：命襄州总管王谊讨之，消难奔陈。
现代文：高祖命令襄州总管王谊征讨他们，司马消难逃到陈朝。
English: Gaozhu ordered the governor of Xiangzhou, Wang Yi, to subjugate them, and Sima was forced to flee to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：荆、郢群蛮乘衅作乱，命亳州总管贺若谊讨平之。
现代文：荆、郢两地的南蛮趁机作乱，高祖命令亳州总管贺若谊平息了他们。
English: Nanban in Jing and Handan took the opportunity to make trouble, and Gaozhu ordered He Ruoyi, the general manager of Handan, to quell them.

古文：先是，上柱国王谦为益州总管，既见幼主在位，政由高祖，遂起巴蜀之众，以匡复为辞。
现代文：在此之前，上柱国王谦为益州总管，见周静帝年幼，由高祖理朝，就纠集巴、蜀之众，以挽救朝廷为借口，声讨高祖。
English: Prior to this, Shangzhu King Qian was the governor-general of Yizhou. Seeing that Emperor Zhou Jing was young and ruled by Emperor Gao, he rallied the people of Ba and Shu to denounce Emperor Gao on the pretext of saving the imperial court.

古文：高祖方以东夏、山南为事，未遑致讨。
现代文：高祖正忙于东夏和山南的战事，没有余暇去征讨他们。
English: Gaozu was busy with the wars in Eastern Xia and Shannan, and had no spare time to fight them.

古文：谦进兵屯剑阁，陷始州。
现代文：王谦进兵驻扎在剑阁，攻破始州。
English: Wang Qian marched into the army stationed in Jiange, and invaded Shizhou.

古文：至是，乃命行军元帅、上柱国梁睿讨平之，传首阙下。
现代文：等到平定尉迟迥后，高祖就命令行军元帅、上柱国梁睿征讨王谦，将王谦首级传到京师。
English: After the death of Lieutenant Ping Ding, Gao Zu ordered the marching marshal, the upper pillar, Guo Liang Rui, to recruit Wang Qian and send Wang Qian's head to the Beijing division.

古文：巴蜀阻险，人好为乱，于是更开平道，毁剑阁之路，立铭垂诫焉。
现代文：巴、蜀地势险要，百姓喜欢作乱，高祖于是另外开辟平坦的大道，毁弃剑阁的道路，并在此立石碑刻文字告诫他们。
English: The Ba and Shu regions were in a precarious situation, and the people liked to make trouble. Gaozu therefore opened up another flat avenue, destroying the road of Jiange, and erected a stone monument with inscribed words to warn them.

古文：五王阴谋滋甚，高祖赍酒肴以造赵王第，欲观所为。
现代文：宇文招等五王暗中谋反更急迫了，高祖准备酒菜送到赵王府，想看看赵王的所作所为。
English: Yu Wenzhao and other Five Kings secretly plotted rebellion more urgently. Gao Zu prepared wine and vegetables and sent them to King Zhao's palace, wanting to see what King Zhao was up to.

古文：赵王伏甲以宴高祖，高祖几危，赖元胄以济，语在胄传。
现代文：赵王宴请高祖，四周埋伏着甲兵，高祖处境很危险，依赖元胄的帮助才脱险，《元胄传》里记载着这件事。
English: Zhao Wang invited Gao Zu to a banquet, and there were armored soldiers lying in ambush around him. Gao Zu was in a very dangerous situation, and he had to rely on the help of the Yuan Dynasty to get out of danger. "The Legend of the Yuan Dynasty" records this event.

古文：于是诛赵王招、越王盛。
现代文：于是高祖杀了赵王宇文招、越王宇文盛。
English: As a result, Gaozu killed Zhao Wang Yuwenzhu and Yue Wang Yuwensheng.

古文：九月，以世子勇为洛州总管、东京小冢宰。
现代文：九月，任命高祖长子杨勇为洛州总管、东京小冢宰。
English: In September, Gao Zu's eldest son, Yang Yong, was appointed as the general manager of Lozhou and the vice-governor of Tokyo.

古文：壬子，周帝诏曰： 假黄钺、使持节、左大丞相、都督内外诸军事、上柱国、大冢宰、隋国公坚，感山河之灵，应星辰之气，道高雅俗，德协幽显。
现代文：三十日，周静帝下诏说： 假黄钺、使持节、左大丞相、都督内外诸军事、上柱国、大冢宰、隋国公杨坚，感山河之灵，应星辰之气，道德高尚而显著。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Zhou Jing issued an edict saying: "False Huang Xuan, Envoy Ji Jie, Left Grand Chancellor, Military Governors at home and abroad, Shangzhuan, Dazhai, Sui, Yang Jian, the spirit of the mountains and rivers, the spirit of the stars, high morals and remarkable.

古文：伊尹辅殷，霍光佐汉，方之蔑如也。
现代文：可授予大丞相之职，免去左、右丞相之官，余官如故。 
English: The post of grand chancellor can be awarded, the posts of left and right chancellors are eliminated, and the remaining posts remain unchanged.

古文：昔营丘、曲阜，地多诸国，重耳、小白，锡用殊礼。萧何优赞拜之仪，番君越公侯之爵。姬、刘以降，代有令谟，宜崇典礼，宪章自昔。
现代文：十月二十日，周静帝下诏追封高祖的曾祖杨烈为柱国、太保、都督徐兖等十州诸军事、徐州刺史、隋国公，谥号康；追封高祖祖父杨祯为柱国、太傅、都督陕蒲等十三州诸军事、同州刺史、隋国公，谥号献；追封高祖父亲杨忠为上柱国、太师、大冢宰、都督冀定等十三州诸军事、雍州牧。诛杀陈王宇文纯。二十一日，上柱国、郧国公韦孝宽去世。
English: On October 20th, Emperor Zhou Jing issued an edict to posthumously appoint Gao Zu's great-grandfather, Yang Li, as Zhiguo, Taibo, and the military governor of ten states, such as the governor of Xuzhou and the governor of Sui Province, with the posthumous name Kang; to posthumously appoint Gao Zu's grandfather, Yang Li, as Zhuguo, Taifu, and the governor of Shaanxi Province, with the military governor of thirteen states, with the military governor of the same state, and the governor of Sui Province, with the posthumous name Xian; to posthumously appoint Gao Zu's

古文：可授相国，总百揆，去都督内外诸军事、大冢宰之号，进公爵为王，以隋州之崇业，郧州之安陆、城阳，温州之宜人，应州之平靖、上明，顺州之淮南，士州之永川，昌州之广昌、安昌，申州之义阳、淮安，息州之新蔡、建安，豫州之汝南、临颍、广宁、初安，蔡州之蔡阳，郢州之汉东二十郡为隋国。剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，备九锡之礼，加玺绂、远游冠、相国印、绿綟绶，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：十一月十三日，诛杀代王宇文达、滕王宇文荄。十二月二十日，周静帝下诏说： 假黄钺、使持节、大丞相、都督内外诸军事、上柱国、大冢宰、隋国公杨坚，可授相国之职，总理朝政，免去其都督内外诸军事、大冢宰之职。爵位由公晋封为王。将隋州的崇业，郧州的安陆、城阳，温州的宜人，应州的平靖、上明，顺州的淮南，士州的永川，昌州的广昌、安昌，申州的义阳、淮安，息州的新蔡、建安，豫州的汝南、临颍、广宁、初安，蔡州的蔡阳，郢州的汉东等二十个郡划为隋国的封地。隋王可佩剑上殿，入朝时不必快步疾走，朝拜时不必通报姓名，备九锡之礼，加授玺绂、远游冠、相国印绶，地位在诸侯王之上。
English: On December 20th, Emperor Zhou Jing issued the following edict: False Huang Di, Envoys, Grand Ministers, Military Governors at home and abroad, Shangzhu States, Grand Emperors, and Yang Jian, the Prince of Sui, may be awarded the title of Consort of the State, Prime Minister of the State, and the Military Governors and Grand Emperors at home and abroad may be removed from their titles. The title of nobility shall be conferred on the King by the Prince of Jin. Sui, Anlu, Chengyang, Wenzhou, Pingjing, Shangming, Shunzhou, Huainan, Shizhou, Yongchuan, Changzhou

古文：隋国置丞相已下，一依旧式。
现代文：隋国可设置丞相以下的各级官职，全部依照旧制。 
English: Sui State may set up official posts at all levels below chancellor, all in accordance with the old system.

古文：高祖再让，不许。
现代文：高祖再三推辞，周静帝都不答应。
English: Gaozu repeatedly declined, but Zhou Jing did not agree.

古文：乃受王爵、十郡而已。
现代文：于是高祖才接受王位和十郡的封地。
English: As a result, Gao Zu accepted the throne and the fief of ten counties.

古文：诏进皇祖、考爵并为王，夫人为王妃。
现代文：周静帝又下诏追封高祖祖父、父亲为王，祖母、母亲为王妃。
English: Emperor Zhou Jing also issued an edict to crown Gao's grandfather and father as king, and his grandmother and mother as empress.

古文：仰祗皇灵，俯顺人愿，今敬以帝位禅于尔躬。
现代文：三十日，司马消难率领陈朝的军队攻打江州，刺史成休宁打退了他。周静帝大定元年二月初二，周静帝令高祖恢复杨姓。
English: On the 30th, Sima Qidong led the army of the Chen Dynasty to attack Jiangzhou, and Shi Chengxuning defeated him. On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 2nd year of the

古文：天祚告穷，天禄永终。
现代文：初三，文武百官到高祖府第敦劝高祖接受皇上的封赐，于是，高祖才接受。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, hundreds of civil and military officials went to Ditun, Gaozu's residence, to persuade Gaozu to accept the emperor's conferment of the title, and only then did Gaozu accept.

古文：於戏！
现代文：初四，高祖建王府、设百官。
English: Alas!

古文：王宜允执厥和，仪刑典训，升圆丘而敬苍昊，御皇极而抚黔黎，副率土之心，恢无疆之祚，可不盛欤！
现代文：初六，周静帝下诏让高祖戴皇冠，建制天子旌旗，出入令人开路清道，乘坐金根车，用六匹马拉车，备五时副车，设置旄头云旗，乐舞用八佾，在宗庙悬挂钟；王妃为王后，长子为太子。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Zhou Jing issued an edict to let Gao Zu wear a crown, set up a heavenly banner, open the way for people to enter and leave, ride a golden chariot, use a six-horse carriage, prepare a five-hour secondary carriage, set up a bald cloud flag, use eight gongs for music and dance, and hang a bell in the ancestral temple; the princess is the queen, and the eldest son is the prince.

古文：遣大宗伯、大将军、金城公赵煚奉皇帝玺绂，百官劝进。
现代文：高祖推让再三才接受。不久，周静帝因民心所向，派遣兼太傅、上柱国、杞国公宇文椿奉册令高祖继皇位。又派遣大宗伯、大将军、金城公赵捧皇帝玉玺，百官劝高祖即位。
English: Gao Zu was repeatedly pushed to accept. Soon, Emperor Zhou Jing, moved by the people's will, sent the concubine and taifu, Shangzhu Guo, and Zangguo Guo, as well as the nobleman Wu Wenzhu, to ask Gao Zu to succeed to the throne. He also sent the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-great-uncle, the great-

古文：高祖乃受焉。
现代文：高祖才受命即位。
English: Gao Zu was only enthroned after receiving the order.

古文：开皇元年二月甲子，上自相府常服入宫，备礼即皇帝位于临光殿。
现代文：高祖开皇元年二月十四日，高祖穿便服从相府入宫，在临光殿行礼之后即皇帝位。
English: On February 14th, the first year of Emperor Gao Zu's reign, Gao Zu entered the imperial palace in a ceremonial robe and bowed before the emperor in the Lin Guang Palace.

古文：设坛于南郊，遣使柴燎告天。
现代文：在南郊设坛，令使臣烧柴祭祀告天。
English: An altar was set up in the southern suburb, and the envoys were ordered to burn wood and offer sacrifices to the heavens.

古文：是日，告庙，大赦，改元。
现代文：这天，禀告祖庙，大赦天下囚犯，改元。
English: On this day, the ancestral temple was announced, prisoners were amnestied, and the era was changed.

古文：京师庆云见。
现代文：京城有祥云出现。
English: In Kyoto, clouds of joy appeared, displaying the atmosphere of auspiciousness.

古文：易周氏官仪，依汉、魏之旧。
现代文：高祖改北周官制、礼仪，依照汉、魏的旧制。
English: Gao Zu changed the Northern Zhou official system and etiquette, in accordance with the old system of Han and Wei.

古文：以柱国、相国司马、渤海郡公高颎为尚书左仆射兼纳言，相国司录、沁源县公虞庆则为内史监兼吏部尚书，相国内郎、咸安县男李德林为内史令，上开府、汉安县公韦世康为礼部尚书，上开府、义宁县公元晖为都官尚书，开府、民部尚书、昌国县公元岩为兵部尚书，上仪同、司宗长孙毗为工部尚书，上仪同、司会杨尚希为度支尚书，上柱国、雍州牧、邗国公杨惠为左卫大将军。
现代文：任命柱国、相国司马、渤海郡公高赹为尚书左仆射兼纳言，相国司录、泌源县公虞庆则为内史监兼吏部尚书，相国内郎、咸安县男李德林为内史令，上开府、汉安县公韦世康为礼部尚书，上开府、义宁县公元晖为都官尚书，开府、民部尚书、昌国县公元岩为兵部尚书，上仪同、司宗长孙毗为工部尚书，上仪同、司会杨尚希为度支尚书，上柱国、雍州牧、邗国公杨惠为左卫大将军。
English: He appointed Zhiguo Guo, Sima Xiangguo and Gong Gaoqi of Bohai County as Shangshu's right-hand man, left-hand man and councilor, Gong Yuqing of Jiuyuan County as the supervisor of internal history and director of internal history, Li Delin of Xiang'an County as the director of internal history, Gong Wei Shikang of Shangkaifu and Han'an County as the secretary of etiquette, Gao of Shangkaifu and Yining County as the secretary of government, Gao of Kaifu and Minfu, and Yan of Changguo County as the secretary of military affairs, Shang Yi Tong and

古文：乙丑，追尊皇考为武元皇帝，庙号太祖，皇妣为元明皇后。
现代文：十六日，追尊高祖父亲为武元皇帝，庙号为太祖，高祖的母亲为元明皇后。
English: On the 16th, the father of Gao Zu was named Emperor Wu Yuan, the temple name was Taizu, and Gao Zu's mother was Empress Yuanming.

古文：遣八使巡省风俗。
现代文：派遣八使考察民风。
English: Eight emissaries were sent to various regions to inspect folk customs.

古文：丙寅，修庙社。
现代文：十七日，修建祖庙。
English: On the 16th, the construction of the Great Temple and the community center began.

古文：立王后独孤氏为皇后，王太子勇为皇太子。
现代文：立王后独孤氏作皇后，王太子杨勇为皇太子。
English: He appointed Queen Doko as empress and Crown Prince Yang Yong as crown prince.

古文：丁卯，以大将军、金城郡公赵煚为尚书右仆射，上开府、济阳侯伊娄彦恭为左武候大将军。
现代文：十八日，任命大将军、金城郡公赵为尚书右仆射，上开府、济阳侯伊娄彦恭为左武候大将军。
English: On the 18th, the great general, Jincheng County Gong Zhao, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Shang Kaifu, Jiyang Hou Yijianqiao was appointed as the left-arm general.

古文：己巳，以周帝为介国公，邑五千户，为隋室宾。
现代文：二十日，封周静帝为介国公，食邑五千户，为隋朝宾客。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Fong Zhoujing was crowned Emperor of China, and 5,000 households in the county were invited as guests of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：旌旗车服礼乐，一如其旧。
现代文：介国公旌旗车马服饰礼乐，一切都像做皇帝时那样。
English: In the imperial pageantry, everything is as it was when he was the emperor.

古文：上书不为表，答表不称诏。
现代文：向高祖上书不叫表，高祖答表不叫诏。
English: A letter to Gao Zu is not called a watch, and Gao Zu's reply is not called an edict.

古文：周氏诸王，尽降为公。
现代文：北周诸王，全部降位为公。
English: All the former kings of the Zhou dynasty were reduced to dukes.

古文：辛未，以皇弟同安郡公爽为雍州牧。
现代文：二十二日，任命高祖之弟同安郡公杨爽为雍州牧。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yang Shuang, the prince of Tong'an County, was appointed as the Yongzhou herdsman.

古文：乙亥，封皇弟邵国公慧为滕王，同安公爽为卫王；皇子雁门公广为晋王，俊为秦王，秀为越王，谅为汉王。
现代文：二十六日，封高祖之弟邵国公杨惠为滕王，同安公杨爽为卫王；皇子雁门公杨广为晋王，杨俊为秦王，杨秀为越王，杨谅为汉王。
English: On the 26th, Yang Hui, the younger brother of Gaozu Shao, was named King of Teng, Yang Shuang, the younger brother of Tongan, was named King of Wei, Yang Guang, the younger brother of Ganmeng, was named King of Jin, Yang Jun was named King of Qin, Yang Xiu was named King of Yue, and Yang Peng was named King of Han.

古文：以上柱国、并州总管、申国公李穆为太师，上柱国、邓国公窦炽为太傅，上柱国、幽州总管、任国公于翼为太尉，观国公田仁恭为太子太师，武德郡公柳敏为太子太保，济南郡公孙恕为太子少傅，开府苏威为太子少保。
现代文：任命上柱国、并州总管、申国公李穆为太师，上柱国、邓国公窦炽为太傅，上柱国、幽州总管、任国公于翼为太尉，观国公田仁恭为太子太师，武德郡公柳敏为太子太保，济南郡公孙恕为太子少傅，开府苏威为太子少保。
English: He appointed Li Mu, the governor of Shangzhu Province, the governor of Xizhou Province, and the prince of Shen Province, as the Grand Master, the governor of Shangzhu Province and the prince of Deng Province, Dou Gao, as the Grand Master, the governor of Shangzhu Province, the governor of Yuzhou Province, and the prince of Ren Province, Yu Ying, as the Grand Officer, the governor of Guan Province, Tian Rinkong, as the Grand Master, the prince of Wude County, Gong Liu Min, as the Grand Master, the prince of Jinan County, Gong Sun Shou, as the Young Master, and the prince of Kaifu, Su Wei

古文：丁丑，以晋王广为并州总管，以陈留郡公杨智积为蔡王，兴城郡公杨静为道王。
现代文：二十八日，任命晋王杨广为并州总管，任命陈留郡公杨智积为蔡王，兴城郡公杨静为道王。
English: On the 28th, Yang Guang, the King of Jin, was appointed as the chief administrator of the merged state, Yang Zhizhe, the King of Chenliu County, was appointed as the King of Cai, and Yang Jing, the King of Xingcheng County, was appointed as the King of Tao.

古文：戊寅，以官牛五千头分赐贫人。
现代文：二十九日，将官府五千头牛分给贫民。
English: On the 29th, the government distributed 5,000 head of cattle to the poor.

古文：三月辛巳，高平获赤雀，太原获苍乌，长安获白雀，各一。宣仁门槐树连理，众枝内附。
现代文：三月初二，在高平、太原、长安分别猎获赤雀、苍鸟和白雀各一只，宣仁门槐树连理，众枝向内伸展。
English: On the second day of March, in Gaoping, Taiyuan, and Chang'an, respectively, hunted and caught a redbird, a starling, and a whitebird, respectively. The elm trees of Xuanrenmen were connected, and the branches stretched inward.

古文：壬午，白狼国献方物。
现代文：初三，白狼国进献土产。
English: On the second day of the school year, White Wolf pays tribute to local specialties.

古文：甲申，太白昼见。
现代文：初五，白天出现太白星，初六，再次出现。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, a very white star appeared during the day, and on the 6th day of the first month, it appeared again.

古文：乙酉，又昼见。以上柱国元景山为安州总管。
现代文：高祖任命上柱国元景山为安州总管。
English: Gaozhu appointed Shangzhu Guo Yuan Jingshan as the general manager of Anzhou.

古文：丁亥，诏犬马器玩口味不得献上。戊子，弛山泽之禁。
现代文：初八，高祖下诏令不许进献犬马器玩鲜味。初九，解除对山泽的禁令。
English: On the eighth day of the first lunar month, Emperor Gaozhu issued an edict forbidding the offering of dogs and horses to the emperor. On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the ban on Yamazawa was lifted.

古文：以上开府、当亭县公贺若弼为楚州总管，和州刺史、新义县公韩擒虎为庐州总管。
现代文：任命上开府、当亭县公贺若弼为楚州总管，和州刺史、新义县公韩擒虎为庐州总管。
English: He appointed Shangkaifu and Dangting County's Gongherajuan as the general manager of Chuzhou, and Hezhou Zhishi and Sinyi County's Gonghan Zhigu as the general manager of Ganzhou.

古文：苟利于时，其致一揆，何谓物我之异，无计今古之殊。
现代文：初十，周至县进献连理树，植在宫庭。十二日，任命上柱国、神武郡公窦毅为定州总管。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Zhou Zhi County presented a lianli tree and planted it in the palace garden. On the 12th day, Gong Dou Yi of Shangzhu Province and Shenwu County was appointed as the general manager of Dingzhou.

古文：其前代品爵，悉可依旧。 
现代文：十九日，任命太子少保苏威兼纳言、吏部尚书，其余官职不变。
English: On the 19th, the crown prince, Shobao Suwei, and Nagon were appointed, as well as the director of the personnel department, Shangshu, and the rest of the posts remained unchanged.

古文：丁未，梁主萧岿使其太宰萧岩、司空刘义来贺。
现代文：二十八日，梁国国君萧岿派遣太宰萧岩、司空刘义来京城朝贺。
English: On the 28th, the Prince of Liang Guo Guo, Xiao Wei, sent Dazai Xiao Yan and Secretary Liu Yi to the capital for morning greetings.

古文：四月辛巳，大赦。
现代文：四月初二，高祖大赦天下囚犯。
English: On the second day of April, Gao Zu pardoned all prisoners.

古文：壬午，太白、岁星昼见。
现代文：初三，白天出现太白星、岁星。
English: On the third day of the new year, a white star and a lucky star appear during the day.

古文：戊戌，太常散乐并放为百姓。禁杂乐百戏。
现代文：十九日，将太常的各种乐工一起放出宫廷重作庶民，禁止上演杂乐百戏。
English: On the 19th, all kinds of musicians of the imperial court were released to the common people, and the performance of miscellaneous music was prohibited.

古文：辛丑，陈散骑常侍韦鼎、兼通直散骑常侍王瑳来聘于周，至而上已受禅，致之介国。
现代文：二十二日，陈朝散骑常侍韦鼎、兼通直散骑常侍王王差来问候北周，使者到了，高祖已经受禅即位，就把使者送到介国。
English: On the 22nd, the Chen Dynasty sent Wei Ding and Wang Wang to greet Northern Zhou. The envoys arrived, and Gaozu, who had already been enthroned by Zen, sent the envoys to the neighboring country.

古文：是月，发稽胡修筑长城，二旬而罢。
现代文：这月，遣派稽胡百姓修筑长城，二十天后停止。
English: In this month, Jihu people were dispatched to build the Great Wall, but stopped twenty days later.

古文：五月戊子，封邗国公杨雄为广平王，永康郡公杨弘为河间王。
现代文：五月十日，封邗国公杨雄为广平王，永康郡公杨弘为河间王。
English: On May 10th, Yang Xiong, the Prince of the State of Fujian, became the King of Guangping, and Yang Hong, the Prince of Yongkang County, became the King of Hebei.

古文：辛未，介国公薨，上举哀于朝堂，以其族人洛嗣焉。
现代文：二十三日，介国公逝世，高祖在朝廷为他吊唁，任命他的同族人宇文洛继承爵位。
English: On the 23rd, Prince Kaikokuko died, and Emperor Gaozu offered his condolences at the Imperial Court and appointed his compatriot, Uvenro, to succeed to the title.

古文：六月癸未，诏以初受天命，赤雀降祥，五德相生，赤为火色，其郊及社庙，依服冕之仪，而朝会之服，旗帜牺牲，尽令尚赤。
现代文：六月二十九日，高祖下诏因即位之初，赤雀从天下降吉祥，五德相生，而赤是火的颜色，于是下诏令除冬至日在南郊祭天以及祭土神之日，仍按常规穿戴的礼仪外，其余的如朝会的穿戴，旗帜和祭祀用的牲口的颜色，一律用红色。
English: On the 29th of June, Emperor Gaozong issued an edict, stating that since the first Emperor Gaozong ascended the throne, it was auspicious for the five virtues to be born together, and red was the color of fire. Therefore, in addition to the winter solstice on the day of the Southern Suburbs Festival of Heaven and the day of the Earth God Festival, the Emperor Gaozong issued an edict to still wear red in accordance with the usual etiquette, and the rest, such as the dress of the Imperial Court, the colors of the flag and the sacrificial animals, should be red.

古文：戎服以黄。
现代文：军服用黄色。
English: The army wears yellow.

古文：秋七月乙卯，上始服黄，百僚毕贺。
现代文：七月初八，高祖开始穿黄色衣服，百官全都祝贺。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, Emperor Wen began to wear a yellow imperial robe, and all the officials performed morning greetings.

古文：庚午，靺鞨酋长贡方物。
现代文：二十三日，酋长进奉土产。
English: On the 23rd, the chieftain went to the local market.

古文：八月壬午，废东京官。
现代文：八月初五，废置东京官员。
English: On August 5th, the post established in Tokyo was abolished.

古文：突厥阿波可汗遣使贡方物。
现代文：突厥阿波可汗派遣使者来朝进奉土产。
English: The Turk Abokhan sent an emissary to the court to offer the local produce.

古文：甲午，遣行军元帅乐安公元谐击吐谷浑于青海，破而降之。
现代文：十七日，高祖派遣行军元帅乐安公元谐，在青海攻打吐谷浑，攻破并降服吐谷浑。
English: On the 17th, Gao Zu dispatched the marching marshal Le An to attack Tuyun in Qinghai, and defeated and surrendered Tuyun.

古文：九月戊申，战亡之家，遣使赈给。
现代文：九月初二，高祖派遣使臣赈济阵亡将士的家属。
English: On the second day of September, Gaozu dispatched envoys to help the families of the fallen soldiers.

古文：庚午，陈将周罗攻陷胡墅，萧摩诃寇江北。
现代文：二十四日，陈朝将领周罗目侯攻破胡墅，萧摩诃侵犯长江之北。
English: On the 24th, Chen Zhou captured Hu's villa, and Xiao Miao invaded the north of the river.

古文：辛未，以越王秀为益州总管，改封为蜀王。
现代文：二十五日，高祖任命越王杨秀为益州总管，改封为蜀王。
English: On the 25th, Emperor Gaozhu appointed Yang Xiu, King of Yue, as the general manager of Yizhou and changed his title to King of Shu.

古文：壬申，以上柱国、薛国公长孙览，上柱国、宋安公元景山并为行军元帅以伐陈，仍命尚书左仆射高颎节度诸军。
现代文：二十六日，任命上柱国、薛国公长孙览，上柱国、宋安公元景山，一起为行军元帅，以进攻陈朝，仍任命尚书左仆射高赹指挥众军。
English: On the 26th, Sun Qian, the prince of Shangzhu, Xue Guo, Shangzhu Guo, and Song An, the general of Jingshan, were appointed as marching marshals to attack the Chen Dynasty. Shangshu's left-hand man, Gao Jian, was still appointed to command the troops.

古文：突厥沙钵略可汗遣使贡方物。
现代文：突厥沙钵略可汗派遣使者上贡土产。
English: The Turkic Shah Salih Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local produce.

古文：是月，行五铢钱。
现代文：在这个月，开始用五铢钱。
English: In the same month, 50 baht coins were issued.

古文：冬十月乙酉，百济王扶余昌遣使来贺，授昌上开府、仪同三司、带方郡公。
现代文：十月初九，百济王扶余昌派遣使者来京城朝贺，高祖授扶余昌上开府、仪同三司、带方郡公。
English: At the beginning of October 9th, the King of Baekje, Fuyuchang, sent an envoy to the capital for morning greetings. Gao Zu conferred Fuyuchang the title of Shang Kaifu, the title of Ji Tong San Shi, and the title of Fang Guo Gong.

古文：戊子，行新律。
现代文：十二日，实行新的法律。
English: On the 12th, the new law came into effect.

古文：壬辰，行幸岐州。
现代文：十六日，高祖巡幸岐州。
English: On the 16th, he went on a tour to Qizhou.

古文：十一月乙卯，以永昌郡公窦荣定为右武候大将军。
现代文：十一月初十，高祖任命永昌郡公窦荣定为右武侯大将军。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, Gaozu appointed Gong Dou Rong of Yongchang County as the grand marshal of Wuhou.

古文：丁卯，遣兼散骑侍郎郑捴使于陈。
现代文：二十二日，派遣兼散骑侍郎郑扌为出使陈朝。
English: On the 22nd, Zheng Qi, also a horseback rider, was sent as an envoy to the Chen dynasty.

古文：己巳，有流星，声如隤墙，光烛于地。
现代文：二十四日夜，流星从天下划过，声音像倒塌城墙一样，星光照耀在大地上。
English: On the twenty-fourth day and night, a meteor streaked across the sky, the sound was like a city wall collapsing, and starlight shone on the earth.

古文：十二月戊寅，以申州刺史尔硃敞为金州总管。
现代文：十二月初三，高祖任命申州刺史氽朱敞为金州总管。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, Gaozu appointed Shenzhou Zhi Shi Jun Zhu Chang as the general manager of Jinzhou.

古文：甲申，以礼部尚书韦世康为吏部尚书。
现代文：初九，任命礼部尚书韦世康为吏部尚书。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Wei Shikang was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Rites.

古文：己丑，以柱国元衮为廓州总管，兴势郡公卫玄为淮州总管。
现代文：十四日，任命柱国元兖为廓州总管，兴势郡公卫玄为淮州总管。
English: On the 14th, Zhu Guo Yuanjun was appointed as the general manager of Guozhou, and Xingze County's Gongwei Xuan was appointed as the general manager of Huai Zhou.

古文：庚子，至自岐州。
现代文：二十五日，高祖从岐州还京。
English: On the 25th, he returned from Qizhou.

古文：壬寅，高丽王高阳遣使朝贡，授阳大将军、辽东郡公。
现代文：二十七日，高丽王高阳派遣使者上朝进贡，高祖授高阳为大将军、辽东郡公。
English: On the 27th, Goryeo King Goyang sent an envoy to pay tribute, and Goyang was made a general and the governor of Liaodong County.

古文：太子太保柳敏卒。
现代文：这天，太子太保柳敏去世。
English: Prince Taibo Liumin passed away.

古文：二年春正月癸丑，幸上柱国王谊第。
现代文：开皇二年正月初九，高祖巡幸上柱国王谊府第。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the second year of the Emperor's reign, Gaozhu went on a pilgrimage to Shangzhu King's Friendship Palace.

古文：庚申，幸安成长公主第。
现代文：十六日，巡幸安成长公主府第。
English: On the 16th, the parade passed through the Princess's residence.

古文：陈宣帝殂，子叔宝立。
现代文：这天，陈朝宣帝逝世，其子陈叔宝即位。
English: On this day, Emperor Xuan of the Chen Dynasty died, and his son Chen Shubao ascended to the throne.

古文：辛酉，置河北道行台尚书省于并州，以晋王广为尚书令。
现代文：同日，在并州设置河北道行台尚书省，任命晋王杨广为尚书令。
English: On the same day, the province of Shangshu of Xingtai, Hebei Province, was set up in the annexed prefecture, and the king of Jin, Yang Guang, was appointed as Shangshu.

古文：置河南道行台尚书省于洛州，以秦王俊为尚书令。
现代文：在洛州设置河南道行台尚书省，任命秦王杨俊为尚书令。
English: Henan Province and Xingtai Province were set up in Luozhou, and Qin Wang Yangjun was appointed as the Minister of Education.

古文：置西南道行台尚书省于益州，以蜀王秀为尚书令。
现代文：在益州设置西南道行台尚书省，任命蜀王杨秀为尚书令。
English: In Yizhou, he set up the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy of Xuanxi Dao, and appointed Shu Wang Yangxiu as the Minister of Literature and Calligraphy.

古文：戊辰，陈遣使请和，归我胡墅。
现代文：十七日，陈朝派遣使者来京城请求讲和，归还胡墅。
English: On the 17th, the Chen Dynasty sent an envoy to Beijing to ask for peace and the return of Hu's villa.

古文：辛未，高丽、百济并遣使贡方物。
现代文：二十四日，高丽、百济都派遣使者上贡土产。
English: On the 24th, Goryeo and Baekje both sent emissaries to pay tribute to the local products.

古文：甲戌，诏举贤良。
现代文：二十六日，高祖下诏令天下推荐贤良之士。
English: On the thirtieth day, the following edict was issued to recommend virtuous people.

古文：二月己丑，诏高颎等班师。
现代文：二月十五日，高祖下诏令高赹等班师回朝。
English: On February 15th, Gao Zu issued an edict ordering Gao Yao and the rest of the team to return to China.

古文：庚寅，以晋王广为左武卫大将军，秦王俊为右武卫大将军，馀官并如故。
现代文：十六日，任命晋王杨广为左武卫大将军，秦王杨俊为右武卫大将军，其余官职不变。
English: On the 16th, Yang Guang, King of Jin, was appointed General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, Yang Jun, King of Qin, was appointed General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, and the remaining positions remained unchanged.

古文：辛卯，幸赵国公独孤陀第。
现代文：十七日，高祖巡幸赵国公独孤陀府第。
English: On the 17th, Gao Zu went on a pilgrimage to Zhao Guogong's palace.

古文：庚子，京师雨土。
现代文：二十六日，京城降灰土。
English: On the 26th, a large amount of earth fell in Kyoto.

古文：三月戊申，开渠，引杜阳水于三畴原。
现代文：三月初四，开渠，引杜阳水到三原。
English: On March 4th, the canal was opened, bringing Duyang water to Mihara.

古文：四月丁丑，以宁州刺史窦荣定为左武候大将军。
现代文：四月初四，高祖任命宁州刺史窦荣定为左武侯大将军。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 9th month of the 10th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12

古文：庚寅，大将军韩僧寿破突厥于鸡头山；上柱国李充破突厥于河北山。
现代文：十七日，大将军韩僧寿在鸡头山打破突厥，上柱国李充在河北山打败突厥军队。
English: On the 17th, the great general Han Sang-soo defeated the Turks in Jitou Mountain, and the pillar country Li Cong defeated the Turkish army in Hebei Mountain.

古文：五月戊申，以上柱国、开府长孙平为度支尚书。
现代文：五月初五，高祖任命上柱国、开府长孙平为度支尚书。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of the fifth month, Gaozu appointed Sun Ping, the chief of Shangzhu and the head of the capital, as the governor.

古文：己酉，旱，上亲省囚徒。
现代文：初六，因为天旱，高祖亲自探望囚徒。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, because of the drought, Gaozu personally visited the prisoners.

古文：其日大雨。
现代文：这天下了大雨。
English: It rained heavily that day.

古文：己未，高宝宁寇平州，突厥入长城。
现代文：十五日，高宝宁侵犯平州，突厥人侵入长城。
English: On the 16th, Gao Baoning invaded Pingzhou, and the Turks attacked the Great Wall.

古文：庚申，以豫州刺史皇甫绩为都官尚书。
现代文：十七日，任命豫州刺史皇甫绩为都官尚书。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Emperor Fuxi of the State of Yuzhou was appointed as the official of the capital.

古文：壬戌，太尉、任国公于翼薨。
现代文：十九日，太尉、任国公于翼去世。
English: On the 19th, Tai Lai and Ren Guo Gong died in the wings.

古文：甲子，改传国玺曰受命玺。
现代文：二十一日，高祖把传国玺更名为受命玺。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Jade Scepter will be called the Ordered Scepter.

古文：龙首山川原秀丽，卉物滋阜，卜食相土，宜建都邑，定鼎之基永固，无穷之业在斯。
现代文：六月初十，高祖任命太府卿苏孝慈为兵部尚书，雍州牧、卫王杨爽为原州总管。十二日，派遣使者到陈国吊丧。十三日，上柱国李充在马邑打败突厥军队。二十六日，高祖任命上柱国叱李长叉为兰州总管。
English: At the beginning of June, the 10th, Gaozu appointed the Grand Mufu Su Xiao Ci as the General Secretary of the Military Department, and the Yongzhou Patriarch and the King of Wei Yang Shuang as the General Manager of Yuanzhou. On the 12th, he sent an envoy to Chen Province to pay his respects. On the 13th, Li Chong of Shangzhu Province defeated the Turkish army in Mayu. On the 26th, Gaozu appointed the General Manager of Shangzhu Province Li Changzhao as the General Manager of Lanzhou.

古文：公私府宅，规模远近，营构资费，随事条奏。 仍诏左仆射高颎、将作大匠刘龙、巨鹿郡公贺娄子干、太府少卿高龙叉等创造新都。
现代文：二十九日，任命上开府尔朱敞为徐州总管。七月二十四日，高祖诏左仆射高赹、将作大匠刘龙、钜鹿郡公贺娄子干、太府少卿高龙叉等营造新都。
English: On the 29th, Zhu Chang of Shangkaifu was appointed as the general manager of Xuzhou. On the 24th of July, Gao Zu Zhao's left-hand man, Gao Zhao, will build a new capital with Liu Long, a great craftsman, Gonghe Shanzigang of Elk County, and Gao Longfor, a minor lord of Taifu.

古文：秋八月癸巳，以左武候大将军窦荣定为秦州总管。
现代文：八月二十二日，高祖任命左武侯大将军窦荣定为秦州总管。
English: On August 22nd, Gaozu appointed General Dou Rong as the Governor of Qin State.

古文：十月癸酉，皇太子勇屯兵咸阳以备胡。
现代文：十月初三，皇太子杨勇屯兵咸阳，以防备胡人的侵犯。
English: At the beginning of October 3, Crown Prince Yang Yong sent troops to Xianyang to guard against Hu's encroachment.

古文：庚寅，上疾愈，享百僚于观德殿。赐钱帛，皆任其自取，尽力而出。
现代文：二十日，高祖疾病痊愈，在观德殿大宴百官，并赐给百官布帛钱币，由百官自己尽力去拿。
English: On the 20th day, Gao Zu recovered from his illness, and gave a grand banquet to 100 officials at the Kuangde Hall. He also gave 100 officials cloth and coins, and the officials tried their best to get them.

古文：辛卯，以营新都副监贺娄子干为工部尚书。
现代文：二十一日，任命营建新都的副监贺娄子干为工部尚书。
English: On the 21st, the deputy supervisor of the construction of the new capital, He Shanzigen, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：十一月丙午，高丽遣使献方物。
现代文：十一月初六，高丽派遣使者上贡土产。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of November, Korea sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local products.

古文：十二月辛未，上讲武于后园。
现代文：十二月初二，高祖在后园讲习武事。
English: On the second day of the second month of December, the emperor began to study martial arts in the back garden.

古文：甲戌，上柱国窦毅卒。
现代文：初五，上柱国窦毅去世。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the new year, the head priest, Guo Dou Yi, died.

古文：丙子，名新都曰大兴城。
现代文：初七，新都命名为大兴城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the newly built capital city was named Daxing City.

古文：乙酉，遣沁源公虞庆则屯弘化备胡。
现代文：十五日，派遣沁源公虞庆则带兵驻扎在弘化，防备胡人入侵。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Gongyu Qing Zeng sent soldiers to be stationed in Honghua to guard against the Hu invasion.

古文：突厥寇周槃，行军总管达奚长儒击之，为虏所败。
现代文：突厥侵犯周，行军总管达奚长儒阻击突厥军队，被敌军打败。
English: When the Turks invaded Zhou, the commander-in-chief of the march, Daguang Changru, blocked the Turkish army and was defeated by the enemy.

古文：丙戌，赐国子生经明者束帛。
现代文：十七日，赏赐国子寺中的优秀者束帛。
English: On the 17th, a bunch of bamboo shoots were given to each of the middle school students.

古文：丁亥，亲录囚徒。
现代文：十八日，高祖亲自讯视囚徒罪状记录。
English: On the 18th, the emperor personally inspected the prisoners.

古文：三年春正月庚子，将入新都，大赦天下。
现代文：开皇三年，正月初一，高祖将迁入新都大兴城，大赦天下囚犯。
English: In the third year of the emperor's reign, on the first day of the first month, Gaozu will move into the new capital, Daxing City, and grant amnesty to all prisoners.

古文：禁大刀长槊。
现代文：严禁使用大刀长矛。
English: The use of large swords and spears is strictly prohibited.

古文：癸亥，高丽遣使来朝。
现代文：二十四日，高丽国派遣使者来朝。
English: On the 24th, Korea sent an envoy to the DPRK.

古文：二月己巳朔，日有蚀之。壬申，宴北道勋人。
现代文：二月初一，出现日蚀。初四，设宴款待北道勋人。
English: On the first day of February, there is a solar eclipse. On the fourth day of the first month, a banquet is held to entertain the honourable people of the North.

古文：癸酉，陈遣兼散骑常侍贺彻、兼通直散骑常侍萧褒来聘。
现代文：初五，陈朝派遣兼散骑常侍贺彻、兼通直散骑常侍萧褒来朝问候。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Chen dynasty dispatched He Che, a samurai who also rode horseback, and Xiao Bao, a samurai who also rode horseback, to come and offer greetings.

古文：突厥寇边。
现代文：突厥侵犯边境。
English: The Turks have violated the border.

古文：甲戌，泾阳获毛龟。
现代文：初六，在泾阳捉到毛龟。
English: On his sixth day of junior high school, he caught a turtle in Fenyang.

古文：癸未，以左卫大将军李礼成为右武卫大将军。
现代文：十五日，高祖任命左卫大将军李礼成为右武卫大将军。
English: On the 15th, Gaozu appointed General Li Li of the Left Division to be the General of the Right Division.

古文：三月丁未，上柱国、鲜虞县公谢庆恩卒。
现代文：三月初九，上柱国、鲜虞县公谢庆恩去世。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, Gong Xie Qing'en of Shangzhu Country and Xiangyu County died.

古文：己酉，以上柱国达奚长儒为兰州总管。
现代文：十一日，高祖任命上柱国达奚长儒为兰州总管。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Gaozu appointed Shangzhu Guo Dajian Changru as the head of Lanzhou.

古文：丙辰，雨，常服入新都。
现代文：十八日，下雨，高祖着便服进入新都大兴城。
English: On the 18th, it rained, and Gao Zu entered the new capital Daxing City in civilian clothes.

古文：京师醴泉出。
现代文：京城从地下涌出甘美的泉水。
English: A luscious spring water gushes out of the ground in Kyoto.

古文：丁巳，诏购求遗书于天下。
现代文：十九日，高祖下诏重金收购天下遗书。
English: On the 19th, Gao Zu issued an edict to acquire the world's will.

古文：庚申，宴百僚，班赐各有差。
现代文：二十二日，高祖宴请百官，按等级赏赐。
English: On the 22nd, Gao Zu invited hundreds of officials to a banquet and rewarded them according to their ranks.

古文：癸亥，城榆关。
现代文：二十五日，修筑榆关城墙。
English: On the 25th, the city wall of Shaoguan was rebuilt.

古文：夏四月己巳，上柱国、建平郡公于义卒。
现代文：四月初二，上柱国、建平郡公于义去世。
English: On the second day of April, Shangzhu Province and Jianping County passed away.

古文：庚午，吐谷浑寇临洮，洮州刺史皮子信死之。
现代文：初三，吐谷浑侵犯临洮，洮州刺史皮子信战死。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Tu Gu Hun invaded Linyi, resulting in the death of Zhang Zhou Jishi Zixin.

古文：辛未，高丽遣使来朝。
现代文：初四，高丽国派遣使者来朝。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Korea sent an envoy to Korea.

古文：壬申，以尚书右仆射赵煚兼内史令。
现代文：初五，高祖任命尚书右仆射赵兼内史令。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Sho Sho's right-hand man Sho Zhao was appointed Minister of the Interior.

古文：丁丑，以滕王瓚为雍州牧。
现代文：初十任命滕王杨王赞为雍州牧。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he appointed Teng Wangtao as the Yongzhou Patriarch.

古文：己卯，卫王爽破突厥于白道。
现代文：十二日，卫王杨爽在白道打败突厥军队。
English: On the 12th, Yang Shuang, the King of Wei, defeated the Turkish army in Baidoa.

古文：庚辰，行军总管阴寿破高宝宁于黄龙。
现代文：十三日，行军总管阴寿在黄龙打败高宝宁。
English: On the 13th, Yin Shou, the commander-in-chief of the march, defeated Gao Baoning in Huanglong.

古文：甲申，旱，上亲祈雨于国城之西南。
现代文：十七日，因为干旱，高祖亲自在京城西南祭雨神求雨。
English: On the 17th, because of the drought, Gaozu himself went to southwest Beijing to pray to the rain god for rain.

古文：丙戌，诏天下劝学行礼。
现代文：十九日，高祖下诏鼓励读书知礼。
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an edict to encourage people to read and do the salute.

古文：以济北郡公梁远为汶州总管。
现代文：任命济北郡公梁远为汶州总管。
English: He appointed Gong Liangyuan of Jibei County as the governor of Wenzhou.

古文：己丑，陈郢州城主张子讥遣使请降，上以和好，不纳。
现代文：二十二日，陈朝郢州城长官张子讥派遣使者来朝请求投降，高祖认为已和陈朝和好，不接受。
English: On the 22nd, the Chen dynasty and Zhang Ziqin, the governor of Zhangzhou, sent an envoy to the North to request surrender. Gaozu believed that he had made peace with the Chen dynasty and did not accept.

古文：辛卯，遣兼散骑常侍薛舒、兼通直散骑常侍王劭使于陈。
现代文：二十四日，高祖派遣兼散骑常侍薛舒、兼通直散骑常侍王劭出使陈朝。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Gaozu dispatched Xue Shu, who was also a knight errant, and Wang Xun, who was also a knight errant, to Chen Dynasty.

古文：癸巳，上亲雩。
现代文：二十六日，高祖亲自祭雨。
English: On the 26th, the emperor himself made a burnt offering for rain.

古文：甲午，突厥遣使来朝。
现代文：二十七日，突厥派遣使者来朝。
English: On the 27th, the Turks sent an envoy to Korea.

古文：五月癸卯，行军总管李晃破突厥于摩那渡口。
现代文：五月初六，行军总管李晃在摩那渡口打败突厥军队。
English: On the 6th day of the 5th month of the year, the general manager of the march, Li Kuan, defeated the Turkish army at the Mana ferry port.

古文：甲辰，高丽遣使来朝。
现代文：初七，高丽国派遣使者来朝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Goryeo dispatched an envoy to Korea.

古文：乙巳，梁太子萧琮来贺迁都。
现代文：初八，梁国太子萧琮来京城朝贺迁居新都。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Prince Xiao Jie of Liang Province came to congratulate the relocation of the capital.

古文：丁未，靺鞨贡方物。戊申，幽州总管阴寿卒。
现代文：初十，上贡土产。十三日，幽州总管阴寿去世。
English: On the thirteenth day of the tenth month, the tribute of local products was raised. On the thirteenth day, Yuzhou general manager Yang Shou passed away.

古文：辛酉，有事于方泽。
现代文：二十四日，在方泽祭祀。
English: On the 24th, a religious service was held in Fonze.

古文：壬戌，行军元帅窦荣定破突厥及吐谷浑于凉州。
现代文：二十五日，行军元帅窦荣定在凉州打败突厥和吐谷浑的军队。
English: On the 25th, the marching marshal Dou Rongding defeated the Turkic and Tugu Hun armies in Liangzhou.

古文：丙寅，赦黄龙死罪已下。
现代文：二十九日，赦免黄龙及犯死罪以外的官员。
English: On the 29th, he pardoned Huang Long and other officials who had not committed capital crimes.

古文：六月庚午，以卫王爽子集为遂安郡王。
现代文：六月初四，高祖任命卫王杨爽的儿子杨集为遂安郡王。
English: On the fourth day of the sixth month, Gaozu appointed Yang Jiu, the son of Yang Shuang, the king of Wei, as the king of Su'an County.

古文：戊寅，突厥遣使请和。
现代文：十二日，突厥派遣使者求和。
English: On the 12th, the Turks sent an envoy to Russia to sue for peace.

古文：庚辰，行军总管梁远破吐谷浑于尔汗山，斩其名王。
现代文：十四日，行军总管梁远在尔汗山打败吐谷浑军队，杀死了他们著名的王公。
English: On the 14th, the head of the march, Liang Yuan, defeated Tu Guhun on Erhan Mountain and beheaded him.

古文：壬申，以晋州刺史燕荣为青州总管。
现代文：二十六日，高祖任命晋州刺史燕荣为青州总管。
English: On the 26th, Gao Zu appointed Jinzhou official Shi Yan Rong as the general manager of Qingzhou.

古文：眷言诚节，实有可嘉，宜超恆赏，用明沮劝。
现代文：二十三日，任命河间王杨弘为宁州总管。二十九日，高祖巡幸安成长公主府第。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Yanghong of Kawama was appointed as the chief administrator of Ningzhou. On the 29th, Gao Zu Junxuan grew up in the princess's palace.

古文：台玫可大都督、假湘州刺史。 丁卯，日有蚀之。
现代文：七月初五，高祖任命豫州刺史周摇为幽州总管。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, Gaozu appointed Zhou Yang, the governor of Yuzhou, as the general manager of Yuzhou.

古文：八月丁丑，靺鞨贡方物。
现代文：三十一日，日蚀。八月十日，上贡土产。
English: On the 31st, there is a solar eclipse. On the 10th of August, tributes are paid to local products.

古文：己卯，以右武卫大将军李礼成为襄州总管。
现代文：十二日，高祖任命右武卫大将军李礼成为襄州总管。
English: On the 12th, Gaozu appointed Li Li, the General of the Right Division of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, as the Governor of Xiangzhou.

古文：壬午，遣尚书左仆射高颎出宁州道，内史监虞庆则出原州道，并为行军元帅以击胡。
现代文：十五日，派遣尚书右仆射高赹出宁州道，内史监虞庆则出原州道，都为行军元帅，以攻打胡人。
English: On the 15th, he dispatched Shangshu's right-hand man, Gao Yao, out of Ningzhou Road, and Inner History Supervisor, Yu Qing, out of Yuanzhou Road, both as marching marshals, to attack Hu people.

古文：远近官司，遐迩风俗，巨细必纪，还日奏闻。
现代文：二十一日，高祖到太社祭祀。九月十七日，高祖巡幸城东，巡视庄稼。
English: On the 21st, Gaozu went to Taisha Shrine for a religious service. On the 17th of September, Gaozu went on a sightseeing tour of the eastern part of the city, inspecting the crops.

古文：庶使不出户庭，坐知万里。 
现代文：十八日，大赦天下囚犯。十月初九，高祖废除河南道行台省，任命秦王杨俊为秦州总管。
English: On the 18th, the emperor pardoned all prisoners. At the beginning of October 9th, Gaozu abolished the Henan Province of Henan Province and appointed Qin Wang Yangjun as the general manager of Qin Province.

古文：庚辰，陈遣散骑常侍周坟、通直散骑常侍袁彦来聘。
现代文：十一月十三日，高祖派使者巡视民风。二十四日，陈朝派遣散骑常侍周坟、通直散骑常侍袁彦来朝问候。
English: On November 13th, Gao Zu sent an envoy to inspect the customs of the people. On the 24th, the Chen Dynasty sent the strolling attendant Zhou Gu, and the straight strolling attendant Yuan Yan to greet the morning.

古文：陈主知上之貌异世人，使彦画像持去。
现代文：陈后主知道高祖相貌奇异，令袁彦画高祖像带回去。
English: Chen Hou knew that Gao Zu's appearance was strange, so he asked Yuan Yan to draw a portrait of Gao Zu and bring it back.

古文：甲午，罢天下诸郡。
现代文：甲午日，撤销全国各郡。
English: On the 30th, the establishment of counties throughout the country was abolished.

古文：闰十二月乙卯，遣兼散骑常侍曹令则、通直散骑常侍魏澹使于陈。
现代文：闰十二月二十二日，高祖派遣兼散骑常侍曹令则、通直散骑常侍魏澹出使陈朝。
English: On the 22nd day of the intercalary month of December, Gaozu dispatched a messenger to the Chen dynasty, who was also a regular cavalry scout, and a regular cavalry scout Wei Xuan sent to the Chen dynasty.

古文：戊午，以上柱国窦荣定为右武卫大将军，刑部尚书苏威为民部尚书。
现代文：二十五日，高祖任命上柱国窦荣定为右武卫大将军，刑部尚书苏威为民部尚书。
English: On the 25th, Gaozu appointed Guo Dou Rong, the chief of staff, as the right guard general, and Su Wei, the head of the criminal department, as the head of the civil department.

古文：四年春正月甲子，日有蚀之。
现代文：开皇四年正月初一，出现日蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Emperor, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：己巳，有事于太庙。
现代文：初六，高祖在太庙祭祀。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the first year of junior high school, Gaozu held a religious service at Taimyo.

古文：辛未，有事于南郊。
现代文：初八，在南郊祭祀。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, a ritual is held in the southern suburbs.

古文：壬申，梁主萧岿来朝。
现代文：初九，梁国国君萧岿来朝。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Liang Guo Guojun came to see Xiao Yao.

古文：甲戌，大射于北苑，十日而罢。
现代文：十一日，高祖在北苑打猎，十天结束。
English: On the eleventh day, Gao Zu went hunting in the North Garden, and the ten days ended.

古文：壬午，齐州水。
现代文：十九日，齐州水灾。
English: On the 19th, there was a flood in Qizhou.

古文：辛卯，渝州获兽似麋，一角同蹄。
现代文：二十八日，在渝州捕获一只像麋的野兽，有一只角长得如同蹄一样。
English: On the 28th, a beast resembling a centipede was captured in Yuzhou. It had a horn that grew like a hoof.

古文：壬辰，班新历。
现代文：二十九日，颁布新的历法。
English: On the 29th, the new calendar was promulgated.

古文：二月乙巳，上饯梁主于霸上。
现代文：二月十三日，高祖在霸上为梁国国君萧岿饯行。十五日，上贡土产。
English: On February 13th, Gao Zu went on a pilgrimage to Liang Guo Guo Jun (梁国国君), and on the 15th, he paid tribute to local products.

古文：丁未，靺鞨贡方物。突厥苏尼部男女万馀人来降。
现代文：突厥苏尼部男女一万多人来投降。
English: More than ten thousand men and women from the Turkic Sunni sector came to surrender.

古文：庚戌，幸陇州。
现代文：十八日，高祖巡幸陇州。
English: On the 18th, Gao Zu made a pilgrimage to Bozhou.

古文：突厥可汗阿史那玷率其属来降。
现代文：突厥可汗阿史那玷率部属来投降隋朝。
English: The Turkic Khan Ashina led his subordinates to surrender to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：夏四月己亥，敕总管、刺史父母及子年十五已上，不得将之官。
现代文：四月初八，高祖下令总管、刺史的父母及他们十五岁以上的子女，不能带到官任上去。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month, Gaozu ordered that the head steward, the parents of the chief steward and their children over the age of 15 could not be brought to the official appointment.

古文：庚子，以吏部尚书虞庆则为尚书右仆射，瀛州刺史杨尚希为兵部尚书，毛州刺史刘仁恩为刑部尚书。
现代文：初九，任命吏部尚书虞庆则为尚书右仆射，瀛州刺史杨尚希为兵部尚书，毛州刺史刘仁恩为刑部尚书。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Yu Qing, who was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Personnel, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Yang Shangxi, the secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Liu Ren'en, the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, were appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：甲辰，以上柱国叱李长叉为信州总管。
现代文：十三日，任命上柱国叱李长叉为信州总管。
English: On the 13th, Shangzhuan Guozhen Li Changzha was appointed as the general manager of Shinshu.

古文：丁未，宴突厥、高丽、吐谷浑使者于大兴殿。
现代文：十六日，在大兴殿设宴款待突厥、高丽、吐谷浑使者。
English: On the 16th, a banquet was held in the Great Hall to entertain the Turkish, Korean, and Tutankhamen emissaries.

古文：丁巳，以上大将军贺娄子干为榆关总管。
现代文：二十六日，任命上大将军贺娄子干为榆关总管。
English: On the 26th, the commander-in-chief, General He Yanzi, was appointed as the chief administrator of Shaoguan.

古文：五月癸酉，契丹主莫贺弗遣使请降，拜大将军。
现代文：五月十二日，契丹国主莫贺弗派遣使者请求投降，被拜为大将军。
English: On the 12th of May, the ruler of the Khitan state, Mokhaf, sent an envoy with a request to surrender and appointed him as a general.

古文：丙子，以柱国冯昱为汾州总管。
现代文：十五日，高祖任命柱国冯昱为汾州总管。
English: On the 15th, Gaozu appointed Zhuoguo Feng Rong as the general manager of Zhangzhou.

古文：乙酉，以汴州刺史吕仲泉为延州总管。
现代文：二十四日，任命汴州刺史吕仲泉为延州总管。
English: On the 24th, the governor of Zhangzhou, Lyu Zhongquan, was appointed as the governor of Yanzhou.

古文：六月庚子，降囚徒。
现代文：六月初十，高祖为囚徒减罪。
English: On the tenth day of the sixth month, the prisoner's sentence was commuted.

古文：乙巳，以鸿胪卿乙弗实为冀州总管，上柱国豆卢勣为夏州总管。
现代文：十五日，任命鸿胪卿乙弗萛为翼州总管，上柱国豆卢责力为夏州总管。
English: On the 15th, he appointed Hongyuqing Yifu as the general manager of Yanzhou, and Shangzhuang Guodu Lu as the general manager of Xiazhou.

古文：壬子，开渠，自渭达河，以通运漕。
现代文：二十二日，开渠，从渭水到达黄河以便畅通漕运。
English: On the 22nd, the canal was opened, reaching the Yellow River from Surabaya in order to facilitate smooth paddling.

古文：戊午，秦王俊来朝。
现代文：二十八日，秦王杨俊上朝。
English: On the 28th, Qin Wangjun came to see the emperor.

古文：秋七月丙寅，陈遣兼散骑常侍谢泉、兼通直散骑常侍贺德基来聘。
现代文：七月初六，陈朝派遣兼散骑常侍谢泉、兼通直散骑常侍贺德基来朝问候。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the year, the Chen Dynasty sent Xie Quan and He Deji, both strolling attendants, to greet the emperor.

古文：八月甲午，遣十使巡省天下。
现代文：八月初五，高祖派遣十位使臣巡视全国。
English: On the fifth day of the eighth month, he sent ten envoys to inspect the land.

古文：戊戌，卫王爽来朝。
现代文：初九，卫王杨爽来朝。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, Wei Wang Shuang came to see the morning.

古文：是日，以秦王俊纳妃，宴百僚，颁赐各有差。
现代文：这天，高祖为秦王杨俊纳妃子，宴请并按等级赏赐百官。
English: On this day, Gao Zu, the consort of Qin King Yang Jun, held a banquet and rewarded 100 officials according to their ranks.

古文：壬寅，上柱国、太傅、邓国公窦炽薨。
现代文：十三日，上柱国、太傅、邓国公窦炽去世。
English: On the 13th, Shangzhu Guo, Tai Fu, and Deng Guo Gong Dou passed away.

古文：丁未，宴秦王官属，赐物各有差。
现代文：十八日，设宴款待秦王的部属，并按官职赏赐物品。
English: On the 18th, a banquet was held to entertain the subordinates of King Qin, and they were rewarded with goods according to their official duties.

古文：壬子，享陈使。
现代文：二十三日，设宴款待陈朝使者。
English: On the 23rd, a banquet was held to entertain the envoys of the Chen Dynasty.

古文：乙卯，陈将夏侯苗请降，上以通和，不纳。
现代文：二十六日，陈朝将领夏侯苗请求投降，高祖认为已与陈朝和好，不接受。
English: On the 26th, Xia Houmiao, the general of the Chen Dynasty, requested to surrender. Gaozu thought that he had made peace with the Chen Dynasty and did not accept.

古文：九月甲子，幸襄国公主第。
现代文：九月初五，高祖巡幸襄国公主府第。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month, Gao Zu went on a pilgrimage to the Princess's residence in Xiangguo.

古文：乙丑，幸霸水，观漕渠，赐督役者帛各有差。
现代文：初六，巡幸霸水，巡视漕运之渠，按级别赏赐督促修渠的官吏。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the school year, officials who patrol the water, inspect the canals for rowing, and supervise the repair of canals will be rewarded according to their rank.

古文：己巳，上亲录囚徒。
现代文：初十，高祖亲自讯视囚徒罪行记录。
English: On the tenth day of the month, Gaozu personally inspected the prisoner's criminal record.

古文：庚午，契丹内附。
现代文：十一日，契丹归附。
English: On the 11th day, Khitan came to annex it.

古文：甲戌，驾幸洛阳，关内饥也。
现代文：十五日，高祖巡幸洛阳，这是因为关内饥荒。
English: On the 15th, Gao Zu went on a pilgrimage to Luoyang. This was due to the famine in Guanai.

古文：癸未，太白昼见。
现代文：二十四日，白天见到太白星。
English: On the 24th, during the day, I saw a white star.

古文：冬十一月壬戌，遣兼散骑常侍薛道衡、通直散骑常侍豆卢实使于陈。
现代文：十一月初四，高祖派遣兼散骑常侍薛道衡、通直散骑常侍豆卢萛出使陈朝。
English: On the 4th day of the 11th month of the first month, Gaozu sent Xue Doheng, who was also an aide-de-camp, and Zhuo Lu, who was also an aide-de-camp, to Chen Dynasty.

古文：癸亥，以榆关总管贺娄子干为云州总管。
现代文：初五，任命榆关总管贺娄子干为云州总管。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, He Yanzi, the general manager of Shaoguan, was appointed the general manager of Yunnan.

古文：五年春正月戊辰，诏行新礼。
现代文：开皇五年正月十一日，高祖下诏实行新的礼制。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, a new etiquette will be implemented.

古文：三月戊午，以尚书左仆射高颎为左领军大将军，上柱国宇文忻为右领军大将军。
现代文：三月初二，高祖任命尚书左仆射高赹为左领军大将军，上柱国宇文忻为右领军大将军。
English: On the second day of March, Gaozhu appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Ya Gaozhu, as the general leading the left army, and Shangzhu's right-hand man, Guo Wenyu, as the general leading the right army.

古文：夏四月甲午，契丹主多弥遣使贡方物。
现代文：四月初八，契丹国主多弥派遣使者上贡土产。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the year, the ruler of Khitan, Tami, sent an envoy to collect tribute from the local people.

古文：壬寅，上柱国王谊谋反，伏诛。
现代文：十六日，上柱国王谊谋反，被诛杀。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Shangzhu King plotted a rebellion and was killed.

古文：乙巳，诏征山东马荣伯等六儒。
现代文：十九日，高祖征召山东马荣伯等六位儒生。
English: On the 19th, Gaozu conscripted six Confucian scholars, including Shandong Ma Rongbo.

古文：戊申，车驾至自洛阳。
现代文：二十二日，高祖从洛阳回京。
English: On the 22nd, the driver returned from Luoyang.

古文：五月甲申，诏置义仓。
现代文：五月二十九日，高祖下诏设置防荒粮仓。
English: On May 29, Gao Zu issued an edict to set up grain silos to prevent famine.

古文：梁主萧岿殂，其太子琮嗣立。
现代文：梁国国君萧岿去世。他的太子萧琮继位。
English: Liang Guo Guo Jun Xiao Wei died and was succeeded by his son Xiao Wei Wu.

古文：遣上大将军元契使于突厥阿波可汗。
现代文：高祖派遣上大将军元契出使突厥阿波可汗。
English: General Yuan Qi sent an envoy to the Turk Abokhan.

古文：秋七月庚申，陈遣兼散骑常侍王话、兼通直散骑常侍阮卓来聘。
现代文：七月初六，陈朝派遣兼散骑常侍王话、兼通直散骑常侍阮卓来朝问候。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the year, the Chen Dynasty dispatched the equestrian equerry Wang Zu and the equestrian equestrian equerry Ruan Zhuo to greet the emperor.

古文：丁丑，以上柱国宇文庆为凉州总管。
现代文：二十三日，高祖任命上柱国宇文庆为凉州总管。
English: On the 23rd, Gaozu appointed Shangzhu Guo Yu Wenqing as the general manager of Liangzhou.

古文：壬午，突厥沙钵略上表称臣。
现代文：二十八日，突厥沙钵略可汗向高祖上表称臣。
English: On the 28th, the Turkic Shah Salih Khan presented the title of vassal to Emperor Gaozong.

古文：八月丙戌，沙钵略可汗遣子库合真特勤来朝。
现代文：八月初二，沙钵略可汗派遣其子库合真特勤来朝。
English: On the second day of the first month of August, Shahrullah Khan sent his son, the treasurer Hashimoto, to the DPRK.

古文：甲辰，河南诸州水，遣民部尚书邳国公苏威赈给之。
现代文：二十日，黄河以南各州发水灾，高祖派遣民部尚书邳国公苏威赈灾。
English: On the 20th, floods occurred in the states south of the Yellow River, and Gaozu dispatched the Ministry of People's Affairs, Shangshu, and Guogong Suwei to help with the disaster.

古文：戊申，有流星数百，四散而下。
现代文：二十四日，有数百流星从空中四散而下。
English: On the 24th, hundreds of meteors streamed down.

古文：己酉，幸栗园。
现代文：二十五日，高祖巡幸栗园。
English: On the 25th, Gao Zu toured the Chestnut Orchard.

古文：九月丁巳，至自栗园。
现代文：九月初四，高祖从栗园归。
English: On the fourth day of the ninth month, Gaozu returned from the chestnut orchard.

古文：乙丑，改鲍陂曰杜陂，霸水为滋水。
现代文：十二日，改鲍陂为杜陂，霸水为滋水。
English: On the twelfth day, Baodi was changed to Cucumber, and Baisui was changed to Feeding Water.

古文：陈将湛文彻寇和州，仪同三司费宝首获之。
现代文：陈朝将领湛文彻侵犯和州，仪同三司费宝首活捉了他。
English: Zhan Wenche, a general of the Chen Dynasty, invaded He Prefecture. Yi Tong and the three brothers Fei Bao were the first to capture him alive.

古文：丙子，遣兼散骑常侍李若、兼通直散骑常侍崔君赡使于陈。
现代文：二十三日，高祖派遣兼散骑常侍李若、兼通直散骑常侍崔君赡出使陈朝。
English: On the 23rd, Gaozu dispatched Li Ruo, also a knight errant, and Cui Jun, also a knight errant, to support the Chen dynasty.

古文：冬十月壬辰，以上柱国杨素为信州总管，朔州总管吐万绪为徐州总管。
现代文：十月初九，高祖任命上柱国杨素为信州总管，朔州总管吐万绪为徐州总管。
English: At the beginning of October 9th, Gaozu appointed Yang Su of Shangzhu as the general manager of Shinshu, and Tu Wansu of Shuozhou as the general manager of Xuzhou.

古文：十一月甲子，以上大将军源雄为朔州总管。
现代文：十一月十二日，高祖任命上大将军源雄为朔州总管。
English: On November 12th, Gaozu appointed General Yuan Xiong as the Governor of Shuozhou.

古文：丁卯，晋王广来朝。
现代文：十五日，晋王杨广来朝。
English: On the 15th, the Jin king Yang Guang came to Korea.

古文：十二月丁未，降囚徒。
现代文：十二月二十五日，为囚徒减罪。
English: On December 25, the prisoner's sentence was reduced.

古文：戊申，以上柱国达奚长儒为夏州总管。
现代文：二十六日，任命上柱国达奚长儒为夏州总管。
English: On the 26th, Shangzhu Guo Dajian Changru was appointed as the general manager of Xiazhou.

古文：六年春正月甲子，党项羌内附。
现代文：开皇六年正月十三日，党项羌归附隋朝。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of spring in the sixth year, the party members and the Yi people came to annex it.

古文：庚午，班历于突厥。
现代文：十九日，在突厥颁布历法。
English: On the 19th, the new calendar was promulgated in Turkey.

古文：辛未，以柱国韦洸为安州总管。
现代文：二十日，高祖任命柱国韦氵光为安州总管。
English: On the 20th, Gao Zu appointed Zhuo Guo Wei Bingguang as the general manager of Anzhou.

古文：壬申，遣民部尚书苏威巡省山东。
现代文：二十一日，派遣民部尚书苏威巡视崤函以东各地。
English: On the 21st, the Ministry of Civil Affairs dispatched Shangshu Suwei to inspect the areas east of Shihang.

古文：二月乙酉，山南荆、淅七州水，遣前工部尚书长孙毗赈恤之。
现代文：二月初四，因为华山之南的荆、淅等七州水灾，高祖派遣前工部尚书长孙毗赈灾。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the year, Gao Zu dispatched the former head of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, Shang Shu's eldest grandson, Pi, to the flood-stricken areas in seven provinces due to the floods in the southern part of Mount Huashan.

古文：丙戌，制刺史上佐每岁暮更入朝，上考课。
现代文：初五，高祖规定刺史上佐每年末入朝，上考课。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, the founder of the school stipulated that the student should enter the imperial court at the end of each year and take the entrance examination.

古文：丁亥，发丁男十一万修筑长城，二旬而罢。
现代文：初六，派遣民工十一万修筑长城，二十天结束。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the recruitment and dispatch of 110,000 migrant workers to build the Great Wall was stopped after 20 days.

古文：乙未，以上柱国崔弘度为襄州总管。
现代文：十四日，任命上柱国崔弘度为襄州总管。
English: On the 14th, Shangzhu Guo Cui Hongdu was appointed as the general manager of Xiangzhou.

古文：庚子，大赦天下。
现代文：十九日，大赦天下囚犯。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty for prisoners.

古文：三月己未，洛阳男子高德上书，请上为太上皇，传位皇太子。
现代文：三月初八，洛阳男子高德上书，请高祖退位做太上皇，传位给皇太子。
English: On the eighth day of the third month, Gao De, a man from Luoyang, submitted a letter asking Gao Zu to abdicate as the last emperor and pass the throne to the crown prince.

古文：上曰： 朕承天命，抚育苍生，日旰孜孜，犹恐不逮。岂学近代帝王，事不师古，传位于子，自求逸乐者哉！ 
现代文：高祖说： 我秉承天命，抚育黎民百姓，日以继夜，孜孜不倦，还担心不能达到目的，怎么能像近代帝王那样，做事不效仿古代圣贤兢兢业业，却传位给儿子，求得个人的安逸呢？ 
English: Gao Zu said: I uphold the mandate of heaven, nurture the people of Li, day and night, tirelessly, and still worry that I can not achieve the goal. How can I do things like a modern emperor, not following the ancient sages, but passing the throne to my son, and seeking personal comfort?

古文：癸亥，突厥沙钵略遣使贡方物。
现代文：十二日，突厥沙钵略可汗派遣使者上贡土产。
English: On the 12th, the Turkic Shah Salih Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute to the local products.

古文：夏四月己亥，陈遣兼散骑常侍周磻、兼通直散骑常侍江椿来聘。
现代文：四月十九日，陈朝派遣兼散骑常侍周銵、兼通直散骑常侍江椿来朝问候。
English: On April 19th, the Chen Dynasty dispatched Zhou Qi, the equestrian equerry, and Jiang Tsiming, the equestrian equerry, to come and greet the emperor.

古文：秋七月辛亥，河南诸州水。
现代文：七月初二，黄河南边各州水灾。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, all the states of Henan were flooded.

古文：乙丑，京师雨毛，如马鬃尾，长者二尺余，短者六七寸。
现代文：十六日，京城上空降下如马鬃尾的毛，长的有二尺多，短的有六七寸。
English: On the 16th, a hair like a horse's ponytail, more than two feet long and six or seven inches short, descended over the capital.

古文：八月辛卯，关内七州旱，免其赋税。
现代文：八月十二日，因为关内七个州遭受旱灾，高祖免其赋税。
English: On August 12th, because seven prefectures in Kansai were affected by drought, Gaozu was exempted from paying taxes.

古文：遣散骑常侍裴豪、兼通直散骑常侍刘顗聘于陈。
现代文：派遣散骑常侍裴豪、兼通直散骑常侍刘岂页到陈朝问候。
English: He dispatched his equestrian attendant, Pei Hao, and his equestrian attendant, Liu Xizhe, to greet the Chen dynasty.

古文：戊申，上柱国、太师、申国公李穆薨。
现代文：二十九日，上柱国、太师、申国公李穆去世。
English: On the 29th, Li Mu, the father of Shangzhu, Taishi, and Shen, passed away.

古文：闰月己酉，以河州刺史段文振为兰州总管。
现代文：闰八月初一，高祖任命河州刺史段文振为兰州总管。
English: On the first day of the eighth lunar month, Gaozu appointed the governor of Hezhou Province, Duanwen Zhen, as the governor of Lanzhou.

古文：丁卯，皇太子镇洛阳。
现代文：十九日，皇太子杨勇镇守洛阳。
English: On the 19th, Crown Prince Yang Yongzhen guarded Luoyang.

古文：辛未，晋王广、秦王俊并来朝。
现代文：二十三日，晋王杨广、秦王杨俊一起来朝。
English: On the 22nd, Jin Wangguang and Qin Wangjun came to the DPRK together.

古文：丙子，上柱国、郕国公梁士彦，上柱国、杞国公宇文忻，柱国、舒国公刘昉，以谋反伏诛。
现代文：二十八日，上柱国、成阝国公梁士彦，上柱国、木巳国公宇文忻，柱国、舒国公刘日方，因谋反被杀。
English: On the 28th, Shangzhu and Chenghuang princes Liang Shihang, Shangzhu and Wuxi princes Uwenqi, and Zhu and Shu princes Liu Rong, were killed for plotting rebellion.

古文：上柱国、许国公宇文善坐事除名。
现代文：上柱国、许国公宇文善因受牵连而被免职。
English: Shangzhu Guo and Xu Guo Gongwu Wenzan were removed from their posts for being implicated in the scandal.

古文：九月辛巳，上素服御射殿，诏百僚射，赐梁士彦三家资物。
现代文：九月初四，高祖穿素服到射殿，召集百官投射，赏赐梁士彦等三家钱财布帛。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of September, Gao Zu wore plain clothes to the hall of shooting, called together hundreds of officials to shoot, and rewarded Liang Shih-yan and other three families with money and cloth.

古文：丙戌，上柱国、宋安郡公元景山卒。
现代文：初九，上柱国、宋安郡公元景山去世。
English: In the early 9th century, Jingshan died in Shangzhu Province and Song'an County.

古文：庚子，以上柱国李询为隰州总管。
现代文：二十三日，高祖任命上柱国李询为隰州总管。
English: On the 23rd, Gaozu appointed Li Xun of Shangzhu as the general manager of Zhangzhou.

古文：辛丑，诏大象已来死事之家，咸命赈恤。
现代文：二十四日，高祖下诏对从周静帝大象年间以来死于战事的官兵家属，全部予以赈恤。
English: On the 24th, Gao Zu issued an edict to pardon all the family members of officers and soldiers who died in the war since Zhou Jingdi was an elephant.

古文：冬十月己酉，以河北道行台尚书令、并州总管、晋王广为雍州牧，余官如故；兵部尚书杨尚希为礼部尚书。
现代文：十月初二，任命河北道行台尚书令、并州总管、晋王杨广为雍州牧，其他官职不变；兵部尚书杨尚希为礼部尚书。
English: At the beginning of October 2nd, Yang Guang, the governor of Hebei Province, was appointed as the Yongzhou magistrate, and other positions remained unchanged; Yang Shangxi, the military governor, was appointed as the ceremonial governor.

古文：癸丑，置山南道行台尚书省于襄州，以秦王俊为尚书令。
现代文：初六，在襄州设置山南道行台尚书省，任命秦王杨俊为尚书令。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Shannan Dao Xingtai Shang Shu Province was set up in Xiangzhou, and Qin Wang Jun was appointed as Shang Shu commander.

古文：丙辰，以芳州刺史骆平难为叠州刺史，衡州总管周法尚为黄州总管。
现代文：初九，任命芳州刺史骆平难为叠州刺史，衡州总管周法尚为黄州总管。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Luo Pingnan, the governor of Fangzhou, was appointed the governor of Meizhou, and Zhou Fa, the governor of Hengzhou, was appointed the governor of Huangzhou.

古文：甲子，甘露降于华林园。
现代文：十七日，有甘露降落在华林园。
English: On the 17th, a dewdrop landed in the Hualin Garden.

古文：七年春正月癸巳，有事于太庙。
现代文：开皇七年正月十八日，高祖在太庙祭祀。
English: On the 18th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Emperor's reign, Gaozu was enshrined in the Imperial Temple.

古文：乙未，制诸州岁贡三人。
现代文：二十日，规定各州每年向朝廷推荐三个人。
English: On the 20th, he ordered the states to present three tributes to the imperial court each year.

古文：二月丁巳，祀朝日于东郊。
现代文：二月十二日，在东郊祭祀朝阳。
English: On February 12th, the Asahi Festival was held in the eastern suburbs.

古文：己巳，陈遣兼散骑常侍王亨、兼通直散骑常侍王来聘。
现代文：二十五日，陈朝派遣兼散骑常侍王亨、兼通直散骑常侍王来朝问候。
English: On the 25th, the Chen Dynasty dispatched Wang Heng, who was also a knight errant and a knight errant, to come to the court to offer greetings.

古文：壬申，车驾幸醴泉宫。
现代文：二十八日，高祖巡幸礼泉宫。
English: On the 28th, Gao Zu went on a pilgrimage to the Spring Palace.

古文：是月，发丁男十万余修筑长城，二旬而罢。
现代文：这月，派遣民工十多万人修筑长城，二十天结束。
English: This month, more than 100,000 migrant workers were dispatched to build the Great Wall, which ended after 20 days.

古文：夏四月己酉，幸晋王第。
现代文：四月初五，高祖驾临晋王杨广府第。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth lunar month, Gao Zu drove to the capital of the Jin Dynasty, Yangguang.

古文：庚戌，于扬州开山阳渎，以通运漕。
现代文：初六，在扬州开挖山阳渎，以便于畅通漕运。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, excavations were carried out in Yangzhou in order to facilitate the smooth flow of rowing.

古文：突厥沙钵略可汗卒，其子雍虞闾嗣立，是为都蓝可汗。
现代文：突厥沙钵略可汗去世，他的儿子雍虞闾继位，这就是都蓝可汗。
English: The Turkic Shah Jahan died and was succeeded by his son Yong Yuxuan, known as the Tulan Khan.

古文：癸亥，颁青龙符于东方总管、刺史，西方以驺虞，南方以硃雀，北方以玄武。
现代文：二十九日，高祖分别给东西南北四方总管、刺史颁发青龙、驺虞、朱雀、玄武等符。
English: On the 29th, Gao Zu awarded the Qinglong, Zangyu, Suzaku, Xuanwu and other characters to the East-West, North-South and Four-Square General Manager and Zhishi respectively.

古文：甲戌，遣兼散骑常侍杨同、兼通直散骑常侍崔儦使于陈。
现代文：三十日，高祖派遣兼散骑常侍杨同、兼通直散骑常侍崔亻鹿出使陈朝。
English: On the 30th, Gaozu dispatched Yang Tong, who was also a knight errant, and Cui Erlu, who was also a knight errant, to Chen Dynasty.

古文：以民部尚书苏威为吏部尚书。
现代文：任命民部尚书苏威为吏部尚书。
English: He appointed Su Wei, a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, as a member of the Ministry of Public Administration.

古文：五月乙亥朔，日有蚀之。己卯，雨石于武安、滏阳间十余里。
现代文：五月初一，出现日蚀。初五，在武安、滏阳十多里之间落下陨石。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. On the fifth day of the first month, a meteorite fell more than ten miles between Wu'an and Shenyang.

古文：秋七月己丑，卫王爽薨，上发丧于门下外省。
现代文：七月十六日，卫王杨爽去世，高祖在门下外省为卫王杨爽发丧。
English: On July 16, Yang Shuang, the King of Wei, passed away. Gao Zu mourned for Yang Shuang, the King of Wei, in his province.

古文：八月丙午，以怀州刺史源雄为朔州总管。
现代文：八月初四，高祖任命怀州刺史源雄为朔州总管。
English: On the fourth day of August, Gaozu appointed the Waizhou magistrate Shi Yuanxiong as the general manager of Shuozhou.

古文：庚申，梁主萧琮来朝。
现代文：二十八日，梁国国君萧琮来朝。
English: On the 28th, Liang Guo Guojun and Xiao Yao came to the DPRK.

古文：九月乙酉，梁安平王萧岩掠于其国以奔陈。
现代文：九月十三日，梁国安平王萧岩掠夺梁国财宝，投奔陈朝。
English: On September 13th, Xiao Yan, King of Liang'anping, fled to Chen Province after being captured in Liang Province.

古文：辛卯，废梁国，曲赦江陵。
现代文：十九日，高祖废除梁国，因情况特殊而赦免江陵。
English: On the 19th, Liang Guo was abolished and Jiangling was granted amnesty.

古文：以梁主萧琮为柱国，封莒国公。
现代文：任命原梁国国君萧琮为柱国，封莒国公。
English: Xiao Xi, the prince of the state of Liang, became the pillar state and the prince of the state of Yan.

古文：冬十月庚申，行幸同州，以先帝所居，降囚徒。
现代文：十月十九日，高祖巡幸同州，因为这里是先帝曾住过的地方，所以为囚徒减罪。
English: On October 19th, Gao Zu went on a tour of Tongzhou. Because this is where the former emperor once lived, he commuted the sentence of the prisoners.

古文：癸亥，幸蒲州。
现代文：二十二日，巡幸蒲州。
English: On the 22nd, he went to Puzhou.

古文：丙寅，宴父老，上极欢，曰： 此间人物，衣服鲜丽，容止闲雅，良由仕宦之乡，陶染成俗也。 
现代文：二十五日，设宴款待蒲州父老乡亲，高祖特别高兴，说： 这里的老百姓，衣服颜色华丽，容貌举止文静优雅，的确是因为官宦之乡长期陶冶濡染而养成的风俗。 
English: On the 25th, Gao Zu was particularly pleased to host a banquet for his fellow villagers in Puzhou. He said: "The people here, with their gorgeous clothes and calm and elegant appearance, are indeed a custom that has been nurtured and cultivated for a long time in the township of Guanzhang.

古文：十一月甲午，幸冯翊，亲祠故社。
现代文：十一月二十三日，巡幸冯翊，亲自祭祀土神。
English: On November 23rd, Feng Xuan went on a pilgrimage and personally offered sacrifices to the earth god.

古文：父老对诏失旨，上大怒，免其县官而去。
现代文：父老对诏没有遵从旨意，高祖大怒，罢免县官之后离去。
English: When the elders answered the emperor's question, the text was off-topic. Emperor Wen was furious and dismissed the local county official and left.

古文：戊戌，至自冯翊。
现代文：二十七日，从冯翊回到京城。
English: On the 27th, he returned to Beijing from Fengye.

