古文：吕群朱克融王涯温造李宗闵柳公济王涯王潜韩约王氏王哲杜牧卢献卿卢骈封望卿崔彦曾崔雍庞从
现代文：吕群朱克融王涯温造李宗闵柳公济王涯王潜韩约王氏王哲杜牧卢献卿卢骈封望卿崔彦曾崔雍庞从
English: Lu Qun, Zhu Ke Rong, Wang Lai Wen, Li Zonglu, Gong Zi, Wang Lai, Wang Qian, Han You, Wang Zhe, Wang Du Mu, Lu Xianqing, Lu Wei, Feng Wangqing, Cui Yan Zeng, Cui Yong Pang,

古文：吕群
现代文：吕群
English: Lv Qun

古文：唐进士吕群，元和十一年下第游蜀。
现代文：唐朝的进士吕群，在元和第十一年离开府第去蜀游览。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lu Qun, a Jin soldier of the Tang Dynasty, left Fudi to visit Shu.

古文：性粗褊不容物，仆使者未尝不切齿恨之。
现代文：他性格粗暴偏执心胸狭窄不能容人，跟从他的仆从们没有不切齿痛恨他的。
English: His character was coarse, bigoted, narrow-minded, intolerant, and his followers hated him.

古文：时过褒斜未半，所使多逃去，唯有一厮养。
现代文：当时离褒斜还有一半路程，他手下的仆从大多都逃走了，只有一男仆还侍奉他。
English: At that time, there was still half a distance to the slope, most of his servants had fled, and only one servant was still serving him.

古文：群意凄凄。行次一山岭，复歇鞍放马，策杖寻径，不觉数里。见杉松甚茂，临溪架水。
现代文：吕群心里很悲伤难过，走到一座山岭前面，又歇马放鞍，拿一根拐杖去探路，不知不觉走出几里地，只见杉松很茂盛，靠着小河有一个小桥，桥对岸有一个草堂，环境很幽雅深邃，好像道士所住的地方，但没发现有人。
English: Lv Qun was very sad and upset in his heart. He walked to the front of a mountain range, saddled his horse, took a crutch to explore the road, and unknowingly walked several miles. He saw that the cedar trees were very lush, there was a small bridge along the river, and there was a grass hut on the other side of the bridge. The environment was very elegant and profound, as if it was a place where Taoists lived, but he did not find anyone.

古文：有一草堂，境颇幽邃，似道士所居，但不见人，复入后斋，有新穿土坑，长可容身，其深数尺，中植一长刀，旁置二刀。又于坑旁壁上，大书云： 两口加一口，即成兽矣。
现代文：又进入后斋，发现一个新挖的土坑，坑长可以容纳一个人，有几尺深，坑中插着一柄长刀，旁边放着两把刀。又发现在坑旁边的墙上写着几个大字：两口加一口，即成兽矣。
English: He also went into the backyard and found a newly dug pit, the length of which could accommodate one person, several feet deep, with a long knife stuck in the pit and two knives next to it. He also found several large words written on the wall next to the pit: two mouths plus one mouth, that is, become a beast.

古文：群意谓术士厌胜之所，亦不为异。
现代文：吕群心里想这大概是术士诅咒祈祷的场所。所以也不觉得奇怪。
English: Lv Qun thought in his heart that this was probably a place for sorcerers to curse and pray, so he didn't think it was strange.

古文：即去一二里，问樵人，向之所见者，谁氏所处。
现代文：又走了一二里，问一个砍柴的人；以前看见那个地方是谁家住的处所。
English: He walked another mile or two and asked a woodcutter where he had seen the place where the family lived.

古文：樵人曰： 近并无此处。 
现代文：砍柴人说：这附近并没有这么个地方。
English: The woodcutter said, "There is no such place around here."

古文：因复窥之，则不见矣。
现代文：吕群就回来再看，结果却什么也不见了。
English: Lv Qun came back and looked again, but nothing was missing.

古文：后所到众会之所，必先访其事。
现代文：后来他每到了人多的地方，一定要问一下这件事。
English: Later, whenever he was in a crowded place, he made sure to ask about it.

古文：或解曰： 两口君之姓也，加一口品字也。三刀州字，亦象也，君后位至刺史二千石矣。 
现代文：有人向他解释说： 两口，就是你的姓，加一口是品字，三刀是州字，也是征象了，你以后可以做到刺史这么大的官，每年二千石的俸禄。 
English: Someone explained to him: "Two points, that is, your surname, plus one point is the word of honor, and three swords are the word of the state, which is also a sign. In the future, you can become such a great official, with a salary of two thousand koku per year.

古文：群心然之。
现代文：吕群心里想也有道理。
English: In Lv Qun's mind, it makes sense.

古文：行至剑南界，计州郡所获百千，遂于成都买奴马服用，行李复泰矣。
现代文：走到剑南地界，统计一下到各州郡所得到的钱达了百千，就在成都买了奴仆和马匹好用，他们的行李又宽裕了。
English: When they got to the Jian'nan land boundary, they counted the money they got from each prefecture and county, which amounted to hundreds of thousands. They bought servants and horses in Chengdu, which were easy to use, and their luggage was more than enough.

古文：成都人有曰南竖者，凶猾无状，货久不售。群则以二十缗易之，既而鞭挞毁骂。奴不堪命，遂与其佣保潜有戕杀之心，而伺便未发耳。
现代文：成都有个叫竖南的人，凶狠狡猾没个人样，他有些货很长时间也没卖出去，吕群就用二十串钱买下来，买下后觉得吃亏反而打骂奴仆们，奴仆不能忍受，就和其他的佣人保镖等暗藏着杀吕群的心。寻找时机还没有实行。
English: There is a man named Zhannan in Chengdu. He is fierce, cunning, and has no manners. Some of his goods have not been sold for a long time, and Lü Qun bought them with twenty bunches of money. After buying them, he felt that he was at a loss, but instead he beat and cursed the slaves. The slaves could not bear it, so he and other servants, bodyguards, and so on, secretly harbored the intention of killing Lü Qun. The search for the right time has not yet been carried out.

古文：群至汉州，县令为群致酒宴。时群新制一绿绫裘，甚华洁。县令方燃蜡炬，将上于台，蜡泪数滴，污群裘上。县令戏曰： 仆且拉君此裘。 
现代文：吕群到汉州，县令给吕群准备了酒宴，当时吕群新做了一件绿色的绫裘衣，很华丽干净，县令正点上蜡烛，要放在烛台上，有几滴蜡滴掉到吕群的绿裘上了，县令开玩笑说： 我先拉一下你的这件衣服。 
English: When Lv Qun went to Hanzhou, the county magistrate prepared a wine banquet for Lv Qun. At that time, Lv Qun newly made a green jacquard dress, very gorgeous and clean. The county magistrate was lighting a candle and wanted to put it on the candlestick. A few drops of wax fell on Lv Qun's green jacquard dress. The county magistrate joked and said, "I'll pull this dress of yours first."

古文：群曰： 拉则为盗矣。 
现代文：吕群说： 拉就是盗窃啊。 
English: Lyu Qun said: Pulling is theft.

古文：复至眉州，留十余日。冬至之夕，逗宿眉西之正见寺。
现代文：又到眉州，住了十多天，冬至前一天，留住在眉州西面的正见寺。
English: I went to Meizhou again and stayed there for more than ten days. The day before the winter solstice, I stayed at the Zhengxian Temple in the west of Meizhou.

古文：其下且欲害之。适遇院僧有老病将终，侍烛不绝。其计不行。
现代文：他的手下人就要害他，正赶上院里有一个老僧有病要死，拿着蜡烛护理的不断，手下人的计谋不能实行。
English: His subordinates were about to harm him. Just as they were about to do so, there was an old monk in the senate who was sick and about to die, and they were constantly taking care of him with candles. The schemes of their subordinates could not be implemented.

古文：群此夜忽不乐，乃于东壁题诗二篇。
现代文：吕群这天晚上忽然不痛快，就在东墙上题诗二篇。
English: Lv Qun was suddenly unhappy that evening and inscribed two poems on the east wall.

古文：其一曰： 路行三蜀尽，身及一阳生。
现代文：其第一首是： 路行三蜀尽，身及一阳生。
English: Its first song is: "Road trip is the best of three, body is the best of one."

古文：赖有残灯火，相依坐到明。 
现代文：赖有残灯火，相依坐到明。 
English: Relying on the remaining lights, they sat side by side until dawn.

古文：其二曰： 社后辞巢燕，霜前别蒂蓬；愿为蝴蝶梦，飞去觅关中。 
现代文：第二首是： 社后辞巢燕，霜前别蒂蓬。愿为蝴蝶梦，飞去览关中。 
English: The second song is: After the company, quit the nest, before the frost, bid farewell. I would like to be a butterfly dream, fly to the middle of the review.

古文：题讫，吟讽久之，数行泪下。
现代文：题完了，还吟诵了很长时间，落下几行热泪。
English: After finishing the problem, I recited it for a long time and shed a few tears.

古文：明日冬至，抵彭山县。县令访群，群形貌索然。谓县令曰： 某殆将死乎？ 
现代文：第二天冬至，到彭山县，县令拜访吕群，吕群衣帽不整，也没什么兴趣，对县令说： 我大概是要死了吗？
English: On the second day of the winter solstice, in Pengshan County, the county magistrate paid a visit to Lv Qun. Lv Qun's clothes and hat were not in order, and he was not very interested. He said to the county magistrate: Am I about to die?

古文：意绪不堪，寥落之甚。
现代文：思绪繁乱，心情冷落得很。 
English: My thoughts are chaotic, and my mood is very cold.

古文：县令曰： 闻君有刺使三品之说，足得自宽也。 
现代文：县令说： 听说你有能当刺史三品官的说法，完全可以自己宽慰自己。 
English: The county magistrate said, "I heard that you have the ability to be a magistrate, so you can completely comfort yourself.

古文：县令即为置酒，极欢。至三更，群大醉，舁归馆中。
现代文：然后县令为他置办酒席，他很高兴，到了三更天，吕群喝得大醉。被抬回客馆里。
English: Then the county magistrate set up a bar for him, and he was very happy. On the third day, Lü Qun was very drunk. He was carried back to the guesthouse.

古文：凶奴等已于群所寝床下，穿一坑，如群之大，深数尺。
现代文：他手下那些凶恶的奴仆们已经在他的床下挖了一个坑，象吕群的身体那么大，有几尺深，等吕群来了，就把他抬到坑里。
English: His vicious servants had already dug a pit under his bed, as big as Lu Qun's body and several feet deep. When Lu Qun arrived, they carried him into the pit.

古文：群至，则舁置坑中，断其首，又以群所携剑，当心钉之，覆以土讫，各乘服所有衣装鞍马而去。
现代文：割掉了他的头，又用吕群所带的剑，照心口钉上，把土盖上。各自乘马穿衣而逃。一个多月后。
English: They cut off his head, nailed it shut with the sword Lv Qun was carrying, and covered it with earth. They each dressed themselves and fled on horseback. More than a month later.

古文：后月余日，奴党至成都，货鬻衣物略尽。有一人分得绿裘，径将北归，却至汉州衔中鬻之。适遇县令偶出见之，识其烛泪所污，擒而问焉，即皆承伏。
现代文：那些奴仆们到了成都，把吕群的衣服都卖光了，有一个人分到吕群的那件绿裘，想要直接向到北方，却到了汉中的街上想卖掉，恰好遇到县令偶然出门看见了，认识那蜡滴污染的地方，就把那人抓起来审问，那人立刻招供了。
English: When those servants arrived in Chengdu, they sold out all of Lv Qun's clothes. One person wanted to go directly to the north, but instead went to the streets of Hanzhong to sell the green coat that had been allocated to Lv Qun. He happened to meet the county magistrate, who happened to go out and see the place where the wax droplets had polluted, and arrested the man for questioning. The man immediately confessed.

古文：时丞相李夷简镇西蜀，尽捕得其贼。
现代文：当时丞相李夷简巡察西蜀，把贼人全部抓到。
English: At that time, the minister of justice, Li Yijian, inspected Xishu and caught all the thieves.

古文：乃发群死处，于褒中所见，如影响焉。
现代文：然后挖吕群死的地方，同在褒地所见到的，一模一样。
English: Then they dug up the place where Lv Qun died, and it was exactly the same as what they had seen at the reward site.

古文：朱克融
现代文：朱克融
English: Zhu Ke Rong

古文：唐宝历二年春，范阳节度使朱克融猎鹿。
现代文：唐朝宝历第二年春天，范阳节度使朱克融猎到一只鹿。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Tang Dynasty, the Fanyang Festival made Zhu Ke Rong hunt a deer.

古文：鹿胆中得珠，如弹丸，黑色，初软后硬，如石光明。
现代文：在鹿胆中得到一个珠子，弹丸大小，黑色，起初软后来变硬，像石头还发光。
English: In the stag's gall bladder you get a bead, the size of a projectile, black, soft at first and then hard, like a stone and shiny.

古文：或问麻安石曰： 是何祥也？ 
现代文：有人问麻安石说： 这是什么吉祥征兆吗？ 
English: Someone asked Ma Anshi, "Is this an auspicious sign?"

古文：安石曰： 此事自古未有。请以意推之。 
现代文：安石说： 这种事自古以来没有出现过，请让我按我的想法推测一下。
English: "This kind of thing hasn't happened since ancient times, so please allow me to speculate as I see fit," said Ashi.

古文：鹿胆得珠，克融以为己瑞。鹿者禄也，鹿死是禄尽也。
现代文：鹿胆里得到珠子，克融认为是瑞祥的征兆，鹿就是禄，鹿死是禄尽，俸禄没有了。
English: If a deer is found to have a bead in its gall bladder, it is considered to be a sign of auspiciousness. If the deer is dead, the reward is exhausted, and there is no reward.

古文：珠初软后硬，是珠变也。禄尽珠变，必有变易之事。衰亡之兆也。
现代文：珠开始软后来硬，是珠变，禄尽珠变，一定后有改变的事，这是衰亡的征兆。 
English: The bead begins to soften and then hardens. It is the bead that changes, and the luck that changes the bead. After a certain point, things change. This is a sign of decline.

古文：自此克融言辞轻发。
现代文：从此克融轻易不说什么话。
English: From then on, it was easy for Keren not to say anything.

古文：是年五月，果帐下军乱，而全家被杀。
现代文：这一年五月，果然部下兵变作乱，克融全家被杀。
English: In May of that year, his subordinates mutinied, and Keryong's entire family was killed.

古文：王涯
现代文：王涯
English: Wang Ya

古文：唐丞相王涯，大和九年掌邦赋，又主簿盐铁。
现代文：唐朝丞相王涯，在大和九年掌国家税收，又主管盐铁。
English: Wang Ya, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, was in charge of the national tax in the ninth year of the Great Harmony, and was also in charge of salt and iron.

古文：其子仲翔尝一日避暑于山亭，忽见家僮数十皆无首，被血来仲翔前。
现代文：他的儿子仲翔曾有一天在山亭上避暑。忽然看见数十个没头的僮仆，他们披着血来到仲翔跟前。
English: One day, his son, Zhongxiang, was spending the summer on a mountain pavilion. Suddenly, he saw dozens of headless servants, who came to Zhongxiang covered in blood.

古文：仅食顷，方不见。
现代文：仅一顿饭功夫，就不见了。
English: After just one meal, it's gone.

古文：仲翔惊异且甚，即具白之，愿解去权位。
现代文：仲翔非常奇怪惊惧，马上告诉了父亲，希望他解职回家，但涯不听。
English: Zhongxiang was very surprised and alarmed. He immediately told his father that he hoped he would be relieved of his duties and return home, but Ya didn't listen.

古文：涯不听，是岁冬十一月，果有郑注之祸。
现代文：这一年的冬十一月，果然发生了郑注那样的灾祸。
English: In the winter of November of that year, a disaster like Zheng Zhu's happened.

古文：温造
现代文：温造
English: Hot-rolled steel

古文：新昌里尚书温造宅，桑道茂尝居之。
现代文：新昌里尚书温造的宅院，桑道茂曾住过。
English: Sang Dao Mao once lived in a house built by Shang Shuan in Xinchang.

古文：庭有二柏树甚高。桑生曰： 夫人之所居，古木蕃茂者，皆宜去之。
现代文：庭院里有两棵柏树很高，桑道茂说： 人的住所，古木茂盛的，都应该除去。
English: There are two tall cypress trees in the courtyard. Sandomao said, "People's homes and old trees should all be removed.

古文：且木盛则土衰，由是居人有病者，乃土衰之致也。 
现代文：况且木茂盛就会使土衰败，因此住的人就会有生病的，这是土衰的原因。 
English: Moreover, the flourishing of trees will cause the soil to decay, so the people who live there will be sick, which is the cause of soil decay.

古文：于是以铁数十钧，镇于柏树下。既而告人曰： 后有居，发吾所镇之地者，其家长当死。 
现代文：于是用数十钧铁，镇压在柏树下，然后告诉别人说： 以后谁来住，挖我镇铁的地方，他们的家长就会死。 
English: So he used dozens of shovels of iron to crush the roots under the cypress tree, and then told others: "Whoever comes to live in the future and digs in my place, their parents will die."

古文：唐大和九年，温造居其宅。因修建堂宇，遂发地，得桑生所镇之铁。
现代文：唐朝大和第九年，温造住到这所宅院里，因为修建房子，就挖了地，挖出了桑道茂所镇压的铁。
English: In the ninth year of the Tang Dynasty, Wen Zou lived in this courtyard. Because he was building a house, he dug up the ground and dug out the iron that Sando Mao had suppressed.

古文：后数日，造果卒。
现代文：后来没过几天，温造果然死了。
English: A few days later, Unzo died.

古文：李宗闵
现代文：李宗闵
English: Lee Jong-il

古文：唐丞相李宗闵，大和七年夏出镇汉中。明年冬，再入相。又明年夏中，尝退朝于靖安里第。
现代文：唐朝的丞相李宗闵，在大和七年夏天出京镇守汉中，第二年冬，再次当丞相，又第二年夏天，曾有一次退朝回到靖安里宅第。
English: The prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, Li Zonglu, went to Beijing in the summer of the seventh year of the Great Harmony to guard the Han Dynasty. In the winter of the second year, he became prime minister again, and in the summer of the second year, he once returned to Jing'an.

古文：其榻前有熨斗，忽跳掷久之，宗闵异且恶。
现代文：他的床前有个熨斗。忽然跳跃很长时间，宗闵既惊奇又厌恶这件事。
English: There was an iron in front of his bed, and suddenly he jumped for a long time, which surprised and disgusted him.

古文：是时李训、郑注，以奸诈得幸。
现代文：当时李训、郑注因为奸诈得到皇帝的宠幸。
English: At that time, Li Xun and Zheng Zhu were favored by the emperor because of their treachery.

古文：数言于帝。训知之，遂奏以致其罪。
现代文：宗闵把这件事多次给皇帝说，李训知道后，就上奏皇帝使治宗闵有罪。
English: Zonglu told the emperor about this many times, and after Li Xun knew about it, he appealed to the emperor to convict Zonglu.

古文：后旬日，有诏贬为明州刺史，连贬朝州司户。
现代文：过了十多天，皇帝下诏书贬李宗闵为明州刺史。又再贬为潮州司户。
English: After more than ten days, the emperor issued an imperial edict to demote Li Zongyao to the post of Ming State Historian, and then to the post of Chaozhou Governor.

古文：盖其兆也。
现代文：这都是那件事的兆应吧。
English: It's all a symptom of that.

古文：柳公济柳公济尚书，唐大和中奉诏讨李同揵。
现代文：柳公济尚书柳公济，在唐朝大和年间奉旨讨伐李同揵。
English: Liu Gongzhi is also known as Liu Gongzhi, who was ordered to fight Li Tongzhi during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：既出师，无何，麾枪忽折。
现代文：已经发兵了，不长时间指挥作战的旗杆忽然折断了。
English: The troops had already been sent out, but the flagpole, which had been used to command the battle for a short time, suddenly snapped.

古文：客有见者叹曰： 夫大将军出师，其门旗及麾枪折者，军必败。不然，上将死。 
现代文：外人有看见的感叹说： 大将军发兵，他的门旗以及帅旗折断的，军队一定会失败，不然的话，上将军也得死。 
English: Outsiders have the insight to sigh and say: When a great general sends out an army, and his gate banner and banner are broken, the army will certainly fail, otherwise, the great general will also die.

古文：后数月，公济果薨。
现代文：几个月以后，公济果然死了。
English: A few months later, Gongji did indeed die.

古文：凡军出征，有乌鸢随其后者，皆败亡之征。
现代文：凡是军队出征，如果有乌鸢跟随在他们后面，都是失败灭亡的征兆。
English: Whenever an army sets out on a campaign, if the Black Plague follows them, it is a sign of defeat and destruction.

古文：有曾敬云者，尝为北都裨将。李师道叛时，曾将行营兵士数千人。每出军，有乌鸢随其后，即军必败，率以为常。
现代文：有个叫曾敬云的，曾经当北都的裨将，在李师道叛逆时，他曾率领军队数千人，每次出兵，都有乌鸢跟随在他们后面。这样他的军队就败。这样习以为常。
English: There was a man named Zeng Jingyun, who once served as the commander of the Northern Capital. When Li Shidao rebelled, he led an army of several thousand men. Every time he sent out troops, Wu Gan followed behind them. As a result, his army was defeated. This was the norm.

古文：后舍家为僧，住于太原凝定寺。
现代文：后来他舍家去当和尚，住在太原凝定寺。
English: Later, he left home to become a monk and lived in Taiyuan Geding Temple.

古文：大和九年，罗立言为京兆尹，尝因入朝。
现代文：大和九年，罗立言任京兆尹。
English: In the ninth year of the Yamato era, Luo Lijian was appointed as the successor of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：既冠带，引镜自视，不见其首。
现代文：有一次因要入朝，穿好衣服戴上帽子，拿来镜子照一下，看不见自己的头。
English: Once, because I wanted to go to the palace, I put on my clothes, put on my hat, and took a mirror to look at myself. I couldn't see my head.

古文：遂语于季弟约言。
现代文：于是告诉了二弟罗约言。
English: So he told his second brother Luo about the promise.

古文：后果为李训连坐，诛死。
现代文：后来他果然被李训的事株连，被处死。
English: Later, he was indeed arrested by Li Xun and executed.

古文：唐永宁王相涯三怪。
现代文：唐朝永宁丞相王涯家中有三件怪事。
English: There are three strange things going on in the home of Wang Ya, the Yongning chancellor of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：淅米作人苏闺，本是王家炊人，至荆州方知。
现代文：淘米的佣人苏闺，原来是王家做饭的厨师，到了荆州才知道。
English: Su Bu, the maid of Taomei, used to be the cook of the royal family, but she only found out when she arrived in Jingzhou.

古文：因问王家咎征。
现代文：因此向他问王家的凶兆。
English: So he asked him about the royal omen.

古文：言宅南有一井，每夜常沸涌有声。昼窥之，或见铜叵罗，或见银熨斗者，水腐不可饮。
现代文：他说：王家宅院南边有一个井，每天晚上常常有沸腾奔涌的声音，白天看那井，有时发现铜酒卮，有时发现银熨斗，井水腐臭不能饮用。
English: He said: There is a well on the south side of the Royal Residence, and every evening there is often the sound of boiling camels. If you look at the well during the day, you will sometimes find copper wine presses, and sometimes silver irons. The well water is rancid and undrinkable.

古文：又王相内斋有禅床，柘材丝绳，工极精巧。
现代文：又一件是王丞相内斋有个禅床，用贵重的木料精心制做。
English: Another thing is that Wang Zhengxian has a Zen bed in the inner sanctum, which is carefully made of precious wood.

古文：无故解散。各聚一处。王甚恶之，命焚于灶下。
现代文：作工非常精巧，有一天无故散了架，各自集聚一处，王涯很讨厌，命人在灶房烧毁。
English: The work was very ingenious. One day, without any reason, the shelves fell apart and they all gathered in one place. Wang Ya was disgusted and ordered someone to burn them in the kitchen.

古文：又长子孟博晨兴，见堂地上有凝血数沥，踪至大门方绝。孟博遽令铲去。王相初不知也。
现代文：还有一件是长子孟博早晨醒了，看见厅堂地上有很多血迹，踪迹直到大门才不见了，孟博马上叫人铲去，王丞相起初不知道。
English: Another thing is that the eldest son, Meng Bo, woke up in the morning and saw a lot of bloodstains on the hall floor. The traces did not disappear until the gate. Meng Bo immediately called for someone to shovel it away. At first, Minister Wang did not know.

古文：未数月及难。
现代文：没过几个月就遭到大难。
English: Within a few months, they were in deep trouble.

古文：王潜
现代文：王潜
English: Wang Qian

古文：唐大和，王潜为荆南节度使。
现代文：唐朝大和年间，王潜任荆南节度使。
English: During the Yamato era of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Qian served as the Jingnan Festival envoy.

古文：无故有白马驰入府门而毙，僵卧塞途。
现代文：有一天，有一匹白马无缘无故跑到门前而死，僵卧在路上挡住通道，这一年王潜就死了。
English: One day, a white horse ran up to the gate for no reason and died, lying on the road blocking the passage. Wang Qian died that year.

古文：是岁而潜卒，此近马祸也。
现代文：这就近于马祸。
English: This is close to a horse accident.

古文：韩约
现代文：韩约
English: Hanwoo

古文：韩约，唐大和中为安南都护。
现代文：韩约在唐朝大和年间任安南都护，当时有一种土产叫玉龙膏。
English: Han You served as the protector of Annan during the Tang Dynasty, and there was a local product called Jade Dragon Balm at that time.

古文：时土产有玉龙膏，南人用之，能化银液。
现代文：安南人用它，能化解银液。
English: The Annamese use it to dissolve silver solution.

古文：耆旧相传，其膏不可赍往，犯者则为祸耳。
现代文：时代相传，这种膏不可带走，违反的人就会招来祸患。
English: This anointing, handed down through the ages, cannot be taken away, and those who violate it invite disaster.

古文：约不之信，及受代还阙，贮之以归。时为执金吾，果首罹甘露之祸，乃贪利冒货之所致也。
现代文：韩约不相信这种事，等到受命回京，贮藏玉龙膏回家，当时任执金吾，后果然遭遇甘露之祸，这就是贪图小利冒险所导致的。
English: Han Yao didn't believe it, but when he was ordered to go back to Beijing to store the Jade Dragon Balm, he didn't do it, and as a result, he suffered the misfortune of the nectar, which was caused by the greed for small profits.

古文：王氏
现代文：王氏
English: The Wang family

古文：唐河阳城南百姓王氏庄，有小池，池边巨柳数栽。
现代文：唐朝河阳城南的百姓王氏庄。家里有一个小水池，池边有几棵大柳树。
English: Wang Shizhuang, a villager south of the Tang Dynasty Heyang City, has a small pond at home, with several large willow trees by the pond.

古文：开成末，叶落池中，旋化为鱼，大小如叶，食之无味。
现代文：开成末年，树叶落到水池里，立刻变成鱼，大小和树叶差不多。
English: At the end of the growing season, the leaves fall into the pond and immediately turn into fish, about the same size as the leaves.

古文：至冬，其家有官事。
现代文：吃起来没什么滋味。到了冬天，他们家就有了犯法的事。
English: It doesn't taste good to eat. In the winter, their family got into trouble with the law.

古文：王哲
现代文：王哲
English: Wang Zhe

古文：唐虔州刺史王哲在平康里治第西偏。
现代文：唐朝虔州刺史王哲在平康里修建家里的西偏房。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Wang Zhe, a scholar from Qianzhou, built the west wing of his house in Pingkangli.

古文：家人掘地，拾得一石子，朱书其上曰： 修此不吉。 
现代文：他家的仆奴们挖地，拾到一粒石子，上面有用红笔写的字： 修这房屋不吉利。 
English: His family's servants dug into the ground and found a stone on which was written in red ink: "It is bad luck to rebuild this house."

古文：家人揩拭，转分明。
现代文：家人擦了擦，那字更加清楚了。
English: The family members rubbed it, and the word became clearer.

古文：乃呈哲。哲意家人惰于畚锸，自磨，朱深若石脉。哲甚恶之。
现代文：就呈送给王哲看，王哲认为是那些奴仆不愿干活的借口，就自己研磨那石子，但那红笔的字迹就象石纹一样磨不掉，王哲很讨厌它。
English: He presented it to Wang Zhe to see. Wang Zhe thought it was an excuse for those slaves not wanting to work, so he polished the stone himself. However, the writing on the red pen was like a stone pattern that could not be rubbed off. Wang Zhe hated it.

古文：其月哲卒。
现代文：当月王哲就死了。
English: Wang Zhe died that month.

古文：杜牧
现代文：杜牧
English: Dumu town

古文：唐杜牧自宣城幕除官入京，有诗留别云： 同来不得同归去，故国逢春一寂寥。 
现代文：唐朝杜牧从宣城幕任新职入京，写诗留别说： 同来的不能一同归去，在旧地正逢春天一人多么寂寞。 
English: Du Mu of the Tang Dynasty entered Beijing from his new post as procurator of Xuancheng, and wrote a poem: Don't say: You can't go back together, how lonely one is in the old place in spring.

古文：其后二十余年，连典四郡。
现代文：这以后二十多年，连续主管四郡。
English: After this, for more than twenty years, he was successively in charge of four counties.

古文：后自湖州刺史拜中书舍人，题汴河云： 自怜流落西归疾，不见春风二月时。 
现代文：后来从湖州刺史再升为中书舍人。题诗汴河说： 自觉可怜流落在外西归得快，不能在二月再见春风了。 
English: Later, he was promoted from Huzhou scholar to a scholar of Chinese literature. He said of the poem "Linghe": "Self-consciously poor, I returned to the west quickly, I can't see the spring breeze again in February."

古文：自郡守入为舍人，未为流落，至京果卒。
现代文：从郡守升为舍人，虽然没有流落，但到了京城果然死了。
English: He was promoted from county magistrate to villager, and although he did not go into exile, he died in the capital.

古文：卢献卿
现代文：卢献卿
English: Lu Xianqing

古文：范阳卢献卿，唐大中中举进士，词藻为同流所推。
现代文：范阳人卢献卿，唐大中年间中举进士。诗文被同辈人所推举。
English: Lu Xianqing, a Fanyang man, was a junior high school student at Tang University. His poetry was highly praised by his peers.

古文：作《愍征赋》数千言，时人以为庾子山《哀江南》之亚。
现代文：作的《愍征赋》有几千字，当时的人都认为仅次于庾子山《哀江南》的文章。
English: At that time, people thought that the article was second only to "South of the Yangtze River" written by Zou Zishan.

古文：连年不中第，荡游衡湘，到郴而病。
现代文：但他连年也没有考取功名。于是在衡湘一带荡游。到了彬城就病倒了。
English: But he didn't win any awards for years. So he wandered around Hengxiang. When he got to Bincheng, he fell ill.

古文：梦人赠诗云： 卜筑郊原古，青山唯四邻；扶疏绕屋树，寂寞独归人。 
现代文：曾梦见有人赠给他一首诗说： 我算你将在古郊原上筑屋，四邻只有青山。绕屋的树木枝叶繁茂。
English: He once dreamed that someone gave him a poem saying: I suppose you will build a house in the ancient countryside, surrounded only by green mountains. The trees around the house are lush.

古文：献卿旬日而殁。
现代文：你自己归去多么寂寞。 献卿十多天后就死了。
English: How lonely it must have been for you to go back alone. He died more than ten days after the dedication.

古文：郴守为葬之近郊。
现代文：郴州太守在近郊埋葬了他。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou buried him in a nearby suburb.

古文：果以夏初，皆符所梦者。
现代文：时间果然是夏初，与所梦到的都相符。
English: The time was indeed the beginning of summer, and it matched everything I had dreamed of.

古文：卢骈
现代文：卢骈
English: Lu Wei

古文：唐卢骈员外，才俊之士。
现代文：唐朝有个员外叫卢骈，是个俊美有才能的士人。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, there was an outsider named Lu Yao, who was a handsome and talented scholar.

古文：忽一日晏抵青龙精舍，休僧院，词气凄惨，如蓄甚忧，其呼嗟往复于轩槛间。僧问不对。逮夜将整归骑，徘徊四顾，促命毫砚，题于南楣曰： 寿夭虽云命，荣枯亦太偏；不知雷氏剑，何处更冲天。 题毕，草草而去。
现代文：不知道雷氏宝剑，在何处冲天而起。 
English: I don't know where Lei's sword rose into the sky.

古文：涉旬出官，未逾月卒。
现代文：题完后，急忙走了。经过十多天当了官，未果一个月就死了。
English: After finishing the problem, he hurriedly left. After more than ten days of being an official, he died a month later.

古文：其诗至今在院，僧逢其人，辄话其异。
现代文：他的诗到现在还在寺院里，僧人碰到人就说这是怪事。
English: His poem is still in the temple, and when monks come across it, they say it is a strange thing.

古文：封望卿
现代文：封望卿
English: Lord of the Heirloom

古文：唐封望卿，仆射敖之子。
现代文：唐朝的封望卿，是仆射敖的儿子。
English: Fengwangqing of the Tang Dynasty was the son of Hupehaeng.

古文：杜邠公悰镇岐下，自省中请为判官。
现代文：杜公邠悰镇守岐下，从省中把他请来作判官。
English: Du Gongjun, the keeper of the town of Qishita, invited him from the province to be the judge.

古文：其所常居室壁，有笔洒墨迹者。
现代文：他常住的屋墙上有笔洒的墨迹。
English: The walls of the building where he usually lives are splattered with ink.

古文：望卿一日，忽以指爪尽掐去之，其色如丧。洎侍儿或问其故，望卿默不应。
现代文：有一天，望卿忽然用指甲全都把墨迹掐去了，他的脸色像死人一样，等到侍童来了就问他这是什么原因，望卿沉默不语，没过多久就病得很历害。
English: One day, Lord Wang suddenly wiped off all the ink with his fingernails, his face looked like a dead man. When the servant came, he asked him what the reason was. Lord Wang was silent, and soon became very ill.

古文：无何病甚，谓侍儿曰： 记吾前日以指瓜掐墨迹否？
现代文：对侍童说： 你记得我前些天用指甲掐去墨迹的事吗？
English: To the page boy: Do you remember the other day when I used my nail clippers to remove the ink?

古文：吾其时恶之，不能语汝。每点乃一鬼字。
现代文：我那时特别讨厌它，不能告诉你，那每一点都是一个鬼字。 
English: I hated it so much at the time, I can't tell you, it was every bit as bad.

古文：数日而卒。
现代文：几天后病死了。
English: Xue Shaoyin recounted the story.

古文：崔彦曾
现代文：崔彦曾
English: Cui Yanzeng

古文：荥阳郡城西有永福湖，引郑水以涨之。
现代文：荥阳郡城西有个永福湖。引入郑水使它充满。
English: There is a Yongfu Lake in the west of Shengyang County. The introduction of Zhengshui has filled it.

古文：平时环岸皆台树花木，乃太守郊劳班饯之所。西南壖多修竹乔林，则故徐帅崔常侍彦曾之别业也。
现代文：平时环绕岸边都修台栽树种上多种花木，这是太守在郊外慰劳饯别用的场所，西南面的空地上多栽竹植树，这是已故徐帅的常侍崔彦曾的副业。
English: In ordinary times, the banks are surrounded by terraces planted with trees and various flowers and trees. This is a place for the governor to use in the suburbs, and the open space in the southwest is mostly planted with bamboo trees. This was the sideline of the late Xu Shuai's regular attendant Cui Yan.

古文：唐咸通中，庞勋作乱。彦曾为贼执，湖水赤如凝血者三日。
现代文：唐朝咸通年间，庞勋作乱，崔彦曾被贼人抓获，湖水红得象凝血长达三天。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Pang Xun made a disturbance, Cui Yan was once captured by thieves, and the lake was red like blood for three days.

古文：未几而凶问至。
现代文：不长时间凶信就到了。
English: It didn't take long for the bad news to arrive.

古文：昔河间王之征辅公袥也，江行，舟中宴群帅，命左右以金碗酌江水。
现代文：过去河间王征讨辅公袥，在江中行船，于船中宴请众帅，命令左右的人用金碗酌取江水，将要饮用。
English: In the past, emperors used to go to the river to solicit aid from the public, sailing in the middle of the river, inviting the generals to a banquet in the boat, and ordering the people around them to use gold bowls to drink river water.

古文：将饮之，水至忽化为血，合座失色。
现代文：水打上来忽然变成了血。满座的人都变了脸色。
English: When the water hit, it suddenly turned into blood, and everyone in the auditorium turned pale.

古文：王徐曰： 碗中之血，公袥授首之征。 
现代文：河间王慢慢地说： 碗中的血，是公袥被砍头的征兆。 
English: King Kawama said slowly, "The blood in the bowl is a sign that the prince has been beheaded.

古文：果破之，则祸福之难明也如是。崔雍
现代文：果然打败了公袥。像这样祸福很难断定啰！崔雍
English: He successfully defeated Gong Li. It's hard to judge the blessing and the curse like this! Cui Yong

古文：崔雍起居，誉望清美，尤嗜古书图画。
现代文：崔雍这个人的起卧动止等日常生活，追求清奇高雅的环境，特别爱好古书古画。
English: Cui Yong's daily life, such as getting up and moving around, pursues a clean and elegant environment, and is particularly fond of ancient books and paintings.

古文：故钟王韩展之迹，萃于其家；常宝太真上马图一轴，以为画品之上者。
现代文：所以钟王韩展的墨迹，都荟萃在他家里，以前收藏太真上马图一轴，认为这是绘画的上品。
English: Therefore, the ink blots of Zhong Wang Han Zhan are all gathered in his home. He used to collect too much ink, and thought that this was the top quality of painting.

古文：唐咸通戊子岁，授禄二千石于和州。
现代文：唐朝咸通戊子年，在和州授俸禄二千石。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Hamdong Tongwuzi was awarded a stipend of two thousand koku in Hezhou.

古文：值庞勋构逆，丰沛间贼锋四掠，历阳么郡。
现代文：在庞勋反叛时，丰沛之间贼寇所到之处四处抢掠，达到阳么郡。
English: During the rebellion of Pang Xun, the bandits of Fengpei plundered everywhere they went, reaching as far as Yangshuo County.

古文：右史儒生，非枝拒所及矣，乃命小将赍持牛酒犒贼师，且以全雉蝶活黎庶为请，由是境亡剽戮之患。
现代文：一个右史儒生，不是他的能力所能抗拒的，于是就命令小将带着酒肉犒劳贼军。并且请求他们保全城镇免除百姓性命之危。
English: A right-wing Confucian scholar could not resist, so he ordered the young general to bring wine and meat to the laborers, and asked them to protect the town from the danger to the lives of the people.

古文：虽矫为款谕，而密表自陈。时宰有不协者，因置之以法。
现代文：虽然假托是皇帝的命令，但还是上表书自己陈述当时这样做的理由，当时的宰相有和他不对付的，因此最后还是依法处置了。
English: Although it was assumed to be an order from the emperor, the above document still stated the reason for doing so at the time. The prime minister at the time did not agree with him, so it was finally dealt with in accordance with the law.

古文：士君子相吊。
现代文：当时的仁士君子们都来吊唁。
English: At that time, all the noblemen and gentlemen came to offer their condolences.

古文：后有得崔君所宝画者，轴杪题云： 上蔡之犬堪嗟，人生到此，华亭之鹤虚唳。天命如何。 
现代文：后来有得到崔雍所收藏的宝画的人，看见在轴底下题了几行字说： 上蔡的犬叫得很历害，人生到了这种地步，华亭的鹤也只能空鸣，天命啊，又能怎么样呢？ 
English: Later, some people who obtained the treasure paintings collected by Cui Yong saw a few lines of words inscribed at the bottom of the shaft, saying: Shang Cai's dog barked very hard, life has reached this stage, Huating's cranes can only sing in the air, it's fate, what can I do?

古文：字虽真迹，不书时日。
现代文：字虽然真是崔雍的字迹，但没有写时间。
English: Although the handwriting was indeed that of Cui Yong, there was no time to write.

古文：识者云，闻命之后，无暇及此，其予知耶？复偶然耶？
现代文：有明白此事的人说： 知道自己的命运后，没有闲暇顾及到这些了。 这是自己预知呢，还是偶然呢？
English: Some people who know about this said, "After knowing my fate, I don't have time to think about these things. Is it my own foresight, or is it a coincidence?

古文：庞从
现代文：庞从
English: Pang Cong

古文：唐昭宗乾宁丙辰岁，朱梁太祖诛不附己者。
现代文：唐昭宗乾宁丙辰年，朱梁太祖诛杀那些不依附顺从他的人。
English: In the year of Qianning Bingchen of the Tang Zhaozong, Zhu Liang Taizu killed those who did not follow him.

古文：兖师朱瑾亡命淮海，梁祖命徐师庞从，会军五万于青口。所屯之地，盖兵书谓之绝地。人不驾肩，行一舍，方至夷坦之处。时梁祖命腹心者监护之，统师莫之能御。
现代文：兖军统帅朱瑾逃命到淮海，梁祖命令徐州统帅庞从在青口会合五万军队讨伐朱瑾，但他驻扎军队的地方，都是兵书上所说的绝境，山高路窄，人不能并肩而行，行军三十多里，才到了平坦的地方，当时梁祖又命令一个自己信任的人在庞从的身边监护他。虽然他统帅军队。但不能自作主张。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Han army, Zhu Xi, fled for his life to Huaihai. Liang Zu ordered the commander-in-chief of Xuzhou, Pang Cong, to gather fifty thousand troops from Qingkou to fight against Zhu Xi. However, the places where he stationed the troops were all in the desperate situation described in the army book. The mountain roads were narrow, and people could not walk side by side. The army marched for more than thirty miles before reaching a flat place. At that time, Liang Zu also ordered a person whom he trusted to guard him at Pang Cong's side. Although he was the commander-in-chief of the army, he could not

古文：未信宿，朱瑾果自督数万而至。
现代文：连宿两夜，朱谨果然亲自率领几万大军到来。
English: After staying for two consecutive nights, Zhu Zhen himself led tens of thousands of troops to arrive.

古文：从闻瑾亲至，一军丧魄。及战，无敢萌斗志，或溺或浮，唯一二获免。
现代文：庞从听说朱瑾亲自到来，全军都丧魂落魄，等到战斗开始，庞从的军队都丧失了斗志，有的淹死，有的被俘虏，只有一二个人逃跑了。
English: When Pang heard that Zhu Xi had arrived in person, the whole army was in despair. By the time the battle began, Pang Cong's army had all lost their fighting spirit. Some had drowned, some had been captured, and only one or two had escaped.

古文：先是瑾军未至前，部伍虚异，尤多怪惊，刁斗架自行于军帐之前。
现代文：在朱瑾的军队没有到来以前，部下的兵士们就常闹虚惊，刁斗架自己就跑到军帐前面。
English: Before Zhu Xi's army arrived, the soldiers of his subordinates often made false alarms, and Zou Doujia himself ran to the front of the military tent.

古文：家属在徐州，亦凶怪屡见。
现代文：家属在徐州，也是多次见到奇异怪象。
English: Family members in Xuzhou have also seen strange phenomena many times.

古文：使宅之后，素有妖狐之穴，或府主有灾即见。时命僧于雕堂建道场。
现代文：住宅后面，平常就有妖狐的洞穴。有时主人有灾它就出现，当时让和尚在雕堂前面摆了道场。
English: Behind the house, there is usually a fox's cave. Sometimes it appears when the owner is in trouble. At that time, the monk set up a dojo in front of the sculpture hall.

古文：统未亡之前，家人望见燕子楼上，有妇人衣红，白昼凭栏而立。见人窥之，渐移身退后而没。
现代文：在统帅庞从的军队没有失败以前，他的家人就看见在燕子楼上有一个穿红衣服的妇人，大白天就靠着栏杆站着，见到人看她，才渐渐后退而消失。
English: Before Commander Pang Cong's army was defeated, his family saw a woman in a red dress on the Swallow Building. She stood against the railing in broad daylight, and when people saw her, she gradually retreated and disappeared.

古文：时登楼之门，皆扃鐍之。
现代文：当时登楼的门都上了锁。
English: The doors to the building were locked at the time.

古文：不数日，凶问至。
现代文：不过几天，坏消息就来了。
English: But a few days later, the bad news came.

