古文：追度牒
现代文：追度牒
English: The ultimatum

古文：一乡官游寺，问和尚吃荤否。
现代文：有一个地方官到寺院游玩，见到一个和尚，问他吃不吃肉。
English: A local official visited a temple, met a monk and asked him if he ate meat.

古文：曰： 不甚吃。但逢饮酒时，略用些。 
现代文：和尚说： 不怎么吃，只是在赴宴饮酒时，稍微吃一点。 
English: The monk said, "I don't eat much, but when I go to a banquet and drink alcohol, I eat a little.

古文：曰： 然则汝又饮酒乎？ 
现代文：地方官说： 这么说来，你还喝酒呀？ 
English: The magistrate said: So you still drink?

古文：曰： 不甚吃。但逢家岳妻舅来，略陪些。 
现代文：和尚又说： 也不怎么喝，只是在妻舅来的时候，陪他喝一点。 
English: The monk also said, "I don't drink much either, but when my wife's uncle comes, I drink a little with him."

古文：乡官怒曰： 汝又有妻，全不像出家人的戒行。明日当对县官说，追你度牒。 
现代文：地方官一听大怒，说： 你还有妻子呀，完全不像个出家人的样子，明天我就对县官说，把你的文书收回去。 
English: The local official was furious and said, "You still have a wife. You don't look like a monk at all. Tomorrow I'll tell the county official to take your documents back."

古文：僧曰： 不劳费心，三年前贼情事发，早已追去了。 
现代文：和尚说： 不劳您费心，三年前就因为做贼被发现，早就收回去了。 
English: The monk said, "No need to trouble yourself. Three years ago, he was caught for being a thief, and he was taken back a long time ago.

古文：掠缘簿
现代文：掠缘簿
English: The Book of Plunder

古文：和尚做功德回，遇虎，惧甚，以铙钹一片击之。复至，再投一片，亦如之。
现代文：有个和尚做功德回来，路上遇到老虎，十分害怕，用一片铙钹打虎，老虎躲闪，又扑过来；和尚又投一片，老虎躲开又回来。
English: There was a monk who was returning home after performing a meritorious deed. On the way, he met a tiger. He was very scared. He beat the tiger with a piece of wood. The tiger dodged and pounced again. The monk threw another piece of wood, and the tiger dodged and came back.

古文：乃以经卷掠去，虎急走归穴。
现代文：于是和尚拿经卷向老虎扔去，老虎急忙跑回洞里。
English: So the monk took the scroll and threw it at the tiger, which ran back into the cave.

古文：穴中母虎问故。答曰： 适遇一和尚无礼，只扰得他两片薄脆，就掠一本缘簿过来，不得不跑。 
现代文：洞里母老虎问它为什么慌乱跑回洞里，老虎回答说： 刚才遇到一个和尚好没有道理，只吃了他两片薄脆，他就丢一大本化缘簿过来，我不得不跑。 
English: The tigress in the cave asked it why it was running back to the cave in a panic. The tiger replied, "Just now, I met a monk who was being unreasonable. I only ate two thin crispy pieces from him, but he threw a big book of chemical affinities at me, so I had to run.

古文：发往邺都
现代文：发往邺都
English: Sent to Chengdu

古文：有素不信佛事者，死后坐罪甚重。
现代文：有个人一向不信佛，死后阎王给他判了极重的罪。
English: There was a man who never believed in Buddha. After his death, the king of hell sentenced him to a very serious crime.

古文：乃倾其冥资，延请僧鬼作功课，遍觅不得。问人曰： 此间固无僧乎？ 
现代文：这个鬼就拿出家中所有的资财，请鬼僧为他诵经念佛，以求有个超度，到处找不到鬼僧，就问一个鬼： 这里没有鬼僧吗？ 
English: This ghost took out all of the family's wealth and resources, and asked the ghost monks to chant sutras and recite Buddhist scriptures for him, in order to have a superpower. Unable to find a ghost monk anywhere, he asked a ghost: "Are there no ghost monks here?"

古文：曰： 来是来得多。都发往邺都了。 
现代文：回答说： 来是来得多，都打入十八层地狱之下为阎王挖煤去了。 
English: He answered, "Many have come and gone. They have all gone to dig coal for the king of hell beneath the eighteen layers of hell.

古文：追荐
现代文：追荐
English: Follow-up recommendation

古文：一僧追荐亡人，需银三钱，包送西方。
现代文：一个和尚超度死亡的人，需要收银子三钱，包送到西天极乐世界。
English: A person who has died a monk's death needs to collect three coins and send them to the paradise of the West.

古文：有妇超度其夫者，送以低银。僧遂念往东方，妇不悦。
现代文：有个妇女要求超度她的丈夫，给了二钱银子，和尚于是就念往东走，妇女不高兴，和尚怪他钱给少了。
English: There was a woman who asked for more money than her husband, and he gave her two silver coins. The monk then decided to go east. The woman was not happy, and the monk blamed him for giving her less money.

古文：以低银对，即算补之，改念西方。
现代文：妇女立刻赔着笑脸又补给他一钱银子，和尚又改念往西方走。
English: The woman immediately smiled and gave him a silver coin, and the monk changed his mind and went west.

古文：妇哭曰： 我的天。只为几分银子，累你跑到东又跑到西，好不苦呀！ 
现代文：这个妇女哭喊着说： 我的天，只为这几分银子，累得你跑到东又跑到西，好苦呀！ 
English: The woman cried out, "My God, it's so hard for you to run from east to west for just a few pennies!

古文：哭响屁
现代文：哭响屁
English: Crying out loud

古文：一人以幼子命犯孤宿，乃送出家。
现代文：一个人给儿子算命，说他命中注定要出家当和尚才能活长，于是就送儿子去当和尚。
English: A man told his son's fortune-teller that he was destined to become a monk in order to live long, so he sent his son to become a monk.

古文：僧设酒款待，子偶撒一屁甚响，父不觉大恸。
现代文：和尚很高兴，设酒宴款待，小儿偶然放了一个响屁，父亲不由得大哭起来。
English: The monk was very happy and held a banquet. The child accidentally let out a loud fart and the father couldn't help but burst into tears.

古文：僧曰： 撒屁乃是常事，何以发悲？ 
现代文：和尚说： 放屁乃是常事，你为何要哭呢？ 
English: The monk said, "Farting is normal, so why are you crying?

古文：父曰： 我想小儿此后要撒这个响屁，再不能够了。 
现代文：父亲说： 我想小儿从今以后要放这么响的屁，是万万不能的了。 
English: The father said, "I don't think it's possible for my child to fart so loudly from now on.

古文：闻香袋
现代文：闻香袋
English: Scented bag

古文：一僧每进房，辄闭门口呼 亲肉心肝 不置。
现代文：有个和尚每次走进卧室，总是关上门，口里 亲肉心肝 地叫个不停。
English: There was a monk who, every time he went into his bedroom, always shut the door and kept shouting, "I love you."

古文：众徒俟其出，启钥镉觑之，无他物，惟席下一香囊耳。
现代文：徒弟们乘他外出，想要捉弄他。可是寻遍了他的卧室，也没发现任何可疑的东西，只有席子下有个香囊。
English: The apprentices took him out and wanted to play tricks on him, but they searched his bedroom and found nothing suspicious, except for a sachet of incense under the mat.

古文：众疑此有来历，乃去香，实以鸡粪。
现代文：徒弟们觉得这个香囊必定有些古怪，就把里面的香粉拿走，塞进鸡粪。
English: The apprentices thought there must be something strange about the sachet, so they took away the powder and stuffed it with chicken manure.

古文：僧既归，仍闭门取香囊，且嗅且唤曰： 亲肉心肝呀，你怎么这等臭。非撒了一屁么？ 
现代文：和尚回来后，仍然关上门，取出香囊，一边闻一边呼唤道： 亲肉心肝呀，你怎么这样臭，难道是放了一屁吗？ 
English: After the monk came back, he still closed the door, took out the sachet of incense, and while smelling it, he called out, "Dear flesh and blood, why do you smell like this? Did you just fart?

古文：卖字
现代文：卖字
English: Word of mouth

古文：一妇游虎丘，手持素扇。
现代文：有个妇女拿一把白绢扇，在虎丘山游玩。
English: A woman takes a pair of egret fans for a walk in the Huqiu Mountains.

古文：山上有卖字者，每字索钱一文。
现代文：山上有个卖字的，每题一个字要一文钱。
English: There is a word peddler on the mountain. He charges a penny per word.

古文：妇止带有十八文求写，卖字者题曰： 美貌一佳人，胭脂点嘴唇，好像观音样，少净瓶。 
现代文：妇女只带有十八文钱，让他题字，卖字的题字道： 美貌一佳人，胭脂点嘴唇，好像观音样，少净瓶。 
English: The woman only had 18 yuan with her, so she asked him to inscribe the words. The seller's inscription read: "Beautiful woman, rosy lips, like a goddess of mercy, less clean bottle."

古文：子持扇，为馆师见之。问： 此扇何来？ 子述以故。师曰： 被他取笑了。 
现代文：回家后，妇女的儿子拿着扇子，被教书先生看见了，询问此扇来历，妇女的儿子就把题字经过告诉了他。教书先生说： 被他取笑了。 
English: After returning home, the woman's son was holding a fan and was seen by the teacher. When he asked about the origin of the fan, the woman's son told him about the inscription. The teacher said: "He made fun of me."

古文：因取十七文，看他如何写法。
现代文：先生就取了十七文钱，看卖字的如何题写。
English: The teacher took seventeen pennies to see how to inscribe the words.

古文：卖者即书云： 聪明一秀才，文章滚出来，一日宗师到，直呆。 
现代文：卖字的马上写道： 聪明一秀才，文章滚出来，一日宗师到，直呆。 
English: The salesperson immediately wrote: Clever and talented, the article rolled out, the teacher arrived one day, and I was stunned.

古文：生取扇，含怒下山。途遇一僧，询知其故。
现代文：教书先生拿着扇子生气地下山去了，途中遇到一个和尚，和尚询问后，知道了教书先生恼怒的缘故。
English: Mr. Teach angry went down the mountain with a fan. On the way, he met a monk. After the monk inquired, he learned the reason for Mr. Teach's anger.

古文：僧曰： 待小僧去难他。 
现代文：和尚说： 等小僧我去为难他一下。 
English: The monk said, "Wait for the boy, I'll go and embarrass him."

古文：遂携十六文以往。
现代文：于是就带了十六文钱前往。
English: So he took sixteen pennies with him.

古文：写者题曰： 伶俐一和尚，好像如来样。睡到五更头，硬。 
现代文：卖字的写道： 伶俐一和尚，好似如来样，睡到五更头，硬。 
English: The seller wrote: "Chang Yi Monk, like a real monk, sleeps until 5 a.m., hard.

古文：僧曰： 尾韵不雅，补钱四文，求你换过。 
现代文：和尚说： 尾韵不雅，补交四文钱，求你更换一下。 
English: The monk said, "The ending rhyme is not elegant. Please change it and pay the additional four-cents."

古文：卖字曰： 既写，如何抹去？不若与你添上罢。 
现代文：卖字的说： 已经写定了，怎好抹去，不如给你添上吧。 
English: The seller said, "It's already written, how can I erase it, it's better to add it to you."

古文：援笔写曰： 硬到大天亮。 
现代文：随即操起笔来写道： 硬到大天亮。 
English: Then he took up his pen and wrote: "Hard until dawn."

古文：没骨头
现代文：没骨头
English: No bones.

古文：停篙问曰： 你们适才骂我狗骨头，汝秀才是甚骨头，讲得有理，饶汝性命，不然推下水去！ 
现代文：秀才、道士、和尚三人同乘一船过河。艄公解缆绳稍微慢了一点，三个人就骂道： 狗骨头，为什么这样慢？ 艄公听了十分生气，忍气摆渡。撑到河中时，停船问道： 你们刚才骂我狗骨头，你秀才是什么骨头？说得有理，饶你性命，否则推下水去！ 
English: Three people, a scholar, a Taoist and a monk, were crossing the river in the same boat. The eunuch was a little slow in untying the rope, and the three people scolded him: "Dog bone, why are you so slow?" The eunuch was very angry when he heard this and endured the ferry. When he reached the middle of the river, he stopped the boat and asked: "You just called me dog bone, what kind of bone is your scholar? You are right, spare your life, otherwise push it into the water!"

古文：士曰： 我读书人攀龙附凤，自然是龙骨头。 
现代文：秀才说： 我们读书人攀龙附凤，自然是龙骨头。 
English: Xiu Cai said: We readers are like dragons and phoenixes, naturally we are the bones of the dragon.

古文：次问道士，乃曰： 我们出家人，仙风道骨，自然是神仙骨头。 
现代文：艄公又问道士，道士说： 我们出家人仙风道骨，自然是神仙骨头。 
English: Zeng Gong also asked the priest, and the Taoist said, "Our monastics have the bones of immortals. Naturally, they are the bones of immortals.

古文：和尚无可说得，乃慌哀告曰： 乞求饶恕，我这秃子，从来是没骨头的。 
现代文：和尚没有什么可说，便慌忙哀求道： 乞求饶恕，我这秃子，从来是没有骨头的。 
English: The monk had nothing to say, so he hurriedly pleaded: "Beg forgiveness, I, the bald man, never had any bones.

古文：杜徐
现代文：杜徐
English: Du Xu

古文：一僧赴宴而归。人问坐第几席，答曰： 首席是姓杜的，次席是姓徐的，杜徐之下，就是贫僧了。 
现代文：有个和尚赴宴回来，别人问他坐第几席，和尚回答说： 首席是姓杜的，第二席是姓徐的，杜徐之下，就是贫僧了。 
English: A monk went to a banquet and came back. Someone asked him which seat to take. The monk replied, "The first is surnamed Du, the second is surnamed Xu, and below Du Xu is a poor monk."

古文：天报
现代文：天报
English: Tian Bao

古文：老僧往后园出恭，误被笋尖搠入臀眼，乃唤疼不止。小沙弥见之。合掌云： 阿弥陀佛，天报。 
现代文：有个老和尚到后竹园内拉屎，误被竹尖插入屁眼，于是他不停地叫疼，小和尚见了合掌道： 阿弥陀佛，天报应。 
English: An old monk went to defecate in the back of the bamboo garden. By mistake, the tip of the bamboo was inserted into his buttock, so he kept crying out in pain. The little monk looked at him and said, "Amitabha Buddha, heaven will reward you."

古文：问秃
现代文：问秃
English: Ask Balding

古文：一秀才问僧人曰： 秃字如何写？ 
现代文：有个秀才想取笑和尚，就问： 秃字怎么写？ 
English: There was a genius who wanted to make fun of a monk, so he asked: How do you write 秃字?

古文：僧曰： 不过秀才的尾巴弯过来就是了。 
现代文：和尚回答道： 只不过是把秀才的屁股翘上来就是了。 
English: The monk replied, "It's just a matter of wiping the scholar's bottom."

古文：当真取笑
现代文：当真取笑
English: Taking a joke seriously

古文：一和尚途行，一小厮叫曰： 和尚和尚，光头浪荡。 
现代文：有个和尚在路上走，一个小孩喊道： 和尚和尚，光头浪荡。 
English: There was a monk walking down the road, and a child called out, "Monk, monk, wandering around with a shaved head."

古文：僧怒云： 一个筋头翻在你娘肚上。 
现代文：和尚听了生气道： 一个筋斗，翻到你娘肚皮上。 
English: The monk said angrily, "One coil, turn it over onto your daughter's stomach."

古文：妇怒曰： 我家小厮，不过作耍，为何出此粗言？ 
现代文：小孩的母亲听了生气地说： 我家小孩，不过是开玩笑，你为什么说这样的粗话？ 
English: The child's mother listened and angrily said: My child, it was just a joke, why did you say such rude words?

古文：僧曰： 娘娘，难道小僧当真，何须着急？ 
现代文：和尚回答说： 娘子，我也不当真，着什么急嘛？ 
English: The monk replied, "Daughter, I'm not serious. What's the hurry?

古文：道士狗养
现代文：道士狗养
English: Taoist Dog Breeding

古文：猪栏内忽产下一狗，事属甚奇。
现代文：母猪在猪栏内产下一只狗崽，大家感到很奇怪。
English: A sow has given birth to a litter of puppies in a pig pen, much to everyone's surprise.

古文：邻里环聚议曰： 道是狗养的，又是猪的种；道是猪养的，又是狗的种。 
现代文：邻居们围在一起议论说： 道是狗养的，又是猪的种；道是猪养的，又是狗的种。 
English: Neighbors gathered around and said: "Dao is a dog breeder and a pig breeder; Do is a pig breeder and a dog breeder.

古文：跳墙
现代文：跳墙
English: Wall jump

古文：一和尚偷妇人，为女夫追逐，既跳墙，复倒坠，见地上有光头痕，遂捏拳即指痕土上如冠子样，曰： 不怕道士不承认。 
现代文：有个和尚偷戏一个妇女，被妇女的丈夫发现，追赶到墙下。和尚翻墙而过，倒栽下去，在泥地上留下了光头的痕迹，于是和尚握着拳头在地上压出了一个帽子的形状，说： 不怕道士不承认。 
English: A monk stole the limelight from a woman, was spotted by the woman's husband, and chased him under a wall. The monk ran over the wall, fell down, and left barefoot footprints on the muddy ground. So the monk pressed the shape of a hat on the ground with his clenched fist, saying, "I'm not afraid that the Taoist won't recognize it."

古文：养汉尼
现代文：养汉尼
English: Raising Hanni

古文：有尼姑同一妓者，死见阎王。
现代文：有一个尼姑与一个妓女死后去见阎王。
English: A nun and a prostitute died and went to hell.

古文：王问妓曰： 汝前世做何生理？ 
现代文：阎王问妓女道： 你生前是干什么的？ 
English: The king of hell asked the prostitute: What did you do before you died?

古文：妓曰： 养汉接客。 
现代文：妓女回答说： 养汉接客。 
English: The prostitute replied, "I'm a hostess.

古文：王判云： 养汉接人，方便孤身。
现代文：于是阎王判道： 养汉接客，方便光棍汉。
English: Therefore, the king of hell judged: Raise a man to receive guests, and make it convenient for a single man.

古文：发还阳世，早去超生。 
现代文：因此返还人间，早去超生。 
English: Therefore, return to the human world and go beyond birth.

古文：问尼姑： 你是何人？ 
现代文：阎王又问尼姑： 你是什么人？ 
English: The king of hell also asked the nun: Who are you?

古文：答曰： 吃素念佛。 
现代文：尼姑回答说： 吃素念佛。 
English: The nun replied: "Eat vegetarian and recite the Buddha's name."

古文：王亦判云： 吃素念经，佛口蛇心。
现代文：阎王听后判道： 吃素念经，佛口蛇心。
English: After listening to it, the king of hell judged: "Eat vegetarian chanting, Buddha mouth snake heart."

古文：一百竹片，打断脊筋。 
现代文：打一百竹板，打断她的脊筋骨。 
English: Beat a hundred bamboo planks and break her backbone.

古文：尼哀告曰： 不瞒大王说，小妇人虽是个尼姑，其实背地里养汉，做私窠子的。 
现代文：尼姑哀求说： 不瞒大王说，小妇人我表面上虽说是个尼姑，其实背地里养汉，做暗娼。 僧浴
English: The nun pleaded, "To tell you the truth, Your Majesty, although I am a nun on the surface, I am actually a prostitute behind the scenes.

古文：僧浴僧见道家洗浴，先请师太，次师公，后师父，挨次而行，毫不紊乱。因感慨自叹曰： 独我僧家全无规矩。老和尚不曾下去，小和尚先脱得精光了。 
现代文：和尚见道家洗澡，先请师祖，次请师爷，再请师父，逐次进行，很有规矩，一点也不乱，于是感慨自叹道： 我们僧门人全都没有规矩，老和尚还没下去，小和尚却已经脱得精光了。 
English: When the monk saw a Taoist taking a bath, he first asked his father-in-law, then his father-in-law, and then his father-in-law, one after the other. It was very orderly and not at all chaotic, so he sighed with emotion and said, "All of us monks have no rules. The old monk hasn't gone down yet, but the young monk has already stripped himself bare."

古文：见和尚
现代文：见和尚
English: See the monk

古文：有三人同行，途遇穿一破裤者。
现代文：有三个人一同在路上走，遇到一个穿破裤子的人。
English: Three people were walking along the road when they came across a man wearing torn trousers.

古文：一友曰： 这好像猎户张三。 
现代文：一人说： 这好像猎人张三。 
English: One person said, "It looks like Zhang San, the whale hunter."

古文：一人曰： 不然。还似渔翁撒网。 
现代文：另一人说： 不对，是像渔翁撒网。 
English: Another said, "No, it's like a fisherman casting a net."

古文：又一人曰： 都不确。依我看来，好像一座多年破庙。 
现代文：又一个人说： 都不准确，依我看来，好像一座多年的破庙。 
English: Another person said: "It's all inaccurate. In my opinion, it looks like a temple that has been abandoned for many years.

古文：问： 为何？ 答曰： 前也看见和尚，后也看见和尚。 
现代文：二人问他为什么，回答说： 前面看见和尚，后面也看见了和尚。 
English: The two asked him why, and he replied, "I saw a monk in front of me, and a monk behind me.

古文：上下光
现代文：上下光
English: Up and down light

古文：师号光明，徒号明光。
现代文：师父法号光明，徒弟法号明光。
English: Master's dharma name is bright, disciple's dharma name is bright.

古文：客问： 贤师徒法号如何分别？ 
现代文：客人询问： 贤师、贤徒的名号怎么区别？ 
English: Guest Question: What is the difference between the names of a sage and a disciple?

古文：徒答曰： 上头光是家师，下头光即是小僧。 
现代文：徒弟回答说： 上头光是家师，下头光就是小僧。 
English: The apprentice replied: The top light is the master, and the bottom light is the boy.

古文：望烟囱
现代文：望烟囱
English: Looking up chimneys

古文：富人才当饮啖，闲汉毕集。
现代文：有个富人，每当刚要吃饭的时候，闲汉们就都来了。
English: There was a rich man who, whenever he was about to eat, the idlers would come.

古文：因问曰： 我这里每到饭熟，列位便来，就一刻也不差，却是何故？ 
现代文：因此，富人奇怪地问道： 我这里每到饭熟的时候，各位就来了，一刻也不相差，你们是怎么知道的？ 
English: Therefore, the rich man asked strangely: Every time my meal is ready, you come here, not a moment later, how do you know?

古文：诸闲汉曰： 遥望烟囱内烟出，即知做饭，熄则熟矣，如何得错。 
现代文：众闲汉回答说： 远远地望见你家的烟囱内冒烟，就知道是在做饭，等烟灭了，就是饭熟了，怎么会弄错。 
English: The crowd of idlers replied: "When you can see the smoke from your chimney from far away, you know that you are cooking. When the smoke clears, the meal is ready. How could you be mistaken?

古文：富人曰： 我明日买个行灶来煮，且看你们望甚么？ 
现代文：富人说： 我明天去买个行灶来煮饭，看你们还望什么。 
English: The rich man said, "I'm going to buy a stove tomorrow and cook some rice. Let's see what else you want."

古文：众曰： 你煨了行灶，我等也不来了。 
现代文：众闲汉说： 你要是到了煨行灶的地步，我们也不会来了。 
English: The crowd of idlers said, "If you get to the point of quitting, we won't come either."

古文：忏悔
现代文：忏悔
English: Confession

古文：孝子忏悔亡父，僧诵普庵咒。至 南无佛佗耶 句，孝子喜曰： 正愁我爷难过奈何桥，多承佗过了。 
现代文：有个孝子向死去的父亲忏悔，请和尚念诵普庵咒以超生，念诵到 南无佛佗耶 句时，孝子高兴地说： 正愁我爹难过奈何桥，承蒙你给驮过去了。 
English: A filial son repented to his dead father and asked the monk to chant the Pu'an Mantra to be born again. When he chanted the Nanmufeng sentence, the filial son said happily, "I'm really sorry that my father passed away, but thanks to you, he passed away."

古文：乃出金劳之。
现代文：接着，孝子拿出钱慰劳和尚。
English: Next, the filial son took out money to comfort the monk.

古文：僧曰： 若肯从重布施，连你娘等我也佗了去罢。 桩粪
现代文：和尚说： 你如果肯献出更多的钱，连你娘等人我也驮过去。 桩粪
English: The monk said, "If you are willing to give more money, I will even bring your daughter and others."

古文：有买粪于寺者，道人索倍价，乡人讶之。
现代文：有个乡民向寺庙买粪，道士索要双倍的价钱，乡民十分惊讶。
English: A villager bought excrement from a temple, but the Taoist asked for double the price. The villager was very surprised.

古文：道人曰： 此粪与他处不同，尽是师父们桩实落的，泡开来一担便有两担。 
现代文：道士说： 此粪与其他地方的不同，都是师父们桩实落的，泡开来一担便是两担。 
English: The Taoist said, "This manure is different from that of other places. All the masters have piled it solidly. If one load of manure is soaked up, two loads of manure will be produced.

古文：倒挂
现代文：倒挂
English: Hanging upside down

古文：一士问僧云： 你看我腹中是甚么？ 
现代文：有一人问和尚： 你看我腹中是什么？ 
English: One person asked the monk: What do you see in my stomach?

古文：僧曰： 相公自然满腹文章在内。 
现代文：和尚答： 相公您自然是满腹文章在内。 
English: Monk: Your father-in-law is naturally full of articles.

古文：士曰： 非也。 
现代文：那人说： 不对。 
English: The man said, "That's not right.

古文：曰： 然则是五脏六腑乎？ 
现代文：和尚说： 那么是五脏六腑了？ 
English: The monk said, "So you're exhausted?

古文：士曰： 亦非也。 
现代文：那人说： 也不对。 
English: The man said, "That's not right either.

古文：僧问何物，曰： 一肚皮和尚。若不信，现有一光头挂在外面。 
现代文：和尚问那人到底是什么东西，那人回答说： 是一肚皮和尚，如果不信，现有一光头挂在外面。 
English: The monk asked the man what he was, and the man replied, "A belly monk. If you don't believe me, there's a bald head hanging outside."

古文：祭器
现代文：祭器
English: Sacrificial vessels

古文：僧临终嘱其徒曰： 享祀不须他物，只将你窟臀供座足矣。 
现代文：有个和尚临终前嘱托徒弟说： 我死了以后，祭祀不必用其他东西，只要将你的屁股供在供桌上，我就满足了。 
English: On his deathbed, a monk told his apprentice: "After I die, you don't need to use anything else for the sacrifice. Just offer your bottom on the offering table, and I'll be satisfied."

古文：徒如命。
现代文：徒弟遵嘱。
English: The apprentice complied.

古文：方在祭献，听见有人叩门。忙应曰： 待我收拾了祭器就来。 
现代文：正在祭祀，听见有人敲门，慌忙回答道： 等我收拾了祭器就来。 
English: While they were offering the sacrifice, they heard someone knocking at the door, and they hurriedly answered, "I'll come when I've put away the sacrificial vessels."

古文：头眼
现代文：头眼
English: Head and eyes

古文：一僧与人对弈，因夺角不能成眼，躁甚头痒。乃手摩头顶而沉吟曰： 这个所在，有得一个眼便好。 
现代文：有个和尚与人下围棋，互相夺角做不成眼，和尚烦躁得脑袋发痒，于是手摸头顶沉吟说： 这个地方，如果做成一眼，那就太好了。 
English: There was a monk who was playing Go with someone, and they were trying to outdo each other. The monk was so irritated that his head itched, so he put his hand on the top of his head and said, "This place would be great if it was perfect."

古文：驱蚊
现代文：驱蚊
English: Mosquito repellent

古文：一道士自夸法术高强，撇得好驱蚊符，或请得以贴室中。
现代文：有个道士自夸法术高明，强人一筹，做得一手好驱蚊符。有人求他做了一驱蚊符，贴在卧室里。
English: There was a Taoist who boasted that he was good at spells, a strong man, and made a good mosquito repellent. Someone asked him to make a mosquito repellent and stick it in the bedroom.

古文：至夜蚊虫愈多。往咎道士。
现代文：到了晚上蚊虫更多，那人到道士那里责怪。
English: In the evening, there were more mosquitoes, and the man went to a Taoist priest to complain.

古文：道士曰： 吾试往观之。 
现代文：道士说： 待我去看看。 
English: The Taoist said: Let me go and see.

古文：见所贴符曰： 原来用得不如法耳。 
现代文：道士见了那人所贴的驱蚊符说： 原来是用得不合方法的缘故。 
English: The moralist saw the mosquito repellent sign posted by the man and said: It turned out that it was used in an unsuitable way.

古文：问： 如何用法？ 
现代文：那人问： 那该怎么个用法？ 
English: The man asked: How should it be used?

古文：曰： 每夜赶好蚊虫，须贴在帐子里面。 
现代文：道士说： 每天晚上赶好蚊虫，必须将驱蚊符贴在蚊帐里面。 
English: Taoist said: Every night to catch the mosquitoes, you must stick the mosquito repellent to the inside of the mosquito net.

古文：谢符
现代文：谢符
English: A token of thanks

古文：一道士过王府基，为鬼所迷，赖行人救之，扶以归。
现代文：有个道士碰到王府的墓地，被鬼所迷，凭借过路人相救，扶他回来。
English: There was a Taoist monk who came across the cemetery of the royal palace. He was possessed by a ghost and relied on passers-by to rescue him and help him return.

古文：道士曰： 感君相救，无物可酬，有避邪符一道，聊以奉谢。 
现代文：道士说： 感谢你相救，没什么东西可以酬谢，只有避邪符一道送给你，略表谢意。 
English: The Taoist priest said, "Thank you for rescuing me. I have nothing to thank you for, except for giving you a charm to ward off evil spirits as a small token of my gratitude."

古文：鬼王撒尿
现代文：鬼王撒尿
English: The king of demons is pissing

古文：大族出丧，路逢大雨。
现代文：有个大族人家出丧，路遇大雨。
English: A large family was in mourning, and the road was affected by heavy rain.

古文：女眷人等，避于路旁檐下。
现代文：女家眷等人，躲避在路旁庙檐下。
English: The female members of the family and others took refuge under the eaves of a roadside temple.

古文：和尚没处存身，暂躲在开路神腹内。
现代文：和尚没处存身，暂时躲藏在开路神腹内。
English: The monk had nowhere to hide, so he temporarily hid in the belly of the road-opening god.

古文：少顷，一僧从神腰里伸头探望，看雨住否。
现代文：不一会，一个和尚从开路神腰里伸出头来探望，看雨停了没有。
English: After a while, a monk poked his head out of the god's waist to see if the rain had stopped.

古文：诸女眷惊曰： 我们回避，开路神要撒尿哩。 
现代文：众女家眷吃惊地说： 我们赶快回避，开路神要撒尿哩！ 
English: The women's relatives were surprised and said: "Let's get out of the way, the god of the road wants to pee!"

