古文：王冕，字服周，洛阳人。
现代文：王冕，字服周，洛阳人。
English: Wang Guanyin, Zifu Zhou, Luoyang people.

古文：正德十二年进士。除万安知县。
现代文：正德十二年进士，授万安县知县。
English: Zhengde entered the priesthood in the 12th year, and was conferred the title of Wan'an County.

古文：宸濠反，长吏多奔窜。冕募勇壮士，得死士数千人，从王守仁攻复南昌。
现代文：宸濠反叛朝廷，官吏们多逃窜了，冕招募勇士数千人，随从王守仁攻克南昌。
English: After rebelling against the imperial court, many officials fled, and the crown recruited thousands of warriors to follow Wang Shouren in conquering Nanchang.

古文：宸濠解安庆围，还救，至鄱阳湖，两军相拒。
现代文：宸濠放弃对安庆的围攻，回军救南昌，在鄱阳湖与王守仁所领导的官军相遇。
English: He gave up the siege of Anqing, returned to save Nanchang, and met the government army led by Wang Shuren at Poyang Lake.

古文：濠尽出金制犒士，殊死战，官军不利。冕密白守仁，以小艇实苇于中，拟建昌人语，就贼舰，乘风举火。濠兵大惊，遂溃败，焚溺死者无算。
现代文：宸濠将金钱布帛犒赏士卒，要他们做殊死战斗，形势对朝廷官军不利，而王守仁采用冕的建议，以小船装芦苇，驶近贼舰，乘风举火，使宸濠兵大惊，被烧死溺死者无数。
English: The situation was unfavorable for the imperial official army, and Wang Shuren used Guo's suggestion to load reeds with a small boat, sail close to the pirate ship, and use the wind to light a fire, which shocked the pirates, and countless people were burned to death and drowned.

古文：濠易舟，挟宫人遁。
现代文：宸濠换船带着宫人逃跑。
English: He changed boats and fled with the palace guards.

古文：冕部卒棹渔舟，追执之。
现代文：冕率卒乘渔船追擒。
English: The corona rate is higher when chasing trout by fishing boat.

古文：宸濠平，守仁封新建伯，而冕未及叙，坐他事落职。
现代文：宸濠之乱平定后，守仁封新建伯，而冕却因他事被削职。
English: After the suppression of the Warring States period, Shuren Fong was promoted to the newly created position of Bo, while Guan Rong was demoted for other reasons.

古文：既而录前功，擢兵部主事，巡视山海关。
现代文：后见他平宸濠乱有功，升为兵部主事，巡视山海关。
English: Later, he was promoted to the head of the military department and inspected the Shanhaiguan Customs.

古文：嘉靖三年十二月，辽东妖贼陆雄、李真等作乱，突入关。
现代文：嘉靖三年十二月，辽东妖贼陆雄、李真等作乱，攻入山海关。
English: In December of the third year of Jiajing, Lu Xiong, Li Zhen and other Liaodong monsters and thieves made a riot and invaded the Shanhaiguan Customs.

古文：侍吏欲扶冕趋避，冕不可，曰： 吾有亲在。 
现代文：部属们要挟冕避开，冕不肯，对他们说 ：我母亲在这里。 
English: His subordinates tried to get him to leave, but he refused, telling them: "My mother is here."

古文：诏赠闻诗凤阳同知，伦归德同知，并立祠死所。
现代文：忙奔向母亲住所，执兵器保卫。贼至，母被伤，冕被捕，被贼杀害。
English: He rushed to his mother's residence and defended it with his weapon. Thieves arrived, his mother was injured, arrested, and killed by the thieves.

古文：王鈇，字德威，顺天人。
现代文：诏赠光禄少卿，为他建祠祭祀。王鈇，字德威，顺天人。
English: The emperor presented Guanglu Shaoqing with an imperial edict, and a small shrine was built for him. Wang Yao, also known as Dewi, was a man of heaven.

古文：嘉靖二十九年进士。授常熟知县。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年进士，授常熟知县。
English: He became a scholar in the 29th year of the Jiajing Dynasty.

古文：滨海多大猾，匿亡命作奸，鈇悉贳其罪。
现代文：滨海多奸诈之徒，常窝藏亡命，为非作歹，鈇都赦免其罪。
English: The coast is full of treacherous people. They often hide fugitives, and if they commit a crime, they are pardoned.

古文：倭患起，鈇语诸猾曰： 何以报我？ 
现代文：倭寇之患发生后，钅夫对这些奸诈之徒说 ：何以报答我？ 
English: After the Japanese invasion, the woodcutter said to the traitors, "How can I be repaid?

古文：咸请效死，于是立耆长，部署子弟得数百人，合防卒训练。
现代文：都表示愿誓死效力。于是立长老，收纳子弟数百人与边防士卒一起训练。
English: They all expressed their willingness to work to the death. Therefore, they set up elders and recruited hundreds of children to train with the border guards.

古文：县故无城，鈇率士卒城之。
现代文：县原无城墙，鈇率士卒修建，多次打退倭寇的袭击。
English: The county was originally without a city wall, but it was built with the help of soldiers, and repelled the attacks of Japanese pirates many times.

古文：倭来薄，数御却之。已，自三丈浦分掠常熟、江阴。参政任环令鈇与指挥孔焘分统官民兵三千，破其寨，斩首百五十有奇，焚二十七艘，余倭皆遁。
现代文：其后，倭寇自三丈浦劫掠常熟、江阴，参政任环令钅夫与指挥孔焘分别统官民兵三千破其寨，斩首一百五十多，焚船二十七艘，其他倭寇皆逃。
English: After that, the wokou from Sanzhangpu plundered Changshu and Jiangyin, and the three thousand militiamen under the command of the ring commander Yanfu and the commander Kong Jun, respectively, participated in politics, beheaded more than 150 people, burned 27 ships, and all other wokou fled.

古文：复掠劳县，将由尚湖还海。
现代文：同乡钱泮，字鸣声，原任江西参政。
English: He is a fellow villager of Qianqian, the former member of the Jiangxi Provincial Party Committee.

古文：鈇愤曰： 贼尚敢涉吾地邪！
现代文：回到家乡，因其父亲灵柩被倭寇焚毁，非常忿恨，极力怂恿和支持王钅夫对倭进剿。
English: When he returned to his hometown, he was very angry because his father's coffin was burned by wako, and he tried his best to encourage and support Wang Weifu against wako.

古文：必击杀之。 
现代文：钅夫用小艇数十只追踪倭寇，不幸受到倭寇的夹击。
English: The woodcutter chased the wako with dozens of small boats, but was unfortunately caught by the wako.

古文：鈇陷淖，瞋目大呼，腹中刃死。泮被数枪，杀三贼而死。时三十四年五月也。
现代文：当时只有几个长老相随，钅夫腹被刀刺入，泮身中数枪，皆战死。这是嘉靖三十四年五月的事。
English: At that time, only a few elders were with him. The woodcutter was stabbed in the stomach with a knife and shot several times in the body. They all died in battle. This happened in May of the 34th year of Jiajing.

古文：其子尚宝诉于朝，乃赠太仆丞，而荫尚实为国子生。王德，字汝修，永嘉人。
现代文：朝廷诏赠泮光禄寺卿，赠钅夫太仆寺少卿。在殉难地方立祠，每年按时祭祀。王德，字汝修，永嘉人。
English: The imperial edict bestowed the title of Jinguanglu Temple to Wang De, and the title of Wufu Daju Temple to Shaoqing. A small shrine was built in the place of his martyrdom, and it is regularly held every year. Wang De, also known as Ru Xiu, was from Yongjia.

古文：嘉靖十七年进士。历户科给事中。
现代文：嘉靖十七年进士，曾任户科给事中。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 17th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, and was once in charge of household affairs.

古文：定国公徐延德丐无极诸县闲田为业，且言私置庄田，不宜以灾伤免赋。德抗疏劾之，俺答围都城，屡陈军国便宜，悉报可。
现代文：定国公徐延德请求将无极等县的闲田拨归他所有，德上疏弹劾。蒙古旗之俺答围京师，王德多次奏陈有关军政重事的建议，都被采纳。
English: Xu Yande, the governor of Dingguo, requested that the idle fields in Wuji and other counties be allocated to him, and he was impeached by De Shangsuo. I, the leader of the Mongolian flag, responded by encircling Beijing, and Wang De repeatedly referred to Chen's suggestions on important military and political matters, all of which were adopted.

古文：时城门尽闭，避难者不得入，号呼彻西内。
现代文：当时京师城门都关闭，避难人民不能入城，呼喊之声，响彻西宫。
English: At that time, the gates of the imperial capital were closed, and the people who had taken refuge were not allowed to enter the city. Shouts resounded throughout the West Palace.

古文：德以为言，民始获入。
现代文：德将此情形报告朝廷，建议打开城门，这样，难民才得以入城。
English: De reported the situation to the imperial court and suggested opening the gates so that the refugees could enter the city.

古文：寇退，命募兵山东，所得悉骁勇，为诸道最。
现代文：俺答军退，命德至山东募兵。他所募的都是骁勇之士，是诸将募兵中最好的。
English: I ordered the army to retreat, and I went to Shandong to recruit soldiers. All the soldiers he recruited were very brave, and he was the best recruiter among all the generals.

古文：还朝，会李默长吏部，怒德投刺倨，出为岭南兵备佥事。
现代文：还朝时，正值李默主管吏部工作，认为王德拜谒他时态度傲慢，十分不满，有意把他调出京师，去任岭南兵备佥事。
English: At the time of the Qing Dynasty, when Li Mo was in charge of the work of the cadre department, he thought that Wang Debai's attitude was arrogant and he was very dissatisfied, and he intended to transfer him out of the Beijing Division to serve as a Lingnan soldier.

古文：与巡抚争事，投劾径归。
现代文：德在岭南与巡抚遇事意见不合，他一边上书弹劾，同时离职归家。
English: In Lingnan, Mr. De had a disagreement with the superintendent. He wrote a letter of impeachment on the one hand, and at the same time left his post to return home.

古文：默复起吏部，用前憾，落职闲住。
现代文：李默又起任他为吏部官员，但因有宿怨，德被夺职闲住家中。
English: Li Mo was also appointed as an official of the cadre department, but because of a long-standing grudge, he was deprived of his post and lived idly at home.

古文：德乡居，以倭乱，奉母居城中，倾赀募健儿为保障计。
现代文：德在家乡闲住时，因倭寇侵扰，把母亲接进城内居住，将其全部家财用来募兵，保卫家乡。
English: When De was idling in his hometown, he took his mother to live in the city due to the invasion of wako, and used all of his family's money to recruit soldiers to defend his hometown.

古文：三十七年夏，倭自梅头至，大掠。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年夏，倭自梅头进犯永嘉，大肆掳掠。
English: In the summer of the thirty-seventh year of Jiajing, the Wa attacked Yongjia from Meitou and plundered it.

古文：亡何，倭复至，大掠。
现代文：德与同族叔父王沛督率义军抵御，倭乘夜逃去。
English: De and his uncle Wang Peigu led the rebel army to resist, and Wa fled by night.

古文：德愤怒，勒所部追袭至龙湾，军败，手射杀数人，骂贼死。
现代文：突然有倭寇驾船来侵犯，被王沛等歼灭。不久，倭寇又来进犯。德统率所部追至龙湾，战败被俘，为倭寇所杀。
English: Suddenly, a wokou came to invade by boat and was annihilated by Wang Pei and others. Soon, the wokou attacked again. De Tong led the headquarters to Longwan, was defeated and captured, and was killed by the wokou.

古文：然倭自是不敢越德乡侵郡城矣。
现代文：但从此以后，倭寇再也不敢经过王德家乡去侵犯郡城。
English: But from then on, the wokou would no longer dare to pass through Wang De's hometown to invade the county seat.

古文：事闻，赠太仆少卿，世荫锦衣百户，立祠曰愍忠。
现代文：朝廷知道后，赠王德太仆寺少卿，荫其后世代为锦衣卫百户；为之立祠纪念，名为 愍忠祠 。
English: After the court found out, Wang De was given the title of Junior Secretary of the Taipu Temple. In the following generations, there were hundreds of Jin Yi Wei households. An ancestral shrine was built in his memory, called the Zou Zhong Temple.

古文：沛赠太仆丞，立祠，予荫。汪一中，字正叔，歙人。
现代文：汪一中，字正叔，歙县人。
English: Wang Yizhong, surnamed Zheng Xiu, from Jixian County.

古文：嘉靖二十三年进士。由开封推官历江西副使。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年进士，由开封推官进至江西副使。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he was promoted from Kaifeng magistrate to Jiangxi deputy envoy.

古文：四十年，邻境贼入寇，薄泰和。
现代文：嘉靖四十年，邻境盗贼入侵，攻泰和。
English: In the 40th year of Jiajing, neighboring thieves invaded and attacked Taihe.

古文：一中方宴，投著起曰： 贼鼓行而西，掩我不备，不早计，且无唯类，岂饮酒时乎！ 
现代文：一中正在宴请宾客，闻讯投箸而起，厉声说道： 贼大张旗鼓地西窜，乘我不备进行袭击，若不早为防御，我们还算人吗？现在已不是饮酒的时候了。 
English: One of them, who was entertaining guests at a banquet, threw up his chopsticks when he heard the news, and said in a sharp voice: "Thieves are making a great fanfare, taking advantage of me to attack. If we don't defend ourselves early, are we still human? Now is not the time to drink alcohol."

古文：当路遂以讨贼属之。
现代文：当局把讨贼的重任交给了他。
English: The authorities gave him the important task of tracking down the thieves.

古文：先是，泰和巡检刘芳力战死，贼怒磔其尸。
现代文：在此以前，泰和巡检刘芳极力抗贼，战死后，贼还将他分尸。
English: Prior to this, Liu Fang, a patrol inspector from Taihe, tried his best to resist the thief. After the war, the thief also dismembered his body.

古文：贼薄城，被执，骂贼死。赠国子博士。
现代文：一中跃马奋力抵抗，射死贼二人，杀一人，而自己左胁、臂都受伤，与指挥王应鹏、千户唐鼎皆战死。朝廷赠其光禄寺卿，给祭葬，谥忠愍。
English: In the middle of the battle, Yue Ma fought hard to resist, shot two thieves and killed one, while his left shoulder and arm were injured. He and the commander Wang Yingpeng and Qianhuang Tangding all died in the battle. The imperial court gave him the title of Guanglu Jiaqing, and he was given a ceremonial funeral.

古文：张振德，字季修，昆山人。
现代文：张振德，字季修，昆山人。
English: Zhang Zhende, surnamed Qixiu, from Kunshan.

古文：祖情，从祖意，皆进士。情福建副使，意山东副使。
现代文：祖父张情，进士，曾任福建副使。叔祖父张意，也是进士，曾任山东副使。
English: His grandfather Zhang Rong, a scholar, was a deputy envoy to Fujian, and his great-uncle Zhang Yi, also a scholar, was a deputy envoy to Shandong.

古文：振德由选贡生授四川兴文知县。
现代文：振德由选贡生而授四川兴文知县。
English: Zhende was awarded to Xingwen County, Sichuan Province, by the election of tribute students.

古文：县故九丝蛮地，万历初，始建士墙数尺，户不满千。
现代文：兴文县治原在九丝蛮。万历初，才建土城墙数尺，其户不满一千。
English: Jihara, Xingwen County, is in the middle of nowhere. At the beginning of the millennium, only a few feet of earthen walls were built, and there were less than a thousand households.

古文：永宁宣抚奢崇明有异志，潜结奸人，掠卖子女。
现代文：永宁宣抚奢崇明，心怀不轨，暗中勾结奸徒，掠卖子女。
English: Yongning Xuanfujing is extravagant and lofty-minded, has a bad heart, secretly colludes with traitors, and plunders children.

古文：振德捕奸人，论配之，招还被掠者三百余人。
现代文：振德逮捕了这些奸徒，处以流刑，招还被掠子女三百余人。
English: Zhende arrested these traitors, sentenced them to exile, and recruited more than three hundred abducted children.

古文：崇明贿以二千金，振德怒却之，裂其牍。
现代文：崇明以二千金贿赂他，振德大怒，拒不接受，并撕毁来信。
English: Chongming bribed him with two thousand gold, Zhende was furious, refused to accept, and tore up the letter.

古文：天启元年方赴成都与乡闱事，而崇明部将樊龙杀巡抚徐可求，副使骆日升、李继周等。
现代文：天启元年，赴成都参加乡试，崇明部将樊龙杀死巡抚徐可求、副使骆日升、李继周等。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he went to Chengdu to participate in the township test. The Chongming Department killed the inspector Xu Keku, the deputy inspector Luo Risheng, and Li Jizhou.

古文：重庆知府章文炳、巴县知县段高选皆抗节死，贼遂据重庆。
现代文：重庆知府章文炳、巴东知县段高选坚决抵抗，宁死不屈。贼占据了重庆。
English: Chongqing prefectural Zhang Wenyi and Badong County Duan Gao Xuan resolutely resisted and would rather die than give in. Thieves occupied Chongqing.

古文：时振德兼署长宁，去贼稍远，从者欲走长宁。
现代文：当时，振德兼管长宁县。此地离贼稍远，随行者打算逃往长宁。
English: At that time, Zhende was also in charge of Changning County. This place was a little far from the thieves, and the attendants planned to flee to Changning.

古文：振德曰： 守兴文，正也。 
现代文：振德说： 应当坚守兴文。 
English: Zhende said: We should stick to Xingwen.

古文：疾趋入城。
现代文：于是急忙赶回城。
English: So they hurried back to the city.

古文：长宁主簿徐大礼与振德善，以骑来迎，振德却之。
现代文：长宁主簿徐大礼与振德要好，派人来接他，振德谢绝了。
English: Changning's chief accountant, Xu Dali, wanted to be friends with Zhen De. He sent someone to pick him up, but Zhen De declined.

古文：督乡兵与战，不敌，退集居民城守。
现代文：他督率乡兵与贼战，因寡不敌众，退入城内，组织居民防守。
English: He led the village soldiers to fight against the bandits. As they were outnumbered, he retreated into the city and organized the residents to defend themselves.

古文：会大风雨，贼毁士城入。
现代文：不幸遇大风大雨，贼破土城而入。
English: Unfortunately, in the heavy wind and rain, the thief broke through the mud and entered the city.

古文：乞如张振德例，优加恤典。 
现代文：振德与妻钱氏及二女均自杀，一门死者十二人。朝廷闻其事，赐祭葬，赠光禄寺卿，谥烈愍。
English: Zhende, his wife Qian, and his two daughters all committed suicide, leaving a family of twelve dead. When the imperial court heard about it, they gave them a ceremonial funeral, a temple honor, and a martyr's medal.

古文：报可。董尽伦，字明吾，合州人。
现代文：命当地官府建祠纪念，荫其后代为锦衣卫千户。董尽伦，字明吾，合州人。
English: He ordered the local government to build a memorial shrine, and his descendants are the thousands of Jin, Yi and Wei families. Dong Jinlun, also known as Mingwu, is a native of Hezhou.

古文：万历中举于乡，除清水知县，调安定，咸有惠政。
现代文：万历年间乡试中举，授清水知县，后调安定知县。在两县政绩卓著。
English: During the Wanli era, he was awarded the title of Qingshimizuchi County in the township examination. Later, he was transferred to the stable Zhixian County. His political achievements in the two counties were outstanding.

古文：秩满，安定人诣阙奏留，诏加巩昌同知，仍视县事。
现代文：任期满，安定县民到京城奏请将尽伦留任。朝廷诏令尽伦为巩昌府同知，仍管安定县事。
English: At the end of his term of office, the people of Anding County went to Beijing to appeal to him to remain in office. The Imperial Court decreed that Asing County was the same as Gongchang Prefecture and was still in charge of Anding County affairs.

古文：久之，以同知理甘州军饷，解职归。
现代文：许久以后，尽伦以巩昌府同知之职来负责甘州军饷的供给。后解职归家乡合州。
English: After a long time, Jinlun took up the post of Gongchang prefectural comrade-in-arms to be responsible for the supply of military supplies to Gansu. Later, he was dismissed and returned to his hometown, Hezhou.

古文：天启初，奢崇明反，率众薄城。
现代文：天启初年，奢崇明谋反，率众攻合州城。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, Shuxu Chongming plotted a rebellion and led the crowd to attack the state capital.

古文：尽伦偕知州翁登彦固守。
现代文：尽伦与知州翁登彦固守。
English: Jiren and Chishu Ondenhiko held firm.

古文：贼遣使说降，尽伦大怒，手刃贼使，抉其晴啖之，屡挫贼锋，城获全。
现代文：贼派人来说降，尽伦大怒，亲手杀死来使，又多次挫败来犯之敌，保住了合州。
English: Thieves sent people to surrender, they were furious, they killed them with their own hands, defeated the invading enemy many times, and saved Hezhou.

古文：复率众援铜梁有功，寻被檄捣重庆，孤军深入，伏四起，遂虞死。
现代文：又率众援救铜梁，再立战功。不久，奉命进攻重庆，由于孤军深入，中敌伏击，战死。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to attack Chongqing. Due to the depth of the lone army, he was ambushed by the enemy and died in battle.

古文：仕龙阳县丞，被执，不屈死。
现代文：朝廷赠光禄寺少卿，建祠祭祀，荫其后世为百户。不久，改荫指挥佥事。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the title of Shokei (Junior Secretary) of Koroku-ji Temple, a small shrine was built for his worship, and his descendants numbered a hundred households.

古文：皆未予恤。龚万禄，贵州人。
现代文：崇祯初，改荫锦衣卫千户。龚万禄，贵州人。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, thousands of households changed the shade of brocade and cloth.

古文：目不知书，有胆志，膂力过人。
现代文：目不知书，有胆识，臂力过人。
English: The eyes do not know the book, have the courage, the strength of the arm.

古文：从刘綎征杨应龙，先登海龙囤，署守备，戍建武所。奢崇明反，众推万禄游击将军，主兵事。指挥李世勋，名位先万禄，亦受节制，戮力固守。
现代文：曾随刘纟廷征讨杨应龙，戍守建武所。奢崇明谋反，众推万禄为游击将军，主持军务。指挥李世勋，名次本在万禄之前，现在也受万禄节制，努力固守建武所。
English: Yang Yinglong, who had been with Liu Bingding in the campaign to recruit soldiers, guarded the Jianwu camp. Shuang Chong, who was clearly plotting a rebellion, was elected by the people to be the guerrilla general and presided over the military affairs. Commander Li Shixun, whose rank was originally before that of Wanlu, but is now also controlled by Wanlu, strove to keep the Jianwu camp.

古文：崇明谋犯成都，惮万禄牵其后，遣部将张令说降。
现代文：崇明企图进犯成都，但怕万禄抄他的后方，遣部将张令去说降万禄。
English: Chongming attempted to invade Chengdu, but fearing that Wanlu would capture his rear, he sent an order to Zhang to say that he would surrender to Wanlu.

古文：令与万禄结，绐崇明以降。
现代文：张令却与万禄串通，骗崇明说万禄愿降。
English: Zhang Ling, however, colluded with Banlu and deceived Chongming into saying that Banlu was willing to step down.

古文：崇明果遣他将来戍，万禄胁降之，诱杀无算。
现代文：崇明果然另派将官来建武所戍守，万禄胁迫这个被派来的将官投降，并诱杀了崇明的许多士卒。
English: As expected, Chongming sent another general to guard Jianswuso. Banlu coerced the general to surrender and killed many of Chongming's soldiers.

古文：复微服走叙州，说副使徐如珂曰： 贼精骑萃成都，留故巢者悉老弱，诚假万禄万人捣其巢，彼必还救，成都围立解矣。 
现代文：万禄又装扮成平民到叙州，对该州副使徐如珂说： 贼精兵集中在成都，留在老巢的都是些老弱。若能借我一万人马去捣其巢穴，崇明必会回军援救，这样便可立即解成都之围。 
English: Wanlu also disguised himself as a civilian and went to Shuzhou. He said to the deputy envoy of the state, Xu Rugao: The thief soldiers are concentrated in Chengdu, and those who stay in the old nest are weak. If I can borrow ten thousand horses to smash their nests, Chongming will surely return to the army for rescue, so that the siege of Chengdu can be immediately lifted.

古文：如珂奇其计，而不能用。
现代文：如珂认为此计甚妙，但不采纳。
English: Rukka thinks it's a great idea, but it doesn't work.

古文：未几，贼悉众攻建武，万禄邀击十里外，兵少败还，城遂陷。
现代文：不久，崇明全力攻建武所，万禄在十里外拦截，兵少败回。
English: Soon, Chongming made all-out efforts to attack and build the military academy. Wanlu intercepted the attack ten miles away, and the soldiers were defeated.

古文：世勋具衣冠再拜，率家属自焚死。
现代文：建武被攻陷，世勋与其家属自焚。
English: When Jianwu was invaded, Shihun and his family members set themselves on fire.

古文：万禄手刃两妾、两孙，自刎不殊，乃握槊驰出，大呼： 我龚万禄也，孰能追我者！ 
现代文：万禄亲手杀其两妾、两孙，然后自刎，未死。又手执长矛飞奔而出，大呼： 我就是龚万禄，谁敢来追我！ 
English: Manroku killed his two concubines and two grandchildren with his own hands, and then hanged himself before dying. He also ran out with a spear in his hand, shouting: I am Manroku, who dares come after me!

古文：贼相视不敢逼。
现代文：贼面面相觑，不敢靠近。
English: The thieves looked at each other, not daring to approach.

古文：御贼战死，有虎守其骸不去，蛮人嗟异。
现代文：万禄走至叙州，向巡抚朱燮元求救兵收复了建武所。这时官军败于江门，贼四面来攻，万禄力战三日，终与其子崇学牺牲。
English: When the government army was defeated at Jiangmen and the bandits attacked from all directions, Banlu fought hard for three days and eventually died with his son, Chong Xu.

古文：事闻，赠太仆卿，赐祭葬。
现代文：朝廷诏赠都督佥事，立祠赐祭，荫后代为百户。
English: The imperial edict bestowed the title of the city-governor, a shrine was built and a festival was held, and the descendants of the imperial family numbered in the hundreds.

古文：姬文胤，字士昌，华州人。
现代文：姬文胤，字士昌，华州人。
English: Ji Wenzhong, also known as Shi Chang, is a native of Huazhou.

古文：举于乡。天启二年授滕县知县。
现代文：乡试中举，天启二年授滕县知县。
English: He won the township examination in middle school, and was awarded the title of Tengxian Zhixian in the second year of the Apocalypse.

古文：视事甫三日，白莲贼徐鸿儒薄城，民什九从乱。
现代文：文胤到任刚三日，白莲教徐鸿儒起义，进攻滕县，百姓十分之九都加入了义军。
English: On the third day after Wen Yin took office, Bai Lian and Xu Hongru rebelled and attacked Teng County. Nine out of ten people joined the rebel army.

古文：文胤徒步叫号，驱吏卒登陴，不满三百，望贼辄走，存者才数十。
现代文：文胤把其吏卒驱赶到城上去抵御，总共不足三百人，他们一看到义军便逃走了，只剩下数十人。
English: Wen Tan drove his officers and men to the city to defend themselves, a total of less than three hundred people. As soon as they saw the rebels, they fled, leaving only dozens of people.

古文：问何故从贼，曰： 祸由董二。 
现代文：文胤询问吏民为何要投降义军，他们说是因为董二。
English: Wen Tan asked the officials and people why they wanted to surrender to the rebels. They said it was because of Dong Er.

古文：董二者，故延绥巡抚董国光子也，居乡贪暴，民不聊生，故从贼。
现代文：董二就是已故延绥巡抚董国光的儿子，此人在当地贪婪横暴，弄得民不聊生，故百姓纷纷投入起义军。
English: Dong II is the son of the late Yancheng governor Dong Guoguang, who was greedy and tyrannical in the local area, causing people to be bored, so the people rushed into the rebel army.

古文：文胤凭城谕曰： 良民以董二故，挺而从贼。
现代文：文胤在城上对大家说 ：良民因为董二而铤身走险。
English: In the castle, Bunyan said to everyone, "Because of Dong Er, the good people risked their lives.

古文：吾将执二置诸法，为若雪愤，可乎？ 
现代文：我一定把董二依法惩处，为你们雪恨，你们看如何？ 
English: I will definitely punish Dong Er according to the law, and I hate you all. What do you think?

古文：文胤身长赤面，须髯戟张，贼望见，骇为神人，皆欢呼罗拜。俄而发箭西隅，毙二贼。
现代文：文胤身长面赤，胡须像戟一样，城下义军以为他是神人。忽然从西城角射出箭，杀死义军二人。
English: Red-faced and bearded like a baboon, the rebels under the castle thought he was a god. Suddenly, he shot an arrow from the west corner of the castle, killing two rebels.

古文：视之，延绥沙柳竿也。
现代文：义军认为文胤是在欺骗他们，非常愤恨，一举攻下滕县。
English: The rebels thought that Wenyan was deceiving them, and they were very angry. They captured Teng County in one fell swoop.

古文：历官武定府同知。巡抚伉令监纪军事，兵败被执，死之。
现代文：文胤穿上大红朝服，坐在堂上大骂不止，三日后自尽。
English: Wenyan put on the crimson imperial robe, sat in the hall and cursed endlessly. Three days later, he committed suicide.

古文：赠太仆少卿，建祠曰精忠。
现代文：朝廷闻知，赠太仆寺少卿，立祠祭祀。
English: The Imperial Court heard about it, presented him with the title of Taichu-ji Shokei, and a small shrine was built for him.

