古文：王商字子威，涿郡蠡吾人也，徙杜陵。
现代文：王商字子威，原为涿郡蠡吾县人，后来迁居杜陵。
English: Wang Shangzhi Ziwei, originally from Xingwu County, Yunnan Province, later moved to Tulin.

古文：商公武、武兄无故，皆以宣帝舅封。
现代文：王商的父亲王武，王武的兄长无故，都由于是宣帝的外戚而受封。
English: Wang Shang's father, Wang Wu, and Wang Wu's elder brother, Wu Kuo, were both given the title because they were relatives of Emperor Xuan.

古文：无故为平昌侯，武为乐昌侯。
现代文：无故封为平昌侯，王武封为乐昌侯。
English: He was awarded the title of PyeongChang Marquis for no reason, and Wang Wu was awarded the title of LeChang Marquis.

古文：语在《外戚传》。
现代文：这些话记载在《外戚传》裹。
English: For the details, see "Hanshu, Gaozhi Zhuang."

古文：商少为太子中庶子，以肃敬敦厚称。
现代文：王商史丹傅喜传王商年轻时任太子中庶子，以严肃恭敬性格忠厚受称赞。
English: Wang Shang, the middle child of the prince when he was young, was praised for his serious and respectful character.

古文：父薨，商嗣为侯，推财以分异母诸弟，身无所受，居丧哀戚。
现代文：父亲死后，王商继承父亲为乐昌侯，推让财产，将财产分给诸位异母弟弟，自己什么也没留下，在丧期之中悲伤哀痛。
English: After his father's death, Wang Shang inherited his father as Lord of Lechang, transferred his property, and distributed his property to his half-brothers. He did not leave anything for himself, and was sad and sorrowful during the mourning period.

古文：于是大臣荐商行可以厉群臣，义足以厚风俗，宜备近臣。
现代文：于是大臣推荐说王商品行可以勉励群臣，仁义足以使风俗淳厚，应该用为近臣。
English: Therefore, the minister recommended that the king's mercantile line could encourage his vassals, that benevolence was enough to make customs pure, and that he should be used as a close vassal.

古文：繇是擢为诸曹、侍中、中郎将。
现代文：由此王商被擢升为诸曹侍中中郎将。
English: As a result, Wang Shang was promoted to the position of Zhu Cao's middle-ranked general.

古文：元帝时，至右将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：元帝时，官至右将军、光禄大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuan, he held the posts of General of the Right and Doctor of Guanglu.

古文：是时，定陶共王爱幸，几代太子。
现代文：当时，定陶共王受宠，几乎替代了太子。
English: At that time, Ding Tao was favored by the king and almost replaced the crown prince.

古文：商为外戚重臣辅政，拥佑太子，颇有力焉。
现代文：王商作为外戚重臣辅佐朝政，拥护扶助太子，起了很大作用。
English: Wang Shang, as a maternal relative and senior vassal, assisted the imperial government and supported the crown prince, which played a great role.

古文：元帝崩，成帝即位，甚敬重商，徙为左将军。
现代文：元帝去世后，成帝即位，很敬重王商，改任左将军。
English: After the death of Emperor Yuan, Emperor Cheng ascended to the throne, respected Wang Shang very much, and was appointed General Zuo.

古文：而帝元舅大司马大将军王凤颛权，行多骄僣。
现代文：而成帝长舅大司马大将军王凤独揽大权，行为多骄傲过分。
English: However, Emperor Cheng's eldest uncle, Grand Master Ma Da Gen Wang Feng, monopolized power and behaved in an excessively proud manner.

古文：商论议不能平凤，凤知之，亦疏商。
现代文：王商议论朝臣时不能公平对待王凤，王凤知道了这件事，也疏远了王商。
English: Wang Shang couldn't treat Wang Feng fairly when discussing courtiers. Wang Feng found out about this and alienated Wang Shang.

古文：建始三年秋，京师民无故相惊，言大水至，百姓奔走相蹂躏、老弱号呼，长安中大乱。
现代文：建始三年的秋天，京都百姓无缘无故惊慌起来，传言洪水将至，百姓奔走，相互践踏老弱号呼，长安城中大乱。
English: In the autumn of the third year of construction, the people of Kyoto panicked for no reason, rumors of a flood were coming, people ran, trampled on each other, and there was a big riot in Chang'an City.

古文：天子亲御前殿，召公卿议。
现代文：皇帝亲自驾临前殿，召集公卿大臣商议这件事。
English: The emperor himself came to the front hall to convene the nobles and ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：大将军凤以为太后与上及后宫可御船，令吏民上长安城以避水。
现代文：大将军王凤认为太后和皇上以及后宫嫔妃可以坐船，让官吏百姓登上长安城墙躲避洪水。
English: The general Wang Feng thought that the empress dowager and the emperor as well as the concubines could take a boat and let the officials and commoners board the Chang'an city wall to escape the flood.

古文：群臣皆从凤议。
现代文：群臣都听从王凤的主张。
English: The courtiers all obeyed Wang Feng's suggestion.

古文：左将军商独曰： 自古无道之国，水犹不冒城郭。
现代文：惟独左将军王商说： 自古以来没有德政的国家，洪水尚且不曾淹没城池。
English: However, the Left General Wang Shang said: Since ancient times, there has been no German government in the country, and the flood has not yet flooded the city.

古文：今政治和平，世无兵革，上下相安，何因当有大水一日暴至？
现代文：现在政事安定，世世代代没有战争，君臣上下安定，因为什么会有洪水一日之中突然出现？
English: Now the government is stable, there has been no war for generations, the monarchs and ministers are stable, because what would cause a flood to suddenly appear in the middle of the day?

古文：此必讹言也，不宜令上城，重惊百姓。 
现代文：这一定是谧言，不应该让百姓上城墙，使百姓更加惊慌。 
English: This must be a trick. The people should not be allowed to climb the city wall, which would make the people even more panicked.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上因此作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：有顷，长安中稍定，问之，果讹言。
现代文：不久，长安城中逐渐安定下来，经查证，果然是谣言。
English: Soon, Chang'an City gradually settled down. After verification, it was indeed a rumor.

古文：上于是美壮商之固守，数称其议。
现代文：皇上于是大为赞美王商的坚持留守，屡次称赞他的主张。
English: The emperor then greatly praised Wang Shang's insistence on staying behind, and repeatedly praised his proposal.

古文：而凤大惭，自恨失言。
现代文：而王凤大为惭愧，自悔发言错误。
English: Wang Fengda was ashamed and regretted his mistake.

古文：明年，商代匡衡为丞相，益封千户，天子甚尊任之。
现代文：第二年，王商替代匡衡担任丞相，加封食邑千户，皇帝非常尊敬和信任他。
English: In the second year, Wang Shang replaced Kuang Heng as chancellor, and sealed thousands of households in food villages. The emperor respected and trusted him very much.

古文：为人多质有威重，长八尺余，身体鸿大，容貌甚过绝人。
现代文：王商为人朴实，外表威严，身高八尺有余，身材魁梧，相貌堂堂，非同常人。
English: Wang Shang was a simple man, dignified in appearance, more than eight feet tall, large in stature, handsome, and extraordinary.

古文：河平四年，单于来朝，引见白虎殿。
现代文：河平四年，单于前来朝拜，被引导到白虎殿进见。
English: In the fourth year of the Heping era, he came alone to pay homage and was led to the White Tiger Hall for an audience.

古文：丞相商坐未央廷中，单于前，拜谒商。
现代文：丞相王商坐在未央宫朝廷上，单于上前，参拜谒见王商。
English: Wang Shang, the chancellor, was sitting in the imperial court of the Weiyang Palace. He went up alone to pay his respects to Wang Shang.

古文：商起，离席与言，单于仰视商貌，大畏之，迁延却退。
现代文：王商站起来，离开席位和他交谈，单于仰头看见王商容貌，非常害怕，战战兢兢倒着退出去。
English: Wang Shang stood up, left his seat and talked to him. He looked up and saw Wang Shang's face. He was very scared and retreated backwards.

古文：天子闻而叹曰： 此真汉相矣！ 
现代文：皇帝听说以后赞叹道： 造人真不愧是汉朝的丞相啊！ 
English: After hearing this, the emperor said with admiration: Zou Ren is truly worthy of being the prime minister of the Han Dynasty!

古文：初，大将军凤连昏杨肜为琅邪太守，其郡有灾害十四，已上。
现代文：当初，大将军王凤的姻亲杨肜任琅邪太守，他的属郡有十分之四的地方发生了灾害，已经上报皇帝。
English: At the beginning, Yang Xuan, the in-law of the great general Wang Feng, was the governor of Shiyan, and four-tenths of his county had suffered disasters, which had been reported to the emperor.

古文：商部属按问，凤以晓商曰： 灾异天事，非人力所为。
现代文：王商顺次安排审查讯问，王凤就告知王商说： 灾害怪异是上天的事情，不是人的力量所能做到的。
English: Wang Feng then told Wang Shang: "Weird disasters are God's work, and cannot be done by human power.

古文：肜素善吏，宜以为后。 
现代文：杨肜一向是个好官，应该从轻发落。 
English: Yang Hui has always been a good official, and should be treated lightly.

古文：商不听，竟奏免肜，奏果寝不下，凤重以是怨商，阴求其短，使人上书言商闺门内事。
现代文：王商不听，竟然上奏请求罢免杨肜，奏书果然被扣住不发，王凤因此越发怨恨王商，私下搜求王商的短处，派人献上奏书揭发王商的家庭隐私。
English: Wang Shang didn't listen, and went so far as to submit a petition to recall Yang Qi. The petition was indeed withheld and not issued. As a result, Wang Feng became increasingly resentful of Wang Shang, privately searched for Wang Shang's shortcomings, and sent someone to submit a petition to expose Wang Shang's family privacy.

古文：天子以为暗昧之过，不足以伤大臣，凤固争，下其事司隶。
现代文：皇帝认为这是不必告人的隐私，不足以中伤大臣，王凤固执地争辩，就把这件事交给司隶处理。
English: The emperor thought that this was a private matter that did not need to be reported and was not enough to defame the minister. Wang Feng argued stubbornly and handed the matter over to the subordinate to deal with.

古文：先是，皇太后尝诏问商女，欲以备后宫。
现代文：先前皇太后曾经召来王商询问他的女儿，想要把她纳入后宫。
English: Previously, the empress dowager had summoned the merchant king to inquire about his daughter, wanting to include her in the harem.

古文：时女病，商意亦难之，以病对，不入。
现代文：当时王商的女儿病重，王商心裹也认为这件事很困难，就用女儿病重来回答，没让女儿入后宫。
English: At that time, Wang Shang's daughter was seriously ill, and Wang Shang Xinwu also thought that this matter was very difficult, so he answered with his daughter's serious illness and did not let his daughter enter the harem.

古文：及商以闺门事见考，自知为凤所中，惶怖，更欲内女为援，乃因新幸李婕妤家白见其女。
现代文：等到王商因为家庭隐私受考问的时候，自己知道是被王凤所中伤，非常恐惧，又想要献纳女儿作为救助，就依靠新受宠幸的李婕妤家禀告，使女儿入了后宫。
English: When Wang Shang was questioned about the privacy of his family, he knew that he had been slandered by Wang Feng, was very afraid, and wanted to offer his daughter as a rescue. He relied on the newly favored Li Ying family obituary to get his daughter into the harem.

古文：会日有蚀之，太中大夫蜀郡张匡，其人佞巧，上书愿对近臣陈日蚀咎。
现代文：正好又出现日食，太中大夫蜀郡人张匡，为人奸佞机巧，献上奏书说愿意应答亲近的大臣，陈述日食的原因。
English: Just as another solar eclipse occurred, Zhang Kuang, the Taizhong Doctor of Shu County, who was a cunning person, presented a report saying that he was willing to respond to the minister who was close to him, stating the reasons for the solar eclipse.

古文：下朝者左将军丹等问匡，对曰： 窃见丞相商作威作福，从外制中，取必于上，性残贼不仁，遣票轻吏微求人罪，欲以立威，天下患苦之。
现代文：下了朝堂的左将军史丹等人询问张匡，张匡回答说： 我认为丞相王商作威作福，援引外部势力控制朝廷，自己想要得到的，就一定要实现，性情残忍狠毒，毫不仁慈，遣罪疾速，轻视官员，私下搜求别人的过错，想要用来树立威望，天下人以他为苦痛祸患。
English: Zhang Kuang was questioned by the left-wing general Stan and others who came down from the imperial court. Zhang Kuang replied: I think that the prime minister Wang Shang is arrogant and self-serving, invokes external forces to control the imperial court, and what he wants must be achieved. His disposition is cruel and merciless, he is quick to punish, despises officials, secretly searches for other people's faults, and wants to be used to establish prestige. People all over the world regard him as a painful scourge.

古文：前频阳耿定上书言商与父傅通，及女弟淫乱，奴杀其私夫，疑商教使。
现代文：先前频阳人耿定上奏书揭发王商和他父亲的婢女私通，以及妹妹淫乱，家奴杀死她私通的奸夫，怀疑是王商教唆。
English: Previously, Geng Ding, a frequent Yang person, published a report exposing Wang Shang and his father's maid fornicating, as well as his sister fornicating, and the family slave killing her fornicating adulterer, suspected of being instigated by Wang Shang.

古文：章下有司，商私怨怼。
现代文：奏章交付有司处理，王商私下不满。
English: Wang Shangrui was privately dissatisfied with the way the report was handled.

古文：商子俊欲上书告商，俊妻左将军丹女，持其书以示丹，丹恶其父子乘迕，为女求去。
现代文：王商的儿子王俊想要上奏书告发王商，王俊的妻子是左将军史丹的女儿，就拿着王俊的奏书去给史丹看，史丹厌恶他们父子相互抵触，为女儿请求离异。
English: Wang Jun, the son of Wang Shang, wanted to file a complaint against Wang Shang. Wang Jun's wife was the daughter of Left General Stan, so he took Wang Jun's complaint to Stan. Stan was disgusted by the conflict between father and son and asked for a divorce for the sake of his daughter.

古文：商不尽忠纳善以辅至德，知圣主崇孝，远别不亲，后庭之事皆爱命皇太后，太后前闻商有女，欲以备后宫，商言有固疾，后有耿定事，更诡道因李贵人家内女，执左道以乱政，诬罔悖大臣节，故应是而日蚀。
现代文：王商不竭尽忠诚进献良策来辅佐至德的君主，知道圣明的主上推崇孝道，远离女色，后宫的事情都听从皇太后，太后先前听说王商有个女儿，想要把她纳入后宫，王商声称女儿有久治不愈的疾病，后来有耿定上书之事，又违反正道藉助李贵人家献纳女儿。王商实行邪门旁道来扰乱朝政，以不实之辞欺骗人，违背大臣应有的操节，因此而发生了日食。
English: Wang Shang did not exhaust his loyalty to offer good policies to assist the German monarch. He knew that the Lord of the Sacred Light promoted filial piety and stayed away from women. He listened to the empress dowager in matters of the harem. The empress dowager had previously heard that Wang Shang had a daughter and wanted to include her in the harem. Wang Shang claimed that his daughter had a long-term incurable disease. Later, there was the matter of Geng Ding's letter, and he violated the right way by helping Li Guizhong's family to offer his daughter. Wang Shang carried out the evil side path to disrupt the imperial government, deceived people with untrue words

古文：《周书》曰： 以左道事君者诛。 《易》曰： 日中见昧，则折其右肱。 
现代文：《周书》上说： 用邪门旁道事奉君主的人应诛杀，《易经》上说： 太阳正午时被遮蔽变暗，就应折去右肱辅佐之臣。
English: "Zhou Shu" said: Those who serve the monarch with evil ways should be killed, and "I Ching" said: If the sun is obscured and darkened at noon, the minister of the Right Hand and Assistant Minister should be removed.

古文：往者丞相周勃再建大功，及孝文时纤介怨恨，而日为之蚀，于是退勃使就国，卒无怵惕忧。
现代文：从前丞相周勃两次立了大功，到孝文帝时有细微怨恨，太阳因此而受食，于是孝文帝屏退周勃，让他回到封地去，终于没有了戒惧之忧。
English: From the former prime minister Zhou Bo, who twice made great achievements, to Emperor Xiaowen, there was a slight resentment, and the sun was eaten as a result, so Emperor Xiaowen screened Zhou Bo, let him return to the fiefdom, and finally there was no fear of fear.

古文：今商无尺寸之功，而有三世之宠，身位三公，宗族为列侯、吏二千石、侍中诸曹，给事禁门内，连昏诸侯王，权宠至盛。
现代文：现在王商没有微小的功劳，却受到三代君主的宠幸，自身位列三公，亲族封为列侯，任二千石的官吏、侍中诸曹等，供职于宫门之内，和诸侯王结成姻亲，权势荣宠兴盛到了顶点。
English: Now Wang Shang did not have a small merit, but he was favored by three generations of monarchs. He was ranked as the third prince, his relatives were appointed as vassals, he appointed officials of two thousand koku, attendants, etc. to serve in the palace, and he was married to the vassal king. The power and glory flourished to the peak.

古文：审有内乱杀人怨怼之端，宜究竟考问。
现代文：确实有内闱淫乱、教唆杀人、心怀怨恨的缘由，应当追究拷问。
English: There are indeed reasons for infidelity, incitement to murder, and harboring grudges, and they should be investigated and interrogated.

古文：臣闻秦丞相吕不韦见王无子，意欲有秦国，即求好女以为妻，阴知其有身而献之王，产始皇帝。
现代文：我听说秦国丞相吕不韦看到秦王没有子嗣，企图占有秦国，就找来一位美女作了自己的妻子，暗中知道她怀孕了，然后把她献给秦王，生下始皇帝。
English: I heard that Lü Buwei, the prime minister of Qin, saw that the Qin king had no children, and in an attempt to take possession of Qin, he found a beautiful woman to be his wife, secretly knew that she was pregnant, and then gave her to the Qin king, giving birth to the first emperor.

古文：及楚相春申君亦见王无子，心利楚国，即献有身妻而产怀王。
现代文：到楚国丞相春申君也看到楚王没有子嗣时，心裹认为楚国有利可图，就献上有身孕的妻子给楚王而生下了怀王。
English: When the chancellor of Chu, Chunshen, also saw that King Chu had no children, he thought that Chu was profitable, so he offered his pregnant wife to King Chu and gave birth to King Huai.

古文：自汉兴几遭吕、霍之患，今商有不仁之性，乃因怨以内女，其奸谋未可测度。
现代文：自从汉朝兴起以来，差点就遭逢了吕后、霍氏的灾祸，现在王商有残忍不仁的本性，于是因为心怀怨恨而献纳女儿，他奸诈的机谋无法揣测。
English: Since the rise of the Han Dynasty, the calamity of Lvou and Huo has almost been encountered. Now Wang Shang has a cruel and merciless nature, so he sacrificed his daughter because of his resentment. His treacherous strategy cannot be guessed.

古文：前孝景世七国反，将军周亚夫以为即得雒阳剧孟，关东非汉之有。
现代文：先前景帝之世有七国反叛，将军周亚夫认为即使抓到了雒阳人剧孟，关东地区也不是汉朝所能占有。
English: There were seven rebellions in the imperial era, and General Zhou Yafu believed that even if he caught the Shenyang people, the Kanto region could not be occupied by the Han Dynasty.

古文：今商宗族权势，合赀巨万计，私奴以千数，非特剧孟匹夫之徒也。
现代文：现在王商亲族众多，权势显赫，全部资财以万万来计量，家奴以千来计数，不仅仅是剧孟独夫这样的一些人。
English: Nowadays, there are many relatives of Wang Shang, and their power is prominent. The total assets are measured in tens of thousands, and the family slaves are counted in thousands. They are not just a few people like Yu Mengduo.

古文：且失道之至，亲戚畔之，闺门内乱，父子相讦，而欲使之宜明圣化，调和海内，岂不谬哉！
现代文：并且无道之极，内外亲属背叛了他，内室淫乱，父子互相攻击，却要让他明白圣主的教化，协调天下，难道不是很荒谬的事情吗？
English: Moreover, there is no way around it. His relatives at home and abroad have betrayed him, his family is adulterous, and his father and son are attacking each other. But to make him understand the enlightenment of the Lord and the coordination of the world, isn't that a ridiculous thing?

古文：商视事五年，官职陵夷而大恶著于百姓，甚亏损盛德，有鼎折足之凶。
现代文：王商任职五年，职位衰落而恶行显露在百姓向前，很是损害皇上的大德，有九鼎断足的凶兆。
English: Wang Shang was in office for five years, but his position declined and his evil deeds were revealed to the people. This was very damaging to the emperor's great virtue, and there were ominous signs that Jiuding would be cut off.

古文：臣愚以为圣主富于春秋，即位以来，未有惩奸之威，加以继嗣未立，大异并见，尤宜诛讨不忠，以遏未然。
现代文：我认为圣明的主上正当盛年，继承皇位以来，还没有过惩处奸人的威仪，加上继位的后嗣还没有确立，怪异现象一齐出现，尤其应当整顿惩罚不忠之臣，来防止还没有成为事实的祸患。
English: I think that the Lord of the Sacred Light is in the prime of his life. Since he succeeded to the throne, he has not yet had the dignity of punishing traitors. In addition, the heir to the throne has not yet been established. Strange phenomena have appeared at the same time. In particular, it is necessary to rectify the punishment of disloyal vassals to prevent the evil that has not yet become a reality.

古文：行之一人，则海内震动，百奸之路塞矣。 
现代文：如果惩办王商一人，就可以使天下震动，奸邪之路堵塞而不通。 
English: If Wang Shang were to be punished alone, the whole world would be shaken, and the path of evil-doers would be blocked.

古文：于是左将军丹等奏： 商位三公，爵列侯，亲受诏策为天下师，不遵法度以翼国家，而回辟下媚以进其私，执左道以乱政，为臣不忠，罔上不道，《甫刑》之辟，皆为上戮，罪名明白。
现代文：于是左将军史丹等人奏道： 王商位列三公，爵封列侯，亲自接受韶书为天下之师，不遵循法制来扶助主上，却邪僻谄媚来实现他的私欲，实行旁门邪道来扰乱朝政，作为臣子不忠实，欺骗主上不仁道，按照《甫刑》之法，应为死罪，刑罚说得很清楚。
English: Therefore, the Left General Stan and others recited: the king of merchants ranked as the third prince, the peerage ranked as the third prince, he personally accepted the imperial edict as the world's teacher, he did not follow the legal system to support the Lord, but he was perverse and flattering to realize his selfish desires, he practiced a side-door evil way to disrupt the imperial government, he was unfaithful as a courtier, he deceived the Lord and was not merciful, according to the law of "Imprisonment," it should be a capital crime, the punishment is very clear.

古文：臣请诏谒者召商诣若卢诏狱。 
现代文：臣下请求您下诏给谒者，召王商到若卢的牢狱去。 
English: Your subjects request that you issue an edict to the executioner, summoning Wang Shang to the prison in Ruolu.

古文：上素重商，知匡言多险，制曰 勿治 。
现代文：皇上一向敬重王商，知道张匡说话阴险，下命令说： 不应查处。 
English: The emperor had always respected Wang Shang. Knowing that Zhang Kuang's words were insidious, he gave the order: "Do not investigate."

古文：凤固争之，于是制诏御史： 盖丞相以德辅翼国家，典领百寮，协和万国，为职任莫重焉。
现代文：王凤固执地争论，皇上于是韶令御史： 丞相应当以德行来辅佐扶助皇帝，总领百官，协同调和各个封国，作为职责没有比它更重要的了。
English: Wang Feng argued stubbornly, and the emperor then issued an order to the emperor: the prime minister should use virtue to assist and support the emperor, lead hundreds of officials, and coordinate various fiefs. As a duty, there is nothing more important than it.

古文：今乐昌侯商为丞相，出入五年，未闻忠言嘉谋，而有不忠执左道之辜，陷于大辟。
现代文：现在乐昌侯王商任丞相，任职五年，没有听过他的诚恳的劝告，良好的计谋，却有行为不忠、施行邪道的罪过，身犯死罪。
English: Now, Lechang Marquis Wang Shang, who has served as chancellor for five years, has not listened to his sincere advice and good strategy, but he has committed the crime of being unfaithful and practicing evil, and is guilty of capital crime.

古文：前商女弟内行不修，奴贼杀人，疑商教使，为商重臣，故抑而不穷。
现代文：先前王商的妹妹不修妇女之德，家奴杀死了她的情人，怀疑是王商教唆，因为王商是居重要职位的大臣，所以抑止住没有追究。
English: Previously, Wang Shang's younger sister did not practice women's virtue, and the family slave killed her lover. It is suspected that Wang Shang instigated the murder. Since Wang Shang was a minister in an important position, there was no investigation to deter him.

古文：今或言商不以自悔而反怨怼，朕甚伤之。
现代文：现在有人告发王商不因此自己悔过，却反而心怀怨恨，朕很伤心。
English: Now someone is accusing Wang Shang of harboring resentment instead of feeling remorse, which makes me very sad.

古文：惟商与先帝有外亲，未忍致于理。
现代文：王商和已故的父王有外戚的亲属关系，不忍心把他送到法官那裹去。
English: Wang Shang and his late father, Wang, were related through a maternal relative, and he did not have the heart to take him to the judge.

古文：其赦商罪。
现代文：赦免王商的罪过。
English: The sins of Wang Shang were pardoned.

古文：使者收丞相印绶。 
现代文：使者没收他的丞相印信。 
English: The envoy confiscated his imperial seal letter.

古文：商免相三日，发病呕血薨，谥曰戾侯。
现代文：王商被罢免丞相三天之后，疾病发作吐血而死，被谧为戾侯。
English: Three days after Wang Shang was ousted as chancellor, he died of an illness that caused him to vomit blood, and was banished to the capital.

古文：而商子弟亲属为驸马都尉、侍中、中常侍、诸曹大夫郎吏者，皆出补吏，莫得留给事宿卫者。
现代文：而王商的亲族子弟任驸马都尉、侍中、中常侍、诸曹大夫郎吏的，都出为候补官吏，没有人能够留下来供职值宿警卫。
English: However, Wang Shang's relatives and children who held the positions of captain of the imperial cavalry, chamberlain, and chief chamberlain, as well as those who were the retainers of Cao Daifu, were all made alternate officials. No one could stay behind to serve as guards on duty at the inn.

古文：有司奏商罪过未决，请除国邑。
现代文：有司奏明王商的罪行还没有判决，请求免去封邑。
English: There has been no verdict on the crime of Yusesongming Wang Shang, and he has requested to be exempted from the fief.

古文：有诏长子安嗣爵为乐昌侯，至长乐卫尉、光禄勋。
现代文：皇帝诏令王商的长子王安继承爵位为乐昌侯，官至长乐宫卫尉、光禄勋。
English: The emperor decreed that Wang An, the eldest son of Wang Shang, would succeed to the title of Lord of Lechang, and he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Palace Guards of Lechang and awarded the Guanglu Honor.

古文：商死后，连年日蚀、地震，直臣京兆尹王章上封事召开，讼商忠直无罪，言凤颛权蔽主。
现代文：王商死后，连续多年日食地震，正直的大臣京兆尹王章献上密封的奏章被召见，为王商伸冤说他忠厚正直毫无过错，揭发王凤独揽大权蒙蔽主上。
English: After Wang Shang's death, after many consecutive years of solar eclipses and earthquakes, the honest minister, Jing Zhaoying Wang Zhang, was summoned to present a sealed record, to vindicate Wang Shang that he was loyal and honest without any fault, and to expose Wang Feng's monopolization of power.

古文：凤竟以法诛章，语在《元后传》。
现代文：王凤竟然藉助法律诛杀了王章，这些话详见《元后传》裹。
English: Wang Feng actually killed Wang Zhang with the help of the law, these words are detailed in "The Legend of the Yuan Dynasty."

古文：至元始中，王莽为安汉公，诛不附己者，乐昌侯安见被以罪，自杀，国除。
现代文：到了互垃年间，王菱当了塞违公，惩罚不归附自己的人，乐昌侯王安被加以罪名，自尽，封邑被除去。
English: In the intercalary year, Wang Ling was accused of violating public order and punishing those who did not return to him. Wang An, the lord of Lechang, was accused of committing suicide and his fiefdom was removed.

古文：史丹字君仲，鲁国人也，徙杜陵。
现代文：史丹字君仲，原为鲁国人，后来迁居杜陵。
English: Stan Zi Junzhong, originally from Lu, later moved to Tuling.

古文：祖父恭有女弟，武帝时为卫太子良娣，产悼皇考。
现代文：祖父史恭有个妹妹，武帝时是卫太子的良娣，生了悼皇考。
English: Grandfather Shi Qiong had a younger sister. When Emperor Wu was Emperor Wei's daughter, she gave birth to the Empress Dowager.

古文：皇考者，孝宣帝父也。
现代文：皇考，是宣帝的父亲。
English: Emperor Gao is the father of Emperor Xuan.

古文：宣帝微时依倚史氏。
现代文：宣帝贫贱时依靠史氏。
English: When Emperor Xuan was poor, he relied on Shi.

古文：语在《史良娣传》。
现代文：这些话记载在《史良娣传》裹。
English: These words are recorded in the "Biography of Shi Liangzhuang."

古文：及宣帝即尊位，恭已死，三子，高、曾、玄。
现代文：等到宣帝登上皇位的时候，史恭已经死了，有三个儿子，史高、史曾、史玄。
English: By the time Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, Shi Qiong had already died and had three sons, Shi Gao, Shi Zeng and Shi Xuan.

古文：曾、玄皆以外属旧恩封：曾为将陵侯，玄平台侯。
现代文：史曾、史玄都由于是外家亲属且有先代的恩德而受封，史曾封为将陵侯，史玄封为平台侯。
English: Both Shi Zeng and Shi Xuan were given the title because they were relatives from outside the family and had been favored by the previous generation. Shi Zeng was given the title of General of the Mausoleum, while Shi Xuan was given the title of General of the Platform.

古文：高侍中，贵幸，以发举反者大司马霍禹功封乐陵侯。
现代文：史高任侍中，位尊而受宠幸，以揭发谋反的大司马霍禹之功被封为乐陵侯。
English: Shi Gao served as an attendant, was highly respected and favored, and was awarded the title of Le Ling Hou for his role in exposing the treason of the Grand Master Ma Huoyu.

古文：宣帝疾病，拜高为大司马、车骑将军，领尚书事。
现代文：宣帝病重，任命史高为大司马车骑将军，兼尚书之职。
English: Emperor Xuan was seriously ill, and appointed Shi Gao as the general of the grand coach, who also held the post of secretary.

古文：帝崩，太子袭尊号，是为孝元帝。
现代文：宣帝去世，太子承袭帝号，造就是孝元帝。
English: When Emperor Xuan died, the crown prince inherited the imperial title and became Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：高辅政五年，乞骸骨，赐安车驷马、黄金，罢就第。
现代文：史高辅佐朝政五年，因年老请求退职，被赐予四马所拉的安车和黄铜，免职回到家裹。
English: Shi Gao, who had been an aide-de-camp to the emperor for five years, asked for retirement due to old age, was given a four-horse carriage and brass, and returned home.

古文：薨，谥曰安侯。
现代文：死后，被谧为安侯。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Anhou.

古文：自元帝为太子时，丹以父高任为中庶子，侍从十余年。
现代文：从元帝当太子的时候起，史丹由于父亲史高的缘故被任命为中庶子，随从左右十多年。
English: From the time when Emperor Yuan was crown prince, Stan was appointed as the middle child because of his father Shi Gao, and he followed Mao for more than ten years.

古文：元帝即位，为驸马都尉侍中，出常骖乘，甚有宠。
现代文：元帝即位后，史丹任驸马都尉侍中，皇帝出行常常在车右边陪乘，很受宠幸。
English: After the enthronement of the Yuan Emperor, Stan served as an aide-de-camp to the commander of the imperial cavalry. He often accompanied the emperor on the right side of the car, and was very favored.

古文：上以丹旧臣，皇考外属，亲信之，诏丹护太子家。
现代文：皇上因为史丹是原来的臣下，亡父的外家亲属，亲近信任他，命史丹护卫太子一家。
English: The emperor trusted Stan because he was a former vassal and a foreign relative of his late father, and ordered him to guard the prince's family.

古文：是时，傅昭仪子定陶共王有材艺，子母俱爱幸，而太子颇有酒色之失，母王皇后无宠。
现代文：当时，傅昭仪的儿子定陶共王有才能，母子都被宠幸，而太子稍微有酒色方面的过失，母亲王皇后不受宠爱。
English: At that time, Fu Zhaoyi's son Ding Tao Gong Wang was talented, and both mother and son were favored, but the prince had a slight fault in terms of wine color, and his mother, the queen, was not favored.

古文：建昭之后，元帝被疾，不亲政事，留好音乐。
现代文：建昭年间，元帝患病，不能亲理朝政，衹是贪恋音乐。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jian Zhao, Emperor Yuan fell ill and was unable to govern the imperial court. He was obsessed with music.

古文：或置鼙鼓殿下，天子自临轩槛上，隤铜丸以擿鼓，声中严鼓之节。
现代文：有人将鼙鼓放置在大殿之下，皇帝自己到殿前栏杆上，扔下铜丸来掷中鼙鼓，声音符合庄严的鼓乐节拍。
English: Someone placed a gong under the main hall, and the emperor himself went to the railing in front of the hall and threw a bronze ball to hit the gong. The sound matched the solemn beat of the drum.

古文：后宫及左右习知音者莫能为，而定陶王亦能之，上数称其材。
现代文：后宫嫔妃和左右侍从熟习了解音乐的人没有谁能做到，而定陶王也能办到，皇上屡次称赞他的才能。
English: The harem concubine and the attendants on the left and right who are familiar with and understand music can't do it, but King Ding Tao can do it, and the emperor has repeatedly praised his talent.

古文：丹进曰： 凡所谓材者，敏而好学，温故知新，皇太了是也。
现代文：史丹进谏说： 凡是被称为有才能的人，应当聪敏而又喜好学习，温习旧业，增加新知，是皇太子做到的。
English: "Anyone who is called a talented person should be intelligent and willing to learn, review old work, and increase new knowledge. The crown prince has done it.

古文：若乃器人于丝竹鼓鼙之间，则是陈惠、李微高于匡衡，可相国也。 
现代文：如果以丝竹鼓鼙的才能来衡量人，那么这是陈惠、李微比匡衡高明，可以扶助国家了。 
English: If people are to be measured by their talents, then Chen Hui and Li Wei are more talented than Kuang Heng, and can help the country.

古文：于是上嘿然而笑。
现代文：于是皇上嘿嘿地笑了。
English: So the Emperor chuckled.

古文：其后，中山哀王薨，太子前吊。
现代文：在这之后，中山哀王死了，太子前往吊唁。
English: After this, Zhongshan mourned Wang's death, and the prince went to offer condolences.

古文：哀王者，帝之少弟，与太子游学相长大。
现代文：哀王是皇上的小弟弟，和太子游学一起长大成人。
English: King Aye was the emperor's younger brother, and he and the prince grew up together.

古文：上望见太子，感念哀王，悲不能自止。
现代文：皇上从远处看见太子，感触地想起哀王，悲伤得不能自己控制自己。
English: The emperor saw the prince from a distance and thought of the mourning king with emotion. He was so sad that he could not control himself.

古文：太子既至前，不哀。
现代文：太子已经来到驾前，并不哀伤。
English: The crown prince has already arrived and is not sad.

古文：上大恨曰： 安有人不慈仁而可奉宗庙为民父母者乎！ 上以责谓丹。
现代文：皇上极不满意地说： 哪裹会有一个人不慈和仁爱却可以奉祀宗庙，作百姓父母的呢厂皇上把责备的话告诉史丹。
English: The emperor was very dissatisfied and said, "How can there be a person who does not have mercy and kindness, but can worship the ancestral temple and be the parents of the people?" The emperor told the words of rebuke to Stan.

古文：丹免冠谢上曰： 臣诚见陛下哀痛中山王，至以感损。
现代文：史丹摘下帽子向皇上谢罪说： 我看见陛下哀伤痛悼中山王，到了损伤身体的地步。
English: Stan took off his hat and thanked the emperor, saying, "I saw your majesty grieve and mourn Zhongshan Wang to the point of injury.

古文：向者太子当进见，臣窃戒属毋涕泣，感伤陛下。
现代文：先前太子应当进宫见驾时，我私下告诫嘱咐他不要哭泣，使陛下感触悲伤。
English: Earlier, when the Crown Prince was about to enter the palace, I privately admonished him and told him not to cry, which made His Majesty feel sad.

古文：罪乃在臣，当死。 
现代文：过错祇在我身上，应当处死。 
English: The fault is mine alone, and I deserve to die.

古文：上以为然，意乃解。
现代文：皇上认为他的话是对的，怒意才化解了。
English: The emperor thought his words were right, and his anger was resolved.

古文：丹之辅相，皆此类也。
现代文：史丹辅助朝政，都是这一类的事。
English: That's the kind of thing that happens when Stan helps run the government.

古文：竟宁元年，上寝疾，傅昭仪及定陶王常在左右，而皇后、太子希得进见。
现代文：竟宁元年，皇上的病势渐沉重，傅昭仪和定陶王常常服侍在身旁，而皇后、太子很少能够进宫见驾。
English: In the first year of King Ning's reign, the emperor's condition became increasingly serious. Fu Zhaoyi and King Ding Tao often served at his side, while the empress and the prince were rarely able to visit the palace.

古文：上疾稍侵，意忽忽不平，数问尚书以景帝时立胶东王故事。
现代文：皇上的病逐渐加重，心情恍惚不平和，屡次向尚书询问景帝时立胶束王为太子的例。
English: The emperor's illness gradually worsened, his mood was uneasy, and he repeatedly asked Shangshu about the example of Emperor Jing's enthronement of Jiuquan Wang as crown prince.

古文：是时，太子长舅阳平侯王凤为卫尉、侍中，与皇后、太子皆忧，不知所出。
现代文：当时，太子长舅阳平侯王凤任卫尉、侍中，和皇后、太子都很担忧，不知该采用什么计策。
English: At that time, the prince's eldest uncle, Prince Yang Ping and Prince Wang Feng, were appointed as guards and attendants, and the queen and the prince were very worried and did not know what strategy to adopt.

古文：丹以亲密臣得侍视疾，侯上间独寝时，丹直入卧内，顿首伏青蒲上，涕泣言曰： 皇太子以適长立，积十余年，名号系于百姓，天下莫不归心臣子。
现代文：史丹由于是亲近臣子能够进宫侍候，探视疾病，等到皇上乘间独自躺着休息时，史丹径直闯入寝室，头叩地拜伏在青缘蒲席上，哭泣着说： 皂太子以嫡长子而被立，至今达十多年，受到百姓的尊重，天下人没有不从心裹归附他，白托为臣子的。
English: Because of his closeness to the courtier, Stane was able to enter the palace to wait on and visit the sick. When the emperor was lying alone in his room, Stane ran straight into the bedroom, bowed his head and prostrated himself on the green cushion, weeping and saying: Prince Soap was established as the eldest son, and has been for more than ten years. He is respected by the people, and the people of the world have not reluctantly attached themselves to him. He is a courtier.

古文：见定陶王雅素爱幸，今者道路流言，为国生意，以为太子有动摇之议。
现代文：看到定陶王一向很受喜爱宠幸，现在路上流播谣言，为国家起了怀疑之心，认为太子有不稳固的议论。
English: Seeing that Ding Tao Wang has always been very popular and favored, and now rumors are circulating on the road, the country has become suspicious and believes that the prince has an unstable argument.

古文：审若此，公卿以下必以死争，不奉诏。
现代文：如果确实是这样，公卿大臣以下一定会以死抗争，不接受诏令。
English: If this is indeed the case, nobles, ministers and others will certainly fight to the death and not accept the edict.

古文：臣愿先赐死以示群臣！ 
现代文：我愿意先受赐而死来给众位大臣看！ 
English: I am willing to be given up and die first to show the ministers!

古文：天子素仁，不忍见丹涕泣，言又切至，上意大感，喟然太息曰： 吾日困劣，而太子、两王幼少，意中恋恋，亦何不念乎！
现代文：皇帝向来仁爱，不忍心看见史丹流泪悲泣，言辞又恳切到了极点，皇上心裹大为感动，喟然出声长叹说： 我一天天地疲惫衰弱，而太子、两位王子幼小，心中恋恋不舍，又怎么会不惦念呢？
English: The emperor has always been benevolent and loving. He could not bear to see Stan shed tears and weep, and his words were sincere to the extreme. His heart was greatly moved, and he said with a long sigh: I am tired and weak every day, and the prince and the two princes are small, and their hearts are in love. How can I not miss them?

古文：然无有此议。
现代文：可是并没有这样的主张。
English: But there is no such proposal.

古文：且皇后谨慎，先帝又爱太子，吾岂可违指！
现代文：况且皇后细心慎重，已故的父王又喜爱太子，我怎么会违背他的意旨！
English: Besides, the Empress is careful and prudent, and her late father loved the Crown Prince. How could I go against his wishes!

古文：驸马都尉安所受此语？ 
现代文：驸马都尉从什么地方听来这些话？ 
English: Where did Captain Tsuchima hear these words?

古文：丹即却，顿首曰： 愚臣妾闻，罪当死！ 
现代文：史丹马上退后，叩头说： 愚昧的臣下胡乱听信谣言，按罪应当处死！ 
English: Stan immediately stepped back and bowed his head and said, "Stupid vassals who listen to rumors should be put to death!"

古文：上因纳，谓丹曰： 吾病浸加，恐不能自还。
现代文：皇上于是接受了史丹的忠言，对史丹说： 我的病情逐渐加重，恐怕不久于人世。
English: The emperor then accepted Stan's loyal advice and said to Stan: My condition is getting worse and I'm afraid I won't be around much longer.

古文：善辅道太子，毋违我意！ 
现代文：你好好地辅佐引导太子，不要违背我的心意。 
English: You should help and guide the crown prince well, and not go against my wishes.

古文：丹嘘唏而起。
现代文：史丹唏嘘着站起来。
English: Stan lies and gets up.

古文：太子由是遂为嗣矣。
现代文：太子因此终于成为继承人。
English: As a result, the prince finally became the heir.

古文：元帝竟崩，成帝初即位，擢丹为长乐卫尉，迁右将军，赐爵关内侯，食邑三百户，给事中，后徙左将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：元帝竟然一病不起，成帝刚刚登基，即提升史丹任长乐卫尉，升任右将军，赐予关内侯的爵位和三百户食邑，加官给事中，后来调任左将军、光禄大夫。
English: Emperor Yuan suddenly fell ill. Emperor Cheng had just ascended to the throne, and promoted Stan to the post of Changle Guard Lieutenant, promoted to the right general, granted the title of Kuanai Marquis and three hundred households, promoted to the middle, and later transferred to the left general and Guanglu doctor.

古文：鸿嘉元年，上遂下诏曰： 夫褒有德，赏元功，古今通义也。
现代文：鸿嘉元年，皇上于是发下韶书说： 赞扬有德之人，奖赏有功之臣，是从古到今通用的道理。
English: In the first year of Hongjia, the emperor then issued an imperial edict saying: Praising virtuous people and rewarding meritorious vassals is a common principle from ancient times to the present.

古文：左将军丹往时导朕以忠正，秉义醇一，旧德茂焉。
现代文：左将军史丹从前用忠厚正直的品行来引导我，秉持道义淳朴专一，往日的德泽美盛。
English: Left General Stan used to guide me with a loyal and honest character, upholding morality, simplicity and single-mindedness, the former De Ze Mei Sheng.

古文：其封丹为武阳侯，国东海郯之武强聚，户千一百。 
现代文：封史丹为武阳侯，以东海郯县的武彊聚为封地，食邑为一千一百户。 
English: The fief of Stan was Wuyang, the fief of Wuyi County in the East China Sea was Wuyi Ju, and there were more than 1,100 households in the county.

古文：丹为人足知，恺弟爱人，貌若傥荡不备，然心甚谨密，故尤得信于上。
现代文：史丹为人足智多谋，平易待人，外貌看去像是倜傥不羁，然而内心却非常谨慎，所以尤其能够被皇上信任。
English: Stan is a resourceful and easy-going person. He looks like an uninhibited person, but his heart is very cautious, so he can be trusted by the emperor.

古文：丹兄嗣父爵为侯，让不受分。
现代文：史丹的兄长继承父亲的侯爵，推辞不接受名分。
English: Stan's elder brother, who succeeded his father as marquess, declined to accept the title.

古文：丹尽得父财，身又食大国邑，重以旧恩，数见褒赏，赏赐累千金，僮奴以百数，后房妻妾数十人，内奢淫，好饮酒，极滋味声色之乐。
现代文：史丹得到父亲的全部财产，自身又受纳大封邑的赋税，又加上有往的恩泽，屡次被褒扬奖赏，所受的赏赐累计达千金，僮仆用百来计数，内室的妻妾有几十人，在家中奢侈过分，喜爱喝酒，极尽美味音乐女色的快乐。
English: Stan received all of his father's property, and he himself was subject to the taxation of the great fiefdom, plus past favors, and was repeatedly praised and rewarded. The rewards he received amounted to thousands of dollars. The servants were counted in hundreds, and there were dozens of wives and concubines in the inner chamber. He was extravagant at home, loved to drink, and enjoyed the joy of delicious music.

古文：为将军前后十六年，永始中病乞骸骨，上赐策曰： 左将军寝病不衰，愿归治疾，朕愍以官职之事久留将军，使躬不瘳。
现代文：担任将军前后共十六年，永始年间病重请求告老退职，皇上赐予策书说： 左将军逐渐病重而不衰损，希望归家治疗疾病，我很哀怜，用官府职任的事务长久地留住将军，致使身体没有痊愈。
English: He served as a general for a total of sixteen years. In the beginning of the year, he was seriously ill and asked to retire. The emperor gave him a recommendation saying, "General Zuo is gradually becoming seriously ill but is not deteriorating. He hopes to return home to treat his illness. I am very sorry that I kept the general for a long time with the affairs of the government post, so that his body did not recover.

古文：使光禄勋赐将军黄金五十斤，安车驷马，其上将军印绶。
现代文：派光禄勋赐予将军五十斤黄铜，四马所拉的安车，交上将军的印信。
English: He presented the General with the Order of the Radiant Star, 50 catties of brass, four horse-drawn carriages, and the General's seal.

古文：宜专精神，务近医药，以辅不衰。 
现代文：应当使精力心神专一，务必亲近医生药物，来扶助身体，使它不衰竭。 
English: One should concentrate one's energy, mind and spirit, and be sure to be close to doctors and medicines to support the body and keep it from exhaustion.

古文：丹归第数月薨，谥曰顷侯。
现代文：史丹回到家裹几个月后去世，被谧为顷侯。
English: Stan died a few months after returning home and was cremated.

古文：有子男女二十人，九男皆以丹任并为侍中、诸曹，亲近在左右。
现代文：有儿子女儿二十人，九个儿子都由于史丹受信任而一起当了侍中诸曹，亲密接近皇帝，常在皇帝身旁。
English: He had twenty sons and daughters, and all nine of his sons became attendants to the emperor because of his trust in Stan. They were very close to the emperor and were always by his side.

古文：史氏凡四人侯，至卿、大夫、二千石者十余人，皆讫王莽乃绝，唯将陵侯曾无子，绝于身云。
现代文：史氏总共有四个人封侯，官至卿大夫俸禄为二千石的有十多人，都到了王莽时期才断绝，衹有将陵侯史曾没有子嗣，到他自己就断绝了。
English: There were a total of four members of the Shi clan who were vassals, and there were more than ten people from officials to nobles and doctors with a salary of two thousand koku. All of them were broken off only in the Wang Mang period. There was a time when the commander of the imperial mausoleum, Shi, had no children, but he himself was broken off.

古文：傅喜字稚游，河内温人也，哀帝祖母定陶傅太后从父弟。
现代文：傅喜字稚游，河内温县人，是哀帝的祖母定陶傅太后的堂弟。
English: Fu Xizhichangyu, a native of Hanoi's Wen County, was a cousin of Emperor Ai's grandmother, Empress Dowager Ding Tao.

古文：少好学问，有志行。
现代文：年轻时喜欢学习和询问，有志向与操守。
English: When you are young, you like to learn and ask questions. You have ambition and integrity.

古文：哀帝立为太子，成帝选喜为太子庶子。
现代文：哀帝被立为太子，成帝挑选傅喜任太子庶子。
English: Emperor Ai was installed as crown prince, Emperor Cheng selected Prince Fu Xiren's illegitimate son.

古文：哀帝初即位，以喜为卫尉，迁右将军。
现代文：哀帝刚刚登上帝位，就让傅喜任卫尉，升为右将军。
English: When Emperor Ai had just ascended to the throne, he promoted Fu Xi to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and to the rank of General of the Right.

古文：是时，王莽为大司马，乞骸骨，避帝外家。
现代文：当时，王莽任大司马，请求告老辞职，避居在皇帝的舅舅家。
English: At that time, Wang Mang, who was the chief steward, asked to resign and take refuge at the emperor's uncle's house.

古文：上既听莽退，众庶归望于喜。
现代文：皇上已经听凭王莽退职，众人都把厚望寄托在傅喜身上。
English: The emperor had already allowed Wang Mang to retire, and everyone pinned high hopes on Fu Xi.

古文：喜从弟孔乡侯晏亲与喜等，而女为皇后。
现代文：傅喜的堂弟孔乡侯傅晏跟皇帝的亲属关系与傅喜一样，而且女儿是皇后。
English: Fu Xi's cousin, Kongxiang Hou Fu Yao, was related to the emperor in the same way as Fu Xi, and his daughter was the empress.

古文：又帝舅阳安侯丁明，皆亲以外属封。
现代文：还有皇帝的舅舅阳安侯丁明，也是由于亲密的外家亲属而受封。
English: The emperor's uncle, Yang Anhou Dingming, was also given the title due to his close foreign relatives.

古文：喜执谦称疾。
现代文：傅喜固守谦逊而声称有病。
English: Fu Xi remained modest and claimed to be ill.

古文：傅太后始与政事，喜数谏之，由是傅太后不欲令喜辅政。
现代文：傅太后开始参预政治事务，傅喜屡次规劝她，因此傅太后不想让傅喜辅佐朝政。
English: When Empress Dowager Fu began to participate in pre-revolutionary political affairs, Fu Xi repeatedly persuaded her, so Empress Dowager Fu did not want Fu Xisuo to participate in imperial politics.

古文：上于是用左将军师丹代王莽为大司马，赐喜黄金百斤、上将军印绶，以光禄大夫养病。
现代文：皇上于是任用左将军师丹替代王莽当大司马，赐给傅喜一百斤黄铜，交上将军的印信，以光禄大夫的名义休养病体。
English: The emperor then appointed the left general Shi Dan to replace Wang Mang as the grand steed, gave Fu Xi a hundred pounds of brass, handed over the general's seal letter, and recuperated in the name of Dr. Guanglu.

古文：大司空何武、尚书令唐林皆上书言： 喜行义修洁，忠诚忧国，内辅之臣也，今以寝病，一旦遣归，众庶失望，皆曰傅氏贤子，以论议不合于定陶太后故退，百寮莫不为国恨之。
现代文：大司空何武、尚书令唐林都献上奏书说： 傅喜品质高洁，忠于国事，是辅佐朝政的大臣，现在由于有病在身，忽然谪贬归家，必使百姓失望，都说傅氏贤人，因为议论不符合定陶太后的缘故而退职，百官没有不替国家感到遗憾的。
English: Daishi Ku He Wu and Shang Shuling Tanglin both presented a report saying: Fu Xi is of high quality and is loyal to state affairs. He is a minister who assists the government. Now that he is ill, he suddenly returns home, which is bound to disappoint the people. They all said that Fu is a wise man. Because the discussion did not conform to the reason of the Dowager Empress Ding Tao, he resigned. The officials did not feel sorry for the country.

古文：忠臣，社稷之卫，鲁以季友治乱，楚以子玉轻重，魏以无忌折冲，项以范增存亡。
现代文：忠臣，是国家的屏障，鲁国的治乱在于季友，楚国的强弱在于子玉，魏国仅以无忌即可退敌，项羽的存亡在于范增。
English: The loyal vassal is the barrier of the country, the control of the chaos in Lu lies in Ji You, the strength and weakness of Chu lies in Ziyu, Wei can only repel the enemy with no regrets, and the survival of Xiang Yu lies in Fan Zeng.

古文：故楚跨有南土，带甲百万，邻国不以为难，子玉为将，则文公侧席而坐，及其死也，君臣相庆。
现代文：所以楚国虽然拥有南方的疆土，披甲的将士有上百万，相邻的国家不认为可怕，子玉当了将领，于是晋文公坐不安稳，等到子玉死去时，晋国的君臣相互庆贺。
English: Therefore, although Chu has the southern territory, there are millions of soldiers in armor, the neighboring countries do not think it is terrible, Ziyu has become a general, so Jinwen Gong sits uneasily, and when Ziyu dies, the princes and ministers of Jin celebrate each other.

古文：百万之众，不如一贤，故秦行千金以间廉颇，汉散万金以疏亚父。
现代文：所以说百万个普通人也比不上一位贤人，因此秦国花费千金来离间廉颇，汉王散发万金来疏远亚父。
English: Therefore, it is said that a million ordinary people are not as good as one wise man. Therefore, the Qin Dynasty spent a lot of money to alienate the Chinese, and the Han Dynasty spent a lot of money to alienate the Chinese.

古文：喜立于朝，陛下之光辉，傅氏之废兴也。 
现代文：傅喜留在朝廷上，是陛下您的荣耀，也是傅氏兴盛的标志。 
English: The fact that Fu Xi remains in the imperial court is your majesty's honor and a sign of Fu Shi's prosperity.

古文：上亦自重之。
现代文：皇上自己也很器重傅喜。
English: The Emperor himself was also very fond of Fu Xi.

古文：明年正月，乃徙师丹为大司空，而拜喜为大司马，封高武侯。
现代文：第二年正月，就调师丹任大司空，而任命傅喜当大司马，封为高武侯。
English: In the first month of the second year, he transferred Dan to the post of grand steward, and appointed Fu Xi as grand steward and Gao Wuhou.

古文：丁、傅骄奢，皆嫉喜之恭俭。
现代文：丁氏、傅氏骄横奢侈，都嫉妒傅喜的谦恭节俭。
English: Both the arrogant and extravagant Ding and Fu were jealous of Fu Xi's modesty and thrift.

古文：又傅太后欲求称尊号，与成帝母齐尊，喜与丞相孔光、大司空师丹共执正议。
现代文：又加上傅太后想要求取皇太后的称号，与成帝的母亲同等尊贵，傅喜与丞相孔光、大司空师丹一齐坚持正当的主张。
English: In addition, Empress Dowager Fu wanted to claim the title of Empress Dowager, equal in dignity to Emperor Cheng's mother, and Fu Xi, together with Prime Minister Kong Guang and Grand Secretary Ku Shi Dan, insisted on the rightful claim.

古文：傅太后大怒，上不得已，先免师丹以感动喜，喜终不顺。
现代文：傅太后勃然大怒，皇上不得不先罢免师丹来触动傅喜，傅喜终归没有顺从。
English: Empress Dowager Fu flew into a rage. The emperor had to first remove Shidan to move Fu Xi, but Fu Xi ultimately did not obey.

古文：后数月，遂策免喜曰： 君辅政出入三年，未有昭然匡朕不逮，而本朝大臣遂其奸心，咎由君焉。
现代文：遇了几个月以后，就下令罢免傅喜说： 你辅佐朝政供职三年，没有明显地纠正过我没做到的地方，而朝中的大臣却成就了奸诈之心，过错在你身上。
English: A few months after the incident, he ordered the dismissal of Fu Xi Rong, saying: You have served as an aide to the government for three years, and have not obviously corrected what I failed to do, but the minister of the government has achieved a treacherous heart, and the fault is on you.

古文：其上大司马印绶，就第。 
现代文：交上大司马的印信，归于府第。 
English: He handed over the seal letter of Daisima and returned it to the prefectural government.

古文：傅太后又自诏丞相、御史曰： 高武侯喜无功而封，内怀不忠，附下罔上，与故大司空丹同心背畔，放命圮族，亏损德化，罪恶虽在赦前，不宜奉朝请，其遣就国。 
现代文：傅太后又自己诏令丞相御史说： 高武侯傅喜没有功劳而受封，内心怀有不忠诚的想法，依附下级，欺骗主上，和原来的大司空师丹齐心背离叛变，放弃教令，毁坏族类，损害道德教化，罪行虽然是在赦免之前，但不适合以奉朝请的名义参加朝会，遣发他回到封地去。 
English: Empress Dowager Fu also issued her own edict to the prime minister, saying: Gaowu marquis Fu Xi was given the title without merit, harboring disloyal thoughts, clinging to subordinates, deceiving the lord, and the original Daishi Ku Shi Danzhong defected from the rebellion, abandoned the edict, destroyed the tribe, and damaged moral enlightenment. Although the crime was before the pardon, it was not suitable to attend the imperial court meeting in the name of inviting the imperial court, and he was sent back to the fiefdom.

古文：后又欲夺喜侯，上亦不听。
现代文：后来又想要剥夺傅喜的侯爵，皂上也不听从。
English: Later, he tried to deprive Fu Xi of his marquisate, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：喜在国三岁余，哀帝崩，平帝即位，王莽用事，免傅氏宫爵归故郡，晏将妻子徙合浦。
现代文：傅喜留在封地三年多，哀帝去世，平帝继位，王莽当权，免去傅氏的官职爵位遣归原来的郡县，傅晏带领妻子儿女迁居合浦。
English: Fu Xi stayed in the fief for more than three years. Emperor Yao died, Emperor Ping succeeded to the throne, Wang Mang assumed power, and the Fu clan was exempted from official posts and titles and sent back to their original counties. Fu Xi led his wife and children to move to Hapu.

古文：莽白太后下诏曰： 高武侯喜姿性端悫，论议忠直。虽与故定陶太后有属，终不顺指从邪，介然守节，以故斥逐就国。
现代文：王莽禀告太后下令说： 高武侯傅喜的姿质性情端正严，言论意见忠厚正直，虽然和原来的定陶太后有亲属关系，但始终没有顺应意旨服从邪恶，坚定不移地固守节操，因此被驱逐回到封地。
English: Wang Mang reported to the Empress Dowager and ordered: Gaowu Hou Fu Xi's posture is upright and strict, his speech is loyal and honest. Although he is related to the original Empress Dowager Ding Tao, he has never complied with the will to obey evil and unswervingly adhered to discipline, so he was expelled back to the fief.

古文：传不云乎？ 岁寒然后知松伯之后凋也 。
现代文：古书上不是说了吗？ 岁寒然后知松柏之后凋。 
English: Isn't it said in the old book? After the cold of the year, the pine and cypress wither.

古文：其还喜长安，以故高安侯莫府赐喜，位特进，奉朝请。 
现代文：让傅喜回到长安，把原来的高安侯的府第赐给傅喜，居特进之位，以奉朝请的名义参加朝会。 
English: Let Fu Xi return to Chang'an, give Fu Xi the former Gao'an prefect's residence, stay in the special promotion position, and participate in the imperial court meeting in the name of being invited by the imperial court.

古文：喜虽外见褒赏，孤立忧惧，后复遣就国，以寿终。
现代文：傅喜虽然表面上被褒扬奖赏，但孤单无助，担惊受怕，后来又遣发回到封地，到年老就死了。
English: Although Fu Xi was praised and rewarded on the surface, he was lonely, helpless, and frightened. Later, he was sent back to his fiefdom and died of old age.

古文：莽赐谥曰贞侯。
现代文：王莽赐予他贞侯的谧号。
English: Wang Mang bestowed on him the title of Zhenhong.

古文：子嗣，莽败乃绝。
现代文：儿子继承爵位，王莽败亡后就断绝了。
English: His son inherited the title of nobility, which was discontinued after Wang Mang's defeat and death.

古文：赞曰：自宜、元、成、哀外戚兴者，许、史、三王、丁、傅之家，皆重侯累将，穷贵极富，见其位矣，未见其人也。
现代文：赞曰：自宣帝、元帝、成帝、哀帝以来外戚之家特别得势的，有许氏、史氏、三位王氏、丁氏、傅氏这几家，他们都是一家有数人封侯，有多位将军，极尽富贵，衹看到他们地位显赫，没见到他们有杰出的人才。
English: Zang Zai said: Since Emperor Xuan, Emperor Yuan, Emperor Cheng and Emperor Pao, the matrilineal families that have been particularly powerful are the Xu family, the Shi family, the three Wang families, the Ding family and the Fu family. They all have several princes, many generals, and are extremely wealthy. I saw their prominent status, but did not see them have outstanding talents.

古文：阳平之王多有材能，好事慕名，其势尤盛，旷贵最久。
现代文：阳平王氏稍有才能，喜欢多事，喜爱名声，他的权势尤其兴盛，才不胜任而身居高位的时间最长。
English: Yangping Wang has a little talent, likes many things, likes fame, his power is particularly prosperous, he is incompetent and has been in a high position for the longest time.

古文：然至于莽，亦以覆国。
现代文：然而到了王莽时期，也就覆灭了。
English: However, by the time of Wang Mang, it was also destroyed.

古文：王商有刚毅节，废黜以忧死，非其罪也。史丹父子相继，高以重厚，位至三公。
现代文：王商有刚直坚定的节操而被罢免，由于担忧而死去，并不是他的过错史丹父子相连续，史高由于庄重忠厚，职位列为三公之一。
English: Wang Shang was dismissed because of his uprightness and firmness, and died of worry, which was not his fault. Stan and his son were consecutive, and Shigao was ranked as one of the three princes because of his solemnity and loyalty.

古文：丹之辅道副主，掩恶扬美，傅会善意，虽宿儒达士无以加焉。
现代文：史丹辅佐引导太子，掩盖不好的地方，称赞好的地方，领会贯通好的意图，即使是老成的儒者、明达的士人也无法超越他。
English: Even a veteran Confucianist and an astute scholar cannot surpass him in guiding the prince, covering up the bad, praising the good, and understanding the good.

古文：及其历房闼，入卧内，推至诚，犯颜色，动寤万乘，转移大谋，卒成太子，安母后之位。 无言不雠 ，终获忠贞之报。
现代文：到他穿过房门，直入寝室时，用最大的诚心对待皇帝，冒犯皇帝的尊严，使皇帝感动醒悟，转变了改立太子的打算，终于成就了太子，稳定了太后的地位， 没有什么言论会不受到相应的对待 ，史丹最终获得了忠厚坚贞的报答。
English: By the time he walked through the door and straight into the bedroom, he treated the emperor with the utmost sincerity, offended the emperor's dignity, moved the emperor to wake up, changed the plan to re-establish the prince, finally achieved the prince, and stabilized the status of the empress dowager. No speech would not be treated accordingly. Stan eventually received a loyal reward.

古文：傅喜守节不倾，亦蒙后凋之赏。
现代文：傅喜固守节操，毫不倾侧，也受到了最后凋零的奖赏。
English: Fu Xi firmly adhered to the principle of discipline, did not lean to one side, and also received the reward of the last withering.

古文：哀、平际会，祸福速哉！
现代文：哀帝、乎帝的交接时期，灾祸或福气是来得很快的啊！
English: During the transition period between the Emperor and the Empress, misfortune or good fortune comes quickly!

