古文：太清问于无穷曰： 子知道乎？ 
现代文：太清问无穷： 你知道 道 吗？ 
English: Too clear, endless questions: Do you know the way?

古文：无穷曰： 吾弗知也。 
现代文：无穷说： 我不知道。 
English: Infinity says: I don't know.

古文：又问于无为曰： 子知道乎？ 
现代文：太清又问无为： 你知道 道 吗？ 
English: Tai Qing also asked helplessly: Do you know the way?

古文：无为曰： 吾知道。 
现代文：无为回答说： 我知道 道 。 
English: And he said, I know the way.

古文： 子知道，亦有数乎？ 
现代文：太清又问： 你所知道的 道 也有特征吗？ 
English: Taechi also asked: Does the way you know have characteristics?

古文：无为曰： 吾知道有数。 
现代文：无为接着回答： 我所知道的 道 有它的特征。 
English: Needless to say: I can tell you its features.

古文：曰： 其数奈何？ 
现代文：太清问：  道 的特征是怎样的呢？ 
English: I said: What is this characteristic?

古文：无为曰： 吾知道之可以弱，可以强；可以柔，可以刚；可以阴，可以阳；可以窈，可以明；可以包裹天地，可以应待无方。
现代文：无为回答： 我所知道的 道 可以弱也可以强，可以柔也可以刚；可以阴也可以阳，可以暗也可以明；可以包裹天地也可以应对无穷。
English: No answer: The way I know can be weak or strong, can be soft or hard; can be yin or yang, can be dark or bright; can wrap heaven and earth and can also deal with infinity.

古文：此吾所以知道之数也。 
现代文：这就是我所知道的 道 的特征。 
English: This is the characteristic of the Tao that I know.

古文：太清又问于无始曰： 向者，吾问道于无穷，曰： 吾弗知之。 
现代文：太清又对无始说： 刚才我问无穷有关 道 的问题，无穷说： 我不知道。 
English: Tai Qing also said to Beginningless: Just now, I asked Endless a question about the Tao, and Endless said: I don't know.

古文：又问于无为，无为曰： 吾知道。 
现代文：我又问无为，无为说： 我知道。 
English: I asked again, to no avail, and to no avail he said: I know.

古文：曰： 子之知道亦有数乎？ 
现代文：我又问： 你能说出它的特征吗？ 
English: I also asked: Can you tell me its characteristics?

古文：无为曰： 吾知道有数。 
现代文：无为说： 我能说出它的特征。 
English: Needless to say: I can tell you its features.

古文：曰： 其数奈何？ 
现代文：我说： 这特征是怎么样的呢？ 
English: I said: What is this characteristic?

古文：无为曰： 吾知道之可以弱，可以强；可以柔，可以刚；可以阴，可以阳；可以窈，可以明；可以包裹天地，可以应待无方，吾所以知道之数也。 
现代文：无为回答说： 它是可以弱也可以强，可以柔也可以刚；可以阴也可以阳，可以暗也可以明；可以包裹天地也可以应对无穷。这就是它的特征。 
English: "It can be weak or strong, soft or hard; it can be yin or yang, dark or light; it can encircle heaven and earth, and it can cope with infinity. This is its characteristic.

古文：若是，则无为知与无穷之弗知，孰是孰非？ 
现代文：这样的话，你是否能回答无为知道和无穷不知道哪个对哪个错呢？ 
English: In this case, can you answer the questions of knowing nothing and not knowing which is right and which is wrong?

古文：无始曰： 弗知之深而知之浅，弗知内而知之外，弗知精而知之粗。 
现代文：无始回答说： 说不知道的恰恰说明他知道的深奥，说知道的恰恰说明他知道的肤浅；说不知道的恰恰说明他知道了它的实质，说知道的恰恰说明他只知道它的外表；说不知道的恰恰说明他知道了它的精粹，说知道的恰恰说明他只知道它的大概。 
English: Without beginning, he answered: "To say that he does not know is precisely to say that he knows the profundity, to say that he knows is precisely to say that he knows the superficiality; to say that he does not know is precisely to say that he knows the essence, to say that he knows is precisely to say that he knows only the appearance; to say that he does not know is precisely to say that he knows the essence, to say that he knows is precisely to say that he knows only the outline."

古文：太清仰而叹曰： 然则不知乃知邪？知乃不知邪？
现代文：太清听后仰天叹息说： 这么说来，不知道的却是知道，知道的却是不知道。
English: After listening too clearly, he sighed and said, "Thus, those who don't know know, and those who know don't know."

古文：孰知知之为弗知，弗知之为知邪？ 
现代文：谁晓得知道的却是不知道，不知道的却是知道呢？ 
English: Who knows what he knows but does not know, and what he does not know but knows?

古文：无始曰： 道不可闻，闻而非也；道不可见，见而非也；道不可言，言而非也，孰知形之不形者乎？ 
现代文：无始接着说：  道 是不可闻的，能听闻到的就不是 道 ； 道 是不可见的，能看得见的就不是 道 ； 道 是不可言说的，能言说规定的就不是 道 。
English: Beginningless went on to say: The way is inaudible, and what can be heard is not the way; the way is invisible, and what can be seen is not the way; the way is ineffable, and what can be said and prescribed is not the way.

古文：故老子曰： 天下皆知善之为善，斯不善也。
现代文：谁晓得生成有形物体的是无形的 道 ？ 所以《老子》说： 天下人都知 善 之所以 善 时，也就会显出不 善 来。 
English: Who knows if it is the formless Tao that produces the form? Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "All people in the world know what is good, but when they are good, they will also show themselves to be bad."

古文：故 知者不言，言者不知 也。 
现代文：所以说 智者不言，言者不智 。
English: Therefore, it is said that the wise do not speak, and those who speak are not wise.

古文：白公问于孔子曰： 人可以微言？ 孔子不应。
现代文：白公问孔子： 人可以密谋吗？ 孔子不回答。
English: Bai Gong asked Confucius: Can people conspire? Confucius did not answer.

古文：白公曰： 若以石投水中何如？ 
现代文：白公又问： 假若像石头一样扔到水里，怎么样？ 
English: Bai Gong asked again: What if you threw it into the water like a stone?

古文：曰： 吴越之善没者能取之矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 吴越地区善于潜水的人可以把它捞起来。 
English: Confucius said: People who are good at diving in the Wuyue area can fish it out.

古文：曰： 若以水投水，何如？ 
现代文：白公又说： 假若像水一样泼入水中，怎么样？ 
English: Bai Gong also said, "What if I were to splash into the water like water?

古文：孔子曰： 菑渑之水合，易牙尝而知之。 
现代文：孔子说： 菑水和渑水汇合一起，但辨味专家易牙能尝辨出来。 
English: Confucius said: Salty water and salty water come together, but taste experts can taste and distinguish them.

古文：白公曰： 然则人固不可与微言乎？ 
现代文：白公于是说： 这么说来，人就根本不能和他们密谋了？ 
English: Bai Gong then said: So, people can't conspire with them at all?

古文：孔子曰： 何谓不可！
现代文：孔子说： 怎么说不可以啊！
English: Confucius said: How can you say it is not allowed!

古文：谁知言之谓者乎！夫知言之谓者，不以言言也。
现代文：那些能明白你说话意思的人就可以和他密谋呀！但话又说回来，那些能明白你说话意思的人，你不去和他说，他也会明白。 
English: Those who can understand what you are saying can conspire with him! But then again, those who can understand what you are saying, if you don't talk to him, he will understand.

古文：争鱼者濡，逐兽者趋，非乐之也。
现代文：争夺鱼的人没有不湿衣服的，追逐野兽的人没有跑得慢的，他们并不是乐意这样做，而是利欲之心驱动他们这样做。
English: Scrambling for fish and shrimp with a wet body, chasing the beast's aching legs, is not something I am happy to do.

古文：故至言去言，至为无为。
现代文：所以，最高妙的话是不说出来别人就已领悟，最好的行为是不做什么却能样样成功。
English: Therefore, the highest language is no language, and the highest action is no action.

古文：夫浅知之所争者，未矣！ 
现代文：那些才智浅薄的人才会去争夺那些枝末小利。
English: It is the shallow-minded who fight over the scraps.

古文：白公不得也，故死于浴室。
现代文：白公就是不懂这其中的道理，所以导致最后因事败走投无路而自缢于浴室之地。
English: Bai Gong just didn't understand the reason for this, which eventually led to him losing his way and locking himself in the bathroom.

古文：故老子曰： 言有宗，事有君。夫唯无知，是以不吾知也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 言论有宗旨，行事有根据，因为人们无知顽钝，所以也不理解我说的道理。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Speech has a purpose, actions have a basis, because people are ignorant and obtuse, so they do not understand my reason.

古文：白公之谓也。
现代文：这无知顽钝的人说的就是白公啊。
English: This ignorant and obtuse person is talking about Baikong.

古文：惠子为惠王为国法，已成而示诸先生，先生皆善之。奏之惠王，惠王其说之，以示翟煎，曰： 善！ 
现代文：惠施为魏惠王制定国家法令，制定出来后拿给德高望重的各位年长儒生征求意见，儒生们都称赞法令制定得好，惠施于是将法令上呈给魏惠王，惠王十分高兴，拿去给墨煎看。墨煎说： 很好。 
English: Hui Shi drew up a national decree for Wei Hui Wang. After it was drawn up, he took it to a number of highly respected elderly Confucian scholars to solicit their opinions. The Confucian scholars all praised the decree as well-drafted. Hui Shi then presented the decree to Wei Hui Wang. Hui Wang was very pleased and showed it to Mo Ren. Mo Ren said, "It's very good."

古文：惠王曰： 善，可行乎？ 翟煎曰： 不可。 
现代文：惠王说： 既然法令制定得好，那么就拿出去颁布实行了吧？ 墨煎说： 不行。 
English: Hui Wang said: Since the decree is well formulated, then it should be promulgated and implemented, right? Mo Ren said: No.

古文：惠王曰： 善而不可行，何也？ 
现代文：惠王说： 好却不能颁布实行，这是为什么？ 
English: Hui Wang said: It is good, but it cannot be promulgated and implemented. Why is that?

古文：翟煎对曰： 今夫举大木者，前呼邪许，后亦应之，此举重劝力之歌也，岂无郑卫激楚之音哉？
现代文：墨煎说： 如今那些扛大木头的人，前面的呼喊 嗨哎 ，后面的也同声应和。这是人们在扛举重物时为鼓劲而唱喊的歌声。现在难道没有郑国、卫国那样的高亢激越的乐曲？
English: Moren said, "Nowadays, those who carry large logs shout "Hi, hey" in front of them, and the same goes for those behind them. This is the song that people sing for encouragement when they carry heavy loads. Aren't there high-pitched and exciting music like that of Zheng Guo and Wei Guo?

古文：然而不用者，不若此其宜也。
现代文：有的，但就是不用它，这是因为它不如那种号子歌声来得适用。
English: Yes, but we don't use it, because it's not as applicable as the trumpet sound.

古文：治国有礼，不在文辩。 
现代文：同样，治理国家，在于礼法的实际内容和有效性，而不在于这法令的文辞修饰如何。 
English: In the same way, the governance of the country depends on the actual content and effectiveness of the etiquette, not on the wording of the decree.

古文：故老子曰： 法令滋彰，盗贼多有。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 法令越详明，盗贼就越多。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The more detailed the decree is, the more thieves there will be.

古文：此之谓也。
现代文：说的就是这种情况。
English: This is exactly what is happening.

古文：田骈以道术说齐王，王应之曰： 寡人所有，齐国也。
现代文：田骈用道术游说齐宣王，齐宣王回答说： 我所拥有的是齐国。
English: Tian Xuan used Taoism to persuade King Qi Xuan. King Qi Xuan replied, "What I have is Qi Province."

古文：道术难以除患，愿闻国之政。 
现代文：你向我说的道术难以消除当前齐国的祸患。
English: The Daoism that you told me is difficult to eliminate the current scourge of Qi.

古文：田骈对曰： 臣之言无政，而可以为政。
现代文：所以我倒希望听到一些好的治政高见。 田骈回答说： 我说的道术尽管不直接涉及政事，但可以运用到政事。
English: That's why I would like to hear some good advice on governance. Tian Ye replied: Although the Taoism I'm talking about is not directly related to politics, it can be applied to politics.

古文：譬之若林木无材而可以为材。
现代文：这就好比说树林里没有成材的树木，但它可以培育出好的树木，供人们使用。
English: It's like saying there are no mature trees in the forest, but it can grow good trees for people to use.

古文：愿王察其所谓，而自取齐国之政焉己。
现代文：所以希望大王能仔细考察我说的话的旨意，能否从中领悟出些能治理齐国政事的道理来。
English: Therefore, I hope that the great king can carefully examine the intention of what I said, and whether he can understand some of the principles that can govern the political affairs of Qi.

古文：虽无除其患害，天地之间，六合之内，可陶冶而变化也。齐国之政，何足问哉！ 
现代文：虽然我说的道术中没有关于消除齐国祸患的内容，但是天地之间、六合之内都可以用 道 来陶冶变化，那你齐国的政事又何足道呢？
English: Although there is no content about eliminating the scourge of Qi in the Taoism I mentioned, the Tao can be used to cultivate change between heaven and earth and within the Six Ecumenical Councils. Then, what is the political affairs of Qi?

古文：此老聃之所谓 无状之状，无物之象 者也。
现代文：这就是老子说的 无状之状，无物之象 。
English: This is what Lao Tzu called the formless state, the appearance of nothing.

古文：若王之所问者，齐也。田骈所称者，材也。
现代文：像你大王所说的只不过是一个齐国，而我田骈所说的也不过是树木的培育而已。
English: As your great king said, it is just a "Qi Guo," and what I said is just the cultivation of trees.

古文：材不及林，林不及雨，雨不及阴阳，阴阳不及和，和不及道。
现代文：而实际上树木比不上树林，树林比不上雨水，雨水比不上阴阳，阴阳比不上中和之气，而中和之又怎么比得上这 道 呢！ 
English: But in reality, trees are not comparable to woods, woods are not comparable to rain, rain is not comparable to yin and yang, and yin and yang are not comparable to the air of neutralization, and how can neutralization be comparable to this way!

古文：白公胜得荆国，不能以府库分人。
现代文：白公胜取得楚国的政权后，不肯将府库内的粮食和兵器分发给民众。
English: After Bai Gongsheng gained power in Chu, he refused to distribute the grain and weapons in the treasury to the people.

古文：七日，石乙入曰： 不义得之，又不能布施，患必至矣。
现代文：七天以后，石乞进见白公胜说： 我们现在得到的是不义之财，又不肯将不义之财布施给民众，我看祸害必定会降临。
English: Seven days later, the stone mendicant came to see Bai Gongsheng and said, "What we have now is ill-gotten wealth, and we are not willing to distribute the ill-gotten wealth to the people. I think evil will surely come."

古文：不能予人，不若焚之，毋令人害我。 
现代文：既然不肯布施给民众，不如用火一烧了之，千万别叫人家利用这些东西来害我们。 
English: Since you are not willing to give alms to the people, it is better to burn them with fire. Don't let them use these things to harm us.

古文：白公弗听也。
现代文：白公胜不听。
English: Bai Gongsheng did not listen.

古文：九日，叶公入，乃发大府之货以予众，出高库之兵以赋民，因而攻之，十有九日而禽白公。
现代文：到了第九天，叶公子高从方城攻入楚都，立即将府库里的财物和兵器分发给民众，依靠民众的向心力攻打白公胜，等到第十九天就彻底打败白公胜。
English: On the ninth day, Ye Gongzigao invaded Chu from Fangcheng, immediately distributed the property and weapons in the government treasury to the people, and relied on the people's centripetal force to attack Bai Gongsheng. By the nineteenth day, Bai Gongsheng was completely defeated.

古文：夫国非其有也，而欲有之，可谓至贪也；不能为人，又无以自力，可谓至愚矣。
现代文：这国家本不该白公胜所有而白公胜却想占有它，这可以说是最贪婪的了。不能为他人着想和谋利益，又无能耐保住自我，这可以说是最愚蠢的了。
English: This country should not be owned by all and sundry, but all and sundry want to own it, which is arguably the greediest. Unable to think of others and seek benefits, and unable to protect themselves, this is arguably the stupidest.

古文：譬白公之啬也，何以异于果之爱其子也。故老子曰： 持而盈之，不如其已。
现代文：白公胜的吝啬，与枭鸟爱养其子最后被长大的枭子吃掉又有什么不同呢？所以《老子》说： 执持盈满，不如作罢；锤尖太细，难保长久。 
English: What is the difference between the stinginess of Bai Gongsheng and that of an ostrich that loves to raise its young and is eventually eaten by a grown-up pigeon? Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: It is better to give up holding on to fullness; the tip of the hammer is too thin and it is difficult to keep it for a long time.

古文：揣而锐之，不可长保也。 赵简子以襄子为后，董阏于曰： 无卹贱，今以为后，何也？ 
现代文：赵简子选中庶子无恤，即以后的赵襄子为继承人，董阏于说： 无恤低贱，现在选立他为继承人，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Zhao Jianzi chose his illegitimate son, Zhao Xiangzi, as his successor, and Dong Xuan Yu said: "Zhao Jianzi is low-born, and now he has chosen him as his successor. Why is that?

古文：简子曰： 是为人也，能为社稷忍羞。 
现代文：赵简子回答说： 无恤这个人，以后一定能为国家忍辱负重。 
English: Zhao Jianzi replied: "Without mercy, this person will certainly be able to bear the burden of humiliation for the country in the future.

古文：异日，知伯与襄子饮而批襄子之首，大夫请杀之，襄子曰： 先君之立我也，曰能为社稷忍羞，岂曰能刺人哉！ 
现代文：后来有一次智伯与赵襄子一起饮酒，智伯趋着酒兴向赵襄子头上猛击一掌，赵襄子手下的人请求杀了智伯，赵襄子却说： 先君立我为继承人时说我将会为国家社稷忍辱负重，却未曾说过我好杀人啊！ 
English: Later, there was a time when Zhibo was drinking with Zhao Xiangzi. Zhibo tended to drink and hit Zhao Xiangzi on the head with a slap. Zhao Xiangzi's men asked to kill Zhibo, but Zhao Xiangzi said: When the emperor made me the heir, he said that I would bear the burden of humiliation for the national society, but he never said that I was good at killing!

古文：处十月，知伯围襄子于晋阳，襄子疏队而击之，大败知伯，破其首以为饮器。
现代文：过了十个月，智伯举兵将赵襄子包围在晋阳，赵襄子分兵出击智伯军，大败智伯，并剖开智伯的头颅作壶器。
English: After ten months, Zhibo raised an army to surround Zhao Xiangzi in Jinyang. Zhao Xiangzi's detachment attacked Zhibo's army, defeated Zhibo, and cut open Zhibo's head to make pottery.

古文：故老子曰： 知其雄，守其雌，其为天下谿。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 虽然知道什么是刚强，但却谨守柔弱。甘心处于天下的低卑处。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Although he knows what is strong, he is wary of weakness. He is willing to be in the lowest place in the world.

古文：齧缺问道于被衣，被衣曰： 正女形，壹女视，天和将至。
现代文：齧缺向披衣问 道 ，披衣说： 端正你的形体，集中专一你的视觉，这样天然和气将降临。
English: Zou Que asked Pili, and Pili said, "Correct your body, focus on your vision, and natural harmony will come."

古文：摄女知，正女度，神将来舍，德将来附若美，而道将为女居。
现代文：敛藏你的智慧，端正你的思虑，神明就会留宿在你心中。德将为你显得更美，道将留居你身上。
English: Conceal your wisdom, rectify your concerns, and the gods will reside in your heart. Virtue will appear more beautiful to you, and the Tao will reside in you.

古文：惷乎若新生之犊，而无求其故。 
现代文：你将纯朴得像新生的牛犊，不探求所有事物的缘由。 
English: You will be as innocent as a newborn calf, not seeking the cause of all things.

古文：言未卒，齧缺继以雠夷，被衣行歌而去曰： 形若槁骸，心如死灰。直实不知，以故自持，墨墨恢恢，无心可与谋。彼何人哉！ 
现代文：披衣的话还没说完，啮缺还是像先前那样显得目光呆滞不言不语。披衣唱着歌而离去，说： 形若槁骸，心如死灰；真实地知道了天道，不以智巧故作矜持；看上去混混沌沌毫无心机，不能与他谋议什么，那是什么样的人啊！ 
English: Before the words of Pippin were finished, Zou Que still looked as blank-eyed and speechless as before. Pippin sang a song and left, saying: Shaped like a skeleton, heart like ashes; truly knew the way of heaven, did not hold back with cleverness; looked chaotic and chaotic, had no heart, could not discuss anything with him, what kind of person was that!

古文：故老子曰： 明白四达，能无以知乎？ 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 悟彻明白事理，能不使心机掺杂其间吗？ 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "Wu Che understands the reason, can he not mix it with the heart?"

古文：赵襄子攻翟而胜之，取尤人、终人。使者来谒之，襄子方将食而有忧色。
现代文：赵襄子派兵攻打翟国获胜，夺取了尤人和终人两座城镇，使者前来报告赵襄子，赵襄子正准备吃饭，听后露出忧虑的神色。
English: Zhao Xiangzi sent troops to attack Shandong and won, capturing the two towns of Youren and Zhunan. An envoy came to report to Zhao Xiangzi. Zhao Xiangzi was preparing to eat, and after listening, he showed a worried look.

古文：左右曰： 一朝而两城下，此人之所喜也。
现代文：他身边的人看到后就说： 一个早上就攻下两座城镇，这是人们所高兴的事。
English: When the people around him saw this, they said, "It is good for the people to take two towns in one morning."

古文：今君有忧色，何也？ 
现代文：现在您反而显得忧愁，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Now, on the contrary, you seem sad. Why is that?

古文：襄子曰： 江河之大也，不过三日。飘风暴雨，日中不须臾。
现代文：赵襄子回答说： 长江黄河发大水，也不过三天就退下去了；狂风暴雨，太阳当头照，也都是片刻的现象。
English: Zhao Xiangzi replied, "The Yangtze River and the Yellow River discharge large amounts of water, and it takes only three days for the water to recede. Storms and rainstorms, and the sun shining directly on your head are all temporary phenomena.

古文：今赵氏之德行无所积，今一朝两城下，亡其及我乎？ 
现代文：现在我们赵氏的德行没有积累多少，而这么轻松夺取两座城镇，衰败也大概会接踵而来了吧？ 
English: Now our Zhao's virtue has not accumulated much, and if we take two towns so easily, decay will probably follow, right?

古文：孔子闻之曰： 赵氏其昌乎！ 
现代文：孔子知道此事后说： 赵氏将要昌盛了。 
English: Upon hearing this, Confucius said, "The Zhao clan must have prospered!

古文：夫忧，所以为昌也，而喜，所以为亡也。
现代文：取得胜利后反而忧虑、反思，这恰恰说明会进一步取胜和昌盛；而为了一点胜利就沾沾自喜则说明非但不会进一步取胜，还会导致失败。
English: Worry and reflection after a victory indicate further victory and prosperity, while complacency after a small victory indicates no further victory and will lead to failure.

古文：胜非其难也，持之者其难也。
现代文：取得胜利并不难，难的是如何保持胜利。
English: It's not hard to win, it's hard to keep winning.

古文：贤主以此持胜，故其福及后世。
现代文：贤明的君主知道这个道理，所以能保持胜利，并将所缔造的胜利果实传给后代。
English: A wise ruler uses sorrow to maintain his victory, and thus his happiness is passed on to future generations.

古文：齐、楚、吴、越皆尝胜矣，然而卒取亡焉，不通乎持胜也。
现代文：而历史上的齐、楚、吴、赵四国都曾战胜过诸侯，称霸过天下，但最终都走向衰亡，这是因为四国君主都不懂如何保持胜利果实的道理。
English: However, historically, the four states of Qi, Chu, Wu and Zhao had defeated the princes and dominated the world, but eventually they all went into decline. This is because the monarchs of the four countries did not understand how to keep the fruits of victory.

古文：唯有道之主能持胜。
现代文：只有有 道 的君主才能保持胜利果实。
English: Only a virtuous monarch can preserve the fruits of victory.

古文：孔子劲构国门之关，而不肯以力闻。墨子为守攻，公输般服，而不肯以兵知。
现代文：孔子的力气大得能拉开城门的门栓，但他却不愿意以力大而著称；墨子善于守御攻城，这种技术连公输般都不得不佩服，但是墨子就是不愿意以善于用兵而出名。
English: Confucius' strength was so great that he could open the bolts of the city gate, but he did not want to be known for his great strength; Mozi was good at defending the city against attack, a technique that even the public had to admire, but Mozi did not want to be known for being good at using soldiers.

古文：善持胜者，以强为弱。
现代文：所以，善于保持胜利的人，尽管处于强势，但却表现出柔弱，以防止物壮则老。
English: Therefore, those who are good at maintaining victory, although they are in a strong position, show weakness to prevent the strong from becoming old.

古文：故老子曰： 道冲，而用之又弗盈也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 道体虚空，但它的作用无穷无尽。 
English: That is why "Lao Zi" said: The Tao is empty, but its effects are endless.

古文：惠孟见宋康王，蹀足謦欬，疾言曰： 寡人所说者，勇有功也，不说为仁义者也，客将何以教寡人？ 
现代文：惠孟拜见宋康王，康王跺着脚、咳嗽着，大声说： 我所喜欢的是勇猛有力的人，不喜欢那些讲仁义的人。你这位客人对此有何高见指教我？ 
English: Hui Meng paid a visit to Song Kang Wang. Kang Wang stomped his feet, coughed, and said loudly: I like brave and powerful people, I don't like those who talk about benevolence and righteousness. What does your guest have to say about this?

古文：惠孟对曰： 臣有道于此。人虽勇，刺之不入；虽巧有力，击之不中。
现代文：惠孟回答说： 我这里有一种道术，能够让你有这种功夫：再骁勇的人也刺不进你的身体，再有力的人也击不倒你。
English: Hui Meng replied, "I have a kind of Taoism here that can make you have this kind of gongfu: no matter how brave, no one can pierce your body, and no matter how powerful, no one can defeat you.

古文：大王独无意邪？ 
现代文：大王难道不想具有这种功夫吗？ 康王说： 好。
English: Isn't the king interested in this?

古文：宋王曰： 善，此寡人之所欲闻也。 惠孟曰： 夫刺之而不入，击之而不中，此犹辱也。
现代文：这种功夫我倒想听你介绍介绍。 惠孟于是接着说： 刺你而刺不进身体，击打你而击不倒你，但这还是使受刺击的你感到是一种侮辱。
English: Hui Meng then continued: "To stab you without piercing your body, to strike you without knocking you down, but this still makes you feel insulted.

古文：臣有道于此，使人虽有勇弗敢刺，虽有力不敢击，夫不敢刺、不敢击，非无其意也。
现代文：我这里的一种道术，能够让你有这种本事：再骁勇的人不敢刺你，再有力的人不敢击打你。但不敢刺你，不敢击打你，不等于他没有这种想刺击你的意图。
English: One of my techniques here can give you this ability: the more courageous person would not dare to stab you, the more powerful person would not dare to hit you. But not daring to stab you, not daring to hit you, does not mean that he does not have such an intention to stab you.

古文：臣有道于此，使人本无其意也。
现代文：所以，我这里还有一种道术，能够让你有这种品行：使别人就根本没有这种想伤害你的意图。
English: So, I have another technique here that can help you to have this kind of character: to make others have no such intention to hurt you at all.

古文：夫无其意，未有爱利之心也。
现代文：但是没有这种想伤害你的意图，不等于说他就有一种爱护你、使你得利的心。
English: But the absence of such an intention to hurt you does not mean that he has a heart to love you and benefit you.

古文：臣有道于此，使天下丈夫女子莫不欢然皆欲爱利之心，此其贤于勇有力也，四累之上也。
现代文：由此，我这里再有一种道术，能够使你有这种德行，即别人非但没有伤害你的意图，还无不欣喜愉悦地爱你，使你得利。这种德行要远远超过勇武有力，在这四种情况中属于最好的一种。
English: Therefore, here I have another Taoist technique that can make you have the virtue that others, far from intending to harm you, love you with joy and pleasure to benefit you. This virtue is far more powerful than bravery and strength, and is the best of the four situations.

古文：大王独无意邪？ 
现代文：大王难道不想获得这种德行吗？ 
English: Isn't the king interested in this?

古文：宋王曰： 此寡人所欲得也。 
现代文：康王听后说： 这正是我想获得的。 
English: After listening, King Kang said, "This is exactly what I want to obtain."

古文：惠孟对曰： 孔、墨是已。
现代文：惠孟接下说： 孔子、墨子就是具有这种德行的人。
English: Hui Meng then said: Confucius and Mozi are people with this kind of virtue.

古文：孔丘、墨翟，无地而为君、无官而为长，天下丈夫女子莫不延颈举踵而愿安利之之者。
现代文：所以，他们尽管没有任何领地但却成为众人敬仰的精神领袖，他们尽管没有任何官职但却能成为人们的主宰。天下男男女女无不伸长脖子踮着脚跟仰望他们、并希望他们平安幸福。
English: Therefore, although they do not have any territory, they have become spiritual leaders who are admired by everyone, and although they do not have any official position, they can become the masters of people. Men and women all over the world crane their necks, stomp their heels, look up to them, and wish them peace and happiness.

古文：今大王，万乘之主也。诚有其志，则四境之内皆得其利矣。此贤于孔、墨也远矣！ 
现代文：今天你大王是一个大国的君主，如果你真有孔墨这样的德行，那么，全国范围内的人、包括你自己，都能得到利益，这不比孔墨强多吗？ 
English: Today, Your Majesty is the ruler of a big country. If you really have the virtues of Confucius, then people all over the country, including yourself, will benefit. Isn't this more powerful than Confucius?

古文：宋王无以应。
现代文：听了之后，宋康王无话可答。
English: Song Kang Wang had nothing to say.

古文：惠盂出，宋王谓左右曰： 辩矣，客之以说胜寡人也。 
现代文：惠孟出去之后，宋康王对身边的人说： 这位客人很会说话，他的辩说使我十分佩服。 
English: After Hui Meng left, Song Kang Wang said to the people around him: This guest is very eloquent, I am very impressed by his argument.

古文：故老子曰： 勇于不敢则活。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 勇于柔弱就不会陷于死地。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said: "If you are brave enough to be weak, you won't fall to your death."

古文：由此观之，大勇反为不勇耳。
现代文：由此看来，大勇反而成了不勇了。
English: From this point of view, daring has become not daring.

古文：昔尧之佐九人，舜之佐七人，武王之佐五人。
现代文：过去尧帝的辅佐大臣有九个人，舜帝的辅佐大臣有七个人，武王的辅佐大臣有五个人。
English: In the past, Emperor Shun had nine assistant ministers, Emperor Shun had seven assistant ministers, and King Wu had five assistant ministers.

古文：尧、舜、武王于九、七、五者，不能一事焉，然而垂拱受成功者，善乘人之资也。
现代文：尧帝、舜帝和武王跟他们这些辅佐大臣相比，并不具有辅佐大臣那样的本事，但却能相当轻松地取得成功，这是因为尧、舜、武王都能善于充分利用各人的能力。
English: Compared with these assistant ministers, Emperor Gong, Emperor Gong and King Wu do not have the same skills as the assistant ministers, but they can succeed quite easily, because Emperor Gong, Emperor Gong and King Wu are all good at making full use of each other's abilities.

古文：故人与骥逐走则不胜骥，托于车上，则骥不能胜人。
现代文：所以人和千里马赛跑是跑不过千里马的，但乘坐在由千里马拉的车子上，情况就不一样了。
English: Therefore, it is impossible for a person to run a thousand-mile race with a thousand-mile horse, but the situation is different when sitting on a thousand-mile-long car.

古文：北方有兽，其名曰蹷，鼠前而兔后，趋则顿，走则颠，常为蛩蛩駏驉取甘草以与之，蹷有患害，蛩蛩駏驉必负而走。
现代文：北方有一种兽，名叫 蹶 ，前肢短如鼠脚，后腿却长如兔，快步走就会叩倒，跑起来就会跌倒，常常为善走而不善觅食的蛩蛩駏骢采摘甘草，但反过来如 蹶 碰到祸害时，蛩蛩駏骢就会背着 蹶 逃跑。
English: In the north, there is a beast called the grasshopper. Its forelimbs are as short as a mouse's foot, but its hind legs are as long as a rabbit's. If it takes a brisk walk, it will be knocked down, and if it runs, it will fall down. The grasshopper often picks licorice because it is good at walking but not at foraging for food, but conversely, if the grasshopper encounters a disaster, it will run away with the grasshopper on its back.

古文：此以其能，托其所不能。
现代文：这二种兽都以自己的长处能力来帮助、弥补对方的短处不足。
English: Both of these animals use their strengths and abilities to help and make up for each other's shortcomings.

古文：故老子曰： 夫代大匠斫者，希不伤其手。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 那些硬代替工匠去砍木头的人，很少有不自伤其手的。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Those who are forced to cut wood in place of craftsmen rarely do not hurt their hands.

古文：薄疑说卫嗣君以王术。嗣君应之曰： 予所有者，千乘也。
现代文：薄疑拿着王道之术游说卫嗣君，卫嗣君对他说： 我所拥有的只是一个千乘小国，希望先生能拿治理小国的方法指导我。 
English: He said to him, "All I have is a small country. I hope you can guide me on how to govern a small country."

古文：愿以受教。 薄疑对曰： 乌获举千钧，又况一斤乎！ 
现代文：薄疑回答说： 大力士乌获能举起千斤重的东西，又何况这一斤重的东西呢？ 
English: The sceptic replied, "How can a strong man lift a thousand pounds, much less this one pound?"

古文：杜赫以安天下说周昭文君。文君谓杜赫曰： 愿学所以安周。 
现代文：杜赫拿着安邦天下的方法游说周昭文君，周昭文君对杜赫说： 我只希望学习安定周朝的具体方法。 
English: Duch lobbied Zhou Zhaowen with the method of stabilizing the world. Zhou Zhaowen said to Duch: I only hope to learn the specific method of stabilizing the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：赫对曰： 臣之所言不可，则不能安周。臣之所言可，则周自安矣。
现代文：杜赫回答说： 如果你认为我说的安邦方法不管用，那么没有别的方法可以安定周朝了；如果你认为我说的安邦方法可行，那么周朝就自然会安定。
English: Duch replied: "If you think that the Anbang method I mentioned does not work, then there is no other way to stabilize the Zhou Dynasty; if you think that the Anbang method I mentioned is feasible, then the Zhou Dynasty will naturally stabilize.

古文：此所谓弗安而安者也 。
现代文：这就是所谓的认为不能安邦的方法恰恰是可以安邦的。 
English: This is the so-called way of thinking that it is impossible to achieve peace, but it is possible to achieve peace.

古文：故老子曰： 大制无割。故致数舆无舆 也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 用大道治理天下无所伤害 ， 所以过多地计较称誉不称誉反而得不到称誉 。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: There is no harm in using the avenue to govern the world, so if you care too much about reputation, you will not get reputation.

古文：鲁国之法，鲁人为人妾于诸侯，有能赎之者，取金于府。
现代文：鲁国的法律规定，鲁国人中有给诸侯作臣妾的，可以将他们赎身为平民，所需的赎金可以由国家的金库来支付。
English: According to the laws of the State of Lu, those Lu people who were given to the princes as vassals and concubines could be redeemed as civilians, and the required ransom could be paid from the state treasury.

古文：子赣赎鲁人于诸侯，来而辞不受金。
现代文：子贡从别的诸侯国那里赎回了作臣妾的本国人，但回来后推辞不受国库的赎金。
English: Zigong redeemed his compatriots who were vassals and concubines from other vassal states, but after returning, he refused to accept the ransom from the national treasury.

古文：孔子曰： 赐失之矣！
现代文：孔子知道后说： 赐这样做就不对了。
English: After knowing this, Confucius said, "It is not right to do so."

古文：夫圣人之举事也，可以移风易俗，而受教顺可施后世，非独以适身之行也。
现代文：圣人做事情，能够起到移风易俗的作用，他的行为所起的教化作用能够影响到后世，并不是自以为品行高尚就行了。
English: When a saint does things, he can play a role in changing customs, and the edifying effect of his actions can affect future generations. It is not enough for him to think that his behavior is noble.

古文：今国之富者寡而贫者众。赎而受金，则为不廉；不受金，则不复赎人。
现代文：如今我们鲁国是富人少而穷人多，赎回了臣妾而拿国库的赎金和奖金，自然会被人们看轻，认为是不廉洁。但问题是，大家都赎回了臣妾后不接受赎金和奖金，以后谁还会去赎人呢？
English: Nowadays, there are fewer rich people and more poor people in our country, and it is natural for people to look down on those who ransomed their vassals and concubines and took the ransom and bonus money from the national treasury. However, the problem is that everyone does not accept the ransom and bonus money after they have ransomed their vassals and concubines. Who will ransom people in the future?

古文：自今以来，鲁蹻不复赎人于诸侯矣。 
现代文：由此也可推知，鲁国将不会再有从诸侯那里赎回臣妾的人了。 
English: From this, it can also be deduced that there will no longer be anyone in Lu who redeems vassals and concubines from the princes.

古文：孔子亦可谓知礼矣。
现代文：事情也正如孔子预料的那样。
English: Things turned out just as Confucius had predicted.

古文：故老子曰： 见小曰明。 
现代文：所以说孔子也可以算得上一个懂得事物变化发展的人了。
English: Therefore, Confucius can also be regarded as a person who understands the change and development of things.

古文：魏武侯问于李克曰： 吴之所以亡者，何也？ 
现代文：这就是《老子》说的： 能观察细微的叫做 明 。 魏武侯问李克： 吴国灭亡的原因是什么？ 
English: This is what "Lao Zi" said: Those who can observe subtleties are called Ming. Wei Wuhou asked Li Ke: What was the reason for the downfall of the State of Wu?

古文：李克对曰： 数战而数胜。 
现代文：李克回答说： 屡战屡胜。 
English: Li Ke replied: Repeatedly fight and repeatedly win.

古文：武侯曰： 数战数胜，国之福，其独以亡，何故也？ 
现代文：武侯问： 屡战屡胜，这是国家的福气，吴国偏偏为此而灭亡，这又是什么原因呢？ 
English: Wuhou asked, "It is a blessing for a country to have repeated victories in war. It is precisely for this reason that the State of Wu perished. What is the reason for this?

古文：对曰： 数战则民罢，数胜则主桥，以骄主使罢民，则国不亡者，天下鲜矣。
现代文：李克解释说： 经常打仗，百姓必然感到疲惫不堪；而屡战屡胜必然导致君主骄傲；让骄横的君主去指挥役使疲惫的百姓，不亡国这样的事情是很少见的。
English: Li Ke explained: frequent wars inevitably make the people feel exhausted; and repeated wars and victories inevitably lead to the monarch's pride; it is rare to see such a thing as a proud monarch commanding a tired people to not destroy the country.

古文：则恣，恣则极物；罢则怨，怨则极虑。
现代文：君主骄傲就会放肆，放肆纵欲就会穷奢极欲；百姓疲惫就会产生怨恨，怨恨多了就会去动足脑筋谋求摆脱疲惫痛苦，以致会用到谋反的手段。
English: If the monarch is proud, he will be impudent; if he is indulgent, he will be extravagant; if the people are tired, they will be resentful; if they are more resentful, they will try their best to get rid of the fatigue and pain, so that they will use the means of rebellion.

古文：上下俱极。吴之亡犹晚矣！
现代文：这样上下都将事物推向极端，吴国现在才灭亡已经算晚的了。
English: In this way, things are pushed to the extreme from top to bottom, and it is already too late for Wu to perish.

古文：夫差之所以自到于干遂也。 
现代文：吴王夫差就是因为这个才败在越王勾践手下，自杀身亡的。
English: It was because of this that Wu Wangfusha was defeated at the hands of Yue Wangguo and committed suicide.

古文：故老子曰： 功成，名遂，身退，天之道也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 功成名就，引身告退，这才符合天之道。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said: "Success and fame are enough, and it is only in accordance with Heaven's way that one should retire."

古文：宁越欲干齐桓公，困穷无以自达，于是为商旅、将任车，以商于齐，暮宿于郭门之外。
现代文：宁戚想向齐桓公谋求官职，以便能施展自己的才能，但是穷困得没有办法去齐国见桓公，于是给去齐国经商的商人赶运货车，晚上停宿在齐国都城外。
English: Ning Qi wanted to seek an official position from King Qi Huan in order to be able to show his talent, but he was too poor to go to Qi to see King Huan, so he drove a truck to the merchants who went to Qi to do business, and parked outside the capital of Qi at night.

古文：桓公效迎客，夜开门，辟任车，爝火甚盛，从者甚众。
现代文：这时，齐桓公去郊外迎接客人，打开城门后，随从让宁戚赶的那辆车回避到一边去；桓公一行人所举的火把将四周照得如同白昼，而随从的人又很多。
English: At this time, Prince Qi Huan went to the suburbs to meet the guests. After opening the gate, he followed the car driven by the relatives of Emperor Ning to the side. The torches held by Prince Huan and his entourage will shine around like daylight, and there are many people following.

古文：宁越饭牛车下，望见桓公而悲，击牛角而疾商歌。桓公闻之，抚其仆之手曰： 异哉，歌者非常人也。 
现代文：在车旁给牛喂草料的宁戚看了后，悲从心中起，于是敲击着牛角唱起悲凄激越的歌曲，桓公听到这突如其来的悲曲，情不自禁地拍着仆人的手说： 奇妙，那唱歌的人一定是位不寻常的人。 
English: After watching Ning Qi, who was feeding grass to the cows next to the car, his heart was filled with sadness, so he struck the horns of the cow and sang a sad and emotional song. When Huan Gong heard this sudden sad song, he couldn't help but pat his servant's hand and say: "It's strange, that singer must be an unusual person."

古文：命后车载之。
现代文：于是命令随从的车将宁戚载返回去。
English: He then ordered the escort vehicle to return with Ning Qi.

古文：桓公及至，从者以请。
现代文：到了朝廷，随从人员就宁戚的事请示桓公。
English: When they arrived at the imperial court, the attendants asked Prince Kan for advice on the matter.

古文：桓公赣之衣冠而见，说以为天下。
现代文：桓公赐给宁戚衣裳和帽子，并接见了他。
English: Prince Kan gave his cousin clothes and a hat and received him.

古文：桓公大说，将任之。
现代文：宁戚拿治理天下的道理游说桓公，桓公听了后大喜，打算任用宁戚。
English: Ning Qizhi lobbied Kuan for the right to govern the world. After listening, Kuan was overjoyed and planned to appoint Ning Qizhi.

古文：群臣争之曰： 客，卫人也。卫之去齐不远，君不若使人问之。问之而故贤者也，用之未晚。 
现代文：大臣们纷纷规劝： 这位客人是卫国人，卫国离我们齐国不远，君王你不如派人到卫国去查访一下，如查访的结果说明宁戚是位贤者，再任用他不迟。 桓公说： 不妥。
English: The ministers exhorted one after another: This guest is a defender of the country, the homeland is not far from our country, the king, you might as well send someone to the homeland to make an inspection, if the results of the inspection show that the relative is a wise man, it is not too late to reappoint him.

古文：桓公曰： 不然，问之，患其有小恶也，以人之小恶而忘人之大美，此人主之所以失天下之上也。 
现代文：去查访他只不过担心他有什么小毛病而已；而因人家的小毛病却忽视人家的大优点，这正是贤明君主失去天下士人的原因。 
English: To visit him is only to worry about his little faults; and to neglect a man's great qualities because of his little faults is the way a wise prince loses the world's knights.

古文：凡听必有验，一听而弗复问，合其所以也。且人固难合也，权而用其长者而已矣。
现代文：大凡听一个人说话，必定会产生某些心理反应；如与人谈话一次后，便不再去深究其人的底细，这正说明这人的言谈投合听者的心意，产生了强烈的共鸣。
English: If you listen to a person's speech, you are bound to have certain psychological reactions; if after a conversation with a person, you no longer delve into the details of the person, this just shows that the person's speech fits the listener's mind and has a strong resonance.

古文：当是举也，桓公得之矣。
现代文：再说，人无完人，只要经过权衡认为说话者的长处能发扬就行。
English: Besides, no one is perfect, as long as the speaker's strengths can be developed after being weighed.

古文：故老子曰： 天大，地大，道大，王亦大。
现代文：在这件事上，桓公做对了，因此他果真得了一位人才。所以《老子》说： 天大、地大、道大、王亦大。
English: In this matter, Emperor Kan did the right thing, so he really got a talented person. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Heaven is big, earth is big, road is big, and king is big.

古文：域中有四大，而王处其一焉。 
现代文：宇宙间的四大，而王居其中之一。 
English: There are four great ones in the universe, and Wang Ju is one of them.

古文：以言其能包裹之也。
现代文：这是说君王应像天地大道那样包容一切。
English: This is to say that the king should be as all-embracing as heaven and earth.

古文：大王亶父居邠，翟人攻之，事之以皮帛珠玉而弗受，曰： 翟人之所求者地，无以财物为也。 
现代文：大王亶父住在邠的时候，翟国人经常来侵扰。于是大王亶父拿着皮革、布帛和珍珠玉石赠送给翟国人以求和好太平，但翟人不肯接受，说他们要的是地盘而不在乎财物。
English: When his great-grandfather lived in Handan, the people of Handan often came to disturb him. Therefore, his great-grandfather presented the people of Handan with leather, cloth and pearl jade to seek peace and tranquility, but the people of Handan refused to accept it, saying that they wanted land and did not care about property.

古文：大王禀父曰： 与人之兄居而杀其弟，与人之父处而杀其子，吾弗为。
现代文：大王亶父向百姓解释说： 和人家的兄长一起生活而杀死他的弟弟，和人家的父亲一起生活而杀害他的儿子，这样的事情我是做不出的。
English: "I cannot live with another man's brother and kill his brother, or live with another man's father and kill his son," he explained to the people.

古文：皆勉处矣！
现代文：大家都好好地在这个地方生活下去吧！
English: Let's all live well in this place!

古文：为吾臣，与翟人奚以异？
现代文：当我的臣民和当翟国人的臣民有什么不同呢？
English: What is the difference between being my subjects and being the subjects of my countrymen?

古文：且吾闻之也：不以其所养害其养。 
现代文：况且我听说了，不能因贪得养生之物而伤害性命。 
English: Besides, I've heard that you shouldn't harm life by being greedy for health food.

古文：杖策而去。民相连而从之，遂成国于岐山之下。
现代文：于是大王亶父拄着手杖离开了邠地，百姓们成群结队地跟随着他离去，后来在岐山下建立了周朝。
English: As a result, the great king and his father left Shantian with a cane, and the people followed him in droves. Later, they established the Zhou Dynasty at the foot of Qi Mountain.

古文：大王禀父可谓能保生矣。
现代文：大王亶父可称得上保重生命的人。
English: Daowang Shifu can be said to be a person who cherishes life.

古文：虽富贵，不以养伤身；虽贫贱，不以利累形。
现代文：即使富贵，也不因财物而伤害自身；即使贫贱，也不因为贪利而拖累形体。
English: Even if he is rich, he will not harm himself because of wealth; even if he is poor, he will not drag his body because of greed.

古文：今受其先人之爵禄，则必重失之。所自来者久矣，而轻失之，岂不惑哉？
现代文：现在有人从祖先那里接受了爵禄，就生怕会丧失，而对来之不易的生命却轻易地抛弃，这难道不糊涂吗？
English: Is it not absurd that those who have received a knighthood from their ancestors are afraid of losing it, while those who have gained a hard-earned life easily throw it away?

古文：故老子曰： 贵以身为天下，焉可以托天下；爱以身为天下，焉可以寄天下 矣。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 看重自身而为天下人，有这种美德的人可以将天下托付给他；爱惜自身而为天下人，有这样美德的人可以将天下寄托给他。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "If you value yourself and are a man of the world, people with this virtue can entrust the world to you; if you cherish yourself and are a man of the world, people with this virtue can entrust the world to you."

古文：中山公子牟谓詹子曰： 身处江海之上，心在魏阙之下，为之奈何？ 
现代文：中山公子魏牟对詹何说： 我虽身处江湖过着隐居避世的生活，但心中还是老惦记着朝政，我该如何办才好呢？ 
English: Zhongshan's son Wei Mou said to Zhan He: Although I am in the country and live a secluded life, I still keep the imperial government in mind. How should I do it?

古文：詹子曰： 重生。
现代文：詹何回答说： 就珍惜生命吧！
English: Zhan Yu said; value life.

古文：重生则轻利 。
现代文：能珍惜生命也就能轻视利欲。 
English: If you can cherish life, you can also despise greed.

古文：中山公子牟曰： 虽知之，犹不能自胜。 
现代文：中山公子魏牟又说： 我虽然知道这个重生轻利的道理，但还是无法战胜这名利的欲念。 
English: Zhongshan's son Wei Mou also said: Although I know the principle of rebirth and frivolity, I still can't overcome this desire for fame and fortune.

古文：詹子曰： 不能自胜则从之。从之，神无怨乎！不能自胜而强弗从者，此之谓重伤。重伤之人，无寿类矣！ 故老子曰： 知和曰常，知常曰明，益生曰祥，心使气曰强。 
现代文：反过来，你既不能自制欲念，又要勉强压制不愿顺随，这才会受到双重损伤；如受到这双重损伤的人就不会长寿。 所以《老子》说： 知道保持平和纯厚之气的道理叫做 常 ，懂得这种 常 的称为 明智 。纵欲贪生就会有灾殃，欲念支配淳和之气就会逞强。 
English: On the other hand, if you can't control your desires, and you have to suppress your unwillingness to comply, you will suffer double damage; if you suffer from this double damage, you won't live long. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Knowing the truth of maintaining a peaceful and pure spirit is called Chang, and understanding this kind of Chang is called wisdom. Indulgence and greed will bring disaster, and desires that dominate a peaceful spirit will be strong.

古文：是故 用其光复归其明 也。
现代文：因此，运用涵蓄着的 光 ，返复到观察细微的 明 。
English: Therefore, the use of the stored light, the response to the observation of subtle light.

古文：楚庄王问詹何曰： 治国奈何？ 
现代文：楚庄王问詹何： 怎样才能治理国家？ 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang asked Zhan He: How to govern the country?

古文：对曰： 何明于治身，而不明于治国？ 
现代文：詹何回答说： 我只明白修养自身，而不知道怎样治理国家。 
English: Zhan He replied: I only know how to cultivate myself, but I don't know how to govern the country.

古文：楚王曰： 寡人得立宗庙社稷，愿学所以守之。 
现代文：楚庄王又说： 我现在能够登位为君执掌朝政，希望学习一些持守国家的方法。 
English: Chu Zhuang Wang also said: I am now able to ascend the throne and take charge of the imperial government for you, and I hope to learn some methods of maintaining the country.

古文：詹何对曰： 臣未尝闻身治而国乱者也，未尝闻身乱而国治者也。
现代文：詹何于是接着说： 我还没有听说过自身修养得很好而国家却乱哄哄的事例呢！我还同样没有听说过自身不修养而国家治理得很好的事例呢！
English: Zhan He then went on to say: I have yet to hear of a case where a person is well-groomed but the country is chaotic! I have also yet to hear of a case where a person is not well-groomed but the country is well-governed!

古文：故本任于身，不敢对以未。 楚王曰： 善。 故老子曰： 修之身，其德乃真 也。
现代文：所以治国之本在于治身养性，我不敢以一些枝末的内容来回答您。 楚庄王听后说： 说得好。 所以《老子》说： 修养好自身，他的 德 就会纯真。 
English: Therefore, the essence of governing a country lies in cultivating one's self-discipline, and I don't dare to answer you with the details of some branches. After listening, Chu Zhuang Wang said: Well said. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Cultivate oneself well, and his virtue will be pure.

古文：桓公读书于堂，轮人研轮于堂下，释其椎凿而问桓公曰： 君之所读者何书也？ 桓公曰： 圣人之书。 
现代文：齐桓公正在堂上读书，一位做车轮的工匠在堂下砍削车轮，他放下手中的椎子和凿子，问齐桓公： 君王您正在读的是什么书？ 桓公说： 是圣人的书。 
English: King Qi Huan was reading in the hall. A wheel-maker was chopping wheels in the hall below. He put down the spindle and chisel in his hand and asked King Qi Huan: What book are you reading, Your Majesty? King Huan said: It is the book of a saint.

古文：轮扁曰： 其人在焉？ 
现代文：这位叫轮扁的工匠又问： 这位圣人还活着？ 
English: The craftsman, who goes by the name of Lian Bian, then asked: Is this saint still alive?

古文：桓公曰： 已死矣。 
现代文：桓公回答说： 已经死了。 
English: Prince Kan replied, "He is already dead."

古文：轮扁曰： 是直圣人之糟粕耳！ 
现代文：轮扁马上说： 那您读的只能是圣人的糟粕了。 
English: Lian Bian immediately said, "Then what you are reading can only be the rubbish of a saint."

古文：桓公悖然作色而怒曰： 寡人读书，工人焉得而讥之哉！
现代文：桓公听了，一下变了脸色，怒道： 我读圣贤书，你这工匠凭什么讥笑我？
English: After listening to this, King Huan suddenly changed his face, and angrily said, "I read the Book of Saints, why do you, a craftsman, mock me?

古文：有说则可，无说则死。 
现代文：你说出理由来也就罢了，如说不出理由来，就处死你。 
English: If you can tell the truth, it's fine, but if you can't tell the truth, you'll be executed.

古文：轮扁曰： 然，有说。
现代文：轮扁不慌不忙地说： 好的，我说出道理来。
English: Ruan Bian said unhurriedly: Okay, I'll tell you the truth.

古文：臣试以臣之所轮语之：大疾则苦而不入，大徐则甘而不固。
现代文：我试试拿我做车轮的体会来说说这其中的道理：如果榫头大，榫眼开小了，就会涩滞安不进去；如果榫眼开大了，榫头做小了，太松滑动不牢。
English: I'll try to use my experience of making wheels to explain the reason for this: if the hoe is large and the eyelet is small, it will be too tight to get in; if the eyelet is large and the hoe is small, it's too loose and won't slide well.

古文：不甘不苦，应于手，厌于心，而可以至妙者，臣不能以教臣之子，而臣之子亦不能得之于臣。是以行年七十，老而为轮。
现代文：不松不紧，得心应手，达到神妙境界的技术，我无法传授给我的儿子，而我的儿子也无法从我这里学到这技术；所以我尽管年逾古稀、年老无力，但还得亲自做车轮。
English: I could not pass on to my son, and my son could not learn from me, the skill of the steady, the skillful, the sublime; so I had to make the wheels myself, in spite of my age and infirmity.

古文：今圣人之所言者，亦以怀其实，穷而死，独其糟粕在耳！ 
现代文：由此可见，圣人的话中如果有高深神妙的精华，但由于不能言传，所以也必定会随着圣人死去而带走，而只有那些可以言传的糟粕留下来。 
English: From this it can be seen that if there is a high, deep and wonderful essence in the words of a saint, but since it cannot be passed on, it will certainly be taken away with the death of the saint, and only the dregs that can be passed on will remain.

古文：故老子曰： 道可道，非常道；名可名，非常名。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 可以用言词表达的 道 并非常 道 ；可以用文字叙述的 名 并非常 名 。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The Tao that can be expressed in words is not a Tao; the name that can be described in words is not a name.

古文：昔者司城子罕相宋，谓宋君曰： 夫国家之安危，百姓之治乱，在君行赏罚。
现代文：从前，司城子罕辅佐宋君，一次他对宋君说： 国家的安危，百姓的治理，均取决于君王施行赏罚。
English: Once upon a time, Siyongzi Hanjuan Sasa Songjun, once he said to Songjun: The safety of the country and the governance of the people all depend on the reward and punishment of the monarch.

古文：夫爵赏赐予，民之所好也，君自行之。杀戮刑罚，民之所怨也，臣请当之。 
现代文：这爵禄的赏赐，是人民所喜爱的，就请您国君亲自执掌；那诛杀刑罚，是人民所怨恨的，就由我来担当这角色。 
English: This award of the knighthood, which is loved by the people, I ask your sovereign to administer in person; that punishment of beheading, which is hated by the people, I will assume this role.

古文：宋君曰： 善，寡人当其美，子受其怨，寡人自知不为诸侯笑矣。 
现代文：宋君听后说： 好。我受百姓赞美，你受百姓怨恨，这样一来我知道诸侯们就不会嘲笑我了。 
English: After listening, Song Jun said, "Good. I am praised by the people, and you are hated by the people. This way, I know that the lords will not laugh at me."

古文：国人皆知杀戮之专，制在子罕也，大臣亲之，百姓畏之。居不至期年，子罕遂却宋君而专其政。
现代文：但实际上宋国人知道生杀大权掌握在子罕手里后，大臣们就亲附子罕，百姓们都畏惧子罕，不到一年时间，子罕就将大权旁落的宋君杀掉而篡夺了宋国的政权。
English: However, in reality, after the Song people knew that the power of life and death was in the hands of Zi Han, the ministers were personally attached to Zi Han, and the people were afraid of Zi Han. In less than a year, Zi Han killed Song Jun, who had the power of life and death, and usurped the power of Song.

古文：故老子曰： 鱼不可脱于渊，国之利器不可以示人。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 鱼不可脱离池渊，国家的 利器 不可随便让人知道。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "The fish must not leave the pond, and the country's sharp weapon must not be known to anyone."

古文：王寿负书而行，见徐冯于周。
现代文：王寿背着书走路，在周国的大路上碰到隐士徐冯。
English: Wang Shou was walking with a book on his back when he met the hermit Xu Feng on the highway in Zhou Province.

古文：徐冯曰： 事者，应变而动。
现代文：徐冯说： 人的行为应随变化而变化，变化产生了时机。
English: Xu Feng said: People's behavior should change with changes, and changes have created opportunities.

古文：变生于时，故知时者无常行。
现代文：所以识时务者没有固定不变的行为。
English: Therefore, there is no fixed and unchanging behavior of time-conscious people.

古文：书者，言之所出也。言出于知者，知者藏书。 
现代文：书记载着人的言论，言论当然出自智者，但有智慧的人是不藏书的。 
English: The register contains the sayings of men. The sayings, of course, come from wise men, but wise men do not keep books.

古文：于是王寿乃焚书而舞之。
现代文：王寿听了徐冯的开导说后将自己的藏书全部烧掉，然后轻松地手舞足蹈起来。
English: After listening to Xu Feng's enlightening speech, Wang Shou burned all his books, and then danced with ease.

古文：故老子曰： 多言数穷，不如守中。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 议论太多，反而使人无所适从，自己也会感到困惑，所以不如持守虚静之道。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Too much discussion will make people confused, and they will also feel confused, so it is better to stick to the path of emptiness and tranquility.

古文：令尹子佩请饮庄王，庄王许诺。
现代文：楚国的令尹子佩请庄王饮酒，庄王答应了。
English: Yin Zipei, the governor of Chu, asked Zhuo Wang to drink alcohol, and Zhuo Wang agreed.

古文：子佩疏揖，北面立于殿下，曰： 昔者君王许之，今不果往，意者，臣有罪乎？ 
现代文：于是子佩在强台这个地方准备了酒席，但庄王又不肯前往了。第二天子佩赤着脚拱手站在殿下，问朝南坐的庄王： 先前君王答应出席酒宴，但又不践约前往，我想大概我有什么地方不对了？ 
English: Therefore, Zi Pei prepared a banquet in the place of the stronghold, but Zhuang Wang refused to go. The next day, Zi Pei stood barefoot with his arm outstretched to his royal highness and asked Zhuang Wang, who was sitting facing south: The previous monarch promised to attend the banquet, but did not go according to the agreement. I think there must be something wrong with me.

古文：庄王曰： 吾闻子具于强台。
现代文：庄王回答： 我听说你将酒席设在强台。
English: Zhuang Wang replied: I heard that you set the bar on a strong platform.

古文：强台者，南望料山，以临方皇，左江而右淮，其乐忘死。
现代文：这强台是南望料山，靠近方皇湖，左边是长江，右边是淮水，这样好的自然环境能使人高兴得忘掉死的悲哀。
English: This stronghold is Nanwangji Mountain, close to Fanghuang Lake, on the left is the Yangtze River, on the right is Huai Shui, such a good natural environment can make people happy to forget the sadness of death.

古文：若吾薄德之人，不可以当此乐也，恐留而不能反。 故老子曰： 不见可欲，使心不乱。 
现代文：像我这样德行微薄的人是无法消受这种欢乐的。我还害怕去了以后会留连忘返呢！ 所以《老子》说： 不去看或不去接触那些能惹人之欲望的事与物，以致使人的心神不散乱。 
English: A person of meager virtue like me cannot absorb this joy. I am also afraid that I will forget it after I go! Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Do not look at or touch those things and things that can arouse people's desires, so that people's minds are not scattered.

古文：晋公子重耳出亡，过曹，无礼焉。
现代文：晋公子重耳流亡国外，经过曹国，曹国君对他很不礼貌。
English: When Prince Jin went into exile, he passed by Cao Guo, and Cao Guo Jun was very rude to him.

古文：厘负羁之妻谓厘负羁曰： 君无礼于晋公子。
现代文：这时，厘负羁的妻子对厘负羁说： 我们的国君对晋公子重耳相当不礼貌。
English: At this time, the wife of Li Shouqi said to Li Shouqi: Our sovereign is quite impolite to listen to Prince Jin.

古文：吾观其从者，皆贤人也，若以相夫子反晋国，必伐曹，子何不先加德焉？ 
现代文：但我观察到跟随重耳公子流亡的几位都是贤人，如果这些人能帮助重耳公子回到晋国执掌朝政，必定会讨伐我们曹国的。你为何不乘现在先给晋公子重耳施加恩德呢？ 
English: However, I have observed that several of the wise men who followed Chong Er in exile are wise men. If these people can help Chong Er return to Jin to take charge of the imperial government, they will certainly fight against our Cao. Why don't you take advantage of this opportunity to bestow boons on Chong Er?

古文：厘负羁遗之壶餕而加璧焉，重耳受其餕而反其璧。
现代文：于是厘负羁遵照妻子的话给重耳他们一壶稀粥和璧玉。
English: Therefore, according to his wife's words, Lin Shou Jiao gave them a pot of gruel and jade.

古文：及其反国，起师伐曹，克之，令三军无人厘负羁之里。
现代文：重耳他们接受了稀粥而将璧玉退回给厘负羁。等到重耳他们返回晋国并执掌朝政后，就发令讨伐曹国，在攻克曹国以后，特地命令三军不许侵扰厘负羁所居住的里巷。
English: When they returned to Jin and took control of the government, they issued an order to invade Cao. After conquering Cao, they specifically ordered the three armies not to intrude into the alleys and lanes where Li Xizang lived.

古文：故老子曰： 曲则全，枉则直。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 委曲反能保全，屈就反能伸直。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said: "If you bend, you can straighten."

古文：越王勾践与吴战而不胜，国破身亡，困于会稽。
现代文：越王勾践与吴国交战失败，国家破残，人民伤亡，自己又被围困在会稽。
English: Yue Wang Gochun's war with Wu failed, the country was crippled, the people were killed and wounded, and he was besieged in Huanqiu.

古文：忿心张胆，气如涌泉，选练甲卒，赴火若灭。
现代文：这时勾践是内心愤恨、胆气豪壮，激情豪气像涌泉，训练选拔士兵，决心赴汤蹈火与吴国决一雌雄。
English: At this time, the practice was to train and select soldiers with inner resentment and courage, and the passion and courage were like a spring. They were determined to go through the fire with Wu.

古文：然而请身为臣，妻为妾，亲执戈为吴兵先马走，果禽之于干遂。
现代文：但经过大臣文种的劝说，以屈辱条件和吴国达成协议，勾践亲自为吴王作臣仆，妻子为吴王作奴仆；又亲自执戈为吴王牵马开道，经过这样多年的卧薪尝胆，终于在干遂将吴国打败，并擒获吴王夫差。
English: However, through the persuasion of Minister Wenzhong, he reached an agreement with the State of Wu under humiliating conditions. He personally served the King of Wu as a vassal, and his wife served the King of Wu as a slave. He also personally led the way for the King of Wu to lead the horse. After so many years of lying and trying, he finally defeated the State of Wu and captured the King of Wu.

古文：故老子曰： 柔之胜刚也，弱之胜强也，天下莫不知，而莫之能行。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 柔可以胜刚，弱可以胜强，天下没有人不知道这个道理，但是没有谁能够亲自实施。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Soft can win over hard, weak can win over strong, no one in the world does not know this truth, but no one can personally implement it.

古文：越王亲之，故霸中国。
现代文：而越王勾践亲自去实行了，所以他最终称霸了中原。
English: However, Yue Wang Qochun personally implemented it, so he eventually dominated the Central Plains.

古文：赵简子死，未葬，中牟入齐。
现代文：赵简子死后还没落葬，中牟的守将就叛变投靠齐国了。
English: Before Zhao Jianzi was buried after his death, Zhongmou's commander-in-chief defected to Qi Guo.

古文：已葬五日，襄子起兵攻，围之未合，而城自坏者十丈，襄子击金而退之。
现代文：赵襄子将父亲简子下葬料理停当后，第五天发兵征伐中牟城，但包围还没完全合拢，中牟城的城墙突然自行倒塌十来丈，赵襄子下令鸣金收兵。
English: After Zhao Xiangzi stopped his father Jianzi's funeral meal, he sent troops to conquer Zhongmou City on the fifth day, but the siege was not completely closed. The city wall of Zhongmou City suddenly collapsed on its own, and Zhao Xiangzi ordered the army to withdraw.

古文：军吏谏曰： 君诛中牟之罪而城自坏，是天助我，何故去之？ 
现代文：军吏们劝谏说： 君王亲率兵马征讨中牟守将的罪行，城墙自行倒塌，这说明老天爷帮助我们去讨伐这些天理难容的罪人，为什么我们要撤退呢？ 
English: The military officials advised him, "The fact that the walls of the city collapsed on their own when the prince and his soldiers went out to investigate the crimes of the corrupt warlord shows that God has helped us to fight these criminals who are unacceptable to God. Why should we retreat?"

古文：襄子曰： 吾闻之叔向曰： 君子乘人于利，不迫人于险。 
现代文：赵襄子解释道： 我听叔向说过： 君子不该在自己有利的形势下去欺凌别人，君子也不该在别人处险境时去逼迫他。 
English: Zhao Xiangzi explained: I heard my uncle say: A gentleman should not bully others when he is in a favorable situation, and a gentleman should not persecute others when they are in a dangerous situation.

古文：使之治城，城治而后攻之。 
现代文：所以让他们将城墙修好后我们方开战进攻吧！ 
English: So let them repair the wall and then we will attack!

古文：中牟闻其义，乃请降。
现代文：中牟城内的守将听到赵襄子这番如此仁义的话后，便请求投降。
English: After hearing Zhao Xiangzi's kind words, the guard in Zhongmou requested to surrender.

古文：故老子曰： 夫唯不争，故天下莫能与之争。 
现代文：所以《老子》说 正因为不与别人争，所以天下也没有人能争得过他 。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said that just because he does not compete with others, no one in the world can compete with him.

古文：秦穆公谓伯乐曰： 子之年长矣，子姓有可使求马者乎？ 
现代文：秦穆公对伯乐说： 你的年纪很大了，你的同族的子弟中有可以派去相马的人吗？ 
English: Qin Mu Gong said to Bo Le: You are very old, are there any of your descendants who can be sent to visit Guo Liangma?

古文：对曰： 良马者，可以形容筋骨相也。
现代文：伯乐回答： 一般的良马，可以凭马的外貌骨架来识别。
English: Bo Le replied: An ordinary good horse can be identified by the appearance of the horse's skeleton.

古文：相天下之马者，若灭若失，若亡其一。若此马者，绝尘弭辙。
现代文：但真的要识别天下难得的良好，就得注意到马身上存在着的若隐若现的神韵，就不能光注意到马的形体和骨架。像这样的马，真是绝世超尘，奔驰如飞，不留痕迹。
English: But if you really want to recognize the world's rare good, you have to pay attention to the faint charm that exists in the horse, you can't just pay attention to the horse's shape and skeleton. A horse like this is really extraordinary, speeding like a jet, leaving no trace.

古文：臣之子，皆下材也，可告以良马，而不可告以天下之马。
现代文：我的儿孙和弟子，都是下等人才，可以相一般的良好，但没有相千里马的功夫。
English: My children, grandchildren and disciples are all inferior talents, they can be as good as average, but they don't have the effort to be as good as the best.

古文：臣有所与供儋緾采薪者九方堙，此其于马，非臣之下也，请见之。 
现代文：我倒有一位在一起打过柴的朋友，叫九方堙，此人相马的本领不在我之下，让我来引见给您君王。 
English: On the other hand, I have a friend who used to collect firewood with me, called Jiufang Yao. This person's horse-riding skills are not up to me, so let me introduce him to you.

古文：穆公见，使之求马，三月而反报曰： 已得马矣，在于沙丘。 
现代文：秦穆公于是接见了九方堙，并让他外出寻找千里马去。三个月以后，九方堙回来禀报秦穆公，说： 我已找到一匹千里马，在沙丘那个地方。 
English: Three months later, Jiufang Yao returned and reported to Qin Mu Gong, saying, "I have found a horse of a thousand li, in that place of the sand dunes."

古文：穆公曰： 何马也？ 
现代文：秦穆公问： 是怎么样的马？ 
English: Qin Mukong asked: What kind of horse is it?

古文：对曰： 牡而黄。 
现代文：九方堙回答道： 是一匹黄色的雄马。 
English: Jufangyao replied, "It is a yellow male horse."

古文：使人往取之，牝而骊。
现代文：秦穆公派人去沙丘牵马，一看却是一匹黑色的雌马。
English: Qin Mu Gong sent someone to the dunes to lead the horse, but it turned out to be a black female horse.

古文：穆公不说，召伯乐而问之曰： 败矣！
现代文：秦穆公不高兴了，召来伯乐责问： 败兴得很。
English: Qin Mu Gong was not happy, and summoned Bo Le to ask: "You have failed very badly.

古文：子之所使求者，毛物牝牡弗能知，又何马之能知！ 
现代文：你那个朋友相马连毛色和雌雄都分不清，又怎么能相千里马？ 
English: Your friend can't even tell the difference between a male and a female horse, so how can you tell them apart?

古文：伯乐喟然大息曰： 一至此乎！
现代文：伯乐听后叹息说： 九方堙的相马术竟到了这种神妙境地？
English: After listening to it, Bo Le sighed and said, "How did Jiufangyao's horse-drawn carriage come to this miraculous situation?

古文：是乃其所以千万臣而无数者也。
现代文：正说明他的本领要超出我不知多少倍。像九方堙这样的相马术，相的是马原本所赋有的内在灵性和实质。
English: That's where he's a million times better than me.

古文：若堙之所观者，天机也。
现代文：他正是相中了马的内在精华而忘却了马的外表粗疏，他看到的是马的素质而不强调马的外形。
English: It is he who sees the inner essence of the horse and forgets the rough appearance of the horse. He sees the quality of the horse and does not emphasize the shape of the horse.

古文：得其精而忘其粗，在内而忘其外，见其所见而不见其所不见，视其所视而遗其所不视。
现代文：九方堙只注意应该注意的地方，而那些不重要的地方，他根本不去注意它；他只强调应该强调的地方，而那些不必注重的地方，他根本不去强调。
English: Jiufangyao only pays attention to the places that should be paid attention to, and those that are not important, he does not pay attention to it at all; he only emphasizes the places that should be emphasized, and those that do not need to be emphasized, he does not emphasize at all.

古文：若彼之所相者，乃有贵乎马者。 
现代文：像他这样的相马术，本身就比千里马珍贵。 
English: Such horse-sighting as his is in itself more precious than a thousand horses.

古文：马至，而果千里之马。
现代文：这马经过骑试，果然是千里马。
English: After a riding test, the horse is a thoroughbred.

古文：故老子曰： 大直若屈，大巧若拙。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 最直的好像是弯曲的，最灵巧的好像是笨拙的。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The straightest seems to be crooked, the most dexterous seems to be clumsy.

古文：吴起为楚令尹，适魏，问屈宜若曰： 王不知起之不肖，而以为令尹。
现代文：吴起任楚国的令尹，一次到魏国去，对流亡魏国的屈宜咎说： 君王还认为我很贤能，任用我做楚国令尹。
English: Wu took up the post of lingyin of the State of Chu and once went to the State of Wei and said to Qu Yi, who was in exile in the State of Wei: "The king also thinks I am very capable and appointed me as lingyin of the State of Chu."

古文：先生试观起之为人也。 屈子曰： 将奈何？ 
现代文：先生试试看我吴起怎么样来做好这个令尹。 
English: Teacher, try to see how I can do this well.

古文：吴起曰： 将衰楚国之爵而平其制禄，损其有余而绥其不足，砥砺甲兵，时争利于天下。 
现代文：屈直咎问道： 你打算怎样做呢？ 吴起说： 我打算削减楚国贵族的爵位，平抑法定的俸禄制度，损有余以补不足；精心训练军队，等待机会和各国争霸天下。 
English: Wu Qi said: I plan to reduce the ranks of the nobility of Chu, level the statutory salary system, and make up for the losses; carefully train the army, and wait for the opportunity to compete with other countries for world domination.

古文：屈子曰： 宜若闻之，昔善治国家者，不变其故，不易其常。今子将衰楚国之爵而平其制禄，损其有余而绥其不足，是变其故，易其常也，行之者不利。
现代文：屈直咎说： 我屈直咎听说过，以前善于治国的人是不改变原有的制度和常规的，你吴起今天要削减楚国贵族的爵位和平抑法定的俸禄制度，损有余以补不足，这实际上是改变了原有的制度和常规。
English: He said: I have heard that people who were good at governing the country in the past did not change the original system and routine. You, Wu Qi, today want to reduce the titles of nobility in the State of Chu and suppress the statutory salary system. You have more to lose than to make up for. This is actually a change to the original system and routine.

古文：宜若闻之曰： 怒者，逆德也；兵者，凶器也；争者，人之所本 也。
现代文：我屈宜咎又听说： 激怒是违逆天德的事；兵器则是杀人的凶器；而争斗又是该抛弃的。 
English: I have heard it said that anger is contrary to the laws of nature, that weapons are murderous, and that fighting should be abandoned.

古文：今子阴谋逆德，好用凶器，始人之所本，逆之至也。
现代文：你现在阴谋策划违逆天德的事，又好用兵器，并挑起人们之间的争斗，这就是最大的倒行逆施。
English: You are now plotting and scheming to do things that go against Heaven and Earth, to use weapons, and to provoke fights between people. This is the greatest act of rebellion.

古文：且子用鲁兵，不宜得志于齐，而得志焉。
现代文：再说，你先前任鲁国的将领，不应该动用鲁军打齐国，而你却以打败齐国来满足你的意愿。
English: Besides, as the former general of the Russian Empire, you should not have used the Russian army to fight Qi, but you satisfied your will by defeating Qi.

古文：子用魏兵，不宜得志于秦，而得志焉。
现代文：你又指挥过魏军，做过魏国西河郡守，本不应该动秦国的脑筋，而你却使秦国不敢东犯魏界，这样又实现了你的志愿。
English: You also commanded the Wei army and served as the governor of the West River County of Wei. You should not have touched the brain of Qin, but you made Qin not dare to encroach on Wei territory, thus fulfilling your wish.

古文：宜若闻之：非祸人，不能成祸。
现代文：我听说过，不危及别人，也就不会给自己带来祸害。
English: I've heard that if you don't harm others, you won't harm yourself.

古文：吾固惑吾王之数逆天道，戾人理，至今无祸。
现代文：我现在就感到纳闷，我们的君王屡次违逆天道，背弃人理，怎么至今还没遭受灾祸。唉！
English: I now find myself wondering how it is that our monarchs, who have repeatedly violated heavenly law and human reason, have not yet suffered disaster. Alas!

古文：差须夫子也。 
现代文：这灾祸可能正等着你呢！ 
English: This scourge may be waiting for you!

古文：吴起惕然曰： 尚可更乎？ 
现代文：吴起听了后惊惧地问： 还可以改变吗？ 
English: After listening, Wu Qi asked in surprise: Can it still be changed?

古文：屈子曰： 成形之徒，不可更也。
现代文：屈直咎说： 已经形成的局势无法改变。
English: "The situation that has developed cannot be changed," he said.

古文：子不若敦爱而笃行之。
现代文：你不如现在真心实意地做些敦厚仁慈的事，或许能有所改观。 
English: You might as well do something generous and kind with all your heart now, and maybe you can make a difference.

古文：老子曰： 挫其锐，解其纷，和其光，同其尘。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 不露锋芒，超脱纠纷，敛和光耀，混同尘世。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: do not show the edge, get rid of disputes, restrain and shine, and mix with the world.

古文：晋伐楚，三舍不止，大夫请击之。
现代文：晋国讨伐楚国，连续推进九十里地还不停止。
English: Jin Province is fighting against Chu Province, and the continuous advance of ninety miles has not stopped.

古文：庄王曰： 先君之时，晋不伐楚。及孤之身而晋伐楚，是孤之过也，若何其辱群大夫？ 
现代文：楚国的大夫们请求楚庄王与晋国正式交战，楚庄王说： 先王在世时，晋国不敢征伐楚国，现在到了我执政，晋国却不断地征伐楚国，这说明我存在着错误。怎么能让诸位大夫跟着我蒙受屈辱呢？ 
English: The doctors of Chu asked the king of Chu and Jin to officially go to war. The king of Chu said, "When the former king was alive, Jin did not dare to invade Chu. Now that I am in power, Jin is constantly invading Chu. This shows that I have made a mistake. How can I let you doctors be humiliated by me?"

古文：曰： 先臣之时，晋不伐楚，今臣之身而晋伐楚，此臣之罪也。
现代文：众大夫说： 前朝的大臣在世的时候，晋国不敢进犯楚国，现在轮到我们当大臣了，晋国却敢进犯我们楚国，这是我们群臣的罪过啊！
English: The doctors said, "When the ministers of the previous government were alive, Jin did not dare to invade Chu. Now it is our turn to be ministers, but Jin dares to invade our Chu. This is the fault of our ministers!"

古文：请三击之。 
现代文：请君王下令反击晋军吧！ 
English: Please order the king to counterattack the Jin army!

古文：王俯而泣涕沾襟，起而拜群大夫。
现代文：楚庄王听了难过得低头而泣，泪水都沾湿了衣襟，起身揖拜各位大夫。
English: After hearing this, Chu Zhuang Wang bowed his head in sorrow and wept. His tears wet his shirt collar. He stood up and bowed to the doctors.

古文：晋人闻之曰： 君臣争以过为在己，且轻下其臣，不可代也。 
现代文：此事被晋国人知道后议论说： 楚国的君臣争着承担过失的责任，而且楚王还很谦恭地对待大臣，这样的国家我们不可继续征伐下去了。 
English: After the matter was known to the people of Jin, they discussed it and said: the princes and ministers of the state of Chu are competing to assume the responsibility of negligence, and the king of Chu is also very humble to the minister, we can not continue to conquer such a country.

古文：夜还师而归。
现代文：于是晋军连夜撤兵回国。
English: As a result, the Jin army withdrew overnight and returned home.

古文：老子曰： 能受国之垢，是谓社稷主。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 能够承担国家的屈辱，这才配称国家的君主。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said: The one who can bear the humiliation of the country is worthy of being called the monarch of the country.

古文：宋景公之时，荧惑在心。公惧，召子韦而问焉，曰： 荧惑在心，何也？ 
现代文：宋景公的时候，荧惑星停留在心宿的位置，景公很害怕，召见太史子韦询问这件事： 荧惑在心宿，这是怎么回事？ 
English: At the time of Song Jinggong, the fluorescent planet stayed in the position of the heart. Jinggong was very afraid and summoned Taishi Ziwei to inquire about the matter: Fluorescence in the heart, what's going on?

古文：子韦曰： 荧惑，天罚也。心，宋分野。
现代文：子韦说： 荧惑是表示上天惩罚的；心宿是宋国的分野。
English: Zi Wei said: "Fluorescence bewitchment is the expression of heaven's punishment; the heart is the domain of the Song Dynasty.

古文：祸且当君。
现代文：正因为这样，所以灾祸将要降落到君王身上。
English: Therefore shall evil come upon the prince for this thing.

古文：虽然，可移于宰相。 
现代文：虽然如此，但可以将灾祸转嫁到宰相身上的。 
English: Nevertheless, it is possible to blame the prime minister for the disaster.

古文：公曰： 宰相，所使治国家也，而移死焉，不祥。 
现代文：宋景公说： 宰相是任命来治理国家的，把死转移到他身上，不吉利。 
English: Song Jinggong said: The prime minister is appointed to govern the country, and it is unlucky to transfer the death to him.

古文：子韦曰， 可移于民。 
现代文：子韦又说： 那可以转嫁到百姓身上。 
English: Zi Wei also said: That can be passed on to the people.

古文：公曰： 民死，寡人谁为君乎？
现代文：景公马上说： 老百姓都死光了，我当谁的君主？
English: King Jing immediately said, "The common people are all dead, whose ruler should I be?

古文：宁独死耳！ 
现代文：我倒情愿我自己一个人死了。 
English: I'd rather die on my own.

古文：子韦曰： 可移于岁。 
现代文：子韦又说： 可以转移到年成上。 
English: Zi Wei also said: It can be transferred to Niancheng.

古文：公曰： 岁，民之命。岁饥，民必死矣。为人君而欲杀其民以自活也，其谁以我为君者乎？
现代文：景公接着话题说： 年成是百姓的命根子，年成不好闹饥荒，百姓必定没活路，做人君的让百姓的死来换取自己的性命，那还有谁要我做君主？
English: Jinggong went on to say: "The harvest is the lifeblood of the people. If the harvest is not good, there will be famine. The people will have no way to survive. If you are a prince, you will let the people die in exchange for your own life. Who else would want me to be a monarch?

古文：是寡人之命固已尽矣，子韦无复言矣！ 
现代文：好了，我的性命也注定要完结了，你也不必再说转嫁灾祸的事了。 
English: Well, my life is also doomed to end, and you don't have to talk about passing on the disaster anymore.

古文：子韦还走，北面再拜曰： 敢贺君！天之处高而听卑。君有君人之言三，天必有三赏君。今夕星必徙三舍，君延年二十一岁。 
现代文：子韦听了这话后，起身转向北面，对景公行了个大礼说： 我谨向你表示祝贺，苍天在上能听到人间的一切，君王刚才讲了做人君的应该如何对待臣民的三条原则，上天也必定会给你三个赏赐，今晚荧惑星一定会移动三舍，你也必定会延年二十一年。 
English: After listening to this, Zi Wei stood up, turned to the north and made a grand salute to Jing Gong and said: "I would like to congratulate you. The heavens can hear everything on earth. The king has just spoken of the three principles of how a ruler should treat his subjects. The heavens will surely give you three rewards. Tonight, the fluorescent planet will surely move the three houses. You will surely extend your life by 21 years."

古文：公曰： 子奚以知之？ 
现代文：景公不解地问： 你凭什么说这样的话？ 
English: Jing Gong asked puzzled: Why do you say such a thing?

古文：对曰： 君有君人之言三，故有三赏，星必三徙舍，舍行七里，三七二十一，故君移年二十一岁，臣请伏于陛下以伺之，星不徙，臣请死之。 公曰： 可。 
现代文：子韦说： 你讲的做君主的三条原则，所以上天也必有 三 赏，荧惑星移动三舍，每移动一舍就经过七个星座，三七二十一，所以君王能延长寿命二十一年。我愿爬伏在陛阶下等候着，如果荧惑星呆在原处不移徙，我情愿替君王去死！ 景公说： 可以。 
English: Zi Wei said, "The three principles of being a monarch that you talked about are three in number, so there must be three rewards in heaven. The fluorescent planet moves three houses, and each time it moves, it passes through seven constellations, 3721, so the king can extend his life by 21 years. I would like to crawl under His Majesty's step and wait. If the fluorescent planet stays in place and does not migrate, I would rather die for the king! Jing Gong said, "Yes."

古文：是夕也，星果三徙舍，故老子曰： 能受国之不祥，是谓天下王。 
现代文：当天晚上，荧惑星果然移徙三舍。所以《老子》说： 能够承担国家祸殃的，才配做天下的君王。 
English: On the evening of the same day, the fluorescent planet did indeed migrate. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: He who can bear the country's misfortune is worthy to be the king of the world.

古文：昔者公孙龙在赵之时，谓弟子曰： 人而无能者，龙不能与游。 
现代文：从前，公孙龙在赵国的时候，对弟子们说： 一个人如果无技能，我是不会和他交往的。 
English: Once upon a time, when Gongsun Long was in Zhao Province, he said to his disciples: If a person has no skills, I will not associate with him.

古文：有客衣褐带索而见曰： 臣能呼。 
现代文：这时，有位身穿粗布短衣，腰际索着粗麻绳的客人来见公孙龙，说： 我能大声呼喊。 
English: At this time, a guest wearing a coarse cloth short coat and a coarse hemp rope around his waist came to see Gongsun Long and said: I can shout loudly.

古文：公孙龙顾谓弟子曰： 门下故有能呼者乎？ 
现代文：公孙龙回头问弟子： 我门下可有能大声呼喊的弟子吗？ 
English: Gongsunlong turned to his disciples and asked, "Do I have any disciples who can shout loudly?"

古文：对曰： 无有。 
现代文：弟子们回答： 没有。 
English: Jun Yuyan replied, "No."

古文：公孙龙曰： 与之弟子之籍。 
现代文：于是公孙龙说： 那么就让这位客人入我门下吧！ 
English: Then Gongsun Long said: Then let this guest come under my door!

古文：后数日，往说燕王，至于河上，而航在一记，使善呼者呼之，一呼而航来。
现代文：几天以后，公孙龙带着弟子前往燕国游说。到了黄河边，看到渡船在河对岸，便叫那位能呼喊的弟子呼喊摆渡船上的艄公，此人只呼喊一声，渡船便摇了过来。
English: A few days later, Gongsun Long and his disciples went to Yan'an to lobby. When they arrived at the Yellow River and saw the ferry on the other side of the river, they asked the disciple who could shout to shout to the ferryman on the ferry. This person only shouted once, and the ferry rocked.

古文：故曰圣人之处世，不逆有伎能之士。
现代文：所以圣人处世，不拒绝每一位有一技之长的人士。
English: Therefore, the sage does not reject every person who has a skill.

古文：故老子曰， 人无弃人，物无弃物，是谓袭明。 
现代文：这也就是《老子》说的： 人没有无用的人，物没有废弃的物，这就叫做含藏着的聪明智慧。 
English: This is what "Lao Zi" said: People have no useless people, things have no waste, this is called hidden wisdom.

古文：子发功蔡，逾之。
现代文：楚将子发率军攻打蔡国，胜利而归。
English: Chu Zhezi led the army to attack Cai Guo and returned victorious.

古文：宣王郊迎，列田百顷而封之执圭。
现代文：楚宣王亲自到郊外迎接子发，封给他百顷良田和执圭的爵位。
English: King Chu Xuan himself went to the suburbs to welcome Zi Fa, and bestowed upon him the title of Hundred Hectares of Good Fields and Good Conduct.

古文：子发辞不受，曰： 治国立政，诸侯入宾，此群之德也。发号施令，师未合而敌遁，此将军之威也。兵陈战而胜敌者，此庶民之力也。
现代文：子发推辞不接受，说： 治理好楚国的国政，使各诸侯都来楚国朝拜，这是君王的德行所致；发号施令，军队还没会合上去敌军就逃跑了，这是将军的声威所致；兵卒上阵打败敌军，这是百姓的力量所致。
English: Zi Fa did not accept the rebuff, saying, "To govern the state affairs of Chu well, to make all the princes come to Chu to worship, this is the result of the king's virtue; to give orders, the enemy army fled before the army was assembled, this is the result of the general's prestige; soldiers went into battle to defeat the enemy army, this is the result of the people's strength.

古文：夫乘民之功劳而取其爵禄者，非仁义之道也。 
现代文：利用百姓的功劳而取得爵禄，是不仁义的。 
English: It is unfair to take advantage of people's merits to get a knighthood.

古文：故辞而弗受，故老子曰： 功成而不居，夫惟不居，是以不去。 
现代文：因此子发是坚持推辞不接受。所以《老子》说： 功成业就而不居功夸耀，正因为不居功，所以这功绩也就不会泯灭 。
English: Therefore, Zi Fa insisted on refusing to accept. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Achievement is achieved without taking credit. Precisely because it does not take credit, this achievement will not be extinguished.

古文：晋文公伐原，与大夫期三日，三日而原不降，文公令去之。
现代文：晋文公征伐原邑，和大夫们约定三天攻克。但打了三天，原人还没投降，于是文公依约下令撤兵离去。
English: Jin Wenkong led a military expedition to attack the original village, and the doctors agreed to fight for three days. However, after three days of fighting, the original people had not surrendered, so Wenkong ordered the troops to withdraw according to the agreement.

古文：军吏曰： 原不过一二日将降矣。 
现代文：身边的军官们就说了： 再坚持一、二天原人就会投降了。 
English: The officers around him said, "If you hold out one or two more days, the Hara will surrender."

古文：君曰： 吾不知原三日而不可得下也，以与大夫期。尽而不罢，失信得原，吾弗为也。 
现代文：文公说： 我当初不知道原邑不可能三天内攻克，但我与大夫们约定三天内攻克，现在三天已过，如果继续攻下去，就会失去信用，这样既使得到原邑，我也不会做这样的事的。 
English: Wenguang said, "I didn't know at first that the original town couldn't be conquered in three days, but I agreed with the doctors to conquer it in three days. Now three days have passed. If I continue to attack, I will lose credibility. Even if I get the original town, I won't do such a thing.

古文：原人闻之曰： 有君若此，可弗降也？ 
现代文：这事被原人得知了，说： 有这样讲信用的君王，还不投降干什么？ 
English: When the original man learned of this, he said, "With such a trustworthy king, why doesn't he surrender?"

古文：遂降，温人闻，亦请降。
现代文：于是纷纷投降。温邑人听说原人投降，也就请求投降了。
English: As a result, they surrendered one after another. When the people of Winnipeg heard that the original people had surrendered, they also asked to surrender.

古文：故老子曰： 窈兮冥兮，其中有精。其精甚真，其中有信 。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 深远幽昧之中，却有它的精质；这精质非常真诚，真诚中有它的诚信。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: In the profound obscurity, there is its essence; this essence is very sincere, and sincerity has its integrity.

古文：故 美言可以市尊，美行可以加人。 
现代文：所以 美好的言辞可以博取尊敬，美好的行为可以超越众人 。
English: Therefore, a good speech can win respect, and a good deed can surpass many people.

古文：公仪休相鲁，而嗜鱼。
现代文：公仪休担任鲁国的国相，非常喜欢吃鱼。
English: Gongyi Hu, who served as the minister of state of Lu, likes to eat fish very much.

古文：一国献鱼，公仪子弗受。
现代文：全鲁国的人都向他献鱼，公仪休一律谢绝不收。
English: People from all over Lu offered him fish, but he refused to accept any official gifts.

古文：其弟子谏曰： 夫子嗜鱼，弗受何也？ 
现代文：他的弟子劝他说： 先生你喜欢吃鱼，又不接受别人送的鱼，为什么呢？ 
English: His disciples advised him, "Sir, you like to eat fish, but you don't accept fish from others. Why is that?

古文：答曰： 夫唯嗜鱼，故弗受。 
现代文：公仪休回答说： 正因为喜欢吃鱼，所以才不接受别人送的鱼。
English: Gong Lixiu replied, "It is precisely because I like to eat fish that I do not accept fish sent by others.

古文：夫受鱼而免于相，虽嗜鱼，不能自给鱼；毋受鱼而不免于相，则能长自给鱼；此明于为人为己者也。
现代文：如果你收下了别人送的鱼，就有可能被君王罢免相位，这样反倒吃不到官府供给的鱼；不接受别人献的鱼，也就保着了相位，反倒能长期吃到官府提供的鱼。 这位公仪休真算是懂得为人也为己的人。
English: If you accept a fish offered by someone else, it is possible that you will be removed from your position by the king, and as a result, you will not be able to eat the fish provided by the government; if you do not accept a fish offered by someone else, you will keep your position, and on the other hand, you will be able to eat the fish provided by the government for a long time.

古文：故老子曰： 后其身而身先，外其身而身存，非以其无私邪？
现代文：所以《老子》说： 置自身于最后，结果反而能占先；置自身于度外，结果反而能安存。
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: If you put yourself last, the result will be first; if you put yourself outside the degree, the result will be stable.

古文：故能成其私。 
现代文：这不正是由于他没有私心？所以能成就他的私心。 
English: Isn't it precisely because he has no selfishness? So he can fulfill his selfishness.

古文：一曰： 知足不辱。 
现代文：换一种说法是： 知道满足，就不会受到侮辱。 
English: Or, to put it another way: if you know contentment, you will not be insulted.

古文：狐丘丈人谓孙叔敖曰： 人有三怨，子知之乎？ 
现代文：狐丘的一位老人对孙叔敖说： 人有三件容易招怨恨的事情，你知道吗？ 
English: Foxtop's father-in-law said to Sun Shuxuan, "There are three things that people hate about a person, do you know?

古文：孙叔敖曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：孙叔敖说： 哪三件？ 
English: Sun Shuxuan asked, "What does it say?"

古文：对曰： 爵高者士妒之，官大者主恶之，禄厚者怨处之。 
现代文：老人回答说： 爵位高了，士人就会嫉妒他；官做大了，君王便会嫌恶他；俸禄丰厚了，怨恨就会找上门来。 
English: The old man replied, "When a nobleman's rank is high, people will be jealous of him; when a government official becomes powerful, the king will hate him; when his salary is rich, people will be resentful of him.

古文：孙叔敖曰： 吾爵益高，吾志益下；吾官益大，吾心益小；吾禄益厚，吾施益博。
现代文：孙叔敖说： 我爵位越高，我的态度越卑恭；我官做得越大，我的心欲越小；我的俸禄越丰厚，我的布施越广泛。
English: Sun Shuxuan said, "The higher my title, the lower my ambition; the higher my position, the lower my ambition; the higher my salary, the more I give.

古文：是以免三怨，可乎？ 
现代文：我用这种方法来避免三方面怨恨，你看可以吗？ 
English: I use this method to avoid three-way grudges. Do you think it's okay?

古文：故老子曰： 贵必以贱为本，高必以下为基。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 尊贵必以贱卑为根本，高大必以低下为基础。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Honor must be based on inferiority, and greatness must be based on inferiority.

古文：大司马捶钧者年八十矣，而不失钩芒。
现代文：楚国的大司马有位捶制钩的工匠，年纪已经八十岁了，可是制造出来的钩仍然锋芒锐利。
English: Daisima, an 80-year-old artisan of rivet hooks in the state of Chu, still produces sharp hooks.

古文：大司马曰： 子巧耶？
现代文：大司马问他： 你是有技艺呢？
English: Daisima asked him, "Do you have any skills?"

古文：有道邪？ 
现代文：还是有别的道术呢？ 
English: Is there any skill involved?

古文：曰： 臣有守也。
现代文：老工匠回答说： 我是坚守着一种信念的。
English: The old man with the forged hook says: I follow the path.

古文：臣年二十好捶钩，于物无视也，非钩无察也。 
现代文：我从二十岁起就喜欢上捶制钩了，这样，我对别的事物均不关心，除了钩我什么都不留意。 
English: I've been hooking since I was twenty, so I don't care about anything else, I don't pay attention to anything but the hook.

古文：是以用之者必假于弗用也，而以长得其用，而况持无不用者乎，物孰不济焉？故老子曰： 从事于道者，同于道。 
现代文：所以这位工匠是把所有的精力都用到捶制钩上来，这样也就能长期管用，何况又把握了无论什么都管用的道，那么什么事情不能从 道 那里得到帮助？所以《老子》说： 从事于 道 的，便同于 道 。 
English: Therefore, this craftsman used all his energy to make a fishing hook, so that he could use it for a long time. What's more, he grasped the way to use anything, so what things can't be helped from the way? Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Those who are engaged in the way are the same as the way.

古文：文王砥德修政，三年而天下二垂归之，纣闻而患之曰： 余夙兴夜寐，与之竞行，则苦心劳形。纵而置之，恐伐余一人。 
现代文：周文王还是诸侯的时候，就磨砺德行，修明政事，只三年功夫，天下三分之二的诸侯就归顺了他。纣王知道后忧心忡忡地说： 我如果起早摸黑地和他竞争，那就会费尽心思，劳累形体；我如果对此放纵他置之不理，又担心他以后会讨伐到我的头上来。 
English: When King Zhouwen was still a vassal, he honed his virtue and rectified his political affairs. It only took three years of hard work, and two-thirds of the vassals in the world submitted to him. After learning this, King Zhouwen said with concern: "If I try to compete with him at an early stage, I will exhaust my mind and body; if I allow him to ignore this, I am afraid that he will attack me later."

古文：崇侯虎曰： 周伯昌行仁义而善谋，太子发勇敢而不疑，中子旦恭俭而知时；若与之从，则不堪其殃，纵而赦之，身必危亡。
现代文：这时崇侯虎说： 周伯姬昌仁慈仗义而且智足多谋，他的大太子姬发勇敢且果断，二太子姬旦恭谦节俭且知道时变。如果我们任其发展，那就难以忍受他们的祸殃；如果我们对他们放纵和宽容，以后我们必将遭受危险和灭亡。
English: At this time, Chong Houhu said: Zhou Boke Qichang is kind, righteous and resourceful, his eldest son Qifat is brave and decisive, and his second son Qitan is humble and frugal and knows the times. If we allow them to develop, it will be difficult to endure their scourge; if we indulge and tolerate them, we will surely suffer danger and perish in the future.

古文：冠虽弊，必加于头，及未成，请图之！ 
现代文：帽子再破，还得戴在头上。所以还是趁他们还没形成大气候时，请尽快制止他们。 
English: So please stop them as soon as possible before they become a big problem.

古文：屈商乃拘文王于羑里。
现代文：于是纣王让屈商把文王拘囚在羑里的大牢中。
English: As a result, the king of Kashi asked the merchant to imprison King Wen in a large prison in Kashi.

古文：于是散宜生乃以千金求天下之珍怪，得驺虞鸡斯之乘，玄玉百工，大贝百朋，玄豹黄黑、青豻、白虎文皮千合，以献于纣，因费仲而通。
现代文：这时候，周臣散宜生用重金来收买天下的珍奇宝物，收得驺虞、鸡斯良马、玄玉百玨、大贝百朋、玄豹、黄罴、青犴、白虎毛皮上千盒，通过费仲疏通，送到纣王手里。
English: At this time, Zhou San Yisheng used heavy money to buy rare treasures from all over the world. He collected more than a thousand boxes of furs, including yakitori, yakitori, yakitori, yakitori, yakitori, yakitori, yakitori, yakitori, and white tiger fur, and sent them to the king through Feizhong dredge.

古文：纣见而说之，乃免其身，杀牛而赐之。
现代文：纣王见了礼物十分高兴，于是赦免了文王，并杀牛赏赐文王。
English: King Yao was very happy to see the gift, so he pardoned King Wen and rewarded him with a cow.

古文：文王归，乃为玉门，筑灵台，相女童，击钟鼓，以待纣之失也。
现代文：文王回去后，便用玉来装饰屋门、修筑起灵台、并挑选了不少美女，经常在灵台上奏乐寻欢，以此来等待纣王的进一步失误。
English: After King Wen returned, he used jade to decorate the door of the house, built a hearse, and selected many beautiful women, often playing music on the hearse to find happiness, in order to wait for the further mistakes of King Zou.

古文：纣闻之曰： 周伯昌改道易行，吾无忧矣！ 
现代文：而此时的纣王被假象所迷惑，却说： 周伯姬昌终于改弦易辙了，放弃了野心，我不必担忧了。 
English: But at this time, the king of Zhai was confused by the illusion, but said: Zhou Bo Jichang finally changed his ways and gave up his ambitions, I don't have to worry.

古文：乃为炮烙，剖比干，剔孕妇，杀谏者。
现代文：于是更加荒淫无耻、残暴无道，以致发展到设置炮烙酷刑、挖比干心、剖孕妇腹，杀死直言劝谏的大臣。
English: As a result, they became even more shameless and brutal, to the point of setting up torture, digging up the heart, dissecting the abdomen of a pregnant woman, and killing a minister who spoke out.

古文：文王乃遂其谋。
现代文：此时，文王终于可以实施他的计划了。
English: At this time, King Wen could finally carry out his plan.

古文：故老子曰： 知其荣，守其辱，为天下谷。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 虽然知道什么是荣耀，却安守卑辱，甘愿处于天下低微的地位。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Although he knows what glory is, he keeps humiliation, and is willing to be in a low position in the world.

古文：成王问政于尹佚曰： 吾何德之行，而民亲其上？ 
现代文：周成王向太史佚请教为政之道说： 我要具备怎样的德行，才能使百姓亲附我？ 
English: Zhou Chengwang asked Taishi Yan for advice on how to govern, saying: "What kind of virtue should I have in order to make the people close to me?

古文：对曰： 使之时，而敬顺之。 
现代文：尹佚回答说： 用民要适合时宜，而且要恭敬谨慎地对待他们。 
English: Yin Qi replied: The use of the people should be suitable for the time, and they should be treated with respect and caution.

古文：王曰： 其度安在？ 
现代文：成王接着问： 如何才能达到这种敬慎呢？ 
English: Cheng Wang then asked: How can this kind of prudence be achieved?

古文：曰： 如临深渊，如履薄冰。 
现代文：尹佚说： 好像面临深渊，犹如行走在薄冰上。 
English: Yin Qi said: It's like facing the abyss, like walking on thin ice.

古文：王曰： 惧哉，王人乎！ 
现代文：成王说： 做个君王，如此可怕！ 
English: Cheng Wang said, "Being a king is so terrible!

古文：尹扶曰： 天地之间，四海之内，善之则吾畜也，不善则吾雠也。
现代文：尹佚说： 天地之间，四海之内，你善待百姓，他们就会热爱你顺从你；你不善待百姓，他们就有可能成为你的仇敌。
English: Yin Qi said: Between heaven and earth, within the four seas, if you treat the people well, they will love you and obey you; if you do not treat the people well, they may become your enemy.

古文：昔夏商之臣，反雠桀纣而臣汤武；宿沙之民，皆自攻其君而归神农，此世之所明知也，如何其无惧也？ 
现代文：过去夏商的臣民起来反抗桀纣而自愿臣服汤武，宿沙民众自发起来攻打宿沙君王而归顺神农，这些历史事实大家都很清楚，所以怎么能不害怕这民众的力量呢？ 
English: In the past, the subjects of the Xia merchants rose up against the Yao and voluntarily surrendered to the Tang, and the Suqian people spontaneously attacked the Suqian king and surrendered to the Shennong. These historical facts are very clear to everyone, so how can we not be afraid of the power of this people?

古文：故者子曰： 人之所畏，不可不畏也。 
现代文：这就是《老子》所说的 人们所畏惧的，也不能不畏惧 。
English: This is what "Lao Zi" said that people are afraid of and cannot help but be afraid of.

古文：跖之徒问跖曰： 盗亦有道乎？ 
现代文：盗跖的门徒问盗跖： 强盗也有道术吗？ 
English: The disciples of the robber asked the robber: Do robbers also have Taoism?

古文：跖曰： 奚适其道也！
现代文：盗跖说： 到哪里会没有道术？
English: The thief said, "Where can there be no Taoism?"

古文：夫意而中藏者，圣也；入先者，勇也；出后者，义也；分均者，仁也；知可否者，智也。
现代文：能够猜中人家家中有什么财物，就是圣明；带头进入人家，就是勇敢；最后一个离开现场就是有义气；分赃平均，就是仁爱；知道行动是否成功，就是智慧。
English: To be able to guess what belongings are in someone's home is shenming; to lead the way into someone's home is brave; to be the last to leave the scene is virtuous; to divide the spoils equally is benevolence; to know whether an action is successful is wisdom.

古文：五者不备而能成大盗者，天下无之。 
现代文：这五条道术不具备而能成为大盗的，天底下还没有。 
English: There is no one in the world who can become a great thief without these five skills.

古文：由此观之，盗贼之心，必托圣人之道而后可行。
现代文：由此看来，盗贼的用心只有依托圣人之道然后才能实行。
English: From this point of view, the thief's intention can only be carried out by relying on the sage's way.

古文：故老子曰： 绝圣弃智，民利百倍。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 抛弃聪明和智巧，人民才能获得百倍的利益。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Abandoning cleverness and cleverness, the people can gain a hundredfold benefit.

古文：楚将子发好求技道之士。楚有善为偷者往见曰： 闻君求技道之士。臣偷也，愿以技赍一卒。 
现代文：楚将子发喜欢网罗有一技之长的人士，楚国有位擅长偷窃的人前来会见子发，他对子发手下的人说： 我听说子发将军要寻求一技之长的人士，我呢，是楚国集市上的小偷，愿以这偷窃的技艺充当子发手下的一名小卒。 
English: Chu's general Zifat liked to recruit people with a special skill. A man from Chu who was good at stealing came to meet Zifat. He said to Zifat's men: "I heard that General Zifat is looking for people with a special skill. I, a thief from the market in Chu, would like to use this stealing skill to serve as a pawn for Zifat."

古文：子发闻之，衣不给带，冠不暇正，出见而礼之。
现代文：子发听到禀报后，来不及束好衣带、戴正帽子就出来以礼接见这位小偷。
English: After hearing the bad news, Zi Fa did not have time to tie up his clothes and wear a formal hat, so he came out to greet the thief.

古文：左右谏曰： 偷者，天下之盗也，何为之礼？ 
现代文：子发身边的人看见后说： 小偷是天下公认的盗贼，将军你为什么要如此礼待他？ 
English: When the people around Zi Fa saw this, they said, "A thief is a thief recognized all over the world. General, why did you treat him so politely?"

古文：君曰： 此非左右之所得与。 
现代文：子发解释说： 这不是你们所能预知的事。 
English: "It's not something you can predict," Zi Fa explained.

古文：后无几何，齐兴兵伐楚，子发将师以当之。
现代文：这事过了没多久，齐国兴兵攻打楚国，作为将领的子发率兵抵御齐军。
English: Not long after this event, the Qing soldiers of the State of Qi attacked the State of Chu, and the son of the general led the soldiers to resist the Qi army.

古文：兵三却。
现代文：然而楚军接连败退。
English: However, the Chu army was defeated one after another.

古文：楚贤良大夫皆尽其计而悉其诚，齐师愈强。
现代文：楚国的贤良之士和大夫们都献计献策，竭尽诚心地想打退齐国，挽回败局，可是齐军就是越战越勇，日益强大。
English: The virtuous people and doctors of Chu all made plans and suggestions, and tried their best to beat back Qi and recover the defeat, but the Qi army became more and more courageous in the Vietnam War and became increasingly powerful.

古文：于是市偷进请曰： 臣有薄技，愿为君行之。 子发曰： 诺。 
现代文：在这关键时刻，那位集市上的小偷来到子发的军帐中请缨说： 我的这点微不足道的技艺，愿为将军你表演表演。 子发说： 好。 
English: At this critical moment, the thief from the bazaar came to Zi Fa's military account and asked him, "With my insignificant skill, I would like to perform for the general." Zi Fa said, "Good."

古文：不问其辞而遣之。
现代文：也不问清小偷说的话的意思是什么就派他去了。
English: Without asking the thief what he meant, they sent him on his way.

古文：偷则夜解齐将军之帱帐而献之。
现代文：当天夜里，小偷就将齐军将领用的帷帐拆了来，连夜献给子发。
English: In the night of the same day, the thief tore down the curtain used by the general of the Qi army, and dedicated it to Zifaru overnight.

古文：子发因使人归之，曰： 卒有出薪者，得将军之帷，使归之于执事。 
现代文：第二天子发就将这帷帐派人送回齐军将领，并传话说： 我们楚军中的一位士兵外出打柴，得到了将军的帷帐，特派人送还。 
English: The next day, Zifa sent the curtain back to the Qi general, and sent a message saying: One of our soldiers in the Chu army went out to collect firewood and got the general's curtain. A special envoy was sent to return it.

古文：明又复往取其枕，子发又使人归之。
现代文：是夜，小偷又潜入齐军将领的营帐中偷走了他的枕头。天明时候，子发又派人将枕头送还给齐军将领。
English: At night, the thief sneaked into the camp of the Qi general and stole his pillow. At dawn, Zifa sent someone to return the pillow to the Qi general.

古文：明日又复往取其簪，子发又使人归之。
现代文：第三天晚上，小偷照例偷回了齐将的簪子，子发还是照例派人送还。
English: On the evening of the third day, the thief, as usual, stole back Qi Zheng's braid. Zi Fa still sent someone to return it as usual.

古文：齐师闻之，大骇，将军与军吏谋曰： 今日不去，楚君恐取吾头。 
现代文：这事一下子在齐军传开，引起一片惊慌，将军与手下的军官们商量，说： 今天我们如果还不撤军，楚军恐怕就要来取我们的脑袋了。 
English: The news spread quickly among the Qi army, causing panic. The general consulted with his officers and said, "If we don't withdraw today, the Chu army will probably come to take our heads."

古文：乃还师而去，故曰无细而能薄，在人君用之耳。
现代文：于是立即撤兵回国。所以，人的技艺和能力无所谓高低贵贱，就看你人君如何使用罢了。
English: As a result, the troops were immediately withdrawn back home. Therefore, human skills and abilities are not important, it just depends on how you use them.

古文：故老子曰： 不善人，善人之资也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说得好： 就是不好的人也能作为一面镜子，可供我们借鉴。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said it well: Even a bad person can serve as a mirror for us to learn from.

古文：颜回谓仲尼曰： 回益矣。 
现代文：颜回对孔子说： 我近来颇有长进。 
English: Yan Hui said to Confucius, "I have made a lot of progress recently.

古文：仲尼曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：孔子问道： 这话怎么说？ 
English: Confucius said: What do you mean by progress?

古文：曰： 回忘礼乐矣。 
现代文：颜回说： 我忘掉了礼乐了。 
English: Yan Hui said, "I have already forgotten the ceremonial music."

古文：仲尼曰： 可矣，犹未也。 
现代文：孔子接着说： 好啊，但还不够。 
English: Confucius still replied, "Good, but not enough."

古文：异日复见，曰： 回益矣。 仲尼曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：过了几天，颜回又去拜访孔子，说： 我颜回又有新的长进了。 孔子问： 此话又如何解释？ 
English: A few days later, Yan Hui went to visit Confucius again and said, "My Yan Hui has grown into something new." Confucius asked, "How do you explain this?"

古文：曰： 回忘仁义矣。 
现代文：颜回说： 我忘掉了仁义了。 
English: Yan Hui said, "I have forgotten about benevolence and righteousness."

古文：仲尼曰： 可矣，犹未也。 
现代文：孔子还是这样回答： 好啊，但还是不够。 
English: Confucius still replied, "Good, but not enough."

古文：异日复见，曰： 回坐忘矣。 
现代文：过了若干天，颜回又去拜访孔子，说： 我已经达到坐忘的境界了。 
English: Several days later, Yan Hui again went to visit Confucius and said, "I have reached the realm of sitting and forgetting.

古文：仲尼遽然曰： 何谓坐忘？ 
现代文：孔子猝然变了脸色说： 那你说说什么叫 坐忘 呢？ 
English: Confucius suddenly changed his countenance and said: What do you mean by "sitting down and forgetting"?

古文：颜回曰： 隳支体。黜聪明，离形去知，洞于化通，是谓坐忘。 
现代文：颜回回答说： 我静坐时忘掉我自己，无所闻也无所见，好像远离形体，无知无觉、浑然一体，这就叫 坐忘 。 
English: Yan Hui replied, "When I meditate, I forget myself. I hear nothing and see nothing. It's as if I'm far away from my body. I'm clueless, unconscious, and one with everything. This is called "sitting and forgetting."

古文：仲尼曰： 洞则无善也，化则无常矣。
现代文：孔子说： 无知无觉，浑然一体就不会有嗜欲，融道为一体就不拘泥于常理。
English: Confucius said: Ignorance and unconsciousness, if they are all one, there will be no craving, and if they are all one, they will not stick to common sense.

古文：而夫子荐贤，丘请从之后。 
现代文：由此看来，你的境界已远远超过我们，我也只能跟随在你的后面了。 
English: From this perspective, your realm is far beyond us, and I can only follow behind you.

古文：故老子曰： 载营魄抱一，能无离乎？
现代文：所以《老子》说： 精神与形体浑然一体，能不相分离吗？
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Spirit and form are one and the same, can they be separated?

古文：专气至柔，能如婴几乎？ 
现代文：积聚精气以致柔顺，能像无欲的婴儿吗？ 
English: Is it possible to accumulate energy and become soft, like a baby with no desires?

古文：秦穆公兴师，将以袭郑，蹇叔曰： 不可。
现代文：秦穆公发动军队，准备去袭击郑国。蹇叔说： 不能这样做。
English: Qin Mu Gong launched an army and prepared to attack Zheng Guo. Uncle Yao said, "You can't do that.

古文：臣闻袭国者，以车不过百里，以人不过三十里，为其谋未及发泄也，甲兵未及锐弊也，粮食未及乏绝也，人民未及罢病也。
现代文：我听说凡要袭击他国，都应该是用兵车行军不得超过一百里，而士兵步行不得超过三十里，这是因为只有这样行动计划才不会泄露，部队官兵才不至于过分疲劳，军队的给养也不至于耗尽，国内的百姓也不至于疲惫不堪，前线后方都能斗志高昂，部队战斗力旺盛，到这时候去攻击敌人，就能消灭他们。
English: I heard that anyone who wants to attack another country should march no more than a hundred miles in a troop car and no more than thirty miles on foot. This is because only in this way will the action plan not be leaked, the troops will not be over-tired, the army's supplies will not be exhausted, and the people in the country will not be exhausted. Both the front and the rear can be high-spirited, and the troops have strong combat effectiveness. If you attack the enemy at this time, you can destroy them.

古文：皆以其气之高与其力之盛至，是以犯敌能威，今行数千里，又数绝诸侯之地以袭国，臣不知其可也。君重图之！ 
现代文：现在我军行军数千里，还得多次穿越其他几个诸侯国的地盘，这样去袭击郑国，我不知道行得通行不通。我提请君王慎重考虑此事。 
English: Now that our army has marched thousands of miles and has had to cross the territory of several other principalities many times, I do not know if it is possible to attack Zheng. I would like to ask the king to carefully consider this matter.

古文：穆公不听。
现代文：秦穆公不听蹇叔的意见。
English: Qin Mu Gong did not listen to Uncle Zou's advice.

古文：蹇叔送师，衰绖而哭之。
现代文：蹇叔只得到郊外给部队送行，他披麻戴孝、哭哭啼啼，部队在这种气氛中出征了。
English: Uncle Zou was only allowed to go to the countryside to see off the troops. He wore a military uniform and cried and cried, and the troops went to war in this atmosphere.

古文：师遂行，过周而东，郑贾人弦高矫郑伯之命，以十二牛劳秦师而宾之。
现代文：部队经过周都向东进发，郑国商人弦高假借郑国君的命令，拿出十二头牛来犒劳秦军，并代表郑国君用宾客礼节欢迎他们。
English: The troops marched eastward through Zhoudu. Zheng merchant Zheng Gao took out twelve oxen to work for the Qin army on the orders of Zheng Guojun, and welcomed them with guest etiquette on behalf of Zheng Guojun.

古文：三帅乃惧而谋曰： 吾行数千里以袭人，未至而人已知之，其备必先成，不可袭也。 
现代文：秦军的三位将领以为事情已经败露，惊恐地一起商量： 我军行走千里来偷袭人家，还没到达目的地，人家郑国已经知道，他们也一定事先有准备，看来我们不能再去袭击了。 
English: The three generals of the Qin army thought that the matter had already been revealed, and discussed it together in horror: Our army walked thousands of miles to sneak attack someone. Before reaching the destination, Zheng Guo already knew that they must have prepared in advance. It seems that we can no longer attack.

古文：还师而去。
现代文：于是率军回撤。
English: As a result, he led his army back.

古文：当此之时，晋文公适薨，未葬，先轸言于襄公曰： 昔吾先君与穆公交，天下莫不闻，诸侯莫不知。
现代文：正在这个时候，晋文公刚去世，还没下葬，晋军主帅先轸对晋襄公说： 早先我们先君与秦穆公交好，天下没有人不知道这件事的，诸侯中也没有人不知道这件事的。
English: It was at this time that Jin Wenguang had just passed away and had not yet been buried, and the commander of the Jin army, Xian Qi, said to Jin Xiangguang: "Earlier, we had a good meeting with Qin Mu. No one in the world did not know about this matter, and no one among the princes did not know about this matter.

古文：今吾君薨未葬，而不吊吾丧，而不假道，是死吾君而弱吾孤也，请击之！ 
现代文：现在我们先君去世还没下葬，秦国非但不派人来吊丧，而且偷袭郑国途经我国也不借道，这无异是欺侮我们新君孤幼。请允许我率军伏击他们吧。 
English: Now that our late emperor has not yet been buried, Qin has not only failed to send anyone to pay his respects, but has also attacked Zheng through China. This is tantamount to bullying our new emperor and his children. Please allow me to lead my army to ambush them.

古文：襄公许诺，先轸举兵而与秦师遇于殽，大破之，擒其三帅以归。
现代文：晋襄公答应了。于是先轸领兵在殽山与秦军相遇，经过一番激战，大败秦军，并俘获秦军三位将领，胜利返回。
English: Jin Xianggong agreed. Therefore, the leader of the Qin army met the Qin army in Lushan, and after a fierce battle, he defeated the Qin army, captured three generals of the Qin army, and returned in victory.

古文：穆公闻之，素服临庙以说于众。
现代文：秦穆公听到部队惨败，穿着丧服来到祖庙哭告，以获取大家对他的谅解。
English: When Qin Mu Gong heard of the army's disastrous defeat, he came to the ancestral temple in mourning clothes to cry and get everyone's understanding of him.

古文：故老子曰： 知而不知，尚矣；不知而知，病也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 知道自己不知道，是好的；不知道而自以为知道，就不好了。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: It is good to know that you do not know; it is not good to know and think that you know.

古文：齐王后死，王欲置后而未定，使群臣议。
现代文：齐威王的王后死了，想立一位新王后，但一直无法确定。于是便让群臣来商议此事。
English: King Zi Wei's queen died, and he wanted to appoint a new queen, but he couldn't be sure, so he asked his ministers to discuss the matter.

古文：薛公欲中王之意，因献十珥而美其一。
现代文：薛公很想迎合威王的心意，于是献上十枚玉珥，并特意说明其中哪一枚玉珥为最好的玉珥。
English: Xue Gong was eager to cater to Wei Wang's wishes, so he presented ten jade ornaments, and specifically explained which one of the ornaments was the best.

古文：旦日，因问美珥之所在，因劝立以为王后。齐王大说，遂尊重薛公。
现代文：第二天，薛公打听到被赐予最好的玉珥的妃嫔是谁，便认定这位获得最好玉珥的妃嫔就是威王最宠爱的，于是就劝威王立这位妃嫔为王后，而这也正合威王之意，威王十分高兴，从此就更加看重薛公了。
English: The next day, when Xue Gongtu heard who the consort of the best jade figurine was, he decided that the consort of the best jade figurine was Wei Wang's favorite, so he persuaded Wei Wang to make this consort the queen, which was exactly what Wei Wang wanted. Wei Wang was very happy, and from then on he valued Xue Gong even more.

古文：故人主之意欲见于外，则为人臣之所制。
现代文：所以，君王的意图和欲望轻易流露在外，被大臣们掌握后，君王就会受到臣属的挟制。
English: Therefore, the king's intentions and desires are easily exposed, and after being controlled by ministers, the king will be controlled by his subjects.

古文：故老子曰： 塞其兑，闭其门，终身不勤。 
现代文：由此《老子》说： 塞着泄露欲念的通道，关闭接触外物的门户，便能终身不受劳疾困扰。 
English: From this, "Lao Zi" said: By blocking the passage of leaking desires and closing the portal of contact with foreign objects, you can be free from work-related diseases for life.

古文：卢敖游乎北海，经乎太阴，入乎玄阙，至于蒙谷之上。
现代文：卢敖漫游到了北海，经过太阴，进入玄阙，到达蒙谷山。
English: Lu Wei roamed to the North Sea, through Taiyin, into Xuanwu, and reached Menggu Mountain.

古文：见一士焉，深目而玄鬓，泪注而鸢肩，丰上而杀下，轩轩然方迎风而舞，顾见卢敖，慢然下其臂，遯逃乎碑。
现代文：发现有个人在那里，此人眼眶深陷，鬓发乌黑，脖子粗短，双肩耸起像老鹰，上身丰满，下身瘦削，正迎着风翩翩起舞。此人回头看见了卢敖，慢慢放下手臂停止舞动，逃避到山脚后面。
English: He found a man there, his eyelids sunken, his hair dark, his neck short, his shoulders hunched like an eagle's, his upper body plump, his lower body thin, dancing against the wind. The man looked back at Lu Wei, slowly lowered his arm to stop dancing, and fled behind the foot of the mountain.

古文：卢敖就而视之，方倦龟壳而食蛤梨。
现代文：卢敖走近去观察，此人正蹲在龟壳上吃蛤蜊。
English: Lu Yao walked closer to observe. The man was squatting on a turtle shell and eating clams.

古文：卢敖与之语曰： 唯敖为背群离党，穷观于六合之外者，非敖而已乎？
现代文：卢敖于是上去与他搭话： 唯有我卢敖离乡背井，远离人群，观览遍六合之外的所有地方，这样的人恐怕难找第二个吧？
English: Lu Yao then went up to talk to him: Only I, Lu Yao, am away from home, away from the crowd, observing all the places outside of Liuhe, I'm afraid it's hard to find a second person like that?

古文：敖幼而好游，至长不渝，周行四极，唯北阴之示窥，今卒睹夫子于是，子殆可与敖为友乎？ 
现代文：我卢敖从小喜欢周游四方，长大以后这种兴趣也没改变。我游遍了四方极远的地域，只是还没见过北阴。今天我在这里突然与你相遇，不知你愿意与我为友吗？ 
English: When I was a child, I liked to travel around the four directions, and this interest has not changed since I grew up. I have traveled to the most distant regions of the four directions, but I have not yet seen the northern shadow. Today I suddenly met you here, I wonder if you would like to be my friend?

古文：若士者齤然而笑曰： 嘻！子中州之民，宁肯而远至此？
现代文：这时这位人士露齿而笑说： 嘿嘿，您是中原人，竟然远道来到这个地方。
English: At this time, this person grinned and said: Hey hey, you are a Central Plains person who came all the way to this place.

古文：此犹光乎日月而载列星，阴阳之所行，四时之所生，其比夫不名之地，犹窔奥也。
现代文：不过这里仍然日月照耀，满天星辰，阴阳运行，四季变化，这儿与那个叫不出名称的地方相比，还只是个小角落。
English: However, the sun and moon still shine here, the sky is full of stars, the yin and yang run, the four seasons change, and this is just a small corner compared to the place that cannot be named.

古文：若我南游乎冈之野，北息乎沉墨之乡，西穷窅冥之党，东开鸿濛之光，此其下无地而上无天，听焉无闻，视焉无眴，此其外，犹有汰沃之汜。
现代文：像我向南游过的无边无际的空旷之地，在北方休息在寂静幽暗的地方，向西跑遍幽深边远的地方，往东一直来到日出之处。这些地域是下无地而上无天，听不到任何声音，看不清任何物件。
English: The boundless expanse of empty space that I swam through to the south, rested in a silent and dark place in the north, ran through deep and remote places to the west, and went to the sunrise in the east, these areas are bottomless and skyless, can not hear any sound, can not see anything clearly.

古文：其余一举而千万里，吾犹未能之在，今子游始于此，乃语穷观，岂不亦远哉！
现代文：此外还有水天相连的海洋的边岸，我尽管一动就是千万里，但我还是无法达到那里。现在你才游历到这里，就认为看尽了一切地方，与我上述说的那些地方比，你不觉得差远了吗？
English: In addition, there is the shore of the ocean, which is connected by water and sky. Even though I am a million miles away, I still can't get there. Now that you have just traveled here, you think you have seen everything, compared to the places I mentioned above, don't you think it's far away?

古文：然子处矣，吾与汗漫期于九垓之外，吾不可以久驻。 
现代文：不过你呆在这里好了，我与汗漫先生已约好在九垓之外会面，所以我无法在这里久留陪你。 
English: But it's okay for you to stay here. I've made an appointment with Mr. Khanman to meet him outside Jiuzhaigou, so I can't stay here with you for long.

古文：若士举臂而竦身，遂入云中。
现代文：说完，此人一举臂、一耸身便飞入云端。
English: After saying this, the man raised his arm and flew into the clouds.

古文：卢敖仰而视之，弗见，乃止驾，柸治，悖若有丧也，曰： 吾比夫子，犹黄鹄与壤虫也。
现代文：卢敖仰面瞭望，已看不见此人的身影了；于是卢敖停下了马车，惊惧困惑，若有所失，自言自语说： 我和这位先生相比，就如同黄鹄与小虫一样。
English: Lu Xun looked up and could no longer see the man's shadow; so Lu Xun stopped the carriage, frightened and confused, and if he lost something, he said to himself: "Compared to this gentleman, I am just like the yellow centipede and the small worm.

古文：终日行，不离咫尺，而自以为远，岂悲不哉！
现代文：我整天奔波不停，却还在咫尺之地漫游，但我却自以为很遥远了，这不是显得很悲哀吗？ 
English: Isn't it sad that I've been running around all day, and I'm still within touching distance, but I think I'm far away?

古文：故庄子曰： 小年不及大年，小知不及大知，朝菌不知晦朔，蟪蛄不知春秋。 
现代文：所以《庄子》说： 寿命短的不了解寿命长的，小聪明不理解大智慧，朝生暮亡的菌类不知月的晦朔，蟪蛄不知一年中的春和秋。 
English: Therefore, "Zhuangzi" said: the short life does not understand the long life, the small clever does not understand the great wisdom, the fungi that are born and die do not know the new moon, and the grasshopper does not know the spring and autumn of the year.

古文：此言明之有所不见也。
现代文：这是说视力好的也有他无法看到的东西。
English: This means that even with good eyesight, there are things he cannot see.

古文：季子治禀父三年，而巫马期絻衣短褐，易容貌往观化焉，见得鱼释之，巫马期间焉，曰： 凡子所为鱼者，欲得也。
现代文：宓子贱治理亶父三年，孔门弟子巫马期穿上粗劣的麻布衣，化装前去察访宓子贱的教化情况。巫马期看到有人捕鱼，但捕到鱼后又放回水中去，就上前询问： 你之所以来捕鱼，是为了捕到鱼。
English: Three years after his father's death, Confucian disciple Wuma Zi put on a coarse linen robe and disguised himself to inspect Zou Zi's enlightenment. Wuma Zi saw someone fishing, but after catching the fish, he put it back in the water and asked: "The reason why you came to fish is to catch fish."

古文：今得而释之，何也？ 
现代文：今天你将捕到的鱼又放生回水，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Today, the fish you catch will be released back into the water. Why is that?

古文：渔者对曰： 季子不欲人取小鱼也，所得者小鱼，是以释之。 
现代文：渔夫回答说： 宓子贱不希望人们捕捉那些没长成的小鱼。我刚才之所以将捕到的鱼都放回河中，因为捕捉的都是小鱼。 
English: The fisherman replied: "I don't want people to catch the small fish that haven't grown up. The reason I put all the fish I caught back into the river just now is because they were all small fish.

古文：季子何以至于此？ 孔子曰： 丘尝问之以治，言曰：诫于此者刑于彼 季子必行此术也。 
现代文：巫马期回去将此事报告给孔子，说： 宓子贱的品德教育达到这么好的程度，他能让人暗中做事都不敢胡来，就像刑法放在他身边一样。他是怎样达到这种效果的呢？ 孔子说： 我曾经询问过宓子贱的治政方法，他告诉我： 诚爱之心一旦扎根于内心世界，就会在任何其他事情上体现出来。 宓子贱一定是实施了这种方法。 
English: Wuma went back to report the matter to Confucius, saying: Zou Zichian's moral education has reached such a good level that he can make people not dare to do things in secret, just like the criminal law is placed around him. How did he achieve this effect? Confucius said: I once asked Zou Zichian's governance method, he told me: Once the heart of sincere love is rooted in the inner world, it will be reflected in any other matter. Zou Zichian must have implemented this method.

古文：故老子曰： 去彼取此。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 去彼取此。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Go to him to get this.

古文：罔两问于景曰： 昭昭者神明也？ 
现代文：罔两问影子： 那明亮的日光就是神明？ 影子回答： 不是。 
English: The two asked the shadow: Is that bright sunlight the gods? The shadow replied: No.

古文：景曰： 非去。 
现代文：罔两又问： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: Xingrui asked again: How did you know?

古文：罔两曰： 子何以知之？ 景曰： 扶桑受谢，日照宇宙，昭昭之光，辉烛四海。
现代文：影子说： 太阳每天从扶桑升起又从西边落下去，它照耀在宇宙间，那明亮的阳光照耀四海。
English: The shadow said: The sun rises every day from Fusang and sets from the west, it shines in the universe, the bright sun shines on the four seas.

古文：阖户塞牗，则无由入矣。
现代文：可是将门窗紧闭，阳光就无法照射进来。
English: But if you close the doors and windows tightly, the sun cannot shine in.

古文：若神明，四通并流，无所不及，上际于天，下蟠于地，化育万物而不可为象，俯仰之间而抚四海之外，昭昭何足以明之！ 
现代文：但那神明却能四通八达，无所不及，上至九天，下居大地，生育万物而不露痕迹，仰俯之间便能抚及四海之外，这明亮的日光哪有这样的神通？ 
English: But that deity can reach everywhere, surpass everything, reach up to the ninth heaven, dwell on the earth below, give birth to all things without leaving a trace, and can touch the four seas between the ups and downs. Does this bright sunlight have such a magic?

古文：故老子曰： 天下之至柔，驰骋天下之至坚。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 天下最柔弱的东西，能穿越于最坚硬的东西中。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said: The weakest thing in the world can pass through the hardest thing.

古文：光耀问于无有曰： 子果有乎？其果无有乎？ 
现代文：光耀问无有： 你果真有呢？还是果真没有呢？ 
English: Shine asks the nonexistent: Do you really exist? Or do you really not exist?

古文：无有弗应也。
现代文：无有不吭声。
English: There is no silence.

古文：光耀不得问，而视其状貌，冥然忽然，视之不见其形，听之不闻其声，搏之不可得，望之不可极也。
现代文：光耀听不到无有的回答，于是上前去观察无有的模样，只觉得是：黑呼恍惚，看它看不见形状，听它听不到声响，触摸它又触摸不到，一眼望不到头。
English: Shine could not hear the nonexistent answer, so he went forward to observe the appearance of the nonexistent, only to feel: black breath trance, look at it can not see the shape, listen to it can not hear the sound, touch it and can not touch, can not see the head at a glance.

古文：光耀曰： 贵矣哉，孰能至于此乎？
现代文：光耀于是说： 珍贵啊，有谁能达到这种神奇的状态？
English: Shining then said: Precious, who can achieve this magical state?

古文：予能有无矣，未能无无也。及其为无无，又何从至于此哉？ 
现代文：就我光耀来说，还只是达到 无形 和 无声 ，只能给人以抓不住和听不见的感觉，还不能达到连光都没有的状态。
English: As far as my radiance is concerned, I have only achieved invisibility and silence, which can only give people the feeling that they cannot be grasped or heard, and cannot even achieve the state of having no light.

古文：故老子曰： 无有入于无间，吾是以知无为之有益也。 
现代文：至于达到无一切的状态，那又是怎么样达到这样的呢！ 所以《老子》说： 这个什么都没有的东西能渗透穿越没有间隙的东西，我因此知道 无为 的益处。 
English: As for attaining the state of nothingness, how does one achieve this? Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: This nothingness can permeate through things without gaps, so I know the benefits of doing nothing.

古文：白公胜虑乱，罢朝而立，倒杖策，錣上贯颐，血流至地而弗知也。
现代文：白公胜欲报杀父之仇，一心想发动兵变，退朝后站立不走，手中拿的马鞭倒拄着自己的面颊，以至于鞭梢的尖针穿透了面颊，血流到地上都不知道。
English: Bai Gongsheng wanted to avenge his father's murder, he was bent on starting a mutiny, he backed down and stood firm, the horse whip he held in his hand stung his cheek so badly that the needle from the end of the whip pierced his cheek, and he didn't even know that blood was flowing onto the ground.

古文：郑人闻之曰： 颐之忘，将何不忘哉！ 
现代文：郑国人听到这件事以后说： 白公胜连自己的面颊都给忘了，还有什么不会忘掉呀！ 
English: After hearing this, the people of Zheng said: Bai Gongsheng even forgot his own cheek, what else will he not forget!

古文：此言精神之越于外，智虑之荡于内，则不能漏理其形也。
现代文：这是说人的精神一旦脱离开人的心身，而智虑又在内心激荡，那么人就不能充实气血、调理形体。
English: This is to say that once the human spirit is detached from the human mind and body, and intellectual concerns are stirred up in the heart, then a person cannot enrich the qi and blood and regulate the body.

古文：是故神之所用者远，则所遗者近也。
现代文：因此，精神思虑的范围越远，那么就越不能顾及近在咫尺的形体。
English: Therefore, the further the scope of mental contemplation, the more it cannot take into account the form that is close at hand.

古文：故老子曰： 不出户以知天下，不窥牗以见天道，其出弥远，其知弥少。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 不出门外，能知天下事；不望窗外，能认识天道。越向外竞逐，知道得越少。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: "If you do not go outside, you can know the things of the world; if you do not look out of the window, you can know the way of heaven. The more you go out, the less you know."

古文：此谓也。
现代文：说的就是这个道理。
English: That's what he said.

古文：秦皇帝得天下，恐不能守，发边戍，筑长城，修关梁，设障塞，具传车，置边吏，然刘氏夺之，若转闭锤。
现代文：秦始皇得天下之后，唯恐江山守不住，于是派遣大量的民兵守卫边疆，并修筑长城，建造关口津梁，设置要塞障碍，装备驿站车马，派遣边疆官吏。然而刘家夺取秦之天下，却如同翻转轴锤那样便易。
English: After the first emperor of Qin conquered the country, he feared that he would not be able to defend the country, so he sent a large number of militia to guard the border, and built the Great Wall, built the Jinshan Pass, set up fortress barriers, equipped post stations, and dispatched border officials. However, it was as easy for the Liu family to seize the country of Qin as it was to flip a hammer.

古文：昔武王伐纣，破之牧野，乃封比干之墓，表商容之闾，柴箕子之门，朝成汤之庙，发钜桥之粟，散鹿台之钱；破鼓折枹，弛弓绝弦，去舍露宿以示平易，解剑带笏以示无仇。
现代文：以前武王讨伐纣王，在牧野打败了纣王，推翻殷朝，建立起自己的政权。于是修整了比干的坟墓，旌表商容的故里，保护了箕子的旧宅，朝拜了商汤的宗庙，散发了巨桥的粮食和鹿台的财物；砸破战鼓、折断鼓槌、松开强弓、拉断弓弦；搬离房舍、露宿野外，以示生活简朴；松懈佩剑，带着笏板，以示不再有仇敌。
English: In the past, King Wu fought against King Shun, defeated King Shun in Makino, overthrew the Yin Dynasty, and established his own political power. Therefore, he repaired the tomb of Bi Gan, the ancestral home of Shun watch merchant, protected the old house of Shun Zi, worshiped the ancestral temple of Shang Tang, and distributed the grain of Giant Bridge and the property of Deer Terrace; smashed the war drum, broke the drumstick, loosened the strong bow, and broke the bow string; moved out of the house and camped in the field to show a simple life; loosened the sword and carried the cutting board to show that there was no longer an enemy

古文：于此天下歌而乐之，诸侯执币相朝，三十四世不夺。
现代文：这时候天下百姓都编出歌谣来庆贺天下太平，诸侯均带着厚礼前来朝拜，江山传了三十四代也没被篡夺。
English: At this time, the people all over the world made up songs to celebrate the world peace, the princes all came to pay homage with a heavy gift, and the country was passed down for thirty-four generations without being usurped.

古文：故老子曰： 善闭者，无关键而不可开也，善结者。无绳约而不可解也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 善于关闭的，不用门闩却使人无法打开；善于捆缚的，不用绳索却使人无法解开。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Those who are good at closing, do not use the latch but make people unable to open; those who are good at tying, do not use the rope but make people unable to untie.

古文：尹需学御，三年而无得焉，私自苦痛，常寝想之，中夜梦受秋驾于师。
现代文：尹需拜师学习驾御术，三年过去还是没有收获，内心十分痛苦，经常是睡觉时还在思虑这件事。一天半夜时分，他从梦中学会了 秋驾 的技术。
English: Yin needed to learn driving skills from a teacher, but after three years, he still had no results. His heart was very painful, and he often thought about it while sleeping. At midnight one day, he learned the skills of autumn driving from a dream.

古文：明日往朝，师望之，谓之曰： 吾非受道于子也，恐子不可予也。
现代文：第二天，尹需去拜访老师，老师望着他说： 我不是舍不得将驾御术传授给你，只是怕你没有能力学会它。
English: The next day, Yin needed to visit his teacher. The teacher looked at him and said, "I'm not reluctant to teach you the art of driving, but I'm afraid you don't have the ability to learn it.

古文：今日教子以秋驾。 
现代文：今天我就教你秋驾技术吧。 
English: Today I will teach you autumn driving techniques.

古文：尹需反走，北面再拜曰： 臣有天幸，今夕固梦受之。 
现代文：尹需听后，兜了一个圈子，朝北向老师行了再拜礼，说： 我有天赐幸运，昨天夜里我已在梦中接受了老师教的秋驾技术了。 
English: After listening, Yin Meng circled around in a circle and bowed to the teacher again, saying: I am blessed with luck. I have accepted the autumn driving technique taught by the teacher in my dream last night.

古文：故老子曰： 致虚极，守静笃，万物并作，吾以观其复 也。
现代文：所以《老子》说： 致虚与守静的主体修养工夫，要做到极点和专笃。万物都在生长发展，我从而可以观察其往复循环。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: the cultivation of the subject of leading to emptiness and keeping quiet should be extreme and dedicated. Everything is growing and developing, so I can observe its reciprocating cycle.

古文：昔孙叔敖三得令尹，无喜志；三去令尹，无忧色。延陵季子，吴人愿一以为王而不肯。许由让天下而弗受。晏子与崔杼盟，临死地不变其仪。
现代文：以前孙叔敖三次得到令尹的官职而不露喜悦之情，三次失去令尹的官职而没有忧愁之色；延陵季子，吴国人要立他为王，但他坚决不肯；许由，尧准备将天下让给他，但他不接受；晏子与崔杼盟誓，面临着死亡威胁而不改变他的原则。
English: In the past, Sun Shuxuan obtained the official post of Lingyin three times without showing joy, and lost the official post of Lingyin three times without sadness; Yanling Ji Zi, the people of Wu wanted to appoint him as king, but he resolutely refused; Xu Yue, Zou was ready to give him the world, but he did not accept; Zou Zi and Cui Yao swore an oath, facing the threat of death without changing his principles.

古文：此皆有所远通也。
现代文：这些人都能对事物作长远思考。
English: These are people who can think long-term.

古文：精神通于死生，则物孰能惑之！
现代文：人的精神能够认识到死生之分，那么还有什么外物能诱惑他！
English: If the human spirit is capable of recognizing the difference between life and death, then what else can tempt it?

古文：荆有佽非，得宝剑于干队，还反度江，至于中流，阳侯之波，两蛟挟绕其船。
现代文：楚国有位佽非，在干遂得到一宝剑。返回时渡长江，船到江中心时，波浪涌起，两条蛟龙挟持缠绕着船。
English: When returning from crossing the Yangtze River, when the ship reached the center of the river, the waves surged, and two dragons wrapped around the ship.

古文：佽非谓枻船者曰： 尝有如此而活者乎？ 对曰： 未尝见也。 
现代文：佽非对船艄公说： 你见过在这种险境中逃生的人吗？ 艄公回答： 没见过。 
English: He said to the boatman, "Have you ever seen anyone escape in such a dangerous situation?" The boatman replied, "I haven't."

古文：于是佽非瞑目然攘臂拔剑曰： 武士可以仁义之礼说也，不可劫而夺也。
现代文：这时佽非怒目圆睁、血气勃涌、捋起衣袖、拔出宝剑，喝道： 武勇之士可以用仁义之礼来说服，但不能威逼强夺他的志向。
English: At this time, Yu Bin's eyes were wide with anger, his blood was rising, he rolled up his sleeves, pulled out his sword, and shouted: A brave man can be persuaded with kindness and justice, but he cannot be forced to take his ambition.

古文：此江中之腐肉朽骨，弃剑而已，余有奚爱焉？ 
现代文：人总是要变为腐肉朽骨的，就是弃剑而能保全性命也没什么意义，所以生命又有什么值得吝惜的呢！ 
English: People will always turn into rotting flesh and bones. It is meaningless to abandon the sword to save one's life, so what is there to regret about life?

古文：赴江刺蛟，遂断其头。船中人尽活，风波毕除，荆爵为执圭。
现代文：说完便跳入江中搏杀蛟龙，终于将蛟龙的头斩断，使一船的人全得以保全性命，风浪也平息下来。楚王于是封给了佽非执圭爵位。
English: After saying this, he jumped into the river to fight and kill the dragon, and finally cut off the dragon's head, so that all the people in the boat could save their lives, and the storm calmed down. King Chu then gave Gongfei the title of knight.

古文：孔子闻之曰： 夫善载！
现代文：孔子听到这件事后说： 好啊！
English: When Confucius heard this, he said, "Good!

古文：腐肉朽骨弃剑者，佽非之谓乎？ 
现代文：不因为吝惜生命而弃掉宝剑，佽非称得上这样的人。 
English: A man who does not throw away his sword because he does not care about his life is worthy of such a title.

古文：故老子曰： 夫唯无以生为者，是贤于贵生焉。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 只有那不贪生怕死的人，才胜过厚养生命的人。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Only those who are not greedy for life and afraid of death are better than those who are rich in life.

古文：齐人淳于髠以从说魏王。魏王辩之。
现代文：齐国人淳于髡用合纵策略游说魏惠王，魏惠王认为淳于髡的辩说有道理。
English: The people of Qi, Chun Yuxuan, lobbied Wei Hui Wang with a longitudinal strategy. Wei Hui Wang thought that Chun Yuxuan's argument was reasonable.

古文：约车十乘，将使荆，辞而行。
现代文：于是为他准备了十乘车子，派他出使楚国实施合纵。
English: Therefore, a ten-seater carriage was prepared for him, and he was dispatched to Chu to carry out the merger.

古文：人以为从未足也，复以衡说，其辞若然，魏王乃止其行而疏其身。
现代文：但在淳于髡告辞将要出发之际，他又觉得合纵策略不是十分完善，于是又用连横策略游说魏惠王。言辞同样说得雄辩有理。但魏惠王却认为淳于髡有些反复无常不可信，就不让他出使楚国了，并有意疏远了他。
English: However, when Chunyu's farewell speech was about to be delivered, he felt that the long-term strategy was not perfect, so he lobbied Wei Hui Wang with a long-term strategy. The words were also eloquent and reasonable. However, Wei Hui Wang thought that Chunyu was somewhat capricious and untrustworthy, so he did not let him send an envoy to Chu, and deliberately alienated him.

古文：失从心志，而又不能成衡之事，是其所以固也。
现代文：这样，淳于髡既没有实施合纵的意愿，也无法施行连横的策略，这正是他的鄙陋之处。
English: In this way, Chunyu Kun did not have the will to implement the vertical integration, nor was he able to implement the horizontal integration strategy, which is precisely his meanness.

古文：夫言有宗，事有本。失其宗本，技能虽多，不若其寡也，故周鼎著倕，而使龁其指，先王以见大巧之不可也。
现代文：这说明说话要有宗旨，办事要抓着根本；失去了宗旨和根本，就是有再多的技能也无济于事；还不如技能少些为好。因此周朝的鼎上铸有工倕的像，还特意让他咬着自己的手指头，是想告诫人们过分智巧不可取。
English: This shows that speech should have a purpose, and actions should grasp the fundamentals; if the purpose and fundamentals are lost, even more skills will not help; it is better to have fewer skills. Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty's crown was cast with the image of a workhorse, and he was specially made to bite his own finger, in order to warn people that it is not advisable to be too clever.

古文：故慎子曰： 匠人知为门能以门，所以不知门也，故必杜然后能门。 
现代文：所以《慎子》说： 工匠知道做门，但如果不知道怎样使门能开能关，这就等于不知道做门的关键所在。所以一定要知道这门之关键所在，才能算会做门。 
English: Therefore, "Shinko" said: Craftsmen know how to make doors, but if they do not know how to make the door open and close, it is equivalent to not knowing the key to making a door. Therefore, it is necessary to know the key to this door in order to be able to make a door.

古文：墨者有田鸠者，欲见秦惠王，约车申辕，留于秦，周年不得见。
现代文：墨家弟子中有位叫田鸠的人，想见秦惠王，他套好车、绑好车辕来到秦国，可是在秦国一呆就呆三年还未见到秦惠王。
English: One of Mo's disciples, a man named Tian Qi, wanted to see Qin Hui Wang. He hitched a ride, tied up his car and came to Qin. However, he stayed in Qin for three years without seeing Qin Hui Wang.

古文：客有言之楚王者，往见楚王。
现代文：有位门客于是将田鸠引荐给楚威王。
English: A disciple then introduced Tian Xuan to King Chu Wei.

古文：楚甚悦之，予以节，使于秦。至，因见予之将军之节，惠王见而说之。
现代文：田鸠到了楚国见到楚王，楚王很喜欢他，并赐给他将军的符节，派他出使秦国。
English: When Tian Xuan arrived in the State of Chu, he met the King of Chu. The King of Chu liked him very much and gave him the general's insignia and sent him to the State of Qin.

古文：出舍，喟然而叹，告从者曰： 吾留秦三年不得见，不识道之可以从楚也。 
现代文：田鸠到了秦国，见到了秦惠王，秦惠王也同样十分喜欢他。田鸠离开秦惠王的馆舍后，深深地叹息，对他的随从人员说： 我呆滞在秦国三年而不能见到秦王，当时还真不知道会见秦王的门路可以从楚国这里打通。 
English: After leaving Qin Hui Wang's mansion, Tian Qi sighed deeply and said to his entourage: "I stayed in Qin for three years without being able to see King Qin. At that time, I really didn't know that the door to meeting King Qin could be opened from Chu."

古文：物故有近之而远，远之而近者。
现代文：所以说，事物有时想接近它却反而疏远了它，疏远它却反而接近了它。
English: Therefore, things sometimes want to approach it but alienate it, alienate it but approach it.

古文：故大人之行，不掩以绳，至所极而已矣。
现代文：因此，有大家风范的人，他的行为不会死守一定规矩、机械呆板，只要能达到最终目的就行。
English: Therefore, the behavior of a person who has everyone's demeanor will not adhere to certain rules and mechanical rigidity, as long as it can achieve the ultimate goal.

古文：此所谓筦子枭飞而维绳者。
现代文：这就是《管子》一书中说的： 鸟飞虽不必像绳之直，意南而南，意北而北，但最终会集期于它们的栖宿处。 
English: This is what the book "Pipe" says: Although birds do not have to fly like a straight line, from south to south and from north to north, they will eventually gather in their habitat.

古文：沣水之深千仞，而不受尘垢，投金铁鍼焉，则形见于外，非不深且清也，鱼鳖龙蛇莫之肯归也。
现代文：沣水深达千仞，不受尘垢污染，河水深清得丢一根金属针都可以现出形状来，不能说它不清不深，但正因为这样，鱼鳖龙蛇都不肯在那里生活。
English: The river water is as deep as a thousand fathoms, and is not polluted by dirt. The river water is so deep and clear that a metal needle can be dropped to reveal the shape. It cannot be said that it is not clear and deep, but it is precisely because of this that the fish, dragon and snake do not want to live there.

古文：是故石上不生五谷，秃山不游麋鹿，无所阴蔽隐也。
现代文：因此石头上不长五谷，这光秃秃的山上就没有麋鹿出没游动，因为那里无法掩蔽藏身。
English: That's why there's no grain on the stone, and no elk roam this bare mountain, because there's no place to hide.

古文：昔赵文子问于叔向曰： 晋六将军，其孰先亡乎？ 
现代文：从前赵文子问叔向： 我们晋家的六将军，你看他们哪家先灭亡？ 
English: Once upon a time, Zhao Wenzi asked his uncle: Our six generals of the Jin Dynasty, which one of them will perish first?

古文：对曰： 中行、知氏。 
现代文：叔向回答： 中行氏和智氏两家。 
English: Uncle Xiang replied: There are two families, the Zhongxing family and the Zhi family.

古文：文子曰： 何乎？ 
现代文：文子又问： 这为什么呢？ 
English: Fumiko asked again: Why is that?

古文：对曰： 其为政也，以苛为察，以切为明，以刻下为忠，以计多为功。
现代文：叔向答道： 这两家处理政事，将苛求当作明察，把严厉当成英明，以苛刻当作忠君，以计多当作功劳。
English: Uncle Xiang replied: These two families deal with political affairs, and regard demanding as discernment, severe as wisdom, harsh as loyalty, and calculating as merit.

古文：譬之犹廓革者也，廓之，大则大矣，裂之道也。 故老子曰： 其政闷闷，其民纯纯；其政察察，其民缺缺。 
现代文：这就好比扩撑皮革，死劲地扩拉，大是大了，但这同时也正是撕裂皮革的蠢办法。 所以《老子》说： 政治宽容，人民就淳厚；政治严苛，人民就狡诈。 
English: This is like stretching the leather, tugging at it tenaciously, big is big, but this is also a stupid way to tear the leather. Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: Political tolerance, the people are honest; political rigor, the people are cunning.

古文：景公谓太卜曰： 子之道何能？ 
现代文：齐景公问太卜： 你的道术有何能耐？ 
English: Qi Jing Gong asked the deaconess: What is your ability in Daoism?

古文：对曰： 能动地。 
现代文：太卜回答： 能使大地震动。 
English: Taib replied: It can make the earth tremble.

古文：晏子往见公，公曰： 寡人间太卜曰 子之道何能？ 
现代文：这时晏子前去见景公，景公说： 我曾问太卜： 你的道术有何能耐？ 
English: At this time, the mule went to see King Jing. King Jing said, "I once asked the old woman, 'What is your ability in the martial arts?'

古文：对曰： 能动地 ，地可动乎？ 
现代文：他回答： 能使大地震动。 地真的能叫它动吗？ 
English: And he said, Canst thou shake the earth out of her place?

古文：晏子默然不对。
现代文：晏子听了默不作声。
English: The mule listened in silence.

古文：出，见太卜曰： 昔吾见句星在房、心之间，地其动乎？ 
现代文：出去后去找太卜，说： 早先我观察到客星处在房、心二宿之间，大概要地震了吧？ 
English: After going out, he went to the goddess and said, "Earlier, I observed that the guest star is located between the house and the heart, so it must be an earthquake, right?"

古文：太卜曰： 然。 
现代文：太卜回答说： 是这样的。 
English: "That's right," replied the old woman.

古文：晏子出，太卜走往见公曰： 臣非能动地，地固将动也。 
现代文：晏子走了以后，太卜连忙赶到景公那里，说： 不是我能叫地动，而是大地本来就要震动了。 
English: After the cripple had gone, the old woman hurried to the king and said, "It is not I who can make the earth move, but the earth itself is about to shake.

古文：田子阳闻之曰： 晏子默然不对者，不欲太卜之死；往见太卜者，恐公之欺也。
现代文：齐臣田子阳听到这件事后说： 晏子默然不回答景公，是不想太卜因谎言而被处死；又去见太卜，是想叫太卜自觉承认说谎以免使景公受蒙骗。
English: After hearing about this, the Qi minister Tian Ziyang said, "The reason why the mule didn't answer Jing Gong silently was because he didn't want to put the deacon to death for lying; he went to see the deacon again because he wanted the deacon to consciously admit to lying so as not to deceive Jing Gong.

古文：晏子可谓忠于上而惠于下矣。 
现代文：晏子真可谓称得上忠于君主又爱护下属啊。 
English: The mule can truly be said to be loyal to the monarch and love subordinates.

古文：故老子曰： 方而不割，廉而不判。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 行为方正而不绝情，虽有棱角而不伤人。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: The behavior should be upright but not heartless, and it should not hurt people although there are sharp edges and corners.

古文：魏文侯筋诸大夫于曲阳，饮酒酣，文侯喟然叹曰： 吾独无豫让以为臣乎？ 
现代文：魏文侯在曲阳设酒宴招待诸位大夫。酒兴正浓时，魏文侯深深叹息道： 我偏偏没有像豫让这样的忠烈之士来作大臣么！ 
English: Wei Wenhou held a wine banquet in Quyang to invite all the doctors. When the wine was booming, Wei Wenhou sighed deeply: I just don't have a loyal person like Yu Zhan to be a minister!

古文：蹇重举白而进之，曰： 请浮君！ 
现代文：这时蹇重捧着一杯罚酒敬给魏文侯，说： 请罚君王一杯。 
English: At this time, Zou held a cup of wine for Wei Wenhou and said: "Please give the king a cup of wine."

古文：君曰： 何也？ 
现代文：魏文侯不解地问： 为什么罚我？ 
English: Wei Wenhou asked puzzledly: Why punish me?

古文：对曰： 臣闻之：有命之父母不知孝子，有道之君不知忠臣。
现代文：蹇重回答说： 我听说，命运好的父母不知道什么是孝子，有道的国君不知道什么是忠臣。
English: Zou Zhe replied: I have heard that parents with a good fortune do not know what a filial son is, and a virtuous sovereign does not know what a loyal subject is.

古文：夫豫让之君亦何如哉？ 
现代文：那豫让的君主又怎么样呢？ 
English: What about the monarch who abdicated?

古文：文侯受觞而饮釂不献，曰： 无管仲、鲍叔以为臣，故有豫让之功。 
现代文：文侯接过罚酒一饮而尽，不再回劝对方饮酒，表示认罚，说： 这是因为智伯没有管仲、鲍叔那样的贤才辅佐，所以才有了豫让誓死为他报仇的功名。 
English: Wen Hou took over the punishment of drinking and drank it all, no longer advised the other party to drink, and acknowledged the punishment, saying: This is because Zhi Bo did not have Guanzhong, Bao Uncle's wise assistant, so he had the merit of Yuzheng's death to avenge him.

古文：故老子曰： 国家昏乱，有忠臣。 
现代文：所以这也如《老子》说的： 国家昏乱，才会有忠臣。 
English: Therefore, this is also like what "Lao Zi" said: Only when the country is in chaos will there be loyal subjects.

古文：孔子观桓公之庙，有器焉，谓之宥卮。
现代文：孔子参观鲁桓公的庙堂，看到庙中有一器具，叫做宥卮。
English: Confucius visited the temple of King Lu Huan and saw an instrument in the temple called a yakitori.

古文：孔子曰： 善哉！
现代文：孔子说： 好啊！
English: Confucius said: Good!

古文：予得见此器。 
现代文：我能够看到这种器物真荣幸。 
English: It's an honour for me to be able to see this object.

古文：顾曰： 弟子取水！ 
现代文：回头对他的随行弟子说： 取水来吧！ 
English: He turned to the disciple who was with him and said, "Get some water!"

古文：水至，灌之，其中则正，其盈则覆。
现代文：水随即取到，灌入宥卮之中，灌得适中的时候，这宥卮就平平正正，但一旦灌满时，这宥卮就倾倒了。
English: The water is then taken and poured into the yakitori, and when it is just right, the yakitori is perfectly flat, but when it is full, the yakitori is overflowing.

古文：孔子造然革容曰： 善哉持盈者乎！ 
现代文：这时，孔子突然神情严肃地说： 这宥卮器具告诉了我们对待盈满的态度了。 
English: At this time, Confucius suddenly looked serious and said: This utensil tells us our attitude towards abundance.

古文：子贡在侧曰： 请问持盈。 
现代文：子贡马上问： 请问这盈满的态度是什么？ 
English: Zigong immediately asked: What is this overflowing attitude?

古文：曰： 益而损之。 
现代文：孔子回答： 这器具告诉我们，盈满了就得减损。 
English: Confucius replied, "This utensil tells us that when it is full, it must be emptied.

古文：曰： 何谓益而损之？ 
现代文：子贡又问： 为什么盈满了就得减损呢？ 
English: And the tax collector asked, "Why is it that the full amount has to be taken away?"

古文：曰： 夫物盛而衰，乐极则悲，日中而移，月盈而亏。
现代文：孔子解释说： 事物兴盛了就会转向衰败，这就好像乐极生悲一样；自然界也是这样，太阳到正午后便西斜，月亮圆后便慢慢残缺。
English: Confucius explained: When things flourish, they will turn to decay. This is just like the extremes of joy and sorrow; the same is true of nature. The sun will tilt to the west after noon, and the moon will slowly become incomplete after the full moon.

古文：是故聪明睿智，守之以愚；多闻博辩，守之以陋；武力毅勇，守之以畏；富贵广大，守之以俭；德施天下，守之以让。
现代文：所以，聪明有智慧，要靠愚笨来持守；见多识广口才好，要靠寡闻孤陋来持守；勇武刚强有力气，要靠怯懦胆小来持守；富贵宽裕，要靠朴素节俭来持守；德泽施及天下，要靠退让谦逊来持守。
English: Therefore, to be clever and wise, one must be stupid; to be well-informed and well-spoken, one must be ignorant; to be brave, strong and powerful, one must be cowardly and timid; to be rich and generous, one must be simple and frugal; to be virtuous and generous, one must be humble and humble.

古文：此五者，先王所以守天下而弗失也。
现代文：这五方面是先王用以保住天下而不丧失的法宝。
English: These five aspects are the magic weapon that the former king used to keep the world safe without losing it.

古文：反此五者，未尝不危也。 
现代文：违背这五方面，没有不危险的。 
English: Violation of these five aspects is not without danger.

古文：故老子曰： 服此道者不欲盈。夫唯不盈，故能弊而不新成。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 遵循此道的人不求盈满，正因为不过分盈满，所以才能做到虽敝旧却能更新成功。 
English: Therefore, "Lao Zi" said: People who follow this path do not seek fullness, precisely because they are not too full, so they can achieve success even though they are old.

古文：武王问太公曰： 寡人伐纣，天下是臣杀其主而下伐其上也。
现代文：周武王问姜太公： 我兴兵讨伐夺取纣王的天下，这是臣杀君、下伐上的事情。
English: King Zhou Wu asked Jiang Taigong: I have raised an army to fight and conquer the world of the king of Qi. This is a matter of a vassal killing a prince and bringing him down.

古文：吾恐后世之用兵不休，斗争不已，为之奈何？ 
现代文：我担心以后这类的战争将会继续下去，人们相互间的斗争就不会停止，对此你看怎么办？ 太公说： 好！
English: I am afraid that this kind of war will continue in the future, and people will not stop fighting each other. What do you think about this? Grandmother Gong said: Good!

古文：太公曰： 甚善，王之问也。
现代文：君王你提的问题很重要。
English: Your Majesty, your question is very important.

古文：夫未得兽者，唯恐其创之小也。已得之，唯恐伤肉之多也。
现代文：这真是没有获得猎物时唯恐射杀野兽不力；但一旦获得猎物时又唯恐射杀野兽太厉害，影响猎物的质量。
English: This is really a case of not being able to shoot the beast when there is no prey, but being too afraid to shoot the beast when there is prey, affecting the quality of the prey.

古文：王若欲久持之，则塞民于兑，道全为无用之事、烦扰之教。彼皆乐其业，供其情，昭昭而道冥冥，于是乃去其督而载之木，解其剑而带之笏。
现代文：君王你如果想长久地持有天下，唯一的办法是堵塞人民的眼耳口鼻，不使他们有任何欲望产生，引导他们做些无用的事情，并施以烦琐纷扰的说教，让他们乐于本业，安逸于现实生活，使他们由清醒明白转向糊涂愚昧。这样就可能摘下他们的头盔、给他们戴上鹬冠，解下他们的宝剑、让他们带上笏板上朝。
English: Your Majesty, if you want to hold the world for a long time, the only way is to block the people's eyes, ears, mouth and nose, prevent them from having any desires, guide them to do useless things, and give them tedious and troublesome sermons to make them happy in their work, comfortable in real life, and make them turn from sober and clear to muddled and stupid. In this way, it is possible to take off their helmets, put crowns on them, unsheathe their swords, and let them take the scepter to the palace.

古文：为三年之丧，令类不蕃。高辞卑让，使民不争。
现代文：又制定守丧三年的礼制，让他们不能繁衍后代；提倡推崇人们之间的互相谦让，使之不争斗。
English: It also established a three-year mourning ritual, so that they could not reproduce offspring; advocated the promotion of mutual modesty between people, so that they would not fight.

古文：酒肉以通之，竽瑟以娱之，鬼神以畏之。繁文滋礼以飱其质，厚葬久丧以伣其家；含珠鳞施纶组，以贫其财，深凿高垄以尽其力。
现代文：用酒肉使他们心情通畅，以音乐让他们自娱自乐，用鬼神使他们敬畏，用繁文缛节来掩盖他们的本质，以厚葬服丧来耗尽他们的家财，用一些贵重的随葬物使他们贫穷，用深挖墓穴、高筑坟地来耗尽他们的体力。
English: With wine and meat to make their mood smooth, with music to let them entertain themselves, with ghosts and gods to make them awe-inspiring, with red tape to cover their essence, with thick funeral clothes to exhaust their family wealth, with some precious funerary objects to make them poor, with deep graves and high cemeteries to exhaust their physical strength.

古文：家贫族少，虑患者贫。
现代文：这样家族贫穷、部族衰弱，图谋作乱的人便少了。
English: Thus the family is impoverished, the tribe weakens, and there are fewer people who try to make trouble.

古文：以此移风，可以持天下弗失。 
现代文：用上述这些方法来改变世俗，就可以保住天下而不丧失。 
English: If we use the above-mentioned methods to change the world, we can save the world and not lose it.

古文：故老子曰： 化而欲作，吾将镇之以无名之朴也。 
现代文：所以《老子》说： 自然变化到贪欲萌发，我就用 道 的真朴来镇服它。 
English: That's why "Lao Zi" said: "When the natural changes lead to the germination of greed, I will use the simplicity of the Tao to subdue it."

