古文：宋子曰：斯文千古之不坠也，注玄尚白，其功孰与京哉？
现代文：宋先生说：古代文化之所以能够流传千古而不失散，靠的就是白纸黑字的文献记载，墨的功劳是不可超越替代的。
English: Mr. Song said: The reason why ancient culture can be passed down for thousands of years without being lost is because of the black-and-white documentary records. The merits of ink are irreplaceable.

古文：离火红而至黑孕其中，水银白而至红呈其变。
现代文：火是红色的，其中却酝酿着最黑的墨烟；水银是白色的，而最红的银朱却由它变化而来。
English: Fire is red, but the blackest smoke is brewing in it; mercury is white, but the reddest cinnabar comes from it.

古文：造化炉锤，思议何所容也。
现代文：大自然的熔炉锤炼变化万千，真是不可思议啊！
English: Nature's furnace hammers out thousands of variations, it's incredible!

古文：五章遥降，朱临黑而大号彰。万卷横披，墨得朱而天章焕。
现代文：从遥远的时代五色就已经出现，有了朱红色和墨色这两种主要颜色就能使得重大的号令得到彰扬；万卷图书，阅读时用朱红色的笔在黑色的字加以圈点从而使好文章焕发了异彩。
English: The five colors have been around since ancient times, and the two main colors, vermilion and ink, can be used to highlight important announcements; thousands of books, when reading, use a vermilion pen to circle the black words to make the good articles shine.

古文：文房异宝，珠玉何为？
现代文：文房自有笔、墨、纸、砚四宝，在这里即便是珠玉又能派上什么用场呢？
English: The stationery room has its own pens, ink, paper, and inkstone. What use can even a jewel be here?

古文：至画工肖像万物，或取本姿，或从配合，而色色咸备焉。
现代文：至于画家描摹万物，有的人使用原色，有的人使用调配出来的颜色，这样一来，各种各样的颜色也就齐备了。
English: As far as painters depicting all things, some people use primary colors, some people use blended colors, so a variety of colors are also available.

古文：夫亦依坎附离，而共呈五行变态，非至神孰能与于斯哉？
现代文：颜料的调制，要依靠水火的作用，而表现在水、火、木、金、土这五种事物的相互磨合变化之中，若不是世间最为玄妙的大自然，谁能做到这一切呢？
English: The modulation of pigments depends on the action of water and fire, and is manifested in the interaction of five things: water, fire, wood, gold, and earth. If it is not the most mysterious nature in the world, who can do all this?

古文：○朱
现代文：朱
English: Zhu

古文：凡朱砂、水银、银朱，原同一物，所以异名者，由精细老嫩而分也。
现代文：朱砂、水银和银朱本属于同一种物质，名称不同只是由于其中精与粗、老与嫩等的差别所造成的。
English: Cinnabar, mercury and silver cinnabar belong to the same substance. The different names are only due to the difference between fine and coarse, old and young.

古文：上好朱砂出压辰、锦与西川者，中即孕Е，然不以升炼。
现代文：上等朱砂产于湖南西部的辰水、锦江流域以及四川西部地区。虽然这些朱砂里面包含着水银，但它并不用来提炼水银。
English: High-grade cinnabar is produced in western Hunan's Chenshui and Jinjiang river basins, as well as in western Sichuan. Although this cinnabar contains mercury, it is not used to extract mercury.

古文：盖光明、箭镞、镜面等砂，其价重于水银三倍，故择出为朱砂货鬻。
现代文：这是因为光明砂、箭镞砂、镜面砂等几种朱砂的价格要比水银贵三倍，因此要选出好的朱砂用来卖出高价。
English: This is because the price of several kinds of cinnabar, such as bright cinnabar, arrowhead cinnabar and mirror cinnabar, is three times more expensive than mercury. Therefore, good cinnabar should be selected to sell at a high price.

古文：若以升水，反降贱值。
现代文：如果用这些朱砂提炼水银反而降低了它们的价值。
English: If you use these cinnabar to extract mercury, it actually reduces their value.

古文：唯粗次朱砂方以升炼水银，而水银又升银朱也。
现代文：只有那些质地粗糙品质较差的朱砂才用来提炼水银，然后再由水银炼成银朱。
English: Only the coarser, poorer quality cinnabar is used to extract the mercury, which is then refined into silver cinnabar.

古文：凡朱砂上品者，穴土十余丈乃得之。
现代文：上等的朱砂矿，要挖土十多丈深才能找到。
English: Superior cinnabar ore can only be found by digging more than ten feet deep.

古文：始见其苗，磊然白石，谓之朱砂床。
现代文：发现矿苗时，只看见一堆白石，这叫做朱砂床。
English: When the seedlings were discovered, all they saw was a pile of white rock, which is called a cinnabar bed.

古文：近床之砂，有如鸡子大者。
现代文：靠近床的朱砂，有的像鸡蛋那样大块。
English: Close to the bed of cinnabar, some as large as eggs.

古文：其次砂不入药，只为研供画用与升炼水银者。
现代文：那些次等朱砂一般是不用来配药的，而只是研磨成粉供绘画或炼水银用。
English: Those inferior cinnabar are generally not used for dispensing medicines, but are only ground into powder for painting or for making mercury.

古文：其苗不必白石，其深数丈即得。外床或杂青黄石，或间沙土，土中孕满，则其外沙石多自折裂。
现代文：这种次等朱砂矿不一定会有白石矿苗，挖到几丈深就可以得到，它的矿床外面还掺杂有青黄色的石块或沙土，由于土中蕴藏着朱砂，因此石块或沙土大多自行裂开。
English: This kind of inferior cinnabar ore does not necessarily have whitestone seedlings. It can be obtained by digging to several feet deep. Its ore deposit is also doped with bluish-yellow stones or sand. Since there is cinnabar in the soil, most of the stones or sand are cracked by themselves.

古文：此种砂贵州思、印、铜仁等地最繁，而商州、秦州出亦广也。
现代文：这种次等朱砂以贵州东部的思南、印江、铜仁等地最为常见，而陕西商县、甘肃天水县一带也十分常见。
English: This kind of inferior cinnabar is most common in Sinan, Yingjiang, Tongren and other places in the eastern part of Guizhou, and is also very common in the areas of Shangxian County in Shaanxi and Tianshui County in Gansu.

古文：凡次砂取来，其通坑色带白嫩者，则不以研朱，尽以升Е。
现代文：次等朱砂，如果整条矿坑都是质地较嫩而颜色泛白的，就不用来研磨做朱砂，而全部用来炼取水银。
English: Second-class cinnabar, if the whole mine is relatively tender and whitish in color, is not used to grind cinnabar, but is used to extract mercury.

古文：若砂质即嫩而烁视欲丹者，则取来时，入巨铁碾槽中，轧碎如微尘，然后入缸，注清水澄浸。过三日夜，跌取其上浮者，倾入别缸，名曰二朱。其下沉结者，晒干即名头朱也。
现代文：如果砂质虽然很嫩但其中有红光闪烁的，就用大铁槽碾成尘粉，然后放入缸内，用清水浸泡三天三夜，然后摇荡它把上浮的砂石倒入别的缸里，这是二朱，把下沉的取出来晒干成头朱。
English: If the sand is very soft, but some of it has red glitter, use a large iron trough to grind it into dust, then put it in a jar, soak it in clean water for three days and three nights, and then shake it to pour the floating sand into another jar, which is two vermilion, and take the sinking one out and dry it into vermilion.

古文：凡升水银，或用嫩白次砂，或用缸中跌出浮面二朱，水和槎成大盘条，每三十斤入一釜内升Е，其下炭质亦用三十斤。
现代文：提炼水银，一般采用颜色嫩白的次等朱砂或者缸里浮上来的二朱。加水搓成粗条，盘起来放进锅里。每锅共装三十斤，下面烧火用的炭也要三十斤。
English: To refine mercury, generally a second-class cinnabar with a tender white color is used, or second-class cinnabar that has floated up in a jar. Add water, roll into coarse strips, plate them up and put them in a pan. Each pan contains a total of 30 kilos, and the charcoal used for the fire below also needs 30 kilos.

古文：凡升Е，上盖一釜，釜当中留一小孔，釜傍盐泥紧固。
现代文：锅上面还要倒扣另一只锅，锅顶留一个小孔，两锅的衔接处要用盐泥加固密封。
English: On top of the pot, another pot should be turned upside down, leaving a small hole at the top of the pot, and the junction of the two pots should be reinforced and sealed with salt mud.

古文：釜上用铁打成一曲弓溜管，其管用麻绳缠通梢，仍用盐泥涂固。
现代文：锅顶上的小孔和一支弯曲的铁管相连接，铁管通身要用麻绳缠绕紧密，并涂上盐泥加固，使每个接口处不能有丝毫漏气。
English: A small hole on the top of the pot is connected to a curved iron pipe. The iron pipe should be tightly wound with twine and reinforced with salt mud, so that there can be no air leakage at each interface.

古文：煅火之时，曲溜一头插入釜中通气，一头以中罐注水两瓶，插曲溜尾于内，釜中之气在达于罐中之水而止。共煅五个时辰，其中砂末尽化成Е，布于满釜。
现代文：曲管的另一端则通到装有两瓶水的罐子中，使熔炼锅中的气体只能到达罐里的水为止。在锅底下起火加热，约共煅烧十个钟头后，朱砂就会全部化为水银布满整个锅壁。
English: The other end of the curved pipe leads to a canister containing two bottles of water, so that the gas in the melting pot can only reach the water in the canister. It is heated under the bottom of the pot. After about ten hours of co-calcination, the cinnabar will all turn into mercury and cover the entire wall of the pot.

古文：冷定一日，取出扫下。
现代文：冷却一天之后，再取出扫下。
English: After cooling for a day, remove the broom.

古文：此最妙玄，化全部天机也。
现代文：这里面的道理最难以捉摸，自然界的变化真是奥妙无穷！
English: The reason for this is the most elusive, the changes in the natural world are truly mysterious!

古文：凡将水银再升朱用，故名曰银朱。
现代文：用水银再炼成朱砂，就叫做银朱。
English: When mercury is used to refine cinnabar, it is called silver cinnabar.

古文：其法或用磬口泥罐，或用上下釜。
现代文：提炼时使用一个敞口的泥罐，或者用上下两口锅。
English: When refining, use an open-mouthed mud pot, or use two pots.

古文：每水银一斤入石亭脂二斤，同研不见星，炒作青砂头，装于罐内。
现代文：每一斤水银中要加用硫磺制造的石亭脂二斤，然后研磨，一直要磨到看不见水银的光亮，然后把它们在火上炒成青色颗粒，装进罐子里。
English: To every kilo of mercury two kilos of turpentine, made of sulphur, are added, and then they are ground until the light of the mercury is no longer visible, and then they are stirred over a fire to form blue particles, which are put into jars.

古文：上用铁盏盖定，盏上压一铁尺。铁线兜底捆缚，盐泥固济口缝，下用三钉插地鼎足盛罐。
现代文：罐子口要用铁盘盖好，盘上再压一根铁尺，并用铁线把罐子和铁盘绑紧，所有的接缝都要用盐泥封住，然后，取三根铁棒插在地上把泥罐架起来，下面起火让它烧三炷香的时间。
English: The mouth of the jar should be covered with an iron plate, and an iron ruler should be pressed on the plate, and the jar and the iron plate should be tied tightly with an iron wire. All seams should be sealed with salt mud. Then, take three iron rods and stick them on the ground to stand the mud jar up, and start a fire underneath to let it burn three times.

古文：打火三炷香久，频以废笔蘸水擦盏，则银自成粉，贴于罐上，其贴口者朱更鲜华。
现代文：加热过程中要用一支废毛笔蘸上水不停地擦拭铁盘，这样水银变成的银朱粉就会自然附着在罐壁上，贴近罐口的银朱颜色更加鲜艳。
English: During the heating process, use a waste brush to dip the iron plate in water and constantly wipe it, so that the mercury-turned-silver powder will naturally adhere to the tank wall, and the silver color close to the tank mouth will be more vivid.

古文：冷定揭出，刮扫即用。
现代文：待银朱冷却之后取下罐子上的铁盘，就可以把银朱刮扫下来。
English: After the cinnabar cools, remove the iron plate on the jar, and you can scrape the cinnabar off.

古文：其石亭脂沉下罐底，可取再用也。
现代文：剩下来的硫磺沉到罐底，还能再用。
English: The remaining sulphur sinks to the bottom of the tank and can be used again.

古文：每升水银一斤得朱十四两，次朱三两五钱，出数藉硫质而生。
现代文：每一斤水银可炼出十四两银朱和三两半次朱，多出来的分量是因为硫磺而产生的。
English: Every kilo of mercury can refine fourteen silver cinnabar and three and a half times cinnabar. The extra amount is due to sulphur.

古文：凡升朱与研朱，功用亦相仿。
现代文：用这种方法提炼成的朱砂跟天然朱砂研成的朱砂功用差不多。
English: The function of cinnabar extracted by this method is similar to that of natural cinnabar.

古文：若皇家、贵家画彩，则即同辰、锦丹砂研成者，不用此朱也。
现代文：皇家贵族作画，用的是辰州、锦州等地出产的丹砂直接研磨而成的细粉，而不用升炼成的银朱粉。
English: The paintings of the royal aristocrats were made of fine powder directly ground from red sand produced in Chenzhou, Jinzhou and other places, instead of refined silver powder.

古文：凡朱，文房胶成条块，石砚则显，若磨于锡砚之上，则立成皂汁。
现代文：书房用的朱砂通常胶合成条块状，在石砚上磨就能显出原来的鲜红色。但如果在锡砚上磨，就会立即变成灰黑色。
English: The cinnabar used in the study is usually glued together into a blocky strip. If it is ground on a stone roller, it will show its original bright red color, but if it is ground on a tin roller, it will immediately turn gray-black.

古文：即漆工以鲜物彩，唯入桐油调则显，入漆亦晦也。
现代文：当漆工用朱砂调制红油彩来粉饰器具时，和桐油调在一起就会色彩鲜明，和天然漆调在一起就会色彩灰暗。
English: When lacquerers use cinnabar-modulated red oil paint to whitewash equipment, the color will be bright when mixed with tung oil, and the color will be dark when mixed with natural lacquer.

古文：凡水银与朱更无他出，其Е海、草Е之说无端狂妄，耳食者信之。
现代文：水银和朱砂无法从其他原料中提炼，只能由朱砂矿石中取得，或者互相变化而成。
English: Mercury and cinnabar cannot be extracted from other raw materials, but can only be obtained from cinnabar ore, or from each other.

古文：若水银已升朱，则不可复还为Е，所谓造化之巧已尽也。
现代文：水银一旦提炼成银朱，就没有办法再还原为水银，因为大自然的奇妙变化就已到此为止。
English: Once mercury has been refined into cinnabar, there is no way to reduce it back to mercury, because the wonderful changes in nature have come to an end.

古文：○墨
现代文：墨
English: Ink from

古文：凡墨烧烟凝质而为之。
现代文：墨是由烟和胶二者结合而成的。
English: The ink is a combination of smoke and glue.

古文：取桐油、清油、猪油烟为者居十之一，取松烟为者居十之九。
现代文：用桐油、菜籽油、猪油烧出来的烟灰所做的墨约占总数的十分之一；用松烟做墨占总数的十分之九。
English: About one-tenth of the total amount of ink is made from soot burned with tung oil, rapeseed oil, and lard; nine-tenths of the total amount of ink is made from pine smoke.

古文：凡造贵重墨者，国朝推重徽郡人，或以载油之艰，遣人僦居荆、襄、辰、沅，就其贱值桐油点烟而归。
现代文：制造贵重的墨，本朝最推崇安徽的徽州人。他们有时由于油料运输困难，于是派人到湖北的江陵、襄阳和湖南的辰溪、沅陵等地租屋居住，购买当地便宜的桐油就地点烟，燃成的烟灰带回去用来制墨。
English: The people of Huizhou in Anhui are the most revered in this dynasty for producing valuable ink. Sometimes, due to difficulties in transporting the oil, they sent people to rent houses in Jiangling and Xiangyang in Hubei, and Chenxi and Fuling in Hunan, to buy cheap local tung oil to smoke on the spot, and take the burnt soot back to be used to make ink.

古文：其墨他日登于纸上，日影横射有红光者，则以紫草汁浸染灯心而燃炷者也。
现代文：有一种墨，写在纸上后在阳光斜照下可泛红光，那是用紫草汁浸染灯芯之后，用点油灯所得的烟做成的。
English: There is a type of ink that glows red when written on paper and exposed to direct sunlight. It is made from the smoke of a kerosene lamp after the wick has been dyed with comfrey juice.

古文：凡油取烟，每油一斤得上烟一两余。
现代文：燃烧桐油制取烟灰，每斤油可获得上等烟一两多。
English: Burning tung oil to produce soot, each pound of oil can get more than one or two premium soot.

古文：手力捷疾者，一人供事灯盏二百付。
现代文：手脚爽利的，一个人就可以照看二百盏专门用来取烟的灯。
English: With nimble hands and feet, one person can take care of two hundred lamps specifically used to extract smoke.

古文：若刮取怠缓则烟老，火燃质料并丧也。
现代文：如果刮取烟灰不及时，烟就会过火而质量下降，也会白白耗费灯油和原料。
English: If the soot is not scraped off in time, the smoke will be too hot and the quality will decline, and the lamp oil and raw materials will be wasted.

古文：其余寻常用墨，则先将松树流去胶香，然后伐木。
现代文：其余的一般用墨，都是用松烟制成的，先使松树中的松脂流掉，然后砍伐。
English: The rest of the common inks are made from pine smoke. First, the pine trees are stripped of their resin, and then they are cut down.

古文：凡松香有一毛未净尽，其烟造墨，终有滓结不解之病。
现代文：松脂哪怕有一点点没流干净，用这种松烟做成的墨就总会有渣滓，不好书写。
English: Even if a little bit of pine resin does not flow cleanly, the ink made with this pine smoke will always have residue, which is not good for writing.

古文：凡松树流去香，木根凿一小孔，炷灯缓炙，则通身膏液就暖倾流而出也。
现代文：流掉松脂的方法是，在松树干接近根部的地方凿一个小孔，然后点灯缓缓燃烧，这样整棵树上的松脂就会朝着这个温暖的小孔倾流出来。
English: The way to drain the pine resin is to drill a small hole in the pine trunk near the root, and then light a slow fire, so that the pine resin on the whole tree will pour out towards this warm small hole.

古文：凡烧松烟，伐松斩成尺寸，鞠篾为圆屋如舟中雨篷式，接连十余丈。内外与接口皆以纸及席糊固完成。
现代文：烧制松烟的时候，先把松木砍成一定的尺寸，并在地上用竹篾搭建一个圆顶的棚子，就像小船上的遮雨篷那样，逐节连接成长达十多丈，它的内外和接口都要用纸和草席糊紧密封。
English: When firing pine tobacco, the pine cutter is first cut to a certain size, and a dome-shaped shed is built on the ground with bamboo shoots. Like a canopy on a small boat, it is connected section by section and grows up to more than ten feet. Its inside and outside and the interface are tightly sealed with paper and straw mat paste.

古文：隔位数节，小孔出烟，其下掩土砌砖先为通烟道路。
现代文：每隔几节，要留一个出烟的小孔，竹篷和地接触的地方要盖上泥土，篷内砌砖时要先预留排烟的通道。
English: Every few sections, a small hole should be left for smoke to come out. The place where the bamboo canopy and the ground come into contact should be covered with soil. When laying bricks inside the canopy, the smoke exhaust channel should be reserved first.

古文：燃薪数日，歇冷入中扫刮。
现代文：让松木在里面可以连续燃烧几天，冷却之后人们才进去扫刮了。
English: The pine trees were allowed to burn inside for several days in a row, and only after they had cooled did people go in to scrape them.

古文：凡烧松烟，放火通烟，自头彻尾。
现代文：烧松烟时，放火通烟的操作顺序是从篷头弥散到篷尾。
English: When burning pine smoke, the order of operation of setting fire to smoke is from the canopy head to the canopy tail.

古文：靠尾一二节者为清烟，取入佳墨为料。
现代文：从那靠尾一二节中取的烟叫做清烟，是制作优质墨的原料。
English: The smoke taken from the last one or two sections is called clear smoke and is the raw material for making high-quality ink.

古文：中节者为混烟，取为时墨料。
现代文：从中节取的烟叫做混烟，用做普通墨料。
English: The smoke taken from the middle section is called mixed smoke and is used as ordinary ink.

古文：若近头一二节，只刮取为烟子，货卖刷印书文家，仍取研细用之。
现代文：从近头一二节中取的烟叫做烟子，只能卖给印书的店家，仍要磨细后才能用。
English: The smoke taken from the first one or two stanzas is called smoke, and can only be sold to bookstores. It must still be ground before it can be used.

古文：其余则供漆工、垩工之涂玄者。
现代文：其他的就留给漆工、粉刷工作为黑色颜料使用了。
English: The rest was left to the painters, who used black paint for the whitewash.

古文：凡松烟造墨，入水久浸，以浮沉分清悫。
现代文：造墨用的松烟，放在水中长时间浸泡的话，其中那些精细而纯粹的会浮在上面，粗糙而稠厚的就会沉在下面。
English: The fine and pure ones will float on top, and the coarse and thick ones will sink to the bottom, if the pine smoke used for making ink is soaked in water for a long time.

古文：其和胶之后，以捶敲多寡分脆坚。
现代文：在和胶调在一起固结之后，用锤敲它，根据敲出的多少来区别墨的坚脆。
English: After curing with the glue, hammer it with a hammer to distinguish the crispness of the ink according to how much is hammered out.

古文：其增入珍料与漱金、衔麝，则松烟、油烟增减听人。
现代文：至于在松烟或油烟中刻上金字或加入麝香之类的珍贵原料，多少则可由人自行决定。
English: As for precious raw materials such as carving gold letters or adding musk in pine smoke or soot, the amount can be decided by the person.

古文：其余《墨经》、《墨谱》，博物者自详，此不过粗纪质料原因而已。
现代文：其他有关墨的知识，《墨经》《墨谱》等书中都有所记述，想要知道更多知识的人，可以自己去仔细阅读，这里只不过是简单地概述一下制墨的原料和方法罢了。
English: Other knowledge about ink is described in books such as the "Book of Ink" and the "Ink Spectrum." People who want to know more can read them carefully on their own. This is just a brief overview of the raw materials and methods of making ink.

古文：○附
现代文：附
English: 附

古文：胡粉
现代文：胡粉。
English: Ho powder.

古文：黄丹
现代文：黄丹。
English: Huang Dan.

古文：靛花
现代文：靛花。
English: The flowers are blooming.

古文：紫粉
现代文：紫粉。
English: Purple powder.

古文：大青
现代文：大青。
English: Very young.

古文：铜绿
现代文：铜绿。
English: Bronze and green.

古文：石绿
现代文：石绿。
English: Stone green.

古文：代赭石
现代文：代赭石。
English: It is a substitute for vermiculite.

古文：石黄
现代文：石黄。
English: Stone yellow.

