古文：袁盎者，楚人也，字丝。
现代文：袁盎是楚地人，字丝。
English: Yuan Ang is a native of Chudi.

古文：父故为群盗，徙处安陵。
现代文：他的父亲曾经与强盗为伍，后来移居安陵。
English: His father was once a bandit and later moved to Anling.

古文：高后时，盎尝为吕禄舍人。
现代文：吕后时期，袁盎曾经当过吕禄的家臣。
English: During the reign of Queen Lulu, Yuan Ang was once a vassal of Lulu.

古文：及孝文帝即位，盎兄哙任盎为中郎。
现代文：等到汉文帝即位的时候，袁盎的哥哥袁哙保举他做了中郎。
English: When Emperor Hanwen ascended to the throne, Yuan Ang's brother, Yuan Shibao, promoted him to the position of middle-ranking official.

古文：绛侯为丞相，朝罢趋出，意得甚。
现代文：绛侯周勃担任丞相，朝觐之后，便急急忙忙地走出朝廷，很是踌躇满志。
English: Zhou Bo served as chancellor, and after the imperial court ceremony, he hurried out of the imperial court, full of ambition.

古文：上礼之恭，常自送之。
现代文：皇上对他非常恭敬，常常亲自送他。
English: The Emperor treated him with great respect and often sent him off in person.

古文：袁盎进曰： 陛下以丞相何如人？ 
现代文：袁盎进谏说： 陛下以为丞相绛侯是什么样的人？ 
English: Yuan Wanzhong said, "Your Majesty, what kind of person do you think the prime minister is?

古文：上曰： 社稷臣。 
现代文：皇上说： 他是国家的重臣。 
English: The emperor said: He is the chief minister of the country.

古文：盎曰： 绛侯所谓功臣，非社稷臣，社稷臣主在与在，主亡与亡。
现代文：袁盎说： 绛侯是通常所说的功臣，并不是国家的重臣。国家的重臣能与皇上生死与共。
English: Yuan Ang said: "A prince is what is commonly called a meritorious vassal, not a chief vassal of the state. A chief vassal of the state can live and die with the emperor.

古文：方吕后时，诸吕用事，擅相王，刘氏不绝如带。
现代文：当年吕后的时候，吕氏家族掌权，擅自封王，以致刘家的天下就像细微的丝带一样勉强维系着，几乎快要断绝。
English: At the time of Queen Lyu, the Lyu family was in power and had made themselves king without permission. As a result, the Liu family's reign was barely maintained, like a thin ribbon, and was almost about to be severed.

古文：是时绛侯为太尉，主兵柄，弗能正。
现代文：这个期间，绛侯周勃当太尉，掌握兵权，不能匡正汉室的倾危。
English: During this period, Zhou Bo, the warlord, was a first lieutenant and held the military power, but he could not rectify the perilous situation of the Han dynasty.

古文：吕后崩，大臣相与共畔诸吕，太尉主兵，適会其成功，所谓功臣，非社稷臣。
现代文：吕后逝世，大臣们一起共同反对吕氏家族，太尉掌握兵权，又恰好遇到那个成功的机会，所以他是通常所说的功臣，而不是国家的重臣。
English: After the death of Empress Lyu, the ministers jointly opposed the Lyu family, and the lieutenant seized the military power. He also happened to meet the opportunity of success, so he is commonly called the hero, not the chief minister of the country.

古文：丞相如有骄主色。陛下谦让，臣主失礼，窃为陛下不取也。 
现代文：丞相如果对皇上表现出骄傲的神色，而陛下却谦虚退让，臣下与主上都违背了礼节，我私下认为陛下不应该采取这种态度。 
English: If the prime minister shows a proud look to the emperor, while his majesty humbly concedes, both the subject and the lord violate the etiquette, and I privately think that his majesty should not take this attitude.

古文：后朝，上益庄，丞相益畏。
现代文：后来的朝会上，皇上逐渐威严起来，丞相也逐渐敬畏起来。
English: Later, at the imperial court meeting, the emperor gradually became more dignified, and the prime minister gradually became more reverent.

古文：已而绛侯望袁盎曰： 吾与而兄善，今兒廷毁我！ 
现代文：过了不久，丞相怨恨袁盎说： 我与你的兄长袁哙有交情，现在你小子却在朝廷上毁谤我！ 
English: After a short while, the prime minister took a grudge against Yuan Ang and said, "I have a friendship with your brother Yuan Xuan, but now your boy is slandering me in the court!"

古文：盎遂不谢。
现代文：袁盎也不向他谢罪。
English: Yuan Ang did not apologize to him.

古文：及绛侯免相之国，国人上书告以为反，徵系清室，宗室诸公莫敢为言，唯袁盎明绛侯无罪。
现代文：等到绛侯被免除了丞相的职位，回到自己的封国，封国中有人上书告发他谋反，于是绛侯被召进京，囚禁在监狱中。皇族中的一些公侯都不敢替他说话，只有袁盎声明绛侯没有罪。
English: When Yan Hou was relieved of his position as chancellor and returned to his fiefdom, someone in the fiefdom sent a letter accusing him of plotting a rebellion, so Yan Hou was summoned to Beijing and imprisoned in a prison. Some princes in the imperial family did not dare to speak for him, only Yuan Ang declared that Yan Hou was not guilty.

古文：绛侯得释，盎颇有力。
现代文：绛侯得以被释放，袁盎出了不少力。
English: Yan Hou was able to be released, and Yuan Ang showed a lot of strength.

古文：绛侯乃大与盎结交。
现代文：绛侯于是与袁盎倾心结交。
English: Yan Hou then made friends with Yuan Unqin.

古文：淮南厉王朝，杀辟阳侯，居处骄甚。
现代文：淮南王刘长来京朝见的时候，杀死了辟阳侯，他平时待人处事也相当骄横。
English: When Liu Chang, the king of Huainan, came to Beijing to meet the imperial court, he killed Biyang Hou. He was also quite arrogant in his dealings with people.

古文：袁盎谏曰： 诸侯大骄必生患，可適削地。 
现代文：袁盎劝谏皇上说： 诸侯太过骄横，必然会发生祸患，可以适当地削减他们的封地。 
English: Yuan Ang advised Emperor Zou saying: Princes are too arrogant, disasters will inevitably occur, and their fiefdoms can be appropriately reduced.

古文：上弗用。淮南王益横。
现代文：皇上没有采纳他的意见，淮南王更加骄横。
English: The emperor did not adopt his opinion, and King Huainan became even more arrogant.

古文：及棘蒲侯柴武太子谋反事觉，治，连淮南王，淮南王徵，上因迁之蜀，轞车传送。
现代文：等到棘蒲侯柴武的太子准备造反的事被发觉，追查治罪，这件事牵连到了淮南王，淮南王被征召，皇上便将他贬谪到蜀地去，用囚车传送。
English: When it was discovered and investigated that the prince of the spiny puffer Chaiwu was preparing to rebel, the matter implicated King Huainan. King Huainan was conscripted, and the emperor demoted him to Shudi and transported him in a prison wagon.

古文：袁盎时为中郎将，乃谏曰： 陛下素骄淮南王，弗稍禁，以至此，今又暴摧折之。
现代文：袁盎当时担任中郎将，便劝谏说： 陛下向来骄纵淮南王，不稍稍加以限制，以至落到了现在这种地步，如今又突然摧折他。
English: Yuan Weng, who was the middle-ranking general at the time, advised Yu, saying, "Your Majesty has always been proud of the King of Huainan, and has not restricted him in the slightest, so that he has fallen to the present level, and now you have suddenly crushed him.

古文：淮南王为人刚，如有遇雾露行道死，陛下竟为以天下之大弗能容，有杀弟之名，柰何？ 
现代文：淮南王为人刚直，万一在路上遇到风寒而死在半途中，陛下就会被认为以天下之大却容不得他，而背上杀死弟弟的恶名，到时怎么办呢？ 
English: King Huainan is an upright person. If he were to encounter wind and cold on the road and die halfway, his majesty would be considered to be the greatest in the world but could not tolerate him, and the notoriety of killing his brother would be on his back. What would he do then?

古文：上弗听，遂行之。
现代文：皇上不听，终于那样办了。
English: The emperor didn't listen, so it was finally done that way.

古文：淮南王至雍，病死，闻，上辍食，哭甚哀。
现代文：淮南王到了雍地就病死了，这个消息传来，皇上不吃也不喝，哭得很悲哀。
English: When King Huainan fell ill and died in the Yangtze River, the news reached the emperor, who did not eat or drink and wept bitterly.

古文：盎入，顿首请罪。
现代文：袁盎进入，叩头请罪。
English: Yuan Ang entered and bowed down to plead guilty.

古文：上曰： 以不用公言至此。 
现代文：皇上说： 因为没有采用你的意见，所以才落得这样的结果。 
English: The emperor said, "It is because we did not adopt your opinion that we ended up with this result."

古文：盎曰： 上自宽，此往事，岂可悔哉！
现代文：袁盎说： 皇上请自我宽心，这已经是过去的事了，难道还可以追悔吗！
English: Yuan Ang said, "Emperor, please be relieved, this is already a thing of the past, can you still regret it?"

古文：且陛下有高世之行者三，此不足以毁名。 
现代文：再说陛下有三种高出世人的行为，这件事不足以毁坏您的名声。 
English: Besides, your majesty, there are three acts that are above the world, and this one is not enough to ruin your reputation.

古文：上曰： 吾高世行三者何事？ 
现代文：皇上说： 我高于世人的行为是哪三种？ 
English: The emperor said, "What are the three ways in which I am superior to the world?"

古文：盎曰： 陛下居代时，太后尝病，三年，陛下不交睫，不解衣，汤药非陛下口所尝弗进。
现代文：袁盎说： 陛下住在代国的时候，太后曾经患病，三年的时间，陛下不曾合眼，也不脱下衣服睡觉，凡汤药不是陛下亲口所尝过的，就不准进奉给太后。
English: Yuan Ang said, "When Your Majesty was in China, the Empress Dowager fell ill. For three years, Your Majesty did not close your eyes, nor did you take off your clothes to sleep. Any soup medicine that Your Majesty had not personally tasted was not allowed to be given to the Empress Dowager.

古文：夫曾参以布衣犹难之，今陛下亲以王者脩之，过曾参孝远矣。
现代文：曾参作为贫民尚且难以做到这样，现在陛下以君王的身份实践了它，比起曾参的孝来那是超过得很多了。
English: It was difficult to do this as a pauper, but now His Majesty has practiced it as a monarch, and it is much more than the filial piety of Zeng San.

古文：夫诸吕用事，大臣专制，然陛下从代乘六传驰不测之渊，虽贲育之勇不及陛下。
现代文：诸吕当权时，大臣独断专行，而陛下从代地乘坐六辆下等马拉的车子，奔驰到祸福难料的京城来，即使是孟贲、夏育那样的勇士，也比不上陛下。
English: When Zhu Lü was in power, the minister acted arbitrarily, while His Majesty took six inferior horse-drawn carriages from the vicarage and galloped to the capital, where misfortune and fortune were unpredictable. Even warriors like Meng Xuan and Xia Yu were no match for His Majesty.

古文：陛下至代邸，西向让天子位者再，南面让天子位者三。
现代文：陛下到达代国在京城的客馆，面向西两次辞让天子位，面向南坐着有三次辞让天子位。
English: When His Majesty arrived at the guesthouse in the capital to represent the country, he bowed to the emperor twice while facing west, and bowed three times while facing south.

古文：夫许由一让，而陛下五以天下让，过许由四矣。
现代文：许由辞让天下也只是一次，而陛下五次将天下辞让，超过许由四次之多啊。
English: It only takes one resignation to give up the throne, but His Majesty has resigned the throne five times, which is more than four resignations.

古文：且陛下迁淮南王，欲以苦其志，使改过，有司卫不谨，故病死。 
现代文：再说陛下贬谪淮南王，是想让他的心志受些劳苦，使他改正过错，由于官吏护卫得不谨慎，所以他才病死。 
English: Moreover, His Majesty's disparagement of the King of Huainan was intended to make his spirit suffer some hardships so that he would correct his mistakes. He only died of illness because the officials did not guard him prudently.

古文：於是上乃解，曰： 将柰何？ 
现代文：于是皇上才感到宽解，说道： 那以后怎么办呢？ 
English: Only then did the Emperor feel relieved and said: What will happen then?

古文：盎曰： 淮南王有三子，唯在陛下耳。 
现代文：袁盎说： 淮南王有三个儿子，随陛下安排罢了。 
English: Yuan Ang said: King Huainan has three sons, it's up to His Majesty to arrange.

古文：於是文帝立其三子皆为王。
现代文：于是文帝便把淮南王的三个儿子都封为王。
English: As a result, Emperor Wen made all three sons of King Huainan kings.

古文：盎由此名重朝廷。
现代文：而袁盎也因此在朝廷中名声大振。
English: As a result, Yuan Ang became famous in the imperial court.

古文：袁盎常引大体慷慨。
现代文：袁盎常常称引大义，说得慷慨激昂。
English: Yuan Ang would often make impassioned and impassioned speeches.

古文：宦者赵同以数幸，常害袁盎，袁盎患之。
现代文：宦官赵同因为不只一次地受到皇上的宠幸，常常暗中伤害袁盎，袁盎为此感到忧虑。
English: Because the eunuch Zhaotong was favored by the emperor more than once, he often hurt Yuan Ang secretly. Yuan Ang was worried about this.

古文：盎兄子种为常侍骑，持节夹乘，说盎曰： 君与斗，廷辱之，使其毁不用。 
现代文：袁盎的侄儿袁种担任侍从骑士，手持符节护卫在皇帝左右。袁种劝说袁盎说： 你和他相斗，在朝廷上侮辱他，使他所毁谤的话不起作用。 
English: Yuan Xiang, the nephew of Yuan Ang, served as an attendant knight, holding a rune guard around the emperor. Yuan Xiang persuaded Yuan Ang to say: You fight with him, insult him in the court, so that his slanderous words do not work.

古文：孝文帝出，赵同参乘，袁盎伏车前曰： 臣闻天子所与共六尺舆者，皆天下豪英。
现代文：汉文帝出巡，赵同陪同乘车，袁盎伏在车前，说道： 我听说陪同天子共乘高大车舆的人，都是天下的英雄豪杰。
English: When Emperor Wen of Han went on a tour, Zhao accompanied him by car, and Yuan Anfu stood in front of the car and said, "I heard that the people who accompanied the emperor and rode together in a tall car were all heroes of the world.

古文：今汉虽乏人，陛下独奈何与刀锯馀人载！ 
现代文：如今汉王朝虽然缺乏人才，陛下为什么单单要和受过刀锯切割的人同坐一辆车呢！ 
English: Nowadays, although the Han Dynasty lacks talent, why does His Majesty just want to ride in a car with someone who has been cut with a knife and saw!

古文：於是上笑，下赵同。赵同泣下车。
现代文：于是皇上笑着让赵同下去，赵同流着眼泪下了车。
English: So the emperor laughed and let Zhao Tong go, and Zhao Tong got off the train in tears.

古文：文帝从霸陵上，欲西驰下峻阪。
现代文：文帝从霸陵上山，打算从西边的陡坡奔驰而下。
English: Emperor Wen went up the mountain from Bailing, intending to gallop down the steep slope on the west side.

古文：袁盎骑，并车揽辔。
现代文：袁盎骑着马，靠在车边挽住了马缰绳。
English: Yuan Ang rode a horse, leaned on the side of the car and took hold of the reins.

古文：上曰： 将军怯邪？ 
现代文：皇上说： 将军害怕了吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Is the general afraid?"

古文：盎曰： 臣闻千金之子坐不垂堂，百金之子不骑衡，圣主不乘危而徼幸。
现代文：袁盎说： 我听说家有千金的人就坐时不靠近屋檐边，家有百金财富的人站的时候不倚在楼台的栏杆上，圣明的君主，不在面临危险的时候而心存侥幸。
English: Yuan Ang said: I have heard that people with a lot of money do not sit close to the edge of the roof when they are sitting, and people with a lot of money do not lean on the railing of the platform when they are standing.

古文：今陛下骋六騑，驰下峻山，如有马惊车败，陛下纵自轻，柰高庙、太后何？ 
现代文：现在陛下放纵驾车的六匹马，从高坡上奔驰下来，假如有马匹受惊车辆毁坏的事，陛下纵然看轻自己，怎么对得起高祖和太后呢？ 
English: Now that His Majesty has allowed the six horses driving the car to gallop down the high slope, if there is a matter of the horses being frightened and the car being destroyed, even if His Majesty thinks lightly of himself, how can he do justice to Gaozu and the Empress Dowager?

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上终于停止。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：上幸上林，皇后、慎夫人从。
现代文：皇上驾临上林苑，窦皇后、慎夫人跟从。
English: The Emperor arrived at Shanglin Court, followed by Empress Dou and Lady Shen.

古文：其在禁中，常同席坐。
现代文：她们在宫中的时候，慎夫人常常是同席而坐。
English: When they were in the palace, Mrs. Shin often sat at the same table.

古文：及坐，郎署长布席，袁盎引卻慎夫人坐。
现代文：这次，等到就坐的时候，郎署长布置坐席，袁盎把慎夫人的坐席向后拉退了一些。
English: This time, when it was time to sit down, Director Lang arranged the seats, and Yuan Ang pulled Mrs. Shin's seat back a bit.

古文：慎夫人怒，不肯坐。
现代文：慎夫人生气，不肯就坐。
English: Mrs. Shin was angry and refused to sit down.

古文：上亦怒，起，入禁中。
现代文：皇上也发怒，站起身来，回到宫中。
English: The emperor was also angry, stood up and returned to the palace.

古文：盎因前说曰： 臣闻尊卑有序则上下和。
现代文：袁盎就上前劝说道： 我听说尊贵和卑下有区别，那样上下才能和睦。
English: Yuan Ang stepped forward to persuade him, saying, "I have heard that there is a difference between high-ranking and low-ranking, and that's how high-ranking and low-ranking can be reconciled.

古文：今陛下既已立后，慎夫人乃妾，妾主岂可与同坐哉！
现代文：如今陛下既然已经确定了皇后，慎夫人只不过是个妾，妾和主上怎么可以同席而坐呢！
English: Now that His Majesty has decided on a queen, Lady Shin is just a concubine. How can a concubine sit at the same table with the Lord?

古文：適所以失尊卑矣。
现代文：这样恰恰失去了尊卑的分别了。
English: In this way, the distinction between superiority and inferiority is lost.

古文：且陛下幸之，即厚赐之。
现代文：再说陛下宠爱她，就重重地赏赐她吧。
English: Besides, Your Majesty favors her, so reward her generously.

古文：陛下所以为慎夫人，適所以祸之。
现代文：陛下用来宠爱慎夫人的办法，其实恰好成了祸害她的根由。
English: The method used by His Majesty to pamper Lady Shin has actually become the root cause of her misfortune.

古文：陛下独不见 人彘 乎？ 
现代文：陛下难道没有看见过 人彘 吗？ 
English: Hasn't your majesty ever seen a human centipede?

古文：於是上乃说，召语慎夫人。
现代文：皇上这才高兴，召来慎夫人，把袁盎的话告诉了她。
English: The emperor was so pleased that he summoned Lady Shen and told her Yuan Ang's words.

古文：慎夫人赐盎金五十斤。
现代文：慎夫人赐给袁盎黄金五十斤。
English: Madam Shen gave Yuan Ang 50 catties of gold.

古文：然袁盎亦以数直谏，不得久居中，调为陇西都尉。
现代文：但是袁盎也因为多次直言劝谏，不能长久地留在朝廷，被调任陇西都尉。
English: However, Yuan Ang could not stay at the imperial court for a long time due to his many outspoken exhortations, and he was transferred to the position of Shaanxi captain.

古文：仁爱士卒，士卒皆争为死。
现代文：他对士兵们仁慈爱护，士兵们都争相为他效命。
English: He was kind and loving to his soldiers, who were all eager to serve him.

古文：迁为齐相。
现代文：之后，袁盎提升为齐国丞相。
English: After that, Yuan Ang was promoted to the post of Qi Guozheng.

古文：徙为吴相，辞行，种谓盎曰： 吴王骄日久，国多奸。
现代文：又改任吴国丞相。在辞别起程的时候，袁种对袁盎说： 吴王骄横的时间已经很长了，国中有许多奸诈之人。
English: At the time of his departure, Yuan Zang said to Yuan Ang: "Wu Wang has been arrogant for a long time, and there are many treacherous people in the country.

古文：今苟欲劾治，彼不上书告君，即利剑刺君矣。
现代文：现在如果你要揭发惩办他们的罪行，他们不是上书控告你，就是用利剑把你刺死。
English: Now, if you try to expose and punish them for their crimes, they will either write you a complaint or stab you to death with a sharp sword.

古文：南方卑湿，君能日饮，毋何，时说王曰毋反而已。
现代文：南方地势低洼潮湿，你最好每天喝酒，不要管什么事，时常劝说吴王不要反叛就是了。
English: Nanfang is low-lying and humid. You'd better drink alcohol every day, not care about anything, and just persuade King Wu not to rebel.

古文：如此幸得脱。 
现代文：像这样你就可能侥幸摆脱祸患。 
English: Like that, you might just get away with it.

古文：盎用种之计，吴王厚遇盎。
现代文：袁盎采纳了袁种的策略，吴王厚待袁盎。
English: Yuan Ang adopted Yuan Zhai's strategy, and Wu Wang treated Yuan Ang generously.

古文：盎告归，道逢丞相申屠嘉，下车拜谒，丞相从车上谢袁盎。袁盎还，愧其吏，乃之丞相舍上谒，求见丞相。
现代文：袁盎请假回家的时候，在路上碰到丞相申屠嘉，便下车行礼拜见，丞相只从车上表示谢意，袁盎回到家里，在下属官吏面前感到羞愧，于是到丞相府上，要求拜见丞相。
English: When Yuan Ang was going home on leave, he met the prime minister Shen Tu Jia on the road and got out of the car to pay his respects. The prime minister only expressed his gratitude from the car. Yuan Ang returned home and felt ashamed in front of subordinate officials, so he went to the prime minister's office and asked to see the prime minister.

古文：丞相良久而见之。盎因跪曰： 原请间。 
现代文：丞相过了很长时间才出来见他，袁盎便下跪说： 希望别人回避，单独会见。 
English: It took a long time for the prime minister to come out to meet him, so Yuan Ang knelt down and said, "I hope others will avoid me and meet me alone."

古文：丞相曰： 使君所言公事，之曹与长史掾议，吾且奏之；即私邪，吾不受私语。 
现代文：丞相说： 如果你所说的是公事，请到官署与长史掾吏商议，我将把你的意见报告上去；如果是私事，我不接受私下的谈话。 
English: The prime minister said: If what you are saying is a business matter, please go to the government office and discuss it with the chief historian, and I will report your opinion; if it is a private matter, I will not accept a private conversation.

古文：袁盎即跪说曰： 君为丞相，自度孰与陈平、绛侯？ 
现代文：袁盎就跪着劝说道： 你当丞相，请自我权衡一下，与陈平、绛侯相比你怎么样？ 
English: Yuan Wang kneeled down to persuade him and said: You are the prime minister, please weigh yourself. How are you compared to Chen Ping and Yan Hou?

古文：丞相曰： 吾不如。 
现代文：丞相说： 我比不上他们。 
English: The prime minister said: "I can't compete with them.

古文：袁盎曰： 善，君即自谓不如。
现代文：袁盎说： 好，你自己都说比不上他们。
English: Yuan Ang said, "Good, you can't even compare to them.

古文：夫陈平、绛侯辅翼高帝，定天下，为将相，而诛诸吕，存刘氏；君乃为材官蹶张，迁为队率，积功至淮阳守，非有奇计攻城野战之功。
现代文：陈平、绛侯辅佐保护高祖，平定天下，当了将相，诛杀诸吕，保全了刘氏天下；您只是脚踏弓弩，才当了低级武士，又提升为队长，积累功劳做到了淮阳郡守，并没有出什么奇计，在攻城夺地、野外厮杀中立下战功。
English: Chen Ping, the assistant of Yan Hou, protected Gao Zu, pacified the world, became the general phase, fought and killed Zhu Lv, and preserved the Liu world. You only stepped on the bow and arrow to become a low-level samurai, and promoted to captain, and accumulated merits to achieve Huaiyang County. There was no magic trick, and you won the battle in the siege of the city and the battle in the field.

古文：且陛下从代来，每朝，郎官上书疏，未尝不止辇受其言，言不可用置之，言可受采之，未尝不称善。
现代文：再说陛下从代地来，每次上朝，郎官呈上奏书，他从来没有不停下车来听取他们的意见，意见不能采用的，就搁置一边，可以接受的，就采纳，从来没有人不称道赞许。
English: Furthermore, His Majesty came from the vicarage, and every morning when the retainers presented their report, he never stopped getting out of the car to listen to their opinions. Opinions that could not be adopted were put aside, and those that could be accepted were adopted. No one ever disapproved.

古文：何也？
现代文：这是为了什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：则欲以致天下贤士大夫。
现代文：是想用这种办法来招致天下贤能的士大夫。
English: They want to use this method to attract the world's most capable scholars and doctors.

古文：上日闻所不闻，明所不知，日益圣智；君今自闭钳天下之口而日益愚。
现代文：皇上每天听到自己从前所没听过的事情，明白以前所不曾明白的道理，一天比一天更加英明智慧；您现在自己封闭天下人的口，就一天比一天愚昧。
English: Emperor, every day you hear things you have never heard before, understand things you have never understood before, and become wiser and wiser day by day. Now that you yourself are shutting the mouths of everyone in the world, you are becoming more and more foolish day by day.

古文：夫以圣主责愚相，君受祸不久矣。 
现代文：以圣明的君主来督责愚昧的丞相，你遭受祸患的日子不远了啊！ 
English: The day of your calamity is not far off, when a holy monarch will rebuke a foolish prime minister.

古文：丞相乃再拜曰： 嘉鄙野人，乃不知，将军幸教。 
现代文：丞相于是拜了两拜，说道： 我是个粗鄙庸俗的人，就是不聪明，幸蒙将军教诲。 
English: The prime minister then bowed twice and said: I am a coarse and vulgar person, that is, I am not clever, but I am fortunate to have been taught by a general.

古文：引入与坐，为上客。
现代文：申屠嘉引袁盎入内室同坐，把他作为上宾。
English: Shen Tuo Jia invited Yuan Ang to sit with him in the inner room and made him the chief guest.

古文：盎素不好晁错，晁错所居坐，盎去；盎坐，错亦去：两人未尝同堂语。
现代文：袁盎向来不喜欢晁错，只要有晁错在的地方，袁盎就离去；只要有袁盎在的地方，晁错也离开。两个人从来没有在一起谈过话。
English: Yuan Ang has always disliked mistakes. As long as there is a mistake, Yuan Ang will leave. As long as there is a mistake, Yuan Ang will also leave. The two have never talked together.

古文：及孝文帝崩，孝景帝即位，晁错为御史大夫，使吏案袁盎受吴王财物，抵罪，诏赦以为庶人。
现代文：等到汉文帝去世，汉景帝继位，晁错当上了御史大夫，派官吏查核袁盎接收吴王刘濞财物的事，要按罪行的轻重给予惩罚。
English: When Emperor Hanwen died and Emperor Hanqing succeeded to the throne, Zou became the imperial historian by mistake, and sent officials to investigate the matter of Yuan Ang receiving the property of King Liu Bei of Wu. They should be punished according to the severity of the crime.

古文：吴楚反，闻，晁错谓丞史曰： 夫袁盎多受吴王金钱，专为蔽匿，言不反。
现代文：皇帝下诏令将袁盎贬为平民。吴楚叛乱的消息传到京城，晁错对丞史说： 袁盎接收了吴王的许多金钱，专门为他遮掩，说他不会反叛。
English: The emperor issued a decree to relegate Yuan Ang to the status of a commoner. News of Wu Chu's rebellion spread to Beijing, and Zou Er mistakenly said to Joseph: Yuan Ang received a lot of money from the king of Wu, specifically to cover up for him, saying that he would not rebel.

古文：今果反，欲请治盎宜知计谋。 
现代文：现在反叛已成事实，我打算请求处治袁盎。他必当知道叛乱的阴谋。 
English: Now that the rebellion has become a reality, I plan to ask for the execution of Yuan Ang. He must have known about the rebellion plot.

古文：丞史曰： 事未发，治之有绝。
现代文：丞史说： 事情还没有暴露出来，就惩治他，可能中断叛乱阴谋。
English: Zheng Shi said: The matter has not yet been exposed, so punish him, and it may interrupt the rebellion plot.

古文：今兵西乡，治之何益！且袁盎不宜有谋。 
现代文：现在叛军向西进发，惩办袁盎有什么好处呢！再说袁盎也不该有什么阴谋 。
English: Now that the rebels are heading west, what good would it do to punish Yuan Ang? Besides, Yuan Ang shouldn't be plotting anything.

古文：晁错犹与未决。
现代文：晁错犹豫不决。
English: He hesitates.

古文：人有告袁盎者，袁盎恐，夜见窦婴，为言吴所以反者，原至上前口对状。
现代文：有人将这件事告知了袁盎，袁盎害怕，连夜去见窦婴，向他说明吴王反叛的原因，希望能到皇上面前亲口对质。
English: Someone told Yuan Ang about this. Yuan Ang was afraid and went to see Dou Ying overnight to explain to him the reasons for King Wu's rebellion, hoping to confront the emperor in person.

古文：窦婴入言上，上乃召袁盎入见。
现代文：窦婴进宫向皇上报告了，皇上就召袁盎进宫会见。
English: Dou Ying entered the palace and reported to the emperor, who summoned Yuan Ang to the palace for a meeting.

古文：晁错在前，及盎请辟人赐间，错去，固恨甚。
现代文：晁错就在面前，等到袁盎请求皇上避开别人单独接见，晁错退了下去，心里非常怨恨。
English: Yan Xie was right in front of him. When Yuan Weng asked the emperor to avoid others and receive him alone, Yan Xie retreated, feeling very resentful.

古文：袁盎具言吴所以反状，以错故，独急斩错以谢吴，吴兵乃可罢。
现代文：袁盎详细地说明了吴王谋反的情况，是因为晁错的缘故，只有立即斩杀晁错向吴王谢罪，吴军才可能停止。
English: Yuan Ang explained in detail the circumstances of King Wu's rebellion. It was due to a mistake. Only by immediately killing the mistake and apologizing to King Wu, could the Wu army be stopped.

古文：其语具在吴事中。
现代文：他的这些话都记载在《吴王濞列传》中。
English: These words of his are recorded in the "Biography of King Wu."

古文：使袁盎为太常，窦婴为大将军。
现代文：皇上任命袁盎担任太常，窦婴担任大将军。
English: The emperor appointed Yuan Ang as the First Lady and Dou Ying as the General.

古文：两人素相与善。
现代文：这两个人向来有交情。
English: The two men have a long-standing friendship.

古文：逮吴反。诸陵长者长安中贤大夫争附两人，车随者日数百乘。
现代文：等到吴王谋反，居住在诸陵中有威望的人和长安城中的贤能官吏都争着依附他们两个人，驾车跟随在后面的每天有几百辆。
English: By the time of King Wu's rebellion, the dignitaries living in the tombs and the high-ranking officials in Chang'an City were all vying to attach themselves to the two of them, with hundreds of cars following behind every day.

古文：及晁错已诛，袁盎以太常使吴。
现代文：等到晁错被诛杀以后，袁盎以太常的身份出使到吴国。
English: After Zou Er was killed, Yuan Ang was sent to Wuxi in his usual capacity.

古文：吴王欲使将，不肯。
现代文：吴王想让他担任将领，袁盎不肯。
English: Wu Wang wanted to make him a general, but Yuan Ang refused.

古文：欲杀之，使一都尉以五百人围守盎军中。
现代文：吴王杀死他，派一名都尉带领五百人把袁盎围困在军中。
English: King Wu killed him and sent a captain with five hundred men to surround Yuan Ang and trap him in the army.

古文：袁盎自其为吴相时，有从史尝盗爱盎侍兒，盎知之，弗泄，遇之如故。
现代文：当初袁盎担任吴国国相的时候，曾经有一个从史偷偷地跟袁盎的婢女私通，袁盎知道了这件事，没有泄露，对待从史仍跟从前一样。
English: When Yuan Ang served as the Minister of State of Wu, there was once a Zongshi who secretly had an affair with Yuan Ang's maid. Yuan Ang knew about this, did not reveal it, and treated Zongshi the same way as before.

古文：人有告从史，言 君知尔与侍者通 ，乃亡归。袁盎驱自追之，遂以侍者赐之，复为从史。
现代文：有人告诉从史，说袁盎知道他跟婢女私通的事，从史便逃回家去了，袁盎亲自驾车追赶从史，就把婢女赐给他，仍旧叫他当从史。
English: Someone told Zongshi that Yuan Ang knew about his illicit affair with Zongshi's maid, so Zongshi fled home. Yuan Ang himself drove after Zongshi, gave him the maid, and still told him to be Zongshi.

古文：及袁盎使吴见守，从史適为守盎校尉司马，乃悉以其装赍置二石醇醪，会天寒，士卒饥渴，饮酒醉，西南陬卒皆卧，司马夜引袁盎起，曰： 君可以去矣，吴王期旦日斩君。 
现代文：等到袁盎出使吴国被围困，从史刚好是围困袁盎的校尉司马，司马就把随身携带的全部财物卖了，用这钱购买了两担味道浓厚的酒，刚好碰上天气寒冷，围困的士兵又饿又渴，喝多了酒，围守城西南角的士兵都醉倒了，司马乘夜里领袁盎起身，说道： 您可以走了，吴王预期明天杀你。 
English: When Yuan Ang set out to besiege Wu, Sima, who happened to be the lieutenant of the besieging Yuan Ang, sold all the belongings he had brought with him and used the money to buy two loads of strong wine. The weather was cold, the besieging soldiers were hungry and thirsty, and they drank too much wine. The soldiers guarding the southwest corner of the city were all drunk. Sima got Yuan Ang up in the middle of the night and said, "You can go, the King of Wu expects to kill you tomorrow."

古文：盎弗信，曰： 公何为者？ 
现代文：袁盎不相信，说： 您是干什么的？ 
English: Yuan Ang didn't believe him and said, "What do you do?

古文：司马曰： 臣故为从史盗君侍兒者。 
现代文：司马说： 我是原先当从史与您的婢女私通的人。 
English: Sima said, "I was the one who was supposed to commit adultery with your maid.

古文：盎乃惊谢曰； 公幸有亲，吾不足以累公。 
现代文：袁盎这才吃惊地道谢说： 您庆幸有父母在堂，我可不能因此连累了您。 
English: Surprised, Yuan Ang thanked him and said, "You are fortunate to have your parents in the class. I can't burden you with this.

古文：司马曰： 君弟去，臣亦且亡，辟吾亲，君何患！ 
现代文：司马说： 您只管走，我也将要逃走，把我的父母藏匿起来，您又何必担忧呢？ 
English: Sima said: You just go, I will also run away and hide my parents, why should you worry?

古文：乃以刀决张，道从醉卒隧出。
现代文：于是用刀把军营的帐幕割开，引导袁盎从醉倒的士兵所挡住的路上出来。
English: So he used a knife to cut open the tent of the military camp and guide Yuan Ang out of the road blocked by the drunken soldiers.

古文：司马与分背，袁盎解节毛怀之，杖，步行七八里，明，见梁骑，骑驰去，遂归报。
现代文：司马与袁盎分路背道而走，袁盎解下了节旄揣在怀中，拄着杖，步行了七八里，天亮的时候，碰上了梁国的骑兵，就骑马飞奔逃离，终于回到朝廷汇报。
English: Sima and Yuan Ang separated and went their separate ways. Yuan Ang unfastened the scepter, carried it in his arms, carried a cane, and walked seven or eight miles. At dawn, he met Liang Guo's cavalry and fled on horseback. Finally, he returned to the imperial court to report.

古文：吴楚已破，上更以元王子平陆侯礼为楚王，袁盎为楚相。
现代文：吴楚叛军已被攻破，皇上便把楚元王的儿子平陆侯刘礼改封为楚王，袁盎担任楚相。
English: The Wu-Chu rebels had been defeated, and the emperor changed the title of the son of King Chu Yuan, Prince Ping Lu Liu Li, to King of Chu, and Yuan Ang became the Prime Minister of Chu.

古文：尝上书有所言，不用。
现代文：袁盎曾经上书进言，但未被采纳。
English: Yuan Ang once submitted a written proposal, but it was not accepted.

古文：袁盎病免居家，与闾里浮沈，相随行，斗鸡走狗。
现代文：袁盎因病免官，闲居在家，与乡里人在一起混日子，跟他们玩斗鸡赛狗的游戏。
English: Yuan Ang was relieved of his duties due to illness, and idled at home, hanging out with the villagers and playing a game of cockfighting and dog racing with them.

古文：雒阳剧孟尝过袁盎，盎善待之。
现代文：洛阳人剧孟曾经拜访袁盎，袁盎热情地接待他。
English: Luoyang People's Drama Meng once visited Yuan Ang, Yuan Ang warmly received him.

古文：安陵富人有谓盎曰： 吾闻剧孟博徒，将军何自通之？ 
现代文：有个安陵地方的富人，对袁盎说： 我听说剧孟是个赌徒，您为什么要跟他来往呢？ 
English: A rich man in Anling said to Yuan Ang: I heard that Yu Meng is a gambler, why are you associating with him?

古文：盎曰： 剧孟虽博徒，然母死，客送葬车千馀乘，此亦有过人者。
现代文：袁盎说： 剧孟虽是个赌徒，然而他母亲去世的时候，送葬的客人车子有一千多辆，这也是因为他有过人的地方。
English: Yuan Ang said: Although He Meng is a gambler, when his mother died, there were more than a thousand cars of guests to attend the funeral, which is also because he had more people.

古文：且缓急人所有。
现代文：再说危难的事人人都有。
English: Besides, everyone has things that are dangerous.

古文：夫一旦有急叩门，不以亲为解，不以存亡为辞，天下所望者，独季心、剧孟耳。
现代文：一旦遇到危难有急事敲门，不以有父母在为借口而推脱，不用有事不在家加以拒绝，天下所仰望的人只有季心、剧孟而已。
English: In the event of a crisis, if something urgent comes knocking at the door, don't use your parents as an excuse to get out of it, don't refuse if something is not at home, the only people the world looks up to are Ji Xin and Yu Meng.

古文：今公常从数骑，一旦有缓急，宁足恃乎！ 
现代文：如今您身后常常有几个骑兵随从着，一旦有急事，这些人难道可以依吗？ 
English: Now you often have several cavalry behind you. If there is an emergency, can these people be relied on?

古文：骂富人，弗与通。
现代文：袁盎痛骂富人，从此不再与他来往。
English: Yuan Ang scolded the rich man and stopped associating with him.

古文：诸公闻之，皆多袁盎。
现代文：众人听了这件事，都很称赞袁盎。
English: After hearing about this, everyone praised Yuan Ang.

古文：袁盎虽家居，景帝时时使人问筹策。
现代文：袁盎虽然闲居在家，汉景帝经常派人来向他询问计谋策略。
English: Although Yuan Ang was idle at home, Emperor Han Jing often sent people to ask him about strategies.

古文：梁王欲求为嗣，袁盎进说，其後语塞。梁王以此怨盎，曾使人刺盎。
现代文：梁王想成为汉景帝的继承人，袁盎进言劝说，之后这种议论就中止了，梁王因此怨恨袁盎，曾经派人刺杀袁盎。
English: King Liang wanted to become the successor of Emperor Han Jing. Yuan Ang tried to persuade him, but the discussion was stopped. As a result, King Liang resented Yuan Ang and sent someone to assassinate him.

古文：刺者至关中，问袁盎，诸君誉之皆不容口。
现代文：刺客来到关中，打听袁盎到底是一个怎样的人。众人都赞不绝口。
English: The assassin came to Guanzhong to find out what kind of person Yuan Ang really was. Everyone was full of praise.

古文：乃见袁盎曰： 臣受梁王金来刺君，君长者，不忍刺君。
现代文：刺客便去见袁盎说： 我接受了梁王的金钱来刺杀你，您是个宽厚的人，我不忍心刺杀您。
English: The assassin then went to Yuan Ang and said, "I accepted money from Liang Wang to assassinate you. You are a generous person. I cannot bear to assassinate you."

古文：然後刺君者十馀曹，备之！ 
现代文：但以后还会有十多批人来刺杀您，希望您多加防备！ 
English: But in the future, more than ten groups of people will come to assassinate you. I hope you will be more prepared!

古文：袁盎心不乐，家又多怪，乃之棓生所问占。
现代文：袁盎心中很不愉快，家里又接二连三地发生了许多怪事，便到棓先生那里去占卜问吉凶。
English: Yuan Weng was very unhappy in his heart. Many strange things happened at home one after another, so he went to Mr. Zou to ask for fortune-telling.

古文：还，梁刺客後曹辈果遮刺杀盎安陵郭门外。
现代文：回家的时候，随后派来的梁国刺客果然在安陵外城门外面拦住了袁盎，把他刺杀了。
English: When he was returning home, the assassins sent by Liang Guo stopped Yuan Ang outside the gate of Anling and assassinated him.

古文：晁错者，颍川人也。
现代文：晁错是颍川人。
English: The mistake was made by the people of the Hechuan River.

古文：学申商刑名於轵张恢先所，与雒阳宋孟及刘礼同师。
现代文：曾经在轵县张恢先生那里学习过申不害和商鞅的刑名学说，与洛阳人宋孟和刘礼是同学。
English: He once studied the theories of "do no harm" and "negotiation" from Mr. Zhang Wei in Handan County, and was a classmate of Song Meng and Liu Li from Luoyang.

古文：以文学为太常掌故。
现代文：凭着通晓典籍，担任了太常掌故。
English: With a thorough knowledge of classics, he has served as a too-frequent pupil.

古文：错为人穞直刻深。
现代文：晁错为人正直严厉。
English: If you do something wrong, be honest and stern.

古文：孝文帝时，天下无治尚书者，独闻济南伏生故秦博士，治尚书，年九十馀，老不可徵，乃诏太常使人往受之。
现代文：汉文帝的时候，天下没有研究《尚书》的人，只听说济南伏先生是原来秦朝的博士，研究过《尚书》，年老不能应召，文帝于是下令太常派人前往他那里学习。
English: At the time of Emperor Wen of Han, there was no one in the world who studied the Shangshu. It was only heard that Mr. Jinan Fu was a doctor of the original Qin Dynasty and had studied the Shangshu. He was too old to be summoned, so Emperor Wen ordered to send people to him to study.

古文：太常遣错受尚书伏生所。
现代文：太常派遣晁错前往伏先生那里学习《尚书》。
English: He often sent his students to Mr. Fu to study "Shang Shu."

古文：还，因上便宜事，以书称说。
现代文：学成回来后，趁着向皇上报告利国利民的事，称引解说《尚书》。
English: After returning from his studies, he took advantage of the opportunity to report to the emperor on matters that would benefit the country and the people, saying that he had quoted and explained the Shangshu.

古文：诏以为太子舍人、门大夫、家令。
现代文：汉文帝下诏令，任命晁错担任太子舍人、门大夫、太子家令。
English: Emperor Hanwen issued an imperial edict, appointing Zou Er to serve as the prince's concubine, gatekeeper, and prince's housekeeper.

古文：以其辩得幸太子，太子家号曰 智囊 。
现代文：晁错凭着他的辩才，得到太子的宠幸，太子家称他为 智囊 。
English: By virtue of his ability to argue, Zou Er obtained the favor of the prince, and the prince's family called him "the brain."

古文：数上书孝文时，言削诸侯事，及法令可更定者。
现代文：汉文帝的时候，晁错多次上书，说到削减诸侯势力的事，以及修改法令的事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwen, he mistakenly wrote several times about reducing the power of the princes and amending laws.

古文：书数十上，孝文不听，然奇其材，迁为中大夫。
现代文：几十次上书，汉文帝都没有采纳，但认为他有奇特的才能，提升为中大夫。
English: He submitted his application dozens of times, but Emperor Hanwen did not accept it. However, he thought he had a special talent and promoted him to the rank of middle doctor.

古文：当是时，太子善错计策，袁盎诸大功臣多不好错。
现代文：当时，太子称赞晁错的计策谋略，袁盎和诸位大功臣却大多都不喜欢晁错。
English: At that time, the prince praised the strategy of correcting mistakes, but Yuan Ang and most of the great heroes did not like to correct mistakes.

古文：景帝即位，以错为内史。
现代文：汉景帝继位后，任命晁错为内史。
English: After Emperor Han Jing succeeded to the throne, he appointed Zou Er as the leader of the Inner History.

古文：错常数请间言事，辄听，宠幸倾九卿，法令多所更定。
现代文：晁错多次请求皇帝单独与他谈论政事，景帝总是听从，对他的恩宠超过了九卿，晁错修改了不少的法令。
English: He repeatedly asked the emperor to discuss political affairs with him alone, and Emperor Jing always obeyed. His grace exceeded that of the nine nobles, and he amended many decrees.

古文：丞相申屠嘉心弗便，力未有以伤。
现代文：丞相申屠嘉心里不满意，但又没有足够的力量来毁伤他。
English: Premier Shen Tu Jia was not satisfied in his heart, but he did not have enough strength to destroy him.

古文：内史府居太上庙壖中，门东出，不便，错乃穿两门南出，凿庙壖垣。丞相嘉闻，大怒，欲因此过为奏请诛错。错闻之，即夜请间，具为上言之。丞相奏事，因言错擅凿庙垣为门，请下廷尉诛。上曰： 此非庙垣，乃壖中垣，不致於法。 
现代文：打算就这次晁错的过失写成奏章，请求诛杀晁错。晁错听到了这个消息，当夜请求单独进谏皇上，具体详细地向皇上说明了这件事情。丞相申屠嘉上朝奏事，乘机禀告了晁错擅自凿开太上庙的围墙做门，请求皇上把他交给廷尉处死。皇上说： 晁错所凿的墙不是太上庙的墙，而是庙外空地上的围墙，不致于触犯法令。 
English: He planned to write a report on this mistake and ask the emperor to kill him. When the emperor heard this news, he asked to go to the emperor alone that night and explain the matter to the emperor in detail. The prime minister reported the incident to the emperor and took the opportunity to denounce the mistake of cutting the wall of the temple without permission to make a door, and asked the emperor to give him to the imperial lieutenant to be executed. The emperor said: The wall cut by the mistake is not the wall of the temple, but the wall on the ground outside the temple, so as not to violate the law.

古文：丞相谢。
现代文：丞相谢罪。
English: The chancellor, Chosho, repented.

古文：罢朝，怒谓长史曰： 吾当先斩以闻，乃先请，为兒所卖，固误。 
现代文：退朝之后，生气地对长史说： 我本当先杀了他再报告皇上，却先奏请，反而被这小子给出卖，实在是大错。 
English: After retiring from the imperial court, he angrily said to Choshu: I really killed him first and then reported to the emperor, but I asked permission first, but instead I was sold out by this boy. It was really a big mistake.

古文：丞相遂发病死。错以此愈贵。
现代文：丞相终于发病死了，晁错因此更加显贵。
English: The prime minister finally fell ill and died, making the mistake all the more conspicuous.

古文：迁为御史大夫，请诸侯之罪过，削其地，收其枝郡。
现代文：晁错被提升为御史大夫，请求就诸侯的罪过相应地削减他们的封地，收回各诸侯国边境的郡城。
English: He was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian, and requested that the fiefs of the lords be reduced in proportion to their crimes, and that the county towns on the borders of the lordships be recovered.

古文：奏上，上令公卿列侯宗室集议，莫敢难，独窦婴争之，由此与错有卻。
现代文：奏章呈送上去，皇上命令公卿、列侯和皇族一起讨论，没有一个人敢非难晁错的建议，只有窦婴与他争辩，因此和晁错有了隔阂。
English: When the report was submitted, the emperor ordered the nobles, vassals, and members of the imperial family to discuss it together. No one dared to criticize the erroneous proposal, only Dou Ying argued with him, so there was a gap between them.

古文：错所更令三十章，诸侯皆諠譁疾晁错。
现代文：晁错所修改的法令有三十章，诸侯们都叫喊着反对，痛恨晁错。
English: There were thirty chapters in the revised edict, and the princes all shouted their opposition and abhorred the error.

古文：错父闻之，从颍川来，谓错曰： 上初即位，公为政用事，侵削诸侯，别疏人骨肉，人口议多怨公者，何也？ 
现代文：晁错的父亲听到了这个消息，就从颍川赶来，对晁错说： 皇上刚刚继位，你执掌政权，侵害削弱诸侯的力量，疏远人家的骨肉，人们纷纷议论怨恨你，为什么要这样做呢？ 
English: When his father heard the news, he came from Luochuan and said to him, "Your Majesty has just succeeded to the throne, you are in power, you are encroaching on and weakening the power of the princes, you are alienating people's flesh and blood, people are talking about hating you, why do you want to do this?

古文：晁错曰： 固也。不如此，天子不尊，宗庙不安。 
现代文：晁错说： 事情本来就应该这样，不这样的话，天子不会受到尊崇，国家不会得到安宁。 
English: He mistakenly said, "Things should be as they are. Otherwise, the Son of Heaven would not be revered, and the country would not have peace."

古文：错父曰： 刘氏安矣，而晁氏危矣，吾去公归矣！ 
现代文：晁错的父亲又说： 照这样下去，刘家的天下安宁了，而我们晁家却危险了，我要离开你回去了。 
English: The erring father said again, "If you continue like this, the world of the Liu family will be peaceful, but our family will be in danger. I will leave you and go back."

古文：遂饮药死，曰： 吾不忍见祸及吾身。 
现代文：便服毒药而死，死前说道： 我不忍心看到祸患连累自己。 
English: He took poison and died, saying before his death: I cannot bear to see the evil that has befallen me.

古文：死十馀日，吴楚七国果反，以诛错为名。
现代文：晁错的父亲死后十几天，吴楚七国果然反叛，以诛杀晁错为名义。
English: Ten days after the death of Zou Er's father, the seven kingdoms of Wu-Chu rebelled in the name of fighting and killing Zou Er.

古文：及窦婴、袁盎进说，上令晁错衣朝衣斩东市。
现代文：等到窦婴、袁盎进言，皇上就命令晁错穿着朝服，在东市把他处死。
English: As soon as Dou Ying and Yuan Wang made their speeches, the emperor ordered Zou Er to put on the imperial robe and execute him in Dongshi.

古文：晁错已死，谒者仆射邓公为校尉，击吴楚军为将。
现代文：晁错死后，谒者仆射邓公担任校尉，攻打吴楚的军队时，他担任将领。
English: After the death of Zou Jie, Zou's servant Zhao Deng Gong served as a lieutenant, and when he attacked Wu Chu's army, he served as a general.

古文：还，上书言军事，谒见上。
现代文：回京城后，上书报告军事情况，进见皇上。
English: After returning to the capital, he submitted a report on the military situation to the emperor.

古文：上问曰： 道军所来，闻晁错死，吴楚罢不？ 
现代文：皇上问道： 你从军中来，听到晁错死了，吴楚的军队退了没有？ 
English: The emperor asked, "You came from the army, and you heard that Yu died by mistake. Has Wu Chu's army retreated?"

古文：邓公曰： 吴王为反数十年矣，发怒削地，以诛错为名，其意非在错也。
现代文：邓公说： 吴王蓄意谋反已经有几十年了啊，他因为你削减他的封地而发怒，所以以诛杀晁错为名义，他的本意并不在晁错呀。
English: Deng Gong said, "Wu Wang has been deliberately plotting rebellion for decades. He was angry because you reduced his fief, so he killed you in the name of killing you. His intention was not to kill you.

古文：且臣恐天下之士噤口，不敢复言也！ 
现代文：再说我担心天下的士人都将闭口，再也不敢进言了。 
English: Furthermore, I am worried that all the scholars in the world will shut their mouths and never dare to speak again.

古文：上曰： 何哉？ 
现代文：皇上说： 为什么呢？ 
English: The emperor said: Why?

古文：邓公曰： 夫晁错患诸侯彊大不可制，故请削地以尊京师，万世之利也。
现代文：邓公说： 晁错担心诸侯强大了不能够制服，所以要求削减诸侯的封地，借以尊宠朝廷，这是万代的利益啊。
English: Deng Gong said, "He mistakenly feared that the powerful lords would not be able to subdue him, so he demanded that the fiefs of the lords be reduced in order to favor the imperial court. This is the interest of all generations."

古文：计画始行，卒受大戮，内杜忠臣之口，外为诸侯报仇，臣窃为陛下不取也。 
现代文：计划才开始实行，竟然遭到杀戮，对内堵塞了忠臣的口，对外反而替诸侯报了仇，我私下认为陛下这样做是不可取的。 
English: The plan had only just begun to be implemented when they were killed, which silenced loyal subjects at home and avenged the feudal lords abroad. Privately, I don't think it's advisable for His Majesty to do this.

古文：於是景帝默然良久，曰： 公言善，吾亦恨之。 
现代文：此时景帝沉默了好久，说： 您的话很对，我也悔恨这件事。 
English: At this time, Emperor Jing was silent for a long time and said, "Your words are right, and I also regret this matter.

古文：乃拜邓公为城阳中尉。
现代文：于是任命邓公担任城阳中尉。
English: As a result, Deng Gong was appointed as the lieutenant of Chengyang.

古文：邓公，成固人也，多奇计。
现代文：邓公是成固人，有许多出人意料的妙计。
English: Deng Gong is a Chenggu person, with many unexpected tricks.

古文：建元中，上招贤良，公卿言邓公，时邓公免，起家为九卿。
现代文：建元年间皇上招纳贤良之士，公卿们都推举邓公，当时邓公免官，便由在家闲居起用做了九卿。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, the emperor recruited virtuous men, and the nobles all recommended Deng Gong. At that time, Deng Gong was relieved of his duties, and he began to work from home and made nine nobles.

古文：一年，复谢病免归。其子章以脩黄老言显於诸公间。
现代文：一年之后，又推说有病辞职回家，他的儿子邓章因为研究黄帝、老子的学说在朝廷大臣之间很有名望。
English: A year later, he resigned, saying he was ill, and returned home. His son, Deng Zhang, was well-known among ministers of the imperial court for his research into the teachings of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi.

古文：太史公曰：袁盎虽不好学，亦善傅会，仁心为质，引义慷慨。
现代文：太史公说：袁盎虽然不好学，可是他善于领会贯通，他以仁爱之心为本体，常常称引大义，慷慨激昂。
English: Tai Shikong said: Although Yuan Ang is not good at learning, he is good at comprehending and understanding. With benevolence as his essence, he is often generous and impassioned.

古文：遭孝文初立，资適逢世。
现代文：赶上汉文帝刚刚继位，他的才智恰好碰上了适宜的时代，因此能得以施展。
English: As Emperor Hanwen had just succeeded to the throne, his talent just happened to meet the right era, so he was able to display it.

古文：时以变易，及吴楚一说，说虽行哉，然复不遂。
现代文：时局不断地在变动，等到吴楚反叛时，建议诛杀晁错。
English: The situation was constantly changing, and when Wu Chu rebelled, it was wrong to suggest fighting.

古文：好声矜贤，竟以名败。
现代文：虽然他的建议被采纳实行，然而他以后不再被朝廷所用。
English: Although his suggestion was accepted and implemented, he was no longer used by the court.

古文：晁错为家令时，数言事不用；後擅权，多所变更。
现代文：爱好名声夸耀才能，终于因为追求名声而招致祸患。晁错做太子家令的时候，多次进言而不被采用。后来擅权，修改了国家的许多法令。
English: He loved fame and boasted of his talent, and finally his pursuit of fame led to disaster. When he mistakenly made the prince's family order, he repeatedly made suggestions but was not adopted. Later, he took power and amended many of the country's laws.

古文：诸侯发难，不急匡救，欲报私雠，反以亡躯。
现代文：诸侯发动叛乱，晁错不急于匡正挽救这个危机，却想报个人的私仇，反而因此招来杀身之祸。
English: Princes and lords launched a rebellion, but they were not in a hurry to rectify and save the crisis, but they wanted to avenge their personal vendettas, which instead led to the disaster of suicide.

古文：语曰 变古乱常，不死则亡 ，岂错等谓邪！
现代文：俗话说： 改变古法，搞乱常规，不是身死，就是逃亡 ，难道说的就是晁错这类人吗？
English: As the saying goes: change the ancient law, mess up the routine, either die or flee, is it wrong to say such people?

