古文：五国伐秦无功，罢于成皋。
现代文：赵、魏、韩、燕、齐五国联合攻打秦国，没有成功，罢兵休战，军队驻扎在成皋。
English: The five countries of Zhao, Wei, Han, Yan and Qi jointly attacked Qin without success. They called a truce and stationed their troops in Chengdu.

古文：赵欲构于秦，楚与魏、韩将应之，秦弗欲。
现代文：赵国想和秦国讲和，楚、魏、韩三国打算跟从，但齐国不愿这样做。
English: Zhao wanted to make peace with Qin, and Chu, Wei, and Han intended to follow suit, but Qi was unwilling to do so.

古文：苏代谓齐王曰： 臣以为足下见奉阳君矣。
现代文：苏秦对齐王说： 我已经为您会见了奉阳君李兑了。
English: Su Qin said to Qi Wang: I have already met with Feng Yangjun Li Du for you.

古文：臣谓奉阳君曰： 天下散而事秦，秦必据宋。
现代文：我对奉阳君说： 各诸侯国解散合纵联盟而去侍奉秦国，秦国一定会占据宋国。
English: I said to Bongyang, "All the vassal states dissolved the alliance to serve Qin. Qin will definitely occupy Song."

古文：魏冉必妒君之有阴也。
现代文：魏冉必然会妒忌您得到了陶邑。
English: Wei Ran is bound to be jealous that you got the cinnamon.

古文：秦王贪，魏冉妒，则阴不可得已矣。
现代文：秦王贪婪，魏冉妒忌，因此您不可能得到陶邑了。
English: Qin Wang is greedy, Wei Ran is jealous, so you can't get the pottery.

古文：君无构，齐必攻宋。
现代文：如果您不和秦国和解的话，齐国必然要进攻宋国。
English: If you do not reconcile with Qin, Qi will inevitably attack Song.

古文：齐攻宋，则楚必攻宋，魏必攻宋，燕、赵助之。
现代文：齐国一旦进攻宋国，楚、魏两国也必然会进攻宋国，燕、赵两国出兵帮助它。
English: Once Qi attacked Song, Chu and Wei would also attack Song, and Yan and Zhao would send troops to help.

古文：五国据宋，不至一二月，阴必得矣。
现代文：五国军队联合起来进攻宋国，用不了一两个月，一定会攻下陶邑。
English: The armies of the five countries united to attack Song, and it would not take more than a month or two to capture Tawu.

古文：得阴而构，秦虽有变，则君无患矣。
现代文：攻取了陶邑之后，就和秦国和解，秦国即使有什么变故，那么您也没有什么可忧虑的。
English: After conquering Taoyu, they reconciled with Qin. If there is any change in Qin, then you have nothing to worry about.

古文：若不得已而必构，则愿五国复坚约。
现代文：如果不得已一定要和秦国和解的话，那么就希望五国能够坚守约定。
English: If it is absolutely necessary to reconcile with Qin, then we hope that the five countries can stick to the agreement.

古文：愿得赵，足下雄飞，与韩氏大吏东免，齐王必无召呡也。
现代文：希望能由赵国和您来担任联盟的领袖，和韩国的重臣勉励齐王，齐国就必然无所召回。
English: It is hoped that Zhao Guo and you can serve as the leaders of the alliance, and the South Korean vassals will encourage Qi Wang, and Qi Guo will certainly not be recalled.

古文：使臣守约，若与有倍约者，以四国攻之。
现代文：您就让我来监守执行盟约，如果盟国中有违背盟约的，就让其他四个国家攻打它。
English: Let me supervise the implementation of the treaty, and if any of the allies violates the treaty, let the other four countries attack it.

古文：无倍约者，而秦侵约，五国复坚而宾之。
现代文：如果五国没有违背盟约，而是秦国侵略同盟的国家，五国就坚守盟约，共同来抵抗秦国。
English: If the five countries did not violate the covenant, but Qin invaded the countries of the alliance, the five countries would stick to the covenant and jointly resist Qin.

古文：今韩、魏与齐相疑也，若复不坚约而讲，臣恐与国之大乱也。
现代文：如今韩、魏两国和齐国互相猜疑，如果五国不坚守盟约，而与秦国讲和的话，我恐怕盟国之间会发生大乱。
English: Now, Han, Wei and Qi countries are suspicious of each other. If the five countries do not stick to the treaty and make peace with Qin, I am afraid that there will be chaos between the allies.

古文：齐、秦非复合也，必有踦重者矣。后合与踦重者，皆非赵之利也。
现代文：齐秦两国如果重新联合起来，那么各诸侯国要么倚重秦国，要么倚重齐国，无论怎样，都对赵国不利。
English: If the two states of Qi and Qin were to re-unite, then the various states would either rely on Qin or Qi. Either way, it would be detrimental to Zhao.

古文：且天下散而事秦，是秦制天下也。
现代文：而且诸侯国解散了合纵联盟去侍奉秦国，那么秦国就能控制天下。
English: Moreover, the vassal states dissolved the alliance to serve Qin, so Qin could control the world.

古文：秦制天下，将何以天下为？
现代文：秦国一旦控制了天下，那么还有什么各诸侯国呢？
English: Once Qin controlled the world, what other states were there?

古文：臣愿君之蚤计也。
现代文：我请您尽早考虑这件事。
English: I ask you to consider this matter at your earliest convenience.

古文： 天下争秦有六举，皆不利赵矣。
现代文：各诸侯国都争着来侍奉秦国，一共有六种可能的方案，都对赵国极为不利。
English: All of the vassal states were vying to serve Qin. There were a total of six possible plans, all of which were extremely unfavorable to Zhao.

古文：天下争秦，秦王受负海内之国，合负亲之交，以据中国，而求利于三晋，是秦之一举也。
现代文：诸侯竞相侍奉秦国，秦国会与齐国结盟，再与以前背叛连横的诸侯国恢复交往，这就控制了中原地区，那么就会向赵、魏、韩三国索取利益，这是秦国采取的第一个方案。
English: The princes competed with each other to serve the Qin State, the Qin State formed an alliance with the Qi State, and then resumed contacts with the previously traitorous princes, which controlled the Central Plains region, then they would seek benefits from the three countries of Zhao, Wei, and Han, which was the first plan adopted by the Qin State.

古文：秦行是计，不利于赵，而君终不得阴，一矣。
现代文：秦国实行这个方案，会对赵国不利，您也最终得不到陶邑，这是其一。
English: If Qin implements this plan, it will be unfavorable to Zhao, and you will eventually not get the pottery, which is the first.

古文： 天下争秦，秦王内韩珉于齐，内成阳君于韩，相魏怀于魏，复合衍交两王，王贲、韩他之曹，皆起而行事，是秦之一举也。
现代文：天下诸侯竞相侍奉秦国，秦王就会让韩珉去齐国做大臣，让成阳君到韩国做大臣，让魏怀去魏国做国相，恢复与赵、燕两国的连横阵线。同时，像王贲、韩他等人都再度被起用，执掌大权，这是秦国采取的第二个方案。
English: The princes of the world competed with each other to serve Qin. The king of Qin would make Han Xuan minister to Qi, Chengyang Jun minister to Korea, Wei Huai minister to Wei, and restore the line of battle with Zhao and Yan. At the same time, people like Wang Xuan, Han and others would be used again to hold power. This was the second plan adopted by Qin.

古文：秦行是计也，不利于赵，而君又不得阴，二矣。
现代文：秦国实行这个方案，对赵国不利，而您还是得不到陶邑，这是其二。
English: If Qin implements this plan, it will be unfavorable to Zhao, and you still won't get the pottery, which is the second.

古文： 天下争秦，秦王受齐受赵，三强三亲，以据魏而求安邑，是秦之一举也。
现代文：各国诸侯竞相侍奉秦国，秦王接受齐国和赵国，三个强国结成同盟以后，就会控制魏国，索取安邑，这是秦国采取的又一个方案。
English: The princes of various countries competed to serve Qin. The king of Qin accepted Qi and Zhao. After the three powerful countries formed an alliance, they would control Wei and demand An'yun. This was another plan adopted by Qin.

古文：秦行是计，齐、赵应之，魏不待伐，抱安邑而信秦，秦得安邑之饶，魏为上交，韩必入朝秦，过赵已安邑矣，是秦之一举也。
现代文：秦国实行这个方案，齐赵两国都会响应，魏国等不到秦军进攻就会献出安邑来争取秦国的谅解。秦国取得安邑这样富饶的地方，又和魏国交好，那么韩国必然也要倒向秦国，秦国就会拿魏国献出安邑为借口，要求赵国也割让土地。
English: If Qin implemented this plan, both Qi and Zhao would respond. If Wei did not wait for the Qin army to attack, Wei would offer An'yun to gain Qin's understanding. If Qin obtained such a rich place as An'yun and made friends with Wei, then Korea would inevitably fall to Qin. Qin would use Wei's offer of An'yun as an excuse to demand that Zhao also cede land.

古文：秦行是计，不利于赵，而君必不得阴，三矣。
现代文：秦国这样做，会对赵国不利，而您一定不会得到陶邑了，这是其三。
English: If Qin does so, it will be disadvantageous to Zhao, and you will definitely not get the pottery, which is the third.

古文： 天下争秦，秦坚燕、赵之交，以伐齐收楚，与韩呡而攻魏，是秦之一举也。
现代文：天下诸侯竞相侍奉秦国，秦国就加强与燕赵两国的外交关系，并联合楚国进攻齐国，联合韩国进攻魏国，这是秦国的又一举措。
English: The princes of the world competed to serve Qin. Qin strengthened diplomatic relations with Yan and Zhao, and jointly attacked Qi with Chu, and attacked Wei with Korea. This was another measure taken by Qin.

古文：秦行是计，而燕、赵应之。
现代文：秦国实行这个方案，燕国和赵国响应。
English: Qin implemented this plan, and Yan and Zhao responded.

古文：燕、赵伐齐，兵始用，秦因收楚而攻魏，不一二月，魏必破矣。
现代文：燕赵两国去进攻齐国，战争刚一开始，秦国就会趁机联合楚国进攻魏国，不到一两个月，魏国肯定会破亡。
English: Yan and Zhao attacked Qi. At the very beginning of the war, Qin would take the opportunity to attack Wei jointly with Chu. Within a month or two, Wei would certainly be destroyed.

古文：秦举安邑而塞女戟，韩之太原绝，下轵道、南阳、高，伐魏，绝韩，包二周，即赵自消烁①矣。
现代文：秦国占领安邑，阻塞女戟，韩国的太原就会暴露在外面。秦军经轵道、南阳、高，进攻魏国，断绝韩国的退路，包围东周和西周，那么赵国就自然也被削弱了。
English: If Qin occupied An'yip and blocked Jiuquan, South Korea's Taiyuan would be exposed to the outside world. If Qin's army attacked Wei via Jiuquan, Nanyang, and Gao, cut off South Korea's escape route, and encircled East Zhou and West Zhou, then Zhao would naturally be weakened.

古文：国燥于秦，兵分于齐，非赵之利也。而君终身不得阴，四矣。
现代文：国家被秦国威胁，军队又被拉去攻打齐国，这对赵国不利，您也最终得不到陶邑，这是其四。
English: The country is threatened by Qin, and the army is drawn to attack Qi, which is unfavorable to Zhao, and you will eventually not get Tao. This is the fourth.

